
FREINDSHIP 

OTHER, 



EAKIX' WORKS 



JANE 'AUSTEN 



m. 





V 



\ 




LOVE AND FREINDSHIP 




Reproduction, about half size, from a page 
of the ORIGINAL MANUSCRIPT 



LOVE & FREINDSHIP 

AND 

OTHER EARLY WORKS 

NOW FIRST PVBLISHED 
FROM THE ORIGINAL MS. BY 

JANE A USTEN 

WITH A PREFACE BY 

G. K. CHESTERTON 




NEW YORK 

FREDERICK A. STOKES COMPANY 
PUBLISHERS 



Copyright, 1922, ly 

J. R. SANDERS 
A II Rights Reserved 



Printed in the United States of America 



To Madame la Comtesse 
DE FEVILLIDE 

this Novel is inscribed 
by her obliged Humble 
Servant THE AUTHOR. 



"Deceived in Frefeidship and Betrayed in Love' 



PREFACE 



IN a recent newspaper controversy about the 
conventional silliness and sameness of all the 
human generations previous to our own, some- 
body said that in the world of Jane Austen a lady 
was expected to faint when she received a pro- 
posal. To those who happen to have read any 
of the works of Jane Austen, the connection of 
ideas will appear slightly comic. Elizabeth 
Bennett, for instance, received two proposals 
from two very confident and even masterful ad- 
mirers; and she certainly did not faint. It 
would be nearer the truth to say that they did. 
But in any case it may be amusing to those who 
are thus amused, and perhaps even instructive to 
those who thus need to be instructed, to know that 
the earliest work of Jane Austen, here published 
for the first time, might be called a satire on the 
fable of the fainting lady. "Beware of fainting 
fits ... though at times they may be refresh- 
ing and agreable yet believe me they will in the 
end, if too often repeated and at improper sea- 
sons, prove destructive to your Constitution." 
Such were the words of the expiring Sophia to 
the afflicted Laura; and there are modern critics 

vii 



PREFACE 

capable of adducing them as a proof that all soci- 
ety was in a swoon in the first decade of the nine- 
teenth century. But in truth it is the whole point 
of this little skit that the swoon of sensibility is 
not satirised because it was a fact, even in the 
sense of a fashion, but satirised solely because 
it was fiction. Laura and Sophia are made ludi- 
crously, unlike life by being made to faint as 
real ladies do not faint. Those ingenious mod- 
erns, who say that the real ladies did faint, are 
actually being taken in by Laura and Sophia, and 
believing them against Jane Austen. They are 
believing, not the people of the period but the 
most nonsensical novels of the period, which even 
the people of the period who read them did not 
believe. They have swallowed all the ,solem- 
nities of the Mysteries of Udolpho, and never 
even seen the joke of Northanger Abbey. 

For if these juvenilia of Jane Austen anticipate 
especially any of her after works, they certainly 
anticipate the satiric side of Northanger Abbey. 
Of their considerable significance on that side 
something may be said presently; but it will be 
well to preface it by a word about the works 
themselves as items of literary history. Every- 
one knows that the novelist left an unfinished 
fragment, since published under the name of 
"The Watsons," and a finished story called "Lady 
Susan," in letters, which she had herself appar- 
viii 



PREFACE 

ently decided not to publish. These preferences 
are all prejudices, in the sense of matters of un- 
nanageable taste; but I confess I think it a strange 
historical accident that things so comparatively 
dull as "Lady Susan" should have been printed 
already, while things so comparatively lively as 
"Love and Freindship" should never have been 
printed until now. It is at least a curiosity of 
literature that such curiosities of literature 
should have been almost accidently concealed. 
Doubtless it was very rightly felt that we may 
go much too far in the way of emptying the waste- 
paper basket of a genius on the head of the pub- 
lic; and that there is a sense in which the waste- 
paper basket is as sacred as the grave. But with- 
out arrogating to myself any more right in the 
matter than anybody has to his own taste, I hope 
I may be allowed to say that I for one would 
have willingly left "Lady Susan" in the waste- 
paper basket, if I could have pieced together 
"Love and Freindship" for a private scrap-book; 
a thing to laugh over again and again as one 
laughs over the great burlesques of Peacock or 
Max Beerbohm. 

Jane Austen left everything she possessed to 
her sister Cassandra, including these and other 
manuscripts; and the second volume of them, 
containing these, was left by Cassandra to her 
brother, Admiral Sir Francis Austen. He gave it 

ix 



PREFACE 

to his daughter Fanny, who left it in turn to her 
brother Edward, who was the Rector of Barfre- 
stone in Kent, and the father of Mrs. Sanders, to 
whose wise decision we owe the publication of 
these first fancies of her great-aunt; whom it 
m'ight be misleading here to call her great great- 
aunt. Everyone will judge for himself; but I my- 
self think she added something intrinsically im- 
portant to literature and to literary history; and 
that there are cartloads of printed matter, regu- 
larly recognised and printed with the works of 
all great authors, which are far less character- 
istic and far less significant than these few nursery 
jests. 

For "Love and Freindship," with some sim- 
ilar passages in the accompanying fragments, is 
really a rattling burlesque ; something much better 
than what the ladies of the time called an agree- 
able rattle. It is one of those things that can be 
the more readily read with enjoyment through 
being written with enjoyment; in other words, 
it is all the better for being juvenile in the sense 
of being joyful. She is said to have written 
these things at the age of seventeen, evidently 
in much the same spirit in which people conduct 
a family magazine; for the medallions included 
in the manuscript were the work of her sister 
Cassandra. The whole thing is full of the sort 
of high spirits that are always higher in private 
x 



PREFACE 

than in public; as people laugh louder in the 
house than in the street. Many of her admirers 
would not expect, perhaps many of her admirers 
would not admire, the sort of fun to be found in 
the letter of the young lady "whose feelings were 
too strong for her judgment," and who remarks 
incidentally "I murdered my father at a very 
early period of my life, I have since murdered 
my mother, and I am now going to murder my 
sister." Personally I think it admirable; not the 
conduct, but the confession. But there is much 
more than hilarity in the humour, even at this 
stage of its growth. There is almost everywhere 
a certain neatness in the nonsense. There is 
not a little of the true Austen irony. "The noble 
Youth informed us that his name was Lindsay 
for particular reasons, however, I shall conceal 
it under that of Talbot." Did anyone really 
desire that to disappear into the waste-paper 
basket? "She was nothing more than a mere 
good-tempered, civil and obliging young woman; 
as such we could scarcely dislike her she was 
only an object of contempt." Is not that some- 
thing like the first faint line in the figure of Fanny 
Price? When a loud knocking is heard on the 
door of the Rustic Cot by the Uske, the heroine's 
father enquires the nature of the noise, and by 
cautious steps of inference they are enabled to 
define 'it as somebody outside striking the door. 

xi 



PREFACE 

" 'Yes (exclaimed I) I cannot help thinking it 
must be somebody who knocks for admittance.' ' 
"That is another point, (replied he) we must not 
pretend to determine on what motive the person 
may knock tho' that some one does rap at the 
door I am partly convinced." In the aggravating 
leisure and lucidity of that reply, is there not the 
foreshadowing of another and more famous 
father; and do we not hear for a moment, in the 
rustic cottage by the Uske, the unmistakable voice 
of Mr. Bennett? 

But there is a larger and critical reason for 
taking pleasure in the gaiety of these various 
travesties and trifles. Mr. Austen Leigh seems 
to have thought them not sufficiently serious for 
the reputation of his great relative; but greatness 
is not made up of serious things, in the sense of 
solemn things. The reason here, however, is as 
serious as even he or anyone else could desire; 
for it concerns the fundamental quality of one of 
the finest talents in letters. 

A very real psychological interest, almost 
amounting to a psychological mystery, attaches 
to any early work of Jane Austen. And for that 
one reason, among others, which has hardly been 
sufficiently emphasised. Great as she was, no- 
body was likely to maintain that she was a poet. 
But she was a marked example of what is said of 
the poet; she was born, not made. As com- 
xii 



PREFACE 

pared with her, indeed, some of the poets really 
were made. Many men who had the air of set- 
ting the world on fire have left at least a reason- 
able discussion about what set them on fire. 'Men 
like Coleridge or Carlyle had certainly kindled 
their first torches from the flambeaux of equally 
fantastic German mystics or Platonic speculators; 
they had gone through furnaces of culture where 
even less creative people might have been inflamed 
to creation. Jane Austen was not inflamed or in- 
spired or even moved to be a genius; she simply 
was a genius. Her fire, what there was of it, 
began with herself; like the fire of the first man 
who rubbed two dry sticks together. Some would 
say that they were very dry sticks which she 
rubbed together. It is certain that she by her 
own artistic talent made interesting what thou- 
sands of superficially similar people would have 
made dull. There was nothing in her circum- 
stances, or even in her materials, that seems ob- 
viously meant for the making of such an artist. 
It might seem a very wild use of the wrong word 
to say that Jane Austen was elemental. It might 
even seem even a little wanton to insist that she 
was original. Yet this objection would come 
from the critic not really considering what is 
meant by an element or an origin. Perhaps it 
might be as well expressed in what is really meant 
by an individual. Her ability is an absolute; it 

xiii 



PREFACE 

cannot be analysed into influences. She had been 
compared to Shakespeare; and in this sense she 
really does recall the joke about the man who said 
he could write like Shakespeare if he had the 
mind. In this case we seem to see a thousand 
spinsters sitting at a thousand tea-tables; and they 
could all have written "Emma" if they had had 
the mind. 

There is therefore, in considering even her 
crudest early experiments, the interest of look- 
ing at a mind and not at a mirror. She may 
not be conscious of being herself; but she is not, 
like so many more cultivated imitators, conscious 
of being somebody else. The force, at its first 
and feeblest, is coming from within and not 
merely from without. This interest, which be- 
longs to her as an individual with a superior 
instinct for the intelligent criticism of life, is the 
first of the reasons that justify a study of her 
juvenile works ; it is an interest in the psychology 
of the artistic vocation. I will not say of the 
artistic temperament; for nobody ever had less of 
the tiresome thing commonly so described than 
Jane Austen. But while this alone would be a 
reason for finding out how her work began, it 
becomes yet more relevant when we have found 
out how it did begin. This is something more 
than the discovery of a document; it is the dis- 
covery of an inspiration. And that inspiration 
xiv 



PREFACE 

was the inspiration of Gargantua and of Pick- 
wick; it was the gigantic inspiration of laughter. 
If it seemed odd to call her elemental, it may 
seem equally odd to call her exuberant. These 
pages betray her secret; which is that she was nat- 
urally exuberant. And her power came, as all 
power comes, from the control and direction of 
exuberance. But there is the presence and pres- 
sure of that vitality behind her thousand trivial- 
ities; she could have been extravagant if she liked. 
She was the very reverse of a starched or a 
starved spinster; she could have been a buffoon 
like the Wife of Bath if she chose. This is 
what gives an infallible force to her irony. This 
is what gives a stunning weight to her under- 
statements. At the back of this artist also, 
counted as passionless, there was passion; but her 
original passion was a sort of joyous scorn and 
a fighting spirit against all that she regarded 
as morbid and lax and poisonously silly. The 
weapons she forged were so finely finished that 
we might never have known this, but for these 
glimpses of the crude furnace from which they 
came. Finally there are two additional facts 
involved which I will leave the modern 
critics and correspondents in newspapers to pon- 
der and explain at their leisure. One is that 
this realist, in rebuking the romantics, is very 
much concerned with rebuking them for the very 

xv 



PREFACE 

thing for which revolutionary sentiment has so 
much admired them; as for their glorification of 
ingratitude to parents and their easy assumption 
that the old are always wrong. "No!" says the 
noble Youth in "Love and Freindship," "never 
shall it be said that I obliged my father!" And 
the other is that there is not a shadow of indi- 
cation anywhere that this independent intellect 
and laughing spirit was other than contented 
with a narrow domestic routine, in which she 
wrote a story as domestic as a diary in the inter- 
vals of pies and puddings, without so much as 
looking out of the window to notice the French 
Revolution. 

G. K. CHESTERTON. 



xvi 



CONTENTS g. 

PAGE 

Love and Freindship I 

Lesley Castle 53 

The History of England 101 

Collection of Letters 123 

Scraps 159 



XT!! 



LOVE AND FREINDSHIP 



LETTER the FIRST 
From ISABEL to LAURA 

HOW often, in answer to my repeated in- 
treaties that you would give my Daughter 
a regular detail of the Misfortunes and Adven- 
tures of your Life, have you said "No, my freind 
never will I comply with your request till I may 
be no longer in Danger of again experiencing such 
dreadful ones." 

Surely that time is now at hand. You are this 
day 55. If a woman may ever be said to be in 
safety from the determined Perseverance of dis- 
agreable Lovers and the cruel Persecutions of 
obstinate Fathers, surely it must be at such a time 
of Life. 

Isabel. 



LETTER 2nd 
LAURA to ISABEL 

ALTHO' I cannot agree with you in suppos- 
ing that I shall never again be exposed to 
Misfortunes as unmerited as those I have already 

I 



& JANE AUSTEN 

experienced, yet to avoid the imputation of Ob- 
stinacy or ill-nature, I will gratify the curiosity 
of your daughter; and may the fortitude with 
which I have suffered the many afflictions of my 
past Life, prove to her a useful lesson for the 
support of those which may befall her in her 
own. 

Laura. 

LETTER 3 rd 

LAURA to MARIANNE 

AS the Daughter of my most intimate freind 
I think you entitled to that knowledge of 
my unhappy story, which your Mother has so 
often solicited me to give you. 

My Father was a native of Ireland and an in- 
habitant of Wales; my Mother was the natural 
Daughter of a Scotch Peer by an italian Opera- 
girl I was born in Spain and received my Ed- 
ucation at a Convent in France. 

When I had reached my eighteenth Year I was 
recalled by my Parents to my paternal roof in 
Wales. Our mansion was situated in one of the 
most romantic parts of the Vale of Uske. Tho' 
my Charms are now considerably softened and 
somewhat impaired by the Misfortunes I have 
2 



LOVE AND FREINDSHIP & 

undergone, I was once beautiful. B.ut lovely as 
I was the Graces of my Person were the least of 
my Perfections. Of every accomplishment ac- 
customary to my sex, I was Mistress. When in 
the Convent, my progress had always exceeded 
my instructions, my Acquirements had been won- 
derfull for my age, and I had shortly surpassed 
my Masters. 

In my Mind, every Virtue that could adorn it 
was centered; it was the Rendez-vous of every 
good Quality and of every noble sentiment. 

A sensibility too tremblingly alive to every af- 
fliction of my Freinds, my Acquaintance and par- 
ticularly to every affliction of my own, was my 
only fault, if a fault it could be called. Alas! 
how altered now! Tho' indeed my own Mis- 
fortunes do not make less impression on me than 
they ever did, yet now I never feel for those of 
an other. My accomplishments too, begin to 
fade I can neither sing so well nor Dance so 
gracefully as I once did and I have entirely 
forgot the Minuet Dela Cour. 

Adeiu. 

Laura. 



3 JANE AUSTEN & 

LETTER 4 th 

LAURA to MARIANNE 

OUR neighbourhood was small, for it con- 
sisted only of your Mother. She may 
probably have already told you that being left 
by her Parents in indigent Circumstances she 
had retired into Wales on eoconomical motives. 
There it was our freindship first commenced. 
Isabel was then one and twenty. Tho' pleasing 
both in her Person and Manners (between our- 
selves) she never possessed the hundredth part 
of my Beauty or Accomplishments. Isabel had 
seen the World. She had passed 2 Years at one 
of the first Boarding-schools in London; had 
spent a fortnight in Bath and had supped one 
night in Southampton. 

"Beware my Laura (she would often say) Be- 
ware of the insipid Vanities and idle Dissipations 
of the Metropolis of England; Beware of the un- 
meaning Luxuries of Bath and of the stinking fish 
of Southampton." 

"Alas! (exclaimed I) how am I to avoid those 
evils I shall never be exposed to? What prob- 
ability is there of my ever tasting the Dissipations 
of London, the Luxuries of Bath, or the stinking 
Fish of Southampton? I who am doomed to 
waste my Days of Youth and Beauty in an hum- 
ble Cottage in the Vale of Uske." 
4 



& LOVE AND FREINDSHIP 

Ah! little did I then think I was ordained so 
soon to quit that humble Cottage for the Deceit- 
full Pleasures of the World. 

Adeiu 

Laura. 



LETTER 5-th 

LAURA to MARIANNE 

ONE Evening in December as my Father, my 
Mother and myself, were arranged in social 
converse round our Fireside, we were on a sud- 
den, greatly astonished, by hearing a violent 
knocking on the outward door of our rustic Cot. 

My Father started "What noise is that," 
(said he.) "It sounds like a loud rapping at the 
door" (replied my Mother.) "it does indeed." 
(cried I.) "I am of your opinion; (said my 
Father) it certainly does appear to proceed from 
some uncommon violence exerted against our un- 
offending door." "Yes (exclaimed I) I cannot 
help thinking it must be somebody who knocks 
for admittance." 

"That is another point (replied he;) We must 
not pretend to determine on what motive the 
person may knock tho' that someone does rap 
at the door, I am partly convinced. 

5 



^ JANE AUSTEN ^ 

Here, a 2d tremendous rap interrupted my 
Father in his speech, and somewhat alarmed my 
Mother and me. 

"Had we not better go and see who it is? 
(said she) the servants are out." "I think we 
had." (replied I.) "Certainly, (added my 
Father) by all means," "Shall we go now?" 
(said my Mother,) "The sooner the better." (an- 
swered he.) "Oh! let no time be lost" (cried 

A third more violent Rap than ever again 
assaulted our ears. "I am certain there is some- 
body knocking at the Door." (said my Mother.) 
"I think there must be," (replied my Father) "I 
fancy the servants are returned; (said I) I 
think I hear Mary going to the Door." "I'm glad 
of it (cried my Father) for I long to know who 
it is." 

I was right in my conjecture; for Mary in- 
stantly entering the Room, informed us that a 
young Gentleman and his Servant were at the 
door, who had lossed their way, were very cold 
and begged leave to warm themselves by our 
fire. 

"Won't you admit them?" (said I.) "You 
have no objection, my Dear?" (said my Father.) 
"None in the World." (replied my Mother.) 

Mary, without waiting for any further com- 
mands immediately left the room and quickly re- 
6 



& LOVE AND FREINDSHIP 

turned introducing the most beauteous and ami- 
able Youth, I had ever beheld. The servant, she 
kept to herself. 

My natural sensibility had already been greatly 
affected by the sufferings of the unfortunate 
stranger and no sooner did I first behold him, 
than I felt that on him the happiness or Misery 
of my future Life must depend. 

Adeiu 

Laura. 



LETTER 6th 

LAURA to MARIANNE 

THE noble Youth informed us that his name 
was Lindsay for particular reasons how- 
ever I shall conceal it under that of Talbot. 
He told us that he was the son of an English 
Baronet, that his Mother had been many years 
no more and that he had a Sister of the middle 
size. "My Father (he continued) is a mean and 
mercenary wretch it is only to such particular 
freinds as this Dear Party that I would thus 
betray his failings. Your Virtues my amiable 
Polydore (addressing himself to my father) yours 
Dear Claudia and yours my Charming Laura 
call on me to repose in you, my confidence." 



^ JANE AUSTEN ^ 

We bowed. "My Father, seduced by the false 
glare of Fortune and the Deluding Pomp of 
Title, insisted on my giving my hand to Lady 
Dorothea. No never exclaimed I. Lady Doro- 
thea is lovely and Engaging; I prefer no woman 
to her; but know Sir, that I scorn to marry her in 
compliance with your Wishes. No ! Never shall 
it be said that I obliged my Father." 

We all admired the noble Manliness of his re- 
ply. He continued. 

"Sir Edward was surprised; he had perhaps 
little expected to meet with so spirited an opposi- 
tion to his will. "Where, Edward in the name of 
wonder (said he) did you pick up this unmean- 
ing gibberish? You have been studying Novels 
I suspect." I scorned to answer: it would have 
been beneath my dignity. I mounted my Horse 
and followed by my faithful William set forwards 
for my Aunts." 

"My Father's house is situated in Bedfordshire, 
my Aunts' in Middlesex, and tho' I flatter my- 
self with being a tolerable proficient in Geog- 
raphy. I know not how it happened, but I found 
myself entering this beautifull Vale which I find is 
in South Wales, when I had expected to have 
reached my Aunts." 

"After having wandered some time on the 
Banks of the Uske without knowing which way 
to go, I began to lament my cruel Destiny in the 
8 



: LOVE AND FREINDSHIP g 

bitterest and most pathetic Manner. It was now 
perfectly dark, not a single star was there to di- 
rect my steps, and I know not what might have 
befallen me had I not at length discerned thro' 
the solemn Gloom that surrounded me a distant 
light, which as I approached it, I discovered to be 
the chearfull Blaze of your fire. Impelled by 
the combination of Misfortunes under which I 
laboured, namely Fear, Cold and Hunger I hes- 
itated not to ask admittance which at length I 
have gained; and now my Adorable Laura (con- 
tinued he taking my Hand) when may I hope to 
receive that reward of all the painfull sufferings 
I have undergone during the course of my attach- 
ment to you, to which I have ever aspired. Oh! 
when will you reward me with Yourself?" 

"This instant, Dear and Amiable Edward." 
( replied I. ) . We were immediately united by my 
Father, who tho' he had never taken orders had 
been bred to the Church. 

Adeiu 

Laura. 



JANE AUSTEN 



LETTER 

LAURA to MARIANNE 

WE remained but a few days after our 
Marriage, in the Vale of Uske. After 
taking an affecting Farewell of my Father, my 
Mother and my Isabel, I accompanied Edward to 
his Aunts' in Middlesex. Philippa received us 
both with every expression of affectionate Love. 
My arrival was indeed a most agreable surprise 
to her as she had not only been totally ignorant 
of my Marriage with her Nephew, but had never 
even had the slightest idea of there being such a 
person in the World. 

Augusta, the sister of Edward was on a visit to 
her when we arrived. I found her exactly what 
her Brother had described her to be of the 
middle size. . She received me with equal sur- 
prise though not with equal Cordiality, as Phil- 
ippa. There was a disagreeable coldness and 
'Forbidding 'Reserve in her reception of me which 
was equally distressing and Unexpected. None 
of that interesting Sensibility or amiable simpathy 
in her manners and Address to me when we first 
met which should have distinguished our intro- 
duction to each other. Her Language was 
neither warm, nor affectionate, her expressions of 
regard were neither animated nor cordial; her 
10 



LOVE AND FREINDSHIP & 

arms were not opened to receive me to her Heart, 
tho' my own were extended to press her to mine. 

A short Conversation between Augusta and 
her Brother, which I accidently overheard en- 
creased my dislike to her, and convinced me that 
her Heart was no more formed for the soft ties 
of Love than for the endearing intercourse of 
Freindship. 

"But do you think that my Father will ever 
be reconciled to this imprudent connection?" 
(said Augusta.) 

"Augusta (replied the noble Youth) I thought 
you had a better opinion of me, than to imagine 
I would so abjectly degrade myself as to consider 
my Father's Concurrence in any of my affairs, 
either of Consequence or concern to me. Tell 
me Augusta tell me with sincerity; did you ever 
know me consult his inclinations or follow his 
Advice in the least trifling Particular since the 
age of fifteen?" 

"Edward (replied she) you are surely too diffi- 
dent in your own praise. Since you were fifteen 
only ! My Dear Brother since you were five years 
old, I entirely acquit you of ever having will- 
ingly contributed to the satisfaction of your 
Father. But still I am not without apprehensions 
of your being shortly obliged to degrade your- 
self in your own eyes by seeking a support for 
your wife in the Generosity of Sir Edward." 

II 



JANE AUSTEN 

"Never, never Augusta will I so demean my- 
self, (said Edward). Support! What support 
will Laura want which she can receive from him?" 

"Only those very insignificant ones of Victuals 
and Drink." (answered she.) 

" Victuals and Drink! (replied my Husband in 
a most nobly contemptuous Manner) and dost 
thou then imagine that there is no other support 
for an exalted mind (such as is my Laura's) than 
the mean and indelicate employment of Eating 
and Drinking?" 

"None that I know of, so efficacious." 
(returned Augusta) . 

"And did you then never feel the pleasing 
Pangs of Love, Augusta? (replied my Edward). 
Does it appear impossible to your vile and cor- 
rupted Palate, to exist on Love? Can you not 
conceive the Luxury of living in every distress 
that Poverty can inflict, with the object of your 
tenderest affection?" 

"You are too ridiculous (said Augusta) to 
argue with; perhaps however you may in time be 
convinced that . . ." 

Here I was prevented from hearing the remain- 
der of her speech, by the appearance of a very 
Handsome young Woman, who was ushured into 
the Room at the Door of which I had been listen- 
ing. On hearing her announced by the Name of 
"Lady Dorothea," I instantly quitted my Post 

12 



^ LOVE AND FREINDSHIP ^ 

and followed her into the Parlour, for I well 
remembered that she was the Lady, proposed as 
a Wife for my Edward by the Cruel and Unrelent- 
ing Baronet. 

Altho' Lady Dorothea's visit was nominally 
to Philippa and Augusta, yet I have some reason 
to imagine that (acquainted with the Marriage 
and arrival of Edward) to see me was a prin- 
cipal motive to it. 

I soon perceived that tho' Lovely and Elegant 
in her Person and tho' Easy and Polite in her 
Address, she was of that inferior order of Beings 
with regard to Delicate Feeling, tender Senti- 
ments, and refined Sensibility, of which Augusta 
was one. 

She staid but half an hour and neither in the 
Course of her Visit, confided to me any of her 
secret thoughts, nor requested me to confide in 
her, any of Mine. You will easily imagine there- 
fore my Dear Marianne that I could not feel any 
ardent affection or very sincere Attachment for 
Lady Dorothea. 

Adeiu 

Laura. 



JANE AUSTEN 

LETTER 8th 

LAURA to MARIANNE, in continuation 

LADY DOROTHEA had not left us long 
before another visitor as unexpected a 
one as her Ladyship, was announced. It was Sir 
Edward, who informed by Augusta of her Broth- 
er's marriage, came doubtless to reproach him for 
having dared to unite himself to me without his 
Knowledge. But Edward foreseeing his design, 
approached him with heroic fortitude as soon as 
he entered the Room, and addressed him in the 
following Manner. 

"Sir Edward, I know the motive of your Jour- 
ney here You come with base Design of re- 
proaching me for having entered into an indis- 
solable engagement with my Laura without your 
Consent. But Sir, I glory in the Act . It is 
my greatest boast that I have incurred the dis- 
pleasure of my Father!" 

So saying, he took my hand and whilst Sir 
Edward, Philippa, and Augusta were doubtless 
reflecting with admiration on his undaunted 
Bravery, led me from the Parlour to his Father's 
Carriage which yet remained at the Door and in 
which we were instantly conveyed from the pur- 
suit of Sir Edward. 

The Postilions had at first received orders 

H 



& LOVE AND FREINDSHIP & 

only to take the London road; as soon as we had 
sufficiently reflected However, we ordered them 

to Drive to M . the seat of Edward's most 

particular freind, which was but a few miles 
distant. 

At M . we arrived in a few hours; and on 

sending in our names were immediately admitted 
to Sophia, the Wife of Edward's freind. After 
having been deprived during the course of 3 
weeks of a real freind (for such I term your 
M'other) imagine my transports at beholding 
one, most truly worthy of the Name. Sophia 
was rather above the middle size; most elegantly 
formed. A soft languor spread over her lovely 
features, but increased their Beauty . It was 
the Charectarestic of her Mind . She was all 
sensibility and Feeling. We flew into each 
others arms and after having exchanged vows of 
mutual Freindship for the rest of our Lives, in- 
stantly unfolded to each other the most inward 
secrets of our Hearts . We were interrupted 
in the delightfull Employment by the entrance of 
Augustus, (Edward's freind) who was just re- 
turned from a solitary ramble. 

Never did I see such an affecting Scene as was 
the meeting of Edward and Augustus. 

"My Life! my Soul!" (exclaimed the former) 
"My adorable angel!" (replied the latter) as 
they flew into each other's arms. It was too 

15 



JANE AUSTEN 

pathetic for the feelings of Sophia and myself 
We fainted alternately on a sofa. 

Adeiu 

Laura 



LETTER the 9th 

From the same to the same 

TOWARDS the close of the day we received 
the following Letter from Philippa. 

"Sir Edward is greatly incensed by your abrupt 
departure; he has taken back Augusta with him 
to Bedfordshire. Much as I wish to enjoy again 
your charming society, I cannot determine to 
snatch you from that, of such dear and deserving 
Freinds When your Visit to them is termi- 
nated, I trust you will return to the arms of your" 

"Philippa." 

We returned a suitable answer to this affec- 
tionate Note and after thanking her for her kind 
invitation assured her that we would certainly 
avail ourselves of it, whenever we might have no 
other place to go to. Tho' certainly nothing 
could to any reasonable Being, have appeared 
more satisfactory, than so gratefull a reply to 
her invitation, yet I know not how it was, but she 
was certainly capricious enough to be displeased 
16 



g LOVE AND FREINDSHIP ^ 

with our behaviour and* in a few weeks after, either 
to revenge our Conduct, or releive her own soli- 
tude married a young and illiterate Fortune-hun- 
ter. This imprudent step (tho' we were sensible 
that it would probably deprive us of that fortune 
which Philippa had ever taught us to expect) 
could not on our own accounts, excite from our 
exalted minds a single sigh; yet fearfull lest it 
might prove a source of endless misery to the de- 
luded Bride, our trembling Sensibility was greatly 
affected when we were first informed of the 
Event. The affectionate Entreaties of Augustus 
and Sophia that we would for ever consider their 
House as our Home, easily prevailed on us to 
determine never more to leave them. In the 
society of my Edward and this Amiable Pair, I 
passed the happiest moments of my Life; Our 
time was most delightfully spent, in mutual Pro- 
testations of Freindship, and in vows of unalter- 
able Love, in which we were secure from being in- 
terrupted, by intruding and disagreable Visitors, 
as Augustus and Sophia had on their first Entrance 
in the Neighbourhood, taken due care to inform 
the surrounding Families, that as their Happiness 
centered wholly in themselves, they wished for 
no other society. But alas ! my Dear Marianne 
such Happiness as I then enjoyed was too perfect 
to be lasting. A most severe and unexpected 
Blow at once destroyed every sensation of Plea- 



JANE AUSTEN 

sure. Convinced as you must be from what I 
have already told you concerning Augustus and 
Sophia, that there never were a happier Couple, 
I need not I imagine, inform you that their union 
had been contrary to the inclinations of their 
Cruel and Mercenery Parents; who had vainly 
endeavoured with obstinate Perseverance to force 
them into a Marriage with those whom they 
had ever abhorred; but with an Heroic Fortitude 
worthy to be related and admired, they had both, 
constantly refused to submit to such despotic 
Power. 

After having so nobly disentangled themselves 
from the shackles of Parental Authority, by a 
Clandestine Marriage, they were determined 
never to forfeit the good opinion they had gained 
in the World, in so doing, by accepting any pro- 
posals of reconciliation that might be offered 
them by their Fathers to this farther tryal of 
their noble independance however they never 
were exposed. 

They had been married but a few months when 
our visit to them commenced during which time 
they had been amply supported by a considerable 
sum of money which Augustus had gracefully pur- 
loined from his unworthy father's Escritoire, a 
few days before his union with Sophia. 

By our arrival their Expenses were considerably 
encreased tho' their means for supplying them 
18 



^ LOVE AND FREINDSHIP & 

were then nearly exhausted. But they, Exalted 
Creatures ! scorned to reflect a moment on their 
pecuniary Distresses and would have blushed at 
the idea of paying their Debts. Alas! what was 
their Reward for such disinterested Behaviour! 
The beautiful Augustus was arrested and we were 
all undone. Such perfidious Treachery in the 
merciless perpetrators of the Deed will shock 
your gentle nature Dearest Marianne as much as 
it then affected the Delicate sensibility of Edward, 
Sophia, your Laura, and of Augustus himself. 
To compleat such unparalelled Barbarity we were 
informed that an Execution in the House would 
shortly take place. Ah! what could we do but 
what we did! We sighed and fainted on the 
sofa. 

Adeiu 

Laura. 



LETTER icth 
LAURA in continuation 

WHEN we were somewhat recovered from 
the overpowering Effusions of our grief, 
Edward desired that we would consider what 
was the most prudent step to be taken in our un- 
happy situation while he repaired to his im- 

19 



JANE AUSTEN 

prisoned freind to lament over his misfortunes. 
We promised that we would, and he set forwards 
on his journey to Town. During his absence we 
faithfully complied with his Desire and after the 
most mature Deliberation, at length agreed that 
the best thing we could do was to leave the 
House; of which we every moment expected the 
officers of Justice to take possession. We waited 
therefore with the greatest impatience, for the 
return of Edward in order to impart to him the 
result of our Deliberations. But no Edward ap- 
peared. In vain did we count the tedious mo- 
ments of his absence in vain did we weep in 
vain even did we sigh no Edward returned . 
This was too cruel, too unexpected a Blow to our 
Gentle Sensibility we could not support it we 
could only faint. At length collecting all the 
Resolution I was Mistress of, I arose and after 
packing up some necessary apparel for Sophia 
and myself, I dragged her to a Carriage I had 
ordered and we instantly set out for London. 
As the Habitation of Augustus was within twelve 
miles of Town, it was not long e'er we arrived 
there, and no sooner had we entered Holboun 
than letting down one of the Front Glasses I en- 
quired of every decent-looking Person that we 
passed "If they had seen my Edward?" 

But as we drove too rapidly to allow them 
to answer my repeated Enquiries, I gained 
20 



LOVE AND FREINDSHIP 

little, or indeed, no information concerning him. 
"Where am I to drive ?" said the Postilion. u To 
Newgate Gentle Youth (replied I), to see Augus- 
tus." "Oh! no, no, (exclaimed Sophia) I can- 
not go to Newgate ; I shall not be able to support 
the sight of my Augustus in so cruel a confine- 
ment my feelings are sufficiently shocked by the 
recital, of his Distress, but to behold it will over- 
power my Sensibility." As I perfectly agreed 
with her in the Justice of her Sentiments the 
Postilion was instantly directed to return into the 
Country. You may perhaps have been some- 
what surprised my Dearest Marianne, that in the 
Distress I then endured, destitute of any support, 
and unprovided with any Habitation, I should 
never once have remembered my Father and 
Mother or my paternal Cottage in the Vale of 
Uske. To account for the seeming forgetfull- 
ness I must inform you of a trifling circumstance 
concerning them which I have as yet never men- 
tioned. The death of my Parents a few weeks 
after my Departure, is the circumstance I allude 
to. By their decease I became the lawfull In- 
heritress of their House and Fortune. But alas ! 
the House had never been their own and their 
Fortune had only been an Annuity on their own 
Lives. Such is the Depravity of the World! 
To your Mother I should have returned with 
Pleasure, should have been happy to have intro- 



^ JANE AUSTEN 

duced to her, my charming Sophia and should 
with Chearfullness have passed the remainder of 
my Life in their dear Society in the Vale of Uske, 
had not one obstacle to the execution of so agre- 
able a scheme, intervened; which was the Mar- 
riage and Removal of your Mother to a distant 
part of Ireland. 

Adeiu. 

Laura. 



LETTER nth 
LAURA in continuation 

I HAVE a Relation in Scotland (said Sophia 
to me as we left London) who I am certain 
would not hesitate in receiving me." "Shall I 
order the Boy to drive there?" said I but in- 
stantly recollecting myself, exclaimed, "Alas I 
fear is will be too long a Journey for the Horses." 
Unwilling however to act only from my own in- 
adequate Knowledge of the Strength and Abili- 
ties of Horses, I consulted the Postilion, who was 
entirely of my Opinion concerning the Affair. 
We therefore determined to change Horses at 
the next Town and to travel Post the remainder 
of the Journey . When we arrived at the last 
Inn we were to stop at, which was but a few 



LOVE AND FREINDSHIP 

miles from the House of Sophia's Relation, un- 
willing to intrude our Society on him unexpected 
and unthought of, we wrote a very elegant and 
well penned Note to him containing an account 
of our Destitute and melancholy Situation, and 
of our intention to spend some months with him 
in Scotland. As soon as we had dispatched this 
Letter, we immediately prepared to follow it in 
person and were stepping into the Carriage for 
that Purpose when our attention was attracted 
by the Entrance of a coroneted Coach and 4 into 
the Inn-yard. A Gentleman considerably ad- 
vanced in years, descended from it. At his first 
Appearance my Sensibility was wonderfully 
affected and e'er I had gazed at him a 2d time, 
an instinctive sympathy whispered to my Heart, 
that he was my Grandfather. Convinced that I 
could not be mistaken in my conjecture I instantly 
sprang from the Carriage I had just entered, and 
following the Venerable Stranger into the Room 
he had been shewn to, I threw myself on my 
knees before him and besought him to acknowl- 
edge me as his Grand Child. He started, and 
after having attentively examined my features, 
raised me from the Ground and throwing his 
Grandfatherly arms around my Neck, exclaimed, 
"Acknowledge thee! Yes dear resemblance of 
my Laurina and Laurina's Daughter, sweet image 
of my Claudia and my Claudia's Mother, I do 

2 3 



JANE AUSTEN 

acknowledge thee as the Daughter of the one and 
the Grandaughter of the other." While he was 
thus tenderly embracing me, Sophia astonished 
at my precipitate Departure, entered the Room 
in search of me. No sooner had she caught the 
eye of the venerable Peer, than he exclaimed with 
every mark of astonishment " Another Gran- 
daughter ! Yes, yes, I see you are the Daughter 
of my Laurina's eldest Girl; Your resemblance 
to the beauteous Matilda sufficiently proclaims it. 
"Oh! replied Sophia, when I first beheld you 
the instinct of Nature whispered me that we were 
in some degree related But whether Grand- 
fathers, or Grandmothers, I could not pretend 
to determine." He folded her in his arms, and 
whilst they were tenderly embracing, the Door of 
the Apartment opened and a most beautifull 
young Man appeared. On perceiving him Lord 
St. Clair started and retreating back a few paces, 
with uplifted Hands, said, "Another Grand-child! 
What an unexpected Happiness is this! to dis- 
cover in the space of 3 minutes, as many of my 
Descendants ! This, I am certain is Philander 
the son of my Laurina's 3d girl the amiable 
Bertha; there wants now but the presence of 
Gustavus to compleat the Union of my Laurina's 
Grand-Children." 

u And here he is; (said a Gracefull Youth who 
that instant entered the room) here is the Gus- 

24 



3 LOVE AND FREINDSHIP 

? 

tavus you desire to see. I am the son of Agatha 
your Laurina's 4th and youngest Daughter." "I 
see you are indeed; replied Lord St. Clair But 
tell me (continued he looking fearfully towards 
the Door) tell me, have I any other Grand-chil- 
dren in the House." "None my Lord." "Then 
I will provide for you all without farther de- 
lay Here are 4 Banknotes of 5o each Take 
them and remember I have done the Duty of a 
Grandfather." He instantly left the Room and 
immediately afterwards the House. 

Adeiu. 

Laura. 



LETTER the i2th 
LAURA in continuation 

YOU may imagine how greatly we were sur- 
prised by the sudden departure of Lord St. 
Clair. "Ignoble Grand-sire!" exclaimed Sophia. 
"Unworthy Grandfather!" said I, and instantly 
fainted in each other's arms. How long we re- 
mained in this situation I know not; but when 
we recovered we found ourselves alone, without 
either Gustavus, Philander, or the Banknotes. 
As we were deploring our unhappy fate, the 
Door of the Apartment opened and "Macdonald" 

25 



JANE AUSTEN 

was announced. He was Sophia's cousin. The 
haste with which he came to our releif so soon 
after the receipt of our Note, spoke so greatly 
in his favour that I hesitated not to pronounce 
him at first sight, a tender and simpathetic Freind. 
Alas ! he little deserved the name for though he 
told us that he was much concerned at our Mis- 
fortunes, yet by his own account it appeared 
that the perusal of them, had neither drawn from 
him a single sigh, nor induced him to bestow one 
curse on our vindictive stars . He told Sophia 
that his Daughter depended on her returning with 
him to Macdonald-Hall, and that as his cousin's 
friend he should be happy to see me there also. 
To Macdonald-Hall, therefore we went, and 
were received with great kindness by (Janetta 
the Daughter of Macdonald, and the Mistress 
of the Mansion. Janetta was then only fifteen; 
naturally well disposed, endowed with a sus- 
ceptible Heart, and a simpathetic Disposition, she 
might, had these amiable qualities been properly 
encouraged, have been an ornament to human 
Nature; but unfortunately her Father possessed 
not a soul sufficiently exalted to admire so promis- 
ing a Disposition, and had endeavoured by 
every means in his power to prevent its encreasing 
with her Years. He had actually so far extin- 
guished the natural noble Sensibility of her Heart, 
as to prevail on her to accept an offer from a 
26 



5 LOVE AND FREINDSHIP $ 

young Man of his Recommendation. They were 
to be married in a few months, and Graham, was 
in the House when we arrived. We soon saw 
through his character. He was just such a Man 
as one might have expected to be the choice of 
Macdonald. They said he was Sensible, well-in- 
formed, and Agreable; we did not pretend to 
Judge of such trifles, but as we were convinced 
he had no soul, that he had never read the sor- 
rows of Werter, and that his Hair bore not the 
least resemblance to auburn, we were certain 
that Janetta could feel no affection for him, or 
at least that she ought to feel none. The very 
circumstances of his being her father's choice 
too, was so much in his disfavour, that had he 
been deserving her, in every other respect yet thai 
of itself ought to have been a sufficient reason in 
the Eyes of Janetta for rejecting him. These 
considerations we were determined to represent 
to her in their proper light and doubted not of 
meeting with the desired success from one nat- 
urally so well disposed; whose errors in the affair 
had only arisen from a want of proper confidence 
in her own opinion, and a suitable contempt of 
her father's. We found her indeed all that our 
warmest wishes could have hoped for; we had no 
difficulty to convince her that it was impossible 
she could love Graham, or that it was her Duty 
to disobey her Father; the only thing at which she 

27 



^ JANE AUSTEN ^ 

rather seemed to hesitate was our assertion that 
she must be attached to some other Person. 
For sometime, she persevered in declaring that she 
knew no other young man for whom she had the 
smallest Affection; but upon explaining the im- 
possibility of such a thing she said that she be- 
leived she did like Captain M'Kenrie better than 
any one she knew besides. This confession 
satisfied us and after having enumerated the good 
Qualities of M'Kenrie and assured her that she 
was violently in love with him, we desired to know 
whether he had ever in any wise declared his 
affection to her. 

u So far from having ever declared it, I have 
no reason to imagine that he has ever felt any 
for me." said Janetta. "That he certainly 
adores you (replied Sophia) there can be no 
doubt . The Attachment must be reciprocal. 
Did he never gaze on you with admiration 
tenderly press your hand drop an involuntary 
tear and leave the room abruptly?" "Never 
(replied she) that I remember he has always 
left the room indeed when his visit has been 
ended, but has never gone away particularly 
abruptly or without making a bow." Indeed my 
Love (said I) you must be mistaken for it is 
absolutely impossible that he should ever have 
left you but with Confusion, Despair, and 
Precipitation. Consider but for a moment Jan- 
28 



: LOVE AND FREINDSHIP 

etta, and you must be convinced how absurd it 
is to suppose that he could ever make ' a Bow, 
or behave like any other Person." Having 
settled this Point to our satisfaction, the next 
we took into consideration was, to determine 
in what manner we should inform M'Kenrie of 
the favourable Opinion Janetta entertained of 
him. . . . We at length agreed to aquaint him 
with it by an anonymous Letter which Sophia 
drew up in the following manner. 

"Oh! happy Lover of the beautifull Janetta, 
oh! amiable Possessor of her Heart whose hand 
is destined to another, why do you thus delay a 
confession of your attachment to the amiable 
Object of it? Oh! consider that a few weeks 
will at once put an end to every flattering Hope 
that you may now entertain, by uniting the un- 
fortunate Victim of her father's Cruelty to the 
execrable and detested Graham." 

"Alas! why do you thus so cruelly connive 
at the projected Misery of her and of yourself by 
delaying to communicate that scheme which had 
doubtless long possessed your imagination? A 
secret Union will at once secure the felicity of 
both." 

The amiable M'Kenrie, whose modesty as he 
afterwards assured us had been the only reason 
of his having so long concealed the violence of 
his affection for Janetta, on receiving this Billet 

29 



J JANE- AUSTEN g 

flew on the wings of Love to Macdonald-Hall, 
and so powerfully pleaded his Attachment to her 
who inspired it, that after a few more private 
interviews, Sophia and I experienced the satis- 
faction of seeing them depart for Gretna-Green, 
which they chose for the celebration of their 
Nuptials, in preference to any other place al- 
though it was at a considerable distance from 
Macdonald-Hall. 

Adeiu 

Laura. 



LETTER the i 3 th 
LAURA in continuation 

THEY had been gone nearly a couple of 
Hours, before either Macdonald or Graham 
had entertained any suspicion of the affair. And 
they might not even then have suspected it, but 
for the following little Accident. Sophia happen- 
ing one day to open a private Drawer in Mac- 
donald's Library with one of her own keys, dis- 
covered that it was the Place where he kept his 
Papers of consequence and amongst them some 
bank notes of considerable amount. This dis- 
covery she imparted to me ; and having agreed to- 
gether that it would be a proper treatment of so 

30 



g LOVE AND FREINDSHIP & 

vile a Wretch as Macdonald to deprive him of 
money, perhaps dishonestly gained, it was de- 
termined that the next time we should either of 
us happen to go that way, we would take one or 
more of the Bank notes from the drawer. This 
well meant Plan we had often successfully put in 
Execution; but alas! on the very day of Janetta's 
Escape, as Sophia was majestically removing the 
5th Bank-note from the Drawer to her own purse, 
she was suddenly most impertinently interrupted 
in her employment by the entrance of Macdonald 
himself, in a most abrupt and precipitate Manner. 
Sophia (who though naturally all winning sweet- 
ness could when occasions demanded it call forth 
the Dignity of her sex) instantly put on a most 
forbiding look, and darting an angry frown on 
the undaunted culprit, demanded in a haughty 
tone of voice "Wherefore her retirement was 
thus insolently broken in on?" The unblushing 
Macdonald, without even endeavouring to ex- 
culpate himself from the crime he was charged 
with, meanly endeavoured to reproach Sophia 
with ignobly defrauding him of his money . . . 
The dignity of Sophia was wounded; "Wretch 
(exclaimed she, hastily replacing the Bank-note 
in the Drawer) how darest thou to accuse me of 
an Act, of which the bare idea makes me blush?" 
The base wretch was still unconvinced and con- 
tinued to upbraid the justly-offended Sophia in 

3 1 



JANE AUSTEN & 

such opprobious Language, that at length he so 
greatly provoked the gentle sweetness of her 
Nature, as to induce her to revenge herself on 
him by informing him of Janetta's Elopement, 
and of the active Part we had both taken in the 
affair. At this period of their Quarrel I entered 
the Library and was as you may imagine equally 
offended as Sophia at the ill-grounded accusations 
of the malevolent and contemptible Macdonald. 
"Base Miscreant! (cried I) how canst thou thus 
undauntedly endeavour to sully the spotless rep- 
utation of such bright Excellence? Why dost 
thou not suspect my innocence as soon?" "Be 
satisfied Madam (replied he) I do suspect it, and 
therefore must desire that you will both leave 
this House in less than half an hour." 

"We shall go willingly; (answered Sophia) 
our hearts have long detested thee, and nothing 
but our freindship for thy Daughter could have 
induced us to remain so long beneath thy roof." 

"Your Freindship for my Daughter has indeed 
been most powerfully exerted by throwing her 
into the arms of an unprincipled Fortune-hunter." 
(replied he) 

"Yes, (exclaimed I) amidst every misfortune, 
it will afford us some consolation to reflect that 
by this one act of freindship to Janetta, we have 
amply discharged every obligation that we have 
received from her father." 
32 



^ LOVE AND FREINDSHIP 

"It must indeed be a most gratefull reflection, 
to your exalted minds." (said he.) 

As soon as we had packed up our wardrobe 
and valuables, we left Macdonald Hall, and after 
having walked about a mile and a half we sate 
down by the side of a clear limpid stream to re- 
fresh our exhausted limbs. The place was 
suited to meditation. A grove of full-grown 
Elms sheltered us from the East . A Bed of 
full-grown Nettles from the West . Before us 
ran the murmuring brook and behind us ran the 
turn-pike road. We were in a mood for con- 
templation and in a Disposition to enjoy so 
beautifull a spot. A mutual silence which 
had for some time reigned between us, was 
at length broke by my exclaiming u What a 
lovely scene I Alas why are not Edward and 
Augustus here to enjoy its Beauties with 
us?" 

"Ah! my beloved Laura (cried Sophia) for 
pity's sake forbear recalling to my remembrance 
the unhappy situation of my imprisoned Hus- 
band. Alas, what would I not give to learn the 
fate of my Augustus! to know if he is still in 
Newgate, or if he is yet hung. But never shall I 
be able so far to conquer my tender sensibility as 
to enquire after him. Oh, do not I beseech you 
ever let me again hear you repeat his beloved 
name . It affects me too deeply . I cannot 

33 



^ JANE AUSTEN 

bear to hear him mentioned it wounds my 
feelings." 

* 'Excuse me my Sophia for having thus unwill- 
ingly offended you " replied I and then 
changing the conversation, desired her to admire 
the noble Grandeur of the Elms which sheltered 
us from the Eastern Zephyr. "Alas ! my Laura 
(returned she) avoid so melancholy a subject, I 
intreat you. Do not again wound my Sensibility 
by observations on those elms. They remind me 
of Augustus. He was like them, tall, majestic, 
he possessed that noble grandeur which you 
admire in them." 

I was silent, fearfull lest I might any more 
unwillingly distress her by fixing on any other 
subject of conversation which might again re- 
mind her of Augustus. 

"Why do you not speak my Laura? (said she 
after a short pause) "I cannot support this si- 
lence you must not leave me to my own reflections ; 
they ever recur to Augustus." 

"What a beautiful sky! (said I) How charm- 
ingly is the azure varied by those delicate streaks 
of white!" 

"Oh! my Laura (replied she hastily withdraw- 
ing her Eyes from a momentary glance at the sky) 
do not thus distress me by calling my Attention to 
an object which so cruelly reminds me of my 
Augustus's blue satin waistcoat striped with 
34 



^ LOVE AND FREINDSHIP ^ 

white ! In pity to your unhappy freind avoid a 
subject so distressing. What could I do? The 
feelings of Sophia were at that time so exquisite, 
and the tenderness she felt for Augustus so poig- 
nant that I had not power to start any other topic, 
justly fearing that it might in some unforseen 
manner again awaken all her sensibility by direct- 
ing her thoughts to her Husband. Yet to be 
silent would be cruel; she had intreated me to 
talk. 

From this Dilemma I was most fortunately 
releived by an accident truly apropos; it was the 
lucky overturning of a Gentleman's Phaeton, on 
the road which ran murmuring behind us. It was 
a most fortunate accident as it diverted the at- 
tention of Sophia from melancholy reflections 
which she had been before indulging. We in- 
stantly quitted our seats and ran to the rescue 
of those who but a few moments before had been 
in so elevated a situation as a fashionably high 
Phaeton, but who were now laid low and spraw- 
ling in the Dust. "What an ample subject for 
reflection on the uncertain Enjoyments of this 
World, would not that Phaeton and the Life of 
Cardinal Wolsey afford a thinking Mind!" said 
I to Sophia as we were hastening to the field of 
Action. 

She had not time to answer me, for every 
thought was now engaged by the horrid spectacle 

35 



JANE AUSTEN 

before us. Two Gentlemen most elegantly at- 
tired but weltering in their blood was what first 
struck our Eyes we approached they were 
Edward and Augustus . Yes dearest Mari- 
anne they were our Husbands. Sophia shreiked 
and fainted on the ground I screamed and in- 
stantly ran mad . We remained thus mutually 
deprived of our senses, some minutes, and on re- 
gaining them were deprived of them again. For 
an Hour and a Quarter did we continue in this un- 
fortunate situation Sophia fainting every mo- 
ment and I running mad as often. At length a 
groan from the hapless Edward (who alone re- 
tained any share of life) restored us to ourselves. 
Had we indeed before imagined that either of 
them lived, we should have been more sparing of 
our Greif but as we had supposed when we first 
beheld them that they were no more, we knew 
that nothing could remain to be done but what we 
were about. No sooner therefore did we hear 
my Edward's groan than postponing our lamen- 
tations for the present, we hastily ran to the Dear 
Youth and kneeling on each side of him implored 
him not to die . "Laura (said He fixing his 
now languid Eyes on me) I fear I have been over- 
turned." 

I was overjoyed to find him yet sensible. 

"Oh I tell me Edward (said I) tell me I be- 
seech you before you die, what has befallen you 

36 



LOVE AND FREINDSHIP 

since that unhappy Day in which Augustus was 
arrested and we were separated " 

"I will" (said he) and instantly fetching a deep 
sigh, Expired . Sophia immediately sunk again 
into a swoon . My greif was more audible. 
My Voice faltered, My Eyes assumed a vacant 
stare, my face became as pale as Death, and my 
senses were considerably impaired . 

"Talk not to me of Phaetons (said I, raving 
in a frantic, incoherent manner) Give me a 
violin . I'll play to- him and soothe him in 
his melancholy Hours Beware ye gentle 
Nymphs of Cupid's Thunderbolts, avoid the pier- 
cing shafts of Jupiter Look at that grove of 
Firs I see a Leg of Mutton They told me 
Edward was not Dead; but they deceived me 
they took him for a cucumber " Thus I con- 
tinued wildly exclaiming on my Edward's Death 
. For two Hours did I rave thus madly and 
should not then have left off, as I was not in the 
least fatigued, had not Sophia who was just re- 
covered from her swoon, intreated me to consider 
that Night was now approaching and that the 
Damps began to fall. "And whither shall we go 
(said I) to shelter us from either."? "To that 
white Cottage." (replied she pointing to a neat 
Building which rose up amidst the grove of Elms 
and which I had not before observed ) I 
agreed and we instantly walked to it we knocked 

37 



^ JANE AUSTEN ^ 

at the door it was opened by an old woman ; on 
being requested to afford us a Night's Lodging, 
she informed us that her House was but small, 
that she had only two Bedrooms, but that How- 
ever we should be wellcome to one of them. We 
were satisfied and followed the good woman into 
the House where we were greatly cheered by the 
sight of a comfortable fire . She was a Widow 
and had only one Daughter, who was then just 
seventeen One of the best of ages; but alas! 
she was very plain and her name was Bridget. 
. . . Nothing therfore could be expected from 
her she could not be supposed to possess 
either exalted Ideas, Delicate Feelings or refined 
Sensibilities . She was nothing more than a 
mere good-tempered, civil and obliging young 
woman; as such we could scarcely dislike her 
she was only an Object of Contempt . 

Adeiu 

Laura. 



LETTER the i4th 
LAURA in continuation 

ARM yourself my amiable young Freind with 
all the philosophy you are Mistress of; 
summon up all the fortitude you possess, for alas ! 

38 



3 LOVE AND FREINDSHIP ^ 

in the perusal of the following Pages your sensi- 
bility will be most severely tried, Ah! what 
were the misfortunes I had before experienced 
and which I have already related to you, to the 
one I am now going to inform you of. The Death 
of my Father my Mother, and my Husband 
though almost more than gentle nature could 
support, were trifles in comparison to the misfor- 
tune I am now proceeding to relate. The morn- 
ing after our arrival at the Cottage, Sophia 
complained of a violent pain in her delicate 
limbs, accompanied with a disagreable Head- 
ake. She attributed it to a cold caught by 
her continued faintings in the open air as 
the Dew was falling the Evening before. 
This I feared was but too probably the case; 
since how could it be otherwise accounted for that 
I should have escaped the same indisposition, but 
by supposing that the bodily Exertions I had 
undergone in my repeated fits of frenzy had so 
effectually circulated and warmed my Blood as to 
make me proof against the chilling Damps of 
Night, whereas, Sophia lying totally inactive on 
the ground must have been exposed to all their 
severity. I was 'most seriously alarmed by her 
illness which trifling as it may appear to you, a 
certain instinctive sensibilty whispered me, would 
in the End be fatal to her. 

Alas ! my fears were but too fully justified; she 

39 



JANE AUSTEN ^ 

grew gradually worse and I daily became more 
alarmed for her. At length she was obliged to 
confine herself solely to the Bed allotted us by 
our worthy Landlady . Her disorder turned 
to a galloping Consiumption and in a few days 
carried her off. Amidst all my Lamentations for 
her (and violent you may suppose they were) I 
yet received some consolation in the reflection of 
my having paid every attention to her, that could 
be offered, in her illness. I had wept over her 
every Day had bathed her sweet face with my 
tears and had pressed her fair Hands continually 
in mine . "My beloved Laura (said she to me 
a few Hours before she died) take warning from 
my unhappy End and avoid the imprudent con- 
duct which had occasioned it ... Beware of 
fainting-fits, . . Though at the time they may be 
refreshing and agreable yet beleive me they will 
in the end, if too often repeated and at improper 
seasons, prove destructive to your Constitution 
. . . My fate will teach you this . . I die a Mar- 
tyr to my grief for the loss of Augustus . . One 
fatal swoon has cost me my Life . . B'eware of 
swoons Dear Laura. ... A frenzy fit is not one 
quarter so pernicious; it is an exercise to the Body 
and if not too violent, is I dare say conducive 

to Health in its consequences Run mad as 

often as you chuse; but do not faint " 

These were the last words she ever addressed 
40 



LOVE AND FREINDSHIP 

to me . . It was her dieing Advise to her afflicted 
Laura, who has ever most faithfully adhered to 
it. 

After having attended my lamented freind to 
her Early Grave, I immediately (tho' late at 
night) left the detested Village in which she died, 
and near which had expired my Husband and 
Augustus. I had not walked many yards from 
it before I was overtaken by a stage-coach, in 
which I instantly took a place, determined to pro- 
ceed in it to Edinburgh, where I hoped to find 
some kind some pitying Freind who would receive 
and comfort me in my afflictions. 

It was so dark when I entered the Coach that 
I could not distinguish the Number of my Fellow- 
travellers; I could only perceive that they were 
many. Regardless however of anything concern- 
ing them, I gave myself up to my own sad reflec- 
tions. A general silence prevailed A si- 
lence, which was by nothing interrupted but by 
the loud and repeated snores of one of the 
Party. 

"What an illiterate villain must that man be! 
(thought I to myself) What a total want of 
delicate refinement must he have, who can thus 
shock our senses by such a brutal noise ! He must 
I am certain be capable of every bad action*! 
There is no crime too black for such a Char- 
acter I" Thus reasoned I within myself, and 



JANE AUSTEN 

doubtless such were the reflections of my fellow 
travellers, 

At length, returning Day enabled me to be- 
hold the unprincipled Scoundrel, who had so vio- 
lently disturbed my feelings. It was Sir Edward 
the father of my Deceased Husband. By his side, 
sate Augusta, and on the same seat with me were 
your Mother and Lady Dorothea. Imagine my 
-surprise at finding myself thus seated amongst 
my old Acquaintance. Great as was my astonish- 
ment, it was yet increased, when on looking out 
of Windows, I beheld the Husband of Philippa, 
with Philippa by his side, on the Coach-box and 
when on looking behind I beheld, Philander and 
Gustavus in the Basket. "Oh! Heavens, (ex- 
claimed I) is it possible that I should so unex- 
pectedly be surrounded by my nearest Relations 
and Connections"? These words roused the rest 
of the Party, and every eye was directed to the 
corner in which I sat. "Oh! my Isabel (contin- 
ued I throwing myself acro-ss Lady Dorothea in 
to her arms) receive once more to your Bosom 
the unfortunate Laura.. Alas! when we la-st 
parted in the Vale of Usk, I was happy in being 
united to the best of Edward's; I had then a Father 
and a Mother, and had never known misfortunes 
But now deprived of every freind but 
yau 

"What! (interrupted Augusta) is my Brother 
42 



^ LOVE AND FREINDSHIP & 

dead then? Tell us I entreat you what is become 
of him?" "Yes, cold and insensible Nymph, 
(replied I) that luckless swain your Brother, is 
no more, and you may now glory in being the 
Heiress of Sir Edward's fortune." 

Although I had always despised her from the 
Day I had overheard her conversation with my 
Edward, yet in civility I complied with hers and 
Sir Edward's intreaties that I would inform them 
of the whole melancholy affair. They were 
greatly shocked even the obdurate Heart of Sir 
Edward and the insensible one of Augusta, were 
touched with sorrow, by the unhappy tale. At 
the request of your Mother I related to them 
every other misfortune which had befallen me 
since we parted. Of the imprisonment of Au- 
gustus and the Absence of Edward of our arri- 
val in Scotland of our unexpected Meeting with 
our Grand-father and our cousins of our visit to 
Macdonald-Hall of the singular service we there 
performed towards Janetta of her Fathers in- 
gratitude for it ... of his inhuman Behav- 
iour, unaccountable suspicions, and barbarous 
treatment of us, in obliging us to leave the House 
... of our lamentations on the loss of Edward 
and Augustus and finally of the melancholy Death 
of my beloved Companion. 

Pity and surprise were strongly depictured in 
your Mother's countenance, during the whole of 

43 



JANE AUSTEN X 

my narration, but I am sorry to say, that to the 
eternal reproach of her sensibility, the latter 
infinitely predominated. Nay, faultless as my con- 
duct had certainly been during the whole course 
of my late misfortunes and adventures, she pre- 
tended to find fault with my behaviour in many 
of the situations in which I had been placed. As 
I was sensible myself, that I had always behaved 
in a manner which reflected Honour on my Feel- 
ing and Refinement, I paid little attention to what 
she said, and desired her to satisfy my Curiosity 
by informing me how she came ther, instead of 
wounding my spotless reputation with unjustifi- 
able Reproaches. As soon as she had complyed 
with my wishes in this particular and had given 
me an accurate detail of every thing that had 
befallen her since our separation (the particulars 
of which if you are not already acquainted with, 
your Mother will give you) I applied to Augusta 
for the same information respecting herself, Sir 
Edward and Lady Dorothea. 

She told me that having considerable taste for 
the Beauties of Nature, her curiosity to behold 
the delightful scenes it exhibited in that part of 
the World had been so much raised by Gilpin's 
Tour to the Highlands, that she had prevailed on 
her Father to undertake a Tour of Scotland and 
had persuaded Lady Dorothea to accompany 
them. That they had arrived at Edinburgh a 
44 



& LOVE AND FREINDSHIP 

few Days before and from thence had made daily 
Excursions? into the Country around in the Stage 
Coach they were then in, from one of which Ex- 
cursions they were at that time returning. My 
next enquiries were concerning Philippa and her 
Husband, the latter of whom I learned having 
spent all her fortune, had recouse for subsistence 
to the talent in which, he had always most ex- 
celled, namely, Driving, and that having sold 
every thing which belonged to them except their 
Coach, had converted it into a Stage and in order 
to be removed from any of his former Acquaint- 
ance, had driven it to Edinburgh from whence he 
went to Sterling every other Day. That Phil- 
ippa still retaining her affection for her ungrate- 
full Husband, had followed him to Scotland and 
generally accompanied him in his little Excursions 
to Sterling. "It has only been to throw a little 
money into their Pockets (continued Augusta) 
that my Father has always travelled in their 
Coach to view the beauties of the Country since 
our arrival in Scotland for it would certainly 
have been much more agreable to us, to visit the 
Highlands in a Postchaise than merely to travel 
from Edinburgh to Sterling and from Sterling to 
Edinburgh every other Day in a crowded and un- 
comfortable Stage." I perfectly agreed with her 
in her sentiments on the affair, and secretly 
blamed Sir Edward for thus sacrificing his Daugh- 

45 



$ JANE AUSTEN ^ 

ter's Pleasure for the sake of a ridiculous old wo- 
man whose folly in marrying so young a man 
ought to be punished. His Behaviour however 
was entirely of a peice with his general Character; 
for what could be expected from a man who pos- 
sessed not the smallest atom of Sensibility, who 
scarcely knew the meaning of simpathy, and who 
actually snored . 

Adeiu 

Laura. 



LETTER the 

LAURA in continuation. 

WHEN we arrived at the town where we 
were to Breakfast, I was determined to 
speak with Philander and Gustavus, and to that 
purpose as soon as I left the Carriage, I went 
to the Basket and tenderly enquired after their 
Health, expressing my fears of the uneasiness of 
their situation. At first they seemed rather con- 
fused at my appearance dreading no doubt that I 
might call them to account for the money which 
our Grandfather had left me and which they had 
unjustly deprived me of, but finding that I men- 
tioned nothing of the Matter, they desired me to 
step into the Basket as we might there converse 
46 



LOVE AND FREINDSHIP 

with greater ease. Accordingly I entered and 
whilst the rest of the party were devouring green 
tea and buttered toast, we feasted ourselves in 
a more refined and sentimental Manner by a con- 
fidential Conversation. I informed them of 
every thing which had befallen me during the 
course of my life, and at my request they related 
to me every incident of theirs. 

"We are the sons as you already know, of the 
two youngest Daughters which Lord Saint Clair 
had by Laurina an italian opera girl. Our 
mothers could neither of them exactly ascertain 
who were our Father, though it is generally be- 
leived that Philander, is the son of one Philip 
Jones a Bricklayer and that my Father was Greg- 
ory Staves a Staymaker of Edinburgh. This is 
however of little consequence for as our Mothers 
were certainly never married to either of them it 
reflects no Dishonour on our Blood, which is of 
a most ancient and unpolluted kind. Bertha (the 
Mother of Philander) and Agatha (my own 
Mother) always lived together. They were 
neither of them very rich; their united fortunes 
had originally amounted to nine thousand Pounds, 
but as they had always lived upon the principal 
of it, when we were fifteen it was diminished to 
nine Hundred. This nine Hundred, they always 
kept in a Drawer in one of the Tables which stood 
in our common sitting Parlour, for the conveni- 

47 



JANE AUSTEN 

ence of having it always at Hand. Whether it 
was from this circumstance, of its being easily 
taken, or from a wish of being independent, or 
from an excess of sensibility (for which we were 
always remarkable) I cannot now determine, but 
certain it is that when we had reached our I5th 
year, we took the nine Hundred Pounds and ran 
away. Having obtained this prize we were de- 
termined to manage it with economy and not to 
spend it either with folly or Extravagance. To 
this purpose we therefore divided it into nine par- 
cels, one of which we devoted to Victuals, the 2nd 
to Drink, the 3rd to Housekeeping, the 4th to 
Carriages, the 5th to Horses, the 6th to Servants, 
the yth to Amusements the 8th to Cloathes and 
the Qth to Silver Buckles. Having thus arranged 
our Expences for two months (for we expected 
to make the nine Hundred Pounds last as long) 
we hastened to London and had the good luck to 
spend it in 7 weeks and a Day which was 6 Days 
sooner than we had intended. As soon as we 
had thus happily disencumbered ourselves from 
the weight of so much money, we began to think 
of returning to our Mothers, but accidentally 
hearing that they were both starved to Death, 
we gave over the design and determined to engage 
ourselves to some strolling Company of Players, 
as we had always a turn for the Stage. Accord- 
ingly we offered our services to one and were 



LOVE AND FREINDSHIP ' 

accepted; our Company was indeed rather small, 
as it consisted only of the Manager his wife and 
ourselves, but there were fewer to pay and the 
only inconvenience attending it was the Scarcity 
of Plays which for want of People to fill the Char- 
acters, we could perform. We did not mind 
trifles however . O'ne of our most admired 
Performances was Macbeth, in which we were 
truly great. The Manager always played 
Banquv himself, his Wife my La dy Macbeth. I 
did the Three Witches and Philander acted all 
the rest. To say the truth this tragedy was not 
only the Best, but the only Play we ever per- 
formed; and after having acted it all over Eng- 
land, and Wales, we came to Scotland to exhibit it 
over the remainder of Great Britain. We hap- 
pened to be quartered in that very Town, where 
you came and met your Grandfather . We 
were in t'he Inn-yard when his Carriage entered 
and perceiving by the arms to whom it be- 
longed, and knowing that Lord St. Clair was 
our Grandfather, we agreed to endeavour to 
get something from him by discovering the 
Relationship . You know how well it suc- 
ceeded . Having obtained the two Hun- 
dred Pounds, we instantly left the Town, 
leaving our Manager and his Wife to act Macbeth 
by themselves, and took the road to Sterling, 
where we spent our little fortune with great eclat. 

49 



JANE AUSTEN 

We are now returning to Edinburgh in order to 
get some preferment in the Acting way; and such 
my Dear Cousin is our History." 

I thanked the amiable Youth for his enter- 
taining narration, and after expressing my wishes 
for their Welfare and Happiness, left them in 
their little Habitation and returned to my other 
Freinds who impatiently expected me. 

My adventures are now drawing to a close my 
dearest Marianne; at least for the present. 

When we arrived at Edinburgh Sir Edward 
told me that as the Widow of his son, he desired 
I would accept from his Hands of four Hundred 
a year. I graciously promised that I would, but 
could not help observing that the unsimpathetic 
Baronet offered it more on account of my being 
the Widow of Edward than in being the refined 
and amiable Laura. 

I took up my residence in a romantic Village 
in the Highlands of Scotland where I have ever 
since continued, and where I can uninterrupted by 
unmeaning Visits, indulge in a melancholy solitude, 
my unceasing Lamentations for the Death of my 
Father, my Mother, my Husband and my Freind. 

Augusta has been for several years united to 
Graham the Man of all others most suited to her; 
she became acquainted with him during her stay 
in Scotland. 

Sir Edward in hopes of gaining an Heir to his 

50 



^ LOVE AND FREINDSHIP 

Title and Estate, at the same time married Lady 
Dorothea . His wishes have been answered. 

Philander and Gustavus, after having raised 
their reputation by their Performances in the 
Theatrical Line in Edinburgh, removed to Co- 
vent Garden, where they still Exhibit under the 
assumed names of Luvis and Quick. 

Philippa has long paid the Debt of Nature, 
Her Husband however still continues to drive the 
Stage-Coach from Edinburgh to Sterling: 
Adeiu my Dearest Marianne. 

Laura. 
Finis 

June I3th 1790. 



LESLEY CASTLE 

AN UNFINISHED NOVEL IN 
LETTERS 



To HENRY THOMAS AUSTEN 

Esqre. 
Sir 

1AM now availing myself of thje Liberty you 
have frequently honoured me with of dedicat- 
ing one of my Novels to you. That it is un- 
finished, I greive; yet fear that from me, it will 
always remain so; that as far as it is carried, it 
should be so trifling and so unworthy of you, is 
another concern to your obliged humble 

Servant 

The Author 

Messrs Demand and Co please to pay Jane 
Austen Spinster the sum of one hundred guineas 
on account of your Humble Servant. 

H. T. Austen 
105. o. o 



55 



LESLEY CASTLE 



LETTER The FIRST is from 

Miss MARGARET LESLEY to Miss CHAR- 

LOTTE LUTTERELL. 

Lesley Castle Janry 3rd 1792. 

MY Brother has just left us. "Matilda 
(said he at parting) you and Margaret 
will I am certain take all the care of my dear little 
one, that she might have received from an indul- 
gent, and affectionate and amiable Mother." 
Tears rolled down his cheeks as he spoke these 
words the remembrance of her, who had so wan- 
tonly disgraced the Maternal character and so 
openly violated the conjugal Duties, prevented 
his adding anything farther; he embaced his 
sweet Child and after saluting Matilda and Me 
hastily broke from us and seating himself in his 
Chaise, pursued the road to Aberdeen. Never 
was there a better young Man ! Ah ! how little 
did he deserve the misfortunes he has experienced 
in the Marriage state. So good a Husband to 
so bad a Wife ! for you know my dear Charlotte 
that the Worthless Louisa left him, her Child and 
reputation a few weeks ago in company with 
Danvers and dishonour.* Never was there a 
sweeter face, a finer form, or a less amiable Heart 

* Rakehelly Dishonour, Esqre. (as in M.S.). 

57 



JANE AUSTEN 

than Louisa owned! Her Child already posses- 
ses the personal Charms of her unhappy Mother! 
May she inherit from her Father all his mental 
ones! Lesley is at present but five and twenty, 
and has already given himself up to melancholy 
and Despair; what a difference between him and 
his Father ! Sir George is 57 and still remains the 
Beau, the flighty stripling, the gay Lad, .and 
sprightly Youngster, that his Son was really about 
five years back, and that he has affected to appear 
since my remembrance. While our father is flut- 
tering about the streets of London, gay, dissi- 
pated, and Thoughtless at the age of 57, Matilda 
and I continue secluded from Mankind in our old 
and Mouldering Castle, which is situated two 
miles from Perth on a bold projecting Rock, and 
commands an ectensive view of the Town and its 
delightful Envisons. But tho' retired from al- 
most all the World, (for we visit no one but the 
M'Leods, The M'Kenzies, the M'Phersons, the 
M'Cartneys, the M'Donalds, The M'kinnons, the 
M'lellans, the M'Kays, the Macbeths and the 
Macduffs) we are neither dull nor unhappy; on 
the contrary there never were two more lively, 
more agreable or more witty girls, than we are; 
not an hour 'in the Day hangs heavy on our Hands. 
We read, we work, we walk, and when fatigued 
with these Employments releive our spirits, either 

58 



^ LOVE AND FREINDSHIP & 

by a lively song, a graceful Dance, or by some 
smart bon-mot, and witty repartee. We are 
handsome my dear Charlotte, very handsome and 
the greatest of our Perfections is, that we are en- 
tirely insensible of them ourselves. But why do 
I thus dwell on myself? Let me rather repeat 
the praise of our dear little Neice the innocent 
Louisa, who is at present sweetly smiling in a gen- 
tle Nap, as she reposes on the sofa. The dear 
Creature is just turned of two years old; as hand- 
some as tho' 2 and 20, as sensible as tho' 2 and 30, 
and as prudent as tho' 2 and 40. To convince you 
of this, I must inform you that she has a very 
fine complexion and very pretty features, that she 
already knows the two first letters in the Alpha- 
bet, and that she never tears her frocks . If 
I have not" now convinced you of her Beauty, Sense 
and Prudence, I have nothing more to urge in 
support of my assertion, and you will therefore 
have no way of deciding the Affair but by coming 
to Lesley-Castle, and by a personal acquaintance 
with Louisa, determine for yourself. Ah! my 
dear Freind, how happy should I be to see you 
within these venerable Walls! It is now four 
years since my removal from School has separated 
me from you; that two such tender Hearts, so 
closely linked together by the ties of simpathy and 
Freindship, should be so widely removed from 

59 



g JANE AUSTEN ^ 

each other, is vastly moving. I live in Perthshire, 
You in Sussex. We might meet in London, were 
my Father disposed to carry me there, and were 
your Mother to be there at the same time. We 
might meet at Bath, at Tunbridge, or anywhere 
else indeed, could we but be at the same place 
together. We have only to hope that such a 
period may arrive. My Father does not return 
to us till Autumn; my Brother will leave Scotland 
in a few Days; he is impatient to travel. Mis- 
taken Youth! He vainly flatters himself that 
change of Air will heal the Wounds of a broken 
Heart! You will join with me I am certain my 
dear Charlotte, in prayers for the recovery of 
the unhappy Lesley's peace of Mind, which 
must ever be essential to that of your sincere 
freind. 

M. Lesley. 



LETTER the SECOND 

From Miss C. LUTTERELL to Miss M. Les- 
LEY in answer. 

Glenford Feb:ry 12 

I HAVE a thousand excuses to beg for having 
so long delayed thanking you my dear Peggy 
for your agreable Letter, which beleive me I 
60 



^ LOVE AND FREINDSHIP ^ 

should not have deferred doing, had not every 
moment of my time during the last five weeks 
been so fully employed in the necessary arrange- 
ment for my sisters wedding, as to allow me no 
time to devote either to you or myself. And now 
what provokes me more than anything else is that 
the Match is broke off, and all my Labour thrown 
away. Imagine how great the Dissapointment 
must be to me, when you consider that after hav- 
ing laboured both by Night and by Day, in order 
to get the Wedding dinner ready by the time ap- 
pointed, after having roasted Beef, Broiled Mut- 
ton, and Stewed Soup enough to last the new- 
married couple through the Honey-moon, I had 
the mortification of finding that I had been Roast- 
ing, Broiling and Stewing both the Meat and My- 
self to no purpose. Indeed my dear Freind, I 
never remembered suffering any vexation equal 
to what I experienced on last Monday when my 
sister came running to me in the store-room with 
her face as White as a Whipt syllabub, and told 
me that Hervey had been thrown from his Horse, 
had fractured his Scull and was pronounced by 
his surgeon to be in the most emminent Danger. 
"Good God! (said I) you dont say so? Why 
what in the name of Heaven will become of all the 
Victuals ! We shall never be able to eat it while 
it is good. However, well call in the Surgeon to 
help us. I shall be able to manage the Sir-loin 

61 



& JANE AUSTEN ^ 

myself, my Mother will eat the soup, and You 
and the Doctor must finish the rest." Here I 
was interrupted, by seeing my poor Sister fall 
down to appearance Lifeless upon one of the 
Chests, where we keep our Table linen. I im- 
mediately called my Mother and the Maids, and 
at last we brought her to herself again; as soon 
as ever she was sensible, she expressed a determin- 
ation of going instantly to Henry, and was so 
wildly bent on this Scheme, that we had the great- 
est Difficulty in the World to prevent her put- 
ting it in execution ; at last however more by Force 
than Entreaty we prevailed on her to go into her 
room; we laid her upon the Bed, and she con- 
tinued for some Hours in the most dreadful Con- 
vulsions. My Mother and I continued in the 
room with her, and when any intervals of toler- 
able Composure in Eloisa would allow us, we 
joined in heartfelt lamentations on the dread- 
ful Waste in our provisions which this Event 
must occasion, and in concerting some plan for 
getting rid of them. We agreed that the best 
thing we could do was to begin eating them imme- 
diately, and accordingly we ordered up the cold 
Ham and Fowls, and instantly began our De- 
vouring Plan on them with great Alacrity. We 
would have persuaded Eloisa to have taken a 
Wing of a Chicken, but she would not be per- 
suaded. She was however much quieter than she 
62 



5 LOVE AND FREINDSHIP ^ 

had been; the convulsions she had before suffered 
having given way to an almost perfect Insensi- 
bility. We endeavoured to rouse her by every 
means in our power, but to no purpose. I talked 
to her of Henry. "Dear Eloisa (said I) there's 
no occasion for your crying so much about such a 
trifle, (for I was willing to make light of it in 
order to comfort her) I beg you would not mind 
it You see it does not vex me in the least; though 
perhaps I may suffer most from it after all; for I 
shall not only be obliged to eat up all the Victuals 
1 have dressed already, but must if Henry should 
recover (which however is not very likely) dress 
as much for you again; or should he die (as I sup- 
pose he will) I shall still have to prepare a Dinner 
for you whenever you marry any one else. So 
you see that tho' perhaps for the present it may 
afflict you to think of Henry's sufferings, Yet I 
dare say he'll die soon, and then his pain will be 
over and you will be easy, whereas my Trouble 
will last much longer for work as hard as I may, 
I am certain that the pantry cannot be cleared in 
less than a fortnight." Thus I did all in my 
power so console her, but without any effect, and 
at last I saw that she did not seem to listen to me, 
I said no more, but leaving her with my Mother 
I took down the remains of The Ham and 
Chicken, and sent William to ask how Henry did. 
He was not expected to live many Hours ; he died 

63 



& JANE AUSTEN & 

the same day. We took all possible care to break 
the melancholy Event to Eloisa in the tenderest 
manner; yet in spite of every precaution, her 
sufferings on hearing it were too violent for her 
reason, and she continued for many hours in a 
high Delirium. She is still extremely ill, and her 
Physicians are greatly afraid of her going into a 
Decline. We are therefore preparing for Bristol, 
where we mean to be in the course of the next 
week. And now my dear Margaret let me talk 
a little of your affairs; and in the first place I 
must inform you that it is confidently reported, 
that your Father is going to be married; I am very 
unwilling to beleive so unpleasing a report, and at 
the same time cannot wholly discredit it. I have 
written to my freind Susan Fitzgerald, for infor- 
mation concerning it, which as she is at present in 
Town, she will be very able to give me. I know 
not who is the Lady. I think your Brother is 
extremely right in the resolution he has taken of 
travelling, as it will perhaps contribute to oblit- 
erate from his remembrance those disagreable 
Events, which have lately so much afflicted him I 
am happy to find that tho' secluded from all the 
World, neither you nor Matilda are dull or un- 
happy that you may never know what it is to be 
either is the wish of your sincerely affectionate 

C. L. 
64 



g LOVE AND FREINDSHIP 

P. S. I have this instant received an answer 
from my freind Susan, which I enclose to you, 
and on which you will make your own reflec- 
tions. 
The enclosed LETTER 

My dear CHARLOTTE 

YOU could not have applied for information 
concerning the report of Sir George Lesleys 
Marriage, to any one better able to give it you 
than I am. Sir George is certainly married; I 
was myself present at the Ceremony, which you 
will not be surprised when I subscribe myself 
your 

Affectionate 

Susan Lesley 



LETTER the THIRD 

From Miss MARGARET LESLEY to Miss C. 
LUTTERELL 

Lesley Castle February the i6th 

I HAVE made my own reflections on the letter 
you have enclosed to me, my Dear Charlotte 
and I will now tell you what those reflections 

65 



3 JANE AUSTEN ^ 

were. I reflected that if by this second Marriage 
Sir George should have a second family, our 
fortunes must be considerably diminushed that 
if his Wife should be of an extravagant turn, she 
would encourage him to persevere in that gay and 
Dissipated way of Life to which little encourage- 
ment would be .necessary, and which has I fear al- 
ready proved by too detrimental to his health and 
fortune that she would now become Mistress 
of those Jewels which once adorned our Mother, 
and which Sir George had always promised us 
that if they did not come into Perthshire I should 
not be able to gratify my curiosity of beholding 
my Mother-in-law and that if they did, Matilda 
would no longer sit at the head of her Father's 
table . These my dear Charlotte were the mel- 
ancholy reflections which crowded into my imag- 
ination after perusing Susan's letter to you, and 
which instantly occurred to Matilda when she 
had perused it likewise. The same ideas, the 
same fears, immediately occupied her Mind, and 
I know not which reflection distressed her most, 
whether the probable Diminution of our For- 
tunes, or her own Consequence. We both wish 
very much to know whether Lady Lesley is hand- 
some and what is your opinion of her; as you 
honour her with the appellation of your freind, 
we flatter ourselves that she must be amiable. 
My Brother is already in Paris. He intends to 
66 



^ LOVE AND FREINDSHIP ^ 

quit it in a few Days and to begin his route to 
Italy. He writes in a most cheerfull manner, 
says that the air of France has greatly recovered 
both his Health and Spirits; that he has now en- 
tirely ceased to think of Louisa with any degree 
either of Pity or Affection, that he even feels 
himself obliged to her for her Elopement, as he 
thinks it very good fun to be single again. By 
this, you may perceive that he has entirely re- 
gained that chearful Gaiety, and sprightly Wit, 
for which he was once so remarkable. When he 
first became acquainted with Louisa which was 
little more than three years ago, he was one of 
the most lively, the most agreable young Men of 
the age . I believe you never yet heard the par- 
ticulars of his first acquaintance with her. It com- 
menced at our cousin Colonel Drummond's, at 
whose house in Cumberland he spent the Christ- 
mas, in which he attained the age of two and 
twenty. Louisa Burton was the Daughter of a 
distant Relation of Mrs. Drummond, who dicing a 
few Months before in extreme poverty, left his 
only Child then about eighteen to the protection of 
any of his Relations who would protect her. 
Mrs. Drummond was the only one who found 
herself so disposed Louisa was therefore re- 
moved from a miserable Cottage in Yorkshire to 
an elegant Mansion in Cumberland, and from 
every pecuniary Distress that Poverty could in- 

67 



^ JANEAUSTEN & 

flict, to every elegant Enjoyment that Money 
could purchase . Louisa was naturally ill- 
tempered and Cunning; but she had been taught 
to disguise her real Disposition, under the ap- 
pearance of insinuation Sweetness, by a father 
who but too well knew, that to be married, would 
be the only chance she would have of not being 
starved, and who flattered himself that with such 
an extraoidinary share of personal beauty, joined 
to a gentleness of Manners, and an engaging 
address, she might stand a good chance of pleas- 
ing some young Man who might afford to marry 
a girl without a Shilling. Louisa perfectly 
entered into her father's schemes and was deter- 
mined to forward them with all her care and at- 
tention. By dint of Perseverance and Applica- 
tion, she had at length so thoroughly disguised her 
natural disposition under the mask of Innocence, 
and Softness, as to impose upon every one who 
had not by a long and constant intimacy with 
her discovered her real Character. Such was 
Louisa when the hapless Lesley first beheld her 
at Drummond-house. His heart which (to use 
your favourite comparison) was as delicate as 
sweet and as tender as a Whipt-syllabub, could 
not resist her attractions. In a very few Days, 
he was falling in love, shortly after actually fell, 
and before he had known her a Month, he had 
married her. My Father was at first highly dis- 
68 



^ LOVE AND FREINDSHIP 

pleased at so hasty and imprudent a connection; 
but when he found that they did not mind it, he 
soon became perfectly reconciled to the match. 
The Estate near Aberdeen which my brother 
possesses by the bounty of his great Uncle in- 
dependant of Sir George, was entirely sufficient 
to support him and, my Sister in Elegance and 
Ease. For the first twelvemonth, no one could 
be happier than Lesley, and no one more amiable 
to appearance than Louisa, and so plausibly did 
she act and so cautiously behave that tho' Matilda 
and I often spent several weeks together with 
them, yet we neither of us had any suspicion of 
her real Disposition. After the birth of Louisa, 
however, which one would have thought would 
have strengthened her regard for Lesley, the 
mask she had so long supported was by degrees 
thrown aside, and as probably she then thought 
herself secure in the affection of her Husband 
(which did indeed appear if possible augmented 
by the birth of his child) she seemed to take no 
pains to prevent that affection from ever dimin- 
ushing. Our visits therefore to Dunbeath, were 
now less frequent and by far less agreable than 
they used to be. Our absence was however never 
either mentioned or lamented by Louisa who in 
the society of young Danvers with whom she 
became acquainted at Aberdeen (he was at one of 
the Universities there,) felt infinitely happier 



JANE AUSTEN 

than in that of Matilda and your freind, tho' 
there certainly never were pleasanter girls than 
we are. You know the sad end of all Lesleys 
connubial happiness; I will not repeat it . 
Adeiu my dear Charlotte; although I have not 
yet mentioned anything of the matter, I hope 
you will do me the justice to beleive that I think 
and jeel y a great deal for your Sisters affliction. 
I do not doubt but that the healthy air of the 
Bristol downs will intirely remove it, by erasing 
from her Mind the remembrance of Henry. I 
am my dear Charlotte yrs ever 

M. L. 



LETTER the FOURTH 

From Miss C. LUTTERELL to Miss M. 
LESLEY 

Bristol February 27th 
My dear Peggy 

1HAVE but just received your letter, which be- 
ing directed to Sussex while I was at Bristol 
was obliged to be forwarded to me here, and from 
some unaccountable Delay, has but this instant 
reached me . I return you many thanks for the 
70 



X LOVE AND FREINDSHIP g 

account it contains of Lesley's acquaintance, Love 
and Marriage with Louisa, which has not the less 
entertained me for having often been repeated to 
me before. 

I have the satisfaction of informing you that 
we have every reason to imagine our pantry is 
by this time nearly cleared, as we left particular 
orders with the servants to eat as hard as they 
possibly could, and to call in a couple of Chair- 
women to assist them. We brought a cold 
Pigeon pye, a cold turkey, a cold tongue, and half 
a dozen Jellies with us, which we were lucky 
enough with the help of our Landlady, her hus- 
band, and their three children, to get rid of, 
in less than two days after our arrival. Poor 
Eloisa is still so very indifferent both in Health 
and Spirits, that I very much fear, the air of 
the Bristol downs, healthy as it is, has not been 
able to drive poor Henry fom her remem- 
brance, 

You ask me whether your new Mother in law 
is handsome and amiable I will now give you 
an exact description of her bodily and mental 
charms. She 'is short, and extremely well made; 
is naturally pale, but rouges a good deal; has 
fine eyes, and fine teeth, as she will take care 
to let you know as soon as she sees you, and is 
altogether very pretty. She is remarkably good- 

7 1 



JANE AUSTEN 

tempered when she has her own way, and very 
lively when she is not out of humour. She is 
naturally extravagant and not very affected; she 
never reads anything but the letters she receives 
from me, and never writes anything but her an- 
swers to them. She plays, sings and Dances, but 
has no taste for either, and excells in none, tho' 
she says she is passionately fond of all. Per- 
haps you may flatter me so far as to be sur- 
prised that one of whom I speak with so little 
affection should be my particular freind; but to 
tell you the truth, our freindship arose rather 
from Caprice on her side than Esteem on mine. 
We spent two or three days together with a Lady 
in Berkshire with whom we both happened to be 
connected . During our visit, the Weather 
being remarkably bad, and our party particularly 
stupid, she was so good as to conceive a violent 
partiality for me, which very soon settled in a 
downright Freindship and ended in an established 
correspondence. She is probably by this time 
as tired of me, as I am of her; but as she is 
too polite and I am too civil to say so, our letters 
are still as frequent and affectionate as ever, and 
our Attachment as firm and sincere as when it 
first commenced. As she had a great taste for 
the pleasures of London, and of Brighthelmstone, 
she will I dare say find some difficulty in pre- 
72 



LOVE AND FREINDSHIP 

vailing on herself even to satisfy the curiosity 1 
dare say she feels of beholding you, at the ex- 
pence of quitting those favourite haunts of Dis- 
sipation, for the melancholy tho' venerable 
gloom of the castle you inhabit. Perhaps how- 
ever if she finds her. health impaired by too 
much amusement, she may acquire fortitude 
sufficient to undertake a Journey to Scotland in 
the hope of its' proving at least beneficial to her 
health, if not conducive to her happiness. Your 
fears I am sorry to say, concerning your father's 
extravagance, your own fortunes, your Mothers 
Jewels and your Sister's consequence, I should 
suppose are but too well founded. My freind 
herself has four thousand pounds, and will prob- 
ably spend nearly as much every year in Dress 
and Public places, if she can get it she will 
certainly not endeavour to reclaim Sir George 
from the manner of living to which he has been 
so long accustomed, and there is therefore some 
reason to fear that you will be very well off, 
if you get any fortune at all. The Jewels I 
should imagine too will undoubtedly be hers, and 
there is too much reason to think that she will 
preside at her Husbands table in preference to 
his Daughter. But as so melancholy a subject 
must necessarily extremely distress you, I will 
no longer dwell on it . 

73 



JANE AUSTEN 

Eloisa's indisposition has brought us to Bristol 
at so unfashionable a season of the year, that 
we have actually seen but one genteel family 
since we came. Mr and Mrs Marlowe are very 
agreable people; the ill health of their little boy 
occasioned their arrival here; you may imagine 
that being the only family with whom we can 
converse, we are of course on a footing of inti- 
macy with them ; we see them indeed almost every 
day, and dined with them yesterday. We spent 
a very pleasant Day, and had a very good 
Dinner, tho' to be sure the Veal was terribly 
underdone, and the Curry had no seasoning. I 
could not help wishing all dinner-time that I had 
been at the dressing it . A brother of Mrs 
Marlowe, Mr Cleveland is with them at present; 
he is a good-looking young Man, and seems to 
have a good deal to say for himself. I tell 
Eloisa that she should set her cap at him, but 
she does not at all seem to relish the proposal. 
I should like to see the girl married and Cleve- 
land has a very good estate. Perhaps you may 
wonder that I do not consider myself as well as 
my Sister in my matrimonial Projects; but to tell 
you the truth I never wish to act a more principal 
part at a Wedding than the superintending and 
directing the Dinner, and therefore while I can 
get any .of my acquaintance to marry for me, I 
shall nevef think of doing it myself, as I very 
74 



LOVE AND FREINDSHIP 

much suspect that I should not have so much time 
for dressing my own Wedding-dinner, as for 
dressing that of my freinds. 

Yours sincerely 

C. L. 



LETTER, the FIFTH 

Miss MARGARET LESLEY to Miss CHAR- 
LOTTE LUTTERELL 

Lesley-Castle March i8th 

ON the same day that I received your last 
kind letter, Matilda received one from Sir 
George which was dated from Edinburgh, and 
informed us that he should do himself the pleasure 
of introducing Lady Lesley to us on the fol- 
lowing evening. This as you may suppose con- 
siderably surprised us, particularly as your ac- 
count of her Ladyship had given us reason to im- 
agine there was little chance of her visiting Scot- 
land at a time that London must be so gay. As 
it was our business however to be delighted at 
such a mark of condescension as a visit from Sir 
George and Lady Lesley, we prepared to return 
them an answer expressive of the happiness we 
enjoyed in expectation of such a Blessing, when 
luckily recollecting that as they were to reach the 

75 



3 JANE AUSTEN 

Castle the next Evening, it would be impossible 
for my father to receive it before he left Edin- 
burgh, we contented ourselves with leaving them 
to suppose that we were as happy as we ought 
to be. At nine in the Evening on the following 
day, they came, accompanied by one of Lady 
Leslie's brothers. Her Ladyship perfectly an- 
swers the description you sent me of her, except 
that I do not think her so pretty as you seem to 
consider her. She has not a bad face, but there 
is something so extremely unmajestic in her little 
diminutive figure, as to render her in comparison 
with the elegant height of Matilda and Myself, an 
insignificant Dwarf. Her curiosity to see us 
(which must have been great to bring her more 
than four hundred miles) being now perfectly 
gratified, she already begins to mention their 
return to town, and has desired us to accompany 
her. We cannot refuse her request since it is 
seconded by the commands of our Father, and 
thirded by the entreaties of Mr. Fitzgerald who 
is certainly one of the most pleasing young Men, 
I ever beheld. It is not yet determined when 
we are to go, but when ever we do we shall 
certainly take our little Louisa with us. Adeiu 
my dear Charlotte; Matilda unites in best wishes 
to you and Eloisa, with yours ever 

M.L. 
76 



LOVE AND FREINDSHIP 
LETTER the SIXTH 

LADY LESLEY to Miss CHARLOTTE 
LUTTERELL 

Lesley-Castle March 2Oth 

WE arrived here my sweet Freind about a 
fortnight ago, and I already heartily re- 
pent that I ever left our charming House in 
Portman-square for such a dismal old weather- 
beaten Castle as this. You can form no idea 
sufficiently hideous, of its dungeon-like form. It 
is actually perched upon a Rock to appearance 
so totally inaccessible, that I expected to have 
been pulled up by a rope; and sincerely repented 
having gratified my curiosity to behold my 
Daughters at the expense of being obliged to 
enter their prison in so dangerous and ridiculous 
a. manner. But as soon as I once found myself 
safely arrived in the inside of this tremendous 
building, I comforted myself with the hope of 
having my spirits revived, by the sight of two 
beautifull girls, such as the Miss Lesleys had been 
represented to me, at Edinburgh. But here 
again, I met with nothing but Disappointment 
and Surprise. Matilda and Margaret Lesley 
are two great, tall, out of the way, over-grown, 
girls, just of a proper size to inhabit a Castle 
almost as large in comparison as themselves. 

77 



JANE AUSTEN 

I wish my dear Charlotte that you could but be- 
hold these Scotch giants; I am sure they would 
frighten you out of your wits. They will do 
very well as foils to myself, so I have invited 
them to accompany me to London where I hope 
to be in the course of a fortnight. Besides these 
two fair Damsels, I found a little humoured Brat 
here who I beleive is some relation to them, they 
told me who she was, and gave me a long rigmer- 
role story of her father and a Miss Somebody 
which I have entirely forgot. I hate scandal and 
detest Children. I have been plagued ever since I 
came here with tiresome visits from a parcel 
of Scotch wretches, with terrible hard-names ; they 
were so civil, gave me so many invitations, and 
talked of coming again so soon, that I could not 
help affronting them. I suppose I shall not 
see them any more, and yet as a family party 
we are so stupid, that I do not know what to do 
with myself. These girls have no Music, but 
Scotch airs, no Drawings but Scotch Mountains, 
and no Books but Scotch Poems and I hate every 
thing Scotch. In general I can spend half the 
Day at my toilett with a great deal of pleasure, 
but why should I dress here, since there is not 
a creature in the House whom I have any wish to 
please. I have just had a conversation with my 
Brother in which he has greatly offended me, and 
which as I have nothing more entertaining to send 



LOVE AND FREINDSHIP 

you I will gave you the particulars of. You must 
know that I have for these 4 or 5 Days past 
strongly suspected William of entertaining a par- 
tiality to my eldest Daughter. I own indeed that 
had / been inclined to fall in love with any woman, 
I should not have made choice of Matilda Lesley 
for the object of my passion, for there is 
nothing I hate so much as a tall Woman: but 
however there is no accounting for some men's 
taste and as William is himself nearly six feet 
high, it is not wonderful that he should be partial 
to that height. Now as I have a very great affec- 
tion for my Brother and should be extremely sorry 
to see him unhappy, which I suppose he means 
to be if he cannot marry Matilda, as moreover 1 
know that his drcumstances will not allow him to 
marry any one without a fortune, and that 
Matilda's is entirely dependant on her Father, 
who will neither have his own inclination nor my 
permission to give her anything at present, I 
thought it would be doing a good-natured action 
by my Brother to let him know as much, in order 
that he might choose for himself, whether to con- 
quer his passion, or Love and Despair. Accord- 
ingly finding myself this Morning alone with him 
in one of the horrid old rooms of this Castle, I 
opened the cause to him in the following Man- 
ner. 

"Well my dear William what do you think of 

79 



JANE AUSTEN 

these girls? for my part, I do not find them so 
plain as I expected: but perhaps you may think 
me partial to the Daughters of my Husband and 
perhaps you are right They are indeed so 
very like Sir George that it is natural to 
think" 

"My Dear Susan (cried he in a tone of the 
greatest amazement) Y|ou do not really think 
they bear the least resemblance to their Father! 
He is so very plain! but I beg your pardon 
I had entirely forgotten to whom I was speak- 
ing" 

"Oh! pray dont mind me; (replied I) every 
one knows Sir George is horribly ugly, and I 
assure you I always thought him a fright." 

"You surprise me extremely (answered Wil- 
liam) by what you say both with respect to Sir 
George and his Daughters. You cannot think 
your Husband' so deficient in personal Charms 
as you speak of, nor can you surely see any resem- 
blance between him and the Miss Lesleys who 
are in my opinion perfectly unlike him and per- 
fectly Handsome." 

"If that is your opinion with regard to the 
girls it certainly is no proof of their Father's 
beauty, for if they are perfectly unlike him and 
very handsome at the same time, it is natural to 
suppose that he is very plain." 
80 



LOVE AND FREINDSHIP 

"By no means, (sa'id he) for what may be 
pretty in a Woman, may be very unpleasing in a 
Man." 

"But you yourself (replied I) but a few minutes 
ago allowed him to be very plain.'" 

"Men are no Judges of Beauty in their own 
Sex." (said he). 

"Neither Men nor Women can think Sir 
George tolerable." 

"Well, well, (said he) we will not dispute 
about his Beauty, but your opinion of his Daugh- 
ter is surely very singular, for if I understood you 
right, you said you did not find them so plain as 
you expected to do !" 

"Why, do you find them plainer then?" (said 

i). 

"I can scarcely beleive you to be serious (re- 
turned he) when you speak of their persons in so 
extroidinary a Manner. Do not you think the 
Miss Lesleys are two very handsome young 
Women?" 

"Lord! No! (cried I) I think them terribly 
plain!" 

"Plain! (replied He) My dear Susan, you 
cannot really think so ! Why what single Fea- 
ture in the face of either of them, can you possibly 
find fault with?" 

"Oh! trust me for that; (replied I). Come I 
will begin with the eldest with Matilda. Shall 

81 



JANE AUSTEN % 

I, William?" (I looked as cunning as I could 
when I said it, in order to shame him). 

"They are so much alike (said he) that I 
should suppose the faults of one, would be the 
faults of both." 

"Well, then, in the first place; they are both so 
horribly tall!" 

"They are taller than you are indeed." (said 
he with a saucy smile.) 

"Nay, (said I), I know nothing of that." 

"Well, but (he continued) tho' they may be 
above the common size, their figures are perfectly 
elegant; and as to their faces, their Eyes are 
beautiful!.' 1 

"I never can think such tremendous, knock-me- 
down figures in the least degree elegant, and as 
for their eyes, they are so tall that I never could 
strain my neck enough to look at them." 

"Nay, (replied he) I know not whether you 
may not be in the right in not attempting it, for 
perhaps they might dazzle you with their 
Lustre." 

"Oh! Certainly, (said I, with the greatest 
complacency, for I assure you my dearest Char- 
lotte I was not in the least offended tho' by what 
followed, one would suppose that William was 
conscious of having given me just cause to be so, 
for coming up to me and taking my hand, he 
82 



LOVE AND FREINDSHIP 

said) "You must not look so grave Susan; you 
will make me fear I have offended you!" 

"Offended me! Dear Brother, how came 
such a thought in your head! (returned I) No 
really! I assure you that I am not in the least 
surprised at your being so warm an advocate for 
the Beauty of these girls" 

"Well, but (interrupted William) remember 
that we have not yet concluded our dispute con- 
cerning them. What fault do you find with 
their complexion?" 

"They are so horribly pale." 

"They have always a little colour, and after 
any exercise it is considerably heightened." 

"Yes, but if there should ever happen to be 
any rain in this part of the world, they will never 
be able to raise more than their common stock 
except indeed they amuse themselves with run- 
ning up and Down these horrid old galleries and 
Antichambers." 

"Well, (replied my Brother in a tone of vex- 
ation and glancing an impertinent look at me) if 
they have but little colour, at least it is all their 



own." 



This was too much my dear Charlotte, for I 
am certain that he had the impudence by that 
look, of pretending to suspect the reality of mine. 
But you I am sure will vindicate my character 

83 



JANE AUSTEN $ 

whenever you may hear it so cruelly aspersed, 
for you can witness how often I have protested 
against wearing Rouge, and how much I always 
told you I disliked it. And I assure you that my 
opinions are still the same. . Well, not bear- 
ing to be so suspected by my Brother, I left the 
room immediately, and have been ever since in 
my own Dressing-room writing to you. What a 
long letter have I made of it ! But you must not 
expect to receive such from me when I get to 
Town; for it is only at Lesley castle, that one 
has time to write even to a Charlotte Lutterell. . 
I was so much vexed by William's glance that I 
could not summon Patience enough, to stay and 
give him that advice respecting his attachment to 
Matilda which had first induced me from pure 
Love to him to begin the conversation; and I am 
now so thoroughly convinced by it, of his violent 
passion for her, that I am certain he would never 
hear reason on the subject, and I shall therefore 
give myself no more trouble either about him or 
his favourite. Adeiu my dear girl 

Yrs affectionately Susan L. 



LOVE AND FREINDSHIP 
LETTER the SEVENTH 

From Miss C. LUTTERELL to Miss M. 
LESLEY 

Bristol the 27th of March 

1HAVE received Letters from you and your 
Mother-in-law within this week which have 
greatly entertained me, as I find by them that you 
are both downright jealous of each others Beauty. 
It is very odd that two pretty Women tho j 
actually Mother and Daughter cannot be in the 
same House without falling out about their faces. 
Do be convinced that you are both perfectly hand- 
some and say no more of the Matter. I suppose 
this letter must be directed to Portman Square 
where probably (great as is your affection for 
Lesley Castle) you will not be sorry to find your- 
self. In spite of all that people may say about 
Green fields and the Country I was always of 
opinion that London and its amusements must be 
very agreable for a while, and should be very 
happy could my Mother's income allow her to 
jockey us into its Public-places, during Winter. I 
always longed particularly to go to Vaux-hall, to 
see whether the cold Beef there is cut so thin as it 
is reported, for I have a sly suspicion that few 
people understand the art of cutting a slice of cold 
Beef so well as I do : nay it would be hard if I 

85 



JANE AUSTEN ^ 

did not know something of the Matter, for it was 
a part of my Education that I took by far the 
most pains with. Mama always found me her 
best scholar, tho' when Papa was alive Eloisa 
was his. Never to be sure were there two more 
different Dispositions in the World. We both 
loved Reading. She preferred Histories, and / 
Receipts. She loved drawing, Pictures, and I 
drawing Pullets. No one could sing a better 
song than she, and no one make a better Pye than 
I. And so it has always continued since we 
have been no longer children. The only diffier- 
ence is that all disputes on the superior excellence 
of our Employments then so frequent are now no 
more. We have for many years entered into an 
agreement always to admire each other's works; 
I never fail listening to her Music, and she is as 
constant in eating my pies. Such at least was the 
case till Henry Hervey made his appearance in 
Sussex. Before the arrival of his Aunt in our 
neighbourhood where she established herself you 
know about a twelvemonth ago, his visits to her 
had been at stated times, and of equal and settled 
Duration; but on her removal to the Hall which 
is within a walk from our House, they became 
both more frequent and longer. This as you 
may suppose could not be pleasing to Mrs Diana 
who is a professed enemy to everything which is 
86 



LOVE AND FREINDSHIP ^ 

not directed by Decorum and Formality, or which 
bears the least resemblance to Ease and Good- 
breeding. Nay so great was her aversion to her 
Nephews behaviour that I have often heard her 
give such hints of it before his face that had not 
Henry at such times been engaged in conversation 
with Eloisa, they must have caught his Attention 
and have very much distressed him. The alter- 
ation in my Sisters behaviour which I have before 
hinted at, now took place. The Agreement we 
had entered into of admiring each others produc- 
tions she no longer seemed to regard, and tho' I 
constantly applauded even every Country-dance, 
she played, yet not even a pigeon-pye of my mak- 
ing could obtain from her a single word of appro- 
bation. This was certainly enough to put any 
one in a Passion; however, I was as cool as a 
cream-cheese and having formed my plan and con- 
certed a scheme of Revenge, I was determined to 
let her have her own way and not even to make 
her a single reproach. My scheme was to treat 
her as she treated me, and tho' she might even 
draw my own Picture or play Malbrook (which 
is the only tune I ever really liked) not to say so 
much as "Thank you Eloisa"; tho' I had for 
many years constantly hollowed whenever she 
played, Bravo, Bravissimo, Encore, Da capo, 
allegretto con expressione, and Poco presto with 

87 



JANE AUSTEN 

many other such outlandish words, all of them as 
Eloisa told me expressive of my Admiration ; and 
so indeed I suppose they are, as I see some of 
them in every Page of every Music book, being 
the sentiments I imagine of the composer. 

I executed my Plan with great Punctuality. I 
can not say success, for alas ! my silence while she 
played seemed not in the least to displease her; 
on the contrary she actually said to me one day 
"Well Charlotte, I am very glad to find that you 
have at last left off the ridiculous custom of 
applauding my Execution on the Harpsichord till 
you made my head ake, and yourself hoarse. I 
feel very much obliged to you for keeping your 
admiration to yourself." I never shall forget the 
very witty answer I made to this speech. "Eloisa 
(said 1)1 beg you would be quite at your Ease 
with respect to all such fears in future, for be 
assured that I shall always keep my admiration 
to myself and my own pursuits and never extend 
it to yours." This was the only very sever thing 
I ever said in my Life; not but that I have often 
felt myself extremely satirical but it was the only 
time I ever made my feelings public. 

I suppose there never were two young people 
who had a greater affection for each other than 
Henry and Eloisa; no, the Love of your Brother 
for Miss Burton could not be so strong tho' it 
might be more violent. You may imagine there- 
88 



^ LOVE AND FREINDSHIP & 

fore how provoked my Sister must have been to 
have him play her such a trick. Poor girl ! she 
still laments his Death with undiminished con- 
stancy notwithstanding he has been dead more 
than six weeks ; but some people mind such things 
more than others. The ill state of Health into 
which his loss has thrown her makes her so weak, 
and so unable to support the least exertion, that 
she has been in tears all this Morning merely from 
having taken leave of Mrs. Marlowe who with 
her Husband, Brother and Child are to leave for 
Bristol this morning. I am sorry to have them 
go because they are the only family with whom 
we have here any acquaintance, but I never 
thought of crying; to be sure Eloisa and Mrs 
Marlowe have always been more together than 
with me, and have therefore contracted a kind of 
affection for each other, which does not make 
Tears so inexcusable in them as they would be in 
me. The Marlowes are going to Town; Clive- 
land accompanies them; as neither Eloisa nor I 
could catch him I hope you or Matilda may have 
better Luck. I know not when we shall leave 
Bristol, Eloisa's spirits are so low that she is very 
averse to moving, and yet is certainly by no means 
mended by her residence here. A week or two 
will I hope determine our Measures in the mean- 
time believe me 

and etc and etc Charlotte Lutterell. 



& JANE AUSTEN ^ 

LETTER the EIGHTH 

Miss LUTTERELL to Mrs MARLOWE 

Bristol April 4th 

1FEEL myself greatly obliged to you my dear 
Emma for such a mark of your affection as 
I flatter myself was conveyed in the proposal you 
made me of our Corresponding; I assure you that 
it will be a great releif to me to write to you 
and as long as my Health and Spirits will allow 
me you will find me a very constant correspond- 
ent; I will not say an entertaining one, for you 
know my situation sufficiently not to be ignorant 
that in me Mirth would be improper and I 
know my own Heart too well not to be sensible 
that it would be unnatural. You must not ex- 
pect news for we see no one with whom we are 
in the least acquainted, or in whose proceedings 
we have any Interest. You must not expect 
scandal for by the same rule we are equally de- 
barred either from hearing or inventing it. 
You must expect from me nothing but the melan- 
choly effusions of a broken Heart which is ever re- 
verting to the Happiness it once enjoyed and 
which ill supports its present wretchedness. The 
Possibility of being able to write, to speak, to you 
of my lost Henry will be a luxury to me, and your 
90 



^ LOVE AND FREINDSHIP & 

goodness will not I know refuse to read what it 
will so much releive my Heart to write. I once 
thought that to have what is in general called a 
Freind (I mean one of my own sex to whom I 
might speak with less reserve than to any other 
person) independent of my sister would never be 
an object of my wishes, but how much I was mis- 
taken ! Charlotte is too much engrossed by two 
confidential correspondents of that sort, to supply 
the place of one to me, and I hope you will not 
think me girlishly romantic, when I say that to 
have some kind and compassionate Freind who 
might listen to my sorrows without endeavouring 
to console me was what I had for some time 
wished for, when our acquaintance with you, the 
intimacy which followed it and the particular af- 
fectionat attention you paid me almost from the 
first, caused me to entertain the flattering Idea of 
those attentions being improved on a closer ac- 
quaintance into a Freindship which, if you were 
what my wishes formed you would be the greatest 
Happiness I could be capable of enjoying. To 
find that such Hopes are realized is a satisfaction 
indeed, a satisfaction which is now almost the 
only one I can ever experience. I feel myself so 
languid that I am sure were you with me you 
would oblige me to leave off writing, and I cannot 
give you a greater proof of my affection for you 



JANE AUSTEN 

than by acting, as I know you would wish me to 
do, whether Absent or Present I am my dear 
Emmas sincere freind 

E. L. 



LETTER the NINTH 

Mrs MARLOWE to Miss LUTTERELL 

Grosvenor Street, April loth 

NEED I say my dear Eloisa how wellcome 
your letter was to me? I cannot give a 
greater proof of the pleasure I received from it, 
or the Desire I feel that our Correspondence 
may be regular and frequent than by setting you 
so good an example as I now do in answering it 
before the end of the week . But do not imag- 
ine that I claim any merit in being so punctual ; on 
the contrary I assure you, that it is a far greater 
Gratification to me to write to you, than to spend 
the Evening either at a Concert or a Ball. Mr. 
Marlowe is so desirous of my appearing at some 
of the Public places every evening that I do not 
like to refuse him, but at the same time so much 
wish to remain at Home, that independant of the 
Pleasure I experience in devoting any portion of 
my Time to my Dear Eloisa, yet the Liberty I 
92 



LOVE AND FREINDSHIP 

claim from having a letter to write of spending 
an Evening at home with my little Boy, you know 
me well enough to be sensible, will of itself be a 
sufficient Inducement (if one is necessary) to my 
maintaining with Pleasure a Correspondence with 
you. As to the subject of your letters to me, 
whether grave or merry, if they concern you they 
must be equally interesting to me; not but that 
I think the melancholy Indulgence of your own 
sorrows by repeating them and dwelling on them 
to me, will only encourage and increase them, 
and that it will be more prudent in you to avoid 
so sad a subject; but yet knowing as I do what a 
soothing and melancholy Pleasure it must afford 
you, I cannot prevail on myself to deny you so 
great an Indulgence, and will only insist on your 
not expecting me to encourage you in it, by my 
own letters; on the contrary I intend to fill them 
with such lively Wit and enlivening Humour as 
shall even provoke a smile in the sweet but sor- 
rowful countenance of my Eloisa. 

In the first place you are to learn that I have 
met your sisters three freinds Lady Lesley and 
her Daughters, twice in Public since I have been 
here. I know you will be impatient to hear my 
opinion of the Beauty of three Ladies of whom 
you have heard so much. Now, as you are too 
ill and too unhappy to be vain, I think I may 
venture to inform you that I like none of their 

93 



JANE AUSTEN 

faces so well as I do your own. Yet they are all 
handsome Lady Lesley indeed I have seen be- 
fore ; her Daughters I bel'eive would in general be 
said to have a finer face than her Ladyship, and 
yet what with the charms of a Blooming com- 
plexion, a little Affectation and a great deal of 
small-talk, (in each of which she is superior to 
the young Ladies) she will I dare say gain her- 
self as many admirers as the more regular fea- 
tures of Matilda, and Margaret. I am sure you 
will agree with me in saying that they can none 
of them be* of a proper size for real Beauty, when 
you know that two of them are taller and the 
other shorter than ourselves. In spite of this 
Defect (or rather by reason of it, there is some- 
thing very noble and majestic in the figures of the 
Miss Lesleys, and something agreably lively in 
the appearance of their pretty little Mother-in- 
law. But tho' one may be majestic and the other 
lively, yet the faces of neither possess that Be- 
witching sweetness of my Eloisas, which her pres- 
ent languor is so far from diminishing. What 
would my Husband and Brother say of us, if they 
knew all the fine things I have been saying to you 
in this letter. It is very hard that a pretty woman 
is never to be told she is so by any one of her 
own sex without that person's being suspected to 
be either her determined Enemy, or her professed 
Toadeater. How much more amiable are women 
94 



LOVE AND FREINDSHIP ^ 

in that particular ! One man may say forty civil 
things to another without supposing that he is 
ever paid for it, and provided he does his Duty 
by our sex, we care not how Polite he is to his 
own. 

Mrs Lutterell will be so good as to accept my 
compliments, Charlotte, my Love, and Eloisa the 
best wishes for the recovery of her Health and 
Spirits that can be offered by her affectionate 
Freind 

E. Marlowe. 

I am afraid this letter will be but a poor speci- 
men of my Powers in the witty way; and your 
opinion of them will not be greatly increased 
when I assure you that I have been as entertain- 
ing as I possibly could. 



LETTER- the TENTH 

From Miss MARGARET LESLEY to Miss 
CHARLOTTE LUTTERELL 



Portman Square April T3th 
DEAR CHARLOTTE 

E left Lesley-Castle on the 28th of last 
Month, and arrived safely in London 

95 



W 



JANE AUSTEN 

after a Journey of seven Days; I -had the pleasure 
of finding your Letter here waiting my Arri- 
val, for which you have my grateful Thanks. 
Ah ! my dear Freind I every day more regret the 
serene and tranquil Pleasures of the Castle we 
have left, in exchange for the uncertain and un- 
equal Amusements of this vaunted City. Not 
that I will pretend to assert that these uncertain 
and unequal Amusements are in the least Degree 
unpleasing to me; on the contrary I enjoy them 
extremely and should enjoy them even more, 
were I not certain that every appearance I make 
in 'Public but rievtts the Chains of those unhappy 
Be'ings whose Passion it is impossible n'ot to pity, 
tho' it is out of my power to return. In short 
my Dear Charlotte it is my sensibility for the 
sufferings of so many amiable young Men, my 
Dislike of the extreme admiration I meet with, 
and my aversion to being so celebrated both in 
Public, and Private, in Papers, and in Printshops, 
that are the reasons why I cannot more fully en- 
joy, the Amusements so various and pleasing of 
London. How often have I wished that I pos- 
sessed as little personal Beauty as you do; that 
my figure were as inelegant; my face as unlovely; 
and my appearance as unpleasing as yours ! But 
ah ! what little chance is there of so desirable 
an Event; I have had the small-pox, and must 
therefore submit to my unhappy fate. 



& LOVE AND FREINDSHIP ^ 

I am now going to intrust you my dear Char- 
lotte with a secret which has long disturbed the 
tranquility of my days, and which is of a kind to 
require the most inviolable Secrecy from you. 
Last Monday se'night Matilda and I accompanied 
Lady Lesley to a Rout at the Honourable Mrs 
Kickabout's; we were escorted by Mr Fitzgerald 
who is a very amiable young Man in the main, 
tho' perhaps a little singular in his Taste He is 
in love with Matilda . We had scarcely paid 
our Compliments to the Lady of the House and 
curtseyed to half a score different people when my 
Attention was attracted by the appearance of a 
Young Man the most lovely of his Sex, who at 
that moment entered the Room with another 
Gentleman and Lady. From the first moment I 
beheld him, I was certain that on him depended 
the future Happiness of my Life. Imagine my 
surprise when he was introduced to me by the 
name of Cleveland I instantly 'recognised him 
as the Brother of Mrs Marlowe, and the acquaint- 
ance of my Charlotte at Bristol. Mr and Mrs 
M. were the gentleman and Lady who accom- 
panied him. (You do not think Mrs Marlowe 
handsome?) The elegant address of Mr Cleve- 
land, his polished Manners and Delightful Bow, 
at once confirmed my attachment. He did not 
speak; but I can imagine everything he would 
have said, had he opened his Mouth. I can pic- 

97 



^ JANE AUSTEN & 

ture to myself the cultivated Understanding, the 
Noble sentiments, and elegant Language which 
would have shone so conspicuous in the conver- 
sation of Mr Cleveland. The approach of Sir 
James Gower (one of my too numerous admirers) 
prevented the Discovery of any such Powers, by 
putting an end to a Conversation we had never 
commenced, and by attracting my attention to 
himself. But oh ! how inferior are the accom- 
plishments of Sir James to those of his so greatly 
envied Rival ! Sir James is one of the most fre- 
quent of our Visitors, and is almost always of our 
Parties. We have since often met Mr and Mrs 
Marlowe but no Cleveland he is always engaged 
some where else. Mrs Marlowe fatigues me to 
Death every time I see her by her tiresome Con- 
versations about you and Eloisa. She is so stu- 
pid ! I live in the hope of seeing her irrisistable 
Brother to night, as we are going to Lady Flam- 
beaus who is I know intimate with the Marlowes. 
Our Party will be Lady Lesley, Matilda, Fitz- 
gerald, Sir James Gower, and myself. We see 
little of Sir George, who is almost always at the 
gaming-table. Ah! my poor Fortune where art 
thou by this time? We see more of Lady L. 
who always makes her appearance (highly 
rouged) at Dinner-time. Alas! what Delightful 
Jewels will she be decked in this evening at Lady 
Flambeau's ! Yet I wonder how she can herself 



3E LOVE AND FREINDSHIP 

delight in wearing them; surely she must be sensi- 
ble of the ridiculous impropriety of loading her 
little diminutive figure with such superfluous 
ornaments; is it possible that she can not know 
how greatly superior an elegant simplicity is to the 
most studied apparel? Would she but present 
them to Matilda and me, how greatly should we 
be obliged to her, How becoming would Dia- 
monds be on our fine majestic figures! And how 
surprising it is that such an Idea should never 
have occurred to her. I am sure if I have re- 
flected in this manner once, I have fifty times. 
Whenever I see Lady Lesley dressed in them such 
reflections immediately come across me. My 
own Mother's Jewels too! But I will say no 
more on so melancholy a subject Let me enter- 
tain you with something more pleasing 

'Matilda had a letter this morning from Lesley, 
by which we have the pleasure of finding that he 
is at Naples has turned Roman-Catholic, obtained 
one of the Pope's Bulls for annulling his ist Mar- 
riage and has since actually married a Neapoli- 
tan Lady of great Rank and Fortune. He tells 
us moreover that much the same sort of affair 
has befallen his first wife the worthless Louisa 
who is likewise at Naples had turned Roman- 
Catholic, and is soon to be married to a Neapoli- 
tan Nobleman of great and Distinguished merit. 
He says, that they are at present very good 

99 



JANE AUSTEN ^ 

Freinds, have quite forgiven all past errors and 
intend in future to be very good Neighbours. He 
invites Matilda and me to pay a visit to Italy and 
to bring him his little Louisa whom both her 
Mother, Step-mother, and himself are equally de- 
sirous of beholding. As to our accepting this in- 
vitation, it is at present very uncertain; Lady Les- 
ley advises us to go without loss of time; Fitz- 
gerald offers to escort us there, but Matilda has 
some doubts of the Propriety of such a scheme 
she owns it would be very agreable. I am certain 
she likes the Fellow. My Father desires us not 
to be in a hurry, as perhaps if we wait a few 
months both he and Lady Lesley will do them- 
selves the pleasure of attending us. Lady Leslie 
says no, that nothing will tempt her to forego the 
Amusements of Brighthelmstone for a Journey to 
Italy merely to see our Brother. "No (says the 
disagreable Woman) I have once in my life been 
fool enough to travel I dont know how many 
hundred Miles to see two of the Family, and I 
found it did not answer, so Deuce take me, if 
ever I am so foolish again. " So says her Lady- 
ship, but Sir George still perseveres in saying that 
perhaps in a month or two, they may accompany 
us. 

Adeiu my Dear Charlotte 

Yrs faithful Margaret Lesley. 

100 




THE HISTORY OF ENGLAND 
FROM 

THE REIGN OF HENRY THE 
4 TH 

TO 

THE DEATH OF CHARLES 
THE iST 

BY A PARTIAL, PREJUDICED, AND IGNORANT 
HISTORIAN 



To Miss Austen, eldest daughter of the 
Rev. George Austen, this work is inscribed 
with all due respect by 

THE AUTHOR. 

N.B. There will be very few Dates in 
this History. 



THE HISTORY OF ENGLAND 



HENRY the 4 th 

HENRY the 4th ascended the throne of Eng- 
land much to his own satisfaction in the 
year 1399, after having prevailed on his cousin 
and predecessor Richard the 2nd, to resign it to 
him, and to retire for the rest of his life to Pom- 
fret Castle, where he happened to be murdered. 
It is to be supposed that Henry was married 
since he had certainly four sons, but it is not in 
my power to inform the Reader who was his 
wife. Be this as it may, he did not live for ever, 
but falling ill, his son the Prince of Wales came 
and took away the crown; whereupon the King 
made a long speech, for which I must refer the 
Reader to Shakespear's Plays, and the Prince 
made a still longer. Things being thus settled 
between them the King died, and was succeeded by 
his son Henry who had previously beat Sir Wil- 
liam Gascoigne. 



105 



3E JANE AUSTEN 

HENRY the 5 th 

THIS Prince after he succeeded to the throne 
grew quite reformed and amiable, forsak- 
ing all his disipated companions, and never thrash- 
ing Sir William again. During his reign, Lord 
Cobham was burnt alive, but I forget what for. 
His Majesty then turned his thoughts to France, 
where he went and fought the famous Battle of 
Agincourt. He afterwards married the King's 
daughter Catherine, a very agreable woman by 
Shakespear's account. In spite of all this how- 
ever he died, and was succeeded by his son Henry. 



HENRY the 6th 

I CANNOT say much for this Monarch's sense. 
Nor would I if I could, for he was a Lan- 
castrian. I suppose you know all about the 
Wars between him and the Duke of York who 
was of the right side; if you do not, you had 
better read some other History, for I shall not be 
very diffuse in this, meaning by it only to vent 
my spleen against, and shew my Hatred to all 
those people whose parties or principles do not 
suit with mine, and not to give information. This 
King married Margaret of Anjou, a Woman 
106 



LOVE AND FREINDSHIP ^ 

whose distresses and misfortunes were so great 
as almost to make me who hate her, pity her. It 
was in this reign that Joan of Arc lived and made 
such a row among the English. They should not 
have burnt her but they did. There were sev- 
eral Battles between the Yorkists and Lan- 
castrians, in which the former (as they ought) 
usually conquered. At length they were entirely 
overcome; the King was murdered The Queen 
was sent home and Edward the 4th ascended 
the Throne. 



EDWARD the 4th 

THIS Monarch was famous only for his 
Beauty and his Courage, of which the Pic- 
ture we have here given of him, and his un- 
daunted behaviour in marrying one Woman while 
he was engaged to another, are sufficient proofs. 
His Wife was Elizabeh Woodville, a Widow 
who, poor Woman ! was afterwards confined in 
a Convent by that Monster of Iniquity and Av- 
arice Henry the 7th. One of Edward's Mis- 
tresses was Jane Shore, who has had a play writ- 
ten about her, but it is a tragedy and therefore 
not worth reading. Having performed all these 

107 



JANE AUSTEN 

noble actions, his Majesty died, and was succeeded 
by his son. 






EDWARD the 5th 

THIS unfortunate Prince lived so little a while 
that nobody had him to draw his picture. 
He was murdered by his Uncle's Contrivance, 
whose name was Richard the 3rd. 



RICHARD the 3rd 

THE Character of this Prince has been in 
general very severely treated by Historians, 
but as he was a York, I am rather inclined to 
suppose him a very respectable Man. It has in- 
deed been confidently asserted that he killed his 
two Nephews and his Wife, but it has also been 
declared that he did not kill his two Nephews, 
which I am inclined to believe true; and if this 
is the case, it may also be affirmed that he did 
not kill his Wife, for if Perkin Warbeck was 
really the Duke of York, why might not Lambert 
Simnel be the Widow of Richard. Whether inno- 
cent or guilty, he did not reign long in peace, for 
Henry Tudor E. of Richmond as great a villain 
108 



& LOVE AND FREINDSHIP & 

as ever lived, made a great fuss about getting the 
Crown and having killed the King at the battle 
of Bosworth, he succeeded to it. 



HENRY the yth 

THIS Monarch soon after his accession 
married the Princess Elizabeth of York, 
by which alliance he plainly proved that he 
thought his own right inferior to hers, tho' he 
pretended to the contrary. By this Marriage 
he had two sons and two Daughters, the elder of 
which Daughters was married to the King of 
Scotland and had the happiness of being grand- 
mother to one of the first Characters in the 
World. But of her, I shall have occasion to 
speak more at large in future. The youngest, 
Mary, married first the King of France and sec- 
ondly the D. of Suffolk, by whom she had one 
daughter, afterwards the Mother of Lady Jane 
Grey, who tho' inferior to her lovely Cousin the 
Queen of Scots, was yet an amiable young woman 
and famous for reading Greek while other people 
were hunting. It was in the reign of Henry the 
7th that Perkin Warbeck and Lambert Simnel 
before mentioned made their appearance, the for- 
mer of whom was set in the stocks, took shelter 
in Beaulieu Abbey, and was beheaded with the 

109 



JANE AUSTEN 

Earl of Warwick, and the latter was taken into 
the Kings kitchen. His Majesty died and was 
succeeded by his son Henry whose only merit was 
his not being quite so bad as his daughter Eliz- 
abeth. 



HENRY the 8th 

IT would be an affront to my Readers were I 
to suppose that they were not as well acquainted 
with the particulars of this King's reign as I am 
myself. It will therefore be saving them the 
task of reading again what they have read before, 
and myself the trouble of writing what I do not 
perfectly recollect, by giving only a slight sketch 
of the principal Events which marked his reign. 
Among these may be ranked Cardinal Wolsey's 
telling the father Abbott of Leicester Abbey 
that "he was come to lay his bones among them," 
the reformation in Religion and the King's 
riding through the streets of London with Anna 
Bullen. It is however but Justice, and my Duty 
to declare that this amiable Woman was entirely 
innocent of the Crimes with which she was ac- 
cused, and of which her Beauty, her Elegance, 
and her Sprightliness were sufficient proofs, not 
to mention her solemn protestations of Innocence, 
the weakness of the Charges against her, and the 
no 



3 LOVE AND FREINDSHIP & 

King's Character; all of which add some confirm- 
ation, tho' perhaps but slight ones when in com- 
parison with those before alledged in her favour. 
Tho' I do not profess giving many dates, yet 
as I think it proper to give some and shall of 
course make choice of those which it is most 
necessary for the Reader to know, I think it right 
to inform him that her letter to the King was 
dated on the 6th of May. Tire Crimes and 
Cruelties of this Prince, were too numerous to 
be mentioned, (as this history I trust has fully 
shown;) and nothing can be said in his vindica- 
tion, but that his abolishing Religious Houses 
and leaving them to the ruinous depredations of 
time has been of infinite use to the landscape of 
England in general, which probably was a princi- 
pal motive for his doing it, since otherwise why 
should a Man who was of no Religion himself 
be at so much trouble to abolish one which had 
for ages been established in the Kingdom. His 
Majesty's 5th Wife was the Duke of Norfolk's 
Neice who, tho' universally acquitted of the 
crimes for which she was beheaded, has been by 
many people supposed to have led an abandoned 
life before her Marriage of this however I have 
many doubts, since she was a relation of that noble 
Duke of Norfolk who was so warm in the Queen 
of Scotland's cause, and who at last fell a victim 
to it. The Kings last wife contrived to survive 

in 



:SE JANE AUSTEN 

him, but with difficulty effected it. He was suc- 
ceeded by his only son Edward. 



EDWARD the 6th 

AS this prince was only nine years old at the 
time of his Father's death, he was considered 
by many people as too young to govern, and the 
late King happening to be of the same opinion, 
his mother's Brother the Duke of Somerset was 
chosen Protector of the realm during his minor- 
ity. This Man was on the whole of a very 
amiable Character, and is somewhat of a favour- 
ite with me, tho' I would by no means pretend 
to affirm that he was equal to those first of Men 
Robert Earl of Essx, Delamere, or Gilpin. He 
was beheaded, of which he might with reason have 
been proud, had he known that such was the death 
of Mary Queen of Scotland; but as it was im- 
possible that he should be conscious of what 
had never happened, it does not appear that he 
felt particularly delighted with the manner of 
it. After his decease the Duke of Northumber- 
land had the care of the King and the Kingdom, 
and performed his trust of both so well that the 
King died and the Kingdom was left to his 
daughter in law the Lady Jane Grey, who has 
been already mentioned as reading Greek. 

112 



LOVE AND FREINDSHIP 

Whether she really understood that language or 
whether such a study proceeded only from an 
excess of vanity for which I believe she was al- 
ways rather remarkable, is uncertain. What- 
ever might be the cause, she preserved the same 
appearance of knowledge, and contempt of what 
was generally esteemed pleasure, during the 
whole of her life, for she declared herself dis- 
pleased with being appointed Queen, and while 
conducting to the scaffold, she wrote a sentence 
in Latin and another in Greek on seeing the dead 
Body of her Husband accidentally passing that 
way. 



MARY 

THIS woman had the good luck of being 
advanced to the throne of England, in spite 
of the superior pretensions, Merit, and Beauty 
of her Cousins Mary Queen of Scotland and 
Jane Grey. Nor can I pity the Kingdom for 
the misfortunes they experienced during her 
Reign, since they fully deserved them, for having 
allowed her succeed her Brother which was a 
double piece of folly, since they might have fore- 
seen that as she died without children, she would 
be succeeded by that disgrace to humanity, that 
pest of society, Elizabeth. Many were the 



JANE AUSTEN 

people who fell martyrs to the protestant Re- 
ligion during her reign; I suppose not fewer than 
a dozen. She married Philip King of Spain who 
in her sister's reign was famous for building 
Armadas. She died without issue, and then the 
dreadful moment came in which the destroyer of 
all comfort, the deceitful Betrayer of trust re- 
posed in her, and the Murderess of her Cousin 
succeeded to the Throne. 

ELIZABETH 

IT was the peculiar misfortune of this Woman 
to have bad Ministers Since wicked as she 

herself was, she could not have committed such 
extensive mischeif, had not these vile and aban- 
doned Men connived at, and encouraged her in 
her Crimes. I know that it has by many people 
been asserted and believed that Lord Burle'igh, 
Sir Francis Walsingham, and the rest of those 
who filled the chief offices of State were deserving, 
experienced, and able Ministers. But oh ! how 
blinded such writers and such Readers must be to 
true Merit, to Merit despised, neglected and de- 
famed, if they can persist in such opinions when 
they reflect that these men, these boasted men 
were such scandals to their Country and their 
sex as to allow and assist their Queen in confin- 
114 



& LOVE AND FREINDSHIP & 

ing for the space of nineteen years, a Woman 
who if the claims of Relationship and Merit were 
of no avail, yet as a Queen and as one who con- 
descended to place confidence in her, had every 
reason to expect assistance and protection; and at 
length in allowing Elizabeth to bring this amiable 
Woman to an untimely, unmerited, and scandalous 
Death. Can any one if he reflects but for a mo- 
ment on this blot, this everlasting blot upon their 
understanding and their Character, allow any 
praise to Lord Burleigh or Sir Francis Walsing- 
ham? Oh! what must this bewitching Princess 
whose only friend was then the Duke of Norfolk, 
and whose only ones now Mr Whitaker, Mrs Le- 
froy, Mrs Knight and myself, who was abandoned 
by her son, confined by her Cousin, abused, re- 
proached and vilified by all, what must not her 
most noble mind have suffered when informed 
that Elizabeth had given orders for her Death ! 
Yet she bore it with a most unshaken fortitude, 
firm in her mind; constant in her Religion; and 
prepared herself to meet the cruel fate to which 
she was doomed, with a magnanimity that would 
alone proceed from conscious Innocence. And 
yet could you Reader have believed it possible 
that some hardened and zealous Protestants have 
even abused her for that steadfastness in the 
Catholic Religion which reflected on her so much 
credit? But this is striking proof of their nar- 



^ JANE AUSTEN ^ 

row souls and prejudiced Judgements who accuse 
her. She was executed in the Great Hall at 
Fortheringay Castle (sacred Place !) on Wednes- 
day the 8th of February 1586 to the ever- 
lasting Reproach of Elizabeth, her Ministers, 
and of England in general. It may not be unnec- 
essary before I entirely conclude my account 
of this ill-fated Queen, to observe that she had 
been accused of several crimes during the time 
of her reigning in Scotland, of which I now 
most seriously do assure my Reader that she 
was entirely innocent; having never been guilty 
of anything more than Imprudencies into which 
she was betrayed by the openness of her Heart, 
her Youth, and her Education. Having I trust 
by this assurance entirely done away every Sus- 
picion and every doubt which might have arisen 
in the Reader's mind, from what other Histori- 
ans have written of her, I shall proceed to men- 
tion the remaining Events that marked Eliza- 
beth's reign. It was about this time that Sir 
Francis Drake the first English Navigator who 
sailed round the World, lived, to be the ornament 
of his Country and his profession. Yet great as 
he was, and justly celebrated as a sailor, I cannot 
help foreseeing that he will be equalled in this 
or the next Century by one who tho' now but 
young, already promises to answer all the ardent 
and sanguine expectations of his Relations and 
116 



& LOVE AND FREINDSHIP 

Friends, amongst whom I may elates the amiable 
Lady to whom this work is dedicated, and my 
no less amiable self. 

Though of a different profession, and shining 
in a different sphere of Life, yet equally conspic- 
uous in the Character of an Earl, as Drake was 
in that of a Sailor, was Robert Devereux Lord 
Essex. This unfortunate young Man was not 
unlike in character to that equally unfortunate 
one Frederic Delamere. The simile may be 
carried still farther, and Elizabeth the torment 
of Essex may be compared to the Emmeline of 
Delamere. It would be endless to recount the 
misfortunes of this noble and gallant Earl. It 
is sufficient to say that he was beheaded on the 
25th of Feb. after having been Lord Lieutenant 
of Ireland, after having clapped his hand on his 
sword, and after performing many other ser- 
vices to his Country. Elizabeth did not long 
survive his loss, and died so miserable that were 
it not an injury to the memory of Mary I should 
pity her. 



JAMES the ist 

THOUGH this King had some faults, among 
which and as the most principal, was his 
allowing his Mother's death, yet considered on 

117 



X JANE AUSTEN ^ 

the whole I cannot help liking him. He married 
Anne of Denmark, and had several Children ; 
fortunately for him his eldest son Prince Henry 
died before his father or he might have experi- 
enced the evils which befell his unfortunate 
Brother. 

As I am myself partial to the roman catholic 
religion, it is with infinite regret that I am obliged 
to blame the Behaviour of any Member of it: 
yet Truth being I think very excusable in an 
Historian, I am necessitated to say that in this 
reign the roman Catholics of England did not 
behave like Gentlemen to the protestants. Their 
Behaviour indeed to the Royal Family and both 
Houses of Parliament might justly be considered 
by them as very uncivil, and even Sir Henry 
Percy tho' certainly the best bred man of the 
party, had none of that general politeness which 
is so universally pleasing, as his attentions were 
entirely confined to Lord Mounteagle. 

Sir Walter Raleigh flourished in this and the 
preceeding reign, and is by many people held in 
great veneration and respect But as he was an 
enemy of the noble Essex, I have nothing to say 
in praise of him, and must refer all those who 
may wish to be acquainted with the particulars 
of his life, to Mr Sheridan's play of the Critic, 
where they will find many interesting anecdotes as 
well of him as of his friend Sir Christopher Hat- 
118 



3 LOVE AND FREINDSHIP 

ton. His Majesty was of that amiable dispo- 
sition which inclines to Freindship, and in such 
points was possessed of a keener penetration in 
discovering Merit; than many other people. I 
once heard an excellent sharade on a Carpet, of 
which the subject I am now on reminds me, and 
as I think it may afford my Readers some amuse- 
ment to find it out, I shall here take the liberty 
of presenting it to them. 

SHARADE 

My first is what my second was to King James 
the ist, and you tread on my whole. 

The principal favourites of his Majesty were 
Car, who was afterwards created Earl of Somer- 
set and whose name perhaps may have some share 
in the above mentioned sharade, and George 
Villiers afterwards Duke of Buckingham. On 
his Majesty's death he was succeeded by his son 
Charles. 



CHARLES the ist 

THIS amiable Monarch seems born to have 
suffered misfortunes equal to those of his 
lovely Grandmother; misfortunes which he could 
not deserve since he was her descendant. Never 
certainly were there before so many detestable 

119 



JANE AUSTEN 

Characters at one time in England as in this pe- 
riod of its History; never were amiable men 
so scarce. The number of them throughout the 
whole Kingdom amounting only to five, besides 
the inhabitants of Oxford who were always loyal 
to their King and faithful to his interests. The 
names of this noble five who never forgot the 
duty of the subject, or swerved from their attach- 
ment to his Majesty, were as follows The King 
himself, ever steadfast in his own support Arch- 
bishop Laud, Earl of Strafford, Viscount Faulk- 
land and Duke of Ormond, who were scarcely less 
strenuous or zealous in the cause. While the 
villains of the time would make too long a list 
to be written or read; I shall therefore content 
myself with mentioning the leaders of the Gang. 
Cromwell, Fairfax, Hampden, and Pym may be 
considered as the original Causers of all the 
disturbances, Distresses, and Civil Wars in which 
England for many years was embroiled. In this 
reign as well as in that of Elizabeth, I am obliged 
in spite of my attachment to the Scotch, to con- 
sider them as equally guilty with the generality of 
the English, since they dared to think differently 
from their Sovereign, to forget the Adoration 
which as Stuarts it was their Duty to pay them, 
to rebel against, dethrone and imprison the un- 
fortunate Mary; to oppose, to deceive, and to 
sell the no less unfortunate Charles. The Events 
120 



X LOVE AND FREINDSHIP 

of this Monarch's reign are too numerous for 
my pen, and indeed the recital of any Events 
(except what I make myself) is uninteresting to 
me; my principal reason for undertaking the 
History of England being to prove the innocence 
of the Queen of Scotland, which I flatter myself 
with having effectually done, and to abuse Eliz- 
abeth, tho' I am rather fearful of having fallen 
short in the latter part of my scheme. As there- 
fore it is not my intention to give any particular 
account of the distresses into which this King was 
involved through the misconduct and Cruelty of 
his Parliament, I shall satisfy myself with vin- 
dicating him from the Reproach of Arbitrary and 
tyrannical Government with which he has often 
been charged- This, I feel, is not difficult to be 
done, for with one argument I am certain of 
satisfying every sensble and well disposed person 
whose opinions have been properly guided by 
a good Education and this Argument is that he 
was a STUART. 

FINIS 
Saturday Nov: 26th 1791. 



121 



A COLLECTION OF LETTERS 






To Miss COOPER 

COUSIN 

CONSCIOUS of the Charming Character 
which in every Country, and every Clime 
in Christendom is Cried, Concerning you, with 
Caution and Care I Commend to your Charitable 
Criticism this Clever Collection of Curious Com- 
ments, which have been Carefully Culled, Col- 
lected and Classed by your Comical Cousin 

The Author 



A COLLECTION OF LETTERS 

LETTER the FIRST 

From a MOTHER to her FREIND. 

MY Children begin now to claim all my atten- 
tion in a different manner from that in 
which they have been used to receive it, as they 
are now arrived at that age when it is necessary 
for them in some measure to become conversant 
with the World. My Augusta is 17 and her sis- 
ter scarcely a twelvemonth younger. I flatter 
myself that their education has been such as will 
not disgrace their appearance in the World, and 
that they will not disgrace their Education I have 
every reason to beleive. Indeed they are sweet 
Girls . Sensible yet unaffected Accomplished 
yet Easy . Lively yet Gentle . As their 
progress in every thing they have learnt has been 
always the same, I am willing to forget the 
difference of age, and to introduce them together 
into Public. This very Evening is fixed on as 
their first entree into Life, as we are to drink tea 
with Mrs Cope and her Daughter. I am glad 
that we are to meet no one, for my Girls sake, 
as it would be awkward for them to enter too 
wide a Cercle on the very first day. But we shall 
proceed by degrees. Tomorrow Mr Stanly's 
family will drink tea with us, and perhaps the 

127 



JANE AUSTEN 

Miss Phillips's will meet them. On Tuesday we 
shall pay Morning Visits On Wednesday we 
are to dine at Westbrook. On Thursday we 
have Company at home. On Friday we are to 
be at a private Concert at Sir John Wynna's and 
on Saturday we expect .Miss Dawson to call 
in the Morning which will complete my Daugh- 
ters Introduction into Life. How they will bear 
so much dissipation I cannot imagine; of their 
spirits I have no fear, I only dread their health. 



This mighty affair is now happily over, and my 
Girls are out. As the moment approached for 
our departure, you can have no idea how the 
sweet Creatures trembled with fear and expecta- 
tion. Before the Carriage drove to the door, I 
called them into my dressing-room, and as soon 
as they were seated thus addressed them. "My 
dear Girls the moment is now arrived when I am 
to reap the rewards of all my Anxieties and 
Labours towards you during your Education. 
You are this Evening to enter a World in which 
you will meet with many wonderfull Things; 
Yet let me warn you against suffering yourselves 
to be meanly swayed by the Follies and Vices of 
others, for beleive me my beloved Children that 

if you do 1 shall be very sorry for it." 

128 



LOVE AND FREINDSHIP 

They both assured me that they would ever re- 
member my advice with gratitude, and follow it 
with attention; That they were prepared to find a 
World full of things to amaze and to shock 
them: but that they trusted their behaviour 
would never give me reason to repent the Watch- 
ful Care with which I had presided over their 
infancy and formed their Minds " "With 
such expectations and such intentions (cried I) 
I can have nothing to fear from you and can 
chearfully conduct you to Mrs Cope's without 
a fear of your being seduced by her Example, 
or contaminated by her Follies. Come, then my 
Children (added I) the Carriage is driving to 
the door, and I will not a moment delay the 
happiness you are so impatient to enjoy.' 7 
When we arrived at Warleigh, poor Augusta 
could scarcely breathe, while Margaret was all 
Life and Rapture. "The long-expected Moment 
is now arrived (said she) and we shall soon be in 
the World." In a few Moments we were in 
Mrs Cope's parlour, where with her daughter 
she sate ready to receive us. I observed with 
delight the impression my sweet Children made 
on them . They were indeed two sweet, ele- 
gant-looking Girls, and tho' somewhat abashed 
from the peculiarity of their situation, yet there 
was an ease in their Manners and address which 

129 



JANE AUSTEN 

could not fail of pleasing . Imagine my dear 
Madam how delighted I must have been in be- 
holding as I did, how attentively they observed 
every object they saw, how disgusted with some 
Things, how enchanted with others, how aston- 
ished at all! On the whole however they re- 
turned in raptures with the World, its Inhabi- 
tants, and Manners. 

Yrs Ever A. F. 



LETTER the SECOND 

From a YOUNG LADY, . crossed in Love 
to her freind 

WHY should this last disappointment hang 
so heavily on my spirits? Why should 
I feel it more, why should it wound me deeper 
than those I have experienced before? Can it be 
that I have a greater affection for Willoughby 
than I had for his amiable predecessors? Or 
is it that our feelings become more acute from 
being often wounded? I must suppose my dear 
Belle that this is the Case, since I am not conscious 
of being more sincerely attached to Willoughby 
than I was to Neville, Fitzowen, or either of the 
Crawfords, for all of whom I once felt the most 
lasting affection that ever warmed a Woman's 
130 



LOVE AND FREINDSHIP 

heart. Tell me then dear Belle why I still sigh 
when I think of the faithless Edward, or why I 
weep when I behold his Bride, for too surely this 
is the case . My Freinds are all alarmed for 
me; They fear my declining health; they 
lament my want of spirits; they dread the 
effects of both. In hopes of releiving my melan- 
choly, by directing my thoughts to other objects, 
they have inv-ited several of their freinds to 
spend the Christmas with us. Lady Bridget 
Darkwood and her sister-in-law, Miss Jane are 
expected on Friday; and Colonel Beaton's family 
will be with us next week. This is all most kindly 
meant by my Uncle and Cousins; but what can 
the presence of a dozen indefferent people do to 
me, but weary and distress me . I will not fin- 
ish my Letter till some of our Visitors are 
arrived. 



Friday Evening 

Lady Bridget came this morning, and with her, 
her sweet sister Miss Jane . Although I have 
been acquainted with this charming Woman 
above fifteen Years, yet I never before observed 
how lovely she is. She is now about 35, and in 
spite of sickness, sorrow and Time is more bloom- 
ing than I ever saw a Girl of 17. I was delighted 



JANE AUSTEN 

with her, the moment she entered the house, and 
she appeared equally pleased with me, attaching 
herself to me during the remainder of the day. 
There is something so sweet, so mild in her Coun- 
tenance, that she seems more than Mortal. Her 
Conversation is as bewitching as her appearance; 
I could not help telling her how much she engaged 
my admiration . "Oh! Miss Jane (said I) 
and stopped from an inability at the moment of 
expressing myself as I could wish "Oh! Miss 
Jane (I repeated) I could not think of words 
to suit my feelings She seemed waiting for my 
speech . I was confused distressed my 
thoughts were bewildered and I could only add 
"How do you do?" She saw and felt my Em- 
barrassment and with admirable presence of mind 
releived me from it by saying "My dear Sophia 
be not uneasy at having exposed yourself I will 
turn the Conversation without appearing to notice 
it." Oh! how I loved her for her kindness! 
"Do you ride as much as you used to do?" said 
she . "I am advised to ride by my Physician. 
We have delightful Rides round us, I have a 
Charming horse, am uncommonly fond of the 
Amusement, replied I quite recovered from my 
Confusion, and, in short I ride a great deal." 
"You are in the right my Love," said she. Then 
repeating the following line which was an extem- 
132 



^ LOVE AND FREINDSHIP 

pore and equally adapted to recommend both 
Riding and Candour 

"Ride where you may, Be Candid where you 
can," she added, "/ rode once, but it is many years 
ago" She spoke this in so low and tremulous a 
Voice, that I was silent . Struck with her Man- 
ner of speaking I could make no reply. "I have 
not ridden, continued she fixing her Eyes on my 
face, since I was married." I was never so sur- 
prised "Married, Ma'am!" I repeated. "You 
may well wear that look of astonishment, said 
she, since what I have said must appear improb- 
able to you Yet nothing is more true than that I 
once was married." 

"Then why are you called Miss Jane?" 
"I married, my Sophia without the consent or 
knowledge of my father the late Admiral Anne- 
sley. It was therefore necessary to keep the 
secret from him and from every one, till some 
fortunate opportunity might offer of revealing 
it . Such an opportunity alas ! was but too soon 
given in the death of my dear Capt. Dashwood 
Pardon these tears, continued Miss Jane wiping 
her Eyes, I owe them to my Husband's memory. 
He fell my Sophia, while fighting for his Country 
in America after a most happy Union of seven 
years . My Children, two sweet Boys and a 
Girl, who had constantly resided with my Father 

133 



JANE AUSTEN 

and me, passing with him and with every one as 
the Children of a Brother (tho' I had ever been 
an only Child) had as yet been the comforts of 
my Life. But no sooner had I lossed my Henry, 
than these sweet Creatures fell sick and died . 
Conceive dear 'Sophia what my feelings must have 
been when as an Aunt I attended my Children to 
their early Grave . My Father did not survive 
them many weeks He died, poor Good old 
man, happily ignorant to his last hour of my 
Marriage." 

"But did not you own it, and assume his name 
at your husband's death? 1 ' 

"No; I could not bring myself to do it; more 
especially when in my Children I lost all induce- 
ment for doing it. Lady Bridget, and yourself 
are the only persons who are in the knowledge of 
my having ever been either Wife or Mother. As 
I could not prevail on myself to take the name 
of Dashwood (a name which after my Henry's 
death I could never hear without emotion) and 
as I was conscious of having no right to that of 
Annesley, I dropt all thoughts of either, and have 
made it a point of bearing only my Christian one 
since my Father's death." She paused "Oh! 
my dear Miss Jane (said I) how infinitely am I 
obliged to you for so entertaining a story! You 
cannot think how it has diverted me ! But have 
you quite done?" 



LOVE AND FREINDSHIP ^ 

"I have only to add my dear Sophia, that my 
Henry's elder Brother dicing about the same 
time, Lady Bridget became a Widow like myself, 
and as we had always loved each other in idea 
from the high Character in which we had ever 
been spoken of, though we had never met, we 
determined to live together. We wrote to one 
another on the same subject by the same post, so 
exactly did our feeling and our actions coincide ! 
We both eagerly embraced the proposals we gave 
and received of becoming one family, and have 
from that time lived together in the greatest 
affection." 

"And is this all? sa'id I, I hope you have not 
done." 

"Indeed I have; and did you ever hear a story 
more pathetic?" 

"I never did and it is for that reason it 
pleases me so much, for when one is unhappy noth- 
ing is so delightful to one's sensations as to hear 
of equal misery." 

"Ah ! but my Sophia why are you unhappy?" 

"Have you not heard Madam of Willoughby's 
Marriage?" "But my love why lament his per- 
fidy, when you bore so well that of many young 
Men before ?" "Ah ! Madam, I was used to it then, 
but when Willoughby broke his Engagements I 
had not been dissappointed for half a year." 

"Poor Girl!" said Miss Jane. 

'35 



JANE AUSTEN 

LETTER the .THIRD 

From a YOUNG LADY in distressed Circum- 
stances to her freind 

A FEW days ago I was at a private Ball given 
by Mr Ashburnham. As my Mother 
never goes out she entrusted me to the care of 
Lady Greville who did me the honour of calling 
for me in her way and of allownig me to sit 
forwards, which is a favour about which I am 
very indifferent especially as I know it is con- 
sidered as confering a great obligation on me. 
"So Miss Maria (said her Ladyship as she saw 
me advancing to the door of the Carriage) you 
seem very smart to night My poor Girls will 
appear quite to disadvantage by you I only 
hope your Mother may not have distressed her- 
self to set you off. Have you got a new Gown 
on?" 

"Yes Ma'am." replied I with as much indeffer- 
ence as I could assume. 

"Aye, and a fine one too I think (feeling it, 
as by her permission I seated myself by her) I 
dare say it is all very smart But I must own, 
for you know I always speak my mind, that I think 
it was quite a needless piece of expence Why 
could not you have worn your old striped one? 
It is not my way to find fault with people because 
136 



LOVE AND FREINDSHIP 

they are poor, for I always think that they are 
more to be despised and pitied than blamed for 
it, especially if they cannot help it, but at the 
same time I must say that in my opinion your 
old striped Gown would have been quite fine 
enough for its Wearer for to tell you the truth 
(I always speak my mind) I am very much afraid 
that one half of the people in the room will not 
know whether you have a Gown on or not But 
I suppose you intend to make your fortune to 
night . Well, the sooner the better ; and I wish 
you success." 

"Indeed Ma'am I have no such intention " 

"Who ever heard a young Lady own that she 
was a Fortune-hunter?" Miss Greville laughed 
but I am sure Ellen felt for me. 

"Was your Mother gone to bed before you left 
her?" said her Ladyship. 

"Dear Ma'am, said Ellen it is but nine 
o'clock." 

"True Ellen, but Candles cost money, and Mrs 
Williams is too wise to be extravagant." 

"She was just sitting down to supper Ma'am." 

"And what had she got for supper?" "I did 
not observe," "Bread and Cheese I suppose." 
"I should never wish for a better supper." said 
Ellen. "You have never any reason replied her 
Mother, as a better is always provided for you." 

137 



JANE AUSTEN 

Miss Greville laughed excessively, as she con- 
stantly does at her Mother's wit. 

Such is the humiliating Situation in which I 
am forced to appear while riding in her Lady- 
ship's Coach I dare not be impertinent, as my 
Mother is always admonishing me to be humble 
and patient if I wish to make- my way in the world- 
She insists on my accepting every invitation of 
Lady Greville, or you may be certain that I would 
never enter either her House, or her Coach with 
the disagreable certainty I always have of being 
abused for my Poverty while I am in them. 
When we arrived at Ashburnham, it was nearly 
ten o'clock, which was an hour and a half later 
than we were desired to be there ; but Lady Gre- 
ville is too fashionable (or fancies herself to be 
so) to be punctual. The Dancing however was 
not begun as they waited for Miss Greville. I 
had not been long in the room before I was en- 
gaged to dance by Mr Bernard, but just as we 
were going to stand up, he recollected that his 
Servant had got his white Gloves, and immediately 
ran out to fetch them. In the mean time the 
Dancing began and Lady Greville in passing to 
another room went exactly before me She saw 
me and instantly stopping, said to me though 
there were several people close to us, 

"Hey day, Miss Mafia! What cannot you 
get a partner? Poor Young Lady! I am afraid 

138 



^ LOVE AND FREINDSHIP 

your new Gown was put on for nothing. But do 
not despair; perhaps you may get a hop before 
the Evening is over." So saying, she passed on 
without hearing my repeated assurance of being 
engaged, and leaving me very much provoked at 
being so exposed before every one Mr Ber- 
nard however soon returned and by coming to 
me the moment he entered the room, and leading 
me to the Dancers my Character I hope was 
cleared from the imputation Lady Greville had 
thrown on it, in the eyes of all the old Ladies who 
had heard her speech. I soon forgot all my 
vexations in the pleasure of dancing and of hav- 
ing the most agreable partner in the room. As 
he is moreover heir to a very large Estate I could 
see that Lady Greville did not look very well 
pleased when she found who had been his Choice 
She was determined to mortify me, and ac- 
cordingly when we were sitting down between 
the dances, she came to me with more than her 
usual insulting importance attended by Miss Ma- 
son and said loud enough to be heard by half 
the people in the room, "Pray Miss Maria in 
what way of business was your Grandfather? for 
Miss Mason and I cannot agree whether he was 
a Grocer or a Bookbinder." I saw that she 
wanted to mortify me, and was resolved if I pos- 
sibly could to prevent her seeing that her scheme 
succeeded. "Neither Madam; he was a Wine 

139 



JANE AUSTEN ^ 

Merchant." u Aye, I knew he was in some such 
low way He broke did not he?" "I beleive 
not Ma'am." "Did not he abscond?" "I never 
heard that he did." "At least he died insolvent?" 
i( I was never told so before." "Why, was not 
your Father as poor as a Rat?" "I fancy not." 
"Was not he in the Kings Bench once ?" "I never 
saw him there." She gave me such a look, and 
turned away in a great passion; while I was half 
delighted with myself for my impertinence, and 
half afraid of being thought too saucy. As Lady 
Greville was extremely angry with me, she took 
no further notice of me all the* Evening, and in- 
deed had I been in favour I should have been 
equally neglected, as she was got into a party of 
great folks and she never speaks to me when she 
can to anyone else. Miss Greville was with her 
Mother's party at supper, but Ellen preferred 
staying with the Bernards and me. We had a 

very pleasant Dance and as Lady G slept all 

the way home, I had a very comfortable ride. 

The next day while we were at dinner Lady 
Greville's Coach stopped at the door, for that is 
the time of day she generally contrives it should. 
She sent in a message by the servant to say that 
"she should not get out but that Miss Maria 
must come to the Coach-door, as she wanted to 
speak to her, and that she must make haste and 
come immediately " "What an impertinent 
140 



X LOVE AND FREINDSHIP 

Message Mamma !" said I "Go Maria " re- 
plied she Accordingly I went and was obliged 
to stand there at her Ladyships pleasure though 
the Wind that was extremely high and very cold. 
"Why I think Miss Maria you are not quite 
so smart as you were last night But I did 
not come to examine your dress, but to tell you 
that you may dine with us the day after tomorrow 
Not tomorrow, remember, do not come to- 
morrow for we expect Lord and Lady Clermont 
and Sir Thomas Stanley's family There will 
be no occasion for your being very fine for I shant 
send the Carriage If it rains you may take an 
umbrella " I could hardly help laughing at 
hearing her give me leave to keep myself dry 
"And pray remember to be in time, for I shant 
wait I hate my Victuals over-done But you 
need not come before the time How does your 
Mother da? She is at dinner is not she?" "Yes 
Ma'am we were in the middle of dinner when 
your Ladyship came." "I am afraid you find it 
very cold Maria." said Ellen. "Yes, it is ah hor- 
rible East wind said her Mother I assure 
you I can hardly bear the window down But 
you are used to be blown about by the wind Miss 
Maria and that is what has made your Complex- 
ion so rudely and coarse. You young Ladies who 
cannot often ride in a Carriage never mind what 
weather you trudge in, or how the wind shews 

141 



^ JANE AUSTEN ^ 

your legs. I would not have my Girls stand out 
of doors as you do in such a day as this. But 
some sort of people have no feelings either of 
cold or Delicacy Well, remember that we 
shall expect you on Thursday at 5 o'clock You 
must tell your Maid to come for you at night 
There will be no Moon and you will have an 
horrid walk home My compts to your Mother 
I am afraid your dinner will be cold Drive 
on " And away she went, leaving me in a great 
passion with her as she always does. 

Maria Williams. 



LETTER the FOURTH 

From a YOUNG LADY rather impertinent to 
her freind 

WE dined yesterday with Mr Evelyn where 
we were introduced to a very agreable 
looking Girl his Cousin. I was extremely pleased 
with her appearance, for added to the charms of 
an engaging face, her manner and voice had some- 
thing peculiarly interesting in them. So much 
so, that they inspired me with a great curiosity to 
know the history of her Life, who were her 
parents, where she came from, and what had 
befallen her, for it was then only known that she 
142 



^ LOVE AND FREINDSHIP 

was a relation of Mr Evelyn, and that her name 
was Grenville. In the evening a favourable op- 
portunity offered to me of attempting at least to 
know what I wished to know, for every one played 
at Cards but Mrs Evelyn, My Mother, Dr Dray- 
ton, Miss Grenville and myself, and as the two 
former were engaged in a whispering Conver- 
sation, and the Doctor fell asleep, we were of 
necessity obliged to entertain each other. This 
was what I wished and being determined not to 
remain in ignorance for want of asking, I 
began the Conversation in the following Man- 
ner. 

"Have you befcn long in Essex Ma'am?" 

"I arrived on Tuesday." 

u You came from Debyshire?" 

"No, Ma'am ! appearing surprised at my ques- 
tion, from Suffolk." You will think this a good 
dash of mine, dear Mary, but you know that I am 
not wanting for Impudence when I have any end 
in view. "Are you pleased with the Country 
Miss Grenville? Do you find it equal to the one 
you have left?" 

"Much superior Ma'am in point of Beauty." 
She sighed. I longed to know for why. 

"But the face of any Country however beau- 
tiful said I, can be but a poor consolation for the 
loss of one's dearest Freinds." She shook her 
head, as if she felt the truth of what I said. My 

143 



X JANE AUSTEN 

Curiosity was so much raised, that I was resolved 
at any rate to satisfy it. 

"You regret having left Suffolk then Miss 
Grenville?" "Indeed I do." "You were born 
there I suppose?" "Yes Ma'am I was and 
passed many happy years there " 

"That is a great comfort said I I hope 
Ma'am that you never spent any unhappy one's 
there." 

"Perfect Felicity is not the property of Mor- 
tals, and no one has a right to expect uninter- 
rupted Happiness. Some Misfortunes I have 
certainly met with." 

'What Misfortunes dear Ma'am? replied I, 
burning with impatience to know every thing. 
"None Ma'am I hope that have been the effect 
of any wilfull fault in me." "I dare say not 
M.a'am, and have no doubt but that any sufferings 
you may have experienced could arise only from 
the cruelties of Relations or the Errors of 
Freinds." She sighed "You seem unhappy my 
dear Miss Grenville Is it in my power to soften 
your Misfortunes?" "Your power Ma'am re- 
plied she extremely surprised; it is in no ones 
power to make me happy." She pronounced 
these words in so mournful and solemn an accent, 
that for some time I had not courage to reply. 
I was actually silenced. I recovered myself how- 
ever in a few moments and looking at her with 
144 



& LOVE AND FREINDSHIP & 

all the affection I could, "My dear Miss Grenville 
said I, you appear extremely young and may 
probably stand in need of some one's advice 
whose regard for you, joined to superior Age, 
perhaps superior Judgement might authorise her 
to give it. I am that person, and I now challenge 
you to accept the offer I make you of my Con- 
fidence and Freindship, in return to which I shall 
only ask for yours " 

"You are extremely obliging Ma'am said she 
and I am highly flattered by your attention to 
me But I am in no difficulty, no doubt, no uncer- 
tainty of situation in which any advice can be 
wanted. Whenever I am however continued she 
brightening into a complaisant smile, I shall know 
where to apply." 

I bowed, but felt a good deal mortified by such 
a repulse; still however I had not given up my 
point. I found that by the appearance of senti- 
ment and Freindship nothing was to be gained 
and determined therefore to renew my attacks 
by Questions and suppositions. "Do you intend 
staying long in this part of England Miss Gren- 
ville?" 

"Yes Ma'am, some time I beleive." 
"But how will Mr and Mrs Grenville bear 
your absence?" 

"They are neither of them alive Ma'am." 
This was an answer I did not expect I was 

145 



3 JANE AUSTEN ^ 

quite silenced, and never felt so awkward in my 
Life . 



LETTER the FIFTH 

From a YOUNG LADY very much in love to 
her Freind 

MY Uncle gets more stingy, my Aunt more 
particular, and I more in love every day. 
What shall we all be at this rate by the end of 
the year! I had this morning the happiness of 
receiving the following Letter from my dear Mus- 
grove. 

Sackville St: Jan:ry 7th 
It is a month to day since I first beheld my 
lovely Henrietta, and the sacred anniversary must 
and shall be kept in a manner becoming the day 
by writing to her. Never shall I forget the 
moment when her Beauties first broke on my sight 
No time as you well know can erase it from my 
Memory. It was at Lady Scudamores. Happy 
Lady Scudamore to live within a mile of the 
divine Henrietta ! When the lovely Creature 
first entered the room, oh ! what were my sensa- 
tions? The sight of you was like the sight of a 
wonderful fine Thing. I started I gazed at her 
146 



g LOVE AND FREINDSHIP 

with admiration She appeared every moment 
more Charming, and the unfortunate Musgrove 
became a captive to your Charms before I had 
time to look about me. Yes Madam, I had the 
happiness of adoring you, an happiness for which 
I cannot be too grateful. "What said he to him- 
self is Musgrove allowed to die for Henrietta? 
Enviable Mortal ! and may he pine for her who is 
the object of universal admiration, who is adored 
by a Colonel, and toasted by a Baronet! Ador- 
able? Henrietta how beautiul you are ! I de- 
clare you are quite divine ! You are more than 
Mortal. You are an Angel. You are Venus 
herself. In short Madam you are the prettiest 
Girl I ever saw in my Life and her Beauty is 
encreased in her Musgroves Eyes, by permitting 
him to love her and allowing me to hope. And 
ah! Angelic Miss Henrietta Heaven is my wit- 
ness how ardently I do hope for the death of 
your villanous Uncle and his abandoned Wife, 
since my fair one will not consent to be mine till 
their decease has placed her in affluence above 
what my fortune can procure . Though it is an 
improvable Estate . Cruel Henrietta to per- 
sist in such a resolution ! I am at present with 
my sister where I mean to continue till my own 
house which tho' an excellent one is at present 
somewhat out of repair, is ready to receive me. 
Amiable princess of my Heart farewell Of that 

147 



JANE AUSTEN 

Heart which trembles while it signs itself your 
most ardent Admirer and devoted humble ser:t 

T. Musgrove. 

There is a pattern for a Love-letter Matilda! 
Did you ever read such a master-peice of Writ- 
ing? Such sense, such sentiment, such purity of 
Thought, such flow of Language and such un- 
feigned Love in one sheet? No, never I can 
answer for it, since a Musgrove is not to be met 
with by every Girl. Oh ! how I long to be with 
him ! I intend to send him the following in 
answer to his Letter tomorrow. 

My dearest Musgrove . Words cannot 

express how happy your Letter made me; I 
thought I should have cried for joy, for I love 
you better than anybody in the World. I think 
you the most amiable, and the handsomest Man in 
England, and so to be sure you are. I never 
read so sweet a Letter in my Life. Do write 
me another just like it, and tell me you are in love 
with me in every other line. I quite die to see 
you. How shall we manage to see one another? 
for we are so much in love that we cannot live 
asunder. Oh ! my dear Musgrove you cannot 
think how impatiently I wait for the death of my 
Uncle and Aunt If they will not Die soon, I 
beleive I shall run mad, for I get more in love 
with you every day of my Life. 
148 



& LOVE AND FREINDSHIP ^ 

How happy your Sister is to enjoy the pleasure 
of your Company in her house, and how happy 
every body in London must be because you are 
there. I hope you will be so kind as to write 
me again soon, for I never read such sweet Let- 
ters as yours. I am my dearest Musgrove most 
truly and faithfully yours for ever and ever 

Henrietta Halton. 

I hope he will like my answer; it is as good a 
one as I can write though nothing to his; Indeed 
I had always heard what a dab he was at a Love- 
letter. I saw him you know for the first time at 
Lady Scudamores And when I saw her Lady- 
ship afterwards she asked me how I liked her 
Cousin Musgrove? 

"Why upon my word said I, I think he is a 
very handsome young Man." 

"I am glad you think so replied she, for he is 
distractedly in love with you." 

"Law! Lady Scudamore said I, how can you 
talk so ridiculously?"- 

"Nay, t'is very true answered she, I assure you, 
for he was in love with you from the first mo- 
ment he beheld you." 

"I wish it may be true said I, for that is the 
only kind of love I would give a farthing for 
There is some sense in being in love at first 
sight." 

149 



JANE AUSTEN 

4 Well, I give you Joy of your conquest, re- 
plied Lady Scudamore, and I beleive it to have 
been a very complete one; I am sure it is not a 
contemptible one, for my Cousin is a charming 
young fellow, has seen a great deal of the World, 
and writes the best Love-letters I ever read." 

This made me very happy, and I was excessively 
pleased with my conquest. However, I thought 
it was proper to give myself a few Airs so I 
said to her 

"This is all very pretty Lady Scudamore, but 
you know that we young Ladies who are Heiresses 
must not throw ourselves away upon Men who 
have no fortune at all." 

"My dear Miss Halton said she, I am as much 
convinced of that as you can be, and I do assure 
you that I should be the last person to encourage 
your marrying anyone who had not some pre- 
tensions to expect a fortune with you. Mr Mus- 
grove is so far from being poor that he has an 
estate of several hundreds an year which is cap- 
able of great Improvement, and an excellent 
House, though at present it is not quite in repair." 

"If that is the case replied I, I have nothing 
more to say against him, and if as you say he is 
an informed young Man and can write a good 
Love-letters, I am sure I have no reason to find 
fault with him for admiring me, tho' perhaps I 
may not marry him for all that Lady Scudamore." 
150 



^ LOVE AND FREINDSHIP ^ 

"You are certainly under no obligation to marry 
him answered her Ladyship, except that which 
love himself will dictate to you, for if I am not 
greaty mistaken you are at this very moment un- 
known to yourself, cherishing a most tender affec- 
tion for him." 

"Law, Lady Scudamore replied I blushing how 
can you think of such a thing?" 

"Because every look, every word betrays it, 
answered she; Come my dear Henrietta, con- 
sider me as a freind, and be sincere with me 
Do not you prefer Mr Musgrove to any man 
of your acquaintance?" 

"Pray do not ask me such questions Lady Scuda- 
more, said I turning away my head, for it is not 
fit for me to answer them." 

"Nay my Love replied she, now you confirm 
my suspicions. But why Henrietta should you be 
ashamed to own a well-placed Love, or why re- 
fuse to confide in me?" 

"I am not ashamed to own it; said I taking 
Courage. I do not refuse to confide in you or 
blush to say that I do love your cousin Mr Mus- 
grove, that I am sincerely attached to him, for it 
is no disgrace to love a handsome Man. If he 
were plain indeed I might have had reason to be 
ashamed of a passion which must have been mean 
since the object would have been unworthy. But 
with such a figure and face, and such beautiful 



^ JANE AUSTEN g 

hair as your Cousin has, why should I blush to 
own that such superior merit has made an impres- 



sion on me." 



"My sweet Girl (said Lady Scudamore em- 
bracing me with great affection) what a delicate 
way of thinking you have in these matters, and 
what a quick discernment for one of your years ! 
Oh! how I honour you for such Noble senti- 
ments!" 

"Do you Ma'am? said I; you are vastly oblig- 
ing. But pray Lady Scudamore did your Cousin 
himself tell you of his affection for me? I shall 
like him the better if he did, for what is a Lover 
without a Confidante?" 

"Oh! my Love replied she, you were born for 
each other. Every word you say more deeply 
convinces me that your Minds are actuated by 
the invisible power of simpathy, for your opinions 
and sentiments so exactly coincide. Nay, the col- 
our of your Hair is not very different. Yes my 
dear Girl, the poor despairing Musgrove did re- 
veal to me the story of his Love . Nor was 
I surprised at it I know not how it was, but I 
had a kind of presentiment that he would be in 
love with you." 

"Well, but how did he break it to you?" 

"It was not till after supper. We were sit- 
ting round the fire together talking on indifferent 
subjects, though to say the truth the Conversa- 
152 



^ LOVE AND FREINDSHIP & 

tion was cheifly on my side for he was thought- 
ful and silent, when on a sudden he interrupted 
me in the midst of something I was saying, by ex- 
claiming in a most Theatrical tone 
Yes I'm in love I feel it now 
And Henrietta Halton has undone me 
"Oh ! What a sweet way replied I, of de- 
claring his Passion ! To make such a couple of 
charming lines about me ! What a pity it is that 
they are not in rhime !" 

"I am very glad you like it answered she; To 
be sure there was a great deal of Taste in it. And 
are you in love with her, Cousin? said I. I am 
very sorry for it, for unexceptionable as you are 
in every respect, with a pretty Estate capable of 
Great improvements, and an excellent House tho' 
somewhat out of repair, yet who- can hope to 
aspire with success to the adorable Henrietta who 
has had an offer from a Colonel and been toasted 
by a Baronet" "That I have" cried I. Lady 
Scudamore continued. "Ah dear Cousin replied 
he, I am so well convinced of the little Chance I 
can have of winning her who is adored by thou- 
sands, that I need no assurances of yours to make 
me more thoroughly so. Yet surely neither you 
or the fair Henrietta herself will deny me the 
exquisite Gratification of dicing for her, of fall- 
ing a victim to her Charms. And when I am 
dead" continued her 

153 



JANE AUSTEN 

"Oh Lady Scudamore, said I wiping my eyes, 
that such a sweet Creature should talk of dicing!" 

"It is an affecting Circumstance indeed, re- 
plied Lady Scudamore." When I am dead said 
he, let me be carried and lain at her feet, and per- 
haps she may not disdain to drop a pitying tear 
on my poor remains." 

"Dear Lady Scudamore interrupted I, say no 
more on this affecting subject,. I cannot bear 
it." 

"Oh! how I admire the sweet sensibility of 
your Soul, and as I would not for Worlds wound 
it too deeply, I will be silent." 

"Pray go on." said I. She did so. 

"And then added he, Ah! Cousin imagine what 
my transports will be when I feel the dear pre- 
cious drops trickle on my face ! Who would not 
die to haste such extacy! And when I am in- 
terred, may the divine Henrietta bless some hap- 
pier Youth with her affection, May he be as ten- 
derly attached to her as the hapless Musgrove 
and while he crumbles to dust, May they live an 
example of Felicity in the Conjugal state!" 

Did you ever hear any thing so pathetic? 
What a charming wish, to be lain at my feet when 
he was dead! Oh! what an exalted mind he 
must have to be capable of such a wish ! Lady 
Scudamore went on. 

"Ah! my dear Cousin replied I to him, such 

154 



LOVE AND FREINDSHIP ^ 

noble behaviour as this, must melt the heart of 
any woman however obdurate it may naturally 
be; and could the divine Henrietta but hear your 
generous wishes for her happiness, all gentle as 
is her mind, I have not a doubt but that she would 
pity your affection and endeavour to return it." 
"Oh! Cousin answered he, do not endeavour to 
raise my hopes by such flattering assurances. No, 
I cannot hope to please this angel of a Woman, 
and the only thing which remains for me to do, 
is to die." "True Love is ever desponding re- 
plied I, but / my dear Tom will give you even 
greater hopes of conquering this fair one's heart, 
than I have yet given you, by assuring you that 1 
watched her with the strictest attention during 
the whole day, and could plainly discover that she 
cherishes in her bosom though unknown to her- 
self, a most tender affection for you." 

"Dear Lady Scudamore cried I, This is more 
than I ever knew!" 

"Did not I say that it was unknown to your- 
self? I did not, continued 1 to him, encourage 
you- by saying this at first, that surprise might 
render the pleasure still Greater." No Cousin 
replied he in a languid voice, nothing will con- 
vince me that / can have touched the heart of 
Henrietta Halton, and if you are deceived your- 
self, do not attempt deceiving me." "In short 
my Love it was the work of some hours for me 

155 



JANE AUSTEN 

to persuade the poor despairing Youth that you 
had really a preference for him; but when at last 
he could no longer deny the force of my argu- 
ments, or discredit what I told him, his trans- 
ports, his Raptures, his Extacies are beyond my 
power to describe." 

"Oh ! the dear Creature, cried I, how passion- 
ately he loves me ! But dear Lady Scudamore 
did you tell him that I was totally dependant on 
my Uncle and Aunt?" 

"Yes, I told him every thing." 

u And what did he say." 

"He exclaimed wlith virulence against Uncles 
and Aunts; Accused the laws of England for 
allowing them to possess their Estates when 
wanted by their Nephews or Neices, and wished 
he were in the House of Commons, that he might 
reform the Legislature, and rectify all its abuses." 

"Oh ! the sweet Man ! What a spirit he has !" 
said I. 

"He would not flatter himself he added, that 
the adorable Henrietta would condescend for his 
sake to resign those Luxuries and that splendor 
to which she had been used, and accept only in 
exchange the Comforts and Elegancies which his 
limited Income could afford her, even supposing 
that his house were in Readiness to receive her. 
I told him that it could not be expected that she 
would; it would be doing her ,an injustice to 



& LOVE AND FREINDSHIP ^ 

suppose her capable of giving up the power she 
now possesses and so nobly uses of doing such 
extensive Good to the poorer part of her fellow 
Creatures, merely for the gratification of you and 
herself." 

"To be sure said I, I am very Charitable 
every now and then. And what did Mr Mus- 
grove say to this?" 

"He replied that he was under a melancholy 
necessity of owning the truth of what I said, 
and that therefore if he should be the happy 
Creature destined to be the Husband of the 
Beautiful Henrietta he must bring himself to 
wait, however impatiently, for the fortunate day, 
when she might be freed from the power of 
worthless Relations and able to bestow herself 
on him." 

What a noble Creature he is ! Oh ! Matilda 
what a fortunate one I am, who am to be his 
Wife ! My Aunt is calling me to come and make 
the pies, so adeiu my dear freind, and believe me 

yours etc 

H. Halton. 
Finis. 



157 



SCRAPS 



To Miss FANNY CATHERINE AUSTEN 

MY DEAR NEICE 

AS I am prevented by the great distance be- 
tween Rowling and Steventon from super- 
intending your Education: myself, the care of 
which will probably on that account devolve on 
your Father and Mother, I think it is my par- 
ticular Duty to* prevent your feeling as much 
as possible the want of my personal instructions, 
by addressing to you on paper my Opinions and 
Admonitions on the conduct of Young Women, 
which you will find expressed in the following 
pages. 

I am my dear Ne'ice 

Your affectionate Aunt 

The Author. 



SCRAPS 



THE FEMALE PHILOSOPHER 
A LETTER 

MY DEAK LOUISA 

YOUR friend Mr Millar called upon us yes- 
terday in hig way to Bath, whither he is go- 
ing for his health; two of his daughters were with 
him, but the eldest and the three Boys are with 
their Mother in Sussex. Though you have often 
told me that Miss Millar was remarkably hand- 
some, you never mentioned anything of her 
Sisters' beauty; yet they are certainly extremely 
pretty. I'll give you their description. Julia is 
eighteen; with a countenance in which Modesty, 
Sense and Dignity are happily blended, she has 
a form which at once presents you with Grace, 
Elegance and Symmetry. Charlotte who is just 
sixteen is shorter than her Sister, and though her 
figure cannot hoast the easy dignity of Julia's, yet 
it has a pleasing plumpness which is in a different 
way as estimable. She is fair and her face is 
expressive sometimes of softness the most be- 
witching, and at others of Vivacity the most 
striking. She appears to have infinite Wit and 
a good humour unalterable; her conversation 

163 



3E JANE AUSTEN & 

during the half hour they set with us, was replete 
with humorous sallies, Bonmots and repartees; 
while the sensible, amiable Julia uttered senti- 
ments of Morality worthy of a heart like her own. 
Mr Millar appeared to answer the character I 
had always received of him. My Father met 
him with that look of Love, that social Shake, 
and cordial kiss which marked his gladness at 
beholding an old and valued freind from whom 
thro' various circumstances he had been separated 
nearly twenty years. Mr Millar observed (and 
very justly too) that many events had befallen 
each during that interval of time, which gave 
occasion to the lovely Julia for making most sen- 
sible reflections on the many changes in their 
situation which so long a period had occasioned, 
on the advantages of some, and the disadvan- 
tages of others. From this subject she made a 
short digression to the instability of human 
pleasures and the uncertainty of their duration, 
which led her to observe that all earthly Joys 
must be imperfect. She was proceeding to illus- 
trate this doctrine by examples from the Lives of 
great Men when the Carriage came to the Door 
and the amiable Moralist with her Father and Sis- 
ter was obliged to depart; but not without a 
promise of spending five or six months with us on 
their return. We of course mentioned you, and 
I assure you that ample Justice was done to your 
164 



5 LOVE AND FREINDSHIP ^ 

Merits by all. "Louisa Clarke (said I) is in 
general a very pleasant Girl, yet sometimes her 
good humour is clouded by Peevishness, Envy 
and Spite. She neither wants Understanding or 
is without some pretensions to Beauty, but these 
are so very trifling, that the value she sets on her 
personal charms, and the adoration she expects 
them to be offered are at once a striking example 
of her vanity, her pride, and her folly." So 
said I, and to my opinion everyone added weight 
by the concurrence of their own. 
Your affect 

Arabella Smythe. 



165 



JANE AUSTEN 

THE FIRST ACT OF A COMEDY 

Characters 

Popgun Maria 

Charles Pistolletta 

Postilion Hostess 

Chorus of ploughboys Cook 
and and 

Strephon Chloe 

SCENE AN INN 
Enter Hostess, Charles, Maria, and Cook. 

Hostess to Maria) If the gentry in the Lion 
should want beds, shew them 
number 9. 

Maria) Yes Mistress. exit Maria 

Hostess to Cook) If their Honours in the 
Moon ask for the bill of 
fare, give it them. 

Cook) I will, I will. exit Cook 

Hostess to Charles) If their Ladyships in the 
Sun ring their Bell answer 
it. 

Yes Madam. Exeunt Sev- 
erally. 

SCENE CHANGES TO THE MOON, and dis- 
covers Popgun and Pistoletta. 

166 



LOVE AND FREINDSHIP 

Pistoletta) Pray papa how far is it to 

London ? 

Popgun) My Girl, my Darling, my 

favourite of all my Children, 
who art the picture of thy 
poor Mother who died two 
months ago, with whom I 
am going to Town to marry 
to Strephon, and to whom I 
mean to bequeath my whole 
Estate, it wants seven Miles. 

SCENE CHANGES TO THE SUN 
Enter Chloe and a chorus of ploughboys. 

Chloe Where am I? AtHounslow. 

Where go I? To Lon- 
don .What to do? To be 
married .Unto whom? Un- 
to Strephon. Who is he? A 
Youth. Then I will sing a 
song. 

SONG 

I go to Town 

And when I come down, 

I shall be married to Stree- 

phon.* 

* Note the two e's. 

167 



JANE AUSTEN 

And that to me will be fun. 

Chorus) Be fun, be fun, be fun, 

And that to me will be fun. 

Enter Cook 

Cook) Here is the bill of fare. 

Chloe reads) 2 Ducks, a leg of beef, a 

stinking partridge, and a 
tart. I will have the leg of 
beef and the partridge. 

exit Cook. 
And now I will sing another 

song. 

I am going to have my dinner, 
After which I shan't be thin- 
ner, 

I wish I had here Strephon 
For he would carve the par- 
tridge if it should be a tough 
one. 
Chorus) 

Tough one, tough one, tough 
one 

For he would carve the par- 
tridge if it 
Should be a tough one. 

Exit Chloe and Chorus. 
168 



LOVE AND FREINDSHIP 

SCENE CHANGES TO INSIDE OF THE LION. 
Enter Strephon and Postilion. 

Streph:) You drove me from Staines 

to this place, from whence I 
mean to go to Town to 
marry Chloe. H'ow much is 
your due ? 

Post:) Eighteen pence. 

Alas, my freind, I have but 
a (bad guinea with which I 
mean to support myself in 
Town. But I will pawn to you 
an undirected Letter that I 
received from Chloe. 

Post:) Sir, I accept your offer. 

END OF THE FIRST ACT 



A LETTER from a YOUNG LADY, whose 
feelings being too strong for her Judgement led 
her into the commision of Errors which her Heart 
disapproved. 

MANY have been the cares and vicissitudes 
of my past life, my beloved Ellinor, and 
the only consolation I feel for their bitterness 
is that on a close examination of my conduct, I 

169 



JANE AUSTEN 

am convinced that I have strictly deserved them. 
I murdered my father at a very early period of 
my Life, I have since ^murdered my Mother, 
and I am now going to murder my Sister. I have 
changed my religion so often that at present I 
have not an idea of any left. I have been a per- 
jured witness in every public tryal for these last 
twelve years; and I have forged my own Will. 
In short there is scarcely a crime that I have not 
committed But I am now going to reform. 
Colonel Martin of the Horse guards, has paid 
his Addresses to me, and we are to be married 
in a few days. As there is something singular in 
our Courtship, I will give you an account of it. 
Col : Martin is the second son of the late Sir John 
Martin who died immensely rich, but bequeathing 
only one hundred thousand pound apeice to his 
three younger Children, left the bulk of his for- 
tune, about eight Million to the present Sir 
Thomas. Ulpon his small pittance the Colonel 
lived tolerably contented for nearly four months 
when he took it into his head to determine on 
getting the whole of his eldest Brother's Estate. 
A new will was forged and the Colonel produced 
it in Court but nobody would swear to it's being 
the right will except himself, and he had sworn 
so much that Nobody beleived him. At that 
moment I happened to be passing by the door of 
the Court, and was beckoned in by the Judge who 
170 



^ LOVE AND FREINDSHIP ^ 

told the Colonel that I was a Lady ready to wit- 
ness anything for the cause of Justice, and ad- 
vised him to apply to me. In short the Affair 
was soon adjusted. The Colonel and I swore 
to its' being the right will, and Sir Thomas has 
been obliged to resign all his illgotten wealth. 
The Colonel in gratitude waited on me the next 
day with an offer of his hand . I am now 
going to murder my Sister. 

Yours Ever, 

Anna Parker. 



A TOUR THROUGH WALES 
in a LETTER from a YOUNG LADY 

MY DEAR CLARA 

1HAVE been so long on the ramble that I have 
not till now had it in my power to thank 
you for your Letter . We left our dear home 
on last Monday month; and proceeded on our 
tour through Wales, with * is a principality con- 
tiguous to England and gives the title to the 
(Prince of Wales. We travelled on horseback 
by preference. My Mother rode upon our 
little poney and Fanny and I walked by her side 
or rather ran, for my Mother is so fond of 

* As in M. S., meaning which; 

171 



X JANE AUSTEN 

riding fast that she galloped all the way. You 
may be sure that we were in a fine perspiration 
when we came to our place of resting. Fanny 
has taken a great many Drawings of the Country, 
which are very beautiful, tho' perhaps not such 
exact resemblances as might be Wished, from 
their 4 being taken as she ran along. It would 
astonish you to see all the Shoes we wore out in 
our Tour. We determined to take a good Stock 
with us and therefore each took a pair of our 
own besides those we set off in. However we 
were obliged to have them both capped and heel- 
peiced at Carmarthen, and at last when they 
were qu'ite gone, Mama was so kind as to lend 
us a pair of blue Sattin Slippers, of which we each 
took one and hopped home from Hereford de- 
lightfully 

I am your ever affectionate 

Elizabeth Johnson. 



A TALE. 

A GENTLEMAN whose family name I shall 
conceal, bought a small Cottage in Pem- 
brokeshire about two years ago. This daring Ac- 
tion was suggested to him by his elder Brother 
who promised to furnish two rooms and a Closet 
for him, provided he would take a small house 
172 



LOVE AND FREINDSHIP 

near the borders of an extensive Forest, and about 
three Miles from the Sea. Wilhelminus gladly 
accepted the offer and continued for some time 
searching after such a retreat when he was one 
morning agreably releived from his suspence by 
reading this advertisement in a Newspaper. 

To BE LETT 

A Neat Cottage on the borders of an extensive 
forest and about three Miles from the Sea. It 
is ready furnished except two rooms and a 
Closet. 

The delighted Wilhelminus posted away im- 
mediately to his brother, and shewed him the 
advertisement. Robertus congratulated him 
and sent him in his Carriage to take possession 
of the Cottage. After travelling for three days 
and six nights without stopping, they arrived at 
the Forest and following a track which led by its' 
side down a steep Hill over which ten Rivulets 
meandered, they reached the Cottage in half an 
hour. Wilhelminus alighted, and after knocking 
for some time without receiving any answer or 
hearing any one stir within, he opened the door 
which was fastened only by a wooden latch and 
entered a small room, which he immediately per- 
ceived to be one of the two that were unfur- 
nished From thence he proceeded into a Closet 
equally bare. A pair of stairs that went out of it 

173 



3 JANE AUSTEN 

led him into a room above, no less destitute, and 
these apartments he found composed the whole 
of the House. He was by no means displeased 
with this discovery, as he had the comfort of 
reflecting that he should not be obliged to lay 
out anything on furniture himself . He re- 
turned immediately to his Brother, who took him 
the next day to every Shop in Town, and bought 
what ever was requisite to furnish the two rooms 
and the Closet, In a few days everything was 
completed, and Wilhelminus returned to take 
possession of his Cottage. Robertus accom- 
panied him, with his Lady the amiable Cecilia and 
her two lovely Sisters Arabella and Marina to 
whom Wilhelminus was tenderly attached, and a 
large number of Attendants. An ordinary 
Genius might probably have been embarrassed, 
in endeavouring to accomodate so large a party, 
but Wilhelminus with admirable presence of mind 
gave orders for the immediate erection of two 
noble Tents in an open spot in the Forest ad- 
joining the house. Their Construction was both 
simple and elegant A couple of old blankets, 
each supported by four sticks, gave a striking 
proof of that taste for architecture and that 
happy ease in overcoming difficulties which were 
some of Wilhelminus's most striking Virtues. 



Finis 
End of the Second Volume 



174 



**.,./- 





\ 



Austen, Jane, 1775-1817. 

Love and freindship and other 
early works/ 



FROM 

" My Friends' 

Little Book Shop ' 

95 Bloor West 

Toronto 



