m 





>.-' 

^ 



^ 



THE NOFELS OF JANE AUSTEN 



. .NORTHANGER 


ABBEY. 


^ ' 


BY 


JANE AUSTEN 



% 



BOSTON 

LITTLE, BROWN, AND COMPANY 

1903 







^$a 



[^ 



o3 



^p^!lr 



NZRAI. 



Copyright, 1892, 
By Roberts Brothers. 



^Enibersttg press: 
John Wilson and Son, Cambridge, U.S.A, 




NORTHANGER ABBEY, /^^x 



CHAPTEE I. 




one who had ever seen Catherine Mor- 
land in her infaucj^ would have sup- 
posed her born to he a heroine. Her 
situation in life, the character of her 
father and mother, her own person and disposition, 
were all equally against her. Her father was a 
clergyman, without being neglected or poor, and 
a very respectable man, though his name was 
E-ichard, — and he had never been handsome. He 
had a considerable independence, besides two good 
livings; and he was not in the least addicted to 
locking up his daughters. Her mother was a 
woman of useful, plain sense, with a good temper, 
and, what is more remarkable, with a good consti- 
tution. She had three sons before Catherine was 
born; and instead of dying in bringing the latter 
into the world, as anybody might expect, she still 
lived on, — lived to have six children more, to 
see them growing up around her, and to enjoy 



.^ i: ''.'". •'' 'HORTHANGiJE ABBEY. 

t^z '^ ' •' 'r '/ ;''.'':'...; /• ', » . .' 

excellent health herself. A family of ten chil- 
dren will be always called a fine family, where 
there are heads and arms and legs enough for the 
number; but the Morlands had little other right 
to the word, for they were in general very plain, 
and Catherine, for many years of her life, as plain 
as any. She had a thin, awkward figure, a sallow 
skin without color, dark, lank hair, and strong feat- 
ures, — so much for her person. And not less 
unpropitious for heroism seemed her mind. She 
was fond of all boys' plays, and greatly preferred 
cricket, not merely to dolls, but to the more heroic 
enjoyments of infancy, — nursing a dormouse, 
feeding a canary-bird, or watering a rose-bush. In- 
deed, she had no taste for a garden; and if she 
gathered flowers at all, it was chiefly for the pleas- 
ure of mischief, — at least so it was conjectured, 
from her always preferring those which she was 
forbidden to take. Such were her propensities. 
Her abilities were quite as extraordinary. She 
never could learn or understand anything before 
she was taught; and sometimes not even then, for 
she was often inattentive and occasionally stupid. 
Her mother was three months in teaching her only 
to repeat the *^ Beggar's Petition;" and after all, 
her next sister, Sally, could say it better than she 
did. Not that Catherine was always stupid, — by 
no means: she learnt the fable of ^^The Hare and 
many Eriends " as quickly as any girl in England. 
Her mother wished her to learn music; and Cath- 
erine was sure she should like it, for she was very 
fond of tinkling the keys of the old forlorn spin- 
net; so, at eight years old, she began. She learnt 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 7 

a year, and could not bear it; and Mrs. Morland, 
who did not insist on her daughters being accom- 
plished in spite of incapacity or distaste, allowed 
her to leave off. The day which dismissed the 
music-master was one of the happiest of Catherine's 
life. Her taste for drawing was not superior; 
though whenever she could obtain the outside of a 
letter from her mother, or seize upon any other 
odd piece of paper, she did what she could in that 
way, by drawing houses and trees, hens and chick- 
ens, all very much like one another. Writing and 
accounts she was taught by her father; French by 
her mother : her proficiency in either was not remark- 
able, and she shirked her lessons in both whenever 
she could. What a strange, unaccountable charac- 
ter! — for with all these symptoms of profligacy at 
ten years old, she had neither a bad heart nor a 
bad temper; was seldom stubborn, scarcely ever 
quarrelsome, and very kind to the little ones, 
with few interruptions of tyranny; she was more- 
over noisy and wild, hated confinement and cleanli- 
ness, and loved nothing so well in the world as 
rolling down the green slope at the back of the 
house. 

Such was Catherine Morland at ten. At fifteen, 
appearances were mending; she began to curl her 
hair, and long for balls; her complexion improved, 
her features were softened by plumpness and color, 
her eyes gained more animation, and her figure 
more consequence. Her love of dirt gave way to 
an inclination for finery, and she grew clean as she 
grew smart ; she had now the pleasure of sometimes 
hearing her father and mother remark on her per- 



8 NORTHANGEU ABBEY. 

sonal improvement. '^Catlierine grows quite a 
good-looking girl, — she is almost pretty to-day," 
were words which caught her ears now and then; 
and how welcome were the sounds! To look al- 
most pretty is an acquisition of higher delight to 
a girl who has been looking plain the first fifteen 
years of her life than a beauty from her cradle can 
ever receive. 

Mrs. Morland was a very good woman, and 
wished to see her children everything they ought 
to be ; but her time was so much occupied in lying- 
in, and teaching the little ones, that her elder 
daughters were inevitably left to shift for them- 
selves ; and it was not very wonderful that Cather- 
ine, who had by nature nothing heroic about her, 
should prefer cricket, base-ball, riding on horse- 
back, and running about the countr}^, at the age of 
fourteen, to books, — or at lea^t books of informa- 
tion ; for, provided that nothing like useful knowl- 
edge could be gained from them, provided they 
were all story and no reflection, she had never any 
objection to books at all. But from fifteen to 
seventeen she was in training for a heroine; she 
read all such works as heroines must read to sup- 
ply their memories with those quotations which are 
so serviceable and so soothing in the vicissitudes 
of their eventful lives. 

From Pope, she learnt to censure those who 

** Bear about the mockery ot woe." 



From Gray, that 



" Many a flower is born to blush unseen, 

And waste its fragrance on the desert air." 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 9 

From Thomson, that 

" It is a delightful task 
To teach the youug idea how to shoot." 

And from Shakspeare she gained a great store of 
information; amongst the rest, that 

" Trifles, light as air, 
Are to the jealous coufirmation strong 
As proofs of Holy Writ." 
That 

" The poor beetle, which we tread upon, 
In corporal sufferance feels a paug as great 
As when a giaut dies.'* 

And that a young woman in love always looks 

" Like Patience on a monument 
Smiling at Grief." 

So far her improvement was sufficient, — and in 
many other points she came on exceedingly well ; 
for though she could not write sonnets, she brought 
herself to read them; and though there seemed 
no chance of her throwing a whole party into rap- 
tures by a prelude on the pianoforte of her own 
composition, she could listen to other people's per- 
formance with very little fatigue. Her greatest 
deficiency was in the pencil ; she had no notion of 
drawing, — not enough even to attempt a sketch of 
her lover's profile, that she might be detected in 
the design. There she fell miserably short of the 
true heroic height. At present she did not know 
her own poverty, for she had no lover to portray. 
She had reached the age of seventeen without hav- 
ing seen one amiable youth who could call forth 
her sensibilit}^, without having inspired one real 
passion, and without having excited even any admi- 



10 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

ration but what was very moderate and very tran- 
sient. This was strange indeed ! But strange 
things may be generally accounted for if their 
cause be fairly searched out. There was not one 
lord in the neighborhood; no, not even a baronet. 
There was not one family among their acquaint- 
ance who had reared and supported a boy acciden- 
tally found at their door, not one young man 
whose origin was unknown. Her father had no 
ward, and the squire of the parish no children. 

But when a young lady is to be a heroine, the 
perverseness of forty surrounding families cannot 
prevent her. Something must and will happen to 
throw a hero in her way. 

Mr. Allen, who owned the chief of the property 
about Fullerton, the village in Wiltshire where the 
Morlands lived, was ordered to Bath for the benefit 
of a gouty constitution; and his lady, a good- 
humored woman, fond of Miss Morland, and prob- 
ably aware that if adventures will not befall a 
young lady in her own village, she must seek them 
abroad, invited her to go with them. Mr. and 
Mrs. Morland were all compliance, and Catherine 
all happiness. 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 11 



CHAPTER II. 

In addition to what has been already said of 
Catherine Morland's personal and mental endow- 
ments when about to be launched into all the 
difficulties and dangers of a six weeks' residence 
in Bath, it may be stated, for the reader's more 
certain information, lest the following pages should 
otherwise fail of giving an}'- idea of what her charac- 
ter is meant to be, that her heart was affectionate, 
her disposition cheerful and open, without conceit or 
affectation of any kind, — her manners just removed 
from the awkwardness and shjmess of a girl ; her 
person pleasing, and, when in good looks, prett}^; 
and her mind about as ignorant and uninformed 
as the female mind at seventeen usually is. 

When the hour of departure drew near, the ma- 
ternal anxiety of Mrs. Morland will be naturally 
supposed to be most severe. A thousand alarm- 
ing presentiments of evil to her beloved Catherine 
from this terrific separation must oppress her 
heart with sadness, and drown her in tears for the 
last day or two of their being together; and advice 
of the most important and applicable nature must 
of course flow from her wise lips in their parting 
conference in her closet. Cautions against the 
violence of such noblemen and baronets as delight 
in forcing young ladies away to some remote farm- 
house must, at such a moment, relieve the fulness 



12 NORTH ANGER ABBEY. 

of her heart. Who would not think so? But Mrs. 
Morland knew so little of lords and baronets that 
she entertained no notion of their general mis- 
chievousness, and was wholly unsuspicious of dan- 
ger to her daughter from their machinations. Her 
cautions were confined to the following points: ''I 
beg, Catherine, you will always wrap yourself up 
very warm about the throat when you come from the 
E-ooms at night; and I wish you would try to keep 
some account of the money you spend, — I will 
give you this little book on purpose.'' 

Sally, or rather Sarah (for what young lady of 
common gentility will reach the age of sixteen 
without altering her name as far as she can?) must 
from situation be at this time the intimate friend 
and confidante of her sister. It is remarkable, 
however, that she neither insisted on Catherine's 
writing by every post, nor exacted her promise of 
transmitting the character of every new acquaint- 
ance, nor a detail of every interesting conversation 
that Bath might produce. Everything indeed 
relative to this important journey was done on the 
part of the Morlands with a degree of moderation 
^nd composure which seemed rather consistent with 
the common feelings of common life than with 
refined susceptibilities, the tender emotions which 
the first separation of a heroine from her family 
ought always to excite. Her father, instead of 
giving her an unlimited order on his banker, or 
even putting a hundred pounds bank-bill into her 
hands, gave her only ten guineas, and promised 
her more when she wanted it. 

Under these unpromising auspices the parting 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 13 

took place and the journey began. It was per- 
formed with suitable quietness and uneventful 
safety. Neither robbers nor tempests befriended 
them, nor one lucky overturn to Introduce them to 
the hero. Nothing more alarming occurred than a 
fear, on Mrs. Allen's side, of having once left her 
clogs behind her at an inn, and that fortunately 
proved to be groundless. 

They arrived at Bath. Catherine was all eager 
delight; her* eyes were here, there, everywhere, 
as they approached its fine and striking environs, 
and afterwards drove through those streets which 
conducted them to the hotel. She was come to be 
happy, and she felt happy already. 

They were soon settled in comfortable lodgings 
in Pulteney Street. 

It is now expedient to give some description of 
Mrs. Allen, that the reader may be able to judge 
in what manner her actions will hereafter tend 
to promote the general distress of the work, and 
how she will probably contribute to reduce poor 
Catherine to all the desperate wretchedness of 
which a last volume is capable, — whether by 
her imprudence, vulgarity, or jealousy, — whether 
by intercepting her letters, ruining her character, 
or turning her out of doors. 

Mrs. Allen was one of that numerous class of 
females whose society can raise no other emotion 
than surprise at there being any men in the world 
who could like them well enough to marry them. 
She had neither beauty, genius, accomplishment, 
nor manner. The air of a gentlewoman, a great 
deal of quiet, inactive good temper, and a trifling 



14 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

turn of mind were all that could account for her 
being the choice of a sensible, intelligent man, like 
Mr. Allen. In one respect she was admirably 
fitted to introduce a young lady into public, being 
as fond of going everywhere and seeing everything 
herself as any young lady could be. Dress was 
her passion. She had a most harmless delight in 
being fine; and our heroine's entree into life could 
not take place till after three or four days had been 
spent in learning what was mostly worn, and her 
chaperon was provided with a dress of the newest 
fashion. Catherine, too, made some purchases 
herself; and when all these matters were arranged, 
the important evening came which was to usher her 
into the Upper Rooms. Her hair was cut and 
dressed by the best hand, her clothes put on with 
care, and both Mrs. Allen and her maid declared 
she looked quite as she should do. With such 
encouragement, Catherine hoped at least to pass 
uncensured through the crowd. As for admiration, 
it was always very welcome when it came; but she 
did not depend on it. 

Mrs. Allen was so long in dressing that they 
did not enter the ball-room till late. The season 
was full, the room crowded, and the two ladies 
squeezed in as well as they could. As for Mr. 
Allen, he repaired directly to the card-room, and 
left them to enjoy a mob by themselves. With 
more care for the safety of her new gown than for the 
comfort of her prot^g^e, Mrs. Allen made her way 
through the throng of men by the door as swiftly 
as the necessary caution would allow; Catherine, 
however, kept close at her side, and linked her 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 15 

arm too firmly within her friend's to be torn 
asunder by any common effort of a struggling 
assembly. But, to her utter amazement, she found 
that to proceed along the room was oy no means 
the way to disengage themselves from the crowd: 
it seemed rather to increase as they went on; 
whereas she had imagined that when once fairly 
within the door, they should easily find seats, and 
be able to watch the dances with perfect conven- 
ience. But this was far from being the case; and 
though by unwearied diligence they gained even 
the top of the room, their situation was just the 
same: they saw nothing of the dancers, but the 
high feathers of some of the ladies. Still they 
moved on, — something better was yet in view; 
and by a continued exertion of strength and 
ingenuity they found themselves at last in the 
passage behind the highest bench. Here there 
was something less of crowd than below; and hence 
Miss Morland had a comprehensive view of all the 
company beneath her, and of all the dangers of her 
late passage through them. It was a splendid 
sight; and she began, for the first time that even- 
ing, to feel herself at a ball. She longed to dance, 
but she had not an acquaintance in the room. 
Mrs. Allen did all that she could do in such a 
case by saying very placidly every now and then, 
^'I wish you could dance, my dear; I wish yon 
could get a partner." For some time her young 
friend felt obliged to her for these wishes; but they 
were repeated so often, and proved so totally 
ineffectual, that Catherine grew tired at last, and 
would thank her no more. 



16 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

They were not long able, however, to enjoy the 
repose of tlie eminence they had so laboriously 
gained. Everybody was shortly in motion for 
tea, and they must squeeze out like the rest. 
Catherine began to feel something of disappoint- 
ment: she was tired of being continually pressed 
against by people, the generality of whose faces 
possessed nothing to interest, and with all of whom 
she was so wholly unacquainted that she could not 
relieve the irksomeness of imprisonment by the 
exchange of a syllable with any of her fellow- 
captives; and when at last arrived in the tea- 
room, she felt yet more the awkwardness of hav- 
ing no party to join, no acquaintance to claim, no 
gentleman to assist them. They saw nothing of 
Mr. Allen; and after looking about them in vain 
for a more eligible situation, were obliged to sit 
down at the end of a table, at which a large party 
were already placed, without having anything to do 
there, or anybody to speak to except each other. 
" Mrs. Allen congratulated herself, as soon as 
they were seated, on having preserved her gown 
from injury. *^ It would have been very shocking 
to have it torn," said she, ^' would not it ? It is 
such a delicate muslin. For my part, I have not 
seen anything I like so well in the whole room, I 
assure you." 

"How uncomfortable it is," whispered Cather- 
ine, '' not to have a single acquaintance here ! " 

''Yes, my dear," replied Mrs. Allen, with per- 
fect serenity, "it is very uncomfortable indeed." 

"What shall we do? The gentlemen and la- 
dies at this table look as if they wondered why we 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 17 

came here: we seem forcing ourselves into tlieir 
party/' 

'*Ay, so we do. That is very disagreeable. 
'I wish we had a large acquaintance here." 

*'I wish we had any: it would be somebody 
to go to." 

*'Very true, my dear; and if we knew any- 
body, we would join them directly. The Skin- 
ners were here last year. I wish they were 
here now." 

* ' Had not we better go away, as it is ? Here 
are no tea-things for us, you see." 

^^iSTo more there are, indeed. How very pro- 
voking! But I think w^e had better sit still, for 
one gets so tumbled in such a crowd! How is my 
head, my dear? Somebody gave me a push that 
vhas hurt it, I am afraid." 

^ '^No, indeed, it looks very nice. But, dear 
Mrs. Allen, are you sure there is nobody you 
know in all this multitude of people? I think 
you must know somebody." 

^'1 don't, upon my word. I wish I did. I 
wish I had a large acquaintance here with all my 
heart, and then I should get you a partner. I 
should be so glad to have you dance. There goes 
a strange-looking woman! What an odd gown 
she has got on! How old-fashioned it is! Look 
at the back." 

After some time they received an offer of tea 
from one of their neighbors. It was thankfully 
accepted; and this introduced a light conversation 
with the gentleman who offered it, which was the 
only time that an^^body spoke to them during the 



18 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

evening, till they were discovered and joined by 
Mr. Allen when the dance was over. 

^^Well, Miss Morland/' said he, directly, ''1 
hope you have had an agreeable ball." 

^^Very agreeable, indeed," she replied, vainly 
endeavoring to hide a great yawn. 

'*I wish she had been able to dance," said his 
wife ] "^ wish we could have got a partner for 
her. I have been saying how glad I should be if 
the Skinners were here this winter, instead of last; 
or if the Parrys had come, as they talked of once, 
she might have danced with George Parry. I am 
so sorry she has not had a partner ! " 

^* We shall do better another evening, I hope/' 
was Mr. Allen's consolation. 

The company began to disperse when the dan- 
cing was over, — enough to leave space for the re- 
mainder to walk about in some comfort; and now 
was the time for a heroine who had not yet 
played a very distinguished part in the events of 
the evening, to be noticed and admired. Every 
five minutes, by removing some of the crowd, gave 
greater openings for her charms. She was now 
seen by many young men who had not been near 
her before. Not one, however, started with rap- 
turous wonder on beholding her, no whisper of 
eager inquiry ran round the room, nor was she 
once called a divinity by anybody. Yet Cather- 
ine was in very good looks, and, had the company 
only seen her three years before, the}'- would now 
have thought her exceedingly handsome. 

She was looked at, however, and with some 
admiration; for in her own hearing two gentle- 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 19 

men pronounced her to be a pretty girl. Such 
words had their due effect: she immediately 
thought the evening pleasanter than she had 
found it before; her humble vanity was con- 
tented; she felt more obliged to the two young 
men for this simple praise than a true quality 
heroine would have been for fifteen sonnets in cel- 
ebration of her charms ; and went to her chair in 
good humor with everybody, and perfectly satis- 
fied with her share of public attention. 



20 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 



CHAPTEE III. 

Every morning now brought its regular duties: 
shops were to be visited; some new part of the 
town to be looked at; and the Pump-room to be 
attended, where they paraded up and down for an 
hour, looking at everybody and speaking to no 
one. The wish of a numerous acquaintance in 
Bath was still uppermost with Mrs. Allen; and 
she repeated it after every fresh proof, which 
every morning brought, of her knowing nobody 
at all. 

They made their appearance in the Lower 
Booms; and here fortune was more favorable to 
our heroine. The master of the ceremonies intro- 
duced to her a very gentlemanlike young man as 
a partner. His name was Tilney. He seemed to 
be about four or five and twenty, was rather tall, 
had a pleasing countenance, a very intelligent and 
lively eye, and, if not quite handsome, was very 
near it. His address was good, and Catherine 
felt herself in high luck. There was little leisure 
for speaking while they danced; but when they 
were seated at tea, she found him as agreeable as 
she had already given him credit for being. He 
talked with fluency and spirit; and there was an 
archness and pleasantry in his manner which in- 
terested, though it was hardly understood by her. 
After chatting some time on such matters as nat- 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 21 

urally arose from the objects around them, he 
suddenly addressed her with: '^I have hitherto 
been very remiss, madam, in the proper attentions 
of a partner here. I have not yet asked you how 
long you have been in Bath; whether you were 
ever here before; whether you have been at the 
Upper Rooms, the theatre, and the concert; and 
how ycu like the place altogether. I have been 
very negligent ; but are you now at leisure to sat- 
isfy me in these particulars? If you are, I will 
begin directly? " 

*' You need not give yourself that trouble, sir.'' 

*' No trouble, I assure you, madam." Then, 
forming his features into a set smile, and affect- 
edl}^ softening his voice, he added, with a simper- 
ing air, ''Have you been long in Bath, madam?" 

''About a week, sir," replied Catherine, trying 
not to laugh. 

"Eeally!" with affected astonishment. 

'''Why should you be surprised, sir?" 

"Why, indeed? "said he, in his natural tone; 
"but some emotion must appear to be raised by 
your reply, and surprise is more easily assumed, 
and not less reasonable, than any other. Now 
let us go on. V/ere you never here before, 
madam? " 

"Never, sir." 

"Indeed! Have you yet honored the Upper 
Rooms?" 

"Yes, sir; I was tliere last Monday." 

"Have you been to the theatre?" 

*^ Yes, sir; I was at the play on Tuesday." 

"To the concert?" 



22 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

''Yes, sir; on Wednesday." 

''And are you altogether pleased with Bath? '* 

"Yes; I like it very well." 

" Now I must give one smirk, and then we may 
be rational again." 

Catherine turned away her head, not knowing 
whether she might venture to laugh. 

"I see what you think of me," said he, 
gravely: " I shall make but a poor figure in your 
journal to-morrow." 

"My journal!" 

"Yes; I know exactly what you will say: 
'Friday went to the Lower Booms; wore my 
sprigged muslin robe with blue trimmings, plain 
black shoes, — appeared to much advantage ; 
but was strangely harassed by a queer, half-witted 
man, who would make me dance with him, and 
distressed me by his nonsense.' " 

"Indeed I shall say no such thing." 

" Shall I tell you what you ought to say? " 

"If you please." 

"I danced with a very agreeable young man, 
introduced by Mr. King; had a great deal of con- 
versation with him; seems a most extraordinary 
genius; hope I may know more of him. That, 
madam, is what I wish you to say." 

"But perhaps I keep no journal." 

"Perhaps you are not sitting in this room, and 
I am not sitting by you. These are points in 
which a doubt is equally possible. Not keep a 
journal! How are your absent cousins to under- 
stand the tenor of your life in Bath without one ? 
How are the civilities and compliments of every 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 23 

day to be related as they ought to be, unless noted 
down every evening in a journal? How are your 
various dresses to be remembered, and the particu- 
lar state of your complexion and curl of your hair 
to be described, in all their diversities, without 
having constant recourse to a journal? My dear 
madam, I am not so ignorant of young ladies' 
ways as you wish to believe me. It is this de- 
lightful habit of journalizing which largely con- 
tributes to form the easy style of writing for which 
ladies are so generally celebrated. Everybody 
allows that the talent of writing agreeable letters 
is peculiarly female. Nature may have done some- 
thing; but I am sure it must be essentially assisted 
by the practice of keeping a journal.'' 

^*I have sometimes thought," said Catherine, 
doubtingl}^, "whether ladies do write so much 
better letters than gentlemen. That is, I should 
not think the superiority was always on our 
side." 

''As far as I have had opportunity of judging, 
it appears to me that the usual style of letter- 
writing among women is faultless, except in three 
particulars." 

'' And what are they? " 

''A general deficiency of subject, a total inat- 
tention to stops, and a very frequent ignorance of 
grammar." 

' ' Upon my word ! I need not have been afraid 
of disclaiming the compliment. You do not think 
too highly of us in that way." 

'' I should no more lay it down as a general rule 
that vvomen write better letters than men than 



24 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

that tliey sing better duets or draw better land' 
scapes. In every power of which taste is th«? 
foundation excellence is pretty fairly divided 
between the sexes." 

They were interrupted by Mrs. Allen. ^< My 
dear Catherine," said she, ''do take this pin out 
of my sleeve. I am afraid it has torn a hole 
already. I shall be quite sorry if it has; for this 
is a favorite gown, though it cost but nine shil- 
lings a yard." 

''That is exactly what I should have guessed it, 
madam," said Mr. Tilney, looking at the muslin. 

" Do you understand muslins, sir? " 

"Particularly well; I always buy my own cra- 
vats, and am allowed to be an excellent judge; and 
my sister has often trusted me in the choice of a 
gown. I bought one for her the other day, and it 
was pronounced to be a prodigious bargain by 
every lady who saw it. I gave but five shillings 
a yard for it, and a true Indian muslin." 

Mrs. Allen was quite struck by his genius. 
"Men commonly take so little notice of those 
things," said she. "I can never get Mr. Allen 
to know one of my gowns from another. You 
must be a great comfort to your sister, sir." 

" I hope I am, madam." 

"And pray, sir, what do you think of Miss 
Morland's gown? " 

"It is very pretty, madam," said he, gravely 
examining it; "but I do not think it will wash 
well: I am afraid it will fray." 

"How can you," said Catherine, laughing, 
"be so " — she had almost said "strange." 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 25 

''I am quite of your opinion, sir/' replied Mrs. 
Allen; '^ and so I told Miss Morland when she 
bought it." 

*'But then you know, madam, muslin alwa^'-s 
turns to some account or other : Miss Morland will 
get enough out of it for a handkerchief or a cap 
or a cloak. Muslin can never be said to be wasted. 
I have heard my sister say so forty times, when 
she has been extravagant in buying more than she 
wanted, or careless in cutting it to pieces. '^ 

'^Bath is a charming place, sir; there are so 
many good shops here. We are sadly off in the 
country, — not but what we have ver}^ good shops in 
Salisbury, but it is so far to go; eight miles is a 
long way; Mr. Allen says it is nine, measured 
nine; but I am sure it cannot be more than eight; 
and it is such a fag, — I come back tired to death. 
Now, here one can step out of doors, and get a 
thing in five minutes." 

Mr. Tilney was polite enough to seem interested 
in what she said; and she kept him on the subject 
of muslins till the dancing recommenced. Cath- 
erine feared, as she listened to their discourse, 
that he indulged himself a little too much with 
the foibles of others. "What are you thinking 
of so earnestly?" said he, as they walked back to 
the ball-room; "not of your partner, I hope, 
for by that shake of the head your meditations 
are not satisfactory." 

Catherine colored, and said, " I was not think- 
ing of anything." 

" That is artful and deep, to be sure; but I had 
rather be told at ouce that you will not tell me.'' 



26 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

^^Well, then, I will not." 

''Thank you; for now we shall soon be ac- 
quainted, as I am authorized to tease you on this 
subject whenever we meet, and nothing in the 
world advances intimacy so much.'^ 

They danced again; and when the assembly 
closed, parted, on the lady's side at least, with a 
strong inclination for continuing the acquaintance. 
Whether she thought of him so much while she 
drank her warm wine and water and prepared her- 
self for bed as to dream of him when there, cannot 
be ascertained; but I hope it was no more than in 
a slight slumber, or a morning doze at most; for 
if it be true, as a celebrated writer has maintained, 
that no young lady can be justified in falling in 
love before the gentleman's love is declared,^ it 
must be very improper that a young lady should 
dream of a gentleman before the gentleman is first 
known to have dreamt of her. How proper Mr. 
Tilney might be as a dreamer or a lover, had not 
yet, perhaps, entered Mr. Allen's head; but that 
he was not objectionable as a common acquaintance 
for his young charge, he was on inquiry satisfied; 
for he had early in the evening taken pains to 
know who her partner was, and had been assured 
of Mr. Tilney's being a clergyman, and of a very 
respectable family in Gloucestershire. 

1 Vide a letter from Mr. Richardson, No. 97, vol. ii., 
« Rambler " 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 27 



CHAPTEE lY. 

With more than usual eagerness did Catherine 
hasten to the Pump-room the next day, secure 
within herself of seeing Mr. Tilney there before 
the morning was over, and ready to meet him with 
a smile; but no smile was demanded, — Mr. Tilney 
did not appear. Every creature in Bath, except 
himself, was to be seen in the room at different 
periods of the fashionable hours ; crowds of people 
were every moment passing in and out, up the 
steps and down ; people whom nobody cared about, 
and nobody wanted to see ; and he only was absent. 
<'What a delightful place Bath is," said Mrs. 
Allen, as they sat down near the great clock, after 
parading the room till they were tired; ^'and how 
pleasant it wo aid be if we had any acquaintance 
here.'' 

This sentiment had been uttered so often in 
vain that Mrs. Allen had no particular reason to 
hope it would be followed with more advantage 
now ; but we are told to ^ ' despair of nothing we 
would attain,'' as '^unwearied diligence our point 
would gain:" and the unwearied diligence with 
which she had every day wished for the same thing 
was at length to have its just reward; for hardly 
had she been seated ten minutes, before a lady of 
about her own age, who was sitting by her, and 



28 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

had been looking at her attentively for several 
minutes, addressed her with great complaisance 
in these words: ^'I think, madam, I cannot be 
mistaken; it is along time since I had the pleas- 
ure of seeing you, but is not your name Allen? '' 
This question answered, as it readily was, the 
stranger pronounced hers to be Thorpe; and Mrs. 
Allen immediately recognized the features of her 
former school-fellow and intimate, whom she had 
seen only once since their respective marriages, 
and that many years ago. Their joy on this meet- 
ing was very great, as well it might; since they 
had been contented to know nothing of each other 
for the last fifteen years. Compliments on good 
looks now passed; and after observing how time 
had slipped away since they were last together, 
how little they had thought of meeting in Bath, 
and what a pleasure it was to see an old friend, 
they proceeded to make inquiries and give intelli- 
gence as to their families, sisters, and cousins, 
talking both together, far more ready to give than 
to receive information, and each hearing very 
little of what the other said. Mrs. Thorj^e, how- 
ever, had one great advantage as a talker over 
Mrs. Allen, in a family of children ; and when she 
expatiated on the talents of her sons and the 
beauty of her daughters, — when she related their 
different situations and views, — that John was at 
Oxford, Edward at Merchant-Taylors', and Wil- 
liam at sea, — and all of them more beloved and 
respected in their different stations than any other 
three beings ever were, Mrs. Allen had no similar 
information to give, no similar triumphs to press 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 29 

on the unwilling and unbelieving ear of her friend ; 
and was forced to sit and appear to listen to all 
these maternal effusions, — consoling herself, how- 
ever, with the discovery, which her keen eyes soon 
made, that the lace on Mrs. Thorpe's pelisse was 
not half so handsome as that on her own. 

'* Here come my dear girls," cried Mrs. Thorpe, 
pointing at three smart-looking females, who, arm 
in arm, were then moving towards her. '^My 
dear Mrs. Allen, I long to introduce them; they 
will be so delighted to see you ; the tallest is 
Isabella, my eldest ; is she not a fine young 
woman? The others are very much admired too; 
but I believe Isabella is the handsomest.'' 

The Miss Thorpes were introduced; and Miss 
Morland, who had been for a short time forgotten, 
was introduced likewise. The name seemed to 
strike them all ; and after speaking to her with 
great civility, the eldest young lady observed aloud 
to the rest, *'How excessively like her brother 
Miss Morland is! " 

^'The very picture of him indeed ! " cried the 
mother; and ^'I should have known her anywhere 
for his sister ! " was repeated by them all, two or 
three times over. For a moment Catherine was 
surprised; but Mrs. Thorpe and her daughters had 
scarcely begun the history of their acquaintance 
with Mr. James Morland, before she remembered 
that her eldest brother had lately formed an inti- 
macy with a young man of his own college, of the 
name of Thorpe, and that he had spent the last 
week of the Christmas vacation with his family, 
near London. 

The whole being explained, many obliging 



/ 



II 



30 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

things were said by the Miss Thorpes of their 
wish of being better acquainted with her ; of being 
considered as already friends, through the friend- 
ship of their brothers, etc., which Catherine heard 
with pleasure, and answered with all the pretty ex- 
pressions she could command; and as the first 
proof of amity, she was soon invited to accept an 
arm of the eldest Miss Thorpe, and take a turn 
with her about the room. Catherine was delighted 
with this extension of her Bath acquaintance, and 
almost forgot Mr. Tilney while she talked to Miss 
Thorpe. Friendship is certainly the finest balm 
for the pangs of disappointed love. 

Their conversation turned upon those subjects of 
which the free discussion has generally much to 
do in perfecting a sudden intimacy between two 
young ladies; such as dress, balls, flirtations, and 
quizzes. Miss Thorpe, however, being four years 
older than Miss Morland, and at least four years 
better informed, had a very decided advantage in 
discussing such points; she could compare the 
balls of Bath with those of Tunbridge, its fashions 
with the fashions of London; could rectify the 
opinions of her new friend in many articles of 
tasteful attire; could discover a flirtation between 
any gentleman and lady who only smiled on each 
other; and point out a quiz through the thickness 
of a crowd. These powers received due admiration 
from Catherine, to whom they were entirely new; 
and the respect which they naturally inspired 
might have been too great for familiarit}^, had not 
the easy gayety of Miss Thorpe's manners, and her 
frequent expressions of delight on this acquaint- 
ance with her, softened down every feeling of awe 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 31 

and left nothing but tender affection. Their in- 
creasing attachment was not to be satisfied with 
lialf-a-dozen turns in the Pump-room, but required, 
when they all quitted it together, that Miss 
Thorpe should accompany Miss Morland to the 
very door of Mr. Allen's house; and that they 
should there part with a most affectionate and 
lengthened shake of hands, after learning, to their 
mutual relief, that they should see each other 
across the theatre at night, and say their prayers 
in the same chapel the next morning. Catherine 
then ran directly upstairs, and watched Miss 
Thorpe's progress down the street from the drawing- 
room window; admired the graceful spirit of her 
walk, the fashionable air of her figure and dress, 
and felt grateful, as well she might, for the chance 
which had procured her such a friend. 

Mrs. Thorpe was a widow, and not a very rich 
one ; she was a good-humored, well-meaning woman, 
and a very indulgent mother. Her eldest daughter 
had great personal beauty ; and the younger ones, 
by pretending to be as handsome as their sister, 
imitating her air, and dressing in the same stj^le, 
did very well. 

This brief account of the family is intended to 
supersede the necessity of a long and minute detail 
from Mrs. Thorpe herself, of her past adventures 
and sufferings, which might otherwise be expected 
to occupy the three or four following chapters, — 
in which the worthlessness of lords and attorneys 
might be set forth, and conversations, which had 
passed twenty years before, be minutely repeated. 



32 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 



CHAPTER V. 

Catherine was not so much engaged at the 
theatre that evening, in returning the nods and 
smiles of Miss Thorpe, though they certainly 
claimed much of her leisure, as to forget to look 
with an inquiring eye for Mr. Tilney in every box 
which her eye could reach; but she looked in vain. 
Mr. Tilney was no fonder of the play than the 
Pump-room. She hoped to be more fortunate the 
next day; and when her wishes for fine weather 
were answered by seeing a beautiful morning, she 
hardly felt a doubt of it; for a fine Sunday in 
Bath empties every house of its inhabitants, and all 
the world appears, on such an occasion, to walk 
about and tell their acquaintance what a charming 
day it is. 

As soon as divine service was over, the Thorpes 
and Aliens eagerly joined each other; and after 
staying long enough in the Pump-room to discover 
that the crowd was insupportable, and that there 
was not a genteel face to be seen, which everj^body 
discovers every Sunday throughout the season, 
they hastened away to the Crescent to breathe the 
fresh air of better company. Here Catherine and 
Isabella, arm in arm, again tasted the sweets of 
friendship in an unreserved conversation ; — they 
talked much, and with much enjoyment; but again 



NORTHAXGER ABBEY. 33 

was Catherine disappointed in her hope of re-seeing 
her partner. He was nowhere to be met with: 
every search for him was equally unsuccessful, in 
morning lounges or evening assemblies; neither 
at the Upper nor Lower Eooms, at dressed or un- 
dressed balls, was he perceivable ; nor among the 
walkers, the horsemen, or the curricle-drivers of 
the morning. His name was not in the Pump- 
room book, and curiosity could do no more. He 
must be gone from Bath ; yet he had not mentioned 
that his stay would be so short! This sort of 
mysteriousness, which is always so becoming in a 
hero, threw a fresh grace, in Catherine's imagi- 
nation, around his person and manners, and in- 
creased her anxiety to know more of him. From 
the Thorpes she could learn nothing, for they had 
been only two days in Bath before they met with 
Mrs. Allen. It was a subject, however, in which 
she often indulged with her fair friend, from 
whom she received every possible encouragement 
to continue to think of him; and his impression 
on her fancy was not suffered therefore to weaken. 
Isabella was very sure that he must be a charming 
young man; and was equally sure that he must 
have been delighted with her dear Catherine, and 
would therefore shortly return. She liked him 
the better for being a clergjanan, ^'for she must 
confess herself very partial to the profession; " 
and something like a sigh escaped her as she said 
it. Perhaps Catherine was wrong in not demand- 
ing the cause of that gentle emotion; but she 
was not experienced enough in the finesse of love 
or the duties of friendship to know when delicate 
d 



34 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

raillery was properly called for, or when a confi- 
dence should be forced. 

Mrs. Allen was now quite happy, — quite satisfied 
with Bath. She had found some acquaintance; 
had been so lucky, too, as to find in them the 
family of a most worthy old friend; and as the 
completion of good fortune, had found these 
friends by no means so expensively dressed as 
herself. Her daily expressions were no longer, 
*^ I wish we had some acquaintance in Bath!" 
They were changed into, ''How glad I am we 
have met with Mrs. Thorpe!" and she was as 
eager in promoting the intercourse of the two fam- 
ilies as her young charge and Isabella themselves 
could be; never satisfied with the day unless she 
spent the chief of it by the side of Mrs. Thorpe, 
in what they called conversation;, but in which 
there was scarcely ever any exchange of opinion, 
and not often any resemblance of subject, — for Mrs. 
Thorpe talked chiefly of her children, and Mrs. 
Allen of her gowns. 

The progress of the friendship between Catherine 
and Isabella was quick as its beginning had been 
warm; and they passed so rapidly through every 
gradation of increasing tenderness that there was 
shortly no fresh proof of it to be given to their 
friends or themselves. They called each other by 
their Christian name, were always arm in arm 
when they walked, pinned up each other's train for 
the dance, and' were not to be divided in the set; 
and if a rainy morning deprived them of other 
enjo3^ments, they were still resolute in meeting, in 
defiance of wet and dirt, and shut themselves up to 



NOIiTHANGER ABBEY. 35 

^ead novels together. Yes, novels ; for I will not 
adopt that ungenerous and impolitic custom, so 
common with novel-writers, of degrading, by their 
contemptuous censure, the very performances to 
the number of which they are themselves adding; 
joining with their greatest enemies in bestowing 
the harshest epithets on such works, and scarcely 
ever permitting them to be read by their own 
heroine, who, if she accidentally take up a novel, 
is sure to turn over its insipid pages with disgust. 
Alas ! if the heroine of one novel be not patronized 
by the heroine of another, from whom can she 
expect protection and regard? I cannot approve of 
it. Let us leave it to the reviewers to abuse such 
effusions of fancy at their leisure, and over every 
new novel to talk in threadbare strains of the trash 
with which the press now groans. Let us not 
desert one another: we are an injured body. 
Although our productions have afforded more exten- 
sive and unaffected pleasure than those of any 
other literary corporation in the world, no species 
of composition has been so much decried. From 
pride, ignorance, or fashion, our foes are almost as 
many as our readers; and while the abilities of the 
nine-hundredth abridger of the History of England, 
or of the man who collects and publishes in a 
Yolume some dozen lines of Milton, Pope, and 
Prior, with a paper from the '' Spectator," and a 
chapter from Sterne, are eulogized by a thousand 
pens, — there seems almost a general wish of de- 
crying the capacity and undervaluing the labor 
of the novelist, and of slighting the performances 
which have only genius, wit, and taste to recom- 



36 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

mend them. ^^ I am no novel-reader; '' "I seldom 
look into novels; " '^Do not imagine tliat I often 
read novels; " ^' It is really very well for a novel/^ 
— such is the common cant. *' And what are you 

reading, Miss ? " " Oh, it is only a novel! *' 

replies the young lady, while she lays down her 
book with affected indifference or momentary 
shame. ^' It is only Cecilia, or Camilla, or Belinda; 
or, in short, only some work in which the greatest 
powers of the mind are displayed, in which the 
most thorough knowledge of human nature, the 
happiest delineation of its varieties, the liveliest 
effusions of wit and humor, are conveyed to the 
world in the best-chosen language. Now, had the 
same young lady been engaged with a volume of the 
*^ Spectator," instead of such a work, how proudly 
would she have produced the book, and told its 
name! though the chances must be against her 
being occupied by any part of that voluminous 
publication, of which either the matter or manner 
would not disgust a young person of taste; the 
substance of its papers so often consisting in the 
statement of improbable circumstances, unnatural 
characters, and topics of conversation which no lon- 
ger concern any one living; and their language, 
too, frequently so coarse as to give no very favor- 
able idea of the age that could endure it. 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 37 



CHAPTER VI. 

The following conversation, which took place 
between the two friends in the Pump-room one 
morning, after an acquaintance of eight or nine 
days, is given as a specimen of their very warm 
attachment, and of the delicacy, discretion, 
originality of thought, and literary taste which 
marked the reasonableness of that attachment. 

They met by appointment ; and as Isabella had 
arrived nearly five minutes before her friend, her 
first address naturally was: ^'My dearest creat- 
ure, what can have made you so late? I have been 
waiting for you at least this age! ^' 

*' Have you, indeed? I am very sorry for it; but 
really I thought I was in very good time. It is but 
just one. I hope you have not been here long ? '^ 

" Oh, these ten ages, at least! I am sure I 
have been here this half-hour. But now let us go 
and sit down at the other end of the room and enjoy 
ourselves. I have a hundred things to say to you. 
In the first place, I was so afraid it would rain 
this morning, just as I wanted to set off; it looked 
very showery, and that would have thrown me into 
agonies! Do you know, I saw the prettiest hat 
you can imagine, in a shop-window in Milsom 
Street just now, — very like yours, only with co- 
quelicot ribands instead of green? I quite longed 



38 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

for it. But, my dearest Catherine, what have you 
"been doing with yourself all this morning? Have 
you gone on with Udolpho? ^^ 

^' Yes; I have been reading it ever since I woke, 
and I am got to the black veil.'' 

''Ave you, indeed? How delightful! Oh, I 
would not tell you what is behind the black veil for 
the world! Are not you wild to know? '' 

'' Oh, yes! quite; what can it be? But do not 
tell me, — I would not be told upon any account. 
I know it must be a skeleton; I am sure it is 
Laurentina's skeleton. Oh, I am delighted with 
the book! I should like to spend my whole life 
in reading it, I assure you ; if it had not been to 
meet you, I would not have come away from it for 
all the world.'' 

'' Dear creature! how much I am obliged to you; 
and when you have finished Udolpho, we will read 
the Italian together; and I have made out a list of 
ten or twelve more of the same kind for you." 

*'Have you, indeed? How glad I am! What 
are they all?" 

'' I will read you their names directly; here they 
are, in my pocket-book: Castle of Wolfenbach, 
Clermont, Mysterious Warnings, Kecromancer of 
the Black Forest, Midnight Bell, Orphan of the 
E-hine, and Horrid Mysteries. Those will last us 
sometime." 

*^ Yes, pretty well; but are they all horrid? Are 
you sure they are all horrid? " 

'* Yes, quite sure; for a particular friend of mine, 
— a Miss Andrews, — a sweet girl, one of the sweet- 
est creatures in the world, has read every one of 



NORTHANGEil ABBEY. 39 

them. I wish you knew Miss Andrews ; you would 
be delighted with her. She is netting herself the 
sweetest cloak you can conceive. I think her as 
beautiful as an angel, and I am so vexed with the 
men for not admiring her! I scold them all amaz- 
ingly about it.'' 

' ' Scold them ! Do you scold them for not 
admiring her? '' 

'' Yes, that I do. There is nothing T would not 
do for those who are really my friends. I have no 
notion of loving people by halves; it is not my 
nature. My attachments are always excessively 
strong. I told Captain Hunt at one of our assem- 
blies this winter, that if he was to tease me all 
night I would not dance with him, unless he 
would allow Miss Andrews to be as beautiful as an 
angel. The men think us incapable of real friend- 
ship, you know ; and I am determined to show them 
the difference. Now, if I were to hear anj^bodj^ 
speak slightingly of you, I should fire up in a 
moment ; but that is not at all likely, for you are 
just the kind of girl to be a great favorite with 
the men.'' 

'* Oh, dear!" cried Catherine, coloring, *^how 
can you say so ? " 

^'I know you very well; you have so much 
animation, which is exactly what Miss Andrews 
wants; for I must confess there is something 
amazingly insipid about her. Oh, I must tell you 
that just after we parted yesterday I saw a young 
man looking at you so earnestly; I am sure he is 
in love with you." Catherine colored, and dis- 
claimed again. Isabella laughed. ^*It is very 



40 NOllTHANGER ABBEY. 

true, upon my honor ; but I see how it is, — you are 
indifferent to everybody's admiration except that 
of one gentleman, who shall be nameless. Nay, 
I cannot blame you,'' speaking more seriously; 
" your feelings are easily understood. Where the 
heart is really attached, I know very well how 
little one can be pleased with the attention of any- 
body else. Everything is so insipid, so uninter- 
esting, that does not relate to the beloved object! 
I can perfectly comprehend your feelings." 

*^But you should not persuade me that I thiuk 
so very much about Mr. Tilney; for perhaps I may 
never see him again." 

^*Not see him again! My dearest creature, do 
not talk of it. I am sure you would be miserable 
if you thought so." 

^^No, indeed, I should not. I do not pretend to 
say that I was not very much pleased with him; 
but while I have Udolpho to read, I feel as if no- 
body could make me miserable. Oh, the dreadful 
black veil! My dear Isabella, I am sure there 
must be Laurentina's skeleton behind it." 

"It is so odd to me that you should never have 
read Udolpho before; but I suppose Mrs. Morland 
objects to novels." 

*^No; she does not. She very often reads Sir 
Charles Grandison herself; but new books do not 
fall in our way." 

"Sir Charles Grandison! That is an amaziug 
horrid book, is it not? I remember Miss Andrews 
could not get through the first volume." 

"It is not like Udolpho at all; but yet I think 
it is very entertaining." 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 41 

'^Do you indeed! — you surprise me; I thouglit 
it had not been readable. But, my dearest Cath- 
erine, have you settled what to wear on your head 
to-night? I am determined, at all events, to be 
dressed exactly like you. The men take notice of 
that sometimes, you know.'' 

''But it does not signify, if they do,'' said 
Catherine, vevy innocently. 

''Signify! heavens! I make it a rule never 
to mind what they say. They are very often 
amazingly impertinent, if you do not treat them 
with spirit, and make them keep their distance." 

"Are they? Well, I never observed that. 
They always behave very well to me." 

"Oh, they give themselves such airs! They are 
the most conceited creatures in the world, and 
think themselves of so much importance ! B3' the 
by, though I have thought of it a hundred times, 
I have always forgot to ask you what is your fa- 
vorite complexion in a man. Do you like them 
best dark or fair ? " 

"I hardly know. I never much thought about 
it. Something between both, I think: brown, — 
not fair, and not very dark. " 

"Very well, Catherine, That is exactly he. I 
have not forgot your description of Mr. Tilney, -^ 
a brown skin, with dark eyes, and rather dark 
air.' Well, my taste is diffei^ent. I prefer light 
eyes; and as to complexion, do you know, I 
like a sallow better than any other. You must not 
betray me, if you should ever meet with one of 
your acquaintance answering that description." 

" Betray you! What do you mean? " 



42 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

'^Nay, do not distress me. I believe I have 
said too much. Let us drop the subject. '' 

Catherine, in some amazement, complied; and 
after remaining a few moments silent, was on the 
point of reverting to what interested her at that 
time rather more than anything else iii the world, 
— Laurentina's skeleton, — when her friend pre- 
vented her, by saying, *^For heaven's sake! let 
us move away from this end of the room. Do you 
know, there are two odious young men who have 
been staring at me this half-hour? They really 
put me quite out of countenance. Let us go and 
look at the arrivals. They will hardly follow us 
there.'' 

Awaj'' they walked to the book; and while 
Isabella examined the names, it was Catherine's 
employment to watch the proceedings of these 
alarming young men. 

^^They are not coming this way, are they? I 
hope they are not so impertinent as to follow us. 
Pray let me know if they are coming. I am deter- 
mined I will not look up." 

In a few moments Catherine, with unaffected 
pleasure, assured her that she need not be longer 
uneasy, as the gentlemen had just left the Pump- 
room. 

''And which way are they gone? " said Isabella, 
turning hastily round. ''One was a very good- 
looking young man." 

"They went towards the churchyard." 

"Well, I am amazingly glad I have got rid of 
them! And now, what say you to going to Edgar's 
Buildings with me, and looking at my new hat? 
You said you should like to see it." 



NORTIiANGER ABBEY. 43 

Catherine readily agreed. ^'Only/^ she added, 
"perhaps we may overtake the two young men." 

" Oh, never mind that. If we make haste, we 
shall pass by them presently, and I am dying to 
show you my hat." 

"But if we only wait a few minutes, there will 
be no danger of our seeing them at all.'^ 

" I shall not pay them any such compliment, I 
assure you. I have no notion of treating men with 
such respect. That is the way to spoil them." 

Catherine had nothing to oppose against such 
reasoning; and therefore, to show the independence 
of Miss Thorpe, and her resolution of humbling the 
sex, they set off immediately as fast as they could 
walk, in pursuit of the two young men. 



44 NORTHANGER ABBEY, 



CHAPTER VII. 

Half a minute conducted them through the 
Pump-yard to the archway, opposite Union Pas- 
sage; but here they were stopped. Everybody ac- 
quainted with Bath may remember the difficulties 
of crossing Cheap Street at this point j it is indeed 
a street of so impertinent a nature, so unfortu- 
nately connected with the great London and Ox- 
ford roads, and the principal inn of the city, that 
a day never passes in which parties of ladies, how- 
ever important their business, whether in quest of 
(pastry, millinery, or even (as in the present case) 
of young men, are not detained on one side or 
other by carriages, horsemen, or carts. This evil 
had been felt and lamented, at least three times 
a day, by Isabella since her residence in Bath ; and 
she was now fated to feel and lament it once more ; 
for at the very moment of coming opposite to 
Union Passage, and within view of the two gentle- 
men, who were proceeding through the crowds, and 
threading the gutters of that interesting alley, 
they were prevented crossing by the approach of a 
gig, driven along on bad pavement by a most know- 
ing-looking coachman, with all the vehemence that 
could most fitly endanger the live, of himself, his 
companion, and his horse. 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 45 

*^0b, these odious gigs! " said Isabella, looking 
up; *'how I detest them! '' But this detestation, 
though so just, was of short duration; for she 
looked again, and exclaimed, ^'Delightful! Mr. 
Morland and my brother!'' 

^' Good heaven! 't is James! '' was uttered at the 
same moment by Catherine; and on catching the 
young men's eyes, the horse was immediately 
checked with a violence which almost threw him on 
his haunches, and, the servant having now scampered 
up, the gentlemen jumped out, and the equipage 
was delivered to his care. 

Catherine, by whom this meeting was wholly 
unexpected, received her brother with the liveliest 
pleasure; and he, being of a very aniiable^ disposi- 
tion, and sincerely attached to her, gave every 
proof on his side of equal satisfaction, which he 
could have leisure to do while the bright eyes of 
Miss Thorpe were incessantly challenging his no- 
tice; and to her his devoirs were speedily paid, 
with a mixture of joy and embarrassment which 
might have informed Catherine, had she been more 
expert in the development of other people's feel- 
ings, and less simply engrossed by her own, that 
her brother thought her friend quite as pretty as 
she could do herself. 

John Thorpe, who in the mean time had been 
giving orders about the horses, soon joined them, 
and from him she directly received the amends 
which were her due; for while he slightly and 
carelessly touched the hand of Isabella, on her he 
bestowed a wht^^e scrape and half a short bow. He 
was a stout young man, of middling height, who, 



46 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

with a plain face and ungraceful form, seemed fear- 
ful of being too handsome unless he wore the 
dress of a groom, and too much like a gentleman 
unless he were easy where he ought to be civil, 
and impudent where he might be allowed to be 
easy. He took out his watch: ^'How long do you 
think we have been running it from Tetbury, Miss 
Morland? " 

<'I do not know 'the distance." Her brother 
told her that it was twenty-three miles. 

'< Three and twenty! " cried Thorpe; '^five and 
twenty, if it is an inch." Morland remonstrated, 
j^leaded the authority of road-books, innkeepers, 
and milestones; but his friend disregarded them 
all, — he had a surer test of distance. *^ I know it 
must be five and twenty," said he, ''by the time 
we have been doing it. It is now half after one; 
we drove out of the inn-yard at Tetbury as the 
town-clock struck eleven; and I defy any man in 
England to make my horse go less than ten miles "ax 
hour in harness ; that makes it exactly twenty-five. '' 

''You have lost an hour," said Morland; "it 
was only ten o'clock when we came from 
Tetbury. '^ 

"Ten o'clock! it was eleven, upon my soul! I 
counted every stroke. This brother of yours 
would persuade me out of my senses. Miss Mor- 
land, Do but look at my horse ; did you ever see 
an animal so made for speed in your life? " (The 
servant had just mounted the carriage, and was 
driving off.) "Such true blood! Three hours 
and a half, indeed, coming only three and twenty 
miles ! Look at that creature, and suppose it pos- 
sible, if you can." 



NORTH ANGER ABBEY. 47 

^'He does look very hot, to be sure.'' 

^*Hot! he had not turned a hair till we came to 
Walcot Church. But look at his forehand; look at 
his loins; only see how he moves; that horse can- 
not go less than ten miles an hour: tie his legs, 
and he will get on. What do you think of my 
gig, Miss Morland? a neat one, is not it? Well- 
hung, town-built ; I have not had it a month. It 
was built for a Christ-church man, — a friend of 
mine, a very good sort of fellow; he ran it a few 
weeks, till, I believe, it was convenient to have 
done with it. I happened just then to be looking 
out for some light thing of the kind, though I had 
pretty well determined on a curricle too; but I 
chanced to meet him on IMagdalen Bridge as 
he was driving into Oxford, last term: 'Ah, 
Thorpe ! ' said he, * do you happen to want such a 
little thing as this? It is a capital one of the 

^^ind, but I am cursed tired of it.' ' Oh! d ,' 

said I, * I am j'our man ; what do you ask ? ' 
And how much do you think he did, Miss 
Morland? " 

*' I am sure I cannot guess at all." 

'' Curricle-hung, j'-ou see; seat, trunk, sword- 
case, splashing-board, lamps, silver moulding,^ 
all, you see, complete ; the iron-work as good as new, 
or better. He asked fifty guineas. I closed with 
him directly, threw down the money, and the 
carriage was mine." 

''And I am sure," said Catherine, "I know so 
little of such things that I cannot judge whether 
it was cheap or dear." 

" Neither one nor t' other. I might have got it 



48 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

for less, I dare say ; but I hate haggling, and poor 
Freeman wanted cash." 

*^That was very good-natured of you," said 
Catherine, quite pleased. 

" Oh, d it ! when one has the means of 

doing a kind thing by a friend, I hate to be 
pitiful." 

An inquiry now took place into the intended 
movements of the young ladies; and on finding 
whither they were going, it was decided that the 
gentlemen should accompany them to Edgar's 
Buildings, and pay their respects to Mrs. Thorpe. 
James and Isabella led the way ; and so well satis- 
fied was the latter with her lot, so contentedly was 
she endeavoring to insure a pleasant walk to him 
who brought the double recommendation of being 
her brother's friend and her friend's brother, so 
pure and uncoquettish were her feelings, that 
though they overtook and passed the two offending 
young men in Milsom Street, she was so far from 
seeking to attract their notice that she looked 
back at them only three times. 

John Thorpe kept of course with Catherine, 
and after a few minutes' silence, renewed the 
conversation about his gig. ^^You will find, how- 
ever. Miss Morland, it would be reckoned a cheap 
thing by some people, for I might have sold it for 
ten guineas more the next day: Jackson, of Oriel, 
bid me sixty at once; Morland was with me at 
the time." 

**Yes," said Morland, who overheard this; 
'^but you forget that your horse was included." 

<*My horse! oh, d it! I would not sell my 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 49 

horse for a hundred. Are you fond of an open 
carriage, Miss Morland ? '^ 

''Yes, very. I have hardly ever an opportunity 
of being in one; but I am particularly fond of it." 

''I am glad of it; I will drive you out in mine 
every day." 

"Thank you," said Catherine, in some distress, 
from a doubt of the propriety of accepting such 
an offer. 

''I will drive you up Lansdown Hill to- 
morrow." 

''Thank you; but will not your horse want 
rest?" 

"Kest! he has only come three and twenty 
miles to-day; all nonsense; nothing ruins horses 
so much as rest ; nothing knocks them up so soon. 
No, no; I shall exercise mine at the average of 
ffl'ur hours every day while I am here." 

"Shall you indeed!" said Catherine, very se- 
riously; "that will be forty miles a day.'' 

" Forty! ay, fifty, for what I care. Well, I will 
drive you up Lansdown to-morrow; mind, I am 
engaged." 

"How delightful that w^ill be! " cried Isabella, 
turning round. "My dearest Catherine, I quite 
envy you; but I am afraid, brother, you will not 
have room for a third." 

" A third, indeed ! Ko, no, I did not come to 
Bath to drive my sisters about; that would be a 
good joke, faith! Morland must take care of 
you." 

This brought on a dialogue of civilities between 
the other two; but Catherine heard neither the 
4 



50 NORTH ANGER ABBEY. 

particulars nor the result. Her companion's dis- 
course now sunk from its hitherto animated pitch 
to nothing more than a short decisive sentence of 
praise or condemnation on the face of every woman 
they met; and Catherine, after listening and 
agreeing as long as she could, with all the civility 
and deference of the youthful female mind, fearful 
of hazarding an opinion of its own in opposition 
to that of a self-assured man, esjiecially where the 
beauty of her own sex is concerned, ventured at 
length to vary the subject by a question which had 
been long uppermost in her thoughts; it was, 
'^Have you ever read Udolpho, Mr. Thorpe ? " 

^'Udolpho! Oh, Lord! not I. I never read 
novels; I have something else to do." 

Catherine, humbled and ashamed, was going to 
apologize for her question; but he prevented her 
by sajnng, ''Novels are all so full of nonsense 
and stuff; there has not been a tolerably decent 
one come out since To m Jones, except jth e Monk : 
I read that t'other day; but as for all the others, 
they are the stupidest things in creation." 

''I think you must like Udolpho, if you were 
to read it; it is so veiy interesting." 

''Not I, faith! No, if I read any, it shall be 
Mrs. Kadcliffe's: her novels are amusing enough; 
they are worth reading; some fun and nature in 
them." /I 

"Udolpho was written by Mrs. Radcliffe," said^' 
Catherine, with some hesitation, from the fear of 
mortifying him. 

"No, sure; was it? Ay, I remember, so it 
was; I was thinking of that other stupid book. 



NORTH ANGER ABBEY. 51 

written by that woman they made such a fuss 
about, — she who married the French emigrant." 

^^I suppose you mean Camilla?" 

''Yes, that's the book; such unnatural stuff! — 
An old man playing at see-saw. I took up the 
first volume once, and looked it over, but I soon 
found it would not do; indeed, I guessed what 
sort of stuff it must be before I saw it : as soon as 
I heard she had married an emigrant, I was sure 
I should never be able to get through it." 

''I have never read it." 

"You had no loss, I assure you; it is the hor- 
ridest nonsense you can imagine; there is nothing 
in the world in it but an old man's playing at see- 
saw and learning Latin, — upon my soul, there 
is not." 

This critique, the justness of which was un- 
fortunately lost on poor Catherine, brought them 
to the door of Mrs. Thorpe's lodgings; and the 
feelings of the discerning and unprejudiced reader 
of Camilla gave way to the feelings of the dutiful 
and affectionate son, as they met Mrs. Thorpe, 
who had descried them from above, in the passage. 
''Ah, mother! how do you do?" said he, giving 
her a hearty shake of the hand. "Where did yon 
get that quiz of a hat? It makes you look like an 
old witch. Here is Morland and I come to stay 
a few days with you ; so you must look out for a 
couple of good beds somewhere near." And this 
address seemed to satisfy all the fondest wishes of 
the mother's heart, for she received him with the 
most delighted and exulting affection. On his 
two younger sisters he then bestowed an equal 



>^ 



52 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 



portion of his fraternal tenderness ; for lie asked 
eacli of them how they did, and observed that they 
both looked very ugly. 

These manners did not please Catherine ; but he 
was James's friend and Isabella's brother; and her 
judgment was further bought off by Isabella's 
assuring her, when they withdrew to see the new 
hat, that John thought her the most charming 
girl in the world, and by John's engaging her 
before they parted to dance with him that even- 
ing. Had she been older or vainer, such attacks 
might have done little ; but where youth and diffi- 
dence are united, it requires uncommon steadiness 
of reason to resist the attraction of being called 
the most charming girl in the world, and of being 
so very early engaged as a partner; and the conse- 
quence was that when the two Morlands, after 
sitting an hour with the Thorpes, set off to walk 
together to Mr. Allen's, and James, as the door 
was closed on them, said, ^^ Well, Catherine, how 
do you like my friend Thorpe?" instead of answer- 
ing, as she probably would have done, had there 
been no friendship and no flattery in the case, 
**I do not like him at all," she directly replied, 
**I like him very much; he seems very agreeable. " 

'^Heis as good-natured a fellow as ever lived, — 
a little of a rattle; but that will recommend him to 
your sex, I believe. And how do you like the rest 
of the family? " 

'^Very, very much indeed, — Isabella particu- 
larly." 

^^ I am very glad to hear you say so; she is just 
the kind of young woman I could wish to see you 



NORTHAN(^ER ABBEY. 53 

attached to; she has so much good sense, and is 
so thoroughly unaffected and amiable. I always 
wanted you to know her; and she seems very fond 
of you. She said the highest things in your praise 
that could possibly be; and the praise of such a 
girl as Miss Thorpe even you, Catherine,'^ taking 
her hand with affection, '^ may be proud of." 

*^ Indeed I am," she replied; '^I love her ex- 
ceedingly, and am delighted to find that you like 
her too. You hardly mentioned anything of her 
when you wrote to me after your visit there." 

^* Because I thought I should soon see you my- 
self. I hope you will be a great deal together 
while you are in Bath. She is a most amiable 
girl; such a superior understanding! How fond 
all the family are of her! She is evidently the 
general favorite; and how much she must be ad- 
mired in such a place as this, — is not she?" 

*'Yes, very much indeed, I fancy; Mr. Allen 
thinks her the prettiest girl in Bath." 

^'1 dare say he does; and I do not know any 
man who is a better judge of beauty than Mr. 
Allen. I need not ask you whether you are happy 
here, my dear Catherine; with such a companion 
and friend as Isabella Thorpe, it would be impos- 
sible for you to be otherwise ; and the Aliens, I am 
sure, are very kind to you.'' 

^' Yes, very kind; I never was so happy before; 
and now you are come, it will be more delightful 
than ever : how good it is of you to come so far on 
purpose to see me ! " 

James accepted this tribute of gratitude, and 
qualified his conscience for accepting it too, by 



54 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

saying with perfect sincerity, '^Indeed, Catherine, 
I love you dearly." 

Inquiries and communications concerning broth- 
ers and sisters, the situation of some, the growth 
of the rest, and other family matters, now passed 
between them, and continued, with only one small 
digression on James's part in praise of Miss 
Thorpe, till they reached Pulteney Street, where 
he was welcomed with great kindness by Mr. and 
Mrs. Allen, invited by the former to dine with 
them, and summoned by the latter to guess the 
price and weigh the merits of a new muff and 
tippet. A pre-engagement in Edgar's Buildings 
prevented his accepting the invitation of one 
friend, and obliged him to hurry away as soon as 
he had satisfied the demands of the other. The 
time of the two parties' uniting iu the octagon 
room being correctly adjusted, Catherine was then 
left to the luxury of a raised, restless, and fright- 
ened imagination over the pages of Udolpho, lost 
from all worldly concerns of dressing and dinner, 
incapable of soothing Mrs. Allen's fears on the 
delay of an expected dressmaker, and having only 
one minute in sixty to bestow even on the reflec- 
tion of her own felicity in being already engaged 
for the evening. 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 55 



I 



CIIAPTEE VIII. 



In spite of Udolplio and the dressmaker, however, 
the party from Pulteney Street reached the Upper 
Booms in very good time. The Thorpes and James 
i Morland were there only two minutes before them; 
and Isabella having gone through the usual cere- 
monial of meeting her friend with the most smil- 
ing and affectionate haste^ of admiring the set of 
her gown and envying thfe curl of her hair, they 
followed their chaperons, ;arm in arm, into the 
ball-room, whispering to each other whenever a 
thought occurred, and supplying the place of many 
ideas by a squeeze of the hand or a smile of 
affection. 

The dancing began within a few minutes after 
they were seated; and James,, who had been en- 
gaged quite as long as his sistfijL was very importu- 
nate with Isabella to stand upjrbut John was gone 
into the card-room to speak t6' a friend, and noth- 
ing, she declared, should induce her to join the 
set before her dear Catherine could join it too. "1 
assure you," said she, ^^I would not stand up 
without your dear sister, for all the world; for if I 
did, we should certainly be separated the whole 
evening.'' Catherine accepted this kindness with 
gratitude, and they continued as they were for 
three minutes longer, when Isabella, who had been 
talking to James on the other side of her, turned 



56 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

again to his sister and whispered, ^^My dear 
creature, I am afraid I must leave you, your 
brother is so amazingly impatient to begin; I know 
you will not mind my going away, and I dare say 
John will be back in a moment, and then you may 
easily find me out." Catherine, though a little 
disappointed, had too much good nature to make 
any opposition, and, the others rising up, Isabella 
had only time to press her friend's hand and say, 
^^Good-by, my dear love," before they hurried 
off. The younger Miss Thorpes being also danc- 
ing, Catherine was left to the mercy of Mrs. 
Thorpe and Mrs. Allen, between whom she now 
remained. She could not help being vexed at the, 
non-appearance of Mr. Thorpe; for she not only 
longed to be dancing, but was likewise aware that 
as the real dignity of her situation could not be 
known, she was sharing with the scores of other 
young ladies still sitting down all the discredit of; 
wanting a partner. To be disgraced in the eye of 
the world, to wear the appearance of infamy while, 
her heart is all purity, her actions all innocence, 
and the misconduct of another the true source oi 
her debasement, is one of those circumstances 
which peculiarly belong to the heroine's life, and 
her fortitude under it what particularly dignifies 
her character. Catherine had fortitude too; she 
suffered, but no murmur passed her lips. 

From this state of humiliation she was roused, 
at the end of ten minutes, to a pleasanter feeling,: 
by seeing, not Mr. Thorpe, but Mr. Tilney, withiu 
three yards of the place where they sat : he seemed 
to be moving that way, but he did not see her, 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. ■ 57 

and therefore tlie smile and the blusli wliicli his 
sudden reappearance raised in Catherine passed 
away without sullying her heroic importance. He 
looked as handsome and as lively as ever, and was 
talking with interest to a fashionable and pleasing- 
looking young w^oman, who leant on his arm, and 
whom Catherine immediately guessed to he his 
sister; thus unthinkingly throwing away a fair 
opportunity of considering him lost to her forever, 
by being married already. But, guided only by 
what was simple and probable, it had never entered 
her head that Mr. Tilney could be married; he had 
Qot behaved, he had not talked, like the married 
men to whom she had been used; he had never 
mentioned a wife, and he had acknowledged a 
jister. Erom these circumstances sprang the in- 
stant conclusion of his sister's now being by his 
jide; and therefore, instead of turning of a death- 
ike paleness, and falling in a fit on Mrs. Allen's 
)osom, Catherine sat erect, in the perfect use of 
ler senses, and with cheeks only a little redder 
ihan usual. 

Mr. Tilney and his companion, who continued, 
hough slowly, to approach, were immediately pre- 
;eded by a lady, an acquaintance of Mrs. Thorpe; 
i,nd this lady stopping to* speak to her, they, as 
)elonging to her, stopped likewise, and Catherine, 
latching Mr. Tilney's eye, instantly received from 
lim the smiling tribute of recognition. She re- 
urned it with pleasure, and then advancing still 
learer he spoke both to her and Mrs. Allen, by 
v^hom he was very civilly acknowledged. ^'1 am 
ery happy to see you again, sir, indeed; I was 



58 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

afraid you had left Bath.'' He thanked her for 
her fears, and said that he had quitted it for a 
week, on the very morning after his having had 
the pleasure of seeing her. 

''Well, sir, and I dare say you are not sorry to 
be back again, for it is just the place for young 
people; and, indeed, for everybody else too. I 
tell Mr. Allen, when he talks of being sick of it, 
that I am sure he should not complain, for it is so 
very agreeable a place that it is much better to be 
here than at home at this dull time of year. I tell 
him he is quite in luck to be sent here for his 
health." 

*'And I hope, madam, that Mr. Allen will be 
obliged to like the place, from finding it of service 
to him.'' 

*' Thank you, sir. I have no doubt that he 
will. A neighbor of ours, Dr. Skinner, was here 
for his health last winter, and came away quite 
stout." 

''That circumstance must give great encourage- 
ment." 

"Yes, sir; and Dr. Skinner and his family were 
here three months: so I tell Mr. Allen he must 
not be in a hurry to get away." 

Here they were interrupted by a request from 
Mrs. Thorpe to Mrs. Allen, that she would move 
a little to accommodate Mrs. Hughes and Miss 
Tilney with seats, as they had agreed to join their 
party. This was accordingly done, Mr. Tilney 
still continuing standing before them; and after 
a few minutes' consideration, he asked Catherine 
to dance with him. This compliment, delightful, 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 59 

as it was, produced severe mortification to the 
lady; and in giving her denial, she expressed her 
sorrow on the occasion so very much as if she 
really felt it, that had Thorpe, who joined her just 
afterwards, heen half a minute earlier, he might 
have thought her sufferings rather too acute. The 
very easy manner in which he then told her that 
he had kept her waiting, did not by any means 
reconcile her more to her lot; nor did the particu- 
lars which he entered into while they were stand- 
ing up, of the horses and dogs of the friend whom 
he had just left, and of a proposed exchange of 
terriers between them, interest her so much as to 
prevent her looking very often towards that part 
of the room where she had left Mr. Tilney. Of 
her dear Isabella, to whom she particularly longed 
to point out that gentleman, she could see nothing. 
They were in different sets. She was separated 
from all her party, and away from all her acquaint- 
ance: one mortification succeeded another; and 
from the whole she deduced this useful lesson, that 
to go previously engaged to a ball does not neces- 
sarily increase either the dignity or enjoyment of 
a young lady. From such a moralizing strain as 
this she was suddenly roused by a touch on the 
shoulder; and turning round, perceived Mrs. 
Hughes directly behind her, attended by Miss 
Tilney and a gentleman. *'I beg 3-our pardon. 
Miss Morland," said she, ''ior this liberty, but I 
cannot anyhow get to Miss Thorpe; and Mrs. 
Thorpe said she was sure you would not have the 
least objection to letting in this young lady by 
you." Mrs. Hughes could not have applied to 



60 NORTHANGEE ABBEY. 

any creature in the room more liapp}'- to oblige her 
than Catherine. The young ladies were intro- 
duced to each other, — Miss Tilney expressing 
a proper sense of such goodness; Miss Morland, 
with the real delicacy of a generous mind, making 
light of the obligation, — and Mrs. Hughes, satis- 
fied with having so respectably settled her young 
charge, returned to her party. 

Miss Tilney had a good figure, a pretty face, 
and a very agreeable countenance; and her air, 
though it had not all the decided pretension, the 
resolute stylishness, of Miss Thorpe's, had more 
real elegance. Her manners showed good sense 
and good breeding; they were neither shy nor 
affectedly open ; and she seemed capable of being 
young, attractive, and at a ball without wanting to 
fix the attention of every man near her, and without 
exaggerated feelings of ecstatic delight or incon- 
ceivable vexation on every little trifling occurrence. 
Catherine, interested at once by her appearance 
and relationship to Mr. Tilnej^, was desirous of 
being acquainted with her, and readily talked, 
therefore, whenever she could think of anything to 
say, and had courage and leisure for saying it. 
But the hindrance thrown in the way of a very 
speedy intimacy, by the frequent want of one or 
more of these requisites, prevented their doing more 
than going through the first rudiments of an ac- 
quaintance, by informing themselves how well the 
other liked Bath, how much she admired its build- 
ings and surrounding country; whether she drew, 
or played, or sang, and whether she was fond of 
riding on horseback. 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 61 

The t^yo dances were scarcely concluded, before 
Catherine found her arm gently seized by her 
faithful Isabella, who in great spirits exclaimed: 
"At last I have got you. My dearest creature, I 
have been looking for you this hour. What could 
induce you to come into this set, when you knew I 
was in the other? I have been quite wretched 
without you.'' 

"My dear Isabella, how was it possible for me 
to get at you? I could not even see where you 
were." 

" So I told your brother all the time, but he 
would not believe me. 'Do go and see for her, 
Mr. Morland,' said I; but all in vain, he would 
not stir an inch. Was not it so, Mr. Morland? 
But you men are all so immoderately lazy! I 
have been scolding him to such a degree, my dear 
Catherine, you would be quite amazed. You 
know I never stand upon ceremony with such 
people.'' 

"Look at that young lady with the white beads 
round her head," whispered Catherine, detaching 
her friend from James; "it is Mr. Tilney's 
sister." 

"Oh, heavens! you don't say so! Let me look 
at her this moment. What a delightful girl! I 
never saw anything half so beautiful ! But where 
is her all-conquering brother? Is he in the room? 
Point him out to me this instant, if he is ; I die to 
see him. Mr. Morland, you are not to listen; Ave 
are not talking about you." 

"But what is all this whispering about? What 
is going on?" 



62 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

'^ There now, I knew how it would be. You 
men have such restless curiosity. Talk of the curi- 
osity of women, indeed! — 'tis nothing. But be 
satisfied; for you are not to know anything at all 
of the matter.'' 

*'And is that likely to satisfy me, do you 
think? " 

"Well, I declare, I never knew anything like 
you. What can it signify to you, what we are 
talking of? Perhaps we are talking about you; 
therefore I would advise you not to listen, or you 
may happen to hear something not very agreeable." 

In this commonplace chatter, which lasted some 
time, the original subject seemed entirely forgot- 
ten; and though Catherine was very well pleased 
to have it dropped for a while, she could not avoid 
a little suspicion at the total suspension of all 
Isabella's impatient desire to see Mr. Tilney. 
When the orchestra struck up a fresh dance, James 
would have led his fair partner away, but she 
resisted. "I tell you, Mr. Morland," she cried, 
^^I would not do such a thing for all the world. 
How can you be so teasing! Only conceive, my 
dear Catherine, what your brother wants me to do? 
He wants me to dance with him again, though I 
tell him that it is a most improper thing, and en- 
tirely against the rules. It would make us the 
talk of the place, if we were not to change 
partners." 

"Upon my honor," said James, "in these pub- 
lic assemblies it is as often done as not." 

"Nonsense, how can you say so? But when 
you men have a point to carry, you never stick at 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 63 

anything. My sweet Catherine, do support me; 
persuade joux brother how impossible it is. Tell 
him that it would quite shock you to see me do 
such a thing; now would not it?'' 

"No, not at all; but if you think it wrong, you 
had much better change." 

"There," cried Isabella, "you hear what your 
sister says, and yet you will not mind her. Well, 
remember that it is not my fault, if we set all the 
old ladies in Bath in a bustle. Come along, my 
dearest Catherine, for heaven's sake, and stand by 
me." And off they went to regain their former 
place. John Thorpe, in the mean while, had 
walked away ; and Catherine, ever willing to give 
Mr. Tilney an ojiportunity of repeating the agree- 
able request which had already flattered her once, 
made her way to Mrs. Allen and Mrs. Thorpe as 
fast as she could, in the hope of finding him still 
with them, — a hope which, when it proved to be 
fruitless, she felt to have been highly unreason- 
able. "Well, my dear," said Mrs. Thorpe, im- 
patient for praise of her son, "I hope you have 
had an agreeable partner." 

"Very agreeable, madam." 

"lam glad of it. John has charming spirits, 
has not he? " 

"Did you meet Mr. Tilney, my dear?" said 
Mrs. Allen. 

"No; where is he? " 

"He was with us just now, and said he was so 
tired of lounging about, that he was resolved to go 
and dance ; so I thought perhaps he would ask you, 
if he met with you." 



64 NORTHANGER AEBEY. 

*^Wliere can he be?" said Catherine, loolving 
round; but she had not looked round long, before 
she saw him leading a young lady to the dance. 

^* Ah ! he has got a partner: T wish he had asked 
you," said Mrs. Allen; and after a short silence 
she added, ^'He is a very agreeable young man." 
*^ Indeed he is, Mrs. Allen," said Mrs. Thorpe, 
smiling complacently; "1 must say it, though I 
am his mother, that there is not a more agreeable 
young man in the world." 

This inapplicable answer might have been too 
much for the comprehension of many; but it did 
not puzzle Mrs. Allen; for after only a moment's 
consideration, she said, in a whisper, to Catherine, 
*'I dare say she thought I was speaking of her 
son.'' 

Catherine was disappointed and vexed. She 
seemed to have missed, by so little, the very 
object she had had in view; and this persuasion 
did not incline her to a very gracious reply, when 
John Thorpe came up to her soon afterwards, and 
said, ^^Well, Miss Morland, I suppose you and I 
are to stand up and jig it together again? " 

^'Oh, no; I am much obliged to you, our tv/o 
dances are over; and, besides, I am tired, and do 
not mean to dance any more. " 

**Do not you? — then let us walk about and quiz 
people. Come along with me, and I will show you 
the four greatest quizzes in the room, — my two 
younger sisters and their partners. I have been 
laughing at them this half-hour." 

Again Catherine excused herself; and at last he 
walked off to quiz his sisters by himself. The 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 65 

rest of the evening she found very dull; Mr. 
Tilney was drawn away from their party at tea to 
attend that of his partner; Miss Tilney, though 
belonging to it, did not sit near her; and James 
and Isabella were so much engaged in conversing 
together, that the latter had no leisure to bestow 
more on her friend than one smile, one squeeze, 
and one ^'dearest Catherine/' 



66 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 



CHAPTEE IX. 

The progress of Catherine's unhappiness from 
the events of the evening was as follows. It 
appeared first in a general dissatisfaction with 
everybody about her while she remained in the 
rooms, which speedily brought on considerable 
weariness and a violent desire to go home. This, 
on arriving in Pulteney Street, took the direction 
of extraordinary hunger, and when that was ap- 
peased, changed into an earnest longing to be in 
bed: such was the extreme point of her distress; for 
when there, she immediately fell into a sound 
sleep, which lasted nine hours, and from which she 
awoke perfectly revived, in excellent spirits, with 
fresh hopes and fresh schemes. The first wish of 
her heart was to improve her acquaintance with 
Miss Tilney, and almost her first resolution to 
seek her for that purpose in the Pump-room at 
noon. In the Pump-room one so newly arrived in 
Bath must be met with; and that building she had 
already found so favorable for the discovery of 
female excellence, and the completion of female 
intimacy, so admirably adapted for secret discourses 
and unlimited confidence, that she was most rea^ 
sonably encouraged to expect another friend from 
within its walls. Her plan for the morning thus 
settled, she sat quietly down to her book after 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 67* 

breakfast, resolving to remain in the same place 
and the same employment till the clock struck one; 
and from habitude very little incommoded by the 
remarks and ejaculations of Mrs. Allen, whose 
vacancy of mind and incapacity for thinking were 
such that as she never talked a great deal, so she 
could never be entirely silent ; and therefore, while 
she sat at her work, if she lost her needle or broke 
her thread, if she heard a carriage in the street or 
saw a speck upon her gown, she must observe it 
aloud, whether there were any one at leisure to 
answer her or not. At about half-past twelve, a 
remarkably loud rap drew her in haste to tho 
window; and scarcely had she time to inform 
Catherine of there being two open carriages at the 
door, in the first only a servant, her brother driv- 
ing Miss Thorpe in the second, before John Thorpe 
came running upstairs, calling out, ^* Well, Miss 
Morland, here I am. Have you been waiting long? 
We could not come before ; the old devil of a coach- 
maker was such an eternity finding out a thing 
fit to be got into, and now it is ten thousand to one 
but they break down before we are out of the street. 
How do you do, Mrs. Allen? A famous ball last 
night, was not it? Come, Miss Morland, be quick, 
for the others are in a confounded hurry to be off. 
They want to get their tumble over." 

*^ What do you mean? " said Catherine; ''where 
are you all going ^q? " 

" Going 'Q) Why, you have not forgot our 
engagement? Did not we agree together to take 
a drive this morning? What a head you have! 
We are going up Claverton Down." 



68 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

'^ Sometliing was said about it, I remember/' 
said Catherine, looking at Mrs. Allen for her 
opinion; ^^but really I did not expect you." 

^^Not expect me! that's a good one! And 
what a dust you would have made if I had not 
come! '' 

Catherine's silent appeal to her friend, mean- 
while, was entirely thrown away; for Mrs. Allen, 
not being at all in the habit of conveying any 
expression herself by a look, was not aware of its 
being ever intended by anybody else ; and Catherine, 
whose desire of seeing Miss Tilney again could at 
that moment bear a short delay in favor of a drive, 
and who thought there could be no impropriety in 
her going with Mr. Thorpe, as Isabella was go- 
ing at the same time with James, was therefore 
obliged to speak plainer. ''Well, ma'am, what do 
you say to it? Can you spare me for an hour or 
two? Shall I go?" 

'' Do just as you please, my dear," replied Mrs. 
Allen, with the most placid indifference. Cather- 
ine took the advice, and ran off to get ready. In 
a very few minutes she reappeared, having 
scarcely allowed the two others time enough to get 
through a few short sentences in her praise, after 
Thorpe had procured Mrs. Allen's admiration of 
his gig; and then, receiving her friend's parting 
good wishes, they both hurried downstairs. '* M}- 
dearest creature," cried Isabella, to whom the 
duty of friendship immediately called her before 
she could get into the carriage, ^' you have been at 
least three hours getting ready; I was afraid you 
were ill. What a delightful ball we had last 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 69 

night! I have a thousand things to say to you; 
but make haste and get in, for I long to be off.'' 

Catherine followed her orders and turned away, 
but not too soon to hear her friend exclaim aloud 
to James, ^* What a sweet girl she is! I quite 
dote on her/' 
I '*You will not be frightened, Miss Morland," 
1 said Thorpe, as he handed her in, ''if my horse 
should dance about a little at first setting off. He 
will, most likely, give a plunge or two, and 
perhaps take the rest for a minute; but he will 
soon know his master. He is full of spirits, play- 
ful as can be, but there is no vice in him. " 

Catherine did not think the portrait a very invit- 
ing one, but it was too late to retreat, and she was 
too young to own herself frightened; so, resigning 
herself to her fate, and trusting to the animal's 
boasted knowledge of its owner, she sat peaceably 
down, and saw Thorpe sit down by her. Every- 
thing being then arranged, the servant who stood 
at the horse's head was bid in an important voice 
*'to let him go;" and off they went in the quietest 
manner imaginable, without a plunge or a caper, 
or anything like one. Catherine, delighted at so 
happy an escape, spoke her pleasure aloud with 
grateful surprise ; and her companion immediately 
made the matter perfectly simple by assuring her 
that it was entirely owing to the peculiarly judicious 
manner in which he had then held the reins, and 
the singular discernment and dexterity with which 
he had directed his whip. Catherine, though she 
\ could not help wondering that with such perfect 
command of his horse he should think it necessary 



70 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

to alarm lier with a relation of its tricks, congratu- 
lated herself sincerely on being under the care of so 
excellent a coachman; and perceiving that the ani- 
mal continued to go on in the same quiet manner, 
without showing the smallest propensity towards 
any unpleasant vivacity, and (considering its in- 
evitable pace was ten miles an hour) by no means 
alarmingly fast, gave herself up to all the enjoy- 
ment of air and exercise of the most invigorating 
kind in a fine mild day of February, with the 
consciousness of safety. A silence of several 
minutes succeeded their first short dialogue; it 
was broken by Thorpe^s saying very abruptly, 
** Old Allen is as rich as a Jew, is not he? '' 
Catherine did not understand him; and he re- 
peated his question, adding, in explanation, *^ Old 
Allen, the man you are with.'' 

*'0h, Mr. Allen, you mean. Yes, I believe he 
is very rich.'' 

''And no children at all?" 

''No, — not any." 

"A famous thing for his next heirs. He is 
your godfather, is not he? " 

"My godfather, — no." 

"But you are always very much with them." 

" Yes, very much." 

"Ay, that is what T meant. He seems a good 
kind of old fellow enough, and has lived very well 
in his time, I dare say; he is not gouty for noth- 
ing. Does he drink his bottle a day now? " 

"His bottle a day? No. Why should you think 
of such a thing? He is a very temperate man, and 
you could not fancy him in liquor last night?" 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 71 

''Loicl help you! You women are always 
thinking of men's being in liquor. Why, you do 
not suppose a man is overset by a bottle? I am 
sure of thisj — that if everybody was to drink their 
bottle a day, there would not be half the disorders 
in the world there are now. It would be a famous 
good thing for us all.'' 

'' I cannot believe it." 

^^Oh, Lord, it would be the saving of thousands. 
There is not the hundredth part of the wine con- 
sumed in this kingdom that there ought to be. 
Our foggy climate wants help." 

^' And yet I have heard that there is a great deal 
of wine drank in Oxford." 

^' Oxford! There is no drinking at Oxford now, 
I assure you. Nobody drinks there. You would 
hardly meet with a man who goes beyond his four 
pints at the utmost. Now, for instance, it was 
reckoned a remarkable thing at the last party in 
my rooms, that upon an average we cleared about 
five pints a head. It was looked upon as some- 
thing out of the common way. Mine is famous 
good stuff, to be sure. You would not often meet 
with anything like it in Oxford, — and that may 
account for it. But this will just give you a 
notion of the general rate of drinking there." 

''Yes, it does give a notion," said Catherine, 
warmly; ''and that is, that you all drink a great 
deal more wine than I thought you did. However, 
I am sure James does not drink so much." 

This declaration brought on a loud and overpow- 
ering reply, of which no part was very distinct, 
except the frequent exclamations, amounting al- 



73 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

most to oaths, which adorned it; and Catherine 
was left, when it ended, with rather a strengfh- 
ened belief of there being a great deal of wine 
drank in Oxford, and the same happy conviction 
of her brother's comparative sobriety. 

Thorpe's ideas then all reverted to the merits of 
his own equipage, and she was called on to admire 
the spirit and freedom with which his horse moved 
along, and the ease which his paces as well as the 
excellence of the springs gave the motion of the 
carriage. She followed him in all his admiration 
as well as she could. To go before or beyond him, 
was impossible. His knowledge and her ignorance 
of the subject, his rapidity of expression and her 
diffidence of herself, put that out of her power; 
she could strike out nothing new in commendation, 
but she readily echoed whatever he chose to as- 
sert, and it was finally settled between them, with- 
out any difficulty, that his equipage was altogether 
the most complete of its kind in England, his car- 
riage the neatest, his horse the best goer, and him- 
self the best coachman. *' You do not really think, 
Mr. Thorpe," said Catherine, venturing after some 
time to consider the matter as entirely decided, 
and to offer some little variation on the subject, 
** that James's gig will break down?" ** 

<' Break down! Oh, Lord! Did you ever see 
such a little tittuppy thing in your life? There is 
not a sound piece of iron about it. The wheels 
have been fairly worn out these ten years at least; 
and as for the body! — upon my soul, you might 
shake it to pieces yourself with a touch. It is the 
most devilish little rickety business I ever beheld. 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 73 

Thank God! we have got a better. T would not 
be bound to go two miles in it for fifty thousand 
pounds." 

'' Good heavens! '^ cried Catherine, quite fright- 
ened, ^' then pray let us turn back; they will cer- 
tainly meet with an accident if we go on. Do let 
us turn back, Mr. Thorpe; stop and speak to my 
brother, and tell him how very unsafe it is/' 

'' Unsafe! oh. Lord! what is there in that? They 
will only get a roll if it does break down ; and there 
is plenty of dirt, it will be excellent falling. Oh, 
curse it! the carriage is safe enough if a man 
knows how to drive it; a thing of that sort in good 
hands will last above twenty years after it is fairly 
worn out. Lord bless you! I would undertake for 
five pounds to drive it to York and back again 
without losing a nail.'' 

Catherine listened with astonishment: she knew 
not how to reconcile two such very different ac- 
counts of the same thing; for she had not been 
brought up to understand the propensities of a rat- 
tle, nor to know to how many idle assertions and 
impudent falsehoods the excess of vanity will lead. 
Her whole family were plain matter-of-fact people 
who^^seldom aimed at wit of any kind; her father 
at the utmost being contented with a pun, and her 
mother with a proverb; they were not in the habit, 
therefore, of telling lies to increase their impor- 
tance, or of asserting at one moment what they 
would contradict the next. She reflected on the 
affair for some time in much perplexity, and was 
more than once on the point of requesting from 
Mr. Thorpe a clearer insight into his real opinion 



74 NOllTHANGER ABBEY. 

on the subject; but she checked herself, because it 
appeared to her that he did not excel in giving 
those clearer insights, in making those things 
plain which he had before made ambiguous; and 
joining to this the consideration that he would 
not really suffer his sister and his friend to be ex- 
posed to a danger from which he might easily pre- 
serve them, she concluded at last that he must know 
the carriage to be in fact perfectly safe, and there- 
fore would alarm herself no longer. By him the 
whole matter seemed entirely forgotten; and all 
the rest of his conversation, or rather talk, began 
and ended with himself and his own concerns. He 
told her of horses which he had bought for a trifle 
and sold for incredible sums; of racing matches in 
which his judgment had infallibly foretold the 
winner; of shooting-parties in which he had killed 
more birds (though without having one good shot) 
than all his companions together ; and described to 
her some famous day's sport with the fox-hounds, 
in which his foresight and skill in directing the 
dogs had repaired the mistakes of the most experi- 
enced huntsman, and in which the boldness of his 
riding, though it had never endangered his own life 
for a moment, had been constantly leading others 
into difficulties, which he calmly concluded had 
broken the necks of many. 

Little as Catherine was in the habit of judging 
for herself, and unfixed as were her general notions 
of what men ought to be, she could not entirely 
repress a doubt, while she bore with the effusions of 
his endless conceit, of his being altogether com- 
pletely agreeable. It was a bold surmise, for he 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 75 

was Isabella's brother; and she had been assured 
by James that his manners would recommend him 
to all her sex; but in spite of this, the extreme 
weariness of his company, which crept over her 
before they had been out an hour, and which con- 
tinued unceasingly to increase till they stopped 
in Pulteney Street again, induced her in some 
small degree to resist such high authority and to 
distrust his powers of giving universal pleasure. 

When they arrived at Mrs. Allen's door, the 
astonishment of Isabella was hardly to be ex- 
pressed, on finding that it was too late in the day 
for them to attend her friend into the house: 
*'Past three o'clock!" it was inconceivable, in- 
credible, impossible! and she would neither be- 
lieve her own watch, nor her brother's, nor the 
servant's; she would believe no assurance of it 
founded on reason or reality, till Morland pro- 
duced his watch, and ascertained the fact ; to have 
doubted a moment longer then, would have been 
equally inconceivable, incredible, and impossible; 
and she could only protest, over and over again, 
that no two hours and a half had ever gone off so 
swiftly before, as Catherine was called on to con- 
firm; Catherine could not tell a falsehood even to 
please Isabella; but the latter was spared the mis- 
ery of her friend's dissenting voice, by not wait- 
ing for her answer. Her own feelings entirely 
engrossed her; her wretchedness was most acute 
on finding herself obliged to go directly home. 
It was ages since she had had a moment's conver- 
sation with her dearest Catherine; and though 
she had such thousands of things to say to her, it 



76 NORTHANGER ABBEY 

appeared as if they were never to be together 
I again; so, with smiles of most exquisite misery, and 
[the laughing eye of utter despondency, she bade 
her friend adieu and went on. 

Catherine found Mrs. Allen just returned from 
all the busy idleness of the morning, and was 
immediately greeted with, **Well, my dear, here 
you are," — a truth which she had no greater in- 
clination than power to dispute; "and I hope you 
have had a pleasant airing? " 

"Yes, ma'am, I thank you; we could not have 
had a nicer day." 

"So Mrs. Thorpe said; she was vastly pleased 
at your all going." 

"You have seen Mrs. Thorpe, then?" 

'' Yes, I went to the Pump-room as soon as you 
were gone, and there I met her, and we had a 
great deal of talk together. She says there was 
hardly an}?- veal to be got at market this morning, 
it is so uncommonly scarce." 

"Did you see anybody else of our acquaint- 
ance?" 

"Yes; we agreed to take a turn in the Cres- 
cent, and there we met Mrs. Hughes, and Mr. 
and Miss Tilney walking with her." 

"Did you, indeed! and did they speak to 
you?" 

"Yes; we walked along the Crescent together 
for half an hour. They seem very agreeable peo- 
ple. Miss Tilney was in a very pretty spotted 
muslin, and I fancy, by what I can learn, that she 
always dresses very handsomely. Mrs. Hughes 
talked to me a great deal about the family." 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 77 

''And what did she tell you of them?" 
''Oh, a vast deal, indeed j she hardly talked of 
anything else." 

"Did she tell you what part of Gloucestershire 
they come from? " 

"Yes, she did; but I cannot recollect now. 
But they are very good kind of people, and very 
rich. Mrs. Tilney was a Miss Drummond, and 
she and Mrs. Hughes were school-fellows; and 
Miss Drummond had a very large fortune; and 
when she married, her father gave her twenty 
thousand pounds, and five hundred to buy wed- 
ding clothes. Mrs. Hughes saw all the clothes 
after they came from the warehouse." 

"And are Mr. and Mrs. Tilney in Bath? " 

"Yes, I fancy they are, but I am not quite 

certain. Upon recollection, however, I have a 

notion they are both dead; at least, the mother is; 

yes, I am sure Mrs. Tilney is dead, because Mrs. 

j Hughes told me there was a very beautiful set of 

i pearls that Mr. Drummond gave his daughter on 

i her wedding-day and that Miss Tilney has got now, 

I for they were put by for her when her mother 

I died." 

I "And is Mr. Tilney, my partner, the only 
; son?'' 

"I cannot be quite positive about that, my 
dear; I have some idea he is; but, however, he is 
a very fine young man, Mrs. Hughes says, and 
likely to do very well." 

Catherine inquired no further; she had heard 
enough to feel that Mrs. Allen had no real intelli- 
gence to give, and that she was most particularly 



78 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

unfortunate herself in having missed such a meet- 
ing with hoth brother and sister. Could she have 
foreseen such a circumstance, nothing should have 
persuaded her to go out with the others ; and as it 
was, she could only lament her ill-luck, and think 
over what she had lost, till it was clear to her 
that the drive had by no means been very pleas- 
ant, and that John Thorpe himself was quite 
disagreeable. 



NORTHANGEli ABBEY. 79 



CHAPTEE X. 

The Aliens, Thorpes, and Morlands all met in 
the evening at the theatre; and as Catherine 
I and Isabella sat together, there was then an oppor- 
i tunity for the latter to utter some few of the many 
1 thousand things which had been collecting with- 
I in her for communication, in the immeasurable 
i length of time which had divided them. — '^Oh, 
; heavens! my beloved Catherine, have I got you at 
'last?'' was her address on Catherine's entering 
the box and sitting by her. ^'Now, Mr. Mor- 
land," for he was close to her on the other side, 
M*I shall not speak another word to you all the 
best of the evening; so I charge you not to expect 
jit. My sweetest Catherine, how have you been 
jthis long age? But I need not ask you, for you 
jlook delightfully. You really have done your 
I hair in a more heavenly style than ever: you mis- 
jchievous creature, do you want to attract every- 
Ibody? I assure you my brother is quite in love 
jwith you alread}^; and as for Mr. Tilney, — but 
[that is a settled thing — even your modesty can- 
inot doubt his attachment now; his coming back to 
iBath makes it too plain. Oh, what would not I 
jgive to see him! I really am quite wild with 
impatience. My mother says he is the most de- 
lightful young man in the world; she saw him 



80 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

this morning, you know: you must introduce him 
to me. Is he in the house now? — Look about, 
for heaven's sake! I assure you, I can hardly 
exist till I see him." 

^'No/' said Catherine, ^'he is not here; I can^ 
not see him anywhere." 

'' Oh, horrid! am I never to be acquainted with 
him? How do you like my gown? I think it 
does not look amiss; the sleeves were entirely my 
own thought. Do you know I get so immoder- 
ately sick of Bath ; your brother and I were agree- 
ing this morning that though it is vastly well to 
be here for a few weeks, we would not live here 
for millions. We soon found out that our tastes 
were exactly alike in preferring the country to 
every other place; really our opinions were so 
exactly the same, it was quite ridiculous! There 
was not a single point in which we differed. I 
would not have had you by for the world; you are 
such a sly thing, I am sure you would have made 
some droll remark or other about it.'' 
^^No, indeed, I should not." 
*^0h, yes, you would, indeed; I know you bet- 
ter than you know yourself. You would have told 
us that we seemed born for each other, or some 
nonsense of that kind, which would have dis- 
tressed me beyond conception ; my cheeks would 
have been as red as your roses ; I would not have 
had you by for the world." 

*^ Indeed you do me injustice; I would not have ; 
made so improper a remark upon any account; and 
besides, I am sure it would never have entered 
my head." 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 81 

Isabella smiled incredulously, and talked the 
rest of the evening to James. 

Catherine's resolution of endeavoring to meet 
Miss Tilney again continued in full force the 
next morning; and till the usual moment of go- 
ing to the Pump-room, she felt some alarm from 
the dread of a second prevention. But nothing 
of that kind occurred, no visitors appeared to de- 
lay them, and they all three set off in good time 
for the Pump-room, where the ordinary course of 
events and conversation took place: Mr. Allen, 
after drinking his glass of water, joined some 
gentlemen to talk over the politics of the day and 
compare the accounts of their newspapers ; and the 
ladies walked about together, noticing every new 
face, and almost every new bonnet in the room. 
The female part of the Thorpe family, attended by 
James Morland, appeared among the crowd in less 
than a quarter of an hour, and Catherine immedi- 
ately took her usual place by the side of her 
friend. James, who was not in constant attend- 
ance, maintained a similar position ; and separat- 
ing themselves from the rest of their party, they 
walked in that manner for some time, till Cather- 
ine began to doubt the happiness of a situation 
which, confining her entirely to her friend and 
brother, gave her very little share in the notice of 
either. They were always engaged in some senti- 
mental discussion or lively dispute, but their sen- 
timent was conveyed in such whispering voices, 
and their vivacity attended with so much laughter, 
that though Catherine's supporting opinion was 
not unfrequently called for by one or the other, 
6 



82 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

she was never able to give any, from not having 
heard a word of the subject. At length, however, 
she was empowered to disengage herself from her 
friend, by the avowed necessity of speaking to 
Miss Tilney, whom she most joyfully saw just en- 
tering the room with Mrs. Hughes, and whom she 
instantly joined, with a firmer determination to be 
acquainted than she might have had courage to 
command, had she not been urged by the disap- 
pointment of the day before. Miss Tilney met 
her with great civility, returned her advances 
with equal good will, and they continued talking 
together as long as both parties remained in the 
room; and though in all probability not an ob- 
servation was made, nor an expression used by 
either which had not been made and used some 
thousands of times before, under that roof, in 
every Bath season, yet the merit of their being 
spoken with simplicity and truth and without 
personal conceit might be something uncommon. 

^^How well your brother dances! " was an art- 
less exclamation of Catherine's towards the close 
of their conversation, which at once surprised and 
amused her companion. 

<^ Henry!" she replied with a smile. **Yes, 
he does dance very well." 

^^ He must have thought it very odd to hear me 
say I was engaged the other evening, when he saw 
me sitting down. But I really had been engaged 
the whole day to Mr. Thorpe." Miss Tilney could 
only bow. '^ You cannot think," added Catherine, 
after a moment's silence, " how surprised I was to 
see him again. I felt so sure of his being quite 
gone away.'^ 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 83 

*'When Henry had the pleasure of seeing you 
before, he was in Bath but for a couple of days. 
He came only to engage lodgings for us." 

^' That never occurred to me; and of course, not 
seeing him anywhere, I thought he must be gone. 
Was not the young lady he danced with on Mon- 
} day a Miss Smith? " 
j ^' Yes; an acquaintance of Mrs. Hughes." 

''I dare say she was very glad to dance. Do 
you think her pretty?" 
^' Not very." 

<*He never comes to the Pump-room, I sup- 
pose? '' 

'^ Yes, sometimes; but he has rid out this morn- 
ing with my father." 

Mrs. Hughes now joined them, and asked Miss 
JTilneyif she was ready to go. '^I hope I shall 
I have the pleasure of seeing you again soon," said 

I Catherine. *^ Shall you be at the cotillion ball 
to-morrow? " 

^* Perhaps we — yes, I think we certainly shall.'' 
"I am glad of it, for we shall all be there." 
This civility was duly returned, and they parted : 
on Miss Tilney's side with some knowledge of her 
new acquaintance's feelings, and on Catherine's, 
without the smallest consciousness of having ex- 
plained them. 

She went home very happy. The morning had 
answered all her hopes, and the evening of the 
following day was now the object of expectation, 
the future good. What gown and what head-dress 
she should wear on the occasion became her chief 
concern. She cannot be justified in it. Dress is 



84 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

at all times a frivolous distinction, and excessive 
solicitude about it often destroys its own aim. 
Catherine knew all this very well ; her great-aunt 
had read her a lecture on the subject onl}^ the 
Christmas before; and yet she la}^ awake ten min- 
utes on Wednesday night debating between her 
spotted and her tamboured muslin, and nothing 
but the shortness of the time prevented her buying 
a new one for the evening. This would have been 
an error in judgment, great though not uncommon, 
from which one of the other sex rather than her 
own, a brother rather than a great-aunt, might 
have warned her; for man only can be aware of the 
insensibility of niah" towards a new gown. It 
would be mortifying to the feelings of manj'- ladies 
could they be made to understand how little the 
heart of man is affected by what is costly or new 
in their attire; how little it is biassed by the 
texture of their muslin, and how unsusceptible 
of peculiar tenderness towards the spotted, the 
sprigged, the mull, or the jaconet. Woman is 
fine for her own satisfaction alone. No man will 
admire her the more, no woman will like her the 
better for it. Neatness and fashion are enough for 
the former, and a something of shabbiness or im- 
propriety will be most endearing to the latter. 
But not one of these grave reflections troubled the 
tranquillity of Catherine. 

She entered the rooms on Thursday evening 
with feelings very different from what* had at- 
tended her thither the Monday before. She had 
then been exulting in her engagement to Thorpe, 
3.nd was now chiefly anxious to avoid his sight, 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 85 

lest he sliould engage her again; for though she 
could not, dared not expect that Mr. Tilney should 
ask her a third time to dance, her wishes, hopes, 
and plans all centred in nothing less. Every 
young lady may feel for my heroine in this critical 
moment, for every young lady has at some time or 
other known the same agitation. All have been, 
or at least all have believed themselves to be, in 
danger from the pursuit of some one whom they 
wished to avoid; and all have been anxious for the 
attentions of some one whom they wished to 
please. As soon as they were joined by the 
Thorpes, Catherine's agony began; she fidgeted 
about if John Thorpe came towards her, hid her- 
self as much as possible from his view, and when 
he spoke to her pretended not to hear him. The 
cotillions were over, the country-dancing begin- 
ning, and she saw nothing of the Tilneys. *'Do 
not be frightened, my dear Catherine," whispered 
Isabella, ^'but I am really going to dance with 
your brother again. I declare positively it is 
quite shocking. I tell him he ought to be ashamed 
of himself, but you and John must keep us in 
countenance. Make haste, my dear creature, and 
come to us. John is just walked off, but he will 
be back in a moment." 

Catherine had neither time nor inclination to 
answer. The others walked awa}^, John Thorpe 
was still in view, and she gave herself up for lost. 
That she might not appear, however, to observe or 
expect him, she kept her eyes intently fixed on her 
fan ; and a self-condemnation for her folly, in sup- 
posing that among such a crowd they should even 



86 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

meet with tlie Tilneys in any reasonable time, had 
just passed through her mind, when she suddenly 
found herself addressed and again solicited to 
dance, by Mr. Tilney himself. With what spark- 
ling eyes and ready motion she granted his re- 
quest, and with how pleasing a flutter of heart she 
went with him to the set, may be easily imagined. 
To escape, and, as she believed, so narrowly 
escape John Thorpe, and to be asked so immedi- 
ately on his joining her, asked by Mr. Tilney, 
as if he had sought her on purpose ! — it did not 
appear to her that life could supply any greater 
felicity. 

Scarcely had they worked themselves into the 
quiet possession of a place, however, when her 
attention was claimed by John Thorpe, who stood 
behind her. " Heyday, Miss Morland! '' said he, 
''what is the meaning of this? — I thought you 
and I were to dance together.'' 

*'I wonder you should think so, for you never 
asked me." 

''That is a good one, by Jove! I asked you 
as soon as I came into the room, and I was just 
going to ask you again, but when I turned round 
you were gone! This is a cursed shabby trick! 
I only came for the sake of dancing with you, and 
I firmly believe you were engaged to me ever since 
Monday. Yes; I remember, 1 asked you while 
you were waiting in the lobby for your cl^ak. And 
here have I been telling all my acquaintance that 
I was going to dance with the prettiest girl in the 
room; and when they see you standing up with 
somebody else, they will quiz me famously." 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 87 

'^Oh, no; they will never think of me, after 
such a description as that.'' 

''By heavens, if they do not, I will kick them 
out of the room for blockheads. What chap have 
you there?'' Catherine satisfied his curiosity. 
"Tilney, " he repeated: "hum — I do not know 
him. A good figure of a man; well put together. 
Does he want a horse? Here is a friend of 
mine, Sam Fletcher, has got one to sell that would 
suit anybody. A famous clever animal for the 
road, — only forty guineas. I had fifty minds to 
buy it myself, for it is one of my maxims always 
to buy a good horse when I meet with one ; but it 
would not answer my purpose, it would not do for 
the field. I would give any money for a real good 
hunter. I have three now, the best that ever were 
backed. I would not take eight hundred guineas 
for them. Fletcher and I mean to get a house in 
Leicestershire against the next season. It is so 
d d uncomfortable living at an inn." 

This was the last sentence by which he could 
weary Catherine's attention, for he was just then 
borne off by the resistless pressure of a long string 
of passing ladies. Her partner now drew near, 
and said: ''That gentleman would have put me 
out of patience, had he staj^ed with you half a min- 
ute longer. He has no business to withdraw the 
attention of my partner from me. We have en- 
tered into a contract of mutual agreeableness for 
the space of an evening, and all our agreeableness 
belongs solely to each other for that time. No- 
body can fasten themselves on the notice of one, 
without injuring the rights of the other. I 



88 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

consider a country-dance as an emblem of marriage. 
Fidelity and com^^laisance are the principal duties 
of both ; and those men who do not choose to dance 
or marry themselves, have no business with th& 
partners or wives of their neighbors." 

*^ But they are such very different things! " 

*'That you think they cannot be compared 
together." 

*' To be sure not. People that marry can nevei 
part, but must go and keep house together. 
People that dance only stand opposite to each othei 
in a long room for half an hour." 

" And such is your definition of matrimony and 
dancing. Taken in that light certainly, their 
resemblance is not striking; but I think I could 
place them in such a view. — You will allow that 
in both man has the advantage of choice, woman 
only the power of refusal ; that in both it is an en- 
gagement between man and woman, formed for the 
advantage of each; and that when once entered 
into, they belong exclusively to each other till the 
moment of its dissolution; that it is their duty each 
to endeavor to give the other no cause for wishing 
that he or she had bestowed themselves elsewhere, 
and their best interest to keep their own imagina- 
tions from wandering towards the perfections of 
their neighbors, or fancying that they should have 
been better off with any one else. You will allow 
all this? " 

' ' Yes, to be sure, as you state it, all this sounds 
very well ; but still they are so very different. I 
cannot look upon them at all in the same light, nor 
think the same duties belong to them." 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 89 

*' In one respect there certainly is a difference. 
In marriage the man is supposed to provide for 
the support of the woman ; the woman to make the 

' home agreeable to the man; he is to purvey, and 
she is to smile. But in dancing, their duties are 
exactly changed; the agreeableness, the compliance 
are expected from him, while she furnishes the fan 
and the lavender water. That, I suppose, was the 

1 difference of duties which struck you, as rendering 
the conditions incapable of comparison." 
''No, indeed, I never thought of that.'' 

. ^* Then I am quite at a loss. One thing, however, 

, \I must observe. This disposition on your side is 
rather alarming. You totally disallow an 3^ simi- 
larity in the obligations; and may I not thence 
infer that your notions of the duties of the dancing 
state are not so strict as your partner might wish? 
Have I not reason to fear that if the gentleman 
who spoke to you just now were to return, or if any 
other gentleman were to address you, there would 
be nothing to restrain you from conversing with 
him as long as you chose? " 

*^Mr. Thorpe is such a very particular friend of 
my brother's, that if he talks to me, I must talk to 
him again; but there are hardly three young men 
in the room besides him that I have any acquaint- 
ance with." 

''And is that to be my only security? Alas, 
alas!" 

*'N"ay, I am sure you cannot have a better; for 
if I do not know anybody, it is impossible for me 
to talk to them ; and besides, I do not want to talk 
to anybody." 



90 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

^' l!^ow you have given me a security worth, hav- 
ing; and I shall proceed with courage. Do you 
find Bath as agreeable as when I had the honor of 
making the inquiry before? " 

'^Yes, quite, — more so, indeed." 

^' More so! Take care, or you will forget to be 
tired of it at the proper time. You ought to be 
tired at the end of six weeks." 

'^I do not think I should be tired, if I were to 
stay here six months.'' 

'^ Bath, compared with London, has little variety, 
and so everybody finds out every year. ' For six 
weeks I allow Bath is pleasant enough; but be- 
yond that, it is the most tiresome place in the 
world.' You would be told so by people of all 
descriptions, who come regularly every winter, 
lengthen their six weeks into ten or twelve, and 
go away at last because they can afford to stay 
no longer.'' 

''Well, other people must judge for themselves, 
and those who go to London may think nothing of 
Bath. But I, who live in a small retired village in 
the country, can never find greater sameness in such 
a place as this than in my own home ; for here are 
a variety of amusements, a variety of things to be 
seen and done all day long, which I can know 
nothing of there." 

''You are not fond of the countryr" 

"Yes, I am. I have always lived there, and 
always been very happy. But certainly there is 
much more sameness in a country life than in a 
Bath life. One day in the country is exactly like 
another." 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 91 

*' But then you spend your time so much more 
rationally in the country." 

^'Dol?'' 

<*Doyounot?'' 

**I do not believe there is much difference.'' 

" Here you are in pursuit only of amusement all 
I day long." 

*'And so I am at home, — only I do not find 
so much of it. I walk about here, and so I do 
I there; but here I see a variety of people in 
[ every street, and there I can only go and call on 
,Mrs. Allen." 

Mr. Tilney was very much amused. ^^Only go 
land call on Mrs. Allen! " he repeated. *'What a 
i picture of intellectual poverty! However, when 
'you sink into this abyss again, you will have more 
to say. You will be able to talk of Bath, and of 
all that you did here." 

^'Oh, yes. I shall never be in want of some- 
i thing to talk of again to Mrs. Allen, or anybody 
I else. I really believe I shall always be talking of 
jBath, when I am at home again, — I do like it so 
'very much. If I could but have papa and mamma, 
and the rest of them here, I suppose I should be 
I too happy! James's coming (my oldest brother) is 
j quite delightful; and especially as it turns out that 
i the very family we are just got so intimate with are 
his intimate friends already. Oh, who can ever 
be tired of Bath? " 

*'Not those who bring such fresh feelings of 
every sort to it as you do. But papas and mammas 
and brothers and intimate friends are a good deal 
gone by, to most of the frequenters of Bathj and 



92 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

the honest relish of balls and plays and every-day 
sights is past with them." 

Here their conversation closed; the demands of 
the dance becoming now too importunate for a 
divided attention. 

Soon after their reaching the bottom of the set, 
Catherine perceived herself to be earnestly re-^ 
garded by a gentleman who stood among the" 
lookers-on, immediately behind her partner. He 
was a very handsome man, of a commanding 
aspect, past the bloom, but not past the vigor of 
life; and with his eye still directed towards her, 
she saw him presently address Mr. Tilney in a 
familiar whisper. Confused by his notice, and 
blushing from the fear of its being excited by 
something wrong in her appearance, she turned 
away her head. But while she did so, the gentleman 
retreated, and her partner coming n-earer, said: ^^ I 
see that you guess what I have just been asked. 
That gentleman knows your name, and you have 
a right to know his. It is General Tilney, my 
father." 

Catherine's answer was only ^'Oh!" but it was 
an "Oh! " expressing everything needful, — atten- 
tion to his words, and perfect reliance on their truth. 
"With real interest and strong admiration did her 
eye now follow the General, as he moved through 
the crowd, and * ' How handsome a family they 
are ! " was her secret remark. 

In chatting with Miss Tilney before the evening 
concluded, a new source of felicity arose to her. 
She ha(J never taken a country walk since her 
arrival in Bath. Miss Tilney, to whom all the 



NOKTHANGER ABBEY. 93 

commonly frequented environs were familiar, spoke 
of them in terms which made her all eagerness to 
know them too*, and on her openly fearing that she^ 
might find nobody to go with her, it was proposed 
by the brother and sister that they should join in a 
walk, some morning or other. *'I shall like it," 
she cried, '^beyond anything in the world; and do 
not let us put it off, — let us go to-morrow." This 
was readily agreed to, with only a proviso of Miss ^ 
Tilney's that it did not rain, which Catherine was 
sure it would not. At twelve o'clock they were 
to call for her in Pulteney Street; and *' remem- 
ber — twelve o'clock," was her parting speech to 
her new friend. Of her other, her older, her more 
established friend, Isabella, of whose fidelity and 
worth she had enjoyed a fortnight's experience, 
she scarcely saw anything during the evening. 
Yet, though longing to make her acquainted with 
her happiness, she cheerfully submitted to the wish 
of Mr. Allen which took them rather early away; 
and her spirits danced within her, as she danced 
in her chair all the way home. 



94 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 



CHAPTER XI. 

The morrow brought a very sober-looking morning, 
the sun making only a few efforts to appear; and 
Catherine augured from it everything most favor- 
able to her wishes. A bright morning so early in 
the year, she allowed, would generally turn to 
rain; but a cloudy one foretold improvement as 
the day advanced. She applied to Mr. Allen for 
confirmation of her hopes ; but Mr. Allen, not hav- 
ing his own skies and barometer about him, de- 
clined giving any absolute promise of sunshine. 
She applied to Mrs. Allen, and Mrs. Allen's 
opinion was more positive. ^'She had no doubt 
in the world of its being a very fine day, if the 
clouds would only go off, and the sun keep out." 

At about eleven o'clock, however, a few specks 
of small rain upon the windows caught Catherine's 
watchful eye, and *'0h dear, I do believe it will 
be wet ! '' broke from her 'jp. a most desponding 
tone. 

<'I thought how it would be," said Mrs. Allen. 

*^No walk for me to-day," sighed Catherine; 
*^but perhaps it may come to nothing, or it may 
hold up before twelve." 

*^ Perhaps it may; but then, my dear, it will be 
so dirty." 

" Oh, that will not signify ; I never mind dirt." 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 95 

'*No," replied her friend, very placidly, ^'I 
know you never mind dirt." 

After a short pause, '^It comes on faster and 
faster!'^ said Catherine, as she stood watching at 
a window. 

^^So it does, indeed. If it keeps raining, the 
streets will be very wet. " 

^* There are four umbrellas up already. How I 
hate the sight of an umbrella! " 

^'They are disagreeable things to carry. I 
would much rather take a chair at any time." 

"It w^as such a nice-looking morning! I felt so 
convinced it would be dry! " 

^'Anybody would have thought so, indeed. 
I There will be very few people in the Pump-room, 
if it rains all the morning. I hope Mr. Allen will 
I put on his great-coat when he goes, but I dare sa}?- 
|}ie will not, for he had rather do anything in the 
[world than walk out in a great-coat; I wonder he 
(should dislike it, it must be so. comfortable." 

The rain continued, — fast, though not'^heavy. 

J Catherine went every five minutes to the clock, 

[threatening, on each return, that if it still kept 

on raining another five minutes, she would give 

[up the matter as hc^eless. The clock struck 

twelve, and it still rained. "You will not be able 

to go, my dear." 

"I do not quite despair yet. I shall not give 
it up till a quarter after twelve. This is just the 
time of day for it to clear up, and I do think it 
looks a little lighter. There, it is twenty minutes 
after twelve, and now I shall give it up entirely. 
Oh that we had such weather here as they had at 



96 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

Udolpho, or at least in Tuscany and the South of 
France! — the night that poor St. Aubin died! — 
such beautiful weather! '' 

At half-past twelve, when Catherine's anxious 
attention to the weather was over, and she could 
no longer claim any merit from its amendment, 
the sky began voluntaril}'- to clear. A gleam of 
sunshine took her quite by surprise: she looked 
round, the clouds were parting, and she instantly 
returned to the window to watch over and encour- 
age the happy appearance. Ten minutes more 
made it certain that a bright afternoon would suc' 
ceed, and justified the opinion of Mrs. Allen, who 
had ''always thought it would clear up." But 
whether Catherine might still expect her friends, 
whether there had not been too much rain for Mis:5 
Tilney to venture, must j^et be a question. 

It was too dirty for Mrs. Allen to accompany 
her husband to the Pump-room : he accordingly set 
off by himself, and Catherine had barely watched 
him down the street, when her notice was claimed 
by the approach of the same two open carriages, 
containing the same three people that had surprised 
her so much a few mornings back. 

''Isabella, my brother, and Mr. Thorpe, I de- 
clare! They are coming for me, perhaps; but I 
shall not go: I cannot go, indeed; for, you know. 
Miss Tilney may still call." Mrs. Allen agreed 
to it. John Thorpe was soon with them, and his 
voice was with them yet sooner, for on the stairs 
he was calling out to Miss Morland to be quick. 
*'Make haste! make haste! '' as he threw open the 
door, — "put on your hat this moment; there is 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 97 

no time to be lost, — we are going to Bristol. — 
How d' ye do, Mrs. Allen? " 

j '^To Bristol! Is not that a great way off? But, 

I however, I cannot go with you to-day, because I 

; am engaged; I expect some friends every moment. '* 
This was of course vehemently talked down as 
no reason at all, Mrs. Allen was called on to sec- 
ond him, and the two others walked in, to give 
their assistance. *^ My sweetest Catherine, is not 
this delightful? We shall have a most heavenly 
drive. You are to thank your brother and me for 

I the scheme : it darted into our heads at breakfast- 

' time, I verily believe at the same instant ; and w*e 
should have been off two hours ago, if it had not 
been for this detestable rain. But it does not sig- 
nify, the nights are moonlight, and we shall do 

, delightfully. Oh, I am in such ecstasies at the 
thoughts of a little country air and quiet ! — so 

] much better than going to the Lower Rooms. We 

! shall drive directly to Clifton and dine there; and 
as soon as dinner is over, if there is time for it, go 

(on to Kings weston." 

I "1 doubt our being able to do so much," said 

IjMorland. 

I ''You croaking fellow!" cried Thorpe, ''we 
shall be able to do ten times more. Kingsweston! 
ay, and Blaize Castle too, and anything else we 
can hear of; but here is your sister says she will 

[not go." 

I "Blaize Castle! '^ cried Catherine; "what is 

ithat?" 

"The finest place in England, — worth going 
fifty miles at any time to see.'' 

7 



98 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

"What! is it really a castle, an old castle?" 

" The oldest in the kingdom. '^ 

^' But is it like what one reads of? " 

'^Exactly, — the very same.^' 

*^But now, really, are there towers and long 
galleries? '^ 

"Bj dozens/' 

" Then I should like to see it; but I cannot, — 
I cannot go." 

'^Not go! — my beloved creature, what do you 
mean? " 

*^I cannot go, because," looking down as she 
spoke, fearful of Isabella's smile, ''I expect Miss 
Tilney and her brother to call on me to take a 
country walk. The}^ promised to come at twelve, 
only it rained! but now, as it is so fine, I dare 
say they will be here soon." 

''Not they, indeed," cried Thorpe; ''for as we 
turned into Broad Street, I saw them. Does he 
not drive a phaeton with bright chestnuts?" 

" I do not know, indeed." 

"Yes, I know he does; I saw him. You are 
talking of the man you danced with last night, are 
not you?" 

"Yes." 

"Well, I saw him at that moment turn up the 
Lansdown Road, driving a smart-looking girl." 

"Did you, indeed?" 

" Did, upon my soul; knew him again directly, 
and he seemed to have got some very pretty cattle 
too." 

"It is very odd! but I suppose they thought it 
would be too dirty for a walk." 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 99 

** And well they might, for I never saw so much 
dirt in my life. Walk! you could no more walk 
than you could fly ! It has not been so dirty the 
whole winter; it is ankle-deep everywhere.'' 

Isabella corroborated it: ^^My dearest Cather- 
ine, you cannot form an idea of the dirt. Come, 
you must go; you cannot refuse going now.'' 

<^I should like to see the castle; but may we 
go all over it? May we go up every staircase and 
into every suite of rooms? " 

^* Yes, yes; every hole and corner." 

*'But then, — if they should only be gone out 
for an hour till it is drier, and call by and by? " 

*'Make yourself easy, there is no danger of that; 
for I heard Tilney hallooing to a man who was just 
passing by on horseback, that they were going as 
far as Wick Rocks." 

'' Then I will. Shall I go, Mrs. Allen? " 

*^ Just as you please, my dear." 

^^Mrs. Allen, you must persuade her to go," 
was the general cry,. Mrs. Allen was not inatten- 
jtive to it. ^'Well, my dear," said she, *^ suppose 
lyou go." And in two minutes they were off. 
I Catherine's feelings, as she got into the carriage, 
[were in a very unsettled state; divided between re- 
gret for the loss of one great pleasure, and the 
jhope of soon enjoying another, almost its equal in 
[degree, however unlike in kind. She could not 
(think the Tilneys had acted quite well by her in 
jso readily giving up their engagement without 
[sending her any message of excuse. It was now 
I but an hour later than the time fixed on for the 
j beginning of their walk; and in spite of what she 



100 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

had heard of the prodigious accumulation of dirt 
in the course of that hour, she could not, from her 
own observation, help thinking that they might 
have gone with very little inconvenience. To feel 
herself slighted by them was very painful. On 
the other hand, the delight of exploring an edifice 
like Udolpho, as her fancy represented Blaize Cas- 
tle to be, was such a counterpoise of good as might 
console her for almost an3^thing. 

They passed briskly down Pulteney Street 
and through Laura Place, without the exchange 
of many words. Thorpe talked to his horse, and 
she meditated, by turns, on broken promises and 
broken arches, phaetons and false hangings, Til- 
neys and trap-doors. As they entered Argyle 
Buildings, however, she was roused by this address 
from her companion: *^Who is that girl who 
looked at you so hard as she went by? " 

^^ Who? — where?'' 

^'On the right-hand pavement, — she must be 
almost out of sight now." Catherine looked round 
and saw Miss Tilney, leaning on her brother's 
arm, walking slowly down the street. She saw 
them both looking back at her. ^' Stop, stop, Mr. 
Thorpe," she impatiently cried, "it is Miss Til- 
ney; it is indeed. How could you tell me they 
were gone ? Stop, stop, I will get out this mo- 
ment and go to them." But to what purpose did 
she speak ? Thorpe only lashed his horse into a 
brisker trot; the Tilneys, who had soon ceased to 
look after her, were in a moment out of sight 
round the corner of Laura Place, and in another 
moment she was herself whisked into the Market 



NORTHANGEE ABBEYS. 101 

Place. Still, however, and during t'ne 'lfcngi;li of 
another street, she entreated him to stop. ^'Pray, 
pray, stop, Mr. Thorpe. I cannot go on, — I will 
not go on; I must go back to Miss Tilney.'* 
But Mr. Thorpe only laughed, smacked his whip, 
encouraged his horse, made odd noises, and drove 
on; and Catherine, angry and vexed as she was, 
having no power of getting away, was obliged to 
give up the point and submit. Her reproaches, 
however, were not spared. ^^ How could you de- 
ceive me so, Mr. Thorpe? How could you say 
that you saw them driving up the Lansdown 
Eoad? I would not have had it happen so for the 
world. They must think it so strange, so rude of 
me, to go by them too, without saying a word! 
You do not know how vexed I am. I shall have 
no pleasure at Clifton, nor in anything else. 1 
had rather, ten thousand times rather, get out now, 
and walk back to them. How could you say you 
saw them driving out in a phaeton?'' Thorpe de- 
fended himself very stoutly, declared he had never 
seen two men so much alike in his life, and would 
hardly give up the point of its having been Tilney 
himself. 

Their drive, even when this subject was over, 
was not likely to be very agreeable. Catherine's 
complaisance was no longer what it had been in 
their former airing. She listened reluctantly, and 
her replies were short. Blaize Castle remained her 
only comfort; towards that she still looked at in- 
tervals with pleasure; though rather than be disap- 
pointed of the promised walk, and especially rather 
than be thought ill of by the Tilneys, she would 



i 



10^ NOIiTiiANGER ABBEY. 

wiriiiigly liave g'iven \ip all the happiness which its 
walls could supply, — the happiness of a progress 
through a long suite of lofty rooms exhibiting the 
remains of magnificent furniture, though now for 
many years deserted, — the happiness of being 
stopped in their way along narrow, winding vaults, 
by a low, grated door; or even of having their lamp, 
their only lamp, extinguished by a sudden gust of 
wind, and of being left in total darkness. In the 
mean while they proceeded on their journey with- 
out any mischance; and were within view of the 
town of Keynsham, when a halloo from Morland, 
who was behind them, made his friend pull up, to 
know what was the matter. The others then came 
close enough for conversation ; and Morland said, 
^^We had better go back, Thorpe; it is too late to 
go on to-day; your sister thinks so as well as I. 
We have been exactly an hour coming from Pulte- 
ney Street, very little more than seven miles; and, 
I suppose, we have at least eight more to go. It 
will never do. We set out a great deal too late. 
We had much better put it off till another day, and 
turn round.'' 

^^It is all one to me,'' replied Thorpe, rather 
angrily; and instantly turning his horse, the}?- were 
on their way back to Bath. 

^^ If your brother had not got such a d d beast 

to drive," said he soon afterwards, ^^we might 
have done it very well. My horse would have 
trotted to Clifton within the hour, if left to him- 
self, and I have almost broke my arm with pulling 
him in to that cursed broken-winded jade's pace. 
Morland is a fool for not keeping a horse and gig 
of his own." 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 103 

"No, he is not/' said Catherine, warmly; ^^for 
I am sure he could not afford it.'' 

'^And why cannot he afford it?" 

'^ Because he has not money enough." 

'^ And whose fault is that?" 

"Nobody's, that I know of." Thorpe then said 
something in the loud, incoherent way to which he 

had often recourse, about its being a d d thing 

to be miserly; and that if people who rolled in 
money could not afford things, he did not know 
who could, — which Catherine did not even endeavor 
to understand. Disappointed of what was to have 
been the consolation for her first disappointment, 
she was less and less disposed either to be agreeable 
herself, or to find her companion so; and they re- 
turned to Pulteney Street without her speaking 
twenty words. 

As she entered the house, the footman told her 
that a gentleman and lady had called and inquired 
for her a few minutes after her setting off; that 
when he told them she was gone out with Mr. 
Thorpe, the lady had asked whether any message 
had been left for her; and on his saying no, had felt 
for a card, but said she had none about her, and 
went away. Pondering over these heart-rending 
tidings, Catherine walked slowly upstairs. At 
the head of them she was met by Mr. Allen, who, 
m hearing the reason of their speedy return, said : 
"I am glad your brother had so much sense; I am 
^lad you are come back. It was a strange, wild 
scheme." 

They all spent the evening together at Thorpe's. 
Catherine was disturbed and out of spirits; but 



104 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

Isabella seemed to find a pool of commerce, in the 
fate of which she shared by private partnership with 
Morland, a very good equivalent for the quiet and 
country air of an inn at Clifton. Her satisfaction, 
too, in not being at the Lower Booms, was spoken 
more than once. *^How I pity the poor creatures 
that are going there! How glad I am that I am not 
amongst them ! I wonder whether it will be a full 
ball or not ! They have not begun dancing yet. I 
would not be there for all the world. It is so de- 
lightful to have an evening now and then to one's 
self. I dare say it will not be a very good ball. 
I know the Mitchells will not be there. I am sure 
I pity everybody that is. But I dare say, Mr. 
Morland, you long to be at it, do not you? I am 
sure you do. Well, pray do not let anybody here 
be a restraint on you. I dare say we could do very 
well without you; but you men think yourselves of 
such consequence." 

Catherine could almost have accused Isabella of 
being wanting in tenderness towards herself and 
her sorrows ; so very little did they appear to dwell 
on her mind, and so very inadequate was the com- 
fort she offered. ^^Do not be so dull, my dearest 
creature," she whispered. ^' You will quite break 
my heart. It was amazingly shocking, to be sure; 
but the Tilneys were entirely to blame. Why 
were not they more punctual? It was dirty, in- 
deed, but what did that signify? I am sure John 
and I should not have minded it. I never mind 
going through anything where a friend is con- 
cerned; that is my disposition, and John is just 
the same; he has amazing strong feelings. Good 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 105 

heavens! what a delightful hand you have got! 
Kings, I vow! I never was so happy in my life! 
I would fifty times rather you should have them 
than myself/' 

And now I may dismiss my heroine to the sleep' 
less couch, which is the true heroine's portion; to 
a pillow strewed with thorns and wet with tears. 
And lucky may she think herself, if she get an- 
other good night's rest in the course of the next 
three months. 



106 NORTHANGER ABBEy( 



CHAPTEE XII. 

<^ Mrs. Allen,'* said Catherine, the next morning, 
*^will there be any harm in my calling on Miss 
Tilney to-day? I shall not be easy till I have 
explained everything." 

^'Go, by all means, my dear; only put on a 
white gown. Miss Tilney always wears white." 

Catherine cheerfully complied; and being prop- 
erly equipped, was more impatient than ever to be 
at the Pump-room, that she might inform herself 
of General Tilney's lodgings; for though she be- 
lieved they were in Milsom Street, she was not 
certain of the house; and Mrs. Allen's wavering 
convictions only made it more doubtful. To Mil- 
som Street she was directed; and having made her- 
self perfect in the number, hastened away with 
eager steps and a beating heart to pay her visit, 
explain her conduct, and be forgiven. Tripping 
lightly through the churchyard, and resolutely 
turning away her eyes, that she might not be 
obliged to see her beloved Isabella, and her dear 
family, who she had reason to believe were in a 
shop hard by, she reached the house without any 
impediment, looked at the number, knocked at the 
door, and inquired for Miss Tilney. The man 
believed Miss Tilney to be at home, but was not 
quite certain. Would she be pleased to send up 
her name? She gave her card. In a few minutes 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 107 

the servant returned, and, with a look which did 
not quite confirm his words, said he had been mis- 
taken, for that Miss Tilney was walked out. 
Catherine, with a blush of mortification, left the 
house. She felt almost persuaded that Miss Tilney 
was at home, and too much offended to admit her; 
and as she retired down the street, could not 
withhold one glance at the drawing-room windows, 
in expectation of seeing her there, — but no one 
appeared at them. At the bottom of the street, 
however, she looked back again; and then, not at 
a window, but issuing from the door, she saw Miss 
Tilney herself ; she was followed by a gentleman, 
whom Catherine believed to be her father, and 
they turned up towards Edgar's Buildings. Cath- 
erine, in deep mortification, proceeded on her way. 
She could almost be angr}^ herself at such angry 
incivility ; but she checked the resentful sensation : 
she remembered her own ignorance. She knew 
not how such an offence as hers might be classed 
by the laws of worldly politeness, — to what a de- 
gree of unforgiveness it might with propriety 
lead, — nor to what rigors of rudeness in return it 
might justly make her amenable. Dejected and 
humbled, she had even some thoughts of not going 
with the others to the theatre that night; but it 
must be confessed that they were not of long con- 
tinuance : for she soon recollected, in the first place, 
that she was without any excuse for staying at 
home; and, in the second, that it was a play she 
wanted very much to see. To the theatre accord- 
ingly they all went ; no Tilneys appeared, to plague 
01 please her: she feared that, amongst the many 



108 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

perfections of the family, a fondness for plays was 
not to be ranked; but perhaps it was because they 
were habituated to the finer performances of the 
London stage, which she knew, on Isabella's 
authority, rendered everything else of the kind 
^' quite horrid." She was not deceived in her own 
expectation of pleasure: the comedy so well sus- 
pended her care, that no one, observing her during 
the first four acts, would have supposed she had 
any wretchedness about her. On the beginning of 
the fifth, however, the sudden view of Mr. Henry 
Tilney and his father joining a party in the oppo- 
site box recalled her to anxiety and distress. The 
stage could no longer excite genuine merriment, — 
no longer keep her whole attention. Every other 
look upon an average was directed towards the op- 
posite box ; and for the space of two entire scenes 
did she thus watch Henry Tilney, without being 
once able to catch his eye. No longer could he be 
suspected of indifference for a play ; his notice was 
never withdrawn from the stage during two whole 
scenes. At length, however, he did look towards 
her, and he bowed — but such a bow ! no smile, no 
continued observance attended it; his eyes were 
immediately returned to their former direction. 
Catherine was restlessly miserable; she could al- 
most have run round to the box in which he sat, 
and forced him to hear her explanation. Feelings 
rather natural than heroic possessed her; instead of 
considering her own dignity injured by this ready 
condemnation, — instead of proudly resolving, in 
conscious innocence, to show her resentment to- 
wards him who could harbor a doubt of it, to leave 



NORTHANGEK ABBEY. 109 

to him all the trouble of seeking an explanation, 
and to enlighten him on the past only by avoiding 
his sight, or flirting with somebody else, she took 
to herself all the shame of misconduct, or, at least, 
of its appearance, and was only eager for an oppor- 
tunity of explaining its cause. 

The play concluded, — the curtain fell; Henry 
Tilney was no longer to be seen where he had 
hitherto sat, but his father remained, and perhaps 
he might be now coming round to their box. She 
was right: in a few minutes he appeared, and 
making his way through the then thinning rows, 
I spoke with like calm politeness to Mrs. Allen and 
I her friend. Not with such calmness was he an- 
swered by the latter. '^Oh, Mr. Tilney, I have 
[been quite wild to speak to you and make my 
.apologies. You must have thought me so rude; 
but indeed it was not my own fault, — was it, 
Mrs. Allen? Did not they tell me that Mr. Tilney 
and his sister were gone out in a phaeton together? 
and then what could I do? But I had ten thou- 
sand times rather have been with you. Now had 
not I, Mrs. Allen? " 

^'My dear, you tumble my gown," was Mrs. 
Allen's reply. 

Her assurance, however, standing sole as it did, 
was not thrown away; it brought a more cordial, 
more natural smile into his countenance, and he 
replied in a tone which retained only a little 
affected reserve: ''We were much obliged to you, 
at any rate, for wishing us a pleasant walk after 
our passing you in Argyle Street. You were so 
kind as to look back on purpose." 



110 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 



(C 



But, indeed, I did not wish you a pleasant 
walk, — I never thought of such a thing; but I 
begged Mr. Thorpe so earnestly to stop; I called 
out to him as soon as ever I saw you. Now, Mrs. 
Allen, did not — Oh ! you were not there. But, 
indeed, I did; and if Mr. Thorpe would only have 
stopped, I would have jumped out and run after 
you." 

Is there a Henry in the world who could be in- 
sensible to such a declaration? Henry Tilney, at 
least, was not. With a yet sweeter smile he said 
everything that need be said of his sister's con- 
cern, regret, and dependence on Catherine's honor, 
^'Oh, do not say Miss Tilney was not angry," 
cried Catherine, *' because I know she was; for 
she would not see me this morning when I called : 
I saw her walk out of the house the next minute 
after my leaving it. I was hurt, but I was not 
affronted. Perhaps you did not know I had been 
there." 

^^I was not within at the time; but I heard of it 
from Eleanor, and she has been wishing ever since 
to see you, to explain the reason of such incivility; 
but, perhaps, I can do it as well. It was nothing 
more than that my father — they were just pre- 
paring to walk out, and he being hurried for time, 
and not caring to have it put off, made a point of 
her being denied. That was all, I do assure you 
She was very much vexed, and meant to make her 
apology as soon as possible." 

Catherine's mind was greatly eased by this in- 
formation, yet a something of solicitude remained, 
from which sprang the following question, thor- 



NORTH ANGER ABBEY. Ill 

I oughly artless in itself, though rather distressing 
to the gentleman: ''But, Mr. Tilney, why were 
3^ou less generous than your sister? If she felt 
such confidence in my good intentions, and could 
suppose it to be only a mistake, why should you 
be so ready to take offence?" 
\ ^'Mel — I take offence!" 

''Nay, I am sure by your look, when you came 
into the box, you were angry." 

^' I angry! I could have no right." 

" Well, nobody would have thought you had no 
right who saw your face." 

He replied by asking her to make room for him, 
and talking of the play. 

He remained with them some time, and was 
only too agreeable for Catherine to be contented 
when he went away. Before they parted, how- 
ever, it was agreed that the projected walk should 
be taken as soon as possible; and setting aside 
the misery of his quitting their box, she was, 
upon the whole, left one of the happiest creatures 
in the world. 

While talking to each other, she had observed 
with some surprise that John Thorpe, who was 
never in the same part of the house for ten min- 
utes together, was engaged in conversation with 
General Tilney; and she felt something more than 
surprise when she thought she could perceive her- 
self the object of their attention and discourse. 
What could they have to say of her? She feared 
-General Tilney did not like her appearance. She 
found it was implied in his preventing her admit- 
tance to his daughter, rather than postpone his 



112 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

own walk a few minutes. ^'How came Mr. 
Thorpe to know j^our father?" was her anxious 
inquiry, as she pointed them out to her compan- 
ion. He knew nothing about it; but his father, 
like every military man, had a very large ac- 
quaintance. 

When the entertainment was over, Thorpe came 
to assist them in getting out. Catherine was the 
immediate object of his gallantry; and while they 
waited in the lobby for a chair, he prevented the 
inquiry which had travelled from her heart almost 
to the tip of her tongue, by asking, in a conse- 
quential manner, whether she had seen him talk- 
ing with General Tilney. "He is a fine old 
fellow, upon my soul ! — stout, active, — looks as 
young as his son. I have a great regard for him, 
I assure you. A gentlemanlike, good sort of a 
fellow as ever lived.'' 

'^But how came you to know him?" 
*^Know him! There are few people much about 
town that I do not know. I have met him for- 
ever at the Bedford; and I knew his face again to- 
day the moment he came into the billiard-room. 
One of the best players we have, by the by; and 
we had a little touch together, though I was almost 
afraid of him at first. The odds were five to four 
against me; and if I had not made one of the 
cleanest strokes that perhaps ever was made in 
this world — I took his ball exactly — but I could 
not make you understand it without a table : how- 
ever, I did beat him. A very fine fellow; as rich 
as a Jew. I should like to dine with him; I dare 
say he gives famous darners. But what do you 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 113 

think we have been talking of? You. Yes, by 
heavens! and the General thinks you the finest 
girl in Bath.'' 

''Oh, nonsense! how can you say so?*' 

''And what do you think I said? " lowering 
his voice. " 'Well done, General,' said I, 'I am 
quite of your mind.' " 

Here Catherine, who was much less gratified by 
his admiration than by General Tilney's, was not 
sorry to be called away by Mr. Allen. Thorpe, 
however, would see her to her chair, and, till she 
entered it, continued the same kind of delicate 
flattery, in spite of her entreating him to have 
done. 

That General Tilney, instead of disliking, 
should admire her, was very delightful; and she 
joyfully thought that there was not one of the 
family whom she need now fear to meet. The 
evening had done more, much more for her than 
could have been expected. 



H4 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 



CHAPTER XIII. 



Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Fri- 
day, and Saturday have now passed in review be- 
fore the reader; the events of each day, its hopes 
and fears, mortifications and pleasures, have been 
separately stated, and the pangs of Sunday only 
now remain to be described, and close the week. 
The Clifton scheme had been deferred, not relin- 
quished; and on the afternoon's Crescent of this 
day it was brought forward again. In a private 
consultation between Isabella and James, the for- 
mer of whom had particularly set her heart upon 
going, and the latter no less anxiously placed his 
upon pleasing her, it was agreed that provided the 
weather were fair, the pavty should take place on the 
following morning; and they were to set off very 
early, in order to be at home in good time. The 
affair thus determined, and Thorpe's approbation 
secured, Catherine only remained to be apprised 
of it. She had left them for a few minutes to 
speak to Miss Tilney. In that interval the plan 
was completed, and as soon as she came again, 
her agreement was demanded; but instead of the 
gay acquiescence expected by Isabella, Catherine 
looked grave, was very sorry, but could not go. 
The engagement which ought to have kept her 
from joining in the former attempt would make it 
impossible for her to accompany them now. She 
had that moment settled With Miss Tilney to take 



NORTHANGER ABBEY, 115 

their promised walk to-morrow; it was quite de- 
termined, and she would not, upon any account, 
retract. But that she must and should retract 
was instantly the eager cry of both the Thorpes ; 
they must go to Clifton to-morrow, they would 
not go without her; it would be nothing to put off 
a mere walk for one day longer, and they would 
not hear of a refusal. Catherine was distressed, 
but not subdued. ''Do not urge me, Isabella. I 
am engaged to Miss Tilney. I cannot go.'' This 
availed nothing. The same arguments assailed 
her again; she must go, she should go, and they 
would not hear of a refusal. ''It would be so 
easy to tell Miss Tilney that you had just been re- 
minded of a prior engagement, and must only beg 
to put off the walk till Tuesday." 

"No, it would not be easy. I could not do it. 
There has been no prior engagement.'' But Isa- 
bella became only more and more urgent; calling 
on her in the most affectionate manner, address- 
ing her by the most endearing names. She was 
sure her dearest, sweetest Catherine would not 
seriously refuse such a trifling request to a friend 
who loved her so dearly. She knew her beloved 
Catherine to have so feeling a heart, so sweet a 
temper, to be so easily persuaded by those she 
loved. But all in vain; Catherine felt herself to 
be in the right, and though pained by such tender, 
such flattering supplication, could not allow it to 
influence her. Isabella then tried another method. 
She reproached her with having more affection for 
Miss Tilney, though she had known her so little 
a while, than for her best and oldest friends ; with 



116 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

being grown cold and indifferent, in short, to- 
wards herself. '^1 cannot help being jealous, Cath- 
erine, when I see myself slighted for strangers, — 
I, who love you so excessivel}^ When once my af- 
fections are placed, it is not in the power of any- 
thing to change the^. But I believe my feelings 
are stronger than anybody's; I am sure ihej are 
too strong for my own peace; and to see myself 
supplanted in your friendship by strangers does 
cut me to the quick, I own. These Tilneys seem 
to swallow up everj^thing else." 

Catherine thought this reproach equally strange 
and unkind. Was it the part of a friend thus to 
expose her feelings to the notice of others? Isa- 
bella appeared to her ungenerous and selfish, re- 
gardless of everything but her own gratification. 
These painful ideas crossed her mind, though 
she said nothing. Isabella in the mean while 
had applied her handkerchief to her e^^es; and 
Morland, miserable at such a sight, could not help 
saying, ''Nay, Catherine, I think you cannot stand 
out any longer now. The sacrifice is not much; 
and to oblige such a friend, I shall think you 
quite unkind if you still refuse." 

This was the first time of her brother's openly 
siding against her; and anxious to avoid his 
displeasure, she proposed a compromise. If they 
would only put off their scheme till Tuesday, 
which they might easily do, as it depended only 
on themselves, she could go with them, and every- 
body might then be satisfied. But "No, no, 
no! " was the immediate answer; ''that could not 
be, for Thorpe did not know that he might not go 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 117 

to town ou Tuesday." Catherine was sorry, but 
could do no more; and a short silence ensued, 
which was broken by Isabella, who, in a voice of 
cold resentment, said, ''Very well, then there is 
an end of the party. If Catherine does not go, I 
cannot. I cannot be the only woman. I would 
not, upon any account in the world, do so improper 
► a thing." 

'' Catherine, you must go," said James. 

''But why cannot Mr. Thorpe drive one of his 
other sisters? I dare say either of them would 
like to go." 

"Thank ye," cried Thorpe; "but I did not 
come to Bath to drive my sisters about, and look 

like a fool. No, if you do not go, d me if 

I do. I only go for the sake of driving you." 

"That is a compliment which gives me no 
pleasure." But her words were lost on Thorpe, 
who had turned abruptly away. 

The three others still continued together, walk- 
ing in a most uncomfortable manner to poor Cath- 
erine; sometimes not a word was said, sometimes 
she was again attacked with supplications or re- 
proaches, and her arm was still linked within 
Isabella's, though their hearts were at war. At 
one moment she was softened, at another irritated; 
always distressed, but always steady. 

"I did not think you had been so obstinate, 
Catherine," said James: "you were not used to be 
so hard to persuade; you once were the kindest, 
best-tempered of my sisters." 

"I hope I am not less so now," she replied 
very feelingly; " but indeed I cannot go. If I am 
wrong, I am doing what I believe to be right." 



118 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

*^I suspect," said Isabella, in a low voice, 
** there is no great struggle." 

Catherine's heart swelled; she drew away her 
arm, and Isabella made no opposition. Thus 
passed a long ten minutes, till they were again;: 
joined by Thorpe, who, coming to them with a 
gayer look, said, "Well, I have settled the mat- 
ter, and now we may all go to-morrow with a safe ! 
conscience. I have been to Miss Tilney, and made 
your excuses." 

*' You have not! " cried Catherine. 

"I have, upon my soul. Left her this moment. 
Told her you had sent me to say that having just 
recollected a prior engagement of going to Clifton 
with us to-morrow, you could not have the pleasure 
of walking with her till Tuesday. She said very 
well, Tuesday was just as convenient to her; so 
there is an end of all our difficulties. — A pretty 
good thought of mine, — hey? '' 

Isabella's countenance was once more all smiles 
and good-humor, and James too looked happy 
again. 

"A most heavenl}^ thought, indeed! Now, my 
sweet Catherine, all our distresses are over; you 
are honorably acquitted, and we shall have a most 
delightful party." ' 

"This will not do," said Catherine; "I cannot 
submit to this. I must run after Miss Tilney 
directly, and set her right." 

Isabella, however, caught hold of one hand, 
Thorpe of the other; and remonstrances poured in 
from all three. Even James was quite angry. 
When everything was settled, when Miss Tilney 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 119 

herself said that Tuesday would suit her as well, 
it was quite ridiculous, quite absurd, to make any 
further objection. 

. '^I do not care. Mr. Thorpe had no business 

to invent any such message. If I had thought it 

right to put it off, I could have spoken to Miss 

Tilney myself. This is only doing it in a ruder 

way; and how do I know that Mr. Thorpe has — 

He may be mistaken again, perhaps: he led me 

into one act of rudeness hy his mistake on Friday. 

Let me go, Mr. Thorpe; Isabella, do not hold me." 

Thorpe told her it would be in vain to go after 

i the Tilneys ; they w'ere turning the corner into 

I Brock Street, when he had overtaken them, and 

were at home by this time. 

^'Then I will go after them," said Catherine; 
** wherever they are, I will go after them. It does 
not signify talking. If I could not be persuaded 
' into doing what I thought wrong, I never will be 
(tricked into it." And with these words she broke 
I away and hurried off. Thorpe would have darted 
J after her, but Morland withheld him. ''Let her 
I go, let her go, if she will go. She is as obstinate 
,as — " 

Thorpe never finished the simile, for it could 
hardly have been a proper one. 

Away walked Catherine in great agitation, as 
fast as the crowd would permit her, fearful of 
being pursued, yet determined to persevere. As 
she walked, she reflected on w^hat had passed. It 
was painful to her to disappoint and displease 
them, particularly to displease her brother; but 
she could not repent her resistance. Setting her 



120 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

own inclination apart, to have failed a second time 
in her engagement to Miss Tilney, to have re- 
tracted a promise voluntarily made only five min- 
utes before, and on a false pretence too, must have 
been wrong. She had not been withstanding them 
on selfish principles alone, she had not consulted 
merely her own gratification; that might have been 
insured in some degree by the excursion itself, by 
seeing Blaize Castle; no, she had attended to what 
was due to others, and to her own character in 
their opinion. Her conviction of being right, 
however, was not enough to restore her composure : 
till she had spoken to Miss Tilney, she could not 
be at ease ; and quickening her pace when she got 
clear of the Crescent, she almost ran over the re- 
maining ground till she gained the top of Milsomij 
Street. So rapid had been her movements, that, jii; 
in spite of the Tilneys' advantage in the outset, 
they were but just turning into their lodgings as 
she came within view of them; and the servant 
still remaining at the open door, she used only the 
ceremony of saying that she must speak with Miss 
Tilney that moment, and hurrying by him pro- 
ceeded upstairs. Then, opening the first door . 
before her, which happened to be the right, she ti- 

k: 

k 



immediately found herself in the drawing-room 
with General Tilney, his son and daughter. Hei, 
explanation, defective only in being — from her 
irritation of nerves and shortness of breath — nc 
explanation at all, was instantly given. "I anj 
come in a great hurry — it was all a mistake — 1 
never promised to go — I told them from the firs' sj^. 
I could not go — I ran away in a great hurry t<|ai,l 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 121 

explain it — I did not care what you thought of 
me — I would not stay for the servant." 

The business, however, though not perfectly 
elucidated by this speech, soon ceased to be a 
puzzle. Catherine found that John Thorpe had 
given the message ; and Miss Tilney had no scruple 
j in owning herself greatly surprised by it. But 
i whether her brother had still exceeded her in re- 
sentment, Catherine, though she instinctively ad- 
dressed herself as much to one as to the other in 
her vindication, had no means of knowing. What- 
ever might have been felt before her arrival, her 
eager declarations immediately made every look 
and sentence as friendly as she could desire. 

The affair thus happily settled, she was intro- 
duced by Miss Tilney to her father, and received 
hy him with such ready, such solicitous politeness, 
as recalled Thorpe's information to her mind, and 
made her think with pleasure that he might be 
sometimes depended on. To such anxious atten- 
tion was the General's civility carried, that, not 
aware of her extraordinary swiftness in entering 
the house, he was quite angry with the servant 
whose neglect had reduced her to open the door of 
the apartment herself. ^' What did William mean 
by it? He should make a point of inquiring into 
the matter." And if Catherine had not most 
warmly asserted his innocence, it seemed likely 
that William would lose the favor of his master 
forever, if not his place, by her rapidity. 

After sitting with them a quarter of an hour, 
she rose to take leave, and was then most agree- 
ably surprised by General Tilney's asking her if 



122 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

she would do his daughter the honor of dining and 
spending the rest of the day with her. Miss 
Tihiey added her own wishes. Catherine was 
greatly obliged; but it was quite out of her power. 
Mr. and Mrs. Allen would expect her back every 
moment. The General declared he could say no 
more : the claims of Mr. and Mrs. Allen were not 
to be superseded; but on some other day, he 
trusted, when longer notice could be given, they 
would not refuse to spare her to her friend. *' Oh, 
no; Catherine was sure they would not have the 
least objection, and she should have great pleasure 
in coming." The General attended her himself to 
the street-door, saying everything gallant as they 
went downstairs, admiring the elasticity of her 
walk, which corresponded exactly with the spirit 
of her dancing, and making her one of the most 
graceful bows she had ever beheld when they 
parted. 

Catherine, delighted by all that had passed, pro- 
ceeded gayl}'- to Pulteney Street; walking, as she 
concluded, with great elasticity, though she had 
never thought of it before. She reached home 
without seeing anything more of the offended 
party; and now that she had been triumphant 
throughout, had carried her point, and was secure 
of her walk, she began (as the flutter of her spirits 
subsided) to doubt whether she had been perfectly 
right. A sacrifice was always noble; and if she 
had given way to their entreaties, she should have 
been spared the distressing idea of a friend dis- 
pleased, a brother angry, and a scheme of great 
happiness to both destroyed, perhaps through her 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 123 

means. To ease her mind, and ascertain by the 
opinion of an unprejudiced person what her own 
conduct had really been, she took occasion to men- 
tion before Mr. Allen the half-settled scheme of 
her brother and the Thorpes for the following day. 
Mr. Allen caught at it directly. ^< Well," said he, 
^^and do you think of going too?" 

^'No; I had just engaged myself to walk with 
Miss Tilney before they told me of it; and there- 
fore, you know, I could not go with them, could 
I? " 

"'No, certainly not; and I am glad you do not 
think of it. The schemes are not at all the thing. 
Young men and women driving about the country 
in open carriages ! !N^ow and then it is very well ; 
but going to inns and public places together! It is 
not right; and I wonder Mrs. Thorpe should allow 
it. I am glad you do not think of going; I am 
sure Mrs. Morland would not be pleased. Mrs. 
Allen, are not you of my way of thinking? Do not 
you think these kind of projects objectionable?" 

" Yes, very much so, indeed. Open carriages 
are nasty things. A clean gown is not five min- 
utes' wear in them. You are splashed getting in 
and getting out ; and the wind takes your hair and 
your bonnet in every direction. I hate an open 
carriage myself." 

'^I know you do; but that is not the question. 
Do not you think it has an odd appearance, if 
young ladies are frequently driven about in them by 
young men, to whom they are not even related? " 

" Yes, my dear, a very odd appearance, indeed. 
I cannot bear to see it.'' 



124 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

'^ Dear madam," cried Catherine, ^Ulien why 
did not you tell me so before? I am sure if I had 
known it to be improper I would not have gone 
with Mr. Thorpe at all; but I alwa3's hoped you 
would tell me, if you thought I was doing wrong.'' 

^^ And so I should, my dear, you may depend on 
it; for, as I told Mrs. Morland at parting, I would 
always do the best for you in my power. But one 
must not be over particular. Young people will 
be young people, as your good mother says herself. 
You know I wanted you, when we first came, not 
to buy that sprigged muslin, but you would. 
Young people do not like to be always thwarted." 

^^But this was something of real consequence; 
and I do not think you would have found me hard 
to persuade." 

''As far as it has gone hitherto, there is no 
harm done," said Mr. Allen; ''and I would only 
advise you, my dear, not to go out with Mr. 
Thorpe any more." 

"That is just what I was going to say," added 
his wife. 

Catherine, relieved for herself, felt uneasy for 
Isabella; and after a moment's thought, asked Mr. 
Allen whether it would not be both proper and 
kind in her to write to Miss Thorpe, and explain 
the indecorum of which she must be as insensible 
as herself; for she considered that Isabella might 
otherwise perhaps be going to Clifton the next day, 
in spite of what had passed. Mr. Allen, however, 
discouraged her from doing any such thing. " You 
had better leave her alone, my dear, she is old 
enough to know what she is about; and if not, has 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 125 

a mother to advise her. Mrs. Thorpe is too indul- 
gent beyond a doubt; but, however, 3^ou had better 
not interfere. She and your brother choose to go, 
and you will be only getting ill-will." 

Catherine submitted; and though sorry to think 
that Isabella should be doing wrong, felt greatly 
relieved by Mr. Allen's approbation of her own 
conduct, and truly rejoiced to be preserved by his 
advice from the danger of falling into such an error 
herself. Her escape from being one of the party 
to Clifton was now an escape indeed; for what 
would the Tilneys have thought of her, if she had 
broken her promise to them in order to do what 
was wrong in itself, — if she had been guilty of 
one breach of propriety, only to enable her to be 
guilty of another? 



I 



126 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 



CHAPTEE XIV. 

The next morning was fair, and Catherine al- 
most expected another attack from the assembled 
party. With Mr. Allen to support her, she felt 
no dread of the event; but she would gladly be 
spared a contest, where victory itself was painful j 
and was heartily rejoiced, therefore, at neither see- 
ing nor hearing anything of them. The Tilnej^s 
called for her at the appointed time ; and no new 
difficulty arising, no sudden recollection, no un- 
expected summons, no impertinent intrusion, to 
disconcert their measures, my heroine was most 
unnaturally able to fulfil her engagement, though -^ 
it was made with the hero himself. They deter- 
mined on walking round Beechen Cliff, that noble 
hill, whose beautiful verdure and hanging coppice 
render it so striking an object from almost every 
opening in Bath. 

^^I never look at it,'' said Catherine, as they 
walked along the side of the river, *' without 
thinking of the south of France* » 

^' You have been abroad, then? '' said Henry, a 
little surprised. 

" Oh no, I only mean what I have read about. 
It always puts me in mind of the country that 
Emily and her father travelled through, in the 
^Mysteries of Udolpho.' But you never read 
novels, I dare say? '' 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 127 

'^ Why not?" 

'^ Because they are not clever enough for you, — 
gentlemen read better books." 

''The person, be it gentleman or lady, who 
has not pleasure in a good novel, must be intoler- 
ably stupid. I have read all Mrs. Radcliffe's 
works, and most of them with great pleasure. The 
* Mysteries of Udolpho, ' when I had once begun 
it, I could not lay down again; I remember fin- 
ishing it in two days, my hair standing on end 
the whole time." 

''Yes," added Miss Tilney, "and I remember 
that you undertook to read it aloud to me; and 
that when I was called away for only five minutes, 
to answer a note, instead of waiting for me, you 
took the volume into the Hermitage Walk, and I 
was obliged to stay till you had finished it." 

"Thank you, Eleanor; — a most honorable testi- 
mony. You see. Miss Morland, the injustice of 
your suspicions. Here was I, in my eagerness to 
get on, refusing to wait only five minutes for my 
sister; breaking the promise I had made of read- 
ing it aloud, and keeping her in suspense at a most 
interesting part, by running away with the vol- 
ume, which, you are to observe, was her own, par- 
ticularly her own. I am proud when I reflect on 
it, and I think it must establish me in your good 
opinion." 

' ' I am very glad to hear it, indeed ; and now I 
shall never be ashamed of liking Udolpho myself. 
But I really thought before, young men despised 
novels amazingly." 

"It is amazingly; it may well suggest amaze- 



128 NORTHANGEB ABBEY. 

ment if they do, for they read nearly as many as 
women. I myself have read hundreds and hun- 
dreds. Do not imagine that you can cope with me 
in a knowledge of Julias and Louisas. If we pro- 
ceed to particulars, and engage in the never-ceasing 
inquiry of ' Have you read this?' and ^ Have you 
read that? ' I shall soon leave you as far behind me 
as — what shall I say? — I want an appropriate 
simile, — as far as your friend Emily herself left 
poor Valancourt when she went with her aunt into 
Italy. Consider how many years I have had the 
start of you. I had entered on my studies at Ox- 
ford while you were a good little girl, working 
your sampler at home! '' 

^^ Not very good, I am afraid. But now, really, 
do not you think Udolpho the nicest book in the 
world?" 

"The nicest, — by which I suppose you mean the 
neatest. That must depend upon the binding." 

"Henry," said Miss Tilney, "you are very im- 
pertinent. Miss Morland, he is treating you ex- 
actly as he does his sister. He is forever finding 
fault with me for some incorrectness of language, 
and now he is taking the same liberty with you. 
The word 'nicest,' as you used it, did not suit 
him: and you had better change it as soon as you 
can, or we shall be overpowered with Johnson and 
Blair all the rest of the way." 

" I am sure," cried Catherine, " I did not mean 
to say anj^thing wrong; but it is a nice book, and 
why should not I call it so?" 

"Very true," said Henry, "and this is a very 
nice day; and we are taking a very nice walk; and 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 129 

you are two very nice young ladies. Oh, it is a 
very nice word, indeed ! — it does for everything. 
Originally, perhaps, it was applied only to express 
neatness, propriety, delicacy, or refinement; — 
people were nice in their dress, in their senti- 
ments, or their choice. But now every commen- 
dation on every subject is comprised in that one 
word.'' 

*' While, in fact," cried his sister, ^^it ought 
only to be applied to you, without any commen- 
dation at all. You are more nice than wise. 
Come, Miss Morland, let us leave him to meditate 
over our faults in the utmost propriety of diction, 
while we praise Udolpho in whatever terms we 
like best. It is a most interesting work. You 
are fond of that kind of reading? " 

*' To say the truth, I do not much like any 
other. " 

^ indeed!" 

"That is, I can read poetry and plays, and 
things of that sort, and do not dislike travels. 
But history, real solemn history, I cannot be in- 
terested in. Can you?'' 

*' Yes, I am fond of history." 

" I wish I were too. I read it a little as a duty, 
but it tells me nothing that does not either vex or 
weary me. The quarrels of popes and kings, with 
w^ars or pestilences, in every page ; the men all so 
good for nothing, and hardly any women at all — 
it is very tiresome ; and yet I often think it odd 
that it should be so dull, for a great deal of it 
must be invention. The speeches that are put 
into the heroes' mouths, their thoughts and designs 



130 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

— the chief of all this must be invention ; and in- 
vention is what delights me in other books." 

''Historians, you think," said Miss Tilney, 
''are iiot happy in their flights of fancy. They 
display imagination without raising interest. I 
am fond of history — and am very well contented 
to take the false with the true. In the principal 
facts they have sources of intelligence in former 
histories and records, which may be as much de- 
pended on, I conclude, as anything that does not 
actuall}^ pass under one's own observation; and as 
for the little embellishments you speak of, they 
are embellishments, and I like them as such. If 
a speech be well drawn up, I read it with pleasure, 
by whomsoever it may be made — and probably 
with much greater, if the production of Mr. Hume 
or Dr. Robertson, than if the genuine words of 
Caractacus, Agricola, or Alfred the Great." 

"You are fond of history! — and so are Mr. 
Allen and my father; and I have two brothers who 
do not dislike it. So many instances within my 
small circle of friends is remarkable ! At this rate, 
I shall not pity the writers of history any longer. 
If people like to read their books, it is all very 
well; but to be at so much trouble in filling great 
volumes, which, as I used to think, nobody would 
willingly ever look into, to be laboring only for 
the torment of little boys and girls, always struck 
me as a hard fate; and though I know it is all 
very right and necessary, I have often wondered 
at the person's courage that could sit down on pur- 
pose to do it." 

" That little boys and girls should be tor- 



NORTHANGEE ABBEY. 131 

meiited," said Henry, ^^is what no one at all ac- 
quainted with human nature in a civilized state 
can deny; but in behalf of our most distinguished 
historians, I must observe that they might well be 
offended at being supposed to have no higher aim; 
and that by their method and style they are per- 
fectly well qualified to torment readers of the most 
advanced reason and mature time of life. I use 
the verb ' to torment,' as I observed to be your own 
method, instead of * to instruct, ' supposing them to 
be now admitted as synonymous." 

^' You think me foolish to call instruction a tor- 
ment; but if you had been as much used as myself 
to hear poor little children first learning their let- 
ters, and then learning to spell, — if you had over 
seen how stupid they can be for a whole morning 
together, and how tired my poor mother is at the 
end of it, as I am in the habit of seeing almost 
every day of my life at home, — you would allow 
that to torment and to instruct might sometimes be 
used as synonymous words." 

'^Very probably. But historians are not ac- 
countable for the difficulty of learning to read; 
and even you yourself, who do not altogether seem 
particularly friendly to very severe, very intense 
application, may perhaps be brought to acknowl- 
edge that it is very well worth while to be tor- 
mented for two or three years of one's life, for the 
sake of being able to read all the rest of it. Con- 
sider — if reading had not been taught, Mrs. 
Radcliffe would have written in vain, or, perhaps, 
might not have written at all." 

Catherine assented; and a very warm panegyric 



132 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

from her on that lady's merits closed the subjec'. 
The Tilneys were soon engaged in another, on 
which she had nothing to say. They were viewing 
the country with the eyes of persons accustomed to 
drawing; and decided on its capability of being 
formed into pictures, with all the eagerness of real 
taste. Here Catherine was quite lost. She knew 
nothing of drawing, nothing of taste; and she 
listened to them with an attention which brought 
her little profit, for they talked in phrases which 
conveyed scarcely any idea to her. The little 
which she could understand, however, appeared to 
contradict the very few notions she had entertained 
on the matter before. It seemed as if a good view 
were no longer to be taken from the top of a high 
hill, and that a clear blue sky was no longer a 
proof of a fine day. She was heartily ashamed of 
her ignorance, — a misplaced shame. Where peo- 
ple wish to attach, they should always be ignorant. 
To come with a well-informed mind is to come 
with an inability of administering to the vanity of 
others, which a sensible person would always wish 
to avoid. A woman, especially, if she have the 
misfortune of knowing anything, should conceal it 
as well as she can. 

The advantages of natural folly in a beautiful 
girl have been already set forth by the capital pen 
of a sister author; and to her treatment of the sub- 
ject I will only add, in justice to men, that though, 
to the larger and more trifling part of the sex im- 
becility in females is a great enhancement of their 
personal charms, there is a portion of them too 
reasonable and too well informed themselves to 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 133 

desire anything more in woman than ignorance. 
But Catherine did not know her own advantages, 
— did not know that a good-looking girl, with an 
affectionate heart and a very ignorant mind, can- 
not fail of attracting a clever young man, unless 
circumstances are particularly untoward. In the 
present instance she confessed and lamented her 
want of knowledge; declared that she would give 
anj^thing in the world to be able to draw; and a 
lecture on the picturesque immediately followed, 
in which his instructions were so clear that she 
soon began to see beauty in everything admired by 
him; and her attention was so earnest that he 
became perfectly satisfied of her having a great 
deal of natural taste. He talked of foregrounds, 
distances, and second distances, side-screens and 
perspectives, lights and shades; and Catherine 
was so hopeful a scholar that when they gained 
the top of Beechen Cliff, she voluntarily rejected 
the whole city of Bath, as unworthy to make part 
of a landscape. Delighted with her progress, and 
fearful of wearying her with too much wisdom at 
once, Henry suffered the subject to decline; and 
by an easy transition from a piece of rocky frag- 
ment, and the withered oak which he had placed 
near its summit, to oaks in general, to forests, 
the enclosure of them, waste lands, crown lands 
and government, — he shortly found himself ar- 
rived at politics ; and from politics it was an easy 
step to silence. The general pause which suc- 
ceeded his short disquisition on the state of the 
nation was put an end to by Catherine, who in 
rather a solemn tone of voice uttered these words ; 



134 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

^' I have heard that something very shocking 
indeed will soon come out in London/' 

Miss Tilnej, to whom this was chiefly addressed, 
was startled, and hastily replied, "Indeed! and 
of what nature? " 

^^ That I do not know, nor who is the author. I 
have only heard that it is to he more horrible than 
anything we hav^ met with yet." 

*^Good heaven! Where could you hear of such 
a thing?'' 

"A particular friend of mine had an account of 
it in a letter from London yesterday. It is to be 
uncommonly dreadful. I shall expect murder and 
everything of the kind." 

" You speak with astonishing composure! But 
I hope your friend's accounts have been exagger- 
ated; and if such a design is known beforehand, 
proper measures will undoubtedly be taken by gov- 
ernment to prevent its coming to effect." 

*' Government," said Henry, endeavoring not 
to smile, ''neither desires nor dares to interfere in 
such matters. There must be murder; and govern- 
ment cares not how much." 

The ladies stared. He laughed, and added: 
'' Come, shall I make you understand each other, or 
leave you to puzzle out an explanation as you 
can? No; I will be noble - I will prove myself a 
man, no less by the generosity of my soul "than the 
clearness of my head. I have no patience with 
such of my sex as disdain to let themselves some- 
times down to the comprehension of 3'ours. Per- 
haps the abilities of women are neither sound nor 
acute, neither vigorous nor keen. Perhaps they 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 135 

may want observation, discernment, judgment, fire, 
genius, and wit-." 

*'Miss Morland, do not mind what he says; but 
have the goodness to satisfy me as to this dreadful 
riot." 

'^Eiot! what riot?" 

*' My dear Eleanor, the riot is only in your own 
brain. The confusion there is scandalous. Miss 
Morland has been talking of nothing more dread- 
ful than a new publication which is shortly to 
come out, in three duodecimo volumes, two hundred 
and seventy-six pages in each, with a frontispiece 
to the first, of two tombstones and a lantern — 
do you understand? And you, Miss Morland — 
my stupid sister has mistaken all your clearest 
expressions. You talked of expected horrors in 
London; and instead of instantly conceiving, as 
any rational creature would have done, that such 
words could relate only to a circulating library, she 
immediately pictured to herself a mob of three 
thousand men assembling in St. George's Fields; 
the Bank attacked, the Tower threatened, the 
streets of London flowing with blood, a detachment 
of the Twelfth Light Dragoons (the hopes of 
the nation) called up from Northampton to quell 
the insurgents, and the gallant Captain Frederick 
Tilney, in the moment of charging at the head of 
his troop, knocked off his horse by a brickbat from 
;an upper window. Forgive her stupidity* The 
fears of the sister have added to the weakness of 
the woman; but she is by no means a simpleton in 
:general." 
I Catherine looked grave. '* And now, Henry,'' 



136 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

said Miss Tilney, ^Hhat you have made us under- 
stand each other, you may as well make Miss 
Morland understand yourself, — unless you mean to 
have her think you intolerably rude to your sister, 
and a great brute in your opinion of women in 
general. Miss Morland is not used to your odd 
ways.'' 

^^I shall be most happy to make her better 
acquainted with them." 

* ' No doubt ; but that is no explanation of the 
present." 

*' What am I to do?'' 

*^ You know what you ought to do. Clear your 
character handsomely before her. Tell her that 
you think very highly of the understanding of 
women." 

*'Miss Morland, I think very highly of the 
understanding of all the women in the world, 
especially of those — whoever they may be — with 
whom I happen to be in company." 

'* That is not enough. Be more serious." 

"Miss Morland, no one can think more highly 
of the understanding of women than I do. In my 
opinion, nature has given them so much that they 
never find it necessary to use more than half." 

*^We shall get nothing more serious from him 
now. Miss Morland. He is not in a sober mood. 
But I do assure you that he must be entirely 
misunderstood, if he can ever appear to say an 
unjust thing of any woman at all, or an unkind 
one of me." 

It was no effort to Catherine to believe that 
Henry Tilney could never be wrong. His manner 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 137 

might sometimes surprise, but liis meaning must 
always be just; and what she did not understand 
she was almost as ready to admire as what she 
did. The whole walk was delightful; and though 
it ended too soon, its conclusion was delightful 
too. Her friends attended her into the house; and 
Miss Tilney, before they parted, addressing her- 
self with respectful form as much to Mrs. Allen as 
to Catherine, petitioned for the pleasure of her 
company to dinner on the day after the next. No 
difficulty was made on Mrs. Allen's side, and the 
only difficulty on Catherine's was in concealing 
the excess of her pleasure. 

The morning had passed away so charmingly as 
to banish all her friendship and natural affection; 
for no thought of Isabella or James had crossed her 
during their walk. When the Tilneys were gone, 
she became amiable again, but she was amiable for 
some time to little effect; Mrs. Allen had no in- 
telligence to give that could relieve her anxiety, 
she had heard nothing of any of them. Towards 
the end of the morning, however, Catherine having 
occasion for some indispensable yard of riband, 
which must be bought without a moment's delay, 
walked out into the town, and in Bond Street over- 
took the second Miss Thorpe, as she was loiter- 
ing towards Edgar's Buildings between two of 
the sweetest girls in the world, who had been her 
dear friends all the morning. From her she soon 
learned that the party to Clifton had taken place. 
**They set off at eight this morning," said Miss 
Anne, ''and I am sure I do not envy them their 
drive. I think you and I are very well off to be 



138 NORTH ANGER ABBEY. 

out of the scrape. It must be the dullest thing in 
the world, for there is not a soul at Clifton at 
this time of year. Belle went with your brother, 
and John drove Maria." 

Catherine spoke the pleasure she really felt on 
hearing this part of the arrangement. 

*' Oh, yes," rejoined the other, "Maria is gone. 
She was quite wild to go. She thought it would 
be something very fine. I cannot say I admire 
hei taste; and, for my part, I was determined from 
the first not to go, if the}^ pressed me ever so 
much." 

Catherine, a little doubtful of this, could not 
help answering, " I wish you could have gone too. 
It is a pity you could not all go." 

" Thank you ; but it is quite a matter of indiffer- 
ence to me. Indeed, I would not have gone on any 
account. I was saying so to Emily and Sophia, 
when you overtook us." 

Catherine was still unconvinced; but glad that 
Anne should have the friendship of an Emily and 
a Sophia to console her, she bade her adieu with- 
out much uneasiness, and returned home, pleased 
that the party had not been prevented by her 
refusing to join it, and very heartily wishing that 
it might be too pleasant to allow either James or 
Isabella to resent her resistance any longer. 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 139 



CHAPTER XV. 

Early the next day, a note from Isabella, speak- 
ing peace and tenderness in every line, and entreat- 
ing the immediate presence of her friend on a 
matter of the utmost importance, hastened Cath- 
erine in the happiest state of confidence and 
curiosity, to Edgar's Buildings. The two youngest 
Miss Thorpes were by themselves in the parlor; 
and, on Anne's quitting it to call her sister, 
Catherine took the opportunity of asking the other 
for some particulars of their yesterday's party. 
Maria desired no greater pleasure than to speak of 
it; and Catherine immediately learnt that it had 
been altogether the most delightful scheme in the 
world; that nobody could imagine how charming 
it had been, and that it had been more delightful 
than anybody could conceive. Such was the 
information of the first five minutes; the second 
unfolded thus much in detail, — that they had 
driven directly to the York hotel, ate some soup, 
and bespoke an early dinner, walked down to the 
Pump-room, tasted the water, and laid out some 
shillings in purses and spars; thence adjouriied to 
eat ice at .a pastry-cook's, and hurrying back to the 
hotel, swallowed their dinner in haste, to prevent 
being in the dark; and then had a delightful drive 
back, only the moon was not up, and it rained a 



140 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

little, and Mr. Morland's horse was so tired he 
could hardly get it along. 

Catherine listened with heartfelt satisfaction. 
It appeared that Blaize Castle had never heen 
thought of; and as for all the rest, there was 
nothing to regret for half an instant. Maria's 
intelligence concluded with a tender effusion of 
pity for her sister Anne, whom she represented as 
insupportably cross, from being excluded the 
party. 

" She will never forgive me, I am sure ; but you 
know, how could I help it? John would have me 
go, for he vowed he would not drive her, because 
she had such thick ankles. I dare say she will not 
be in good humor again this month; but I am 
determined I will not be cross: it is not a little 
matter that puts me out of temper." 

Isabella now entered the room with so eager a 
step, and a look of such happy importance, as en- 
gaged all her friend's notice. Maria was without 
ceremony sent away; and Isabella, embracing 
Catherine, thus began: " Yes, my dear Cather- 
ine, it is so, indeed; your penetration has not de- 
ceived you. Oh, that arch eye of yours ! — it sees 
through everything." 

Catherine replied only by a look of wondering 
ignorance. 

''Nay, my beloved, sweetest friend," continued 
the other, "compose yourself. I am amazingly 
agitated, as you perceive. Let us sit down and 
talk in comfort. Well, and so you guessed it the 
moment you had my note? — Sly creature! — Oh, 
my dear Catherine, you alone who know my heart 



! 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 141 

can judge of my present happiness. Your brother 
is the most charming of men. I only wish I were 
more worthy of him. But what will your excellent 
father and mother say? Oh, heavens! when I 
think of them, I am so agitated!" 

Catherine's understanding began to awake: an 
idea of the truth suddenly darted into her mind; 
and, with the natural blush of so new an emotion, 
she cried out, '^ Good heaven! — my dear Isabella, 
what do you mean? Can you — can you really be 
in love with James? " 

This bold surmise, however, she soon learnt 
comprehended but half the fact. The anxious 
affection which she was accused of having contin- 
ually watched in Isabella's every look and action, 
had, in the course of their yesterday's party, re- 
ceived the delightful confession of an equal love. 
Her heart and faith were alike engaged to James. 
Never had Catherine listened to anything so full 
of interest, wonder, and joy. Her brother and her 
friend engaged! New to such circumstances, the 
importance of it appeared unspeakably great, and 
she contemplated it as one of those grand events, 
of which the ordinary course of life can hardly 
afford a return. The strength of her feelings she 
could not express; the nature of them, however, 
contented her friend. The happiness of having 
such a sister was their first effusion, and the fair 
ladies mingled in embraces and tears of joy. 

Delighting, however, as Catherine sincerely did, 
in the prospect of the connection, it must be ac- 
knowledged that Isabella far surpassed her in 
tender anticipations. "You will be so infinitely 



142 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

dearer to me, my Catherine, than either Anne or 
Maria : I feel that I shall be so much more attached 
to my dear Morland's family than to my own." 

This was a pitch of friendship beyond Catherine. 

*^ You are so like your dear brother," continued 
Isabella, '^that I quite doted on you the first 
moment I saw you. But so it always is with me; 
the first moment settles everything. The very 
first day that Morland came to us last Christmas 
— the ver^^ first moment I beheld him — my 
heart was irrecoverably gone. I remember I wore 
my yellow gown, with my hair done up in braids; 
and when I came into the drawing-room, and John 
introduced him, I thought I never saw anybody so 
handsome before.'' 

Here Catherine secretly acknowledged the power 
of love; for, though exceedingly fond of her 
brother, and partial to all his endowments, she 
had never in her life thought him handsome. 

^^I remember, too,* Miss Andrews drank tea 
with us that evening, and wore her puce-colored 
sarsenet; and she looked so heavenly that I 
thought yonr brother must certainly fall in love 
with her; I could not sleep a wink all night for 
thinking of it. Oh, Catherine, the many sleepless 
nights I have had on your brother's account! I 
would not have you suffer half what I have done ! 
I am grown wretchedly thin, I know; but I wdll 
not pain you by describing my anxiety; you have 
seen enough of it. 1 feel that I have betrayed 
myself perpetually; — so unguarded in speaking 
of my partiality for the church ! — But my secret I 
was always sure would be safe with you." 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 143 

Catherine felt that nothing could have been 
safer; but ashamed of an ignorance little expected, 
she dared no longer contest the point, nor refuse 
to have been as full of arch penetration and affec- 
tionate sympathy as Isabella chose to consider her. 
Her brother, she found, was preparing to set off 
with all speed to Eullerton, to make known his 
situation and ask consent ; and here was a source 
of some real agitation to the mind of Isabella. 
Catherine endeavored to persuade her, as she was 
herself persuaded, that her father and mother 
would never oppose their son's wishes. ''It is 
impossible," said she, ''for parents to be more 
kind, or more desirous of their children's hap- 
piness; I have no doubt of their consenting im- 
mediately." 

"Morland says exactly the same, " replied Isa- 
bella; "and yet I dare not expect it: my fortune 
will be so small; they never can consent to it. 
Your brother, who might marry anybody!" 

Here Catherine again discerned the force of 
love. 

"Indeed, Isabella, you are too humble. The 
difference of fortune can be nothing to signify." 

" Oh, my sweet Catherine, in your generous 
heart I know it would signify nothing; but we 
must not expect such disinterestedness in many. 
As for myself, I am sure I only wish our situa- 
tions were reversed. Had I the command of mil- 
lions, were I mistress of the whole world, your 
brother would be my only choice." 

This charming sentiment, recommended as 
much by sense as novelty, gave Catherine a most 



144 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

pleasing remembrance of all the lieroines of her 
acquaintance; and she thought her friend never 
looked more lovely than in uttering the grard 
idea. — ^^I am sure they will consent," was her 
frequent declaration; ^'I am sure they will be 
delighted with you." 

^'For my own part," said Isabella, ''my wishes 
are so moderate that the smallest income in nature 
would be enough for me. Where people are really 
attached, poverty itself is wealth: grandeur I de- 
test : I would not settle in London for the universe. 
A cottage in some retired village would be ecs- 
tasy. There are some charming little villas about 
Eichmond." 

''Richmond!" cried Catherine. ''You must 
settle near Fullerton. You must be near us." 

"I am sure I shall be miserable if we do not. 
If I can but be near you, I shall be satisfied. But 
this is idle talking; I will not allow myself to 
think of such things till we have your father's 
answer. Morland says that by sending it to-night 
to Salisbury, we may have it to-morrow. To- 
morrow? I know I shall never have courage to 
open the letter. I know it will be the death 
of me." 

A reverie succeeded this conviction; and when 
Isabella spoke again, it wa;s to resolve on the 
quality of her wedding-gown. 

Their conference was put an end to by the anx- 
ious young lover himself, who came to breathe his 
parting sigh before he set off for Wiltshire. Cath- 
erine wished to congratulate him, but knew not 
what to say, and her eloquence was only in her 



r 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 145 

eyes. From them, however, the eight parts of 
speech shone out most expressively, and James 
could combine them with ease. Impatient for the 
realization of all that he hoped at home, his adieus 
were not long; and they would have been yet 
shorter, had he not been frequently detained by 
the urgent entreaties of his fair one that he would 
go. Twice was he called almost from the door by 
her eagerness to have him gone. ^' Indeed, Mor- 
I land, I must drive you away. Consider how far 
I you have to ride. I cannot bear to see you lin- 
I ger so. Eor Heaven's sake, waste no more time. 
[There, go, go, — I insist on it." 
j The two friends, with hearts now more united 
, than ever, were inseparable for the day; and in 
schemes of sisterly happiness the hours flew along. 
Mrs. Thorpe and her son, who were acquainted 
with everything, and who seemed only to want 
Mr. Morland's consent to consider Isabella's en- 
gagement as the most fortunate circumstance ima- 
ginable for their family, were allowed to join their 
counsels, and add their quota of significant looks 
and mysterious expressions, to fill up the measure 
of curiosity to be raised in the unprivileged 
younger sisters. To Catherine's simple feelings, 
this odd sort of reserve seemed neither kindly 
meant nor consistently supported; and its unkind- 
ness she would hardly save forborne pointing out, 
had its inconsistency been less their friend; but 
Anne and Maria soon set her heart at ease by the 
sagacity of their ^'I know what; " and the even- 
ing was spent in a sort of war of wit, a display of 
family ingenuity, — on one side in the mystery of 
10 



146 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

an affected secret, on the other of undefined dis- 
covery, all equally acute. 

Catherine was with her friend again the next 
day, endeavoring to support her spirits, and while 
away the many tedious hours before the delivery 
of the letters, — - a needful exertion ; for as the 
time of reasonable expectation drew near, Isabella 
became more and more desponding, and before the 
letter arrived, had worked herself into a state of 
real distress. But when it did come, where could 
distress be found? ^'1 have had no difficulty in 
gaining the consent of my kind parents, and am 
promised that everything in their power shall bo 
done to forward my happiness," were the first 
three lines; and in one moment all was joyful se- 
curity. The brightest glow was instantly spread 
over Isabella's features, — all care and anxiety 
seemed removed, her spirits became almost too 
high for control, and she called herself without 
scruple the liappiest of mortals. 

Mrs. Thorpe, with tears of joy, embraced her 
daughter, her son, her visitor, and could have em- 
braced half the inhabitants of Bath with satisfac- 
tion. Her heart was overflowing with tenderness. 
It was ^Mear John," and 'Mear Catherine, " at 
every word; ''dear Anne and dear Maria" must 
immediately be made sharers in their felicity; and 
two "dears " at once before the name of Isabella 
were not more than that beloved child had now 
well earned. John himself was no skulker in joy. 
He not only bestowed on Mr. Morland the high 
commendation of being one of the finest fellows in 
the world, but swore off many sentences in his 
praise. 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 147 

The letter whence sprang all this felicity was 
short, containing little more than this assurance 
of success ; and every particular was deferred till 
James could write again. But for particulars 
Isabella could well afford to wait. The needful 
was comprised in Mr. Morland's promise: his 
honor was pledged to make everything easy; and 
by what means their income was to be formed, 
whether landed property were to be resigned, or 
funded money made over, was a matter in which 
her disinterested spirit took no concern. She 
knew enough to feel secure of an honorable and 
speedy establishment, aud her imagination took a 
rapid flight over its attendant felicities. She saw 
herself, at the end of a few weeks, the gaze and 
admiration of every new acquaintance at Fuller- 
ton, the envy of every valued old friend in Put- 
ney, with a carriage at her command, a new name 
on her tickets, and a brilliant exhibition of hoop 
rings on her finger. 

'WHien the contents of the letter were as- 
certained, John Thorpe, who had only waited its 
arrival to begin his journey to London, prepared 
to set off. ''Well, Miss Morland,'' said he, on 
finding her alone in the parlor, ''I am come to 
bid you good-by." Catherine wished him a good 
journey. Without appearing to hear her, he 
walked to the window, fidgeted about, hummed a 
tune, and seemed wholly self-occupied. 

''Shall not you be late at Devizes?" said 
Catherine. He made no answer; but after a min- 
ute's silence burst out with, "A famous good 
thing this marrying scheme, upon my soul! A 



148 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

clever fancy of Morland's and Belle's. What do 
you think of it, Miss Morland? I say it is no bad 
notion. '^ 

"I am sure I think it a very good one." 

*'Do you? — that 's honest, by heavens! I am 
glad you are no enemy to matrimony, however. 
Did you ever hear the old song, *' Going to one 
wedding brings on another''? I say, you will 
come to Belle's wedding, I hope." 

*'Yes; I have promised your sister to be with 
her, if possible." 

"And then, you know," twisting himself 
about, and forcing a foolish laugh, — '^ I say, then, 
you know, we may try the truth of this same old 
song." 

*^ May we? — but I never sing. Well, I wish 
you a good journey. I dine with Miss Tilney to- 
day, and must now be going home." 

" Nay, but there is no such confounded hurry. 
Who knows when we may be together again? 
Kot but that I shall be down again by the end of 
a fortnight, and a devilish long fortnight it will 
appear to me." 

" Then why do you stay away so long? *" replied 
Catherine, finding that he waited for an answer. 

"That is kind of you, however, — kind and 
good-natured. I shall not forget it in a hurry. 
But you have more good-nature and all that than 
anybody living, I believe. A monstrous deal of 
good-nature, — and it is not only good-nature, but 
you have so much, so much of everything; and then 
you have such — Upon my soul, I do not know 
anybody like you." 



N0R7ILVNGER ABBEY. 149 

*^0h dear, there are a great manj people like 
me, I dare say, only a great deal 1? t;ter. Good 
morning to you." 

''But I say, Miss Morland, I sli-^ll come and 
pay my respects at Fullerton before it is long, if 
not disagreeable." 

"Pray do, — my father and mother will be very 
glad to see you." 

"And I hope, — I hope, Miss Morland, yoic, 
will not be sorry to see me." 

"Oh dear, not at all. There are very few 
people I am sorry to see. Company h always 
cheerful." 

"That is just my way of thinking. Give me 
but a little cheerful company, let me only have 
the company of the people I love, let me only be 
where I like and with whom I like, and the devil 
take the rest, say I. And I am heartily glad to 
hear you say the same. But I have a notion. Miss 
Morland, you and I think pretty much alike upon 
most matters." 

"Perhaps we may; but it is more than I ever 
thought of. And as to most matters, to say the 
truth, there are not many that I know my own 
mind about." 

" By Jove, no more do I. It is not my way to 
bother my brains with what does not concern me. 
My notion of things is simple enough. Let me 
only have the girl I like, say I, with a comfort- 
able house over mj^ head, and what care I for all 
the rest? Fortune is nothing. I am sure of a 
good income of my own; and if she had not a 
penny, why, so much the better." 



150 NORTHANGEK ArBEY. 

''Very true. I think like you there. If there 
is a good fortune on one side, there can be no 
occasion for any on the other. No matter which 
has it, so that there is enough. I hate the idea of 
one great fortune looking out for another. And 
to marry for money, I think the wickedest thing 
in existence. Good day. We shall be very glad 
to see you at FuUerton, whenever it is conven- 
ient.'' And away she went. It was not in the 
power of all his gallantry to detain her longer. 
With such news to communicate, and such a visit 
to prepare for, her departure was not to be delayed 
by anything in his nature to urge; and she 
hurried away, leaving him to the undivided con- 
sciousness of his own happy address and her 
explicit encouragement. 

The agitation which she had herself experi- 
enced on first learning her brother's engagement 
made her expect to raise no inconsiderable emotion 
in Mr. and Mrs. Allen, by the communication of 
the wonderful event. How great was her disap- 
pointment! The important affair, which many 
words of preparation ushered in, had been foreseen 
by them both ever since her brother's arrival; and 
all that the}'- felt on the occasion was compre- 
hended in a wish for the young people's happi- 
ness, with a remark, on the gentleman's side, in 
favor of Isabella's beauty, and on the lady's, of 
her great good luck. It was to Catherine the 
most surprising insensibility. The disclosure, 
however, of the great secret of James's going to 
Fullerton the day before did raise some emotion in 
Mrs. Allen. She could not listen to that with 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 151 

perfect calmness; but repeatedly regretted the 
necessity of its concealment, wished she could 
have known his intention, wished she could have 
seen him before he went, as she should certainly 
have troubled him with her best regards to his 
father and mother, and her kind compliments to 
pjl the SkinnerSc 



152 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 



CHAPTER XVL 

Catherine'^s expectations of pleasure from her visit 
in Milsom Street were so very high that disap- 
pointment was inevitable; and accordingly, though 
she was most politely received by General Tilney, 
and kindly welcomed by his daughter, — though 
Henry was at home, and no one else of the party, — • 
she found on her return, without spending many 
hours in the examination of her feelings, that she 
had gone to her appointment preparing for happi- 
ness which it had not afforded. Instead of finding 
herself improved in acquaintance with Miss Til- 
ney, from the intercourse of the day, she seemed 
hardly so intimate with her as before. Instead 
of seeing Henry Tilney to greater advantage than 
ever, in the ease of a family party^ he had never 
said so little, nor been so little agreeable; and in 
spite of their father's great civilities to her, —in 
spite of his thanks, invitations, and compliments, — , 
it had been a release to get away from him. It 
puzzled her to account for all this. It could not 
be General Tilney 's fault. That he was perfectly 
agreeable and good-natured, and altogether a very 
charming man, did not admit of a doubt, for he 
was tall and handsome, and Henry^s father. He 
could not be accountable for his children's want 
of spirits, or for her want of enjoyment in his com- 



NORTH ANGER ABBEY. 153 

paiiy. The former, she hoped at last, might have 
been accidental, and the latter she could only at- 
tribute to her own stupidity. Isabella, on hearing 
the particulars of the visit, gave a different expla- 
nation. ''It was all pride, pride; insufferable 
haughtiness and pride! She had long suspected 
the family to be very high, and this made it cer- 
tain. Such insolence of behavior as Miss Tilney's 
she had never heard of in her life ! Not to do the 
honors of her house with common good breeding! 
To behave to her guest with such superciliousness! 
Hardly even to speak to her! " 

"But it was not so bad as that, Isabella; there 
was no superciliousness; she was very civil." 

" Oh, don't defend her! And then the brother, 
he who had appeared so attached to youi Good 
heavens! well, some people's feelings are incom- 
prehensible. And so he hardly looked once at you 
the whole day?" 

**I do not say so; but he did not seem in good 
spirits." 

" How contemptible! Of all things in the world 
inconstancy is my aversion. Let me entreat you 
never to think of him again, my dear Catherine; 
indeed he is unworthy of you." 

''Unworthy! I do not suppose he ever thinks 
of me." 

" That is exactly what I say; he never thinks of 
you. Such fickleness ! Oh, how different to your 
brother and to mine! I really believe John has 
the most constant heart. " 

"But as for General Tilney, I assure you it 
would be impossible for anybody to behave to me 



154 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

with greater civilit}^ and attention; it seemed to be 
his only care to entertain and make me happy." 

" Oh, I know no harm of him; I do not suspect 
him of pride. I believe he is a very gentleman- 
like man. John thinks very well of him; and 
John's judgment — " 

*' Well, I shall see how thej'^ behave to me this 
evening; we shall meet them at the rooms." 

<^ And must I go?" 

^'Donot you intend it? I thought it was all 
settled." 

^'Nay, since you make such a point of it, T can 
refuse you nothing. But do not insist upon my 
being very agreeable, for my heart, you know, will 
be some forty miles off. And as for dancing, do 
not mention it, I beg; that is quite out of the 
question. Charles Hodges will plague me to 
death, I dare say; but I shall cut him very short. 
Ten to one but he guesses the reason, and that is 
exactly what I want to avoid; so I shall insist on 
his keeping his conjecture to himself." 

Isabella's opinion of the Tilneys did not influ- 
ence her friend: she was sure there had been no 
insolence in the manners of either brother or sister; 
and she did not credit there being any pride in 
their hearts. The evening rewarded her confidence ; 
she was met by one with the same kindness, and 
by the other with the same attention, as hereto- 
fore; Miss Tilney took pains to be near her, and 
Henry asked her to dance. , 

Having heard the day before in Milsom Street 
that their elder brother, Captafn Tilney, was ex- 
pected almost every hour, she was at no loss^ for 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 155 

the name of a very fashionable-looking, handsome 
young man, whom she had never seen before, and 
who now evidently belonged to their party. She 
looked at him with great admiration; and even 
supposed it possible that some people might think 
him handsomer than his brother, though, in her 
eyes, his air was more assuming, and his counte- 
nance less prepossessing. His taste and manners 
were, beyond a doubt, decidedly inferior; for, 
within her hearing, he not only protested against 
every thought of dancing himself, but even laughed 
openly at Henry for finding it possible. From 
the latter circumstance it may be presumed that 
whatever might be our heroine's opinion of him, 
his admiration of her was not of a very dangerous 
kind; not likely to produce animosities between 
the brothers, nor persecutions to the lady. He 
cannot be the instigator of the three villains in 
horsemen's great-coats, by whom she will hereafter 
be forced into a travelling-chaise and four, which 
will drive off with incredible speed. Catherine, 
meanwhile, undisturbed by presentiments of such 
an evil, or of any evil at all except that of having 
but a short set to dance down, enjoyed her usual 
happiness with Henry Tilney, listening with 
sparkling eyes to everything he said; and in find- 
ing him irresistible, becoming so herself. 

At the end of the first dance Captain Tilney 
came towards them again, and, much to Cath- 
erine's dissatisfaction, pulled his brother away. 
They retired whispering together; and though her 
delicate sensibility did not take immediate alarm, 
and lay it down as fact that Captain Tilney must 



156 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

have heard some malevolent misrepresentation of 
her, which he now hastened to communicate to his 
brother in the hope of separating them forever, 
she could not have her partner conveyed from her 
sight without very uneasy sensations. Her sus- 
pense was of full five minutes' duration; and she 
was beginning to think it a very long quarter of 
an hour, when they both returned; and an expla- 
nation was given, by Henry's requesting to know 
if she thought her friend Miss Thorpe would 
have any objection to dancing, as his brother would 
be most happy to be introduced to her. Cather- 
ine, without hesitation, replied that she was very 
sure Miss Thorpe did not mean to dance at all. 
The cruel reply was passed on to the other, and he 
immediately walked away. 

^* Your brother will not mind it, I know," said 
she, "because I heard him say before that he hated 
dancing; but it was very good-natured in him to 
think of it. I suppose he saw Isabella sitting 
down, and fancied she might wish for a partner; 
but he is quite mistaken, for she would not dance 
upon any account in the world." 

Henry smiled, and said, ''How very little 
trouble it can give you to understand the motive 
of other people's actions!" 

''Why? What do you mean? " 

"With you it is not. How is such a one likely 
to be influenced; what is the inducement most 
likely to act upon such a person's feelings, age, 
situation, and probable habits of life considered? — 
but. How should I be influenced; what would be 
my inducement in acting so and so? " 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 157 

*' I do not understand you.'' 

'^Then we are on very unequal terms, for I un- 
derstand you perfectly well." 

'^Me? Yes; I cannot speak well enough to be 
unintelligible." 

''Bravo! — an excellent satire on modern lan- 
guage." 

'' But pray tell me what you mean." 
'' Shall I, indeed ? Do you really desire it? But 
you are not aware of the consequences; it will in- 
volve 3^ou in a very cruel embarrassment, and cer- 
tainly bring on a disagreement between us." 

*^I^o, no; it shall not do either. I am not 
afraid." 

•' Well, then, I only meant that your attributing 
my brother's wish of dancing with Miss Thorpe to 
good-nature alone, convinced me of your being su- 
perior in good-nature yourself to all the rest of the 
world." 

Catherine blushed and disclaimed, and the gen- 
tleman's predictions were verified. There was a 
something, however, in his words which repaid her 
for the pain of confusion; and that something oc- 
I cu}3ied her mind so much that she drew back for 
; some time, forgetting to speak or to listen, and al- 
jmost forgetting where she was; till, roused by the 
i voice of Isabella, she looked up, and saw her with 
Captain Tilney preparing to give them hands 
across. 

Isabella shrugged her shoulders and smiled, the 
only explanation of this extraordinary change 
which could at that time be given; but as it w^as 
not quite enough for Catherine's comprehension, 



158 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

she spoke her astonishment in very plain terms to 
her partner. 

''I cannot think how it could happen! Isabella 
was so determined not to dance." 

"And did Isabella never change her mind 
before?'' 

" Oh ! but, because — And your brother ! After 
what you told him from me, how could he think of 
going to ask her? " 

"I cannot take surprise to myself on that head. 
You bid me be surprised on your friend's account, 
and therefore I am; but as for my brother, his 
conduct in the business, I must own, has been no 
more than I believed him perfectly equal to. The 
fairness of your friend was an open attraction; her 
firmness, you know, could only be understood by 
yourself." 

*^You are laughing; but, I assure you, Isabella 
is very firm in general." 

"It is as much as should be said of any one. To 
be always firm must be to be often obstinate. 
When properly to relax is the trial of judgment; 
and without reference to my brother, I really think 
Miss Thorpe has by no means chosen ill in fixing 
on the present hour." 

The friends were not able to get together for any 
confidential discourse till all the dancing was over ; 
but then, as they walked about the room arm in 
arm, Isabella thus explained herself: " I do not 
wonder at your surprise ; and I am really fatigued 
to death. He is such a rattle ! — Amusing enough, 
if my mind had been disengaged; but I would 
have given the world to sit still." 



NORTHANGER ABBEY, 159 

<<Then why did not you? " 

^' Oh, my dear, it would have looked so particu- 
lar; and you know how I abhor doing that. I 
refused him as long as I possibly could, but he 
would take no denial. You have no idea how he 
pressed me. I begged him to excuse me, and get 
some other partner — but no^ not he ; after aspiring 
to my hand, there was nobody else in the room he 
could bear to think of; and it was not that he 
wanted merely to dance, he wanted to be with me. 
i Oh, such nonsense! I told him he had taken a 
I very unlikely way to prevail upon me; for, of all 
I things in the world, I hated fine speeches and 
compliments ; and so — and so then I found there 
would be no peace if I did not stand up. Besides, 
I thought Mrs. Hughes, who introduced him, 
might take it ill if I did not; and your dear 
brother, I am sure he would have been miserable 
if I had sat down the whole evening. I am so 
glad it is over! My spirits are quite jaded with 
listening to his nonsense ; and then, being such a 
smart young fellow, I saw every eye was upon us." 
^'He is very handsome, indeed." 
'^Handsome! Yes, I suppose he may. I dare 
say people would admire him in general ; but he is 
not at all in my style of beauty. I hate a florid 
complexion and dark eyes in a man. However, he 
is very well. Amazingly conceited, I am sure. I 
took him down several times, you know, in my 
way." 

When the young ladies next met, they had a far 
; more interesting subject to discuss. James Mor- 
. land^s second letter was then received, and the 



160 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

kind intentions of his father fully explained. A 
living, of which Mr. Morland was himself patron 
and incumbent, of about four hundred pounds 
yearly value, was to be resigned to his. son as soon 
as he should be old enough to take it; no trifling 
deduction from the family income, no niggardly 
assignment to one of ten children. An estate of 
at least equal value, moreover, was assured as his 
future inheritance. 

James expressed himself on the occasion with 
becoming gratitude; and the necessity of waiting 
between two and-ilttiree years before they could 
marry being, however unwelcome, no more than he 
had expected, was borne by him without discon- 
tent. Catherine, whose expectations had been as 
unfixed as her ideas *of her father's income, and 
whose judgment was now entirely led by her 
brother, felt equally well satisfied, and heartily 
congratulated Isabella on having everything so 
pleasantly settled. 

''It is very charming, indeed,'' said Isabella, 
with a grave face. 

''Mr. Morland has behaved vastly handsome, 
indeed," said the gentle Mrs. Thorpe, looking 
anxiously at her daughter. " I only wish I could 
do as much. One could not expect more from him, 
you know. If he finds he can do more, by and by, 
I dare say he will; for I am sure he must be an 
excellent, good-hearted man. Four hundred is but 
a small income to begin on, indeed; but your 
wishes, my dear Isabella, are so moderate, you do 
not consider how little you ever want, ray dear." 

*' It is not on my own account I wish for more; 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 161 

but I cannot bear to be the means of injuring my 
dear Morland, making him sit down upon an in- 
come hardly enough to find one in the common 
necessaries of life. For myself, it is nothing; I 
never think of myself." 

"I know you never do, my dear; and you will 
always find your reward in the affection it makes 
everybody feel for you. There never was a young 
woman so beloved as you are by everj^body that 
knows you; and I dare say when Mr. Morland sees 
you, ray dear child — But do not let us distress 
our dear Catherine by talking (s^^uch things. Mr. 
Morland has behaved so very handsome, you know. 
I always heard he was a most excellent man; and 
you know, my dear, we are not to suppose but 
what, if you had had a suitable fortune, he would 
have come down with something more; for J[ am 
sure he must be a most liberal-minded man." 

*^ Nobody can think better of Mr. Morland than 
I do, I am sure. But everybody has their failing, 
you know; and everybody has a right to do what 
they like with their own money." 

Catherine was hurt by these insinuations. " I 
am very sure," said she, ^'that my father has 
promised to do as much as he can afford." 

Isabella recollected herself. ^'As to that, my 
sweet Catherine, there cannot be a doubt, and you 
know me well enough to be sure that a much 
smaller income would satisfy me. It is not the 
want of more money that makes me just at present 
a little out of spirits : I hate money ; and if our 
union could take 2:>lace now upon only fifty pounds 
a year, I should not have a wish unsatisfied. Ah, 
11 



162 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

my Catherine, you have found me out. There 's 
the sting. The long, long, endless twa years and 
a half that are to pass hefore yourjbrother' can hold 
the living." 

^*Yes, yes, my darling Isabella," said Mrs. 
Thorpe, ^'we perfectly see into your heaKL You 
have no disguise. We perfectly understand the 
present vexation; and everybody must love you the 
better for such a noble, honest affection." 

Catherine's uncomfortable feelings began to les- 
sen. She endeavored to. believe that the delay of 
the marriage was the- onl;5fcource of Isabella's re- 
gret; and when she saw her at their next interview 
as cheerful and amiable as ever, endeavored to for- 
get that she had for a minute thought otherwise. 
James soon followed his letter, and was received 
with the most giatifying kindness. 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 163 



' i.^ 



M CHAPTER XVII. 

The Aliens had now entered on the sixth week 
of their stay in Bath; and whether it should be 
the last, was for some time a question to which 
Catherine listened with a beating heart. To have 
her acquaintance with tHjTilneys end so soon, was 
an evil which nothing could counterbalance. Her 
whole happiness seemed at stake, while the affair 
was in suspense, and everything secured when it 
was determined that the lodgings should be taken 
for another fortnight. What this additional fort- 
night was to produce to her beyond the pleasure of 
sometimes seeing Henry Tilney, made but a small 
part of Catherine's speculation. Once or twice, 
indeed, since James's engagement had taught her 
what could be done, she had got so far as to in- 
dulge in a secret '' perhaps," but in general the 
felicity of being with him for the present bounded 
her views : the present was now comprised in an- 
other three weeks, and her happiness being certain 
for that period, the rest of her life was at such a 
distance as to excite but little interest. In the 
course of the morning which saw tliis business ar- 
ranged, she visited Miss Tilney, and poured forth 
her joyful feelings. It was doomed to be a day of 
trial. No sooner had she expressed her delight in 
Mr. Allen's lengthened stay, than Miss Tilney 



164 NORTH ANGER ABBEY. 

told her of her father's having just determined 
upon quitting Bath hy the end of another week. 
Here was a blow! The past suspense of the morn- 
ing had been ease and quiet to the present disap- 
pointment. Catherine's countenance fell; and in 
a voice of most sincere concern she echoed Miss 
Tilney's concluding words, "By the end of an- 
other week! " 

*'Yes, my father can seldom be prevailed on to 
give the waters what I think a fair trial. He has 
been disappointed of some friends' arrival whom he 
expected to meet here, and as he is now pretty 
well, is in a hurry to get home." 

"1 am very sorry for it," said Catherine, 
dejectedly *'if I had known this before — '^ 

" Perhaps," said Miss Tilney, in an embarrassed 
manner, '^ you would be so good — it would make 
me verjT^ happy if — " 

The entrance of her father put a stop to the 
civility, which Catherine was beginning to hope 
might introduce a desire of their corresponding. 
After addressing her with his usual politeness, 
he turned to his daughter, and said, " Well, 
Eleanor, may I congratulate you on being success- 
ful in your application to your fair friend?" 

'^I was just beginning to make the request, sir, 
as you came in." 

*^Well, proceed, by all means. I know how 
much your heart is in it. My daughter, Miss 
Morland, " he continued, without leaving his 
daughter time to speak, " has been forming a very 
bold wish. We leave Bath, as she has perhaps 
told you, on Saturday se'nnight. A letter from 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 165 

my steward tells me that my presence is wanted 
at home; and being disappointed in my hope of 
seeing the Marquis of Longtown and General 
Courteney here, some of my very old friends, there 
is nothing to detain me longer in Bath. And 
could we carry our selfish point with you, we should 
leave it without a single regret. Can you, in 
short, be prevailed on to quit this scene of public 
triumph, and oblige your friend Eleanor with your 
company in Gloucestershire? I am almost ashamed 
to make the request, though its presumption would 
certainly appear greater to every creature in Bath 
than yourself. Modesty such as yours — But not 
for the world would I pain it by open praise. If 
you can be induced to honor us with a visit, you 
will make us happy beyond expression. 'T is 
true, we can offer you nothing like the gayeties of 
this lively place; we can tempt you neither by 
amusement nor splendor, for our mode of living, 
as you see, is plain and unpretending; yet no 
endeavors shall be wanting on our side to make 
Northanger Abbey not wholly disagreeable." 

Northanger Abbey ! — These were thrilling words, 
and wound up Catherine's feelings to the highest 
point of ecstasy. Her grateful and gratified heart 
could hardly restrain its expressions within the 
language of tolerable calmness. To receive so 
flattering an invitation! To have her company so 
warmly solicited! Everything honorable and 
soothing, every present enjoyment and every future 
hope was contained in it; and her acceptance, with 
only the saving clause of papa and mamma's appro- 
bation, was eagerly given. — "I will write home 



166 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

directly," said she; '^and if they do not object, as 
I dare say they will not — " 

General Tilney was not less sanguine, having 
already waited on her excellent friends in Pulteney 
Street, and obtained their sanction of his wishes. 
*' Since the}'' can consent to part with you," said 
he, ' ' we may expect philosophy from all the 
world." 

Miss Tilney was earnest, though gentle, in her 
secondary civilities; and the affair became in a 
few minutes as nearly settled as this necessary 
reference to Fullerton would allow. 

The circumstances of the morning had led 
Catherine's feelings through the varieties of 
suspense, security, and disappointment; but they 
were now safely lodged in perfect bliss ; and with 
spirits elated to rapture, with Henry at her heart, 
and Northanger Abbey on her lips, she hurried 
home to write her letter. Mr. and Mrs. Morland, 
relying on the discretion of the friends to whom 
they had already intrusted their daughter, felt no 
doubt of the propriety of an acquaintance which 
had been formed under their eye, and sent there- 
fore, by return of post, their ready consent to her 
visit in Gloucestershire. This indulgence, though 
not more than Catherine had hoped for, completed 
her conviction of being favored beyond every other 
human creature, in friends and fortune, circum- 
stance and chance. Everything seemed to co- 
operate for her advantage. By the kindness of her 
first friends, the Aliens, she had been introduced 
into scenes where pleasures of every kind had 
met her. Her feelings, her preferences had each 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 167 

known the happiness of a return. Wherever she 
felt attachment, she had been able to create it. 
The affection of Isabella was to be secured to her 
in a sister. The Tilneys — they by whom, above 
all, she desired to be favorably thought of — out- 
stripped even her wishes in the flattering measures 
by which their intimacy was to be continued. 
She was to be their chosen visitor, she was to be for 
weeks under the same roof with the person whose 
society she mostly prized; and, in addition to all 
the rest, this roof was to be the roof of an abbey! 
Her passion for ancient edifices was next in degree 
to her passion for Henry Tilney, — and castles and 
abbeys made usually the charm of those reveries 
which his image did not fill. To see and explore 
either the ramparts and keep of the one, or the 
cloisters of the other, had been for many weeks a 
darling wish, though to be more than the visitor 
of an hour had seemed too nearly impossible for 
desire. And yet this was to happen. With all 
the chances against her of house, hall, place, park, 
court, and cottage, Northanger turned up an ab- 
bey, and she was to be its inhabitant. Its long, 
damp passages, its narrow cells and ruined chapel, 
were to be within her daily reach, and she could 
not entirely subdue the hope of some traditional 
legends, some awful memorials of an injured and 
ill-fated nun. 

iEt was wonderful that her friends should seem so 
little elated by the possession of such a home 5 that 
the consciousness of it should be so meekly borne. 
The power of early habit only could account for it. 
•A distinction to which they had been born gave no 



168 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

pride. Their superiority of abode was no more to 
them than their superiority of person. 

Many were the inquiries she was eager to make 
of Miss Tilney; but so active were her thoughts 
that when these inquiries were answered, she was 
hardly more assured than before of Northanger 
Abbey having been a richly endowed convent at 
the time of the Reformation, of its having fallen 
into the hands of an ancestor of the Tilneys on its 
dissolution, of a large portion of the ancient build- 
ing still making a part of the present dwelling 
although the rest was decayed, or of its standing 
low in a valley, sheltered from the north and east 
by rising woods of oak. 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 169 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

With a mind thus full of happiness, Catherine was 
hardly aware that two or three days had passed 
away, without her seeing Isabella for more than a 
few minutes together. She began first to be 
sensible of this, and to sigh for her conversation, 
as she walked along the Pump-room one morning, 
by Mrs. Allen's side, without anything to say or to 
hear; and scarcely had she felt a five minutes' long- 
ing of friendship, before the object of it appeared, 
and, inviting her to a secret conference, led the 
way to a seat. **This is my favorite place,'' said 
she, as they sat down on a bench between the 
doors, which commanded a tolerable view of every- 
bod}^ entering at either, ^'it is so out of the 
way. '" 

Catherine, observing that Isabella's eyes were 
1 continually bent towards one door or the other as 
in eager expectation, and remembering how often 
she had been falsely accused of being arch, thought 
the present a fine opportunity for being reallj^so; 
and therefore gayly said. *'Do not be uneasy, 
Isabella. James will soon be here." 

'* Psha! my dear creature," she replied, ''do not 
think me such a simpleton as to be always wanting 
to confine him to my elbow. It would be hideous 
to be always together; we should be the jest of the 
place. And so you are going to Northanger! I 



170 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

am amazingly glad of it. It is one of the finest 
old places in England, I understand. I shall 
depend upon a most particular description of it." 

^^ You shall certainly have the best in my power 
to give. But who are you looking for? Are your 
sisters coming? ^' 

" I am not looking for anybody. One's eyes 
must be somewhere, and you know what a foolish 
trick I have of fixing mine, when my thoughts are 
a hundred miles off. I am amazingly absent: I 
believe I am the most absent creature in the world. 
Tilney says it is always the case with minds of a 
certain stamp." 

^^But I thought, Isabella, you had something in 
particular to tell me? " 

* ' Oh, yes^ and so I have. But here is a proof of 
what I was saying. My poor head! I have quite 
forgot it. Well, the thing is this, — I have. just 
had a letter from John; you can guess the 
contents.'' 

^'No, indeed, I cannot." 

*'My sweet love, do not be so abominably 
affected. What can he write about but yourself? 
You know he is over head and ears in love with 
you." 

" With me, dear Isabella! " 

"Nay, my sweetest Catherine, this is being quite 
absurd! Modesty, and all that, is very well in its 
way, but really a little common honesty is some- 
times quite as becoming. I have no idea of beingj 
so overstrained! It is fishing for compliments. 
His attentions were such as a child must have 
noticed. And it was but half an hour before he left 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 171 

Bath, that you gave him the most positive encour- 
agement. He says so in this letter; says that he 
as good as made you an offer, and that you received 
his advances in the kindest way; and now he 
wants me to urge his suit, and say all manner of 
pretty things to you. So it is in vain to affect 
ignorance." 

Catherine, with all the earnestness of truth, 
expressed her astonishment at such a charge, 
protesting her innocence of every thought of Mr. 
Thorpe's being in love with her, and the conse- 
quent impossibilily of her having ever intended 
to encourage him. '*'As to any attentions on his 
side, I do declare, upon my honor, I never was 
sensible of them for a moment, — except just his 
asking me to dance the first day of his coming. 
And as to making me an offer, or anything like it, 
there must be some unaccountable mistake. I 
could not have misunderstood a thing of that kind, 
you know ! — and, as I ever wish to be believed, I 
solemnly protest that no syllable of such a nature 
ever passed between us. The last half-hour before 
he went away ! It must be all and completely a 
mistake — for I did not see him once that whole 
morning." 

" But that you certainly did, for you spent the 
whole morning in Edgar's Buildings, — it was the 
day your father's consent came, — and I am pretty 
sure that you and John were alone in the parlor 
some time before you left the house." 

*^Are you? Well, if you say it, it was so, I dare 
say; but for the life of me, I cannot recollect it. 
1 do remember now being with you, and seeing 



172 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

him as well as the rest; but that we were ever alone 
for five minutes — However, it is not worth argu- 
ing about; for whatever might pass an his side, 
you must be convinced, by my having no recollection 
of it, that I never thought nor expected nor wished 
for anything of the kind from him. I am exces- 
sively concerned that he should have any regard for 
me; but indeed it has been quite unintentional 
on my side. I never had the smallest idea of it. 
Pra}^ undeceive him as soon as you can, and tell him 
I beg his pardon; that is — I do not know what I 
ought to say — but make him understand what I 
mean, in the properest way. I would not speak 
disrespectfully of a brother of yours, Isabella, I am 
sure ; but you know very well that if I could think 
of one man more than another, he is not the 
person." Isabella was silent. " My dear friend, 
you must not be angr}'- with me. I cannot suppose 
your brother cares so very much about me. And, 
you know, we shall still be sisters." 

*' Yes, yes," with a blush, '^ there are more ways 
than one of our being sisters. But where am I 
wandering to ? Well, my dear Catherine, the case 
seems to be that you are determined against poor 
John, - — is not it so? " 

^'I certainly cannot return his affection, and as 
certainly never meant to encourage it.'' 

*^ Since that is the case, I am sure I shall not 
tease you any further. John desired me to speak 
to you on the subject, and therefore I have. But 
I confess, as soon as I read his letter, I thought it 
a very foolish, imprudent business, and not likely 
to promote the good of either; for what were you 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 173 

to live upon, supposing you came together ? You 
have both of you something, to be sure, but it is not 
a trifle that will support a family nowadays ; and 
after all that romancers may say, there is no doing 
without money. I only wonder John could think 
of it; he could not have received my last." 

^^You do acquit me, then, of anything wrong? 
You are convinced that I never meant to deceive 
your brother, never suspected him of liking me 
till this moment?^' 

^' Oh, as to that,'' answered Isabella, laughingly, 
' I do not pretend to determine what your thoughts 
and designs in time past may have been. All 
that is best known to yourself. A little harmless 
flirtation or so will occur, and one is often drawn 
on to give more encouragement than one wishes to 
stand by. But you may be assured that I am the 
last person in the world to judge you severel}^ 
All those things should be allowed for in youth 
and high spirits. What one means one day, you 
know, one may not mean the next. Circumstances 
change, opinions alter." 

^'But my opinion of your brother never did al- 
ter; it was always the same. You are describing 
what never happened.'' 

*'My dearest Catherine," continued the other, 
without at all listening to her, '^I would not for 
all the world be the means of hurrying you into 
an engagement before you knew what you were 
about. I do not think anything would justify me 
in wishing you to sacrifice all your happiness 
imerely to oblige my brother, because he is my 
brother, and who, perhaps, after all, you know, 



174 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

miglit be just as happy without you; for people 
seldom know what the^^ would be at, — young men 
especially, they are so amazingly changeable and 
inconstant. What I say is, why should a brother's 
happiness be dearer to me than a friend's? You 
know I carry my notions of friendship pretty high. 
But, above all things, my dear Catherine, do not 
be in a hurry. Take my word for it, that if you 
are in too great a hurry, you will certainly live to 
repent it. Tilney says, there is nothing people 
are so often deceived in as the state of their own 
affections; and I believe he is very right. Ah! 
here he comes; never mind, he will not see us, I 
am sure." 

Catherine, looking up, perceived Captain Til- 
ney; and Isabella, earnestl}^ fixing her eye on him 
as she spoke, soon caught his notice. He ap- 
proached immediately, and took the seat to which 
her movements invited him. His first address 
made Catherine start. Though spoken low, she 
could distinguish, ^^ What! always to be watched, 
in person or by proxy! " 

^^Psha, nonsense!" was Isabella's answer, in 
the same half whisper. ^^ Why do you put such 
things into my head? If I could believe it — my 
spirit, you know, is pretty independent." 

^'I wish your heart were independent. That 
would be enough for me." 

"My heart, indeed! What can you have to do 
with hearts? You men have none of you any 
hearts." 

* ^ If we have not hearts, we have eyes ; and they 
give us torment enough." 



J 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 175 

''Do tliey? I am sorry for it; I am sorry they 
find anything so disagreeable in me. I will look 
another way. I hope this pleases you, " turning her 
back on him ; " I hope your eyes are not tormented 
now." 

''Never more so; for the edge of a blooming 
cheek is still in view, — at once too much and too 
little." 

Catherine heard all this, and, quite out of coun- 
tenance, could listen no longer. Amazed that 
Isabella could endure it, and jealous for her 
brother, she rose up, and saying she should join 
Mrs. Allen, proposed their walking. But for this 
Isabella showed no inclination. She was so amaz- 
ingly tired, and it was so odious to parade about 
the Pump-room; and if she moved from her seat, 
she should miss her sisters : she was expecting her 
sisters every moment ; so that her dearest Cather- 
ine must excuse her, and must sit quietly down 
again. But Catherine could be stubborn too; and 
Mrs. Allen just then coming up to propose their 
returning home, she joined her and walked out of 
the Pump-room, leaving Isabella still sitting with 
Captain Tilney. With much uneasiness did she 
thus leave them. It seemed to her that Captain 
Tilney was falling in love with Isabella, and 
Isabella unconsciously encouraging him; uncon- 
sciously it must be, for Isabella's attachment to 
James was as certain and well acknowledged as her 
engagement. To doubt her truth or good inten- 
tions was impossible; and yet, during the whole of 
their conversation, her manner had been odd. She 
wished Isabella had talked more like her usual 



176 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

self, and not so much abont money, and had not I 
looked so well pleased at the sight oi Captain Til- ! 
ney. How strange that she should not perceive 
his admiration! Catherine longed to give her a 
hint of it, to put her on her guard, and prevent all 
the pain which her too lively behavior might other- 
wise create both for him and her brother. 

The compliment of John Thorpe's affection did 
not make amends for this thoughtlessness in his 
sister. She was almost as far from believing as 
from wishing it to be sincere ; for she had not for- 
gotten that he could mistake, and his assertion of 
the offer and of her encouragement convinced her 
that his mistakes could sometimes be verj^ egre- 
gious. In vanity, therefore, she gained but little ; 
her chief profit was in wonder. That he should 
think it worth his while to fancy himself in love 
with her was a matter of lively astonishment. 
Isabella talked of his attentions; she had never 
been sensible of any : but Isabella had said many 
things which she hoped had been spoken in haste, 
and would never be said again ; and upon this she 
was glad to rest altogether for present ease and 
comfort. 



NORTHANGEK ABLEY. 177 



CHAPTER XIX. 

A FEW days passed away; and Catherine, though 
not allowing herself to suspect her friend, could 
not help watching her closely. The result of her 
ohservations was not agreeable. Isabella seemed 
an altered creature. When she saw her indeed 
surrounded only by their immediate friends in 
Edgar's Buildings or Pulteney Street, her change 
of manners was so trifling that, had it gone no 
farther, it might have passed unnoticed. A some- 
thing of languid indifference, or of that boasted 
absence of mind which Catherine had never heard 
of before, would occasionally come across her; but 
had nothing worse appeared, that might only have 
spread a new grace and inspired a warmer interest. 
But when Catherine saw her in public, admitting 
Captain Tilney's attentions as readily as they were 
offered, and allowing him almost an equal share 
with James in her notice and smiles, the altera- 
tion became too positive to be passed over. What 
could be meant by such unsteady conduct, what 
her friend could be at, was beyond her comprehen- 
sion. Isabella could not be aware of the pain she 
was inflicting; but it was a degree of wilful 
thoughtlessness which Catherine could not but 
resent. James was the sufferer. She saw him 
grave and uneasy; and however careless of his 
present comfort the woman might be who had 

12 



178 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

given him her heart, to her it was alwaj^s an 
object. For poor Captain Tilney too she was 
greatly concerned. Though his looks did not 
please her, his name was a passport to her good- 
will, and she thought with sincere compassion of 
his approaching disappointment; for in spite of 
what she had believed herself to overhear in the 
Pump-room, his behavior was so incompatible with 
a knowledge of Isabella's engagement that she 
could not, upon reflection, imagine him aware of 
it. He might be jealous of her brother as a rival; 
but if more had seemed implied, the fault must 
have been in her misapprehension. She wished, 
by a gentle remonstrance, to remind Isabella of 
her situation, and make her aware of this double 
unkindness ; but for remonstrance, either opportu- 
nity or comprehension was always against her. If 
able to suggest a hint, Isabella could never under- 
stand it. In this distress, the intended departure 
of the Tilney family became her chief consolation; 
their journey into Gloucestershire was to take 
place within a few days, and Captain Tilney's 
removal would at least restore peace to every heart 
but his own. But Captain Tilnejr had at present 
no intention of removing; he was not to be of the 
party to Northanger, he was to continue at Bath. 
When Catherine knew this, her resolution was 
directly made. She spoke to Henry Tilney on the 
subject, regretting his brother's evident partiality 
for Miss Thorpe, and entreating him to make 
known her prior engagement. 

*^My brother does know it," was Henry's 
answer. 



NORTH ANGER ABBEY. 179 

'^Does he? — then why does he stB,y here? " 

He made no reply, and was beginning to talk 
of something else; but she eagerly continued; 
*'Why do not you persuade him to go away? 
The longer he stays, the worse it will be for him 
at last. Pray advise him for his own sake, and 
I for everybody's sake, to leave Bath directly. Ab- 
Isence will in time make him comfortable again; 
but he can have no hope here, and it is only stay- 
ing to be miserable." 

Henry smiled, and said, " I am sure my brother 
would not wish to do that." 

'' Then you will persuade him to go away? " 

^'Persuasion is not at command; but pardon 
me, if I cannot even endeavor to persuade him. 
.1 have myself told him that Miss Thorpe is en- 
gaged. He knows what he is about, and must be 
his own master." 

I ''No, he does not know what he is about," 
/cried Catherine; ''he does not know the pain he 
is giving my brother. JNot that James has ever 
I told me so, but I am sure he is very un- 
icomfortable." 

" And are you sure it is my brother's doing? " 
I *' Yes, very sure." 

I "Is it my brother's attentions to Miss Thorpe, 
I or Miss Thorpe's admission of them, that gives 
jthe pain?" 

"Is not it the same thing?" 
j "I think Mr. Morland would acknowledge a 
i difference. No man is offended by another man's 
i admiration of the woman he loves; it is the 
woman only who can make it a torment." 



180 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

Catherine blushed for her friend, and said: 
** Isabella is wrong. But I am sure she cannot 
mean to torment, for she is very much attached to 
my brother. She has been in love with him ever 
since they first met, and while my father's con- 
sent was uncertain, she fretted herself almost 
into a fever. You know she must be attached 
to him." 

**I understand: she is in love with James, and 
flirts with Frederick.'' 

^^ Oh, no, not flirts. A woman in love with one 
man cannot flirt with another." 

'* It is probable that she will neither love so 
well nor flirt so well as she miglit do either 
singly. The gentlemen must each give up a 
little." 

After a short pause Catherine resumed 
*^Then you do not believe Isabella so very much 
attached to my brother?" 

*■ I can have no opinion on that subject." 

^^But what can your brother mean? If he 
knows her engagement, what can he mean by his 
behavior?" 

^* You are a very close questioner." 

^' Am I? I only ask what I want to be told." 

^^But do you onl}' ask what I can be expected 
to tell?" 

*'Yes, I think so; for you must know your 
brother's heart." 

'' My brother's heart, as you term it, on the 
present occasion, I assure you I can only guess 
at." 

''Well?" 



up a 

j 

with: I 



NORTHANGEE ABBEY. 18J 

*^Well! Nay, if it is to be guesswork, let us 
all guess for ourselves. To be guided by second- 
hand conjecture is pitiful. The premises are be- 
fore you. My brother is a lively and perhaps 
sometimes a thoughtless young man ; he has had 
about a week's acquaintance with your friend, and 
he has known her engagement almost as long as 
he h^s known her." 

''Well," said Catherine, after some moments' 
consideration, ''you may be able to guess at your 
brother's intentions from all this ; but I am sure 
I cannot. But is not your father uncomfortable 
about it? Does not he want Captain Tilney to 
go away? Sure, if your father were to speak to 
him, he would go." 

"My dear Miss Morland," said Henry, "in 
this amiable solicitude for your brother's comfort, 
may you not be a little mistaken? Are you not 
carried a little too far? Would he thank you, 
either on his own account or Miss Thorpe's, for 
supposing that her affection, or at least her good 
behavior, is only to be secured by her seeing 
nothing of Captain Tilney? Is he safe only in 
solitude? or is her heart constant to him only 
when unsolicited by any one else? He cannot 
think this, and 3^ou may be sure that he would 
not have you think it. I will not say, 'Do not 
be uneasy,' because I know that you are so at 
this moment; but be as little uneasy as you can. 
You have no doubt of the mutual attachment of 
[your brother and your friend; depend upon it, 
therefore, that real jealousy never can exist between 
them; depend upon it that no disagreement be- 



182 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

tween tliem can be of any duration. Their hearts 
are open to each other, as neither heart can he to 
you : they know exactly what is required and what 
can he home; and you may he certain that one 
will never tease the other heyond what is known 
to he pleasant." 

Perceiving her still to look douhtful and grave, 
he added: ** Though Frederick does not leave Bath 
with us, he will probably remain but a very short 
time, perhaps only a few days, behind us. His 
leave of absence will soon expire, and he must 
return to his regiment. And what will then be 
their acquaintance? The mess-room will drink 
Isabella Thorpe for a fortnight, and she will 
laugh with your brother over poor Tilney's pas- 
sion for a month." 

Catherine would contend no longer against com- 
fort. She had resisted its approaches during the 
whole length of a speech, but it now carried her 
captive. Henry Tilney must know best. She 
blamed herself for the extent of her fears, and 
resolved never to think so seriously on the subject 
again. 

Her resolution was supported by Isabella's be- 
havior in their parting interview. The Thorpes 
spent the last evening of Catherine's stay in Pul- 
teney Street; and nothing passed between the 
lovers to excite her uneasiness, or make her quit 
them in apprehension. James was in excellent 
spirits, and Isabella most engagingly placid. 
Her tenderness for her friend seemed rather the 
first feeling of her heart; but that at such a mo- 
ment was allowable; and once she gave her lover 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 183 

a flat contradiction, and once she drew back her 
hand; but Catherine remembered Henry's instruc- 
tions, and placed it all to judicious affection. 
The embraces, tears, and promises of the parting 
fair ones may be fancied. 



184 NORTH ANGER ABBEY. 



CHAPTEE XX. 

xVTr. and Mrs. Allen were sorry to lose their 
young friend, whose good-humor and cheerfulness 
had made her a valuable companion, and in the 
promotion of whose enjoyment their own had been 
gently increased. Her haj^piness in going with 
Miss Tilney, however, prevented their wishing it 
otherwise; and as they were to remain only one 
more week in Bath themselves, her quitting them 
now would not long be felt. Mr. Allen attended 
her to Milsom Street, where she was to breakfast, 
and saw her seated with the kindest welcome 
among her new friends; but so great was her 
agitation in finding herself as one of the family, 
and so fearful was she of not doing exactly what 
was right, and of not being able to preserve their 
good opinion, that, in the embarrassment of the 
first five minutes, she could almost have wished to 
return with him to Pulteney Street. 

Miss Tilney's manners and Henry's smile soon 
did away some of her unpleasant feelings: but 
still she was far from being at ease; nor could 
the incessant attentions of the General himself 
entirely reassure her. Nay, perverse as it 
seemed, she doubted whether she might not have 
felt less, had she been less attended to. His 
anxiety for her comfort, his continual solicitations 
that she would eat, and his often expressed fears 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 185 

of lier seeing nothing to her taste, though never 
in her life before had she beheld half such variety 
on a breakfast-table, made it impossible for her to 
forget for a moment that she was a visitor. She 
felt utterly unworthy of such respect, and knew 
not how to reply to it. Her tranquillity was not 
improved by the General's impatience for the 
appearance of his eldest son, nor by the displeas- 
ure he expressed at his laziness when Captain 
Tilney at last came down. She was quite pained 
by the severity of his father's reproof, which 
seemed disproportionate to the offence; and much 
was her concern increased, when she found herself 
the principal cause of the lecture; and that his 
tardiness was chiefly resented from being disre- 
spectful to her. This was placing her in a very 
uncomfortable situation, and she felt great com- 
passion for Captain Tilney, without being able to 
hope for his good-will. 

He listened to his father in silence, and at- 
tempted not any defence, which confirmed her in 
fearing that the inquietude of his mind on Isa- 
bella's account might, by keeping him long sleep- 
less, have been the real cause of his rising late. 
It was the first time of her being decidedly in his 
company, and she had hoped to be now able to 
form her opinion of him; but she scarcely heard 
his voice while his father remained in the room; 
and even afterwards, so much were his spirits af- 
fected, she could distinguish nothing but these 
words, in a whisper to Eleanor, ''How glad I 
ishall be when you are all off ! '^ 

The bustle of going was not pleasant. The 



186 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

clock struck ten while the trunks were carrying 
down, and the General had fixed to be out of Mil- 
som Street by that hour. His great-coat, instead 
of being brought for him to put on directl}^, was 
spread out in the curricle in which he was to ac- 
company his son. The middle seat of the chaise 
was not drawn out, though there were three people 
to go in it, and his daughter's maid had so crowded 
it with parcels that Miss Morland would not have 
room to sit; and so much was he influenced by 
this apprehension when he handed her in, that she 
had some difficulty in saving her own new writing- 
desk from being thrown out into the street. At 
last, however, the door was closed upon the three 
females, and they set off at the sober pace in which 
the handsome, highly fed four horses of a gentle- 
man usuall}^ perform a journey of thirty miles : such 
was the distance of Northanger from Bath, to be 
now divided into two equal stages. Catherine's 
spirits revived as they drove from the door, for 
with Miss Tilney she felt no restraint; an^, with 
the interest of a road entirely new to her, of an 
abbey before, and a curricle behind, she caught the 
last view of Bath without any regret, and met with 
every milestone before she expected it. The te- 
diousness of a two hours' bait at Petty France, in 
which there was nothing to be done but to eat 
without being hungry, and loiter about without 
anything to see, next followed; and her admiration 
of the style in which they travelled, of the fash- 
ionable chaise and four, postilions handsomely liv- 
eried, rising so regularly in their stirrups, and 
numerous outriders properly mounted, sunk a little 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 187 

under this consequent inconvenience. Had their 
party been perfect!}^ agreeable, the delay would 
have been nothing; but General Tilne}^, though so 
charming a man, seemed alwaysa check upon his 
children's spirits, and scarcely anything was said 
but by himself; the observation of which, with his 
discontent at whatever the inn afforded, and his 
angry impatience at the waiters, made Catherine 
grow every moment more in awe of him, and ap- 
peared to lengthen the two hours into four. At 
last, however, the order of release was given; and 
much was Catherine then surprised by the Gen- 
eral's proposal of her taking his place in his son's 
curricle for the rest of the journey; — the day was 
fine, and he was anxious for her seeing as much of 
the country as possible. 

The remembrance of Mr. Allen's opinion re- 
specting young men's open carriages made her 
blush at the mention of such a plan, and her first 
thought was to decline it; but her second was of 
greater deference for General Tilney's judgment: 
he could not propose anything improper for her; 
and in the course of a few minutes she found her- 
self with Henry in the curricle, as happy a being 
as ever existed. A very short trial convinced her 
that a curricle was the prettiest equipage in the 
world; the chaise and four wheeled off with some 
grandeur, to be sure, but it was a heavy and trou- 
blesome business, and she could not easily forget 
its having stopped two hours at Petty France. 
Half the time would have been enough for the 
curricle; and so nimbly were the light horses dis- 
posed to move, that, had not the General chosen 



188 NORTHANGER ABBEY, 

to have his own carriage lead the way, they could 
have passed h with ease in half a minute. But 
the merit of the curricle did not all belong to the 
horses; Henry drove so well, so quietly, with- 
out making any disturbance, without parading to 
her, or swearing at them; so different from the 
only gentleman-coachman whom it was in her 
power to compare him with I h^nd then his hat sat 
"^ so well, and the innumerable capes of his great-coat 
looked so becomingly important! To be driven 
by him, next to being dancing with him, was cer- 
tainly the greatest happiness in the world. In ad- 
dition to every other delight, she had now that of 
listening to her own praise ; of being thanked at 
least, on his sister's account, for her kindness in 
thus becoming her visitor; of hearing it ranked as 
real friendship, and described as creating real 

(gratitude. His sister, he said, was uncomfortably 
circumstanced; she had no female companion, and, 
in the frequent absence of her father, was some- 
times without any companion at all. 

'^ But how can that be? " said Catherine; " are 
not you with her? " 

'^Northanger is not more than half my home. I 
have an establishment at my own house in Wood- 
ston, which is nearly twenty miles from my father's ; 
and some of my time is necessarily spent there." 
''How sorry you must be for that! " 
/• '' I am always sorry to leave Eleanor." 

" Yes ; but besides your affection for her, you 
must be so fond of the Abbey ! After being used 
to such a home as the Abbey, an ordinary parsonage- 
hous^ nust be very disagreeable." 



NORTIIANGER ABBEY. 189 

He smiled, and said, ^' You have formed a very 
favorable idea of the Abbey.'' 

^' To be sure I have. Is not it a fine old place, 
just like what one reads about? " 

^'And are you prepared to encounter all the 
horrors that a building such as ^ what one reads 
about ' may produce? Have you a stout heart? 
Nerves fit for sliding panels and tapestry? " 

^^Oh, yes, I do not think I should be easily 
frightened, because there would be so many people 
in the house; and besides, it has never been unin- 
habited and left deserted for years, and then the 
family come back to it unawares, without giving 
any notice, as generally happens." 

*' No, certainly. We shall not have to explore 
r our way into a hall dimly lighted by the expiring 
embers of a wood fire, nor be obliged to spread our 
beds on the floor of a room without windows, doors, 
or furniture. But you must be aware that when a 
young lady is (by whatever means) introduced into 
a dwelling of this kind, she is always lodged apart 
from the rest of the family. While they snugl}'' 
repair to their own end of the house, she is for- 
mally conducted by Dorothy, the ancient house- 
keeper, up a different staircase, and along many 
gloomy passages, into an apartment never used 
since some cousin or kin died in it about twenty 
years before. Can you stand such a ceremony as 
this? Will not your mind misgive you, when you 
find yourself in this gloomj^ chamber, too lofty and 
extensive for you, with only the feeble rays of a 
single lamp to take in its size, its walls hung with 
tapestry exhibiting figures as large as life, and the 



4 



190 NORTHANGEIi ABBEY. 

bed, of dark green stuff or purple velvet, present* 
ing even a funereal appearance. Will not your 
heart sink within you?" 

^' Oh, but this will not happen to me, I am sure.'' 

"How fearfully will you examine the furniture 
of your apartment! And what will you discern? 
Not tables, toilettes, wardrobes, or drawers, but 
on one side perhaps the remains of a broken lute, 
on the other a ponderous chest which no efforts can 
open, and over the fireplace the portrait of some 
handsome warrior, whose features will so incompre.- 
hensibly strike you that you will not be able to 
withdraw your eyes from it. Dorothy, meanwhile, 
no less struck by your appearance, gazes on you in 
great agitation, and drops a few unintelligible 
hints. To raise your spirits, moreover, she gives 
you reason to suppose that the part of the Abbey 
you inhabit is undoubtedly haunted, and informs 
you that you will not have a single domestic with- 
in call. With this parting cordial, she courtesies 
off: you listen to the sound of her receding foot- 
steps as long as the last echo can reach you; and 
when, with fainting spirits, you attempt to fasten 
your door, you discover, with increased alarm, that 
it has no lock." 

" Oh, Mr. Tilney, how frightful ! This is just 
like a book ! But it cannot really happen to me. I 
am sure your housekeeper is not really Dorothy. 
Well, what then? " 

"Nothing further to alarm, perhaps, may occur 
the first night. Af^er surmounting your unconquer- 
able horror of the bed, you will retire to rest, and 
get a few hours' unquiet slumber. But on the sec- 



NORTH ANGER ABBEY. 191 

oud, or at farthest the third night after your ar- 
rival, you will probably have a violent storm. 
Peals of thunder so loud as to seem to shake the 
edifice to its foundation will roll round the neigh- 
boring mountains ; and during the frightful gusts 
of wind which accompany it, you will probably 
think you discern (for your lamp is not extin- 
guished) one part of the hanging more violently 
agitated than the rest. Unable of course to repress 
your curiosity in so favorable a moment for indulg- 
ing it. you will instantly arise, and, throwing your 
dressing-gown around you, proceed to examine this 
mystery. After a very short search you will discover 
a division in the tapestry so artfully constructed 
as to defy the minutest inspection, and on opening 
it, a door will immediately appear, which door be- 
ing only secured by massy bars and a padlock, you 
will, after a few efforts, succeed in opening, and, 
with your lamp in your hand, will pass through it 
into a small vaulted room." 

^'No, indeed; I should be too much frightened 
to do any such thing." 

'^ What ! not when Dorothy has given you to 
understand that there is a secret subterraneous 
communication between your apartment and the 
chapel of St. Anthony, scarcely two miles off. 
Could you shrink from so simple an adventure? 
No, no; yon will proceed into this small vaulted 
room, and through this into several others, without 
perceiving anything very remarkable in either. In 
one, perhaps, there may be a dagger, in another 
a few drops of blood, and in a third the remains of 
some instrument of torture; but there being noth- 



192 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

ing in all this out of the common way, and your 
lamp being nearly exhausted, you will return 
towards your own apartment. In repassing through 
the small vaulted room, however, your eyes will be 
-attracted towards a large, old-fashioned cabinet of 
ebony and gold, which, though narrowlj^ examining 
the furnijjre before, you had passed unnoticed. 
Impelled by an irresistible presentiment, you will 
eagerly advafflfe to it, unlock its folding doors, and 
search into every drawer; but for some time with- 
out discovering anything of imj^ortance, — perhaps 
nothing but a considerable hoard of diamonds. At 
last, however, by touching a secret spring, an inner 
compartment will open, a roll of paper appears, 
you seize it, — it contains many- sheets of manu- 
script, — you. hasten with the precious treasure 
into your own chamber; but scarcely have you 
been able to decipher, ' Oh thou, whomsoever thou 
mayst be, into whose hands these memoirs of tlie 
wretched Matilda may fall,' — when your lamp 
suddenly expires in the socket, and leaves you in 
total darkness." 

*^0h, noj no; do not say so. Well, go on." 
But Henry was too much amused by the interest 
he had raised, to be able to carry it farther: he 
could no longer command solemnity either of sub- 
ject or voice, and was obliged to entreat her to use 
her own fancy in the perusal of Matilda's woes. 
Catherine, recollecting herself, grew ashamed of 
her eagerness, and began earnestly to assure him 
that her attention had been fixed without the 
smallest apprehension of really meeting with what 
he related. ^'Miss Tilney, she was sure, would 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 193 

never put her into such a chamber as he had de- 
scribed. She was not at all afraid." 

As they drew near the end of their journey, her 
impatience for a sight of the Abbey — for some 
time suspended by his conversation on subjects 
very different — returned in full force, and every 
bend in the road was expected, with ^giemn awe, 
to afford a glimpse of its massy waller of gray stone, 
rising amidst a grove of ancient flp^s, 'v^th the 
last beams of the sun playing in beautiful splendor 
on its high Gothic windows. But so low did the 
building stand, that she found herself passing 
through the great gates of the lodge, into the very 
grounds of Northapger, without having discerned 
even an antique chimney. 

She knew not that she had any right to be sur- 
prised, but there was a something in this mode of 
approach which she certainly had not expected. 
To pass between lodges of a modern appearance, to 
find herself with such ease in the very precincts of 
the Abbey, and driven so rapidly along a smooth, 
level road of fine gravel, without obstacle, alarm, 
or solemnity of any kind, struck her as odd and 
inconsistent. She was not long at leisure, how- 
ever, for such considerations. A sudden scud of 
rain driving full in her face, made it impossible 
for her to observe anything further, and fixed all 
her thoughts on the welfare of her new straw bon- 
net; and she was actually under the Abbey walls, 
was springing, with Henry's assistance, from the 
carriage, was beneath the shelter of the old porch, 
and had even passed on to the hall, where her 
friend and the General were waiting to welcome 
13 



194 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

her, without feeling one awful foreboding of future 
misery to herself, or one moment's suspicion of any 
past scenes of horror being acted within the solemn 
edifice. The breeze had not seemed to waft the 
sighs of the murdered to her; it had wafted noth- 
ing worse than a thick mizzling rain; and having 
given a good shake to her habit, she was ready to 
be shown into the common drawing-room, and 
capable of considering where she was. 

An abbey! Yes, it was delightful to be really 
in an abbey! But she doubted, as she looked 
round the room, whether anything within her 
observation would have given her the conscious- 
ness. The furniture was in all the profusion and 
elegance of modern taste. The fireplace, where 
she had expected the ample width and ponderous 
carving of former times, was contracted to a Rum- 
ford, with slabs of plain, though handsome marble, 
and ornaments over it of the prettiest English 
china. The windows, to which she looked with 
peculiar dependence, from having heard the Gen- 
eral talk of his preserving them in their Grothic 
form with reverential care, were yet less what her 
fancy had portrayed. To be sure, the pointed arch 
was preserved, — the form of them was Gothic, — 
they might be even casements; but every pane was 
so large, so clear, so light! To an imagination 
which had hoped for the smallest divisions, and 
the heaviest stonework, for painted glass, dirt, and 
cobwebs, the difference was very distressing. 

The General, perceiving how her eye was em- 
ployed, began to talk of the smallness of the room 
and simplicity of the furniture, where everything 



NOKTHANGER ABBEY. 195 

being for daily use, pretended only to comfort, etc. ; 
flattering himself, however, that there were some 
apartments in the Abbey not unworthy her notice, 
and was proceeding to mention the costly gilding 
of one in particular, when, taking out his watch, 
he stopped short, to pronounce it, with surprise, 
within twenty minutes of five ! This seemed the 
word of separation; and Catherine found herself 
hurried away by Miss Tilney, in such a manner as 
convinced her that the strictest punctuality to the 
family hours would be expected at Northanger. 

Returning through the large and lofty hall, they 
ascended a broad staircase of shining oak, which, 
af-^r many flights and many landing-places, 
bi ought them upon a long wide gallery. On one 
side it had a range of doors, and it was lighted on 
the other by windows, which Catherine had only 
time to discover looked into a quadrangle, before 
Miss Tilney led the way into a chamber, and 
scarcely staying to hope she would find it comfort- 
able, left her with an anxious entreaty that she 
would make as little alteration as possible in her 
dress. 



196 " NORTHANGER ABBEY. 



CHAPTER XXI. 

A moment's glance was enough to satisfy Cath- 
erine that her apartment was very unlike the one 
which Henry had endeavored to alarm her h}^ the 
desiiiription of. It was by no means unreasonably 
large, and contained neither tapestry nor velvet. 
The walls were papered, the floor was carpeted; 
the windows were neither less perfect nor more 
dim than those of the drawing-room below; the 
furniture, though not of the latest fashion, was 
handsome and comfortable, and the air of the room 
altogether far from uncheerful. Her heart instan- 
taneously at ease on this point, she resolved to lose 
no time in particular examination of anything, as 
she greatly dreaded disobliging the General by any 
delay. Her habit, therefore, was thrown off with 
all possible haste, and she was preparing to unpin 
the linen package, which the chaise-seat had con- 
veyed for her immediate accommodation, when her 
eye suddenly fell on a large high chest, standing 
back in a deep recess on one side of the fireplace. 
The sight of it made her start; and forgetting 
everything else, she stood gazing on it in motion- 
less wonder, while these thoughts crossed her : — 

**T]ns is strange, indeed! I did not expect 
such a sight as this! An immense heavy chest! 
Wliat can it hold? Wh}- should it be placed here? 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 197 

Pushed back too, as if meant to be out of sight ! I 
^Yill look into it, — cost me what it may, I will look 
into it, — and directly too — by daylight. If I 
stay till evening, my candle may go out.'^ She 
advanced, and examined it closely : it was of cedar, 
curiously inlaid with some darker wood, and raised 
about a foot from the ground, on a carved stand of 
the same. The lock was silver, though tarnished 
from age; at each end were the imperfect remains 
of handles also of silver, broken perhaps prema- 
turely by some strange violence; and on the CQi^tre 
of the lid, was a mysterious cipher, in the same 
metal. Catherine bent over it intently, but with- 
out being able to distinguish anything with cer- 
tainty. She could not, in whatever direction she 
took it, believe the last letter to be a T; and j^et 
that it should be anything else in that house was a 
circumstance to raise no common degree of aston- 
ishment. If not originally theirs, by what strange 
events could it liave fallen into the Tilney family? 
Her fearful curiosity was ever}' moment growing 
greater; and seizing with trembling hands the 
hasp of the lock, she resolved at all hazards to 
satisfy herself at least as to its contents. With 
difficulty, for something seemed to resist her 
efforts, she raised the lid a few inches; but at 
that moment a sudden knocking at the door of the 
room made her, starting, quit her hold, and the 
lid closed with alarming violence. This ill-timed 
intruder was Miss Tilney's maid, sent by her 
mistress to be of use to Miss Morland; and 
though Catherine immediately dismissed her, it 
recalled her to the sense of what she ouglit to be 



198 NORTIIANGER ABBEY. 

doing, and forced her, in spite of her anxious de- 
sire to penetrate this mystery, to proceed in her 
dressing without further delay. Her progress was 
not quick, for her thoughts and her eyes were still 
bent on the object so well calculated to interest 
and alarm; and though she dare not waste a mo- 
ment upon a second attempt, she could not remain 
many paces from the chest. At length, however, 
having slipped one arm into her gown, her toilette 
seemed so nearly finished that the impatience of 
her curiosity might safely be indulged. One mo- 
ment surely might be spared; and so desperate 
should be the exertion of her strength, that, 
unless secured by supernatural means, the lid in 
one moment should be thrown back. With this 
spirit she sprang forward, and her confidence did 
not deceive her. Her resolute effort threw back 
the lid, and gave to her astonished eyes the view 
of a white cotton counterpane, properly folded, 
reposing at one end of the chest in undisputed 
possession! 

She was gazing on it with the first blush of 
surprise, when Miss Tilney, anxious for her 
friend's being ready, entered the room, and to the 
rising shame of having harbored for some minutes 
an absurd expectation, was then added the shame 
of being caught in so idle a search. ''That is a 
curious old chest, is not it?" said Miss Tilney, as 
Catherine hastily closed it and turned away to the 
glass. *'It is impossible to say how many gener- 
ations it has been here. How it came to be first 
put in this room I know not, but I have not had 
it moved, because I thought it might sometimes 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 199 

be of use in holding hats and bonnets. The worst 
of it is that its weight makes it difficult to open. 
In that corner, however, it is at least out of the 
way." 

Catherine had no leisure for speech, being at 
once blushing, tying her gown, and forming wise 
resolutions with the most violent despatch. Miss 
Tilney gently hinted her fear of being late; and in 
half a minute they ran downstairs together, in an 
alarm not wholly unfounded, for General Tilney 
was pacing the drawing-room, his watch in his 
hand, and having, on the ver}" instant of their 
entering, pulled the bell with violence, ordered 
*Minner to be on table directly!" 

Catherine trembled at the emphasis with which 
he spoke, and sat pale and breathless, in a most 
humble mood, concerned for his children, and 
detesting old chests; and the General, recovering 
his politeness as he looked at her, spent the rest 
of his time in scolding his daughter for so fool- 
ishly hurrying her fair friend, who was absolutely 
out of breath from haste, when there was not the 
lleast occasion for hurr}^ in the world; but Cather- 
iine could not at all get over tlie double distress of 
j having involved her friend in a lecture and been 
a great simpleton herself, till they were happily 
seated at the dinner-table, when the General's 
complacent smiles, and a good appetite of her 
own, restored her to peace. The dining-parlor 
was a noble room, suitable in its dimensions to a 
much larger drawing-room than the one in com- 
mon use, and fitted up in a style of luxury and 
expense which was almost lost on the unpractised 



200 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

eye of Catherine, who saw little more than its 
spaciousness and the number of their attendants. 
Of the former, she spoke aloud her admiration; 
and the General, with a very gracious counte- 
nance, acknowledged that it was by no means an 
ill-sized roomj and further confessed that though 
as careless on such subjects as most people, he did 
look upon a tolerably large eating-room as one 
of the necessaries of life; he supposed, however, 
^Hhat she must have been used to much better 
sized apartments at Mr. Allen's? '^ 

"1^0, indeed," was Catherine's honest assur. 
ance; *^Mr. Allen's dining-parlor was not more 
than half as large; " and she had never seen so 
large a room as this in her life. The General's 
good-humor increased. Why, as he 7iad such rooms, 
he thought it would be simple not to make use of 
them; but, upon his honor, he believed there 
might be more comfort in rooms of only half their 
size. Mr. Allen's house, he was sure, must be ex- 
actly of the true size for rational happiness. 

The evening passed without any further disturb- 
ance, and in the occasional absence of General Til- 
ney, with much positive cheerfulness. It was only 
in his presence that Catherine felt the smallest 
fatigue from her journe}^; and even then, even in 
moments of languor or restraint, a sense of general 
happiness preponderated, and she could think of 
her friends in Bath without one wish of being with 
them. 

The night was stormy; the wind had been ris- 
ing at intervals the whole afternoon; and by the 
time the party broke up, it blew and rained 



-i 



NORTHANGER ABBF.Y. 201 

violently. Catherine, as she crossed the hall, 
listened to the tempest with sensations of awe ; and 
when she heard it rage round a corner of the 
ancient building, and close with sudden fury a 
distant door, felt for the first time that she was 
really in an abbey. Yes, these were characteristic 
sounds : they brought to her recollection a count- 
less variety of dreadful situations and horrid 
scenes, which such buildings had witnessed, and 
sach storms ushered in; and most heartily did she 
rejoice in the happier circumstances attending her 
entrance within walls so solemn! She had noth- 
ing to dread from midnight assassins or drunken 
gallants. Henry had certainly been only in jest in 
what he had told her that morning. In a house 
so furnished and so guarded, she could have nothing 
to explore or to suffer, and might go to her bed- 
room as securely as if it had been her own chamber 
at Fullerton. Thus wisely fortifying her mind, as 
she proceeded upstairs, she was enabled, especially 
on perceiving that Miss Tilney slept only two 
doors from her, to enter her room with a tolerably 
stout heart; and her spirits were immediately 
assisted by the cheerful blaze of a wood fire. 
** How much better is this,'' said she, as she 
walked to the fender; ^'how much better to find a 
tire ready lit, than to have to wait shivering in 
the cold, till all the family are in bed, as so many 
poor girls have been obliged to do, and then to 
have a faithful old servant frightening one by com- 
ing in with a faggot ! How glad I am that North- 
anger is what it is! If it had been like some 
other places, I do not know that in such a niglit as 



202 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

this T could have answered for my courage; hut 
now, to be sure, there is nothing to alarm one." 

She looked round the room. The window-cur- 
tains seemed in motion. It could be nothing but 
the violence of the wind penetrating through the 
divisions of the shutters; and she stept boldly for- 
ward, carelessly humming a tune, to assure herself 
of its being so, peeped courageously behind each 
curtain, saw nothing on either low window-seat 
to scare her, and on placing a hand against the 
shutter, felt the strongest conviction of the wind's 
force. A glance at the old chest, as she turned 
away from this examination, was not without its 
use; she scorned the causeless fears of an idle 
fancy, and began with a most happy indifference 
to prepare herself for bed. *' She should take her 
time; she should not hurry herself; she did not 
care if she were the last person up in the house. 
But she would not make up her fire; that would 
seem cowardly, as if she wished for the protection 
of light after she were in bed." The fire therefore 
died away; and Catherine, having spent the best 
part of an hour in her arrangements, was begin- 
ning to think of stepping into bed, when, on giving 
a parting glance round the room, she was struck 
by the appearance of a high, old-fashioned black 
cabinet, which, though in a situation conspicu- 
ous enough, had never caught her notice before. 
Henry's words, his description of the ebony cabinet 
which was to escape her observation at first, imme- 
diately rushed across her; and though there could be 
nothing really in it, there was something whimsi- 
cal, it was certainly a very remarkable coincidence! 



I 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 203 

She took her candle and looked closely at the 
cabinet. It was not absolutely ebony and gold; 
but it was Japan, black and yellow Japan of the 
handsomest kind; and as she held her candle, the 
yellow had very much the effect of gold. The key 
was in the door, and she had a strange fancy to 
look into it ; not however with the smallest expecta- 
tion of finding anything, but it was so very odd, 
after what Henry had said. In short, she could 
not sleep till she had examined it. So, placing 
the candle with great caution on a chair, she seized 
the key with a very tremulous hand and tried 
to turn it; but it resisted her utmost strength. 
Alarmed, but not discouraged, she tried it another 
way : a bolt flew, and she believed herself success- 
ful; but how strangel}^ mysterious! — the door was 
still immovable. She paused a moment in breath- 
less wonder. The wind roared down the chimney, 
the rain heat in torrents against the windows, and 
everything seemed to speak the awfulness of her 
situation. To retire to bed, however, unsatisfied on 
such a point would be vain, since sleep must be 
impossible with the consciousness of a cabinet 
so mysteriously closed in her immediate vicinity. 
Again, therefore, she applied herself to the key, 
and after moving it in every possible way for some 
instants with the determined celerity of hope's last 
effort, the door suddenly yielded to her hand: her 
heart leaped with exultation at such a victory, and 
having thrown open each folding-door, the second 
being secured only by bolts of less wonderful con- 
struction than the lock, though in that her eye 
could not discern any thing unusual, a double range 



204 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

of small drawers appeared in view, with some 
larger drawers above and below them; and in 
the centre a small door, closed also with a lock 
and key, secured in all probability a cavity of 
importance. 

Catherine's heart beat quick, but her courage did 
not fail her. With a cheek flushed by hope, and 
an eye straining with curiosity, her fingers 
grasped the handle of a drawer and drew it forth. 
It was entirely empty. With less alarm and 
greater eagerness she seized a second, a third, a 
fourth, — each was equally empty. Not one was 
left unsearched, and in not one was anything 
found. Well read in the art of concealing a treas- 
ure, the possibility of false linings to the drawers 
(^id not escape her, and she felt round each with 
anxious acuteness in vain. The place in the 
middle alone remained now unexplored; and 
though she had ^' never from the first had the 
smallest idea of finding anything in any part of the 
cabinet, and was not in the least disappointed at 
her ill success thus far, it would be foolish not to 
examine it thoroughly while she was about it.'' 
It was some time, however, before she could un- 
fasten the door, the same difficulty occurring in 
the management of this inner lock as of the outer; 
but at length it did open: and not vain, as 
hitherto, was her search; her quick eyes directly 
fell on a roll of paper pushed back into the further 
part of the cavity, apparently for concealment, and 
her feelings at that moment were indescribable. 
Her heart fluttered, her knees trembled, and her 
cheeks grew pale. She seized, with an unsteady 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 205 

liand, the precious manuscript, for half a glance 
sufficed to ascertain written characters; and while 
she acknowledged with awful sensations this strik- 
ing exemplification of what Henry had foretold, 
resolved instantly to peruse every line before she 
attempted to rest. 

The dimness of the light her candle emitted 
made her turn to it with alarm; but there was no 
danger of its sudden extinction, it had yet some 
hours to burn; and that she might not have any 
i greater difficulty in distinguishing the writing 
, than what its ancient date might occasion, she 
hastily snuffed it. Alas! it was snuffed and 
extinguished in one. A lamp could not have 
I expired with more awful effect. Catherine, for a 
few moments, was motionless with horror. It was 
done completely; not a remnant of light in the 
wick could give hope to the rekindling breath. 
Darkness impenetrable and immovable filled the 
room. A violent gust of wind, rising with sud- 
den fury, added fresh horror to the moment. 
Catherine trembled from head to foot. In the 
pause which succeeded, a sound like receding foot- 
steps and the closing of a distant door struck on 
her affrighted ear. Human nature could support 
no more. A cold sweat stood on her forehead, the 
manuscript fell from her hand, and groping her 
way to the bed, she jumped hastily in, and sought 
some supension of agony by creeping far under- 
neath the clothes. To close her eyes in sleep that 
night she felt must be entirely out of the question. 
With a curiosity so justly awakened, and feelings 
in every way so agitated, repose must be absolutely 



206 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

impossible. The storm, too, abroad so dreadful! 
She had not been used to feel alarm from wind, but 
now every blast seemed fraught with awful intelli- 
gence. The manuscript so wonderfully found, so 
wonderfully accomplishing the morning's predic- 
tion, how was it to be accounted for? What could 
it contain? to whom could it relate? by what means 
could it have been so long concealed? and how 
singularly strange that it should fall to her lot to 
discover it! Till she had made herself mistress 
of its contents, however, she could have neither 
repose nor comfort; and with the sun's first rays 
she was determined to peruse it. But many were 
the tedious hours which must yet intervene. 
She shuddered, tossed about in her bed, and envied 
every quiet sleeper. The storm still raged; and 
various were the noises, more terrific even than 
the wind, which struck at intervals on her startled 
ear. The very curtains of her bed seemed at one 
moment in motion, and at another the lock of her 
door was agitated, as if by the attempt of some- 
body to enter. Hollow murmurs seemed to creep 
along the gallery ; and more than once her blood 
was chilled by the sound of distant moans. Hour 
after hour passed away, and the wearied Catherine 
had heard three proclaimed by all the clocks in 
the house before the tempest subsided, or she 
unknowingly fell fast asleep. 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 207 



CHAPTER XXII. 

The housemaid's folding back her window- shut- 
ters at eight o'clock the next day was the sound 
which first roused Catherine; and she opened her 
ejes, wondering that they could ever have been 
closed, on objects of cheerfulness; her fire was 
alreaay burning, and a bright morning had suc- 
ceeded the tempest of the night. Instantaneously 
with the consciousness of existence, returned her 
recollection of the manuscript; and springing from 
the bed in the very moment of the maid's going 
away, she eagerly collected every scattered sheet 
which had burst from the roll on its falling to the 
ground, and flew back to enjoy the luxury of their 
perusal on her pillow. She now plainly saw that 
she must not expect a manuscript of equal length 
with the generality of what she had shuddered 
over in books; for the roll, seeming to consist en- 
tirely of small disjointed sheets, was altogether 
but of trifling size, and much less than she had 
supposed it to be at first. 

Her greedy eye glanced rapidly over a page. 
She started at its import. Could it.be possible, 
or did not hep senses play her false? An inven- 
tory of linen, in coarse and modern characters, 
seemed all that was before her! If the evidence 



208 NORTHANGER ABBEY 

of sight might be trusted, she held a washing-bill 
in her hand. She seized another sheet, and saw 
the same articles with little variation; a third, 
a fourth, and a fifth presented nothing new. 
Shirts, stockings, cravats, and w^aistcoats faced \ 
her in each. Two others, penned by the same 
hand, marked an expenditure scarcely more inter- 
esting, in letters, hair-powder, shoe-string and 
breeches-ball. And the larger sheet, which had 
enclosed the rest, seemed by its first cramp line, 
^*To poultice chestnut mare," a farrier's bill! 
Such was the collection of papers (left, perhaps, 
as she could then suj^pose, by the negligence of a 
servant in the place whence she had taken ^hem), 
which had filled her with expectation and alarm, 
and robbed her of half her night's rest! She felt 
humbled to the dust. Could not the adventure of 
the chest have taught her wisdom? A corner of 
it catching her eye as she lay, seemed to rise up 
in judgment against her. Nothing could now be 
clearer than the absurdity of her recent fancies. 
To suppose that a manuscript of many generations 
back could have remained undiscovered in a room 
such as that, so modern, so habitable! or that she 
should be the first to possess the skill of unlock- 
ing a cabinet, the key of which was open to all! 

How could she have so imposed on herself? 
Heaven forbid that Henry Tilney should ever 
know her folly! And it was in a great meas- 
ure his own doing, for had not the cabinet ap- 
peared so exactly to agree with his description of 
her adv^entures, she should never have felt the 
smallest curiosity about it. This was the only 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 209 

comfort that occurred. Impatient to get rid of 
those hateful evidences of her folly, those detest- 
able papers then scattered over the bed, she rose 
directly; and folding them up as nearly as possible 
in the same shape as before, returned them to the 
same spot within the cabinet, with a very hearty 
wish that no untoward accident might ever bring 
them forward again, to disgrace her even with 
herself. 

Why the locks should have been so difficult to 
open, however, was still something remarkable, 
for she could now manage them with perfect ease. 
In this there was surely something mysterious; 
and she indulged in the flattering suggestion for 
half a minute, till the possibility of the door's 
having been at first unlocked, and of being herself 
its fastener, darted into her head and cost her 
another blush. 

She got away as soon as she could from a room 
in which her conduct produced such unpleasant 
reflections, and found her way with all speed to 
the breakfast-parlor, as it had been pointed out to 
her by Miss Tilney the evening before. 

Henry was alone in it; and his immediate hope 
of her having been undisturbed by the tempest, 
with an arch reference to the character of the 
building they inhabited, was rather distressing. 
For the world would she not have her weakness 
suspected; and yet, unequal to an absolute false- 
hood, was constrained to acknowledge that the 
wind had kept her awake a little. "But we have 
a charming morning after it," she added, desiring 
to get rid of the subject; ''and storms and sleep- 

14 



210 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

lessness are nothing when they are over. What 
beautiful hyacinths! I have just learnt to love a 
hyacinth.'' 

^^And how might you learn? By accident or 
argument? '' 

'^Your sister taught me: I cannot tell how. 
Mrs. Allen used to take pains, year after jesbv, to 
make me like them; but I never could, till I saw 
them the other day in Milsom Street; I am natur- 
ally indifferent about flowers." 

' ' But now you love a hyacinth. So much the bet- 
ter. You have gained a new source of enjoyment, 
and it is well to have as many holds uj)on happi- 
ness as possible. Besides, a taste for flowers is 
always desirable in your sex, as a means of getting 
you out of doors, and tempting you to more fre- 
quent exercise than you would otherwise take; and 
though the love of a hj^acinth may be rather do- 
mestic, who can tell, the sentiment once raised, 
but you may in time come to love a rose?" 

^*But I do not want any such pursuit to get me 
out of doors. The pleasure of walking and breath- 
ing fresh air is enough for me, and in fine weather 
I am out more than lialf my time. Mamma says 
I am never within." 

*' At any rate, however, I am pleased that you 
have learnt to love a hyacinth. The mere habit of 
learuing to love is the thing; and a teachableness 
of disposition in a young lady is a great blessing. 
Has my sister a pleasant mode of instruction? '' 

Catherine was saved the embarrassment of at- 
tempting an answer, by the entrance of the Gen- 
eral, whose smiling compliments announced a 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 211 

happy state of mind, but whose gentle hint of 
sympathetic early rising did not advance her 
composure. 

The elegance of the breakfast set forced itself 
on Catherine's notice when they were seated at 
table; and, luckily, it had been the General's 
choice. He was enchanted by her approbation of 
his taste, confessed it to be neat and simple, 
thought it right to encourage the manufacture of 
his country; and for his part, to his uncritical 
palate, the tea was as well flavored from the clay 
of Staffordshire as from that of Dresden or Sevres. 
But this was quite an old set, purchased two years 
ago. The manufacture was much improved since 
that time; he had seen some beautiful specimens 
when last in town, and had he not been perfectly with- 
out vanity of that kind, might have been tempted 
to order a new set. He trusted, however, that an 
opportunity might erelong occur of selecting one, 
though not for himself. Catherine was probably the 
only one of the party who did not understand him. 

Shortly after breakfast Henry left them for 
Woodston, where business required and would 
I keep him two or three days. They all attended in 
the hall to see him mount his horse; and immedi- 
ately on re-entering the breakfast-room, Catherine 
walked to a window in the hope of catching an- 
other glimpse of his figure. " This is a somewhat 
heavy call upon your brother's fortitude, " observed 
the General to Eleanor. *' Woodston will make 
Ibut a sombre appearance to-day." 

^'Is it a pretty place?" asked Catherine. 

" What say you, Eleanor? Speak your opinion; 



212 NORTHANGEK ABBEY. 

for ladies can best tell the taste of ladies in regard 
to places as well as men. I think it would be 
acknowledged by the most impartial eye to have 
many recommendations. The house stands among 
fine meadows facing the southeast, with an excel- 
lent kitchen-garden in the same aspect; the M'alls 
surrounding which I built and stocked myself 
about ten jeavs ago, for the benefit of my son. It 
is a family living, Miss Morland; and the prop- 
erty in the place being chiefly my own, you may 
believe I take care that it shall not be a bad one. 
Did Henry's income depend solely on this living, 
he would not be ill provided for. Perhaps it may 
seem odd, that with only two younger children, I 
should think any profession necessary for him; and 
certainly there are moments when we could all 
wish him disengaged from every tie of business. 
But though I may not exactly make converts of 
you young ladies, I am sure your father, Miss 
Morland, would agree with me in thinking it ex- 
pedient to give every young man some employ- 
ment. The money is nothing, it is not an object; 
but employment is the thing. Even Frederick, my 
eldest son, you see, who will perhaps inherit as 
considerable a landed property as any private man 
in the county, has his profession." 

The imposing effect of this last argument was 
equal to his wishes. The silence of the lady 
proved it to be unanswerable. 

Something had been said the evening before of 
her being shown over the house, and he now offered 
himself as her conductor; and though Catherine 
had hoped to explore it accompanied only by his 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 213 

daughter, it v/as a proposal of too much happiness 
in itself, under an}^ circumstances, not to be gladly 
accepted; for she had been already eighteen hours 
in the Abbey, and had seen only a few of its 
I rooms. The netting-box, just leisurely drawn 
[forth, was closed with joyful haste, and she was 
ready to attend him in a moment. ''And when 
they had gone over the house, he promised himself, 
moreover, the pleasure of accompanying her into 
the shrubberies and garden." She courtesied her 
acquiescence. "But perhaps it might be more 
agreeable to her to make those her first object. 
The weather was at present favorable, and at this 
time of year the uncertainty was very great of its 
continuing so. Which would she prefer? He was 
equally at her service. Which did his daughter 
think would most accord with her fair friend's 
wishes? But he thought he could discern. Yes, 
he certainly read in Miss Morland's eyes a judi- 
cious desire of making use of the present smiling 
weather. But when did she judge amiss? The 
Abbey would be always safe and dry. He yielded 
implicitly, and would fetch his hat and attend 
them in a moment." He left the room; and Cath- 
erine, with a disappointed, anxious face, began to 
speak of her unwillingness that he should be taking 
them out of doors against his own inclination, 
under a mistaken idea of pleasing her; but she 
was stopped by Miss Tilney's saying, with a little 
confusion, " I believe it will be wisest to take the 
imorning while it is so fine; and do not be uneasj^ 
on my father's account, he always walks out at 
this time of day." 



214 NORTIIANGER ABBEY. 

Catherine did not exactly know how this was to 
be understood. Why was Miss Tilney embar- 
rassed? Could there be any unwillingness on the 
General's side to show her over the Abbey? Tlie 
proposal was his own. And was not it odd that he 
should always take his walk so early? Neither 
her father nor Mr. Allen did so. It was certainly 
very provoking. She was all impatience to see 
the house, and had scarcely any curiosity about the 
grounds. If Henry had been with them, indeed! 
but now she should not know what was picturesque 
when she saw it. Such were her thoughts; but 
she kept tliem to herself, and put on her bonnet in 
patient discontent. 

She was struck, however, beyond her expecta- 
tion, by the grandeur of the Abbey, as she saw it, 
for the first time, from the lawn. The whole 
building enclosed a large court; and two sides of 
the quadrangle, rich in Gothic ornaments, stood 
forward for admiration. The remainder was shut 
off by knolls of old trees, or luxuriant plantations, 
and the steep woody hills rising behind to give it 
shelter were beautiful even in the leafless month of 
March. Catherine had seen nothing to compare 
with it; and her feelings of delight were so strong 
that without waiting for any better authority, she 
boldly burst forth in wonder and praise. The 
General listened with assenting gratitude, and it 
seemed as if his own estimation of Northanger had 
waited unfixed till that hour. 

The kitchen garden was to be next admired, and 
he led the way to it across a small portion of the 
park. 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 215 

The number of acres contained in this garden 
was such as Catherine could not listen to without 
dismay, being more than double the extent of all 
Mr. Allen's, as well as her father's, including 
churchyard and orchard. The walls seemed count- 
less in number, endless in length ; a village of hot- 
houses seemed to arise among them, and a whole 
parish to be at work w^ithin the enclosure. The 
General was flattered by her looks of surprise, 
which told him almost as plainly as he soon forced 
her to tell him in words, that she had never seen 
any gardens at all equal to them before; and he 
then modestly owned that, ^'without any ambition 
of that sort himself, without any solicitude about 
it, he did believe them to be unrivalled in the 
kingdom. If he had a hobby-horse, it was that. 
He loved a garden. Though careless enough in 
most matters of eating, he loved good fruit, — or 
if he did not, his friends and children did. There 
were great vexations, however, attending such a 
garden as his. The utmost care could not always 
secure the most valuable fruits. The pinery had 
yielded only one hundred in the last year. Mr. 
Allen, he supposed, must feel these inconveniences 
as well as himself. 

"'No, not at all. Mr. Allen did not care about 
the garden, and never went into it." 

With a triumphant smile of self-satisfaction, the 
General wished he could do the same, for he never 
entered his without being A^exed in some way or 
other, by its falling short of his plan. 

" How were IVIr. Allen's succession-houses 
worked? " describing the nature of his own as they 
entered them. 



216 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

^'Mr. Allen had only one small hot-house, 
which Mrs. Allen had the use of for her plants in 
winter, and there was a tire in it now and then." 
' '•'■ He is a happy man! " said the General, with 
a look of ver?^ happy contempt. 

Having td^en her into every division, and led 
her under . every wall, till she was heartily weary 
of seeing and wondering, he suffered the girls at 
last to seize the advantage of an outer door, and 
then expressing his wish to examine the effect of 
some recent alterations about the tea-house, pro- 
posed it as no unpleasant extension of their walk, 
if Miss Morland were not tired. ^^But where are 
you going, Eleanor? Why do you choose that 
cold, damp path to it? Miss Morland will get 
wet. Our best way is across the park." 

''This is so favorite a walk of mine," said Miss 
Tilney, ''that I always think it the best and near- 
est way. But perhaps it may be damp.'' 

It was a narrow winding path through^a thick 
gi'ove of old Scotch firs; and Catherine, struck by 
its gloomy aspect and eager to enter it, could not, 
even by the General's disapprobation, be kept from 
stepping forward. He perceived her inclination, 
and having again urged the plea of health in vain, 
was too polite to make further opposition. He 
excused himself, however, from attending them: 
"The rays of the sun were not too cheerful for 
him, and he would meet them by another course." 
He turned away; and Catherine was shocked to 
find how much her spirits were relieved by the sep- 
aration. The shock, however, being less real than 
the relief, offered it no injury ; and she began to 



XORTIIANGER ABBEY. 217 

talk with easy gayety of the delightful melancholy 
which such a grove inspired. 

^^I am particularly fond of this spot/' said her 
comjmnion, with a sigh. *' It was my mother's 
[favorite walk.'' 

Catherine had never heard Mrs. Tilney men- 
Itioned in the family before; and the interest ex- 
cited by this tender remembrance showed itself 
directly in her altered countenance, and in the 
attentive pause with which she waited for some- 
thing more. 

^^I used to walk here so often with her," added 
Eleanor; '^ though I never loved it then as I have 
loved it since. At that time, indeed, I used to 
wonder at her choice. But her memory endears 
it now." 

*'And ought it not," reflected Catherine, ''to 
endear it to her husband? Yet the General would 
not enter it." Miss Tilney continuing silent, she 
ventured to say, *'Her death must have been a 
great affliction! " 

"A great and increasing one," replied the 
other in a low voice. <'I was only thirteen when 
it happened; and though I felt my loss perhaps as 
strongly as one so 3'oung could feel it, I did not, I 
could not, then know what a loss it was." She 
stopped for a moment, and then added, with great 
firmness: **I have no sister, you know; and 
though Henry — though my brothers are very 
affectionate, and Henry is a great deal here, which 
I am most thankful for, it fs impossible for me not 
to be often solitary'-." 

*'To be sure, you must miss him very much." 



218 NORTIIAXGER ABBEY. 

*' A mother would have been alwaj^s present; a 
mother would have been a constant friend; her 
influence would have been beyond all other/' 

''AVas she a very charming woman? Was she 
handsome? Was there any picture of her in the 
Abbey? And why had she been so partial to that 
grove? Was it from dejection of spirits?" — 
were questions now eagerly poured forth. The 
first three received a ready affirmative, the two 
others were passed by ; and Catherine's interest in 
the deceased Mrs.'^ilney augmented with every 
question, whether answered or not. Of lier un- 
happiness in marriage, she felt persuaded. The 
General certainly had been an unkind husband. 
He did. not love her walk: could he, therefore, 
have loved her? And besides, handsome as he 
was, there was a something in the turn of Iiis 
features which spoke his not having behaved well 
to lier. 

*'Her picture, I suppose,'' blushing at the con- 
summate art of her own question, '' hangs in your 
father's room? " * 

^^No; it was intended for the drawing-room; 
but my father was dissatisfied with the painting, 
and for some time it had no place. Soon after her 
death I obtained it for my own, and hung it in my 
bedchamber, where I shall be happy to show it 
you: it is very like." Here was another proof. 
A portrait — very like — of a departed wife, not 
valued by the husbandi He must have been dread- 
fully cru'l to her! % 

Catherine attempted no longer to hide from her- 
self the i.ature of the feelings which, in spite of 



NORTH ANGER ABBEY. 219 

all his attentions, he had previously excited; and 
what had been terror and dislike before was now 
absolute aversion. Yes, aversion! His cruelty 
to such a charming woman made him odious to 
her. She had often read of such characters, — char- 
acters which Mr. Allen had been used to call un- 
natural and overdrawn ; but here was proof positive 
of the contrary. 

She had just settled this point, when the end of 
the path brought them directly upon the General; 
and in spite of all her virtuous indignation, she 
found herself again obliged to walk with him, 
listen to him, and even to smile when he smiled. 
Being no longer able, however, to receive pleasure 
from the surrounding objects, she soon began to 
walk with lassitude : the General perceived it, and 
with a concern for her health, which seemed to re- 
proach her for her opinion of him, was most urgent 
for returning with his daughter to the house. He 
would follow them in a quarter of an hour. Again 
they parted; but Eleanor was called back in half a 
minute to receive a strict charge against taking 
her friend round the Abbey till his return. This 
second instance of his anxiety to delay what she 
so much wished for struck Catherine as very 
remarkable. 



% 



220 NORTIIANGER ABBEY. 



CHAPTER XXIII. 

An hour passed away before the General came in, 
spent, on the part of his young guest, in no very 
favorable consideration of his character. "This 
lengthened absence, these solitary rambles, did 
not speak a mind at ease, or a conscience void of 
reproach." At length he appeared; and whatever 
might have been the gloom of his meditations, he 
could still smile with tliem. Miss Tilney, under- 
standing in part her friend's curiosity to see the 
house, soon revived the subject; and her father 
being, contrary to Catherine's expectations, unpro- 
vided with any pretence for further delay, beyond 
that of stopping five minutes to order refreshmeuts 
to be in the room by their return, was at last ready 
to escort them. 

They set forward; and with a grandeur of air, a 
dignified step, which caught the eye, but could not 
shake the doubts of the well-read Catherine, he led 
the way across the hall, through the common 
drawing-room and one useless antechamber, into a 
room magnificent both in size and furniture, — the 
real drawing-room, used only with company of 
consequence. It was very noble, very grand, 
very charming ! was all that Catherine had to say, 
for her indiscrimii»,ting eye scarcely discerned the 
color of the satin; and all minuteness of praise, all 



NORTH ANGER ABBEY. 221 

praise that had much meaning, was supplied hy 
the General: the costliness or elegance of any 
room's fitting-up could be nothing to her; she cared 
for no furniture of a more modern date than the 
fifteenth century. When the General had satisfied 
his own curiosity in a close examination of every 
well-known ornament, they proceeded into the 
library, — an apartment, in its w^a}^, of equal mag- 
nificence, exhibiting a collection of books on 
wdiich an humble man might have looked with 
pride. Catherine heard, admired, and wondered 
with more genuine feeling than before, gathered 
all that she could from this storehouse of know- 
ledge by running over the titles of half a shelf, 
and was ready to proceed. But suites of apartments 
did not spring up with her wishes. Large as was 
the building, she had already visited the greatest 
part; though, on being told that, with the addition 
of the kitchen, the six or seven rooms she had now 
seen surrounded three sides of the court, she could 
scarcely believe it, or overcome the suspicion of 
there being many chambers secreted. It was some 
relief, however, that they were to return to the 
rooms in common use by passing through a few of 
less importance, looking into the court, w^hich, 
with occasional passages, not wholly unintricate, 
connected the different sides ; and she was further 
soothed in her progress, by being told that she was 
treading what had once been a cloister, having 
traces of cells pointed out, and observing several 
doors that were neither opened nor explained to 
her; by finding herself successively in a billiard- 
room, and in the General's private apartment, 



222 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

without comprehending their connection, or being = 
able to turn aright when she left them; and 
lastly, by passing through a dark little room, 
owning Henry's authority, and strewed with his 
litter of books, guns, and great-coats. 

From the dining-room, of which, though already 
seen, and always to be seen at five o'clock, the 
General could not forego the pleasure of pacing out 
the length, for the more certain information of 
Miss Morland, as to what she neither doubted nor 
cared for, they proceeded by quick communication 
to the kitchen, — the ancient kitchen of the con- 
vent, rich in the massy walls and smoke of former 
days, and in the stoves and hot closets of the pres- 
ent. The General's improving hand had not loi- 
tered here : every modern invention to facilitate the 
labor of the cooks had been adopted within this 
their spacious theatre; and when the genius of 
others had failed, his own had often produced the 
perfection wanted. His endowments of this spot 
alone might at any time have placed him high 
among the benefactors of the convent. 

With the walls of the kitchen ended all the an- 
tiquity of the Abbey ; the fourth side of the quad- 
rangle having, on account of its decaying state, 
been removed by the General's father, and the 
present erected in its place. All that was vener- 
able ceased here. The new building was not only 
new, but declared itself to be so ; intended only for 
offices, and enclosed behind by stable-yards, no 
uniformity of architecture had been thought neces- 
sary. Catherine could have raved at the hand 
which had swept away what must have been be- 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 223 

yond the value of all the rest, for the purposes of 
mere domestic economy; and would willingly have 
been spared the mortification of a walk through 
scenes so fallen, had the Greneral allowed it : but if 
he had a vanity, it was in the arrangement of his 
offices; and as he was convinced that to a mind 
like Miss Morland's, a view of the accommodations 
and comforts by which the labors of her inferiors 
were softened must always be gratifying, he 
should make no apology for leading her on. They 
took a slight survey of all; and Catherine was im- 
pressed, beyond her expectation, by their multipli- 
city and their convenience. The purposes for 
which a few shapeless pantries and a comfortless 
scullery were deemed sufficient at Fullerton, were 
here carried on in appropriate divisions, commodi- 
ous and roomy. The number of servants continu- 
ally appearing did not strike her less than the 
number of their offices. Wherever they went, 
some pattened girl stopped to courtesy, or some 
footman in dishabille sneaked off. Yet this was 
an abbey! How inexpressibly different in these 
domestic arrangements from such as she had read 
about, — from abbeys and castles in which, though 
certainly larger than Northanger, all the dirty 
work of the house was to be done by two pair of 
female hands at the utmost. How they could get 
through it all, had often amazed Mrs. Allen; and 
when Catherine saw what was necessary here, she 
began to be amazed herself. 

They returned to the hall, that the chief stair- 
case might be ascended, and the beauty of its wood 
and ornaments of rich carving might be pointed 



224 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

out; having gained the top, they turned in an 
opposite direction from the gallery in which her 
room lay, and shortly entered one on the same 
plan, but superior in length and breadth. She 
was here shown successively into three large bed- 
chambers, with their dressing-rooms, most com- 
pletely and handsomel}^ fitted up; everything that 
money and taste could do, to give comfort and ele- 
gance to apartments, had been bestowed on these; 
and being furnished within the last five years, 
they were perfect in all that would be generally 
pleasing, and wanting in all that could give pleas- 
ure to Catherine. As they were surveying the 
last, the General, after slightly naming a few of 
the distinguished characters by whom they had at 
times been honored, turned with a smiling counte- 
nance to Catherine, and ventured to hope tliat 
henceforward some of their earliest tenants might 
be " our friends from Fullerton.^' She felt the un- 
expected compliment, and deeply regretted the 
impossibility of thinking well of a man so kindly 
disposed towards herself, and so full of civility to 
all her family. 

The gallery was terminated by folding-doors, 
which Miss Tilney, advancing, had thrown open, 
and passed through, and seemed on the point of 
doing the same by the first door to the left, in an- 
other long reach of gallery, when the General, com- 
ing forwards, called her hastily, and, as Catherine 
thought, rather angrily back, demanding whither 
she were going ? And what was there more to be 
seen ? Had not Miss Morland already seen all 
that could be worth her notice ? And did she not 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 225 

suppose her friend might be glad of some refresh- 
ment after so much exercise ? Miss Tilney drew 
back directly, and the heavy doors were closed 
upon the mortified Catherine, who, having seen, 
in a momentary glance beyond them, a narrower 
passage, more numerous openings, and symptoms 
of a winding staircase, believed herself at last 
within the reach of something worth her notice; 
and felt, as she unwillingly paced back the gallery, 
that she would rather be allowed to examine that 
end of the house than see all the finery of all the 
rest. The General's evident desire of preventing 
such an examination was an additional stimulant. 
Something was certainly to be concealed: her 
fancy, though it had trespassed latel}^ once or 
twice, could not mislead her here ; and what that 
something was, a short sentence of Miss Tilney's, 
as they followed the General at some distance down- 
stairs, seemed to point out: "I was going to 
take you into what was my mother's room, — the 
room in which she died," were all her words; 
but few as the}^ were, they conveyed pages of intel- 
ligence to Catherine. It was no wonder that the 
General should shrink from the sight of such ob- 
jects as that room must contain, — a room in all 
probability never entered by him since the dread- 
ful scene had passed which released his suffering 
wife, and left him to the stings of conscience. 

She ventured, when next alone with Eleanor, to 
express her wish of being permitted to see it, as 
well as all the rest of that side of the house; and 
Eleanor promised to attend her there, whenever 
they should have a convenient hour. Catherine un- 
15 



226 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

derstood her; the General must be watched from 
home, before that room could be entered. '' It re- 
mains as it was, I suppose ? ^' said she, in a tone 
of feeling. 

" Yes, entirely. '^ 

^' And how long ago may it be that your mother 
died?" 

^^She has been dead these nine years." And 
nine years, Catherine knew, was a trifle of time, 
compared with what generally elapsed after the 
death of an injured wife, before her room was put 
to rights. 

" You were with her, I suppose, to the last? " 

*' No," said Miss Tilney, sighing; ''I was un- 
fortunately from home. Her illness was sudden 
and short; and before I arrived it was all over." 

Catherine's blood ran cold with the horrid sug- 
gestions which naturally sprang from these words. 
Could it be possible ? Could Henry's father ? 
And yet how maiij^ were the examples to justify 
even the blackest suspicions! And when she saw 
him in the evening, while she worked with her 
friend, slowly pacing the drawing-room for an hour 
together in silent thoughtfulness, with downcast 
eyes and contracted brow, she felt secure from all 
possibility of wronging him. It was the air and 
attitude of a Montoni ! What could more plainly 
speak the gloomy workings of a mind not wholly 
dead to every sense of humanity, in its fearful re- 
view of past scenes of guilt ? Unhappy man ! 
And the anxiousness of her spirits directed her 
eyes towards his figure so repeatedly as to catch 
Miss Tilney 's notice. ^'My father," she whis- 



NORTHANGEK ABBEY. 227 

pered, *^ often walks about the room in this way; 
it is nothing unusual.'' 

•^So much the worse!'' thought Catherine; 
Such ill-timed exercise was of a piece with the 
strange unseasonableness of his morning walks, 
and boded nothing good. 

After an evening the little variety and seeming 
length of which made her peculiarly sensible of 
Henry's importance among them, she was heartily 
glad to be dismissed; though it was a look from 
the General not designed for her observation which 
sent his daughter to the bell. When the butler 
would have lit his master's candle, however, he 
was forbidden. The latter was not going to retire. 
*'I have many pamphlets to finish," said he to 
Catherine, " before I can close my eyes ; and per- 
haps may be poring over the affairs of the nation 
for hours after you are asleep. Can either of us be 
more meetly employed ? My eyes will be blinding 
for the good of others; and yours preparing by 
rest, for future mischief." 

But neither the business alleged, nor the mag- 
nificent compliment, could win Catherine from 
thinking that some very different object must oc- 
casion so serious a delay of proper repose. To be 
kept up for hours, after the family were in bed, 
by stupid pamphlets, was not very likely. There 
must be some deeper cause: something was to be 
done which could be done only while the house- 
hold slept; and the probability that Mrs. Tilney 
yet lived, shut up for causes unknown, and receiv- 
ing from the pitiless hands of her husband a 
nightly supply of coarse food, was the conclusion 



228 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

which necessarily followed. Shocking as was the 
idea, it was at least better than a death unfairly 
hastened, as, in the natural course of things, she 
must erelong be released. The suddenness of her 
reputed illness; the absence of her daughter, and 
probably of her other children, at the time, — all 
favored the supposition of her imprisonment. Its 
origin — jealousy, perhaps, or wanton cruelty — 
was yet to be unravelled. 

In revolving these matters while she undressed, 
it suddenly struck her as not unlikely, that she 
might that morning have passed near the very spot 
of this unfortunate woman's confinement, — might 
have been within a few paces of the cell in which 
she languished out her days ; for what part of the I 
Abbey could be more fitted for the purpose than ' 
that which yet bore the traces of monastic divi- 
sion ? In the high-arched passage, paved with 
stone, which already she had trodden with peculiar 
awe, she well remembered the doors of which the 
General had given no account. To what might 
not those doors lead ? In support of the plausi- 
bility of this conjecture, it further occurred to 
her, that the forbidden gallery, in which lay the 
apartments of the unfortunate Mrs. Tilney, must 
be, as certainly as her memory could guide her, 
exactly over this suspected range of cells ; and the 
staircase by the side of those apartments of which 
she had caught a transient glimpse, communicating 
by some secret means with those cells, might well 
have favored the barbarous proceedings of her hus- 
band. Down that staircase she had perhaps been 
conveyed in a state of well-prepared insensibility. 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 229 

Catherine sometimes started at tlie boldness of 
her own surmises, and sometimes hoped or feared 
that she had gone too far; but they were supported 
by such appearances as made their dismissal im- 
possible. 

The side of the quadrangle in which she sup- 
posed the guilty scene to be acting being, accord- 
ing to her belief, just opj^osite her own, it struck 
her that if judiciously watched, some rays of light 
from the General's lamp might glimmer through 
the lower windows, as he passed to the prison of 
his wife; and twice before she stepped into bed, 
she stole gently from her room to the corresponding 
window in the gallery, to see if it appeared; but 
all abroad was dark, and it must yet be too early. 
The various ascending noises convinced her that 
the servants must still be up. Till midnight she 
supposed it would be in vain to w^atch; but then, 
when the clock had struck twelve, and all was 
quiet, she would, if not quite appalled by darkness, 
steal out and look once more. The clock struck 
twelve, — and Catherine had been half an hour 
asleep. 



230 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 



CHAPTER XXIV. 

The next day afforded no opportunity for the pro- 
posed examination of the mysterious apartments. 
It was Sunday, and the whole time between morn- 
ing and afternoon service was required by the 
General in exercise abroad or eating cold meat at 
home; and great as was Catherine's curiosity, her 
courage was not equal to a wish of exploring them 
after dinner, either by the fading light of the sky 
between six and seven o'clock, or by the yet more 
partial though stronger illumination of a treacher- 
ous lamp. The day was unmarked, therefore, by 
anything to interest her imagination bej^ond the 
sight of a very elegant monument to the memory 
of Mrs. Tilney, which immediately fronted the 
family pew. By that her eye was instantly caught 
and long retained; and the perusal of the highly 
strained epitaph, in which every virtue was 
ascribed to her by the inconsolable husband, who 
must have been in some way or other her destroyer, 
affected her even to tears. 

That the General, having erected such a monu- 
ment, should be able to face it, was not perhaps 
very strange; and yet that he could sit so boldly 
collected within its view, maintain so elevated 
an air, look so fearlessly around, nay, that he 
should even enter the church, seemed wonderful to 



NORTHAXGER ABBEY. 231 

Catherine. Not, however, that many instances of 
beings equally hardened in guilt might not be 
produced. She could remember dozens who had 
persevered in every possible vice, going on from 
crime to crime, murdering whomsoever they chose, 
without any feeling of humanity or remorse, till a 
violent death or a religious retirement closed their 
black career. The erection of the monument itself 
could not in the smallest degree affect her doubts 
of Mrs. Tilney's actual decease. Were she even to 
descend into the family vault where her ashes were 
supposed to slumber, were she to behold the coffin 
in which they were said to be enclosed, — what 
could it avail in such a case? Catherine had read 
too much not to be perfectly aware of the ease with 
which a waxen figure might be introduced, and a 
supposititious funeral carried on. 

The succeeding morning promised something 
better. The General's early walk, ill-timed as it 
was in every other view, was favorable here; and 
when she knew him to be out of the house, she 
directly proposed to Miss Tilney the accomplish- 
ment of her promise. Eleanor was ready to oblige 
her; and Catherine reminding her as they went of 
another promise, their first visit in consequence 
was to the portrait in her bedchamber. It repre- 
sented a very lovely woman, with a mild and pen- 
sive countenance, justifying so far the expectations 
of its new observer; but they were not in every re- 
spect answered, for Catherine had depended upon 
meeting with features, air, complexion, that should 
be the very counterpart, the very image, if not of 
Henry's, of Eleanor's; — the only portraits of which 



232 NORTHANGER ABBEY. i 

she had been in the habit of thinking bearing 
always an equal resemblance of mother and child. 
A face once taken was taken for generations. But 
here she was obliged to look, and consider, and 
study for a likeness. She contemplated it, how- 
ever, in spite of this drawback, with much emotion, 
and but for a yet stronger interest would have left 
it unwillingly. 

Her agitation, as they entered the great gallery, 
was too much for any endeavor at discourse; she 
could only look at her companion. Eleanor's 
countenance was dejected, yet sedate; and its com- 
posure spoke her inured to all the gloomy objects 
to which they were advancing. Again she passed 
through the folding- doors, again her hand was 
upon the important lock, and Catherine, hardiy 
able to breathe, was turning to close the former 
with fearful caution, when the figure, the dreaded 
figure, of the General himself at the further end 
of the gallery stood before her! The name of 
*' Eleanor" at the same moment, in his loudest 
tone, resounded through the building, giving to 
his daughter the first intimation of his presence, 
and to Catherine terror upon terror. An attempt 
at concealment had been her first instinctive move- 
ment on perceiving him, yet she could scarcely 
hope to have escaped his eye; and when her friend, 
w^ho with an apologizing look darted hastily by her, 
had joined and disappeared with him, she ran for 
safety to her own room, and, locking herself in, 
believed that she should never have courage to go 
down again. She remained there at least an hour, 
in the greatest agitation, deeply commiserating 



NORTH ANGER ABBEY. ' 233 

the state of her poor friend^ and expecting a sum* 
mons herself from the angry General to attend him. 
in his own apartment. JSTo summons, however, 
arrived; and at last, on seeing a carriage drive up 
to the Abbey, she was emboldened to descend 
and meet him under the protection of visitors. 
The breakfast-room was gay with company; and 
she was named to them by the General as the friend 
of his daughter, in a complimentary style, which 
so well concealed his resentful ire as to make her 
feel secure at least of life for the present. And 
Eleanor, with a command of countenance which did 
honor to her concern for his character, taking an 
early occasion of saying to her, *' My father only 
wanted me to answer a note," she began to hope 
that she had either been unseen by the General, or 
that from some consideration of policy she should 
be allowed to suppose herself so. Upon this trust 
she dared still to remain in his presence after the 
company left them, and nothing occurred to dis- 
turb it. 

In the course of this morning's reflections, she 
came to a resolution of making her next attempt on 
the forbidden door alone. It would be much better 
in every respect that Eleanor should know nothing 
of the matter. To involve her in the danger of a 
second detection, to court her into an apartment 
which must wring her heart, could not be the 
office of a friend. The General's utmost anger 
could not be to herself what it might be to a 
daughter; and, besides, she thought the examina- 
tion itself would be more satisfactory if made with- 
out any companion. It would be impossible to 



234 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

explain to Eleanor the suspicions, from which th§ 
other hadj in all likelihood, been hitherto happily 
exempt; nor could she therefore, in her presence, 
search for those proofs of the General's cruelty 
which, however they might yet have escaped dis- 
covery, she felt confident of somewhere drawing 
forth, in the shape of some fragmented journal, 
continued to the last gasp. Of the way to the 
apartment she was now perfectly mistress; and as 
she wished to get it over before Henry's return, 
who was expected on the morrow, there was no 
time to be lost. The day was bright, her courage 
high: at four o'clock the sun was now two hours 
above the horizon, and it would be only her retir- 
ing to dress half an hour earlier than usual. 

It was done ; and Catherine found herself alone 
in the gallery before the clocks had ceased to 
strike. It was no time for thought : she hurried 
on, slipped with the least possible noise through 
the folding-doors, and without stopping to look or 
breathe, rushed forward to the one in question. 
The lock yielded to her hand, and, luckily, with 
no sullen sound that could alarm a human being. 
On tiptoe she entered: the room was before her; 
but it was some minutes before she could advance 
another step. She beheld what fixed her to the 
spot and agitated every feature. She saw a large, 
well-proportioned apartment, a handsome dimity 
bed, arranged as unoccupied with a housemaid's 
care, a bright Bath stove, mahogany wardrobes 
and neatly painted chairs, on which the warm 
beams of a western sun gajly poured through two 
sash windows! Catherine had expected to have 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 235 

her feelings worked, and worked they were. 
Astonishment and doubt first seized them; and a 
shortly succeeding ray of common sense added 
some bitter emotions of shame. She could not be 
mistaken as to the room ; but how grossly mistaken 
in everything else! — in Miss Tilney's meaning, 
in her own calculation! This apartment, to which 
l^she had given a date so ancient, a position so 
awful, proved to be one end of what the General's 
father had built. There were two other doors in 
the chamber, leading probably into dressing-closets; 
but she had no inclination to open either. Would 
the veil in which Mrs. Tilney had last walked, or 
the volume in which she had last read, remain to 
tell what nothing else was allowed to whisper ? 
Ko: whatever might have been the General's 
crimes, he had certainly too much wit to let them 
sue for detection. She was sick of exploring, and 
desired but to be safe in her own room, with her 
own heart only privy to its folly ; and she was on 
the point of retreating as softly as she had entered, 
when the sound of footsteps, she could hardly tell 
where, made her pause and tremble. To be found 
there, even by a servant, would be unpleasant ; but 
by the General (and he seemed always at hand 
when least wanted) , much worse ! She listened, — 
the sound had ceased; and resolving not to lose a 
moment, she passed through and closed the door. 
At that instant a door underneath was hastily 
opened; some one seemed with swift steps to 
ascend the stairs, by the head of which she had yet 
to pass before she could gain the gallerj^ She had 
no power to move. With a feeling of terror not 



236 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

very definable, she fixed her eyes on the staircase, 
and in a few moments it gave Henry to her view. 
*'Mr. Tilney!" she exclaimed in a voice of more 
than common astonishment. He looked astonished 
too. " Good God !" she continued, not attending 
to his address, *^how came you here ? — how came 
you up that staircase ? " 

^^How came T up that staircase !" he replied, 
greatly surprised. '' Because it is my nearest way 
from the stable-yard to my own chamber; and why 
should I not come up it ? " 

Catherine recollected herself, blushed deeply, 
and could say no more. He seemed to be looking 
in her countenance for that explanation which her 
lips did not afford. She moved on towards the 
gallery. ^^And may I not, in my turn," said he, 
as he pushed back the folding-doors, " ask how 
you came here ? This passage is at least as extra- 
ordinary a road from the breakfast-parlor to your 
apartment as that staircase can be from the stables 
to mine." 

^'Ihave been," said Catherine, looking down, 
*'to see your mother's room." 

*^ My mother's room ! Is there anything extraor- 
dinary to be seen there ? " 

^^No, nothing at all. I thought you did not 
mean to come back till to-morrow." 

^'I did not expect to be able to return sooner, 
when I went away ; but three hours ago I had the 
pleasure of finding nothing to detain me. You 
look pale. I am afraid I alarmed you by running 
so fast up those stairs. Perhaps you did not know 
— you Were not aware of their leading from the 
offices in 'common use ? " 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 237 



*^No, I was not. You have had a very fine day 
for your ride.^' 

'^ Very; and does Eleanor leave you to find your 
way into all the rooms in the house by yourself ? " 

^^ Oh, no; she showed me over the greatest part 
on Saturday, and we were coming here to these 
rooms, but only, 'Mropping her voice, ^*your father 
was with us." 

*^And that prevented you," said Henry, ear- 
nestly regarding her. *' Have you looked into all 
the rooms in that passage ? " 

^^ISTo; I only wanted to see — Is not it very 
late ? I must go and dress." 

^'It is only a quarter past four,'' showing his 
watch ; ' ' and you are not now in Bath. No theatre, 
no rooms to prepare for. Half an hour at North- 
anger must be enough." 

She could not contradict it, and therefore suffered 
herself to be detained, though her dread of further 
questions made her, for the first time in their 
acquaintance, wish to leave him. They walked 
slowly up the gallery. ^' Have you had any letter 
from Bath since I saw you ? " 

'*No, and I am very much surprised. Isabella 
promised so faithfully to write directly." 

''Promised so faithfully! A faithful promise! 
That puzzles me. I have heard of a faithful per- 
formance. But a faithful promise, — the fidelity 
of promising ! It is a power little worth knowing, 
however, since it can deceive and pain you. My 
mother's room is very commodious, is it not ? 
Large and cheerful-looking, and the dressing- 
closets so well disposed. It always strikes me as 



238 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

the most comfortable apartment in the house; and 
I rather wonder that Eleanor should not take it for 
her own. She sent you to look at it, I suppose ! " 

^^No." 

** It has been your own doing entirely ? '^ 
Catherine said nothing. After a short silence, 
during which he had closely observed her, he 
added: ''As there is nothing in the room in it- 
self to raise curiosity, this must, have proceeded 
from a sentiment of respect for my mother's char- 
acter, as described by Eleanor, which does honor 
to her memory. The world, I believe, never saw 
a better woman. But it is not often that virtue 
can boast an interest such as this. The domestic, 
unpretending merits of a person never known, do 
not often create that kind of fervent, venerating 
tenderness which would prompt a visit like yours. 
Eleanor, I suppose, has talked of her a great 
deal!" 

''Yes, a great deal. That is — no, not much, 
but what she did say was very interesting. Her 
dying so suddenly," slowly, and with hesitation 
it was spoken, "and you — none of you being at 
home ; and your father, I thought, perhaps had not 
been very fond of her." 

"And from these circumstances," he replied, 
his quick eye fixed on hers, "you infer, perhaps, 
the probability of some negligence — some — " 
(involuntarily she shook her head), "or it may 
be, of something still less pardonable." She 
raised her eyes towards him more fully than she 
had ever done before. " M}^ mother's illness," he 
continued, "the seizure which ended in her death, 



NOHTHANGER ABBEY. 239 

was sudden. The malady itself one from which 
she had often suffered, — a bilious fever; its 
cause therefore constitutional. On the third day, 
in short as soon as she could be prevailed on, a 
physician attended her, — a very respectable man, 
and one in whom she had always placed great 
confidence. Upon his opinion of her danger, two 
others were called in the next day, and remained 
in almost constant attendance for four-and-twenty 
hours. On the fifth day she died. During the 
progress of her disorder Frederick and I (we were 
both at home) saw her repeatedly; and from our 
own observation can bear witness to her having 
received every possible attention which cou'd 
spring from the affection of those about her, or 
which her situation in life could command. Poor 
Eleanor was absent, and at such a distance as to 
return only to see her mother in her coffin.** 

''But your father," said Catherine, ''was he 
afflicted?" 

"For a time greatly so. You have erred in 
supposing him not attached to her. He loved her, 
I am persuaded, as well as it was possible for him 
to — We have not all, you know, the same ten- 
derness of disposition; and I will not pretend to 
say that while she lived she might not often have 
had much to bear; but though his temper injured 
her, his judgment never did. His value of her 
was sincere ; and if not permanently, he was truly 
afflicted by her death." 

"I am very glad of it," said Catherine,* "it 
would have been very shocking — " 

** If I understand you rightly, you have formed 



240 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

a surmise of such horror as I have hardly words 
to — Dear Miss Morland, consider the dreadful 
nature of the suspicions you have entertained. 
What have you been judging from ? Remember 
the country and the age in which we live. Re- 
member that we are English, that we are Christians. 
Consult your own understanding, your own sense 
of the probable, your own observation of what is 
passing around you. Does our education prepare 
us for such atrocities? Do our laws connive at them? 
Could they be perpetrated without being known, 
in a country like this, where social and literary 
intercourse is on such a footing, where every man 
is surrounded by a neighborhood of voluntary 
spies, and where roads and newspapers lay every- 
thing open ? Dearest Miss Morland, what ideas 
have you been admitting?" 

They had reached the end of the gallery; and 
with tears of shame she ran off to her own room. 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 241 



CHAPTER XXV. 

The visions of romance were over. Catherine was 
completely awakened. Henry's address, short as it 
had been, had more thoroughly opened her eyes to 
the extravagance of her late fancies than all her 
several disappointments had done. Most grievously 
was she humbled. Most bitterly did she cr3\ It 
was not only with herself that she was sunk, but 
with Henry. Her folly, which now seemed even 
criminal, was all exposed to him, and he must de- 
spise her forever. The liberty which her imagina- 
tion had dared to take with the character of his 
father, could he ever forgive it? The absurdity of 
her curiosit}^ and her fears, could they ever be for- 
gotten? She hated herself more than she could ex- 
press. He had — she thought he had, once or twice 
before this fatal morning, shown something like 
affection for her. But now — in short, she made 
herself as miserable as possible for about half an 
hour, went down, when the clock struck five, with 
a broken heart, and could scarcely give an intelli- 
gible answer to Eleanor's inquiry if she was well. 
The formidable Henry soon followed her into the 
room, and the only difference in his behavior to 
her was that he paid her rather more attention 
than usual. Catherine had never wanted comfort 
more, and he looked as if he was aware of it. 
16 



242 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

The evening wore away with no abatement of 
this soothing politeness; and her spirits were 
gradually raised to a modest tranquillity. She 
did not learn either to forget or defend the past; 
but she learned to hope that it would never tran- 
spire farther, and that it might not cost her Hen- 
^ ry's entire regard. Her thoughts being still chiefly 
/ fixed on what she had with such causeless terror 
felt and done, nothing could shortly be clearer 
than that it had been all a voluntary, self-created 
delusion, each trifling circumstance receiving im- 
portance from an imagination resolved on alarm, 
and everything forced to bend to one purpose by a 
mind which, before she entered the Abbey, had 
been craving to be frightened. She remembered 
with what feelings she had prepared for a know- 
ledge of Northanger, She saw that the infatuation 
had been created, the mischief settled long before 
her quitting Bath, and it seemed as if the whole 
might be traced to the influence of that sort of 
reading which she had there indulged. 

Charming as were all Mrs. Radcliffe's works, 
and charming even as were the works of all her 
imitators, it was not in them, perhaps, that human 
nature, at least in the midland counties of Eng- 
land, was to be looked for. Of the Alps and 
Pyrenees, with their pine forests and their vices, 
they might give a faithful delineation; and Italy, 
Switzerland, and the south of France might be as 
fruitful in horrors as they were there represented. 
Catherine dared not doubt beyond her own coun- 
try, and even of that, if hard pressed, would have 
yielded the northern and western extremities. 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 243 

But in the central part of England there was 
surely some security for the existence even of a 
wife not beloved, in the laws of the land, and the 
manners of the age. Murder was not tolerated, 
servants were not slaves, and neither poison nor 
sleeping potions to be procured, like rhubarb, from 
every druggist. Among the Alps and Pyrenees, 
perhaps, there were no mixed characters. There, 
such as were not as spotless as an angel might 
have the dispositions of a fiend. But in England 
it was not so; among the English, she believed, 
in their hearts and habits, there was a general 
though unequal mixture of good and bad. Upon 
this conviction, she would not be surprised if even 
in Henry and Eleanor Tilney some slight imper- 
fection might hereafter appear; and upon this 
conviction she need not fear to acknowledge some 
actual specks in the character of their father, who, 
though cleared from the grossly injurious sus- 
picions which she must ever blush to have enter- 
tained, she did believe, upon serious consideration, 
to be not perfectly amiable. 

Her mind made up on these several points, and 
her resolution formed, of always judging and act- 
ing in future with the greatest good sense, she had 
nothing to do but to forgive herself and be hap- 
pier than ever; and the lenient hand of time 
did much for her by insensible gradations in the 
course of another day. Henry's astonishing gen- 
erosity and nobleness of conduct, in never allud- 
ing in the slightest way to what had passed, was 
of the greatest assistance to her; and sooner than 
she could have supposed it possible in the begin- 



244 NORTH ANGER ABBEY. 

ning of her distress, her spirits became absolutely 
comfortable, and capable, as heretofore, of contiimai 
improvement by anything he said. There were 
still some subjects, indeed, under which she be- 
lieved they must always tremble, — the mention 
of a chest or a cabinet, for instance, and she did 
not love the sight of japan in any shape; but even 
she could allow that an occasional memento of 
past folly, however painful, might not be without 
use. 

The anxieties of common life began soon to suc- 
ceed to the alarms of romance. Pier desire of hear- 
ing from Isabella grew every day greater. She 
was quite impatient to know how the Bath world 
went on, and how the Rooms were attended; and 
especially was she anxious to be assured of Isa- 
bella's having matched some fine netting cotton, 
on which she had left her intent; and of her con- 
tinuing on the best terms with James. Her only 
dependence for information of any kind was on 
Isabella. James had protested against writing to 
her till his return to Oxford; and Mrs. Allen had 
given her no hopes of a letter till she had got 
back to Fullerton. But Isabella had promised and 
promised again; and when she promised a thing, 
she was so scrupulous in performing it! This made 
it so particularly strange ! 

For nine successive mornings Catherine won- 
dered over the repetition of a disappointment 
which each morning became more severe; but on 
the tenth, when she entered the breakfast-room, 
her first object was a letter, held out by Henry's 
willing hand. She thanked him as heartily as if 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 245 

he had written it himself. ^^'Tis only from 
James, however/' as she looked at the direction. 
She o^Dened it: it was from Oxford; and to this 
purpose : — 

Dear Catherine, — Though God knows, with little 
inclination for writing, I think it my duty to tell you 
that everything is at an end between Miss Thorpe and 
me. I left her and Bath yesterday, never to see either 
again. I shall not enter into particulars, they would 
only pain you more. You will soon hear enough from 
another quarter to know where lies the blame ; and I 
hope will acquit your brother of everything but the folly 
of too easily thinking his affection returned. Thank 
God ! I am undeceived in time ! But it is a heavy blow ! 
After my father's consent had been so kindly given — 
But no more of this. She has made me miserable for- 
ever 1 Let me soon hear from you, dear Catherine ; you 
are my only friend ; your love I do build upon. I wish 
your visit at Northanger may be over before Captain 
; Tilney makes his engagement known, or you will be un- 
j comfortably circumstanced. Poor Thorpe is in town : 
I I dread the sight of him ; his honest heart would feel so 
I much. I have written to him and my father. Her du- 
plicity hurts me more than all ; till the very last, if I 
reasoned with her, she declared herself as much attached 
to me as ever and laughed at my fears. I am ashamed 
to think how long I bore with it ; but if ever man had 
reason to believe himself loved, I was that man. I can- 
not understand even now, what she would be at, for 
there could be no need of my being played off to make 
her secure of Tilney. We parted at last by mutual con- 
sent — happy for me had we never met ! I can never 
expect to know such another woman ! Dearest Cathe- 
rine, beware how you give your heart. 
Beheve me, etc. 



246 NORTHANGEIl ABBEY. 

Catherine had not read three lines before her 
sudden change of countenance, and short exclama- 
tions of sorrowing wonder declared her to be re- 
ceiving unpleasant news; and Henry, earnestly 
watching her through the whole letter, saw plainly 
that it ended no better than it began. He was 
prevented, however, from even looking his surprise 
by his father's entrance. They went to breakfast 
directly; but Catherine could hardly eat anything. 
Tears filled her eyes, and even ran down her 
cheeks as she sat. The letter was one moment in 
her hand, then in her lap, and then in her pocket; 
and she looked as if she knew not what she did. 
The General, between his cocoa and his newspaper, 
had luckily no leisure for noticing her; but to the 
other two her distress was equally visible. As 
soon as she dared leave the table, she hurried 
away to her own room; but the housemaids were 
busy in it, and she was obliged to come down 
again. She turned into the drawing-room for 
privacy; but Henry and Eleanor had likewise re- 
treated thither, and were at that moment deep in 
consultation about her. She drew back, trying to 
beg their pardon, but was, with gentle violence, 
forced to return; and the others withdrew, after 
Eleanor had affectionately expressed a wish of 
being of use or comfort to her. 

After half an hour's free indulgence of grief and 
reflection, Catherine felt equal to encountering her 
friends ; but whether she should make her distress 
known to them was another consideration. Per- 
haps, if particularly questioned, she might just 
give an idea — just distantly hint at it — but not 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 247 

more. To expose a friend, such a friend as Isa- 
bella had been to her — and then their own brother 
so closely concerned in it ! She believed she must 
waive the subject altogether. Henry and Eleanor 
were by themselves in the breakfast-room; and 
each, as she entered it, looked at her anxiously. 
Catherine took her place at the table, and after a 
short silence Eleanor said: ''No bad news from 
Eullerton, I hope? Mr. and Mrs. Morland — 
your brothers and sisters — I hope they are none 
of them ill?" 

''No, I thank you," sighing as she spoke; 
" they are all very well. My letter was from my 
brother at Oxford." 

Nothing further was said for a few minutes ; and 
then, speaking through her tears, she added, "I 
do not think I shall ever wish for a letter again! " 

"I am sorry," said Henry, closing the book 
he had just opened; " if I had suspected the letter 
of containing anything unwelcome, I should have 
given it with very different feelings." 

" It contained something worse than anybody 
could suppose ! Poor James is so unhappy ! You 
will soon know why." 

"To have so kind-hearted, so affectionate a 
sister," replied Henry, warmly, "must be a com- 
fort to him under any distress." 

"I have one favor to beg," said Catherine, 
shortly afterwards, in an agitated manner, "that 
if your brother should be coming here, you will 
give me notice of it, that I may go away." 

' ' Our brother ! Frederick ! " 

" Yes; I am sure I should be very sorry to leave 



248 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

you so soon, but something has happened that 
would make it very dreadful for me to be in the 
same house with Captain Tilney.'' 

Eleanor's work was suspended while she gazed 
with increasing astonishment; but Henry began to 
suspect the truth, and something, in which Miss 
Thorpe's name was included, j)assed his lips. 

''How quick you are! " cried Catherine: ''you 
have guessed it, I declare! And yet, when we 
talked about it in Bath, you little thought of its 
ending so. Isabella — no wonder now I have not 
heard from her — Isabella has deserted my brother 
and is to marry yours ! Could you have believed 
there had been such inconstancy, and fickleness, 
and everything that is bad in the world? " 

" I hope, so far as concerns my brother, you are 
misinformed. I hope he has not had any material 
share in bringing on Mr. Morland's disappoint- 
ment. His marrying Miss Thorpe is not probable. 
I think you must be deceived so far. I am very 
sorry for Mr. Morland, — sorry that any one you 
love should be unhappy ; but my surprise would be 
greater at Frederick's marrying her than at any 
other part of the stor3\" 

"It is very true, however; you shall read 
James's letter yourself. Stay — there is one 
part — " recollecting, with a blush, the last line. 

" Will you take the trouble of reading to us the 
passages which concern my brother? " 

"No, read it yourself," cried Catherine, whose 
second thoughts were clearer. " I do not know what 
I was thinking of," blushing again that she had 
blushed before, — "James only means to give me 
good advice." 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 249 

He gladly received the letter; and having read 
it through with close attention, returned it, saying : 
*^Well, if it is to be so, I can only say that I am 
sorry for it. Frederick will not be the first man 
who has chosen a wife with less sense than his 
family expected. I do not envy his situation, 
either as a lover or a son." 

Miss Tilney, at Catherine's invitation, now read 
the letter likewise ; and having expressed also her 
concern and surprise, began to inquire into Miss 
Thorpe's connections and fortune. 

*^Her mother is a very good sort of woman," 
was Catherine's answer. 

^^What was her father? " 

'^ A lawyer, I believe. They live at Putney." 

*' Are they a wealthy family ? " 

*'N"o, not very. I do not believe Isabella has 
any fortune at all; but that will not signify in 
your family. Your father is so very liberal ! He 
told me the other day that he only valued money 
as it allowed him to promote the happiness of his 
children." The brother and sister looked at each 
other. '' But," said Eleanor, after a short pause, 
'* would it be to promote his happiness to enable 
him to marry such a girl ? She must be an un- 
principled one, or she could not have used your 
brother so. And how strange an infatuation on 
Frederick's side ! A girl who, before his eyes, is 
violating an engagement voluntarily entered into 
with another man ! Is not it inconceivable, 
Henry? Frederick, too, who always wore his heart 
so proudly, who found no woman good enough to 
be loved ! " 



250 NOllTHANGER ABBEY. 

^'Tliat is the most unpromising circumstance, 
the strongest presumption against him. When I 
think of his past declarations, I give him up. 
Moreover, I have too good an opinion of Miss 
Thorpe's prudence, to suppose that she would part 
with one gentleman before the other was secured. 
It is all over with Frederick, indeed ! He is a 
deceased man, — defunct in understanding. Pre- 
pare for your sister-in-law, Eleanor, and such a 
sister-in-law as you must delight in ! Open, can- 
did, artless, guileless, with affections strong but 
simple, forming no pretensions, and knowing no 
disguise." 

**'Such a sister-in-law, Henry, I should delight 
in," said Eleanor, with a smile. 

*^But, perhaps," observed Catherine, ^^ though 
she has behaved so ill by our family, she may be- 
have better by yours. Now she has really got the 
man she likes, she may be constant." 

'' Indeed, I am afraid she will," replied Henry; 
^^I am afraid she will be very constant, unless a 
baronet should come in her way; that is Frederick's 
only chance. I will get the Bath paper, and look 
over the arrivals." 

*' You think it is all for ambition, then ? And 
* Upou my word, there are some things that seem 
very like it. I cannot forget that when she first 
knew what my father would do for them, she 
seemed quite disappointed that it was not more. 
I never was so deceived in any one's character in 
my life before." 

" Among all the great variety that you have 
known and studied." 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 251 

*^My own disappointment and loss in her is 
very great; but as for poor James, I suppose lie 
will hardly ever recover it." 

^^ Your brother is certainly very much to be 
pitied at present ; but we must not, in our concern 
for his sufferings, undervalue yours. You feel, I 
suppose, that in losing Isabella, you lose half 
yourself; you feel a void in your heart which noth- 
ing else can occupy. Society is becoming irksome, 
and aa> for the amusements in which jou. were wont 
to share at Bath, the very idea of them without 
her is abhorrent. You would not, for instance, 
now go to a ball for the world. You feel that you 
have no longer any friend to whom you can speak 
with unreserve; on whose regard you can place de- 
pendence ; or whose counsel, in any difficult}^, you 
could rely on. You feel all this ? " 

^*No,'' said Catherine, after a few moments' re- 
flection, **I do not — ought I ? To say the truth, 
though I am hurt and grieved that I cannot still 
love her, that I am never to hear from her, perhaps 
never to see her again, I do not feel so very, very 
much afflicted as one would have thought.'' 

**You feel, as you always do, what is most to 
the credit of human nature. Such feelings ought 
to be investigated, that they may know them-* 
selves." 

Catherine, by some chance or other, found her 
spirits so very much relieved by this conversation, 
that she could not regret her being led on, though 
so unaccountably, to mention the circumstance 
which had produced it. 



252 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 



CHAPTEK XXVI. 

"From this time, the subject was frequently can- 
vassed by the three young people; and Catherine 
found, with some surprise, that her two young 
friends were perfectly agreed in considering Isa- 
bella's want of consequence and fortune as likely 
to throw great difficulties in the way of her marry- 
ing their brother. Their persuasion that the 
General would, upon this ground alone, indepen- 
dent of the objection that might be raised against 
her character, oppose the connection, turned her 
feelings, moreover, with some alarm towards her- 
self. She was as insignificant and perhaps as 
portionless as Isabella; and if the heir of the Til- 
ney property had not grandeur and wealth enough 
in himself, at what point of interest were the de- 
mands of his younger brother to rest ? The very 
painful reflections to which this thought led could 
only be dispersed by a dependence on the effect of 
that particular partiality which, as she was given 
to understand by his words as well as his actions, 
she had from the first been so fortunate as to ex- 
cite in the General; and by a recollection of some 
most generous and disinterested sentiments on the 
subject of money, which she had more than once 
heard him utter, and which tempted her to think 
his disposition in such matters misunderstood by 
his children. 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 253 

They were so fully convinced, however, that 
their brother would not have the courage to apply 
in person for his father's consent, and so repeat- 
edly assured her that he had never in his life been 
less likely to come to North anger than at the pres- 
ent time, that she suffered her mind to be at ease 
as to the necessity of any sudden removal of her 
own. But as it was not to be supposed that Captain 
Tilney, whenever he made his application, would 
give his father any just idea of Isabella's conduct, 
it occurred to her as highly expedient that Henry 
should lay the whole business before him as it 
really was, enabling the General by that means to 
form a cool and impartial opinion, and prepare his 
objections on a fairer ground than inequality of 
situations. She proposed it to him accordingly; 
but he did not catch at the measure so eagerly as 
she had expected. ^^No,'' said he; *^ my father's 
hands need not be strengthened, and Frederick's 
confession of folly need not be forestalled. He 
must tell his own story." 

^^But he will tell only half of it.*' 

**A quarter would be enough." 

A day or two passed away, and brought no tid- 
ings of Captain Tilney. His brother and sister, 
knew not what to think. Sometimes it appeared 
to them as if his silence would be the n?-^""-'' 
suit of the suspected engascf" 
that it was wholly inc 
General, meanwhile, 
ing by Frederick'^ 
from any real "'" 
pressing soli 



254 NORTHANGER ABBEr. 

land's time at Northanger pass pleasantly. He 
often expressed his uneasiness on this head, feared 
the sameness of every day's society and employ- 
ments would disgust her with the place, wished 
the Lady Erasers had been in the country, talked 
every now and then of having a large party to 
dinner, and once or twice began even to calculate 
the number of young dancing people in the neigh- 
borhood. But then it was such a dead time of 
year, no wild-fowl, no game, and the Lady Erasers 
were not in the country. And it all ended, at last, 
in his telling Henry, one morning, that when he 
next went to Woodston, they would take him by 
surprise there some day or other, and eat their 
mutton with him. Henry was greatly honored 
and very happy, and Catherine was quite delighted 
with the scheme. ^^ And when do you think, sir, 
I may look forward to this pleasure ? I must be 
at Woodston on Monday to attend the parish meet- 
ing, and shall probably be obliged to stay two or 
three days." 

'* Well, well, we will take our chance some one 
of those days. There is no need to fix. You are 
not to put yourself at all out of your way. What- 
ever you may happen to have in the house will be 
nough. I think I can answer for the young 
oVing allowance for a bachelor's table, 
will be a busy day with you, 
nday; and Tuesday will 
expect my surveyor 
in the morning; 
- fa^l attending 
acquaintance 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 255 

if I stayed away now; for, as I am known to be 
in the country, it would be taken exceedingly 
amiss; and it is a rule with me. Miss Morland, 
never to give offence to any of my neighbors, if a 
small sacrifice of time and attention can prevent it. 
They are a set of very worthy men. They have half 
a buck from Nor than ger twice a year; and I dine 
with them whenever I can. Tuesday, therefore, we 
may say, is out of the question. But on Wednes- 
day, I think, Henry, you may expect us; and we 
shall be with you early, that we may have time to 
look about us. Two hours and three quarters will 
carry us to Woodston, I suppose: we shall be in 
the carriage by ten; so, about a quarter before one 
on Wednesday, you may look for us." 

A ball itself could not have been more welcome 
to Catherine than this little excursion, so strong 
was her desire to be acquainted with Woodston; 
and her heart was still bounding with joy, when 
Henry, about an hour afterwards, came booted and 
great-coated into the room where she and Eleanor 
were sitting, and said: ''I am come, young ladies, 
in a very moralizing strain, to observe that our 
pleasures in this world are always to be paid for, 
and that we often purchase them at a great disad- 
vantage, giving ready-moneyed actual happiness for 
a draft on the future that may not be honored. 
Witness myself at this present hour. Because I 
am to hope for the satisfaction of seeing you at 
Woodston on Wednesday, which bad weather or 
twenty other causes may prevent, I must go away 
directly, two days before I intended it.'' 

"Go away!'' said Catherine, with a very long 
face; ^'and why?" 



256 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

*'Why! How can you ask the question? Be- 
cause no time is to be lost in frightening my old 
housekeeper out of her wits, because I must go 
and prepare a dinner for you, to be sure/' 

^*0h! not seriously! '^ 

**Ay, and sadly too, — for I had much rather 
stay. " 

'^But how can you think of such a thing after 
what the Greneral said? — when he so particularly 
desired you not to give yourself any trouble, be- 
cause anything would do.'' 

Henry only smiled. " I am sure it is quite un- 
necessary upon your sister's account and mine. 
You must know it to be so ; and the General madk5 
such a point of your providing nothing extraordi- 
nary : besides, if he had not said half so much as 
he did, he has always such an excellent dinner at 
home, that sitting down to a middling one for one 
day could not signify." 

''1 wish I could reason like you, for his sake 
and my own. Good-by. As to-morrow is Sunday, 
Eleanor, I shall not return." 

He went; and it being at any time a much sim- 
pler operation to Catherine to doubt her own judg- 
ment than Henry's, she was very soon obliged to 
give him credit for being right, however disagree- 
able to her his going. But the inexplicability of 
the General's conduct dwelt much on her thoughts. 
That he was very particular in his eating, she had, 
by her own unassisted observation, already dis- 
covered; but why he should say one thing so posi- 
tively, and mean another all the while, was most 
unaccountable! How were people, at that rate^ to 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 257 

be understood? Who but Henry could have been 
aware of what his father was at? 

From Saturday to Wednesday, however, they 
were now to be without Henry. This was the sad 
finale of every reflection : and Captain Tilney's 
letter would certainly come in his absence; and 
Wednesday, she was very sure, would be wet. 
The past, present, and future were all equally in 
gloom. Her brother so unhappy, and her loss in 
Isabella so great; and Eleanor's spirits always 
affected by Henry's absence! What was there to 
interest or amuse her? She was tired of the woods 
and the shrubberies, — always so smooth and so 
dry; and the Abbey in itself was no more to her 
now than any other house. The painful remem- 
brance of the folly it had helped to nourish and 
perfect was the only emotion which could spring 
from "a consideration of the building. What a rev- 
olution in her ideas! — she, who had so longed to be 
in an abbey! Now, there was nothing so charm- 
ing to her imagination as the unpretending comfort 
of a well-connected parsonage, — something like 
Fullerton, but better : Fullerton had its faults, but 
Woodston probably had none. If Wednesday 
should ever come! 

It did come, and exactly when it might be rea- 
sonably looked for. It came, — it was fine, and 
Catherine trod on air. By ten o'clock the chaise- 
and-four conveyed the two from the Abbey; and 
after an agreeable drive of almost twenty miles, 
they entered Woodston, a large and populous vil^ 
lage, in a situation not unpleasant. Catherine 
was ashamed to say how pretty she thought it, as 
17 



258 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

the General seemed to think an apology necessary 
• for the flatness of the country and the size of the 
village ; but in her heart she preferred it to any 
place she had ever been at, and looked with great 
admiration at every neat house above the rank of a 
cottage, and at all the little chandler's shops which 
they passed. At the further end of the village, 
and tolerably disengaged from the rest of it, stood 
the Parsonage, a new-built, substantial^ stone 
house, with its semicircular sweep and green gates ; 
and as they drove up to the door, Henry, with the 
friends of his solitude, a large Newfoundland 
puppy and two or three terriers, was ready to re- 
ceive and make much of them. 

Catherine's mind was too full, as she entered 
the house, for her either to observe or to say a 
great deal; and till called on by the General for 
her opinion of it, she had very little idea of the 
room in which she was sitting. Upon looking 
round it then, she perceived in a moment that it 
was the most comfortable room in the world; but 
she was too guarded to say so, and the coldness 
of her praise disappointed him. 

^^ We are not calling it a good house," said he. 
'^We are not comparing it with Fullerton and 
Northanger. We are considering it as a mere 
parsonage, small and confined, we allow, but de- 
cent, perhaps, and habitable, and altogether not 
inferior to the generality; or in other words, I 
believe there are few country parsonages in Eng- 
land half so good. It may admit of improvement, 
however. Far be it from me to say otherwise; 
and anything in reason — a bow thrown out, per- 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 259 

haps — though, between ourselves, if there is one 
thing more than another my aversion, it is a 
;patchecl-on bow." 

Catherine did not hear enough of this speech to 
understand or be pained by it; and other subjects 
being studiously brought forward and supported by 
Henry, at the same time that a tray full of refresh- 
jments was introduced by his servant, the General 
J was shortly restored to his complacency, and Cath- 
j erine to all her usual ease of spirits. 
I The room in question was of a commodious, well- 
j proportioned size, and handsomely fitted up as a 
idining-parlor; and on their quitting it to walk 
i round the grounds, she was shown, first into a 
I smaller apartment, belonging peculiarly to the 
' master of the house, and made unusually tidy on 
i the occasion; and afterwards into what was to be 
I the drawing-room, with the appearance of which, 
though unfurnished, Catherine was delighted 
enough even to satisfy the General. It was a pret- 
tily shaped room, the windows reaching to the 
ground, and the view from them pleasant, though 
only over green meadows; and she expressed her 
admiration at the moment with all the hotiest sim- 
iplicity with which she felt it. ^^Oh, why do not 
you fit up this room, Mr. Tilney ? What a pity 
not to have it fitted up ! It is the prettiest room I 
ever saw; — it is the prettiest room in the world! " 
"1 trust,'' said the General, with a most satis- 
fied smile, ^' that it will very speedily be fur- 
nished: it waits only for a lady's taste.'' 

^'Well, if it was my house, I should never sit 
anywhere else. Oh, what a sweet little cottage 



260 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

there is among the trees, — apple-trees too! It is 
the prettiest cottage — ^' 

"You like it, — you approve it as an object; 
it is enough. Henry, remember that Robinson is 
spoken to about it. The cottage remains.'' 

Such a compliment recalled all Catherine's con- 
sciousness, and silenced her directly; and though 
pointedly applied to by the General for her choice 
of the prevailing color of the paper and hangings, 
nothing like an opinion on the subject could be 
drawn from her. The influence of fresh objects 
and fresh air, however, was of great use in dissi- 
pating these embarrassing associations; and having 
reached the ornamental part of the premises, con- 
sisting of a walk round two sides of a meadow, on 
which Henry's genius had begun to act about half 
a year ago, she was sufficiently recovered to think 
it prettier than any pleasure-ground she had ever 
been in before, though there was not a shrub in it 
higher than the green bench in the corner. 

A saunter into other meadows, and through 
part of the village, with a visit to the stables to 
examine some improvements, and a charming game 
of play with a litter of puppies just able to roll 
about, brought them to four o'clock, when Cathe- 
rine scarcely thought it could be three. At four 
they were to dine, and at six to set off on their 
return. Never had any day passed so quickly! 

She could not but observe that the abundance of 
the dinner did not seem to create the smallest 
astonishment in the General; nay, that he was 
even looking at the side-table for cold meat which 
was not there. His son and daughter's observa- 



J 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 261 

tions were of a different kind. They had seldom 
seen him eat so heartily at any table but his own, 
and never before known him so little disconcerted 
by the melted butter's being oiled. 

At six o'clock, the General having taken his 
coffee, the carriage again received them; and so 
gratifying had been the tenor of his conduct 
throughout the whole visit, so well assured was 
her mind on the subject of his expectations, that, 
could she have felt equally confident of the wishes 
of his son, Catherine would have quitted Woodstou 
with little anxiety as to the how or the when she 
might return to it. 



262 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 



CHAPTER XXVII. 

The next morning brought the following very 
unexpected letter from Isabella : — 

Bath, April, — . 
My dearest Catherine, — I received your two kind 
letters with the greatest delight, and have a thousand 
apologies to make for not answering them sooner. I 
really am quite ashamed of my idleness ; but in this 
horrid olace one can find time for nothing. I have had 
my pen in my hand to begin a letter to you almost every 
day since you left Bath, but have always been prevented 
by some silly trifler or other. Pray write to me soon, 
and direct to my own home. Thank God ! we leave this 
vile place to-morrow. Since you went away, I have had no 
pleasure in it, — the dust is beyond anything, and every- 
body one cares for is gone. I believe if I could see you I 
should not mind the rest, for you are dearer to me than 
anybody can conceive. I am quite uneasy about your 
dear brother, not having heard from him since he went 
to Oxford; and am fearful of some misunderstanding. 
Your kind offices will set all right : he is the only man 1 
ever did or could love, and I trust you will convince him 
of it. The spring fashions are partly down, and the hats 
the most frightful you can imagine. I hope you spend 
your time pleasantly, but am afraid you never think of 
me. I will not say all that I could of the family you are 
with, because I would not be ungenerous, or set you 
against those you esteem ; but it is very difficult to know 
whom to trust, and young men never know their minds 
two days together. 1 rejoice to say that the young man 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 263 

whom, of all others, I particularly abhor, has left Bath. 
You will know from this description I must mean 
Captain Tilney, who, as you may remember, was amaz- 
ingly disposed to follow and tease me, before you went 
away. Afterwards he got worse, and became quite my 
shadow. Many girls might have been taken in, for never 
were such attentions ; but I knew the fickle sex too well. 
He went away to his regiment two days ago, and I trust 
I shall never be plagued with him again. He is the 
greatest coxcomb I ever saw, and amazingly disagreeable. 
The last two days he was always by the side of Charlotte 
Davis : I pitied his taste, but took no notice of him. The 
last time we met was in Bath Street, and I turned 
directly into a shop that he might not speak to me; I 
would not even look at him. He went into the Pump- 
room afterwards, but I would not have followed him for 
I all the world. Such a contrast between him and your 

I brother 1 Pray send me some news of the latter. I am 
quite unhappy about him, he seemed so uncomfortable 
when he went away, with a cold, or something that af- 

\ fected his spirits. I would write to him myself, but have 

II mislaid his direction ; and, as I hinted above, am afraid 
j: he took something in my conduct amiss. Pray explain 
I everything to his satisfaction ; or if he still harbors any 
j doubt, a line from himself to me, or a call at Putney 
liwhen next in town, might set all to rights. I have not 

been to the Rooms this age, nor to the play, except going 
I in last night with the Hod^eses, for a frolic, at half-price : 
they teased me into it, and I was determined they should 
not say I shut myself up because Tilney was gone. We 
happened to sit by the Mitchells, and they pretended to 
be quite surprised to see me out. I knew their spite : at 
one time they could not be civil to me, but now they are 
all friendship ; but I am not such a fool as to be taken in 
by them. You know I have a pretty good spirit of my 
lown. Anne Mitchell had tried to put on a turban like 
mine, as I wore it the week before at the Concert, but 



264 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

made wretched work of it. It happened to become my 
odd face, I believe, — at least Tilney told me so at the 
time, and said every eye was upon me; but he is the last 
man whose word I would take. I wear nothing but pur- 
ple now : I know 1 look hideous in it, but no matter, — it 
is your dear brother's favorite color. Lose no time, my 
dearest, sweetest Catherine, in writing to him and to me, 
Who ever am, etc. 

Such a strain of shallow artifice could not impose 
even upon Catherine. Its inconsistencies, contra- 
dictions, and falsehood struck her from the very- 
first. She was ashamed of Isabella, and ashamed 
of having ever loved her. Her professions of 
attachment were now as disgusting as her excuses 
were empty, and her demands impudent. *' Write 
to James on her behalf! No, James should never 
hear Isabella's name mentioned by her again.'^ 

On Henry's arrival from Woodston she made 
known to him and Eleanor their brother's safety, 
congratulating them with sincerity on it, and read- 
ing aloud the most material passages of her letter 
with strong indignation. When she had finished 
it, '^So much for Isabella," she cried, *'and for 
all our intimacy! She must think me an idiot, 
or she could not have written so; but perhaps this 
has served to make her character better known to 
me than mine is to her. I see what she has been 
about. She is a vain coquette, and her tricks have 
not answei-ed. I do not believe she had ever any 
regard either for James or for me, and I wish I had 
never known her." 

"It will soon be as if you never had," said 
Henry. 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 265 

'^ There is but one thing that I cannot under- 
stand. I see that she has had designs on Captain 
Tilney which have not succeeded; but I do not 
, understand what Captain Tilney has been about all 
i this time. Why should he pay her such attentions 
as to make her quarrel with my brother, and then 
I fly off himself?" ^ 

I ^' I have very little to say for Frederick's motives, 
I such as I believe them to have been. He has his 
j vanities as well as Miss Thorpe; and the chief' 
difference is that, having a stronger head, they 
have not yet injured himself. If the effect of his 
! behavior does not justify him with you, we had 
better not seek after the cause." 

*^ Then you do not sujDpose he ever really cared 
i about her ? " 

j " I am persuaded that he never did." 
I ** And only made believe to do so for mischiefs 
[sake?" 

i Henry bowed his assent. 

j "Well, then, I must say that I do not like him 
I at all. Though it has turned out so well for us, I 
( do not like him at all. As it happens, there is no 
|; great harm done, because I do not think Isabella 
ii has any heart to lose. But suppose he had made 
her very much in love with him ? " 

"But we must first suppose Isabella to have 
had a heart to lose, consequently to have been a very 
different creature; and in that case she would 
have met with very different treatment." 

"It is very right that you should stand by your 
■brother." 

" And if you would stand by yours, you would 



266 NOKTH ANGER ABBEY. 

not be mucli distressed by the disappointment of 
Miss Thorpe. But your mind is warped by an 
innate principle of general integrity, and there- 
fore not accessible to the cool reasonings of family 
partiality, or a desire of revenge." 

Catherine was complimented out of further bit- 
terness. Frederick could not be unpardonably 
guilty while Henry made himself so agreeable. She 
resolved on not answering Isabella's letter, and 
tried to think no more of it. 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 267 



CHAPTER XXVIII. 

Soon after this, the General found himself obliged 
to go to London for a week; and he left North- 
anger, earnestly regretting that anj^ necessity 
I should rob him, even for an hour, of Miss Mor- 
land's compan}^, and anxiously recommending the 
study of her comfort and amusement to his chil- 
I dren, as their chief object in his absence. His 
i dej^arture gave Catherine the first experimental 
I conviction that a loss may be sometimes a gain. 
t The happiness with which their time now passed 
— every employment voluntary, every laugh in- 
, dulged, everj^ meal a scene of ease and good- 
humor, walking where they liked and when they 
liked, their hours, pleasures, and fatigues at their 
own command, — made her thoroughly sensible of 
the restraint which the General's presence had 
imposed, and most thankfully feel their present 
release from it. Such ease and such delights 
made her love the place and the people more and 
more every day; and had it not been for a dread 
of its soon becoming expedient to leave the one, 
and an apprehension of not being equally beloved 
by the other, she would at each moment of each day 
have been perfectly happy ; but she was now in the 
fourth week of her visit; before the General came 
home, the fourth week would be turned, and per- 



268 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

haps it might seem an intrusion if she stayed 
much longer. This was a painful consideration 
whenever it occurred; and eager to get rid of such 
a weight on her mind, she very soon resolved to 
speak to Eleanor about it at once, propose going 
away, and be guided in her conduct by the man- 
ner in which her proposal might be taken. 

Aware that if she gave herself much time, she 
might feel it difficult to bring forward so unpleas- 
ant a subject, she took the first opportunity of 
being suddenly alone with Eleanor, and of Elea- 
nor's being in the middle of a speech about some- 
thing very different, to start forth her obligation 
of going away very soon. Eleanor looked and 
declared herself much concerned. She had '' hoped 
for the pleasure of her company for a much longer 
time, — had been misled (perhaps by her wishes) 
to suppose that a much longer visit had been 
promised, — and could not but think that if Mr. 
and Mrs. Morland were aware of the pleasure it 
was to her to have her there, they would be too 
generous to hasten her return." Catherine ex- 
plained: ^'Oh, as to that, papa and mamma Avere 
in no hurry at all. As long as she was happy, 
they would alwaj^s be satisfied." 

^^Then why, might she ask, in such a hurry 
herself to leave them?" 

'' Oh, because she had been there so long." 

^^Nay, if you can use such a word, I can urge 
you no farther. If you think it long — " 

" Oh, no, I do not indeed. Eor my own pleas- 
ure, I could stay with you as long again." And 
it was directly settled that till she had, her leav- 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 269 

ing them was not even to be thought of. In having 
this cause of uneasiness so pleasantly removed, the 
i force of the other was likewise weakened. The 
i kindness, the earnestness of Eleanor's manner in 
[ pressing her to stay, and Henry's gratified look on 
I being told that her stay was determined, were 
I such sweet proofs of her importance with them, as 
! left her only just so much solicitude as the human 
'[ mind can never do comfortably without. She did 
j — almost always — believe that Henry loved her, 
, and quite always that his father and sister loved 
and even wished her to belong to them; and be- 
I lieving so far, her doubts and anxieties were 
I merely sportive irritations. 

Henry was not able to obey his father's injunc- 

I tion of remaining wholly at Northanger, in at- 

1 tendance on the ladies, during his absence in 

London; the engagements of his curate at Wood- 

ston obliging him to leave them on Saturday for a 

couple of nights. His loss was not now what it. 

had been while the General was at home : it les- 

I sened their gayety, but did not ruin their comfort; 

' and the two girls, agreeing in occupation and 

improving in intimacy, found themselves so well- 

I sufficient for the time to themselves, that it 

was eleven o'clock, rather a late hour at the 

' Abbey, before they quitted the supper-room on the 

day of Henry's departure. They had just reached 

the head of the stairs, when it seemed, as far as 

the thickness of the walls would allow them to 

! judge, that a carriage was driving up to the door; 

and the next moment confirmed the idea by the 

loud noise of the house-bell. After the first per- 



270 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

turbation of surprise had passed away, in a 
"Good heaven! what can be the matter?" it 
was quickly decided by Eleanor to be her eldest 
brother, whose arrival was often as sudden, if not 
quite so unseasonable; and accordingly she hur- 
ried down to welcome him. 

Catherine walked on to her chamber, making up 
her mind, as well as she could, to a further ac- 
quaintance with Captain Tilney, and comforting 
herself under the unpleasant impression his con- 
duct had given her, and the persuasion of his be- 
ing by far too fine a gentleman to approve of her, 
that at least they should not meet under such cir- 
cumstances as would make their meeting mate- 
rially painful. She trusted he would never speak 
of Miss Thorpe; and indeed, as he must by this 
time be ashamed of the part he had acted, there 
could be no danger of it; and as long as all men- 
tion of Bath scenes was avoided, she thought she 
could behave to him very civilly. In such con- 
siderations time passed away, and it was certainly 
in his favor that Eleanor should be so glad to see 
him, and have so much to say, for half an hour 
was almost gone since his arrival, and Eleanor did 
not come up. 

At that moment Catherine thought she heard 
her step in the gallery, and listened for its contin- 
uance; but all was silent. Scarcely, however, 
had she convicted her fancy of error, when the 
noise of something moving close to her door made 
her start; it seemed as if some one was touching 
the very doorway, — and in another moment a 
slight motion of the lock proved that some hand 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 271 

must be on it. She trembled a little at the idea 
of any one's approaching so cautiously; but resolv- 
ing not to be again overcome by trivial appear- 
ances of alarm, or misled by a raised imagination, 
she stepped quietly forward, and opened the door. 
Eleanor, and onl}^ Eleanor, stood there. Cather- 
ine's spirits, however, were tranquillized but for 
an instant, for Eleanor's cheeks were pale, and her 
manner greatly agitated. Though evidently in- 
tending to come in, it seemed an effort to enter 
the room, and a still greater to speak when there. 
Catherine, supposing some uneasiness on Captain 
Tilney's account, could onl}'- express her concern 
by silent attention; obliged her to be seated, 
rubbed her temples with lavender water, and hung 
over her with affectionate solicitude. ^' My dear 
Catherine, you must not — you must not indeed — " 
were Eleanor's first connected words. "1 am quite 
well. This kindness distracts me — I cannot bear 
it — I come to you on such an errand!" 

^^ Errand! — to me!" 

^^How shall I tell you! Oh, how shall I tell 
you!" 

A new idea now darted into Catherine's mind, 
and turning as pale as her friend, she exclaimed, 
^^'Tisa messenger from Woodston!" 

^^ You are mistaken, indeed," returned Eleanor, 
looking at her most compassionately, — ''it is no 
one from Woodston. It is my father himself." 
Her voice faltered, and her eyes were turned to 
the ground as she mentioned his name. His un- 
looked-for return was enough in itself to make 
Catherine's heart sink, and for a few moments she 



272 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

hardly supposed there were anything worse to be 
told. She said nothing; and Eleanor, endeavor- 
ing to collect herself and speak with firmness, but 
with eyes still cast down, soon went on. " You are 
too good, I am sure, to think the worse of me for 
the part I am obliged to perform. I am, indeed, 
a most unwilling messenger. After what has so 
lately passed, so lately been settled between us — 
how joyfully, how thankfully on my side! — as to 
your continuing here as I hoped for many, many 
weeks longer, how can I tell you that your kind- 
ness is not to be accepted, and that the happiness 
your company has hitherto given us is to be repaid 
by — But I must not trust myself with words. 
My dear Catherine, we are to part. My father has 
recollected an engagement that takes our whole 
family away on Monday. We are going to Lord 
Longtown's, near Hereford, for a fortnight. Ex- 
planation and apology are equally impossible. I 
cannot attempt either." 

*^My dear ^Eleanor," cried Catherine, suppress- 
ing her feelings as well as she could, ''do not be so 
distressed. A second engagement must give way 
to a first. I am very, very sorry we are to part 
so soon, and so suddenly too; but I am not of- 
fended, indeed I am not. I can finish my visit 
here, you know, at any time; or I hope you will 
come to me. Can you, when you return from this 
lord's, come to Eullerton?'' » 

^'It will not be in my power, Catherine.'' 

*^Come when you can, then.'' 

Eleanor made no answer; and Catherine's 
thoughts recurring to something more directly 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 273 

interesting, she added, thinking aloud, ^^ Monday 
— so soon as Monday 5 and you all go. Well, I am 
certain of — I shall be able to take leave, how- 
ever. I need not go till just before you do, you 
know. Do not be distressed, Eleanor; I can go on 
Monday very well. My father and mother's hav- 
ing no notice of it is of very little consequence. 
The General will send a servant with me, I dare 
say, half the wa}^, — and then I shall soon be at 
Salisbury, and then I am only nine miles from 
home." 

^^ Ah, Catherine! were it settled so, it would be 
somewhat less intolerable ; though in such common 
attentions you would have received but half of 
what you ought. But — how can I tell you ? — to- 
morrow morning is fixed for your leaving us, and 
not even the hour is left to your choice ; the very 
carriage is ordered, and w^ill be here at seven 
o'clock, and no servant will be offered you." 

Catherine sat down, breathless and speechless. 

^' I could hardly believe my senses when I heard 
it ; and no displeasure, no resentment that you can 
feel at this moment, however justly great, can be 
more than I myself — But I must not talk of what 
I felt. Oh that I could suggest anything in ex- 
tenuation! Good God! what will your father and 
mother say ? After courting you from the protec- 
tion of real friends to this — almost double dis- 
tance from your home — to have you driven out 
of the house, without the considerations even of 
decent civility! Dear, dear Catherine, in being 
the bearer of such a message, I seem guilty myself 
of all its insult; yet I trust you will acquit me, 
18 



274 NORTIIANGER ABBEY. 

for you must have been long enough in this house 
to see that I am but a nominal mistress of it, that 
my real power is nothing." 

" Have I offended the General ? '^ said Cathe- 
rine, in a faltering voice. 

'^ Alas! for my feelings as a daughter, all that 
I know, all that I answer for is that you can have 
given him no just cause of offence. He certainly 
is greatly, very greatly discomposed; I have sel- 
dom seen him more so. His temper is not happy, 
and something has now occurred to ruffle it in an 
uncommon degree, — some disappointment, some" 
vexation, which just at this moment seems impor- 
tant, but which I can hardly suppose you to have 
any concern in; for how is it possible ? '' 

It was with pain that Catherine could speak at 
all; and it was only for Eleanor's sake that she 
attempted it. *' I am sure," said she, ^' I am very 
sorry if I have offended him. It was the last 
thing I would willingly have done. But do not 
be unhappy, Eleanor. An engagement, you know, 
must be kept. I am only sorry it was not recol- 
lected sooner, that I might have written home. 
But it is of very little consequence." 

^'1 hope, I earnestly hope that to your real 
safety it will be of none; but to everything else it 
is of the greatest consequence; to comfort, appear- 
ance, propriety, to your family, to the world. 
Were your friends, the Aliens, still in Bath, you 
might go to them with comparative ease; a few 
hours would take you there; but a journey of 
seventy miles to be taken post by you, at your 
age, alone, unattended! '* 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 275 

'^Oh, the journey is nothing. Do not think 
about that. And if we are to part, a few hours 
sooner or later, you know, makes no difference. 
I can be ready by seven. Let me be called in 
time." Eleanor saw that she wished to be alone; 
and believing it better for each that they should 
avoid any further conversation, now left her with, 
"I shall see you in the morning.'' 

Catherine's swelling heart needed relief. In 
Eleanor's presence friendship and pride had 
equally restrained her tears, but no sooner was she 
gone than they burst forth in torrents. Turned 
from the house, and in such a way ! Without any 
reason that could justify, any apology that could 
atone for the abruptness, the rudeness, nay, the 
insolence of it. Henry at a distance, — not able 
even to bid him farewell. Every hope, every ex- 
pectation from him suspended, at least, and who 
could say how long ? Wlio could say when they 
might meet again ? And all this by such a man as 
General Tilney, so polite, so well-bred, and here- 
tofore so particularly fond of her! It was as in- 
comprehensible as it was mortifying and grievous. 
From what it could arise, and where it would end, 
were considerations of equal perplexity and alarm. 
The manner in which it was done so grossly un- 
civil : hurrying her away without any reference to 
her own convenience, or allowing her even the 
appearance of choice as to the time or mode of her 
travelling; of two days, the earliest fixed on, and 
of that almost the earliest hour, as if resolved to 
have her gone before he was stirring in the morn- 
ing, that he might not be obliged even to see her. 



276 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

What could all this mean but an intentional 
affront ? By some means or other she must have 
had the misfortune to offend him. Eleanor had 
wished to spare her from so painful a notion, but 
Catherine could not believe it possible that any 
injury or any misfortune could provoke such ill- 
-will against a person not connected, or, at least, 
not, supposed to be connected with it. 

Heavily passed the night. Sleep, or repose that 
deserved the name of sleep, was out of the ques- 
tion. That room, in which her disturbed imagi- 
nation had tormented her on her first arrival, was 
again the scene of agitated spirits and unquiet 
slumbers. Yet how different now the source of 
her inquietude from what it had been then, — how 
mournfully superior in reality and substance! JHer 
anxiety had foundation in fact, her fears in proba- 
l)ility; anH. with a mind so occupied in the contem- 
plation of actual and natural evil, the solitude of 
her situation, the darkness of her chamber, the 
antiquity of the building, were felt and considered 
without the smallest emotion; and though the 
wind was high, and often produced strange and 
sudden noises throughout the house, she heard it 
all as she lay awo^e, hour after hour, without 
curiosity or terror. • 

Soon after six Eleanor entered her room, eager 
to show attention, or give assistance where it was 
possible; but very little remained to be done. 
Catherine had not loitered ; she was almost dressed, 
and her packing almost finished. The possibility 
of some conciliatory message from the General 
occurred to her as his daughter appeared. What 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 277 

so natural as that anger should pass away and re« 
pentance succeed it ? and she only wanted to know 
how far, after what had passed, an apology might 
properly be received by her. But the knowledge 
would have been useless here, it was not called 
for; neither clemency nor dignity was put to the 
trial, — Eleanor brought no message. Very little 
I passed between them on meeting: each found her 
! greatest safety in silence ; and few and trivial were 
I the sentences exchanged while they remained up- 
1 stairs, Catherine in busy agitation completing her 
I dress, and Eleanor, with more good-will than ex- 
1 perience, intent upon filling the trunk. When 
everything was done, they left the room, Cathe- 
rine lingering only half a minute behind her 
friend to throw a parting glance on every well- 
known cherished object, and went down to the 
breakfast-parlor, where breakfast was prepared. 
She tried to eat, as well to save herself from the 
; pain of being urged, as to make her friend com- 
fortable; but she had no appetite, and could not 
swallow many mouthfuls. The contrast between 
this and her last breakfast in that room gave her 
fresh misery, and strengthened her distaste for 
everything before her. It \vas not four-and- 
twenty hours ago since they aad met there to the 
same repast, but in circumstances how different.' 
With what cheerful ease, what happy though 
false security, had she then looked around her, 
enjoying everything present, and fearing little in 
future, beyond Henry's going to Woodston for a 
day! Happy, happy breakfast! for Henry had 
been there, — Henry had sat by her and helped 



278 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

her. These reflections were long indulged undis- 
turbed by any address from her companion, who 
sat as deep in thought as herself; and the appear- 
ance of the carriage was the first thing to startle 
and recall them to the present moment. Cathe- 
rine's color rose at the sight of it; and the indig- 
nity with which she was treated striking at that 
instant on her mind w^h peculiar force, made her 
for a short time sensible only of resentment. 
Eleanor seemed now impelled into resolution, and 
speech. 

^' You must write to me, Catherine," she cried; 
*^you must let me hear from you as soon as possi- 
ble. Till I know you to be safe at home, I shall 
not have an hour's comfort. For one letter, at all 
risks, all hazards, I must entreat. Let me have 
the satisfaction of knowing that you are safe at 
Fullerton, and have found your family well; and 
then, till I can ask for your correspondence as I 
ought to do, I will not expect more. Direct to me 
at Lord Longtown's, and I must ask it, under 
cover to Alice." 

*^No, Eleanor, if you are not allowed to receive 
a letter from me, I am sure I had better not write. 
There can be no doubt of my getting home safe." 

Eleanor only replied, ^'I cannot wonder at 
your feelings. I will not importune you. I will 
trust to your own kindness of heart when I am at 
a distance from you." But this, with the look of 
sorrow accompanying it, was enough to melt Cath- 
erine's pride in a moment, and she instantly said, 
"Oh, Eleanor, I will write to you, indeed." 

There was yet another point which Miss Tilney 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 273 

was anxious to settle, though somewhat emhar- 
rassed in speaking of. It had occurred to her 
that after so long an ahsence from home, Cather- 
ine might not be provided with money enough for 
the expenses of her journey, and, upon suggesting 
it to her with most affectionate offers of accommoda- 
tion, it proved to be exactly the case. Catherine 
had never thought on the subject till that moment ; 
but upon examining her purse, was convinced 
that but for this kindness of her friend she might 
have been turned from the house without even the 
means of getting home ; and the distress in which 
she must have been thereby involved filling the 
minds of both, scarcely another word was said by 
either during the time of their remaining together. 
Short, however, was that time. The carriage was 
soon announced to be ready; and Catherine in- 
stantly rising, a long and affectionate embrace sup- 
plied the place of language in bidding each other 
adieu ; and as they entered the hall, unable to leave 
the house without some mention of one whose name 
had not yet been spoken by either, she paused a 
moment, and with quivering lips just made it in- 
telligible that she left ^^ her kind remembrance for 
her absent friend." But with this approach to his 
name ended all possibility of restraining her feel- 
ings; and hiding her face as well as she could 
with her handkerchief, she darted across the hall, 
jumped into the chaise, and in a moment was 
driven from the door. 



280 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 



CHAPTER XXIX. 

Catherine was too wretched to be fearful. The 
journey in itself had no terrors for her; and she 
began it without either dreading its length or 
feeling its solitariness. Leaning back in one cor- 
ner of the carriage, in a violent burst of tears, she 
was conveyed some miles beyond the walls of the 
Abbey before she raised her head; and the highest 
point of ground within the park was almost closed 
from her view before she was capable of turning 
her eyes towards it. Unfortunately, the road she 
now travelled was the same which only ten days 
ago she had so happily passed along in going to 
and from Woodston; and for fourteen miles ever}^ 
bitter feeling was rendered more severe by the 
review of objects on which she had first looked 
under impressions so different. Every mile, as it 
brought her nearer Woodston, added to her suffer- 
ings; and when within the distance of five, she 
passed the turning which led to it, and thought of 
Henry, so near yet so unconscious, her grief and 
agitation were excessive. 

The day which she had spent at that place had 
been one of the hajjpiest of her life. It was there, 
it was on that day, that the General had made use 
of such expressions with regard to Henry and her- 
self; had so spoken and so looked as to give her 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 281 

the most positive conviction of his actually wish- 
ing their marriage. Yes, only ten days ago had 
he elated her by his pointed regard, — had he even 
confused her by his too significant reference! And 
now — what had she done, or what had she omitted 
to do, to merit such a change ? 

The only offence against him, of which she could 
accuse herself, had been such as was scarcely pos- 
sible to reach his knowledge. Henry and her own 
heart only were privy to the shocking suspicions 
which she had so idly entertained; and equally 
safe did she believe her secret with each. Design- 
edly, at least, Henry could not have betrayed her. 
If, indeed, by any strange mischance his father 
should have gained intelligence of what she had 
dared to think and look for, of her causeless fancies 
and injurious examinations, she could not wonder 
at any degree of his indignation. If aware of her 
having viewed him as a murderer, she could not 
wonder at his even turning her from his house. 
But a justification so full of torture to herself she 
trusted would not be in his power. 

Anxious as were all her conjectures on this 
point, it was not, however, the one on which she 
dwelt most. There was a thought yet nearer, — -a 
more prevailing, more impetuous concern: how 
Henry would think and feel and look, when he 
returned on the morrow to Northanger and heard 
of her being gone, w^as a question of force and in- 
terest to rise over every other, to be never-ceasing, 
alternately irritating and soothing; it sometimes 
suggested the dread of his calm acquiescence, and 
at otbers was answered by the sweetest confidence 



282 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

in his regret and resentment. To tlie General, of 
course, he would not dare to speak; but to Eleanor, 
— what might he not say to Eleanor about her ? 

In this unceasing recurrence of doubts and in- 
quiries, on any one article of which her mind was in- 
capable of more than momentary repose, the hours 
passed away, and her journey advanced much fas- 
ter than she looked for. The pressing anxieties of 
thought, which prevented her from noticing any- 
thing before her when once beyond the neighbor- 
hood of Woodston, saved her at the same time 
from watching her progress; and though no object 
on the road could engage a moment's attention, she 
found no stage of it tedious. From this she was 
preserved, too, by another cause, — by feeling no 
eagerness for her journey's conclusion; for to re- 
turn in such a manner to Fullerton was almost to 
destroy the pleasure of a meeting with those she 
loved best, even after an absence such as hers, — 
an eleven weeks' absence. What had she to say 
that would not humble herself and pain her family ; 
that would not increase her own grief by the con- 
fession of it, extend an useless resentment, and 
perhaps involve the innocent with the guilty in 
undistinguishing ill-will ? She could never do 
justice to Henry and Eleanor's merit, — she felt it 
too strongly for expression; and should a dislike 
be taken against them, should they be thought of 
unfavorably, on their father's account, it would 
cut her to the heart. 

With these feelings, she rather dreaded than 
sought for the first view of that well-known spire 
which would announce her within twenty miles of 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 283 

home. Salisbury she had known to be her point 
on leaving Northanger; but after the first stage, 
she had been indebted to the postmasters for the 
names of the places which were then to conduct 
her to it; so great had been her ignorance of her 
route. She met with nothing, however, to distress 
or frighten her. Her j'-outh, civil manners, and 
liberal pay procured her all the attention that a 
traveller like herself could require; and stopping 
only to change horses, she travelled on for about 
eleven hours without accident or alarm, and be- 
tween six and seven o'clock in the evening found 
herself entering Fullerton. 

A heroine returning, at the close of her career, 
to her native village, in all the triumph of recov- 
ered reputation, and all the dignity of a countess, 
with a long train of noble relations in their several 
phaetons, and three waiting-maids in a travelling 
chaise-and-four behind her, is an event on which 
the pen of the contriver may well delight to dwell; 
it gives credit to every conclusion, and the author 
must share in the glory she so liberally bestows. 
But my affair is widely different : I bring back my 
heroine to her home in solitude and disgrace; and 
no sweet elation of spirits can lead me into mi- 
nuteness. A heroine in a hack post-chaise is such 
a blow upon sentiment as no attempt at grandeur 
or pathos can withstand. Swiftly, therefore, shall 
her post-boy drive through the village, amid the 
gaze of Sunday groups; and speedy shall be her 
descent from it. 

But whatever might be the distress of Cather- 
ine's mind as she thus advanced towards the Par- 



284 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

sonage, and whatever the humiliation of her biog- 
rapher in relating it, she was preparing enjoy- 
ment of no every-day nature for those to whom she 
went, — first, in the appearance of her carriage, 
and, secondly, in herself. The chaise of a trav- 
eller being a rare sight in Fullerton, the whole 
family were immediately at the window; and to 
have it stopped at the sweep-gate was a pleasure to 
brighten every eye and occupy every fancy, — a 
pleasure quite unlocked for by all but the two 
youngest children, a boy and girl of six and four 
years old, who expected a brother or sister in every 
carriage. Happy the glance that first distinguished 
Catherine ! Happy the voice that proclaimed the 
discovery ! But whether such happiness were the 
lawful property of George or Harriet, could never 
be exactly understood. 

Her father, mother, Sarah, George, and Harriet, 
all assembled at the door, to welcome her with 
affectionate eagerness, was a sight to awaken the 
best feelings of Catherine's heart; and in the em- 
brace of each, as she stepped from the carriage, she 
found herself soothed beyond anything that she 
had believed possible. So surrounded, so caressed, 
she was even happy ! In the joyfulness of family 
love, everything for a short time was subdued; 
and the pleasure of seeing her leaving them at 
first little leisure for calm curiosity, they were all 
seated round the tea-table, which Mrs. Morland 
had hurried for the comfort of the poor traveller, 
whose pale and jaded looks soon caught her notice, 
before any inquiry so direct as to demand a posi- 
tive answer was addressed to her. 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 285 

Eeluctantly and with much hesitation did she 
then begin what might, perhaps, at the end of 
half an hour be termed by the courtesy of her 
hearers an explanation; but scarcely within that 
time could they at all discover the cause, or col- 
lect the particulars of her sudden return. They 
were far from being an irritable race ; far from any 
quickness in catching, or bitterness in resenting 
affronts; but here, when the whole was unfolded, 
was an insult not to be overlooked, nor, for the 
first half-hour, to be easily pardoned. Without 
suffering any romantic alarm in the consideration 
of their daughter's long and lonely journey, Mr. 
and Mrs. Morland could not but feel that it might 
have been productive of much unpleasantness to 
her; that it was what they could never have vol- 
untarily suffered; and that, in forcing her on such 
a measure. General Tilney had acted neither hon- 
orably nor feelingly, neither as a gentleman nor as 
a parent. Why he had done it, what could have 
provoked him to such a breach of hospitality, and 
so suddenly turned all his partial regard for their 
daughter into actual ill-will, was a matter which 
they were at least as far from divining as Catherine 
herself: but it did not oppress them, by any means, 
so long; and after a due course of useless conjec- 
ture, that ^'it was a strange business, and that he 
must be a very strange man," grew enough for all 
their indignation and wonder; though Sarah, in- 
deed, still indulged in the sweets of incomprehen- 
sibility, exclaiming and conjecturing with youthful 
ardor. ^^My dear, you give yourself a great deal 
of needless trouble," said her mother at last; ''de- 



286 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

pend upon it, it is something not at all worth 
understanding. '' 

"I can allow for his wishing Catherine away 
when he recollected this engagement," said Sarah; 
^'hut why not do it civilly ? " 

"1 am sorry for the young people," returned 
Mrs. Morland; ^Hhey must have a sad time of it: 
but as for anything else, it is no matter now; 
Catherine is safe at home, and our comfort does 
not depend upon General Tilney." Catherine 
sighed. " Well," continued her philosophic mother, 
^'I am glad I did not know of jouv journey at 
the time; but now it is all over, perhaps there 
is no great harm done. It is always good for 
young people to be put upon exerting themselves ; 
and you know, my dear Catherine, you always 
were a sad little shatter-brained creature : but now 
you must have been forced to have your wits about 
you, with so much changing of chaises and so 
forth; and I hope it will appear that you have not 
left anything behind you in any of the pockets." 

Catherine hoped so too, and tried to feel an in- 
terest in her own amendment, but her spirits were 
quite worn down; and to be silent and alone be- 
coming soon her only wish, she readily agreed to 
her mother's next counsel of going early to bed. 
Her parents seeing nothing in her ill-looks and 
agitation but the natural consequence of mortified 
feelings, and of the unusual exertion and fatigue of 
such a journey, parted from her without any doubt 
of their being soon slept awa}^; and though, when 
they all met the next morning, her recovery was 
not equal to their hopes, they were still perfectly 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 287 

unsuspicious of there being an}^ deeper evil. They 
never once thought of her heart, which, for the 
parents of a young lady of seventeen, just returned 
from her first excursion from home, was odd 
enough ! 

As soon as breakfast was over, she sat down to 
fulfil her promise to Miss Tilney, whose trust in 
the effect of time and distance on her friend's dis- 
position, was already justified, for already did 
Catherine reproach herself with having parted 
from Eleanor coldly; with having never enough 
valued her merits or kindness ; and never enough 
commiserated her for what she had been yesterday 
left to endure. The strength of these feelings, 
however, was far from assisting her pen; and 
never had it been harder for her to write than in 
addressing Eleanor Tilney. To compose a letter 
which might at once do justice to her sentiments 
and her situation, convey gratitude without servile 
regret, be guarded without coldness, and honest 
without resentment, — a letter which Eleanor might 
not be pained by the perusal of, — and, above all, 
which she might not blush herself if Henry 
should chance to see, was an undertaking to frighten 
away all her powers of performance ; and after long 
thought and much perplexity, to be very brief was 
all that she could determine on with any confi- 
dence of safet3^ The money, therefore, which 
Eleanor had advanced was enclosed with little 
more than grateful thanks, and the thousand good 
wishes of a most affectionate heart. 

^'This has been a strange acquaintance, '' ob* 
served Mrs. Morland, as the letter was finished; 



288 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

'^ soon made and soon ended. I am sorry it hap- 
pens so, for Mrs. Allen thought them very pretty 
kind of young people ; and you were sadly out of 
luck, too, in your Isabella. Ah, poor James! 
Well, we must live and learn; and the next new 
friends you make I hope will be better worth 
keeping.'^ 

Catherine colored as she warmly answered, "No 
friend can be better worth keeping than Eleanor." 

"If so, my dear, I dare say you will meet again 
sometime or other; do not be uneasy. It is ten to 
one but you are thrown together again in the 
course of a few years ; and then what a pleasure it 
will be!" 

Mrs. Morland was not happy in her attempt at 
consolation. The hope of meeting again in the 
course of a few years could only put into Cather- 
ine's head what might happen within that time to 
make a meeting dreadful to her. She could never 
forget Henry Tilney, or think of him with less 
tenderness than she did at that moment: but he 
might forget her; and in that case to meet! Her 
eyes filled with tears as she pictured her acquaint- 
ance so renewed; and her mother, perceiving her 
comfortable suggestions to have had no good effect, 
proposed as another expedient for restoring her 
spirits, that they should call on Mrs. Allen. 

The two houses were only a quarter of a mile 
apart; and as they walked, Mrs. Morland quickly 
despatched all that she felt on the score of James's 
disappointment. "We are sorry for him," said 
she; "but otherwise there is no harm done in the 
match going off; for it could not be a desirable 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 289 

thing to have him engaged to a girl whom ^ye had 
not the smallest acquaintance with, and who was 
so entirely without fortune; and now, after such 
behavior, we cannot think at all well of her. Just 
at present it comes hard to poor James : but that 
will not last forever; and I dare say he will be a 
discreeter man all his life, for the foolishness of 
his first choice/' 

This was just such a summary view of the affair 
as Catherine could listen to: another sentence 
might have endangered her complaisance, and 
made her reply less rational ; for soon were all her 
thinking powers swallowed up in the reflection of 
her own change of feelings and spirits since last 
she had trodden that well-known road. It was not 
three months ago since, wild with joyful expecta- 
tion, she had there run backwards and forwards 
some ten times a day, with a heart light, gay, and 
independent; looking forward to pleasures untasted 
and unalloyed, and free from the apprehension of 
evil as from the knowledge of it. Three months 
ago had seen her all this ; and now how altered a 
being did she return! 

She was received by the Aliens with all the 
kindness which her unlooked-for appearance, acting 
on a steady affection, would naturally call forth; 
and great was their surprise, and warm their dis- 
pleasure, on hearing how she had been treated, — 
though Mrs. Morland's account of it was no in- 
flated representation, no studied appeal to their 
passions. ^'Catherine took us quite by surprise 
yesterday evening," said she. '' She travelled all 
the way post by herself, and knew nothing of 
19 



290 NORTH ANGER ABBEY. 

coming till Saturday night; for General Tilney, 
from some odd fancy or other, all of a sudden grew 
tired of having her there, and almost turned her 
out of the house. Very unfriendly, certainly; and 
he must be a very odd man : but we are so glad to 
have her amongst us again! And it is a great 
comfort to find that she is not a poor helpless 
creature, but can shift very well for herself.'^ 

Mr. Allen expressed himself on the occasion 
with the reasonable resentment of a sensible 
friend; and Mrs. Allen thought his expressions 
quite good enough to be immediately made use of 
again by herself. His wonder, his conjectures, 
and his explanations became in succession hers, 
with the addition of this single remark, — •'! 
really have not patience with the General," — to 
fill up every accidental pause. And *'I really 
have not patience with the General," was uttered 
twice after Mr. Allen left the room, without any 
relaxation of anger, or any material digression of 
thought. A more considerable degree of wander- 
ing attended the third repetition; and after com- 
pleting the fourth, she immediately added: *' Only 
think, my dear, of my having got that frightful 
great rent in my best Mechlin so charmingly 
mended, before I left Bath, that one can hardly 
see where it was. I must show it you some day or 
other. Bath is a nice place, Catherine, after all. 
I assure you I did not above half like coming 
away. Mrs. Thorpe's being there was such a 
comfort to us, was not it ? You know, you and I 
were quite forlorn at first." 

*^ Yes; but that did not last long," said Catherine, 



NOHTIIANGER ABBEY, 291 

her eyes brightening at the recollection of what 
had first given spirit to her existence there. 

'^Very true: we soon met with Mrs, Thorpe, 
and then we wanted for nothing. My dear, do 
not you think these silk gloves wear very well ? 
I put them on new the first time of our going 
to the Lower E-ooms, you know, and I have worn 
them a great deal since. Do you remember that 
evening ? " 

<^Do I ! Oh, perfectly.'' 

'^ It was very agreeable, was not it ? Mr. Tilney 
drank tea with us, and I always thought him a 
great addition, he is so very agreeable. I have a 
notion you danced with him, but am not quite 
sure. I remember I had my favorite gown on." 

Catherine could not answer; and after a short 
trial of other subjects, Mrs. Allen again returned 
to, ^* I really have not patience with the General! 
Such an agreeable, worthy man as he seemed to be ! 
I do not suppose, Mrs. Morland, you ever saw a 
better-bred man in your life. His lodgings were 
taken the very day after he left them, Catherine. 
But no wonder; Milsom Street, you know." 

As they walked home again, Mrs. Morland 
endeavored to impress on her daughter's mind the 
happiness of having such steady well-wishers as 
Mr. and Mrs. Allen, and the very little considera- 
tion which the neglect or unkindness of slight 
acquaintance like the Tilneys ought to have with 
her, while she could preserve the good opinion and 
affection of her earliest friends. There was a 
great deal of good sense in all this ; but there are 
some situations of the human mind in which good 



292 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

sense has very little power; and Catherine's feel- 
ings contradicted almost every position her mother 
advanced. It was upon the behavior of these very 
slight acquaintance that all her present happiness 
depended; and while Mrs. Morland was success- 
fully confirming her own opinions by the justness 
of her own representations, Catherine was silently 
reflecting that now Henry must have arrived at 
Northanger; now he must have heard of her de- 
parture; and now, perhaps, they were all setting 
off for Hereford. 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 293 



CHAPTER XXX. 

Catherine's disposition was not naturally seden- 
tary, nor had her habits been ever very industrious ; 
but whatever might hitherto have been her defects 
of that sort, her mother could not but perceive 
them now to be greatly increased. She could 
neither sit still nor employ herself for ten minutes 
together; walking round the garden and orchard 
again and again, as if nothing but motion was 
voluntary, and it seemed as if she could even walk 
about the house rather than remain fixed for any 
time in the parlor. Her loss of spirits was a yet 
greater alteration. In her rambling and her idle- 
ness, she might only be a caricature of herself; but 
in her silence and sadness she was the very reverse 
of all that she had been before. 

For two days Mrs. Morland allowed it to pass 
even without a hint; but when a third night's rest 
had neither restored her cheerfulness, improved her 
in useful activity, nor given her a greater inclina- 
tion for needlework, she could no longer refrain 
from the gentle reproof of, ^^My dear Catherine, 
I am afraid you are growing quite a fine lady. I 
do not know when poor Richard's cravats would be 
done, if he had no friend but you. Your head runs 
too much upon Bath ; but there is a time for every- 
thing, — a time for balls and plays, and a time for 



294 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

work. You have had a long run of amusement, 
and now you must try to be useful." 

Catherine took up her work directly, saying, in a 
dejected voice, that *^her head did not run upon 
Bath — much." 

'' Then you are fretting about General Tilney, 
and that is very simple of you; for ten to one 
whether you ever see him again. You should 
never feet about trifles." After a short silence: 
" I hope, my Catherine, you are not getting out of 
humor with home because it is not so grand as 
Northanger; that would be turning your visit into 
an evil, indeed. Wherever you are, you should al- 
ways be contented, but especially at home, because 
there you must spend the most of your time. I 
did not quite like, at breakfast, to hear you talk so 
much about the French bread at JSTorthanger." 

" I am sure I do not care about the bread. It is 
all the same to me what I eat." 

^' There is a very clever essay in one of the 
books upstairs upon much such a subject, about 
young girls that have been spoilt for home by 
great acquaintance, — * The Mirror, ' I think. I 
will look it out for you some day or other, because 
I am sure it will do you good." 

Catherine said no more; and with an endeavor 
to do right, applied to her work : but after a few 
minutes, sunk again, without knowing it herself, 
into languor and listlessness; moving herself in 
her chair, from the irritation of weariness, much 
oftener than she moved her needle. Mrs. Morland 
watched the progress of this relapse; and seeing, 
in her daughter's absent and dissatisfied look, the 



NORTHANGER ABBEY 295 

full proof of that repining spirit to which she had 
now begun to attribute her want of cheerfulness, 
hastily left the room to fetch the book in question, 
anxious to lose no time in attacking so dreadful a 
malady. It was some time before she could find 
what she looked for; and, other family matters 
occurring to detain her, a quarter of an hour had 
elapsed ere she returned downstairs with the volume 
from which so much was hoped. Her avocations 
above having shut out all noise but what she 
created herself, she knew not that a visitor had 
arrived within the last few minutes, till, on enter- 
ing the room, the first object she beheld was a young 
man whom she had never seen before. With a 
look of much respect, he immediately rose; and 
being introduced to her by her conscious daughter 
as '^Mr. Henry Tilney,'' with the embarrassment 
of real sensibility began to apologize for his appear- 
ance there, acknowledging that after what had 
passed he had little right to expect a welcome at 
Fullerton, and stating his impatience to be assured 
of Miss Morland's having reached her home in 
safety, as the cause of his intrusion. He did not 
address himself to an uncandid judge or a resent- 
ful heart. Far from comprehending him or his 
sister in their father's misconduct, Mrs. Morland 
had been always kindly disposed towards each ; and 
instantly, pleased by his appeara,nce, received him 
with the simple professions of unaffected benevo- 
lence : thanking him for such an attention to her 
daughter; assuring him that the friends of her 
children were always welcome there; and entreat- 
ing him to say not another word of the past. 



296 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

He was not ill inclined to obey this request ; for 
though his heart was greatly relieved by such 
unlooked-for mildness, it was not, just at that 
moment, in his power to say anything to the 
purpose. Returning in silence to his seat, there- 
fore, he remained for some minutes most civilly an- 
swering all Mrs. Morland's common remarks about 
the weather and roads. Catherine, meanwhile, — 
the anxious, agitated, happy, feverish Catherine, — 
said not a word; but her glowing cheek and bright- 
ened eye made her mother trust that this good- 
natured visit would, at least, set her heart at ease 
for a time ; and gladly, therefore, did she lay aside 
the first volume of '^The Mirror'' for a future 
hour. 

Desirous of Mr. Morland's assistance, as well in 
giving encouragement as in finding conversation 
for her guest, whose embarrassment on his father's 
account she earnestly pitied, Mrs. Morland had 
very early despatched one of the children to sum- 
mon him ; but Mr. Morland was from home, — and 
being thus without any support, at the end of a 
quarter of an hour she had nothing to say. After 
a couple of minutes' unbroken silence, Henry, turn- 
ing to Catherine for the first time since her 
mother's entrance, asked her, with sudden alacrity, 
if Mr. and Mrs. Allen were now at Fullerton; and 
on developing, from amidst all her perplexity of 
words in reply, the meaning, which one short syl- 
lable would have given, immediately expressed his 
intention of paying his respects to them; and with 
a rising color, asked her if she would have the 
goodness to show him the way. ^'You may see 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 237 

the house from this window, sir," was information 
on Sarah's side, which produced only a bow of 
acknowledgment from the gentleman, and a silenc- 
ing nod from her mother; for Mrs. Morland, think- 
ing it probable, as a secondary consideration in 
his wish of waiting on their worthy neighbors, 
that he might have some explanation to give of 
his father's behavior, which it must be more pleas 
ant for him to communicate only to Catherine, 
would not, on any account, prevent her accompany- 
ing him. They began their walk, and Mrs. Mor- 
land was not entirely mistaken in his object in 
wishing it. Some explanation on his father's 
account he had to give : but his first purpose was 
to explain himself; and before they reached Mr. 
Allen's grounds he had done it so well that Cathe- 
rine did not think it could ever be repeated too 
often. She was assured of his affection ; and that 
heart in return was solicited, which, perhaps, they 
pretty equally knew was already entirely his own; 
for though Henry was now sincerely attached to 
her, — though he felt and delighted in all the 
excellences of her character, and truly loved her 
society, — I must confess that his affection origi- 
nated in nothing better than gratitude; or, in 
other words, that a persuasion of her partiality for 
him had been the only cause of giving her a seri- 
ous thought. It is a new circumstance in romance, 
I acknow^ledge, and dreadfully derogatory of a 
heroine's dignity; but if it be as new in common 
life, the credit of a wild imagination will at least 
be all my own. 

A very short visit to Mrs. Allen, in which 



298 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

Henry talked at random, without sense or con' 
nection, and Catherine, wrapt in the contempla- 
tion of her own unutterable happiness, scarcely 
opened her lips, dismissed them to the ecstasies of 
another tete-a -tete ; and before it was suffered to 
close, she was -enabled to judge how far he was 
sanctioned by parental authority in his present 
application. On his return from Woodston, two 
days before, he had been met near the Abbey by 
his impatient father, hastily informed in angry 
terms of Miss Morland's departure, and ordered to 
think of her no more. 

Such was the permission upon which he had now 
offered her his hand. The affrighted Catherine, 
amidst all the terrors of expectation, as she lis- 
tened to this account, could not but rejoice in the 
kind caution with which Henry had saved her 
from the necessity of a conscientious rejection, by 
engaging her faith before he mentioned the sub- 
ject; and as he proceeded to give the particulars, 
and explain the motives of his father's conduct, 
her feelings soon hardened into even a triumphant 
delight. The General had had nothing to accuse 
her of, nothing to lay to her charge, but her being 
the involuntary, unconscious object of a deception 
which his pride could not pardon, and which a 
better pride would have been ashamed to own. She 
was guilty only of being less rich than he had sup- 
posed her to be. Under a mistaken persuasion of 
her possessions and claims, he had courted her 
acquaintance in Bath, solicited her company at 
Northanger, and designed her for his daughter-in- 
law. On discovering his error, to turn her from 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 299 

the house seemed the best, though to his feelings 
an inadequate, proof of his resentment towards her- 
self, and his contempt of her family. 

John Thorpe had first misled him. The Gen- 
eral, perceiving his son one night at the theatre to 
be paying considerable attention to Miss Morland, 
had accidentally inquired of Thorpe if he knew 
more of her than her name. Thorpe, most happy 
to be on speaking terms with a man of General 
Tilney's importance, had been joyfully and proudly 
communicative; and being at that time not only 
in daily expectation of Morland^s engaging Isfv- 
bella, but likewise pretty well resolved upon 
marrying Catherine himself, his vanity induced 
him to represent the family as yet more wealthy 
than his vanity and avarice had made him believe 
them. With whomsoever he was, or was likely to 
be connected, his own consequence always required 
that theirs should be great; and as his intimacy 
with any acquaintance grew, so regularly grew 
their fortune. The expectations of his friend Mor- 
land, therefore, from the first overrated, had, ever 
since his introduction to Isabella, been gradually 
increasing; and by merely adding twice as much 
for the grandeur of the moment, by doubling what 
he chose to think the amount of Mr. Morland's 
preferment, trebling his private fortune, bestowing 
a rich aunt, and sinking half the children, he was 
able to represent the whole family to the General 
in a most respectable light. For Catherine, how- 
ever, the peculiar object of the General's curiosity 
and his own speculations, he had yet something 
more in reserve, and the ten or fifteen thousand 



300 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

pounds which her father could give her would he a 
pretty addition to Mr. Allen's estate. Her inti- 
macy there had made him seriously determine on 
her heing handsomely legacied hereafter; and to 
speak of her therefore as the almost acknowledged 
future heiress of Fullerton naturally followed. 
Upon such intelligence the General had proceeded; 
for never had it occurred to him to douht its 
authority. Thorpe's interest in the family, by his 
sister's approaching connection with one of its 
members, and his own views on another (circum- 
stances of which he boasted with almost equal 
openness), seemed sufficient vouchers for his truth ; 
and to these were added the absolute facts of the 
Aliens being wealthy and childless, of Miss Mor4- 
land's being under their care, and — as soon as his 
acquaintance allowed him to judge — of their treat- 
ing her with parental kindness. His resolution 
was soon formed. Already had he discerned a 
liking towards Miss Morland in the countenance 
of his son ; and, thankful for Mr. Thorpe's commu- 
nication, he almost instantly determined to spare 
no pains in weakening his boasted interest, and 
ruining his dearest hopes. Catherine herself could 
not be more ignorant at the time of all this than 
his own children. Henry and Eleanor, perceiv- 
ing nothing in her situation likely to engage their 
father's particular respect, had seen with astonish- 
ment the suddenness, continuance, and extent of 
his attention; and though latterly, from some 
hints which had accompanied an almost positive 
command to his son of doing everything in his 
power to attach her, Henry was convinced of his 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 301 

father^s believing it to be an advantageous con- 
nection, it was not till the late explanation at 
Northanger that they had the smallest idea of the 
false calculations which had hurried him on. That 
they were false, the General had learnt from the 
very person who had suggested them, from Thorpe 
himself, whom he had chanced to meet again in 
town, and who, under the influence of exactly 
opposite feelings, irritated by Catherine's refusal, 
and yet more by the failure of a very recent 
endeavor to accomplish a reconciliation between 
Morland and Isabella, convinced that they were 
separated forever, and spurning a friendship which 
could be no longer serviceable, hastened to contra- 
dict all that he had said before to the advantage 
of the Morlands ; — confessed himself to have been 
totally mistaken in his opinion of their circum- 
stances and character, misled by the rhodomontade 
of his friend to believe his father a man of sub- 
stance and credit, whereas the transactions of the 
two or three last weeks proved him to be neither; 
for after coming eagerly forward, on the first over- 
ture of a marriage between the families, with the 
most liberal proposals, he had, on being brought 
to the point by the shrewdness of the relator, been 
constrained to acknowledge himself incapable of 
giving the young people even a decent support. 
They were, in fact, a necessitous family; numer- 
ous, too, almost beyond example; by no means 
respected in their own neighborhood, as he had 
lately had particular opportunities of discovering; 
aiming at a style of life which their fortune could 
not warrant; seeking to better themselves by 



302 NORTHAKGER ABBEY. 

wealthy connections; a forward, bragging, schem- 
ing race 

The terrified General pronounced the name of 
Allen with an inquiring look; and here too Thorpe 
had learnt his error. The Aliens, he believed, 
had lived near them too long, and he knew the 
young man on whom the Fullerton estate must 
devolve. The General needed no more. Enraged 
with almost everybody in the world but himself, 
he set out the next day for the Abbey, where his 
performances have been seen. 

I leave it to my reader's sagacity to determine 
how much of all this it was possible for Henry to 
communicate at this time to Catherine, how much 
of it he could have learnt from his father, in what 
points his own conjectures might assist him, and 
what portion must yet remain to be told in a let- 
ter from James. I have united for their ease what 
they must divide for mine. Catherine, at any 
rate, heard enough to feel that in suspecting 
General Tilney of either murdering or shutting np 
his wife, she had scarcely sinned against his char- 
acter, or magnified his cruelty. 

Henry, in having such things to relate of his 
father, was almost as pitiable as in their first 
avowal to himself. He blushed for the narrow- 
\ninded counsel which he was obliged to expose. 
The conversation between them at Northanger 
had been of the most unfriendly kind. Henry's 
indignation on hearing how Catherine had been 
treated, on comprehending his father's views, and 
being ordered to acquiesce in them, had been open 
and bold. The General, accustomed on every or- 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 303 

dinary occasion to give the law in his family, pre- 
pared for no reluctance but of feeling, no opposing 
desire that should dare to clothe itself in words, 
could ill brook the opposition of his son, steady a& 
the sanction of reason and the dictate of conscience 
could make it. But in such a cause his anger, 
though it must shock, could not intimidate Heury, 
who was sustained iu his purpose b}'- a conviction 
of its justice. He felt himself bound as much in 
honor as in affection to Miss Morland, and believ- 
ing that heart to be his own which he had been 
directed to gain, no unworthy retraction of a tacit 
consent, no reversing degree of unjustifiable anger, 
could shake his fidelity, or influence the resolu- 
tions it prompted. 

He steadily refused to accompany his father into 
Herefordshire, — an engagement formed almost at 
the moment, to promote the dismissal of Cather- 
ine, — and as steadily declared his intention of of- 
fering her his hand. The General was furious in 
his anger, and they parted in dreadful disagree- 
ment. Henry, in an agitation of mind which 
many solitary hours were required to compose, had 
returned almost instantly to Woodston; and on 
the afternoon of the following day had begun his 
journey to Fullerton. 



304 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 



CHAPTER XXXI. 

Mr. and Mrs. Morland^s surprise on being ap- 
plied to by Mr. Tilney for their consent to liis 
marrying their daughter was for a few minutes 
considerable, it having never entered their heads 
to suspect an attachment on either side; but as 
nothing, after all, could be more natural than 
Catherine's being beloved, they soon learnt to con- 
sider it with only the happy agitation of gratified 
pride, and, as far as they alone were concerned, 
had not a single objection to start. His pleasing 
manners and good sense were self-evident recom- 
mendations; and having never heard evil of 
him, it was not their way to suppose any evil 
could be told. Good-will supplying the place of. 
experience, his character needed no attestation. 
** Catherine would make a sad, heedless young 
housekeeper, to be sure," was her mother's fore- 
boding remark; but quick was the consolation of 
there being nothing like practice. 

There was but one obstacle, in short, to be men- 
tioned; but till that one was removed, it must be 
impossible for them to sanction the engagement. 
Their tempers were mild, but their principles 
were steady; and while his parent so expressly 
forbade the connection, they could not allow them- 
selves to encourage it. That the General should 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 305 

come forward to solicit the alliance, or that he 
should even very heartily approve it, they were 
not refined enough to make any parading stipula- 
tion; but the decent appearance of consent must 
be yielded, and that once obtained — and their 
own hearts made them trust that it could not be 
very long denied — their willing approbation was 
instantly to follow. His consent was all that they 
wished for. They were no more inclined than 
entitled to demand his money. Of a very con- 
siderable fortune, his son was, by marriage settle- 
ments, eventually secure; his present income was 
an income of independence and comfort; and 
under every pecuniary view, it was a match be- 
yond the claims of their daughter. 

The young people could not be surprised at a 
decision like this. They felt and they deplored, 
but they could not resent it; and they parted, 
endeavoring to hope that such a change in the 
General as each believed almost impossible might 
speedily take place, to unite them again in the 
fulness of privileged affection. Henry returned 
to what was now his only home, to watch over his 
young plantations, and extend his improvements 
for her sake, to whose share in them he looked 
anxiously forward; and Catherine remained at 
Pullerton to cry. Whether the torments of ab- 
sence were softened by a clandestine correspond- 
ence, let us not inquire. Mr. and Mrs. Morland 
never did — they had been too kind to exact any 
promise; and whenever Catherine received a let- 
ter, as at that time happened pretty often, they 
always looked another way. 
20 



316 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

The anxiety which in this state of their attach" 
nent must be the portion of Henry and Catherine, 
and of all who love either, as to its final event, 
can hardly extend, I fear, to the bosom of my 
readers, who will see in the tell-tale compression 
of the pages before them, that we are all hastening 
together to perfect felicity. The means by which 
their early marriage was effected can be the only 
doubt: what probable circumstance could work 
upon a temper like the General's ? The circum- 
stance which chiefly availed was the marriage of 
his daughter with a man of fortune and conse- 
quence, which took place in the course of the 
summer, — an accession of dignity that threw him 
into a fit of good-humor, from which he did not 
recover till after Eleanor had obtained his forgive- 
ness of Henry, and his permission for him "to be 
a fool if he liked it!" 

The marriage of Eleanor Tilne}^, her removal 
from all the evils of such a home as Northanger, 
had been made by Henry's banishment, to the 
home of her choice and the man of her choice, is 
an event which I exj^ect to give general satisfac- 
tion among all her acquaintance. My own joy on 
the occasion is very sincere. I know no one more 
entitled by unpretending merit, or better prepared 
by habitual suffering, to receive and enjoy feli- 
city. Her partiality for this gentleman was not of 
recent origin; and he had been long withheld only 
by inferiority of situation from addressing her. 
His unexpected accession to title and fortune had 
removed all his difficulties; and never had the 
General loved his daughter so well in all her 



NORTHANGER ABBEY. 3D7 

hours of companionship, utility, and patient en- 
durance, as when he first hailed her " Your Lady- 
ship! " Her husband was really deserving of her; 
independent of his peerage, his wealth, and his 
attachment, being to a precision the most charm- 
ing young man in the world. Any further defi- 
nition of his merits must be unnecessary; the most 
charming young man in the world is instantly be- 
fore the imagination of us all. Concerning the 
one in question, therefore, I have only to add 
(aware that the rules of composition forbid the 
introduction of a character not connected with my 
fable) that this was the very gentleman whose 
negligent servant left behind him that collection 
of washing-bills, resulting from a long visit at 
Northanger, by which my heroine was involved in 
one of her most alarming adventures. 

The influence of the Viscount and Viscountess 
in their brother's behalf was assisted by that right 
understanding of Mr. Morland's circumstances 
which, as soon as the General would allow himself 
to be informed, they were qualified to give. It 
taught him that he had been scarcely more misled 
by Thorpe's first boast of the family wealth than 
by his subsequent malicious overthrow of it; that 
in no sense of the word were they necessitous or 
poor, and that Catherine would have three thou- 
sand pounds. This was so material an amendment 
of his late expectations, that it greatl}'- contributed 
to smooth the descent of his pride; and by no 
means without its effect was the private intelli- 
gence, which he was at some pains to procure, 
that the Fullerton estate, being entirely at the 



308 NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

disposal of its present proprietor, was consequently 
open to every greedy speculation. 

On the strength of this, the General, soon after 
Eleanor's marriage, permitted his son to return to 
Northanger, and thence made him the hearer of 
his consent, very courteously worded in a page 
full of empty professions, to Mr. Morland. The 
event which it authorized soon followed: Henry 
and Catherine were married, the bells rang, and 
everybody smiled; and as this took place within 
a twelvemonth from the first da}'- of their meeting, 
it will not appear, after all the dreadful delays 
occasioned by the General's cruelty, that they 
were essentially hurt by it. To begin perfect 
happiness at the respective ages of twenty-six and 
eighteen is to do pretty well; and professing 
myself, moreover, convinced that the General's 
unjust interference, so far from being really in- 
jurious to their felicity, was perhaps rather con- 
ducive to it, by improving their knowledge of 
each other, and adding strength to their attach- 
ment, I leave it to be settled by whomsoever it 
msLj concern, whether the tendency of this work 
be altogether to recommend parental tyranny, or 
reward filial disobedience. 



14 DAY USE r 

RETUKN TO DESK FROM WHICH BORROWED | 

LOAN DEPT. 

This book is due on the last date stamped below, or 









LD 21A-60m-3,'65 
(F2336sl0)476B 



General Library 
University of Calif on / 
Berkeley /: 



:,r*.. 



f" yQ 



J»0 c. \ 




yi 






)o.'"'' 




iD< 





^<3!»axV 



