
This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at http : //books . google . com/| 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



A 



EX LIBRIS 

♦ 

Sutntytnemy booke is vnto me A Gody 
Sumtyme I tbrowe it from me A rodd. 
All kynde ofbookesy goody and baddy 
Sayntisb and Diuelisby that ar to be badd. 
Owldey andyungCy 
For matter and tungey 
Wberesoeuer tbey dwelly 
In Heaueny or in Hell. 



DOUGLAS BUSH 



QIFT OP 



PROP. JOHN NASH DOUGLAS BUSH 



RD COLLEGE LI BRARY3S<1 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



%/' 




Digitized by VjOOQIC 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



THE ARDEN SHAKESPEARE 
GENERAL EDITOR : W. J. CRAIG 



ALL'S WELL THAT ENDS WELL 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



THE WORKS 

OF 

SHAKESPEARE 

ALL'S WELL THAT ENDS WELL 

EDITED BY 
W. OSBORNE BRIGSTOCKE 



« 



METHUEN AND CO. 

36 ESSEX STREET: STRAND 

LONDON 

1904 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



A- 



UtJRAKY 



-77 V 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



CONTENTS 



Introduction 

All's Well that Ends Well 



IX 

I 



vH 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



INTRODUCTION 

AlVs Well that Ends Welly first published in the folio of 
1623, is certainly one of the worst printed plays in the 
volume. It teems with obscure and corrupt passages, some 
of which, in spite of the erudition and ingenuity of genera- 
tions of Shakespeare scholars, are still unexplained. There 
is almost unlimited scope for conjecture ; consequently, one 
of the main difficulties is the sifting of endless emendations. 
I have throughout endeavoured to be as conservative of the 
original folio text as possible, relying rather on the reading 
of the first folio than on the versions of the other three, 
adopting subsequent emendations or conjectures only when 
supported by what seemed to me conclusive arguments. 
It seems preferable to leave doubtful readings as they are 
in the original; for conjectural corrections, unless quite 
indispensable, are best confined to the footnotes. 

With regard to the carelessness of the printing, Hudson 
says that " it may be worth the while to observe . . . that 
in respect of plot and action the piece is of a somewhat 
forbidding, not to say repulsive, nature ; and though it 
abounds in wisdom and is not wanting in poetry, and has 
withal much choice delineation of character, and contains 
scenes which stream down with the poet's raciest English, 
yet it is not among the plays which readers are often drawn 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



X INTRODUCTION 

to by mere recollections of delight ; . . . the poet may have 
left the manuscript in a more unfinished and illegible state, 
from a sense of something ungenial and unattractive in the 
subject-matter and action of the play." ^ Perhaps : but 
surely the fact that the play is supposed to have been 
remodelled after the lapse of several years is hardly in 
keeping with the idea that Shakespeare saw something 
ungenial in the subject-matter. On the contrary, all seems 
to lead us to suppose that Shakespeare liked the subject 
sufficiently well to revise the greater part of an old comedy 
he had written years before, and also to treat of the same 
subject in Measure for Measure. Be that as it may, the 
play certainly does, as Dr. Hudson says, abound in wisdom 
and contain scenes which stream down with the poet's 
raciest English. 

The data we possess for determining the time of com- 
position are lamentably scant. Of direct, certain evidence 
there is none ; neither external nor~internal. AlVs Well 
that Ends Well is mentioned neither by contemporary 
theatre-goers nor in the Registers. In the piece itself there 
is nothing to point conclusively to a definite period — or 
rather, there are many things which point to different 
periods. Certainly not much to go upon. 

In Meres's Palladis Tamia there is the mention of a play 
called Lov^s Labout^s Wonne. Though Halliwell is of the 
opinion that this play has been lost, most critics agree that, 
considering the commercial value of Shakespeare's name, it 
is hardly likely that such a thing can have happened. If 
we possess the play at all, it is evident that we must have 
it under a different title. There are three plays which may 

^ Hudson, Shakcsptare : His Life^ Art^ and Characters^ vol. i. p. 374. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



INTRODUCTION xi 

not unreasonably be called tales of " love's labour's won," 
namely, Tke- Te r npnt, The Taming- of the Shrew ^ and All's 
Well that Ends Well. This is not the place to discuss the 
several claims of these three plays: the battle has been 
fought out, and critics are now almost unanimous in declar- 
ing that All's Well that Ends Well is, in all probability, the 
play that Meres calls Lov^s Ldbout^s Wonne ; — a conclusion 
first arrived at by Dr. Farmer in his Essay on the Learning 
of Shakespeare (1767). 

This would not only prove that the play must already 
have been written by the year 1598; it would also lead 
one to suppose that it was written in connection with Lov^s 
Labours Lost — either before or shortly after it, as a sequel 
— presumably the latter, as Lov^s Ldbout^s Lost is one of 
the very earliest plays we possess. That being so, 1590 
might be taken to be the date of the first composition. 
Love's Labouf^s Lost was published in 1598, "newly cor- 
rected and augmented " ; and it is possible that the com- 
panion play, though not published, may have undergone a 
similar correction about that time. 

In the play itself we cannot find much to help us. 
There are one or two passages which lead Stokes to believe 
that Shakespeare may possibly (and it is just within the 
bounds of possibility that he may) have made use of the 
following works : — Tom Drum's Vants (etc.) in Gentle Craft 
(ii. 8), 1598; Mendoza's Theorique and Practice of Warre 
(IV. lii. 160-165), translated by Holy 1597 ; Nash's novels 
The Unfortunate Traveller y or Life of Jack Wilton^ 1594. 
Another passage (v. iii. 83-87) seems to Elze to refer to 
the gift of a ring by Elizabeth to Essex when he departed 
for Cadiz in 1596. He writes : " The circumstance of the 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



xii INTRODUCTION 

ring is strangely not referred to till this last scene ; and may 
have been introduced into the fifth act, at a remodelling 
in 1597, say, when Shakespeare would know of the Essex 
incident." ^ 

The style and diction of a play are, as a rule, most 
useful in determining the period of composition; but in 
AlVs Well that Ends Well it is rather a stumbling-block 
than a help; for distinguished and learned critics have 
assigned dates ranging from 1590 to 1606, and where they 
have failed it is hardly likely that anyone can have success. 

Elze thinks that "the unmistakable beauties of com- 
position and characterisation " are indications that the piece 
cannot have been written very early. Though Helen's 
letter is written in sonnet form and though the Italian style 
is still prominent, he considers that it is certainly less 
pronounced than in the very early work. Rhyme is fairly 
abundant, and the clown is not furnished with all the pro- 
verbs and snatches of song which are characteristic of the 
clown of Shakespeare's later period. I gather from this 
that Elze would agree with Drake, who gives 1598, or with 
Chalmers, who gives 1599. Ulrici thinks the peculiar 
diction a sign of early composition, and gives 1590-1593 ; 
Hertzberg, on the other hand, thinks that this peculiar 
diction clearly indicates a late date of composition, say 
1603; and he dismisses the idea that the play may have 
been written at two different periods. Malone at first con- 
jectured 1598, and subsequently changed his mind and said 
1606. Knight holds that there is no proof that it was 

* Halliwell-Phillipps thinks that Shakespeare may have seen Delone/s second 
part of the Gentle Craft (1598), and taken from it the incidents of the Parolles 
story. See Essays on SkcHespeare, Karl Elze, tr. L. D. Schmitz (1874), p. 147. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



INTRODUCTION xiii 

written after 1590. Though Delius emphatically asserts 
that the characteristic peculiarities of this play are in no 
way connected with the characteristic peculiarities of Shake- 
speare's early plays, Gervinus and v. Friesen are in favour 
of the theory that the play was written early and sub- 
sequently revised. The former writes: "The rhymed 
passages, the alternate rhymes, the sonnet letter of 
Helena, point to the form which the piece probably more 
uniformly bore, when with its first title it was placed by 
the side of Lov^s Labour^ s Lost^ to the style of which those 
passages nearly correspond. By far the greatest part of 
the play, however, must have undergone . . . remodelling, for 
the prose-scenes, the soliloquies, which in profound thought 
and force often call to mind Hamlet and Timon^ and 
challenge all the interpreter's art of arrangement, punctua- 
tion, and transposition, the comic passages, which in sub- 
stance and form recall the scenes of Falstaff, all evidently 
belong to the later period of the poet's writing ; [probably to] 
the years 1605 or 1606."^ It was also Coleridge's decided 
opinion that All's Well that Ends Well was written at two 
different and rather distant periods of the poet's life, and 
Verplanck, who is of the same opinion, writes : " The con- 
trast of two different modes of thought and manners of 
expression here mixed in the same piece, must be evident 
to all who have made the shades and gradations of Shake- 
speare's varying and progressive taste and mind at all the 
subject of study. Much of the graver dialogue, especially 
in the first two acts, reminds the reader in taste of 
composition, in rhythm and in a certain quaintness of ex- 

^ Gervinus, Commentaries (AlVs Well . . . ), Eng. trans, by Bunnett, ed. 
1863, voL u. p. 241, lines 10-22. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



xiv INTKODUCTION 

pression of The Two Gentlemen of Verona. On the other 
hand, there breaks forth everywhere, and in many cases 
entirely predominates, a grave moral thoughtfulness, ex- 
pressed in a solemn, reflective and sometimes in a senten- 
tious levity of phrase and harshness of rhythm which seem 
to me to stamp many passages as belonging to the epoch 
of Measure for Measure or King Lear. We miss, too, 
the gay and fanciful imagery which shows itself continually 
alike amidst the passion and the moralising of the previous 
comedies." ^ Hudson closes his remarks on this question as 
follows : " To my taste, the better parts of the workman- 
ship relish strongly of the poet's later style — perhaps I 
should say quite as strongly as the poorer parts do of its 
earlier. This would bring the revisal down to as late a 
time as 1603 or 1604: which date accords, not only with 
my own sense of the matter, but with the much better 
judgment of the critics I have quoted. I place the finished 
Hamlet at or near the close of the poet's middle period ; 
and I am tolerably clear that in this play he discovers a 
mind somewhat more advanced in concentrated fulness, and 
a hand somewhat more practised in sinewy sternness than 
in the finished Hamlet!* * 

Thus, in spite of the undoubted difficulties due to the 
frequent changes of metre, style, and language, and in spite 
of the much more questionable inconsistency in dramatic 
power and moral tone, there are many weighty supporters 
of the theory that All's Well that Ends Well was written 
early and remodelled later; that there are clearly two 

* I have retained this quotation, although I cannot give the exact reference. 
I cannot vouch for it ; but I have no reason to suspect that the pass^e does not 
convey Verplanck's opinion. 

« Shakespeare: Hts Life^ Art^ and Characters^ ed. 1872, p. 377, lines 1^23. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



INTRODUCTION xv 

distinct styles, the one reminding one of the earliest plays, 
the other of the great plays of the period of tragedy ; that 
the fourfold recurrence of the proverb " All 's well that ends 
well" in the text of the play, and the apparent blending 
of the two titles in " All is well ended, if this suit be won," 
are strong circumstantial evidence in favour of accepting 
Dr. Farmer's conjecture that All^s Well that Ends Well 
is the play mentioned by Meres in his Palladis Tamia 
under the name Lovis Labour^ s Wonne; and lastly, that 
the faulty passages, which have baffled everyone, may be 
accounted for by supposing them to mark the places where 
the old and new versions were joined, and their obscurity 
to be due either to new passages being omitted or else 
inserted in the wrong place. 

Everyone who reads this play is at first shocked and 
perplexed by the revolting idea which underlies the plot It 
is revolting, there is no doubt about it ; and it leaves so un- 
pleasant a flavour with some people that it is not tasted again. 
I hold that the taste for All's Well that Ends Well is an 
acquired taste : and when the taste has once been acquired, 
one wonders how the revolting side of the plot could ever have 
hidden the manifold, and in certain respects unique, interest 
of the play, I say unique, because in no other play, so far 
as I know, do we have so curious a blending of Shake- 
speare's various styles; here a passage of florid rhetoric 
characteristic of the earliest work, here a phrase which seems 
a bettered version of some lines in King John^ and there 
gleams of irony that surely come reflected from the dark 
period of King Lear^ Measure for Measure^ or Hamlet. 
Furthermore, the eye in time becomes accustomed to the 
brightness of Helen's personality, and recognises round her 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



xvi INTRODUCTION 

a number of lesser characters, unnoticed before. By study- 
ing to understand what Shakespeare added to the authentic 
story, we may come to conjecture why the tale of Helen's 
labours touched him, and in what spirit he intended us to 
read his rendering of it. 

The story on which the play is founded forms Nov. 9, 
Giorn. iii. of the Decameron. Shakespeare must have read 
it in Paynter's version {Palace of Pleasure^ 4to, 1566), for it 
can hardly be a coincidence that both English writers call 
the people of Sienna " the Senois." Paynter's " version of 
the tale of Giglietta di Nerbona is faithful, and that seems 
to have been the principal excellence at which he aimed : 
he . . . seems generally satisfied with the first word that 
presented itself to his mind, if it conveyed sufficiently the 
meaning of his author." ^ This is his version of Boccaccio's 
novel : — 

" Giletta a phisiciatis doughter of Narbon^ healed the Frenche 
Kyng of a fistula^ for reward whereof she demaunded 
Beltramo Counte of Rossiglione to husbande. The 
Counte beyng maried againste his willy for despite fled 
to Florence and loved an other. Giletta his wife^ by 
pollicie founde meanes to lye with her kusbande, in place 
of his lover y and was begotten with child of two soonnes : 
which knowen to her husbande^ he received her againe^ 
and afterwardes he lived in greate honor and felicitie. 

" In Fraunce there was a gentleman called Isnardo, the 
Counte of Rossiglione, who bicause he was sickly and 
diseased, kepte alwaies in his house a phisicion, named 
maister Gerardo of Narbona. This counte had one onely 

* Payne Collier, "Shakespeare's Library," 1843, vol. ii. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



INTRODUCTION xvii 

Sonne called Beltramo, a verie yonge childe, pleasaunt and 
faire. With whom there was nourished and broughte up, 
many other children of his age : emonges whom one of the 
doughters of the said phisicion, named Giletta, who fer- 
ventlie fill in love with Beltramo, more then was meete for 
a maiden of her age. This Beltramo, when his father was 
dedde, and left under the roial custodie of the Kyng, was 
sente to Paris, for whose departure the maiden was very 
pensive. A little while after, her father beyng likewise 
dedde, she was desirous to goe to Paris, onely to see the 
younge counte, if for that purpose she could gette any good 
occasion. But beyng diligently looked unto by her kins- 
folke (bicause she was riche and fatherless) she could see no 
conviente waie for her intended journey: and being now 
mariageable, the love she bare to the counte was never out 
of her remembraunce, and she refused many husbandes with 
whom her kinsfolke would have placed her, without making 
them privie to the occasion of her refusall. Now it chaunced 
that she burned more in love with Beltramo than ever she 
did before, bicause she heard tell that hee was growen to 
the state of a goodly yonge gentlemanne. She heard by 
report, that the Frenche Kyng had a swellyng upon his 
breast, whiche by reason of ill cure was growen to a fistula, 
and did putte him to merveilous pain and grief, and that 
there was no phisicion to be founde (although many were 
proved) that could heale it, but rather did impaire the grief 
and made it worsse and worsse. Wherfore the Kyng, like 
one that was in dispaire, would take no more counsaill or 
helpe. Whereof the yonge maiden was wonderfuU glad, 
and thought to have by this meanes, not onelie a lawfuU 
occasion to goe to Paris, but if the disease were suche (as 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



xviii INTRODUCTION 

she supposed) easely to bryng to passe that she might have 
the Counte Beltramo to her husbande. Whereupon with 
such knowledge as she had learned at her fathers handes 
before time, shee made a pouder of certain herbes, which 
she thought meete for that disease, and rode to Paris. And 
the first thing she went about when she cam thither was to 
see the Counte Beltramo. And then she repaired to the 
Kyng, praying his grace to vouchsafe to shewe her his dis- 
ease. The Kyng perceivyng her to be a faire yonge maiden 
and a comelie, would not hide it, but opened the same unto 
her. So soone as she sawe it, shee putte hym in comforte, 
that she was able to heale h)rm, saiyng : * Sire, if it shall 
please your grace, I trust in God without any paine or grief 
unto your highness, within eighte dales I will make you 
whole of this disease.' The Kyng hearyng her sale so, 
began to mocke her, saiyng : * How is it possible for thee, 
beyng a yong woman, to doe that which the best renouned 
phisicions in the worlde can not ? ' He thanked her for her 
good will, and made her a directe answere, that he was 
determined no more to foUowe the counsaile of any phisiciony 
Whereunto the maiden answered: 'Sire, you dispise my 
knowledge bicause I am yonge and a woman, but I assure 
you that I doe not minister phisicke by profession, but by 
the aide and helpe of God: and with the cunnyng of 
maister Gerardo of Narbona, who was my father, and a 
phisicion of greate fame so longe as he lived.' The Kyng 
hearyng those wordes, saied to hymself : ' This woman, per- 
adventure, is sent unto me of God, and therefore why should 
I disdain to prove her cunnyng ? sithens she promiseth to 
heale me within a litle space, without any offence or grief 
unto me.' And beyng determined to prove her, he said : 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



INTRODUCTION xix 

' Damosell, if thou doest not heale me, but make me to 
breake my determinacion, what wilt thou shall folowe 
thereof.' * Sire/ saied the maiden : ' Let me be kept in what 
guarde and kepyng you list : and if I dooe not heale you 
within these eight dales, let me bee burnte : but if I doe 
heale your grace what recompence shall I have then ? ' To 
whom the Kyng answered : ' Bicause thou art a maiden and 
unmarried, if thou heale me accordyng to thy promisse, I 
wil bestowe thee upon some gentleman, that shalbe of right 
good worship and estimacion.' To whom she answered: 
*Sire, I am verie well content that you bestowe me in 
mariage : but I will have suche a husbande as I my self 
shall demaunde, without presumption to any of your children 
or other of your bloudde.' Which requeste the Kyng in- 
continently graunted. The yong maiden began to minister 
her phisicke, and in shorte space before her appoincted 
tyme, she had throughly cured the Kyng. And when the 
Kyng perceived himself whole, said unto her : * Thou hast 
well deserved a husbande (Giletta) even suche a one as 
thy selfe shalt chose.' * I have then my lorde (quod she) 
deserved the Countie Beltramo of Rossiglione, whom I have 
loved from my youthe.' The Kyng was very lothe to 
graunte hym unto her : but bicause he had made a promis 
which he was lothe to breake, he caused hym to be called 
forthe, and saied unto hym : * Sir counte, bicause you are a 
gentleman of greate honour, our pleasure is, that you re- 
toume home to your owne house, to order your estate 
according to your degree : and that you take with you a 
damosell which I have appoincted to be your wife.' To 
whom the counte gave his humble thankes, and demaunded 
what she was ? ' It is she (quoth the Kyng) that with her 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



XX INTRODUCTION 

medicines hath healed me.' The counte knewe her well, and 
had alreadie seen her, although she was faire, yet knowing her 
not to be of a stocke convenable to his nobilitie, disdainfullie 
said unto the King, * Will you then (sir) give me a phisi- 
cion to wife ? It is not the pleasure of God that ever I 
should in that wise bestowe my self.' To whom the Kyng 
said : * Wilt thou then, that we should breake our faithe, 
which we to recover healthe have gfiven to the damosell, 
who for a rewarde thereof asked thee to husband ? ' ' Sire 
(quoth Beltramo) you male take from me al that I have, 
and give my persone to whom you please, bicause I am 
your subject : but I assure you I shall never be contented 
with that mariage.' * Well you shall have her, (saied the 
Kyng) for the maiden is faire and wise, and loveth you 
moste intirely: thinkyng verelie you shall leade a more 
joyfull life with her, then with a ladie of a greater house.' 
The counte therewithal helde his peace, and the King made 
great preparacion for the mariage. And when the ap- 
poincted daie was come, the counte in the presence of the 
Kyng (although it were against his will) maried the maiden, 
who loved hym better then her owne self. Whiche dooen, 
the counte determinyng before what he would doe, praied 
licence to retoume to his countrie to consummat the mariage. 
And when he was on horsebacke he went not thither, but 
tooke his journey into Thuscane, where understandyng that 
the Florentines and Senois were at warres, he determined 
to take the Florentines parte, and was willinglie received 
and honourablie interteigned, and made capitaine of a cer- 
taine nomber of men, continuyng in their service a longe 
tyme. The newe maried gentlewoman, scarce contented 
with that, and hopyng by her well doyng to cause hym to 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



INTRODUCTION xxi 

retourne into his countrie, went to RossigUone, where she 
was received of all his subjectes for their ladie. And per- 
ceivyng that through the countes absence all thinges were 
spoiled and out of order, she like a sage lady, with greate 
diligence and care, disposed all thynges in order againe; 
whereof the subjectes rejoysed verie much, bearyng to her 
their hartie love and affection, greatlie blamyng the counte 
bicause he could not contente himself with her. This not- 
able gentlewoman having restored all the countrie againe, 
sent worde thereof to the counte her husbande, by two 
knightes of the countrie, whiche she sent to signifie unto 
hym, that if it were for her sake that he had abandoned his 
countrie, he should sende her worde thereof, and she to doe 
hym pleasure, would depart thence. To whom he chorlishlie 
saied : * Lette her doe what she list : for I doe purpose to 
dwell with her, when she shall have this ryng (meanyng a 
ryng which he wore) upon her finger, and a soonne in her 
armes begotten by me.* He greatly loved that ryng, and 
kepte it verie carefullie, and never tooke it of from his 
finger, for a certaine vertue that he knewe it had. The 
knightes hearyng the harde condicion of twoo thinges im- 
possible : and seyng that by them he could not be removed 
from his determinacion, thei retourned againe to the ladie, 
tellinge her his answere : who, verie sorrowfull, after she 
hadde a good while bethought herself, purposed to finde 
meanes to attaine to those twoo thynges, to the intente that 
thereby she might recover her husbande. And havyng 
advised with her self what to doe, she assembled the noblest 
and chiefest of her countrie, declaring unto them in lament- 
able wise what shee had alredie dooen, to winne the love of 
the counte, shewyng them also what followed thereof. And 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



xxu INTRODUCTION 

in the ende saied unto them, that she was lothe the counte 
for her sake should dwell in perpetuall exile : therefore she 
determined to spende the rest of her tyme in pilgrimages 
and devocion, for preservacion of her soule, praiyng them 
to take the charge and govemmente of the countrie, and 
that they would lette the counte understande, that she had 
forsaken his house, and was removed farre from thence: 
with purpose never to retoume to Rossiglione againe. 
Many teares were shedde by the people, as she was 
speakyng these wordes, and divers supplications were made 
unto him to alter his opinion, but al in vaine. Wherefore 
commending them all unto God, she tooke her waie with 
her maide, and one of her kinsemen, in the habite of a 
pilgrime, well furnished with silver and precious jewelles: 
tellyng no man whither shee wente, and never rested till 
she came to Florence: where arrivyng by fortune at a 
poor widowes house, she contented her self with the state 
of a poore pilgrime, desirous to here newes of her lorde, 
whom by fortune she sawe the next dale passing by the 
house (where she lay) on horsebacke with his companie. 
And although she knewe him well enough, yet she de- 
maunded of the good wife of the house what he was : who 
answered that he was a straunge gentleman, called the 
counte Beltramo of Rossiglione, a curteous knighte, and wel 
beloved in the citie, and that he was mervellously in love 
with a neighbor of hers, that was a gentlewoman, verie 
poore and of small substaunce, neverthelesse of right honest 
life and report, and by reason of her povertie was yet un- 
married, and dwelte with her mother, that was a wise and 
honest ladie. The countess well notyng these wordes, and 
by Utle and litle debatyng every particular point thereof. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



INTRODUCTION xxiii 

comprehendyng the effecte of those newes, concluded what 
to doe, and when she had well understanded whiche was 
the house, and the name of the ladie, and of her doqghter 
that Mras beloved of the counte : upon a daie repaired to the 
house secretlie in the habite of a pilgrime, where finding the 
mother and doughter in poore estate emonges their familie, 
after she hadde saluted them, tolde the mother that she had 
to sale unto her. The gentlewoman risyng up, curteouslie 
interteigned her, and beyng entred alone into a chamber, 
thei satte doune, and the countesse began to sale unto her 
in this wise. 'Madame we thinke that ye be one upon 
whom fortune doeth frowne, so well as upon me : but if you 
please, you male bothe comfort me and your self/ The 
ladie answered, * That there was nothyng in the worlde 
whereof she was more desirous then of honest comforte.' 
The countesse procedyng in her talke, saied unto her : ' I 
have nede now of your fidelitie and trust, whereupon if I 
doe stale, and you deceive mee, you shall bothe undoe me 
and your self.' * Tel me then what it is hardelie (saied the 
gentlewoman :) if it bee your pleasure : for you shall never 
bee deceived of me.' Then the countesse begaune to recite 
her whole estate of love: tellyng her what she was, and 
what had chaunced to that present daie, in such perfite 
order that the gentlewoman belevyng her woordes, bicause 
she had partlie heard report thereof before, b^aune to 
have compassion upon her, and after that the countesse had 
rehearsed all the whole circumstaunce, she continued her 
purpose, saying : * Now you have heard emonges other my 
troubles, what twoo thynges thei bee, whiche behoveth me 
to have, if I do recover my husbande, which I knowe 
none can helpe me to obtain, but onely you, if it bee true 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



xxiv INTRODUCTION 

that I heare, which is, that the counte my husbande, is farre 
in love with your doughter.' To whom the gentlewoman 
saied : * Madame, if the counte love my doughter, I knowe 
not, albeit the likelihoode is greate : but what am I able to 
doe, in that which you desire ? ' * Madame,' answered the 
countesse, * I will tell you : but first I will declare what I 
mean to doe for you, if my determinacion be brought to 
effect : I see your faier doughter of good age, redie to marie, 
but as I understand the cause why she is unmarried, is the 
lacke of substance to bestowe upon her. Wherfore I pur- 
pose, for recompense of the pleasure, which you shall dooe 
for me, to give so much redie money to marie her honor- 
ably, as you shall thinke sufficient.' The countesse' offer 
was very well liked of the ladie, bicause she was but poore : 
yet having a noble hart, she said unto her, * Madame, tell 
me wherein I male do you service : and if it be a thing 
honest, I will gladlie performe it, and the same being 
brought to passe, do as it shal please you.' Then saied the 
countesse : * I thinke it requisite, that by some one whom 
you trust, that you give knowledge to the counte my 
husbande, that your doughter is, and shalbe at his com- 
maundement: and to the intent she male bee well 
assured that he loveth her in deede above any other, that 
she praieth him to sende her a ring that he weareth upon 
his finger, whiche ring she heard tell he loved verie derely : 
and when he sendeth the ryng, you shall give it unto me, 
and afterwardes sende hym woorde, that your doughter is 
redie to accomplishe his pleasure, and then you shall cause 
him secretly to come hither, and place me by hym (in 
steede of your doughter) peradventure God will give me 
the grace, that I maie bee with childe, and so havyng this 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



INTRODUCTION xxv 

ryng on my finger, and the childe in myne armes begotten 
by him, I shall recover him, and by your meanes continue 
with hym, as a wife ought to doe with her husbande.' This 
thing seemed difficulte unto the gentlewoman : fearyng that 
there would followe reproche unto her doughter. Notwith- 
standyng, consideryng what an honest parte it were, to be 
a meane that the good ladie should recover her husband, 
and that she should doe it for a good purpose, havyng 
affiaunce in her honest affection, not onely promised the 
countesse to bryng this to passe, but in fewe dales with 
greate subtiltie, folowyng the order wherein she was in- 
structed, she had gotten the ryng, although it was with the 
countes ill will, and toke order that the countesse in stede 
of her doughter did lye with hym. And at the first 
meetyng, so , affectuously desired by the counte : God so 
disposed the matter that the countesse was begotten with 
child, of twoo goodly sonnes, and her delivery chaunced at 
the due time. Whereupon the gentlewoman, not onely con- 
tented the countesse at that tyme with the companie of her 
husbande, but at many other times so secretly that it was 
never knowen : the counte not thinkyng that he had lien 
with his wife, but with her whom he loved. To whom at 
his uprisyng in the momyng, he used many curteous and 
amiable woordes, and gave divers faire and precious jewelles, 
whiche the countesse kepte most carefullie : and when shee 
perceived herself with childe, she determined no more to 
trouble the gentlewoman, but saied unto her, 'Madame, 
thankes be to God and you, I have the thyng that I desire, 
and even so it is tyme to recompence your desert, that 
afterwardes I male departe.' The gentlewoman saied unto 
her, that if she had doen any pleasure agreable to her mind, 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



xxvi INTRODUCTION 

she was right glad thereof whiche she did, not for hope of 
rewarde, but because it apperteined to her by well doyng so 
to doe. Whereunto the countesse saied: 'Your saiyng 
pleaseth me well, and likewise for my parte, I dooe not 
purpose to give unto you the thing you shall demaunde 
of me in rewarde, but for consideracion of your well 
doyng, which duetie forceth me to so dooe.' The gentle- 
woman then constrained with necessitie, demaunded of her 
with greate bashfulnesse, an hundred poundes to marie 
her doughter. The countesse perceivyng the shamefast- 
nesse of the gentlewoman, and hearyng her curteous 
demaunde, gave her five hundred poundes, and so many 
faire and costly jewels whiche almoste amounted to like 
valer. For whiche the gentlewoman more then contented, 
gave most hartie thankes to the countesse, who departed 
from the gentlewoman and retourned to her lodging. The 
gentlewoman to take occasion from the counte of any 
farther repaire, or sendyng to her house, tooke her doughter 
with her, and went into the countrie to her frendes. The 
counte Beltramo, within fewe dales after, beyng revoked 
home to his owne house by his subjectes, (hearyng that 
the countesse was departed from thence) retourned. The 
countesse knowynge that her husband was gone from 
Florence and retourned into his countrie, was verie glad 
and contented, and she continewed in Florence till the tyme 
of her child-bedde was come, and was brought a bedde of 
twoo soones, which were verie like unto their father, and 
caused them carefuUie to be noursed and brought up, and 
when she sawe tyme, she toke her journey (unknowen to 
any manne) and arrived at Montpellier, and restyng her self 
there for certaine dales, hearyng newes of the counte, and 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



INTRODUCTION xxvii 

where he was, and that upon the dale of All Sainctes, he 
purposed to make a great feast and assemblie of ladies and 
knightes, in her pilgrimes weede she wente thither. And 
knowyng that thei were all assembled, at the palace of the 
counte, redie to sitte doune at the table, she passed through 
the people without change of apparell, with her twoo sonnes 
in her armes : and when she was come up into the hall, 
even to the place where the counte was, fallyng doune pros- 
trate at his feete, wepyng, saied unto him : * My lorde, I 
am thy poor infortunate wife, who to the intent thou 
mightest retume and dwel in thine owne house, have been 
a great while beggyng about the worlde. Therefore I now 
beseche thee, for the honour of God, that thou wilt observe 
the condicions, whiche the twoo knightes (that I sent unto 
thee) did commaunde me to doe : for beholde, here in myne 
armes, not onelie one sonne begotten by thee, but twaine, 
and likewise thy rynge. It is now tyme then (if thou kepe 
promis) that I should be received as thy wife.' The counte 
hearyng this, was greatly astonned, and knewe the rynge 
and the children also, thei were so like hym. * But tell me 
(quod he) how is this come to passe ? ' The countesse to 
the great admiracion of the counte, and of all those that 
were in presence, rehearsed unto them in order all that, 
whiche had been doen, and the whole discourse thereof. 
For whiche cause the counte knowyng the thynges she had 
spoken to be true (and perceivyng her constaunt minde and 
good witte, and the twoo faier yonge boies to kepe his 
promise made, and to please his subjectes, and the 
ladies that made sute unto him, to accept her from that 
time forthe as his lawfuU wife, and to honour her) abjected 
his obstinate rigour : causyng her to rise up, and imbraced 



Digitized by ^ 



xxviii INTRODUCTION 

and kissed her, acknowledgyng her againe for his lawfull wife. 
And after he had apparelled her according to her estate, to 
the greate pleasure and contentacion of those that were there, 
and of all his other frendes not onelie that dale, but many 
others, he kepte great chere, and from that tyme forthe, he 
loved and honoured her, as his dere spouse and wife." 

It was from this uncouth version of the story that Shake- 
speare drew inspiration for Helena — according to Coleridge 
"his loveliest creation." Mrs. Jameson tells us that "in Helena 
we have a . . . character . . . allied, indeed, to Juliet as a 
picture of fervent, enthusiastic, self-forgetting love, but differ- 
ing wholly from her in other respects ; for Helen is the union 
of strength of passion with strength of character ... a 
character almost as difficult to delineate in fiction as to find 
in real life . . . touched with the most soul-subduing pathos 
and developed with the most consummate skill 

" Helena, as a woman, is more passionate than 
imaginative; and, as a character, she bears the same 
relation to Juliet that Isabel bears to Portia. There is 
equal unity of purpose and effect, with much less of the 
glow of imagery and the external colouring of poetry 
in the sentiments, language, and details. It is passion 
developed under its most profound and serious aspect; 
as in Isabella we have the serious and the thoughtful, not 
the brilliant side of intellect. Both Helena and Isabel 
are distinguished by high mental powers, tinged with a 
melancholy sweetness; but in Isabella the serious and 
energetic part of the character is founded in religious 
principle, in Helena it is founded in deep passion. 

"There never was, perhaps, a more beautiful picture 
of a woman's love, cherished in secret, not self-consuming 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



INTRODUCTION xxix 

in silent languishment — not pining in thought — not passive 
and * desponding over its idol' — ^but patient and hopeful, 
strong in its own intensity, and sustained by its own fond 
faith. The passion here reposes upon itself for all its 
interest; it derives nothing from art or ornament or 
circumstance ; it has nothing of the picturesque charm or 
glowing romance of Juliet; nothing of the poetical 
splendour of Portia or the vestal grandeur of Isabel. 
The situation of Helena is the most painful and degrading 
in which a woman can be placed. She is poor and lowly : 
she loves a man who is far her superior in rank, who re- 
pays her love with indifference, and rejects her hand with 
scorn. She marries him against his will; he leaves her 
with contumely on the day of their marriage, and makes 
his return to her arms depend on conditions apparently 
impossible. All the circumstances and details with which 
Helena is surrounded are shocking to our feelings and 
wounding to our delicacy; and yet the beauty of the 
character is made to triumph over all; and Shakespeare, 
resting for all his effect on its internal resources and its 
genuine truth and sweetness, has not even availed him- 
self of some extraneous advantages with which Helen is 
represented in the original story . . . Helena, in the play, 
derives no dignity or interest from place or circumstance, 
and rests for all our sympathy and respect solely upon 
the truth and intensity of her affections. She is, indeed, 
represented to us as one 

Whose beauty did astonish the survey 
Of richest eyes ; whose words all ears took captive ; 
Whose dear perfection hearts that scom'd to serve 
Humbly call'd mistress. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



XXX INTRODUCTION 

As her dignity is derived from mental power, without any 
alloy of pride, so her humility has a peculiar grace . . . 
She is more sensible to his greatness than to her own 
littleness: she is continually looking from herself up to 
him, not from him down to herself. She has been bred 
up under the same roof with him; she has adored him 
from infancy. Her love is not * th* infection taken in at 
the eyes ' nor kindled by youthful romance : it appears to 
have taken root in her being, to have grown with her years, 
and to have gradually absorbed all her thoughts and faculties, 
until her fancy ' carries no favour in it but Bertram's,' and 

* there is no living, none, if Bertram be away.' . . . 

"And although Helena tells herself that she loves in 
vain, a conviction stronger than reason tells her that she 
does not : her love is like a religion, pure, holy, and deep : 
the blessedness to which she has lifted her thoughts is 
for ever before her ; to despair would be a crime — it would 
be to cast herself away and die. The faith of her affection, 
combining with the natural energy of her character, believ- 
ing all things possible, makes them so. It could say to the 
mountain of pride which stands between her and her hopes, 

* Be thou removed ! * and it is removed. This is the solution 
of her behaviour in the marriage scene, where Bertram, with 
obvious reluctance and disdain, accepts her hand, which the 
King, his feudal lord and guardian, forces on him. Her 
maidenly feeling is at first shocked, and she shrinks back — ■ 

That you are well restored, my lord, I am glad : 
Let the rest go. 

But shall she weakly relinquish the golden opportunity, 
and dash the cup from her lips at the moment it is pre- 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



INTRODUCTION xxxi 

sented ? Shall she cast away the treasure for which she 
has ventured both life and honour, when it is just within 
her grasp? Shall she, after compromising her feminine 
delicacy by the public disclosure of her preference, be 
thrust back into shame, * to blush out the remainder of her 
life,' and die a poor, lost, scorned thing ? This would be 
very pretty and interesting, and characteristic in Viola or 
Ophelia, but not at all consistent with that high, deter- 
mined spirit, that moral energy, with which Helena is 
portrayed. Pride is the only obstacle opposed to her. 
She is not despised and rejected as a woman, but as a 
poor physician's daughter; and this, to an understanding 
so clear, so strong, so just as Helena's, is not felt as an 
unpardonable insult. The mere pride of rank and birth 
is a prejudice of which she cannot comprehend the force, 
because her mind towers so immeasurably above it ; and, 
compared to the infinite love which swells within her own 
bosom, it sinks into nothing. She cannot conceive that he 
to whom she has devoted her heart and truth, her soul, her 
life, her services, must not one day love her in return ; and 
once her own beyond the reach of fate, that her cares, her 
caresses, her unwearied, patient tenderness, will not at last 
' win her lord to look upon her ' — 

. . . For time will bring on summer, 

When briers shall have leaves as well as thorns. 

And be as sweet as sharp ! 

It is this fond faith which, hoping all things, enables her 
to endure all things; which hallows and dignifies the 
surrender of her woman's pride, making it a sacrifice on 
which virtue and love throw a mingled incense." ^ 

^ Mrs. Jameson, Characteristics of Women (Shakespeare's Heroines). 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



xxxii INTRODUCTION 

I cannot fbel much sympathy for the elaborate German 
treatise in which "pride of rank" is held to be the >dce 
ridiculed, the fact that " worth is rank " the moral of the 
play.^ It seems preferable to avoid making each drama 
turn as it were on some central pivot : life does not move 
in that way. Any fragment of life may contain one or all 
of the ideas that German critics would prove to be singly 
the keynote of a play. May we not more profitably study 
to see what part of this life Shakespeare most clearly 
sympathises with, which runner is his favourite, what way 
of running evidently the one that seems best to him ? No 
one denies that Shakespeare is as nearly impersonal as it 
is possible to be. But it is hardly possible for anyone to 
make a plain statement of facts, giving both sides of each 
case, without betraying his own opinion— if only by the 
wording of the phrases. Each play is essentially a state- 
ment of facts : and each play contains, at least to a certain 
degree, a statement of both sides of all questions. It is 
from this, and almost exclusively from this, that we must 
hope for reliable information regarding Shakespeare's 
theories of life. Professor Dowden writes: "The Eliza- 
bethan drama is thoroughly free from lassitude, and 
from that lethargy of heart, which most of us have felt 
at one time or another. ... To this mood of barren 
world-weariness the Elizabethan drama comes with no 
direct teaching, but with a vision of life. Even though 
death end all, these things at least are — beauty and 
force, purity, sin, and love, and anguish and joy. These 

* Gervinus, Shakespeare Commentaries^ tr. Bunnett, 1863, vol. i. p. 252 : 
" The idea, that merit goes before rank, has, as we shall presently see, expressly 
occupied Shakespeare's mind in the period before us." 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



INTRODUCTION xxxui 

things are, and therefore life cannot be a little idle whirl 
of dust. We are shown the strong man taken in the 
toils, the sinner sinking farther and farther away from 
light and reality and the substantial life of things into 
the dubious and the dusk, the pure heart all vital, and 
confident, and joyous; we are shown the glad, vicarious 
sacrifice of soul for soul, the malign activity of evil, 
the vindication of right by the true justiciary; we are 
shown the good common things of the world, and the 
good things that are rare; the love of parents and 
children, the comradeship of young men, the exquisite 
vivacity, courage and high-spirited intellect of noble 
girlhood, the devotion of man and woman to man and 
woman. The vision of life rises before us; and we 
know that the vision represents a reality."^ And a 
reality looked at not in the light of its being transient, 
but as being of great value and worth fighting for. The 
Elizabethans of all men knew best how to value life 
and to make the most of it, and it is interesting to see 
what price the greatest of them puts on some things we 
might look upon as being useless. Not one of us but feels 
at first that Bertram is absolutely worthless, a rogue, a liar, 
and mean. It is significant that Shakespeare has intensi- 
fied the moral failings of this man and made him more 
repulsive still by laying emphasis on his superficial 
attractiveness. There seems to be a hint of this at the 
very beginning (Act I. sc. i.), when the Countess says, 
"Where an unclean mind carries virtuous qualities, there 
commendations go with pity ; they are virtues and traitors 
too"; though it must be confessed that Bertram's good 

* Shakespeare: His Mind and Art ^ p. 30 j^. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



xxxiv INTRODUCTION 

qualities may be summed up by saying that he was hand* 

some and brave. 

Youth, thou bear'st thy father's face ; 
Frank nature, rather curious than in haste, 
Hath well composed thee. Thy father's moral parts 
Mayst thou inherit too ! 

But at that time Bertram had not inherited, as far as one 
could see, any of his father's moral parts — or if he had, they 
had grown viciously. Both contempt and bitterness were 
in his pride; his honour was not clock to itself, nor did 
he obey the hand of it ; and, though he was born of so 
good a father, all went to demonstrate that Bertram was 
but a goer backward. He was one of those men who 
make a good impression — " Whatsome'er he is, he 's bravely 
taken here," says Diana. But however much we despise 
Bertram, it is unnecessary to go to the length of saying 
that Helen's love for him is " a tragic perversion." Surely 
there are two most weighty arguments in his favour: 
Helen — " Shakespeare's loveliest creation " — thought him 
worth struggling for: and Shakespeare let him have her. 
Dr. Herford calls it irony. But Helena's wish to cure the 
King seemed rather tragic — ^and yet it proved successful; 
and, as Elze has pointed out, she cures Bertram as she 
cured the King. To the King she says : 

What is infirm from your sound parts shall fly, 
Health shall live free, and sickness freely die. 

The same with Bertram. His disease was ParoUes — a 
snipt-taffeta fellow, as the Countess describes him, whose 
villanous saffron would have made all the unbaked and 
doughy youth of a nation in his colour. Of him Bertram 
is rid when he accepts Helen. But Dr. Herford holds 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



INTRODUCTION xxxv 

that Shakespeare had never yet pictured the tragic 
perversion of a maiden's passion, as he does here. He 
goes on to say : ^ It is a picture characteristic of the years 
when in Julius CcBsar and in Hamlet he was laying bare, 
with deepening irony, the fatalities which lie in wait for 
the weakness of noble characters. The issues are here 
less grave, but the irony is even more pronounced, in so 
far as Helen's passion for Bertram seems to spring not 
from any flaw in her clear and penetrating mind, but 
from something fundamentally irrational in the nature 
of love itself. Christian idealism sees the peculiar glory 
of love in its power of transcending and ignoring dis- 
tinctions of merit and pouring itself forth on the mean 
and lowly. Modem Romanticism, from a kindred but 
distinct point of view, has delighted to picture the salvation 
of a worthless man by a woman's devoted love. But 
neither of these transcendent ways of looking at love is 
anywhere suggested in Shakespeare. Helen's love is an 
idolatry, and finds its highest expression in adoring self- 
subjection : yet the triumph of her love is merely external. 
Of the sequel we are left to form what ominous conjecture 
we may from the perfunctory declaration of the shrewd 
boggier in the last lines : 

If she, my liege, can make me know this clearly 
1*11 love her dearly, ever, ever dearly." 

That is one way of looking at the play. Of course the 
question of what "ominous conjectures" we are likely to 
make, is not one to argue. Some will agree with Dr. 
Herford and expect the worst. Others may prefer not to 
conjecture at all : they may find plenty to enjoy in the 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



xxxvi INTRODUCTION 

play, troubling themselves as little about what happened 
" ever, ever after " as the Elizabethans did, in practical life, 
about what was to happen in the "undiscovered country 
from whose bourne no traveller returns." Lastly, there 
may be some who think that the prospect is not so gloomy 
after all. To be sure, Bertram is indeed "haughty, rash 
and unbridled, assuming though ill-advised, influenced by 
the most wretched society, and entirely devoid of judgment 
and reflection " (Gervinus). But throughout there is a force 
of character which works in the opposite direction : Helen 
appears " humble, meek, modest, but perfectly mature, wise 
and prudent, endowed with high aspirations and instinctively 
impelled to follow them" (Gervinus). Is it not probable 
that the influence of Helen's clear purpose and resolute will 
(she has been called the antithesis to Hamlet), will end by 
giving Bertram's character the wisdom and the experience 
he so sorely stands in need of? It must have been a great 
shock to his pride to discover how entirely ParoUes had 
duped him : and a still more wholesome lesson to him to 
learn how he had been deceived by Diana. Lafeu speaks 
contemptuously of him, and his words must have touched 
him to the quick. All the evil influence is taken from 
him : he has the guidance only of such friends as the King 
and his mother, besides an angel to bless him, unworthy 
husband that he is. The Countess declares that 

he cannot thrive 
Unless her prayers, whom heaven delights to hear 
And loves to grant, reprieve him from the wrath 
Of greatest justice. 

May we not suppose that "all is well ended" because 
her prayers do reprieve him from the wrath of justice ? 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



INTRODUCTION xxxvii 

There is no ParoIIes in the original stoty. EIze suggests 
that he is meant to show us what Bertram may become if 
Helen does not succeed in wooing him, just as we see in the 
Countess what Helen will one day be like. He has been 
compared with Falstaff, which is not only irrelevant, but 
also a little unfair on our fat friend. The witty knight 
may justly disclaim any relationship to this cowardly liar. 
Parolles must rather be looked upon as the etymon of that 
lago whose last wcM'ds were 

From this time forth I never will speak word. 

In Othello the "window of lattice" was not so easy to 
look through ; it was so well shuttered that Desdemona, 
instead of being able to say, " one that goes with him . . . 
I know him," was left in ignorance. 

If any such there be, heaven pardon him . . . 

SO securely fastened that Othello did not "find" him 
until it was too late. All the terrible possibilities which lie 
in a man like Parolles if he happens to be not " a great way 
fool" were developed in lago, a terrible incarnation of 
malice. 

Shakespeare's Countess is a charming old lady : full of 
tenderest sympathy for the sweet girl she has, so to speak, 
adopted ; she loves her as a daughter — and it is noticeable 
that one can hardly conceive of anyone else being able to 
be so kind and helpful to her. " Under the circumstances 
Helena's mother would not have been at all a fitting person 
to assist and encourage her love. The Countess was 
required, with her gentle disposition. She loves Helena for 
her purity, her honesty, her clear-sightedness, her modesty, 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



xxxviii INTRODUCTION 

her beauty; her love and esteem are increased the more 
Helena does to bring about her love's desire, until she loves 
her almost as much as her son " (Elze). 

Lafeu, the steward, and the clown are also Shakespeare's 
own creations. 

In Dr. Halliwell-Phillipps's notes on this play I find 
two passages which I venture to quote verbatim. 

" It is worthy of remark that Shakespeare's comedy at a 
later period, seems to have passed under the name of 
Monsieur Parolles, that appellation being assigned to it by 
King Charles I. in a manuscript note in a copy of the 
second folio of 1632, preserved at Windsor Castle, which 
formerly belonged to that unfortunate monarch. No notice 
of Airs Well that Ends Well^ under that title, has been 
discovered of a date previous to its entry on the books of 
the Stationers' Company, in November 1623, where it is 
placed in the list of ' soe manie of the said copies as are not 
formerly entred to other men.* " 

" No records of any early performance oi All's Well that 
Ends Well has yet been discovered, and it does not appear 
to have been revived in the seventeenth century after the 
accession of Charles ll., nor, indeed, until October 1741, 
when it was produced at Drury-lane theatre, Mrs. Woffing- 
ton taking the part of Helena and Theophilus Cibber that 
of Parolles. It was again revived, under the superintend- 
ence of Garrick, in 1757, when Mrs. Prichard acted the 
Countess; Miss Macklin, Helen; Mrs. Davies, Diana; 
Woodward, Parolles ; Berry, Lafeu ; and Davies, the King. 
In the year 1785 it was altered by Frederic Pilon, reduced 
to three acts, and performed at the Haymarket theatre, but 
this version was not printed. The alteration in use at the 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



INTRODUCTION xxxix 

theatres during the last sixty years is that by Kemble, in 
which the offensive peculiarities of the story are to a great 
extent concealed, and the principal condition in Bertram's 
letter entirely omitted. ... It is scarcely a matter of 
surprise that the performance of the drama in this vitiated 
form, should not have met, at any recent period, with the 
success that it probably commanded on the Shakespearean 
stage." 

Mr. P. A. Daniel's time-analysis of this play is as 
follows : — 

Day I. Act I. sc. i. 

Interval. Bertram's journey to Court 
Day 2. Act I. sc ii. and iii. 

Interval, Helena's journey to Court 
Day 3. Act II. sc. i. and ii. 

Interval^ two days. Cure of the King's malady. 
Day 4. Act ll. sc. iii., iv., and v. 

Interval. Helena's return to Rousillon. Bertram's 
journey to Florence. 
Day 5. Act III. sc. i. and it 
Day 6. Act ill. sc. iii. and iv. 

Interval^ " some two months." 
Day 7. Act ill. sc. v. 

Day 8. Act ill. sc. vi. and. vii., Act IV. sc. i. and ii. 
Day 9. Act IV. sc. iii. and iv. 

Interval. Bertram's return to Rousillon. Helena's 
return to Marseilles. 
Day ID. Act iv. sc. v.. Act v. sc. 1. 
Day 1 1. Act v. sc. ii. and iii. 

Total time about three months: eleven days represented 
on the stage. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



xl INTRODUCTION 

By the courtesy of the British Museum authorities I 
have been able to base the present text upon their copies 
of the folios. I have also had before me the Cambridge 
Shakespeare^ invaluable to anyone who studies the text 
critically. I gained something from most of the editions 
I consulted, and it is therefore impossible to acknowledge 
my indebtedness more particularly. I have throughout 
endeavoured to mention my authority, whenever I knew 
the source of my information. 

I am indebted to Mr. A. E. Thiselton's notes on the 
play; though I have not always been able to agree with 
his versions, his comments are excellent and in many 
ways most valuable. Professor Proescholdt has constantly 
aided me with criticisms and suggestions, and Mr. W. J. 
Craig, Editor of the Oxford Shakespeare^ placed his large 
collection of manuscript notes at my disposal, and also the 
manuscript of his " Little Quarto Shakespeare." Any value 
that this edition may possess is entirely due to their gener- 
ous assistance. I take this opportunity of expressing my 
thanks for this valuable assistance. 

References to plays of Shakespeare other than AlVs 
Well that Ends Well are given with the numbering (etc.) of 
the Globe edition. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



ALL'S WELL THAT ENDS WELL 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



DRAMATIS PERSON 2E^ 

King of France. 

Duke of Florence, 

Bertram, Count of RousiUon. 

Lafeu, an old Lord, 

Parolles, a Follower of Bertram, 

RiNALDO, Steward to the Countess of Rousillon. 

Lavache, Clown^ in her household. 

A Page. 

Countess of Rousillon, Mother to Bertram, 
Helena, a Gentlewoman protected by the Countess, 
A Widow of Florence, 
Diana, Daughter to the Widow, 



\ Neighbours and Friends to the Widow, 



VlOLENTA,2 

Mariana, 

lA>rds^ Officers^ Soldiers^ etc., French and Florentine, 

Scene: Rousillon; Paris; Florence; Marseilles. 

* Dramads Personse] Not given in the 1623 F. First enumerated by Rowe. 
^ Violenta] a mute persom^e; retained because some have thought that 
Diana's first speech in in. v. may belong to her. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



ALL'S WELL THAT ENDS WELL 



ACT I 



SCENE I. — Rousillcn, A Room in the Countesses Palace. 



EnUr Bertram, the Countess of Rousillon, Helena, 
and Lafeu, all in black. 

Count. In delivering my son from me, I bury a second 

husband. 
Ber. And I in going, madam, weep o'er my father's 

death anew; but I must attend his majesty's 

command, to whom I am now in ward, evermore 5 

in subjection. 
Laf. You shall find of the king a husband, madam ; 

you, sir, a father. He that so generally is at all 

3 And /, in goings madain\ F I ; And in going madam F 2, 3 ; And in 
goings madam, I Rowe. 



Rousillon] or RoussiUon, an old pro- 
vince of France, separated from Spain 
l^ the Pyrenees. Perpignan was the 
capital, as it is of the modem depart- 
ment of Pjnr^nte-Orientales, which 
occupies nearly the same territory. 
(Rolfe.) 

4. attmd\ be in attendance on ; cf. 
'' each hath his place and function to 
attend" (i Henry VL I. i. 173). 

5. in ward] When the feudal lord of 
an estate died, the heir, if still a minor, 
became the ward of the sovere^, who 



oflen deputed some nobleman to ** take 
the charge." The sovereign could even 
dispose of his ward's marriage. 

7. 0/ the king] Cf. " even such a 
husband Hast thou of me as she is for 
a wife" (Merchant of Venice^ in. v. 
89). "We shall find of him A 
shrewd contriver" (Julius Ccesar, ii. 
i. 157). 

8. . gCTf^gfflla ltogethgr. Cf. "This 
gentleman '1 o wHom we all rest gener- 
ally beholding " (Taming of the Shrew, 
I. ii. 274). 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



ALL S WELL 



[act 



times good, must of necessity hold his virtue to 
you, whose worthiness would stir it up where it lo 
wanted rather than lack it where there is such 
abundance. 

Count What hope is there of his majesty's amend- 
ment ? 

Laf. He hath abandoned his physicians, madam ; 1 5 
under whose practices he hath persecuted time 
with hope, and finds no other advantage in the 
process but only the losing of hope by time. 

Count. This young gentlewoman had a father, — O, 

that " had," how sad a passage 'tis ! — whose skill 20 

II. lack"] slack Theobald (Warburton). 16. persecuted]prosecuUd Hanmer. 



9. hold] continue to devote. Cf. "I 
hold my duty, as I hold my soul. Both 
to my God and to my gracious king " 
(Hamlet^ II. ii. 44). 

10-12. worthiness . . . adundance] 
your worthiness is such that it would 
win ** virtue " not only firom a king at all 
times good, but even from one slow 
to kindly feeling. 

II. /ack] Theobald's proposal to sub- 
stitute ** slack" for " lack " seems good. 
The word in question is clearly in anti- 
thesis to "stir it up," and it is rather 
difficult to get much meaning out of 
** worthiness lacked it." 

16, 17. persecuted, . . hope\ Schmidt 
says: "not very intelligibly used." 
Tlie meaning is : the king for a while 
hoped so fervently, that the idea of 
time was banished from his mind : he 
had, by the advice of his physicians, 
maltreated the present time and in- 
flicted upon himself much pain in the 
hope of ultimately curing his disorder ; 
time had, however, outlived the per- 
secution and ended by quashing hope. 
Time = lifetime; cf. " out of thy long ex- 
perienced time, Give me some counsel " 
\Rofneo and Juliet^ iv. i. 60). Mr. 
Thiselton (quoting Minshew) connects 



* * persecute " with * * persequor. " But is 
there anything to show that Shake- 
speare used " persecute " in its primary 
sense? 

20. that " had^' ] Blackstone quotes 
the HeatUontimorumenos of Terence, 
where Menedenus says : 

** — Fllium unicum adolescentulum 
Habeo. Ah, quid dixi? habere 

me ? imo--habui, Chreme 
Nunc habeam necne incertum est." 
The same idea has been made use of 
by Dante, Spenser, and others. 

20. sad a passage] " Passage is any- 
thing that passes. So we now say a 
passage of an author ; and we usea to 
say, tiie passages of a reign. When 
the Countess mentions Helena's loss of 
a fether, she recollects her own loss of 
a hiisband, and stops to observe how 
heavily the word * had ' passes through 
her mind." This is Johnson's explana- 
tion. The word is a difficult one to 
understand. Dowden conjectures " oc- 
currence," as in Cymbeline^ ill. iv. 94, 
" act of common passage." The word 
occurs again in Comedy of Errors^ ill. i. 
99, " Now is the stimng passage of the 
day." Steevens Quotes "two philoso- 
phers that jeer and weep at the passage 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



SCI.] THAT ENDS WELL 5 

was almost as great as his honesty; had it 
stretch'd so far, would have made nature immortal, 
and death should have play for lack of work. 
Would, for the king's sake, he were living! I 
think it would be the death of the king's disease. 25 

Laf. How called you the man you speak of, madam ? 

Count He was famous, sir, in his profession, and it 
was his great right to be so : Gerard de Narbon. 

Laf. He was excellent indeed, madam : the king very 

lately spoke of him admiringly, and moumingly. 30 
He was skilful enough to have liv'd still, if know- 
ledge could be set up against mortality. 

Ber. What is it, my good lord, the king languishes of? 

Laf. A fistula, my lord. 

Ber. I heard not of it before. 3 5 

La/, I would it were not notorious. Was this gentle- 
woman the daughter of Gerard de Narbon ? 

Count. His sole child, my lord; and bequeathed to 
my overlooking. I have those hopes of her good 
that her education promises ; her dispositions she 40 

22. would] it would Rowe, '/ would Singer. 23. have play\ have had play 
Hanmer, have play'd Warburton. 40. promises ; her] Rowe, promises her 
Ff, promises her ; Pope ; dispositions] disposition Rowe. 

of the world " in the English Intelli- 21. honesty] honourable character, 
gencer, a tragi-comedy, 1641. The 28. his great right] his fully justified 

word undoubtMly does mean " occur- right, due to him as a great man. 
rence ** very frequently. Steevens 34. fistula] a. swelling on the breast, 

(}uotes other instances where this mean- aggravated by neglect. ** Used in a 

ing is perfectly evident. Nevertheless way as a sore." Guard, Healthy 1579 

I am inclined to prefer the explanation {New Eng. Diet,), 
that " passage " here means " passing 39. hopes] expectations. Cf. " I 

away.^^ The word is so used by Shake- shall falsify men's hopes*' (1 Henry 

speare : * * Would some part of my young IV, I. ii. 235). 

years Might but redeem the passage of 40. her dispositions] she derives her 

your age ! " (i Henry VI, 11. v. 108). honesty, without which no goodness 

"When he is fit and seasoned for his acquired hy education could be fair, 

passage " {Hamlet^ in. iii. 86). I am inclmed to think the reading 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



6 



ALL'S WELL 



[act I. 



inherits, which makes fair gifts fairer ; for where 
an unclean mind carries virtuous qualities, there 
commendations go with pity; they are virtues 
and traitors too : in her they are the better for 
their simpleness; she derives her honesty and 
achieves her goodness. 

Laf. Your commendations, madam, get from her 
tears. 

Count 'Tis the best brine a maiden can season her 
praise in. The remembrance of her father never 
approaches her heart but the tsnranny of her 
sorrows takes all livelihood from her cheek. No 

45. their\ her Hanmer (Warburton). 

** disposition," is ri^ht, though the 
interpolation of s " in die comedies is 
not frequent. Walker conjectures that 
this common misprint was due to some 
peculiarity in Shakespeare's handwrit- 
ing which increased as he grew older. 
If so there seems to be no reason why 
this should not be one of these mis- 
prints — the pa^sa^e being in all prob- 
ability of later <&te than some of the 
rh3nned portions. 

42. virtuous qualities] This use of 
virtuous is akin to the Italian use of 
the word virtuoso, implying the passione 
delle belle arti made perfect by practice. 
Shakespeare is alluding only to those 
qualities which can be acquired by a 
mind either naturally honest or naturally 
unclean. In the north the word often 
meant ** ingenious.'* Steevens under- 
stands it so here; as in Chapman's 
Ilicuif viii. "our virtuous engine," and 
also Marlowe's Tamburlaine, Dyce, 
pt. i. V. ii. p. 33^ : 

" One thought, one grace, one wonder 
at the least. 
Which into words no vertue can 
digest." 

43. go with pity] go with regret, 
"pity" being often used to express 
what we call " a pity." 



45 



50 



43, 44. virtues and traitors] Johnson 
has a long note on this expression, 
the meaning of which seems to be that 
Iclevemess (virtue) in an unclean mind 
'is treacherous virtue (quality) because 
lit inspires an admiration in others which 
tends to make them forget that it is "a 
pity." 

45. simpleness] opposite of subtle- 
ness. Cf. R. Greene, A Quip for an 
Upstart Courtier, p. i, "there grew 
many simples whose virtues taught me 
to be subtle,^* There is an evident 
play on the words here. 

48. tears] probably placed at the 
end of the sentence for emphasis and to 
" give the cue " to the following speech. 

49. season] frequently used by Shake- 
speare. "Salt water {Le, tears) to 
season love" {/Borneo and Juliet, 11. iii. 
72). See also Troilus and Cressida, i. 
ii. 278 ; Twelfth Night, i. i. 30. It has 
been called a coarse metaphor; but, 
as Knight points out, it was in Jesus' 
mind when he said, "Ye are the salt 
of the earth" (Matt. v. 13). Cf. also 
L'Estrange's Fables i " children should 
be seasoned betimes and lessoned." 

52. livelihood] animation (Middle 
Ei^^lish live-lode = life leading). This is 
the only use of the word in Slmkespeare. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



SC. I.] 



THAT ENDS WELL 



more of this, Helena ; go to, no more ; lest it be 

rather thought you affect a sorrow than to have— 
Heh I do affect a sorrow indeed, but I have it too. 5 5 

Laf. Moderate lamentation is the right of the dead, 

excessive grief the enemy to the living. 
Count. If the living be enemy to the grief, the excess 

makes it soon mortal. 
Ber. Madam, I desire your holy wishes. 60 

Laf. How understand we that ? 



53) 54* ^^^ • • • ^^ — ] ^^^^ yf>^ ^^ rather thought to Hanmer, , , , to have 
it, Warburton, to have, Steevens, htwe it, Capell. 58. If the living . . . 

grief\ the grief be enemy to the living Gould conj., be not the enemy Theobald 
(Warburton). 60, 61.] Theobald conj. transposes these two lines. 



53. lest , . .] a strange construction, 
but the meaning is obvious : — lest you 
be thought rather to affect a sorrow than 
to feel it. Such slight inaccuracies are 
not peculiar to Shakespeare, as Malone 
has thought necessary to prove in detail. 

54. than to have — ] I think this must 
be left; it is impossible to say that 
Shakespeare did not write this : there- 
fore we dare not change it 

55. I do affect , , .] Helena seems 
to be speaking half to herself — ** there 
is indeed an outward show of sorrow, 
but I am really unhappy too." Cowden 
Clarke pertinently calls attention to the 
fact that these, Helena's first words, 
render her meaning so indistinctly that it 
is undivined by those around her, only 
half perceived even by the reader. It 
is the beginning of what the king calls 
"theHtter" (v. iii.), and the subject 
of the play is how the ** bitter passed " 
and ended well. 

58. If the living » . .] Johnson para- 
phrases, ** If the living do not indulge 
grief, grief destroys itself by its own 
excess." Malone quotes Winter^ s Tale^ 
V. iii. 51, in support of Johnson's inter- 
pretation : 

**. . . scarce any joy 
Did ever live so long ; no sorrow 
But kill'd itself much sooner." 



Also Romeo and Juliet^ li. vi. 9: 
** These violent deli|;hts have violent 
ends. And in their tnumph die." The 
word " mortal " often means " deadly " 
in Shakespeare. Cf. Othello y ii. i. 72. — 
This whole speech has been assigned 
by many editors to Helena, and the 
ailments in favour of the suggestion 
are plausible. The great objection is 
that there seems to 1^ little reason for 
doubting the correctness of the Ff. It 
is clearly an antithetical reply to Lafeu's 
remark, and logically belongs to the 
Countess, who said ** no more of this" 
just before. Mr. Thiselton suggests 
that "the living "= the Countess; 
meaning "that if she did not combat 
Helena^ grief, it would soon be the 
death of Helena." 

61. How , , , thatf] This is a strange 
speech. But it seems still stranger if 
we transpose it. Where place it? 
After line 55? then we have two 
speeches running. After 59? then 
Bertram's interruption is rude. Per- 
hap so. I cannpt accept as unreserv- 
edly as does Mr. Thiselton Kinnear's 
''admirable" explanation that this is 
the ** humourous allusion to the possi- 
bility of the Countess* wishes being 
anything else but holy." 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



8 



ALL'S WELL 



[act I. 



Count, Be thou blest, Bertram ; and succeed thy father 
In manners, as in shape ! thy blood and virtue 
Contend for empire in thee ; and thy goodness 
Share with thy birthright ! Love all, trust a few, 6$ 
Do wrong to none: be able for thine enemy 
Rather in power than use, and keep thy friend 
Under thy own life's key : be check'd for silence, 
But never tax'd for speech. What heaven more will 
That thee may furnish, and my prayers pluck down, 70 
Fall on thy head ! [To Lafeu\ Farewell, my lord ; 
'Tis an unseason'd courtier ; good my lord, 
Advise him. 



68, 69. chul^d . . . tcu^d\ tax'd . . . chuk'd Daniel conj. 71. headt\ 
F I ; hand F 2, 3, 4 ; Farewell^ my lord^ Farewell my Lord Ff, Farewell— my 
lord Lafeu Capell. 71-75*] Hanmer makes the lines end with '/» an: advise 
him : a/lend: Bertram, He is followed by Dyce. S. Walker gives lines ending 
with my lord Lafeu: my lord: that shall: Bertram, reading in line 74 canU for 
cannot, 73. Advise him] advise him you CapeU. 



6j. <ikn^^^iilf] 1^ Pqii«»1 tn. Cf. 

•'Tnink noTto share with me in glory 
any more" (i Henry IV, V. iv. 64). 
With the following Unes cf. Euphues's 
Advice to Philautus (The Complete 
Works of Lyly, ed. Warwick Sond, 
vol. ii. p. 223, etc.). 

66. oe able] Have power to daunt 
your foe, but practise not your power 
upon him. Cf. "Be ye angry and sin 
not." Johnson informs us that ''able 
for " is not often nor very properly used. 
It occurs in Wilkins's Mathematical 
Magic, "There have been inventions 
which have been able for the utterance of 
articulate sounds.*' Cotgrave gives, "To 
be able or sufficient =6tre suSisant." 

68. checJi^d] rebuked for being silent. 
Cf. fulius Casar, iv. iii. 97, " Checked 
like a bondman." See also iS Henry IV, 
I. ii. 220. 

69. tasedfor] blamed for. Cf. "he 
would not have taxed Milton for his 
choice of a supernatural argument." 
(Dryden.) 



70. That , . . furnish] "When the 
unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he 
walketh through dry places, seeking 
rest ; and finding none, he saith, I wiU 
return unto my house, whence I came 
out. And when he cometh, he findeth 
it swept and garnished." In the same 
way Shakespeare speaks of the spirit 
or mind being furnished. As in Lear 
(ill. i. 29) fi]mishin|s mean appendages 
(that are not essential). The Countess 
prays for anv superfluous gift that 
heaven may be willing to confer to 
embellish Bertram's chsuracter. In the 
same line " pluck " may be taken in its 
strong sense : "a team of horse shall 
not pluck that from me " ( Two Gentlemen 
of Verona, III. i. 266). Or in its milder 
sense : " pluck a dainty doe to ground " 
(Titus Andronicus, ii. il 26). The 
former seems more forceful in this 



72. unseason'd] See note, line 49, 
above. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



SC.^ I.] 



THAT ENDS WELL 



9 



Laf. He cannot want the best that shall attend 
His love. 

Count Heaven bless him! Farewell, Bertram. 75 

{Exit. 

Ber. \To Helena^ The best wishes that can be forged 
in your thoughts be servants to you I Be com- 
fortable to my mother, your mistress, and make 
much of her. 

Laf. Farewell, pretty lady : you must hold the credit 80 
of your father. [Exeunt Bertram and Lafeu. 

HeL O I were that all. I think not on my father ; 

And these great tears g^ace his remembrance more 

Than those I shed for him. What was he like ? 

I have forgot him: my imagination 85 



74* the besi\ Mr. Thiselton explains 
** tile best achncey* it being a compli- 
ment to the effect that he can have 
nothing to add to the excellent counsel 
the Countess has just given her son. 
The passage may be corrupt. Mr. 
Cra^ suggests "this lord" mstead of 
"his love" — ^he who is a courtier in 
the service of this (feudal) lord can- 
not want the best. Mr. P. A. Daniel 
thinks that it is a case of punctuation — 
"He cannot want the best. That 
shall attend his love." The sense is 
not clear in the original, but the emen- 
dations are not quite convincing. 

76. The best wishes . . .] Servants 
may here be used in the sense of lovers, 
as so frequently in the literature of 
chivalry. In that case the sentence 
would mean : May the best wishes you 
can frame for yourself fulfil your will as 
a lover would. Or else it is used in its 
straightforward sense as in Coriolanus^ 
V. ii. 89, ** my affairs are servanted 
to others." Mr. Thiselton takes this 
speech to be spoken to the Countess. 

77, 78. Be comfortable^ be full of 
comfort. Cf. " I have another daughter 
who, I am sure, is kind and comfort- 



able" (LeoTy I. iv. 327). Also "com- 
fortable friar" (Romeo and TtUUt^ v. 
iii. 148), and the "comfortable words." 
80. hold\ Helena has said, " I have a 
sorrow," ue, for the loss of my father, 
as Lafeu must have understood it. In 
parting he says, "You must hold the 
grief, hold the credit of your father." 
Some take it to mean " uphold." The 
passage is difficult, but it seems more 
reasonable to suppc^ that Helena was 
told to hold (cnerish, remember) her 
father's credit, rather than to uphold it 
— a thing she could hardly do. And 
Helena's next exclamation, " O, were 
that all ! " seems to indicate that she 
understands Lafeu's remark as referring 
to her feelings. " I think not on my 
father." 

82. Of were, . .] Helena sees them 
all go, with kind words of sympathy 
for her fatherless condition ; she cannot 
help exclaiming, "how small a part of 
all my woe is tJiat I " 

83, 84. these , , , for him] These 
tears grace Bertrams remembrance 
more than those I shed for my &ther. 
The meaning of the his is not obscure 
when accentuated by a gesture. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



10 



ALL'S WELL 



[act I. 



Carries no favour in 't but Bertram's. 

I am undone : there is no living, none, 

If Bertram be away. *Twere all one 

That I should love a bright particular star 

And think to wed it, he is so above me : 90 

In his bright radiance and collateral light 

Must I be comforted, not in his sphere. 

Th* ambition in my love thus plagues itself: 

The hind that would be mated by the lion 

Must die for love. 'Twas pretty, though a plague, 9 5 

To see him every hour ; to sit and draw 

His arched brows, his hawking eye, his curls, 

In our heart's table ; heart too capable 

Of every line and trick of his sweet favour : 

88. 'Twere] Ff, // ivere Pope and Dyce. 89. particular] parti^lar Pope. 
90. tne:"] Rowe, abotfe tne In Ff. 96. hour; to sit] hour to sit Ff. 97. 
brows] browes F I, 2 ; arrows F 3, 4. 98. our] my (5)llier (MS. notes). 



86. favour] possibly a simile taken 
from the knight's custom of wearing 
his lad/s f&vour or badge when fight- 
ing in a tourney. But perhaps the 
word merely means "face" as com- 
monly. 

91. radiance . . .] Steepens quotes 
Milton, Paradise Lost, X. 85, "from his 
radiant seat he rose Of high collateral 
glory." Cf. also Hamlet^ iv. v. 206, 
**If by direct or by collateral hand 
they find us touched ..." Here it 
means light emanating firom a different 
sphere. 

97. hawking] adjective, like the 
words charm-mg, middl-in^. 

98. tahle]_ Malone explams this as 
* * meaning f*^picfure,'^ French tableau, " 
Boswell quotes the following in con- 
firmation : ''^- he has a strange aspect. 
And looks much like the figure of a 
hangman In a table of the passion." 

98. capable] ready to receive the 
impress of. See below, i. i. 215, " So 
thou wilt be capable of a courtier's 



counsel." The word capable refers to 
any kind of power or ability to assume 
a thing as in the sense of mheriting a 
thing. Cf. Lear, ii. i. 87, "And of 
my land, loyal and natural boy, I'll 
work the means to make thee capable." 
See Mr. Craig's note on this passage in 
Lear. Also Hamlet, ill. iv. 127. 

99. line and trick] See JCing John, 
I. i. 85, " he hath a trick of Coeur de 
Lion's face." Line is often used by 
Shakespeare meaning "lineament. 
It is more especially me ouAint, See 
also 1 Henry IV, v, ii. II. In Lear, 
IV. vi. 108, we find "the trick of that 
voice." Trick means " characteristic " 
— something not in the "line." The 
Cambridge editors in their note on King 
John, I. i. 85, quote a note by Wil- 
braham. " THci is a term in Heraldry 
for a cojby" In the Gentleman* s Maga- 
zine (1003, Sup. p. 1207), in an account 
of various memorandums of receipts 
and expenditures (etc) by some one at 
the latter end of the seventeenth century, 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



SCI.] THAT ENDS WELL 11 

But now he's gone, and my idolatrous fancy lOO 

Must sanctify his reHcs. Who comes here ? 



Enter Parolles. 

[Aside.] One that goes with him : I love him for his 

sake; 
And yet I know him a notorious liar, 
Think him a great way fool, solely a coward ; 
Yet these fix'd evils sit so fit in him, 105 

That they take place, when virtue's steely bones 



102. Aside] Cambridge editors, omitted Ft 
stately Caitnght conj. 



io6. sfeefy] suley Badham, 



are the following: "Juty aist, 1691, 
Receiv'd of "Mr. Cole for a trick of 
Consumes Arms, 2s. 6d. ; July 25th, 
Mr. Martyn the Paynter for a trick of 
Lady Cath. Damlev's Arms, 2s. 6d. ; 
Dec. 1 8th, Received of Mr. Gentry for 
a trick of Wyatt's Arms, 2s. 6d." 

99. favour] comitenance, as below, 
V. iii. 48, "Contempt . . . Which 
warp'd the line of evety other favour." 

loi. sanctify his relics'] relics or re- 
licjues^remgo^uaDceV See below, v. 
iii. 23, "The nature of his great 
offence is dead, And deeper than ob- 
livion we do bury The incensing relics 
of it.*' Is this echo merely a chance 
one? Or is it one of the many 
instances of Shakespeare's irony — the 
inu^e of nature's irony ? 

104. a great way] Cf. Julius Casar^ 
II. i. 107, " Here tiie sun arises, which 
is a great way growing on the south, 
weighing the youthful season of the 
year." 

104. S£lelj^_a^_(;jasiqrd1_ entiTely; a 
sheer coward. Boswell compares' this 
use ""oT^* solely" with "only." Cf. 
Cupid? s Revenge^ "she being only 
wicked." Rolfe quotes Macbeth^ I. v. 
71, " Solely sovereign sway." 

106. A«l^ /A^^] flte notice able (?). 
Schmidt says, " are received as equals, 



in high society. " Cowden Clarke gives 
"precedence" as the meaning. Mr. 
Thiselton's note is admirable: "evi- 
dently signifies more than it would at 
the present day. In Utopia we read, 
'The whiche two vices of affection 
and avarice, where they take place in 
judgements' . . . (original Latin, sicuH 
incubuere iudiciis) . • . where Robin- 
son, to judge by his usual practice, 
would have ampufied, if 'take place' 
had not adequately represented the 
Latin. We may, therefore, conclude 
that * talqe^placc-'- may, mean 'take 
upslheir quarters.' " 

106. steely bones] "steel - boned, 
unyielding, uncomplying virtue" 
(Schmidt). Steely is only used once 
elsewhere by Shakespeare : " the steely 
point of Clifford's lance" {S Henry VL 
II. iii. 16). Bones might here be a 
singular noun meaning body ; in which 
case "lookes" of the Ff would be 
correct. Badham reads * * seely bones. " 
Does he understand a reference to 
" funny-bone," which was often called 
** crazy-bone," but not, so fiir as I am 
aware, " silly-bone " ? It seems some- 
what difficult to accept the explanation 
"when virtue's silly bones look bleak 
i' the cold wind," meaning ''out at 
elbow." 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



12 



ALL'S WELL 



[act I. 



Look bleak i* th cold wind : withal, full oft we see 
Cold wisdom waiting on superfluous folly. 

Par. Save you, fair queen ! 

HeL And you, monarch I no 

Par. Na 

HeL And no. 

Par. Are you meditating on virginity ? 

HeL Ay. You have some stain of soldier in you; 

let me ask you a question. Man is enemy to 1 1 5 
virginity ; how may we barricado it against him ? 

Par. Keep him out. 

HeL But he assails ; and our virginity, though valiant, 
in the defence yet is weak. Unfold to us some 
warlike resistance. 120 

Par. There is none : man, setting down before you, 
will undermine you and blow you up. 

107. Look] Rowe, dimes Lookes Ff, bom Looks Bulloch conj. ; ^ M] Ff, in the 
Pope. Hudson suggests omitting ** cold " and Pope " withal." Kinnear instead 
of ** wind; withal^ would write "wind without:" 108. Cold] S. Walker 
thinks that this word is corrupt {Crit. Ex, iii. 71), perhaps "poor." 117, 
1 18. Keep him out, HeL Buf] Keep him out ? Hel. For he Hanmer. 1 18. 
assails;] assails us; S. Walker conj. {Crit, Ex, ii. 263). 121. setting] sitting 
Johnson. 

107. wiV^tf/] therewith. 

108. Cold, . .>/^] cold for naked; 
superfluous foroverclothed( Warburton). 
Poor wisdom waiting on too rich _fqlly. 
pyce quotes,"*^*^ our'lJaseSl'beggarsare 
in the poorest things superfluous" 
{Lear, 11. iv. 268). S. Walker would 
read "poor" instead of "cold," and 
take the first cold (cold wind) to be 
an interpolation: the whole passage 
to run, "... That they take place, 
when virtue^s silly bone Looks bleak i' 
th' wind : withal, full oft we see Cold 
wisdom waiting on superfluous folly." 

. Iia monarch] perhaps an allusion 
I to that "vain &ntastical man" called 
iMonarcho (cf. Armado in Love's 
Labour* s Lost), 



114. some stain] "some qualities, 
at least superficial" (Johnson). Cf. 
Troilus anaCressida, I. ii. 26, "there 
is no man hath a virtue that he hath 
not a glimpse of, nor any man an 
attaint but he carries some stain of it." 

121. setting down] laying siege. 
"All places yield to him ere he sets 
down** {Coriolanus, iv. vii. 28). Mr. 
Thiselton quotes the following passages 
from Euphues : " * And though women 
have small force to overcome men by 
reason, yet have they good fortune to 
undermine them by poUcie. The soft 
droppes of raine perce hard Marble, 
many strokes overthrow the tallest Oke, 
a silly woman in time may make such 
a breach into a man's heart, as hir 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



SC. I.] 



THAT ENDS WELL 



13 



HeL Bless our poor virginity from underminers and 
blowers up! Is there no military policy, how 
virgins might blow up men? 125 

Par, Virginity being blown down, man will quicklier 
be blown up: marry, in blowing him down 
again, with the breach yourselves made, you lose 
your city. It is not politic in the common- 
wealth of nature to preserve virginity. Loss of 130 
virginity is rational increase, and there was never 
virgin got till virginity was first lost. That you 
were made of is metal to make virgins. Virginity, 
by being once lost, may be ten times found: 
by being ever kept, it is ever lost Tis too cold 135 
a companion : away with *t ! 



131. rational^ national Hanmer (Theobald conj.), natural Anon, conj. (ap, 
HalUwell). 132. go^Yz.goeY \. 



teares may enter withoat resistance' 
— which seems to fix the meanings 
of 'blowne downe.* 'Blowne up' 
means made to spring into 'bloom,' 
and also inflated with victory, and 
in £aict all possible meanings of * blow 
up' and *blow down' are intended 
in the course of the passage. ParoUes' 

I remarks on virginity seem to have been 
suggested by Uie conversation between 
Ferardo and Ludlla in Euphues^ from 
which the following is extracted : ' But 
this grieveth me most, that thou art 
almost vowed to the vayne order of the 
vestal virgins, dispising, or at least not 
desiring the sacred bandes of Juno hir 
bedde. If thy mother had bene of 
that minde when she was a mayden, 
thou haddest not nowe bene borne, to 
be of Ais minde to be a virgin. Way 
with thy selfe what slender profit they 
bring to the common wealth, what 
slight pleasure to themselves, what 
great pief to their psurents, which joy 
most m their off-spring, and desire 



most to enjoy the noble and blessed 
name of a graundfather. Thou knowest 
. . . that the woman that maketh hir 
selfe barren by not marrying, b ac- 
compted amonge the Grecian Ladyes 
worse than a carryon, as Homer re- 
porteth': and ag^, 'that honour- 
able est/le 6f Matrimony, which was 
sanctifiri in Paradise, allowed of the 
PatriaJtches, hallowed of the olde Pro- 
phets^' and commended of all persons ' " 
(ed. Bond, vol. i. p. 229, etc.). 

129. city\ a maid's innocence. 
Malone quotes the Lover^s Complaint : 
" And long upon these terms I held 
my dty Till thus he 'gan besiege me." 
And the Rape of Lucrece: "This 
made in him more rage, and lesser 
pity To make the breach and enter 
this sweet city." 

131. rational] reasonable. Cf. 
Glanville's Scepsis: "When the con- 
clusion is deduced firom the unerring 
dictates of our fiu:ulties, we say the 
inference is rational." 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



14 



ALL'S WELL 



[acti. 



Hd. I will stand for 't a little, though therefore 1 die 
a virgin. 

Par. There 's little can be said in 't ; 'tis against the 

rule of nature. To speak on the part of virginity 140 
is to accuse your mothers, which is most in- 
fallible disobedience. He that hangs himself is 
a virgin : virginity murders itself, and should be 
buried in highways out of all sanctified limit, as 
a desperate offendress against nature. Virginity 145 
breeds mites, much like a cheese, consumes itself 
to the very paring, and so dies with feeding his 
own stomach. Besides, virginity is peevish, 
proud, idle, made of self-love, which is the most 
inhibited sin in the canon. Keep it not; you 150 
cannot choose but lose by 't Out with *t! 
within one year it will make itself two, which is 

147. paring\ Rowe; payring F I, 2, 152. one year . . , two^ Grant 

White and I^ce ; tenyeare {yeares or years) . . . two Ft ; ten months . . . two 
Singer ; the year . . . two Anon. conj. and Delius ; ten year , , . ten Cam- 
bric^ editors and Globe edition ; two years . • . two ColUer, ed. 2 (Steevens 
conj.); ten years . . . twelve ToVLtt con]. 



137. stand for V] fight for 't. 
Shylock in the court of judgment 
says, "I stand for judgment ... I 
stand for law." See also Winter^s 
TaUy III. ii. 46, "For honour 'Tis 
a derivative from me to mine ; And 
only that I stand for.'' 

140. 0M the part of] side, party. 
** My &ther came on the part of York " 
(5 ffenty VI. 11. v. 66). "I'll fight 
against the part I come with" (Cym- 
beliney v. i. 25). 

142. He that hangs . . .] he that 
commits suicide is like a virgin : both 
put an end to their own existence. 
(Malone.) 

144. sanctified limit'] Cf. Harrison, 
Description of England^ 11. chap, ii., 
"such as kill themselves are bujied 



in the field with a stake through their 
bodies" (W. J. C.). 

15a inhibited] forbidden. "a 
practiser of arts inhibited and out of 
warrant" (Othello, i. ii. 79). 

150. in the canon] Cf. Hamlet, I. 
ii. 131, "O, that the Everlasting 
had not fixed His canon 'gainst sel^ 
slaughter." 

151. Out with '/] not the same as 
"Keep it not." It implies giving or 
putting a thing out to interest. (Malone 
compares Tempest, in. iii. 48.) The 
idea is borne out by the subsequent 
words of Parolles. 

152. within . . . two] The Ff have 
within ten . . . two. A famous crux. 
Sir Th. Hanmer's emendation has been 
adopted by the Cambridge editors and in 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



SC. I.] 



THAT ENDS WELL 



15 



a goodly increase, and the principal itself not 
much the worse. Away with 't ! 

Hel. How might one do, sir, to lose it to her own 155 
liking ? 

Par. Let me see : marry, ill, to like him that ne'er it 
likes. Tis a commodity will lose the gloss with 
lying ; the longer kept, the less worth : ofF with 
't while 'tis vendible ; answer the time of request 160 
Virginity, like an old courtier, wears her cap out 
of fashion; richly suited, but unsuitable: just 
like the brooch and the toothpick, which wear 
not now. Your date is better in your pie and 
your porridge than in your cheek: and your 165 
virginity, your old virginity, is like one of our 
French withered pears ; it looks ill, it eats drily ; 
marry, 'tis a withered pear; it was formerly 

I57> 15s* i^ ^i^^s] likes it S. Walker conj. {Crit, Ex. ii. 248). 163. wear\ 
Capell, were Ff, we wear Rowe. 



the Globe edition ; Malone's arguments 
in favour of this reading are forcible. 
But if the editors of the later folios 
changed the " yeare " of the first Folio 
because of the *Uen yeare," editors 
who give "ten years" accept the 
emendation of the later folios, which 
is at least disputable. To su{^>ose, 
as Grant White does, that the 1623 
folio printed ** ten " by mistake instead 
of "one" is certainly the simplest and 
perhaps the safest way of taking this 
much discussed passage. 

157. to like . . .] to love the man 
who puts an end to virginity. 

157, 158. it likes] in all probabilitv 
* * it "i§,accusative goveoiedhjLi' likes," 
j.^.lEtni'finikes It." S. Walker would 
changFthe text to " likes it." 

159. fying] as in Taming of the 
Shrew y 11. 330, "'Twas a commodity 
lay fretting by you," 



163. toothpick"] probably first used 
in Italy, and at one time only used in 
England by those who affected foreign 
customs. Cf. "your traveller, he and 
his toothpick at my worship's mess" 
{Johuy I. i. 190). 

163, 164. wear not now] are not the 
fashion. Cf. "Motley's the only 
wear" lAs You Like It, 11. vii 34). 
" Any toys for your head of the newest 
and finest wear" (Winter^ s Tale, I v. 
iv. 327). 

164. date] There is a pun here on 
the two meanings of date (a firuit, time 
of life), not quite clear, because dates 
are no longer " the candied fruit much 
used " for pastry and other dishes. Cf. 
Troilus and Cressida, I. ii. 280, "And 
then to be bak'd with no date in the 
pie, for then the man's date is out" 
(Steevens.) 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



16 



ALL'S WELL 



[act I. 



better; many, yet 'tis a withered pear. Will 
you any thing witfi it? 170 

HeL Not my virginity yet. . . . 

There shall your master have a thousand loves, 
A mother, and a mistress, and a friend, 
A phoenix, captain, and an enemy, 

169. ye^yes Hanmer. 170. with itT] itntk me? Johnson conj. ; with ust 
Tyrwhitt conj. ; with it? We are for the Court Staunton conj. 171. Not 
. . . yet"] No t — my virginity I yet There shall its Jackson conj. ; Hanmer sug- 
gests ^^yet. You We for the court,^ 



169. yet 'tis] Hanmer suggests * ' yes, " 
which is quite a likely reading. Cf. 
C^mdeline, "Faith, yes.*' But prob- 
ably **vet" is here used meaning 
**now." He has just said, "it was 
formerly better; marry, now 'tis a 
withered pear." The word "yet" is 
frequently used in this sense (cf. 
Coriolanus, IV. iii. 5, iv. v. 69, etc.). 

169, 170. JVill you any thing with 
itF] A common expression in the six- 
teenth century, conveying no iparticular 
signification beyond a certam saucy 
flippancy, like our modem "if you 
'Wish to know," "so now you know." 
Cf. Hale's Criminal Cases cited by 
Mr. Froude in his History of England 
(L p. 181, ed. i): "The apparitor of 
the Bishop of London went with a 
citation into the shop of a mercer • . . 
' Who does cite me ? ' asked the 
mercer. * Marry, that do I,' answered 
the apparitor, 'if thou wilt anything 
with it' — ^Whereupon . . . (the said 
mercer) did snatch up his viiga — 
Anglice, his ^rard — and did pursue 
the apparitor mto the public streets, 
and, after multiplying of many blows, 
did break the hcM of the said 
apparitor." (Dyce.) 

171. Not , , , yet , . ,] Something 
must have been lost here, perhaps sevend 
lines. I s^pathise with Johnson, 
who said, "I know not what to do 
with l^e passage." If the abrupt stop 
at "yet" is not due to the omission of 
something, there might conceivably 
have beoi a mistake about the parts : 



the Page may have entered in the 
middle of Helena's sentence. But that 
means recasting the whole passage, 
which is quite impossible. Tne next 
few lines may be looked upon as an 
example of dramatic prophecy — by 
means of which the subject is con- 
stantly kept before us. CL lower down, 
I. ii. 72, where the KiB^ says, "If he 
were living, I would try hmi," suggesting 
to us that he will try the daughter. 

173. mother] Dr. Herford su^ests 
that " this word is perhaps the same as 
'mauther,* an old provincial word for 
a young girl or maid ... Cf. Ben 
Jonson's Alchemist, ed. H. C. Hart, 
IV. 4, 641. * Away ! You talk like a 
foolisii mauther.' It was sometimes 
written modder . . . and, as Brome 
has it, with an evident quibble, 'Where 
maids are mothers, and modiers are 
maids.*" According to Nares the 
word is still used in Norfolk and 
SufiTolk. Doubtful in this passage. 

174. captain] All these terms are 
often used as epithets of endearment. 
Cf. Wintet^s Tale, I. iu 122, where 
Leontes says to young MamUlius, 
"Come, captain, we must ,be neat 
. . ." ; and in the same scene Polixenes, 
speaking of his son, says, "He's all 
my exercise, my mirth, my matter ; 
Now my sworn friend, and then mine 
enemy ; My parasite, my soldier, states- 
naan, all." (Malone.) Steevens's note 
is to the point : " Our ancient writers 
delighted in ^ catalogues, and alwa}^ 
characterised love by contrarieties." 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



SC. I.] 



THAT ENDS WELL 



17 



A guide, a goddess, and a sovereign, 175 

A counsellor, a traitress, and a dear ; 

His humble ambition, proud humility, 

His jarring, concord, and his discord, dulcet, 

His faith, his sweet disaster ; with a world 

Of pretty fond-adoptious Christendoms, 1 80 

That blinking Cupid gossip s. Now shall he — 

I know not what he shall. God send him well I 

The court 's a learning-place, and he is one — 

Par. What one, i' faith? 

ffel. That I wish well. Tis pity — 185 

Par. What's pity? 

Ilei. That wishing well had not a body ia 't, 

Which might be felt ; that we, the poorer bom. 

Whose baser stars do shut us up. in wishes, 

Might with effects of them follow our friends, 190 

179. Hisfaith^ his\ His faithless Hanmer. i8a find'Odqptumsl S. Walker 
conj, (adopted by Dyce), pretty fond adoptious Yi. 



179. faithy his swee(\ Hanmer con- 
jectured 'feith less sweet.' But how 
can we change a passage that is meant 
to be nonsense ? 

180. fond - adoptious Christendoms'] 
ad opted nam es"ondve^ This use of 
the word Christendom to signify 
"christian name" seems rare. 
Malone quotes an instance from Nash 
in Four Letters Confuted: "But for 
an author to renounce his Christendom 
to write in his owne commendation, 
to refuse the name his god^Either and 

fodmothers gave him in baptism. ..." 
To other instance of the word "adop- 
tions " is known. 

181. gosjipslytth^ used in the old 
sens e of acting^"lt gr^,six?nsor. The 
change oi meanii^ had perhaps already 
begun in Shakespeare's time, for we 
find him using the word with reference 



to the women who waited on mothers 
during childbirth. It is Cupid who gives 
these "fond-adoptious Christendoms.'' 

189. baser stars] base as belonging 
to the poorer bom = the base. "Our 
basest beggars are in the poorest 
things superfluous " (Lear^ 11. iv. 267). 
"And base things of the world and 
things which are despised hath God 
chosen" (I Cor. i. 28). 

190. with] with the, wi' th'. (Hcr- 
ford.) 

19a with effects] An eflfect is the 
result or fulfilment of a wish or pur- 
pose. "Do not look upon me, Lest 
with this piteous action you convert 
My stem effects " {Hamlet^ iii. iv. 129). 
"Thoughts are but dreams till their 
effects be tried " (Lucrece^ 353). ' * Our 
wishes may prove eflfects" (Lear^ I v. 
ii. 15). 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



18 ALL'S WELL [acti. 

And show what we alone must think, which never 
Returns us thanks. 

Enter a Pagt. 

Page. Monsieur ParoUes, my kml calls for you. \Exit. 

Par. Little Helen, farewell : if I can remember thee, 

I will think of thee at court. 195 

Hel. Monsieur Parolles, you were bom under a 

charitable star. 
Par. Under Mars, I. 
HeL I especially think, under Mars. 

Par. Why under Mars ? 200 

Hel. The wars have so kept you under, that you must 

needs be bom under Mars. 
Par. When he was predominant 
HeL When he was retrograde, I think rather. 
Par. Why think you so? 205 

Hel. You go so much backward when you fight. 
Par. That 's for advantage. 
Hel. So is mnning away, when fear proposes the 

safety: but the composition that your valour 

and fear makes in you is a virtue of a good wing, 210 

and I like the wear well. 
Par. I am so full of businesses, I cannot answer thee 

acutely. I will return perfect courtier; in the 

201. ioars Aave] Pope ; warres hath F i, 2 ; waters halth F 3, 4 ; waters 
have Rowe. 2ii. / like the] is like to Mason conj. 212. businesses] 
business F 4. 

191. show] as in the phrases, show 209. comfosition]ci, iv,m,i%t\x\ow. 

inty, show justice. 21 1. / like the wear] Mason suggests 

191. alone must think] must only '* and is like to wear welL" See note 

think. on line 163. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



SC.I.] 



THAT ENDS WELL 



19 



2IS 



which my instruction shall serve to natur^ize 
thee, so thou wilt be capable of a courtier's 
counsel, and understand what advice shall thrust 
upon thee ; else thou diest in thine untiiankful- 
ness, and thine ignorance makes thee away: 
farewell. When tiiou hast leisure, say thy 
prayers; when thou hast none, remember thy 
friends. Get thee a good husband, and use him 
as he uses thee : so farewell. [Exit, 

HeL Our remedies oft in ourselves do lie 1« 

Which we ascribe to heaven : the fated sky 
Gives us free scope ; only doth backward pull 
Our slow designs when we ourselves are dull. 
What power is it which mounts my love so high, 
That makes me see, and cannot feed mine eye ? 
The mightiest space in fortune nature brings 
To JQiaJikeHkes, and kiss like native things. 230 

220. wme^ mon^y WilKams conj. 229. The migktust space] The wid'st 
apart Staunton conj., through mightiest space Johnson ; fortune nature] nature 
fortune Rann (Malone conj.}; brings] springs Anon. conj. {Fras, Mag»y 1853). 
230. To join like likes] Likes to join Itkes JobSason conj., Like to join like Long 
MS. 



220 



^tlMr 



225 



1^' 



H' 



214. nat^raUsHJissa^' Cf. Sooth, 
**He rises fresii to his hammer and 
anvil; custom has naturalized his 
labour to him." 

215. capable of] See article on line 
98, above. 

218. makes thee moay] makes away 
with thee. "So in thyself thyself art 
made away " ( Venus and AdoniSy 763). 
"Three score year would make tiie 
world away " {Sonnets^ xi. 8). 

22a none] no leisure? absolute 
nonsense. Perhaps Parolles is meant 
to be talking nonsense. If not, 
Williams's conjecture that "none" 
is a misprint for "money" is almost 
certainly right. 

22\. fated] fetefol. Cf. **The 



plagues hang feted o'er men's £siults'^ 
\Leary iii. iv.). 

227. high] Bertram's rank high as 
compared with hers. 

229, 230. brings To join] succeed in 
making, " I cannot bring my ton^e 
to such a pace" {Coriolanus^ ii. iii. 
56). Malone paraphrases, "The 
affections given us by nature often . 
unite persons between whom fortune ; 
or accident has placed the greatest | 
distance or disparity, and causes them | 
to join, like likes {tnstar parium) like : 
persons in the same situation or rank ' 
of life." Mr. Thiselton quotes: "So 
that I fear they do but bring Eztreams 
to touch, and mean one thing" 
(Jonson's The Sad Shepherd^ I. v.). 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



/ 



20 



ALL S WELL 



[act I. 



Impossible be strange attempts to those 

That weigh their pains in sense, and do suppose 

What hath been cannot be. Who ever strove 

To show her merit that did miss her love ? 

The king's disease — my project may deceive me, 235 

But my intents are fix'd and will not leave me. [Exit. 



SCENE II. — Paris. A Room in the King's Palace. 

Flourish of comets. Enter the KiNG, with letters ; 
Lords and others attending. 

King. The Florentines and Senoys are by th' ears ; 
Have fought with equal fortune, and continue 
A braving war. 

233. What . . . be\ hath not deen canU be Hanmer, hc^nt been cannot be 
Mason con}., n^ath been cannot be Staunton conj., hath been can but be BuUoch 
conj. Perhaps, '' What hath not, cannot, be." 

where he lyketh, so he maketh no 
conscience ot these idle ceremonies." 
233. hath been] One is tempted to 



The anonymous conjecture in the Fras. 
Mag.^ 1 8^3, substituting ''springs" for 
''brings" is good. But it is not a 
suggestion to adopt 

231. Impossible\ inconce ivable. 
"Ajnd what inipossibihty WOttW slay 
In common sense, sense saves another 
way " (11. i. 178, below). Here again 
Mr. Thiselton very aptly quotes from 
Euphues : " Neither am I so wedded 
to the world that I should be moved 
with great possessions, neither so be- 
witch^ with wantonnesse, that I should 
be entysed with any mans proportion, 
neither if I were so disposed would I 
be so proude, to desire one of noble 
proginie, or so precise to choose one 
onely of mine owne countrey, for that 
commonly these things happen alwayes 
to the contrary. Doe we not see the 
noble to match with the base, the rich 
with the poore, the Italian oftentimes 
Mrith the rortingale ? As love knoweth 
no lawes, so it regardeth no conditions ; 
and as the lover maketh no pawse 



adopt Hanmer's suggestion, "ha'n't 
been." There is, as editors have not 
been slow to point out, olenty of sense 
to be wrung out of " what hath been 
cannot be. But it is so unusual a 
phrase, whereas "what ha'n't been 
cannot be " is what one would expect 

Scene 11. 

I. Sepujys] natives of Siena, distant 
from Florence about thirty miles. 
Pj^jitet -Spells the word "S^pis." 
Boccaccio calls them "^Sanesi." 

I, by tJC ears] quarrel. "Were 
half to half the world by th' ears . . ." 
{Coriolanus, I. i. 237). The metaphor 
is taken from fighting animals and in 
old writers the commonest form is " go 
together by the ears" (W. J. C). 

3. braving] Cf. "in braving arms 
a|;ainst thy sovereign" {Richard II. 11. 
iii. 112). 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



sa n.] THAT ENDS WELL 21 

First Lord. So 'tis reported, sir. 

King. Nay, 'tis most credible : we here receive it 

A certainty, vouch'd from our cousin Austria, S 

With caution, that the Florentine will move us 
For speedy aid ; wherein our dearest friend 
Prejudicates the business, and would seem 
To have us make denial. 

First Lord. His love and wisdom. 

Approved so to your majesty, may plead lo 

For amplest credence. 

King. He hath arm'd our answer, 

And Florence is denied before he comes : 
Yet, for our gentlemen that mean to see 
The Tuscan service, freely have they leave 
To stand on either part. 

Second Lord. It well may serve 1 5 

A nursery to our gentry, who are sick 
For breathing and exploit. 

King. What 's he comes here ? 

Enter Bertram, Lafeu, and Parolles. 

First Lord. It is the Count Rousillon, my good lord, 
Young Bertram. 

18. Count Rausillon\Vo^t Count RosignollY 1, 

4. credible] the first lord has just lo. Apprcn^d so] proved, made evi- 
qualified the King's statement by say- dent by proof. See below, line 50, " So 
ing, "So 'tis reported," and the King in approof lives not his epitaph As in 
answers, ** it is credible," ue, certainly your royal speech." 

trustworthy, reliable. 16. nursery] original meaning, a 

5. cousin] a title among princes, place for satisfying hunger. 

Mr. Craig tells me that in the North of 17. breathing] activity. See below, 

Ireland they say of an arrogant person, 11. iii. 259, "I think thou wast 

''he would not call the King his created for men to breathe themselves 

cousin." upon thee." We say, ** let oflf steam." 

6. tnffve us] ask us. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



22 



ALL'S WELL 



[act I. 



Tfluif 



King. Youth, Aou bear^st thy father's face ; 

Frank nature, rather curious than in haste, 20 

Hath well compos'd thee. Thy father's moral 

parts 
Ma/st thou inherit too ! Welcome to Paris. 

Ber. My thanks and duty are your majesty's. 

King. I would I had that corporal soundness now. 

As when thy father and myself in friendship 25 

First tried our soldiership 1 He did look far 
Into the service of the time and was 
Discipled of the bravest : he lasted long ; 
But on us both did haggish age steal on, 
And wore us out of act. It much repairs me 30 

To talk of your good father. In his youth 
He had the wit, which I can well observe 
I To-day in our young lords ; but they may jest 

Till their own scorn return to them unnoted 



21. w$ll composed thee] compo^d thee well Pope. 



20. curious] Mr. Cra% ia his note 
on the word ♦* curiosity " {lAor^ i. i. 6, 
etc.) gives "a man must not go too 
hastily to it (shooting with the bow), for 
that is rashness, nor yet make too much 
to do about it, for that is curiosity.'' 
(Ascham, Toxiphilus^ Arber, p. 147), 
**. . . Who overthrew himself in his 
doings, not so much for lack of reason- 
able skill of Warres, as through his 
unprofitable curiositie and strictness in 
observing the law." The word curious 
occurs in Ex. xxviii. 8, **The curious 
(= embroidered) girdle of the ephod." 
Ps. cxxxix., "I was made in secret, 
and curiously wrought" 

21. Hath] This word is suspiciously 
like an interpolation — the repetition 
of the word ** haste" at the ena of the 
preceding line. 



26. He did looker] was a ma p who 
hadseen much activefservTce. 

28r2«aJ52^^n^taught by. 

30. act] activity or power to take 
part in action. 

33. they may jest] **your fiaither (says 
the King) had the same airy flights of 
satirical wit with the young lords of the 

§ resent time, but they do not what he 
id, hide their unnoted levity in honour, 
cover petty faults with great merit" 
Johnson, whose paraphrase this is, 
considers it ' ' an excellent observation. 
Jocose follies, and slight offences, are 
only allowed by mankind in him that 
overpowers them by great qualities." 
There is an old saying: *' young men 
are subtle arguers : the cloak of honour 
covers all their &ults, as that of passion 
all their follies." 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



SC. II.] 



THAT ENDS WELL 



23 



Ere they can hide their levity in honour. 35 

So like a courtier^ contempt nor bitterness 
Were in his pride or sharpness ; if they were, 
His equal had awak'd them; and his honour, 
Clock to itself, knew the true minute when 
Es cceptio n bid him speak, and at this time 40 

His tongue obeyed his hand : who were below him 
He us'd as creatures of another place, 
And bow'd his eminent top to their low ranks, 
Making them proud of his humility, 
In their poor praise he humbled. Such a man 45 
Might be a copy to these younger times, 
Which, followed well, would demonstrate them now 
But goers backward. 
Ber. His good remembrance, sir, 

35. in konmr] in humour Long MS. (and independently Dyce conj.). 35> 
36. honour. So , , , C0urtier'\ konour : So like a courtier Ff. 42. of another 
place'] of a brother race Hanmer, cf a nobler plcice Williams conj, 44. proud of] 
proud; oiMfWarburton (Williams conj.)- 45* In , , , humbled] be-humbled 
Staunton conj., He^ in . , . praise^ humbled Becket conj., praise the humbler 
Williams conj. (reading line 44 with Warburton) ; perhaps so humbled* 

" What I have done That might your 
nature, honour and exception Rou^ly 
awake." 

41. his ^^1 the clock's ^and. 

42. of another' place] perhaps 
''strangers, men to whom it was 
necessary to be courteous." The pas- 
sage is obscure. "Another place*' is 
strange; Williams's conjecture "nobler 
place " seems better, but hardly right, 
rerhaps "an other place" means "an 
equal place " in the sense of ' ' second and 
equal,^* as when " other " is used with 
" the." Perhaps instead of " he hum- 
bled" we might read "so humbled." 
Malone explains the construction as 
being equivalent to "he bein^ humbled 
in their poor praise.*' Williams tries 
to escape the difficulty by reading " in 
their poor praise the humbler." 



3<. in honour] Long MS. and Dyce 
read " humour." I see no reason. 

36. So like a courtier] Sir William 
Blackstone suggested placing a stop 
after "courtier/^ and was followed by 
Capell, Rolfe, and others. Johnson, 
accepting no emendation, paraphrases 
"He was so like a courtier that there 
was in his dignity of manner nothing 
contemptuous, and in his keenness of 
wit nothing bitter. If bitterness or 
contemptuousness ever appeared, they 
had been awakened by some injur]^, 
not of a man below him, but of his 
equal." 

39. true] proper. C£ " truepenny," 
and below, II. v. 6* "my dial goes not 
true." 

40. Excep tion] disapproval. The 
same word is used in Uamlei, v. ii. 241, 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



24 



ALL'S WELL 



[act I. 



Lies richer in your thoughts than on his tomb ; 
So in approof lives not his epitaph 50 

As in your royal speech. 
King^. Would I were with him ! He would always say, — 
Methinks I hear him now : his plausive words 
He scatter'd not in ears, but grafted them, 
To grow there and to bear ; — ^*' Let me not live," — 5 5 
Thus his good melancholy oft began, 
On the catastrophe and heel of pastime. 
When it was out, — ^ Let me not live," quoth he, 
'' After my flame lacks oil, to be tiie snufT 
Of younger spirits, whose apprehensive senses 60 

All but new things disdain ; whose judgments are 

56. Tlius] Pope, This Ft 58. //] wii Staunton conj. ; was] wears Kinnear 
conj. (putting line 56 in a parenthesis). 

on the heel of limping winter treads" 
{Romeo and Juliet ^ I. u. 27). 

58. out"] Staunton conjectured '* wit," 
evidently unable to ^et any meaning 
out of tne passage as it stands. Most 
editors have, I believe, taken the ** it " 
to refer to "pastime" — "when the 
pastime was over." It might also refer 
to * * melancholy " — ^and the * * was out " 
would then mean being at a loss for 
something; to say (down in the mouth). 
"Thus his good melancholy oft b^an 
. . . when It was out (of sorts)." Cf. 
Lovers Labour's Lost^ V. ii. 152, 165, 
172; As You Like It^ I v. i. 76, 82; 
Coriolanus, v. iii. 41. 

59. snujr\ Cf. Mai. i. 13, "Ye 
have snufied at (m^ table), s^th the 
Lord." The margin gives ** whereas 
ye might have blown it away." Cf. 
also "Left like an unsavoury snuff 
Whose property is only to offend" 



50. So in ap^oof] "Hb epitaph 
lives for better in your royal speech 
than it could in the remembrance of 
posterity." Approvers were men who 
tried the accused ; and the verb " ap- 
prove " is used in the sense of increas- 
ing or supporting a reputation : as in 
"if you did, it would not much ap- 
prove me" (Hamlet^ v. ii, 141) (Dyce). 
Bertram means that the King's words 
^ve life to the epitaph which as a rule 
can only live in the judgment (approof) 
of posterity, Cf. "of very valiant ap- 
proof" (II. V. 3, below). "And as my 
mrthest band shall pass on thy approof" 
(Antony and Cleopatra, III. ii. 27). 

J3. plausive"] pleasing ; as in Hamlet, 
I, IV, 30, "his plausive manners." 

54. scattered not in ears] Knight 
quotes : "Grant, we beseech Thee, . . . 
that the words which we have heard 

with our outward ears may . . , be so ^ _^_ .^ _ __^ 

grafted inwardly in our hearts, that they (Jonson's JEvery Man in his Humour). 
may bring forth the fruit of good living." 60. apprehensive] Falstaff says, "a 
[The Book of Common Prayer, The good sherris-sack . , , makes the brain 
Communion,] apprehensive, quick, foi^etive (inven- 

57. catastrophe . . . heel] both tive) " {2 Henry iv. iii. 107). Shake- 
words mean "end." "When April speare uses it several times in this sense. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



sc.iii.] THAT ENDS WELL 25 

Mere fathers of their garments ; whose constancies 

Expire before their fashions." This he wish'd : 

I, after him, do after him wish too, 

Since I nor wax nor honey can bring home, 65 

I quickly were dissolved from my hive, 

To give some labourers room. 
Second Lord. You are lov'd, sir ; 

They that least lend it you shall lack you first. 
King. I fill a place, I know 't How long is 't, count. 

Since the physician at your father's died ? 70 

He was much fam'd. 
Ber. Some six months since, my lord. 

King. If he were living, I would try him yet. 

Lend me an arm : Ae rest have worn me out 

With several applications : nature and sickness 

Debate it at their leisure. Welcome, count ; 75 

My son 's no dearer. 
Ber. Thank your majesty. 

[Flourish. Exeunt. 

SCENE HI. — Rousillon. A Room in the 
Countesses Palace. 

Enter CoUNTESS, Steward, and Clown. 

Count. I will now hear: what say you of this gentle- 
woman ? 

62. fathersi feathers Tyrwhitt conj., parcels Williams conj. 67. You are] 
Capell, you*r ox you *re Ff. 

62. fathers of their garments'] their " Th^ wish was fether to that thought " 

judgments did nothing but give birth (2 Henry IV, iv. v. 93). 

to new designs for clothes. CE ** Every 66. dissolved] dischw-ged. Cf. Merry 

minute now Should be the fether of Wvves^ v. v. 237. 
some stratagem" (Malone). Also, 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



26 



ALL^S WELL 



[act I. 



Stew. Madam, the care I have had to even your 
content, I wish might be found in the calendar 
of my past endeavours ; for then we wound our 5 
modesty and make foul the clearness of our 
deservings, when of ourselves we publish them. 

Count. What does this knave here ? Get you gone, 
sirrah ; the complaints I have heard of you I do 
not all believe: 'tis my slowness that I do not; 10 
for I know you lack not folly to commit them, and 
have ability enough to make such knaveries yours. 

Clo. Tis not unknown to you, madam, I am a poor 
fellow. 

Count. Well, sir. 1 5 

Clo. No, madam, 'tis not so well that I am poor, 
though many of tiie rich are damned. But, if I 
may have your ladyship's good will to go to the 
world, Isbel your woman and I will do as we may. 

Count, Wilt thou needs be a beggar? 20 

18. to go ial to iff F s, 4. 19. your] Badham, fke Ff ; and I will\ F 2, 
3, 4 ; and w will F i ; and we will Collier. 



3. even\ the transitive verb " even ** 
is only twice used by Shakespeare. 
" But we '11 even all that good time will 
pive us" (Cymbeline^ iii. iv, 184). It 
IS borrowed from the language of ac- 
countants, as Mr. Crai|; points out in 
his note on to make even m Lear^ iv. viL 
80. Cotgrave has ** egaler=to equall, 
even, levell, match." The meaning 
here is that the steward has had a care 
to make his endeavours balance with 
or even her wishes. 

4. calendar] record {.New Eng, Diet, ). 
Bacon writes : ** Shepherds of people 
had best know the calendars of tempests 
of state," 

8. What , . . heref\ The Steward 
beats about the bush, because he has 



the delicacy to shrink from making 
known his discovery to the Countess in 
the presence of a tmrd party — and such 
a tmrd party too ! The word "pub- 
lish " is a strong hint to her to dismiss 
the clown, which she promptly takes. 
The clown, however, makes the most 
of his privileges, and airs his wit before 
he goes. (A. E. Thiselton.) 

II. commit them] a curious con- 
struction : but the meaning is clear. 

18, 19. go to the world] be married. 
Cf. As You Like It, V. iii. 5. "Thus 
goes every one to the world but I" 
XMuch Adot II. i. 330). 

i^, do as we may] as best we can. 
Cf. Fitzherbert on Husbandry: after 
saying that a cowe gives more milk 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



sciii,] THAT ENDS WELL 27 

Clo. I do beg your good will in this case. 

Count. In what case? 

Clo. In Isbel's case and mine own. Service is no 

heritage; and I think I shall never have the 

blessing of God till I have issue o' my body, for 25 

they say bames are blessings. 
Count Tell me thy reason why thou wilt marry. 
Clo. My poor body, madam, requires it : I am driven 

on by the flesh ; and he must needs go that the 

devil drives. 30 

Count. Is this all your worship's reason ? 
Clo. Faith, madam, I have other holy reasons, such 

as they are. 
Count. May the world know them ? 
Clo. 1 have been, madam, a wicked creature, as you 35 

and all flesh and blood are; and indeed, I do 

marry that I may repent. 
Count. Thy marriage, sooner than thy wickedness. 
Clo. 1 am out o' friends, madam; and I hope to 

have friends for my wife's sake. 40 

Count. Such friends are thine enemies, knave. 

25. ^ my body] Rowe (ed. 2), a my body Ff. 39. out d] Capell ; out a 
Fi,2,Sio$ao/F4. 

when fed on grasse ^n on heye, he hermitage '" (x^). We may take it that 

goes on, '* But he that hath no pasture, he was trying to ** remember himself" 

must do as he may" (Skeat, 1882, p. <^ our proverb. 

58). W. J. C. 26. bonus] old form of the word for 

23. Sertfice . . .] a proverb. Gol- children now spelled ''bairns'' in Scot- 

lancz says, ''the idea seems to be that land. Occurs several times in Shake- 

if service is no blessing, children are." speare. 

Mr. Craig pointed out tome a passage 29, 3a he must . . • drives] pro* 

in the History of George a Greene verbial. 

Pickering (ed. 1827, p. 9), "he 32. holy reasons] reasons connected 

remembored himself of the • • . with religion. *'Holy vows" occurs 

English proverb ' that service is no in ^ Le^s Compiaint^ 179. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



28 



ALL'S WELL 



[act I. 



Clo. You're shallow, madam; e'en great friends; for 
the knaves come to do that for me which I am 
aweary of. He that ears my land spares my team, 
and gives me leave to in the crop : if I be his 45 
cuckold, he 's my drudge. He that comforts my 
wife is the cherisher of my flesh and blood ; he 
that cherishes my flesh and blood loves my flesh 
and blood ; he that loves my flesh and blood is 
my friend: ergo^ he that kisses my wife is my 50 
friend. If men could be contented to be what 
they are, there were no fear in marriage; for 
young Charbon the puritan, and old Foysam the 
papist, howsomere their hearts are severed in 
religion, their heads are both one ; they may jowl 5 5 
horns together, like any deer i' the herd. 

Count Wilt thou ever be a foul-mouthed and calum- 
nious knave ? 



43. You're] Capdl, ^'or^ Ff; e*€n] Hanmer, in Ft 53. Charbcn . . , 
Poysam] see article below. 54. Aawsomere] F 4 ; Aoto somere F i, 2 ; haW' 
someere F 3 ; howso^er Pope. 



42. ^m] Malone adopted this change, 
thinking that ^*in ^eat friends" was 
evidently a way of writing * * e*en. " The 
same spelling occurs in many other 
places m Shakespeare. 

43. the knaves] the great friends. 
Knave = young fellow, servant 

44. ears] ploughs: frequently used 
by Shakesp^e and the Bible trans- 
lators. 

45. in the crop] bring in the crop. 
Rolfe quotes Bacon, Henry VI L, " All 
was inned at last into the King's bame." 
Holland's Pliny ^ "and when this is 
inned and laid up in the bame." 

53. Charbon . . . Poysam] a refer- 
ence to the lenten fere of puritan and 
papist. Malone is responsiUe for 



1 Poysam = Poisson. Benjamin Easy 
for Charbon =:Chairbonne; he adds, 
" Shakespeare has clearly appropriated 
. . . the old French proverb */eune 
chair et viel poisson* The frill mean- 
ing intended to be conveyed is not that 
some, but that the best men, whatever 
their age or whatever may be their own 
or their wives' religion, all share the 
common fate." Malone understood 
"charbon" to be an allusion to the 
" firy zeal of the puritan." 

55' >^/l ,ltnqck. Cf. "How the 
knave iowli ifto the ground " {Hamlet ^ 
V. i. 84). The word also occurs in 
North's "Plutarch" {Theseus), 2nd 
wLi 1595, p. 6. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



SC. III.] 



THAT ENDS WELL 



29 



Clo. A prophet I, madam ; and I speak the truth the 

next way : 60 

For I the ballad will repeat 

Which men full true shall find; 

Your marriage combes by destiny^ 
Your cuckoo sings by kind. 

Count, Get you gone, sir: I'll talk with you more 65 

anon. 
Stew. May it please you, madam, that he bid Helen 

come to you : of her I am to speak. 
Count. Sirrah, tell my gentlewoman I would speak 

with her; Helen I mean. 70 

Clo. Was this fair face the cause, quoth she. 

Why the Grecians sacked Troy ? 
Fond done, done fond. 

Was this King Priam* s joy t 

61-64.] Prose in the Ff; Rowe (ed. 2) first printed them as verse. 73. 
Fond done, done fond] omitted by Pope. 73, 74.] one line in Ff. After " fond 
done" Theobald (Warburton) inserts "for Paris he" ; Capell conj. "but Paris 
he"; Collier, ed. 2 (MS.) "good sooth, it was"; Keightley "for only he"; 
Rann (Heath conj.) " For it undone, undone, quoth he, 74. joy?] ioy, F i, 
2 ; joy. (several modem editors). 

59. A prophet /] Warburton com- 
ments as follows : " It is a supposition, 
which has run through all aqges and 
people, that natural fools have some- 
thing in them of divinity. On which 
account they were esteemed sacred ; 
travellers tell us in what esteem the 
Turks now -hold them; nor had they 
less honour (? irony) paid them hereto- 
fore in France, as appears from the 
old word benety for a natural fool." 

60. w^^^Lsearest. Cf. "'Tis the 
next way to turn tailor " {1 Henry IV. 
III. i. 264). The phrase is still used in 
Warwickshire, according to Henley. 



61. ballad] Steevens points out that 
it is to be found in John Grange's 
Garden (1577). 

64. by kind] in the nature of. Cf. 
" the worm will do his kind" (Antony 
and Cleopatra^ v. ii. 264). 

71-80.] stanza of an old ballad : a 
few words must have been lost. There 
seems to be no chance of correcting it, 
until the original is found. A ballad, 
ent. sta. r^. 1585, T%e lamentation of 
Hecuba and the Ladyes of Troy (Dr. 
Herford tells us), is lost. Warburton 
understood "ten" to refer to the ten 
sons of Priam. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



30 



ALL S WELL 



[acti. 



With that she sighed as she stoody 7S 

With that she sighed as she steady 

And gave this sentence then ; 
Among nine bad if one be goody 
Among nine bad if one be good^ 

There *s yet one good in ten. 80 

Count. What! one good in ten? you corrupt the 
song, sirrah. 

Clo. One good woman in ten, madam ; which is a puri- 
fying o' the song. Would God would serve the 
world so all the year ! we 'd find no fault with the 85 
tithe-women if I were the parson. One in ten, 
quoth a*! An we might have a good woman 
bom but or every blazing star, or at an earth- 
quake, 'twould mend the lottery well: a man 
may draw his heart out ere a' pluck one. 90 

Count. You '11 be gone, sir knave, and do as I com- 
mand you ! 

Clo. That man should be at woman's command, and 
yet no hurt donel Though honesty be no 
puritan, yet it will do no hurt; it will wear the 95 

75. With . . % stood] with . . . stood, his Ff. 76.] omitted in Ff and by 
Pope. 78-^0.] Prose mFf; verse by Rowe (ed. 2). 84. o^ thestmii Capell ; 
atk F I, 2 ; a' thYi, 4. 88. or\ Capell ; <v^ F 1, 2 ; <fre F 3, 4 ; ^erKowe ; 
omitted Pope; on Rann; ere Collier (ed. i); one Collier (ed. 2) MS. ; /or 
Harness ; 'fire Staunton. 90. dra!w\pray Rowe. 92. you f\ you } Ff. 93. 
wopum's] F I ; fl woman's F 2, 3, 4. 93, 94. andyef] F i, 2 ; and get F 3, 
4. 94, 95. nopuritani a puritan Rann (Tyrwhitt conj.). 



88. orl Capeirs version. "For" is 
a likely sdtemative, but I see no reason 
for changing the original. Or = before. 

89. lottery well: a] there may be a 
mistake in punctuation here. I prefer 
"lottery. Well, a . . .'* 

90. draw] Rowe suggests "pray." I 
take "draw" in connection with 



•7- 

and drawing till he dies, and not draw 
a good woman. 
94, 95.] jDt. Herford writes: 
Though honesty be no puritan, yet 
it will act as the puritans do ; it will 
comply with the law outwardly in 
token of its humility, etc. The allusi(m 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



sc. in.] 



THAT ENDS WELL 



31 



surplice of humility over the black gown of a big 
heart I am going, forsooth : the business is jR)r 
Helen to come hither. [Exit, 

Count. Well, now. 

Stew. I know, madam, you love your gentlewoman lOO 
entirely. 

Count Faith, I do : her father bequeathed her to me ; 
and she herself, without other advantage, may 
lawfully make title to as much love as she finds : 
there is more owing her than is paid; and 105 
more shall be paid her than she '11 demand. 

Stew. Madam, I was very late more near her than I 
think she wished me: alone she was, and did 
x:ommunicate to herself her own words to her 
own ears ; she thought, I dare vow for her, they no 
touched not any stranger sense. Her matter was, 
she loved your son : Fortune, she said, was no 
goddess, that had put such difference betwixt their 
two estates ; Love, no god, that would not extend 
his might, only where q ualitie s were level ; Dian, 115 

115, 116. level; Dian, nejueen] Globe ed. (Theobald's emendation) ; levellf 
Queene F i, 2 ; levell: Queen F 3, 4 ; level; . . . gueen Cambridge Edd. (thinkii^ it 
probable tlmt something more has been omitted, perhaps a whole line of the MS.). 

their consciences would not suffer them 



is to the controversy touching such 
thing^s as kneeling at the Communion, 
the ring in marriage, and especially the 
use of the surplice as an official vest- 
ment in the public services of the 
church. This controversy was running 
very high in the poet's time ; all men 
were interested m it; so that the 
allusion would be generally understood. 
The puritans abominated the surplice 



to officiate without the latter, nor the 
law of the church without the former,*' 

96. 3^g]proudj 

1 1 ^.-'^uaitties] rank. " Gentlemen of 
blood and~quality ** JHenry V. IV. viii. 

95). 

115. Dian . . .J Theobald's well- 
known note runs as follows: "*Tis 
evident to every sensible reader that 



as a rag of iniquity, and were great something must have slipt out here, by 
sticklersforthe black gown, which was which the meaning of the context is 
to them the symbol of Calvinism. Some rendered defective. The steward is 
of them, however, 3delded so far as to speaking in the veiy Words he over- 
wear the surplice over the gown, because heard of the young lady ; fortune was 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



32 



ALL'S WELL 



[act I. 



V -^i^f 



no queen of virgins, that would suffer her poor 
knight surprised, without rescue in the first 
assault or ransom afterward. This she delivered 
in the most bitter touch of sorrow that e'er I 
heard virgin exclaim in; which I held my duty 120 
speedily to acquaint you withal, sithence in the 
loss that may happen, it concerns you something 
to know it 

Count. You have discharged this honestly ; keep it to 

yourself. Many likelihoods inform'd me of this 125 
before, which hung so tottering in the balance, 
that I could neither believe nor misdoubt Fray 
you, leave me : stall this in your bosom ; and I 
thank you for your honest care. I will speak 
with you further anon. [Exit Steward. 1 30 

Count. Even so it was with me when I was young : 

If ever we are nature's, these are ours ; this thorn 
Doth to our rose of youth rightly belong ; 
Our blood to us, this to our blood is bom : 

117. knight surprised] knight to be surprised Rowe. 



no goddess, she said, for one reason ; 
love, no god, for another ; — what could 
she then more naturally subjoin, than 
as I have amended in the text: 
' Dia!na, no queen . . .' For in 
poetical history, Diana was as well 
known to preside over chastity, as 
Cupid over love, or Fortune over the 
change or regulation of our circum- 
stances." Boswell adds that ** Diana*s 
knight" is elsewhere used meaning **a 
virgin." 

117. surprised] to be surprised. 
Dyce quotes Greene*s Penelopes Web 
(1601), "suffering the princesse injury 
unrevenged." Dr. Herford quotes 
Drayton s Harmonie of the Church 
(1591), ''suffer not their mouthesshut 
up, O Lord I " 



119. touch] just above we have had 
"she thought (her words) touched not 
any stranger sense." Cf. also, ** Did*st 
thou but know the inly touch of love " 
{Two Gentlemen^ ii. viL i8). It is 
somewhat differently used in the ex- 
pression, "One touch of nature makes 
the whole world kin," where the pres- 
ence of the word nature makes it con- 
vey the sense of weakness. 

121. sithence] sith, since. 

128. stall] Shakespeare does not 
elsewhere use this word with a meta- 
phorical sense. 

133. rose of youth] "tell him he 
wears the rose Of youth upon him" 
{Antony and Cleopatra^ III. xiii. 
20). 

134. Our blood to us] " This thorn is 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



SC.III.] THAT ENDS WELL 33 

It is the show and seal of nature's truth, 135 

Where love's strong passion is impressed in youth : 
By our remembrances of days foregone, 
Such were our faults ; or then we thought them none. 

Enter HELENA. 

Her eye is sick on 't : I observe her now. 

Hel. What is your pleasure, madam? 140 

Count. You know, Helen, I am a mother to you. 

Hd. Mine honourable mistress. 

Count. Nay, a mother : 

Why not a mother? When I said " a mother," 

Methought you saw a serpent : what 's in " mother " 

That you start at it? I say, I am your mother; 145 

And put you in the catalogue of those 

That were enwombed mine : 'tis often seen 

Adoption strives with nature, and choice breeds 

A native slip to us from foreign seeds ; 

You ne'er oppress'd me with a mother's groan, 150 

Yet I express to you a mother's care. 

God's mercy, maiden ! does it curd thy blood 

To say I am thy mother ? What 's the matter, 

139. Enter HeUna\ Singer. After line 130 in Ff. 141. You . . . you\ 

Capell divides into two lines ending Helen , , , to you. 142, 143. Nay^ a 
mother . . . said " a mother ^^'\ in one line in Ft 

as natural a thing as blood." Blood =s those were our only &ults — or, rather, I 

passion. ** The brain may devise laws we did not think them faults then.'' ^ 
for the blood, but a hot temper leaps IJ9. onU^ oft, as very often in 

over a cold decree" {Merchant of Shakespeare. 

Venice, I. ii. 19). 149. native slipl choice breeds a slip 

I'fi, faults ; or] Many editors have (a grafting?) which becomes native to 

wanted to chiuige this. It may stand ; us, though sprung from foreign 

meaning "as far as we can remember (stranger) seed« 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



84 



ALL'S WELL 



[act I. 



That this distempered messenger of wet, 

The many-coloured Iris, round thine eye ? 155 

Why ? that you are my daughter ? 

Hel. That I am not. 

Count. I say, I am your mother. 

Hel. Pardon, madam ; 

The Count Rousillon cannot be my brother : 
I am from humble, he from honour'd name ; 
No note upon my parents, his all noble: 160 

My master, my dear lord he is ; and I 
His servant live, and will his vassal die. 
He must not be my brother. 

Count. Nor I your mother ? 

Hel. You are my mother, madam : would you were, — 

So that my lord your son were not my brother, — 165 
Indeed my mother ! or were you both our mothers, 
I care no more for than I do for heaven. 
So I were not his sister. Can't no other, 

163. moihiriy Rowe (ed. 2), mother. Ft 167. /core , . . keaven] I eare 
no more for than you do, fore heaven Becket conj. ; Vd care e^en more for ^t 
than I do for heaven Kd^hUey ; I care no more for than I do fear heaven uould 
conj. ; Steevens adds [Aside] to the Ff reading. 



154. distempered] contains an idea 
of "bad weather." Cf. King John, 
III. iv. 154, "No distempered day.** 

155. Iris\ Cf: As You Like It, III. 
"• 393> "* bl^c ®y^ *^*^ sunken" — 
one of Rosalind's marks of a lover. 
Cf. also Rape of Lucrece (1586), "And 
round about her tear-distained eye, 
Blue circles streamed, like rainbows in 
the sky." Rounds = surrounds. "... 
That rounds the mortal temples of a 
king " (Dyce). There is a reference to 
the shadow round eyes that are in love 
or sorrowful 

166. both our] of us both. A common 
construction in Shakespeare. Cym' 



beline, v. v. 388, " your three motives " 
=the motives of you three. Marlowe 
writes, "I have sworn to frustrate 
both their hopes," and Sheridan, " Tell 
her 'tis all our ways." 

167. I care • . . Aazz^^ Some sense 
can undoubtedly be eked out of this 
line : but I take it to be corrupt The 
most likely emendation seems to be, 
" I 'd care more for it than I do for 
heaven, So I were not his sister." Or 
perhap it means, ^^ I fret about that 
as little as I do about heaven. " " Care- 
ful hours "= hours full of care. 

168. CcuCt no other] can it not be 
otherwise* 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



sera.] THAT ENDS WELL 86 

But, I your daughter, he must be my brother ? 

Count. Yes, Helen, you might be my daughter-in-law. 170 
God shield you mean it not ! daughter and mother 
So strive upon your pulse. What ! pale again ? 
My fear hath catch'd your fondness : now I see 
The mystery of your loneliness, and find 
Your salt tears' head : now to all sense 'tis gross 175 
You love my son : invention is asham'd. 
Against the proclamation of thy passion, 
To say thou dost not : therefore tell me true ; 
But tell me then, 'tis so ; for, look, thy cheeks 
Confess it, th' one to th' other; and thine eyes 180 
See it so grossly shown in thy behaviours. 
That in their kind they speak it : only sin 
And hellish obstinacy tie thy tongue, 
That truth should be suspected Speak, is 't so ? 
If it be so, you have wound a goodly clew ; 185 

If it be not, forswear 't : howe'er, I charge thee. 
As heaven shall work in me for thine avail. 
To tell me truly. 

Hel. Good madam, pardon me ! 

Count, Do you love my son ? 

HeL Your pardon, noble mistress ! 

174. /w^/iif^jj] Theobald, UnulinessYi, 175, 176. gross Youlgrosse: You 
Ff. 180. tic one to tK other\ Knight; 'ton tooth to tlCY \\ ' ton to tk* Y 2 ; 
'tone to M* F 3, 4. 186. forswear' t: how^er^ forsweare't how ere F I, 2. 
187. thine'\ F I ; mine F 2, 3, 4. 188, tnify'[ true Hanmer. 

174. loneliness'^ The Ff read loaeli- mountain, open, palpable" (1 Henry 
ness. The correction was made on IV, 11. iv. 250). 

Lord Ellesmere*s copy of the Folio— 181. grossly] conspicuously. 

an emendation which nas been accepted 185. wound \ , , clew"] C{, Proverbs 

by most editors. of Tohn Heywood (1546, Sharman, p. 

175, grossi palpable. FalstaflTs lies Ii8), ** In being your own foe you spn 
were "like their fether, gross as a a £Eiyre thread.'* (W. J. C.) 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



36 



ALL'S WELL 



[act I. 



Count. Love you my son ? 

HeL Do not you love him, madam ? 190 

Count. Gro not about; my love hath in't a bond, 

Whereof the world takes note : come, come, disclose 

The state of your affection, for your passions 

Have to the full appeach'd. 
Hel. Then, I confess. 

Here on my knee, before high heaven and you, 195 

That before you, and next unto high heaven, 

I love your son. 

My friends were poor, but honest ; so 's my love : 

Be not offended, for it hurts not him 

That he is lov'd of me : I follow him not 200 

By any token of presumptuous suit ; 

Nor would I have him till I do deserve him ; 

Yet never know how that desert should be. 

I know I love in vain, strive against hope ; 

Yet in this captious and intenible sieve 205 

iQ^j I97«] As in Pope. Printed as one line in Ff. 205. captious] cafcious 
Fanner (conj.), copious Jackson (conj.) ; intenible] intemible F i. 



194. appeacKd] informed against 
you. "I will appeach the viUain" 
{Richard IL V. ii. 79). Also cf. Speed 
Chronicle (161 1, p. 6200), "he was 
openly appeach*d for treason." 

198. friends'] relations. 

205. captious . . . sieve] The full 
stop after "siue" in the Ff is clearly 
a misprint, and all seem agreed that 
** sine means ** sieve." What "cap- 
tious and intemible *' means is not so 
easy to decide. Dr. Herford explains 
it : "apt to receive but not to hold." 
Malone takes "captious" to mean 
* * recipient " ; and * * intenible " = in- 
capable of holding. Farmer and 
Scnmidt connect "captious" with 
' ' capacious. " Kolfe supports Malone's 



interpretation. Singer would have us 
take "captious" in the sense of the 
Latin captiosus (deceptive). The allu- 
sion, he savs, may be to the story of 
the Danaldes, which has been thus 
moralised: "These Virgins, who in 
the flower of their ace pour water into 
pierced vessels whidi they can never 
fill, what is it but to be always bestow- 
ing our love on the ungrateful ? " The 
Quotation is admirable ; but I cannot 
think " captious " = captiosus. Cot- 
grave gives captieux=^csi^iiovis, cavil- 
Sng, too curious, also cautelous. This 
seems to support the meaning "un- 
grateful," but not the meaning "de- 
ceitful." 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



SC. lU.] 



THAT ENDS WELL 



37 



I still pour in the waters of my love, 

And lack not to lose still. Thus, Indian-like, 

Religious in mine error, I adore 

The sun, that looks upon his worshipper. 

But knows of him no more. My dearest madam, 210 

Let not your hate encounter with my love 

For loving where you do : but if yourself. 

Whose aged honour cites a virtuous youth. 

Did ever in so true a flame of liking 

Wish chastely and love dearly, than your Dian 215 

Was both herself and Love : O ! then, give pity 

To her, whose state is such, that cannot choose 

But lend and give where she is sure to lose ; 

That seeks not to find that her search implies. 

But riddle-like, lives sweetly where she dies. 220 

Count. Had you not lately an intent, speak truly. 
To go to Paris ? 

HeL Madam, I had. 

Count Wherefore? tell true. 

207. lack"] reck Keightley conj. ; lose] F 4 ; loose F I, 2, 3 ; love Tyrwhitt conj. 
214. liking] F I ; living F 2; loving Y 3, 4. 223. Madam] omitted Hanmer; 
224. tell true] omitted Steevens (conj.) ; S. Walker conjectures separate line. 
Dyce gives that reading and places "tell true *' in a line by itself. 



207. lose still] probably "I lack 
not (do not cease) to lose still more 
* waters of love ' vainly poured out." 

213. aged honour cites] Malone ex- 
plains: "whose respectable conduct 
m ^e shows or proves that you were 
no less virtuous when young." Cf. 
"The morning rise doth cite each 
moving sense from idle rest" {Pil- 
grinit 195). " I need not cite him to 
It" {Two Gentlemen, ii. iv. 85). "It 
dtes us, brother, to the field " {S Henry 
VI, II. i. 34). I prefer to understand 
"cite" to mean "urge on" — your 
aged honour urges on (is a good ex- 



ample to) a well - disposed young 
person. 

220. riddle -like] secretly, like a 
riddle. The foregoing lines seem to/ 
have suggested the simile. Cf. "Thought 
like the pestilence and old-feishionedi 
love, riddlingly it catch men, ana 
doth remove never, till it be starved " 
(Donne). 

222.] If these short sentences are to 
be arranged in verse at all I think 
Walker and Dyce have the right 
version : " To go to Paris ? Hel, 
Madam I had. Count, Wherefore? 
IITeU true. II ffel. I will," etc. But 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



38 



ALL'S WELL 



[ACT I. 



Hd. I will tell truth ; by grace itself I swear. 225 

You know my father left me some prescriptions 
Of rare and prov*d effects, such as his reading 
And manifest experience had collected 
For general sovereignty ; and that he will'd me 
In heedfuU'st reservation to bestow them, 230 

As notes, whose faculties inclusive were. 
More than they were in note. Amongst the rest, 
There is a remedy, approved, set down, 
To cure the desperate languishings whereof 
The king is render'd lost. 

Count This was your motive 235 

For Paris, was it ? Speak. 

Hel. My lord your son made me to think of this ; 
Else Paris, and the medicine, and the king, 
Had from the conversation of my thoughts 
Haply been absent then. 

Count. But think you, Helen, 240 

225. fell truth'\ F l\ tell true F 2, 3, 4. 228. manifest^ manifold Collier 
(ed. 2), Long MS. and Collier MS. and S. Walker (Crit, Ex, il 245). 231. 
notes] cures Gould conj. 235, 236.] Capell's arrangement In one line in 
the folios. 236.1/? Speak\SXi^vtnsi tt^speake?¥i. 240. J7a/(K] Pope, 
Happily Ff. 



seeing that in this case we have an 
unfinished line it may be advisable to 
retain the Ff reading, though that 
broken line "Tell true" may imply 
the pause during which Helena hesitates 
and then suddenly replies, "I will tell 
truth . . ." 

228. ptanifesl] A doubtful reading. 
I like the emendation "manifold** 
(ColL MS.)* Manifest must mean, if 
anything, fiunous. 

229. general sovereignty] universal 
remedy. 

230. bestow them] lay up or stow. 
C£ " And when he came to the Tower, 



he took them from their hand and be- 
stowed them in the house" (2 Kings 
v. 24). 

231. notes] "cures "is Gould's con- 
jecture. Notes may be a misprint 

231. inclusive] including eveiything. 

232. in note] written down. Per- 
haps "known." 

233. approved] See note above, i. iL 
50. 

235. rendered] represented. " I 
heard him speak of that same brother, 
and he did render him the most un- 
natural that liv'd 'mongst men" lAs 
You Like It, IV. iii. 123). 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



sc.in.J THAT ENDS WELL 39 

If you should tender your supposed aid, 

He would receive it ? He and his physicians 

Are of a mind ; he, that they cannot help him, 

They, that they cannot help. How shall they credit 

A poor unlearned virgfin, when the schools, 245 

Emboweird of their doctrine, have left off 

The danger to itself? 

HeL There 's something in 't, 

More than my father's skill, which was the great'st 
Of his profession. That his good receipt 
Shall for, my legacy be sanctified 250 

By the luckiest stars in heaven: and, would your 

honour 
But give me leave to try success, I 'd venture 
The well-lost life of mine on his grace's cure 
By such a day and hour. 

Count. Dost thou believe 't ? 

HeL Ay, madam, knowingly. 255 

Count. Why, Helen, thou shalt have my leave and love, 
Means and attendants, and my loving greetings 
To those of mine in court. I '11 stay at home 
And pray God's blessing into thy attempt 
Be gone to-morrow; and be sure of this, 260 

What I can help thee to, thou shalt not miss. 

\Exeunt. 

247. itself f\ Rowe, itself e, Ff; ««V] hints Hanmer (Warburton). 249. 
profession, ThcU\ profession, that Ff. 254. day and hour] day, an houre 
Ff. 257. attendants] attendance S. Walker conj. 

243. help] cure. Cf. " It helps the mont and Fletcher, RoUo, 11. iJ. 
head-ache, cough and tissick" (Beau- Song). ' 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



40 



ALL'S WELL 



[act II. 



ACT II 



SCENE I. — Paris. The King's Palace. 



Flourish. Enter the King, with divers young Lords taking 
leave for the Florentine war ; BERTRAM, Parolles, 
and Attendants. 

King. Farewell, young lord : these warlike principles 

Do not throw from you : and you, my lord, farewell : 
Share the advice betwixt you ; if both gain all, 
The gift doth stretch itself as 'tis received. 
And is enough for both. 

First Lord. Tis our hope, sir, 5 

After well enter'd soldiers, to return 
And find your grace in health. 

King. No, no, it cannot be ; and yet my heart 

I, 2. lord\ Hanmer, Urds Ff. 3. both gain a/l] Johnson, 6atA gain, all 
Ff. 5. First Lord] Rowe, Lord G. Ff. 



young Lords] "Throughout this 
scene me two speakers whom Rowe 
and all subsequent editors have called 
'First' and 'Second Lord' are 
called in the, Ff * Lord G.' and 
•Lord E.' In all likelihood, as 
Capell has suggested, the parts were 
originally played by two actors whose 
names began respectively with G and 
E ; and in fact, in the list of * Prin- 
cipall Actors' prefixed to the first 
Folio we find the names of Gilburne, 
Goughe and Ecclestone. The same 
actors doubtless took the parts of the 
two gentlemen who bring the letter to 
Helena in the second Scene of Act iii., 
and who in the stage-directions of the 
Folio are termed 'French G.' and 
« French E.' The confusion of 
speakers in the dialogue at the close 



of III. vi. will be remedied if we sup- 
pose the Folio to have printed Cap. G. 
by mistake for Cap. E. in line 113 and 
Cap. E. for Cap. G. in lines 115, 121. 
' Lord E.' appears again in I v. i., and 
'Cap. G.' and 'Cap. E.' in IV. iii." 
(Camb. Edd. vol. iii. p. 260). 

3. if both gain all\ the reading of 
Ff " if both gain, all " is surely wrong. 
The king tells them to share the 
advice: but even if both parties take 
all the advice, it will stretch itself 
accordingly. 

6. well entered soldiers] become out 
and out soldiers. " His pupil age man 
entered thus" {Coriolanus, ii. u. 103). 
Eng» Dial. Diet, gives " enter " as a 
hunting term, meamng to train or break 
in a hound, etc., to admit him into 
the regular pack. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



SC. I.] 



THAT ENDS WELL 



41 



Will not confess he owes the malady 

That doth my life besiege. Farewell, young lords ; lo 

Whether I live or die, be you the sons 

Of worthy Frenchmen : let higher Italy, 

Those bated that inherit but the fall 

Of the last monarchy, see that you come 

Not to woo honour, but to wed it ; when 1 5 

The bravest questant shrinks, find what you seek. 

That fame may cry you loud : I say, farewell. 

Second Lord. Health, at your bidding, serve your majesty ! 

Kin£^. Those girls of Italy, take heed of them : 

They say our French lack language to deny 20 

If they demand : beware of being captives, 
Before you serve. 

Both. Our hearts receive your warnings. 

Kin£^. Farewell. [To Bert.] Come hither to me. 

[Exit, in his chair, 

13. hi^^l hired Coleridge conj., hirer Bulloch conj. 13. TTiose bated] 
Those bastards Hanmer. i6. questanf] F I ; question F 2, 3, 4 ; quester Collier 
MS. 23.] [to B.] Pope, [to attendants] Theobald, omitted Ff, [retires to a 
couch, attenduits leading him] Capell, [Go backe] Collier MS. 



9. he"] stands for "it," referring to 
the heart. 

9. owes"] owns, as below, 11. v. 81. 

12, 13. higher . . . inherit] With 
r^rd to Hanmer's reading, it seems 
difficult to meet the objection that the 
king would hardly speak of these par- 
ticular Italians as bastards, seeing that 
his knights were about to enlist in their 
ranks. More probably he means the 
nobility of Italy (not including those 
who won glory in the fall of the Roman 
Empire). This is the opinion of Delius. 
a, Julius Casar, 11. i. no, "the high 
(= perfect) east." Other editors have 
understood it to mean the further part 
of Italy where the Senoys and Floren- 
tines hved. See below, iv. iii. 43. 

15* 16.] The reading given is Pope's. 



The Ff have "to wed it, when the 
bravest questant shrinks " : " questant " 
is a word not used again by Shake- 
speare : I know of no other instance of 
it. The later Ff give "question"— a 
possible but very unlikely reading, as 
the verb "to shrink" is not used by 
Shakespeare transitively with the mean- 
ing "to shirk." If "question" is 
right, it means " duel," as in Othello^ 
I. iii. 23. In King Lear, III. vii. 17, 
we find "knights . . . Hot questrists 
after him." 

17. cry you loud] Cf. Beaumont and 
Fletcher, The Hun, Lieut,, II. i. I, 
" when all men ciy him " (New Eng, 
Diet,). 

23. Come hither to me] There are no 
stage instructions in the Ff : to supply 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



42 



ALL'S WELL 



[actu. 



First Lord. O my sweet lord, that you will stay behind us ! 

Par. Tis not his fault, the spark. 

Second Lord. O ! 'tis brave wars. 2 5 

Par. Most admirable : I have seen those wars. 

Ber. I am commanded here, and kept a coil with 

" Too young," and " the next year," and " 'tis too early." 

Par. An thy mind stand to 't, boy, steal away bravely. 

Ber. I shall stay here the fordiorse to a smock, 30 

Creaking my shoes on the plain masonry. 
Till honour be bought up, and no sword worn 
But one to dance with. By leaven I I '11 steal away. 



29. An . . . bravefy] Theobald; And . . . UoU boy, steaU amay bravely 
F I, 3, 3 ; And thy mind—Stand io it^ boy; stsal away bravely. Fojpt. 



them is by no means easy. Pope 
makes the king leave the stage; 
Capell supposes that he retires to a 
couch. Mr. P. A. Daniel supposes 
that the king is conveyed to a couch 
at the back of the stage and that a 
traverse is drawn before him; this is 
perhaps the only satis&ctor3r view. 
Theobald would make the king tell 
lAe attendants to come to him : surely 
it is Bertram whom he summons; B. 
moves to obey when the First Lord 
exclaims " That you will stay behind 1 " 
The crux is Bertram's "Stay the 
king *' (line 49). ^ These words probablv 
mean that he is going to stay with 
I or support the king, i cannot think 
\ that they can have any reference to 
I the reappearance of the King. Mr. 
P. A. i)aniel would adopt Pope's 
emendation **Stay; the king — *^ mean- 
ing *'I am going to stay. The king 
— (with a shrug) will have it so." The 
Cambridge Editors give the reading of 
the later Ff, "Stay: the king." Ex- 
plaining : " The kmg we may suppose 
is carried out on a couch. When Ber- 
tram says ' Stay : the king,' the ushers 
in attendance throw open the folding 
doors at the back of the stage, Bertram 



and ParoUes retire close to one of the 
side doors, and while they are speakinjg 
together the king is borne in upon his 
couch to the front of the stafe. . . . 
We must . . . suppose that he is re- 
clining on a couch throughout the whole 
scene. Thus at his tet appearance, 
his illness would be made evident to 
the spectators. After they have set 
the couch down, the attendants retire 
to the back of the stage so as to be 
out of earshot" 

30. forehorse . . .] the horse in a 
team which goes foremost " I '11 learn 
you the names of all our team and ac- 
quaint you with Jock the forehorse and 
Fibb the fill-horse" (T. H^wood's 
Fortune by Land and Seci). Bertram 
refers to ushering in sq^uiring ladies 
(Schmidt). Delius takes it to mean a 
linen-horse. 

32. Till . . . bought up'\ till there 
is no honour left to be gained (Schmidt). 

32> 33* sword . . , to dance with] 
Men used to wear short swords for 
dandnp, a custom frequently referred 
to in literature. It is called a " dan- 
cing-rapier" in Titus Andronicus, ii. 
i. 39. Cf^ also Antony and Cleopatra, 
IIL xL 36. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



SC. I.] 



THAT ENDS WELL 



43 



First Lard. There 's honour in the theft. 

Par. Commit it, count 

Second Lord. I am your accessary; and so farewell 35 

Ber. I grow to you, and our parting is a tortured body. 

First Lord. Farewell, captain. 

Second Lord. Sweet Monsieur Farolles ! 

Par. Noble heroes, my sword and yours are kin. 

Good sparks and lustrous, a word, good metals : 40 
you shall find in the regiment of the Spinii one 
Captain Spurio, with his cicatrice, an emblem of 
war, here on his sinister cheek : it was this very 
sword entrenched it: say to him, I live, and 
observe his reports for me. 45 

Second Lord. We shall, noble captain. [Exeunt Lords. 

Par. Mars dote on you for his novices! [To Bert.'] 
What will you do ? 

Ber. Stay the king. 

Par. Use a more spacious ceremony to the noble 50 

42. with . . . embleml Theobald, his cicatrice (sicatrice F i), Ttnth an emblem 
Ff. 47. [To Bert.] Capell, omitted Ff. 48. you\ Capell, ye Ft 49. 
Stay the king\ F I ; Stay : the king F 2, 3, 4 ; Stay; the king— Pope. 



36. tortured dody] Cf. the use of the 
word body in " the body of your dis- 
course is sometime guarded with frag- 
ments" {Much Ado, I. i. 287). It is 
here used meaning nothing more than 
• * thing." This strange (and somewhat 
foolish) manner of farewell has been 
thought corrupt : but I think the read- 
ing of the Ff may stand. 

48. What will you do f] Capell's read- 
ing. Ff have **ye." To whom is this 
addressed ? Capell thinks to Bertram. 
If so, does Bertram answer, **I will 
stay tiie king," or does he interrupt (as 
most editors take it) 1^ calling attention 
to the entrance of the king? I think 
the former. Mr. Daniel wntes : ** The 
scene ends line 61 with the departure 



of Bertram and Parolles. Perhaps we 
ought now to mark a new scene ; but 
it would necessitate renumbering the 
lines and cause confusion. The traverse 
is now withdrawn, discovering Lafeu 
kneeling before him. On the old stage 
the king would probably be brought 
forward in his chaur, just as he was con- 
veywl out at line 23." The Cambridge 
Editors, on the other hand, say : " as 
printed in the Ff the words * what will 
ye do ? * seem to be a taunt addressed, 
after the speaker's manner, to the 
young lords when their backs were 
turned." 

49. Stay the king'\ be in attendance 
on him. See Cotgrave, ** Supporters 
to support^ sustain, stay or beare up." 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



44 



ALL'S WELL 



[acth. 



lords; you have restrained yourself within the 
list of too cold an adieu : be more expressive to 
them ; for they wear themselves in the cap of the 
time, there do muster true gait, eat, speak, and 
move under the influence of the most received 55 
star; and though the devil lead the measure, 
such are to be followed. After them, and take a 
more dilated farewell. 

Ber. And I will do so. 

Par, Worthy fellows ; and like to prove most sinewy 60 



sword-men. 



\Exeunt Bertram and Parolles. 



Re-enter King in his chair and Lafeu. 

Laf. Pardon, my lord, for me and for my tidings. 

King. I '11 fee thee to stand up. 

Laf. Then here's a man stands that has brought his 
pardon. 
I would you had kneel'd, my lord, to ask me mercy, 6$ 
And that at my bidding you could so stand up. 

King. I would I had; so I had broke thy pate, 

54. gaif\ Johnson, gate Ft 55. move] F i ; fnore F 2, 3, 4. 63. fee] 
Theobald, see Ff. 64. broughfl bought Theobald. 67. and fol. arranged 
as in CapelL 



54. there , . . ^i/] there (in the cap 
of time) true gait (£hose who are feshion- 
able) do muster or come together. 

56. mecuurel dance. 

61.] Pope makes this the beginning 
of Scene h. And he is probably right. 
But it is difficult to change what has 
practically become an accepted division 
of this Act (into five Scenes). 

63. fee thee to stand up] This seems 
to be an unusual way of saying, ''I'll 
fee thee if thou can'st make me stand 
up." I know of no instance c^ the 



verb "fee" used with **to," but in 
Fieldmg's The Mock Doctor^ ii. iiL, 
there occurs, ** I *11 fee you, you villain 
— cure me I " where it evidently means 
** I '11 give you your fee — but cure me." 
In the present instance the king must 
have meant, ** I '11 fee thee if I stand 
up," to which Lafeu immediately re- 

Elies, "Then here's a man has 
rought his pardon." Some editors 
give "bought" But the pardon is 
clearly defined by what follows — " 'tis 
thus.'< 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



SC. I.J 



THAT ENDS WELL 



45 



And ask'd thee mercy for 't. 

Laf. Good faith, across. 

But, my good lord, 'tis thus ; will you be cur'd 
Of your infirmity ? 

Kin^. No. 

Laf, O ! will you eat 70 

No grapes, my royal fox ? Yes, but you will 
My noble grapes an if my royal fox 
Could reach them. I have seen a medicine 
That 's able to breathe life into a stone. 
Quicken a rock, and make you dance canary 75 

With spritely fire and motion ; whose simple touch 
Is powerful to araise King Pepin, nay. 
To give great Charlemain a pen in 's hand 
And write to her a love-line. 

King. What " her " is this ? 

Laf. Why, Doctor She. My lord, there 's one arriv'd, 80 
If you will see her : now, by my faith and honour, 
If seriously I may convey my thoughts 
In this my light deliverance, I have spoke 



68. Goodfaiihi across] not a brilliant 
retort. The metaphor is taken from 
the tournaments; it was considered 
shameful to break a lance "across" 
your opponent **like a noble goose" 
(As You Like It^ ill. iv. 47). 

72. My noble grapes'] Rolfe points out 
that the "my" is emphatic. There is 
perhaps a reference to iEsop's Fable. 

73. medicine] physician. Cotgrave 
uses the word in the same way. See 
also Wintet^s Tale^ iv. iv. 597 ; Mac- 
beth, V. ii. 27. 

75. dance canary] to dance a lively 
jig. The origin of flie word ** canary " 
seems obscure, but it may have some- 
thing to do with the wine. 

77. araise] an old form which occurs 



in Morte cP Arthur, and frequently else- 
where (see New Eng. Diet?), 

77. King Pepii^ a name chosen 
because he had been dead some time : 
in Love's Labouf^s Lost, iv. i., we 
hear of " one that was a man when King 
Pepin was a little boy." 

79.] It has been pointed out that this 
sentence is not grammatically correct ; 
but it is, logically, and I cannot think 
that a whole line can have been lost. 
Shakespeare was fond of these elliptical 
constructions. Capell would read 
"and give . . . hand To write." It 
will be remembered that Charlemagne 
could not write. 

83. light deliverance]\t&^z manner 
ofspeaking(W.J. C). 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



46 ALL'S WELL [acth. 

With one, that in her sex, her years, profession. 
Wisdom and constancy, hath amaz'd me more 85 

Than I dare blame my weakness. Will you see 

her. 
For that is her demand, and know her business ? 
That done, laugh well at me. 

King. Now, good Lafeu, 

Bring in the admiration, that we with thee 
May spend our wonder too, or take off thine 90 

By wond'ring how thou took'st it, 

JLaf. Nay, ril fit you, 

And not be all day neither. [Exit 

King, Thus he his special nothing ever prologues. 

Re-enter Lafeu, with HELENA. 

Laf, Nay, come your ways. 

King. This haste hath wings indeed. 

Laf. Nay, come your ways. 95 

This is his majesty, say your mind to him : 
A traitor you do look like ; but such traitors 
His majesty seldom fears : I am Cressid's uncle, 
That dare leave two together. Fare you well. 

[Exit. 

King. Now, fair one, does your business follow us? 100 

Hel. Ay, my good lord. Gerard de Narbon was 

86. blatne] blaze Theobald conj.^ task Keightley conj. icx>. follow\ fellow 
Anon. conj. loi. and fol. arranged as in Hanmer. 

84. profession^ what she professed to %(>, blanu my weahtess] more than 

be or to be able to do ; ''her demand I dare confess, 

and her business" (line 87). Cf. *' It is 89. admiration} a wonder, 

the privilege of mine honours, my oath 91. rilfUyou\ satisfy vou. 

and my profession " (King Lear^ v. iii. 100. follow us ?} Cf. ** the liberty that 

1 30), follows our places " {Henry V, v. ii. 297). 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



( 



SC.1.] THAT ENDS WELL 47 

My father ; in what he did prctfess, weUJound. 

King-. I knew him. 

Hel. The rather will I spare my praises towards him ; 

Knowing him is enough. On 's bed of death 105 
Many receipts he gave me ; chiefly one, 
Which, as the dearest issue of his practice, 
And of his old experience the only darling. 
He bade me store up as a triple eye. 
Safer than mine own two, more dear. I have 
so; no 

And, hearing your high majesty is touch'd 
With that malignant cause wherein the honour 
Of my dear father's gift stands chief in power, 
I come to tender it and my appliance, 
With all bound humbleness. 

King-. We thank you, maiden ; 115 

But may not be so credulous of cure. 
When our most learned doctors leave us, and 
The congfr^ated college have concluded 
That labouring art can never ransom nature 
From her inaidable state ; I say we must not 1 20 

So stain our judgment, or corrupt our hope. 
To prostitute our past-cure malady 
To empirics, or to dissever so 

106. ckie/fy] namely F 3, 4. iia two^ more dear,"] stops sabstandally 
as in Steevens; Htfo: more deare Ff. 120. inaidable'\ Capell; inaydibU 

F I, 2; unaydihU F 3, 4 ; st<Ue'\ Dyce (ed. 2) (S. Walker conj.), estaU Ff. 

IQ2. well found\ Steevens explains 112. ^aMJ^J^disease, sickness. 1 509, 

*'of known, acknowledged excel- Hawes, Past, Fleas, xviii., xviL, 'I 

lence." Delius understands it to mean your cause can nothing remedy.' 1578, 

** learned." Lyte, Dodoeus^ in. XXVL353, * Hellebor 

109. triplel used m ory th^^^ ^^^^ by may not be ministred except in de- 

Shakes peare t o mean "th ird." Ci. sperate causes.' Cf. Coriolanus, III. i. 

AnUmyand Ckopatra^ I. i. 12. 235 " (New Eng, Diet,). 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



48 ALL'S WELL [Acrn. 

Our great self and our credit, to esteem 

A senseless help, when help past sense we deem. 125 
Hel. My duty then shall pay me for my pains : 

I will no more enforce mine office on you ; 

Humbly entreating from your royal thoughts 

A modest one, to bear me back again. 
King. I cannot give thee less, to be call'd grateful 130 

Thou thought'st to help me, and such thanks I 
give 

As one near death to those that wish him live ; 

But what at full I know, thou know'st no part, 

I knowing all my peril, thou no art 
Hel. What I can do can do no hurt to try, 135 

Since you set up your rest 'gainst remedy. 

He that of greatest works is finisher, 

Oft does them by the weakest minister : 

So holy writ in babes hath judgment shown. 

When judges have been babes; great floods have 
flown 140 

From simple sources ; and great seas have dried 

When miracles have by the greatest been denied. 

125. help'l cure, as often in Shake- vUr: ** II y renvunt de sa reste^ He set 

^eare. See below, ii. iii. i6. Also his whole rest, he adventured all his 

Two Gentlemen^ **help him of his estate upon it." H ence to set up p ne*s 

blindness " (in Who is Syhia ?). . rest c ame to mea n^^'^ determin ed. 

136. set up your rest] Professor r^^eSl For" many examples, ~see 

Dowden says it is "a metaphor from Naxe^^ldssafy, See also /Borneo and 

primero (a game at cards) ; the stake Juliet^ iv. v. 6 (and others). 
was a smaller sum, the rest a larger 140. judges have been babes] Holt 

sum, which, if a player were confident White supposes that Shakespeare re- 

(or desperate) might all be set or set ferred to the story of Susanna and 

upi that is, wagered." In the game Daniel. On the other hand, Malone 

of primero play^ in dialogue (in the thinks the passage refers to Christ's 

Diidogues (p. 26) append^ to Min- well-known words, 
sheu's Spanish Diet,) "two shillings 142. by the great st] *'by" is here 

form the stake, eight shillings the used as in the phrase "he did his 

rest, » . •" Cotgrave has under ^cn- duty by his children." 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



SCI.] THAT ENDS WELL 49 

Oft expectation fails, and most oft there 
Where most it promises ; and oft it hits 
Where hope is coldest and despair most fits. 14$ 

King. I must not hear thee : fare thee well, kind maid. 
Thy pains, not us'd, must by thyself be paid : 
Proffers not took reap thanks for their reward. 

HeU In^ired merit so by breath is barr'd. 

It is not so with him that all things knows, 150 

As 'tis with us that square our guess by shows ; 

But most it is presumption in us when 

The help x>f heaven we count the ^ct of men, 

Dear sir, to my endeavours give consent ; 

Of heaven, not me, make an experiment 155 

I am not an impostor that proclaim 

Myself against the level of mine aim ; 

But know I think, and think I know most sure. 

My art is not past power nor you past cure. 

King. Art thou so confident ? Within what space 1 60 
Hop'st thou my cure? 

HeU The greatest grace lending grace, 

143*] Johnson believes that a line has dropt out here, because there is nothing 
torhymewith "there." 145. /^j] Collier (Theobald conj.), skJftsYL 156. 
imposlor] F 3, 4 5 imposirue F l, 2 ; imposture Capell. 161. The great st . . . 
grace\ Capell, The greatest grace lending grace Ff, The greatest lending grace 
Rowe. 

145. fits'l The Ff read " shifts." On 151. square our guess by shtms"] Cf. 

the margin of the copy in Lord EUes- " thou art said to have a stubborn soul, 

mere's possession, the correction ''ffits" that aj^reheiMis no further than this 

has been made. Theobald suggested world, and squarest thy life according " 

the same emendation. (Measure for Measure^ v. 487). 

149. by breath is barr*d] bar = to 156, 157. proclaim . . . mine aim'\ 

prevent or keep out. *' Merriment To proclaim one thing against another is 

which bars a thousand harms " ( Taming to say that it is better or superior to it. 

of the Shrew ^ Induction, ii. 138), Helen says, "Myself (my power) which 

** Breath "= (probably) language, word, I proclaim is not inferior to (or unable 



> in Measure for Measure^ v. 122, to attain) the high level of my aim." 

** permit A blasting and a scandalous 161. The . . . grace\ The Ff read 

breath to &U cm him." ^< the greatest grace lending grace." 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



50 



ALL'S WELL 



[act II. 



Ere twice the horses of the sun shall bring 

Their fiery torcher his diurnal ring, 

Ere twice in murk and occidental damp 

Moist Hesperus hath quench'd her sleepy lamp 165 

Or four-and-twenty times the pilot's glass 

Hath told the thievish minutes how they pass, 

What is infirm from your sound parts shall fly, 

Health shall live free, and sickness freely die. 

King. Upon thy certainty and confidence 1 70 

What dar'st thou venture ? 

HeL Tax of impudence, 

A strumpet's boldness, a divulged shame, 
Traduc'd by odious ballads : my maid's name 
Sear'd otherwise ; ne worse of worst, extended 

173. maiePs name] S. Walker conj., maiden's name Ff. 174. m« w&rse of 
worst"] Ff, Mo^, worse, if worse, extended Anon, conj., on worst of racks extended 
Anon. conj. The later Ff have " no " instead of « ne." 



Most editors give " great'st" But the 
line "Hopest thou my cure? The 
great'st grace lending grace" is im- 
poMtible: it is difficult to believe Shake- 
speare wrote it Mr. Craig writes and 
says, '* Suppose that Shakespeare wrote 
first, 'The great God lendmg grace,' 
i^d that^ on account of the Act against 
profanity on the stage, the players were 
induced to alter this and instead of 
*God' put 'grace.' Then finding 
that 'the great Grace' did not sound 
well they may have decided to read 
'the great'st grace lendinp; grace.'" 
Delius Quotes Macbeth,y, vii., "by the 
grace of Grace." 

164. in murk] this word majr here 
be either a noun or an adjective: it 
matters little which of the two. 

165. her] most editors correct this 
to "his." But the "mistake" was 
possibly in the original MS., and it is 
as well to leave it. 

166. piioPs glass} technically half an 



hour. Not so used by Shakespeare. 
(See Shakespeare and Sea-Glasses, by 
Dr. Brinsley I^cholson, New Sh, Soc. 
Tr., March 12, 1880.) 

171. Tkr] accusation. 

174. ^jguLnot. By "ne worse of 
worst "lielena probably means that 
nothing could be worse than "my 
name sear'd otherwise." extended = 
seized by a course of law. Johnson 
(Diet,) Quotes Hudibras: "The law 
that settles all vou do. And marries 
where you did but woo ; An(d) if it 
iudge upon your side, Will soon extend 
her for your bride ; And put her person, 
proods or lands, Or which you like best, 
mt* your hands." Cf. also As Vou 
Like It, III. i. 17, "Let my officers 
make an extent upon his house and 
land, And turn him going." Also 
Antony and Cleopatra, i. iL 105, 
" Labienus hath extended Asia."— The 
Cambridge Editors cite more than 
twenty various readings of this phrase. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



SC. I.] 



THAT ENDS WELL 



51 



With vilest torture let my life be ended. 175 

King. Methinks in thee some blessed spirit doth speak 
His powerful sound within an organ weak ; 
And what impossibility would slay 
In common sense, sense saves another way. 
Thy life is dear ; for all that life can rate 1 80 

Worth name of life in thee hath estimate ; 
Youth, beauty, wisdom, courage, ... all 
That happiness and prime can happy call : 
Thou this to hazard needs must intimate 
Skill infinite or monstrous desperate. 185 

Sweet practiser, thy physic I will try. 
That ministers thine own death if I die. 
Hel. If I break time, or flinch in property 
Of what I spoke, unpitied let me die, 
And well deserv'd. Not helping, death's my fee ; 190 
But, if I help, what do you promise me ? 
King. Make thy demand. 

175. viUst'\ vildest F I, 2. 182. courage . . . a//] courage ^ all Ff. Two 
syllables seem to have been left out here, perhaps " heal&i and. ' Theobald sup- 
plies ''virtue," Collier "honour.'' 183. happiness and] happiness in Rann 
(Mason conj.). 



177. poTvefful sound] direct object of 
"speak." 

178, 179. what . . . another way] 
There 's sense in what you say, but it is 
not common sense. 

181. in thee hath estimate] Hath 
great value in a young life like yours. 

183. happiness and prime] Why 
change to "happiness in prime" as 
Rann and Mason conjecture ? Because 
"in the prime" is the trite phrase? 
This use of the word " prime^' is as 
beautiful as the one in which Shake- 
speare sa]^, " love b crowned with the 
prime in spring time." 



185. monstrous desperate] a strange 
construction. Desperate seems to agree 
with * * a dispcMsition " understood. The 
meaning is quite clear. 

188, 189. property Of what] "in pro- 
perty of" does not seem to have been a 
usual construction at any time. Shake- 
speare speaks of "property of blood," 
meaning probably "right." Milton 
uses the word "proper" meaning 
"original" in the phrase "our proper 
motion." Perhaps the sentence here 
means, "If I flinch in the exact 
fulfilment of the conditions I have 
accepted. ..." 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



52 ALL'S WELL [actii. 

Hel. But will you make it even ? 

King. Ay, by my sceptre, and my hopes of heaven. 

Hd. Then shalt thou give me with thy kingly hand 

What husband in thy power I will command : 195 

Exempted be from me the arrogance 

To choose from forth the royal blood of France, 

My low and humble name to propagate 

With any branch or image of thy state ; 

But such a one, thy vassal, whom I know 200 

Is free for me to ask, thee to bestow. 

King. Here is my hand ; the premises observed. 
Thy will by my performance shall be serv'd : 
So make the choice of thy own time, for I, 
Thy resolv'd patient, on thee still rely. 205 

More should I question thee, and more I must. 
Though more to know could not be more to 

trust, 
From whence thou cam'st, how tended on; but 

rest 
Unquestion'd welcome and undoubted blest 
Give me some help here, ho ! If thou proceed 210 
As high as word, my deed shall match thy deed. 

{Flourish. Exeunt. 

193. hem>m\ Theobald (Thirlby conj.)i hel^e) Ff. 199. tmc^'\ impagt 
(Warburton). 

193. hopes of heavenl'Fihst.v^ "helpe" but he gives no instance of the use of 

instead of "heaven." As Boswell this word : it seems rare. Henley says 

points outy the only reason for chang- that '* branch refers- to the collateral 

ing what is perfect sense is the break in descendants of the ro}^ blood, and 

the rh3rme; the reason is sufficiently image to the direct and immediate 

conclusive here, line." 

199. dfHoge of thy sUUe] Warburton's 201. destoto] See note on 11. iii. 55, 

emendation "impage" is beautiful: below. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



sen.] THAT ENDS WELL 53 

SCENE II. — RousiUon. A Room in the Countesses 
Palace. 

Enter CouNTESS and Clown. 

Count. Come on, sir; I shall now put you to the 

height of your breeding. 
Clo. I will show myself highly fed and lowly taught. 

I know my business is but to the court 
Count. To the court ! why, what place make you 5 

special, when you put off that with such contempt? 

« But to the court ! " 
Clo. Truly, madam, if God have lent a man any 

manners, he may easily put it off at court : he 

that cannot make a leg, put ofT's cap, kiss his 10 

hand, and say nothing, has neither leg, hands, 

lip, nor cap; and indeed such a fellow, to say 

precisely, were not for the court. But for me, I 

have an answer will serve all men. 
Count. Marry, that 's a bountiful answer that fits all 1 5 

questions. 
Clo. It is like a barber's chair that fits all buttocks ; 

the pin-buttock, the quatch-buttock, the brawn 

buttock, or any buttock. 

6, 7. contempt? . . . court t] Pope, contempt^ . . . c^urif Ff. 13. court. 
But] Rowe, court, but Ff. 

10, II. cannot . . . say nothingl Steevens quotes from More Fooles Yet 

cannot say anything. by R. S. — 1610, 4to : " Moreover 

10. make a Ug\ a common phrase ; sattm sutes he doth compare Unto the 

cf. Ben Jonson's Cynthids Revels^ serv^e of a barber's chayre ; As fit for 

" Hath travelled to make legs and seen every Jacke and journeyman As for a 

the cringe Of several courts" (W, J. C). knight or worthy gentleman." 

17. like a barber^ s chair] proverbisd il. qucUch\ £ait and squat (probablv). 

(see Ray's Proverbs. '^MxXoxizAnatomv I know of no other instance of this 

of Melancholy, ed. 1632, p. 666). word. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



54 ALL'S WELL [Acrn. 

Count. Will your answer serve fit to all questions ? 20 

Clo. As fit as ten groats is for the hand of an at- 
torney, as your French crown for your taffeta 
punk, as Tib's rush for Tom's forefinger, as a 
pancake for Shrove-Tuesday, a morris for May- 
day, as the nail to his hole, the cuckold to his 25 
horn, as a scolding quean to a wrangling knave, 
as the nun's lip to the friar's mouth ; nay, as the 
pudding to his skin. 

Count. Have you, I say, an answer of such fitness for 

all questions ? 30 

Clo. From below your duke to beneath your constable, 
it will fit any question. 

Count. It must be an answer of most monstrous 
dze that must fit all demands. 

Clo. But a trifle neither, in good faith, if the learned 35 
should speak truth of it Here it is, and all that 
belongs to 't : ask me if I am a courtier ; it shall 
do you no harm to learn. 

Count. To be young again, if we could. I will be 

aa serve Jit to] tmi, fit Cf. "How for Tib's finger." But it b of small 

fit his garments serve me!" (C^m^^/in^, importance. "Rush" is probably a 

IV. i. 2). reference to the old custom (or abuse) 

ai. ten groats] a piece of money of putting a rush ring on the finger 

worth 3s. 4a. — the attorney's fee. of a woman about to marry de 

22. French crown] there is probably facto but not de Jure. (See Brand's 

a reference to ** Morbus Gallicus " — the Popular Antiquities^ Bohn's ed. 2, 

joke was a favourite one (see Mid" 107.) 

summer Nigh fs Dream t i. it 99). 24. morris] "a mayday frolic, with 

22, 2j. taffeta punk] strumpet dancing and a hobby-horse perform- 
dressed m taneta. French crown = ance : originally called morisco, and 
her price. There is an old proverb, said to be derived from the Moors 
"All that the Clarke toyles for his through Spain, where it is still popular 
Punke devours." under the name of fandango^ (Dr. 

23. Til^s . . . forejinger] Sir J. Herford). Cf. the game of Nine men's 
Hawkins says that ^' Tom is the man morris {Midsummer Nights Dream, 11. 
and Tib the woman ; therefore, more i. 98). 

properly, we might read — Tom's rush 39. young again, if we could] "The 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



sc.li.] THAT ENDS WELL 55 

a fool in question, hoping to be the wiser by 40 
your answer. I pray you, sir, are you a courtier? 

Clo. O Lord, sir! there's a simple putting off. 
More, more, a hundred of them. 

Count Sir, I am a poor friend of yours, that loves you. 

Clo. O Lord, sir! Thick, t hick, spare not me. 45 

Count I think, sir, you can eat none of this homely 
meat 

Clo, O Lord, sir ! Nay, put me to 't, I warrant you. 

Count You were lately whipped, sir, as I think. 

Clo. O Lord, sir! Spare not me. 50 

Count Do you cry, " O Lord, sir ! " at your whipping, 
and "spare not me"? Indeed your "O Lord, 
sir!" is very sequent to your whipping: you 
would answer very well to a whipping, if you 
were but bound to't 55 

Clo. I ne'er had worse luck in my life in my "O 
Lord, sir ! " I see things may serve long, but 
not serve ever. 

Count I play the noble housewife with the time. 

To entertain 't so merrily with a fool. 60 

Clo, O Lord, sir ! why, there 't serves well again. 

Count An end, sir : to your business. Give Helen this, 

41. Ipray\ F3; La. I pray . . . F I, 2 ; Lady. I pray . . , Y 4r 59. 
60.] Prose in Ff; verse by Knight 60. entertain' f\ Cambridge Edd. (S. 
Walker conj.)> entertain it Ff. 62. An end, sir: to\ Rowe (ed. 2) ; And end 
sir toF l,Z; And end; sir to F 3, 4. 

ladT censures her own levity in trifling then in vogue at court" It was 

with her jester, as a ridiculous attempt ridiculed by oUier writers, 
to return back to youth" (Johnson). 45, tk ieA] quick. ^ Cf. Cymieline, 

"To be "is dependent on the clown's III. ii. 58, "isay and speak thick." 

" to learn " (Cowden Clarke). Troilus and Cressida, ill. ii. 38, " my 

42. O Lord, sir'\ Warburton calls heart beats thicker than a feverish 
this ''that foolish expletive of speech pulse." 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



56 



ALL'S WELL 



[acth. 



And urge her to a present answer back : 

Commend me to my kinsmen and my son. 

This is not much. 6$. 

Clo. Not much commendation to them. 

CounU Not much employment for you: you under- 
stand me? 

Clo. Most fruitfully : I am there before my legs. 

CounU Haste you again. \Exeunt severally. 70 



SCENE III. — Paris. A Room in the King's Palace. 



Enter Bertram, Lafeu, and Parolles. 

Laf. They say miracles are past; and we have our 
philosophical persons, to make modern and 
familiar, things supernatural and causeless. 
Hence is it that we make trifles of terrors, ensconc- 
ing ourselves into seeming knowledge, when we 
should submit ourselves to an unknown fear. 

Par. Why, 'tis the rarest argument of wonder that 
hath shot out in our latter times. 

(^. tAem] them? Theobald conj. 68. nu^'\ Capell, tne. Ft 



66. Not . . . thetn\ may be a ques- 
tion as Theobald conjectured. But it is 
just as well as it is. 

Seme iih 

2, 3. modem andfamiliar] See Act v. 
iii. 216, below, **with her modem 
grace." Also As You Like It, ii. vii. 
156, * * Full of wise saws and modem in- 
stances." * * Modem " occurs frequently 
(ten times) in Shakespeare, and in this 
case means "common, everyday." 

3. causeless] "having no antecedent 
cause, fortuitous {New Eng. Diet,), 

4, 5. ensconcing oursehes into} an in- 



stance of the use of a verb of rest with 
into. Literally "retire into a sconce 
or fortification." It is thus used by 
Rowley in^ Afatek at Midnight, * * Look 
an he hath not esconced himself "(Dods. 
Old Plays, Hazl. vol. xiii. p. 47). W. 
J. C. Cf. Sonnets, xlix., " Against that 
time do I insconce me here Within the 
knowledge of mine own desert." 

6. an unhnottm/ear] one of Shake- 
speare's beautiful metonymies. 

7. argument] subject. Cf. "The 
argument of your praise" {King Lear, I. 
i. 218) ; see also Much Ado^ 11. iii. li, 
and below, in. v. 60. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



SC. III.] 



THAT ENDS WELL 



57 



Ber. And so 'tis. 

Laf, To be relinquished of the artists, — lo 

Par. So I say, both of Galen and Paracelsus. 

Laf. Of all the learned and authentic fellows, — 

Par. Right; so I say. 

Laf. That gave him out incurable, — 

Par. Why, there 'tis ; so say I too. 1 5 

Laf. Not to be help'd, — 

Par. Right ; as 'twere a man assured of a — 

Laf. Uncertain life, and sure death. 

Par. Just, you say well : so would I have said. 

Laf. I may truly say it is a novelty to the world. 20 

Par. It is, indeed: if you will have it in showing, 

you shall read it in — what do you call 

there? 
Laf. A showing of a heavenly effect in an earthly 

actor 25 

Par. That 's it ; I would have said the very same. 

II.] The Cambridge Editors suggest giving the words **dotk . . . Paracelsus" 
to X^eu and adding another " Par. So I say.'* This reading has been adopted 
in ^e Globe and Oxford editions. 21. // is, indeed: if] it is indeede if Ff, 
22. in-^haf] Capell, in what Ff. 23. there f] Capell, there. Ff. 26. 

That's it; I . . . said the] That's it^ I . . . said, the F 1,2, 3; That's it, 
I . . . said; the CapelL 



10. artists] used only a few times by 
Shakespeare and always in the sense of 
"scholars." The umversities still use 
the word **arts" in the same way. 

11. Gcden and Paracelsus] Galen, 
A.D. 130-200 (?) Paracelsus, 1493-1 541 
— ^two names usually linked together 
and familiar to all, as representing 
medicine generally. 

12. 0M/^^^^] original ; perhaps duly 
qualified, licensed. Cf. 1540, Act 32 
Henry viii., xxv,, "With the appro- 
bacions and testimonies of fowre sundrie 
notaries authentique thereunto sub- 



scribed." 1610, Ben Jonson,^i4ri. 11. iii. , 
* * Why, h' is the most authentique dealer 
in these commodities" {New Eng. 
Diet.). The author of Was Shake- 
speare a Lawyer i sees here a refer- 
ence to the recognised members of the 
College of Physicians which first re- 
ceived a charter fi-om Edward vi. (?) 

16. helfd] cured, as above, 11. i. 
125. 

21. in showing] on paper. 

24, 25. A shffwir^ . . . actor] War- 
burton says that this must be the title 
of some pamj^let here ridiculed. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



58 ALL'S WELL [acth. 

Laf. Why, your dolphin is not lustier: 'fore me, I 
speak in respect — 

Par. Nay, 'tis strange, 'tis very strange, that is the 

brief and the tedious of it; and he's of a most 30 
facinerious spirit that will not acknowledge it to 
beth&— 

Laf. Very hand of heaven — 

Par. Ay, so I say. 

Laf. In a most weak — 35 

Par. And debile minister, great power, great tran- 
scendence : which should, indeed, give us a further 
use to be made than alone the recovery of the 
king, as to be — 

Laf. Generally thankful. 40 

Par. I would have said it: you say well. Here 
comes the king. 

EnUr King, Helena, and Attendants. 

Laf. Lustig, as the Dutchman says : I '11 like a maid 
the better, whilst I have a tooth in my head. 
Why, he's able to lead her a carranto. 45 

35-40.] There are various readings. The passage may be corrupt 43. 
Lu5tig\ LustiqtteY I, 2. 

a/. dolphin'\ "a plain fish." Qi. 43. LusHg\ A Dutch word used by 

Antony and Cleopatra^ v. ii. 88, << His English writers of that time. Steevens 

delights Were dolphin like." In Hoi- gives two instances from works dated 

lan<rs Pliny (a book Shakespeare read) 1618 and 1634 (respectively), namely, 

the dolphin is described as being *'the ''can walk a mile or two as lustique 

swiftest of all other living creatures, as a boor" — "whatl all lustick, all 

and not of sea-fish only . . . quicker frolicksome ! " 

than the flying fowl . . . disporteth 45. carranto] a coranto = lively 

himself and fetcheth a thousand friskes dance. See Tivtlfth Night , i. iii. 137, 

andgamboles" (W. J. C). and Henry V, in. v. 33. Johnson 

f'^l. facinerious] ParoUes' mistake calls it **cor'ant, a lofty si>rightly 

for "fiunnorous," a word meaning dance, from Frendi courcmt** (it used 

wicked. to be spelled ** couranto "). 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



SC. III.] 



THAT ENDS WELL 



59 



Par, Mor du vinager ! Is not this Helen ? 

Laf. Tore God, I think so. 

King. Go, call before me all the lords in court 
Sit, my preserver, by thy patient's side : 
And with this healthful hand, whose banish'd sense 
Thou hast repeal'd, a second time receive 
The confirmation of my promised gift, 
Which but attends thy naming. 



SO 



Enter several Lords. 

Fair maid, send forth thine eye : this youthful parcel 
Of noble bachelors stand at my bestowing, 5 5 

O'er whom both sovereign power and father's voice 
I have to use : thy frank elect ion make ; 
Thou hast power to choose, and they none to forsake. 
Hel. To each of you one fair and virtuous mistress 

Fall, when Love please ! marry, to each, but one. 60 



46. Mort du vinagir\ Ff, Mori du vinaigre Usu. Rdg 
G>llier. 59, 6a mistress Fall,] Rowe, Mistris; Falll 



Mort du vainqueur 



46. Mor du vinagerl a meaningless 
oath. Probably Parolles intended to 
swear in Frendi. The result is on- 
satis£Eu:tory in evary way. 

47. *Fore God] Cf. 1435, Torr. 
Portugal, 745. "Fore Sen Tame I 
What ys the gyantes name." Tlie ex- 
pression ''foregad" is a common one 
{New Eng, Diet,). 

50. healthful]\iesXihy, 

51. repeafd] called back, restored 
from banishment Cf. ''the banished 
Bolingbroke repeals himself" (Richard 
II, II. ii. 49). 

54. parcii] party. Cf. '* This parcel 
of wooers" (Merchant of Venice^ i. iL 

"9). 

55. at my bestowing] The feudal lord 
might tender a husband to his female 
ward in her minority, and if she re- 
jected the proposal she forfeited the 



sum which the guardian could have 
obtained from sudi an alliance. This 
was afterwards extended to male wards 
(Students Hume, 1870, p. 132). 

57. fran k election] a legal phras e, 
which, accorciing to Kushton, occurs in 
3 Edward i. (Westminster the First), 
cap. V. 

58. forsake] refuse, deny (German, 
versagen). An anon3rmous writer in 
Notes and Queries (5th S. viii. 182, 
X. 145) quotes B. Rfich], in Greene's 
Newes both from Heaven and Hell 
(1593)) who introduces a bricklayer 
"who forsooke to goe into heauen 
because his wife was there." 

60. marry . . . one] One of the 
many delightfril touches which make 
Helena so charming a character. She 
means that there is only one Lord to 
whom she cannot ¥risb a hxi and 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



60 



ALL'S WELL 



[acth. 



Laf, I 'd give bay Curtal and his furniture, 

My mouth no more were broken than these boys', 
And writ as little beard. 

King. Peruse them well : 

Not one of those but had a noble father. 

Hel. Gentlemen, 65 

Heaven hath through me restor'd the king to health. 

AU. We understand it, and thank heaven for you. 

HeL I am a simple maid ; and therein wealthiest 
That I protest I simply am a maid. 
Please it your majesty, I have done already : 70 

The blushes in my cheeks thus whisper me, 
" We blush that thou should'st choose ; but, be refus'd. 
Let the white death sit on thy cheek for ever ; 
We '11 ne'er come there again." 

King. Make choice ; and, see, 

Who shuns thy love, shuns all his love in me. 75 

Hd. Now, Dian, from thy altar do I fly. 

And to imperial Love, that god most high. 

Do my sighs stream. Sirs, will you hear my suit ? 

65, 66.] Capell's arrangement ; prose in Ff. 65.] [She addresses her to a 
Lord.] F£ 72. choose; but^ berrfused] Rann ; choose^ but be refused F i, 2, 3. 

77. imperial Love] imperiall loue F I ; imperial Jove F 2 ; impartial Jove F 3, 4. 

78. Sirs] Thiselton conj., Sir Ff. 

virtuous mistress, because that one is to 
have her to wife. 

61. Curtal] 1530, Palsgr, 68, 
Covrtavltf a courtaU, a horse. Ibid, 
506-1. "I wyll cutte of my horse 
tayle and make n3rm a courtault " {New 
Eng. Diet,), 

61. furniture] trappings. Cf. " The 
horse's furniture must be of very 
sensible colours " (Dryden). 

62. broken] a broken mouth is one 
which has lost part of its teeth 
(Johnson). 

63. writ as little beard] Cf. "as if 



he had writ man since his &ther was a 
bachelor " {£ Henry IV, I. U. 30). 

72. be refund] In the Ff the semi- 
colon is put after "refused": the 
punctuation here given has been 
adopted by most editors, as it makes 
more sense. " But if you are refused, 
let your cheeks be for everpale, for we 
will never come again." The personi- 
fication of blushes is as beautiful as it is 
scarce. 

78. Sirs] The Ff read "Sir," as if 
Helena addressed herself only to one 
Lord. The context supports Thisel- 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



scm.] THAT ENDS WELL 61 

First Lord. And grant it 

HeL Thanks, sir ; all the rest is mute. 

Laf. I had rather be in this choice than throw 80 
ames-ace for my life. 

HeL The honour, sir, that flames in your fair eyes, 
Before I speak, too threateningly replies : 
Love make your fortunes twenty times above 
Her that so wishes, and her humble love ! 85 

Second Lord, No better, if you please. 

HeL My wish receive, 

Which great Jove grant! and so I take my 
leave. 

Laf. Do all they deny her ? An they were sons of 
mine I 'd have them whipped, or I would send 
them to the Turk to make eunuchs of. 90 

HeL Be not afraid that I your hand should take ; 
I '11 never do you wrong for your own sake : 
Blessing upon your vows ! and in your bed 
Find fairer fortune, if you ever wed ! 

Laf. These boys are boys of ice, they'll none have 95 
her : sure, they are bastards to the English ; the 
French ne'er got 'em. 

80, 81.] Prose in Pope. In the Ff, two verses ending tkraiv . . . life. 
81. ames-ace} ¥ i\ A aeaus-ace F 2, 3, 4. 87. Jove'] F 3, 4 ; love F i, 2. 
88. An] Ca^W, And ¥i. 

ton's conjecture, that ''the comma of dice) is used in modem English, 

after * Sir ' may have been * s* in the Lowell {Shakespeare Once More, 

MS." Essays on the English Poets y Walter 

79. the rest is mute] the others are Scott ed.) writes: "... risk the pro- 
all silent. sperity of a verse upon a lucky throw of 

80. I had rather . . .] This passage words, which may come up the sixes of 
as usually interpreted seems rather hardy metaphor or the ambsace of 
foolish. I suspect that Lafeu means he conceit." 

would very much like to be in this 83. Before I speak] Helen, passing 
choice — "for my life!" may be an the second lord, pays him thiscompU- 
exclamation. " Ames-ace " (two sixes ment to excuse her refusal. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



62 ALL'S WELL [actii. 

Hd. You are too young, too happy, and too good, 

To make yourself a son out of my blood. 
Fourth Lord. Fair one, I think not so. lOO 

Laf. There's one grape yet; I am sure thy father 

drank wine. But if thou be'st not an ass, I am 

a youth of fourteen : I have known thee already. 
Hel. [To Bertram,] I dare not say I take you ; but I give 

Me and my service, ever whilst I live, 105 

Into your guiding power. This is the man. 
King. Why, then, young Bertram, take her ; she 's thy wife. 
Ber. My wife, my liege I I shall beseech your highness. 

In such a business give me leave to use 

The help of mine own eyes. 
King. Know'st thou not, Bertram, no 

What she has done for me ? 
BeK Yes, my good lord ; 

But never hope to know why I should marry her. 
King. Thou know'st she has rais'd me from my sickly bed. 
Ber. But follows it, my lord, to bring me down 

Must answer for your raising ? I know her well : 1 1 5 

She had her breeding at my father's charge. 

A poor physician's daughter my wife I Disdain 

Rather corrupt me ever 1 
King. Tis only title thou disdain'st in her, the which 

loi, 102]. Theobald (Warburton) arrange as follows : " Laf. Th^re *s one grape 
yet, — Par. I am surt thy father drank wine, Laf. But if , . ." 104.] [To 
Bertram.] Rowe. 107. Why , , , «^] verse Rowe ; prose Ff^ 110-113. 
Ktumfst thou . . . bed\ verse Pope ; prose F£ 

98. You art too young . . . ] This 117, 118. Disdain Rather corrupt 

speech is, in Ff, attributed to Lafeu. me ever'\ disgrace make me ever despic- 

lOi, 102. thy father drank wine"] able in future, 

therefore thou shouldest have fire with- 119. on/y title] only lack of title, 

in thy skin (Delius). Cf. *' I almost die for food" {As You 

103. known thee already^ Am sure of Like It^ 11. vii. 104). 
it, from what I have seen of you. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



sc. in.] 



THAT ENDS WELL 



63 



I can build up. Strange is it that our bloods, 120 

Of colour, weight, and heat, pour'd all together. 

Would quite confound distinction, yet stands off 

In differences so mighty. If she be 

All that is virtuous, save what thou dislik'st, 

A poor physician's daughter, thou dislik'st 125 

Of virtue for the name ; but do not so : 

From lowest place when virtuous things proceed. 

The place is dignified by the doer's deed : 

Where great additions swell 's, and virtue none. 

It is a dropsied honour. Good alone 1 30 

Is good without a name ? Vileness is so : 

The property by what it is should go. 

Not by the title. She is young, wise, fair ; 

In these to nature she 's immediate heir. 

And these breed honour : that is honour's scorn 135 

Which challenges itself as honour's born. 

And is not like the sire : honours thrive 

127. place whm\ Theobald (Thirlby conj.),//a^^y whence F{. 129. additions 
STve/rs} F l ; addition swell* s F 2 ; addition swells F 3 4; additions swells 
Malone. 130, 131. Good alone Is good without a name f Vileness is so']Y I, 
2, 3. Most editors follow F 4, which drops the note of interrogation after name. 
137. honours thrive] F I ; honours best thrive F 2, 3, 4. 

quoted by W. J. Craig in his " Little 
Quarto Shakespeare"). 

129. swell's] probably for "swell 
us/' as Boswell explains. 

130, 131. Good alone . • . namtf] 
Is only goodness good when it has no«^ 
title ? No, for vileness is vile when it j 
has no title. " Let 's write good an^ j 
on the devil's horn, 'Tis not the devil's 
crest" (Steevens). 

136. challenges itself\ makes a claim 
for Itself. 

137. honours thrive) F 2, 3, 4 read 
* ' honours best thrive." But " sire " is 
a dissyllable (Abbott's Grammar^ 
480). 



120. bloods\ plural form with singular 
meaning. 

121. Of colour . . . heat] Either, as 
Malone understands, " of one and same 
colour (etc.)," or else "as regards 
colour (etc.)." The latter is the 
meaning given by Abbott. 

124. what thou distill st] This seems 
to refer to "a poor physician's 
daughter." 

125, 126. dislik'st Of] Cf. "If you 
like of me" {Much Ado^ v. iv. 59). 

129. additions] "In our common 
lat. kw 'addition' si^ifieth any title 
given to a man besides his name" 
(Bttllokar, An English Expositor, 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



64 



ALL'S WELL 



[act II. 



When rather from our acts we them derive 

Than our foregoers : the mere words a slave, 

Debosh'd on every tomb, on eveiy grave 140 

A lying trophy, and as oft is dumb 

Where dust and damn'd oblivion is the tomb 

Of honoured bones indeed. What should be said ? 

If thou canst like this creature as a maid, 

I can create the rest: virtue and she 145 

Is her own dower ; honour and wealth from me. 

Ber. I cannot love her, nor will strive to do 't. 

King. Thou wrongest thyself if thou should'st strive to 
choose. 

Hel. That you are well restored, my lord, I 'm glad : 

Let the rest go. 150 

King My honour 's at the stake, which to defeat 

I must produce my power. Here, take her hand. 
Proud scomfijl boy, unworthy this good gift. 
That dost in vile misprision shackle up 



139. words] F I ; wcrd^s F 2j 
tomb Of . , . indeed] Theobald (' 
151. defeat] defend ThitohaXA, 



4. 140. griwe] grave: Ff. 142, 143. 
" Iby conj.), Tomde, Of . , , indeed Ff. 



138.] "The pith o* sense and pride 
o' worth Are higher ranks than a' 
that." 

139. words] same construction as 
in Coriolanus^ IV. v. 242, "as warres 
may be said to be ravisher,** 

140. DeboslCd] vitiated and worth- 
less; now spelled debauched. 

143. honoured bones] bones worthy 
of bong honoured. 

145. virtue and she] Perhaps we 
should read "virtue — and she is her 
own dower "; meaning "as Detr as 
virtue is concerned she has nothing to 
receive in addition" (conj. by H. T., 
author of Was Shakespeare a Lawyer f), 

148. strive to choose] Bertram being 



the king's ward has no right to 
choose. 

151. which to defeat] "which "here 
refers to the loss of his honour, which 
the king implies by saying that it is at 
the stake. Malone quotes the parallel 
in Othetio, "... She dying gave it me, 
And bid me, when my fete would have 
me wive, To give it her," i,e. to my 
wife, though not before mentioned 
but by implication. Theobald prefers 
to change "defeat," writing instead 
"defend." 

152. produce] unsheath as a sword 
drawn from its scabbard. 

154. misprision] "Misprision is in- 
cluded in every treason or felony, and 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



sc. 



III.] 



THAT ENDS WELL 



65 



My love and her desert ; that canst not dream, 155 
We, poising us in her defective scale, 
Shall weigh thee to the beam ; that wilt not know. 
It is in us to plant thine honour where 
We please to have it grow. Check thy contempt : 
Obey our will, which travails in thy good : 160 

Believe not thy disdain, but presently 
Do thine own fortunes that obedient right 
Which both thy duty owes and our power claims ; 
Or I will throw thee from my care for ever 
Into the staggers and the careless lapse 165 

Of youth and ignorance ; both my revenge and hate 
Loosing upon thee, in the name of justice, 
Without all terms of pity. Speak ; thine answer. 
Ber. Pardon, my gracious lord ; for I submit 

My fancy to your eyes. When I consider 1 70 

What great creation and what dole of honour 

165. careUssl cureless Dyce (ed. 2), S. Walker conj. 



when any one hath committed treason 
or felony the king may order that he 
shall be indicted for misprision only" 
(Wood's Institutes^ 2na ed., 406). 
"The king (here) probably uses it in a 
doable sense, signifying wrong or false 
imprisonment . . . and also signifying 
contempt, with which word it is con- 
nected with the passage below, in. 
ii. 31 " (Rushton). Cf. 1 Henry IV. 
I. lii. 27, and Twelfth Night, I. 
V. 61. 

165. staggers'] Shakespeare uses this 
word once in its literal sense of a 
disease in horses, "Spoiled with the 
staggers" {Taming of the Shrew, in. 
ii. 55). Here it is used to signify a 
giddy and useless existence. Beaumont 
and Retcher write, "Poor Gentleman, 
he's troubled with the staggers." 

165. careless] Dyce has a strong case 



for the emendation "cureless^" quoting 
W. W. Williams {The Parthenon, Nov. 
I, 1862): "I have alwajrs considered 
'cureless' to be the author's word. 
I. Because ' care ' in the one line, and 
' careless ' in the other, where no verbal 
resemblance can be intended, presents 
an anti-Shakespearian cacophony. 2. 
We have countless misprints of the 
same kind : as in Troilus and Cressida, 
where the Q gives us * destruction * and 
the F 'distraction.* 3. Lapse=fell; 
and the king is unmistakably warning 
Bertram that, if he does not obey him, 
he will let him go his own hea(istrong 
way to irreparable ruin. As, 'Repair 
thy wit, good youth, or it will fall To 
cureless ruin,*^ Merchant of Venice, 
IV. i. 141." 

171. dole of honour] share of honoui , 
See Henry V. IV. iii, 22. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



66 



ALL'S WELL 



[Acrm 



Flies where you bid it, I find that she, which 

late 
Was in my nobler thoughts most base, is now 
The praised of the king ; who, so ennobled, 
Is as 'twere born so. 

King. Take her by the hand, 175 

And tell her she is thine : to whom I promise 
A counterpoise ; if not to thy estate, 
A balance more replete. 

Ber. I take her hand. 

King. Good fortune and the favour of the king 

Smile upon this contract ; whose ceremony 1 80 

Shall seem expedient on the now-born brief, 
And be performed to-night : the solemn feast 
Shall more attend upon the coming space. 
Expecting absent friends. As thou lov'st her. 



172. bid i/] bid Rowe. 179. king\ S. Walker conj. a corruption. 
noW'bornl now borne F i, 2 ; now bom F 3, 4 ; new-bom Warburton. 



181. 



177. if not . . . estaU] if she be not 
thine eqoal in rank, I will make the 
balance more replete. Cf. ''fortune 
now to my heart's nope ! " {Merchant of 
Venice, 11. ix. 20) ; •* to her own worth 
she shall be prized " ( Troilus and Cres- 
sida, IV. iv. 135); "a soldier even to 
Cato's wish '* {Coriolanus, I. iv. 57). 

179. kingl S. Walker conjectures 
that this word is a misprint, being a 
repetition of the same word which 
occurs a few lines above. It does seem 
curious that the king should thus speak 
of himself twice running. Perhaps it 
should be " the fevour of the Lord." 

181. seem . . . brief] "seem" here 
means figure or be notified as expedient 
... be found to be expedient " Now- 
born " means either just written or now 
borne away ; it is difficult to say which. 
Does brief mean a letter? It so, is it 
the letter despatched by the Countess 



to Helena (11. u. 66) of which the king 
mav have heard during his conversation 
with Bertram ? (Schmidt). Is it a sum- 
mary or temporary contract as in '' She 
told me in a sweet verbal brief" (which 
occurs below, v. iii. 137)? Or is it 
something that will be developed after- 
wards? *'The hand of time shidl 
draw this brief into as huge a volume." 
{King John, ii. 103). Or does it mean 
"a royal command"? There is no 
deciding, I think. 

183. Shall . . , j;^^] another obscure 
phrase. Probably means ''shall not 
take place in the immediate future, at 
all events until the expected absent 
friends arrive." This passage seems 
obscurely to prophesy that the feast 
would be postponed, and that it would 
eventually be a matter of expecting 
absent friends-^only the audience know 
whatfiiends. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



sc.ni.l THAT ENDS WELL 67 

Thy love's to me religious ; else, does err. 185 

[Exeunt, Parolles and Lafeu stay behind^ 
commenting of this wedding. 
Laf. Do you hear, monsieur ? a word with you. 
Par. Your pleasure, sir. 
Laf. Your lord and master did well to make his 

recantation. 
Par. Recantation! My lord! my master! 190 

Laf Ay ; is it not a language I speak ? 
Par. A most harsh one, and not to be understood 

without bloody succeeding. My master I 
Laf Are you companion to the Count Rousillon ? 
Par. To any count; to all counts ; to what is man. 195 
Laf To what is count's man: count's master is of 

another style. 
Par. You are too old, sir ; let it satisfy you, you are 

too old. 
Laf I must tell thee, sirrah, I write man ; to which 200 

title age cannot bring thee. 
Par. What I dare too well do, I dare not do. 
Laf I did think thee, for two ordinaries, to be a pretty 

wise fellow: thou didst make tolerable vent of 

thy travel ; it might pass : yet the scarfs and the 205 

bannerets about thee did manifoldly dissuade me 

203. ordinaries, to\ ordinaries: toY ly2\ ordinaries foF St 4* 

193. dloodv succeeding] subsequent ledge of these things" (Mabbe's tians- 

shedding of blood. lation of Guzman de Alfarcuhe, 1623, 

195. to what is man] Parolles doubt- W. G. Stone, New Sh. Soc. Trans., 

less means to imply that Lafeu is no 1880-85, p. 399). 

man. Lafeu takes Uie word in another 203. two ordinaries'] two meals, two 

sense. days. Cf. ''goes to the feast and for 

200. / write man] Cf. ** Albeit I did his ordinary pays his heart for what his 

write man, yet I was but a young lad eyes eat only" (Antony and Cleopatra^ 

. . , and a meere child in the know- 11. ii. 230). 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



68 ALL'S WELL [acth. 

from believing thee a vessel of too great a burthen. 
I have now found thee ; when I lose thee again, 
I care not; 5^t art thou good for nothing but 
taking up, and that thou'rt scarce worth. 210 

Par. Hadst thou not the privil^e of antiquity upon 
thee, — 

Laf. Do not plunge thyself too far in anger, lest thou 
hasten thy trial ; which if — Lord have mercy on 
thee for a hen ! So, my good window of lattice, 215 
fare thee well : thy casement I need not open, for 
I look through thee. Give me thy hand. 

Par. My lord, you give me most egr^ous indignity. 

Lafy Ay, with all my heart; and thou art worthy 

of it. 220 

Par. I have not, my lord, deserved it. 

Laf. Yes, good faith, every dram of it ; and I will not 
bate thee a scruple. 

Par. Well, I shall be wiser — 

Laf. E'en as soon as thou canst, for thou hast to pull 225 
at a smack o* the contrary. If ever thou be'st 
bound in thy scarf and beaten, thou shalt find 
what it is to be proud of thy bondage. I have 
a desire to hold my acquaintance with thee, or 

214. f/— ] Theobald ; 1/, F i, 2 ; w, F 3, 4. 224. wiser^} Theobald, wiser. 
Ff. 225, 226. thou hast to puU at a smack 0* the contrary] thou hast too full a 
smack Daniel conj. 

210. taking up] Johnson says that 215. lattice] ale-house window, 

"to take up is to contradict, to call 225, 226. full at , . , contrary] pull 

to account Cf. the quibble ** take this or draw at a taste of folly, as at a 

shadow up, for 'tis thy rival" {7\oo vessel: taste or considerable amount. 

Gentlemen of Verona^ IV. iv. 202); "a Schmidt asks "with a pun? meaning 

whoreson jackanapes must take me up also a small vessel, a sloop ? " Cf! 

for swearing" (CymbelinCy II. L 4). "some smack of age" (j? Henry IV. 

215. a hen] term of contempt, as in I. ii. in), 
"hen-hearted." 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



scm.] THAT ENDS WELL 69 

rather my knowledge, that I may say in the 230 
default, he is a man I know. 

Par. My lord, you do me most insupportable 
vexation. 

Laf. I would it were' hell-pains for thy sake, and my 

poor doing eternal : for doing I am past ; as I will 235 
by thee, in what motion age will give me leave. 

\ExU, 

Par. Well, thou hast a son shall take this disgrace 
off me ; scurvy, old, filthy, scurvy lord 1 Well, I 
must be patient ; there is no fettering of authority. 
I '11 beat him, by my life, if I can meet him with 240 
any convenience, an he were double and double 
a lord. I '11 have no more pity of his age than I 
would have of — I '11 beat him, an if I could but 
meet him again I 

Re-enUr Lafeu. 

Laf. Sirrah, your lord and master's married; there's 245 
news for you : you have a new mistress. 

Par. I most unfeignedly beseech your lordship to 
make some reservation of your wrongs : he is my 
good lord : whom I serve above is my master. 

Laf. Who? God? 250 

235, 236.] Probably corrupt. Hanmer considers "for doing . . . leave" 
spurious. Warburton supposes a line to be lost after "past" 250. Godf\ 
F4; (7<w?. F I, 2, 3. 

230, 231. in thedefauUI when neces- 248, 249. he is , . , fvo;/^] a strange 

sary, needful. construction : but the emendations of 

236. by theel Malone explains this as Rowe and Pope involve the omission 
a conceit. " I am past : but I will pass of " is," and seem rather bold. 

by thee . . ." 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



70 



ALL'S WELL 



[Acrn. 



Par. Ay, sir. 

Laf. The devil it is that's thy master. Why dost 
thou garter up thy arms o' this fashion? dost 
make hose of thy sleeves ? do other servants so ? 
Thou wert best set thy lower part where thy nose 255 
stands. By mine honour, if I were but two hours 
younger, I'd beat thee: methinks't thou art a 
general offence, and every man should beat thee : 
I think thou wast created for men to breathe 
themselves upon thee. 260 

Par. This is hard and undeserved measure, my lord. 

Laf. Go to, sir ; you were beaten in Italy for picking 
a kernel out of a pomegranate ; you are a vaga- 
bond and no true traveller : you are more saucy 
with lords and honourable personages than the 265 
commission of your birth and virtue gives you 
heraldry. You are not worth another word, else 
I 'd call you knave. I leave you. \Exit. 

Par. Good, very good ; it is so then : good, very good ; ^ 
let it be concealed awhile. 270 



253. <>1 Rowe (ed. 2), a Ff. 
metkinJest Ft 



257. meihinks 'fl Dyce (S. Walker conj.)» 



254. make hose of thy sleeves] Halli- 
well cites Fairholt to show how servants 
used to gather up their long sleeves and 
tuck them into their gircues in order 
that those feshionable appendages might 
not be in the way while they were 
attending to theur duties. (Ladies who 
wear fashionable sleeves will under- 
stand. ) 

257. methihks '/] it thinks or seems 
to me. Cf. "Thinks 't thee" in Hamlet. 

259, 260. breathe themselves upon] as 
an exercise for them. 

263. pome^anate] Rushton suggests 



that this may mean " that Parolles was 
punished for sending a letter in a 
pomegranate, like Euphues's Philautus, 
who "at the last taking out of his 
dosette a fiftyre Pomegranat and pully- 
ing all the Kemelles out of it, hee 
wrapped his Letter in it" 

267. heraldry] rank or the right of 
rank. Cleveland uses the word in 
much the same sense when he says 
"she makes pearls and planets humble 
heraldry." Hanmer would read "the 
heraldry of ^our birth and virtue gives 
you commission.' 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



sera,] THAT ENDS WELL 71 

Re-enter Bertram. 

Ber. Undone, and forfeited to cares for ever ! 

Par* What 's the matter, sweet heart ? 

Ber. Although before the solemn priest I have sworn, I 
will not bed her. 

Par. What, what, sweet heart? 275 

Ber. O my Parolles, they have married me ! 

I '11 to the Tuscan wars, and never bed her. 

Par, France is a dog-hole, and it no more merits 
The tread of a man's foot. To the wars ! 

Ber. There's letters from my mother: what the im- 280 
port is, I know not yet. 

Par. Ay, that would be known. To the wars, my boy ! 
to the wars ! 
He wears his honour in a box, unseen. 
That hugs his kicky-wicky here at home, 
Spending his manly marrow in her arms, 285 

Which should sustain the bound and high curvet 
Of Mars's fiery steed. To other regions ! 
France is a stable ; we that dwell in 't jades ; 
Therefore, to the war I 

Ber. It shall be so: I '11 send her to my house, 290 

Acquaint my mother with my hate to her, 

270. Re-enter Bertram] Dyce ; Enter Count Rossillion Ff (after line 268). 
284. kUhf'Wicky^ kicku'wickie F i ; kicksie-wicksie F 2, 3. 287, 288. regions ! 
France^ Capell, regions, France Ff. 

280. letters] a letter, as in Latin. at a stake and sometimes sideling to 

286. curvet] ^'Amongst these salts and fro, wherein the horse maketh as 

and leaps the corvette, or curvet, was though he would fain run and cannot 

highly esteemed." It was ''acertaine be suffered" (D. H. Madden quoting 

continuall pransing and dansing up and Gervase Markham). 
downe still in one place, like a oeare 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



72 ALL'S WELL [acth. 

And wherefore I am fled ; write to the king 

That which I durst not speak : his present gift 

Shall fiimish me to those Italian fields. 

Where noble fellows strike. Wars is no strife 295 

To the dark house and the detested wife. 

Par. Will this capriccio hold in thee ? art sure ? 

Ber. Go with me to my chamber, and advise me. 
I '11 send her straight away : to-morrow 
I '11 to the wars, she to her single sorrow. 300 

Par. Why, these balls bound; there's noise in it 'Tis 
hard: 
A young man married is a man that 's marr'd : 
Therefore away, and leave her bravely ; go : 
The king has done you wrong : but, hush I 'tis so. 

\Exeunt. 

SCENE IV. — Another Room in the Same. 

Enter HELENA and Clown. 

Hel. My mother greets me kindly : is she well ? 
Clo. She is not well; but yet she has her health: 
she 's very merry ; but yet she is not well : but 

296. detested\ Rowe, detected Ff. 299. to-tnorrom^ even t(hmorr<no Hanmer, 
betimes to-morrow Steevens conj. 303. her bravely; go:^ her; bravely go: 
Delius. 

294. furnish me to] eguip with what as when halls hound with a noise they 

b necessaiy for. " To mrnish thee to are as th^ should be, so arc Bertram's 

BelmonV* [Merchant o/Fenice, I. i.iS2), words. Proverbial. 

296. detested] In the margin of the 302. married . . . marred] a trite 

third Folio belonging to the Oipell joke. Cf. Merry Wives , i. i. 25, 

collection an unknown hand has ** Shallow, You may by marrying, 

made the correction "detested" for Evans, It is marring indeed." Rush- 

** detected" (Cambridge Editors). ton quotes Pnttenham as giving "The 

299. to-morrow] perhaps we should maide that soone marri^ is, soone 

read " and to-morrow." There b evi- marred." Marrying marring is one 

dently something missing. of the proverbs of J. H. Sharman, p. 

301. balls bound] meaning that just 144 (W. J. C). 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



sc.iv.] THAT ENDS WELL 73 

thanks be given, she's very well, and wants 

nothing i' the world ; but yet she is not well. 5 

HeL If she be very well, what does she ail, that she 's 

not very well ? 
Clo. Truly, she's very well indeed, but for two 

things. 
HeL What two things? 10 

Clo. One, that she 's not in heaven, whither God send 

her quickly 1 the other, that she 's in earth, from 

whence God send her quickly ! 

EnUr Parolles. 

Par. Bless you, my fortunate lady ! 

HeU I hope, sir, I have your good will to have mine 1 5 

own good fortunes. 
Par, You had my prayers to lead them on ; and to 

keep them on, have them still. O I my knave, 

how does my old lady ? 
Clo. So that you had her wrinkles, and I her money, 20 

I would she did as you say. 
Par. Why, I say nothing. 
Clo. Marry, you are the wiser man ; for many a man's 

tongue shakes out his master's undoing. To say 

nothing, to do nothing, to know nothing, and to 25 

have nothing, is to be a great part of your titles 

which is within a very little of nothing. 

II. whither\ whether F I. l6. fortunes] Capell (Heath con],)^ fortune Ff 
(the following « them " requires a pliual noun, but it is by no means certain that 
Shakespeare used one). 

24. shakes ou^ a similar metaphor labour . . , even thus be he shaken 

occurs in the Bible. "Also I shook out, and emptied ** (Neh. v. 13). 
my lap, and said^ So God shake out 26. yaur ^t/e] Title js here use d 

every man from his house, and from his meaning " ^5?^ intfltisic value.*' 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



74 



ALL'S WELL 



[Acxn. 



30 



35 



40 



Par. Away ! th' art a knave. 

Clo. You should have said, sir, before a knave th' art 

a knave ; that 's, before me th 'rt a knave : this 

had been truth, sir. 
Par. (jo to, thou art a witty fool ; I have found thee. 
Clo. Did you find me in yourself, sir, or were you 

taught to find me ? 
Par. ♦ ♦ ♦ 
Clo. The search, sir, was profitable; and much fool 

may you find in you, even to the world's pleasure 

and the increase of laughter. 
Par. A good knave, i' faith, and well fed. 

Madam, my lord will go away to-night ; 

A very serious business calls on him. 

The great prerogative and rite of love. 

Which, as your due, time claims, he does acknowledge, 

But puts it off to a compelled restraint ; 

Whose want, and whose delay, is strew'd with 
sweets, 45 

Which they distil now in the curbed time, 

34.] There can be little doubt that a speech of Parolles has been lost here. 
Probably (as several editors have conjectured) something equival< 
myself." 44. /i?] F i, 2 ; ^^ F 3, 4. 46. curbed tifne\ Ff, c 
Collier conj. 

28, 29. tic ari\ old way of apostro- 
phising "thou art." 

32. found thee\ Cf. " I have found 
you, your la)rs and out-leaps, Junius" 
(Beaumont and Fletcher, Bonduca, 
I. iii.)* 

36. The search^ sir . . .] This 
ate speech 



lent to "in 
cup of time 



passage is as it were a separate speech 
m the Ff; though tne foregoing 
sentence is also given to the clown. 
Perhaps some remark is missing be- 
tween "find me" and "the search." 
Parolles may have said something in 
which the word "search" occurred. 



Collier supplies the missing speech 
from the MS. notes, namely, "-Par. 
Go to, I say : I have found thee : no 
more ; I have found thee, a witty fool." 

39. well fed^ Ritson suggests that 
this is an allusion to the old saying, 
" Better fed than taught," to which the 
clown has himself ^uded in a pre- 
ceding scene: "I will show myself 
highly fed and lowly taught." 

46. curbed time] Collier suggested 
" cup of time," a very beautiful emen- 
dation, so plausible as to be almost 
convincing. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



scv] THAT ENDS WELL 75 

To make the coming hour overflow with joy, 

And pleasure drown the brim. 
mi. What 's his will else ? 

Par. That you will take your instant leave o' the king, 

And make this haste as your own good proceeding, 50 

Strengthen'd with what apology you think 

May make it probable need. 
HeL What more commands he ? 

Par. That, having this obtained, you presently 

Attend his further pleasure. 
HeL In every thing I wait upon his will. 5 5 

Par. I shall report it so. \Exit ParoUes. 

Hel. [To Cloum.] I pray you come, sirrah. [Exeunt. 



SCENE V. — Another Room in the Same. 

Enter Lafeu and Bertram. 

Laf. But I hope your lordship thinks not him a 

soldier. 
Ber. Yes, my lord, and of very valiant approof. 
Laf. You have it from his own deliverance. 
Ber. And by other warranted testimony. 5 

Laf. Then my dial goes not true : I took this lark for 

a bunting. 

52. need\ omitted Gould conj. 

48. drown the brim\ an expression Scene V. 

often used to signify overflow, as when 3. valiant a^proof\ approved valour 

rivers "drown dieir shores." (see above, i. li. 50). 

52. probable need] a likely or plaus- 4. deliverance'] speech, as elsewhere 



ible necessity. in Shakespeare. 

53. this] refers to taking leave of 6. took this lark . . .| ** Tbe bunting 
the king, and the leave he was to give, is, in feather, size, and form, so like 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



76 ALL'S WELL [actu. 

Ber. I do assure you, my lord, he is very great in 
knowledge, and accordingly valiant 

Laf. I have then sinned against his experience and lo 
transgressed against his valour; and my state 
that way is dangerous, since I cannot yet find 
in my heart to repent Here he comes ; I pray 
you, make us friends ; I will pursue the amity. 

Enter Parolles. 

Par. \To Bertram^ These things shall be done, sir. 1 5 

Laf. Pray you, sir, who 's his tailor ? 

Par. Sir? 

Laf. O I I know him well. Ay, sir ; he, sir, 's a good 

workman, a very good tailor. 
Ber. [Aside to Parol/es.] Is she gone to the king? 20 

Par. She is. 

Ber. Will she away to-night ? 
Par. As you '11 have her. 
Ber. I have writ my letters, casketed my treasure, 

given order for our horses; and to-night, when 25 

I should take possession of the bride, end ere I 

do begin. 

15. [To Bertram] Capell, omitted Ff. 18. A^] Capell, / Ff. sir, 's] Theo- 
bald ; sirs F I ; rtV'x F 2, 3, 4. 2a [Aside to Parolles] Rowe, omitted Ff. 
24-27.] Arrangement as in Pope ; verse Ff. 26. eftd] Collier, and Ff. 

the skylark, as to require nice attention 9. accordingly] in proportion to his 

to discover the one from the other ; it very great knowledge, 

also ascends and sinks in the air nearly 16. Ais tailor} your tailor, 

in the same manner; but it has little 26,27. ^^ • • • ^<pif]Theemenda- 

or no song, which gives estimation don ''end" for "ana" was made by 

to the skykrk" (Johi^n). Barrett's someone in Lord EUesmere's copy of the 

Aluearie,isSo,^yesitBS**avisalaudae Folio. Cf. " You always end ere you 

similis. ..." Bunting and lark are begin" (Two GmtUmen of Verona, 

frequently found together in old ballads 11. iv. 31). 
and nursery rhymes. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



SC.V.] THAT ENDS WELL 77 

Laf, A good traveller is something at the latter end 
of a dinner ; but one that lies three thirds, and 
uses a known truth to pass a thousand nothings 30 
with, should be once heard and thrice beaten. 
God save you, captain. 

Ber, Is there any unkindness between my lord and 
you, monsieur? 

Par. I know not how I have deserved to run into my 35 
lord's displeasure. 

Laf, You have made shift to run into 't, boots and 
spurs and all, like him that leaped into the 
custard ; and out of it you *11 run again, rather 
than suffer question for your residence. 40 

Ber. It may be you have mistaken him, my lord. 

Laf. And shall do so ever, though I took him at's 
prayers. Fare you well, my lord; and believe 
this of me, there can be no kernel in this light 
nut; the soul of this man is his clothes. Trust 45 
him not in matter of heavy consequence ; I have 
kept of them tame, and know their natures. 
Farewell, monsieur : I have spoken better of you 
than you have or will to deserve at my hand ; 
but we must do good against evil. \Exit 50 

Par. An idle lord, I swear. 

29. one\ Rowe (ed. 2), on Ff. 31. heard\ hard F i. 49. haoe or will] 
your ^havtour wills Bulloch (conj.), have qualities or will Malone (conj.), wit 
or will Singer (conj.)) power or will Lettsom (conj.). 

28. good traveller] Lafeu harps upon Ben Jonson alludes to the practice in 

ParoUes' boasted travels. DevtVs an Ass^ i. i. 

39. custard] Theobald says that *' It 47. kept . . . tame] I have kept 

f was a foolery practised at city enter- some such creatures tame. 

' tainments, whilst the jester . . . was 51. idle] silly. Cf. "And their 

in vogue, for him to jump into a large words seemed to them as idle tales, and 

deep custard, set for tne purpose. ..." they believed them not" (S. Luke 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



78 



ALL'S WELL 



[acth. 



Ber. I think not so. 
Par. Why, do you know him ? 
Ber. Yes, I do know him well ; and common speech 
Gives him a worthy pass. Here comes my clog. 



55 



Enter Helena. 

Hel. I have, sir, as I was commanded from you, 

Spoke with the king, and have procured his leave 
For present parting ; only he desires 
Some private speech with you. 

Ber. I shall obey his will. 

You must not marvel, Helen, at my course, 60 

Which holds not colour with the time, nor does 
The ministration and required office 
On my particular : prepared I was not 
For such a business ; therefore am I found 
So much unsettled. This drives me to entreat you, 65 
That presently you take your way for home ; 
And rather muse than ask why I entreat you ; 

52. nof] S. Walker (conj.) and Singer (ed. 2), omitted Ff. 53. know him?] 
S. Walker (conj.) and Singer (ed. 2), not know him Ff. 



xxiv. II). See also iv. iii. 219, 
below. 

52, 53.] The Ff read ''Ber. I 
thmk so. Par, Why, do you not 
know him ? " That seems to hi wrong. 
The *' not" must have been put in the 
wrong phice. Delius takes **I think 
so" to be a modification of " I swear." 
If so the original might stand — ^but it 
seems rather a far-fetched meaning. 

63. On my particular"] as far as I am 
concerned. Cf. Antony and Cleopatra^ 
IV. ix. 20, ** Forgive me in thine own 
particular." Also ibid,^ I. iii. ^4, 
"My more particular is Fulvia's 
death." 



67. mu5e\ wonder. " Do not muse 
at me, my worthy friends" {Macbeth^ 
III. iv. 85). "I muse your majesty 
doth seem so cold" (King John^ iii, 
i. 317). Milton {Paradise Losty viL 
52) has "filled With admiration and 
deep muse"; also vi. 581, "while we 
suspense Collected stood within our 
thoughts amused." 

67. entreat you] This is probably 
another misprint. The expression 
" entreat you * occurs just above, and 
there can be little doubt that Shake- 
speare must have used some other 
words in the second case. S. Walker 
suggests the reading " dismiss you." 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



scv,] THAT ENDS WELL 79 

For my respects are better than they seem. 

And my appointments have in them a need 

Greater than shows itself at the first view 70 

To you that know them not This to my mother. 

[Giving a Utter. 

Twill be two days ere I shall see you, so 

I leave you to your wisdom. 
Hel. Sir, I can nothing say, but that I am 

Your most obedient servant 
Ber. Come, come, no more of that. 
HeL And ever shall 75 

With true observance seek to eke out that 

Wherein toward me my homely stars have fail'd 

To equal my great fortune. 
Ber. Let that go : 

My haste is very great Farewell : hie home. 
Hel. Pray sir, your pardon. 

Ber. Well, what would you say ? 80 

Hel. I am not worthy of the wealth I owe. 

Nor dare I say 'tis mine, and yet it is ; 

But, like a timorous thief, most fain would steal 

What law does vouch mine own. 
Ber. What would you have ? 

HeL Something, and scarce so much : nothing, indeed 85 

71. [Giving a letter] Rowe, omitted Ff. 73, 74.] Arranged according to 
S. Walker's conj. ; in Ff two lines, the first ending with "say." 78, 79.] 
Ammged as in rope ; F i, 2, 3 read two lines ending "fiurewell . . . home " ; 
F 4 is prose. 

68. respects] reasons. Cf. "This do pull you on" {King John^ ill. i. 

argues conscience in your grace, but 318). 

the respects thereof are nice and 81. owe'\ possess. (See iii. ii. 124, 

trivial" (Richard III. III. vii. 175). below; and 11. i. 9, above.) 
Also. "When such profound respects 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



80 ALL'S WELL [acthi. 

I would not tell yea what I would, my lord : — 
Faith, yes ; 

Strangers and foes do sunder, and not kiss. 
Bgr. I pray you, stay not, but in haste to horse. 
Hel. I shall not break your bidding, good my lord. 90 

Ber. Where are my other men, monsieur ? Farewell 

[Exit Helena. 
Go thou toward home ; where I will never come 
Whilst I can shake my sword or hear the 

drum. 
Away I and for our flight 
Par. Bravely, coragio ! 

[Exeunt. 



ACT III 



SCENE I. — Florence. A Room in the Dukes Palace. 

Flourish. Enter the Duke of Florence, the two 
Frenchmen^ with a troop of Soldiers. 

Duke. So that from point to point now have you heard 
The fundamental reasons of this war, 

86, 87.] Arranged acoordinfi; to Dyce's conj. ; all in one line in the Ff ; 
Hanmer leaves out "my lord. '^ 91. Where . . . FareweUyixiiiait Folios the 
speech is a continuation of Helen's preceding one ; emendation by Theobald ; 
men^ fnonsi€Hrf\ Theobald, nient Monsieur: Ff, 

91. IViere . . . men] The Ff give mouth. The question is, which of the 

this to Helena. The words may be- two is the more likely one to have 

long to Bertram as Theobald suggested, uttered them ? The majority of editors 

but as White explains, Helena also are of the opinion that it is best to give 

must have had a retinue of some sort, the sentence to Bertram, 
and the speech is not nonsense in her 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



SC. I.] 



THAT ENDS WELL 



81 



Whose great decision hath much blood let forth 
And more thirsts after. 

First Lord. Holy seems the quarrel 

Upon your Grace's part ; black and fearful 
On the opposer. 

Duke, Therefore we marvel much our cousin France 
Would in so just a business shut his bosom 
Against our borrowing prayers. 

Second Lord. Good my lord, 

The reasons of our state I cannot yield, 
But like a common and an outward man, 
That the great figure of a council frames 
By self-unable motion : therefore dare not 
Say what I think of it, since I have found 
Myself in my incertain grounds to fail 
As often as I guess'd. 

Duke. Be it his pleasure. 

First Lord. But I am sure the younger of our nature. 



ID 



15 



3. decision] action of deciding a con- 
test. Cf. 1538, Starkey, England, ii. 
ii. 192, "Thys causyth sutys to be 
long in decysyon" (New Eng, Diet), 

5. part] a dissyllable (see Abbott, 

§485). 

6. £5!>^«r] the people of Siena. The 
same construction occurs in Cortolanus, 
I. vi. 27, "More than I know the 
sound of Mardus' tongue from every 
meaner man." 

9. Good my lord] The meaning of 
the passage is: ''Since I can only 
speak of the reasons of our state as a 
common and an outward man who 
conjectures by poor guesses what the 
council is about, I dare not give an 
opinion ; for I have never been able 
to make a correct guess yet." The 
reading of the Ff may be corrupt — a 
line or two may be missing. 

6 



10. yield] communicate. 

11. But like] ^iRit^X. in the capacity 
of. 

II. outward] the opposite of the 
phrase ''inv^ard," wmch occurs in 
Measure for Measure, III. ii. 138, " I 
was an inward of his." 

13. self unable motion] by the unable ] 
(weak) motion (conception) of his own 
self (or brains). 

17. nature] Rowe changes this to 
"nation." But I think the word 
"nature" here means "birth" or 
"rank." In £ Henry IV. I. i. 61, 
"this man's brow foretells the nature 
of a tragic volume," the word " nature " 
seems to have a distinct trace of the 
original meaning of the word. Again, 
in Troilus arul Cressida, v. i. 39, 
Shakespeare speaks of "diminutives of 
nature " = by birth. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



82 



ALL'S WELL 



[act III. 



That surfeit on their ease, will day by day 
Come here for physic. 
Duke. Welcome they shall be, 

And all the honours that can fly from us 20 

Shall on them settle. You know your places well ; 
When better fall, for )rour avails they fell. 
To-morrow to the field. [Flourish. Exeunt. 



SCENE II. — Rausillon. A Room in the Countes^s 
Palace. 



Enter COUNTESS and Clown. 

Count. It hath happened all as I would have had it, 
save that he comes not along with her. 

Clo. By my troth, I take my young lord to be a very 
melancholy man. 

Count By what observance, I pray you ? 

Clo. Why, he will look upon his boot and sing ; mend 
the ruff and sing; ask questions and sing ; pick his 
teeth and sing. I know a man that had this trick 
of melancholy sold a goodly manor for a song. 



9. soldi F 3, 4 ; hold F i, 2. 

22. When better falP^ Rolfb says, 
by "better" is meant "your superiors 
in office " : adding that it speaks of 
places, but means those who fill the 
places. It may mean, "when better 
places happen to &11 vacant or fsXL to 
your share." Cf. Macbeth^ i. ii, 58, 
"The victory fell on us"; and King 
Lear, IV. v. 38, " Preferment fidls on 
him that cuts him off." 

Scene //. 
6, 7. mend the rtiff\ As he speaks 



of "the" ruff and not of "his" ruff; 
editors have conjectured that he refers 
to the ruffles of his boots. According 
to Fairholt, the &shion of wearing these 
"ruflfe" was introduced into England 
in the latter part of the sixteenth 
century. 

9. soldi The emphasis is clearly on 
" for a song." The emendation " sold " 
(first made in F 3) has been almost 
universally accepted, but "hold" 
would do if we changed "know" to 
"knew." "I knew a man hold a 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



sc. n.] 



THAT ENDS WELL 



83 



Count Let me see what he writes, and when he means lo 
to come. [Reads the letter.^ 

Clo. I have no mind to Isbel since I was at court. 
Our [codlings] and our Isbels o' the country are 
nothing like your [codlings] and your Isbels o' the 
court: the brains of my Cupid's knocked out, 15 
and I begin to love, as an old man loves money, 
with no stomach. 

Count. What have we here ? 

Clo. E'en that you have there. [Exit. 

Count / have sent you a daughter-in-law : she hath 20 
recovered the king^ and undone me, I have wedded 
her^ not bedded her ; and sworn to make the " riot " 
eternal. You shall hear I am run away : know it 
before the report come. If there be breadth enough 



II. [Reads the letter] Theobald, omitted Ff. 13. cocUin^ 
old lings F i; old ling F 2, 3, 4. 19. E^en] Theobald, In 



codlings] Kinnear conj.i 



manor for a song" is much the same 
as ''I never knew a man hold vile 
stuff so dear" (Lov^s Labour^ s Lost). 
Perhaps " hold " means " wager " : 
but I cannot remember an instance of 
die word **hold" in this sense followed 
by "for." 

9. manor] Perhaps any kind oi for- 
tune. Cf. Ifenry VIII. I. i. 83, "O 
many Have broke their backs with 
laying manors on them For this great 
journey." Also, Burton's Anatomy of 
Melancholy^ Part iii. sec. 2, Mem. ill. 
subs. 3, "*Tis an ordinary thing to 
put a thousand oaks and an hundred 
oxen into a suit of apparel, to wear 
a whole manor on his back." 

I3i 14- {codlings] Mr. Joseph Crosby 
wrote to Dr. Herfbrd : " In the county 
of Westmoreland the peasantry have 
a verv common word to coddle . . . 
If John is courting Isbel he is said 
to be coddling her . . • and Isbel is 
John's coddling." The Now Eng. 



Diet, says the word "codling" (quod- 
linge) is used figuratively applied to a 
raw youth. Ben Jonson, Alchemist (ed. 
Hart), I. L 189, '^Stib. Who is it, Dol ? 
Dol. A fine young quodling. Feu:. O, 
my lawyer's darke, I lighted on last 
night." 1640, Shirley, Captain Under^ 
wit, IV. ii. (in Bullen, Old Plays , 1883, 
"• 379)> "Take a venr fine young 
Codlu^ heire and pouna him as small 
as you can . . . then you must cozen 
him." 1663, Flagellum ; or O. Crom- 
well, " All the codlings and emlnryons 
of Triploe." The Ff read " old Ung " 
or "old lii^s" — almost certainly a 
misprint; if not it must mean "the 
fish," more particularly the lenten &re. 
" When harvest is ended take shipping 
or ride, Ling, salt fish and herring 
for Lent to provide " (Tusser). 

15. the brains of my Cupid 's knocked 
out] For the plural "brains" with a 
sinjgolar verb, cf. Hamlet, in. i. 182; 
King Lear, l, v. 8» 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



84 ALL'S WELL [Acxm, 

in the worlds I will hold a longdistance. My duty 25 
to you. Your unfortunate son^ 

Bertram. 
This is not well, rash and unbridled boy, 
To fly the favours of so good a king ; 
To pluck his indignation on thy head 30 

By the misprising of a maid too virtuous 
For the contempt of empire. 

Re-enter Clown. 

Clo. O madam ! yonder is heavy news within between 

two soldiers and my young lady. 
Count. What is the matter? 35 

Clo. Nay, there is some comfort in the news, some 

comfort ; your son will not be killed so soon as I 

thought he would. 
Count. Why should he be killed ? 
Clo. So say I, madam, if he run away, as I hear he 40 

does : the danger is in standing to 't ; that 's the 

loss of men, though it be the getting of children. 

Here they come will tell you more ; for my part, 

I only hear your son was run away. \Exit. 

Enter Helena and two Gentlemen. 

First Gent Save you, good madam. 45 

Hel. Madam, my lord is gone, for ever gone. 
Second Gent. Do not say so. 



35. matter f\ F 3, 4 ; matter. F i, 2. 

31. misprising] "misprisio (says 

)oke) Cometh of the word mes-pris, 

which properly signifieth neglect or 



31. misprising] "misprisio (says contempt . . . and so mesprise is iU 
Coke) Cometh of the word mes-pris, apprehended or known " (Rushton). 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



SC. 11.] 



THAT ENDS WELL 



85 



Count. Think upon patience. Pray you, gentlemen, 
I have felt so many quirks of joy and grief, 
That the first face of neither, on the start, 50 

Can woman me unto 't : where is my son, I pray you ? 

Second Gent. Madam, he 's gone to serve the Duke of 
Florence : 
We met him thitherward ; for thence we came. 
And after some dispatch in hand at court. 
Thither we bend again. 5 5 

Hel. Look on his letter, madam ; here 's my passport. 
When thou canst get the ring upon my finger ^ 
which never shall come off^ and show me a child 
begotten of thy body that I am father to^ then call me 
husband: but in such a " then " I write a " never ^ 60 
This is a dreadful sentence. 

Count. Brought you this letter, gentlemen ? 

First Gent. Ay, madam; and for the contents' sake 
are sorry for our pains. 

Count. I prithee, lady, have a better cheer; 65 



51. I pray you f\ omitted Theobald. 

<l. Can woman me unto^(\ Schmidt 
pomts out that as the speaker is a 
woman the words "unto't" also must 
be emphatic He takes it to mean 
subdued like a woman to her huS' 
band, Johnson explains, ''make 
pliant as a woman"; Steevens, "it 
affects me suddenly and deeply." 

53. met him thitherward] on his 
way thither. 

56. pas5porf\ anything which gives 
one free passage to anything. Cf. "A 
passport to her affection" (Sidney). 
"The Gospel has then only free ad- 
mission into the assent of die under- 
standing when it brings a passport from 
a rightly disposed will "(South). "His 



passport is his innocence and grace" 
(Dryden). "Fortime for a passport 
gave him wealth " (Harte). 

57/ g^O ^6 off. Hanmer suggests 
reading "from my finger." But 
Shakespeare probably had in mind 
die passage in Boccaccio's Giletta of 
Narbona — "for I doe purpose to dweU 
with her, when she shall have this 
ring (meanyng a ring which he wore) 
upon her finger . . ." 

65. che er'X literally face . As in Mid- 
summer JNtghis Jjream, in. ii. 96, 
"all fancy -sick she is and pale of 
cheer." To "have a better cheer" 
means to look more cheerfiil (W. 
J. C). 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



86 ALL'S WELL [act in. 

If thou engiossest all the griefis are thine, 
Thou robb'st me of a moiety : he was my son, 
But I do wash his name out of my blood, 
And thou art all my child. Towards Flcx'ence is he ? 
Second Gent. Ay, madam. 

Count. And to be a soldier ? 70 

Second Gent. Such is his noble purpose ; and, believe 't. 
The duke will lay upon him all the honour 
That good convenience claims. 
Count. Return you thither ? 

First Gent. Ay, madam, with the swiftest wing of speed. 
HeL [Reading.] Till I have no wife^ I have nothing m 75 
France. 
Tis bitter. 
Count. Find you that there ? 
Hel. Ay, madam. 

First Gent. Tis but the boldness of his hand, haply, 

which his heart was not consenting to. 80 

Count. Nothing in France, until he have no wife I 
There 's nothing here that is too good for him 
But only she ; and she deserves a lord 
That twenty such rude boys might tend upon, 
And call her hourly mistress. Who was with him ? 85 
First Gent. A servant only, and a gentleman which I 

have sometime known. 
Count. ParoUes, was it not ? 

66. engrossest . . . are] all the griefs as thine Rowe, these griefs as (Lettsom 
conj.). 70. soldier f\ Pope ; Ff have full stop or note of exclamation. 75. 
[Reading] Rowe, omitted Ff. 

66. If thou engrossest] Steevens para- of the word in " engrossing " thoughts, 
phrases the line, " If thou keepest all desires, etc 
thy sorrows to thyself." Ci. our use 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



sc. n.] 



THAT ENDS WELL 



87 



First Gent Ay, my good lady, he. 

Count, A very tainted fellow, and full of wickedness. 90 
My son corrupts a well-derived nature with his 
inducement 

First Gent. Indeed, good lady, the fellow has a deal 
of that too much, which holds him much to 
have. 95 

Count Y' are welcome, gentlemen. 

I will entreat you, when you see my son, 
To tell him that his sword can never win 
The honour that he loses : more I '11 entreat you 
Written to bear along. 

Second Gent. We serve you, madam, 100 

In that and all your worthiest affairs. 

Count. Not so, but as we change our courtesies. 
Will you draw near ? 

[Exeunt Countess and Gentlemen. 

HeL " Till I have no wife, I have nothing in France." 

Nothing in France until he has no wife 1 105 

Thou shalt have none, Rousillon, none in France ; 



94. of thai too much'] Rowe, o/that, too much Ff. 



91. wen -derived} derived, as above 

(I. i. 45). 

91, 92. with his inducement] through 
his influence. 

94. holds him much] The fellow has 
a deal of that talent for inducement, 
which is of so much use to him in his 
intercourse with Bertram. Cf. 1320, 
Sir Triste, 918, *' What halt it long to 
striue? Mi leue y take at te." 1380, 
Sir Ferumb, 1602, "What halt hit 
much her-of to telle, to drecchen ous 
of our lay?" {New Eng, Diet,), 

102. Notso] " The Gentlemen declare 
that they are servants to the Countess ; 



she replies — ^No otherwise than as she 
returns the same offices of civility " 
(Johnson). 

104.] Surely Heine misunderstood 
this passage when he said that Helena's 
words were not quite honest — that she 
was playing with words — ** no husband 
in France "meaning one in Italy (etc. ) ? 
It seems more likely that Helena did 
not know where she was going — except 
that the instinct of love was likely 
to lead her to the land where Bertram 
was — for lovers all go the same road 
whatever their nominal destination 
may be. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



88 



ALL'S WELL 



[act in. 



Then hast thou all again. Poor lord I is 't I 
That chase thee from thy country, and expose 
Those tender limbs of thine to the event 
Of the none-sparing war? and is it I no 

That drive thee from the sportive court, where thou 
Wast shot at with fair eyes, to be the mark 
Of smoky muskets ? O you leaden messengers, 
That ride upon the violent speed of fire, 
Fly with false aim ; move the [still-peering] air, 115 
That sings with piercing ; do not touch my lord ! 
Whoever shoots at him, I set him there ; 
Whoever charges on his forward breast, 
I am the caitiff that do hold him to 't ; 
. And, though I kill him not, I am the cause 1 20 

His death was so effected : better 'twere 
I met the ravin lion when he roar'd 
With sharp constraint of hunger ; better 'twere 
That all the miseries which nature owes 

115. [sHll'peeringl F I, sHl^')piercing F 2, 3, 4 ; still-pierced Nares; rcve the 
still-piecing Tyrwhitt ; mow the still-pacing "i^xisati conj. ; wound the still-piecing 
Collier ed. 2 (Col. MS.); move the still 'pearing Delius, 1876; still cU ' 



stiH-Jleeingf stUl-Jleering^ still-recking (etc ). 1 16. 
122. rcmin\ Capell ; ravine F i, 2, 3 ; raving F 4. 



closing, 
sings] F i; stings F 2, 3, 4. 



lie, Jstill-peering] This word in the 
first Foho is probably corrupt ; it has, 
however, been retained in the Cam- 
bridge and Globe editions. The editors 
take it to mean that the air is always 
ready at hand, however often pierced. 
The later Ff have still-piercmg — ^an 
obviously felse attempt to better the 
first Folio. Nares in nis Glossary pro- 
poses ** still pierced," which has the 
disadvantage of being unlike ''still 
peering." Steevens and Dyce adopt an 
anonymous conjecture, ** still-piecing," 
whicn is one of the best emendations. 
The play on the words ** piecing" and 
"piercing" is quite in keeping with 



the passage, and " still piecing " gives 
the idea of the air being pierced 
without harm. In support of the reading 
" still 'pearing " DeUus quotes Hamlet, 
IV. v. 151, ** It shall as level to your 
judgment peare " (or pierce). Of all the 
many conjectures, there is no readmg, in 
my opinion, quite as good as Delius's. 

122. the ravin lion] To ravin is to 
swallow voraciously ; cf. "The ravined 
salt sea shark" (Macbethy iv. i. 24). 
The adjective is not elsewhere used by 
Shakespeare, and is perhaps a corrup- 
tion of ** ravening." 

124. owes] possesses, as in 11. i. 9, 
and II. V. 81, above. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



SCIII-] THAT ENDS WELL 89 

Were mine at once. No, come thou home, Rousillon, 

Whence honour but of danger wins a scar, 126 

As oft it loses all : I will be gone ; 

My being here it is that holds thee hence : 

Shall I stay here to do 't ? no, no, although 

The air of paradise did fan the house, 130 

And angels offic'd all : I will be gone, 

That pitiful rumour may report my flight. 

To consolate thine ear. Come, night ; end, day ! 

For with the dark, poor thief, I '11 steal away. 

[Exit. 

SCENE III. — Florence. Before the Dukis Palace. 

Flourish. Enter DUKE, BERTRAM, Parolles, Soldiers, 
Drum and Trumpets. 

Duke, The general of our horse thou art ; and we. 

Great in our hope, lay our best love and credence 
Upon thy promising fortune. 

Ber. Sir, it is 

A charge too heavy for my strength, but yet 

We *11 strive to bear it for your worthy sake 5 

To the extreme edge of hazard. 

Duke. Then go thou forth, 

And fortune play upon thy prosperous helm 

133* ccnsolaie] The only instance of ^ 

the word in Shakespeare. " Console " ^^^ "^' 

he does not use at all, and '*con- 6. extreme] accented on the first 

solation" only twice. The word con- syllable to correspond to the "utmost" 

solate is used by other writers, as in in Milton's imitation, "Ye see our 

Brown's Vu^. £rr., "What may danger on the utmost edge Of hazard." 

somewhat consolate all men that 7. play upon] Elsewhere we find 

honour virtue, we do not discover the Shakespeare s^king of victory playing 

latter scene of his misery in authors of upon the dancing banners of the French 

antiquity." (King John, ll. l 307). 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



90 ALL'S WELL [Acrm. 

As thy auspicious mistress 1 
Ber. This very day, 

Great Mars, I put myself into thy file : 
Make me but like my thoughts, and I shall 
prove ID 

A lover of thy drum, hater of k)ve. [Exeunt 



SCENE IV. — RousUlon. A Room in the Countess's 
Palace. 

Enter COUNTESS and Steward. 

Count. Alas ! and would you take the letter of her ? 

Might you not know she would do as she has 

done, 
By sending me a letter ? Read it again. 
Stew. [Reads.] / am 5. Jaque^ pilgrim^ thither gone : 

Ambitious love hath so in m^ offended^ 5 

That bare-foot plod I the cold ground upon 

With sainted vow my faults to have amended. 
Write^ write, that from the bloody course of war. 

My dearest master, your dear son, may hie : 
Bless him at home in peace, whilst I from far lo 
His name with zealous fervour sanctify : 



^^s 



3. let/erf] Pope, Letter Ft 4. [^eads] Collier, omitted Ff. 10. peace, 
whilst] F 3, 4; peace. Whilst F i, 2. 

4. S. Jaqnes' pilgrim] Commentators been in Italy, because Helena passed 
have tried to give the shrine some local through Florence on her w&j to it 
position. Johnson speaks of S. Jaques 11. His name . . . sanctify] C£ this 
de Compostella in Spain, and Reed of line with ''But now he's gone, and 
Orlean&^ But Delius tlunks it clear my idolatrous iaxiCY, Must sanctify his 
that the shrine of S. Jaques must have relics " (i. i. 100, above). 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



sciv.] THAT ENDS WELL 91 

His taken labours bid him nu forgive; 

/, his despiteful Juno^ sent him forth 
From courtly friends^ with camping foes to live. 

Where death and danger dogs the heels of worth : 
He is too good and fair for Death and me ; 1 6 

Whom I myself embrace, to set him free. 

Count. Ah ! what sharp stings are in her mildest words ; 
Rinaldo, you did never lack advice so much, 
As letting her pass so : had I spoke with her, 20 

I could have well diverted her intents, 
Which thus she hath prevented. 

Stew. Pardon me, madam : 

If I had given you this at over-night, 
She might have been o'erta'en ; and yet she writes, 
Pursuit would be but vain. 

Count. What angel shall 25 

Bless this unworthy husband ? he cannot thrive, 
Unless her prayers, whom heaven delights to hear 
And loves to grant, reprieve him from the wrath 
Of greatest justice. Write, write, Rinaldo, 
To this unworthy husband of his wife ; 30 

15. dogs] dog Rowe. i8. Count.] Capell, omitted Ft. 19. Rmaldo] 
Rynaldo F I, 3, 4 ; Rynardo F 2. 26. husband f\ F 4 ; husband F I, 2, 3. 
29. Write, write] F i, 3, 4 [pronounce IVrit^ write] ; write andtt^te F 2. 

12. His taken labours] an indirect 2"^, over'nighf]]oYaason(Dict) siays i 

reference to the labours of Hercules. " This seems to be used by Shakespeare 

15. do||s] Several editors change this as a noun (meaning night before bed- 
to " doe." But the singular verb with time), but by Addison more properly 
two subjects occurs frequently. (See as a noun (night) with a preposition 
Abbott.) (over)." Addison writes : ^*Willcon- 

19. advice] forethought or judgment, fesses that for half his life his head 

Cf. '' That 's not suddenly to l^ per- ached every morning with reading men 

formed, but with advice and silent over night" 
seaecy" (;? Henry VI, il. ii 68). 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



92 ALL'S WELL [actiii. 

Let every word weigh heavy of her worth 

That he does weigh too light : my greatest grief, 

Though little he do feel it, set down sharply. 

Dispatch the most convenient messenger : 

When haply he shall hear that she is gone, 35 

He will return ; and hope I may that she, 

Hearing so much, will speed her foot again. 

Led hither by pure love. Which of them both 

Is dearest to me, I have no skill in sense 

To make distinction. Provide this messenger. 40 

My heart is heavy and mine age is weak ; 

Grief would have tears, and sorrow bids me speak. 

[Exeunt. 

SCENE V.— Witfumtthe Walls of Florence. 

A tucket afar off. Enter old Widow of Florence, DiANA, 
ViOLENTA, and Mariana, with other Citizens. 

Wid. Nay, come ; for if they do approach the city, we 

shall lose all the sight 
Dia. They say the French count has done most 

honourable service. 
Wid. It is reported that he has taken their greatest 5 

commander, and that with his own hand he slew 

the duke's toother. [Tucket.] We have lost our 

3. Dia.] Violenta. Cambridjgfe Editors conj. Perhaps Vlolenta's part has been 
lost altogether, which may easily have happened. If not, it is difficult to find a 
place in the dialogue, in which she must necessarily have spoken. Perhaps it 
was she who said, " Come ; let *s return again, and suffice ourselves with the report 
of it," and she may then have gone away. It is to be supposed that she was not 
present at the end, for Helena does not invite her to dinner with the others, which 
she would probably have done had Violenta still bteen there. 7. [Tucket] 
Capell, omitted Ff. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



scv.] THAT ENDS WELL 93 

labour; they are gone a contrary way: hark! 
you may know by their trumpets. 

Mar. Come; let's return again, and suffice ourselves lo 
with the report of it. Well, Diana, take heed of 
this French earl: the honour of a maid is her 
name, and no legacy is so rich as honesty. 

Wid. I have told my neighbour how you have been 

solicited by a gentleman his companion. 1 5 

Mar. I know that knave; hang him! one FaroUes: 
a filthy officer he is in those suggestions for the 
young earl. Beware of them, Diana; their 
promises, enticements, oaths, tokens, and all these 
engines of lust, are not the things they go under : 20 
many a maid hath been seduced by them ; and 
the misery is, example, that so terrible shows in 
the wrack of maidenhood, cannot for all that 
dissuade succession, but that they are limed with 
the twigs that threatens them. I hope I need 25 
not to advise you further ; but I hope your own 
grace will keep you where you are, though there 
were no further danger known but the modesty 
which is so lost. 

Dia, You shall not need to fear me. 30 

Enter HELENA. 

Wid. I hope so. Look, here comes a pilgrim: I 
know she will lie at my house ; thither they send 
one another. I '11 question her. 

22. isy exampUil Rowe, is example Ff. 

20. go under] profess to be. 24. limed] birdlime to catch birds. 

24. dissuade succession] prevent 30. fear me] be anxious about me 
imitation. An unusual use of the word, or be obliged to frighten me. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



94 



ALL'S WELL 



[acthi. 



God save you, pilgrim 1 whither are you bound ? 
HeL To S. Jaques le Grand. 3 S 

Where do the palmers lodge, I do beseech you ? 
Wid. At the S. Francis here beside the port 
Hel. Is this the way ? 
Wid. Ay, marry, is 't. Hark you ! 

\A march afar off. 

They come this way. 

If you will tarry, holy pilgrim, 40 

But till the troops come by, 

I will conduct you where you shall be lodg'd ; 

The rather, for I think I know your hostess 

As ample as myself. 
Hel Is it yourself? 

Wid, If you shall please so, pilgrim. 45 

HeL I thank you, and will stay upon your leisure. 
Wid. You came, I think, from France ? 
HeL I did so. 

Wid. Here you shall see a countryman of yours 

That has done worthy service. 
HeL His name, I pray you. 



35- Af]F3,4; iiiFi,2. 

36. palmers] Reed explains : " Pil- 
grims that visited holy places ; so called 
from a staff, or bough of palm they 
were wont to carry, especially such as 
had visited the holy places at Jerusalem. 
'A pilgrim and a palmer differed 
thus: a pilgrim had some dwelling- 
place, the palmer none ; the pilgrim 
travelled to some certain place, the 
palmer to all, and not to any one in 
particular ; the pilgrim might go at his 
own charge, the palmer must profess 
wilful poverty ; the pilgrim might give 
over his pro£^on, the palmer must be 



constant, till he had the palm ; that is, 
victory over his ghostlv enemies, and 
life by death * " (Blount's Glossography^ 
z/<v^ "Pilgrim"). 

37. pori\ gate. The word port- is 
frequently used in this sense; cf. 
** Golden care that keepest the ports of 
slumber open wide" (J Henry IV, iv, 
V. 24). See also Antony and Cleopatra^ 
IV. iv. 23, and CoriolanuSy i. vii. i. 

44. ample] I know 3rour hostess as 
well as I know myself. CL "how 
ample you're beloved" (Timon of 
Athens, u u. 136). 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



scv.] THAT El^DS WELL 95 

Dia. The Count Rousillon : know you such a one? 50 

HeL But by the ear, that hears most nobly of him : 
His face I know not 

Dia. Whatsomere he is, 

He 's bravely taken here. He stole from France, 
As 'tis reported, for the king had married him 
Against his liking. Think you it is so ? 55 

Hel, Ay, surely, mere the truth : I know his lady. 

Dia. There is a gentleman that serves the count 
Reports but coarsely of her, 

HeL What 's his name ? 

Dia. Monsieur ParoUes. 

HeL O ! I believe with him. 

In argument of praise, or to the worth 60 

Of the great count himself, she is too mean 
To have her name repeated : all her deserving 
Is a reserved honesty, and that 
I have not heard examined. 

Dia. Alas ! poor lady ; 

Tis a hard bondage to become the wife 65 

Of a detesting lord. 

Wid. Ay, right ; good creature, wheresoe'er she is, 

52. Whatsomere] F i ; IVhat somere his is ¥2; Whatsomere he is F $, 4. 
56. mere the] meerfye Warburton, the mere Hanmer (S. Walker conj.)* 
58. coarsely] Johnscm, coarsely Ff, 67, Ay, right; good creature] Capell ; 

I write gcid creature F i ; I right good creature F 2, 3, 4. 

52. Whatsomere] Cf. ''all men's faces 6a argument of praise] as for deserv- 
are true, whatsomere their hands are " ing praise. . . . 

(Antony and Cleopatra^ ii. vi. 102). 63. reserved honesty] a well-guarded 

53. bravely taken] thought much of. chastity. As in CymbeHne, I. iv. 143, 
56. mere the truth] the plain truth. ''I will bring from thence that honour of 

The Ff read ''I, surely, meere the hers which you imagine so reserved.*' 

truth." I know of no other instance of 64. examin*d] questioned or dovibttd, 

" mere the," and it may be a misprint 67. Ay, . . . she is]F i here reads 

for "the mere." Warburton reads "I write good creature"; the t>ther Ff 

" meerlye " for *' meere the." " I right good creature," which seems 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



96 ALL'S WELL [Acrm. 

Her heart weighs sadly. This young maid might do 
her 

A shrewd turn if she pleas'd. 
HeL How do you mean ? 

May be the amorous count solicits her 70 

In the unlawful purpose. 
Wid. He does indeed ; 

And broked with all that can in such a suit 

Corrupt the tender honour of a maid : 

But she is arm'd for him, and keeps her guard 

In honestest defence. 
Mar. The gods forbid else ! 75 

Enter^ with drum and colours^ the whole Florentine 
army, Bertram and Parolles. 
Wid. So, now they come. 

That is Antonio, the duke's eldest son ; 

That, Escalus. 
HeL Which is the Frenchman ? 

Dia. He; 

That with the plume : 'tis a most gallant fellow ; 

I would he lov'd his wife. If he were honester 80 

75. Enter . . . Parolles] before «*Mar. The gods forbid else I'' in Ff. 

an improvement. Most editors have, accept the reading '' write," comparing 

however, adhered to the very obscure it to "About it, and write happy when 

reading " I write," taking it to be a thou hast done," in King L4ar, 

parallel to the ''I write man" (ii. iiL 69. shrev)d'\ mischievous; not quite 

200, above), or as meaning '* I declare." the same as in line 89, below, or in 

RoUe, who takes this hist to be the v. iii. 232, below. It is here used as 

best, accepts the reading only as a in Antony and Cleopatra^ iv. ix. 5, 

choice of evils, and suspects some cor- "the last day (of battle) was a shrewd 

ruption. Rowe has '*Ah! right good one to us." Cf. also the old proverb, 

creature!" and Theobald, "Ah! right; "God sendeth the shrewd cow short 

good creature!" Malone conjectures homes" (J. Hejrwood, Prov. (Sharm.), 

" I weet good creature," but seems to p. 47). 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



sc. v.] 



THAT ENDS WELL 



97 



He were much goodlier; is 't not a handsome gentleman? 
Hd* I like him well. 
Dia. 'Tis pity he is not honest Yond 's that same knave 

That leads him to these places : were I his lady, 

I would poison that vile rascal. 
Hel. Which is he? 8$ 

Dia. That jack-an-apes with scarfs. Why is he melancholy? 
HeL Perchance he *s hurt i' the battle. 
Par. Lose our drum ! well. 
Mar. He 's shrewdly vexed at something. Look, he 

has spied us. 90 

Wid. Marry, hang you ! 
Mar. And your courtesy, for a ring-carrier ! 

[Exeunt Bertram^ Parolles^ Officers and Soldiers. 
Wid. The troop is past. Come, pilgrim, I will bring you 

Where you shall host : of enjoin'd penitents 

81. gmtlemanf\ F 2, 3, 4; Gentleman. F i. 84. pUuesl Ff, passes Dyce 
(Lettsom conj.). 93f 94. bring you Where\ Mng^you^ Where F i. 



84. places'] The emendation " passes " 
was first adopted by Dyce, and may be 
supported by ** I perceive your grace, 
like power mvine hath look'd upon my 
passes " (Measure for Measure^ v, 1. 
375). The very doubtful reading of 
ffie Ff " places " is understood to mean 
common houses; which seems hardly 
probable, seeing that Diana's home had 
been visited. 

86. jack-an-apesl ** Precise origin un- 
certain . . . the word appears first as 
an opprobrious nickname of William de 
la Pole, Duke of Suffolk (murdered 
1450), whose baidge was a clog and 
chain, such as was attached to a tame 
ape . . . 'Jack Napes' is the earliest 
form, of which *Tack-a-Napes,* *Jack 
of Napes* (? Naples) * Jack -an -Ape,' 
' Jack and apes, are later perversions. 
1593, Greene, Upstart Courtier ^ H j b, 

7 



* A jollie light timberd Jacke a Napes in 
a sute of watchet Taffeta.' Cf. 1623, 
Massinger, Bondman^ 11. ill., * Here 's a 
Jane-ofapes shall serve'" (New Eng. 
Diet,), 

89. shrewdly vexed] Schmidt com- 
pares this use of the word ** shrewdly " 
to the German adverb arg. It occurs 
again below (v. iii. 232), ** You boggle 
shrewdly," and in Hamlet (i. iv. i), 
" The air bites shrdwdly." 

92. ring-carrier] a term of obloquy ; 
cf. Bandiello, Tragical Discourses 
(Tudor Classics, ed. Fenton, 1890), 
vol. i. p. 151, " the he bawd of Lon- 
don carryeth a ring in his mouth . . . 
the she bawd a basket" (W. J. €.). 

94. h osf] find a ho st. Cf. "Go, 
bear it toTKrCSHHSF where we host" 
(Comedy of Errors ^ I. ii. 9), 

94. enjoined] bound by an oath. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



98 ALL'S WELL [Acrm. 

There's four or five, to Great S. Jaques bound, 95 
Already at my house. 

Hel. I humbly thank you. 

Please it this matron and this gentle maid 
To eat with us to-night, the charge and thanking 
Shall be for me ; and, to requite you further, 
I will bestow some precepts of this virgin 100 

Worthy the note. 

Both. We '11 take your offer kindly. 

\Exeunt. 

SCENE VI. — Camp before Florence. 

Enter Bertram and the two French Lords. 

First Lord. Nay, good my lord, put him to 't : let him 
have his way. 

Second Lord. If your lordship find him not a hilding, 
hold me no more in your respect 

First Lord. On my life, my lord, a bubble. 5 

Ber. Do you think I am so far deceived in him ? 

First Lord. Believe it, my lord, in mine own direct 
knowledge, without any malice, but to speak of 
him as my kinsman, he 's a most notable coward, 
an infinite and endless liar, an hourly promise- 10 
100. en F I ; ^ F 2, 3, 4. 

Scene vi. 

6. Do . . . him ?] Pope's arrangement. In the Ff two lines, the first ending 
withy&r. 

100. ofthisvirgin\Ct ** What bestow 5. bubble'] a deceptive thing, as in 
of \^^^ (Twelfth Nightt ill. iv. 2>, Swift's phrase, "The nation then too 

late will find . . . South Sea at best a 
^^^^ ^^- mighty bubble." Cf. also "bubble 

3. hildingi a coward, — a term of reputation." 
extreme obloquy, applied also to beasts. 9. as my kinsman] as of my kinsman. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



scvi.] THAT ENDS WELL 99 

breaker, the owner of no one good quality worthy 
your lordship's entertainment 

Second Lord. It were fit you knew him ; lest, reposing 
too far in his virtue, which he hath not, he might 
at some great and trusty business in a main 15 
danger fail you. 

Ber. I would I knew in what particular action to try 
him. 

Second Lord. None better than to let him fetch off 

his drum, which you hear him so confidently 20 
undertake to do. 

First Lord. I, with a troop of Florentines, will sud- 
denly surprise him : such I will have whom I am 
sure he knows not from the enemy. We will 
bind and hoodwink him so, that he shall suppose 25 
no other but that he is carried into the leaguer 
of the adversaries, when we bring him to our own 
tents. Be but your lordship present at his ex- 
amination : if he do not, for the promise of his 
life and in the highest compulsion of base fear, 30 
offer to betray you and deliver all the intelligence 
in his power against you, and that with the 
divine forfeit of his soul upon oath, never trust 
my judgment in any thing. 

13. lesQ F 4 ; leasty F i, 2, 3, 26. leaguer] F 4!; Leager F i, 2, 3. 

12. entertainmenti Cf. below, iv. i. was therefore equivalent to the loss of 

15, "band of strangers i' the adver- the colours. 

sajry*s entertainment" Bacon's Henry 26. leaguer] Douce quotes Sir John 

F//., **He was ... an entertainer Smythe's Discourses: "They will not 

of fortune by the da)j. " vouchsafe in their speaches or writings to 

19, 20. fetch off his drum] It must be use ourancient terms belonging to matters 

remembered that the loss of drums in of warre, but doo call a campe by the 

those days was a matter of great import- Dutch name of * L^^ar ' ; nor will not 

ance, because they were decorated with affoord to say, that such a towne or such a 

the colours of the regiment. The loss fort is besieged, but that it is *belegard.'" 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



100 



ALL'S WELL 



Second Lord. O! for the love of laughter, let him 
fetch his drum : he says he has a stratagem for 't. 
When your lordship sees the bottom of his suc- 
cess in 't, and to what metal this counterfeit lump 
of ore will be melted, if you give him not John 
Drum's entertainment, your inclining cannot be 
removed. Here he comes. 



[act in, 
35 



40 



Enter Parolles, 
First Lord. [Aside to Bert.] O! for the love of 
laughter, hinder not the honour of his design: 
let him fetch off his drum in any hand. 

37. his\ Rowe, this Ff. 39. ore] oar Theobald, ours Ff, ores Collier MS. 
42. [Aside . . .] Capell, omitted Ff. 43. Aottour] kumour Theobald. 



39, 40. John Drum's entertainmenf] 
the same as Tom Drum's. Various 
passages have been collected in which 
this expression occurs. Theobald 
quotes from " an old motlw interlude " 
(printed in 1601) called Jack DrunCs 
EfUertainment ; or^ The Comedy of 
Pasquil and Catherine. In this Jack 
Drum is a servant of intrigue who is 
ever aiming at projects, and always 
foiled and ^ven the drop. Also an- 
other old piece (published in 1627) 
called ApoUo Shroving^ in which occurs : 
''Tom Drum's entertainment: a flap 
with a fox-tail. ..." Holinshed in 
his description of Ireland, speaking 
of Patrick Sarsefield (Mayor of Dublin 
in 1 55 1) and of his extravagant hospi- 
tality, subjoins that ''no guest had 
ever a cold or forbidding look : so that 
his porter durst not for both his eares 
give the simplest man that resorted to 
his house, Tom Drum his entertayn- 
ment, which is, to ha\e a man in by the 
heade, and thrust him out by both the 
shoulders." Malone quotes a passage 
from the above-mentioned motley in- 
terlude : " In faith good gentlemen, 



I think we shall be forced to give you 
right John Drum's entertainment (1.^. 
treat you very ill) ..." Reed finds in 
Taylor's Laugh and be Fat, "Mons' 
Ockome Who on his owne backe-side 
received his pay Not like the enter- 
tainm^ of Jacke Drum Who was best 
welcome when he went away." Also 
in Manners and Customs of all Nations 
(ed. Aston, 161 1, 4to, p. 280), "Some 
others on the contrarie part, give them 
John Drum's intertamm* revilinjg 
and beating them away from their 
houses." But little clew is given as to 
the origin of the phrase except in such 
phrases as "Oh, it's a most precious 
fool, make much of him. I can com- 
pare him to nothing more happly than 
a drum, for eveiyone may play upon 
him" (jonson, Every Man in his 
Humour , III. i.). 

44. in any hand] Cf. with this phrase 
* * at any hand " ( Taming of the Shrew , 
I. ii. 147, 227), and "Of all hands" 
{Levis Labours Lost, iv. iii. 219). 
The expression "in any hand" occurs 
over and over again in Holland's Pliny 
(pp. 456, 508, 553. etc). 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



scvi] THAT ENDS WELL 101 

Ber. How now, monsieur ! this drum sticks sorely in 45 
your disposition. 

Second Lord. A pox on 't ! let it go : 'tis but a drum. 

Par. " But a drum ! " Is 't " but a drum " ? A drum 
so lost! There was excellent command, — to 
charge in with our horse upon our own wings, 50 
and to rend our own soldiers ! 

Second Lord. That was not to be blamed in the 
command of the service : it was a disaster of war 
that Caesar himself could not have prevented, if 
he had been there to command. 55 

Ber. Well, we cannot greatly condemn our success: 
some dishonour we had in the loss of that drum ; 
but it is not to be recovered. 

Par. It might have been recovered. 

Ber. It might ; but it is not now. 60 

Par. It is to be recovered. But that the merit of 
service is seldom attributed to the true and exact 
performer, I would have that drum or another, or 
hicjacet. 

Ber. Why, if you have a stomach, to't, monsieur; if 65 
you think your mystery in stratagem can bring 
this instrument of honour again into his native 
quarter, be magnanimous in the enterprise and 
go on; I will grace the attempt for a worthy 

65. a stomachy toU^ monsieur ; t/} a stonmcke^ tooU Monsieur: i/F i; a 
stomacke : too V Monsieur: i/F 2; a stomach to V, Monsieur: i/F $, 4. 68. 
magnanimous] magnanimious F i. 

49. There was an excellent command^ under a separate heading, meaning pro- 

we were exceedingly well commanded fessional skill. The word may be com- 

— used sarcastically of course. pared with " craft," which is still used 

66. mystery in stratagem] Schmidt m much the same way. 
places tlus instance of the word mystery 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



102 



ALL'S WELL 



[act ni. 



exploit : if you speed well in it, the duke shall 70 
both speak of it, and extend to you what further 
becomes his greatness, even to the utmost syllable 
of your worthiness. 

Par. By the hand of a soldier, I will undertake it 

Ber. But you must not now slumber in it. 75 

Par. I '11 about it this evening : and I will presently 
pen down my dilemmas, encourage myself in my 
certainty, put myself into my mortal preparation, 
and by midnight look to hear further from me. 

Ber. May I be bold to acquaint his grace you are 80 
gone about it? 

Par. I know not what the success will be, my lord ; 
but the attempt I vow, 

Ber. I know th'art valiant; and to the possibility 

of thy soldiership, will subscribe for thee. Fare- 85 
well. 

Par. I love not many words. \Exit. 

First Lord. No more than a fish loves water. Is not 
this a strange fellow, my lord, that so confidently 
seems to undertake this business, which he knows 90 



81. Uf\ Rowe (ed. 2), it. Ff. 

77- cUUmmas\ occurs only twice in 
Shakespeare. Cf. " In perplexity and 
doubtjful dilemma" (Merry Wives, 
IV. V. 87). The word seems to be 
used in its primitive sense of "an 
argument equally conclusive by con- 
trary suppositions." He was going to 
pen them down in order to argue them 
out in his favour, "encourage himself 
in his certainty." 

78. mortal preparation\ preparation 
for the end of mortal life. Cf. "pay 
his breath to time and mortal custom " 
(Macbeth^ IV. i. 100). A schoolboy 



might idiomatically substitute "mortal 
funk." 

84. the possibility\ the capability. 
Johnson quotes from Rogers, "Ex- 
ample not only teaches us our duty, 
but convinces us of the possibility of 
our imitation." 

87. / love . . . words'] This passage 
supports the conjecture that Parolles' 
name is derived from the French 
paroles. It is, however, a trisyllable, 
it having been thus pronounced at that 
time in England. Cotgrave writes 
parolles. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



scvi.] THAT ENDS WELL 103 

is not to be done; damns himself to do, and 
dares better be damned than to do 't ? 

Second Lard. You do not know him, my lord, as we 
do : certain it is that he will steal himself into a 
man's favour, and for a week escape a great deal 95 
of discoveries ; but when you find him out, you 
have him ever after. 

Ber. Why, do you think he will make no deed at all of 
this that so seriously he does address himself imto ? 

First Lord. None in the world; but return with an 100 
invention, and clap upon you two or three prob- 
able lies. But we have almost embossed him, 
you shall see his fall to-night ; for indeed he is 
not for your lordship's respect. 

Second Lord. We'll make you some sport with the 105 
fox ere we case him. He was first smoked by 
the old lord Lafeu : when his disguise and he is 
parted, tell me what a sprat you shall find him ; 
which you shall see this very night 

First Lord. I must go look my twigs: he shall be no 
caught 

92. doUf] Theobald ; d^ V F i, 2 ; flfc V F 3, 4* 96. discoveries] discovery 
S. Walker (conj.); ou^ once Daniel (conj.)« loi, 102. probctbW] improbable 
S. Walker (conj.)) palpable Proescholdt. no, in. / . . . caught\ given to the 
former speaker by Capell. One line in Pope ; two in F^ the first ending with twigs. 

95. deal\ Not often used with a s.v. Casing, ''They say, flay a deer, 

plural. New Eng. Diet, p;ives, 1597, case a hare." 

Gerarde, Herbal^ I. xxxi. § i, 42, 106. smoked"] Ct I v. L 28, below, 
"Nothing else but a deale of flocks "They begin to smoke me." John- 
set and thrust tc^ther." son ^ves two instances from Ad<uson : 

102. etnbossea] "To emboss a deer " Will Trippet begins to be smoked " — 

is to enclose him in a wood " (Johnson). " I began to smoke that they were a 

106. ccue kirn] strip him nsJced. Cf. parcel of mummers." Also from Hudi- 

" Pompey is uncasing for the combat " oras, "He hither came to observe and 

{Lov^s Labour *s Lost^ v. ii. 707). New smoke." The meaning is obvious. 
Eng. Diet, gives, 1803, Rees. Cycl. no. /. . . /wt^] The metaphor of 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



104 ALL'S WELL [Acrra. 

Ber. Your brother he shall go along with me. 

First Lord. As 't please your lordship : I '11 leave you. 

[Exit. 

Ber. Now will I lead you to the house, and show you 
The lass I spoke of. 

Second Lord. But you say she 's honest. 115 

Ber. That *s all the fault I spoke with her but once, 
And found her wondrous cold ; but I sent to her, 
By this same coxcomb that we have i' the wind, 
Tokens and letters which she did resend ; 
And this is all I have done. She 's a fair creature ; 1 20 
Will you go see her ? 

Second Lord. With all my heart, my lord. 

[Exeunt. 

SCENE Wll.— Florence. A Room in the Widow's 
House. 

Enter Helena and Widow. 

Hel. If you misdoubt me that I am not she, 
I know not how I shall assure you further, 
But I shall lose the grounds I work upon. 

Wid. Though my estate be fall'n, I was well born. 

Nothing acquainted with these businesses ; 5 

113. Exit] Theobald, omitted Ff. 

Scene viu 
5. businesses] basenesses Anon. conj. 

limed twigs, as above, in. v. 24. « 

"Look" is used transitively, as often '^^^'^ ^^^' 

elsewhere. 3. lose the grounds] Ke\em,covL\d^vc 

118. Aave i* the wind] a proverbial no further proof of her identity, save by 

saying akin to the modem pnrase " to revealing herself to the Count himself— 

be in the wind of," the very thing she did not wish to do. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



scvii] THAT ENDS WELL 105 

And would not put my reputation now 
In any staining act. 

HeL Nor would I wish you. 

First, give me trust, the count he is my husband. 
And what to your sworn counsel I have spoken 
Is so from word to word ; and then you cannot, lO 
By the good aid that I of you shall borrow. 
Err in bestowing it. 

Wid. I should believe you ; 

For you have show'd me that which well approves 
You 're great in fortune. 

HeL Take this purse of gold, 

And let me buy your friendly help thus far, 1 5 

Which I will over-pay and pay again 
When I have found it The count he woos your 

daughter, 
Lays down his wanton siege before her beauty, 
Resolved to carry her : let her in fine consent, 
As we '11 direct her how 'tis best to bear it. 20 

Now his important blood will nought deny 
That she '11 demand : a ring the county wears, 
That downward hath succeeded in his house 
From son to son, some four or five descents 

8. count he] County Dyce (S. Walker conj.)> also line 17, below. 14. 
You *re\ K' are Ff. 19. Resolved] Collier ; Resolue F i ; Resolves F 2, 3, 4. 

9. your sworn counsel] Schmidt ex- French emportant, Shakespeare uses 
pl^s "counsel" as being "privity to it frequently in this sense: "your 
another's secret thoughts," as when im^itaxit XttXtJS^^ {Comedy of ErrofSf 
Othello says, "He was of my counsel v. i. 138) ; "if the prince be too im- 
in my whole course of wooing" (in. portant, tell him there is measure in 
iii. III). "Sworn counsel "= bound every thing "(-^«rA Ado, 11. i. 74). 
by oath to secrecy. See W. J. Craig's note on King Lear^ 

21. important bloody Johnson calls iv. iv. 26. 
this a corrupt use of die word, but it 22. county"] count, as elsewhere, 
seems to tally singularly well with the 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



106 ALL'S WELL [actih. 

Since the first father wore it : this ring he holds 25 
In most rich choice ; yet in his idle fire, 
To buy his will, it would not seem too dear, 
Howe'er repented after. 

Wid. Now I see 

The bottom of your purpose. 

Hel. You see it lawful then. It is no more, 30 

But that your daughter, ere she seems as won, 
Desires this ring ; appoints him an encounter ; 
In fine, delivers me to fill the time. 
Herself most chastely absent After this. 
To marry her, I '11 add three thousand crowns 3 5 

To what is past already. 

Wid, I have yielded. 

Instruct my daughter how she shall persever. 
That time and place with this deceit so lawful 
May prove coherent Every night he comes 
With musics of all sorts and songs composed 40 

To her unworthiness : it nothing steads us 
To chide him from our eaves, for he persists 
As if his life lay on *t 

Hel. Why then to-night 

Let us assay our plot ; which, if it speed. 
Is wicked meaning in a lawful deed, 45 

And lawful meaning in a lawful act, 

28, 29. New , . . purp05e\ Capell's arrangement ; in one line in the Ff. 
34. After this\ F 2, 3, 4 ; after F I. 41. steads\ F 4 ; steeds F i, 2, 3. 
46. lawful meaning unlawful meaning Hanmer $ a lawful acf] a wicked act 
Warburton, a lawless act Anon. conj. 

26. In most rich cAoice] in very 26. idle] See 11. v. 51, above, 

high esteem. Cf. Evelyn's Kalendar^ 40, 41. compoid To her unwortki- 

'* Carry into the shade such auriculas, ness] composed with unworthy purpose 

seedlings or plants, as are for their to her. 
choiceness reserved in pots." 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



sc. vu.] 



THAT ENDS WELL 



Where both not sin, and yet a sinful fact. 
But let 's about it. 



107 



[Exeunt. 



ACT IV 



SCENE I. — Without the Florentine Camp. 



Enter Second French Lord^ with five or six Soldiers 
in ambush. 

Second Lord. He can come no other way but by this 
hedge-comer. When you sally upon him, speak 
what terrible language you will: though you under- 
stand it not yourselves, no matter ; for we must 
notseem tounderstand him,unless some one among 
us, whom we must produce for an interpreter. 

First Sold. Good captain, let me be the interpreter. 

Second Lord. Art not acquainted with him? knows 
he not thy voice ? 

First Sold. No, sir, I warrant you. 



10 



Enter Second French Lord] Camb. Edd. ; Enter one of the Frenchmen Ff. 
See note on Act ii. Scene i. i. Sec. Lord] i Lord E. Ff. 7. captain^ 
F 3, 4 ; captaitu F i ; captaive F 2. 



47. Where . . . foci] Either corrupt 
or purposely obscure. The meaning of 
the whole passage as it stands seems to 
be that the deed is lawful and yet is 
meant to be wrong by Bertram; that 
both happen to be innocent — ^and yet 
guilty, he of wantonness, she of de- 
ception. If any change be called for 
we might read **and yet a sin full 
act" 



ActJV. Scene I, 

2. hedge-comer] In Shakespeare's 
day hedges were not frequent: the 
country was not generally enclosed 
until long after, and so a hedge sur- 
rounding a garden or field would be 
a prominent object, and one to which 
a hunted animal would escape for 
refuge. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



108 



ALL^S WELL 



[act IV. 



Second Lord. But what linsey-woolsey hast thou to 
speak to us again ? 

First Sold. E'en such as you speak to me. 

Second Lord. He must think us some band of strangers 
i' the adversary's entertainment Now he hath 
a smack of all neighbouring languages ; therefore 
we must every one be a man of his own fancy, 
not to know what we speak one to another ; so 
we seem to know, is to know straight our pur- 
pose: choughs' language, gabble enough, and 
good enough. As for you, interpreter, you must 
seem very politic. But couch, ho ! here he comes, 
to beguile two hours in a sleep, and then to return 
and swear the lies he forges. 



15 



20 



Enter Parolles. 

Par. Ten o'clock: within these three hours 'twill be 25 
time enough to go home* What shall I say I 
have done ? It must be a very plausiye inven- 
tion that carries it They begin to smoke me, 



15. adversary si Tohnson, adversaries F^ adversaries Warburton. 
choughs'} F 3, 4; choughs F i, 2. 



II. linsey*woo/sey] An unintelligible 
mixture of several languages. Johnson 
quotes Hudibras, "A lawless linsey- 
woolsey brother Half of one order, 
half another." The New Eng, Diet, 
traces this word back to the Cath. Aug. 
1483 {Old Eng, Lot, Diet,), and the 
Dial, Diet, says it is alive in Hereford 
near the Welsh border. Also in Cumber- 
land in the form of " Listy-wunsty.** 

14, 15. strangers', . . entertainment'^ 
foreign troops in the enemy's pay 
(Johnson). Cf. note on III. vi. 12, 
above. 

19. know straight^ Hanmer reads 



2a 



"shew straight," and Collier "Go 
straight to." The expression "know 
straight" seems here to mean "know 
our mind, our purpose." Malone 
would explain it, "Our seeming to 
know what we speak one to another 
is to make him to know our purpose 
immediately; to discover our design 
to him." 

20. ehoughi language} jackdaws' 
gabble. 

27. plausive} plausible. Shake- 
speare uses both words indiscriminately. 

28. smoke me] See note above, in, 
vi. 106. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



SCI] THAT ENDS WELL 109 

and disgraces have of late knocked too often at 
my door. I find my tongue is too foolhardy; 30 
but my heart hath the fear o( Mars before it and 
of his creatures, not daring the reports of my 
tongue. 

Second Lord. This is the first truth that e'er thine own 

tongue was guilty of. 35 

Par, What the devil should move me to undertake 
the recovery of this drum, being not ignorant of 
the impossibility, and knowing I had no such 
purpose ? I must give myself some hurts, and 
say I got them in exploit Yet slight ones will 40 
not carry it : they will say, " Came you off with 
so little ? " and great ones I dare not give. Where- 
fore, what 's the instance ? Tongue, I must put 
you into a butter-woman's mouth, and buy myself 
another of Bajazefs mule, if you prattle me into 45 
these perils. 

Second Lord. Is it possible he should know what he 
is, and be that he is ? 

Par. I would the cutting of my garments would serve 

the turn, or the breaking of my Spanish sword. 50 

Second Lord. We cannot afford you so. 

40. in exploit in the exploit'^, J. Craip^ (conj.). 45. Bajasefs] BaiautKs 
F I ; Ba^'azeths F 2, 3, 4 ; BcUaanCs Addis conj. ; inule\ F I, 2 ; mules F 3, 4 ; 
mute Hanmer (Warburton). 48. isi\ F 4 ; w. F I, 2, 3. 

43. what*s the instance?'] ParoUes get rid of his tongue because it wags 

asks himself, what proof can he ^s- too much, and to buy a less talkative 

sibly give? "What instance gives one. But why^ he should buy from 

Lord Warwick for his vow ? " {2 Henry Bajazet's mule is a m)rstery. Hanmer 

VI, III. ii. 159) ; ** I have received read " mute," and explained, ** I 'U 

a certain instance that Glendower is buy a tongue that never speaks." 

dead" {^2 Henry IV, iii. i. 103), etc. 51. afford you so] we cannot afford 

45. Bajazefs mule\ ParoUes is medi- it to jou so, we cannot allow you to 

tating on the possilulity of having to have it so dieap. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



110 ALL'S WELL [activ. 

Par. Or the baring of my beard, and to say it was in 

stratagem. 
Second Lord. Twould not do. 

Par. Or to drown my clothes, and say I was stripped. 5 5 
Second Lord. Hardly serve. 
Par. Though I swore I leaped from the windpw of 

the citadel — 
Second Lord. How deep ? 

Par. Thirty fathom. 60 

Second Lord. Three great oaths would scarce make 

that be believed. 
Par. I would I had any drum of the enemy's: I 

would swear I recovered it 
Second Lord, You shall hear one anon. 65 

Par. A drum now of the enemy's, — {Alarum within. 

Second Lord. Throca movousus^ cargo^ cargOy cargo. 
All. Cargo ^ cargo y cargo^ vUlianda par corbo^ cargo. 
Par. O ! ransom, ransom ! Do not hide mine eyes. 

\They seize and blindfold him. 
First Sold. Boskos thromuldo boskos. 70 

Par. I know you are the Muskos' regiment ; 

And I shall lose my life for want of language. 

If there be here German, or Dane, low Dutch, 

52. baring] paring F 4. 58. citadel—'] Theobald, citadett. Ff. 6a 
fathoni] 'Royrtf fadoim Ff. 66. enemy Sy — ] Camb. EdcL, «»«wyj/ Malone, 
enemies! Theobald, enemies, Ff. 69. C? . . . eyes] Pope's arrangement; 

two lines in Ff; They . . . him] Rowe, omitted Ff. 70. First Soldier] 
throughout these scenes described as "Interpreter" in the Ff. 71. Muskos'] 
Capefl, Muskos Ff. 

52. baring] shaving. "Shave the 53. stratagem] the carrying out 

head and tie the beard, and say it was of the stratagem. Cf. ill. vi. 66, 

the desire of the penitent to be so above. 

bared before his death" (Measure for 55. drown] C£ Tempest^ v. i. 57, 

Measure^ iv. ii. 189). "1^11 drown my book." 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



SCI.] THAT ENDS WELL 111 

Italian, or French, let him speak to me : 

I will discover that which shall undo 75 

The Florentine. 

First Sold, Boskos vauvado : I understand thee, and 
can speak thy tongue: KerelybontOy Sir, betake 
thee to thy faith, for seventeen poniards are at 
thy bosom. 80 

Par. O! 

First Sold. O f pray, pray, pray. Manka revania dulcke. 

Second Lord. Oscorbidulchos volivorco. 

First Sold. The general is content to spare thee yet ; 

And, hoodwink'd as thou art, will lead thee on 85 
To gather from thee : haply thou ma/st inform 
Something to save thy life. 

Par. O ! let me live. 

And all the secrets of our camp I '11 show. 
Their force, their purposes ; nay, I '11 speak that 
Which you will wonder at. 

First Sold. But wilt thou faithfully ? 90 

Par. If I do not, damn me. 

First Sold. Acordo linta. 

Come on ; thou art granted space. 

\Exit^ with Parolles guarded. 
A short alarum within. 

Second Lord. Go, tell the Count Rousillon, and my brother. 
We have caught the woodcock, and will keep him 

muffled 
Till we do hear from them. 

75, 76.] Arranged as in Malone ; one line in Ff. 

82. pray^ P^oy\ Used in the same 94. woodcock"] a bird supposed to 
connection as '* betake thee to thy have no brains, and often used instead 
feith." of "fool" 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



112 ALL'S WELL [activ. 

Second Sold. Captain, I wilL 95 

Second Lord. A' will betray us all unto ourselves : 

Inform on that 
Second Sold. So I will, sir. 

Second Lord. Till then 111 keep him dark and safely 
lock'd. [Exeunt 



SCENE II.— Florence. A Room in the Widov/s 
House. 

Enter Bertram and Diana. 

Ber. They told me that your name was FontibelL 

Dia. No, my good lord, Diana. 

Ber. Titled goddess ; 

And worth it, with addition ! But, fair soul. 
In your fine frame hath love no quality ? 
If the quick fire of youth light not your mind, 5 

You are no maiden, but a monument : 
When you are dead you should be such a one 
As you are now, for you are cold and stern ; 
And now you should be as your mother was 
When your sweet self was got 10 

Dia. She then was honest 

Ber. So should you be. 

97. Inform on thail inform ^em that Rowe and Dyce. 

Scene ii. 

Enter . . .] Enter Bertram and the Maide called Diana Ff. a. Titled 
goddess;] TitPd^ goddess Capell. 6. monument:'} monument F i. 

97. Inform on that} Dyce says, " It 
appjears to me that the context -^cene n. 

positively requires **em.'" Xi. ^^^»/</J»eans "would," 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



SC. II.] 



THAT ENDS WELL 



113 



Dia. 



No: 



My mother did but duty ; such, my lord, 

As you owe to your wife. 
Ber. No more o' that ! 

I prithee do not strive against my vows. 

I was compell'd to her ; but I love thee i S 

By love's own sweet constraint, and will for ever 

Do thee all rights of service. 
Dia. Ay, so you serve us 

Till we serve you ; but when you have our roses. 

You barely leave our thorns to prick ourselves, 

And mock us with our bareness. 
Ber. How have I sworn ! 20 

Dia. 'Tis not the many oaths that makes the truth. 

But the plain single vow that is vow*d true. 

What is not holy, that we swear not by. 

But take the high'st to witness: then, pray you, 
tell me, 

If I should swear by Jove's great attributes, 25 

I lov'd your dearly, would you believe my oaths, 



19. barely] baseh Rowe (ed. 2), merely Lettsom conj. 25. 
foues F I, 2 ; Goifs Globe ed. (Camb. Edd. conj.) ; lov^s Grant 
conj.). 



'cv^s] F 3, 4 ; 
te (Johnson 



14. my vows\ Mak>ne quotes 
Webster, Vittoria Corombona (1612), 
" Henceforth I '11 never lie with thee, 
My vow is fix*d"; implying that the 
present passage is to be understood in 
the same sense. 

21. etc.] This passage has been held 
to be corrupt by many editors. In 
line 25 Johnson said he could hardly 
distinguish whether the word in F i 
was Jffoe or Lave, /cve^ the more 
difficult version of the two, has been 
accepted, and I think there can be no 

8 



doubt that that is the word printed in 
the 1623 Folio. But it is possible that 
Shakespeare wrote hvei possible also 
that he wrote God^ and that, as Hall- 
well conjectured, God was erased on 
account of the law against profenity. 
The whole passage lends itself to 
emendation. Staunton prmx>sed to 
give Bertram the words, *'Then . . . 
fll?" and Johnson, "What . . . 
witness." In the Collier MS. the 
whole passage from "What is . . . 
against him " is erased. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



114 



ALL'S WELL 



[act IV. 



When I did love you ill ? This has no holding, 
To swear by him whom I protest to love, 
That I will work againsthim : therefore your oaths 
Are words and poor conditions, but unseal'd ; 30 

At least in my opinion. 

Ber. Change it, change it 

Be not so holy-cruel : love is holy ; 
And my integrity ne'er knew the crafts 
That you do charge men with. Stand no more off. 
But give thyself unto my sick desires, 35 

Who then recovers : say thou art mine, and ever 
My love as it begins shall so persever. 

Dia. [I see that men make rope's in such a scarre 

That we '11 forsake ourselves.] Give me that ring. 

Ber. I '11 lend it thee, my dear ; but have no power 40 
To give it from me. 

Di(L Will you not, my lord ? 

28. To swear . . . U/ve\ To swear (by Him) that I will work against him 
Whom I protest to love (Addis conj.); by him} to him Rann Q^ohnson conj.) ; 
whom] when Singer 5 protest] attest Johnson conj., profess Hams conj., Becket 
proposes ''and to protest I love Whom I will work against'' 29. That I will 
, , .] While that I did Herr conj., Hudson conj. omitted "him." 30. but] 
best Williams conj., yet Herr conj. 32. holy-cruel] Theobald, holy cruell Ff. 
38, 39. [Isee . . . ourselves] make ropis in such a scarre F I, 2 ; imike ropes in 
such a scarre F 3 ; make ropes in such a scar F 4. More thana score of readings 
are to be found in various editions (Cambridge ed. gives twenty-five). 



27. holding] consistency (Johnson 
and Schmidt). Cf. " Thou sayest well, 
and it holds weU too" (i Henry IV. i. 
ii. 34). 

28. h him] to him. 

32. holy-cruel] This is a strange 
expression, and possibly corrupt. Per- 
haps we should read "wholly crueL" 
The play on the words gives some sup- 
port to Uie conjecture. 

16. Who then recovers] "Who" 
re^rs either to Bertram's self (in 
which case this b another instance 



of phrase logically but not grammatically 
correct), or else to the desires, which 



of_ 

correct), 

involves two unusual constructions- 

" who " after " desires " and a singular 

verb. 

38.] No emendation has yet been 
proposed which is quite satisfactory 
and clears away all the difficulties of 
a passage which is, without doubt, 
corrupt. It is generally supposed that 
the phrase must convey some excuse 
for askin|; for the ring, for the sadden 
change of tactics. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



sen.] THAT ENDS WELL 115 

Ber. It IS an honour longing to our house, 
Bequeathed down from many ancestors, 
Which were the greatest obloquy i' the world 
In me to lose. 

Dia. Mine honour 's such a ring : 45 

My chastity 's the jewel of our house, 
Bequeathed down from many ancestors. 
Which were the greatest obloquy i' the world 
In me to lose. Thus your own proper wisdom 
Brings in the champion honour on my part 50 

Against your vain assault 

Ber Here, take my ring : 

My house, mine honour, yea, my life, be thine, 
And I '11 be bid by thee. 

Dia. When midnight comes, knock at my chamber-window : 
I '11 order take my mother shall not hear. 5 5 

Now will I charge you in the band of truth, 
When you have conquer'd my yet maiden bed, 
Remain there but an hour, nor speak to me. 
My reasons are most strong ; and you shall know them 
When back again this ring shall be deliver'd : 60 

And on your finger in the night I '11 put 
Another ring, that what in time proceeds 
May token to the future our past deeds. 
Adieu, till then ; then, fail not. You have won 
A wife of me, though there my hope be done. 65 

Ber. A heaven on earth I have won by wooing thee. 

[Exit. 
Dia. For which live long to thank both heaven and me ! 

43. longingl belonging, as often in 56. band of trutK\QX, "Thy oath and 
Shakespeare. band ** ( = bond) {Richard II. i. L 2). 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



116 



ALL^S WELL 



[activ. 



You may so in the end 

My mother told me just how he would woo, 

As if she sat in 's heart ; she says all men 70 

Have the like oaths : he had sworn to marry me 

When his wife 's dead ; therefore I '11 lie with him 

When I am buried. Since Frenchmen are so braid, 

Marry that will, I live and die a maid : 

Only in this disguise I think 't no sin 75 

To cozen him that would unjustly win. [Exit. 



SCENE III. — TAe Florentine Camp, 

Enter the two French Lords^ and some two or three Soldiers. 

First Lord. You have not given him his mother's 

letter? 
Second Lord. I have delivered it an hour since : there 



71. haoCl Ff, hai Dyce, hath Capell. 74* -0 F i, 2 ; 7*^ F 3, 4. 

Scene iii, 
2. letterf] Rowe, letter Ff. 



^l. he had] he would have. 

73. dratd] Of doubtful meaning. 
Steevens quotes Greene, Never too 
Late (1616), "Dian rose with all her 
maids Blushing thus at love his braids." 
Also Thomas Drant's translation of 
Horace's Epistles y "Professing thee 
a friend, to plaie the ribbalde at a 
brade." In the Romaunt of the Rosey 
V. 1336, "braid seems to mean forth- 
with or at a jerk, answering the French 
tantdt, Cf. "The Ancient Song of 
Lytyl Thanke" (MS. Cotton, Titus 
AndronicuSy xxvi.), "But in come 
ffrankelyn at a braid "= on a sudden. 
Boswell thinks Mr. Boaden's suggestion 
may be correct, namely, that it means 
fickle, apt to start away suddenly from 



engagements. " To braid " for to start 
is foimd in Lord Buckhurst and man^ 
old writers. Richardson makes it 
mean violent. Webster derives it from 
"to braid," knit, hence knit a net, 
draw into a net, deceive. Schmidt 
and Johnson also give deceitftil. In 
Pericles y I. i. 93, we find, "'twould 
braid yourself too near for me to tell 
it," in which case, if we allow the 
analogy, the phrase means "since 
Frenchmen are so blamed, accused." 
The New Eng, Diet, throws no new 
light on this word "of doubtful mean- 
ing and origin," which proves how 
difficult it is to obtain new illustrations 
of its use. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



sc. in.] 



THAT ENDS WELL 



117 



is something in 't that stings his nature; for on the 
reading it he changed almost into another man. 5 

First Lord. He has much worthy blame laid upon him 
for shaking off so good a wife and so sweet a lady. 

Second Lord. Especially he hath incurred the ever- 
lasting displeasure of the king, who had even tuned 
his bounty to sing happiness to him. I will tell you i o 
a thing, but you shall let it dwell darkly within you. 

First Lord. When you have spoken it, 'tis dead, and 
I am the grave of it. 

Second Lord. He hath perverted a young gentlewoman 

here in Florence, of a most chaste renown ; and this 1 5 
night he fleshes his will in the spoil of her honour : 
he hath given her his monumental ring, and thinks 
himself made in the unchaste composition. 

First Lord. Now, God delay our rebellion ! as we are 

ourselves, what things are we. 20 

19. delay] allay Hanmer ; rebellion I as] rebellion^ ax F 3, 4 ; rebellion as'F ly 2. 



5. another man] Karl Elze under- 
stands this! to mean moral change. 
More probably it means merely grow- 
ing pcde. Mr. W. J. Craig quotes, 
< ' At the reading of the letter he looked 
like a man of another world " {Jew of 
Malta, IV. iv. 67). 

6. w^r^Ay] deserved. "This super- 
ficial tale is but a pre£Eu:e of her worthy 
praise" {1 Henry VI, V. v. ii). Also, 
"Hate turns one or both to worthy 
danger and deserved death" {Richard 
II. V. i. 68). 

i6. /^j^j] satiates. Cf. "The wild 
dog shall flesh his tooth on every 
innocent" {2 Henry IV. I v. v. 133). 
Also, Jonson's Every Man in his 
Humour (11. ii.), ^^ Brainworm. I am 
fleshed now I have sped so well." 

17. f^M7ff«m^»/a/]preservin^memory. 
Cf. the use of " monument " in Pope's 
letter to Swift, "Collect the best 



monuments of our friends, their own 
images in their own writings." 

15. made . . .] a made man=a 
fortunate man. Cf. OthellOy i. ii. 51, 
"he*s made for ever." (Also Mid- 
summer Nighfs Dreamy IV. ii. 18.) 

18. comfosition] pact. Cf. "The 
twelfth 01 August, Shoonehouen was 
by composition yielded to the enemie 
( 1575). In August the Prince of Conde 
with his armie . . . tooke Ruermonde 
and Lennen by composition " {A Brief e 
Cronicle . . , of the Low Countries, 
Germanie, Italy, etc, 1598). Cf. i. i. 
209, above. 

19. delay] Hanmer would read 
" allay *' : surely the original is correct. 
"May God make us slow to rebeL" 
Dr. Hudson quotes Spenser, The Faerie 
Queene, ii. 6, 40, " The hasty heat of 
his avowd revenge delayd." And in 
his 30th Sonnet, " That my exceeding 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



118 



ALL S WELL 



[act IV. 



Second Lord. Merely our own traitors : and as in the 
common course of all treasons, we still see them 
reveal themselves, till they attain to their abhorred 
ends, so he that in this action contrives against his 
own nobility, in his proper stream o'erflows him- 25 
self. 

First Lord. Is it not meant damnable in us, to be 
trumpeters of our unlawful intents? We shall 
not then have his company to-night ? 

Second Lord. Not till after midnight, for he is 30 
dieted to his hour. 

First Lord. That approaches apace: I would gladly 
have him see his company anatomized, that he 

21. M»] is Keightley conj. 23. /i7/] ere Hanmer, when Mason conj., while 
W. J. Craig conj. 25.] Punctuation by Theobald ; nobility in . . . stream, Ff. 
27. meant damnable"] Ff; Hanmer reads ''most damnable," an emendation 
accepted by S. Walker, Dyce, and Pioescholdt. 31. dieted] tied Daniel conj. 
33. company] companion Hanmer. 



heat is not delayd by her hart-firosen 
cold." Insupportof* allay "Williams 
sa^: **It is not . . . clear why the 
Furst Lord should wish such rebellions 
to be delayed, as no advantage could 
arise from mere postponement, and the 
poet himself warns us that 'delays 
have dangerous ends.' The error 
probably originated in a very pardon- 
able nuMiearing of the first two letters. 
I read — Now God allay our rebellion. 
Cf. Henry VIIL l. i. 149, 'If with the 
sap of reason you would quench, Or 
but allay, the fire of passion . . .' If 
it be urged that delay (French, delayer) 
was originally the same as allay, I can 
only reply that, although Spenser may 
thus have used it, Shakespeare appears 
nowhere to have so employed it." 

19, 20. are ourselves] unaided by God. 

23, 24. abhorred ends] The meaning 
of the passage seems to be: "Just as 
in common course of all treasons, we 
always see them betray themselves and, 
in the long-run, come to Uieir awful 



Sunishments, so Bertram, who by this 
eed alone contrives against his own 
nobility, covers himself still more in 
shame by publishing it." This is 
borne out by the next passage, "Is it 
not meant damnable in us to be the 
trumpeters" (etc). Steevens takes 
"abhorred ends" to mean "the loath- 
some ends they aim at." Delius says 
that " till "= before. The construc- 
tion is not an easy one to translate 
exactly. 

27. Is it , , . in us] "Do we not 
willingly incur damnation by being 
trumpeters of , . . ? " Schmidt explains 
it, " Is not our drift a damnable one ? " 
With the expression "meant damnable " 
cf. our phrase "I meant good" (evil). 
31. dieted] perhaps corrupt; if not, 
it must mean "fully occupied." Daniel 
conjectures "tied to his hour," and 
quotes, " I '11 not be tied to hours nor 
'pointed times" (Taming of the Shrew, 
in. i. 19). 
33. compcuty] Farolles. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



sciii.] THAT ENDS WELL 119 

might take a measure of his own judgments, 
wherein so curiously he had set this counterfeit 35 

Second Lord, We will not meddle with him till he come, 
for his presence must be the whip of the other. 

First Lord. In the meantime, what hear you of these 
wars? 

Second Lord I hear there is an overture of peace. 40 

First Lord. Nay, I assure you, a peace concluded. 

Second Lord. Vfhsit will Count Rousillon do then? 
will he travel higher, or return again into France ? 

First Lord. I perceive by this demand, you are not 

altogether of his council. 45 

Second Lord. Let it be forbid, sir ; so should I be a 
great deal of his act. 

First Lord. Sir, his wife some two months since fled 
from his house : her pretence is a pilgrimage to 
S. Jaques le Grand; which holy undertaking 50 
with most austere sanctimony she accomplished ; 
and, there residing, the tenderness of her nature 
became as a prey to her grief; in fine, made a groan 
of her last breath, and now she sings in heaven. 

Second Lord. How is this justified ? 55 

First Lord. The stronger part of it by her own letters, 

35. curiously] F I, 2 ; seriausfy F 3, 4. 56. stronger] stranger Collier 
(ed. 2) MS. 

x^ judgments] Ff. Pope reads sense of sanctity (in C?/i4^/A? Shakespeare 

judgment, a correction whicn is sup- used it as we use it). Cf. **If vows 

ported by S. Walker. be sanctimonies ... if sanctimony be 

35. curiously] most carefully; or, the gods' delight" {Troilus and CreS' 

perhaps, in a costly manner. See I. sida^ v. iL 139). 

li. 20, above. ^l» justified] proved. Cf. **Say't 

35. sef] like a counterfeit jewel. and justify it " {Wintet^s Tale^ I. ii. 

43. A^IfA^] probably **fiirther in- 278). Also, ** I could justify you trai- 

land." See article, ii. i. 12, 13. tors" (Tempest ^ v. i. 128). 

51. jtf/MT/iV;!^^] here used in the old $6. stronger part] "main part" 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



120 ALL*S WELL [activ. 

which makes her story true, even to the point of 
her death : her death itself, which could not be 
her office to say is come, was faithfully confirmed 
by the rector of the place. 60 

Second Lord. Hath the count all this intelligence ? 

First Lord, Ay, and the particular confirmations, point 
from point, to the full arming of the verity. 

Second Lord. I am heartily sorry that he '11 be glad of 

this. 65 

First Lord. How mightily sometimes we make us 
comforts of our losses ! 

Second Lord. And how mightily some other times we 
drown our gain in tears ! The great dignity that 
his valour hath here acquired for him shall at 70 
home be encountered with a shame as ample. 

First Lord, The web of our life is of a mingled yam, 
good and ill together : our virtues would be proud, 
if our faults whipped them not ; and our crimes 
would despair, if they were not cherished by our 75 
virtues. 

Enter a Servant. 

How now ! where 's your master ? 
Serv. He met the duke in the street, sir, of whom he 
hath taken a solemn leave : his lordship will next 
morning for France. The duke hath offered him 80 
letters of commendations to the king. 

62, 63. point from pointy Ff, from point to point Hanmer, point for point 
Capell. 69. gaini gains Camb. Edd. conj. 70. acquired^ requiPdY ^^ 4. 

(Dyce). However, in hb second edition, 60. r^^/iv] ruler, governor. 

Dyce adopts ColUer's correction "the 74. our crimes , . .] we should despair 

stranger part," which also appeared, on account of our crimes, had we not 

apparently through a misprint, in his our virtues to console us. 

first edition. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



saiiL] THAT ENDS WELL 121 

Second Lord. They shall be no more than needful 
there, if they were more than they can commend. 

First Lord. They cannot be too sweet for the king's 

tartness. Here 's his lordship now. 85 

Enter Bertram. 

How now, my lord ! is 't not after midnight ? 

Ber. I have to-night dispatched sixteen businesses, a 
month's length a-piece, by an abstract of success : 
I have congied with the duke, done my adieu with 
his nearest, buried a wife, mourned for her, writ 90 
to my lady mother I am returning, entertained 
my convoy ; and between these main parcels of 
dispatch effected many nicer needs : the last was 
the greatest, but that I have not ended yet. 

Second Lord. If the business be of any difficulty, and 95 
this morning your departure hence, it requires 
haste of your lordship. 

Ber. I mean, the business is not ended, as fearing to 
hear of it hereafter. But shall we have this 
dialogue between the fool and the soldier ? Come, 100 
bring forth this counterfeit module : has deceived 
me, like a double-meaning prophesier. 

84. First Lord] Ber. F i, 2 ; Cap. G. F 3, 4. In the Ff Bertram is made 
to enter after ''can commend" (line 83). 89. congied"] Ff; cong^d Capell. 
93. effected] F 3, 4; affected F i, 2. loi. module] Ff, medal }AxaxsL<st (War- 
burton), model Collier j hcui] F 2 ; has F I ; 'has F 3, 4. 

88. an abstract of success] " a string (French, congi). It occurs as a noun, 
of successes,'' as we might say. ''By "congy." Shakespeare does not use 
a successful summary proceeding the word elsewhere. 

(Schmidt). H.T., already quoted, gives loi. module] same as model. Cf. 

"an abstracts an abridgment ; success "All this thou see&l is buFlk. clod And 

= succession; so that iSas phrase may module of confounded royalty" (King 

mean in quick succession." John, v. vii. 58). 

89. congied with] taken leave of 102. doudle ' meaning] zweideutig, 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



122 ALL'S WELL [activ. 

Second Lord. Bring him forth. [Exeunt Soldiers. 

Has sat i' the stocks all night, poor gallant knave. 

Ber. No matter; his heels have deserved it, in usurp- 105 
ing his spurs so long. How does he carry himself? 

First Lord. I have told your lordship already, the 
stocks carry him. But to answer you as you 
would be understood; he weeps like a wench 
that had shed her milk : he hath confessed him- no 
self to Morgan, whom he supposes to be a friar, 
from the time of his remembrance to this very 
instant disaster of his setting i' the stocks ; and 
what think you he hath confessed ? 

Ber. Nothing of me, has a ? 115 

Second Lord. His confession is taken, and it shall be read 
to his face : if your lordship be in 't, as I believe 
you are, you must have the patience to hear it. 

Re-enter Soldiers^ with Parolles. 

Ber. A plague upon him 1 muffled 1 he can say nothing 

of me. 1 20 

First Lord, Hush ! hush ! Hoodman comes ! Porto- 
tartarossa. 

First Sold. He calls for the tortures : what will you 
say without 'em ? 

104. Has] ICas F 4; hcCs F i, 2, 3. Steevens proposes "he has" here 
and just above. But below we find (line 115) hcCs a (F i, 2, 3), has a (F 4), 
where it clearly means **has he" ; hence **ha s" of F i probably stands for 
has — the he in both cases (loi and 104) having been dropped. 115. has 
af\ hcisa F i, 2, $; has aF 4; has h^ Rowe (ed. 2). 118. Re-enter . . .] 
Enter Parolles with his interpreter Ff. 121.] The Ff give the "Hush !" to 
Bertram (F 2, 3, 4, hush.). 

undoubtedly a reference to the oracles 121. Hoodman comes\ an allusion to 
which could be understood to mean the game of blind man's buff, which was 
yes or no. formerly called " Hod-man-blinde." 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



sc. in.] 



THAT ENDS WELL 



123 



Par. I will confess what I know without constraint: 125 
if ye pinch me like a pasty, I can say no more. 

First Sold. Bosko chimurcho. 

Second Lord. Boblibindo chicurmurco. 

First Sold. You are a merciful general. Our general 

bids you answer to what I shall ask you out of a 130 
note. 

Par. And truly, as I hope to live. 

First Sold. Firsts demand of him how many horse the 
duke is strong. What say you to that ? 

Par. Five or six thousand; but very weak and un- 135 
serviceable : the troops are all scattered, and the 
commanders very poor rogues, upon my reputa- 
tion and credit, and as I hope to live. 

First Sold. Shall I set down your answer so ? 

Par. Do: I'll take the sacrament on't, how and 140 
which way you will. 

Ber, All's one to him. What a past-saving slave 
is this ! 

First Lord. Y* are deceiv'd, my lord : this is Mon- 
sieur ParoUes, the gallant militarist, — that was 145 
his own phrase, — that had the whole theoric of 
war in the knot of his scarf, and the practice in 
the chape of his dagger. 

142. AlVs . . . him. What^ Capell; alV s one to him. Bert. WhatYi. 



145. militarist^ This must literalljr be 
taken to be a phrase of his own coining. 
It is a parallel to his expression ** facin- 
erious (11. iii. 31, above). 

146. theoric] Cf. Othello^ I. i. 24, and 
Henry V. I. i. 52. Hart in his note 
on the former passage says that it is 
one of the terms Ben Jonson ridicules, . .. _ 
and it appears to have been introduced covers the point. 



by Gabriel Harvey in his "letters to 
Spenser," Theoricks and Practicks^ 
about 1573. 

148. chape] Schmidt defines it as 
" the metallic part at the end of the 
scabbard." New Eng. Diet,, "The 
metal plate or mounting of ajcabbard 
or JTsheaili \ particularly" J|aJ„ jyhdch 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



124 ALL'S WELL [activ. 

Second Lord. I will never trust a man again for keep- 
ing his sword clean; nor believe he can have 150 
every thing in him by wearing his apparel neatly. 

First Sold. Well, that 's set down. 

Par. Five or six thousand horse, I said, — I will say 
true, — or thereabouts, set down, for I '11 speak truth. 

First Lord. He 's very near the truth in this. 155 

Ber. But I con him no thanks for 't, in the nature he 
delivers it 

Par. Poor rogues, I pray you, say. 

First Sold. Well, that's set down. 

Par. I humbly thank you, sir. A truth's a truth; 160 
the rogues are marvellous poor. 

First Sold Demand of hint^ of what strength they are 
a-foot. What say you to that ? 

Par. By my troth, sir, if I were to live this present 

hour, I will tell true. Let me see: Spurio, a 165 
hundred and fifty; Sebastian, so many; Cor- 
ambus, so many; Jaques, so many; Guiltian, 
Cosmo, Lodowick, and Gratii, two hundred fifty 
each; mine own company, Chitopher, Vaumond, 
Bentii, two hundred fifty each: so that the 170 

149. Second Lord] Bertram (S. Walker conj.). 160, 161. A truth* s . . . 
poor] given to First Lord by Dyce (ed. 2) (S. Walker conj.). 164. /tve] die 
Dyce (ed. 2) (S. Walker conj.), leave Staunton conj., Itve but this hour Hanmer. 

149.] In all probability S. Walker is bef. King, 30, "I will kon them small 

right in conjecturing that this speech thanks." {Stt 2Aso New En£^. Diet,) 

was meant for Bertram. 164. to live] S. Walker is jjositive 

I $6. con him no thanks] "con" that this should be " die ": to his note 

originally meant **know." Chaucer h^sMsmira editorum iufaur0ri(fia.\ I 

wrote, **01d wymen connen mochil still prefer Toilet's explanation that 

thinge," It was used as in French, see " fear may be supposed to occasion 

Palsgrave (1530), 475-1, *'I have ParoUes* mistake; as poor frighted 

conned hjnm good tbanke: je luy ay Scrub cries: * Spare all I have, and 

sceu bon gr^.*^ Cf. also Wren, Serm, take my life.'" 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



sciii.] THAT ENDS WELL 125 

muster-file, rotten and sound, upon my life, 
amounts not to fifteen thousand poll; half of 
the which dare not shake the snow from off* their 
cassocks, lest they shake themselves to pieces. 

Ber. What shall be done to him? 175 

First Lord, Nothing, but let him have thanks. De- 
mand of him my condition, and what credit I 
have with the duke. 

First Sold. Well, that's set down. You shall de- 
mand of hiffty whether one Captain Dumain be i 1 80 
the camPy a Frenchman; what his reputation is 
with the duke; what his valour, honesty, and 
expertness in wars ; or whether he thinks it were 
not possible, with well-weighing sums of gold, to 
corrupt him to a revolt. What say you to this? 185 
what do you know of it ? 

Par. I beseech you, let me answer to the particular 
of the inter'gatories : demand them singly. 

First Sold. Do you know this Captain Dumain ? 

Par. I know him : a was a botcher's prentice in Paris, 190 
from whence he was whipped for getting the 
shrieve's fool with child ; a dumb innocent, that 
could not say him nay. 

172. poll] Theobald, pole Ff. 174. lesf] F 4 ; least F i, 2, 3. 187. par- 
ticular] particulars Oipell. 188. intet^ gatories] F i, 2, 3 ; interrogatories 
F 4 ; interrogatory Capell. 193.] Johnson here adds Dumain lifts his hand 
in anger. 

174. cassocks] military cloaks. Delius us there upon inter'gatories " {.Merchant 

quotes Glapthome's Hollander ^ *' Here, of Venice^ v. i. 298). 
Sir, receive this military cassock, it has 192. shrievi s foci] The word ** fool " 

seen service.*' here means a woman who is an idiot 

184. well - weighing] has double and in the charge of a sheriff. "The 

meaning — weight and influence. custody of all * ideots,* etc. , possessed of 

188. inter' gcUories] Cf. " And charge landed property, belonged to the king, 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



126 ALL'S WELL [activ. 

Ber. Nay, by your leave, hold your hands ; though I 

know his brains are forfeit to the next tile that falls. 195 

First Sold. Well, is this captain in the Duke of 
Florence's camp ? 

Par. Upon my knowledge he is, and lousy . 

First Lard. Nay, look not so upon me ; we shall hear 

of your lordship anon. 200 

First Sold. What is his reputation with the duke ? 

Par. The duke knows him for no other but a poor 
officer of mine, and writ to me this other day to 
turn him out o' the band: I think I have his 
letter in my pocket 205 

First Sold. Marry we '11 search. 

Par. In good sadness, I do not know: either it is 
there, or it is upon a file with the duke's other 
letters in my tent 

First Sold. Here 'tis; here's a paper; shall I read it 210 
to you ? 

Par. I do not know if it be it or no. 

Ber. Our interpreter does it well. 

20a lordship'\ Pope, Lord Ft 204. ci' the] d th Ff. 

who was entitled to the mcome of their being sold or given with as little cere- 
lands, but obliged to find them with mony, treated as capriciously and veiy 
necessaries. This prerogative, when often, it is to be feared, left to perish 
there was a large estate in the case, as miserably, as cats or d(^ '' (Ritson). 
was generally granted to some court 195. next tile] a trite metaphor for 
^vourite, or o3ier person who made sudden death. It is used by Lucian, 
suit for and had interest enough to Plutarch, and many others, mcluding, 
obtain it, which was called * begging a as Rolfe mentions, Whitney, whose 
fool.' But when the land was ofmcon- Emblems (1586) Shakespeare may have 
siderable value, the * natural ' was main- read. 

tained, out of the profits, by the 198. le usvX low-bom^ despicable, 

•sheriff,* who accounted for them to 207. In good saaness] m earnest, 

the crown. As for those unhappy "joking apart.*' Cf. " I think my 1^ 

creatures who had neither possessions would shew in a silken hose ... In 

nor relations, they seem to have been sadness I think it would** {Every Mem 

considered as a species of property, in his Humour^ i. ii.). 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



SC.III.] THAT ENDS WELL 127 

First Lord. Excellently. 

First Sold. Dian^ the count 's a fool, andfidl of gold — 215 

Par. That is not the duke's letter, sir: that is an 
advertisement to a proper maid in Florence, one 
Diana, to take heed of the allurement of one Count 
Rousillon, a foolish idle boy, but for all that very 
ruttish, I pray you, sir, put it up again. 220 

First Sold. Nay, I '11 read it first, by your favour. 

Par. My meaning in't, I protest, was very honest 
in the behalf of the maid ; for I knew the young 
count to be a dangerous and lascivious boy, who 
is a whale to virginity, and devours up all the 225 
fry it finds. 

Ber. Damnable both-sides rogue 1 

First Sold. Whenhe swears oaths^ bid hint dropgold^ and take it; 
After he scores^ he never pays the score : 
Half won is match well made ; match^ andweU make it : 
He ne^er pays after-debts ; take it before^ 231 

And say a soldiery Dian, told thee thisy 
Men are to mell with, boys are not to kiss ; 

215, 216.] Johnson supposes a line to be lost here. Steevens instead of 
"gold" conjectures ** golden store" or "golden ore." Jackson reads " gold, I 
speak it," and lines 229-231 in this order : 230, 231, 229. Of course the £Eict 
that "gold" has nothing with which to rhyme may indicate that something is 
lost : but it seems just as likely that Shakespeare left it incomplete and began a 
fresh line 228. 230. well made] ill made Capell conj., half made Jackson 
conj. ; match, and well] match well and Hanmer, watch, and well Johnson 
conj., watch well and Rann ; Johnson would read in this order : lines 230, 228, 
229, 231 ; and well] an' we'll Steevens conj. 232, 233.] Capell would omit 
th^ lines as doubtftil. 233. not to] but to Pope (Theobald). 

220. ruttish] lustful (said of " Deere you match, see that all is well arranged, 
or Boares"). Cf. King John^ i. i. 174, "well won is 

229. scores] takes (down a debt) still well shot ..." 

hence incurs a debt Cf. " Have you 233. Men . . . kiss] The emphasis 

scored me?" (C?/>i«/A;, iv. i. 130). is probably on "men" and "boyTS," 

230. Half won . . .] match made in the words "mell "and "kiss" having 
business fashion is half won, so when much the same signification — ^that ot 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



128 ALL'S WELL [activ. 

For count of thiSy the count *s a fool, I know it, 
Who pays before, but not when he does owe it. 235 

Thine, as he voufd to thee in thine ear, 

Parolles. 

Ber. He shall be whipped through the army with 
this rhyme in 's forehead. 

Second Lord This is your devoted friend, sir; the 240 
manifold linguist and the armipotent soldien 

Ber. I could endure any thing before but a cat, and 
now he *s a cat to me. 

First Sold. I perceive, sir, by our general's looks, we 

shall be fain to hang you. 245 

Par. My life, sir, in any case ! not that I am afraid 
to die; but that, my offences bdng many, I 
would repent out the remainder of nature. Let 
me live, sir, in a dungeon, 1' the stocks, or any- 
where, so I may live. 250 

First Sold. We '11 see what may be done, so you 
confess freely: therefore, once more to this 
Captain Dumain. You have answered to his 
reputation with the duke and to his valour : what 
is his honesty? 255 

241. armipotentl Capell, army-potent Yi. 244. ourl Capell ; your F l, 2 ; 
the F 3, 4. 

dallying. " Mell " was frequently used 242. a caf] Bertram repeats the 

in the sense of "meddling." Spenser obloquy several times; it is, as Clarke 

wrote, " It fethers fits not with such points out, characteristically indicative 

things to mell." Dyce adopts the ofhis bad-tempered vexation. Bertram 

emendiation ** but to kiss." is throughout revealed to us as a coward 

234. count of] Cf. " no man counts more base, perhaps, than Parolles. lie 

of her beauty" {Two Gentlemen of lacks the faculty of ** knowing what he 

Verona^ ii. i. 65). is " which Parolles possesses. Besides, 

241. armipotenf] sometimes used as noblesse oblige. 

an epthet of God. Cf. **The armi- 248. nature'] the "three score years 

potent Mars " (Lovers Labour^ s Losty v. and ten." 
u. 650). 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



sera,] THAT ENDS WELL 129 

Par. He will steal, sir, an egg out of a cloister ; for 
rapes and ravishments he parallels Nessus; he 
professes not keeping of oaths ; in breaking 'em 
he is stronger than Hercules; he will lie, sir, 
with such volubility, that you would think truth 260 
were a fool ; drunkenness is his best virtue, for 
he will be swine-drunk, and in his sleep he does 
little harm, save to his bed-clothes about him; 
but they know his conditions, and lay him in 
straw. I have but little more to say, sir, of his 265 
honesty : he has every thing that an honest man 
should not have; what an honest man should 
have, he has nothing. 

First Lord, I begin to love him for this. 

Ber. For this description of thine honesty? A pox 270 
upon him for me 1 he is more and more a cat. 

First Sold. What say you to his expertness in war ? 

Par. Faith, sir, has led the drum before the English 
tragedians, — to belie him I will not, — and more 
of Jiis soldiership I know not; except, in that 275 
country he had the honour to be the officer at a 
place there called Mile-end, to instruct for the 

256. egg'\ Ag. (t\e. Agnes) Becket conj. 263, 264. bed-clothes . . . they\ 
bed-clothes; but they about him Watkiss Lloyd conj. 273. Aw] hcis Ff, 

256. egg . . . cloister] Used gener- (deister). He understands that an ^;g 

ally to be understood to mean that he is an ingredient in such preparations, 

would steal the most worthless thing and thinks that such ''a masterpiece of 

ft-om a holy place. It may refer to the nasty greed " would be quite in keeping 

iold custom of blessing eggs (** Bless, O with flie Parolles's humour. It is a 

Lord, we beseech Thee, this Thy brilliant conjecture, 
creature of eggs . . .") to which Falstaflf 277. Mile-end] the proverbial drill 

referred when he said, "Thou hast not ground. Cf. "Your devices in the 

so much grace in thee, as to bless thee war (are) not like those a man . . . 

an egg." Someone suggested to Mr. sees at Mile End" (Ben Jonson, 

Thiselton that we should read "clyster" Every Man in his Humour ^ iv. ii). 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



130 ALL'S WELL [activ. 

doubling of files : I would do the man what hcmour 

I can, but of this I am not certain. 
First Lord. He hath out-villained villany so far that 280 

the rarity redeems him. 
Ber. A pox on him ! he 's a cat still. 
First Sold. His qualities being at this poor price, I 

need not to ask you if gold will corrupt him to 

revolt 285 

Par. Sir, fcwr a cardecue he will sell the fee-simple of 

his salvation, the inheritance of it ; and cut the 

entail from all remainders, and a perpetual 

succession for it perpetually. 
First Sold. What's his brother, the other Captain 290 

Dumain ? 
Second Lord. Why does he ask him of me ? 
First Sold. What 'she? 
Par. E'en a crow o' the same nest ; not altogether so 

great as the first in goodness, but greater a great 295. 

deal in evil. He excels his brother for a coward, 

yet his brother is reputed one of the best that is. 

In a retreat he outruns any lackey; marry, in 

coming on he has the cramp. 

28a out-mllained] out-villanied S. Walker conj. 286. cardecue] F 2, 3, 4 ; 
cardecue F i. 289. for i^mit Hanmer. 

280. out'VillcUned villany] the ob- is derived from a general and greater 

vious parallel is ** out-herod Herod." estate (Wood).** — Rushton. 
286. car ^cue'] eightpe nce. 292. Why . , . mef] Jfohnson re- 

286. fie -simple] **tenant in fee- marks that ** every man is, on such 

simple ... is he which hath lands or occasions, more willing to hear his 

tenements to hold to him and to his neighbours* character than his own.** 
heir for ever (Littleton) ; an estate in 298. lackey] a footman who '*ran.'' 

remainder is the residue of an estate, The New Eng, Diet, gives an instance 

in land depending upon a particular from The Times Whistle^ iii. 106, 

estate and created together with the "lackeys before her chariot run.** 
A particular estate is that which 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



sc. in.] THAT ENDS WELL 131 

First Sold. If your life be saved, will you undertake to 300 
betray the Florentine ? 

Par. Ay, and the captain of his horse, Count Rousillon. 

First Sold. I '11 whisper with the general, and know 
his pleasure. 

Par. [Aside.] I '11 no more drumming ; a plague of all 305 
drums ! Only to seem to deserve well, and to 
beguile the supposition of that lascivious young 
boy the count, have I run into this danger. Yet 
who would have suspected an ambush where I 
was taken? 310 

First Sold. There is no remedy, sir, but you must 
die. The general says, you that have so 
traitorously discovered the secrets of your army, 
and made such pestiferous reports of men very 
nobly held, can serve the world for no honest 315 
use ; therefore you must die. Come, headsman, 
off with his head. 

Par. O Lord, sir, let me live, or let me see my death 1 

First Sold. That shall you, and take your leave of all 

your friends. [ Unmuffling him. 320 

So, look about you : know you any here ? 

Ber. Good morrow, noble captain. 

Second Lord. God bless you. Captain ParoUes. 

First Lord. God save you, noble captain. 

Second Lord. Captain, what greeting will you to my 325 
Lord Lafeu ? I am for France. 

First Lord. Good captain, will you give me a copy of 
the sonnet you writ to Diana in behalf of the 

305. [Aside] Rowe (ed. 2\ omitted Ff. 320. Unmuffling him] Steevens, 
omitted Ff. 328. the sonnet'] F i, 2 ; the same sonnet F 3, 4. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



132 



ALL'S WELL 



[act IV. 



Count Rousillon ? an I were not a very coward 
I 'd compel it of you ; but fare you well. 330 

[Exeunt Bertram and Lords. 

First Sold. You are undone, captain; all but your 
scarf; that has a knot on 't yet 

Par. Who cannot be crushed with a plot ? 

First Sold. If you could find out a country where but 

women were that had received so much shame, 335 
you might begin an impudent nation. Fare ye 
well, sir ; I am for France too : we shall speak of 
you there. [Exit 

Par. Yet am I thankful : if my heart were great 

'Twould burst at this. Captain ni be no more; 340 

But I will eat and drink, and sleep as soft 

As captain shall : simply the thing I am 

Shall make me live. Who knows himself a braggart, 

Let him fear this ; for it will come to pass 

That every braggart shall be found an ass. 345 

Rust, sword ! cool, blushes ! and, Parolles, live 

Safest in shame ! being fool'd, by foolery thrive ! 

There 's place and means for every man alive. 

1 11 after them. [Exit 

329. an\ Capell, and Ff. 



345.] S. Walker says: "There is 
perhaps a line lost adfter 'found an 
ass.' Something seems to be wanting ; 
live — thrive, too, is a suspicious rhyme 
for Shakespeare's age ; tnplets are very 
rare in him, and occur only, I think, 
under special circumstances. Perhaps, 



however, a rhyme is not wanted 
here." 

348. There's place . . .] A line 
characteristic of Shakespeare's genius. 
He seems to have had sympathy with 
this miserable " thing " simply because 
it was a fellow-man. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



sc.iv,] THAT ENDS WELL 133 



SCENE IV. — Florence. A Room in the Widov/s House. 

Enter Helena, Widow^ and Diana. 

HeL That you may well perceive I have not wronged you, 
One of the greatest in the Christian world 
Shall be my surety ; 'fore whose throne 'tis needful, 
Ere I can perfect mine intents, to kneel. 
Time was, I did him a desired office, 5 

Dear almost as his life ; which gratitude 
Through flinty Tartar's bosom would peep forth. 
And answer, thanks. I duly am inform'd 
His grace is at Marsellis ; to which place 
We have convenient convoy. You must know, lo 
I am supposed dead : the army breaking, 
My husband hies him home ; where, heaven aiding. 
And by the leave of my good lord the king. 
We '11 be before our welcome. 

Wid. Gentle madam. 

You never had a servant to whose trust 1 5 

Your business was more welcome. 

Hel. Nor you, mistress. 

Ever a friend whose thoughts more truly labour 
To recompense your love. Doubt not but heaven 
Hath brought me up to be your daughter's dower. 
As it hath fated her to be my motive 20 

3. ^fore\forV I. 9. MarselUs\¥2, 3 ; Marcella F i ; MarselisY^ 16, 
yau,'\ Rowe ; you F 4 ; your F i, 2, 3. 

9. Marseilis\ Marseilles, pronounced is assistant, let me hear from you " 

as a trisyllable. (Hamlet^ i. iii. 3). 

la r^fzvy] means of conveyance. Cf. 11. ^^o^Vf^] disbanding. 
" As the wmds give benefit and convoy ao. motwe\ whatever nudkes a thing 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



134 



ALLS WELL 



[activ^ 



And helper to a husband. But, O strange men i 
That can such sweet use make of what they hate, 
When saucy trusting of the cozen'd thoughts 
Defiles the pitchy night : so lust doth play 
With what it loathes for that which is away. 25 

But more of this hereafter. You, Diana, 
Under my poor instructions yet must suffer 
Something in my behalf. 

Dia. Let death and honesty 

Go with your impositions, I am yours 
Upon your will to suffer. 

HeL Yet, I pray you : 30 

But with the word the time will bring on summer, 
When briars shall have leaves as well as thorns. 
And be as sweet as sharp. We must away ; 
Our waggon is prepared, and time revives us : 
All 's w ell that e nds well ; still the fine *s the crown ; 35 
Whatever the course, the end is the renown. 

\Exeunt. 

35. thefine*s] Theobald ; the Jim F i ; that fines F 2, 3 ; that finds F 4. 



move, the cause of motion. Cf. " The 
slavi^ motive of recanting fear" 
(= tongue) (^i^f^rflf//. i. i. 193); also 
" all impediments in £euic/s course are 
motives of more £uicy" (v. iii. 214, 
below). 

23. saucy trusting\ wantonly giving 
the rein to or entertaining, (^nenl 
(King Lear^ I. iv. 350) says in answer 
to Albany's "you may fear^too for" — 
'* Safer than trust too iax. Let me still 
take away the harms I fear." Also, 
**as to remit Their saucy sweetness, 
that do coin heaven's image In stamps 
that are forbid " (Measure fi>r Measure^ 
II. iv. 45). 

30. Yef\ as in "yet forty days, and 



Nineveh shall be overthrown " Qonah 
iii. 4). 

31. with the ward]ohscmQ, Perhi^ 
the drift of the meaning is "I must 
still pray you 'upon my will to 
suffer : but it is with my word, my 
promise, that time will turn the bitter 
mto sweet." 

34. revives US'] Cf. "that omr God 
may lighten our eyes, and give us a 
little reviving in our bondage" (Ezra 
ix. 8). 

35. the fine] " Finis coronat opus," 
as Boswell sa)^. ' ' La fin couronne les 
oeuvres " (2 Henry VL v. u. 28). We 
still use the word in the phrase "in 
fine." 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



scv.] THAT ENDS WELL 135 



SCENE V. — RousUlcn. A Room in the Countess's Palace. 

Enter CoUNTESS, Lafeu, and Clown. 

Laf, No, no, no ; your son was misled with a snipt- 
taffeta fellow there, whose villanous saffron 
would have made all the unbaked and doughy 
youth of a nation in his colour : your daughter- 
in-law had been alive at this hour, and your son 5 
here at home, more advanced by the king than 
by that red-tailed humble-bee I speak of. 

Count. I would I had not known him ; it was the death 
of the most virtuous gentlewoman that ever nature 
had praise for creating. If she had partaken of my i o 
flesh, and cost me the dearest groans of a mother, 
I could not have owed her a more rooted love. 

Laf, 'Twas a good lady, 'twas a good lady : we may 
pick a thousand salads ere we light on such 
another herb. 1 5 

Clo. Indeed, sir, she was the sweet-marjoram of the 
salad, or rather the herb of grace. 

Laf. They are not herbs, you knave; they are nose- 
herbs. 

Clo. I am no great Nebuchadnezzar, sir ; I have not 20 
much skill ia grass. 

8. I had] he had Hanmer (Theobald conj.), Mason and Dyce. 14. suiads] 
Reed, sallets Ff (as also line 17). 18. herbs] sallet-herbs Rowe, pot-hearbes 
Collier MS. 21. grass] Rowe, grau Ff. 

2. villanous saffron] There is some '* because holy water was sprinkled 

reference to the fevourite yellow dye with it " (Johnson), 
used for various purposes. 18, 19. nose-herbs] scented flowers 

II. dearesf] direst, as frequently. (cf. nos^;ay). 

17. herb of grace] rue, so called 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



136 ALL'S WELL (activ. 

Laf. Whether dost thou profess thyself, a knave or a 

fool? 
Clo. A fool, sir, at a woman's service, and a knave at 

a man's. 25 

La/. Your dbtinction ? 
Qo. I would cozen the man of his wife, and do his 

service. 
La/. So you were a knave at his service, indeed. 
Clo. And I would give his wife my bauble, sir, to do 30 

her service. 
La/. I will subscribe for thee, thou art both knave and 

fool. 
Clo. At your service. 

La/ No, no, no. 3 5 

Clo. Why, sir, if I cannot serve you, I can serve as 

great a prince as you are. 
La/ Who's that? a Frenchman? 
Clo. Faith, sir, a' has an English name ; but his fisnomy 

is more hotter in France than there. 40 

La/ What prince is that ? 

Clo. The black prince, sir ; alias, the prince of dark- 
ness ; altos, the devil. 
La/ Hold thee, there 's my purse. I give thee not 

39. name] Rowe; matne F i, 2; main F 3; m€an F 4; mien Anon, conj. 
40. hotter] honoured Hanmer (Warburton). 

30. bauble] the stick of a court explain why the hair should be 

fool ; the word was frequently used English. 

equivocally. (See Romeo and Juliet , 40, more hotter] Warburton's emend- 

II. iv. 97.) ation "honoured" for "hotter" has 

. 39. an English name] namelv, the been adopted by many editors; but 

r Uju^ Black Prince. The "authentic" ver- there is httle reason to suppose that 

^ Y.'-J V **^'" ^^^ "maine." Some editors Shakespeare did not write "more 

^ * £,a' ^ have taken this to refer to the hairiness hotter." 

U* ^ of "Old Harry"; but they do not 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



sc. v.] 



THAT ENDS WELL 



137 



this to suggest thee from thy master thou talkest 45 
of: serve him still. 

Clo. I am a woodland fellow, sir, that always loved a 
great fire ; and the master I speak of ever keeps 
a good fire. But, sure, he is the prince of the 
world ; let his nobility remain in 's court. I am 50 
for the house with the narrow gate, which I take 
to be too little for pomp to enter: some that 
humble themselves may ; but the many will be 
too chill and tender, and they '11 be for the flowery 
way that leads to the broad gate and the great fire. 5 5 

Laf. Go thy ways, I begin to be aweary of thee ; and 
I tell thee so before, because I would not fall out 
with thee. Go thy ways : let my horses be well 
looked to, without any tricks. 

Clo. If I put any tricks upon 'em, sir, they shall be 60 
jades' tricks, which are their own right by the law 
of nature. \Exit 

Laf. A shrewd knave and an unhappy. 

45. suggesf\ seduce Rowe (ed. 2). 49. sure"] since Hanmer,/^ CapelL 



45* suggest thee'\ tempt thee to 
leave. 

54. too chill] too hesitating, too luke- 
wann. 

54> 55* flowery way"] Steevens aptly 
quotes "the primrose way to the ever- 
lasting bonfire." 

59. trices] a reference to the greasily 
of horses' teeth to prevent their eating 
the foK^e the ostler thought well to 
appropriate. 

03. shrewd] mischievous. **A 
shrewd unhappy gallows" {Lovers 
LcLboui^s Lost, V. ii. 12). "unhappy" 
= unlucky. Mr. Craig quotes from 
Holland's Pliny (Nat. Hist,y Bk. xix. 
chap. vL pt ii. p. 22, K. ed., 1634) : 



" There is a kind of garlicke growing 
wilde in the fieldes . . . which being 
boiled that it should not grow, they 
commonly throw forth in cornfields for 
the shrewd, unhappy foules which lie 
upon the land ana eat up the seed new 
sown; for presently as anv of these 
birds taste thereof they will be drunk." 
In this instance "unhappy" is more 
likely to mean "mischievous" than 
"unlucky." Cf. Much Ado, II. i. 361, 
" She hath often dreamed of unhappi- 
ness, and waked herself with laughing." 
The construction "and an unhappy" 
is not unusual. Delius quotes a parallel 
from Paynter, "A £ur maid and a 
comely." 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



138 ALL'S WELL [activ. 

Count. So he is. My lord that 's gone made himself 

much sport out of him : by his authority he re- 65 
mains here, which he thinks is a patent for his 
sauciness ; and, indeed, he has no pace, but runs 
where he will. 

Laf. I like him well ; 'tis not amiss. And I was about 

to tell you, since I heard of the good lady's death, 70 
and that my lord your son was upon his return 
home, I moved the king my master to speak in 
the behalf of my daughter ; which, in the minority 
of them both, his majesty, out of a self-gracious 
remembrance, did first propose. His highness 75 
hath promised me to do it ; and to stop up the 
displeasure he hath conceived against your son, 
there is no fitter matter. How does your lady- 
ship like it ? 

Count With very much content, my lord ; and I wish 80 
it happily effected. 

Laf. His highness comes post from Marsellis, of as 
able body as when he numbered thirty : a will be 
here to-morrow, or I am deceived by him that in 
such intelligence hath seldom failed 85 

Count It rejoices me, that I hope I shall see him ere I 
die. I have letters that my son will he here to- 

67. pace] place Hanmer, pause W. J. Craig conj. 75. propose'] putpose S. 
Walker conj. 82. Marsellisi F 2 ; Marcellus F i ; MarseUes F 3, 4. 86. 
//]/rFi,/F2. 

67. p<ue\ Schmidt understands this 74. self-graciousl gracious to himself, 

to mean " he observes no rule, pa^ Cf. " Inmsing him with self and vain 

no reeard to form." The metaphor is conctiV* {Richard II, in. it 166). 

probi^ly taken from horse-breaking Also, " Who by self and violent hands 

and traming — the clown has no took off her fife** (Macbeth^ V. viiL 

restraint laid on him. 70). 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



scv.] THAT ENDS WELL 139 

night: I shall beseech your lordship to remain 

with me till they meet together. 
Laf. Madam, I was thinking with what manners I 90 

might safely be admitted. 
Count. You need but plead your honourable privilege. 
Laf. Lady, of that I have made a bold charter ; but 

I thank my God it holds yet. 

Re-enter Clown, 

Clo. O madam! yonder 's my lord your son with a 95 
patch of velvet on's face: whether there be a 
scar under 't or no, the velvet knows ; but 'tis a 
goodly patch of velvet. His left cheek is a cheek 
of two pile and a half, but his right cheek is worn 
bare. 100 

Laf. A scar nobly got, or a noble scar, is a good 
livery of honour; so belike is that. 

Clo, But it is your carbonadoed face. 

Laf Let us go see your son, I pray you : I long to 

talk with the young noble soldier. 105 

Clo. Faith, there 's a dozen of 'em, with delicate fine 
hats and most courteous feathers, which bow the 
head and nod at every man. \Exeunt. 

103. carb(madoed\ Theobald, carbinadtfd Ff. 

98.] Cf. Measure for Measure^ I. ii., 103. carbonadoed facel ** A carbonado 

"... And thou me velvet ; thou art is a piece of meat cut so as to be cooked 

food velvet ; thou *rt a three piled piece, on a gridiron. The word is still used 
warrant thee : I had as lief be a list of in France " (Schmidt). Cf. King Lear ^ 
an English kersey as be piled, as thou ii. ii. 41, "I '11 carbonado your shanks 
art piled for a French velvet." for you." In his note on this passage, 
lOi.] Malone says that it is more Mr. Craig quotes Cotgrave : ** Car- 
likely that the countess should have bonade, a carbonadoe, a rasher on the 
spoken thus ^ivourably of Bertram than coals ; also a flash over the face which 
Lafeu. But Lafeu was hoping to fetcheth the flesh with it." 
become his fiither-in-law. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



140 



ALL'S WELL 



[actv. 



ACT V 

SCENE I. — Marseilles. A Street 

Enter Helena, Widow, and Diana, with two Attendants. 

Hel. But this exceeding posting day and night, 

Must wear your spirits low ; we cannot help it : 

But since you have made the days and nights as one, 

To wear your gentle limbs in my affairs. 

Be bold you do so grow in my requital 5 

As nothing can unroot you. In happy time ; 

Enter a gentle Astringer. 

This man may help me to his majesty's ear. 

If he would spend his power. God save you, sir. 
Gent. And you. 

Hel. Sir, I have seen you in the court of France. lo 

Gent. I have been sometimes there. 
Hel. I do presume, sir, that you are not fallen 

From the report that goes upon your goodness ; 

And therefore, goaded with most sharp occasions. 



Marseilles. A Street] Capell, The Court of France. Pope. 6. a gentle 
Astringer] F l ; Enter a gentle Astranger F 2 ; Enter a gentleman a stranger 
F3,4. 



5. ^* A>Af| be swre. Cf. "Iwouldl 
were so sure To win the king as I am 
bold her honour Will remain hers" 
{Cymdeiine, 11. iv. 2). 

6. Enter a gentle Agtxinger] "An 
ostringer or astnn^er is a folconer, and 
such a character is pfoTSUbly tu be met 
with about a court which was fiunous 
for the love of that diversion . . . 



A 'gentle astringer' is a 'gentleman 
fiilconer.* . . . Cowell in his Litw 
Diet, says, ' We usually call a £eilconer, 
who keeps that kind of hawk, an 
austringer*" (Steevens). The word 
"astrii^;er" may have been added to 
the MS. by the manager of the theatre 
merely to indicate the costume. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



sc I.] THAT ENDS WELL 141 

Which lay nice manners by, I put you to 15 

The use of your own virtues, for the which 

I shall continue thankful. 
Gent. What 's your will ? 

Hel. That it will please you 

To give this poor petition to the king. 

And aid me with that store of power you have 20 

To come into his presence. 
Gent The king 's not here. 
Hel. Not here, sir ! 

Gent. Not, indeed : 

He hence remov'd last night, and with more haste 

Than is his use. 
Wid. Lord, how we lose our pains ! 

Hel. AlJjajEell^at^ndswell yet, 2 5 

Though time seem so adverse and means unfit. 

I do beseech you, whither is he gone ? 
Gent. Marry, as I take it, to Rousillon ; 

Whither I am going. 
Hel. I do beseech you, sir, 

Since you are like to see the king before me, 30 

Commend the paper to his gracious hand ; 

Which I presume shall render you no blame 

But rather make you thank your pains for it. 

I will come after you with what good speed 

Our means will make us means. 
Gent. This 1 11 do for you 35 

Hel. And you shall find yourself to be well thank'd, 

16. virtues] virtue S. Walker conj. 35. make us meansJ] make us. Anon, 
conj. 36-38.] Prose in Ff ; verse first by Pope. 

23. removed] the word was used as a rule for the movements of monarchs. 



^ Digitized by VjOOQIC 



142 



ALLS WELL 



[actv. 



Whate'w falb more. We must to horse again : 

Go, go, provide. [Exeunt. 

SCENE II. — Rousillon. The inner Court of the 
Countesses Palace, 



Enter Clown and Parolles. 

Par. Good Mr. Lavache, give my Lord Lafeu this letter. 
I have ere now, sir, been better known to you, 
when I have held familiarity with fresher clothes ; 
but I am now, sir, muddied in fortune's mood, and 
smell somewhat strong of her strong displeasure. 5 

Clo. Truly, fortune's displeasure is but sluttish if it 
smell so strongly as thou speakest of: I will 
henceforth eat no fish of fortune's buttering. 
Prithee, allow the wind. 

Par. Nay, you need not to stop your nose, sir: I 10 
spake but by a metaphor. 

4. mood\ moat Theobald. **Theobald altered 'mood* to «moat»; but a 
Quibble between *mood' and *mud* is intended here, — ^the words having been 
formerly pronounced nearly alike " (Dyce). 1 1. spake\ F i ; speakt F 2 ; speak 
F3,4. 



below. 



"J, falls] befieOls. Cf. v. iii. 121, 

Seme //. 

I. Lavache] If Parolles's name is 
taken from the French, it is just as 
probable that "Lavatch," which we 
have in the Ff, is the English spelling 
of La Vache. Clarke derives it from 
" lavage." Toilet thinks Shakespeare 
may have made some punning allusion 
to the name of the actor who played 
the part, namely, either Richard 
Cowley or John Lowine. 

4. mood] This is the Ff reading, and 
no comment would have been required 



had not Theobald hit upon the idea of 
dianging it to "moat," for whidi 
many reasons can be urged. Steevens 
goes so far as to call it "one of the 
luckiest ever produced." Be that as 
it may, it is surely best policy to 
retain the reading of the only 
"authentic" version we possess. 
Shakespeare often uses the word mood 
to imply displeasure, so that there is 
little reason for supposing that he did 
not write "muddied m fortune's mood " 
if he wrote " I smell of her strong 
displeasure." The two sentences are 
parallel. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



sc. n.] 



THAT ENDS WELL 



143 



Clo. Indeed, sir, if your metaphor stink, I will stop 
my nose; or against any man's metaphor. 
Prithee, get thee further. 

Par. Pray you, sir, deliver me this paper. 

Clo. Foh! prithee, stand away: a paper from for- 
tune's close-stool to give to a nobleman ! Look, 
here he comes himself. 



15 



Enter Lafeu. 

Here is a pur of fortune's, sir, or of fortune's cat, 
but not a musk-cat, that has fallen into the un- 20 
clean fishpond of her displeasure, and, as he says, 
is muddied withal. Pray you, sir, use the carp 
as you may, for he looks like a poor, decayed, 
ingenious, foolish, rascally knave. I do pity his 
distress in my similes of comfort, and leave him 25 
to your lordship. \Exit. 

Par. My lord, I am a man whom fortune hath cruelly 
scratched. 

Laf. And what would you have me to do ? 'Tis too 

19. pur\ F 4 ; purre F i, 2, 3 ; puss Mason conj. ; or of fortune's cat] or 
fortune's cat Warburton. 20. musk-cat'] Theobald, muscat Ff, mouse-cat 
Anon. conj. 25. similes] Theobald (Warburton), smiles F£ 26. Exit] 
Capell, omitted Ff. 



24. ingenious] probably "not in- 
genious." Ingenious is used by Shake- 
speare to mean intellectually gifted, as 
in *'bold, quick, ingenious, forward, 
capable" {Richard III. in. i. 155). 
The word here seems to be used as if 
there were an adjective "genious" 
with a negative prefix "in." Cf. 
"ingag'd," v. iii. 96, below. The 
New Eng, Diet, quotes, 1621, 
Brathwait, Nat, Emb, Beggarie 
(1877), 43, "Sprong of ingenerous 
bloud"; the word "ingenious," as 



used in this instance, may be a 
corruption of "ingenerous." 

25. similes] Steevens quotes an 
entry on the books of the Stationers' 
Company (1595): "A booke of verie 
pythie similies, comfortable and pro- 
fitable for all men to read." He sudds 
that the misprint "smiles" for 
"similies" occurs in the old copies 
of i Henry IV, i. ii. 89, where instead 
of " unsavoury similies " we read " un- 
savoury smiles." 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



144 ALL'S WELL [act v. 

late to pare her nails now. Wherein have you 30 

played the knave with fortune that she should 

scratch you, who of herself is a good lady, and 

would not have knaves thrive long under her? 

There's a cardecue for you. Let the justices 

make you and fortune friends; I am for other 35 

business. 
Par. I beseech your honour to hear me one single 

word. 
Laf. You b^ a single penny more: come, jrou shall 

ha 't ; save your word. 40 

Par. My name, my good lord, is ParoUes. 
Laf. You beg more than one word then. Cox my 

passion! give me your hand. How does your 

drum? 
Par. O my good lord ! you were the first that found me. 45 
Laf. Was I, in sooth ? and I was the first that lost 

thee. 
Par. It lies in you, my lord, to bring me in some 

grace, for you did bring me out. 
Laf. Out upon thee, knave! dost thou put upon me 50 

at once both the office of God and the devil? 

One brings thee in grace and the other brings 

thee out. [Trumpets sound. 

33, under her7\ F 2, 3, 4; under? F I. 42, one word] F 3, 4; word 
F I, 2; tf word Collier (Egerton MS.). 51. devil f\ Pope, diuel: F i. 
53. Trumpets sound] Theobald, omitted Ff. 

34. />i^/i«^jr^j] " The reference is to on the word Parolles. Cf., however, 
the Poor Law, by which Justices of the what Parolles says in line 37, "hear 
Peace had to grant a pauper's main- me one single word " (Dr. Proescholdt). 
tenance** (H. T.). 42, 43- ^^^ my possum] God's (my) 

42. word] Evidently a play on the passion ; probably a corruption of 

name Parolles. Malone thinks that ** God's passion." Cf. "Cock's 

one was unnecessarily added l^ the passion, silence!" {Taming of the 

editor of F 3, a quibble being intended Shrew^ iv. i. 121). 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



SC. III.] 



THAT ENDS WELL 



145 



The king's coming; I know by his trumpets. 
Sirrah, inquire further after me; I had talk of 55 
you last night: though you are a fool and a 
knave, you shall eat : go to, follow. 
Par. I praise God for you. \ExeunU 



SCENE \\\.—The Same. A Room in ike 
Countes^s Palace. 



Flourish. Enter King, Countess, Lafeu, 
Lords^ Gentlemen^ Guards^ etc. 

King. We lost a jewel of her, and our esteem 

Was made much poorer by it : but your son, 
As mad in folly, lack'd the sense to know 
Her estimation home. 

Count. Tis past, my liege ; 

And I beseech your majesty to make it 
Natural rebellion, done i' the blaze of youth ; 
When oil and fire, too strong for reason's force, 
O'erbears it and bums on. 

6. hla%t\ Waiburton (Theobald conj.)» blade Ff, blood Perring conj. 



I. esteem\ In Troilus and Cressida 
Shakespeare uses the phrase ''most 
dear in the esteem and poor in worth," 
which illustrates exactly the meaning 
of "esteem," namely, the supposed 
worth as opoosed to (he real worth. 
So '' esteem '' may mean self-esteem or 
else the value at which others esteem 
us ; it therefore means here either ** we 
are less rich in self-esteem," or ''we 
are less rich in things that we esteem " 
dnce she is gone. Cf. inscription on 
Moli^'s bust! ** Rim ne manqu$ 
d sa gloire, il manquait h la ndtre,^* 

10 



3. As] as if. 

4. home] to know home is to know 
very completely. Cf. " I cannot speak 
him home" (Cortolanus, ii. ii, 107); 
"tax him home" {Hamlet, in. iii. 
29). 

6. ^/oaf] The Ff read "blade." The 
word blade is nowhere else used by 
Shakespeare in such a context (though 
in a similar metai^ojr sometimes) ; nor 
does it seem in any way an appropriate 
word to precede sudi a suniw as 
"when oil and fire o'erbeurs reason 
and bums on." 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



146 ALL'S WELL [act v. 

King. My honour'd lady, 

I have forgiven and forgotten all, 

Though my revenges were high bent upon him, lo 

And watch'd the time to shoot 
Laf. This I must say, — 

But first I beg my pardon, — the young lord 

Did to his majesty, his mother, and his lady, 

Offence of mighty note, but to himself 

The greatest wrong of all : he lost a wife 1 5 

Whose beauty did astonish the survey 

Of richest eyes, whose words all ears took captive, 

Whose dear perfection hearts that scorn'd to serve 

Humbly call'd mistress. 
King, Praising what is lost 

Makes the remembrance dear. Well, call him 
hither ; 20 

We are reconcil'd, and the first view shall kill 

All repetition. Let him not ask our pardon : 

The nature of his great offence is dead. 

And deeper than oblivion we do bury 

The incensing relics of it : let him approach, 25 

A stranger, no offender ; and inform him 

So 'tis our will he should. 
GenL I shall, my liege. [Exit. 

King, What says he to your daughter ? have you spoke ? 
Laf. All that he is h^th reference to your highness. 

24. we do] do we Reed. 28. What , . . spoke?] Two lines in Ff, ending 
"daughter," . . . "spoke?" 

10. high benf\ a metaphor from 29. reference] Cf. "Many things 

ardiery. having reference to one consent, may 

17. richest eyes] "to have seen work contrariously " (Henry V, i. ii. 

much ... is to have rich eyes " {As 205). 
You Like It^ IV. i. 24). 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



sciii.] THAT ENDS WELL 147 

King. Then shall we have a match. I've letters sent 
me 30 

That sets him high in fame. 

Enier BERTRAM. 

Laf. He looks well on 't. 

King. I 'm not a day of season, 

For thou mayst see a sunshine and a hail 
In me at once ; but to the brightest beams 
Distracted clouds give way: so stand thou forth; 35 
The time is fair again. 

Ber. My high-repented blames, 

Dear sovereign, pardon to me. 

King. All is whole ; 

Not one word more of the consumed time. 
Let 's take the instant by the forward top, 
For we are old, and on our quick'st decrees 40 

The inaudible and noiseless foot of time 
Steals ere we can effect them. You remember 
The daughter of this lord ? 

Ber, Admiringly, my liege. At first 

I stuck my choice upon her, ere my heart 45 

Durst make too bold a herald of my tongue. 
Where the impression of mine eye infixing, 

30, 31.] Prose in Ff ; verse first by Pope. 32. stason\ summer Clark MS., 
seasonable weather Keightley conj. 44. Admiringly ^ my liege,"] Rowe ; Admir- 
ingly my liege, F i, 2 ; Admiringly, my liege, F 3, 4. 46.] After this line 
Keightley tlunks that a line may be lost, conveying the meaning, "Another 
object met my wandering fiincy." 

30. letters'] singular. Cf. iv. v. 87, sense which we understand now ("a 

above. saw a flea stuck upon Bardolph's 

32. not . • . season] I am a day out nose "), but also in a more dignified 

of season. sense. '* Honour stuck upon him as 

45. stuck . . . upon] "Stick" was the sun in the grey vault of heaven" 

by Shakespeare not only in the (S Henry IV, 11. iii. 18). 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



X48 ALL'S WELL [act v. 

Contempt his scornful p erspect ive did lend me, 
Which warp'd the line of every other favour ; 
Scom'd a fair colour, or expressed it stolen ; 50 

Extended or contracted all proportions 
To a most hideous object : thence it came 
That she, whom all men prais'd, and whom myself, 
Since I have lost, have lov'd, was in mine eye 
The dust that did offend it 
Xing'. Well excus'd : 5 5 

That thou didst love her, strikes some scores away 
From the great compt But love, that comes too late, 
Like a remorseful pardon slowly carried. 
To the great sender turns a sour offence. 
Crying, " That 's good that 's gone." Our rash faults 
Make trivial price of serious things we have, 61 

Not knowing them until we know their grave : 
Oft our displeasures, to ourselves unjust. 
Destroy our friends and after weep their dust : 
Our own love waking cries to see what's done, 65 
While shameful hate sleeps out the afternoon. 

49. warfd'] warpt F i, 2 ; wrapt F 3, 4. 50. Scorned] Scorched Hanmer 
(Warburton), Scorfd Becket conj. 58, 59. carried^ . . . Jenifer] Theobald, 
carried . . . sender^ Yt 61. tr%vial\ F i, 2 ; triall F 3 ; tried F 4. 65, 
66.] Johnson considered these two lines spurious. 66. shamejul Jkate] shame 
full late Globe edition (W. G. C, Fraser Aiag, conj.). 

^, perspective\ The old word for we shall meet at compt " (C7/^/iS9, v. n. 

telescope is here used to mean a special 273), where it means the final reckon- 

kind of glass. ''Perspectives, which ing. 

rightly gazed upon, show nothing but 60. raskfaults\ Lettsom would read 

confusion, cftA awry distinguish form " " rasher fifiidts." 

(Richard IL ii. ii. 18), Cf. also, 1615, 66.] This line is by many editors 

John Stephens, SatyriccU Essays^ supped to be corrupt. Sleep out the 

character xvii. p. 301, '' My mistresse afternoon probabl3r means to sleep all 

is m^ perspective glasse, through which the afternoon, having completed one's 

I view the world's vanity" (Tram, work in the morning. Hate has done 

New Shak, Sec.). its best and now sleeps at ease. Of. 

57. cempt] reckoning, at in " When ** Thou hast not youth nor age ; But, 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



sc. m.] 



THAT ENDS WELL 



149 



Be this sweet Helen's knell, and now forget her. 
Send forth your amorous token for fair Maudlin : 
The main consents are had ; and here we '11 stay 
To see our widower's second marriage-day. 70 

Count Which better than the first, O dear heaven, bless ! 
Or, ere they meet, in me, O nature, cesse ! 

Laf. Come on, my son, in whom my house's name 
Must be digested, give a favour from you 
To sparkle in the spirits of my daughter, 75 

That she may quickly come. 

[Bertram gives a ring. 
By my old beard. 
And every hair that 's on 't, Helen, that 's dead. 
Was a sweet creature ; such a ring as this, 
The last that e'er I took her leave at court, 
I saw upon her finger. 



71. Count] Theobald, continued to king in Ff. 
comma in Ff. 79, that ^er r\ that ere iff. 



72. matfl Rowe; no 



aft it were, an after-dinner's slecnp. 
Dreaming on both . . ." (Measure for 
Measure, in. L 32). 

68. il/asM^£»] Magdalen. It may be 
only a coincidence mat the heroine of 
this plav has Shakespeare's &vourite 
name (it we may judge by the frequent 
use), whereas her substitute is given a 
name apparently distasteful to mm, for 
we only come across it once again, in 
the Comedy of Errors, as a servant's 
name. 

71. 72. Which . . . cesse !'\ The Ff 
give this speech to the king. The 
mistake is palpable. 

72. cesse\ old spelling, retained for 
the sake of the rhyme. 

73. /<7«] son-in-law. 

74. digested] amalgamated. Cf. 
"With my two daughters' dowers 
digest this third" (King Lear, I. i. 130). 



79. The last] the last time (see 
Abbott, § 48); "her" seems to be 
used for ** of her," '* at her hands," i,e. 
I bade her &rewell (Abbott, § 220) 
[Prof. Proescholdt]. Lettsom observes, 
" The last that " cannot possibly mean 
" the last time that " : if it means any- 
thing, he says, it must mean " the la^ 
ring that" " Nor is it Ei^lish to say 
'take a person's leave' for *take 
leave of a person.' " He would there- 
fore read "The last eve, ere she took 
her leave at court" It seems rather 
beside the mark to discuss the " Eng- 
lish." Shakespeare used the language 
very much as he pleased, as poor John- 
son so often discovered. Taking " the 
last" to mean "the last time" makes 
the passage quite dear, and I think that 
suffices. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



150 ALL'S WELL [act v. 

Ber. Hers it was not 80 

King. Now, pray you, let me see it ; for mine eye, 
While I was speaking, oft was fastened to 't 
This ring was mine ; and, when I gave it Helen, 
I bade her, if her fortunes ever stood 
Necessitied to help, that by this token 85 

I would relieve her. Had you that craft to reave 

her 
Of what should stead her most ? 
Ber. My gracious sovereign, 

Howe'er it pleases you to take it so. 
The ring was never hers. 
Count. Son, on my life, 

I Ve seen her wear it ; and she reckon'd it 90 

At her life's rate. 
Laf. I 'm sure I saw her wear it 

Ber. You are deceiv'd, my lord, she never saw it : 
In Florence was it from a casement thrown me, 
Wrapp'd in a paper, which contained the name 
Of her that threw it Noble she was, and thought 95 
I stood ingag'd : but when I had subscribed 
To mine own fortune, and informed her fully 
I could not answer in that course of honour 

90. /'w]Pope, /^tfwFf. 91. /^i]Rowe, /jWiFf;/V/]Pope, /a»»Ff. 
96. ingag*d'\ engaged TSiowt, 

83.] Elze compares the supposed gift understand *'I bade her . . . (remem- 

of a ring by Elizabeth to Essex, when ber) that by this token ..." 
the latter sailed for Cadiz, 1596 (cf. 85. Necessitied] mneQ^ oihtX^, 
Henry VIII,), ** In Samuel Rowley's 96. fW^^'flf] not gaged (not ingaged). 

When you see me^ you know tne^ Cf. inhabitable =unimiabitable. Also 

there is a similar giving of a ring" Merchant of Venice^ i. i. 130, where 

(Hunter). the positive "gaged " is used. 

84. / bade her] an elliptical con- 96. subscrwd] given an account 

stmction. To make it quite clear, of. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



SC. III.] 



THAT ENDS WELL 



151 



As she had made the overture, she ceas'd 
In heavy satisfaction, and would never lOO 

Receive the ring again. 
King. Plutus himself. 

That knows the tinct and multiplying medicine. 
Hath not in nature's mystery more science 
Than I have in this ring : 'twas mine, 'twas Helen's 
Whoever gave it you. Then, if you know 105 

That you are well acquainted with yourself. 
Confess 'twas hers, and by what rough enforcement 
You got it from her. She call'd the saints to 

surety. 
That she would never put it from her finger. 
Unless she gave it to yourself in bed, no 

Where you have never come, or sent it us 
Upon her great disaster. 
Ber, She never saw it 

King. Thou speak'st it falsely, as I love mine honour ; 
And mak'st conjectural fears to come into me. 
Which I would fain shut out. If it should prove 115 
That thou art so inhuman, — ^'twill not prove so ; 
And yet I know not : thou didst hate her deadly, 

11^, falsely i as . , . honour f^ Rowe, 



loi. Plutus"] Rowe, Flatus Ff. 
falsely: as , , , honour, Ff. 

100. heaty satisfaction] "sadly ac- 
quiescing in what she acknowledged 
to be necessary " (Schmidt). 

loi. Plutus] '* The grand alchemist, 
who knows the tincture which confers 
the properties of gold upon base metals, 
and the matter by which gold is multi- 
plied, by which a small quantity of gold 
IS maide to communicate its qualities to 
a large mass of base metal." In the 



gold, or use any craft of multiplication. 
Cf, Antony and Cleopatra, r. v. 37, 
"that great medicine hath With his 
tinct gilded thee." The grand elixir 
of the alchemists is here referred to. 

106. That . . . yourself] The use 
of " ^you know " is similar to that in 
Macbeth, in. iv. 74, "If I stand here, 
I saw him." The meaning in this 
passage is: "As sure as you know 



reign of Henry iv. a law was made to that you are well acquainted with your^ 
forbid all men thenceforth to multiply self," 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



152 ALL'S WELL [act v. 

And she is dead ; which nothing, but to close 
Her eyes myself, could win me to believe, 
More than to see this ring. Take him away. 1 20 

[Guards seize Bertram. 
My fore-past proofs, howe'er the matter fall. 
Shall tax my fears of little vanity. 
Having vainly fear'd too little. Away with him ! 
Well sift this matter further. 

Ber. If you shall prove 

This ring was ever hers, you shall as easy 125 

Prove that I husbanded her bed in Florence, 

Where 3^ she never was. [Exit^ guarded. 

King. I am wrapp'd in dismal thinkings. 

Enter a Gentleman. 

Gent. Gracious sovereign. 

Whether I have been to blame or no, I know 

not: 
Here 's a petition from a Florentine, 1 30 

Who hath for four or five removes come short 
To tender it herself. I undertook it, 
Vanquished thereto by the fair grace and speech 
Of the poor suppliant, who by this I know 
Is here attending : her business looks in her 135 

With an importing visage, and she told me, 

122. tax] F 3, 4 ; taxe F 2 ; tau F I. 127. Exit guarded] Rowe, omitted 
Ff. 128. Enter a Gentleman] before << I am . . . thmkings" Ff. 

123. Having tfomiy] " The proofii I 131. reptoves] day's journeys. A 
hare already known all the time are so frequent word to describe the journeys of 
evident that, whatever the ultimate re- parties, such as a king and his retinue, 
suit, my fears will have proved to have 131. cofM skori] fail to over- 
been too wavering, too feeble." take. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



8C.in.] THAT ENDS WELL 153 

In a sweet verbal brief, it did concern 
Your highness with herself. 

King. Upon his many protestations to marry me when 

his wife was dead^ I blush to say it^ he won me, 140 
Now is the Count Rousillon a widower : his vows 
are forfeited to me^ and my honour ^s paid to him. 
He stole from Florence^ taking no leave^ and I 
follow him to his country for justice. Grant it 
me^Okingl in you it best lies ; otherwise a seducer 145 
flourishes^ and a poor maid is undone. 

Diana Camlet. 

Laf. I will buy me a son-in-law in a fair, and toHJar 

this : I '11 none of him. 
King. The heavens have thought well on thee, Lafeu, 1 50 

To bring forth this discovery. Seek these suitors : 

Go speedily and bring again the count 

[Exeunt Gentleman and some Attendants. 

I am afeard the life of Helen, lady, 

Was foully snatch'd. 
Count. Now, justice on the doers !. 

142. honour's] Rowe ; honors F i, 2, 3 ; honours, F 4. 144. his country] 
F I, 2 ; this country F 3, 4. 148. fair\ F i i/ear F 3, 4 ; feare F 2 ; and 
toll] a touU Becket con]. 148, 149. toll for this: ril\touU for this. lie F 
I ; totUe him for this. IleF 2, Sj 4* 152. Exeunt . . .] Malone, omitted Ff. 

137. sweet . . . brief] To Rolfe this to the right owner." Lafeu means 

phrase seems exactly to describe itself "I will put Bertram up for sale; 

and many others like it in the poet's I prefer to have any other." Some 

languages-condensed ** sweetness and editors take it to mean I will toll the 

light" — ''infinite riches in a little bell for this Bertram, get rid of him. 

room." The toll-book in which horses sold at 

148, 149. toll for this] ** pay a tax for fairs were entered is alluded to in The 



the Ub ert^ of jefli ng^ this = Bertram. 

The"toii-took was onlered l)y law " to . ., 

prevent the sale of such (horses) as were (apud Simpson, The School of Shake- 

stolen and to preserve the property speare^ vol. ii. p. 210). 



Revengei^s Tragedy{apud Dodsley, l.c, 
X. 44). See also The play of Stuckley 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



154 ALL'S WELL [act v. 

Re-enter Bertram, guarded. 

King. I wonder, sir, sith wives are monsters to you, 155 
And that you fly them as you swear them lordship, 
Yet you desire to marry. 

Re-enter Gentleman^ with Widow and Diana. 

What woman *s that ? 

Dia. I am, my lord, a wretched Florentine, 
Derived from the ancient Capilet : 
My suit, as I do understand, you know, 160 

And therefore know how far I may be pitied. 

Wid, I am her mother, sir, whose age and honour 
Both suffer under this complaint we bring. 
And both shall cease, without your remedy. 

King. Come hither, county ; do you know these women ? 

Ber. My lord, I neither can nor will deny 1 66 

But that I know them : do they charge me further? 

Dia. Why do you look so strange upon your wife ? 

Ber. She 's none of mine, my lord. 

Dia. If you shall marry. 

You give away this hand, and that is mine ; 1 70 

You give away heaven's vows, and those are mine ; 
You give away myself, which is known mine ; 

154. Re-enter . . .] after line 153 in the Ff. 155. sir, sith wives are 
monsters'] Dyce ; Sir^ sir^ wives are monsters F I ; Sir^ wives are such monsters 
F 2 ; Sir^ wives are so monstrous F 3, 4. 157. Re-enter . . .] Malone ; 
Enter Widdow, Diana, and Parolles Ff. 165. hither"] F 2, 3, 4 ; hether F I ; 
county;] Dyce (ed. 2) (S. Walker conj.), count; Ff. 

15J. «Mw/wj] The Folio reads, "Sir, seems so plausible as to be aknost a 

sir wives,'' which, if not absolute non- certainty. 

sense (it has been taken to express the 164. cease] perish (as above). Both 

king's impatience), is a very unusual my age and honour will come to an end 

phrase. Dyce's emendation sith (since) unless I have your remedy. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



sciii.] THAT ENDS WELL 155 

For I by vow am so embodied yours, 

That she which marries you must marry me ; 

Either both or none. 175 

Laf. Your reputation comes too short for my daughter : 

you are no husband for her. 
Ber. My lord, this is a fond and desperate creature, 

Whon sometime I have laugh'd with : let your highness 

Lay a more noble thought upon mine honour 1 80 

Than for to think that I would sink it here. 
King. Sir, for my thoughts, you have them ill to friend 

Till your deeds gain them : fairer prove your honour 

Than in my thought it lies. 
Dia, Good my lord. 

Ask him upon his oath, if he does think 185 

He had not my virginity. 
King, What say'st thou to her ? 
Ber. She *s impudent, my lord ; 

And was a common gamester to the camp. 
Dia. He does me wrong, my lord ; if I were so, 

He might have bought me at a common price: 190 

Do not believe him. O ! behold this ring. 

Whose high respect and rich validity 

Did lack a parallel ; yet for all that 

He gave it to a commoner o' the camp. 

If I be one. 
Count He blushes, and 'tis hit : 195 

183. gain them: fairer] Hanmer (Theobald conj.), i^in them fairer: Ff. 
195. 'tis hit] 'tis it Capell, 'tis his Pope, is hit Malone conj., *tis ft Henley 
conj. 

192. validity] worth. Cf. "more 195. 'tis hit] 'tis found out. Cf. 

validity . . . lives in carrion flies than *'Thou hast hit it" {Tamit^ of the 

Romeo " (Romeo and Juliet^ in. iii. Shrew, 11. 199). In most editions the 

33). emendation * * 'tis it " has been adopted. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



166 



ALL'S WELL 



[actv. 



Of six preceding ancestors, that gem 
Conferr'd by testament to th' sequent issue. 
Hath it been owed and worn. This is his wife : 
That ring 's a thousand proofs. 

King. Methought you said 

You saw one here in court could witness it 200 

Dia. I did, my lord, but loath am to produce 
So bad an instrument: his name's FaroUes. 

Laf. I saw the man to-day, if man he be. 

King. Find him, and bring him hither. 

Ber. What of him? 

He's quoted for a most perfidious slave, 205 

With all the spots o' the world tax'd and debosh'd 
Whose nature sickens but to speak a truth. 
Am I or that or this for what he 11 utter, 
That will speak any thing ? 

King. She hath that ring of yours 

Ber. I think she has : certain it is I lik'd her, 210 

And boarded her i* the wanton way of youth. 
She knew her distance, and did angle for me. 
Madding my eagerness with her restraint. 



197. /^M']Fj,4; to*thTi,2. 
nahtre sickens: but • . • truths Ff. 



207. Whose . • . truth'\ Hanmer, Whose 
211. 6oardeaiRawe,6oordedFf. 



197. sequent issue"] a legal term : the 
next heir to whom persomd property is 
bequeathed. 

202. instrumenf\ a thing or person 
useful as a means to an end. 

205. quoted] dted. Cf. " A fellow 
by the hand of nature marked, quoted 
and signed to do a deed of shame" 
(Kin/john, IV. ii. 222). 

205. tUbosh*d] See above, 11. iii. 140. 

208. Am I or . . J] not to be or 
this or that for s to be indifferent to. 



211. boarded] See Cotgrave : ** abor- 
der = to approach, accoast, abboord 
. . . come or draw neer unto." Ct 
"Whom, thus at gaze, the palmer 
'gan to board With goodly reason, and 
thus fair bespake'' (Spenser). Also 
ffamletf II. ii. 170, **Awav, I do 
beseech you both, away; I 11 board 
him presently." 

213. Madding] the only verb in 
Shakespeare meaning " to make 
mad." 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



sc. in,] 



THAT ENDS WELL 



157 



As all impediments in fancy's course 
Are motives of more fancy ; and, in fine, 215 

Her infinite cunning, with her modem grace, 
Subdued me to her rate : she got the ring. 
And I had that which any inferior might 
At market-price have bought. 
Dia. I must be patient ; 

You, that have tum'd off a first so noble wife, 220 
May justly diet me. I pray you yet, 

216. infinite cunning] Singer (S. Walker conj. and Collier MS.); insuiU 
camming ¥ i ; insuit comming F 2, 3 ; instUt coming F 4. 2 iS. any\ anotmy 
S. Walker conj. 221. dieq dytt Ff, dye to conj. 



215. fancyl love ; frequently used in 
this sense. Cf. "a martial man to be 
soft fanc/s slave " (Lucrece^ 200). 

216. modem grace] Editors have 
found it difficult to explain this expres- 
sion. Williams asks, " What are we 
to understand by 'modem grace'? 
Johnson tells us explicitly tmit, in 
Shakespeare, 'modem' has the 
signification of 'vulgar,' 'mean,' 
'common.' Malone understands it 
to mean 'common,' 'ordinary'; 
Walker 'trivial,' 'everyday.' That 
such was its early meaning we may 
learn from this play, 11. iii. 2, where 
we hear of 'philosophical persons, to 
make modem and familiar, thinfi;s 
supernatural and causeless.' Could 
such an epithet be, imder any circum- 
stances, applicable to grace (it would 
be preposterous, in this case, to suppose 
an ox3rmoron), and, if it could, would 
'modem grace' convey the evident 
purport of Bertram's explanation of 
nis conduct? Assuredly not. Could 
Bertram wish it to be believed that 
he had been betrayed by a woman of 
but commonplace attractions? . . ." 
Bertram is evidently trying to excuse 
his conduct ; probably he meant very 
much what Beaumont and Fletcher 
implied when they wrote, "Can red 
and white An eye, a nose, a cheek — ... 
with a little turn That wanton fools call 



faishion thus abuse me?" (Band$ua^ 
II. ii.). 

217. rcUel condition, i,e, the gift of 
the ring. 

218. a»(jK] Walker supposes this to be 
a misprint ; as in Lov^s Labow^s Losty 
I. i. 104, where " Why should I joy in 
any abortive birth ? " is print^ by mis- 
take for "an abortive birth." 

221. diet] undoubtedly corrupt^ but 
nothing to replace it. Malone mter- 
prets it " may justly loath or be weary 
of me, as people generally are of a 
regimen or prescribed and scanty diet." 
Collins and Steevens think she means 
"may justly make me £Eist, by de- 
priving me (as Desdemona sajrs) of the 
rites for which I love you." Steevens 
adds that the allusion may be to the 
management of hawks who were half* 
starved till they became tractable. 
Thus in Coriolanus, "I'll watch him. 
Till he be dieted to my request." To 
£Eist, like one who takes diet, is a 
comparison that occurs in The Two 
Gentlemen of Verona. If we are to 
accept the reading 'diet,' it seems 
preferable to accept the latter inter- 
pretation, as answering to Bertram's 
"turning o£f" of Helena. Shake- 
speare may have written something 
Iflce "do't to me" or "do't with 
me," or perhaps " dye to me." (See 
Rom. xiv. 7.) 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



158 ALL'S WELL [act v. 

Since you lack virtue I will lose a husband, 

Send for your ring ; I will return it home, 

And give me mine again. 
Ber. I have it not. 

King. What ring was yours, I pray you ? 
Dia. Sir, much like 225 

The same upon your finger. 
King. Know you this ring ? this ring was his of late. 
Dia, And this was it I gave him, being abed. 
King. The story then goes false, you threw it him 

Out of a casement 
Dia. I have spoke the truth. 230 

Enter Attendant with Parolles. 

Ber. My lord, I do confess the ring was hers. 

King. You boggle shrewdly, every feather starts you. 
Is this the man you speak of? 

Dia. Ay, my lord. 

King. Tell me, sirrah, but tell me true, I charge you, 

Not fearing the displeasure of your master, 235 

Which on your just proceeding I '11 keep off. 

By him and by this woman here what know you ? 

Par. So please your majesty, my master hath been 

226.] Arranged as in Capell; in one line in Ff ; Hanmer would put " Sir" 
after "finger.'^ 227. ringt'i Theobald, Ring, Ff. 

223. h(mu\ Cf. **So thy great gift, us that he means "a fickle woman " 

upon misprision growing, comes home {Antony and Cleopatra, in. xiii. 

again" {Sonnets, Ixxxvii. 12). Also, no). 

•* Now to Helen is (my heart) home 237. By , . . you T\ ** By " is yyc£i<^' 

XQt\xmtA*'(Midsummer'Nigkfs Dream, times used by Shakespeare after verbs 

in. ii. 172). of speaking, thinking and knowing 

232. boggle] change about. Antony "about.*' Cf. Much Ado, v. L 313, 

says to Cleopatra, **you have been a ** anything that I do know by her" ; 

boggier ever," where the context tells Merchant of Venice, i, iL 58, "how say 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



sciii.] THAT ENDS WELL 159 

an honourable gentleman : tricks he hath had in 
him, which gentlemen have. 240 

King. Come, come, to the purpose : did he love this 
woman ? 

Par. Faith, sir, he did love her ; but how ? 

King: How, I pray you ? 

Par, He did love her, sir, as a gentleman loves a woman. 245 

King. How is that ? 

Par. He loved her, sir, and loved her not 

King, As thou art a knave, and no knave. What an 
equivocal companion is this ! 

Par. I am a poor man, and at your majesty's com- 250 
mand. 

Laf. He 's a good drum, my lord, but a najjghty orator. 

Dia. Do you know he promised me marriage ? 

Par. Faith, I know more than I '11 speak. 

King. But wilt thou not speak all thou knowest? 255 

Par. Yes, so please your majesty. I did go between 
them, as I said; but more than that, he loved 
her, for indeed he was mad for her, and talked of 
Satan, and of limbo, and of Furies, and I know 
not what : yet I was in that credit with them at 260 
that time, that I knew of their going to bed, and 
of other motions, as promising her marriage, and 

243. but hatvfl Malone thinks that this belongs to the next speech of the king. 
248. knave.'^ knave, Ff. 257. than that, /4^] F 3, 4 ; then that he F I, 2. 

you by the French Lord ? " Also, **For ..." Sidney wrote, **A prince of 

1 know nothing by (concerning) my- great courage and beauty, but fostered 

self; yet am I not hereby justified: up in blood by his naughty father." 

but he that judgeth me is the Lord" 262. mo tions'] suggestion s. Cf. "Ill 

(I Cor. iv. 4). join my datSfiterroTum forthwith in 



lx)r. IV. 4). loin I 

252. natd£h ty} worthless (German, holy wedlock bands. — I thank you for 

nichttg), Kif^Lear, n.iv. 136, "Thy your motion" {S Henry VI. III. 

sister's naught : O Regan ! she hath 244). 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



160 ALL'S WELL [act v. 

things that would derive me ill will to speak of: 

therefore I will not speak what I know. 
King. Thou hast spoken all already, unless thou canst 265 

say they are married : but thou art too fine in 

thy evidence ; therefore stand aside. 

I^his ring, you say, was yours. 
Dia. Ay, my good lord. 

King. Where did yoxx buy it ? or who gave it you ? 
Dia. It was not given me, nor I did not buy it 270 

King. Who lent it you ? 

Dia. It was not lent me neither. 

King. Where did you find it then ? 
Dia. I found it not 

King. If it were yours by none of all these ways, 

How could you give it him ? 
Dia. I never gave it him. 

Laf. This woman's an easy glove, my lord: die goes 275 

off and on at pleasure. 
King. This ring was mine : I g^ve it his first wife. 
Dia. It might be yours or hers, for aught I know. 
King. Take her away ; I do not like her now. 

To prison with her ; and away with him. 280 

Unless thou telFst me where thou hadst this ring 

Thou diest within this hour. 
Dia. 1 11 never tell you. 

270. nor I did mi] F i^ 2 ; f$cr did not F Z» 4* 278. au^ht] Theobald 
(ed. a), ou£^if Ff. 

263. derive me ii/] bring down ill on mad devil of jealousy " (Merry Wives^ 

me. Cf. " What friend of mine that v. i. 19). 

had to him deriyed your anger, did I 27a n^/^^fM?/] one of the double 

continue in my liking ? " {Henry VIII. negatives so common in Elizabethan 

II. iv. 32). literature. 

2^. fine] subtle. Cf. **The finest 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



sciii] THAT ENDS WELL 161 

King. Take her away. 

Dia. I '11 put in bail, my liege. 

King. I think thee now some common customer. 

Dia. By Jove, if ever I knew man, 'twas you. 285 

King. Wherefore hast thdu accus'd him all this while ? 

Dia. Because he 's guilty, and he is not guilty. 

He knows I am no maid, and he '11 swear 

to 't : 
I '11 swear I am a maid, and he knows not. 
Great king, I am no strumpet, by my life ; 290 

I 'm either maid, or else this old man's wife. 

King. She does abuse our ears : to prison with her ! 

Dia. Good mother, fetch my bail. \Exit Widow. 

Stay, royal sir : 
The jeweller that owes the ring is sent for. 
And he shall surety me. But for this lord, 295 

Who hath abus'd me, as he knows himself. 
Though yet he never harm'd me, here I quit 

him: 
He knows himself my bed he hath defil'd. 
And at that time he got his wife with child : 
Dead though she be, she feels her young one 
kick : 300 

So there 's my riddle : one that 's dead is quick ; 
And now behold the meaning. 

291. / 'm\ Pope, lam Yi. 293. Exit Widow] Pope, omitted Ft 

288. knows\ " 'To know' seems to therefore considered wealthy, wereun- 

be used in more than one passage of exceptionable bail" (H. T.)« 

this play in the sense of opinari, 294. oives] possesses, a^ above, 

as its sister yytai^tu sometimes is" 297. quit him\ declare him to be 

(S. Walker, Crit. Ex. iii. 81). quit. Cf. "God quit you in his 

2g4. jewe/ler] "Jewellers were mercy" {Nienry V. 11. ii. 166). 
formerly the only bankers, and being 

II 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



162 ALL'S WELL [act v. 

Re-enter Widow with Helena. 

King, Is there no exordst 

Beguiles the truer office of mine eyes ? 

Is 't real that I see? 
Hel. No, my good lord ; 

Tis but the shadow of a wife you see ; 305 

The name and not the thing. 
Ber. Both, both. O ! pardon. 

Hel. O my good lord 1 when I was like this maid, 

I found you wondrous kind. There is your ring ; 

And, look you, here 's your letter ; this it says : 

When from my finger you can get this ring^ 310 

And are by me with child^ etc. 

This is done : 

Will you be mine, now you are dQubly won ? 
Ber If she, my li^e, can make me know this clearly, 

1 11 love her dearly, ever, ever dearly. 
Hel. If it appear not plain and prove untrue, 315 

Deadly divorce step between me and you 1 

O ! my dear mother ; do I see you living ? 
Laf. Mine eyes smell onions; I shall weep anon. 

\To Parolles.'\ Good Tom Drum, lend me a hand- 

kercher: so, I thank thee. Wait on me home, 320 

I'll make sport with thee: let thy courtesies 

alone, they are scurvy ones. 

£. Re-enter . , .] Capell ; Enter Hellen and Widow Yt 303. truer 
true Office F 3, true Officer F 4. 311. are) Rowe, is Ff. 319. [To 
ies] Rowe, omitted F. 319, 32a Geod . . . handkercher\ as verse in Ff. 
321. courtetiesi curtsies Ff. 

302. exercisti here used in the sense of Witchcrafts Bk. XV. iL, " to raise a 
of one who raises spirits, by no ^ost ... the exorcist must seek out 
means usual. Cf. Scott, The Discovery . . ."(W. J. C, LiUle Quarto Shah.). 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



sciiL] THAT ENDS WELL 163 

King. Let us from point to point this story know, 
To make the,..gvenjnith in pleasure flow. 
\To Diana.] If thou be'st yet a fresh uncropped 
flower, 325 

Choose thou thy husband, and I '11 pay thy dower ; 
For I can guess that by thy honest aid 
Thou kept'st a wife herself, thyself a maid. 
Of that and all the progress, more and less, 
Resolvedly more leisure shall express: 330 

All y gt seems we ll ; and if it end so meet, 
The bitter past, more welcome is the sweet 

[F/ourisA. 

325. [To Diana] Rowe, omitted Ff. 328. i*//*j/] JkepM F i ; J^M F 2 j 
ke^pesf F 3, 4. 330. Resolvtdlyl F 4, Resoldvedfy F i ; ResoMcUyY 2, 3. 

324. ev en /rKML ghfiletrnth. Cf. 330. Resolvedhi until all is resolved 

** The king natA run bad humours on or explained. Cl "at pick'd leisure . . . 

the knight; that's the evai of it" single I'll resolve you ... of every 

{Henry V.iiA. 128). There is a shade These happened accidents" (Tempesty 

of meaning in it which connects it with v. i. 248). 
the verb " flow " that follows. 



[Epilogue. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



164 ALL'S WELL THAT ENDS WELL 



EPILOGUE 



Spoken by the King. 

The king^s a beggar^ now the play is done : 

All uwell endedi jfjhis suit be won, 

That you express content ; which we will pay. 

With strife to please you, day exceeding day : 

Ours be your patience then, and yours our parts ; 5 

Your gentle hands lend us, and take our hearts, 

[Exeunt. 



Epilogue 



King\ Pope. 



I. The king 's a begear] Reference to 
the Ballad. In LwSs Labour's Lost 
Annado asks his page, " Is there not a 
ballad, boy, of the kin? and the 6^;gar?" 
To which Moth repBes, " The world 
was very guilty of such a ballad some 
three ages since ; but, I think, now 'tis 
not to be found ; or, if it were, it would 
neither serve for the writing nor the 
time. " In spite of which remarks it has 



been looked for and found, Rolfe says, 
vaVacf^Reliques. Ct Richard IL v , 
iiL So, ''Our scene is altered from a 
serious thing, And now changed to 'The 
B^[gar and the King.' " 

4. day . . . day] every day better 
than the dav before. 

5. Ours be . . . and yours] Let us 
have your patience, you will have our 
parts, our acting. 



Prinitd by MOKKISON & Gibb Limitsd, Edinburgh 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



■-a 



Digitized by VjOOQIC : '' 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



