THE WORKS OF SHAKESPEARE 

EDITED FOR THE SYNDICS OF THE 

CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS 

BY 

SIR ARTHUR QUILLER-COUCH 
AND JOHN DOVER WILSON 



THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 



CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS 

C. F. CLAY, Manager 
LONDON : FETTER LANE, E.C. 4 

NEW YORK : THE MACMILLAN CO. 

BOMBAY ] 

CALCUTTA [ MACMILLAN AND CO., LTD. 

MADRAS ) 

TORONTO : THE MACMILLAN CO. OF 

CANADA, LTD. 
TOKYO : MARUZEN-KABUSHIKI-KAISHA 

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED 



f 



THE 
COMEDY OF ERRORS 





CAMBRIDGE 

AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS 
I 922 






\C{Z'^. 



finmio m a«Ej»T •■I'mia 



CONTENTS 



FRANCIS BACON 

INTRODUCTION 

TO THE READER 

THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 

THE COPY FOR THE TEXT OF 1623 

NOTES 

THE STAGE-HISTORY 

GLOSSARY 



FRONTISPIECE 



I 
65 
87 

"5 
121 



THE FRONTISPIECE IS REPRODUCED FROM THE ENGRAVING 
BY SIMON VAN DE PASSE (v. pp. XXll-Xxiii) 



THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 



I 

The Folio of 1623 supplies our only text: The 
Comedie of Errors coming fifth in the order of that 
volume. On every test it must rank among the earliest 
of Shakespeare's plays. Francis Meres (1598) puts it 
second on his famous list in Palladis Tamia. — 'As 
Plautus and Seneca are accounted the best for Comedy 
and Tragedy among the Latines, so Shakespeare among 
the English is the most excellent in both kinds; for 
Comedy, witnes his Geteme of Verona, his Errors, his 
Loue labors lost. . . . ' But we find an almost indubitable 
reference to it in a merry tract describing the Christmas 
revels at Gray's Inn, i 594—5, and entitled Gesta Gray- 
orum: or the History of the High and mighty Prince, 
Henry, Prince of Purpoole . . . Who Reigned and Died, 
A.D. 1594^; this Prince being one Henry Helmes of 
Norfolk, gentleman, chosen Lord of Misrule for the 

^ A boyish, boisterous and clearly contemporaneous ac- 
count of these very remarkable revels, which ended by 
attracting Queen Elizabeth herself to witness x^ntiv finale in 
a Masque of Proteus (introduced by Campion's lovely lyric 
'Of Neptune's Empire let us sing...'). The MS would 
seem to have lain in limbo until 1688, when it was 'printed 
for W. Canning, at his Shop in the Temple-Cloysters, Price, 
one Shilling,' and dedicated by him to Matthew Smyth, 
Esq., Comptroller of the Inner Temple. A reprint (19 15) 
has been edited by Dr W. W. Greg for the Malone Society. 
'Prince of Purpoole' is a title facetiously borrowed from 
Porte Poule Lane, by Gray's Inn. For the descent of this 
property to Gray's Inn from one Simon de Gardino de 
Purtepole the curious may consult Mr Kingsford's edition 
of Stow's Surrey of London (Oxford, 1908), and follow the 
references given in his Note, vol. ii. p. 371. 



viii THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 

occasion. He was installed with no little pomp and cir- 
cumstance, issued extravagant proclamations containing 
much legal wit (and some bawdry), and in particular 
on the second Grand Night (Dec. 28) entertained an 
'ambassador' and his suite from the Inner Temple: on 
which occasion, it would seem, a great deal of misrule 
arose. 

When the Ambassador was placed, as aforesaid, and that 
there was something to be performed for the Delight of the 
Beholders, there arose such a disordered Tumult and Crowd 
upon the Stage, that there was no Opportunity to effect 
that which was intended: there came so great a number of 
worshipful Personages upon the Stage, that might not be 
displaced; and Gentlewomen, whose Sex did privilege them 
from Violence, that when the Prince and his Officers had 
in vain, a good while, expected and endeavoured a Reforma- 
tion, at length there was no hope of Redress for that present. 
The Lord Ambassador and his Train thought that they 
were not so kindly entertained, as was before expected, and 
thereupon would not stay any longer at that time, but, in 
a sort, discontented and displeased. 

After their Departure the Throngs and Tumults did 
somewhat cease, although so much of them continued as was 
able to disorder and confound any good Inventions what- 
soever. In regard whereof, as also for that the Sports in- 
tended were especially for the gracing of the Templarians, 
it was thought good not to offer any thing of Account, 
saving Dancing and Revelling with Gentlewomen; and 
after such Sports, a Comedy of Errors (like to Plautus his 
Menechmus) was played by the Players. So that Night was 
begun, and continued to the end, in nothing but Confusion 
and Errors; whereupon, it was ever afterwards called, The 
Night of Errors. 

Now this (in i 594) while obviously referring to our 
play, obviously does not refer to a premiere. It leads 
rather to a conjecture which Mr Henry Cunningham^ 
thus sets forth: 

1 Introduction to The Comedy of Errors in 'The Arden 
Shakespeare,' p. xv. 



INTRODUCTION ix 

The expression 'played by the Players' must have re- 
ference to a performance by the Chamberlain's servants, 
which was on the 28th December, the servants most probably 
including Shakespeare himself; and it is somewhat singular, 
as Fleay points out in his Life and Works of Shakespeare, 
p. 125, that this performance should also have been given 
apparently by the same company as that which we know 
played before the Queen at Greenwich on the same date and 
possibly in the same piece. It would undoubtedly, at any 
rate from the business point of view, be so much more con- 
venient for the company not to change the piece that we 
may fairly regard Fleay 's supposition as correct. 

A difficulty is raised by Dr Greg (following Mr E. K. 
Chambers^) that the accounts of the Treasurer of the 
Chamber show payments to the Lord Chamberlain's 
men (Shakespeare's company) for performances before 
the Court, then at Greenwich, both on the 26th December 
and the 28th, Gray's Inn night: and the performances 
were in the evening, and the players could not have been 
in two places at once. But Mrs C. Carmichael Stopes 
had already shown, and has recently reminded us^, that 
the assumption italicised is worse than unnecessary: that 
instead of the usual form 'On Innocents' Day at night' 
this particular entry has 'On Innocents' Day.' So we are 
still free to believe that our players, having enacted 
Errors before the Queen in the afternoon, returned in 
time to present it before the lavvyers in the evening. 

We cannot follow Mrs Stopes, however, in extracting 
from the Gesta a theory that 'the play was considered 
the crowning disgrace of the evening.' To be sure a 
mock court was held, two nights later, to enquire into 
hese ' great Disorders and Abuses,' and a mock' Sorcerer' 
3ut on trial for having caused them — 'and Lastly, that 
le had foisted a Company of base and common Fellows, 

^ Modem Language Re^uieix:, Oct. 1906. 

- The Life of Henry, Third Earl of Southampton, Shake- 
heare's Patron, by Charlotte Carmichael Stopes. Cam- 
ridge, 1922 (p. 73). 



X THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 

to make up our Disorders with a Play of Errors and 
Confusions; and that that Night had gained to us Dis- 
credit, and it self a Nick-name of Errors.' It seems to 
us, remembering some few undergraduate 'rags' at 
Oxford and Cambridge and the 'literature' to which 
they gave gay occasion, that the lady takes au grand 
s&ieux a serio-comic account of what was actually a 
giddy revel from first to last. We doubt then that it was 
a makeshift: we suspect rather that it was pre-arranged; 
that the players had been pre-empted from Greenwich 
to present just such an extravaganza upon Plautus as 
would tickle the scholarly taste and amuse the 'studious 
lawyers' amid their bowers. 

All this, at any rate, carries us back to i 594. A scrap 
of 'internal evidence' suggested to Theobald a yet 
earlier date. The following passage occurs in 3. 2, 122, 
where Dromio (of Syracuse) is describing Luce, the 
fat kitchen-wench: 

She is spherical, like a globe: I could find out countries 
in her... 

Where France? 

In her forehead — armed and reverted, making war against 
her heir. 

Here is a play upon hair and heir. In i 5 89 Henry III 
of France had named Henry of Navarre^ — Henri 
Quatre — as heir to the throne. This nomination re- 
vived civil war, as everyone knows, and in i 591 Eliza- 
beth sent across an expeditionary force, under Sir John 
Norris and the Earl of Essex, to support Navarre's 
cause — a move in her game of Protestant policy. Peace 
was made in July 1593, and Navarre proclaimed king: 
after which the pun in our author's topical allusion 
must have speedily fallen flat. But in 1591 (say) our 
great national deliverance from the Armada would yet 

^ Cf. for England's contemporary interest in Navarre, 
Lo've's Labour^ s Lost {passim). 



INTRODUCTION xi 

prevail in memoiy, to win applause as the catechism 
went on : 

Where Spain? 

Faith, I saw it not: but I felt it hot in her breath. 

Where America, the Indies? 

O, sir, upon her nose, all o'er embellished with rubies, 
carbuncles, sapphires, declining their rich aspect to the hot 
breath of Spain, iKiho senfwhole armadoes of c arracks to be 
ballast at her nose^. 

On the whole the date, i 591-2, generally assigned 
to this play, seems the likeliest. 

II 

For its 'origin,' it is simply an adaptation of the 
Menaechmi {The Ttoo Menaechmuses) of Plautus; with 
the additions of one scene (3. i.) borrowed from the 
same author's Amphitruo — where Mercury keeps the 
real husband out of his own house while Jupiter, the 
sham husband, is engaged with the poor fellow's wife, 
within doors — and a romantic Shakespearian beginning 
and end. 

We are not greatly concerned to enquire if Shake- 
speare had enough Latin to derive his plot direct from 
Plautus, or if he took it from a translation — and, if so, 
from what translation ? It would be interesting to know; 
and research has passed all that can gather of Elizabethan 
Grammar Schools and their curricula through various 
sieves, to shake out various modest heaps of our poet's 
latinity. In the result we get little for certain, and that 
little certainly, for critical purposes, of no great matter. 
For our part, it lays no strain upon us to believe that 
the 'small Latin' put into Shakespeare at the Stratford- 
on-Avon Grammar School included a play or so of 
Plautus, the trick of whose Latin is easier to master 

^ Possibly some pun here, to us recondite, between 
Spain's nose and King Philip's No's. 

bz 



xii THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 

than that of Homeric Greek to which, at age of eleven 
and under, one of the present editors underwent promo- 
tion straight from an Attic grammar. The earliest 
known English translation of Menaechmi was entered 
on the books of the Stationers' Cdmpany in i 594, and 
appeared in i 595 under the i\x\.Q.,Mencechmt, A pleasant 
and fine conceited Comcedie, taken out of the most excellent 
zoittie Poet Plautus. Chosen purposely from all the rest, 
as least harmefull, and yet most delightfuH. Written in 
English by W. W. Those who, on the strength of a 
resemblance of phrase here and there^, believe or 
incline to believe that Shakespeare used W. W.'s 
translation, have to conjecture — and this, to be sure, is 
not incredible — that he had seen it in manuscript some 
time before its appearance in print. 

There is, however, another explanation, which we 
ourselves favour, viz.: that Shakespeare worked upon 
some older play based on Plautus' comedy^. If so, it 

^ Of which we may quote two of the most salient. 
{a) Mencechmi, 5. i. 91: 
Mulier. He makes me a stale and a laughing-stocke to the 
world. 
Errors, 2. i. loi: 

Adriana. He breakes the pale 

And feedes from home; poore I am but his stale 
— both ladies complaining of their husbands' misbehaviour, 
(i) Menachmi, 5. i. 308: 
Methinks it is no pleasure to a man to be basted -uoith a 
ropes end two or three houres together. 
Errors, 4. i. 16; 4. 4. 16, 42, etc.: 
Ropes end : to a ropes end, sir, and to that end am I 
return'd: beware the ropes end; 
and cf. 2. 2. 62: Purchase me another drie basting. 

Mr Cunningham collects some 14 of these parallels in his 
Introduction and reprints the whole of W. W.'s rendering 
in his Appendix. Cf. also Hazlitt's Shakespeare^ s Library. 

2 V. the note on the copy, pp. 74, 77-8. 



INTRODUCTION xiii 

was probably the lost play The Historie of Error, 
'shown at Hampton Court on New Yere's daie at night 
I 576, 77, enacted by the children of Powles (St Paul's)': 
which same play seems to turn up again in 1583 as the 
' History of Ferrar ' ( i^^ ^he Revels Accounts as having 
been produced at Windsor. But it will be noted — 
and to this we shall recur — that whenever we hit on 
any record, whether of The Comedy of Errors itself or 
of some likely original, the place of performance is 
always some banqueting hall, be it Gray's Inn, or 
Greenwich, or Hampton Court, or Windsor. 

This third chance, that Shakespeare worked upon 
an earlier play, is curiously strengthened when we dis- 
cover the FoHo, in the two first Acts, distinguishing 
the two Antipholuses as Antipholus Erotes and Anti- 
pholus Sereptus. In 1.2. Antipholus Erotes (of Syracuse) 
pxoha.h\Y= Antipholus Erraticus or Errans, the 'wan- 
dering' and Antipholus Sereptus— Surreptus, the 'stolen' 
brother: but the point is that in the very Prologue of 
the original Plautus calls the stolen twin puer surreptus'^. 

In any event, and whether Shakespeare went straight 
to the Latin, or was indebted to W. W. or to some 
antecedent play, no one seriously disputes that the play, 
as we have it, is of Shakespeare's writing in the main, 
or that it is early work, or that its plot comes out of 
Plautus. 

Ill 

The fun to be extracted from 'mistaken identity,' 
if not as old as the hills, dates back to earliest fairy- 
tale and, on the stage, at least so far back as to later 
Greek Comedy. Plautus himself is suspected to have 
'lifted' his Menaechmi from a play of Poseidippus, the 

^ The similarity between Antipholus Erotes and the 
name Erotium of the courtesan in Plautus may be purely 
accidental, or may have crept in somewhere by mnemonic 
confusion. 



xiv THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 

AtSv/Aot^ 'The Twins' (or 'O/xotoi, 'As Like as Two 
Peas'). But let us see, in a brief abstract, how Plautus 
works it. — 

He opens with a Prologue, the speaker of which 
takes the spectators knowingly into his confidence 
and says, in effect, 'The scene behind me, ladies and 
gentlemen, is a street in Epidamnus. It will present 
some other town to-morrow, in another play; but for 
the while suppose that in Epidamnus we are. I have 
no personal acquaintance with the characters who 
will presently appear; but, as I understand it, the 
situation is something like this: 

'There was a certain merchant in Syracuse who 
had twin sons born to him, so much alike that their 
real mother — let alone their foster-mother — could 
not tell t'other from which. When they had grown to 
seven years of age, their father took one of them, with 
a rich cargo, on a voyage to Tarentum. At Tarentum 
there happened to be a Fair day, with a great con- 
course of people. The boy, straying from his father, 
was lost in the crowd. A certain merchant from 
Epidamnus — a childless man — picked the urchin up 
— kidnapped him, if you will — carried him home to 
Epidamnus, and adopted him for his own. 

'Meanwhile the true father, after seeking his boy 
all over Tarentum, took to his bed there and died 
in a few days, of a broken heart. 

'When news of all this reached Syracuse, the boys' 
grandfather [nothing is said of the mother] in his 
repining altered the name of the surviving twin, 
Sosicles, to Menaechmus, that of the stolen one, 
the puer surreptus.' And this Sosicles-Menaechmus, 

^ Athenaeus (xiv. 658) says that only in the comedies of 
Poseidippus are slave-cooks presented to us. There is one, 
Cylindrus, in the Mcnaechmi. An allusion to Hiero of 
Sicily {Men. 409 seq^ seems a throw-back from Plautus to 
an original which would agree with the date of Poseidippus. 



INTRODUCTION xv 

coming to man's estate, travels for six years in search 
of his lost brother, scouring Istria, Spain, Marseilles, 
lUyria, the Adriatic coasts. Magna Graecia, and all 
the harbours of Italy : until at length on a day he puts 
in at the port of Epidamnus, in Sicily: and at this 
point the play itself opens. 

The lost twin, Menaechmus, is by this time a well- 
to-do citizen of Epidamnus; able to entertain para- 
sites: but something of a loose-liver and moreover 
married to a jealous shrewish wife. As the curtain 
rises his pet parasite, one Peniculus, is discovered 
hanging about his patron's doorway, hungry for a 
meal, when the door opens and Menaechmus tumbles 
out followed by objurgations from his wife. But 
never mind! He has stolen one of her mantles — he 
has it hidden under his cloak — and, by your leave, 
he'll carry it off for a present to the courtesan 
Erotium across the way, taking Peniculus with him. 
So off they steal and are greeted effusively by that 
wanton lady, who calls out her cook and despatches 
him to buy provisions for a luncheon. The assignation 
made, Menaechmus goes off with Peniculus to his 
morning's business in the forum. 

In their absence and while Erotium's cook is 
marketing for the meal, the other twin, Menaechmus- 
Sosicles, arrives on the scene, with his slave Messenio 
and a porter or two carrying his luggage from the 
quay; for he is fresh from shipboard. Whilst he 
stares about him, the cook returns laden with pro- 
visions and greets him by name; and his amazement 
is by no means over when Erotium herself appears 
in tlie doorway and bids him in with endearing words 
and caresses — '' Animule mi, my own Menaechmus!' 
— confounding him still farther by rattling off his 
family history. 'What! Not know you.? — Menaech- 
mus, the son of Moschus, born at Syracuse in Sicily' 
etc. Upon this the stranger — who has hitherto sup- 



i THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 

posed her to be mad or drunk — starts, in desperation 
of his own wits, to play up to her, and, against his 
slave's warning, follows her into the house. This 
closes Act ii. 

Act iii opens with the sweating return of the 
parasite, Peniculus, who has lost his patron in the 
crowd of the forum, and is harking back with pangs 
in his belly for the belated luncheon. Upon him, out 
of Erotium's doorway, tumbles the Traveller-twin; 
who has eaten and been entertained, and, moreover, 
carries perplexedly a rich mantle on his arm, on an 
errand to the dyer's. 'This Epidamnus is a fine place 
egad! where the strumpets not only feast you for 
nothing, but let you loose with a gage d' amour of this 
value ! ' The parasite, promptly mistaking him for his 
twin, at once assails him with reproaches. 'Sir, this is 
outrageous! You gave me the slip: you have doubled 

back and cheated me of my promised luncheon ' 

Close upon this altercation Erotium's maid comes 
running out to overtake the stranger with another 
commission, 'And please Menaechmus, my mistress 
desires you, with her love, to take this bracelet to 
the jeweller's to be smartened up with an extra 
ounce of gold.' 'Better and better!' thinks Sosicles- 
Menaechmus, and walks off with his double booty, 
having first taken care to toss his festal garland down 
another street, to mislead pursuit. 

But the parasite, vowing revenge for his lost 
luncheon, has gone off to tell Menaechmus' wife of 
her husband's perfidy. At the opening of Act iv she 
comes bouncing out of her house in a fury, with the 
informerat her heels. 'You'll catch him red-handed,' 
he promises. ' He came out of that woman's, full of 
wine and garlanded, with the mantle on his arm to 

take to the dyer's Yes, and hullo! here's the garland 

he had Here's the way, if you want to find him!' 

Sure enough, at that moment, they see the real 



INTRODUCTION xvii 

Menaechmus approaching up the street, and hide 
themselves in a porchway. He is late for luncheon 
and in a very bad temper, having been detained at 
the law-courts finding security for a client. As he 
makes for Erotium's door, his wife collars him and 
slaps his face, demanding her mantle. A lively scene 
follows, the parasite abetting the wife and Menaech- 
mus lying hardily. But the woman, weakened by her 
outburst, finally breaks down in tears; threatening, 
however, that he shall never re-enter his own house 
unless he brings back the mantle. 'I'll see it's brought 
back,' promises Menaechmus. 'But, look here,' asks 
Peniculus, as she goes in; 'What do / get for my 
services.?' 'I'll do as much for you when something 
is stolen from your house!' is the answer, as she 
closes the door. 

The parasite — not the first man to interfere be- 
tween husband and wife and to end by cursing both 
— walks off in dudgeon. Menaechmus knocks at 
Erotium's door, which is opened by that lady in 
person. He asks her for the mantle, saying that his 
wife has found out everything. 'But I gave it to you, 
to take to the dyer's — andvay bracelet!' He protests; 
and the more he protests, the more convinced she 
becomes of his cheating. Ladies of her profession know 
these tricks, and she wastes no time over cutting her 
losses. 'Oh, very well! Keep the mantle, wear it or 

let your wife wear it You have fooled me this 

time, but you don't set foot in this house again. So 
you may just run along and fool somebody else!' 
Her door in its turn is slammed-to, and Menaechmus 
left in the street scratching his head, the most shut- 
out — exclusissimus — citizen in Epidamnus. He must 
really go and ask a it^^ friends for advice. 

He has no sooner departed on this errand than 
[Act v] his twin re-enters from the opposite street, 
still a little drunk, still carrying the mantle, and in 



viii THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 

foggy search after his slave Messenio, who has the 
wallet containing his money and is doubtless drinking 
in some obscure tavern. Simultaneously Menaech- 
mus' wife opens her door and, recognising the mantle, 
of course recognises him for her husband. ' So you've 
come back, you beast: and properly ashamed of 
yourself, I hope!' Menaechmus-Sosicles, almost 
sobered by the shock of this onset, pulls himself to- 
gether and asks, with stiff politeness — 

I beg your pardon — What is it excites you, madam .^ 

Wife. You dare breathe a word to me, you shameless 
villain .-' 

M. Sosicles. Excuse me, what is my offence, that I 
may not speak .^ ' 

Wife. You ask me? Oh, the brazen impudence of 
men! 

M. Sosicles {yet more politely). Do you happen to know, 
ma'am, why the Greeks asserted Queen Hecuba to be 
a bitch .J" 

Wife. Certainly not. 

M. Sosicles. It was because Hecuba used to behave 
precisely as you are behaving at this moment. 

So, between the man who has never set eyes on 
her before and the woman who objurgates him as 
her husband, the wrangle goes on until the wife's 
father appears — an old man grumbling at his years 
and infirmities. To him she appeals to be taken home 
and released from this monster of a husband. To 
this the dotard's first answers amount to no more 
than 'Tut-tut! A squabble.' Look here, how many 
times have I warned you against that sort of thing.?... 
And goes with another woman, does he 1 Well, what 
do you expect if you mew a husband up ^ Would you 
have him sit indoors with the maids and card wool?' 
But when he tries equally sage advice upon Men- 
aechmus-Sosicles it is met with assertions and denials 
which both accusers in their turn so sincerely accept 



INTRODUCTION xix 

for signs of madness that at length in bewildered 
self-defence the poor man feigns actual madness. 
A doctor is sent for : whose attentions Sosicles avoids 
by escaping to his ship. Prompt on the doctor's 
arrival the real Menaechmus strolls up, and is at 
once subjected to an examination in lunacy, and is 
only saved by the intervention of Messenio, who 
rescues his supposed master and is promised his 
freedom for it by one who neither is his real master 
nor knows him from Adam. Finally, in the rough- 
and-tumble, Menaechmus-Sosicles, infuriated on 
learning that his slave had been given his liberty by 
somebody who had no business to do anything of 
the sort, rushes in, confronts his twin upon Erotium's 
doorstep. Whereupon, after a swift dvayvoJpicris, all 
is eiplained and all ends happily. 



IV 

From this analysis of Plautus' comedy two things will 
at once be perceived. For the first and most obvious — 
Plautus is content with one pair of twins: Shakespeare 
out-PIautusing Plautus, adds a second pair, the two 
Dromios. Now to double a pair of twins so alike that 
even a wife cannot tell one from the other is not 
merely to double that amount of the improbable which 
a play of 'mistaken identity' claims for credence, but to 
multiply it by more than a hundred — nay by more than 
a thousand. When all the changes have been rung on 
Aristode's impossible probabilities and possible im- 
probabilities, a fairy-tale is a fairy-tale, and we can 
concede a Fairy Prince incommoded by a nose a yard 
long. But a play supposed to be enacted by real persons 
exempt from magic must hold some claim of credence 
in its postulate, even though it call itself a farce. So 
when the condemned merchant ^geon, telling his tale 



XX THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 

before the Duke, asserts that his wife arrived at an inn 

and became 

A joyful mother of two goodly sons : 

And, which was strange, the one so like the other, 

As could not be distinguished but by names 

That 'very hour, and in the self-same inn, 

A meaner woman was delivered 

Of such a burden male, twins both alike : 

we must suspect that inn of more than dramatically- 
licensed victualling; or at least submit that here is be- 
haviour beyond even the lax range of the Bona-fide 
Traveller. On the stage of Plautus the convention of 
two men being alike enough to deceive even a wife 
might pass. It was actually a convention of pasteboard, 
since the actors wore masks; you had only to paint two 
masks alike, and the trick was done. But even on the 
stage of Plautus to present tzvo pairs of doubles would 
have been to present an impossible improbability. 

Shakespeare makes that improbability still more im- 
possible by presenting it, on his stage, without masks. 
The critical excuse for The Comedy of Errors is usually 
borrowed from a passage in Coleridge's Literary 
Remains, and runs thus: 

Shakespeare has in this piece presented us with a legiti- 
mate farce in exactest consonance with the philosophical 
principles and character of farce, as distinguished from 
comedy and from entertainments. A proper farce is mainly 
distinguished from comedy by the license allowed; and even 
required, in the fable, in order to produce strange and 
laughable situations. The story need not be probable, it is 
enough that it is possible. A comedy would scarcely allow 
even the two Antipholuses; because, although there have 
been instances of almost indistinguishable likeness in two 
persons, yet these are mere individual accidents, casus 
ludentis naturae, and the H)erum will not excuse the in- 
•verisimile . But farce dares add the two Dromios, and is 
justified in so doing by the laws of its end and constitution. 
In a word, farces commence in a postulate, which must be 
granted. 



INTRODUCTION xxi 

With all respect to Coleridge we say that this has the 
air of special pleading; and we distrust it the more be- 
cause of its categorising farce apart from comedy and 
giving it 'laws of its end and constitution.' As a matter 
of history, and even of nomenclature, farce and comedy 
never have been and never can be divided into com- 
partments with separate literary laws. If Moliere and 
Congreve be the norm of Comedy (as Meredith in his 
famous Essay quite capriciously assumes) then Aristo- 
phanes is merely farcical, and — what does it matter? 
Who ever made these categories or gave them 'laws'? 
M. Maeterlinck's VOiseau Bleu or Sir James Barrie's 
Peter Pan are not farces as certainly as they are not 
tragedies. There is no line of demarcation — all such 
lines, or attempts at them, are a professional humbug 
of criticism. In literature it is all a question of tact. 
The author persuades us into the right mood, and 
Cinderella's godmother changes a pumpkin into a coach 
as readily as Gulliver finds himself in Lilliput, Peisthe- 
tairus in Nephelococcygia. We see no point at all in 
praising the Errors above the Menaechmi as 'the high 
water mark of elaborate farce in its highest signification.' 
It might (though we doubt it) have come near to de- 
serve such praise had Shakespeare not set his artificial 
farce between the romantic-realism of the distressed 
merchant, with which he opens, and of the long-lost 
wife reclaimed, with which he concludes. As Dowden 
puts it: 

The old man [^geon] stands before us doomed to death; 
and presently a play, like the flashing across and to and fro of 
dragon-flies, distracts our attention, but the human sorrow 
and affliction cannot wholly pass from view; before the 
close it must give place to some consolation. This is not 
the spirit in which mere farce is written. Plautus is in fact 
too light for Shakespeare. 

We should prefer to say that' in this early play Shake- 
speare already discloses his ^propensity for infusing 



xxii THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 

romance into each or every ' form ' of drama ; that unique 
propensity which in his later work makes him so magical 
and so hard to define. But, as yet, farce and romance 
were not one 'form' but two separate stools; and be- 
tween them in The Comedy of Errors he fell to the 
ground. We should add, however, that we have never 
seen it on the boards, for it is seldom staged. There is 
some evidence that it 'acts well' — which, after all, is 
the test — and even that it provokes uproarious mirth. 
Sundry passages, even in its farcical episodes, show us 
the born poet, the born romancer, itching to be at his 
trade. For an example: 

O, train me not, sweet mermaid, with thy note, 
To drown me in thy sister's flood of tears : 
Sing, siren, for thyself, and I will dote : 
Spread o'er the silver waves thy golden hairs; 
And as a bed I'll take them, and there lie: 
And, in that glorious supposition, think 
He gains by death that hath such means to die: 
Let Love, being light, be drowned if she sink ! 

3.2.45-52. \ 



We prefix our book with a portrait of Bacon, who 
was admitted to Gray's Inn in 1575 and became a 
Bencher in i 586. It is likely enough, therefore, that he 
attended the performance of this play of Shakespeare's 
given in Gray's Inn Hall on Grand Night, Dec. 28, 
I 594. Indeed we may go further. In the course of the 
revels (as related in Gesta Grayorum), and some nights 
after the performance of 'Errors,' we find the Prince 
of Purpoole holding a Council and listening to the set 
speeches of Six Councillors, who in turn exhort him 
upon (i) the Exercise of War, (2) the Study of Philo- 
sophy, (3) Eternizement and Fame by Buildings and 
Foundations, (4) Absoluteness of State and Treasure, 
(5) Virtue and a gracious Government, (6) Pastimes 
and Sports. These addresses are fully reported, with 



INTRODUCTION xxiii 

the Prince's reply: and James Spedding in 1861 
{Letters and Life of Francis Bacon, i. 325) boldly, on 
internal evidence of style, ascribed them to Bacon: the 
speeches of the Six Councillors, says he, 'carry his 
signature in every line.' Spedding, on the strength of 
his long and close intimacy with Bacon's style, was en- 
titled to speak positively. That, upon examination of the 
speeches, we believe him to be right is as much as we can 
modestly say. The ascription rests on internal evidence 
only, save for one small fact, noted by Dr W. W. Greg, 
which curiously supports it — that in the index of the 
so-called Northumberland MS occurs the entry of an 
item missing from the MS itself. Orations at Grates 
Inne reuells. Indeed it lies within the range of con- 
jecture that the pages of this missing item were removed 
from the Northumberland collection to be used as the 
'copy' from which W. Canning in 1688 set up Gesta 
Grayorum in print. 



TO THE READER 

The following is a briefdescription of the punctuation 
and other typographical devices employed in the text, 
which have been more fully explained in the Note on 
Punctuation and the Textual Introduction to be found in 
The Tempest volume : 

An obelisk (t) implies corruption or emendation, and 
suggests a reference to the Notes. 

A single bracket at the beginning of a speech signifies 
an 'aside.' 

Four dots represent a full-stop in the original, except 
when it occurs at the end of a speech, and they mark 
a long pause. 

Original colons or semicolons, which denote a some- 
what shorter pause, are retained, or represented as three 
dots when they appear to possess special dramatic 
significance. 

Similarly, significant commas have been given as 
dashes. 

Round brackets are taken from the original, and mark 
a significant change of voice; when the original brackets 
seem to imply little more than the drop in tone accom- 
panying parenthesis, they are conveyed by commas or 
dashes. 

In plays for which both Folio and Quarto texts exist, 
passages taken from the text not selected as the basis for 
the present edition will be enclosed within square 
brackets. 

Single inverted commas ('') are editorial; double ones 
("") derive from the original, where they are used to 
draw attention to maxims, quotations, etc. 

The reference number for the first line is given at the 
head of each page. Numerals in square brackets are 
placed at the beginning ofthe traditional acts and scenes. 



THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 



The scene : Ephesus 

CHARACTERS IN THE PLAY 

SoLiNUs, Duke of Ephesus 

iEcEON, a merchant of Syracuse 

Antipholus of Ephesus ^ twin brothers, and sons 

Antipholus of Syracuse] to ^geon and Emilia 

Dromio of Ephesus \ tnjoin brothers, and bondmen 

Dromio of Syracuse] to the tivo Antipholuses 

Balthazars 

Angelo, a goldsmith 

A Merchant, friend to Antipholus of Syracuse 

Another Merchant, to ix)hom Angelo is in debt 

Doctor Pinch, a schoolmaster 

Emilia, an abbess at Ephesus, luife to £geon 

Adriana, 'voife to Antipholus of Ephesus 

LuciANA, her sister 

Luce, or Nell, kitchen-maid to Adriana 

A Courtesan 

Gaoler, officers, and other attendants 



THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 

[i.i.] A public square in Epkesus, hard by the Mart: 
in the centre, at the sign of the Phcenix, the house of 
Antipholus of Ephesus, with a balcony; on one side, the 
wall of an abbey-garden, with a gate; on the other the 
entrance to a street. Without the garden-wall stands 
a judgment-seat of stone, with steps leading thereto 

The Duke of Ephtius, followed by attendants, a gaoler, 
.£geon in charge of officers, and a crowd of citizens, 
enters the square and ascends the judgment-seat 

jEgeon. Proceed, Solinus, to procure my fall, 
And by the doom of death end woes and all. 

Duke. Merchant of Syracusa, plead no more.... 
I am not partial to infringe our laws; 
The enmity and discord which of late 
Sprung from the rancorous outrage of your duke 
To merchants our well-dealing countrymen. 
Who, wanting guilders to redeem their lives, 
Have sealed his rigorous statutes with their bloods, 
Excludes all pity from our threat'ning looks: 
For, since the mortal and intestine jars 
'Twixt thy seditious countrymen and us, 
It hath in solemn synods been decreed, 
Both by the Syracusians and ourselves, 
To admit no traffic to our adverse towns: 
Nay, more— if any born at Ephesus 
Be seen at Syracusian marts and fairs... 
Again, if any Syracusian born 
Come to the bay of Ephesus— he dies... 



4 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 1.1.20 

His goods confiscate to the duke's dispose. 
Unless a thousand marks be levied 
To quit the penalty and to ransom him: 
Thy substance, valued at the highest rate. 
Cannot amount unto a hundred marks — 
Therefore by law thou art condemned to die. 

Mgeon. Yet this my comfort, when your words" 
are done. 
My woes end likewise with the evening sun. 

Duke. Well, Syracusian; say, in brief, the cause 
Why thou departedst from thy native home. 
And for what cause thou cam'st to Ephesus. 

jEgeon. A heavier task could not have been imposed 
Than I to speak my griefs unspeakable: 
Yet, that the world may witness that my end 
Was wrought by nature, not by vile offence, 
I'll utter what my sorrow gives me leave.... 
In Syracusa was I born, and wed 
Unto a woman, happy but for me, 
And by me too... had not our hap been bad: 
With her I lived in joy— our wealth increased 
By prosperous voyages I often made 
To Epidamnum, till my factor's death 
And the great care of goods at random left 
Drew me from kind embracements of my spouse; 
From whom my absence was not six months old. 
Before herself— almost at fainting under 
The pleasing punishment that women bear — 
Had made provision for her following me. 
And soon, and safe, arrived where I was... 
There had she not been long but she became 
A joyful mother of two goodly sons: 
And, which was strange, the one so like the other. 
As could not be distinguished but by names.... 



1. 1. 53 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 

That very hour, and in the self-same inn, 

A meaner woman was delivered 

Of such a burden male, twins both alike: 

Those, for their parents were exceeding poor, 

I bought, and brought up to attend my sons.... 

My wife, not meanly proud of two such boys, 

Made daily motions for our home return : 

Unwilling I agreed. Alas, too soon 

We came aboard.... 

A league from Epidamnum had we sailed, 

Before the always-wind-obeying deep 

Gave any tragic instance of our harm: 

But longer did we not retain much hope; 

For what obscured light the heavens did grant 

Did but convey unto our fearful minds 

A doubtful warrant of immediate death. 

Which, though myself would gladly have embraced. 

Yet the incessant weepings of my wife, 

Weeping before for what she saw must come. 

And piteous plainings of the pretty babes. 

That mourned for fashion, ignorant what to fear. 

Forced me to seek delays for them and me. 

And this it was— for other means was none: 

The sailors sought for safety by our boat, 

And left the ship, then sinking-ripe, to us.... 

My wife, more careful for the latter-born. 

Had fast'ned him unto a small spare mast. 

Such as seafaring men provide for storms : 

To him one of the other twins was bound. 

Whilst I had been hke heedful of the other.... 

The children thus disposed, my wife and I, 

Fixing our eyes on whom our care was fixed, 

Fast'ned ourselves at either end the mast; 

And floating straight, obedient to the stream, 



6 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 1.1.87 

Were carried towards Corinth, as we thought.... 
At length the sun, gazing upon the earth. 
Dispersed those vapours that offended us, 
And, by the benefit of his wished light. 
The seas waxed calm, and we discovered 
Two ships from far making amain to us: 
Of Corinth that, of Epidaurus this. 
But ere they came— O, let me say no morel- 
Gather the sequel by that went before. 

Duke. Nay, forward, old man— do not break off so. 
For we may pity, though not pardon thee. 

JEgeon. O, had the gods done so, I had not now 
Worthily termed them merciless to us... 
For, ere the ships could meet by twice five leagues, 
We were encountred by a mighty rock. 
Which being violently borne upon. 
Our helpful ship was splitted in the midst; 
So that, in this unjust divorce of us. 
Fortune had left to both of us alike 
What to delight in, what to sorrow for. 
Her part, poor soul, seeming as burdened 
With lesser weight, but not with lesser woe. 
Was carried with more speed before the wind, 
And in our sight they three were taken up 
By fishermen of Corinth, as we thought.... 
At length, another ship had seized on us— 
And, knowing whom it was their hap to save. 
Gave healthful welcome to their shipwracked guests — 
And would have reft the fishers of their prey. 
Had not their bark been very slow of sail; 
And therefore homeward did they bend their course.... 
Thus have you heard me severed from my bliss. 
That by misfortunes was my life prolonged, 
To tell sad stories of my own mishaps. 



1.I.I2I THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 7 

Duke. And, for the sake of them thou sorrowest for. 
Do me the favour to dilate at full 
What hath befall'n of them and thee till now. 

jEgeon. My youngest boy, and yet my eldest care. 
At eighteen years became inquisitive 
After his brother; and importuned me. 
That his attendant— so his case was like, 
Reft of his brother, but retained his name — 
Might bear him company in the quest of him: 
Whom whilst I laboured of a love to see, 

I hazarded the loss of whom I loved 

Five summers have I spent in farthest Greece, 
Roaming clean through the bounds of Asia, 
And, coasting homeward, came to Ephesus; 
Hopeless to find, yet loath to leave unsought 
Or that, or any place that harbours men... 
But here must end the story of my life— 
And happy were I in my timely death, 
Could all my travels warrant me they live. 

Duke. Hapless ^geon, whom the fates have marked 
To bear the extremity of dire mishap... 
Now, trust me, were it not against our laws. 
Against my crown, my oath, my dignity. 
Which princes, would they, may not disannul. 
My soul should sue as advocate for thee: 
But, though thou art adjudged to the death. 
And passed sentence may not be recalled, 
But to our honour's great disparagement... 
Yet will I favour thee in what I can; 
Therefore, merchant, I'll limit thee this day 
fTo seek thy health by beneficial help. 
Try all the friends thou hast in Ephesus— 
Beg thou, or borrow, to make up the sum, 
And live: if no, then thou art doomed to die... 



8 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 1.1.155 

Gaoler, take him to thy custody. [^e rises 

Gaoler. I will, my lord. 

jEgeon. Hopeless, and helpless, doth ^Egeon wend, 
But to procrastinate his lifeless end. [^^O' <^^P^^i 

[1.2.] The Marl of Ephesus: in the centre, at the sign 
of the Porpentine, the house of a courtesan; streets on 
either side, one leading to the Bay, the other to the 
house of Antipholus of Ephesus 

Jntipholus of Syracuse, his man Dromio and a 
merchant enter from the street leading to the Bay 

Merchant. Therefore, give out you are of Epidamnum, 
Lest that your goods too soon be confiscate: 
This very day, a Syracusian merchant 
Is apprehended for arrival here, 
And, not being able to buy out his life. 
According to the statute of the town. 
Dies ere the weary sun set in the west... 
There is your money that I had to keep. 

S. Antipholus [to Dromio]. Go bear it to the Centaur, 
where we host. 
And stay there, Dromio, till I come to thee; 
Within this hour it will be dinner-time- 
Till that, I'll view the manners of the town. 
Peruse the traders, gaze upon the buildings, 
And then return and sleep within mine inn. 
For with long travel I am stiff and weary... 
Get thee away. 

S. Dromio. Many a man would take you at your word. 
And go indeed, having so good a mean. [he goes 

S. Antipholus. A trusty villain, sir, that very oft, 
When I am dull with care and melancholy, 
Lightens my humour with his merry jests... 
What, will you walk with me about the town. 



1.2.23 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 9 

And then go to my inn, and dine with me ? 

Merchant. I am invited, sir, to certain merchants. 
Of whom I hope to make much benefit: 
I crave your pardon. Soon at five o'clock, 
Please you, I'll meet with you upon the mart. 
And afterward consort you till bed-time: 
My present business calls me from you now. 

S. Antipholus. Farewell till then : I will go lose myself. 
And wander up and down to view the city. 

Merchant. Sir, I commend you to your own content. 

\he departs 

S. Antipholus. He, that commends me to mine 
own content. 
Commends me to the thing I cannot get: 
I to the world am like a drop of water. 
That in the ocean seeks another drop. 
Who, falling there to find his fellow forth. 
Unseen, inquisitive, confounds himself.... 
So I, to find a mother and a brother, 
fin quest of them, unhappier, lose myself. 

Dromio of Ephesus enters the Mart 

Here comes the almanac of my true date: 
What now! How chance thou art returned so soon? 
E. Dromio. Returned so soon! rather approached 
too late: 
The capon burns, the pig falls from the spit; 
The clock hath strucken twelve upon the bell; 
My mistress made it one upon my cheek: 
She is so hot, because the meat is cold: 
The meat is cold, because you come not home: 
You come not home, because you have no stomach: 
You have no stomach, having broke your fast: 
But we, that know what 'tis to fast and pray, 
Are penitent for your default to-day. 



lo THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 1.2.53 

S. Antipholus. Stop in your wind, sir— tell me this, 
I pray! 
Where have you left the money that I gave you ? 

E. Dromio. O — sixpence, that I had o' Wednesday last, 
To pay the saddler for my mistress' crupper... 
The saddler had it, sir, I kept it not. 

S. Antipholus. I am not in a sportive humour now: 
Tell me, and dally not, where is the money? 
We being strangers here, hovi' dar'st thou trust 
So great a charge from thine own custody ? 

E. Dromio. I pray you, jest, sir, as you sit at dinner: 
I from my mistress come to you in post: 
If I return, I shall be post indeed. 
For she will score your fault upon my pate: 
Methinks your maw, like mine, should be your clock, 
And strike you home without a messenger. 

S. Antipholus. Come Dromio, come, these jests are 
out of season— 
Reserve them till a merrier hour than this : 
Where is the gold I gave in charge to thee.^ 

E. Dromio. To me, sir .'' why you gave no gold to me. 

S. Antipholus. Come on, sir knave, have done 
your foolishness. 
And tell me how thou hast disposed thy charge. 

E. Dromio. My charge was but to fetch you from 
the mart 
Home to your house, the Phoenix, sir, to dinner; 
My mistress and her sister stay for you. 

S. Antipholus. Now, as I am a Christian, answer me. 
In what safe place you have bestowed my money; 
Or I shall break that merry sconce of yours 
That stands on tricks when I am undisposed: 
Where is the thousand marks thou hadst of me t 

E. Dromio. I have some marks of yours upon my pate: 



1.2.83 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS n 

Some of my mistress' marks upon my shoulders: 
But not a thousand marks between you both.... 
If I should pay your worship those again, 
Perchance you will not bear them patiently. 

S. Antipkolus. Thy mistress' marks! what mistress, 
slave, hast thou t 

E. Dromio. Your worship's wife, my mistress at 
the Phcenii; 
She that doth fast till you come home to dinner, 
And prays that you will hie you home to dinner. 

S. Jniip^o/us. What,\vilt thou flout me thus unto my face, 
Being for bid. ''There, take you that, sir knave. \he beats him 

E. Dromio. What mean you, sir.? for God's sake 

hold your hands; 
Nay, an you will not, sir, I'll take my heels. 

[he takes flight 

S. Antipholus. Upon my life, by some device or other. 
The villain is o'er-raught of all my money.... 
They say this town is full of cozenage: 
As, nimble jugglers that deceive the eye, 
Dark-working sorcerers that change the mind. 
Soul-killing witches that deform the body. 
Disguised cheaters, prating mountebanks. 
And many such-like liberties of sin: 
If it prove so, I will be gone the sooner... 
I'll to the Centaur, to go seek this slave. 
I greatly fear my money is not safe. \he follows Dromio 

[2. I.] The square before the house of Antipholus 

Adrian A and Luciana come forth 
Adriana. Neither my husband nor the slave returned, 
That in such haste I sent to seek his master! 
Sure, Luciana, it is two o'clock. 



12 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 2.1.4 

Luciana. Perhaps some merchant hath invited him, 
And from the mart he's somewhere gone to dinner... 
Good sister, let us dine, and never fret; 
A man is master of his Hberty: 
Time is their master, and when they see time. 
They'll go or come; if so, be patient, sister. 

Adriana. Why should their liberty than ours be more.' 

Luciana. Because their business stiU lies out-a-door. 

Adriana. Look, when I serve him so, he takes it ill. 

Luciana. O, know he is the bridle of your will. 

Adriana. There's none but asses will be bridled so. 

Luciana. Why, headstrong liberty is lashed with v/oe: 
There's nothing situate under heaven's eye 
But hath his bound, in earth, in sea, in sky.... 
The beasts, the fishes, and the winged fowls 
Are their males' subjects and at their controls: 
Men, more divine, the masters of all these. 
Lords of the wide world and wild watry seas. 
Indued with intellectual sense and souls, 
Of more pre-eminence than fish and fowls. 
Are masters to their females, and their lords: 
Then let your wiU attend on their accords. 

Adriana. This servitude makes you to keep unwed. 

Luciana. Not this, but troubles of the marriage-bed. 

Adriana. But, were you wedded, you would bear 
some sway. 

Luciana. Ere I learn love, I'll practise to obey. 

Adriana. How if your husband start some 
other where.' 

Luciana. Till he come home again, I would forbear — 

Adriana. Patience unmoved! no marvel though 
she pause — 
They can be meek that have no other cause: 
A wretched soul, bruised with adversity, 



2.1.35 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 13 

We bid be quiet when we hear it cry.... 

But were we burd'ned with like weight of pain. 

As much, or more, we should ourselves complain : 

So thou, that hast no unkind mate to grieve thee. 

With urging helpless patience wouldst relieve me; 

But, if thou live to see like right bereft. 

This fool-begged patience in thee will be left. 

Luciana. Well, I will marry one day, but to try... 
Here comes your man, now is your husband nigh. 

Dromio of Ephesus comes up, rubbing his head 

Adriana. Say, is your tardy master now at hand? 

E. Dromio. Nay, he's at two hands with me, and 
that my two ears can witness. 

Adriana. Say, didst thou speak with him.' know'st 
thou his mind.'' 

E. Dromio. Ay, ay, he told his mind upon mine ear — 
Beshrew his hand, I scarce could understand it. 

Luciana. Spake he so doubtfully, thou couldst not 
feel his meaning.' 

E. Dromio.. Nay, he struck so plainly, I could too 
well feel his blows; and withal so doubtfully, that I 
could scarce understand them. 

Adriana. But say, I prithee, is he coming home? 
It seems he hath great care to please his wife. 

E. Dromio. Why, mistress, sure my master is 
horn-mad. 

Adriana. Horn-mad, thou villain! 

E. Dromio. I mean not cuckold-mad — 

But, sure, he is stark mad: 
When I desired him to come home to dinner. 
He asked me for a thousand marks in gold : 
"Tis dinner-time,' quoth I: 'My gold!' quoth he: 
'Your meat doth burn,' quoth I: 'My gold!' quoth he: 



14 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 2.1.64 

'Will you come home?' quoth I: 'My gold!' quoth he: 
'Where is the thousand marks I gave thee, villain.?' 
'The pig,' quoth I, 'is burned': 'My gold!' quoth he: 
'My mistress, sir—' quoth I: 'Hang up thy mistress! 
I know thy mistress not, out on thy mistress!' 

Luciana. Quoth who? 

E. Dromio. Quoth my master. 
'I know,' quoth he, 'no house, no wife, no mistress'... 
So that my errand, due unto my tongue, 
I thank him, I bare home upon my shoulders; 
For, in conclusion, he did beat me there. 

Adriana. Go back again, thou slave, and fetch 
him home. 

E. Dromio. Go back again, and be new beaten home ? 
For God's sake send some other messenger. 

Adriana. Back, slave, or I will break thy pate across. 

E. Dromio. And he will bless that cross with 
other beating: 
Between you, I shall have a holy head. 

Adriana. Hence, prating peasant; fetch thy 

master home. [she beats him 

E. Dromio. Am I so round with you, as you with me. 
That like a football you do spurn me thus ? 
You spurn me hence, and he will spurn me hither. 
If I last in this service, you must case me in leather. 

\ke goes 

Luciana. Fie, how impatience loureth in your face! 

Adriana. His company must do his minions grace. 
Whilst I at home starve for a merry look : 
Hath homely age th'alluring beauty took 

From my poor cheek ? then he hath wasted it 

Are my discourses dull? barren my wit? 
If voluble and sharp discourse be marred, 
Unkindness blunts it more than marble hard.... 
Do their gay vestments his affections bait? 



3.1.95 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 15 

That's not my fault, he's master of my state.... 
What ruins are in me that can be found, 
By him not ruined .'' then is he the ground 
Of my defeatures.... My decayed fair 
A sunny look of his would soon repair.... 
But, too unruly deer, he breaks the pale, 
And feeds from home; poor I am but his stale. 

Luciana. Self-harming jealousy! fie, beat it hence. 

Adriana. Unfeeling fools can with such 
wrongs dispense... 
I know his eye doth homage otherwhere. 
Or else what lets it but he would be here.^ 
Sister, you know he promised me a chain — 
Would that alone o' love he would detain. 
So he would keep fair quarter with his bed! 
I see the jewel best enamelled 
Will lose his beauty; yet the gold bides still 
That others touch, and often touching will, 
j"Where gold and no man that hath a name. 
By falsehood and corruption doth it shame... 
Since that my beauty cannot please his eye, 
I'll weep what's left away and weeping die. 

Luciana. How many fond fools serve mad jealousy! 

\they go within 

[2. 2.] The Mart of Ephesus 

Antipholvs of Syracuse comes up the street, musing 

S. Antipholus. The gold I gave to Dromio is laid up 
Safe at the Centaur, and the heedful slave 
Is wandred forth, in care to seek me out. 
By computation and mine host's report, 
I could not speak with Dromio since at first 
I sent him from the mart! See, here he comes. 
Dromio of Syracuse approaches 



i6 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 2.2.7 

How now, sir! is your merry humour altered? 
As you love strokes, so jest with me again... 
You know no Centaur.'' you received no gold."* 
Your mistress sent to have me home to dinner.? 
My house was at the Phcenix? Wast thou mad. 
That thus so madly thou didst answer me ? 

S. Dromio. What answer, sir } when spake I such 
a word ? 

S. Antipholus. Even now, even here, not half an 
hour since. 

S. Dromio. I did not see you since you sent me hence 
Home to the Centaur, with the gold you gave me. 

S. Antipholus. Villain, thou didst deny the 
gold's receipt, 
And told'st me of a mistress, and a dinner — 
For which, I hope, thou felt'st I was displeased. 

S. Dromio. I am glad to see you in this merry vein. 
What means this jest.'' I pray you, master, tell me. 

4$". Antipholus. Yea, dost thou jeer, and flout me in 
the teeth ? 
Think'st thou, I jest.? Hold, take thou that, and that. 

[' beats Dromio ' 

S. Dromio. Hold, sir, for God's sake! now your jest 
is earnest. 
Upon what bargain do you give it me ? 

S. Antipholus. Because that I familiarly sometimes 
Do use you for my fool and chat with you, 
Your sauciness will jest upon my love. 
And make a common of my serious hours. 
When the sun shines, let foolish gnats make sport, 
But creep in crannies, when he hides his beams... 
If you will jest with me, know my aspect, 
And fashion your demeanour to my looks. 
Or I will beat this method in your sconce. 



2.2.35 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 17 

S. Dromio. Sconce, call you it.^ so you would leave 
battering, I had rather have it a head. An you use 
these blows long, I must get a sconce for my head, and 
ensconce it too, or else I shall seek my wit in my 
shoulders. But, I pray, sir, why am I beaten.'' 

S. Antipkolus. Dost thou not know? 

S. Dromio. Nothing, sir, but that I am beaten. 

S. Antipholus. Shall I teU you why ? 

S. Dromio. Ay, sir, and wherefore; for they say 
every why hath a wherefore. 

S. Antipholus. Why, first for flouting me, and 
then wherefore. 
For urging it the second time to me. 

S. Dromio. Was there ever any man thus beaten out 
of season. 
When in the why and the wherefore is neither rhyme 

nor reason? 
WeD, sir, I thank you. 

S. Antipholus. Thank me, sir, for what? 

S. Dromio. Marry, sir, for this something that you 
gave me for nothing. 

S. Antipholus. rU make you amends next, to give you 
nothing for something. ...But say, sir, is it dinner-time? 

S. Dromio. No, sir. I think the meat wants that I 
have. 

S. Antipholus. In good time, sir: what's that? 

S. Dromio. Basting. 

S. Antipholus. Well, sir, then 'twill be dry. 

S. Dromio. If it be, sir, I pray you eat none of it. 

S. Antipholus. Your reason? 

S. Dromio. Lest it make you choleric and purchase 
me another dry basting. 

S. Antipholus. Well, sir, learn to jest in good time — 
there's a time for all things. 

Q.C.E. 3 



i8 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 2.2.65 

S. Dromio. I durst have denied that, before you were 
so choleric. 

S. Antipholus. By what rule, sir? 

S. Dromio. Marry, sir, by a rule as plain as the plain 
bald pate of Father Time himself. 

S. Antipholus. Let's hear it. 

S. Dromio. There's no time for a man to recover his 
hair that grows bald by nature. 

S. Antipholus. May he not do it by fine and recovery } 

S. Dromio. Yes, to pay a fine for a periwig and recover 
the lost hair of another man. 

S. Antipholus. Why is Time such a niggard of hair, 
being, as it is, so plentiful an excrement? 

S. Dromio. Because it is a blessing that he bestows 
on beasts: and what he hath scanted men in hair, he 
hath given them in wit. 

S. Antipholus. Why, but there's many a man hath 
more hair than wit. 

S. Dromio. Not a man of those but he hath the wit 
to lose his hair. 

S. Antipholus. Why, thou didst conclude hairy men 
plain dealers without wit. 

S. Dromio. The plainer dealer, the sooner lost; yet he 
loseth it in a kind of jollity. 

S. Antipholus. For what reason ? 

S, Dromio. For two— and sound ones too. 

S. Antipholus. Nay, not sound, I pray you. 

S. Dromio. Sure ones then. 

S. Antipholus. Nay, not sure, in a thing falsing. 

S. Dromio. Certain ones then. 

S. Antipholus. Name them. 

S. Dromio. The one, to save the money that he spends 
in tiring; the other, that at dinner they should not drop 
in his porridge. 



2.2.99 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 19 

S. Antipholus. You would all this time have proved 
there is no time for all things. 

S. Dromio. Marry, and did, sir: namely, fe'en no 
time to recover hair lost by nature. 

S. Antipholus. But your reason was not substantial 
why there is no time to recover. 

S, Dromio. Thus I mend it: Time himself is bald, 
and therefore, to the world's end, will have bald fol- 
lowers. 

S. Antipholus. I knew 'twould be a bald conclusion... 

Adrian A enters the Mart, with Luciana, and 
beckons to Antipholus of Syracuse 

But soft, who wafts us yonder .■' [he draws near 

Adriana. Ay, ay, Antipholus, look strange and frown. 
Some other mistress hath thy sweet aspects : 
I am not Adriana, nor thy wife.... 
The time was once, when thou unurged wouldst vow 
That never words were music to thine ear, 
That never object pleasing in thine eye, 
That never touch well welcome to thy hand. 
That never meat sweet-savoured in thy taste. 
Unless I spake, looked, touched, or carved to thee.... 
How comes it now, my husband, O, how comes it. 
That thou art then estranged from thyself.? 
Thy self I call it, being strange to me... 
That, undividable, incorporate. 
Am better than thy dear self's better part..,. 
Ah, do not tear away thyself from me; 
For know, my love... as easy mayst thou fall 
A drop of water in the breaking gulf. 
And take unmingled thence that drop again, 
Without addition, or diminishing. 
As take from me thyself and not me too.... 



20 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 2.2.130 

How dearly would it touch thee to the quick, 

Shouldst thou but hear I were licentious! 

And that this body, consecrate to thee. 

By ruffian lust should be contaminate! 

Wouldst thou not spit at me, and spurn at me, 

And hurl the name of husband in my face. 

And tear the stained skin off my harlot-brow. 

And from my false hand cut the wedding-ring. 

And break it with a deep-divorcing vow? 

I know thou canst— and therefore, see thou do it.... 

I am possessed with an adulterate blot, 

j"My blood is mingled with the grime of lust: 

For, if we two be one, and thou play false, 

I do digest the poison of thy flesh. 

Being strumpeted by thy contagion... 

fl live distained, thou undishonoured. 

Keep then fair league and truce with thy true bed! 

S. Antipholus. Plead you to me, fair dame ? I know 
you not: 
In Ephesus I am but two hours old. 
As strange unto your town as to your talk— 
Who, every word by all my wit being scanned. 
Wants wit in all one word to understand. 

Luciano . Fie, brother! how the world is changed 
with you : 
When were you wont to use my sister thus } 
She sent for you by Dromio home to dinner. 

S. Antipholus. By Dromio? 

S. Dromio. By me? 

Adriana. By thee, and this thou didst return from him. 
That he did buffet thee, and in his blows. 
Denied my house for his, me for his wife. 

S. Antipholus. Did you converse, sir, with 
this gentlewoman? 



2.2.I6I THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 21 

What is the course and drift of your compact? 

S. Dromio. I, sir? I never saw her till this time. 

S. Antipkolus. Villain, thou liest, for even her 
very w^ords 
Didst thou deliver to me on the mart, 

S. Dromio. I never spake with her in all my life. 

S. Antipkolus. How can she thus then call us by 
our names ? 
Unless it be by inspiration. 

Adriana. How iU agrees it with your gravity 
To counterfeit thus grossly with your slave, 
Abetting him to thwart me in my mood; 
Be it my wrong you are from me exempt. 
But wrong not that wrong with a more contempt.... 
Come, I will fasten on this sleeve of thine: 
Thou art an elm, my husband, I a vine... 
Whose weakness, married to thy stronger state, 
Makes me with thy strength to communicate: 
If aught possess thee from me, it is dross. 
Usurping ivy, briar, or idle moss. 
Who, all for want of pruning, wath intrusion 
Infect thy sap and live on thy confusion. 

((S. Antipkolus. To me she speaks, she moves me for 
her theme; 
What, was I married to her in my dream ? 
Or sleep I now, and think I hear all this ? 
What error drives our eyes and ears amiss ? 
Until I know this sure uncertainty, 
I'll entertain the offered fallacy. 

Luciana. Dromio, go bid the servants spread 
for dinner. 

S. Dromio. O, for my beads! I cross me for a sinner.... 
This is the fairy land— O, spite of spites !— 
"fWe talk with goblins, owls, and sprites; 



22 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 2.2.191 

If we obey them not, this will ensue : 

They'll suck our breath, or pinch us black and blue. 

Luctana. Why prat'st thou to thyself and 
answer'st not? 
Dromio, thou drone, thou snail, thou slug, thou sot. 

S. Dromio. I am transformed, master, am not I? 

S. Antipholus. I think thou art, in mind, and so am I. 

S. Dromio. Nay, master, both in mind and in 
my shape. 

S. Antipholus. Thou hast thine own form. 

S. Dromio. No, I am an ape. 

Luciana. If thou art changed to aught, 'tis to an ass. 

S. Dromio. 'Tis true, she rides me and I long 
for grass.... 
'Tis so, I am an ass — else it could never be. 
But I should know her as well as she knows me. 

Adriana. Come, come, no longer will I be a fool, 
To put the finger in the eye and weep. 
Whilst man and master laugh my woes to scorn... 
Come, sir, to dinner. Dromio, keep the gate: 
Husband, I'll dine above with you to-day. 
And shrive you of a thousand idle pranks : 
Sirrah, if any ask you for your master. 
Say he dines forth, and let no creature enter... 
Come, sister. Dromio, play the porter well. 

(S. Antipholus. Am I in earth, in heaven, or in hell ? 
Sleeping or waking.^ mad or well-advised.' 
Known unto these, and to myself disguised! 
I'll say as they say, and persever so... 
And in this mist at all adventures go. 

S. Dromio. Master, shall I be porter at the gate? 

Adriana. Ay, and let none enter, lest I break your pate. 

Luciana. Come, come, Antipholus, we dine too late. 

{they go 



3. 1. 1 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 23 

[3. I.] The square before the house of Antipholus 

Jntipholus of Ephesus, his man Dromio, Jngelo 
a goldsmith, and Balthazar enter the square 

E. Antipholus. Good Signior Angelo, you must 
excuse us all— 
My wife is shrewish when I keep not hours; 
Say that I lingered with you at your shop 
To see the making of her carcanet. 
And that to-morrow you will bring it home.... 
But here's a villain that would face me down 
He met me on the mart, and that I beat him, 
And charged him with a thousand marks in gold. 
And that I did deny my wife and house; 
Thou drunkard, thou, what didst thou mean by this? 
E. Dromio. Say what you will, sir, but I know what 
I know- 
That you beat me at the mart, I have your hand to show ; 
If the skin were parchment and the blows you gave 

were ink. 
Your own handwriting would tell you what I think. 
E. Antipholus. I think thou art an ass. 
E. Dromio. Marry, so it doth appear 

By the wrongs I suffer and the blows I bear. 
I should kick, being kicked, and being at that pass, 
You would keep from my heels and beware of an ass. 
E. Antipholus. Y'are sad, Signior Balthazar— pray 

God, our cheer 
May answer my good will and your good 
welcome here. 
Balthazar. I hold your dainties cheap, sir, and your 

welcome dear. 
E.Antipholus. O, Signior Balthazar, either at flesh or fish, 
A table-full of welcome makes scarce one dainty dish. 



24 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS s-i-M 

Balthaxar. Good meat, sir, is common ; that every 

churl affords. 
E. Antipholus. And welcome more common, for that's 

nothing but words. 
Balthazar. Small cheer and great welcome makes a 

merry feast. 
E. Antipholus. Ay, to a niggardly host and more 

sparing guest: 
But though my cates be mean, take them in good part. 
Better cheer may you have, but not with better heart.... 
But soft, my door is locked; go bid them let us in. 
E. Dromio. Maud, Bridget, Marian, Cicely, 

Gillian, Ginn! 
S. Dromio \Jrom withi7i\. Mome, malt-horse, capon, 

coxcomb, idiot, patch! 
Either get thee from the door or sit down at the hatch: 
Dost thou conjure for wenches, that thou call'st for 

such store. 
When one is one too many t Go, get thee from 

the door. 
E. Dromio. What patch is made our porter \ My 

master stays in the street. 
S. Dromio. Let him walk from whence he came, lest 

he catch cold on's feet. 
E. Antipholus. Who talks within there.? ho, open 

the door! 
6". Dromio. Right, sir, I'll tell you when, an you'll tell 

me wherefore. 
E. Antipholus. Wherefore.? for my dinner: I have not 

dined to-day. 
S. Dromio. Nor to-day here you must not; come again 

when you may. 
E. Antipholus. What art thou that keep'st me out from 

the house I owe.? 



3.1.43 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 25 

S. Dromio. The porter for this time, sir, and my name 

is Dromio. 
E. Dromio. O villain, thou hast stol'n both mine office 
and my name. 
The one ne'er got me credit, the other mickle blame... 
If thou hadst been Dromio to-day in my place, 
■fThou wouldst have changed thy face for an aim, or 
thy name for an ass. 

Luce, the kitchen-maidy comes out upon the balcony 

Luce. What a coil is there, Dromio } who are those at 

the gate."" 
E. Dromio. Let my master in. Luce. 
Luce. Faith no, he comes too late— 

And so tell your master. 

E. Dromio. O Lord, I must laugh! 

Have at you with a proverb — Shall I set in my staff? 
Luce. Have at you with another, that's — When ? can 

you tell.'' 
S. Dromio. If thy name be called Luce— Luce, thou 

hast answered him well. 
E. Antipkolus. Do you hear, you minion } you'll let us 

in, I hope."* 
Luce. I thought to have asked you. 
S. Dromio. And you said, no. 

\E. Antipkolus beats upon the door 
E. Dromio. So, come, help — well struck— there was 

blow for blow. 
E. Antipkolus. Thou baggage, let me in. 
Luce. Can you tell for whose sake.'' 

E. Dromio. Master, knock the door hard. 
Luce. Let him knock till it ache. 

E. Antipkolus. You'll cry for this, minion, if I beat the 

door dowm. 



26 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 3.1.60 

Luce. What needs all that, and a pair of stocks in 
the town.' 

Adrian A comes out upon the balcony 

Jdriana.'Wh.o is that at the door that keeps all this noise? 
S. Dromio. By my troth, your town is troubled with 

unruly boys. 
E. Antipholus. Are you there, wife.'' you might have 

come before. 
Adriana. Your wife, sir knave! go, get you from 

the door. \tke women go in 

E. Dromio. If you went in pain, master, this 'knave' 

would go sore. 
Angelo. Here is neither cheer, sir, nor welcome! We 

would fain have either. 
Balthazar. In debating which was best, we shall part 

with neither. 
E. Dromio. They stand at the door, master. Bid them 

welcome hither. 
E. Antipholus. There is something in the wind, that 

we cannot get in. 
E. Dromio. You would say so, master, if your garments 

were thin.... 
Your cake here is warm within : you stand here in 

the cold.... 
It would make a man mad as a buck to be so bought 

and sold. 
E. Antipholus. Go, fetch me something— I'll break ope 

the gate. 
4$'. Dromio. Break any breaking here, and I'll break 

your knave's pate. 
E. Dromio. A man may break a word with you, sir, 

and words are but wind: 
Ay, and break it in your face, so he break it not behind. 



3.1.77 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 27 

S.Dromio. It seems thou want'st breaking. Out upon 

thee, hind! 
E. Dromio. Here's too much 'out upon thee'! I pray 

thee, let me in. 
S. Dromio. Ay, when fowls have no feathers, and fish 

have no fin. 
E. Antipkolus. Well, I'll break in... Go borrow me 

a crow. 
E. Dromio. A crow without feather.^ master, mean 



you so 



For a fish without a fin, there's a fowl without a feather. 
If a crow help us in, sirrah, we'll pluck a crow together. 

E. Antipkolus. Go, get thee gone, fetch me an 
iron crow. 

Balthazar. Have patience, sir — O, let it not be so! 
Herein you war against your reputation. 
And draw within the compass of suspect 
Th'unviolated honour of your wife.... 
Once this — your long experience of her wisdom. 
Her sober virtue, years, and modesty. 
Plead on her part some cause to you unknown; 
And doubt not, sir, but she will well excuse 
Why at this time the doors are made against you.... 
Be ruled by me, depart in patience, 
And let us to the Tiger all to dinner. 
And, about evening, come yourself alone. 
To know the reason of this strange restraint... 
If by strong hand you offer to break in. 
Now in the stirring passage of the day, 
A vulgar comment will be made of it; 
And that supposed by the common rout 
Against your yet ungalled estimation. 
That may with foul intrusion enter in 
And dwell upon your grave when you are dead; 



28 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 31105 

For slander lives upon succession; 

For ever housed where it gets possession. 

E. Antipholus. You have prevailed. I will depart 
in quiet, 
And, in despite of mirth, mean to be merry... 
I know a wench of excellent discourse, 
Pretty and witty; wild and yet, too, gentle; 
There will we dine: this woman that I mean, 
My wife— but, I protest, without desert- 
Hath oftentimes upbraided me withal: 
To her will we to dinner. \tQ Angela] Get you home. 
And fetch the chain— by this, I know, 'tis made— 
Bring it, I pray you, to the Porpentine, 
For there's the house... That chain will I bestow — 
Be it for nothing but to spite my wife— 
Upon mine hostess there. Good sir, make haste... 
Since mine own doors refuse to entertain me, 
I'll knock elsewhere, to see if they'll disdain me. 

Angela. I'll meet you at that place some hour hence. 

E. Antipholus. Do so. This jest shall cost me 

some expense. \they go 

[3. 2.] The door opens ; LuciANA and Antipholus of 
Syracuse come forth 

Luciana. And may it be that you have quite forgot 
A husband's office? Shall, Antipholus, 
Even in the spring of love thy love-springs rot? 
fShall love, in building, grow so ruinate ? 
If you did wed my sister for her wealth. 
Then for her wealth's sake use her with more kindness : 
Or, if you like elsewhere, do it by stealth, 
Muffle your false love with some show of blindness: 
Let not my sister read it in your eye: 
Be not thy tongue thy own shame's orator: 



3.a.ii THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 29 

Look sweet, speak fair, become disloyally : 
Apparel vice like virtue's harbinger: 
Bear a fair presence, though your heart be tainted. 
Teach sin the carriage of a holy saint. 
Be secret-false: w^hat need she be acquainted? 
What simple thief brags of his ow^n attaint? 
'Tis double vi^rong, to truant with your bed 
And let her read it in thy looks at board : 
Shame hath a bastard fame, well managed, 
111 deed is doubled with an evil word... 
Alas, poor women! make us but believe. 
Being compact of credit, that you love us— 
Though others have the arm, show us the sleeve: 
We in your motion turn, and you may move us.... 
Then, gentle brother, get you in again; 
Comfort my sister, cheer her, call her wife; 
'Tis holy sport, to be a litde vain. 
When the sweet breath of flattery conquers strife. 
S. Antipkolus. Sweet mistress — what your name is 
else, I know not; 
Nor by what wonder you do hit of mine... 
Less in your knowledge and your grace you show not 
Than our earth's wonder, more than earth divine.... 
Teach me, dear creature, how to think and speak: 
Lay open to my earthy-gross conceit, 
Smoth'red in errors, feeble, shallow, weak, 
The folded meaning of your words' deceit... 
Against my soul's pure truth why labour you 
To make it wander in an unknowm field ? 
Are you a god ? would you create me new ? 
Transform me, then, and to your power I'll yield.... 
But if that I am I, then well I know 
Your weeping sister is no wdfe of mine. 
Nor to her bed no homage do I owe: 



30 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 3.2.44 

Far more, far more, to you do I decline... 
O, train me not, sweet mermaid, with thy note. 
To drown me in thy sister's flood of tears : 
Sing, siren, for thyself, and I will dote: 
Spread o'er the silver waves thy golden hairs; 
And as a bed I'll take them, and there lie: 
And, in that glorious supposition, think 
He gains by death that hath such means to die: 
Let Love, being light, be drowned if she sink! 

Luciana. What, are you mad, that you do reason so t 

S. Antipholus. Not mad, but mated— how, I do 
not know. 

Luciana. It is a fault that springeth from your eye. 

S. Antipholus. For gazing on your beams, fair sun, 
being by. 

Luciana. Gaze where you should, and that will clear 
your sight. 

S. Antipholus. As good to wink, sweet love, as look 
on night. 

Luciana. Why call you me love ? call my sister so. 

S. Antipholus. Thy sister's sister. 

Luciana. That's my sister. 

S. Antipholus. No: 

It is thyself, mine own self's better part: 
Mine eye's clear eye, my dear heart's dearer heart; 
My food, my fortune, and my sweet hope's aim; 
My sole earth's heaven, and my heaven's claim. 

Luciana. All this my sister is, or else should be. 

S. Antipholus. Call thyself sister, sweet, for I am thee: 
Thee will I love, and with thee lead my life; 
Thou hast no husband yet, nor I no wife: 
Give me thy hand. 

Luciana. O, soft, sir, hold you still... 

I'll fetch my sister, to get her good will. \s he goes within 



3.2.71 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 31 

D ROM 10 of Syracuse rum from the house 

S. Antipholus. Why, how now, Dromio! where run'st 
thou so fast.'' 

S. Dromio. Do you know me, sir ? am I Dromio .'' am 
I your man? am I myself? 

S. Antipholus. Thou art Dromio, thou art my man, 
thou art thyself. 

S. Dromio. I am an ass, I am a woman's man, and 
besides myself. 

S. Antipholus. What woman's man ? and how besides 
thyself? 

S. Dromio. Marry, sir, besides myself, I am due to a 
woman; one that claims me, one that haunts me, one 
that will have me. 

S. Antipholus. What claim lays she to thee? 

S. Dromio. Marry, sir, such claim as you would lay 
to your horse; and she would have me as a beast — not 
that, I being a beast, she would have me, but that she, 
being a very beastly creature, lays claim to me. 

S. Antipholus. What is she? 

S. Dromio. A very reverend body: ay, such a one as 
a man may not speak of without he say ' Sir-reverence.' 
I have but lean luck in the match, and yet is she a 
wondrous fat marriage. 

S. Antipholus. How dost thou mean a fat marriage? 

S. Dromio. Marry, sir, she's the kitchen-wench, and 
all grease — and I know not what use to put her to, but 
to make a lamp of her, and run from her by her own 
light.... I warrant her rags and the tallow in them will 
burn a Poland winter: if she lives till doomsday, she'll 
burn a week longer than the whole world. 

S. Antipholus. What complexion is she of? 

S. Dromio. Swart, like my shoe, but her face nothing 



32 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 3.2.103 

like so clean kept: for why? she sweats, a man may go 
over-shoes in the grime of it. 

S. Antipholus. That's a fault that water will mend. 

S. Dromio. No, sir, 'tis in grain— Noah's flood could 
not do it, 

S. Antipholus. What's her name? 

S. Dromio. Nell, sir: but her name and three quarters, 
that's an ell and three quarters, will not measure her 
from hip to hip. 

S. Antipholus. Then she bears some breadth? 

S. Dromio. No longer from head to foot than from 
hip to hip: she is spherical, like a globe: I could find 
out countries in her. 

S. Antipholus. In what part of her body stands Ireland ? 

S. Dromio. Marry, sir, in her buttocks— I found it 
out by the bogs. 

S. Antipholus. Where Scotland ? 

S. Dromio. I found it by the fbarren-nesses, hard in 
the palm of the hand. 

S. Antipholus. Where France? 

S. Dromio. In her forehead— armed and reverted, 
making war against her heir. 

S. Antipholus. Where England ? 

S. Dromio. I looked for the chalky cliffs, but I could 
find no whiteness in them.... But I guess, it stood in her 
chin, by the salt rheum that ran between France and it. 

S. Antipholus. Where Spain? 

S. Dromio. Faith, I saw it not: but I felt it hot in her 
breath. 

S. Antipholus. Where America, the Indies ? 
S. Dromio. O, sir, upon her nose, all o'er embellished 
with rubies, carbuncles, sapphires, declining their rich 
aspect to the hot breath of Spain, who sent whole 
armadoes of carracks to be ballast at her nose. 



3.2.137 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 33 

S. Antipkolus. Where stood Belgia, the Netherlands ? 

S. Dromio. O, sir, I did not look so low.... To con- 
clude, this drudge, or diviner, laid claim to me— called 
me Dromio, swore I was assured to her, told me what 
privy marks I had about me, as the mark of my shoulder, 
the mole in my neck, the great wart on my left arm, 
that I, amazed, ran from her as a witch.... 
And, I think, if my breast had not been made of faith, 

and my heart of steel. 
She had transformed me to a curtal-dog, and made me 
turn i'th' wheel. 

S. Antipkolus. Go, hie thee presently post to the road. 
An if the wind blow any way from shore, 
I will not harbour in this town to-night.... 
If any bark put forth, come to the mart. 
Where I will walk till thou return to me... 
If every one know us, and we know none, 
'Tis time, I think, to trudge, pack, and be gone. 

S. Dromio. As from a bear a man would run for life. 
So fly I from her that would be my wife. [he goes 

S. Antipkolus. There's none but witches do inhabit here. 
And therefore 'tis high time that I were hence... 
She that doth call me husband, even my soul 

Doth for a wife abhor but her fair sister. 

Possessed with such a gentle sovereign grace. 
Of such enchanting presence and discourse. 
Hath almost made me traitor to myself: 
But, lest myself be guilty to self-wrong, 
I'll stop mine ears against the mermaid's song. 

''Enter Angelo with the chain ' 

Angelo. Master Antipholus— 

S. Antipkolus. Ay, that's my name. 

Angelo. I know it well, sir. Lo, here is the chain. 

Q. C. E. 3 



34 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 3-2.166 

I thought to have ta'en you at the Porpentine. 
The chain unfinished made me stay thus long. 

S. Antipkolus [takes the chain\ What is your will that 
I shall do with this? 

Angela. What please yourself, sir : I have made it 
for you. 

S. Antipholus. Made it for me, sir! I bespoke it not. 

Angela. Not once, nor twice, but twenty times you have : 
Go home with it and please your wife withal, 
And soon at supper-time I'll visit you, 
And then receive my money for the chain. 

S. Antipkolus. I pray you, sir, receive the money now, 
For fear you ne'er see chain nor money more. 

Angela. You are a merry man, sir. Fare you well. 

\he goes 

S. Antipkolus. What I should think of this, I cannot tell : 
But this I think, there's no man is so vain 
That would refuse so fair an offered chain.... 
I see a man here needs not live by shifts, 
When in the streets he meets such golden gifts : 
I'll to the mart, and there for Dromio stay — 
If any ship put out, then straight away. \he departs 

[4.1.] Tke Mart of Epkesus 

Angelo enters, witk a merckant and an officer 

Merckant. You know since Pentecost the sum is due. 
And since I have not much importuned you, 
Nor now I had not, but that I am bound 
To Persia, and want guilders for my voyage: 
Therefore make present satisfaction. 
Or I'll attach you by this officer. 

Angelo. Even just the sum that I do owe to you 
Is growing to me by Antipholus, 



4.1.9 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 35 

And in the instant that I met with you 
He had of me a chain. At five o'clock, 
I shall receive the money for the same: 
Pleaseth you walk with me down to his house, 
I will discharge my bond, and thank you too. 

Antipholvs of Ephesus, and Dromio of Epkesus 
come forth from the courtesan s ' 

Officer. That la^bour may you save : see where he comes. 

E. Antipholus. While I go to the goldsmith's house, 
go thou 
And buy a rope's-end — that will I bestow 
Among my wife and her confederates. 
For locking me out of my doors by day... 
But soft, I see the goldsmith; get thee gone, 
Buy thou a rope, and bring it home to me. 

E. Dromio. I buy a thousand pound a year! I buy 
a rope! \he runs off, shouting 

E. Antipholus. A man is well holp up that trusts 
to you ! 
I promised your presence and the chain. 
But neither chain nor goldsmith came to me: 
Belike you thought our love would last too long, 
If it were chained together; and therefore came not. 

Angela. Saving your merry humour... here's the note, 
How much your chain weighs to the utmost charect. 
The fineness of the gold, and chargeful fashion — 
Which doth amount to three odd ducats more 
Than I stand debted to this gentleman. 
I pray you, see him presently discharged, 
For he is bound to sea, and stays but for it. 

E. Antipholus. I am not furnished with the 
present money : 
Besides, I have some business in the town. 

3-* 



36 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 4i-36 

Good signior, take the stranger to my house, 
And with you take the chain, and bid my wife 
Disburse the sum on the receipt thereof. 
Perchance I will be there as soon as you. 
Angela. Then you will bring the chain to her yourself.^ 
E. Antipholus. No, bear it with you, lest I come not 

time enough. 
Angela. Well, sir, I will... Have you the chain 

about you \ 
E. Antipholus. An if I have not, sir, I hope you have: 
Or else you may return without your money. 

Angela. Nay, come, I pray you, sir, give me the chain : 
Both wind and tide stays for this gentleman. 
And I, to blame, have held him here too long. 
E. Antiphalus. Good Lord! you use this dalliance 
to excuse 
Your breach of promise to the Porpentine. 
I should have chid you for not bringing it, 
But, like a shrew, you first begin to brawl. 
Af^Tc/Jfz;?/. The hour steals on — I pray you, sir, dispatch. 
Angela. You hear, how he importunes me— the chain! 
E. Antipholus. Why, give it to my wife, and fetch 

your money. 
Angela. Come, come, you know, I gave it you 
even now; 
Either send the chain or send me by some token. 
E. Antiphalus. Fie! now you run this humour out 
of breath. 
Come, where's the chain .'' I pray you, let me see it. 
Merchant. My business cannot brook this dalliance. 
Good sir, say whe'er you'll answer me or no: 
If not, rU leave him to the officer. 
E. Antipholus. I answer you! What should I 
answer you ? 



4.1.63 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 37 

Angela. The money that you owe me for the chain. 

E. Antipholus. I owe you none till I receive the chain. 

Angela. You know I gave it you half an hour since. 

E. Antiphojus. You gave me none, you wrong me much 
to say so. 

Angela. You wrong me more, sir, in denying it.... 
Consider how it stands upon my credit. 

Merchant. Well, officer, arrest him at my suit. 

Officer. I do, 
And charge you in the duke's name to obey me. 

Angela. This touches me in reputation.... 
Either consent to pay this sum for me. 
Or I attach you by this officer. 

E. Antipkalus. Consent to pay thee that I never had! 
Arrest me, foolish fellow, if thou dar'st. 

Angela. Here is thy fee, arrest him officer. 
I would not spare my brother in this case, 
If he should scorn me so apparently. 

Officer. I do arrest you, sir. You hear the suit. 

E. Aniiphalus. I do obey thee, till I give thee bail. 
But, sirrah, you shall buy this sport as dear 
As all the metal in your shop will answer. 

Angela. Sir, sir, I shall have law in Ephesus, 
To your notorious shame, I doubt it not. 

Dromio af Syracuse returns ''from the Bay ' 

S. Dramia. Master, there's a bark of Epidamnum, 
That stays but till her owner comes aboard. 
And then she bears away,... Our fraughtage, sir, 
I have conveyed aboard, and I have bought 
The oil, the balsamum, and aqua-vitae.... 
The ship is in her trim, the merry wind 
Blows fair from land : they stay for nought at all. 
But for their owner, master, and yourself. 



38 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 41. 94 

E. Antipholus. How now! a madman? Why, thou 
peevish sheep, 
What ship of Epidamnum stays for me? 

S. Dromio. A ship you sent me to, to hire waftage. 

E. Antipholus. Thou drunken slave, I sent thee for 
a rope, 
And told thee to what purpose and what end. 

S. Dromio. You sent me for a rope's-end, sir, as soon.... 
You sent me to the Bay, sir, for a bark. 

E. Antipholus. I will debate this matter at more leisure. 
And teach your ears to list me with more heed... 
To Adriana, villain, hie thee straight: 
Give her this key, and tell her, in the desk 
That's covered o'er with Turkish tapestry 
There is a purse of ducats — let her send it: 
Tell her I am arrested in the street. 
And that shall bail me: hie thee, slave — be gone. 
On, officer, to prison till it come. 

\he departs with the officer; Angela and 
the merchant following 

S. Dromio. To Adriana! that is where we dined. 
Where Dowsabel did claim me for her husband. 
She is too big, I hope, for me to compass. 
Thither I must, although against my will; 
For servants must their masters' minds fulfil, [he goes 

[4. 2.] The square before the house of Antipholus 

Adriana and Luciana come forth 

Adriana. Ah, Luciana, did he tempt thee so ? 
Mightst thou perceive austerely in his eye. 
That he did plead in earnest? yea or no? 
Looked he or red or pale, or sad or merrily? 
What observation mad'st thou in this case, 



4.2.6 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 39 

Of his heart's meteors tilting in his face ? 

Luciana. First, he denied you had in him no right. 

Adriana. He meant he did me none: the more my spite. 

Luciana. Then swore he that he was a stranger here. 

Adriana. And true he swore, though yet forsworn 
he were. 

Luciana. Then pleaded I for you. 

Adriana. And what said he? 

Luciana. That love I begged for you, he begged of me. 

Adriana. With what persuasion did he tempt thy love? 

Luciana. With words that in an honest suit 
might move.... 
First, he did praise my beauty, then my speech. 

Adriana. Didst speak him fair? 

Luciana. Have patience, I beseech. 

Adriana. I cannot, nor I will not, hold me still. 
My tongue, though not my heart, shall have his will.... 
He is deformed, crooked, old and sere. 
Ill-faced, worse bodied, shapeless every where: 
Vicious, ungentle, foolish, blunt, unkind, 
Stigmatical in making, worse in mind. 

Luciana. Who would be jealous then of such a one? 
No evil lost is wailed when it is gone. 

Adriana. Ah, but I think him better than I say... 
And yet would herein others' eyes were worse. 
Far from her nest the lapwing cries away; 
My heart prays for him, though my tongue do curse. 

Dromio of Syracuse runs up 

S. Dromio. fHere, go... the desk, the purse! sweat 

now, make haste. 
Luciana. How hast thou lost thy breath ? 
S. Dromio. By running fast. 

Adriana. Where is thy master, Dromio ? is he well ? 



40 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 42. 32 

S. Dromio. No, he's in Tartar limbo, worse than hell: 
A devil in an everlasting garment hath him; 
One whose hard heart is buttoned up with steel : 
f A fiend, a fury, pitiless and rough: 
A wolf, nay worse, a fellow all in buff: 
A back-friend,a shoulder-clapper, one that countermands 
The passages of alleys, creeks, and narrow lands; 
A hound that runs counter, and yet draws dry-foot well; 
One that, before the Judgement, carries poor souls 
to 'hell.' 
Adriana. Why, man, what is the matter ? 
S. Dromio. I do not know the matter, he is 'rested on 

the case. 
Adriana. What, is he arrested } tell me, at whose suit. 
S. Dromio. I know not at whose suit he is 
arrested well; 
■j"But he's in a suit of bulF which 'rested him, that can 

I tell. 
Will you send him, Mistress Redemption, the money 
in his desk .'' 
Adriana. Go fetch it, sister... This I wonder at, 

\Luciana goes within 
That he, unknown to me, should be in debt... 
Tell me, was he arrested on a band } 

S. Dromio. Not on a band, but on a stronger thing: 
A chain, a chain! Do you not hear it ring.? 
Adriana. What, the chain ? 

S. Dromio. No, no, the bell, 'tis time that 

I were gone... 
It was two ere I left him, and now the clock strikes one. 
Adriana. The hours come back! that did I never hear. 
S. Dromio. O yes. If any hour meet a sergeant, a' 

turns back for very fear. 
Adriana. As if Time were in debt: how fondly dost 
thou reason! 



4.2.57 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 41 

S. Dromio. Time is a very bankrupt, and owes more 
than he's worth to season.... 
Nay, he's a thief too: have you not heard men say. 
That Time comes stealing on by night and day ? 
fif he be in debt and theft, and a sergeant in the way, 
Hath he not reason to turn back an hour in a day? 

LuciANA returns with a purse 

Adriana. Go, Dromio. There's the money, bear 
it straight. 
And bring thy master home immediately.... \he goes 
Come, sister. I am pressed down with conceit: 
Conceit, my comfort and my injury. \they go within 

[4. 3.] The Mart of Ephesus 

Jntipholus of Syracuse approaches, musing; the 
chain about his neck 

S. Antipholus. There's not a man I meet but doth 
salute me 
As if I were their well-acquainted friend. 
And every one doth call me by my name: 
Some tender money to me, some invite me; 
Some other give me thanks for kindnesses; 
Some offer me commodities to buy.... 
Even now a tailor called me in his shop. 
And showed me silks that he had bought for me. 
And, therewithal, took measure of my body.... 
Sure, these are but imaginary wiles, 
And Lapland sorcerers inhabit here. 

Dromio of Syracuse returns, running 

S. Dromio. Master, here's the gold you sent me for... 
"fWhere have you got the picture of old Adam new- 
apparelled i* 



42 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 4.315 

S. Antiphohs. What gold is this? What Adam dost 
thou mean? 

S. Dromio. Not that Adam that kept the Paradise... 
but that Adam that keeps the prison; he that goes in 
the calf's skin that was killed for the Prodigal; he that 
came behind you, sir, like an evil angel, and bid you 
forsake your liberty. 

S. Antipkolus. I understand thee not. 

S. Dromio. No? why, 'tis a plain case: he that went, 
like a bass-viol, in a case of leather; the man, sir, that 
when gentlemen are tired gives them a sob, and 'rests 
them; he, sir, that takes pity on decayed men, and gives 
them suits of durance; he that sets up his rest to do 
more exploits with his mace than a morris-pike. 

S. Antipkolus. What, thou mean'st an officer? 

S. Dromio. Ay, sir, the sergeant of the band: he that 
brings any man to answer it that breaks his band: one 
that thinks a man always going to bed, and says, 'God 
give you good rest!' 

S. Antipkolus. Well, sir, there rest in your foolery.... 
Is there any ship puts forth to-night? may we be gone? 

S. Dromio. Why, sir, I brought you word an hour 
since that the bark 'Expedition' put forth to-night, and 
then were you hindered by the sergeant to tarry for 
the hoy 'Delay '...Here are the angels that you sent 
for to deliver you. 

S. Antipkolus. The fellow is distract, and so am I, 
And here we wander in illusions: 
Some blessed power deliver us from hence! 

Tke Courtesan, clad in a gay vestment, comes from her house 

Courtesan. Well met, well met. Master Antipholus... 
I see, sir, you have found the goldsmith now: 
Is that the chain you promised me to-day? 



4.3-46 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 43 

S . Antipholus . Satan, avoid! I charge thee tempt me not! 

iS". Dromio. Master, is this Mistress Satan? 

S. Antipholus. It is the devil. 

S. Dromio. Nay, she is w^orse, she is the devil's dam. .. 
and here she comes in the habit of a light w^ench, and 
thereof comes that the wenches say ' God damn me,' 
that's as much as to say ' God make me a light w^ench ' 
...It is w^ritten, they appear to men like angels of light. 
Light is an effect of fire, and fire will burn: ergo, light 
wenches will burn. Come not near her. 

Courtesan. Your man and you are marvellous 
merry, sir.... 
WiU you go with me.? We'll mend our dinner here. 

S. Dromio. Master, if you do, expect spoon-meat, or 
bespeak a long spoon. 

S. Antipholus. Why, Dromio .? 

S. Dromio. Marry, he must have a long spoon that 
must eat with the devil. 

S. Antipholus. Avoid, thou fiend! what tell'st thou me 
of supping .? 
Thou art, as you are all, a sorceress: 
I conjure thee to leave me and be gone. 

Courtesan. Give me the ring of mine you had at dinner, 
Or, for my diamond, the chain you promised. 
And rU be gone, sir, and not trouble you. 

S. Dromio. Some devils ask but the parings of 
one's nail, 
A rush, a hair, a drop of blood, a pin, 
A nut, a cherry-stone... 

But she, more covetous, would have a chain... 
Master, be wise— an if you give it her. 
The devil wiU shake her chain, and fright us with it. 

Courtesan. I pray you, sir, my ring, or else the chain. 
I hope you do not mean to cheat me so! 



44 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS ^.^.^^ 

S. Antipkolus. Avaunt, thou witch! Come, Dromio, 
let us go. \he departs in haste 

S. Dromio. 'Fly pride,' says the peacock — Mistress, 
that you know. \he follows 

Courtesan. Now, out of doubt, Antipholus is mad. 
Else would he never so demean himself. 
A ring he hath of mine worth forty ducats, 
And for the same he promised me a chain — 
Both one and other he denies me now. . . 
The reason that I gather he is mad. 
Besides this present instance of his rage, 
Is a mad tale he told to-day at dinner. 

Of his own doors being shut against his entrance 

Belike his wife, acquainted with his fits. 

On purpose shut the doors against his way... 

My way is now to hie home to his house. 

And tell his wife that, being lunatic. 

He rushed into my house and took perforce 

My ring away.... This course I fittest choose, 

For forty ducats is too much to lose. \s he goes 

[4. 4.] Antipholus of Ephesus returns with the officer 

E. Antipholus. Fear me not, man, I will not 
break away. 
I'll give thee, ere I leave thee, so much money. 
To warrant thee, as I am 'rested for.... 
My wife is in a wayward mood to-day. 
And will not lightly trust the messenger. 
That I should be attached in Ephesus, 
I tell you, 'twill sound harshly in her ears.... 

''Enter Dromio of Ephesus, with a rope's-end'' 

Here comes my man, I think he brings the money.... 
How now, sir! have you that I sent you for? 



4.410 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 45 

E. Dromio. Here's that, I warrant you, will pay 
them all. 

E. Antipholus. But where's the money? 

E. Dromio. Why, sir, I gave the money for the rope. 

E. Antipholus. Five hundred ducats, villain, for a rope ? 

E. Dromio. I'll serve you, sir, five hundred at the rate. 

E. Antipholus. To what end did I bid thee hie 
thee home ? 

E. Dromio. To a rope's-end, sir, and to that end am 
I returned. 

E. Antipholus. And to that end, sir, I will 

welcome you. \ke beats him 

Officer. Good sir, be patient. 

E. Dromio. Nay, 'tis for me to be patient. I am in 
adversity. 

Officer. Good now, hold thy tongue. 

E. Dromio. Nay, rather persuade him to hold his hands. 

E. Antipholus. Thou whoreson, senseless villain! 

\he beats him again 

E. Dromio. I would I were senseless, sir, that I might 
not feel your blows. 

E. Antipholus. Thou art sensible in nothing but blows, 
and so is an ass. 

E. Dromio. I am an ass, indeed— you may prove it by 
my long 'ears.. ..I have served him from the hour of my 
nativity to this instant, and have nothing at his hands 
for my service but blows.... When I am cold, he heats 
me with beating: when I am warm, he cools me with 
beating: I am waked with it when I sleep, raised with 
it when I sit, driven out of doors with it when I go 
from home, welcomed home with it when I return, 
nay, I bear it on my shoulders, as a beggar wont her 
brat: and, I think, when he hath lamed me, I shall beg 
with it from door to door. 



46 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 4-4.39 

''Adrian Ay Luciana, the Courtesan and a schoolmaster 
called Pinch ' enter the Mart 

E. Antipholus. Come, go along— my wife is 
coming yonder. 

E. Dromio. Mistress, 'respice finem,' respect your 
end, or rather, to prophesy like the parrot, 'beware the 
rope's-end.' 

E. Antipholus. Wilt thou still talk ? \^ke beats him 

Courtesan. How say you now? is not your 
husband mad? 

Adriana. His incivility confirms no less... 
Good Doctor Pinch, you are a conjurer — 
Establish him in his true sense again. 
And I will please you what you will demand. 

Luciana. Alas, how fiery and how sharp he looks! 

Courtesan. Mark how he trembles in his ecstasy! 

Pinch. Give me your hand, and let me feel your pulse. 

\Antipholus strikes him 

E. Antipholus. There is my hand, and let it feel 
your ear. 

Pinch. I charge thee, Satan, housed within this man. 
To yield possession to my holy prayers. 
And to thy state of darkness hie thee straight. 
I conjure thee by all the saints in heaven. 

E. Antipholus. Peace, doting wizard, peace; I am 
not mad. 

Adriana. O, that thou wert not, poor distressed soul! 

E. Antipholus. You minion, you, are these 
your customers ? 
Did this companion with the saffron face 
Revel and feast it at my house to-day. 
Whilst upon me the guilty doors were shut, 
And I denied to enter in my house ? 



4.4-64 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 47 

Adriana. O, husband, God doth know you dined 

at home, 
Where would you had remained until this time. 
Free from these slanders and this open shame. 
E. Antipholus. Dined at home! Thou villain, what 

say est thou ? 
E. Dromio. Sir, sooth to say, you did not dine at home. 
E. Antipkolus. Were not my doors locked up, and I 

shut out ? 
E. Dromio. Perdie, your doors were locked, and you 

shut out. 
E. Antipkolus. And did not she herself revile me there } 
E. Dromio. Sans fable, she herself reviled you there. 
E. Antipkolus. Did not her kitchen-maid rail, taunt, 

and scorn me.'' 
E. Dromio. Certes, she did— the kitchen- vestal 

scorned you. 
E. Antipkolus. And did not I in rage depart from thence } 
E. Dromio. In verity, you did— my bones bear witness, 
That since have felt the vigour of his rage. 
Adriana. Is't good to soothe him in these contraries? 
Pinck. It is no shame. The fellow finds his vein. 
And yielding to him humours well his frenzy. 
E. Antipkolus. Thou hast suborned the goldsmith to 

arrest me. 
Adriana. Alas, I sent you money to redeem you. 
By Dromio here, who came in haste for it. 
E. Dromio. Money by me? heart and good-will 

you might. 
But, surely, master, not a rag of money. 
E. Antipkolus. Went'st not thou to her for a purse 

of ducats ? 
Adriana. He came to me, and I delivered it. 
Luciana. And I am witness with her that she did. 



48 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 4.4.89 

E. Drotnio. God and the rope-maker bear me witness 
That I was sent for nothing but a rope. 

Pinch. Mistress, both man and master is possessed— 
I know it by their pale and deadly looks. 
They must be bound, and laid in some dark room. 

E. Antipholus. Say, wherefore didst thou lock me 
forth to-day. 
And why dost thou deny the bag of gold "i 

Adriana. I did not, gentle husband, lock thee forth. 

E. Dromio. And, gentle master, I received no gold: 
But I confess, sir, that we were locked out. 

Adriana. Dissembling villain, thou speak'st false 
in both. 

E. Antipholus. Dissembling harlot, thou art false in all, 
And art confederate with a damned pack. 
To make a loathsome abject scorn of me: 
But with these nails I'll pluck out these false eyes 
That would behold in me this shameful sport. 

\he makes toward her 

Adriana [shrieks], O, bind him, bind him, let him 
not come near me. 

Pinch. More company! The fiend is strong within him. 

^ Enter three or four, and offer to bind him: he strives'' 

Luciana. Ay me! poor man, how pale and wan 

he looks. 
E. Antipholus. What, will you murder me .'' Thou 
gaoler, thou, 
I am thy prisoner; wilt thou suffer them 
To make a rescue ? [he is bound 

Officer. Masters, let him go: 

He is my prisoner, and you shall not have him. 
Pinch. Go, bind this man, for he is frantic too. 

[they bind Dromio of Ephesus 



4.4-II3 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 49 

Adriana. What wilt thou do, thou peevish officer ? 
Hast thou delight to see a wretched man 
Do outrage and displeasure to himself? 

Officer. He is my prisoner — if I let him go, 
The debt he owes will be required of me. 

Adriana. I will discharge thee ere I go from thee. 
Bear me forthwith unto his creditor. 
And, knowing how the debt grows, I will pay it.... 
Good master doctor, see him safe conveyed 
Home to my house. O most unhappy day! 

E. Antipholui. O most unhappy strumpet! 

E. Dromio. Master, I am here entred in bond for you. 

E. Antiphohs. Out on thee, villain! wherefore dost 
thou mad me? 

E. Dromio. Will you be bound for nothing ? be mad, 
good master- 
Cry, 'The devil!' 

Luciana. God help, poor souls, how idly do they talk. 

Adriana. Go bear him hence. Sister, go you 
with me.... 

Pinch and his assistants carry off Antipholus of 
Epkesus and Dromio of Ephesus 

Say now, whose suit is he arrested at? 

Officer. One Angelo a goldsmith, do you know him ? 

Adriana. I know the man: what is the sum he owes? 

Officer. Two hundred ducats. 

Adriana. Say, how grows it due ? 

Officer. Due for a chain your husband had of him. 

Adriana. He did bespeak a chain for me, but had it not. 

Courtesan. When as your husband, all in rage, to-day 
Came to my house, and took away my ring— 
The ring I saw upon his finger now — 
Straight after did I meet him with a chain. 

Q.C.E. 4 



so THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 4-4i4o 

Adriana. It may be so, but I did never see it.... 
Come, gaoler, bring me where the goldsmith is, 
I long to know the truth hereof at large. 

^ Enter Jntipholus of Syracuse, with his rapier drawn, 
and Dromio of Syracuse ' 

Luciana. God, for thy mercy! they are loose again. 
Adriana. And come with naked swords — let's call 
more help 
To have them bound again. 
Officer. Away, they'll kill us. 

They ''run all out, as fast as may be, frighted'' 

S. Antipholus. I see these witches are afraid of swords. 

S. Dromio. She that would be your wife now ran 
from you. 

S. Antipholus. Come to the Centaur, fetch our stuff 
from thence: 
I long that we were safe and sound aboard. 

S. Dromio. Faith, stay here this night, they will surely 
do us no harm: you see they speak us fair, give us gold: 
methinks they are such a gentle nation, that but for the 
mountain of mad flesh that claims marriage of me, I 
could find in my heart to stay here still, and turn witch. 

S. Antipholus. I will not stay to-night for all the town— 
Therefore away, to get our stuff aboard. [they go 

[5. I.] The square before the house of Antipholus 
Angelo and the merchant return 

Angela. I am sorry, sir, that I have hindred you. 
But I protest he had the chain of me. 
Though most dishonestly he doth deny it. 

Merchant. How is the man esteemed here in the city? 

Angelo. Of very reverend reputation, sir, 
Of credit infinite, highly beloved, 



5.1.7 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 51 

Second to none that lives here in the city: 
His word might bear my wealth at any time. 
Merchant. Speak softly— yonder, as I think, he walks. 

Antipholus and Dromio of Syracuse approach 

Angela. 'Tis so; and that self chain about his neck. 
Which he forswore most monstrously to have.... 
Good sir, draw near with me, I'll speak to him... 
Signior Antipholus, I wonder much 
That you would put me to this shame and trouble. 
And not without some scandal to yourself. 
With circumstance and oaths so to deny 
This chain which now you wear so openly.... 
Beside the charge, the shame, imprisonment, 
You have done wrong to this my honest friend. 
Who, but for staying on our controversy. 
Had hoisted sail and put to sda to-day: 
This chain you had of me, can you deny it? 

S. Antipholus. I think I had. I never did deny it. 

Merchant. Yes, that you did, sir, and forswore it too. 

S. Antipholus. Who heard me to deny it or forswear it? 

Merchant. These ears of mine, thou know'st, did 
hear thee: 
Fie on thee, wretch! 'tis pity that thou liv'st 
To walk where any honest men resort. 

S. Antipholus. Thou art a villain to impeach me thus. 
I'll prove mine honour and mine honesty 
Against thee presently, if thou dar'st stand... 

Merchant. I dare, and do defy thee for a villain. 

[' they draw ' 

Adrian Ay Luciana, the Courtesan, and others appear 

Adriana. Hold, hurt him not for God's sake! he is mad. 
Some get within him, take his sword away: 
Bind Dromio too, and bear them to my house. 



52 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 5 i-36 

S. Dromio. Run, master, run— for God's sake take 
a house— 
This is some priory — in— or we are spoiled. 

They take flight into the abbey; the others make to 
pursue; the Lady Abbess meets them at the gate 

Abbess. Be quiet, people. Wherefore throng 
you hither? 

Adriana. To fetch my poor distracted husband hence. 
Let us come in, that we may bind him fast. 
And bear him home for his recovery. 

Angelo. I knew he was not in his perfect wits. 

Merchant. I am sorry now that I did draw on him. 

Abbess. How long hath this possession held the man ? 

Adriana. This week he hath been heavy, sour, sad, 
And much much different from the man he was: 
But till this afternoon his passion 
Ne'er brake into extremity of rage. 

Abbess. Hath he not lost much wealth by wrack 
of sea } 
Buried some dear friend.'' Hath not else his eye 
Strayed his affection in unlawful love? 
A sin prevailing much in youthful men, 
Who give their eyes the liberty of gazing.... 
Which of these sorrows is he subject to? 

Adriana. To none of these, except it be the last. 
Namely, some love that drew him oft from home. 

Abbess. You should for that have reprehended him. 

Adriana. Why, so I did. 

Abbess. Ay, but not rough enough. 

Adriana. As roughly as my modesty would let me. 

Abbess. Haply, in private. 

Adriana. And in assemblies too. 

Abbess. Ay, but not enough. 



5-1.62 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS S3 

Adriana. It was the copy of our conference.... 
In bed, he slept not for my urging it: 
At board, he fed not for my urging it: 
Alone, it was the subject of my theme: 
In company I often glanced it: 
StiU did I tell him it was vile and bad. 

Abbess. And thereof came it that the man was mad.... 
The venom clamour of a jealous woman 
Poisons more deadly than a mad dog's tooth. 
It seems his sleeps were hindred by thy railing, 
And thereof comes it that his head is light. 
Thou say'st his meat was sauced with thy upbraidings, 
Unquiet rneals make ill digestions. 
Thereof the raging fire of fever bred — 
And what's a fever but a fit of madness ? 
Thou say'st his sports were hindred by thy brawls: 
Sweet recreation barred, what doth ensue 
■fBut moody and duU melancholy. 
Kinsman to grim and comfortless despair. 
And at her heels a huge infectious troop 
Of pale distemperatures and foes to life ? 
In food, in sport, and life-preserving rest 
To be disturbed, would mad or man or beast: 
The consequence is, then, thy jealous fits 
Have scared thy husband from the use of wits. 

Luciana. She never reprehended him but mildly, 
When he demeaned himself rough, rude, and wildly. 
Why bear you these rebukes and answer not.? 

Adriana. She did betray me to my own reproof. 
Good people, enter and lay hold on him. 

Abbess. No, not a creature enters in my house. 

Adriana. Then, let your servants bring my 
husband forth. 

Abbess. Neither. ..He took this place for sanctuary. 



54 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 5195 

And it shall privilege him from your hands 
Till I have brought him to his wits again, 
Or lose my labour in assaying it. 

Adriana. I will attend my husband, be his nurse, 
Diet his sickness, for it is my office. 
And will have no attorney but myself. 
And therefore let me have him home with me. 
Abbess. Be patient, for I will not let him stir 
Till I have used the approved means I have, 
With wholesome syrups, drugs, and holy prayers. 
To make of him a formal man again : 
It is a branch and parcel of mine oath, 
A charitable duty of my order, 
Therefore depart, and leave him here with me. 

Adriana. I will not hence, and leave my husband here: 
And ill it doth beseem your holiness 
To separate the husband and the wife. 
Abbess. Be quiet and depart, thou shalt not have him. 
\she goes within and shuts the gate 
Luciana. Complain unto the duke of this indignity. 
Adriana. Come, go, I will fall prostrate at his feet, 
And never rise until my tears and prayers 
Have won his grace to come in person hither. 
And take perforce my husband from the abbess. 

Merchant. By this, I think, the dial points at five: 
Anon, I'm sure, the duke himself in person 
Comes this way to the melancholy vale; 
■fThe place of death and sorry execution. 
Behind the ditches of the abbey here. 
Angela. Upon what cause? 

Merchant. To see a reverend Syracusian merchant. 
Who put unluckily into this Bay 
Against the laws and statutes of this town. 
Beheaded publicly for his oiFence. 



5. 1. 128 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 55 

Angela. See, where they come, we will behold his death. 
Luciana. Kneel to the duke before he pass the abbey. 

A procession draws near: the Duke of Ephesus, ^GEON 
the merchant of Syracuse y bareheaded^ with the headsman 
and other officers 

Duke. Yet once again proclaim it publicly. 
If any friend will pay the sum for him, 
He shall not die— so much we tender him. 

Adriana. Justice, most sacred duke, against the abbess! 

Duke. She is a virtuous and a reverend lady. 
It cannot be that she hath done thee wrong. 

Adriana. May it please your grace, Antipholus, 
my husband — 
Whom I made lord of me and all I had. 
At your important letters— this iU day 
A most outrageous fit of madness took him : 
That desp'rately he hurried through the street — 
With him his bondman all as mad as he- 
Doing displeasure to the citizens 
By rushing in their houses... bearing thence 
Rings, jewels, anything his rage did like.... 
Once did I get him bound, and sent him home. 
Whilst to take order for the wrongs I went. 
That here and there his fury had committed. 
Anon, I wot not by what strong escape, 
He broke from those that had the guard of him. 
And with his mad attendant and himself, 
Each one with ireful passion, with dravsm swords, 
Met us again and, madly bent on us. 
Chased us away: till, raising of more aid, 
We came again to bind them: then they fled 
Into this abbey, whither we pursued them; 
And here the abbess shuts the gates on us. 



56 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 51157 

And will not suffer us to fetch him out, 
Nor send him forth that we may bear him hence.... 
Therefore, most gracious duke, with thy command. 
Let him be brought forth and borne hence for help. 

Duke. Long since thy husband served me in my wars; 
And I to thee engaged a prince's word. 
When thou didst make him master of thy bed, 
To do him all the grace and good I could.... 
Go, some of you, knock at the abbey-gate. 
And bid the lady abbess come to me : 
I will determine this before I stir. 

A servant runs from the house 
Servant. O mistress, mistress! shift and save yourself 
My master and his man are both broke loose. 
Beaten the maids a-row, and bound the doctor, 
Whose beard they have singed off with brands of fire. 
And ever as it blazed, they threw on him 
Great pails of puddled mire to quench the hair; 
My master preaches patience to him, and the while 
His man with scissors nicks him like a fool: 
And, sure, unless you send some present help. 
Between them they will kill the conjurer. 
Adriana. Peace, fool, thy master and his man 
are here. 
And that is false thou dost report to us. 

Servant. Mistress, upon my life, I tell you true, 
I have not breathed almost since I did see it.... 
He cries for you and vows, if he can take you. 
To scorch your face, and to disfigure you... 

Cries heard from the house 
Hark, hark, I hear him, mistress... fly, be gone. . 
Duke. Come, stand by me, fear nothing... Guard 
with halberds! 



5.1.186 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 57 

Antipholus and Dromio of Epkesus appear on 
the steps of the house, with lighted brands 

Adriana. Ay me, it is my husband... Witness you, 
That he is borne about invisible! 
Even now we housed him in the abbey here.... 
And now he's there, past thought of human reason. 

E. Antipholus {advances and kneels\ Justice, most 
gracious duke! O, grant me justice, 
Even for the service that long since I did thee. 
When I bestrid thee in the wars, and took 
Deep scars to save thy life; even for the blood 
That then I lost for thee, now grant me justice. 

^geon. Unless the fear of death doth make me dote, 
I see my son Antipholus, and Dromio. 

E. Antipholus. Justice, sweet prince, against that 
woman there... 
She whom thou gav'st to me to be my wife; 
That hath abused and dishonoured me. 
Even in the strength and height of injury... 
Beyond imagination is the wrong 
That she this day hath shameless thrown on me. 

Duke. Discover how, and thou shalt find me just. 

E. Antipholus. This day, great duke, she shut the doors 
upon me. 
While she with harlots feasted in my house. 

Duke. A grievous fault... Say, woman, didst thou so.^ 

Adriana. No, my good lord.... Myself, he, and my sister 
To-day did dine together: so befall my soul 
As this is false he burdens me withal. 

Luciana. Ne'er may I look on day, nor sleep on night. 
But she tells to your highness simple truth. 

Angela. O perjured woman! They are both forsworn. 
In this the madman justly chargeth them. 



58 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 51.214 

E. Antipholus. My liege, I am advised what I say- 
Neither disturbed with the effect of wine. 
Nor heady-rash, provoked with raging ire, 
Albeit my wrongs might make one wiser mad.... 
This woman locked me out this day from dinner; 
That goldsmith there, were he not packed with her, 
Could witness it... for he was with me then, 
Who parted with me to go fetch a chain, 
Promising to bring it to the Porpentine, 
Where Balthazar and I did dine together.... 
Our dinner done, and he not coming thither, 
I went to seek him. ...In the street I met him. 
And in his company that gentleman.... 
There did this perjured goldsmith swear me down 
That I this day of him received the chain. 
Which, God he knows, I saw not.... for the which, 
He did arrest me with an officer.... 
I did obey, and sent my peasant home 
For certain ducats: he with none returned. 
Then fairly I bespoke the officer 
To go in person with me to my house.... 
By th' way we met 

My wife, her sister, and a rabble more 
Of vile confederates... Along with them 
They brought one Pinch, a hungry lean-faced villain; 
A mere anatomy, a mountebank, 
A threadbare juggler, and a fortune-teller, 
A needy, hollow-eyed, sharp-looking wretch; 
A living-dead man. ...This pernicious slave. 
Forsooth, took on him as a conjurer; 
And, gazing in mine eyes, feeling my pulse. 
And with no face, as 'twere, out-facing me, 
Cries out, I was possessed.... Then all together 
They fell upon me, bound me, bore me thence, 



5.1.248 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 59 

And in a dark and dankish vault at home 

There left me and my man, both bound together — 

Till gnawing with my teeth my bonds in sunder, 

I gained my freedom; and immediately 

Ran hither to your grace, whom I beseech 

To give me ample satisfaction 

For these deep shames and great indignities. 

Angela. My lord, in truth, thus far I witness with him; 
That he dined not at home, but was locked out. 

Duke. But had he such a chain of thee, or no.'' 

Angela. He had, my lord, and when he ran in here, 
These people saw the chain about his neck. 

Merchant. Besides, I will be sworn these ears of mine 
Heard you confess you had the chain of him, 
After you first forswore it on the mart. 
And, thereupon, I drew my sword on you: 
And then you fled into this abbey here. 
From whence, I think, you are come by miracle. 

E. Antipholus. I never came within these abbey-walls, 
Nor ever didst thou draw thy sword on me : 
I never saw the chain, so help me Heaven : 
And this is false you burden me withal. 

Duke. Why, what an intricate impeach is this! 
I think you all have drunk of Circe's cup: 
If here you housed him, here he would have been.... 
If he were mad, he would not plead so coldly: 
You say he dined at home, the goldsmith here 
Denies that saying.... Sirrah, what say you .'' 

E. Dromio. Sir, he dined with her there at 
the Porpentine. 

Courtesan. He did, and from my finger snatched 
that ring. 

E. Antipholus. 'Tis true, my liege, this ring I had 
of her. 



6o THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 5.1. 279 

Duke. Saw'st thou him enter at the abbey here? 
Courtesan. As sure, my liege, as I do see your grace. 
Duke. Why, this is strange... Go call the 
abbess hither.... 
I think you are all mated, or stark mad. 

An attendant enters the abbey-gate 

^geon. Most mighty duke, vouchsafe me speak a word : 
Haply I see a friend will save my life. 
And pay the sum that may deliver me. 

Duke. Speak freely, Syracusian, what thou wilt. 

uEgeon. Is not your name, sir, called Antipholus? 
And is not that your bondman Dromio? 

E. Dromio. Within this hour I was his bondman, sir. 
But he, I thank him, gnawed in two my cords. 
Now am I Dromio, and his man, unbound. 

^geon. I am sure you both of you remember me. 

E. Dromio. Ourselves we do remember, sir, by you: 
For lately we were bound, as you are now.... 
You are not Pinch's patient, are you, sir \ 

jEgeon. Why look you strange on me? you know 
me well. 

E. Antipholus. I never saw you in my life till now. 

jEgeon. O, grief hath changed me since you saw 
me last, 
And careful hours with Time's deformed hand 
Have written strange defeatures in my face: 
But tell me yet, dost thou not know my voice ? 

E. Antipholus. Neither. 

uEgeon. Dromio, nor thou ? 

E. Dromio. No, trust me, sir, nor I. 

jEgeon. I am sure thou dost! 

E. Dromio. Ay, sir, but I am sure I do not— and what- 
soever a man denies, you are now bound to believe him. 



5.I.307 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 6i 

jEgeon. Not know my voice! O, time's extremity, 
Hast thou so cracked and splitted my poor tongue 
In seven short years, that here my only son 
Knows not my feeble key of untuned cares? 
Though now this grained face of mine be hid 
In sap-consuming winter's drizzled snow. 
And all the conduits of my blood froze up... 
Yet hath my night of life some memory: 
My wasting lamps some fading glimmer left: 
My dull deaf ears a little use to hear: 
AH these old witnesses — I cannot err — 
Tell me thou art my son Antipholus. 

E. Antipholus. I never saw my father in my life. 

jiEgeon. But seven years since, in Syracusa, boy, 
Thou know'st we parted. But, perhaps, my son, 
Thou sham'st to acknowledge me in misery. 

E. Antipholus. The duke and all that know me in the city 
Can witness with me that it is not so.... 
I ne'er saw Syracusa in my life. 

Duke. I tell thee, Syracusian, twenty years 
Have I been patron to Antipholus, 
During which time he ne'er saw Syracusa: 
I see thy age and dangers make thee dote. 

The Abbess, Antipholus of Syracuse and 
Dromio of Syracuse come from the abbey 

Abbess. Most mighty duke, behold a man 

much wronged. \^ all gather to see them ' 

Adriana. I see two husbands, or mine eyes deceive mc. 

Duke. One of these men is Genius to the other... 
And so of these, which is the natural man. 
And which the spirit.? Who deciphers them.'' 

S. Dromio. I, sir, am Dromio — command him away. 

E. Dromio. I, sir, am Dromio — pray let me stay. 

S. Antipholus. ^geon art thou not? or else his ghost? 



62 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 5.1. 338 

S. Dromio. O, my old master! who hath bound 
him here? 

Abbess. Whoever bound him, I will loose his bonds. 
And gain a husband by his liberty... 
Speak, old ^geon, if thou beest the man 
That hadst a wife once called -Emilia, 
That bore thee at a burden two fair sons! 
O, if thou beest the same ^Egeon, speak... 
And speak unto the same Emilia. 

(Duke. Why, here begins his morning story right: 
These two Antipholuses, these two so like, 
And these two Dromios, one in semblance... 
Besides her urging of her wrack at sea — 
These are the parents to these children. 
Which accidentally are met together. 

jEgeon. If I dream not, thou art -Emilia. 
If thou art she, tell me where is that son 
That floated with thee on the fatal raft.? 

Abbess. By men of Epidamnum, he and I 
And the twin Dromio, all were taken up; 
But by and by rude fishermen of Corinth 
By force took Dromio and my son from them. 
And me they left with those of Epidamnum.... 
What then became of them, I cannot tell; 
I to this fortune that you see me in. 

Duke [to S . Antipholus\ Antipholus, thou cam'stfrom 
Corinth first. 

S. Antipholus. No, sir, not I. I came from Syracuse. 

Duke. Stay, stand apart— I know not which is which. 

E. Antipholus. I came from Corinth, my most 
gracious lord. 

E. Dromio. And I with him. 

E. Antipholus. Brought to this town by that most 
famous warrior, 
Duke Menaphon, your most renowned uncle. 



5.1.369 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 63 

Adriana. Which of you two did dine with me to-day? 

S. Antipholus. I, gentle mistress. 

Adriana. And are not you my husband .'' 

E. Antipholus. No, I say nay to that. 

S. Antipholus. And so do I, yet did she call me so : 
And this fair gentlewoman, her sister here. 
Did call me brother.... What I told you then, 
I hope I shall have leisure to make good, 
If this be not a dream I see and hear. 

Angela. That is the chain, sir, which you had of me. 

S. Antipholus. I think it be, sir. I deny it not. 

E. Antipholus. And you, sir, for this chain arrested me. 

Angelo. I think I did, sir. I deny it not. 

Adriana. I sent you money, sir, to be your bail, 
By Dromio — but I think he brought it not. 

E. Dromio. No, none by me. 

S. Antipholus. T\n5 purse of ducats I received from you, 
And Dromio my man did bring them me: 
I see we still did meet each other's man. 
And I was ta'en for him, and he for me, 
And thereupon these errors are arose. 

E. Antipholus. These ducats pawn I for my father here. 

Duke. It shall not need, thy father hath his life. 

Courtesan. Sir, I must have that diamond from you. 

E. Antipholus. There, take it, and much thanks for my 
good cheer. 

Abbess. Renowned duke, vouchsafe to take the pains 
To go with us into the abbey here, 
And hear at large discoursed all our fortunes: 
And all that are assembled in this place. 
That by this sympathized one day's error 
Have suffered wrong, go, keep us company, 
And we shall make full satisfaction.... 
Thirty-three years have I but gone in travail 
Of you, my sons— and tiU this present hour 



64 THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 51. 402 

tMy heavy burden ne'er delivered... 
The duke, my husband, and my children both, 
And you the calendars of their nativity, 
■fGo to a gossips' feast, and joy with me 
"["After so long grief such festivity! 
Duke. With all my heart I'll gossip at this feast. 

All enter the abbey ^ save the four brothers 
S. Dromio. Master, shall I fetch your stuff 

from shipboard? 
E. Antipholus. Dromio, v^hat stuff of mine hast 

thou embarked? 
S. Dromio. Your goods that lay at host, sir, in 

the Centaur. 
S. Antipholus. He speaks to me. I am your 
master, Dromio.... 
Come, go with us, we'll look to that anon. 
Embrace thy brother there, rejoice with him. 

Antipholus of Syracuse and Antipholus of Ephesus 
pass through the gate, arm in arm 

S. Dromio. There is a fat friend at your master's house, 
That kitchened me for you to-day at dinner: 
She now shall be my sister, not my wife. 

E. Dromio. Methinks you are my glass, and not 
my brother: 
I see by you I am a sweet-faced youth. 
Will you walk in to see their gossiping? 

S. Dromio. Not I, sir, you are my elder. 

E. Dromio. That's a question— how shall we try it ? 

S. Dromio. We'll draw cuts for the senior— till then, 
lead thou first. 

E. Dromio. Nay, then thus: [they join hands 

We came into the world like brother and brother: 
And now let's go hand in hand, not one before another, 

[they enter the abbey 



THE COPY FOR 
THE COMEDY OF ERRORS, 1623 

The Folio gives us the earliest extant text of Errors, 
and as the play is entered to Blount and Jaggard, together 
with other Foho plays i, in the Stationers' Register for 
November 8, 1623, there is a strong presumption that it 
had not previously seen the light of print. We make a 
point of this, because there are certain features of the 
text which might tempt one to believe that the Folio 
printers had here a lost Quarto to go upon, as they had 
Quartos, not lost, in the case of the succeeding four plays 
in the volume. For if Heminge and Condell furnished 
Jaggard with a MS copy oi Errors, it is not easy to define 
its character. On the whole the text is a clean one, 
strikingly so to an editor fresh from the puzzling dis- 
order oi Measure for Measure. Yet it exhibits phenomena 
which mark it o^ as different not only from any Folio 
text we have hitherto handled but also from the Good 
Quartos as a class. Its outstanding textual features may 
be classified under the following heads: — 

(i) Normality of spelling. In § 5 of the Textual Intro- 
duction to this edition we pointed out that in books set 
up from the authors' MSS, authors' spellings, which 
were in general far more archaic than those of com- 
petent compositors of that period, were liable to crop up 
by inadvertence in print. The Good Quartos are fuU of 
these copy-speUings, which may be taken as specimens 
of Shakespeare's orthography. And even the Bad Quar- 
tos oi Hamlet and Romeo and Juliet, which were in part 

^ By 'Folio plays' we mean texts which were not printed 
in any form before 1623. 

Q. c. E. 3 



66 THE COPY FCj^ 

set up from transcripts of the originag^ provide us with 
spellings which must be regarded as 'hakespearian inas- 
much as they correspond at times wij^ abnormal spell- 
ings found in parallel passages of the s^^^ Quartos. In 
other words, while a transcriber woiy obliterate most 
of the original spellings, occasionally hqg^^j^gjm.j^j.Qygj^^ 
so to speak, when a word in the MS happened to catch 
his eye._ Now one of the most rema^j^^^e features of 
Errors is the consistent normality o- j^g orthography. 
There are, it is true, a few spellings, .-^^^ 'gonne' (sun)^ 
'waight' (weight),_ 'arrant' (errancy 'tearme' and 
'theame,' which might strike the ni0Cgj.j^ reader as odd 
and the student of the Good Quartos ^^ possibly Shake- 
spearian, but such forms are in reality- ^y -^^ means un- 
common in sixteenth and early sev^^^^gj^^j^ century 
books. Indeed the only two words \^ ^^ whole text 
which seem in any way abnormal fo^ ^ compositor of 
the period are 'swoats' (3. 2. 103) ai^^ 'bralles' (c. i. 
77), and if these be not misprints they^^^ probably un- 
Shakespearian forms, since they are v\|j.j^out parallel in 
the Good Quartos. The text oi Errors, -^^ ^ ^^^d, as far 
as spelling is concerned, contains nothj^ which points 
to a close connexion with Shakespear,» orieinal This 
condition of affairs might be eiplaine^^ j^^^ ^.j^^ Folio 
been set up from a late edition of a Q^'aito which first 
got into print, say, about 1594, sinct. ^^^j^ successive 
compositor would have obliterated ^^-^^^ ^nd more of 
Shakespeare's traces as edition follov j edition But 
while a single edition in quarto might h^^^ perished, the 
series of editions which the hypothesis i-gguii-es is quite 
out of the question; we must, therefore ^^^j. around for 
another explanation. Unless we are ^listaken a con- 
sideration of the misprints of the text wiij fm-^ish us with 
what we need. 

(ii) Auditory misprints. As we have g^j^^ ^^^^^^ jg ^ 
clean text, superficially much cleaner ^^iVi. that of the 
majority of the Good Quartos. It cOj^^^jj^g ygj.y few 



THE COMEDY OF ERRORS, I 6 2 3. 67 

serious cruxes, and they can mostly be accounted for as 
the result of playhouse 'cuts.' Yet there are a number of 
trivial misprints, almost all of which have been corrected 
by previous editors, and the interesting thing about them 
is that some can only be explained as mishearings, that 
others can more easily be explained as mishearings than 
as misreadings, while the theory of mishearing also works 
when applied to certain doubtful readings which pre- 
vious editors have not been able to solve. Reserving a 
detailed consideration of these auditory misprints for the 
Notes, we may here gather the chief of them together in 
tabular form: 

{a) Misdivisions : 'vnhappiea' for 'unhappier' (1.2. 
40); 'a name' for 'an aim' (3. i. 47); 'burthen are' for 
'burden ne'er' (5.1. 402); and we may perhaps include 
'a riuall' for 'arrival' (i. 2. 4) with thas class, {b) Con- 
fusion of consonants : 'helpe' for 'health' (i. i. 151); 
'them' for 'men' (2. 2. 79); 'crime' for 'grime' (2. 2. 
141); 'depth' for 'death' (5. i. 121). {c) Confusion of 
vowels: 'in' for 'e'en' (2. 2. loi); 'is' for 'he's' (4. 2. 
45); T for 'he' (4. 2. 60). All these three, it will be 
noted, are cases of i:e confusion, and may point to 
dialect peculiarity. 

Few, if any, of these misprints can be explained on 
the ordinary lines of the ductus litterarum . Clearly, we 
think, the mischief lies not with the eye of the transmitter 
but with his ear. It is, for example, very difficult to 
understand how a compositor or transcriber, seeing 
'burthen nere' in his copy, could have transformed the 
words into 'burthen are,' whereas if he did not see them 
because they were read aloud to him the mistake would 
be easy enough. In short, we believe we have in Errors 
a text which at some time has gone through the process 
of dictation. And if so, it must have been dictated to a 
scribe, since the possibility of dictation may be definitely 
put aside as far as the printing-house is concerned, for the 
simple reason that it would increase the cost of labour 



68 THECOPYFOR 

without saving any time to speak of ^. But we can predi- 
cate nothing definite about the more haphazard methods 
of the playhouse. There, out of play-hours, just as in a 
school out of work-hours, idle fellows might be about, 
and in both cases a person with the task before him of 
copying out so many lines has the standing temptation to 
call someone to his assistance and bid him read the lines 
aloud as he writes them out. Further, the dictation- 
theory affords us a solution of our difficulty with the 
spelling. Obviously a dictated text will be entirely in the 
spelling of the scribe, though it is important to note that 
the spelling, to say nothing of the handwriting, of the 
original may even under these circumstances influence 
the copy to some extent, since it may lead astray the 
person who is reading the lines aloud, and so give rise 
to misprints not greatly dissimilar to those found in other 
texts. As to the remarkable normality of the orthography, 
this simply imphes that the spelHng of the scribe closely 
approximated to that of the printing-houses of his time. 
He may have been a professional scrivener, or he may 
have been a player who had at some period worked 
in a printing-office. Such players were not unknown: 
Anthony Munday, for example, had been apprenticed 
to John Allde and his spelling, to judge by his MS text 
of Sir Thomas More, was very much that of the ordinary 
compositor. 

(iii) Speech-headings and stage-directions. Assuming 
then that the copy for The Comedy of Errors, 1623, was 
not Shakespeare's original but some sort of transcript 
therefrom, written in the playhouse at dictation, we have 
next to enquire what was the character of this transcript 
and for what purpose was it made .'' The question intro- 
duces us to a consideration of the most patent pecu- 
liarity of the text, its strange stage-directions. But before 

^ V. R. B. McKerrow, ' Notes on Bibliographical evidence 
for literary students and editors,' Trans. Bib. Soc. vol. xii. 
pp. 243-4. 



THE COMEDY OF ERRORS, 1623 69 

dealing with these we shall do well to look at the speech- 
headings. 

In the Good Quartos, as we shall find, Shakespeare 
was both careless and forgetful in regard to the names of 
his minor characters, such carelessness generally de- 
noting revision of an old text. In Errors the word 
'Egeon' occurs five times in the dialogue (i. i. 140, 
157? 5- I- 337» 341? 344)> but never in the speech- 
headings or the stage-directions. At the head of i. i. he 
is described as 'the Merchant of Siracusa,' and his 
speeches in this scene are labelled with various abbrevi- 
ations of ' Merchant.' But the play is full of ' merchants,' 
and in 5. i. matters become complicated, since there 
is another merchant (name unknowTi) also present. 
yEgeon's first speech in 5. i. is therefore headed 'Mar. 
Fat.' (i.e. merchant father) and the others 'Fa.,' 'Fath.,' 
'Fat.' and so on. Yet the use of 'Eg.' would seem to 
have offered a far less clumsy way out of the difficulty. 
Why was it not resorted to.'' The right answer may be 
that Shakespeare was revising an old play, and could not 
be bothered to remember the name 'Egeon,' except 
when it cropped up in the dialogue he was working 
upon (v. § V below). In the same way, though the 
speech-heading 'Ang.' is employed for Angelo in 3. i. 
and 3. 2., he becomes 'Gold.' (i.e. goldsmith) for the 
rest of the play. 

On the other hand, there are speech-headings which 
we cannot attribute to Shakespeare, since they were un- 
doubtedly added after the transcript was made. Indeed 
we can be tolerably certain that the bulk of the speech- 
headings were written by one scribe and the bulk of the 
stage-directions by another, who occasionally altered the 
speech-headings. The treatment of 'Luciana,' for ex- 
ample, is illuminating. The name is correctly given at 
the head of 2. i., where she first appears, which is not 
surprising as it occurs at 1. 3 of the dialogue. In the next 
scene (1. 108) we get 'Enter Adriana and Luciana.' But 



70 THE COPY FOR 

in 3. 2., where she enters without her sister, she is not 
recognised or her name has been forgotten, for the scene 
is headed 'Enter luliana, with Antipholus of Siracusia,' 
while her opening words are ascribed to 'lulia.' (v. 
head-note 3. 2.). Nevertheless, with this one exception, 
her speeches throughout the scene are correctly labelled 
'Luc' which shows that 'luliana' was not derived from 
the original MS but was a gloss. Again, wherever the 
Courtesan speaks, her lines are headed 'Cur.' or 'Curt.,' 
while in the stage-directions she is, with one exception, 
invariably spelt 'Courtizan' or 'Courtezan.' The ex- 
ception is found at 4. 3. 42 which gives us 'Enter a 
Curtizan.' This difference of spelling seems to us a strong 
indication that two hands had been at work on the 
'copy,' one of them, which we shall call Hand A, being 
responsible for the speech-headings and, presumably, the 
dialogue, the other, which we shall call Hand B, being 
responsible for the stage-directions. The appearance, 
however, of 'Enter a Curtizan' at 4. 3. 42 suggests that 
at least some of the stage-directions belonged to Hand A. 
And this supposition is borne out by the duplication in 
'Enter Antipholus, and E. Dromio of Ephesus' (5. i. 
185), which, we take it, is Hand A's stage-direction 
'Enter Ant. and E. Drom.' expanded by Hand B. 
Further the 'lulia.' at 3. 2. i seems to be an instance in 
which Hand B has influenced the speech-headings, and 
this mixture of hands is to be found also in the spellings 
given for the various characters designated merchant. 
After act i the word 'merchant' is always spelt 'Mer- 
chant' in the stage-directions and abbreviated 'Mar.' in 
the speech-headings; presumably therefore Hand A 
generally affected the mar and Hand B the mer form. 
Yet in i. i. we get 'Merchant' in the stage-direction, 
'Marchant' as the heading for ^geon's first speech and 
'Mer.' for his other speeches, while in i. 2. we have 
'Marchant' in the stage-direction, 'Mer.' for the first 
speech, and ' E. Mar.' for the rest. It will be noticed that 



THE COMEDY OF ERRORS, 1623 71 

in three cases the heading of the opening speech differs 
in spelling or in form from those given to the same 
character in the remainder of the scene. Dr W. W. Greg 
has suggested to us that this may be due to the fact that 
the first speech after an entrance was without a name 
attached in the transcript and that therefore Hand B was 
obliged to insert one (e.g. 'Marchant' at i. i. i, 'Mer.' 
at I. 2. I, and 'lulia.' at 3. 2. i). This hypothesis is 
strongly supported, as we found on examination, by the 
absence of a name in the Folio at 4. 3. i and 5. i. 168 
(v. notes). 

The conclusion we draw from all this is that the 
'copy' which reached the printers in 1623 was com- 
posite in character, the dialogue and a few brief stage- 
directions being in Hand A, and that Hand B, after the 
dictated transcript was finished, went over the whole 
thing filling out the stage-directions and in places touch- 
ing up the speech-headings. We shall find further evi- 
dence in support of this conclusion as we proceed to 
examine the stage-directions more minutely. 

Fuller than those we are accustomed to in the Good 
Quartos, they are all the more remarkable as occurring 
in a play which in the Folio follows on the bare texts of 
T/ie Two Gentlemen, Merry Wives, and Measure for 
Measure. For this reason they have been described as 
'literary' and have even been attributed to someone re- 
sponsible for the editing of the Folio. We see no neces- 
sity for going outside the theatre to account for them. 
Property-directions, like 'Enter Angelo with the Chaine' 
(3. 2. 163), or 'Enter Dromio Eph. with a ropes end' 
(4. 4. 7) are nothing out of the way, and find an apt 
parallel in the famous 'Enter Piramus with the Asse 
head' which the Folio prints in J Midsummer-Night's 
Dream. Less usual are action-directions, such as 'Enter 
three or foure, and offer to binde him: Hee striues' (4. 
4. 106), 'Runne all out'/' Exeunt omnes, as fast as may 
be, frighted' (4. 4. 145), and 'All gather to see them' 



72 THE COPY FOR 

(5. I. 330). Yet these also can be paralleled in many 
Folio plays. For example, 3 Henry FI gives us 'He 
stampes with his foot, and the Souldiers shew them- 
selues,' 'Enter Edward running,' 'Qifford gfones,' 
'They leade him out forcibly,' 'Layes his Hand on his 
Head,' and many more. Now 3 Henry VI is beyond 
doubt printed from an unedited prompt-copy, since in 
another stage-direction, 'Enter Sinklo and Humfrey 
with Croffe-bowes in their hands,' it substitutes the 
names of two players for those of the characters. Most 
interesting of all the directions in Errors, however, are 
the topical ones, i.e. 'Enter Antipholus Ephes. Dromio 
from the Courtizans' (4. i. 13), 'Enter Dromio Sira. 
from the Bay' (4. i. 85), 'Exeunt to the Priorie' (5.1. 
37) and 'Exit one to the Abbesse' (5. i. 282). It is 
probably these last which have principally raised sus- 
picions of literary editing in the minds of critics, and 
they are, as far as we know, unique in the Shakespearian 
canon ^. Yet it is always better to exhaust the theatrical 
possibilities before resorting to external agencies for an 
explanation of peculiarities in a dramatic text. May it 
not be, then, that these unusual stage-directions were due 
to unusual conditions of performance .'' We suggest, in a 
word, that Errors, in the text we possess, was arranged 
for something corresponding to a classical stage, with 
doors labelled: 'The House of Antipholus,' 'The Street 
to the Bay,' 'The Courtesan,' 'The Priory,' according 
to the mise-en-scene. But we shall have to return to this 
point in § vi below. 

We have already seen indications that two hands had 
been at work upon the stage-directions. Perhaps the 
most glaring instance of the kind is the direction 
quoted above from 4. 4. 145, 'Runne all out'/'Exeunt 
omnes, as fast as may be, frighted.' Commenting on 
this in his recent book, The Stagery of Shakespeare, 

^ M.V. 3. I. 76 'Enter a man from Anthonio' comes very 
near them. 



THE COMEDY OF ERRORS, 1623 73 

Mr Crompton Rhodes writes : ' It is safe to say that the 
prompt-book had merely "Exeunt omnes," the additions 
being made for reasons external and literary, and not 
internal and theatrical' (p. 12). We agree that 'Exeunt 
omnes' probably stood first in the text and that the rest 
was added later (v. note 4. 4. 144-5). ^^^^ ^^ ^^ have 
just seen, there is nothing necessarily untheatrical about 
this addition, while the duplication of stage-directions 
by diiferent scribes is very common in prompt-copy. 
There are, for example, three or four instances of it in 
the MS of Sir Thomas More. Clearly 'Exeunt omnes' 
was in Hand A, and 'Runne all out, as fast as may be, 
frighted' in Hand B, who was revising the stage- 
directions for theatrical purposes. 

The scribe whom we call Hand B obviously pos- 
sessed very vague ideas of the text he was working on, 
since he is dependent upon a hurried reading of the 
dialogue for his knowledge of the names of the charac- 
ters. It was he no doubt who transformed 'Luciana' 
into 'luliana.' But it is his treatment of 'Antipholus' 
which really gives him away. This name first crops up 
in the dialogue at 2. 2. no, and it occurs for the second 
time in the last line of the same scene, which also is the 
last line of the act. Now this marks a significant change 
in the fortunes of the name in the stage-directions. Up 
to the end of act 2 it is always spelt ' Antipholis,' which 
can hardly be a misprint seeing that it is three times 
given in this form. But with the correct spelling staring 
him in the face in the last line of the second act, the scribe 
begins act 3 'Enter Antipholus,' etc., and never after- 
wards forgets his lesson. Clearly he made up his stage- 
directions as he went along without troubling to read 
through the dialogue first. 

Such a procedure would be surprising, if not im- 
possible, for a scribe who knew nothing of the text he 
was dealing with. It is not however necessary to imagine 
an audacity of this kind. The writer knew something of 



74 THE COPY FOR 

the play, and probably thought his knowledge quite 
sufficient for the task. He had, for example, heard of 
Antipholus before he set to work, though the form ' Anti- 
pholis' shows that his hearing had not been very exact. 
He knew also that there were two persons of that name, 
for he distinguishes them, again up to the end of act 2, 
as 'Antipholis Erotes' (or 'Errotis') and 'Antipholis 
Sereptus.' Now these strange titles are, as has long been 
recognised, merely corruptions of 'Erraticus' and 'Sur- 
reptus,' which were appropriate names for the twin 
Menaechmi of Plautus, one of whom was stolen away 
from his parents, while the other wandered over the 
world to find him. Yet they are not the names which 
Plautus actually gives his characters, nor are they suitable 
to Shakespeare's twins, since Antipholus of Ephesus was 
not 'surreptus' but separated from his parents at sea. 
They must, therefore, be derived from some play inter- 
mediate in development between the Menaechmi and 
The Comedy of Errors. And if so, then the 'Erotes' and 
'Sereptus' of our text were written by someone familiar 
with this intermediate play, presumably an actor, who, 
relying upon that familiarity, confidently undertook to 
construct stage-directions for a text of which he had no 
exact knowledge and which he did not even trouble to 
read through. Nor are we entirely without external evi- 
dence for the existence of this intermediate play, since, 
as Malone long ago pointed out. The Historie of Error, 
performed on Jan. i, 1577, at Hampton Court by the 
Children of Paul's, was almost certainly some kind of 
textual half-way house between the drama of Plautus and 
that of Shakespeare, while if the mysterious History of 
Ferrar, acted at Windsor in 1583 'on Twelfdaie at 
night' by the Sussex men be the same title disguised by 
a careless scribe, as some think, this would form yet 
another link in the chain. 

Our theory then is that the copy for The Comedy of 
Errors, 1623, was a dictated transcript, made in the 



THE COMEDY OF ERRORS, 1623 75 

playhouse sometime in the early 'nineties, and prepared 
for the stage by elaborate stage-directions from the hand 
of an actor with vivid memories of the old Historie of 
Error. But if so, why was the addition of these stage- 
directions necessary, and why in the process did they 
take this elaborate form? We can discover only one 
satisfactory answer to the first of these questions. If the 
transcriber. Hand A, had been working direct from 
Shakespeare's MS, which would be the prompt-copy, 
the stage-directions of this original (for it must have con- 
tained adequate stage-directions) would naturally have 
been dictated to him with the dialogue. Since, however, 
the bulk of the stage-directions were patently added after 
the transcription had been made, we infer that the 
transcript was based not upon the prompt-copy but 
upon players' parts, in which stage-directions would be 
quite inadequate or non-existent. Yet we believe, as 
stated above, that the transcriber was able to insert a 
few brief stage-directions as he proceeded with his task, 
and we account for their presence by supposing that the 
theatrical 'plot' was available at the time for consultation 
(cf. Tzvo Gentlemen, pp. 77—9). As for the elaborate 
character of the directions subsequentiy inserted into the 
text, it raises a problem of wide reference and introduces 
other considerations. 

(iv) Abridgment. The text of Errors is the shortest in 
the canon, and runs to only 1760 lines. In an ordinary 
play, this fact would naturally suggest drastic curtail- 
ment. But Errors is not an ordinary play; it is a light 
farce, obviously designed for an after-dinner piece at 
Court or as an item in a night of revels such as took place 
at Gray's Inn on December 28,1594, the earliest recorded 
date of the performance (v. pp. vii— x). Its brevity, 
therefore, was of its essence, while its putative ancestor 
the Plautine play is even shorter, the i 595 translation of 
M<f,¥tf(fr/^/w/ running to just under 1300 lines. Moreover, 
in the received text there is not enough dramatic material 



76 THE COPY FOR 

to allow of considerable expansion beyond its present 
length. Nevertheless there are, we think, unmistakable 
indications of theatrical 'cuts' in the somewhat tedious 
opening scene (v. notes i. i. 17, 38,61, 127, 155) and 
in certain other scenes (v. notes 2. i. 1 12; 4. 3. 69—74; 
5. I. 346-51), while we have a dramatic 'ghost' in 
Balthazar (v. p. 7 8) and in Luce or Nell, a character which 
the young Shakespeare must surely have felt an almost 
irresistible temptation to make something more of than 
has come down to us. The Courtesan again is a character 
which seems to demand further development. Now it 
happens that scope for the fuller exhibition of all three 
characters might easily, and naturally, have been afforded 
by the two dinner-scenes which we hear of but do not 
see: the 'kitchening' of S. Dromio by Nell, and the 
dinner of E. Antipholus with Balthazar and the Cour- 
tesan at her house, 'the Porpentine.' Such scenes, how- 
ever, would require the use of the inner-stage, and one 
of the outstanding features of the received text is that the 
inner-stage is never employed. Possibly, therefore, these 
scenes were cut out deliberately in order to adapt the 
play for more primitive theatrical conditions. However 
this may be, we may feel pretty sure that Shakespeare's 
version was longer than the text which has come down 
to us, perhaps by as much as three or four hundred lines. 
Why, then, was the play shortened.'' We suggest that it 
was abridged for some company touring the provinces, 
as many companies were doing in the years i 591—4. 
In other words, we believe that it may belong to the 
same class of playhouse copy as the shortened transcripts, 
upon which, according to the hypothesis propounded 
elsewhere by Mr A. W. Pollard and the present 
textual editor, the four Bad Quartos were based. It 
is approximately the same length as the Bad Quartos, 
while its elaborate stage-directions bear a strong family 
resemblance to those found in three of them ^. 

^ 'The Stolne and Surreptitious Shakespearian Texts,' 
Times Literary Supplement, Jan. 9, 1919. 



I 



THE COMEDY OF ERRORS, 1623 77 

(v) Shakespeare's revision. In his note on The His- 
torie of Error Malone writes: 'It may be presumed that 
this ancient piece was in a good measure founded on the 
comedv of Plautus; and doubtless thus the fable was 
transmitted to Shakespeare.' We venture to go farther 
and to claim that there is at least a high probabiHt}' that 
Shakespeare's plav was actually a revision of the old 
Historie. If the '.Antipholis Erotes' and 'Antiphohs 
Sereptus' of the Folio text were derived, by memor>', 
from the Historie, that play was still fresh in men's minds 
after Shakespeare's version of the story had come into 
existence, while if his version were not an independent 
creation but a recension of the Historie the confident 
impetuosity' of the maker of stage-directions finds a 
natural excuse. But the internal evidence is still more 
suggestive. The mid-sixteenth centur}" academic comedy, 
of which Ralph Roister Doister and Gammer Gurton's 
Needle are the sole survi\-ing specimens, was written in 
what Professor Saintsbur}' well describes as 'the some- 
what unformed doggerel couplet of twelve syllables or 
thereabouts.' This doggerel is found in several of Shake- 
speare's early dramas, to wit. The Tzco Gentlemen, Love's 
Labour's Lost and The Taming of the Shrezv, while we 
have found traces of it even in his last play, The Tempest 
(v. p. 79, present edition). Without raising here the 
large question as to whether any of this doggerel was 
written by Shakespeare^, we may safely hazard the con- 
clusion that none of it in Errors is his. It is true that most 
belongs to the Dromios, and it may be contended that 
doggerel is the appropriate poetic form for clowns. But 
not aU of it can be so accounted for. Take the first scene 
of act 3, for instance. It opens with 10 lines of blank 
verse, continues with 73 hnes of doggerel, and concludes 
with another 40 hnes of blank verse. In our vie%v, we 
have here a scene from The Historie of Error, of which 
Shakespeare has only revised the beginning and the end. 

1 For observations on the matter, v. E. H. C. Oliphant 
Modem Language Re^vieuc, iv. pp. 347-350. 



78 THE COPY FOR 

And our reasons for thinking so are these: {a) All the 
characters speak doggerel between lines lo and 83; 
(<^) Balthazar, the 'ghost,' appears in this scene alone. 
We know nothing about him, and his presence is left 
unexplained; {c) 'Luce' also appears in this scene and 
nowhere else. This, however, as we have said above, may 
be due to the abridger. Yet abridgment cannot be held 
responsible for another fact about her, namely that she 
is called 'Luce' here, though in other places her name 
is 'Nell' — for it is clear from 4. 4. 73—4 that the two 
names belong to the same person. Surely the best way 
of explaining these facts is to suppose that when in the 
course of revising the old MS Shakespeare came across 
this horse-play episode outside the door of E. Anti- 
pholus' house, he thought it good enough to pass muster 
as it stood, and so left it alone, without noticing or with- 
out troubling about the loose ends. And if this be so, 
another important consequence follows, viz. that there 
were two Dromios in the play before Shakespeare 
handled it, since the chief point of the scene is the insults 
they hurl at each other. Other and smaller indications of 
revision will be brought out in the Notes. But there is one 
large question, connected as we think with the revision, 
which must be dealt with here. 

(vi) T he problem of locality. In preparing the stage- 
directions for this text, we have found it extremely diffi- 
cult to determine the locality of the various scenes. As 
the play was derived directly or indirectly from Plautus, 
Capell decided that unity of place was intended and laid 
the whole action in 'A pu Slick place.' Since his day 
successive editors have introduced new scene-headings 
according to their fancy, until in the Globe edition no 
less than six different localities are named. For some 
time the present editors felt that Capell's solution was the 
most satisfactory one, though they remained gready 
puzzled by the complexity of the problem. A brief sur- 
vey of the text, taking the traditional scene-headings in 



THE COMEDY OF ERRORS, 1623 79 

order, will show the grounds of their perplexity and at 
the same time set forth the textual evidence on the sub- 
ject. The headings quoted are those given in the Globe, 
the name of the critic who first introduced the heading 
being stated in brackets. 

I.I. A hall in the Duke's palace (Theobald). This is a 
plausible heading. Yet (i) there is nothing in the scene 
which obliges us to suppose that it took place indoors; 
(ii) the Duke is prepared to face the elements at the final 
judgment on ^geon in 5. i.; (iii) an interior scene suggests 
the use of the inner-stage, and there seems reason for think- 
ing that the received text was prepared for performance on 
a stage with no inner portion. We have, therefore, laid the 
scene as in 5. i. 

1. 2. The Mart (Clark and Glover). This is supported 
by 2. 2. 6 'I sent him from the mart,' and is clearly correct. 
On the other hand, 2. i. 76 'be new beaten home' suggests 
that 'The Mart' and the house of Antipholus are close to 
each other. 

2. I. The house of Antipholus of Ephesus (Pope). If this 
scene be identical in place with the foregoing, as Capell 
would make it, the exit of E. Dromio at i. 2. 94 and his 
entry at 2. i. 43 are very awkward, though the difficulty 
might be slurred over by playing 2. i. on the upper-stage. 

2. 2. A public place (Capell). This we think should cer- 
tainly be headed 'The Mart,' since the words 'even here' 
(1. 14) prove that the locality is the same as in i. 2. Never- 
theless Adriana's 'wafting' (1. 109) would naturally be 
from the balcony of Antipholus' house, while we feel pretty 
confident that when the received text was played in the six- 
teenth century, S. Antipholus and S. Dromio were intended 
to enter the house at the end of the scene. 

3. I. Before the house of Antipholus of Ephesus (Pope). 
Obviously correct, though edd. have failed to notice that 
the upper-stage is in use during the scene (v. note 3. i. 47 
S.D.). 

3. 2. The same (Pope). Dyce made 3. i. and 3. 2. con- 
tinuous, and writes that Luciana and S. Antipholus enter 
from the door of the house as soon as the stage is left vacant 
by the departure of the other characters. He is surely right. 
Luciana goes to fetch her sister at 1. 70, and S. Dromio has 



8o THE COPY FOR 

just fled from the kitchen on his entry. On the other hand 
Til to the mart' (1. 183) proves that 'Before the house of 
Antipholus' and 'The Mart' cannot be the same locality. 

4.. I. A public place (Capell). This scene must be very 
close to if not identical with that of 3. 2., since Angelo tells 
the Merchant 'in the instant that I met with you/He had 
of me a chain' (1. 9). It must also be 'at the mart,' since 
that is where E. Antipholus 'forswore' the chain (5. i. 
262), whUe S. Dromio had been bidden 'come to the mart' 
(3. 2. 149) and keeps his appointment at 1. 85. Further, 
'walk with me down to his house' (1. 12) seems to imply 
that the 'house' is some distance off. It is in 4. i. that the 
F. gives us the locality-directions 'from the Courtizans' 
(1. 13) and 'from the Bay' (1. 85) which suggest a change of 
stage-setting (see below). 

4. 2. T^e house of Antipholus of Ephesus (Pope). This 
scene is on all fours with 2. i. S. Dromio's exit at the end 
of 4. I. and his re-entry at 4. 2. 28 would make identity of 
place in the two scenes very awkward, though once again 
the use of the upper-stage might disguise the difficulty. 

4.3. A public place (Capell) . Clearly this locality is the 
same as that of 4. i., since S. Dromio returns with the gold 
and asks what has happened to the sergeant. Again 'hie 
home to his house' (1. 90) suggests that E. Antipholus' 
house is some way off, and therefore the localities of 4. 3. 
and 4. 2. are not the same. Moreover presumably the 
Courtesan enters from her house at 1. 42; otherwise the 
audience would scarcely be able to grasp who she is. 

4. 4. A street (Pope). There is nothing to show definitely 
where this scene takes place. But it can hardly be before the 
house of Antipholus, since Adriana and the rest 'run all 
out' at 1. 145 and though they re-enter at 5. i. 32, which is 
before the 'house,' they have evidently not been home 
meanwhile. On the other hand, there is no reason why we 
should not head it 'The Mart.' 

5. I. A street before the Priory (Pope). It is certainly 
'before the priory' but equally certainly 'before the house 
of Antipholus,' seeing that cries are heard from the house 
(1. 183), the servant evidently enters therefrom (1. 167) and 
presumably E. Antipholus and E. Dromio also (1. 186). 
The priory and the house of Antipholus are therefore next 
door each other. 



THE COMEDY OF ERRORS, 1623 81 

The chief difficulty, as will be clear from this survey, 
is to determine the relative positions of the Mart and the 
house of Antipholus. At times they seem some distance 
apart, at others they are close together, if not in the same 
locality. After much consideration, we have come to the 
conclusion that the most satisfactory arrangement for a 
modern reader's text is to alternate between two localities: 
(i) an open space before the house of Antipholus, which 
will have the priory on one side and a street-exit on the 
other, and (ii) the Mart, which will have the Courtesan's 
house in the centre and street-exits, one of them leading to 
the bay, on either side. We believe too that those respons- 
ible for the text, as we have it, kept these two localities 
more or less in mind, distinguishing them at the time of 
performance by means of placards, when necessary. 
Evidently the play was to be acted upon a simple platform 
with three doors at the back, and no inner-stage. In 
scenes i. i. and r. 2. no placards would be needed. In 
2. I. a placard inscribed 'The house of Antipholus' or 
'The Phcenix' would be hung up over the middle door, 
and would probably remain there throughout 2. 2., 3.1., 
and 3.2. In 4. I. this would be removed and its place 
taken by another headed 'The Courtesan's house' or 
'The Porpentine,' while one of the side-doors would be 
labelled 'To the Bay.' In 4. 2. these placards ought by 
rights to have been exchanged for 'The house of Anti- 
pholus,' and perhaps they were; in any event they would 
be needed again in 4. 3. and 4. 4. Lastly, in 5. i. the 
Courtesan's house would be once again transformed into 
the dwelling-place of the respectable Adriana, while a 
' Priory' placard would make one of the side-doors the entry 
to the domain of the stiU more respectable Lady Abbess. 
Possibly the three doors we have posited were simply 
the entrances to the painted 'houses' which are known 
to have been used on the academic and court stage ^; 

^ v. Creizenach, T/ie English Drama in the age of Shake- 
speare, pp. 353-5- 



82 THE COPY FOR 

but it is not necessary to our argument to suppose this, 
since the bare dais of a hall, with three doors at the 
back, would serve. In any event, we submit that the 
foregoing conjectural reconstruction of the stage-ar- 
rangements for Errors provides an adequate explanation 
of the locality-directions in the text. It is not of course 
contended that Shakespeare himself contemplated any 
such stage conditions while penning his recension. On 
the contrary, the obvious necessity for an upper-stage in 
3. r., a scene which must have lost much of its eifect 
when played in a hall without a gallery, and the pos- 
sibility that his unabridged MS contained at least two 
inner-stage scenes, suggest that he had the ordinary 
Elizabethan stage in mind throughout. Yet in adapting 
the play for the impromptu theatre of a travelling com- 
pany, Hand B was, perhaps even consciously, restoring 
to it something of the classical structure which it had 
once possessed, since that indistinctness of locality which 
still hangs about the play is best explained by supposing 
that at some period of its evolution the classical unities 
had been strictly observed and there had been no change 
of locality at all. 

One point more remains to be glanced at. The re- 
corded performance at Gray's Inn took place on the 
evening of Dec. 28, 1594. But the accounts of the 
Treasurer of the Chamber inform us that the Chamber- 
lain's men and the Admiral's men were acting on the 
same date before the Queen at Greenwich. Some get 
over this difficulty by supposing that the entry for the 
Chamberlain's men was a scribal error for Dec. 27, a 
supposition which would free them for the performance 
at Gray's Inn on the 28th and obviate the somewhat 
unusual contingency of two court performances on the 
same date. Others solve the problem by conjecturing 
that Shakespeare's company played before the Queen at 
Greenwich in the afternoon of the 28th, and then went 
on to Gray's Inn in the evening (cf p. ix). Our theory 



THE COMEDY OF ERRORS, 1623 83 

of the 'copy' allows a third alternative. For if there 
were two prompt-books for Errors, Shakespeare's MS 
and the abridged transcript which the Folio preserves, 
the 'company of base and common fellows' which per- 
formed at Gray's Inn was notnecessarily the same troupe 
that acted at Greenwich. 



With the publication of The Comedy of Errors, the 
fifth play in the canon, the textual editor comes to 
the end of a definite stage in his journey. The Folio 
opens with a batch of five comedies, none of which had 
previously appeared in complete form; and these are 
followed by a second batch, of four comedies, for all of 
which Good Quartos not only existed but were actually 
used as copy by the Folio printers. In the next four 
volumes, therefore, we shall be dealing with texts pub- 
lished during Shakespeare's lifetime, printed in all 
probability from his autograph manuscripts, and un- 
tainted by any suspicion of later revision by inferior 
hands. 

Yet though, owing to the arrangement of the Folio, 
it is not until five plays are published that we come to 
close quarters with a Good Quarto text, what may be 
called the Good Quarto norm has been before our eyes 
from the commencement of the undertaking. It is pos- 
sible to edit The Works of Shakespeare from either of 
two points of view. One may start, as most editors have 
done, by adopting the Folio as the impregnable rock of 
Shakespearian scripture, by regarding every text therein 
as of equal authority with every other, and by accepting 
at its face value Heminge and Condell's implication that 
all the quartos were 'stolne and surreptitious.' On the 
other hand, one may — now Mr A. W. Pollard has 
shown the way — begin by studying the Good Quartos, 
on the assumption that those texts bring us into the 
closest proximity now possible with Shakespeare him- 
self, learn from the study much about the general charac- 

6-3 



84 THE COPY FOR 

ter of his prompt-books, and having thus arrived at a 
kind of textual standard, bring the Folio texts to the test 
of that standard. Such has been the method pursued in 
this edition; and it must be admitted that, as far as the 
first five Folio texts go, the test has proved an un- 
expectedly acid one. Tv^o of them — The Two Gentle- 
men and Merry Wives — are found to be assembled texts, 
transcribed from players' parts; a third — Errors — is ap- 
parently derived from a dictated copy; a fourth — Mea- 
sure for Measure — presents us with a remarkable blend 
of transcribed Shakespearian verse, and of prose most of 
which is by some other dramatist. In only one instance, 
The Tempest, can we feel tolerably certain that Jaggard's 
compositor saw a line of Shakespeare's handwriting, and 
even here the text has been disturbed and added to by a 
later reviser. 

Disconcerting, however, as these results may seem, 
they afford no cause for discouragement. In his Pro- 
posals for printing the Dramatick Works of William 
Shakespeare, issued in 1756, nine years before his edition 
appeared, Dr Johnson gave utterance to the following 
appraisement of the received texts of Shakespeare, an 
appraisement which has been more or less tacitly ac- 
cepted by all subsequent critics, until Mr Pollard began 
his researches: 

He sold them, not to be printed, but to be played. They 
were immediately copied for the actors, and multiplied -by 
transcript after transcript, vitiated by the blunders of the 
penman, or changed by the affectation of the player; per-' 
haps enlarged to introduce a jest, or mutilated to shorten 
the representation; and printed at last without the concur- 
rence of the author, without the consent of the proprietor, 
from compilations made by chance or by stealth out of the 
separate parts written for the theatre: and thus thrust into 
the world surreptitiously and hastily, they suffered another 
depravation from the ignorance and neghgence of the 
printers, as every man who knows the state of the press in 
that age will readily conceive. 



THE COMEDY OF ERRORS, 1623 85 

It is not to be supposed that Johnson had proceeded far 
in his examination of the Folio when he wrote these 
words, but had he perused no more than the first five 
plays, their condition, together with the fatal phrase 
about 'stolne and surreptitious' in the preface, is quite 
enough to account for his pessimism. In a word, it 
seems likely that the whole Folio has been hitherto 
judged by the state of its first hundred pages. As we pro- 
ceed with our enquiry, we shall no doubt find other texts 
in almost as strange a condition as some of those we have 
just dealt with. Yet it is highly improbable that none of 
the remaining Folio plays were printed from Shake- 
spearian prompt-copies, while in the Good Quartos, 
their age-long stigma now removed, we have texts 
most of which are almost without doubt straight from 
Shakespeare's study. And of these the next four plays 
provide us with very beautiful specimens. 

D.W. 



NOTES 

All significant departures from the Folio are re- 
corded; the name of the critic who first suggested a 
reading being placed in brackets. Illustrative spellings 
and misprints are quoted from the Good Quarto texts 
or from the Folio where no Good Quarto exists. The 
line-numeration for reference to plays not yet issued in 
this edition is that used in Bartlett's Concordance . 

F., unless otherwise specified, stands for the First 
Folio; T.I. and Facs.=the Textual Introduction and 
the Facsimile of a passage from the 'Shakespearian' 
Addition to Sir Thomas More, both to be found in the 
Tempest volume ; N.E.D.= The New English Dictionary ; 
^)\^Xi^.— Shake speare" s England; S.D.= Stage-direction; 
G.= Glossary. 

Characters in the Play. The F. gives no list of the 
Names of all the Actors, though there is ample room for 
one on the last page of the text. Presumably no 'copy' 
for this was delivered to the printers. N.B. (i) Solinus; 
the Duke's name is never mentioned except in the first 
line of the play, (ii) yEgeon; always spelt 'Egeon' in 
the text. Cf. 'Egeus' in M.N.D. (iii) Antipholus; v, 
pp. 73-4. (iv) Luciana; v. pp. 69-71. 

Acts and Scenes. F. divides into acts but not into 
scenes. It is not surprising to find act-divisions in an 
early play, derived directly or indirectly from the 
classical drama, but they are probably purely theatrical. 
The absence of scene-divisions suggests that Jaggard was 
not provided with a 'plot' for this text, as he was like- 
wise not provided with a list of the 'actors.' Cf. T.I. 
pp. xxxvi— xxxvii. 

Punctuation. The F. pointing, though exhibiting 
little delicacy, is on the whole good. Stops are normally 



88 NOTES I.I. 

well cared for in dictation, and in any event it would be 
important to get them right in acting-copy of the kind 
we believe this to be (v. p. 76). 

Stage-directions. Cf pp. 71-5. All F. stage-directions 
are given in the notes. 

I. I. 

S.D. F. 'Enter the Duke of Ephefus, with the Mer- 
chant of Siracufa, Taylor, and other attendants.' 

I. F. heads this speech ' Marchant,' though all 
^geon's other speeches in this scene are headed 'Mer.' 
v. pp. 70-1 andcf. notes 1.2. l ; 3.2. i ; 4. 3. i ; 5.1. 168. 

5. The enmity and discord Qtc. Such inter-municipal 
feuds were common in Elizabethan England. 'Each 
new set of market regulations was contested with the 
same eagerness and from much the same motives as a 
modern American tariff.... The Stratford council em- 
ployed men armed with cudgels to keep out the traders 
of Coventry. The Leicester glovers strove with might 
and main to prevent the glovers of Ashby and Lough- 
borough from buying skins in their market. Between 
many neighbouring towns there raged an animosity 
almost as fierce as the feud between Ephesus and Syra- 
cuse' (Prof Unwin, Sh. Eng. i. 315). 

17. Be seen at Syracusian (Pope) F. 'Be feene at 
any Siracufian' The F. words occur just above 'if any 
Siracufian ', which the eye of the compositor has evi- 
dently caught. 

fairs... The sentence is left incomplete; possibly a 
'cut' here. 

31-2. A heavier task. ..unspeakable The construc- 
tion of this sentence is reminiscent of Greene's work. 

38. by me too... F. 'by me;' F2 'by me too;' The 
F2 reading makes tolerable sense; but it possesses no 
authority and the semi-colon raises suspicions of a 'cut.' 

41. Epidamnum (Pope) F. 'Epidamium' and so 
throughout. The mistake may well be Shakespeare's. 



I.I. NOTES 89 

42. And the (Theobald) F. 'And he' In English 
script th and h were liable to confusion. The error, 
therefore, may be ascribed either to the printer or to the 
playhouse reader. 

52. distinguished but by names The twins were of 
course not so distinguished in the present text. But in 
Plautus one of the brothers is called Sosicles, and takes 
the name of his twin Menaechmus after the latter is 
stolen. The passage is clearly a hnk with the Plautine 
original and its obscurity may be due either to careless 
revision or to abridgment. Cf. note 1. 127 below. 

54. meaner (S. Walker) F. 'meane' F2 'poor 
meane' Walker's emendation is accepted by all mod. 
edd. 

55. a burden male, twins F. 'a burthen Male, twins' 
All mod. edd. read 'a burden, male twins' — thus ob- 
scuring the quibble, stressed by the F. capital letter; 
V. G. 'male.' 

61. We came aboa?-d F. prints this with I. 60. The 

broken line suggests a 'cut.' 

87. Were (Rowe: Craig reads) F. 'Was' 

93. Epidaurus (F2) F. 'Epidarus' Theobald conj. 

'Epidamnus' 

102. upon (Pope) F. 'vp' F2 'vp vpon' Cf. note 
2. 2. 12. 

103. helpful ship Rowe reads 'helpless ship', and 
other edd. suspect F. reading; but the mast, a very present 
help in trouble, might surely be called a 'helpful ship.' 

116. bark (F2) F. 'backe' — a badly shaped r might 
resemble c in English script. 

123. hath. ..thee (F2) F. 'hauc.they' — possibly 
due to mishearing. 

127. so his case F2 'for his case' which some edd. 
read. The passage is obscure and perhaps suffers from 
abridgment, ^geon obviously intends to say that 
S. Dromio, like S. Antipholus, had assumed the name 
of his lost brother; cf. note 1. 52 above. 



9° NOTES I.I. 

132-3. Five summers. ..Asia Again very similar to 
Greene's style. 

139. travels ^geon also means 'travails'; the two 
w^ords were not differentiated in Shakespeare's day. 

143. Against my crown etc. 1 44. Which princes etc. 
Hanmer transposes these two lines, and improves the 
sense by so doing. Cf. note 2. 2. 145. 

150. Capell reads 'I'll, therefore, merchant limit 
thee this day.' N.B. Shakespeare never accents 'mer- 
chant' on the second syllable. 

151. health. ..help F. 'helpc.helpe' Many con- 
jectures for the first 'helpe,' e.g. 'store,' 'sum,' 'life,' 
'pelf,' 'hope,' etc. 'Health' preserves the required 
jingle and is a likely word to have been changed into 
'help' by mishearing, v. pp. 66-8. 

155. Gaoler ' Go gaoler' and ' Gaoler go' have been 
suggested. But the short line, taken with that which 
follows, may be due to abridgment. 

157. yEgeon F. 'Egean' 

158. lifeless F. 'liueleffe' 
S.D. F. 'Exeunt.' 

I. 2. 

S.D. F. 'Enter Antipholis Erotes, a Marchant, and 
Dromio.' Cf. p. 74. 

r . F. heads this speech ' Mer.' though the merchant's 
other speeches in the scene are headed 'E. Mar.' v. 
note I. I. I and pp. 70-1. 

4. arrival (F2) F. 'a riuall' The error might be due 
either to mishearing or to misdivision in the MS. 

16. broken line. 

18. mean v. G. S.D. F. 'Exit Dromio.' 

19. villain i.e. bondman. Malone quotes 'The 
homely villain curtsies to her low' Lucr. 1338. 

2i\..'' I am invited tic. -^2. Sir,Icommendt\.c. F. heads 
these speeches 'E. Mar.' (i.e. Ephesian Merchant), 
though 1. I is headed 'Mer.' Clearly an attempt to 



1.2. NOTES 9> 

differentiate this Merchant from 'the Merchant of 
Siracusa,' i.e. ^geon, in i. i., and the prefix 'E.' 
seems to be the germ of 'E.' and 'S.' Antipholus, later. 
For the difference of spelling (marchant — merchant) 
V. pp. 70—1. It should be noted that there is nothing 
in the dialogue to show that this merchant, who has just 
arrived by ship with S. Antipholus, belonged to Ephesus. 
He is clearly not the same person as the Ephesian mer- 
chant to whom Angelo is in debt (4. i.). 

26. Soon at V. G. o'clock F. 'a clocke' 

32. S.D. F. 'Exeunt.' 

40. unhappier (Clark and Glover) F. '(vnhappie 
a)' Most edd. follow F2 and read 'unhappy' If 'un- 
happier' be the right reading, as we believe it is, the F. 
'vnhappie a' can best be explained as an auditory 
error. It should however be noted that confusion be- 
tween a and r might arise from careless writing, though 
hardly, we think, at the end of a word. v. pp. 66—8. 

S.D. F. 'Enter Dromio of Ephefus.' 

41. almanac of my true date Cf. 5. i. 404. 

45. twelve The Elizabethan dinner hour was about 
1 1 .30. Breton {Fantastickes, 1626) tells us that the first 
course was over by 'twelve of the clock.' Cf. Merry 
Wives, pp. xvi— xvii. 

65. score (Rowe) F. 'fcoure' v. G. 

66. clock (Pope) F. 'cooke' Perhaps a mishearing. 

75. the Pkcxnix E. Antipholus was a merchant, and 
this was the sign of his shop. 

76. stay (Rowe) F. 'ftaies' 

85. pay V. G. 89. dinner, F. 'dinner:' 

93. Goi'j (Hanmer) F. 'God' 

94. S.D. F. 'Exeunt Dromio Ep.' 

96. o'^r-r^«^/J/ (Hanmer) F. 'ore-wrought' — prob- 
ably a mishearing. N.B. the word 'raught' occurs seven 
times in Shakespeare and is always spelt correctly else- 
where, except at L.L.L. 4. 2. 41 where the Q. misprint 
'rought' gives rise to the F. reading 'wrought' 



92 NOTES 1.2. 

98, 99, 100, loi. F. ends each of these lines with a 
colon. 

102. liberties Hanmer reads 'libertines'; but v. G. 
105. S.D. F. 'Exit.' 



2. I. 

S.D. F. 'Enter Adriana, wife to Antipholis Sereptus, 
with Luciana her Sifter.' Cf. pp. 69-71, 74. The name 
'Luciana' occurs in the dialogue at 1. 3, but that of 
'Adriana' does not appear until 2. 2. 112. She is how- 
ever an important character, and if the writer of stage- 
directions remembers 'Antipholis,' we may suppose that 
his memory was good for 'Adriana' also, more especially 
as he had the speech-headings 'Adr.,' 'Adri.' to assist it. 
Possibly he found it already written in the transcript by 
Hand A. v. p. 75. 

3. clock F. 'a clocke' 

12. /// (F2) F. 'thus' This may be a compositor's 
slip. 

15. lashed F. 'lafht' This makes sense; but some 
edd. would read 'leashed', which seems better, and is 
possible, 'leash' and 'lash' being closely allied in the 
1 6th cent. 

20—1. Men... masters... Lords (Hanmer) F. 'Man... 
Mafter...Lord' 

30. start some other where Johnson conj. 'start some 
other hare'; but cf. 1. 104 below, 'his eye doth homage 
otherwhere' and v. G. 'start.' 

39. zvouldst (Rowe) F. 'would' 

43. S.D. F. 'Enter Dromio Eph.' 

44-85. Note the mixture of prose and verse in this 
section, Dromio sometimes speaking prose and some- 
times verse. Cf. note 1. 59 below. 

45. two hands i^ 2) F. 'too hands' It is just possible 
that F. may be correct, if we suppose that 'to be at 
to-hands' was a current expression, v. G. 'hands.' 



2.1. NOTES 93 

49, 54. understand Cf. G. and Two Gent. 2. 5. 23. 

59. But, sure, etc. broken line, at the beginning of 
a speech in verse. We can feel pretty sure that Dromio's 
part has undergone revision in this scene. 

61. thousand (F2) F. 'hundred' Cf. i. 2. 81, 84 
and 1. 65 below^. where F. prints 'thousand' The error 
was due perhaps to the use of figures in the copy. 

64. come home (Hanmer) F. 'come' 

68. / know thy mistress not (Seymour) F. 'I know 
not thy miftrefle' This simple transposition of the nega- 
tive, which ruins the verse, may be due to the com- 
positor. 

70—4. Quoth my master etc. F. prints these lines as 
prose, which again suggests revision, if we assume that 
the 'reader' was careful to mark the termination of 
verse-lines as he seems to be elsewhere. 

72. errand {Y\) F. 'arrant' The sp. 'arrand' occurs 
in 2 Hen. IF, i. i. 69; Jdo, 2. i. 273, and 'arrant' in 
TroiL 5. 4. 9. 

79. bless V. G. 

80. holy V. G. 

85. S.D. F. gives no 'exit' for Dromio. 

102. jealousy! F. 'lealoufie;' 

107. alone 0' love F. 'alone, a loue' F2 'alone, 
alone' — which almost all edd. follow. The F. text, in 
modernised spelling, seems to make good sense, i.e. 'in 
the name of love.' F. constantly prints 'a' for 'o', and 
there are many examples in the present play, cf. 'a 
Wednesday' i. 2. 55, 'a clocke' 2. i. 3, 'a door' 
2. I. II. Our reading was suggested by Cunningham, 
who quotes 'of all loves' M.W.W. 2. 2. 107, M.N.D. 
2. 2. 154. 

112. Where gold etc. The line is hopelessly corrupt, 
and we print it as it stands in the F. There have been 
many attempts to mend it, e.g. Theobald reads 'wear' 
for 'where', and all mod. edd. follow, ignoring the fact 
that 'touching will wear gold' flatly contradicts 'the gold 



94 NOTES 2.1. 

bides still that others touch.' We explain the corruption 
by a 'cut' of two or more rhyming lines, thus: 
yet the gold bides still 
That others touch, and often touching will. 
Where gold and 

No man that hath a name, 

By falsehood and corruption doth it shame. 
113. By falsehood Theobald, followed by Malone 
and others, reads 'But falsehood' See previous note. 

115. what's left azvay F. '(what's left away)' 

116. S.D. F. 'Exit.' 

2. 2. 

S.D. F. 'Enter Antipholis Errotis.' v. p. 74. 

3-4. out. By computation... report, (Rowe) F. 'out 
By computation... report.' — and most edd. tollow. But 
F. pointing is clearly wrong, as the exclamation-mark 
(a query in F.) after 'mart' in 1. 6 shows. Antipholus is 
puzzled and is trying to piece the situation together. 

6. / sent him from the mart Cf. 'even here' 1. 14. 
It seems clear from this that scenes 1.2. and 2. 2. both 
take place 'at the mart.' Cf. pp. 78-82. 

S.D. F. 'Enter Dromio Siracufia.' 

12. didst (F2) F. 'did didst' This suggests correc- 
tion while the sheets were in proof, the correction 'didst' 
being inserted into the forme without the removal of the 
original error 'did' Cf. note i. i. 102. 

14. Even now etc. This speech is headed 'E. Ant.' 
by F. An interesting point, since it shows that those 
responsible for the copy had not so far made up their 
minds how the two Antipholuses should be distinguished 
in the speech-headings. The Dromios are characterised 
from the beginning as 'E. Dro.' and 'S. Dro.,' but the 
same principle is not applied to their masters until 3.1. 
The present instance marks an attempt at such differ- 
entiation, though a misleading one, since 'Antipholis 
Errotis' is, of course, Antipholus of Syracuse. 



2.2. NOTES 95 

23. S.D. F. 'Beats Dro.' 

25. Upon what bargain v. G. 'earnest.' 

28. jest Dyce and others read 'jet', which may be 
preferred. 

32. aspect V. G. 

35. Sconce, call you it etc. v. G. 'sconce.' Note the 
sudden drop into prose, possibly denoting revision. 

45-9. Why, first etc. F. prints as prose, which again 
suggests revision. Cf. note 2. i. 70-4. 

52. next Capell and Malone conj. 'next time' 

56. In good time v. G. 'time.' 

79. scanted men (Theobald) F. 'fcanted them' 
Theobald's reading, adopted by all mod. edd., is 
obviously correct. Malone notes a similar error in 
2 Hen. IF, Ind. 8, where Q. reads 'men' and F. mis- 
prints 'them' The mistake here, therefore, may be due 
to the compositor. 

82. more hair than wit Cf. Two Gent. 3. i. 350—4. 

88. jollity Staunton conj. and 'Arden' reads 
'policy', which fits the context, while 'jollity' is point- 
less. If Shakespeare wrote 'pollitie' the word might 
easily be changed to 'jollity' by mishearing; but Shake- 
speare never uses 'polity' elsewhere, though the word 
occurs in Ben Jonson. 

91. not sound The point is obscure. 

93. falsing V. G. Grant White reads 'falling', 
which taken with 'sure' and Dromio's 'drop' (1. 97), 
seems to make better sense than the F. 

97. tiring (Pope) F. 'trying' 

100. there is The ^ looks broken in F. and is in some 
copies apparently missing. 'The F. comma before 
"there" sticks up and prevents the d of "proved" and 
the t of "there" marking properly' (W. W. Greg: 
privately). 

loi. e'en no time (Capell) F. 'in no time' F2 'no 
time' Malone approved of Capell's reading, but all 
mod. edd. follow F2. F2 can claim no authority, and 



96 NOTES 2.2. 

the F. 'in' is readily explained as a mishearing of 'e'en,' 
which makes good sense, v. pp. 66-8. 

108-9. I knew &tc. F. prints this as prose. 

108. S.D. F. 'Enter Adriana and Luciana.' — after 
1. 109. 

118. Unless I spake etc. (Steevens) F. 'Vnlelle I 
fpake, or look'd, or touch'd, or caru'd to thee' The F. 
version suggests carelessness in the copying. 

120. t/ien Most edd. follow Rowe and read 'thus'; 
we see no sufficient reason for altering the F. text. 

141. grime (Warburton) F. 'crime' Malone ap- 
proved of Warburton's reading, which Dyce and 
Staunton follow. We think the context makes it almost 
certain. But 'grime' lacks palaeographical support, and 
the F. reading, if wrong, must be an ear-error. Cf. 
pp. 66-8. 

145. / live distained, thou undishonourid. F. prints 
this line as the last in the speech, after 'Keep then.... true 
bed.' We have transposed the couplet, since that seems 
the only way of making sense of the passage. All edd. 
have worried over 'distained.' Theobald coins a word 
'dis-stained' and explains it as 'unstained'; but N.E.D. 
provides no parallel. The 'Globe' cuts the Gordian 
knot by reading 'unstained,' and there are other con- 
jectures. 'Distained,' however, means 'stained,' is a 
good Shakespearian word (cf. R. Ill, 5. 3. 322, Troil. 
I. 3. 241, Per. 4. 3. 31), and cannot be explained away. 
The line, where we place it, makes an excellent climax 
to 11. 140-4, and in a text like this transposition is not at 
all impossible. Cf. note i. r. 143—4. 

164. on the mart Cf. note 1. 6 above and pp. 78-82. 

175. stronger {¥jf) F. 'ftranger' 

186. the offered (Capell) F. 'the free'd' The error 
probably arose through a compositor's misdivision of the 
contracted form 'thofred' in the transcribed copy, 
though the words ought not to have been contracted. 

190. F. 'We talke with GobHns, Owles and 



2.2. NOTES 97 

Sprights; ' A two-syllable word has clearly been omitted. 
Pope accordingly reads 'elvish sprites' and there are 
many other guesses. Theobald reads 'ouphes' for 'owls' 
which is very attractive, since 'oufes' and 'oules' might 
be confused in the MS; cf. T'i?;w/». 3. 2.4-5 (note). Some 
edd. have defended 'owls' on the pretext that these birds 
are traditionally associated with witchcraft; e.g. Harsnet, 
Popish Impostures, 1603, speaks of a girl being 'owle- 
blasted and possessed.' Yet Dromio is surely thinking 
of spirits in human form. 
192. suck our breath v. G. 

194. drone (Theobald) F. 'Dromio' 

195. am not I? (Theobald) F. 'am I not.!" Theo- 
bald's emendation makes a sort of rhyme with the next 
line and both Aldis Wright and Craig follow. 

204. weep, F. 'weepe;' 

205. laugh (Pope) F. 'laughes' 

207. dine above This prepares us for the use of the 
upper-stage in the next scene. 

208. shrivev.G. 219. S.D. F. gives no 'exeunt.' 

3- r- 

This scene is an important one from the point of view 
of the history of the text. v. pp. 77-8. 

S.D. F. 'Enter Antipholus of Ephefus, his man 
Dromio, Angelo the Goldfmith, and Balthafer the Mer- 
chant.' For this S.D. v. pp. 73-4. The scribe could 
glean Angelo'sname from the first line of the scene, and 
Balthazar's from 1. 19. But the description 'Balthaser 
the Merchant' is interesting, seeing that there is nothing 
in the dialogue to support it. It seems possible, there- 
fore, that the scribe wrote the name down from memory, 
his memory of The Historie of Error, in which Balthazar 
ex hypothesi played a more important part than in 
Shakespeare's version. The fact that he spells the name 
'Balthaser' while it is spelt 'Balthazar' at 11. 19 and 22 
lends colour to this supposition. 

Q.C. E. 7 



98 NOTES 3.1- 

11-83. rhyme doggerel, v. p. 77. 

24. common; that F. 'comon that' 

41. not; come F. 'not come' 

47. thy face for an aim, or thy name for an ass F. 
'thy face for a name, or thy name for an affe' No one 
has been able to explain the F. reading, and various con- 
jectures have been proposed. Dromio is referring to his 
recent experiences. His name had been changed 'for 
an ass' at 11. 15-18 above, while his face had been 
changed 'for an aim,' i.e. a butt or mark (v. N.E.D. 
'aim' 6) by the blows which S. Antipholus in i. 2. and 
Adriana in 2. i. dehvered upon his pate. The quibble 
on 'an aim' and 'a name' is parallel with that on 'an 
eir and 'Nell' 3. 2. iic and on 'ears' and 'years' at 

4. 4. 29. It can scarcely be doubted that the F. reading 
is due to dictation, v. pp. 66-8. 

S.D. F. 'Enter Luce.' N.B. No entry is given for 

5. Dromio, and this distinction marks their respective 
positions on the stage. In a public playhouse, for which 
this scene is clearly arranged, S. Dromio would be 
'within' i.e. behind the door or curtain at the back of 
the inner-stage, while Luce and Adriana would appear 
on the balcony which overhangs the inner-stage. All 
previous edd. have placed the two women 'within' with 
S. Dromio. Such an arrangement is extremely awkward 
from the theatrical point of view, since the audience 
would be greatly puzzled by three unseen characters, 
more especially as one of them appears nowhere else in 
the play. Luce and Adriana, on the upper-stage, could 
be seen by the audience without themselves seeing 
E. Dromio and E. Antipholus, who would be at the 
door out of sight under the balcony. On the other 
hand at a performance such as that at Gray's Inn 
Dec. 28, 1594, where no inner-stage and probably 
no balcony would be available, the three characters 
would have to be 'within.' For the name 'Luce' 
v. p. 78. 



3.1. NOTES 99 

49-51. F. divides ' Faith... Mafter./O Lord...Pro- 
uerbe,/Shall...ftaffe.' — thus ignoring the rhymes. 

51. set in my staff v. G. 'staff.' 

54. I- hope Theobald reads 'I trow' for the sake of 
the rhyme. Malone, pointing out that this would make 
a triple rhyme, supposes a line lost. Triple rhymes are 
frequent enough elsewhere, e.g. at 11. 63—5 below. 
Nevertheless, Malone rnay be right, since Luce's 'I 
thought to have asked you' and S. Dromio's rejoinder 
are obscure as the text stands. 

60. S.D. F. 'Enter Adriana.' v. note 1. 47 S.D. 
above. 

65. in pain 'pain' is followed by 'sore,' so that the 
text is not apparently corrupt; yet the point of the jest 
seems hopelessly obscure. 

67. part with v. G. 

75. you, sir (F2) F. 'your fir' 

83. pluck a crow together v. G. 'crow.' 

89. Once this v. G. 

her wisdom (Rowe) F. 'your wifedome' 

91. her part (Rowe) F. 'your part' 

108. despite of mirth Warburton and others explain : 
'even out of spite to mirth, which is now of all things 
the most unpleasing to me.' Theobald reads 'despite of 
wrath ', which is simpler and possibly the true reading, 
'mirth' and 'wrath' being not unlike in English script. 

123. S.D. F. 'Exeunt.' 

3. 2. 

S.D. F. 'Enter luliana, with Antipholus of Sira- 
cufia.' V. pp. 69-70. 

I. F. heads this speech ' lulia.' v. p. 70. 

4. ia//d'/»^ (Theobald) F. 'buildings' 

ruinate Capell, followed by most edd., reads 'ruin- 
ous' to rhyme with 'Antipholus.' Theobald reads 
'Antipholus, hate' in 1. 2 to rhyme with 'ruinate.' The 
modern reader must take his choice; we incline to 

7-2 



loo NOTES 3.2. 

Theobald's reading, since 'ruinate' has the true Shake- 
spearian ring and is not a likely word to have been sub- 
stituted for 'ruinous' by a scribe. Moreover 'rot' as a 
transitive verb seems a distinct improvement. Cf. note 

4-2. 33- 

16. attaint (Rowe) F. 'attaine' 

20. /// deed is F. 'Ill deeds is' F2, which all edd. 
follow, '111 deeds are' We prefer the singular as more 
in accordance with the style of the young Shakespeare, 
and because 'deeds is' is, to the ear, closer to 'deed is' 
than to 'deeds are.' 

21. but believe (Theobald) F. 'not beleeue' 
26. wife (F2) F. 'wife' 

32. our earth's wonder Douce supposes this to be a 
reference to Queen Elizabeth. 

34. earthy-gross (Clark and Glover) F. 'earthie 
groffe' 

conceit, F. 'conceit:' 

46. sister's (F2) F. 'fifter' 

49. bed (F2) F. 'bud' This may be an ear-error. 
In some English hands, however, an open e might be 
mistaken for u. Possibly simply a compositor's slip. 

them (Capell) F. 'thee' 

52. Let Love, being light, be drowned if she sink! 
This has puzzled many; but Malone's apt parallel from 
V. A. 149—50, 'Love is a spirit all compact of fire,/Not 
gross to sink, but light, and will aspire,' seems to make 
the meaning clear. ' Light '= fire, and 'drovvTied'= ex- 
tinguished (cf. Ham. 4. 7. 192, Q2). 

57. where (Rowe) F. 'when' 

58. As good to wink... night Cf. Two Gent. 5. 2. 

13-14- 

60. No: F. prints this with 1. 61. 

66. I am thee Capell, followed by many mod. edd., 
reads 'I aim thee' (i.e. I intend thee); Rowe reads 'I 
mean thee' Yet the F. reading, after U. 61-2, seems 
unexceptionable. Antipholus has just identified Luciana 



3.2. NOTES loi 

with himself, and now counters her 'All this my sister is' 
with a conceit: 'Call yourself "sister," if you wiU; you 
have lost your identity in me.' 

70. S.D. F. 'Exit.'/' Enter Dromio, Siracufia.' 

71—80. F. prints as verse; and 11. 71—2 and 79-80 
may be read as verse. Since Antipholus and Dromio 
speak verse together at U. 144—54, the prose in the scene 
may be due to revision. 

86. horse; F. 'horfe,' 

90. reverend i^oi^^aS) F, 'reuerent' Cf. notes 5.1.5, 
124. 

96. all grease a quibble, 'grease' and 'grace' being 
pronounced alike at this period. 

99. a Poland winter Cf. Meas. 2. i. 129-30. 

103. sweats Some copies F. read 'fwoats', others 
'fweats'. If 'fwoats' be not a misprint, it is an un- 
Shakespearian spelling, v. p. 66. Cf. note 4. 2. 29. 

104. overshoes Cf. Two Gent. i. i. 24, 25. 
109. her name and (Theobald) F. 'her name is' 
114-38. This lesson in the geography of Nell's per- 
son is a companion panel to Launce's 'catalogue' in 
Two Gent. 3. i. 271—360. The two passages were 
probably written very much at the same period. 

120. barren-nesses F. 'barenneffe' The F. reading 
leaves 'hard' without point, while it is not particularly 
applicable to Scotland. But 'barren-nesses' is very 
Scotland, and refers aptly to the callosities on the palm 
of a kitchen drudge. For a barren palm cf. Ado, 2. i. 
123 'his dry hand' and Ant. i. 2. 53 'an oily palm.' 

1 2 3—4. armed and reverted. . .heir The passage is im- 
portant as proving that this portion, at least, of the text 
cannot have been written earher than i 5 89 or later than 
1593, since the reference is to the civil war between 
Henry IV and the League. N.B. ' reverted '= revolted. 
V. G. 'armed and reverted' and 'reverted.' 

126. chalky cliffs Dromio clearly means her teeth, 
though no commentator appears to have observed this. 



I02 NOTES 3,2. 

144-5. F- prints this rhyme-doggerel as prose. 

144. faith Hanmer and many others read 'flint', to 
balance 'steel'; but 'faith' is surely the meaning required 
here. Cf. i Hen. IF, 3. i. 155 'as puts me from my 
faith.' 

154. S.D. F. 'Exit.' 

163. S.D. F. 'Enter An gelo with the Chaine.' 

165. here is (VoY>&) F. 'here's' 

177, 184. S.D. F. 'Exit.' 



4. I. 

S.D. F. 'Enter a Merchant, Goldfmith, and an 
Officer.' It is noteworthy that after act 3 the name 
'Angelo' never appears in either S.D. or speech-head- 
ings. It crops up in the dialogue once, i.e. 4. 4. 131. 
Cf. p. 69. 

13. S.D. F. 'Enter Antipholus Ephef. Dromio 
from the Courtizans.' For this S.D. v. p. 72. 

17. her (Rowe) F. 'their' 

21. / buy a thousand found a year! I buy a rope! 
The point of this is not obvious. Prof. Unwin (pri- 
vately) suggests that it refers to the 'thousand marks' 
which S. Antipholus demands of E. Dromio at i. 2. 81. 
E. Dromio there replies: 

I have some marks of yours upon my pate : 
Some of my mistress' marks upon my shoulders : 
But not a thousand marks between you both. 

In buying the rope he will be buying a thousand pounds 
(i.e. blows) a year — for Adriana and her confederates. 
S.D. F. 'Exit Dromio.' 

41 . This unmetrical 1 2-syllable line suggests adapta- 
tion. 

42. I will... F. 'I will.?' 

47. to blame (F4) F. 'too blame' 'In the i6-i7th 
cent, the to was misunderstood as "too" and blame taken 
as an adj .= blameworthy, culpable' (N.E.D.). 



4.1. NOTES 103 

55. now; F. 'now.' 

56. send me by some token i.e. 'send him with a verbal 
token to his wife, by which it might be ascertained that 
he came from Antipholus, and that she might safely pay 
the price of the chain' (Malone). 

60. whe'er F. 'whe'r' Cf. Temp. 5. i. iii. 

answer v, G. 

70. / do, F. prints this with 1. 7 1 ; Hanmer reads it 
as part of 1. 69. Possibly the result of a small 'cut.' 

85. S.D. F. 'Enter Dromio Sira. from the Bay.' 
V. p. 72. 

88. then she (Capell) F. 'then fir fhe' The com- 
positor, or transcriber, may have caught 'sir' from the 
end of the Hne. Cf. note 1. 99 below. 

94-5. sheep. ..ship For the quibble cf. Two Gent. 
I. I. 72—3 and L.L.L. 2. i. 221. 

96. hire F. 'hier' — which provides the necessary 
extra syllable to the line. 

99. rope's-end, sir, as soon (Cunningham) F. 'ropes 
end as foone' Steevens reads 'Sir, for a rope's-end as 
soon', but Cunningham's position for 'sir' seems better. 
For 'rope's-end' v. G. 

109. S.D. F. 'Exeunt.' 

114. S.D. F. 'Exit.' 

4.2. 

S.D. F. 'Enter Adriana and Luciana.' 
2. austerely This has puzzled edd. Hudson reads 
'assuredly' But Adriana would not wish Luciana to 
gaze into Antipholus' eye otherwise than 'austerely,' 
and she is evidently suspicious. 

6. Of his (F2) F. 'Oh, his' An interesting mis- 
print, which suggests that Shakespeare here, as some- 
times elsewhere, spelt 'of as 'a' or 'o' — a notinfrequent 
cause of confusion in the old texts. For 'meteors' v. G. 

28. S.D. F. 'Enter S. Dromio.' 

29. sweat now F. 'fweet now' The rude clown can 



104 NOTES 4-2. 

hardly address the ladies as 'sweet,' and Keightley does 
not improve matters much by reading 'sweet mistress.' 
N.B. Adriana was not S. Dromio's 'mistress.' But 
'sweat now' suits the context well, while 'sweat' and 
'sweet' could both be spelt 'swete' or 'swet' in the i6th 
cent, and the sp. 'swet'=' sweat' is found in Lucr. 396. 
Cf. Temp, note 4. i. 184. 

33. everlasting garment i.e. of buff; cf. 1. 36 below, 

4. 3. 18, 23 and V. G. It is important to notice that 

5. Dromio's mind is full of images from the old miracle 
and morality plays in this and the following scene. 

hatk him Spedding and others add 'by the heel' for 
the sake of the rhyme, and they may be right. Cf. note 
3. 2. 4, where another rhyming word may have been 
omitted from the end of a line. 

34. One (F2) F. 'On' — a common i6th cent. sp. 
Cf. Two Gent. 2. I. 3 (note). 

35. fury (Theobald) F. 'Fairie' — which has been 
defended. The difference between the two words is one 
minim. Aldis Wright follows Theobald. 

38. creeks, and narrow lands v. G. 'creeks,' 'lands.' 
42. matter. ..case v. G. 'case.' 

45. But he's (F2) F. 'but is' Taken by itself this 
might be explained as the omission of 'he' by the com- 
positor; but in the present text it looks like an ear-error, 
'he's' taken for 'is.' Cf. note 1. 60 below. 

46. Mistress Redemption (F4) F. 'Miftris redemp- 
tion' All mod. edd. read 'send him, mistress, redemp- 
tion, the money' etc., which is awkward. F4 is surely 
right, since the reading throws us back into the atmo- 
sphere of the morality plays. Cf. note 1. 33 above. It 
must be remembered that Adriana was a stranger to 
S. Dromio. 

47. wonder at, F. 'wonder at.' 
S.D. F. 'Exit Luciana.' 

48. That he (F2) F. 'Thus he' 

54. hear{¥2) F.'here' — a common mistake in the Qq. 



4.2. NOTES 105 

57. to season v. G. 'season.' 

60. //"/J^ (Malone) F. 'If I' Probably another ear- 
error. Cf. note 1. 45 above and p. 67. Rowe reads 
'If Time' and most mod. edd. foUow. 

61. S.D. F. 'Enter Luciana.' 
65. S.D. F. 'Exit.' 

4- 3- 

S.D. F. 'Enter Antipholus Siracufia.' 

I. F. omits the heading 'S. Ant.' before the speech. 
V. p. 71. 

13. Where have you got the picture F. 'what haue 
you got the picture' Theobald reads 'What, have you 
got rid of the picture'; Malone pronounced this emenda- 
tion 'absolutely necessary,' and many mod. edd. follow. 
But Shakespeare never uses the phrase 'get rid of,' and 
N.E.D. quotes no example earlier than 1 66 5 . The words 
'what' and 'where' might easily become interchanged, 
especially as the next line begins with 'what.' v. G. 
'Adam.' 

1 5. What gold is this etc. A line of verse, suggesting 
that the prose is the result of revision. S. Antipholus 
returns to verse at 1. 40. 

19-20. like an evil angel... your liberty S. Dromio's 
mind still runs on the old miracle plays; 'forsake your 
liberty-' i.e. sell your soul to the devil. 

24. sob Various conjectures; 'Oxford' reads 'fob', 
'Arden' reads 'bob' But 'sob' is right, v. G. 

34. ship (F2) F. 'fhips' 

38-9. angels. ..to deliver you Good angels this time, 
sent by Mistress Redemption, v. note 4. 2. 46. 

42. S.D. F. 'Enter a Curtizan.' It seems absolutely 
necessary that this lady should enter from a door marked 
'the house of the Courtesan,' if the audience is to grasp 
who she is. Cf. note 1. 57 below and p. 80. 

47. Mistress Satan Yet another character in S. 
Dromio's miracle play. 



io6 NOTES 4.3- 

49. Nay ...devil's dam F. prints this separately as a 
line of verse. Cf. note 1. 1 5 above. 

50—1. and t/iereof comes etc. Cf. Two Gent. 3. i. 
298 'And thereof comes the proverb' etc. precisely in 
the same manner. Cf. note 3. 2. 114—38. 

52. t/iat's as muck as to say (Rowe) F. 'that's as 
much to fay' Cf. Two Gent. 3. i. 312 'That's as much 
as to say, bastard virtues.' 

53. It is written etc. Cf. 2 Cor. xi. 14 'Satan himself 
is transformed into an angel of light.' 

54-5. light wenches will burn 'Burning' was a 
euphemism for some form of venereal disease, v. Sh. 
Eng. i. 439. 

57. We'll mend our dinner here Clearly she points 
to the door labelled 'Courtesan's house' as she says this. 
Cf. note 1. 42 above and pp. 80-1. 

58-9. Master, if you do, etc. (F2) F. 'Mafter, if 
do expect fpoon-meate, or befpeake a long fpoone.' The 
word 'you' has obviously been omitted. 'I believe some 
other words were passed over by the compositor' 
(Malone), and we think this likely. The sense is obscure, 
v. G. 'spoon-meat.' 

63. Avoid, thou fiend {Y\) F. 'Auoid then fiend' — a 
common o:e error. Dyce and Craig read 'Avoid thee, 
fiend'; but cf. 'Avaunt, thou witch' 1. 77 below. 

69-74. Some devils. ..with it. F. prints this as prose, 
which fact with the broken line at 71 suggests revision 
or abridgment. N.B. The text does not tell us what the 
devils do with their gifts, though it might be understood. 

69-71. parings of one's nail etc. This interesting list 
of articles used in witchcraft is not referred to in the 
chapter on superstition in Sh. Eng. 

78. Fly pride tic. v. G, 'pride.' S.D. F. 'Exit.' 

94. S.D. F. gives no 'exit.' 



4.4- NOTES 107 

4.4. 

S.D. F. 'Enter Antipholus Ephef. with a lailor.' 
7. S.D. F. 'Enter Dromio Eph. with a ropes end.' 
14. ril serve you, sir. Jive hundred at the rate. We 
may suppose that Dromio apes the obsequious manners 
of a shopman, as he says these words. 

16. The omission of 'am' would improve this line, 
a word perhaps carelessly added in the transcript. 

29. ''ears (Aldis Wright: conj.) F. 'eares' The 
quibble on 'years' seems to us unmistakable. We get 
'yeere' for 'ear' at 2 Hen. IF, i. 2. 218, and as late as 
1749 Lord Chesterfield was complaining of the vulgar 
pronunciation 'yearth' for 'earth.' 

38. S.D. F. 'Enter Adriana, Luciana, Courtizan, 
and a Schoole-mafter, call'd Pinch.' The description 
'a schoolmaster' once again suggests that the writer of the 
S.D. knew more about the characters than the received 
text tells us. Cf. 3. i. head-note. v. G. 'conjurer.' 

40. respice finem v. G. 

41. to prophesy (Dyce) F. 'the prophefie' 
43. S.D. F. 'Beats Dro.' 

67. Dined F. 'Din'd' Capell 'I din'd' Theobald 
'Din'd r 

73. kitchen-maid This establishes the identity of 
Luce and Nell. v. p. 78. 

74. Certes (F2) F. 'Certis' 
76. bear (Yz) F. 'beares' 

78. contraries (F2) F. 'crontraries' 

84-5. heart and good-will... not a rag of money Cf. 
Nashe, Foure Letters Confuted (1592), ed. McKerrow, 
i. 301: 'heart and good will, but neuer a ragge of 
money.' The parallel, hitherto unnoticed we believe, 
is remarkable and unless both writers are quoting from 
some common source, we must suppose that Nashe 
was borrowing from Shakespeare. Cf. McKerrow, 
Nashe, i. 271-2: *I borrowed this sentence out of a 



io8 NOTES 4.4- 

Play. The Theater, Poets hall, hath many more such 
prouerbcs' etc. 

88. she did. F. The did:' Possibly a 'cut' here. 
93. laid in some dark room The recognised treatment 
for lunacy at this period. Compare the confinement of 
Malvolio in Twelfth Night. 

106. S.D. F. 'Enter three or foure, and offer to 
binde him: Hee ftriues.' — after 1. 104. 

108-11. What, will you... not have him. F. prints 
as prose. 

108. murder me ? Thou gaoler, thou, F. ' murther me, 
thou lailor thou ? ' 

125—8. Out on thee... talk F. prints as prose. 
129. S.D. F. 'Exeunt. Manet Offic. Adri. Luci. 
Courtizan.' 

142. S.D. F. 'Enter Antipholus Siracufia with his 
Rapier drawne, and Dromio Sirac' 
144-5. -f"- prints: 

Adr. And come with naked fwords, 
Let's call more helpe to haue them bound againe. 

Runne all out. 
Off. Away, they'l kill vs. 

Exeunt omnes, as faft as may be, frighted. 

It seems probable that 'Exeunt omnes' was the original 
S.D.,and that 'Runne all out, as fast as may be, frighted.' 
was written in the margin in two lines, and so got 
divided. Cf. pp. 72-3. N.B. 'Exeunt omnes' is wrong, 
as the text stands, while the verse-lines are misdivided. 

151. you see (Capell) F. 'you faw' 

156. S.D. F. 'Exeunt.' 

5. I. 

S.D. F. 'Enter the Merchant and the Goldfmith.' 
5. reverend F. 'reuerent' Cf. note 1. 124 below. 
9. S.D. F. 'Enter Antipholus and Dromio againe.' 

This 'againe' clearly marks the S.D. as theatrical and 

not literary. 



5.1. NOTES 109 

12. near with me (Hudson) F. 'neere to me' Note 
the hypnotic effect of 'to have' and 'to him' in close 
proximity, which might easily give rise to the misprint. 

26. know' St Pope reads 'knovv'est', Hanmer 'know- 
est well' and there are other conjectures. 

32. S.D. F. 'They draw. Enter Adriana, Luciana, 
Courtezan, & others.' 

33. God's sake (F3) F. 'God fake' Cf. note i. 2. 
93. F. prints 'Gods fake' at 1. 36 just below. 

37. S.D. F. 'Exeunt to the Priorie.'/' Enter Ladie 
Abbeffe.' 

46. much much different (F2) F. 'much different' 
Cf.M.o//^. 3.2.61. 

51. Strayed not found elsewhere in Shakespeare in 
transitive use. 

61. broken line. 

63. urging it: F. 'vrging it,' 

69. clamour (Capell) F. 'clamors' 

70. tooth, so F. 
72. light, so F. 

77. brawls: F. 'bralles.' v. p. 66. 

79. But moody and dull melancholy Various dis- 
syllables have been suggested by critics to fill up this 
short line, generally some sb. to follow 'moody,' e.g. 
'madness,' 'sadness,' 'musing,' 'moping,' etc. The con- 
text, however, seems to forbid the possibility of a second 
sb. Perhaps we should read 'dull-footed' for 'dull;,' 
which would lead up to 'her heels.' 

80. Kinsman The 1 8th cent. edd. worried over the 
gender of this word. Mod. edd. are content to take it 
in the generic sense. 

86. Have{Yz) F. 'Hath' 

112. S.D. F. gives no 'exit.' 

121. death (F3) F. 'depth' Almost certainly an 
ear-error. Cf. 'helpe' for 'health' i. i. 151 (cf. note) 
and V. pp. 66-8. 

123. broken line. 



no NOTES 5.1. 

124. reverend {Y ■^') F. 'reuerent' Cf. notes 3. 2. 90; 
5. I. 5. F. prints 'reuerend' at 1. 134 below. 

129. S.D. F. 'Enter the Duke of Ephefus, and the 
Merchant of Siracufe bare head, with the Headfman, 
& other Officers.' 

137. Whom {^ 2) F. 'Who' 

138. letters — this F. 'Letters this' 
155. pursued them; F. 'purfu'd them,' 
161. wars; F. 'wars' 

167. S.D. F. 'Entera Meffenger.' 

168. F. gives no speech-heading, v. p. 71. 

174. to him Capeli omitted these words to make the 
line run smoothly. Alternatively 'and the' might be left 
out. Possibly the scribe inserted one or the other in- 
advertently. 

175. scissors F. 'Cizers' nicks him like a fool v. G. 
183. scorch Warburton and some others read 

'scotch' The F. reading suggests the entry of Antipholus 
and Dromio with burning brands at 1. 1 89, which makes 
an effective tableau. 

S.D. F. 'Cry within.' This proves that the scene 
takes place close to the house of Antipholus. 

185. S.D. F. 'Enter Antipholus, and E. Dromio of 
Ephefus.' — after 1. 189. The duplication in 'E. Dromio 
of Ephefus' seems to show touching up of the original 
S.D. by the second scribe. Cf. note 4. 4. 144—5 ^'^^ 
V. p. 70. 

195—6. This speech is printed as prose and headed 
'Mar. Fat.' (i.e. Merchant Father) by F. Possibly 
written in the margin at some stage of the transmission. 

219. That goldsmith there etc. This is curious after 
Angelo's speech (II. 212-13) ^'^ support of Antipholus. 

223. Balthazar The only reference to this character 
outside 3. I. V. p. 78. Antipholus seems to imply that 
the Duke is acquainted with the man. 

232. returned. F. 'return'd.' 

235. By th' way we met This broken line, which 



5.1. NOTES III 

strongly suggests a 'cut,' is printed as part of I. 236 
byF. 

241 . F. prints ' A needy-hollow-ey'd-fharpe-looking- 
wretch' 

246. all together (Rowe) F. 'altogether' 

282. S.D. F. 'Exitonetothe Abbeffe.' 

283. ^geon's speeches are from henceforth headed 
'Fa.', 'Fath.' or 'Father' in F. v. p. 69. 

302-6. Neither etc. This passage, consisting of verse- 
scraps and prose in the middle of a verse-scene, suggests 
abridgment. 

306. bound a quibble on ^geon's 'bonds.' 

315. lamps Rowe, followed by some mod. edd., 
reads 'lamp' But ^geon is surely speaking of his eyes. 

317. old witnesses — / cannot err — (Rowe) F. 'old 
witneffes, I cannot erre.' Possibly we should read 'All 
these hold witness as I cannot err.' This would run 
smoothly, fit in with the F. pointing, and add force to 
1. 318. Warburton suggested 'hold' for 'old' The con- 
struction of the F. reading is unusual and awkward, 
while the mistake might easily arise through dictation. 

320. Syracusa, boy, F. 'Siracufa boy' Hanmer reads 
'Syracusa bay' which is attractive. 'Boy' is somewhat 
brusque for ^geon's pleading vein. 

329. S.D. F. 'Enter the Abbeffe with Antipholus 
Siracufa, and Dromio Sir.' 

330. S.D. F. 'All gather to fee them.' 

333. And so of these, (F.) Most edd. read 'And so 
of these.' There seems no reason to alter the F. pointing. 
The Duke says, in effect, 'And so of these two Dromios, 
which is the man and which the Genius?' 

346-51. Why , here . . . met together. Ca pell, followed 
by all subsequent edd., altered the position of these 
six lines and placed them after the next speech of the 
Abbess (11. 355-61), on the ground that 'her urging of 
the wrack' is unsupported by anything in Emilia's first 
speech. But, as a matter of fact, she says nothing of the 



"2 NOTES 5.1. 

'wrack' in either speech and it seems to us that the 
simplest way out of the difficulty is to preserve the F. 
arrangement and suppose that some lines mentioning 
the 'wrack' have been 'cut' after 1. 343. The Duke's 
'here begins' shows that he seizes upon the resemblance 
as soon as Emilia commences her story, while her second 
speech appears to continue the account of the 'wrack' 
which should have been begun in her first. We are in- 
debted for this solution to a suggestion by Dr W. W. Greg 

366. broken line or prose. 

368. Menapkon In 1589 Robert Greene published 
his Arcadian romance with this title. As a good deal of 
the verse in i. i. is remarkably similar to Greene's, it is 
possible that he had a hand in the Hisiorie of Error at 
some stage of its development. 

371, 383. broken lines or prose. 

376. a dream I see and hear Cf. Two Gent. 5. 4. 26. 

388. errors So F. Most edd. print 'ERRORS' 

are arose Dr Henry Bradley (Sh. Eng. ii. 551) 
quotes this as an instance of the use of preterital for the 
participial form. But in a text like this it seems likely 
that Shakespeare wrote 'here arose' (anon. conj.). Cf. 
'burthen are' for 'burden ne'er' 1. 402 below. 

395. fortunes: 396. place, F. 'fortunes,'/' place:' 
thus transposing the terminal pointing. 

398. wrong, go F. 'wrong. Goe' The mistake ap- 
parently arises from the transposition in 11. 395-6. 

400. Thirty-t/iree Theobald reads 'twenty five', 
since eighteen years had elapsed between the wreck and 
the separation from S. Antipholus (v. i. i. 125) and 
seven years between that and the present time (v. 5. i. 
320). Theobald presumes that the number 'was at first 
written in figures and perhaps blindly.' But the mistake 
may well be the author's. Consistency as regards the 
passage of time which affects the structure of the play is 
a different matter. 

402. burden ne'er (Dyce) F. 'burthen are' Most 



5.1. NOTES 113 

mod. edd., including Aldis Wright, accept Dyce's 
emendation, which we may take as certain. Craig reads 
'burdens ne'er' We can only explain the F. reading as 
an ear-error, v. pp. 66—8. 

405. gossips feast V. G. 

joy with me (Dyce, followed by Craig and others) 
F. 'go with mee' Dyce is almost certainly right, and we 
must suppose that 'joy' became 'go' by attraction with 
'go' at the beginning of the line. N.B. 'joy'=enjoy; cf. 
2 Hen. VI, 3. 2. 365. 

406. festivity (Johnson, followed by 'Globe,' 
'Oxford' and most mod. edd.) F. 'Natiuitie' Johnson 
writes : 'Nativity lying so near, and the termination being 
the same of both words, the mistake was easy.' It is 
noticeable that these errors accumulate towards the end 
of the text, as if those engaged in the dictation were 
growing impatient with their task. 

407. S.D. F. 'Exeunt omnes. Manet the two 
Dromio's and two Brothers.' 

408. Master. F. 'Maft.' 
413. S.D. F. 'Exit.' 
422. senior F. 'Signior' 
426. S.D. F. 'Exeunt.' 



ft.C.E. 



THE STAGE-HISTORY OF 
THE COMEDT OF ERRORS 

In spite of an entry in the accounts of the Treasurer 
of the Chamber, which states that the Lord Chamber- 
lain's Company was acting before the Court at Green- 
wich on the evening of December 28, i 594, it is com- 
monly accepted that on that evening they were acting 
Shakespeare's play, T/ie Comedy of Errors, in Gray's Inn 
during the Christmas Revels. Gesta Grayorurn, the con- 
temporary account of those revels, gives a vivid picture 
of the scene. When the Lord Ambassador from 'Tem- 
plaria,' the Inner Temple, had been placed in a chair 
of state in the hall, 'there arose such a disordered 
Tumult and Crowd upon the Stage, that there was no 
Opportunity to effect that which was intended.' Wor- 
shipful Personages, and 'Gentlewomen, whose Sex did 
privilege them from Violence,' crowded on to the 
stage, and might not be displaced. The Lord Ambassa- 
dor and his train departed, 'in a sort, discontented and 
displeased'; but still the tumult went on, so as to 'dis- 
order and confound any good Inventions whatsoever. 
In regard whereof, as also for that the Sports intended 
were especially for the gracing of the Templarians, it 
was thought good not to offer any thing of Account, 
saving Dancing and Revelling with Gentlewomen ; and 
after such Sports, a Comedy of Errors (like to Plautus 
his Menechmus) was played by the Players. So that 
Night was begun, and continued to the end, in nothing 
but Confusion and Errors; whereupon, it was ever 
afterwards called, The Night of Errors' 

8-2 



ii6 THE STAGE-HISTORY OF 

In I 598 Meres mendons 'Shakespeare. . .his Errors^ 
among the six comedies of Shakespeare; the Revels 
Accounts show that ''The Plate of Errors, by Shax- 
berd,' was acted by His Majesty's Players before 
the Court at Whitehall on Innocents' Night, 1604. 
Then the play disappears for nearly a century and a half. 
On October 9, 1734, 'a Comedy in two Acts taken 
from Plautus and Shakspeare, called See if you like 
it, or 'Tis all a Mistake' was acted at Covent Garden 
by Stoppelear and others. Five times in the season 
of 1 741— 2 The Comedy of Errors was acted at Drury 
Lane, and it is recorded that in these performances 
Macklin played Dromio of Syracuse; and thereafter, 
in one version or another, the comedy appeared pretty 
regularly at Covent Garden, and once or twice at 
Drury Lane, until the end of the first quarter of the 
nineteenth century. It seems to have been a special 
favourite for benefit nights. Several people tried their 
hands at improving it; and it is not always possible to 
tell from the records whose version was acted on each 
occasion, though it is safe to conclude that it was never, 
during that period, Shakespeare's own. And in the 
casts Antipholus is always spelled Antipholis. At Covent 
Garden, on April 24, 1762, T/ie Twins, or the Comedy 
of Errors was acted 'but once,' with a new prologue 
by Smith. This version was attributed to Thomas Hull, 
actor and dramatist, but was probably not his work. At 
Covent Garden, on January 22, 1779, another version 
appears, which may have been Hull's; or, again, the 
production at Covent Garden on June 3, 1793, may 
have been the first performance of Hull's version of the 
comedy, which is said to have been published in London 
in that year. Meanwhile at the Theatre Royal in Edin- 
burgh, in 1780, a farce by W. Woods, called The 



THE COMEDY OF ERRORS "7 

Twins, or Which is Which?, 'altered from Shake- 
speare's Comedy of Errors,' was produced; and this 
farce, the author of which 'endeavoured to use the 
Pruning-Knife only to make the shoots of Genius spring 
forth more vigorously,' was printed at Edinburgh the 
same year. On April 6, 1790, a version in three acts 
makes its appearance at Covent Garden; and in 1808, 
on January 9, John Philip Kemble produced his own 
alteration (first printed in 1 8 1 1) of the version by Hull. 
Hull had cut a great deal of Shakespeare out and had 
put a great deal of Hull in its place. In general, the 
aim of these versions was to remove, or to conceal, the 
'improbability' of the events, and to get rid of some 
of the verbal witticism which amused Georgian audi- 
ences less than it had amused Elizabethan. Among the 
players who took part in the comedy during this period 
we find Hull constantly playing ^geon. 'Gentleman' 
Lewis was famous as Antipholis of Syracuse. Quick was an 
excellent Dromio of Ephesus, with sometimes Brunsdon, 
but usually Munden for Dromio of Syracuse; and, 
after Quick had left Covent Garden for Drury Lane, 
we find Rees playing Dromio of Ephesus to the Dromio 
of Syracuse of Munden, and closely imitating Munden 's 
voice and manner. Mrs Lessingham, Mrs Bates, Mrs 
Mattocks and Miss Wallis all played Adriana; and an 
eminent Luciana was Mrs Mountain, while Wewitzer 
was often seen as Dr Pinch. When Kemble first pro- 
duced his alteration of the version by Hull (who died 
just about that time), Pope and Charles Kemble played 
the Antipholis twins, Munden and Blanchard the 
Dromios (unfortunately, Blanchard was much taller 
than Munden); Murray succeeded Hull as ^geon; 
Mrs Gibbs was the Adriana, and Miss Norton the 
Luciana. 



u8 THE STAGE-HISTORY OF 

Kemble's version held the stage (it is at least strongly 
probable that it was his uncle's version which Henry 
Siddons, the son of Sarah, staged at the Theatre Royal, 
Edinburgh, in February, 1 8 1 5) until, in 1 8 1 9, Frederic 
Reynolds turned the comedy into an opera, which was 
as successful as were most of Reynolds's operas, and 
was acted 27 times in one season. Songs from other 
plays by Shakespeare were dragged in with complete 
impropriety; but the staging was splendid; the music 
was well chosen by Henry Bishop, and the cast in- 
cluded Liston and William Farren as the Dromios, 
Blanchard as Dr Pinch, Mrs Faucit as the Abbess, Miss 
Stephens as Adriana, and Maria Tree as Luciana. 
Hazlitt said of Maria Tree : ' She sings delightfully in 
company with Miss Stephens; and in the Comedy of 
Errors almost puzzles the town, as she does Antipholis 
of Syracuse, which to prefer: Magis pares quam similes! 
In February, 1820, The Comedy of Errors, which 
possibly means Reynolds's opera, was staged at Bath, 
with Farren as Antipholis of Syracuse; but poor Miss 
Greene, less fortunate than Miss Stephens, was 
'execrable' as Adriana. However, she was not too 
execrable to play the part in the autumn of that year at 
Covent Garden. And at Drury Lane, in 1824, Mme 
Vestris appeared in the opera as Luciana, to the Adriana 
of Miss Stephens, with Liston and Harley for the 
Dromios. 

Samuel Phelps restored Shakespeare's The Comedy of 
Errors (with many another of Shakespeare's plays) to 
the stage. On Nov. 8, 1855, he played it at Sadler's 
Wells, tacked on to a 'new play called Hamilton of 
Bothwellhaugh,' written by one A. R. Slous; but in 
January, 1856, he seems to have given it the place of 
honour in his bill. In the next decade the play was 



THE COMEDY OF ERRORS 119 

taken up by two Irish brothers, Charles and Harry 
Webb, who played the Dromios at Drury Lane under 
Falconer and Chatterton, at the Princess's during the 
Shakespeare Tercentenary celebrations of 1864, and 
in many provincial towns. On one occasion, in 1 864, 
when they were playing the comedy at Liverpool, the 
Antipholus of Syracuse was a young actor named 
S. B. Bancroft, and the Dr Pinch a still younger actor 
named John Hare. The Webbs anticipated modern 
experiments by acting the piece continuously, without 
fall of the curtain, and it was beautifully mounted. 
Lionel Brough once played one of the Dromios at 
Saker's theatre in Liverpool; but, after the Webbs, the 
most notable pair of Dromios were the American actor, 
J. S. Clarke, and Harry Paulton, who acted these parts 
in 1883 at the now demolished Strand and Opera 
Comique theatres, the play being given in three acts, 
with Miss Lindley for Adriana, and some attractive 
scenery and costumes by Lewis Wingfield. The comedy 
was in the repertory of the Benson company, who acted 
it in London in the spring and summer of 1905, with 
F. R. Benson as Antipholus of Syracuse, and George R. 
Weir and Arthur Whitby as the Dromios. 

Harold Child. 



GLOSSARY 



Note. \Miere a pun or quibble is intended, the meanings 
are distinguished as {a) and {b) 



Adam, 'the picture of old Adam 
new-apparelled,' a reference to 
the sergeant's bufF-coat (v. buff 
and 4. 2. 36). Cf. Gfn.iii. 2i'Unto 
Adam also and to his wife did the 
Lord God make coats of skins, 
and clothed them'; 4. 3. 13 

Anatomy, skeleton; 5. i. 239 

Answer, discharge a debt (of. 
I Hen. IF, I. 3. 185); 4. I. 
60 

Apparently, openly; 4. i. 79 

AguA-viT.c, ardent spirits; 4. 1.90 

Armed and reverted, a reference 
to the ' French disease,' {a) in the 
body politic of France, i.e. the 
civil war between Henr}' IV, the 
'heir,' and the 'reverted' (q.v.) 
League, {b) i.e. venereal disease, 
'armed' =with eruptions and 
'reverted' = receding because of 
the loss of hair (cf. Meas. G. 
'French crown'); 3. 2. 123 

Aspect, (a) glance, {h) the favour- 
able or unfavourable influence of 
a planet according to the old 
astrologers; 2. 2. 32, 11 1 

Assured, pledged, betrothed; 3. 2. 
140 

Attach, arrest; 4. i. 6 

Austerely, with self-restraint; 
4. 2. 2 

Avoid, depart, quit; 4. 3. 46, 63 

Back-friend, lit. a pretended or 
false friend; here used of the 
sergeant who comes behind and 
claps his victim on the back (cf. 
shoulder-clapper); 4. 2. 37 



Balsamum, balm; 4. i. 90 

Band, (^2) bond, i.e. for debt; 4. 3. 
30, {b) a leash to tie up a dog (v. 
N.E.D. sb.i 5), hence the quibble 
on 'a chain'; 4. 2. 49, 50 

Bass-viol, violoncello, with a 
quibble upon 'base' and 'vile'; 
4. 3. 23 

Bear, 'his word might bear my 
wealth at any time.' Not satis- 
factorily explained; the natural 
interpretation would be 'his word 
is as good as my whole credit,' 
but N.E.D. quotes no examples 
of 'bear' in this sense; 5. i. 8 

Become disloyalty, i.e. assume 
disloyalty with an air (the follow- 
ing line develops the thought); 
3. 2. II 

Bless (that cross), {a) consecrate; 
cf. the similar play upon 'bless' 
and 'cross' in Ado, 1.3. 70, and 
McKerrow, Nashe, iii. 35; 
{b) beat, thrash. Cf. Gam. Gurt. 
Need. 3. 3 'Tarry, thou knave 
...I shall make these hands bless 
thee'; 2. i. 79 

Bought and sold, in modern slang 
'sold'; 3. I. 72 

Breaking, {a) breaking wind, 
[b) cutting up a deer or hind 
after the kill; 3. i. 74-7 

Breaking gulf, i.e. of the waves, 
cf. Ric. II, 3. 2. 3 'the breaking 
seas'; 2. 2. 126 

Buck (mad as a), i.e. as a buck in 
the rutting season, cf. horn-mad 
and the modern 'mad as a March 
hare'; 3. i. 72 



GLOSSARY 



Buff, 'a very stout kind of leather 
made of ox-hide, dressed with 
oil, and having a characteristic 
fuzzy surface, and a dull wrhitish- 
yellow colour' (N.E.D.), used 
for the attire of sergeants, bum- 
bailifFs and soldiers (cf. Adam); 
4- 2. 36, 45. 

Capon, lit. a castrated cock, often 
employed to signify a dull fool; 
I. 2. 44; 3. I. 32 
Carcanet, 'an ornamental collar 
or necklace, usually of gold or 
set w^ith jewels' (N.E.D.); 3. 1.4 
Careful, full of care; 5. i. 299 
Carracks, galleons; 3. 2. 136 
Case (on the), {a) 'an action on the 
case' = a form of legal procedure, 
which Blackstone describes as 
'an universal remedy for all per- 
sonal wrongs and injuries with- 
out force, not specially provided 
for by law, so called because the 
plaintiff's whole case or cause of 
complaint is set forth at length 
in the original writ' (cf. Sh. Eng. 
i. 390-1), {b) clothes. Malone 
writes 'Dromio, I believe, is still 
quibbling. His master's "case" 
was touched by the shoulder- 
clapper, who was himself "in a 
case of leather"'; 4. 2. 42 
Charect, old form of 'carat'; 4. i. 

28 
Chargeful, expensive; 4. i. 29 
Circumstance, argument; 5. i. 16 
Compact, sh. plot, conspiracy; 2. 2. 

161 

Compact, adj. composed, made up 

of (cf. M.N.D. 5. I. 8); 3. 2. 22 

Conceit, (i) understanding; 3. 2. 

34, (ii) imagination; 4. 2. 64, 65 

Conjurer, lit. one who deals with 

devils or spirits. Dr Pinch is 

more strictly an 'exorcist'; he 



is a schoolmaster, because only 
scholars had enough Latin to 
address spirits in the language 
they were supposed to under- 
stand (cf. Ham. I. I. 42 'Thou 
art a scholar; speak to it, 
Horatio'); 4. 4. 46; 5. i. 177, 
243 

Copy, 'It was the copy of our con- 
ference'; the 'copy of a con- 
ference' = the agenda or subject- 
matter. Cf. Udall, Diotrephes 
(1588), 'One had conference 
with a bishop... and gave his 
friends a copy of his conference' ; 
5. I. 62 

Counter (run), {a) hunting term 
= to follow a trail in the direc- 
tion opposite to that taken by 
the game, {b) a quibble upon 
'Counter' = the debtor's prison 
(cf. 2 Hen. IV, i. 2. 102 'You 
hunt-counter: hence! avaunt!'); 
4. 2. 39 

Countermands (the passages of 
etc.), forbids entry to; 4. 2. 37 

Cozenage, fraud, imposture; i. 2. 

Creeks, winding narrow passages 
(v. N.E.D. sb.i 5); 4. 2. 38 

Crow, 'pluck a crow together,' 
provb. = to settle accounts, to 
pick a bone together; 3. i. 83 

CuRTAL-DOG, a dog with a docked 
tail, of no service in the chase; 
3. 2. 145 

Customer, 'a familiar associate or 
companion' (N.E.D.); 4. 4. 59 

Dealer, 'plain dealer' =one free 
from deceit, and (here app.) of 
wit; in 'the plainer dealer, the 
sooner lost' S. Dromio seems to 
be using 'deal' in its original 
sense of 'divide, sever'; 2. 2. 86 

Decline, incline; 3. 2. 44 



GLOSSARY 



123 



Defeature, disfigurement (cf. 

V. A. "J id 'pure perfection with 

impure defeature'); 2.1.98; 5. i. 

300 
DisTAiNED, defiled, sullied (cf. 

Ric. Ill, 5. 3. 322); 2. 2. 145 
Doubtfully, with the secondary 

meaning of 'dreadfully' (v. 

N.E.D. 'doubtful' 3, 4, 5); 2. I. 

53 

DowsABEL, the English form of 
Dulcibella,' applied generically to 
asweetheart' (N.E.D.); 4. 1. 1 1 1 

Draw dry-foot, to track game by 
the mere scent of the foot-print 
(cf. Sk. Eng. ii. 335-6); 4. 2. 39 

Dry. Unbasted meat becomes dry 
when cooked ; a ' dry complexion' 
was supposed to induce choler; 
a dry-basting = (by a quibble) a 
severe beating (cf. Rom. 3. i. 83 
'dry-beat.' In this sense 'dry' 
= mighty and is etymologically 
distinct from 'dry' as opposed to 
moist. V. Mod. Lang. Rev. x. 
pp. 224-5); 2. 2. 58-62 

Durance (suits of), {a) imprison- 
ment, (1^) app. a stout kind of 
cloth, but Shakespeare seems to 
identify 'durance' with 'buff' 
(q.v.). Cf. I Hen. IV, i. 2. 49 
'Is not a buff jerkin a most 
sweet robe of durance.' '; 4. 3. 26 

Earnest, with a quibble upon 
'earnest-money,' i.e. an instal- 
ment paid for the purpose of 
securing a bargain; 2. 2. 24 

Ell, i\ yards; 3. 2. no 

Ensconce, conceal (v. sconce); 2. 2. 

Everlasting, 'a material used in 
the 16— 17th c. for the dress of 
sergeants and catchpoles, app. 
identical with durance' (N.E.D.). 
The sergeant in Errors, however. 



is certainly clad in buff-leather 
and not cloth (cf. durance and 
'he that goes in the calf's skin,' 
4. 3. 17); 'everlasting' would 
suit this material also, and, for 
the rest, is a highly appropriate 
epithet for the garment of a 
'devil'; 4. 2. 33 
Excrement, any outgrowth of the 
body, e.g. hair, nails; 2. 2. 77 

Factor, commercial agent; 1. 1.41 

Fall, let fall; 2. 2. 125 

Falsing, deceiving, defrauding, 
falsifying (v. note); 2. 2. 93 

Feel (his meaning), perceive, sense 
(cf. Hen. V, /\.. I. 131 'You 
speak this to feel other men's 
minds'); 2. i. 51 

Fine and recovery, a legal pro- 
cedure by which entailed pro- 
perty might be converted into 
fee-simple; S. Antipholus ap- 
pears to be quibbling upon 'heir' 
and 'hair'; 2. 2. 73 

Fool-begged, i.e. idiotic, 'so fool- 
ish that the guardianship of it 
might be begged' (Nares). 'To 
beg a person' = 'to petition the 
Court of Wards for the custody 
of a minor, an heiress or an idiot, 
as feudal superior or as having 
interest in the matter; hence 
also fig. "to beg (any one) for a 
fool" or " idiot " = to take him 
for, set him down as, a fool' 
(N.E.D. 'beg' vb. 5 a); 2. i. 41 

Formal, normal (cf. Meas. 5. i. 
232); 5. I. 105 

Fraughtage, cargo; 4. 1.88 

Glanced, alluded to; 5. i. 66 
Gossip, lit. a sponsor to a child, 
hence it came to be applied to 
friends invited to be present at 
a. birth; 5. i. 405 



124 



GLOSSARY 



Grain (in), indelible, ineradicable, 
lit. short for 'dyed in grain' 
= dyed scarlet or crimson, fast 
dyed; 3. 2. 106 

Grained, furrowed, lined (like 
wood); 5. I. 311 

Grass (long for), i.e. long for free- 
dom (v. N.E.D. 'grass' sb.^ 5 b, 
and McKerrow, iVai/ie, iii. 97); 
2. 2. 200 

Grow, accrue ; 4.i.8;4.4..i20,i33 

Hands (at two), 'at hands '= at 
close quarters in a conflict (v. 
N.E.D. 'hand' 25/); 2. i. 45 

Harlot, orig. = vagabond, rascal 
(of either sex), which may be the 
meaning here; but Shakespeare 
generally uses it in reference to 
fornication (cf. Wint. 2. 3. 4 
'She the adulteress; for the har- 
lot king/Is quite beyond mine 
arm'); 5. i. 205 

Hatch, 'sit down at the hatch.' 
S. Dromio is referring to the 
proverb, 'to set a hatch before 
the door,' i.e. keep silence 
(N.E.D. sb.i I h); 3. I. 33 

Hell, a debtors' prison; app. the 
name was originally given to a 
part of the old law-courts at 
Westminster, used as a prison 
for the king's debtors, and after- 
wards transferred to all prisons 
of the kind (v. N.E.D. 'hell' 5); 
4. 2. 40 

Holy, with a quibble upon 'holey'; 
2. I. 80 

Horn-mad, mad with rage like a 
bull or buck (q.v.), but often 
by word-play used of the anger 
of a cuckold (cf. M.W.W. 3. 5. 
138), hence Adriana's indigna- 
tion; 2. I. i;7, 58 

Host, lodge, put up; i. 2. g; 'lay 
at host,' were lodged; 5. i. 410 



Hoy, 'a small vessel... employed in 
carrying passengers and goods, 
particularly in short distances on 
the sea-coast' (N.E.D.); 4. 3. 38 

Impeach, accusation, charge (cf. 
3 Hen. VI, I. 4. 60); 5. I. 270 
Important, weighty; 5. i. 138 

KiTCHENED, entertained in the 
kitchen (N.E.D. quotes no other 
example); 5. I. 415 

Lands (narrow). Not explained; if 
not corrupt, possibly = the strips 
into which the fields were 
divided under the old agricultural 
system; 4. 2. 38 

Lapland sorcerers. 'For practice 
of vv'itchcraft and sorcery they 
[the Lapps] pass all nations of 
the world,' Giles Fletcher, Of 
the Russe Common JVealth{lc,()l). 
The Finns are said to have a 
similar reputation among sailors 
to this day; 4. 3. 1 1 

Lapwing, peewit, plover (cf. Meas. 
I. 4. 32); 4. 2. 27 

Liberty, unrestrained action, li- 
cence (cf. Meas. i. 3. 29 'And 
liberty plucks justice by the 
nose'); i. 2. 102 

Love-springs, 'springs' =the first 
tender shoots of a plant or tree; 
3- 2- 3 

Male, 'a burden male,' with a 
quibble upon 'mail,' i.e. baggage; 
I. I. 55 

Malt-horse, a clumsy kmd of 
horse used by maltsters, a heavy 
stupid person (cf. S/irezv, 4. I. 
132 'You whoreson malt-horse 
drudge ; ]onsot\,E'V.Man inHum. , 
I. 4 'he hath no more judgement 
than a malt-horse'); 3. i. 32 



GLOSSARY 



125 



Managed, under control, like a 
horse in the manege; 3. 2. 19 

Mated, amazed, confounded; 3. 2. 
54. (with a quibble on 'mated' 
= wedded); 5. i. 282 

Mean, (a) opportunity, (b) sum of 
money; i. 2. 18 

Meteor, 'his heart's meteors tilt- 
ing in his face.' Meteor = any 
aerial phenomenon, e.g. aurora 
borealis (cf. Ro?n. 3. 5. 13 'some 
meteor that the sun exhales'). 
Antipholus' heart, like the unseen 
sun below the horizon, reveals 
its influence by swift changes of 
colour and expression in the face 
(cf. ^do, 4.. I. 1 6 1-2); 4.. 2. 6 

Mome, blockhead, dolt; 'possibly 
related to "mum"' (N.E.D.); 

3. I. 32 

Morris-pike, a formidable kind of 
pike, supposed to be of Moorish 
origin (N.B. the sergeant was 
dressed in buff, like a soldier); 

4. 3. 27 

Motion, 'Weinyour motion turn, 
and you may move us,' referring 
to the motions of the heavenly 
spheres in the old astronomy; 
i.e. woman is a planet set in the 
sphere, man; 3. 2. 24. 

NiCES HIM LIKE A FOOL. ' Fools, 

undoubtedly, were shaved and 
nicked in a particular manner 
in our author's time,' writes 
Malone, who quotes T/ie Choice 
of Change {\ 598), 'They [monks] 
were shaven and notched on the 
head, like fools'; 5. i. 175 

O'er-raught, over-reached, cheated; 
I. 2. 96 

Once, 'once this,' i.e. once for all, 
in short (cf. Ado, i. i. 320 "tis 
once, thou lov'st', and McKer- 
row, A'^ai/^e, iii. 57, 128); 3.1.89 



Owe, own; 3. i. 4.2 
Owls, v. note; 2. 2. 190 

Pack, gang of rascals; 4. 4.. 10 1 
Packed with, in conspiracy with; 

5. I. 219 
Pain (in). Unexplained (v. note); 

3.1.65 
Pale, an enclosed area in a park 
for game : ' to break the pale ' = to 
indulge in licence (N.E.D.); 2. i. 
100 
Parcel, a constituent part; 5. i, 

106 
Part with, depart with; 3. i. 67 
Patch, fool (in reference to the 

fool's costume); 3. i. 32, 36 
Pay, beat, flog; i. 2. 85; 4. 4. 10 
Peevish, senseless; 4. 4. 113 
Presently, at once, immediately; 

3. 2. 146; 4. I. 32; 5. I. 31 
Pride, '"Fly pride," says the pea- 
cock.' S. Dromio's parting shot 
may be thus explained: The pea- 
cock, emblem of pride, entices 
the female bird to make advances 
by flitting before her with his 
tail outspread; so pride flies 
pride, since 'pride' in another 
sense = 'sexual desire, especially 
in female animals' (N.E.D. sb.^ 
11). Cf. 0th. 3. 3. 404 'as salt 
as wolves in pride.' S. Antipholus 
is the peacock, who by turning 
his back on the courtesan invites 
her, Dromio implies, to follow 
him; 4. 3. 78 

Rag (of money), a shred (as we 
should say); app. 'rag' was a cant 
term for a farthing (N.E.D. sb.^ 
2 c), V. note; 4. 4. 85 

Respice finem, etc. 'Respice fi- 
nem, respice funem' was a 
common jest of the period; 
equally common was the collo- 



126 



GLOSSARY 



cation, probably connected with 
some story now lost, of 'parrot' 
and 'rope'; 4. 4. 40 

Rest (to set up one's), to be re- 
solved, determined. The phrase, 
derived from 'primero,' a card- 
game in which 'the rest' = the 
reserved stakes, originally meant 
'to risk one's all' (N.E.D. quotes 
Greene, 1587, 'we set our rest 
on the hazard and so desperately 
throw at air ) — hence ' to do one's 
utmost,' ' to make a decision,' ' to 
take a resolution. 'The expression 
was, however, readily adapted to 
various quibbles; in the present 
instance the reference is to the 
'rest' for the pike when soldiers 
stood to the charge; 4. 3. 26 

Reverted, revolted. Cf. N.E.D. 
which quotes 'The Duke of 
Britaine and his brother were 
reverted and turned to the 
French partie' (1568). v. armed 
and reverted; 3. 2. 123 

Road, roadstead; 3. 2. 146 

Rope's-end, (a) a piece from the 
end of a rope, commonly used as 
an instrument of punishment, 

[b) a halter or hangman's noose; 
4. I. 99 

Round, [a) spherical, {b) severe, 
harsh; 2. 1. 82 

Sconce, {a) head, [b) a small fort 
('so you would leave battering'), 

(c) a protective screen ('I must 
get a sconce for my head'); cf. 
ensconce-^ 2. 2. 34—8 

Score, {a) to keep count by notches 
or marks on a stick or post, 
{b) a quibble upon 'scour' =beat. 
N.B. F. reads 'fcoure'; 1. 2. 65 

Season, 'Time. ..owes more than 
he's worth to season.' App. 
'season' here = opportunity; if 



so S. Dromio means 'There is 
never time to do all that occasion 
offers'; 4. 2. 57 

Sere, withered; 4. 2. 19 

Sergeant or the band; 4. 3. 29. 
Strictly speaking — the com- 
mander of a company of soldiers, 
but here used for the sheriff's 
officer. Clearly a familiar figure 
in Shakespeare's London, and 
S. Dromio gives a minute de- 
scription of him and his func- 
tions. He arrests for debt; he 
tours the city and pries into dark 
passages, etc. for rogues and evil- 
doers (4. 2. 38); he seems to act 
as watchman, since he calls out 
'God give you good rest,' as he 
goes his rounds (4. 3. 31-2); he 
commands a band, presumably of 
other catchpoles or watchmen; 
he carries a mace (4. 3. 27); and 
his uniform is of buff. 

Shoulder-clapper, an officer who 
arrests an offender; N.E.D. 
quotes Taylor, the water-poet, 
1 62 1, 'He's free from shoulder- 
clapping Sergeants clawes'; 4. 2. 

37 

Shrive, 'shrive you of a thousand 
idle pranks,' i.e. ' I will call you to 
confession, and make you tellyour 
tricks' (Dr Johnson); 2. 2. 208 

Sir-reverence, a corruption of 
'save-reverence' = an apology for 
mentioning an unpleasant fact; 
often used as a euphemism for 
'dung' (cf. Rom. i. 4. 41 'we'll 
draw thee from the mire/Of this 
sir-reverence love, wherein thou 
stick'st'); 3. 2. 91 

Sob, quibble upon 'sob'=a rest 
given to a horse to recover its 
wind (v. N.E.D. sb. i c); 4. 3. 24 ■ 

Soon at, betimes, early (cf. M.TV.JV. 
I. 4. 7 'soon at night'); i. 2. 26 



GLOSSARY 



127 



Spoon-meat, lit. 'food prepared for 
infants,' here prob. = dainties, 
delicacies. The modern slang 
sense of 'spoon,' which would be 
most appropriate to the passage, 
seems to have been unknown in 
Shakespeare's day; 4. 3. 58 

Staff, 'shall I set in my staff?' 
i.e. shall 1 take up my abode 
here.'; 3. i. 51 

Stale, 'a lover or mistress whose 
devotion is turned into ridicule 
for the amusement of a rival' 
(N.E.D., which quotes Lyly, 
Euphues, 'I perceive, Lucilla 
(said he) that I was made thy 
stale and Philautus thy laugh- 
ing-stock'); 2. I. lOI 

Start, swerve aside (like a horse); 
2. I. 30 

Stigmatical, crooked, deformed; 
4. 2. 22 

Substantial, 'your reason was not 
substantial why...' i.e. 'your 
reason does not prove why...' 
(cf. 1 6th and 17th c. quotations 
N.E.D. 'substantial' 10 b); 2. 2. 
103 

Succession (upon), i.e. by begetting 
other slanders to succeed it, so 
that the line of its heirs is never 
extinct; 3. i. 105 

SucE OUR breath. This piece of 
folk-lore was perhaps connected 
with the old idea that the breath 
of man was his soul; 2. 2. 192 

Sweat, i.e. exert yourselves (cf. 
Milton, L' Allegro, 105 'the 
drudging goblin sweat/To earn 
hiscream-bowldulyset'); 4.2.29 

Sympathized. ..ERROR, i.e. errors 
which have affected all alike; 
S- I- 397 

Tartar limbo, worse than hell, 
'limbo' =hell, though it also = 



prison; 'Tartar' is a common 
abbreviation of 'Tartarus' =hell 
(cf. Tiv. Nt. 2. 5. 226 'To the 
gates of Tartar'). The jest is that 
the clown Dromio takes 'Tartar 
limbo' to mean the hell of the 
Tartars or Mohammedans, and 
so worse than the Christian hell; 
4. 2. 32 
Tender, have regard for; 5. i. 132 
Time (in good), an interjection 
with various shades of meaning, 
here scornful = 'indeed!' or 'for- 
sooth!'; 2. 2. 56, 63 
Train, entice, lure; 3. 2. 45 
Turkish tapestry, 'As there was 
no such fabric made in Turkey 
at that date this undoubtedly 
refers to a small carpet of Turkey- 
work (i.e. a needlework imitation 
of an Eastern carpet) forming a 
table-cloth to the flat Eliza- 
bethan oak box-desk on legs' 
{Sh. Eng. ii. 128); 4. i. 105 

Understand, with a quibble upon 
'stand under'; 2. i. 49, 54 

Villain, slave, bondman; 1.2. 19. 
Possibly 'villain' at I. 2. 96 has 
the same meaning; elsewhere the 
word carries the ordinary sig- 
nification of 'rascal.' 

Waftage, passage byboat; 4. i. 96 
When.'' can you tell .^ a scornful 
expression to parry an imperti- 
nent question or request, similar 
in meaning to the modern ' What 
next.'' (cf. I Hen. IF, 2. i. 42-5 
' Gads. I pray thee lend me thine. 
Sec. Car. Ay when.' canst tell? 
Lend me thy lantern, quoth he? 
Marry, I'll see thee hanged first.'); 

3- I- 52 
Wink, close the eyes; 3. 2. 58 
Wont, is wont; 4. 4. 36 



PRINTED IN ENGLAND 

AT THE CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS 

BY J. B. PEACE, M.A. 




PR 
2804 

A2^4 
1922 



Shakespeare, V.illiara 
The comedy of errors 



PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE 
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET 

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY 




'■ ,r " ' ,' ' 'Wi 

, . ' ' ' ,i ' . ■' ' ' ' !^i ^;?lI:l!g'^^ 

-' '.- .■" ,t"N'; 'V,, '■■''.iiif' 

ill! Ill ^ ' ' ' i-iA-".!;?!'?!™ 







