


iil 



L^: 




ELINE 



Digitized by the Internet Archive 

in 2007 with funding from 

IVIicrosoft Corporation 



http://www.archive.org/details/cymbelineOOshakuoft 



THE WARWICK SHAKESPEARE 



CYMBELINE 



EDITED BY 



ALFRED J. WYATT, M.A. 

DIRECTOR OF MODERN LANGUAGE STUDIES. 
JESUS COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE 



BLACKIE & SON LIMITED 

LONDON AND GLASGOW 



Blackie & Son Limited 

16I18 William IV Street, 

Charinn Cross, London. W.C.a 
17 Stanhope Street. Glasgow 

Blackie & Son (India) Limited 
1031 5 Fori Street Bombay 

Blackie & Son (Canada) Limited 
Toronto 



<\^RA$^ PR 



O'-'T 2 



9 32111' 



1964 1! ^^^^ 
c// AZW 



Frintea in Great Britain by Blackie & Son, Limited Glassow 



GENERAL PREFACE 



In this edition of Shakespeare an attempt is made to 
present the greater plays of the dramatist in their hterary 
aspect, and not merely as material for the study of philology 
or grammar. Criticism purely verbal and textual has only 
been included to such an extent as may serve to help the 
student in the appreciation of the essential poetry. Questions 
of date and literary history have been fully dealt with in the 
Introductions, but the larger space has been devoted to the 
interpretative rather than the matter-of-fact order of scholar- 
ship. Aesthetic judgments are never final, but the Editors 
have attempted to suggest points of view from which the 
analysis of dramatic motive and dramatic character may be 
profitably undertaken. In the Notes likewise, while it is 
hoped that all unfamiliar expressions and allusions have been 
adequately explained, yet it has been thought even more 
important to consider the dramatic value of each scene, and 
the part which it plays in relation to the whole. These 
general principles are common to the whole series; in detail 
each Editor is alone responsible for the play intrusted to 
him. 

Every volume of the series has been provided with a 
Glossary, an Essay upon Metre, and an Index ; and Appen- 
dices have been added upon points of special interest, which 
could not conveniently be treated in the Introduction or the 
Notes. The text is based by the several Editors on that of 
the Globe edition: the only omissions made are those that are 
unavoidable in an edition likely to be used by young students. 

By the systematic arrangement of the introductory matter, 
and by close attention to typographical details, every effort 
has been made to provide an edition that will prove con- 
venient in use. 



THE WARWICK SHAKESPEARE General 
editor. Professor C. H. Herford, Litt.D., F.BA. 



Play 
Antony and Cleopatra. 

As You Likb It 
coriolanus. 

Cymbelinb. 

Hamlet. 

Henry the Fourth — Part I. 

Henry the Fourth — Part II. 

Henry the Fifth. 

Henry the Eighth. 

JUUUS CiESAR. 

Kino John. 
King Lear. 
Love's Labour's Lost. 

Macbeth. 

The Merchant of Venice 
A Midsummer-Night's 
Dream. 

Much Ado About Nothing. 

Othello. 

Richard the SBCO^^). 

Richard the Third. 

Romeo and Juliet 
The Tempest. 
Troilus and Cressida. 

Twelfth Night. 
The Winter's Talb. 



Edited by 
A. E. Morgan, M.A., and W. 

Sberard vines, M.A. 
J. C. Smith. M.A., B.A. 
Sir Edmund K. Chamber*. 

K.B.E.. C.B., M.A. D.Utt. 
A, J. Wyatt, M.A. 
Sir Edmund K. Chambers. 

F. W. Moorman. B.A., Ph.D 

C. H. Herford, Litt.D., F.B.A 

G. C. Moore Smith, D.Litt. 
Ph.D.. LL.D. 

D. Nichol Smith. M.A.. 
D.Litt. 

Arthur D Innes, MA. 
G. C. Moore Smith. 
D. Nichol Smith. 

A. E. Morgan, M.A., and W. 

Sherard vines, M.A. 
Sir Edmund K. Chambers. 
H. L. Withers. 
Sir Edmund K. Chambers. 

J. C. Smith, M.A., B.A. 

C. H. Herford, Utt.D.. F.B.A. 

C. H. Herford. 

Sir George Macdonaid. 

K.C.B., D.Litt., LL.D. 
J.E. Crofts, B.Litt. 
F. S. Boas, MJV., LL.D. 

Bonamy Dobr6e. O.B.B- 

M.A. 
Arthur D. Innes. M.A. 
C H. Herford. 



CONTENTS 



Page 

Introduction vii 

Dramatis PERSONit xxx. 

Cymbeline 3^ 

Notes ^45 

Appendix A — Prosody 206 

Appendix B — History and Holinshed - - - 211 
Appendix C—" Westward for Smelts" - - - 216 
Appendix D— Suspected Passages - - - - 217 
Appendix E— The Title of the Play - - - 221 

Glossary 223 

Index of Words - - - 228 

General Index 232 

Addendum: Shakespeare's Stage in its bearing 
upon his Drama, by Prof. C. U. Herford, Litt.D, 



INTRODUCTION 



I, DATE, HISTORY, AND BIBLIOGRAPHY OF 
THE PLAY. 

The First Folio of 1623, the first collected edition of 
Shakespeare's plays (now one of the most precious books 
in the world), contained thirty-six of the thirty-seven plays 
now usually associated with Shakespeare's name — Pericles 
was not included until the Third Folio of 1664— one half of 
which had previously appeared as single plays in " quarto" 
editions, the other eighteen being then published for the first 
time. Among the latter was Cymbeline, the last of the "tra- 
gedies", and the last play in the book. 

Date of Composition. — It is not possible to fix the date of 
composition of this play with certainty. The items of external 
and external-internal evidence are four in number : 

{a) Dr. Simon Forman, the astrologer, in his MS. "book 
of plays, and notes thereof", has under the year 161 1, but 
undated, a brief sketch of the plot of " Cimbalin King of 
England ", which was Shakespeare's play. Forman died in 
September of that year, and his diary, which also contains 
dated descriptions of Macbeth and Winter's Tale, belongs to 
the years 1610-161 1. It is not improbable that, when Forman 
saw it, Cyinbeli7te was a new play. 

{b) The suggestion for the character of Euphrasia in Beau- 
mont and Fletcher's Philaster was apparently taken from 
Imogen. Moreover, compare these two passages: 

^^ Phi. I hear the tread of people. I am hurt : 

The gods take part against me: could this boor 
Have held me thus else?" — Philaster, iv. 3.* 

1 Mermaid Series, London, 1893, p. 164. 

7 



viii CYMBELINE 

^Wtuh. I have belied a lady, 

The princess of this country, and the air on 't 

Revengingly enfeebles me; or could this carl, 

A very drudge of nature's, have subdued me 

In my jirofession?" — Cymbelhie, v. 2. 2-6. 

/'///A7j/'i?A- is dated 1608-161 1; 161 1 would then be the down- 
ward limit for Cymbeline. 

(c) The main plot of the play is derived from the ninth 
"novel" of the second day in Boccaccio's Decamerone. From 
the same source Shakespeare took part of a speech of Au- 
tolycus in Winter's Tale, as will be manifest to anyone who 
compares these two passages following: 

"Atit. He has a son, who shall be flayed alive; tlien 'nointed over 
with honey, set on the head of a wasp's nest ; then stand till he be 
three quarters and a dram dead; then recovered again with aqua- 
vitae or some other hot infusion ; then, raw as he is, and in the 
hottest day prognostication proclaims, shall he be set against abrick- 
wuli, the sun looking with a southward eye upon him, where he is to 
heboid him with flies blown to death." 

— Wiftter's Tale, iv. 4. 812-821. 

"But as for Ambrogiuolo, the very same day that he waS impaled 
on a stake, anointed with honey, and fixed in the place appointed to 
his no mean torment, he not only died, but likewise was devoured 
to the bare bones by flies, wasps, and hornets, whereof the country 
notoriously aboundeth." —Decamerone, ii. 9.^ 

The date of the Winter's Tale is 1610-161 1, and it is inferred 
that Cymbeline preceded it by no long interval. 

{(i) From the allusion to the story of Antony and Cleo- 
patra in ii. 4. 69-72: 

' ' the story 
Proud Cleopatra, when she met her Roman, 
And Cydnus swell'd above the banks, or for 
The press of boats or pride "; 

and to the Troy legend in iv. 2. 252, 253: 

"Thersites' body is as good as Ajax', 
When neither are alive"; 

1 Morley's Universal Library, No. 15, London, 1885. 



INTRODUCTION ix 

it has been supposed that Cymbeline comes after Antony and 
Cleopatra and Troilus and Cresstda, that is, after 1607. 

If the foregoing evidence be valid, the limits of date are 
1607 and 161 1, and between these two years the composition 
of the play has been held to fall. 

Malone conjectured that, inasmuch as Shakespeare drew 
material from the same parts of Holinshed's Chronicles for 
Lear, Macbeth, and Cymbeline, these three plays were written 
about the same time. Basing himself partly on this con- 
jecture, Mr. Fleay^ postulates a double date for the play — 
part written in 1606-1607, the remainder about 1610. Dr. 
Ingleby,^ relying mainly on some similarities of phrase be- 
tween this play and Macbeth which are pointed out in the 
notes on act ii. scene 2, came to the same general conclusion, 
but differs widely from Mr. Fleay as to the scenes to be 
assigned to the earlier date. Thus the hypothesis of a double 
date, which would require very strong evidence, is far from 
being proved at the present time. 

It is more satisfactory to turn to the internal evidence, 
which will be found to point unmistakably towards the later 
date. 

Cymbeline, The Tempest, and The Winter's Tale (with 
Pericles) form a small group with marked points of resem- 
blance. They have been well christened " romances ". 
"There is a romantic element about these plays. In all 
there is the same romantic incident of lost children recovered 
by those to whom they are dear — the daughters of Pericles 
and Leontes, the sons of Cymbeline and Alonso. In all 
there is a beautiful romantic background of sea or moun- 
tain." They all deal with divided and reunited families, with 
a background composed largely of country scenes, as if the 
dramatist's thoughts and steps were now often turned in the 
direction of Stratford, where he may even have written parts 
of these plays. Not less marked are the resemblances in 
style, language, — often outpaced by the thought — metre. 
There are laxities in the dramatic construction of Cymbelitie 

1 Shakespeare Mamtal, London, 1876, p. 53; and I^if' and Work 0/ Shake- 
speare. ^ Shakespeare's Cymbeline, London, 1886, p. xi. 
I* (M332) 



X CYMBELINE 

(sec, e.g., note on iii. 3. 99) which place it without doubt 
among the author's latest plays. 

The metrical evidence of date is threefold: {a) The pro- 
portion of unstopped to end-stopped lines in his verse in- 
creases steadily throughout Shakespeare's dramatic life, 
although the former are never the majority. Compare the 
blank verse of Love's Labour's Lost with that of our play: 
the ratios of unstopped to end-stopped lines are i : 1814 and 
I : 2'52 respectively; in T/ie Tevipest and The Winters Tale 
they are i : 3*02 and i:2'i2. {p) The number of eleven-syl- 
labled lines, lines with double or feminine endings, increases 
in like manner with the lateness of Shakespeare's work. In 
Love's Labour's Lost they form only 4 per cent of the total 
lines; in Winter's Tale they are 3ro9 per cent, in Cymbeline 
32 per cent, in The Tempest 33 per cent, {c) Weak endings, 
or decasyllabic lines ending in unemphatic words such as 
pronouns, prepositions, conjunctions, are not found in the 
earlier plays; in the later plays, beginning with Macbeth, they 
increase in number almost continuously. In Cymbeline they 
form 4"83 of the whole. Tempest 4-59, Winter's Tale 5 '59. 
Five wonderful lines in Cytnbeli'ne — iv. 2. 220-224 — iljustrate 
all the above metrical characteristics in briefest space: 

"thou shalt not lack 
The flower that 's like thy face, pale primrose, nor 
The azured harebell, like thy veins, no, nor 
The leaf of eglantine, whom not to slander, 
Out-sweeten'd not thy breath". 

Thus it will be seen that the metrical unites with the other 
internal evidence in bringing the three plays of Cymbeline, 
The Tempest, and The Winter's Tale closely together in date 
of composition. If the last belongs to 1610-1611, and The 
Tempest to 16 10, as is almost certain, we cannot be far wrong 
in dating Cymbeline 1609-16 10. 

Subsequent History.— There is little of importance in the 
subsequent history of the play. We know from the Office-book 
of Sir Henry Herbert, Master of the Revels, that it was acted 
at Court in January, 1633, and was "well liked by the king". 



INTRODUCTION 



Thomas D'Urfey's Injured Princess, or the Fatal Wager, first 
played in 1682, is an adaptation of Cytnbeline; perhaps its 
worth may be gauged by the hne : 

" Fly, sirrah, with this to the packet-boat ". 

The most famous stage version of the play is Garrick's, pro- 
duced at Drury Lane in 1761. The changes, with the excep- 
tion of a few added words, were confined to omissions and 
transpositions. Henry Brooke, author of The Fool of Quality, 
wrote a tragedy of Cymbeline, based on Shakespeare's, and 
published in 1778, but it was never acted. 

Commentators upon Shakespeare have been only too plen- 
tiful and only too foolish. At first there was room for careful 
revision and correction of the earlier editions ; but, this done, 
Shakespeare was improved upon, and other men's language 
and thoughts, save for an occasional suggestion of genius, 
were put in the place of his. Of most of the emendations — 
save the mark! — that have been suggested we do well to be 
impatient. A wise conservatism is the best attitude of mind 
in textual criticism. 

The following list of editions may be useful, and may ex- 
plain some references in the notes: 



Quartos of single plays from 

1597; 
First Folio, 1623; 
Second Folio, 1632; 
Third Folio, 1663 and 1664; 
Fourth Folio, 1685; 
Rowe's (first critical edition), 

1709; 
Pope's, 1725; 
Theobald's, 1733; 



Hanmer's, 1744- 1746; 

Warburton's, 1747; 

Dr. Johnson's, 1765; 

Capell's, 1768; 

Johnson and Steevens', 1773; 

Malone's, 1790; 

Variorum editions, 1803, 1813; 

Bowdler's ("family"), 1818; 

Boswell's Malone, 1821; 



and, among more recent ones, those of Singer, Knight, Col- 
lier, Halliwell-Phillipps, Hudson, Dyce, Grant White, Staun- 
ton, the " Globe", the " Cambridge", and the Furness Variorum 
(in progress). 



CYMBELINE 



2. SOURCES. 

In seeking out the sources of a play of Shakespeare, it 
must be borne in mind that no attempt is made to take away 
from the glory and greatness of the dramatist's share of the 
work. On the contrary, Shakespeare contributed to the 
making of his plays almost every element of their greatness. 
To use a familiar metaphor, he almost always borrowed the 
rough ore of a story or plot and transmuted it into the pure 
gold of one of his complete plays. Mere stories lay ready to 
his hand in abundance: Shakespeare made them dramatic; 
gave to the principal actors in the stories distinctive char- 
acters, and revealed those characters to us, often by slight 
but masterly indications; showed us the play of motives, of 
feelings, of passions; made \(\^ personce as real to us as our 
personal friends and foes. 

The sources of Cymbeline are twofold — one simple, the 
other more complicated. The main plot of the play is a 
medieval fiction; the setting is early British history. This 
historical framework, such as it is, Shakespeare tdok from 
Holinshed's Chronicles. It consists chiefly of a few names, 
especially those of Cymbeline and his sons (but see notes on 
dramatis personai) ; of a few allusions, as, for instance, to 
Mulmutius and his laws; and of the incident of a handful of 
men staying the flight of an army and turning defeat into 
victory, which Shakespeare, as was his wont, took from quite 
another part of Holinshed. Since the passages of Holinshed 
are quoted in full in Appendix B and references made to 
them in the notes, nothing more need be said here than that 
the Queen, Cloten (all but the name), the life of the Court, 
Belarius and his theft and its consequences, are not in Holin- 
shed, and no other source has been found for them. 

The story of the wager, out of which Shakespeare con- 
structed his main plot, is known to us, intact in all its essen- 
tials, in at least six different forms. They are: (i) A French 
miracle-play, entitled " Un Miracle de Nostre-Dame", prob- 
ably of the 13th century, printed in the "Theatre Frangais 



INTRODUCTION xiii 

au Moyen-Age" (1839): of this Collier^ quotes a summary. 
(2) A French poetical "Roman de la Violette" of the 13th 
century, by Gibert de Montreuil, of which Collier^ gives an 
analysis taken from " Le Journal des Savans". (3) Another 
poetical French romance of the same century, " Le Compte 
de Poitiers", of which also Collier^ gives an analysis. It 
differs from " La Violette " in little more than the names. 
(4) The ninth " novel " of the second day in Boccaccio's 
Decamcrone, which first appeared complete in English dress 
in 1620; but the dedicatory epistle of that edition states that 
many of Boccaccio's novels had been translated into English 
long before. (5) The tale of the fish-wife of Stand on the 
Green (see Appendix C) in Westward for Smelts, a collection 
of tales, which Malone^ dated 1603, but of which no edition 
earlier than 1620 is known; and the entry in the registers 
of the Stationers' Company confirms the latter date. 
(6) "Frederick of Jennen", which Steevens^ describes as 
"an ancient translation, or rather a deformed and inter- 
polated imitation, of the ninth novel of the second day of 
the Decameron". He adds: "This novel exhibits the 
material features of its original; though the names of the 
characters are changed, their sentiments debased, and their 
conduct rendered still more improbable than in the scenes 
before us ". The colophon states that it was printed in Ant- 
werp in 1 5 18! * 

In all these the plot is essentially the same : the wager, 
the repulse of the villain, the husband's attempted revenge, 
the wife's escape, the discovery of the fraud, the happy 
reconciliation of husband and wife, and the punishment of 
the criminal. The variety of form — miracle-play, romance, 
novel; the extent of time, from about 1200 to the 17th 
century; show how wide-spread the legend must have been, 
and how more than possible it is that Shakespeare knew the 
story in more than one form, which may or may not be those 

1 Shakespeare's Library, vol. ii. 

2 Bosweirs Malone, xiii. 229. ^ lb. xiii. 2-3. 

* It should be clearly understood that some of these six versions are almost 
identical with one another, but at least none of them professes to be a mere trans- 
lation. 



xiv CYMBELINE 

which we now possess. This much at least is clear, that it 
would be absurd to speak in a tone of certainty about the 
matter. 

For the present purpose (i) the miracle-play, (4) the De- 
camerone tale, and (5) that in Westward for Smelts, stand out 
from the rest. It seems to me impossible to decide whether 
Shakespeare went direct to the Italian original, or borrowed 
from an English translation or close adaptation now lost ; but 
that he drew material from the one or the other, I consider 
there is no room to doubt. The only other known source 
that can compete with the Decamerone is Westward for Smelts. 
That the student may judge for himself, I give Skottowe's ^ 
abridgment of the former here ; in Appendix C he will find a 
rough sketch of the latter, designed chiefly to bring out the 
points of difference. This is the story in Boccaccio : 

Several Italian merchants met accidentally in Paris at supper, and 
conversed freely of their absent wives. " I know not ", one jestingly 
remarked, "how my wife conducts herself in my absence, but of this 
I am certain, that whenever I meet with an attractive beauty, I make 
the best advantage I can of the opportunity." "And so do I," 
quoth another, " for whether I believe my wife unfaithful or not, 
she will be so if she pleases." A third said the same, and all readily 
coincided in the licentious opinion, except Bernabo Tomekin of 
Genoa, who maintained that he had a wife perfectly beautiful, in 
the flower of youth, and of such indisputable chastity, that he was 
convinced if he were absent for ten years she would preserve 
her fidelity. A young merchant of Piacenza, Ambrogiuolo, was 
extremely facetious on the subject, and concluded some libertine 
remarks by offering to effect the seduction of this modem Lucretia, 
provided opportunity were afforded him. Bernabo answered his 
confident boast by the proposition of a wager, which was instantly 
accepted. 

According to agreement, Bernabo remained at Paris, while Am- 
brogiuolo set out for Genoa, where his enquiries soon convinced him 
that Zinevra, the wife of Bernabo, had not been too highly praised, 
and that his wager would be lost, without he could effect by strata- 
gem what he had certainly no probability of obtaining by direct 

^Li/e of Shakespeare, London, 1824; ii. 261 foil. The tale will be found in 
full in No. i5of Morley's Universal Library, is. 



INTRODUCTION xv 

solicitation. Chance threw in his way a poor woman, often em- 
ployed in the house of Zinevra, whom he secured in his interest by 
a bribe. Pretending unavoidable absence for a few days, the woman 
entreated Zinevra to take charge of a large chest till she returned. 
The lady consented, and the chest, with Ambrogiuolo secreted in it, 
was placed in Zinevra's bed-chamber. When the lady retired to 
rest, the villain crept from his concealment, and by the light of a 
taper tooli particular notice of the pictures and furniture, and the 
form and situation of the apartment. Advancing to the bed, he 
eagerly sought for some mark about the lady's person, and at last 
espied a mole and tuft of golden hair upon her left breast. Then 
taking a ring, a purse, and other trifles, he returned to his conceal- 
ment, whence he was not released till the third day, when the woman 
returned and had the chest conveyed home. 

Ambrogiuolo hastily summoned the merchants in Paris, who were 
present when the wager was laid. As a proof of his success he 
produced the stolen trinkets, called them gifts from the lady, and 
described the furniture of the bed-room. Bemabo acknowledged the 
correctness of the account, and confessed that the purse and the ring 
belonged to his wife; but added, that as Ambrogiuolo might have 
obtained his account of the room, and procured the jewels also, from 
some of Zinevra's servants, his claim to the money was not yet 
established. "The proofs I have given", said Ambrogiuolo, "ought 
to suffice ; but as you call on me for more, I will silence your scepti- 
cism at once; — Zinevra has a mole on her left breast." Bernabo's 
countenance testified the truth of the assertion, and he shortly 
acknowledged it by words : he then paid the sum he had wagered, 
and instantly set out for Italy. Arriving near his residence, he 
despatched a messenger for Zinevra, and gave secret orders that she 
should be put to death upon the road. The servant stopped in a 
lonely place, and declared his master's harsh instructions. The lady 
vehemently protested her innocence of any crime against her husband; 
besought the compassion of her conductor, and promised to conceal 
herself in some distant and obscure abode. Her life was spared, 
and the servant returned to his master with some of Zinevra's clothes, 
reporting that he had killed her, and left her body to the ferocity of 
beasts of prey. 

Zinevra disguised herself in the garments of a man, and entered 
the service of a Catalonian gentleman, who carried her to Alexandria. 
Here she was fortunate enough to attract the attention of the Sultan, 
who solicited her from her master. She ?oon became a favourite. 



xvi CYMBELINE 

and under the name of Sicurano was appointed captain of the guard. 
For the security of both Christian and Turkish merchants, who 
resorted to the fair at Acre, the Sultan annually sent an officer with 
a band of soldiers. Sicurano was employed on this service, when, 
being ;n the shop of a Venetian merchant, she cast her eye upon a 
purse and girdle, which she recognized as her own. Without de- 
claring her discovery, she enquired to whom they belonged, and 
whether they were for sale. Ambrogiuolo, who had arrived with a 
stock of merchandise, now stepped forward, and re[)lied, that the 
trinkets were his, and begged Sicurano, since he admired them, to 
accept of them. Sicurano asked why he smiled; when Ambrogiuolo 
related, that the purse and girdle were presents to him from a married 
lady of Genoa, whose love he had enjoyed ; and that he smiled at 
the folly of her husband, who had laid five thousand against one 
thousand florins, that the virtue of his wife was incorruptible. 

The jealousy and revenge of Bernabo were now explained to 
Zinevra, and the base artificer of her ruin stood before her. She 
feigned pleasure at Ambrogiuolo's story, cultivated his acquaintance, 
and took him with her to Alexandria. Her next care was to have 
Bernabo, now reduced to great distress, brought privately to Alex- 
andria. Then, watching a favourable opportunity, she prevailed 
with the Sultan to compel Ambrogiuolo to relate publicly every 
circumstance of his villainy. Bernabo confessed that he had caused 
his wife to be murdered on the supposition of her guilt with Ambro- 
giuolo. "You perceive", said Sicurano to the Sultan, "how little 
reason the unhappy lady had to be proud either of her gallant or 
her husband: if you, my lord, will punish the deceiver, and pardon 
the deceived, the traduced lady shall appear in your presence." 
The Sultan assented; Sicurano fell at his feet, and discarding her 
assumed demeanour, declared herself to be Zinevra: the display of 
the mole upon her breast banished every doubt. Ambrogiuolo was 
then put to a cruel death ; and his immense wealth was given to 
Zinevra. The Sultan pardoned Bernabo, and, making Zinevra a 
princely donation of jewels and money, provided a ship, and suffered 
her and her husband to depart for Genoa. 

The deviations of Shakespeare from his original make up 
the play itself. Even where he has followed most closely, 
he has changed and glorified his loan until it is barely 
recognizable. In all the circumstances of the wager, in the 
repentance of the husband and of the villain, and in the 



INTRODUCTION xvii 

punishment of the latter, how great the changes are must be 
apparent tc all. It is more to the purpose here, therefore, 
to indicate some particulars in which it is possible that 
Shakespeare followed versions of the story other than that in 
the Decainerone. That he knew the Decamerone version is 
proved by the quotation from Winter's Tale above (see p.viii), 
and by the fact that the device of the trunk for conveying 
the concealed villain into the lady's bed-room is peculiar to 
that version;^ in Westward for Smelts he conceals himsell 
under the bed. The mark on the lady's person is on the left 
breast^ in Boccaccio as in Shakespeare; it is not mentioned 
in Westward for Smelts. But, on the other hand, there are 
a few remarkable resemblances between the Fishwife's tale 
and Shakespeare, which are also divergences from Boccaccio: 
(i) the villain proposes the wager, not the husband as in 
Boccaccio; (2) the villain converses with the lady and is 
entertained by her, whereas in the Decamerone he only sees 
her asleep, being convinced of the hopelessness of his errand 
by the report he hears of her virtue ; (3) the lady requests 
the servant to fulfil his master's command and kill her, while 
in Boccaccio she begs for her life to be spared ; (4) she is 
found in great distress in her disguise by King Edward IV. 
(in Westward for Smelts), becomes one of his pages [Cym- 
belijte, V. 5. 86), and follows him to battle. Whether Shake- 
speare took these variations of the story from a lost edition 
of Westward for Smelts I am unable to decide ; possibly 
he was as capable of making them for himself as "kinde 
Kitt of Kingstone". It is noteworthy that, while the prin- 
cipal actors are all Italian in Boccaccio, and all English in 
the English tale, in Shakespeare two are English and one 
Italian. 

It only remains to give, from a tract quoted by Collier,^ two 
points of resemblance between the French Miracle and 

1 Hudson states that the discovery of a private mark on the lady's person, and 
her disguise in male attire, are also "not found in any other version of the tale". 
This is an error. Both are in the miracle-play ; the mark on the person is in 
Violette (but upon the right breast) ; the male attire in Westward for Smelts. 

"^ Shakespeare s Library, vol. ii. The tract bears date 1839, ^^^ '^ entitled 
" Farther Particulars of Shakespeare and his Works ". 



Kviii CYMBELINE 

Shakespeare which may deserve remark. Count Berengier, 
the villain of the piece, boasts to the husband that he knows 
no woman living, but if he might speak to her twice, at the 
third time he might have all his desire. Compare this with 
lachimo's {i. 4. 1 1 3-1 14) : "with no more advantage than the 
opi)ortunity of a second conference". Again, Jicrengicr says 
to Denise, the lady of the play : " I come from Rome, where 
I left your lord, who does not value you the stalk of a cherry: 
he is connected with a girl for whom he has so strong a 
regard, that he knows not how to part from her". Compare 
this with Cymbeline, i. 6. These two coincidences, whatever 
they may be worth, are absent alike from Boccaccio and from 
Westward for Sntelts; they go some way towards proving 
the truth of the suggestion, that the tale may have been 
known to Shakespeare in some form now lost. 

3. CRITICAL COMMENTS. 

Probably no play of Shakespeare's is generally appreciated 
so far below its real merits as Cymbeline. This is partly due 
to the supposed "essential indecency of the plot"; partly to 
the fact that it yields its gold only to the earnest miner, not 
to the mere scraper of the surface. That gold is, firstly, the 
charming sylvan picture of the royal rustics Cuiderius and 
Arviragus ; secondly, a d/nouement of unsurpassed interest 
in the unravelling of a most intricate plot; lastly, the most 
fully drawn "portrait of a lady" in the whole gallery of 
.Shakespeare's women, his ideal of womanhood, the peerless 
Imogen, 

The earliest notable criticism of the play is Dr. Johnson's: 
"This play has many just sentiments, some natural dialogues, 
and some pleasing scenes, but they are obtained at the 
expense of much incongruity. To remark the folly of the 
fiction, the absurdity of the conduct, the confusion of the 
names and manners of different times, and the impossibility 
of the events in any system of life, were to waste criticism 
upon unresisting imbecility, upon faults too evident for 
detection and too gross for aggravation." Fortunately it 



INTRODUCTION xix 

is unnecessary in our day to reply to this in detail. Shake- 
speare borrowed the fiction, as was his wont, and the use he 
has made of it may be held even in this instance to have 
justified his choice. "The confusion of the names and 
manners of different times" is admitted: Caius Lucius and 
lachimo, the Roman general and the medieval Italian, hailing 
from the same country in the same play. Shakespeare could 
be as consistent in such matters as Ben Jonson when he 
chose; witness The Tempest. But it is clear that he did 
not often choose : here and in Winter's Tale he silently and 
effectually claims the utmost freedom for himself and for the 
English romantic drama. " The impossibility of the events 
in any system of life" I deny. If we take the medieval plot 
out of its setting of mythical early British history, there is 
nothing impossible or even improbable about it ; the alleged 
incongruity between the nature of the plot and the character 
of Posthumus will be dealt with later on. 

Cymbelinc is neither a "history", a comedy, nor a tragedy. 
Haziitt called it a "dramatic romance". Our greatest living 
Shakespeare-critic says of Cymbeline, The Winter's 'Tale, and 
The Tempest, which he classes together: "Characteristics of 
versification and style, and the enlarged place given to scenic 
spectacle, indicate that these plays were produced much about 
the same time. But the ties of deepest kinship between them 
are spiritual. There is a certain romantic element in each. 
They receive contributions from every portion of Shakspere's 
genius, but all are mellowed, refined, made exquisite; they 
avoid the extremes of broad humour and of tragic intensity; 
they were written with less of passionate concentration 
than the plays which immediately precede them, but with 
more of a spirit of deep or exquisite recreation." And the 
same writer adds with reference to the same plays: " When 
a man has attained some high and luminous tableland of 
joy or of renouncement, when he has really transcended self, 
or when some one of the everlasting, virtuous powers of the 
world— duty or sacrifice or the strength of anything higher 
than oneself— has assumed authority over him, forthwith a 
strange, pathetic, ideal light is shed over all beautiful things 



XX CYMBELINE 

in the lower world which has been abandoried ".^ All Shake- 
speare's latest plays tell of reconciliation and reunion of 
husbands and wives, of parents and children, and it is im- 
possible not to think of the great poet himself returning at 
the close of his career to his quiet country home with his 
heart full of the mellowed practical wisdom that abounds in 
these plays. 

If it is hard to find a better term for this play, yet "romance" 
is not altogether a happy one because of its exceeding am- 
biguity, and because it does the play bare justice. Cymbeline 
is almost as comprehensive as life itself. In the struggle 
between the evil and the good, in the intervention of the 
powers above on the side of the righteous in affliction, in 
the threefold action and the varied and distracting interests, 
in the wonderful disentanglement of the last scene, though 
we miss the intensity of passion of Lear and the headlong 
precipitation of Macbeth^ we are compensated by the many- 
sided, all-embracing fulness of the play. The divine inter- 
vention must be brought into connection with its happy 
termination. "For", as a well-known critic remarks, "the 
personages who here act and err are friends and favourites 
of the gods, because even that which in calm certainty or 
uncertain passion they do contrary to the maxims of morality, 
is done from moral motives or in moral indignation ; so that 
the drama with a tragic ending would have been an impeach- 
ment of the world's government." 

The same critic- expends much ingenuity in showing that 
there is an underlying "idea" in each of Shakespeare's plays, 
"would men observingly distil it out". That Shakespeare 
consciously and of set purpose wrote a play round an idea 
for a centre-piece, as it were, I do not believe. But that the 
actions and characters of this play can be made to group 
themselves around one all-pervading "idea", which they 
express and impress in many ways and situations, I am 
bound to admit. But let the writer speak for himself. [The 

'^ Sliakspere: A Critical Study of his Mind and Art, by Edward Dowden, 
LL.D., pp. 403, and 414, 415. 

^Gervinus: Shakespeare Commentaries, translated by F. E. Bunnett ; d. 
644 ff. 



INTRODUCTION xxi 

play] "treats uniformly throughout two opposite ideas or 
moral qualities, namely, truth in word and in deed (fidelity), 
and untruth and faithlessness, — falseness in deed or perfidy, 
falseness in word or slander. All the actions and characters 
of the play combine to exemplify these ideas." This opening 
statement is then enforced by many examples and quotations. 
The court is the world of falsehood, the sylvan home of 
Belarius is the abode of truth. The Queen is false to every 
one but Cloten. The happiness of Posthumus and Imogen 
depends on their confidence in one another. When they 
swerve, as they both do, from perfect trust, the direst nemesis 
follows. The true Posthumus is contrasted with the false 
lachimo. The good characters of the play can often be 
true to their better selves only by being false to the evil 
characters. Thus the Physician deceives the Queen, and 
Pisanio deceives Cloten. Such words as "truth", "true", 
"falsehood", "false", "lie", are of constant occurrence. 
Imogen says : 

" To lapse in fulness 
Is sorer than to lie for need, and falsehood 
Is worse in kings than beggars" (iii. 6. 12-14). 



Cornelius : 



"'She is foofd 
With a most false effect ; and I the truer, 
So to be false with her" (i. 5. 42-44). 



Pisanio ; 



" for true to thee 
Were to prove false, which I will never be, 
To him that is most true" (iii. 5. 151-153). 

And again : 

"Wherein 1 am false I am honest; not true, to be true" (iv. 3. 42). 

Posthumus : 

" villain-like, I lie- 
That caused a lesser villain than myself, 
A sacrilegious thief, to do't" (v. 5. 218-220). 

Fidelity is the cardinal virtue of an heroic age ; nothing then 
is nobler or more valuable than a true and tried friend, 



xxii CYMBELINE 

servant, or wife. Posthumus and Imogen, in spite of every- 
thing, preserve their fideHty unspotted. " And this it is, and 
this alone, which at last overcomes misfortune and wicked- 
ness : that we do not shape our own course after that of the 
world, that we do not let the vices of others tempt us to our 
own nor believe them excusable. 'By constancy', says 
Bacon, ' fate and fortune return like Proteus to their former 
being.' Faithlessness, in revenge for faithlessness, as recom- 
mended by lachimo to Imogen, would have for ever destroyed 
the love and happiness of both ; the true constancy of both, 
in spite of the supposed falsehood of each, surmounted the 
wicked report and even the incurable evil — the supposed 
death." 

Mention has been made of the threefold action of this play. 
The imperial or political action of the relations between the 
courts of Britain and Rome in the reign of Cymbeline is the 
least interesting of the three. Cymbeline himself is a king 
only in outward show ; in act he is a mere tool of the queen, 
in speech he is an echo of her or even of " that harsh, noble, 
simple nothing" Cloten. Hence his title to give the name 
to the play has been called in question. It may be defended 
on the ground that in him alone are the threads of the dif- 
ferent actions and interests united.^ 

The second action — the rustic life of Belarius and his 
foster-sons among the Welsh mountains — is Shakespeare's 
own invention. It stands in no very vital relation to the rest 
of the play; but its justification is its great and inherent 
charm, that is far indeed from being dulled by greater famili- 
arity. At first acquaintance it may appear that the two 
brothers are but a doubling of the same character; a more 
careful reading will reveal that the dramatist has limned 
them as differently as the size and nature of his canvas would 
allow. 

But it is in the main action of the wager and its conse- 
quences that interest must always centre; it is upon the chief 
actors therein that Shakespeare has showered all the wealth. 

1 See Appendices B and E. 



INTRODUCTION xxiii 

of his own intense interest, and consequently all the matured 
power of his inimitable portraiture. That there is something 
repugnant to modern notions in the very wager itself is no 
doubt true; that it will repay every reader a hundredfold to 
overcome and banish that repugnance is still more true. 

It remains for us to glance at the persons chiefly concerned 
in this wager; to note, if we can, its effect upon them, and 
their influence upon one another; and to see in what way 
they were different from their former selves at the close of 
the play. 

The devil has been declared to be " not so black as he is 
painted"; the utter revulsion and contempt we feel for lachimo 
make it all the more necessary to point out some redeeming 
traits in his character. In the first place there are the facts, 
" writ large " upon the play, that he is deeply impressed by a 
moral purity which he had never before encountered, and 
that in the end he feels and expresses sincere contrition for 
his own wickedness. Before his meeting with Posthumus he 
had not known, or had not sought to know, virtuous men and 
women, and did not believe that such existed. His first 
glance at Imogen gives this disbelief a rude shock: 

"If she be fumish'd with a mind so rare, 
She is alone the Arabian bird, and I 
Have lost the wager ". 

After this first encounter, with her and the following scene in 
her bed-chamber lachimo is never the same man again. His 
life and reputation depend upon the result of the wager, and 
he carries his part through with effrontery; but — mark this 
well — there is no exaggerated bravado in his report of his 
successful errand, he keeps as near the exact truth as cir- 
cumstances permit, he does not drag the "heavenly angel" 
any deeper into the hell of slander than he can avoid. Then, 
with Posthumus, he disappears for two acts, and when we 
meet him again, when he has been vanquished and his life 
nobly spared by him whom he had so woefully wronged, he 
ejaculates: 

"The heaviness and guilt within my bosom 
Takes off my manhood ". 



XXIV CYMBELINE 

And in the last scene he prefaces his enforced confession with 
these significant conscience-stricken words: 

"I am glad to be constrain'd to utter that 
Which torments me to conceal". 

Thus the last state of this man is better than the first. 

Imogen's choice of a husband has been assailed on account 
of his conduct in the matter of the wager, and for the sake of 
both the hero and the heroine the charge must be examined 
and if possible rebutted. In the court of Britain there is but 
one opinion of Posthumus among the disinterested: 

"to seek through the regions of the earth 
For one his like, there would be something failing 
In him that should compare ". 

But abroad "this matter of marrying his king's daughter" is 
not allowed to "word him a great deal from the matter", and 
the cynical, sceptical lachimo puts him through an awful 
ordeal from which he is ultimately saved, " yet so as by fire ". 
The successive steps of lachimo's demoniacally cunning pro- 
vocation and challenge must be carefully traced in i. 4., 
before one can attempt to answer the question posed by t4ie 
detractors of Posthumus : Ought he to have accepted the 
wager.? Regarded not as a question of morality, but as pro- 
perly a question of medieval chivalry, the answer can but be, 
Yes. lachimo's challenge is against the whole sex: " I durst 
attempt it against any lady in the world". Posthumus was 
the more bound to accept it. By doing so he was acting in 
the spirit of the most exalted ideals of chivalry. Indeed 
alike himself and the cause he was championing would have 
been held for ever disgraced if he had acted otherwise. Post- 
humus had the uttermost confidence in his lady; she would 
put the slanderer of her sex to ignominious rout (as she actu- 
ally did), and her champion would then take fitting revenge 
on the "Italian fiend" for his gross and blatant disbelief. 
That this is lachimo's own view of the matter is evident from 
his admiring testimony in the final scene to the conduct of 
Imogen's " true knight ". 



INTRODUCTION xxv 

There is a second count in the indictment — that Posthumus 
ought not to have accepted lachimo's proofs that he had 
" convinced the honour of his mistress ". The answer is the 
same as before — let the reader follow step by step the dia- 
bolical cleverness of lachimo's report in ii. 4., and he will 
infallibly come to the same conclusion as Philario: "You 
have won ". The behaviour of Posthumus when he believes 
the wager lost compares unfavourably enough with Imogen's 
when convinced of his unfaithfulness. But even in his mur- 
derous letter to Pisanio we read: "the testimonies whereof 
lie bleeding in 7ne", and of "proof as strong as my grief". 
Later, while his wife's guilt is still not disproved, he makes 
not unworthy reparation. When he reappears in the fifth act 
it is as a heart-broken penitent, purified and ennobled, even 
to the point of silently and greatly sparing the life of him 
who was the cause of all his woe. 

In the character of Imogen we have the dramatic study of 
an almost perfect woman, the crowning glory^ of that incom- 
parable galaxy which contains Miranda, Desdemona, and 
Rosalind, Portia, Cordelia, and Hermione. This would seem 
to have been the opinion alike of Shakespeare himself and 
of his critics. Every intimate student of Cymbeline takes up 
the chorus of praise. Hazlitt is a partial exception; but his 
depreciatory remark, that Imogen "is only mteresting herself 
from her tenderness and constancy to her husband", is too 
extraordinary for discussion, and is disproved by the unfailing 
interest with which each reader follows her every word and 
action. Against it may be set the opinions of the last great 
actress who has played the part, Helen Faucit, Lady Martin 
— " In drawing her he has made his masterpiece" — and that 
of a critic who is also one of the two^ greatest of living English 
poets: "The play of plays, which is Cymbeline", says Swin- 
burne.- " Here is depth enough with weight enough of tragic 
beauty and passion, terror and love and pity, to approve the 
presence of the most tragic master's hand ; subtlety enough 
of sweet and bitter truth to attest the passage of the mightiest 

1 Alas ! the other is gone from us since these words were penned : William 
Morris died October 3rd, 1896. ^ ^ Study 0/ Shakespeare, p. 226. 



XX vi CYMBELINE 

and wisest scholar or teacher in the school of the human 
spirit; beauty with delight enough and glory of life and grace 
of nature to proclaim the advent of the one omnipotent Maker 
among all who bear that name. Here above all is the most 
heavenly triad of human figures that ever even Shakespeare 
brought together. . . . The passion of Posthumus is noble, 
and potent the poison of lachimo; . . . but we think first and 
last of her who was ' truest speaker ' and those who ' called 
her brother, when she was but their sister; she them brothers, 
when they were so indeed '. The very crown and flower of 
all her father's daughters — I do not speak here of her human 
father, but her divine — the woman above all Shakespeare's 
women is Imogen. ... In Imogen we find half glorified 
already the immortal godhead of womanhood. I would fain 
have some honey in my words at parting — with Shakespeare 
never, but for ever with these notes on Shakespeare; and I 
am therefore something more than fain to close my book 
upon the name of the woman best beloved in all the world of 
song and all the tide of time; upon the name of Shakespeare's 
Imogen." 

That she is the incarnation of the poet's own ideal of 
womanly grace, beauty, and intellect, may be inferred from 
the almost universal admiration he showers upon her through- 
out the play. Even Cloten is fain to admit that 

" she 's fair and royal, ' 
And that she hath all courtly parts more exquisite 
Than lady, ladies, woman ; from every one 
The best she hath, and she of all compounded, 
Outsells them all". 

The most striking testimony to her personal beauty is the 
admiration and awe which almost make a pure man of the 
defeated libertine in the famous bed-chamber scene. To 
Bclarius, who had fled from court before her birth, she 
appears (in her male attire) "a fairy", "an angel", "an earthly 
paragon", "divineness no elder than a boy". Her brothers' 
welcome and treatment of her cannot be taken out of its 
context, but it is one prolonged tribute to her charms. 
Lucius never had 



INTRODUCTION xxvii 

"A page so kind, so duteous, diligent, 
So tender over his occasions, true. 
So feat, so nurse-like ". 

Pisanio, when instructing her in a page's part, bids her 

change 

" fear and niceness — 

The handmaids of all women, or, more truly. 

Woman it pretty self— into a waggish courage ; 

Ready in gibes, quick-answer'd, saucy and 

As quarrelous as the weasel . . . and forget 

Your laboursome and dainty trims, wherein 

You made great Juno angry". 

It is no doubt partly because Imogen cannot change her very- 
nature after this fashion, and only succeeds in maintaining 
her incognita by keeping the part she has to play ever 
present to consciousness, that she wins all men's hearts as 
much in male attire as in her proper person. In whatever 
attire, in whatever company, in whatever situation, Imogen's 
unchangeable nature is " a shop of all the qualities that man 
loves woman for". Even her "neat cookery" was, at least 
in the opinion of her unsophisticated brothers, fit for Juno 
"sick"; to the same judges her singing was "angel-like", 
and Pisanio delicately implies that her natural voice was 
musical (iii. 4. 175). Her qualities of mind and heart are not 
inferior to the endowments of her person. She is blest with 
a native healthiness of feeling and of intellect that makes her 
equal to every emergency, and invariably leads her to do and 
to say the right thing. Her keen penetration makes her an 
excellent judge of character. Thus in the very first scene, in 
spite of all the Queen's protestations, she sees through her 
''dissembling courtesy". 

It is inevitable that we should compare her conduct with 
that of Posthumus to his detriment. Both of them are led to 
believe that the other has proved false. It never occurs to 
either of them to take revenge by similar faithlessness. But 
while Posthumus determines on the murder of his wife without 
even giving her a chance of proving her innocence, she, in 



xxviii CYMBELINE 

similar circumstances, commands Pisanio to fulfil his master's 
bidding and take her life, without a single thought of revenge. 
While Posthumus rails at the whole sex because he beheves 
its most virtuous ornament to have fallen a prey to the wiles 
of lachimo, Imogen, on her part, fears that 

" all good seeming, 
By thy revolt, O husband, shall be thought 
Put on for villany " ; 

"so thou, Posthumus, 
Wilt lay the leaven on all proper men ; 
Goodly and gallant should be false and perjur'd 
From thy great fail ", 

What a height of nobility and self-command to attain at this 
moment of supreme anguish ! 

Imogen had never been ambitious for the throne or even 
for a courtly life ; she had chosen a poor husband ; she once 
wished she had been "thief-stol'n", hke her two brothers, and 
thought those blest. 

" How mean soe'er, that have their honest wills". 

When she met her brothers in the cave, she could not refrain 
the wish that she had been their sister, "and so more equal 
ballasting to thee, Posthumus". The close of the play finds 
these wishes partly fulfilled. She has lost a kingdom, but 
gained two worlds by it. She has her honest will. " See", 
says Cymbeline, 

" Posthumus anchors upon Imogen, 
And she, like harmless lightning, throws her eye 
On him, her brothers, me, her master, hitting 
Each object with a joy".' 

1 It is a pleasure to acknowledge my indebtedness to Fletcher's Studies of 
Shakespeare. 



CYMBELINE 



DRAMATIS PERSONS 

Cymbeline, king of Britain. 

Cloten, son to the Queen by a former husband. 

PosTHUMUS Leonatu.s, a gentleman, husband to Imogen. 

Belarius, a banished lord, disguised under the name of Morgan. 

GuiDERius, ("sons to Cymbeline, disguised under the names of Polydore 

Arviragus, \ and Cadwal, supposed sons to Morgan. 

Philario, friend to Posthumus, '\ . ,. 
I /■ • J r.1 -1 • r Italians. 

Iachimo, friend to Philano, J 

Caius Lucius, general of the Roman forces. 

PiSANio, servant to Posthumus. 

Cornelius, a phy.^ician. 

A Roman Captain. 

Two British Captains. 

A Frenchman, friend to Philario. 

Two Lords of Cymbeline's court. 

Two Gentlemen of the same. 

Two Gaolers. , 

Queen, wife to Cymbeline. 

Imogen, daughter to Cymbeline by a former queen. 

Helen, a lady attending on Imogen. 

Lords, Ladies, Roman Senators, Tribunes, a Soothsayer, a Dutchman, a Spaniard, 
Musicians, Officers, Captains, Soldiers, Messengers, and other attendants. 

Apparitions. 

Scene: Britain; Rome. 



CYMBELINE 



ACT I. 
Scene I. Britain. The garden of Cymbelinis palace. 

Enter t7vo Gentlemen. 

First Gent. You do not meet a man but frowns : our bloods 
No more obey the heavens than our courtiers 
Still seem as does the king. 

Sec. Gent. But what 's the matter? 

First Gent. His daughter, and the heir of 's kingdom, whom 
He purposed to his wife's sole son — a widow 
That late he married — hath referr'd herself 
Unto a poor but worthy gentleman: she's wedded; 
Her husband banish'd; she imprison'd: all 
Is outward sorrow; though I think the king 
Be touch'd at very heart. 

Sec. Gent. None but the king? lo 

First Gent. He that hath lost her too ; so is the queen, 
That most desired the match ; but not a courtier, 
Although they wear their faces to the bent 
Of the king's looks, hath a heart that is not 
Glad at the thing they scowl at. 

Sec. Gent. And why so? 

First Gent. He that hath miss'd the princess is a thing 
Too bad for bad report : and he that hath her — 
I mean, that married her, alack, good man! 

31 



32 



CYMBELINE [Act I. 



And therefore banish'd — is a creature such 

As, to seek through the regions of the earth 20 

For one his Hke, there would be something failing 

In him that should compare. I do not think 

So fair an outward and such stuff within 

Endows a man but he. 

Sec. Gefit. You speak him far. 

First Gent. I do extend him, sir, within himself, 
Crush him together rather than unfold 
His measure duly. 

Sec. Gettt. What's his name and birth? 

First Gent. I cannot delve him to the root : his father 
Was called Sicilius, who did join his honour 
Against the Romans with Cassibelan, 30 

But had his titles by Tenantius, whom 
He served with glory and admired success, 
So gain'd the sur-addition Leonatus; 
And had, besides this gentleman in question, 
Two other sons, who in the wars o' the time 
Died with their swords in hand; for which their father, 
Then old and fond of issue, took such sorrow 
That he quit being, and his gentle lady. 
Big of this gentleman our theme, deceased 
As he was born. The king he takes the babe 4c 

To his protection, calls him Posthumus Leonatus, 
Breeds him and makes him of his bed-chamber. 
Puts to him all the learnings that his time 
Could make him the receiver of; which he took, 
As we do air, fast as 't was minister'd, 
And in 's spring became a harvest, Hved in court — 
Which rare it is to do — most praised, most loved, 
A .sample to the youngest, to the more mature 
A glass that feated them, and to the graver 
A child that guided dotards; to his mistress, 50 

For whom he now is banish'd, her own price 

(m332) 



Scene i.] CYMBELINE 33 

Proclaims how she esteem'd him and his virtue \ 
By her election may be truly read 
What kind of man he is. 

Sec. Gent. I honour him 

Even out of your report. But, pray you, tell me 
Is she sole child to the king? 

First Gent. His only child. 

He had two sons: if this be worth your hearing, 
Mark it . the eldest of them at three years old, 
I' the swathing-clothes the other, from their nursery 
Were stol'n, and to this hour no guess in knowledge 60 

Which way they went. 

Sec. Gent. How long is this ago? 

First Gent. Some twenty years. 

Sec. Gent. That a king's children should be so convey'd, 
So slackly guarded, and the search so slow, 
That could not trace them ! 

First Gent. Howsoe'er 't is strange, 

Or that the negligence may well be laughed at. 
Yet is it true, sir. 

Sec. Gent. I do well believe you. 

First Gent. We must forbear: here comes the gentleman. 
The queen, and princess. [^Exeunt. 

Enter the Queen, Posthumus, and Imogen. 

Queen. No, be assured you shall not find me, daughter, 
After the slander of most stepmothers, 71 

Evil-eyed unto you : you 're my prisoner, but 
Your gaoler shall deliver you the keys 
That lock up your restraint. For you, Posthumus, 
So soon as I can win the offended king, 
I will be known your advocate: marry, yet 
The fire of rage is in him, and 't were good 
You lean'd unto his sentence with what patience 
Your wisdom may inform you. 

2 (m332) 



34 



CYMBELINE [Act I. 



Post. Please your highness, 

1 will from hence to-day. 

Queen. You know the peril. 80 

I '11 fetch a turn about the garden, pitying 
The pangs of barr'd affections, though the king 
Hath charged you should not speak together. [Exit. 

Imo. O 

Dissembling courtesy ! How fine this tyrant 
Can tickle where she wounds! My dearest husband, 
I something fear my father's wrath ; but nothing — 
Always reserved my holy duty — what 
His rage can do on me: you must be gone; 
And I shall here abide the hourly shot 

Of angry eyes, not comforted to live, 90 

But that there is this jewel in the world 
That I may see again. 

Post. My queen! my mistress! 

O lady, weep no more, lest I give cause 
To be suspected of more tenderness 
Than doth become a man. I will remain 
The loyal'st husband that did e'er plight troth: 
My residence in Rome at one Philario's, 
Who to my father was a friend, to me 
Known but by letter: thither write, my queen, 
And with my eyes I '11 drink the words you send, too 

Though ink be made of gall. 

Re-enter Queen. 

Queen. Be brief, I pray you: 

If the king come, I shall incur I know not 
How much of his displeasure. [Aside] Yet I '11 move 

him 
To walk this way: I never do him wrong. 
But he does buy my injuries, to be friends; 
Pays dear for my offences. [Exit. 



Scene 1=] CYMBELINE 35 

Posi. Should we be taking leave 

As long a term as yet we have to live, 
The loathness to depart would grow. Adieu! 

Imo. Nay, stay a little : 
Were you but riding forth to air yourself, no 

Such parting were too petty. Look here, love; 
This diamond was my mother's: take it, heart; 
But keep it till you woo another wife. 
When Imogen is dead. 

Post. How, how! another? 

You gentle gods, give me but this I have. 
And sear up my embracements from a next 
With bonds of death! [Putimg on the r/ng.] Remain, re^ 

main thou here 
While sense can keep it on. And, sweetest, fairest, 
As I my poor self did exchange for you, 
To your so infinite loss, so in our trifles 120 

I still win of you: for my sake wear this; 
It is a manacle of love; I '11 place it 
Upon this fairest prisoner. [Putting a bracelet upon her arm. 

Imo. O the gods ! 

When shall we see again? 

Enter Cymbeline and Lords. 

Post. Alack, the king! 

Cym. Thou basest thing, avoid! hence, from my sight! 
If after this command thou fraught the court 
With thy unworthiness, thou diest: away! 
Thou 'rt poison to my blood. 

Post. The gods protect you! 

And bless the good remainders of the court! 
I am gone. \Exit. 

Imo. There cannot be a pinch in death 130 

More sharp than this is. 

Cym. O disloyal thing, 



36 CYMBELINE [Act I. 

That shouldst repair my youth, thou heap'st 
A year's age on me. 

Into. I beseech you, sir, 

Harm not yourself with your vexation : 
I am senseless of your wrath; a touch more rare 
Subdues all pangs, all fears. 

Cym. Past grace? obedience? 

Imo. Past hope, and in despair; that way, past grace. 

Cym. That mightst have had the sole son of my queen ! 

Tmo. O blest, that I might not ! I chose an eagle, 
And did avoid a puttock. 140 

Cym. Thou took'st a beggar; wouldst have made my throne 
A seat for baseness. 

Imo. No; I rather added 

A lustre to it. 

Cym. O thou vile one! 

Imo. Sir, 

It is your fault that I have loved Posthumus: 
You bred him as my playfellow, and he is 
A man worth any woman, overbuys me 
Almost the sum he pays. 

Cym. What, art thou mad? 

Imo. Almost, sir: heaven restore me! Would I were 
A neat-herd's daughter, and my Leonatus 
Our neighbour shepherd's son! 

Cym. Thou foolish thing! 150 

Re-enter Queen. 

They were again together: you have done 
Not after our command. Away with her, 
And pen her up. 

Queen. Beseech your patience. Peace, 

Dear lady daughter, peace! Sweet sovereign. 
Leave us to ourselves; and make yourself some comfort 
Out of your best advice. 



Scene i.] CYMBELINE 37 

Cym. Nay, let her languish 

A drop of blood a day; and, being aged, 

Die of this folly ! [Exeunt Cymbeline and Lords- 

Queen. Fie! you must give way. 

Enter Pisanio. 

Here is your servant. How now, sir! What news? 

Pis. My lord your son drew on my master. 

Queen. Ha! r6o 

No harm, I trust, is done? 

Pis. There might have been, 

But that my master rather play'd than fought 
And had no help of anger: they were parted 
By gentlemen at hand. 

Queen. I am very glad on 't. 

Imo. Your son 's my father's friend ; he takes his part. 
To draw upon an exile! O brave sir! 
I would they were in Afric both together; 
Myself by with a needle, that I might prick 
The goer-back. Why came you from your master? 

Pis. On his command: he would not suffer me 170 

To bring him to the haven; left these notes 
Of what commands I should be subject to. 
When 't pleased you to employ me. 

Queen. This hath been 

Your faithful servant: I dare lay mine honour 
He will remain so. 

Pis. I humbly thank your highness. 

Queen. Pray, walk awhile. 

Imo. About some half-hour hence, 

I pray you, speak with me: you shall at least 
Go see my lord aboard : for this time leave me. \Exeunt. 



38 CYMBELINE [Act I. 

Scene II. The same. A public place. 
Enter Cloten and two Lords. 

First Lord. Sir, I would advise to shift a shirt; the violence 
of action hath made you reek as a sacrifice: where air comes 
out, air comes in : there 's none abroad so wholesome as that 
you vent. 

Clo. If my shirt were bloody, then to shift it. Have I hurt 
him? 

Sec. Lord. [Aside] No, 'faith; not so much as his patience. 

First Lord. Hurt him ! his body 's a passable carcass, if he 
be not hurt : it is a throughfare for steel, if it be not hurt. 

Sec. Lord. [Aside] His steel was in debt; it went o' the 
backside the town. ii 

Clo. The villain would not stand me. 

Sec. Lord. [Aside] No; but he fled forward still, toward 
your face. 

First Lord. Stand you ! You have land enough of your 
own: but he added to your having; gave you some ground. 

Sec. Lord. [Aside] As many inches as you have oceans. 
Puppies! 

Clo. I would they had not come between us. 

Sec. Lord. [Aside] So would I, till you had measured how 
long a fool you were upon the ground. 21 

Clo. And that she should love this fellow and refuse me! 

Sec. Lord. [Aside] If it be a sin to make a true election, 
she is damned. 

First Lord. Sir, as I told you always, her beauty and her 
brain go not together: she's a good sign, but I have seen 
small reflection of her wit. 

Sec. Lord. [Aside] She shines not upon fools, lest the 
reflection should hurt her. 

Clo. Come, I '11 to my chamber. Would there had been 
some hurt done! ;}i 



Scene 3.] OYMBELINE 39 

Sec. Lord. [Aside] I wish not so; unless it had been the 
fall of an ass, which is no great hurt. 
Clo. You'll go with us? 
First Lord. I '11 attend your lordship. 
Clo. Nay, come, let 's go together. 
Sec. Lord. Well, my lord. \E:i 



txeuni. 



Scene III. A room in Cymbelinis palace. 

Enter Imogen and Pisanio. 

Imo. I would thou grew'st unto the shores o' the haven, 
And question'dst every sail : if he should write, 
And I not have it, 't were a paper lost. 
As offered mercy is. What was the last 
That he spake to thee? 

Fis. It was his queen, his queen ! 

Imo. Then waved his handkerchief? 

Fis. And kiss'd it, madam. 

Imo. Senseless linen! happier therein than I! 
And that was all? 

Fis. No, madam; for so long 

As he could make me with this eye or ear 
Distinguish him from others, he did keep 10 

The deck, with glove, or hat, or handkerchief 
Still waving, as the fits and stirs of 's mind 
Could best express how slow his soul sail'd on. 
How swift his ship. 

Imo. Thou shouldst have made him 

As little as a crow, or less, ere left 
To after-eye him. 

Fis. Madam, so I did. 

Imo. I would have broke mine eye-strings, crack'd them, but 
To look upon him, till the diminution 
Of space had pointed him sharp as my needle, 



40 CYMBELINE [Act I. 

Nay, follow'd him, till he had melted from 20 

The smallness of a gnat to air, and then 
Have turn'd mine eye and wept. But, good Pisanio, 
When shall we hear from him? 

Pis. Be assured, madam, 

With his next vantage. 

Imo. I did not take my leave of him, but had 
Most pretty things to say: ere I could tell him 
How I would think on him at certain hours 
Such thoughts and such, or I could make him swear 
The shes of Italy should not betray 

Mine interest and his honour, or have charged him, 30 

At the sixth hour of morn, at noon, at midnight. 
To encounter me with orisons, for then 
I am in heaven for him; or ere I could 
Give him that parting kiss which I had set 
Betwixt two charming words, comes in my father 
And like the tyrannous breathing of the north 
Shakes all our buds from growing. 

Enter a Lady. 

Lady. The queen, madam, 

Desires your highness' company. 

Imo. Those things I bid you do, get them dispatch'd. 
I will attend the queen. 

Pis. Madam, I shall. \Exeunt. 40 

Scene IV. Rome. Philarid's house. 

Enter Philario, Iachimo, a Frenchman, a Dutchman, 
afid a Spaniard. 

lack. Believe it, sir, I have seen him in Britain: he was 
then of a crescent note, expected to prove so worthy as since 
he hath been allowed the name of; but I could then have 
looked on him without the help of admiration, though the 



Scene 4.] CYMBELINE 41 

catalogue of his endowments bad been tabled by his side and 
I to peruse him by items. 

Phi. You speak of him when he was less furnished than 
now he is with that which makes him both without and 
within. 

French. I have seen him in France: we had very many 
there could behold the sun with as firm eyes as he. 1 1 

lach. This matter of marrying his king's daughter, wherein 
he must be weighed rather by her value than his own, words 
him, I doubt not, a great deal from the matter. 

French. And then his banishment. 

lach. Ay, and the approbation of those that w^eep this 
lamentable divorce under her colours are wonderfully to 
extend him; be it but to fortify her judgement, which else an 
easy battery might lay flat, for taking a beggar without less 
quality. But how comes it he is to sojourn with you? How 
creeps acquaintance? 21 

Phi. His father and I were soldiers together; to whom I 
have been often bound for no less than my life. Here comes 
the Briton: let him be so entertained amongst you as suits, 
with gentlemen of your knowing, to a stranger of his quality. 

Enter Posthumus. 

T beseech you all, be better known to this gentleman, whom 
I commend to you as a noble friend of mine: how worthy he 
is I will leave to appear hereafter, rather than story him in 
his own hearing. 

French. Sir, we have known together in Orleans. 30 

Post. Since when I have been debtor to you for courtesies, 
which I will be ever to pay and yet pay still. 

French. Sir, you o'er-rate my poor kindness : I was glad I 
did atone my countryman and you; it had been pity you 
should have been put together with so mortal a purpose as 
then each bore, upon importance of so slight and trivial a 
nature. 

2* (m332) 



42 



CYMBELINE [Act I. 



Post. By your pardon, sir, I was then a young traveller; 
rather shunned to go even with what I heard than in my 
every action to be guided by others' experiences : but upon my 
mended judgement — if I offend not to say it is mended — my 
quarrel was not altogether slight. 42 

French. Faith, yes, to be put to the arbitrement of swords, 
and by such two that would by all likelihood have confounded 
one the other, or have fallen both. 

lack. Can we, with manners, ask what was the difference? 

French. Safely, I think : 't was a contention in public, which 
may, without contradiction, suffer the report. It was much 
like an argument that fell out last night, where each of us fell 
in praise of our country mistresses; this gentleman at that 
time vouching — and upon warrant of bloody affirmation — his 
to be more fair, virtuous, wise, chaste, constant-qualified and 
less attemptable than any the rarest of our ladies in France. 

lach. That lady is not now living, or this gentleman's 
opinion by this worn out. 55 

Post. She holds her virtue still and I my mind. 

lach. You must not so far prefer her 'fore ours of Italy. 

Post. Being so far provoked as I was in France, I would 
abate her nothing, though I profess myself her adorer, not 
her friend. 60 

lack. As fair and as good — a kind of hand-in-hand com- 
parison — had been something too fair and too good for any 
lady in Britain. If she went before others I have seen, as 
that diamond of yours outlustres many I have beheld, I could 
not but believe she excelled many: but I have not seen the 
most precious diamond that is, nor you the lady. 

Post. I praised her as I rated her: so do I my stone. 

lach. What do you esteem it at? 

Post. More than the world enjoys. 

lack. Either your unparagoned mistress is dead, or she 's 
outprized by a trifle. 71 

Post. You are mistaken : the one may be sold, or given, if 



Scene 4.] CYMBELINE 43 

there were wealth enough for the purchase, or merit for the 
gift: the other is not a thing for sale, and onlj' the gift of the 
gods. 

lack. Which the gods have given you? 

Post, Which, by their graces, I will keep. 

lach. You may wear her in title yours: but, you know, 
strange fowl light upon neighbouring ponds. Your ring may 
be stolen too. So your brace of unprizable estimations, the 
one is but frail and the other casual, a cunning thief, or a 
that way accompUshed courtier, would hazard the winning 
both of first and last. 83 

Post, Your Italy contains none so accomplished a courtier 
to convince the honour of my mistress, if, in the holding or 
loss of that, you term her frail. I do nothing doubt you have 
store of thieves; notwithstanding, I fear not my ring. 

Phi. Let us leave here, gentlemen. 

Post. Sir, with all my heart. This worthy signior, I thank 
him, makes no stranger of me; we are familiar at first. 90 

lach. With five times so much conversation, I should get 
ground of your fair mistress, make her go back, even to the 
yielding, had I admittance and opportunity to friend. 

Post. No, no, 

lach. I dare thereupon pawn the moiety of my estate to 
your ring; which, in my opinion, o'ervalues it something: 
but I make my wager rather against your confidence than 
her reputation: and, to bar your offence herein too, I durst 
attempt it against any lady in the world. 99 

Post. You are a great deal abused in too bold a persuasion ; 
and I doubt not you sustain what you 're worthy of by your 
attempt. 

lach. What's that? 

Post. A repulse: though your attempt, as you call it, 
deserve more; a punishment too. 

Phi. Gentlemen, enough of this: it came in too suddenly; 
let it die as it was born, and, I pray you, be better acquainted. 



44 



CYMBELINE [Act I. 



lack. Would I had put my estate and my neighbour's on 
the approbation of what I have spoke! 

Post. What lady would you choose to assail? no 

Jack. Yours; whom in constancy you think stands so safe. 
I will lay you ten thousand ducats to your ring, that, com- 
mend me to the court where your lady is, with no more ad- 
vantage than the opportunity of a second conference, and I 
will bring from thence that honour of hers which you imagine 
so reserved. 

Post. I will wage against your gold, gold to it : my ring I 
hold dear as my finger; 't is part of it. 

lack. You are afraid, and therein the wiser. If you buy 
ladies' flesh at a million a dram, you cannot preserve it from 
tainting: but I see you have some religion in you, that you 
fear. 122 

Post. This is but a custom in your tongue; you bear a 
graver purpose, I hope. 

lack. I am the master of my speeches, and would undergo 
what 's spoken, I swear. 

Post. Will you? I shall but lend my diamond till your 
return : let there be covenants drawn between 's : my mistress 
exceeds in goodness the hugeness of your unworthy thinking: 
I dare you to this match: here's my ring. 130 

Phi. I will have it no lay. 

lack. By the gods, it is one. If I bring you no sufficient 
testimony, my ten thousand ducats are yours; so is your 
diamond too : if I come off, and leave her in such honour as 
you have trust in, she your jewel, this your jewel, and my 
gold are yours: provided I have your commendation for 
my more free entertainment. 

Post. I embrace these conditions; let us have articles 
betwixt us. Only, thus far you shall answer: if you make 
your voyage upon her and give me directly to understand you 
have prevailed, I am no further your enemy; she is not worth 
our debate: if she remain unseduced, you not making it 



Scene 5.] CYMBELINE 45 

appear otherwise, for your ill opinion and the assault you 
have made to her chastity you shall answer me with your 
sword. 145 

lach. Your hand; a covenant: we will have these things 
set down by lawful counsel, and straight away for Britain, 
lest the bargain should catch cold and starve: I will fetch 
my gold and have our two wagers recorded. 149 

Post. Agreed. \Exeunt Posthumus and lachimo. 

French. Will this hold, think you? 

Phi. Signior lachimo will not from it. Pray, let us follow 
'em. \Exeunt. 

Scene V. Britain. A room in Cymbeline's palace. 
Enter Queen, Ladies, and Cornelius. 

Queen. Whiles yet the dew's on ground, gather those flowers: 
Make haste: who has the note of them? 

First Lady. I, madam. 

Queen. Dispatch. [Exeunt Ladies. 

Now, master doctor, have you brought those drugs? 

Cor. Pleaseth your highness, ay : here they are, madam : 

[Presenting a small box. 
But I beseech your grace, without offence, — 
My conscience bids me ask — wherefore you have 
Commanded of me these most poisonous compounds, 
Which are the movers of a languishing death, 
But, though slow, deadly. 

Queen. I wonder, doctor, la 

Thou ask'st me such a question. Have I not been 
Thy pupil long? Hast thou not learn'd me how 
To make perfumes? distil? preserve? yea, so 
That our great king himself doth woo me oft 
For m.y confections? Having thus far proceeded, — 
Unless thou think'st me devilish— is 't not meet 
That I did amplify my judgement in 



46 CYMBELINE [Act L 

Other conclusions? I will try the forces 

Of these thy compounds on such creatures as 

We count not worth the hanging, but none human, 20 

To try the vigour of them and apply 

Allayments to their act, and by them gather 

Their several virtues and effects. 

Cor. Your highness 

Shall from this practice but make hard your heart: 
Besides, the seeing these effects will be 
Both noisome and infectious. 

Queen. O, content thee. 

Enter Pisanio. 

[/4stde] Here comes a flattering rascal; upon him 

Will I first work : he 's for his master, 

And enemy to my son. How now, Pisanio! 

Doctor, your service for this time is ended; 30 

Take your own way. 

Cor. [AsiWe] I do suspect you, madam ; 

But you shall do no harm. 

Queen. [To Pisafuo^ Hark thee, a word. 

Cor. [Aside] I do not like her. She doth think she has 
Strange lingering poisons: I do know her spirit, 
And will not trust one of her malice with 
A drug of such damn'd nature. Those she has 
Will stupefy and dull the sense awhile; 
Which first, perchance, she '11 prove on cats and dogs, 
Then afterward up higher: but there is 
No danger in what show of death it makes, 40 

More than the locking-up the spirits a time, 
To be more fresh, reviving. She is fool'd 
With a most false effect; and I the truer. 
So to be false with her. 

Queen. No further service, doctor. 

Until I send for thee. 



Scenes.] CYMBELINE 47 

Cor. I humbly take my leave. \Exit. 

2ueen. Weeps she still, say'st thou? Dost thou think in time 
She will not quench and let instructions enter 
Where folly now possesses? Do thou work: 
When thou shalt bring me word she loves my son, 
I '11 tell thee on the instant thou art then 50 

As great as is thy master, greater, for 
His fortunes all lie speechless and his name 
Is at last gasp: return he cannot, nor 
Continue where he is: to shift his being 
Is to exchange one misery with another. 
And every day that comes comes to decay 
A day's work in him. What shalt thou expect, 
To be depender on a thing that leans. 

Who cannot be new built, nor has no friends, 59 

So much as but to prop him? \^The Queen drops the box: 

Pisanio takes it tip.'\ Thou takest up 
Thou know'st not what; but take it for thy labour: 
It is a thing I made, which hath the king 
Five times redeem'd from death : I do not know 
What is more cordial. Nay, I prithee, take it; 
It is an earnest of a farther good 
That I mean to thee. Tell thy mistress how 
The case stands with her; do't as from thyself. 
Think what a chance thou changest on ; but think 
Thou hast thy mistress still, to boot, my son. 
Who shall take notice of thee: I '11 move the king 70 

To any shape of thy preferment such 
As thou 'It desire; and then myself, I chiefly, 
That set thee on to this desert, am bound 
To load thy merit richly. Call my women : 
Think on my words. [Exit Pisanio. 

A sly and constant knave. 
Not to be shaked; the agent for his master 
And the remembrancer of her to hold 



48 CYMBELINE [Act I 

The hand-fast to her lord. I have given him that 

Which, if he take, shall quite unpeople her 

Of liegers for her sweet, and which she after, 80 

Except she bend her humour, shall be assured 

To taste of too. 

Re-enter Pisanio and Ladies. 

So, so: well done, well done: 
The violets, cowslips, and the primroses. 
Bear to my closet. Fare thee well, Pisanio ; 
Think on my words. \^Exeu7it Queen and Ladies. 

Pis. And shall do: 

But when to my good lord I prove untrue, 
I '11 choke myself: there 's all I '11 do for you. \_Exii 

Scene VI. The same. Another room in the paiace. 

Enter Imogen. 

Imo. A father cruel, and a step-dame false; 
A foolish suitor to a wedded lady. 
That hath her husband banish'd; — O, that husband! 
My supreme crown of grief! and those repeated 
Vexations of it! Had I been thief-stol'n, 
As my two brothers, happy! but most miserable 
Is the desire that 's glorious : blest be those, 
How mean soe'er, that have their honest wills. 
Which seasons comfort. Who may this be? Fie! 

Enter Pisanio and Iachimo. 

Pis. Madam, a noble gentleman of Rome, lo 

Comes from my lord with letters. 

lach. Change you, madam? 

The worthy Leonatus is in safety 
And greets your highness dearly. [Presents a letter. 



Scene 6.] CYMBELINE 49 

Imo. Thanks, good sir: 

You 're kindly welcome. 

lack. [As/dd] All of her that is out of door most rich! 
If she be furnish'd with a mind so rare, 
She is alone the Arabian bird, and I 
Have lost the wager. Boldness be my friend! 
Arm me, audacity, from head to foot ! 

Or, like the Parthian, I shall flying fight; 20 

Rather, directly fly. 

/mo. [fiends] '. . . He is one of the noblest note, to whose 
kindnesses I am most infinitely tied. Reflect upon him 
accordingly, as you value your trust. . . . Leonatus.' 
So far I read aloud: 
But even the very middle of my heart 
Is warm'd by the rest, and takes it thankfully. 
You are as welcome, worthy sir, as I 
Have words to bid you, and shall find it so 
In all that I can do. 

lacA. Thanks, fairest lady. 30 

What, are men mad? Hath nature given them eyes 
To see this vaulted arch, and the rich crop 
Of sea and land, which can distinguish 'twixt 
The fiery orbs above and the twinn'd stones 
Upon the number'd beach? and can we not 
Partition make with spectacles so precious 
'Twixt fair and foul? 

Imo. What makes your admiration? 

lacL It cannot be i' the eye, for apes and monkeys 
'Twixt two such shes would chatter this way and 
Contemn with mows the other; nor i' the judgement, 40 
For idiots in this case of favour would 
Be wisely definite; nor i' the appetite; 
Sluttery to such neat excellence opposed 
Should make desire vomit emptiness, 
Not so allured to teed. 



50 CYMBELINE [Act I. 

Imo. What is the matter, trow? 

lach. The cloyed will, 

That satiate yet unsatisfied desire, that tub 
Both fill'd and running, ravening first the lamb 
Longs after for the garbage. 

Imo. What, dear sir. 

Thus raps you? Are you well? 50 

lach. Thanks, madam; well. [Ti? Fisanio] Beseech you, 
sir, 
Desire my man's abode where I did leave him : 
He 's strange and peevish. 

Pis. I was going, sir. 

To give him welcome. [Exit. 

Imo. Continues well my lord? His health, beseech you? 

lach. Well, madam. 

Imo. Is he dispos'd to mirth? I hope he is. 

lack. Exceeding pleasant; none a stranger there 
So merry and so gamesome: he is call'd 
The Briton reveller. 

Imo. When he was here, 60 

He did incline to sadness, and oft-times 
Not knowing why. 

lach. I never saw him sad. 

There is a Frenchman his companion, one 
An eminent monsieur, that, it seems, much loves 
A Gallian girl at home; he furnaces 
The thick sighs from him, whiles the jolly Briton — 
Your lord, I mean — laughs from 's free lungs, cries ' O, 
Can my sides hold, to think that man, who knows 
By history, report, or his own proof. 

What woman is, yea, what she cannot choose 70 

But must be, will his free hours languish for 
Assured bondage?' 

Imo. Will my lord say so? 

lach. Ay, madam, with his eyes in flood with laughter: 



Scene 6.] CYMBELINE $1 

It is a recreation to be by 

And hear him mock the Frenchman. But, heavens know, 

Some men are much to blame, 

Imo. Not he, I hope. 

lack. Not he : but yet heaven's bounty towards him might 
Be used more thankfully. In himself, 'tis much; 
In you, which I account his beyond all talents, 
Whilst I am bound to wonder, I am bound 80 

To pity too. 

Imo. What do you pity, sir? 

lach. Two creatures heartily, 
Imo. Am I one, sir? 

You look on me : what wreck discern you in me 
Deserves your pity? 

lach. Lamentable ! What, 

To hide me from the radiant sun and solace 
r the dungeon by a snuff? 

Imo. I pray you, sir, 

Deliver with more openness your answers 
To my demands. Why do you pity me? 
lach. That others do — 

I was about to say— enjoy your But 90 

It is an ofifice of the gods to venge it, 
Not mine to speak on 't. 

Imo. You do seem to know 

Something of me, or what concerns me: pray you, — 
Since doubting things go ill often hurts more 
Than to be sure they do; for certainties 
Either are past remedies, or, timely knowing, 
The remedy then born — discover to me 
What both you spur and stop, 

lach. Had I this cheek 

To bathe my lips upon; this hand, whose touch, 
Whose every touch, would force the feeler's soul 100 

To the oath of loyalty; this object, which 



52 CYMBELINE [Act I. 

Takes prisoner the wild motion of mine eye, 

Fixing it only here; should I, damn'd then, 

Slaver with lips as common as the stairs 

That mount the Capitol; join gripes with hands 

Made hard with hourly falsehood— falsehood, as 

With labour; then by-peeping iii an eye 

Base and unlustrous as the smoky light 

That's fed with stinking tallow; it were fit 

That all the plagues of hell should at one time no 

Encounter such revolt. 

Into. My lord, I fear, 

Has forgot Britain. 

lach. And himself. Not I, 

IncUned to this intelligence, pronounce 
The beggary of his change • but 't is your graces 
That from my mutest conscience to my tongue 
Charms this report out. 

Imo. Let me hear no more. 

lach. O dearest soul ! your cause doth strike my heart 
With pity, that doth make me sick. A lady 
So fair, and fasten'd to an empery. 

Would make the great'st king double, — to be partner'd 120 
With tomboys hired with that self-exhibition 
Which your own coffers yield! Be revenged; 
Or she that bore you was no queen, and you 
Recoil from your great stock. 

Imo. Revenged ! 

How should I be revenged? If this be true, — 
As I have such a heart that both mine ears 
Must not in haste abuse— if it be true. 
How should I be revenged? 

lach. I dedicate myself to your sweet pleasure. 
More noble than that runagate to your bed, 130 

And will continue fast to your affection, 
Still close as sure. 



scene 6.] CYMBELINE 53 

Im^ What, ho, Pisanio! 

lack. Let me my service tender on your lips. 

Into. Away! I do condemn mine ears that have 
So long attended thee. If thou wert honourable. 
Thou wouldst have told this tale for virtue, not 
For such an end thou seek'st, — as base as strange. 
Thou wrong'st a gentleman, who is as far 
From thy report as thou from honour, and 
Solicit'st here a lady that disdains 140 

Thee and the devil alike. What, ho, Pisanio! 
The king my father shall be made acquainted 
Of thy assault: if he shall think it fit, 
A saucy stranger in his court to expound 
His beastly mind to us, he hath a court 
He little cares for and a daughter who 
He not respects at all. What, ho, Pisanio! 

lach. O happy Leonatus! I may say: 
The credit that thy lady hath of thee 

Deserves thy trust, and thy most perfect goodness 150 

Her assured credit. Blessed live you long! 
A lady to the worthiest sir that ever 
Country call'd his! and you his mistress, only 
For the most worthiest fit! Give me your pardon. 
I have spoke this, to know if your affiance 
Were deeply rooted; and shall make your lord, 
That which he is, new o'er: and he is one 
The truest manner'd; such a holy witch 
That he enchants societies into him; 
Half all men's hearts are his. 

Imo. You make amends. 160 

lack. He sits 'mongst men like a descended god: 
He hath a kind of honour sets him off. 
More than a mortal seeming. Be not angry, 
Most mighty princess, that I have adventured 
To try your taking of a false report; which hath 



54 CYMBELINE [Act f. Sc. 6. 

Honour'd with confirmation your great judgement 

In the election of a sir so rare, 

Which you know cannot err: the love I bear him 

Made me to fan you thus, but the gods made you, 

Unlike all others, chaffless. Pray, your pardon. 170 

Into. All's well, sir: take my power i' the court for 
yours. 

lach. My humble thanks. I had almost forgot 
To entreat your grace but in a small request, 
And yet of moment too, for it concerns 
Your lord; myself and other noble friends 
Are partners in the business. 

Into. Pray, what is't? 

Inch. Some dozen Romans of us and your lord — 
The best feather of our wing — have mingled sums 
To buy a present for the emperor; 

Which I, the factor for the rest, have done j8c 

In France: 'tis plate of rare device, and jewels 
Of rich and exquisite form; their values great; 
And I am something curious, being strange. 
To have them in safe stowage: may it please you 
To take them in protection? 

Into. Willingly ; 

And pawn mine honour for their safety: since 
My lord hath interest in them, I will keep them 
In my bedchamber. 

lach. They are in a trunk, 

Attended by my men: I will make bold 
To send them to you, only for this night; I90 

I must aboard to-morrow. 

Imo. O, no, no. 

lach. Yes, I beseech; or I shall short my word 
By lengthening my return. From Gallia 
I cross'd the seas on purpose and on promise 
To see your grace. 



Act II. Sc. I.] CYMBELINE 55 

Into. I thank you for your pains : 

But not away to-morrow! 

lach. O, I must, madam: 

Therefore I shall beseech you, if you please 
To greet your lord with writing, do 't to-night : 
I have outstood my time; which is material 
To the tender of our present. 

Imo. I will write. 200 

Send your trunk to me; it shall safe be kept, 
And truly yielded you. You 're very welcome. [Exeunt, 



ACT II. 
Scene I. Britain. Before Cymbeline's palace. 

Enter Cloten and tivo Lords. 

Clo. Was there ever man had such luck! when I kissed 
the jack, upon an up-cast to be hit away! I had a hundred 
pound on 't : and then a whoreson jackanapes must take me 
up for swearing; as if I borrowed mine oaths of him and 
might not spend them at my pleasure. 

First Lord. What got he by that? You have broke his 
pate with your bowl. 

Sec. Lord. [Aside] If his wit had been like him that broke 
it, it would have run all out. 9 

C/o. When a gentleman is disposed to swear, it is not for 
any standers-by to curtail his oaths, ha? 

Sec. Lord. No, my lord ; [Aside] nor crop the ears of them. 

Clo. Whoreson dog! I give him satisfaction? Would he 
had been one of my rank ! 

Sec. Lord. [Aside] To have smelt like a fool. 

Clo. I am not vexed more at anything in the earth : a pox 
on 't! I had rather not be so noble as I am; they dare not 



56 CYMBELINE [Act II. 

fight with me, because of the queen my mother: every Jack- 
slave hath his bellyful of fighting, and I must go up and 
down like a cock that nobody can match. 20 

Sec. Lord. [Aside] You are cock and capon too; and you 
crow, cock, with your comb on. 

Clo. Sayest thou? 

Sec. Lord. It is not fit your lordship should undertake every 
companion that you give offence to. 

Clo. No, I know that: but it is fit I should commit offence 
to my inferiors. 

Sec. Lord. Ay, it is fit for your lordship only. 

Clo. Why, so I say. 

First Lord. Did you hear of a stranger that's come to 
court to-night? 31 

Clo. A stranger, and I not know on't! 

Sec. Lord. [Aside] He's a strange fellow himself, and 
knows it not. 

Firsl Lord. There's an Italian come; and, 'tis thought, 
one of Leonatus' friends. 

Clo. Leonatus! a banished rascal; and he's another, what- 
soever he be. Who told you of this stranger? 

Firsl Lord. One of your lordship's pages. 

Clo. Is it fit I went to look upon him? is there no deroga- 
tion in 't? 41 

Sec. Lord. You cannot derogate, my lord. 

Clo. Not easily, I think. 

Sec. Lord. [Aside] You are a fool granted : therefore your 
issues, being foolish, do not derogate. 

Clo. Come, I '11 go see this Italian: what I have lost to-day 
at bowls I '11 win to-night of him. Come, go. 

Sec. Lord. I '11 attend your lordship. 

[Exeunt Cloten and First Lord. 
That such a crafty devil as is his mother 
Should yield the world this ass! a woman that 50 

Bears all down with her brain; and this her son 



Scene 2.] CYMBELINE 57 

Cannot take two from twenty, for his heart, 

And leave eighteen. Alas, poor princess. 

Thou divine Imogen, what thou endurest. 

Betwixt a father by thy step-dame govern'd, 

A mother hourly coining plots, a wooer 

More hateful than the foul expulsion is 

Of thy dear husband, than that horrid act 

Of the divorce he 'Id make! The heavens hold firm 

The walls of thy dear honour, keep unshaked 60 

That temple, thy fair mind, that thou mayst stand, 

To enjoy thy banish'd lord and this great land. [Exif. 



Scene II. Ifiiogen's bedchamber in Cymbeli7ie's palace: 
a trimk in one corner of it. 

Imogen in bed, reading; a Lady attending. 

Imo. Who's there? my woman Helen? 

Lady. Please you, madam. 

Imo. What hour is it? 

Lady. Almost midnight, madam. 

Imo. I have read three hours then : mine eyes are weak : 
Fold down the leaf where I have left : to bed: 
Take not away the taper, leave it burning; 
And if thou canst awake by four o' the clock, 
I prithee, call me. Sleep hath seized me wholly. 

\Exit Lady. 
To your protection I commend me, gods. 
From fairies and the tempters of the night 
Guard me, beseech ye. 10 

\Sleeps. lachimo comes from the trunk. 

lack. The crickets sing, and man's o'er-labour'd sense 
Repairs itself by rest. Our Tarquin thus 
Did softly press the rushes, ere he waken'd 
The chastity he wounded. Cytherea, 



58 CYMBELINE [Act II. 

How bravely thou becomest thy bed, fresh lily, 

And whiter than the sheets! That I might touch! 

But kiss; one kiss. Rubies unparagon'd. 

How dearly they do 't ! 'T is her breathing that 

Perfumes the chamber thus: the flame o' the taper 

Bows toward her, and would under-peep her lids, 20 

To see the enclosed lights, now canopied 

Under these windows, white and azure, laced 

With blue of neaven's own tinct. But my design. 

To note the chamber: I will write all down: 

Such and such pictures; there the window; such 

The adornment of her bed; the arras; figures. 

Why, such and such; and the contents o' the story. 

Ah, but some natural notes about her body 

Above ten thousand meaner movables 

Would testify, to enrich mine inventory. 30 

O sleep, thou ape of death, lie dull upon her! 

And be her sense but as a monument. 

Thus in a chapel lying ! Come off, come off: 

[ Taking off her bracelet. 
As slippery as the Gordian knot was hard ! 
'Tis mine; and this will witness outwardly, 
As strongly as the conscience does within, 
To the madding of her lord. On her left breast 
A mole cinque-spotted, like the crimson drops 
r the bottom of a cowslip: here's a voucher, 
Stronger than ever law could make : this secret 40 

Will force him think I have pick'd the lock and ta'en 
The treasure of her honour. No more. To what end.? 
Why should I write this down, that 's riveted, 
Screw'd to my memory? She hath been reading late 
The tale of Tereus; here the leaf's turn'd down 
Where Philomel gave up. I have enough : 
To the trunk again, and shut the spring of it. 
Swift, swift, you dragons of the night, that dawning 



Scenes.] CYMBELINE 59 

May bare the raven's eye! I lodge in fear; 

Though this a heavenly angel, hell is here. \Clock strikes. 50 

One, two, three: time, time! 

[Goes ifito the trunk. The scene closes. 



Scene III. An ante-chamber adjoining hnogen^s 
apartments. 

Enter Cloten and Lords. 

First Lord. Your lordship is the most patient man in loss, 
the most coldest that ever turned up ace. 

Clo. It would make any man cold to lose. 

First Lord. But not every man patient after the noble 
temper of your lordship. You are most hot and furious when 
you win. 

Clo. Winning will put any man into courage. If I could 
get this foolish Imogen, I should have gold enough. It's 
almost morning, is 't not? 

First Lord. Day, my lord. 10 

Clo. I would this music would come: I am advised to give 
her music o' mornings : they say it will penetrate. 

Enter Musicians. 

Come on; tune: if you can penetrate her with your fingering, 
so; we '11 try with tongue too: if none will do, let her remain ; 
but I '11 never give o'er. First, a very excellent good-conceited 
thing ; after, a wonderful sweet air, with admirable rich words 
to it : and then let her consider. 

Song. 

Hark, hark ! the lark at heaven's gate sings, 

And Phoebus 'gins arise. 
His steeds to water at those springs 20 

On chaliced flowers that lies; 



6o CYMBELINE [Act II. 

And winking Mary-buds begin 

To ope their golden eyes : 
With every thing that pretty is, 

My lady sweet, arise: 
Arise, arise. 

Clo. So, get you gone. If this penetrate, I will consider 
your music the better: if it do not, it is a vice in her ears, 
which horse-hairs and calves'-guts, nor the voice of eunuch to 
boot, can never amend. \Exeunt Musiciaiis. 30 

Sec. Lord. Here comes the king. 

Clo. I am glad I was up so late ; for that 's the reason I 
was up so early: he cannot choose but take this service I 
nave done fatherly. 

Enter Cymbeline and Queen. 
Good morrow to your majesty and to my gracious mother. 

Cym. Attend you here the door of our stern daughter? 
Will she not forth? 

Clo. I have assailed her with music, but she vouchsafes no 
notice. 

Cym. The exile of her minion is too new; 40 

She hath not yet forgot him: some more time 
Must wear the print of his remembrance out. 
And then she 's yours. 

Queen. You are most bound to the king, 

Who lets go by no vantages that may 
Prefer you to his daughter. Frame yourself 
To orderly soliciting, and be friended 
With aptness of the season ; make denials 
Increase your services; so seem as if 
You were inspired to do those duties which 
You tender to her; that you in all obey her, 50 

Save when command to your dismission tends, 
And therein you are senseless. 

Clo. Senseless ! not so. 



Scene 3.] CYMBELINE 61 



Enter a Messenger. 

Mess. So like you, sir, ambassadors from Rome; 
The one is Caius Lucius. 

Cym. A worthy fellow, 

Albeit he comes on angry purpose now; 
But that 's no fault of his : we must receive him 
According to the honour of his sender; 
And towards himself, his goodness forespent on us, 
We must extend our notice. Our dear son, 
When you have given good morning to your mistress, 60 
Attend the queen and us; we shall have need 
To employ you towards this Roman. Come, our queen. 

\Exeunt all but Cloten. 

Clo. If she be up, I '11 speak with her; if not. 
Let her lie still and dream. \^Knocks'\ By your leave, ho ! 
I know her women are about her: what 
If I do line one of their hands? 'T is gold 
Whicn buys admittance; oft it doth; yea, and makes 
Diana's rangers false themselves, yield up 
Their deer to the stand o' the stealer; and 'tis gold 
Which makes the true man kill'd and saves the thief; 70 
Nay, sometime hangs both thief and true man: what 
Can it not do and undo? I will make 
One of her women lawyer to me, for 
I yet not understand the case myself. 
\^Knocks^ By your leave. 

Enter a Lady. 

Lady. Who 's there that knocks? 

Clo. A gentleman. 

Lady. No more? 

Clo. Yes, and a gentlewoman's son. 

Lady. That 's more 



62 CYMBELINE [Act II 

Than some, whose tailors are as dear as yours, 

Can justly boast of. What 's your lordship's pleasure? 

Clo. Your lady's person: is she ready? 

Lady. Ay, 80 

To keep her chamber. 

Clo. There is gold for you ; 

Sell me your good report. 

Lady. How! my good name? or to report of you 
What I shall think is good? — The princess! 

Etiter Imogen. 

Clo. Good morrow, fairest: sister, your sweet hand. 

\Exit Lady. 

Lmo. Good morrow, sir. You lay out too much pains 
For purchasing but trouble: the thanks I give 
Is telling you that I am poor of thanks 
And scarce can spare them. 

Clo. Still, I swear I love you. 

Lmo. If you but said so, 'twere as deep with me: 90 

If you swear still, your recompense is still 
That I regard it not. 

Clo. This is no answer. 

lmo. But that you shall not say I yield being silent, 
I would not speak. I pray you, spare me: faith, 
I shall unfold equal discourtesy 
To your best kindness: one of your great knowing 
Should learn, being taught, forbearance. 

Clo. To leave you in your madness, 't were my sin : 
I will not. 

Lmo. Fools cure not mad folks. 

Clo. Do you call me fool? 100 

Lmo. As I am mad, I do: 
If you '11 be patient, I '11 no more be mad ; 
That cures us both. I am much sorry, sir, 
You put me to forget a lady's manners, 



Scenes.] CYMBELINE 63 

By being so verbal : and learn now, for all, 

That I, which know my heart, do here pronounce. 

By the very truth of it, I care not for you, 

And am so near the lack of charity — 

To accuse myself — I hate you; which I had rather 

You felt than make 't my boast. 

Clo. You sin against no 

Obedience, which you owe your father. For 
The contract you pretend with that base wretch, 
One bred of alms and foster'd with cold dishes. 
With scraps o' the court, it is no contract, none: 
And though it be allow'd in meaner parties — 
Yet who than he more mean? — to knit their souls. 
On whom there is no more dependency 
But brats and beggary, in self-figured knot; 
Yet you are curb'd from that enlargement by 
The consequence o' the crown, and must not soil 120 

The precious note of it with a base slave, 
A hilding for a livery, a squire's cloth, 
A pantler, not so eminent. 

Imo. Profane fellow ! 

Wert thou the son of Jupiter and no more 
But what thou art besides, thou wert too base 
To be his groom : thou wert dignified enough. 
Even to the point of envy, if 't were made 
Comparative for your virtues to be styled 
The under-hangman of his kingdom, and hated 
For being preferr'd so well. 

Clo. The south-fog rot him! 130 

Imo. He never can meet more mischance than come 
To be but named of thee. His meanest garment, 
That ever hath but clipp'd his body, is dearer 
In my respect than all the hairs above thee. 
Were they all made such men. How now, Pisanio! 



64 CYMBELINE [Act II. 

Enter Pisanio. 

Clo. ' His garment!' Now the devil — 

Imo. To Dorothy my woman hie thee presently — 

Clo. ' His garment ! ' 

Imo. I am sprited with a fool, 

Frighted, and anger'd worse: go bid my woman 
Search for a jewel that too casually 140 

Hath left mine arm: it was thy master's: 'shrew me, 
If I would lose it for a revenue 
Of any king's in Europe. I do think 
I saw't this morning: confident I am 
Last night 'twas on mine arm; I kiss'd it: 
I hope it be not gone to tell my lord 
That I kiss aught but he. 

Pis. 'T will not be lost. 

Imo. I hope so : go and search. \Exit Pisanio. 

Clo. You have abused me: 

'His meanest garment!' 

Imo. Ay, I said so, sir: 

If you will make 't an action, call witness to 't. 150 

Clo. I will inform your father. 

Imo. Your mother too: 

She 's my good lady, and will conceive, I hope, 
But the worst of me. So, I leave you, sir, 
To the worst of discontent. \Exit. 

Clo. I '11 be revenged : 

'His meanest garment!' Well. \Exit. 

Scene IV. Roju" Philarid's house. 
Efiter PosTHUMUS a?id Philario. 
Post. Fear it not, sir: I would I were so sure 
To win the king as I am bold her honour 
Will remain hers. 

Phi. What means do you make to him? 



Scene 4.] CYMBELINE 65 

Post. Not any, but abide the change of time, 
Quake in the present winter's state and wish 
That warmer days would come: in these feared hopes, 
I barely gratify your love; they failing, 
I must die much your debtor. 

Phi. Your very goodness and your company 
O'erpays all I can do. By this, your king 10 

Hath heard of great Augustus : Caius Lucius 
Will do's commission throughly: and I think 
He '11 grant'the tribute, send the arrearages. 
Or look upon our Romans, whose remembrance 
Is yet fresh in their grief. 

Post. I do believe, 

Statist though I am none, nor like to be, 
That this will prove a war; and you shall hear 
The legions now in Gallia sooner landed 
In our not-fearing Britain than have tidings 
Of any penny tribute paid. Our countrymen 20 

Are men more order'd than when Julius Caesar 
Smiled at their lack of skill, but found their courage 
Worthy his frowning at: their discipline, 
Now mingled with their courage, will make known 
To their approvers they are people such 
That mend upon the world. 

Enter Iachimo. 

Phi. See! Iachimo! 

Post. The swiftest harts have posted you by land: 
And winds of all the corners kiss'd your sails, 
To make your vessel nimble. 

Phi. Welcome, sir. 

Post. I hope the briefness of your answer made 30 

The speediness of your return. 

lach. Your lady 

Is one of the fairest that I have looked upon. 

3 (mS32) 



66 CYMBELINE [Act II. 

Post. And therewithal the best: or let her beauty 
Look through a casement to allure false hearts 
And be false with them. 

lach. Here are letters for you. 

Post. Their tenour good, I trust. 

lack. 'T is very like. 

Phi. Was Caius Lucius in the Britain court 
When you were there? 

lach. He was expected then, 

But not approach'd. 

Post. All is well yet. 

Sparkles this stone as it was wont? or is 't not 40 

Too dull for your good wearing? 

lach. If I had lost it, 

I should have lost the worth of it in gold. 
I '11 make a journey twice as far, to enjoy 
A second night of such sweet shortness which 
Was mine in Britain, for the ring is won. 

Post. The stone 's too hard to come by. 

lach. Not a whit, 

Your lady being so easy. 

Post. Make not, sir, 

Your loss your sport: I hope you know that we 
Must not continue friends. 

lach. Good sir, we must. 

If you keep covenant. Had I not brought 50 

The knowledge of your mistress home, I grant 
We were to question further: but I now 
Profess myself the winner of her honour, 
Together with your ring; and not the wronger 
"Of her or you, having proceeded but 
By both your wills. 

Post. If you can make 't apparent. 

My hand 
And ring is yours; if not, the foul opinion 



Scene 4.] CYMBELINE 67 

You had of her pure honour gains or loses 

Your sword or mine, or masterless leaves both 60 

To who shall find them. 

lack. Sir, my circumstances, 

Being so near the truth as I will make them, 
Must first induce you to believe: whose strength 
I will confirm with oath; which, I doubt not, 
You '11 give me leave to spare, when you shall find 
You need it not. 

Post. Proceed. 

lach. First, her bedchamber, — 

Where, I confess, I slept not, but profess 
Had that was well worth watching — it was hang'd 
With tapestry of silk and silver; the story 
Proud Cleopatra, when she met her Roman, 70 

And Cydnus swell'd above the banks, or for 
The press of boats or pride : a piece of work 
So bravely done, so rich, that it did strive 
In workmanship and value; which I wonder'd 
Could be so rarely and exactly wrought, 
Since the true life on 't was— 

Post. This is true; 

And this you might have heard of here, by me. 
Or by some other. 

lack. More particulars 

Must justify my knowledge. 

Post. So they must, 

Or do your honour injury. 

lach. The chimney 80 

Is south the chamber, and the chimney-piece 
Chaste Dian bathing: never saw I figures 
So likely to report themselves: the cutter 
Was as another nature, dumb; outwent her, 
Motion and breath left out. 

Post. This is a thing 



68 CYMBELINE [Act II. 

Which you might from relation likewise reap, 
Being, as it is, much spoke of. 

lack. The roof o' the chamber 

With golden cherubins is fretted : her andirons — 
I had forgot them — were two winking Cupids 
Of silver, each on one foot standing, nicely 90 

Depending on their brands. 

Post. This is her honour! 

Let it be granted you have seen all this — and praise 
Be given to your remembrance- — the description 
Of what is in her chamber nothing saves 
The wager you have laid. 

lach. Then, if you can, 

\Showi71g the bracelet. 
Be pale: I beg you leave to air this jewel; see! 
And now 't is up again : it must be married 
To that your diamond; I '11 keep them. 

Post. Jove ! 

Once more let me behold it: is it that 
Which I left with her? 

lack. Sir — I thank her — that: 100 

She stripp'd it from her arm; I see her yet; 
Her pretty action did outsell her gift, 
And yet enrich'd it too: she gave it me, and said 
She prized it once. 

Post. May be she pluck'd it off, 

To send it me. 

lach. She writes so to you, doth she? 

Post. O, no, no, no! 'tis true. Here, take this too; 

\Gives the ring. 
It is a basilisk unto mine eye, 
Kills me to look on 't. Let there be no honour 
Where there is beauty; truth, where semblance; love, 
W^here there 's another man : the vows of women no 

Of no more bondage be, to where they are made, 



Scene 4.] CYMBELINE 69 

Than they are to their virtues; which is nothing. 
O, above measure false! 

Phi. Have patience, sir, 

And take your ring again : 't is not yet won : 
It may be probable she lost it; or 
Who knows if one of her women, being corrupted, 
Hath stol'n it from her? 

Post. Very true; 

And so, I hope, he came by't. Back my ring: 
Render to me some corporal sign about her, 
More evident than this; for this was stolen. 120 

lach. By Jupiter, I had it from her arm. 

Post. Hark you, he swears; by Jupiter he swears. 
'Tis true: — nay, keep the ring — 'tis true: I am sure 
She would not lose it: her attendants are 
All sworn and honourable: — they induced to steal it! 
And by a stranger! — No, he hath enjoy'd her. 
There, take thy hire; and all the fiends of heli 
Divide themselves between you ! 

Phi, Sir, be patient: 

This is not strong enough to be believed 
Of one persuaded well of — 130 

Post. Never talk on 't. 

lach. If you seek 

For further satisfying, under her breast — 
Worthy the pressing — lies a mole, right proud 
Of that most delicate lodging : by my life, 
I kiss'd it; and it gave me present hunger 
To feed again, though full. You do remember 
This stain upon her? 

Post. Ay, and it doth confirm 

Another stain, as big as hell can hold. 
Were there no more but it. 

Jach. Will you hear more? 

Post. Spare your arithmetic: never count the turns; 140 



70 



CYMBELINE [Act II. Sc. 5. 



Once, and a million ! 

lach. I '11 be sworn — 

Post. No swearing. 

If you will swear you have not done 't, you lie. 
O, that I had her here, to tear her limb-meal! 
I will go there and do 't — i' the court — before 
Her father. I '11 do something — \Exii. 

Phi. Quite besides 

The government of patience! You have won: 
Let 's follow him, and pervert the present wrath 
He hath against himself. 

lach. With all my heart. \Exeum. 

Scene V. Another room in Philarids housi. 

Enter Posthumus. 

Post. Could I find out 
The woman's part in me! For there 's no motion 
That tends to vice in man, but I afifirm 
It is the woman's part: be it lying, note it, 
The woman's; flattering, hers; deceiving, hers; 
Lust and rank thoughts, hers, hers; revenges, hers; 
Ambitions, covetings, change of prides, disdain, 
Nice longing, slanders, mutability, 
All faults that may be named, nay, that hell knows, 
Why, hers, in part or all; but rather, all; 10 

For even to vice 

They are not constant, but are changing still 
One vice, but of a minute old, for one 
Not half so old as that. I '11 write against them, 
Detest them, curse them : yet 't is greater skill 
In a true hate, to pray they have their will: 
The very devils cannot plague them better. \Extt. 



Act III. Sc. I.] CYMBELINE 71 

ACT III. 
Scene I. Britain. A hall i?i Cymbeline's palace. 

Enter in state, Cymbeline, Queen, Cloten, and Lords, 
at one door, and at another, Caius Lucius and Atten- 
dants. 

Cyjn. Now say, what would Augustus Caesar with us? 

Luc. When JuUus Caesar, whose remembrance yet 
Lives in men's eyes, and will to ears and tongues 
Be theme and hearing ever, was in this Britain 
And conquer'd it, Cassibelan, thine uncle, — 
Famous in Caesar's praises, no whit less 
Than in his feats deserving it — for him 
And his succession granted Rome a tribute. 
Yearly three thousand pounds, which by thee lately 
Is left untender'd. 

Queen. And, to kill the marvel, 10 

Shall be so ever. 

Clo. There be many Caesars, 

Ere such another Julius. Britain is 
A world by itself; and we will nothing pay 
For wearing our own noses. 

Queen. That opportunity 

Which then they had to take from 's, to resume 
We have again. Remember, sir, my liege. 
The kings your ancestors, together with 
The natural bravery of your isle, which stands 
As Neptune's park, ribbed and paled in 
With rocks unscalable and roaring waters, 20 

With sands that will not bear your enemies' boats, 
But suck them up to the topmast. A kind of conquest 
Caesar made here; but made not here his brag 
Of ' Came ' and ' saw ' and ' overcame ' : with shame — 



72 CYMBELINE [Act III. 

The first that ever touch'd him — he was carried 

From off our coast, twice beaten ; and his shipping — 

Poor ignorant baubles! — on our terrible seas, 

Like egg-shells moved upon their surges, crack'd 

As easily 'gainst our rocks: for joy whereof 

The famed Cassibelan, who was once at point — 30 

O giglot fortune ! — to master Caesar's sword. 

Made Lud's town with rejoicing fires bright 

And Britons strut with courage. 

Clo. Come, there 's no more tribute to be paid: our king- 
dom is stronger than it was at that time; and, as I said, there 
is no moe such Caesars: other of them may have crook'd 
noses, but to owe such straight arms, none. 

Cytn. Son, let your mother end. 38 

Clo. We have yet many among us can gripe as hard as 
Cassibelan: I do not say I am one; but I have a hand. Why 
tribute? why should we pay tribute? If Caesar can hide the 
sun from us with a blanket, or put the moon in his pocket, we 
will pay him tribute for light; else, sir, no more tribute, pray 
you nov;. 

Cym. You must know, 
Till the injurious Romans did extort 
This tribute from us, we were free: Caesar's ambition, 
Which swell'd so much that it did almost stretch 
The sides o' the world, against all colour here 
Did put the yoke upon's; which to shake off 50 

Becomes a warlike people, whom we reckon 
Ourselves to be. 

Clo. We do. 

Cym. Say, then, to Caesar, 

Our ancestor was that Mulmutius which 
Ordain'd our laws, whose use the sword of Caesar 
Hath too much mangled; whose repair and franchise 
Shall, by the power we hold, be our good deed. 
Though Rome be therefore angry: Mulmutius made our laws. 



Scene i.] CYMBELINE 73 

Who was the first of Britain which did put 
His brows within a golden crown and call'd 
Himself a king. 

Luc. I am sorry, Cymbeline, 60 

That I am to pronounce Augustus Caesar — 
Cccsar, that hath more kings his servants than 
Thyself domestic officers — thine enemy; 
Receive it from me, then : war and confusion 
In Caesar's name pronounce I 'gainst thee: look 
For fury not to be resisted. Thus defied, 
I thank thee for myself. 

Cym. Thou art welcome, Caius. 

Thy Caesar knighted me; my youth I spent 
Much under him; of him I gather'd honour; 
Which hf to seek of me again, perforce, 70 

Behoves me keep at utterance. I am perfect 
That the Pannonians and Dalmatians for 
Their liberties are now in arms; a precedent 
Which not to read would show the Britons cold : 
So Caesar shall not find them. 

Luc. Let proof speak. 

Clo. His m.ajesty bids you weicome. Make pastime with 
us a day or two, or longer : if you seek us afterwards in other 
terms, you shall find us in our salt-water girdle: if you beat 
us out of it, it is yours; if you fall in the adventure, our crows 
shall fare the better for you; and there's an end. 80 

Luc. So, sir. 

Cym. I know your master's pleasure and he mine: 
All the remain is ' Welcome ! ' \Exeunt. 



3» 



(M 332) 



74 CYMBELINE [Act III. 

Scene II. Another roo?n in the palace. 

Enter Pisanio, with a letter. 

Pis. How! of adultery? Wherefore write you not 
What monster's her accuser? Leonatus! 

master! what a strange infection 

Is fall'n into thy ear! What false Italian, 

As poisonous-tongued as handed, hath prevail'd 

On thy too ready hearing? Disloyal! No: 

She 's punish'd for her truth, and undergoes, 

More goddess-Hke than wife-like, such assaults 

As would take in some virtue. O my master! 

Thy mind to her is now as low as were lo 

Thy fortunes. How ! that I should murder her. 

Upon the love and truth and vows which I 

Have made to thy command? I, her? her blood? 

If it be so to do good service, never 

Let me be counted serviceable. How look I, 

That I should seem to lack humanity 

So much as this fact comes to? ' Do "t: the letter 

That I have sent her, by her own command 

Shall give thee opportunity.' O damn'd paper! 

Black as the ink that 's on thee 1 Senseless bauble, 20 

Art thou a feodary for this act, and look'st 

So virgin-like without? Lo, here she comes. 

1 am ignorant in what I am commanded. 

Etiter Imogen. 

Imo. How now, Pisanio! 

Pis. Madam, here is a letter from my lord. 

I?no. Who? thy lord? that is my lord, Leonatu? 
O, learn'd indeed were that astronomer 
That knew the stars as I his characters; 
He 'Id lay the future open. You good gods, 



Scene 2.] CYMBELINE 75 

Let what is here contain'd relish of love, 30 

Of my lord's health, of his content, yet not 

That we two are asunder; let that grieve him: 

Some griefs are med'cinable; that is one of them, 

For it doth physic love : of his content, 

AH but in that! Good wax, thy leave. Blest be 

You bees that make these locks of counsel ! Lovers 

And men in dangerous bonds pray not alike: 

Though forfeiters you cast in prison, yet 

You clasp young Cupid's tables. Good news, godsi 39 

[J?eads'\ ' Justice, and your father's wrath, should he take 
me in his dominion, could not be so cruel to me, as you, O 
the dearest of creatures, would even renew me with your eyes. 
Take notice that I am in Cambria, at Milford-Haven : what 
your own love will out of this advise you, follow. So he 
wishes you all happiness, that remains loyal to his vow, and 
your, increasing in love, Leonatus Posthumus.' 

O, for a horse with wings! Hear'st thou, Pisanio? 

He is at Milford-Haven : read, and tell me 

How far 't is thither. If one of mean affairs 

May plod it in a week, why may not I 50 

Glide thither in a day? Then, true Pisanio, — 

Who long'st, like me, to see thy lord; who long'st, — 

O, let me bate, — but not like me — yet long'st. 

But in a fainter kind: — O, not like me; 

For mine's beyond beyond: say, and speak thick — 

Love's counsellor should fill the bores of hearing, 

To the smothering of the sense — how far it is 

To this same blessed Milford : and by the way 

Tell me how Wales was made so happy as 

To inherit such a haven : but first of all, 60 

How we may steal from hence, and for the gap 

That we shall make in time, from our hencegoing 

And our return, to excuse: but first, how get hence: 



76 CYMBELINE [Act IIL 

Why should excuse be born or ere begot? 
We '11 talk of that hereafter. Prithee, speak, 
How many score of miles may we well ride 
'Twixt hour and hour? 

Pis. One score 'twixt sun and sun, 

Madam, 's enough for you : [Aside] and too much too. 

/mo. Why, one that rode to 's execution, man. 
Could never go so slow: I have heard of riding wagers, 70 
Where horses have been nimbler than the sands 
That run i' the clock's behalf. But this is foolery: 
Go bid my woman feign a sickness; say 
She '11 home to her father : and provide me presently 
A riding-suit, no costlier than would fit 
A franklin's housewife. 

Pis. Madam, you 're best consider. 

Imo. I see before me, man: nor here, nor here, 
Nor what ensues, but have a fog in them. 
That I cannot look through. Away, I prithee; 
Do as I bid thee: there 's no more to say; 80 

Accessible is none but Milford way. [^Exeunt 



Scene III. Wales: a mountainous country wiih a cave. 

Enter, from the cave, Belarius; Guiderius, 
and Arviragus following. 

Bel. A goodly day not to keep house, with such 
Whose roof's as low as ours! Stoop, boys; this gate 
Instructs you how to adore the heavens and bows you 
To a morning's holy ofifice : the gates of monarchs 
Are arch'd so high that giants may jet through 
And keep their impious turbans on, without 
Good morrow to the sun. Hail, thou fair heaven! 
We house i' the rock, yet use thee not so hardly 
As prouder livers do. 



Scene 3.] CYMBELINE 77 

Gui. Hail, heaven! 

Arv. Hail, heaven! 

Bel. Now for our mountain sport: up to yond hill: 10 
Your legs are young; I '11 tread these flats. Consider, 
When you above perceive me like a crow. 
That it is place which lessens and sets off: 
And you may then revolve what tales I have told you 
Of courts, of princes, of the tricks in war: 
This service is not service, so being done. 
But being so allow'd: to apprehend thus, 
Draws us a profit from all things we see; 
And often, to our comfort, shall we find 
The sharded beetle in a safer hold 20 

Than is the fuU-wing'd eagle. O, this life 
Is nobler than attending for a check, 
Richer than doing nothing for a bribe, 
Prouder than rustling in unpaid-for silk: 
Such gain the cap of him that makes 'em fine. 
Yet keeps his book uncross'd: no life to ours. 

Gui. Out of your proof you speak : we, poor unfledged. 
Have never wing'd from view o' the nest, nor know not 
What air 's from home. Haply this life is best, 
If quiet life be best; sweeter to you 30 

That have a sharper known ; well corresponding 
With your stiff age : but unto us it is 
A cell of ignorance; travelling a-bed; 
A prison for a debtor, that not dares 
To stride a limit. 

Arv. What should we speak of 

When ws are old as you? When we shall hear 
The rain and wind beat dark December, how, 
In this our pinching cave, shall we discourse 
The freezing hours away? We have seen nothing; 
We are beastly, subtle as the fox for prey, 40 

Like warlike as the wolf for what we eat; 



78 CYMBELINE [Act III. 

Our valour is to chase what flies; our cage 
We make a quire, as doth the prison'd bird, 
And sing our bondage freely. 

Bel. How you speak ! 

Did you but know the city's usuries 
And felt them knowingly; the art o' the court, 
As hard to leave as keep; whose top to climb 
Is certain falling, or so slippery that 
The fear's as bad as falling; the toil o' the war, 
A pain that only seems to seek out danger 50 

r the name of fame and honour, which dies i' the search. 
And hath as oft a slanderous epitaph 
As record of fair act; nay, many times, 
Doth ill deserve by doing well; what's worse. 
Must court'sy at the censure : — O boys, this story 
The world may read in me : my body 's mark'd 
With Roman swords, and my report was once 
First with the best of note: Cymbeline loved me. 
And when a soldier was the theme, my name 
Was not far off: then was I as a tree 60 

Whose boughs did bend with fruit: but in one night, 
A storm or robbery, call it what you will, 
Shook down my mellow hangings, nay, my leaves, 
And left me bare to weather. 

Gtii. Uncertain favour! 

Bel. My fault being nothing — as I have told you oft — 
But that two villains, whose false oaths prevail'd 
Before my perfect honour, swore to Cymbeline 
I was confederate with the Romans: so 
FoUow'd my banishment, and this twenty years 
This rock and these demesnes have been my world; 70 

Where I have lived at honest freedom, paid 
More pious debts to heaven than in all 
The fore-end of my time. But up to the mountains 
This is not hunters' language: he that strikes 



Scene 3.] CYMBELINE 79 

The venison first shall be the lord o' the feast; 

To him the other two shall minister; 

And we will fear no poison, which attends 

In place of greater state. I '11 meet you in the valleys. 

[Exetini Gidderius and Arviragus, 
How hard it is to hide the sparks of nature ! 
These boys know little they are sons to the king; 80 

Nor Cymbeline dreams that they are alive. 
They think they are mine; and though train'd up thus meanly 
r the cave wherein they bow, their thoughts do hit 
The roofs of palaces, and nature prompts them 
In simple and low things to prince it much 
Beyond the trick of others. This Polydore, 
The heir of Cymbeline and Britain, who 
The king his father call'd Guiderius, — Jove! 
When on my three-foot stool I sit and tell 
The warlike feats I have done, his spirits fly out 90 

Into my story: say 'Thus mine enemy fell. 
And thus I set my foot on 's neck'; even then 
The princely blood flows in his cheek, he sweats. 
Strains his young nerves and puts himself in posture 
That acts my words. The younger brother, Cadwal, 
Once Arviragus, in as like a figure. 
Strikes life into my speech and shows much more 
His own conceiving. — Hark, the game is roused! — 
O Cymbeline ! heaven and my conscience knows 
Thou didst unjustly banish me: whereon, 100 

At three and two years old, I stole these babes: 
Thinking to bar thee of succession, as 
Thou reft'st me of my lands. Euriphile, 
Thou wast their nurse; they took thee for their mother. 
And every day do honour to her grave : 
Myself, Belarius, that am Morgan call'd. 
They take for natural father. The game is up. \Exit. 



8o CYMBELINE [Act III. 

Scene IV. Country near Milford-Haven. 

Enter Pisanio and Imogen. 

l7no. Thou told'st me, when we came from horse, the place 
Was near at hand : ne'er long'd my mother so 
To see me first, as I have now. Pisanio! man! 
Where is Posthumus? What is in thy mind, 
That makes thee stare thus? Wherefore breaks that sigh 
From the inward of thee? One, but painted thus, 
Would be interpreted a thing perplex'd 
Beyond self-explication : put thyself 
Into a haviour of less fear, ere wildness 
Vanquish my staider senses. What 's the matter? lo 

Why tender'st thou that paper to me, with 
A look untender? If't be summer news, 
Smile to't before; if winterly, thou need'st 
But keep that countenance still. My husband's hand! 
That drug-damn'd Italy hath out-craftied him, 
And he 's at some hard point. Speak, man : thy tongue 
May take off some extremity, which to read 
Would be even mortal to me. 

Pis. Please you, read; 

And you shall find me, wretched man, a thing 
The most disdain'd of fortune. 20 

Imo. \Reads\ 'Thy mistress, Pisanio, hath played the 
strumpet in my bed; the testimonies whereof lie bleeding in 
me. I speak not out of weak surmises, but from proof as 
strong as my grief and as certain as I expect my revenge. 
That part thou, Pisanio, must act for me, if thy faith be not 
tainted with the breach of hers. Let thine own hands take 
away her life: I shall give thee opportunity at Milford-Haven. 
She hath my letter for the purpose: where if thou fear to 
strike and to make me certain it is done, thou art the pandar 
to her dishonour and equally to me disloyal.' 30 



Scene 4.] CYMBELINE 81 

Pis. What shall I need to draw my sword? the 
paper 
Hath cut her throat already. No, 't is slander, 
Whose edge is sharper than the sword, whose tongue 
Outvenoms all the worms of Nile, whose breath 
Rides on the posting winds and doth belie 
All corners of the world : kings, queens and states,, 
Maids, matrons, nay, the secrets of the grave 
This viperous slander enters. What cheer, madam? 

Imo. False to his bed! What is it to be false? 
To lie in watch there and to think on him? 40 

To weep 'twixt clock and clock? if sleep charge nature, 
To break it with a fearful dream of him 
And cry myself awake? that 's false to 's bed, is it? 

Pis. Alas, good lady! 

Imo. I false! Thy conscience witness. lachimo 
Thou didst accuse him of incontinency; 
Thou then look'dst like a villain; now methinks 
Thy favour 's <^ood enough. Some jay of Italy, 
Whose mother was her painting, hath betray'd him: 
Poor I am stale, a garment out of fashion ; 50 

And, for I am richer than to hang by the walls, 
I must be ripp'd: — to pieces with me! — O, 
Men's vows are women's traitors ! All good seeming. 
By thy revolt, O husband, shall be thought 
Put on for villany; not born where 't grows, 
But worn a bait for ladies. 

Pis. Good madam, hear me. 

Imo. True honest men being heard, like false ^neas, 
Were in his time thought false, and Sinon's weeping 
Did scandal many a holy tear, took pity 
From most true wretchedness : so thou, Posthumus, 6e 

Wilt lay the leaven on all proper men; 
Goodly and gallant shall be false and perjured 
From thy great fail. Come, fellow, be thou honest: 



82 CYMBELINE [Act III 

Do thou thy master's bidding: when thou see'st him, 

A little witness my obedience: look! 

I draw the sword myself: take it, and hit 

The innocent mansion of my love, my heart: 

Fear not; 'tis empty of all things but grief: 

Thy master is not there, who was indeed 

The riches of it: do his bidding; strike. 70 

Thou mayst be valiant in a better cause; 

But now thou seem'st a coward. 

Pis. Hence, vile instrument! 

Thou shalt not damn my hand. 

Into. Why, I must die; 

And if I do not by thy hand, thou art 
No servant of thy master's. Against self-slaughter 
There is a prohibition so divine 

That cravens my weak hand. Come, here 's my heart, 
Something's afore 't. Soft, soft! we'll no defence; 
Obedient as the scabbard. What is here? 
The scriptures of the loyal Leonatus, 80 

All turn'd to heresy? Away, away. 
Corrupters of my faith ! you shall no more 
Be stomachers to my heart. Thus may poor fools 
Believe false teachers. Though those that are betray'd 
Do feel the treason sharply, yet the traitor 
Stands in worse case of woe. 
And thou, Posthumus, thou that didst set up 
My disobedience 'gainst the king my father, 
And make me put into contempt the suits 
Of princely fellows, shalt hereafter find 90 

It is no act of common passage, but 
A strain of rareness : and I grieve myself 
To think, when thou shalt be disedged by her 
That now thou tirest on, how thy memory 
Will then be pang'd by me. Prithee, dispatch : 
The lamb entreats the butcher: where 's thy knife? 



Scene 4.] CYMBELINE 83 

Thou art too slow to do thy master's bidding, 
When I desire it too. 

Pis. O gracious lady, 

Since I received command to do this business 
I have not slept one wink. 

Imo. Do't, and to bed then. 100 

Pis. I '11 wake mine eye-balls blind first. 

Imo. Wherefore then 

Didst undertake it? Why hast thou abused 
So many miles with a pretence? this place? 
Mine action and thine own? our horses' labour? 
The time inviting thee? the perturb'd court 
For my being absent? whereunto I never 
Purpose return. Why hast thou gone so far, 
To be unbent when thou hast ta'en thy stand, 
The elected deer before thee? 

Pis. But to win time 

To lose so bad employment; in the which 110 

I have consider'd of a course. Good lady, 
Hear me with patience. 

Into. Talk thy tongue weary; speak: 

I have heard I am a strumpet; and mine ear, 
Therein false struck, can take no greater wound. 
Nor tent to bottom that. But speak. 

Pis. Then, madam, 

I thought you would not back again. 

Into. Most like. 

Bringing me here to kill me. 

Pis. Not so, neither: 

But if I were as wise as honest, then 
My purpose would prove well. It cannot be 
But that my master is abused: 120 

Some villain, ay, and singular in his art. 
Hath done you both this cursed injury. 

Imo. Some Roman courtezan. 



84 CYMBELINE [Act III. 

Pis. No, on my life. 

I '11 give but notice you are dead and send him 
Some bloody sign of it; for 'tis commanded 
I should do so: you shall be miss'd at court, 
And that will well confirm it; — 

Into. Why, good fellow, 

What shall I do the while? where bide? how live? 
Or in my life what comfort, when I am 
Dead to my husband? 

Pis. If you '11 back to the court — 130 

Jmo. No court, no father; nor no more ado 
With that harsh, noble, simple nothing. 
That Cloten, whose love-suit hath been to me 
As fearful as a siege. 

Pis. If not at courts 

Then not in Britain must you bide 

Into. Where then? 

Hath Britain all the sun that shines? Day, night. 
Are they not but in Britain? I' the world's volume 
Our Britain seems as of it, but not in 't; 
In a great pool a swan's nest: prithee, think 
There 's livers out of Britain. 

Pis. I am most glad 140 

You think of other place. The ambassador, 
Lucius the Roman, comes to Milford-Haven 
To-morrow : now, if you could wear a mind 
Dark as your fortune is, and but disguise 
That which, to appear itself, must not yet be 
But by self-danger, you should tread a course 
Pretty and full of view; yea, haply, near 
The residence of Posthumus; so nigh at least 
That though his actions were not visible, yet 
Report should render him hourly to your ear 150 

As truly as he moves. 

Imo. O, for such means! 



Scene 4.] CYMBELINE 85 

Though peril to my modesty, not death on 't, 
I would adventure. 

Pis. Well, then, here 's the point : 

You must forget to be a woman; change 
Command into obedience: fear and niceness — 
The handmaids of all women, or, more truly, 
Woman it pretty self — into a waggish courage; 
Ready in gibes, quick-answer'd, saucy and 
As quarrelous as the weasel; nay, you must 
Forget that rarest treasure of your cheek, 160 

Exposing it — but, O, the harder heart! 
Alack, no remedy ! — to the greedy touch 
Of common-kissing Titan, and forget 
Your laboursome and dainty trims, wherein 
You made great Juno angry. 

Imo. Nay, be brief: 

I see into thy end, and am almost 
A man already. 

Pis. First, make yourself but like one. 

Fore-thinking this, I have already fit — 
'T is in my cloak-bag — doublet, hat, hose, all 
That answer to them: would you in their serving, 170 

And with what imitation you can borrow 
From youth of such a season, 'fore noble Lucius 
Present yourself, desire his service, tell him 
Wherein you 're happy, — which you '11 make him know, 
If that his head have ear in music, — doubtless 
With joy he will embrace you, for he 's honourable. 
And doubling that, most holy. Your means abroad. 
You have me, rich; and I will never fail 
Beginning nor supplyment. 

Imo. Thou art all the comfort 

The gods will diet me with. Prithee, away: 180 

There 's more to be consider'd ; but we '11 even 
All that good time will give us: this attempt 



86 CYMBELINE [Act III. 

I am soldier to, and will abide it with 
A prince's courage. Away, I prithee. 

Pis. Well, madam, we must take a short farewell. 
Lest, being miss'd, I be suspected of 
Your carriage from the court. My noble mistress, 
Here is a box; I had it from the queen: 
What 's in 't is precious; if you are sick at sea, 
Or stomach-qualm'd at land, a dram of this 190 

Will drive away distemper. To some shade. 
And fit you to your manhood. May the gods 
Direct you to the best! 

Imo. Amen: I thank thee. \Exeunt, severally. 

Scene V. A room in Cymbeline' s palace. 

Enter Cymbeline, Queen, Cloten, Lucius, Lords, and 
Attendants. 

Cym. Thus far; and so farewell. 

Luc. Thanks, royal sir. 

My emperor hath wrote, I must from hence; 
And am right sorry that I must report ye 
My master's enemy. 

Cym. Our subjects, sir, 

Will not endure his yoke; and for ourself 
To show less sovereignty than they, must needs 
Appear unkinglike. 

Luc. So, sir; I desire of you 

A conduct over-land to Milford-Haven. 
Madam, all joy befal your grace and you! 

Cym. My lords, you are appointed for that office; io 

The due of honour in no point omit. 
So farewell, noble Lucius. 

Luc. Your hand, my lord. 

Clo. Receive it friendly; but from this time forth 
I wear it as your enemy. 



Scene 5.] CYMBELINE 87 

Luc, Sir, the event 

Is yet to name the winner: fare you well. 

Cym. Leave not the worthy Lucius, good my lords, 
Till he have cross'd the Severn. Happiness! 

\E.xeunt Lucius a?id Lords 

Queen, He goes hence frowning: but it honours us 
That we have given him cause. 

Clo, 'Tis all the better; 

Your valiant Britons have their wishes in it. 20 

Cym. Lucius hath wrote already to the emperor 
How it goes here. It fits us therefore ripely 
Our chariots and our horsemen be in readiness: 
The powers that he already hath in Gallia 
Will soon be drawn to head, from whence he moves 
His war for Britain. 

Qiceen. 'T is not sleepy business; 

But must be look'd to speedily and strongly. 

Cym. Our expectation that it would be thus 
Hath made us forward. But, my gentle queen, 
Where is our daughter? She hath not appear'd 30 

Before the Roman, nor to us hath tender'd 
The duty of the day : she looks us like 
A thing more made of malice than of duty: 
We have noted it. Call her before us; for 
We have been too slight in sufferance. \^Exit an Attendant. 

Queen. Royal sir, 

Since the exile of Posthumus, most retired 
Hath her life been; the cure whereof, my lord, 
'Tis time must do. Beseech your majesty, 
Forbear sharp speeches to her: she's a lady 
So tender of rebukes that words are strokes 40 

And strokes death to her. 



88 CYMBELINE [Act III. 

Re-enter Attendant. 

Cym. Where is she, sir? How 

Can her contempt be answer'd? 

Atten. Please you, sir, 

Her chambers are all lock'd; and there's no answer 
That will be given to the loud'st of noise we make. 

Qiieen. My lord, when last I went to visit her, 
She pray'd me to excuse her keeping close, 
Whereto constrain'd by her infirmity. 
She should that duty leave unpaid to you. 
Which daily she was bound to proffer: this 
She wish'd me to make known; but our great court 50 

Made me to blame in memory. 

Cym. Her doors lock'd? 

Not seen of late? Grant, heavens, that which I fear 
Prove false ! [Exit. 

Queeti. Son, I say, follow the king. 

Cio. That man of hers, Pisanio, her old servant, 
I have not seen these two days. 

Queeti. Go, look after. \Exit Cloten. 

Pisanio, thou that stand'st so for Posthumus! 
He hath a drug of mine; I pray his absence 
Proceed by swallowing that, for he believes 
It is a thing most precious. But for her. 
Where is she gone? Haply, despair hath seized her, 60 
Or, wing'd with fervour of her love, she 's flown 
To her desired Posthumus: gone she is 
To death or to dishonour; and my end 
Can make good use of either: she being down, 
I have the placing of the British crown. 

Re-enter Cloten. 

How now, my son? 

Clo. 'T is certain she is fled. 



Scene 5.] CYMBELINE 89 

Go in and cheer the king: he rages; none 
Dare come about him. 

Queeti. [Aside] All the better: may 
This night forestall him of the coming day ! [Exif. 

Clo. I love and hate her: for she 's fair and royal, 70 

And that she hath all courtly parts more exquisite 

Than lady, ladies, woman; from every one 

The best she hath, and she, of all compounded, 

Outsells them all; I love her therefore: but 

Disdaining me and throwing favours on 

The low Posthumus slanders so her judgement 

That what 's else rare is choked ; and in that point 

I will conclude to hate her, nay, indeed. 

To be revenged upon her. For when fools 

Shall— 

Enter Pisanio. 

Who is here? What, are you packing, sirrah? 80 
Come hither: ah, you precious pandar! Villain, 
Where is thy lady? In a word; or else 
Thou art straightway with the fiends. 

Pis. O, good my lord! 

Clo. Where is thy lady? or, by Jupiter, — 
I will not ask again. Close villain, 
I '11 have this secret from thy heart, or rip 
Thy heart to find it. Is she with Posthumus? 
From whose so many weights of baseness cannot 
A dram of worth be drawn. 

Pis. Alas, my lord, 

How can she be with him? When was she miss'd? 90 

He is in Rome. 

Clo. Where is she, sir? Come nearer; 

No farther halting : satisfy me home 
What is become of her. 

Pis. O, my all-worthy lord ! 

Clo. All-worthy villain! 



90 CYMBELINE [Act III. 

Discover where thy mistress is at once, 
At the next word: no more of ' worthy lord'! 
Speak, or thy silence on the instant is 
Thy condemnation and thy death. 

Fis. Then, sir, 

This paper is the history of my knowledge 
Touching her flight. ^Presenting a tetter. 

Clo. Let's see't. I will pursue her loo 

Even to Augustus' throne. 

Pis. [Aside] Or this, or perish. 

She's far enough; and what he learns by this 
May prove his travel, not her danger. 

C/o. Hum ! 

Pis. [Aside] I '11 write to my lord she 's dead. O Imogen, 
Safe mayst thou wander, safe return again! 

Cio. Sirrah, is this letter true! 

Pis. Sir, as I think. 107 

Cio. It is Posthumus' hand; I know't. Sirrah, if thou 
wouldst not be a villain, but do me true service, undergo 
those employments wherein I should have cause to use thee 
with a serious industry, that is, what villany soe'er I bid thee 
do, to perform it directly and truly, I would think thee an 
honest man: thou shouldst neither want my means for thy 
relief nor my voice for thy preferment. 114 

Pis. Well, my good lord. 

Cio. Wilt thou serve me? for since patiently and constantly 
thou hast stuck to the bare fortune of that beggar Posthumus, 
tnou canst not, in the course of gratitude, but be a diligent 
follower of mine: wilt thou serve me? 

Pis. Sir, I will. 120 

Cio. Give me thy hand; here 's my purse. Hast any of thy 
late master's garments in thy possession? 

Pis. I have, my lord, at my lodging, the same suit he wore 
when he took leave of my lady and mistress. 



Scene 5.] CYMBELINE 91 

Clo. The first service thou dost me, fetch that suit hither: 
let it be thy first service ; go. 

Pis. I shall, my lord. [Exit. 127 

Clo. Meet thee at Milford-Haven ! — I forgot to ask him 
one thing: I'll remember 't anon: — even there, thou villain 
Posthumus, will I kill thee. I would these garments were 
come. She said upon a time — the bitterness of it I now 
belch from my heart — that she held the very garment of 
Posthumus in more respect than my noble and natural person, 
together with the adornment of my quaUties. With that suit 
upon my back, will I ravish her: first kill him, and in her eyes; 
there shall she see my valour, which will then be a torment 
to her contempt. He on the ground, my speech of insultment 
ended on his dead body, to the court I 'II knock her back, foot 
her home again. She hath despised me rejoicingly, and I '11 
be merry in my revenge. ^4° 

Re-enter Pisanio, with the clothes. 

Be those the garments? 

Pis. Ay, my noble lord. 

Clo. How long is't since she went to Milford-Haven? 

Pis. She can scarce be there yet. 

Clo. Bring this apparel to my chamber; that is the second 
thing that I have commanded thee: the third is, that thou wilt 
be a voluntary mute to my design. Be but duteous, and true 
preferment shall tender itself to thee. My revenge is now at 
Milford: would I had wings to follow it! Come, and be 
true. \Exit. 150 

Pis. Thou bid'st me to my loss: for true to thee 
Were to prove false, which I will never be, 
To him that is most true. To Milford go. 
And find not her whom thou pursuest. Flow, flow, 
You heavenly blessings, on her! This fool's speed 
Be cross'd with slowness; labour be his meed! \_Exit 



92 CYMBELINE [Act III. 

Scene VI. Wales. Before the cave of Belarius. 

Enter Imogen, in boy's clothes. 

/mo. I see a man's life is a tedious one: 
I have tired myself, and for two nights together 
Have made the ground my bed. I should be sick, 
But that my resolution helps me. Milford, 
When from the mountain-top Pisanio show'd thee, 
Thou wast within a ken : O Jove ! I think 
Foundations fly the wretched; such, I mean. 
Where they should be relieved. Two beggars told me 
I could not miss my way: will poor folks lie, 
That have afflictions on them, knowing 't is lo 

A punishment or trial? Yes; no wonder. 
When rich ones scarce tell true. To lapse in fulness 
Is sorer than to lie for need, and falsehood 
Is worse in kings than beggars. My dear lord ! 
Thou art one o' the false ones. Now I think on thee. 
My hunger's gone; but even before, I was 
At point to sink for food. But what is this? 
Here is a path to 't : 't is some savage hold : 
I were best not call; I dare not call: yet famine. 
Ere clean it o'erthrow nature, makes it valiant. 20 

Plenty and peace breeds cowards: hardness ever 
Of hardiness is mother. Ho ! who 's here ? 
If any thing that 's civil, speak ; if savage, 
Take or lend. Ho! No answer? Then I '11 enter. 
Best draw my sword ; and if mine enemy 
But fear the sword like me, he '11 scarcely look on 't. 
Such a foe, good heavens ! [Exit, to the cave. 

Enter Belarius, Guiderius, and Arviragus. 

Bel. You, Polydore, have proved best woodman and 
Are master of the feast : Cadwal and I 
Will play the cook and servant : 't is our match : 30 



Scene 6.] CYMBELINE 93 

The sweat of industry would dry and die. 

But for the end it works to. Come; our stomachs 

Will make what's homely savoury: weariness 

Can snore upon the flint, when resty sloth 

Finds the down pillow hard. Now peace be here, 

Poor house, that keep'st thyself! 

Gui. I am throughly weary. 

Arv. I am weak with toil, yet strong in appetite. 

Gui. There is cold meat i' the cave; we '11 browse on that, 
Whilst what we have kill'd be cook'd. 

Bel. [^Looking into the cave] Stay ; come not in. 40 

But that it eats our victuals, I should think 
Here were a fairy. 

Gui. What's the matter, sir? 

Be/. By Jupiter, an angel ! or, if not. 
An earthly paragon ! Behold divineness 
No elder than a boyS 

Re-enter Imogen. 

Into. Good masters, harm me not: 
Before I enter'd here, I call'd; and thought 
To have begg'd or bought what I have took: good troth, 
I have stol'n nought, nor would not, though I had found 
Gold strew'd i' the floor. Here 's money for my meat : 5c 
I would have left it on the board so soon 
As I had made my meal, and parted 
With prayers for the provider. 

Gui. Money, youth? 

Arv. All gold and silver rather turn to dirt ! 
As 't is no better reckon'd, but of those 
Who worship dirty gods. 

Imo. I see you 're angry: 

Know, if you kill me for my fault, I should 
Have died had I not made it. 

Bel. Whither bound? 



94 



CYMBELINE [Act III. 



Imo. To Milford-Haven. 

Bel. What 's your name ? 60 

Imo. Fidele, sir. I have a kinsman who 
Is bound for Italy; he embark'd at Miiford; 
To whom being going, almost spent with hunger, 
I am fall'n in this offence. 

Bel. Prithee, fair youth, 

Think us no churls, nor measure our good minds 
By this rude place we live in. Well encounter'd ! 
'Tis almost night: you shall have better cheer 
Ere you depart; and thanks to stay and eat it. 
Boys, bid him welcome. 

Gid. Were you a woman, youth, 

I should woo hard but be your groom in honesty. 70 

I bid for you as I do buy. 

Arv. I '11 make 't my comfort 

He is a man; I '11 love him as my brother: 
And such a welcome as I 'Id give to him 
After long absence, such is yours: most welcome! 
Be sprightly, for you fall 'mongst friends. 

Imo. 'Mongst friends. 

If brothers. [Asz'de] Would it had been so, that they 
Had been my father's sons! then had my prize 
Been less, and so more equal ballasting 
To thee, Posthumus. 

Be/. He wrings at some distress. 

Gta. Would I could free 't ! 

Arv. Or I, whate'er it be, 80 

What pain it cost, what danger. Gods! 

Bel. Hark, boys. 

[ Whispering. 

Imo. Great men, 
That had a court no bigger than this cave, 
That did attend themselves and had the virtue 
Which their own conscience seal'd them — laying by 



Scene 7.] CYMBELINE 95 

That nothing-gift of differing multitudes — 
Could not out-peer these twain. Pardon me, gods ! 
I 'Id change my sex to be companion with them, 
Since Leonatus 's false. 

Bel. It shall be so. 

Boys, we'll go dress our hunt. Fair youth, come in: 90 
Discourse is heavy, fasting; when we have supp'd. 
We '11 mannerly demand thee of thy story, 
So far as thou wilt speak it. 

Gtii. Pray, draw near. 

Arv. The night to the owl and morn to the lark less wel- 
come. 

Imo. Thanks, sir. 

Arv. I pray, draw near. [Exeunt 



Scene VII. Rome. A ptiblic place. 

Enter two Senators and Tribunes. 

First Sen. This is the tenour of the emperor's writ: 
That since the common men are now in action 
'Gainst the Pannonians and Dalmatians 
And that the legions now in Gallia are 
Full weak to undertake our wars against 
The fall'n-off Britons, that we do incite 
The gentry to this business. He creates 
Lucius proconsul: and to you the tribunes. 
For this immediate levy, he commends 
His absolute commission. Long live Caesar! 10 

First Tri. Is Lucius general of the forces? 

Sec. Sen. Ay. 

First Tri. Remaining now in Gallia? 

First Sen. With those legions 

Which I have spoke of, whereunto your levy 
Must be supplyant: the words of your commission 



96 CYMBELINE [Act IV. 

Will tie you to the numbers and the time 
Of their dispatch. 

First Tri. We will discharge our duty. \Exeunt 



ACT IV. 

Scene I. Wales: near the cave of Belarius 

Enter Cloten. 

Clo. I am near to the place where they should m.eet, it 
Pisanio have mapped it truly. How fit his garments serve 
me! Why should his mistress, who was made by him that 
made the tailor, not be fit too? the rather — saving reverence 
of the word — for 't is said a woman's fitness comes by fits. 
Therein I must play the workman. I dare speak it to myself 
— for it is not vain-glory for a man and his glass to confer in 
his own chamber — I mean, the lines of my body are as well 
drawn as his; no less young, more strong, not beneath him 
in fortunes, beyond him in the advantage of the time, above 
him in birth, alike conversant in general services, and more 
remarkable in single oppositions: yet this imperceiverant 
thing loves him in my despite. What mortality is ! Posthumus, 
thy head, which now is growing upon thy shoulders, shall 
within this hour be off; thy mistress enforced; thy garments 
cut to pieces before thy face: and all this done, spurn her 
home to her father; who may haply be a little angry for my 
so rough usage; but my mother, having power of his testiness, 
shall turn all into my commendations. My horse is tied up 
safe: out, sword, and to a sore purpose! Fortune, put them 
into my hand! This is the very description of their meeting- 
place; and the fellow dares not deceive me. \Exit. 22 



Scene 2.] CYMBELINE 97 

Scene II. Before the cave of Belarius. 

Enter, from the cave, Belarius, Guiderius, Arviragus, 
a?id Imogen. 

Bel. [To Irnogeji\ You are not well: remain here in the 
cave; 
We '11 come to you after hunting. 

Aru. [To Imogen] Brother, stay here: 

Are we not brothers? 

Imo. So man and man should be; 

But clay and clay differs in dignity, 
Whose dust is both alike. I am very sick. 

Giii. Go you to hunting; I'll abide with him. 

Imo. So sick I am not, yet I am not well; 
But not so citizen a wanton as 
To seem to die ere sick: so please you, leave me; 
Stick to your journal course : the breach of custom jq 

Is breach of all. I am ill, but your being by me 
Cannot amend me; society is no comfort 
To one not sociable : I am not very sick. 
Since I can reason of it. Pray you, trust me here: 
I '11 rob none but myself; and let me die, 
Stealing so poorly. 

Gut. I love thee; I have spoke it: 

How much the quantity, the weight as much, 
As I do love my father. 

Bet. What! how! how! 

Arv. If it be sin to say so, sir, I yoke me 
In my good brother's fault : I know not why SO 

I love this youth; and I have heard you say. 
Love's reason 's without reason : the bier at door. 
And a demand who is 't shall die, I 'Id say 
' My father, not this youth '. 

Be/. [Aside] O noble strain! 

4 (M332) 



98 CYMBELINE [Act IV. 

worthiness of nature! breed of greatness! 
Cowards father cowards and base things sire base: 
Nature hath meal and bran, contempt and grace. 

1 'm not their father; yet who this should be, 
Doth miracle itself, loved before nie. 

'T is the ninth hour o' the morn. 

Arv. Brother, farewell. 30 

Imo. I wish ye sport. 

Arv. You health. So please you, sir. 

Imo. [Aside] These are kind creatures. Gods, what lies 1 
have heard! 
Our courtiers say all 's savage but at court: 
Experience, O, thou disprovest report ! 
The imperious seas breed monsters, for the dish 
Poor tributary rivers as sweet fish. 
I am sick still; heart-sick. Pisanio, 
I '11 now taste of thy drug. 

GuL I could not stir him : 

He said he was gentle, but unfortunate; 
Dishonestly afflicted, but yet honest. 40 

Arv. Thus did he answer me: yet said, hereafter 
I might know more. 

Be/. To the field, to the field! 

We '11 leave you for this time : go in and rest. 

Arv. We '11 not be long away. 

-Be/. Pray, be not sick, 

For you must be our housewife. 

Imo. Well or ill, 

I am bound to you. 

Be/. And shalt be ever. 

[£x// Imogen, to the cave. 
This youth, howe'er distress'd, appears he hath had 
Good ancestors. 

Arv. How angel-like he sings ! 

Gui. But his neat cookery! he cut our roots in characters 



Scene 2.] CYMBELINE 99 

And sauced our broths, as Juno had been sick 50 

And he her dieter. 

Arv. Nobly he yokes 

A smiling with a sigh, as if the sigh 
Was that it was, for not being such a smile ; 
The smile mocking the sigh, that it would fly 
From so divine a temple, to commix 
With winds that sailors rail at. 

Gui. I do note 

That grief and patience, rooted in him both. 
Mingle their spurs together. 

Arv. Grow, patience! 

And let the stinking elder, grief, untwine 
His perishing root with the increasing vine! 60 

Be/. It is great morning. Come, away! — Who's there? 

Enter Cloten. 

Clo. I cannot find those runagates; that villain 
Hath mock'd me. I am faint. 

Bel. ' Those runagates ! ' 

Means he not us! I partly know him: 'tis 
Cloten, the son o' the queen. I fear some ambush. 
I saw him not these many years, and yet 
I know 'tis he. We are held as outlaws: hence! 

Gui. He is but one: you and my brother search 
What companies are near: pray you, away; 
Let me alone with him. \_Exeunt Belarius and Arviragiis. 

Clo. Soft! What are you 70 

That fly me thus? some villain mountaineers? 
I have heard of such. What slave art thou? 

Gui. A thing 

More slavish did I ne'er than answering 
A slave without a knock. 

Clo. Thou art a robber, 

A law-breaker, a villain : yield thee, thief. 



loo CYMBELINE fAct IV 

Gut. To who? to thee? What art thou? Have not I 
An arm as big as thine? a heart as big? 
Thy words, I grant, are bigger, for I wear not 
My dagger in my mouth. Say what thou art, 
Why I should yield to thee? 

Clo. Thou villain base, 80 

Know'st me not by my clothes? 

Gut. No, nor thy tailor, rascal, 

Who is thy grandfather: he made those clothes, 
Which, as it seems, make thee. 

Clo. Thou precious varlet. 

My tailor made them not. 

Gui. Hence, then, and thank 

The man that gave them thee. Thou art some fool; 
I am loath to beat thee. 

Clo. Thou injurious thief. 

Hear but my name, and tremble. 

Giii. What 's thy name ? 

Clo. Cloten, thou villain. 

Gui. Cloten, thou double villain, be thy name, 
I cannot tremble at it : were it Toad, or Adder, Spider, 90 
'T would move me sooner. 

Clo. To thy further fear, 

Nay, to thy mere confusion, thou shalt know 
I am son to the queen. 

Gui. I am sorry for't; not seeming 

So worthy as thy birth. 

Clo. Art not afeard? 

Gui. Those that I reverence those I fear, the wise: 
At fools I laugh, not fear them. 

Clo. Die the death: 

When I have slain thee with my proper hand, 
I '11 follow those that even now fled hence, 
And on the gates of Lud's town set your heads : 
Yield, rustic mountaineer. [Exeunt fighting. 100 



Scene 2.] CYMBELINE loi 

Re-enter Belarius and Arviragus. 

Bel. No company 's abroad? 

Arv. None in the world: you did mistake him, sure. 

Bel. I cannot tell: long is it since I saw him, 
But time hath nothing blurr'd those lines of favour 
Which then he wore; the snatches in his voice. 
And burst of speaking, were as his : I am absolute 
'T was very Cloten. 

Arv. In this place we left them: 

I wish my brother make good time with him. 
You say he is so fell. 

Bel. Being scarce made up, 

I mean, to man, he had not apprehension no 

Of roaring terrors; for the effect of judgement 
Is oft the cause of fear. But, see, thy brother. 

Re-enter Guiderius, with Cloten's head. 

Gui. This Cloten was a fool, an empty purse; 
There was no money in't: not Hercules 
Could have knock'd out his brains, for he had none: 
Yet I not doing this, the fool had borne 
My head as I do his. 

Bel. What hast thou done? 

Gui. I am perfect what : cut off one Cloten's head. 
Son to the queen, after his own report; 
Who call'd me traitor, mountaineer, and swore 120 

With his own single hand he 'Id take us in. 
Displace our heads where — thank the gods ! — they grow, 
And set them on Lud's town. 

Bel. We are all undone. 

Gui. Why, worthy father, what have we to lose. 
But that he swore to take, our lives? The law 
Protects not us: then why should we be tender 
To let an arrogant piece of flesh threat us, 
Play judge and executioner all himself, 



I02 CYMBELINE [Act IV. 

For we do fear the law? What company 
Discover you abroad? 

Bel. No single soul 130 

Can we set eye on; but in all safe reason 
He must have some attendants. Though his humour 
Was nothing but mutation, ay, and that 
From one bad thing to worse; not frenzy, not 
Absolute madness could so far have raved 
To bring him here alone; although perhaps 
It may be heard at court that such as we 
Cave here, hunt here, are outlaws, and in time 
May make some stronger head; the which he hearing — 
As it is like him — might break out, and swear 140 

He 'Id fetch us in; yet is 't not probable 
To come alone, either he so undertaking. 
Or they so suffering: then on good ground we fear, 
If we do fear this body hath a tail 
More perilous than the head. 

Arv. Let ordinance 

Come as the gods foresay it: howsoe'er, 
My brother hath done well. 

Bel. I had no mind 

To hunt this day: the boy Fidele's sickness 
Did make my way long forth. 

Giii. With his own sword, 

Which he did wave against my throat, I have ta'en 150 

His head from him: I '11 throw 't into the creek 
Behind our rock; and let it to the sea. 
And tell the fishes he 's the queen's son, Cloten : 
That 's all I reck. [Exit 

Bel. I fear 'twill be revenged: 

Would, Polydore, thou hadst not done 't ! though valour 
Becomes thee well enough. 

Arv. Would I had done 't, 

So the revenge alone pursued me! Polydore, 



Scene 2.] CYMBELINE 103 

I love thee brotherly, but envy much 
Thou hast robb'd me of this deed : I would revenges, 
That possible strength might meet, would seek us through 
And put us to our answer. 

Bel. Well, 'tis done: 161 

We '11 hunt no more to-day, nor seek for aanger 
Where there 's no profit. I prithee, to our rock ; 
You and P'idele play the cooks: I'll stay 
Till hasty Polydore return, and bring him 
To dinner presently. 

Arv. Poor sick Fidele! 

I'll willingly to him: to gain his colour 
I 'Id let a parish of such Clotens blood. 
And praise myself for charity. \Exit. 

Bel. O thou goddess. 

Thou divine Nature, how thyself thou blazon'st 170 

In these two princely boys! They are as gentle 
As zephyrs blowing below the violet, 
Not wagging his sweet head; and yet as rough, 
Their royal blood enchafed, as the rudest wind, 
That by the top doth take the mountain pine. 
And make him stoop to the vale. 'T is wonder 
That an invisible instinct should frame them 
To royalty unlearn'd, honour untaught. 
Civility not seen from other, valour 

That wildly grows in them, but yields a crop 180 

As if it had been sow'd. Yet still it 's strange 
What Cloten's being here to us portends. 
Or what his death will bring us. 

Re-e7iter Guiderius. 

Gui. Where 's my brother? 

I have sent Cloten's clotpoU down the stream, 
In embassy to his mother: his body's hostage 
For his return. \iiolemti music. 



104 CYMBELINE [Act IV. 

Bel. My ingenious instrument! 

Hark, Polydore, it sounds! But what occasion 
Hath Cadwal now to give it motion? Hark! 

Gui. Is he at home? 

Bei. He went hence even now. 

Gui. What does he mean? since death of my dear'st 
mother 
It did not speak before. All solemn things 191 

Should answer solemn accidents. The matter? 
Triumphs for nothing and lamenting toys 
Is jollity for apes and grief for boys. 
Is Cadwal mad? 

Re-enter Arviragus, with Imogen as dead, bearing her 
in his arms. 

Bel. Look, here he comes. 

And brings the dire occasion in his arms 
Of what we blame him for. 

Arv. The bird is dead 

That we have made so much on. I had rather 
Have skipp'd from sixteen years of age to sixty, 
To have turn'd my leaping-time into a crutch, 200 

Than have seen this. 

Gui. O sweetest, fairest Uly! 

My brother wears thee not th' one half so well 
As when thou grew'st thyself. 

Bel. O melancholy! 

Who ever yet could sound thy bottom? find 
The ooze, to show what coast thy sluggish crare 
Might easiliest harbour in? Thou blessed thing! 
Jove knows what man thou mightst have made; but I, 
Thou diedst, a most rare boy, of melancholy. 
How found you him? 

Arv. Stark, as you see: 

Thus smihng, as some fly had tickled slumber, 21C 



Scene 2.] CYMBELINE 105 

Not as death's dart, being laugh'd at; his right cheek 
Reposing on a cushion. 

Gut. Where? 

Arv. O' the floor; 

His arms thus leagued: I thought he slept, and put 
My clouted brogues from off my feet, whose rudeness 
Answer'd my steps too loud. 

Gui. Why, he but sleeps: 

If he be gone, he'll make his grave a bed; 
With female fairies will his tomb be haunted, 
And worms will not come to thee. 

Arv. With fairest flowers 

Whilst summer lasts and I live here, Fidele, 
I '11 sweeten thy sad grave: thou shalt not lack 220 

The flower that 's like thy face, pale primrose, nor 
The azured harebell, like thy veins, no, nor 
The leaf of eglantine, whom not to slander, 
Out-sweeten'd not thy breath: the ruddock would, 
With charitable bill, — O bill, sore-shaming 
Those rich-left heirs that let their fathers lie 
Without a monument! — bring thee all this; 
Yea, and furr'd moss besides, when flowers are none, 
To winter-ground thy corse. 

Giii. Prithee, have done; 

And do not play in wench-like words with that 230 

Which is so serious. Let us bury him. 
And not protract with admiration what 
Is now due debt. To the grave! 

Arv. Say, where shall 's lay him? 

Gui. By good Euriphile, our mother. 

Arv. Be't so: 

And let us, Polydore, though now our voices 
Have got the mannish crack, sing him to the ground. 
As once our mother; use like note and words, 
Save that 'Euriphile' must be 'Fidele'. 

*• (M 332) 



io6 CYMBELINE [Act IV. 

Gui. Cadwal, 
I cannot sing: I'll weep, and word it with thee; 240 

For notes of sorrow out of tune are worse 
Than priests and fanes that lie. 

Arv. We'll speak it, then. 

Bel. Great griefs, I see, medicine the less; for Cloten 
Is quite forgot. He was a queen's son, boys; 
And though he came our enemy, remember 
He was paid for that: though mean and mighty, rotting 
Together, have one dust, yet reverence. 
That angel of the world, doth make distinction 
Of place 'tween high and low. Our foe was princely; 
And though you took his life, as being our foe, 250 

Yet bury him as a prince. 

Gui. Pray you, tetch him hither. 

Thersites' body is as good as Ajax', 
When neither are alive. 

Arv. If you '11 go fetch him, 

We '11 say our song the whilst. Brother, begin. 

\Exit Belariiis. 

Gui. Nay, Cadwal, we must lay his head to the east; 
My father hath a reason for 't. 

Arv. 'T is true. 

Gui. Come on then, and remove him. 

Arv. So. Begin. 

Song. 

Gut. Fear no more the heat o' the sun, 

Nor the furious winter's rages; 
Thou thy worldly task hast done, 260 

Home art gone and ta'en thy wages : 
Golden lads and girls all must. 
As chimney-sweepers, come to dust. 

Arv. Fear no more the frown o' the great; 
Thou art past the tyrant's stroke; 



Scene 2.] CYMBELINE 107 

Care no more to clothe and eat ; 
To thee the reed is as the oak : 

The sceptre, learning, physic, must 

All follow this, and come to dust. 
Gui. Fear no more the lightning-flash, 270 

A7'v. Nor the all-dreaded thunder-stone; 

Gui. Fear not slander, censure rash; 

Ai-v. Thou hast finish'd joy and moan: 

Both. All lovers young, all lovers must 

Consign to thee, and come to dust. 
Gui. No exorciser harm thee! 

Arv. Nor no witchcraft charm thee! 

Gui. Ghost unlaid forbear thee! 

Arv. Nothing ill come near thee! 

Both. Quiet consummation have! 280 

And renowned be thy grave ! 

Re-enter Belarius, with the body of Cloten. 
Gui. We have done our obsequies : come, lay him down. 
Bet. Here 's a few flowers ; but 'bout midnight, more : 
The herbs that have on them cold dew o' the night 
Are strewings fitt'st for graves. Upon their faces. 
You were as flowers, now wither'd: even so 
These herblets shall, which we upon you strow. 
Come on, away: apart upon your knees. 
The ground that gave them first has them again: 
Their pleasures here are past, so is their pain. 290 

[^Exeunt Belarius, Guiderius, afid Arviragits. 
Into. \Awaking\ Yes, sir, to Milford-Haven; which is the 
way? — 
I thank you— By yond bush? — Pray, how far thither? 
'Ods pittikins! can it be six mile yet? — 
I have gone all night. Taith, I '11 lie down and sleep. 
But, soft! no bedfellow! — O gods and goddesses! 

\Seeing the body of Cloten. 



lo8 CYMBELINE [Act IV. 

These flowers are like the pleasures of the world; 

This bloody man, the care on 't. I hope I dream; 

For so I thought I was a cave-keeper, 

And cook to honest creatures: but 'tis not so; 

'T was but a bolt of nothing, shot at nothing, 300 

Which the brain makes of fumes : our very eyes 

Are sometimes like our judgements, bUnd. Good faith, 

I tremble still with fear: but if there be 

Yet left in heaven as small a drop of pity 

As a wren's eye, fear'd gods, a part of it ! 

The dream 's here still : even when I wake, it is 

Without me, as within me; not imagined, felt. 

A headless man! The garments of Posthumus! 

I know the shape of 's leg: this is his hand; 

His foot Mercurial; his Martial thigh; 310 

The brawns of Hercules; but his Jovial face — 

Murder in heaven? — How! — 'Tis gone. Pisanio, 

All curses madded Hecuba gave the Greeks, 

And mine to boot, be darted on thee ! Thou, 

Conspired with that irregulous devil, Cloten, 

Hast here cut off my lord. To write and read 

Be henceforth treacherous ! Damn'd Pisanio 

Hath with his forged letters, — damn'd Pisanio — 

From this most bravest vessel of the world 

Struck the main-top! O Posthumus! alas, 320 

Where is thy head? where 's that? Ay me! where 's that? 

Pisanio might have kill'd thee at the heart. 

And left this head on. How should this be? Pisanio? 

'T is he and Cloten : malice and lucre in them 

Have laid this woe here. O, 't is pregnant, pregnant ! 

The drug he gave me, which he said was precious 

And cordial to me, have I not found it 

Murderous to the senses? That confirms it home: 

This is Pisanio's deed, and Cloten's : O ! 

Give colour to my pale cheek with thy blood, 330 



Scene 2.] CYMBELINE 109 

That we the horrider may seem to those 
Which chance to find us: O, my lord, my lord! 

\_Fa/ls on the body. 

Enter Lucius, a Captain and other Officers, and a 
Soothsayer. 

Cap. To them the legions garrison'd in Gallia, 
After your will, have cross'd the sea, attending 
You here at Milford-Haven with your ships: 
They are in readiness. 

Luc. But what from Rome? 

Cap. The senate hath stirr'd up the confiners 
And gentlemen of Italy, most willing spirits, 
That promise noble service: and they come 
Under the conduct of bold lachimo, - 340 

Syenna's brother. 

Ltic. When expect you them? 

Cap. With the next benefit o' the wind. 

Luc. This forwardness 

Makes our hopes fair. Command our present numbers 
Be muster'd: bid the captains look to 't. Now, sir, 
What have you dream'd of late of this war's purpose? 

Sooth. Last night the very gods show'd me a vision — 
I fast and pray'd for their intelligence — thus: 
I saw Jove's bird, the Roman eagle, wing'd 
From the spongy south to this part of the west, 
There vanish'd in the sunbeams: which portends— 350 
Unless my sins abuse my divination — 
Success to the Roman host. 

Luc. Dream often so. 

And never false. Soft, ho ! what trunk is here 
Without his top? The ruin speaks that sometime 
It was a worthy building. How ! a page ! 
Or dead, or sleeping on him? But dead rather; 
For nature doth abhor to make his bed 



no CYMBELINE [Act IV. 

With the defunct, or sleep upon the dead. 
Let 's see the boy's face. 

Cap. He 's alive, my lord. 

Ltic. He '11 then instruct us of this body. Young one, 360 
Inform us of thy fortunes, for it seems 
They crave to be demanded. Who is this 
Thou makest thy bloody pillow? Or who was he 
That, otherwise than noble nature did, 
Hath alter'd that good picture? What's thy interest 
In this sad wreck? How came it? Who is it? 
What art thou? 

Imo. I am nothing: or if not. 

Nothing to be were better. This was my master, 
A very valiant Briton and a good, 

That here by mountaineers lies slain. Alas! 370 

There is no more such masters: I may wander 
From east to Occident, cry out for service. 
Try many, all good, serve truly, never 
Find such another master. 

Liic. 'Lack, good youth ! 

Thou movest no less with thy complaining than 
Thy master in bleeding: say his name, good friend. 

Imo. Richard du Champ. [Aside] If I do lie and do 
No harm by it, though the gods hear, I hope 
They'll pardon it. — Say you, sir? 

Lt^c. Thy name? 

Imo. Fidele, sir. 

Ziic. Thou dost approve thyself the very same : 380 

Thy name well fits thy faith, thy faith thy name. 
Wilt take thy chance with me? I will not say 
Thou shalt be so well master'd, but, be sure. 
No less beloved. The Roman emperor's letters. 
Sent by a consul to me, should not sooner 
Than thine own worth prefer thee: go with me. 

Imo. I '11 follow, sir. But first, an 't please the gods. 



Scene 3.] CYMBELINE XII 

I '11 hide my master from the flies, as deep 

As these poor pickaxes can dig; and when 

With wild wood-leaves and weeds I ha' strew'd his grave. 390 

And on it said a century of prayers, 

Such as I can, twice o'er, I '11 weep and sigh; 

And leaving so his service, follow you, 

So please you entertain me. 

Luc. Ay, good youth ^ 

And rather father thee than master thee. 
My friends, 

The boy hath taught us manly duties: let us 
Find out the prettiest daisied plot we can. 
And make him with our pikes and partisans 
A grave : come, arm him. Boy, he is preferr'd 400 

By thee to us, and he shall be interr'd 
As soldiers can. Be cheerful; wipe thine eyes: 
Some falls are means the happier to arise. \Exeunt. 

Scene III. A room in Cymbeline's palace. 
Enter Cymbeline, Lords, Pisanio, and Attendants. 

Cym. Again ; and bring me word how 't is with her. 

\Exit att Attendant. 
A fever with the absence of her son, 
A madness, of which her life 's in danger. Heavens, 
How deeply you at once do touch me ! Imogen, 
The great part of my comfort, gone ; my queen 
Upon a desperate bed, and in a time 
When fearful wars point at me; her son gone, 
So needful for this present: it strikes me, past 
The hope of comfort. But for thee, fellow, 
Who needs must know of her departure and 10 

Dost seem so ignorant, we '11 enforce it from thee 
By a sharp torture. 

Pis. Sir, my life is yours; 



112 CYMBELINE [Act IV. 

I humbly set it at your will; but, for my mistress, 
I nothing know where she remains, why gone. 
Nor when she purposes return. Beseech your highness 
Hold me your loyal servant. 

First Lord. Good my liege, 

The day that she was missing he was here: 
I dare be bound he 's true and shall perform 
All parts of his subjection loyally. For Cloten, 
There wants no diligence in seeking him, 20 

And will, no doubt, be found. 

Cym. The time is troublesome. 

\To Fisanio] We'll slip you for a season; but our jealousy 
Does yet depend. 

First Lord. So please your majesty. 
The Roman legions, all from Gallia drawn, 
Are landed on your coast, with a supply 
Of Roman gentlemen, by the senate sent. 

Cy7n. Now for the counsel of my son and queen ! 
T am amazed with matter. 

First Lord. Good my liege, 

Your preparation can affront no less 

Than what you hear of: come more, for more you're ready: 
The want is but to put those powers in motion 31 

That long to move. 

Cym. I thank you. Let 's withdraw; 

And meet the time as it seeks us. ^Ve fear not 
What can from Italy annoy us; but 
We grieve at chances here. Away ! \Exeunt all but Fisanio. 

Fis. I heard no letter from my master since 
I wrote him Imogen was slain: 'tis strange: 
Nor hear I from my mistress, who did promise 
To yield me often tidings; neither know I 
What is betid to Cloten ; but remain 40 

Perplex'd in all. The heavens still must work. 
Wherein I am false I am honest; not true, to be true. 



Scene 4.] CYMBELINE 113 

These present wars shall find I love my country, 

Even to the note o' the king, or I '11 fall in them. 

All other doubts, by time let them be clear'd: 

Fortune brings in some boats that are not steer'd. [Exit 



Scene IV. Wales: before the cave of Belarius. 
E7iter Belarius, Guiderius, a7id Arviragus. 

Gui. The noise is round about us. 

Bel. Let us from it. 

Arv. What pleasure, sir, find we in life, to lock it 
From action and adventure? 

Gui. Nay, what hope 

Have we in hiding us? This way, the Romans 
Must or for Britons slay us, or receive us 
For barbarous and unnatural revolts 
During their use, and slay us after. 

Bel. Sons, 

We '11 higher to the mountains ; there secure us. 
To the king's party there 's no going : newness 
Of Cloten's death — we being not known, not muster'd 10 
Among the bands — may drive us to a render 
Where we have lived, and so extort from 's that 
Which we have done, whose answer would be death 
Drawn on with torture. 

Gui. This is, sir, a doubt 

In such a time nothing becoming you, 
Nor satisfying us. 

Arv. It is not likely 

That when they hear the Roman horses neigh, 
Behold their quarter'd fires, have both their eyes 
And ears so cloy'd importantly as now, 
That they will waste their time upon our note, 20 

To know from whence we are. 



114 CYMBELINE [Act IV. Sc. 4. 

Bel. O, I am known 

Of many in the army: many years, 
Though Cloten then but young, you see, not wore him 
From my remembrance. And, besides, the king 
Hath not deserved my service nor your loves; 
Who find in my exile the want of breeding, 
The certainty of this hard life; aye hopeless 
To have the courtesy your cradle promised, 
But to be still hot summer's tanlings and 
The shrinking slaves of winter. 

Grd. Than be so 30 

Better to cease to be. Pray, sir, to the army: 
I and my brother are not known ; yourself 
So out of thought, and thereto so o'ergrown. 
Cannot be question'd. 

Arv. By this sun that shines, 

I '11 thither: what thing is it that I never 
Did see man die! scarce ever look'd on blood, 
But that of coward hares, hot goats, and venison ! 
Never bestrid a horse, save one that had 
A rider like myself, who ne'er wore rowel 
Nor iron on his heel! I am ashamed 40 

To look upon the holy sun, to have 
The benefit of his blest beams, remaining 
So long a poor unknown. 

Gtii. By heavens, I '11 go : 

If you will bless me, sir, and give me leave, 
I '11 take the better care, but if you will not. 
The hazard therefore due fall on me by 
The hands of Romans! 

Arv. So say I : amen. 

Bel. No reason I, since of your lives you set 
So slight a valuation, should reserve 

My crack'd one to more care. Have with you, boys! 50 
If in your country wars you chance to die. 



Act V. Sc. I.] CYMBELINE 115 

That is my bed too, lads, and there I'll lie: 

Lead, lead. [Aside] The time seems long; their blood 

thinks scorn, 
Till it fly out and show them princes born. [£xeunf. 



ACT V. 
Scene I. Britain. The Roman camp. 

Enter Posthumus, iviih a bloody handkerchief. 

Post. Yea, bloody cloth, I '11 keep thee, for I wish'd 
Thou shouldst be colour'd thus. You married ones. 
If each of you should take this course, how many 
Must murder wives much better than themselves 
For wrying but a little ! O Pisanio ! 
Every good servant does not all commands: 
No bond but to do just ones. Gods! if you 
Should have ta'en vengeance on my faults, I never 
Had lived to put on this : so had you saved 
The noble Imogen to repent, and struck 10 

Me, wretch more worth your vengeance. But, alack 
You snatch some hence for little faults; that's love. 
To have them fall no more: you some permit 
To second ills with ills, each elder worse. 
And make them dread it, to the doers' thrift. 
But Imogen is your own: do your best wills, 
And make me blest to obey! I am brought hither 
Among the Italian gentry, and to fight 
Against my lady's kingdom : 't is enough 
That, Britain, I have kill'd thy mistress; peace! 20 

I '11 give no wound to thee. Therefore, good heavens. 
Hear patiently my purpose: I '11 disrobe me 



ii6 CYMBELINE [Act V. 

Of these Italian weeds and suit myself 

As does a Briton peasant : so I '11 fight 

Against the part I come with; so I '11 die 

For thee, O Imogen, even for whom my life 

Is every breath a death; and thus, unknown, 

Pitied nor hated, to the face of peril 

Myself I '11 dedicate. Let me make men know 

More valour in me than my habits show. 30 

Gods, put the strength o' the Leonati in me! 

To shame the guise o' the world, I will begin 

The fashion, less without and more within. [Exit 

Scene IL Field oj battle betiveen the British 
and Romaii ca7nps. 

Enter, from one side, Lucius, Iachimo, and the Roman 
Army : from the other side, the British Army ; Leonatus 
PosTHUMUS following, like a poor soldier. They march 
over and go out. Theft eftter again, in skirmish, 
Iachimo and Posthumus: he vanquisheth and dis- 
armeth Iachimo, and theft leaves him. 

lach. The heaviness and guilt within my bosom 
Takes off my manhood: I have belied a lady. 
The princess of this country, and the air on 't 
Revengingly enfeebles me; or could this carl, 
A very drudge of nature's, have subdued me 
In my profession? Knighthoods and honours, borne 
As I wear mine, are titles but of scorn. 
If that thy gentry, Britain, go before 
This lout as he exceeds our lords, the odds 
Is that we scarce are men and you are gods. \Exit. j 1 



Scene 3.J CYMBELINE H7 

The battle continues; the Britons 7?^; Cymbeline is taken: 
then enter, to his rescue, Belarius, Guiderius, and 
Arviragus. 

Bel. Stand, stand.! We have the advantage of the ground; 
The lane is guarded: nothing routs us but 
The villany of our fears. 

^"^- \ Stand, stand, and fight! 

Re-enter Posthumus, and seconds the Britons; they rescue 
Cymbeline, and exeunt. Then re-enter Lucius, and 
Iachimo, 7vith Imogen. 

Luc. Away, boy, from the troops, and save thyself; 
For friends kill friends, and the disorder 's such 
As war were hoodwink'd. 

lack. 'T is their fresh supplies. 

Luc. It is a day turn'd strangely: or betimes 
Let 's re-inforce, or fly. [Exeunt. 

Scene III. Another part of the field. 

Enter Posthumus and a British Lord. 

Lord. Camest thou from where they made the stand? 

Post. I did: 

Though you, it seems, come from the fliers. 

Lord. I did. 

Post. No blame be to you, sir; for aU was lost, 
But that the heavens fought: the king himself 
Of his wings destitute, the army broken. 
And but the backs of Britons seen, all flying 
Through a strait lane; the enemy full-hearted, 
Lolling the tongue with slaughtering, having work 
More plentiful than tools to do 't, struck down 



Il8 CYMBELINt [Act V, 

Some mortally, some slightly touch'd, some falling lo 

Merely through fear; that the strait pass was damm'd 
With dead men hurt behind, and cowards living 
To die with lengthen'd shame. 

Lord. Where was this lane? 

Post. Close by the battle, ditch'd, and wall'd with turf; 
Which gave advantage to an ancient soldier, 
An honest one, I warrant; who deserved 
So long a breeding as his white beard came to. 
In doing this for 's country: athwart the lane. 
He, with two striplings — lads more like to run 
The country base than to commit such slaughter; 20 

With faces fit for masks, or rather fairer 
Than those for preservation cased, or shame, — 
Made good the passage; cried to those that fled, 
'Our Britain's harts die flying, not our men: 
To darkness fleet souls that fly backwards. Stand; 
Or we are Romans and will give you that 
Like beasts which you shun beastly, and may save, 
But to look back in frown: stand, stand.' These three. 
Three thousand confident, in act as many — 
For three performers are the file when all 30 

The rest do nothing — with this word 'Stand, stand'. 
Accommodated by the place, more charming 
With their own nobleness, which could have turn'd 
A distaff to a lance, gilded pale looks, 
Part shame, part spirit renew'd ; that some, turn'd coward 
But by example— O, a sin in war, 
Damn'd in the first beginners ! — 'gan to look 
The way that they did, and to grin like lions 
Upon the pikes o' the hunters. Then began 
A stop i' the chaser, a retire, anon 40 

A rout, confusion thick; forthwith they fly 
Chickens, the way which they stoop'd eagles; slaves. 
The strides they victors made : and now our cowards, 



Scene 3.^ CYMBELINE 119 

Like fragments in hard voyages, became 

The life o' the need: having found the back-door open 

Of the unguarded hearts, heavens, how they wound 

Some slain before, some dying; some, their friends 

O'er-borne i' the former wave: ten, chased by one, 

Are now each one the slaughter-man of twenty : 

Those that would die or ere resist are grown 50 

The mortal bugs o' the field. 

Lord. This was strange chance: 

A narrow lane, an old man, and two boys. 

Post. Nay, do not wonder at it: you are made 
Rather to wonder at the things you hear 
Than to work any. Will you rhyme upon 't, 
And vent it for a mockery? Here is one: 
'Two boys, an old man twice a boy, a lane. 
Preserved the Britons, was the Romans' bane'. 

Lord. Nay, be not angry, sir. 

Post. 'Lack, to what end? 

Who dares not stand his foe, I'll be his friend; 60 

For if he '11 do as he is made to do, 
I know he '11 quickly fly my friendship too. 
You have put me into rhyme. 

Lord. Farewell; you 're angry. \Exii. 

Post. Still going? This is a lord ! O noble misery. 
To be i' the field, and ask 'what news?' of me! 
To-day how many would have given their honours 
To have saved their carcases ! took heel to do 't. 
And yet died too ! I, in mine own woe charm'd. 
Could not find death where I did hear him groan, 
Nor feel him where he struck : being an ugly monster, 70 
'T is strange he hides him in fresh cups, soft beds, 
Sweet words; or hath more ministers than we 
That draw his knives i' the war. Well, I will find him; 
For, being now a favourer to the Briton, 
No more a Briton, I have resumed again 



I20 CYMBELINE [Act V. 

The part I came in: fight I will no more, 

But yield me to the veriest hind that shall 

Once touch my shoulder. Great the slaughter is 

Here made by the Roman; great the answer be 

Britons must take. For me, my ransom 's death; 80 

On either side I come to spend my breath; 

Which neither here I '11 keep nor bear again, 

But end it by some means for Imogen. 

Enter two British Captains and Soldiers. 

First Cap. Great Jupiter be praised ! Lucius is taken. 
T is thought the old man and his sons were angels. 

Sec. Cap. There was a fourth man, in a silly habit, 
That gave the affront with them. 

First Cap. So 't is reported : 

But none of 'em can be found. Stand! Who 's there? 

Post. A Roman, 
Who had not now been drooping here, if seconds 9c 

Had answer'd him. 

Sec. Cap. Lay hands on him ; a dog .' 

A leg of Rome shall not return to tell 
What crows have peck'd them here. He brags his service 
As if he were of note : bring him to the king. 

Enter Cymbeline, Belarius, Guiderius, Arviragus, 
PiSANio, Soldiers, Attendants, and Roman Captives. 
The Captains present Posthumus to Cymbeline, who 
delivers him over to a Gaoler: then exeunt omnes. 



Scene 4.] CYMBELINE 121 

Scene IV. A British prison. 

E}iter PosTHUMUS and two Gaolers. 

First Gaol. You shall not now be stol'n, you have locks 
upon you; 
So graze as you find pasture. 

Sec. GaoL Ay, or a stomach. 

\Exeunt Gaoler 

Post. Most welcome, bondage 5 for thou art a way, 
I think, to liberty : yet am I better 
Than one that's sick o' the gouc, smcehe had rather 
Groan so in perpetuity than be cured 
By the sure physician, death, who is the key 
To unbar these locks. My conscience, thou art fetter'd 
More than my shanks and wrists : you good gods, give me 
The penitent instrument to pick that bolt, 10 

Then, free for ever! Is't enough I am sorry? 
So children temporal fathers do appease; 
Gods are more full of mercy. Must I repent? 
I cannot do it better than in gyves, 
Desired more than constrain'd: to satisfy, 
If of my freedom 't is the main part, take 
No stricter render of me than my all. 
I know you are more clement than vile men. 
Who of their broken debtors take a third, 
A sixth, a tenth, letting them thrive again 20 

On their abatement: that's not my desire: 
For Imogen's dear life take mine; and though 
'T is not so dear, yet 'tis a life; you coin'd it: 
'Tween man and man they weigh not every stamp; 
Though light, take pieces for the figure's sake: 
You rather mine, being yours : and so, great powers, 
If you will take this audit, take this life. 
And cancel these cold bonds. O Imogen ! 
I '11 speak to thee in silence. \Sleeps. 



122 CYMBELINE [Act V. 

Solemn tnusic. Enter, as in an apparition, SiCiLius Leon- 
ATUS, father to Posthumus, an old man, attired like a 
warrior; leading iti his hand a?i ancient matron, his 
wife, and mother to Posthunms, with music before them: 
then, after other music, follow the two young Leonati, 
brothers to Posthumus, with wounds as they died in the 
7vars. They circle PosTHbMUS round, as he lies sleeping. 

Sici. No more, thou thunder-master, show 30 

Thy spite on mortal flies: 
With Mars fall out, with Juno chide, 

That thy adulteries 
Rates and revenges. 
Hath my poor boy done aught but well, 

Whose face I never saw? 
I died whilst in the womb he stay'd 

Attending nature's law: 
Whose father then, as men report 

Thou orphans' father art, 40 

Thou shouldst have been, and shielded him 

From this earth-vexing smart. 

Moth. Lucina lent not me her aid., 

But took me in my throes; 
That from me was Posthumus ript. 
Came crying 'mongst his foes, 
A thing of pity! 

Sici. Great nature, like his ancestry. 

Moulded the stuff so fair, 
That he deserved the praise o' the world, 50 
As great Sicilius' heir. 

First Bro. When once he was mature for man. 
In Britain where was he 
That could stand up his parallel; 
Or fruitful object be 



Scene 4.3 CYMBELINE 123 

In eye of Imogen, that best 
Could deem his dignity? 

Moth, With marriage wherefore was he mock'd, 

To be exiled, and thrown 
From Leonati seat, and cast 60 

From her his dearest one. 
Sweet Imogen? 

Sici. Why did you suffer lachimo, 

Slight thing of Italy, 
To taint his nobler heart and brain 

With needless jealousy; 
And to become the geek and scorn 
O' th' other's villany? 

Sec. Bro. For this from stiller seats we came, 

Our parents and us twain, 70 

That striking in our country's cause 
Fell bravely and were slain, 

Our fealty and Tenantius' right 
With honour to maintain. 

First Bro. Like hardiment Posthumus hath 

To Cymbeline perform'd: 
Then, Jupiter, thou king of gods. 

Why hast thou thus adjourn'd 
The graces for his merits due. 

Being all to dolours turn'd? 80 

Sici. Thy crystal window ope; look out; 

No longer exercise 
Upon a valiant race thy harsh 
And potent injuries. 

Moth. Since, Jupiter, our son is good. 

Take off his miseries. 



124 CYMBELINE [Act V. 

Sici. Peep through thy marble mansion; help; 

Or we poor ghosts will cry 
To the shining synod of the rest 

Against thy deity. 90 

Both Bro. Help, Jupiter; or we appeal, 
And from thy justice fly. 

Jupiter descends zn thunder atid lightning, sitting upon an 
eagle: he throws a thunderbolt. The Ghosts fall Ofi 
their knees. 

Jup. No more, you petty spirits of region low. 

Offend our hearing; hush! How dare you ghosts 
Accuse the thunderer, whose bolt, you know, 

Sky-planted batters all rebelling coasts? 
Poor shadows of Elysium, hence, and rest 

Upon your never-withering banks of flowers : 
Be not with mortal accidents opprest; 

No care of yours it is; you know 'tis ours. 100 
Whom best I love I cross; to make my gift, 

The more delay'd, delighted. Be content; 
Your low-laid son our godhead will uplift : 

His comforts thrive, his trials well are spent. 
Our Jovial star reign'd at his birth, and in 

Our temple was he married. Rise, and fade. 
He shall be lord of lady Imogen, 

And happier much by his affliction made. 
This tablet lay upon his breast, wherein 

Our pleasure his full fortune doth confine: no 
And so, away : no further with your din 

Express impatience, lest you stir up mine. 

Mount, eagle, to my palace crystalline. \Ascends. 

Sici. He came in thunder; his celestial breath 
Was sulphurous to smell: the holy eagle 
Stoop'd, as to foot us : his ascension is 



Scene 4.] CYMBELINE 125 

More sweet than our blest fields : his royal bird 
Prunes the immortal wing and cloys his beak, 
As when his god is pleased. 

All. Thanks, Jupiter! 

Sici. The marble pavement closes, he is enter'd 120 

His radiant roof. Away ! and, to be blest, 
Let us with care perform his great behest. 

\The Ghosts vanish 

Post. [ Waking\ Sleep, thou has been a grandsire, and 
begot 
A father to me; and thou hast created 
A mother and two brothers : but, O scorn ! 
Gone ! they went hence so soon as they were born ; 
And so I am awake. Poor wretches that depend 
On greatness' favour dream as I have done. 
Wake and find nothing. But, alas, I swerve: 
Many dream not to find, neither deserve, 130 

And yet are steep'd in favours; so am I, 
That have this golden chance and know not why. 
What fairies haunt this ground? A book? O rare one! 
Be not, as is our fangled world, a garment 
Nobler than that it covers: let thy effects 
So follow, to be most unlike our courtiers, 
As good as promise. 

[J^eads] ' Whenas a lion's whelp shall, to himself unknown, 
without seeking find, and be embraced by a piece of tender 
air; and when from a stately cedar shall be lopped branches, 
which, being dead many years, shall after revive, be jointed 
to the old stock and freshly grow; then shall Posthumus end 
his miseries, Britain be fortunate and flourish in peace and 
plenty.' 144 

'T is still a dream, or else such stuff as madmen 
Tongue and brain not; either both or nothing; 
Or senseless speaking or a speaking such 



126 CYMBELINE [Act V. 

As sense cannot untie. Be what it is, 

The action of my hfe is like it, which 

I '11 keep, if but for sympathy. 150 

Re-enter Gaolers. 

First Gaol. Come, sir, are you ready for death? 

Post. Over-roasted rather; ready long ago. 

First Gaol. Hanging is the word, sir: if you be ready for 
that, you are well cooked. 

Post. So, if I prove a good repast to the spectators, the 
dish pays the shot. 156 

First Gaol. A heavy reckoning for you, sir. But the 
comfort is, you shall be called to no more payments, fear 
no more tavern-bills; which are often the sadness of parting, 
as the procuring of mirth: you come in faint for want of 
meat, depart reeling with too much drink; sorry that you 
have paid too much, and sorry that you are paid too much; 
purse and brain both empty; the brain the heavier for being 
too light, the purse too light, being drawn of heaviness: of 
this contradiction you shall now be quit. O, the charity of 
a penny cord! it sums up thousands in a trice: you have 
no true debitor and creditor but it; of what's past, is, and 
to come, the discharge: your neck, sir, is pen, book and 
counters : so the acquittance follows. 

Post. I am merrier to die than thou art to live. 170 

First Gaol. Indeed, sir, he that sleeps feels not the tooth- 
ache : but a man that were to sleep your sleep, and a hangman 
to help him to bed, I think he would change places with his 
officer; for, look you, sir, you know not which way you shall 

go- 

Post. Yes, indeed do I, fellow. 

First Gaol. Your death has eyes in's head then; I have 
not seen him so pictured: you must either be directed by 
some that take upon them to know, or to take upon yourself 
that which I am sure you do not know, or jump the after 



Scene 5.] CYMBELINE T27 

inquiry on your own peril: and how you shall speed in your 
journey's end, I think you'll never return to tell one. 182 

Post. I tell thee, fellow, there are none want eyes to direct 
them the way I am going, but such as wink and will not use 
them. 

First Gaol. What an infinite mock is this, that a man 
should have the best of eyes to see the way of blindness! 
I am sure hanging 's the way of winking. 

Enter a Messenger. 

Mess. Knock off his manacles; bring your prisoner to the 
king. 190 

Post. Thou bring'st good news; I am called to be made 
free. 

First Gaol. I '11 be hang'd then. 

Post. Thou shalt be then freer than a gaoler; no bolts for 
the dead. \Exeunt all but the First Gaoler. 

First Gaol. Unless a man would marry a gallows and 
beget young gibbets, I never saw one so prone. Yet, on 
my conscience, there are verier knaves desire to live, for all 
he be a Roman: and there be some of them too that die 
against their wills; so should I, if I were one. I would we 
were all of one mind, and one mind good; O, there were 
desolation of gaolers and gallowses! I speak against my 
present profit, but my wish hath a preferment in 't. [Exit. 203 

Scene V. Cymbeline's tent. 

Enter Cymbeline, Belarius, Guiderius, Arviragus, 
PiSANio, Lords, Officers, and Attendants. 

Cym. Stand by my side, you whom the gods have 
made 
Preservers of my throne. Woe is my heart 
That the poor soldier that so richly fought, 



128 CYMBELINB [Act V. 

Whose rags shamed gilded arms, whose naked breast 
Stepp'd before targes of proof, cannot be found: 
He shall be happy that can find him, if 
Our grace can make him so. 

Bel. I never saw 

Such noble fury in so poor a thing; 
Such precious deeds in one that promised nought 
But beggary and poor looks. 

Cym. No tidings of him? ic 

Pis. He hath been search'd among the dead and living, 
But no trace of him. 

Cym. To my grief, I am 

The heir of his reward; \To Belarius, Guide7'i7is, and Arvi 

ragus\ which I will add 
To you, the liver, heart and brain of Britain, 
By whom I grant she lives. 'T is now the time 
To ask of whence you are. Report it. 

Bel. Sir, 

In Cambria are we born, and gentlemen : 
Further to boast were neither true nor modest, 
Unless I add, we are honest. 

Cym. Bow your knees. 

Arise my knights o' the battle: I create you 20 

Companions to our person and will fit you 
With dignities becoming your estates. 

Enter Cornelius atid Ladies. 

There 's business in these faces. Why so sadly 
Greet you our victory? you look like Romans, 
And not o' the court of Britain. 

Cor. Hail, great king! 

To sour your happiness, I must report 
The queen is dead. 

Cym. Who worse than a physiciac 

Would this report become? But I consider, 



Scene 5.] CYMBELINE 129 

By medicine life may be prolong'd, yet death 

Will seize the doctor too. How ended she? 30 

Cor. With horror, madly dying, like her life, 
Which, being cruel to the world, concluded 
Most cruel to herself. What she confess'd 
I will report, so please you: these her women 
Can trip me, if I err; who with wet cheeks 
Were present when she finish'd. 

Cym. Prithee, say 

Cor. First, she confess'd she never loved you, only 
Affected greatness got by you, not you : 
Married your royalty, was wife to your place; 
Abhorr'd }'Our person. 

Cym. She alone knew this? 40 

And, but she spoke it dying, I would not 
Believe her lips in opening it. Proceed. 

Cor. Your daughter, whom she bore in hand to love 
With such integrity, she did confess 
Was as a scorpion to her sight; whose life, 
But that her flight prevented it, she had 
Ta'en off by poison. 

Cym. O most delicate fiend: 

Who is't can read a woman? Is there morer 

Cor. More, sir, and worse. She did confess she 
had 
For you a mortal mineral; which, being took, 50 

Should by the minute feed on life and lingering 
By inches waste you: in which time she purposed, 
By watching, weeping, tendance, kissing, to 
O'ercome you with her show, and in time. 
When she had fitted you with her craft, to work 
Her son into the adoption of the crown: 
But, failing of her end by his strange absence, 
Grew shameless-desperate; open'd, in despite 
Of heaven and men, her purposes: repented 

5 (M 332) 



I30 CYMBELINE [Act V. 

The evils she hatch'd were not effected; so 60 

Despairing died. 

Cym. Heard you all this, her women? 

First Lady. We did, so please your highness. 

Cym. Mine eyes 

Were not in fault, for she was beautiful; 
Mine ears, that heard her flattery; nor my heart, 
That thought her like her seeming; it had been vicious 
To have mistrusted her: yet, O my daughter! 
That it was folly in me, thou mayst say, 
And prove it in thy feeling. Heaven mend all! 

Efiter Lucius, Iachimo, the Soothsayer, a?td other Roman 
Prisoners, guarded; Posthumus behind, a?id Imogen. 

rhou comest not, Caius, now for tribute; that 

The Britons have razed out, though with the loss 70 

Of many a bold one; whose kinsmen have made suit 

That their good souls may be appeased with slaughter 

Of you their captives, which ourself have granted : 

So think of your estate. 

Luc. Consider, sir, the chance of war: the day 
Was yours by accident; had it gone with us. 
We should not, when the blood was cool, have threaten'd 
Our prisoners with the sword. But since the gods 
Will have it thus, that nothing but our lives 
May be call'd ransom, let it come : sufficeth 80 

A Roman with a Roman's heart can suffer: 
Augustus lives to think on't: and so much 
For my peculiar care. This one thing only 
I will entreat; my boy, a Briton born. 
Let him be ransom'd: never master had 
A page so kind, so duteous, diligent. 
So tender over his occasions, true. 
So feat, so nurse-like: let his virtue join 
With my request, which I '11 make bold your highness 



Scene 5.] CYMBELINE 131 

Cannot deny; he hath done no Briton harm, 90 

Though he have served a Roman : save him, sir, 
And spare no blood beside. 

Cym. I have surely seen him: 

His favour is familiar to me. Boyj 
Thou hast look'd thyself into my grace, 
And art mine own. I know not why nor wherefore 
To say 'live, boy': ne'er thank thy master; live: 
And ask of Cymbehne what boon thou wilt. 
Fitting my bounty and thy state, I '11 give it; 
Yea, though thou do demand a prisoner. 
The noblest ta'en. 

Imo. I humbly thank your highness, 100 

Luc. I do not bid thee beg my hfe, good lad; 
And yet I know thou wilt. 

Imo. No, no: alack, 

There's other work in hand: I see a thing 
Bitter to me as death: your life, good master. 
Must shuffle for itself. 

Luc. The boy disdains me. 

He leaves me, scorns me: briefly die their joys 
That place them on the truth of girls and boys. 
Why stands he so perplex'd? 

Cym. What wouldst thou, boy? 

I love thee more and more: think more and more 
What's best to ask. Know'st him thou look'st on? speak, 
Wilt have him live? Is he thy kin? thy friend? iii 

Imo. He is a Roman; no more kin to me 
Than I to your highness; who, being born your vassal, 
Am something nearer. 

Cym. Wherefore eyest him so? 

Imo. I '11 tell you, sir, in private, if you please 
To give me hearing. 

Cym. Ay, with all my heart. 

And lend my best attention. What 's thy name? 



132 CYMBELINE [Act V. 

Irno. Fidele, sir. 

Cym. Thou 'rt my good youth, my page; 

I'll be thy master: walk with me; speak freely. 

\^Cymbeline and Imogen converse apart 

Bel. Is not this boy revived from death ? 

Arv. One sand anothei 

Not more resembles that sweet rosy lad 121 

Who died, and was Fidele. What think you? 

Gut. The same dead thing alive. 

Bel. Peace, peace! see further; he eyes us not; forbear; 
Creatures may be alike : were 't he, I am sure 
He would have spoke to us. 

Gut. But we saw him dead. 

Bel. Be silent; let's see further. 

Fis. [Aside] It is my mistress: 

Since she is living, let the time run on 
To good or bad. \Cy7?ibeline and Imogen cofne forwara 

Cym. Come, stand thou by our side; 

Make thy demand aloud. [To lachimo] Sir, step you forth; 
Give answer to this boy, and do it freely; 131 

Or, by our greatness and the grace of it, 
Which is our honour, bitter torture shall 
Winnow the truth from falsehood. On, speak to him. 

Imo. My boon is, that this gentleman may render 
Of whom he had this ring. 

fast. [Aside] What 's that to him? 

Cyjn. That diamond upon your finger, say 
How came it yours? 

lack. Thou 'It torture me to leave unspoken that 
Which, to be spoke, would torture thee. 

Cym. How! me? 140 

lack. I am glad to be constrain'd to utter that 
Which torments me to conceal. By villany 
I got this ring: 'twas Leonatus' jewel; 
Whom thou didst banish; and — which more may grieve thee, 



Scene 5.] CYMBELINE 133 

As it doth me — a nobler sir ne'er lived 

'Twixt sky and ground. Wilt thou hear more, my lord? 

Cym. All that belongs to this. 

lack. That paragon, thy daughter, — • 

For whom my heart drops blood, and my false spirits 
Quail to remember — Give me leave; I faint. 

Cym. My daughter! what of her.? Renew thy strength: 
I had rather thou shouldst live while nature will 151 

Than die ere I hear more: strive, man, and speak. 

lach. Upon a time, — unhappy was the clock 
That struck the hour! — it was in Rome, — accursed 
The mansion where ! — 't was at a feast,— O, would 
Our viands had been poison'd, or at least 
Those which I heaved to head! — the good Posthumus — 
What should I say? he was too good to be 
Where ill men were^ and wa:: the best of all 
Amongst the rarest of good ones, — sitting sadly, 260? 

Hearing us praise our loves of Italy 
For beauty that made barren the swell'd boast 
Of him that best could speak, for feature, laming 
The shrine of Venus, or straight-pight Minerva, 
Postures beyond brief nature, for condition, 
A shop of all the qualities that man 
Loves woman for, besides that hook of wiving. 
Fairness which strikes the eye — 

Cym. I stand on fire: 

Come to the matter, 

lach. All too soon I shall, 

Unless thou wouldst grieve quickly. This Posthumus, 170 
Most like a noble lord in love and one 
That had a royal lover, took his hint; 
And, not dispraising whom we praised, — therein 
He was as calm as virtue — he began 
His mistress' picture; which by his tongue being made, 
And then a mind put in 't, either our brags 



,34 CYMBELINE [Act V. 

Were crack'd of kitchen-trulls, or his description 
Proved us unspeaking sots. 

Cv7n. Nay, nay, to the purpose. 

iach. Your daughter's chastity — there it begins. 
He spake of her, as Dian had hot dreams, i8o 

And she alone were cold: whereat I, wretch, 
Made scruple of his praise; and wager'd with him 
Pieces of gold 'gainst this which then he wore 
Upon his honour'd finger, to attain 
In suit the place of 's bed and win this ring 
By hers and mine adultery. He, true knight, 
No lesser of her honour confident 
Than I did truly find her, stakes this ring; 
And would so, had it been a carbuncle 

Of Phoebus' wheel, and might so safely, had it 190 

Been all the worth of 's car. Away to Britain 
Post I in this design: well may you, sir. 
Remember me at court; where I was taught 
Of your chaste daughter the wide difference 
'Twixt amorous and villanous. Being thus quench'd 
Of hope, not longing, mine Italian brain 
'Gan in your duller Britain operate 
Most vilely; for my vantage, excellent: 
And, to be brief, my practice so prevail'd. 
That I return'd with simular proof enough 200 

To make the noble Leonatus mad, 
By wounding his belief in her renown 
With tokens thus, and thus; averring notes 
Of chamber-hanging, pictures, this her bracelet, — 

cunning, how I got it! — nay, some marks 
Of secret on her person, that he could not 
But think her bond of chastity quite crack'd, 

1 having ta'en the forfeit. Whereupon— 
Methinks, I see him now — 

Post. [Advancing] Ay, so thou dost, 



Scene 5.] CYMBELINE 135 

Italian fiend! Ay me, most credulous fool, 210 

Egregious murderer, thief, any thing 

That 's due to all the villains past, in being, 

To come! O, give me cord, or knife, or poison, 

Some upright justicer. Thou, king, send out 

For torturers ingenious : it is I 

That all the abhorred things o' the earth amend 

By being worse than they. I am Posthumus, 

That kill'd thy daughter: — villain-like, I lie — 

That caused a lesser villain than myself, 

A sacrilegious thief, to do't: the temple 22& 

Of virtue was she; yea, and she herself. 

Spit, and throw stones, cast mire upon me, set 

The dogs o' the street to bay me: every villain 

Be call'd Posthumus Leonatus ; and 

Be villany less than 'twas! O Imogen! 

My queen, my life, my wife! O Imogen, 

Imogen, Imogen! 

Inio. Peace, my lord; hear, hear — 

Post. Shall's have a play of this? Thou scornful 
page. 
There lie thy part. \Str iking her: she falls. 

Pis. O, gentlemen, help! 

Mine and your mistress! O, my lord Posthumus! 230 

You ne'er kill'd Imogen till now. Help, help! 
Mine honour'd lady! 

Cym. Does the world go round? 

Post. How come these staggers on me? 

Pis. Wake, my mistress! 

Cytn. If this be so, the gods do mean to strike me 
To death with mortal joy. 

Pis. How fares my mistress? 

Imo. O, get thee from my sight; 
Thou gavest me poison: dangerous fellow, hence! 
Breathe not where princes are. 



136 CYMBELINE [Act V. 

Cym. The tune of Imogen! 

Pis. Lady, 
The gods throw stones of sulphur on me, if 240 

That box I gave you was not thought by me 
A precious thing: I had it from the queen. 

Cym. New matter still? 

Jmo. It poison'd me. 

Cor. O gods! 

I left out one thing which the queen confess'd, 
Which must approve thee honest: 'If Pisanio 
Have ' said she ' given his mistress that confection 
Which I gave him for cordial, she is served 
As I would serve a rat '. 

Cym. What's this, Cornelius? 

Cor. The queen, sir, very oft importuned me 
To temper poisons for her, still pretending 250 

The satisfaction of her knowledge only 
In killing creatures vile, as cats and dogs. 
Of no esteem : I, dreading that her purpose 
Was of more danger, did compound for her 
A certain stuff, which, being ta'en, would cease 
The present power of life, but in short time 
All offices of nature should again 
Do their due functions. Have you ta'en of it? 

Imo. Most like I did, for I was dead. 

Bel. My bo)S, 

There was our error. 

Gni. This is, sure, Fidele. 260 

Imo. Why did you throw your wedded lady from 
you? 
Think that you are upon a rock; and now 
Throw me again. \Embracing him. 

Post. Hang tliere like fruit, my soul. 

Till the tree die! 

Cym. How now, my flesh, my child! 



Scene 5.] CYMBELINE 137 

What, niakest thou me a dullard in this act? 
Wilt thou not speak to me? 

Imo. \Kneeling\ Your blessing, sir. 

Bel. [To Guiderius and Arviragus\ Though you did love 
this youth, I blame ye not; 
You had a motive for 't. 

Cym. My tears that fall 

Prove holy water on thee! Imogen, 
Thy mother 's dead. 

Imo. I am sorry for't, my lord. 270 

Cym. O, she was naught; and long of her it vi^as 
That we meet here so strangely : but her son 
Is gone, we know not how nor where. 

Pis. My lord, 

Now fear is from me, I '11 speak troth. Lord Cloten, 
Upon my lady's missing, came to m3 
With his sword drawn; foam'd at the mouth, and swore 
If I discover'd not which way she was gone, 
It was my instant death. By accident, 
I had a feigned letter of my master's 

Then in my pocket; which directed him 280 

To seek her on the mountains near to Milford ; 
Where, in a frenzy, in my master's garments. 
Which he enforced from me, away he posts 
With unchaste purpose and with oath to violate 
My lady's honour: what became of him 
I further know not. 

Gui. Let me end the story: 

I slew him there. 

Cym. Marry, the gods forfend! 

I would not thy good deeds should from my lips 
Pluck a hard sentence: prithee, valiant youth, 
Deny 't again. 

Gui. I have spoke it, and I did it. 290 

Cym. He was a prince. 

* (M '.32/ 



138 CYMBELINE [Act V. 

Gui. A most incivil one: the wrongs he did me 
Were nothing prince-hke; for he did provoke me 
With language that would make me spurn the sea, 
If it could so roar to me: I cut off 's head; 
And am right glad he is not standing here 
To tell this tale of mine. 

Cym. I am sorry for thee: 

By thine own tongue thou art condemn'd, and must 
Endure our law: thou'rt dead. 

Imo. That headless man 

I thought had been my lord. 

Cym. Bind the offender, 300 

And take him from our presence. 

Bel. Stay, sir king: 

This man is better than the man he slew, 
As well descended as thyself; and hath 
More of thee merited than a band of Clotens 
Had ever scar for. \To the Guard] Let his arms alone; 
They were not born for bondage. 

Cym. Why, old soldier. 

Wilt thou undo the worth thou art unpaid for. 
By tasting of our wrath? How of descent 
As good as we? 

Arv. In that he spake too far. 

Cym. And thou shalt die for't. 

Bel. We will die all three. 310 

But I will prove that two on 's are as good 
As I have given out him. My sons, I must, 
For mine own part, unfold a dangerous speech, 
Though, haply, well for you. 

Arv. Your danger 's ours. 

Gui. And our good his. 

Bel Have at it then, by leave. 

Thou hadst, great king, a subject who 
Was call'd Belarius. 



Scene 5.] CYMBELINE 139 

Cym. What of him? he is 

A baiiish'd traitor, 

Bel. He it is that hath 

Assumed this age; indeed a banish 'd man; 
I know not how a traitor. 

Cym. Take him hence: 320 

The whole world shall not save him. 

Bel. Not too hot: 

First pay me for the nursing of thy sons; 
And let it be confiscate all, so soon 
As I have received it, 

Cym. Nursing of my sons ! 

Bel. I am too blunt and saucy: here's my knee: 
Ere I arise, I will prefer my sons ; 
Then spare not the old father. Mighty sir, 
These two young gentlemen, that call me father 
And think they are my sons, are none of mine; 
They are the issue of your loins, my liege, 330 

And blood of your begetting. 

Cytti. How ! my issue ! 

Bel. So sure as you your father's. I, old Morgan, 
Am that Belarius whom you sometime banish'd: 
Your pleasure was my mere offence, my punishment 
Itself, and all my treason; that I suffer'd 
Was all the harm I did. These gentle princes — 
For such and so they are — these twenty years 
Have I train'd up: those arts they have as I 
Could put into them; my breeding was, sir, as 
Your highness knows. Their nurse, Euriphile, 340 

Whom for the theft I wedded; stole these children 
Upon my banishment: I moved her to't. 
Having received the punishment before. 
For that which I did then : beaten for loyalty 
Excited me to treason : their dear loss. 
The more of you 't was felt, the more it shaped 



I40 CYMBELINE [Act V. 

Unto my end of stealing them. But, gracious sir, 

Here are your sons again ; and I must lose 

Two of the sweet'st companions in the world. 

The benediction of these covering heavens 350 

Fall on their heads like dew! for they are worthy 

To inlay heaven with stars. 

Cym. Thou weep'st, and speak'st. 

The service that you three have done is more 
Unlike than this thou tell'st. I lost my children: 
If these be they, I know not how to wish 
A pair of worthier sons. 

Bel. Be pleased awhile. 

This gentleman, whom I call Polydore, 
Most worthy prince, as yours, is true Guiderius : 
This gentleman, my Cadwal, Arviragus, 

Your younger princely son : he, sir, was lapp'd ,360 

In a most curious mantle, wrought by the hand 
Oi his queen mother, which for more probation 
I can with ease produce. 

Cym. Guiderius had 

Upon his neck . mole, a sanguine star; 
It was a mark of wonder. 

Bel. This is he; 

Who hath upon him still that natural stamp: 
It was wise nature's end in the donation, 
To be his evidence now. 

Cytn. O, what, am I 

A mother to the birth of three? Ne'er mother 
Rejoiced deliverance more. Blest pray you be, 370 

That, after this strange starting from your orbs, 
You may reign in them now! O Imogen, 
Thou hast lost by this a kingdom. 

Imo. No, my lord ; 

I have got two worlds by 't. O my gentle brothers^ 
Have we thus met? O, never say hereafter 



Scene 5.] CYMBELINE 141 

But I am truest speaker: you call'd me brother, 
When I was but your sister; I you brothers, 
When ye were so indeed. 

Cym. Did you e'er meet? 

.Aiyj. Ay, my good lord. 

Gui. And at first meeting loved; 

Continued so, until we thought he died. 380 

Cor. By the queen's dram she swallow'd. 

Cym. O rare instinct! 

When shall I hear all through? This fierce abridgement 
Hath to it circumstantial branches, which 
Distinction should be rich in. Where? how lived you? 
A.nd when came you to serve our Roman captive? 
How parted with your brothers? how first met them? 
Why fled you from the court? and whither? These, 
And your three motives to the battle, with 
I know not how much more, should be demanded; 
And all the other by-dependencies, 390 

From chance to chance : but nor the time nor place 
Will serve our long inter'gatories. See, 
Posthumus anchors upon Imogen, 
And she, like harmless lightning, throws her eye 
On him, her brothers, me, her master, hitting 
Each object with a joy : the counterchange 
Is severally in all. Let 's quit this ground, 
And smoke the temple with our sacrifices. 
{To Belarms] Thou art my brother; so we'll hold thee ever. 

Imo. You are my father too, and did relieve me, 400 

To see this gracious season. 

Cym. All o'erjoy'd. 

Save these in bonds : let them be joyful too, 
For they shall taste our comfort. 

jpio. My good master, 

I will yet do you service. 

Luc. Happy be you ; 



142 



CYMBELINE [Act V. 



Cym. The forlorn soldier, that so nobly fought, 
He would have well becomed this place, and graced 
The thankings of a king. 

Post. I am, sir, 

The soldier that did company these three 
In poor beseeming; 'twas a fitment for 
The purpose I then foUow'd. That I was he, 410 

Speak, lachimo: I had you down and might 
Have made you finish. 

lach. \Kneeling\ I am down again: 
But now my heavy conscience sinks my knee, 
As then your force did. Take that life, beseech you. 
Which I so often owe: but your ring first; 
And here the bracelet of the truest princess 
That ever swore her faith. 

Post. Kneei not to me: 

The power that I have on you is to spare you ; 
The malice towards you to forgive you: live, 
And deal with others better. 

Cym. Nobly doom'd! 420 

We'll learn our freeness of a son-in-law; 
Pardon 's the word to all. 

Arv. You holp us, sir, 

As you did mean indeed to be our brother; 
Joy'd are we that you are. 

Post. Your servant, princes. Good my lord of Rome, 
Call forth your soothsayer: as I slept, methought 
Great Jupiter, upon his eagle back'd, 
Appear'd to me, with other spritely shows 
Of mine own kindred: when I waked, I found 
This label on my bosom; whose containing 430 

Is so from sense in hardness, that I can 
Make no collection of it: let him show 
His skill in the construction. 

Luc Philarmonus! 



Scene s-j CYMBELINE 14^ 

Sooth. Here, my good lord. 

Luc. Read, and declare the meaning. 

Sooth. \Reads\ 'When a lion's whelp shall, to himself 
unknown, without seeking find, and be embraced by a piece 
of tender air; and when from a stately cedar shall be lopped 
branches, which, being dead many years, shall after revive, 
be jointed to the old stock, and freshly grow; then shall 
Posthumus end his miseries, Britain be fortunate and flourish 
in peace and plenty.' 441 

Thou, Leonatus, art the lion's whelp; 
The fit and apt construction of thy name, 
Being Leo-natus, doth impart so much. 
\To Cymbeline] I'he piece of tender air, thy virtuous daughter, 
Which we call 'mollis aer'; and 'mollis aer' 
We term it * mulier ' : which ' mulier ' I divine 
Is this most constant wife; who, even now. 
Answering the letter of the oracle, 

Unknown to you, unsought, were clipp'd about 450 

With this most tender air. 

Cym. This hath some seeming. 

Sooth. The lofty cedar, royal Cymbeline, 
Personates thee: and thy lopp'd branches point 
Thy two sons forth; who, by Belarius stol'n, 
For many years thought dead, are now revived, 
To the majestic cedar join'd, whose issue 
Promises Britain peace and plenty. 

Cym. Well ; 

My peace we will begin. And, Caius Lucius, 
Although the victor, we submit to Caesar, 
And to the Roman empire; promising 460 

To pay our wonted tribute, from the which 
We were dissuaded by our wicked queen; 
Whom heavens, in justice, both on her and hers, 
Have laid most heavy hand. 

Sooth. The fingers of the powers above do tune 



144 



CYMBELINE [Act V. Sc> 5. 



I'he harmony of this peace. The vision 

Which I made known to Lucius, ere the stroke 

Of this yet scarce-cold battle, at this instant 

Is lull accomplish'd; for the Roman eagle, 

From south to west on wing soaring aloft, 470 

Lessen'd herself, and in the beams o' the sun 

So vanish'd: which foreshow'd our princely eagle, 

The imperial Caesar, should again unite 

His favour with the radiant Cymbeline, 

Which shines here in the west. 

Cym. Laud we the gods; 

And let our crooked smokes climb to their nostrils 
From our blest altars. Publish we this peace 
To all our subjects. Set we forward : let 
A Roman and a British ensign wave 

Friendly together: so through Lud's town march: 480 

And in the temple of great Jupiter 
Our peace we'll ratify; seal it with feasts. 
Set on there! Never was a war did cease. 
Ere bloody hands were wash'd, with such a peace. \Exeunt 



NOTES 



For single words, on which no note is given here, reference must be 
made to the Glossary. A word that occtirs several times in the same 
sense is usually atinotated only once, and the note on it can be found 
by reference to the Index. Students mnst bear in mind that no two 
words are synonymotis ; and therefore, rather than place too imtch 
reliance on the explanations here given, they should cultivate a sym- 
■pathetic feeling for the meaning of words and passages. 



"Fl" denotes a reading of the First Folio (1623); "Ff." the 
reading of at least the first two Folios. Only verbal emendations of 
the readings of the Folios are called attention to, not changes in 
spelling, punctuation, or arrangement of lines (see note on i. I. l). 
''■Abbott" stands for the third edition of Dr. Abbott's Shakespearian 
Grami?iar. References to other plays of Shakespeare are to act, 
scene, and line of the Globe edition. 

Time-analysis of the play by Mr. P. A. Daniel' 
"The time of the drama includes twelve days represented on the 
stage; with intervals. 

Day I. Act I. sc. i.-iii. 

An Interval. Posthumus's journey to Rome. 
,, 2. Act I. sc. iv. 

An Interval. lachimo's journey to Britain. 
,, 3. Act I. sc. V. and vi.. Act II. sc. i. and part of sc. ii. 
,, 4. Act II. sc. ii., in part, and sc. iii. [Act III. sc. i. also 
belongs to this day]. 
An Interval. lachimo's return journey to Rome. 
„ 5. Act II. sc. iv. and v. 

An Interval. Time for Posthumus's letters from 

Rome to arrive in Britain. 
[Act III. sc. i. See Day No. 4.] 
,, 6. Act III. sc. ii. and iii. 

An Interval, including one clear day. Imogen and 
Pisanio journey to Wales. 
,, 7. Act III. sc. iv. 

in Interval, including one clear day. IMsanio returns 
to court. 

1 Tra>isactio)is of Nezu Shalispere Society, 1877-79, p. 247. 
145 



146 CYMBELINE [Dramatis Persona;, 

Day 8. Act III. sc. v. and vi. 

[Act III. sc. vii. In Rome. Time, between Days 5 and 6.] 
An Interval, including one clear day. Cloten journeys 
to Wales. 
,, 9. Act IV. sc. i. and ii. 

All Interval — a few days perhaps. 
,, 10. Act IV. sc. iii. 
,, II. Act IV. sc. iv. 
,, 12. Act V." 

Title. " The Tragedie of Cymbeline." Ff. 

DRAMATIS PERSONS 

Cymbeline. See Appendix B. 

Cloten. In Holinshed, Mulmucius (iii. i. 53, 57) is "the son of 
Cloton ". See Appendix B. 

Posthiimiis Leonatns. Posthtimns is accented on the second syl- 
lable, except in iv. 2. 320, where the accent is on the first. The 
name was given him by Cymbeline because he was a posthumous 
child, i.e. born after the death of his father. See i. i. 40 ff. 
Posthumus in Holinshed is another name of Ascanius, son of ^Eneas 
(editiorr of 1807-8, i. 437). It is a singular fact that the opening 
stage-direction of Much Ado, in the quarto of 1600, runs: "Enter 
Leonato [and] Innogen his wife ". Leonato is governor of Messina 
in that play, but his only feminine relatives are his daughter Hero 
and his niece Beatrice. Shakespeare may have taken the name 
Leonatus from Sidney's Airadia. 

Gtiiderius. \ These names are taken from 

Arvirdgus (iii. 3. 96; v. 5. 359). / Holinshed (see Appendix B), 
as are also, I have no doubt, the assumed names, Polydore, Cadwal, 
and Morgan. Margan and Cunedag are nephews of "Cordeilla", 
youngest daughter of Lear. "Cunedag came into Cambria, now 
called Wales, where the said Margan gave him eftsoons a new battle; 
but being too weak in number of men, he was there overcome and 
slain in the field, by reason whereof that country took name of him, 
being there slain, and so is called to this day Glau Margan, which is 
to mean in our English tongue, Margan's land" (Holinshed, 1S07-8, 
i. 448). Polydore Vergil, a Latin chronicler under the first Tudors, 
is one of Holinshed's authorities, and as such the name " Polydor" 
often occurs in the margin. " Cadwallo " in Holinshed [ib. i. 610) 
is the British king Cadwalla, who slew Edwin, king of Northumbria, 
in 633 (see the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle under that year). Shakespeare 
may have taken a hint from Holinshed for the characters of Guiderius 
and Arviragus, " This Guiderius being a man of stout courage" [ib. 
i. 480), and of Arviragus: " He bare himself right manfully against 
Claudius and his Romans" (ib. i. 484). 



Act I.. Sc. I.] NOTES 147 

Lucius, in Holinshed {ib. i. 511), is the name of a king of Britain. 
The invasion of Caius Lucius is Shakespeare's invention. 

Imogen. In Holinshed, Innogen is the wife of Brute or Brutus, 
the great-grandson of ^■Eneas {ib. i. 439). 

Act I. — Scene I. 

The date of the commencement of the play is a.d. id, the twenty- 
fourth year of Cymbeline, the forty-second of Augustus. — Fleay. 

" The two Gentlemen give us information while the action waits" 
(Herford). They tell the audience and ourselves many things neces- 
sary for the understanding of the play : that Cymbeline, a widower 
with an only daughter, Imogen, has lately married a widow with an 
only son, Cloten; that their designs for securing the joint succession 
of this son and daughter by wedding them to each other have been 
frustrated by the marriage of Imogen and Posthumus Leonatus (a 
posthumous son of a famous British warrior, Sicilius Leonatus), who 
had been " bred as Imogen's playfellow " and made a gentleman of 
the bed-chamber; that in consequence of this marriage Posthumus 
is about to leave the court, a banished man ; and that Cymbeline's 
only other children were two sons, who had been stolen twenty years 
ago, the elder being then three years old, and had never been heard 
of since. 

Here the first scene ended in the Folios, and I should have 
adhered to this arrangement but for the inconvenience of departing 
from the Globe division. It would then be a solitary instance, it is 
true, of a first scene in Shakespeare fulfilling the function of Prologue, 
giving information without action ; but that might be merely one of 
the signs of the dramatic laxity referred to in the ' ' History and Date 
of the Play" (Introduction, p. ix). 

The remainder of the scene shows us Posthumus and Imogen 
taking a fond farewell and exchanging Mizpah-tokens, a ring and a 
bracelet; interrupted by the Queen, who is Imogen's jailer, and 
who, while feigning sympathetic indulgence for the young pair, 
reveals her true disposition by drawing the king to the spot, to dis- 
miss Posthumus abruptly and rail at his daughter. 

As already implied, this play is divided into acts and scenes in the 
Folios. 

1-7. The opening lines appear in F I as follows : — 
I Gettt. 
You do not meet a man but Frownes. 
Our bloods no more obey the Pleauens 
Then our Courtiers : 
Still seeme, as do's the Kings. 
2 Gent. But what's the matter? 

I. His daughter, and the heire of 's kingdome (whom 
He purpos'd to his wiues sole Sonne, a Widdow 



148 CYMBELINE [Act I. 

That late he married) hath referred her selfe 
Vnto a poore, but worthy Gentleman. 

1. bloods, dispositions. 

2. No, not. This is the key to the meaning of the sentence, as is 
clear from 11. 13, 14 below: 

" they wear their faces to the bent 
Of the king's looks ". 

Every face reflects the frown on the king's brow (at his daughter's 
marriage) as unvaryingly as our dispositions are obedient to heavenly- 
influences (in accordance with mediaeval superstition). 

An antithesis of the blood — which was supposed not to be in our 
own power, but to be dependent on the influences of the heavenly 
bodies — and the countenances, which are in our power really, though 
from flattery we bring them into a no less apparent dependence upon 
the sovereign, than the former are in actual dependence on the con- 
stellations. — Cole7-idge. 

3. king, Tyrwhitt ; kings, Ff. 

6, 7. referr'd herself Unto, bestowed her hand upon ; possibly 
an affectation of speech in keeping with much that follows. 

ID. touch'd at very heart, by the failure of his marriage 
scheme (11. 4, 5). 

22. In him that should compare, in the one that should be 
selected for comparison with Posthumus. 

24. he. Cf ii. 3. 145. Strict grammar requires him, which 
would be necessary in any completion of the sentence. In cases 
where the pronoun would be in the nominative in the completed 
sentence, modern grammar still hesitates between he and him. 
For a see Abbott, § 8r. 

25. My praise, however extensive, is within his merit [Joktison). 
For extend cf. i. 4. 18. 

29. Sicilius, in Holinshed (iii. 5), is a king of Britain. 

join. Jervis conjectured gain. Join yields good enough sense: 
he took an honourable part with Cassibelan against the Romans, but 
won his titles when serving under Tenantius. 

31. Tenantius, father of Cymbeline, and son of Lud, whose 
younger brother Cassibelan had usurped the throne on Lud's death. 
See Appendix B. 

37. fond of issue, doting on his children. 

43. time, time of life, years. 

47. This encomium is highly artful. To be at once in any great 
degree loved and praised is truly xzxt.— Johnson. 



Scene i.] .NOTES 149 

49. A glass that feated them, a mirror wherein they fashioned 
themseh'es. Cf. 2 Henry IV., ii. 3. 21, 22: 

" he [Hotspur] was indeed the glass 
Wherein the noble youth did dress themselves". 

Unique instance of verby^a^ in Shakespeare. For the adjective, see 
V. 5. 88; and the Glossary. 

50. to his mistress. The to is rendered redundant by the 
anacohithon (the name given to the want of sequence in a sentence, 
when the latter part does not correspond in construction with the 
former). 

51. For v/hom, because of his marriage with whom. 

her own price, her own worth, not ' the price she put upon 
him '. 

60. no guess [resulting] in knowledge. 

63. convey'd, sc. away, made away with, kidnapped. 

65. That, the relative pronoun, not the conjunction with the 
subject it omitted. See Abbott, § 279. 

70. Scene 2 began with this line in the Ff. It was made a part 
of scene l by Rowe. 

The Queen allows the interview to take place in order that she 
may bring the king to witness it, and so incense him further against 
Posthumus. See 11. 103-106. 

71. After the slander, in accordance with the slanderous repu- 
tation of most stepmothers. Cf. i. 6. I. 

78. lean'd unto his sentence: cf. "to bow to the ruling of 
the court". 

79. inform, suggest to. 

84. This is the first indication given of the true character of the 
Queen, though of course Imogen does not suspect the depths of 
depravity afterwards revealed. The First Gentleman is too much 
of a courtier to express to an evident stranger any suspicions he may 
have had with reference to the Queen, though his scruples do not 
extend to her son. 

88. me : you. The pronouns are emphatic. ' I have no fear for 
myself beyond what is implied in filial duty.' 

104-106. The Queen is both parties in her quarrels with the 
King, first the offending party, and then receiving every satisfaction 
from the King, in order to be friends again, as if she were the 
injured party. 

This "Aside" reveals much; the King is seen to be a mere tool 
in the hands of the Queen. 

113. But, only. ' Keep it but till', no longer. 



I50 



CYMBELINE [Act I. 



ii6. sear: probably only another spelling of cere, the "bonds of 
death " being the cerecloth {Merchant of Vetiice), ox cerements {Hamlet), 
a waxed linen shroud. See Glossary. 

ii8. it: by change of person for 'thee'. Other examples of 
change of person are: i. 6. II2-II4; iii. 3. 104, 105 ; iv. 2. 217, 218; 
V. i. 3. 4- 

iig, 120. Cf. 11. 145-147: 

" and he is 
A man worth any woman, overbuys nie 
Almost the sum he pays". 

The lovers' generous estimate of each other's worth is very fine. 

124. see: sc. one another. Cf. i. 4. 30: "Sir, we have known 
together in Orleans ". See Abbott, § 382. Possibly the idiom is of 
great antiquity, for we find in the Old English poem of Beowulf, 

1-1875: 

' ' ^aet hie seo'S'San geseon moston , 

that they might see [one another] again ; and the same expression is 
found again in an O.E. poem on St. Andrew (1. 1012). 

126. fraught, burden. Cf Tempest, i. 2. 13: 

" The fraughting souls within her ". 
Elsewhere in Shakespeare it is a perf. part. = freighted. 

129. the good remainders of the court, the few good people 
left there. 

135. senseless of, insensible to. 

touch, feeling: the "sweet pain" of parting with Poslhumus 
deadens her sensibility to all besides. 

137. that way, past grace. This appears to me a theological 
play upon words. The sinner is beyond reach of grace as long as he 
despairs. 

140. puttock, "the glede, a species of kite; also, sometimes, the 
common buzzard " ( Webster); a useless bird of prey. See Glossary. 

146, 147. overbuys me Almost the sum he pays, pays too 
much for worthless me by almost the whole of the purchase-money, 
his precious self. 

156. advice, deliberation, reflection. 

The Queen wishes to conciliate Imogen, in the hope that she will 
forget Posthumus and marry Cloten. See i. 5- 49- 

157, 158. and, being aged, Die of this folly: which Imogen 
would no doubt very gladly do. The feebleness of this curse is 
characteristic. 

162. Posthumus evidently is a hero to his valet. 

167. in Afric, where there would be no one to part them. 



Scene 2.] NOTES 151 

172. Of what commands I should be subject to, as to the 
obedience I should render. 

176. walk awhile, withdraw for a time. 

177. I, Capell; Ff. omit. 

Scene 2. 

This scene is introduced to show up Cloten in a character which — 
to judge by his subsequent conduct — he hardly deserves, that of a 
conceited coward. The First Lord flatters him too grossly for human 
credulity, and the Second Lord, by "asides", lampoons him, for the 
benefit of the groundlings. The allusions are obscure, and the 
quibbles poor. It would be a relief to know that Shakespeare was 
not responsible for either this scene, or the first in Act IL Both, 
however, may be omitted without loss in reading this play. — Ingleby. 

1-4. You are reeking like a sacrifice, and unwholesome cold air 
is pouring in to take the place of that with which you are favouring 
the atmosphere; therefore you had better change your shirt. 

5, 6. Have I hurt him? i.e. Posthumus, in their late encounter. 

8. passable, penetrable without being wounded. 

9. throughfare. Through and thorough are variant spellings of 
the same word. Cf. Matthew, iii. 12: "and he will throughly purge 
his floor ". 

10. II. Cloten's sword did not give as good as it got; it slunk 
away, like a debtor afraid to leave the back streets for fear of im- 
prisonment. 

23. election, choice; so also i. i. 53, and i. 6. 167. Here there 
is probably another theological play upon words. 

26. sign, (i) Possibly 'the sign of a house or inn', almost all of 
which, says Steevens, "had a motto or some attempt at a witticism" 
underneath them. (2) Possibly ' a constellation ', in which case wit 
is used in its more common Elizabethan meaning of 'understanding', 
' intellect '. This interpretation receives some support from shines, 
in line 28. (3) But shines may equally well be suggested by re- 
flection, and this is quite in accordance with Shakespeare's way of 
punning, reflection being used by the Second Lord in a different 
sense from that in which it is used by the First ( = radiance). In 
that case the First Lord simply repeats his first remark in other 
words — her mental equipments do not correspond with her fair 
exterior — which is quite as much as we have a right to expect from 
him. 

34, Addressed to the Second Lord. 



152 CYMBELINE [Act I. 

Scene 3. 

Imogen's confidences to Pisanio show how utterly he is trusted 
by these married lovers ; her pretty, clever talk about her husband 
reveals more fully than we have yet seen it the wonderfully beautiful 
union of heart and brain that we find in her throughout. 

4. offer'd mercy has been explained as ' the pardon of a con- 
demned criminal', which does not reach him. To me, the most 
probable reference is to the Divine mercy, oflered and not accepted. 

9. this, Warburton; his, Ff. No altogether satisfactory emenda- 
tion has been proposed, but the sense seems to be : "As long as I 
was within ear-shot he called to me; when hearing failed he still 
waved me his farewells, till I could no longer distinguish him ". 

12. fits and stirs, impulses and movements. 

15, 16. ere left To after-eye him, ere you ceased to gaze 
after him. With this sense of leave, not uncommon in Shakespeare, 
cf Fr. laisser: " Ne laissez pas de le surveiller", do not cease to 
keep an eye on him. Cf. also the absolute use of leave in i. 4. 88, 
and ii. 2. 4. 

17. eye-strings. These are supposed to be the tendons which 
move the eye-ball ; but in this place the word is more applicable to 
the nerve-fibres which contract and expand the pupil. — Ingleby. 

crack'd. To us, a-ack'd is something of an anti-climax after 
broke. But in Shakespeare crack was a stronger term than now, as 
in Coriolamis, i. I. 72: 

" Cracking ten thousand curbs 
Of more strong link asunder". 

Cf. its intransitive use in iii. i. 28. 

18, 19. the diminution Of space, i.e. of the space he filled to 
the eye. 

24. vantage, opportunity, 

29. Cf. iii. 4. 48, 49. For j-//£ = woman, cf. i. 6. 40, and see 
Abbott, § 224. 

32. encounter me with orisons, join me in prayers. 

33. or ere, or before. Here each word has its separate force, 
whereas in iii. 2. 64 ; v. 3. 50, and elsewhere in Shakespeare, or ere 
(often incorrectly writterw or e'er) is merely a reduplication of ere. 

35. charming words, words which should have the power of a 
charm to ward off every kind of evil. The other passages in the 
play, in which the word occurs — i. 6. 1 16; iv. 2. 277; v. 3. 32, 68 — 
should be compared with this. In Shakespeare it always retains 
something of the primary sense it has in this passage, even when it 
has moved so far towards its modern meaning as in Twelfth Night, 
ii. 2. 19: " Fortune forbid ray outside have not charm'd her". 



Scene 4.] NOTES 153 

Scene 4. 

Verse and Prose. Shakespeare's choice of these two modes of 
expression is noteworthy. It is mainly determined by two considera- 
tions : {a) the characters speaking ; [b) the dominant sentiment or 
interest of the situation. Since prose is nearer to the language of 
ordinary life, it is used [a) by clowns, servants, and women in 
familiar conversation; [b) whenever the interest is mainly comic, 
intellectual, or commonplace. Verse is a more ceremonious and 
conventional mode of speech, and so is used (a) by noble persons; 
[b) wherever the interest is mainly emotional, passionate, or imagina- 
tive.— y. C. Smith, editor of As You Like It in the Warwick Shake- 
speare. 

This general statement must not be applied too rigidly to any par- 
ticular play ; but it is interesting to note that Cloten evidently finds 
talking in verse very hard work, for he loses no opportunity of 
slipping into prose. The student must observe throughotU the play 
what scenes are written in prose. 

Though the present scene must be felt by the spectator or reader 
to develop an almost tragic interest, it commences in very common- 
place fashion, and would impress us as rather offhand than momentous 
throughout, were it not for the suspicion that much will depend upon 
it in the future. It should be compared with the sequel, Act II. sc. 4; 
there the intense interest demands verse ; here the dramatist would 
have been seriously hampered by it. 

Follow the scene carefully after reading the two criticisms below, 
and try to decide for yourself which critic is in the right. It will 
perhaps help you to decide if you turn to lachimo's own account of 
the matter in v. 5. 153-209 (leave out of sight for the present that his 
account differs in some unimportant points of fact). 

"It is a grievous fault that Posthumus accepts so disgraceful a 
challenge, and argues defective acumen that he does not discern base 
motive when it is put upon the footing of a wager for his priceless 
diamond." — IV. IV. Lloyd. 

"The truth is, that Posthumus, under the first shock and provo- 
cation of this revolting encounter, behaves both modestly and 
patiently — ' as calm as virtue ', according to lachimo's jjenitent 
admission. He does not propose the wager : it is forced upon him 
by the scoffs and taunts of the Italian ; and is accepted at last with a 
view to punish them, — first, by the repulse which his addresses are 
sure to sustain, — secondly, by the loss of his property, — and thirdly, 
by the duel which is to follow. They who have so violently objected 
against the husband's procedure on this occasion, have judged of it 
according to the cool, calculating habits of feeling belonging to the 
modern time, — ignorant of, or overlooking the real character of that 
chivalric love, that truly religious faith and devotion of the heart, 
which Shakespeare found it here his business to paint." — G. Fletcher. 

2. of a crescent note, &c., making his mark, giving promise of 
earning such a name as he has since been credited with [tincarned, 



154 CYMBELINE [Act I. 

lachimo wishes to imply; observe his depreciatory tone from the 
first). For «(?/£= distinction, cf. i. 6. 22; ii. 3. 121 ; iii. 3. 58. 

4. without the help of admiration, without admiring him. 

6. I : sc. had. 

II. could behold the sun: a reference to the eagle, which, as 
Milton says in Areopagitica, "kindles her undazzl'd eyes at the full 
midday beam ". 

13, 14. words him ... a great deal from the matter, causes 
him to be spoken of in a way differing widely from the truth. Cf. 
"story", 1. 28. For the pregnant use oi from cf. v. 5. 431, and see 
Abbott, § 158. 

16. This continued disparagement of Posthumus by lachimo, who 
is envious of his reputation, makes the rest of the scene appear less 
forced and unnatural. 

17. under her colours, of her party. 

17, 18. are wonderfully to extend him, tend and are intended 
to give him a reputation far beyond his due. I incline strongly to 
justify the plural are in the belief that lachimo takes up the French- 
man's "banishment" into the subject by his approving "ay", and 
adds to it " the approbation, &c.". Abbott regards it as an instance 
of " confusion of proximity"; see § 412. 

18, 19. an easy battery might lay flat, might easily be impugned. 

19, 20. without less quality, with no other than a beggar's 
position. In support of the truth of Malone's observation, that 
" whenever less or viore is to be joined with a verb denoting want, 
or a preposition of a similar import, Shakespeare never fails to be 
entangled in a grammatical inaccuracy, or rather, to use words that 
express the very contrary of what he means ", many instances might 
be quoted, e.g. Lear, ii. 4. 140-142 : 

' ' I have hope 
You less know how to value her desert 
Than she to scant her duty ". 

20, 21. How creeps acquaintance? How do you come to be 
acquainted? 

24. Briton. Britain, Ff. always, as in Holinshed. 

25. knowing, experience in society. Cf. ii. 3. 96. 

The stage-direction, ''Enter PoSTHUMUS", occurs in Ff. after 
"life"; it was shifted to its present position by Dyce. 

30. The earlier meeting of the Frenchman and Posthumus in 
Orleans overcomes the awkwardness of an introduction to a party of 
strangers. Besides, the Frenchman revives the memory of a former 
quarrel, and thus paves the way for the subsequent dispute on a 
similar ground. 



Scene 4.] NOTES 155 

32. which I will be ever to pay and yet pay still, for which 
I shall always be in your debt though never ceasing to return them 
{Abbott, § 405). 

36. importance, import, cause. 

39. to go even with what I heard is synonymous with ' to be 
guided by others' experiences'. Yox go even in this sense cf. Twelfth 
Night, V. 246: 

" Were you a woman, as the rest goes even ". 

The sense is: ' I was then a hot-headed young fellow: I preferred 
to go my own way rather than &c. '. 

41. not. Ff. omit; inserted by Rowe. 

44. such two that. See Abbott, §§ 279, 427. 

confounded, destroyed ; so often. Cf. confusion, iii. i. 64. 
* One would have destroyed the other, or they would both have 
fallen.' 

49, 50. fell in praise, fell to praising. 

50. this gentleman, Posthumus, in the affair at Orleans. Shake- 
speare introduces the previous night's argument, in which lachimo 
had taken part, as another means of easing the approach to the 
following quarrel. 

52. constant -qualified, endowed with constancy: Capell'? 
emendation for constant^ qualified, Ff. Ingleby defends the Folio 
reading, but his justificatory passages contain "5^? (qualified", and are 
therefore not true parallels. 

59, 60. though I profess myself her adorer, not her friend 
has afforded plenty of scope for discussion. Friend = lover, and 
the usual explanation is: 'I regard her with the calm devotion 
of a worshipper, not with the rapt enthusiasm of a lover'; but it is 
easier to believe that Posthumus uses 'adorer' as a much stronger 
word than 'friend', and to regard the after-thought, "though... 
friend", as a concession to the enemy: 'I admit I'm anything but 
an unprejudiced champion '. 

61-63. The reference is to 11. 52, 53, and 58. ' If Posthumus had 
said [not "more fair", but] ''■as fair and as good [as any lady in 
Italy]" — a comparison wherein beauty and goodness go hand in hand 
— that would have been beyond the mark for any lady in Britain.' 

65. but. Ff. omit ; inserted by Malone. 

69. The value of the ring is of course infinitely enhanced for 
Posthumus because it was Imogen's gift and the pledge of her love. 
Notice how the growing heat of the disputants is shown by the 
pointedness of their speeches, by the dropping of circumlocutions 
and affectations. 

72. if; or if, Ff. ; or omitted by Rowe. 



156 CYMBELINE [Act I. 

73. purchase, Rowe ; purchases, Ff. 

80. unprizable estimations, things of priceless value. 

81. casual, liable to mischance. 

81, 82. a that way accomplished courtier. For other "phrase- 
compounds " see ii. 4. 19, and v. 5. 468, and Abbott, § 434. 

85. convince, prevail against. 

87. fear = fear for, is common in Shakespeare. 

90. at first. See Abbott, § 90. 

93. to friend, for my friend; Abbott, § 189. 

96. it, your ring. 

100. abused, deceived; cf. i. 6. 127; iii. 4. 102, 120. 

109. approbation, proof, making good. So approve^^xove., iv, 
2. 380, and V. 5. 245. Cf. Acts, ii. 22: "A man approved of God 
among you by miracles ". 

III. whom, by a species of attraction, where modern grammar 
requires who. It is one of the numerous remnants of O.E. grammar 
\n Shakespeare. 

114. See Introduction, p. xviii. 

119. afraid, Warburton; a Friend, Ff. 

121. religion apparently means 'conscientious scruple' against 
putting your wife to a test which you can't expect her to stand. 

125. undergo, carry out, take upon oneself. Cf. iii. 5. 109. 

127. It will be seen, in ii. 3, that Imogen, under similar provo- 
cation—the defamation of her husband — loses her self-control in 
no more dignified fashion than he. It is almost a justification 
of Posthumus that his conduct on this occasion does not compare 
unfavourably with his wife's. 

132. Observe lachimo's artful statement of the conditions, some- 
thing like "heads, you win; tails, I lose"; in reality he states only 
those conditions which will hold in case of his failure. Posthumus, 
however, while accepting them, makes the statement complete. 

136, 137. your commendation for my more free entertain- 
ment, your recommendation to procure me a more cordial welcome. 
148. lest the bargain should catch cold and starve, lest the 
wager which was laid in the heat of the dispute should be declared 
off, when the disputants have had time for cool reflection. — Ingleby. 

Scene 5. 

This scene is necessary to relieve the tension, and in order to 
allow lachinio to reach the court of Cymbeline ; otherwise it is rather 



Scene 5.] NOTES 157 

important for subsequent developments than specially interesting in 
itself. 

15. confections, drugs. Again, v. 5. 246. 

17. did. For the sequence of tenses see Abbott, § 370. 

18. conclusions, experiments; still preserved in "to try con- 
clusions ". 

20. human : always spelt humane in the old editions, but with 
the accent on the first syllable. 

22. act, action; often so used. 

25. the seeing. Here, and in 1. 41, the is a remnant of the old 
verbal noun construction, " the seeing of these effects", from which 
our so-called gerundial construction was developed. See Abbott, § 93. 

26. noisome and infectious, both disgusting to you and dan- 
gerous in the way of infection, i.e. by their being taken up into her 
system . — Deigh ton. 

32. Hark thee. Abbott, § 212, regards this thee, not as a 
reflexive pronoun proper, but as a euphonic unemphatic reduction 
of thoti, which we have still further reduced to nothing. 

39-42. If Shakespeare had not felt something akin to -contempt 
for vulgar melodramatic effects, he would not have given us this 
premonition of the result of Imogen's swallowing the Queen's " con- 
fection ". 

42-44. For passages of the same general tenor see Introduction, 
p. xxi, and cf. iii. 2. 14, 15. 

44. So to be false, by {or inx) thus being false. The infinitive 
was used much more widely in Shakespeare's day than in ours, 
especially in contexts where we now employ, as here, a gerund 
governed by a preposition. As Abbott points out, in Elizabethan 
English 'to walk' might also denote 'by walking', 'as regards 
walking', 'for walking', &c. Thus in 1. 58, "To be depender" = 
from being dependent; in iv. 4. 2, "to lock " = in locking; in v. 3. 
28, "But to look back "= by merely looking back; while in iii. I. 
70, "to seek" is best represented by the present participle 'seeking'. 

[The student should make for himself lists, which can afterwards 
be enlarged from other plays, of the chief grammatical and other 
anomalies, such as, words differently spelt or accented then and 
now, irregular past participles, &c.] 

47. quench, grow cool, or let her grief be quenched. Abbott 
says that in Elizabethan, as compared with Victorian English, 
"Clearness was preferred to grammatical correctness, and brevity 
both to correctness and clearness". See the admirable summary 
of the chief differences between the "Queen's English" of the two 
periods in the Introduction to his Shakespearian Grammar. 

54. being, all the conditions of life, including place of abode. 



158 CYMBELINE [Act I. 

56. decay, spoil, i.e. either to prevent him from doing a day's 
work, or to undo the work of a day earlier in his life. 

58. leans, is tottering to its fall. 

64. What is more cordial, anything more spirit-reviving. 

65. farther, Ff.; when used as an adjective modern editions often 
change the word io further. 

68, 69. ' Think on what a chance [of promotion] thou changest 
{or wilt change) [masters] ; remember too t?jat thou hast thy same 
mistress still, and my son to boot.' 

73. to this desert, to deserve this. 

77, 78. And the remembrancer... lord, arid one who reminds 
her to keep her plighted troth to her lord. Refuenibrancer, in law, 
was the name of an officer in the exchequer. 

79, 80. shall quite unpeople her Of liegers for her sweet, 
shall deprive her of her husband's only ambassador at this court. 
" Liegers for her sweet " is a sarcastically exaggerated equivalent of 
"agent for his master" in 1. 76, as if Imogen's "sweet" were a 
foreign power. For lieger see Glossary. 

Scene 6. 

Here we have lachimo's sorry and foredoomed attempt to win the 
wager. He quails at the first sight of Imogen, but, calling "auda- 
city" to his aid, makes a desperate bid for success. Up to a certain 
point all goes well for him. Starting with an enthusiastic recom- 
mendation from Posthumus, he first feigns a fit of abstraction, of 
which he takes advantage to reflect indirectly on the conduct of 
Posthumus, and thus awaken Imogen's anxiety, making his insinua- 
tions ever less vague ; but the inevitable false step comes when he 
changes his tone to one of direct flattery, and proceeds to " expound 
his beastly mind " to her. Then her first thought is of her personal 
danger, her second — of resentment — shows her clear, practical intellect, 
lachimo, however, is equal to the occasion, and beats a masterly 
retreat. His insidious eloquence and Imogen's behaviour deserve 
equally careful attention : the one is as diabolically clever as the 
other is magnificently natural. 

4. My supreme crown of grief, the greatest and crowning 
sorrow of that grief, whose lesser tributaries are the three just 
specified — cruelty, falsity, and folly=" those repeated vexations of 
it " (Ingleby). 

6, 7. most miserable Is the desire that's glorious, most 
miserable are those whose ambition is for glory. 

9. Which seasons comfort, the fruition of which, having one's 
honest will, gives a zest to comfort. — Abbott, § 337. 

Fie! Imogen is sorry to have her solitude broken in upon. 



Scene 6.) NOTES IS9 

II. Change you, do you change colour? Imogen's colour 
changes rapidly from excitement, tremor, expectation of good or 
bad news. 

17. She is alone the Arabian bird, she alone is the phoenix, 
of which Cynewulf says : " Himself is to himself both son and own 
dear father ". Alone, because there was never more than one 
phoenix. 

20. Parthian. The Parthians were a warlike Asiatic tribe living 
south-east of the Caspian. Their tactics in war became proverbial. 

23. tied, bound by the ties of friendship, indebted. 
Reflect upon, regard. 

24. your trust is either ' my trust in you ', or ' your position of 
trust as my wife'. 

27. takes. Pope; take, Ff. 

31-50. All this is a soliloquy in feigned abstraction; Imogen's 
interruptions being unheeded. lachimo begins in the most imper- 
sonal way: "What, are men mad?" "and can we not?". But 
already in 1. 39 he is particularizing, "two such shes", meaning, of 
course, Imogen and her imaginary rival. 

32. crop. Crosby proposed scope ; I retain crop, which I take to 
be a bold metaphor for the wide expanse or prospect of sea and land, 
suggesting the thought of a harvest. The general sense is : Cannot 
the eyes, which can take in the whole of heaven and earth at one 
sweep, and, on the other hand, can distinguish two objects, in heaven 
or earth, almost exactly alike, — cannot they distinguish fair and foul? 

34. twinn'd stones refers to the likeness, as of twins, between 
the stones on the beach. 

35. number'd, numerous, containing a great number. "It seems 
to be intended to bring the multitude of similar stones on the beach 
into comparison with the multitude of similar stars in the sky. 
Men's eyes can distinguish the stars from one another and the stones 
likewise, though both are so numerous and so much alike." Theo- 
bald proposed th' unnumbered— \.\\q innumerable. 

36. spectacles, organs of vision, eyes. 

37. admiration, in its classical sense of ' wonder'. 

38. It cannot be i' the eye, such perversity of choice cannot 
be the eye's fault. 

41. in this case of favour, in judging of grace, charm. Beauty 
appeals to the eye, grace to the judgment, daintiness of appearance 
to the appetite. In iii. 4. 48 and iv. 2. 104 /(7WMr= personal 
appearance. 

44, 45. ' Instead of tempting the appetite, would nauseate and 
produce retching from an empty stomach.' The sensation is familiar 



i6o 



CYMBELINE [Act I. 



to bad sailors. Should and would, shall and will, are frequently 
interchanged, as here, in i. 4. 35, and iv. 3. 18. 

46. trow: from I trow -1 wonder, originally 'I believe'; thence 
the stages must have been 'I suppose', 'I guess', 'I doubt', 'I 
wonder '. 

52. Desire, seek out. lachimo takes the necessary precaution of 
getting Pisanio out of the way by sending him on a feigned errand. 

53. strange and peevish, strange to the place and foolish. 
Peevish usually = foolish, simple, silly in Shakespeare; cf. Richard III., 

iii. I. 31 ; 

" What an indirect and peevish course". 

58. none a stranger there. Abbott (§§ 53, 85) considers that 
none here has adverbial force, = ne'er a stranger. To punctuate thus, 
"none, a stranger there", would be a simpler explanation. 

65. furnaces. Abbott says that in Elizabethan English "almost 
any part of speech can be used as any other part of speech... Any 
noun, adjective, or neuter verb can be used as an active verb". 
Among nouns and adjectives used as transitive verbs in this play he 
mentions (§ 290): furnace, foot (iii. 5. 138), tongtie, and brain (v. 4. 
146). 

67. from 's free lungs, freely, heartily. 

71. his free hours, sc. during; accusative of duration of time. 

78-81. In himself... pity too. ' As regards himself alone he is 
greatly to blame; as regards you, whom I must suppose to be irre- 
deemably his, his conduct amazes me and fills me with pity.' This 
is, I believe, the meaning of this difficult sentence. Most recent 
editors punctuate line 79 thus: 

" In you, which I account his, beyond all talents". 
This makes the passage yield a totally different meaning, as in the 
following paraphrase (Deighton's) : 'Heaven's bounty to him is 
abundant in regard to what is inherent in himself {e.g. noble descent, 
heroic character, manifold accomplishments), while in regard to you, 
whom I look upon as belonging to him, it is beyond all limit ; but 
while I am on this account compelled to wonder, I am also com- 
pelled to pity'. 

83. wreck: wrack, Ff. always. 

For the omission of the relative pronoun see Abbott, § 244. 

85. me, pleonastic. 

94. doubting things go ill, the fear that things are going 
wrong. Cf. doubt in iv. 4. 14. 

96. timely knowing, being known in time. Knowing, as if the 
subject of the sentence were ' we ' or ' I ', is a good example of an 
" unrelated participle ". 



Scene 6.] NOTES i6l 

98. What both you spur and stop, the information which 
(like a horse) you both urge onward and rein in. 

loi. this object, Imogen's beautiful self. 

103. should I, damn'd then, were I (in that case damned) to. 
This begins the second protasis; the apodosis is in 11. 109-111. 

104. Slaver with lips as common, exchange disgusting kisses 
with lips that are as much common property. 

io5, 107. Made hard ... labour, as hardened (figuratively) by 
constant falseness as if they had been hardened (literally) by toil. 

107. by-peeping, casting sidelong glances, as at a companion 
sitting by one's side. 

108. unlustrous, Rowe ; illustrious, Ff. ; ill-lustrous, Ingleby. 
Cf. As You Like It, ii. 7. 21 : "lack-lustre eye". 

Ill, 112. Notice the tender mildness of this reproach, 

113. Inclined: causal use of the adjective; 'because I am in- 
clined ', ' because I am glad to convey '. 

115. conscience, consciousness, inmost thoughts. Cf. ii. 2. 36. 

116. Charms: see note on i. 3. 35. The singular verb after a 
relative pronoun with a plural antecedent Abbott connects with the 
fact that the relative has no inflection: see § 247 (but also § 333), 
and cf. ii. 3. 21. 

The disgusting detail into which lachimo immediately enters, as 
to the way in which, he says, her husband spends the money drawn 
from her own coffers, instead of strengthening her conviction and 
rousing her resentment, as he had anticipated, has precisely the con- 
trary effects. It both affords her time to recover from the first stun- 
ning shock given to her mind by such a communication acting upon 
the unguarded confidence into which she had been betrayed, and, 
by the very overcharging of the picture which he draws, begins to 
awaken her incredulity as to the truth of the representation. — Fletcher. 

I18-122. 'For a lady, so fair and heir of such an empire, that she 
would make the greatest king himself twice over, to be put on an 
equality with wantons, hired with the very allowance that she herself 
pays!' Exhibition in Shakespeare has only this meaning, which is 
still retained at the universities. 

124. Recoil, degenerate. 

132. close, secret. 

Imogen's call to Pisanio is a striking testimony to his worth and 
her confidence in him. Notice her sudden transition from dejection 
to vigour and animation, due partly to indignation, partly to her 
restored belief in her husband. 

137. Note the omission after " end", o{ as correlative with such. 

140. Solicit'st: solicites, Ff. So in iii. 3. 103, refts, Ff., for 
6 (M 332) 



i62 CYMBELINE [Act I., Sc. 6. 

reffst. Abbott, § 340, says that in verbs ending with t, -test final 
in the second person singular often becomes -ts for euphony. 

144. The clause is in apposition to it in the previous line. In 
present English we should either supply ' for' — ^ for a saucy stranger 
to expound' — or turn ^ that .. .should Q%^o\\T\dL\ 

146. who : cf. iii. 3. 87 ; iv. 2. 76 (who for -whom interrogative), 
and see Abbott, § 274. 

149-151. ' The trust that your lady has in you is worthy of your 
faith in her, and your perfect goodness deserves that confident trust 
of hers.' 

155-170. Remember that this is not true, although Imogen be- 
lieves it; and see with what subtle cunning lachimo turns to good 
account his own previous slanders and insults, by making Imogen 
believe that "the love I bear him Made me to fan you thus"; in 
fact, that it was purely out of love for her husband he had designed 
this test, in order that he might carry back a report of her unalter- 
able constancy. 

157. That which he is, new o'er, over again and more than 
ever, that which he is already. 

one: Abbott (§ 18) thinks that this word is emphatic, = above 
all, alone. 

161. Cf. Acts., xiv. II: "The gods are come down to us in the 
likeness of men ". 

163. seeming, a verbal noun — 'a more than mortal bearing'. 

168. Which ... cannot err: either (i) ' a judgment which is not 
liable to error', or (2) 'an election ( = choice) in which you cannot 
be mistaken '. 

169, 170. fan...chafifless. Qi. Matthew, m. 12: "Whose ^:« is in 
his hand... but the chaff" he will burn up". 

171. The critics whose opinions I quoted at the head of this scene 
are equally opposed here. Imogen "is as inconsiderate in putting 
any trust in the beguiling Italian afterwards, as her husband in 
making covenants of honour with one so self- convicted of baseness 
and mean thoughts" {Lloyd). 

She betrays no weakness of judgment in accepting this explana- 
tion from a man introduced to her, under her husband's own hand, 
as " one of the noblest note ", to whose kindnesses he was most 
infinitely obliged. Overlooking, though not quite forgetting, the 
liberty taken with herself, the revulsion of feeling in her generous 
breast makes her welcome the insinuating stranger with hardly less 
cordiality than before, though with the added reserve of a dignity 
and a delicacy too lately wounded. — Fletcher. 

172. When did lachimo conceive the attempt to conceal his 
failure and win the wager by fraud? Did he devise it in case of 
failure before his arrival in Britain? or was it the fabrication of the 
few moments intervening since his defeat? 



Act II., Sc. I.] NOTES 163 

172. Observe how skilfully Shakespeare manages this incident in 
comparison with his sources. In Boccaccio Ambrogiuolo had to remain 
in the chest till the third day ; in JVeshvard for Smelts the villain 
concealed himself under the bed. 

178. The best feather of our wing, the choicest spirit of our 
fellowship. Tor feather =^hird' cL Twelfth Night, \\\. i. 71: 
"And, like the haggard, check at every feather 
That comes before his eye". 

For wz'«^= ' fellowship ' cf. Dekker's Bellman of London (1608): 
"Of all the mad rascals that are of this wing the Abraham-man is 
the most fantastic". 

189. Attended, guarded. Shakespeare uses this transitive verb 
in several different senses, some of which are illustrated in this play: 
cf i. 2. 35 and ii. i. 48 (=accompany), i. 6. 135 ( = attend to, listen 
to), ii. 3. 36 (= attend at, do homage at), iv. 2. 334 (=wait for). 
For its intransitive use see iii. 3. 22 (and note), 77. 



Act II. — Scene I. 

This scene is in many ways little more than a repetition of i. z 
{q.v.). It serves no special purpose, except to separate the two 
Imogen-Iachimo scenes. The Second Lord rises into verse when 
he is no longer playing to the groundlings with his Asides. 

I, 2. In the game of bowls, to which Shakespeare has several 
allusions, the object of each player is to roll his bowls so that they 
come to rest as near as possible to the jack, the small bowl towards 
which aim is taken. The most successful stroke is to "kiss the 
jack ", i.e. to play one's bowl alongside and touching the jack. 
From this position, however, one may be dislodged, as Cloten was, 
by the "up-cast" (delivery) of a following player's bowl. 

8. like him, like his. 

II. ha? eh? 

18, ig. Jack- slave. See Jackanapes in Glossary. 

21, 22. How much Shakespeare intended to convey by this fooling 
is doubtful, but the danger of reading more into his words than he 
intended is exemplified by the following: "Ingleby says that Cloten 
is compared to a capon merely for his fatness ; but surely there is an 
allusion to the want of courage of emasculated animals " (Deighton). 
It is certain that comb on is a pun on capon, and that the Second 
Lord meant that Cloten is a coxcomb. A cock's comb formed part 
of a fool's cap; hence coxcomb in Shakespeare meant (l) a fool's cap, 
(2) a fool. The puns on curtail and crop the ears, rank and smelt 
above, are sufficiently obvious. 



i64 CYMBELINE lAct II. 

25. companion, a term of contempt, ' low fellow ' ; often so 
used. 

42. Foolish proceedings cannot be derogatory to an acknowledged 
fool. 

56. It is plainly significant of the Queen's increasing daring and 
recklessness that even this courtier knows her to be " hourly coining 
plots ". The Physician, we have seen, had the darkest suspicions ; 
but, on the other hand, Imogen seems only to have vaguely mis- 
crusted her as "false", while Pisanio did not even suspect the 
contents of the mysterious box. 

Scene 2. 

Was ever the victory of silent beauty, elegance, and purity, over 
the awe-strnck spirit of a sensualist, so exquisitely painted or so 
nobly celebrated as in these lines! It is not "the flame o' the 
taper" that here "Bows toward her", but the unhallowed flames 
in a voluptuary and a treacherous breast, that render extorted yet 
grateful homage to the lovely, spotless, and fragrant soul ! — Fletcher. 

lachimo's thoughts catch the delicacy and purity of their object, 
and he dare not utter a foul word even to himself. — Htidson. 

The only stage-direction in the First Folio is, "Eftter Imogen, in 
her bed, and a Lady ". The bed must have been pushed on to the 
stage from behind the curtains at the back. 

Ingleby's note (referred to on p. ix of my Introduction) is as 
follows: "In the course of this lovely scene one is frequently 
reminded of passages in the second act of Macbeth : a fact which 
may be of use in determining an earlier date (1606) for parts of this 
play. One would naturally infer that this scene was written while 
Macbeth, ii. I, 2, and 3 were fresh in the writer's mind". 

He then compares 1. 2 with Macbeth, ii. I. 1-3 ; 11. 7-10 with 
Macbeth, ii. I. 6-9; 11. 11, 12 with Macbeth, ii. 2. 38 ("Sore labour's 
bath"); 11. 12-14 with Macbeth, ii. I. 55, 56; 11. 22, 23 with Macbeth, 
ii. 3. 118 ("His silver skin laced with his golden blood"); 1. 31 
with Macbeth, ii. 3. 81 ("Shake off" this downy sleep, death's coun- 
terfeit"). And concludes: "Add to these the slight resemblance 
in the mention of ' heaven ' and ' hell ' at the end both of this scene 
and of Macbeth, ii. i ". 

Possibly this argument tells with equal force the other way : may 
not Shakespeare have been less liable to repeat himself when Macbeth 
had lately come white-hot from his brain? 

8-10. Observe the fine dramatic contrast between the concluding 
wish of the Second Lord in the previous scene and Imogen's prayer 
on the one hand, and lachimo's stealing from his trunk as if the prayer 
had been heard and answered by infernal deities. 

13. The rushes are one of Shakespeare's many anachronisms, 
repeated in this case from his own poem Lucrece (1. 318). Floors 



Scene 2.J NOTES 165 

of rooms and stages of theatres were strewn with rushes in Shake- 
speare's time. 

14. Cytherea, Venus, so called because she was worshipped by 
the Phoenicians of Cythera, an island ofT the S. E. point of Laconia. 

18. How dearly they do 't, how dearly do her lips kiss each 
other. Of course lachimo does not kiss her- 

22, 23. windows. ..tinct. Her eyelids were laced with deep-blue 
veins, which made them look "white and azure". 

23. What a striking testimony to Imogen's beauty is the fact that 
even in this perilous situation it has detained lachimo from his sole 
purpose. 

31. thou ape of death. [Explain.] 

dull, heavy, almost 'dulling'. 

34. Gordian knot. The pole of the wagon of Gordius, an ancient 
king of Phrygia, was fastened to the yoke in such a way that the ends 
of the cord could not be perceived. Hence the report went abroad 
that the empire of Asia was promised by an oracle to him who could 
untie it. Alexander the Great, on his arrival at Gordium, cut the 
knot with his sword, and applied the oracle to himself. 

36. conscience, not of Posthumus, but of any guilty person. 

37. To the madding of, with the result of maddening. 

38. cinque, five, pronounced sink, as in the Cinque Ports. 

crimson: not nearly the right colour, but the "drops i' the 
bottom of a cowslip " seem of a deeper colour in recollection than 
they actually are by contrast with the surrounding pale-yellow. 

In the Roinan dc la Violette (Introduction, p. xiii) the traitor, while 
the lady is at her bath, " voit De sur sa destre mamelete Le semblant 
d'une violete " (sees on her right breast the mark of a violet). 

45, 46. Tereus concealed his wife, Procne, that he might marry 
her sister, Philomela, whom he deceived with the report that Procne 
was dead. The tale is found in a collection of stories entitled, A 
petite Pallace of Petiie his plesure, compiled about 1576- ^'^ is the 
seventh of Chaucer's Legends of Good lVo>nen, and is in the fifth book 
of Gower's Cotifessio Amantis and the sixth of Ovid's Metamorphoses. 

48. you dragons, that draw the chariot of the night. 

49. bare, Theobald's conjecture; beare, Ff. ; probably meaning 
' bare '. It is said that the raven "catches the worm ", and thus its 
eye is bared or opened by dawn. 

51. lachimo counts the strokes of the hour, and when he hears 
four, exclaims, "time", i.e. the time at which Imogen wished to be 
called. With reference to the notes of time in this scene, Mr. Daniel, 
whose time-analysis is quoted at the head of these notes, remarks: 
" Stage time is not measured by the glass, and to an expectant 



i66 CYMBELINE [Act II. 

audience the awful pause between the falling asleep of Imogen and 
the stealthy opening of the trunk from which lachimo issues would 
be note and mark of time enough". 

Scene 3. 

Cloten does not shine in wooing, though he rises into verse for the 
occasion. But the scene is noteworthy for a perfect gem of song; 
for Imogen's anger at the abuse of her husband; for a magnificent 
example of tragic irony in 11. 146, 147 ; and for Cloten's threat of 
vengeance, because his stupid vanity is greater than his love. 

2. most coldest. Double superlatives are not uncommon in 
Shakespeare; cf. i. 6. 1 54, and iv. 2. 319, and see Abbott, § II. 

ace. The game was evidently one in which the ace is the 
worst card. 

3. lose, Rowe; loose, Ff. (not infrequently so). 

12. o', Theobald ; a, Ff. 

15. excellent good -conceited, excellently well conceived, 
imagined, composed. Excellent good is not uncommon, excellent 
being used adverbially, as wonderful and adini7-able are below. 

18-26. There are striking resemblances between this song and 
the 29th Sonnet, and a passage in Lyly's Alexander and Ca/npaspe, 
fro.a which Shakespeare may have derived a suggestion for the two 
former : 

' ' who is 't now we hear ; 
None but the lark so shrill and clear ; 
Now at heaven's gates she claps her wings, 
The morn not waking till she sings. 
Hark, hark ". 

Sonnet 29 : 

"and then my state, 
Like to the lark at break of day arising 
From sullen earth, sings hymns at heaven's gate ". 

20, 21. The sun drinks up the dew lying in cup-shaped flowers. 
22, Mary-buds, marigolds, which close at night. Cf. Sonnet 25: 
" Great princes' favourites their fair leaves spread 
But as the marigold at the sun's eye ". 

27. 28. consider your music the better, pay for it more liberally. 

28. vice, Rowe; voice, Ff., an error probably due to "anticipa- 
tion " of voice in the next line. 

29. horse-hairs and calves'-guts, bow-strings and fiddle- 
strings. Shakespeare was much nearer the mark than some of his 



Scene 3.] NOTES 167 

editors, who read cats' -guts, for catgut is made from sheep's intes- 
tines, never from those of the cat. 

38. music, Hanmer; musics, Ff., for which cf. AlFs Well, iii. 
7- 39> 40 : 

" Every night he comes 
With musics of all sorts ". 

44, 45. vantages that may Prefer you, opportunities for endea- 
vouring to ingratiate you. For vantage cf. i. 3. 24. Prefer has the 
same sense of 'recommend' in iv. 2. 386, 400, and= 'promote' in 
1. 130 and in v. 5. 326 (q-v.). 

46. soliciting, Collier; solicity, Fl; solicits, F2. 

52. senseless. Senseless, insensible, devoid of sense: we have 
already had the word twice in the former meaning (i. i. 135 and 
i- 3- 7)> which Cloten here mistakes. 

58, 59. his goodness ... notice, on account of his former kind- 
ness to us, we must show increased attention or regard. His good- 
ness ... us is nominative absolute; or possibly according to is to be 
understood from the previous line. 

68. Diana's rangers false themselves, Diana's huntresses 
perjure themselves, because they had taken vows against matrimony. 
It is possible \kv3X false is an adjective here, though that makes the 
construction very abrupt ; there is no other certain instance of its use 
as a verb in Shakespeare, but it is common in Spenser. 

69. stand, the station of the huntsman waiting for game. Cf. 
iii. 4. 108, 109. 

74. Abbott, § 76, calls attention to the fact that yet is only used 
now after a negative. 

95, 96. equal... kindness. Abbott (§ 419, a) and Schmidt take 
this to mean 'discourtesy equal to your best kindness', but it is at 
least equally likely that the more obvious meaning is the right one. 

96, 97. one of your... forbearance, a man of your great know- 
ledge, or experience, being taught forbearance should learn the 
lesson. 

99. cure, Warburton ; are, Ff. Steevens defends the Folio 
reading: "This, as Cloten very well understands it, is a covert 
mode of calling him fool. The meaning implied is this : If I am 
mad, as you tell me, I am what you can never be. ' Fools are not 
mad folks.'" If Cloten understood this, he must have been as 
clever as a Shakespearian commentator. It is certainly not the 
most obvious inference from "Fools are not mad folks", which 
rather is: 'Whether I am a fool may be a matter of question, but 
even fools are not necessarily mad '. I am compelled to adopt 
Warburton's conjecture, (l) because it makes Imogen's reply to 
Cloten perfectly apposite, and his following question most natural 



i68 CYMBELINE [Act II. 

and pertinent; (2) because of the added force it gives to "That 
cures us both"; (3) because, though there are plenty of obscurities 
in the later plays, there is hardly a trace of obscurity in all Imogen's 
very plain speaking to Cloten. To this I need only add, that when 
Imogen says she'll "no more be mad", she does not refer to the 
madness that Cloten meant, that of her love, but to the madness 
which made her call him fool. 

105. By being so verbal, by your repeated protestations. This 
is the obvious meaning, but several editors refer the expression to 
Imogen herself: ' by my expressing in words what is ordinarily 
understood by implication '. 

109. To accuse myself: se. of lack of charity. 

117, 118. no more dependency But, nothing more depending 
than. 

118. self- figured knot, a knot tied by themselves. 

119, 120. curb'd... crown, restrained from such freedom of choice 
by the succession, by considerations of state. 

120. soil, Hanmer; foil, Ff. , which may be right, but /for / (s) 
was an easy misprint. 

122. for a livery, only fit for a livery. A squire's cloth is in 
apposition to livery. 

123. pantler, the servant who had charge of the pantry. Cf. 
2 Henry IV., ii. 4. 257-259: "a' would have made a good pantler, 
a' would ha' chipped bread well ". 

124. 125. and no more ... besides, and in other respects no 
different from what you are at present. 

126-130. ' It would be an enviable dignity for you, if the post of 
under-hangman of his kingdom were held to be sufficient recognition 
of your merits in comparison with his, and if you were hated for such 
excessive promotion.' 

130. south-fog. Cf. "The spongy south" in iv. 2. 349. The 
moist south wind was supposed to be unhealthy. 

138. sprited with a fool, haunted by a fool, as by a sprite. 

The 'tragic irony' — "which consists in putting into the mouth 
of a speaker double-edged phrases, of which the hidden meaning is 
only apparent to the spectators" — of the rest of this speech will not 
escape notice. 

148. I hope so = modern 'I hope not '. 

150. Of course ironical. 

154. Nothing in this scene becomes Cloten worse than "the 
leaving it ". His frequent repetition of this insult is perhaps the 
cause why he has not forgotten it even in iii. 5. Cf. Dogberry in 
Much Ado. 



Scene 4.] NOTES 169 

Scene 4. 

The fiendishly cruel and clever way in which lachimo gradually 
enfolds Posthumus in the snare he has prepared for him requires the 
closest examination, step by step. The same eloquence, that spread 
its toils in vain for the seduction of Imogen, now serves the villain's 
purpose only too speedily and well. 

Observe as you read the successive moves in the game — from 
Imogen's letters proving the visit to the court of Britain until 
lachimo makes Posthumus see "her pretty action" of stripping 
the bracelet from her arm and reduces him to the last desperate 
suggestion, "May be she pluck'd it off to send it me" — by which 
Posthumus' reason and judgment are taken prisoner, so that at last 
he passes sentence, not like a iudge, but in the temper of a raving 
madman. 

3. What means do you make to him? What steps are you 
taking to win his favour? 

6. fear'd. hopes, hopes mingled with fear lest they should not be 
fulfilled. The Globe adopts Tyrwhitt's conjecture, 5£ar'rf=: withered. 

11. Hath heard of great Augustus, has received his message. 

12, throughly, thoroughly; see note on i. 2. 9. 

14. Or, ere. See Glossary. 

14, 15. whose ... grief, the remembrance of whom is still kept 
fresh by the Britons' grief. 

16. Statist, politician. 

18. legions, Theobald; legion, Ff.; but cf. iii. 7. 4. 

sooner qualifies shall hear. 

24. courage, Dyce; c(?«;'ff^«, Ff. Shakespeare nowhere else uses 
the plural of this word. 

25. their approvers, those who put them to the proof, make 
trial of them. Unicjue instance {i.e. the word occurs nowhere else 
in Shakespeare). See note on i. 4. 109. For such That see Abbott, 
§279- 

26. mend upon the world, earn and claim increasing recog- 
nition. 

28. of all the corners, from every quarter. 

34. through, Rowe ; thorough, Ff. This preposition, when dis- 
syllabic, is spelt both ways in Shakespeare, but here the metre requires 
a monosyllable. See note on 1. 12 above. 

36. tenour, Theobald ; tenure, Ff. as usual. 

37. Phi., Capell; Post., Ff. The assignment of the speech to 
Philario gives Posthumus lime to glance through his letters. 

6< (M 332) 



I70 CYMBELINE [Act II. 

40, 41. Referring to i. 4. 64. Posthumus means : Is it not a case 
of the fox and the grapes? 

41. had, Singer; have, Ff., in support of which see Abbott, § 371 : 
" The consequent does not always answer to the antecedent in mood 
or tense ". 

58. is. Abbott, § 336: " The inflection in s is of frequent occur- 
rence also when two or more singular nouns precede the verb ". Cf. 
I. 10; iii. 3. 99; iii. 6. 21; and v. 2. 2. 

59. 60. gains ... mine, gains me your sword or loses mine. 

60. leaves, Rowe ; leave, Ff. 

61. circumstances, circumstantial details. 
68. watching, keeping awake for. 

70. her Roman, Mark Antony. 

71. Cydnus, a river in Cilicia, flowing into the Mediterranean. 
73, 74. it did strive In workmanship and value. [What 

does this mean?] 

lachimo's language is such as a skilful villain would naturally use 
'—^ mixture of airy triumph and serious deposition.— yb/^wjtiw. 

82. Chaste Dian. Who is "Dian"? and why called "chaste"? 

83. So likely to report themselves, i.e. to speak and say 
who they were. 

83-85. ' The sculptor did all and more than all that nature could 
do, apart from speech, breathing, and movement.' 

88. andirons, fire-dogs; to be seen in any good example of an 
old fireplace. See Glossary. 

89. winking, with eyes closed or nearly so, because love is blind. 

90. 91. nicely Depending on their brands, elegantly sup- 
ported by their brands. Cf. i. 5. 58. Brands is explained in two 
ways: (l) = brand-irons, i.e. the horizontal bars at the back of the 
andirons on which the logs actually rest. The fact that the Cupids 
would not stand without the support of these "brands" favours this 
interpretation. (2) Bratids — 'Ca.Q Cupids' firebrands or torches, by 
resting on which they seemed to be maintaining their poise. Cupid's 
torch is a symbol of the inflaming power of love. This interpreta- 
tion is supported by two passages in Sonnets 153 and 154: 

" Cupid laid by his brand, and fell asleep ". 
"The little Love-god lying once asleep 
Laid by his side his heart-inflaming brand." 

These are the only passages in which Shakespeare has the word in 
either of the above meanings. 

91. This is her honour! And the attainment of this knowledge 
is to pass for the corruption of her honour ! {Johnson). 



Scene 5,] NOTES 171 

92. Let it be granted you have seen all this. This is a 
most damning and unforensic admission for Posthumus to make, but 
he is becoming exasperated with lachinio's coolness and apparent 
mastery of the situation as well as with the flawless exactness of hia 
"circumstances", which yet keep aloof from the real subject of the 
wager. But there is more than exasperation in the admission : 
lachimo had actually seen all that he describes, and Posthumus 
must have felt that matters were taking an unpleasantly ominous 
turn, and his immediate impulse was to come to the crisis at once. 

96, 97. lachimo at first gives Posthumus but a tantalizing, mad- 
dening glimpse of the bracelet. To understand the tremendous 
effects of this sight upon Posthumus, we need to remember that it 
was the pledge of his wife's plighted troth, and must have recalled 
instantly and vividly to his mind the sacred endearments of their 
parting ; that any shock to his trust in his wife's perfect fidelity would 
be all the greater because of the unassailably serene and confident 
nature of that trust ; and that, though that trust still holds firm, he 
is now reduced to the excited and possibly vaguely alarmed state of 
mind in which he most easily falls a prey to the wiles of lachimo. 

98. I '11 keep them, though your mistress and you have parted 
with them so easily — a perfectly Satanic thrust. 

107. a basilisk, or cockatrice, was a fabulous creature supposed 
to be produced from a cock's egg hatched by a serpent ; its breath 
and even its look were fatal to life. 

109. semblance, a fair exterior. 

II0-II2. the vows of women. ..virtues. 'Let the vows of 
women be held to have no more binding force towards those to 
whom they are made than there is binding force between them and 
their virtues.' 

120. What is the meaning oi evidenl here? 

121. By Jupiter. This is here a very solemn asseveration, 
lachimo uses it only this once, and in support of a statement which 
is literally true. 

130. Of one persuaded well of [her virtue], by one convinced of. 

133. the, Rowe; her, Ff. 

145. besides (beside, by the side of, outside of), beyond. 

146. Even the disinterested Philario, the friend of both parties, is 
convinced now. 

147. pervert, turn aside; unique instance with this meaning. 

Scene 5. 

Shakespeare's dramatic purpose in this scene is evident and 
essential — to lay clearly open to us that stormy desolation, those 



,72 CYMBELINE [Act III. 

volcanic heavings of a noble heart, our full conception of which can 
alone make us tolerate that purpose of sanguinary vengeance -which 
is to be formed and pursued by his hero. — Fletcher. 

Compare the whole behaviour and course of action of Posthumus, 
first with those of Imogen in somewhat sin\ilar circumstances, both 
(in i. 6) when lachimo reports her husband's infidelity, and later 
when she convinces herself of his infidelity as the only explanation of 
his murderous commission to Pisanio (iii. 4. 48-52, 80 ff.); secondly, 
with his own opening speech in the 5th Act. 

2. What a fall is here from the confident reply to lachimo's "I 
durst attempt it against any lady in the world": "You are a great 
deal abused in too bold a persuasion " (i. 4). 

7. change of prides, pride on account of one thing at one time, 
of another at another. 

8. Nice, fanciful, capricious. 

14. I '11 write against them : probably, with against emphatic, 
'I'll join the "woman-hating crew'", certainly not 'I'll rush into 
print against them'. Cf. Ahuh Ado, iv. I. 57: "Seeming! I will 
write against it ". 

17. Exit, with lachimo, for two acts. 



Act 111.— Scene I. 

This scene serves to carry on the political action and goes nearer 
than any other to justifying Skottowe's remark that Cloten " is a 
natural fool ; yet he often talks with the wit of one of Shakespeare's 
professed fools ". After one short speech in verse he fails into the 
jocular, bantering vein for which prose is the fit medium. For 
Mulmutius (1. 53), the knighting of Cymbeline by Augustus (1. 68), 
and the mention of the Pannonians and Dalmatians (1. 72), see 
Appendix B. 

5, uncle, great-uncle. Cassibelan was the younger brother of 
Lud, Cymbeline's grandfather. 

6, 7. no whit less Than in his feats deserving it, no whit 
less famous than he deserved to be for his feats. 

7, 8. for him And his succession, for himselfand his successors. 

12. Britain is, Pope, for the sake of the metre; Britain's, Ff. 

13. A world by itself. Cf. Virgil's Eclogues, i. 68: 

" Et penitus toto divisos orbe Britannos" 
(and the Britons entirely cut off from the whole world). 

14. For wearing our own noses, probably, ' for daring to have 
noses of our own not conformed to the Roman pattern '. See 1. 37. 



Scene i.J NOTES i73 

14-16. That opportunity... have again. Paraphrase this sen- 
tence. 

20. rocks, Seward's conjecture; oaks, Fi. 

27. ignorant, unacquainted with the nature of our boisterous seas 
[Johnson). 

30. at point, on the point of. 

30, 31. Told in Holinshed of Nenius, Cassibelan's brother. See 
Appendix B 2. 

32. See Appendix B 3. 

36. other : a remnant of the old plural form of the adjective, which 
had no s. 

37. to owe, as regards owning [Abbott, § 357). See Glossary. 

38. Cymbeline wishes the Queen to pronounce his ultimatum, but 
Cloten ignores the interruption. How full of meaning Shakespeare 
can make an apparently insignificant speech of five words ! 

46. injurious, insolent; cf. iv. 2. 86, and Fr. injure (insult). 
48,49. Which swell'd... world. What does this mean? 
49. against all colour, without any pretence of right. Cf. 
/ Henry IV., iii. 2. lOO: 

" For of no right, nor colour like to right". 

52. Clo. We do. So Dyce, following Collier's MS. Ff. assign 
the whole to Cymbeline, with a comma after be; but this is too feeble 
even for his majesty, and is quite foreign to Shakespeare's kingly 
style. 

55. franchise, free exercise. 

70. 71. W^hich... utterance, which [honour], he seeking it of me 
again by force, it behoves me to maintain to the uttermost, to the 
death. At tttterance — Yr. a oidratue; tin combat a outrance — 2i fight 
to the death. Cf. Macbeth, iii. i. 71, 72: 

" come fate into the list, 
And champion me to the utterance!" 
"The phrase admits of no doubt" (as Ingleby says at the close of 
his impossible explanation). 

71. I am perfect, I am perfectly informed, I know perfectly 
well ; cf iv. 2. 1 18. 

72. Pannonia was a Roman province between the Danube and 
the Alps; Dalmatia, east of the Adriatic, nearly corresponded with 
the modern Dalmatia. The Pannonians joined the Dalmatians in 
their revolt from Rome in A.D. 7, but were finally conquered by 
Tiberius in A.D. 9. 

83. All the remain, all that remains. The singular noun is rare; 
besides this passage Shakespeare has remain once, and here remain 
once, in each case in the sense of ' stay ', ' sojourn '. 



,74 CYMBELINE [Act III. 

Scene 2. 

The whole of this scene, after the entry of Imogen, is a prolonged 
example of tragic irony ; this adds inexpressible pathos to her pretty 
talk : " Blest be you bees that make these locks of counsel" ; "And 
by the way tell me how Wales was made so happy as to inherit such 
a haven". 

2. monster 's her accuser, Capell; monsters her accuse, P"f. 

5. As poisonous-tongued as handed, with a tongue as ready 
for slander as his hands are to administer poison. The Italians 
had an evil reputation in Elizabeth's days as skilful poisoners. Cf. 
iii. 4. 15. 

7. truth [meaning?]. 

undergoes, endures firmly, bears up against. [What meaning 
has it elsewhere in this play?] 

9. take in, conquer, subdue, as in iv. 2. 121. 

10,11. Thy mind... fortunes. [Paraphrase this sentence.] 

12. Upon, by; but we retain upon in 'upon my soul' and many 
similar phrases. 

17. Pisanio is not actually reading from his master's letter which 
he has in his hand, and which is given in full in iii. 4. 21 ff., for the 
letter is of course prose ; but he is giving its substance in two lines. 

23. ' I knov nothing (for the present) about these commands 
which have been laid upon me.' 

33. med'cinable, medicinal ; passive for active. 

34. doth physic love, keeps love healthy and vigorous. 

35. All but in that, in all hut that, i.e. of his contentment with 
everything but our separation. 

36. What are these locks of conn sell 

36-39. The bees are not blessed by the man who forfeiting a bond 
is sent to prison, as they are by the lover for whom they perform the 
more pleasing office of sealing letters. — Steevens. 

Verplanck points out that the seal was essential to the bond, 
though a signature was not ; and that forfeiters was the technical 
term for those who had broken a contract and become liable to the 
legal penalty. 

39. tables, tablets, letters. 

40-43. Pope suggested hut for as, and this probably gives the 
meaning: 'They could not be so cruel but that the sight of you 
would revive me '. 

49. of mean affairs, bent on ordinary business. 



Scene 3.1 NOTES I7S 

50. May : in its etymological sense of 'can', as in Psalms, cxxv. i 
(Prayer-book version): " Mount Zion, which may not be removed". 
Cf. 1. 66. 

53. bate, abate, moderate, what I said : ' Who longest, as I do, 
but not like me '. 

55. thick, fast. 

63. And. Pope read ////. But the irregularity is all of a piece 
with "the happy hurry of spirits and joyous impatience" of the 
whole speech. 

to excuse, how to make excuse. 

64. or ere begot, before the deed is done which it would be 
invented to excuse. For or ere — ere cf. v. 3. 50, and see or in 
Glossary. 

69. With fine unconscious irony Imogen gives in the next line 
the very reason why twenty miles a day is " too much" in Pisanio's 
opinion. 

71, 72. the sands That run i' the clock's behalf, the sands of 
the hour-glass: 'swifter than the flight of time'. 

74. presently, immediately — its usual meaning. See ii. 3. 137; 
iv. 2. 166, and cf. Matthew, xxvi. 53: "and he shall presently give 
me more than twelve legions of angels". 

76. franklin, originally ' a country gentleman whose estate con- 
sisted in free land, and was not subject to feudal services or pay- 
ments'; this is the signification of the word in Chaucer. Johnson 
defines it as meaning 'a freeholder with a small estate'. Shakespeare 
uses the word only three times, apparently in the latter sense. 

you 're best, you were best, representing the old construction, 
it were best for you; but you is nominative in Shakespeare, because 
he has " I were best" (iii. 6. 19), " Thou 'rt best", &c. 

77, 78. nor here, nor here, Nor what ensues, but have a 
fog in them, right and left (pointing) and behind me it is impene- 
trably foggy. 

Scene 3. 

This and the other scenes laid among the Welsh mountains bring 
with them, in addition to their intrinsic beauty, a sense of relief from 
the oppression of Cymbeline's court and the unsavoury nature of the 
main plot. 

2. Stoop, Hanmer; Sleep, Ff. 

6. turbans. The idea of a giant was, among the readers of 
romances, who were almost all the readers of those times, always 
confounded with that of a Saracen {Johnson). 

12. Cf. i. 3. 15. 



176 CYMBELINE [Act III. 

13. [Paraphrase this line.] 

16, 17. This service. ..allow'd, it is not the doing of the deed, 
but the acknowledgment or approval of it [which may or may not 
follow], that makes it service. Allow in this sense (Fr. allouer, 
approve of = Lat. allaiidare, praise) has a different etymology from 
a//ow = permit. 

This line and a half is an illustration of the ways of courts, &c. ; 
whereas "to apprehend thus" { = such moralizing) refers to the whole 
passage from 1. 11. 

20. sharded, with scaly wing-cases. The shards are stretched 
out in flight ; hence Macbeth, iii. 2. 42 : 

"The shard-borne beetle with his drowsy hums", 

as if the shards supported the beetle. Notice the perfect contrast 
between "sharded beetle" and "full-wing'd eagle". 

22. attending for a check, doing service, dancing attendance, 
only to be rebuked. Cf 1. 77. 

23. bribe, Hanmer; babe, Ff ; bauble, Rowe. With the Folio 
reading babe, the line is explained either to mean ' dangling about 
in attendance on a youthful prince', or to be an allusion to court 
favourites administering the estates of infant wards and neglecting 
the children confided to their care. Neither explanation can be 
called obvious, if indeed they are not both forced. It has been 
objected to the emendation bauble, that the implied rebuke in "doing 
nothing for a bauble" {i.e. a decoration, title to a peerage, &c.) is 
pointless, because it is the recognized system to bestow them for 
" doing nothing ". To bribe it has been objected that it gives richer 
a pecuniary sense, which, in the mouth of Belarius, is nonsense. 
But I cannot admit that the pecuniary sense of richer is a necessity. 
Just as he is speaking of true nobility and true pride, so he says in 
effect, ' Our life is more truly rich than if we took bribes for doing 
nothing'. In Spenser's Mother Hubberd's Tale, which is largely a 
satire on court life, there is a passage which well illustrates, if it does 
not support the reading adopted in the text. The Ape is a courtier, 
and the Fox is his servant, and we read of the latter : 

" So would he work the silly man [a suitor] by treason 
To buy his Master's frivolous good will. 
That had not power to do him good or ill" . 

25. 'em, Capell; him, Ff. The tailor raises his cap to them 
politely, but does not get his money, and so cannot cross the debt 
out in his ledger. 

28, 29. nor know not What air 's from home. Paraphrase. 
Quote other instances of double negative. 

33. travelling: travailing, Ff, but the two forms were used 
indiscriminately. 



Scene 3.] NOTES 177 

34. for, Pope ; or, Ff. 

35. To stride a limit, to transgress his bounds. 

40. beastly [meaning?]. Used as an adverb in v. 3. 27. 

50. pain, toil, labour, trouble, like Fr. peine. 

51. I take the antecedent of which to be "fame and honour"; 
but although dies undoubtedly suggested epitaph in the next line, 
I venture to think that the most satisfactory sense is got by putting 
a comma after "honour" (instead of the usual semicolon), reading 
"which dies i' the search" as parenthetical, and making "And 
hath &c."a parallel relative clause to "that only seems &c.", with 
antecedent " the toil o' the war, A pain". 

54. deserve, earn, gain. 

70. demesnes is merely another spelling oi domaitts. 

79 ff. In each of these [last] we can see Shakespeare, as it were, 
tenderly bending over the joys and sorrows of youth. We recognize 
this rather through the total characterization, and through a feeling 
and a presence, than through definite incident or statement. But 
some of this feeling escapes in the disinterested joy and admiration 
of old Belarius when he gazes at the princely youths. — Dowden. 

83. wherein they, Warburton ; whereo7t the, Ff. 

85. prince it. Shakespeare also uses "queen it" {Winter's 
Tale), and " dukes it " {Measttre for Measure). Abbott, § 226, says 
that " it is often added to nouns or words that are not generally used 
as verbs, in order to give them the force of verbs ". 

94. nerves, sinews, tendons. 

96-98. in as like... conceiving. Arviragus acts the words of 
Belarius as well as Guiderius, but in an even more lifelike way 
because he has a much clearer conception of what took place. 
Belarius here gives us the clue to the discrimination of the characters 
of the two youths, apparently so much alike — a clue that must be 
followed up in the succeeding scenes. 

99 ff. There are moments when Shakespeare was not wholly 
absorbed in his work as artist at this period; it is as if he were 
thinking of his own life, or of the fields and streams of Stratford, 
and still wrote on ; it is as if the ties which bound him to his art 
were not severing with thrills of strong emotion, but were quietly 
growing slack. The soliloquy of Belarius, at the end of the third 
scene of the third act of Cytnheline, and that of Imogen when she 
discovers the headless body of Cloten [iv. 2. 291 ff.], were written as 
if Shakespeare were now only moderately interested in certain por- 
tions of his dramatic work. Such lines as the following [11. 99-107], 
purporting to be part of a soliloquy, but being in fact an explanation 
addressed to the audience, could only have been written when the 
poet did not care to energize over the less interesting but still 
necessary passages of his drama. — Dowden. 



178 CYMBELINE [Act III. 

Scene 4. 

Here the pathetic tragedy of the play culminates. P'rom this 
point matters tend on the whole to mend, although slowly and 
with apparent sets-back. The partial succumbing of Posthumus 
in the fiery ordeal by which he was tried — it must always be 
remembered that in actual fidelity he never wavered, any more than 
did Imogen — leads to the equally fearful testing of Imogen in this 
scene, a testing from which she emerges unscathed. In this she is 
helped by her splendidly healthy physical and moral nature, to which 
suicide is an impossibility (see also iv. 2. 330 fi".); and though she 
bids Pisanio execute his master's commands, and is m spirit faithful 
even unto death, she is quite ready to accept his way of escape, and 
to enter the service of Lucius with a view to prove the truth of 
Pisanio's surmise that "my master is abused". See also "Critical 
Comments ". 

3. as I have now. [Complete this elliptical sentence in two 
possible ways.] 

9, 10. ere... senses, before madness takes possession of my 
hitherto composed senses. Unique instance oi staid. 

II, 12. tender'st...untender. The frequency of such plays 
upon words proves that they cannot have been esteemed in bad 
taste in Shakespeare's day. 

15. Cowden Clarke says, with reference to this line: "And but 
once is she betrayed into an expression of anger". And Hudson 
says of Imogen: "The calm sweetness of her temper is rutHed but 
twice". Mention all the occasions on which Imogen speaks angrily. 

17. take off some extremity, dull the sharpness of the blow. 

22. lie : lies, Ff. 

24. as I expect my revenge, as my expectation of revenge. 

34. worms, serpents, snakes. In the Old English poem Beowtdf, 
the dragon is called " the worm ". 

of Nile. Cf. Antony and Cleopati-a, v. 2. 243, 244: "Hast 
thou the pretty worm of Nilus there, That kills and pains not?" 
i.e. the asp. 

36. states, persons of the highest rank. 

39-43. Observe the wonderful art that makes this speech express 
so much : the awful shock of the letter, the utter inability to com- 
prehend for a time even the nature of the charge, the perfect sincerity 
of Imogen's innocence, the absolute purity of her nature. 

45. conscience, consciousness, inmost thoughts. Cf. ii. 2. 36. 

As soon as Imogen has sufficiently recovered from the first shock 
to be able to think of the cause of the charge, but one explanation 
occurs to her — that her husband himself is unfaithful ; it is no more 



Scene 4.] NOTES 179 

difficult for her to believe in his infidelity than to find him capable 
of believing in hers. Therefore her interview with lachimo at once 
recurs to memory, and she now believes that he withdrew what were 
true charges against her husband in order to allay her anger. Do 
not forget that Imogen is really wronging her husband in thought. 
The true explanation — that lachimo has slandered her to her husband, 
as he tried to slander her husband to her — probably does not occur 
to her because she could not conceive of such wickedness. 

47. now, sc. I can no longer believe you were telling a lying tale. 

48. Some jay of Italy = some Roman courtezan (1. 123). 

49. Whose mother was her painting, the creature, not of 
nature, but of painting {Johnson). Cf. iv. 2. 81-83. 

51, 52. for I am richer... ripp'd. Steevens says that garments 
no longer worn were hung up in a room devoted to the purpose, 
and the richer ones were ripped up for domestic uses. 

53-65. Compare this with Act ii. sc. 5, and see "Critical Com- 
ments" (Introduction, p. xxi). 

57 ff. Just as yEneas, through his falsity to Dido, laid "true 
honest men " under suspicion ; just as Sinon, through the false 
weeping which prevailed on the Trojans to receive the wooden 
horse, cast a slur on holy tears and robbed the wretched of pity. 
Being heard in 1. 57 is in reply to hear vie in 1. 56. 

61. the leaven. Cf. i Corinthians, v. 6: " Know ye not that a 
little leaven leaveneth the whole lump?" 

proper men, handsome gentlemen. 
75, 76. Cf. Hatnlet, i. 2. 131, 132: 

" Or that the Everlasting had not fix'd 
His canon 'gainst self-slaughter ! " 

78. afore 't, Rowe; afoot, Ff 

79. Obedient as the scabbard. [Explain.] 

80,81. scriptures. ..turn'd to heresy. [Show that this expres- 
sion has a double meaning.] 

86-89. Capell inserted the second thoii in 1. 87 for the sake of the 
metre. Ff make only three lines, ending, Posthtttnus,...kittg... suits. 

89. make, Malone; makes, Ff 

90. fellows, equals in rank. 

Even in Imogen's self-praise there is the utmost sweetness, 
because of the disdained yet most devoted love which is expressed 
in it. 

91. passage, occurrence. 

93. be disedged by her, have the keen edge of thy passion for 
her blunted. For iirest see Glossary. 



i8o CYMBELINE [Act III. 

loi. blind, Hanmer; Ff. omit; out, Johnson. The last conjecture, 
though not so forcible as blind, derives support from two passages 
quoted by Steevens: " I shall watch my eyes out", from a MS. play 
called The Bugbears; and " I '11 ride to Oxford and watch out mine 
eyes, but I '11 hear the brazen head speak", from Middleton's Roaring 
Girl, l6ii. 

io8. To be unbent, only to have your bow still unbent. 

stand, cf. ii. 3. 69. 

121, 122. Pisanio does not suspect lachimo, because he knows 
nothing of the latter's imputations on his master's conduct in i. 6 ; 
his very ignorance also keeps his belief in his master's honour un- 
impaired. 

125. See line 29 : "to make me certain it is done ". 

135 ff". Imogen seems to think that Pisanio had meant that the 
court was the only place where she could live in Britain, and that 
any other country was out of the question (see 11. 136, 137), whereas 
she in reality takes his cue and pursues the train of thought he had 
wished to suggest (see 11. 137, 138). 

137-140. 'Though Britain seems only like a swan's nest in a great 
pool — a small island in an ocean of waters — and though it is not in 
the world (cf. iii. I. 13), yet there is a great world beyond (t/" which 
it forms a part.' 

140. There 's livers. Abbott, § 335, says: "When the subject is 
as yet future and, as it were, unsettled, the third person singular 
might be regarded as the normal inflection. Such passages are very 
common, particularly in the case of 'There is'". See also iv. 2. 
283, 371, and V. 5. 233. 

143, 144. a mind Dark as your fortune is. Darkness applied 
to the mind is secrecy, applied to the fortune is obscurity [Johnson). 
Pisanio expounds his meaning in 11. 154 ff. 

144-146. and but disguise. ..self-danger, and only disguise that 
(your sex and identity) the disclosure of which would for a time be 
full of danger. 

147. Pretty is often glossed 'apt, suitable for the purpose'. The 
whole expression, " You should tread a pretty course", seems to me 
rather to mean : ' You would have a part to play that would be 
novel, full of interest, and likely to succeed'. Collier suggested the 
reading /rz'^y/. 

full of view, giving you a coign of vantage for observing un- 
observed. That this is the meaning is confirmed by the rest of the 
speech. 

155. niceness, coyness, or dainty scrupulousness of attire (see 
1. 164). The adjective is common in the corresponding senses, but 
this is the unique instance of the noun. 



Scene 4.] NOTES 181 

157. it: a transitional form between his, the old genitive case sin- 
gular neuter, and its, which came into common use in the 1 7th century. 
It { = its) is frequent in the early Quartos, and is found sixteen times 
in the First Folio. Its (spelt it's in every instance but one) occurs 
only ten times in the First Folio. In every other passage Shake- 
speare uses his ( = its) in F I. Its is not found in the Authorized 
Version of 1611; in the one passage in which it now occurs in the 
Authorized Version {Leviticus, xxv. 5) the edition of 161 1 has "of zV 
own accord ". Milton uses the form its but three times in the whole 
of his poetry. Abbott, § 228. 

159. As quarrelous as the weasel. It is said that weasels 
were formerly kept in houses for the destruction of vermin, as cats 
are now. They are very bloodthirsty, but there is no evidence to 
show that they are "quarrelous" (unique instance). 

161. the harder heart. I am not certain of the meaning of 
these words, and therefore give three other interpretations before 
adding one of my own. (i) ' How more than hard his (Posthumus') 
heart', i.e. for compelling you to such hardships. (2) 'This too 
hard heart of mine ', which urges you to such a course. (3) Pisanio 
apprehends that Imogen, in the part she is going to act, will feel 
the need of a man's harder, or tougher, heart. (4) I would suggest 
as possible : ' O, the danger of your heart becoming harder, more 
like a man's, when you don man's attire' ! The following " Alack, 
no remedy ! " at least seems to lend some countenance to this 
suggestion. 

163. common-kissing Titan, the sun who kisses indiscrimin- 
ately. The Titans were properly the sons and daughters of Uranus 
(Heaven) and Ge (Earth), but the name is also given to those divine 
or semi -divine beings who were descended from the Titans, espe- 
cially Helios (the Sun). 

168. fit, prepared. Cf. iv. i. 4. 

170. in their serving. [Explain.] 

172. season, time of life. 

174. Wherein you're happy, what your gifts are. 

you '11, Hanmer ; will, Ff. 

176. embrace you, accept your offer. 

177. holy, virtuous, righteous; so, often. 

177, 178. Your means ... rich, as to your means of support 
abroad, you have me to supply you, and I am rich. 

179. supplyment, continual supply; unique instance. 

181, 182. we'll even ... give us, we'll make our achievements 
equal to our opportunities. 

1S3. I am soldier to, I am as ready for as a soldier is for Ijattle. 



i82 CYMBELINE [Act III. 

187. Your carriage, the convejang of you; your, objective geni- 
tive. 

191. distemper, indisposition. 

Scene 5. 

Cloten rises into verse for tb.e last time before, like the swan, he 
dies in melody in the next act. He is moved to do so by his 
patriotism, which is not unworthy, and by his unworthy passion for 
Imogen. When that passion degenerates into mere lust, Shake- 
speare rightly makes him speak it in prose. 

2. wrote. Abbott, § 343. [Collect from the whole play all the 
verbal forms that are now anomalous.] 

8. conduct, escort. 

9. This is the reading of the Ff. The Globe assigns the words 
"And you!" to the Queen, but Mr. Aldis Wright returns to the 
original reading in the Cambridge edition. You then of course 
means Cymbeline. 

22. It fits us therefore ripely, the time is ripe and fitting, the 
need is pressing. 

25. drawn to head, collected for war, mobilised. 

32. looks us like. [What should we now say?] See Abbott, 
§ 220. 

33. thing. [In what other passages of this play is the word 
" thing" applied to a person?] 

35. too slight in sufferance, too lax in allowing such behaviour. 

35-41. It is only in the Queen's soliloquies that we see her real 
character. On other occasions, like the true plotter, she is "all 
things to all men", attempting to conciliate everybody's good opinion 
by affected amiability. 

44. loud'st of, Capell; lotidof, Ff. 

51. Made me to blame in memory. [Paraphrase.] 

68, 69. may This night... day! This is usually taken to mean: 
' May this night prevent his living to see another day' ! But there 
is no sufficient reason for Cymbeline's dying that night, and the 
Queen's own method of getting rid of him was by slow poisoning 
(see V. 5. 49 ff.). It seems to me preferable, therefore, to give the 
sentence a figurative meaning : ' May this (night of) sorrow and 
despair caused by Imogen's disappearance deprive him of (the coming 
day of) her succession to the throne and happy reign ! ' 

70. for, because. 

71. And that = and for (that) = and because. Abbott, § 285. 



Scene 6.] NOTES 183 

72. Than lady, ladies, woman, than any lady, than all ladies, 
than all womankind {Johnson). Cf. AWs Well, ii. 3. 202 : " To any 
count, to all counts, to what is man ". 

73. The best she hath, and she, the best that she has, and 
she (Imogen). Or, the line may be read with a strong emphasis on 
" best", and then each " she " = Imogen. [Discuss which meaning 
is the better.] 

77. choked, as if by rank weeds. 

in that point, sc. of view ; on that account. 

gi. Come nearer, sc. to the point. 

92. home, thoroughly; cf. iv. 2. 328. We still say "strike home", 
" drive it home ", " bring it home ", &c., in a similar sense. 

99. This would seem to be the letter to Imogen (see sc. 2), for 
Pisanio says in v. 5. 278 ff.: 

" By accident, 
I had a feigned letter of my master's 
Then in my pocket ". 

See also 1. 133 below. Pisanio could not have shown Cloten the 
letter to himself (sc. 4), which moreover was not a feigned letter. 

loi. Or this, or perish. [Explain.] 

104, 105. Observe the riming couplet where verse is exchanged 
for prose. 

128, 129. Observe how constantly Shakespeare's experience as an 
actor serves hini in good stead ; what a past master in the art of 
stagecraft he proves himself to be by his insertion of such natural 
touches as these, which, apparently insignificant in themselves, yet 
give the play an ever-present air of vivid reality. 

129. thou. Observe carefully by whom, to whom, and on what 
occasions this pronoun is used in the play. 

137. insultment : unique instance. The noun instill is not found 
in Shakespeare. 

155. speed, success; with a play on the other meaning of the 
word. 

Scene 6. 

Julia, Jessica, Portia, Rosalind, and Viola had all assumed male 
disguise in earlier plays. Shakespeare doubtless adopted this device 
the more readily because female parts were played by boys in his 
day. The supreme charm of the scenes between Imogen and her 
brothers cannot need to be pointed out. 

7. Foundations, firm, solid buildings. The following line 
hardly leaves it open to doubt that there is also a reference to chari- 
table foundations. 



i84 CYMBELINE ,Act III. 

10, II. knowing 'tis A punishment or trial, when they know 
that their afflictions are a punishment from heaven or a trial of their 
" patience ". 

12, 13. To lapse in fulness Is sorer, to fall from the truth is 
worse in a rich person. The verb lapse occurs only in one other 
passage, where it has the same meaning as here. 

13, 14. falsehood reminds Imogen at once of Posthumus. How 
exquisitely pathetic is her tender reflection on his conduct. 

17. At point to sink, on the point of sinking. 

21. hardness, hardship. In v. 5. 431 it = difficulty. 

23. civil, in contrast to savage — cw'tXiz^A. 

24. Take or lend, take money in exchange for food, or give me 
food for hospitality's sake. This is the usual explanation, which is 
suoported by 11. 47, 48: "and thought To have begged 07- bought 
what I have took". If take has this meaning, le7td cannot have its 
usual modern sense, for a stranger could not proffer money and in 
the same breath suggest a loan : lend is frequently used by Shake- 
speare without the notion of return. 

27. A prayer that she may encounter such a foe as she has just 
alluded to. 

The Folios commence Scene 7 here, with "Enter Imogen" below. 
Rowe continued Scene 6. 

28. woodman, hunter. 

30. 't is our match. [Explain.] 

32, 33. our stomachs, &c. ' Hunger is the best sauce.' 

36. that keep'st thyself! Cf. As You Like It, iv. 3. 82, 83: 

" But at this hour the house doth keep itself; 
There 's none within ". 

38. browse, a corruption of broiist (O.F. brouster), etymologically 
' to nibble off young shoots ' ; hence the very word for this context. 

50. i* the floor. In for on was not uncommon. Cf. Matthew, 
vi. 10: "Thy will be done in earth", and see Abbott, § 160. 

52. parted, departed ; so, often. 

61. Fidele. Characteristically enough she is obliged to conceal 
and preserve her fidelity under the false, but characteristic, name of 
Fidele ( Ge7-vinus). 

62. embark'd. There is this to be said for Hanmer's emendation 
embarks, that it certainly makes Imogen's tale hang together better, 

63. being going, going, being on the way. Abbott, § 295. 

64. in = into, is common, and is preserved in "fall in love". 
Abbott, § 159. 



Scene 7.] NOTES 185 

70, 71. The reading in the text is that of the Ff. (except that they 
have only a colon at honesty), and I cannot see that any sufficiently 
good case has been made out for a change. I interpret the passage 
thus : ' I should woo hard rather than fail of being your bridegroom 
in an honourable way. I bid for your affection on my usual terms — 
in honourable exchange for mine.' Groom occurs only once in 
Shakespeare in the sense of ' bridegroom ', and then it immediately 
follows 'bride' — "like bride and groom", Othello, ii. 3. 180 — but 
this meaning is strongly suggested to me by the word ' woo ' here, 
and is confirmed by the following speech of Arviragus: " I '11 make 't 
my comfort He is a man". Besides, '\l groom means 'servant', there 
is no force in "were you a woman"; he might be his groom, if 
Imogen were a man. Honesty frequently means both ' honourable- 
ness ' and 'chastity'; " in the way of honesty " in this sense is found 
both in Merry Wives and in Antony and Cleopatra. The Globe 
and Cambridge editions road : 

" I should woo hard but be your groom. In honesty, 
I bid for you as I 'Id buy ", 

which may be paraphrased thus: 'If you were a woman, I would 
woo you in marriage. You are not, but I speak with perfect 
sincerity all the same, offering only what I would readily give if 
circumstances allowed.' Iti honesty,— m. truth, occurs nowhere else, 

73. to him, to my brother. 

76-78. If they had been my father's sons, I should not have been 
the heir, and thus less of a prize. The metaphor is nautical. Cf. 
the use oi price in i. I. 51. 

79. wrings, is visibly pained. 

80. free 't, put an end to the distress; as it were, set it free that it 
might fly away. 

85, 86. laying by... multitudes, putting on one side the worth- 
less praise and false honour of "the still-discordant wavering multi- 
tude". 

87. out-peer, surpass. 

88, 89. It is only with a change of sex that Imogen can even now 
contemplate the desertion of Posthumus. 

92. of, concerning, about. Cf iv. 4. 48. 

Scene 7. 

We learn that Lucius is appointed general of the army to be 
employed in the war in Britain. This army is to consist of the 
forces " remaining now in Gallia", supplemented with a levy of the 
gentry of Rome. This scene is evidently out of place. In any time- 
scheme it must come much earlier in the drama. — P. A. Daniel. 



,86 CYMBELINE [Act IV. 

9. commends, delivers. This is Warburton's conjecture, the Ff. 
having commands. But conuiiend was the usual formula, as in Lear, 
ii. 4. 28 : 

" I did commend your highness' letters to them ". 

14. supplyant, Capell ; suppliant, Ff. The emendation is con- 
venient for preventing confusion. 



Act IV.— Scene I. 



Much of this soliloquy is a repetition of one near the close of iii. 5. 

8. the lines of my body, &c. Cloten has this much justifi- 
cation, that Imogen mistakes his headless trunk, in the garments of 
Posthumus, for Posthurnus himself. See iv. 2. 308 ff. 

11. 12. alike conversant... oppositions, equally experienced in 
military service, and more distinguished in single combats. 

12. imperceiverant, Dyce; iinperseverant , Ff. The meaning is 
the same, ' undiscerning '; both spellings were in vogue. Persever- 
ance, discernment, and perseverant, discerning, both occur not 
infrequently in authors of the time. 

13. What mortality is! What a thing mortality is ! 

16. thy face. Warburton suggested her, which is certainly the 
meaning. But Clarke defends thy on the ground that the confusion 
of pronouns is "in Cloten's usual blundering, headlong manner ". 

17. haply. The Ff have happily, as often. In iii. 3. 29 they 
have hafly. Haply and happily are from the same root, one direct, 
the other via ' happy '. 

18. power of, control over. 

21, 22. This is. ..meeting-place. [Paraphrase.] 

Scene 2. 
4, 5. Cf 11. 246-249. 

8. citizen, town-bred, effeminate, 
wanton, a person of luxurious habits. 

9. so please you = Fr. s'ilvoiis plait. 

10. journal, diurnal (from the same root), daily. 

10, II. the breach of custom Is breach of all. [Paraphrase.] 

17, 18. The construction of the sentence is irregular, but the sense 
is quite plain. 

Cf this " instinct of birth " in the brothers with Cymbeline's "in- 
stinct of affinity" in v. 5. 109. 



Scene 2.] NOTES 187 

29. Doth miracle itself, becomes a miracle, is marvellous. With 
miracle used as a verb cf. "That monsters it", Lear, i. i. 223. 

31. So please you, sir. When Belarius says, "'Tis the ninth 
hour o' the morn ", he turns to a part of the cave, and takes down 
some of their hunting instruments, reaching one to Arviragus; which 
is the occasion of the words, "So please you, sir", the reaching being 
linked with a call {Capell). During Imogen's Aside the three men 
are equipping themselves for the hunt. 

35. imperious, imperial; so, often. 

38. The stage-direction Swallows some, inserted here by Dyce, 
who is followed by the Globe and most modern editions, is not in 
the Ff , and is probably misleading. The drug is contained in a 
box, which Imogen would not be likely to produce before the cave 
in the presence of the three men. She carries out her intention after 
her exit in 1. 46. 

stir him, persuade him to tell his story. 

46. bound, indebted. Belarius may purposely take the word in 
the sense of ' tied ', or he may mean: "We will never let you repay 
us ". 

47. appears he hath had: a confusion of two constructions, 
'appears to have had', and 'it appears, hath had'. 

49. In characters, in the shape of letters. Capell continued this 
speech, after cookery, to Guiderius; Ff give two following speeches 
to Arviragus, " He cut our roots ", and " Nobly he yokes ", — an ob- 
vious error. 

Even in cooking, Imogen's dainty and elegant ways, not unworthy 
of Juno's attendants, do not desert her. Be intolerant of criticism 
which suggests that this accomplishment was inconsistent with 
Imogen's rank. Shakespeare at any rate did not think so. 

57. him. Pope; them, Ff 

58. spurs, the largest roots of trees, which appear partly above 
the ground. 

patience, Theobald; patient, Ff. 

59. 60. The vine is of course patience. [Even a usually sane 
editor like Ingleby says it "is Fidele, or perhaps Fidele's heart".] 
' Let the root of the evil-smelling elder, grief, perish and untwine 
from the vine, patience, which will then grow all the more freely.' 
From has been proposed for zvith, but there is no reason to doul)t 
that Shakespeare used the same construction with tintiviiic as with 
twine. Perishing ■axiA unceasing a.Tt used proleptically, i.e. by antici- 
pation. Biron in Love's Labour's Lost (v. 2. 610) says: "Judas 
was hanged on an elder ". To this tradition, aided no doubt by its 
sickly smell, the bad reputation of the tree was due. 

61. great morning: possibly imitated from the Yr. grand jour= 
broad day. Fr. de grand matin = very early. 



i88 CYMBELINE [Act IV. 

63. Belarius' conscience, guilty or not, at once suspects pursuit oi 
himself instigated by the king. 

66. saw him not. For the tense, j^ast indefinite = present perfect, 
cf. 1. 191 and iv. 3. 36. This is in accordance with the Greek use 
of the aorist (cf. the Revised with the Authorized Version of the 
New Testament), and it is as logical as our more modern use. The 
difference depends upon a difference of thought, the action being 
regarded simply as past without reference to the present or to com- 
pletion. It will be noticed that both the above samples contain a 
negative. The indeji7iite tense seems to have peculiar propriety 
when we are denying that an action was performed at any time 
whatever {Abbott, § 347). 

69. companies: probably here and in 1. lOl not in the military 
sense, but simply 'people' or 'companions', as in Henry V., i. i. 55: 
" Since his addiction was to courses vain. 
His companies unletter'd". 

The singular is similarly used in 1. 129. 

71. mountaineers were supposed to be savage and barbarous. 
Cf. 11. 100, 120, 370, where the spelling of F I is mountaineer; here 
it is motintainer, just as we also find enginer, mtitiner (as well as 
mutineer). 

74. A slave : usually taken to mean ' the epithet slave ', on the 
false analogy of Romeo a7id Juliet, iii. i. 130: 

"Now, Tybalt, take the 'villain' back again". 

It is evident that the use of the indefinite article here makes all the 
difference, and that Guiderius is hurling Cloten's abusive epithet back, 
just as he does in 1. 89 below. 

81. Does Cloten in his anger forget for the moment that he is 
dressed in the garments of Posthumus? or does he expect to be 
recognized as Posthumus? Cloten's next speech hardly settles the 
point, because Guiderius' reply may well have made him look down 
at his clothes and reminded him that he was in borrowed garments ; 
but it precludes the third supposition, that of an oversight on the 
part of the dramatist. 

92. mere confusion, absolute overthrow. Cf. iii. i. 64. 

loi. company's, Ff.; companies. Globe. Cf. 1. 69. 

103. long is it since I saw him: "some twenty years" (i. i. 
62). 

105, 106. the snatches in his voice, And burst of speaking 
is a capital realistic touch, equally helpful to the actor on the stage, 
and to those of us who prefer to act Shakespeare in our easy-chairs. 

106. absolute, certain. CL perfect in 1. 1 18 and iii. i. 71. 
109, no. made up... to man [meaning?]. 



Scene 2,] NOTES 189 

III. the effect, Theobald; defect, Ff. Theobald's conjecture gives 
the required sense, ' Cloten had no judgment, and therefore had no 
fear'. Mr. Aldis Wright, in the Cambridge Shakespeare, returns to 
the Ff. reading, and appends this note: " Since none of the proposed 
emendations can be regarded as perfectly satisfactory, we leave this 
passage as it stands in the Folios. Possibly, as some editors have 
suggested, the author may through inadvertence have said the reverse 
of what he meant. Or a whole line, ending with the word 'judge- 
ment', may have dropped out, and the original sentence may have 
been to the following purport : ' for defect of judgement supplies the 
place of courage while true judgement is oft the cause of fear '." 

122. thank, Steevens; thanks, Ff 

129. For we do fear the law, because, forsooth, we are afraid 
of the law. For y^r= because see Abbott, § 151. 

131. safe, sound, good. We still say: "You may safely infer". 

132. humour, Theobald; hottor, Ff. 

136. For the omission oi as, cf. 11. 126, 127 above, where both sc 
and as are omitted. See Abbott, § 281. 

141. fetch us in. Cf. iii. 2. 9 (and note), and 1. 121 above. 

141, 142. yet is 't... alone. [Paraphrase.] 

145. ordinance, that which is ordained. 

146. howsoe'er, sc. it be; in any case. 

149. Did make my way long forth. [Paraphrase.] 

152. The omission of the verb of motion is frequent. See 11. 163, 
167. 

157. So, on the condition that : ' I would gladly bear all the con- 
sequences for the glory of the deed '. 

159-161. I would revenges. ..answer. [Paraphrase.] 

167. to gain his colour, to restore the hue of health to his 
cheeks. 

168. Clotens is not possessive case, but objective. Let blood 
(= bleed) is a compound verb, construed with the objective (dative?), 
and even used in the passive, as in Troilus and Cressida, ii. 3. 222 : 
" I '11 let his humours blood"; and Richard III., iii. I. 183: 

" His ancient knot of dangerous adversaries 
To-morrow are let blood at Pomfret-castle". 

169. The old man, glorious in his humility, imputes to their royal 
blood the high and heroic thoughts which his own great and childlike 
spirit has breathed into them [Hudson). Cf iii. 3. 79, and iv. 2. 25. 

170. how. Pope; thou, F I. 



/go CYMBELINE [Act IV. 

179. Civility, good breeding, refinement. Cf. civil, iii. 6. 23. 

186. ingenious, Ff.,= ingenuous; but the two forms were used 
indiscriminately. 

190. since death. The was frequently omitted before a noun 
already defined by another noun, especially in prepositional phrases 
{Abbott, § 89). 

193, 194. Exultation over nothing is jollity fit for apes, and lamen- 
tation for trifles is grief fit only for boys. 

Rimed couplets are introduced in strange and unexpected places 
in this play. Probably here and in v. 5. 106, 107 the rime is 
intended to emphasize the contempt expressed. From here to 1. 290 
we have perhaps the finest poetry in the play, not easily surpassed 
in the whole of Shakespeare's works. 

198. on is frequently interchangeable with of. Cf 1. 297, v. 2. 3, 
and Tempest, iv. i. 157: 

"We are such stuft 
As dreams are made on". 

200. To. [Collect other instances of this redundant ^^.] 

204-206. Who ever yet could sotitui thy bottom? find 

The ooze, to shew what coast thy sluggish care 
Might' st easilest harbour in. Ff 
The ooze? or shew what coast thou, sluggish care. 
Might' st easiVest harbour in? Capell. 

Crare is Sympson's brilliant emendation (see Glossary). Melancholy 
is compared, first to a bottomless sea, then to a sluggish crare seek- 
ing safe anchorage therein. Sound thy bottom —fnd the ooze, not — 
' fathom thy hold', which would complicate the metaphors. Ingleby 
proposes Sound the bottom?, which has the merit of reducing the two 
comparisons to one. Or perhaps we should read, with alternative 
comparisons : 

Who ever yet could sound thy bottom, fitid 

The ooze? or shew what coast thy sluggish crare 

Might easiliest harbour in? 

The general purport of the passage is clear enough: ' Melancholy is 
an unfathomable sea, in which it is useless to take soundings in the 
hope of finding any coast for harbouring '. 

207. what man. A was sometimes omitted after what in the 
sense of ' what kind of {Abbott, § 86). Cf iv. 4. 35. 

but I, sc. know. 

210, 211. 'Smiling as if he had been tickled in his sleep by a fly, 
not smitten by death's dart, for he was still laughing.' 

Mr. Spedding compares this with Shakespeare's treatment of the 
face of a beautiful woman just dead in two other instances, showing 



Scene 2.J NOTES 191 

his wonderful imagination in the two later plays as compared with 
the mere fancy of the earlier. 

" Death lies on her, like an untimely frost 
Upon the fairest flower of all the field ". 

Romeo and Juliet (1596-7), iv. 5. 28, 29. 
" But she looks like sleep, 
As she would catch another Antony 
In her strong toil of grace ". 

Antony and Cleopatra (1607), v. 2. 349-51. 

214. clouted brogues, heavy shoes patched with leather. Brogues 
(Gaelic bmg) are ( I ) coarse shoes, often of half-dressed leather; 
hence (2) brogtte—\he dialect of people who wear such. Clouted shoes 
now = shoes whose soles are studded with clout-nails (Fr. clouter, to 
stud). But there can be little doubt that in our older authors the 
hackneyed expression clouted skoon {Comus, 635) meant 'shoes 
patched with clouts (O.E. clUt, a patch) of leather'. CL Joshua, 
ix. 5: "old shoes and clouted upon their feet"; and Latimer's 
Sermons: "he should not have clouting leather to piece his shoes 
with". 

216. a bed, as fresh and pure as if he were asleep on a bed — such 
"charming" power has he. 

217, 218. Female fairies will fall in love with him and, haunting 
his tomb, save his body from decay. Cf. the fairies' song in Afid- 
sunimer Night'' s Dream, ii. 2. 9 ff. : 

" Beetles black, approach not near; 
Worm nor snail, do no offence ". 

According to tradition such creatures would not approach where 
fairies were. 

222. azured harebell. The harebell of Shakespeare is un- 
doubtedly the wild hyacinth (Ellacombe, Plant Lore of Shakespeare), 
Scilla nutans. Cf. ii. 2. 22. 

223. whom not to slander, which, not to slander it. 

224. ruddock, Hanmer ; raddock, Ff The same legend is found 
in The Bahes in the Wood. In Thomas Johnson's Cornucopia (15 16) 
we read : "The robin redbreast, if he find a man or a woman dead, 
will cover all his face with moss, and some think that if the body 
should remain unburied that he would cover the whole body also". 

229. winter-ground. To winter-ground z.-^\2S\\. is to protect it 
from the inclemency of the winter season by straw, dung, &c., laid 
over it [Steevens). No other instance of the word is known. 

232. admiration : very likely combining here its modern sense 
with that of 'wonder', seen in i. 6. 37 above. 

233. shall 's, shall us, shall we; again in v. 5. 228. Abbott (§215) 
connects this with the old impersonal use of the verb, of which he 



192 CYMBELINE [Act IV. 

gives no example, and of which very few examples indeed are to be 
found. I think it more likely to be an irregular extension of the 
familiar usage after transitive verbs, as in ' Let 's ' for ' Let us '. 

237. As once ; as once to, Ff. ; Pope omitted to. 

238. It is noteworthy that these names do not occur in the dirge. 

248. That angel of the world, the 'guardian angel', 'daemon' 
(cf Antony and Cleopatra, ii. 3. 19), that keeps security and order in 
the world. 

The idea of reverence and respect for ' degree ' as of paramount 
importance in the maintenance of social order, is found elsewhere 
in Shakespeare, notably in the fine speech of Ulysses {Troilns and 
Cressida, iv. i . 83 ff. ) : 

" O, when degree is shaked. 

Which is the ladder to all high designs. 

Then enterprise is sick .... 

Take but degree away, untune that string, 

And hark, what discord follows ! . . . 

Force should be right ; or rather, right and wrong. 

Between whose endless jar justice resides. 

Should lose their names, and so should justice too." 

252. Ajax, son of Telamon, second to Achilles in bravery among 
the Greeks who took part in the Trojan war, and Thersites, "a de- 
formed and scurrilous Grecian", are both characters in Shakespeare's 
Troihis and Cressida. 

255, 256. The Christian custom of burial is to lay the head to the 
west and the feet to the east; " so at the second coming of the Son 
of Man the dead might rise and face him in the general resurrec- 
tion " (Lee's Glossary of Liturgical and Ecclesiastical Terms, p. 62). 
In reversing the position, Shakespeare may have had no other in- 
tention than to suit the pre-Christian period of his play. But it is 
at least possible that he was aware of the classical (and Celtic) myth 
which located the ' Earthly Paradise ' in the Fortunate Islands 
(Avalon) across the western ocean, and which gave rise to the custom 
of burying the dead with their faces set thitherwards. (See Tylor's 
Primitive Culture, vol. ii. pp. 48, 422, and Baring Gould's Curious 
Myths of the Middle Ages. ) 

267. [What is the meaning of this line?] 

271. thunder-stone, thunderbolt {not meteorite). 

275. Consign to thee, sign the same contract with thee, submit 
to the same terms. 

276. exorciser (unique instance), exorcist (occurs twice), and 
exorcism (once), are always used by Shakespeare in connection with 
raising spirits, not, as now, with laying them or casting them out. 

278. forbear thee, let thee alone, forbear to disturb thee. [Assign 
the exact meaning of this word and oi forbearance in each of the 



Scene 2.] NOTES I93 

following passages : i. i. 68 ; ii. 3. 97 ; iii. 5. 39 ; and v. 5. 124. Which 
of these meanings do these words still retain?] 

280. consummation. Cf the closing prayer of the Church of 
England Burial Service: "that we, with all those that are departed 
in the true faith of thy holy Name, may have our perfect consum- 
mation and bliss, both in body and soul, in thy eternal and ever- 
lasting glory". 

285. Upon their faces, si. strew the flowers. Possibly Shake- 
speare for the moment forgot that Cloten's " clotpoU " had gone to 
tell the fishes he was the queen's son. Staunton proposed C'po/i 
tK eartKs face, without a stop at face. 

290. is, Pope: are, Ff. 

293. 'Ods pittikins! a diminutive corruption of 'God's pity'; 
cf. "God's bodykins" (for doJj'), in Hamlet, ii. 2. 554. 

297-312. Imogen wakes to semi-consciousness, and only by 
degrees shakes off the effects of the drug. Finding a "bloody man" 
by her side she hopes she is dreaming now, and that so (observe this 
pregnant word in 1. 298) her life in the cave was a reality ; but, 
praying with averted eyes for mercy, she looks again at the man 
(1. 306), and concludes that this is the reality and that the dream. 
Next she sees that the man is headless. Then the recognition of the 
garments of Posthumus suddenly removes all effects of the trance 
together with the memory of all that has immediately preceded, so 
that in a second she makes the awful discovery that the face and 
head are gone. 

300, 301. 'Twas but a phantasm of the brain, an arrow made of 
nothing and shot at nothing. 

310, 311. Mercurial, &c., of Mercury, of Mars, of Jove. 

311. brawns, brawny arms. 

313. madded Hecuba. Hecuba, Hector's mother, maddened 
at his death. 

315. irregulous (L. regula), lawless, licentious. Found nowhere 
else. 

316. Hast, Pope; Hath, Ff 

320. Posthumus ; accented everywhere else on the penult. This 
act has of course been used by the supporters of the double-date 
cheory (see Iittrodiiction, p. ix). 

325. pregnant, evident; so, frequently. 

329. Cloten's, Pope ; Cloteti, Ff. 

333. To, in addition to. 

337. confiners (unique instance) = either 'borderers' or 'inhabi- 
tants'. Confines in Shakespeare usually = district, territory, not 
' borders '. 

7 (M332) 



194 CYMBELINE [Act IV., Sc. 3. 

341. Syenna's brother, l:)rother of the ruler of Siena, a town 
and province in Tuscany. In the middle ages it was the chief of 
the Ghibelline towns, in the struggle with the Guelphs. 

347. fast, fasted. In verlw in which the infinitive ends in /, ed 
is often omitted in the past indicative for euphony {Abbott, § 341). 

348. wing'd, having flown. 

363-365. Who has changed that noble picture to something quite 
different from what noble nature made it? 

373. The commas punctuate Imogen's sobs. 

389. pickaxes, her hands. 

400. arm him, take him up in your arms. 

403. Cf. this sentiment and that of iv. 3. 46 with v. 4. loi, 102. 

Scene 3 

shows us Cymbeline in a most unfavourable light. In a great 
emergency he appears utterly incapable and incompetent, "amazed 
with matter", looking for the counsel of others who cannot give it, 
and thinking that in his stepson he has lost a great strategist or a 
great general ("so needful for this present"). 

6. Upon a desperate bed, so ill that her life is almost despaired 
of. 

8. it strikes me, this succession of blows falls upon me. 

17. missing = missed, and thus the statement is literally true (see 
iii. 5). 

21. For the omission of the nominative see Abbott, § 400. 
troublesome [meaning?]. 

22. slip, as a greyhound from the leash in coursing. 

22, 23. but our jealousy Does yet depend, 'but you are not 
yet free from our suspicion, which is still hanging over you '. 

28. amazed with matter, bewildered with pressing business. 

29, 30. can affront no less Than, is equal to meeting as many 
as. Cf. the noun affront in v. 3. 87. 

36. I heard no letter='I have not had a line', whatever the 
precise meaning of letter may be here. 

40. betid, Hanmer; betide, Ff. Such contraction in preterites 
and past participles was particularly common after dentals even from 
the Old English period. Cf. bestrid, iv. 4. 3S. 

44. Even to the note o' the king, so that even the king should 
be compelled to notice my valour. Cf tipon otir note (iv. 4. 20), ' in 
taking note of us '. 



Act v., Sc. i/j NOTES 195 

Scene 4. 

4. This way, if we do so, i.e. hide here. [Paraphrase the rest 
of the sentence.] 

6. revolts, revolters ; occurs also in King John. Cf. revenges, 
iv. 2. 159, and see Abbott, § 433. 

II. render, account, confession. The verb is used similarly in 
V. 5- 135- 

13. whose answer, the punishment of which. 

17. the, Rowe ; their, Ff. 

18. their quarter'd fires, burning in the several quarters of 
their camp. 

19. cloy'd importantly, stopped up (O.P>. cloyer, doer, to stop 
up, nail), filled with matters of great importance. 

27. The certainty, ' which is the certain consequence '. 
29. But [destined, doomed] to be. 

33. thereto so o'ergrown, moreover so covered with hair and 
beard. Cf. v. 3. 17. 

35. thing: almost = reproach. 

46. The hazard therefore due. [Explain.] 



Act v.— Scene I. 

There is nothing corresponding to this scene in any of Shakespeare's 
possible sources, wherein none of the villains have any thought of 
guilt or repentance until their wives' innocence is made clear at the 
close. Thus vShakespeare always transmutes his material into some- 
thing nobler, more true to life, more deeply significant. 

I. wish'd, Pope; am wis hi, Ff. 

The bloody cloth is the "bloody sign" of iii. 4. 125 (see 
note). 

5. wrying, going awry or astray. No other instance of this verb 
used intransitively is known. 

7. bond, obligation. Observe how completely Pisanio's actual 
course of action is here justified by his master. 

9. to put on this, to instigate this vengeance. It was the 
wager between Posthumus and lachimo which had led to Imogen's 
supposed fall. 

13-15. Some you snatch from hence fur little faults; others you 
suffer to heap ills on ills, and afterwards make them dread tlieir 



196 CYMBELINE [Act V. 

having done so, to the eternal welfare of the doers (Mason). Cf. 
Lucrece, 939-943 '■ 

"Time's glory is . . . 
To wrong the wronger till he render right ". 

For thrift = thriving, welfare, cf Merchant of Venice, i. i. 175: "T 
have a mind presages me such thrift". 

each elder worse is one of those daring usages in which Shake- 
speare would doubtless have delighted still more if he could have 
known what a godsend they were destined to be to his ultra-logical 
commentators. The words must mean ' each ill or crime worse 
than the one which had preceded it ', the crime being termed elder 
because committed at a more advanced age. Cf. Bacon's Advance- 
tnent of Learning, i. 5: "These times are the ancient times when 
the world is ancient ". 

16. The connection is best seen by regarding the last sentence as 
parenthetical; the line of thought interrupted at "vengeance" in 
1. 1 1 is here resumed. 

21. thee, Britain, not 'peace'. 

23. suit [meaning?]. 

30. habits, clothes (Fr. habits). 

32, 33. The guise or fashion of the world being then as now 
' more without and less within '. 

Scene 2. 

lachimo's sense of guilt is again entirely an addition of Shake- 
speare's own, and prepares the way for his repentant confession in 
Sc. 5. Posthumus here consummates his own repentance by his 
magnanimous sparing of the life of him who had wrought all his 
woe. That he recognized lachimo is proved by v. 5. 136, 410-412. 

15. See Appendix B (5). 

Scene 3. 

Observe how modestly Posthumus omits all mention of his own 
distinguished share in the Romans' defeat. He is at first (1. 3) 
politely sympathetic with the noble Lord ; but when the bearing of 
the latter, and his evident lack of patriotism, convince Posthumus 
that he is a coward at heart, he cannot refrain from contemptuous 
sarcasms. The scene serves the double purpose of describing the 
battle and showing how completely the victory was due to the valour 
of Belarius, Guiderius, Arviragus, and Posthumus. 

4. See Appendix B (5). 

14. wall'd with turf, with banks of turf outside the ditches. 

16-18. who deserved, for 's country, who, by doing this for 



Scene 3.] NOTES 197 

his country, earned the support it had given him during the long life 
indicated by his white beard. 

20. The country base, the country game of prisoner's base ; also 
called cAivy (from Chevy Chase). 

21, 22. Masks were worn by ladies for two purposes, to preserve 
their complexions, and for concealment. Hence the meaning is : 
' With faces fair enough for masks, or rather even fairer than faces 
that are masked for preservation or to guard against impertinent 
curiosity', shame = the desire not to be recognized. 

23. Made good the passage. [Explain,] 

24. harts, Theobald; hearts, Ff. 

24-51. [Paraphrase this passage.] 

32. ' Aided by the advantage of the place, and influencing others 
as if by magic' Or, "more charming" may mean that they in- 
fected [others] with their nobleness even more than they were aided 
by position. In 1. 68 charni'd— protected as if by magic spells. See 
also i. 3. 35, and note. 

34. gilded pale looks, brought the colour back to faces blanched 
through fear. Glided is the principal verb to These three (1. 28). 
Cf. Macbeth, ii. 2. 56: "I'll gild the faces of the grooms"; and 
Tempest, v. 280: " This grand liquor that hath gilded them". 

35. Part ... renewed, partly revived their sense of shame, partly 
their courage. 

.\Q. A stop i' the chaser, a halt by the pursuer. 

42. stoop'd, Rowe; stopt, Ff. .Syt^t'/'a'^ swooped ; it is a tech- 
nical term for the pouncing of birds of prey. Cf. v. 4. 126. 

43. they, Theobald; the, Ff. The construction is exactly parallel 
to that of the preceding lines. Observe the appropriateness of strides 
for victors. 

45. need, extremity, emergency. 

47. The punctuation in the text is my own. It is impossible that 
the three somes are nominatives, because Some slain before 
cannot possibly = some wound those slain before. The first two, 
therefore, are accusatives ; the third makes equally good sense as 
accusative or nominative, i.e. according as we supply 'who were' or 
'wound' after it; but it is more probably accusative like the first two. 

51. mortal bugs, objects of deadly terror (Welsh hiug, a spectre). 
Mortal in this sense occurs repeatedly in this play. 

51, 52. The well-bred irony of unpatriotic indifference and uncon- 
cern arouse Posthumus' anger. 

53^55- Posthumus first bids him not wonder, then tells him in 
another mode of reproach that wonder is all that he was made for 
{Johnson). 



198 CYMBELINE [Act V. 

6i. as he is made to do, Avliat he is naturally qualified to do, 
i.e. fly. 

64. Still going? i.e. you run away from me as you did from the 
enemy. 

64, 65. O noble misery, &c. What miserable nobility, lo be 
present on the battle-field and yet, so far from fighting (see 1. 2), have 
to ask a poor peasant-soldier what took place. 

74-76. The probable meaning is : ' I have returned lo the side 
on which I came hither (cf. v. I. 25), being now an Italian again, 
though at heart favouring the Britons '. Capell suggested that 1. 74 
referred lo Death: 'Death being now a favourer to the Briton, I 
am more likely to meet with him by rejoining the Romans'. I 
reject this interpretation as not being the natural meaning of the 
passage (the colon at the close of 1. 73 is in the earliest text). It 
seems to me obvious that "a favourer to the Briton " and " no more 
a Briton" refer to the same person, the "I"' of 1. 75. Moreover, 
added point is given to this explanation if we suppose that Post- 
humus has now resumed his "Italian weeds". At the beginning 
of the scene, in his conversation with the British Lord, he is evi- 
dently a British soldier; at its close he is taken prisoner as an Italian. 
Why may we not suppose the change to have been effected at this 
point and to be glanced at in these lines? — ' Though still at heart 
favouring the Britons, I have joined the Romans again, for among 
them, the vanquished, I shall meet with death'. 

78. touch my shoulder, the usual way of arresting a prisoner. 
Cf. As You Like It, iv. i. 48: "Cupid hath clapped him o' the 
shoulder ". 

81. 'On one side or the other [i.e. for or against the Britons) I am 
come to end my life.' 

90, 91. if seconds Had answer'd him, if he had been seconded 
with valour equal to his own. 

92. leg. Cf. Richard II., ii. 3. 90: 

"Why have those banish'd and forbidden legs 
Dared once to touch a dust of England's ground?" 

Scene 4. 

It is somewhat difficult to be altogether patient with any part of 
this scene but the opening soliloquy of Posthumus, except as a foil 
to the intense interest of that which follows it. The genuineness of 
11. 30-122 (not of the dumb-show) has been questioned. See Ap- 
pendix E. 

I, 2. The reference is lo the custom of putting a lock on a horse's 
leg when he is turned out to pasture. 



Scene 4.] NOTES igg 

8. unbar these locks. Cf. pick that bolt (1. lo). We now speak 
of ' picking a lock ' and ' unbarring a door ', &c. 

8-28. [Paraphrase this passage.] 

10. The penitent instrument to pick that bolt, the means 
of showing his repentance, by which he may free his conscience. 
Ingleby explains the penite)it instrument in the following note: " In 
this speech Posthumus is made to employ the language of the early 
divines, in distinguishing the three parts (primary, secondary, and 
'main') of Repentance, as the condition of Remission of Sins. 
I. Attrition, or sorrow for sin: ' Is't enough I am sorry?' 2. Pen- 
ance; which was held to convert attrition into contrition, or godly 
sorrow: 'Must I repent?' 3. Satisfaction: 'to satisfy'. And he 
contends that as he has fulfilled the former requirements, he is willing 
to fulfil the last — to pay his debt, for having taken Imogen's life, by 
giving up his own." 

16. If... part, if satisfaction is the main condition of my freedom 
of conscience. 

17. stricter. It is contended that stricter (L. strictus, tightened) 
here =' more restricted', 'less severe', because the gods could not 
demand a more severe "render" than his all. The word occurs in 
Hooker in that sense, but nowhere else in Shakespeare. But the 
whole point of the speech is that the gods show mercy in proportion 
as they inflict penance. Therefore, when Posthumus bids them take 
no "stricter" render than his all, he means no less a penance than 
his life. The student will find that the speech repays careful thought, 
without which, indeed, its full meaning cannot be appreciated. 

18-21. I ask not to be allowed to compound with my creditors, 
which would be no clemency to me. 

24, 25. Stamped coins, though light, are accepted for the sake of 
the figure stamped upon them. 

26. You.. .yours, you should the rather take mine because "you 
coin'd it " (1. 23). 

27. take this audit, accept the statement of account I offer. 
Posthumus has made out the account against himself, and offers per 
contra the life he has to give as the "main part " of his Repentance. 
He now asks the gods to accept his audit, and in discharge to take 
his life [Ingleby). 

28. cancel these cold bonds, free me from these cold (iron) 
gyves by death. 

43. Lucina, the goddess who presides over child-birth : Juno or 
Diana. 

60. Leonati. Abbott, S 22, attributes this quasi-adjectival use 
o{ Leonati to an increasing dislike and disuse of th-,; inflection in 'j. 



200 CYMBELINE [Act V. 

97. Elysium, the abode of the shades of the blest in the lower 
world. 

102. delighted, delighting, delightful ; passive for active. 

114-117. ' He came down in thunder and sulphurous smoke; he 
ascends with an odour sweeter than the scents of the " beatific As- 
phodel meadows" of Elysium'. 

116. foot, strike with his claws. 

118. cloys, cleys, clees, claws {Farmer), as hawks and eagles are 
fond of doing; no other instance of the word is known. 

120. is enter'd : cf. Fr. est entre, and see Abbott, § 295. But 
"are born" (v. 5. i7) = Fr. nous sommes nes — v;^ were born. 

129. I swerve [meaning ?]. 

135-137. let thy effects... promise. [Paraphrase.] 

149. The action of my life is like it, the course of my life is 
an equally hopeless enigma. 

159, 160. which are often... mirth. [Paraphrase.] 

164. heaviness: of, Globe. Y \\\2A heaviness. 0/i, c/, by antici- 
pation of Oh in the next line. 

167. debitor and creditor, account-book or ledger. 

169. counters, round pieces of base metal used in making calcu- 
lations. 

173. that were to sleep, who was destined to sleep. 

179. to take. This redundant to is frequently found before the 
second of two parallel infinitives. See Abbott, § 350. 

180. jump, risk, hazard. Cf. Macbeth, i. 7. 7 : 

"We 'Id jump the life to come ". 
198, 199. for all he be, despite his being. 

203. my wish hath a preferment in't, if my wish were fulfilled 
I should hope for preferment to a better ofiice. 

Scene 5. 

For a proper appreciation of the wonderful denouement of this 
scene it must be remembered how much there is to be unravelled, 
not for the spectators only, but still more for the actors themselves. 
For, it may be borne in mind, we, as readers or spectators, know a 
great deal more about the several persona than they know about one 
another, and our own interest is greatly enhanced by a sympathetic 
interest in the disentanglement of the intricate knots of the play 
from the personal stand-point of each of the principal cliaractevs. To 
take one illustration: -i>.'e know that Imogen's virtue has remained 
unspotted throughout ; Posthumus does not know it ; we recognize 



Scene 5.] NOTES 201 

his wife in the page of Lucius; he does not. We look \v\[.\\ personal 
interest to see how the revelation and the recognition will l)e brought 
about ; we look with something of sympathetic interest to see how 
Posthumus and Imogen will be affected by the revelation and the 
recognition. 

5. targes of proof, shields of proof; of proof is a technical ex- 
pression, frequently applied to armour that had been satisfactorily 
tested after manufacture. Targes is here a monosyllable. 

9,10. Such precious. ..poor looks. [Paraphrase.] 

14. liver, heart and brain : standing for all the vital forces of 
the body. 

16. of whence = of from where, i.e. of where, <7r whence. 

22. estates, rank, dignity. Cf. with i. 4. 95, 108. In 1. 74, 

estate -sidiie, condition. 

31. like her life, which had been a mad horror of wickedness 
and unrest. 

36. finish'd, died; see 1. 412. 

38. Affected, loved. 

43. bore in hand, made believe, pretended; not uncommon. 

54-56. Win your heart by her show of affection, and in time, 
when she had thus got you into a fit frame of mind to accept her 
proposal, to secure the adoption of her son as heir to the crown. 

62-66. Cymbeline here confesses his own lack of insight and 
weakness of character. 

68. And prove it in thy feeling. [Explain.] 

83. peculiar, personal, of myself. 

86 ff. This recalls Boccaccio's description of Bernabo Lomellin's 
wife, the Imogen of the tale: "She was goodly of person, and yet very 
young, quick, quaint, mild, and courteous, and not wanting anything 
appertaining to the office of a vi^ife, either for domestic affairs, or any 
other employment whatsoever". 

87. So tender over his occasions, so nicely sensible of his 

wants {Schmidt). 

95. nor, Rowe ; Ff. omit. 
g6. To say, I should say. 

103. a thing, i.e. the ring she had given Posthumus on the finger 
of her tempter lachimo, whom she recognizes among the prisoners. 
What wild possibilities this sight must send thronging through her 
brain ! 

120-122. One sand does not resemble another more closely [than 
he resembles] that sweet rosy lad who died, and was Fidele. There 
T (M332) 



202 CYMBELINE [Act V. 

is no reason to doubt the correctness of the Folio reading. These 
latest plays are full of "rapid and abrupt turnings of thought, so 
quick that language can hardly follow fast enough; impatient activity 
of intellect and fancy, which, having once disclosed an idea, cannot 
wait to work it orderly out ". 

126. saw, Rowe; see, Ff. 

127. It is not to be wondered at that Pisanio is the first to identify 
his mistress, for he alone was privy to her disguise. Bear in mind 
that Imogen has not revealed herself to Cymbeline in their private 
conference. It is worth while at this point to run over in your mind 
how much of the exact state of affairs is known to each of the princi- 
pal characters, e.i;. lachimo knows that he obtained the ring by 
wronging Cymbeline's daughter and her husband, but does not 
recognize either of the latter; on the other hand, Posthumus knows 
him (see 1. 136). 

139, 140. Since what I have to say will torture you, you will [if 
wise] torture me to leave it unsaid. See 1. 133. 

155 ff. lachimo's narration differs so widely from the facts as given 
in i. 4., that it is evident Shakespeare was thinking, not of what he 
had previously written, but of the "Italian merchants who acciden- 
tally met in Paris at supper, and talked freely of their wives at home" 
(in Boccaccio). In i. 4 there is no "feast", no Posthumus "sitting 
sadly", no gallants praising their "loves of Italy", &c. 

163-165. for feature. ..nature, for grace and dignity of form, 
surpassing those antique statues of Venus and Minerva whose 
attitudes are unattainable by nature {Staimton). 

165. brief, transient. Art idealizes and makes permanent the 
changing, fleeting forms of nature. 

condition, disposition, character. 

167, 168. besides that hook of wiving. Fairness, besides that 
hook which catches a husband, beauty. 

176-178. Either our boasted loves were actually mere kitchen- 
trulls (see Glossary) as compared with his, or we in describing them 
were as dumb fools compared with him. 

182. Made scruple of, expressed doubt with regard to. 

185. In suit, by making suit to her. 

186. hers and mine adultery. We should now say ' my 
adultery and hers'. "It is felt that the ear cannot wait till the 
end of the sentence while so slight a word as her remains with 
nothing to depend on " {Abbott, § 238). Cf. 1. 230. 

190. Phoebus' wheel, a wheel of the fabled chariot of the sun. 

194, 195. ' Between the pure passion of a pure woman and passion 
adulterate with lust.' 



Scene 5.] NOTES 203 

196. mine Italian brain. Shakespeare intended lachimo as a 
foil to Postliiimus, not only as regards purity of morals, but also as 
regards open directness of conduct. Here there is not improbably 
a reference to the Machiavelism of his day. Machiavel, who died 
1530, taught that in government right should be subordinated to 
expediency. Cf. iii. 4. 15. 

igg. practice, plot, stratagem. 

206, 207. he could not But think. It is essential to remember 
this opinion of lachimo in order to the formation of a correct judg- 
ment as to the blameworthiness or otherwise of Posthumus' conduct. 
See "Critical Comments", and i. 4 and ii. 4. 

2og ff. What a magnificent dramatic moment ! Observe that all 
these opprobrious epithets are intended for himself, not for lachimo. 
Fletcher well says: "Nothing can exceed the dramatic beauty of 
this electric burst of agonizing shame and remorse from the husband's 
heart, thus taking the place of lachimo's intended account of the 
transport of vindictive rage into which he had fallen when firs^ 
persuaded of his wife's infidelity. The atonement to the injured 
name of Imogen is now complete, and the catastrophe of the drama 
fully prepared." 

2i5, 217. That all... than they. [Paraphrase.] Cf. 1. 225. 

221, she herself, virtue herself. 

227. Here for the first and only time Imogen seems to forget that 
she is in male disguise, and thus brings on herself that blow from her 
husband which still further heightens the interest of this pathetic 
climax. 

228, 229. If we 're going to make a play of it, act your part by 
lying there. 

233. come, Rowe; comes, Ff. 

238. The tune of Imogen: 'Imogen's musical voice' is surely 
implied. Cf. iii. 4. 174, 175. 

240. stones of sulphur, thunderbolts. 

250. temper, mix, compound. 

261. from. Here and in one other place (not in this play) the 
Ff. have/rc. 

262, 263. Think. ..again. Imogen seems to be carrying out the 
image suggested by her own question. ' Imagine yourself upon a 
rock, where you may easily throw me from you again, and now [as 
she embraces Posthumus] see if you can do so!' What a world of 
meaning is conveyed by this simple challenge ! 

275. missing, being absent (and missed). 

277. discover'd, revealed, disclosed ; so in i. 6. 97 and iii. 5. 9";. 



204 CYMBELINE [Act V. 

284. But Pisanio was not present when Cloten announced this 
purpose in iii. 5. 134 f{. 

286. It is not altogether satisfactory to me that Pisanio here drops 
out of the play without any recognition from Posthumus and Imogen 
of his sterling fidelity. 

297. of mine : i.e. of my head being cut off. 

298, 299. Cymbeline refuses to redeem his character up to the 
last. Nothing could possibly show him in a worse light than this 
speech to the slayer of the villain who, as he had just heard, was 
bent upon treating his daughter in a way worse than death. 

303-305. He has desei-ved better of you than a whole band of 
Clotens ever did by any service in which they received scars. 

307, 308. Will you undo the worthy service for which you are not 
yet rewarded by doing that for which you must experience our wrath? 

311. But I will prove, if I do not prove. 

319. Assumed this age, taken on tliis appearance of age (since 
last you saw him). 

334; 335- ' My entire (oj- only) offence, my very punishment, and 
my treason, were the creation and outcome solely of your caprice.' 

334. mere, Tyrwhitt ; 7iear, Ff. 

338. For as (instead of which), correlative with that, i&& Abbott, § 280. 

346, 347. the more it shaped Unto my end of stealing 
them, the better it fulfilled the purpose for which I stole them. 

351. worthy, sc. to be used. 

352-354. Thy tears give testimony to the sincerity of thy relation; 
and I have the less reason to be incredulous, because the actions 
which you have done within my knowledge are more incredible than 
the story which you relate {Johnson). 

371. orbs, orbits, or the revolving spheres to which the planets 
were fastened in the Ptolemaic astronomy. 

378. ye, Rowe; we, Ff. 
e'er, Rowe; ere, Ff. 

383, 384. which Distinction should be rich in, which the 
discrimination and following out of the different parts of the narrative 
will be sure to reveal fully. 

385. you (emphatic), Imogen. 

386. brothers, Rowe; brother, Ff. 

388. your three motives, the motives of you three (Belarius 
and the two lirothers). 

395. her master, Lucius. Here, at the close oi the drama, 



Scene 5.] NOTES 205 

Imogen is in her rightful place : though she has lost a kingdom, she 
is queen of every heart. 

396; 397- the counterchange...all. [Paraphrase.] 

409. beseeming, seeming, appearance ; unique instance. 

fitment, suitable attire. 

421. freeness, generosity; unique instance. 

428. spritely shows, ghostly apparitions. 

430-432. whose containing ... collection of it, the contents 
of which are so hard to make sense of that I can draw no inference 
from it. From is often a pregnant word in Shakespeare; see Abbott, 
§158. 

446, 447. IVIr. Aldis Wright cites this identical derivation, worthy 
to rank with that of rat from mouse, from Henry Stephen's IVorld 
of Wonders, 1607: "If any should reply and say, that it is not to 
be wondered at that the ancient Latinists never mentioned these 
Etymologies, considering the names were not then in use ; I answer, 
that they had no good dexterity in giving Etymologies of Ancient 
latin words; witness the notation of Mulier, quasi mollis aer'\ 

448-450. There is something of confusion liere, which Capell pro- 
posed to remove by reading thy for this. If who (1. 448) be addressed 
to Posthumus, the sense is clear; but it apparently means Imogen, 
and in that case it is possible that \{\e you in 1. 450 stepped into the 
place of the real subject and thus led to a change in the voice of the 
verb. 

458. My, Ff. ; Hanmer proposed By. 

459. Cymbeline was personally indebted to Caesar; see iii. I. 68, 69. 

464. The sense is clear, and the construction may be rectified by 
supplying upon at the close of this line. 



APPENDIX A 



PROSODY 

Cymbdine is the longcbl but three of all Shakespeare's plays: 
Antony and Cleopatra has 3964 lines, Hamlet 3924, Richard III. 3599, 
Cymbeluie 3448. Mr. F. G. Fleay, to whom the above numbers are 
due, also gives the following totals in Cytnbeline: Prose, 638 lines; 
blank verse, 2585 lines; decasyllabic rhyming hnes, 107. I make the 
number of lines in rhyming couplets somewhat different; but the 
essential thing to note is, that, for so late a play, decasyllabic rhyming 
couplets are unusually frequent, especially the rhymed tags at the close 
of scenes and important passages. Mr, Fleay gives the following 
numbers : 





No. of scenes 
in play. 


No. of scenes 
with tags. 


No. of tag 
rhymes. 


Cytnbeline, 
Tempest, ... 
Winter'' s Tale, ... 


27 

9 
15 


II 
I 



16 

I 




The study of the prosody of a play of Shakespeare's is of use for 
two important practical purposes : First, the characteristics of the 
versification vary greatly at different periods of the dramatist's career, 
and a careful study of these characteristics has proved a great aid in 
determining the approximate order of composition of the plays. And 
the knowledge of this order enables us to read the plays in chrono- 
logical sequence — by far the best order in which to read them — and 
thus to trace the gradual growth of Shakespeare's marvellous powers. 
See "Date, History, &c., of the Play", Introduction, § i. Secondly, 
some knowledge of scansion is necessary for the intelligent reading 
of a play aloud : for the avoidance at the one extreme of reading 
poetry exactly as if it were prose (sometimes not even prose cut up 
into lengths), and at the other of reading it in a monotonous sing- 
song way, every line on one pattern, thus — 

"As to seek through the ;r-gions r7/"the earth", 

without regard to the comparative importance and emphasis, or un- 
importance and lack of emphasis, of each word. Now, inasmuch as 
the knowledge of scansion necessary for this purpose is not great, 
and because the subject is not of thrilling interest in itself, being 
moreover utterly inadequate and useless unless backed by an en- 
thusiastic desire to derive the fullest meaning and pleasure from 

206 



APPENDIX A 207 

what is read, I shall say what I have to say as simply and briefly as 
possible. 

Feet. — English prosody has adopted most of its terminology from 
classical prosody; it is therefore the more necessary to bear in mind 
this essential difference between the two systems: classical scansion 
divided syllables into long and short, English divides them into 
accented or stressed and unaccented or unstressed. If we represent 
an accented syllable by a and an unaccented syllable by x, we can 
easily exemplify the commonest kinds of metrical feet: 

Symbol. Name. Example. 

xa Iambic machine. 

ax Trochaic father. 

xxa Anapcestic interfere. 

axx Dactylic carpenter. 

Lines. — When a line consists of five feet it is called a pentameter, 
if of six feet a hexameter. When a pentanietric line or pentameter 
is made up of five (mostly) iambic feet, it is called an iambic penta 
meter. The great majority of the lines in thi^ play are iambic penta- 
meters; but if they are unrhymed, they are conveniently and shortly 
called blank verse (lines). Here is an example of such a line: 

"As he I was bom. | The king | he takes | the babe" ji. i. 40). 



Variations. — I purposely selected the above line because each 
foot is a very fair iambic. But it happens only rarely, perhaps not 
oftener than onco in every twelve to twenty lines, that a hne consists 
of five normal iambic feet. Were it otherwise, blank verse would 
become as intolerably monotonous as Pope's couplets. The highest 
technical art is shown in the way great poets vary the music of their 
verse by varying the feet they employ. 

For my present purpose I leave degrees of stress out of account. It 
is obvious that a syllable may have any degree of strength or weak- 
ness, i.e. of stress or lack of stress. And it would be possible to 
indicate these variations by a more or less complicated system of 
symbols. But there is this serious objection to any such system, 
that, whereas different persons usually agree as to whether a syllable 
is stressed or unstressed, they as frequently differ as to the amount 
of stress to be laid on any particular syllable. I divide all syllables, 
therefore, simply into stressed and unstressed (denoted respectively 
by a and x). This enables me to arrange all variations in three 
classes: (I.) dissyllabic, (II.) trisyllabic, (III.) monosyllabic. 

I. Dissyllabic variations. — There are four kinds of dissyllabic feet: 
(i) X a, iambus; (2) ax, trochee; (3) a a, spondee; (4) .r .v, pyrrhic. 
Of these the iambic, as we have seen, is ihe normnl foot in dramatic 
blank verse; the trochaic foot is the commonest dissyllabic variation; 
and examples oi aa and xx are not uncommon. Mr. J. C. Smith 



2o8 CYMBELINE 

(in the Warwick /^j Voit Like It) lays down the following limitations 
to the occurrence of the trochaic variation a x : 

(a) It is commonest after a pause; i.e. either in the first foot (after 
tlie pause at the end of the previous line) or after the pause so often 
found in the middle of a line (usually in the third or fourth foot), 
called the ccesiira or csesural pause. It is not often found in the 
second foot. 

(/;) It is very rare in the last foot, because a change of rhythm in 
that place produces a halting effect. There is one example in iv. 
3- 9: 

"The hope | of com | fort. But i for thee, | fellow". 
X a X a X a X a ax 

(e) There are never more than two trochaic feet in a line — a 
majority of trochaics would alter the character of the rhythm of 
the line. 

(d) Two trochaic feet rarely come together. 

II. Trisyllabic variations are less common. There are the follow- 
ing possible varieties: axx (dactyl), xxa (anapaest), xax (amphi- 
brach) — all pretty common; xxx (tribrach), and those containing 
two or three accented syllables, xaa, ax a, a ax, aaa — all rare. 

III. Monosyllabic variation. — Occasionally we find a foot consisting 
of a single accented syllable. This is especially the case when the 
preceding syllable (often a monosyllable) is unusually emphatic, so 
that, through the voice dwelling heavily or long upon it, the absence 
of the unstressed syllable in the next foot is rendered much less con- 
spicuous. An extreme instance is seen in v. 5- 54- 

" O'ercome | you with | her show, | and | in time ". 
X a XX X a a x a 

Here the effect is displeasing, because "and" is inadequate to bear 
the stress of a whole foot, however emphatic the preceding syllable 
may be. 

IV. Hypermetrical lines.— In addition to the above variations, any 
line may have one, or even two, supernumerary final syllables. A 
few figures will show that eleven-syllabled lines, or lines with one 
extra unaccented syllable after the fifth foot, are very much more 
frequent in the late than in the early plays of Shakespeare. The 
number opposite each play is the percentage of eleven-syllabled lines 
to all the other lines in the play. 

per cent. 

Lovers Labour'' s Lost ... ... ... 4 



Richard If. 
merchant of Venice 
As Yon Like It ... 

Othello 

IVinter's Tale 
Cyinbeline 
Tempest ... 



11-39 

15 

18 

26 

3109 

32 

33 



APPENDIX A 209 

Two things remain: (l) to scan several consecutive lines in illus- 
tration of the foregoing remarks; (2) to scan some of the most 
irregular and difficult lines in the play. In both cases, it may be 
well to state, there can often be no absolute certainty as to the right 
scansion of a line; much depends, for one thing, on the feeling of 
the reader. 

(i) I select one of the most finely poetical passages in the poem 
for consecutive scansion — ii. 2. 11-30: 

"The eric [ kets sing, \ a:id man's | o'er-la \ bour'd sense 

-T (T ji a jf a a a .r it 

Repairs | itself | by rest. | Our Tar | quin thus 

jr rt .r a- Ji: a a a x a 

Did soft I ly press | the rush | es, ere | he wa | ken'd 

X a X a X a x a x a x 

The chas j tity | he woun | ded. Cy | there | a, 

X a x x X a x a x a x 

How brave | ly thou | becomest | thy bed, 1 fresh li | ly, 
a a X ii X a X X a a a x 

And whi | ter than | the sheets ! | That I | might touch ! 

X a X a X a x a x a 

But kiss ; \ one kiss ! i Rubies I unpa | ragon'd, 

an a a ax x a x a 

How dear | ly they do't! | 'Tis | her brea ! thing that 

X a X X a a X a x a 

Perfumes ] the cham | ber thus : 1 the flame | o' the ta | per 

X a X a X a x a x x a x 

Bows to I ward her, | and would un | der-peep | her lids, 
ax X a X X a x a x a 

To see j the enclo \ sed lights, | now ca | nopied 
X a X a X a x a x a 

Under | these win | dows, white | and a [ zure, laced 
ax X a X a. x a x a 

With blue | of heaven's | own tinct. | But my ] design, 
X a X a X a a x x a 

To note I the cham j ber : I | will write | all down : 

X a. X a X a X a a a 

Such and | such pic | tures ; there | the win | dow ; such 
a X a a X a x a x a 

The adorn | ment of | her bed ; j the ar | ras ; fi i gures, 
X a X X X a x a x a x 

Why, such | and such ; | and the | contents | o' the sto | ry. 
a a X a xxxaxxax 

Ah, but I some na | tural notes | about | her bo ] dy 
ax X a X a x a x a x 
Above ( ten thou | sand mea | ner mo | vables 
X a X a X a x a x x 

Would tes I tify, | to enrich I mine inven | tory". 
X a XX X a x x a x x 

(2) The following lines afford samples of special irregularities, 
some of w hich are of frequent occurrence. 

"A sample | to the youn | gest, to ] the more | mature" (i. i. 48). 
X a X X a X a X a x a 



2IO CYMBELINE 

This and the next two examples illustrate the taking up into the 
previous syllable or else the slurring of final unstressed -le, -er, espe- 
cially before a vowel or quasi-mute k, a pause, or an unstressed 
syllable. 

"Myself I by with I a needle, | that I | might prick" (i. i. i68). 

j: a a jc X a x a x a 

" Report I should ren | der him hour | ly to | your ear" (iii. 4. 150). 

X a X a X X a x x x a 

The next examples show the compressing almost into monosyllables 
of such words as having and evil : 

" The hfe | o' the need : | having found | the back- | door open " (v. 3. 45), 
X a X X a X a x a x a 

"The evils | she hatch "d | were not | effec | ted; so" (v. 5. 60). 
X a X a X a X a X a 

But in i. I. 72 I prefer this scansion: 

" Evil- I eyed un | to you : you're | my pri | soner, but". 
ax a a X X a x a x a 

The next five lines show the elision of a whole foot after a well- 
marked pause ; they are, in fact, tetrametric lines : 

"That shouldst | repair | my youth, | thou heap'st" (i. i. 132). 

X a X a X a a a 

" Will I I first work : | he 's for | his mas | ter '' 1 i. 5. 28). 

X a a a a x x a x 

"Last night | 'twas on | mine arm; | I kiss'd | it" (ii. 3. 145). 

X a X a X a X a X 

"And leave | eighteen. | Alas, I poor prin j cess" (ii. i. 53). 

X a X a X a a a x 

" \ prin 1 ce's courage. | Away, 1 I pri | thee" (iii. 4. 184). 
X a X ax X a x a x 

And so is 

"With that 1 harsh, no | ble, sim | pie no | thing" (iii. 4. 132). 
X a a a X a X a x 

I. 3. 7 is difficult. To avoid three successive trochees (see p. 153 
'Above), we must make the first foot monosyllabic: 

" Sense | less li | neni hap | pier therein | than I ! " 



Some of the following lines require no special comment; in some 
the scansion is tentative : 

" But, I though slow, ' deadly. | 
Queen. I won | der, doc | tor " (I. 5. 10). 



APPENDIX B 211 

Lines divided between two speakers are specially liable to irregu- 
larities. Cf. : 

" The than ] kings of | a king. | 
Post. I I am, sir " (v. 5. 407). 

X a X X X a a x a 

"Try ma | ny, a | 11 good, 1 serve tru | ly, ne | ver" {iv. 2. 373;. 
X a X a X a a a x a x 

If, as I believe, Imogen is sobbing in this line, all would easily 
become dissyllabic. 

"That sa | tiate yet | unsa | tisfied | desire, | that tub" '(\. 6. 47) 
X a X a X a X a x a x a 

is a hexameter or alexandrine. 

" With gol I den che | rubins | is fretted: | her and | irons" (ii. 4. 88; 
X a X a X a x a x x a x x 

has two supernumerary final syllables. 

Unless we are to make iv. 2. 26 into a halt-trochaic, half-iambic 
line, it is best taken thus : 

" Cowards fa | ther cowards | and base 1 things si | re base ". 
a a X a x x a x a x a 

There is no need to compress the second cowards before the CKSural 
pause. 

" I hum I bly set it | at your will; | but, for | my mis | tress" (iv. 3. 13). 
X a X a X X X a a x x a x 

" Nor when | she purposes | return. 1 Beseech | your high | ness " (iv. 3. 15). 
X a X a X X a x a x a x 



APPENDIX B 

HISTORY AND HOLINSHED 

History. — The various sources whence Shakespeare drew his 
materials for Cymbelitte and King Lear are largely mythical ; and 
very little is actually known of the history of Britain at the beginning 
of our era. Csesar and Tacitus tell us the bulk of what we know 
about the manners and customs of its then inhabitants : the facts, 
names and events that these chance observers report have been veri- 
fied or disproved, rarely supplemented, by the researches of the 
philologist and the numismatologist. Putting these old and new 
authorities together we learn that tlie island was inhabited by 
various tribes mainly of Iveltic stock; thnt these differed widely in 
race, religion, and polity; that the civilization of these tribes varied 
inversely with their distance from Gaul ; that by Cymbeline's time a 



212 CYMBELINE 

considerable trade had sprung up across the Channel, the exports 
being tin, iron, and grain, the imports being bronze and kickshaws ; 
and that, in the interval between the invasion of Julius Ca-sar 
(55 and 54 B.C.) and that under the auspices of the emperor 
Claudius, in 43 A.D., Roman influences were quietly making them- 
selves felt among the southern peoples, who had hitherto owed their 
civility to the Greek merchants from Massalia (Marseilles). 

Cymbeline belonged, in all probability, to the only Briton family 
of the day that has left its footprints on the sands of time. His 
father, Tasciovant, was most likely the grandson of the Caswallon 
or Cassibelaunos who resisted Julius Csesar; one of his sons was the 
Caradoc or Caractacus who headed first his own people, afterwards 
the Silures (of the Wye valley) against the later and more permanent 
Roman invasions, and who, in 50 A.D., was carried off to grace an 
imperial triumph in Rome. Cunobelin — as he calls himself on his 
coins — lived, it would appear, till the eve of the Claudian invasion, 
and exercised a kind of suzerainty over the south-east of the island. 
The Catuvelauni, of whose hereditary dynasty he was a member, 
had their head-quarters at Verulam, near S. Albans; but Cunobelin 
moved his residence to Camalodun (Colchester), the chief town ol 
the Trinobantes. The greater part of the Midlands and a consider- 
able region between the Thames and the south coast seem to have 
owned his sway : hence the Roman biographer Suetonius speaks of 
him — somewhat loosely — as "Jfex Britaimoriun^' . But his over- 
lordship was precarious, and his military power melted like wax at 
the presence of the Roman legions : even so, seventeen centuries 
later, did the empire of the Great Mughal collapse at the presence 
of the British. 

Holinshed. — It was from Holinshed's Chro7iicles, the first edition 
of which appeared in 1577, that Shakespeare derived the materials 
for nearly all his historical plays, as well as the historical material for 
Macbeth, Lear, and Cymbeline. The following quotations from the 
edition of 1 807-8, but with modernized spelling, show the extent of 
his indebtedness to Holinshed in this play : — 

(I) The heading of the first chapter of "The Third Book of the 
History of England" is: "Of Mulmutius, the first king of Britain, 
who was crowned with a golden crown, his laws, his foundations, 
with other his acts and deeds". In this chapter we read: " Mul- 
mucius Dunwallo...the son of Cloton (as testifieth... Geffrey of Mon- 
mouth) got the upper hand of the other dukes or rulers: and after 
his father's decease began his reign over the whole monarchy of Bri- 
tain in the year of the world 3529, after the building of Rome 314, 
and after the deliverance of the Israelites out of captivity 97, and 
about the 26 year of Darius Artaxerxes Longimanus, the fifth king 
of the Persians. . . . He also made many good laws, which were long 
after used, called Mulmucius' laws, turned out of the British speech 
into the Latin by Gildas Priscus, and long time after translated out 
of Latin into English by Alfred, king of England, and mingled in 
his statutes. ...After he had established his land, and set his Britons 



APPENDIX B 213 

[' Britains'] in good and convenient order, he ordained him by the 
advice of his lords a crown of gold, and caused himself ■i\ ith great 
solemnity to be crowned, according to the custom of the pagan laws 
then in use : and because he was the first that bare a crown here in 
Britain, after the opinion of some writers, he is named the fust king 
of Britain, and all the other before rehearsed are named rulers, 
dukes, or governors." 

(2) [From Book III., chap. 13.] The same history also maketh 
mention of one Belinus that was general of Cassibelan's army, and 
likewise of Nenius brother to Cassibelan, who in fight happened to 
get Ccesar's sword fastened in his shield by a blow which Caesar 
struck ["stroke", like the Folios] at him. 

(3) [From Book III., chap. 16.] Thus, according to that which 
Caesar himself and other authentic authors have written, was Britain 
made tributary to the Romans by the conduct of the same Caesar. 
But our histories far differ from this, affirming that Caesar coming 
the second time, was by the Britons with valiancy and martial 
prowess beaten and repelled, as he was at the first, and specially by 
means that Cassibelan had pight in the Thames great piles of trees 
piked with iron, through which his ships being entered the river, 
were perished and lost. And after his coming aland, he was van- 
quished in battle, and constrained to flee into Gallia with those ships 
that remained. For joy of this second victory (saith Galfrid) Cassi- 
belan made a great feast at London, and there did sacrifice to the 
gods. 

(4) [From Book III., chap. 18.] After the death of Cassibelan, 
Theomantius or Tenantius, the youngest son of Lud, was made king 
of Britain in the year of the world 3921, after the building of Rome 
706, and before the coming of Christ 45. ••• Theomantius ruled the 
land in good quiet, and paid the tribute to the Romans which Cassi- 
belan had granted, and finally departed this life after he had reigned 
22 years, and was buried at London. 

Kymbeline or Cimbeline the son of Theomantius was of the Bri- 
tons made king after the decease of his father, in the year of the 
world 3944, after the building of Rome 728, and before the birth of 
our Saviour 23. This man (as some write) was brought up at Rome, 
and there made knight by Augustus C;iesar, under whom he served 
in the wars, and was in such favour with him, that he was at liberty 
to pay his tribute or not. Little other mention is made of his doings, 
except that during his reign, the Saviour of the world our Lord 
Jesus Christ the only son of God was born of a virgin, about the 23 
year of the reign of this Kymbeline, and in the 42 year of the 
emperor Octavius Augustus, that is to wit, in the year of the world 
3966, in the second year of the 194 Olympiad, after the building of 
ihe city of Rome 750 nigh at an end, after the universal flood 231 1, 
from the birth of Abraham 2019, after the departure of the Israelites 
out of Egypt 15 13, after the captivity of liabylon 535, from the 
i>uilding of the temple liy Solomon 1034, and from the nrrival of 
Brute 1 1 16, complete. Touching the continuance of the years of 



214 CYMBELINE 

Kynibeline's reign, some writers do vary, but the best approved 
affirm, that he reigned 35 years and then died, and was buried at 
London, leaving l)ehind him two sons, (juiderius and Arviragus. 

But here is to be noted, that although our histories do affirm, that 
as well this Kymbeline as also his father Theomantius lived in quiet 
with the Romans and continually to them paid the tributes which 
the Britons had covenanted with Julius Ccesar to pay, yet we find in 
the Roman writers that after Julius Ctesar's death, when Augustus 
had taken upon him the rule of the empii-e, the Britons refused to 
pay that tribute: whereat as Cornelius Tacitus reporteth, Augustus 
(being otherwise occupied) was contented to wink; howbeit, through 
earnest calling upon to recover his right by such as were desirous to see 
the uttermost of the British kingdom ; at length, to wit, in the tenth 
year after the death of Julius Ca;sar, which was about the thirteenth 
year of the said Theomantius, Augustus made provision to pass with 
an army over into Britain, and was come forward upon his journey 
into Gallia Celtica: or as we may say, into these hither parts of 
France. 

But receiving advertisements that the Pannonians, which inhabited 
the country now called Hungary, and the Dalmatians whom now we 
call Slavons had rebelled, he thought it best first to subdue those 
rebels near home, rather than to seek new countries, and leave such 
in hazard whereof he had present possession, and so turning his 
power against the Pannonians and Dalmatians, he left off for a time 
the wars of PJritain, whereby the land remained without fear of any 
invasion to be made by the Romans, till the year after the building 
of the city of Rome 725, and about the 19 year of king Theomantius' 
reign, that Augustus with an army departed once again from Rome 
to pass over into Britain, there to make war. But after his coming 
into Gallia, when the Britons sent to him certain ambassadors to 
treat with him of peace, he stayed there to settle the state of things 
among the Gauls, for that they were not in very good order. And 
having finished there, he went into Spain, and so his journey into 
Britain was put off till the next year, that is the 726 after the build- 
ing of Rome, which fell before the birth of our Saviour 25, about 
which time Augustus eftsoons meant the third time to have made a 
voyage into Britain, because they could not agree upon covenants. 
But as the Pannonians and Dalmatians had aforetime stayed him, 
when (as before is said) he meant to have gone against the Britons : 
so even now the Salassians (a people inhabiting about Italy and 
Switzerland), the Cantabrians and Astiirians by such rebellious stirs 
as they raised, withdrew him from his purposed journey. But 
whether this controversy which appeareth to fall forth betwixt the 
Britons and Augustus was occasioned by Kymbeline, or some other 
prince of the Britons, I have not to avouch : for that by our writers 
it is reported, that Kymbeline being brought up in Rome, and 
knighted in the court of Augustus, ever showed himself a friend to 
the Romans, and chiefly was loth to break with them, because the 
youth of the Briton nation should not be deprived of the benefit to 



APPENDIX B 



215 



be trained and brought up among the Romans, whereby they might 
learn both to behave themselves like civil men, and to attain to the 
knowledge of feats of war. 

(5) {.The History of Scotland, reign of Kenneth; Holinshed's 
Chronicles, 1807-8, vol. v., pp. 243, 244.] For as it chanced, 
there was in the next field at the same time an husbandman, with 
two of his sons busy about his work, named Hay, a man strong and 
stiff in making and shape of body, but indued with a valiant courage. 
This Hay beholding the king with the most part of the nobles, 
fighting with great valiancy in the middle ward, now destitute of the 
wings, and in great danger to be oppressed by the great violence of 
his enemies, caught a plough-beam in his hand, and with the .same, 
exhorting his sons to do the like, hasted towards the battle, there to 
die rather amongst other in defence of his country, than to remain 
alive after the discomfiture in miserable thraldom and bondage of 
the cruel and most unmerciful enemies. There was near to the 
place of the battle, a long lane fenced on the sides with ditches and 
walls made of turf, through the which the Scots which fled were 
beaten down by the enemies on heaps. 

Here Hay with his sons, supposing they might best stay the flight, 
placed themselves overthwart the lane, beat them back whom they 
met fleeing, and spared neither friend nor foe : but down they went 
all such as came within their reach, wherewith divers hardy person- 
ages cried unto their fellows to return back unto the battle, for there 
was a new power of Scottishmen come to their succours, by whose 
aid the victory might be easily obtained of their most cruel adversaries 
the Danes: therefore might they choose whether they would be slain 
of their own fellows coming to their aid, or to return again to fight 
with the enemies. The Danes being here stayed in the lane by the 
great valiancy of the father and the sons, thought verily there had 
been some great succours of Scots come to the aid of their king, 
and thereupon ceasing from further pursuit, fled back in great dis- 
order unto the other of their fellows fighting with the middle ward 
of the Scots. 

Thus Hay being honoured of all estates, within certain days after, 
at a council holden at Scone, it was ordained, that both he and his 
posterity should be accepted amongst the number of the chiefest 
nobles and peers of the realm, being rewarded (besides many and 
other great gifts) with islands and revenues, such as he should choose 
sufficient for the maintenance of their estates. 



2i6 CYiMBELINE 



APPENDIX C 

A short sketch of the Tale told by the Fishwife of Stand on the 
Green, in " Westward for Smelts, or the Waterman's Fare of 
mad Merry Western "VS'enches, whose Tongues albeit, like Bell- 
clappers, they never leave ringing, yet their Tales are sweet, 
and will much content you : Written by kind Kitt of Kingstone".* 

In the reign of Henry VI. there dwelt in Waltham, near London, 
a gentleman with a beautiful wife, who was as rare and unparalleled 
in body as in her gifts of mind. Her husband "having business one 
day to London, took up his inn" there, and supped with other 
gentlemen. A discussion arising about woman's constancy, he said 
that another speaker should not be so bitter — all were not faulty, 
instancing his own wife, who was "as free from disloyalty as the 
sun from darkness or the fire from cold". The first speaker replied 
that if he knew that same saint, he would obtain some manifest token 
of her disloyalty, taunting him that his youth and inexperience made 
him credulous. The husband, saying that for his wife's sake he 
spoke on behalf of all women, now laid a wager of ;^ioo to the 
other's /"50, that he could not within a month's space bring a token 
of his wife's falseness, and bound himself not to forewarn her. This 
was accepted, and the money delivered into the " oast of the house 
his hands". 

The next day, having knowledge of the place, this man rode 
thither, vowing " by force, policy, or free will to get some jewel or 
other toy from her", that would win the wager. The villain lay at 
Waltham a whole day, when seeing the gentlewoman in the fields 
he went and kissed her, giving a message from her husband. She 
very modestly bade him welcome, and gave him such entertainment 
as was fit. He lay two nights at her house; on the third he feigned 
to be ill and went to bed "timelier than was his wont". Going 
thence to her chamber he placed himself under the bed, and soon 
came in the gentlewoman and her maiden. "She, preparing her- 
self to bedward", lay her jewels on a table thereby — he specially 
noting the gold crucifix worn next her heart. Being "untyred" she 
went to bed, and the maid bolting the door withdrew to sleep behind 
the arras. When the cunning villain heard her "draw her breath 
long", he rose without noise, took the crucifix, and unbolted the 
door. In the early morning he started for London, where he found 
the husband still asleep. The latter quickly rose, and was told that 
his wife was untrue to him, the crucifix being shown as proof. At 
sight of this "his blood left his face, running to comfort his faint 
heart ". He was minded to fall upon his sword, and so end all his 
miseries at once, but he decided to punish her with death, and him- 
self to follow the fortunes of Henry VI. 

1 f liven in full in J. Payne Collier's Shakespeare's Library, vol. ii. p. 35. 



APPENDIX D 217 

Calling his servant George to him, he sent him home to tell his 
mistress to meet him half-way to London ; then, having her by the 
way, in some private place, he was to kill her: " I mean as I speak; 
kill her, I say; this is my command". He gave him his rin.g and 
told him to govern his estate till his return. The wife surprised to 
see the servant rather than her husband, was told she was to meet 
the latter at Enfield. Starting at once and having come to a bye- 
way, George asked her what the woman deserved who through her 
behaviour ' ' has made her husband to neglect his estate and means 
of life, seeking by all means to die ". 

"Why, George," quoth she, "hast thou met with some such 
creature? — I should think her worthy of death." " Faith, mistress, 
I think so too. Mistress, you are this woman." On hearing this 
she looked as one dead, but denied the charge, and sent a message 
to her husband entreating he would not speak aught ill of her when 
dead, for in good troth she had deserved none. George, finding 
it impossible to kill her, being persuaded of her innocence, advised 
her to " live in some disguise till time have opened the cause of his 
mistrust". She agreed; and parting with tears in their eyes, George 
went to govern the house, and she in boy's attire to wander about 
until she fell in with King Edward [the Fourth] and two or three 
noblemen. 

She followed the king's fortunes until "the battle at Barnet", 
when seeing her late guest lying for dead she opened his breast to 
dress his wounds, and saw there her crucifix. She bad him taken 
to London, where he told her that he obtained it wrongfully: words 
which she caused the owner of the house to remember. Begging 
the king to right her she had her husband, who was taken prisoner 
at Barnet, and her traducer brought before him. Discrepancies in 
the account of how the jewel was obtained, led finally to the villain's 
confession. The king speaking to the husband, " Your wife shall 
be your judge". Mistress Dorrill went to her husband, saying: "All 
my anger I lay down with this kiss". The king gave judgment that 
the villain "should restore the money treble which he had wrongfully 
got from him : and so was to have a year's imprisonment. So, this 
gentleman and his wife went lovingly home, where they were kindly 
welcomed by George, to whom for recompense he gave the money 
which he received. So lived they ever after in great content." 



APPENDIX D 

SUSPECTED PASSAGES 

Two parts of this play have been suspected of not being wholly 
Shakespeare's work: {a) the dirge in iv. 2. 258-281 ; (/>) the masque, 
vision, and tablet in v. 4 and 5. 



2i8 CYMBELINE 

(a) iv. 2. 258-281. 

Staimtoii, quoted by Aldis Wright, says : " There is something so 
strikingly inferior, both in the thoughts and expression of the con- 
cluding couplet to each stanza in this song, that we may fairly set 
them down as additions from the same hand which furnished the 
contemptil)le Masque ox I'isiojt that deforms the last act". 

It had been arranged (11. 237, 238}, that they were to "use like note 
and words, Save that 'Euriphile' must be 'Fidele'". Since no 
name is found in the dirge as it stands, either Shakespeare must 
have forgotten the arrangement, or some colour is given to Staunton's 
suggestion above. 

(b) But the chief controversy has raged around the Masque, 
vision and tablet in Act v., scs. 4 and 5. 

I. And first, let us hear the attacking critics : 

(i) Pope is sweeping: "Here follow a vision, a masque, and a 
prophecy, which interrupt the fable [plot] without the least necessity, 
and immeasurably lengthen this act. I think it plainly foisted in 
afterwards for mere show, and apparently not of Shakespeare." 

(2) Coleridge is impatient merely with the tablet (v. 4. 138-144): 
"It is not easy to conjecture why Shakespeare should have intro- 
duced tiiis ludicrous scroll, which answers no one purpose, either 
propulsive or explicatory, unless as a joke on etymology".* 

(3) Staunton. See (a) above. 

(4) Prof. Hudson: "The play has one very serious and decided 
blemish. I refer to the piece of dull impertinence in the fifth act, 
including the vision of Posthumus while asleep in the prison, the. 
absurd ' label ' found on his bosom when he aw akes, and the 
Soothsayer's still more absurd interpretation of the label at the close. 
For nothing can well be plainer than that the whole thing is strictly 
irrelevant : it does not throw the least particle of light on the 
character or motive of any person ; has indeed no business whatever 
with the action of the drama, except to hinder and embarrass it. 
This matter apart, the deitoiieiiwnt is perfect, and the preparation 
for it made with consummate judgment and skill. And it is a note- 
worthy fact that, if the apparition, the dialogue that follows with 
the Jailer, the tablet, and all that relates to it, be omitted, there will 
appear no rent, no loose stitch, nor anything wanting to the com- 
pleteness of the M'ork.^ 

"It is difficult to believe that Shakespeare wrote the passages in 
question at any time ; impossible, that he did so at or near the time 
when the rest of the play was written. For I think every discerning 
student will perceive at once that the style of this matter is totally 
different from that of all the other parts. How, then, came it there? 

1 See note on v. 5. 446, 447. 

- But elsewhere {Critical Notes) Prof. Hudson partly contradicts himself: "The 
'label' is perhaps the absurdest and most unShakespearian part of the whole; yet 
the contents of it are, by the still more absurd interpretation of them at the close, 
so wrought into the dialogue as to make the 'label' itself an inseparable item of 
the drama". 



APPENDIX D 219 

Some consider it a relic of an older drama, perhaps one written by 
Shakespeare in his youth. But the more common opinion is, that 
it was foisted in by the players, the poet himself having nothing to 
do with it. There is no doubt that such things were sometmies 
done." 

(5) Fleay makes an important distinction between the masque 
and the vision, or rather between the dumb-show and the verse of 
the masque: "The verse of the vision, v. 4. 30-122, is palpably by 
an inferior hand, and was probably inserted for some court perform- 
ance after Shakespeare had left the stage. Of course the stage- 
directions for the dumb-show are genuine. This would not have 
been worth mentioning but for the silly arguments of some who 
defend the Shakespearian authorship of these lines, and maintain 
that the play would be maimed without them." 

(6) Ingleby: "The dream-interlude that follows is too poor a 
composition to be imputed to Shakespeare at any period of his 
career, or on any dramatic ground. It is at least open to argument 
whether Posthumus's speech on awaking bears signs of Shake- 
speare's hand. Certainly from 1. 123 to 1. 137 it is a very poor pro- 
duction. The remaining half-dozen lines are not unlike Shake- 
speare." 

II. I now call on the counsel for the defence : 

(1) Gervinus ably defends the least assailable part, the dumb-show, 
but it will be seen that the main purport of his argument would not 
be affected by the excision of 11. 30-122 : " Shakespeare here allows 
the rulers of the world to mix personally in the drama, as is usual in 
the epos, where the actors are in harmony with the divinity and 
his laws. This epic character and the happy termination of the 
epos were necessarily given to this drama also. For the person- 
ages who here act and err are friends and favourites of the gods, 
because even that which in calm certainty or uncertain passion they 
do contrary to the maxims of morality, is done from moral motives 
or in moral indignation ; so tliat the drama with a tragic ending 
would have been an impeachment of the world's government. 
Hence I do not think that Shakespeare would have admitted the 
introduction of Jupiter to be a blunder, as Ulrici calls it, or that he 
needs Tieck's apology, that this scene was a fragment of a youthful 
attempt at this play. Far rather does it appear to me that the intro- 
duction of the divinity in this dramatised epos testifies to the same 
deep and remarkable instinct with which Shakespeare entered into 
the nature of poetry and its various styles and requirements." 

(2) Schlegel is more uncompromising: " Steevens accedes to the 
opinion of Pope respecting the apparition of the ghosts and of Jupiter 
in Cymbeline, while Posthumus is sleeping in the dungeon. But 
Posthumus finds, on waking, a tablet on his breast, with a prophecy 
on which tlie dhiouement of the piece depends. Is it to be imagined 
that Sliakespeare would require of his spectators the belief in a 
wonder without a visible cause? Is Posthumus to dream this tablet 
with the prophecy? But these gentlemen do not descend to this 



220 CYMBELINE 

objection. The verses which the apparitions deliver do not appear 
to them good enough to be Shakespeare's. I imagine I can discover 
why the poet has not given them more of the splendour of diction. 
They are the aged parents and brothers of Posthumus, who, from 
concern for his fate, return from the Vv'orld below. They ought, 
consequently, to speak tlie language of a more simple olden time, 
and their voices ought also to appear as a feeble sound of wailing, 
when contrasted with the thundering oracular language of Jupiter. 
For this reason Shakespeare chose a syllabic measure, which was 
very common before his time, but which was then getting out of 
fashion, though it still continued to be frequently used, especially in 
translations of classical poets. In some such manner might the 
shades express themselves in the then existing translations of Homer 
and Virgil. The speech of Jupiter is on the other hand majestic, 
and in form and style bears a complete resemblance to the sonnets 
of Shakespeare." 

(3) Fletcher is almost uncritically enthusiastic on the same side: 
"The total omission of these prison scenes in acting is another great 
injury done to the dramatic interest as conducted by the poet. 
There may, indeed, be valid theatrical reasons for suppressing the 
vision of Posthumus during the slumber which is supposed to ter- 
minate his soliloquy; but the suppression deprives us of the solemnly 
pathetic effect of the simple chorus, which is plainly introduced in 
order, by recalling the whole tenour of the story, to remind the 
auditor that the hero is much more unfortunate than criminal, and to 
relieve our feelings by announcing an approaching deliverance from 
adversity, — at the same time that curiosity is kept alive by the 
mysterious terms in which the prediction is made. The attendant 
music adds to the soothing solemnity of the scene. How beautiful, 
too, is the plaintive simplicity of the ballad verses reciting his for- 
tune, chanted by the apparitions of his deceased relatives, not one 
of whom has he seen in life." And so on. Fletcher, in fact, has 
nothing but praise for the whole scene. 

{4) Watkiss Lloyd: "The vision and the oracular tablet are so 
utterly unnecessary to the disknotting of the main intrigue of the 
play, that they must have been recommended by some special purpose 
and propriety, if we are only wise enough to see it. It will be found 
tliat they only contribute to the arrangement of the terms of peace 
at last, and thus Jupiter with his thunderbolts from the machine is 
rendered available for what the poet thought a worthy service, — an 
apology for a submission that made Britain tributary." 

(5) Prof A. W. Ward: "The episode in rhymed verse inserted 
in V. iv. was doubtless, like the Mask introduced into the Tempest, 
in accordance with the taste of the period; there is no reason, on 
account of its style, which reminds one of the prefatory lines to the 
Cantos of the Faerie Qiieene, to impugn Shakespeare's authorship 
of it ". 

III. I have given the defendants more ample space because my 
brief summing up will not be wholly in their favour. The "tablet" 



APPENDIX E 221 

or label is, unfortunately, very hard to be rid of, however much one 
may wish it away, for it is involved, not only in the vision, but in 
the remainder of the scene, and in the close of the play. Perhaps, 
on the whole, we may hold it justified by the consideration urged by 
Watkiss Lloyd above. The political conclusion which it gives to 
the play resembles that given by the arrival of Fortinbras in Hamlet, 
and the very similarity of the circumstances and of the lessening 
hold upon the spectator's interest in each case, — coming too near 
the close to be dramatically serious, — may be regarded as an addi- 
tional justification here. 

For the rest, I hold with Fleay that the dumb-show and the verses 
of the masque must be separated. None of the objections urged 
against the latter apply to the former, or not with equal force ; in 
fact, no weighty objection has been urged against it. On the other 
hand, I read 11. 30-122 with an impatience begotten of the belief 
that they are not Shakespeare's. I cannot see Shakespeare's touch 
or hear his music in any part of them. I recommend any one 
who is sceptical on the point to test Jupiter's opening quatrain by 
comparison with any serious passage of Shakespeare's undoubted 
work. Prof. Ward is reminded of the prefatory lines to the Cantos 
of the Faerie Qneene. Exactly ; but did Shakespeare ever seriously 
compose such doggerel as this? — 

"The maske of Cupid, and th' enchant- 
ed Chamber are displayd ; 
Whence Britomart redeemes fair A- 

moret through charmes decayd". {F.Q. \\\. 12.) 

Almost in the same breath Prof. Ward seems to imply that this 
masque resembles that in the Tempest. No other touchstone is 
needed. Let any one read Act iv. of the Tempest and then decide 
if the masque in this play can be by the same hand. 



APPENDIX E 

THE TITLE OF THE PLAY 

Prof. Dowden: '"Posthumus and Imogen' would be a fitter 
name for the play than Cymbeline'\ 

Prof. Hudson: " It is not very apparent why this play should be 
named as it is. For Cymbeline himself is but a cypher, having no 
value of his own, and all his value depending on what stands before 
him; that is, he has no force but to augment the force of somebody 
else. But his very impotence personally renders him important 
dramatically; that he has no spring in himself makes him in some 
sort the mainspring of the play. It was because he was weak that 



222 CYMBELINE 

he drove Belarius into exile, and thus prepared one great source of 
wealth to the drama. It is for the same cause that he prefers the 
Queen's rickety, spluttering, blustering lumi) of flesh for his son-in- 
law, and banishes Posthumus, and withholds the Roman tribute. 
Therefore it is, too, that the Queen is able to hoodwink him so 
completely, that she feels safe in scheming against Imogen's life, 
and to that end gets the cordial which afterwards produces upon her 
the semblance of death. Hence also Cloten, with his empty head 
and savage heart, is encouraged to that pitch of insolence which 
prompts the flight and disguise of Imogen, that she may have 'no 
more ado with that harsh, noble, simple nothing, whose love-suit 
hath been to her as fearful as a siege'.' Thus the king's weakness 
proves the seed-plot of the entire action. So that I suspect the play 
is rightly named, though some have thought otherwise." 

A good name, a taking title, is as essential for the playbill of a 
drama as for the announcement of a book. From this point of view, 
"Cymbeline" is a much better name than any alternative I have 
seen suggested, and I have a suspicion that Shakespeare may have 
known his own business best. 

1 iii. 4. 134 ; but Prof. Hudson is evidently here not speaking by the book. 



GLOSSARY 



affiance (i. 6. 155), trust, confi- 
dence. O. Fr. afiarice = a (Lat. ad) 
+ fiance, ultimately from Lat. 
fidere, to trust. Cf. Prayer-Book: 
"that she nia}' evermore have 
affiance in thee". 

an (iv. 2. 387), if. The same 
word as and. though it is not cer- 
tain how and came to have this 
meaning, which is, however, found 
also in cognat" Hnguages. Shake- 
speare and his contemporaries 
usually employed the full form 
and, and the intensified and if. 
Except in an 7, an occurs only 
once in the First Folio. 

andirons (ii. 4- 88), fire-dogs. 
O.Fr. andier. In English the 
termination was at an early date 
identified with the word jvrw, iron, 
whence the later illusive spellings. 

arras (ii. 2. 26), a hanging 
screen, made of a rich tapestry 
fabric, in which figures and scenes 
are woven in colours; formerly 
placed round the walls of house- 
hold apartments. From Arras, 
the name of a town in France 
famed for its manufacture. 

arrearages (ii. 4. 13), arrears, 
tribute overdue. O.Fr. average, 
from arere, behind. 

bauble (iii. 2. 20), toy; a mere 
toy (iii. I. 27), and thus too small 
or weak for the work in hand. 
O.Fr. babel, also baubel, child's 
toy. 

boot (i. 5. 69), original meaning 
'good, advantage, profit'. Hence 
to boot, ' to the good ', into the 



bargain, in addition, moreover. 
O.E. bot, remedy. 

carl (v. 2. 4), churl (iii. 6. 65), 
"a very drudge of nature's "; ori- 
ginally ' a man of the common 
people, a countryman '. O.Norse 
karl, cognate with churl, O.E. 
ceorl. 

clotpoU (iv. 2. 184), thick or 
' wooden ' head. Also ' block- 
head'. Cf. clodpoU, clodpate. 

crare (iv. 2. 205), crayer, a 
small trading vessel. O. Fr. crayer, 
craier; medieval Lat. craiera. 

curious (i. 6. 183), an.xious, 
concerned, solicitous. O.Fr. cji- 
rius, Lat. curiosus. 

eglantine (iv. 2. 223), sweet 
briar (Rosa nibiginosa). Fr. Eglan- 
tine, O. Fr. aiglent, probably front 
Lat. *acnlentus, prickly. 

fangled (v. 4. 134), character- 
ized by crotchets or fopperies. 
Apparently from a mistaken an- 
alysis of new-fangled, later form 
of ncTuf angle, eager for novelty, 
from fangel, ready to catch, from 
0.\\. fangcn, p.p. o^fon, to catch. 

fatherly, adv. (ii. 3. 34), in a 
fatherly manner. In O.E. adjec- 
tives were formed by means of 
the suffi.x lie, like, e.g. fcrdeilic, 
fatherly, firondlic, friendly; and 
from these adjectives adverbs ,vere 
formed by the adverbial Lirmina- 
tion -e, fcederlicc, freondlice. Sub- 
sequently, both these terminations 
were represented by -ly, so that 



224 



CYMBELINE 



etymological! y fathei'ly, fi-iejidly, 
ungodly, &'c. , are equally correct 
as adverbs and as adjectives. 

feat, V. (i. I. 49), to constrain 
to propriety (7 New Eng. Diet.): 
unique instance in this meaning of 
a rare verb; from 

feat, adj. (v. 5. 87), apt, adroit, 
dexterous, graceful. From O.Fr. 
fait, made, \j&\.. f actus. 

feodary (iii. 2. 21), better spelt 
fedary, confederate, accomplice 
(Lat. fcrdus). In Winter's Tale, 
ii. I. 90, we find the form /^(/^rrtri'. 

fleet (v. 3. 25), move swiftly. 
O.K. Jleotan, float. 

fraught (i. i. 126), to freight a 
ship, hence 'to burden': M.Du. 
vrachtefi. Commonly used only 
in the p.p. /?-aiight. Freight is 
probably a later form of the same 
word. 

fretted (ii. 4. 88), ornamented, 
adorned; O .Y,. frcetii'an . Ingleby 
explains : ' ' The fretwork of Imo- 
gen's ceiling had golden ornaments, 
like cherubim, at the intersection 
of the bands ". But this explana- 
tion is unnecessarily complicated 
by the supposed reference to inter- 
lacing fretwork (a word of quite 
different origin), a reference which 
is not supported by the quotation 
from Hamlet (ii. 3. 313) which 
Ingleby appends to his note : 
" "This majestical roof fretted with 
golden fire". 

garbage (i. 6. 49), rubbish, 
offal. Probably from garble-age 
(Skeat), and hence 'the coarse or 
refuse parts from which all that is 
good has been sifted and removed '. 

geek (v. 4. 67), object of derision 
or contempt, dupe ; Du. gek, fool. 

gentle (iv. 2. 39), of gentle birth 
(cf. gentleman), high-born. Ety- 
mologically the same word a.s gen- 
teel and gentile; O.Fr. gentil, Lat. 
gentilis. 

giglot (iii. I. 31), giglet, fickle, 



inconstant ; diminutive of gigle, a 
flirt (Cotgrave). Probably allied 
\ojig. 

gripe, n. (i. 6. 105), grip, clasp 
of the hand. From 

gripe, 'V. (iii. i. 39), grip, clutch 
with the hand; O. E. gripan, to 
seize. 

g3rves (v. 4. 14), fetters; of 
Keltic origin. 

hardiment (v. 4. 75), hardihood 
(a hybrid), bravery. Fr. hardi, 
brave, bold, -h suffix ment, Lat. 
7ncns, mentis. 

haviour (iii. 4. 9), shortened 
form of behaviour, formed abnor- 
mally from the verb behave. 

hilding (ii. 3. 122), a mean base 
fellow. Short for provincial E. 
hilderling or hindcrliiig, a wretch; 
from O. E. hinderling, a mean 
wretch; from hinder, backwards, 
-f- suffix ling. 

hind (v. 3. 77), peasant, rustic. 
The final d is epithetic. ]\LE. 
hine, a domestic; O. E. hina, gen. 
oihiwan, pi., members of a family. 

holp (v. 5. 422), helped. In 
O. E. helpan is a strong verb, pret. 
healp, but in Anglian dialects hdlp, 
whence holp is regularly descended. 

jackanapes (ii. i. 3), coxcomb, 

upstart : = Jack d apes (with epen- 
thetic n to prevent hiatus), a man 
who exhibited performing apes 
(Skeat). Cf. Jack-slave (ii. i. 22). 
jet (iii. 3. s), stalk, strut. Cf. 
Twelfth Night, ii. 5. 36 : 

" how he jets under his advanced plumes ! ", 

and Ralph Roister Bolster, iii. 3. 
121 : 

" Then must ye stately goe, jetting up and 
downe ". 

Fr. Jeter, to throw. 

ken (iii. 6. 6), sight, distance 
within which recognition is pos- 
sible. Coined from ken, to know, 
M. E. kennen, Icel. kenna, to know. 



GLOSSARY 



225 



kitchen-trulls (v. 5. 177), kit- 
chen-wenches, drabs. Ger. trulle, 
trolle, a trull. 

lapp'd (v. 5. 360), wrapped: 
M . Du. lappen. Skeat gives ' ' M. E. 
lappen, also wlappen, another form 
of ivrappen" , apparently on the 
basis of a pret. wlappide in Wyclif. 

learn'd (i. 5. 12), taught; O.E. 
leornian, learn. The confusion 
with M. E. leren, O.E. laran, 
teach, as exemplified here and in 
Ps. .\xv. 4 (Prayer- Book), is late. 

lesser (v. 5. 187), compar. adv., 
less (O.E. l^s). The comparative 
suffix -er is here redundant and 
irregular, but is not incorrect in 
the adjective lesser (O.E. Icessa 
< iSsra). 

lieger (i. 5. 80), leiger, leger, 
ambassador; properly leger ambas- 
sador, one that remained some 
time at a foreign court. The same 
word as ledger; Du. legger, one 
that lies down. Cf. O.E. licgan, 
to lie, p.p. legen. 

like (ii- 3- S3), impers. -'. with 
dat. , please. Thus "so like you" is 
almost the exact equivalent of Fr. 
s'il vous plait. From O.E. ^1?//"- 
cian, used in precisely the same 
way : ' ' gif hit 'Sam papan swa 
gellcode", if it so pleased the pope. 

limb-meal (ii. 4. 143), limb from 
limb. Meal, here and in piece- 
vieal, &c., is from O.E. malum, 
which was used as an adverbial 
suffix, dat. pi. of mSl, measure. 

long of (v. 5. 271), on account of, 
due to ; still common in provincial 
English. O. E. gelang crt : in the 
O.E. poem Bemuulf, Hrothgar 
says to the hero : ' ' Nu is se reed 
gelang ^{X. ast 'Se anum", Now is 
help again long of, dependent on, 
thee alone. 

minion (ii. 3. 40), favourite, dar- 
ling: Fr. mignon. 

moe (iii. I. 36), more. In O.E. 
md is the comparative adverb, 
8 



mdra the comparative adjective. 
Later, moe was used as the com- 
parative of many, while more re- 
mained the comparative of much. 
In Shakespeare's day moe was 
obsolescent. 

mO'WS (i. 6. 40), grimaces. Fr. 
moue, ' a moe or mouth ' (Cot- 
grave); from O. Du. moiiwe, the 
protruded underlip, in making a 
grimace (Skeat). 

or (ii. 4. 14), ere. The spelling 
or partly represents O.Norse ar, 
and partly arises from O.F. <?;- 
through loss of stress. 

or ere (iii. 2. 64, v. 3. 50. In 
i. 3. 33 each word has its own in- 
dependent force, and the following 
note does not apply), a strength- 
ened form of or = ere, before (see 
or above), with a tinge of the 
meaning of ever. The form or ere 
(=O.E. Sr-\-Sr), i.e. merely a 
strengthened form of ere, had \oi\^ 
been familiar. But in Sha!,e 
speare's day ere was also current 
as a poetic and colloquial variant 
of ever. Hence or ere would ha\ e 
originated from or ever even if nc 
phrase of similar form had pre- 
viously existed. It is impossible, 
then, to distinguish or ere and ot 
ever. But it must be understood 
that the notion of ever was pro- 
bably not very distinctly felt in 
or ere ; rather, that the older pleon- 
astic expression was the more 
strongly felt element. In any case, 
it is unlikely that Shakespeare or 
his contemporaries had any con- 
sciousness that there were two 
coincident phrases or ere of dis- 
tinct origin. 1 

owe (iii. I. 37), possess, own: 
O.E. dgan, to possess, while o^vn 
is from the derivative O.E. dgnian, 
to own. 

paled in (iii. i. 19), enclosed or 



1 I am indebted for full informatioti 
on tliis Interesting point to Mr. Henry- 
Bradley. 

(M 3:i2) 



226 



CYMBELINE 



fenced in (with paling). From Fr. 
pal, Lat. pains, a stake. 

partisan (iv. 2. 399), halberd; 
a staff headetl by a blade having 
lateral projections ; now only used 
in ceremonial observances. O. Fr. 
pourtisaine, probablyfroniO. H.G. 
partd, a battle-axe, but with a 
romance suffi.x. 

prone (v. 4. 197), inclined, eager, 
sc. for the gallows: Lat. bronus, 
inclined forwards. 

proper (iv. 2. 97), own; Lat. 
propriiis. 

puttock (i. I. 140), the common 
kite. ' ' Just as a sparrow-harvk is 
named from sparrotvs, I suppose 
that xhe puttock is named from the 
poots or pouts, i.e. small birds on 
which it preys. Pout stands for 
poult— pullet. The suffi.\ -ock may 
be the usual E. dimin. sufifi.x -ock, 
used adjectivally; or, if we should 
suppose puttock to be a corruption 
of poot-hawk, this is not a violent 
nor unlikely change " (Skeat). 

quire (iii. 3. 43), choir, a place 
for singers; M.E. que{i)r, O.Fr. 
chocur, 'the quire of a church, a 
troop of singers ' (Cotgrave); Lat. 
chorus. Quire ("In quires and 
places where they sing", Praycr- 
Book) and choir are merely dif- 
ferent spellings of the same word. 

raps (i. 6. 50), affects with ecstasy, 
transports; elsewhere used by 
Shakespeare with this meaning 
only in the p.p. From rap, to 
snatch, seize hastily; Swedish 
rappa, to seize. 

resty (iii. 6. 34), unwilling to go 
forward, obstinate, stubborn, a 
shortened form of restive. O.Fr. 
restif, 'restie, stubborn, drawing 
backward, that will not go for- 
ward ' (Cotgrave) ; from the same 
root as Fr. rester, to remain. I 
sus|)ect that its use here and else- 
where was influenced by popular 
etymology connecting the word 



with E. rest, from O.E. rest, rest, 
quiet. 

rowel (iv. 4 39), a little wheel 
with sharp points at the end of a 
spur : Fr. rouelle. Low Lat. rotella, 
a little wheel, diminutive of rota, 
a wheel. 

sear (i. i. 116), cere, cover with 
wax ; chiefly used of dipping linen 
cloth in melted wax, to be used as 
a shroud. The shroud was called 
a cerecloth or cerement ( here " bonds 
of death"). The former was often 
written searcloth, wrongly (Skeat). 
Lat. cerare, to wax, from cera, 
wax. This explanation suits the 
passage so well, that I doubt very 
much if there is, as has been sug- 
gested, any reference to the proper 
sense ol sear, to dry up, burn up. 

shanks (v. 4. 9), legs from knee 
to ankle; O.E. scanca, shank, 
shin. 

shot (v. 4. 156), reckoning. It 
is the same word as scot, a contri- 
bution, in scot-free, free from pay- 
ment, for which Shakespeare uses 
shot-free (/ Hetiry IV., v. 3. 30). 
The literal meaning is that which 
is shot into the general fund, hence 
' contribution '. 

'shrew (ii. 3. 141), beshrew; a 
polite imprecation. From shrew, 
a scold; M.E. shrewe, wicked; 
O.E. screawa, a. shrew-mouse, 
which was fabled to poison cattle 
to death by biting them. 

silly (v. 3. 86), plain, simple ; 
O.E. scelig, happy, blessed. Here 
we see the word in the course 
of its deterioration of meaning : 
' timely, lucky, happy, blessed, 
innocent, simple, foolish'. 

simular (v. 5. 200), counterfeit 
but specious. 

slaver (i. 6. 104), exchange 
amorous kisses; Icel. slafra, to 
slaver. Cognate with slabber. 

sluttery (i. 6. 43), the ways and 
dress of a slovenly woman. Of 
Scandinavian origin. 



GLOSSARY 



227 



snuflF (i. 6. 86), properly ' the 
part of a candle-wick charred b)' 
the tlame, whether still burning 
or removed'. Here it evidently 
means ' the unsnuffed wick of a 
candle, darkening the tiame', as 
in Hamlet, iv. 7. 116: 

*' There lives within the very flame of love 
A kind of wick or snutf that will abate it". 

Of Scandinavian origin. 

stark (iv. 2. 209), stiff; used by 
Shakespeare only in speaking of a 
dead body. O.E. stearc, strong, 
Stiff. 

still (i. I. 3, &c.), always, con- 
stantly. 

straight - pight (v. 5. 164), 
straight-pitched, standing erect. 
Pight is the old form of pitched. 
Minerva was usually represented 
(after the colossal bronze statue at 
Athens) standing erect, the left 
foot advanced, wearing her cegis, 
and brandishing a spear. 

strain (iv. 2. 24), inborn dis- 
position, wrace, stock (cf. Pericles, 
iv. 3. 24: " I do shame | To think 
of what a noble strain you are, | 
And of how coward a spirit"). 
"A strain of rareness" (iii. 4. 95) 
=a rare kind of conduct. 

tanlings (iv. 4. 29), persons 
tanned or scorched by the sun : 
unique instance. 

tent (iii. 4. 115), probe (as a 
wound). From tent, a roll of lint 



used to dilate a wound; derived 
through Fr. from Lat. tentare, to 
handle, test. 

tirest(iii.4. 94), preyest; tearest, 
as is done by birds of prey. Ulti- 
mately from O.E. teran, to tear. 

whilst, the (iv. 2. 254), tl-.e 
while, an accus. of duration of 
time. Whilst is really the gen. 
case used adverbially, with epi- 
thetic t; hence the 'whilst is ety- 
mologically inaccurate. 

witch (i. 6. 158), a male sorcerer. 
The application of the word to a 
man is in accordance with its ety- 
mology, for it can stand equally 
for O. E. wicca, a wizard, or wicce. 
a witch. Wizard is from the same 
root. 

woe (v. 5. 2), woeful, sad ; cf. 
Tempest, v. 139: "I am woe for 
it". This adjectival use is at least 
as old as Chaucer, who has [Pro- 
logue to Canterbury Tales, 1. 351) : 
" Wo was his cook but if his sauce 
were | Poynauntand sharpe". Ori- 
ginally woe was an interjection, 
not uncommonly construed with 
the dat. of a noun, whence nuist 
have arisen its adjectival use. 

yond (iii. 3. 10), yonder. The 
correct form of the adjective is von 
(still common in provincial Eng- 
lish), O.E. o-fy^ \ yond (O.'iL. geond, 
throughout) is properly a derivative 
preposition and adverb. 



(M332) 



INDEX OF WORDS 



For words not indexed here, sec the Glossary. 



a, i. I. 24. 
absolute, iv. 2. 106. 
abused, i. 4. loo. 
ace, ii. 3. 2. 
act, i. 5. 22. 

admiration, i. 6. 37 ; iv. 2. 
adorer, i. 4. 59. 
advice, i. i. 156. 
affected, v. 5. 38. 
affront, iv. 3. 29. 
allow, iii. 3. 16. 
andirons, ii. 4. 88. 
approbation, i. 4. 109. 
approve, i. 4. 109. 
approvers, ii. 4. 25. 
at point, iii. I. 30. 
attended, i. 6. 189. 
attending, iii. 3. 22. 

bate, iii. 2. 53. 
i)eing, i. 5. 54. 
beseeming, v. 5. 409. 
besides, ii. 4. 145. 
bloods, i. I. I. 
bond, V. I. 7. 
bound, iv. 2. 46. 
brands, ii. 4. 90. 
brawns, iv. 2. 3 1 1. 
brief, v. 5. 165. 
brogues, iv. 2. 214. 
browse, iii. 6. 38. 
bug, V. 3. 41. 
by- peeping, i. 6. 107. 

calves' -guts, ii. 3. 29. 
casual, i. 4. 81. 
change, i. 6. 9. 



232. 



228 



characters, iv. 2. 49. 
charming, i. 3. 35. 
cinque, ii. 2. 38. 
circumstances, ii. 4. 61. 
citizen, iv. 2. 8. 
civil, iii. 6. 23. 
civility, iv. 2. 179. 
clock, iii. 2. I. 
close, i. 6. 132. 
clouted, iv. 2. 214. 
cloyed, iv. 4. 19. 
cloys, V. 4. 118. 
colour, iii. i. 49. 
command, iii. 7. 9. 
companies, iv. 2. 69. 
companion, ii. I. 25. 
conceited, ii. 3. 15. 
conclusions, i. 5. 18. 
condition, v. 5. 165. 
conduct, iii. 5. 8. 
confection, i. 5. 15. 
confiners, iv. 2. 337. 
confounded, i. 4. 44. 
conscience, i. 6. 115; iii. 4. 45 
consider, ii. 3. 29. 
consign, iv. 2. 275. 
consummation, iv. 2. 280. 
convince, i. 4. 85. 
cordial, i. 5. 64. 
counters, v. 4. 169. 
country base, v. 3. 20. 
cracked, i. 3. 17. 
crare, iv. 2. 204-206. 
crop, i. 6. 32. 

decay, i. 5. 56. 
delighted, v. 4. I02. 



INDEX OF WORDS 



!29 



dLiTiesnes, iii. 3. 70- 
desert, 1. 5. 73. 
deseive, iii. 3. 54. 
desire, i. 6. 52. 
discovered, v. 5. 277. 
disedged, iii. 4. 93. 
distemper, iii. 4. 191. 
doubt, i. 6. 94. 
dull, ii. 2. 31. 



embrace, iii. 4. I7- 
encounter, i. 3. 32. 
estates, v. 5. 22. 
even, iii. 4. 181. 
excellent, ii. 3. 15- 
exhibition, i. 6. 118. 
exorciser, iv. 2. 276. 
extremity, iii. 4. 17. 
eye-strings, i. 3. 17. 

false, ii. 3. 68. 
farther, i. 5. 65. 
favour, i. 6. 41. 
fear, i. 4. 85. 
feard hopes, ii. 4. 6. 
feated, i. I. 49. 
feather, i. 6. 178. 
fellows, iii. 4. 90. 
fit, iii. 4. 168. 
fitment, v. 5. 409. 
foot, V. 4. 1 16. 
for, iii. 5. 70. 
forbear, iv. 2. 278. 
forfeiters, iii. 2. 36-39. 
foundations, iii. 6. 7. 
franchise, iii. I. 55- 
franklin, iii. 2. 76. 
fraught, i. i. 126. 
freeness, v. 5. 421. 
from, i. 4. 13; V. 5. 430. 
full of view, iii. 4. 147. 
fulness, iii. 6. 12. 
furnaces, i. 6. 65. 

gilded, V. 3. 34. 
go even, i. 4. 39. 
great morning, iv. 2. 61. 
groom, iii. 6. 70. 



habits, V. i. 30. 
haply, iv. i. 17. 
happy, iii. 4. 174. 
hardness, iii. 6. 21. 
heard of, ii. 4. 1 1 . 
holy, iii. 4. 177. 
home, iii. 5. 92. 
honesty, iii. 6. 70. 
horse hairs, ii. 3. 29. 

imperceiverant, iv. 1. 1. 
imperious, iv. 2. 35. 
importantly, iv. 4. 19. 
in (=on), iii. 6. 50. 
inclined, i. 6. 113. 
ingenious, iv. 2. 186. 
injurious, iii. i. 46. 
insultment, iii. 5. I37- 
irregulous, iv. 2. 315. 
it, in. 3- 85- . 
it {genitive), iii. 4. I57- 

jack, ii. I. I. 
Jack-slave, ii. I. 18. 
jay, iii. 4. 48. 
journal, iv. 2. 10. 
jump, V. 4. 180. 

lapse, iii. 6. 12. 
leans, i. 5- 5^- 
leave, i. 3. 15. 
lend, iii. 6. 24. 
let blood, iv. 2. 168. 

Mary-buds, ii. 3. 22. 
may, iii. 2. 50. 
mean, iii. 2. 49. 
medicinable, iii. 2. 33. 
mend you, ii. 4. 26. 
mere, iv. 2. 92. 
miracle, iv. 2. 29. 
mortal, v. 3. 51. 
mountaineer, iv. 2. 71. 

nearer, iii. 5- 9'- 
nerves, iii. 3. 94. 
nice, ii. 5- 8. 
niceness, iii. 4. 155- 
none, i. 6. 58. 



230 



CYMBELINE 



note, i. 4. 2. 
numbered, i. 6. 35. 

occasions, v. 5. 87. 
'ods pittikins, iv. 2. 293. 
of, iii. 6. 92. 
on, iv. 2. 198. 
one, i. 6. 157. 
orbs, V. 5. 371. 
ordinance, iv. 2. 145. 
or ere, i. 3. 33. 
orisons, i. 3. 32. 
other, iii. I. 36. 
outpeer, iii. 6. 87. 

pain, iii. 3. 50. 
pantler, ii. 3. 123. 
parted, iii. 6. 52. 
passage, iii. 4. 91. 
peculiar, v. 5. 83. 
peevish, i. 6. 53. 
perfect, iii. I. 71. 
pervert, ii. 4. 147. 
physic, iii. 2. 34. 
practice, v. 5. 199. 
prefer, ii. 3. 44. 
pregnant, iv. 2. 325. 
presently, iii. 2. 74. 
pretty, iii. 4. 147. 
proof, V. 5. 5. 
proper, iii. 4. 61. 
puttock, i. I. 140. 

quarrelous, iii. 4. 159. 
tjuartered, iv. 4. 18. 
quench, i. 5. 47. 

rangers, ii. 3. 68. 
recoil, i. 6. 124. 
referred, i. i. 6. 
reflect, i. 6. 23. 
religion, i. 4. 121. 
remain, iii. i. 83. 
remembrancer, i. 5- 77- 
render, iv. 4. Ii. 
revolt, iv. 4. 6. 
ruddock, iv. 2. 224. 

safe, iv. 2. 131. 



sear, i. I. 1 1 6. 
season, iii. 4. 170. 
seeming, i. 6. 173. 
self-figured, ii. 3. 118. 
semblance, ii. 4. 109. 
senseless, i. i. 135. 
shall 's, iv. 2. 233. 
sharded, iii. 3. 20. 
she, i. 3. 29. 
sign, i. 2. 26. 
slip, iv. 3. 22. 
solicit'st, i. 6. 140. 
so please you, iv. 2. 9. 
spectacles, i. 6. 37. 
speed, iii. 5. 155. 
spirited, ii. 3. 138. 
spritely, v. 5. 428. 
spurs, iv. 2. 58. 
staid, iii. 4. 10. . 
stand, ii. 3. 69. 
states, iii. 4. 36. 
statist, ii. 4. 16. 
stooped, V. 3. 42. 
stricter, v. 4. 17. 
succession, iii. i. 7. 
such that, ii. 4. 25. 
supplyant, iii. 7. 14. 
supplyment, iii. 4. 179. 

tables, iii. 2. 39. 
take in, iii. 2. 9. 
targes, v. 5. 5. 
tender, v. 5. 87. 
thick, iii. 2. 55. 
through, ii. 4. 34 
throughfare, i. 2. 9. 
throughly, ii. 4. 12. 
thunder-stone, iv. 2. 271. 
tied, i. 6. 23. 
time, i. I. 43. 
to head, iii. 5. 25. 
touch, i. I. 135. 
trow, i. 6. 46. 
trust, i. 6. 24. 

undergoes, i. 4. 125; iii. 2. 7* 
unlustious, i. 6. 108. 
ujjcast, ii. I. I. 
upon, iii. 2. 12. 



INDEX OF WORDS 



utterance, iii. i. 70. 

vantage, i. 3. 24. 

wanton, iv. 2. S. 
watching, ii. 4. 6S. 
were best, iii. 2. 76. 
what, iv. 2. 207. 
■wing, i. 6. 178. 



I winged, iv. 2. 348. 

winking, ii. 4. 89. 
I winter-ground, iv. 2. 229. 

woodman, iii. 6. 28. 

worms, iii. 4. 34. 

wrings, iii. 6. 79. 

wrying, v. i. 5. 

yet, ii. 3. 74. 



GENERAL INDEX 



Abbott's Shakespearian Gram- 
mar, i. I. 24, 65, 124; i. 3. 29; 
i.4. 13, 17, 32,44, 82,90, 93; 
i. 5. 17,25, 32,44,47; i. 6.58, 
65, 83, 118, 140, 146, 157; ii. 
3. 2, 74, 95; ii. 4. 25, 41, 58; 
iii. I. 37; m. 3.85; 111. 4. 140, 
157; iii. 5. 2,32, 71; iii. 6. 50, 
63, 64; iv. 2.66, 129, 136, 190, 
207, 233, 347; iv. 3. 21; iv. 4. 
6; V. 4. 60, 120, 179; V. 5. 186, 
338, 430-432. 

accent of ' Postliumiis', iv. 2. 320. 

5 Ijective, causal use of, i. 6. 1 13; 
okl plural of, iii. i. 36; pro- 
leptic use of, iv. 2. 59. 

Advancemeut of Learning, 
Bacon's, v. i. 13-15. 

^neas, iii. 4. 57. 

Afric, i. I. 167. 

Ajax, iv. 2. 252. 

Alexander and Canipaspe, Lyly's, 
ii. 3. 18-26. 

anachronism, ii. 2. 13. 

anacoluthon, i. i. 50. 

Antony, ii. 4. 70. 

A petite Pallace 0/ Pettie his 
plesiire, ii. 2. 45. 

Arabian bird, i. 6. 17. 

'as' omitted, i. 6. 132; iv. 2. 136. 

Avalon, iv. 2. 255. 

Babes in the Wood, iv. 2. 224. 

Bacon's Advattcement of Learn- 
ing, V. I. 13-15. 

basilisk, ii. 4. 107. 

Beowulf, i. I. 124; iii. 4. 34. 

Boccaccio, reminiscence of, v. 5. 
86, 155. 

bowls, ii. I. 1-3. 



Bugbears, The, iii. 4. loi. 
burial customs, iv. 2. 255. 
Capell, i. 4. 52; ii. 4. 37; iii. 2. 

2; iii. 3. 25; iii. 4. 87-89; iii. 

5. 44; iii. 7. 14; iv. 2. 31, 49, 

204-206; v. 3. 74-76; v. 5. 

448-450. 
Cassibelan, iii. 1. 5. 
causal use of adjective, i. 6. 113. 
Celtic burial customs, iv. 2. 255. 
Celtic myth, iv. 2. 255. 
characteristics of later plays, v. 

5. 120-122. 

characters of king and queen, i. 

1. 84, 104. 
Clarke, iv. i. 16. 
Coleridge, i. i. 2. 
Collier, ii. 3. 45; iii. 4. 147. 
Confessio A in a tit is, Gower's, ii. 

2. 45. 

confused construction, iv. 2. 17, 

47; V. 5. 448-450. 
controverted points of inteque- 

tation, i. 2. 26; i. 3. 4; i. 4. 

passim, 59; i. 6. 78-81, 171 ; 

ii. 3. 99; ii. 4. 90; iii. 3. 23; 

iii. 4. 161 ; iii. 5. 68; iii. 6. 24, 

70; V. 3. 32, 74-76. 
Cornucopia (T. Johnson's), iv. 2. 

couplet, riming, iii. 5. 104; iv. 
2. 193. 

Cowden Clarke, iii. 4. 15. 

critical notes, i. i. 84, 104, 156, 
162; i. 2. 1-4; i. 4. 16, 30, 50, 
69, 127, 132; i. 5. ifiit., 39; i. 

6. /////., 9, II, 31, 52, III, 118, 
132, 155-170, 171, 172; ii. I. 
/;///., 21, 56; ii. 2. 8-10, 23, 



GENERAL INDEX 



'-33 



51; ii. 3. /«//., 99, 138, 154; 
li. 4. /«//., 37, 73, 92, 96, 98, 
146; ii. 5- i'ti^; 2; iii. 2. 63, 
69; iii. 3. /«/'/., 23, 51, 79, 
96-98, 99; iii. 4. i'nJL, 15, 

39-43,45. 90, i2i> 135; 'ii-5- 
35-41, 73,99, 128; m.b.uia., 
13, 61, 88; iii. 7. w//. ; iv. i. 
8; iv. 2. 16,31,38,49,59, 63, 
74, 81, 105, 169, 193, 204-206, 
210, 238, 255, 285, 297-312, 
373; iv. 3. /«//.; v. i. /«/'/., 7, 
13-15, 16; V. 2. /«/V. ; V. 3. 
""A, 51, 53-55, 74-76; V. 4. 
int/., 17, 27; V. 5. init., 62-66, 
103, 120 122, 127, 155, 196, 
206, 209, 227, 262, 284, 286, 

299, 395- 
Crosby, i. 6. 33. 
Cupid's tables, iii. 2. 39. 
Cydiius, ii. 4. 71. 
Cynewulf, i. 6. 17. 
Cytherea, ii. 2. 14. 
Dalmatians, iii. I. 72. 
Daniel, ii. 2. 51. 
Deighton, i. 5. 26; ii. i. 21. 
derivation of mze/ur, v. 5. 446. 
Diana, ii. 3. 68. 
disguises, iii. 6. uiiL 
double negative, iii. 3. 28. 
double superlative, ii. 3. 2. 
Dowden, iii. 3. 79, 99. 
Dyce, i. 4. 25; ii. 4. 24; iii. I, 

52; iv. I. 12; iv. 2. 38. 
eagle, i. 4. il. 

Ellacombe's Plant Lore of Shake- 
speare, iv. 2. 222. 
Elysium, v, 4. 97. 
fairies as haunting tombs, iv. 2. 

217. 
Fidele, iii. 6. 6r. 
Fleay, i. i. /;///. 
Fletcher, G., i. 4. init. ; i. 6. 1 18, 

171; ii. 2. ;«//; ii. 5. init.; v. 

5. 209. 
Gervinus, iii. 6. 61. 
Gordian knot, ii. 2. 34. 
Gower's Confessio A mantis, ii. 2. 

45- 



grammatical points, i. I. 24, 65, 
118; i. 4. 17, 19, III; i. 5. 17, 
25, 32, 44; i. 6. 65, 83, 118, 
132; ii. 3. 2; iii. I. 36; iii. 3. 
85; iii. 4. 140; iii. 5. 2; iv. 2 
66, 129, 168, 190, 347; iv. 3. 
21. 

Hanmer, ii. 3. 38, 120; iii. 3. 2, 
23; iii. 4. loi, 174; iii. 6. 62: 
iv. 2. 224; iv. 3. 40; v. 5. 458. 

Hecuba, iv. 2. 313. 

Herford, i. i. init. 

Holinshed, i. i. 29; iii. i. 30. 

Hudson, ii. 2. init.; in. 4. 15,' 
iv. 2. 169. 

infinitive, i. 5. 44. 

influence of heavenly bodies, i. 

I. 2. 

Ingleby, i. 2. init.; i. 3. 17; i. 4. 

52, 148; i. 6. 4, 108; ii. 2. init.; 

iii. I. 70; iv. 2. 59; v. 4. 10, 

27. 
irony, tragic, ii. 3. 138. 
irregular past tense, iv. 2. 347. 
Italian prisoners, iii. 2. 5. 
Jervis, i. I. 29. 
Johnson, S. , i. I. 25, 47; ii. 4. 

73, 90; iii. I. 27, 38; iii. 2. 

init., 17, 76; iii. 3. 6; iii. 4. 

49, loi, 143; iii- 5- 72; v. 3. 

53-55; V. 5. 352-354- 
Johnson, T., Cornucopia, iv. 2. 

224. 
Jupiter, ii. 4. 121. 
legend of robin, iv. 2. 224. 
Lcs;ends of Good Women, ii. 2. 

45- 
Lloyd, \V. W., i. 4. /«rV.; i. 6. 

171. 
locking horse's leg, v. 4. i. 
Lucina, v. 4. 43. 
Lyly's Alexander and Campaspe, 

ii. 3. 18-26. 
Macbeth, resemblances with Cym- 

beline, ii. 2. /';///. 
Machiavelism, v. 5. 196. 
Malone, i. 4. 19; iii. 4. 89. 
masks, v. 3. 21. 
Mason, V. i. 1315. 



234 



CYMBELINE 



Metaniorplioses, Ovid's, ii. 2. 45. 
metaphor, nautical, iii. 6. 76-78. 
Midcileton"s Roaring Girl, iii. 4. 

lOI. 

Milton, i. 4. II; iii. 4. 157. 
Mother HiibberJ's Tale, iii. 3. 23. 
mitlier, absurd derivation of, v. 

5. 446. 
nautical metaphor, iii. 6. 76-78. 
nominative omitted, iv. 3. 21. 
nouns = transitive verbs, i. 6. 55; 

iii. 5. 148; V. 4. 147. 
objective genitive, iii. 4. 187. 
omission of as, i. 6. 132; iv. 2. 

136; of nominative, iv. 3. 21; 

of relative, i. 6. 83; of verb of 

motion, iv. 2. 152. 
Ovid's Metamorphoses, ii. 2. 45. 
Pannonians, iii. I. 72. 
paraphrases, i. I. 22, 25, 88; i. 

2. 10, II; i. 3. 9; i. 4. 13, 32, 
59, 61-63, 148; i- 5- 26, 68, 
79; i. 6. 6, 32, 36, 44, 78-81, 
106, 1 18-122, 149-151; ii. 3. 
58, 104, 126-130; ii. 4. 83-85, 
90, 110-112; iii. 2. 23, 40-43; 
iii. 3. 16, 17 ; iii. 4. 9, 10, 
137-140, 177; iv. I. II; iv. 2. 
193, 204-206, 2IO, 300, 363- 
365; iv. 3. 22; v. I. 13-15; v. 

3. 16-18, 21, 32, 81; V. 4. 16, 
18-21, 24, I14-I17, 215; V. 5. 
54-56, 120-122, 139, 163-165, 
176-178, 194, 228, 262, 302- 
305. 307, 352-354, 3S3, 430- 

432; 

Parthian warfare, i. 6. 20. 

participle, unrelated, i. 6. 96. 

passages difficult of interpreta- 
tion, i. 2. 26; i. 3. 4 ; i. 4. 
passim, 59; i. 6. 78-81, 171; 
ii. 3.99; ii. 4. 90; iii. 3.23; iii. 

4. 161 ; iii. 5. 68; iii. 6. 24, 
70; V. 3. 32, 74-76. 

passive ending for active, iii. 2. 

Petite Pa/lace of Pettie his plesiire, 

ii. 2. 45. 
Phoebus' wheel, v. 5. 190. 



phunix, i. 6. 17. 

phrase compounds, i. 4. 82. 

Plant Lore 0/ Shakespeai e, Ella- 
combe's, iv. 2. 222. 

pleonasm, i. 6. 85. 

Pope, i. 6. 27; iii. i. 12; iii. 2 
40-43, 63; iii. 3. 34; iv. 2. 57, 
170,237,290,316,329; V. I. 1. 

J'osthiainis, accent of, iv. 2. 320. 

Posthumus' wager, i. 4. i?itt. 

pioiepsis, iv. 2. 59. 

prose, Shakespeare's use of, i. 4. 
init. ; iii. 5. tint. 

puns, ii. I. 21. See also "word- 
play". 

raven's eye, ii. 2. 49. 

redundant to, v. 4. 179. 

repentance analysed, v. 4. 10. 

resemblances with Macbeth, ii. 2 
init. 

retribution, v. i. 13-15. 

reverence as basis of social order, 
iv. 2. 248. 

riming couplet, iii. 5. 104; iv. 2. 

193- 
Roaring Girl, Middleton's, iii. 4. 

lOI. 

robin, legend of, iv. 2. 224. 

Roman de la Violette, ii. 2. 38. 

Rowe, i. 4. 41, 72, 73; i. 6. 108; 
ii. 3. 3, 28; ii. 4. 34, 60, 133; 
iii. 3. 23; iii. 4. 78; iii. 6. 27; 
iv. 4. 17; v. 3. 42; v. 5. 95, 
126, 233, 378, 386. 

rusli-strewn floors, ii. 2. 13. 

.Saracens, iii. 3. 6. 

Schmidt, ii. 3. 95; v. 5. 87. 

.Seward, iii. i. 20. 

Shakespeare's experience as an 
actor, iii. 5. 128; his imagina- 
tion, iv. 2. 210 ; his improve- 
ment on his authorities, i. 6. 
172; his usage in prose and 
verse, i. 4. init. ; iii. 5. init. 

Sicilius, i. I. 29. 

Singer, ii. 4. 41. 

singular verb with plural si.bject, 
i. 6. 118; with two subjects, 
ii. 4. 58. 



GENERAL INDEX 



235 



Sinon, iii. 4. 57. 

Skottowe, iii. i. init. 

Smith, J. C, i. 4. init. 

south wind, ii. 3. 130. 

Spedding, iv. 2. 210. 

Spenser, iii. 3. 23. 

Staunton, iv. 2. 285; v. 5. 163- 

Steevens, i. 2. 26; ii. 3. 99; iii. 

2- 36-39; iii- 4- 5i> 101 ; iv- 

2. 122, 229. 

Stephen's World of Wonders, v. 

5- 446- 

stepmothers, i. I. 71. 

suicide, iii. 4. 75. 

Syenna's brother, iv. 2. 341. 

Sympson, iv. 2. 204-206. 

Tenantius, i. i. 31. 

Tereus, ii. 2. 45. 

textual points, i. i. 1,3, 29, 70, 
177; i. 2. 26; i. 4. 24, 41, 52, 
65, 72, 73, 119; i. 6. 27, 32, 
58, 83, 108, I40; ii. 2. 49; ii. 

3. 4, 13, 28, 38, 45, 99, 120; 
ii. 4. 6, 18, 24, 34, 36, 37, 41, 
60, 133; iii. I. 12, 20, 52; iii. 
2. 2, 40-43, 63 ; iii. 3. 2, 23, 
25, 33, 34, 51, 83; iii. 4- 22, 
78, 87-89, 89, loi, 147, 174; 
iii. 5. 9, 44; iii. 6. 27, 62, 70; 
iii. 7. 9, 14; iv. I. 12, 16, 17; 
iv. 2. 38, 49, 57, 58, 59, loi, 

HI, 122, 132, 170, 204-206, 



224, 237, 285, 290, 316, 329; 

iv. 3. 40; IV. 4. 17; V. I. I ; 

V. 3. 24, 42, 43, 47; V. 4. 164; 

V. 5. 95, 126, 233, 261, 334, 

378, 386, 449-451, 45S, 464- 
'I'lieobald, i. 6. 36; ii. 2. 49; ii. 

3. 12; ii. 4. 18, 36; iv. 2. 58, 

III, 132; V. 3. 24, 43. 
theological word-play, i. I. 137; 

i. 2. 23. 
'lliersites, iv. 2. 252. 
thou zx^A you, iii. 5. 129. 
Titan, iii. 4. 163. 
tomb-haunting fairies, iv. 2. 217- 
to redundant, v. 4. 179. 
tragic irony, ii. 3. 138. 
Tyrwhitt, ii. 4. 6 ; v. 5. 334. 
unrelated participle, i. 6. 96. 
Verplanck, iii. 2. 36-39. 
Warburton, i. 3. 9; i. 4. 119; ii. 
3- 99; iii- 3- 83; iii- 1- 9; iv- 

1. 16. 

wearing of masks, v. 3. 21. 
weasels, iii. 4. 159- 
IVestward for Smelts, i. 6. 172. 
word-play, i. i. 137; i. 2. 23; 

iii. 4. II; iii. 5. 155- 
World of Wonders, Stephen's, 

v. 5. 446. 
worms of Nile, iii. 4. 34. 
worn-out garments, iii. 4. 51. 
Wright, W. Aldis., iii. 5. 9; iv. 

2. Ill; V. 5. 446. 



SHAKESPEARE'S STAGE IN ITS BEARING 
UPON HIS DRAMA 

§ 1. The structure and arrangements of the Elizabethan theatre are 
still under discussion, and many points of detail remain unsettled. A 
very extensive and highly technical literature on the subject is avail- 
able, chiefly in England, America, and Germany. It is based especially 
on the new evidence derived from (1) the original stage directions, (2) 
contemporary illustrations and descriptions. The following summary 
gives the conclusions which at present appear most reasonable, neglect- 
ing much speculative matter of great interest. 

§ 2. When Shakespeare arrived in London, soon after 1585, thea- 
trical exhibitions were given there in (1) public theatres, (2) private 
theatres, (3) the halls of the royal palaces, and of the Inns of Court. 

Of the ' public ' theatres there were at least three: The Theater, the Curtain, 
both in Shoreditch, and Newington Butts on the Bankside or Southwark shore. 
About 1587, the Rose, also on the Bankside, was added. All these were occasion- 
ally used by Shakespeare's company before 1599, when their headquarters became 
the newly built Globe, likewise on the Bankside. Of the ' private ' theatres the 
principal, and the oldest, was the Blackfriar, on the site of the present Times 
office. It was also the property of the company in which Shakespeare acquired a 
share, but being let out during practically his whole career, does not count in 
the present connexion. At court, on the other hand, his company played re- 
peatedly. But his plays were written for the ' public ' theatre, and this alone 
had any influence in his stage-craft. 

§ 3. The ' public ' theatre differed from the other two types chiefly 
in being (1) dependent on daylight, (2) open overhead, and (3) par- 
tially seatless; and from the court-stages also, in (4) not using painted 
scenes. While they, again, had the rectangular form, the typical 
' public ' theatre was a round or octagonal edifice, modelled partly on 
the inn-j^ards where companies of players had been accustomed to 
perform, prior to the inhibition of 1574, on movable stages; partly on 
the arenas used for bear-baiting and cock-fighting; — sports still 
carried on in the ' theatres ', and in part dictating their arrangements. 

The circular inner area, known thence as the ' cock-pit ', or ' pit ', had accord- 
ingly no seats; admission to it cost one penny (6d. in modern money), and the 
throng of standing spectators were known as the ' groundlings '. More expensive 
places (up to 2s. &d.) with seats, were provided in tiers of galleries which ran 
round the area, one above the other, as in modern theatres; the uppermost being 
covered with a thatched roof. 

§ 4. The Stage (using the term to describe the entire scenic appa- 
ratus of the theatre) included (1) the outer stage, a rectangular 
platform (as much as 42 feet wide in the largest examples) projecting 
into the circular area, from the back wall, and thus surrounded by 
' groundlings ' on three sides. Above it were a thatched roof and hang- 
ings but no side or front curtains. In the floor was a trap-door by 
which ghosts and others ascended or descended. At the back were 
(2) two projecting wings, each with a door opening obliquely on to 
the .stage, the recess between them, of uncertain shape and extent, 
forming a kind of inner stage. Above this was (3) an upper room or 
rooms, which included the actors' ' tiring house ', with a window or 



ii SHAKESPEARE'S STAGE 

windows opening on to (4) a balcony or gallery from which was hung 
(6) a curtain, by means of which the inner recess could be concealed or 
disclosed. 

§ 5. The most important divergence of this type of structure from 
that of our theatres is in the relation between the outer stage and the 
auditorium. In the modern theatre the play is treated as a picture, 
framed in the proscenium arch, seen by the audience like any other 
picture from the front only, and shut off from their view at any 
desired moment by letting fall the curtain. An immediate conse- 
quence of this was that a scene (or act) could terminate only in one 
of two ways. Either the persons concerned in it walked, or were 
carried, off the stage; or a change of place and circumstances was 
supposed without their leaving it. Both these methods were used. 
The first was necessary only at the close of the play. For this reason 
an Elizabethan play rarely ends on a climax such as the close of 
Ibsen's Ghosts; the overpowering effect of which would be gravely 
diminished if, instead of the curtain falling upon Osvald's helpless 
cry for " the sun ", he and his mother had to walk off the stage. 
Marlowe's Faustus ends with a real climax, because the catastrophe 
ipso facto leaves the stage clear. But the close of even the most over- 
whelming final scenes of Shakespeare is relatively quiet, or even, as 
in Macbeth, a little tame. The concluding lines often provide a motive 
for the (compulsory) clearing of the stage. 

In the Tragedies, the dead body of the hero has usually to be borne ceremoniously 
away, followed by the rest; so Aufldius In Coriolanus: "Help, threeo' thechiefest 
soldiers: I'll be one". Similarly in Hamlet and King Lear. In Othello, Desde- 
mona's bed was apparently in the curtained recess, and at the close the curtains 
were drawn upon the two bodies, instead of their being as usual borne away. 

The close of the Histories often resembles the dispersing of an informal council 
after a declaration of policy by the principal person; thus Richard II. closes with 
Bolingbroke's announcement of the penance he proposes to pay for Richard's 
death; Henry IV. with his orders for the campaign against Northumberland and 
Glendower; King John with Falconbridge's great assertion of English patriotism. 

In the Comedies, the leading persons will often withdraw to explain to one 
another at leisure what the audience already knows (Winter's Tale, Tempest, 
Merchant of Venice), or to carry out the wedding rites {As You Like It, Midsummer- 
Night's Dream); or they strike up a measure and thus (as in Much Ado) naturally 
dance off the stage. Sometimes the chief persons have withdrawn before the close, 
leaving some minor character — Puck [Midsummer-Night's Dream) or the Clown 
(Twelfth Night)— to wind up the whole with a snatch of song, and then retire 
himself. 

§ 6. But the most important result of the exposed stage was that it 
placed strict limit upon dramatic illusion, and thus compelled the 
resort, for most purposes, to conventions resting on symbolism, sug- 
gestion, or make-believe. It was only in dress that anything like 
simulation could be attempted; and here the Elizabethan companies, 
as is well known, were lavish in the extreme. Painted scenes, on the 
other hand, even had they been available, would have been idle or 
worse, when perhaps a third of the audience would see, behind the 
actors, not the scenes but the people in the opposite gallerjs or the 
gallants seated on the stage. Especially where complex and crowded 
actions were introduced, the most beggarly symbolic suggestion was 
cheerfully accepted. Jonson, in the spirit of classical realism, would 



IN ITS BEARING UPON HIS DRAMA iii 

have tabooed all such intractable matter; and he scoffed, in his 
famous Prologue, at the " three rusty swords " whose clashing had 
to do duty for " York and Lancaster's long jars ". Shakespeare's 
realism was never of this literal kind, but in bringing Agincourt upon 
the stage of the newly built Globe in the following year (1559) he 
showed himself so far sensitive to criticisms of this type that he 
expressly appealed to the audience's imagination — " eke out our 
imperfections with your thoughts " — consenting, moreover, to assist 
them by the splendid descriptive passages interposed between the Acts. 
It is probable that the Elizabethan popular audience did not need 
any such appeal. It had no experience of elaborate ' realism ' on the 
stage; the rude movable stages on which the earliest dramas had been 
played compelled an ideal treatment of space and a symbolic treat- 
ment of properties; and this tradition, though slowly giving way, was 
still paramount throughout Shakespeare's career. Thus every audience 
accepted as a matter of course ( 1 ) the representation of distant things 
or places simultaneously on the stage. Sidney, in 1580, had ridiculed 
the Romantic plays of his time with " Asia of one side and Africa of 
the other ", indicated by labels. But Shakespeare in 1593-4 could 
still represent the tents of Richard III. and Richmond within a few 
yards of one another, and the Ghosts speaking alternately to each. 
Every audience accepted (2) the presence on the stage, in full view of 
the audience, of accessories irrelevant to the scene in course of per- 
formance. A property requisite for one set of scenes, but out of place 
in another, could be simply ignored while the latter were in progress; 
just as the modern audience sees, but never reckons into the scenery, 
the footlights and the prompter's box. Large, movable objects, such 
as beds or chairs, were no doubt often brought in when needed; but 
no one was disturbed if they remained during an intervening scene 
in which they were out of place. And " properties either difficult to 
move, like a well, or so small as to be unobtrusive, were habitually 
left on the stage as long as they were wanted, whatever scenes inter- 
vened " (Reynolds). 

Thus in Jonson's The Case is Altered Can early play, not yet reflecting his 
characteristic technique), Jaques, in III. 2, hides his gold in the earth and covers 
it with a heap of dung to avoid suspicion. In IV. 4. he removes the dung to assure 
himself that the gold is still there. The intervening scenes represent rooms in 
Ferneze's palace, and Juniper's shop; but the heap of dung doubtless remained 
on the stage all the time. Similarly in Peele's David and Bethsabe, the spring in 
which Bethsabe bathes; and in his Old Wives' Tale, ' a study * and a ' cross ', 
which belong to unconnected parts of the action. 

It follows from this that the supposed locality of a scene could be 
changed without any change in the properties on the stage, or even of 
the persons. What happened was merely that some properties which 
previously had no dramatic relevance, suddenly acquired it, and vice 
versa; that a tree, for instance, hitherto only a stage property out of 
use, became a tree and signified probably, a wood. The change of 
scene may take place without any break in the dialogue, and be only 
marked by the occurrence of allusions of a different tenor. 

Thus in Doctor Faustus, at v, X106 f., Faustus is in " a fair and pleasant green ", 



iv SHAKESPEARE'S STAGE 

on his way from the Emperor's Court at Wittenberg; at v. 1143 f., he is back in 
his house there. In Romeo and ■/ulirt, I. 4. 5, Romeo and his friends are at first in 
the street; at I. 4. 114, according to the Folio, " they march about the stage and 
serving-men come forth with their napliins "; in other words, we are now in 
Capulet's hall, and C'apulet presently enters meeting his guests. This is con- 
ventionalized in modern editions. 

§ 7. The Inner Stage. — An audience for which the limitations 
of the actual stage meant so little, might be expected to dispense 
readily with the concessions to realism implied in providing an actual 
inner chamber for scenes performed ' within ', and an actual gallery 
for those performed ' aloft '. And the importance and number of the 
former class of scenes have, in fact, been greatly exaggerated. 

Applying modern usages to the semi-mediaeval Elizabethan stage, Brandl (.Ein- 
leituna to his revised edition of Schlegel's translation) and Brodmeier (Disserta- 
tion on the stage conditions of the Elizabethan drama), put forward the theory of 
the ' alternative ' scene; according to which the inner and the outer stage were 
used ' alternately ', a recurring scene, with elaborate properties, being arranged 
in the former, and merely curtained off while intervening scenes were played on the 
outer, or main stage. But while this theory is plausible, as applied to some of 
Shakespeare's plays (e.g. the intricate transitions between rooms at Belmont and 
piazzas at Venice, in the Merchant), it breaks down in others (e.g. Cvmbeline, II. 
2, 3; Richard II., I. 3, 4), and especially in many plays by other dramatists. 

It is probable that the use of the ' inner stage ' was in general re- 
stricted to two classes of scene: (1) where persons ' within ' formed 
an integral though subordinate part of a scene of which the main 
issue was decided on the outer stage; as with the play-scene in 
Hamlet, or where Ferdinand and Miranda are discovered playing chess 
in The Tempest; (2) where a scene, though engaging the whole interest, 
is supposed to occur in an inner chamber. Thus Desdemona's chamber, 
Prospero's cell, Timon's cave, Lear's hovel, the Capulet's tomb. 

§ 8. The Balcony. — There is less doubt about the use of the bal- 
cony or gallery. This was in fact an extremely favourite resource, 
and its existence in part explains the abundance of serenade, rope- 
ladder, and other upper-story scenes in Elizabethan drama. 

From the balcony, or the window above it, Juliet discoursed with Romeo, and 
Sylvia with Proteus {Two Gentlemen of Verona, IV. 2); Richard III. addressed 
the London citizens, and the citizen of Angers the rival Kings. From the window 
the Pedant in Taming of the Shreio, V. 1, hails Petruchio and Grumio below; and 
Stiuire Tub, in Jonson's TaJe of a Tub, I. 1, puts out his head in answer to the 
summons of Parson Hugh. But whole scenes were also, it is probable, occasionally 
enacted in this upper room. This is the most natural interpretation of the scenes 
in Juliet's chamber (IV. 3. 5). On the other hand, though the Senators in Titus 
Andronicus, I. 1, " go up into the ' Senate House ' ", it is probable that the 
debate later in the scene, on the main stage, is intended to be in the Senate-house 
by the convention described in § 6. 

For further reference the following among others may be mentioned : 
G. F. Reynolds, Some Princivles of Elizabethan Staoina (Modern Philology, 
II. III.); A. Brandl, Introduction to his edition of Schlegel's translation 
of Shakespeare; V. E. Albright, The Shakespearian Stage (New York); 
W. Archer, The Elizabethan Stage {Quarterly Review, 1908); W. J. Law- 
rence, The Elizabethan Playhouse and other Studies (1st and 2nd aeries); 
D. Figgis, Shakespeare, a study. 

From one or other of these, many of the above examples hav< 
been taken, 

C. H. H. 



PR CjU |/vut-^-'iu\^ 

2806 I 

A2W78 

I I dL-' 31 T/& lo|© 



CARDS 



Ito 



UNIVI — i 



