Lib. 




^A/£-'>. % 





SIR JOHN FALSTAFF 



^^ 



Hootlovers Ecfiiion 





V 

2^illian\Sl\al^spGarQ 



*ifl/*i^T^lr^rocruc^ iorxs, 

*>^otGs, Glossary, 

Critical ^on\rT\ervjts, 

ai\cf c/^G^bvpcf of Siucfy 



T}\Q Urvjver»si^y Society 
New York. 



Copyright, 1 90 1 

By 

THE UNIVERSITY SOCIETY 



The Second Part of 
King Henry IV. 



COLLEGI 
LIBRARY 



Critical Comments, 






I. 

Argument. 

I. The Earl of Northumberland receives news of his 
son Hotspur's defeat and death; also that the King has 
despatched against him an army under the conduct of 
his second son, P^rince John of Lancaster, and the Earl 
of Westmoreland. Though in feeble health, he resolves 
to resist. Meantime the generalship of the insurgent 
forces devolves upon Scroop, Archbishop of York. 

II. Sir John Falstaff, though entrusted with a com- 
mission for levying a company of royal troops, cannot 
neglect his personal interests at the tavern. He runs 
up an account with the Hostess and narrowly escapes 
being sued for the debt. He is found in the tavern by 
the Prince of Wales, who has just returned from his vic- 
torious engagement at Shrewsbury; and the corpulent 
knight is summoned to forsake his cups and resume his 
military duties. 

III. Falstaff's recruiting is more successful for his 
purse than for the army, since he releases able-bodied 
men who can buy themselves out of service, and retains 
weak, indifferent fellows who hardly serve for targets. 

The King grows despondent on account of failing 
health and the northern insurrection. He cannot be 
persuaded but that the rebels will menace his throne; 
and he bemoans the wars which prevent his crusade to 
the Holy Land. 



Comments THE SECOND PART OF 

IV. The insurgent army under the Archbishop of 
York faces the royal forces of Prince John in Gaultree 
Forest, Yorkshire. The latter, instead of hazarding a 
general engagement, invites the rising chieftains to a 
conference, in which he promises redress of their alleged 
grievances, proclaims peace, and urges a dispersion of 
both armies. The insurgents take him at his word and 
dismiss their forces; whereupon the perfidious prince, 
who had previously given secret instructions to his own 
army to fall upon the scattered insurgent bands, seizes 
on the persons of York and the other rebel leaders and 
condemns them to be executed for treason. The news 
of the discomfiture of the insurgent army is carried to 
the sick King, who, however, is too feeble to evince 
much interest in the tidings. He sinks rapidly. The 
Prince of Wales is summoned from his tavern circle to 
attend his father, whom he finds in a stupor, with the 
crown beside him on the pillow. Believing him to be 
dead, the Prince removes the crown to another room — 
and thereby incurs the bitter reproaches of the King, 
who believes his son desirous of his death. Prince 
Henry justifies his conduct, and the two are reconciled. 

V. Shortly afterwards Henry IV. passes away, and 
the Prince of Wales is crowned Henry V. No sooner 
does he assume his regal dignities than he dismisses from 
his society Sir John Falstaff and his convivial crew, and 
resolves henceforth to prove worthy of his high of^ce. 

McSpadden : Shakespearian Synopses. 

II. 

Falstaff. 

A man w'ith a great flow of animal spirits is sometimes, 
especially if he is liable to sudden bursts of this exuber- 
ance, mistaken to be under the influence of wine. Fal- 
staff's average rate of mirth is so high that wine refuses 
to contest it. The blood of his vein can afford to be 



KING HENRY IV. Comments 

handicapped against the blood of the grape. The mon- 
strous quantities of sack sink through the porosities of his 
rotundity, and mildly percolate a subterranean world; so 
that his abstinence in the article of bread is a very nice 
instinct that balancing bulk enough exists already. 

Falstaff, by every ordinary law of human nature, 
should be inebriated. His exemption is a kind of athe- 
ism. But he prefers to have his own vices overdone 
in the persons of his companions, all of whom seem to 
have anticipated the sanitary argument in favor of the 
use of liquor that an American suggested: " If water 
will rot a cedar-post, what will it do to the human 
stomach!" . . . 

Sir John does not intend to be readily put down. In 
the matter of arrest at Dame Quickly's suit for debt, 
how airily he gives the Chief Justice tap for tap, and 
urges that the officers are hindering him from going on 
the King's errand! He is hard to get fairly cooped in a 
corner; most invaluable counsel to defend a ring, big 
enough to break through the most carefully woven in- 
dictment. When you think you have him neatly at bay, 
the bulky culprit floats over your head in a twinkling 
of resource and is gone: it is done so cleverly that you 
have not the heart to pursue him farther, or, if you do, 
it is only for the sake of enjoying an encore of this 
trapeze-shifting of his wit. 

It is comic when his tone of protestation that he will 
discharge his debt to Dame Quickly succeeds in taking 
in her who has been so often deceived before. But 
one weakness is always too strong for another; so he 
is constantly betrayed into expense by her, and that 
is at once her vice and its reward. " I owe her money; 
and whether she be damned for that I know not." 

It is also comic that his vanity prevents him from 
suspecting himself of cowardice and evasion of duty; 
so that he indulges the most inflated self-appreciation, 
and no misadventure is sharp enough to prick it. 
*' Embowelled! 'Sblood, 'twas time to counterfeit." 



Comments THE SECOND PART OF 

And his fright inspires him with the adage dear ever 
since to shirkers, " The better part of valor is discre- 
tion " ; and it has a sensible purport which blinds him to 
his own disgrace. '' There is not a dangerous action," 
complains he to the Chief Justice, " but I am thrust upon 
it. Well, I cannot last ever. But it was always yet the 
trick of our English nation, if they have a good thing, 
to make it too common. I would to God, my name were 
not so terrible to the enemy as it is." Does he really 
think his bullying style is a perpetual action of bravery, 
or is he delighting to be ironical upon himself? 

Now Falstaff's mind has many a talent which liber- 
ates it from the grossness of his body. His wit shows 
a nimble foot of fancy. His common sense is an acute 
ally of his cowardice. The imagination which betrays 
him into the largeness of his lying goes into the felicity 
of his wit: both are on an ample scale. He rallies Bar- 
dolpli for his complexion, and overwhelms his ragged 
company with comparisons, just as his men in buckram 
grow in number. When his fancy seizes an opportunity 
he cannot let it go, but unconsciously shifts it into all 
possible lights, and exhausts invention to make the point 
emphatic. How many imaginative people there are who 
unconsciously lie in the same way. 

Weiss: IF/V, Humor, and Shakspearc. 



Alike the same incongruous, identical Falstaff, whether 
to the grave Chief Justice he vainly talks of his youth 
and ofifers to caper for a thousand, or cries to ]\lrs. Doll, 
" I am old! I am old! " although she is seated on his 
lap, and he is courting her for busses. . . . There 
is no such thing as totally demolishing Falstaff; he has 
so much of the invulnerable in his frame that no ridicule 
can destroy him; he is safe even in defeat, and seems 
to rise, like another Ant?eus, with recruited vigour at 
every fall. 
MoRGANN : The Dramatic Character of Sir John FahtaW. 



KING HENRY IV. Comments 

III. 
Falstaff and Panurge Compared. 

It is certain, of course, that neither Calderon nor 
Moliere knew anything of Shakespeare or of Falstaff; 
and Shakespeare, for his part, was equally uninfluenced 
by any of his predecessors on the comic stage, when he 
conceived his fat knight. 

Nevertheless, there is among Shakespeare's predeces 
sors a great writer, one of the greatest, with whom we 
cannot but compare him; to wit, Rabelais, the master 
spirit of the early Renaissance in France. He is, more 
over, one of the few great writers with whom Shake- 
speare is known to have been acquainted. He alludes 
to him in As You Like It (III. ii.), where Celia says, when 
Rosalind asks her a dozen questions and bids her answer 
in one word : " You must borrow me Gargantua's 
mouth first: 'tis a word too great for any mouth of this 
age's size." 

If we compare Falstaff with Panurge, we see that 
Rabelais stands to Shakespeare in the relation of a Titan 
to an Olympian god. Rabelais is gigantic, dispropor- 
tioned, potent, but formless. Shakespeare is smaller 
and less excessive, poorer in ideas, though richer in 
fancies, and moulded with the utmost firmness of out- 
line. 

Rabelais died at the age of seventy, ten years before 
Shakespeare was born; there is between them all the 
difference between the morning and the noon of the 
Renaissance. Rabelais is a poet, philosopher, polemist, 
reformer, " even to the very fire exclusively," but al- 
ways threatened with the stake. Shakespeare's coarse- 
ness compared with Rabelais's is as a manure-bed com- 
pared with the Cloaca Maxima. Burlesque uncleanness 
pours in floods from the Frenchman's pen. 

His Panurge is larger than Falstaff, as Utgard-Loki 15 



Comments THE SECOND PART OF 

larger than Asa-Loki. Panurge, like Falstaff, is loqua- 
cious, witty, crafty, and utterly unscrupulous, a humour- 
ist who stops the mouths of all around him by unblush- 
ing effrontery. In war, Panurge is not more of a hero 
than Falstaff, but, like Falstaff, he stabs the foemen who 
have already fallen. He is superstitious, yet his buf- 
foonery holds nothing sacred, and he steals from the 
church-plate. He is thoroughly selfish, sensual, and 
slothful, shameless, revengeful, and light-fingered, and 
as time goes on becomes ever a greater poltroon and 
braggart. 

Pantagruel is the noble knight, a king's son, like 
Prince Henry. Like the Prince, he has one foible: he 
cannot resist the attractions of low company. When 
Panurge is witty, Pantagruel cannot deny himself th'- 
pleasure of laughing at his side-splitting drolleries. 

But Panurge, unlike Falstaff, is a satire on the largest 
scale. In representing him as a notable economist or 
master of finance, wlio calls borrowing credit-creating, 
and has 63 methods of raising money and 214 methods 
of spending it, Rabelais made him an abstract and brief 
chronicle of the French court of his day. In giving him 
a yearly revenue from his barony of " 6,789,106,789 
royaulx en deniers certain," to say nothing of the fluc- 
tuating revenue of the locusts and periwinkles, " montant 
bon an mal an de 2,435,768 a 2,435,769 moutons a la 
grande laine," Rabelais was aiming his satire direct at the 
unblushing extortion which was at that time the glory and 
delight of the French feudal nobility. 

Shakespeare does not venture so far in the direction 
of satire. He is only a poet, and as a poet stands sim- 
ply on the defensive. The only power he can be said 
to attack is Puritanism {Twelfth Night, Measure for 
Measure, etc.), and that only in self-defence. His at- 
tacks, too, are exceedingly mild in comparison with 
those of the Cavalier poets before the victory of Puri- 
tanism and after the reopening of the theatres. But 
Shakespeare was what Rabelais was not, an artist; and 

6 



KING HENRY IV. Comments 

as an artist he was a very Prometheus in his power 
of creating human beings. 

Brandes : WilliajH Shakespeare. 

IV. 
Hostess QuicKly. 

We have already had several glimpses of Mrs. Quickly, 
the heroine of Eastcheap. She is well worth a steady 
and attentive looking at. One of the most character- 
istic passages in the play is her account of Falstaff's debt 
to her; which has been aptly commented on by Cole- 
*ridge as showing how her mind runs altogether in the 
rut of actual events ; that she can think and speak of 
things only in the precise order of their occurrence; 
having no power to select such as are suited to her pur- 
pose, and detach them from the circumstantial imperti- 
nences with which they stand associated in her memory. 

In strict keeping with this peculiarity of mind, her 
character throughout savours strongly of her where- 
about in life, and is curiously elemented from her cir- 
cumstances: she is plentifully trimmed up with vices 
and vulgarities, and they all taste rankly of her place 
and calling, thus showing that she has as much of 
moral as of intellectual passiveness. Notwithstanding, 
somehow she always has an odour of womanhood about 
her: even her worst features are such as none but a 
woman could have; or at least they are greatly miti- 
gated in her case by their marriage wnth a woman's 
nature. Nor is her character, with all its ludicrous and 
censurable qualities, unrelieved, as we have seen, with 
touches of generosity that relish equally of her sex, 
though not so much of her situation. It is even ques- 
tionable whether she would have entertained Sir John's 
proposals so favourably, but 'that when he made them 
he was in a condition to need her kindness ; and when 
her " exion is enter'd " against him, she seems to move 



Comments THE SECOND PART OF 

quite as much from affection for him as from desire of 
tlie money. And who but a woman could speak such 
words of fluttering eagerness as she speaks in urging 
on his arrest : " Do your offices, do your offices, master 
Fang and master Snare ; do me, do me, do me your of- 
fices " ; where her very rekictance to act prompts her 
to the greater despatch, and her heart seems palpitating 
with anxious hope that what she is doing will make 
another opportunity for her kind ministrations. Some- 
times, indeed, she gets wrought up to a pretty high 
pitch of temper, but she cannot hold herself there; and 
between her turns of anger and her returns to the oppo- 
site there is room for more of womanly feeling than 
we shall venture to describe. And there is still more 
of the woman in the cunning simplicity — or is it simple- 
nes6? — with which she manages to keep her good opin- 
ion of Sir John ; as when, upon being told that at his 
death " he cried out of women, and said they were devils 
incarnate," she repHes, " A' never could abide carnation*, 
'twas a colour he never liked " ; as if she could nowise 
understand his words but in such a sense as would stand 
smooth with her interest and her affection. 

It is curious to observe how Mrs. Quickly dwells 
on the confines of virtue and shame, and sometimes plays 
over the borders, ever clinging to the reputation and 
perhaps to the consciousness of the one, without fore- 
closing the invitations to the other. Nor may we dis- 
miss her without remarking how in her w^orst doings 
she apparently hides from herself their ill favour under 
a fair name; as people often paint the cheeks of their 
vices, and then look them sweetly in the face, though 
they cannot but know the paint is all that keeps them 
from being unsightly and loathsome. In her case, how- 
ever, this may spring in part from a simplicity not unlike 
that which sometimes makes children shut their eyes 
at what affrights them, and then think themselves safe. 
Upon the whole, Mrs. Quickly must be set down as 
one of the wicked; the Poet evidently meant her so: 

8 



KING HENRY IV. Comments 

and in mixing so much of good with the general prepon- 
derance of bad in her character, he has shown a rare 
spirit of wisdom, such as may well remind us that " both 
good men and bad men are apt to be less so than they 
seem." 

Hudson : The Works of Shakespeare. 

V. 
Shallow and Silence. 

After Falstafif, the most perfect characters in the play 
are Shallow and Silence, the Gloucestershire justices. 
Here again we have Shakespeare's astonishing power in 
individuality-portraiture. It is impossible to conceive a 
stronger contrast, a more direct antipodes in mental 
structure than he has achieved between FalstafT and 
Shallow ; the one all intellect, all acuteness of perception 
and fancy, and the other, the justice, a mere compound of 
fatuity, a caput mortiiiiin of understanding. Not only is 
Shallow distinguished by his eternal babble, talking " in- 
finite nothings " ; but with the flabby vivacity, the idiotic 
restlessness, that not unfrequently accompany this class 
of mind (if such a being may be said to possess mind 
at all), he not only tattles on — " whirr, whirr, whirr," like 
a ventilator, but he fills up the chinks in his sentences 
with repetitions, as blacksmiths continue to tap the anvil 
in the intervals of turning the iron upon it. But Shake- 
speare has presented us with a still stronger quality of as- 
sociation in minds of Shallow's calibre, that of asking 
questions everlastingly, and instantly giving evidence 
that the replies have not sunk even skin-deep with t4iem, 
rushing on from subject to subject, and returning again 
to those that have been dismissed. . . . 

His provincial habit of life is also indicated by his 
constant recurrence to his metropolitan days — the " mad 
days that he had spent at Clement's Inn." The idea of 
Shallow having been a roysterer at any period of his life! 

9 



Comments THE SECOND PART OF 

the very constitution of the man's mind confutes his 
boast, without the testimony of Falstaff; and that is the 
finest burlesque portrait that ever was drawn : — 

"This same starved justice hath done nothing but prate of the 
wildness of his youth, and the feats he hath done about Turnbull 
Street, and every third word a He, duer paid to the hearer than 
the Turk's tribute. I do remember him at Clement's Inn, Hke a 
man made after supper of a cheese-paring. When he was naked, 
he was for all the world like a forked radish, with a head fantas- 
tically carved upon it with a knife. He was so forlorn that his 
dimensions to any thick sight were invisible : he was the very 
genius of famine ; you might have thrust him and all his apparel 
into an eel-skin : — the case of a treble hautboy was a mansion for 
him — a court ! " 

There is no point in which Falstafif's wit glows more 
brilliantly than in that remarkable power of exaggeration, 
and the above (a portion only of the entire portrait) is 
a confirmatory specimen. 

Silence is an embryo of a man — a* molecule — a gradua- 
tion from nonentity towards intellectual being — a man 
dwelling in the suburbs of sense, groping about in the 
twilight of apprehension and understanding. He is the 
second stage in the "Vestiges"; he has just emerged 
from the tadpole state. Here again a distinction is pre- 
served between these two characters. Shallow gabbles 
on from mere emptiness; while Silence, from the same 
incompetence, rarely gets beyond the shortest replies. 
The firmament of his wonder and adoration are the say- 
ings and doings of his cousin and brother-justice at 
Clement's Inn, and which he has been in the constant 
habit of hearing, without satiety and nausea, for half a 
century. With one of those side-wind indications for 
which Shakespeare is remarkable, we are informed 
through Silence that Shallow has ever been repeating the 
stories of his London days : — 

Silence. That 's fifty-five year ago. 

Shallozv. Ha, cousin Silence, that thou hadst seen that that this 
knight and I have seen ! — Ha, Sir John, said I well ? 

10 



KING HENRY IV. Comments 

At another time he says, as though Silence had been 
now first introduced to him, " I was once of Clement's 
Inn, where I think they will talk of ' mad Shallow ' yet." 
Silence. You were called lusty Shallow then, cousin. 

Like a provincial-bred man, also, Silence thinks no he- 
roes can be so great as those of his own neighbourhood. 
When, therefore, Pistol, in announcing the death of the 
old king, says to Falstafif, " Sweet knight, thou art one 
of the greatest men in the realm," Silence assents from 
politeness, hut with a reservation — " By 'r Lady, I think 
he be, but Goodman Puff of Barson." Again, when thev 
are all at dinner, and Silence waxes drunk, he suddenly 
falls to singing, so that Falstaff says, " I did not think 
Master Silence had been a man of this mettle." 
Silence. Who, I ! I have been merry twice and once, ere now. 

It is noticeable, too. that even this scene of conviviality 
does not draw him out to the achievement of an entire 
song; but he trolls out odds and ends, which he asso- 
ciates with the last words he hears in the conversation. 
Shallow says, " Be merry, Master Bardolph : [and to 
Falstaff's page] my little soldier there, be merry." 
Silence. [Sings] Be merry, be merry, my wife has all. 

Charles Cowden Clarke : Shakespeare Characters, 

VI. 

Prince Henry. 

For Prince Hal : we have one unworthy scene, two 
worthy ones. The shadow of his father's death-sick- 
ness is on him, and he goes for relief — half disgusted 
with himself — (feeling that every one would call him a 
hypocrite if he looked sorry) to his old, loose compan- 
ions. But there's not much enjoyment in his forced 
mirth. He feels ashamed of himself, and soon leaves 
Falstaff and his old life forever — '' let the end try the 
man," as he says. It is clear that he now feels the degra- 
dation of being Falstaff's friend and Poins's reputed 

II 



Comments THE SECOND PART OF 

brother-in-law. On hearing of the war again, as in 
Part I., he changes at a touch, and is himself. The next 
time we see him is by his father's sick bed, and again he 
wins to him his father's l-^eart. But surely by a bit of 
Falstaff-like cleverness and want of truth. Compare 
his first speech to the crow^n with his second giving an 
account of it to his father. But one part of that first 
speech he meant: that he 'd hold his crown against the 
world's whole strength; and that was what King Henry 
wanted. When Hal becomes king, his treatment of his 
brothers, the Chief Justice, and Falstaff is surely wise 
and right, in all three cases. One does feel for Falstaff; 
but certainly what he ought to have had he got — the 
chance of reformation. What other reception could 
Henry, in the midst of his new state, give in public to 
the diity, slovenly, debauched old sinner who thrust 
himself upon him, than the rebuke he did? Any other 
course would have rendered the King's own professed 
reform absurd. 

FuRNivALL : The Leopold Shakspere. 

VII. 

King Henry. 

The person of the Prince is brought so much into the 
foreground in Henry IV. that the unity, which arises 
bv concentrating the interest in the chief figure, is dis- 
turbed; we do not know whether the father or the son 
is to be considred the hero of the play. But apart from 
the inner necessity of pointing out, in the drama, the 
goal towards which the course of events is tending, this 
very division of the personal interest belongs to the 
character of the times represented, to the character of 
the reign of Henry IV., nay, to the very character of 
King Henry himself. A person like him is incapable 
of drawing all interest upon himself: all his actions, his 
inmost being is divided in itself. He is one of those 

12 



KING HENRY IV. Comments 

characters who can excite interest only by their close 
connection with other entirely different natures; it is 
only when contrasted with characters such as Richard 
11. or Henry Percy and his own son, who is so unlike 
himself, that his nature acquires light and significance 
enough for us to take an interest in him. . . . He 
becomes more and more gloomy; he lives without 
having any pleasure in life on account of his increasing 
trouble about establishing his royal power, and the op- 
pressive anxiety about the strange doings of his ap- 
parently degenerate son. He dies in the feeling of 
having striven and struggled in vain to obliterate the 
wrong that is attached to his throne. 

Yet he dies in the proud, outward possession of his 
sovereignty; his rebellious barons have not succeeded 
in lessening his power in the slightest degree. 

Ulrici : Shakspeare's Dramatic Art. 



VIII. 

"Disreputable but Immortal." 

What are the exaggerated tragical trappings with 
which Pistol flourishes over his vileness but the badges 
of a masquerade that in principle at least is a parallel 
to that of the King. An attempt more modest but hap- 
pier on the whole is the vapouring of Lieutenant Bar- 
dolph, swearing "by Heaven," and adventuring an at- 
tempt at camp slang and the air of a soldier where he 
is not known. Justice Shallow for his part dresses up a 
fictitious image of the wildness of his youth and puts up 
a pretension to dissoluteness and violence which his will 
may have been equal to but his power never, and even 
Silence would fain assert a toper's glory which neither 
his head nor his spirits are capable of. I may pass 
over the smoothpated eidolon, Master Dumbleton, who 
could bear a gentleman in hand and then stand upon 

13 • 



Comments THE SECOND PART OF 

security, but who can pass over the ever persevering 
and ever self-betraying seemHness of Hostess Quickly? 
In her care to keep up appearances as a principle of her 
profession as ostensible tavern-keeper, in her sober man- 
nered anxiety to conserve the seemly for herself as for 
all about her, she is forever falling into unhappinesses 
of expression that suggest the state of the fact even to 
those who would forget it, commits herself coolly to the 
plumpest asseverations of overdone lies, or in all sim- 
plicity and pure intent to dsiclaim her true character and 
calling, admits and publishes it in absolute terms. The 
Page's description of Mistress Doll Tearsheet as a proper 
gentlewoman and a kinswoman of his master's, evidently 
came from a Mistress Quickly not unrelated to the 
housekeeper of Dr. Caius, who reserved the world's 
truth for old folks who know the world and held it con- 
science still to put off children with a nayword. The 
well-intentioned creature would be a hypocrite if she 
could, and indeed she seems to have made some prog- 
ress in making a first dupe of herself; but here it is like 
to end, for more than good will is required in the mat- 
ter, and infirm dialectics and haphazard haste convict her 
from her own lips by inevitable propensity, and leave her 
no chance of a second. Mrs. Quickly and Doll Tear- 
sheet embody between them the moral, if we may so speak, 
of the London Police reports and all sheets of night 
charges from the days of Queen Elizabeth to the Times 
newspaper of this current date. 

Lloyd: Critical Essays on the Plays of Shakespeare. 

IX. 

The Two Parts and the Whole. 

It [2 Henry IV.] is inferior to its predecessor [i 
Henry /F.] as a work of dramatic art, though, in my 
judgement, not at all so as a work of genius. ... Its 
noble-r characters have much less of chivalric and ro- 

24 



KING HENRY IV. Comments 

mantic splendour, and its action less oi stage interest 
and effect, and its poetry far less of kindling- and ex- 
citing fervour. On this account it has long disappeared 
as a whole from the stage; but portions of it are familiar 
even to those whose knowledge of Shakespeare is ac- 
quired only from the stage, having been interwoven by 
Cibber, or some other manufacturer of the " acted 
drama," into the action of Richard III. Other portions, 
like the King's invocation to sleep, the Archbishop's 
meditation on the instability of popular favour. Lady 
Percy's lament for Hotspur, and the last scene between- 
the Prince and his father, have sunk deep into thousands 
of hearts, and live in the general memory. Nor is the 
entire graver dialogue unworthy of these gems with 
which it is studded; for it is throughout rich in thought, 
noble and impressive in style, and the characters it pre- 
sents are drawn, if not with the same bold freedom and 
pointed invention as in the first part, yet with undimin- 
ished truth and discrimination. 

But on the comic side of the play there is no flagging 
either of spirit or invention. On the contrary, the 
humour, if perhaps less lively and sparkling, is still more 
rich and copious. It overflows on all sides. The return 
of a character of comic invention in a second part is a 
hard test of originality and fertility, which even Don 
Quixote and Gil Bias did not stand without some loss of 
the charm of our first acquaintance with them. Falstaff s 
humour, as well that which he exhibits in his character 
as that which he utters, is more copious, more luxuriously 
mirthful, and — if the phrase may be allowed — more 
unctuous than ever. Those of his companions, whose ac- 
quaintance we made in the first part, lose nothing of their 
droll effect; and our new acquaintances. Shallow, Silence, 
etc., are still more amusing. The scenes in which these 
last figure give us a delightful peep into the habits of the 
rural gentry of old England, and, as mere history, are 
worth volumes of antiquarian research. 

Verplanck : The Illustrated Shakespeare. 

IS 



Comments THE SECOND PART OF 

None of Shakspeare's plays are more read than the 
first and second parts of Henry IV. Perhaps no author 
has ever, in two plays, afforded so much delight. The 
great events are interesting, for the fate of kingdoms de- 
pends upon them ; the slightest occurrences are divert- 
ing, and, except one or two, sufficiently probable. The in- 
cidents are multiplied with wonderful fertility of inven- 
tion, and the characters diversified with the utmost nicety 
of discernment and the profoundest skill in the nature of 
man. 
Johnson: General Observations on Shakspeare's Plays. 



The second part of Henry n\ is at once the supple- 
ment and epilogue of the first part, and the preparation 
for the ensuing dramatic history of Henry V. We may, 
I think, still detect some traces of the manner in which 
the materials for the history of Henry IV. developed and 
expanded in the Poet's mind until they became not 
simply too bulky for a single play, but until they divided 
by natural polarity into distinct groups and resulted in 
the double birth of contrasted but still closely connected 
and correlative plays. Thus, in the second play we find 
Falstaff passing through Gloucestershire by some incred- 
ible route from London to York, a divergence far too 
wide to be accounted for by his having to take up soldiers 
in counties as he went. The incident as first imagined 
came in no doubt in the earlier sequence of events when 
King Henrv despatching forces toward Wales tells his 
son " and, Harry, you shall march through Gloucester- 
shire " ; a natural course for Falstaff to follow, and so for 
both to encounter in the Poet's own Warwickshire on the 
road near Coventry. The consistency on this view holds 
on and the next stage is indicated towards Sutton Cold- 
field, picturesque municipality still lying under as bright 
a sky as of old, beside the beauty and privilege of its 
wide pastoral park, though the smoke and clamours of 
Birmingham reach the very edge of its horizon. Hence 

i6 



KING HENRY IV. Comments 

we cannot doubt that the tattered troop that Falstaff 
sends to Coventry — thus we still specify a dead cut — 
comprised in the Poet's first invention Wart and his 
wardrobe, to the process of whose enlistment the 
soliloquy on the abuse of the king's press applies so en- 
tirely, and that Shallow and his household were already 
shaped and shadowed forth, though afterwards for ample 
reasons transferred to the later scene. 

Lloyd: Critical Essays on the Plays of Shakespeare. 



The political movements of Henry IV.'s reign, as told 
by Shakespeare's standard authorities, Holinshed and 
Hall, offered little salient matter for the dramatist. 
Nevertheless it is here that he most decisively abandons 
the boldly reconstructive methods of Marlowe; here that 
he unfolds with most consummate power his own 
method, of creating character and detail within the limits 
of a general fidelity to recorded fact. His most direct di- 
vergences from the tale of the chroniclers amount to 
little more than compressions of isolated and scattered 
event. But he supplements their tale and interprets their 
silence with a prodigal magnificence of invention unap- 
proached in the other Histories. Hence Henry IV. pre- 
sents analogies to the group of brilliant Comedies with 
which it was nearly contemporary, not only in its obvious 
wealth of comic genius, but in the points at which this is 
exercised. The historic matter, like the serious story of 
Twelfth Night or Much Ado, is taken over without sub- 
stantial change; while within its meshes plays a lambent 
humour which, ostensibly subordinate and by the way, 
in reality reveals the finer significance of the derived 
story itself, and forms, as literature, the crowning glory of 
the whole. 

Herford : The Eversley Shakespeare. 



17 



DRAMATIS PERSONAE. 

Rumour, the Presenter. 
King Henry the Fourth. 
Henry, Prince of Wales, "^ 

afterwards King Henry V., \ 

Thomas, Duke of Clarence, ^ his sons. 

Prince John of Lancaster, \ 

Prince Humphrey of Gloucester, J 
Earl of Warwick, 
Earl of Westmoreland. 
Earl of Surrey. 
Gower. 
Harcourt. 
Blunt. 

Lord Chief-Justice of the King's Bench. 
A Servant of the Chief-Justice. 
Earl of Northumberland. 
Scroop, Archbishop of York. 
Lord Mowbray. 
Lord Hastings. 
Lord Bardolph. 
Sir John Colville, 

Travers and Morton, retainers of Northumberland. 
Sir John Falstaff, 
His Page. 
Bardolph. 
Pistol. 
Poins. 
^ Peto. 

iSttftALL'DW, , • ,• 

7, ' country justices. 

Silence, 

Davy, servant to Shallow. 

Mouldy, Shadow, Wart, Feeble, and Bullcalf, recruits. 

Fang and Snare, sheritf's oiHccrs. 

Lady Northumberland. 

Lady Percy. 

Mistress Quickly, hostess of a tavern in Eastcheap. 

Doll Tearsheet. 

Lords and Attendants ; Porter. Drawers. Beadles, Grooms, etc. 
A Dancer, speaker of the Epilogue. 

Scene: England. 
18 



The Second Part of 
King Henry IV. 

INDUCTION. 

Warkivorth. Before the castle. 

Enter Rumour, painted full of tongues. 

Rum. Open your ears; for which of you will stop 
The vent of hearing when loud Rumour speaks? 
I, from the orient to the drooping west, 
Making the wind my post-horse, still unfold 
The acts commenced on this ball of earth: 
Upon my tongues continual slanders ride, 
The which in every language I pronounce, 
Stufhng the ears of men with false reports. 
I speak of peace, while covert enmity 
Under the smile of safety wounds the world: lo 
And who but Rumour, who but only I, 
Make fearful musters and prepared defence. 
Whiles the big year, swoln with some other grief, 
Is thought with child by the stern tyrant war. 
And no such matter? Rumour is a pipe 
Blown by surmises, jealousies, conjectures, 
And of so easy and so plain a stop 
That the blunt monster with uncounted heads, 
The still-discordant wavering multitude, 
Can play upon it. But what need I thus 20 

My well-known body to anatomize 

19 



Act I. Sc. i. THE SECOND PART OF 

Among my household? Why is Rumour here? 

I run before King Harry's victory; 

Who in a bloody field by Shrewsbury 

Hath beaten down young Hotspur and his troops, 

Quenching the flame of bold rebellion 

Even with the rebels' blood. But what mean I 

To speak so true at first? my ofiice is 

To noise abroad that Harry Monmouth fell 

Under the wrath of noble Hotspur's sword, 30 

And that the king before the Douglas' rage 

Stoop'd his anointed head as low as death. 

This have I rumour'd through the peasant towns 

Between that royal field of Shrewsbury 

And this worm-eaten hold of ragged stone, 

Where Hotspur's father, old Northumberland, 

Lies crafty-sick: the posts come tiring on, 

And not a man of them brings other news 

Than they have learn'd of me: from Rumour's 

tongues 
They bring smooth comforts false, worse than true 

wrongs. [Exit. 40 

ACT FIRST. 

Scene I. 

The same. 
Enter Lord Bardolph. 
L. Bard. Who keeps the gate here, ho? 
TJic porter opens the gate. 

Where is the earl? 
Port. What shall I say you are? 
L. Bard. Tell thou the earl 

20 



KING HENRY IV. Act I. Sc. i. 

That the Lord Bardolph doth attend him here. 
Port. His lordship is walk'd forth into the orchard: 
Please it your honour, knock but at the gate, 
And he himself will answer. 

Enter Northumberland. 

L. Bard. Here comes the earl. 

[Exit Porter. 

North. What news, Lord Bardolph? every minute now 
Should be the father of some stratagem: 
The times are wild; contention, like a horse 
Full of high feeding, madly hath broke loose, lo 

And bears down all before him. 

L. Bard. Noble earl, 

I bring you certain news from Shrewsbury. 

North. Good, an God will! 

L. Bard. As good as heart can wish: 

The king is almost wounded to the death; 
And, in the fortune of m.j lord your son, 
Prince Harry slain outright; and both the Blunts 
Kill'd by the hand of Douglas; young Prince John 
And Westmoreland and Stafford fled the field; 
And Harry Monmouth's brawn, the hulk Sir John, 
Is prisoner to your son: O, such a day, 20 

So fought, so follow'd and so fairly won, 
Came not till now to dignify the times. 
Since Caesar's fortunes! 

North. How is this derived? 

Saw you the field? came you from Shrewsbury? 

L. Bard. I spake with one, my lord, that came from 
thence, 
A gentleman well bred and of good name, 



Act I. Sc. i. THE SECOND PART OF 

That freely render'd me these news for true. 
North. Here comes my servant Travers, whom I sent 
On Tuesday last to listen after news. 

Enter Travers. 

L. Bard. My lord, I over-rode him on the way : 30 

And he is furnish'd with no certainties 
More than he haply may retail from me. 

North. Now, Travers, what good tidings comes with you? 

Tra. My lord, Sir John Umfrevile turn'd me back 
With joyful tidings; and, being better horsed, 
Out-rode me. After him came spurring hard 
A gentleman, almost forspent with speed. 
That stopp'd by me to breathe his bloodied horse. 
He ask'd the way to Chester; and of him 
I did demand what news from Shrewsbury: 40 

He told me that rebellion had bad luck, 
And that young Harry Percy's spur was cold. 
With that, he gave his able horse the head. 
And bending forward struck his armed heels 
Against the panting sides of his poor jade 
Up to the rowel-head, and starting so 
He seem'd in running to devour the way, 
Staying no longer question. 

North. Ha! Again: 

Said he young Harry Percy's spur was cold? 

Of Hotspur Coldspur? that rebellion 50 

Had met ill luck? 

L. Bard. My lord, I '11 tell you what; 

If my young lord your son have not the day, 
Upon mine honour, for a silken point 
I '11 give my barony : never talk of it. 
22 



KING HENRY IV. Act I. Sc. i. 

North. Why should that gentleman that rode by Travers 
Give them such instances of loss? 

L. Bard. Who, he? 

He was some hilding fellow that had stolen 
The horse he rode on, and, upon my life. 
Spoke at a venture. Look, here comes more news. 

Enter Morton. 

North. Yea, this man's brow, like to a title-leaf, 60 

Foretells the nature of a tragic volume: 
So looks the strond whereon the imperious flood 
Hath left a witness'd usurpation. 
Say, IMorton, didst thou come from Shrewsbury? 

Mor. I ran from Shrewsbury, my noble lord; 
Where hateful death put on his ugliest mask 
To fright our party. 

North. How doth my son and brother? 

Thou tremblest; and the whiteness in thy cheek 
Is apter than thy tongue to tell thy errand. 
Even such a man, so faint, so spiritless, 70 

So dull, so dead in look, so woe-begone. 
Drew Priam's curtain in the dead of night. 
And would have told him half his Troy was burnt; 
But Priam found the fire ere he his tongue. 
And I my Percy's death ere thou report'st it. 
This thou wouldst say, ' Your son did thus and 

thus ; 
Your brother thus: so fought the noble Douglas: ' 
Stopping my greedy ear with their bold deeds : 
But in the end, to stop my ear indeed. 
Thou hast a sigh to blow away this praise. 80 

Ending with ' Brother, son, and all are dead.' 

23 



Act I. Sc. i. THE SECOND PART OF 

Alor. Douglas is living, and your brother, yet; 
But, for my lord your son, — 

North. Why, he is dead. 

See what a ready tongue suspicion hath! 
He that but fears the thing he would not know 
Hath by instinct knowledge from others' eyes 
That what he fear'd is chanced. Yet speak, Morton; 
Tell thou an earl his divination lies. 
And I will take it as a sweet disgrace. 
And make thee rich for doing me such wrong. 90 

Mor. You are too great to be by me gainsaid: 
Your spirit is too true, your fears too certain. 

North. Yet, for all this, say not that Percy's dead. 
I see a strange confession in thine eye: 
Thou shakest thy head, and hold'st it fear or sin 
To speak a truth. If he be slain, say so ; 
The tongue offends not that reports his death: 
And he doth sin that doth belie the dead. 
Not he which says the dead is not alive. 
Yet the first bringer of unwelcome news 100 

Hath but a losing office, and his tongue 
Sounds ever after as a sullen bell, 
Remember'd tolling a departing friend. 

L. Bard. I cannot think, my lord, your son is dead. 

Alor. I am sorry I should force you to believe 
That which I would to God I had not seen; 
But these mine eyes saw him in bloody state, 
Rendering faint quittance, wearied and outbreathed, 
To Harry Monmouth ; whose swift wrath beat down 
The never-daunted Percy to the earth, no 

From whence with life he never more sprung up. 
In few, his death, whose spirit lent a fire 

24 



KiNb HENRY IV. Act I. Sc. i. 

Even to the dullest peasant in his camp, 

Being bruited once, took fire and heat away 

From the best temper'd courage in his troops; 

For from his metal was his party st'eel'd; 

Which once in him abated, all the rest 

Turn'd on themselves, like dull and heavy lead: 

And as the thing that 's heavy in itself, 

Upon enforcement flies with greatest speed, 120 

So did our men, heavy in Hotspur's loss, 

Lend to this weight such lightness with their fear 

That arrows fled not swifter toward their aim 

Than did our soldiers, aiming at their safety. 

Fly from the field. Then was that noble Worcester 

Too soon ta'en prisoner; and that furious Scot, 

The bloody Douglas, whose well-labouring sword 

Had three times slain the appearance of the king 

'Gan vail his stomach and did grace the shame 

Of those that turn'd their backs, and in his flight, 130 

Stumbling in fear, we took. The sum of all 

Is that the king hath won, and hath sent out 

A speedy power to encounter you, my lord, 

Under the conduct of young Lancaster 

And Westmoreland. This is the news at full. 

North. For this I shall have time enough to mourn. 
In poison there is physic ; and these news, 
Having been well, that would have made me sick. 
Being sick, have in some measure made me well: 
And as the wretch, whose fever-weaken'd joints, 140 
Like strengthless hinges, buckle under life, 
Impatient of his fit, breaks like a fire 
Out of his keeper's arms, even so my limbs, 
Weaken'd with grief, being now enraged with grief, 

25 



Act I. Sc. i. THE SECOND PART OF 

Are thrice themselves. Hence, therefore, thou nice 

crutcli ! 
A scaly gauntlet now with joints of steel 
Must glove this hand: and hence, thou sickly quoif! 
Thou are a guard too wanton for the head 
Which princes, fiesh'd with conquest, aim to hit. 
Now bind my brows with iron ; and approach 150 
The ragged'st hour that time and spite dare bring 
To frown upon the enraged Northumberland! 
Let heaven kiss earth! now let not Nature's hand 
Keep the wild flood confined! let order die! 
And let this world no longer be a stage 
To feed contention in a lingering act; 
But let one spirit of the first-born Cain 
Reign in all bosoms, that, each heart being set 
On bloody courses, the rude scene may end, 
And darkness be the burier of the dead! 160 

Tra. This strained passion doth you wrong, my lord. 

L. Bar-d. Sweet earl, divorce not wisdom from your 
honour. 

Mor. The lives of all your loving complices 

Lean on your health ; the which, if you give o'er 
To stormy passion, must perforce decay. 
You cast the event of war, my noble lord. 
And summ'd the account of chance, before you said 
' Let us make head.' It was your presurmise, 
That, in the dole of blows, your son might drop: 
You knew he walk'd o'er perils, on an Q(\gt, 170 

More likely to fall in than to get o'er; 
You were advised his flesh was capable 
Of wounds and scars, and that his forward spirit 
Would lift him where most trade of danger ranged: 
26 



KING HENRY IV. Act I. Sc. i. 

Yet did you say ' Go forth ' : and none of this. 
Though strongly apprehended, could restrain 
The stiff-borne action: what hath then befallen, 
Or what hath this bold enterprise brought forth, 
More than that being which was like to be? 

L. Bard. We all that are engaged to this loss i8o 

Knew that we ventured on such dangerous seas 
That if we wrought out life 'twas ten to one ; 
And yet we ventured, for the gain proposed 
Choked the respect of likely peril fear'd; 
And since we are o'erset, venture again. 
Come, we will all put forth, body and goods, 

Mor. Tis more than time: and, my most noble lord, 
I hear for certain, and do speak the truth, 
The gentle Archbishop of York is up 
A\'itli well-appointed powers: he is a man 190 

Who with a double surety binds his followers. 
Aly lord your son had only but the corpse, 
But shadows and the shows of men, to fight; 
For that same word, rebellion, did divide 
The action of their bodies from their souls; 
And they did fight with queasiness, constrain'd, 
As men drink potions, that their weapons only 
Seem'd on our side; but, for their spirits and souls. 
This word, rebellion, it had froze them up, 
As fish are in a pond. But now the bishop 200 

Turns insurrection to religion: 
Supposed sincere and holy in his thoughts. 
He 's followed both with body and with mind; 
And doth enlarge his rising with the blood 
Of fair King Richard, scraped from Pomfret stones; 
Derives from heaven his quarrel and his cause; 

27 



Act I. Sc. ii. THE SECOND PART OF 

Tells them he doth bestride a bleeding land, 
Gasping for life under great Bolingbroke; 
And more and less do flock to follow him. 
North. I knew of this before; but, to speak truth, 210 
This present grief had wiped it from my mind. 
Go in with me; and counsel every man 
The aptest way for safety and revenge: 
Get posts and letters, and make friends with speed: 
Never so few, and never yet more need. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene II. 

London. A street. 

Enter Falstaif, ivith his Page bearing his 
sivord and buckler. 

FoL Sirrah, you giant, what says the doctor to my 
water? 

Page. He said, sir, the water itself was a good 
healthy water; but, for the party that owed 
it, he might have moe diseases than he knew 
for. 

Fal. Men of all sorts take a pride to gird at me: the 
brain of this foolish-compounded clay, man, is 
not able to invent any thing that tends to 
laughter, more than I invent or is invented on 10 
me : I am not only witty in myself, but the cause 
that wit is in other men. I do here walk before 
thee like a sow that hath overwhelmed all her 
litter but one. If the prince put thee into m)' 
service for any other reason than to set me oflf, 
why then I have no judgement. Thou whoreson 
28 



KING HENRY IV. Act I. Sc. ii. 

mandrake, thou art fitter to be worn in my cap 
than to wait at my heels. I was never manned 
with an agate till now : but I will inset you 
neither in gold nor silver, but in vile apparel, 
and send you back again to your master, for a 
jewel, — the juvenal, the prince your master, 
whose chin is not yet fledged. I will sooner 
have a beard grow in the palm of my hand than 
he shall get one on his cheek ; and yet he will 
not stick to say his face is a face-royal : God 
may finish it when he will, 'tis not a hair amiss 
yet: he may keep it still a face-royal, for a 
barber shall never earn sixpence out of it ; and 
yet he '11 be crowing as if he had writ man ever 30 
since his father was a bachelor. He may keep 
his own grace, but he's almost out of mine, I 
can assure him. What said Master Dombledom 
about the satin for my short cloak and my slops ? 

Page. He said, sir, you should procure him better 
assurance than Bardolph : he would not take his 
band and yours ; he liked not the security. 

Fal. Let him be damned, like the glutton ! pray God 
his tongue be hotter ! A whoreson Achitophel ! 
a rascally yea-forsooth knave ! to bear a gentle- 40 
man in hand, and then stand upon security! 
The whoreson smooth-pates do now wear 
nothing but high shoes, and bunches of keys 
at their girdles ; and if a man is through with 
them in honest taking up, then they must stand 
upon security. I had as lief they would put 
ratsbane in my mouth as offer to stop it with 
security. I looked a' should have sent me two 
29 



Act I. Sc. ii. THE SECOND PART OF 

and twenty yards of satin, as I am a true knight, 
and he sends me security. Well, he may sleep 50 
in security ; for he hath the horn of abundance, 
and the lightness of his wife shines through it : 
and yet cannot he see, though he have his own 
lanthorn to light him. Where 's Bardolph ? 

Page. He 's gone into Smithfield to buy your worship 
a horse. 

Fal. I bought him in Paul's, and he '11 buy me a 
horse in Smithfield : an I could get me but a 
wife in the stews, I were manned, horsed, and 
wived. 60 

Enter the Lord Chief Justice and Servant. 

Page. Sir, here comes the nobleman that committed 
the prince for striking him about Bardolph. 

Fal. Wait close ; I will not see him. 

Ch. Just. What 's he that goes there? 

Serv. Falstaff, an 't please your lordship. 

Ch. Just. He that was in question for the robbery ? 

Serz'. He, my lord : but he hath since done good 
service at Shrewsbury ; and, as I hear, is now 
going with some charge to the Lord John of 
Lancaster. yo 

Ch. Just. W^hat, to York? Call him back again. 

Serz'. Sir John Falstafi* ! 

Fal. Boy, tell him I am deaf. 

Page. You must speak louder ; my master is deaf. 

Ch. Just. I am sure he is, to the hearing of any 
thing good. Go, pluck him by the elbow ; I 
must speak wnth him. 

Serz'. Sir John. 



KING HENRY IV. Act I. Sc. ii. 

Fal. What ! a young knave, and begging ! Is there 

not wars? is there not employment? doth not 80 
the king lack subjects? do not the rebels need 
soldiers? Though it be a shame to be on any 
side but one, it is worse shame to beg than to 
be on the worst side, were it worse than the 
name of rebellion can tell how to make it. 

Scrv. You mistake me, sir. 

Fal. Why, sir, did I say you were an honest man ? 
setting my knighthood and my soldiership aside, 
I had lied in my throat, if I had said so. 

Serv. I pray you, sir, then set your knighthood and 90 
your soldiership aside ; and give me leave to tell 
you, you lie in your throat, if you say I am any 
other than an honest man. 

Fal. I give thee leave to tell me so ! I lay aside that 
which grows to me! If thou gettest any leave 
of me, hang me ; if thou takest leave, thou wert 
better be hanged. You hunt counter : hence ! 
avaunt ! 

Serv. Sir, my lord would speak with you. 

Ch. Just. Sir John Falstafif, a word with you. 100 

Fal. My good lord ! God give your lordship good 
time of day. I am glad to see your lordship 
abroad : I heard say your lordship was sick : I 
hope your lordship goes abroad by advice. Your 
lordship, though not clean past your youth, hath 
yet some smack of age in you, some relish of the 
saltness of time : and I most humbly beseech your 
lordship to have a reverend care of your health. 

CJi. Just. Sir John, I sent for you before your ex- 
pedition to Shrewsbury. no 

31 



Act I. Sc. ii. THE SECOND PART OF 

Fal. An 't please your lordship, I hear his majesty is 
returned with some discomfort from Wales. 

Ch. Just. I talk not of his majesty: you would not 
come when I sent for you. 

Fal. And I hear, moreover, his highness is fallen into 
this same whoreson apoplexy. 

Ch. Just. Well, God mend him ! I pray you, let me 
speak with you. 

Fal. This apoplexy is, as I take it, a kind of lethargy, 

an 't please your worship; a kind of sleeping in 120 
the blood, a whoreson tingling. 

Ch. Just. What tell you me of it ? be it as it is. 

Fal. Tt hath its original from much grief, from study 
and perturbation of the brain : I have read the 
cause of his effects in Galen : it is a kind of 
deafness. 

Ch. Just. I think you are fallen into the disease ; for 
you hear not what I say to you. 

Fal. Very well, my lord, very well : rather, an 't 

please you, it is the disease of not listening, the 130 
malady of not marking, that I am troubled 
withal. 

Ch. Just. To punish you by the heels would amend 
the attention of your ears ; and I care not if I do 
become your physician. 

Fal. I am as poor as Job, my lord, but not so patient : 
your lordship may minister the potion of impris 
onment to me in respect of poverty ; but how I 
should be your patient to follow your prescrip- 
tions, the wise may make some dram of a scruple, 140 
or indeed a scruple itself. 

Ch. Just. I sent for you, when there were matters 

32 



KING HENRY IV. Act I. Sc. ii. 

against you for your life, to come speak with 

me. 
Fal. As I was then advised by my learned counsel in 

the laws of this land-service, I did not come. 
Ch. Just. Well, the truth is. Sir John, you live in 

great infamy. 
Fal. He that buckles him in my belt cannot live in 

less. 
Ch. Just. Your means are very slender, and your 



150 



Pal. I would it were otherwise ; I would my means 

were greater, and my waist slenderer. 
CJi. Just. You have misled the youthful prince. 
Fal. The young prince hath misled me : I am the 

fellow with the great belly, and he my dog. 
Ch. Just. Well, I am loath to gall a new-healed 

wound : your day's service at Shrewsbury hath 

a little gilded over your night's exploit on Gads- 160 

hill : you may thank the unquiet time for your 

quiet o'er-posting that action. 
Fal My lord? 
CJi. Just. But since all is well, keep it so : wake not 

a sleeping wolf. 
Fal. To wake a wolf is as bad as to smell a fox. 
Ch. Just. What ! you are as a candle, the better part 

burnt out. 
Fal. A wassail candle, my lord, all tallow : if I did 

say of wax, my growth would approve the 170 

truth. 
Ch. Just. There is not a white hair on your face but 

should have his effect of gravity. 
Fal. His effect of gravy, gravy, gravy. 

33 



Act I. Sc. ii. THE SECOND PART OF 

Ch. Just. Yon follow the young prince up and down, 
like his ill angel. 

Fal. Not so, my lord ; your ill angel is light ; but I 
hope he that looks upon me will take me with- 
out weighing : and yet, in some respects, I grant, 
I cannot go: I cannot tell. Virtue is of so little i8o 
regard in these costermonger times that true 
valour is turned bear-herd : pregnancy is made 
a tapster, and hath his quick wit wasted in giving 
reckonings : all the other gifts appertinent to 
man, as the malice of this age shapes them, are 
not worth a gooseberry. You that are old con- 
sider not the capacities of us that are young; 
you do measure the heat of our livers with the 
bitterness of your galls: and we that are in the 
vaward of our youth, I must confess, are wags 190 
too. 

Ch. Just. Do you set down your name in the scroll 
of youth, that are written down old with all the 
characters of age^ Have you not a moist eye? 
a dry hand? a yellow^ cheek? a white beard? a 
decreasing leg ? an increasing belly ? is not your 
voice broken? your wind short? your chin 
double? your wit single? and every part about 
you blasted with antiquity ? and will you yet call • 
yourself young? Fie, fie, fie, Sir John ! 200 

Fal. My lord, I was born about three of the clock 
in the afternoon, with a white head and some- 
thing a round belly. For my voice, I have lost 
it with halloing and singing of anthems. To 
approve my youth further, I will not : the truth 
is, I am only old in judgement and understand 

34 



KING HENRY IV. Act I. Sc. ii. 

ing; and he that will caper with me for a 
thousand marks, let him lend me the money, and 
have at him. For the box of the ear that the 
prince gave you, he gave it like a rude prince, 210 
and you took it like a sensible lord. I have 
checked him for it, and the young lion repents; 
marry, not in ashes and sackcloth, but in new 
silk and old sack. 

CJi. J list. Well, God send the prince a better com- 
panion ! 

Pal. God send the companion a better prince ! I can- 
not rid my hands of him. 

CJi. Just. Well, the king hath severed you and Prince 

Harrv : I hear you are going with Lord John of 220 
Lancaster against the Archbishop and the Earl of 
Northumberlan d. 

Fal. Yea ; I thank your pretty sweet wit for it. But 
look you pray, all you that kiss my lady Peace at 
home, that our armies join not in a hot day ; for, 
by the Lord, I take but two shirts out with me, 
and I mean not to sweat extraordinarily : if it be 
a hot day, and I brandish any thing but a bottle, 
I would I might never spit white again. There 
is not a dangerous action can peep out his head. 230 
but I am thrust upon it : well, I cannot last ever : 
but it was alway yet the trick of our English 
nation, if they have a good thing, to make it too 
common. If ye will needs say I am an old man, 
you should give me rest. I would to God my 
name were not so terrible to the enemy as it is : 
I were better to be eaten to death wnth a rust than 
to be scoured to nothing with perpetual motion. 

35 



Act I. Sc. li. THE SECOND PART OF 

Ch. Just. Well, be honest, be honest ; and God bless 

your expedition ! 240 

Fal. Will your lordship lend me a thousand pound to 
furnish' me forth ? 

Ch. Just. Not a penny, not a penny ; you are too im- 
patient to bear crosses. Fare you well : com- 
mend me to my cousin Westmoreland. 

[Exetmt Chief Justice and Servant. 

Fal. If I do, fillip me with a three-man beetle. A 
man can no more separate age and covetousness 
than a' can part young limbs and lechery : but 
the gout galls the one, and the pox pinches the 
other ; and so both the degrees prevent my 250 
curses. Boy ! 

Page. Sir? 

Fal. What money is in my purse ? 

Page. Seven groats and two pence. 

Fal. I can get no remedy against this consumption of 
the purse : borrowing only lingers and lingers it 
out, but the disease is incurable. Go bear this 
letter to my Lord of Lancaster; this to the 
prince ; this to the Earl of Westmoreland ; and 
this to old Mistress Ursula, whom I have 260 
weekdy sworn to marry since I perceived the first 
white hair on my chin. About it : you know 
where to find me. [Exit Page.] A pox of this 
gout ! or, a gout of this pox ! for the one or the 
other plays the rogue with my great toe. 'Tis 
no matter if I do halt ; I have the wars for my 
colour, and my pension shall seem the more 
reasonable. A good wit will make use of any 
thing : I will turn diseases to commodity. [Exit, 

36 



KING HENRY IV. Act I. Sc. iii. 

Scene III. 

York. The Archbishop's palace. 

Ejuter the Archbishop, the Lords Hastings, Mozvbray, 
and Bardolph. 

Arch. Thus have you heard our cause and kno\^i our 
means ; 
And, my most noble friends, I pray you all, 
Speak plainly your opinions of our hopes : 
And first, lord marshal, what say you to it ? 

Mozi'b. I well allow the occasion of our arms ; 
But gladly would be better satisfied 
How in our means we should advance ourselves 
To look with forehead bold and big enough 
Upon the power and puissance of the king. 

Hast. Our present musters grow upon the file lo 

To five and twenty thousand men of choice ; 
And our supplies live largely in the hope 
Of great Northumberland, whose bosom burns 
With an incensed fire of injuries. 

L. Bard. The question then, Lord Hastings, standeth thus ; 
Whether our present five and twenty thousand 
May hold up head without Northumberland ? 

Hast. With him, we may. 

L. Bard. Yea, marry, there 's the point : 

But if without him we be thought too feeble, 
]\Iy judgement is, we should not step too far 20 

Till we had his assistance by the hand ; 
For in a theme so bloody-faced as this 
Conjecture, expectation, and surmise 
Of aids incertain should not be admitted. 

Arch. 'Tis very true. Lord Bardolph ; for indeed 

37 



Act I. Sc. iii. THE SECOND PART OF 

It was young Hotspur's case at Shrewsbury. 
L. Bard. It was, my lord ; who Hned himself with hope, 
Eating the air on promise of supply, 
Flattering himself in project of a power 
Much smaller than the smallest of his thoughts. 30 
And so, with great imagination 
Proper to madmen, led his powers to death, 
And winking leap'd into destruction. 

Hast. But, by your leave, it never yet did hurt 
To lay down likelihoods and forms of hope. 

L. Bard. Yes, in this present quality of war ; 

Indeed the instant action — a cause on foot — 

Lives so in hope as in an early spring. 

We see the appearing buds ; which to prove fruit, 

Hope gives not so much warrant as despair 40 

That frost will bite them. When we mean to build. 

We first survey the plot, then draw the model ; 

And when we see the figure of the house. 

Then must we rate the cost of the erection ; 

\Miich if we find outweighs ability, 

What do we then but draw anew the model 

In fewer offices, or at least desist 

To build at all ? IMuch more, in this great work, 

Which is almost to pluck a kingdom down 

And set another up, should we survey 50 

The plot of situation and the model, 

Consent upon a sure foundation. 

Question surveyors, know our own estate, 

How able such a work to undergo. 

To weigh against his opposite ; or else 

We fortify in paper and in figures, 

Using the names of men instead of men : 

38 



KING HENRY IV. Act I. Sc. iii. 

Like one that draws the model of a house 
Beyond his power to build it; who, half through, 
Gives o'er and leaves his part-created cost 60 

A naked subject to the weeping clouds. 
And waste for churlish winter's tyranny. 

Hast. Grant that our hopes, yet likely of fair birth, 
Should be still-born, and that we now possess'^ 
The utmost man of expectation, 
I think we are a body strong enough, 
Even as we are, to equal with the king. 

L. Bard. AMiat, is the king but five and twenty thousand ? 

Hast. To us no more ; nay, not so much. Lord Bardoloh. 
For his divisions, as the times do brawl, 70 

Are in three heads: one power against the French, 
And one against Glendower; perforce a third 
Must take up us: so is the unfirm king 
In three divided; and his coffers sound 
With hollow poverty and emptiness. 

Arch. That he should draw his several strengths together 
And come against us in full puissance. 
Need not be dreaded. 

Hast. If he should do so. 

He leaves his back unarm'd, the French and Welsh 
Baying him at the heels : never fear that. 80 

L. Bard. Who is it like should lead his forces hither? 

Hast. The Duke of Lancaster and Westmoreland; 

Against the Welsh, himself and Harry Monmouth: 
But who is substituted 'gainst the French, 
I have no certain notice. 

Arch. Let us on, 

And pubHsh the occasion of our arms. 
The commonwealth is sick of their own choice; 

39 



Act I. Sc. iii. THE SECOND PART OF 

Their over-greedy love hath surfeited: 

An habitation giddy and unsure 

Hath he that buildeth on the vulgar heart. 90 

O thou fond many, with what loud applause 

Didst thou beat heaven with blessing Bolingbroke, 

Before he was what thou wouldst have him be! 

And being now trimm'd in thine own desires, 

Thou, beastly feeder, art so full of him, 

That thou provokest thyself to cast him up. 

So, so, thou common dog, didst thou disgorge 

Thy glutton bosom of the royal Richard; 

And now thou wouldst eat thy dead vomit up, 99 

And howl'st to find it. What trust is in these times? 

They that, when Richard lived, would have him die, 

Are now become enamour'd on his grave: 

Thou, that threw'st dust upon his goodly head 

When through proud London he came sighing on 

After the admired heels of BoHngbroke, 

Criest now ' O earth, yield us that king again. 

And take thou this! ' O thoughts of men accursed! 

Past and to come seems best; tilings present, worst. 

Mozi'b. Shall we go draw our numbers, and set on? 

Hast. We are time's subjects, and time bids be gone, no 

[Exeunt. 



46 



KING HENRY IV. Act II. Sc. i. 

ACT SECOND. 

Scene I. 

London. A street. 

Enter Hostess, Fang and his Boy zvith her, and 
Snare foUozuing. 

Host. Master Fang, have you entered the action ? 

Fang. It is entered. 

Host. Where 's your yeoman? Is 't a lusty yeoman ? 
will a' stand to 't ? 

Fang. Sirrah, where 's Snare ? 

Host. O Lord, ay! good Master Snare. 

Snare. Here, here. 

Fang. Snare, we must arrest Sir John Falstaff. 

Host. Yea, good Master Snare ; I have entered him 

and all. ' lo 

Snare. It may chance cost some of us our lives, for 
he will stab. 

Host. Alas the day! take heed of him; he stabbed 
me in mine own house, and that most beastly: 
in good faith, he cares not what mischief he 
does, if his weapon be out: he will foin like 
any devil ; he will spare neither man, woman, 
nor child. 

Fang. If I can close with him, I care not for his 
thrust. 

Host. No, nor I neither : I '11 be at your elbow. 20 

Fang. An I but fist him once ; an a' come but within 
my vice, — 

Host. I am undone by his going; I warrant you, 
he 's an infinite thing upon my score. Good Mas- 
ter Fang, hold him sure : good Master Snare, let 

41 



Act II. Sc. i. THE SECOND PART OF 

him not 'scape. A' comes continually to Pie- 
corner — saving your manhoods — to buy a saddle ; 
and he is indited to dinner to the Lubber's-head 
in Lumbert street, to Master Smooth's the silk- 
man^: I pray ye, since my exion is entered and my 30 
case so openly known to the world, let him be 
brought in to his answer. A hundred mark is a 
long one for a poor lone woman to bear : and I 
have borne, and borne, and borne ; and have 
been fubbed off, and fubbed off, and fubbed off, 
from this day to that day, that it is a shame to be 
thought on. There is no honesty in such deal- 
ing; unless a woman should be made an ass and 
a beast, to bear every knave's wrong. Yonder he 
comes ; and that arrant malmsev-nose knave, 40 
Bardolph, with him. Do your offices, do your 
offices : Master Fang and Master Snare, do me, 
do me, do me your offices. 

Enter Falstaff, Page, and Bardolph. 

Fal. How now ! whose mare 's dead ? what 's the 
matter ? 

Fang. Sir John, I arrest you at the suit of ^listress 
Quickly. 

Fal. Away, varlets ! Draw, Bardolph : cut me off the 
villain's head : throw the quean in the channel. 

Host. Throw me in the channel ! I "11 throw thee 

in the channel. Wilt thou? wilt thou? thou 50 
bastardly rogue! Murder, murder! Ah, thou 
honey-suckle villain ! Wilt thou kill God's officers 
and the king's? Ah, thou honey-seed rogue! 
thou art a honey-seed, a man-queller, and a 
woman -quel ler. 

42 



KING HENRY IV. Act II. Sc. i. 

Fal. Keep them off, Bardolph. 

Fang. A rescue! a rescue! 

Host. Good people, bring a rescue or two. Thou 
wo't, wo't thou? thou wo't. wo't ta? do, do, 
thou rogue ! do, thou hemp-seed ! 60 

Fal. Away, you scuUion ! you rampaUian ! you fus- 
tilarian ! I '11 tickle your catastrophe. 

Enter the Lord Chief Justice, and his men. 

Ch. Just. What is the matter ? keep the peace here, 

ho! 
Host. Good my lord, be good to me. I beseech you, 

stand to me. 
Ch. Just. How now. Sir John ! what are you brawling 
here? 

Doth this become your place, your time and business ? 

You should have been well on your way to York. 

Stand form him, fellow : wherefore hang'st upon him ? 
Host. O my most worshipful lord, an 't please your 71 

grace, I am a poor widow of Eastcheap, and he 

is arrested at my suit. 
Ch. Just. For what sum? 
Host. It is more than for some, my lord : it is for all, 

all I have. He hath eaten me out of house and 

home ; he hath put all my substance into that fat 

belly of his : but I will have some of it out again, 

or I will ride thee o' nights like the mare. 
Fal. I think I am as like to ride the mare, if I have 80 

any vantage ground to get up. 
Ch. Just. How comes this, Sir John ? Fie ! what 

man of good temper would endure this tempest 

of exclamation ? xA-re you not ashamed to en- 

43 



Act II. Sc. i. THE SECOND PART OF 

force a poor widow to so rough a course to come 
by her own ? 

Fal. What is the gross sum that I owe thee ? 

Host. Marry, if thou wert an honest man, thyself and 
the money too. Thou didst swear to me upon a 
parcel-gilt goblet, sitting in my Dolphin-chamber, 90 
at the roud table, by a sea-coal fire, upon 
Wednesday in Wheeson week, when the prince 
broke thy head for liking his father to a singing- 
man of Windsor, thou didst swear to me then, 
as I was washing thy wound, to marry me and 
make me my lady thy wife. Canst thou deny 
it? Did not good wife Keech, the butcher's 
wife, come in then and call me gossip Quickly? 
coming in to borrow a mess of vinegar ; telling 
us she had a good dish of prawns ; whereby thou 100 
didst desire to eat some ; whereby I told thee 
they were ill for a green wound? And didst 
thou not, when she was gone down stairs, desire 
me to be no more so familiarity with such poor 
people ; saying that ere long they should call me 
madam? And didst thou not kiss me and bid 
me fetch thee thirty shillings? I put thee now 
to thy book-oath : deny it, if thou canst. 

Fal. IMy lord, this is a poor mad soul ; and she says 

up and down the town that her eldest son is like no 
you: she hath been in good case, and the truth 
is, poverty hath distracted her. But for these 
foolish officers, I beseech you I may have redress 
against them. 

Ch. Just. Sir John, Sir John, I am well acquainted 
with your manner of wrenching the true cause 

44 



KING HENRY IV. Act II. Sc. i. 

the false way. It is not a confident brow, nor 
the throng of words that come with such more 
than impudent sauciness from you, can thrust me 
from a level consideration : you have, as it ap- 120 
pears to me, practised upon the easy-yielding 
spirit of this woman, and made her serve your 
uses both in purse and in person. 

Host. Yea, in truth, my lord. 

Cli. Just. Pray thee, peace. Pay her the debt you owe 
her, and unpay the villany you have done her : 
the one you may do with sterling money, and the 
other with current repentance. 

Fal. My lord, I will not undergo this sneap without 

reply. You call honourable boldness impudent 130 
sauciness : if a man will make courtesy and say 
nothing, he is virtuous : no, my lord, my humble 
duty remembered, I will not be your suitor. I 
say to you, I do desire deliverance from these 
officers, being upon hasty employment in the 
king's affairs. 

Ch. Jtist. You speak as having power to do wrong : 
but answer in the effect of your reputation, and 
satisfy the poor woman. 

Fal. Come hither, hostess. 140 

Enter Gozvcr. 

Ch. Jnst. Now, Master Gower, what news ? 

Gozv. The king, my lord, and Harry Prince of Wales 

Are near at hand : the rest the paper tells. 
Fal. As I am a gentleman. 
Host. Faith, you said so before. 
Fal. As I am a gentleman. Come, no more words of it. 

45 



Act II. Sc. i. THE SECOND PART OF 

Host. By this heavenly ground I tread on, I must be 
fain to pawn both my plate and the tapestry of 
my dining-chambers. 

Fal. Glasses, glasses, is the only drinking: and for 150 
thy walls, a pretty slight drollery, or the story 
of the Prodigal, or the German hunting in water- 
work, is worth a thousand of these bed-hangings 
and these fly-bitten tapestries. Let it be ten 
pound, if thou canst. Come, an 'twere not for 
thy humours, there 's not a better wench in Eng- 
land. Go, wash thy face, and draw the action. 
Come, thou must not be in this humour with me ; 
dost not know me? come, come, I know thou 
wast set on to this. 160 

Host. Pray thee. Sir John, let it be but twenty no- 
bles : i' faith, I am loath to pawn my plate, so 
God save me, la ! 

Fal. Let it alone; I '11 make other shift: you '11 be a 
fool still. 

Host. Well, you shall have it, though I pawn my 
gown. I hope you '11 come to supper. You '11 
pay me all together? 

Fal Will I live? [To Bard ol ph.] Go, with her, with 

her; hook on, hook on. 170 

Host. Will you have Doll Tearsheet meet you at 
supper ? 

Fal. No more words ; let 's have her. 

\Fxcunt Hostess, Bardolph, officers^ and Boy, 

Ch. Just. I have heard better news. 

Fal. What 's the news, my lord ? 

Ch. Just. Where lay the king last night ? 

Gow. At Basingstoke, my lord. 

46 



KING HENRY IV. Act II. Sc. i. 

Fal. I hope, my lord, all 's well : what is the news, 

my lord? 
Ch. Just. Come all his forces back? i8o 

Goi<.\ No ; fifteen hundred foot, five hundred horse. 

Are march 'd up to my Lord of Lancaster, 

Against Northumberland and the Archbishop. 
FaJ. Comes the king back from Wales, my noble lord ? 
Ch. Just. You shall have letters of me presently : 

Come, go along with me, good Master Gower. 
Fal. My lord ! 

Ch. Just. What 's the matter? 
Fal. Master Gower, shall I entreat you with me to 

dinner ? 190 

Gozv. I must wait upon my good lord here ; I thank 

you, good Sir John. 
Ch. Just. Sir John, you loiter here too long, being 

you are to take soldiers up in counties as you 

go. 
Fal. Will you sup with me, Master Gower? 
Ch. Just. What foolish master taught you these 

manners. Sir John ? 
Fal. Master Gower, if they become me not, he was 

a fool that taught them me. This is the right 200 

fencing grace, my lord ; tap for tap, and so part 

fair. 
Ch. Just. Now the Lord lighten thee ! thou art a 

great fool. [Exeunt. 



47 



Act II. Sc. ii. THE SECOND PART OF 

Scene II. 

London. Another street. 
Enter Prince Henry and Poins. 

Prince. Before God, I am exceeding weary. 

Poins. Ts 't come to that? I had thought weari- 
ness durst not have attached one of so high 
blood. 

Prince. Faith, it does me ; though it discolours the 
complexion of my greatness to acknowledge it. 
Doth it not show vilely in me to desire small 
beer? 

Poins. Why, a prince should not be so loosely studied 

as to remember so weak a composition. lo 

Prince. Belike then my appetite was not princely got ; 
for, by my troth, I do now remember the poor 
creature, small beer. But, indeed, these humble 
considerations make me out of love with my 
greatness. What a disgrace is it to me to re- 
member thy name! or to know thy face to- 
morrow ! or take note how many pair of silk 
stockings thou hast, viz. these, and those that 
were thy peach-coloured ones ! or to bear the 
inventory of thy shirts ; as, one for superfluity, 20 
and another for use ! But that the tennis-court- 
keeper knows better than I ; for it is a low ebb 
of linen with thee when thou keepest not racket 
there ; as thou hast not done a great while, be- 
cause the rest of thy low countries have made a 
shift to eat up thy holland : and God knows, 
whether those that bawl out the ruins of thy 
linen shall inherit his kingdom : but the mid- 



KING HENRY IV. Act II. Sc. ii. 

wives say the children are not in the fault ; 
whereupon the world increases, and kindreds are 30 
mightily strengthened. 

Poins. How ill it follows, after you have laboured so 
hard, you should talk so idly! Tell me, how 
many good young princes would do so, their 
fathers being so sick as yours at this time is ? 

Prince. Shall I tell thee one thing, Poins? 

Poins. Yes, faith ; and let it be an excellent good 
thing. 

Prince. It shall serve among wits of no higher breed- 
ing than thine. 40 

Poins. Go to ; I stand the push of your one thing 
that you will tell. 

Prince. Marry, I tell thee, it is not meet that I shoilld 
be sad, now my father is sick : albeit I could tell 
to thee, as to one it pleases me, for fault of a 
better, to call my friend, I could be sad, and sad 
indeed too. 

Poins. Very hardly upon such a subject. 

Prince. By this hand, thou thinkest me as far in the 

devil's book as thou and Falstafif for obduracy 50 
and persistency : let the end try the man. But 
I tell thee, my heart bleeds inwardly that my 
father is so sick : and keeping such vile company 
as thou art hath in reason taken from me all 
ostentation of sorrow. 

Poins. The reason? 

Prince. What wouldst thou think of me, if I should 
weep? 

Poins. I would think thee a most princely hypocrite. 

Prince. It would be every man's thought ; and thou 60 

49 



Act IL Sc. ii. THE SECOND PART OF 

art a blessed fellow to think as every man thinks : 
never a man's thought in the world keeps the 
road-way better than thine: every man would 
think me an hypocrite indeed. And what accites 
your most worshipful thought to think so? 

Poins. Why, because you have been so lewd, and so 
much engraffed to Falstafif. 

Prince. And to thee. 

Poins. By this light, I am well spoke on ; I can hear 

it with mine own ears : the worst that they can 70 
say of me is that I am a second brother, and that 
I am a proper fellow of my hands ; and those 
two things, I confess, I cannot help. By the 
mass, here comes Bardolph. 

Enter Bardolph and Page. 

Prince. And the boy that I gave Falstaff : a' had him 
from me Christian ; and look, if the fat villain 
have not transformed him ape. 

Bard. God save your grace ! 

Prince. And yours, most noble Bardolph ! 

Bard. Come, you virtuous ass, you bashful fool, must 80 
you be blushing? wherefore blush you now? 
What a maidenly man-at-arms are you become ! 
Is 't such a matter to get a pottle-pot's maiden- 
head? 

Page. A' calls me e'en now, my lord, through a red 
lattice, and I could discern no part of his face 
from the window : at last I spied his eyes ; and 
methought he had made two holes in the ale- 
wife's new petticoat and so peeped through. 

Prince. Has not the boy profited ? 90 

50 



KING HENRY IV. Act II. Sc. ii. 

Bard. Away, you whoreson upright rabbit, away! 

Page. Away, you rascally Althaea's dream, away ! 

Prince. Instruct us, boy; what dream, boy? 

Page. Marry, my lord, Althaea dreamed she was de- 
livered of a fire-brand ; and therefore T call him 
her dream. 

Prince. A crown's worth of good interpretation : 
there 'tis, boy. 

Poius. O, that this good blossom could be kept from 

cankers ! Well, there is sixpence to preserve thee lOO 

Bard. And you do not make him hanged among you, 
the gallows shall have wrong. 

Prince. And how doth thy master, Bardolph? 

Bard. Well, my lord. He heard of your grace's 
coming to town : there 's a letter for you. 

Poins. Delivered with good respect And how doth 
the martlemas, your master? 

Bard. In bodily health, sir. 

Poins. Marry, the immortal part needs a physician ; 

but that moves not him: though that be sick, it no 
dies not. 

Prince. I do allow this wen to be as familiar with 
me as my dog ; and he holds his place ; for look 
you how he writes. 

Poins. [Reads] ' John Falstaff, knight,' — every man 
must know that, as oft as he has occasion to 
name himself : even like those that are kin to the 
king; for they never prick their finger but they 
say, ' There 's some of the king's blood spilt.' 
* How comes that ? ' says he, that takes upon him 
not to conceive. The answer is as ready as a 120 
borrower's cap, ' I am the king's poor cousin, sir.* 

51 



Act II. Sc. ii. THE SECOND PART OF 

Prince. Nay, they will be kin to us, or they will fetch 
it from Japhet. fkit to the letter: 

Poins. [Reads] ' Sir John Falstaff, knight to the son 
' of the king, nearest his father, Harry Prince of 
Wales, greeting.' Why, this is a certificate. 

Prince. Peace! 

Poins. [Reads] ' I will imitate the honourable Ro- 
mans in brevity:' he sure means brevity in 130 
breath, short-winded. ' I commend me to thee, 
I commend thee, and I leave thee. Be not too 
familiar with Poins ; for he misuses thy favours 
so much, that he swears thou art to marry his 
sister Nell. Repent at idle times as thou may- 
est ; and so, farewell. 

* Thine, by yea and no, which is as much 
as to say, as thou usest him. Jack 
Falstaff with my familiars, John 
with my brothers and sisters, and 140 
Sir John with all Europe.' 
My lord, I '11 steep this letter in sack, and make 
him eat it. 

Prince. That 's to make him eat twenty of his words. 
But do you use me thus, Ned? must I marry 
your sister? 

Poins. God send the wench no worse fortune ! But 
I never said so. 

Prince. Well, thus we play the fools with the time : 

and the spirits of the wise sit in the clouds and 150 
mock us. Is your master here in London ? 

Bard. Yea, my lord. 

Prince. Where sups he? doth the old boar feed in 
the old frank? 

S2 



KING HENRY IV. Act II. Sc. ii. 

Bard. At the old place, my lord, in Eastcheap. 

Prince. What company ? 

Page. Ephesians, my lord, of the old church. 

Prince. Sup any women with him ? 

Page. None, my lord, but old Mistress Quickly and 

Mistress Doll Tearsheet. i6o 

Prince. What pagan may that be ? 
Page. A proper gentlewoman, sir, and a kinswoman 

of my master's. 
Prince. Even such kin as the parish heifers are to the 

town bull. Shall we steal upon them, Ned, at 

supper ? 
Poins. I am your shadow, my lord ; I '11 follow you. 
Prince. Sirrah, you boy, and Bardolph, no word to 

your master that I am yet come to town : there 's 

for your silence. 170 

Bard. I have no tongue, sir. 
Page. And for mine, sir, I will govern it. 
Prince. Fare you well ; go. [Exeunt Bardolph and 

Page.] This Doll Tearsheet should be some road. 
Poins. I warrant you, as common as the way between 

Saint Alban's and London. 
Prince. How might we see Falstaff bestow himself 

to-night in his true colours, and not ourselves be 

seen ? 
Poins. Put on two leathern jerkins and aprons, and iSd 

wait upon him at his table as drawers. 
Prince. From a god to a bull? a heavy descension ! 

it was Jove's case. From a prince to a prentice ? 

a low transformation ! that shall be mine ; for in 

every thing the purpose must weigh with the 

folly. Follow me, Ned. [Exeunt. 

S3 



Act II. Sc. iii. THE SECOND PART OF 

Scene III. 

IVarkworth. Before the castle. 

Enter Northumberland, Lady Northumberland, 
and Lady Percy. 

North. I pray thee, loving wife, and gentle daughter, 
Give even way unto my rough affairs : 
Put not you on the visage of the times, 
And be like them to Percy troublesome. 

Lady N. I have given over, I will speak no more : 
Do what you will ; your wisdom be your guide. 

North. Alas, sweet wife, my honour is at pawn ; 
And, but my going, nothing can redeem it. 

Lady P. O yet, for God's sake, go not to these wars ! 

The time was, father, that you broke your word, lo 

When you were more endear'd to it than now ; 

When your own Percy, when my heart's dear Harry. 

Threw many a northward look to see his father 

Bring up his powers ; but he did long in vain. 

W' ho then persuaded you to stay 'at home ? 

There were two honours lost, yours and your son's. 

For yours, the God of heaven brighten it ! 

For his, it stuck upon him as the sun 

In the grey vault of heaven, and by his light 

Did all the chivalry of England move 20 

To do brave acts : he was indeed the glass 

Wherein the noble youth did dress themselves : 

He had no legs that practised not his gait ; 

And speaking thick, which nature made his blemish. 

Became the accents of the valiant ; 

For those that could speak low and tardily 

Would turn their own perfection to abuse, 

54 



KING HENRY IV. Act II. Sc. iii. 

To seem like him : so that in speech, in gait, 

In diet, in affections of delight, 

In military rules, humorous of blood, 30 

He was the mark and glass, copy and book, 

That fashion 'd others. And him, O wondrous him ! 

O miracle of men! him did you leave, 

Second to none, unseconded by you. 

To look upon the hideous god of war 

In disadvantage; to abide a field 

Where nothing but the sound of Hotspur's name 

Did seem defensible: so you left him. 

Never, O never, do his ghost the wrong 

To hold your honour more precise and nice 40 

With others than with him! let them alone: 

The marshal and the archbishop are strong: 

Had my sweet Harry had but half their numbers. 

To-day might I, hanging on Hotspur's neck, 

Have talk'd of ]\Ionmouth's grave. 

North. Beshrew your heart, 

Fair daughter, you do draw my spirits from me 
With new lamenting ancient oversights. 
But I must go and meet with danger there, 
Or it will seek me in another place 
And find me worse provided. 

Lady N. O, fly to Scotland, 50 

Till that the nobles and the armed commons 
Have of their puissance made a little taste. 

Lady P. If they get ground and vantage of the king, 
Then join you with them, like a rib of steel. 
To make strength stronger; but, for all our loves, 
First let them try themselves. So did your son; 
He was so suffer'd: so came I a widow; 

55 



Act II. Sc. iv. THE SECOND PART OF 

And never shall have length of life enough 
To rain upon remembrance with mine eyes, 
That it may grow and sprout as high as heaven, 60 
For recordation to my noble husband. 
North. Come, come, go in with me. 'Tis with my mind 
As with the tide swell'd up unto his height. 
That makes a still-stand, running neither way: 
Fain would I go to meet the archbishop, 
But many thousand reasons hold me back. 
I will resolve for Scotland : there am I, 
Till time and vantage crave my company. [Exeunt. 

Scene IV. 

London. The Boars-head Tavern in Eastcheap. 
Enter tivo Drazvers, 

First Draw. What the devil hast thou brought there? 
apple-johns? thou knowest Sir John cannot en- 
dure an apple-john. 

Sec. Drazv. Mass, thou sayest true. The prince once 
set a dish of apple-johns before him, and told him 
there were five more Sir Johns ; and, putting 
off his hat, said, ' I will now take my leave of 
these six dry, round, old, withered knights.' It 
angered him to the heart: but he hath forgot 
that. 10 

First Drazv. Why, then, cover, and set them down : 
and see if thou canst find out Sneak's noise; 
Mistress Tearsheet would fain hear some music. 
Dispatch : the room where they supped is too 
hot; they '11 come in straight. 

Sec. Draw. Sirrah, here will be the prince and Master 

S6 



KING HENRY IV. Act II. Sc. iv. 

Poins anon ; and they will put on two of our 
jerkins and aprons ; and Sir John must not know 
of it : Bardolph hath brought word. 

First Drazv. By the mass, here will be old utis : it 20 
>\ will be an excellent stratagem. 

Sec. Drazv. I '11 see if I can find out Sneak. [Exit. 

Enter Hostess and Doll Tearsheet. 

Host, r faith, sweetheart, methinks now you are in 
^ an excellent good temperality: your pulsidge 
beats as extraordinarily as. heart would desire; 
and your colour, I warrant you, is as red as any 
rose, in good truth, la ! But, i' faith, you have 
drunk too much canaries ; and that 's a mar- 
vellous searching wine, and it perfumes the 
blood ere one can say ' What 's this ? ' How do 30 
you now? 

Dol. Better than I was : hem ! 

Host. Why, that 's well said ; a good heart 's worth 
gold. Lo, here comes Sir John. 

Enter Falstaif, 

Fal. [Singing] ' When Arthur first in court ' — 
Empty the Jordan. [Exit First Drazver — [^in^- 
ing] ' And was a worthy king.' How now. Mis- 
tress Doll ! 

Host. Sick of a calm ; yea, good faith. 

Fal. So is all her sect ; an they be once in a calm, 

they are sick. 40 

Dol. You muddy rascal, is that all the comfort you 
give me? 

Fal. You make fat rascals. Mistress Doll. 

Dol. T make them ! gluttony and diseases make them ; 
I make them not. 

57 



Act II. Sc. iv. THE SECOND PART OF 

Fal. If the cook help to make the gluttony, you help 
to make the diseases, Doll : we catch of you, 
Doll, we catch of you ; grant that, my poor vir- 
tue, grant that. 

DoL Yea, joy, our chains and our jewels. 50 

FaL ' Your brooches, pearls, and ouches ' : for to 
serve bravely is to come halting off, you know ; 
to come off the breach with his pike bent 
l^ravely, and to surgery bravely ; to venture upon 
the charged chambers bravely, — >^ 

DoL Hang vourself, vou muddy conger, hang your- 
self! 

Host. By my troth, this is the old fashion ; you two 
never meet but you fall to some discord : you 
are both, i' good truth, as rheumatic as two dry 60 
toasts ; you cannot one bear with another's con- 
firmities. What the good-year! one must bear, 
and that must be you : you are the weaker ves- 
sel, as they say, the. emptier vessel. 

DoL Can a weak empty vessel bear such a huge full 
hogshead ? there 's a whole merchant's venture 
of Bourdeaux stuff in him ; you have not seen a 
hulk better stuffed in the hold. Come, I '11 be 
friends with thee, Jack : thou art going to the 
wars ; and whether I shall ever see thee again 70 
or no, there is nobody cares. 

Re-enter First Drazver. 

First Drazv. Sir, Ancient Pistol 's below, and would 

speak with you. 
DoL Hang him,swaggering rascal ! let him not come 

hither : it is the foul-mouthedst rogue in England. 

S8 



KING HENRY IV. Act II. Sc. iv. 

Host. If he swagger, let him not come here : no, by 
my faith; I must Uve among my neighbours; 
I '11 no swaggerers : I am in good name and 
fame with the very best : shut the door ; there 
comes no swaggerers here : I have not lived all 80 
this while, to have swaggering now: shut the 
door, I pray you. 
Fal Dost thou hear, hostess? 
Host. Pray ye, pacify yourself, Sir John: there 

comes no swaggerers here. 
Fal Dost thou hear? it is mine ancient. 
Host. Tilly-fally, Sir John, ne'er tell me: your an- 
cient swaggerer comes not m my doors. I was 
before Master Tisick, the deputy, t' other day ; 
and, as he said to me, 'twas no longer ago than 90 
Wednesday last, ' I, good faith, neighbour 
Quickly,' says he ; Master Dumbe, our minister, 
was by then ; ' neighbour Quickly,' says he, ' re- 
ceive those that are civil ; for,' said he, ' you are 
in an ill name ; ' now a' said so, I can tell where- 
upon ; ' for,' says he, ' you are an honest woman, 
and well thought on ; therefore take heed what 
guests you receive : receive,' says he, ' no swag- 
gering companions.' There comes none here: 
you would bless you to hear what he said: no, 100 
I '11 no swaggerers. 
Fal. He 's no swaggerer, hostess ; a tame cheater, i' 
faith ; you may stroke him as gently as a puppy 
greyhound : he '11 not swagger with a Barbary 
hen, if her feathers turn back in any show of 
resistance. Call him up, drawer. 

[Exit First Drainer. 

59 



Act II. Sc. iv. THE SECOND PART OF 

Host. Cheater, call you him? I will bar no honest 
man my house, nor no cheater : but I do not love 
swaggering, by my troth ; I am the worse, when 
one says swagger: feel, masters, how I shake; no 
look you, I warrant you. 

Dol. So you do, hostess. 

Host. Do I ? yea, in very truth, do I, an 'twere an 
aspen leaf: I cannot abide swaggerers. 

Enter Pistol, Bardolpli, and Page. 

Pist. God save you, Sir John ! 

Fal. Welcome, Ancient Pistol. Here, Pistol, I 

charge you with a cup of sack : do you discharge 

upon mine hostess. 
Pist. I will discharge upon her, Sir John, with two 

bullets. 120 

Fal. She is pistol-proof, sir ; you shall hardly offend 
her. 

Host. Come, I '11 drink no proofs nor no bullets : I '11 
drink no more than will do me good, for no 
man's pleasure, I. 

Pist. Then to you. Mistress Dorothy ; I will charge 
you. 

Dol. Charge me ! I scorn you, scurvy companion. 
What! you poor, base, rascally, cheating, lack- 
linen mate! Away, you mouldy rogue, away! 130 
I am meat for your master. 

Pist. I know you, IMistress Dorothy. 

Dol. Away, you cut-purse rascal ! you filthy bung, 
away ! by this wine, I '11 thrust my knife in your 
mouldy chaps, an you play the saucy cuttle with 
me. Away, you bottle-ale rascal ! you basket- 

60 



KING HENRY IV. Act II. Sc. iv. 

hilt stale juggler, you ! Since when, I pray you, 
sir? God's light, with two points on your 
shoulder ? much ! 

Pist, God let me not live, but I will murder your ruff 140 
for this. 

Fal, No more, Pistol ; I would not have you go off 
here : discharge yourself of our company, Pistol. 

Host. No, good Captain Pistol ; not here, sweet cap- 
tain. 

Dol. Captain ! thou abominable damned cheater, art 
thou not ashamed to be called captain? An 
captains were of my mind, they would truncheon 
you out, for taking their names upon you before 
you have earned them. You a captain! you 150 
slave, for what ? for tearing a poor whore's ruff 
in a bawdy-house ? He a captain ! hang him, 
rogue ! he lives upon mouldy stewed prunes and 
dried cakes. A captain ! God's light, these vil- 
lains will make the word as odious as the word 
' occupy ' ; w.hich was an excellent good word 
before it was ill sorted : therefore captains had 
need look to 't. 

Bard. Pray thee, go down, good ancient. 

Fal. Hark thee hither, Mistress Doll. ^ 160 

Fist. Not I: I tell thee what, Corporal Bardolph, T 
could tear her : I '11 be revenged of her. 

Fa^ic. Pray thee, go down. 

Pist. I'll see her damned first; to Pluto's damned 
lake, by this hand, to the infernal deep, with 
Erebus and tortures vile also. Hold hook and 
line, say I. Down, down, dogs ! down, faitors ! 
Have we not Hiren here ? 
61 



Act II. Sc. iv. THE SECOND PART OF 

Host. Good Captain Peesel, be quiet ; 'tis very late, 

i' faith: I beseek you now, aggravate your 170 
choler. 

Pist. These be good humours, indeed! Shall pack- 
horses. 
And hollow pamper 'd jades of Asia, 
Which cannot go but thirty mile a day, 
Compare with C?esars, and with Cannibals, 
And Trojan Greeks? nay, rather damn them with 
King Cerberus ; and let the welkin roar. 
Shall we fall foul for toys? 

Host. By my troth, captain, these are very bitter words. 

Bard. Be gone, good ancient : this will grow to a iSd 
brawl anon. 

Pist. Die men like dogs ! give crowns like pins ! 
Have we not Hiren here? 

Host. O' my word, captain, there 's none such here. 
What the good-year ! do you think I would deny 
her? For God's sake be quiet. 

Pist. Then feed, and be fat, my fair Calipolis. 
Come, give 's some sack. 

' Si fortune me tormente, sperato me contento.' 
Fear we broadsides? no, let the fiend give fire: 190 
Give me some sack : and, sweetheart, lie thou there. 

[Laying doivn his sn'ord. 
Come we to full points here ; and are etceteras noth- 
ing? 

Fal. Pistol, I would be quiet. 

Pist. Sweet knight, I kiss thy neaf : what ! we have 
seen the seven stars. 

Dot For God's sake, thrust him down stairs : I can- 
not endure such a fustian rascal. 
62 



KING HENRY IV. Act II. Sc. iv. 

Pist. Thrust him down stairs! know we not Gallo- 
way nags ? 

Fal. Quoit him down, Bardolph, like a shove-goat 200 
shilling : nay, an a' do nothing but speak noth- 
ing, a' shall be nothing here. 

Bard. Come, get you down stairs. 

Pist. What ! shall we have incision ? shall we imbrue ? 

[Snatching up his sword. 
Then death rock me asleep, abridge my doleful 

days ! 
Why, then, let grievous, ghastly, gaping wounds 
Untwine the Sisters Three ! Come, Atropos, I say ! 

Host. Here 's goodly stuff toward ! 

Fal. Give me my rapier, boy. 

Dol I pray thee. Jack, I pray thee, do not draw. 210 

Fal. Get you down stairs. 

[Drawing, and driving Pistol out. 

Host. Here 's a goodly tumult ! I '11 forswear keep- 
ing house, afore I '11 be in these tirrits and 
frights. So; murder, I warrant now. Alas, 
alas ! put up your naked weapons, put up your 
naked weapons. [Exeunt Pistol and Bardolph. 

Dol. I pray thee. Jack, be quiet ; the rascal 's gone. 
Ah, you whoreson little valiant villain, you ! 

Host. Are you not hurt i' the groin? methought a' 

made a shrewd thrust at your belly. 220 

Re-enter Bardolph. 

Fal. Have you turned him out o' doors ? 

Bard. Yea, sir. The rascal 's drunk : you have hurt 

him, sir, i' the shoulder. 
FaL A rascal ! to brave me ! 

63 



Act II. Sc. iv. THE SECOND PART OF 

Dol, Ah, you sweet little rogue, you! Alas, poor 
ape, how thou sweatest ! come, let me wipe thy 
face ; come on, you whoreson chops : ah, rogue ! 
i' faith, I love thee: thou art as valorous as 
Hector of Troy, worth five of Agamemnon, and 
ten times better than the Nine Worthies : ah, 230 
villain ! 

Fal. A rascally slave! I will toss the rogue in a 
blanket. 

Dol Do, an thou darest for thy heart : an thou dost, 
I '11 canvass thee between a pair of sheets. 

Enter Music. 

Page, The music Is come, sir. 

Fal. Let them play. Play, sirs. Sit on my knee, 
Doll. A rascal bragging slave! the rogue fled 
from me like quicksilver. 

Dol. V faith, and thou foUowedst him like a church. 240 
Thou whoreson little tidy Bartholomew boar- 
pig, when wilt thou leave fighting o' days and 
foining o' nights, and begin to patch up thine old 
body for heaven ? 

Enter, behind, Prince Henry and Poins, disguised. 

Fal. Peace, good Doll! do not speak like a death's- 
head ; do not bid me remember mine end. 

DoL Sirrah, what humour 's the prince of ? 

Fal. A good shallow young fellow: a' would have 
made a good pantler, a' would ha' chipped bread 
well. 250 

Dol. They say Poins has a good wit. 

Fal. He a good wit ? hang him, baboon ! his wit 's 

64 



KING HENRY IV. Act II. Sc. ivo 

as thick as Tewksbury mustard; there's no 
more conceit in him than is in a mallet. 
DoL Why does the prince love him so, then ? 
Fal. Because their legs are both of a bigness ; and 
a' plays at quoits well; and eats conger and 
fennel; and drinks off candles' ends for flap- 
dragons ; and rides the wild-mare with the boys ; 
and jumps upon joined-stools ; and swears with 260 
a good grace ; and wears his boots very smooth, 
like unto the sign of the leg; and breeds no 
bate with telling of discreet stories ; and such 
other gambol faculties a' has, that show a weak 
mind and an able body, for the which the prince 
admits him : for the prince himself is such an- 
other ; the weight of a hair will turn the scales 
between their avoirdupois. 
Prince. Would not this nave of a wheel have his ears 

cutofif? 270 

Poins. Let 's beat him before his whore. 
Prince. Look, whether the withered elder hath not 

his poll clawed like a parrot. 
Poins. Is it not strange that desire should so many 

years outlive performance? 
Fal. Kiss me, Doll. 
Prince. Saturn and Venus this year in conjunction! 

what says the almanac to that ? 
Poins. And, look, whether the fiery Trigon, his man, 

be not Usping to his master's old tables, his 280 
note-book, his counsel-keeper. 
Fal. Thou dost give me flattering busses. 
DoL By my troth, I kiss thee with a most constant 
heart. • 

65 



Act II. Sc. IV. THE SECOND PART OF 

Fal. I am old, I am old. 

Dol. I love thee better than I love e'er a scurvy young" 
boy of them all. 

Fal. What stuff wilt have a kirtle of ? I shall receive 
money o' Thursday: shalt have a cap to-mor- 
row. A merry song, come: it grows late; we '11 290 
to bed. Thou 'It forget me when I am gone. 

Dol, By my troth, thou 'It set me a-weeping, an thou 
sayest so : prove that ever I dress myself hand- 
some till thy return : well, hearken at the end. 

Fal. Some sack, Francis. 

Ptxhcc 1 

. ' y Anon, anon, sir. [Coming forivard. 

Fal. Ha ! a bastard son of the king's ? And art not 

thou Poins his brother? 
Prince. Why, thou globe of sinful continents, what 

a Hfe dost thou lead ! 300 

Fal. A better than thou : I am a gentleman ; thou art 

a drawer. 
Prince. Very true, sir ; and I come to draw you out 

by the ears. 
Host. O, the Lord preserve thy good grace ! by my 

troth, welcome to London. Now, the Lord bless 

that sweet face of thine ! O Jesu, art you come 

from Wales? 
Fal. Thou whoreson mad compound of majesty, by 

this light flesh and corrupt blood, thou art 310 

welcome. 
Dol. How, you fat fool ! I scorn you. 
Poins. My lord, he will drive you out of your re- 
venge and turn all to a merriment, if you take 

not the heat. • 

66 



KING HENRY IV. Act II. Sc. iv. 

Prince. You whoreson candle-mine, you, how vilely 
did you speak of me even now before this honest, 
virtuous, civil gentlewoman! 

Host, God's blessing of your good heart ! and so she 

is, by my troth. 320 

Fal. Didst thou hear me? 

Prince. Yea, and you knew me, as you did when you 
ran away by Gadshill : you knew I was at your 
back, and spoke it on purpose to try my pa- 
tience. 

Fal. No, no, no ; not so ; I did not think thou wast 
within hearing. 

Prince. I shall drive you then to confess the wilful 
abuse ; and then I know how to handle you. 

Fal. No abuse, Hal, o' mine honour ; no abuse. 330 

Prince. Not to dispraise me, and call me pantler and 
bread-chipper and I know not what ? 

Fal. No abuse, Hal. 

Poins. No abuse? 

Fal. No abuse, Ned, i' the world ; honest Ned, none. 
I dispraised him before the wicked, that the 
wicked might not fall in love with him ; in which 
doing, I have done the part of a careful friend 
and a true subject, and thy father is to give me 
thanks for it. No abuse, Hal : none, Ned, none : 340 
no, faith, boys, none. 

Prince. See now, whether pure fear and entire cow- 
ardice doth not make thee wrong this virtuous 
gentlewoman to close with us. Is she of the 
wicked? is thine hostess here of the wicked? or 
is thy boy of the wicked? or honest Bardolph, 
whose zeal burns in his nose, of the wicked? 

(>7 



Act II. Sc. iv. THE SEXOND PART OF 

Poins. Answer, thou dead elm, answer. 

Fal. The fiend hath pricked down Bardolph irre- 
coverable ; and his face is Lucifer's privy- 350 
kitchen, where he doth nothing but roast malt- 
worms. For the boy, there is a good angel 
about him ; but the devil outbids him too. 

Prince. For the women ? 

Fal. For one of them, she is in hell already, and 
burns poor souls. For the other, I owe her 
money ; and whether she be damned for that, 
I know not. 

Host. No, I warrant you. 

Fal. No, I think thou art not ; I think thou art quit 360 
for that. Marry, there is another indictment 
upon thee, for suffering flesh to be eaten in thy 
house, contrary to the law ; for the which I think 
thou wilt howl. 

Host. All victuallers do so : what 's a joint of mutton 
or two in a whole Lent? 

Prince. You, gentlewoman, — 

Dot. What says your grace? 

Fal. His grace says that which his flesh rebels 

against. 370 

[Knocking within. 

Host. Who knocks so loud at door? Look to the 
door there, Francis. 

Fnter Peto. 

Prince. Peto, how now! what news? 

Peto. The king your father is at Westminster ; 
And there are twenty weak and wearied posts 
Come from the north : and, as I came along, 

68 



KING HENRY IV. Act II. Sc. iv. 

I met and overtook a dozen captains, 
Bare-headed, sweating, knocking at the taverns, 
And asking every one for Sir John Falstaff. 

Prince. By heaven, Poins, I feel me much to blame, 380 
So idly to profane the precious time ; 
When tempest of commotion, like the south 
Borne with black vapour, doth begin to melt. 
And drop upon our bare unarmed heads. 
Give me my sword and cloak. Falstaff, good night. 
[Exeunt Prince Henry, Poins, Peto, and Bardolph. 

FaL Now comes in the sweetest morsel of the night, 
and we must hence, and leave it unpicked. 
[Knocking within.] More knocking at the door ! 

Re-enter Bardolph. 

How now ! what 's the matter ? 

Bard. You must away to court, sir, presently ; 390 

A dozen captains stay at door for you. 

Fal. [To the Page.] Pay the musicians, sirrah. 
Farewell, hostess ; farewell, Doll. You see, my 
good wenches, how men of merit are sought 
after: the undeserver may sleep, when the man 
of action is called on. Farewell, good wenches : 
if I be not sent away post,* I will see you again 
ere I go. 

Dol. I cannot speak; if my heart be not ready to 

burst, — well, s.weet Jack, have a care of thyself. 400 

Fal. Farewell, farewell. [Exeunt Falstaff and Bardolph. 

Host. Well, fare thee well : I have known thee these 
twenty nine years, come peacod-time; but an 
honester and truer-hearted man, — well fare thee 
well. 

69 



Act III. Sc. i. THE SECOND PART OF 

Bard. [Within] Mistress Tearsheet ! 

Host What 's the matter? 

Bard, [Within'] Bid Mistress Tearsheet come to my 

master. 
Host. O, run, Doll, run ; run, good Doll : come. 410 

[She comes blubbered.] Yea, will you come, Doll? 

[Exeunt. 

ACT THIRD. 

Scene I. 

Westminster. The palace. 

Enter the King in his nightgozvn, zvith a Page. 

King. Go call the Earls of Surrey and of Warwick ; 
But, ere they come, bid them o'er-read these letters 
And well consider of them : make good speed. 

[Exit Page. 
How many thousand of my poorest subjects 
Are at this hour asleep ! O sleep, O gentle sleep, 
Nature's soft nurse, how have I frighted thee. 
That thou no more wilt weigh my eyelids down. 
And steep my senses in forgetfulness ? 
Why rather, sleep, liest thou in smoky cribs. 
Upon uneasy pallets stretching thee, 10 

And hush'd with buzzing night-flies to thy slumber, 
Than in the perfumed chambers of the great, 
Under the canopies of costly state, 
And luU'd with sound of sweetest melody ? 
O thou dull god, why liest thou with the vile 
In loathsome beds, and leavest the kingly couch 
A watch-case or a common 'larum-bell ? 

70 



KING HENRY IV. Act III, Sc. i. 

Wilt thou upon the high and giddy mast 

Seal up the ship-boy's eyes, and rock his brains 

In cradle of the rude imperious surge, 20 

And in the visitation of the winds, 

Who take the ruffian billows by the top, 

Curling their monstrous heads, and hanging them 

With deafening clamour in the sHppery clouds, 

That, with the hurly, death inself awakes? 

Canst thou, O partial sleep, give thy repose 

To the wet set-boy in an hour so rude; 

And in the calmest and most stillest night, 

With all appliances and means to boot. 

Deny it to a king? Then happy low, lie down! 30 

Uneasy lies the head that wears a crown. 

Enter Warwick and Surrey. 

War. Many good morrows to your majesty ! 

King. Is it good morrow, lords? 

War. 'Tis one o'clock, and past. 

King. Why, then, good morrow to you all, my lords. 
Have you read o'er the letters that I sent you ? 

War. We have, my liege. 

King. Then you perceive the body of our kingdom 
How foul it is; what rank diseases grow. 
And with what danger, near the heart of it. 40 

War. It is but as a body pet distemper'd ; 

Which to his former strength may be restored 

With good advice and little medicine: 

My Lord Northumberland will soon be cool'd. 

King. O God! that one might read the book of fate. 
And see the revolution of the times 
Make mountains level, and the continent, 

71 



Act III. Sc. i. THE SECOND PART OF 

Weary of solid firmness, melt itself 

Into the sea! and, other times, to see 

The beachy girdle of the ocean 50 

Too wide for Neptune's hips ; how chances mock 

And changes fill the cup of alteration 

With divers Hquors! O, if this were seen, 

The happiest youth, viewing his progress through, 

What perils past, what crosses to ensue, 

Would shut the book, and sit him down and die. 

'Tis not ten years gone 

Since Richard and Northumberland, great friends. 

Did feast together, and in two years after 

Were they at wars : it is but eight years since 60 

This Percy was the man nearest my soul; 

Who like a brother toil'd in my affairs, 

And laid his love and life under my foot; 

Yea, for my sake, even to the eyes of Richard 

Gave him defiance. But which of you was by — 

You, cousin Nevil, as I may remember — 

[To Warwick. 
When Richard, with his eye brimful of tears. 
Then check'd and rated by Northumberland, 
Did speak these words, now proved a prophecy? • 
' Northumberland, thou ladder by the which 70 
My cousin Bohngbroke ascends my throne; ' 
Though then, God knows, I had no such intent, 
But that necessity so bow'd the state, 
That I and greatness were compell'd to kiss: 
* The time shall come,' thus did he follow it, 
'The time will come, that foul sin, gathering 

head, 
Shall break into corruption: ' so went on, 

72 



KING HENRY IV. Act III. Sc. i. 

Foretelling this same time's condition, 
And the division of our amity. 

IVar. There is a history in all men's lives, 80 

Figuring the nature of the times deceased; 
The which observed, a man may prophesy. 
With a near aim, of the main chance of things 
As yet not come to life, which in their seeds 
And weak beginnings lie intreasured. 
Such things become the hatch and brood of time; 
And by the necessary form of this 
King Richard might create a perfect guess 
That great Northumberland, then false to him, 
Would of that seed grow to a greater falseness; 90 
Which should not find a ground to root upon. 
Unless on you. 

King. Are these things then necessities? 

Then let us meet them like necessities 
And that same word even now cries out on us: 
They say the bishop and Northumberland 
Are fifty thousand strong. 

War. It cannot be, my lord; 

Rumour doth double, like the voice and echo. 
The numbers of the fear'd. Please it your grace 
To go to bed. Upon my soul, my lord, 
The powers that you already have sent forth 100 
Shall bring this prize in very easily. 
To comfort you the more, I have received 
A certain instance that Glendower is dead. 
Your majesty hath been this fortnight ill; 
And these unseason'd hours perforce must add 
Unto your sickness. 

K. Hen. I will take your counsel 

73 



Act III. Sc. ii. THE SECOND PART OF 

And were these inward wars once out of hand, 
We would, dear lords, unto the Holy Land. 

[Exeunt. 
Scene II. 

Gloucestershire. Before Justice Shallozv's house. 

Enter Shallozv and Silence, meeting; Mouldy, Shadow, 
Wart, Feeble, Bullcalf, a Servant or two zvith them. 

Shal. Come on, come on, come on, sir ; give me your 
hand, sir, give me your hand, sir: an early 
stirrer, by the rood! And how doth my good 
cousin Silence? 

Sil. Good morrow, good cousin Shallow. 

Shal. And how doth my cousin, your bedfellow? and 
your fairest daughter and mine, my god-daughter 
Ellen? 

Sil. Alas, a black ousel, cousin Shallow! 

Shal. By yea and nay, sir, I dare say my cousin lo 
William is become a good scholar : he is at 
Oxford still, is he not? 

Sil. Indeed, sir, to my cost. 

Shal. A' must then, to the inns o' court shortly: 
I was once of Clement's Inn, where I think 
they will talk of mad Shallow yet. 

Sil. You were called ' lusty Shallow ' then, cousin. 

Shal. By the mass, I was called any thing; and I 
would have done any thing indeed too, and 
roundly too. There was I, and little John Doit 20 
of Staffordshire, and black George Barnes, and 
Francis Pickbone, and Will Squele, a Cotswold 
man; you had not four such swinge-bucklers in 
all the inns o' court again: and I may say to you, 

74 



KING HENRY IV. Act III. Sc. ii. 

we knew where the bona-robas were, and had the 
best of them all at commandment. Then was 
Jack Falstaff, now Sir John, a boy, and page to 
Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk. 

^'/7. This Sir John, cousin, that comes hither anon 

about soldiers? 30 

ShaL The same Sir John, the very same. I see him 
break Skogan's head at the court-gate, when a' 
was a crack not thus high : and the very same 
day did I fight with one Sampson Stockfish, a 
fruiterer, behind Gray's Inn. Jesu, Jesu, the 
mad days that I have spent ! and to see how 
many of my old acquaintance are dead ! 

Sil. We shall all follow, cousin. 

Shal. Certain, 'tis certain ; very sure, very sure : 

death, as the Psalmist saith, is certain to all ; 40 
all shall die. How a good yoke of bullocks at 
Stamford fair? 

SiL By my troth, I was not there. 

Shal. Death is certain. Is old Double of your town 
living yet? 

Sil. Dead, sir. 

Shal. Jesu, Jesu, dead! a' drew a good bow; and 
dead ! a' shot a fine shoot : John a Gaunt loved 
him well, and betted much monev on his head. 
Dead ! a' would have clapped i' the clout at 50 
twelve score ; and carried you a forehand shaft 
a fourteen and fourteen and a half, that it would 
have done a man's heart good to see. How a 
score of ewes now? 

Sil. Thereafter as they be : a score of good ewes may 
be worth ten pounds. 

75 



Act III. Sc. ii. THE SECOND PART OF 

Shal. And is old Double dead? 
Sil. Here come two of Sir John Falstaff's men, as 
I think. 

Enter Bardolph, and one zuith him. 

Bard. Good morrow, honest gentlemen : I beseech 60 
you, which is Justice Shallow? 

Shal. I am Robert Shallow, sir ; a poor esquire of 
this country, and one of the king's justices of the 
peace : what is your good pleasure with me ? 

Bard. My captain, sir, commends him to you ; my 
captain, Sir John Falstaff, a tall gentleman, by 
heaven, and a most gallant leader. 

Shal. He greets me well, sir. I knew him a good 
back-sword man. How doth the good knight? 
may I ask how my lady his wife doth? 70 

Bard. Sir, pardon ; a soldier is better accommodated 
than with a wife. 

Shal. It is well said, in faith, sir ; and it is well said 
indeed too. Better accommodated ! it is good ; 
yea, indeed, is it : good phrases are surely, and 
ever were, very commendable. Accommodated ! 
it comes of ' accommodo ' : very good ; a good 
phrase. 

Bard. Pardon me, sir; I have heard the word. 

Phrase call you it? by this good day, I know 80 
not the phrase; but I will maintain the word 
with my sword to be a soldier-like word, and 
a word of exceeding good command, by heaven. 
Accommodated ; that is, when a man is, as they 
say, accommodated : or when a man is, being, 
whereby a' may be thought to be accommo- 
dated ; which is an excellent thing. 



KING HENRY IV. Act iii. Sc. ii. 

Shal. It is very just. 

Enter Falstaif, 

Look, here comes good Sir John. Give me youV 
good hand, give me your worship's good hand : 90 
by my troth, you Hke well and bear your years 
very well : welcome, good Sir John. 

Fal. I am glad to see you well, good Master Robert 
Shallow : Master Surecard, as I think ? 

Shal. No, Sir John ; it is my cousin Silence, in com- 
mission with me. 

Fal. Good Master Silence, it well befits you should 
be of the peace. 

Sil. Your good worship is welcome. 

Fal. Fie ! this is hot weather, gentlemen. Have you 100 
provided me here half a dozen sufficient men ? 

Shal. Marry, have we, sir. Will you sit? 

Fal. Let me see them, I beseech you. 

Shal. Where 's the roll? where 's the roll ? where 's 
the roll? Let me see, let me see, let me see. 
So, so, so, so, so, so, so : yea, marry, sir : Ralph 
Mouldy ! Let them appear as I call ; let them 
do so, let them do so. Let me see; where is 
Mouldy ? 

Moid. Here, an 't please you. no 

Shal. What think you. Sir John? a good-limbed 
fellow ; young, strong, and of good friends. 

Fal. Is thy name Mouldy? 

Moid. Yea, an 't please you. 

Fal. 'Tis the more time thou wert used. 

Shal. Ha, ha, ha ! most excellent, i' faith ! things that 
are mouldy lack use: very singular good! in 
faith, well said. Sir John ; very well said. 

77 



Act III. Sc. ii. THE SECOND PART OF 

Fal. Prick him. 

MouL I was pricked well enough before, an you 120 
could have let me alone: my old dame will be 
undone now, for one to do her husbandry and 
her drudgery : you need not to have pricked me ; 
there are other men fitter to go out than I. 

Fal. Go to : peace, Alouldy ; you shall go. Mouldy, 
it is time you were spent. 

MouL Spent! 

Shal. Peace, fellow, peace; stand aside: know you 
where you are ? For the other, Sir John : let 
me see: Simon Shadow! 130 

Fal. Yea, marry, let me have him to sit under : he 's 
like to be a cold soldier. 

Shal. Where 's Shadow ? 

Shad. Here, sir. 

Fal. Shadow, whose son art thou? 

Shad. My mother's son, sir. 

Fal. Thy mother's son ! like enough, and thy father's 
shadow ; so the son of the female is the shadow 
of the male : it is often so, indeed ; but much of 
the father's substance! 140 

Shal. Do you like him. Sir John? 

Fal. Shadow will serve for summer ; prick him, for 
we have a number of shadows to fill up the 
muster-book. 

Shal. Thomas Wart ! 

Fal. Where 's he ? 

Wart. Here, sir. 

Fal. Is thy name Wart? 

Wart. Yea, sir. 

Fal. Thou art a very ragged wart. 

78 



KING HENRY IV. Act III. Sc. ii. 

Shal. Shall I prick him down, Sir John ? 

Fal. It were superfluous; for his apparel is built 

upon his back, and the whole frame stands upon 

pins : prick him no more. 
Shal. Ha, ha, ha! you can do it, sir; you can do it: 

I commend you well. Francis Feeble! 
Fee. Here, sir. 

Shal. What trade art thou. Feeble ? 
Fee. A woman's tailor, sir. 

Shal. Shall I prick him, sir? i6o 

Fal. You may: but if he had been a man's tailor, 

he 'ad ha' pricked you. Wilt thou make as many 

holes in an enemy's battle as thou hast done in a 

woman's petticoat? 
Fee. I will do my good will, sir: you can have no 

more. 
Fal. Well said, good woman's tailor! well said, 

courageous Feeble! thou wilt be as valiant as 

the wrathful dove or most magnanimous mouse. 

Prick the woman's tailor : well, Master Shallow ; 170 

deep, Master Shallow. 
Fee. I would Wart might have gone, sir. 
Fal. I would thou wert a man's tailor, that thou 

mightst mend him and make him fit to go. I 

cannot put him to a private soldier, that is the 

leader of so many thousands : let that suffice, 

most forcible Feeble. 
Fee. It shall suffice, sir. 
Fal. I am bound to thee, reverend Feeble. Who 

is next. * 180 

Shal. Peter Bullcalf o' the green ! 
Fal. Yea, marry, let 's see Bullcalf. 

79 



Act III. Sc. ii. THE SECOND PART OF 

Bull. Here, sir. 

Fal. 'Fore God, a likely fellow ! Come, prick me 

BuUcalf till he roar again. 
Bull. O Lord ! good my lord captain, — 
Fal. What, dost thou roar before thou art pricked ? 
Bull. O Lord, sir ! I am a diseased man. 
Fal. What disease hast thou ? 
Bull. A whoreson cold, sir, a cough, sir, which I 190 

caught with ringing in the king's affairs upon 

his coronation-day, sir. 
Fal. Come, thou shalt go to the wars in a gown ; we 

will have away thy cold; and I will take such 

order that thy friends shall ring for thee. Is 

here all ? 
Shal. Here is two more called than your number; 

you must have but four here, sir: and so, I 

pray you, go in with me to dinner. 
Fal. Come, I will go drink with you, but I cannot 

tarry dinner. I am glad to see you, by my 200 

troth, Master Shallow. 
SJial. O, Sir John, do you remember since we lay all 

night in the windmill in Saint George's field ? 
Fal. No more of that. Good Master Shallow, no more 

of that. 
Shal. Ha ! 'twas a merry night. And is Jane Night- 
work alive? 
Fal. She lives, Master Shallow. 
Shal. She never could away with me. 
Fal. Never, never; she would always say she could 210 

not abide Master Shallow. 
Shal. By the mass, I could anger her to the heart. 
She was then a bona-roba. Doth she hold her 
own well? 

80 



KING HENRY IV. Act III. Sc. ii. 

Fal Old, old, Master Shallow. 

Shal. Nay, she must be old; she cannot choose but 
be old ; certain she 's old ; and had Robin 
Nightwork by old Nightwork before I came to 
Clement's Inn. 

Sil. That 's fifty-five year ago. 220 

Shal. Ha, cousin Silence, that thou hadst seen that 
that this knight and I have seen! Ha, Sir 
John, said I well? 

Fal. We have heard the chimes at midnight, Master 
Shallow. 

Shal. That we have, that we have, that we have; 
in faith, Sir John, we have : our watch-word 
was * Hem boys ! ' Come, let 's to dinner; come, 
let 's to dinner : Jesus, the days that we have 
seen! Come, come. 230 

[Exeunt Falstaif and the Justices. 

Bull. Good master corporate Bardolph, stand my 
friend ; and here 's four Harry ten shillings in 
French crowns for you. In very truth, sir, I 
had as hef be hanged, sir, as go: and yet, for 
mine own part, sir, I do not care; but rather, 
because I am unwilling, and, for mine own part, 
have a desire to stay with my friends ; else, sir, 
I did not care, for mine own part, so much. 

Bard. Go to ; stand aside. 

Moul. And, good master corporal captain, for my old 240 
dame's sake, stand my friend: she has nobody 
to do any thing about her when I am gone ; and 
she is old, and cannot help herself: you shall 
have forty, sir*. 

Bard, Go to ; stand aside. 

81 



Act III. Sc. ii. THE SECOND PART OF 

Fee, By my troth, I care not; a man can die but 
once ; we owe God a death : I '11 ne'er bear a 
base mind : an 't be my destiny, so ; an 't be 
not, so : no man 's too good to serve 's prince ; 
and let it go which way it will, he that dies this 250 
year is quit for the next. 

Bard. Well said ; thou 'rt a good fellow. 

Fee. Faith, I'll bear no base mind. 

Re-enter Falstaif and the Justices. 

Fat. Come, sir, which men shall I have? 

Shal. Four of which you please. 

Bard. Sir, a word with you : I have three pound 
to free Mouldy and BuUcalf. 

Fal. Go to; well. 

Shal. Come, Sir John, which four will you have ? 

FaL Do you choose for me. 260 

Shal. Marry, then. Mouldy, Bullcalf, Feeble and 
Shadow. 

Fal. Mouldy and Bullcalf : for you, Mouldy, stay at 
home till you are past service : and for your part, 
Bullcalf, grow till you come unto it : I will none 
of you. 

Shal. Sir John, Sir John, do not yourself wrong: 
they are your likeliest men, and I would have 
you served with the best. 

Fal. Will you tell me. Master Shallow, how to 270 
choose a man ? Care I for the limb, the thewes, 
the stature, bulk, and big assemblance of a man ! 
Give me the spirit, Master Shallow. Here 's 
Wart ; you see what a ragged appearance it is : 
a' shall charge you and discharge you with the 

82 



KING HENRY IV. Act III. Sc. ii. 

motion of a pewterer's hammer, come off and on 
swifter than he that gibbets on the brewer's 
bucket. And this same half-faced fellow, 
Shadow ; give me this man : he presents no 
mark to the enemy; the foeman may with as 280 
great aim level at the edge of a penknife. And 
for a retreat; how swiftly will this Feeble the 
woman's tailor run off! O, give me the spare 
men, and spare me the great ones. Put me a 
caliver into Wart's hand, Bardolph. 

Bard. Hold, Wart, traverse; thus, thus, thus. 

Fal. Come, manage me your caliver. So : very well : 
go to : very good, exceeding good. O, give me 
always a little, lean, old chapt, bald shot. Well 
said, i' faith. Wart ; thou 'rt a good scab : hold, 290 
there 's a tester for thee. 

Shal. He is not his craft's-master ; he doth not do it 
right. I remember at Mile-end Green, when I 
lay at Clement's Inn, — I was then Sir Dagonet in 
Arthur's show, — there was a little quiver fellow, 
and a' would manage you his piece thus ; and a' 
would about and about, and come you in and 
come you in : ' rah, tah, tah,' would a' say ; 
' bounce ' would a' say ; and away again would 
a' go, and again would a' come : I shall ne'er see 300 
such a fellow. 

Fal. These fellows will do well, Master Shallow. 
God keep you, Master Silence: I will not use 
many words with you. Fare you well, gentle- 
men both : I thank you : I must a dozen mile to- 
night. Bardolph, give the soldiers coats. 

Shal. Sir John, the Lord bless you! God prosper 

83 



Act III. Sc. ii. THE SECOND PART OF 

your affairs ! God send us peace ! At your re- 
turn visit our house; let our old acquaintance 
be renewed: peradventure I will with ye to the 310 
court. 

fai 'Fore God, I would you w^ould, Master Shallow. 

Jhal. Go to; I have spoke at a word. God keep 
you. 

Fal. Fare you well, gentle gentlemen. [Exeunt 
Justices.] On, Bardolph; lead the men away. 
[E.veioit Bardolph, Recruits, etc.] As I return, 
I will fetch off these justices : I do see the bot- 
tom of Justice Shallow. Lord, Lord, how sub- 
ject ye old men are to this vice of lying! This 320 
same starved justice hath done nothing but prate 
to me of the wildness of his youth, and the feats 
he hath done about Tumbull Street ; and every 
third word a lie, duer paid to the hearer than the 
Turk's tribute. I do remember him at Clement's 
Inn like a man made after supper of a cheese- 
paring: when a' was naked, he was, for all the 
world, like a forked radish, with a head fantas- 
tically carved upon it with a knife: a' was so 
forlorn, that his dimensions to any thick sight 330 
were invisible : a' was the ver}^ genius of famine ; 
yet lecherous as a monkey, and the whores 
called him mandrake : a' came ever in the rear- 
ward of the fashion, and sung those tunes to the 
overscutched huswives that he heard the carmen 
w^histle, and sware they were his fancies or his 
good-nights. And now is this Vice's dagger 
become a squire, and talks as familiarly of John 
a Gaunt as if he had been sworn brother to him ; 

84 



KING HENRY IV. Act IV. Sc. i. 

and I '11 be sworn a' ne'er saw him but once in 340 
the Tilt-yard; and then he burst his head for 
crowding among the marshal's men. I saw it, 
and told John a Gaunt he beat his own name ; 
for you might have thrust him and all his apparel 
into an eel-skin ; the case of a treble houtboy 
was a mansion for him, a court : and now has 
he land and beefs. Well, I '11 be acquainted 
with him, if I return ; and it shall go hard but I 
will make him a philosopher's two stones to me : 
if the young dace be a bait for the old pike, I see 350 
no reason in the law of nature but I may snap 
at him. Let time shape, and there an end. [Exit. 

ACT FOURTH. 
Scene I. 

Yorkshire. Gaidtrce Forest. 

Enter the Archbishop of York, Mowbray, 
Hastings, and others. 

Arch. What is this forest call'd? 

Hast. 'Tis Gaultree Forest, an 't shall please your grace. 

Arch. Here stand, my lords ; and send discoverers forth 
To know the numbers of our enemies. 

Hast. We have sent forth already. 

Arch. 'Tis well done. 

My friends and brethren in these great affairs, 
I must acquaint you that I have received 
New-dated letters from Northumberland ; 
Their cold intent, tenour and substance, thus : 
Here doth he wish his person, with such powers 10 

85 



Act IV. Sc. i. THE SECOND PART OF 

As might hold sortance with his quality, 
The which he could not levy ; whereupon 
He is retired, to ripe his growing fortunes. 
To Scotland : and concludes in hearty prayers 
That your attempts may overlive the hazard 
And fearful meeting of their opposite. 
Mowb. Thus do the hopes we have in him touch ground 
And dash themselves to pieces. 

Enter a Messenger. 

Hast. Now, what news? 

Mess. West of this forest, scarcely off a mile, 

In goodly form comes on the enemy ; 20 

And, by the ground they hide, I judge their number 
Upon or near the rate of thirty thousand. 

Mowb. The just proportion that we gave them out. 
Let us sway on and face them in the field. 

Arch. What well-appointed leader fronts us here ? 

Enter Westmoreland. 

Mozvb. I think it is my Lord of Westmoreland. 

West. Health and fair greeting from our general, 
The prince. Lord John and Duke of Lancaster. 

Arch. Say on, my Lord of Westmoreland, in peace : 
What doth concern your coming? 

West. Then, my lord, 30 

Unto your grace do I in chief address 
The substance of my speech. If that rebellion 
Came like itself, in base and abject routs, 
Led on by bloody youth, guarded with rags, 
And countenanced by boys and beggary ; 
I say, if damn'd commotion so appeared, 



KING HENRY IV. Act IV. Sc. i. 

In his true, native and most proper shape, 
You, reverend father, and these noble lords 
Had not been here, to dress the ugly form 
Of base and bloody insurrection 40 

With your fair honours. You, lord Archbishop. 
Whose see is by a civil peace maintain'd, 
Whose beard the silver hand of peace hath touch'd. 
Whose learning and good letters peace hath tutor'd. 
Whose white investments figure innocence. 
The dove and very blessed spirit of peace. 
Wherefore do you so ill translate yourself 
Out of the speech of peace that bears such grace. 
Into the harsh and boisterous tongue of war ; 
Turning your books to graves, your ink to blood, 50 
Your pens to lances, and your tongue divine 
To a loud trumpet and a point of war? 
Arch. Wherefore do I this? so the question stands. 
Briefly to this end: we are all diseased. 
And with our surfeiting and wanton hours 
Have brought ourselves into a burning fever, 
And we must bleed for it; of which disease 
Our late king, Richard, being infected, died. 
But, my most noble Lord of Westmoreland, 
I take not on me here as a physician, 60 

Nor do I as an enemy to peace 
Troop in the throngs of military men; 
But rather show a while like fearful war, 
To diet rank minds sick of happiness. 
And purge the obstructions which begin to stop 
Our very veins of life. Hear m^ more plainly. 
I have in equal balance justly weigh'd 
What wrongs our arms may do, what wrongs we sufifer, 

87 



Act IV. Sc. i. THE SECOND PART OF 

And find our griefs heavier than our offences. 

We see which way the stream of time doth run, 70 

And are enforced from our most quiet there 

By the rough torrent of occasion; 

And have the summary of all our griefs, 

When time shall serve, to show in articles; 

Which long ere this we offer'd to the king, 

And might by no suit gain our audience: 

When we are wrong'd and would unfold our griefs, 

We are denied access unto his person 

Even by those men that most have done us wrong. 

The dangers of the days but newly gone, 80 

Whose memory is wfitten on the earth 

With yet appearing blood, and the examples 

Of every minute's instance, present now, 

Hath put us in these ill-beseeming arms. 

Not to break peace or any branch of it, 

But to establish here a peace indeed, 

Concurring both in name and quality. 

West. When ever yet was your appeal denied? 
Wherein have you been galled by the king? 
What peer hath been suborn'd to grate on you, 90 
That you should seal this lawless bloody book 
Of forged rebellion with a seal divine. 
And consecrate commotion's bitter edge? 

Aj'ch. My brother general, the commonwealth, 
To brother born an household cruelty, 
I make my quarrel in particular. 

West. There is no need of any such redress; 
Or if there were, it not belongs to you. 

Mowb Why not to him in part, and to us all 

That feel the bruises of the davs before, 100 



KING HENRY IV. Act IV. Sc. i. 

And suffer the condition of these times 
To lay a heavy and unequal hand 
Upon our honours? 

West. O, my good Lord Mowbray, 

Construe the times to their necessities, 
And you shall say indeed, it is the time, 
And not the king, that doth you injuries. 
Yet for your part, it not appears to me 
Either from the king or in the present time 
That you should have an inch of any ground 
To build a grief on: were you not restored no 
To all the Duke of Norfolk's signories, 
Your noble and right well remember'd father's? 

Mozvb. What thing, in honour, had my father lost, 
That need to be revived and breathed in me? 
The king that loved him, as the state stood then, 
Was force perforce compell'd to banish him: 
And then that Henry Bolingbroke and he. 
Being mounted and both roused in their seats, 
Their neighing coursers daring of the spur, 119 

Their armed staves in charge, their beavers down, 
Their eyes of fire sparkling through sights of steel 
And the loud trumpet blowing them together, 
Then, then, when there was nothing could have stay'd 
j\Iy father from the breast of Bolingbroke, 
O, when the king did throw his warder down. 
His own life hung upon the staff he threw; 
Then threw he down himself and all their lives 
That by indictment and by dint of sword 
Have since miscarried under Bolingbroke, 

West. You speak, Lord Mowbray, now you know not 
what. 130 

89 



Act IV. Sc. i. THE SECOND PART OF 

The Earl of Hereford was reputed then 

In England the most valiant gentleman: 

Who knows on whom fortune would then have 

smiled? 
But if your father had been victor there, 
He ne'er had borne it out of Coventry : 
For all the country in a general voice 
Cried hate upon him ; and all their prayers and love 
Were set on Hereford, whom they doted on 
And bless'd and graced indeed, more than the king. 
But this is mere digression from my purpose. 140 

Here come I from our princely general 
To know your griefs; to tell you from his grace 
That he will give you audience; and wherein 
It shall appear that your demands are just, 
You shall enjoy them, every thing set off 
That might so much as think you enemies. 

Mowh. But he hath forced us to compel this offer ; 
And it proceeds from policy, not love. 

West. Mowbray, you overween to take it so; 

This offer comes from mercy, not from fear: 150 
For, lo ! within a ken our army lies. 
Upon mine honour, all too confident 
To give admittance to a thought of fear. 
Our battle is more full of names than yours, 
Our men more perfect in the use of arms. 
Our armour all as strong, our cause the best; 
Then reason will our hearts should be as good: 
Say you not then our offer is compell'd. 

Mowh. Well, by my will we shall admit no parley. 

West. That argues but the shame of your offence: 160 
A rotten case abides no handling. 

90 



KING HENRY IV. Act IV. Sc. i. 

Hast. Hath the Prince John a full commission, 
In every ample virtue of his father. 
To hear and absolutely to determine 
Of what conditions we shall stand .upon? 

West. That is intended in the general's name: 
I muse you make so slight a question. 

Arch. Then take, my Lord of Westmoreland, this 
schedule, 
For this contains our general grievances: 
Each several article herein redress'd, 170 

All members of our cause, both here and hence, 
That are insinewed to this action. 
Acquitted by a true substantial form, 
And present execution of our wills 
To us and to our purposes confined. 
We come within our awful banks again. 
And knit our powers to the arm of peace. 

West. This will I show the general. Please you, lords. 
In sight of both our battles we may meet; 
And either end in peace, which God so frame! 180 
Or to the place of difference call the swords 
Which must decide it. 

Arch. My lord, we will do so. [Exit West. 

Mowb. There is a thing within my bosoui tells me 
That no conditions of our peace can stand. 

Hasf. Fear you not that: if we can make our peace 
Upon such large terms and so absolute 
As our conditions shall consist upon, 
Our peace shall stand as firm as rocky mountains. 

Mowb. Yea, but our valuation shall be such 

That every slighc and false-derived cause, 190 

Yea, every idle, nice and wanton reason 
Shall to the king taste of this action; 

91 



Act IV. Sc. i. THE SECOND PART OF 

That, were our royal faiths martyrs in love, 
We shall be winnow'd with so rough a wind 
That even our corn shall seem as light as chaff 
And good from bad find no partition. 

Aixh. No, no, my lord. Note this; the king is weary 
Of dainty and such picking grievances : 
For he hath found to end one doubt by death 
Revives two greater in the heirs of life, 200 

And therefore will he wipe his tables clean, 
And keep no tell-tale to his memory 
That may repeat and history his loss 
To new remembrance; for full well he knows 
He cannot so precisely weed this land 
As his misdoubts present occasion: 
His foes are so enrooted with his friends 
That, plucking to unfix an enemy, 
He doth unfasten so and shake a friend. 
So that this land, like an offensive wife 210 

That hath enraged him on to offer strokes. 
As he is striking, holds his infant up, 
And hangs resolved correction in the arm 
That was uprear'd to execution, 

Hast. Besides, the king hath wasted all his rods 
On late offenders, that he now doth lack 
The very instruments of chastisement 
So that his power, like to a fangless lion. 
May offer, but not hold. 

Arch. 'Tis very true : 

And therefore be assured, my good lard marshal, 
If we do now make our atonement well, 221 

Our peace will, like a broken limb united. 
Grow stronger for the breaking. 

92 



KING HENRY IV. Act IV. Sc. ii. 

Mowh. Be it so. 

Here is return'd my Lord of Westmoreland. 

Re-enter Westmoreland. 

West. The prince is here at hand : pleaseth your lordship 

To meet his grace just distance 'tween our armies. 
Mozi'b. Your grace of York, in God's name, then, set 

forward. 
Arch. Before, and greet his grace : my lord, we come. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene II. 

Another part of the forest. 

Enter, from one side, Mozvbray, attended; afterzvards, 
the Archbishop ; Hastings, and others: from the 
other side, Prince John of Lancaster, and Westmore- 
land; OiHcers, and others with them. 

Lan. You are well encounter'd here, my cousin Mowbray : 
Good day to you, gentle lord archbishop ; 
And so to you, Lord Hastings, and to all- 
My Lord of York, it better show'd with you 
When that your flock, assembled by the bell, 
Encircled you to hear with reverence 
Your exposition on the holy text. 
Than now to see you here an iron man, 
Cheering a rout of rebels with your drum. 
Turning the word to sword and life to death. lo 

That man that sits within a monarch's heart. 
And ripens in the sunshine of his favour, 
Would he abuse the countenance of the king. 
Alack, what mischiefs might he set abroach 

93 



Act IV. Sc. ii. THE SECOND PART OF 

In shadow of such greatness ! With you, lord bishop, 

It is even so. Who hath not heard it spoken 

How deep you were within the books of God? 

To us the speaker in his parHament ; 

To us the imagined voice of God himself ; 

The very opener and intelligencer 20 

Between the grace, the sanctities of heaven 

And our dull workings. O, who shall believe 

But you misuse the reverence of your place. 

Employ the countenance and grace of heaven, 

As a false favourite doth his prince's name, 

In deeds dishonourable? You have ta'en up. 

Under the counterfeited zeal of God, 

The subjects of his substitute, my father, 

And both against the peace of heaven and him 

Have here up-swarm'd them. 

Arch. Good my Lord of Lancaster, 30 

I am not here against your father's peace ; 
But, as I told my Lord of Westmoreland, 
The time misorder'd doth, in common sense. 
Crowd us and crush us to this monstrous form, 
To hold our safety up. I sent your grace 
The parcels and particulars of our grief. 
The which hath been with scorn shoved from the 

court, 
Whereon this Hydra son of war is born ; 
Whose dangerous eyes may well be charm'd asleep 
With grant of our most just and right desires, 40 
And true obedience, of this madness cured. 
Stoop tamely to the foot of majesty. 

Mowh. If not, we ready are to try our fortunes 
To the last man. 

94 



KING HENRY IV. Act IV. Sc. ii. 

Hast, And though we here fall down, 

We have supplies to second our attempt : 
If they miscarry, theirs shall second them ; 
And so success of mischief shall be born, 
And heir from heir shall hold this quarrel up, 
Whiles England shall have generation. 49 

Lan. You are too shallow, Hastings, much too shallow, 
To sound the bottom of the after-times. 

West. Pleaseth your grace to answer them directly 
How far forth you do like their articles. 

Lan. I like them all, and do allow them well ; 
And swear here, by the honour of my blood, 
My father's purposes have been mistook ; 
And some about him have too lavishly 
Wrested his meaning and authority. 
My lord, these griefs shall be with speed redress'd ; 
Upon my soul, they shall. If this may please you, 
Discharge your powers unto their several counties. 
As we will ours : and here between the armies 62 
Let 's drink together friendly and embrace. 
That all their eyes may bear those tokens home 
Of our restored love and amity. 

Arch. I take your princely word for these redresses. 

Lan. I give it you, and will maintain my word: 
And thereupon I drink unto your grace. 

Hast. Go, captain, and deliver to the army 69 

This news of peace : let them have pay, and part : 
I know it will well please them. Hie thee, captain. 

[Exit OMcer, 

Arch. To you, my noble Lord of Westmoreland. 

IVest, I pledge your grace ; and, if you knew what pains 
I have bestow'd to breed this present peace, 

95 



Act IV. Sc. ii. THE SECOND PART OF 

You would drink freely : but my love to ye 

Shall show itself more openly hereafter. 
Arch. I do not doubt you. 
West. I am glad of it. 

Health to my lord and gentle cousin, Mowbray. 
Mowb. You wish me health in very happy season ; 

For I am, on the sudden, something ill. 80 

Arch. Against ill chances men are ever merry ; 

But heaviness foreruns the good event. 
West. Therefore be merry, coz ; since sudden sorrow 

Serves to say thus, ' some good thing comes to-morrow ?' 
Arch. Believe me, I am passing light in spirit. 
Mowb. So much the worse, if your own rule be true. 

[Shouts zvithin. 
Lan. The word of peace is render'd : hark, how they shout 1 
Mozvb. This had been cheerful after victory. 
Arch. A peace is of the nature of a conquest ; 

For then both parties nobly are subdued, 90 

And neither party loser. 
Lan. Go, my lord. 

And let our army be discharged too. 

[Exit Westmoreland. 

And, good my lord, so please you, let our trains 

March by us, that we may peruse the men 

We should have coped withal. 
Arch. Go, good Lord Hastings. 

And, ere they be dismissed, let them march by. 

[Exit Hastings. 
Lan. I trust, lords, we shall lie to-night together. 

Re-enter Westmoreland. 

Now, cousin, wherefore stands our army still? 
96 



KING HENRY IV. Act IV. Sc. ii. 

West. The leaders, having charge from you to stand, 

Will not go off until they hear you speak. lOO 

Lan. They know their duties. 

Re-enter Hastings. 

Hast. My lord, our army is dispersed already : 

Like youthful steers unyoked, they take their courses 
East, west, north, south ; or, like a school broke up, 
Each hurries toward his home and sporting-place. 

West. Good tidings, my Lord Hastings ; for the which 
I do arrest thee, traitor, of high treason : 
And you, lord archbishop, and you, Lord Mowbray, 
Of capital treason I attach you both. 

Mowh. Is this proceeding just and honourable? no 

West. Is your assembly so? 

Arch. Will you thus break your faith ? , 

-^o«. I pawn'd thee none : 

I promised you redress of these same grievances 
Whereof you did complain ; which, by mine honour, 
I will perform with a most Christian care. 
But for you, rebels, look to taste the due 
Meet for rebellion and such acts as yours. 
Most shallowly did you these arms commence. 
Fondly brought here and foolishly sent hence. 
Strike up our drums, pursue the scatter'd stray : 120 
God, and not we, hath safely fought to-day. 
Some guard these traitors to the block of death. 
Treason's true bed and yielder up of breath. 

[Exeunt. 



97 



Act IV. Sc. Hi. THE SECOND PAR'^ C^ 

Scene III. 

Another part of the forest. 

Alarum. Excursions. Enter Falstaff and Colevile, 
meeting. 

Fal. What 's your name, sir ? of what condition are 
you, and of what place, I pray? 

Cole. I am a knight, sir ; and my name is Colevile of 
the dale. 

fal. Well, then, Colevile is your name, a knight is 
your degree, and your place the dale : Colevile 
shall be still your name, a traitor your degree, 
and the dungeon your place, a place deep 
enough ; so shall you be still Colevile of the 
dale. 10 

Cole. Are not you Sir John Falstaff ? 

Fal. "As good a man as he, sir, whoe'er I am. Do ye 
yield, sir? or shall I sweat for you? If I do 
sweat, they are the drops of thy lovers, and they 
weep for thy death : therefore rouse up fear and 
trembling, and do observance to my mercy. 

Cole. I think you are Sir John Falstaff, and in that 
thought yield me. 

Fal. I have a whole school of tongues in this belly 

of mine, and not a tongue of them all speaks any 20 
other word but my name. An I had but a belly 
of any indifferency, I were simply the most active 
fellow in Europe: my womb, my womb, my 
womb, undoes me. Here comes our general. 

Enter Prince John of Lancaster, Westmoreland, 
Blunt, and others, 
l^an. The heat is past ; follow no further now: 

08 



KING HENRY IV. Act IV. Sc. iii. 

Call in the powers, good cousin Westmoreland. 

[Exit Westmoreland. 
Now, Falstaff, where have you been all this 

while ? 
When every thing is ended, then you come : 
These tardy tricks of yours will, on my Hfe, 
One time or other break some gallows' back. 30 

FaL I would be sorry, my lord, but it should be 
thus: I never knew yet but rebuke and check 
was the reward of valour. Do you think me a 
swallow, an arrow, or a bullet? have I, in my 
poor and old motion, the expedition of thought ? 
I have speeded hither with the very extremest 
inch of possibility ; I have foundered nine score 
and odd posts : and here, travel-tainted as I am, 
have, in my pure and immaculate valour, taken 
Sir John Colevile of the dale, a most furious 40 
knight and valorous enemy. But what of that ? 
he saw me, and yielded; that I may justly say, 
with the hook-nosed fellow of Rome, ' I came, 
saw, and overcame.' 

Lan. It was more of his courtesy that your deserving. 

FqI. I know not : here he is, and here I yield him : 
and I beseech your grace, let it be booked with 
the rest of this day's deeds ; or, by the Lord, I 
will have it in a particular ballad else, with mine 
own picture on the top on 't, Colevile kissing my 50 
foot : to the which course if I be enforced, if 
you do not all show like gilt two-pences to me, 
and I in the clear sky of fame o'ershine you as 
much as the full moon doth the cinders of the 
element, which show like pins' heads to her, 

99 



Act IV. Sc. iii. THE SECOND PART OF 

believe not the word of the noble : therefore let 

me have right, and let desert mount. 
Lan. Thine 's too heavy to mount. 
Fal. Let it shine, then. 

Lan. Thine 's too thick to shine. 60 

Fal. Let it do something, my good lord, that may do 

me good, and call it what you will. 
Lan. Is thy name Colevile ? 
Cole, It is, my lord. 

Lan, A famous rebel art thou, Colevile? 
Fal. And a famous true subject took him. 
Cole. I am, my lord, but as my betters are, 

That led me hither : had they been ruled by me. 

You should have won them dearer than you have. 
Fal. I know not how they sold themselves : but thou, 70 

like a kind fellow, gavest thyself away gratis; 

and I thank thee for thee. 

Re-enter Westmoreland. 

Lan. Now, have you left pursuit? 

West. Retreat is made and execution stay'd. 

Lan. Send Colevile with his confederates 
To York, to present execution : 
Blunt, lead him hence ; and see you guard him sure. 
[Exeunt Blunt and others zvith Colvile. 
And now dispatch we toward the court, my lords : 
I hear the king my father is sore siclc : 
Our news shall go before us to his majesty, 80 

Which, cousin, you shall bear to comfort him ; 
And we with sober speed will follow you. 

Fal. My lord, I beseech you, give me leave to go 

Through Gloucestershire: and, when you come to 
court, 

100 



KING HENRY IV. Act IV. Sc. iii. 

Stand my good lord, pray, in your good report. 

Lan. Fare you well, Falstaff : I, in my condition, 
Shall better speak of you than you deserve. 

[Exeunt all except Falstaff. 

Fal. I would you had but the wit : 'twere better than 
your dukedom. Good faith, this same young 
sober-blooded boy doth not love me ; nor a man 90 
cannot make him laugh ; but that 's no marvel, 
he drinks no wine. There 's never none of these 
demure boys come to any proof ; for thin drink 
doth so over-cool their blood, and making many 
fish-meals, that they fall into a kind of male 
green-sickness; and then, when they marry, 
they get wenches : they are generally fools and 
cowards; which some of us should be too, but 
for inflammation. A good sherris-sack hath a 
two-fold operation in it. It ascends me into the too 
brain; dries me there all the foolish and dull 
and crudy vapours which environ it; makes it 
apprehensive, quick, forgetive, full of nimble, 
fiery and delectable shapes ; which, delivered 
o'er to the voice, the tongue, which is the birth, 
becomes excellent wit. The second property 
of your excellent sherris is, the warming of the 
blood; which, before cold and settled, left the 
liver white and pale, which is the badge of 
pusillanimity and cowardice; but the sherris no 
warms it and makes it course from the inwards 
to the parts extreme: it illumineth the face, 
which as a beacon gives warning to all the rest 
of this little kingdom, man, to arm ; and then 
the vital commoners and inland petty spirits 



Act IV. Sc. iv. THE SECOND PART OF 

muster me all to their captain, the heart, who, 
great and pufifed up with this retinue, doth any 
deed of courage ; and this valour comes of sher- 
ris. So that skill in the weapon is nothing with- 
out sack, for that sets it a-work ; and learning a 120 
mere hoard of gold kept by a devil, till sack com- 
mences it and sets it in act and use. Hereof 
comes it that Prince Harry is valiant; for the 
cold blood he did naturally inherit of his father, 
he hath, like lean sterile and bare land, manured, 
husbanded and tilled with excellent endeavour of 
drinking good and good store of fertile sherris, 
that he is become very hot and valiant. If I 
had a thousand sons, the first humane principle 
I would teach them should be, to forswear thin 130 
potations, and to addict themselves to sack. 

Enter Bardolph, 

How now, Bardolph ? 

Bard. The army is discharged all and gone. 

Fal. Let them go. I '11 through Gloucestershire ; 
and there will I visit Master Robert Shallow, 
esquire : I have him already tempering between 
my finger and my thumb, and shortly will I seal 
with him. Come away. [Exeunt. 

Scene IV. 

Westminster. The Jerusalem Chamber. 

Enter the King, the Princes Thomas of Clarence and 
Humphrey of Gloucester, Warwick, and others. 
King. Now, lords, if God doth give successful end 
To this debate that bleedeth at our doors. 

102 



KING HENRY IV. Act IV. Sc. iv. 

We will our youth lead on to higher fields 

And draw no swords but what are sanctified. 

Our navy is address'd, our power collected, 

Our substitutes in absence well invested, 

And every thing lies level to our wish: 

Only, we w^ant a little personal strength; 

And pause us, till these rebels, now afoot. 

Come underneath the yoke of government. lo 

War. Both which we doubt not but your majesty 
Shall soon enjoy. 

King. Humphrey, my son of Gloucester, 

Where is the prince your brother? 

Gloii. I think he 's gone to hunt, my lord, at Windsor. 

King. And how accompanied? 

Glou. I do not know, my lord. 

King. Is not his brother, Thomas of Clarence, with him? 

Clou. No, my good lord, he is in presence here. 

Clai'. What would my lord and father? 

King. Nothing but well to thee, Thomas of Clarence. 19 
How chance thou art not with the prince thy brother ? 
He loves thee, and thou dost neglect him, Thomas; 
Thou hast a better place in his affection 
Than all thy brothers: cherish it, my boy, 
And noble offices thou mayst effect 
Of mediation, after I am dead. 
Between his greatness and thy other brethren : 
Therefore omit him not; blunt not his love, 
Nor lose the good advantage of his grace 
By seeming cold or careless of his will; 
For he is gracious, if he be observed: 30 

He hath a tear for pity, and a hand 
Open as day for melting charity: 

103 



Act IV. Sc. iv. THE SECOND PART OF 

Yet notwithstanding, being incensed, he 's flint, 
As humorous as winter, and as sudden 
As flaws congealed in the spring of day. 
His temper, therefore, must be well observed: 
Chide him for faults, and do it reverently. 
When you perceive his blood incHned to mirth; 
But, being moody, give him line and scope, 
Till that his passions, Hke a whale on ground, 40 
Confound themselves with working. Learn this, 

Thomas, 
And thou shalt prove a shelter to thy friends, 
A hoop of gold to bind thy brothers in, 
That the united vessel of their blood. 
Mingled with venom of suggestion — 
As, force perforce, the age will pour it in — 
Shall never leak, though it do work as strong 
As aconitum or rash gunpowder. 

Clar. I shall observe him with all care and love. 

King. Why art thou not at Windsor with him, 
Thomas? 

Clar. He is not there to-day; he dines in London. 51 

King. And how accompanied? canst thou tell that? 

Clar. With Poins, and other his continual followers. 

King. Most subject is the fattest soil to weeds; 
And he, the noble image of my youth. 
Is overspread with them: therefore my grief 
Stretches itself beyond the hour of death: 
The blood weeps from my heart when I do shape, 
In forms imaginary, the unguided days 
And rotten times that you shall look upon, 60 

When I am sleeping with my ancestors. 
For when his headstrong riot hath no curb, 
104 



KING HENRY IV. Act IV. Sc. iv. 

When rage and hot blood are his counsellors, 
When means and lavish manners meet together, 
O, with what wings shall his affections fly 
Towards fronting peril and opposed decay ! 

War. My gracious lord, you look beyond him quite : 
The prince but studies his companions 
Like a strange tongue, wherein, to gain the language, 
'Tis needful that the most immodest word 70 

Be look'd upon and learn'd ; which once attain'd. 
Your highness knows, comes to no further use 
But to be known and hated. So, like gross terms, 
The prince will in the perfectness of time 
Cast off his followers ; and in their memory 
Shall as a pattern or a measure live. 
By which his grace must mete the lives of 'Others, 
Turning past evils to advantages. 

King. 'Tis seldom when the bee doth leave her comb 
In the dead carrion. 

Enter Westmoreland. 

Who's here? Westmoreland? 80 
West. Health to my sovereign, and new happiness 
Added to that that I am to deliver ! 
Prince John your son doth kiss your grace's hand : 
Mowbray, the Bishop Scroop, Hastings and all 
Are brought to the correction of your law ; 
There is not now a rebel's sword unsheathed. 
But Peace puts forth her olive every where. 
The manner how this action hath been borne 
Here at more leisure may your highness read, 
With every course in his particular. 90 

King. O Westmoreland, thou art a summer bird, 

105 



Act IV. Sc. iv. THE SECOND PART OF 

Which ever in the haunch of winter sings 
The Hfting up of day. 

Enter Harcourt. 

Look, here 's more news. 

Har, From enemies heaven keep your majesty; 

And, when they stand against you, may they fall 

As those that I am come to tell you of ! 

The Earl Northumberland and the Lord Bardolph, 

With a great power of English and of Scots, 

Are by the sheriff of Yorkshire overthrown : 

The manner and true order of the fight, too 

This packet, please it you, contains at large. 

King. And wherefore should these good news make me sicK ^ 
Will Fortune never come with both hands full, 
But write her fair words still in foulest letters ? 
She either gives a stomach and no food ; 
Such are the poor, in health ; or else a feast 
And takes away the stomach : such are the rich, 
That have abundance and enjoy it not. 
I should rejoice now at this happy news ; 
And now my sight fails, and my brain is giddy : no 
O me ! come near me ; now I am much ill. 

Glou. Comfort, your majesty! 

Clar. O my royal father ! 

West, My sovereign lord, cheer up yourself, look up. 

War. Be patient, princes ; you do know, these fits 
Are with his highness very ordinary. 
Stand from him, give him air ; he '11 straight be well. 

Clar. No, no, he cannot long hold out these pangs : 
The incessant care and labour of his mind 
Hath wrought the mure, that should confine it in, 
io6 



KING HENRY IV. Act IV. Sc. v. 

So thin that life looks through and will break out. 
Gloii. The people fear me ; for they do observe 121 

Unfather'd heirs and loathly births of nature : 

The seasons change their manners, as the year 

Had found some months asleep and leap'd them over. 
Clar. The river hath thrice flow'd, no ebb between ; 

And the old folk, time's doting chronicles. 

Say it did so a little time before 

That our great-grandsire, Edward, sick'd and died. 
War. Speak lower, princes, for the king recovers. 
Glott. This apoplexy w^ill certain be his end. 130 

King. I pray you, take me up, and bear me hence 

Into some other chamber : softly, pray. [Exeunt. 

Scene V. 

Another chamber. 

The King lying on a bed: Clarence, Gloucester, 
Warwick, and others in attendance. 

King. Let there be no noise made, my gentle friends ; 

Unless some dull and favourable hand 

Will whisper music to my weary spirit. 
War. Call for the music in the other room. 
King. Set me the crown upon my pillow here. 
Clar. His eye is hollow, and he changes much. 
War. Less noise, less noise ! 

Enter Prince Henry. 

Prince. Who saw the Duke of Clarence ? 

Clar. I am here, brother, full of heaviness. 
Prince, How now ! rain within doors, and none abroad ! 
How doth the king? . 10 

107 



Act IV. Sc. V. THE SECOND PART OF 

Glou. Exceeding ill. 

Prince. Heard he the good news yet? 

Tell it him. 

Glou. He alter'd much upon the hearing it. 

Prince. If he be sick with joy, he '11 recover without 
physic. 

War. Not so much noise, my lords : sweet prince, speak 
low; 
The king your father is disposed to sleep. 

Clar. Let us withdraw into the other room. 

JVar. Will 't please your grace to £;o along with us ? 

Prince. No ; I will sit and watch here by the king. 20 

[Exeunt all except the Prince. 
Why doth the crown lie there upon his pillow, 
Being so troublesome a bedfellow? 
O polish'd perturbation ! golden care ! 
That keep'st the ports of slumber open wide 
To many a watchful night ! sleep with it now ! "=' 
Yet not so sound and half so deeply sweet 
As he whose brow with homely biggen bound 
Snores out the watch of night. O majesty! 
When thou dost pinch thy bearer, thou dost sit 
Like a rich armour worn in heat of day, 30 

That scalds with safety. By his gates of breath 
There lies a downy feather which stirs not : 
Did he suspire, that light and weightless down 
Perforce must move. My gracious lord ! my father ! 
This sleep is sound indeed ; this is a sleep. 

That from this golden rigol hath divorced ■ 

So many English kings. Thy due from me 
Is tears and heavy sorrows of the blood. 
Which nature, love, and fiHal tenderness, 
108 



KING HENRY IV. Act IV. Sc. v. 

Shall, O dear father, pay thee plenteously : 40 

My due from thee is this imperial crown. 

Which, as immediate from thy place and blood. 

Derives itself to me. Lo, here it sits. 

Which God shall guard : and put the world's whole 

strength 
Into one giant arm, it shall not force 
This lineal honour from me : this from thee 
Will I to mine leave, as 'tis left to me. [Exit. 

King. Warwick ! Gloucester ! Clarence ! 

Re-enter IVarzvick, Gloucester, Clarence, and the rest. 

Clar. Doth the king call? 

War. What would your majesty ? How fares your grace ? 
King. Why did you leave me here alone, my lords? 51 
Clar. We left the prince my brother here, my liege. 

Who undertook to sit and watch by you. 
King. The Prince of Wales ! Where is he ? let me see 

f him: 

He is not here. 
War. This door is open ; he is gone this way. 
Clou. He came not through the chamber where we stay'd. 
King. Where is the crown ? who took it from my pillow ? 
War. When we withdrew, my liege, we left it here. 
King. The prince hath ta'en it hence : go, seek him out. 60 

Is he so hasty that he doth suppose 

My sleep my death ? 

Find him, my Lord of Warwick ; chide him thither. 

{Exit Warzvick. 

This part of his conjoins with my disease, 

And helps to end me. See, sons, what things you 
are! 

109 



Act IV. Sc. V. THE SECOND PART OF 

How quickly nature falls into revolt 

When gold becomes her object! 

For this the foolish over-careful fathers 

Have broke their sleep with thoughts, their brains 

with care, 
Their bones with industry ; 73 

For this they have engrossed and piled up 
The canker'd heaps of strange-achieved gold ; 
For this they have been thoughtful to invest 
Their sons with arts and martial exercises : 
When, like the bee, culling from every flower 
The virtuous sweets. 

Our thighs pack'd with wax, our mouths with honey, 
We bring it to the hive ; and, like the bees, 
Are murder'd for our pains. This bitter taste 
Yield his engrossments to the ending father. 80 

Re-enter Warzvick. 

Now, where is he that will not stay so long 

Till his friend sickness hath determined me? f 

War. My lord, I found the prince in the next room, 
Washing with kindly tears his gentle cheeks. 
With such a deep demeanour in great sorrow. 
That tyranny, which never quaff'd but blood. 
Would, by beholding him, have wash'd his knife 
With gentle eye-drops. He is coming hither. 

King. But wherefore did he take away the crown? 

Re-enter Prince Henry. 

Lo, where he comes. Come hither to me, Harry. 
Depart the chamber, leave us here alone. 91 

[Exeunt Warwick and the rest. 
no 



KING HENRY IV. Act IV. Sc. v. 



Prince. I never thought to hear you speak again. 

King. Thy wish was father, Harry, to that thought: 
I stay too long by thee, I weary thee. 
Dost thou so hunger for mine empty chair 
That thou wilt needs invest thee with my honours 
Before thy hour be ripe? O foolish youth! 
Thou seek'st the greatness that will overwhelm thee. 
Stay but a little; for my cloud of dignity 
Is held from falling with so weak a wind lOO 

That it will quickly drop: my day is dim. 
Thou hast stolen that which after some few hours 
Were thine without offence; and at my death 
Thou hast seal'd up my expectation: 
Thy life did manifest thou lovedst me not. 
And thou wilt have me die assured of it. 
Thou hidest a thousand daggers in thy thoughts, 
Which thou hast whetted on thy stony heart, 
To stab at half an hour of my life. 
What! canst thou not forbear me half an hour? no 
Then get thee gone and dig my grave thyself, 
And bid the merry bells ring to thine ear 
That thou art crowned, not that I am dead. 
Let all the tears that should bedew my hearse 
Be drops of balm to sanctify thy head : 
Only compound me with forgotten dust; 
Give that which gave thee life unto the worms. 
Pluck down my officers, break my decrees; 
For now a time is come to mock at form: 
Harry the fifth is crown'd: up, vanity! 120 

Down, royal state! all you sage counsellors, hence 
And to the English court assemble now. 
From every region, apes of idleness! 
Ill 



Act IV. Sc. V. THE SECOND PART OF 

Now, neighbour confines, purge you of your scum: 
Have you a ruffian that will swear, drink, dance, 
Revel the night, rob, murder, and commit 
The oldest sins the newest kind of ways? 
Be happy, he will trouble you no more; 
England shall double gild his treble guilt, 
England shall give him ofhce, honour, might; 130 
For the fifth Harry from curb'd licence plucks 
The muzzle of restraint, and the wild dog 
Shall flesh his tooth on every innocent. 

my poor kingdom, sick with civil blows! 
When that my care could not withhold thy riots, 
What wilt thou do when riot is thy care? 

O, thou wilt be a wilderness again. 
Peopled with wolves, thy old inhabitants! 
Prince. O, pardon me, my liege! but for my tears, 

The moist impediments unto my speech, 140 

1 had forestall'd this dear and deep rebuke. 
Ere you with grief had spoke and I had heard 
The course of it so far. There is your crown; 
And He that wears the crown immortally 
Long guard it yours ! If I effect it more 
Than as your honour and as your renown, 
Let me no more from this obedience rise, 
Which my most inward true and duteous spirit 
Teacheth, this prostrate and exterior bending. 

God witness with me, when I here came in, 150 

And found no course of breath within your majesty. 
How cold it struck my heart ! If I do feign, 
O, let me in my present wildness die, 
And never live to show the incredulous world 
The noble change that I have purposed! 
112 



KING HENRY IV. Act IV. Sc. v. 

Coming to look on you, thinking you dead, 

And dead almost, my liege, to think you were, 

I spake unto this crown as having sense, 

And thus upbraided it : ' The care on thee depending 

Hath fed upon the body of my father; i6o 

Therefore, thou best of gold are worst of gold: 

Other, less fine in carat, is m.ore precious. 

Preserving life in medicine potable; 

But thou, most fine, most honour'd, most renown'd, 

Hast eat thy bearer up.' Thus, my most royal liege, 

Accusing it, I put it on my head. 

To try with it, as with an enemy 

That iiad before my face murder'd my father. 

The quarrel of a true inheritor. 

But if it did infect my blood with joy, 170 

Or swell my thoughts to any strain of pride; 

If any rebel or vain spirit of mine 

Did with the least affection of a welcome 

Give entertainment to the might of it, 

Let God for ever keep it from my head, 

And make me as the poorest vassal is. 

That doth with awe and terror kneel to it! 

King. O my son, 

God put it in thy mind to take it hence, 

That thou mightst win the more thy father's love. 

Pleading so wisely in excuse of it! 181 

Come hither, Harry, sit thou by my bed; 

And hear, I think, the very latest counsel 

That ever I shall breathe. God knows, my son. 

By what by-paths and indirect crook'd ways 

I met this crown ; and I myself know well 

How troublesome it sat upon my head. 

"3 



Act IV. Sc. V. THE SECOND PART OF 

To thee it shall descend with better quiet, 

Better opinion, better confirmation; 

For all the soil of the achievement goes 190 

With me into the earth. It seem'd in me 

But as an honour snatched with boisterous hand. 

And I had many living to upbraid 

My gain of it by their assistances; 

Which daily grew to quarrel and to bloodshed. 

Wounding supposed peace: all these bold fears 

Thou see'st with peril 1 have answered; 

For all my reign hath been but as a scene 

Acting that argument : and now my death 

Changes the mode; for what in me was purchased, 

Falls upon thee in a more fairer sort; 201 

So thou the garland wear'st successively. 

Yet, though thou stand'st more sure than I could do. 

Thou art not firm enough, since griefs are green ; 

And all my friends, which thou must make thy 

friends. 
Have but their stings and teeth newly ta'en out; 
By whose fell working I was first advanced 
And by whose power I well might lodge a fear 
To be again displaced: which to avoid, 
Icutthemof¥; and had a purpose now 210 

To lead out many to the Holy Land, 
Lest rest and lying still might make them look 
Too near unto my state. Therefore, my Harry, 
Be it thy course to busy giddy minds 
With foreign quarrels ; that action, hence borne out, 
May waste the memory of the former days. 
More would I, but my lungs are wasted so 
That strength of speech is utterly denied me. 

114 



KING HENRY IV. Act IV. Sc. v. 

How I came by the crown, O God forgive ; 
And grant it may with thee in true peace Uve ! 220 
Prince. My gracious Hege, 

You won it, wore it, kept it, gave it me ; 
Then plan and right must my possession be : 
Which I with more than with a common pain 
'Gainst all the world will rightfully maintain. 

Enter Lord John of Lancaster. 

King. Look, look, here comes my John of Lancaster. 
Lan. Health, peace, and happiness to my royal father ! 
King. Thou bring' st me happiness and peace, son John ; 

But health, alack, with youthful wings is flown 

From this bare wither'd trunk : upon thy sight 230 

M^ worldly business makes a period. 

Where is my Lord of Warwick ? 
Prince. My Lord of Warwick ! 

Re-enter Warzvick, and others. 

King. Doth any name particular belong 

Unto the lodging where I first did swoon ? 

War. 'Tis call'd Jerusalem, my noble lord. 

King. Laud be to God ! even there my life must end. 
It hath been prophesied to me many years, 
I should not die but in Jerusalem ; 
Which vainly I supposed the Holy Land : 
But bear me to that chamber ; there I '11 lie ; 240 

In that Jerusalem shall Harry die. [Exeunt. 



IIS 



Act V. Sc. i. THE SECOND PART OF 

ACT FIFTH. 

Scene I. 

Gloucestershire. Shallozv's house. 
Enter Shallozv, Falstaif, Bardolph, and Page. 

Shal. By cock and pie, sir, you shall not away to- 
night. What, Davy, I say! 

Pal. You must excuse me, Master Robert Shallow. 

Shal. I will not excuse you ; you shall not be ex- 
cused; excuses shall not be admitted; there is 
no excuse shall serve ; you shall not be excused. 
Why, Davy. 

Enter Davy. 

« 

Davy. Here, sir. 

Shal. Davy, Davy, Davy, Davy, let me see, Davy; 

let me see, Davy; let me see: yea, marry, lo 
William cook, bid him come hither. Sir John, 
you shall not be excused. 

Davy. Marry, sir, thus ; those precepts cannot be 
served : and, again, sir, shall we sow the head- 
land with wheat ? 

ShMl. With red wheat, Davy. But for William cook : 
are there no young pigeons? 

Davy. Yes, sir. Here is now the smith's note for 
shoeing and plough-irons. 

Shal. Let it be cast and paid. Sir John, you shall not 20 
be excused. 

Davy. Now, sir, a new link to the bucket must needs 
be had : and, sir, do you mean to stop any of 
William's wages, about the sack he lost the other 
day at Hinckley fair ? 



KING HENRY IV. Act V. Sc. i. 

Shal. A' shall answer it. Some pigeons, Davy, a 
couple of short-legged hens, a joint of mutton, 
and any pretty little tiny kickshaws, tell William 
cook. 

Davy. Doth the man of war stay all night, sir ? 30 

Shal. Yea, Davy. I will use him well: a friend i' 
the court is better than a penny in purse. Use 
his men well, Davy; for they are arrant knaves, 
and will backbite. 

Davy. No worse than they are backbitten, sir; for 
they have marvellous foul linen. 

Shal. Well conceited, Davy: about thy business, 
Davy. 

Davy. I beseech you, sir, to countenance William 

Visor of Woncot against Clement Perkes o' the 40 
hill. 

Shal. There is many complaints, Davy, against that 
Visor: that Visor is an arrant knave, on my 
knowledge. 

Davy. I grant your worship that he is a knave, sir; 
but yet, God forbid, sir, but a knave should 
have some countenance at his friend's request. 
An honest man, sir, is able to speak for himself, 
when a knave is not. I have served your wor- 
ship truly, sir, this eight years; and if I cannot 50 
once or twice in a quarter bear out a knave 
against an honest man, I have but a very little 
credit with your worship. The knave is mine 
honest friend, sir; therefore, I beseech your 
worship, let him be countenanced. 

Shal. Go to; I say he shall have no wrong. Look 
about, Davy. [Exit Davy.] Where are you, 

117 



Act V. Sc. i. THE SECOND PART OF 

Sir John? Come, come, come, off with your 
boots. Give me your hand, Master Bardolph. 
Bard. I am glad to see your worship. 60 

Shal. I thank thee with all my heart, kind Master 
Bardolph: and welcome, my tall fellow {to the 
Pagc.'\ Come, Sir John. 
Fal. I '11 follow you, good Master Robert Shallow. 
\Exit Shallozi'.] Bardolph, look to our horses. 
[Exeunt Bardolph and Page.] 'If I were sawed 
into quantities, I should make four dozen of 
such bearded hermits' staves as Master Shallow. 
It is a wonderful thing to see the semblable co- 
herence of his men's spirits and his: they, by 70 
observing of him, do bear themselves like fool- 
ish justices; he, by conversing with them, is 
turned into a justice-like serving-man: their 
spirits are so married in conjunction with the 
participation of society that they flock together 
in consent, like so many wild-geese. If I had a 
suit to Master Shallow, I would humour his 
men with the imputation of being near their 
master: if to his men, I would curry with Mas- 
ter Shallow that no man could better command 
his servants. It is certain that either wise bear- 80 
ing or ignorant carriage is caught, as men take 
diseases, one of another: therefore let men take 
heed of their company. I will devise matter 
enough out of this Shallow to keep Prince 
Harry in continual laughter the wearing out of 
six fashions, which is four terms, or two ac- 
tions, and a' shall laught without intervallums. 
O, it is much that a lie with a slight oath and 
a jest with a sad brow will do with a fel- 

118 



KING HENRY IV. Act V. Sc. ii. 

low that never had the ache in his shoulders ! 90 
S; you shall see him laugh till his face be like a 
wet cloak ill laid up ! 

low. 

Scene II. 

Westminster. The palace. 
Enter Warwick and the Lord Chief Justice, meeting. 
War. How now, my lord chief justice! whither away? 
Ch Jti^t. How doth the king? 

ran Exceeding well; his cares are now all ended. 
Ch. Just. I hope, not dead^^ ^^ ^^^^^^^ ^^^ ^^,^^, ^^ ^^^^^^ . 

"^nd to our purposes he lives no more. 
a,. jTst. I would his majesty had caird me with him: 
The service that I truly did his hte 
Hath left me open to all injuries 
War. Indeed I think the young king loves you not. 
a Just I know he doth not, and do arm myself 
■' To welcome the condition of the time. 

Which cannot look more hideously upon me 
Than I have drawn it in my fantasy. 

Enter Lancaster, Clarence, Gloucester, Westmore- 
land, and others. 
War. Here comes the heavy fsue of dead Harry : 
O that the living Harry had the temper 
Of him the worst of these three gentlemen! 
How many nobles then should hold their places. 



119 



Act V. Sc. ii. THE SECOND PART OF 



y Good morrow, cousin. 



That must strike sail to spirits of vile sort ! 
Ch. Just. O God, I fear all will be overturn' d ! 
Lan. Good morrow, cousin Warwick, good morrow. 20 
Gloii. 
Clar. 

Lan. We meet like men that had forgot to speak. 
Wai'. We do remember ; but our argument 

Is all too heavy to admit much talk. 
Lan. Well, peace be with him that hath made us heavy ! 
Ch. Just. Peace be with us, lest we be heavier ! 
Gloii. O, good my lord, you have lost a friend indeed ; 

And I dare swear you borrow not that face 

Of seeming sorrow, it is sure your own. 
Lan. Though no man be assured what grace to find, 30 

You stand in coldest expectation : 

I am the sorrier ; would 'twere otherwise. 
Clar. Well, you must now speak Sir John Falstafif fair ; 

Which swims against your stream of quality. 
Ch. Just. Sweet princes, what I did, I did in honour, 

Led by the impartial conduct of my soul ; 

And never shall you see that I will beg 

A ragged and forestall'd remission. 

If truth and upright innocency fail me, 

I '11 to the king my master that is dead, 40 

And tell him who hath sent me after him. 
War. Here comes the prince. 

Enter King Henry the fifth, attended. 

Ch. Just. Good morrow, and God save your majesty ! 
King. This new and gorgeous garment, majesty. 

Sits not so easy on me as you think. 

Brothers, you mix your sadness with some fear : 

120 



KING HENRY IV. Act V. Sc. ii. 

This is the EngHsh, not the Turkish court; 

Not Amurath an Amurath succeeds, 

But Harry Harry. Yet be sad, good brothers, 

For, by my faith, it very well becomes you: 50 

Sorrow so royally in you appears 

That I will deeply put the fashion on. 

And wear it in my heart: why then, be sad; 

But entertain no more of it, good brothers. 

Than a joint burden laid upon us all. 

For me, by heaven, I bid you be assured, 

I '11 be your father and your brother too; 

Let me but bear your love, I '11 bear your cares: 

Yet weep that Harry's dead; and so will I; 

But Harry lives, that shall convert those tears 60 

By number into hours of happiness. 

Princes. We hope no other from your majesty. 

King. You all look strangely on me: and you most; 
You are, I think, assured I love you not. 

Ch. Just. I am assured, if I be measured rightly, 
Your majesty hath no just cause to hate me. 

Fing. No! 

How might a prince of my great hopes forget 
So great indignities you laid upon me? 
What! rate, rebuke, and roughly send to prison 70 
The immediate heir of England ! Was this easy ? 
May this be wash'd in Lethe, and forgotten? 

C/i. Just. I then did use the person of your father; 
The image of his power lay then in me : 
And, in the administration of his law, 
Whiles I was busy for the commonwealth, 
Your highness pleased to forget my place, 
The majesty and power of law and justice, 
121 



Act V. Sc. ii. THE SECOND PART OF 

The image of the king whom I presented, 
And struck me in the very seat of judgement; 80 
Whereon, as an offender to your father, 
I give bold way to my authority. 
And did commit you. If the deed were ill, 
Be you contented, wearing now the garland, 
To have a son set your decrees at nought. 
To pluck down justice from your awful bench, 
To trip the course of law and blunt the sword 
That guards the peace and safety of your person; 
Nay, more, to spurn at your most royal image 
And mock your workings in a second body. 90 
Question your royal thoughts, make the case yours ; 
Be now the father and propose a son. 
Hear your own dignity so much profaned. 
See your most dreadful laws so loosely slighted. 
Behold yourself so by a son disdain'd; 
And then imagine me taking your part. 
And in your power soft silencing your son: 
After this cold considerance, sentence me ; 
And, as you are a king, speak in your state 
What I have done that misbecame my place, 100 

My person, or my liege's sovereignty. 
King, You are right, justice, and you weigh this well; 
Therefore still bear the balance and the sword: 
And I do wish your honours may increase, 
Till you do live to see a son of mine 
Offend you, and obey you, as I did. 
So shall I live to speak my father's words: 
* Happy am I, that have_ a man so bold, 
That dares do justice on my proper son; 
And not less happy, having such a son, 110 

122 



KING HENRY IV. Act V. Sc. ii. 

That would deliver up his greatness so 
Into the hands of justice.' You did commit me: 
For which, I do commit into your hand 
The unstained sword that you have used to bear ; 
With this remembrance, that you use the same 
With the like bold, just, and impartial spirit 
As you have done 'gainst me. There is my hand. 
You shall be as a father to my youth : 
My voice shall sound as you do prompt mine ear, 
And I will stoop and humble my intents 120 

To your well-practised wise directions. 
And, princes all, believe me, I beseech you ; 
My father is gone wild into his grave, 
For in his tomb lie my affections ; 
And with his spirit sadly I survive, 
To mock the expectation of the world, 
To frustrate prophecies, and to raze out 
Rotten opinion, who hath writ me down 
After my seeming. The tide of blood in me 
Hath proudly flow'd in vanity till now : 130 

Now doth it turn and ebb back to the sea, 
Where it shall mingle with the state of floods, 
And flow henceforth in formal majesty. 
Now call we our high court of parliament : 
And let us choose such limbs of noble counsel, 
That the great body of our state may go 
In equal rank with the best govern'd nation ; 
That war, or peace, or both at once, may be 
As things acquainted and familiar to us ; 
In which you, father, shall have foremost hand. 140 
Our coronation done, we will accite. 
As I before remember' d, all our state : 
123 



Act V. Sc. iii. THE SECOND PART OF 

And, God consigning to my good intents, 

No prince nor peer shall have just cause to say, 

God shorten Harry's happy life one day. [Exeunt. 

Scene III. 

Gloucestershire. Shallozv's orchard. 

Enter Falstaif, Shallozv, Silence, Davy, Bardolph, 
and the Page. 

Shal. Nay, you shall see my orchard, where, in an 

arbour, we will eat a last year's pippin of my 

own graffing, with a dish of caraways, and so 

forth : come, cousin Silence : and then to bed. 
Fal. 'Fore God, you have here a goodly dwelling 

and a rich. 
Shal. Barren, barren, barren ; beggars all, beggars 

all, Sir John : marry, good air. Spread, Davy ; 

spread, Davy ; well said, Davy. 
Fal. This Davy serves you for good uses ; he is your lo 

serving-man and your husband. 
Shal. A good varlet, a good varlet, a very good var- 

let, Sir John : by the mass, I have drunk too 

much sack at supper: a good varlet. Now sit 

down, now sit down : come, cousin. 
Sil. Ah, sirrah ! quoth-a, we shall 

Do nothing but eat, and make good cheer. [Singing. 

And praise God for the merry year ; 

When flesh is cheap and females dear, 

And lusty lads roam here and there 20 

So merrily, 
And ever among so merrily. 
124 



KING HENRY IV. Act V. Sc. iii. 

Fal. There 's a merry heart I Good Master Silence, 

I '11 give you a health for that anon. 
Shai Give master Bardolph some wine, Davy. 
Davy. Sweet, sir, sit ; I '11 be with you anon ; most 
sweet sir, sit. Master page, good master page, 
sit. Proface ! What you want in meat, we '11 
have in drink ; but you must bear ; the heart 's 
all. [Exit. 30 

Shal. Be merry, Master Bardolph ; and, my little 

soldier there, be merry. 
Sil. Be merry, be merry, my wife has all ; [Singing, 

For women are shrews, both short and tall : 
'Tis merry in hall when beards wag all, 

And welcome merry Shrove-tide. 
Be merry, be merry. 
Fal. I did not think Master Silence had been a man 

of this mettle. 
^^7. Who, I ? I have been merry twice and once ere 40 
now. 

Re-enter Davy. 

Davy. There 's a dish of leather-coats for you. 

[To Bardolph. 
Shal. Davy! ' 
Davy. Your worship ! I '11 be with you straight 

[to Bardolph]. A cup of wine, sir? 
Sil. A cup of wine that 's brisk and fine, [Singing. 

And drink unto the leman mine ; 
And a merry heart lives long-a. 
Fal. Well said. Master Silence. 
Sil. An we shall be merry, now comes in the sweet 50 

o' the night. 
Fal. Health and long life to you, Master Silence. 

12?, 



Act V. Sc. iii. THE SECOND PART OF 

Sil. Fill the cup, and let it come; [Singing. 

I '11 pledge you a mile to the bottom. 

Shal. Honest Bardolph, welcome: if thou wantest 
any thing, and wilt not call, beshrew thy heart. 
Welcome, my little tiny thief [to the Page], and 
welcome indeed too. I '11 drink to Master Bar- 
dolph, and to all the cavaleros about London. 

Davy. I hope to see London once ere I die. 60 

Bard. An I might see you there, Davy, — 

Shal. By the mass, you '11 crack a quart together, ha ! 
will you not. Master Bardolph? 

Bard. Yea, sir, in a pottle-pot. 

Shal. By God's liggens, I thank thee : the knave will 
stick by thee, I can assure thee that. A' will 
not out ; he is true bred. 

Bard. And I '11 stick by him, sir. 

Shal. Why, there spoke a king. Lack nothing: be 

merry. [Knocking within.] Look who's at 70 
door there, ho! who knocks? [Exit Davy. 

Fal. Why, now you have done me right. 

[To Silence, seeing him take off. a bumper. 

Sil. Do me right, [Singing. 

And dub me knight : 
Samingo. 
Is 't not so ? 

Fal. 'Tis so. 

Sil. Is 't so ? Why then, say an old man can do 
somewhat. 

Re-enter Davy. 

Davy. An 't please your worship, there 's one Pistol 80 

come from the court with news. 
Fal. From the court ! let him come in. 

126 



KING HENRY IV. Act V, Sc. iii. 

Enter Pistol 

How now, Pistol ! 
Pist. Sir John, God save you ! 
Pal. What wind blew you hither, Pistol ? 
Pist. Not the ill wind which blows no man to good. 

Sweet knight, thou art now one of the greatest 

men in this realm. 
SiL By 'r lady, I think a' be, but goodman Puff of 

Barson. 90 

Pist. Puff! 

Puff in thy teeth, most recreant coward base ! 

Sir John, I am thy Pistol and thy friend, 

And helter-skelter have I rode to thee, 

And tidings do I bring and lucky joys 

And golden times and happy news of price. 
Pah I pray thee now, deliver them like a man of this 

world, 
Pist. A foutre for the world and worldlings base ! 

I speak of Africa and golden joys. 100 

Pal. O base Assyrian knight, what is thy news ? 

Let King Cophetua know the truth thereof. 
SiL And Robin Hood, Scarlet, and John. [Singing. 

Pist. Shall dunghill curs confront the Helicons? 

And shall good news be baffled ? 

Then, Pistol, lay thy head in Furies' lap. 
Shal. Honest gentleman, I know not your breeding. 
Pist. Whey then, lament therefore. 
Shal. Give me pardon, sir : if, sir, you come with 

news from the court, I take it there's but two no 

ways, either to utter them, or to conceal them. 

I am, sir, under the king, in some authority. 

1:27 



Act V. Sc. iii. THE SECOND PART OF 

Pist. Under which king, Besonian ? speak, or die. 

Shal. Under King Harry. 

Pist. Harry the fourth ? or fifth ? 

ShaL Harry the fourth. 

Pist. A foutre for thine office ! 

Sir John, thy tender lambkin now is king; 
Harry the fifth 's the man. I speak the truth : 
When Pistol lies, do this ; and fig me, like 
The bragging Spaniard. 

Fal. What, is the old king dead? 120 

Pist. As nail in door : the things I speak are just. 

Fal. Away, Bardolph! saddle my horse. Master 
Robert Shallow, choose what office thou wilt 
in the land, 'tis thine. Pistol, I will double- 
charge thee with dignities. 

Bard. O joyful day ! 

I would not take a knighthood for my fortune. 

Pist. What ! I do bring good news. 

Fal. Carry Master Silence to bed. Master Shallow, 

my Lord Shallow, — be what thou wilt; I am 130 
fortune's steward — get on thy boots : we '11 ride 
all night. O sweet Pistol! Away, Bardolph! 
[Exit Bard.] Come, Pistol, utter more to me; 
and withal devise something to do thyself good. 
Boot, boot. Master Shallow ! I know the young 
king is sick for me. Let us take any man's 
horses ; the laws of England are at my com- 
mandment. Blessed are they that have been 
my friends; and woe to my lord chief justice! 
Let vultures vile seize on his lungs also! 140 

* Where is the life that late I led ? ' say they : 
Why here it is ; welcome these pleasant days ! 

128 



KING HENRY IV. Act V. Sc. iv. 

Scene IV. 

London. A street. 

Enter Beadles, dragging in Hostess Quickly and 
Doll Tearsheet. 

Host. No, thou arrant knave ; I would to God that I 
might die, that I might have thee hanged : thou 
hast drawn my shoulder out of joint. 

First Bead. The constables have delivered her over to 
me ; and she shall have whipping-cheer enough, 
I warrant her: there hath been a man or two 
lately killed about her. 

Dol. Nut-hook, nut-hook, you lie. Come on ; I '11 
tell thee what, thou damned tripe-visaged rascal, 
an the child I now go with do miscarry, thou lo 
wert better thou hadst struck thy mother, thou 
paper-faced villain. 

Host. O the Lord, that Sir John were come! he 
would make this a bloody day to somebody. 
But I pray God the fruit of her womb mis- 
carry ! 

First Bead, If it do, you shall have a dozen of cush- 
ions again ; you have but eleven now. Come, 
I charge you both go with me ; for the man is 
dead that you and Pistol beat amongst you. 20 

Dol. I '11 tell you what, you thin man in a censer, 
I will have you as soundly swinged for this, — 
you blue-bottle rogue, you filthy famished cor- 
rectioner, if you be not swinged, I '11 forswear 
half-kirtles. 

First Bead. Come, come, you she knight-errant, come. 

129 



Act V. Sc. V. THE SECOND PART OF 

Host. O God, that right should thus overcome 

might ! \\^ell, of sufferance comes ease. 
Dol. Come, you rogue, come; bring me to a justice. 30 
Host. Ay, come, you starved blood-hound. 
Dol. Goodman death, goodman bones! 
Host. Thou atorfiy, thou! 

Dol. Come, you thin thing; come, you rascal. 
First Bead. Very well. [Exeunt. 

Scene V. 

A public place near Westminster Abbey. 

Enter tzvo grooms, streunng rushes. 

First Groom. More rushes, more rushes. 

Sec. Groom. The trumpets have sounded twice. 

First Groom. 'Twill be two o'clock ere they come 

from the coronation : dispatch, dispatch. [Exeunt. 

Enter Falstaff, SJiallozc, Pistol, Bardolph, and Page. 

Fal. Stand here by me, Master Robert Shallow ; I "* 
will make the king do you grace : I will leer 
upon him as a' comes by ; and do but mark the 
countenance that he will give me. 

Pist. God bless thy lungs, good knight. 

Fal. Come here. Pistol; stand behind me. O, if I 10 
had had time to have made new liveries, I would 
have bestowed the thousand pound I borrowed 
of you. But 'tis no matter ; this poor show doth 
better: this doth infer the zeal I had to see him. 

ShaL It doth so. 

Fal, It shows my earnestness of affection, — 

Shal. It doth so. 

130 



KING HENRY IV. Act V. Sc. V. 

Fal. My devotion, — 

Shal It doth, it doth, it doth. 

Fal. As it were, to ride day and night ; and not to 20 

deUberate, not to remember, not to have patience 

to shift me, — 
Shal. It is best, certain. 
Fal. But to stand stained with travel, and sweating 

with desire to see him ; thinking of nothing else, 

putting all affairs else in oblivion, as if there 

were nothing else to be done but to see him. 
Pist. 'Tis ' semper idem,' for ' obsque hoc nihil est : ' 

'tis all in every part. 
Shal. 'Tis so, indeed. 30 

Pist. My knight, I will inflame thy noble liver, 

And make thee rage. 

Thy Doll, and Helen of thy noble thoughts. 

Is in base durance and contagious prison ; 

Haled thither 

By most mechanical and dirty hand : 

Rouse up revenge from ebon den with fell Alecto's 
snake, 

For Doll is in. Pistol speaks nought but truth. 
Fal. I will deliver her. 39 

[Sho^its zvithln, and the trumpets sound. 
Pist. There roar'd the sea, and trumpet-clangor sounds. 

Enter the King and his train, the Lord Chief Justice 
among them. 

Fal. God save thy grace. King Hal ! my royal Hal ! 
Pist. The heavens thee guard and keep, most royal 

imp of fame ! 
Fal. God save thee, my sweet boy ! 

131 



Act V. Sc. V. THE SECOND PART OF 

King. My lord chief justice, speak to that vain man. 

Ch. Just. Have you your wits ? know you what 'tis you 
speak ? 

FaL My king ! my Jove ! I speak to thee, my heart ! 

King. I know thee not, old man : fall to thy prayers ; 
How ill white hairs become a fool and jester! 
I have long dream'd of such a kind of man, 50 

So surfeit-swell'd, so old, and so profane ; 
But, being awaked, I do despise my dream. 
Make less thy body hence, and more thy grace ; 
Leave gormandizing ; know the grave doth gape 
For thee thrice wider than for other men. 
Reply not to me with a fool-born jest : 
Presume not that I am the thing I was ; 
For God doth know, so shall the world perceive. 
That I have turn'd away my former self; 
So will I those that kept me company. 60 

When thou dost hear I am as I have been. 
Approach me, and thou shalt be as thou wast, 
The tutor and the feeder of my riots : 
Till then, I banish thee, on pain of death, 
As I have done the rest of my misleaders, 
Not to come near our person by ten mile. 
For competence of life I will allow you. 
That lack of means enforce you not to evil : 
And, as we hear you do reform yourselves, 69 

We will, according to your strengths and qualities. 
Give you advancement. Be it your charge, my 

lord, 
To see perform'd the tenour of our word. 
Set on. [Exeunt King, etc, 

FaL Master Shallow, I owe you a thousand pound. 

132 



KING HENRY IV. Act V. Sc. v. 

ShaL Yea, marry, Sir John ; which I beseech you to 
let me have home with me. 

Fal That can hardly be, Master Shallow. Do not 
you grieve at this ; I shall be sent for in private 
to him : look you, he must seem thus to the 
world : fear not your advancements ; I will be So 
the man yet that shall make you great. 

SJiaJ. 1 cannot well perceive how, unless you should 
give me your doublet, and stuff me out with 
straw. I beseech you, good Sir John, let me 
have five hundred of my thousand. 

Fal. Sir, I will be as good as my word : this that 
you heard was but a colour. 

ShaL A colour that I fear you will die in, Sir John. 

Fal. Fear no colours : go with me to dinner : come. 

Lieutenant Pistol ; come, Bardolph : I shall be 9c 
sent for soon at night. 

Re-enter Prince John, and the Lord Chief Justice; 
Officers zvith them. 

Ch. Just. Go, carry Sir John Falstaff to the Fleet : 
Take all his company along with him. 

Fal. My lord, my lord, — 

Ch. Just. I cannot now speak : I will hear you soon. 
Take them away. 

Fist. Si fortuna me tormenta, spero contenta. 

[Exeunt all hut Prince John and the Chief Justice. 

Lan. I like this fair proceeding of the king's : 
He hath intent his wonted followers 
Shall all be very well provided for ; 100 

But all are banish'd till their conversations 
Appear more wise and modest to the world. 

133 



Epilogue THE SECOND PART OF 

Ch. Just. And so they are. 

Lan. The king hath call'd his parUament, my lord. 

Ch. Just. He hath. 

Lan. I will lay odds that, ere this year expire, 
We bear our civil swords and native fire 
As far as France : I heard a bird so sing. 
Whose music, to my thinking, pleased the king. 
Come, will you hence ? [Exeunt, no 

EPILOGUE. 

Spoken by a Dancer. 

First my fear ; then my courtesy ; last my 
speech. My fear is, your displeasure ; my cour- 
tesy, my duty ; and my speech, to beg your par- 
dons. If you look for a good speech now, you 
undo me : for what I have to say is of mine own 
making; and what indeed I should say will, I 
doubt, prove mine own marring. But to the 
purpose, and so to the venture. Be it known to 
you, as it is very well, I was lately here in the 
end of a displeasing play, to pray your patience lo 
for it and to promise you a better. I meant 
indeed to pay you with this ; which, if like an 
ill venture it come unluckily home, I break, and 
you, my gentle creditors, lose. Here I promised 
you I would be, and here I commit my body to 
your mercies : bate me some, and I will pay you 
some, and, as most debtors do, promise you in- 
finitely. 

If my tongue cannot entreat you to acquit me, 

134 



KING HENRY IV. Epilogue 

will you command me to use my legs? and yet 20 
that were but light payment, to dance out of 
your debt. But a good conscience will make 
any possible satisfaction, and so would I. All 
the gentlewomen here have forgiven me : if the 
gentlemen will not, then the gentlemen do not 
agree with the gentlewomen, which was never 
seen before in such an assembly. 

One word more, I beseech you. If you be 
not too much cloyed with fat meat, our humble 
author will continue the story, with Sir John in 3c 
it, and make you merry with fair Katharine of 
France; where, for any thing I know, Falstaff 
shall die of a sweat, unless already a' be killed 
with your hard opinions ; for Oldcastle died a 
martyr, and this is not the man. Aly tongue is 
weary : when my legs are too, I will bid you 
good night: and so kneel down before you; 
but, indeed, to pray for the queen. 



135 



THE SECOND PART OF 



Glossary. 



A', he (Quartos, "a"; Folios, 
" hee " or " he ") ', I. ii. 48. 

Abated, " reduced to lower 
temper, or as the workmen 
call it, let down" (Johnson) ; 
I. i. 117. 

Abide, undergo, meet the for- 
tunes of ; II. iii. 36. 

Able, active; I. i. 43. 

Abroach; " set a.," cause, ? set 
flowing; IV. ii. 14. 

Accite, summon; V. ii. 141. 

Accites, incites (Folios 3, 4, 
"excites") ; II. ii. 64. 

Accommodated, supplied (sat- 
irized as an affected word) ; 
(Quarto, '' accommodate ") ; 
III. ii. 71. 

Achitophcl, Ahithopel, the 
counsellor of Absalom, 
cursed by David (Folio 2, 
" Architophel") ; I. ii. 39- 

Aconitiim, aconite; IV. iv. 48. 

Address'd, prepared; IV. iv. 5. 

Advised, well aware; I. i. 172. 

Affect, love ; IV. v. 145. 

Affections, inclinations; IV. iv. 

After, according to; V. ii. 129. 

Against, before, in anticipation 
of;IV. ii. 81. 

Agate, a figure cut in an agate 
stone and worn in a ring or 
as a seal; a symbol of small- 
ress (Johnson's emendation 
of Folios, " agot") ; I. ii. 19. 



Aggravate, Mrs. Q.'s blunder 
for moderate; II. iv. 170. 

All, quite; IV. i. 156. 

Allow, approve ; IV. ii. 54. 

Amurath, the name of the 
Turkish Sultans ; Amurath 
III. died in 1596, leaving a 
son Amurath, who, on com- 
ing to the throne, invited his 
brothers to a feast, where he 
had them all strangled, in or- 
der to prevent any incon- 
venient disputes concerning 
the succession. T hi s is 
probably the circumstance 
which is here referred to (the 
allusion helps to fix the date 
of the play) ; V. ii. 48. 

An, if (Quarto, " and" ; Folios, 
"if') ; I. fi. 59. 

Anatomize, lay open, show dis- 
tinctly (Folio 4, "anato- 
mize"; Quarto, " anotho- 
mize"; Folios i, 2, 3, " Ana- 
thomize") ; Induct. 21. 

Ancient, ensign; II. iv. 72. 

Angel, with play upon angel, 
the gold coin, of the value of 
ten shillings; I. ii. 177. 

Anon, anon, Sir, the customary 
reply of the Drawers; II. iv. 
296. 

Antiquity, old age; I. ii. 299. 

Appertinent, belonging; I. ii. 
184. 



130 



KING HENRY IV. 



Glossary 



Apple-Johns, a particular kind 
of apple, which shrivelled by 
keeping; II. iv. 2. 

Apprehensive, imaginative ; IV. 
iii. 103. 

Approve, prove; I. ii. 205. 

Apter, more ready; I. i. 69. 

Argument, subject; V. ii. 23. 

Armed, with spurs (Quarto, 
" armed " ; Folios, " able " ; 
Pope, "agile") ; I. i. 44. 

Assemhlance, aggfegate, tout 
ensemble (Pope, "sem- 
blance"; Capell, "assem- 
blage") ; III. ii. 272. 

Assurance, surety; I. ii. 36. 

At a word, in a word, briefly; 
III. ii. 313. 

Atomy, Mrs. Q.'s blunder for 
"anatomy," skeleton (Folios 
"Anatomy") ; V. iv. 33. 

Atonement, reconciliation; IV. 
i. 221. 

Attach, arrest; IV. ii. 109. 

Attached, seized; II. ii. 3. 

Attend, await, waits for; I. i. 3. 

Azi'ay zvitJi; "could a. w. me," 
i.e. could endure me ; III. ii. 

Awful, inspiring awe ; V. ii. 86. 

Aivfnl banks, bounds of re- 
spect, reverence (Warburton, 
"lawful") ; IV. i. 176. 

Back-szvord man, fencer at 
single sticks ; III. ii. 69. 

Balm, consecrated oil used for 
anointing kings; IV. v. 115. 

Band, bond (Folios, "bond") ; 

I. ii. 2>7- 

Barbary hen, a ben whose 
feathers are naturally ruffled ; 

II. iv. 104. 



Barson, corruption of Barston, 
in Warwickshire ; V. iii. 90. 

Bartholomew boar- pig, roast 
pig was one of the attrac- 
tions of Bartholomew Fair ; 
II. iv. 241. 

Basingstoke, in Hampshire, 
about fifty miles from Lon- 
don (Quarto, "Billings- 
gate ") ; II. i. 177. 

Basket hilt, the hilt of a sword 
with a covering of narrow 
plates of steel in the shape 
of a basket, and serving as 
a protection to the hand ; II. 
iv. 136. 

Bastardly, ? dastardly; II. i. 

51- 

Bate, contention ; II. iv. 263. 

Bate, remit ; Epil. 16. 

Battle, army; IV. i. 154. 

Battle, battalion; III. ii. 163. 

Bazvl out, bawl out from 
(Quarto, " bal out"; Capell, 
'bawl out from"); II. ii. 

27; 

Baying, driving to bay (a term 
of the chase) ; I. iii. 80. 

Bear-herd, leader of a tame 
bear (Folio 4, "bear-herd" ; 
Quarto, "Berod"; Folios i, 
2, " Beare-heard " ; Folio 3. 
"Bear-heard") ; I. ii. 182. 

Bear in hand, flatter with false 
hopes, keep in expectation ; 
I. ii. 40. 

Beavers, movable fronts of hel- 
mets ; IV. i. 120. 

Beefs, oxen (?) cattle (Fo- 
lios, " beeves ") ; III. ii. 347. 

Before, . go before me ; IV. i. 
228. 



137 



Glossary 



THE SECOND PART OF 



Being you are, since yoU are 
(Gould conjectured "see- 
ing") ; 11. i. 193. 

Belike, I suppose; II. ii. 11. 

Beseek, beseech; II. iv. 170. 

Besonian, base fellow, beggar ; 
V. iii. 113. 

Bestow, behave ; II. ii. 177. 

Bestowed, spent ; V. v. 12. 

Big, pregnant; Induct. 13. 

Biggen, " nightcap " ; properly, 
a coarse headband or cap 
worn by the Beguines, an 
order of Flemish nuns ; IV. 
V. 27. 

Bleed, be bled ; IV. i. 57. 

Bloody, headstrong, intemper- 
ate ; IV. i. 34. 

Blubbered, blubbering, weep- 
ing; II. iv. 411. 

Blue-bottle rogue; alluding to 
the blue uniform of the 
beadles ; V. iv. 22. 

Blunt, dull-witted; Induct. 18. 

Bona - robas, handsome 
wenches; III. ii. 25. 

Borne with, laden with; II. iv. 

383. 

Bounce, bang ; III. ii. 299. 

Brave, defy ; II. iv. 224. 

Brawn, mass of flesh ; I. i. 19. 

Break, am bankrupt; Epil. 13. 

Breathe, let take breath, rest ; 
I. i. 38. 

Bruited, noised, rumoured 
abroad ; I. i. 114. 

Buckle, bow, bend (Bailey con- 
jectured "knuckle"); I. i. 
141. 

Bung, sharper ; II. iv. 133. 

Burst, broke, cracked ; III. ii. 
341. 



Busses, kisses ; II. iv. 282. 

But, except ; V. iii. 89. 

By, on, consequent upon; IV. 

V. 87. 
By God's liggens, an oath, 

probably of the same force 

as " bodikins " (omitted in 

Folios) ; V. iii. 65. 
By the rood, by the holy cross, 

an asseveration ; III. ii. 3. 
By yea and nay, without doubt ; 

III. ii. 10. 

Caliver, a very light musket ; 

III. ii. 287. 

Calm, qualm ; II. iv. 38. 

Came, became ; II. iii. 57. 

Canaries, canary wine (Folio 4, 
" Canary ") ; II. iv. 28. 

Candle-mine, magazine of tal- 
low ; II. iv. 316. 

Canker'd, polluted ; IV. v. 72. 

Cankers, canker-worms ; II. ii. 
102. 

Cannibals, Hannibals ; II. iv. 

175- 

Capable, susceptible ; I. i. 172. 

Carat, quality (Folios i, 2, 3, 
" Charract " ; Folio 4. " Cav- 
ract"; Quarto, "Karrat"); 

IV. V. 162. 

Caraways, a kind of confection 
made with cumin seeds, 
" caraway seeds " ; V. iii. 3. 

Care, mind ; I. ii. 134. 

Cast, calculated ; I. i. 166. 

Cavaleros, cavaliers (Quarto, 
" cabileros"', Folios, " Caui- 
leroes") ; V. iii. 59. 

Censer; " thin man in a cen- 
ser " ; probably a kind of cap 
like a censer; (some explain 



138 



KING HENRY IV. 



Glossary 



that censers were made of 
thin metal, and often had 
rudely hammered or em- 
bossed figures in the middle 
of the pierced convex lid) ; 
V. iv. 20. 

Chance ; " how c," how comes 
it ; IV. iv. 20. 

Channel, gutter (Pope, "ken- 
nel"); II. i. 48. 

Chapt, worn, wrinkled (Quarto, 
Folios, " chopt") ; III. ii. 289. 

Charge ; " in c," i.e. " ready for 
the charge " ; IV. i. 120. 

Charge, pledge ; II. iv. 126. 

Cheater; " a tame ch.," a low 
gamester ; a cant term 
(Quarto, " cheter" ; some 
eds., " chetah," a leopard) ; 
II. iv. 102. 

Cheater, escheator. an officer of 
the exchequer; II. iv. 107. 

Check, reproof; IV. iii. 32. 

Checked, reproved; I. ii. 212. 

Churlish, rude, rough ; I. iii. 62. 

Civil, well-ordered ; IV. i. 42. 

Clapped i' the clout, hit the 
white mark in the target 
without effort ; III. ii. 50. 

Close, make peace; II. iv. 344. 

' Cock and pie,' a slight oath 
commonly used; cock, a cor- 




From an old alehouse sign at Bewdley. 



ruption of God ; pie (= Latin 
pica) was the old name of 
the Ordinate ; V. i. i. 

Coherence, agreement, accord ; 
V. i. 69. 

Cold, calm ; V. ii. 98. 

Coldest, most hopeless ; Y. ii. 

31- 
Colour, pretence ; V. v. 87. 
Colours ; " fear no colours," 

fear no enemy, fear nothing ; 

V. V. 89. 
Colour, excuse ; I. ii. 257. 
Commandment, command; V. 

iii. 137. 
Commit, commit to prison ; V. 

ii. 83. 
Commodity, profit; I. ii. 269. 
Commotion, insurrection; IV. i. 

36. 
Companion, fellow, used con- 
temptuously; II. iv. 128. 
Complices, accomplices, allies ; 

I. i. 163. 
Condition, " official capacity " ; 

IV. iii. 86. 
Coniirmities, Mrs. Q.'s blunder 

for infirmities; II. iv. 61. 
Confound, exhaust ; IV. iv. 41. 
Conger, sea-eel (Quarto, " Cun- 

ger"); II. iv. 56. 
Consent, agreement ; V. i. 75. 
Consent, agree, decide (Collier 

MS., "Consult") ; I. iii. 52. 
Considerance, consideration ; V. 

ii. 98. 
Consigning to, confirming; V. 

ii. 143- 
Consist upon, claim, stand upon 

(Rowe, "insist") ; IV. i. 187. 
Contagious, pernicious; V. v. 

34- 



139 



Glossary 



THE SECOND PART OF 



Continuantly, Mrs. Quickly's 
blunder for continually 
(Quartos,, '' continually ") ; 
11. i. 26. 

Conversations, habits; V. v. 

lOI. 

Cophetua; alluding to the bal- 
lad of King Cophetua and the 
Beggar to be found in 
Percy's Reliques (Quarto, 
" Couetua " ; Folios, " Coui- 
tha") ; V. iii. 102. 

Corporate, Bullcalfs blunder 
for corporal; III. ii. 231. 

Corpse, corpses (Folios i, 2, 
"Corpes"; Folios 3, 4. 
" Corps " ; Dyce, " corpse ") ; 
I. i. 192. 

Correctioner, one who inflicts 
punishment ; V. iv. 23. 

Cost; " part-created cost," 
partly erected costly build- 
ing; (Vaughan conjectured 
" part-erected castle " ; Herr 
conjectured "part-erected, 
cast" \ Keightley, "house") \ 
I. iii. 60. 

Costermonger, commercial, 

petty dealing; (Quarto, " cos- 
tar-mongers times " ; Folios 
I, 2, " Costor-mongers " ; Fo- 
lios 3, 4, " coster-mongers 
days") ; I. ii. 181. 

Cotswold man, a man from the 
Cotswold Downs, celebrated 
for athletic games and rural 
sports of all kinds, hence an 
athlete (Quartos, " Cotsole 
man " ; Folios, " Cot-sal- 
man " ; Capell, " Cot sail 
man") ; III. ii. 22. 



Courtesy, curtsy (Folio i, 
" Curtsie " ; Folios 2, 3, 4, 
"Curtesie " ; Quarto, " cur- 
sie ") ; Epil. i. 

Cover, lay the table; II. iv. 11. 

Crack, " a pert little boy " ; III. 

Crafty-sick, feigning sickness; 

Induct. 2)7- 
Crosses, coins stamped with a 

cross (used quibblingly) ; I. 

ii. 244. 
Crudy, crude, raw; IV. iii. 102. 
Current, genuine, with pun 

upon sterling ; II. i. 128. 
Curry with, curry favour with ; 

V. i. 79. 

Cuttle, knife used by cut- 
purses, hence, cutpurse ; II. 
iv. 135. 

Day, day of battle, battle; I. i. 
20. 

Dear, earnest; IV. v. 141. 

Debate, contest ; IV. iv. 2. 

Defensible, furnishing the 
means of defence (Folio 4, 
" sensible ") ; II. iii. 38. 

Depart, leave ; IV. v. 91. 

Derives itself, descends ; IV. v. 
43- 

Descension, descent, decline 
(Folios, "declension") ', II. 
ii. 182. 

Determined, put an end to, set- 
tled : IV. V. 82. 

'Devil's book,' "alluding to the 
old belief that the Devil had 
a register of the persons who 
were subject to him " ; II. ii. 
49. {Cp. illustration in Tam- 
ing of Shrew.) 



140 



KING HENRY IV. 



Glossary 



Directly, in a direct manner, 

plainly; IV. ii. 52. 
Discharge, disband, dismiss; 

IV. ii. 61. 
Discolours; " d. the complexion 

of my greatness " = makes 

me blush; XL ii. 5. 
Discomfort, uneasiness (Capell 

conjectured "discomfit") ; I. 

ii. 112. 
Discoverers, scouts (Folios 3, 

4, "discoveries") ; IV. i. 3. 
Distemper' d, disordered, out of 

health; III. i. 41. 
Distracted, made mad ; II. i. 

112. 
Dole, dealing, interchange ; I. i. 

169. 
Doubt, fear, suspect ; Epil. 7. 
Draw, draw together, muster ; 

I. iii. 109; withdraw; II. i. 

157. 
Drew, drew aside ; I. i. 72. 
Drollery, (probably) a humor- 
ous painting; II. i. 151. 
Drooping, declining; Induct, 3. 
Dub me knight, referring to the 

custom of the time, that he 

who drank a large potation 

on his knees to the health of 

his mistress, was said to be 

dubbed a knight, and retained 

the title for the evening; V, 

iii. 74- 
Duer, more duly (Quarto, 

" dewer " ; Pope, " move 

duly"); III. ii. 324. 
Dull, soothing, drowsy ; IV. v. 2. 

Easy, easy to be borne; V. ii. 

71. 
Ebon, black, dark; V. v. 37. 



Effect, suitable manner; II. i. 

Element, sky ; IV. iii. 55. 
Endear' d, bound (Quarto, " en- 

deere ") ; II. iii. 11. 
Ending, dying; IV. v. 80. 
Enforcement, application of 

force ; I. i. 120. 
Engaged, bound, tied ; I. i. 180. 
Engraffed to, firmly attached 

to; II. ii. 67. 
Engrossed, piled up, ama'ssed; 

IV. V. 71. 
Engrossments, accumulations ; 

IV. V. 80. 
Enlarge, extend, widen ; I. i. 

204. 
Ephesians, jolly companions (a 

cant term of the day) ; II. ii. 

157. 

Equal with, cope with ; I. iii. 
67. 

Ever among, perhaps a corrup- 
tion of ever and anon ; V. iii. 
22. 

Exclamation, outcry against 
you ; II. i. 84. 

Exion, Mrs. Q.'s blunder for 
action (Folios 3, 4, "ac- 
tion ") ; II. i. 30. 

Extraordinarily, Mrs. Q.'s 
blunder for ordinarily ; II. iv. 
25. 

Face-royal, used equivocally for 
(i.) a royal face, and (ii.) 
the figure stamped upon " a 
royal," a coin of the value 
of ten shillings; I. ii, 26 . 

Faitors, evil-doers (Quarto, 
"fater"; Folios, "Fates"); 
II. iv. 167. 



141 



Glossary 



THE SECOND PART OF 



Familiarity, Mrs. Q.'s blunder 
for familiar (Folios, "fa- 
miliar") ; II. i. 104. 

Fancies and good-nights, the 
common title of little poems ; 
III. ii. 336. 

Fantasy, imagination; V. ii. 13. 

Fear, frighten; IV. iv. 121. 

Fear, a fearful thing; I. i. 95. 

Fearful, full of fear; Induct. 
12. 

Fears, causes of fear ; IV. v. 
196. 

Fennel, an inflammatory herb; 
II. iv. 258. 

Fetch off, make a prey of, 
fleece; III. ii. 318. 

Few; " in f.," in a few words, 
in short ; I. i. 112. 

Fig, insult by putting the 
thumb between the fore and 
middle finger; V. iii. 118. 
(Cp. illustration in Henry 
V.) 

Fillip, strike ; I. ii. 246. 

Flap-dragon, snap-dragon ; II. 
V. 267. 

Fleet, the prison for debtors ; 
V. V. 92. 

Flesh'd, " made fierce and eager 
for combat, as a dog fed with 
flesh only" (Capell conjec- 
tured " ilush'd") ; I. i. 149. 

Foin, make a thrust in fencing; 
II. i. 16. 

Follow'd, followed up the ad- 
vantage gained ; I. i. 21. 

Fond, foolish ; I. iii. 91. 

Fondly, foolishly; IV. ii. 119. 

Foolish-compounded, composed 
of absurdity; I. ii. 8. 

For, in spite of; I. i. 93. 



Force perforce, an emphatic 
form of perforce; (Theo- 
bald's emendation of Folios, 
" forc'd, perforce"); IV. i. 
116. 

Forehand shaft; " an arrow 
particularly formed for 
shooting straight forward, 
concerning which Ascham 
says it should be big 
breasted" (Nares) ; (Col- 
lier MS., "fourehand");lll. 

ii. 51. 

Forgetive, inventive ; IV. iii. 
103. 

Forspent, utterly worn out {for 
intensive) ; I. i. 2)7- 

Fortune ; " in the f.," by the 
good fortune; I. i. 15. 

Fourteen and a half, i.e. two 
hundred and ninety yards ; 
the maximum distance 
reached by the archers of the 
time being three hundred 
yards; III. ii. 52. 

Foiitre, an expression of con- 
tempt; (Quarto, " fowtre" ; 
Folios, " footra") ; V. iii. 99. 

Frank, sty; II. ii. 154. 

Fright, affright, terrify; I. i. 67. 

Fubbed off, deluded with false 
promises ; II. i. 34. 

Fustian, nonsensic^al ; II. iv. 
198. 

Fustilarian, a word of Fal- 
staff's coinage (? connected 
with " fusty," or perhaps 
from " fustis," with refer- 
ence to the cudgel of the 
bailiff) ; II. i. 61. 



Gainsaid, contradicted: I. i. 91. 



142 



KING HENRY IV. 



Glossary 



Galled, injured, annoyed; IV. 
i. 89. 

Gallozvay nags, a small and in- 
ferior breed of horses ; com- 
mon hackneys; II. iv. 199. 

'Gan, began ; I. i. 129. 

Garland, crown; V. ii. 84. 

Gaultree, the ancient forest of 
Galtres, to the north of the 
City of York (Folios, " Giial- 
tree"); IV. i. 2. 

Gave out, described ; IV. i. 23. 

G e r m a n hunting; " hunting 
subjects were much in favour 
for the decoration of in- 
teriors, and the chase of the 
wnld boar in Germany would 
naturally form a spirited 
scene" (Clarke); Quarto, 
" larman" ; Folios i, 2, 3, 
"Germane") ; II. i. 152. 

Gibbets on, hangs on; alluding 
to the manner of carrying 
beer-barrels, by hanging" 
them on a sling; III. ii. 277. 

Giddy, excitable, hot-brained ; 
IV. V. 214. 

Gird, jeer, gibe; I. ii. 7. 

God's light, by God's light; an 
oath; (Folios, "what") ; II. 
iv. 138. 



Good case, good circumstances; 

II. i. III. 
Good faith, indeed (Folios, 

"good-sooth"); II. iv. 38. 
Gracing, grafting; V. iii. 3. 
Grate on, vex, be offensive ; IV. 

i. 90. 
Green, fresh ; IV. v. 204. 
Grief, (i) pain; (2) sorrow; 

I. i. 144. 
Groat, a coin of the value of 

four-pence ; I. ii. 254. 
Grows to, incorporates wnth ; I. 

ii. 59. 
Guarded zvith rags, trimmed, 

ornamented with rags (Pope, 

" goaded " ; Singer, " rags " ; 

Quartos and Folios, 

"rage") ; IV. i. 34. 

Haled, dragged (Quarto, 
"halde"; Folios i. 2, 3, 
"Hall'd"; Folio 4. " Hal'd"; 
Pope. "Haiild"); V. v. 35. 

Half-kirtles, jackets, or the pet- 
ticoats attached to them; V. 
iv. 24. 

Halloing, shouting (Quarto, 
Folios I, 2, "hallowing"; 
Folios 3, 4, "hollowing") ; 
I. ii. 204. 




A gold ten shilling piece of Henry VIII. From an original specimen. 
143 



Glossary 



THE SECOND PART OF 



Hands; " of my h.," of my size ; 

11. ii. 72. 
Hangs, suspends ; IV. i. 213, 
Haply, mayhap, perhaps ; I. 1. 

Harry ten shillings; " four H. 
t. s. in French crowns " ; 
there were no ten-shilHng 
pieces till the reign of Henry 
VII. ; French crowns were 
worth somewhat less than 
five shillings each; III. ii. 232. 
(Cp. illustration.) 

Haunch, hinder (i.e. latter) 

- part ; IV. iv. 92. 

Hautboy, a wind-instrument 
(Quarto, "hohoy"; Folios, 
"Hoe-hoy") III. ii. 345. 

Have at Jiim, I am read}'^ ; I. ii. 
209. 

Head; " make head," raise an 
army; I. i. 168. 

Headland, a strip of un- 
ploughed land at the end of 
the furrows; V. i. 14. 

Heart, will, intention ; V. iii. 
29. 

Heat, pursuit ; IV. iii. 25. 

Hence, henceforth ; V. v. 53. 

Hilding, base, menial (Folios, 
" hielding ") \ I. i. 57. 

Hinckley, a market town in 
Leicestershire (Quarto, 
" Hunkly ") ; V. i. 26. 

His, its (Folio 4, "its") ; I. ii. 
125. 

History, relate ; IV. i. 203. 

Hold, fastness, fortress (Theo- 
bald's correction of Quarto 
and Folios, '' Hole ") ; In- 
duct. 35. 



Hold sortance, be in accord- 
ance; IV. i, II. 

Holland, a kind of linen ; with 
a quibble upon Holland ; II. 
ii. 26. 

Honey-seed, Mrs. Q.'s blunder 
for homicide; II. i. 54. 

Honey-suckle, Mrs. Q.'s blun- 
der for homicidal ; II. i. 52. 

Hook on, don't lose sight of 
her; keep close to her; II. i. 
170. 

How, what price; III. ii. 41. 

Humane, human (omitted in 
Folios) ; IV. iii. 129. 

Humorous, capricious ; IV. iv. 

34. 
Humours of blood, caprices of 

disposition; II. iii. 30. 
Hunt counter, are on the wrong 

scent ; I. ii. 97. 
Hurly, hurly-burly, tumult ; 

III. i. 25. 
Husband, husbandman (Folios 

3, 4, "husbandman")', V. iii. 

II. 

Imbrue, draw blood; II. iv. 204. 

Immediate, next in line ; IV. v. 
42. 

Imp, youngling ; V. v. 43. 

In, with ; I. iii. 7. 

Incertain, uncertain (Folios i, 
2, " incertain " ; Folios 3, 4, 
"uncertain") ; I. iii. 24. 

Incision, draw blood ; II. iv. 
204. 

Indifferency, moderate dimen- 
sions ; IV. iii. 22. 

Indited, Mrs. Q.'s blunder for 
invited; (Folios 3, 4, "in- 
vited") ; II. i. 28. 



144 



KING HENRY IV. 



Glossary 



Infer, suggest; V. v. 14. 
Iniinitive, Mrs. Quickly's blun- 
der for infinite ; II. i. 26. 
Inset, set (Folios, " set") ; I. ii. 

19. 

Insinewed, allied; IV. i. 172. 

Instance, proof; III. i. 103. 

Intelligencer, mediator; IV. ii. 
20. 

Intended, understood; IV. i. 
166. 

Intervallums, intervals; V. i. 
91. 

Intreasured, stored; III. i. 85. 

Invested, invested with author- 
ity; IV. iv. 6. 

Investments, vestments; IV. i. 

Iron man, armed man, clad m 
armour (Quarto, "man talk- 
ing") ; IV. ii. 8. 

7^ = its; (Quarto and Folios i, 
2, "it"; Folios 3, 4- "its") ; 
I. ii. 123. 

It is, he is; used contemptu- 
ously; II. iv. 75. 

Jade, a term of pity for a mal- 
treated horse ; I. i. 45- 

Joined-stools, a kind of folding 
chairs ; II. iv. 260. 

Juggler, trickster, cheat ; II. iv. 

137- 
Juvenal, youth ; I. ii. 22. 

Kccch, "the fat of an ox or 
cow, rolled up by the butcher 
in a round lump ; hence a 
name given to a butcher's 
wife " ; II. i. 97- 

Kickshaws, trifles; V. i. 28. 

Kindly, natural; IV. v. 84. 



Kir tie, a jacket with a petticoat 
attached to it ; II. iv. 288. 

'Larum-bcll, alarm bell ; III. i. 

17- 
Law, justice; V. ii. 87. 
Lay, stayed, resided; III. ii. 

294. 
Leather-coats, a kind of apple, 

brown-russets; V. iii. 44- 
Leer, simper, smile ; V. v. 6. 
Leman, sweetheart, lover; V. 

iii. 47. 
Lethe, the river in the infernal 

regions whose waters caused 

forgetfulness (Quarto, " le- 

thy"); V. ii. 72. 
Lie, lodge; IV. ii. 97- 
Lief, willingly (Quarto, 

"Hue") ; I. ii. 46- 
Lighten, enlighten; II. i. 203. 
Like, (?) look (Folios, 

"look") ; III. ii. 91- 
Like, likely; I. iii. 81. 
Liking, likening (Folios, "lik'n- 

ing him ") ; II. i. 93- 
Lined, strengthened ; I. iii. 27. _ 
Listen after, enquire for; I. i. 

29. 

Livers, formerly considered the 

seat of the passions; I. ii. 

188. 

Loathly, loathsome; IV. iv. 122. 

Look beyond, misjudge; IV. iv. 

67. 
Looked, anticipated, expected; 

I. ii. 48. 
Lubber' s-head, Libbard's-head, 
i.e. Leopard's head, the sign 
of a house (Folios, " Lub- 
bars") ; II. i. 3i- 



145 



Glossary 



THE SECOND PART OF 



Lumbert street, Lombard- 
Street ; in early times fre- 
quented by the Lombardy 
merchants (FoHos, "Lom- 
bard") : II. i. 29. 

Lusty, lively, merry; III. ii. 17. 

Malmsey-nose, red-nosed; II. 
i. 40. 

Malt-worms, ale-topers; II. iv. 
351. 

Manage, handle; III. ii. 287. 

Mandrake, " the plant Aropa 
Mandragora, the root of 
which was thought to resem- 
ble the human figure, and to 
cause madness and even 
death, when torn from the 
ground " ; I. ii. 16. 




The above illustration (from an illu- 
minated MS. in the British Museum) 
shows the method by which the man- 
drake was supposed to be obtained. 

Man-queller, manslayer, mur- 
derer; II. i. 54. 

Many, multitude (Douce con- 
jectured "meyny")', I. iii. 
91. 

Mare, nightmare ; II. i. 79. 

Marks ; a mark is of the value 
of thirteen shillings and four- 
pence; I. ii. 208. 



Marry, a corruption of Mary ; 
a mild form of oath (Quarto, 
"Mary"; Folios, "Why"); 
II. ii. 42. 

Martlemas, Martinmas, the 
Feast of St. Martin, which 
marked the close of autumn ; 
used figuratively = an old 
man ; II. ii. 107. 

Matter; " no such m.," it is 
nothing of the kind; Induct. 
15- 

Mechanical, vulgar, occupied in 
low drudgery; V. v. 36. 

Medicine potable, alluding to 
the auriim potabile of the al- 
chemists ; IV. V. 163. 

Melting, softening, pitying 
(Quarto, "meeting"); IV. 
iv. 32. 

Mess, " common term for a 
small portion of anything be- 
longing to the kitchen " ; II. 
i. 99. 

Met, obtained ; IV. v. 186. 

Metal, ardour, high courage 
(used in both senses, 
"metal" and "mettle"); 
(Folio 4, "metal"; Quarto, 
" mettal" ; Folios, i, 2, 3, 
"Mettle"); I. i. 116. 

Mete, judge of; IV. iv. 77. 

Mile-end Green, the usual 
ground for military drill, and 
also for public sports ; III. 
ii. 293. 

Misdoubts, apprehensions; IV. 
i. 206. 

Miscarried, perished; IV. i. 129. 

Misorder'd, disordered ; IV. ii. 
33- 



146 



KING HENRY IV. 



Glossary 



Mistook, mistaken, misunder- 
stood; IV. ii. 56. 

Mode, form of things (Quarto 
and Folios, " mood ") ; IV. v. 
200. 

Model, plans ; I. iii. 42. 

More and less, high and low ; I. 
i. 209. 

Much! an exclamation of ironi- 
cal admiration ; II. iv. 139. 

Much ill, very ill ; IV. iv. iii. 

Muse, wonder, am surprised ; 
IV. i. 167. 

Neaf, fist; II. iv, 195. 

Near, in the confidence ; V. i. 
78. 

Neighbour confines, neighbour- 
ing boundaries ; IV. v. 124. 

New-dated, recently dated ; IV. 
i. 8. 

Nice, over-delicate, dainty. I. i. 
145; trivial, petty, IV. i. 191. 

" Nine Worthies " ; these were 
commonly enumerated as fol- 
lows : — Hector, Alexander, 
and Julius Caesar ; Joshua, 
David, and Judas Macca- 
beus ; Arthur, Charlemagne, 
and Godfrey of Bouillon ; II. 
iv. 230. (Cp. Love's Labour 's 
Lost.) 

Nobles, a gold coin worth six 
shillings and eightpence ; II. 
i. 161. 

Noise, company of musicians: 
II. iv., 12. (The annexed il- 
lustration, representing two 
companies of noises, is taken 
from Harrison's Arches of 
Triumph, erected in honour \ 



of the entry of James L into 
London, 1603.) 




No other, nothing else (Quar- 
to, '' otherwise ") ; V. ii. 62. 

Nut-hook, contemptuous term 
for a catchpole ; V. iv. 8. 

Obedience, obeisance; IV. v. 
147. 

Obserz>ancc,ohQ.\?>?ince, homage; 
IV. iii. 16. 

Observed, deferred to ; IV.iv.30. 

O'er-posting, getting clear of; 
I. ii. 162. 

Offer, menace ; IV. i. 219. 

Offices, domestic offices, apart- 
ments (especially servants' 
quarters) ; I. iii. 47. 

Omit, neglect; IV. iv. 27. 

On, of; I. iii. 102. 

One, i.e. mark, score ; pro- 
nounced "own" (Theobald 
conjectured " Lone "=: loan ; 
Collier MS., ''score''); II. i. 

Opposite, adversary, opponent ; 
I. iii. 55. 

Orchard, garden; V. iii. i. 

Ostentation, outward show; II. 
ii. 54. 

Ouches, ornaments; II. iv. 53. 

Ousel, blackbird; (Quarto, 
" woosel" : Folios, "Ous- 
el"); III. ii. 9. 



147 



Glossary 



THE SECOND PART OF 



Ot:f; "will not out," will not 
fail you ; a sportsman's ex- 
pression ; V. iii. 67. 

Outhreatlied, out of breath, ex- 
hausted ; I. i. 108. 

Overlive, outlive; IV. i. 15. 

Over-rode, caught him up, out- 
rode ; I. i. 30. 

O V e r s c u t c h e d, (?) over- 
scotched or, overwhipped ; 
(Quarto, " ouer-schiicJit " ; 
Grant White, " v e r- 
switched " ; " over-switched 
house-wife " ^ (according to 
Ray, a strumpet) ; III. ii. 

335. 
Overween, think arrogantly ; 
IV. i. 149. 

Pantler, the servant who had 
charge of the pantry ; II. iv. 
249. 

Parcels, small parts, particu- 
lars ; IV. ii. 36. 

Parcel-gilt, part-gilt, generally 
only the embossed portions ; 
II. i. 90. 

Part, depart ; IV. ii. 70. 

Part, " characteristic action " ; 
IV. V. 64. 

Particular ; " his particular," its 
details ; IV. iv. 90. 

Passing, surprisingly, exceed- 
ingly; IV. ii. 85. 

'Pauls'; "The body of old St. 
Paul's Church in London was 
a constant place of resort for 
business and amusement. Ad- 
vertisements were fixed up 
there, bargains made, ser- 
vants hired, and politics dis- 
cussed " (Nares) ; I. ii. 57. 



Pawn'd, pledged; IV. ii. 112. 

Peasant, rural, provincial (Col- 
lier MS., "pleasant") ; In- 
duct. 2>3- 

Peascod-time, the time when 
peas are in pod; II. iv. 403. 

Persistency, persistency in evil, 
II. ii. 50. 

Peruse, survey, examine ; IV. 
ii. 94. 

Picking, petty ; IV. i. 198, 

' Pie-corner,' near G i 1 1 s p u r 
Street; the Great Fire ended 
at this corner; II. i. 26. 

Please it, if it please ; I. 1. 5. 

Point, a signal given by the 
blast of a trumpet (Collier 
MS., '' report " ; Singer, " a 
bruit") ; IV. i. 52. 

Point, a tagged lace, used to tie 
parts of the dress ; I. i. 53. 

Points, mark of commission; 
perhaps the same as the 
shoulder-knots worn by sol- 
diers and livery servants; II. 
iv. 138. 

Ports, portals, IV. v. 24. 

Posts, post-horses ; IV. iii. 38. 

Pottle-pot, a tankard holding 
two quarts ; II. ii. 83. 

Power, armed force ; I. iii. 29. 

Precepts, summonses ; V. i. 13. 

Precisely, exactly ; IV. i. 205. 

Pregnancy, ready wit ; I. ii. 182. 

Present, immediate ; IV. iii. 76. 

Presented, represented; V. ii. 
79- 

Prick, mark, put him on the 
list; III. ii. 119. 

Pricked down, marked; II. iv. 
349- 



148 



KING HENRY IV. 



Glossary 



Proface ; " an Anglicized form 
of the Italian pro vi faccia " ; 
" much good may it do you "; 
V. iii. 28. 

Project, expectation ; I. iii. 29. 

Proof ; " come to any proof," 
show themselves worth any- 
thing when it comes to the 
test; IV. iii. 93. 

Proper, handsome ; XL ii. 72. 

Proper, appropriate ; I. iii. 32. 

Proper, own ; V. ii. 109. 

Proposal, suppose ; V. ii. 92. 

Piilsidge, Mrs. Q.'s blunder for 
pulse; II. iv. 24. 

Punish by the heels, the techni- 
cal term for committing to 
prison; I. ii. 133. 

Purchased; " used probably in 
its legal sense, acquired by a 
man's own act, as opposed to 
an acquisition by descent " 
(Malone) ; IV. v. 200. 

Push, thrust ; II. ii. 40. 

Quantities, small pieces ; V. i. 

67. 

Quean, contemptible w e n c h, 
hussy; II. i. 48. 

Queasiness, sickly feeling, nau- 
sea; I. i. 196. 

Question; "in q.," under judi- 
cial trial ; I. ii. 66. 

Quit, safe, free; III. ii. 251. 

Quittance, requital, return of 
blows; I. i. 108. 

Quiver, nimble ; III. ii. 295. 

Quoif, cap or hood ; " sickly 
q.," cap which is the badge of 
sickness ; I. i. 147. 

Quoit, throw, pitch (Quarto, 
" Quaite") ; II. iv. 200. 



Ragged, rugged, rough. Induct. 

35 ; beggarly, V. ii. 38. 
Ragged'st, roughest (Theobald 

conjectured " rugged' st") ; I. 

i. 151- 

Ralph (Quarto, " Rafe"; Fo- 
lios I, 2, "Ralphe"); III. ii. 
106. 

Rampallian, an abusive epithet 
{cp. " rapscallion ") ; II. i. 61. 

Rapier, a small sword used in 
thrusting; II. iv. 209. 

Rascals; originally lean deer 
not fit to hunt or kill ; II. iv. 

43- 
Rash, quickly ignited; IV. iv. 
48. 




From a fin of th^, year 1728, on which 
are depicted tl is and other scenes of 
Udrlholomew Fair. 



149 



Glossary 



THE SECOND PART OF 



Rated, chided ; III. i. 68. 

Recordation to, memory of; 11. 
iii. 6i. 

Red lattice, an ale-house win- 
dow, commonly red; II. ii. 
86. (Q. illustration.) 

Red wheat, late wheat, spring 
wheat; V. i. i6. 

Rememher'd, mentioned ; V. ii. 
142. 

Remembrance, memory ; II. iii. 
59; admonition; V. ii. 115. 

Render d, reported, told ; I. i. 
27. 

Resolved correction, the chas- 
tisement determined upon ; 

IV. i. 213. 

Respect, regard, consideration; 

I. i. 184. 
Rheumatic, probably a blunder 

for splenetic ; II. iv. 60. 
Rides the zvild-mare, plays at 

see-saw ; II. iv. 259. 
Rigol, circlet ; IV. v. 2)^. 
Ripe, mature ; IV. i. 13. 
Rising, insurrection ; I. i. 204. 
Robin Hood, Scarlet and John; 

V. iii. 103. (Cp. illustra- 
tion.) 




From the editio i>7-inceps (i685) of 
Robin Hood's Garland. 



Rood, cruciHx; III. ii. 3. (^Cp. 
illustration.) 




From the MS. Harl., 1527. 

Roundly, without much cere- 
mony ; III. ii. 20. 

Routs, gangs ; IV. i. 33. 

Rowel-head, the axis on which 
the wheel-shaped points of a 
spur turn ; I. i. 46. 

Royal faiths, faith to the king 
(Hanmer conjectured, "loy- 
al") ; IV. i. 193. 

Sack; generic term for Spanish 
wines ; I. ii. 214. 

Sad, sober, serious; V. i. 89. 

Sadly, soberly ; V. ii. 125. 

Samingo, probably a blunder 
for San Domingo, the patron 
saint of topers ; a common 
burden of drinking-songs ; V. 

iii; 75. 
Saving your manhoods, saving 

your reverence ; II. i. 27. 
Scab, a term of contempt and 

disgust ; III. ii. 290. 
Scattered stray, stragglers ; IV. 

ii. 120. 



150 



KING HENRY IV. 



Glossary 



Scal'd up, fully confirmed ; IV. 
V. 104, 

Sect, sex ; II. iv. 39. 

Scmhlable, similar; V. i. 6g. 

Set off, (?)=cast out, ig- 
nored, or = rendered account 
for (Clarke) ; (perhaps the 
phrase is intentionally 
vague) ; IV. i. 145. 

Set on, begin to march ; I. iii. 
109. 

Seven stars, the Pleiades ; II. 
iv. 196. 

Shadows; " s. to fill up the 
muster-book," i.e. " we have 
in the muster-book many 
names for which we receive 
pay, though We have not the 
men" (Johnson) ; III. ii. 143. 

Shall, will; I. ii. 24. 

Sherris-sack, sherry ; a Spanish 
wine, so called from the town 
of Xeres ; IV. iii. 99. 

Shot, marksman; III. ii. 289. 

Shove-groat ; " s. shilling," al- 
luding to a game which con- 
sisted in pushing pieces of 
money on a board to reach 
certain marks ; II. iv. 200. 
(Cp. illustration in Merry 
Wives. ) 

Shrewd, mischevious ; II. iv. 
220. 

Shrove-tide, a time of special 
merriment, as the close of the 
carnival season ; V. iii. 36. 

Sights, eye-holes; IV. i. 121. 

Sign of the leg, the sign over a 
bootmaker's shop ; II. iv. 262. 

Silkman, silk mercer; II. i. 29. 

Single, simple, silly (used quib- 
blingly) ; I. ii. 198. 



Slops, loose breeches; I. ii. 34. 

Smack, taste, savour ; I. ii. 106. 

Smooth-pates, sleek-h e a d e d ; 
" a synonym for the later and 
more historical name round- 
heads" (Quarto, " smoothy- 
pates") ; I. ii. 42. 

Sneap, snubbing, rebuke; II, i. 
129. 

So, so be it ; III. ii. 248. 

Soft; " s. silencing," gently re- 
proving ; V. ii. 97. 

Something a, a somewhat (Col- 
lier MS., ''something of"); 
I. ii. 2C2-3. 

Soon; " soon at night," this 
very night ; V. v. 91. 

Sort, manner; IV. v. 201. 

South, south wind; II. iv. 382. 

Spirits, monosyllabic (as oft- 
en) ; I. i. 198. 

Spoke on, spoken of (Folios, 
"spoken of") ; II. ii. 69. 

Stand; " s. my good lord," be 
my kind master, patron ; IV. 
iii. 85. _ = 

Stand upon, insist upon ; I. ii. 

41. 

Spirits, monosyllabic (as 
often) ; I. i. 108. 

State of Hoods; "the majestic 
dignity of the ocean" (Ma- 
lone) ; (Hanmer, "Hoods of 
state") ; V. ii. 132. 

Stick, hesitate ; I. ii. 25. 

Stiff-home, obstinately pur- 
sued; I. i. 177. 

Still, continually ; Induct. 4. 

Still-discordant, ever-discord- 
ant; Induct. 19. 

Still-stand, standstill ; II. iii. 64. 

Stomach, appetite; IV. iv. 105. 



151 



Glossary 



THE SECOND PART OF 



Stops, the holes in a wind in- 
strument by the opening or 
closing of which by the fin- 
gers the sounds are pro- 
duced; Induct. 17. 

Strained, excessive; I. i. 161. 

Strange-achieved, (?) strange- 
ly acquired (by wrong 
means) ; according to some. 
" gained in foreign lands " 
(Schmidt, "gained and not 
yet enjoyed")-; IV. v. 72. 

Stratagem, " anything amazing 
and appalling " ; I. i. 8. 

Strengths, armies, forces ; I. iii. 
76. 

Strond, strand ; I. i. 62. 

Studied, inclined; II. ii. 10. 

Success, succession, continua- 
tion; IV. ii. 47. 

Successively, by right of suc- 
cession ; IV. V. 202. 

Sufferance, suffering; V. iv. 28. 

Suggestion, temptation ; IV. iv. 

45. 

Supplies, additional forces, re- 
serves ; IV. ii. 45. 

Surecard; " surecard was used 
as a term for a boon-com- 
panion as lately as the latter 
end of the last century" 
(Malone) ; (Quartos, " Soc- 
card") ; III. ii. 94- 

Suspire, breathe; IV. v. ZZ- 

Swaggerers, bullies, blusterers ; 

II. iv. 80. 

Sway on, move on (Collier 

" Let's away ") ; IV. i. 24. 
Sivinge-hucklers, roisterers : 

III. ii. 23. 

Swinged, whipped; V. iv. 21. 



Tables; table-books, memoran- 
dum books ; II. iv. 280. 

Ta'en up, taken up, levied 
(Quarto, "tane"; Folios, 
"taken"); IV. ii. 26. 

Take the heat, get the start of 
him; II. iv. 314-5. 

Take such order, give such or- 
ders; III. ii. 194. 

Take up, encounter ; I. iii. y^)- 

Taking up, obtaining on trust ; 
I. ii. 45. 

Tall, used ironically ; V. i. 62. 

Tail, sturdy ; III. ii. 66. 

Tapfortap,t\\.iorid.i; II. i. 201. 

Tempering, becoming soft like 
wax; IV. iii. 136. 

Temperality, Mrs. Q.'s blunder 
for temper; II. iv. 24. 

Tends, contributes (Folios, 
"tends"; Quarto, " in- 
tends") ; I. ii. 9. 

Tester, sixpence ; III. ii. 291. 

Tewksbury mustard, mustard 
made in Tewkesbury; II. iv. 

253- 

That that, that which; IV. iv. 

That, so that; I. i. I97- 

Theme, business; I. iii. 22. 

Thewes, muscles and sinews ; 
III. ii. 271. 

Thick, fast ; II. iii. 24. 

Thin man in a censer, evidently 
meaning that the officer wore 
the kind of cap which is here 
likened to a censer ; V. iv. 20. 
(Cp. Censer.) 

Three-man beetle, " a heavy 
rammer with three handles 
used in driving piles, requir- 
ing three men to wield it " ; 
I. ii. 246. 



152 



KING HENRY IV. 



Glossary 



Tilly-fally, an exclamation of 
contempt ; II. iv. 87. 

Tirrits, Mrs. Q.'s blunder for 
(?) terrors; II. iv. 213. 

To^ compared to ; IV. iii. 55. 

To, for; III. ii. 175. 

Tolling, ringing for (Quarto, 
'' tolling " ; Folios, " knell- 
ing") ; I. i. 103. 

Toward, in preparation ; II. iv. 
208. 

Toys, trifles; II. iv. 178. 

Trade, activity, intercourse 
with; I. i. 174. 

Traverse, marsh ; III. ii. 286. 

Trimm'd, trimmed up, fur- 
nished with (Folios, 2, 3, 4, 
" trimm'd up " ; Vaughan, 
" Cramm'd") ; I. iii. 94. 

Trip, defeat ; V. ii. 87. 

Turk; "the Turk," the Grand 
Turk — the Sultan ; III. ii.325. 

Turnbull street, a corruption of 
Turnmill Street, near Clerk- 
enwell ; the resort of bullies, 
rogues, etc. (Folios, " Turn- 
ball") ; in. ii. 2>2Z. 

Twelve score, twelve score 
yards; III. ii. 51. 

Uneasy, uncomfortable ; III. i. 
10. 

Uniirm, weak ; I. iii. y^- 

Unseason'd, unseasonable ; III. 
i. 105. 

Up-swarm'd, raised in swarms ; 
IV. ii. 30. 

Utis ; " old utis," great fun 
(utis, cp. huit ; originally ap- 
plied to the eighth day of a 
festival) ; II. iv. 20. 



Vail his stomach, lower his 
haughty pride ; I. i. 129. 

Valuation; "our v.." the estim- 
ation of us ; IV. i. 189. 

Vmrlet, knave, rascal ; V. iii. 12. 

Vazvard, vanguard (Theobald 
conjectured "rearguard" or 
" waneward ") ; I. ii. 190. 

Vent, small hole made for pas- 
sage ; Induct. 2. 

Venture, let us venture; I. i. 
185. 

Vessel; ' the united v. of their 
blood,' the vessel of their 
united blood ; IV. iv. 44. 

Vice, grip, grasp (Quarto, 
" view") ; II. i. 22. 

Vice's dagger, the wooden dag- 
ger carried by the Vice of the 
old Morality plays; III. ii. 

Wanton, luxurious, effiminate ; 
I. i. 148. 

Warder, staff of command ; IV. 
i. 125. 

Wassail candle, a large candle 
lighted up at a feast ; I. ii. 
169. 

Watch-case, sentry-box; III. i. 
17. 

Water-work, water colours; II. 
i. 152. 

Well conceited, clevered, re- 
torted; V. i. Z7- 

Well encounter' d, well met ; IV. 
ii. I. 

What, an exclamation of im- 
patience ; V. i. 2. 

What, who; I. i. 2. 



153 



Glossary 



THE SECOND PART OF 



IVhaf the good-year, supposed 
lo be a corruption from gou- 
jere, i.e. the French disease; 
a mild oath ; TI. iv, 62. 

Wheeson. Whitsun ; (Folios, 
"Whit son")', IT. i. 92. 

Whipping-cheer, whipping fare ; 
V. iv. 5. {Cp. illustration.) 

Who, which; V. ii. 128. 

Winking, closing his eyes; I. 

With, by; I. i. 204. 

Withal, with ; IV. ii. 95. 

Within a ken, in sight; IV. i. 
151. 

' Witness' d usurpation ' = " wit- 
nesses, or traces, of its usur- 
pation " ; I. i. 63. 

JVoe-begone, overwhelmed with 
grief; (Bentley conjectured 
" Ucalegon '') ) I. i. 71. 

JJ'oman-queller, woman-killer : 
II. i. 55- 

Woncot, Wilnecote, a village 
near Stratford (Collier MS., 
" Wilnecot") ; V. i. 40. 

Wo't, wouldst; "Thou wo't, 
wo't thou ? thou wo't, wo't 
ta?" (Quarto, ''thou wot, 
wot thou, thou zvot, wot ta" ; 
Folios, " Thou wilt not? thou 
wilt not? ")\ II. I 59. 



Wrought the mure, worn away 
the wall ; IV. iv. 119. 

Yea-forsooth knave ; " one say- 
ing yea and forsooth ; allud- 
ing to the mild quality of citi- 
zen oaths " ; I. ii. 40. 

Yeoman, a kind of under-bailiff, 
sheriff's officer; II. i. 3. 

Yet, still ; I. i. 82. 

Zeal; " z. of God," i.e. "devo- 
tion to God's cause" (Capell 
conjectured "seal") ; IV. ii. 
27. 




Whipping-cheer. 
From an engraving by Fairholt. 



154 



KING HENRY IV. 



Critical Notes. 



BY ISRAEL GOLLANCZ. 



Induction. 'Enter Rumour, painted full of tongues' so Quarto; 
Folios, 'Enter Rumour.' In ancient pageants Rumour was often 
represented as apparelled in a robe ' full of toongs ' ; Stephen 
Hawes, in his Pastime of Pleasure, describes Rumour as 

"A goodly lady, environed about 
WitJi tongues of fire." 

Similarly Chaucer, House of Fame, 298-300. Probably the idea 
was ultimately derived from Virgil, JEneid. IV. 173-188. 

Induct. 6. ' tongues' so Quarto ; Folios, ' tongue.' 

Induct. 8. ' men,' so Quarto ; Folios, ' them.' 

I. i. 62. 'whereon,' so Quarto; Folios, 'when.' 

I. i. 66. 'Hateful death put on his ugliest mask. Cp. the accom- 
panying illustration from a specimen formerly used in the Tod- 
tentanz, and preserved in the old German Museum of Nuremberg. 

I. i. 164. ' Lean ' ; Quarto, ' leaue ' ; ' your ' ; Quarto, ' you.' 

I. i. 166-179; 189-209; omitted in Quarto. 

I. ii. 8. 'foolish-compounded clay, man'; 
Quarto and Folios, ' foolish compounded clay- 
man.' 

I. ii. 39. 'his tongue he hotter,' alluding to 
the rich man in the Parable, Luke xvi. 24. 

I. li. 40. 'a rascally yca-forsooth knave''. 
Quarto, ' rase all.' 

I. ii. 61, 62. ' here comes the nobleman zvho 
committed the prince,' etc. ; this was Sir Wil- 
liam Gascoigne, Chief Justice of the King's 
Bench. Cp. illustration to note on V. ii. z^. 

I. ii. 129. In Quarto the prefix ' Old ' is 
given instead of Fal( staff), cp. Preface. 

I. ii. 180. 'I cannot go; I cannot tell'; Johnson was probably 
right in seeing here a play on go and tell in the sense of ' pass 
current' and ' count as good money.' 




155 



Notes THE SECOND PART OF 

I. ii. 229. 'spit white'; cp. Batman uppon Bartholome, ed. 
1582 (quoted by Dr. Furnivall) : — "If the spittle be zvhite viscus, 
the sickness cometh of fleam; if black, of melancholy; the white 
spittle not knottie signiHeth health." Other passages indicate that 
it was also regarded as a sign of thirst. 

I. ii. 232-238. Omitted in Folios. 

I. iii. 36-55. Omitted in Quarto. 

I. iii. z^, etc. 

'If this present quality of war 
Indeed the instant action: a cause on foot," etc. 

Various attempts have been made to restore the meaning of the 
lines. Malone's reading has been generally accepted: — 

' Yes, in this present quality of war: 
Indeed the instant action — a cause on foot — 
Lives so in hope as in an early spring/ 

which Grant White paraphrases, " Yes, in this present quality, 
function, or business of war, it is harmful to lay down likelihoods, 
etc. Indeed this very action or affair — a cause on foot — is no more 
hopeful of fruition than the buds of an unseasonably early spring." 
Pope proposed "Impede the instant act"; Johnson, "in this pres- 
ent. . . . Indeed of instant action"; Mason, "if this prescient 
quality of war Induc'd the instant action," etc. 

T. iii. 71. ' against the French.' A French army of 12,000 men 
landed at Milford Haven in Wales, for the aid of Glendower, dur- 
ing this rebellion. 

I. iii. 85-108. Omitted in Quarto. 

II. i. 162. 'so God save me, la! '; Quarto, 'so God save me 
law ' ; Folios, ' in good earnest la.' 

II. ii. 26-30. Omitted in Folios. 

II. ii. 80. 'virtuous'; Folio, 'pernicious' ; Capell conjectured 
'precious.' 

II. ii. 92. ' Alth(sa ' ; the boy here confounds Althaea's firebrand 
with Hecuba's ; perhaps the blunder was the poet's. 

II. ii. 121. 'borrower's cap'; Theobald's emendation; Folios 
and Quarto, ' borrowed cap.' 

II. ii. 180. ' leathern jerkins,' commonly worn by vintners and 
tapsters. 

II. iii. 12. ' heart's dear Harry ' ; Folios, ' heart-deere-Harry.' 

II, iii. 19. 'thee grey vault of heaven'] cp. the use of 'grey* 

156 



KING HENRY IV. Notes 

applied to the eyes, where we generally use 'blue'; 'grey-eyed 
morn' {Romeo and Juliet, II. iii. i) may perhaps illustrate the 
same fact. 

II. iv. 35. ' When Arthur first in court'; from the ballad of Sir 
Lancelot du Lake, printed in Percy's Reliques. 

11. iv. 51. 'your broocJies, pearls, and ouches'', a scrap of an 
old ballad, first marked as a quotation by Capell. 

II. iv. 56, 57. Omitted in Folios. 

II. iv. 115. Pistol has been likened to the character of 'the 
swaggering ruffian,' Centurio, in the famous Spanish play by 
Rojas, called Celestina, which was translated into English by 
James Mabbe ; and though entered on the Stationers' Register in 
1598, the translation was not issued till 1630. It is more than 
probable that Mabbe was one of Shakespeare's friends; at all 
events, the dramatist may easily have read the English Tragicke- 
Comedye of Celestina in MS. (Mabbe's fascinating book has re- 
cently been reprinted as a volume of Mr. Nutt's Tudor Trans- 
lations.) 

II. iv. 137. 'Since when, I pray you, sir?' a scoffing form of 
enquiry. 

II. iv. 142, 143. Omitted in Folios. 

II. iv. 168. 'Have zve not Hiren here?' probably a quotation 
from a lost play by George Peele called The Turkish Mahomet 
and Hyren the Fair Greek ; ' Hiren,' a corruption of ' Irene.' 

II. iv. 173. 'And hollow pamper d jades of Asia'; cp. 2 Tam- 
biirlainc, IV. iv. : — 

" Holla, ye pamper' d jades of Asia! 
What ! can ye draw but tzventy miles a day? " 

II. iv. 177. 'Let tJie ivelkin roar'; a commonplace tag in old 
ballads of the time. 

II. iv. 187. 'Then feed, and be fat, my fair Calipolis'; a bur- 
lesque of passages in Peele's Battle of Alcazar (1594) ; Muley 
Mahomet enters to his wife with lion's flesh on his sword, and 
says, 'Feed then, and faint not, my fair Calipolis.' 

II, iv. 189. 'Si fortune me tormente, sperato me contento'; the 
line, probably purposely corrupted, was restored by Hanmer : — 
' Si fortuna mc tormenta, il sperare me contenta' {i.e. ' If fortune 
torments me, hope contents me '). " Pistol is only a copy of Han- 
nibal Gonsaga," remarked Farmer, " who vaunted on yielding 

157 



Notes THE SECOND PART OF 

himself a prisoner, as you may read in an old collection of tales, 
called Wits, Fits, Fancies: — 



'Si Fortiina mc tormenta, 
II speranca me contenta.' 



l^ 



r 






From an old French rapier formerly in the Douce collection. 

II. iv. 205. ' Then death rock me asleep,' etc. ; said to be a frag- 
ment of an old song written by Anne Boleyn. 

II. iv. 207. 'Untwine the Sisters Three'; cp. Midsummer- 
Night's Dream, V. i. 343-348, where there is a reference to the 
' shears ' of Atropos, the Fate that cut the thread of human des- 
tiny. 

II. iv. 279. ' Fiery Trigon ' ; alluding to the astrological division 
of the zodiacal signs into four trigons or triplicities; one consisting 
of the three fiery signs (Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius) ; the others, 
respectively, of three airy, three watery, and three earthly signs. 
When the three superior planets were in the three fiery signs they 
formed a fiery trigon ; when in Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces, a 
zvatery one, etc. 

III. i. The whole scene omitted in Quarto i {i.e. the earlier 
copies of the edition). 

III. i. 30. 'Then happy lozv, lie dozvn!'; Quarto reads 'Then 
(happy) low lie dozvne.' Coleridge suggested ' Then happy lozv- 
lie-dozvn' ; Warburton, 'happy lowly dozen.' The Folio seems 
to make the meaning quite clear : — ' Then happy Lowe, lye 
downe ' ; ' low ' is used substantively, ' You who are happy in 
your humble situations, lay down your heads to rest,' etc. 

III. i. 43. ' little,' i.e. ' a little.' 

III. i. 53-56. Omitted in Folios. 

Ill i. 66. 'cousin Nevil' ; the earldom of Warwick did not 
come into the family of the Nevilles till the latter part of the reign 
of Henry VI. ; at this time it was in the family of Beauchamp. 

III. ii. 'Justice Shallozv' ; the character has, with much rea- 
son, been identified with Sir Thomas Lucy of Charlecote {cp. The 
Merry Wives of Windsor) ; perhaps there is a reference to his 
arms in the words, 'If the young dace he a bait for the old pike, 

158 



KING HENRY IV. 



Notes 



/ see no reason in the lazu of nature but I may snap at line' (cp. 
infra, 11. 351,352; ' luce ' = ' pike,' cp. Note, line i, Merry Wives 
of Windsor) . 

Ill, ii. 26. ' Then was Jack Falstaff, now Sir John, a hoy, and 
page to Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk.' This is generally- 
given as one of the points of evidence that Falstaff was originally 
called Oldcastle, Sir John Oldcastle having actually been in his 
youth page to the Duke of Norfolk : but it would seem that the 
same is true of Sir John Fastolf. 

III. ii. 31. '/ see (Folios, 'saw') him break Skogan's head' 
(Quarto, Skoggins; Folio i, ' Scoggans') ; two Scogans must be 
carefully differentiated, though probably both are confused by 
Shakespeare in this passage: — (i.) Henry Scogan, the poet. Chau- 
cer's Scogan, described by Ben Jonson in The Fortunate Isles, as 

"a fine gentleman, and master of arts 
Of Henry the Fourth's times, that made disguises 
For the King's sons, and writ in ballad royal 
Daintily well" ; 

(ii.) John Scogan, " an excellent mimick, and of great pleasantry 
in conversation, the favourite buffoon of the court of Edward 




From Faithome's Map of Londo7i. 1658, the only known copy of 
which is preserved in the National Library at Paris. 



Notes 



THE SECOND PART OF 



IV." A book of ' Scogins Jests' was published in 1565 by An- 
drew Borde, and probably suggested the name to Shakespeare. 

III. ii. 140. 'but flinch of the father's substance' ; so Quarto: 
Folios, 'not'; the Variorum of 1821 proposed 'not much'; the 
Quarto reading must be understood as ironical. 

III. ii. 203. 'The ivindmill in St. George's Held'; (cp. illus- 
tration). 

III. ii. 294. ' Dagonct in ArtJiurs shozv'; Sir Dagonet is Ar- 




T/ie Kmghts of the Rojiud Table (see note on III. ii. 294) 
From an illuminated MS. of Lancelot (No 676) in the National Library at Paris. 

thur's fool in the story of Tristram de Lyonesse ; 'Arthur's shoiu ' 
was an exhibition of archery by a society of 58 members which 
styled itself " The Ancient Order, Society, and Unitie laudable of 
Prince Arthur and his Knightly Armory of the Round Table," 

160 



KING HENRY IV. Notes 

and took the names of the knights of the old Romance. Mul- 
caster referred to it in his Positions, concerning the training up 
of children (1581). The meeting-place of the society was Mile- 
end Green. (The names of the knights of the old romance may 
be well illustrated by the illustration on the next page.) 

III. ii. 331. 'invisible'; Rowe's emendation; Quarto and Fo- 
lios, 'invincible.' i.e. (?) "not to b^ evinced, not to be made 
out, indeterminable " (Schmidt). 

III. ii. 2>2)2,32>2>- 'y(^i • • • mandrake' ; 340-343, 'a came 
. . . good-nights'; omitted in Folios. 

III. ii. 349. 'philosopher's two stones'; "one of which was an 
universal medicine, the other a transmuter of base metals into 
gold " ; so Warburton ; Malone explains : — " I will make him of 
twice the value of the philosopher's stone." 

IV. i. 55-79. Omitted in Quarto. 

IV. i. 71. 'there'; the reading of the Folios; Hanmer con- 
jectured ' sphere ' ; Collier ' chair.' 

IV. i. 93. Neither this line nor 95 is to be found in the Folios, 
and they are omitted in some copies of the Quarto. To some 
corruption of the text is due the obscurity of 11. 94-96, which 
Clarke paraphrases : — " The grievances of my brother general, the 
commonwealth, and the home cruelty to my born brother, cause 
me to make this quarrel my own." The archbishop's brother 
had been beheaded by the King's order. 

IV. i. 103-139. Omitted in Quarto. 

IV. i. 173. 'true substantial form,' i.e. ' m due form and legal 
validity.' 

IV. iii. 43. 'hook-nosed fellow of Rome'; Quarto adds 'there 
cosin' before 'I came' which Johnson took to be a corruption 
of ' there, Ccesar.' 

IV. iii. 121, 122. 'commences it and sets it in act and use'; 
Tyrwhitt saw in these words an allusion "to the Cambridge Com- 
mencement and the Oxford Act; for by those different names 
the two Universities have long distinguished the season at which 
each gives to her respective students a complete authority to use 
those hoards of learning which have entitled them to their sev- 
eral degrees." 

IV. iv. 35. 'as flaws congealed in the spring of day': according 
to Warburton the allusion is " to the opinion of some philosophers 
that the vapours being congealed in the air by the cold (which is 
most intense in the morning), and being afterwards rarefied anl 
let loose by the warmth of the sun, occasion those sudden a;iJ 

161 



Notes 



THE SECOND PART OF 



impetuous gusts of wind which are called flaws"; Malone 
explained ' Haws ' to mean " small blades of ice which are stuck 
on the edges of the water in winter mornings." 

IV. iv. 122. ' loathly births of nature/ i.e. unnatural births. 

IV. V. 205. 'And all my friends'; Tyrwhitt's conjecture for 
' thy friends ' of the Folios and Quarto. Dyce ' my foes/ Clarke 
explains the original reading thus : — " By the first thy friends the 
King means those who are friendly inclined to the prince, and 
who, he goes on to say, must be made securely friends." 

IV. V. 235. "Tis called Jerusalem' ', probably from the tapes- 
tries of the history of Jerusalem with which it was hung; now 
used for the meetings of Convocation. 

V. i. 31, 32. 'A friend i' court is better tlian a penny in purse'; 
cp. The Romaunt of the Rose, 5540: — 



For frcnde in court aic better 
Than peny is i npurse, certis" 



IS 



Camden gives the same proverbial expression. 

V. ii. 38. 'A ragged and forestall'd remission' ; ' forestall' d has 
been variously interpreted; the simplest interpretation seems to 
be ' anticipated, asked for before being granted,' not necessarily 
by the Chief-Justice himself, but by his friends ; the explanation 
fits, in well with the dignified utterance of the speaker. Others 
explain, ' a pardon that is sure not to be granted, the case having 
been prejudged '; 'a pardon which is precluded from being abso- 
lute, by the refusal of the offender to accuse or 
~ alter his conduct,' etc. (The accompanying figure, 

from a monument in Deerhurst Church, Glouces- 
tershire, represents the costume of a judge of the 
time of Henry IV.) 

V. iii. 7i. 'Do me right'; 'to do a man right' 
was formerly, according to Steevens, the usual ex- 
pression in pledging healths. 

'And dub me knight' ; it was a custom in Shake- 
speare's day to drink a bumper kneeling to the 
health of one's mistress. He who performed this 
exploit was dubbed a knight for the evening, cp. A 
Yorkshire Tragedy, "They call it knighting in Lon- 
don when they drink upon their knees" (Malone). 
V. iii. 121. 'Dead? As nail in door'; an ancient 
proverbial expression ; the door-nail was probably 
lIic nail on which the knocker struck. "' It is there- 

162 




KING HENRY IV. Notes 

fore used as a comparison to any one irrevocably dead, one who 
has fallen (as Virgil says) multa morte, that is, with abundant 
death, such as iteration of strokes on the head would naturally 
produce." 

V. iii. 141. ' Where is the life that late I led ' ; a scrap of an old 
song; cp. Taming of the Shrew, IV. i. 

V. V. 28. 'absque hoc nihil est,' ''tis all in every part'; the 
second and later Folios correct ' obsque ' to ' absque,' but the 
error may have been intentional on the author's part. Pistol uses 
a Latin expression ' ever the same, for without this there is 
nothing,' and then goes on to allude to an English proverbial 
expression, " All in all, and all in every part," which he seems to 
give as its free rendering. 

V. V. 108. ' 7 heard a bird so sing ' ; a proverbial expression 
still extant. 

Epilogue. Shakespeare's authorship of this epilogue has been 
doubted, and it has been described as ' a manifest and poor imi- 
tation of the epilogue to As You Like If.' It is noteworthy that 
it occurs already in the Quarto (1600), though with one im- 
portant difference ; the words ' and so kneel dozen . . . queen ' 
(11- 3^y ^7) are printed there at the end of the first paragraph, 
after ' infinitely.' It seems probable, therefore, that the epilogue 
originally ended there, and that the remaining lines were added 
somewhat later. One is strongly tempted to infer that the addi- 
tions to the epilogue were called forth by the success of the first 
and second parts of the play of Sir John Oldcastle, written evi- 
dently to vindicate the character of Falstaff's original, and put 
on the stage as a counter-attraction to Henry IV., hence the 
words, added in a spirit of playful defiance, 'for Oldcastle died a 
martyr, and this is not the man' (1. 2>3)- The first part of Sir 
John Oldcastle was performed for the first time about the ist of 
November 1599, the second part, dealing with the Lollard's death, 
wase evidently written by the end of the year. The First Part 
of the true and honourable history of the Life of Sir John Old- 
castle, the good Lord Cobham, appeared in two editions in 1600; 
Shakespeare's name had been impudently printed on the title- 
page of the former and less correct edition ; the authors were 
Munday, Drayton, Wilson, and Chettle. The ' Second Part ' is 
not known to exist. 

1. 28. ' our humble author will continue the story, with Sir 
John in it, and make you merry with fair Katharine in France ' ; 
Shakespeare changed his mind. " The public was not to be in- 

163 



Notes 



THE SECOND PART OF 



dulged in laughter for laughter's sake at the expense of his play. 
The tone of the entire play of Henry V. would have been altered 
if Falstaff had been allowed to appear in it. . . . Agincourt 
is not the field for splendid mendacity. . . . There is no place 
for Falstaff any longer on earth ; he must find refuge ' in Ar- 
thur's bosom.' " But the public would not absolve " our humble 
author of his promise, and they were to make merry again with 
their favourite 

'round about the oak 
Of Heme the hunter.'" 




Interior of an Elizabethan Inn, Rochester. 
From an engraving by Fairholt. 



164 



KING HENRY IV, 



Explanatory Notes. 



The Explanatory Notes in this edition have been specially seUcted and 
adapted, with emendations after the latest and best authorities, from the 
most eminent Shakespearian scholars and commentators, including Johnson, 
Malone, Steevens, Singer, Dyce, Hudson, White, Furness, Dowden, and 
others. This method, here introduced for the first time, provides the best 
annotation of Shakespeare ever embraced in a single edition. 



INDUCTION. 

[Enter Rumour, painted full of tongues.] Judge Holmes and 
other commentators have called attention to the following from 
Bacon's essay, 0/Fa;n£': "The poets make Fame a monster: they 
describe her in part finely and elegantly ; and. in part gravely and 
sententiously ; they say, Look how many feathers she hath: so 
many eyes she hath underneath, so many tongues, so many 
voices, she pricks up so many ears. This is a flourish. There 
follow excellent parables; as that she gathereth strength in 
going ; that she goeth upon the ground, and yet hideth her head 
in the clouds ; that in the daytime she sitteth in a watch-tower, 
and flieth most by night; that she mingleth things done with 
things not done, and that she is a terror to great cities." This 
description is almost a literal translation of that given of Fama 
by Virgil, 

35. this worm-eaten hold: — Northumberland's residence, Wark- 
worth Castle. 

ACT FIRST. 
Scene I. 

6. [Enter Northumberland.] Holinshed gives these particu- 
lars : " The King was minded to have gone into Wales against 
the Welsh rebels, that, under their chieftain Owen Glendower, 
ceased not to do much mischief still against the English subjects. 
But at the same time, to his further disquieting, there was a con- 

x65 



Notes THE SECOND PART OF 

spiracy put in practice against him at home by the Earl of North- 
umberland, who had conspired with Richard Scroope, Archbishop 
of York, Thomas Mowbray, earl marshall, son to Thomas, Duke 
of Norfolk, who for the quarrel betwixt him and King Henry 
had been banished, the Lords Hastings, Fauconbridge, Bardolfe, 
and diverse others. It was appointed that they should meet alto- 
gether with their whole power upon Yorkswold, at a day as- 
signed, and that the Earl of Northumberland should be chieftain, 
promising to bring with him a great number of Scots. The arch- 
bishop, accompanied with the earl marshall, devised certain ar- 
ticles of such matters as it was supposed that, not only the com- 
monalty of the realm, but also the nobility, found themselves 
grieved with : which articles they showed first unto such of their 
adherents as were near about them, and after sent them abroad to 
their friends further off, assuring them that, for redress of such 
oppressions, they would shed the last drop of blood in their 
bodies, if need were." 

47. devour the zcay: — So in Job, xxxix. 24: "He swallowcth 
the ground with fierceness and rage." The same expression oc- 
curs in Ben Jonson's Sejanus: "But with that speed and heat of 
appetite, with which they greedily devour the way to some great 
sports." 

209. more and less: — Great and small in rank; high and low. 

Scene II. 

I. The practice of diagnosing diseases by the mere examination 
of urine was once so much in fashion that Linacre, the founder of 
the College of Physicians, formed a statute to restrain apothe- 
caries from carrying the water of their patients to a doctor, and 
afterwards giving medicines in consequence of the opinions pro- 
nounced concerning it. This statute was followed by another, 
which forbade the doctors themselves to pronounce on any dis- 
order from such an uncertain diagnosis. 

7. Men of all sorts take a pride to gird at me: — This passage 
might be aptly quoted as proving that with Falstaff the main busi- 
ness of life is to laugh and provoke laughter. He is manifestly 
himself proud of the pride that others take in girding at him ; 
enjoys their quips even more perhaps than they do, because he is 
the begetter of them; as being the flint which alone can draw 
forth sparks from their steel, and himself shining by the light he 

166 



KING HENRY IV. Notes 

causes them to emit. And in what he says just after to the Page 
we see that much as he values the things that minister to his 
" huge hill of flesh," he values that hill itself still more as min- 
istering opportunities of saying fine things ; and that he would 
not spare an ounce from that bulk out of which he can extract 
occasion for such prodigies of humour. 

40. a rascally yea-forsooth knave! — Shakespeare here alludes to 
the mild quality of citizen oaths, which excites no less disgust in 
Falstaff than in Hotspur — affording an edifying comment on the 
strange points that afford self-complacency to those who plume 
themselves on their aristocratic superiority and patrician super- 
excellence. Very noteworthy is it that even while arousing our 
highest admiration at the spirited lines w4th which he has limned 
Harry Percy, or at the unction of blended wit and humour with 
which he makes Sir John fabricate a characteristic epithet out of 
a petty oath by way of designating a city mercer, the Poet gives us 
at the very same time a pithy index of the insolent assumptions 
entertained by the dominant and domineering classes in his time. 

145, 146. As I u'as then advised, etc. : — The Poet shows some 
knowledge of the law here ; for, in fact, a man employed as Fal- 
staff then was could not be held to answer in a prosecution for 
an offence of the kind in question. 

241,242. Will your lordship lend me a thousand pound to fur- 
nish me forth f — The point and aptness of this question are so 
subtle as to be, perhaps, not always taken. The judge has just 
been exhorting him to honesty ; he therefore says. Will your lord- 
ship let me have something to be honest with? If you will lend 
me a thousand pounds, I will agree not to steal for a while. 



Scene III. 

[Enter the Archbishop.] "The Archbishop." as Holinshed re- 
lates, " not meaning to stay after he saw himself accompanied 
with a great nurnber of men, that came flocking to York to take 
his part in this quarrel, forthwith discovered his enterprfse, caus- 
ing the articles aforesaid to be set up in the public streets of the 
city of York, and upon the gates of the monasteries, that each 
man might understand the cause that moved him to rise in arms 
against the King, the reforming whereof did not yet appertain 
unto him. Hereupon knights, esquires, gentlemen, yeomen, and 
other of the commons, as well of the city, towns, and countries 

167 



Notes THE SECOND PART OF 

about, being alhirea eitner for desire of change, or else for desire 
to see a reformation in such things as were mentioned in the ar- 
ticles, assembled together in great numbers ; and the Archbishop 
coming forth amongst them, clad in armour, encouraged, ex- 
horted, and pricked them forth to take the enterprise in hand, and 
manfully to continue in their begun purpose ; promising forgive- 
ness of sins to all them whose hap it was to die in the quarrel; 
and thus, not only all the. citizens of York, but all other in the 
countries about that were able to bear weapon, came to the Arch- 
bishop and the earl marshall. Indeed, the respect that men had 
to the Archbishop caused them to like the better of the cause, 
since the gravity of his age, his integrity of life, and incompa- 
rable learning, with the reverend aspect of his amiable personage, 
moved all men to have him in no small estimation." 

82. The Duke of Lancaster: — This is an anachronism. Prince 
John of Lancaster was not created a duke till the second year of 
the reign of his brother. King Henry V. At this time Prince 
Henry was actually Duke of Lancaster. Shakespeare was misled 
by Stowe, who, speaking of the first Parliament of King Henry 
IV., says, "His second sonnc was there made Duke of Lancaster." 

ACT SECOND. 
Scene I. 

44. [Enter Falstaff.] Of this play's changes from grave to gay, 
Ulrici says : " The comic parts illustrate clearly and fully the 
leading thought of the whole play in both its parts. In the first 
we are shown that strife and war, in the second that so-called 
state actions (even though they treat of outwardly important in- 
terests, of crowns and principalities) are wholly unable to give 
history any real historical value ; further that this value can be 
only of an ideal, ethical nature, and that, accordingly, with the 
rupture of the moral foundation, the organic equilibrium of politi- 
cal life itself is broken; that the course of history (even though 
outwardly and apparently well-regulated and entering other 
paths) is nevertheless internally disturbed and will not admit of 
the state enjoying rest and peace, till it has again recovered its 
necessary equilibrium." 

88-108. Coleridge cites this speech of the Hostess as an instance 
of narrative " fermenting o'er with frothy circumstance," and his 

168 



KING HENRY IV. Notes 

comment upon it is one of those rare felicities of criticism, such 
as we never think of until started by another, nor ever forget 
them after ; they being so natural and apt that the mind no sooner 
sees them than it closes with them. " The poor soul's thoughts 
and sentences/' says he, " are more closely interlinked than the 
truth of nature would have required, but that the connections and 
sequence, which the habit, of Method can alone give, have in this 
instance a substitute in the fusion of passion. For the absence of 
Method, which characterizes the uneducated, is occasioned by an 
habitual submission of the understanding to mere events and 
images as such, and independent of any power in the mind to 
classify and appropriate them. The general accompaniments of 
time and place are the only relations which persons of this class 
appear to regard in their statements." 

Scene II. 

[Prince Henry.] Brandes says: "Shakespeare had certainly 
sufficient personal experience to enable him to sympathize with 
this princely youth, who, despite the consciousness of his high aims, 
revels in his freedom, shuns the court life and ceremonial which 
await him, throws his dignity to the winds, riots in reckless high 
spirits, boxes the ears of the Lord Chief Justice, and has yet self- 
command enough to suffer arrest without resistance, takes part 
in a tourney with a common wench's glove in his helm — in short, 
does everj^thing that most conflicts with his people's sense of pro- 
priety and his father's doctrines of prudence, but does it without 
coarseness, with a certain innocence, and without ever having 
to reproach himself with any actual self-degradation. Henry 
IV. misunderstands his son as completely as Frederick William 
of Prussia misunderstood the young Frederick the Great." 

Scene III. 

[Northumberland.] "Northumberland," says Hudson, "makes 
good his previous character : evermore talking big and doing noth- 
ing; full of verbal tempest and practical indecision; and still 
ruining his friends, and at last himself, between " I would " and " I 
dare not," he lives without our respect and dies unpitied of us ; 
v/hile his daughter-in-law's remembrance of her noble husband 
kindles a sharp resentment of his mean-spirited backwardness, 
and a hearty scorn of his blustering verbiage." 

169 



Notes THE SECOND PART OF 

Scene IV. 

[Tlie Boar's-head Tavern.] Thornbury has aptly remarked that 
the characteristic of the Elizabethan age was its sociability. 
People were always meeting at St. Paul's, the theatre, or the 
tavern. Family intercourse, on the other hand, was almost un- 
known; women, as in ancient Greece, played no prominent part 
in society. The men gathered at the tavern club to drink, talk, 
and enjoy themselves. The festive bowl circulated freely, even 
more so than in Denmark, which nevertheless passed for the 
toper's paradise. (Compare the utterances on this subject in 
Hamlet, I. iv., and Othello, II. iii.) The taverns were, moreover, 
favourite places for the rendezvous of court gallants with citi- 
zens' wives ; fast young men would bring their mistresses with 
them, and here, after supper, gambling went on merrily. At 
the taverns writers and poets met in good fellowship, and carried 
on wordy wars, battles of wit, sparkling with mirth and fantasy. 
They were like tennis-rallies of words, in which the great thing 
was to tire out your adversary; they were skirmishes in which 
the combatants poured into each other whole volleys of conceits. 
Beaumont has celebrated them in some verses to Ben Jonson, 
who, both as a great drinker and as an entertaining magister 
bibendi, was much admired and feted : — 

" What things have we seen 
Done at the Mermaid! heard words that have been 
So nimble, and so full of subtile flame, 
As if that every one from whence they came 
Had meant to put his whole wit in a jest 
And had resolv'd to live a fool the rest 
Of his dull life." 
68-71. Come, I 'II be friends, etc. : — It has been aptly suggested 
that Mistress Doll, as if inspired by the present visitation, grows 
poetical here, and improvises in the lyric vein. The close of her 
speech, if set to the eye as it sounds to the ear, would stand some- 
thing thus : — 

" Come, I '11 be friends with thee. Jack : 
Thou art going to the wars ; 
And whether I shall ever see thee again, 
Or no, there is nobody cares." 
89-92. Master Tisick . . . Master Dumbe: — The names of 
Master Tisick and Master Dumbe are ludicrously intended to de- 

170 



KING HENRY IV. Notes 

note that the deputy was pursy and short-whided , the minister 
one of those who preached only the homihes set forth by author- 
ity Th Puritans nicknamed them Dumb-dogs, and the oppro- 
brious epithet continued in use as late as the re>gn of Kmg 

^^i^Vol'no cheater -.-rh, humour consists in Mrs, Quickly's 
miluking ^cl eater for an cscheator or officer of the exchequer 
Lord Coke puns upon the equivoque: " But tf you will be conten 
io let the eseheator alone, and not look mto h.s actions, he w 11 
be contented by deceiving you to change his name takmg unto 
htmselt "he two last syllables only, with the es left out. and so 

'",63 ""''''-V to the la-. -.-By several statutes made in the 
.eii>?s of Elizabeth and James I. for the -g"'^'- ^f ^^f^''^^^^^ 
of fish davs, victuallers were expressly forbidden o furn.sh flesh 
^n lent The brothels were formerly screened under the preten e 
of being victualling houses and taverns, just as too often we see 

them in cities to-day. , , , . « Tho=A valedirtorv 

404 an honester and truer-hearted man:- These valedictory 
word "says Clarke, " (printed in the Folio with a dash, to indi- 
cate a broken speech, as if unfinished from incapacity to express 
S she feels of admiration) uttered by Hostess Qmckly after 
neart thirty years' experience of Sir John's honesty and truth, 
serve blue than pages of commentary upon his powers of fasci- 
naton o show hotv strong is the spell he exercises upon the 
fud°ement and affections of those with whom he associates. The 
Hostess's blind idolatry, Bardolph's toughly worshipping attach- 
m«"?as seen in Henry V.) form the handsomest excuse for the 
bewitchment with which the Prince seeks his society. 

ACT THIRD. 
Scene I. 

let-er; depths of his own experience, and addressed to men of 
the ike expe nee and thought. Every word of this Scene is m 
the liighest'degree significant and admirable. It is here that the 

171 



Noles THE SECOND PART OF 

King turns to what we now call geology for an image of the his- 
torical mutability of all things. When he mournfully reminds his 
attendants that Richard II., whom he displaced, prophesied a 
nemesis to come from those who had helped him to the throne, 
and that this nemesis has now overtaken him, Warwick answers 
with the profound and astonishingly modern reflection embodied 
in these lines. 

92-93. To the words of Warwick just cited, the King returns 
this no less philosophical answer. 

103. Glcndozvcr is dead : — Glendower did not die till after the 
death of King Henry IV. Shakespeare was led into this error by 
Holinshed. 

Scene IL 

50, SI. clapped i' the clout, etc.: — By the provisions of an old 
statute, every person turned of seventeen years of age, who shoots 
at a less distance than twelve score yards, is to forfeit six shillings 
and eight pence. 

71. accommodated: — It appears that it was fashionable in the 
Poet's time to introduce the word accommodate upon all occa- 
sions. Ben Jonson, in his Discoveries, calls it one of the perfumed 
terms of the time. The indefinite use of it is well ridiculed by 
Bardolph's vain attempt, a few lines below, to define it. 

89. {Enter Falstaff.] Brandes thinks this play in its serious 
scenes more faithful to history than the first part. " In the comic 
scenes, which are very amply developed," he declares that 
" Shakespeare has achieved the feat of bringing Falstafif a second 
time upon the stage without giving us the least sense of anti- 
climax. He is incomparable as ever in his scenes with the Lord 
Chief Justice and with the women of the tavern; and when he 
goes down into Gloucestershire in his character of recruiting- 
officer, he is still at the height, of his genius. As new comrades 
and foils to him, Shakespeare has here created the two con- 
temptible country justices, Shallow and Silence. Shallow is a 
masterpiece, a compact of mere stupidity, foolishness, boastful- 
ness, rascality, and senility ; yet he appears a genius in compari- 
son with the inefi^able Silence. Here, as in the first part, the Poet 
evidently drew his comic types from the life of his own day." 

^S7- Vice's dagger : — There is something excessively ludicrous 
in the comparison of Shallow to this powerless weapon of that 
droll personage, the old Vice or fool. 

172 



KING HENRY IV. Notes 

ACT FOURTH. 

Scene I. 

170 et. scq. Holinshed's account runs : " The messengers re- 
turning to the Earl of Westmoreland, showed him what they had 
heard and brought from the Archbishop. When he had read the 
articles, he showed in word and countenance outwardly that he 
liked the Archbishop's holy and virtuous intent and purpose, 
promising that he and his would prosecute the same in assisting 
the Archbishop, who rejoicing hereat gave credit to the earl, and 
persuaded the earl marshall (against his will as it were) to go 
with him to a place appointed for them to commune together. 
Here when they were met with like number on either part, the 
articles were read over, and without any more ado the Earl of 
Westmoreland and those that were with him, agreed to do their 
best to see that a reformation might be had, according to the 
same. The Earl of Westmoreland using more policy than the 
rest: Well (said he) then our travail is come to the wished end: 
and where our people have been long in armour, let them depart 
home to their wonted trades and occupations : in the meantime 
let us drink together in sign of agreement, that the people on both 
sides may see it, and know that it is true, that we be light at point. 
They had no sooner shaken hands together, but that a knight was 
sent straightways from the Archbishop, to bring word to the peo- 
ple that there was peace concluded, commanding each man to lay 
aside his arms, and to resort home to their houses." 

176. our awful banks: — Of course the image of a river is sug- 
gested ; human life being compared to a stream that ought to flow 
in reverential obedience to the order and institutions of the state. 
Keeping itself within the proper bounds, it moves in reverence 
and awe ; in overflowing them it renounces this. 

193. our royal faiths: — So in Henry VIII., IV. i. 7, 8: "The 
citizens . . . have shown at full their royal minds," that is, 
their minds well affected to the king. 

Scene II. 

8. an iron man : — Holinshed says of the Archbishop, that, " com- 
ing foorth amongst them clad in armour, he encouraged and 
pricked them foorth to the enterprise in hand." 

62 et seq. Holinshed narrates : " The people beholding such 

173 



Notes THE SECOND PART OF 

tokens of peace, as shaking of hands and drinking together of the 
lords in loving manner, they being already wearied with the un- 
accustomed travail of war, brake up their field and returned home- 
wards : but in the meantime, whilst the people of the Archbishop's 
side withdrew away, the number of the contrary part increased, 
according to order given by the Earl of Westmoreland : and yet 
the Archbishop perceived not that he was deceived, until the Earl 
of Westmoreland arrested both him and the earl marshall with 
diverse other. Thus saith Walsingham. But others write some- 
what otherwise of this matter, affirming that the Earl of West- 
moreland indeed, and the Lord Rafe Evers, procured the Arch- 
bishop and the earl marshall to come to a communication with 
them, upon a ground just in the midway betwixt both the armies, 
where the Earl of Westmoreland in talk declared to them how 
perilous an enterprise they had taken in hand, so as to raise the 
people, and to move war against the King; advising them there- 
fore to submit themselves without further delay unto the King's 
mercy, and his son the Lord John, who was present there in the 
field with banners spread, ready to try the matter by dint of sword, 
if they refused this counsel ; and therefore he willed them to re- 
member themselves well : and if they would not yield and crave 
the King's pardon, he bade them to do their best to defend them- 
selves." 

112-123. I paivn'd thee none, etc.: — Johnson and other critics 
have been very indignant that the Poet did not put into the mouth 
of some character a strain of hot indignation against this instance 
of treachery. In answer to which Verplanck very aptly quotes a 
remark said to have been made by Chief Justice Marshall. The 
counsel, it seems, had been boring the court a long time with try- 
ing to prove points that nobody doubted; and the judge, after 
bearing it as long as he well could, very quietly informed him that 
" there were some things which the court might safely be pre- 
sumed to know." Perhaps the critics in question did not duly 
consider, that the surest way in such cases to keep down right 
feeling, is to take for granted that men do not know how to feel, 
and so go about to school them up to it. Verplanck rightly ob- 
serves, that when Mowbray, two lines above, asks, " Is this pro- 
ceeding just and honourable?" the Poet "took for granted that 
his audience would find an unhesitating and unanimous negative 
and indignant reply in their own hearts, without hearing a ser- 
mon upon it from the deceived Archbishop, or a lecture from 
some bystander." 

174 



KING HENRY IV. Notes 

Scene III. 

37,38. nine score and odd posts: — " Falstaff's fine exaggera- 
tions," as Clarke notes, " have so rich an excess that they proclaim 
their own immunity from censure as lies. They at once avow inno- 
cence of intention to deceive ; they are uttered for the pure pleas- 
ure of wit-invention. It is not that he for a moment expects 
Prince John to believe in his having foundered more than a hun- 
dred and eighty horses, but he has a relish in defending himself 
with such exuberance of resource that his hearer shall be com- 
pelled to give way. He is not in the right ; but it is his will that 
those who listen to him shall allow him to leave off as if he were 
in the right, even while he is in the wrong, for the pure sake of his 
wit. He never proves his case ; but he so ably defends his cause 
that he invariably gains the day. No one can condemn, though no 
one acquits him; he is left unjudged, and suffered still to go at 
large, and in triumph — the victor ever." 

90,91. a viau cannot make him laugh: — Falstaff's pride of wit 
— a pride which is most especially gratified in the fascination he 
has upon Prince Henry — is shrewdly manifested here, while at 
the same time a very important and operative principle of human 
character in general, and of Prince John's character in particular, 
is most hintingly touched. Falstaff sees that the brain of this 
" sober-blooded boy " has nothing for him to get hold of or work 
upon ; that be he never so witty in himself he cannot be the cause 
of any wit in him ; and he is vexed and mortified that his wit 
fails upon him. And the Poet meant no doubt to have it under- 
stood that Prince Henry was drawn and held to Falstaff by virtue 
of something that raised him immeasurably above his brother; 
and that the frozen regularity, which was proof against all the bat- 
teries of wit and humour, was all of a piece, vitally, with the 
moral hardness which would not flinch from such an abominable 
act of perfidy as that towards the Archbishop and his party. Well, 
therefore, does Johnson remark upon the passage : " He who can- 
not be softened into gaiety, cannot easily be melted into kindness." 

106. becomes excellent wit: — Concerning this first "property of 
your excellent sherris," some curious matter has been quoted by 
Hughson in his History of London, from an unpublished Diary of 
Ben Jonson preserved at Dulwich College. One memorandum 
runs thus : " I laid the plot of my Volpone, and wrote most of it, 
after a present of ten doz. of Palm sack, from my very good Lord 
T ; that play, I am positive, will last to posterity, when I 

175 



Notes THE SECOND PART OF 

and Envy are friends with Applause." Again, speaking of his 
Catiline, he thinks one of its scenes is flat, and therefore resolves 
to drink no more water with his wine. And he describes The Al- 
cJiemist and TJie Silent Woman as the product of much and good 
wine, adding, withal, that The Devil is an Ass " was written when 
I and my boys drank bad wine." Doubtless Shakespeare and rare 
old Ben had discussed the virtues of sack in more senses than 
one in some of their wit-combats at the Mermaid ; though which 
of them was the master, and which the pupil, in this deep science, 
cannot now be ascertained. Both their establishments, no doubt, 
were pretty good at convertin-g wine into wit ; but surely Shake- 
speare's must have been far the best, since all the benefit of Fal- 
staff's full-grown and ripe experience had accrued to him. 

Scene IV. 

[The Jerusalem chamber.] Holinshed says: " We find that he 
[King Henry] was taken with his last sickness while he was mak- 
ing his prayers at Saint Edward's shrine, there as it were to take 
his leave and so to proceed forth on his journey. He was so sud- 
denly and grievously taken, that such as were about him feared 
lest he would have died presently. Wherefore, to relieve him (if 
it were possible), they bare him unto a chamber that was next at 
hand belonging to the Abbot of Westminster, where they laid him 
on a pallet before the fire, and used all remedies to revive him. 
At length he recovered his speech and understanding, and per- 
ceiving himself in a strange place which he knew not, he willed 
to know if the chamber had any particular name ; whereunto 
answer was made that it was Jerusalem. Then, said the King, 
lauds be given to the Father of heaven ; for now I know that I 
shall die here in this chamber, according to the prophecy of me 
declared, that I should depart this life in Jerusalem." 

7Q. (So. 'Tis seldom zvhcn the bee, etc.: — As the bee, having once 
placed her comb in a carcass, stays by her honey, so he that has 
once taken pleasure in bad company will continue to associate 
with those that have the art of pleasing him. 

122. Unfather'd heirs: — To Staunton, these were certain so- 
called prophets, who pretended to have been conceived by miracle, 
like Merlin. So Spenser, in The Faerie Queene: — 

" And. sooth, men say that he was not the sonne 
Of mortall Syre or other living wight, 
But wondrously begotten, and begonne* 

1/6 



KING HENRY IV. Notes 

By false illusion of a guilefull Spright 

On a faire Lady Nonne, that whilome hight 

Matilda, daughter to Pubidius, 

Who was the lord of Mathraval by right, 

And coosen unto King Ambrosius ; 

Whence he indued was with skill so merveilous." 

Also Montaigne, Essays : " In Mahomet's religion, by the 
easie beleefe of that people, are many Merlins found; that is to 
say, fatherles children ; spiritual children, conceived and borne 
devinely in the wombs of virgins," etc. 

Scene V. 

2, 3. Unless some dull, etc. : — It has always been thought that 
slazi; or in the old sense, dull music induces sleep. Ariel enters 
playing solemn music to produce this effect, in The Tempest. The 
notion is not peculiar to our Poet, as the following exquisite lines, 
from Wit Restored, 1658, may witness : — * 

" O, lull me, lull me, charming air, 

My senses rock'i with wonder sweet; 
Like snow on wool thy fallings are. 
Soft like a spirit are thy feet. 
Grief who need fear 
That hath an ear? 
Down let him lie, 
And slumbering die, 
And change his soul for harmony." 
[Enter Prince Henry.] Holinshed thus narrates the circum- 
stances of the Prince's interview with the King : " The prince, sore 
offended with such persons as by slanderous reports sought, not 
only to spot his good name abroad in the realm, but to sow dis- 
cord also betwixt him and his father, wrote his letters into every 
part of the realm, to reprove all such slanderous devices of those 
that sought his discredit. And to clear himself the better, that the 
world might understand what wrong he had to be slandered in 
such wise, about the feast of Peter and Paul, to wit, the nine-and- 
twentieth day of June, he came to the court, with such a number 
of noblemen and other his friends that wished him well, as the 
like train had been seldom seen repairing to the court at any one 
time in those days. The court was then at Westminster, where he 
being entered into the hall, not one of his company durst once 

177 



Notes THE SECOND PART OF 

advance himself further than the fire in the same hall, notwith- 
standing they were earnestly requested by the lords to come 
higher ; but they, regarding what they had in commandment of 
the Prince, would not presume to do in any thing contrary there- 
unto. He himself, only accompanied with those of the King's 
house, was straight admitted to the presence of the King his 
father, who being at that time grievously diseased, yet caused him- 
self in his chair to be borne into his privy chamber, where, in the 
presence of three or four persons in whom he had most confidence, 
he commanded the Prmce to show what he had to say concerning 
the cause of his coming. The Prince kneeling down before his 
father, said : Most redoubted and sovereign lord and father, I am 
at this time come to your presence as your liege man, and as your 
natural son, in all things to be at your commandment. And where 
I understand you have in suspicion my demeanour against your 
Grace, you know very well, that if I knew any man within this 
realm of whom you should stand in fear, my duty were to punish 
that^erson, thereby to remove that grief from your heart. Then 
how much more ought I to suffer death, to ease your Grace of 
that grief which you have of me, being your natural son and liege 
man; and to that end I have this day made myself ready by con- 
fession and receiving the sacrament. And therefore I beseech 
you, most redoubted lord and dear father, for the honour of God, 
to ease your heart of all such suspicion as you have of me, and to 
despatch me here before your knees with this same dagger (and 
withal he delivered unto the King his dagger in all humble rever- 
ence, adding further, that his life was not so dear to him that he 
wished to live one day with his displeasure) ; and therefore, in 
thus ridding me out of life, and yourself from all suspicion, here 
in presence of these lords, and before God at the day of the gen- 
eral judgement, I faithfully protest clearly to forgive you. The 
King, moved herewith, cast from him the dagger, and, embracing 
the Prince, kissed him, and with shedding tears confessed, that 
indeed he had him partly m 'suspicion, though now (as he per- 
ceived) not with just cause; and therefore from thenceforth no 
misreport should cause him to have him in mistrust; and this he 
promised of his honour. Thus were the father and the son recon- 
ciled, betwixt whom the said pickthanks had sown division." 

163. medicine potable : — It was long a prevailing opinion that a 
solution of gold had great medicinal virtues ; and that the incor- 
ruptibility of the metal might be communicated to the body im- 
pregnated with it. Potable gold was a panacea of ancient quacks. 

178 



KING HENRY IV. Notes 

ACT FIFTH. 

Scene I. 

[Enter . . . Falstaff.] " If," says Hudson, " we were to fix 
upon anything as especially characteristic of Falstaff, we should 
say it is an amazing fund of good sense. His vast stock of this, to 
be sure, is pretty much all enlisted or impressed into the service 
of sensuality, yet nowise so but that the servant still overpeers and 
outshines the master. Moreover, his thinking has such agility 
and quickness, and at the same time is so apt and pertinent, as to 
do the work of the most prompt and popping wit, yet in such sort 
as we cannot but feel the presence of something much larger 
and stronger than wit. For mere wit, be it never so good, to be 
keenly relished must be sparingly used, and the more it tickles the 
sooner it tires. But no one can ever weary of Falstaff's talk, who 
understands it; his speech being like pure, fresh cold water, 
which always tastes good, because it is — tasteless. The wit of 
other men seems to be some special faculty or mode of thought, 
and lies in a quick seizing of remote and fanciful affinities ; 
whereas in Falstaff it lies not in any one thing more than another, 
for which cause it cannot be defined, being indeed none other 
than that roundness and evenness of mind which we call good 
sense, so quickened and pointed as to produce the effect of wit, 
yet without hindrance to its own proper effect.'' 

45-55- I grant your worship, etc. : — This is no exaggerated pic- 
ture of the course of justice in Shakespeare's time. Sir Nicholas 
Bacon, in a speech in Parliament, 1559, says, "Is it not a mon- 
strous disguising to have a justice a maintainer, acquitting som? 
for gain, enditing others for malice, bearing with him as his 
servant, overthrowing the other as his enemy? " A member of 
the House of Commons, in 1601, says, "A justice of peace is a 
living creature, that for half a dozen chickens will dispense with 
a dozen of penal statutes," 

66-68. // / zvere sawed, etc. : — Clarke comments here : " The 
relish with which Falstaff each time stays by himself to witticize 
upon Shallow's peculiarities, the gusto with which he makes the 
justice's leanness furnish him with as ample store of humour as 
his own fatness, the shrewdness with which he penetrates the 
truth of the relative qualities and positions of the country magis- 
trate and his serving-man, all show how thoroughly the author 

179 



Noies THE SECOND PART OF 

liimself enjoyed the composition of this thrice admirable comedy- 
portrait character." 

76-80. // / had a suit, etc. : — This is a most shrewd and search- 
ing commentary on what has just passed between Shallow and 
Davy in Falstaff's presence. It is impossible to hit them more 
aptly, to take them off more felicitously. Of course Sir John 
could not be the greatest of makesports, as he is, unless he were, 
or at least were capable of being, something more. And in fact 
he has as much practical sagacity and penetration as the King ; 
there being no other person in the play, except Prince Henry, that 
dives so quickly and deeply into the characters of those about him. 

86. which is four tcrtns : — These terms were the terms or sit- 
tings of the courts, by which the seasons were then commonly 
reckoned. During the law terms, many people went up from the 
country into the city, to transact business, learn the fashions, and 
do sundry other things. Some one has justly remarked upon the 
humour of making a spendthrift thus compute time by those 
periods which a hard-up debtor would be apt to remember. 

88. et seq. Lloyd says: "In the second part of Henry IV. 
Falstaff lets out the principle and secret of his sycophancy. ' O 
it is much,' he says, ' that a lie with a slight oath and a jest with a 
sad brow will do with a fellow that never had the ache in his 
shoulders.' The rogue infallibly divines the Prince's rejoinder to 
every remark he makes, grossly as he mistakes as to the main 
point of the ultimate hold he supposes himself to possess on his 
habits or sympathies. To supply the Prince with mirth is his busi- 
ness and his enjoyment, and he gains his ludicrous Doints by ex- 
aggerating his personal unwieldiness and vices of mind and habit, 
ever with full reliance that the Prince will fall into the trap and 
never discern the trick. When wit and mirth and nimbleness of 
imaginative suggestions are in question, Falstaff is as superior to 
the Prince as the master to his instrument, and it is the very use 
of this superiority that misleads him into the belief that he has 
equal sway over his earnest purposes. The Prince is even inferior 
to Poins in the imaginative design and conduct of a jest." 

Scene II. 

73-83. / then did use . . . commit you : — While Sir Will- 
iam Gascoigne was at the bar, Henry of Bolingbroke was his 
client, and appointed him his attorney to sue out his livery in the 
Court of Wards ; but Richard II. defeated his purpose. When 

180 



J 



KING HENRY IV. Notes 

Bolingbroke became Henry IV. he appointed Gascoigne Chief 
Justice. In that station he acquired the character of a learned, 
upright, wise and intrepid judge. In treating the commitment of 
the Prince, Shakespeare follows the Chronicles. 

113, 114. Forzchicli, I do commit, etc. : — " The reader," says Ver- 
planck, " must bear in mind that the present tenure of office for 
life by the English judges is but modern; and that, under the 
Plantagenets and Tudors, a Chief Justice might be removed like 
any other officer of the crown. Henry's voluntary retaining the 
Chief Justice in his high station is, therefore, a manly acknowl- 
edgement of his own error, and a magnanimous tribute to the up- 
rightness of the magistrate. The story of the Prince's insolence, 
and his commitment to prison, is strictly historical, being related 
briefly by Hall and Holinshed, and more minutely by Sir Thomas 
Elyot, in his book of political ethics entitled The Goveniour. But 
these are all silent as to Henry V.'s after-treatment of the Chief 
Justice, or the latter's being continued in office after the accession 
of Henry V. Several of the Shakespearian historical critics . . . 
deny the fact itself, and some of them in a tone of rebuke for 
the * author's deviation from history.' I should be sorry to lose a 
noble example of moderation and magnanimit}^ in the exercise of 
political patronage, from history; but if those comments are cor- 
rect, Shakespeare deserves the higher honour of not having 
merely adopted and beautifully enforced, but having invented the 
striking incident, embodying a noble lesson of political ethics, 
which in our own days even republican rulers may profit by. I in- 
cline to the opinion that the English commentators are in error 
as to the fact, and that the Poet has merely decorated and en- 
forced the truth, which probably came down to him by popular 
and general tradition, as a plain fact, to which he has given the 
impressive weight of moral instruction." Verplanck follows these 
remarks with an argument in support of the substantial historical 
accuracy of the Poet in his treatment of the matter. And it is 
now considered to have been fully established that Shakespeare 
herein has based his " lesson of political ethics " on history no 
less than upon his own ideals of magnanimity. 

Scene III. 

3. caraways : — Caraway seeds were formerly much eaten with 
apples, for reasons which appear from the following quotations : 
In Cogan's Haven of Health, 1594, it is stated that '" careway 



Notes THE SECOND PART OF 

seeds are used to be made in comfits, and to be eaten with apples, 
and surely very good for that purpose, for all such things as breed 
wind would be eaten with other things that breake wind." Again : 
" Howbeit we are wont to eate carrawaies, or biskets, or some 
other kind of comfits or seedes, together with apples, thereby to 
breake winde ingendred by them; and surely this is a verie good 
way for students." 

Scene IV. 

[Hostess Quickly and Doll Tcarsheet.] " In his first years in 
London," says Brandes, " Shakespeare, as an underling in a com- 
pany of players, can have had no opportunity of associating with 
other women than, firstly, those who sat for his Mistress Quickly 
and Doll Tearsheet ; secondly, those passionate and daring women 
who make the first advances to actors and poets ; and, thirdly, 
those who served as models for his Merry Wives, with their 
sound bourgeois sense and not over delicate gaiety. But the ordi- 
nary citizen's wife or daughter of that day offered the Poet no 
sort of spiritual sustenance. They were, as a rule, quite illiterate. 
Shakespeare's younger daughter could not even write her own 
name." 

Scene V, 

56. Reply not, etc.: — "We see by this," shrewdly observes 
Clarke, " that there was a light in Falstaff's eye, a play of his lip 
that betokened some repartee as to wherefore the grave should 
naturally gape wider for him than for other and slenderer men; 
and the King, knowing of old that once let Falstaff retort and he 
is silenced, forestalls the intended reply by forbidding and con- 
demning it beforehand." 

" Nature," declares Warburton, " is highly touched in this pas- 
sage. The King, having shaken off his vanities, schools his old 
companion for his follies with great severity : he assumes the air 
of a preacher, bids him fall to his prayers, seek grace, and leave 
gormandizing. But that word unluckily presenting him with a 
pleasant idea, he cannot forbear pursuing it — ' Know, the grave 
doth gape for thee thrice wider,' etc. — and is just falling back into 
Hal, by a humorous allusion to Falstaff's bulk. But he perceives 
it immediately, and fearing Sir John should take the advantage 
of it, checks both himself and the knight with 

' Reply not to me with a fool-born jest '; 

182 



KING HENRY IV. Notes 

and so resumes the thread of his discourse, and goes morahzing 
on to the end of the chapter. Thus the Poet copies nature with 
great skill, and shows us how apt men are to fall back into their 
old customs, when the change is not made by degrees and brought 
into a habit, but determined of at once, on the motives of honour, 
interest, or reason." 

The great change which transformed the Hal of yesterday into 
the King of to-day is thus set forth by Holinshed : " Henry, 
Prince of Wales, son and heir to King Henry the Fourth, born in 
Wales, at Monmouth on the river of Wye, after his father was 
departed took upon him the regiment of this realm of England, 
the twentieth of March, 1413, the morrow after proclaimed king 
by the name of Henry the Fifth, This king even at first appoint- 
ing with himself to show that in his person princely honours 
should change public manners, he determined to put on him the 
shape of a new man. For whereas aforetime he had made himself 
a companion unto misruly mates of dissolute order and life, he 
now banished them all from his presence (but not unrewarded, 
or else unpreferred), inhibiting them, upon a great pain, not once 
to approach, lodge, or sojourn within ten miles of his court or 
presence ; and in their places he chose men of gravity, wit, and 
high policy, by whose wise counsel he might at all times rule to 
his honour and dignity." 



1B3 



THE SECOND PART OF 



Questions on 2 Henry IV. 



INDUCTION. 

1. From what work of literature is this personification o! 
Rumour ultimately derived? 

2. Does Rumour in the following play ever influence the course 
of the action ? 

3. What does Rumour report of Harry Monmouth ; of the 
King; of Northumberland? 

4. What influence had Rumour in establishing the grounds for 
the action of this play ? 

ACT FIRST. 

5. What kind of sickness has Rumour attributed to Northum- 
berland? In what way does the news from the field of Shrews- 
bury reach him? How does he reveal his true character when the 
authentic reports arrive? 

6. What words of Harry Percy in the First Part do the words 
of Morton (i. 170, 171) recall? 

7. How does the insurrection, headed by the Archbishop of 
York, differ in character and in personnel from the rebellion 
headed by Percy? 

8. What estimate of himself as a wit-producer does Falstaff 
utter? Into what state do his money affairs seem to be falling? 
Explain the secular use to which St. Paul's Church was put. 

9. For what is the Lord Chief Justice noted? How is the in- 
cident here casually alluded to used elsewhere in the play? 

10. How long does Sir John play upon his assumption of 
deafness? What reputation did he acquire from Shrewsbury? 

11. Justify his humorous contentions concerning his youth. 

12. What effort had the King made to separate Falstaff and 
Prince Hal? 

13. How does Falstaff employ his mind when he has no 
audience ? 

184 



KING HENRY IV. Questions 

14. What principles does Lord Bardolph lay down (Sc. iii.) 
that should check the enterprise? Is Northumberland trusted? 
How is the fickleness of public opinion shown? 



ACT SECOND. 

15. Does Hostess Quickly's defense of herself for bringing suit 
against Falstaff reveal a fondness for him, and so an excuse for 
her harshness ? 

16. Explain the method by which Hostess Quickly's mind 
works. In ^his does she resemble the Nurse in Romeo and 
Juliet ? 

17. How does Falstaff escape from the threatened arrest? 

18. How is the recruitmg scene of Act HI. foreshadowed? 

19. What compunctions (Sc. ii.) does the Prince feel for keep- 
ing bad company? Why would he show no sadness over his 
father's sickness ? 

20. What was Shakespeare's intention in introducing the Page 
into the play? 

21. What were the contents of Falstaff 's letter to the Prince? 
Does Falstaff show jealousy of the Prince's friendship with 
Poins? From what stratum of society did Poins spring? What 
is argued from the fact that he is the only one to whom the Prince 
confides the serious side of his nature? 

22. What new details does Lady Percy in Sc. iii. add to the 
portrait of Hotspur? What is the dramatic purpose of her speech 
as regards Northumberland? What revelation of herself is here 
effected ? 

23. Did the Prince ever show a genuine regard for Sir John? 
What effect had his jest with the apple-johns upon Falstaff'? 

24. Comment upon the realism of Shakespeare as seen in his 
characterization of Doll Tearsheet. Does she possess even t!:e 
mitigating quality of humour? 

25. What qualities are shown in Pistol that are lacking in the 
composition of the roisterers? 

26. Did Doll recognize the Prince and Poins in their dis- 
guises? 

27. What is the effect of Falstaff 's words, / am old, I am old? 

28. May we regard Sc. iv. as marking a culminating point in 
the Prince's wild career? To show this dramatically is not the 
uncompromising vulgarity of the tavern scene necessary? Give 

185 



Questions THE SECOND PART OF 

a psychological analysis of the Prince during this scene. Is he 
elsewhere in the play seen with his tavern companions? 

29. What is foreshadowed in the Prince's words : Falstaff, good 
night? 

ACT THIRD. 

30. What is the tenour of the King's soliloquy at the opening 
of the Act? How does the contrast presented in this speech 
conform to the general scheme of the play in presenting con- 
trasts ? 

31. Is King Henry conscious of any power behind the shows 
of things, like Nemesis, that causes him uneasiness of spirit ; or 
does he see only the bare fact of insubordination among his 
nobles? What is implied by his occasional reference to a pro- 
jected crusade? 

32. Describe the mental traits of Shallow and of Silence. 

S3. How does Bardolph comport himself away from the peo- 
ple who know him? 

34. Are Falstaff's recruits to be regarded as typical of English 
soldiers of any period, or are they invented to serve as butts for 
Falstaff's wit? 

35. From the reminiscences of Falstaff and Shallow construct 
a connected account of Falstaff's life. 

36. Comment on his attitude towards Shallow and Silence. 
From his closing description of Shallow describe the allusive 
powers of Sir John's mind. 

ACT FOURTH. 

37. What is heard of Northumberland at the opening of the Act. 

38. State the purpose of Westmoreland in visiting the rebellious 
nobles. Explain the craft he employs in avoiding the issues they 
present. 

39. What is Mowbray's position both before and after the with- 
drawal of Northumberland with the conditions of peace? What 
is that of the Archbishop of York? 

40. In what way does Lancaster continue the tone of West- 
moreland in treating? Is there any mitigation of the deception 
that he played? 

41. Does the sudden illness of Mowbray foreshadow the catas- 
trophe? Has Shakespeare often presented so sharp a turn in 
the action of his plays ? 

186 



KING HENRY IV. Questions 

42. Was the act of Lancaster and Westmoreland performed at 
Henry's suggestion? Did it meet with his approval or disap- 
proval? Where does the dramatist look to find indignant dis- 
approval? Is such an act disdained by kings in general when it is 
accomplished successfully? 

43. Explain the humour of Falstaff's words (Sc. iii.), let it be 
booked zvith the rest of this day's deeds. 

44. Compare the way in which Falstaff fared at the hands of 
Lancaster with a similar situation in the First Part, V. iv., where 
Prince Hal stands in place of Lancaster. Is there a feeling that 
the shadows are beginning to fall around the old knight? 

45. What is the purport of the King's advice to Thomas of 
Clarence? Is it consonant with the King's character? 

46. What is the effect upon the King of the news from the 
field of battle? 

47. What recommendations for the guidance of his future 
reign does the King give to the Prince? 

48. What is the Prince's excuse for removing the crown? 
Does his apostrophe to the crown bear out the truth of his 
excuse? 

49. Is the King convinced of the genuineness of the Prince's 
professions, or pleased with the ability he shows in his own de- 
fence ? 

50. What is the symbolism implied in the place where the King 
dies? How searching is it in its application? 

ACT FIFTH. 

51. What is the episodic value of Sc. i.? 

52. What apprehensions of the future does the Lord Chief 
Justice express? How do Warwick and the other members of 
the royal household deepen the impression of impending dis- 
asters? 

53. Why was the Lord Chief Justice chosen as the character to 
lead out King Henry V. to a declaration of his changed pur- 
poses in life? 

54. Where in i Henry IV. was this scene foreshadowed? 

55. Is this change in the Prince convincing? Is it a change in 
character or in conduct? 

56. How does Sc. iii. complete the characterization of Silence? 
How is he differentiated from Shallow? What reserved compli- 
ment does he pay Falstaff? How does he end his dramatic life? 

187 



Questions 

57. How is the news of the King's death and Prince Hal's 
elevation brought? What is the emotional effect of the conclu- 
ding part of Sc. iii. ? Is Falstaff's discomfiture foreshadowed in 
any part of this Scene? 

58. What dramatic purpose does Sc. iv. serve? 

59. Does one look with approval or disapproval on the arrest 
of Mrs. Quickly and Doll? State the humorous effect of Mrs. 
Quickly's words, O God, that right should thus overcome anight! 
considered as a comment upon the whole play. 

60. When does one first know that Falstaff has borrowed his 
thousand pounds? 

61. How do Falstaff and his party appear to witness the King's 
procession? What self-deception does the knight indulge in? 

62. What is the first stroke of catastrophe that falls upon him? 

63. Do you approve or disapprove of the King's treatment of 
Sir John? 

64. How does Falstaff show that he has lost his highest stake? 
Does he really believe that he will be sent for in private? 



65. How does the Second Part of this play compare in dramatic 
interest with theTirst Part? Is there felt a loss in the absence 
of such interest as Hotspur inspires? 

66. Summarize the traits of Henry. Wherein was he strong? 
What were his limitations? 

67. Give your estimate of the character of Prince Hal. How 
does he serve as a link-person in producing coherency of action? 

68. What one interest always brought him to himself and 
secured his best endeavours? In what way may this play be 
taken as prologue to Henry V. ? 

69. Discuss the ethical anomaly of Falstaff as an artistic cre- 
ation. 

70. A critic has said : " To Shakespeare, good men and bad 
are alike parts of the order of Nature, to be understood and in- 
terpreted with perfect impartialit^^ He gives a diagnosis of the 
case, not a judgement sentencing them to heaven or hell. His 
characters prosper or suffer, not in proportion to their merits, but 
as good and bad fortune decides or as may be most dramatically 
effective." Considering this as a principle illustrated by the play 
under consideration, what attitude do you take as to the question 
of the relations of art and morality? 



UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA-LOS ANGELES 








L 009 978 338 3 



