— 


ro 1 


R 
B17 

2M7 

905 






Presented to the 
library of the 

UNIVERSITY OF TOROXTO 

by 
ESTATE OF THE LATE 

MARY SINCLAIR 



" r " 



Digitized by the Internet Archive 

in 2011 with funding from 

University of Toronto 



http://www.archive.org/details/kinghenryviiOOshak 



CASSELL'S NATIONAL LIBRARY 



KING HENRY VIII 



Some of the Volumes of the New Series of 

CASSELL'S NATIONAL LIBRARY. 

i.— silas MARNER— George Eliot. Intr^. Stuart J. Reid. 

2.— A SENTIMENTAL JOURNEY— L. Sterne. Intro. L F. AUSTIN. 

3.— RICHARD II.— SHAKESPEARE. 

4 — BkOWNING'S POEMS— (Se.ecrion). Intro. A. D. INNES. 

5.— ON HEKOts AND HERO WORSHIP— Carlvle. 

o.-A CHRISTMAS CAROL AND THE CHIMES— lHARLES Dicken-. 

7.— THE VIi_AR OF WAKEFIELD— GOLDSMITH Intro. SIR HENRY Irving. 

».— MACBETH— Shakespeare. 

9.— EVELYN'S DIARY— 1 Reign of Charles II.). Intro. AUiTIN DOBSON. 
10— JOHNSON'S RASsELAS. 

11.— THE FOUR GEORGES— W, M. THACKERAY Intro. L. F. AUSTIN. 
12.— JULIUS C/ESAR— SHAKESPEARE. 

13.— TENNYSON'S POEMS— se.ection.. Intro. A. T. QUILLER-COUCH. 
14.— THE MERCHANT OF VENICE— SHAKESPEARE. 

1;.— EDGAR ALLAN POE's TALES— (Selection'. Intro. TlGHE Hopkins. 
16.— THE LADY OF THE LAKE— SIR Walter SCOTT. 
17.— EMERSON'S ESSAYS— Selection.. Intro. C. LEWIS HIND. 
18.— HAMLET— SHAKESPEARE. 
19.— GOLDSMITH'S PLAYS. 

20.— BURNS's POEMS— (Selection). Intro. Neil MUNRO. 
21 —MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING— SHakesfeare. 
2a.— BUNYAN's PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. Intro. G K. CHESTERTON. 
23.— SHERIDAN S PLAYS : " The Rivals " and "Tne schosl f >c ScandaL" 
24.— MACAULAY'S LAYs OF ANCIENT ROME. 

25.— NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE'S TALES Intro. FRANK Mathew 
26.— TWELFTH-NIGHT— SHAKESPEARE. 

27.— HORACE WALPOLE'S LETTERS— Selection). Intro. STL'ART J. Reid. 
38.— MARMION— SIR Walter SCOTT. 
29.— THE TEMPEST— SHAKESPEARE. 
30.— SOUTHEYS LIFE OF NELSON. 

31.— THE CRICKET ON THE HEARTH— CHARLES DICKENS. 
32 —OTHELLO— SHAKESPEARE. 

«.— STEELE AND ADDIsON'S "SIR ROGER DE COVERLEY." 
34.— A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM— SHAKESPEARE. 
15— CARLVLE ON BURNS AND S-OTT. 
^6.— MILTON'S PARADISE LOST.— I. 
37.— MILTON'S PARADISE LOST.— II. 
,8.— MACAULAY'S WARREN HASTINGS. 
39.— AS YOU LIKE IT— SHAKESPEARE. 
40— CHILDE HAROLD'S PILGRIMAGE— LORD BYRON. 
41.— KING LEAR— SHAKESPEARE. 
42.-BACONS ESSAYS. 
43.— UTOPI \— Sir Thomas More. 
44.— ROMEO AND JULIET— SHAKESPEARE. 
4 r.— COMPLETE ANGLER— ISAAC WALTON. 
46.-HAKLUYTS DISCOVERY OF MUSCOVY. 

47.— CARLYLE'S SARTOR RESARTUS. Intro. G. K. CHESTERTON. 
48. — KING JOHN— SHAKESPEARE. 

49. -THE MEMORABLE THOUGHTS OF SOCRATES. 
50.— BURLEIGH. &c— MACAULAY. 

ei.— BURKE'S THOUGHTS ON THE PRESENT DISCONTENTS. 
52— TALES FROM THE DECAMERON— BOCCACCIO. 
53.— HENRY V.— SHAKESPEARE. 
54.— ESSAYS AND TALES-ADDISON. 
S5.-MERRY WIVES OF WINDSOR-SHAKESPEARE. 

56.— ESSAYS OF ELIA— Charles Lamb. Intro. William Archer. 

57.— AREOPAGITICA— MILTON. 

58.— THE BA TTLE OF LIFE— CHARLES DICKENS. 

C9 ._ VOYAGES AND TRAVELS-MARCO POLO. 

60.— GRACE ABOUNDING-TOHN BUNYAN. 

61.-THE WINTER'S TALE— SHAKESPEARE. 

62.— HAZLITT'S ESSAYS. Intro. HERBERT PAUL. 

63.-HENRY VIII. — SHAKESPEARE. 

64--DRYDEN'S POEMS. 

65.— BACON'S WISDOM OF THE ANCIENTS. 

66.— PROMETHEUS UNBOUND-SHELLEY. 

67.— BURKE'S ESSAYS ON THE SUBLIME AND BEAUTIFUL, 

68.— THE COMEDY OF ERRORS— SHAKESPEARE. 

69.— WORDSWORTH'S POEMS- (Selection). 

70.— MILTON'S EARLIER POEMS. 

71.— LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST— SHAKESPEARE. 

72.-OLD AGE AND FRIENDSHIP-CICERO. 

73 .-SORROWS OF WERTER-C-OETHE. 

CASSELL & COMPANY, LIMITED, London ; Paris, New York &■ Melbourne. 




QUEEN KATHARINE AND PATIENCE. 

King Henry VIII.. Act III., Scene 1. 

From the Picture by C. R. Leslie, R.A., 
in the Sheepshanks Collection. 
South Kensington Museum. 



G: 



KING HENRY VIII 



BY 

WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE 



With an Introduction by 
HENRY MORLEY 



CASSELL AND COMPANY. LIMITED 
LONDON. PARIS. NEW YORK 
AND MELBOURNE. MCMV 

All Rights Reserved 






R121 



\\ 



^ 



9 



INTRODUCTION. 



Shakespeare's play of King Henry VIII. was 
first printed in the folio of 1623. On the 12th 
of February, 1604 (New style, 1605), there is this 
memorandum in the books of the Stationers' Com- 
pany : 

" Nath. Butter.] Yf he get good allowance for 
the Enterlude of K. Henry 8th before he begyn to 
print yt, and then procure the Wardens' hand to 
yt for the entrance of yt, he is to have the same 
for his copy." 

This shows that there was felt to be some risk ot 
official interference with a play that dealt with the 
royalty of England in critical times not yet beyond 
the touch of living memory. A man of seventy- 
five in February, 1605. was a youth of seventeen 
when Henry VIII. died, but he would only have 
been a child of three in the year of the christening 
of Elizabeth, with which Shakespeare closed his 
play. The "good allowance" was obtained; for 
Nathaniel Butter did publish in that year (1605) 
— with a woodcut of Henry VIII. upon its title- 



6 INTRODUCTION. 

page — a play of King Henry VIII., called, 'When 
you See me, you Know me; or, the famous Chronicle 
Historie of King Henrie the Eight, with the berth 
and vertuous life of Edward Prince of Wales. As 
it was playcl by the high and mightie Prince of 
Wales his servants." It is clear, therefore, that 
the entry made in February, 1605, referred to 
this play, which was by Samuel Rowley, and which 
was printed again for Nathaniel Butter in 1613 
and in 1621, and of which there was a fourth 
edition in 1632. Thus there were three editions 
of Samuel R-owley's play before the first printing of 
Shakespeare's in the first folio. It is an artless 
play, in which the young Prince Edward and Will 
Summers, the King's jester, are much dwelt upon ; 
there are two fools to delight the audience, for 
Wolsey's fool, Patch, is another of the persons of 
the comedy. It might even be said that there are 
three fools, his boisterous Majesty, King Henry 
VIII., being the third. 

What evidence is there, then, as to the time 
when Shakespeare wrote his play of King Henry 
the Eighth ? None. On the 29th of June, 1613, 
the old Globe Theatre was burnt down, about 
twenty years after its first erection, by the firing 
of the thatched roof over its stage during the per- 
formance of a play clearly identified by Sir Henry 
Wotton's description of it, and by references to it 



INTRODUCTION. 7 

in a ballad of the time upon "The Lamentable 
Burning of the Globe Play-house on Saint Peter's 
Day." We learn that the discharge of chambers 
referred to was that in the fourth Scene of the 
First Act when, during Wolsey's banquet at York 
House, the King is supposed to be landing without, 
and the stage direction is "Drum and Trumpet. 
Chambers discharged." Chambers were shallow 
bombs, of little or no use for discharging shot, but 
used for tiring powder on occasions of rejoicing. 
The old Globe was a summer theatre, open to the 
sky, but over the stage there was a thatched roof- 
ing to protect the actors and contribute to the 
framing of the groups they formed. Sir Henry 
Wotton, writing to his nephew on the 2nd of 
July, said, " Now to let matters of state sleep ; I 
will entertain you at the present with what hath 
happened this week at the Bank-side. The King's 
players had a new play, called All is True, repre- 
senting some principal pieces of the reign of Henry 
the Eighth, which was set forth with many extra- 
ordinary circumstances of pomp and majesty, even 
to the matting of the stage ; the Knights of the 
Order, with their Georges and Garter, the guards 
with their embroidered coats, and the like : suffi- 
cient in truth, within a while, to make greatness 
very familiar, if not ridiculous. Now King Henry, 
making a mask at the Cardinal Wolsey's house, 



8 INTRODUCTION. 

and certain cannons being shot off at his entry, 
some of the paper, or other stuff wherewith one of 
them was stopped, did light on the thatch, where, 
being thought at first but an idle smoke, and their 
eyes more attentive to the show, it kindled in- 
wardly, and ran round like a train, consuming, 
within an hour, the whole house to the ver} 
grounds. This was the fatal period of that vir- 
tuous fabric, wherein yet nothing did perish but 
wood and straw, and a few forsaken cloaks : only 
one man had his breeches set on fire, that would 
perhaps have broiled him if he had not, by the 
benefit of a provident wit, put it out with bottle ale." 
Here, then, is clear identification of the scene in 
Shakespeare's play which gave occasion to the 
firing of the thatch. There is allusion in the 
ballad to the trial of Queen Katharine. This, with 
the omission of two verses that can well be 
spared, was the ballad written on occasion of 

"THE LAMENTABLE BURNING OF THE GLOBE 
PLAY-HOUSE ON S. PETER'S DAY. 

" Now, set thee down. Melpomene, 
Wrapp'd in a coal-black robe, 
And tell the doleful tragedy 
Late played at the Globe ; 
Where all men that could sing or say 
Were scarr'd upon S. Peter's day. 
0. sorrow ! 0. pitiful sorrow ! 
And yet it All is True. 



INTRODUCTION. 

" All you that please to understand, 
Come listen to my story, 
And see Death with his rake-hell brand 

Amongst the auditory ; 
Regarding neither Cardinal's state, 
Nor bearded face of Henry the Eight. 
O, sorrow ! &c. 

" This fearful fire began above 
By firing chambers two ; 
And to the stage did soon remove, 

And bum'd th' apparel new : 
Consuming every garish rag, 
Not sparing even the silken flag. 

0, sorrow ! &0. 

" Away ran knights, away ran lords, 
Away ran Burbage too : 
Some lost their hats, their cloaks and swords, 

For there was such ado. 
Old Tooley, careful of his bundle, 
Was forc'd to fly with Harry Cundell. 
O, sorrow ! &c. 

" Away ran poets, eight or nine, 
Who would take no denial ; 
Away ran Lady Katharine, 
Xor waited out her trial. 
Such trial was not in her part ; 
Escape was all she had at heart. 

0, sorrow ! &c. 

" Then perriwigs and drum-heads fry, 
And blaze like butter firkin ; 
Coal-black was presently the dye 
Of many a good buff jerkin. 
*— 63 



10 INTRODUCTION. 

While with, swell'd lips, like drunken Fleming, 
Distraught and sad stood stuttering Hemming. 
0. sorrow ! &c. 



G-o, poets, and prepare petitions, 
And through all London beg : 
To the Lord Mayor now make submission, 

And fawn, and make a leg. 
Take heed you be not too too witty. 
Or you'll get nothing in the City. 
0. sorrow ! 0, pitiful sorrow ! 
And vet it All is True." 



A letter from John Chamberlain, dated the 8th 
of July, said, " The burning of the Globe, or play- 
house, on the Bankside on St. Peter's Day, cannot 
escape you ; which fell out by a peal of chambers 
that. I know not on what occasion, were to be used 
in the play — the tampin or stopple of one of them, 
lighting in the thatch that covered the house, 
burnt it to the ground in less than two hours, with 
a dwelling-house adjoining, and it was a great 
marvel and fair grace of God that the people had 
so little harm, having but two narrow doors to get 
out." 

Ben Jonson was perhaps among those who 
escaped, for he may speak literally and not only 
with poetic vision, when he says in his " Execra- 
tion to Vulcan," upon the burning of his own 



TNTBODUCTION. 11 

Library, that he " saw " also this one among the 
fiery god's misdeeds. 

'' But 0, those reeds ! Tny mere disdain of them 
Made thee beget that cruel stratagem 
Which some are pleased to style but thy mad prank, 
Against the Globe, the glory of the Bank ; 
Which, though it were the fort of the whole parish, 
Flanked with a ditch, and forced out of a marish, 
I saw with two poor chambers taken in, 
And razed, ere thought could urge, "This might have 
been.' " 

Another account of the burning of the Globe 
Theatre is in the edition of Stow's "Annales" 
(first published in 1580), that appeared, "continued 
and augmented by Edmond Howes," in 1615. 
Howes writes of 1613 : " Also upon St. Peter's Day 
last the playhouse or theatre, called the Globe, 
upon the Bankside, near London, by negligent dis- 
charging of a piece of ordnance close to the south 
side thereof the thatch took fire, and the wind 
suddenly dispersed the flame round about, and in a 
very short space the whole building was quite con- 
sumed, and no man hurt ; the house being filled 
with people to behold the play, viz., of Henry the 
Eighth : and the next spring it was new builded 
in far fairer manner than before." 

Shakespeare, at the time of the burning of the 
Globe, had entered his fiftieth year, and had lately 



12 INTRODUCTION. 

retired to Stratford. He died only three years 
afterwards at the age of fifty-two. Sir Henry 
Wotton speaks of All is True as a new play, 
but he writes as one who has no great interest in 
the stage. He was not yet made Provost of Eton, 
but was much employed in missions to Germany 
and Italy ; and it was he who had then lately 
described an ambassador as "a good man sent to 
lie abroad for the sake of his country." The seven- 
teen-year-old Princess Elizabeth had been married 
on the 14th of February in that year (1613) to the 
seventeen-year-old Elector Palatine. There had 
been pomp, masques and plays. They had left 
England on the 25th of April. The MS. Register 
of Lord Harrington, King James's treasurer of the 
chambers, shows that they had seen several of 
Shakespeare's plays acted under altered names : 
Part I. of Henry IV. as Hotspur, Part II. as 
Sir John Falstaff, Much Ado about Nothing as 
Benedict and Beatrix, Julius Ccesar as Cozsar's 
Tragedy. A new name for King Henry VIII. 
(All is True) might be enough to lead Sir Henry 
Wotton to the belief that it was a new play. 

If really new in 1613, King Henry VIII. was 
probably the last play written by Shakespeare. 
I am disposed to agree with Johnson, Steevens and 
Mai one in thinking that it was written towards 
the close of the reign of Elizabeth ; but this is not 



INTRODUCTION. 13 

proved, as they suppose it to be proved, by show- 
ing good reason for belief that the references to 
James I. in the prophecy of Cranmer at the close 
of the play are interpolations. The reign of 
James was outside the conception of the poet ; but 
the reign of Elizabeth had close and direct rela- 
tion to it. If Shakespeare wrote the play in 1612, 
James would have occurred to him then as little as 
in 1601 or 1602. But in 1613 the King's Players 
thought they saw good opportunity for paying 
compliments to James the First, and got theii 
compliment so clumsily inserted that King James 
follows Elizabeth before Elizabeth's death is looked 
forward to as inevitable, and the death of Elizabeth 
appears as something that will happen after the 
accession of James. That there is interpolation I 
have not a doubt ; but I suspect that one part of 
the change consisted in a transference to James of 
some lines written by Shakespeare of Elizabeth, by 
simply writing " he " for " she." Raleigh's fair 
dream, that was not all a dream, of another Eng- 
land far across the seas, of which Virginia should 
be the first and fairest province, was an association 
with Elizabeth's reign that admitted of easy trans- 
fer to James, who gave letters patent to a London 
company that settled colonists on the James River 
and founded James Town in 1607. But Eliza- 
beth, inspired by Raleigh and by the achievements 



14 INTRODUCTION. 

of her mariners, first gave her heart to the concep- 
tion of a greater England with realms beyond the 
sea that should open sources of wealth like those 
which had added to the power of Spain. She gave its 
name to Virginia, and heaped wealth upon Raleigh, 
that he spent in furnishing his costly expeditions ; 
she granted patents in 1585 to private adven- 
turers who sought to trade with Barbary, in 1588 
to adventurers who sought to establish trade in 
Guinea, in 1592 to adventurers to the south of 
Sierra Leone. That aim of hers had a just place 
in Cranmer's prophecy, of which the latter part 
would read thus, when cleared of the intruded 
reference to James : — 



•• Truth shall nurse her. 
Holy and heavenly thoughts still counsel her : 
She shall be loved and feared : her own shall bless her. 
Her foes shake like a field of beaten corn. 
And hang their heads with sorrow : good grows with 

her : 
In her days every man shall eat in safety 
Under his own vine what he plants, and sing 
The merry songs of peace to all his neighbours : 
God shall be truly known : and those about her 
From her shall read the perfect ways of honour. 
And by these claim their greatness, not by blood. 
Wherever the bright sun of Heaven shall shine, 
Her honour and the greatness of her name 
Shall be, and make new nations. She shall flourish, 
And. like a mountain cedar, reach her branches 



INTRODUCTION. 15 

To all the plains about her : our children's children 
Shall see this and bless Heaven. 

A". 1 in i'ii. Thou speakest wonders. 

C ran mi r. She shall be, to the happiness of England, 
An aged princess ; many days shall see her, 
And yet no day without a deed to crown it. 
Would I had known no more ! but she must die, 
She must, the saints must have her ; yet a virgin, 
A most unspotted lily shall she pass 
To the ground, and all the world shall mourn ner. 

A". ILtiry. 0, Lord Archbishop, 
Thou hast made me now a man ; never, befor° 
This happy child, did I get anything : 
This oracle of comfort has so pleased me 
That when I am in heaven I shall desire 
To see what this child does, and praise my Maker." 



By what conceivable sequence of ideas could any 
poet, good or bad, have thrust King James the 
First into the very middle of this passage ) The 
birth of Elizabeth, her labour towards Peace and 
Reformation, were the direct outcome of the wild 
tossing of human fortunes which has been shown in 
the substance of the play. There is a picture of 
the instability of earthly glory, the rising and the 
breaking of the waves of fortune ; but it is not to 
leave the mind impressed with a vague sense of 
human life as a wild sea on which the just and 
unjust battle with the waves, or sink beneath 
them, with hope that looks only to some other 
world than this. The last thought is of God's 



16 INTRODUCTION. 

Providence directing all. Out of the fitful passions 
of the King there came the child through whom 
the nation was to rise hereafter to a higher life. 
It is another way of showing the truth spoken in 
the close of Hamlet : — 

■• There "s a Divinity that shapes our ends, 
Rough hew them how we will." 

But only Elizabeth belonged to the play as the 
good come out of evil, blessing born of the events 
that seemed a curse upon the lives of men. The 
whole prophecy at her baptism is the fit close to 
the poem, in faith that 

•• All is best, though we oft doubt 
What the unsearchable dispose 
Of highest Wisdom brings about, 
And ever best found in the end." 

James the First can have no poetical relation to 
the play, for he is no outcome of its events. He has, 
from the poet's point of view, no more right than 
the Grand Turk to a place in Cranmer's prophecy. 
This is equally true, whether the play were written 
in 1602 or in 1612, under Elizabeth or under 
James. Xo argument against the later date of 
the play can be drawn, therefore, from this interpo- 
lation. 

Argument for the later date has been drawn, not 
unreasonably, from the versification. Our first 



INTRODUCTION. 17 

blank verse was written in the latter part of the 
reign of Henry VIII. by the Earl of Surrey. It 
was imitated from an Italian unrhymed measure, 
at a time when various forms of unrhymed verse 
were being tried in Italy ; and it consisted of ten 
syllables of iambic measure, every second syllable 
being accented, as in this line : — 

" The great | est mon | arch now | alive | may glor | y." 

Here there is a vowel over. In Italian that was 
not easily avoidable, because a large number of 
words in Italian end with unaccented vowels. The 
Italian verse which Surrey imitated did therefore 
close with that weak eleventh syllable. Surrey 
dropped it because most English words have lost 
their final vowels, and so his blank verse was ten- 
syllabled, as in this line : — 

" His roy | al self | in jtidg | ment comes | to hear." 

Our earliest blank verse took few liberties with 
the accent, kept to its ten syllables, and usually 
brought a clause or sentence to its close at the 
closing of a line of verse. It was Marlowe who 
turned altogether from the use of rhyme in plays, 
and with a vigorous genius not only preferred blank 
verse but, about the year 1586, began the develop- 
ment of its great powers of poetical expression. 
The career of Marlowe as a dramatist extended 



18 INTRODUCTION. 

over seven years. During the greater part of this 
time Shakespeare was a beginner among the players, 
observing them and strengthening in power. At 
the close of those seven years he had become an 
original dramatist ; using blank verse at first with 
no more freedom in changes of accent, in the use of 
eleventh syllables, in the running of sentences over 
the ends of lines, and making skilful breaks within 
the lines, than he had learnt of Marlowe. But 
gradually the powers of blank verse grew under his 
hand. He made freer use of unaccented eleventh 
syllables, of variations in the accent, and advanced 
in that which Milton recognised as a main source of 
its power, " the sense variously drawn out from one 
verse into another. " This freedom grew, and in its 
full growth produced what some regard as a third 
period in Shakespeare's versification when modifi- 
cation of accent, added syllables, and sentences 
variously interlaced are much more numerous than 
in his early plays. Now there is no play of Shake- 
speare's in which eleven-syllabled lines are so fre- 
quent as they are in King Henry VIII. One very 
able critic has observed that the unaccented eleventh 
syllables in King Henry VIII. are often detached 
monosyllables, a peculiarity that distinguishes this 
from other plays of Shakespeare, and, in the opinion 
of that critic, proves it to have been written by 
some other poet. It is noticeable, however, that this 



INTRODUCTION. IP 

feature is most marked in those passages of the 
play which are among the finest, and in which the 
genius of Shakespeare is most surely felt, as in this 
well-known passage, where, for convenience of illus- 
tration, in each line the syllable beyond the tenth 
is printed in italics : — 

" So, farewell to the little good you bear me. 
Farewell ! a long farewell, to all my giesktones* .' 
This is the state of man : to-day he puts /erf/; 
The tender leaves of hope, to-morrow blossoms. 
And bears his blushing- honours thick upon him : 
The third day comes a frost, a killing frost ; 
And. — when he thinks, good easy man, full sxnely 
His greatness is a-ripening, — nips his root, 
And then he falls, as I do. I have ventured. 
Like little wanton boys that swim on bladders, 
This many summers in a sea of glory, 
But far beyond my depth : my high-blown pride 
At length broke under me, and now has left me 
Weary, and old with service, to the mercy 
Of a rude stream, that must for ever hide me. 
Vain pomp and glory of this world, I hate ye ; 
I feel my heart new opened." 

Here it may be observed that the only lines 
which close firmly with an accented syllable are the 
two that paint the "killing frost" that "nips the 
root," and one that expresses the " high-blown 
pride " now fallen. The reader will observe espe- 
cially the use of this measure in speeches like 
this of Wolsey's in his fall, or that of Buckingham 



20 INTRODUCTION. 

before his execution. It breaks the pomp of each 
verse at the close, and gives to it a dying fall that 
suits the theme of the whole play, the broken 
pomps of life, the wave that rolls to its full height, 
then bows its crest and falls. If this be so, may 
we not say that, before the death of Elizabeth, 
Shakespeare was artist enough to suit his measure 
to his theme 1 

What was that theme \ Wholly unlike the 
mirth and noise of targets, the fellow in long motley 
coat, the " fool and fight " referred to by contrast in 
the Prologue. Prologue and epilogue were written 
doubtless by some other hand for the production of 
the play in 1613 ; and the Prologue seems to have 
been meant as warning to the audience that this King 
Henry VIII. was Shakespeare's and not Samuel 
Rowley's. Rowley made of the subject such 
comedy as the Prologue points at. Shakespeare's 
treatment of it was profoundly earnest and 
religious. 

The whole play tells us of the seeming chances 
and the sudden changes of this life, and the only 
trust in God. Henry VIII. stands in the centre 
as an earthly god, Fortune. He smiles, men 
prosper ; if he frown, they die. Scene after scene 
shows the rise and fall of human fortunes as of 
waves of the great sea, and each fall — Buckingham's, 
Katharine's, Wolsey's — leads to the same thought — 



INTRODUCTION. 21 

" Farewell 
The hopes of Court I My hopes in Heaven do dwell.'' 

Through four acts this is illustrated, not only by 
the main events, but by all incidental details. In 
the fifth act there is a new note struck in the 
music: — not alone to men singly, but to men in 
nations, to the race of man, the last and sure trust 
is in God, who turns our evil into good. He 
guides the nations in their darkest hours. His 
love is over all. The whole play of King E^enry 
VIII. breathes a spirit that might be expressed in 
words from the 39th Psalm : " Man walketh in a 
vain shadow, and disquieteth himself in vain ; he 
heapeth up riches and cannot tell who shall gather 
them. And now, Lord, what is my Hope ? truly my 
Hope is even in Thee." 

The Fall with which the play opens is that of the 
Duke of Buckingham, and the first note struck is of 
the vanity of earthly pomp in a description of the 
Field of the Cloth of Gold. That meeting between 
King Henry and the King of France was in 1520; 
and Buckingham, at the height of his prosperity, 
but on the brink of ruin, is supposed to have been 
in France, kept by an ague from the meeting of the 
Kings, at which history says he was present. 
Shakespeare meant that his play should open with 
a picture of vain ponip and glory of the world. 
Its vanity the dialogue of the scene shows, for the 



22 INTRODUCTION. 

peace it celebrated was a false peace, and the rich 
lords had been sent thither by Wolsey that they 
might break their fortunes by selling manors to 
maintain their state. The scheming of Wolsey, the 
distrust of him by English nobles, the disdain of 
Buckingham, and Wolsey's will to take revenge for 
it, are all brought to mind before we are shown in 
action Wolsey passing in his state, " who in his 
passage fixeth his eye on Buckingham, and Bucking- 
ham on him, both full of disdain." The words of 
Buckingham after "Wolsey has passed, here printed 

" A beggar's look 
Outworths a noble's blood " 

stand in the first folio " a beggar's booke ; " one 
editor reads " a beggar's brood." The whole 
attention of Wolsey and Buckingham is on the 
look of disdain wherewith each dares the other. 
Wolsey turns to his secretary for the paper that 
will bring his antagonist to the scaffold, where he 
shall " lessen this big look." Buckingham sees 
deadly purpose in the fixed eyes of Wolsey, and 
that this " beggar's look" is more than a noble's 
blood is worth — menaces death — and dwells on the 
same thought after the words of Norfolk's reply, 
saying, 

1 1 read in 's looks 
Matters against me ; " 



INTRODUCTION. 23 

and again, " He 's gone to the King, I '11 follow and 
outstare him." Then follows immediately the 
arrest of Buckingham and of his son-in-law, Lord 
Abergavenny Buckingham looks to Heaven in 
his fall : 

" The will of Heaven be done 
In this and all things." 

Abergavenny, when his arrest follows, resigns 
himself in like manner, and gives emphasis by the 
repetition, 

•■ As the Duke said, 
The will of Heaven be done, and the King's pleasure 
By me obeyed." 

In the next scene, in the Council Chamber, the 
breaking of this wave of earthly fortune is con- 
tinued j Wolsey's wave is still high. " The King 
enters, leaning on the Cardinal's shoulder." 
Katharine's wave is still high ; when she enters 
" the King rises from his State, takes her up, 
kisses and places her by him." The two chief 
examples of the instability of earthly glory, Wolsey 
and Katharine, are now face to face. Katharine is 
made throughout the play as near t} an angel as 
she can be and yet be a woman, and a Spanish 
Princess too. She pleads against exactions burden- 
ing the people, puts in warning words of mercy 
while Wolsey presses his revenge against Bucking 



24 INTRODUCTION. 

ham to the death. The contrast is carefully 
maintained in other scenes, for " there is one end 
to the just and to the unjust ; " there is no 
sure foothold on the paths of this world's wealth. 
Buckingham is under the King's frown, and sent 
to trial as a traitor for proud words reported by the 
men of his own household whom he trusted most. 
Then we pass from the fall of Buckingham to the 
rising of the wave that will bear Anne Boleyn 
to her crowning — a scene, perhaps not written 
by Shakespeare, seems to have no aim but the 
avoidance of a direct passing from Wolsey in the 
Council Chamber to Wolsey as luxurious host in 
York Place. Then follows the banqueting, to 
which the King comes masqued, and with his 
dignity announced by that discharge of chambers 
which set fire to the Globe Theatre in June, 1613. 
Here the King takes Anne Boleyn for the dance. 
He is passionately occupied with her, and when 
Wolsey would interpose a little check by with- 
drawing his impetuous guest to the banqueting 
room his Majesty has sense of his own in answer 
to the Cardinal's 

" Your grace, 
I fear, with dancing is a little heated. 
K. Hen. I fear, too much." 

So to the feast in the next chamber, and then 
back to the dance, and then 



INTRODUCTION. 25 

" Let '8 dream 
Who 's best in favour." 

Thus in the First Act we have the beginning of 
the Fall of Buckingham, and the beginning of the 
Rise of Anne JBoleyn. 

In the Second Act we have the completed Fall 
of Buckingham, the continued Rise of Anne, and 
the beodnninof of the Fall of Katharine. 

Two gentlemen meet, to see Buckingham pass 
to his execution. They will meet again in the 
play to see Anne pass to her coronation. Their 
dialogue describes Buckingham's trial, and con- 
tinues illustrative of the clouds of ill-will gather- 
ing in Wolsey's earthly heaven. Buckingham 
passes — "tipstaves before him; the axe with its 
edge towards him." His last words are pathetic, 
with that dying fall in the metre which we find 
afterwards marked as strongly in the speeches 
of the fallen Wolsey. Buckingham is passing out 
of the vain shadow, with his one last hope in God. 
Of those who loved him he asks that they will 
make of their prayers one sweet sacrifice, and lift 
his soul to Heaven. " Lead on, o' God's name." 
He dies, forgiving all his enemies ; bids Lovell com- 
mend him to the King : — 

u And if he speak of Buckingham, pray, tell him. 
You met him half in Heaven.'" 



26 INTRODUCTION. 

Then follows one of those touches of poetic 
irony frequent in Shakespeare. It is applied, of 
course, to the theme of the play, the vanity of 
earthly pomp : 

" Yaux. Prepare there I 

The Duke is coming : see the barge be ready ; 
And fit it with, such furniture as suits 
The greatness of his person. 

Bud:. Nay, Sir Nicholas, 

Let it alone : my state will now but mock me. 
When I came hither I was Lord High Constable 
And Duke of Buckingham ; now poor Edward Bohun.' 

In the close of that speech we have Buckingham's 
last words. They include expression of the faith 
which Shakespeare planned the last act of King 
Herwy VIII. to confirm : " Heaven has an end in 
all."' They close with the fallen man's last prayer, 
''I have done, and God forgive me." — " And now, 
Lord, what hope I for I Truly my hope is in 
Thee." 

The next words of the gentlemen who have seen 
Buckingham pass to the scaffold, while his last 
breath is still in their ears, carry our minds on 
without pause to the breaking of the next great 
wave of fortune : — 

•' 1 Gent. 0. this is full of pity. — Sir. it calls, 
I fear, too many curses on their heads 
That were the authors. 



INTRODUCTION. 27 

2 Gent. If the Duke be guiltless 

Tis full of woe : yet I can give you inkling 
Of an ensuing evil, if it fall, 
Greater than this." 

At once we pass to the beginning of the Fall of 
Katharine, still blended with suggestion of the 
practices of Wolsey : — 

' The Cardinal 
Will have his will, and she must fall." 

Katharine is in this dialogue, " the good Queen ; " 
Wolsey, a man in whom ambition begets malice. 

The second scene opens with illustration of 
Wolsey \s overbearing pride, and the ill-will to 
him of the nobility. But he is strong in the 
King's favour. He has brought Cardinal Campeius 
to join in trial of the question of Katharine's 
divorce, which the new fancy for Anne Boleyn 
has caused the King to be impatient for. The 
lords (Norfolk and Suffolk) propose to try their skill 
with the King in opposition to the influence of 
Wolsey; but they are chidden away as dogs. 
Wolsey is master of the situation. Henry's 
"Who's there]" before Wolsey enters, is another 
fierce roar of the angry lion as he hears more steps 
approaching. But the tone changes to the warmest 
welcome when Wolsey enters with Campeius. It 
is, rough and loud, " Who 's there % " then soft and 
low, 



28 INTRODUCTION. 

" My good Lord Cardinal ? 0, my "Wolsey, 
The quiet of my wounded conscience." 

Wolsey's glance at the two lords, as he says, 

" I would your grace would give us but an hour 
Of private conference," 

produces from King Henry a loud and rough dis- 
missal of them : " We are busy. Go." 

When the Cardinals arrange for the trial of the 
question of the King's divorce from Katharine, 
because she had been his brother Arthur's wife, 
we have an incidental touch, showing how minor 
details of a poet's work are brought into relation 
with the whole design. We have the beginning 
of the Rise of Gardiner thus indicated : — Henry 
has taken to him, and made him his secretary. 
When Henry thinks of sending to tell the Queen 
what is purposed by the coming of Campeius, it 
occurs to him to send by Gardiner, whom he 
misses. When he abruptly asks, " Where 's Gar- 
diner 1 " Wolsey goes on with his discourse and 
takes no notice of the question. But he gains 
nothing by that, for the great Cardinal himself is 
presently compelled to demean himself by going to 
fetch Gardiner. 

" Cardinal. 

Prythee call Gardiner to me. my new secretary : 

I find him a fit fellow." 



INTRODUCTION. 29 

Wolsey brings him, and exchanges words with 
him to keep him in subordination to himself ; but 
they are few, for his impatient Majesty breaks in 
with his, " Come hither, Gardiner." While the 
King speaks apart with Gardiner, whose wave of 
fortune is upon the rise, a little dialogue between 
Campeius and Wolsey points incidentally to the 
predecessor upon whose fall Gardiner has risen : — 

" Cam. My Lord of York, was not one Doctor Pace 
In this man's place before him .' 

Wol. Yes, he was. 

Cam. Was he not held a learned man ? 

Wol. Yes, surely. 

Cam . Believe me. there 'a an ill opinion spread, then, 
Even of yourself, Lord Cardinal. 

Wol. How ! of me ? 

Cam. They will not stick to say, you envied him, 
And. fearing he would rise, he was so virtuous, 
Kept him a foreign man still ; which so grieved him, 
That he ran mad, and died. 

Wol. Heaven's peace be with him : 

That 's Christian care enough : for living murmurers 
There 's places of rebuke. He was a fool ; 
For he would needs be virtuous : that good fellow, 
If I command him, follows my appointment : 
I will have none so near else." 

So may the mean rise on the ruin of the noble. 
" For there is a man whose labour is in wisdom, 
and in knowledge, and in equity ; yet to a man 
who hath not laboured therein shall he leave it for 



30 INTRODUCTION. 

his portion." As Wolsey is to Queen Katharine 
in the play, so is Gardiner to Doctor Pace. But 
Katharine and Dr. Pace were not saved by their 
worth from being crushed under the wheel of 
earthly fortune. 

The third scene of this Act shows the con- 
tinued Rise of Anne ; the fourth then passes to 
the Fall of Katharine. Anne Boleyn is painted 
throughout as worthy to be the mother of Queen 
Elizabeth ; and the substance of the last Act is 
foreshadowed by reference from time to time to 
some great blessing that shall spring from her. 
Again also the theme of the play is maintained by 
contrast of An ne's character with that of a worldly 
old Court lady, who meets deep sympathy for the 
fallen Queen with shallow words of course. To 
Anne's faith that 

" 'T is better to be lowly born, 
And range with humble livers in content, 
Than to be perked up in a glistering grief, 
And wear a golden sorrow." 

the old Court lady replies in the conventional tone,. 
" Our content is our best having ; " but in all that 
she says afterwards, Shakespeare paints humour- 
ouslv the petty greed of a small courtier's unsatis- 
fied ambition. When the Lord Chamberlain has 
interrupted them with announcements of the 



INTRODUCTION. 31 

Kind's creation of Anne Marchioness of Pembroke, 
with a thousand pounds a year, and has then 
departed with the note to himself that in Anne 
Boleyn beauty and honour are so mingled 

" That they have caught the King ; and who knows 
yet 
But from this lady may proceed a gem 
To lighten all this isle ?— " 

the old lady gives her own reading of a lesson on 
the freaks of fortune : — 

" Why, this it is ; see, see ! 
I have been begging sixteen years in Court, — 
Am yet a courtier beggarly. — nor could 
Come pat between too early and too late 
For any suit of pounds ; and you, Fate I 
A very fresh-fish here — fie, fie upon 
This compelled fortune ! — have your mouth filled 

up 
Before you open it." 

In the next scene, of the Ecclesiastical Court in 
the house of the Dominicans, Blackfriars, there is 
an opening touch to mark the King's impatience. 
Wolsey proposes that the Commissions of the Car- 
dinals should be read, and the King breaks in im- 
patiently with — 

" What 's the need ? 
It hath already publicly been read, 
And on all sides the authority allowed ; 
You may. then, spare that time." 



32 INTRODUCTION. 

This impatience of a quarter of an hour's delay at 
the beginning of the scene gives measure of the 
anger at the end, when nothing is attained but an 
indefinite postponement. 

" I may perceive, 
These Cardinals trifle with me : I abhor 
This dilatory sloth, and tricks of Rome. 
My learn'd and well-beloved servant. Cranmer, 
Prythee return : with thy approach, I know 
My comfort comes along." 

Then angrily, " Break up* the Court ! — I say, set 
on." All readers feel the charm that is given in 
this scene to the character of Katharine by the 
skilful blending of love, patience, piety, and all 
womanly graces with high spirit : by the praise 
that comes with double force from the lips of the 
husband who is putting her away. We may note 
also the continued use of Katharine and Wolsey, 
the two chief types of the fickleness of earthly 
fortune, as opposites to each other in the spirit, 
although subject to like forfeits in the flesh. 

The Third Act of King Henry VIII. in its 
two scenes is wholly occupied with Katharine and 
Wolsey. The first scene represents the fallen 
Queen among her women, and sets her grief to 
soft music that in Shakespeare's plays was used for 
expression of the harmony within immortal souls. 
The words of the song indeed express the thought. 



INTEODUCTION. 33 

The power of Orpheus is the power of the divine 
harmony within to calm the waves of passion and 
bring peace. 

" Everything that heard him play, 
Even the billows of the sen. 

Hung their heads, and then lay by. 
In sweet music is such art. 
Killing care and grief of heart 

Fall asleep, or, hearing, die. 

Now again there is Katharine in contact with 
Wolsey, simple truth with worldly policy ; and in 
the next scene the talk of the nobles shows, with 
the "Rise of Cranmer, the impending Fall of 
Wolsey. Then Wolsey enters with disturbed 
mind, into which we pass (for an Aside means 
always, Now you hear thinking) and rind among 
all its troubles an unshaken confidence of power: 

t: This candle burns not clear : 'tis I must snuff it ; 
Then, out it goes." 

The King enters, reading the inventory of Wolsey'a 
wealth, put by mistake into the packet to him: 
11 What piles of wealth hath he accumulated," "He 
heapeth up riches — " The King departs, " frowning 
upon Wolsey," and leaves him with the paper that 
completed his ruin. He looks first at the inventory 
of his wealth, and thinks out a subtlety to overcome 
that difficulty with the King; but looks then on 
b— 03 



31 INTRODUCTION. 

the other paper. It is his letter to the Pope ; and 
he is ruined beyond all earthly hope. He is sub- 
ject to the insults of the nobles, and his eyes are 
opened to the vanity of earthly glory: 

•■ Vain pomp and glory of the world. I hate ye ! 
I feel my heart new opened." 

We are shown now the better side of Wolsey, 
through the love for him in those of his own 
household. In the scene with Cromwell, while the 
Pdse of others on his Fall is told him, out of the 
heart new opened comes its inmost goodness, and 
Wolsey reads the lesson of his life to Cromwell, by 
bidding him avoid its faults, self seeking revenge, 
corrupt dealing, as his had been with those who 
betrayed Buckingham : 

; ' Love thyself last : cherish those hearts that hate thee. 
Corruption wins not more than honesty. 
Still in thy right hand carry gentle peace. 
To silence envious tongues. Be just, and fear not. 
Let all the ends thou aim'st at be thy country's. 
Thy God's, and truth's : then if thou fall'st. Cromwell, 
Thou fall'st a blessed martyr. Serve the King ; 
And — Pr'ythee lead me in : 
There take an inventory of all I have. 
To the last penny : 't is the King's ; my robe, 
And my integrity to Heaven, is all 
I dare now call my own. Cromwell. Cromwell ! 
Had I but served mv God with half the zeal 



INTRODUCTION. 35 

I served my King. He would not in mine age 
Have left me naked to mine enemies. 

Cromwell. Good sir, have patience. 

Wolsey. So I have. — Farewell 

The hopes of Court ! my hopes in Heaven do dwell." 

>k Man walketh in a vain shadow, and disquieteth 
himself in vain : he heapeth up riches, and cannot 
tell who shall gather them. And now, Lord, what 
is my hope : truly my hope is in Thee." 

The Fourth Act contains two contrasted scenes. 
One is the coronation of Anne Boleyn ; the other 
is the death of Katharine. The two gentlemen 
who meet at the crowning of Anne significantly 
remember that they last met at the execution of 
Buckingham. One tells another of the dying and 
deserted Queen at Kimbolton. There is a sigh for 
the fall of Queen Katharine, followed immediately 
by the sound of trumpets in the celebration of the 
rise of Queen Anne. 

u Alas, good lady ! 

[Trumpets. 
The trumpets sound : stand close, the Queen is coming." 

Then enters another show of pomp — the 
manner of presenting the play being designed to 
give " the view of earthly glory." The description 
of the coronation includes talk of the sickness of 
the ruined Cardinal, of the rise of Gardiner to be 
Bishop of Winchester, of Cranmer to the Arch- 



36 INTRODUCTION. 

bishopric, of Thomas Cromwell to the Privy 
Council ; rise and fall everywhere of the waves of 
fortune. 

The second scene includes the telling of the death 
of Wolsey with the showing of the death of 
Katharine. "Wolsey died, in fact, on the 29th of 
November, 1530, and Katharine in January, 1536, 
more than two years after the birth of Elizabeth ; 
and the coronation of Anne Boleyn was in June, 
1533. But in poetry essential truths are shown 
by bringing suggestive incidents into the most sig- 
nificant relation to each other. So the death of 
Wolsey is told as recent to the dying Katharine. 
Wolsey's ambition ends with his appeal to the 
Abbot of Leicester : 

" father Abbot. 
Ail old man, broken with the storms of state, 
Is come to lay his weary bones among- ye ; 
Give him a little earth for charity !" 

Katharine's last remembrance of their opposition 
to each other is lost in words of charity that show 
the better side of the fallen Cardinal and tell how — 

" His overthrow heaped happiness upon him ; 
For then, and not till then, he felt himself, 
And found the blessedness of being little : 
And. to add greater honours to his age 
Than man could give him. he died fearing God." 



INTRODUCTION. 37 

The death of Katharine with her last hope in 
God is marked by soft music : 

" Cause the musicians play me that sad note 
I named my knell, whilst I sit meditating 
On that celestial harmony I go to." 

Her vision then presents to the eyes of the spec- 
tators, while music suggests also, the heavenly 
crown she has attained. The spark of royal feeling 
near the close is the last flash of her mortality, but 
the last words are of kind thought for those whom 
she has loved and is now leaving. 

Then in the Fifth Act comes the application, to 
the sum of life, to the community of man as to 
the single man, of the faith expressed by fallen 
Buckingham : 

" Heaven has an end in all." 

The whole Act is concerned with two things : a 
picture in little of the divisions in the Church, with 
a control tending towards Reformation ; and the 
birth of Elizabeth, with the prophecy that she, for 
whom so many seeming chances of unequal fortune 
had prepared the way, would be a Queen in 
whose day every man should sing the merry songs 
of peace to all his neighbours, God should be truly 
known, and characters of men should give the 
measure of their greatness. The hope was large, 



38 INTRODUCTION. 

and true although for full accomplishment Eng- 
land must wait 'on, r years beyond the days of 
Elizabeth or of Victoria. But Shakespeare heard. 
as we all may hear, the voice of God in History, 
" Fear thou not. for I am with thee : Be not dis- 
mayed, for I am thy God." 

H. 31; 



King Henry VIII 



DR AM ATI S PERSON jE. 



King Henry the Eighth. 

Cardinal "Wolsey. 

Cardinal Campeius. 

Capucius, Ambassador from 
Charles V. 

Cranmer, Archbishop of Can- 
terbury . 

Duke of Norfolk. 

Duke of Suffolk. 

Duke of Buckingham. 

Earl of Surrey. 

Lord Chamberlain. 

Lord Chancellor. 

Gardiner, Bishop of Win- 
chester. 

Bishop of Lincoln. 

Lord Abergavenny. 

Lord Sands. 

Sir Henry Guildford. 

Sir Thomas Lovell. 

Sir Anthony Denny. 

Sir Nicholas Vaux. 

Secretaries to Wolsey. 

Cromwell, Servant to Wolsey. 

Griffith, Gentleman- Usher to 
Queen Katharine. 

Three other Gentlemen. 



Carter King-at-Arms. 

Dr. Butts, Physician to Uu 
King. 

Surveyor to the Duke of Buck- 
ingham. 

Brandon, and a Serjeant-at- 
Arms. 

Door-keeper of the Council- 
chamber. 

Porter, and his Man. 

Page to Gardiner. A Crier. 

Queen Katharine, Wife to 

King Henry. 
Anne Bullen, her Maid of 

Honour. 
An Old Lady, Friend to Ah ne 

Bullen. 
Patience, Woman to Queen 

Katharine 

Several Lords and Ladies in 
the Dumb-shows; Women 
attending upon the Queen; 
Spirits, which appear to her ; 
Scribes, Officers, Guards, 
and other attendants. 



SCENE — Chiefly in London and Westminster ; once, at 

KlMBOLTON. 



PROLOGUE, 

I come no more to make you laugh : things now 
That bear a weighty and a serious brow, 



40 KING HENRY VIII. Prologue. 

Sad, high, and working, full of state and woe, 

Such noble .scenes as draw the eve to flow, 

We now present. Those that can pity, here 

May, if they think it well, let fall a tear ; 

The subject will deserve it. Such as give 

Their money out of hope they may believe. 

May here find Truth too. Those that come to see 

Only a show or two. and so agree 

The play may pass, if they be still and willing, 

I'll undertake, may see away their shilling 

Richly in two short hours. Only they 

Tii at come to hear a merry, bawdy play, 

A noise of targets, or to see a fellow 

In a long motley coat, guarded with yellow, 

Will be deceived : for. gentle hearers, know, 

To rank our chosen truth with such a show 

A- fool and fight is, beside forfeiting 

Our own brains, and the opinion that we bring 

To make that only true we now intend. 

Will leave us never an understanding friend. 

Therefore, for goodness' sake, and as you are known 

The first and happiest hearers of the town, 

Be sad. as we would make ye : think, ye see 

Tin- very persons of our noble story, 

As they were living : think, you see them great, 

And followed with the creneral throng and sweat 



Scene L] KING HENRY VIII. 41 

Of thousand friends : then, in a moment, see 
How soon this mightiness meets misery : 
And if you can be merry then, I'll say 
A man may weep upon his wedding-day. 



ACT I. 
Scene I. — London. An Ante-chamber in the 

Palace. 
Enter the Duke of Norfolk, at one door ; at the 
other, the Duke o/* Buckingham, and the Lord 
Abergavenny. «, 

Buck. Good morrow, and well met. How have 
ye done 
Since last we saw in France 1 

^or. I thank your grace, 

Healthful ; and ever since a fresh admirer 
Of what I saw there. 

Buck. An untimely ague 

Stayed me a prisoner in my chamber when 
Those suns of glory, those two lights of men, 
Met in the vale of Andren. 

yor. 'Twixt Guynes and Arde : 

I was then present, saw them salute on horseback ; 
b*— 63 



42 KING HENRY Till. TAct I. 

Beheld them, when they lighted, how they clung 
In their embracement as they grew together, 
Which had they, what four throned ones could 

have weighed 
Such a compounded one 1 

Buck. All the whole time 

I was my chamber's prisoner. 

Nor. Then you lost 

The view of earthly glory : men might say. 
Till this time Pomp was single, but now married 
To one above itself Each following day 
Became the next day's master, till the last 
Made former wonders its. To-day the French 
All clinquant, all in gold, like heathen gods, 
Shone down the English : and to-morrow they 
Made Britain. India : every man that stood 
Showed like a mine. Their dwarfish pages were 
A« cherabins, all gilt : the madams too. 
Not used to toil, did almost sweat to bear 
The pride upon them, that their very labour 
Was to them as a painting. Xow this masque 
Was cried incomparable ; and the ensuing night 
Made it a fool and beggar. The two Kings, 
Equal in Lustre, were now best, now worst, 
As presence did present them, him in eye 
Still him in praise ; and, being present both, 



Scene 1.] KING HENRY VIII. 43 

Twas said, they saw but one, and no discerner 
Durst wag his tongue in censure. When these 

suns 
(For so they phrase them) by their heralds chal- 
lenged 
The noble spirits to arms, they did perform 
Beyond thought's compass ; that former fabulous 

story, 
Being now seen possible enough, got credit, — 
That Bevis was believed. 

Buck. 0. you go far. 

Nor. As I belong to worship, and affect 
In honour honesty, the tract of everything 
Would by a good discourser lose some life 
Which action's self was tongue to. All was royal : 
To the disposing of it nought rebelled ; 
Order gave each thing view, the office did 
Distinctly his full function. 

Buck. Who did guide, 

I mean, who set the body and the limbs 
Of this great sport together 1 

Nor. As you guess • 

One, certes, that promises no element 
In such a business. 

Buck. I pray you, who, my lord 1 

Nor. All this was ordered by the good discretion 



44 KING HENRY VIII. [Act 1. 

Of the right reverend Cardinal of York. 

Buck. The devil speed him ! Xo man's pie is 
freed 
From his ambitious finger. What had he 
To do in these fierce vanities I I wonder, 
That such a keech can with his very bulk 
Take up the rays o' the beneficial sun, 
And keep it from the earth. 

Xor. Surely, sir, 

There's in him stuff that puts him to these ends. 
For, being not propped by ancestry, whose grace 
Chalks successors their way : nor called upon 
For high feats done to the Crown : neither allied 
To eminent assistants : spider-like, 
(Jut of his self-drawing web, — give us note, — 
The force of his own merit makes his way, 
A gift that Heaven gives for him. which buys 
A place next to the king. 

Aber. I cannot tell 

What Heaven hath given him ; let some graver 

eye 
Pierce into that ; but I can see his pride 
Peep through each part of him : whence has he 

that ! 
If not from hell, the devil is a niggard, 
Or has given all before, and he begins 



Scauel.] KING HENRY VIII. 45 

A new hell in himself 

Buck. Why the devil, 

Upon this French going-oat, took he upon him, 
Without the privity o' the King, t' appoint 
Who should attend on him ? He makes up the 

rile 
Of all the gentry ; for the most part such 
To whom as great a charge as little honour 
He meant to lay upon : and his own letter, 
The honourable Board of Council out, 
Must fetch him in the papers. 

Aher. I do know 

Kinsmen of mine, three at the least, that have 
By this so sickened their estates, that never 
They shall abound as formerly 

Buck. O, many 

Have broke their backs with laying manors on 

them 
For this great journey. What did this vanity, 
But minister communication of 
A most poor issue \ 

Nor. Grievingly I think 

The peace between the French and us not values 
The cost that did conclude it. 

Buck. Every man 

After the hideous storm that followed, was 



46 KING HENRY VIII. [Act 1 

A thing inspired, and. not consulting, broke 
Into a general prophecy, — that this tempest, 
Dashing the garment of this peace, aboded 
The sudden breach on ; t. 

Nor. Which is budded out ; 

For France hath flawed the league, and hath 

attached 
Our merchants' goods at Bourdeaux. 

Aber. Is it therefore 

The ambassador is silenced ! 

Nor, ]\Iarry, is *t 

Aber. A proper title of a peace, and purchased 
At a superfluous rate. 

Buck. VTliy, all this business 

Our reverend Cardinal carried. 

Nor. Like it your grace, 

The State takes notice of the private difference 
Betwixt you and the Cardinal. I advise you, — 
And take it from a heart that wishes towards you 
Honour and plenteous safety — that you read 
The Cardinal's malice and his potency 
Together ; to consider further, that 
What his high hatred would effect wants not 
A minister in his power. You know his nature, 
That he 's revengeful ; and I know his sword 
Hath a sharp edge : it 's long, and 't may be said, 



Bceuel.] KING HENRY VIII. 4/ 

It reaches far ; and where 't will not extend, 

Thither he darts it. Bosom up my counsel, 

You '11 find it wholesome. Lo, where comes that 

rock, 
That I advise your shunning. 

Enter Cardinal Wolsey, the purse borne before 
him, certain of the Guard, and two Secretaries 
with papers. The Cardinal in his passayejixetk 
his eye on Buckingham, and Buckingham oh 
him, both fu 11 of disda in. 

Wol. The Duke of Buckingham's surveyor? ha ! 
Where 's his examination ] 

1 Seer. Here, so please you. 

Wol. Is he in person ready 1 

1 Seer. Ay, please your grace. 

Wol. Well, we shall then know more; and 
Buckingham 
Shall lessen this big look. 

[Exeunt Cardinal and his Train. 

Buck. This butcher's cur is venom-mouthed, 
and I 
Have not the power to muzzle him ; therefore best 
Not wake him in his slumber. A beggar's look 
Outworths a noble's blood. 

Nor. What, are you chafed ? 



4S KING HENRY VIII. [Act L 

Ask God for temperance ; that 's the appliance 

only 
Which your disease requires. 

Buck. I read in 's looks 

Matter against me ; and his eye reviled 
3Ie. as his abject object : at this instant 
He bores me with some trick. He 's gone to the 

King ; 
I "11 follow, and outstare him. 

Nor. Stay, my lord, 

And let your reason with your choler question 
What 't is you go about. To climb steep hills 
Requires slow pace at first : anger is like 
A full-hot horse, who being allowed his way, 
Self-mettle tires him. Not a man in England 
Can advise me like you : be to yourself 
As you would to your friend. 

Buck. I'll to the King; 

And from a mouth of honour quite cry down 
This Ipswich fellow's insolence, or proclaim 
There 's difference in no persons. 

Nor. Be advised; 

Heat not a furnace for your foe so hot 
That it do singe yourself. We may outrun 
By violent swiftness that which we run at, 
And lose by over-running. Know you not, 



Scene 1.J KING HENRY VIII. 49 

The fire that mounts the liquor till 't run o'er, 

Tn seeming to augment it, wastes it ? Be advised : 

I say again, there is no English soul 

More stronger to direct you than yourself, 

If with the sap of reason you would quench, 

Or but allay, the fire of passion. 

Buck. Sir 

I am thankful to you, and I '11 go along 
By your prescription ; but this top-proud fellow, — 
Whom from the flow of gall T name not, but 
From sincere motions, — by intelligence, 
And proofs as clear as founts in July when 
We see each grain of gravel, I do know 
To be corrupt and treasonous. 

Nor. Say not, treasonous. 

Buck. To the King I '11 say 't ; and make my 
vouch as strong 
As shore of rock. Attend. This holy fox, 
Or wolf, or both — for he is equal ravenous, 
As he is subtle, and as prone to mischief 
As able to perform 't, his mind and place 
Infecting one another, yea, reciprocally — 
Only to show his pomp as well in France 
As here at home, suggests the King, our master, 
To this last costly treaty, the interview, 
That swallowed so much treasure, and like a <?lass 



50 KIXG HENRY VIII. [Act I 

Did break i' the rinsing. 

Nor. 'Faith, and so it did. 

Buck. Pray, give me favour, sir. This cunning 
Cardinal 
The articles o' the combination drew 
As himself pleased ; and they were ratified, 
As he cried, " Thus let be : " to as much end 
As give a crutch to the dead. But our Count- 
Cardinal 
Has done this, and 't is well ; for worthy Wolsey, 
Who cannot err, he did it. Now this follows, 
Which, as I take it, is a kind of puppy 
To the old dam, treason : Charles the Emperor, 
Under pretence to see the Queen, his aunt, — 
For 't was, indeed, his colour ; but he came 
To whisper Wolsey, — here makes visitation. 
His fears were, that the interview betwixt 
England and France might, through their amity, 
Breed him some prejudice ; for from this league 
Peeped harms that menaced him : he privily 
Deals with our Cardinal, and, as I trow, — 
Which I do well ; for, I am sure, the Emperor 
Paid ere he promised, whereby his suit was granted 
Ere it was asked, — but when the way was made, 
And paved with gold, the Emperor thus desired : 
That he would please to alter the King's course, 



Scene 1.J KING HENRY VIII. 51 

And break the foresaid peace. Let the King 

know — 
As soon he shall, by me — that thus the Cardinal 
Does buy and sell his honour as he pleases, 
And for his own advantage. 

Nor. I am sorry 

To hear this of him ; and could wish he were 
Something mistaken in 't. 

Buck. No, not a syllable. 

I do pronounce him in that very shape 
He shall appear in proof. 

Enter Brandon; a Serjeant-at-Arms before hi.i, 
and tico or three of the Guard. 

Bran. Your office, serjeant ; execute it. 

Serj. Sir, 

My lord the Duke of Buckingham, and Earl 
Of Hereford, Stafford, and Northampton, I 
Arrest thee of high treason in the name 
Of our most sovereign King. 

Buck. Lo you, my lord, 

The net has fallen upon me ! I shall perish 
Under device and practice. 

Bran. I am sorry 

To see you ta'en from liberty, to look on 
The business present. 'T is his highness' pleasure, 



52 KING HENRY VIII. [Act I, 

You shall to the Tower. 

Buck It will help me nothing 

To plead mine innocence ; for that dye is on me 
Which makes my whitest part black. The will of 

Heaven 
Be done, in this and all things. — I obey. — 
O, my Lord Aberga ny, fare you well ! 

Bran. Nay, he must bear you company. — [To 
Abergavenny.] The King- 
Is pleased you shall to the Tower, till you know 
How he determines further. 

Aber. As the Duke said, 

The will of Heaven be done, and the King's plea- 
sure 
By me obeyed . 

Bran. Here is a warrant from 

The King to attach Lord Montacute; and the 

bodies 
Of the Duke's confessor, John de la Car, 
One Gilbert Peck, his chancellor, — 

Buck So, so ; 

These are the limbs o' the plot. Xo more, I 
hope. 

Bran. A monk o' the Chartreux. 

Buck. 0, Nicholas Hopkins 1 

Bran. He. 



Scene 2.] KING HENRY VIII. 53 

Buck. My surveyor is false : the o'er-great 
Cardinal 
Hath showed him gold. My life is spanned al- 
ready : 
I am the shadow of poor Buckingham, 
AY hose figure even this instant cloud puts on, 
By darkening my clear sun. — My lord, farewell. 

[Exeunt. 



Scene II. — The Council-chamber. 

Cornets. Enter King Henry, leaning on the Car- 
dinal's shoulder, the Nobles, and Sir Thomas 
Lovell : the Cardinal places himself under 
the King's feet on his right side. 

K. Hen. My life itself, and the best heart of it, 
Thanks you for this great care : I stood i' the 

level 
Of a full charged confederacy, and give thanks 
To you that choked it. — Let be called before us 
That gentleman of Buckingham's : in person 
I'll hear him his confessions j ustify ; 
And point by point the treasons of his master 
He shall again relate. 



54 KING HENRY VIII. [Act I. 

A noise within, crying, ' Room for the Queen ! ' 
Enter the Queen, ushered by the Dukes of 
Norfolk and Suffolk : she kneels. The King 
riseth from his state, takes her up, kisses, and 
placeth her by him. 

Q. Kath. Nay, we must longer kneel : I am a 
suitor. 

K. Hen. Arise, and take place by us : — half your 
suit 
Never name to us : you Lave half our power : 
The other moiety, ere you ask, is given ; 
Repeat your will, and take it. 

Q. Kath. Thank your majesty. 

That you would love yourself, and in that love 
Not unconsidered leave your honour, nor 
The dignity of your office, is the point 
Of my petition. 

K. Hen. Lady mine, proceed. 

Q. Kath, I am solicited, not by a few, 
And those of true condition, that your subjects 
Are in great grievance. There have been com- 
missions 
Sent down among 'em, which hath flawed the 

heart 
Of all their loyalties : wherein, although, 



Scene 2. J XING HENRY Till. 55 

My good lord Cardinal, they vent reproaches 
Most bitterly on you. as putter-on 
Of these exactions, yet the King our master, — 
Whose honour Heaven shield from soil ! — even he 

escapes not 
Language unmannerly ; yea, such which breaks 
The sides of loyalty, and almost appears 
In loud rebellion. 

Nor. Not ' almost appears,' — 

Tt doth appear ; for upon these taxations, 
The clothiers all, not able to maintain 
The many to them longing, have put off 
The spinsters, carders, fullers, weavers : who, 
Unfit for other life, compelled by hunger 
And lack of other means, in desperate manner 
Daring the event to the teeth, are all in uproar, 
And Dansrer serves anions them. 

K. Hen. Taxation ! 

Wherein'? and what taxation? — My lord Cardinal, 
You that are blamed for it alike with us, 
Know you of this taxation 1 

Wol. Please you, sir, 

I know but of a single part, in aught 
Pertains to the state ; and front but in that tile 
Where others tell steps with me. 

Q. Kath. No, my lord, 



56 KING HENRY Till. [Act I 

You know no more than others : but you frame 
Things, that are known alike, which are not whole- 
some 
To those which would not know them, and yet 

must 
Perforce be their acquaintance. These exactions 
"Whereof my sovereign would have note, they are 
Most pestilent to the bearing : and to bear 'em, 
The back is sacrifice to the load. They say 
They are devised by you : or else you suffer 
Too hard an exclamation. 

K. Hen. Still exaction ! 

The nature of it \ In what kind, let's know, 
Is this exaction % 

Q. Katlt. I am much too venturous 

In tempting of your patience : but am boldened 
Under your promised pardon. The subjects' grief 
Comes through commissions, which compel from 

each 
The sixth part of his substance, to be levied 
Without delay ; and the pretence for this 
Is named, your wars in France. This makes bold 

mouths : 
Tongues spit their duties out, and cold hearts 

freeze 
Allegiance in them : their curses now 



Scene 2] KING HENRY VIII. 57 

Live where their prayers did ; and it 's come to 
pass 

That tractable obedience is a slave 
To each incensed will. I would, your highness 
Would give it quick consideration ; for 
There is no primer business. 

K. Hon. By my life, 

This is against our pleasure. 

Wol. And for me, 

I have no further gone in this, than by 
A single voice, and that not passed me but 
By learned approbation of the judges. If I am 
Traduced by ignorant tongues, which neither know 
My faculties nor person yet will be 
The chronicles of my doing, let me say 
'T is but the fate of place and the rough brake 
That virtue must go through. We must not stint 
Our necessary actions in the fear 
To cope malicious censurers, which ever, 
As ravenous fishes, do a vessel follow 
That is new-trimmed, but benefit no further 
Than vainly longing. What we oft do best, 
By sick interpreters, once weak ones, is 
Not ours, or not allowed ; what worst, as oft, 
Hitting a grosser quality, is cried up 
For our best action. If we shall stand still, 



58 KING HENRY Yin. [Act I. 

In fear our motion will be mocked or carped at, 
We should take root here where we sit, or sit 
State-statues only. 

K. Hen. Things done well. 

And with a care, exempt themselves from fear ; 
Things done without example, in their issue 
Are to be feared. Have you a precedent 
Of this commission % I believe, not any. 
We must not rend our subjects from our laws, 
And stick them in our will. Sixth part of each 1 
A trembling contribution ! Why, we take 
From every tree, lop, bark, and part o' the timber; 
And, though we leave it with a root, thus hacked, 
The air will drink the sap. To every county, 
Where this is questioned, send our letters, with 
Free pardon to each man that has denied 
The force of this commission. Pray, look to't ; 
I put it to your care. 

Wol. [To the Secretary.'] A word with you. 
Let there be letters writ to every shire, 
Of the King's grace and pardon. The grieved 

commons 
Hardly conceive of me ; let it be noised, 
That through our intercession this revokeinent 
And pardon comes. I shall anon advise you 
Further in the proceeding. [Exit Secretary. 



SOf* - KING HENRY VIII. 59 

Enter Surveyor. 

Q. KntJt. I am sorry that the Duke of Buckingham 
Is run in your displeasure. 

K. Hen. It grieves many : 

The gentleman is learned, and a most rare speaker; 
To nature none more bound, his training such 
That he may furnish and instruct great teachers, 
And never seek for aid out of himself. 
Yet see, 

When these so noble benefits shall prove 
Not well disposed, the mind growing once corrupt. 
They turn to vicious forms, ten times more ugly 
Than ever they were fair. This man so complete, 
Who was enrolled 'niongst wonders, and when we, 
Almost with ravished listening, could not find 
His hour of speech a minute ; he, my lady, 
Hath into monstrous habits put the graces 
That once were his, and is become as black 
As if besmeared in hell. Sit by us ; you shall hear — - 
This was his gentleman in trust— of him 
Things to strike honour sad. — Bid him recount 
The fore-recited practices ; whereof 
We cannot feel too little, hear too much. 

Wol. Stand forth, and with bold spirit relate 
what you, 



60 KING HEXRY VIII. [Act L 

Most like a careful subject, have collected 
Out of the Duke of Buckingham. 

K. Hen. Speak freely. 

Surv. First, it was usual with him. eveiy day 
It would infect his speech, that if the King 
Should without issue die, he 11 carry 't so 
To make the sceptre his. These very words 
I 've heard him utter to his son-in-law, 
Lord Aberga'ny, to whom by oath he menaced 
Revenge upon the Cardinal. 

Wol. Please your highness, note 

This dangerous conception in this point, 
Not friended by his wish, to your high person 
His will is most malignant ; and it stretches 
Beyond you, to your friends. 

Q. Kath. My learned lord Cardinal, 

Deliver all with charity. 

K. Hen. Speak on. 

How grounded he his title to the crown 
Upon our fail 1 to this point hast thou heard him 
At any time speak aught 1 

Surv. He was brought to this 

By a vain prophecy of Nicholas Henton* 

K. Hen. What was that Henton i 

* Nicholas Hopkins, who was of the convent of Henton, 
near BristoL 



Scene 2.] SING HKNRY VIII. 61 

Surv. Sir, a Chartreux friar, 

His confessor : who fed him every minute 
With words of sovereignty. 

K. JIt.L. How know'st thou this? 

re. Not long before your highness sped to 

France, 
The Duke being at the Rose, within the parish 
•Saint Lawrence Poultney, did of me demand 
What was the speech among the Londoners 
Concerning the French journey ] I replied, 
Men feared the French would prove perfidious, 
To the King's danger. Presently the Duke 
Said, 't was the fear, indeed ; and that he doubted 
T would prove the verity of certain words 
Spoke by a holy monk, " that oft/'" says he, 
" Hath sent to me, wishing me to permit 
John de la Car, my chaplain, a choice hour 
To hear from him a matter of some moment : 
Whom after, under the confession's seal, 
He solemnly had sworn that what he spoke 
My chaplain to no creature bat to me 
Should utter, with demure confidence 
This pausingly ensued, — ' Neither the King nor 's 

heirs, 
TeD you the Duke, shall prosper : bid him strive 
To gain the love of the commonalty : the Duke 



62 KING HENRY VIII. [Act I 

Shall govern England.' 

Q. Kath. If I know you well, 

You were the Duke's surveyor, and lost your office 
On the complaint o' the tenants : take good heed 
You charge not in your spleen a noble person, 
And spoil your nobler soul. I say, take heed ; 
Yes, heartily beseech you. 

K. Hen. Let him on. — 

Go forward. 

Swrv. On my soul, I'll speak but truth. 

I told my lord the Duke, by the devil's illusions 
The monk might be deceived : and that 't was 

dangerous for him 
To ruminate on this so far until 
It forged him some design, which, being believed, 
It was much like to do. He answered, ' Tush ! 
It can do me no damage ; ' adding further, 
That had the King in his last sickness failed, 
The Cardinal's and Sir Thomas Lovell's heads 
Should have gone off. 

K. Hen. Ha ! what, so rank ? Ah ha ! 

There's mischief in this man. — Canst thou say 
further ] 

Surv. I can, my liege. 

K. Hen. Proceed. 

Surv. Bein<4 at Greenwich, 



Scene 2. J KIN'G HENRY VIII. 63 

After your highness had reproved the Duke 
About Sir William Blomer, — 

K. Hen. I remember 

Of such a time: being my sworn servant. 
The Duke retained him his. — But on : what 
hence ? 
Surv. * If,' quoth he, ' I for this had been com- 
mitted, 
As, to the Tower, I thought, — I would have played 
The part my father meant to act upon 
The usurper Richard ; who, being at Salisbury, 
Made suit to come in 's presence ; which if granted, 
As he made semblance of his duty, would 
Have put his knife into him.' 

K. Hen. A giant traitor ! 

Wol. Now, madam, may his highness live in 
freedom, 
And this man out of prison 1 

Q. Kath. God mend all ! 

K. Hen. There 's something more would out of 

thee : what say'st ? 
Surv. After ' the Duke his father,' with ' the 
knife,' 
He stretched him, and, with one hand on his 

dagger, 
Another spread on his breast, mounting his eyes, 



64 KING HENRY Till. [Actl, 

He did discharge a horrible oath : whose tenor 
Was, — were he evil used, he would outgo 
His father, by as much as a performance 
Does an irresolute purpose. 

K. Hen. There 's his period, 

To sheathe his knife in us. He is attached ■ 
Call him to present trial : if he may 
Find mercy in the law, 't is his ; if none, 
Let him not seek 't of us. By day and night, 
He 's traitor to the height. [Exeunt. 



Scene III. — A Room in the Palace. 
Enter the Lord Chamberlain and Lord Sands. 
Cham. Is "t possible the spells of France should 
juggle 
Men into such strange mysteries ] 

Sands. New customs, 

Though they be never so ridiculous, 
Nay, let 'em be unmanly, yet are followed. 

CJta.ni. As far as I see, all the good our English 
Have got by the late voyage is but merely 
A lit or two o' the face ; but they are shrewd 

ones, 
For when they hold 'em, you would swear directly 



Scene 3.] KING HENRY VIII. 65 

Their very noses had been counsellors 

To Pepin or Ciotharius, they keep state so. 

Sands, They have all new legs, and lame ones ; 
one would take it, 
That never saw 'em pace before, the spavin 
And springhalt reigned among 'em. 

Cham. Death ! my Ion?, 

Their clothes are after such a pagan cut too, 
That, sure, they've worn out Christendom. 

Enter Sir Thomas Lovell. 

How now i 
What news, Sir Thomas Lovell 1 

Lou. "Faith, my lord, 

I hear of none, but the new proclamation 
That 's clapped upon the court-gate. 

Cham. What is 't for ? 

Lot: The reformation of our travelled gallants* 
That till the court with quarrels, talk, and tailors. 

Cltaui. I am glad 'tis there : now, I would pray 
our monsieurs 
To think an English courtier may be wise, 
And never see the Louvre. 

Lov. They must either — 

For so run the conditions — leave those remnants 
Of fool, and feather, that they got in France, 



66 KING HENRY VIII. [Act I 

With all their honourable points of ignorance 

Pertaining thereunto, as fights and fireworks ; ' 

Abusing better men than they can be, 

Out of a foreign wisdom ; renouncing clean 

The faith they have in tennis and tall stockings, 

Short blistered breeches, and those types of travel. 

And understand again like honest men ; 

Or pack to their old playfellows : there, I take it, 

They may, cum privilegio, wear away 

The lag end of their lewdness, and be laughed at. 

Sands. 'Tis time to give 'em physic, their 
diseases 
Are grown so catching. 

Cham. What a loss our ladies 

Will have of these trim vanities ! 

Lov. Ay, marry, 

There will be woe indeed, lords : the sly whoresons 
Have got a speeding trick to lay down ladies ; 
A French song and a fiddle has no fellow. 

Sands. The devil fiddle 'em ! I am glad they're 
going, 
For, sure, there 's no converting of 'em : now, 
An honest country lord, as I am, beaten 
A long time out of play, may bring his plain -song, 
And have an hour of hearing ; and, by 'r lady, 
Held current music too. 



Scene 3.J KING HENRY VIII. 07 

Cham. Well said, Lord Sands : 

Your colt's tooth is not cast yet 

Sartdtf. No, my lord, 

Nor shall not, while I have a stump. 

Cham. Sir Thomas, 

Whither were you a-going 1 

Lov. To the Cardinal's. 

Your lordship is a guest too. 

Cham. O, 'tis true : 

This night he makes a supper, and a great one, 
To many lords and ladies ; there will be 
The beauty of this kingdom, I '11 assure you. 

Lov. That churchman bears a bounteous mind 
indeed, 
A hand as fruitful as the land that feeds us ; 
His dews fall everywhere. 

Cham. No doubt, he's noble ; 

He had a black mouth that said other of him. 

Sands. He may, my lord, — has wherewithal ; in 
him 
Sparing would show a worse sin than ill doctrine : 
Men of his way should be most liberal ; 
They are set here for examples. 

Cham. True, they are so; 

But few now give so great ones. My barge stays ; 
Your lordship shall along. — Come, good Sir Thomas 



08 KING HENRY VIII. [Act L 

We shall be late else ; which I would not be, 
For I was spoke to, with Sir Henry Guildford, 
This night to be comptrollers. 

Sands. I am your lordship's. 

\ExeturU. 



Scene IV. — The Presence-chamber in York Place. 

Hautboys. A small table under a state for the 
Cardinal, a longer table for the guests. Then 
enter Anne Bullen, and, dicers other Ladies 
anal Gentlemen, as gu.ests, at one door : at 
another door, enter Sir Henry Guildford. 

Guild. Ladies, a general welcome from his grace 
Salutes ye all ; this night he dedicates 
To fair content, and you. £Jone here, he hopes, 
In all this noble bevy, has brought with her 
One care abroad : he would have all as merry 
As far \s good company, good wine, good welcome, 
Can make good people. 

Enter Lord Chamberlain, Lord Sands, and Sir 
Thomas Lovell. 

0, my lord, you are tardy ; 
The very thought of this fair company 
Clapped wings to me. 



Scene i.] KING HENRY VIII. 69 

Cham. You are young, Sir Harry Guildford. 
Sands. Sir Thomas Lovell, had the Cardinal 
But half my lay- thoughts in him, some of these- 
Should find a running banquet ere they rested, 
I think would better please 'em : by my life, 
They are a sweet society of fair ones. 

Lov. O, that your lordship were but now 
confessor 
To one or two of these. 

Sands. I would I were ; 

They should find easy penance. 

Lov. 'Faith, how easy 1 

Sands. As easy as a down-bed would afford it. 
Cham. Sweet ladies, will it please you sit I Sir 
Harry, 
Place you that side ; I'll take the charge of this : 
His grace is entering. — Nay, you must not freeze ; 

Two women placed together makes cold weather : 

My Lord Sands, you are one will keep them 

waking : 
Pray, sit between these ladies. 

Sands. By my faith, 

And thank your lordship. — By your leave, sweet 
ladies : 

[Seats himself between Anne Bullen 
and another Lad//. 



70 KING HENRY VIII. rAct I. 

If I chance to talk a little wild, forgive me ; 
I had it from my father. 

Anne. Was he mad, sir? 

Sands. ! very mad, exceeding mad, in love 
too; 
But he would bite none : just as I do now, 
He would kiss you twenty with a breath. 

[Kisses her. 

Cham. Well said, my lord. — 

So, now you are fairly seated. — Gentlemen, 
The penance lies on you, if these fair ladies 
Pass away frowning. 

Sands. For my little cure, 

Let me alone. 

Hautboys. Enter Cardinal Wolsey, attended, and 
takes his state. 

Wol. You are welcome, my fair guests : that 
noble lady 
Or gentleman that is not freely merry, 
Is not my friend. This, to confirm my welcome ; 
And to you all, good health. [Drinks. 

Sands. Your grace is noble : — ■ 

Let me have such a bowl may hold my thanks, 
And save me so much talking. 

Wol. My Lord Sands, 



Seem: 4.] KING HENRY VIII. 71 

I am beholding to you : cheer your neighbours. — 
Ladies, you are not merry : — gentlemen, 
Whose fault is this 1 

Saiids. The red wine first must rise 

In their fair cheeks, my lord ; then, we shall 

have 'em 
Talk us to silence. 

Anne. You are a merry gamester. 

My Lord Sands. 

Sands. Yes, if I' make my play. 

Here 's to your ladyship ; and pledge it, madam, 
For 't is to such a thing — 

Anne. You cannot show me. 

Sands. I told your grace, they would talk anon. 
[Drum and trumpet. Chambers discharged. 

Wol. What 's that \ 

Cham. Look out there, some of ye. 

Wol. What warlike voice, 

And to what end is this ? — Nay, ladies, fear not ; 
By all the laws of war you are privileged. 

Enter a Servant. 
Cham. How now ] what is 't ) 
Serv. A noble troop of strangers, 

For so they seem ; they 've left their barge, and 
landed, 



rl KING HEXEY Till. [Act I 

And hither make, as great ambassadors 
From foreign princes. 

Wol. Good Lord Chamberlain, 

Go, give 'em welcome ; you can speak the French 

tongue : 
And, pray, receive 'em nobly, and conduct 'em 
Into our presence, where this heaven of beauty 
Shall shine at full upon them. — Some attend 

him. — 
[Exit Chamberlain. All rise, and tables removed, 
You have now a broken banquet, but we '11 mend it. 
A good digestion to vou all : once more, 
I shower a welcome on ye : — Welcome alL 

Hautboys. Enter the King, and others, as Mas- 
quers, habited like shepherds, ushered by the 
Lord Chamberlain. They pass directly before 
the Cardinal, and gracefully salute him. 

A noble company : what arc their pleasures'? 

Cham. Because they speak no English, thus 
they prayed 
To tell your grace : — that, having heard by fame 
Of this so noble and so fair assembly 
This night to meet here, they could do no less, 
Out of the great respect they bear to beauty. 
But leave their flocks, and, under your fair conduct, 



Bcenei.] KING HENRY VIII. 73 

Crave leave to view these ladies, and entreat 
An hour of revels with ; em. 

\Yul. Say, Lord Chamberlain, 

They have done my poor house grace ; for which 

I pay 'em 
A thousand thanks, and pray 'em take their 
pleasures. 
[Ladies chosen. The King takes Anne Bullen. 
K. Hen. The fairest hand T ever touched : O 
Beauty, 
Till now I never knew thee ! [Music. Dance. 

Wol. My lord ! 

Cham. Your grace 1 

Wol. Pray, tell them thus much from me : 
There should be one amongst them by his person, 
More worthy this place than myself ; to whom, 
If I but knew him, with my love and duty 
I would surrender it. 

Cham. I will, my lord. 

[Goes to the Masquers, and 'returns. 
Wol What say they ? 

Cham. Such a one, they all confess, 

There is, indeed ; which they would have your 

grace 
Find out, and he will take it. 

Wol. Let me see then, — 

c*— G3 



74: KING HEXRY Till. [Act I. 

By all your good leaves, gentlemen : here I '11 make 
My royal choice. 

K. Hen. [Unmasking.] Ye have found him. 
Cardinal. 
You hold a fair assembly ; you do well, lord : 
You are a churchman, or, I '11 tell you, Cardinal, 
I should judge now unhappily. 

Wol. I am glad, 

Your grace is grown so pleasant. 

K. Hen. My Lord Chamberlain, 

Pr'ythee, come hither. What fair lady 's that ? 

Cham. An 't please your grace, Sir Thomas 
Bullen's daughter. 
The Viscount Rochford ; one of her highness' 
women. 

K. Hen. By Heaven, she is a dainty one. — 
Sweetheart, 
I were unmannerly to take you out, 
And not to kiss you. — A health, gentlemen ! 
Let it go round. 

Wol. Sir Thomas Lovell, is the banquet ready 
I' the privy chamber ? 

Lov. Yes, my lord. 

Wol. Your grace, 

I fear, with dancing is a little heated. 

K. Hen. I fear, too much. 



Scene 1.] KING HENRY VIII. 75 

Wol. There 's fresher air, my lord, 

In the next chamber. 

K. Hen. Lead in your ladies, every one. — Sweet 
partner, 
I must not yet forsake you. — Let 's be merry, 
Good my Lord Cardinal : I have half a dozen 

healths 
To drink to these fair ladies, and a measure 
To lead em once again ; and then let 's dream 
Who 's best in favour. — Let the music knock it. 

[Exeunt, with trumpets. 



ACT II. 

Scene I. — A Street. 
Enter two Gentlemen, meeting. 

1 Gent. Whither away so fast 1 

2 Gent. 0, — God save you 
E'en to the hall, to hear what shall become 

Of the great Duke of Buckingham. 

1 Gent. I '11 save you 
That labour, sir. All 's now done, but the ceremony 
Of bringing back the prisoner. 

2 Gent. Were you there 1 



76 KING HENRY VIII. [Act II 

1 Gent. Yes, indeed, was I. 

2 Gent. Pray, speak what has happened, 

1 Gent. You may guess quickly what. 

2 6'e;^. Is he found guilty ? 

1 Gent. Yes, truly is he, and condemned upon "t, 

2 Gent. I am sorry for 't. 

1 Gent. So are a number more. 

2 Gent. But, pray, how passed it i 

1 Gent. I '11 tell you in a little. The great duke 
Came to the bar ; where to his accusations 

He pleaded still not guilty, and alleged 

Many sharp reasons to defeat the law. 

The king's attorney, on the contrary, 

Urged on the examinations, proofs, confessions 

Of divers witnesses, which the duke desired 

To have brought, vivd voce, to his face : 

At which appeared against him, his surveyor ; 

Sir Gilbert Peck his chancellor ; and John Car, 

Confessor to him : with that devil-monk, 

Hopkins, that made this mischief. 

2 Gent. That was he 
That fed him with his prophecies ? 

1 Gent. The same. 

All these accused him strongly j which he fain 
Would have flung from him, but, indeed, he could 
not : 



Scene 1.] KING HENRY VIII. 77 

And so his peers, upon this evidence, 
Have found hini guilty of high treason. Much 
He spoke, and learnedly, for life ; but all 
Was either pitied in him or forgotten. 

2 Gent. After all this, how did he bear himself ? 

1 Gent. When he was brought again to the bar, 

to hear 
His knell rung out, his judgment, — he was stirred 
With such an agony, he sweat extremely, 
And something spoke in choler, ill, and hasty : 
But he fell to himself again, and sweetly 
In all the rest showed a most noble patience. 

2 Gent, I do not think he fears death. 

1 Gent. Sure, he does not ; 
He never was so womanish : the cause 

He may a little grieve at. 

2 Gent. Certainly, 
The Cardinal is the end of this. 

1 Gent. T is likely, 
By all conjectures : first, Kildare's attainder, 
Then Deputy of Ireland ; who removed, 
Earl Surrey was sent thither, and in haste too 
Lest he should help his father. 

2 Gent. That trick of state 
Was a deep envious one. 

1 Gent. At his return 



78 KING HENRY VIII. [Act IL 

No doubt he will requite it. This is noted, 
And generally, — whoever the King favours. 
The Cardinal instantly will find employment. 
And far enough from court too. 

2 Gent. All the commons 

Hate him perniciously, and, o' my conscience, 
Wish him ten fathom deep : this Duke as much 
They love and dote on ; call him bounteous 

Buckingham, 
The mirror of all courtesy, — 

1 Gent. Stay there, sir 
And see the noble ruined man you speak of. 

Enter Buckingham from his arraignment; tip- 
staves before him ; the axe with the edge towards 
him /halberds on each side; accompanied with 
Sir Thomas Lovell, Sir Nicholas Yaux, Sir 

William Sands, and common people, &c. 

2 Gent. Let 's stand close, and behold him. 
Buck. All good people, 

You that thus far have come to pity me, 
Hear what I say, and then go home and lose me. 
I have this day received a traitor's judgment, 
And by that name must die ; yet, Heaven bear 

witness, 
And if I have a conscience, let it sink me, 



Scene 1.] KING HENRY VIII. 79 

Even as the axe falls, if I be not faithful 

The law I bear no malice for my death ; 

T has done upon the premises but justice : 

But those that sought it I could wish more 

Christians : 
Be what they will, I heartily forgive 'em : 
Yet let them look they glory not in mischief, 
Xor build their evils on the graves of great men ; 
For then my guiltless blood must cry against them. 
For further life in this world I ne'er hope, 
Nor will I sue, although the King have mercies 
More than I dare make faults. You few that 

loved me, 
And dare be bold to weep for Buckingham, 
His noble friends and fellows, — whom to leave 
Is only bitter to him, only, dying? — 
Go with me, like good angels, to my end, 
And, as the long divorce of steel falls on me, 
Make of your prayers one sweet sacrifice, 
And lift my soul to Leaven. — Lead on, o' God's 

name. 
Lov. I do beseech your grace for charity, 
If ever any malice in your heart 
Were hid against me, now to forgive me frankly. 

Buck. Sir Thomas Lovell, I as free lorgive you, 
As I would be forgiven : I forgive all. 



80 KING HENRY Till. [Act IL 

There cannot be those numberless offences 

'Gainst me, that I cannot take peace with : no 

black envy 
Shall make my grave. Commend me to his grace : 
And, if he speak of Buckingham, pray, tell him, 
You met him half in heaven. My vows and 

prayers 
Yet are the King's ; and, till my soul forsake. 
Shall cry for blessings on him. May he live 
Longer than I have time to tell his years ! 
Ever beloved, and loving, may his rule be ! 
And when old time shall lead him to his end, 
Goodness and he fill up one monument ! 

Lov. To the water side I must conduct your 

grace : 
Then, give my charge up to Sir Nicholas Vaux, 
Who undertakes you to your end. 

Vaux. Prepare there, 

The Duke is coming ; see the barge be ready, 
And fit it with such furniture as suits 
The greatness of his person. 

Buck. ^ a y> Sir Nicholas, 

Let it alone; my state now will but mock me. 
When I came hither, I was Lord High Constable, 
And Duke of Buckingham ; now, poor Edward 

Bohun : 



Scene 1.] KING HENRY VIII. SI 

Yet I am richer than my base accusers, 

That never knew what troth meant : I now seal it 

And with that blood will make them one day groan 

for 't. 
My noble father, Henry of Buckingham, 
Who first raised head against usurping Richard 
Flying for succour to his servant Banister, 
Being distressed, was by that wretch betrayed, 
And without trial fell : God's peace be with him ! 
Henry the Seventh succeeding, truly pitying 
My father's loss, like a most royal prince, 
Restored me to my honours, and, out of ruins, 
Made my name once more noble. Now, his son, 
Henry the Eighth, life, honour, name, and all 
That made me happy, at one stroke has taken 
For ever from the world. I had my trial, 
And, must needs say, a noble one ; which makes me 
A little happier than my wretched father : 
Yet thus far we are one in fortunes, — both 
Fell by our servants, by those men we loved most : 
A most unnatural and faithless service. 
Heaven has an end in all : yet, you that hear me, 
This from a dying man receive as certain : 
Where you are liberal of your loves and counsels, 
Be sure you be not loose; for those you make 

friends 



82 KING HENRY VIII. [Act II 

And give your hearts to, when they once per- 
ceive 
The least rub in your fortunes, fall away 
Like water from ye, never found again 
But where they mean to sink ye. All good people, 
Pray for me ! I must now forsake ye : the last 

hour 
Of my long weary life is come upon me. 
Farewell : 

And when you would say something that is sad, 
Speak how I fell. — I have done; and God forgive 
me ! [Exeunt Duke and Train. 

1 Gent. 0, this is full of pity. — Sir, it calls, 
I fear, too many curses on their heads 

That were the authors. 

2 Gent. If the Duke be guiltless, 
'T is full of woe : yet I can give you inkling 

Of an ensuing evil, if it fall, 
Greater than this. 

1 Gent. Good angels keep it from us ! 
What may it be? — You do not doubt my faith, 

sir? 

2 Gent. This secret is so weighty, 't will require 
A strong faith to conceal it. 

1 Gent. Let me have it : 

I do not talk much. 



Scene 1.] KING HENRY VIII. 83 

2 Gent. I ain confident ; 

Yon shall, sir : did yon not of late days hear 
A buzzing of a separation 
Between the King and Katharine ] 

1 Gent. Yes, but it held not ; 
For when the King once heard it, out of anger 
He sent command to the Lord Mayor straight 

To stop the rumour, and allay those tongues 
That durst disperse it. 

2 Gent. But that slander, sir, 
Is found a truth now ; for it grows again 
Fresher than e'er it was ; and held for certain, 
The King will venture at it. Either the Cardinal, 
Or some about him near, have, out of malice 

To the good Queen, possessed him with a scruple 
That will undo her : to connrni this too, 
Cardinal Campeius is arrived and lately, 
As all think, for this business. 

1 Gent. 'T is the Cardinal ; 
And merely to revenge him on the Emperor, 

For not bestowing on him, at his asking, 

The archbishoprick of Toledo, this is purposed. 

2 Gent. I think you have hit the mark : but is 't 

not cruel, 
That she should feel the smart of this ] The Car- 
dinal 



34 KING HENRY Till. [Act II. 

Will have his will, and she must fall. 

1 Gent. 'T is woful. 

We are too open here to argue this ; 
Let's think in private more. [Exeunt. 



Scene II. — An Ante-chamber in the Palace. 

Enter the. Lord Chamberlain, reading this letter. 

Cham. ' My lord, — The horses your lordship sent 
for, with all the care I had, I saw well chosen, 
ridden, and furnished. They were young, and 
handsome, and of the best breed in the Xorth. 
When they were ready to set out for London, a 
man of my Lord Cardinal's, by commission and 
main power, took 'em from me, with this reason, — 
his master would be served before a Subject, if not 
before the King ; which stopped our mouths, sir.' 
I fear, he will, indeed ; well, let him have them : 
He will have all, I think. 

Enter the Dukes o/TSobeolk and Suffolk. 

Nor. Well met, my Lord Chamberlain. 

Cham. Good day to both your graces. 

Suf. How is the King employed 1 

Cham. I left him private, 



Scone 2.] 



KING HENRY VIII. 85 



Full of sad thoughts and troubles. 

Xor. What's the cause? 

nn. It seems, the marriage with his brother's 
wife 
Has crept too near his conscience. 

Suf. No, his conscience 

Has crept too near another lady. 

Nor. 'T is so. 

This is the Cardinal's doing, the King-Cardinal : 
That blind priest, like the eldest son of Fortune, 
Turns what he list. The King will know him one 
day. 
Suf. Tray God, he do; he'll never know him- 
self else. 
Xor. How holily he works in all his business ! 
And with what zeal ! for now he has cracked the 

league 
Eetween us and the Emperor, the Queen's great- 
nephew, 
He dives into the King 's soul ; and there scatters 
Dangers, doubts, wringing of the conscience. 
Fears, and despairs,— and all these for his marriage : 
And out of all these to restore the King, 
He counsels a divorce ; a loss of her 
That like a jewel has hung twenty years 
About his neck, yet never lost her lustre ; 



86 KING HENRY VIII. [Act II 

Of her that loves him with that excellence 
That angels love good men with ; even of her 
That, when the greatest stroke of fortune falls, 
Will bless the King : — and is not this course pious 1 

Cham. Heaven keep me from such counsel ! 
'T is most true 
These news are everywhere ; every tongue speaks 

them, 
And every true heart weeps for 't. All, that dare 
Look into these affairs, see this main end, — 
The French king's sister. Heaven will one day 

open 
The King's eyes, that so long have slept upon 
This bold bad man. 

Suf. And free us from his slavery. 

Nor. We had need pray, 
And heartily, for our deliverance ; 
Or this imperious man will work us all 
From princes into pages. All men's honours 
Lie like one lump before him, to be fashioned 
[nto what pitch he please. 

Suf. For me, my lords, 

I love him not, nor fear him ; there 's my creed. 
As I am made without him, so I '11 stand, 
If the King please : his curses and his blessing- 
Touch me alike, they 're breath I not believe in. 



Scene 2.] KING HENRY VIII. 87 

I knew him, and I know him ; so I leave him 
To him that made him proud, the Pope. 

Xor. Let 's in ; 

And with*some other business put the King 
From these sad thoughts, that work too much upon 

him. — 
My lord, you '11 bear us company ? 

Cham. Excuse me ; 

The King hath sent me otherwhere : besides, 
You '11 find a most unfit time to disturb him : 
Health to your lordships. 

Nor. Thanks, my good Lord Chamberlain. 

[E.'-it Lord Chamberlain. 

Norfolk opens a folding door. The King is dis- 
covered sitting, and reading pensively. 

Suf. How sad he looks : sure, he is much 
afflicted. 

K. Hen. Who is there 1 Ha ! 

Nor. 'Pray God, he be not angry. 

K. Ben. Who 's there, I say 1 How dare you 
thrust yourselves 
Into my private meditations 1 
Who am I ? Ha ! 

Nor. A gracious King, that pardons all offences 
Malice ne'er meant : our breach of duty this way 



88 KING HEXRY VIII. [Act II. 

Is business of estate ; in which we come 
To know your royal pleasure. 

K. Hen. Ye are too bold. 

Go to ; I ; 11 make ye know your times of business : 
Is this an hour for temporal affairs ] Ha ! — 

Enter Wolsey and Campeius. 

Who 's there 1 — My good lord Cardinal ? 0, my 

Wolsey, 
The quiet of my wounded conscience ; 
Thou art a cure lit for a King. — [To Campeius.] 

You 're welcome. 
Most learned Reverend Sir, into our kingdom ; 
Use us, and it : — [To Wolsey.] My good lord, 

have great care 
I be not found a talker. 

Wol. Sir, you cannot. — 

I would, your grace would give us but an hour 
Of private conference. 

K. H'-n. [To Norfolk and Suffolk.] "We are 

busy. Go ! 
Nor. [Aside to Suffolk.] This priest has no 
pride in him 1 

Syf. [Aside to Norfolk.] ZSTot to speak of. 
I would not be so sick though for his place : 
But this cannot continue. 



Scene 2.] KING HENRY VIII. 89 

Xor. [Aside to Suffolk.] If it do, 
I '11 venture one have-at-him. 

Suf. [Aside to Norfolk.] I another 

[Exeunt Norfolk and Suffolk. 

WoL Your grace has given a precedent of wisdom 
Above all princes, in committing freely 
Your scruple to the voice of Christendom. 
Who can be angry now ? what envy reach you ? 
The Spaniard, tied by blood and favour to her, 
Must now confess, if they have any goodness, 
The trial just and noble. All the clerks, 
I mean the learned ones, in Christian kingdoms, 
Have their free voices ; Rome, the nurse of judg- 
ment, 
Invited by your noble self, hath sent 
One general tongue unto us, this good man, 
This just and learned priest. Cardinal Campeius, 
Whom once more I present unto your highness. 

K. Hen. And once more in mine arms I bid him 
welcome, 
And thank the holy conclave for their loves : 
They have sent me such a man I would have 
wished for. 

Cam. Your grace must needs deserve all 
strangers' loves, 
You are so noble. To vour highness 1 hand 



90 KING HENRY Till. [Aet II 

I tender my commission, by whose virtue — 
The court of Rome commanding — you, my Lord 
Cardinal of York, are joined with me, their servant, 
In the impartial judging of this business. 

A'. Hen. Two equal men. The Queen shall be 
acquainted 
Forthwith for what you come. — Where 's Gar- 
diner ! — 
Wol. I know, your majesty has always loved her 
So dear in heart, not to deny her that 
A woman of less place might ask by law, 
Scholars allowed freely to argue for her. 

K. Hen. Ay. and the best she shall have ; and 
my favour 
To him that does best : God forbid else. — Cardinal, 
Pr'ythee, call Gardiner to me, my new secretary : 
I nnd him a lit fellow. [Exit Wolset. 

Re-enter Wolsey with Gardiner. 

Wol. Give me your hand ; much joy and favour 
to you : 
You are the King's now. 

Gard. But to be commanded 

For ever by your grace, whose hand has raised me. 
K. Hen. Come hither, Gardiner. 

[They converge "part. — 



Scene 2. j KING HENRY VIII. 91 

Cam. My Lord of York, was not one Doctor 
Pace 

In this man's place before him ? 

Wol. Yes, he was. 

Cam. Was he not held a learned man ] 
Wol. Yes, surely. 

Cam. Believe me, there's an ill opinion spread, 
then, 
Even of yourself, Lord Cardinal. 

Wol. How ! of me 1 

Cam. They will not stick to say. you envied him, 
And, fearing he would rise, he was so virtuous, 
Kept him a foreign man still ; which so grieved 

him, 
That he ran mad, and died. 

Wol. Heaven's peace be with him ! 

That 's Christian care enough : for living mur- 

murers 
There 's places of rebuke. He was a fool ; 
For he would needs be virtuous : that good fellow, 
If I command him, follows my appointment : 
I will have none so near else. Learn this, 

brother, 
We live not to be griped by meaner persons. — 
A'. Hen. Deliver this with modesty to the 
Queen. [Exit Gardiner. — 



92 KING HENRY VIII. [Actll. 

The most convenient place that I can think of, 
For such receipt of learning, is Black-Friars : 
There ye shall meet about this weighty busi- 
ness : — 
My Wolsey, see it furnished : — O my lord, 
Would it not grieve an able man, to leave 
."So sweet a bedfellow 1 But, conscience, con- 
science, — ■ 
O ! 'tis a tender place 1 and I must leave her. 

[Exeunt. 



Scene III. — An Ante-chamber in the Queen's 
Apartments. 

Enter Anne Bullen and an Old Lady. 

Anne. Xot for that neither: here's the pang 
that pinches : 
His highness having lived so long with her, and 

she 
So good a lady, that no tongue could ever 
Pronounce dishonour of her. — by my life, 
She never knew harm-doing, — O, now, after 
So many courses of the sun enthroned, 
Still growing in majesty and pomp, the which 
To leave 's a thousand-fold more bitter than 
T is sweet at first to acquire, — after this process, 



Scene 3.] KING HENRY VIII. 93 

To give her the a vaunt ! it is a pity 
Would move a monster. 

Old L. Hearts of most hard temper 

Melt and lament for her. 

A ane. O, God's will ! much better, 

She ne'er had known pomp : though 't be tem- 
poral, 
Yet, if that quarrel, fortune, do divorce 
It from the bearer, 't is a sufferance panging 
As soul and body's severing. 

Old L. Alas, poor lady • 

She 's a stranger now again. 

Anne. So much the more 

Must pity drop upon her. Verily, 
I swear, 't is better to be lowly born, 
And range with humble livers in content, 
Than to be perked up in a glistering giief, 
And wear a golden sorrow. 

Old L. Our content 

Is our best having. 

Anne. By my troth and maidenhead, 

I would not be a Queen. 

Old L. Beshrew me, I would, 

And venture maidenhead for 't ; and so would you, 
For all this spice of your hypocrisy. 
You, that have so fair parts of woman on you, 



94 KING HENRY VIII. r Act II. 

Have too a woman's heart ; which ever yet 

Affected eminence, wealth, sovereignty; 

Which, to say sooth, are blessings, and which 

gifts — 
Saving your mincing — the capacity 
Of your soft cheveril conscience would receive, 
If you might please to stretch it. 

Anne. Nay, good troth, — 

Old L. Yes, troth, and troth ; — you would not 
be a Queen \ 

Ann-. No, not for all the riches under heaven. 

Old L. 'T is strange : a three-pence bowed would 
hire me, 
Old as I am, to queen it. But, I pray you, 
What think you of a Duchess ] have you limbs 
To bear that load of title ! 

Anne. Xo, in truth. 

Old L Then you are weakly made. Pluck o:i 
a little : 
I would not be a young Count in your way, 
For more than blushing comes to. If your back 
Cannot vouchsafe this burden, 't is too weak 
Ever to get a boy. 

Anne. How you do talk ! 

I swear again, I would not be a Queen 
For all the world. 



Scene 3.] KING HENRY VII :. 95 

Old L. In faith, for little England 

You 'd venture an emballing : T myself 
Would for Carnarvonshire, although there 'longed 
No more to the Crown but that. Lo, who comes 
here 1 

Enter the Lord Chamberlain. 

Cham. Good morrow, ladies; what were it 
worth to know 
The secret of your conference 1 

Anne. My good lord, 

Not vour demand ; it values not vour asking : 
Our mistress' sorrows we were pitying. 

Cham. It was a orentle business, and becoming 
The action of good women ; there is hope 
All will be well. 

Anne. Now, I pray God, Amen ! 

Cham. You bear a gentle mind, and heavenly 
blessings 
Follow such creatures. That you may, fair lady, 
Perceive I speak sincerely, and high note 's 
Ta'en of your many virtues, the King's Majesty 
Commends his good opinion of you to you, and 
Does purpose honour to you no less flowing 
Than Marchioness of Pembroke ; to which title 
A thousand pound a year, annual support 



06 KING HENRY VIII. |Act II. 

Out of his grace he adds. 

Anne. I do not know, 

What kind of my obedience I should tender ; 
More than my all, is nothing ; nor my prayers 
Are not words duly hallowed ; nor my wishes 
More worth than empty vanities : yet prayers, and 

wishes 
Are all I can return. 'Beseech your lordship, 
Vouchsafe to speak my thanks, and my obedience, 
As from a blushing handmaid, to his highness, 
Whose health and royalty I pray for. 

Cham. Lady, 

I shall not fail to approve the fair conceit 
The King hath of you. — [^l^'t/e.] I have perused 

her well : 
Beauty and honour in her are so mingled, 
That they have caught the King : and who knows 

yet 
But from this lady may proceed a gem 
To lighten all this isle >.— [To her.] I'll to the 

King, 
And say, I spoke with you. 

Anne. My honoured lord. 

[Exit Lord Chamberlain. 

Old L. Why, this it is j see, see ! 
I have been begging sixteen years in court, 



Scene 3. J KING HENRY VIII. 97 

Am yet a courtier beggarly, nor could 

Come pat betwixt too early and too late 

For any suit of pounds ; and you, O fate ! 

A very fresh-fish here, lie, fie, upon 

This compelled fortune ! have your mouth filled 

up, 
Before you open it. 

Anne. This is strange to me. 

Old L. How tastes it ? Is it bitter? Forty pence, 
no. 
There was a lady once, 'tis an old stoiy, 
That would not be a Queen, that would she not, 
For all the mud in Egypt :— have you heard it 1 
Anne. Come, you are pleasant. 
Old L. With your theme, I could 

O'ermount the lark. The Marchioness of Pem- 
broke ! 
A thousand pounds a year, — for pure respect ! 
No other obligation ! By my life, 
That promises more thousands : Honour's train 
Is louger than his foreskirt. By this time, 
I know, your back will bear a Duchess : — say, 
Are you not stronger than you were 1 

Anne. Good lady, 

Make yourself mirth with your particular fancy, 
And leave me out on 't. 'Would I had no being, 
d— 63 



98 KING HENRY VIII. [Act IL. 

If this salute my blood a jot : it faints me, 
To think what follows. 
The Queen is comfortless, and we forgetful 
In our long absence. Pray, do not deliver 
What here you Ve heard, to her. 

Old L. What do you think me ? 

[Exeunt. 



Scene IV. — A Hall in Blackfriars. 

Trumpets, sennet, and cornets. Enter two Vergers, 
with short silver wands; next them, tioo Scribes, in 
the habit of Doctors : after them, the Archbishop of 
Canterbury alone; after him, the Bishops of Lin- 
coln, Ely, Rochester, and .Saint Asaph : next 
tliem, with some small distance, follows a Gentle- 
man bearing the Purse, with the great Seal, and 
a Cardinal 's Hat : then two Priests, bearing each 
a silver cross; then a Gentleman-Usher bare- 
headed, accompanied with a Sergeant -at- Arms, 
bearing a Silver Mace ; then two Gentlemen bear- 
ing two great Silver Pillars : after them, side by 
side, the two Cardinals. Two Noblemen with the 
Sword and Mace. Hie King takes place under the 
Cloth of State ; tlte two Cardinals sit under him 
as Judges. The Queen takes place at some 



^Mi] KING HENRY VIII. $$ 

distancefrom the King. Th i Bishops place them- 
selves on each side the Court, in manner of a 
Consistory ; below them, the Scribes. The Lords 
sit next the Bishops. The rest of the Attendant* 
I in convenient order about the Stage. 

WoL Whilst our Commission from Rome is 
read, 
Let silence be commanded. 

K. Hen. What 's the need] 

It hath already publicly been rend, 
And on all sides the authority allowed ; 
You may then spare that time. 

n' /. Be 't so. — Proceed. 

Scribe. Say, Henry King of England, come into 
the Court. 

Crier. Henry King of England, <fec. 
A'. Hen. Here. 

Scribe. Say, Katharine Queen of England, come 
into the Court, 

Crier. Katharine Queen of England, kc. 

[The Queen makes no answer, rises out of her 

chair, yoes about tlie court, comes to the 

King, and kneels at his feet ; then speaks. 

Q. Kath. Sir, I desire you do me right and 

justice, 



100 KIXG HESKY VIII. [Act II. 

And to bestow your pity on me ; for 

I am a most poor woman, and a stranger, 

Born out of your dominions ; having here 

Xo judge indifferent, nor no more assurance 

Of equal friendship and proceeding. Alas, sir, 

In what have I offended you ? what cause 

Hath my behaviour given to your displeasure, 

That thus you should proceed to put me off, 

And take your good grace from me 1 Heaven 

witness, 
I have been to you a true and humble wife, 
At all times to your will conformable : 
Ever in fear to kindle your dislike, 
Yea, subject to your countenance, glad, or sorry, 
As I saw it inclined. When was the hour 
I ever contradicted your desire, 
Or made it not mine too ? Which of your 

friends 
Have I not strove to love, although I knew 
He were mine enemy \ What friend of mine, 
That had to him derived your anger, did I 
Continue in my liking ? nay, gave notice 
He was from thence discharged. Sir, call to mind 
That I have been your wife, in this obedience, 
Upward of twenty years, and have been blest 
With many children by you. If, in the course 



Scene*.] SING HENRY VIII. 101 

And process of this time, you can report, 
And prove it too, against mine honour aught, 
My bond to wedlock, or my love and duty 
Against your sacred person, in God's name 
Turn me away ; and let the foul'st contempt 
Shut door upon me, and so give me up 
To the sharpest kind of justice. Please you, sir, 
The king, your father, was reputed for 
A prince most prudent, of an excellent 
And unmatched wit and judgment : Ferdinand, 
My father, King of Spain, was reckoned one 
The wisest prince that there had reigned by manv 
A year before : it is not to be questioned 
That they had gathered a wise council to them 
Of every realm, that did debate this business, 
Who deemed our marriage lawful. Wherefore I 

humbly 
Beseech you, sir, to spare me, till I may 
Be by my friends in Spain advised, whose counsel 
I will implore. If not, i' the name of God, 
Your pleasure be fulfilled. 

W6L You have here, lady, — 

And of your choice — these reverend fathers ; men 
Of singular integrity and learning, 
Y r ea, the elect of the land, who are assembled 
To plead your cause. It shall be therefore bootless, 



102 KING HENRY VIII. [Act IL 

That longer you desire the Court, as welJ 
For your own quiet, as to rectify 
What is unsettled in the King. 

Cam. His grace 

Hath spoken well, and justly : therefore, madam, 
It 's fit this Royal Session do proceed, 
And that, without delay, their arguments 
Be now produced and heard. 

Q. Kath. Lord Cardinal, 

To you I speak. 

WoL Your pleasure, madam 1 

Q. Kath. Sir, 

I am about to weep j but, thinking that 
We are a Queen, or long have dreamed so, certain 
The daughter of a King, my drops of tears 
I '11 turn to sparks of fire. 

WoL Be patient yet. 

Q. Kath. I will, when you are humble ; nay, 
before, 
Or God will punish me. I do believe, 
Induced by potent circumstances, that 
You are mine enemy ; and make my challenge 
You shall not be my judge. For it is you 
Have blown this coal betwixt my lord and me, 
Which God's dew quench. — Therefore, I say again, 
I utterly abhor, yea, from my soul 



Scene 4.] KING HENRY VIII. 103 

Refuse, you for my judge, whom, yet once, more, 
I hold my most malicious foe, and think not 
At all a friend to tnith. 

Wol. I do profess 

You speak not like yourself ; who ever yet 
Have stood to charity, and displayed the effects 
Of disposition gentle, and of wisdom 
O'ertopping woman's power. Madam, you do me- 

wrong : 
I have no spleen against you ; nor injustice 
For you, or any : how far I have proceeded, 
Or how far further shall, is warranted 
By a Commission from the Consistory, 
Yea, the whole Consistory of Rome. You charge 

me, 
That I have blown this coal : I do deny it. 
The King is present : if it be known to him, 
That I gainsay my deed, how may he wound, 
And worthily, my falsehood ; yea, as much 
As you have done my truth. If he know 
That I am free of your report, he knows 
I am not of your wrong. Therefore in him 
It lies to cure me ; and the cure is, to 
Remove these thoughts from you : the which 

before 
His highness shall speak in, I do beseech 



104 KING HENRY VIII. [Act II. 

You, gracious madam, to unthink your speaking, 
And to say so no more. 

Q. Kath. My lord, my lord, 

I am a simple woman, much too weak 
To oppose your cunning. Sou are meek, and 

humble- mouthed ; 
You sign your place and calling, in full seeming. 
With meekness and humility ; but your heart 
Is crammed with arrogancy, spleen, and pride. 
You have, by fortune and his highness' favours. 
Gone slightly o'er low steps, and now are mounted 
AVhere powers are your retainers ; and your words, 
Domestics to you, serve your will, as 't please 
Yourself pronounce their office. I must tell you, 
You tender more your person's honour than 
Your high profession spiritual : that again 
I do refuse you for my judge, and here, 
Before you all, appeal unto the Pope, 
To bring my whole cause 'fore his Holiness, 
And to be judged by him. 

[She curtsies to the King, and offers to depart. 

Cam. The Queen is obstinate, 

Stubborn to justice, apt to accuse it, and 
Disdainful to be tried by it : "t is not well. 
She ? s going away. 

K. Hen. Call her again. 



Scene -t.] KING HENRY VIII. l<l") 

Crier. Katharine Queen of England, come into 

the Court. 
Griffith. Madam, you are called back. 
Q.Kath. What need you note it? pray you. 
keep your way : 
When you are called, return. — Now the Lord 

help, 
They vex me past my patience ! Pray you, pass 

on : 
I will not tarry ; no, nor ever more 
Upon this business my appearance make 
In any of their Courts. 

[Exeunt Queen, Griffith, and her otfier 

Attendants. 
K. Hen. Go thy ways, Kate : 

That man i' the world who shall report he has 
A better wife, let him in nought be trusted 
For speaking false in that. Thou art, alone, 
If thy rare qualities, sweet gentleness, 
Thy meekness saint-like, wife-like government, 
Obeying in commanding, and thy parts 
Sovereign and pious else, could speak thee out, 
The Queen of earthly Queens. She 's noble born ; 
And like her true nobility she has 
Carried herself towards me. 

Wol Most gracious sir, 

* d*— G3 



106 KOTG HENRY VIII. [Act II. 

In humblest manner I require your highness. 
That it shall please you to declare, in hearing 
Of all these ears, for where I am robbed and 

bound, 
There must I be unloosed, although not there 
At once and fully satisfied, whether ever I 
Did broach this business to your highness, or 
Laid any scruple in your way, which might 
Induce you to the question on 't ? or ever 
Have to you. but with thanks to God for such 
A royal lady, spake one the least word, that might 
Be to the prejudice of her present state, 
Or touch of her good person 1 

K. Hen. My Lord Cardinal, 

I do excuse you ; yea, upon mine honour, 
I free you from ; t. You are not to be taught 
That you have many enemies, that know not 
Why they are so, but, like to village curs, 
Bark when their fellows do : by some of these 
The Queen is put in anger. You are excused : 
But will you be more justified ] you ever 
Have wished the sleeping of this business : never 
Desired it to be stirred: but oft have hindered, 

oft. 
The passages made toward it. — On my honour, 
I speak, my good Lord Cardinal, to this point 



Scene I KING HENRY VIII. 107 

And thus far clear him. Now, what moved me 

to't: 
I will he hold with time, and your attention : — 
Then, mark the inducement. Thus it came ; — give 

heed to 't. 
My conscience first received a tenderness, 
Scruple, and prick, on certain speeches uttered 
By the Bishop of Bayonne. then French am- 
bassador, 
Who had been hither sent on the debating 
A marriage 'twixt the Duke of Orleans and 
Our daughter Mary. I' the progress of this 

business, 
Ere a determinate resolution, he — 
I mean, the bishop — did require a respite, 
Wherein he might the King his Lord advertise 
Whether our daughter were legitimate, 
Respecting this our marriage with the dowager, 
Sometimes our brother's wife. This respite shook 
The bosom of my conscience, entered me, 
Yea, with a splitting power, and made to tremble 
The region of my breast ; which forced such way, 
That many mazed considering.? did throng, 
And pressed in with this caution. First, me- 

th ought, 
I stood not in the smile of Heaven, who had 



108 KING HENRY VIII. [Act II. 

Commanded nature, that my lady's womb, 

If it conceived a male child by me, should 

Do no more offices of life to 't than 

The grave does to the dead, for her male issue 

Or died where they were made, or shortly after 

This world had aired them. Hence I took a 

thought, 
This was a judgment on me, that my kingdom, 
Well worthy the best heir o' the world, should not 
Be gladded in 't by me. Then follows, that 
I weighed the danger which my realms stood in 
By this my issue's fail ; and that gave to me 
Many a groaning throe. Thus hulling in 
The wild sea of my conscience, I did steer 
Toward this remedy whereupon we are 
Now present here together ; that 's to say, 
I meant to rectify my conscience, — which 
I then did feel full sick, and yet not well, — 
By all the reverend fathers of the land, 
And doctors learned. First, I began in private 
With you, my Lord of Lincoln ; you remember 
How under my oppression I did reek, 
When I first moved you. 

Lin. Very well, my liege. 

K. Hen. I have spoke long ; be pleased yourself 
to say 



Scene-*.] KING HENRY VIII. 109 

How far you satisfied me. 

Lin. So please your highness, 

The question did at first so stagger me, — 
Bearing a state of mighty moment in 't, 
And consequence of dread, — that I committed 
The daring'st counsel which I had, to doubt, 
And did entreat your highness to this course, 
Which you are running here. 

K. Hen. I then moved you, 

My Lord of Canterbury, and got your leave 

To make this present summons. — Unsolicited 

I left no reverend person in this Court ; 

But by particular consent proceeded, 

Under your hands and seals : therefore, go on : 

For no dislike i' the world against the person 

Of the good Queen, but the sharp thorny points 

Of my alleged reasons drive this forward. 

Prove but our marriage lawful, by my life 

And kingly dignity, we are contented 

To wear our mortal state to come with her, 

Katharine our Queen, before the primest creature 

That 's paragoned o' the world. 

Cam 80 please your highness, 

The Queen being absent, 't is a needful fitness 

That we adjourn this Court till further day : 

Meanwhile must be an earnest motion 



110 KING HENRY VIII [Act III. 

Made to the Queen, to call back her appeal 
She intends unto his Holiness. 

K. Hen. [Aside.] I may perceive, 

These Cardinals trine with me : I abhor 
This dilatory sloth, and tricks of Rome. 
My learned and well-beloved servant, Cranmer, 
Pr'ythee, return : with thy approach, I know, 
My comfort comes along. — Break up the Court : 
I say, set on. [Exeunt, in manner as they entered. 



ACT III. 

Scene I. — London. The Palace at Bridewell 
A Room in the Queers Apartment. 

The Queen, and, her Women^ at Work. 

Q. Kath. Take thy lute, wench : my soul grows 
.sad with troubles ; 
Sing, and disperse 'em, if thou canst. Leave 
working. 

Song. 
Orpheus with his lute made trees, 
And the mountain-tops that freeze, 
Bow themselves, when he did sing • 



1.] KING HENRY Till. Ill 

To his music plants, and flowers 
Ever sprung j as sun ami showers 
There had mad" a lasting spring. 

Evi i '/thing that heard him play, 
Even the billows of the sea, 

Bang their heads, and then lay by. 
hi sweet music is such art, 
Killing care and grief of heart 

Fall asleep, or, hearing, die. 



Enter a Gentleman. 

Q. Kath. How now ] 

Gent An 't please your grace, the two great 
Cardinals 
Wait in the presence. 

Q. Kath. Would they speak with me ? 

Gent. They willed me say so, madam. 

Q. Kath. Pray their graces 

To come near. [Exit Gentleman.] What can be 

their business 
With me, a poor weak woman, fallen from favour 1 
I do not like their coming, now I think on 't. 
They should be good men ; their affairs as righteous : 
But all hoods make not monks. 



112 KING HEXRY VIII. [Act III. 

Enter "Wolsey and Campeius. 

M'ol. Peace to your highness ! 

Q. Kath. Your graces find me here part of a 
housewife : 
I would be all, against the worst may happen. 
What are your pleasure* with me, reverend lords 1 

Wol. May it please you, noble madam, to with- 
draw 
Into your private chamber, we shall give you 
The full cause of our coming. 

Q. Kath. Speak it here. 

There 's nothing I have done yet, o' my conscience, 
Deserves a corner : 'would all other women 
Could speak this with as free a soul as I do ! 
My lords, I care not, — so much I am happy 
Above a number, — if my actions 
"Were tried by every tongue, every eye saw them, 
Envy and base opinion set against 'em, 
I know my life so even. If your business 
Seek me out, and that way I am wife in, 
Out with it boldly : truth loves open dealing. 

WoL Tanta est erga te -mentis integritas, Regina 
Serenissima, — 

Q. Kaih. O, good my lord, no Latin : 
I am not such a truant since my coming, 



Sceuel.] KING HENRY VIII. 113 

A* not to know the language I have lived in : 
A strange tongue makes my cause more strange- 
suspicious ; 
Pray, speak in English. Here are some will thank 

you, 
I£ you speak truth, for their poor mistress' sake . 
Believe me, she has had much wrong. Lord 

Cardinal, 
The willing'st sin I ever yet committed 
May he absolved in English. 

WoL Xoble lady, 

I am sorry, my integrity should breed — 
And service to his Majesty and you — 
So deep suspicion where all faith was meant. 
We come not by the way of accusation, 
To taint that honour every good tongue bles 
Nor to betray you any way to sorrow ; 
You have too much, good lady ; but to know 
How you stand minded in the weighty difference 
Between the King and you, and to deliver 
Like free and honest men, our just opinions, 
And comforts to your cause. 

Cam. Most honoured madam, 

My Lord of York, — out of his noble nature, 
Zeal and obedience he still bore your grace, 
Forgetting, like a good man, your late censure 



114 KING HENRY VIII. [Act HI. 

Both of his truth and him, which was too far, — 
Offers, as I do, in a sign of peace, 
His service and his counsel. 

Q. Kath. \Aside.\ To betray me. — 

My lords, I thank you both for your good wills, 
Ye speak like honest men. — pray (rod. ye prove 

so ! 
But how to make ye suddenly an answer, 
In such a point of weight, so near mine honour, — 
More near my life, I fear, — with ray weak wit, 
And to such men of gravity and learning, 
In truth, I know not. I was set at work 
Among my maids ; full little, God knows, looking 
Either for such men, or such business. 
For her sake that I have been, for I feel 
The last tit of my greatness, good your graces, 
Let me have time and counsel for my cause. 
Alas, I am a woman, friendless, hopeless. 

Wol. Madam, you wrong the King's love with 
these fears : 
Your hopes and friends are inrinite. 

Q. Kath, In England 

But little for my profit. Can you think, lords, 
That any Englishman dare give me counsel ] 
Or be a known friend, 'gainst his highness' plea- 
sure, — 



Sceuel.J KING HENRY VIII. 115 

Though he be grown so desperate to be honest, — 
And live a subject ') Nay, forsooth ; my friends, 
They that must weigh out my afflictions, 
They that my trust must grow to, live not here : 
They are, as all my other comforts, far hence, 
In mine own country, lords. 

Cam. I would, your grace 

Would leave your griefs, and take my counsel. 

Q. Kath. How, sir 1 

Cam. Put your main cause into the King's pro- 
tection ; 
He \s loving, and most gracious. 'T will be much 
Both for your honour better, and your cause : 
For if the trial of the law o'ertake ye, 
You '11 part away disgraced. 

WoL He tells you rightly. 

Q. Kath. Ye tell me what ye wish for both,— 
my ruin. 
Is this your Christian counsel ? out upon ye ! 
Heaven is above all yet ; there sits a Judge 
That no King can corrupt. 

Cam. Your rage mistakes us. 

Q. Kath, The more shame for ye ! holy men I 
thought ye, 
Upon my soul, two reverend cardinal virtues; 
But cardinal sins, and hollow hearts, I fear ye. 



116 KIXG HENRY VIII. [Act HI. 

Mend them, for shame, my lords. Is this your 

comfort 1 
The cordial that ye bring a wretched lady ? 
A woman lost among ye, laughed at, scorned? 
I will not wish ye half my miseries, 
I have more charity ; but say, I warned ye : 
Take heed, for Heaven's sake, take heed, lest at 

once 
The burden of my sorrows fall upon ye. 

Wol. Madam, this is a mere distraction ; 
You turn the good we offer into envy. 

Q. Kath. Ye turn me into nothing. "Woe upon 

And all such false professors ! Would you have 

me — 
If you have any justice, any pity, 
If ye be anything but churchmen's habits — 
Put my sick cause into his hands that hates 

me i 
Alas, he has banished me his bed already ; 
His love, too long ago : I am old, my lords, 
And all the fellowship I hold now with him 
Is only my obedience. ^Yhat can happen 
To me, above this wretchedness ? all your studies 
Make me a curse, like this. 

Cam. Y r our fears are worse. 



Scene 1.] KING HENRY VIII. 117 

Q. Kath. Have I lived thus long— let me speak 
myself, 
Since virtue finds no friends — a wife, a true one % 
A woman — I dare say, without vain-glory — 
Never yet branded with suspicion ? 
Have I with all my full affections 
Still met the King ? loved him next Heaven \ 

obeyed him ? 
Been, out of fondness, superstitious to him 1 
Almost forgot my prayers, to content him ? 
And am I thus rewarded 1 ; t is not well, lords. 
Bring me a constant woman to her husband, 
One that ne'er dreamed a joy beyond his pleasure, 
And to that woman, when she has done most, 
Yet will I add an honour, — a great patience. 

Wol. Madam, you wander from the good we 

aim at. 
Q. Kath. My lord, I dare not make myself so 
guilty, 
To give up willingly that noble title 
Your master wed me to : nothing but death 
Shall e'er divorce my dignities. 

Wol. P ra y> near me - 

Q. Kath. 'Would I had never trod this English 
earth, 
Or felt the flatteries that grow upon it ! 



118 KING HENRY VIII. [Act III 

Ye have angels' faces, but Heaven knows your 

hearts. 
What will become of me now. wretched lady 1 

I am the most unhappy woman living. — 

[T'» her Women.] Alas ! poor wenches, where are 

now your fortunes 1 
Ship wrecked upon a kingdom where no pity, 
No friends, no hope, no kindred weep for me, 
Almost no grave allowed me. — Like the lily, 
That once was mistress of the field and flourished, 
I '11 hang my head, and perish. 

Wol. If your grace 

Could but be brought to know our ends are hones:. 
You 'd feel more comfort. Why should we. good 

lady. 
Upon what cause, wrong you ! alas, our places, 
The way of our profession is against it : 
We are to cure such sorrows, not to sow them. 
Ft >r goodness' sake, consider what you do ; 
How you may hurt yourself, ay. utterly 
Grow from the King's acquaintance by this car- 
riage. 
The hearts of princes kiss obedience. 
So much they love it : but to stubborn spirits 
They swell and grow as terrible as storms. 
I know you have a gentle, noble temper. 



Scene 1.] KING HENRY VIII. Ill' 

A soul as even as a calm : pray, think us 
Those we profess, peace-makers, friends, and ser- 
vants. 

Cam. Madam, you '11 find it so. You wrong 
your virtues 
With these weak women's fears : a noble spirit, 
As yours was put into you, ever casts 
Such doubts, as false coin, from it. The King 

loves you ; 
Beware, you lose it not : for us, if you please 
To trust us in your business, we are ready 
To use our utmost studies in your service. 

Q. Kath. Do what ye will, my lords : and, pray 
forgive me, 
If I have used myself unmannerly. 
You know, I am a woman, lacking wit 
To make a seemly answer to such persons. 
Pray, do my service to his Majesty : 
He has my heart yet, and shall have my prayers, 
While I shall have my life. Come, reverend 

fathers, 
Bestow your counsels on me ; she now begs, 
That little thought, when she set footing here, 
She should have bought her dignities so dear. 

\Exevnt. 



120 KING HENRY VIII. [Act III. 



Scene II. — Ante-chamber to the King's Apart- 
ment. 

Enter the Duke of Norfolk, the Duke of Suffolk, 
the Earl of Surrey, and the Lord Chamber- 
lain. 

Xor. If you will now unite in your complaints, 
And force them with a constancy, the Cardinal 
Cannot stand under them : if you omit 
The offer of this time, I cannot promise 
But that you shall sustain more new disgraces, 
With these you bear already. 

Sur. I am joyful 

To meet the least occasion that may give me 
Remembrance of my father-in-law, the Duke, 
To be revenged on him. 

Suf. Which of the peers 

Have uncontemned gone by him, or at least 
Strangely neglected 2 when did he regard 
The stamp of nobleness in any person, 
Out of himself I 

Clwm. My lords, you speak your pleasures. 
What he deserves of you and me, I know ; 
What we can do to him, — though now the time 
Gives way to us, — I much fear. If you cannot 



Scene 2. J KING HENRY VIII. 121 

is access to the King, never attempt 
Anything on him, for he hath a witchcraft 
Over the King in 's tongue. 

& '. O, fear him not; 

His spell in that is out : the King hath found 
Matter against him that for ever mars 
The honey of his language. No, he s settled, 
Not to come off, in his displeasure. 

SW. Sir, 

I should be glad to hear such news as this 
Once every hour. 

Nor, Believe it, this is true. 

In the divorce, his contrary proceedings 
Are all unfolded ; wherein he appears 
As I would wish mine enemy. 

S"i'. How came 

His practices to light ? 

Suf. Most strangely. 

> s '"/'. O, how? how? 

Suf. The Cardinal's letter to the Pope miscar- 
ried, 
And came to the eye o' the King; wherein was 

read, 
How that the Cardinal did entreat His Holiness 
To stay the judgment o' the divorce ; for if 
It did take place, ' I do,' quoth he, ' perceive, 



122 KING HENRY VIII. [Act IH 

My King is tangled in affection to 

A creature of the Queens, Lady Anne Bullen.' 

Sur. Has the King this ? 

Suf. Believe it. 

Sur. Will this work 1 

Cham. The King in this perceives him, how he 
coasts, 
And hedges his own way. But in this point 
All his tricks founder, and he brings his physic 
After his patient's death : the King already 
Hath married the fair lady. 

Sur. 'Would he had ! 

Suf. May you be happy in your wish, my lord ; 
For, I profess, you have 5 t. 

Sur. 2s o\v all my joy 

Trace the conjunction ! 

Suf. My Amen to 't ! 

Nor. All men's. 

Suf. There 's order given for her coronation : 
Marry, this is yet but young, and may be left 
To some ears unrecounted. — But, my lords, 
She is a gallant creature, and complete 
In mind and feature : I persuade me, from her 
Will fall some blessing to this land, which shall 
In it be memorized. 

Sur. But, will the King 



Scene 2.] KING HENRY VIII. 123 

Digest this letter of the Cardinal's '! 
The Lord forbid ! 

X<>,-. Marry, Amen ! 

Suf. No, no : 

There be moe wasps that buzz about his nose, 
Will make this sting the sooner. Cardinal 

Canipeius 
Is stolen away to Rome ; hath ta'en no leave j 
Has left the cause o' the King unhandled, and 
Is posted, as the agent of our Cardinal, 
To second all his plot, I do assure you, 
The King cried, ' Ha ! ' at this. 

Cham. Now, God incense him, 

And let him cry, ' Ha ! ' louder ! 

Xor. But, my lord, 

^Yhen returns Cranmer 1 

.3'"/! He is returned, in his opinions, which 
Have satisfied the King for his divorce, 
Together with all famous colleges 
Almost in Christendom. Shortly, I believe, 
His second marriage shall be published, and 
Her coronation. Katharine no more 
Shall be called Queen, but Princess Dowager, 
And widow to Prince Arthur. 

Xor. This same Cranmer 's 

A worthy fellow, and hath ta'en much pain 



124 KING HENRY VIII. [Act III. 

In the King's business. 

Suf. He has : and we shall see him 

For it an Archbishop. 

Nor* So I hear. 

Suf. T is so. 

The Cardinal— 

Enter WoLSKY and Cromwell. 

Nor. Observe, observe ; he 's moody. 

Wol. The packet, Cromwell, 
Gave 't you the King ? 

Cram, To his own hand, in 's bedchamber. 

WoJ. Looked he o' tlr inside of the papers? 

Cram. Presently 

He did unseal them, and the first he viewed, 
He did it with a serious mind : a heed 
Was in his countenance. You he bade 
Attend him here this morning. 

Wol. Is he ready x 

To come abroad ? 

Cram. I think, by this he is. 

TTV. Leave me awhile. — 

[Exit Cromwell 
It shall be to the Duchess of Alen^on, 
The French King's sister : he shall many her. — 
Anne Bullen '( So ; I '11 no Anne Bullens for 
him : 



Scene 2.] KING HENRY VIII. 125 

There 's more in 't than fair visage. — Bull en ! 
No, we 11 no Bullens. — Speedily I wish 
To hear from Borne. — The Marchioness of Pem- 
broke ! — 

Nor. He 's discontented. 

Suf. May be, he hears the King 

Does whet his anger to him. 

Sur. Sharp enough, 

Lord, for thy justice ! — 

Wol. The late Queen's gentlewoman, a knight's 

daughter, 

To be her mistress' mistress ! the queen's queen ! — 

This candle burns not clear : 't is I must snuff it ; 

Then, out it goes. — What though I know her 

virtuous, 
And well deserving 1 yet I know her for 
A spleeny Lutheran ; and not wholesome to 
Our cause, that she should lie i' the bosom of 
Our hard-ruled King. Again, there is sprung up 
An heretic, an arch one, Cranmer ; one 
Hath crawled into the favour of the King, 
And is his oracle. 

Nor. He 's vexed at something. 

Svf. I would, 't were something that would fret 
the string, 
The master-cord on 's heart ! 



126 KING HENRY VIII. [Act m. 

Enter the King, reading a schedule ; and Lovell. 

Suf. The King, the King ! 

K. Hen. What piles of wealth hath he accu- 
mulated 

To his own portion ! and what expense by the 
hour 

Seems to flow from him ! How, i' the name of 
thrift, 

Does he rake this together ? — Now, my lords, 

Saw you the Cardinal ! 

Xor. My lord, we have 

Stood here observing him. Some strange com- 
motion 

Is in his brain : he bites his lip, and starts; 

Stops on a sudden, looks upon the ground, 

Then lays his finger on his temple ; straight, 

Springs out into fast gait : then stops again, 

Strikes his breast hard ; and anon, he casts 

His eye against the moon : in most strange 
postures 

We have seen him set himself. 

K. Hen. It may well be : 

There is a mutiny in 's mind. This morning 

Papers of state he sent me to peruse. 

As I required ; and wot you what I found 



Scene 1] king henry nil. 127 

There, on my conscience, put unwittingly? 
Forsooth an inventory, thus importing. — 
The several parcels of hi?, plate, his treasure, 
Rich stuns, and ornaments of household, which 
I find at such proud rate, that it outspeaks 
Possession of a subject, 

Nor. It's Heaven's will: 

Some spirit put this paper in the packet, 
To bless your eye withal. 

K. Hen. If we did think 

His contemplation were above the earth, 
And fixed on spiritual object, he should still 
Dwell in his musings : but, I am afraid, 
His thinkings are below the moon, not worth 
His serious considering. 

[He takes his seat, and whispers Lovell, who 

goes to Wolsey. 

Wol. Heaven forgive me ! — 

Ever God bless your highness ! 

A'. Hen. Good my lord, 

You are full of heavenly stuff, and bear the 

inventory 
Of vour best graces in your mind : the which 
You were now running o'er : you have scarce 

time 
To steal from spiritual leisure a brief span 



12S KIXG HENRY VIII. [Act IIL 

To keep your earthly audit. Sure, in that 
I deem you an ill husband, and am glad 
To have you therein my companion. 

Wol Sir, 

For holy offices I have a time ; a time 
To think upon the part of business, which 
I bear i' the state ; and nature does require 
Her times of preservation, which, perforce, 
I, her frail son, amongst my brethren mortal, 
Must give my tendance to. 

K. Hen. You have said well. 

Wol. And ever may your highness yoke together, 
As I will lend you cause, my doing well 
With my well-saying ! 

K. Hen. "T is well said again; 

And *t is a kind of good deed, to say well : 
And yet words are no deeds. 31 y father loved 

you ; 
He said he did, and with his deed did crown 
His word upon you. Since I had my office, 
I have kept you next my heart ; have not alone 
Employed you where high profits might come 

home, 
But pared my present havings, to bestow 
My bounties upon you. 

Wol [Aside.] What should this mean 1 



Scene 2.] KING HENRY VIII. 129 

Sw. [Aside, to the others.] The Lord increase 
this business ! 

K. Hen. Have I not made you 

The prime man of the State 1 I pray you, tell 

rne, 
If what I now pronounce you have found true : 
And, if you may confess it, say withal, 
If you are bound to us, or no. What say you ? 

Wol. My sovereign, I confess, your royal graces, 
Showered on me daily, have been more than 

could 
My studied purposes requite ; which went 
Beyond all man s endeavours : my endeavours 
Have ever come too short of my desires, 
Yet hied with my abilities. Mine own ends 
Have been mine so, that evermore they pointed 
To the good of your most sacred person and 
The profit of the state. For your great graces 
Heaped upon me, poor undeserver, I 
Can nothing render but allegiant thanks, 
My prayers to Heaven for you, my loyalty, 
Which ever has, and ever shall be growing, 
Till death, that winter, kill it. 

K, Hen. Fairly answered ; 

A loyal and obedient subject is 
Therein illustrated. The honour of it 
e— G3 



130 KING HENRY VIII. [Act III. 

Does pay the act of it, as, i' the contrary, 
The foulness is the punishment. I presume, 
That, as my hand has opened bounty to you, 
My heart dropped love, my power rained honour, 

more 
On you than any ; so your hand, and heart, 
Your brain, and every function of your power. 
Should, notwithstanding that your bond of duty, 
As 't were in love's particular, be more 
To me, your friend, than any. 

W6L I do profess, 

That for your highness' good I ever laboured 
More than mine own : that am, have, and will 

be- 
Though all the world should crack their duty 

to you, 
And throw it from their soul j though perils did 
Abound, as thick as thought could make 'em. and 
Appear in forms more horrid, — yet my duty, 
As doth a rock against the chiding flood, 
Should the approach of this wild river break, 
And stand unshaken yours. 

K. Hen. 'T is nobly spoken. 

Take notice, lords, he has a loyal breast, 
For you have seen him open "t. — Read o'er this : 

[Giving him papers. 



Scene 2.] KING HENRY VIII. 131 

And, after, this : and then to breakfast with 
What appetite you have. 

[E.rif Kixg, frowning upon the Cardinal. 
The Nobles throng after him, smitirig, 
and whispering. 
WoJ. What should this mean ? 

What sudden anger 's this \ how have I reaped it 1 
He parted frowning from me, as if ruin 
Leaped from his eyes : so looks the chafed lion 
Upon the daring huntsman that has galled him ; 
Then makes him nothing. I must read this paper ; 
I fear, the story of his anger. — 'T is so : 
This paper has undone me ! — 'T is the account 
Of all that world of wealth I have drawn together 
For mine own ends ; indeed, to gain the Popedom, 
And fee my friends in Rome. negligence, 
Fit for a fool to fall by ! What cross devil 
Made me put this main secret in the packet 
I sent the King ] — Is there no way to cure this ] 
No new device to beat this from his brains I 
I know 't will stir him strongly ; — yet I know 
A way, if it take right, in spite of fortune 
Will bring me off again. — What 's this?— To the 

Pope! 
The letter, as I live, with all the business 
I writ to his Holiness. — Nay then, farewell ! 



]o2 KING HENRY VIII. [Act III 

I have touched the highest point of all my 

greatness ; 
And, from that full meridian of my glory, 
[ haste now to my setting : I shall fall 
Like a bright exhalation in the evening, 
And no man see me more. 

Re-enter the Dukes or' Norfolk and Suffolk, the 
Earl of Surrey, arid the Lord Chamberlain. 

Xor. Hear the King's pleasure, Cardinal ; who 
commands you 
To render up the Great Seal presently 
Into our hands, and to confine yourself 
To Asher House, my Lord of Winchester's, 
Till you hear further from his highness. 

Wol. Stay : 

Where 's your commission, lords ? words cannot 

carry 
Authority so weighty. 

Suf. Who dare cross 'em, 

Bearing the King's will from his mouth expressly ] 

Wol. Till I find more than will or words to 
do it, — 
I mean your malice, — know, officious lords, 
I dare, and must deny it. Now I feel 
Of what coarse metal ye are moulded, — envy. 



Scene 2.] KING HENRY VIII. 133 

How eagerly ye follow my disgraces, 

As if it fed ye ! and how sleek and wanton 

Ye appear in everything may bring my ruin ! 

Follow your envious courses, men of malice ; 

You 've Christian warrant for them, and, no doubt, 

hi time will find their fit rewards. That Seal, 

You ask with such a violence, the King — 

Mine, and your master — with his own hand 

gave me ; 
Bade me enjoy it, with the place and honours, 
During my life ; and, to confirm his goodness, 
Tied it by letters-patents : — now, who '11 take it 1 

S>n\ The King that gave it. 

Wol. It must be himself, then. 

Sur. Thou 'rt a proud traitor, priest. 

Wol. Proud lord, thou liest : 

Within these forty hours, Surrey durst better 
Have burnt that tongue than said so. 

Svnr. Thy ambition, 

Thou scarlet Sin, robbed this bewailing land 
Of noble Buckingham, my father-in-law : 
The heads of all thy brother Cardinals — 
With thee, and all thy best parts bound together — 
Weighed not a hair of his. Plague of your policy ! 
You sent me Deputy for Ireland, 
Far from his succour, from the King, from all 



134 KING HENRY VIII. [Act HI. 

That might have mercy on the fault thou gav'st 

him, 
Whilst your great goodness, out of holy pity, 
Absolved him with an axe. 

Wol. This, and all else 

This talking lord can lay upon my credit, 
I answer, is most false. The Duke by law 
Found his deserts. How innocent I was 
From any private malice in his end, 
His noble jury and foul cause can witness. 
If I loved many words, lords, I should tell you, 
You have as little honesty as honour, 
That in the way of loyalty and truth 
Toward the King, my ever royal master, 
Dare mate a sounder man than Surrey can be, 
And all that love his follies. 

Sur. By my soul, 

Your long coat, priest, protects you ; thou shouldst 

feel 
My sword i' the life-blood of thee else. — My lords, 
Can ye endure to hear this arrogance 1 ? 
And from this fellow 1 If we live thus tamely, 
To be thus jaded by a piece of scarlet, 
Farewell nobility ; let his grace go forward, 
And dare us with his cap like larks. 

WoL All goodness 



Scene 2.] 



KING HENRY VIII. 135 



Is poison to thy stomach. 

gur. Yes, that goodness 

Of gleaning all the land's wealth into one, 
Into your own hands, Cardinal, by extortion ; 
The goodness of your intercepted packets, 
Fou writ to the Pope, against the King; your 

goodness, 
Since you provoke me, shall be most notorious.— 
My Lord of Norfolk, — as you are truly noble, 
As you respect the common good, the state 
Of our despised nobility, our issues — 
Who, if he live, will scarce be gentlemen — 
Produce the grand sum of his sins, the articles 
Collected from his life :— I '11 startle you 
Worse than the sacring bell, when the brown 

wench 
Lay kissing in your arms, Lord Cardinal. 

Wol How much, methinks, I could despise 
this man, 
But that I am bound in charity against it 

Nor. Those articles, my lord, are in the King's 
hand ; 
But, thus much, they are foul ones. 

]] r l So much fairer 

And spotless shall mine innocence arise, 
When the King knows my truth. 



136 KING HENRY VIII. [Act III. 

Sur. This cannot save you : 

I thank my memory, I yet remember 

Some of these articles ; and out they shall. 
Now, if you can, blush, and cry guilty, Cardinal, 
You '11 show a little honesty. 

Wol. Speak on, sir; 

I dare your worst objections : if I blush, 
It is to see a nobleman want manners. 

Sur. I had rather want those, than my head. — 
Have at you. 
First, that without the King's assent or knowledge 
You wrought to be a Legate : by which power 
You maimed the jurisdiction of all Bishops. 

Nor. Then, that in all you writ to Rome, or else 
To foreign princes, Ego et Rex mens 
"Was still inscribed ; in which you brought the 

King- 
To be your servant. 

Suf. Then, that without the knowledge 

Either of King or Council, when you went 
Ambassador to the Emperor, you made bold 
To cany into Flanders the Great Seal. 

Sun Item, you sent a large commission 
To Gregory de Cassado, to conclude, 
Without the King's will or the State's allowance, 
A. league between his highness and Ferrara. 



Scene 2.] KING HENRY VIII. 137 

Suf. That, out of mere ambition, you have 
caused 
Your holy hat to be stamped on the King's coin. 
Sur. Then, that you have sent innumerable 
substance, — 
By what means got, I leave to your own 

conscience, — 
To furnish Rome, and to prepare the ways 
You have for dignities ; to the mere undoing 
Of all the kingdom. Many more there are ; 
Which, since they are of you, and odious, 
I will not taint my mouth with. 

■Cham. my lord, 

Press not a failing man too far ; 't is virtue : 
His faults lie open to the laws : let them, 
Not you, correct him. 3Iy heart weeps to see him 
So little of his great self. 

Sur. I forgive him. 

Si'f. Lord Cardinal, the King's further pleasure 
is,— 
Because all those things you have done of late 
By your power legatine within this kingdom, 
Fall into the compass of a Praemunire, — 
That therefore such a writ be sued against you ; 
To forfeit all your goods, lands, tenements, 
Chattels, and whatsoever, and to be 
**— 63 



1:38 ZING HENRY VIII. [Act in 

Out of the King's protection. — This is my charge. 
Xor. And so we '11 leave you to your medita- 
tions, 
How to live better. For your stubborn answer, 
About the giving back the Great Seal to us, 
The King shall know it, and, no doubt, shall thank 

you. 
So, fare you well, my little good Lord Cardinal. 

[Exeunt all but Wolsey. 
Wol. So, farewell to the little good you bear me. 
Farewell ! a long farewell, to all my greatness ! 
This is the state of man : to-day he puts forth 
The tender leaves of hope, to-morrow blossoms, 
And bears his blushing honours thick upon him : 
The third day comes a frost, a killing frost, 
And, — when he thinks, good easy man, full surely 
His greatness is a-ripening, — nips his root, 
And then he falls, as I do. I have ventured, 
Like little wanton boys that swim on bladders, 
This many summers in a sea of glory, 
But far beyond my depth : my high-blown pride 
At length broke under me, and now has left me 
Weary, and old with service, to the mercy 
Of a rude stream, that must for ever hide me. 
Vain pomp and glory of this world, I hate ye : 
I feel my heart new opened. 0, how wretched 



Scene 2.] KING HENRY VIII. 139 

Ts that poor man that hangs on princes' favours ! 
There is, betwixt that smile we would aspire to, 
That sweet aspect of princes, and their ruin. 
More pangs and fears than wars or women have ; 
And when lie falls, he falls like Lucifer, 
Never to hope again. — 

Enter Cromwell, and stands amazed. 

Why, how now, Cromwell ? 

Crom. I have no power to speak, sir. 

jy j What ! amazed 

At my misfortunes 1 can thy spirit wonder 
A great man should decline ? Nay, an you weep, 
I am fallen indeed. 

Crom. How does your grace ? 

Woi. wh y- welL 

Never so truly happy, my good Cromwell. 

I know myself now ; and I feel within me 

A peace above all earthly dignities. 

A still and quiet conscience. The King has cured 

me, 
I humbly thank his grace ; and from these 

shoulders, 
These ruined pillars, out of pity, taken 
A load would sink a navy, — too much honour. 
O, 't is a burden, Cromwell, 't is a burden, 



140 KING HENRY YIII. [Act ni. 

Too heavy for a man that hopes for heaven 

from. I am glad your grace has made that right 
use of it. 

Wol. I hope I have : I am able now, niethinks, 
Out of a fortitude of soul I feel, 
To endure more miseries, and greater far, 
Than my weak-hearted enemies dare offer. 
What news abroad ! 

Crom. The heaviest, and the worst, 

Is your displeasure with the King. 

Wol. God bless him ! 

Crom. The next is, that Sir Thomas More is 
chosen 
Lord Chancellor in your place. 

Wol. That 's somewhat sudden : 

But he 's a learned man. May he continue 
Long in his highness' favour, and do justice 
For truth's sake, and his conscience ; that his 

bones, 
When he has run his course and sleeps in blessings 
May have a tomb of orphans' tears wept on 'em ! — 
"What more I 

Crom. That Cranmer is returned with 

welcome, 
Installed Lord Archbishop of Canterbury. 

Wol. That 's news indeed. 



Scene 2.] KING HEXRY VIII. 141 

Cr> Last, that the Lady Anne-, 

Whom the King hath in secrecy long married, 
This day was viewed in open, as his Queen, 
Going to chapel ; and the voice is new 
Only about her coronation. 

Wol. There was the weight that pulled me down 

Cromwell, 
The King has gone beyond me : all my glories 
In that one woman I have lost for ever. 
No sun shall ever usher forth mine honours, 
Or gild again the noble troops that waited 
Upon my smiles. Go, get thee from me, Cromwell ; 
I am a poor fall'n man, unworthy now 
To be thy lord and master. Seek the King ; 
That sun, I pray, may never set ! I have told him 
What and how true thou art : he will advance 

thee. 
Some little memory of me will stir him — 
I know his noble nature — not to let 
Thy hopeful service perish too. Good Cromwell, 
Neglect him not ; make use now. and provide 
For thine own future safety. 

Crohi, O my lord, 

Must I then leave you ? must I needs forego 
So good, so noble, and so true a master 1 
Bear witness all that have not hearts of iron, 



142 KING HENRY VIII. [Act III 

With what a sorrow Cromwell leaves his lord. 
The King shall have my service ; but my prayers, 
For ever and for ever, shall be yours. 

WoL Cromwell, I did not think to shed a tear 
In all my miseries ; but thou hast forced me, 
Out of thy honest truth, to play the woman. 
Let 's dry our eyes : and thus far hear me, Crom- 
well : 
And — when I am forgotten, as I shall be, 
And sleep in dull cold marble, where no mention 
Of me more must be heard of — say, I taught thee, 
Say, Wolsey, — that once trod the ways of glory 
And sounded all the depths and shoals of honour, — 
Found thee a way, out of his wreck, to rise in ; 
A sure and safe one, though thy master missed it. 
Mark but my fall, and that that ruined me. 
Cromwell, I charge thee, fling away ambition : 
By that sin fell the angels ; how can man, then, 
The image of his Maker, hope to win by 't 1 
Love thyself last : cherish those hearts that hate 

thee. 
Corruption wins not more than honesty. 
Still in thy right hand carry gentle peace, 
To silence envious tongues. Be just, and fear 

not. 
Let all the ends thou aim'st at be thy country's, 



Scene 2.] KING HENRY VIII. 143 

Thy God's, and truth's : then if thou fall'st, 

Cromwell, 
Thou f: list a blessed martyr. Serve the King ; 
And — pr'ythee lead me in : 
There take an inventory of all I have, 
To the last penny ; 't is the King's : my robe, 
And my integrity to Heaven, is all 
I dare now call my own. Cromwell, Cromwell ! 
Had I but ser\ed my God with half the zeal 
I served my King, He would not in mine age 
Have left me naked to mine enemies. 

Crom. Good sir, have patience. 

Wol. So I have. Farewell 

The hopes of Court ! my hopes in Heaven do 

dwell. [Exeunt. 



ACT IV. 

Scene I. — A Street in Westminster. 
Enter two Gentlemen, meeting. 

1 Gent. You 're well met once again. 

2 Gent. So are you. 
1 Gent. You come to take your stand here, and 

behold 



144 KIXG HEXRY VIII. [Act IV. 

The Lady Anne pass from her coronation ? 

2 Gent. 5 T is all my business. At our last en- 
counter, 
The Duke of Buckingham came from his trial. 

1 Gent. 'T is very true : but that time offered 

sorrow ; 
This, general joy. 

2 Gent. 'T is well : the citizens, 

I am sure, have shown at full their royal minds — 
As, let 'em have their rights, they are ever forward — 
In celebration of this day with shows, 
Pageants, and sights of honour. 

1 Gent. Never greater ; 
Nor, I '11 assure you, better taken, sir. 

2 Gent. May I be bold to ask what that contains. 
That paper in your hand 1 

1 Gent. Yes ; 't is the list 
Of those that claim their offices this day, 

By custom of the coronation. 

The Duke of Suffolk is the first, and claims 

To be High-Steward ; next, the Duke of Norfolk, 

He to be Earl Marshal. You may read the rest. 

2 Gent. I thank you, sir : had I not known 

those customs, 
I should have been beholding to your paper. 
But, I beseech you, what 's become of Katharine, 



Scene 1.] KING HENRY VIII. 145 

The Princess Dowager? how goes her business 1 ? 

1 Gent. That I can tell you too. The Arch- 

bishop 
Of Canterbury, accompanied with other 
Learned and reverend fathers of his order, 
Held a late court at Dunstable, six miles otf 
From Ampthill, where the Princess lay ; to which 
She was often cited by them, but appeared not : 
And, to be short, for nob-appearance, and 
The King's late scruple, by the main assent 
Of all these learned men she was divorced, 
And the late marriage made of none effect : 
Since which she was removed to Kimbolton, 
Where she remains now, sick. 

2 Gent. Alas, good lady ! — [Trumpets. 
The trumpets sound : stand close, the Queen is 

coming. [Ha \ t thoys. 

THE ORDER OF THE CORONATION. 

A lively fiourish of trumpets. 

1. Tico Judges. 

2. Lord Chancellor, icith Purse and Mace before 

him. 

3. Choristers, singing. [Music. 

4. Mayor of London, bearing the Mace. Then, 



146 KING HENRY VIII. j>« rv. 

Garter in his coat of arms, and on his 
head a gilt copper crown. 

5. Marquess Dorset, bearing a Sceptre of Gold ; 

on his head a demi-coronal of Gold. 
With him the Earl of Surrey, bearing 
the Rod of Silver with the Dove, crowned 
with an Earl's Coronet. Collars of SS. 

6. Duke of Suffolk, in his robe of estate, his 

Coronet on his head, bearing a long white 
wand, as High-Steward. With him, the 
Duke of Norfolk, with the rod of 
Marshals/tip, a Coronet on his head. 
Collars of SS. 

7. A Canopy borne by four of the Cinque-ports ; 

under it, the Queen in her robe, in her 
hair, richly adorned with pearl, crowned. 
On each side of her, the Bishops of 
London and Winchester. 

8. The old Duchess of Norfolk, in a Coronal of 

Gold, wrought with flowers, bearing the 
Queen's train. 

9. Certain Ladies or Countesses, with plain 

Circlets of Gold without flowers. 

2 Gent. A royal train, believe me. — These I 
know ; — 



Scene 1.J KING HENRY VIII. 147 

Who "s that, that bears the Sceptre ? 

I Gent. Marquess Dorset : 

And that the Earl of Surrey, with the Rod. 

'2 Gent. A bold brave gentleman. That should 
be 
The Duke of Suffolk. 

1 Gent. 'T is the same : High-Steward. 

2 Gent. And that my Lord of Norfolk 3 

1 Gent. Yes. 

2 Gent. [Looking on the Queen.] Heaven bless 

thee! 
Thou hast the sweetest face I ever looked on. — 
Sir, as I have a soul, she is an angel ; 
Our King has all the Indies in his arms, 
And more, and richer, when he strains that lady : 
I cannot blame his conscience. 

1 Gent. They, that bear 
The cloth of honour over her, are four barons 
Of the Cinque-ports. 

2 Gent. Those men are happy ; and so are aj] 

are near her. 
I take it, she that carries up the train 
Is that old noble lady, Duchess of Norfolk. 

1 Gent. It is ; and all the rest are countesses. 

2 Gent. Their coronets say so. These are stars 

indeed : 



14S KING HENRY VIII. [Act IV. 

And sometimes falling ones. 

1 Gent. Xo more of that. 

[fflcit Procession, with a great flourish of 

trumpets. 

Enter a third Gentleman. 

God save you, sir ! Where have you been broiling ? 
3 Gent. Among the crowd i' the Abbey ; where 
a finger 
Could not be wedged in more : I am stifled 
With the mere rankness of their joy. 

2 Gent. You saw the ceremony? 

3 Gent. That I did. 

1 Gent. How was it 1 

3 Gent. Well worth the seeing. 

2 Gent. Good sir, speak it to us. 

3 Gent. As well as I am able. The rich stream 
Of lords, and ladies, having brought the Queen 
To a prepared place in the choir, fell off 

A distance from her ; while her grace sat down 
To rest awhile, some half an hour or so, 
In a rich chair of state, opposing freely 
The beauty of her person to the people. 
Believe me, sir, she is the goodliest woman 
That ever lay by man : which when the people 
Had the full view of, such a noise arose 



Scene 1.] «*« ***** ¥ltt U9 

As the shrouds make at sea in a stiff tempest, 
Afl loud, and to as many tunes : hats, eloaks, 
Doublets, I think, flew up ; and had their faces 
Been loose, this day they had been lost. Such joy 
I never saw before. Great-bellied women, 
That had not half a week to go, like rams 
In the old time of war, would shake the press. 
And make 'em reel before "em. No man living 
Could say, 'This is my wife,' there; all were 

woven 
So strangely in one piece. 

2 Q ent But what followed ? 

3 >,. nL At length her grace rose, and with 

modest paces 
Came to the altar; where she kneeled and saint- 
like 
Cast her fair eyes to heaven, and prayed devoutly. 
Then rose again, and bowed her to the people : 
When by the Archbishop of Canterbury 
She had all the royal makings of a Queen ; 
As holy oil, Edward Confessor's crown, 
The rod, and bird of peace, and all such emblems 
Laid nobly on her : which performed, the choir, 
With all the choicest music of the kingdom, 
Together sung Te Deum. So she parted, 
And with the same full state paced back again 



150 KING HENRY VIII. [Ant IV. 

To York Place, where the feast is held. 

1 Gent. Sir, 
You must no more call it York Place, that 's past ; 
For, since the Cardinal fell, that title 's lost : 

'T is now the King's, and called White Hall. 

3 Gent. I know it ; 

But 't is so lately altered, that the old name 
Is fresh about me. 

2 Gent. What two reverend Bishops 
Were those that went on each side of the Queen ? 

3 Gent. Stokesly and Gardiner ; the one, of 

Winchester, 
Xewlv preferred from the King's Secretary : 
The other, London. 

2 Gent. He of Winchester 

Is held no great good lover of the Archbishop's, 
The virtuous Cranmer. 

3 Gent. All the land knows that : 
However, yet there 's no great breach ; when it 

comes, 
Cranmer will find a friend will not shrink from 
him. 

2 Gent. Who may that be, I pray you ? 

3 Gent Thomas Cromwell; 
A man in much esteem with the King, and truly 
A worthy friend. — The King 



Scene 2.] KING HENRY VIII. 151 

Has made him master of the jewel-house, 
And one. already, of the Privy-Council 

2 Gent. He will deserve more. 

3 Gent. Yes, without all doubt 
Come, gentlemen, ye shall go my way. which 

Is to the Court, there ye shall be my guests : 
Something I can command. As I walk thither, 
I '11 tell ye more. 

Both. You may command us, sir. [Exeunt. 



Scene II.— Kimbolton. 

Enter Katharine, Dowac/er, sick : led between 
Griffith and Patience. 

Grif. How does your grace 1 

Kath. Griffith, sick to death : 

My legs, like loaden branches, bow to the earth, 
Willing to leave their burden : reach a chair : — 
So, — now, methinks, I feel a little ease. 
Didst thou not tell me, Griffith, as thou ledd'st 

me, 
That the great child of honour, Cardinal Wolsey, 
Was dead ? 

Grif. Yes, madam : but, I think, your grace, 
Out of the pain you suffered, gave no ear to J t. 



152 KING HEXBY VIII. [Act IV. 

Kath. Pry thee, good Griffith, tell me how he 
died : 
If well, lie stepped before Die, happily, 
For my example. 

Grif. Well, the voice goes, madam : 

For after the stout Earl Northumberland 
Arrested him at York, and brought him forward, 
As a man sorely tainted, to his answer, 
He fell sick suddenly, and grew so ill 
He could not sit his mule. 

Kath. Alas, poor man ! 

Grif. At last, with easy roads, he came to 
Leicester ; 
Lodged in the Abbey, where the reverend Abbot, 
With all his convent, honourably received him : 
To whom he gave these words, — ' O father Abbot, 
An old man, broken with the storms of state, 
Is come to lay his weary bones among ye ; 
Give him a little earth for charity ! ' 
So went to bed, where eagerly his sickness 
Pursued him still ; and three nights after this. — 
About the hour of eight, which he himself 
Foretold should be his last, — full of repentance, 
Continual meditations, tears, and sorrows, 
He gave his honours to the world again, 
His blessed part to Heaven, and slept in peace. 



2.] KING HENRY VIII. 153 

• Kath, So may he rest : his faults lie gently on 
him 1 
Yet thus far, Griffith, give me leave to speak him, 
And yet with charity. — He was a man 
Of an unbounded stomach, ever ranking 
Himself with princes ; one that by suggestion 
Tied all the kingdom : simony was fair-play ; 
Hi* own opinion was his law : i' the presence 
He would say untruths, and be ever double, 
Both in his words and meaning. He was never, 
But whore he meant to ruin, pitiful : 
His promises were, a>. lie then was, mighty; 
But his performance, as he is now, nothing. 
Of his own body he was ill. and gave 
The clergy ill example. 

Grif. Noble madam, 

Men's evil manners live in brass ; their virtues 
We write in water. May it please your highness 
To hear me speak his good now ] 

Kath. Yes, good Griffith ; 

I were malicious else. 

Grif. This Cardinal, 

Though from an humble stock, undoubtedly 
Waa fashioned to much honour from his cradle. 
He was a scholar, and a ripe and good one : 
Exceeding wise, fair-spoken, and persuading ; 



154 KING HENRY VIII. [Act IV 

Lofty and sour to thein that loved him not ; 

But, to those men that sought him, sweet as 

summer : 
And though he were unsatisfied in getting, — 
Which was a sin, — yet in bestowing, madam, 
He was most princely. Ever witness for him 
Those twins of learning, that he raised in you, 
Ipswich, and Oxford ! one of which fell with him, 
Unwilling to outlive the good that did it ; 
The other, though unfinished, yet so famous. 
So excellent in art, and still so rising, 
That Christendom shall ever "peak his virtue. 
His overthrow heaped happiness upon him ; 
For then, and not till then, he felt himself, 
And found the blessedness of being little : 
And, to add greater honours to his age 
Than man could give him, he died fearing God. 

Kath, After my death I wish no other herald, 
Xo other speaker of my living actions, 
To keep mine honour from corruption, 
But such an honest chronicler as Griffith. 
Whom I most hated living, thou hast made me, 
With thy religious truth and modesty, 
Now in his ashes honour. Peace be with him ! — 
Patience, be near me still ; and set me lower : 
I have not long to trouble thee. — Good Griffith, 



Scene 2.] KING HENRY VIII. 155 

Cause the musicians play me that sad note 
I named my kneil, whilst I sit meditating 
On that celestial harmony I go to. 

[Sad and solemn Music. 
Grif. She is asleep. Good wench, let 's sit down 
quiet, 
For fear we wake her : — softly, gentle Patience. 

The Vision. Enter, solemnly tripping one after 
another, six Personages, clad in white robes, 
wearing on their heads Garlands of Bays, and 
golden visards on their faces ; Branches of Bays, 
or Palm, in their liands. They first congee unto 
her, then dance; and, at certain changes, the 
rirst two hold a spare Garland over her head ; 
at which the other four make reverent curtsies : 
then, the two that held the Garland deliver tlie 
same to the other next two, who observe the same 
order in their changes, and holding the Garland 
over her head. Which done, they deliver the 
same Garland to the last two, who likewise 
observe the same order : ai which (as it were by 
inspiration) she makes in her sleep signs of re- 
joicing, and holdeth up her liands to Heaven. 
And so in their dancing they vanish, carrying 
the Garland with tliem. The Music continues. 

Kath. Spirits of peace, where are ye ? are ye all 



156 KING HENRY VIII. [Act IV. 

And leave nie here in wretchedness behind ye ] 

Grif. Madam, we are here. 

Kath. It is not you I call for : 

Saw ye none enter, since I slept 1 

Grif. None, madam. 

Kath. ISol Saw you not, even now, a blessed 
troop 
Invite me to a banquet ; whose bright faces 
Cast thousand beams upon me, like the sun? 
They promised me eternal happiness, 
And brought me garlands, Griffith, which I feel 
1 am not worthy yet to wear : I shall, 
Assuredly. 

Grif. I am most joyful, madam, such good dreams 
Possess your fancy. 

Kath. Bid the music leave, 

They are harsh and heavy to me. [Music ceases. 

Pat. Do you note, 

How much her grace is altered on the sudden 1 
How long her face is drawn ] how pale she looks, 
And of an earthy colour 1 Mark her eyes ! 

Grif. She is going, wench. Pray, pray. 

Pat. Heaven comfort her ! 

Enter a Messenger. 
Mess. An 't like your grace, — 



Scene 2.1 KING HENRY VIII. 157 

Kath. You are a saucy fellow : 

Deserve we no more reverence ' 

Grif. You are to blame, 

Knowing she will not lose her wonted greatness, 
To use so rude behaviour : go to, kneel. 

Mess. I humbly do entreat your highness' 
pardon ; 
My haste made me unmannerly. There is staying 
A gentleman, sent from the King to see you. 

Kath. Admit him entrance, Griffith : but this 
fellow 
Let me ne ? er see again. 

[Exeunt Griffith and Messenger. 

Re-enter Griffith, with Capucius. 

If my sight fail not, 
You should be lord ambassador from the Emperor, 
My royal nephew, and your name Capucius, 

Cap. Madam, the same, your servant. 

Kath. my lord, 

The times, and titles, now are altered strangely 
With me, since first you knew me. But, I pray 

you, 
"What is your pleasure with me? 

Cap. Xoble lady, 

First, mine own service to your grace ; the next, 



158 KING HENRY VIII. ("A-ct IV. 

The King's request that I would visit you ; 
Who grieves much for your weakness, and by me 
Sends you his princely commendations, 
And heartily entreats you take good comfort. 

Kath. my good lord, that comfort comes too 
late ; 
'T is like a pardon after execution. 
That gentle physic, given in time, had cured me : 
But now I am past all comforts here, but prayers. 
How does his highness 1 

Cap. Madam, in good health. 

Kath. So may he ever do ; and ever nourish, 
When I shall dwell with worms, and my poor 

name 
Banished the kingdom ! — Patience, is that letter, 
I caused you write, yet sent away 1 

Pat. No, madam. 

[Giving it to Katharine. 

Kath. Sir, I most humbly pray you to deliver 
This to my lord the King. 

Cap. Most willing, madam. 

Kath. In which I have commended to his good- 
ness 
The model of our chaste loves, his young daughter, — 
The dews of heaven fall thick in blessings on her ! 
Beseeching him to give her virtuous breeding, — 



Scene 2.. KING HENRY VIII. 159 

She is young, and of a noble modest nature ; 
I hope she will deserve well, — and a little 
To love her for her mother's sake, that loved him, 
Heaven knows how dearly. My next poor peti- 
tion 
Is, that his noble grace would have some pity 
Upon my wretched women, that so long 
Have followed both my fortunes faithfully : 
Of which there is not one, I dare avow — 
And now I should not lie — but will deserve, 
For virtue and true beauty of the soul, 
For honesty and decent carriage, 
A right good husband, let him be a noble ; 
And, sure, those men are happy that shall have 

them. 
The last is, for my men ; they are the poorest, 
But poverty could never draw them from me ; — 
That they may have their wages duly paid them, 
And something over to remember me by : 
If Heaven had pleased to have given me lono-er life 
And able means, we had not parted thus. 
These are the whole contents : — and, good my lord, 
By that you love the dearest in this world, 
As you wish Christian peace to souls departed, 
Stand these poor people's friend, and urge the Kin * 
To do me this last right. 



160 KING HENRY Till. [Act IT 

Cap. By Heaven, I will, 

Or let me lose the fashion of a man ! 

Kath. I thank you, honest lord. Remember 
me 
In all humility unto his highness : 
Say to him, his long trouble now is passing 
Out of this world ; tell him, in death I blessed 

him, 
For so I will. — Mine eyes grow dim. — Farewell, 
My lord. — Griffith, farewell. — Nay, Patience, 
You must not leave me yet : I must to bed ; 
Call in more women. — When I am dead, good 

wench, 
Let me be used with honour : strew me over 
With maiden flowers, that all the world may know 
I was a chaste wife to my grave : embalm me, 
Then lay me forth : although unqueened, yet like 
A Queen, and daughter to a King, inter me. 
I can no more. — [Exeunt, leading Katharine. 



Scene!.] KING HENRY VIII. 161 



ACT V. 

Scene I. — London. A Gallery in the Palace. 

Enter Gardiner, Bishop of Winchester, a Page 
with a torch before him, met by Sir Thomas 
Lovell. 

Gar. It 's one o'clock, boy, is 't not ? 

Boy. It hath struck. 

Gar. These should be hours for necessities, 
Not for delights ; times to repair our nature 
With comforting repose, and not for us 
To waste these times. — Good hour of night, Sir 

Thomas : 
Whither so late ? 

Lov. Came you from the King, my lord 1 

Gar. I did, Sir Thomas ; and left him at primero 
With the Duke of Suffolk. 

Lov. I must to him too, 

Before he go to bed. I '11 take my leave. 

Gar. Not yet, Sir Thomas Lovell. What 's the 
matter 1 
It seems you are in haste : an if there be 
No great offence belongs to 't, give your friend 
F— 63 



162 KING HENRY VIII. [Art V. 

Some touch of your late business. Affairs that 

walk — 
As they say spirits do — at midnight, have 
In them a wilder nature than the business 
That seeks despatch by day. 

Lav. My lord. I love you, 

And durst commend a secret to your ear 
Much weightier than this work. The Queen 's in 

labour, 
They say, in great extremity ; and feared, 
She 11 with the labour end. 

Gar. The fruit she goes with 

1 pray for heartily that it may find 
Good time, and live : but for the stock, Sir Thomas, 
1 wish it grubbed up now. 

Lov. Methinks. I con! 1 

Cry the Amen; and yet my conscience says 
She 's a good creature, and, sweet lady, does 
Deserve our better wishes. 

Gar. But, sir, sir, — 

Hear me, Sir Thomas : you are a gentleman 
Of mine own way ; I know you wise, religious ; 
And, let me tell you. it will ne'e* be well, 
'T will not, Sir Thomas Lovell, take 't of me, 
Till Crammer. Cromwell, her two hands, and s 7 
Sleep in their graves. 



Scene L] KING HENRY VIII. 163 

Low Now, sir, you npnofc of two 

Tim uiit.st remarked i' the kingdom. As for Crom- 
well, 

Beside that of the jewel-house, he's made Master 
O' the Rolls, and the King's Secretary ; further, 

sir, 
Stands in the gap and trade of more preferments, 
With which the time will load him. The Arch- 
bishop 
Is the King's hand and tongue ; and who dare 

speak 
One syllable against him? 

Gar. Yes, yes, Sir Thomas* 

There are that dare ; and I myself have ventured 
To speak my mind of him : and, indeed, this 

day- 
Sir, I may tell it you, I think, — I have 
Incensed the lords o' the council, that he is — 
For so I know he is, they know he is — 
A most arch heretic, a pestilence 
That does infect the land : with which they moved 
Have broken with the King; who hath so far 
Given ear to our complaint, of his great grace 
And princely care, foreseeing those fell mischiefs 
Our reasons laid before him ; hath commanded, 
To-morrow morning to the council-board 



164 KING- HENRY Till. [Act "V 

He be commented. He 'a a rank weed, Sir Thomas, 
And we must root him out. From your affairs 
I hinder you too long : good night ; Sir Thomas. 
Lov. Many good nights, my lord. I rest your 
servant. [Exeunt Gardiner and Page. 

As Lotell is going out, enter the King and the 

Duke of Suffolk. 

K. Hen. Charles, I will play no more to-night : 
My mind 's not on 't ; you are too hard for me. 

Suf Sir, I did never win of you before. 

E. Hen. But little, Charles ; 
JS"or shall not when my fancy 's on my play. 
Now, Lovell, from the Queen what is the news ? 

Lov. I could not personally deliver to her 
What you commanded me, but by her woman 
I sent your message ; who returned her thanks 
In the great'st humbleness, and desired your high- 
ness 
Most heartily to pray for her. 

K. Hen. What say'st thou ? Ha \ 

To pray for her 1 What ! is she crying out ? 

Lov. So said her woman; and that her suffer- 
ance made 
Almost each pang a death. 

K. Hen. Alas, good lady ! 



Scene 1,] KING HENRY VIII. 165 

S>/f. God safely quit her of her burden, and 
With gentle travail, to the gladding of 
Your highness with an heir ! 

K. Hen. 'T is midnight, Charles : 

Pr'ythee, to bed ; and in thy prayers remember 
The estate of my poor Queen. Leave me alone ; 
For I must think of that, which company 
Would not be friendly to. 

Suf. I wish your highness 

A quiet night, and my good mistress will 
Remember in my prayers. 

K. Hen. Charles, good night.— . 

[Exit Suffolk. 

Enter Sir Anthony Denny. 

Well, sir, what follows '\ 

Den. Sir, I have brought my lord the Archbishop, 
As you commanded me. 

K. Hen. Ha ! Canterbury 1 

Den. Ay, my good lord. 

K. Hen. 'T is true : where is he, Denny 1 

Den. He attends your highness' pleasure. 

K. Hen. Bring him to us. [Exit Denny. 

Lov. [Aside.] This is about that which the 
Bishop spake : 
T am happily come hither. 



1GG KING HENRY Yin. [Act V 

Re-enter Denny with Craxmer. 

K. Hen. Avoid the gallery. 

[Loyell seems to stay. 
Ha ! — I have said. — Be gone. 
What ! — [Exeunt Lovell and Denny. 

Cran. I am fearful: — wherefore frowns he thus 1 ? 
'T is his aspect of terror : all 's not well. 

K. Sen,. How now, my lord ? You do desire to 
know 
Wherefore I sent for you. 

Cran. It is my duty 

To attend your highness' pleasure. 

K. Hen. 'Pray you, arise, 

My £Ood and gracious Lord of Canterbury. 
Come, you and I must walk a turn together ; 
I have news to tell you. Come, come, give me 

your hand. 
Ah, my good lord, I grieve at what I speak, 
And am right sorry to repeat what follows. 
I have, and most unwillingly, of late 
Heard many grievous, I do say, my lord, 
Grievous complaints of you ; which, being con- 
sidered, 
Have moved us and our Council, that you shall 
This morning come before us : where, I know, 



Scene 1.] KIX.l HENRY VIII. 167 

You cannot with such freedom purge yourself, 
But that, till further trial in those charges 
Which will require your answer, you must take 
Your patience to you, and be well contented 
To make your house our Tower : you a brother 

of us, 
It tits we thus proceed, or else no witness 
Would come against you. 

Cran. I humbly thank your highness, 

And am right glad to catch this good occasion 
Most thoroughly to be winnowed) where my ch^ff 
And corn shall fly asunder ; for, I know, 
There's none stands under more calumnious tongues, 
Than I myself, poor man. 

K. Hen. Stand up, good Canterbury : 

Thy truth and thy integrity is rooted 
In us, thy friend. Give me thy hand, stand up : 
Pr'ythee, let '* walk. Now, by my halidom, 
What manner of man are you ] My lord, I looked 
You would have given me your petition, that 
I should have ta'en some pains to bring together 
Yourself and your accusers ; and to have heard 

you, 
Without indurance, further. 

Cran. Most dread liege, 

The good 1 stand on is my truth and honesty : 



168 KING HENRY VIII. [Act V, 

If they shall fail, I with mine enemies 

Will triumph o'er my person, which I weigh 

not, 
Being of those virtues vacant. I fear nothing 
What can be said against me. 

K. Hen. Know you not 

How your state stands i' the world, with the whole 

world 1 
Your enemies 

Are many, and not small ; their practices 
Must bear the same proportion : and not ever 
The justice and the truth o' the question carries 
The due o' the verdict with it. At what ease 
Might corrupt minds procure knaves as corrupt 
To swear against you 1 such things have been done. 
You are potently opposed, and with a malice 
Of as great size. Ween you of better luck, 
I mean in perjured witness, than your Master, 
Whose minister you are, whiles here He lived 
Upon this naughty earth ? Go to, go to : 
You take a precipice for no leap of danger, 
And woo your own destruction. 

Cran. God, and your Majesty, 

Protect mine innocence, or I fall into 
The trap is laid for me ! 

K. Hen. Be of good cheer ; 



Scene 1.] KING HENRY VIII. 169 

They shall no more prevail than we give way to. 

Keep comfort to you ; and this morning, see 

S'ou do appear before them. If they shall chance, 

In charging you with matters, to commit you, 

The best persuasions to the contrary 

Fail not to use, and with what vehemency 

The occasion shall instruct you : if entreaties 

Will render you no remedy, this ring 

Deliver them, and your appeal to us 

There make before them. — Look, the good man 

weeps : 
He 's honest, on mine honour. God's blest 

mother ! 
I swear, he is true-hearted ; and a soul 
None better in my kingdom. — Get you gone, 
And do as I have bid you. [Exit Cranmer. 

— He has strangled 
His language in his tears. 

Enter an Old Lady. 

Gent. [Within.] Comeback: what mean you ? 
Old L. I '11 not come back ; the tidings that I 
bring 
Will make my boldness manners. — Now, good 

angels 
Fly o'er thy royal head, and shade thy person 
**— 63 



170 KING HENRY VIII. [Act V. 

"Under their blessed wings ! 

K. H^n. Now, by thy looks 

I guess thy message. Is the queen delivered % 
Say, ay ; and of a boy. 

Old L. Ay, ay, my liege ; 

And of a lovely boy : the God of heaven 
Both now and ever bless her ! — 't is a girl, — 
Promises boys hereafter. Sir, your Queen 
Desires your visitation, and to be 
Acquainted with this stranger : 't is as like you, 
As cherry is to cherry. 

K. Hen. Lovell ! 

Re-enter Lovell. 

Loc. Sir. 

A'. Hen. Give her an hundred marks. I '11 to 
the Queen. [Exit. 

Old L. An hundred marks ! By this light, 1 1 
ha' more. 
An ordinary groom is for such payment. 
I will have more, or scold it out of him. 
Said T for this, the girl was like to him 1 
I will have more, or else unsay 't ; and now, 
While it is hot, I 11 put it to the issue. [Exeunt. 



Scene 2.J KING HENRY VIII. 171 



Scene II. — Lobby before the Council-chamber. 

Enter Cranjier ■ Servants, Door-keeper, &c, 
attending. 

Cran. I hope, I am not too late ; and yet the 
gentleman 
That was sent to me from the Council prayed me 
To make great haste. All fast 1 what means this ? 

Ho! 
Who waits there ? — Sure, you know me ? 

D. Keep. Yes, my lord ; 

But yet I cannot help you. 

Cran. Why 1 

D. Keep. Your grace must wait till you be 
called for. 

Enter Doctor Butts. 

Cran. So. 

BxJts. This is a piece of malice. 1 am glad 
I came this way so happily : the King 
Shall understand it presently. [Exit. 

Cran. [Aside.] 'T is Butts, 

The King's physician. As he passed along, 
How earnestly he cast his eyes upon me. 



172 KING HENRY VIII. [Act V. 

'Pray Heaven, he sound not my disgrace ! For 
certain. 

This is of purpose laid by some that hate me, — 

God turn their hearts! I never sought their 
malice, — 

To quench mine honour : they would shame to 
make me 

Wait else at door, a fellow-counsellor, 

Among boys, grooms, and lackeys. But their plea- 
sures 

Must be fulfilled, and I attend with patience. 

Enter the King and Butts, at a window above. 

Butts. I '11 show your grace the strangest sight — 

K. Hen. What 's that, Butts 1 

Butts. I think your highness saw this many a 
day. 

K. Hen. Body o' me, where is it ? 

Butts. There, my lord : 

The high promotion of his grace of Canterbury ; 
Who holds his state at door, 'mongst pursuivants, 
Pages, and footboys. 

K. Hen. Ha ! T is he, indeed. 

Is this the honour they do one another ? 
'T is well, there 's one above them yet. I had 
thought, 



Scene 2] KING HENRY VIII. 173 

They had parted so much honesty among them — 

At least good manners — as not thus to suffer 

A man of his place, and so near our favour, 

To dance attendance on their lordships' pleasures, 

And at the door too, like a post with packets. 

By holy Mary, Butts, there 'a knavery : 

Let 'em alone, and draw the curtain close ; 

We shall hear more anon. [Exeunt. 

The Council-chamber. 

Enter the Lord Chancellor, the Duke of Suffolk, 
Duke of Norfolk, Earl of Surrey, Lord 
Chamberlain, Gardiner, and Cromwell. 
The Chancellor places himself at the upper end 
of the table on the left hand ; a seat being left 
void above him, as for the Archbishop of 
Canterbury. The rest seat themselves in 
order on each side, Cromwell at the lower 
end, as Secretary. 

Chan. Speak to the business, master Secretary : 
Why are we met in council % 

Crom. Please your honours, 

The chief cause concerns his grace of Canterbury. 

Gar. Has he had knowledge of it ? 

Crom. Yes. 

Nor. Who waits there 1 



174 KING HENRY YIU. [Act V 

D. Keep. Without, my noble lords 1 

Gar. Yes. 

D. Keep. My lord Archbishop; 

And has done half an hour, to know your 
pleasures. 

Cham Let him come in. 

D. Keep. Your grade may enter now. 

[Cranmeb approaches tit? con w 11 -table. 

Client. My good lord Archbishop, I am very 
sorry 
To sit here at this present, and behold 
That chair stand empty : but we all are men, 
In our own natures frail, and capable 
Of our flesh, few are angels : out of which frailty 
And want of wisdom, you, that best should teach us, 
Have misdemeaned yourself, and not a little, 
Toward the King first, then his laws, in tilling 
The whole realm, by your teaching, and your 

chaplains, — 
For so we are informed, — with new opinions, 
Divers and dangerous ; which are heresies, 
And. not reformed, may prove pernicious. 

Gar. Which reformation must be sudden too, 
My noble lords ; for those that tame wild horses 
Pace them not in their hands to make them 
gentle, 



Scene 2. J KING HENRY VIII. 175 

But stop their mouths with stubborn bits, and 

spur them 
Till they obey the manage. If we suffer, 
Out of our easiness and childish pity 
To one man's honour, this contagious sickness. 
Farewell all physic : and what follows then 1 
Commotions, uproars, with a general taint 
Of the whole state ; as, of late days, our neigh- 
bours, 
The upper Germany, can dearly witness, 
Yet freshly pitied in our memories. 

Gran. My good lords, hitherto, in all the pro- 
gress 
Both of my life and office, I have laboured, 
And with no little study, that my teaching, 
And the strong course of my authority 
Might go one way, and safely ; and the end 
Was ever to do well : nor is there living — 
I speak it with a single heart, my lords — 
A man, that more detests, more stirs against, 
Both in his private conscience and his place, 
Defacers of the public peace, than I do. 
Tray Heaven, the King may never find a heart 
With less allegiance in it ! Men that make 
Envy and crooked malice nourishment 
Dare bite the best I do beseech your lordships 



176 KING HENRY VIII. [Act V. 

That, in this case of justice, my accusers, 

Be what they will, may stand forth face to face, 

And freely urge against me. 

Suf. Nay, my lord, 

That cannot be : you are a counsellor, 
And, by that virtue, no man dare accuse you. 

Gar. My lord, because we have business of more 
moment, 
We will be short with you. 'T is his highness' 

pleasure, 
And our consent, for better trial of you, 
From hence you be committed to the Tower; 
Where, being but a private man again, 
You shall know many dare accuse you boldly, 
More than, I fear, you are provided for. 

Cran. Ah, my good Lord of Winchester, I thank 
you; 
You are always my good friend : if your will pass, 
I shall both find your lordship judge and juror, 
You are so merciful. I see your end : 
'T is my undoing. Love and meekness, lord, 
Become a churchman better than ambition ; 
Win straying souls with modesty again, 
Cast none away. That T shall clear myself, 
Lay all the weight ye can upon my patience, 
I make as little doubt, as you do conscience 



Scene 2. J KING HENRY VIII. 177 

In doing daily wrongs. I could say more, 
But reverence to your calling makes me modest. 

Gar. My lord, my lord, you are a sectary ; 
That 's the plain truth : your painted gloss dis- 
covers, 
To men that understand you, words and weakness. 

Crom. My Lord of Winchester, you are a little, 
By your good favour, too sharp : men so noble, 
However faulty, yet should find respect 
For what they have been : 't is a cruelty, 
To load a falling man. 

Gar. Good master Secretary, 

I cry your honour mercy : you may, worst 
Of all this table, say so. 

Crom. Why, my lord ? 

r Gar. Do not I know you for a favourer 
Of this new sect 1 ye are not sound. 

Crom. Not sound 1 ? 

Gar. Not sound, I say. 

Crom. 'Would you were half so honest ; 

Men's prayers then would seek you, not their fears. 

Gar. I shall remember this bold language. 

Crom. Do. 

Remember your bold life too. 

Chan. This is too much ; 

Forbear, for shame, my lords. 



178 KING HENRY VIII. [Act V. 

Gar. I have done. 

Crom. And I. 

Chan. Then thus for you, my lord : — it stands 
agreed, 
I take it, by all voices, that forthwith 
You be conveyed to the Tower a prisoner, 
There to remain till the King's further pleasure 
Be known unto us. Are you all agreed, lords? 

All. We are. 

Cran. Is there no other way of mercy. 

But I must needs to the Tower, my lords 1 

Gar. What other 

Would you expect? You are strangely trouble- 
some. 
Let some o' the guard be ready there. 

Enter Guard. 

Cran. For me ? 

Musi I go like a traitor thither? 

Gar. Receive him, 

And see him safe i' the Tower. 

Cran. Stay, good my lords ; 

I have a little yet to say. — Look there, my lords : 
By virtue of that ring I take my cause 
Out of the gripes of cruel men, and give it 
To a most noble judge, the King my master. 



Scene 2.] KING HENRY VIII. 17^ 

( 'han. This is the King's ring: 

Snr. T is no counterfeit. 

Snf. T is the right ring, by Heaven ! I told 
ye all, 
When we first put this dangerous stone a- rolling, 
T would fall upon ourselves. 

Nor. Do you think, my lords, 

The King will suffer but the little finger 
Of this man to be vexed 1 

Chan. 'T is now too certain : 

How much more is his life in value with him ! 
' Would I were fairly out on 't ! 

Crom. My mind gave me, 

In seeking tales and informations 
Against this man, whose honesty the devil 
And his disciples only envy at, 
Ye blew the fire that burns ye. l^ow, have at ye l 

Enter the King, frowning on them; he takes his 

seat. 
Ga/r. Dread sovereign, how mucn are we bound 
to Heaven 
Tu daily thanks, that gave us such a prince ; 
Not only good and wise, but most religious : 
One that, in all obedience, makes the church 
The chief aim of his honour j and, to strengthen 



180 KING HENRY VIII. [Act V. 

That holy duty, out of dear respect, 
His royal self in judgment conies to hear 
The cause betwixt her and this great offender. 

A'. Hen. You were ever good at sudden com- 
mendations, 
Bishop of Winchester. But know, I come not 
To hear such flatteries now, and in my presence; 
They are too thin and bare to hide offences. 
To me you cannot reach. You play the spaniel, 
And think with wagging of your tongue to win me; 
But. whatsoe'er thou tak'st me for, I'm sure, 
Thou hast a cruel nature, and a bloody. — 
[To Cranmer.] Good man, sit down. Now let me 

see the proudest, 
He that dares most, but wag his finger at thee : 
By all that 's holy, he had better starve 
Than but once think this place becomes thee not. 

Stir. May it please your grace, — 

K. Hen. No, sir, it does not please me 

I had thought, I had had men of some under- 
standing 
And wisdom of my Council : but I find none. 
Was it discretion, lords, to let this man, 
This good man, — few of you deserve that title, — 
This honest man, wait like a lousy footboy 
At chamber-door ? and one as great as you are ? 



Scene 2.] KING HENRY VIII. 181 

Why, what a shame was this ! Did ray com- 
mission 
Bid ye so far forget yourselves 1 I gave ye 
Power, as he was a Councillor to try him, 
Not as a groom. There 's some of ye, I see, 
More out of malice than integrity, 
Would try him to the utmost, had ye mean ; 
Which ye shall never have while I live. 

Chan. Thus far, 

My most dread sovereign, may it like your grace 
To let my tongue excuse all. What was purposed 
Concerning his imprisonment, was rather — 
If there be faith in men — meant for his trial 
And fair purgation to the world, than malice, 
I 'm sure, in me. 

K. Hen. Well, well, my lords, respect him ; 

Take him, and use him well ; he 's worthy of it. 
I will say thus much for him, — if a prince 
May be beholding to a subject, I 
Am, for his love and service, so to him. 
Make me no more ado, but all embrace him : 
Be friends, for shame, my lords ! — My Lord of 

Canterbury, 
I have a suit which you must not deny me ; 
That is, a fair young maid that yet wants baptism, 
You must be god-father, and answer for her. 



182 KING HENRY VIII. [Act V, 

Cran. The greatest monarch now alive may 
g'ory 
In such an honour : how may I deserve it, 
That am a poor and humble subject to you 1 

K. Hen. Come, come, my lord, you 'd spare your 
spoons. You shall have 
Two noble partners with you ; the old Duchess of 

Xorfolk 
And Lady Marquess Dorset : will these please you 1 
Once more, my Lord of Winchester, I charge you, 
Embrace, and love this man. 

Gar. With a true heart, 

And brother-love, I do it. 

Cran. And let Heaven 

Witness, how dear I hold this confirmation. 

K. Hen. Good man, those joyful tears show thy 
true heart. 
The common voice, I see, is verihed 
Of thee, which says thus, ' Do my Lord of Canter- 
bury 
A shrewd turn, and he is your friend for ever.' — 
Come, lords, we trifle time away : I long 
To have this young one made a Christian. 
As I have made ye one, lords, one remain : 
So I grow stronger, you more honour gain. 

[Exeunt 



Scene 3.] KLNG HEXUY VIII. 183 



Scene III.— The Palace Yard. 

Noise and tumult within. Enter Porter and his 

Man. 

Port. You '11 leave your noise anon, ye rascals. 
Do you take the Court for Paris-garden I Ye rude 
slaves, leave your gaping, 

[Within.\ Good master Porter, I belong to the 
larder. 

Port. Belong to the gallows, and be hanged, you 
rogue ! — Is this a place to roar in ? — Fetch me a 
dozen crab-tree staves, and strong ones : these are 
but switches to them. — I'll scratch your heads : 
you must be seeing christenings 1 Do you look for 
ale and cakes here, you rude rascals 1 

Man. Pray, sir, be patient : 't is as much im- 
possible, 
Unless we sweep them from the door with cannons, 
To scatter 'em, as 't is to make 'em sleep 
On May -day morning ; which will never be. 
We may as well push against Paul's as stir them. 

Port. How got they in, and be hanged ! 

Man. Alas, I know not ; how gets t he tide in 1 
As much as one sound cudgel of four foot — 



184 KING HENRY VIII. [Act V- 

You see the poor remainder — could distribute, 
I made no spare, sir. 

Port. You did nothing, sir. 

Man. I am not Samson, nor Sir Guy, nor Col- 
brand, 
To mow them down before me : but if I spared any 
That had a head to hit, either young or old, 
He or she, cuckold or cuckold-maker, 
Let me ne'er hope to see a chine again ; 
And that I would not for a cow, God save her. 

[ Within.] Do you hear, master porter % 

Port. I shall be with you presently, good master 
puppy. — Keep the door close, sirrah. 

Man. What would you have me do ? 

Port. What should you do, but knock 'em down 
oy the dozens 1 Is this Moorfields to muster in ? 
or have we some strange Indian with the great 
tool come to Court, the women so besiege us ? Bless 
me, what a fry of fornication is at door ! On my 
Christian conscience, this one christening will beget 
a thousand ; here will be father, god-father, and all 
together. 

Man. The spoons will be the bigger, sir. There 
is a fellow somewhat near the door, he should be a 
brazier by his face, for o' my conscience, twenty of 
the dog-days now reign in '"s nose : all that stand 



SceneS.] KING HENRY VIII. 185 

about him are under the line, they need no other 
penance. That tire-drake did I hit three times on 
the head, and three times was his nose discharged 
against me : he stands there, like a mortar-piece, to 
blow us. There was a haberdasher's wife of small 
wit near him, that railed upon me till her pink'd 
porringer fell off her head, for kindling such a com- 
bustion in the state. I missed the meteor once, and 
hit that woman, who cried out : Clubs ! when I 
might see from far some forty truncheoners draw 
to her succour, which were the hope o' the Strand, 
where she was quartered. They fell on ; I made 
good my place ; at length they came to the broom- 
staff to me : I defied 'em still ; when suddenly a 
file of boys behind 'em, loose shot, delivered such a 
shower of pebbles, that I was fain to draw mine 
honour in, and let 'em win the work : the devil 
was amongst 'em, I think, surely. 

Port. These are the youths that thunder at a 
play-house, and fight for bitten apples; that no 
audience, but the Tribulation of Tower Hill, or the 
Limbs of Limehouse, their dear brothers, are able 
to endure. I have some of 'em in Limbo Patrum, 
and there they are like to dance these three days, 
besides the running banquet of two beadles that is 
to come. 



1£G KING HENRY VIII. [Act V. 

Enter the Lord Chamberlain. 

Cham. Mercy o' me, what a multitude are here ! 
They grow still, too ; from all parts they are 

coming, 
As if we kept a fair here ! Where are these 

porters, 
These lazy knaves 1 — Ye have made a fine hand, 

fellows : 
There is a trim rabble let in. Are all these 
Your faithful friends o' the suburbs'? We shall 

have 
Great store of room, no doubt, left for the ladies, 
When they pass back from the christening. 

Port. An 't please your honour, 

We are but men ; and what so many may do, 
Not being torn a pieces, we have done : 
An army cannot rule 'em. 

Cham. As I live, 

If the King blame me for 't, I '11 lay ye all 
By the heels, and suddenly ; and on your heads 
Clap round fines for neglect. Ye are lazy knaves ; 
And here ye lie, baiting of bombards, when 
Ye should do service. Hark ! the trumpets 

sound ; 
They 're come already from the christening. 



Scene 4 J 



ZING HENRY VTII. 187 



Go, break among the press, and find a way out 
To let the troop pass fairly, or I '11 find 
A Marshalsea, shall hold you play these two 
months. 

Port. Make way there for the princess. 

jf,,n. Yon g reat fellow, 

Stand close up, or I'll make your head ache. 

Port. You i' the camlet, get up o' the rail 
I '11 pick you o'er the pales else. [Exeunt. 



Scene IV.— The Palace. 

Enter Trumpets, sounding; then two Aldermen, 
Lord Mayor, Garter, Cranmer, Duke of Nor- 
folk, with his marshal's statf] Duke of Suffolk, 
two Noblemen bearing great standing-bowls for 
the christening-gifts; then, four Noblemen bearing 
a canopy, under ivhich the Duchess of Norfolk, 
god-mother, bearing the child richly habited in 
a mantle, &c. Train borne by a Lady: then 
follows the Marchioness of Dorset, the other god- 
mother, and Ladies. The troop pass once about 
the stage, and Garter speaks. 

Gart. Heaven, from thy endless goodness, send 
prosperous life, long, and ever happy, to the high 
and mighty Princess of England, Elizabeth ! 



188 KIXG HEXET YIII. [ActV. 

Flourish. Enter King and Train. 

Cran. [Kneeling.] And to your royal grace and 
the good Queen, 
My noble partners, and myself, thus pray : 
All comfort, joy, in this most gracious lady, 
Heaven ever laid up to make parents happy, 
May hourly fall upon ye ! 

K. Hen. Thank you, good lord Archbishop ; 
What is her name I 

Cran. Elizabeth. 

K. Hen. Stand up, lord. — 

[The King kisses the Child. 

With this kiss take my blessing : God protect 

thee ! 
Into whose hand I give thy life. 

Cran. Amen. 

K. Hen. My noble gossips, ye have been too 
prodigal. 
I thank ye heartily : so shall this lady, 
When she has so much English. 

Cran. Let me speak, sir, 

For Heaven now bids me ; and the words I utter 
Let none think flattery, for they '11 And 'em truth. 
This royal infant, — Heaven still move about her ! — 
Though in her cradle, yet now promises 



Scene 4 J KING HENRY VIII. 18f> 

Upon this land a thousand thousand blessings, 

Which time shall bring to ripeness. She shall be — 

But few now living can behold that goodness — 

A pattern to all princes living with her, 

And all that shall succeed : Saba was never 

More covetous of wisdom and fair virtue, 

Than this pure soul shall be : all princely graces 

That mould up such a mighty piece as this is, 

With all the virtues that attend the good, 

Shall still be doubled on her : Truth shall nurse 

her; 
Holy and heavenly thoughts still counsel her : 
She shall be loved, and feared : her own shall bless 

her; 
Her foes shake like a field of beaten corn, 
And hang their heads with sorrow : good grows 

with her : 
In her days every man shall eat in safety, 
Under his own vine, what he plants ; and sing 
The merry songs of peace to all his neighbours. 
God shall be truly known ; and those about her 
From her shall read the perfect ways of honour, 
And by those claim their greatness, not by blood. 
Nor shall this peace sleep with her : but as when 
The bird of wonder dies, the maiden phcenix, 
Her ashes new create another heir 



190 KING HENRY VIII. [Act V. 

As great in admiration as herself : 

So shall she leave her blessedness to one, 

When Heaven shall call her from this cloud of 

darkness, 
Who, from the sacred ashes of her honour, 
Shall star-like rise, as great in fame as she was, 
And so stand fixed. Peace," plenty, love, truth, 

terror, 
That were the servants to this chosen infant, 
Shall then be his, and like a vine grow to him : 
Wherever the bright sun of Heaven shall shine, 
His honour and the greatness of his name 
Shall be, and make new nations : he shall flourish, 
And, like a mountain cedar, reach his branches 
To all the plains about him. Our children's 

children 
Shall see this, and bless Heaven. 

K. Hen. Thou speakest wonders. 

Cran. She shall be, to the happiness of England, 
An aged princess ; many days shall see her, 
And yet no day without a deed to crown it. 
'Would I had known no more ! but she must die — 
She must, the saints must have her ; — yet a virgin, 
A most unspotted lily shall she pass 
To the ground, and all the world shall mourn her. 
A'. Hen. O lord Archbishop, 



Epilogue.] KING HENRY VIII. 191 

Thou hast made rue now a man : never, before 
This happy child, did I get anything. 
This oracle of comfort has so pleased me, 
That, when I am in heaven, I shall desire 
To see what this child does, and praise my Maker. 
I thank ye all. To you, my good Lord Mayor, 
And your good brethren, I am much beholding : 
1 have received much honour by your pressor* i . 
And ye shall find me thankful. — Lead the way, 

lords : 
Ye must all see the Queen, and she must thank ye, 
She will be sick else. This day, no man think 
'Has business at his house, for all shall stay : 
This little one shall make it holiday. 

[Exeunt. 



EPILOGUE. 

'T is ten to one, this play can never please 

All that are here. Some come to take their ease, 

And sleep an act or two ; but those, we fear, 

We have frighted with our trumpets ; so, 't is 

clear, 
They '11 say, 't is naught : others, to hear the city 
Abused extremely, and to cry, — ' That 's witty ! ' 



192 KING HENRY Till. [Epilogue. 

Which we have nor clone neither ; that, I fear, 
All the expected good we 're like to hear 
For this play, at this time, is only in 
The merciful construction of good women ; 
For such a one we showed 'em. If they smile, 
And saw 't will do, I know, within a while 
All the best men are ours ; for ; t is ill hap, 
If they hold, when their ladies bid 'em clap. 



Printed 1 r Cabell oc Corupanv, Limited. La Belle Sauvasre. London, B.C. 



2817 
A2M7 
1905 



bhakespeare, William 
King Henry VIII 




PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE 
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET 



UN.VERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY 



