


■CO 



CO 



"CO 



\ 



./ 



THE ARDEN SHAKESPEARE 
GENERAL EDITOR : W. J. CRAIG 



THE LIFE AND DEATH 



OF 



KING JOHN 



/ 



THE WORKS 

OF 

SHAKESPEARE 

THE LIFE AND DEATH OF 
KING JOHN 

EDITED BY 
IVOR B. JOHN 



? 









METHrEN AND CO. 

36 ESSEX STREET: STRAND 

LONDON 



First Published in igoj 



CONTENTS 

PAOE 

Introduction ••.... 

The Life and Death of King John • • . . i 

Appendix 

147 



INTRODUCTION 

The reign of King John seems to have had considerable 
attraction for English dramatic writers. Some time before 
1563, and probably not earlier than 154S, John Bale, 
Bishop of Ossory {b. 1495, d. 1563), had seized upon the 
subject as a weapon with which to attack the Papists. 
While still preserving the form and methods of the Moral- 
ity play, the zealous bishop introduced into his Kynge 
Johan a certain amount of the historical element; for we 
find King John represented as the champion of Protes- 
tantism endeavouring to aid " Ynglond " in shaking off the 
chains of Papacy. For this he is excommunicated and 
the country is laid under an interdict, while invasion is 
threatened by the French, Spaniards and Northmen in aid 
of the Papal cause. To save his country from these 
accumulated horrors John submits to the Pope, but is 
poisoned by " Dyssymulacyon," otherwise " Simon of Swin- 
sett," and dies a Protestant martyr. 

With the exception of the King the characters of this 
play are little better than the personified abstractions of 
the Morality, who occupy their time in religious and pol- 
itical discussions while the action is at a standstill. Dra- 
matic propriety of any kind is entirely wanting throughout. 

Though ineffably tedious to read at the present day, 



viii INTRODUCTION 

this production is interesting from at least two points of 
view. In the first place it is a point of fusion between 
the Morality and the Historical play. In the second 
place it is very kind to the memory of "Johan" and 
exalts him into a hero, saint and martyr : — 

This noble Kynge Johan, as a faythfull Moyses 
Withstode proude Pharo for hys pore Israel, {lines 1 106-7). 

He takes part with " Englandes ryghtfull herytage " — 
for Bale carefully avoids any mention of Arthur — and is 
made to declare that his enemies have ever hated him 
" for doynge justice " (/ine 2125). The panegyric pronounced 
by " Veryte " best explains the author's attitude towards 
his "hero." 

I assure ye, fryndes, lete men wryte what they wyll, 
Kynge Johan was a man both valiaunt and godlye 
What though Polydorus reporteth hym very yll 
At the suggestyons of the malicyouse clergye, 
Thynke you a Romane with the Romans can not lye ? 
Yes ; therfore, Leylonde, out of thy slumbre awake, 
And wytnesse a trewthe for thyne owne contrayes sake,^ 

For his valiauntnesse many excellent writers make, 
As Sigebertus, Vincentius, and also Nauclerus ; 
Geraldus and Mathu Parys with hys noble vertues take ; 
Yea, Paulus Phrigio, Johan Major, and Hector Boethius, 
Nothynge is allowed in hys lyfe of Polydorus, 
Which discommendeth hys ponyshmentes for trayterye, 
Advauncynge very sore hygh treason in the clergye. 

Of hys godlynesse thus muche report wyll I : 
Gracyouse provysyon for sore, sycke, halte and lame 
He made in hys tyme, both in toune and cytie, 
Grauntynge great lyberties, for mayntenance of the same, 
By markettes and fayers in places of notable name ; 

' Note the " liaison " between the last rhyme of one stanza and the 
first rhyme of the next. 



1\ 



INTRODUCTION 

Great monymentes arc in Vppeswych, Donwych, and Berye, 
Whych noteth hym to be a man of notable mercye ; 

The cytie of London, through his mere graunt and premye, 
Was first privyliged to have both mayor and shrive, 
Where before hys tyme it had but baylyves onlye ; ' 
In hys dayes the Brydge, the cytizens ded contryve, 
Though he now be dead, hys noble actes are alyve. 
His zele is declared, as towchinge Christes religyon, 
In that he exyled the Jewes out of thys regyon. 

The good bishop's idea of John is as faulty as his 
idea of poetry and verse; his bias is due chiefly to his 
hatred of Catholicism which appears continually in such 
passages as — 

A', y. . . . thou menyst the Pope. 

Ynglond. I mean none other but hym, God geve hym a rope ! 

{Kynge Johan, i. 75.) 

Kynge Johan lay in manuscript until printed by Collier 
for the Camden Society in 1838. If acted at all, it seems 
to have left no trace behind, for in 1591 there was 
•' Imprinted at London for Sampson Clarke, to be solde 
at his shop, on the backe-side of the Royall Exchange," 
a play entitled The Troublesojne Raigne of John Khig of 
England, with the discoverie of King Richard Cordelions 
Base Sonne {vulgarly named. The Bastard Fawconbridge) : 
also the death of King John at Sivinstead Abbey. As it 
was {sundry times) Jublikely acted by tlie Queenes Majesties 
Players, in the honourable citie oj London; and in this 
play the influence o{ Kynge Johan is nowhere visible. 
The Troublesome Raigne was divided into two parts, the 
second being entitled The Second part of the troublesome 
Raigne of King John, conteining the death oJ Arthur 



X INTRODUCTION 

Plantaginet, the landing of Leives, and the poysnmg of 
King fohn at Swinstead Abbey, and it was probably- 
written about 1589; but this is only conjecture, for we 
have no definite evidence on the point. Another edition, 
" Imprinted by Valentine Sims for John Helme," appeared 
in 161 1, claiming to have been "written by W. Sh.," 
while a third edition of 1622 shamelessly asserts itself 
to have been "written by W. Shakespeare." 

No one who compares the Troublesome Raigne with 
King fohn can for a moment entertain the idea that the 
former is a " first draft " of the latter.^ If any argument 
of disproof were needed it would be sufficient to point 
out, as Mr. Rose has done, that no writer could possibly 
recast his own work in such a manner as to remodel 
every line but four. The explanation of the claim on the 
title-pages of the later editions of the Troublesome Raigne 
is quite simple ; it was a deliberate attempt to make the 
public believe that the play for sale was the King fohn 
of Shakespeare, of which no Quarto seems to have ap- 
peared. King fohn had been performed before 1598 {vide 
infra), and so a wily publisher might easily gull the 
public in 161 1 and 1622 into the belief that the Trouble- 
some Raigne was the Shakespearian play. 

Tieck clung to the belief that Shakespeare wrote the 
Troublesome Raigne, maintaining not only that every line 
of it bears the impress of Shakespeare's hand but that it 
is superior to Kitig fohn ! Pope says that it was written 

' Since the above was written Prof. Courthope's volume dealing with 
^'"^ John has appeared, in which the Troublesome Raigne is given to 
Shakespeare. I still fail to see that there is the slightest justification 
for this. 



1 



IMHODUCTION xi 

"by W. Shakespeare and \V. Rowley," and Farmer, who 
believes Rowley to have been the author, thinks that there 
must have been a tradition to that effect in Pope's time. 
Malone attributed the earlier pla>' to Peele or Greene, 
while Fleay sees in it the joint work of Peele, Greene, 
and Lodge. 

Marlowe's name has also been suggested, but the 
character of the play as a whole does not encourage 
belief in Marlowe's authorship. We may say, however, 
that no one but an admirer or pupil of Marlowe's could 
have produced Faulconbridge's soliloquy : — 

What winde of honour blowes this furie forth ? 

Or whence proecde (sic precede) these fumes of Majestic ? 

Me thinkes I heare a hollow Eccho sound. 

That Philip is the Sonne unto a King : 

The whistling leaves upon the trembling trees, 

Whistle in consort I am Richard's Sonne: — 

The bubling murmur of the water's fall, 

Records Phillipus Regius filius : 

Birds in their flight make musicke with their wings. 

Filling the ayre with glorie of my birth ; 

Birds, bubbles, leaves, and mountains, Eccho, all 

Ring in mine eares, that I am Richard's Sonne. 

{TruubUsome Raigiie, lines 263-274.) 

The address to the Gentlemen Readers of the Play 

bears out this supposition, for they are addressed as — 

You that with friendly grace of smoothed brow 
Have entertained the Scythian Tamburlaine. 

But, in fine, we can only guess at the authorship of the 

Troublesome Raigne, and there is little to guide or check 

our guesses. 

The early play has, of course, to bear comparison with 

Shakespeare's recast of it, and therefore appears at a great 



xii INTRODUCTION 

disadvantage. But, taken on its merits, it is by no means 
an utterly poor piece of work. In structure and in its 
sequence of events it fully satisfied Shakespeare ; for the 
differences between the two versions in these respects are 
few and comparatively unimportant. 

iThe Troublesome Raigne is 3081 lines in length. King 
John has 2715 lines; therefore, on the whole, Shakespeare 
has shortened his original. When we compare the first and 
second parts of the Troublesome Raigne with the corre- 
sponding parts of King John, we find that the 1822 lines 
of the first part of the Troublesome Raigne have been 
expanded by Shakespeare into 1987 in King John, 
while the 1259 of the Troublesome Raigne, Part II., have 
been compressed into 728 in King John. A glance at 
the dramatic content of each part reveals at once the 
reason for this difference of treatment. Part I, of the 
Raigne contains much more of the action than Part II, 
It ends with Hubert's setting out to inform the nobles 
that Arthur still lives, leaving little more than the deaths 
of Arthur and John to be dealt with in the second part. 
Therefore what Shakespeare did was to expand the more 
vigorous Part, I., and to take the drag off the more slow- 
moving Part II. 

The further and slighter alterations worth notice are 
as follows : The mother is not present during the scene 
where Faulconbridge proudly claims illegitimacy,, , and a 
little later Shakespeare adds a certain James Gurney to 
the dramatis personce, a supernumerary of absolutely no 
importance.^ 

^See Coleridge's curious note on this point, Table Talk, 12th March, 
1827. " For an instance of Shakespeare's power in minimis, I generally 



INTRODUCTION xiii 

TKing John makes no mention of the Bastard's hope 
of winning Blanch for himself. In the Raigne he says 
(line 825): "Slave as I was, I thought to have moovde the 
match " ; and this explains his hatred of the Dauphin. 

I The incidents of the quarrel between the Bastard and 
Lymoges-Austria are altered. In the Raigne Faulcon- 
bridge chases the Duke and makes him drop the lion's 
skin as early as the first battle between the English and 
French ; later, the t%vo quarrel before John, and Lymoges- 
Austria refuses to fight with Faulconbridge, his social in- 
ferior. John thereupon makes the Bastard Duke of Nor- 
mandy, but Lymoges-Austria still will not fight. The 
death of the latter takes place under the same circumstances 
in both plays. 

The capture and rescue of Elinor is part of the action 
in the Raigne^ while Shakespeare merely narrates it in 
seven lines. 

'•jJThe scene in the Raigne in which Faulconbridge is 
shown at work ransacking the monastery and convent is 
completely omitted from King John. It is out of keep- 
ing even with the cruder style of the earlier play, where it 
seems to be inserted as a vulgar interlude, written in abomin- 
able doggerel. Still more would it have been out of 
keeping with Shakespeare's whole treatment of the play. 

The "five moons" alluded to in King John are actually 
staged in the Raigne — (how this was managed we dare not 
guess !) — and the scenes concerned with the coronation and 
with Peter of Pom fret have been taken to pieces and reset. ' 

quote James Gurney's character in King John. How individual and comical 
he is with the four words allowed to his dramatic life ! And pray look at 
Skelton's Richard Sparrow also ! " 



xiv INTRODUCTION 

Tin the Raigne Faulconbridge is absent when the body 
of Arthur is found by the nobles and they accuse Hubert 
of the murderrj 

Tin the last Act the earlier dramatist stages the poison- 
ing of the King, while Shakespeare brings the King on 
after he has taken the poison.' 

Thus we see that, so far as structure goes, Shake- 
^/speare practically took over the old play as it stood. 
The earlier dramatist took his material from Holinshed's 
Chronicles, handled it to suit his own purposes, and 
cared not a jot for fidelity to his original. It is a far 
cry, therefore, from King John and the Troublesome Raigne 
to the actual events of the reign of the historical King 
John, for Holinshed's Chronicles themselves are not a well 
of English history undefiled. 

The play opens soon after the accession of John in 
1 1 99 and ends with his death in 12 16. For Chatillon's 
embassy there is no historical warrant, nor could Philip 
of France have demanded Anjou, Maine, and Touraine; 
for, says Holinshed, " by generall consent of the nobles 
and peeres of the countries of Anjou, Maine and Touraine, 
Arthur was received as the liege and sovereigne lord of the 
same countries." 

The writer of the Troublesome Raigne, who, as we have 
shown, made much more of the matter than Shakespeare 
did, probably obtained the idea of John's rifling the abbeys 
from a note in Holinshed sub anno 12 10, where we are 
told that John on returning from an expedition to Ireland 
" constreined " the Cistercians to pay 40,000 pounds of 
.silver notwithstanding " all their privileges to the contrary. 



INTRODUCTION xv 

The cause thnt mooved the King to deal so hardh'e with 
them was, for that they refused to helpe him with monie, 
when before his last going over into Normandie, he de- 
manded it of them towards the paiment of the thirtic 
thousand pounds which he had covenanted to pay the 
French king." 

The doings of Philip Faulconbridge have been com- 
pounded of materials derived from several sources. Holin- 
shed mentions " Philip, bastard sonne to King Richard to 
whom his father had given the castell and honor of 
Coinacke," who " Killed the vicount of Limoges, in re- 
venge of his father's death, who was slaine (as yee have 
heard) in besieging the castell of Chalus Cheverell." The 
"discovery of the base sonne" seems to be an adaptation 
of what Halle has to say about the conduct of Dunois, 
the Bastard of Orleans. His father " the lord of Cauni " 
and his mother being dead, Dunois, at eight years of age 
proudly claimed to be the illegitimate .son of the Duke of 
Orleans, when the next-of-kin of Cauni claimed the in- 
heritance. Stow has a somewhat similar story, in which 
Morgan, Provost of Beverley, would have been made 
Bishop had he not preferred to style himself the bastard 
son of King Henry, rather than the lawful issue of "one 
Radulph Bloeth." 

The interview between John and Philip, spoken of in 
Act II., took place on i6th August, 1199; "on the 
morrow after the feast of the Assumption of our ladie." 
Blanch of Ca.stile was not present at this meeting, nor 
was her betrothal mentioned. The match was "cla{)ped 
Up" at the next meeting of the Kings, Blanch still being 



xvi INTRODUCTION 

absent. " FinalHe, upon the Ascension day in this second 
yeare of his reigne, they came eftsoones to a communica- 
tion betwixt the townes of Vernon and Lisle Dandelie ; 
where finalh'e they concluded an agreement, with a 
marriage to be had betwixt Lewes the sonne of King 
Philip, and the ladie Blanch, daughter to Alfonso King 
of Castile the 8 of that name, and neece to K. John by 
his sister Elianor. In consideration whereof, King John, 
besides the summe of thirtie thousand markes in silver, 
as in respect of dowrie assigned to his said neece, resigned 
his title to the citie of Eureux, and also unto all those 
townes which the French King had by warre taken from 
him, the citie of Anglers onelie excepted, which citie he 
received againe by covenants of the same agreement. . , . 
The King of England likewise did homage unto the 
French King for Britaine, and againe (as after you shall 
heare) received homage for the same countrie, and for 
the countie of Richmont, of his nephue Arthur," 

The first part of Act III. Scene i. pursues the thread 
of incident in historical order until we come to the entry 
of Pandulph, who was not sent to England by the Pope 
until 121 1, when the country was still lying under the 
interdict of 1208, The quarrel between John and the 
Pope had arisen soon after 1205 when Hubert, Arch- 
bisho}) of Canterbury, died, and John had refused to allow 
Stephen Langton, the Pope's nominee, " to injoy the rule 
of the bishopricke and dioces of Canturburie ". It was 
not until after the failure of the legates to intimidate 
John that Innocent absolved his subjects from their allegi- 
ance, and declared a kind of Crusade against him. This 
brings us to 12 12, 



IxNTRODUCTION xvii 

li^Scene ii. of the same Act we find Faulconbrido-e 
gloating over the payment of his score against Lymogcs- 
Austria. Holinshed (see p. xv. ante) mentions the kiUing 
in 1 199. The writer of the Troublesome Raigne has 
identified the Duke of Austria who imprisoned Richard 
Coeur-de-Lion in 1193 with Vidomar, Viscount of Limoges. 
"Brave Austria, cause of Cordeh'ons death" {Troubiesome 
Raigne, i. 446) says the French King ; and in a stage-direction 
the Bastard " chaseth Lymoges the Austrich Duke." 

Then follows the capture of Arthur by John, which 
brings us back to 1202, when Arthur was taken at Mira- 
beau, to be imprisoned first at Falaise and afterwards at 
Rouen. The "assailing" of Elinor in her tent is founded 
on the chronicler's description of her being hard beset at 
Mirabeau previous to the turn of fortune which led to 
Arthur's capture. 

Angiers was taken by John in 1206— "comming to the 
Citie of Angiers, [he] appointed certeine bands of his 
footmen, and all his light horssemen to compasse the 
towne about, whilest he, with the residue of the footmen, 
and all the men of armes, did go to assault the gates. 
Which enterprise with fire and sword he so manfullie 
executed, that the gates being in a moment broken 
open, the citie was entered and delivered to the soldiers 
for a preie. So that of the citizens some were taken, 
some killed, and the wals of the citie hjeaten flat to the 
ground," It had previou.sly been taken by the Queen- 
mother in 1199. 

In the first scene of Act IV. we are again with 
Arthur, and the method of the playwrights in dealing 



xviii INTRODUCTION 

with the actual facts about the prince may be best under- 
stood by comparing the words of the chroniclers with 
the plays. "It is said that King John caused his 
nephue Arthur to be brought before him at Falais, and 
there went about to persuade him all that he could to 
forsake his freendship and aliance with the French king, 
and to leane and stick to him, being his naturall uncle. 
But Arthur, like one that wanted good counsell, and 
abounding too much in his owne wilfuU opinion, made a 
presumptuous answer ; not onelie denieing so to doo, but 
also commanding King John to restore unto him the 
realme of England, with all those other lands and pos- 
sessions which King Richard had in his hand at the 
houre of his death. For, sith the same apperteined to 
him by right of inheritance, he assured him, except resti- 
tution were made the sooner, he should not long continue 
quiet. King John being sore mooved with such words, 
thus uttered by his nephue, appointed (as before is said) 
that he should be straitlie kept in prison, as first in 
Falais, and after at Roan within the new castell there. 
Thus by means of this good successe, the countries of 
Poictou, Touraine, and Anjou were recovered. 

"Shortlie after, King John, comming over into ^Eng- 
land, caused himselfe to be crowned againe at Canturburie 
by the hands of Hubert the archbishop there, on the four- 
teenth day of Aprill, and then went backe againe into 
Normandie, where, immediatlie upon his arivall, a rumour 
was spread through all France, of the death of his nephue 
Arthur. True it is that great suit was made to have 
Arthur set at libertie, as well by the French king, as by 



i 



INTRODUCTION xix 

William de Riches a valiant baron of I'oictou, and diverse- 
other noble men of the Britains, who when they could 
not prevaile in their suit, they banded themselves togither 
and, joining in confederacy with Robert, earle of Alanson, 
the vicount Beamont, William de Fulgiers, and other, 
they began to levie sharpe wars against King John in 
diverse places, insomuch (as it was thought) that, so long 
as Arthur lived, there would be no quiet in those parts ; 
whereupon it was reported that King John, through per- 
suasion of his councellors, appointed ccrteine persons to 
go unto Falais, W'here Arthur was kept in prison, under 
the charge of Hubert de Burgh, and there to put out the 
yoong gentlemans eies, 

" But through such resistance as he made against one of 
the tormentors that came to execute the kings com- 
mandement (for the other rather forsook their prince and 
countrie, than they would consent to obeie the king's 
authoritie heerein) and such lamentable words as he 
uttered, Hubert de Burgh did preserve him from that 
injurie ; not doubting but rather to have thanks than dis- 
pleasure at the kings hands, for delivering him of such 
infamie as would have redoundede unto his highnesse, if 
the yoong gentleman had been so cruellie dealt withall. 
For he considered, that King John had resolved upon this 
point onelie in his heat and furie (which moveth men to 
undertake many an inconvenient enterprise, unbeseeming 
the person of a common man, much more reprochfull to 
a prince, all men in that mood being meere foolish and 
furious and prone to accomplish the perverse conceits of 
their ill possessed heart ; . . .) and that afterwards, upon 



XX INTRODUCTION 

better advisement, he would both repente himselfe so to 
have commanded, and give them small thanke that should 
see it put into execution. Howbeit, to satisfie his mind 
for the time, and to stale the rage of the Britains, he 
caused it to be brutcd abroad through the countrie, that 
the kings commandement was fulfilled ; and that Arthur 
also through sorrow and greefe was departed out of this 
life. For the space of fifteen dales this rumour incessantlie 
ran through both the realmes of England and France, and 
there was ringing for him through towns and villages, as 
it had beene for his funerals." This happened in 1202, 
Arthur being then fifteen years of age. From this point 
onward the writer of the Troublesome Raigne "wildly 
walks " from the path of historical accuracy, and, of course, 
Shakespeare follows him. A messenger enters while we 
are still dealing with the events of 1202, to announce the 
landing of the French, which did not actually take place 
until 1 2 16. At the same time the apparently recent deaths 
of Elinor and Constance are announced ; Elinor, however, 
died in 1204, while Constance died three years (not "three 
days") before in 1201. With Peter of Pomfret we are in 
12 1 2. Concerning Peter, Holinshed has a good deal to 
say, the most important things for our purpose being as 
follows : " This Peter, about the first of Januarie last past, 
had told the king that, at the feast of the Ascension, it 
should come to passe, that he should be cast out of his 
kingdome. And (whether, to the intent that his words 
should be the better beleeved, or whether upon too much 
trust of his owne cunning) he offered himself to suffer 
death for it, if his prophesie prooved not true. Heere- 



INTRODUCTION xxi 

upon being committed to the Castle of Corf, when the 
day by him prefixed came, without any other notable 
damage unto king John, he was, by the king's commande- 
inent, drawn from the said castell unto the towne of 
Warham, and there hanged, togither with his sonne. The 
people much blamed king John for this extreame dealing, 
bicausc that the heremit was supposed to be a man of 
great virtue, and his sonne nothing guiltie of the offense 
committed by his father (if any were) against the king. 
Moreover, some thought that he had much wrong to die, 
bicause the matter fell out even as he had prophesied ; 
for, the day before the Ascension day, king John had 
resigned the superioritie of his kingdome (as they tooke 
the matter) unto the pope, and had doone to him hom- 
age, so that he was no absolute King indeed, as authors 
affirm. One cause, and that not the least which mooved 
king John the sooner to agree with the pope, rose through 
the words of the said heremit, that did put such a fearc 
of some great mishap in his hart, which would grow 
through the disloialtie of his people, that it made him 
yeeld the sooner." 

The " five moons " are soberly recorded in Holinshed 
as having appeared in 1 200. " About the moneth of 
December, there were seene in the province of Vorke 
five moones, one in the east, the second in the west, the 
third in the north, the fourth in the south, and the fift 
as it were set in the middest of the other; having manie 
stars about it, and went five or six times incompassing 
the other, as it were the space of one houre, and shortlie 
after vanished awaie." 



xxii INTRODUCTION 

With Arthur's death we are again carried forward to 
1203. After explaining how the "Britains" were angered 
still more upon hearing rumours of Arthur's death, and 
how the fact that he was still living was then made 
known, Holinshed goes on to say : " But now touching 
the maner in verie deed of the end of this Arthur, writers 
make sundrie reports. Nevertheless certeine it is, that, 
in the yeare next insuing, he was remooved from Falais 
unto the castell or tower of Rouen, out of the which there 
was not any that would confesse that ever he saw him go 
alive. Some have written, that, as he assaied to have 
escaped out of prison, and prooving to clime over the 
wals of the castell, he fell into the river of Saine, and 
so was drowned. Other write, that through verie greefe 
and languor he pined awaie, and died of naturall sicknesse. 
But some afifirme, that King John secretlie caused him to 
be murthered and made awaie, so as it is not throughlie 
agreed upon, in what sort he finished his dales ; but 
verelie king John was had in great suspicion, whether 
worthilie or not, the lord knoweth." 

Act V. opens with John's submission to Pandulph, 
which took place on 22nd May, the vigil of Ascension 
Day, 12 1 3. The play, however, treats it as Ascension 
Day. Shakespeare makes the handing over of the crown 
a brief formality ; but in the Raigne a long scene is 
inserted between the surrender of the crown and its re- 
delivery to John. During this time Faulconbridge has 
gone to and returned from Edmundsbury, where the 
English nobles have assembled to meet Lewis. Holin.shed 
tells us that " Pandulph, keeping the crown with him for 



INTRODUCTION xxiii 

the space of five dales in token of possession thereof, at 
length (as the popes vicar) gave it him againe." 

The continual references to the French in England 
transport us to the year 1216, while the "cloked pilgrim- 
age" of the barons who "assembled themselves togithcr at 
the abbeie of Burie (under colour of going thither to do 
their devotions to the bodie of S. Edmund which laie 
there shrined) where they uttered their complaint of the 
kings tyrannicall manners." 

This really was the first step towards the attainment 
of the Great Charter, and had little to do with the motives 
ascribed to the barons in the plays; for "... being thus 
assembled in the queere of the Church of S. Edmund, 
they received a solemn oath upon the altar there, that, 
if the King would not grant to them the same liberties, 
with others which he of his owne accord had promised 
to confirm to them, they would from thencefoorth make 
warre upon him, till they had obteined their purpose, and 
inforced him to grant, not onelie to all these their peti- 
tions, but also yeeld to the confirmation of them under 
his scale, for ever to remaine most stedfast and inviolable." 

The invasion of England by Philip had been really 
staved off by Pandulph in 12 13; the French King, how- 
ever, having prepared for war was resolved to have it, 
and so attacked Fcrrand, Count of Flanders, an ally of 
John's. Ferrand's appeal for help brought on a struggle 
which was ended by Philip's defeat of the English, 
Germans and Plemings at Bouvines on 27th July, 12 14. 
An attempt to recover Poitou and Brittany further 
weakened the English King at home, and the barons 



xxiv INTRODU CTION 

seized the opportunity to make head against him at St. 
Edmundsbury, as we have seen. 

The account of the success of the French in Kent is 
historically correct. So is the account of Lewis's duplicity 
towards his English helpers, and of its exposure by 
Melun. 

The fight in Scene iii. has no historical warrant unless 
it refers to the battle of Lincoln in 12 17, seven months 
after John's death. The wrecked " supply " can only be 
the reinforcements sent by Philip three months after the 
battle of Lincoln. These were destroyed in a naval fight 
by Hubert de Burgh, the stout defender of Dover Castle. 

For the last scenes, chiefly dealing with the death of 
John, the dramatists have used the more picturesque ac- 
counts. Holinshed says "the king hasted forward till he 
came to Wellestreme sands, where passing the washes he 
lost a great part of his armie, with horsses and car- 
riages ; so that it was judged to be a punishment ap- 
pointed by God, that the spoile, which had beene gotten 
and taken out of churches, abbeies, and other religious 
houses, should perish, and be lost by such means togither 
with the spoilers. Yet the king himself, and a few other, 
escaped the violence of the waters, by following a good 
guide. But, as some have written, he tooke such greefe 
for the losse susteined at this passage, that immediatlie 
thereupon he fell into an ague ; the force and heat where- 
of, togither with his immoderate feeding on rawe peaches, 
and drinking of new sider, so increased his sicknesse, that 
he was not able to ride, but was faine to be carried in a 
litter presentlie made of twigs, with a couch of strawe 



IXTKODUCTION XXV 

under him, without any bed or pillow, thinking to have 
gone to Lincolne ; but the disease still so raged and grew 
upon him, that he was inforced to stale one night at the 
castell of Laford, and, on the next day with great paine, 
caused himselfe to be caried unto Newarke, where, in the 
castell, through anguish of mind, rather than through force 
of sickness, he departed this life before the nineteenth day 
of October, in the yeare of his age fifty and one, and 
after he had reigned seaventeene }'eares, six moneths, and 
seaven and twentie dales. 

"There be which have written, that, after he had lost 
his armie, he came to the abbeie of Swineshead in Lin- 
colnc<;hire, and, there understanding the cheapenesse and 
plentie of corne, shewed himselfe greatlie displeased there- 
with, as he that for the hatred which he bare to the 
English people, that had so traitorouslie revolted from him 
unto his adversarie Lewes, wished all miserie to light 
upon them ; and thereupon said in his anger, that he 
would cause all kind of graine to be at a farre higher 
price, yer manie daies should passe. Whereupon a moonke, 
that heard him speake such words, being mooved with 
zeale for the oppression of his countrie, gave the King 
poison in a cup of ale, wherof he first took the assaie, to 
cause the King not to suspect the matter, and so they 
both died in manner at one time." 

The time supposed to be taken up by the play of 
"^ King John is in all not more than about four months. 
Mr. Daniel has done the necessary analysis once and for 
all. and his successors borrow his tables, as I do here. 



xxvi INTRODUCTION 

Day I. Act I. sc. i. 

An interval. Return of the French ambassador, 
and arrival of John in France. 
Day 2. Act ir. sc. i. 
„ Act III. sc. i. 
,, Act III. sc. ii. and iif. 
An interval. 
Day 3. Act ill. sc. iv. (Some time after the battle, 
since the French know that John has forti- 
fied the places he has won and has returned 
to England : from whence they also have news 
that the Bastard is ransacking the church.) 
An interval : (deaths of Constance, 28th March, 
and Elinor, ist April). 
Day 4. Act IV. sc, i. 

,, Act IV. sc. ii. Hubert announces that "Arthur 

is deceased to-night " ( last night). 
„ Act IV. sc. iii. ^^ Hub. 'Tis not an hour since 
I left him well " ; i.e. at end of Act IV. 
sc. i. 
An interval. 
Day 5. Act V. sc. i. The arrival of Ascension Day, 
the presence of Pandulph, the news of the 
Dauphin's success, demand an interval be- 
fore this Act. On the other hand, the 
Bastard has only now returned from his 
mission to the nobles, and the King now 
hears first of Arthur's actual death. These 
facts would connect the scene closely with 
the preceding. 



INTRODUCTION xxvii 

An interval — for Pandulph's return to the Dau- 
phin, the Bastard's preparation for defence, 
and the march to St, Edmundsbury. 
Day 6. Act v. sc. ii, 
„ Act V. sc. iii. 
„ Act V. sc. iv. 
Act V. sc. V. 
Day 7. Act v. sc. vi. 
„ Act V. sc. vii. 
An "interx'al " means at least a clear twenty-four hours, 
in one day. 

• ••■.••••■a 

As we have pointed out, the construction of the plot 
is entirely the work of the earlier unknown dramatist. 
We have catalogued the most important liberties he has 
taken with chronology and historical fact, and must now 
ask whether he was justified in so doing. He was more 
than justified ; the alterations made were absolutely neces- 
sary in order to obtain sufficient dramatic concentration, 
for it needs no pointing out to see that the play would 
have been utterly impossible as a play if the writer had 
slavishly followed the chronicles. As it is, the identifi- 
cation of Lymoges with Austria, the presence of Blanch 
at the interview between the Kings, and the sudden "clap- 
ping up " of her marriage ; and, above all, the close weav- 
ing together of the Papal interference, the death of Arthur, 
the baronial revolt as if brought about by Arthur's supposed 
murder, and the French invasion — all these are felt to be 
dramatic gains. 

In his adaptation two small points escaped Shakespeare's 



xxviii INTRODUCTION 

notice : in the first place, as we have previously mentioned, 
he does not explain the reason why Faulconbridge should 
so hate the Dauphin ; and, secondly, the monk who poisons 
John does so without any apparent motive, for by this 
time the King has submitted to the Pope. In the Trouble- 
some Raigne things are a little more explicit. Swinsted 
seems to have suffered from John's previous plunderings, 
and, in revenge, the monk poisons the King. 

Shakespeare does not seem to have consulted the 
Chronicles at first hand. Mr. Moore-Smith has indicated 
some minor points which seem to argue for his having 
done so — the accusation of unchastity brought by Con- 
stance against Elinor, the death of Elinor on 1st April, 
the use of the word "supply" in the last Act, and John's 
desire to be buried at Worcester. Even granting that 
Shakespeare did go to the Chronicles, he made no inde- 
pendent use of them in any important detail. 

There is no extant Quarto of King John, that is, it 
does not seem to have been published until it made its 
appearance in the First Folio of 1623. It is mentioned 
in Meres' Palladis Tamia, 1598, in the famous phrase 
" For tragedy : his [Shakespeare's] Richard II., Richard III., 
Henry IV., King John, Titus Andronicus, and his Romeo 
and Juliet!' We have already seen that the first edition 
of the Troublesome Raigne was published in 1591, and a 
reference in King John (Act I. sc. i. 1. 244) to the play 
of S oilman and Perseda published in i 592, completes the 
only dcjinite evidence we have concerning the date of the 
play. Often following what we shall see to be the most 



1 



INTRODUCTION xxix 

flimsy evidence of the purely internal kind — that which 
sees in certain passages obscure allusions to contemporary- 
events — difierent editors have placed the play in every 
year between 1592 and 1598. Malone, for instance, was 
in favour of 1596 for the following reasons: (i) Shake- 
speare's son Hamnet died in August, 1596, and the lamen- 
tations of Constance for her captive son are partly an 
expression of Shakespeare's own grief. (2) Chatillon's 
speech, Act II. sc. i., "a braver choice of dauntless spirits," 
etc., may refer to the fleet sent out against Spain in 1596. 
(3) The lines in Act ill. sc. i. 176-9 — 

And meritorious shall that hand be call'd. 
Canonised and worshipp'd as a saint, 
That takes away by any secret course 
Thy hateful life, 

may refer to the Bull published against Elizabeth in 1596. 
Other reasons are given which are even less plausible than 
these, and we must admit that when one of the greatest 
Shakespearian scholars can, along these lines, only adduce 
such slender evidence as this, we must search in other 
directions for clues to the date of our play. 

First of all, it is quite clear that we are dealing with 
"early Shakespeare." Apart from a certain want of de- 
finite continuity throughout the play — which in itself might 
very well be put down to the close following of the older 
version — we find the "clenches," the lengthy speeches, the 
antithetical answers, the absence of prose, and the more 
inelastic verse characteristic of Shakespeare's earlier manner. 
The minute analysis of this last point — verse — the formid- 
able array of perhaps rather too mechanical " double-ending," 



XXX 



INTRODUCTION 



" light -ending," and "broken-line" tests, together with the 
" rhyme-test," lead us to the same conclusion. Professor 
Herford in his Introduction to the Warwick edition of 
Richard II. thus tabulates the results of these tests: — 





S 








S 








^ 




tt: 


5 


c< 




^ 


05 


27 


a:; 


i: 


Rhyme test 


lO-O 


3-0 


3-5 


17*2 


4\S 


i8-6 


2-9 


32 


Double-ending test 


8-2 


137 


19-5 


8-2 


6-3 


ii-o 


5-1 


ib-3 


20'5 


Light-ending test . 


io*4 


lo-o 


13-1 


14-2 


177 


19-9 


22-8 


21-4 


21-8 


Broken-line test 


0-5 


i-o 


29 


14-9 


I2'I 


7-3 


14-2 


ib-8 


18-3 



These percentages in the first two cases do not en- 
lighten us much, but we notice that in the last two, 
which are generally supposed to be the more trustworthy, 
King John shares with Richard II. the middle place in 
the series, and on general grounds (following what we 
might call the "feeling" test) Richard II. and King John 
seem to be grouped together. Authorities unanimous in 
dating Richard II. about i S93-4 are now equally un- 
animous in dating John either immediately before or im- 
mediately after Richard; we have therefore to choose 
between a date nearer to 1 593 and a date nearer to i 595. 
Nothing can guide us in our choice except a comparison 
of the plays in the hope of discovering signs of greater 
maturity in the treatment of one or the other. But even 
here we are handicapped ; firstly, by the fact that Shake- 
speare deliberately chose to keep close to his "source" 
in so many respects, and therefore did not allow his own 
genius full play, and secondly, by the fact that, in any 



INTRODUCTION xxxi 

case, the pla}'s were written within a vcrj' short time of 
one another. Comparison of the methods and character- 
istics of the two plays yields the following results : 
There is a greater consistency and unity in the treatment 
of Richard's character. He is, all through, the weak, senti- 
mental poseur, whose weakness we pity, and whose poses 
we despise ; but we sympathise with him in his mis- 
fortunes because they are brought about not by crime but 
by incompetence, not by deliberate malice but as a result 
of sentimental impotence. On the other hand, John is at 
■ne and the same time the swift and resolute warrior 
leaping fearlessly upon his enemy, the champion of his 
country against Papal aggression, and the vacillating coward 
far worse than the murderer of Arthur, toadying to Pan- 
dulph and detracting from our sympathy with his awful 
death by the childishness of his unkingly lamentations. 
John is neither the hero nor the villain of the piece but 
Ian unpleasant mixture of both. 

Again, the characters in Richard appear to be drawn 
by a hand at once firmer and more subtle. 

We get to know Bolingbroke gradually and surely as 
the play progresses, every action and almost every word 
add little by little to our conception of his character, and 
that conception is only completed with the last scene of 
the last Act. There is no parallel to this in King John. 
We know Faulconbridge as well at the end of the first 
scene as we do when we close the book. It may be said 
that every scene is a new revelation of John's character. 
Granting that, we still find that the revelation is not 
consistent, natural and inevitable as it is in the case of 



xxxii INTRODUCTION 

Bolingbroke. These arguments and others of a similar kind 
that might be adduced make for the later date of Richard. 

As opposed to that view it may be held that the 
mixture of tragedy and comedy in the play brought 
about by Shakespeare's treatment of the character of the 
Bastard is a sign of more mature work ; besides, the 
continual and fatiguing drop into rhyme in the earlier 
part of Richard and the uncalled-for puns and conceits 
in unwelcome places also seem to indicate that Richard 
was earlier than John. Again, if we examine more closely 
the table of tests just given, and compare only the figures 
relating to Richard and John, we find that the first and 
last are in favour of the earlier date of Richard while the 
other two are against it. The tests therefore are at least 
not against the earlier date of Richard II. 

A comparison between two similar passages, King 
John, II. i. 23 ^/ seq. and Richard II., Ii. i. 40 et seq., may 
give a slight hint as to their order. Shakespeare never 
goes back, and in such cases the more elaborate and fuller 
passage is always the later. In this case the Richard 
passage is far more fully developed than that in Johtt ; 
this seems therefore to make for the later date of Richard. 

The definite truth, however, " by our best eyes cannot be 
censured," and we must therefore candidly date John with 
a hyphen, 1593-5- 

We have dealt with the dry bones of the play as 
Shakespeare took them over from the Troublesome Raigne, 
but we have still to deal with the flesh and blood in which 
he clothed them. 



INTRODUCTION xxxiii 

Once again it is the old story of genius, like the 
" glorious sun " playing 

. . . the alchemist, 
Turning with splendour of his precious eye 
The meagre cloddy earth to glittering gold. 

It is true that the play has its defects. We have 
already partly mentioned the greatest of these, — it has no 
real "hero." John ought to be the hero. He is "cast" 
for it, but cannot play the part. Faulconbridge, although 
prominent, is not quite prominent enough, and, as the 
provider of continual "comic relief," is not dignified enough 
Arthur, in order that the pathos of his situation may be 
more fully developed — in the scene with Hubert it is 
absolutely essential that Arthur should be an innocent 
child — is kept too young, and dies too soon. This want 
of a commanding central figure gives a certain regrettable 
looseness of structure to the play. The minor faults of 
construction we have already noticed, and with them we 
are at the end of our fault-finding. 

When we come to ask what are the strong points of 
the play, we do not know whether to admire most that 
breathing of life into the clay figures of the Raigne, which 
stirred into being men and women worthy to take their 
places in the front ranks of Shakespeare's wondrous array 
of human creations ; or that exhibition of supreme mastery 
of all the detail of stage-craft to be found in every re- 
jection, acceptation or alteration of the arrangement of the 
original. Probably the best way to appreciate these things 
would be to read both plays together, scene for scene and 
speech for speech ; we can hardly illustrate them within 



xxxiv INTRODUCTION 

the limits of an Introduction. But, apart from comparison, 
it is quite easy to recognise the touch of genius in the 
presentation of the character of that "hardy wild head, 
tough and venturous," as the RaignecdXXs him,— the Bastard ; 
in the revelation of the depths of Constance's love and 
grief ; in the pathetic and innocent pleadings of Arthur for 
his eyes ; and, indeed, in the glib sophistry of Pandulph. 

For the detailed stage history of the play the reader 
is referred to the Irving Shakespeare. We know nothing 
of it previous to 1736, when Gibber rehearsed an adapta- 
tion of it entitled Papal Tyranny under King John ; but 
this failed to weather a storm of denunciation from op- 
ponents of any tampering with Shakespeare, and "King 
John in silence modestly expire(d)," as Pope took care to 
inform the world. But in 1745 the aged Gibber saw his 
play actually staged, he himself taking the part of Pan- 
dulph. 

In 1737 Shakespeare's King John was produced by 
Rich at Covent Garden, and Walker's Faulconbridge was 
declared to have been a finer performance than that of 
his successors Garrick, Sheridan, Delane and Barry. 

Between 1737 and 1846 the play was often revived. 
The Constance of Mrs. Gibber and Mrs. Siddons, the King 
John of Garrick, Macready and Charles Kean, and the 
Faulconbridge of Kemble being notable performances. 

Mr. Tree's revival of the play at the Haymarket in 
1899 aroused considerable interest, inasmuch as several 
alterations were made. The play was divided into three 
Acts instead of five, the new divisions being made with 



INTRODUCTION xxxv 

reference to Arthur — Act l. ended with his capture, Act II. 
with his death, Act ill. with John's death as a conse- 
quence of Arthur's. Two tableaux were introduced, one 
of the battle before Angiers, and a second (which is very 
difficult to defend) of the signing of Magna Charta, before 
the last Act. 

As regards the Charter, it does seem strange to us, no 
doubt, that Shakespeare and his predecessor completely 
ignored it But we must remember that in their day the 
importance of the Charter had not begun to be under- 
stood. In any case, its introduction into Mr. Tree's ver- 
sion on account of its historical and constitutional import- 
ance hardly seems justified when we remember that it has 
nothing whatever to do with the plot or development of 
the play. Some cleverly conceiv^ed and very effective 
minor " business " was also introduced, and the revival had 
a longer life than any other. 

In preparing this edition I have availed myself freely 
of the labours of my predecessors, and of the works of 
the army of critics and editors of Shakespeariana, of 
which latter class the Shakespeare's Holinshed, of Mr. Bos- 
well-Stone, stands as a splendid example. 

As regards readings, the fact that there is no Quarto 
of King John makes the correction of corrupt passages a 
matter of pure conjecture, and, consequently, we have had 
made many "giddy, loose suggestions." In all cases I 
have endeavoured to be as conservative of the text as 
possible, and besides, I have had no hesitation in sitting 
firmly on the fence where explanations seem unsatisfactory 



xxxvi INTRODUCTION 

or where probabilities seem evenly balanced ; very rarely 
indeed have I ofifered an independent suggestion, the chief 
instance being the reading of "fury-kindled" for "fiery- 
kindled" in II. i. 358. In one or two instances men- 
tioned and noted passim, I have altered the punctuation. 
Finally, I gratefully acknowledge valuable help from 
Professor Littledale and from the general editor of this 
series. 



THE LIFE AND DEATH OF KING JOHN 



DRAMATIS PERSONS* 

King John. 

Prince Henry, son to the king. 

Arthur, Duke of Breiagne, nephew to the king. 

The Earl of Pembroke. 

The Earl of Essex. 

The Earl of Salisbury. 

The Lord Bigot. 

Hubert de Burgh. 

Robert Faulconbridge, son to Sir Robert Faulconbridge. 

Philip. M^ Bastard, his half-brother. 

James Gurney, servant to Lady Faulconbridge. 

Peter of Pomfret, a prophet. 

Philip, king of Fratice. 

Lewis, the Dauphin. 

Lymoges, Duke of Austria. 

Cardinal Pandulph, the Pope's legate. 

Melun, a French lord. 

Chatillon, ambassador from France to King John. 

Queen Elinor, mother to King John. 

Constance, mother to Arthur. 

Blanch of Spain, niece to King John. 

Lady Faulconbridge. 

Lords, Citizens of Anglers, Sheriff, Heralds, Officers, 
Soldiers, Messengers, and other Attendants. 

Scene: Partly in England, and partly m France. 

* The list of dramatis persona does not appear in the Folios. It was 
first given by Rowe. 

2 



THE LIFE AND DEATH OF 
KING JOHN 

ACT I 

SCENE I.— King Johris Palace. 

Enter King John, Queen Elinor, Pembroke, Essex, 
Salisburv, and others, with Chatillon. 

K. John. Now, say, Chatillon, what would France with us ? 

Chat. Thus, after greeting, speaks the King of France 
In my behaviour to the majesty. 
The borrowed majesty, of England here. 

Eli. A strange beginning : " borrowed majesty ! " 5 

K. John. Silence, good mother ; hear the embassy. 

Chat. Philip of France, in right and true behalf 
Of thy deceased brother Geffrey's son, 
Arthur Plantagcnet, lays most lawful claim 

■with Chatillon] The Folios read their behaviours from the great," and 

"with the Chatty lion of France." Faulconbridge's embassy to the 

Perhaps '"Lord" had dropped out French, v. ii. 128, 129: "Now hear 

before " Chattylion," or perhaps our English king ; For thus his 

" ChatyUion" was taken to mean royalty doth speak in me." 

**Chatelain " or some similar title. g. Arthur . . . claim] Pope need- 

3. In my behaviour] through my lessly omits most. Scan "Arthur 

conduct as ambassador. Compare v. Planug'net, lays most lawful claim." 

i. 50, 51 : " inferior eyes, That borrow Compare 3 Henry VI. i. i. 40 : " Un- 

3 



KING JOHN 



[act I. 



To this fair island and the territories, lO 

To Ireland, Poictiers, Anjou, Touraine, Maine, 

Desiring thee to lay aside the sword 

Which sways usurpingly these several titles, 

And put the same into young Arthur's hand, 

Thy nephew and right royal sovereign. 15 

K. John. What follows if we disallow of this ? 

Chat. The proud control of fierce and bloody war, 
To enforce these rights so forcibly withheld. 

K. John. Here have we war for war and blood for blood, 
Controlment for controlment : so answer France. 20 

Chat. Then take my king's defiance from my mouth, 
The farthest limit of my embassy. 

K. Johft. Bear mine to him, and so depart in peace : 
Be thou as lightning in the eyes of France; 
For ere thou canst report I will be there, 25 



18. cnforce'\ inforce F i. 

less Plantag'net, Duke of York, be 
king " ; and ibid, line 48 : "I '11 plant 
Plantag'net, root him up who dares." 
In many other cases, however, Shake- 
speare gives four syllables to Plan- 
tagenet. 

10. island] One is here tempted to 
keep the older and more correct form 
" Hand " as printed in F i. Compare 
Milton's Comus, line 50 : " On Circe's 
Hand fell." 

10. the territories] There is no 
other case of the use of " the terri- 
tories " in this way by Shakespeare. 
One is tempted to suggest either 
" and the territories Of Ireland," or 
"her territories." In Troublesome 
Raigne, 11. iii. (ed. 1591), we have 
" to England, Cornwall and Wales, 
and to their territories." 

12. Desiring] commanding. Com- 
pare modern English (to a child) : " I 
desire you to come here." 



17. The proud . . . a/ar] the proud 
constraint of fierce and bloody war. 
There is no similar use of the word 
" control " in Shakespeare. In 
Troublesome Raigne, i. ii. 11, however, 
we find : " Till I had with an unre- 
sisted shock Controld the mannage 
of proud Anglers walls"; and in 
Kyd's Spanish Tragedy, i. ii. 138, 

139 : — 

" The trespass that my father made 

in peace 
Is now controll'd by fortune of 
the wars." 

20. controlment: so] Shakespeare 
often uses, as here, an extra syllable 
before the csesura. There is no need 
to alter the second " controlment " to 
"control." 

21. Then take . . . mouth] Com- 
pare Henry V. ill. v. 37 : " Let him 
greet England with our sharp de- 
fiance." 



sc. 1.] KING JOHN 5 

The thunder of my cannon shall be heard : 
So hence ! Be thou the trumpet of our wrath 
And sullen presage of your own decay. 
An honourable conduct let him have : 
Pembroke, look to't. Farewell, Chatillon. 30 

[Exeunt Chatillon and Pembroke. 

Eli. What now, my son ! have I not ever said 

How that ambitious Constance would not cease 

Till she had kindled France and all the world, 

Upon tlie right and party of her son ? 

This might have been prevented and made whole 35 

With very easy arguments of love, 

Which now the manage of two kingdoms must 

With fearful-bloody issue arbitrate. 

K. John. Our strong possession and our right for us. 

Eli. Your strong possession much more than your right, 40 
Or else it must go wrong with you and me : 
So much my conscience whispers in your ear, 
Which none but heaven and you and I shall hear. 

Enter a Sheriff. 

Essex. My liege, here is the strangest controversy 

Come from the country to be judged by you, 45 

That e'er I heard : shall I produce the men ? 

29. An honourable conduct ... 37. the manage of two kingdoms] 

have] In Troublesome Raignc, i. i. Ci i.e. those who manage the two 

et seq. John says : — kingdoms, the powers, the authori- 

" Pembroke, convay him safely to ties. Compare note on line 17 supra. 

the sea, F"leay wished to treat it as a plural 

But not in hast : for as we are noun, but if we take it in the more 

advisde abstract sense this is unnecessary. 
We mean to be in France as 38. fearful-bloody] Mr. Craig sug- 
soone as he." gests the fiyphen — a typically Shake- 
Shakespeare does not ascribe this spearian compound, 
petty treachery to John. Enter a Sheriff] The Trouble- 
29. conduct] safe conduct. some Raigne, Part i., has the stage- 



6 KING JOHN [act I. 

K. John. Let them approach. 

Our abbeys and our priories shall pay 
This expedition's charge. 

Enter Robert Faulconbridge, and Philip Ms bastard 

brother. 

What men are you? 

Bast. Your faithful subject I, a gentleman 50 

Born in Northamptonshire, and eldest son, 
As I suppose, to Robert Faulconbridge, 
A soldier, by the honour-giving hand 
Of Cceur-de-lion knighted in the field. 

K.John. What art thou? 55 

Rob. The son and heir to that same Faulconbridge. 

K.John. Is that the elder, and art thou the heir? 
You came not of one mother then, it seems. 

Bast. Most certain of one mother, mighty king ; 

That is well known ; and, as I think, one father : 60 
But for the certain knowledge of that truth 
I put you o'er to heaven and to my mother : 
Of that I doubt, as all men's children may. 

49. expedition^ %] expeditious F i ; Fleay keeps this reading. 54. Coeiir- 

de-lion] Ff and Troublesome Raigne spell Richard's appellation Cordelion. 

direction, " Enter the Shrive, and some Raigne than in King jfohn. In 

whispers the Earlof Sals, in the eare." Bale's Kynge Johan John is always 

Capell introduced this into Shake- harping on the riches of the Church, 

speare's play, substituting "Essex" See Introduction, 

for " Salisbury." Some such device 54. knighted . . . Jield'] To be 

is necessary, unless we assume that knighted in the field was an honour 

Shakespeare wishes us to believe given only to the bravest fighters, 

that Essex had previous knowledge See Gautier's La Chevalerie for in- 

of the Sheriff's business. stances (pp. 253, 254). Compare also 

48, 49. Our abbeys . . . charge] Cymbeline, v. v. 20. 

This pillaging of the Church plays 62. put yoti o'er to] xtiei yo\i to. 
a much larger part in the Trouble- 



sc. 



,.] KING JOHN 



Eli. Out on thee, rude man ! thou dost shame th>- mother 
And wound her honour with this diffidence. 65 

Bast. I, madam ? no, I have no reason for it ; 

That is my brother's plea and none of mine ; 
The which if he can prove, a' pops me out 
At least from fair five hundred pound a year: 
Heaven guard my mother's honour and my land ! 70 

K. John. A good blunt fellow. Why, being younger born, 
Doth he lay claim to thine inheritance ? 

Bast. I know not why, except to get the land. 
But once he slander'd me with bastardy: 
But whether I be as true begot or no, 75 

That still I lay upon my mother's head ; 
But that I am as well begot, my liege, — 
Fair fall the bones that took the pains for me ! — 
Compare our faces and be judge yourself. 
If old sir Robert did beget us both So 

75. u'/ietlur] Ff 1-3 have where for whetlur according to the pro- 
nunciation. 

64. rude mail] = rude-man. Com- would then require alteration to 
pare "rudesby" in Taming of the "slanders." There seems no ade- 
Shrew, in. ii. to, and Twelfth Night, quate reason for rejecting the obvious 
IV. i. 55. Mr. Craig suggests read- meaning of "once" — in time past, 
ing "Out, out on thee, rude man! "Slander'd" does not here neces- 
Dost shame thy mother ! " sarily imply falseness of accusation 

65. diffidence] obsolete sense of as it does nowadays, but accusation 
"mistrust." Compare King Lear, merely. 

I. ii. 161 : " heedless diffidences, 74-78. But] Vaughan suggests that 

banishment of friends, dissipation of three initial "buts" in five lines 

cohorts." could not be due to Shakespeare. 

69. pound] The singular is often He would put line 76 in brackets, and 

used for the plural by Shakespeare in read " Yet " for " But " in line 77. 

these cases. Here it adds to the 78. Fair fall] fair hap befal. Com- 

colloquialisra of the Bastard's speech, piLTc Richard III. i. iii. 2S2 ; "Now 

who also uses the colloquial a' for fair befal thee and thy noble house '" ; 

he. Beaumont and Fletcher, The Captain, 

74. o«ct']Delius would take "OHC^" iii. 3 : " Fair fall thy sweet face for 

as equivalent to " once for all." Mr. it"; Burns' Lines to a Haggis: 

Wright objects, for "slander'd" " fa;> /a' thy honest sonsie face." 



8 



KING JOHN 



[act 



And were our father and this son like him, 

old sir Robert, father, on my knee 

1 give heaven thanks I was not like to thee! 
K. Jo/vi. Why, what a madcap hath heaven lent 

here! 

Eli. He hath a trick of Coeur-de-lion's face; 
The accent of his tongue affecteth him. 
Do you not read some tokens of my son 
In the large composition of this man? 

K. John. Mine eye hath well examined his parts 

And finds them perfect Richard. Sirrah, speak, 
What doth move you to claim your brother's land? 

Bast. Because he hath a half-face, like my father. 



us 



85 



90 



84. lent'\ sent Hudson {Heath conj.). 
year 1] father ? . . . land, . . . year ? 
year ? Ff 3, 4 ; father, . . . land ; . . 
. . . year I Theobald. 



92-94. father. . . . land ; . , . 
Ff I, 2 ; father, . . . land, . . . 
. year. Capell ; father, . . . land .^ 



85. He hath a trick] Vaughan would 
prefer to read " the trick." As it 
stands it means " He hath a copy of 
Cceur-de-lion's face " ; " trick " being 
a heraldic term for a pen-and-ink 
copy of a coat-of-arms. " Tricked : 
sketched in outline with pen and 
ink " (Boutell's Heraldry, p. 84). 
Compare "Copy of the father, eye, 
nose, lip, The trick of 's frown " (The 
Winter's Tale, 11. iii. 100) ; " The 
trick of that voice I do well remem- 
ber " {King Lear, iv. vi. 108), which 
seem to be less pertinent examples, 
where "trick " is used in the more 
modern sense of " peculiarit}'." 

85. affecteth] resembleth. There 
is no other example of this use in 
Shakespeare. 

88. large compositio7i] big build. 
Compare 1 Henry VI, u. iii. 75 : 
" 'I'ou did mistake The outward com- 
position of his body"; and Lyly's 
Euphucs (ed. Arber, p. 293, line 6) : 



" disposition of the mind follows com- 
position of the body." 

92, 9^. half -face] profile. For 
"half that face'' (line 93) Theobald 
reads "that half-face"; Vaughan 
suggests "half a face," and another 
conjecture i.s " half ihe face." Theo- 
bald's reading seems to be the most 
rational. Half-faced groat : a groat 
with the sovereign's face in profile. 
Compare Boorde, Introduction to 
Knowledge (quoted in New Eng. 
Diet.): "They have half -face 
crowns." There seems to be at 
least a suggestion of contempt in the 
use of the term. Compare 2 Henry 
IV. HI. ii. 283 : " And this same half- 
faced fellow, Shadow . . . the foe- 
man may with as great aim level at 
the edge of a penknife " ; and Mun- 
day's Downfall of Richard Earl of 
Hnntington (quoted in Nero Eng. 
Diet.) : " You half-fac'd groat ! You 
thick- (? thin-) cheek'd chittiface." 



sc. I.] KING JOHN 9 

With half that face would he have all my land : 
A half-faced groat five hundred pound a year! 

Rob. My gracious liege, when that my father lived, 95 
Your brother did employ my father much, — 

Bast. Well sir, by this you cannot get my land : 

Your tale must be how he employ'd my mother. 

Rob. And once dispatch'd him in an embass)- 

To Germany, there with the emperor 100 

To treat of high affairs touching that time. 

The advantage of his absence took the king 

And in the mean time sojourn'd at my father's ; 

Where how he did prevail I shame to speak, 

But truth is truth : large lengths of seas and shores 105 

Between my father and my mother lay, 

As I have heard my father speak himself, 

When this same lusty gentleman was got. 

Upon his death-bed he by will bequeath'd 

His lands to me, and took it on his death no 

That this my mother's son was none of his ; 

And if he were, he came into the world 

Full fourteen weeks before the course of time. 

Then, good my liege, let me have what is mine, 

My father's land, as was my father's will. 115 

100. the emperor] Henry VI. this wound on the thigh." Owing 
no. took it on his death] my to the mention of "death-bed" in 
father swore most solemnly. This line log, Stee\cns explains it as 
phrase, often met with in Elizabethan "entertained it as his fixed opinion 
literature, implies that the person when he was dying." Vaughan 
swearing used the most solemn form takes it to mean " engaged to be re- 
of words known to him. Compare sponsible for .it as for a statement 
the modern phrase " May I die if made at the approach of death," 
..." Falstaff could use this for- which seems to be exactly the mean- 
mula without fear on one point only, ing here. "Oath" has been need- 
See 1 Henry IV. v. iv. 154: "I'll lessly suggested for " d#a//»." 
take it upon my death, I gave him 



10 KING JOHN [act I. 

K. John. Sirrah, your brother is legitimate ; 

Your father's wife did after wedlock bear him, 
And if she did play false, the fault was hers ; 
Which fault lies on the hazards of all husbands 
That marry wives. Tell me, how if my brother, 120 
Who, as you say, took pains to get this son. 
Had of your father claim'd this son for his ? 
In sooth, good friend, your father might have kept 
This calf, bred from his cow, from all the world ; 
In sooth he might ; then, if he were my brother's, 125 
My brother might not claim him ; nor your father. 
Being none of his, refuse him : this concludes ; 
My mother's son did get your father's heir ; 
Your father's heir must have your father's land. 

Rob. Shall then my father's will be of no force 130 

To dispossess that child which is not his? 

Bast. Of no more force to dispossess me, sir. 
Than was his will to get me, as I think. 

Eli. Whether hadst thou rather be a Faulconbridge, 

And like thy brother, to enjoy thy land, 135 

Or the reputed son of Coeur-de-lion, 
Lord of thy presence and no land beside? 

Bast. Madam, an if my brother had my shape, 

134. rather . . . Faulconbridge'] rather, — be Capell ; be ? a Vaughan conj. 
138. an if] The Folios read and if for an i/ continually. 

119. lies on the hazards, etc.] is possess land, or to be reputed the son 

among the risks all husbands must of Cceur-de-lion, keeping his present 

run. appearance, and having no land. 

137. Lordof thy presence]" conUnu- The phrase will also bear the mean- 
ing to possess precisely the same ing of " Lord from thy very appear- 
figure and face which you now have " ance," that is, "your mere appear- 
(Vaughan). As Vaughan points out, ance would tell people that you were 
" whether" proposes two alternatives nobly born." But compare ii. i. 367 
— to be like the legitimate son and infra. 



sc. 



.] 



KINC; JOHN 



11 



And I had his, sir Robert's his, like him ; 

And if my legs were two such riding-rods, 140 

My arms such eel-skins stufTd, my face so thin 

That in mine ear I durst not stick a rose 

Lest men should say " Look, where thrcc-farthings 

goes ! " 
And, to his shajDe, were heir to all this land, 
Would I might never stir from off this place, 145 
I would give it every foot to have this face ; 
I would not be sir Nob in any case. 
Eli. I like thee well : wilt thou forsake thy fortune, 
Bequeath thy land to him and follow me ? 
I am a soldier and now bound to France. 150 

tinguished by a rose or rosette behind 
the head of the queen. The three- 
farthings was so marked (see Haw- 
kins, Silver Coins of England, 2nd 
ed., under "Elizabeth"), hence the 
point ot the allusion in Beaumont and 
Fletcher's Scornful Lady, ui. ii. : — 
" He had a bastard, his own 
toward issue, 
Whipp'd and then cropp'd, 
For washing out the roses in 

three-farthings 
To make 'em pence." 

144. And, to his shape, . . . land] 
and in addition to having his appear- 
ance were heir to all this land that 
is in question. The " this," which 
Vaughan would alter, with great pro- 
bability, to " his," may be a collo- 
quialism. 

145. Would . . . stir] Compare 
The Merry Wives of Windsor, v. v. 
igg : " It I did not think it had been 
Anne Page, would I might never 
stir." 

147. / would not] The first Folio 
reads // would not, which Delius re- 
tains, believing that it refers to 
"face." 

147. Nob] diminutive of Robert, 
used contemptuously by the Bastard. 



139. sir Robert's his] This is) treated 
by Schmidt and Mr. Moore-Smith as 
a double genitive. It may be so ex- 
plained, and be quite in keeping with 
the Bastard's colloquial roughness of 
speech. Vaughan would read "just 
Sir Robert's shape," or "just Sir 
Robert his." The meaning is obvious 
— "if my brother had my shape and 
I had his." .\gain, we may suppose 
the Bastard to be literally pointing 
the finger of scorn at his brother at 
the words " his, like him." 

140. riding-rods] switches. Com- 
pare Cotgrave, " Houssine : a switch, 
... a riding rod of holly ; an holly 
wand." Compare rifOi4«^ry Women 
(1597)1 '•• 53: "And if he give her 
[a horse] but a nod, She thinks it is 
a riding rod." 

141. eel-skins] Compare 2 Henry 
IV. III. ii. 351: "You might have 
thrust him and all his apparel into an 
eel skin." 

143. three farthings] Pieces of this 
value were coined in Elizabeth's reign 
for the first and last time in the 
history of English coinage. As the 
smaller coins were of values closely 
approximating to one another, the 
odd and alternate pieces were dis- 



12 KING JOHN [act I. 

Bast. Brother, take you my land, I '11 take my chance. 

Your face hath got five hundred pound a year, 

Yet sell your face for five pence and 'tis dear. 

Madam, I '11 follow you unto the death. 
Eli. Nay, I would have you go before me thither. 155 
Bast. Our country manners give our betters way. 
K. John. What is thy name? 
Bast. Philip, my liege, so is my name begun ; 

Philip, good old sir Robert's wife's eldest son. 
K. John. From henceforth bear his name whose form 
thou bear'st: 160 

Kneel thou down Philip, but rise more great, 

Arise sir Richard and Plantagenet. 
Bast. Brother by the mother's side, give me your hand : 

My father gave me honour, yours gave land. 

Now blessed be the hour, by night or day, 165 

When I was got, sir Robert was away ! 
Eli. The very spirit of Plantagenet ! 

I am thy grandam, Richard ; call me so. 
Bast. Madam, by chance but not by truth ; what though ? 

Something about, a little from the right, 170 

In at the window, or else o'er the hatch : 

161. Kneel . . . great] The line is defective. Pope, rise up , Steevens, 
arise ; Keightley, to rise. 

169. truth] = honesty = honour- " Go not about, my love hath in 't 

able conduct. a bond 

169. 2vhat though ?]'wha.t of that ? Whereof the world takes note." 
what matters it ? Common in Shake- This speech consists of references to 
speare. See As You Like It, iii. iii. the Bastard's illegitimacy wrapped up 
51; Merry Wives of Windsor, i. i. in everyday phrases and proverbs. 
286; Henry V. il. i. 9. 171. o'er the hatch] over the lower 

170. Something about] something half of a door which opened in two 
indirect, not straightforward. Com- parts, like the door of most country 
pare All s Well that Ends Well, I. smithies to-day. Compare Webster, 
iii. 194 : — Northward Ho, i. i : " Kindred that 

comes in o'er the hatch." 



sc. i] KING JOHN 1.3 

Who dares not stir by day must walk by night, 
And have is have, however men do catch : 

Near or far off, well won is still well shot, 

And I am I, howe'er I was begot I75 

K. John. Go, Faulconbridge : now hast thou thy desire ; 

A landless knight makes thee a landed squire. 

Come, madam, and come, Richard, we must speed 

For France, for France, for it is more than need. 
Bast. Brother, adieu: good fortune come to thee! i8o 

For thou wast got i' the way of honesty. 

[Exeunt all but Bastard. 

A foot of honour better than I was ; 

But many a many foot of land the worse. 

Well, now can I make any Joan a lady. 184 

"Good den, sir Richard!"— "God-a-mercy, fellow!" — 

And if his name be George, I '11 call him Peter ; 

For new-made honour doth forget men's names; 

183. many a many'\ Hanmer reads John and his Joan " ; and Love's 
''many, many a," and Collier, ed. 2 Labour's Lost, in. i. 207: "Some 
(Collier MS.), 'many, ah t many a." men mu.st love my lady and some 
rhe emendations are needless, for yoan.'' 

a many was often used where we use 185. Good den] good-evening, 

many a, e.g. Massinger's Virgin good-even, good-e'en, good-den, and 

Martyr, ii. 2 : " Honesty is some sometimes " god-den," e.g. Henry 

fiend, and frights him hence ; A many V. iii. ii. 89 : " God-den to your wor- 

courtiers love it not"; Edward III. ship, good capuin James." 

in. iii. 162 (Temple ed.): "As 1S5. God-a-mercy] This was the 

'twere a many over-ridden jades"; salutation of a superior to an inferior. 

ibid. iii. 4 (stage-direction) ; " Enter This perhaps is most plainly seen in 

a many Frenchmen flying." This /Irrftu o/F?i;frs/jam, where there are 

passage, like so many others, is quite many examples. 

in keeping with the Bastard's char- 187. For new-made honour, etc.] 

acter and needs no emendation. new-made honour doth forget men's 

184. Joan] Used as a common names; to remember them is to do 
noun. " A generic name for a female them too much honour, and is too 
rustic" [New Eng. Diet.). It was sociable for one who has suddenly 
a common peasant name. Compare been promoted to a high position. 
Gosson's Schoole of Abuse (Arber's The Bastard then goes on to suppose 
Reprints, No. iii. p. 35) : " Every himself seated at dinner with a tra- 



14 



KING JOHN 



[act I. 



'Tis too respective and too sociable 

For your conversion. Now your traveller, 

He and his toothpick at my worship's mess, 190 

And when my knightly stomach is sufficed, 

Why then I suck my teeth and catechize 

My picked man of countries : *' My dear sir," 

Thus, leaning on mine elbow, I begin, 

" I shall beseech you " — that is question now ; 195 

And then comes answer like an Absey book : 

**0 sir," says answer, "at your best command; 

At your employment ; at your service, sir : " 

" No, sir," says question, " I, sweet sir, at yours : " 

And so, ere answer knows what question would, 200 

Saving in dialogue of compliment, 

And talking of the Alps and Apennines, 

The Pyrenean and the river Po, 

rennean Ff 2, 3, 4 ; Pyreneans Collier, 



203. Pyrenean] Perennean F i ; Py 
ed. 2 (Collier MS.). 

veiled man. Holt White, followed 
by Mr. Wright, believes "picked 
man of countries " to mean " travelled 
fop," while Steevens and others take 
"of countries" as equivalent to 
" about countries " and depending 
upon " catechize." The toothpick 
was a sign of travelled foppishness. 
The "mess" seems to have been a 
table laid for four, guests at a great 
dinner being arranged in fours (see 
Dyce-Littledale). Malone takes " at 
my worship's mess" to mean "At 
that part of the table where I, as a 
knight, shall be placed," that is, 
above the salt (ibid.). The "Absey 
book " was the ABC book or primer, 
which often included the Catechism. 
193. pickcd^Hmkm. Compare Lyly, 
Etiphiies (ed. Arber, p. 277, line 27) : 
" then they used to woo in plain 
terms, now in piked sentences." 



201. Saving] Theobald, after a 
conjecture of Warburton's, reads 
Serving. Vaughan, in Notes and 
Queries (1882) suggests Sharing or 
Halving or Salving ; while in his 
1886 edition he says : " The line 
should certainly run : ' Salving in 
dialogue of compliment ' " ; the idea 
being that the two speakers were 
merely soothing one another by 
bandying compliments. If we take 
the line as it stands — " Before the 
answering man knows what the ques- 
tioner would, except in so far as 
customary complimentary retorts are 
concerned" — we leave "And so" 
in the air; but having regard to 
the looseness of structure of the 
whole speech, this ma}' not be im- 
possible. We may shuffle out of the 
difficulty by suspecting a dropped 
line. 



sc. i] KING JOHN 15 

It draws toward supper in conclusion so. 

But this is worshipful societ}-, 205 

And fits the mounting spirit like myself; 

For he is but a bastard to the time 

That doth not smack of observation ; 

And so am I, whether I smack or no ; 

And not alone in habit and device, 210 

Exterior form, outward accoutrement, 

But from the inward motion to deliver 

Sweet, sweet, sweet poison for the age's tooth : 

Which, though I will not practise to deceive, 

Yet, to avoid deceit, I mean to learn ; 215 

For it shall strew the footsteps of my rising. 

But who comes in such haste in ridinsf-robes ? 

What woman-post is this ? hath she no husband 

That will take pains to blow a horn before her? 

Enter Ladv Faulconbridge and jAMES GURNEV. 

O me! it is my mother. How now, good lady? 320 
What brings you here to court so hastily ? 
Lady F. Where is that slave, thy brother ? where is he, 
That holds in chase mine honour up and down ? 

204. toward] Ff i, 2 ; towards Ff 3, 4. 208, 209. smack . . . smack] 

Theobald's emendation ; smoake . . . smacke Ff i, 2 ; smoak . . . smack 
Ff 3, 4; smcuk . . . smoak Pope. 220. it is] Pope; 'tis Ff. 

207. For he is but a bastard, etc.] 208. observation] the observing of 

For he is but a bastard to this age the wishes of others, i.e. obsequious- 

who Is not a little obsequious. But ness. 

I am a bastard in any case, not in 212. iwzt^ard »iofio«] " movements " 

appearance alone but inwardly also, of the mind. Compare Lyiy, £«/>/jMf5 

for I will not use flattery. I shall (ed..\rber, p. 236, line 25): "carried the 

learn it though ; not to deceive others motion of his mind in his manners." 
but to avoid being decei%'ed, for as I 213. sweet . . . tooth] Compare 

rise flattery will be strewn before me Lyly, Euphues (ed. Arber, p. 34, line 

like flowers before one making a pro- 27) : " followed unbridled affection, 

gress. most pleasant for his tooth." 



16 



KING JOHN 



[act I. 



Bast. My brother Robert ? old sir Robert's son ? 

Col brand the giant, that same mighty man? 225 

Is it sir Robert's son that you seek so ? 
Lady F. Sir Robert's son ! Ay, thou unreverend boy, 

Sir Robert's son : why scorn'st thou at sir Robert ? 

He is sir Robert's son, and so art thou. 
Bast. James Gurney, wilt thou give us leave awhile ? 230 
Gur. Good leave, good Philip. 
Bast. Philip ! sparrow : James, 

There 's toys abroad : anon I '11 tell thee more. 

\Exit Gurney. 

Madam, I was not old sir Robert's son : 

Sir Robert might have eat his part in me 



232. toys] noise Gould conj. 

225. Colbrand the giant] A popular 
giant and "bug" in Elizabethan 
times. Compare Ralph Roister 
Doister, i. ii. 123: "Who is this? 
Great Goliah, Sampson or Col- 
brand " ; and Henry VIII. v. iv. 22 : 
" I am not Samson, nor Sir Guy, 
nor Colbrand To mow 'em down be- 
fore me." He was one of the 
mightiest giants overthrown by Guy 
of Warwick. He had been brought 
by the Danes as their champion from 
Africa, and was overthrown by Guy 
before King Athelstan at Winchester. 
(See the fifteenth century version of 
Guy of Warwick, ed. Zupitza, Early 
English Text Society, 1876.) 

231. Philip I sparrow]The sparrow 
from its chirp was often called Philip 
or Phip. We may remember Skel- 
ton's Boke of Phyllip Sparowe ; and 
Sidney's Astrophel and Stella (ed. 
Grosart, i. 109, no) (To a Sparrow) : 
"Good brother Philip" and "Leave 
that Syr Phip " ; and " ad solam 
dominam usque pi pia bat" (Lesbia's 
Sparrow, Catullus). The Bastard is 
now no longer Philip Faulconbridge 



but Sir Richard Plantagenet, and is 
playfully rebuking Gurney for calling 
him by his old name, at the same 
time raising his curiosity which he 
promises to satisfy later. Theobald's 
(Warburton's) and Grey's readings — 
Philip, — spare me, and Philip — spare 
oh ! — are amusing. 

232. toys] Compare Edward III. 
IV. iii. 83 : " But all are frivolous 
fancies, toys and dreams." As 
Steevens says, Shakespeare uses the 
word with great latitude. Here it 
seems to mean rumours. Compare 
The Winter's Tale, in. iii. 39 : 
" Dreams are toys " ; and Midsummer- 
Night's Dream, v. i. 3 : "I never may 
believe These antique fables nor these 
fairy toys." The broad meaning, 
" imaginary things," would cover all 
these uses. 



234. 235. eat 



fast] Prover- 



bial. Compare Heywood's Proverbs 
(1564), ed. Sharman (1874) : " He 
may his part on good Fridaie eate, 
And fast never the wurs, for ought he 
shall geate." 



sc. i] KING JOHN 17 

Upon Good-Friday and ne'er broke his fast : 235 

Sir Robert could do well : marr}', to confess, 
Could he get me ? Sir Robert could not do it : 
We know his handiwork : therefore, good mother, 
To whom am I beholding for these limbs? 
Sir Robert never holp to make this leg. 240 

Lady F. Hast thou conspired with thy brother too, 

That for thine own gain shouldst defend mine honour ? 
What means this scorn, thou most untoward knave ? 

Bast. Knight, knight, good mother, Basilisco-like. 

What ! I am dubb'd ! 1 have it on my shoulder. 245 

But, mother, I am not sir Robert's son ; 

I have disclaim'd sir Robert and my land ; 

I^itimation, name and all is gone: 

Then, good my mother, let me know my father ; 

Some proper man, I hope: who was it, mother? 250 

Lady F. Hast thou denied thyself a Faulconbridge ? 

Bast. As faithfully as I deny the devil. 

236, 237. Sir Robert . . . do it] Compare The Taming of the Shrew, 

Vaughan suggests a plausible altera- iv. v. 79 : " If she be froward, Then 

tion in the punctuation : — thou hast taught Hortensio to be un- 

"Sir Robert could do well, tou-ard." 

(Marry, to confess,) 244. Basilisco-like] Theobald first 

Could he get me. Sir Robert pointed out the allusion to Kyd's 

could not do it." Soliman and Perseda : — 

The meaning is plain and is prefer- ''Bus. I, the aforesaid Basilisco, — 

able to that of the generally accepted Knight, good fellow, Knight, 

reading, where " Sir Robert could do Knight, — 

well" seems meaningless when con- Pist. Knave, good fellow, Knave, 

trasted with the next line, while Knave." 

" marry, to confess," has to be treated A large early cannon was called a 

as a mere cliche. Keightley reads " to basilisco or basilisk, 

confess the truth," and Dycc, follow- 247, 248. Robert ... 15 gone] 

ing the Collier MS., reads "could not Fleay, after a conjecture of Sidney 

get me," neither of which is satisfac- Walker's, reads "Robert ; and my 

tory. The Folios read " Could get land. Legitimation name and all is 

me Sir " without a stop after " me." gone," an improvement certainly, 

The reading in the text is Pope's. but the accepted text is quite sound 

243. tintotvard] bad - mannered, in meaning. 



18 



KING JOHN 



[act I. 



Lady F. King Richard Coeur-de-lion was thy father: 
By long and vehement suit I was seduced 
To make room for him in my husband's bed: 255 
Heaven lay not my transgression to my charge ! 
^ ^ (Thou art the issue of my dear offence, 

Which was so strongly urged past my defence. 
Bast. Now, by this light, were I to get again, 

Madam, I would not wish a better father. 260 

Some sins do bear their privilege on earth, 

And so doth yours ; your fault was not your folly : 

Needs must you lay your heart at his dispose, 

Subjected tribute to commanding love, 

Against whose fury and unmatched force 265 

The aweless lion could not wage the fight, 

Nor keep his princely heart from Richard's hand. 

He that perforce robs lions of their hearts 

May easily win a woman's. Ay, my mother. 

With all my heart I thank thee for my father! 270 



257. Thou] F 4 ; That Ff i, 2, 3. 267. hand] hands F 4. 



257. Thou] If we read That with 
the first three Fohos, then it seems 
necessary to read thy charge with 
Staunton and Long MS. in the previ- 
ous line. Delius reads That, con- 
necting it with my transgression 
(Wriglit), which is hardly so likely. 
Evidence and probability seem equally 
balanced between Lady Faulcon- 
bridge's praying that she should not 
be punished for her transgression 
since she was forced into it, and pray- 
ing that her transgression should not 
be visited upon the innocent issue of 
it. 

257. dear offence] either offence for 
which I have paid dearly (as Mr. 
Wright suggests), or my own private 



offence. Compare Richard II. i. i. 
130:— 

"Upon remainder of a dear ac- 
count." 

266. The aweless lion, etc.] Allud- 
ing to the legend of Coeur-de-lion. 
Richard, being in the clutches of the 
King of Almain, is to be put to death 
by a fasting lion. The beast, however, 
is nearly felled by a blow from 
Richard's fist, and as it is opening 
its mouth to roar previous to renew- 
ing the attack, Richard thrusts his 
arm down its throat and tears out 
its heart, which he eats later before 
the assembled court (see Ellis, 
Early Eng. Metr. Romances, pp. 296, 
297)- 



SC. I.] 



KING JOHN 



19 



Who lives and dares but say thou didst not well 
When I was got, I '11 send his soul to hell. 
Come, lady, I will show thee to my kin ; 

And they shall say, when Richard me begot. 
If thou hadst said him nay, it had been sin : 

Who says it was, he lies ; I say 'twas not. 



275 



276. Who says . . . 'twas not] 
" The stanza is nonsense as the last 
line now stands. . . . Shakespeare 
unquestionably wrote : — 

' If thou hadst said him " nay," 
it had been sin. 
Who says " ay " was, he lies ; I 
say 'twas not' " 



[Exeunt. 

(Vaughan). Vaughan's suggestion 
seems quite un-Shakespearian. Still, 
literally, the stanza »5 nonsense in its 
present shape. The meaning is 
obvious, but we arrive at it by wrest- 
ing round the " it " in the last line to 
mean Lady Faulconbridge's surrender 
to CcEur-de-lion. 



ACT II ^^ 

SCENE I. — France. Before Angiers. 

Enter AUSTRIA attd forces, drums, etc., on one side: on 
the other KING PHILIP of France and his power ; 
Lewis, Arthur, Constance, and attendants. 

Lew. Before Angiers well met, brave Austria. 
Arthur, that great 'forerunner of thy blood, 
Richard, that robb'd the lion of his heart 
And fought the 'holy wars in Palestine, 

* 

By this brave Duke came early to his grave : 5 

And for amends to his posterity, 
^At our importance hither is he come, 
To spread his colours, boy, in thy behalf, 
And to rebuke the "usurpation 

Of thy unnatural uncle, English John: 10 

Embrace him, love him, give him welcome hither. 
Arth. God shall forgive you Coeur-de-lion's death 
The rather that you give his offspring life, 

Act II. Scene /.] This is the second " Maria writ 

scene of Act i. in the Folios. The letter at Sir Toby's great 

2. great forerunner] Shakespeare importance.''' 

is here in error if "forerunner " is 13. The rather that] all the more 
taken to mean direct ancestor. Cceur- because. Compare Hamlet, iv. vii. 
de-lion and King John were both 70 : — 
uncles of Arthur. " My lord, I will be ruled ; 

7. At our importance] upon our TAt rai/t^r, if you could devise it 

importuning him. Compare Twelfth so 

Night, V. i. 371 : — That I might be the organ." 

20 



sc. i] KING JOHN 21 

Shadowing their right under your wings of war : 
I giv^e you welcome with a 'powerless hand, 15 

But with a heart full of unstained love : 
Welcome before the gates of Angiers, duke. 

Lew. A noble boy ! 'Who would not do thee right ? 

Aust. Upon thy cheeky lay I this zealous kiss, 

As seal to this 'indenture of my love, 20 

That to my home I will no more return, 
Till Angiers and the** right thou hast in France, 
Together with that pale, that 'white-faced shore, 
Whose foot spurns back the ocean's roaring tides 
And coops from other lands her islanders, 25 

V Even till that England, hedged in with the main, 
That water-walled bulwark, still secure 
And confident from foreign purposes, 
Even till that utmost corner of the west 
Salute thee for her king : till then, fair boy, 30 

Will I not think of home, but follow arms. 

Const. O, take his mother's thanks, a widow's thanks, 

Till your strong hand shall help to give him strength 
To make a more requital to your love ! 

29. utmozt^ Ff I, 2, 3 ; outmost F 4. 

18. do thee right] take thy part. A chant of Venice, v. i. 97, a poetical 

common Shakespearian usage. expression which may be rendered as 

25. coops] protects by shutting in. " the continent of waters." It would 
So 3 Henry VI. v. i. 109: "Alas! I then mark the transition between 
am not coop'd here for defence." main = land and main = water. 
This speech recalls Gaunt's dying Compare" Sailing the Spanish ma/w " 
words in Richard II., and may have in the Wreck of the Hesperus. See 
some bearing on the question of the also Friar Bcuon (1594), ed. Gayley. 
dating of King John and Richard II. One reading of i. viii. 59, 60 has : — 
See Introduction. " And draw the dolphins to thy 

26. main] Hakluyt generally used lovely eyes 

this word for mainland. We have To daunce lavoltas in the purple 

"a main of waters" in The Mer- main." 



22 KING JOHN [act ii. 

Ausf. The peace of heaven is theirs that lift their swords 
In such a just and charitable war. 36 

JC. Phi. Well then, to work : our cannon shall be bent 
Against the brows of this resisting town. 
Call for our chiefest men of discipline, 
•To cull the plots of best advantages: 40 

We'll lay before this town our royal bones, 
Wade to the market-place in Frenchmen's blood, 
But we will make it subject to this boy. 

Const. Stay for an answer to your embassy, 

Lest unadvised you stain your swords with blood : 45 
My Lord Chatillon may from England bring 
That 'right in peace which here we urge in war, 
And then we shall repent each drop of blood 
That hot rash haste so' indirectly shed. 

Enter Chatillon. 

K. Phi. A wonder, lady ! lo, upon thy wish, 50 

Our messenger Chatillon is arrived ! 
What England says, say briefly, gentle lord ; 
We coldly pause for thee ; Chatillon, speak. 

37. work : our'\ work, our F 4 ; work our F 3 ; worke our Ff i, 2. 

37. cannoji] To avoid the anach- Compare The Merchant of Venice, 

ronism Pope substituted "engines" iv. i. 359: — 

for ^'^ cannon," with needless pre- "/H^iV^fi/j and directly too 

cision. Thou hast contrived against the 

40. To cull, etc.] "either to select very life." 
positions which will be most favour The meaning here is nearer to " indis- 
able to us" (Steevens, Mr. Wright), erectly" than to " underhandedly," 
or to take counsel together, to discuss although precipitating a fight before 
the most profitable plans. The the return of a possibly peaceful 
latter explanation seems to fall in answer from the opponent might be 
more with calling upon the " chiefest called "indirection" by an honour- 
men of discipline." able soldier. Cotgrave has "/«(if>a7^- 

45. u«a(ft;jsecf] unadvisedly, hastily, vient : in-directl^', ... by unfit 

49. indirectly] generally means means." 
underhandedly in Shakespeare. 53. coldly] dispassionately. 



sc. 1.] KIXC^ JOHN 23 

Chat. Then turn your forces from this paltry siege 

And stir them up against a mightier task. 55 

England, impatient of your just demands, 

Hath put himself in arms : the adverse winds, 

Whose leisure I have stay'd, have given him time 

To land his legions all as soon as I ; 

His marches are expedient to this town, 60 

His forces strong, his soldiers confident. 

With him along is come the "mother-queen, 

•Aji Ate, stirring him to blood and strife ; 

With her her niece, the Lady Blanch of Spain ; 

With them a bastard of the "king's deceased ; 65 

And all the unsettled humours of the land, 

Rash, inconsiderate, fiery voluntaries. 

With ladies' faces and fierce dragons' spleens, 

Have sold their fortunes at their native homes. 

Bearing their birthrights proudly on their backs, 70 

70. birthrights] Ff i, 2; birthright Ffj, 4. 

60. His marches . . . towti] he is 65. a bastard . . . deceased] We 

inarching to this town with all ex- should now say "a bastard of the 

pedition. See line 223 iii/ra : — deceased king's '' This inversion 

"Who painfully with much ex- was common in Elizabethan writings, 

pedient march yet it was apparently corrected in 

Have brought a countercheck Folios 2-4, which read " King." 

before your gates " ; The line is almost verbally the same 

and IV, ii. 268 infra : — in Troublesome Raigne : " Next them 

" to my closet bring a bastard of the King's deceast." 

The angr>' lords with all ex- 67. voluntaries] volunteers. Com- 

pedient haste." pare Cotgrave, " volontaire : a 

63. i4^«] Rowe's famous emendation voluntarie, one that serves or does 

of the Ace of the Folios. Compare anything without pay or compul- 

Julius Ccesar, ill. i. 271: '• Cassar's sion." 

spirit, ranging for revenge. With Ate 68. dragons' spleens] Compare 

by his side come hot from hell." See Richard III. v. iii. 350: "Inspire 

also Friar Bacon (1594), ed. Gayley, us with the spleen of fiery dragons." 

I, X. 137 : The dragon was the most fearful wild 

" Fond Atae, doomer of bad boad- fowl of Bartholomew and the Hortus 

ing fates, Saiiitatis of Topsell. 

That wrappes proud fortune in 70. Bearing their birthrights, etc.] 

thy snaky locks."' Compare Henry VIII. i. i. 84 : — 



24 KING JOHN [act h. 

To make a hazard of new fortunes here : 
In brief, a braver choice of dauntless spirits 
Than now the English bottoms have waft o'er 
Did never float upon the swelling tide, 
To do offence and scath in Christendom. • 75 

\_Dru7n beats. 
The interruption of their churlish drums 
Cuts off more "circumstance : they are at hand, 
To parley or to fight : therefore prepare. 

K. Phi. How much unlook'd for is this expedition ! 

Aust. By how much unexpected, by so much 80 

We must awake endeavour for defence; 
For courage mounteth with occasion : 
Let them be welcome then; we are prepared. 

Enter King JOHN, Elinor, Blanch, the Bastard, 

Lords, and Forces. 

K. John. Peace be to France, if France in peace permit 
Our just and lineal entrance to our own ; 85 

If not, bleed France, and peace ascend to heaven, 
Whiles we, God's wrathful agent, do correct 
Their proud contempt that beats His peace to heaven. 

K. Phi. Peace be to England, if that war return 

From France to England, there to live in peace. 90 

" O, many 82. wiih occasion] when the emer- 

Have broke their backs with gency demands. 

laying manors on them." 87. Whiles] the genitive form of 

73. bottoms] -vessels. Used techni- while (A.S. hwil) used adverbially, 

cally in this sense at the present Common in Shakespeare. Rowe 

day. reads Whilst. 

77. circumstance] detailed descrip- 88, beats] H^Lnmer reads heat, muk- 

tion, attendant detail. Compare ing that refer to the plural pronoun 

Othello, III. iii. 355 : " Pride, pomp, contained in their and not to contempt 

and circumstance of glorious war." — a needless alteration. 



c. I] KING JOHN 25 

England we love ; and for that England's sake 

With burden of our armour here we sweat. 

This toil of ours should be a work of thine; 

But thou from loving England art so far, 

That thou hast under-wrought his lawful king, 95 

Cut off the sequence of posterity, 

Out-faced infant state, and done a rape 

Upon the maiden virtue of the crown. 

Look here upon thy brother Geffre\''s face ; 

These eyes, these brows, were moulded out of his : 

This little abstract doth contain that large 10 1 

Which died in Geffrey, and the hand of time 

Shall draw this brief into as huge a volume. 

That Geffrey was thy elder brother born, 

And this his son ; England was Geffrey's right, 105 

And this is Geffrey's in the name of God ; 

106. Geffrey'i . . . God;] Gcffreyei in the name of God: Ff i, 2, 3 
{Geffreys F 3) ; Geffreys, in the name of God, F 4 ; Geffrey's : in the name 
0/ God Cambridge Editors. 

95. That . . . king] that thou hast the larger volume, Geffrey. Compare 

undermined the lawful king 01 Eng- Edward III. 11. i. 82 : — 

land, //ii is the neuter possessive pro- "Whose body is zn abstract or a 

noun. Collier MS. reads her, to agree brief 

with the personification of England. Contains each general virtue i'' 

97. Out-faced infant state] Gould the world." 
conjectures " Out-raced infant right." 106. And this is Geffrey's . . . 
Mr. Wright explains the line as God] Apart from the variations in the 
"browbeaten, put down by intimida- punctuation of the Folios this reading 
tion or bravado, the state that belongs has much exercised the critics. The 
to an infant." " Out-faced" is simple difticulty lies in the phrase "And this 
enough, but "infant state" offers is Geffrey's." We cannot add " son " 
some difficulty. How can the state because ofthe previous line. V'aughan 
or majesty that belongs to an infant suggests "And is this Geffrey's," i.e. 
be browbeaten ? And can John's Arthur's, as opposed to " that " 
conduct be described in this way ? Geffrey's — the dead father's. Fail- 
Can -'out-raced" mean "out- ing that, and following out the same 
rooted"? Compare "a race of idea, he would read "And this is 
ginger " = a root of ginger. Geffrey." In default of better, 

loi. This little abstract, etc.] Vaughan's suggestion is preferable 

Philip calls Arthur a small copy of to the others. 



26 KING JOHN [act n. 

How comes it then that thou art call'd a king, 
When living blood doth in these temples beat, 
Which owe the crown that thou o'ermasterest ? 

K. John. From whom hast thou this great commission, 
France, no 

To draw my answer from thy articles ? 

K. Phi. From that supernal judge, that stirs good thoughts 
In any breast of strong authority, 
To look into the blots and stains of right : 
That judge hath made me guardian to this boy: 115 
Under whose warrant I impeach thy wrong, 
And by whose help I mean to chastise it. 

K. John. Alack, thou dost usurp authority. 

K. Phi. Excuse ; it is to beat usurping down. 

Eli. Who is it thou dost call usurper, France? - 120 

Const. Let me make answer ; thy usurping son. 

Eli. Out, insolent ! thy bastard shall be king, 

That thou mayst be a queen, and check the world ! 

Const. My bed was ever to thy son as true 

113. hreasf] beast F i. iig. Excuse ;] so Malone ; Excuse it is Ff. 

109. owe] own. Frequent in Staunton, with great probability, 

Shakespeare. Compare Comedy of claims this as a metaphor taken from 

Errors, in. i. 42 : — chess. 

" What art thou that keepest me 124, 125. My bed . , . husband} 

out from the house I owe ? " It seems strange that Constance 

111. from thy articles] Hanmer should compare her own fideHty with 
prints " to." " Articles " are the sec- that of the person whom she accuses 
tions of a formal document, and the of infidelity a moment later (line 
idea conveyed here is that Philip has 130). Elinor too had been divorced 
been taxing John as if he were reading from Louis VII. for infidelity. To 
a formal indictment. avoid the difficulty Vaughan proposes 

112. supernal] Thli^ is the sole use to read : " As <(i mc was wj husband." 
of the word by Shakespeare, but it is It may be that Shakespeare was con- 
found in contemporaries. See Cot- tent to make Constance femininely 
grave, Sir Thomas More, Milton, illogical in her passion. Mr. Craig's 
Formed by analogy with infernal suggestion that Constance meant 
(Mr. Wright). " My bed was at least as true as 

123. That thou . . . world] yours " avoids the difficulty. 



sc. 



,.] KING JOHN 27 



As thine was to thy husband; and this boy 125 

Liker in feature to his father Geffrey 

Than thou and John in manners ; being as like 

As rain to water, or devil to his dam. 

My boy a bastard ! By my soul, I think 

His father never was so true begot: 130 

It cannot be, an if thou wert his mother. 

Eli. There's a good mother, boy, that blots thy father. 

Const. There 's a good grandam, boy, that would blot 
thee. 

Aust. Peace ! 

Bast. Hear the crier. 

Aust. What the devil art thou ? 

Bast. One that will play the devil, sir, with you, 135 

An a' may catch your hide and you alone: 
You are the hare of whom the proverb goes. 
Whose valour plucks dead lions by the beard : 
I '11 smoke your skin-coat, an I catch you right ; 
Sirrah, look to't; i' faith, I will, i' faith. 140 

127. John in manners ; being] Capell ; John, in manners being Ft'. 
133. There's . . . thee] Pope; two lines in Ff, ending boy, . . . thee. 

127. jfohn in manners ; being] in this connection by Iilizabethan 

Vaughan suggests " manners, — writers. 

being," for the comparison of devil 136. vo«r //iJfj Austria was wearing 

and his dam is, of course, more closely the lion's skin he had taken from 

connected with John and his mother Cceur-dc-lion. 

than with Arthur and Constance. 137. the proverb] Given by Erasmus 

The "devil and his dam" are evi- amongst his /Irfa^ia: " niortuo leoiii 

denlly two personages from the Moral- et lepores insultant." Compare Re- 

ity plays. Compare Ralph Roister turn from Panias5i/i (p. 71, cd. Mac- 

Dttister, u. iv. 38: "the devil's dam ray): " Soo hares may pull deade 

was ne'er so bang'd in hell." " Play lions by the bearde." 
the devil " (line 135) would mean 139. smoke] beat. Halliwell says 

" play as violent a part as the devil that in Devonshire it means " to abuse 

of the Moralities." a person," and in th--- North "to beat 

132. blots] impute dishonour to. severely." To strike one so violently 

Continually used as noun and verb as to make dust fly out of the coat. 



28 



KING JOHN 



[act ii. 



Blanch. O, well did he become that lion's robe 
That did disrobe the lion of that robe ! 

Bast. It lies as sightly on the back of him 
As great Alcides shows upon an ass : 
But, ass, I 'II take that burthen from your back, 145 
Or lay on that shall make your shoulders crack. 

Aust. What cracker is this same that deafs our ears 
With this abundance of superfluous breath? 
King Philip, determine what we shall do straight. 

K. Phi. Women and fools, break off your conference. 1 50 
King John, this is the very sum of all ; 
England and Ireland, Anjou, Touraine, Maine, 
In right of Arthur do I claim of thee: 
Wilt thou resign them and lay down thy arms? 



152. Anjoti] Theobald ; Atigiers Ff. 

144. Alcides shows] The Folios 
read "Alcides shooes " ("shoos," 
F 4). Editors quote a proverb from 
Gosson's Schoolc of Abuse: "Too 
draw the Lyon's skin upon Aesop's 
Asse, Hercules shoes on a childes 
feete." It may therefore be possible 
that Shakespeare had a confused 
recollection of Gosson's lines in his 
mind and that the reading of the 
Folios is correct. Fleay prints 
"shoes . . . ape," and suggests 
"dwarf" or "child" to take the 
place of '■ ass." Rejecting "shows" 
and " shoes," Keightley reads 
" shew'd," and suggests " should." 
Hudson, following a conjecture of 
Vaughan's, reads "does." Kinnear 
conjectures "spoil," and Gould 
" robes." Mr. Worrall (see Warwick 
ed.) suggests that if "shows" is 
right, it is a verb. The reading in 
the text is that ot Theobald, followed 
by most modern editors. It is in any 
case preferable to the Folios' reading, 
which can only be defended by sup- 



posing that Shakespeare was guilty 
of a most senseless confusion. There 
is no possible point in speaking of an 
ass wearing the shoes of Hercules, 
and as Vaughan pointed out, the 
question concerns something vv'orn or 
borne upon the back. 

147. cracker] boaster. Cotgrave 
has " se vanter, ... to crack." 
Compare Ralph Roister Doister, i. i. 

35:— 

" All the day long is he facing 
and cracking 
Of his great acts in fighting and 
fraymaking." 
And compare the modern "a thing 
much cracked-up," i.e. boasted about, 
and " a crack player." 

149. King Philip] The Folios read 
" King Lewis." The emendation is 
Theobald's. Lewis was not king, 
and Austria was not likely to appeal 
to him for a final decision in anything 
of moment. We must, therefore, 
suppose a mistaken substitution of 
Lewis for Philip. 



SC 1.] 



KING JOHN 



21) 



K. John. My life as soon: I do defy thee, France. 155 
Arthur of Bretagne, yield thee to my hand : 
And out of my dear love I '11 give thee more 
Than e'er the coward hand of France can win : 
Submit thee, boy. 

Eli. Come to thy grandam, child. 

Const. Do, child, go to it grandam, child ; 160 

Give grandam kingdom, and it grandam will 
Give it a plum, a cherry, and a fig : 
There's a good grandam. 

A rth. Good my mother, peace ! 

I would that 1 were low laid in my grave : 
I am not worth this coil that's made for me. 165 

Eli. His mother shames him so, poor boy, he weeps. 
\ Const. Now shame upon you, whether -Shei does or no! 

His grandam's wrongs, and not his mother's shames 
Draws those heaven-moving pearls from his poor eyes, 
Which heaven shall take in nat'ire o<" a fee; 170 



156. Bretagne] Hanmer ; Britaine Ff i, 2; Britain F 3; Brittain F 4. 
168. wrongs] Ff i, 2, 3 ; wrong F 4. 



156. Bretagne] This spelling of 
Hanmer's, in spite of its suggestion 
of French pronunciation, is adopted 
by most modern editors to avoid 
confusion with Britain. Shake- 
speare spelt Britanny and Britain in 
the same way. 

160, etc. it] Baby talk. Capell 
could .not suffer "»/" to remain and 
reads *'ifs"l Pope put the whole 
passage down as spurious, from 
"Submit thee" to " repetitions," in 
spite of such lines as 165, 168- 
172. 

165. coil] CotgTzvt hzs " vac arme, 
. . . a tumultuous garboil, hurly- 
burly, stir, coil." Once thought to 




be Celtic in origin, like many other 
words of untraceable pedigree. Pro- 
bably of slang derivation (see New 
Eng. Diet.). 

168, i6g. wrongs, . . . shames 
Draics] The usual defence of this 
grammatical error, that a singular 
phrase has been slipped in between 
the nominative and verb, does not 
hold good here. VVe have either to 
suppose a misprint or believe with Dr. 
Abbott that the Elizabethan ear, owing 
to dialectic influences, was less sensi- 
tive than ours. It seems preferable 
to blame the printer's eye rather than 
Shakespeare's ear. Folio 4 corrects 
the error, but not happily. 




W 



<J 



30 



KING JOHN 

5 



[act II. 



Ay, with these crystal beads heaven shall be bribed 
To do him justice and revenge on you. 

Eli. Thou monstrous slanderer of heaven and earth! 

Const. Thou monstrous injurer of heaven and earth ! 

Call not me slanderer; thou and thine usurp 175 

The dominations, royalties and rights 

Of this oppressed boy: this is thy eld'st son's son, 

Infortunate in nothing but in thee: 

Thy sins are visited in this poor child ; 

The canon of the law is laid on him, 180 

Being but the second generation 

Removed from thy sin-conceiving womb. 

K. John. Bedlam, have done. 

Const. I have but this to say, 

That he is not only plagued for her sin. 
But God hath made her sin and her the plague 185 

175. wof Wit'] Ff I, 2, 3 ; me not F 4. 176. dominatio7ts] F i; domuta-\ 

Hon P'f 2, 3, 4, 177. this is thy eld'st] Capell ; this is thy eldest Ff. 

171. crystal . . . bribed] Mr. Craig 
suggests that here we have a reflec- 
tion of the old voyagers' stories of 
bribing Indians with beads. 

180. The canon . . . on him] The 
sins of Elinor, Arthur's grandmother, 
are being visited upon her grandson, 
according to the canon of the law, 
even to the third and fourth genera- 
tion. 

183. Bedlam] lunatic. Rann, 
after a conjecture of Ritson's, reads 
{quite possibly) " Beldam," but com- 
pare King Lear, ill. vii. 103 : " Let's 
follow the old earl, and get the bed- 
lam To lead him where he would." 
Derived from the Bethlehem Hospital 
for the Insane. 

185. But God hath made her sin, 
etc.] We follow the punctuation sug- 
gested by Roby, who explains the 



passage as follows : " God hath made 
her sin and herself to be a plague to 
this distant child, who is punished 
for her and with the punishment be- 
longing to her : God has made her 
sin to be an injury to Arthur, and her 
injurious deeds to be the executioner 
to punish her sin : all which {viz. her 
first sin and her now injurious deeds) 
are punished in the person of this 
child." The only difficulty here is 
the use of" injury " in two ways, the 
first meaning injury to Arthur, and the 
second meaning injurious deeds per- 
petrated by Elinor. The Folios read 
(line 187) " with her plague her sinne," 
The passage is difficult and has given 
rise to all kinds of suggestions. 
Malone supposed that two half lines 
had been dropped after "And with 
her." 



sc. i] KING JOHN 31 

On this removed issue, plagued for her 

And with her plague ; her sin his injury, 

Her injury the beadle to her sin, 

All punish'd in the person of this child, 

And all for her; a plague upon her! 190 

Eli. Thou unadvised scold, I can produce 
A will that bars the title of thy son. 

Const. Ay, who doubts that ? a will ! a wicked will ; 
A woman's will ; a canker'd grandam's will ! 

K. Phi. Peace, lady ! pause, or be more temperate : 195 
It ill beseems this presence to cry aim 
To these ill-tuned repetitions. 
Some trumpet summon hither to the walls 
These men of Anglers : let us hear them s{jeak 
Whose title they admit, Arthur's or John's. 200 

Trumpet sounds. Enter certain Citizens upon the walls. 

First Cit. \\''ho is it that hath warn'd us to the walls ? 
\j K. Phi. 'Tis France, for England. 
K. John. England, for itself. 

You men of Anglers, and my loving subjects, — 
K. Phi. You loving men of Anglers, Arthur's subjects. 

Our trumpet call'd you to this gentle parle, — 205 
K. John. For our advantage ; therefore hear us first. 

190. And . . , her] Mr. Craig sug- violent proceedings all thy neighbours 

csts that Shakespeare wrote " .\nd shall rrv aim." Several editors have 

all for her, for her ; a plague upon endeavoured to improve the passage. 

her ! " Jonson suggested that " aim " was an 

196. cry aim] " To cr)- aim " meant abbreviation of " ]'aime " ! 

in the first place, to encourage archers 198. Some . . . walls] Mr. Craig 

when shooting. The bystanders suggests " .SoM«d trumpet ! Summon 

evidently used to cry "Aim!" It hither to the walls." 

then came to mean encouragement in 205. f>urle] parley, conference, or 

general. Compare Merry Wives of even speech. So constantly in 

\Windsor, iii. ii. 45 : " And to these Elizabethan plays. 



32 KING JOHN [act II. 

These flags of France, that are advanced here 

Before the eye and prospect of your town, 

Have hither march'd to your endamagement : 

The cannons have their bowels full of wrath, 210 

And ready mounted are they to spit forth 

Their iron indignation 'gainst your walls : 

All preparation for a bloody siege 

And merciless proceeding by these French 

Confronts your city's ej/es, your winking gates ; 215 

And but for our approach those sleeping stones, 

That as a waist doth girdle you about, 

By the compulsion of their ordinance 

By this time from their fixed beds )f lime 

Had been dishabited, and wide havoc made 220 

For bloody power to rush upon your peace. 

But on the sight of us your lawful king, 

Who painfully with much expedient march 

Have brought a countercheck before your gates, 

To save unscratch'd your city's threatened che-^ks, 225 

Behold, the French amaz'd vouchsafe a park ; 

215. Confronts youi'] Capell ; Comfort yours Ff i, 2 ; Comfort your Ff 3, 
4 ; Confront your Rowe ; Come fore your Collier, ed. 2 (Collier MS.). 

207. advanced] lifted up (a common 217. waist] a garment worn round 

Elizabethan meaning). Compare the waist. The modern American 

Cotgrave, ^' Hausse : hoised, raised, lady calls a blouse a "waist." 

advanced, . . . hoven up, . . . set Compare Spenser's Ditty to Eliza : 

aloft." " gird in your waist, For more fine- 

215. winking] closed at our ap- ness with a tawdry lace. " 
proach. "To wink," in the sense 217. </cj//i] Here we have "stones'^ 

of closing both eyes, is common nominative to '^doth" owing to the 

in Elizabethan English. Compare interposition of the singular noun 

Promos and Cassandra (pt. i.), v. v. : " waist.''' Contrast lines 168, 169 

"... your eyes harde you must above, 

close. . . . Winke harde " ; and Lyly, 220. Had been . . . made] Fleay 

Euphnes (ed. Arber, p. 333, line 28) : regularises th^ line by reading " dis- 

" though I vi'/w^ at a flash of lightning, habit" — needlessly. Compare i. i. 

1 dare open my eyes again." 20 and note above. 



sc. i] KING JOHN 83 

And now, instead of bullets wrapp'd in fire, 
To make a shaking fever in your walls, 
They shoot but calm words folded up in smoke, 
To make a faithless error in your ears : 230 

Which trust accordingly, kind citizens, 
And let us in, your king, whose labour'd spirits 
Forwearied in this action of swift speed 
Crave harbourage within your city walls. 
K. Phi. When I have said, make answer to us both. 235 
Lo, in this right hand, whose protection 
Is most divinely vow'd upon the right 
Of him it holds, icarfds young Plantagenet, 
Son to the elder brother of this man. 
And king o'er him and all that he enjoys: 240 

For this down-trodden equity, we tread 
In warlike march these greens before your town, 
Being no further enemy to you 
Than the constraint of hospitable zeal 
In the relief of this oppressed child 245 

Religiously provokes. Be pleased then 
To pay that duty which you truly owe 
To him that owes it, namely this young prince : 
And then our arms, like to a muzzled bear, 

234. Crave] Pope ; Craves Ff. 

229. They shoot . . . smoke] Com- 247, 24S. owe . . . owes] The two 

pare Lucrecc, 1027: "This helpless meanings of " oif^ " are used. Com- 

smoke of words doth me no right." pare ^' owes," which Pope needlessly 

233. Forwearied] completely altered to " owns," with line log 
wearied, tired out. The prefix for above. 

is exactly equivalent to the German 249. arms] Vaughan suggests 

ver-. "army" as more in keeping with the 

234. Crave] See note on line 217 simile of the bear, and as saving the 
above. grammar ; but it makes the line too 

236. in] We should now say " on." long. 

3 



tU KING JOHN [act II. 

Save in aspect, hath all offence seal'd up; 250 

Our cannons' malice vainly shall be spent 

Against the invulnerable clouds of heaven ; 

And with a blessed and unvex'd retire, 

With unhack'd swords and helmets all unbruised, 

We will bear home that lusty blood again 255 

Which here we came to spout against your town, 

And leave your children, wives and you in peace. 

But if you fondly pass our proffer'd offer, 

'Tis not the roundure of your old-faced walls 

Can hide you from our messengers of war, 260 

Though all the English and their discipline 

Were harbour'd in their rude circumference. 

Then tell us, shall your city call us lord, 

In that behalf which we have challenged it? 

Or shall we give the signal to our rage 265 

And stalk in blood to our possession ? 

Firsi Cit, In brief, we are the king of England's subjects : 
For him, and in his right, we hold this town. 

K. John. Acknowledge then the king, and let me in. 

First Cit. That can we not ; but he that proves the king, 270 

253. iinvex'd'l unharassed. words in -tire. Compare Sonnet xxi. : 

253. retire] retreat. Compare "... all things rare That heaven's 

Henry V. iv. iii. 86 : — air in this huge rondure hems" ; and 

" that their souls cincture, iv. iii. 155 infra. 

May make a peaceful and a sweet 259. old-faced^ Williams' conjecture 

retire " ; of " ho\A-faced " looks very probable. 

and line 326 in/ra. '^Old-faced'' does not seem particu- 

258. proffer'd offer] The repetition larly apt in the light of the context, 
of sound here has worried the critics ; The same scholar would alter " rude " 
but the "proper offer" of Jervis, the in line 262 to "wide." We might 
"proffer'd love" of S. Walker, the suppose that Philip is belittling the 
"proffer'd peace" of Hudson, do not fortifications of Anglers, which would 
seem needful or convincing. justify reading "old-faced" and 

259. roundure] The Folios read "rude." 
" rounder," as often with French 



••] 



KING JOHN 



35 



To him will we prove loyal : till that time 
Have we ramm'd up our gates against the world. 

K. John. Doth not the crown of England prove the king ? 
And if not that, I bring you witnesses, 274 

Twice fifteen thousand hearts of England's breed, — 

Bast. Bastards, and else, 

K. John. To verify our title with their lives. 

K. Phi. As many and as well-born bloods as those — 

Bast. Some bastards too. 

K. Phi. Stand in his face to contradict his claim. 280 

First Cit. Till you compound whose right is worthiest, 
We for the worthiest hold the right from both. 
I K. John. Then God forgive the sin of all those souls 
That to their everlasting residence. 
Before the dew of evening fall, shall fleet, 285 

In dreadful trial of our kingdom's king! 

K. Phi. Amen, amen ! Mount, chevaliers ! to arms ! 

Bast. Saint George, that swinged the dragon, and e'er 
since 
Sits on his horse back at mine hostess' door, 



288, 289. Saint George . 
at dragon. 



door] So Pope ; the Folios end the first line 



276. Bastards, and else]MT. Moore- 
~-mith seerns more accurate than 
Schmidt in taking this to mean 
"Bastards and otherwise" instead 
of " Bastards and such-like." 

281. Compound] settle amono; your- 
selves. Compare The Taming of 
the Shrew, i. ii. 27 : " We will com- 
pound this quarrel." 

285. Jleet] flit. Compare The 
Merchaniof Venice, iv. i. 135 : '• Even 
from the gallows did his fell soul 
Jicet:' 

288, 289. Scunt George . . . door] 



The sign of " St. George and the 
Dragon " must have been very com- 
mon in Elizabethan times; indeed 
it is not uncommon nowadays. Com- 
pare Lyly, Euphues (ed. Arber, p. 
47, line 2S8) : " St. George, who is 
ever on horseback yet never rideth." 

288. swinged] thrashed, whipped. 
A.S. swingan, to beat. Compare 
2 Henry IV. v. iv. 21 : — 

" I will have you swinged soundly 
for this." 

289. horse] Perhaps we ought to 
read horse' to indicate the possessive. 



36 KING JOHN [act n. 

Teach us some fence! [To Aust.'\ Sirrah, were I at 
home, 290 

At your den, sirrah, with your Honess, 

I would set an ox-head to your lion's hide, 

And make a monster of you. 
Aust. Peace ! no more. 

Bast. O, tremble, for you hear the lion roar. 
K. John. Up higher to the plain ; where we'll set forth 295 

In best appointment all our regiments. 
Bast. Speed then, to take advantage of the field. 
K. Phi. It shall be so ; and at the other hill 

Command the rest to stand. God and our right I 

\_Exetmt. 

Here after excursions^ enter the Herald of France^ with 

trumpets^ to the gates. 

F. Her. You men of Anglers, open wide your gates, 300 
And let young Arthur, Duke of Bretagne, in, 
Who by the hand of France this day hath made 
Much work for tears in many an English mother, 
Whose sons lie scattered on the bleeding ground : 
Many a widow's husband grovelling lies, 305 

Coldly embracing the discoloured earth ; 
And victory, with little loss, doth play 
Upon the dancing banners of the French, 

290. some fence\ literally " some 304. bleeding growtd] Note the 

fencing." Compare "An I thought transference of the adjective, 

he had been so valiant and cunning 308, 309. Upon the . . . display'd] 

in/ence" (Twelfth Night, in. IV. ■^12), Vaughan connects '^triumphantly 

and the phrase " a master of/(e«<:£^." displayed" with "French." Why 

292. / would . . . hide] one more he should prefer this to the far more 

variation of the inevitable Elizabethan natural " banners ^' does not appear, 

joke on the cuckold's horns. Keightley inverts the line into 



sc. i] KING JOHN -^7 

Who are at hand, triumphantly display'd, 

To enter conquerors, and to proclaim 310 

Arthur of Bretagne England's king and yours. 

Enter English Herald, ivitli trumpet. 

E. Her. Rejoice, >'OU men of Angiers, ring your bells ; 
King John, your king and England's, doth approach, 
Commander of this hot malicious day : 
Their armours, that march'd hence so silver-bright, 315 
Hither return all gilt with Frenchmen's blood; 
There stuck no plume in any English crest 
That is removed by a staff of France ; 
Our colours do return in those same hands 
That did display when we first march'd forth ; 320 
And, like a jolly troop of huntsmen, come 
Our lusty English, all with purpled hands, 
Dyed in the dying slaughter of their foes : 
Open your gates and give the victors way. 

First Cit. Heralds, from off our towers we might behold, 325 
From first to last, the onset and retire 

318. a staff] any staff CoUier, ed. 2 (Collier MS.). 

"Triumphantly display'd; who are To transfer dying to foes would 

at hand." This seems unnecessary. hardly be an improvement, and we 

316. f^ither . . . blood] Compare are forced to believe that Shakespeare 

Macbeth, 11. iii, 118 : — sacrificed sense a little for the sake of 

" Here lay Duncan playing with the sound. 

His silver skin laced with his 325. First Cit.] In the Folios the 

golden blood " ; person here called the First Citizen is 

' Ford, 'Tis Pity, v. vi. : "gilt called Hubert. Mr. Knight retains 

I the blood of a fair sister and a this, identifying him with Hubert 

hapless father." Compare also the de Burgh. Mr. Wright suggests 

phrase " red gold." that the parts both of Hubert and of 

; 318. staff] Here used as equivalent the Citizen were played by the same 

for the whole spear. actor. In the Troublesome Raigne 

323. Dyed . . . dying] The play Hubert and the Citizen are two dis- 

upon words is obvious, and '• dying tinct persons. 

\laughter" may be compared with 326. retire] See line 253 and note 

"bleeding ground," line 304 supra, supra. 



38 



KING JOHN 



[act II. 



Of both your armies ; whose equality 

By our best eyes cannot be censured : 

Blood hath bought blood and blows have answered 

blows ; 
Strength match'd with strength, and power confronted 

power: 330 

Both are alike , and both alike we like. 
One must prove greatest : while they weigh so even, 
We hold our town for neither, yet for both. 

Re-enter the two Kings, with their powers, severally. 

K. John. France, hast thou yet more blood to cast away ? 
Say, shall the current of our right run on? 335 

Whose passage, vex'd with thy impediment. 
Shall leave his native channel, and o'erswell 
With course disturb'd even thy confining shores, 
Unless thou let his silver water keep 
A peaceful progress to the ocean. 340 , 

K. Phi. England, thou hast not saved one drop of blood, j 
In this hot trial, more than we of France ; 
Rather, lost more. And by this hand I swear, 

335. rnn] Ff 3, 4 ; runne F 2 ; rome Y i ; roam Malone ; foam Nicholson' 
conj. 

327, 328. whose equality . . . cen- i. 33) is not, however, convincing. 

sured] our best eyes cannot dis- An old dictionary (1696) by Coles 

tinguish between the two claimants, gives " Censure : to judge, give 

so equally matched are you. Malone sentence," and the meaning "to 

says, " Our author ought to have judge " seems sufficient for oar 

written ' whose superiority,' or passage. 



' whose inequality ' cannot be cen- 
sured." Vaughan explains, " whose 
equality is so exact that our best eyes 
can see no flaw in its completeness," 
and adds that " ceiisun- appears to be 
a term specially applicable to the 
discrimination of differences." The 
instance he quotes (Henry VIII. i. 



335. shall . . . run on] Compare 
V. iv. 56 : " And calmly run on in 
obedience." In view of this there is 
no doubt that run is the preferable 
reading. 

344. climate] Here a portion of the 
sky. In Richard II. iv. i. 130 it is 
used for a region of the earth {" That 



c. i.J KING JOHN 39 

That sways the earth this climate overlooks, 
Before we will lay down our just-borne arms, 345 
We'll put thee down 'gainst whom these arms we bear, 
Or add a royal number to the dead, 
Gracing the scroll that tells of this war's loss 
With slaughter coupled to the name of kings. 
Bast. Ha, majesty! how high thy glor>' towers, 350 

When the rich blood of kings is set on fire ! 
O, now doth Death line his dead chaps with steel ; 
The swords of soldiers are his teeth, his fangs ; 
And now he feasts, mousing the flesh of men. 
In undetermined differences of kings. 355 

Why stand these royal fronts amazed thus? 
Cry " havoc ! " kings ; back to the stained field, 
You equal potents, fiery kindled spirits! 

358. fiery kindUci] fiery-kindled Pope ; fire-ykindled Collier, ed. 2 (Collier 
MS.) ; fire-enkindled Lettsom conj. 

in a Christian climate souls refined gives "to mouch" = "to eat up 

Should show as heinous . . ."). greedily " (Line), and Coles, " to eat 

Cotgrave has " CUmat : a clime, or up all." 

climate ; a division in the skie, or 357. " havoc / "] The crying of 

portion of the world, between south " havoc t " was the signal for indis- 

and north"; Coles (1696) "CHmote criminate slaughter. Compare yi//tMs 

{sic) : clime, such a space of earth Ccesar, iii. i. 273 : — 

(between two parallel lines) as makes " Cry ' Havoc,' and let slip the 

half an hour's difference in the sun- dogs of war." 

dials and length of days." The New Eng. Diet, quotes (1385) 

350. towers] soars. See v. ii. 149 Ord. War Richard II. in Black Bk. 

infra. .\ hawking term. A grouse Admiralty (Rolls), i. 455 : — 

that rises high before dropping after " Item, qe nul soit si hardy de 

being mortally struck is still said to crier havok sur peine davoir la 

"tower." teste coupe." 

354. mousing] generally given as 358. equal potents] equally 

•• tearing, as a cat tears a mouse." matched powers. 

A much better sense is given by tak- 338. fiery kindled] See readings 



ing the more obvious meaning of in the variant, supra. I would sug- 

?iawing, nibbling as a mouse does, gest" fury-kindled spirits." Compare 

he "Well moused, Lion!" of A Edward III. in. iii. 113: "~ 

Midsummer-Night's Dream, w i. 274, enkindled fury turn to flamt 

will also bear this interpretation. It Richard II. i.'i.is'2: "Wrath 

is perhaps worth noting that Halliwell gentlemen, be ruled by me." 



40 KING JOHN [act n. 

Then let confusion of one part confirm 
The other's peace ; till then, blows, blood, and 
death ! 360 

K. John. Whose party do the townsmen yet admit ? 

K. Phi. Speak, citizens, for England ; who 's your king ? 

First Cit. The king of England, when we know the king. 

K. Phi. Know him in us, that here hold up his right. 

K. John. In us, that are our own great deputy, 365 

And bear possession of our person here, 
Lord of our presence, Angiers, and of you. 

First Cit. A greater power than we denies all this ; 
And till it be undoubted, we do lock 
Our former scruple in our strong-barr'd gates ; 370 
King'd of our fears, until our fears, resolved, 
Be by some certain king purged and deposed. 

Bast. By heaven, these scroyles of Angiers flout you, 
kings, 
And stand securely on their battlements. 
As in a theatre, whence they gape and point 375 
At your industrious scenes and acts of death. 

362. whd's\ Ff 2, 3, 4 ; whose F i. 367. o/jom] Ff i, 4 ; if ymi Ff 2, 3. 

367. Lord of our presence] See i. i. feare," and 3 and 4, " Kings of our 

137 supra. Vaughan's explanation fear" — having our fears for king. 

of the use in Act i. would not hold Various other readings have been 

here. Mr. Wright says " presence " suggested, but none seem worth com- 

here means " personal dignity " ; but paring with Tyrwhitt's suggestion, 

it seems difficult to think that John 373. scroyles'] scabby fellows, a 

means " I am here master of my term of utmost contempt. Compare 

personal dignity, of Angiers, and of Cotgrave, " dme escrouellee, an in- 

you." I should imagine " Lord of fected traiterous or depraved spirit " ; 

owr /'?'«ff«C£ " to mean " Lord of the '^ Les escrouelles, the King's evil." 

title by which I am generally known, Steevens quotes Ben Jonson, Every 

i.e. King of England, and also Lord Man in his Humour, i. i. : " hang 'em 

of Angiers and of you." scroyles." 

^yi. King' d of our fears] So Rann, 376. At your . . . death] at the 

after a conjecture of Tyrwhitt's. scenes and acts of death which you 

Folios I and 2 read " Kings of our industriously perform. For the trans- 



sc. 1] KING JOHN 41 

Your royal presences be ruled by me : 

Do like the mutines of Jerusalem, 

Be friends awhile and both conjointly bend 

Your sharpest deeds of malice on this town : 380 

By east and west let France and England mount 

Their battering cannon charged to the mouths, 

Till their soul-fearing clamours have brawl'd down 

The flinty ribs of this contemptuous city : 

rid play incessantly upon these jades, 385 

Even till unfenced desolation 

Leave them as naked as the vulgar air. 

That done, dissever your united strengths, 

And part your mingled colours once again ; 

Turn face to face and bloody point to point ; 390 

Then, in a moment, Fortune shall cull forth 

Out of one side her happy minion. 

To whom in favour she shall give the day, 

And kiss him with a glorious victory. 

379. awhile] a-while Ff i, 2 ; a while Ff 3, 4. 

fcrence of adjective, compare line 383. soul-/earing] causing the soul 

304 iupra. Capell reads " illustri- to fear. Compare The Merchant of 

ous." Venice, 11. i. 9 : — 

378. muline%\ Spedding needlessly " 1 tell thee, lady, this aspect of 

conjectures mutiners. Compare mine 

Hamlet, v. ii. 6 : " Methought 1 lay Hath fear'd the valiant." 

worsethan the m«</«n<ri in the bilboes." Compare Ralph Roister Doister, In- 

The reference is to the leaders of the duction (ed. Dent, p. 13, line 85) : 

factions in Jerusalem, John of Giscela " We '11 fear our children with him ; 

and Simon bar Gioras, who stopped if they be never so unruly do but cry, 

their internecine strife in order to Ralpfi comes . . . and they '11 be as 

fight against the Romans (see quiet as lambs." 

Josephus, y?u'»i/i Wan, bk. v. chs. 392. minion'] Cotgrave has " Mig- 

2 and 6). Since Josephus was not non : a minion, favourite, wanton, 

translated until 1602. Mr. Wright dilling, darling." Compare J Henry 

believes Shakespeare's source to have IV. i. i. 83; "Who is sweet For- 

been Peter Morwyng's translation of tunes minion and her pride." Used 

the spurious narrative of Joseph ben often as a slighting term in Shake- 

Gorion. speare. 



42 



KING JOHN 



[act II. 



How like you this wild counsel, mighty states? 395 
Smacks it not something of the policy? 

K. John. Now, by the sky that hangs above our heads, 
I like it well. France, shall we knit our powers 
And lay this Angiers even with the ground ; 
Then after fight who shall be king of it? 400 

Bast. An if thou hast the mettle of a king. 

Being wrong'd as we are by this peevish town, 

Turn thou the mouth of thy artillery. 

As we will ours, against these saucy walls ; 404 

And when that we have dash'd them to the ground, 

Why then defy each other, and pell-mell 

Make work upon ourselves, for heaven or hell. 

K. Phi. Let it be so. Say, where will you assault? 

K. John. We from the west will send destruction 

Into this city's bosom. 410 

Aust. I from the north. 

A'. Phi. Our thunder from the south 

Shall rain their drift of bullets on this town. 

411. thunder] thunders Grant White (Capell conj.). 



395. states] persons in high posi- 
tions. Compare Troilus and Cres- 
sida, V. V. 65 : " Hail, all you state 
of Greece." Compare also " infant 
state" (11. i. 97 sjipra). 

396. the policy] Gould suggests 
" true policy." Schmidt explains 
" the policy you make so much of " ; 
Mr. Wright, " the policy which is so 
much thought of." Cotgrave and 
Coles equate policy with government, 
a meaning which lends colour to 
Mr. Moore- Smith's conjecture of 
" Has it not some smack or savour 
of the political art." In the light of 
this meaning, Gould's suggestion of 
"true" for "the" is tempting. In 



Elizabethan plays the word denotes 
crafty dealings. Compare Middleton'sl 
Roaring Girl, ii. 2 : "By opposite^ 
policies, courses indirect"; ibid, iv.l 
I : "I'll make her policy the art toj 
trap her " ; and Webster's Vittoria 
Corofnbona (ed. Dyce, p. 11, col. 2) : — ^| 
" So who knows policy and heij 
true aspect, 
Shall find her ways winding and 
indirect." 
406. pell-mell] Cotgrave has " Peslej 
mesle : pell-mell, confusedly, hano 
over head, all on a heap, one witt 
another." 

412. drift] the shower of bullets 
compared to snow driven by the windJ 



sc. 



,] KING JOHN 43 

Bast. O prudent discipline! From north to south. 
Austria and France shoot in each other's mouth : 
I'll stir them to it. Come, away, away! 415 

First Cit. Hear us, great kings : vouchsafe awhile to stay. 
And I shall show you peace and fair-faced league ; 
Win you this city without stroke or wound ; 
Rescue those breathing lives to die in beds, 
That here come sacrifices for the field : 420 

Persever not, but hear me, mighty kings. 

K. John. Speak on with favour : we are bent to hear. 

First Cit. That daughter there of Spain, the Lady Blanch, 
Is niece to England: look upon the years 
Of Lewis the Dauphin and that lovely maid: 425 
If lusty love should go in quest of beauty, 
Where should he find it fairer than in Blanch? 
If zealous love should go in search of virtue. 
Where should he find it purer than in Blanch ? 
If love ambitious sought a match of birth, 430 

Whose veins bound richer blood than Lady Blanch ? 
Such as she is, in beaut}', virtue, birth. 
Is the young Dauphin ever}- wa}- complete : 
If not complete of, say he is not she ; 

421. Per%ever\ Ff i, 2; Persevere Ff 3, 4. 422. Speak on with favour ; 
we] Speak on with favour, wc Ff; Speak on ; with favour we Rowe. 424. 
yiiece] So Singer, ed. 2 (Coliier MS.); neerc Ff i, 2; necr Ff 3, 4. 428. 
should] omitted in Ff 2, 3, 4. 

418, 419. Win you . . . Rescue] I Neece to K. lohn, the lovely 

shall win you . . . I shall rescue. Ladie Blanch." 

422, Speak on . . . to hear] we 434. complete of] There seems to 
grant you leave to speak on ; we are be no other instance of the use of this 
listening. phrase, and several emendations have 

424. «i«fe] The reading of the Folios been suggested. Hanmer, "If not 

is an obvious misprint. Compare complete, oh say, he is not she " ; 

Troublesome Raigne : — Kinnear for " of" reads " so." " So," 

" The beauteous daughter of the with the long s, may have been 

King of Spaine, printed " os " and read as " of." 



44 KING JOHN [act n. 

And she again wants nothing, to name want, 435 
If want it be not that she is not he : 
He is the half part of a blessed man, 
Left to be finished by such as she ; 
And she a fair divided excellence, 
Whose fulness of perfection lies in him. 440 

O, two such silver currents, when they join, 
Do glorify the banks that bound them in ; 
And two such shores to two such streams made one 
Two such controlling bounds shall you be, kings, 
To these two princes, if you marry them. 445 

This union shall do more than battery can 
To our fast-closed gates ; for at this match, 
With swifter spleen than powder can enforce, 
The mouth of passage shall we fling wide ope. 
And give you entrance: but without this match, 450 
The sea enraged is not half so deaf, 
Lions more confident, mountains and rocks 
More free from motion, no, not Death himself 
In mortal fury half so peremptory, 
As we to keep this city. 
Bast. Here's a stay 455 

438. inch, as she'\ Theobald reads, bear its more usuzd meaning of 

after a conjecture of Thurlby's, " such " ill-temper." 

a she," a very probable reading. 454. peremptory} Cotgrave has 

447. wa/c/t] A play upon the double " pcremptoire, . . . absolute, . . . 

meaning, the match between the forcible ; . . . earnest ; that will have 

Dauphin and Blanch, and the match no nay." 

to fire the mine. In the next line 455. stay] Johnson was dissatis- 

Pope reads "speed" for "spleen," fied with this word, and conjectured 

while Becket conjectures " Swifter " flaw," which Hudson adopted, 

than powder can in spleen enforce." Becket suggested " say," which 

We must either take "spleen" to Singer adopted in his second edition. 

mean " haste " (see v. vii. 50 infra) Williams suggested " story " or 

or suspect the text, for it cannot here "storm"; Elze (Athenaum, 1867) 



sc. I] KING JOHN 45 

That shakes the rotten carcass of old Death 

Out of his rags! Here's a large mouth, indeed, 

That spits forth death and mountains, rocks and seas. 

Talks as familiarly of roaring lions 

As maids of thirteen do of puppy-dogs ! 460 

What cannoneer begot this lusty blood ? 

He speaks plain cannon fire, and smoke and bounce ; 

He gives the bastinado with his tongue : 

Our ears are cudgell'd ; not a word of his 

But buffets better than a fist of France: 465 

Zounds! I was never so bethump'd with words 

Since I first call'd my brother's father dad. 

Eli. Son, list to this conjunction, make this match ; 

Give with our niece a dowrj' large enough : 

For by this knot thou shalt so surely tie 470 

Thy now unsured assurance to the crown, 

That yon green boy shall have no sun to ripe 

The bloom that promiseth a mighty fruit. 

I see a yielding in the looks of France ; 

Mark, how they whisper : urge them while their 

souls 475 

Are capable of this ambition, 

••bray," Vaughan "style," Herr Gayley, line 609: "Dub dub a dub, 

"sway," Gould "slave." None of 6oM«ct- quoth the guns with a sulpher- 

these are satisfactory. We must ous huffe snufte " ; and 2 Henry IV. 

assume that "stay" or the word it ni. ii. 304 : " ' BoM«Cf ' would 'a say " ; 

represents means a sudden check or and Knight of the Burning Pestle, v. 

hindrance. In Cheshire there is a i. 94 : " ' Sa, Sa, Sa, bounce I ' quoth 

dialectical term " staw'd ■' applied to the guns." Its modern meaning of 

a horse who is checked by a difficulty bombast does not seem to have dc- 

in climbing a hill {Cheshire Folk- veloped in Shakespeare's time. 

Speech, Dialect Society). 467. Since . . . dad] An inimitable 

462. bounce] The onomatopeic turn of a common saying to suit the 

word for the report of a gun, com- Bastard's own case, 

mon in Elizabethan plays. Compare 46S. list to this conjuHction] list to 

Peele's Old Wives' Tale (1595), ed. the suggestion of this conjunction. 



46 



KING JOHN 



[act II. 



Lest zeal, now melted by the windy breath 
Of soft petitions, pity and remorse, 
Cool and congeal again to what it was. 

First Cit. Why answer not the double majesties 480 

This friendly treaty of our threaten'd town ? 

K. Phi. Speak England first, that hath been forward first 
To speak unto this city : what say you ? 

K. John. If that the Dauphin there, thy princely son, 

Can in this book of beauty read " I love," 485 

Her dowry shall weigh equal with a queen : 

For Anjou, and fair Touraine, Maine, Poictiers, 

And all that we upon this side the sea, 

Except this city now by us besieged. 

Find liable to our crown and dignity, 490 

Shall gild her bridal bed, and make her rich 

In titles, honours and promotions, 

As she in beauty, education, blood, 

Holds hand with any princess of the world. 494 

K. Phi. What say'st thou, boy? look in the lady's face. 

Lew. I do, my lord ; and in her eye I find 
A wonder, or a wondrous miracle. 
The shadow of myself form'd in her eye ; 



477. hest] F 4 ; Lea%t Ff i, 2, 3. 
487. Anjou] So Pope; Angiers Ff. 

477-479. Lest zeal . . . it was] 
Hanmer puts the comma after 
" melted," thus making the windy 
breath of soft petitions, pity and 
remorse do the work of freezing zeal 
which is now melted. The adjective 
" soft," however, clearly determines 
the sense : " Lest [Jackson suggests 
" let "] the desire which the French 
king now has to fall in with the sug- 
gestion, a desire melted by the windy 



486. a qneen']'Pi 1,2', the queen Ff 3, ^. 
494. hand] F i ; hmids Ff 2, 3, 4. 

breath, etc., should cool and freeze 
into its previous form if advantage 
be not now taken." 

480. the] Lettsom suggests " ye " ; 
but Shakespeare's usage would then 
require two " ye's " — " Why answer 
ye not, ye double majesties." 

494. Holds hand] Compare the 
modern phrase " to touch elbows 
with," i.e. to be the equal of. 



sc. i] KING JOHN 47 

Which, being but the shadow of your son, 

Becomes a sun and makes your son a shadow : 500 

I do protest I never loved myself 

Till now infixed I beheld myself 

Drawn in the flattering tabic of her eye. 

[IV/iis/irrs 2vt//i Blanch, 

Bast. Drawn in the flattering table of her eye ! 

Hang'd in the frowning wrinkle of her brow ! 505 
And quarter'd in her heart ! he doth espy 
Himself love's traitor : this is pity now, 
That, hang'd and drawn and quarter'd, there should be 
In such a love so vile a lout as he. 

Blanch. My uncle's will in this respect is mine: 510 

If he see aught in you that makes him like, 
That any thing he sees, which moves his liking, 
I can with ease translate it to my will ; 
Or if you will, to speak more properly, 
I will enforce it easily to my love. 5 1 5 

Further I will not flatter you, my lord, 
That all I see in you is worthy love, 

515. easily] Ff 3, 4 ; easlie Ff i, 2. 

503. table] " the surface on which 504-509. Drawn in . , . as he] 
a picture is painted " (Dyce-Little- Mr. Worrall suggests that Shake- 
dale). Fr. tableau (?). Coles, speare is here mocking at the love 
" Table of Appelles." Compare conceits of contemporary sonneteers. 
Sonnet xxiv. 2 : — The sonnet quoted to illustrate the 
" Mine eye hath play'd the painter, last note is quite in the vein which 
and hath stell'd Shakespeare is here caricaturing. 
Thy beauty's form in table oi my 512, 513. That any thing . . . niy 
heart " ; will] that which he sees and likes I 
and Friar Bacon {1595), ed. Gayley, can easily bring myself to like too. 
i. i. 56 : — The "it" in line 513 summing up 
Her form is Beauty's table, where " That anything he sees " is pleon- 

she paints astic. 

The glories of her gorgious ex- 517. all . . . worthy love] all I 

cellence." see in you is worthy of love. 



48 



KING JOHN 



[act II. 



Than this ; that nothing do I see in you, 

Though churlish thoughts themselves should be your 

judge, 
That I can find should merit any hate. 520 

K. John. What say these young ones ? What say you, 
my niece? 

Blanch. That she is bound in honour still to do 
What you in wisdom still vouchsafe to say. 

K. John. Speak then, prince Dauphin ; can you love this 
lady? 

Lew. Nay, ask me if I can refrain from love; 525 

For I do love her most unfeigned ly. 

K. John. Then do I give Volquessen, Touraine, Maine, 
Poictiers, and Anjou, these five provinces, 
With her to thee ; and this addition more, 
Full thirty thousand marks of English coin. 530 

Philip of France, if thou be pleased withal, 
Command thy son and daughter to join hands. 

K. Phi. It likes us well ; young princes, close your 
hands. 



523. slilV] will Pope ; shall Steevens (1785) (Capell conj.). 533. It 

likes . . . hufids] Rowe ; It likes us well young princes : close your 
hands Ff. 



519: churlish] grudging. Cotgrave 
gives ^'churlish : aspre, rude, vilain." 
Coles " ch7irlich (sic): plainly, 
homely." Every other Shakespearian 
use of the word can be paraphrased 
by " boorish." 

522, 523. still] often bore the 
meaning of "continually." It has 
been borrowed, probably from 
Elizabethan English, into Mid- 
Cardigan and Carmarthenshire Welsh, 
where " Y mae'n dyfod still" means 
"he comes continually" or "regu- 



larly." We find the same use in the 
north of Ireland dialect. Compare 
Milton, Comus, lines 558-560: — 
" (Silence) wished she might 
Deny her nature, and be never 

more, 
Still to be so displaced." 
527. Volquessen] "The ancient 
county of the Velocasses (pagus 
Velocassitius), whose capital was 
Rouen ; divided in modern times 
into Vexin Normand and Vexin 
Franfais" (Mr. Wright). 



sc. i] KING JOHN 49 

Aust. And your lips too ; for I am well assured 

That I did so when I was first assured. 535 

K. Phi. Now, citizens of Angiers, ope your gates, 
Let in that amity which you have made ; 
For at Saint Mary's chapel presently 
The rites of marriage shall be solemnized. 
Is not the Lady Constance in this troop ? 540 

I know she is not, for this match made up 
Her presence would have interrupted much : 
Where is she and her son ? tell me, who knows. 

Lew. She is sad and passionate at your highness' tent. 

K. Phi. And, by my faith, this league that we have 
made 545 

Will give her sadness very little cure. 
Brother of England, how may we content 
This widow lady? In her right we came; 
Which we, God knows, have turn'd another way. 
To our own vantage. 

K. John. We will heal up all; 550 

For we'll create young Arthur Duke of Bretagne 
And Earl of Richmond ; and this rich fair town 

539. rites] F4; rights Ff i, 2, 3. 

535. oiswr^rf] betrothed. have been pronounced "pashnate." 

538. presently] immediately. Com- The word denotes violence of feeling, 

pare The Tempest, iv. i. 4^ : ''Pre- probably of grief in the case of Con- 

sently ? Ay, with a twink." stance, not as would suit the case of 

543. Where . . . kuon's] The Elinor "in a passion." Compare 

punctuation here is that of Steevens Ardcnof Fevcrsham, in. v. 45 : " How 

(*793)- The F^olios have " sonne, now, Alice ? what, sad and passion- 

. . . knowes ? " Steevens evidently ate?" and Middleton, /I Trick, w. Vi. 

takes it to mean " Let him who (Mermaid ed. p. 53), where Witgood 

inowi tell me ! ' is lamenting and the "2nd Gent." 

544. /'ais»o»ia/«]Vaughan suspected says to him: "Fie! you a firm 
"passionate " owing to the extra foot scholar, and an understanding gentle- 
in the line, but has withdrawn his sug- man, and give your best parts to 
gested alterations. It may, he says, passion." 



50 KING JOHN [act ii. 

We make him lord of. Call the Lady Constance; 
Some speedy messenger bid her repair 
To our solemnity: I trust we shall, 555 

If not fill up the measpre of her will, 
Yet in some measure satisfy her so 
That we shall stop her exclamation. 
Go we, as well as haste will suffer us. 
To this unlook'd for, unprepared pomp. 560 

\Exeunt all but the Bastard. 
Bast. Mad world ! mad kings ! mad composition ! 
John, to stop Arthur's title in the whole, 
Hath willingly departed with a part : 
And France, whose armour conscience buckled on, 
Whom zeal and charity brought to the field 565 

As God's own soldier, rounded in the ear 
With that some purpose-changer, that sly devil, 
That broker, that still breaks the pate of faith, 
That daily break-vow, he that wins of all. 
Of kings, of beggars, old men, young men, maids, 570 
Who, having no external thing to lose 

555. soletnnityl the marriage of the forth.' " Mr. Wright points out that 

Dauphin and Blanch. the proper form of the word is 

561. composition] agreement, "rouned," from A.S. runian, and 

Compare "compound," line 281 quotes Piers Plowman {B text), W. i^: 

supra. " And ritt rijte to resoun, and rowneth 

563. departed with] parted with, in his ere." Compare also Gosson's 

566. God's own soldier] Compare Apology of the Schoole of Abuse (ed. 

Macbeth, v. viii. 45 :— Arber, p. 74): "for his Pypers were 

''Siw. Had he his hurts before ? ready too rounde him in the eare, what 

Ross. Ay, on the front. he should speake." 

Siw. Why then, God's soldier 568. broker] agent. The Bastard 

be he!" harps upon the connection of breaking 

566. rounded:] whispered. Com- with the sound of " broker." 

pare The Winter's Tale, i. ii. 217: 571, 572. Who . . . cheats] An 

" They 're here with me already, obvious anacoluthon. 
whispering, rounding ' Sicilia is a so- 



sc. 1] KING JOHN 51 

But the word " maid," cheats the poor maid of that, 

That smooth-faced gentleman, tickling Commodity, 

Commodity, the bias of the world. 

The world, who of itself is peised well, 575 

Made to run even upon even ground. 

Till this advantage, this vile-drawing bias, 

This sway of motion, t|;iis Commodity, 

Makes it take head from all indifterency, 

From all direction, purpose, course, intent : 580 

And this same bias, this Commodity, 

This bawd, this broker, this all-changing word, 

Clapp'd on the outward eye of fickle France, 

Hath drawn him from his own determined aid, 

From a resolved and honourable war, 585 

To a most base and vile-concluded peace. 

And why rail I on this Commodity? 

But for because he hath not woo'd me yet : 

Not that I have the power to clutch my hand, 

When his fair angels would salute my palm ; 590 

But for my hand, as unattempted yet. 

Like a poor beggar, raileth on the rich. 

Well, whiles I am a beggar, I will rail 

573. tickling] flattering. We still of running out of the straight. 

speak of tickling a man's pride. P««(/ : poised, balanced. To "take 

Compare Coriolanus, i. i. 263 : — head from all indifferency " is to 

" Such a nature, leave impartiality, to become biased. 

Tickled \\nth good success, dis- The "eye," according to Staunton, 

dains the shadow was the aperture in the bowl where 

Which he treads on at noon." the leaden weight, also called the 

jghan would read "tickling" as " bias," was fixed. 

.. risyllable. 590. angels] the angel was a gold 

574-580. Commodity . . . intent] coin worth ten shillings in Elizabeth's 

The Bastard compares Commodity, time. 

i.e. Expediency- or Self-interest, to 591. But . . . yet] because my 

the leaden weight inserted in the side hand has been untempted as yet. 
of a bowl to give it " bias," the power 



52 



KING JOHN 



[act II. 



And say there is no sin but to be rich}; 
And being rich, my virtue then shall be 
To say there is no vice but beggary. 
Since kings break faith upon commodity, 
Gain, be my lord, for I will worship thee. 



595 



[Exit. 



y 

^' ACT III 

SCENE I. — The French King's Pavilion. 

Enter CONSTANCE, ARTHUR, and SALISBURY. 

Const. Gone to be married ! gone to swear a peace ! 

False blood to false blood join'd ! gone to be friends ! 
Shall Lewis have Blanch, and Blanch those pro- 
vinces ? 
It is not so; thou hast misspoke, misheard; 
Be well advised, tell o'er thy tale again: 5 

It cannot be : thou dost but say 'tis so : 
I trust I may not trust thee; for thy word 
Is but the vain breath of a common man : 
Believe me, I do not believe thee, man ; 
I have a king's oath to the contrary. 10 

Thou shalt be punish'd for thus frighting me. 
For I am sick and capable of fears, 
Oppress'd with wrongs and therefore full of fears, 
A widow, husband less, subject to fears, 
A woman, naturally born to fears; 15 

Act nr.] Actus SecunJus in the 14. wirffJir] This is not historically 

Folios, ending at line 74. correct. At this time Constance was 

12. capable 0/ fears] susceptible to married to a third husband, Guido, 

fears. Compare 11. i. 476 supra, and brother to the Viscount of Touars. 

Greene's Never Too Late (1600), She had been divorced from her 

p. 95: " Mirimadas eares were not second husband, Ranulph, Earl of 

fa/>aft/< of any amorous persuasion." Chester. 

53 



54 KING JOHN [act m. 

And though thou now confess thou didst but jest, 
With my vex'd spirits T cannot take a truce, 
But they will quake and tremble all this day. 
What dost thou mean by shaking of thy head ? 
Why dost thou look so sadly on my son? 20 

What means that hand upon that breast of thine? 
Why holds thine eye that lamentable rheum. 
Like a proud river peering o'er his bounds ? 
Be these sad signs confirmers of thy words? 
Then speak again; not all thy former tale, 2$ 

But this one word, whether thy tale be true. 

Sal. As true as I believe you think them false 
That give you cause to prove my saying true. 

Const. O, if thou teach me to believe this sorrow, 

Teach thou this sorrow how to make me die, 30 

And let belief and life encounter so 

As doth the fury of two desperate men 

Which in the very meeting fall and die. 

Lewis marry Blanch ! O boy, then where art thou ? 

France friend with England, what becomes of me ? 35 

Fellow, be gone : 1 cannot brook thy sight : 

This news hath made thee a most ugly man. 

16, 17. And . . . truce] So Rowe; And . . . jest with . . . spirits, . . . 
truce Ff. 24. signs] sighs Warburton. 27. yon]yoti 'II Keightley. 

17. cannot] Pope printed "caw 'f " " Have every pelting river made so 
in order to regularise the line. But proud 

" spirits " is often a monosyllable, That they have overborne their 

and the accentuation of the line in- continents" — 

dicates that it is so here. exactly the continenti ripa of Horace. 

19-26. What dost . . . be true] 27, 28. As true . . . saying true] 

This may be compared with Rather a roundabout asseveration, but 

Northumberland's speech on hearing quite in the vein of early Shakespeare, 

of Hotspur's death (^H^nrv/F. i. i). 36, 37. Fellow, be gone . . . ugly 

23. bounds] containing banks, man] Compare this with Cleopatra's 

Compare A Midsummer - Night's reception of bad news about Antony 

Dream, u, i. 92: — {Antony and Cleopatra, 11. v.). 



sc. I] KING JOIIX 55 

Sa/. What other harm have I, good lady, done, 
But spoke the harm that is by others done ? 

Const. Which harm within itself so heinous is 40 

As it makes harmful all that speak of it. 

Art/i. I do beseech you, madam, be content. 

Const. If thou, that bid'st me be content, wert grim, 
Ugly and slanderous to thy mother's womb, 
Full of unpleasing blots and sightless stains, 45 

Lame, foolish, crooked, swart, prodigious, 
Patch'd with foul moles and eye-offending marks, 
I would not care, I then would be content, 
For then I should not love thee, no, nor thou 
Become thy great birth nor deserve a crown. 50 

But thou art fair, and at thy birth, dear boy, 
Nature and Fortune join'd to make thee great : 
Of Nature's gifts thou mayst with lilies boast 
And with the half-blown rose. But Fortune, O, 
She is corrupted, changed and won from thee; 55 

45. and sightless] unsightly Collier MS. 

45. sightless] equivalent in mean- 53, 54. lilies . . . rose] These 
ing to the ''unsightly" of Collier's flowers have been generally deemed 
corrector. Compare the opposite the fairest by poets. It is interesting 
meaning of "sightly" (ii. i. 143 to remember in this connection that 
supra). the lily is the flower of France, the 

46. swart] black. This was hide- rose that of England. There are 
ous in Elizabethan eyes. Compare many comparisons of the beauty of 
.Much Ado About Nothing, v. iv. 36: youths and maids to the beauty of 
" I Ml hold my mind were she an lilies and roses to be found in Shake- 
Ethiope." speare and other Elizabethan liter- 

46. prodigious] of the nature of a ature. Compare A Midsummer- 
prodigy in the worst sense, therefore Night's Dream, iii. i. 96 : — 
monstrous. Compare Richard III. " Most lily like in hue 
I. ii. 22 : " If ever he have child, Of colour like the red rose." 
abortive be it, Prodigious . . ." Cot- See also Tennyson's Maud, xxii. 9 : — 
grave has " Prodigieux : prodigious, •' Queen rojf of the rosebud garden 
wondrous, monstrous, most unnatural of girls ... 
or out of course." Queen lily and rose in one." 



56 



KING JOHN 



[act III. 



She adulterates hourly with thine uncle John, 

And with her golden hand hath pluck'd on France 

To tread down fair respect of sovereignty, 

And made his majesty the bawd to theirs. 

France is a bawd to Fortune and King John, 60 

That strumpet Fortune, that usurping John ! 

Tell me, thou fellow, is not France forsworn? 

Envenom him with words, or get thee gone, 

And leave those woes alone which I alone 

Am bound to under-bear. 

Sal. Pardon me, madam, 65 

I may not go without you to the kings. 

Const. Thou mayst, thou shalt ; I will not go with thee : 
I will instruct my sorrows to be proud ; 
For grief is proud and makes his ov/ner stoop. 
To me and to the state of my great grief 70 

Let kings assemble; for my grief's so great 
That no supporter but the huge firm earth 
Can hold it up: here I and sorrow sit; 
Here is my throne, bid kings come bow to it. 

l^Seats herself on the grotmd. 
64. those] these F 4. 



56. She adulterates] The Folios 
print " SA' adulterates," thus indicat- 
ing the scansion ; meaning = " com- 
mits adultery." This somewhat rare 
use is almost paralleled by Hamlet, 
I. V. 41: "that adulterate beast " = 
that " adulterous " beast. 

65. under-bear]support. Compare 
Richard II. i. iv. 29 : " And patient 
underbearing of his fortune." 

69. For grief . . . stoop] There is 
evidently some corruption of the text 
here, and the context leads one to 



suspect "stoop" and perhaps "his 
owner." All the suggested emenda- 
tions wrest some meaning out of the 
passage, but not one of them carries 
conviction with it. Perhaps " proud " 
is the corrupt word, which ought to be 
"poor" (as suggested by H. A. C, 
Athen. 1867) or some such equivalent. 
This would make Constance say in 
effect, " I will, — in spite of my grief 
which is apt to bow me down and 
make me humble, — be proud in my 
sorrow and make kings come to me." 



sc. i] KING JOHN 57 

/ Enter KING JOHN, King Philip, Lewis, Blanch, 
Elinor, the Bastard, Austria, and Attendants. 

K, Phi. 'Tis true, fair daughter ; and this blessed day 75 
Ever in France shall be kept festival : 
To solemnise this day the glorious sun 
Stays in his course and plays the alchemist, 
Turning with splendour of his precious eye 
The meagre cloddy earth to glittering gold : 80 

The yearly course that brings this day about 
Shall never see it but a holiday. 

Const. A wicked day, and not a holy day ! [Rising. 

What hath this day deserved ? what hath it done. 
That it in golden letters should be set 85 

Among the high tides in the calendar ? 
Nay, rather turn this day out of the week, 
This day of shame, oppression, perjury. 
Or, if it must stand still, let wives with child 
Pray that their burthens may not fall this day, 90 
Lest that their hopes prodigiously be cross'd : 

82. holiday] holy day Ff i, 2, 3 ; holy -day F 4. 

77-80. To solemnise . . . gold] Opening on Neptune with fair 

Compare Sonnet xxxiii. : — blessed beams, 

" Full many a glorious morning Turns into yellow gold his salt 
have I seen green streams." 
Flatter the mountain tops with 85. golden Utters] Probably a refer- 
sovereign eye, ence to the "golden number " used in 
Kissing with golden face the calculatingthefeastdaysoftheChurch. 
meadows green, 86. //tfrs] in the sense of time. Corn- 
Gilding pale streams with pare "Time and /»</<.• wait for no man." 
heavenly alchemy." " High tides " would mean festival- 
Compare also A Midsummer-Night's days, e.g. Whitsuntide, Shrovetide. 
Dream, in. ii. 390: — 90. fall] Whether this means "fall 
"[1] like a forester, the groves due" or " 10 fall" literally is not 
may tread quite clear. 
Even till the eastern gate, all 91. prodigiously] Compare line 46 
fiery-red, supra. 



58 



KING JOHN 



[act hi. 



But on this day let seamen fear no wrack; 

No bargains break that are not this day made : 

This day, all things begun come to ill end, 

Yea, faith itself to hollow falsehood change! 95 

K. Phi. By heaven, lady, you shall have no cause 
To curse the fair proceedings of this day : 
Have I not pawn'd to you my majesty? 

Const. You have beguiled me with a counterfeit 

Resembling majesty, which, being touch'd and tried, 
Proves valueless : you are forsworn, forsworn ; lOi 
You came in arms to spill mine enemies' blood, 
But now in arms you strengthen it with yours : 
The grappling vigour and rough frown of war 
Is cold in amity and painted peace, 105 



92. on this day'] For some inscrut- 
able reason the Folios put " on this 
day " within brackets. Mr. Craig has 
suggested that brackets sometimes 
played the part of commas in F i. 
See Cymbeline, i. i. 120: — 

" As I (my poor selfe) did ex- 
change." 
" But" here means "except," which 
Pope printed. 

92. wrack] I keep the old form, 
which indicates the pronunciation. 

93-95. break . . . covie . . . 
change] These verbs here are in the 
subjunctive mood expressing a wish. 

gg. Counterfeit] i.e. a counterfeit 
coin. Cf. Ben Jonson, Magnetic 
Lady, iii. i (Routledge, p. 453 a) :— 
" had the slip slurr'd on me 
A counterfeit." 
Compare also Lyly, Alexander and 
Campaspe (1584), Prologue at Court : 
" As yet we cannot tell what we 
should tearme our labours, iron or 
bullion ; only it belongeth to your 
Majestic to make them fit either for 



the forge or the mynt, currant by the 
stampe or counterfeit by the anvill." 

100. touch'd and tried] tested by 
being rubbed on a touchstone. A 
touchstone was generally made of 
black jasper and the trained eye could 
tell the fineness of gold rubbed on it 
by the character of the streak left. 
Compare Richard III. iv. ii. 8 : — 

" Now do I play the touch, 
To try if thou be current gold 
indeed." 

102, 103. in arms] armed (line 102) ; 
in one another's arms (line 103). 
As Johnson said, " I am afraid here 
is a clinch intended.'' 

105. cold] The inconsistency of the 
metaphor has led to many suggestions, 
most of them introducing other and 
equally great inconsistencies. It 
seems to me that the process of trans- 
forming vigour and a frown into amity 
may as well be expressed by " cool- 
ing" as by any other figure. I 
therefore see no reason to tamper 
with the text. 



sc. i] KING JOHN 51) 

And our oppression have made up this league. 
Arm, arm, you heavens, against these jx?rjured kings! 
A widow cries ; be husband to me, heavens ! 
Let not the hours of this ungodly day 
Wear out the day in peace ; but, ere sunset, i lo 

Set armed discord 'twixt these perjured kings ! 
Hear me, O, hear me ! 
lust. Lady Constance, peace! 

Const. War ! war ! no peace ! peace is to me a war. 
O Lymoges ! O Austria ! thou dost shame 
That bloody spoil : thou slave, thou wretch, thou 
coward ! 115 

Thou little valiant, great in villany ! 
Thou ever strong upon the stronger side ! 
Thou Fortune's champion, that dost never fight 
But when her humorous ladyship is by 
To teach thee safety! thou art perjured too, 120 

And soothest up greatness. What a fool art thou, 
A ramping fool, to brag and stamp and swear 

no. day] So Theobald ; daies F i ; dayes F 2 ; days Ff 3, 4. 122. and 
stamp] to stamp F 4. 

106. And our . . . this Uague] and 121. Soothest up] i.e. flatterest, 

your oppression of us has joined you dost humour. The tendency so preva- 

together. lent nowadays to add " up " to verbs 

114. O Lymoges I O Austria] An without adding much to the sense, 
unwarrantable identification of the except perhaps making the verb em- 
Duke of Austria and the Viscount phatic (f.j^. " pay i//"," " smash «/> "), 
of Limoges, two entirely dirlerent is to be detected in Elizabethan 
people. See Introduction. English. Compare Spanish Tragedy, 

115. bloody spoil] the lion's skin iii. x. 19: " Salve all suspicions, only 
which Iiad previously raised the ire soothe me up"; and Friar Bacon 
of the Bastard. {1594), i- '••• 2t, 22: — 

119. humorous] i.e. full of differ- '■ This is a fainng, gentle sir, 

em humours, capricious. Compare indeed, 

Love's Labour's Lost, 111. i. j6: — To soothe me up with such 

*' I, that have been love's whip ; smooth flatterie." 

A very beadle to a humorous 122. ramping] wildly gesticulating, 

sigh." Cotgrave gives " grimpemenl : a 



60 



KING JOHN 



[act hi. 



Upon my party! Thou cold-blooded slave, 
Hast thou not spoke like thunder on my side, 
Been sworn my soldier, bidding me depend 125 

Upon thy stars, thy fortune and thy strength, 
And dost thou now fall over to my foes ? 
Thou wear a lion's hide ! doff it for shame, 
And hang a calfs-skin on those recreant limbs. 

AusL O, that a man should speak those words to me! 130 

Bast. And hang a calfs-skin on those recreant limbs. 

Aust. Thou darest not say so, villain, for thy life. 

Bast. And hang a calfs-skin on those recreant limbs. 

K. John. We like not this; thou dost forget thyself. 



Enter Pandulph. 

K. Phi. Here comes the holy legate of the pope. 

Pand. Hail, you anointed deputies of heaven ! 
To thee. King John, my holy errand is. 
I Pandulph, of fair Milan cardinal, 
And from Pope Innocent the legate here, 

131. calfsskinl Capell ; Calves skin Ff i, 2, 3; Calves-skin F 4. 



135 



climbing, crawling, creeping, ramp- 
ing, running upwards " ; and " grim- 
ier : to ramp." " Lion rampant " in 
heraldry ought therefore to mean a 
lion climbing, and this is just the 
attitude of the lions "rampant" 
given in Woodward and Burnett's 
Heraldry, i. plate xxi. It would re- 
quire little imagination however to 
deem this the representation of a lion 
seeking whom he might devour, and 
there is no doubt that in this speech 
of Constance "ramping" bears the 
meaning of rushing wildly about. 
As Mr. Wright suggests, the lion's 
skin had something to do with the 
choice of epithet. Mr, Craig tells me 



of a Kentish inn called the " Ramping 
Cat"! 

127. fall over] revolt. Compare 
1 Henry IV. i. iii. 93 : — 

" Revolted Mortimer I 
He never did fall off my sove- 
reign liege. 
But by the chance of war." 

129. calfs-skin] There may be a 
reference here to the fact mentioned 
by Sir John Hawkins that domestic 
fools were clothed in a coat of calfs- 
skin. "Calf" in Shakespeare often 
means " fool." 

129. recreant] cowardly. See note 
on "recreant" and "miscreant" in 
Arden edition of Richard II. 



c. i] KING JOHN 61 

Do in his name religiously demand 140 

Why thou against the church, our holy mother, 
So wilfully doth spurn ; and force perforce 
Keep Stephen Langton, chosen archbishop 
Of Canterbury-, from that holy see : 
This, in our foresaid holy father's name, 145 

Pope Innocent, I do demand of thee, 
K. John. WTiat earthy name to interrogatories 
Can task the free breath of a sacred king ? 
Thou canst not, cardinal, devise a name 
So slight, unworthy and ridiculous, 150 

To charge me to an answer, as the pope. 
Tell him this tale ; and from the mouth of England 
Add thus much more, that no Italian priest 
Shall tithe or toll in our dominions ; 
But as we, under heaven, are supreme head, 155 

So under Him that great supremacy, 
WTiere we do reign, we will alone uphold. 
Without the assistance of a mortal hand : 
So tell the pope, all reverence set apart 
To him and his usurp'd authority. 160 

144. i«] F 4; Sea Ff i, 2. 3, 14S. taik\ Theobald; tail Ff i, 2; 

taste Ff 3, 4 ; tax Rowe (ed. 2). 

140. religiously] solemnly, or per- term for questions which a witness 

haps, in the name of religion. was bound to answer faithfully. " A 

142. ^orce perforce] by violent question in legal examinations " 

means if necessary, by compulsion. (Coles' Diet.). John asks "whose 

Compare 2 Henry VI. i. i. 25S : "And, name can sanction questions put to a 

force perforce, I '11 make him yield the sacred king ? " 

crown." 154. tithe or toll] Used as verbs = 

147. What earthy name, etc.] John to exact tithe or toll, 

here poses as the defender of the Con- 155. heaven] Here must be equiva- 

stitution against the Church. See lent to God; see "Him" next line. 

Introduction. Collier suggests reading " God.' 

147. interrogatories] A technical 



62 



KING JOHN 



[act III. 



K. Phi. Brother of England, you blaspheme in this. 

K. John. Though you and all the kings of Christendom 
Are led so grossly by this meddling priest, 
Dreading the curse that money may buy out; 
And by the merit of vile gold, dross, dust, 165 

Purchase corrupted pardon of a man. 
Who in that sale sells pardon from himself, 
Though you and all the rest so grossly led 
This juggling witchcraft with revenue cherish, 
Yet I alone, alone do me oppose 170 

Against the pope and count his friends my foes. 

Pand. Then, by the lawful power that I have, 
Thou shalt stand cursed and excommunicate : 
And blessed shall be he that doth revolt 
From his allegiance to an heretic; 175 

And meritorious shall that hand be call'd, 
Canonised and v/orshipp'd as a saint. 



164. Dyeadini{ . . . ont] Compare 
Chaucer's Prologue to Canterbury 
Tales, lines 654-60 : — 

" He wolde techen him to have non 

awe, 
In swich cas, of the erchedeknes 

curs, 
But-if a mannes soule were in his 

purs. 
For in his purs he sholde y-pun- 

isshed be. 
' Purs is the erchedeknes helle,' 

seyde he." 

165. vile] Nearly always spelt 
"vilde" or " vild " in plays of this 
period. 

168, 169. Though you . . . cherish] 
though you and all the rest who are 
so foolishly led, help to keep up this 
juggling witchcraft (i.e. Popery) by 
contributing monies towards it. 



173. excommunicate] excommuni- 
cated. English words from a Latin 
past participle in -atus are often used 
without the -ed in the past. 

177. Canonised . . . sairit] Seymour 
would read " Worshipp'd and canon- 
ized as a saint." But we may read 
"canonized and worshipp'd as a 
saint," which is the accentuation in 
Hamlet, i. iv. 47: — 

"But tell 
Why thy canonized bones hearsed 
in death." 
Compare also Troilus and Cressida, 
II. ii. 202 : — 

" And fame in time to come canon- 
ize us "; 
and in. iv. 52 infra, where Seymour 
again would needlessly invert the line 
for the same reason. 



sc. i] KING JOHN 68 

That takes away by any secret course 
Thy hateful h'fe. 

Const. O, lawful let it be 

That I have room with Rome to curse awhile! i8o 
Good father cardinal, cry thou amen 
To my keen curses ; for without my wrong 
There is no tongue hath power to curse him right. 

Pand. There's law and warrant, lady, for my curse. 

Const. And for mine too: when law can do no right, 185 
Let it be lawful that law bar no wrong : 
Law cannot give my child his kingdom here, 
For he that holds his kingdom holds the law ; 
Therefore, since law itself is perfect wrong. 
How can the law forbid my tongue to curse? 190 

Pand. Philip of France, on peril of a curse. 
Let go the hand of that arch-heretic ; 
And raise the power of France upon his head. 
Unless he do submit himself to Rome. 194 

Eli. Look'st thou pale, France? do not let go thy hand. 

Const. Look to that, devil ; lest that France repent, 
And by disjoining hands, hell lose a soul. 
\ust. King Philip, listen to the cardinal. 

185. right,] right. Ff. 196. that, devil ;] Pope; that devil ; Ff. 

180. room . . . Rome] It seems righted then let no wrongdoing at 

ident that here " room " and all be hindered. Law cannot give 

■Rome" were to be pronounced Arthur his kingdom, for John is 

alike. That " i?ow« " was pronounced master of the law; therefore since 

"room" is shown by rhymes in the law itself is " perfect wrong," how 

Lucrece, 715 and 717, 1644 and 1645. can I be rightfully restrained from 

impare also /w/««5 Crjiar, I. ii. 156 : cursing. This mixture of quibbling 

Now is it Rome indeed and room with passionate argument is charac- 

cnough." teristic of this play. 

185. when law can do no right, 193. raise the power . . . head] 

tic] when the law cannot see people lead the French forces against him. 



64 



KING JOHN 



[act III. 



Bast. And hang a calfs-skin on his recreant h'mbs. 
Aust. Well, ruffian, i must pocket up these wrongs, 200 

Because — 
Bast. Your breeches best may carry them. 

K. John. Philip, what say'st thou to the cardinal? 
Const. What should he say, but as the cardinal? 
Leiv. Bethink you, father; for the difference 

Is purchase of a heavy curse from Rome, 205 

Or the light loss of England for a friend: 

Forgo the easier. 
Blanch. That's the curse of Rome. 

Const. O Lewis, stand fast ! the devil tempts thee here 

In likeness of a new untrimmed bride. 
Blanch. The Lady Constance speaks not from her faith, 

But from her need. 211 



207. That 'sj Thai s Ff i ; That is 

igg. And hang . . . recreant limbs] 
The Bastard takes little interest in 
the wrongs of either party. He seems 
only too delighted that mischief is 
afoot and takes the opportunity to 
worry Austria. 

203. What . . . cardifial ?] what 
should he say, except what the 
Cardinal has already said ? 

207. the curse of Rome] To Blanch 
the curse of Rome would be the lesser 
of two evils, for if John and Philip 
fell out she would have to oppose her 
friends to her husband and his friends. 
This course she has to take ulti- 
mately. 

209. new untrimmed] " Trim " in 
Elizabethan English means gaily 
decked. Compare the use as a verb 
in Romeo and ynliet, iv. iv. 24 : " Go 
waken Juliet, go and trim her up." 
Taking the passage as it stands, we 
may explain it by supposing Con- 
stance to mean that IBlanch was a 
new-made bride having just laid 



Ff2, 3, 4. 

aside the trimmings in which she had 
been married. Schmidt drew atten- 
tion in this connection to Sonnet 
xviii. : — 

"And every fair from fair some- 
times declines, 
By chance or nature's changing 
course untrimmed." 
White says " untrimmed = in des- 
habille," which is hardly likely, even 
though the marriage was suddenly 
clapped up. Others see an allusion 
to the bride's going to church with 
her hair dishevelled. Compare 
Webster, Vittoria Corrombona (ed. 
Dyce, p. 27, col. i) : " Let them 
dangle loose as a bride's hair." The 
emendations are " new and trimmed " 
(Theobald, who also conjectured 
"new untamed" or "new be- 
trimmed"), "new uptrimmed" 
(Dyce), "new entrimmed" (Richard- 
son conj.), "new untamed" (Vaug- 
han, agreeing with Theobald's conj,), 
" new-intervened " (Herr conj.). 



sc I] KING JOHN 65 

Const. O, if thou grant my need, 

Which only hves but by the death of faith, 
That need must needs infer this principle. 
That faith would live again by death of nc^d. 214 
O then, tread down my need, and faith mounts up ; 
Keep my need up, and faith is trodden down ! 

A'. John. The king is moved, and answers not to this. 

Const. O, be removed from him, and answer well ! 

Aiist. Do so, King Philip ; hang no more in doubt. 
[ Bast. Hang nothing but a calfs-skin, most sweet lout. 220 

K. Phi. I am perplex'd, and know not what to say. 

Pand. What canst thou say but will perplex thee more. 
If thou stand e.xcommunicate and cursed ? 

K. Phi. Good reverend father, make my person yours. 
And tell me how you would bestow yourself. 225 
This royal hand and mine are newly knit. 
And the conjunction of our inward souls 
Married in league, coupled and link'd together 
With all religious strength of sacred vows ; 
The latest breath that gave the sound of words 230 
Was deep-sworn faith, peace, amity, true love 
Between our kingdoms and our royal selves, 
And even before this truce, but new before. 
No longer than we well could wash our hands 
To clap this royal bargain up of peace, 235 

233. but new before.^ but new — be/ore — Seymour conj. 

j 227. And the conjunction, etc.] 233. but new be/ore] only just be- 

i There is a looseness of construction fore. 

i in this sentence, for, although "con- 235. clap , . . up] A bargain or a 

' junction " is the subject of " (is) wager was sealed by a handshake, 

married," "(is) coupled," and "(is) There are numerous instances in plays 

linked," these participles agree in of the period. Compare Gosson's 

meaning with " inward souls," To the Gentlewomen of London (ed. 



66 KING JOHN [act m. 

Heaven knows, they were besmear'd and overstain'd 
With slaughter's pencil, where revenge did paint 
The fearful difference of incensed king-s : 
And shall these hands, so lately purged of blood, 
So newly join'd in love, so strong in both, 240 

Unyoke this seizure and this kind regreet ? 
Play fast and loose with faith ? so jest with heaven. 
Make such inconstant children of ourselves, 
As now again to snatch our palm from palm, 
Unswear faith sworn, and on the marriage-bed 245 
Of smiling peace to march a bloody host, 
And make a riot on the gentle brow 
Of true sincerity? O, holy sir. 
My reverend father, let it not be so ! 
Out of your grace, devise, ordain, impose 250 

Some gentle order ; and then we shall be blest 
To do your pleasure and continue friends. 
Pand. All form is formless, order orderless, 
Save what is opposite to England's love. 
Therefore to arms ! be champion of our church, 255 
Or let the church, our mother, breathe her curse, 
A mother's curse, on her revolting son. 
France, thou mayst hold a serpent by the tongue, 

Arber, p. 59): "and the match (is) give. Compare Richard II. i. iii. 

made, ere you strike hands"; and 142: "Shall not regreet our fair 

Middleton, A Trick, iii. i (Mermaid dominions." 

ed. p. 39): "Come, clap hands, a 242. Play fast and loose'] oxigmaWy 

match." to play at a cheating game in which 

240. so strong in both] i.e. hands the gull had no chance (see Appendix) ; 
strong in fight and strong in friend- then to deal dishonourably. 

ship. 253,254. Aliform . . . England's 

241. regreet] greeting once again, love] Everything is null and void 
therefore >'e-agreement, not merely except what is directly opposed tQ 
greeting or salutation as most editors love towards England, 



sc. 



«•] 



KING JOHN 



67 



A chafed lion by the mortal paw, 

A fasting tiger safer by the tooth, 260 

Than keep in peace that hand which thou dost hold. 

A'. Phi. I may disjoin my hand, but not my faith. 

Pand. So makest thou faith an enemy to faith ; 
And like a civil war set'st oath to oath, 
Thy tongue against thy tongue. O, let thy vow 265 
First made to heaven, first be to heaven perform'd, 
That is, to be the champion of our church. 
What since thou sworest is sworn against thyself 
And may not be performed by thyself, 
For that which thou hast sworn to do amiss 270 

Is not amiss when it is truly done, 
And being not done, where doing tends to ill, 
The truth is then most done not doing it : 
The better act of purposes mistook 
Is to mistake again; though indirect, 275 



259. chafed] So Theobald ; cased Ff. 

259. chafed] None of the suggested 
meanings for the "cased" of the 
FoUos seems satisfactory. Mr. Moore- 
Smith says " the point of the epithet 
would se-^rm to be that if the lion were 
shut in, the man would be shut in 
also, and so much more courage would 
be required." I fail to see why the 
man should be supposed to be shut 
in. Henry VIII. m. ii. 206, 207, 
supports Theobald : — 

" so looks the chafed lion 
Upon the daring huntsman who 
has gall'd him." 
There is something to be said for 
Pope's reading, "chased." which 
would hold also in the H.nry VIII. 
passage. A lion that had been hunted 
and, so to speak, driven to bav, would 
not be a pleasant creature to take by 



the paw. If we retain ''chafed" we 
must of course assume it to mean 
" enraged." 

26S. What since thou sworest, etc.] 
"What you have sworn since then is 
sworn against yourself and cannot be 
performed by you, for what wrong 
you have sworn to do is not wrong 
if truly performed, and if you do it 
not, beciuse the doing of it would be 
wrong, then you are most truly per- 
forming it by not doing it." \n 
excellent bit of sophistry, quite in the 
early Shakespearian vein. 

275-278. though indirect . . . new- 
bttrn'd] though in not keeping your 
vow you are turning from the straight, 
yet since you are already on the 
wrong path this very turning will 
bring you back to the right path. 



68 



KING JOHN 



[act hi. 



Yet indirection thereby grows direct, 

And falsehood falsehood cures, as fire cools fire 

Within the scorched veins of one new-burn'd. 



280 
thou 



285 



It is religion that doth make vows kept; 

But thou hast sworn against religion, 

By what thou swear'st against the thing 

swear'st, 
And makest an oath the surety for thy truth 
Against an oath : the truth thou art unsure 
To swear, swears only not to be forsworn ; 
Else what a mockery should it be to swear ! 
But thou dost swear only to be forsworn ; 
And most forsworn, to keep what thou dost swear. 
Therefore thy later vows against thy first 
Is in thyself rebellion to thyself; 
And better conquest never canst thou make 290 

278. scorched] Ff i, 2 ; scorching Ff 3, 4. 282, 283. truth, Against an 

oath the truth,] Ff i, 2 ; truth ; Against an oath the truth, Ff 3, 4. 288. 

later] Ff i, 2 ; latter Ff 3, 4. 

Compare The Merchant of Venice, iv. 
i. 216 : " To do a great right, do a 
little wrong." 

281. But what thou swear'st, etc.] 
Mr. Wright says that the language is 
made intentionally obscure. Although 
this passage is undoubtedly obscure, 
I cannot admit that Shakespeare ever 
deliberately made a serious character 
speak obscurely. Besides, the general 
argument here is plain enough — Of 
two oaths the greater, that taken to 
God and the Church, absolves Philip 
from the consequences of breaking a 
lesser, that plighted to John, if the 
lesser oath is contrary to the first. 
Most editors and critics have at- 
tempted to better the passage, but 
the alterations seem so violent that, 
as Mr. Wright says about Staunton 
and Hudson's readings, they may 



give a meaning which Shakespeare 
never intended. Lines 280, 281 are 
awkward, but can be taken to mean 
— " You have sworn against religion 
by calling in religion to witness an 
oath which will do her harm." " The 
truth . . . forsworn" is the phrase 
that offers most difficulty. It yields 
sense by supposing it to be a slight 
digression from the main argument, 
meaning — "and when you are asked 
to take an oath oi which you are not 
sure of the consequences (such as, 
Pandulph would imply, the oath you 
took with John), you only swear not 
to be forsworn, i.e. on condition that 
it is not contrary to some greater 
oath." 

289. Is] Explained as asjreeing in 
number with rebellion and not with 
voivs. 



I 



sc. i] KING JOHN (;<) 

Than arm thy constant and thy nobler parts 
Against these giddy loose suggestions : 
Upon which better part our prayers come in, 
If thou vouchsafe them. But if not, then know 
The peril of our curses light on thee 295 

So heavy as thou shalt not shake them off, 
But in despair die under their black weight, 

Aust. Rebellion, flat rebellion! 

Bast. Will't not be? 

Will not a calf 's-skin stop that mouth of thine ? 

Lew. Father, to arms ! 

Blanch. Upon thy wedding-day? 300 

Against the blood that thou hast married ? 
What, shall our feast be kept with slaughtered men ? 
Shall braying trumpets and loud churlish drums, 
Clamours of hell, be measures to our pomp? 
O husband, hear me ! ay, alack, how new 305 

Is husband in my mouth! even for that name. 
Which till this time my tongue did ne'er pronounce. 
Upon my knee I beg, go not to arms 
Against mine uncle. 

Const. O, upon my knee. 

Made hard with kneeling, I do pray to thee, 310 

Thou virtuous Dauphin, alter not the doom 
Forethought by heaven ! 

305. a_>',] Ff ; ah! Theobald. -^og-iiz. Against . . . /i(rtr^« /] Pope's 

aiTangement ; Folios end the lines kneeling . . . Dauphin . . . heavtn. 

295. prril . . . light] Note con- thet was applied to the drum once 

;on of number; peril giammati- before (see ii. i. 76 i«/ra). 

- subj. to light, but them showing 304. measures] The accompanying 

u curses was treated as subj. in music to our wedding festivities. 

meining. 312. Forethought] foreseen, and 

303, i:A»Wjj/i] This expressive epi- therefore, since "foreseen by heaven," 



70 



KING JOHN 



[act III. 



Blanch. Now shall I see thy love: what motive may 

Be stronger with thee than the name of wife? 
Const. That which upholdeth him that thee upholds, 315 

His honour : O, thine honour, Lewis, thine honour ! 
Lew. I muse your majesty doth seem so cold, 

When such profound respects do pull you on. 
Pand. I will denounce a curse upon his head. 
K. Phi. Thou shalt not need. England, I will fall from 
thee. 320 

Const. O fair return of banish'd majesty! 
Eli. O foul revolt of French inconstancy! 
K. John. France, thou shalt rue this hour within this hour. 
Bast. Old Time the clock-setter, that bald sexton Time, 

Is it as he will? well then, France shall rue. 325 

Blanch. The sun 's o'ercast with blood : fair day, adieu ! 

Which is the side that I must go withal ? 

I am with both : each army hath a hand ; 

And in their rage, I having hold of both, 



foreordained. Compare Cymheline, 
III. iv. 171 : — 

" Fore-thinking this, I have already 
fit— 
'Tis in my cloak bag — doublet, 
hat, hose . . ." 
Cotgrave has '■^ prenicditi : premedi- 
tated, forethought of" 

317. / tnnsc] I marvel. Compare 
Two Gentlemen 0/ Verona, i. iii. 64: 
"Muse not that I thus suddenly pro- 
ceed." 

318. respects] considerations. See 
Hamlet, in. i. 68 : — 

" There 's the respect 
Thai makes calamity of so long 
life " ; 
and compare v. iv. 41 infra. 

319. denounce'] merely equivalent 
to our " proclaim " ; it contains of 



course no idea of impeachment or 
accusation. 

320. fall from thee] leave your 
party. Mr. Wright quotes Heywood, 
a Edward IV. 1.6 :— 

" If he will recant 
hxiA fall from Lewis again." 

322. French inconstancy] Compare 
a curious passage in Gosson's Schoole 
of Abuse (ed. Arber, p. 34): "We 
have robbed Greece of gluttonie, Italy 
of wantonnesse, Spaine of pride, 
Fraunce of deceite, and Dutchland 
of quaffing." 

324, 325. Old Time . . . shall rue] 
The Bastard remarks after John's 
threat, " If it 's merely a matter of 
time France shall rue." This lacks 
the usual salt of theBastard's speeches, 
and the text has been suspected. 



sc. 



■•] 



KING JOHN 



71 



They whirl asunder and dismember me. 330 

Husband, I cannot pray that thou mayst win ; 
Uncle, I needs must pray that thou mayst lose ; 
Father, I may not wish the fortune thine; 
Grandam., I will not wish thy wishes thrive : 
Whoever wins, on that side shall I lose; 335 

Assured loss before the match be play'd. 

Lew. Lady, with me, with me thy fortune lies. 

Blanch. There where my fortune lives, there my life dies. 

K. John. Cousin, go draw our puissance together. 

\Exit Bastard. 
France, I am burn'd up with inflaming wrath ; 340 
A rage whose heat hath this condition, 
That nothing can allay, nothing but blood. 
The blood, and dearest-valued blood, of France. 

A'. Phi. Thy rage shall burn thee up, and thou shalt turn 
To ashes, ere our blood shall quench that fire : 345 
Look to thyself, thou art in jeopard)-. 

A'. John. No more than he that threats. To arms let's 
hie ! {^Exeunt. 

337. lxes\ lives Capell. 341. thii] a Vaughan conj. 342. alla^-] 

alloy't Dyce (ed. 2) (Capell conj.). 



339. Cousin^ Loosely used for 
kinsman in Elizabethan Knglish. 
Cotgrave has " Cousin : a cosin or 
kinsman." 

339. f>uissance'\ powers, forces. 
Sometimes a dissyllable, here a tri- 
syllable. 

343. The blood . . . blood] The 
repetition of the word "blood" has 
led to emendation. Hud>on prints, 
after a suggestion of Sidney Walker's, 
" The best and dearest valued blood." 
Hudson also suggests " The blood, 
the dearest-valued blood." Bulloch 



conjectures " the dearest-valued 
blue." The text, however, is de- 
fensible. John says nothing can 
allay his rage but blood; he is going 
to state that it must be French blood, 
and when half-way through the 
sentence, he sees a method of 
heightening the effect and interjects 
" and (that the) dearest-valued 
blood." 

346. jeopardy] danger, hazard. 
Mr. Wright derives this from jeit 
parti, a game where the risk is evenly 
divided. 



72 KING JOHN [act m. 



SCENE II. — The same. Plains near Anglers. 

Alarums, excursions. Enter the BASTARD, with Austria's 

head. 

Bast. Now, by my life, this day grows wondrous hot ; 
Some airy devil hovers in the sky, 
And pours down mischief. Austria's head lie there. 
While Philip breathes. 

Enter KING JOHN, ARTHUR, and HUBERT. 

K. John. Hubert, keep this boy. Philip, make up : 5 

My mother is assailed in our tent, 

And ta'en, I fear. 
Bast. My lord, I rescued her ; 

Her highness is in safety, fear you not : 

But on, my liege; for very little pains 

Will bring this labour to an happy end. 10 

[^Exeunt. 

2. airy'] fiery Theobald (Warburton). 7. ta'cn] Rowe; tane Ff. 

2. airy] belonging to the air, aerial. " There, Hubert" ; Keightley, " Here, 

Compare the old list of dramatis Hubert'''; Fleay, "Good Hubert." 

personam 'm The Tempest: "Ariel, an Rann, after a conjecture of Tyrwhitt's, 

ayrie Spirit"; also Webster, The inserts " thou " after " keep." Theo- 

Devil's Law Case, v. 5 (ed. Dyce, p. bald reads " Richard " and Hanmer 

143) : " The devil that rules in the " Cousin " for " Philip." It would 

air hangs in their light." This line be equally natural for King John and 

also occurs in the Duchess of Malfi, for Shakespeare to forget the Bastard's 

11. i. (Dyce, p. 67). Spirits were change of name. 

divided into four classes inhabiting 5. make up] move onward. Com- 

respectively the four elements, air, pare 1 Henry IV. v. iv. 4, 5 : — 

fire, earth and water. " I do beseech your majesty, 

5. Hubert . . . make up] Editors make up, 

have been unwilling to let this line Lest your retirement do amaze 

remain defective. Pope reads your friends." 



sc. Ill] KING JOHN 73 

SCENE lU.— T/te same. 

llanims, exatrsions, retreat. Enter KING JOHN, ELINOR, 
Arthur, t/ie Bastard, Hubert, and Lords. 

K. John. [To Elinor.'] So shall it be; your grace siiall 
stay behind 

So strongly guarded. \_To Arthur.] Cousin, look not 
sad : 

Thy grandam loves thee ; and thy uncle will 

As dear be to thee as thy father was. 
Arth. O, this will make my mother die with grief! 5 
K. John. [To the Bastard.] Cousin, away for England ! 
haste before : 

And, ere our coming, see thou shake the bags 

Of hoarding abbots ; imprisoned angels 

Set at liberty : the fat ribs of peace 

Must by the hungry now be fed upon : 10 

Use our commission in his utmost force. 
Bast. Bell, book, and candle shall not drive me back, 

When gold and silver becks me to come on. 

I leave your highness. Grandam, I will pray. 

If ever I remember to be holy, 15 

For your fair safety ; so, I kiss your hand. 

2. So^ Lettsom's conjecture, adopt- proposed transposition, printed by 

ed by Hudson, of " More" for "So" Grant White, is the least violent 

seems very plausible. The printer's way out of the difficulty, if real 

error can be explained by his eye difficulty there be. He would read 

having caught the "So" ot the pre- "set at liberty. Imprisoned angels." 

vious line — a common failipg among 12. Bell, book, and candle] The 

printers. " properties " necessary for the per- 

8, 9. imprisoned . . . liberty] The formance of the Catholic curse of 

want of rhythm in these lines has led excommunication; referred to in 

to emendation. Sidney Walker's Kynge Johan. 



74 KING JOHN [act ih. 

Eli. F'arewell, gentle cousin. 

K. John. Coz, farewell. 

\Exit Bastard. 

Eli. Come hither, little kinsman ; hark, a word. 

K. John. Come hither, Hubert. O my gentle Hubert, 
We owe thee much ! within this wall of flesh 20 

There is a soul counts thee her creditor, 
And with advantage means to pay thy love : 
And, my good friend, thy voluntary oath 
Lives in this bosom, dearly cherished. 
Give me thy hand. I had a thing to say, 25 

But I will fit it with some better time. 
By heaven, Hubert, I am almost ashamed 
To say what good respect I have of thee. 

Hub. I am much bounden to your majesty. 

K. JohnAGood friend, thou hast no cause to say so yet, 30 
But thou shalt have ; and creep time ne'er so slow, 
Yet it shall come for me to do thee good. 
I had a thing to say, but let it go : 
The sun is in the heaven, and the proud day, 
Attended with the pleasures of the world, 35 

Is all too wanton and too full of gawds 
To give me audience: if the midnight bell 
Did, with his iron tongue and brazen mouth, 

26. timel Pope ; tune Ff. 

22. advantafre] Mr. Wright and in 1 Henry IV. u. iv. 599, "The 

Mr. Moore-Smith explain this as money shall be paid back with ad- 

" interest." It is true that the line vantage,^' means something thrown 

may be paraphrased " I mean to pay into the bargain, more than one 

back thy love with interest," because can legally expect. See Cotgrave, 

our modern phrase "with interest" ^'Avantage : . . . an advantage, . . . 

really means more than mere legally overplus, addition, eeking." 
due interest. The word here and 28. respect] opinion, esteem. 



i 



n..] 



KING JOHN 



75 



Sound on into the drowsy car of night; 

If this same were a churchyard where we stand, 40 

And thou possessed with a thousand wrongs ; 

Or if that surly spirit, melancholy, 

Hid baked thy blood and made it heavy-thick, 

Which else runs tickling up and down the veins, 

Making that idiot, laughter, keep men's eyes 45 

And strain their cheeks to idle merriment, 

A passion hateful to my purposes ; 

Or if that thou couldst see me without eyes, 

Hear me without thine ears, and make reply 

Without a tongue, using conceit alone, 50 

Without eyes, ears and harmful sound of words; 

Then, in despite of brooded watchful day, 

44. tickling] trickling Grey 



43. ht-ai'y -thick] Pope ; heavy, thick Ff. 
conj.; tingling Collier MS. 



39. ear] So printed by Dyce and 
Staunton after conjectures of Collier 
and Sidney Walker. The Folios 
have "race," which is therefore sup- 
posed to have been a misprint for 
*' tare." F'or " on " Theobald printed 
*' one." But as Vaughan pointed 
out the midnight bell does not sound 
one! Delius conjectured "on!" 
Wetherell "not" and Bulloch 
" dong." Other emendations of the 
line have been proposed, but with 
the single alteration of "race" to 
"ear" it gives perfectly good sense. 

45. kfep] occupy. Compare Love's 
Labour 's Lost, iv. iii. 324 : " Other 
slow arts entirely k<cp the brain." 
Mr. P. A. Daniel points out that in 
The Puritan, iii. vi. 592, we find 
" we '11 steep Our eyes in laughter." 

50. conceit] in Elizabethan English 
often means imagination. Compare 
Richard n. 11. ii. 33: "'Tis nothing 
but conceit, my gracious lady." Here 
it has a wider meaning, equivalent to 
" some intangible power of the mind." 



52. brooded] Even though 
" brooded " be equivalent to " brood- 
ing," as Mr. Wright points out, it 
does not seem an apt epithet for 
"day" in this connection. Cotgrave 
gives ^' Accouve ; brooded: set close 
on, crouded (crouched ?) over ; also 
covered, hidden, overshadowed," thus 
vouching for the form of the word in 
-ed, but proving the inapplicability 
of the meaning. The day cannot be 
proud, wanton and full of gawds, 
attended with the pleasures of the 
world, watchful and at the same time 
brooded. Pope reads " broad-ey'd," 
Collier MS. "the broad," Delius 
after a conj. of Mason's, " brooded- 
watchful." An anonymous conj. in 
Halliwell suggests "broody," while 
Vaughan has withdrawn his sug- 
gestion of "bruited." Perhaps the 
Delius-Mason reading is the least 
objectionable, taking "brooded" to 
be an epithet applied to watchful, the 
day being as watchful as a sitting bird ; 
but even this is far from satisfactory. 



76 KING JOHN [act m. 

I would unto thy bosom pour my thoughts : 

But, ah, I will not ! yet I love thee well ; 

And, by my troth, I think thou lovest me well. 55 
Hub. So well, that what you bid me undertake. 

Though that my death were adjunct to my act, 

By heaven, I would do it. 
K. John. Do not I know thou wouldst? 

Good Hubert, Hubert, Hubert, throw thine eye 

On yon young boy ; I '11 tell thee what, my friend, 60 

He is a very serpent in my way ; 

And wheresoe'er this foot of mine doth tread. 

He lies before me : dost thou understand me ? 

Thou art his keeper. 
Hub. And I '11 keep him so, 

That he shall not offend your majesty. 
K. John. Death. 65 

Hub. My Lord? 
K. John. A grave. 

Hub. He shall not live. 

K. John. Enough. 

I could be merry now. Hubert, I love thee; 

Well, I '11 not say what I intend for thee : 

Remember. Madam, fare you well: 

I '11 send those powers o'er to your majesty. 70 

Eli. My blessing go with thee ! 
K. John. For England, cousin, go : 

Hubert shall be your man, attend on you 

With all true duty. On toward Calais, ho ! 

[Exeunt. 

65. My lord?'\ Rowe; My lord. Ff. 72. attend] Ff i, 2; to attend 

Ff 3, 4 ; V attend Pope. 



sc. IV] KING JOHN 77 



SCENE IV. — Tlu same. The French King's tent. 

Enter Kl\g Philip, Lewis, Pandulph, and 

A ttendants. 

K. Phi. So, by a roaring^ tempest on the flood, 
A whole armado of convicted sail 
Is scattered and disjoin'd from fellowship. 
ind. Courage and comfort ! all shall yet go well. 

K Phi. What can go well, when we have run so ill ? 5 
Are we not beaten ? Is not Angiers lost ? 
Arthur ta'en prisoner? divers dear friends slain? 
And bloody England into England gone, 
O'erbearing interruption, spite of France? 

Lew. What he hath won, that hath he fortified : 10 

So hot a speed with such advice disposed, 
Such temperate order in so fierce a cause. 
Doth want example : who hath read or heard 
Of any kindred action like to this ? 

K. Phi. Well could I bear that England had this praise 15 
So we could find some pattern of our shame. 

Pandulph] Pandulpho F i ; Pandupho Ff 2, 3, 4. 14. kindred at tioti] 

hyphened in Ff. 

2. armado] From the Spanish scattered by a storm — and disposes 

armada, a fleet of armed ships. of the various suggested emendations. 

2. convicted] Mr. Wright takes Mr. Wright sees in the phrase a re- 

this to mean "beaten, discomfited," ference to the defeat of the Spanish 

for which .Malone gives the authority Armada. Delius reads " connected." 

of Florio's Worlde of Words. The 12. cause] Theobald made a tempt- 

New Eng. Diet, quotes Lloid's ing suggestion of course, which 

Pilgrimage of Princes (1607), ii. : Hanmer has printed. 

"iHippolita) being convicted by 16. So we could . . . our shame] 

Theseus . . . was married to him." If we could find some example of 

This meaning gives quite good others put to such shame as we have 

sense — A discomfited tlcet has been been. 



78 KING JOHN [act m. 

Enter CONSTANCE. 

Look, who comes here ! a grave unto a soul ; 

Holding the eternal spirit, against her will, 

In the vile prison of afflicted breath. 

I prithee, lady, go away with me. 20 

Const. Lo, now! now see the issue of your peace. 

K. Phi. Patience, good lady ! comfort, gentle Constance I 

Const. No, I defy all counsel, all redress, 

But that which ends all counsel, true redress. 

Death, death; O amiable lovely death! 25 

Thou odoriferous stench ! sound rottenness ! 

Arise forth from the couch of lasting night, 

Thou hate and terror to prosperity. 

And I will kiss thy detestable bones 

And put my eyeballs in thy vaulty brows 30 

And ring these fingers with thy household worms 

And stop this gap of breath with fulsome dust 

And be a carrion monster like thyself: 

24,25. rcdre%s. Death, death ;'\T\it.Q\)2\^\ redresse : Death, death, ¥i\ re- 
dress. Death; death, Pope. 

19. the vile prison . . . breath] 26. Thou . . . rottenness /] The 

The body is often looked upon as a man who could pen certain passages 

vile prison for the purer spirit or in the Dunciad rejected this line ! 

breath {anima) which is afflicted by 27. forth from] The inversion 

being kept prisoner within the body, ''from forth" of the Collier MS. 

One is reminded of Browning's betters the line in rhythm and gives 

Karshish : — a more natural order of words than 

" This man's flesh he hath admir- " Arise forth." 

ably made, 28. Thou hate . . . prosperity] 

Blown like a bubble, kneaded Thou who art hated and feared by the 

like a paste, prosperous. 
To coop up and keep down on 29-36. And I -ujill kiss, etc.] Con- 
earth a space stance compares death to a skeleton 
That puff" of vapour from his and goes into grim detail. 

mouth, man's soul." 32. fulsome] nauseous. See Cot- 

23. defy] renounce. Compare 1 grave, '' Nideiir : the stench, or 

Henry IV. i. iii. 228: "All studies fulsom savour of things broiled or 

here I solemnly defy," burnt." 






sc. .v.] KIXG JOHN 70 

Come, grin on me, and I will think thou smilest, 
And buss thee as thy wife. Misery's love, 35 

O, come to me! 

K. Phi. O fair affliction, peace! 

Const. No, no, I will not, having breath to cry: 

O, that mv tongue were in the thunder's mouth ! 
Then with a passion would I shake the world ; 
And rouse from sleep that fell anatomy 40 

Which cannot hear a lady's feeble voice, 
Which scorns a modem invocation. 

"and. Lady, you utter madness, and not sorrow. 
I Const. Thou art not holy to belie me so ; 

I am not mad : this hair I tear is mine ; 45 

My name is Constance ; I was Geffrey's wife ; 

Young Arthur is my son, and he is lost : 

I am not mad : I would to heaven I were ! 

For then, 'tis like I should forget m>'self: 

O, if I could, what grief should I forget ! 50 

39. would r\ F I ; / would Ff 2, 3, 4. 44. not holy] F 4 ; holy Ff i, 2, 3. 

35. buss] to kiss wantonly. The 42. modern] trite, commonplace. 
: older form was " bass." The same Compare All 's Will that Ends 
I distinction holds between "kissing" Will, u. iii. 2: "To make modern 
\ and " bussing " as between modern and familiar things supernatural 
[ Fitnch emhraser And baiser. and causeless"; also As You Like 

36. affliction] afflicted one. The //, 11. vii. 156 : " Full of wise 
abstract for concrete. saws and modern instances." Rowe, 

40. a«a<ow_>'] skeleton. So Comedy Knight and Collier MS. emend need- 
.Errarj, V. i. 237-238:— lessly. See Prof. Case's note in 

" a hungry lean-faced villain, Antony and Cleopatra (Arden Shake- 

A mere anatomy ." speare). 

>mpare Cotgrave, " Scelete : the 44. not holy] This emendation by 

^ole coagmentation of bones in the fourth Folio is perhaps not so 

their natural position; also an ana- good a^^ the " mh/io/j " conjectured by 

'my made thereof" ; and Reginald Steevens. and adopted by Dclius and 

ot's Discoverie of Witchcraft, 1584 Staunton ; but it has the F"olio autho- 

(.Nicholson, p. 36): "as bare and rity. 
naked as an anatomie." 



80 KING JOHN [act III. ^ 

Preach some philosophy to make me mad, 

And thou shalt be canonized, cardinal; 

For, being not mad but sensible of grief, 

My reasonable part produces reason 

How I may be deliver'd of these woes, 55 

And teaches me to kill or hang myself: 

If I were mad, I should forget my son. 

Or madly think a babe of clouts were he: 

I am not mad ; too well, too well I feel 

The different plague of each calamity. 60 

K. Phi. Bind up those tresses. O, what love I note 
In the fair multitude of those her hairs! 
Where but by chance a silver drop hath fallen, 
Even to that drop ten thousand wiry friends 
Do glue themselves in sociable grief, 6 

Like true, inseparable, faithful loves, 
Sticking together in calamity. 

Const. To England, if you will. 

K. Phi. Bind up your hairs. 

Const. Yes, that I will ; and wherefore will I do it ? 

I tore them from their bonds and cried aloud, 70 
" O that these hands could so redeem my son, 
As they have given these hairs their liberty ! " 
But now I envy at their liberty. 
And will again commit them to their bonds, 
Because my poor child is a prisoner. 7 

52. canonizcdX pronounced canon- Wright suggests that lines 21-67 may 

iz'd. See m. i. 177 supra. have been added to the original 

58. babe of clnnts] xdig doW. draft of the play. His alternative 

64. friends'] Rowe's reading. The suggestion that Constance is sinking 

Folios have "fends " — a queer error, into apathy after her first outburst is 

68. To England] Constance's reply not convincing, because, in the next 

to Philip's invitation, line 20. Mr. line, she resumes her lamentations. 

J 



'v] KING JOHN 



81 



And, father cardinal, I have heard you say 

That we shall see and know our friends in heaven : 

If that be true, I shall see my boy again ; 

For since the birth of Cain, the first male child. 

To him that did but yesterday suspire, 80 

There was not such a gracious creature born. 

But now will canker sorrow eat my bud 

And chase the native beauty from his check 

And he will look as hollow as a ghost, 

As dim and meagre as an ague's fit, 85 

And so he'll die; and, rising so again, 

When I shall meet him in the court of heaven 

I shall not know him : therefore never, never 

Must I behold my pretty Arthur more. 

Pand. You hold too heinous a respect of grief. 90 

Cons/. He talks to me that never had a son. 

K. Phi. You are as fond of grief as of your child. 

Const. Grief fills the room up of my absent child. 
Lies in his bed, walks up and down with me, 
Puts on his pretty looks, repeats his words, 95 

Remembers me of all his gracious parts, 
Stuffs out his vacant garments with his form; 

ei^u. ^^ ^^'^! '■ ' ■ r^y again] The comfort from the thought that she 

shght irregularity of this line has led will see and know her son in heaven 

to us being suspected, and its con- But then comes the thought " sorrow 

tradiction of lines 8S, 89 appears to will so alter him that I may meet him in 

»°" "^.x, suspicion. Pope omits the court of heaven and not know him. 

true, Vaughan omits " see," Fleay, therefore I shall never see him more." 

lollowing Sidney Walker's conjecture, 90. You hold . . . of grief] You 

^IIT^ ' "*.. ■ ,V,".,'^'^''^ Seymour con- look upon your grief too hatefully. 

i!? I'k^' u ^y . ^" '^"'^ '""^'y 9^'- i'^'« "^*- «^ Md . . . child] 

set the rhythm right. Kinnear con- One may suspect a play upon "fond " 

jectures • If that be true, then never here. You are as fond of (or you as 

snaJl 1 see my boy again." But this foolish owing to) grief as you are 

IS not warranted by the real meaning fond of your child. Constance, of 

01 tne speech. Constance first takes course, only sees one meaning. 
6 



82 KING JOHN [act in. 

Then have I reason to be fond of grief. 

Fare you well: had you such a loss as I, 

I could give better comfort than you do. loo 

I will not keep this form upon my head, 

When there is such disorder in my wit. 

O Lord ! my boy, my Arthur, my fair son i 

My life, my joy, my food, my all the world ! 

My widow-comfort, and my sorrows' cure ! [Exit. 105 

K. Phi. I fear some outrage, and I '11 follow her. [Exit. 

Lew. There 's nothing in this world can make me joy : 
Life is as tedious as a twice-told tale 
Vexing the dull ear of a drowsy man ; 
And bitter shame hath spoil'd the sweet world's taste. 
That it yields nought but shame and bitterness. 1 1 1 

Pand. Before the curing of a strong disease, 
Even in the instant of repair and health, 
The fit is strongest ; evils that take leave. 
On their departure most of all show evil : 115 

What have you lost by losing of this day? 

Lew. All days of glory, joy and happiness. 

Pand. If you had won it, certainly you had. 

loi. Most editors print a stage- no. woWtZ's] Pope's almost certain 

direction here. " Tearing off her emendation of the " words " of the 

Head-cloaths," Pope ; " Looses her P'oHos. DeHus suggests a meaning 

hair again," Dent MS.; "Tearing by allowing " ze^o^-d's " to refer to life, 

her hair " Collier, ed. 2 (Collier MS.), and reading "that sweet word's 

It is evident that Constance does taste." Jackson conjectures "word, 

again fall to tearing her hair, and we state." 

must understand "form" as merely in. shame] The repetition of 

order or arrangement in opposition " shame " has led Sidney Walker to 

to "disorder" in the next line with- conjecture "gall" in the second 

out going into the concrete " Head- place, while Cartwright suggests 

cloaths " of Pope. "grief." There is no pressing need 

lo-j. joy] rejoice. So Much Ado for this painting of the lily. 

About Nothitig, I. \. 2?, :"■ How m\xch. 118. // you had won it, etc.] 

better it is to weep at joy than iojoy Pandulph rises through sophistry 

at weeping!" into prophecy. 



sc. IV.] KING JOHN 8.-} 

No, no; when fortune means to men most good, 
She looks upon them with ri threatening eye. 120 
'Tis strange to think how mucli King John hruh 

lost 
In this which he accounts so clearly won : 
Are not you grieved that Arthur is his prisoner? 

Lew. As heartily as he is glad he hath him. 

•^.uid. Your mind is all as youthful as your blood. 125 
Now hear me speak with a prophetic spirit ; 
For even the breath of what I mean to speak 
Shall blow each dust, each straw, each little rub, 
Out of the path which shall directly lead 
Thy foot to England's throne ; and therefore mark. 
John hath seized Arthur; and it cannot be 131 

That, whiles warm life plays in that infant's veins, 
The misplaced John should entertain an hour, 
One minute, nay, one quiet breath of rest. 
A sceptre snatch'd with an unruly hand 135 

Must be as boisterously maintain'd as gain'd ; 
And he that stands upon a slippery place 
Makes nice of no vile hold to stay him up : 
That John ma}- stand, then Arthur needs must 

fall; 
So be it, for it cannot be but so. 140 

Lew. Rut what shall I gain by young Arthur's fall? 

132. ivhiles\ whilst Rowe. 139. stand, then] stand then, Hanmer. 

128. rub] "Any obstruction to the green is supposed to be as absolutely 

bowl's course from inequalities of the true as a biiliard-table. Bowls was 

ground or natural obstacles; also a favourite Elizabethan game, and 

used of a running bowl sideling from from Shakespeare's frequent reler- 

another" (Encyc. of Sport, i. 129). ences to it wc may guess that it was 

"Each dust, each straw," is hardly a favourite game of his. 
any exaggeration, for a good bowling- 



84 KING JOHN [act m. 

Pand. You, in the right of Lady Blanch your wife, 
May then make all the claim that Arthur did. 

Lew. And lose it, life and all, as Arthur did. 

Pand. How green you are and fresh in this old world ! 145 
John lays you plots ; the times conspire with you ; 
For he that steeps his safety in true blood 
Shall find but bloody safety and untrue. 
This act so evilly born shall cool the hearts 
Of all his people and freeze up their zeal, 150 

That none so small advantage shall step forth 
To check his reign, but they will cherish it ; 
No natural exhalation in the sky, 
No scope of nature, no distemper'd day, 
No common wind, no customed event, 155 

But they will pluck away his natural cause 
And call them meteors, prodigies and signs, 
Abortives, presages and tongues of heaven. 
Plainly denouncing vengeance upon John. 

152. reign] F 4; r eigne Ff i, 2, 3 ; reiti Capell conj. 

146. John lays you plots'] ]ohx\\2iys within the range of natural pheno- 

plots by which you and not he will mena. Pope reads "scape" as 

benefit. Malone conjectures "your equivalent to "freak," but this is 

plots," where the meanin.; would unsupported by any example of the 

necessarily be the same ; hence we same use in Shakespeare, 

gain nothing by the alteration. 157. meteors] supernatural pheno- 

151, 152. none so small . . . but] mena. See Coles, " Aff^^ors ; appari- 

no circumstance, however trifling, tions on high, or bodies imperfectly 

that may give them any weapon mixt of vapours drawn up in the air, 

against him will they omit to make as comets, clouds, wind, rain, etc." 

the most of. Evidently in the sixteenth and seven- 

153. ^;r/!a/a/«o«] meteor. So jfulius teenih centuries " meteors" and " ex- 
Casar, 11. i. 44; "The exhalations halations" were terms loosely used 
whizzing in the air"; and 1 Henry and imperfectly understood. 

7F. II. iv. 352: " My lord, do you see 158. Abortives] We may either 

these meteors ? Do you behold these take this to mean abortions of 

exhalations ?'^ See "meteor," line nature, or dreadful happenings that 

157 infra. would bring about abortion in those 

154. scope of nature] anything witnessing them. 



SC. IV.] 



KING JOHN 



85 



Lew. May be he will not touch young Arthur's life, i6o 
But hold himself safe in his prisonment. 
'and. O, sir, when he shall hear of j-our approach, 
If that young Arthur be not gone already. 
Even at that news he dies ; and then the hearts 
Of all his people shall revolt from him, 165 

And kiss the lips of unacquainted change, 
And pick strong matter of revolt and wrath 
Out of the bloody fingers' ends of John. 
Methinks I see this hurly all on foot : 
And, O, what better matter breeds for you 170 

Than I have named ! The bastard Faulconbridgc 
Is now in England, ransacking the church, 
Offending charity : if but a dozen French 
Were there in arms, they would be as a call 
To train ten thousand English to their side, 175 

Or as a little snow, tumbled about, 
Anon becomes a mountain. O noble Dauphin, 
Go with me to the king: 'tis wonderful 

164. that\ this F 4. 



166-168. And kiss the lips . . . 
Johh] will greet change as a welcome 
Btranger, and find good cause for 
revolt and wrath in those crimes in 
which John has dabbled. Compare 
this unpleasant metaphor with 
Gammer Gurton's Needle (1563), ed. 
Gayley, line 153 : — 

" I picke not this geare, hearst 

thou, out of my fingers endes ; 

But he that hard {sic) it told 

me." 

169. hurly] tumult. Compare The 

Taming of the Shrew, iv. i. 206: 

"amid this hurly." In Holland's 

Livy (1600), " hurly " is used to 



translate the Latin tumullus. The 
commoner form is " hurly-burly," 
which is still in use. 

173. charity] in the wider sense of 
" good-will," as in the phrase 
"Faith, Hope, and Charity." 

174. a tn//] a decoy bird. Compare 
Lodge's Alarum against Usury : 
" It is enough for silly birds to be led 
by the call of the fowler." 

175. train] to draw, attract. F"r. 
trainer. If a dozen French were 
there they would act as a decoy to 
entice ten thousand English to their 
side. 



86 KING JOHN [act m. 

What may be wrought out of their discontent, 
Now that their souls are topful of offence. i8o 

For England go: I will whet on the king. 
Lew. Strong reasons make strong actions : let us go : 

If you say ay, the king will not say no. {^Exeunt. 

182. makel Capell ; makes Ff. strong] Ff 2, 3, 4; strange F i. 

180. topful] brimful. C&mpare Macbeth, i. v. 44 : " topfull of direst cruelty." 



ACT IV 

SCENE I. — A room in a castle. 

Enter HUBERT and Executioners. 

Hub. Heat me these irons hot ; and look thou stand 
Within the arras : when I strike my foot 
Upon the bosom of the ground, rush forth, 
And bind the boy which you shall find with me 
Fast to the chair : be heedful : hence, and watch. 5 

First Exec. I hope your warrant will bear out the deed. 

Hub. Uncleanly scruples ! fear not you : look to 't. 

[Exeunt Executioners. 
Young lad, come forth; I have to say with you. 

Enter ARTHUR, 

Art/i. Good morrow, Hubert. 

Hub. Good morrow, little prince. 

1. thou] you Rowe. 

2. arras] tapestry, so called from scruples frighten you," giving " fear " 
its having been first manufactured at the same meaning as it bears in ii. i. 
Arras. It was evidently hung at some 383. This is rather forcing the con- 
disunce from the walls, for we often siruction, and Rowe's reading is much 
hear of people hiding behind it, as to be preferred, especially as the fourth 
did Polonius in Hamlet. Folio supports it. 

7. Uncleanly . . . you] The first 8. Yoiin^ lad] .\rthur is not to be 
three Folios read" Uncleanly scruples classed with the children of Shake- 
fear not you " ; the fourth Folio inserts speare — young .Macduti, little Ed- 
a comma after " scruples." The read- mund of England, little Coriolanus. 
ing in the text is that of Rowe. Mr. Shakespeare deliberately calls him a 
Moore-Smith, following .Schmidt and lad, and he is more like the sons of 
the first three Folios, would take the Cymbeline. 
meaning as " Let no unbecoming 

87 



88 KING JOHN [,„ ,v. 

Arth. As little prince, having so great a title jo 

To be more prince, as may be. You are sad. 
Hub. Indeed, I have been merrier. 

^^^^- Mercy on me! 

Methinks no body should be sad but I : 
Yet, I remember, when I was in France, 
Young gentlemen would be as sad as night, 15 

Only for wantonness. By my Christendom, 
So I were out of prison and kept sheep, 
I should be as merry as the day is long ; 
And so I would be here, but that I doubt 
My uncle practises more harm to me: 20 

He is afraid of me and I of him : 
Is it my fault that I was Geffrey's son? 
No, indeed, is't not; and I would to heaven 
I were your son, so you would love me, Hubert. 

Hub. [Aszc^e.] If I talk to him, with his innocent 

prate ^^ 

He will awake my mercy which lies dead: 
Therefore I will be sudden and dispatch. 
Art/L Are you sick, Hubert? you look pale to-day: 
In sooth, I would you were a little sick, 

_ 10. As little prince, etc.] consider- 19. doubt] fear 

ing my great title, heir to the crown 20. practises] plots. Compare Cot- 

a pnnce as may be. or packing in a matter." ^ 

16. z£'a«/o««mjoutofmereaffecta- 23. is't] The Folios are here at 

T.ffl\ "'^ " ?',"°" f '""r ''"'' "°'^ P-P°«-- F°lio° I and ; read 
to affect melancholy. See Jaques' "is't," 2 and 3 "it's." Pope reads 

descr.p.on of the various kinds of " it is." Mr. Moore-Smith ?ays that 

me]anchoIym^sFo»L,^.//,zv.i.i„. there ought to be no comma afte 

16 chnstendom] chnstenmg, bap- "indeed,'' in order to expbli the 

t sm Chnsfanuy-therefore " by my inversion '« is' t " on the model of t e 

chnstendom" rr^eans "by the fact Gtrm^n Gewiss ist es so. 
♦ hat I am a Christian." 



sc. i] KING JOHN 89 

That I might sit all night and watch with you : 30 
I warrant I love you more than you do me. 

Hub. \^Aside.\ His words do take possession of my bosom. 
Read here, young Arthur. [Showing a paper. 

[Aside.'] How now, foolish rheum ! 
Turning dispiteous torture out of door ! 
I must be brief, lest resolution drop 35 

Out at mine eyes in tender womanish tears. 
Can you not read it ? is it not fair writ ? 

Arth. Too fairly, Hubert, for so foul effect: 

Must you with hot irons burn out both mine eyes ? 

Hub. Young boy, I must. 

Arth. And will you ? 

Hub. And I will. 40 

Arth. Have you the heart? When your head did but 
ache, 
I knit my handkercher about your brows, 
The best I had, a princess wrought it me, 
And I did never ask it you again ; 
And with my hand at midnight held your head. 45 
And like the watchful minutes to the hour, 
Still and anon cheer'd up the heavy time, 

34. dispiteous^ dispitious Ff. 35. Ust] F 4 ; least Ff i, 2, 3. 46. 

minutes to] Rowe; minutes, to Ff. 

34. dispiteous] merciless. reeled into " handkerchief " by Rowe. 

38. Too fairly . . . foul effect] too The form "handkercher" still sur- 

well written, Hubert, to convey such vives in vulgar .speech, 
a horrible meaning. Malone suggests 46. watchful minutes to the hour] 

" zl^ct" foT "effect." But compare i.e. minutes which watch the hour. 

Hamlet, in. iv. 129 : — A common Elizabethan inversion. 

" Do not look upon me ; 47. Still and anon] continually, 

Lest with this piteous action you ever and again. For this use of " still " 

convert see note on 11. i. 522 supra. Compare 

My stern effects." also Dekker, King's Entertainment 

42. handkercher] needlessly cor- (1604), cd. Pearson, 1318: "Envy 



90 KING JOHN [act iv. 

Saying, "What lack you?" and "Where lies your 

grief?" 
Or " What good love may I perform for you ? " 
Many a poor man's son would have lien still 50 

And ne'er have spoke a loving word to you ; 
But you at your sick service had a prince. 
Nay, you may think my love was crafty love, 
And call it cunning : do, an if you will : 
If heaven be pleased that you must use me ill, 55 
Why then you must. Will you put out m.ine eyes? 
These eyes that never did nor never shall 
So much as frown on you. 

Hub. I have sworn to do it ; 

And with hot irons must I burn them out. 

Arth. Ah, none but in this iron age would do it! 60 

The iron of itself, though heat red-hot, 
Approaching near these eyes, would drink my tears 
And quench his fiery indignation 
Even in the matter of mine innocence ; 

63. }iis\ Capell ; this Ff. 

. , . stood . . . neere unto Vertue, "lien" ("I heard of an Egyptian 
but making a shew of fearfuhiesse to That had nine hours Hen dead "). 
approach her and the Hght : yet still 52. at your sick service] An abbre- 
and anon casting her eyes sometimes viation for " at your serijice when 
to the one side beneath." Perhaps you were sick." Compare "true 
this phrase has some connection with defence " in iv. iii. 84 infra. Perhaps 
the curious " still-an-end" of T7V0 we ought to read ''sick-service" 
Gentlemen of Verona, iv. iv. 67. (service to a sick man in his bed- 
Schmidt calls this latter a corruption chamber). 

of " still and anon." 57. nor] Pope reads " and," for, by 

50. lien] A form of the participle his time, the double negative had 

of " lie," which survived right into become incorrect, 

the nineteenth century (see Ar«7i^ E«^. 61. heat] heated. Shakespeare 

Diet.) ; now superseded by the form often used abbreviated past participles 

" lain." The first three Folios have in " t" in this way. 

" lyen," the fourth " lain." In 64. the matter of mine innocence] 

Pericles, in. ii. 85, we again read Let us hope that Shakespeare here 



sc. 1.] KING JOHN 91 

Nay, after that, consume away in rust, 65 

But for containing fire to harm mine eye. 
Are you more stubborn-hard than hammer'd iron ? 
An if an angel should have come to me 
And told me Hubert should put out mine eyes, 
I would not have believed him, — no tongue but 
Hubert's. 70 

/////;. Come forth. [Sta/n/>s. 

Rc-cntcr Executioners, with a cord, irons, etc. 

Do as I bid you do. 
.//■///. O, save me, Hubert, save me ! my eyes are out 

Even with the fierce looks of these bloody men. 
Hub. Give me the iron, I say, and bind him here. 75 
Arth. Alas, what need you be so boisterous-rough? 

I will not struggle, I will stand stone-still. 

For heaven sake, Hubert, let me not be bound ! 

Nay, hear me, Hubert, drive these men away, 

And I will sit as quiet as a lamb; 80 

67. stubborn-hard] first hyphened by Theobald (1740) (ed. 2). 71. 
Stamps] omitted Ff. 76. boisterous-rough] hyphened by Theobald. 

meant " the substance which be- attempt to regularise this line is to 

tokens my innocence (the water of my spoil it. 

tears) " (Moore-Smith), rather than 77. stone-still] Common in 

the "secretion," "exudation," of Elizabethan English, and found more 

Schmidt. But compare iv. ii. 79-81 than once in Chaucer. Compare 

supra. Florio's Montaigne (ed. Waller, p. 

70. / iconld . . . Hubert's] This 12): "She stood afraid, 5/i'Wf5/;7/ at 

line, with the exception of the sub- the strange sight"; and Lucrcce, 

stitution of a comma and a dash for 1730 : " Stone still, astonished with 

the colon after '"him " is the reading this deadly deed."' 

of the Folios, and gives excellent 78. heaven sake] Another instance 

sense if we will only be good enough of the omission of the mark of the 

to allow Shakespeare to use an possessive when clashing with 

ellipsis. "/ K>o«/J not have believed another sibilant. Compare" Alcides 

him, — (I will believe) no tongue but shows," n. i. 144 supra. 

Hubert's." There are many emenda- 80. quiet as a lamb] Proverbial; 

tions. found in Heywood's Pericles (1546). 

73. O, save me, Hubert, etc.] To 



92 KING JOHN [act iv. 

I will not stir, nor wince, nor speak a word, 

Nor look upon the iron angerly: 

Thrust but these men away, and I 'U forgive you, 

Whatever torment you do put me to. 
Hub, Go, stand within; let me alone with him. 85 

First Exec. I am best pleased to be from such a deed. 

\_Exeunt Executioners. 
Arth. Alas, I then have chid away my friend! 

He hath a stern look, but a gentle heart : 

Let him come back, that his compassion may 

Give life to yours. 
Hub. Come, boy, prepare yourself. 90 

Arth. Is there no remedy? 

Hub. None, but to lose your eyes. 

Arth. O heaven, that there were but a mote in yours, 

A grain, a dust, a gnat, a wandering hair, 

Any annoyance in that precious sense! 

Then, feeling what small things are boisterous there, 95 

Your vile intent must needs seem horrible. 
Hub. Is this your promise? go to, hold your tongue. 

81. wince] The first Folio reads 91. IJone, hut tolose your eyes\'X\i\^ 

w/wf/:, evidently a form of " t«;/«c^." answer seems to imply that losing 

All the Quartos and Folios of Ham- the eyes was a remedy. We may 

let, except the 1603 Quarto, print construe "remedy" as alternative, 

III. ii. 252 as " Let the galled jade and then we have to ask alternative 

winch." to what ? Vaughan omits " to," and 

85. let me alone with him] trust explains " AToh^, 6?<< lose your eyes" 

me to deal with him. So Twelfth as " no remedy against losing your 

Night, II. iii. 145: "For Monsieur eyes." Perhaps Hubert is thinking 

Malvolio, let me alone with him." of John's command to put Arthur to 

Compare also Tirelfth Night, in. iv. death, and this putting out of the 

201 : " Let me alone for swearing" ; eyes is a remedy against that, 

and Middleton, A Trick, i. i (Mer- 92. }note] So Steevens (1793), after 

maid ed. p. 8): " if his nephew be Long MS. and aconjectureof Upton's, 

poor indeed he lets God alone with The Folios have moth, and mote and 

him." moth are the same words, 



sc. 



••] 



KING JOHN 



U3 



'\rt/i. Hubert, the utterance of a brace of tongues 
Must needs want pleading for a pair of e)'es : 
Let me not hold my tongue, let me not, Hubert; lOO 
Or, Hubert, if you will, cut out my tongue, 
So I may keep mine eyes : O, spare mine eyes, 
Though to no use but still to look on you ! 
Lo, by my troth, the instrument is cold 
And would not harm me. 

Hub. I can heat it, boy. 105 

\rth. No, in good sooth; the fire is dead with grief, 
Being create for comfort, to be used 
In undeserved extremes: see else yourself; 
There is no malice in this burning- coal ; 
The breath of heaven hath blown his spirit out no 
And strew'd repentant ashes on his head. 

Hub. But with my breath I can revive it. boy. 

Art/i. An if you do, you will but make it blush 

And glow with shame of your proceedings, Hubert : 
Nay, it perchance will sparkle in your eyes; 115 

And like a dog that is compell'd to fight, 

lor. will, cut] Rowe ; will cut FT. 



gS, gg. the utterance of a brace of 
ijnguti, etc.] Two tongues would be 
unable to plead sufficiently for two 
eyes. Vaughan's inversion of 

" the pleading for a pair of eyes 
Must needs want utterance of a 
brace of tongues " 
is unnecessary if we give " want " its 
proper force of "fall short in," as in 
IV. iii. 138 infra : " Let hell want 
pains enough to torture me." 

106- loS. No, in good sooth . . . 
extremes] no, in truth ; the fire is 
dead with grief (for it was created for 



our comfort) at being wrongly used 
for cruel purposes. Create = created. 
Compare heat = heated, line 6i supra. 
log. in this burning coal] Hudson, 
upon a conjecture of Grey's, prints 
" burning in this coal," a most logical 
and practical emendation, for there 
would be malice in a burning coal. 
The next few lines however rather 
take away the point of the new read- 
ing, for it becomes evident that the 
coal was still alight although covered 
with ashes, and could be revived by 
blowing upon it. 



94 



KING JOHN 



[act IV. 



Snatch at his master that doth tarre him on. 
All things that you should use to do me wrong 
Deny their office : only you do lack 
That mercy which fierce fire and iron extends, 
Creatures of note for mercy-lacking uses. 

Hub. Well, see to live; I will not touch thine eye 
For all the treasure that thine uncle owes : 
Yet am I sworn and I did purpose, boy. 
With this same very iron to burn them out. 

Arth. O, now you look like Hubert! all this while 
You were disguised. 

Hub. Peace ; no more. Adieu. 

Your uncle must not know but you are dead ; 
I '11 fill these dogged spies with false reports : 

122. cye\ Ff ; eyes Steevens (1793) (Capell conj.). 

117. Snatch'\ snap, bite. 

117. fary<?] urge. Mid. Eng. f^rr^n, 
or terien, to incite. Compare Hamlet, 
II. ii. 370: "The nation holds it no 
sin to tarre them to controv^ersy." 
The word still exists in dialect (see 
Eng. Dialect Diet.). Halliwell's 
Diet, quotes Wilbraham (p. 112) 
under Tarr-on : " To excite to anger 
or violence ; is still used in Cheshire. 
It is a good old word, used by Wicliffe 
in his Path Waye to Perfeet Knoiv- 
Icdg ; and also in a MS. translation 
of the Psalms by Wicliffe, penes me : 
' They have terrid thee to ire.' " 

119-121. only you do laek . . . 
merey-laeking uses'\ you alone lack 
that mercy which even fire and iron 
exhibit, — fire and iron, things notably 
used in affairs where no mercy is 
required. The number of the verb 
"extends" may be explained by 
supposing that fire and iron really 
conveyed but one idea to the mind. 

122. see to live] Elze [Athcn. 1867) 
conjectures either " live to see " or 



120 



12: 



" live and see." Roderick conjectures 
" see and live." The meaning is 
evidently " live and keep thy sight " ; 
but I cannot help thinking that here 
we have another clue to the thoughts 
of Hubert as in line 91 note, siipra. 
He has promised John that Arthur 
shall not " live," and continually has 
the death of Arthur in his mind. In 
putting out Arthur's eyes it seems 
to me that he originally intended to 
kill the prince, and that in the phrase 
*• see to live" we have an admission 
of that. What would make Hubert 
choose the peculiar punishment of 
putting out Arthur's eyes when he 
had promised the king to kill him, 
unless, in so doing, he meant to 
kill? 

122. touch'] injure. Connected 
with Scan, tac, a wound [?] (Skeat). 
Compare Cymbeline, v. iii. 10 : 
" Some mortally, some slightly 
touched " ; also the modern " touchy." 

123. owes] See 11. i. log, 248 supra, 
and IV. ii. 99 infra. 



sc. II.] KING JOHN 95 

And, pretty child, sleep doubtless and secure, 130 

That Hubert, for the wealth of all the world. 

Will not offend thee. 
Arth. O heaven! I thank you, Hubert. 

/////;. Silence ; no more : go closely in with me : 

Much danger do I undergo for thee. [Exeunt. 

SCENE U.— King John's Palace. 

r.nter King John, Pembroke, Salisbury, and other 

Lords. 

K. John. Here once again we sit, once again crown 'd. 
And look'd upon, I hope, with cheerful eyes. 

Peni. This "once again," but that your highness pleased, 
Was once superfluous : you were crown'd before, 
And that high royalty was ne'er pluck'd off, 5 

The faiths of men ne'er stained with revolt; 
Fresh expectation troubled not the land 
With any long'd-for change or better state, 

Sal. Therefore, to be possess'd with double pomp, 

To guard a title that was rich before, lO 

To gild retined gold, to paint the lily, 
To throw a perfume on the violet. 
To smooth the ice, or add another hue 

I. against crown d\ Ff i, 2. 

130. doubtless and secure] without jcctures '• to," for we may take 

douDt and without care, bee sii}>ra, " better state " as alternative with 

II. i. 27, 374. " change," while " long'd-for " quali- 

133. closely] secretly. Compare ties both. 

Hamlet, iii. 1. .^9 ; •' We have closely io. guard] to ornament, to put 

sent tor Hamlet hither." facings on. Compare The Merchant 

of Venice, ii. ii. 164 : " a livery more 

iicene U. guarded than his lellows " ; also the 

6. or] Vaughan needlessly con- modern " watch-^warJ." 



96 KING JOHN [act iv. 

Unto the rainbow, or with taper-light 

To seek the beauteous eye of heaven to garnish, 1 5 

Is wasteful and ridiculous excess. 

Pern. But that your royal pleasure must be done, 
This act is as an ancient tale new told, 
And in the last repeating troublesome, 
Being urged at a time unseasonable. 20 

Sal. In this the antique and well noted face 
Of plain old form is much disfigured ; 
And, like a shifted wind unto a sail. 
It makes the course of thoughts to fetch about. 
Startles and frights consideration, 25 

Makes sound opinion sick and truth suspected. 
For putting on so new a fashion 'd robe. 

Pern. When workmen strive to do better than well, 
They do confound their skill in covetousness ; 
And oftentimes excusing of a fault 30 

Doth make the fault the worse by the excuse, 
As patches set upon a little breach 
Discredit more in hiding of the fault 
Than did the fault before it was so patch'd. 

21. antique'] Pope ; Anticke, Ff i, 2 ; Antick, Ff 3, 4. 

18, 19. This act . , . troublesome] pardonable sin of splitting the infini- 

Exactly the same simile has been tive. 

used by the Dauphin in in. iv. 29. They do confound . . . covetous- 

108. • ness] they spoil everything by aiming 

24. to fetch about] to take a cir- at too much — a case of vaulting 

cuitous course. ambition o'erleaping itself and fall- 

27. so new a fashioned robe] a robe ing on the other. Compare v. vii. 20 
of so new a fashion, " so new a infra. There is no need to read 
fashioned" being treated like a big " curiousness" for '■'covetousness " as 

compound adjective. Daniel would, as this does not 

28. to do better] Staunton would improve the meaning, while scanning 
read to better do, much improving " cov'tousness " makes Capell's con- 
the rhythm, but committing the un- jecture of " covetize " needless. 



sc. ir] KING JOHN 97 

Sa/. To this effect, before you were new crown'd, 35 

We breathed our counsel : but it pleased your highness 
To overbear it, and we are all well pleased, 
Since all and every part of what we would 
Doth make a stand at what your highness will. 

K. John. Some reasons of this double coronation 40 

I have possess'd you with and think them strong ; 
And more, more strong, then lesser is my fear, 
I shall indue you with : meantime but ask 
What you would have reform'd that is not well, 
And well shall you perceive how willingly 45 

I will both hear and grant you your requests. 

Pern. Then I, as one that am the tongue of these, 
To sound the purposes of all their hearts. 
Both for myself and them, but, chief of all, 
Your safety, for the which myself and them 50 

Bend their best studies, heartily request 
The enfranchisement of Arthur; whose restraint 

42. then lesser] F i ; then Icsse Ff 2, 3, 4. 

38, 39. Since all . . . will] every- which is not at all probable. The 

thing we wish is subservient to your true reading must be one in which 

wishes. John makes little of his fear ; and 

42. And more . . . my fear] If we none oi the proposed readings (Collier 

keep the reading of the first Folio, we MS. "thus lessening," Keightley 

must take " then " as equivalent to " than lesser, in," Fletcher [N. and 

"than," understanding the line to Q. 1SS9] " than lesser, is ") make this 

mean " More reasons, more strong point. 

in proportion as my fear is less." 50. myself and them]Th\s\ingvzm- 
Although Shakespeare in King John matical construction may be ex- 
seems to have written several pas- plained (i.) by supposing that 
sages where the meaning is not "myself" in suggesting " them- 
obvious at first glance, he has not selves" attracted "they" into 
set such another puzzle as this, ''them"; (ii.) that the printer's eye 
Tyrwhitt's conjecture of " when " for caught the " myself and them " of the 
"then," adopted by Steevens, is, as preceding line and repeated it; (iii.) 
Dr. Herford has said, very plausible, that Shakespeare repeated his own 
but has the great objection of making phrase without being sensible of the 
John admit that he was in great fear, grammatical error. 



98 



KING JOHN 



[act IV. 



Doth move the murmuring lips of discontent 

To break into this dangerous argument, — 

If what in rest you have in right you hold, 55 

Why then your fears, which as they say, attend 

The steps of wrong, should move you to mew up 

Your tender kinsman, and to choke his days 

With barbarous ignorance, and deny his youth 

The rich advantage of good exercise. 60 

That the time's enemies may not have this 

To grace occasions, let it be our suit 

That you have bid us ask his liberty ; 

Which for our goods we do no further ask 

Than whereupon our weal, on you depending, 65 

Counts it your weal he have his liberty. 



Enter Hubert. 

K. John, Let it be so : I do commit his youth 

To your direction. Hubert, what news with you? 

[Taking him, apart. 

Pern. This is the man should do the bloody deed ; 

He show'd his warrant to a friend of mine : 70 



55. // ivhat in rest, etc.] This line 
presents two difficulties ; we cannot be 
sure of the exact meaning of the term 
"in rest," and the line as a whole is 
meaningless in view of lines 56-60. 
" Rest" can have nothing to do with 
the game of primero, where it stood 
for the limiting stake, and it seems 
best to take it, with Mr. Wright, as 
meaning " peace, security." To 
make any meaning out of the whole 
passage we must either adopt Ma- 
lone's suggestion of " hold not," or 
Vaughan's of " unright " for "in 
right " ; line 57 then becomes a state- 



ment of the popular point of view and 
not an indirect question in a state of 
un-English contortion, as some editors 
would take it. 

59. deny^ refuse. Compare Middle- 
ton, Michaelmas Term, i. ii. 35 : 
" Deny a satin gown and you dare 
now." 

61, 62. That the time's enemies, etc.] 
that the enemies of the present state 
of things may not have this argument 
to use when opportunity offers, etc. 

64. 0-00^5] This plural form of the 
abstract is common in Shakespeare. 
Compare "faiths," line 6 supra. 



sc. II.] KING JOHX 90 

The image of a wicked heinous fault 

Lives in his eye ; that close aspect of his 

Does show the mood of a much troubled breast ; 

And I do fearfully believe 'tis done, 

What we so fear'd he had a charge to do. 75 

Sij/. The colour of the king doth come and go 
Between his purpose and his conscience, 
Like heralds 'twixt two dreadful battles set : 
His passion is so ripe, it needs must break. 

Pem. And when it breaks, I fear will issue thence 80 
The foul corruption of a sweet child's death. 

JC. John. We cannot hold mortality's strong hand : 
Good lords, although my will to give is living, 
The suit which you demand is gone and dead : 
He tells us Arthur is deceased to-night. 85 

Sal. Indeed we fear'd his sickness was past cure. 

Peni. Indeed we heard how near his death he was, 
Before the child himself felt he was sick : 
This must be answer 'd either here or hence. 

K. John. Why do you bend such solemn brows on me? 90 
Think you I bear the shears of destiny ? 
Have I commandment on the pulse of life? 

Sal. It is apparent foul-play ; and 'tis shame 

73. Does^ F 4 ; Doe F 2 ; Do Ff i, 3 ; Doth Dyce and Staunton. 

72. cloie\ secretive, suspiciously re- " If it were so, it was a grievous 

served. Here the word implies that fault, 

Hubert looked as if he were hiding a And grievously hath Caesar 

guilty secret. Compare "closely," answer'd'xx..^' 

IV. i. i^ii supra. 93. a//>arfM<] plainly evident. The 

77. Between . . . conscietue] be- modern word is often used for what 

tween the thoughts of his accom- appears to be so, but may not be, 

piished design on .Arthur's life and and probably is not so. 

his conscience as a murderer. g^-g^. It is apparent foul-play, tic] 

8g. ansirer'J] atoned for. So it is manifest foul play, and it is a 

Julius Ciesar, iii. ii. 85 : — shame that those in high places should 



100 



KING JOHN 



[act IV. 



That greatness should so grossly offer it : 

So thrive it in your game ! and so, farewell. 95 

Pern. Stay yet, Lord Salisbury; I'll go with thee, 
And find the inheritance of this poor child, 
His little kingdom of a forced grave. 
That blood which owed the breadth of all this isle, 
Three foot of it doth hold: bad world the while! 100 
This must not be thus borne: this will break out 
To all our sorrows, and ere long I doubt 

\^Exeunt Lords. 

K. John. They burn in indignation. 1 repent : 
There is no sure foundation set on blood, 



No certain life achieved by others' death. 



10! 



Enter a Messenger. 

A fearful eye thou hast : where is that blood 
That I have seen inhabit in those cheeks ? 
So foul a sky clears not without a storm : 
Pour down thy weather: how goes all in France? 
Mess. From France to England. Never such a power 1 10 
For any foreign preparation 
Was levied in the body of a land. 
The copy of your speed is learn'd by them ; 



99. breadth] breath Rowe. 
conj.) ; England, never Ff. 



no. England. Never] Johnson (Roderick 



accomplish things so clumsily. May 
the rest of your policy thrive in the 
same manner. 

100. bad world the while] it is a 
bad world when such things happen. 
See Richard III. m. vi. lo : " Here 's 
a good world the while I " ; and iv, iii. 
116 infra. 



102. doubt] Compare iv. 1. 19 
supra. 

107. inhabit] intransitive. Sc 
commonly in Shakespeare. 

log. weather] Here equivalent to" 
bad weather, storm. So The Winter's 
Tale, III. iii. 104 : " Both roaring 
louder than the sea or weather." 



sc. II.] KING JOHN 101 

For when you should be told they do prepare, 

The tidings comes that they are all arrived, 115 

A'. John. O, where hath our intelligence been drunk ? 
Where hath it slept? Where is my mother's care, 
That such an army could be drawn in France, 
And she not hear of it ? 

Mess. My liege, her ear 

Is stopp'd with dust; the first of April died 120 

Your noble mother : and, as I hear, my lord. 

The Lady Constance in a frenzy died 

Three days before : but this from rumour's tongue 

I idly heard ; if true or false I know not. 

K.John. Withhold thy speed, dreadful occasion! 125 

O, make a league with me, till I have pleased 
My discontented peers ! What ! mother dead ! 
How wildly then walks my estate in France ! 
Under whose conduct came those powers of France 
That thou for truth givest out are landed here? 130 

Mess. Under the Dauphin. 

K. John. Thou hast made me giddy 

With these ill tidings. 

Enter the BASTARD and PETER oj Ponijrct. 

Now, what says the world 

115. comes\ Ff I, 2, 3 ; come F 4. 118. could] Ff i, 2, 3 ; %hoidd F 4. 
129. came\ come Hannier. 

116. 117. O, where hath ourintelli- The other three read care. Ear in 
g^^Mff, etc.] We are reminded of iVac- line 119 does not necessarily show 
belh, I. vii. 35, 36 : " Was the hope that eare was the proper reading, for 
drunk wherein you dress'd yourself ? it may have been suggested by " hear " 
hath it slept since ? " in line 119. 

117. care] It is impossible to say 125. occoiiow] Perhaps we rnay best 
whether the first Folio reads eare or render this by " hour of trial." 

care as the hrst letter has been broken. 



102 KING JOHN [act iv. 

To your proceedings ? do not seek to stuff 
My head with more ill news, for it is full. 

Bast. But if you be afeard to hear the worst, 135 

Then let the worst unheard fall on your head. 

K. John. Bear with me, cousin ; for I was amazed 
Under the tide : but now I breathe again 
Aloft the flood, and can give audience 
To any tongue, speak it of what it will. 140 

Bast. How I have sped among the clergy-men, 
The sums I have collected shall express. 
But as I travell'd hither through the land, 
1 find the people strangely fantasied ; 
Possess'd with rumours, full of idle dreams, 145 

Not knowing what they fear, but full of fear: 
And here's a prophet, that I brought with me 
From forth the streets of Pomfret, whom I found 
With many hundreds treading on his heels ; 
To whom he sung, in rude harsh-sounding rhymes, 1 50 
That, ere the next Ascension-day at noon, 
Your highness should deliver up your crown. 

K. John. Thou idle dreamer, wherefore didst thou so ? 

Peter. Foreknowing that the truth will fall out so. 

K. John. Hubert, away with him; imprison him; 155 

And on that day at noon, whereon he says 

135. afeard] afraid F 4. 

137. awm^^ff] bewildered. Compare 146. Not knowing . . .full of fear] 

the Somerset ^' tnazed," which has We have the same idea in Macbeth, 

exactly the same meaning; and see iv. ii. 19, 20: — 

IV. iii. 140 infra, also Troublesome "And do not know ourselves, 

Raigne, p. 16, line i6g : " Nor mad, when we hold rumour 

nor mazde, but well advised." From what we fear, yet know 

139. Aloft] This is the only use of not what we fear. ^' 
this word by Shakespeare as a pre- 
position. 



sc. II.] KING JOHN loa 

I shall >'icld up m>' crown, let him be hang'd. 

Deliver him to safety; and return, 

For I must use thee. [Exii Hubert %vith Peter. 

O my gentle cousin, 

Hear'st thou the news abroad, who are arrived? i6o 
Bast. The French, my lord ; men's mouths are full of it : 

Besides, I met Lord Bigot and Lord Salisbury, 

With eyes as red as new-enkindled fire, 

And others more, going to seek the grave 

Of Arthur, whom they say is kill'd to-night 165 

On your suggestion. 
K. John. Gentle kinsman, go. 

And thrust thyself into their companies: 

I have a way to win their loves again ; 

Bring them before me. 
Bast. I will seek them out. 

K. John. Nay, but make haste; the better foot before. 170 

O, let me have no subject enemies. 

When adverse foreigners affright my towns 

With dreadful pomp of stout invasion ! 

Be Mercury, set feathers to thy heels, 

And fly like thought from them to mc again. 175 
Bast. The spirit of the time shall teach me speed. \^Exit. 
K. John. Spoke like a sprightful noble gentleman. 

Go after him ; for he perhaps shall need 

165, 166. Of . . . suggestion] Rowe (ed. 2); one line in Ff. 171. sub- 
ject] F I ; subjects Ff 2, 3, 4. 

158. ia/><_y] safe custody. referring to the proverbial expression 

167. comfnuies] See iv. ii. 6 and " the best foot foremost." 

64 for •• faiths " and " goods," similar 177. sprightful] = spiritful = spir- 

abstract plurals. ited. " Spright " and " spirit " were 

170. the better foot before] Probably equivalent in Elizabethan English. 



104 KING JOHN [ACT IV. 

Some messenger betwixt me and the peers; 

And be thou he. 
Mess. With all my heart, my liege. [Exit. i8o 

K. John. My mother dead ! 

Re-enter Hubert. 

Hub. My lord, they say five moons were seen to-night; 
Four fixed, and the fifth did whirl about 
The other four in wondrous motion. 

K. John. Five moons ! 

Hub. Old men and beldam^ in the streets 185 

Do prophesy upon it dangerously : 
Young Arthur's death is common in their mouths : 
And when they talk of him, the}^ shake their heads 
And whisper one another in the ear; 
And he that speaks doth gripe the hearer's wrist, 190 
Whilst he that hears makes fearful action. 
With wrinkled brows, with nods, with rolling eyes. 
I saw a smith stand with his hammer, thus, 
The whilst his iron did on the anvil cool, 
With open mouth swallowing a tailor's news; 195 
Who, with his shears and measure in his hand, 
Standing on slippers, which his nimble haste 
Had falsely thrust upon contrary feet, 
Told of a many thousand warlike French 

185. beldams] belle dame meant (i.) so much trash as may be grasped 

a grandmother — compare Lncrece, thus." 

953, " To show the beldam daughters 19S. Had falsely . . . contrary feet] 

of her daughter"; (ii.) an aged Johnson's curious note that "either 

woman ; (iii.) a hag. Here it may shoe will equally admit either foot " 

be used in sense (ii.) or (iii.). would never have been written if he 

193. thus] The actor was left had tried to suggest a reason why 

to illustrate the word. Compare Shakespeare should have alluded to 

Juluis Casar, iv. iii. 26: "For an obvious impossibility. 



sc. 11.] KING JOHN 105 

That were embattailed and rank'd in Kent : 200 

Another lean unwash'd artificer 

Cuts off his tale and talks of Arthur's death. 

K.John. Why seek'st thou to possess me with these fears! 

Why urgest thou so oft young Arthur's death? 

Thy hand hath murder'd him : I had a mighty 

cause 205 

To wish him dead, but thou hadst none to kill him. 

Hub. No had, my lord ! why, did you not provoke me ? 

K. John. It is the curse of kings to be attended 

By slaves that take their humours for a warrant 

To break within the bloody house of life, 210 

And on the winking of authority 

To understand a law, to know the meaning 

Of dangerous majesty, when perchance it frowns 

More upon humour than advised respect. 

Hub. Here is your hand and seal for what I did. 215 

K. John. O, when the last account 'twixt heaven and earth 
Is to be made, then shall this hand and seal 
Witness against us to damnation ! 

210. within] F I ; omitted Ff 2,3,4; '"'^ Pope. 

200. That . . . Kent] Scan " That Mr. Wright considers the use of 

w^re j em-bat- I tail-6d I and rank'd "bloody" here as prolcptic — "the 

I in K6nt." home of life which thereby becomes 

200. ^m6a//aiW] drawn up in battle bloody." It may also be taken 
array. in the ordinary way, as merely de- 

201. artificer] artisan. The term scriptive of the composition of the 
is still kept in the Navy. "house." 

207. No had, my lord I] had not, 211-214. And on the uinking of 

my lord! This peculiar form of re- authority, etc. J when one in authority 

peating interrogatively a negative winks to interpret it as a command, 

assertion was common in Shake- to know what a king means in a 

speare's time. Compare Ralph moment of anger when he frowns 

Roister Doister, i. iv. 34 : " No is ? " capriciously and not as a consequence 

and II. iv. 17 : " No did ? " of deliberation. Some quite unneces- 

207. provoke] incite. sary alterations of this passage have 

210. To break . . . house of life] been suggested. 



106 



KING JOHN 



[act IV. 



25 



How oft the sight of means to do ill deeds 

Make deeds ill done ! Hadst not thou been by, 220 

A fellow by the hand of nature mark'd, 

Quoted and sign'd to do a deed of shame, 

This murder had not come into my mind : 

But taking note of thy abhorr'd aspect, 

Finding thee fit for bloody villany. 

Apt, liable to be employ 'd in danger, 

I faintly broke with thee of Arthur's death; 

And thou, to be endeared to a king, 

Made it no conscience to destroy a prince. 

Hub. My lord,— 

K. John. Hadst thou but shook thy head or made a pause 
When I spake darkly what I purposed, 
Or turn'd an eye of doubt upon my face, 
As bid me tell my tale in express words, 
Deep shame had struck me dumb, made me break 
off, 235 

And those thy fears might have wrought fears in 
me : 



230 



229. Made] Mad'st Pope. 



220. Make] Plural in number owing 
to influence of " deeds." It is tempt- 
ing to read "Make ill deeds done" 
with Knight, after a conjecture of 
Capell's. But the Folios are unani- 
mous, and it seems to me that their 
reading is undoubtedly right, mean- 
ing " How oft the sight of means 
to do ill deeds makes deeds done 
which it were ill to do" — in fact 
"ill" is another proleptic adjective. 
See line 210 supra. 

222. Quoted] specially marked out. 
See Cotgrave, " Quote : quoted, 



marked, noted in the margent"; and 
" Quote : a quote or quoting, a mark 
or note upon an article." 

226. liable to] capable of. See 
jfulitis Cctsar, 1. ii. 199 : " If my 
name were liable to fear." 

227. broke with thee] communicated 
with thee, mentioned to thee. 

233) 234. Or turn'd an eye, etc.] or 
hadst thou turned such an eye of 
doubt upon me as would have bid 
me tell, etc. John, of course, had 
told Hubert his tale " in express 
words," 



sc. ii] KING JOHN 107 

But thou didst understand me by my signs 

And didst in signs again parley with sin ; 

Vca. without stop, didst let thy heart consent, 

And consequently thy rude hand to act 240 

The deed, which both our tongues held vile to name. 

Out of mv sight, and never see me more ! 

My nobles leave me ; and my state is braved. 

Even at my gates, with ranks of foreign powers : 

Nay, in the body of this fleshly land, 245 

This kingdom, this confine of blood and breath, 

Hostility and civil tumult reigns 

Between my conscience and my cousin's death. 

Hub. Arm you against your other enemies, 

I'll make a peace between your soul and you. 250 

Young Arthur is alive : this hand of mine 

Is yet a maiden and an innocent hand. 

Not painted with the crimson spots of blood. 

Within this bosom never enter'd yet 

The dreadful motion of a murderous thought ; 255 

And you have slander'd nature in my form, 

Which, howsoever rude exteriorly. 

Is yet the cover of a fairer mind 

Than to be butcher of an innocent child, 

A'. John. Doth Arthur live ? O, haste thee to the peers, 260 
Throw this report on their incensed rage. 
And make them tame to their obedience ! 



^43. my siate] my authority as 247. r«^wi] Singular number owing 

Iting. to the nominatives both conveying a 

245. Here the Long MS. gives a similaridea. Compare iv. i. 120 sw^ra. 

stage-direction, "Laying his hand Hanmer corrected it to " m'^«." 
upon his breast." John is evidently 255. motion] impulse. Compare t. 

referring to his ov>-n body. i. 212 supra. 



108 KING JOHN [act IV. 

Forgive the comment that my passion made 

Upon thy feature ; for my rage was blind, 

And foul imaginary eyes of blood 265 

Presented thee more hideous than thou art. 

O, answer not, but to my closet bring 

The angry lords with all expedient haste. 

I conjure thee but slowly ; run more fast. [Exeimt. 



SCENE III.— Be/ore the castle. 

Enter ARTHUR, on the walls. 

Arth. The wall is high, and yet will I leap down: 
Good ground, be pitiful and hurt me not ! 
There 's few or none do know me : if they did, 
This ship-boy's semblance hath di.sguised me quite. 
I am afraid ; and yet I '11 venture it. 5 

If I get down, and do not break my limbs, 
I '11 find a thousand shifts to get away : 
As good to die and go, as die and stay. {Leaps down. 
O me ! my uncle's spirit is in these stones : 
Heaven take my soul, and England keep my bones ! 10 

{Dies. 

Enter PEMBROKE, SALISBURY, and BiGOT. 

Sal. Lords, I will meet him at Saint Edmundsbury: 

It is our safety, and we must embrace 

This gentle offer of the perilous time. 
Pem. Who brought that letter from the cardinal? 

II. Saint\ F 2; S. F i ; Si. Ff 3, 4. 
265. imaginary^ imaginative. 



SC. III.] 



KING JOHN 



100 



Sa/. The Count Melun, a noble lord of France; 15 

Whose private with me of the Dauphin's love 
Is much more general than these lines import. 

Big: To-morrow morning let us meet him then. 

Scj/. Or rather then set forward ; for 'twill be 

Two long days' journey, lords, or ere we meet. 20 

Enter the BASTARD. 

Bast. Once more to-day well met, distemper'd lords! 
The king by me requests your presence straight. 

Sal. The king hath dispossess'd himself of us : 
We will not line his thin bestained cloak 
With our pure honours, nor attend the foot 25 

That leaves the print of blood where'er it walks. 
Return and tell him so: we know the worst 

Bast. Whate'er >'ou think, good words, I think, were best. 



15. Mclwi] Rowe; Mcloonc F i ; 



15. Melun] We have here followed 
the generally accepted modernisation 
of the spelling. The Folios indicate 
the pronunciation of the time and 
the accentuation necessary to make 
the line scan. 

16. private] Here equivalent to 
private communication cither by 
letter from the Dauphin or in con- 
versation with Melun, more probably 
the latter. Compare Twelfth Slight, 
HI. iv. 100 : " Let me enjoy my private : 
go off." For "with me" Collier 
substitutes " missive," and Spedding 
conjectures "witness." 

17. Is much more general, etc.]Thc 
meaning oi" general" here is rather 
obscure. Hanmer cleverly gets over 
the difficulty by reading " Is much 
more than these general lines impart." 
As it stands we must take it to mean 
that the private communication of 
the Count was much more compre- 



Melloonc Ff 2, 3, 4. 

hensive in its terms than the formal 
and more guarded letter ; a rendering 
which makes " private " = private 
conversation, more likely. 

21. rfis/j'w/x-rV/] ill-tempered. Com- 
pare Hamlet, iii. ii. 312: '"The king 
... is in his retirement marvellous 
distempered." 

24. thin bestained] These words 
are hyphened in the Folios, and as a 
consequence we have the following 
emendations. Singer (ed. 2), follow- 
ing Collier MS., " s\n-bestaincd," 
Cartwright (conj.) " thycW-bestained," 
Gould (conj.) ''k\n-bcstained." But 
surely it is better to drop the hyphen 
and leave the words untouched when 
they give such an obvious meaning, 
for the hyphens of the Folios are 
quite unreliable. " r/»«M " and ''be- 
stained " olTer two distinct ideas, and 
''thin" is absolutely necessary be- 
cause it carries out the idea of " line." 




I 



I 



no KING JOHN 

Sal. Our griefs, and not our manners, reason now. 

Bast. But there is little reason in your grief; 

Therefore 'twere reason you had manners now. 

Pern. Sir, sir, impatience hath his privilege. 

Bast. 'Tis true, to hurt his master, no man else. 

Sal. This is the prison. What is he lies here ? 

{^Seeing Arthur] 

Pern. O death, made proud with pure and princely 
beauty ! 3 5 

The earth had not a hole to hide this deed. 

Sal. Murder, as hating what himself hath done, 
Doth lay it open to urge on revenge. 

Big. Or, when he doom'd this beauty to a grave, 

Found it too precious-princely for a grave. 40 

Sal. S\r Richard, what think you? have you beheld, 
Or have you read or heard ? or could you think ? 
Or do you almost think, although you see, 1 

That you do see? could thought, without this object,' 
Form such another? This is the very top, 
The height, the crest, or crest unto the crest, 
Of murder's arms : this is the bloodiest shame. 
The wildest savagery, the vilest stroke, 
That ever wall-eyed wrath or staring rage 
Presented to the tears of soft remorse. 

41. have you beheld] Ff 3, 4 ; you have beheld Ff i, 2. 

33. man] This is printed tnans in cA^t^?-^; a whall, or over-white eye; an 

some copies of the first Folio, but eye full of white spots, or whose apple ' 

seems to have been corrected in the seems divided by a streak of white." 

press, for Collier says that the Duke 49. starin<r] In Elizabethan English 

of Devonshire's copy reads " ^Ma«." "staring" meant to glare fiercely. 

49. wall-eyed] having eyes which Compare yuliiis Ccrsar, iv. iii. 40 : ,| 

from some defect appear to stare "Shall I be frighted when a mad- (!j 

fiercely. Compare Cotgrave, "Od/ <fe man stares .' ^^ 



sc. m] KING JOHN 111 

Peyn. All murders past do stand excused in this: 

And this, so sole and so unmatchable, 

Shall give a holiness, a purity, 

To the yet unbegotten sin of times ; 

And prove a deadly bloodshed but a jest, 55 

Exampled by this heinous spectacle. 
Bast. It is a damned and a bloody work ; 

The graceless action of a heavy hand, 

If that it be the work of any hand. 
Sal. If that it be the work of any hand ! 60 

We had a kind of light what would ensue : 

It is the shameful work of Hubert's hand ; 

The practice and the purpose of the king: 

From whose obedience I forbid my soul. 

Kneeling before this ruin of sweet life, 65 

And breathing to his breathless excellence 

The incense of a vow, a holy vow, 

Never to taste the pleasures of the world, 

Never to be infected with delight, 

Nor conversant with ease and idleness, 70 

Till I have .set a glory to this hand, 

By giving it the worship of revenge. 

' - Our souls religiously confirm thy words. 
Big. ) 

60. hand /] hand ? Ff. 

54. times] i.e. times to come, 67. The inceyisc 0/ a vow, ^ic] Ey 

mtureages. Compare Lttcrrct, 717:— reading " head " for " hand " in line 

"For now against himself he 71, Pope m.inufactured what Staunton 

sounds this doom, called a more elegant sense. What 

That through the length of /twfi happens is that Salisbury raises his 

he stands disgraced." own hand to Heaven as hV makes his 

62, 63. It IS the shantc/ul, etc.] vow in the customary manner. There 

Hubert's hand did the deed to suit is no reason for taking the hand of the 

the king's plots and purposes. dead prince as .Mason suggests. 



I 



112 KING JOHN [act IV. 

Enter HUBERT. 

Hub. Lords, I am hot with haste in seeking you: 

Arthur doth live ; the king hath sent for you. 75 

Sal. O, he is bold and blushes not at death. 
Avaunt, thou hateful villain, get thee gone ! 

Hub. I am no villain. 

Sal. Must I rob the lavv^? 

^Drawing his sword. 

Bast. Your sword is bright, sir; put it up again. 

Sal. Not till I sheathe it in a murderer's skin. 80 

Hub. Stand back, Lord Salisbury, stand back, I say; 
By heaven, I think my sword's as sharp as yours: 
I would not have you, lord, forget yourself, 
Nor tempt the danger of my true defence; 
Lest I, by marking of your rage, forget 85 

Your worth, your greatness and nobility. 

Big. Out, dunghill ! darest thou brave a nobleman ? 

Hub. Not for my life: but yet I dare defend 

My innocent life against an emperor. 
Sal. Thou art a murderer. 

Hub. Do not prove me so; 

Yet I am none: whose tongue soe'er speaks false, 
Not truly speaks; who speaks not truly, lies. 

77. Avawit] a contemptuous 84. Nor tempt . . . defence] nor 

method of driving a person away, run the risk of attacking my defence 

Compare Cotgrave, " Dcvant (inter- as a just man. "True" may have 

iect.): used, as our Avaicnt, in the the double meanmg here of Hubert s 

driving away of a dog." defence of himself in justice and of 

79. Your sword is bright, etc.] It his good defence as a swordsman, 

is somewhat strange to see the Bastard 90. Do not prove me so] do not make 

acting as peacemaker. He is however me one by causing me to murder you. 

commissioned to do so by John, to 91. whose tongue . . . /«"/] 

whom he owes everything. Still on Hubert is calling Salisbury a liar m 

the least genuine excuse he is ready a manner befitting his humbler posi- 

for mischief (see line 95, etc. infra). tion. 



sc. 



in] KING JOHN 113 



Pim. Cut him to pieces. 

Hast. Keep the peace, I say. 

Sal. Stand by, or I shall gal! you, Faulconbridge. 

Bast. Thou wert better gall the devil, Salisbury: 95 

If thou but frown on me, or stir thy foot, 
Or teach thy hasty spleen to do me shame, 
I '11 strike thee dead. Put up thy sword betimc ; 
Or I '11 so maul you and your toasting-iron. 
That you shall think the devil is come from hell. 100 

Big. What wilt thou do, renowned Faulconbridge ? 
Second a villain and a murderer ? 

Hub. Lord Bigot, I am none. 

Big. Who kill'd this prince ? 

Hub. 'Tis not an hour since I left him well : 

I honour'd him, I loved him, and will weep 105 

My date of life out for his sweet life's loss. 

Sal. Trust not those cunning waters of his eyes, 
For villany is not without such rheum ; 
And he, long traded in it, makes it seem 
Like rivers of remorse and innocency. i 10 

Away with me, all you whose souls abhor 
The uncleanly savours of a slaughter-house ; 
For I am stifled with this smell of sin. 

Big. Away toward Bury, to the Dauphin there ! 

94,95. gall] gaul Vf. 110. innocency] innocence Pope. 112. savours] 
F I ; savour Ff 2, 3, 4. 

94. gall] wound. Compare Henry Elizabethan meaning. Compare 

VIII. in. ii. 207 : — Daniel, Civil VVarres (1595), bk. i. 

" So looks the chafed lion stanza 15 (ed. Grosart) : — 

Upon the daring huntsman that " False John usurpes his Nephew 

hath galled him." Arthur's right . . . 

97. spleen] anger. Compare n. i. Murders the lawfull heire with- 

448 supra, and v. vii. 50 infra. out remorse." 
no. remorse] pity, the general 

8 



114 



KING JOHN 



[act IV. 



Pern. There tell the king he may inquire us out. 1 1 5 

[Exeunt Lords. 

Bast. Here 's a good world ! Knew you of this fair work ? 
Beyond the infinite and boundless reach 
Of mercy, if thou didst this deed of death, 
Art thou damn'd, Hubert. 

Hub. Do but hear me, sir. 

Bast. Ha! I'll tell thee what; 120 

Thou'rt damn'd as black — nay, nothing is so black : 
Thou art more deep damn'd than Prince Lucifer: 
There is not yet so ugly a fiend of hell 
As thou shalt be, if thou didst kill this child. 

Huh. Upon my soul — 

Bast. If thou didst but consent 125 

To this most cruel act, do but despair ; 
And if thou want'st a cord, the smallest thread 
That ever spider twisted from her womb 
Will serve to strangle thee ; a rush will be a beam 
To hang thee on; or wouldst thou drown thyself, 130 
Put but a little water in a spoon, 
And it shall be as all the ocean. 
Enough to stifle such a villain up. 
I do suspect thee very grievously. 



117-119. Beyond . 
first ending at mercy. 



Hubert] Pope's arrangement; Ff make two lines, 
119. Art thou] Thou art F 4. 



116. Here's a good tvorld !] Com- 
pare IV. ii. 100 supra. 

121. datnn'd as black] The souls of 
the damned were in Mystery plays 
represented by actors who were 
blacked. Compare the queer bill 
quoted by Staunton for the Coventry 
plays : — 

" Item, paid to three white souls, 5s. 



Item, paid to three black souls, 

Item, for making and mending 

of the black souls' hose, 6d. 
Paid for blacking of the souls' 
faces, 6d." 
126. do but despair] onlj' despair 
is left for you. 

132. ocean] A trisyllable. 



sc. 



Ill] KING JOHN 115 



Huh. If I ill act, consent, or sin of thought, 135 

Be guilty of the steah"ng that sweet breath 
Which was embounded in this beauteous clay, 
Let hell want pains enough to torture me. 
I left him well. 

Bast. Go, bear him in thine arms. 

I am amazed, methinks, and lose my way 140 

Among the thorns and dangers of this world. 

How easy dost thou take all England up ! 

From forth this morsel of dead royalty, 

The life, the right and truth of all this realm 

Is fled to heaven; and England now is left 145 

To tug and scamble and to part by the teeth 

The unowed interest of proud-swelling state. 

Now for the bare-pick'd bone of majesty 

Doth dogged war bristle his angry crest 

And snarleth in the gentle eyes of peace : 1 50 

Now powers from home and discontents at home 

Meet in one line ; and vast confusion waits, 

As doth a raven on a sick-fallen beast, 

The imminent decay of wrested pomp. 

136, 127. Be guilty of the stealing, catch may." Rowe emended to 
etc.] Compare iii. iv. 19 and iv. ii. "scramble." 

246 supra. 147. unowed] unowned, for the 

137. embounded in] enclosed with- ownership was being scrambled for. 
in. Compare " owe," iv. i. 123, etc. supra. 

140. amazed] stupefied, struck i^i. powers from home, etc.] (oreif^n 

dumb with astonishment. Compare armies and internal rebels. Abstract 

IV, ii. 137 supra. for concrete. 

146. scamble] scramble for, get by 152. waits] — awaits; transitive, 

rough means. Compare Henry V. the direct object being "decay." 

I. i. 4 : "the scambling and unquiet 154. u-n-i^rt/ />t»w/>J One is tempted 

times." Cotgrave has" Gr;^f oTo^f.- to paraphrase this as " Usurpyd 

by hook or by crook, squimble Power," one of the " characters " in 

squamble, scamblingly, catch that Bale's Kynge Johan. 



116 



KING JOHN 



[act IV. 

155 



Now happy he whose cloak and cincture can 
Hold out this tempest. Bear away that child 
And follow me with speed : I '11 to the king : 
A thousand businesses are brief in hand, 
And heaven itself doth frown upon the land. 

\_ExeuTit. 

155. cincture] So Pope ; center Ff. 158. hi] at Rowe. 

158. brief in hand] call for immediate attention or dispatch. 



ACT V 

SCENE I. — King John's pa/ace. 

Enter King John, Pandulph, and Attendants. 

K. John. Thus have I yielded up into your hand 

The circle of my glory. [Giving the crown. 

Pand. Take again 

From this my hand, as holding of the pope 
Your sovereign greatness and authorit}'. 

K.John. Now keep your holy word: go meet the French, 5 
And from his holiness use all your power 
To stop their marches 'fore we are inflamed. 
Our discontented counties do revolt ; 
Our people quarrel with obedience, 
Swearing allegiance and the love of soul 10 



2. Take again^ Lettsom con- 
■ctured " Take 't again," which Dyce 

inted in his second edition. An 
.^ject is ihus supplied to " take." 
: [eath conjectures that " From this " 
hould read " This from," which 
very ingeniously achieves the same 
end. By inserting a comma after 
"pope," "sovereign greatness and 
authority " may be made object to 
"take": the meaning is thus pre- 
served and the grammatical con- 
struction saved. It is so printed in 
thei82i Boswell-Malone. The Folios 
have no comma. 

8. counties] Are we to interpret 



117 



this as " nobles " (county = count, as 
in Romeo and Juliet), with Steevens 
and Delius, or as " shires," with 
Schmidt and Wright ? I think the 
fact that there is no mention of the 
rebellion of the nobles (which at that 
time was the real danger, as Shake- 
speire knew), if this is supposed not 
to refer to them, decides the matter. 
John would never have omitted them 
from his list of troubles. This 
reason overweighs the negative 
evidence that " counties " is used by 
Shakespeare in other places only for 
Italian nobles. 

lo. love 0/ soul] the sincerest love. 



118 KING JOHN [act v. 

To stranger blood, to foreign royalty. 

This inundation of mistempered humour 

Rests by you only to be qualified : 

Then pause not ; for the present time 's so sick, 

That present medicine must be minister'd, 15 

Or overthrow incurable ensues. 

Pand. It was my breath that blew this tempest up, 
Upon your stubborn usage of the pope; 
But since you are a gentle convertite, 
My tongue shall hush again this storm of war, 20 
And make fair weather in your blustering land. 
On this Ascension-day, remember well, 
Upon your oath of service to the pope, 
Go I to make the French lay down their arms. {Exit. 

K. John. Is this Ascension-day? Did not the prophet 25 
Say that before Ascension-day at noon 
My crown I should give off? Even so I have : 
I did suppose it should be on constraint ; 
But, heaven be thank'd, it is but voluntary. 

Enter the. BASTARD. 

Bast. All Kent hath yielded ; nothing there holds out 30 
But Dover Castle : London hath received, 
Like a kind host, the Dauphin and his powers: 
Your nobles will not hear you, but are gone 

16. inctii'able] inctirably F 4. 

Mr. Moore-Smith quotes Measure qualifie, mitigate." So Tivo Gentle- 

f or Measure, I. \. 18: " we have with men of Verona, 11. vii. 22: "But 

special 50;// elected him," and qualify the fire's extreme rage." 

Schmidt's dictum that the soul is re- 19. convertite'] An old form of 

presented as "the seat of real, not "convert." Compare Lucrsce, 743: 

only piotessed, seniimenis." "He thence departs a heavy con- 

13. quaiijird] stemmed. Cotgrave vertite." 
has '■'Seder; to still, quiet, asswage, 



sc. I] KING JOHN 119 

To offer service to your enemy, 

And wild amazement hurries up and down 35 

The little number of your doubtful friends, 

K. John. Would not m>' lords return to me again, 
After they heard young Arthur was alive? 

Bast. They found him dead and cast into the streets, 

An empty casket, where the jewel of life 40 

By some damn'd hand was robb'd and ta'en away. 

K. John. That villain Hubert told me he did live. 

Bast. So, on my soul, he did, for aught he knew. 

But wherefore do you droop ? why look you sad ? 

Be great in act, as you have been in thought ; 45 

Let not the world see fear and sad distrust 

Govern the motion of a kingly eye: 

Be stirring as the time; be fire with fire; 

Threaten the threatener, and outface the brow 

Of bragging horror : so shall inferior eyes, 50 

That borrow their behaviours from the great, 

Grow great by your example and put on 

The dauntless spirit of resolution. 

Away, and glister like the god of war, 

When he intendeth to become the field: 55 

Show boldness and aspiring confidence. 

What, shall they seek the lion in his den, 

36. your\ F i ; omitted Ff 2, 3, 4. 40. where\ whence Keightley conj.. 

49. outface] stare down. Compare " Should we contest I can 

2 Henry VI. iv. x. 49 :— Outface the proudest." 

" Oppose thy steadfast-gazing eyes 55. to become] to adorn. Compare 

to mine, Henry V. iv. ii. 40 :— 

See if thou canst outface me with " Yon island carrions, desperate of 

thy looks"; their bones, 

also Heywoods Fair Maide of the 111 favouredly fc^iowi^ the mornmg 

Weit (cd. Pearson, ii. 287):— field." 



120 



KING JOHN 



[act v. 



And fright him there ? and make him tremble there ? 
O, let it not be said : forage, and run 
To meet displeasure farther from the doors, 60 

And grapple with him ere he come so nigh. 

K. John. The legate of the pope hath been with me, 
And I have made a happy peace with him ; 
And he hath promised to dismiss the powers 
Led by the Dauphin. 

Bast. O inglorious league! 65 

Shall we, upon the footing of our land, 
Send fair-play orders and make compromise, 
Insinuation, parley and base truce 
To arms invasive ? shall a beardless boy, 
A cocker'd silken wanton, brave our fields, 70 

And flesh his spirit in a warlike soil, 
Mocking the air with colours idly spread. 
And find no check ? Let us, my liege, to arms : 
Perchance the cardinal cannot make your peace; 



67. compromise] comprimise Ff. 
Ff3,4. 

59. forage] range abroad, or, per- 
haps, seize supplies bj' force. Com- 
pare Edward III. iv. iii. 8i : "And 
forage their country as they have 
done ours." Shakespeare uses the 
word several times. Compare Henry 
V. I. ii. no : — 

" Stood smiling to behold his lion's 
whelp 
Forage in blood." 
Cotgrave has " Fotirrager : . . .to 
forrage, ... to ransack, ravage, boot 
hale it." 

66-69. Shall we . . . invasive ?] 
shall we, with our feet upon our own 
soil, make overtures of peace to in- 
vading forces ? 



72. idly] idlely Ff i, 2 ; idely 



70. cocker'd . . . wanton] Very com- 
mon in Elizabethan English. Cot- 
grave throws light on this expression 
— " To cocker : . , . mignarder " ; 
" Mignarder : to lull, feddle, dandle, 
cherish, wantonnize, make much or 
make a wanton of." Compare Gos- 
son's Schoole of Abuse (AiheT): " They 
are cockered continually in those 
islandes, where they see nothing but 
Foxes, and Hares, wil never be per- 
suaded that there are huger beastes." 

yi. flesh] to make an animal savage 
by foretaste of flesh. Compare Hak- 
luyt (1577), ed. Maclehose, x. 498 : 
" The tigers being fleshed on those 
dead carkeisse." 



I sc. 11] KING JOHN 121 

Or if he do, let it at least be said 75 

They saw we had a purpose of defence. 
A'. John. Have thou the ordering of this present time. 
^nist. Away, then, with good courage ! yet, I know, 

Our party may well meet a prouder foe. [Exrunt. 

SCENE II. — The Dauphins camp at St. Eduiutuisbury. 

I Enter, in anns, Levvls, SALISBURY, Melun, Pe.mBROKE, 

Bigot, and Soldiers. 

\ Lezv. My Lord Melun, let this be copied out. 
And keep it safe for our remembrance : 
Return the precedent to the.se lords again ; 
That, having our fair order written down. 
Both they and we, perusing o'er the.se notes, 5 

May know wherefore we took the sacrament 
And keep our faiths firm and inviolable. 

' Sal. Upon our sides it never shall be broken. 
And, noble Dauphin, albeit we swear 
A voluntary zeal and an unurged faith 10 

To your proceedings ; yet believe me, prince, 
I am not glad that .such a sore of time 

3. precedent] Johnson ; president Ff. 

78, 79. Away, then, . . . prouder I am confident that our parly could 

foe] We can hardly agree with beat a stronger foe." 
Johnson that the Bastard is here 

showing the white feather by mean- Seem //. 

ing " Yet I so well know the faintness 

of our party, that I think it may i. this] the compact with the 

easily happen that they shall en- English lords. As an actual document 

counter enemies who have more it is evidently the same as the " pre- 

spirit than themselves." Quite the cedent," the original draft which was 

contrary meaning is more in keeping to be returned to the Engli.shmen, 

with the Bastard's character and while " it " in line 2 must have 

with the continual appeal to English meant the copy that Philip ordered 

patriotism in the play — " Even now to be made. 



122 



KING JOHN 



[act v. 



Should seek a plaster by contemn'd revolt, 

And heal the inveterate canker of one wound 

By making many. O, it grieves my soul, 15 

That I must draw this metal from my side 

To be a widow-maker! O, and there 

Where honourable rescue and defence 

Cries out upon the name of Salisbury i 

But such is the infection of the time, 20 j 

That, for the health and physic of our right, 

We cannot deal but with the very hand 

Of stern injustice and confused wrong. 

And is 't not pity, O my grieved friends, 

That we, the sons and children of this isle, 25 

Were born to see so sad an hour as this ; 

Wherein we step after a stranger, march 

Upon her gentle bosom, and fill up 

Her enemies' ranks, — I must withdraw and weep 

Upon the spot of this enforced cause, — 30 

To grace the gentry of a land remote, 

16. metal] Rowe (ed. 2); mettle Ff. 27. stranger, march^Vi; stranger 
march Theobald ; stranger's march Long MS. ; stra?iger monarch Herr conj. 



14. And heal] We may take the 
construction to be either " such a 
sore of time . . . (should) Itcal " or 
" (I am not glad to) heal." 

17-19. O, and there . . . Salisbury] 
Two explanations of the meaning of 
these lines are offered. (i.) The 
English honourably engaged in fight- 
ing on their country's side would 
exclaim against .Salisbury as a traitor. 
Compare 1 Henry IV. iv. iii. 81 : 
" Cries out upon abuses." (ii.) The 
English would call upon Salisbury 
to rescue and detend them, where 
" cry out upon " = cry upon. Com- 
pare As YoH Like It, iv. iii. 150: 



" And cried, in fainting, upon Rosa- 
lind." I incline to the second inter- 
pretation, because it has more 
connection with what goes before. 
" It grieves my soul to draw my 
sword in order to become a widow 
maker, and that among those whom 
I ought to rescue and protect." 

27. stranger, march] Theobald and 
some others would omit the comma 
after " stranger," thus making it an 
adjective = foreign, and qualifying 
" march " — martial music. 

30. spot] stain, dishonour. I must 
withdraw and weep over this dis- 
honour into which I am forced. 



re. 11] KING JOHN 123 

And follow unacquainted colours here? 
What, here ? O nation, that thou couldst remove ! 
That Neptune's arms, who clippeth thee about, 
Would bear thee from the knowledge of thyself, 35 
And grapple thee unto a pagan shore ; 
Where these two Christian armies might combine 
The blood of malice in a vein of league, 
And not to spend it so unneighbourly ! 
Lew. A noble temper dost thou show in this ; 40 

And great affections wrestling in thy bosom 
Doth make an earthquake of nobility. 
O, what a noble combat hast thou fought 
Between compulsion and a brave respect ! 
Let me wipe off this honourable dew, 45 

That silverly doth progress on thy cheeks : 
My heart hath melted at a lady's tears. 
Being an ordinary inundation ; 
But this effusion of such manly drops, 
This shower, blown up by tempest of the soul, 50 
Startles mine eyes, and makes me more amazed 
Than had I seen the vaulty top of heaven 
Figured quite o'er with burning meteors. 

36. grapple] Pope ; cripple Ff ; gripple Steevens conj. ; couple Gould conj. 
43. thou] omitted in Ff i, 2, 3. 

34. clippeih] embraceth, as often the distaste for this course into which 

in Shakespeare. you are compelled by force of circum- 

39. to spend] This insertion of the stances, and a consideration of the 

mark of the infinitive is common in woes of your country which make you 

the case of the second of two infini- bravely take this course. Hanmer 

lives following an auxiliary verb. printed "compassion" for " com- 

42. Do/A] Attracted into the singu- pulsion," while Capell conjectured 

lar by the influence of "bosom." "compunction." 

Hanmer printed 'Do," while Pope 51. amazed] See iv. ii. 137 and iv. 

corrected "affections" in the previous iii. \^o supra. Here the word more 

line to " affection." nearly means " astonished." 

44. Between . . . respect] between 



124 



KING JOHN 



[act v. 



Lift up thy brow, renowned Salisbury, 

And with a great heart heave away this storm : 55 

Commend these waters to those baby eyes 

That never saw the giant world enraged ; 

Nor met with fortune other than at feasts, 

Full of warm blood, of mirth, of gossiping. 

Come, come ; for thou shalt thrust thy hand as deep 60 

Into the purse of rich prosperity 

As Lewis himself: so, nobles, shall you all. 

That knit your sinews to the strength of mine. 

And even there, methinks, an angel spake : 

Enter Pandulph. 

Look, where the holy legate comes apace, 65 

To give us warrant from the hand of heaven, 
And on our actions set the name of right 
With holy breath. 
Pand. Hail, noble prince of France ! 

The next is this. King John hath reconciled 
Himself to Rome ; his spirit is come in, 70 



56. waters] F i ; warres F 2 ; warrs F 3 ; wars F 4. 
Cambridge ed. (Heath conj.) ; Full warm of Ff. 



59. Full 0/ warm] 



64. And even . . . s/ait^] The only 
satisfactory explanation of this line 
is that of the Cambridge Editors, 
who consider it a contemptuous aside 
of Lewis', with a play upon the word 
"angel," suggested by "purse" and 
"nobles." There is also a reference 
to the entrance of Pandulph. Even 
these explanations are not entirely 
satisfactory. The Folios place the 
stage-direction " Enter Pandulpho " 
after line 63. Hanmer read " speeds " 
for "spake"; Vaughan suggests 



"shapes," t.f. = shapes itself, ap- 
pears; Herr "shakes." in the Tivo 
Angry Women of Abingdon the last 
part of scene vi. between Mistress 
Goursey and Coomes turns upon 
exactly the same pun upon the word 
"angel." 

69. nexf] I can find no Shake- 
spearian warrant for this peculiar use 
of " next." Did Shakespeare write 
"news," as he did in scores of 
similar situations ? 



sc. 



II.] KING JOHN 125 



That so stocxd out against the holy chuicli, 
The great metropolis and see of Rome : 
Therefore thy threatening colours now wind up ; 
And tame the savage spirit of wild war, 
That, like a lion foster'd up at hand, 75 

It may lie gently at the foot of peace, 
And be no further harmful than in show. 
Ltiv. Your grace shall pardon me, I will not back : 
I am too high-born to be propertied. 
To be a secondary at control, 80 

Or useful serving-man and instrument 
To any sovereign state throughout the world. 
Your breath first kindled the dead coal of wars 
Between this chastised kingdom and myself. 
And brought in matter that should feed this fire; 85 
And now 'tis far too huge to be blown out 
With that same weak wind which enkindled it. 
You taught me how to know the face of right, 
Acquainted me with interest to this land, 
Yea, thrust this enterprise into my heart ; 90 

And come ye now to tell me John hath made 
His peace with Rome ? What is that peace to me ? 
I, by the honour of my marriage-bed. 
After young Arthur, claim this land for mine ; 
And, now it is half-conquer'd, must I back 95 

Because that John hath made his peace with Rome ? 

72. iff] F 4 ; Sen Ff i, 2, 3. 

78, 80. Your grace . . . control] Night, iv. ii. gg : "They have here 

your grace must excuse me, but I propertied me." 

will not draw back. I am too high- Sg. Acquainted . . . land] ac- 

born to be made a tool of, etc. quainted me with my claim upon the 

7g. propertied] Compare Twelfth land. 



126 



KING JOHN 



[act v. 



Am I Rome's slave? What penny hath Rome borne, 

What men provided, what munition sent, 

To underprop this action? Is't not I 

That undergo this charge? who else but I, lOO 

And such as to my claim are liable 

Sweat in this business and maintain this war? 

Have I not heard these islanders shout out 

" Vive le roi ! " as I have bank'd their towns ? 

Have I not here the best cards for the game, 105 

To win this easy match play'd for a crown? 

And shall I now give o'er the yielded set? 

No, no, on my soul, it never shall be said. 

Pand. You look but on the outside of this work. 

Lew. Outside or inside, I will not return no 

Till my attempt so much be glorified 
As to my ample hope was promised 
Before I drew this gallant head of war. 
And cull'd these fiery spirits from the world, 
To outlook conquest and to win renown 



108. No, 110^ No, Pope. 

loi. stcch , . . liable] such as are 
willing to admit my claim. Compare 
II. i. 490, IV. ii. 226 supra. 

104. " Vive le roi t "J Shakespeare 
gives this phrase four syllables, in the 
ultra-correct French manner — Vi-ve 
le roi. 

104. bank'd] " formed on the ana- 
logy of ' coasted ' " (Mr. Wright), 
and meaning "sailed along their 
banks." I know of no similar use 
in Elizabethan English ; I am inclined 
to suspect the text, the m.ore so be- 
cause it does not seem likely that the 
French went to attack many towns 
by sailing up rivers, although the cor- 
responding passage of the Trouble- 



115 



some Raigne refers to sailing up the 
Thames. Vaughan takes "bank'd" 
to mean "set up banks around." 
Gould conjectured " pass'd." We 
might suggest " hail'd." 

107. set] A term generally applied 
to the winning number of games in 
any kind of match. Here, of course, 
cards are referred to. Cotgrave has 
^' Partie : ... a match, or set, at 
game." Compare Titus Andronicus, 
V. i. 100 : " As sure a card as. ever 
won a set.'" 

III. glorified] Compare iv. iii. 71 
supra. 

115. To outlook conquest] to defy 
conquest. 



sc. 11] KIXG JOHN 127 

Even in the jaws of danger and of death. 

[ Tnnnpct sonntis. 
What lusty trumpet thus doth summon us? 

Entt'r the Bastard, attended. 

Bast. According to the fair-play of the world, 
Let me have audience ; I am sent to speak, 
My holy lord of Milan, from the king: 120 

I come to learn how you have dealt for him ; 
And, as you answer, I do know the scope 
And warrant limited unto my tongue. 

Pand. The Dauphin is too wilful-opposite, 

And will not temporize with my entreaties; 125 

He flatly says he'll not lay down his arms. 

Bast. By all the blood that ever fury breathed. 

The youth says well. Now hear our English king ; 

For thus his royalty doth speak in me. 

He is prepared, and reason too he should : 130 

This apish and unmannerly approach. 

This hamess'd masque and unadvised revel, 

This unhair'd sauciness and boyish troops, 

124. wilful-opposite] Theobald ; wilful opposite F i ; wil/ull opposite Ff 2, 
3; wilful, opposite F 4. 125. entreaties ;] etitreates. S. Walker conj. 

119-121. speak, . . . king: I eome] tion of " un-heard " of F r, " unheard " 

I have here altered the generally ac- of Ff 2-4. As Mr. Wright points 

cepted punctuation, keeping it nearer out, this is supported by the spell- 

the F"oIios, which have " i/raife ; . . . ing of "haires" as " heares " in 

king^ I come,". Theobald reads the Faerie Queene, 11. ix. 13. The 

*' speak, ... King : I come,". There meaning "unbearded" (Kcightlcy 

is no need of compunction in altering conjectured "unheard") is obvious 

the stopping of the Folios, and Theo- when taken in connection with 

bald's comma after " come," which is " boyish troops." For " unhair'd . . . 

the only difference between his read- and" the Collier MS. reads " un- 

ing and mine, seems to me unneces- heard . . . of." Collier's second edition 

8ary. gives " unhair'd . . . of" ; while Vaug- 

133. unhair'd] Theobald's emenda- han conjectures " unfear'd . . . in." 



128 KING JOHN [act y. 

The king doth smile at; and is well prepared 

To whip this dwarfish war, these pigmy arms, 135 

From out the circle of his territories. 

That hand which had the strength, even at your door, 

To cudgel you and make you take the hatch, 

To dive like buckets in concealed wells. 

To crouch in litter of your stable planks, 140 

To lie like pawns lock'd up in chests and trunks, 

To hug with swine, to seek sweet safety out 

In vaults and prisons, and to thrill and shake 

Even at the crying of your nation's crow, 

Thinking his voice an armed Englishman ; 145 

Shall that victorious hand be feebled here, 

That in your chambers gave you chastisement? 

No : know the gallant monarch is in arms 

And like an eagle o'er his aery towers, 

To souse annoyance that comes near his nest. i 50 

145. his] Rowe ; this Ff. 148. No : knoio] No, no, Lettsom conj. 

149. towers] tower F 4. 150. souse] F 4 ; sowsse Ff i, 2, 3. 

I2S- ihese pigmy arms]Rowe's read- p. 251), a reference to the flight of 

ing. The FoHos have this pigmy ravens which was said to have struck 

Amies, defended by Mr. Moore- terror into the French before the 

Smith, who treats " pigmy arms " as battle of Poitiers. There are many 

singular. Vaughan suggests "this needless emendations of the passage, 

pigmy swarm." 149. And like an eagle, etc.] soars 

138. take the hatch] leap over the high above his young ones to swoop 

lower half of the door without wait- down upon anything that comes 

ing to open it. Compare 7^'/»^ L^a/-, near to annoy his nest. " Aery " really 

III. vi. 76: " Dogs leap the hatch and means nest, but Shakespeare uses it 

all are fled " ; and see i. i. 171 supra, for the young brood. Compare 

141. pawns] things that are lying Richard III. i. iii. 270: " Your aery 

in pawn. buildeth in our aery's nest." "To 

144. your 7iation's crow] The tower " is to soar into a position for 

obvious reference is to the cock striking. Compare Lucrece, 506 : — 

(gallus) ; there is a contemptuous " Which, like a falcon towering in 

side reference and play upon words the skies, 

in calling it a crow, and there may Coucheth the fowl below." 

be, as Dr. Nicholson pointed out in 150. souse] to swoop down upon; 

Notes and Queries (Series iii. No. xi. like "towering," another term from 



sc. 11] KING JOHN 12<» 

And you degenerate, you ingrate revolts, 

You bloody Neroes, ripping up the womb 

Of your dear mother England, blush for shame ; 

For your own ladies and pale-visaged maids 

Like Amazons come tripping after drums, 155 

Their thimbles into armed gauntlets change, 

Their needles to lances, and their gentle hearts 

To fierce and bloody inclination. 

Lew. There end thy brave, and turn thy face in peace ; 
We grant thou canst outscold us: fare thee well; 160 
We hold our time too precious to be spent 
With such a brabbler. 

Pand. Give me leave to speak. 

Bast. No, I will speak. 

Lew. We will attend to neither. 

Strike up the drums ; and let the tongue of war 
Plead for our interest and our being here. 165 

Bast. Indeed, your drums, being beaten, will cry out ; 
And so shall you, being beaten : do but start 

156. changc'\ chaiig'd Dyce (Lettsom conj. and Collier MS.). 

falconry. Compare Ford's Fancies "needles." Steeven.s (1778) gives the 

Chaste and Noble, iii. 2: "And (I) old form, " neelds." 
therefore mean to give the soiose 159. brave] thy braving of u.s, 

whenever I find the game on wing." bravado. So Taming of the Shrew, 

152, 153. You bloody Neroes, etc.] iii. i. 15 : " Sirrah, I will not bear 

Nothing was too awful to be believed these braves of thine." 
of Nero. This special piece of 162. brabbler] prater, babbler 

atrocity is to be found in full in Hig- (Rowe read " babler "). So Troilus 

den's Poly chronicon (Rolls Series, iv. and Cressida, v. i. 99: "He will 

395) ; it is also referred to in the spend his mouth and promise, like 

Troublesome Raigne, p. 34, line 389, Brabbler the hound." Cotgrave has 

and again by Shakespeare in Hamlet, " Breteleur : a brabler, chider, brawler 

ni. ii. 412. or wrangler : a litigious or vain 

154. maids] daughters. talker." Cotgrave's gloss shows 

157. Their needles] Pope omitted clearly that Shakespeare had chosen 
"Their"; Folios i and 2 read the word, — a word, however, quite 
"needl's," evidently indicating the common in Elizabethan English, 
pronunciation ; Folios 3 and 4 read 



130 KING JOHN [act v. 

An echo with the clamour of thy drum, 

And even at hand a drum is ready braced 

That shall reverberate all as loud as thine ; 170 

Sound but another, and another shall 

As loud as thine rattle the welkin's ear 

And mock the deep-mouth'd thunder: for at hand. 

Not trusting to this halting legate here, 

Whom he hath used rather for sport than need, 175 

Is warlike John ; and in his forehead sits 

A bare-ribb'd death, whose office is this day 

To feast upon whole thousands of the French. 

Lew. Strike up your drums, to find this danger out. 

Bast. And thou shalt find it, Dauphin, do not doubt. 180 

\Exeunt. : 

SCENE m.—TAe field of battle. 

Alarums. Enter King John and HUBERT. 

K. John. Flow goes the day with us ? O, tell me, Hubert. 
Hiib. Badly, I fear. How fares your majesty? 
K. John. This fever, that hath troubled me so long, 
Lies heavy on me ; O, my heart is sick ! 

Enter a Messenger. 
Mess. My lord, your valiant kinsman, Faulcon bridge, 5 
Desires your majesty to leave the field 
And send him word by me which way you go. 

170. all as\ Pope ; all, as Ff. 

169. ready braced] ready tightened Compare i Henry VI. II. iv. 12 : " Be- 
up for playing. The leathern sliding tween two dogs which hath the 
loops which are used for tightening deeper month." 

the membranes of military or side- 177. A bare-ribb'd death] Compare 

drums are called " braces." this image with that used by the 

173. deep-mouth'd] deep -voiced. Bastard in 11. t. 352. 



1 



- c. 



IV.] KING JOHN 131 



K. John. Tell him, toward Swinstead, to the abbey 
there. 

Mess. Be of good comfort: for the great supply- 
That was expected by the Dauphin here, lO 
Are wrack'd three nights ago on Goodwin Sands. 
This news was brought to Richard but even now: 
The French fight coldly, and retire themselves. 

K. John. Ay me ! this tyrant fever bums me up, 

And will not let me welcome this good news. 15 

Set on toward Swinstead : to my litter straight ; 
Weakness possesseth me, and I am faint. [Rxeunl. 

SCENE W .-^Another part of the Jield. 

Enter SALISBURY, Pe.mbrOKE, and BiGOT. 

Sal. I did not think the king so stored with friends. 
Pern. Up once again ; put spirit in the French : 

If they miscarry', we miscarry too. 
Sal. That misbegotten devil, Faulconbridge, 

In spite of spite, alone upholds the day. 5 

Pern. They say King John sore sick hath left the 
field. 

14. Ay me\ Aye me Vi\ Ah me Pope. 

Scene iv. 

2,3. French: . . . miscarry,] Rowe ; French, . . . miscarry, Ff 3, 4 ; 
French, . . . miscarry; Ff i, 2. 

II. Are] Capell printed Was and Scene rr. 

Lettsom supposes a lost line ; but 

"supply" here is treated as plural, 5. /« i/*!/*- o/i/ii^f] against all odds, 
as again in v. v. 12 infra. Compare 3 Henry VI. 11. iii. 5 : " And 

spite of spite needs must I rest awhile." 



132 KING JOHN [act v. 

Enter Melun, wounded. 

Mel. Lead me to the revolts of England here. 

Sal When we were happy we had other names. 

Pern. It is the Count Melun. | 

5^/^ Wounded to death. 

Mel. Fly, noble English, you are bought and sold; lo 
Unthread the rude eye of rebellion 
And welcome home again discarded faith. 
Seek out King John and fall before his feet; 
For if the French be lords of this loud day, 
He means to recompense the pains you take 15 

By cutting off your heads : thus hath he sworn 
And I with him, and many moe with me, 
Upon the altar at Saint Edmundsbury; 
Even on that altar where we swore to you 
Dear amity and everlasting love. 20 

Sal. May this be possible? may this be true? 

Mel. Have I not hideous death within my view, 

Retaining but a quantity of life, 

7. revolts] the revolted nobles, as its correctness is proved by the next 

in V. ii. 151 supra. lines. We must therefore suspect 

II. Unthread . . . rebellion'] Mr. line 14. Mr. Wright suggests that 

Wright has conclusively proved in " French " is singular, as in Henry V. 

the Clarendon Press edition that iv, iv. 80 : " The French might have 

the long series of emendations sue- a good prey of us if he knew it." 

ceeding Theobald's rejection of the This necessitates reading " lord " for 

Folios' reading as too homely are "lords," and, unless we accept the 

quite unnecessary. CompSLTe Richard conjecture made independently by 

//. V. V. 17 :— Sidney Walker and Keightley that a 

♦•It is as hard to come as for a line has been lost between 14 and 15, it 

camel seems the only way out of the difficulty. 

To thread the postern of a small 17. moe] Anglo-Saxon ma. This 

needle's eye " ; form often occurs in place of " more. 

and Coriolanns, in. i. 124: "They 23. quantity] small portion. So 

would not ^Armt/ the gates." Taming 0/ the Shrew, iv. ni. 112: 

14, 15. For if the French, etc.] " Thou rag, thou quantity, thou rem- 

•' He " comes in too abruptly, but nant." 



sc. IV.] KING JOHN 133 

WTiich bleeds away, even as a form of wax 

Resolveth from his figure 'gainst the fire? 25 

What in the world should make me now deceive, 

Since I must lose the use of all deceit? 

Why should I then be false, since it is true 

That I must die here and live hence by truth ? 

I say again, if Lewis do win the day, 30 

He is forsworn if e'er those eyes of yours 

Behold another day break in the east : 

But even this night, whose black contagious breath 

Already smokes about the burning crest 

Of the old, feeble and day -wearied sun, 35 

Even this ill night, your breathing shall expire, 

Paying the fine of rated treachery 

Even with a treacherous fine of all your lives, 

If Lewis by your assistance win the day. 

Commend me to one Hubert with your king: 40 

The love of him, and this respect besides, 

For that my grandsire was an Englishman, 

Awakes my conscience to confess all this. 

In lieu whereof, I pray you, bear me hence 

From forth the noise and rumour of the field, 45 

30. do] omitted by Pope. 31. forsicom] I omit the comma of the Folios. 
42. {For . . . EngUsliman.)] Ff. 

24,25. even as a form 0/ wax, ttc] 34. crest] The anonymous sug- 

It seems to have been a common prac- gestion of "cresset" is most tempt- 

tice to place waxen images of enemies ing. 

before a fire in the belief that as the 37. rated] properly appreciated or 

wax melted the person represented recompensed. 

wasted away. Hence the simile. 37, 38. /ine . . . Jine] A play upon 

although not directly referring to the meanings of " penalty " and 

the above practice, would be more "end." Compare Hamlet, v. i. 115: 

familiar to an Elizabethan audience " Is this the /«^ of his yfwfs .^ " 

than to us. 41. respect] consideration. Com- 

25. Resolveth] almost = disso!veth. pare ni. i. 318 iw/ro. 



134 



KING JOHN 



[act v. 



Where I may think the remnant of my thoughts 
In peace, and part this body and my soul 
With contemplation and devout desires. 
Sal. We do believe thee ; and beshrew my soul 

But I do love the favour and the form 50 

Of this most fair occasion, by the which 

We will untread the steps of damned flight, 

And like a bated and retired flood, 

Leaving our rankness and irregular course. 

Stoop low within those bounds we have o'erlook'd, 55 

And calmly run on in obedience 

Even to our ocean, to our great King John. 

My arm shall give thee help to bear thee hence ; 

For I do see the cruel pangs of death 

Right in thine eye. Away, my friends ! New 

flight ; 60 

And happy newness, that intends old right, 

[Exeunt, leading off Melun, 

59. pangs] fangs Heath. 

the reading of the Folios, and so 
would Schmidt. Still it has perhaps 
a sufficiently suspicious look to justify 
the various emendations and sug- 
gestions — " Right in thine eyes," 
Pope ; " Pight in thine eyes," Han- 
mer ; " Pight in thine eye," Warbur- 
ton ; " Fight in thine eye," Capell ; 
" Bright in thine eye," Collier, ed. 2 
(Collier MS.) ; " Fright in thine eye," 
Anon. {ap. Collier conj.) ; " Riot in 
thine eye," Brae (conj.) ; " Writhing 
thine eye," Elze (conj. Athen. 1867); 
" Light on thine eye," Moberly(conj.). 

60. New flight] Pope, in defiance 
of the final couplet, read " And fly 1 " 
and omitted the next line. 

61. And happy newness . . . right] 
happy be the new course which we 
take to establish the right we had 
forsaken. 



53. retired] retiring Hanmer. 

49. beshrew] " a mild form of im- 
precation " (Dyce-Littledale). So 
Twelfth Night, iv. i. 62 : " Beshrew 
his soul for me " ; and see v. v. 14 
infra. 

54. rankness] Capell conjectures 
"bankless"; but "rankness" in the 
sense of immoderate growth or 
pressing beyond bounds is supported 
by many passages in the other plays, 
and this special use is found in Venus 
and Adonis, 71 : " Rain added to a 
river that is rank." Compare also 
E.E. Psalter (1300): "He turned 
into blood the stremes rankc." 

55. we have o'erlook'd] Compare 
Hamlet, iv. v. 99 : " The ocean, over- 
peering of his list." 

60. Right in thine eye] Vaughan, 
withdrawing his conjecture of 
" Brighten thine eye," would retain 



sc. v.] 



KING JOHN 



135 



SCENE V. — The French camp. 

Enter Lewis and his train. 

Lew. The sun of heaven methought was loath to set, 
But stay'd and made the western welkin blush, 
When English measure backward their own ground 
In faint retire. O, bravely came we off, 
When with a volley of our needless shot, 5 

After such bloody toil, we bid good-night ; 
And wound our tottering colours clearly up, 
Last in the field, and almost lords of it ! 



Enter a Messenger. 

Mess. Where is my prince, the Dauphin? 

Lew. Here: what news? 

Mess. The Count Melun is slain ; the English lords 10 



3. When English measure] Pope 
read " ih' English measurd." But 
the sudden change of tense is not 
without warrant elsewhere. Mr. 
Wright quotes The Winter's Tale, v. 
ii. 83: "She lifted the princess from 
the earth, and so locks her in embrac- 
ing as if she would pin her to her 
heart." We might conceivably under- 
stand some such elliptical construction 
as " When the English (should so for- 
get themselves as to) measure,' etc. 

4. retire] Compare ii. i. 253, 326 
supra. 

5. a volley of our needless shot] = 
a needless volley of our shot. For 
this transference of adj. compare 
"bleeding ground," 11. 1. 304 supra. 

j.tottering]The Folios have "tott'r- 
ing," Pope" tatter 'd,"M alone" tatter- 
ing," Collier MS. "totter'd." Mr. 
Wright explains it as flying in tatters. 
It is quite certain that "tatter" was 



often spelt " totter " in Shakespeare's 
time. Fleay also points out that 
" totter " was used for swinging in the 
air — e.g. Spanish Tragedy, iii. xii. 
152: 'behold a man hanging and 
tottering, and tottering as you know 
the wind will wave a man." " Totter- 
ing " here may mean waving in the 
breeze. 

7. clearly] Capell conjectured 
" chearly," the Collier MS. " closely," 
an utterly un-Shakespearian use of 
the word. The Cambridge Editors 
suggest " cleanly," as "equivalent to 
' neatly' " and " antithetical to 'totter- 
ing ' or 'tattering.'" "Clean" or 
"cleanly" in the sense of "com- 
pletely " is an English idiom traceable 
as far back as Alfred the Great — 
" Swae claene hio was oj'feallenu," so 
completely had it fallen away (Preface 
to Alfred's version of the Cum Pas- 
toralis). 



136 



KING JOHN 



[act 



By his persuasion are again fall'n off, 

And your supply, which you have wish'd so long, 

Are cast away and sunk on Goodwin Sands. 

Lew. Ah, foul shrewd news ! beshrew thy very heart ! 

I did not think to be so sad to-night 15 

As this hath made me. Who was he that said 
King John did fly an hour or two before 
The stumbling night did part our weary powers? 

Mess. Whoever spoke it, it is true, my lord. 

Lew. Well ; keep good quarter and good care to-night : 20 
The day shall not be up so soon as I, 
To try the fair adventure of to-morrow. \Exeunt, 



SCENE VI. — An open place in the neighbo7irhood of 

Swinstead Abbey. 

Enter the BASTARD and HUBERT, severally. 

Hub. Who's there? speak, ho! speak quickly, or I shoot. 

Bast. A friend. What art thou? 

Httb. Of the part of England. 



11. again] F i; at length Ff 2, 3, 4. 

12. supply] taken as plural. Com- 
pare V. iii. 9-1 1 supra. Capell read 
"supplies " for the same reason as he 
printed " was" in v. iii. 11. 

14. shrewd] originally meant 
" cursed " = Mid. Eng. schrcwed, p. 
part, of schreawen, to curse. The 
play upon the words "shre7t'd" and 
" beshrew " is now evident. For " be- 
shrew" compare line 49 in the last 
scene ; for the Elizabethan meaning, 
compare Cotgrave, " Mai : ill, bad, 
naughtie, lewd, . . . harmefull, 
shrewd." 

20. keep good quarter] Keep careful 
watch, see that the sentries are pro- 



perly posted. Scene iii. in Act iv. of 
Atitony and Cleopatra explains this 
phrase, and in line 22, " Follow the 
noise so far as we have quarter," 
evidently means " Follow the noise 
to the limit of the post v/e have to 
guard." 

Scene vi. 

2-6. A friend . . . Hubert, I 
think] Few critics have been con- 
tent with the arrangement of these 
lines, Hubert's expostulation (lines 4, 
5) " why . . . mine ? " being mean- 
ingless. Vaughan's suggestion is 



SC. VI.] 



KING JOHN 



i;j' 



Bast. Whither dost thou go? 

Hub. What's that to thee? why may not I demand 

Of thine affairs, as well as thou of mine? 5 

Bast. Hubert, I think. 
Hub. Thou hast a perfect thought : 

I will upon all hazards well b)elieve 

Thou art my friend, that know'st my tongue so well. 

Who art thou ? 
Bast. Who thou wilt : and if thou please, 

Thou mayst befriend me so much as to think 10 

I come one way of the Plantagenets. 
Hub. Unkind remembrance ! thou and eyeless night 

Have done me shame : brave soldier, pardon me. 

That any accent breaking from thy tongue 

Should 'scape the true acquaintance of mine ear. 15 
Bast. Come, come ; sans compliment, what news abroad ? 



3-6. 

^0 ? . 



Whither 
. . thee? 



thought] Arranged by Capell ; six lines in Ff ending 



. affaires. 



mine f 



thinke 



thought . 



perhaps the most ingenious and most 
plausible : " Hub. Of the part of 
England. Whither dost thou go ? 
Bast. What is that to ihee ? Hub. 
What's that to thee. — Why may," 
etc. This different apportioning of 
the speeches and insertion of the 
repeated half line, at once straightens 
out the sense and corrects the metre. 
Watkiss Lloyd distributes the 
speeches as follows : " Bast. A friend. 
Hub. What art thou ? Bast. Of the 
part of England. Whither dost thou 
go ? Hub. What is that to thee ? 
Bast. Why . . . mine ? Hubert, I 
think." This suggestion would be 
convincing were it not for " Hubert, 
I think " being tacked on unnaturally 
to the Bastard's speech. 

6. Thou . . . thought] You have 
guessed exactly right. So 9 Henry 



V. III. i. 88 : " King Richard might 
create a perfect guess." 

11. one way] by one line of descent. 

12. Unkind remembrance]i.e. really 
" unkind want of remembrance." 
Hubert reproaches his memory for 
failing him. 

12. eyeless] The Folios read "end- 
less" (with variations of spelling), for 
which Theobald reads " eyeless," a 
reading suggested by Warburion. 
Daniel conjectured "cand'less" — a 
hideous word. Is there a remini- 
scence on anyone's part (Shake- 
speare, copyist, or printer) of the 
"endless night" of Gaunt's speech 
in Richard II. i. iii. 22? 

16. sans] Shakespeare was very 
fond of this French form of" without." 
It is also used by the anon>Tnous 
writer of the Troublesome Raigne. 



138 



KING JOHN 



[act v. 



Hub, Why, here walk I in the black brow of night, 

To find you out. 
Bast. Brief, then ; and what 's the news ? 

Hub. O, my sweet sir, news fitting to the night, 

Black, fearful, comfortless and horrible. 205 

Bast. Show me the very wound of this ill news 

I am no woman, I '11 not swoon at it. 
Hub. The king, I fear, is poison'd by a monk : 

I left him almost speechless; and broke out 

To acquaint you with this evil, that you might 25 

The better arm you to the sudden time, 

Than if you had at leisure known of this. 
Bast. How did he take it? who did taste to him? 
Hub. A monk, I tell you ; a resolved villain, 

Whose bowels suddenly burst out: the king 30| 

Yet speaks and peradventure may recover. 
Bast. Who didst thou leave to tend his majesty? 
Hub. Why, know you not ? the lords are all come back, 

And brought Prince Henry in their company ; 

At whose request the king hath pardon 'd them, 35 

And they are all about his majesty. 
Bast. Withhold thine indignation, mighty heaven, 

And tempt us not to bear above our power! 

22. swoon\ F 4 ; swound Ff i, 2, 3. 

24-27. and broke out . . . known of 
this] 1 made my escape (from the 
Abbey) to tell you this evil news 
that you might prepare yourself better 
for the emergency than you could 
have done had you heard in a more 
leisurely manner. 

28. who did taste to him] It v^'as 
the duty of a " taster " to eat part 
of every dish set before the king 
with the object of detecting poison. 



33. not?] Ff; not, Malone conj. 

The monk had willingly sacrificed 
his life in performing this duty, thus 
making sure of the death of the king. 

32. Who] Hanmer corrects to 
Whom. So Henry V. iv. vii. 154; 
"Who servest thou under?" This i 
form for the accusative of the inter- 
rogative is not infrequent in lax 
English. 

38, And tempt . . . power] do not j 
try us beyond our power. 



SC. VII.] 



KING JOHN 



131) 



I '11 tell thee, Hubert, half my power this night, 

Passing these flats, are taken by the tide ; 40 

These Lincoln Washes have devoured them ; 

Myself, well mounted, hardly have escaped. 

Away before : conduct me to the king ; 

I doubt he will be dead or ere I come, [Exeunt. 



SCENE VII. — The orduird at Swinstead Abbey. 

Enter PRINCE Henrv, SALISBURY, and BiGOT. 

P. Hen. It is too late : the life of all his blood 
Is touch'd corruptibly, and his pure brain, 
Which some suppose the soul's frail dwelling-house, 
Doth by the idle comments that it makes 
Foretell the ending of mortality. 5 

Enter PEMBROKE. 

Pern. His highness yet doth speak, and holds belief 
That, being brought into the open air, 
It would allay the burning quality 
Of that fell poison which assaiieth him. 

P. Hen. Let him be brought into the orchard here. 10 
Doth he still rage? [Exit Bigot. 

50, where " defensible " in " For we 
no longer are defensible " means 
capable of making defence ; therefore 
we must take the meaning of " cor- 
ruptibly " as " so as to cause it to 
corrupt." 

2. /"Kr*] We must understand 
"pure" as "naturally," "usually," 
or " otherwise clear." Grant White 
read " poor " ; Vaughan suggests 
"hurt," but thinks "pure" quite 
possible ; Herr conjectures " sore." 

II. rage\ rave deliriously. 



40. are] Compare this use of 
"power" as plural with that of 
"supply" in the same way in v. iii. 
9-1 1 and V. V. 12 supra. 

43. Away be/ore] lead the way on. 

Seem vu. 

2. corruptibly] Capell read " cor- 
ruptedly"; Rann conjectured " cor- 
ruptively. ' Mr. Wright points out 
that Shakesf)eare uses adjectives in 
■ible actively — e.g. Henry V. in. iii. 



140 



KING JOHN 



[act v. 



Pern. He is more patient 

Than when you left him ; even now he sung. 

P. Hen. O vanity of sickness! fierce extremes 
In their continuance will not feel themselves. 
Death, having prey'd upon the outward parts, 15 
Leaves them invisible, and his siege is now 
Against the mind, the which he pricks and wounds 
With many legions of strange fantasies, 
Which, in their throng and press to that last hold, 
Confound themselves. 'Tis strange that death should 
sing. 20 

I am the cygnet to this pale faint swan, 
W^ho chants a doleful hymn to his own ,death, 
And from the organ-pipe of frailty sings 
His soul and body to their lasting rest. 

Sal. Be of good comfort, prince; for you are born 25 
To set a form upon that indigest 
Which he hath left so shapeless and so rude. 

16. his] F I ; Ajy Ff 2, 4 ; her F 3. 17. mind\ Rowe (ed. 2) ; winde 

F I ; wind ¥i 2, 3,4. 21. cygnet] Rowe (ed. 2); Symet Ff. 24. to] 

F I ; omitted in Ff 2, 3, 4. 



16. invisible] If we take this to 
refer to Death, the passage yields a 
good meaning — " Death, after prey- 
ing upon the outward parts, leaves 
them without being seen and lays 
siege to the mind." There is a large 
number of unsatisfactory readings 
and conjectures. Fleay reads " leaves 
them, invisible ; and his siege " ; 
this throws up the necessary mean- 
ing by the punctuation and seems 
quite worth adopting. 

20. Confound themselves] " non- 
plus" themselves. Compare "con- 



found their skill in covetousness," iv. 
ii. 29 supra. 

21, 22. / am the cygnet . . . death] 
It was a popular belief that the swa 
" fluted a wild carol ere her death." 
So The Merchant of Venice, in. ii. 
44 : " He makes a swan-like end, 
fading in music." 

26. indigest] chaotic confusion. 
This appears to be a reminiscence of 
Ovid's " ritdis indigestaque moles." 
So 3 Henry VI. v. vi. 51 : "An in- 
digested and deformed lump." 



sc. vii] KING JOHN 141 

Enter Attendants, and BiGOT, carrying KING JOHN 

in a chair. 

K. John. Ay, marry, now my soul hath elbow-room ; 
It would not out at windows nor at doors. 
There is so hot a summer in my bosom, 30 

That all m\- bowels crumble up to dust : 
I am a scribbled form, drawn with a pen 
Upon a parchment, and against this fire 
Do I shrink up. 

P. Hen. How fares your majesty ? 

K. John. Poison'd, — ill fare — dead, forsook, cast off: 35 
And none of you will bid the winter come 
To thrust his icy fingers in my maw, 
Nor let my kingdom's rivers take their course 
Through my burn'd bosom, nor entreat the north 
To make his bleak winds kiss my parched lips 40 
And comfort me with cold. I do not ask you much, 
I beg cold comfort ; and you are so strait. 
And so ingrateful, you deny me that. 

P. Hen. O that there were some virtue in my tears. 
That might relieve you ! 

K. John. The salt in them is hot. 45 

Within me is a hell ; and there the poison 

33, 34. Upon . . . up] one line in Ff. 35. ill /are] ill fair F 4. 

43. ingrateful] ungrateful F 4. 45. in them] F 1; of them Ff 2, 3, 4. 

35. ill fare] I fare ill, poisoned by words has a parallel in the death 

ill fare. Mr. Worrall points out scene of Gaunt in Richard II. 

kindred " clenches " in Haw/f/, III. ii. 42. ztrait] niggardly, mean. We 

97, q8, and Edward III. iv. vi. 53, 54. have a somewhat similar use in Timon 

37. maw] stomach, generally of of Athens, i. i. q6: " His means most 

animals. A.S. maga. short, his creditors most strait." 

42. cold comfort] A« Mr. Wright The Folios have "straight," which 

points out, this death-bed trifling with was corrected by Pope. 



142 



KING JOHN 



[act v. 



Is as a fiend confined to tyrannise 
On unreprievable condemned blood. 



Enter the BASTARD. 

Bast. O, I am scalded with my violent motion, 

And spleen of speed to see your majesty ! 50 

K. John. O cousin, thou art come to set mine eye : 
The tackle of my heart is crack'd and burn'd, 
And all the shrouds wherewith my life should sail 
Are turned to one thread, one little hair : 
My heart hath one poor string to stay it by, 55 

Which holds but till thy news be uttered ; 
And then all this thou seest is but a clod 
And module of confounded royalty. 

Bast. The Dauphin is preparing hither ward. 

Where heaven He knows how we shall answer him ; 60 

For in a night the best part of my power. 

As I upon advantage did remove. 

Were in the Washes all unwarily 

Devoured by the unexpected flood. \T he King dies. 

Sal. You breathe these dead news in as dead an ear. 65 
My liege ! my lord ! but now a king, now thus. 



51. art} are F 4. 

48. On . . . blood] on blood con- 
demned beyond reprieve, i.e. John 
felt that his death was certain. 

50. spleen of speed] See 11. i. 448 
supra. 

51. to set mine eye] to close my 
eyes after death. 

55. to stay it by] Keeping up the 
nautical metaphor, referring to the 
stay of a mast. 

58. module] — model, pattern, 
mould, form. Cotgrave has 



^'Module: a model or module." 
Compare AWs Well that Ends Well, 
IV. iii. 114 : " Bring forth this coun- 
terfeit module." Hanmer printed 
"model." 

58. confounded] worsted, destroyed. 
Compare iv. ii. 29 and v. vii. 20 supra. 

60. heaven He knows] The " he " is 
a common pleonasm. For heaven = 
God = He. Compare in. i. i^^ supra. 

62. upon advantage] seeing a 
favourable opportunity. 



sc. vn] KING JOHN 143 

P. Hen. Even so must I run on, and even so stop. 
What surety of the world, what hope, what stay, 
When this was now a king, and now is clay ? 

Bast. Art thou gone so? I do but stay behind 70 

To do the office for thee of revenge. 
And then my soul shall wait on thee to heaven. 
As it on earth hath been thy servant still. 
Now, now, you stars that move in your right spheres. 
Where be your powers ? show now your mended 
faiths, 75 

And instantly return with me again, 
To push destruction and perpetual shame 
Out of the weak door of our fainting land. 
Straight let us seek, or straight we shall be sought: 
The Dauphin rages at our very heels. 80 

Sal. It seems you know not, then, so much as we : 
The Cardinal Pandulph is within at rest. 
Who half an hour since came from the Dauphin, 
And brings from him such offers of our peace 
As we with honour and respect may take, 85 

With purpose presently to leave this war. 

Bast. He will the rather do it when he sees 
Ourselves well sinewed to our defence. 

74. right] bright Pope. 84. our] fair Roderick conj. 

75. Whtrt be . . . mended faiths] legiance by marching with me upon 
I cannot agree with Mr. Wright's the foe at once." Pope also misunder- 
note upon "mended" — "John's for- stood the passage, or he could never 
tune had broken faith with him"— have read "bright" for "right." 
implying that the Bastard was really 86. presently] immediately, 
addressing the stars. It seems to me 88. sinetved] The Folios have 
quite evident that " Plantagenet" is " sinew'd," which makes the line de- 
talking to the nobles — " stars that fective, leading to Rowe's reading of 
now move in your right spheres " sinewed " in the text, and the su^- 
(which you had left awhile) where are gestion of the Collier MS., " sinew d 
your men ? Show your returned al- to our own." 



144 



KING JOHN 



[act v. 



Sal. Nay, it is in a manner done already ; 

For many carriages he hath dispatch'd 90 

To the sea-side, and put his cause and quarrel 

To the disposing of the cardinal : 

With whom yourself, myself and other lords, 

If you think meet, this afternoon will post 

To consummate this business happily. 95 

Bast. Let it be so : and you, my noble prince, 

With other princes that may best be spared, 

Shall wait upon your father's funeral. 
P. Hen. At Worcester must his body be interr'd ; 

For so he will'd it. 
Bast. Thither shall it then: 100 

And happily may your sweet self put on 

The lineal state and glory of the land ! 

To whom, with all submission, on my knee 

I do bequeath my faithful services 

And true subjection everlastingly. 105 

Sal. And the like tender of our love we make. 

To rest without a spot for evermore. 
P. Hen. I have a kind soul that would give you thanks 

And knows not how to do it but with tear.s. 



89. it is'] Pope ; His Ff. 99. Worcester'] Ff 3, 4 ; Worster Ff i, 2. 



97. princes] Sidney Walker sus- 
pects " princes," believing it to be a 
printer's error, owing to his eye 
catching the " prince " of the previous 
line. Mr. Wright points out that 
" princes " is used of the nobles in 
line 115, and that a preferable change 
would be " prince " into " king " in 
line 96. 

99, 100. At Worcester . . . zvill'd 
it] According to Roger of Wendover 



the dying king said " To God and St. 
Wulstan I commend my body and 
soul." St. Wulstan was Bishop of 
Worcester, 1062 to 1095-6 (Mr. 
Wright). 

108. give yon thanks] The Folios 
read " give thanks" ; the reading in 
the text is Rowe's. The Cambridge 
Editors conjecture " fain give 
thanks " — a far finer reading. 



SC. VII.] 



KING JOHN 



14-5 



Bast. O, let us pay the time but needful woe, rio 

Since it hath been beforehand with our griefs, 
)This England never did, nor never shall, 
Lie at the proud foot of a conqueror, 
But when it first did help to wound itself. 
Now these her princes are come home again, 1 1 5 

Come the three corners of the world in arms, 



And we shall shock them. 

rue, 
If England to itself do rest but true. 



Nought shall make us 



[Exeunt. 



no. time but] Rowe ; time: but Ff. 

no. let us pay . . . woe] let us 
not give way to needless grief. 

115. princes] "princes" evidently 
refers to the nobles returning to their 
allegiance. The Cambridge edition 
prints Mr. Lloyd's suggestion that 
the line is spurious — " A compliment 



to Steenie and Baby Charles, who 
came back from Madrid in the year 
that the first edition of King John 
was published, and thrust in by the 
editors, or perhaps by the actors, in 
place of a line of similar purport, 
but less applicable." 



10 



m 



i 



APPENDIX 

King John, Act III. sc. i. 1. 242 : " Play fast and 
loose . , ." Various differing accounts of the " cheat- 
ing game" known as "fast and loose" have been given. 
In the New English Dictionary we find Halliwell (1847) 
quoted : " a cheating game played with a stick and a belt 
or string so arranged that a spectator would think that 
he could make the latter fast by placing a stick through 
its intricate folds, whereas the operator could detach it at 
once." 

Reginald Scot in his Discoverie of Witchcraft (1584) 
(Nicholson's Reprint, p. 276) describes two sleight-of- 
hand tricks which differ entirely from that described by 
Halliwell. They consist in making the looker-on believe 
that a knot in a handkerchief in the one case, and a 
bead on a string in the other, are "fast" when they are 
really " loose." 

Sir John Hawkins (quoted in Phin's Shakespeare 
Cyclopcedia, p. 112) speaks of the game as follows : " A 
leathern belt was made up into a number of intricate 
folds and placed edgewise upon a table. One of the folds 
was made to resemble the middle of the girdle, so that 
whoever could thrust a skewer into it would think he 
held it fast to the table; whereas when he had .so done, 
the person with whom he plays may take hold of both 
ends, and draw it away." This is also quoted in the 

147 



148 



APPENDIX 



Dyce-Littledale Glossary sub voce, with the addition, 
" This trick is now known to the common people by the 
name of pricking at the belt or girdle, and perhaps was 
practised by gypsies in the time of Shakespeare." 

This evidently is the kind of game alluded to in 
Drayton's Mooncalf : — 

He like a gypsy oftentimes would go, 
All kinds of gibberish he hath learned to know : 
And with a stick, a short string, and a noose 
Would show the people tricks at fast and loose. 

This game is still played at country fairs and on race- 
courses, and the trick is worked as follows ; — 

A doubled belt is wound up upon itself with the 
middle, i.e. the doubled end, in the centre. It is then 
laid edgewise on a flat surface and the gull is asked to 




thrust a skewer or a knife through the central fold. 
This in the diagram is obviously A. If now the holder 
of the belt slips the end D round into the position D i, 
and then pulls at C and D together, B becomes the 
central fold and the skewer or knife does not hold the 
belt " fast " as the gull expects. If the gull next time 



APPENDIX 141) 

chooses B as the central fold, C and D are of course 
pulled off at once together. Hence the belt can be made 
"fast" or "loose" at the will of the player of the game. 
This trick was evidently well known in Elizabethan 
times, for we find man}' mentions of it, e.g. Antony 
and Cleopatra, IV. x. 41, 42: "Like a right gipsy, hath, 
at fast and loose, Beguil'd me " ; and the first part of 
Promos and Cassandra, ii. 5 : " At fast and loose, my 
gyptian, I mean to have a cast." 



THE ABERDEEN UNIVERSITY PRESS LIMITED 



77 2 



I 



PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE 
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET 

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY 



'^WM 



