THE ARDEN SHAKESPEARE 
GENERAL EDITOR : W. J. CRAIG 
1899-1906: R. H. CASE, 1909 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



<_~ { v--» 



THE WORKS 

OF 

SHAKESPEARE 

LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 

EDITED BY 
H. C. HART 



I 






METHUEN AND CO. LTD. 

36 ESSEX STREET: STRAND 
LONDON 

Second Edition 



& 



First Published .... November 1906 
Second Edition .... October 1913 



2-12.1, 

Aztil 
tf/Z 



CONTENTS 

PAQE 

Introduction vii 

Love's Labour's Lost i 



INTRODUCTION 
Date of Play 

Love's Labour's Lost first appeared in print, in Quarto, in 
1598, with the following title : — 

A J Pleasant Conceited Comedie | Called, | Loues 
labors lost. | As it was presented before her Highnes | this 
last Christmas. | Newly corrected and augmented | By W. 
Shakespere. | [Ornamental device] | Imprinted at London by 
W. W. I for Cutbert Burby. | 1598. 

Two points may be noticed at once — that this is the earliest 
play published with Shakespeare's name on the title ; and that 
the words " newly corrected and augmented " seem to imply 
an earlier edition from which this differs appreciably. They 
can hardly be held with fairness to refer merely to the manner 
in which the manuscript or prompter's copy, or copies, had been 
dealt with. And the corrections and augmentations, we are dis- 
tinctly told, are by W. Shakespeare. 

The next publication of Love's Labour } s Lost was in the 
First Folio of 1623, where it is the seventh in order among the 
comedies. This text is distinguished from the Quarto by a 
considerable number of mostly unimportant variations generally 
for the better. These will be dealt with later in the present 
Introduction. Sidney Lee classes this Quarto amongst those 
in which " comparatively few faults are visible," in his Intro- 
duction to the Folio facsimile. The Folio divides the play 
into Acts, which is not done in the Quarto. The Folio is the 
more carefully printed. It is also the most authoritative. In 
1 63 1 a second edition of the Quarto was printed from the 
Folio, " by W. S. for Iohn Smethwicke" ; " As it was Acted by 



viii INTRODUCTION 

his Maiesties Servaunts at the Blacke-Friers and the Globe." 
It is of no weight as an authority. 

We are without any direct evidence as to the date of com- 
position or of the earliest appearance of the play. It is not 
mentioned in the Stationers' Register earlier than 1606-7, but 
it is one of the plays mentioned by Meres in his Wits Treasurie 
printed in the year 1598: "Shakespeare among ye English is 
the most excellent in both kinds for the stage : for Comedy, 
witnes his Gentlemen of Verona, his Errors, his Loue Labors 
Lost, his Loue labours wonne" {Shakespeare Allusion Books, 
New Shakes. Soc. 1874). And in the same year it was re- 
ferred to by Tofte, in his Alba (Grosart's reprint, p. 105): 
"Loves Labour Lost I once did see a play, Ycleped so, so 
called to my paine." Robert Tofte's words imply that some 
considerable time had elapsed since he saw it. He had seen 
the unaugmented play, prior to Christmas, 1 597, probably. 

In 1599 appeared The Passionate Pilgrim, a piratical col- 
lection of poetry published by Jaggard. In this anthology 
are placed three pieces from the play. See notes at IV. ii. 98, 
IV. iii. 57, and IV. Hi. 98. And in Englands Parnassus 
(1600) the line IV. iii. 376, "Revels, Daunses, Maskes and 
merrie houres," is quoted. See Centurie of Prayse (New 
Shakes. Soc. p. 432). There is also a 1606 reference to the 
play in the Centurie. It was one of the " Bookes red be me 
[Drummond of Hawthornden] anno 1606" (p. 71). 

Internal Evidence of Date 

We must, therefore, have recourse to the play itself for 
evidence as to its date of production ; and taking this in its 
general aspect, no better survey has been given than that of 
Gervinus (translated by Burnett, 1875). He says: "The 
comedy of Love's Labour 's Lost belongs indisputably to the 
earliest dramas of the poet, and will be almost of the same 
date as The Two Gentlemen of Verona. The peculiarities of 
Shakespeare's earliest pieces are perhaps most accumulated in 
this play. The reiterated mention of mythological and his- 
torical personages ; the air of learning, the Italian and Latin 



INTRODUCTION ix 

expressions, which here it must be admitted serve a comic 
end ; the older England versification, the numerous doggerel 
verses, and the rhymes more frequent than anywhere else and 
extending over almost half of the play ; all this places this 
work among the earlier efforts of the poet Alliteration . . . 
is to be met with here still more than in the narrative poems, 
the Sonnets and The Two Gentlemen of Verona ; it is expressly 
employed by the pedant Holofernes who calls the art 'to 
affect the letter.' The style is frequently like that of the 
Shakespeare Sonnets; indeed the 127th and 137th bear 
express similarities to those inserted here as well as to other 
passages of the play (IV. iii.). The tone of the Italian school 
prevails more than in any other play. The redundancy of 
wit is only to be compared with similar redundancy of conceit 
in the narrative poems, and with the Italian style in general 
which he at first adopted." Gervinus dwells then upon " the 
structure and management of subject in this play which is 
indisputably one of the weakest of the poet's pieces." In 
Furnivall's introduction to Gervinus he gives a summary of 
the tests derived from rhyme, blank verse, and " run-on " or 
"end-pause" and "weak-ending" lines (of Hertzberg, Fleay 
and others) ; these agree in placing Love's Labour's Lost in 
the earliest period, by their percentages of metrical character- 
istics as compared with the later plays. Furnivall gives a 
special analysis in this respect of passages in Love's Labour's 
Lost, set beside others from King Lear and The Winter's Tale 
— " the dullest ear cannot fail to recognise the difference between 
the early Love's Labour's Lost pause, or dwelling on the end 
of each line, and the later King Lear and The Winter's Tale 
disregard of it, with the following shift of the pause to, or near 
to, the middle of the next line." Love's Labour's Lost, ini 
Furnivall's opinion, is Shakespeare's earliest wholly genuine [ 
play. Another extract from Furnivall will be quoted in rela- 
tion to this subject later on. 

With regard to the parallelisms between the poetry of 
this play and that of the Sonnets, I may refer here to Furness' 
Variorum edition (Philadelphia, 1904). In an Appendix upon 
this subject, he says : " There is none of Shakespeare's plays 



x INTRODUCTION 

wherein more echoes of the Sonnets are to be heard than in 
Loves Labour's L^ost. Very many of these have been noted 
by Dr. C. F. McClumpha {Modem Language Notes, June, 
1900), and he is led to the conclusion that the great similarity 
between the Sonnets and the play in turns of thought and ex- 
pression, in phrases and conceits, leads to a belief in a cor- 
respondence as regards time of composition closer than is 
generally accepted." Furness cites then a number of parallels 
of varying force, but of undoubted cumulative weight. He 
dwells expressly on the " Dark Lady " Sonnet (cxxvii.), and 
the tilt between Biron and his friends over Rosaline's com- 
plexion ; and he concludes with a list of unusual words giving 
tone to a thought, common to the play and the Sonnets, show- 
ing that their composition cannot have been far removed in 
point of time. 

These remarks must be accepted with this modification : 
it is impossible to class some of Love's Labour's Lost (IV. iii. 
286-362, for example) and many of the Sonnets together as 
being Shakespeare's earliest work. Of the Sonnets some must 
belong to a riper perfection, just as some of the play must be 
of later insertion than the early date of the bulk of it. This 
proviso must not carry us too far; a young poet may write 
perfect sonnets in the days of his youth perhaps, or even such 
poetry as has been inserted in the augmented play. But the 
play taken as a whole, with all allowance for revision, is ob- 
viously a very immature production. 

Internal Evidence 

Besides its peculiarities of composition and structure, there 
is another class of evidence to be obtained from the play itself 
over and above those Latin and foreign expressions referred 
to by Gervinus which will be dealt with later. I refer here to 
the inferences that may be drawn from the connection of the 
play with contemporary events and contemporary writers. The 
first of these form a group of doubtfully convincing considera- 
tions, and belong rather to the question of sources of the plot 
or play. With regard to contemporary writers, there is much 



INTRODUCTION xi 

to be said. It is a fascinating subject. There are several well- 
known, or well worthy to be known, writers of this time of 
whom we can detect reminiscences and echoes. This kind 
of evidence appeals with different degrees of conviction to 
different minds. It depends mainly on a close familiarity 
with the literature of the immediate date for its cogency. It 
loses its subtlety as soon as the student leaves that environ- 
ment. A case may, however, be stated for several authors 
whose works would appear to have been known to Shake- 
speare when he wrote this play, and their known dates give 
us a lower limit. 

I will take first Puttenham's Arte of English Poesie, re- 
printed by Arber, which was published first in 1589 (June? 
Arber), although much of it was written as early as 1586. 
Puttenham has a fine flow of English, and his vocabulary is 
ahead of that of his contemporaries. His work is certain to 
have attracted the attention of all literary minds of the' time. 
I refer to my notes for the parallels, merely collecting here the 
more striking examples : — 

voluble. See notes at n. i. 76, and in. i. 60. 
vulgar. See notes at 1. ii. 46, and iv. i. 68-69. 
dominator. See note at 1. i. 217. 
passionate hearing. See note at in. i. 1. 

These are words affectedly used by Armado. Schmidt lays 
stress upon them as such, but they really belong to, or were 
used by, Puttenham earlier. See for Puttenham again, less 
markedly, at "orthography" (V. i. 19); "cadence" (IV. ii. 115); 
"idle toys" (IV. iii. 167); and "out of countenance" (V. ii. 
272 and 612). 

Take next Sir Philip Sidney's Arcadia printed in 1590, 
the writer having died in 1586. There is no need to refer 
here to Shakespeare's familiarity with Sidney's writings, both 
in prose and verse, which is well known. On account of the 
date they are of interest in connection with Love's Labour's 
Lost. I may mention that these parallels, as well as those from 
Puttenham, have not been, so far as I am aware, adduced before. 
Sidney's May Lady has been cited, and will be dealt with later 



xii INTRODUCTION 

as a source; but the following references are to the Arcadia 
similarities only : — ] 

army of desires. See note at i. i. 10. 

arrest your word. See note at II. i. 160. 

arms crossed. See notes at III. i. 15 and 172-174 ; iv. iii. 132. 

salve. See note at m. i. 66. 

brawl (love in a). See note at III. i. 6. 

insinuation. See note at iv. ii. 13. 

thousand years a boy. See note at v. ii. 11 (given by Halliwell). 

weepiftg-ripe. See note at v. ii. 274. 

small (of leg). See note at v. ii. 632 (Hakluyt reference also;. 

(naked truth. See note at v. ii. 698.) 

Other parallels occur in my notes from time to time, but these 
are perhaps the most noteworthy. A few of them are met 
again in Henry VI, The list is in favour of a not earlier date 
than 1 590 for Love's Labour 's Lost. 

Although Sir Philip Sidney's Arcadia is almost entirely 
free from euphuism, as also is Love's Labour's Lost, it has a 
marked peculiarity or affectation that it would be hard to 
match in other writers. It should be classed under Putten- 
ham's "Traductio, or the Tranlacer" {Of Ornament, lib. iii.) 
(Arber, p. 213): "Then have ye a figure which the Latines 
call Traductio, and I the tranlacer " etc. See I. ii. 157-59 for 
the passage at length in my note, and see also at IV. i. 63-64. 
This figure of speech, of ancient and of biblical acceptation, 
is met with here and there in Love's Labour 's Lost, but to no 
notable extent, nor does it afford any date- evidence. We meet 
it in Ascham's Scholemaster (Arber, p. 53), ante 1568. 

In 1590 appeared also another slighter but very popular 
romance by T. Lodge, Rosalynde, or Euphues Golden Legacie. 
It was reprinted at least ten times between 1590 and 1642, 
and from it Shakespeare derived the tale for As You Like It, 
a decade later than the present play. But we may be very 
sure he read it when it appeared. This tale is reprinted 
in the Shakespeare Library with an introduction by Collier, 
which is, however, of very slight interest. Collier is to be 

1 Unfortunately I gave my references to an edition of Arcadia, published in 
London in 1898, which is not Sidney's text, but a remodelling of it. I have cor- 
rected the notes in most places to the Dublin edition of 1738-39. See note at 
H naked truth " (v. ii. 698). 




INTRODUCTION xiii 

commended for falling foul of Steevens, who called this delight- 
ful little tract a " worthless original " — who also said " that the 
force of an Act of Parliament would not be sufficient to compel 
people to read Shakespeare's Sonnets." I want to say a few 
words about this tract before pointing out that Shakespeare 
may have read it, from certain similarities of diction, before he 
wrote Lovers Labour 's Lost. There are points of interest about 
Euphues Golden Legacie that have not been noticed, and all 
these " worthless originals " repay study. Lodge's novel is, 
as the name implies, thoroughly euphuistic. As is well known 
also, Lodge worked in company and was friends with Robert 
Greene. But what I have not seen noted is that there is very 
much of Greene in Rosalynde ^ so much that it is hard to believe 
that Greene did not give the tract a finishing touch. It is a 
better told tale than any of Greene's similar ones and of superior 
interest throughout. It is curious how Greene's peculiarities 
come in ; sometimes there are expressions that appear only 
later in Greene, but there are about forty phrases and terms 
in Rosalynde that it would be hard to parallel except in Greene's 
prose — " Greenisms," in fact. 1 They are euphuistical, but not 
in Euphues. Lodge was an admitted plagiarist, but that does 
not seem a satisfactory view. Lodge says he wrote Rosalynde 
while he, with " Captaine Clarke, made a voyage to the Islands 
of Terceras and Canaries to beguile the time." That voyage took 
place in 1588, and in 1591 Lodge was travelling, apparently, 
again. In that year (1591-92) Lodge and Greene produced A 
Looking- Glass for London and England^ and it is not at all 
unlikely that Greene may have been entrusted with Rosalynde 
to put through the printer's hands. There are several echoes of 
Lodge's novel in Love's Labour 's Lost. A few may be cited : — 

attending star. See note at iv. iii. 228. 

vassal. See note at 1. i. 245. 

rags and robes. See note at iv. i. Si. 

venue. See note at v. i. 56. 

make up the mess. See note at iv. iii. 204. 

satis est quod sufficit. See note at v. i. 1. 

fairest of fair. See note at 11. i. 241. 

faith and troth. See note at iv. iii. 140. 

1 1 have collected these in a series of notes on Greene's prose-works in Nnt.es 
and Queries, 1905-6. 



xiv INTRODUCTION 

Some of these are useful illustrations, and look as though they 
had occurred to the author of Lovers Labour's Lost from his 
having read Lodge previously. Several other minor parallels 
occur which may be mere coincidences. 

There are a good many pertinent illustrations in the notes 
from the writings of Gabriel Harvey and Thomas Nashe, especi- 
ally the former. Some of the more interesting ones which seem 
to bear on the date, or where the writer (Harvey) seems to be 
purposely recalled, must be mentioned here. I will first mention 
those that belong to Harvey's writings down to 1580. After 
that he appears to have been silent, so far as the printing-press 
was concerned, until 1592, when the acrimonious controversy 
between him and Nashe began. The following may be referred 
to of the earlier period : — 

Christmas in May. See note at 1. i. 105-106. 

devise in folio. See note at 1. ii. 174-175. 

mint of phrases. See note at 1. i. 164. 

in print. See note at in. i. 163. 

Venvoy. See note at in. i. 65. 

titles and tittles. See note at iv. i. 81. 

one ( = on). See note at iv. ii. 78. 

lie in throat. See note at iv. iii. 11. 

Novi hominem. See note at v. i. 9. 

career. See note at v. ii. 482. 

taffeta phrases. See note at v. ii. 406. 

pedantical. See note at v. ii. 408. 

Video et gaudeo. See note at v. i. 31. 

ad unguem. See note at v. i. 71-73. 

shrimp. See note at v. ii. 582. 

These are of unequal weight ; some appear to me very striking, 
and the greater part form a link between the pedantry mocked 
at in this play, and the pedantry of one of the most striking 
public expositors of it who was staged at Cambridge as Pedan- 
tius, somewhere soon after 1580. (See pages xxxvii.-xl. for 
more about Pedantius.) 

There are some later parallels, emanating from the Nashe- 
Harvey war or period. These should be included amongst 
the several evidences that point to the remodelling or aug- 
mentation of the play somewhere about 1593-94. Notes to 



INTRODUCTION xv 

these will be found at "woolward for penance" (V. ii. 699), where, 
in Nashe's Wonderfull Prognostication (1591), is an exact 
parallel or explanation. However, this is likely to have been a 
standing early joke. See also "infamonize" (v. ii. 66y) y Armado's 
version of "infamize," a verb coined by Nashe and strongly 
ridiculed by Harvey ; and "l'envoy " (III. i. 65), a Harvey word 
whose use is sneered at by Nashe. See also " Lord have mercy 
on us" (V. ii. 419), used by Nashe in connection with the 
1592-93 visitation of pestilence, which was almost certainly 
in Shakespeare's mind. But the oddest illustration, or coinci- 
dence, if it is no more, occurs in the expression " of piercing 
a hogshead" (IV. ii. 81), where I have shown that this was a 
noteworthy gibe of Harvey's against Nashe, whom he calls 
"Pierce, the hoggeshead of witt," a lustre of conceit which 
Holofernes rejoices at. A little later (lines 87, 88), when 
Holofernes cites the passage, " Fauste precor" etc., we are 
upon the same ground. Nashe objects to Harvey's classifying 
him as a "grammar school wit," and styling him "as deeply 
learned as Fauste precor gelida." It is hard to avoid the con- 
clusion that these passages hint at Harvey and Nashe. In- 
deed, Holofernes himself recalls Harvey's appearance in the 
personal description of the former at V. ii. 602-622. There is 
no resemblance, however, in the dispositions of the two men. 
Both are pedants, but bumptiousness forms no part of Holo- 
fernes, who, though self-reliant and pedantic enough, is a gentle, 
soft-mannered mail,. as befits a useful schoolmaster. 

I do not find much that recalls Robert Greene in this play. 
" From cradle to crutch " is, however, an exception ; and per- 
haps, too, " continent of beauty." See notes at IV. iii. 242 ; IV. 
i. 107. With the exception of those earlier plays, Henry VI 
and Titus Andronicus, which are not wholly Shakespeare's 
and therefore no evidence, it is surprising how seldom Greene's 
peculiarities appear in Shakespeare, considering how volumin- 
ous and how popular a writer the former was. Later, after the 
" tiger's heart " attack on Shakespeare by Greene in his Groats- 
worth of Wit (1 592), an estrangement was inevitable. A care- 
ful study of Greene's romantic prose yields but few valuable 
illustrations of Shakespeare. 



xvi INTRODUCTION 

Mention is made several times in this Introduction of Lyly's 
Euphues, and of the fact that hardly a trace of euphuism ap- 
pears in Loves Labour 's Lost, whereas of the influence of Lyly's 
plays upon Shakespeare we find plain evidence both here and 
in other of the earliest plays. Sidney Lee finds this influence 
down to Much Ado About Nothing in the dialogue of Shake- 
speare's comedies, which "consists in thrusting and parrying 
fantastic conceits, puns, or antitheses." Further, " the dispersal 
through Lyly's comedies of songs possessing every lyrical 
charm" is not the least interesting of the many striking re- 
semblances {Life, ed. 1899, pp. 61, 62). I will collect here the 
more prominent verbal echoes of Lyly's plays. I have used 
Fairholt's edition (1858). I refer here to my notes. 

(reprehend. See note at 1. i. 182.) 

manner and form following. See note at 1. i. 205-206. 

weaker vessel. See note at 1. i. 259. 

(That 's hereby. See note at 1. ii. 127.) 

voluble. See note at 11. i. 76. 

let blood. See note at It. i. 186. 

mad-cap. See note at 11. i. 215. 

mad wenches. See note at 11. i. 257. 

wimpled. See note at in. i. 170. 

slender wit. See note at iv. i. 49. 

O base vulgar. See note at iv. i. 68-69. 

command . . . enforce . . . entreat. See note at iv. i. 78-79. 

{pollusion. See note at iv. ii. 44.) 

society, etc. See note at iv. ii. 1 50-151. 

worms. See note at iv. iii. 151. 

majcstical. See note at v. i. 11. 

Bone . . . Priscian. See note at v. i. 28. 

halfpenny purse. See note at v. i. 67-68. 

mouse. See note at v. ii. 19. 

clapped him on the shoulder. See note at v. ii. 107. 

pinned on (her) sleeves. See note at v. ii. 321. 

you are my elder. See note at v. ii. 597. 

hose. See note at v. ii. 731. 

Tu-whit, Tu-who. See note at v. ii. 907-908. 

There are a few illustrations from Golding's translation of 
Ovid's Metamorphoses in my notes, and more might easily be 
added. One is worthy of separate mention, the pronunciation 
of " Nemean lion " (IV. i. 86), which occurs again in Hamlet. Thi 



INTRODUCTION xvii 

question may be set at rest. Shakespeare took it from his well- 
thumbed Arthur Golding's Ovid (1567). 

Furness gives a useful recapitulation of the dates arrived at 
by the critics. The earliest is 1588, of R. G. White, which is 
also that assigned to quotations from the play in New Eng, 
Diet. To me it seems undoubtedly too early. White relies 
entirely on the want of experience of the author and the youth- 
ful genius that appears in the treatment. Knight and Fleay 
give 1589. Hertzberg, Ward, Furnivall and probably Staunton 
and Sidney Lee place it at 1590. Malone varied from 1590 
to 1594. Halliwell and Hunter arrived at 1596, or later. 
These wide discrepancies point signally to the impossibility of 
naming a date with certainty for the play as one whole. I 
incline to 1 590 for the date of the earliest form of the play, 
with certain alterations and revision, which are of the date 
I 593-94> anQl ma y be classed as the "augmentations" of the 
play we have. Tieck and Sarrazin give the date 1 593-94 for 
the play as a whole. The former (Furness, p. 331) is hardly to 
be taken seriously ; the latter's grounds are of the slenderest. 

Several commentators have endeavoured to distinguish the 
parts of the play due to revision. Craig says : "By far the 
finest passage in the play is the magnificent speech of Biron 
(IV. iii. 286-362). It is quite evident that this and a good deal 
more was not in the first draft of the play, but was brought in 
at the revision." 

The last scene of the play has swelled to its inordinate length 
by the means of additions carelessly huddled into it. It, and 
the speech just referred to, contain the'bulk of the later work. 
Also the opening of the Hunting Scene (IV. i.), to be presently 
referred to more fully, wears a more finished appearance than 
its surroundings. In the last Act, the plague references (see 
note, V. ii. 419) appear certainly to belong to the later work. 
Perhaps too the Muscovite masque may be added (see pp. 
xxvi.-xxviii.). 

In the above list of dates, Furnivall's authority for 1590 

appears. I have already referred to his line of argument 

from metrical tests, but it is advisable to give his views at 

greater length, as expressed in his Introduction to Griggs' 
b 



xviii INTRODUCTION 

facsimile of the first Quarto, because not only is his date the 
most acceptable to me, but he couples with that date (1590) 
his belief that Love's Labour's Lost was Shakespeare's earliest 
play. So do several other commentators of weight, but they 
get behind 1 590. Furnivall says : " But the metrical facts are 
those which to me settle the earliness of L. L. L. over the 
Errors. I cannot believe that Shakespeare, having written 
the Errors with one couplet of rhyme in every six lines, and 
having found how ill-adapted rhyme was to dramas, would 
then go and write L. L. L. with six times more couplets in it. 
I cannot believe that he, having written the Errors with over 
twelve per cent, of extra-syllable lines in it, and one run-on 
line in every ten — and thereby got increased freedom and ease 
in expression — would turn and deliberately cramp himself again 
by writing L. L. L. with only a third of his extra-syllable, and 
half his run-on lines, of the earlier play. I cannot believe that 
in his second play he would two-fold the doggerel, four-fold the 
alternate rhymes, and increase the stanzas of his first play. 
He would not, in my belief, jump out of the frying-pan into 
the fire, even to try how he liked it. I conclude then that the 
first cast of L. L. L. was Shakespeare's first genuine play. And 
if his Second Period began with King John in 1595, and the 
Merchant in 1596, and he came to London in 1587 or there- 
abouts, I suppose L. L. L. to have been written in or before 
1590, the other First Period works, of the five years 1590-4, 
being the Errors, Dream, Two Gentlemen, Romeo and Juliet, 
Venus and Adonis and Lucrece, Richard II., Henry VI., 
Richard III., and possibly touches of Titus." (Furnivall.) 

Later Appearances of the Play, or References 

to IT 

Grosart is responsible for the detection of allusions to Love's 
Labour's Lost (IV '. iii.) in a poem by Robert Southwell (1594-5), 
Saint Peter's Complaint. The passages in the latter are quoted 
in Ingleby's Centurie of Pray se (New Shakes. Soc. 1879, p. 14). 
Grosart is enthusiastic over the " find," but I agree with Fur- 
ness, who also gives the passages, that the " sole basis of com- 



INTRODUCTION xix 



-ell 



parison between Biron and Southwell is that both are praising 
eyes." 

In A Twelfe NigJtf Merriment, edited as Narcissus by 
Miss Lee in 1892, o^ date 1602, there are several Shake- 
spearian reminiscences. Two or three recall Loves Labour 's 
Lost. See notes at f keel the pot " (v. ii. 909) ; M salve in the 
mail " (III. i. 66) ; and " white and red " (I. ii. 86). 

From a letter *by Sir Walter Cope (Ingleby, p. 62) ad- 
dressed to Lord* Cranbourne in 1604, we know that it was 
revived in that year : " Sir, I have sent and bene all this morn- 
ing huntyng for players Juglers & Such kinde of creaturs, but 
fynde them harde to flnde ; wherfore leavinge notes for them to 
seeke me. Burbage ys come, & sayes ther ys no new playe that 
the quene [Anne of Denmark, the queen of James I.] hath not 
seene, but they have Revy ved an olde one, cawled Loves Lahore 
Lost, which for wytt & mirthe he sayes will please her exced- 
ingly. And thys ys apointed to be playd to morowe night at 
my Lord of Sowthamptons, unless yow send a wrytt to Remove 
the Corpus Cum Causa to your howse in Strande. Burbage ys 
my messenger ready attendyng your pleasure. Yours most 
humbly, Walter COPE." As I write, it is 300 years since the 
above letter was penned. It is pleasant reading compared 
with modern criticism upon Love's Labour's Lost, and one's 
heart warms towards the builder of Holland House. 

As a set-off to Sir Walter Cope, the next reference is to 
John Dryden, 1672 (Ingleby, p. 351): " I suppose I need not 
name Pericles, Prince of Tyre, nor the Historical Plays of 
Shakespeare. Besides many of the rest, as the Winters Tale, 
Loves Labour's Lost, Measure for Measure, which were either 
grounded on impossibilities, or at least so meanly written, that 
the comedy neither caused your mirth, nor the serious part your 
concernment" (Dryden's Dramatic Works, ed. 1882, iv. 229). 

In the Introduction to this play in the Henry Irving 
Shakespeare occurs : " No mention of this play having been 
acted occurs in Henslowe's Diary, 1 591-1609, nor in Pepys, nor 
in Genest, whose work embraces the period between 1660 and 
1830. In October, 1839, under the management of Madame 
Vestris, Love's Labour's Lost was played at Coven t Garden. 



xx INTRODUCTION 

. . . It was also acted m 1853 at Sadlers Wells, under the 
management of Mr. Phelps, who himself took the part of Don 
Adriano [Armado]. I can find no instance of its representa- 
tion in our time." Irving goes on : " It may be difficult to 
point out Shakespeare's best play, but there is little difficulty 
in pointing out his worst. Love's Labour 's Lost, whether we 
consider it as a drama, or as a study of character, or as a poeti- 
cal work, is certainly the least to be admired of all his plays." 
This is severe enough, and true perhaps, to a stage-manager. 
But few people will find Titus Andronicus, or any of the three 
parts of Henry VI. , or several other plays, better reading than 
Love's Labour 's Lost. 

Sources of the Plot 

The story or plot of Love's Labour' s Lost is of a very slight 
nature, with few incidents of any dramatic power. So far as it 
may be historical, as it appears to be, the origin of the plot is 
unknown, and we are fairly entitled to say it is Shakespeare's 
own invention. The most striking situation, the only striking 
one indeed, that of the reading of the love-letters (in IV. iii.) 
aloud, while the others listen in hiding, is very effectively carried 
out. The play hangs together, not through any interest in the 
working out of a plot, but entirely through the amusement de- 
rived from the exposure of the oddities, foibles and peculiarities 
of the characters. It was written in ridicule of the affectations 
of the time, like Ben Jonson's Every Man out of his Humour, 
Cynthia s Revels and Poetaster, and like them it may receive 
Jonson's name, of a " Comical Satire." 

Hunter endeavoured to derive the plot from a historical 
event related in the chronicles of Montstrelet (translated by 
Johnes, i. 108) bearing date 1425, or nearly so, which deals 
with negotiations between the kings of France and Navarre at 
that date. With the exception of the name " king of Navarre," 
Charles, not Henry, and the sum mentioned, "two [not one] 
hundred thousand crowns," there seems to be nothing in 
common between the two, and any reference to this trifling 
passage in French history of a century and a half previously 



INTRODUCTION xxi 

is scarcely probable. Moreover if tne story had been directly 
taken from any French origin, there would be much more tan- 
gible matter in the play of, or belonging to, France. There 
is hardly a French touch in it excepting the names of the 
characters and the frequent use of the style " Monsieur." 
One may be cited in the use of the word " capon " for a love- 
letter (IV. i. 57). The allusions to games, concurrent circum- 
stances (such as "Monarcho" and "Banks' horse," IV. i. 97 
and I. ii. 51), and the whole tone and atmosphere of the play 
and characters completely outweigh these hints, and are purely 
English. 

Sidney Lee says that Hunter's " discovery" seems to have 
obscured subsequent investigation in French history. He goes 
on (Gentleman's Magazine, October, 1880, p. 45 3) — I quote from 
Furness here : " The leading event of the comedy — the meet- 
ing of the King of Navarre with the Princess of France — lends 
itself as readily to a comparison with an actual occurrence of 
contemporary French history as do the heroes of the play to a 
comparison with those who played chief part in it. At the 
end of the year 1586 a very decided attempt had been made 
to settle the disputes between Navarre and the reigning king. 
The mediator was a Princess of France — Catherine de Medici — 
who had virtually ruled France for nearly thirty years, and who 
now acted in behalf of her son, decrepit in mind and body, in 
much the same way as the Princess in Love's Labour 's Lost 
represents her decrepit, sick, and bedrid father. The historical 
meeting was a very brilliant one. . . . Navarre, however, parted 
with Catherine and her sirens without bringing their negotia- 
tions to a satisfactory decision. . . . There is much probability 
that the meeting of Navarre and the Princess on the Eliza- 
bethan stage was suggested by the well-known interview at Saint 
Bris. That Shakespeare attempted to depict in the Princess 
the lineaments of Catherine, we do not for a moment assert." 

The discrepancies between the above sketch and the meet- 
ing in the play are more striking than the resemblances : but 
when we couple this event with the fact that two of the King 
of Navarre's most important supporters bore the names of 
Biron and Longaville, and the familiarity of English people at 



xxii INTRODUCTION 

this time with Henry's history, and the sympathy afforded by 
this country, the evidence is all in favour of its having influ- 
enced Shakespeare. A little later (1605), so well known was 
Biron in England, that he was the hero of two of Chapman's 
plays — and it has been suggested that as that character became 
more prominent, so also are his speeches superior, possibly 
pointing to their having been worked up in the revised and 
augmented play. The civil war in France was in progress 
between 1589 and 1594. This, though a patchwork origin, 
and difficult to harmonise with our dates, is the best that has 
yet been offered. In his Life of Shakespeare (1899, pp. 
51-52) Lee has accepted it, and dwelt upon these details as 
the undoubted source. It will be seen presently that I do not 
altogether coincide. See, however, note at IV. iii. 376. It is 
therefore hardly possible to place Love's Labour 's Lost before 
September, 1589, at the earliest, when London's attention must 
have been strongly fixed upon the affairs of Henry of Navarre. 
For at that date we find in Stow {Abridgment of the English 
Chronicle, 16 1 8, p. 381): "In the moneth of September the 
citizens of London furnished 1000 men to be sent over into 
France, to the aiding of Henry late king of Navarre, then 
challenging the Crowne of France." A little later (pp. 384, 
385) Stow continues : c< The said King Henry the third was 
also slaine by a Frier. . . . This Henry the third was the last 
of the house of Valois. And presently upon his death, Henry 
of Burbon, King of Navarre laid just claime to the crowne, who 
with great difficultie,and almost eight yeares sharpe warres with 
the Leagers, he got peacable possession of the whole kingdom. 
But at the first, the Leagers drove him into divers extremities 
and forced him to flie into Deepe, where he was ready to have 
embarked for England, if the Queene had not speedily sent a 
resolute Armie unto him, under command of the Lord Willow- 
by. And from that time the Queene ayded him with divers 
Armies, under the command of the Earle of Essex, General 
Norris, Sir Roger Williams, and many others, besides incessant 
supplies, upon sudden occasions from London, Kent, Essex, 
Suffolke, Surrey, Sussex and Hampshire, both of horse, men and 
munition." The date of Ivry was 14th March, 1590. 



INTRODUCTION xxiii 

It is a pleasing coincidence with Stow's words, " Navarre, 
then challenging the Crowne of France," to read lines 793-799 
(V. ii.), when the Princess of France says to Navarre : — 

Then, at the expiration of the year, 

Come challenge me, challenge me by these deserts, 

And, by this virgin palm now kissing thine, 

I will be thine ; and, till that instant, shut 

My woeful self up in a mourning house, 

Raining the tears of lamentation 

For the remembrance of my father's death. 

France, " raining the tears of lamentation in a mourning house," 
is a suggestive idea, in connection with those times of horrors. 

Furnivall takes up the identification of characters in the In- 
troduction to this play in The Old Spelling Shakespeare 
(1904), as follows: "In the play, then, King Ferdinand re- 
presents Henri IV. of Navarre, Berowne, Marshal de Biron, 
under whom the English contingent of 1589 generally served; 
Longaville, the Duke de Longueville, an officer in Henry's 
army ; while Dumaine, the Duke de Mayenne, was Henry's 
chief opponent, and did not submit to him till 1595 or 1596" 
[those horrid dates !] ; " and the boy Moth may be called after 
the French ambassador, La Mothe or La Motte." 

I do not accept the idea that Moth has any connection 
with, or is a remembrancer of Monsieur La Motte (or Monsieur 
Motte as Middleton calls him), the French ambassador of some 
ten years earlier. La Motte was at Kenilworth in 1572, to 
move the marriage of Francis, Duke of Alencon with Queen 
Elizabeth (Nichols' Progresses, i. 321). He left England in 
1583. The name is merely Moth for a Tom Thumb page. 

But perhaps we may pursue these personifications a step 
further, and let the Princess of France stand for France itself, 
challenged as we see for himself by Henry of Navarre. She 
is more French than anything in the play. Her griefs are 
double (V. ii. 741), fighting for and against her heir. The Gal- 
licism "capon" (iv. i. 57) for a letter, mentioned just above, 
is given to the Princess. See, too, my note at " dances and 
masks" (iv. iii. 376). As France the Princess compares her 
maiden honour to the " unsullied lily" (v. ii. 352), the flower-de- 



xxiv INTRODUCTION 

luce. And Henri III. may be shadowed forth at I. i. 137 in 
"her decrepit, sick, and bed-rid father," taking the king as pater 
patrice. He was not decrepit with age, but "he ended the 
long roll of his vices and crimes" in August, 1589 (v. ii. 708-9). 
Again, when the Princess (France) speaks of the heresy of 
her being "saved by merit " (IV. i. 21) as "fit for these days," 
which was a purely Romanist expression (see note), may she 
not refer to her own country's history? Henri III., in the 
midst of his dissipations, posed as a good Roman Catholic, and 
his last words were to recommend his heir, Henry of Navarre, 
to become one too. In 1593 he did so to secure his kingdom : 
the injunction was fulfilled and France was saved. 

It is an interesting fact, surely worthy of mention here, 
that Spenser's eleventh canto of Book v. of his Faerie Queene 
(printed in 1596) is largely devoted to the " Bourbon knight," 
Henry of Navarre. His " faere lady" is France, or the genius 
of France, " hight Flour de lis " (stanzas 43 and 49). Spenser 
begins at stanza 43 by recalling Elizabeth's assistance : " Assure 
yourself, Sir Knight, she shall have ayd " ; and at stanza 47 : 
"whom when they thus distressed did behold, they drew unto 
his aide." And in the previous stanza, when the Bourbon 
knight was so sharply assayed, " That they his shield in pieces 
battered here, and forced him to throw it quite away," thereby 
being blotted with blame and counted but a recreant knight, 
the allusion undoubtedly is to Henry's leaving Protestantism 
and turning Roman Catholic. See notes in Todd's Spenser, vi. 
288 et sea. And at the end of the canto Bourbon gains the 
"Ladie," "and bore her quite away nor well or ill apayd." 
This part of Spenser's work was therefore probably composed 

in 1593-4. 

This parallelism between Shakespeare's and Spenser's 
topical allusions is of interest, and has not, I think, been 
noticed. 

Another contemporary non -historical reference to Eliza- 
beth's aid to Henry of Navarre may be quoted from Speeches 
to the Queen at Bisham, 1592 (Nichols' Progresses, in. 134): 
" One hande she stretcheth to Fraunce to weaken Rebels ; the 



INTRODUCTION xxv 

other to Flaunders to strengthen Religion : her heart to both 
countries, her ventures to all." 

I have already mentioned Hunter's theory, which may 
safely be set aside. But I find it is given a prominent place 
in Hudson's edition of the play in the Windsor Shake- 
speare, and it seems to have caught on particularly by the 
help of the " two hundred thousand crowns." Furnivall {Old 
Spelling Shakespeare) devotes an express paragraph to "the 
two hundred thousand crowns." And certainly the passage 
in Loves Labour's Lost (n. i. 129-149) is told in most historical 
fashion of a hundred thousand crowns, and of another hundred 
thousand crowns, as indemnities for war expenses. The 
passage in Monstrelet (as quoted by Hudson) has nothing of 
wars, or tribute towards the expenses of wars, in it. The 
sum is there specified as being paid as the result of successful 
negotiations in lieu of an exchange of territories, castles, etc. 
The figure is not an uncommon one : " Henry the 2. . . . after- 
wards gave out a generall absolution, and forgave the racing 
of the Townhouse [of Burdeaux] the paiment of two hundred 
thousand pounds, and the defraying of the charges of the armie" 
(T. B.'s translation of Primaudaye's French Academy ', chap. 30, 
1586). And in Secret Court Memoirs: The Court of Berlin 
(i. 102) (Grolier Society), writing of date 1786: "The old 
Monarch has been generous. He has bequeathed Prince 
Henry two hundred thousand crowns." The bare sum is not 
a strong enough peg to hang a theory on, although it be a 
transaction between France and Navarre. 

Another suggestion of Hunter's with regard to the plot 
may be mentioned here. He believed that the promise given 
about Armado (1. i. 170), and so entirely unfulfilled, as well as 
the speech of the King on money matters (beginning II. i. 129), 
so unsuited for verse, are proofs that Shakespeare was working 
on a story formed for him. I should add to that reasonable 
view the pathetic touch about Katharine's sister (v. ii. 13) as 
belonging perhaps to a fuller tale. Armado's peculiarities will 
be spoken of presently. 

Sidney Lee finds a parallel in contemporary events for 
another episode in the play, namely, the masque of Muscovites 



xxvi INTRODUCTION 

or Russians (v. ii. 121 : see my note at the passage). He 
thinks the event there mentioned, the mission to Queen Eliza- 
beth of an ambassador to seek a wife in her court for Ivan the 
Terrible in 1583, accounts for Shakespeare's introduction of the 
Russians. The description of these circumstances is to be 
found in The Travels of Sir Jerome Horsey (Hakluyt Society, 
1856, pp. 173, 174 and 195-96). Furnivall quotes them in his 
Old Spelling edition ; and they are given in modernised form 
by Furness from Sidney Lee's article in the Gentleman's Maga- 
zine (p. 455) already referred to. The event may have taken 
some hold on people's minds, since Lady Mary Hastings, who 
was selected as bride, to her horror, was said to have been 
known afterwards in court as the " Empress of Muscovia." 
Russians or Muscovites were very much in evidence at the 
latter part of the sixteenth century in London on account of 
the foundation of the Russian company in 1569 and Muscovy 
trade. Giles Fletcher's Russes Commonwealth was printed in 
1 591, an important and popular work. It is reprinted in the 
same volume as Horsey with a highly interesting introduction 
upon Russia at the close of the sixteenth century by Edward 
H. Bond. The passages quoted from Horsey are more curious 
than convincing, and would occupy more space than they 
appear to me to be worth. Horsey's travels had not been 
printed in those times. He gives an appalling account of Ivan, 
in a most illiterate style. He tells us (p. 187) during his 
mission in 1580 that Bomelius "had deluded the Emperouer, 
makinge him belive the Quen of England was yonge, and that yt 
was very feacable for him to marry her ; whereof he was now 
owt of hoep. Yeat heard she had a yong ladie in her court of 
the bloud ryell, named the Ladye Mary Hastings of which 
wee shall speake more herafter." At the same date (p. 192) 
he tells how the son of the governor of Orentsburgh "gave 
mee a faire Garmaine clocke," the earliest German clock I have 
met with. See note at ill. i. 181, which passage, misprinted 
" cloak " in the old editions, is the oldest illustration in New 
English Dictionary. This is an odd coincidence. 

There is a remarkable parallel for the introduction of " Mus- 




INTRODUCTION xxvii 

covites or Russians" in a masque on the London stage in 
Gesta Grayorum, 1594. 

This interesting series of masques is the more worthy of 
notice since its connection with Shakespeare is undoubted. It 
was during these performances that his Comedy of Errors was 
acted under most unfortunate auspices, a play which contains, 
like Loves Labour 's Lost, contemporary reference (ill. ii. 125- 
127) to the civil wars of France and Henry of Navarre. Gesta 
Grayorum was a magnificent and costly production, and must 
have aroused the greatest interest, quite beyond the precincts 
of the Court at which it was held for the entertainment of 
Queen Elizabeth. At pp. 296-301 (Nichols' Progresses, iii.) we 
are told how the revellers with the mock " Prince of Purpoole " 
from (Jray's Inn, rode through Chancery Lane, Fleet Street, so 
through Cheapside, Cornhill, and to Crosby's Place in Bishops- 
gate Street, where was a sumptuous and costly dinner, etc., " and 
returned again the same way . . . the streets being thronged 
and filled with people, to see the gentlemen as they passed by ; 
who thought there had been some great prince, in very deed, 
passing through the city, so this popular show through the 
streets pleased the Lord Mayor and his commonalty. . . . 
Shortly after this show . . . upon Twelfth-day at night . . . 
there was presently a show which concerned his Highness's 
State and Government : . . . First there came six Knights of 
the Helmet, with three that they led as prisoners, and were 
attired like monsters and miscreants. The knights gave the 
prince to understand, that as they were returning from their 
adventures out of Russia wherein they aided the Emperor 
of Russia against the Tartars, they surprised these three persons 
which were conspiring against his Highness . . . they were 
Envy, Male-content and Folly. . . . Then willed they the 
knights to defeat and to carry away the offenders. . . . After 
their departure, entred the six knights in a very stately mask, 
and danced a new devised measure, and after that they took to 
them ladies and gentlewomen, and danced with them galliards 
and so departed . . . then the King at arms came in before 
the prince and told his Honour, that there was arrived an 
ambassador from the mighty Emperor of Russia and Muscovy 



xxviii INTRODUCTION 

that had some matters of weight . . . who came in attire of 
Russia, accompanied with two of his own country in like habit. 
When they were come in presence of the Prince, the ambassa- 
dor . . . took out letters of credence ... to be read publicly. 
. . . Dated at our Imperial city of Moscow. . . . When the 
Prince had thus spoken, the ambassador was placed in a chair 
near the Prince ; and thare was served up a running banquet 
for the Prince and the lords present, and the rest, with variety 
of music." There are then some other minor "Letters of 
Advertisement" attended to, containing plots of insurrection 
and rebellion, and these being disposed of, the Prince goes on : 
" Ourself, with our chosen Knights, with an army Royal, will 
make towards our brother of Russia with my Lord here, his 
Ambassador ... he took a lady to dance withal, and so did 
the rest " (p. 305). 

Shakespeare had good reason to be annoyed at this probably 
unauthorised production of his Comedy of Errors. It was, 
however, the cause of much subsequent merriment, and it was 
satisfactorily shown by "judgments thick and threefold which 
were read publicly by the Clerk of the Crown " (p. 279) that 
the cause of all that " confused inconvenience " was a sorcerer 
or conjurer, who "had foisted a company of base and common 
fellows to make up our disorders with a play of c Errors and 
Confusions.' " Shakespeare himself was perhaps not present, 
since he was acting on the same day before the queen at 
Greenwich. But the affair was a chief topic during the re- 
mainder of the Gesta, and we might imagine his inserting a hit 
at these masquers, " disguised like Muscovites in shapeless gear," 
with some content, since his play was so badly handled. The 
speeches of the counsellors in this show are well composed. It 
is likely that Bacon, a bencher of Gray's Inn at this time, 
took part in the entertainment. His masque, A Conference 
of Pleasure, is of the same date. This suggested source of 
the cause of the Muscovite masque is but one more of several 
evidences of the later manipulations of Act V. in Loves 
Labour's Lost. It is much nearer home than the Horsey 
business. 



INTRODUCTION xxix 

Peculiarities of Language 

We have seen that Shakespeare chose for the setting of his 
play the surroundings of the prominent historical events of the 
time — the civil wars of Navarre with France (the Princess uses 
the term, II. i. 226), the interest displayed in Russian affairs, 
and the choice of his name Armado for the Braggart, may 
be regarded also as a historical allusion. 

But the historical setting of the play, like its geographical 
position in France, is of slight importance, except to the re- 
searchful student. Th e mockery of affectation in language, 
whether written or spoken , is a rea l aim of the comedy . The 
exponent of the former satire is Armado, and of the latter 
Holofernes with his foil in Nathaniel. Armado is introduced 
by his letter to the King ; Holofernes by his pedantry (IV. ii.) 
with Nathaniel. 

Shakespeare's own account of Armado (1. i. 161- 175) as a 
refined traveller of Spain, who is to " relate in high-born words 
the worth of many a knight," is not the least like the Armado 
we are afterwards presented with, excepting that he hath " a 
mint of phrases in his brain." We are to expect fabulous old 
and noble stories, minstrelsy, deeds of derring-do and what 
not, but we get nothing of the sort. Later, however, we get 
another description of Armado from Boyet (IV. i. 96-98), 
which is more in accordance with that which is presented to 
us. He is still a Spaniard, but in no sense to be taken 
seriously — merely a phantasm that makes sport. Boyet after 
his second letter calls him a " Monarcho," who was a real 
character of the time, a monomaniac who thought he was a 
sovereign, and was a butt of the wits in London about 1580. 
This is the opposite extreme of description, and our real Armado 
lies between the two. 

Any diagnosis of Armado's characteristics, founded upon 
either extreme, is beset with errors. Warburton took the 
line of chivalry, and gave a long and absolutely incorrect and 
inappropriate account of the old romances as an essay upon 
Armado, which Tyrwhitt answered with great propriety. 
Both will be found in Steevens' Shakespeare, appended to the 



xxx INTEODUCTION 

play. It is equally out of place to identify him with Boyet's 
allusion as other commentators do. He is Shakespeare's own 
child of fancy, and his begetter seems to have altered his 
scheme for his career with great celerity and thoroughness. 
We arrive at that unhinged state of mind which, like Don 
Quixote's, is the outcome of an overdose of the stories of 
chivalry and the romances. There seems to be hardly any 
other connection between the germ and its development. 

But perhaps the correct assumption is that at the words 
" Adieu, valour ! rust, rapier ! be still, drum ! for your manager 
is in love ; yea, he loveth " (I. ii. 171-172), the original Armado is 
admittedly dismissed. And his sonnet at IV. i. 86 gives us 
" a trick of the old rage," and shows us what we gained in the 
exchange. 

Sir Walter Scott in his character of Sir Piercie Shafton in 
The Monastery (1830) was, I believe, the first to speak of the 
" Euphuist Don Armado," as he calls him in the Introduction 
to that novel. But neither Sir Piercie nor Armado talk the 
euphuism of its masters, Lyly, Greene and Lodge. Neverthe- 
less, from Sir Walter's time downwards it has been impossible 
to consider Armado apart from euphuism. Since that peculiar 
affectation, so well analysed by Dr. Landmann, was at its 
zenith when this play was written against all affectations, the 
very fact that there is so little of it in Love's Labour's Lost is 
a strong argument against the truth of Blount's statement, made 
in 1632, in an address prefixed to an edition of Lyly's plays, 
that it was the language of the ladies of Elizabeth's court. It 
may have been a fad or a foible of a few in conversation, just 
as but a few writers of any note followed it, and even they 
only in a spasmodic fashion. Dr. Landmann (New Shakes. 
Soc. Trans. 1880-86, p. 241) gives a good description of 
euphuism. " I. An equal number of words in collateral or 
antithetical sentences, well balanced often to the number of 
syllables, the corresponding words being pointed out by alliter- 
ation, consonance or rhyme. 2. ' Unnatural Natural History,' 
which he learned from Pliny. 3. An oppressive load of ex- 
amples taken from ancient history and mythology, as well as 
apophthegms from ancient writers." These are the three main 



INTRODUCTION xxxi 

features. Dr. Landmann goes on (p. 264) — I quote from 
Furness' Variorum edition of the play (pp. 349-350): "In 
Love's Labour's Lost Shakespeare was not ridiculing euphu- 
ism proper, but four other forms of affectation in his day : 1. 
Spanish high-flown diction, bombast, and hyperbole. 2. Italian 
or Petrarchian love-sonneting, word-play, and repartee. 3. 
Pedantic mingling of Latin and English, called by Puttenham 
Soraismus. 4. Excessive alliteration." No. 3 here is quite 
faulty, and will be referred to later. 

These latter remarks are not confined to Armado's diction, 
and it is only he who has been seriously held to be euphuistic. 
In his preface Furness collects a few, a very few, passages 
of Armado's speeches and letters that resemble euphuism. 
There is scarcely a balanced sentence, and never once does 
Armado draw an example from realms of natural history. 
And there is hardly a trace of alliteration. They have no 
claim to be rehearsed. 

An attempt has been made recently by Martin Hume 
{Spanish Influence on English Literature, 1905, pp. 268-274) 
to identify Don Adriano de Armado with "Antonio Perez, 
the exiled Spanish Secretary of State." " Loves Labour 's Lost 
cannot originally have been written later than 1591, and Perez 
did not escape from Spain into France until November of that 
year; so that, if I am correct in my supposition, the points 
upon which I rely cannot have been introduced into the play 
until it was enlarged and partially rewritten for a court per- 
formance in 1597. Perez arrived in England in the autumn 
of 1594. . . . He lived on the bounty of the Earl of Essex 
until Henry IV. became jealous, and insisted upon his coming 
back to him in the summer of 1595. In France and in Eng- 
land, as in Spain, he betrayed and sold every one who trusted 
him. He had been spoilt to such an extent by Henry IV. 
and by his English friends that his presumption and caprice 
became unbearable. When he met Essex at Dover he finally 
disgusted and offended the earl, and thenceforward his star in 
England had set. ... He finally tired out even Henry IV., 
who had treated him with almost royal honours. So that if 
we assume that the special touches of caricature that identify 



xxxii INTRODUCTION 

Don Antonio Armado [!] with Perez were introduced into the 
play when it was recast for the court performance in 1597, the 
reason for the skit upon Essex's fallen favourite becomes at 
once apparent." So says Mr. Martin Hume, and there is a 
vraisemblance in his theory, so far as the intimacy of the 
affected Spaniard with the King of Navarre goes, which is 
no doubt seductive. But before noticing the " special touches" 
which the writer relies on, the recasting, the rewriting and en- 
larging of the play for a court performance in 1597 must be 
disputed, and, in my opinion, rejected altogether, especially as 
they practically involve the whole characterism of Armado — and 
are not in any case a demonstrable fact. 

The special touches are : 1. " Perez's many published 
letters and the famous Relaciones written whilst he was in 
England," which are said to give us " numerous affected turns 
of speech put into the mouth of Don Adriano Armado." Since 
these productions of Perez were never, I believe, translated into 
English, this is a strong statement. I cannot see the smallest 
resemblance between Perez's Anglicised letters given by Martin 
Hume and those of Armado. In one to Lady Rich he says 
(translated by Hume ?) : "I have been so troubled . . . not to 
have the dog's skin gloves your ladyship desires, that ... I 
have resolved to flay a piece of my own skin from the most 
tender part of my body. . . . But this ... is as nothing, for 
even the soul will skin itself for the person it loves." And 
then Perez (says Hume) for two or three pages continues to 
ring the wearisome changes upon dogs and skins and souls, 
in a way that Don Adriano Armado himself could not have 
bettered. Let me take up the cudgels here for Armado. I 
love the sport [of identification] well ; but I shall as soon quarrel 
at it as any man. Does Armado ring wearisome changes 
for two or three pages habitually? 

2. Perez gave himself several nicknames ; but he had one 
favourite — " Peregrino," " El Peregrino," or " Rafael Pere- 
grino." Upon this Hume writes : " * Peregrinate ' is, and always 
has been, an extremely rarely English used word, so that its 
introduction by Shakespeare, especially applied to Don Adriano 
Armado, is significant" (see V. i. 13). But Perez's word is not 



INTRODUCTION xxxiii 

" peregrinate," and " peregrine " was in common use much earlier, 
if any kind of argument could hang upon a Spaniard's word in 
his own language in such a connection. I think the theory is 
hardly established. 

The above remarks about euphuism apply even more ac- 
curately to Holofernes. Although he is alliterative at times, 
" affecting the letter " very strongly in his epitaph on the death 
of the deer, he never verges upon it. Parallels and illustra- 
tions occur abundantly from Lyly, but they are from his plays 
(already noticed in this Introduction), not from his Euphues. 
His plays, though saturated with euphuism, abound also in 
word-quibbling and in Latin scrap-gathering. Of these affecta- 
tions Love's Labour 's Lost has enough and to spare, and Shake- 
speare saw them highly appreciated by the public in Lyly's 
plays. Lyly's euphuism was an integral part of the man's 
craft, cultivated and vehemently approved of by himself. His 
serious characters use it, as he himself does in his correspond- 
ence. But it is a character to be laughed at, like " Sir Tophas, 
the bragging soldier," in Endymion> who introduces those other 
affectations in mockery just as Armado does. Frequently, 
too, Lyly makes use of servants or pages as the mouthpieces 
of these efforts. And in this useful ridicule both Shakespeare 
and Lyly had their predecessors. It is difficult to assert posi- 
tively that Endymion preceded Love's Labour 's Lost — that Sir 
Tophas is an older conception than Armado — but it is highly 
probable. 

Perhaps I should refer here to Fleay's interpretation of 
the " personal portraits " intended by the characters in Love's 
Labour 's Lost — Lyly, Bishop Cooper, Greene, Kemp, etc., 
etc. ; but I refer to them only to discard them as unworthy of 
serious consideration. They are cited by Furness (p. 7) from 
"Shakespeare and Puritanism" {Anglia, 1884, vii. 223). 

With reference to the Latin and other foreign expressions 
in the play, a point dwelt upon by Gervinus as evidence of early 
style, detailed information will be found in my notes. This 
was not an uncommon trick at about the date of Love's 
Labour 's Lost amongst the play writers. It was introduced by 
them from the new Italian drama, whose play-pedant may be 



xxxiv INTRODUCTION 

traced backwards to the conventional Plautine comedy. Dr. 
Landmann (quoted by Furness) says that " Lyly's style is free 
from Latin and Latin quotations." He is speaking of Euphues, 
but the remark is very misleading, since some of Lyly's plays 
{Gallathea, Endymion) are notable in this respect. These may 
be later than Shakespeare's play, but probably Endymion is 
not. Lyly's Campaspe (printed in 1584) exhibits the taint in 
the first scene of the second Act. These Latin scraps are, 
as I have said, often given to the pages, and in Endymion Sir 
Tophas, the "Bragging Soldier," says to a brace of these 
tender juveniles : " The Latine hath saved your lives, the which 
a world of silver could not have done. I understand you, and 
pardon ye." See, too, Edwards' Damon and Pythias {ante 
1566). Moth gives us minime and unum cita (= unciatim). 
Was this fashion evidence of the fact that the youngsters 
usually belonged to the educated classes, fresh from school ? 
Lyly says of one of them : " He learned his leere of my sonne 
whom I have brought up in Oxford " {Mother Bombie). This 
one had quoted " Sine Cerere et Baccho friget Venus!' In 
this play also Lyly gives us more elaborate and heart-scalding 
puns than any in Shakespeare. The mythological allusions in 
Shakespeare's early Italianated work are altogether in Lyly's 
style. Peele's Edward the First is also decorated with Latin 
scraps. It was printed in 1593, but belongs to the Spanish 
Armada period. But there is a better parallel than any of 
these, which precedes them all, with the exception of Edwards' 
play, by several years. I refer to Sir Philip Sidney's May 
Lady, a dramatic interlude shown before the queen at Wanstead 
in 1578. Before speaking of it let us, however, consider another 
point bearing upon the same subject. 

There was a considerably earlier interpretation of a char- 
acter in this play than that dealing with Armado. This was 
that of Warburton, who confidently asserted that Holofernes 
was John Florio, the Italian teacher and dictionary writer and 
the well-known translator of Montaigne's Essays, Warburton 
stated that the year after Love's Labour's Lost appeared 
0597) " comes out our John Florio, with his World of Words 
[in 1 598], recentibus odiis ; and in the preface, quoted above, 



INTRODUCTION xxxy 

falls upon the comic poet for bringing him upon the stage. 
. . . Here Shakespeare is so plainly marked out as not to be 
mistaken" (Steevens' Shakespeare [1793], v. 256, 257). Dr. 
Johnson immediately disagreed, and so did Malone. Farmer 
and Steevens followed Warburton. Warburton's whole fabric 
(it is of considerable length) is well pulled to pieces by Furness, 
who shows the misrepresentations of Florio's words which War- 
burton was guilty of ; for the latter referred obviously to some 
other now unknown person. The theory is now wholly dis- 
credited. Shakespeare is elsewhere indebted to the scholarly 
John Florio, and he would have been the last person living to 
hold him up to ridicule. 

In his comment upon Warburton, Dr. Johnson says : 
"Whether the character of Holofernes was pointed at any 
particular man, I am, notwithstanding the plausibility of Dr. 
Warburton's conjecture, inclined to doubt. Every man adheres 
as long as he can to his own pre-conceptions. Before I read 
this note I considered the character of Holofernes as borrowed 
from the Rombus of Sir Philip Sidney, who, in a kind of 
pastoral entertainment, exhibited to Queen Elizabeth, has in- 
troduced a schoolmaster so called, speaking a leash of languages 
at once, and puzzling himself and his auditors with a jargon 
like that of Holofernes in the present play. Sidney himself 
might bring the character from Italy ; for, as Peacham observes, 
the schoolmaster has long been one of the ridiculous personages 
in the farces of that country." 

Furness notices this observation of Dr. Johnson, which is in 
all probability correct. Not exactly that Holofernes is borrowed 
from Rombus, but that both are very similarly conceived with 
the same purpose, in spite of Furness' disagreement. Furness 
says u this is disproved by the fact that The Lady of May, 
wherein Rombus appears, and the Quarto of Love's Labour 's 
Lost were published in the same year, and the play was not 
then new." But he omits to mention the fact that Sidney's 
"dramatic interlude" was performed before the queen at 
Wanstead in 1578, which made it at once public property 
with such an author to give it fame. Furness quotes Rombus' 
first sentence, and says there is no parallel to it in Holofernes. 



xxxvi INTRODUCTION 

An illogical criticism. Some of A is not like any of B, therefore 
none of B is like any of A ! 

Shakespeare may very well have taken the hint for Holo- 
fernes from Sidney, at any rate he followed his lead in ridiculing 
the pedant and his ways. Sidney's " Entertainment " was 
printed at the end of the Arcadia, but not the first edition. 
It is in vol. ii. of Nichols' Progresses of Queen Elizabeth (1823). 
I do not think any one arising from a study of Love's Labour *s 
Lost, and devoid of a preconception, could help being reminded 
forcibly of Holofernes by Rombus. Rombus not merely em- 
ploys scraps and quotations, but he runs Latin words into his 
speeches to take place as though they were English ; a very 
natural trick when we remember that up to about this time 
schoolmasters taught Latin to their scholars by talking Latin 
(see Ascham's Scholemaster [Arber, p. 28], ante 1 568, and note 
at " Videsne" V. i. 30). This may have led to the trick in pedantry 
of stringing equivalent terms or synonyms together, very much 
in favour apparently with schoolmasters on the stage — a sort 
of dictionary-method like Florio's " Cielo : the heaven, the skie, 
the firmament, the welkin," adduced by Malone as a parallel 
to Holofernes (iv. ii. 5). We have it in Rombus immediately : 
" hath been quodammodo : hunted, as you would say, pursued 
by two, a brace, a couple, a cast of young men " (Nichols, p. 97). 
Holofernes is full of this sort of padding. See note at IV. ii. 
62. I will select a few passages at random from Rombus: 
"You must divisionate your point, quasi you should cut a 
chees into two particles" (Nichols, p. 100; Love's Labour's 
Lost, IV. ii. J?) ; " De singing satis. Nunc are you to argu- 
mentate of the qualifying of their estate " (Nichols, ibid. ; 
Love's Labour's Lost, V. i. 33); "thus he saith, that the sheep 
are good, ergo the shepherd is good" (Nichols, p. 101 ; Love's 
Labour's Lost, V. ii. 584) ; "Bene, bene, nunc de qtiestione pre- 
positus, that is as much as to say as well, well, now of the 
proposed question " (Nichols, p. 102). Rombus tells us he is 
a " Pedagogue, one not a little versed in the disciplinating of 
the juvenal frie" (Nichols, p. 96), which is an earlier use of 
"juvenal" {Love's Labour's Lost, I. ii. 8 ; III. i. 60) than any in 
the New Eng. Diet., and used again by Flute and Falstaff 



INTRODUCTION xxxvii 

jestingly. But see my notes to this word. Several other 
Shakespearian expressions are usefully illustrated from this 
piece of Sidney's. Again, we have here " Lalus the old Shep- 
herd" who uses wrong words like Costard ("contempts," 
"egma," "ad dunghill") and Dull ("pollusion," "collusion"), 
with many more. See notes to " pollusion " (iv. ii. 44) and especi- 
ally to " reprehend " (1. i. 1 82). Lalus gives us " disnounce," " bash- 
less," "loquence," etc. (p. 96). We have another shepherd) 
Dorcas, who comes in as a foil to Rombus, an admirer, like 
Nathaniel of Holofernes, who "praises the Lord for him." 
Dorcas says : " O poor Dorcas, poor Dorcas ! that I was not 
set in my young dayes to school, that I might have purchased 
the understanding of Master Rombus' mysterious speeches" 
(Nichols, pp. 100, 101). See Love's Labour's Lost, IV. ii. 
(Nathaniel's third speech). 

I am fairly well satisfied that Shakespeare took hints from 
Sidney's piece and developed them for his comic business. Of 
the same date (printed in 1578) as The May Lady is Whet- 
stone's Promos and Cassandra. In III. ii. of the second part 
a clown says to a promoter or informer : " You sqwade knave, 
yle burn yee, For reformings lye, thus against mee." " Reform " 
for " inform " here is perhaps the earliest stage example of mis- 
taking law terms. . 

There was a Cambridge Latin drama named Pedantius, 
which had the same ridicule (of pedants) for its object. It was 
printed in 163 1. It is mentioned by Sir John Harington in 
his Apology for Poetry, prefixed to his Orlando Furioso (1591), 
as well known and popular, and it undoubtedly preceded Love's 
Labour's Lost. It may have afforded an inducement to do 
the same work in English, but it cannot have preceded Sidney's 
May Lady. Harington says : " Then for comedies, how full of 
harmless mirth is our Cambridge Pedantius and the Oxford 
Bellum Grammaticale'.' Furness quotes this from an account 
in the German Shakespeare Society (Thirty -fourth Yearbook), 
1 898, of twenty-eight Latin dramas acted at the English uni- 
versities in the time of Elizabeth by George B. Churchill and 
Wolfgang Keller. The writers of this article say : " These 
considerations, together with the intimate similarity of the 



xxxviii INTRODUCTION 

two characters, drive the conviction almost home that in our 
Pedantius we must seek the source of Shakespeare's Holo- 
fernes." Of this statement no proof whatever is advanced 
beyond the " consideration " that Pedantius has a less pedantic 
friend (like Nathaniel) named Dromodotus (see Furness, Vari- 
orum ed. pp. 356, 357). There is however in Pedantius 
(Louvain edition, 1905, p. 61 and note) a parallel for the re- 
ference to cuckoldry in connection with Holofernes ; if it be 
so, at v. i. 58, 61. Another illustration of Armado's boasted 
intimacy with the King occurs at III. I. in Pedantius. When 
he mentions the King he is amico meo. Compare " Sir, the 
king is . . . my familiar" (v. i. 88). See, too, note at IV. i. 72-75. 

The writers of the account of Pedantius that Furness refers 
to, say the author is unknown ; but that is not so, if we are to 
trust Thomas Nashe. Of this presently. Harington refers 
again to it, in The Metamorphosis of Ajax (Chiswick repr. p. 
126), 1596: "For I tell you, though I will not take it upon me 
that I am in dialecticorum dumetis doctus } or in rhetoricorum 
pompapotens, or cceteris scientiis saginatus, as doth our Pedantius 
of Cambridge." Apparently quotations from the play, but 
I have not traced them in the admirable edition by Moore 
Smith, which has appeared since I penned this Introduction. 

Nashe gives us the author's name, Master Winkfield, in 
Foure Letters Confuted (Grosart, ii. 244), 1593: "Though I 
have been pincht with want (as who is not one time or another, 
Pierce Penilesse), yet my muse never wept for want of mainten- 
ance as thine did in Musarum lachrimce^ that was miserably 
flouted at in M. Winkfield's Comoedie of Pedantius in Trinitie 
Colledge." Smitheius vel Musarum Lachrymce was Gabriel 
Harvey's elegy on the death of his patron, Sir Thomas Smith. 
This was printed in 1578, so that Pedantius must be later than 
that date, and therefore later than Sidney's May Lady. Further, 
we learn from this that Master Winkfield went in for bitter 
personalities, so that I think we may exclude Pedantius entirely 
from Shakespeare's recognition. Winkfield was, of course, An- 
tony Winkfield, reader in Greek to Queen Elizabeth; B.A., 
Trinity College, Cambridge, 1574 ; Fellow, 1576, etc., and public 
orator and proctor later, 1581-89. He died about 1615. See 



INTRODUCTION xxxix 

Diet. Nat. Biogr., which is not responsible for this ascription. 
But in his Have With You to Saffron Walden (Grosart, in. 1 17), 
1 596, Nashe tells us a great deal about Pedantius in his best 
form. The passage is too long to quote fully. He calls it 
" Pedantius, that exquisite comedie in Trinitie College ; where 
under the chiefe part from which it tooke his name, as namely 
the concise and flrking finicaldo fine school -master, hee was full 
drawen from the soale of the foote to the crowne of his head. 
The just manner of his phrase in his Orations and Disputations 
they stuft his mouth with . . . those ragged remnaunts in his foure 
familiar Epistles twixt him and Signor Immerito, . . . scoffing 
his Musarum Lachrymae. ... I leave out halfe ; not the carry- 
ing up of his goune, his nice gate on his pantofrles, or the 
affected accent of his speech, but they personated." All this 
is proof that Pedantius was a bitter satirical attack on Gabriel 
Harvey. Signior Immerito is of course Edmund Spenser. 
And since, according to Nashe, Pedantius quotes Harvey's sub- 
scription to one of his letters to Spenser (1580) : Nosti manum 
& stylum (Grosart, i. 74 and 107), we have the date of Pedantius 
as somewhere soon after 1580, while Harvey was still lecturing 
on rhetoric and these things of his were fresh. There is another 
reference to Pedantius in Nashe which annoyed Harvey, a refer- 
ence identifying him with the pedant. In his (Nashe's) Foure 
Letters Confuted he calls him a Dromidote Ergonist (Grosart, 
ii. 218), coining the term from Dromodotus, and showing what 
he was mocked for (see V. ii. 602, and above in this Introduc- 
tion). Harvey, in Pierce's Supererogation (Grosart, ii. 275) gives 
this back to Nashe as one of his " Inkhornish phrases " and 
* outlandish collops." This term has escaped New Eng. Diet. ; 
"ergonist" is there, however, credited to Nashe only. If 
Pedantius were to be constituted " the source of Shakespeare's 
Holofernes," it would be hard to part company between Harvey 
and Holofernes. But there is no personal satire whatever in 
Holofernes. It is all good-natured raillery against the class, 
which inevitably brings in some echoes of that accomplished 
pedant of the day. 

Pedantius is also mentioned in The Return from Parnassus, 
II. i. (1600), in terms that imply he was a good-natured school- 



xl INTRODUCTION 

master, not given to too much flogging. The elder Disraeli 
in his Calamities of Authors (1859, P- I2 ^) mentions this 
attack on Harvey by the author of Pedantius, from Nashe's 
statements. The 163 1 text is the earliest we possess. 

For ridicule of affected language at an immediately subse- 
quent date to the present play and to Harvey's and Nashe's 
wranglings, Jonson's earlier plays afford the proper continua- 
tion. Patient Grissel (by Haughton, Dekker and Chettle), 1600, 
has much of the same satire. See notes at V. i. 38 and 85. 

Shakespeare found the name Holofernes in Rabelais (1. 
xiv.) : " Presently they appointed him (Gargantua) a great 
Sophister-Doctor, called Tubal Holofernes, who taught him 
his ABC." He seems to have been tutor to Gargantua for 
about thirty-five years. While speaking of Rabelais, it seems 
the proper place to mention that Malone, writing of Holofernes, 
says the character was formed (exactly) out of two pedants in 
Rabelais, the other being Janotus de Bragmardo. For The 
Harangue of Master fanotus, see Rabelais, I. xix., xx. Fur- 
ness dismisses Malone's suggestion with the loftiest contempt. 
But Malone is perfectly right, speaking generally — not 
" exactly " — a word Furness rightly objects to. Janotus is in- 
troduced in ridicule of a Latinising pedant and logician. He 
is an amusing property, and Sidney staged him — for however 
much or little resemblance he has to Holofernes, he is certainly 
a counterpart of Rombus. We have another capital pedantical 
laughing-stock in Rabelais, II. vi., where " Pantagruel met with 
a Limousin, who affected to speak in learned phrase." He 
"pindarizes, as the French say," and must not be overlooked, 
since we often meet with him in English writers — Ben Jonson 
and others. 

Dr. Landmann has been quoted above as referring to Putten- 
ham for the " pedantic mingling of Latin and English called 
Soraismus." This is exactly wrong. Puttenham says : " Another 
of your intolerable vices is that which the Greekes call Sorais- 
mus, and we may call the mingle-mangle, as when we make our 
speech or writings of sundry languages using some Italian word, 
or French, or Spanish, br Dutch, or Scottish . . . ignorantly 
and affectedly." Latin is deliberately omitted. Probably in 



INTRODUCTION xli 

Puttenharn's mind it was so usual and needful that it never 
occurred to him it was pedantic. 

Perhaps the earliest dramatic writer in English who makes 
his serious characters — all his characters — interlard their speech 
with Latin words, quotations and proverbs, is R. Edwards in 
Damon and Pithias (Hazlitt's Dodsley, vol. iv.). Edwards died 
in 1566. In that year his Palcemon and Arcyte was exhibited 
before the queen at Oxford. It was said of that play, that a 
certain part " being repeated before certain courtiers . . . be- 
fore the Queen came to Oxford, was by them so well liked, that 
they said it far surpassed Damon and Pithias, than which, they 
thought, nothing could be better. Likewise some said, that 
if the author did any more before his death, he would run mad 
. . . he died within a few months after" (Nichols' Progresses, 
i. 212). This shows what a hit the play made ; and presumably 
the Latin interpolations (they are very marked and numerous) 
were regarded as a work of high art. Edwards saw no fun in 
it, and it may have been against this bad precedent Sidney and 
Shakespeare set their faces, and proposed to mock it off the 
stage. Edwards has four or five French mingle-mangles and 
a couple of Greek ones. He has about twenty-five Latin ones, 
but he speaks only English in the tragical parts of his " tragical 
comedy," so he had some sense of the fitness of things. Ben 
Jonson jeered at parts of this play in his Bartholomew Fair (v. 
iii.) as late as 1614, showing its popularity. It is to a more 
extended structural license in language of this sort that E. 
Kirke devotes his criticism (addressed to Gabriel Harvey) on 
Spenser's Shepherds Calendar (1579). He refers to the 
Anglicising of foreign words and rags, rather than to the bor- 
rowing them in their proper form. He is speaking of our loss 
in obsolete " naturall English words " when he says : " Which 
default whenas some endeavoured to salve and recure, they 
patched up the holes with peeces and rags of other languages, 
borrowing here of the French, there of the Italian, everywhere 
of the Latine; not weighing how il those tongues accorde 
with themselves, but much worse with ours : so now they have 
made our English tongue a gallimaufray or hodge-podge of al 
other speches." E. Kirke was a most intelligent and scholarly 



xlii INTRODUCTION 

critic, but he could hardly have hit on a more erroneous verdict, 
as viewed by posterity. 

There is another peculiarity in Lovers Labour *s Lost which 
in our degenerate days is disapproved of, the display of punning. 
Probably it reaches a record for a drama here. It has been my 
good fortune to unearth several more undoubted gems. One 
critic has counted two hundred and fifty ! Proverbial phrases 
too are well represented. These diversions were the simple 
literary fashion of a time when the shilling shocker and the half- 
penny illustrated were as yet unknown. Lyly's plays abound 
with them. The chief exponents of these accomplishments are 
the wittier characters, Biron, Boyet and Rosaline. Boyet is de- 
picted as one of the fops of the day. The scathing attack on 
the class uttered by Biron at V. ii. 321 et seq., is paralleled by 
Crites' tirade in Ben Jonson's Cynthia *s Revets, III. ii., beginning 
after the real M swell," the "proud and spangled sir," has gone 
by:- 

He past, api ~ars some mincing marmoset 
Made all of clothes and face : his limbs so set 
As if they had some voluntary act 
Without man's motion, and must move just so 
In spite of their creation : one that weighs 
His breath between his teeth, and dares not smile 
Beyond a point, for fear 't unstarch his look ; 
Hath travelled to make legs, and seen the cringe 
Of several courts, and courtiers ; knows the time 
Of giving titles and of taking walls ; . . . 

. . . and all the rules 
Each formal usher in that politic school 
Can teach a man. 

"A blister on his sweet tongue, with my heart," echoes the 
King. And it is noteworthy here that just as the speaker 
Crites in Cynthia's Revels is Ben Jonson himself, so we may 
take Biron as giving expression in this play to Shakespeare's 
own thoughts. This leads to some remarks on the other more 
serious 



I 



INTRODUCTION xliii 



Characters in the Play 



By far the most important personage in Lovis Labour's 
Lost is Biron, and it is usually conceded that Shakespeare 
to a certain extent recast this character in the later form of 
the play, the only one we have. See note at IV. iii. 296-301. 
Gollancz says : " Mr. Spedding as far back as 1839 pointed out 
that the inequality in the length of the Acts gives us a hint 
where to look for the principal additions and alterations ; in 
Act 1. Biron's remonstrance, and in Act IV. nearly the whole 
of the close and a few lines at the opening of the Act, may 
probably be classed with the passages already noted as belong- 
ing to Shakespeare's maturer work." A motive for this de- 
velopment in Biron's character, in the increased popularity of 
Biron, the French Marshal, in England, has been suggested 
already from Mr. Lee's analysis. But it is well to utter a note 
of warning against any tendency to identify the King and his 
courtiers with their French counterparts — counterparts only in . 
name. Perhaps the most glaring absurdity «#is would lead us! 
into is the adoption of the Due de Mayenne (Dumain), whoj 
was Navarre's most powerful opponent, as one of his close? 
circle of intimates. The Due de Longueville, and the Due 
D'Aumont, together with the Marechal de Biron were the im- 
portant generals and adherents of Navarre. One would gladly 
read D'Aumont for Dumain ; Chapman brings him into Biron's 
Conspiracie. The Due de Mayenne was noted for his " heavi- 
ness and dulness . . . augmented not only by the mass of his 
body, great and fat beyond all proportion, and which in con- 
sequence required a great deal of nourishment and much 
sleep" (Secret Memoirs: Henri IV. of France and Navarre 
[Grolier Society, pp. 118, 122, 135]). Dumain is small, beard- 
less and youthful. 

" My lord Du Mayne " appears in one interesting episode 
in connection with Queen Elizabeth in 1592. It was in his 
lodging that the Duke of Guise spoke so basely of her that her 
ambassador Sir Henry Umpton gave him (the duke) the lie, 
and challenged him " with such arms as you shall choose" ; or 
cause him "to be held the arrantest coward and most 



xliv INTRODUCTION 

slaunderous slave that lives in all France " (Fuller's Worthies of 
Berkshire). 

Biron's long and powerful speeches, though ill-adapted for 
the stage, make him tower head and shoulders over the rest of 
the dramatis persona. It is he, moreover, who at once sees the 
impracticability of the King's proposed academical scheme, 
which was to abolish the passions and desires of his coterie, 
and rearrange human nature by clockwork for a term of three 
years. Culture and idealism are to take the place of appetites 
and emotions. Fasting and study are to replace food and 
sleep largely, women are forbidden, and all natural affections 
treated as foes to be warred against. Biron scoffs at the 
start, though bound to submit to the experiment. He pro- 
nounces against it, and agrees only under protest and upon com- 
pulsion. It is he who discloses the obstacles and discovers the 
breakdown of the would-be ascetics, and as a final triumph he 
is called upon by the King and the other conspirators against 
love to find some salve for their perjury and disgrace. And 
with his magnificent speech (IV. iii. 286-362) the academe is 
overthrown, the game is up, and the scholars declare for Saint 
Cupid and the girls of France. So that at the close of the fourth 
Act the real mainspring of the plot has broken down. As it 
was intended, so it has fallen out, and Love is victorious. As 
Dowden says : H The play is a protest against youthful schemes 
of shaping life according to notions rather than according to 
reality, a protest against idealising away the facts of life " : and 
with the success of that protest, there comes the knowledge that 
the object has been attained, and the characters may let down 
the drop-scene and go home. This is a structural defect that 
must " kill the heart " of an acted piece. 

However, we follow their future careers in a fifth Act, and 
discover, or rather we are left to guess, how the labours of Love, 
which were ordained to be lost, are finally won. Our interests 
are speedily reawakened in this entirely new campaign, and 
although there is a distressingly poor kind of sport introduced in 
the masque, nevertheless all the characters seem to brighten 
up, and the fun is faster and freer from restraint and scholastic 
exercises in poetry. But we become painfully aware that we 



INTRODUCTION xlv 

have hardly got a human animated being amongst the whole 
of them. They are all mouthpieces, either for or against love, 
or affectation, or fame, or some other quality — it hardly in- 
terests us which girl is the sweetheart of what man — and a 
first reader who wants to get a thorough grip of his play finds 
himself continually referring back to gather up some character- 
istics, or salient touches, which will enable him to keep the 
figures distinct in his mind. Probably too he will fail, or his 
figures will be indistinct, or his own imagination will have 
supplied them, not Shakespeare's delineation. 

This is altogether different with those who make up the 
comic element. The mind canvasses them at once, and never 
loses them. The poetry of the play might be taken out in 
large sections, and read with delight and without a thought of 
its original surroundings. So might one or two of the girls of 
France or their lovers with no loss to the play. But Armado 
and Moth, Holofernes and Nathaniel, Costard and Dull, are the 
real " triumviry, the corner-cap of the society," upon whose 
shoulders the structure of the piece — as a living picture — is 
borne. We could ill afford to lose them. In the whole gallery 
of Shakespeare's characters they occupy a very special niche — 
not perhaps an exalted one, or one that appeals to any profound 
depths in the reader's nature — but they appeal to youth, fun, 
and sentiment, to the opening intellect and the awakening heart 
in ways of sympathy that no lover of Shakespeare can ever wish 
to forget. Armado is a very finished product. If it were given 
to me to spend an hour with chosen men of amusement from 
Shakespeare, one by one (there are never any funny women), 
there are only a very few I should select before Armado. And 
perhaps his memory owes me a little tiny debt of gratitude. 
See note at V. ii. 712-714. 

Throughout all the characters, in all their views, excepting 
perhaps in "the solemn humour of the Spaniard, or the broad 
caricature of the pedagogue," runs the strain, the somewhat 
dusky strain, of punning. Gervinus has such an entertaining 
passage here that I cannot forbear from quoting it He says : 
" The play and perversion of words ; this is the foundation for 
wit common in every age. Even in the present day we have 



xlvi INTRODUCTION 

but to analyse the wit amongst jovial men to find that it always 
proceeds from punning and quibbling. The conventional peculi- 
arity, therefore, in Shakespeare is the definite form in which 
this word-wit appears. This form was cultivated among the 
English people according to an established custom, which in- 
vested jocose conversation with the character of a regular 
battle." What a sad figure Shakespeare becomes if we de- 
prive him of the salt of comedy — humour. 

Boyet is likewise an excellent portrait of a type of being that 
may still exist in countries where there is no humour to quench 
his little taper in ridicule. The Boyets abound on the stage at 
a later period, especially in Chapman and Massinger. There is 
hardly a play without one. But perhaps Shakespeare's sketch 
is the first elaborated one. Biron on Boyet tells us all we want 
to know (v. ii. 315-338). 

Amongst the ladies, the dark and pale-faced beauty, Rosa- 
line, is the one we know and like the best. The Princess is 
much more of a figure-head. Rosaline is of course developed 
in wit, as a fitting mate for the chief character, Biron. Cole- 
ridge held that Biron and Rosaline were the pre-existent states 
of Benedick and Beatrice in Much Ado About Nothing. Furness 
dwells on this comparison, without much sympathy, in his pre- 
face. I cannot see that it affords the slightest illumination or 
conviction, any more than does a really absurd one, mentioned 
by Furness, that " Jonson intended to ridicule Don Armado by 
his Fastidious Brisk in Every Man out of his Humour? 

The Hunting Scene (iv. i. and iv. ii. 1-57 ; see 
notes also at iv. i. 10 and iv. ii. 54) 

The best parallel in Shakespeare to the Princess's hunting, 
that is to say shooting deer from a stand with a cross-bow, with 
or without the assistance of dogs, is in the opening of Act III. 
of 3 Henry VI. This, like Love's Labour's Lost, is some of 
Shakespeare's earliest work, when he was fresh from the country 
and full of memories of the sports he was addicted to. The 
passage is as follows (I quote from the First Folio) : — 



INTRODUCTION xlvii 

Enter Sinklo and Humfrey, with crosse-bows in their hands. 

Sink. Under this thicke growne brake, we '11 shrowd our selues : 
For through this Lauhd anon the Deere will come, 
And in this couert will we make our Stand, 
Culling the principall of all the Deere. 

Hum. I '11 stay above the hill, so both may shoot. 

Sink. That cannot be, the noise of thy Crosse-bow 
Will scare the Heard, and so my shoot is lost : 
Heerc stand we both, and ayme we at the best. 

For these two speakers' names, modern editions read First 
and Second Keeper, 

Outside Shakespeare the only illustrations given of ladies 
shooting deer with a cross-bow, in the notes to Love's Labour's 
Lost, are by Steevens from letters to the Earl of Shrewsbury, 
dated Aug. 14, 1555, and July, 1605, from Lodge's Illustra- 
tions of British History, etc., i. 203, iii. 295 : "I besiche yor 
Lordeshipp to tayke some sporte of my litell grounde there, 
and to comaund the same even as yo r Lordeshippes owne. 
My ladye may shote w th her crosbowe," etc. ; and, " Y r Lorde- 
shype hath sente me a verie greatte and fatte stagge, the 
wellcomer beynge stryken by yo r ryght honorable Ladie's 
hande," etc. " Bess of Hardwick " was, however, an eccentric 
personage. 

Furness adds nothing to this, bearing on ladies' sports, 
excepting Hunter's words : " This was a favourite amusement 
(shooting at the deer with the cross-bow) of ladies of rank in 
the time of Shakespeare, and buildings with flat roofs called 
stands, or standings, were erected in many parks, as in that of 
Sheffield, and in that of Pilkington, near Manchester [are 
these of Shakespearian date?], expressly for the purpose of 
this diversion." He then quotes from Goldingham (1578), The 
Garden Plot, a passage about a bower, or standing, for men. 

Both Strutt {Sports and Pastimes) and Wright {History of 
Domestic Manners) give figures of ladies shooting with the 
cross-bow from early illuminated manuscripts, of French origin, 
either at rabbits, or from horseback at a stag, with the help of 
greyhounds. See my notes to Merry Wives of Windsor, III. 
iii. (Arden edition, p. 143). 



xlviii INTRODUCTION 

In the passages in Henry VI. there is no mention of dogs, 
but in Love's Labour's Lost (IV. ii. 54) we are distinctly told 
that the Princess's pricket was started " from thicket " by the 
yelling dogs. 

In Wit Narrative of the Visit of Frederick, Duke of Wirtem- 
berg, in 1592 to Windsor (translated from German of 1602) 
(Heutzner, England as seen by Foreigners, pp. 14-17 [1865]), we 
learn something of Windsor methods : " It pleased her Majesty 
to depute an old distinguished lord to attend his Highness, and 
. . . not only to show his Highness the splendid royal castle 
at Windsor, but also to amuse him by the way with shooting 
and hunting red-deer ; for you must know that in the vicinity 
of this same place Windsor, there are upwards of sixty parks 
which are full of game of various kinds, and they are so con- 
tiguous, that in order to have a glorious and royal sport the 
animals can be driven out of one enclosure into another, and so 
on ; all which enclosures are encompassed by fences. ... In 
the first enclosure his Highness shot off the leg of a fallow- 
deer, and the dogs soon after caught the animal. In the 
second they chased a stag ... at length his Highness shot 
him in front with an English cross-bow, and this deer the dogs 
finally worried and caught. In the third the greyhounds chased 
a deer, but much too soon, for they caught it directly, even 
before it could get out into the open plain. . . . The next day, 
August 2 1st, . . . in one of the parks his Highness shot two 
fallow-deer, one with a gun, the other with an English cross- 
bow ; the latter deer we were obliged to follow a very long 
while, until at length a stray track or blood-hound . . . singled 
out the deer from several hundred . . . and the stag, which 
could go no further, was taken by huntsmen, and the hound 
feasted with its blood." This description is nauseating to a 
sportsman. 

I find an illustrative account of a " hunting and shooting ,} 
of this date in Nichols' Progresses of Queen Elizabeth (iii. 91, 
ed. 1825). It is quoted in my notes, but I must repeat it here 
— and it is not lengthy — from The Queen's Entertainment at 
Cowdray, 1591, printed in that year by Thomas Scarlet, dwell- 
ing in Paul's Churchyard. She was entertained by "the 



Right Hon 



INTRODUCTION xlix 



.ight Honourable the Lord Montecute," anno 1591, August 
15 to 21 (Nichols, iii. 90-96). " Mundaie, August 17. On 
Munday, at eight of the clock in the morning, her Highnes 
took horse, with all her traine, and rode into the parke : where 
was a delicate bowre prepared, under the which were her 
Highnesse musicians placed, and a crossebowe by a Nymph, 
with a sweet song, delivered to her hands, to shoote at the 
deere, about some thirtie in number, put into a paddocke, of 
which number she killed three or four, and the Countess of 
Kildare one. 

" Then rode her Grace to Cowdray to dinner, and aboute six 
of the clocke in the evening, from a turret, sawe sixteen buckes 
(all having fayre lawe) pulled downe with greyhoundes, in a 
laund. All the huntinge ordered by Maister Henrie Browne, 
the Lorde Montague's third sonne, Raunger of Windsore 
Forest/' 

Had Shakespeare read this account, or does he allude in 
any way to it ? The hunting scene in Henry VI. bears date 
probably 1592-3. That before us in Love's Labour's Lost 
belongs very likely (at least in the opening of IV. i.) to the 
revised version. Furnivall suggests this in his 1904 edition of 
the play (p. vi., footnote). So that Shakespeare probably 
had read it, but the fact of his disregarding those useful 
theatrical accessories of music and bowers shows also that prob- 
ably he was in nowise guided by it; or he rejected them 
as unworthy of a place in a hunting-scene. They would have 
come in very handily as a mode of entertaining those in- 
hospitably-treated "girls of France." 

I had thought at first that the hunting-shooting picture in 
Love's Labour's Lost was meant rather to represent French 
than English sport. But with this account, done according to 
Windsor ways, that idea must be dismissed. In Henry VI. it 
seems to be fair enough stalking, and the mention of the " noise 
of the cross-bow," as likely to frighten the game, shows that the 
deer were getting a chance. Even at Cowdray we see that 
" fair law " was recognised on the second occasion. But when 
the queen shoots, the time when we would like to see sport at 

its highest and best, with the doubtful number of kills, and 

d 



1 INTRODUCTION 

the "put into a paddock," it is butchery of the first degree. 
It is very little better for his Highness of Wurtemburg at 
Windsor. 

My reason for dwelling upon this is that Shakespeare 
seemed to me to be reproving, or to be wishing to reprove, as 
though condemning a new un-English form of hunting. In 
the play the King at any rate is mounted. In real life we 
know Queen Elizabeth was devoted to every form of the chase, 
properly so called. But are not the words " play the 
murderer" (line 8) chosen with some such purpose of re- 
proach ? Again, it is " mercy to kill " (line 24), and all the 
following lines of the Princess's speech, are very plain-spoken 
against the brutal mutilation that must have taken place. It 
is even a detested crime, for the sake of glory, to spill the poor 
deer's blood. Pity shouldn't let her do it. It is only for 
praise. I should like to think that Shakespeare condemns 
these methods, perhaps of French origin, as unsportsmanlike. 

Some Textual Considerations 

Before enumerating the passages in the following text, 
wherein I have varied in my readings from the generally 
received text, that of the Globe Shakespeare, which is that 
of the Cambridge edition, I must venture on one or two re- 
marks. I am not inclined to accept absolutely the statement 
of Furness and others that there is but one original text — that 
of the 1 598 Quarto. Some consideration must be given to the 
well-known statement of the editors of the Folio, which, if 
words have any meaning, imply that they had access to reliable 
" copy," whether prompter's or manuscript, it is unsafe to guess. 
No doubt they lay claim to (the words need not be requoted) 
more, very much more, than they have executed, when they 
profess to have cured and made perfect all the maims and 
deformities of the stolen and surreptitious texts (Quartos) be- 
fore the public. But the debt due to them is incalculable, and 
as a rule, where there is a choice of reading and where opinion 
is about equally divided as to their merits, or even where it is 
not obviously in favour of the Quarto, my vote would be for 



INTRODUCTION 



li 



the Folio version. Sidney Lee says (Life, p. 307, ed. 1899): 
" The Quarto text of Love's Labour 's Lost, Midsummer-Night's 
Dream and Richard II., for example, differ very largely, and 
always for the better, from the Folio texts." Where it is for 
the better, it is of course accepted ; but that it is " always for 
the better " reads to me like a slip of the pen from that reliable 
authority. For Midsummer-Night 's Dream, it is, I believe, a 
verity; but it is too sweeping an assertion for Love's Labour's 
Lost. The text of the former Quarto is exceptionally excellent. 
Furnivall, in his edition of Love's Labour's Lost Quarto merely 
says : * Its text is earlier, if not better, than that of the First 
Folios which was printed from it." I have not made use of 
Furnivall's Introduction to Griggs' facsimile. I thought it 
better to make independent comparison of the two texts, with 
the help of the Cambridge edition collation. I will give the 
readings where I differ from the Cambridge edition (1863); 
following the Folio where they follow the Quarto. Punctua- 
tion and obvious usual misprints, or archaic spellings, are not 
dealt with here. I place the Folio in the first column, the 
Quarto (or Cambridge) in the second. 



I. 


i. 


72. 


and — but. 


n. 


i. 245. 


point out — point you. 


I. 


i. 


109. 


That were to climb — 
Climb, 


in. 


i. 6. 


Will you — Master will 
you. 


I. 


i. 


109. 


the gate — the little gate. 


in. 


i. 9. 


the feet — your feet. 


I. 


i. 


130. 


shall — can. 


in. 


i. 10. 


eye — eyelids. 


I. 


i. 


i57- 


others — other. 


in. 


i. 52- 


Thy— The. 


I. 


i. 


194. 


hearing — laughing. 


in. 


i. 60. 


voluble — volable. 


I. 


ii. 


39- 


fits—fitteth. 


in. 


i. 134. 


a French — French. 


I. 


ii. 


120. 


let him — suffer him to. 


in. 


i. 141. 


three farthing's worth — 


I. 


ii. 


153- 


be silent — be too silent. 






three farthing worth. 


I. 


ii. 


163. 


Samson was — was 


in. 


i- 143. 


etc. stay — Stay. 








Samson. 


in. 


i. 161. 


why — why. 


II. 


i. 


65. 


as — if. 


IV. 


ii. 4. 


a — the. 


II. 


i. 


88. 


unpeopled — unpeeled. 


IV. 


ii. 144. 


being — before. 


II. 


i. 


168. 


would I — / will. 


IV. 


iii. 82. 


of— in. 


II. 


i. 


175- 


farther— fair. 


IV. 


iii. 165. 


tuning — to turn. 


II. 


i. 


177. 


we shall — shall we. 


IV. 


Hi. 171. 


candle — caudle. 


II. 


i, 


, 180. 


my own — mine own. 


IV. 


iii. 173. 


by me... to you — 


II. 


i. 


184. 


soul — fool. ? 






tome . . . by you. 


II. 


i. 


198. 


if — and. 


IV. 


iii. 179. 


Joan — Love. 


II. 


i. 


244. 


wlunce — where. 


IV. 


iii. 215. 


are — were. 



Hi 



INTRODUCTION 



v. i. 92. 


importunate — import- 


v. ii. 433. 


you not — not you. 




ant. 


v. ii. 502. 


Pompey — Pompion. 


v. ii. 134. 


your — you. 


v. ii. 539. 


prick out — pick out. 


v. ii. 185. 


you on the — her on this. 


v. ii. 574, 


575. in sooth— faith. 


v. ii. 209. 


vouchsafe but — do but 


v. ii. 630. 


Hector — Hector's. 




vouchsafe. 


v. ii. 684. 


pray — bepray. 


v. ii. 220. 


you — we. 


v. ii. 742. 


ears — ear. 


v. ii. 315. 


picks— pecks. 


v. ii. 787. 


their — the. 


v. ii. 324. 


away his hand — his 
hand away. 


v. ii. 829. 


thy — my. 



Most of the variations in the above lists are unimportant. 
Any that seem to need it have received attention in the notes. 
Not a few of them, such as " unpeeled," would never be accepted 
unless by those strongly biassed in favour of the Quarto. In 
those instances, so far as they go, they favour the authority of 
the Folio ; but for a full test of their respective merits in this 
play it will be necessary to lay two other lists before the reader 
— where the Folio corrects the Quarto and vice vers A. I have 
not culled trifling misprints for these lists, except here and there 
for examples, or where distinctly misleading, or liable to mislead. 





Folio Corrects Quarto. 




Quarto 


Corrects Folio. 


I. 


i. 31. 


pomp— pome. 


1. 


i. no. 


sit— fit. 


I. 


i. 130. 


possibly — possible. 




i. 152. 


speak — break. 


I. 


i- 137- 


bedrid — bedred. 


1. 


i. 260. 


keep — keeper. 


I. 


i. 165. 


one — on. 


1. 


ii. 46. 


do — (omitted). 


I. 


i. 183. 


thaborough— far- 
borough. 




ii. 87. 


maculate — immacu- 
late. 


I. 


i. 216. 


welkins viceregent — 


1. 


ii. 115- 


love — ioue. 






wdkis vizgerent. 


1. 


ii. 131. 


that — what. 


I. 


i. 296. 


Prosperity — prosperie. 


11. 


i. 60. 


he — she. 


I. 


ii. 169. 


duello — duella. 


11. 


i. 143. 


repaid — repaie. 


II. 


i. 32. 


Importunes — Importu- 
ous. 


11. 


i. 180, 


183, etc. Biron — 
Boyet. 


II. 


i- 34- 


visaged — visage. 


11. 


i. 213. 


you — You. 


II. 


i. 44. 


parts— peerelsse. 


n. 


i. 234. 


did — do. 


II. 


i- 47, 


48. gloss, gloss — glose 7 


hi. 


i. 67. 


sir — Or sir. 






glose. 


in. 


i. 125. 


honour — honours. 


II. 


i. 115, 


117, etc. Ros. — Kather. 


IV. 


i. 14. 


and again — and then 


II. 


i. 172. 


in — within. 






again. 


III. 


i. 15. 


thin belly— thin bellies. 


IV. 


i. 125. 


An I cannot — I can- 


III. 


i. 67. 


plain — pline. 






not. 


IV. 


i- 3- 


Boy. — Forr. 


IV. 


». 33- 


tell me — tell. 






INTRODUCTION 



liii 





Folio Corrects Quarto. 




Quarto 


Corrects Folio. 


IV. 


i. 6. 


on — ore. 


IV. 


ii. 93. 


loves thee not — 


IV. 


ii. 29. 


indiscreet — indistreel. 






(omitted). 


IV. 


ii. 48. 


ignorant — ignoralt. 


IV. 


ii. 132. 


royal — (omitted). 


IV. 


ii. 79. 


likest — liklest. 


IV. 


iii. 99. 


ever May — every May. 


IV. 


ii. 97. 


stanze — stauze. 


IV. 


iii. 213. 


show — will show. 


IV. 


iii. 36. 


wilt — will. 


V. 


ii. 45. 


not so — (omitted). 


IV. 


iii. 72. 


idolatry — ydotarie. 


V. 


ii. 79. 


is — (omitted). 


IV. 


iii. 263. 


black — Make. 


V. 


ii. 149. 


speaker — keeper. 


IV. 


iii. 364. 


standards — standars. 


V. 


ii. 224. 


you yourselves — your- 


V. 


i- 55. 


wave — wane. 






selves. 


(v. 


i. 92- 


importunate — impor- 
tunt.) 


V. 


ii. 240. 


Take that — Take you 
that. 


V. 


i. 102. 


secrecy — secrety. 


V. 


ii. 312. 


thither — (omitted). 


V. 


i. 112. 


rendered — rended. 


V. 


ii. 334- 


due — duty. 


V. 


ii. 12. 


shrewd — shrowd. 


V. 


ii. 368. 


Russian — Russia. 


V. 


ii. 13. 


ne 7 er — neare. 


V. 


ii. 641. 


Peace — (omitted). 


V. 


ii. 17. 


a grandam — Gran- 
dam. 


V. 


ii. 652, 


653. when he breathed 
. . . man — (omitted). 


V. 


ii. 80. 


stabb'd — stable. 


V. 


ii. 719. 


entreat — entreats. 


V. 


ii. 89. 


sycamore — sycamone. 








V. 


ii. 96. 


they —thy. 








V. 


ii. 134- 


too — two. 






1 


V. 


ii. 139. 


mocking merriment — 
mockerie merement. 








V. 


ii. 163. 


ever — even. 








V. 


ii. 175. 


strangers — stranges. 








V. 


ii. 297. 


vailing — varling. 








v. 


ii. 463. 


slight zanie — sleight 
saine. 








V. 


ii. 481. 


merrily — merely. 








V. 


ii. 499. 


they — thy. 








V. 


ii. 512. 


least — best. 








V. 


"• 559- 


this — his. 








V. 


ii. 592. 


proved — proud. 








V. 


ii. 637. 


gilt nutmeg — gift nut- 
meg. 








V. 


ii. 767. 


the — (omitted). 








V. 


ii. 796. 


instant — instance. 








V. 


ii. 801. 


intitled — intiled. 








V. 


ii. 805. 


hence ever — hence her- 
rite. 








V. 


ii. 905- 


foul— full. 








V. 


ii. 920. 


You that way, — we this 
way — (omitted). 









Hv INTRODUCTION 

These lists prove that the Folio is the more carefully printed. 
Its more harmful faults are those of omission, while the Quarto's 
are those of commission. There are not a dozen places where 
an undoubtedly and altogether wrong word in the Folio is set 
right by the Quarto. There are over three dozen (apart from 
my preference-readings, which are often of much consequence) 
where the Folio corrects the Quarto. The omissions are the 
chief fault in the Folio, comparatively speaking, but the Quarto 
is not blameless in this respect — witness the closing words of 
the play. 

But the above analysis leads me to another conclusion. 
Setting this examination by itself, apart from any preconceived 
theories on the subject, or conclusions based upon what seems 
to have happened in the case of other plays, what does this 
evidence point to with regard to the connection between the 
two editions ? I conclude that the two texts were independently 
printed, and that the Folio edition was not a reprint of the 
Quarto. Both seem to me to have been printed from a 
prompter's or actor's copy, in which, probably, authentic alter- 
ations and corrections had been made. And the Folio printers, 
though sufficiently careless, made a better use of their copy than 
those of the Quarto did. 

Perhaps this may seem to be a needless and narrow dis- 
quisition with regard to any of Shakespeare's plays at this period 
of restful acceptation of the Globe text. But we are con- 
fronted in this play with so many difficulties and doubts, and 
with such a diversity of opinions on various readings, that it 
seems to be unavoidable in any exhaustive edition. There is 
no other way of estimating or displaying the respective values 
of the two texts. 

I have still to mention a few other passages where I depart 
from the received readings. This list will serve also to collect 
in a cluster most of the notorious textual cruxes and corruptions 
in the play. 

I shall merely give my reading here, with the references to 
their positions and my notes. Those in brackets are quite un- 
equal in importance to the rest. 



INTRODUCTION lv 

(sworn, i. i. 114.) 

do you note, men ? in. i. 31. 

(O. O. O. in. i. 141, etc. ; iv. iii. 230, 286, etc.) 

signior-junior. in. i. 171. 

whitely. in. i. 187. 

steep-up rising, iv. i. 2. 

0' the to side. iv. i. 142. 

([/ have] calVd. iv. ii. 49.) 

Of piercing, iv. ii. 81. 

apostrophus. iv. ii. 112. 

candle, iv. iii. 171. 

scAoo/ of night, iv. iii. 252. 

unciatim. v. i. 63. 

pendant-like on ..'-* 

' , . ,., r v. 11. 67. 

pendaunt-hke J ' 

Price, v. ii. 224. 
(square, v. ii. 474.) 
Abate [a] throw or-) 
Bafc a throw J V ' "' 53 

a humble, v. ii. 726. 
straying, v. ii. 752. 

My references throughout, to plays other than the present of 
Shakespeare's, are to the Globe edition, except when mentioned 
otherwise. The illustrations in the notes are almost entirely of 
my own gathering ; where they are not I have made it a rule to 
mention to whom I have been indebted. 

In these days of reprints, and of the great New English 
Dictionary, very many storehouses of research are available 
which were not so to our less fortunate predecessors. Furness' 
valuable Variorum edition of the play made its appearance 
exactly when I required it, and it has been a constant assistance 
— saving great labour by its copious references to, and extracts 
from, the commentators. As usual, Schmidt's Lexicon and 
Murray's monumental Dictionary, already mentioned, have been 
continually in my hands. 

To our kind-hearted general editor, my old and valued friend, 
Mr. Craig, my gratitude is due for several useful notes. Let 
me here offer him my hearty congratulations upon the comple- 
tion of his Labour of Love, his delightful Little Quarto Shake- 
speare — completed, as I complete this, in September, 1905. 



LOVE'S LABOUR 'S LOST 



DRAMATIS PERSON^ 1 

Ferdinand, King of Navarre. 

Biron, 2 \ 

Longaville, 8 v Lords attending on the King, 

Dumain,* j 

BOYET ** I 

Mercade 6 1 L° rds atten <ti n g tne Princess of France. 

Don Adriano de Armado, 7 a fantastical Spaniard. 

Sir Nathaniel, a Curate. 

Holofernes, a Schoolmaster, 

Dull, a Constable. 

Costard, 8 a Clown. 

Moth, 9 Page to Armado. 

A Forester. 

The Princess of France. 

Rosaline, 10 ) 

Maria, j- Ladies attending on the Princess. 

Katharine,) 

Jaquenetta, a country Wench. 

Officers and others ', Attendants on the King and Princess. 
Scene : Navarre. 

1 " The enumeration of the persons was made by Mr. Rowe " (Johnson). 

2 Biron] Berowne or Beroune Qq i, 2, F 1, and some modern edd. 

3 Longaville] Longavill or Longavile Qq 1, 2, F 1 ; rhymes with ill in IV. iii. 
121, with mile, v. ii. 54. 

4 Dumain] Dumane or Dumaine F i, etc. ; Dumaine, some modern edd. 
6 Boyet] rhymes with debt, v. ii. 333. 

6 Mercade] Mar cade Qq, Ff, and some modern edd. 

7 Adriano de Armado] Adriana de Armado, or Armatho. 

8 Costard] Clown, old stage-directions. 

9 Moth] Mote, suggested by Grant White, in agreement with pronunciation in 
the play. 

10 Rosaline] rhymes with mine or thine. 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 

ACT I 

SCENE I.— The King of Navarre's Park. 

Enter FERDINAND, King of Navarre, BlRON, LONGAVILLE, 
and DUMAIN. 

King. Let fame that all hunt after in their lives, 
Live register'd upon our brazen tombs, 
And then grace us in the disgrace of death ; 
When, spite of cormorant devouring Time, 
Th' endeavour of this present breath may buy 5 

That honour which shall bate his scythe's keen edge, 
And make us heirs of all eternity. 
Therefore, brave conquerors — for so you are, 
That war against your own affections 
And the huge army of the world's desires — 10 

Our late edict shall strongly stand in force : 
Navarre shall be the wonder of the world ; 

Biron] Ff 2, 3, 4; Berowne Qq, F 1, and frequently. 1. King] Ferdinand 
Ff> Q°l- 5* Th' endeavour] Ff ; Thendeuour Q 1. 

3. disgrace] disfigurement. Compare Hartings' Ornithology 0/ Shakespeare, 
Sonnet xxxiii. 8. Coleridge noticed where, however, there is no more than 
the " artificial and sought for resem- the assertion. But is it not the quality 
blance in the words " in this line. It of voracity that has enabled the cor- 
is somewhat in Sidney's style in his morant to be domesticated for the 
Arcadia. See notes at 1. ii. 157-159, purpose of sea-fishing from time inl- 
and at iv. i. 63-64. memorial ? 

4. cormorant] ravenous. Furness 6. bate] dull, deaden or lessen. 

says "he can find no proof that this 10. army] a great many. Compare 

aquatic bird is more eager than others Sidney's Arcadia, bk. i. (repr. 1898, p. 

of its kind in satisfying hunger. Pos- 52), ante 1586 : "armies of objections 

sibly it is one of Pliny's facts." Pliny rising against any accepted opinion." 

here is merely an idle suggestion. See See The Merchant of Venice, in. v. 72. 



4 LOVES LABOUR'S LOST [act i, 

Our court shall be a little academe, 

Still and contemplative in living art. 

You three, Biron, Dumain, and Longaville, 15 

Have sworn for three years' term to live with me, 

My fellow-scholars, and to keep those statutes 

That are recorded in this schedule here : 

Your oaths are pass'd ; and now subscribe your names, 

That his own hand may strike his honour down 20 

That violates the smallest branch herein : — 

If you are arm'd to do, as sworn to do, 

Subscribe to your deep oaths, and keep it too. 

Long. I am resolv'd ; ' tis but a three years' fast : 

The mind shall banquet, though the body pine : 25 

Fat paunches have lean pates, and dainty bits 
Make rich the ribs, but bankrupt quite the wits. 

Dum. My loving lord, Dumain is mortified : 

13. academe] Q 2, F 2; Achademe Qi, Fi; Academy Ff 3, 4. 15. Dumain] 
Dumaine Q i ; Dumane F i, etc. 18. schedule] sedule Q i ; scedule Q 2, Ff. 
23. oaths] oath Steevens (1793). it] Qq, F 1 ; them Ff 3, 4. 27. bankrupt quite] 
bancrout quite Q 1 ; banerout quite Q 1 (Dev. copy), Furnivall ; bankerout Ff. 

13. academe] An uncommon poetic be read by the" Knights of the Helmet" 

form of "academy." See later, iv. iii. in Gesta Grayorum, 1594 (Nichols' Pro- 

300. The term came into use about gresses, iii. 285). 

this time of serious, or quasi-serious, 26. Fat paunches have lean pates] 

associations of students, from the name Ray and Fuller give this in their lists of 

of the garden near Athens where proverbs, but no earlier example has 

Plato taught. "A Platonicall garden been found than the present. The 

or orchard, otherwise called an Aca- sentiment is in Plato : " For (as Plato 

demie, where I was not long since with saith) . . . gluttonie fatteth the bodye, 

certaine yoong gentlemen of Aniou my maketh the minde dull and unapt, and 

companions discoursing togither of the which is worse, undermineth reason " 

institution in good maners, and of the (T. B.'s trans, of Primaudaye's French 

means how all estates may live well Academy, chap, xx., 1586). St. Jerome 

and happily " (T[hos.] B[owes'] trans, has : " Pinguis neuter non gignit sensum 

of De la Primaudaye's French A cademy, tenuem" translated from the Greek 

1577, Epistle Dedicatory, 1586). Greene, (Ray). " Pates " means the seat of in- 

in The Royal Exchange (Grosart, vii. tellect, " brains." See note at v. ii. 268. 

314), 1590, tells us that "Plato ad- Clarke inserts lines 26, 27 as a proverb 

mitted no Auditour in his "Ticademie, in his Paramiologia, 1639. 
but such as while they were his schollers 27. bankrupt] beggar, reduce to beg- 

woulde abstaine from women : for he gary. Compare Nashe, Christ's Teares 

was wont to say that the greatest enemie (Grosart, iv. 102), 1593: "In giving 

to memorie, was venerie." Compare them sutable phrase, had I the com- 

Dekker, Seven Deadly Sinnes of Lon- maund of a thousand singular wits, I 

don (Grosart, ii. 50), 1606: "the world should banqroute them all in descrip- 

itself is an Academ, to bring up man tion." 

in knowledge and to put him still into 28. mortified] become apathetic, de- 
action." The French Academy and the prived of feeling. Compare Romans 
Arcadia are two chief works ordered to viii. 13, Colossians iii. 5; and Mar- 



sc. i] LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 5 

The grosser manner of these world's delights 

He throws upon the gross world's baser slaves : 30 

To love, to wealth, to pomp, I pine and die ; 

With all these living in philosophy. 
Biron. I can but say their protestation over ; 

So much, dear liege, I have already sworn, 

That is, to live and study here three years. 35 

But there are other strict observances ; 

As not to see a woman in that term, 

Which I hope well is not enrolled there : 

And one day in a week to touch no food, 

And but one meal on every day beside ; 40 

The which I hope is not enrolled there : 

And then to sleep but three hours in the night, 

And not be seen to wink of all the day, 

When I was wont to think no harm all night, 

And make a dark night too of half the day, 45 

Which I hope well is not enrolled there. 

O, these are barren tasks, too hard to keep, 

Not to see ladies, study, fast, not sleep. 
King. Your oath is pass'd to pass away from these. 
Biron. Let me say no, my liege, an if you please. 50 

I only swore to study with your grace, 

And stay here in your court for three years' space. 
Long. You swore to that, Biron, and to the rest. 
Biron. By yea and nay, sir, then I swore in jest. 

What is the end of study ? let me know. 55 

31. pomp] pome Q I, 

lowe, Jew of Malta, Act i. : " she has dedicated only to variety and solace " 

mortified herself. . . . And is admitted (Nichols' Progresses, iii. 295). The 

to the Sisterhood." previous counsellors have recom- 

43. of all the day] in, or during all mended War, Fame, State, Virtue and 
the day. Compare Hamlet, 1. v. 60. Philosophy. 

44. think no harm all night] think 54. By yea and nay] An old biblical 
no harm of sleeping all night. I affirmation of a sanctimonious nature. 

48. Not to see ladies] In Gesta Gray- Compare A Merry Knack to Know a 

orum, 1594, "the sixth Councellor, Knave (Hazlitt'sDodsleyyi.siQ), quoted 

perswading Pass-time and Sport," says : in notes to The Merry Wives of Windsor 

"What, nothing but tasks? nothing (Arden ed. pp. 10, 60); and Udall's 

but working-days ? No feasting, no Roister Doister (Hazlitt's Dodsley, iii. 

music, no dancing, no triumphs, no 59), 1566 :" Hold by his yea and nay be 

comedies, no love, no ladies? Let his nown white son." See Matthew 

other men's lives be as pilgrimages, v. 37, etc. 
but Princes' lives are as Progresses, 55-58. See note on p. 184. 



6 LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST [act i. 

King. Why, that to know which else we should not know. 

Biron. Things hid and barr'd, you mean, from common sense ? 

King. Ay, that is study's god-like recompense. 

Biron. Come on, then ; I will swear to study so, 

To know the thing I am forbid to know ; 60 

As thus, — to study where I well may dine, 

When I to feast expressly am forbid ; 

Or study where to meet some mistress fine, 

When mistresses from common sense are hid ; 

Or, having sworn too hard a keeping oath, 65 

Study to break it and not break my troth. 

If study's gain be thus, and this be so, 

Study knows that which yet it doth not know. 

Swear me to this, and I will ne'er say no. 

King. These be the stops that hinder study quite, 70 

And train our intellects to vain delight. 

Biron. Why ? all delights are vain, and that most vain, 
Which with pain purchas'd doth inherit pain : 
As, painfully to pore upon a book, 

To seek the light of truth ; while truth the while 75 

Doth falsely blind the eyesight of his look : 
Light seeking light doth light of light beguile : 
So, ere you find where light in darkness lies, 
Your light grows dark by losing of your eyes. 
Study me how to please the eye indeed, 80 

By fixing it upon a fairer eye, 
Who dazzling so, that eye shall be his heed, 
And give him light that it was blinded by. 
Study is like the heaven's glorious sun, 

62. feast . . . forbid] Theobald et seq. ; fast . . . forbid Qq, Ff. 65. 

hard a keeping] hard-a-keeping Hanmer. 72. Why?] Qq, Ff; why, Pope, 

Steevens, Cambridge. and] Ff, Q 2 ; but Q 1, Cambridge. 77. of light] 

Qq, F 1 ; omitted in Ff 2, 3, 4. 

57. common sense] ordinary percep- 1064 : " her sight dazzling makes the 

tion ; average intelligence. wound seem three." "Who" refers 

71. train] allure, entice. to the eye of line 80. Johnson gives 

73. inherit] own, possess. See iv. i. an unnecessarily obscure explanation. 

20. his heed] that which he heeds or 

76. falsely] dishonestly, treacher- attends to ; his beacon. Schmidt, how- 

ously (Johnson). ever, explains " heed " here as meaning 

80. me] dativus ethicus. " guard, protection, means of safety." 

82. dazzling] becoming dim or In either case (and I dislike the latter 

dazzled. Compare Venus and Adonis, sense) the use is somewhat strained. 



SC. I.] 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



That will not be deep-search'd with saucy looks ; 85 

Small have continual plodders ever won, 

Save base authority from others' books. 

These earthly godfathers of heaven's lights 

That give a name to every fixed star, 

Have no more profit of their shining nights 90 

Than those that walk and wot not what they are. 

Too much to know is to know nought but fame ; 

And every godfather can give a name. 
King. How well he 's read, to reason against reading ! 
Dum. Proceeded well, to stop all good proceeding ! 95 

Long. He weeds the corn, and still lets grow the weeding. 
Biron. The spring is near, when green geese are a-breeding. 
Dum. How follows that ? 

Biron. Fit in his place and time. 

Dum. In reason nothing. 
Biron. Something then in rhyme. 



86. plodders] drudges. Not else- 
where in Shakespeare. Nashe has: 
"Grosse plodders they were all, that 
had some learning and reading, but no 
wit to make use of it " (The Unfortunate 
Traveller [Grosart, v. 74], 1594). 

95. Proceeded] Johnson suggests here 
the academical sense of taking a de- 
gree in a university. Compare Ascham, 
Scholemaster (Arber, p. 24) : " untill 
the Scholar be made able to go to the 
Universitie, to procede in Logik, Rhe- 
toricke, and other kindes of learning." 
To continue one's course of study. 

97. green geese] young geese of the 
previous autumn, fit for sale about 
Whitsuntide. " Green geese " suggests 
festivity (line 106), since Green Goose 
Fair, or Goose Fair, held on Whit 
Monday when they were in season, 
was a feast of merriment. See Ben 
Jonson's Poetaster, m. i. (1601). Gif- 
ford says it was still held at Bow 
in Essex. Compare Beaumont and 
Fletcher, Wit in a Constable : " Our 
country sports ... at Islington and 
Green - goose - Fair " ; and Webster, 
Cure for a Cuckold, 11. iii. : " did not 
he dance the hobby-horse In Hackney 
morris once ? . . . Yes, yes, at Green 
goose fair." As a further " reason " of 
the fitness " in place and time," com- 



pare the following passage in The 
Penniless Parliament of Threadbare 
Poets, 1608 (Hindley's reprint) : " 59. 
Furthermore, for the benefit and in- 
crease of foolish humours, we think it 
necessary that those our dear friends 
who are sworn true servitors to womens 
pantables, should have this order set 
doun, that you suit yourselves hand- 
somely against goose-feast, and if you 
meet not a fair lass betwixt St. Paul's 
and Stratford that day, we will bestow 
a new suit of satin upon you, so you 
will bear all the charges." A note re- 
fers to Green Goose Fair held on 23rd 
May at Stratford, Bow. 

99. reason . . . rhyme] The saying 
" neither rhyme nor reason " occurs in 
The Comedy of Errors, 11. ii. 48. " You 
shall hear him chafe beyond all reason 
or rhyme " {Jacob and Esau [Hazlitt's 
Dodsley, ii. 217], 1558). Bartlett 
quotes from Tyndale, 1530. With re- 
ference to the suggested alterations in 
this scene, to make rhymes agree 
where they do not, writers were care- 
less upon this point when they got 
amongst the doggerels, and we are 
not enabled to correct their methods 
by ours. Alliteration saves the position 
often, as in " lily lips " in A Midsummer- 
Night's Dream, v. i. 337. 



8 LOVE'S LABOUR S LOST [act i. 

King. Biron is like an envious sneaping frost ioo 

That bites the first-born infants of the spring. 

Biron. Well, say I am ; why should proud summer boast 
Before the birds have any cause to sing ? 
Why should I joy in any abortive birth ? 
At Christmas I no more desire a rose 105 

Than wish a snow in May's new-fangled shows ; 
But like of each thing that in season grows. 
So you, to study now it is too late, 
That were to climb o'er the house to unlock the gate. 

King. Well, sit you out : go home, Biron : adieu ! 110 

Biron. No, my good lord ; I have sworn to stay with you : 
And though I have for barbarism spoke more 
Than for that angel knowledge you can say, 
Yet confident I '11 keep what I have sworn, 
And bide the penance of each three years' day. 115 

Give me the paper ; let me read the same ; 
And to the strict'st decrees I '11 write my name. 

King. How well this yielding rescues thee from shame ! 

Biron [reads]. Item. That no woman shall come within a 

mile of my court, — Hath this been proclaimed ? 120 

104. any] Qq, Ff; an Pope. 106. shows] Qq, Ff; earth Theobald; mirth 
S. Walker conj., Globe. 109. That . . . gate] Ff, Q 2; Climb o'er the 
house to unlock the little gate Q i. no. sit] Qq, Ff 2, 3, 4 ; Jit F 1. 114. 
sworn] Qq, F 1 ; swore Ff 2, 3,4, Cambridge. 

100. sneaping] biting, nipping. Com- 106. new-fangled shows] open-air 
pare Lucrece, 333, and The Winter's festivities freshly and expressly fash- 
Tale, 1. ii. 13. Seems to be a rare word ioned for the merry month of May. 
outside Shakespeare. Ray gives it as In order to make rhyme Theobald 
North country. It occurs in the Second and Walker would read " earth " or 
Maiden's Tragedy (Hazlitt's Dodsley, "mirth," an unwarrantable license in 
x. 428). See snape, Halliwell's Die- either case. 

tionary. 107. like of] occurs several times in 

101. infants of the spring] buds just Shakespeare. Compare " Rosalynd's 
opening. Compare Hamlet, 1. ii. 39. Madrigal " in Lodge's Euphues Golden 
Craig refers to Lodge's Phillis, Song Legacie : — 

v » (^S) : " Pate an( * dying infant of " Then sit thou safely on my knee, 

the spring." And let thy bower my bosome be ; 

105, 106. At Christmas . . . snow in Lurke in my eies, I like of thee." 
May] Gabriel Harvey has the same 112. barbarism] intellectual ignor- 
sentiment in one of his familiar letters ance ; lack of culture. Nashe and 
to " Immerito " (Spenser) : " shall I Harvey both use the word in 1589. 
nowe by the way send you a Januarie Compare Dekker, Gull's Horn Book, 
gift in Aprile : and as it were shewe you 1609 : " You shall never be good 
a Christmas Gambowlde after Easter ? " Graduates in these rare Sciences of 
(Grosart,i. 78 [1580]). "Christmas gam- Barbarivne and Idiotisme." 

bold" is in The Taming of the Shrew. 



: 



.] LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 9 



ong. Four days ago. 
Biron. Let 's see the penalty — on pain of losing her tongue. 

Who devised this penalty ? 
Long. Marry, that did I. 

Biron. Sweet lord, and why? 125 

Long. To fright them hence with that dread penalty. 
Biron. A dangerous law against gentility ! 

Ltem. If any man be seen to talk with a woman 

within the term of three years, he shall endure such 

public shame as the rest of the court shall possibly 130 

devise. 

This article, my liege, yourself must break ; 

For well you know here comes in embassy 

The French king's daughter with yourself to speak — 

A maid of grace and complete majesty — 135 

About surrender up of Aquitaine 

To her decrepit, sick, and bed-rid father : 

Therefore this article is made in vain, 

Or vainly comes the admired princess hither. 
King. What say you, lords ? why, this was quite forgot. 140 
Biron. So study evermore is overshot : 

While it doth study to have what it would, 

It doth forget to do the thing it should ; 

And when it hath the thing it hunteth most, 

'Tis won as towns with fire ; so won, so lost. 145 

King. We must of force dispense with this decree ; 

She must lie here on mere necessity. 
Biron. Necessity will make us all forsworn 

Three thousand times within these three years' space ; 

For every man with his affects is born, 1 50 

Not by might master'd, but by special grace. 

127. Biron] Theobald; Qq, Ff assign this to Longaville. 130. shall] Ff, 

Q 2 ; can Q 1, and edd. possibly] Ff, Q 2 ; possible Q 1. 

127. gentility] good manners. 133) : " Nature working effects by her 
145. won as towns with fire] For secret affectes " (the words are trans- 
some historical parallels, the reader posed in my edition). 
may refer to Montaigne's Essays, bk. 151. by might master'd] Biron's 
ii. chap. iii. (Florio's trans. Temple thoughts are, perhaps, justifying his 
Classics, vol. ii. pp. 49-50). "affects." "Might masters right" 
147. lie] dwell, stay. was a familiar saying, occurring twice 
150. affects] affections. See Othello, in G. Whetstone's Promos and Cos- 
1. iii. 264. Compare Lodge, Euphues sandra, 1578. 
Golden Legacie (Shakes. Lib. 1875, p. 



10 LOVE'S LABOUR S LOST [act i. 

If I break faith, this word shall speak for me, 
I am forsworn on mere necessity. 
So to the laws at large I write my name ; 
And he that breaks them in the least degree 155 

Stands in attainder of eternal shame : 
Suggestions are to others as to me ; 
But I believe, although I seem so loath, 
I am the last that will last keep his oath. 
But is there no quick recreation granted ? 160 

King. Ay, that there is. Our court, you know, is haunted 
With a refined traveller of Spain ; 
A man in all the world's new fashion planted, 
That hath a mint of phrases in his brain ; 
One whom the music of his own vain tongue 165 

Doth ravish like enchanting harmony ; 
A man of complements, whom right and wrong 
Have chose as umpire of their mutiny : 
This child of fancy that Armado hight, 
For interim to our studies shall relate 170 

In high-born words the worth of many a knight 

154. Subscribes and gives back the Paper.] Capell ; Subscribes, mod. edd. 
157. others] Ff, Q 2 ; other Q 1. 162. refined] Qq, F 1 ; conceited Ff 2, 3, 4. 

165. One whom] Ff 2, 3, 4 ; On who Q 1 ; One who F 1. 

156. Stands in attainder of] is con- of Nature" (Grosart's Harvey, ii. 211, 
demned or sentenced to, by the second 212). 

"item" of the proclamation. Shake- 165. One whom] See note at iv. ii. 

speare has the word "attainder " else- 78. 

where several times with the simple 167. complements] affectations of 

sense of stain, soil. Compare Nashe, courtesy, polish. 

Have With You, etc. (Grosart, iii. 38), 169. child of fancy] Compare "child 

1596 : " Gabriell Scurveis witles mali- of honour and renown," 1 Henry IV. 

cious testimony of thee ... is an at- in. ii. 139; and Sidney's Arcadia, bk. 

tainder that will • sticke by thee for iii. (repr. p. 245) : " being a child of 

ever." passion, and never acquainted with 

157. Suggestions] temptations. The mediocrity." A very ancient figure of 
usual sense in Shakespeare. speech, "originally a Hebraism of 

161. haunted] frequented or visited Scripture translation" (New Eng. 
by. Compare Sidney's Arcadia, bk. i. Diet.). 

(repr. 1898, p. 10) : " a man who for hight] is named, 

his hospitality is so much haunted that 170. interim] interval of relaxation, 

no news stir but come to his ears." interlude. Compare Ben Jonson, 

162. With] by. Cynthia's Revels, 1. i. (1600) : " in which 
164. a mint of phrases] Gabriel disguise, during the interim of these 

Harvey uses similar language of Lyly revels, I will get to follow some one of 

in 1589 : " which he is liable to main- Diana's maids." 

taine sumptuously with a mint of quaint 171. high-born] high-borne may be 

and Vncouth Similes, dainty monsters correct. " Born " is usually spelt borne 



:. i.] 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



11 



From tawny Spain, lost in the world's debate. 

How you delight, my lords, I know not, I ; 

But I protest I love to hear him lie, 

And I will use him for my minstrelsy. 175 

liron. Armado is a most illustrious wight, 

A man of fire-new words, fashion's own knight. 
<ong. Costard the swain, and he shall be our sport ; 

And so to study — three years is but short. 

Enter DULL with a letter, and COSTARD. 

►#//. Which is the duke's own person ? 180 

iiron. This, fellow. What would'st ? 
>ull. I myself reprehend his own person, for I am his 
grace's tharborough : but I would see his own person 
in flesh and blood. 
Biron. This is he. 185 

Dull. Signior Arm — -Arm — commends you. There's 

villany abroad : this letter will tell you more. 
Cost. Sir, the contempts thereof are as touching me. 
King. A letter from the magnificent Armado. 

177. fire-new] fire, new F i. Enter . . . Costard] Malone; Enter a Con- 
stable with Costard with a letter Qq, Ff. 180. duke's] Qq, Ff; King's 
Theobald. 183. tharborough] tar borough Q 1. 



at this time, so that the choice lies be- 
tween high-birth and high-bearing. 
But the compounds of " born " are 
abundant. 

172. tawny Spain] the colour of the 
people given to their country, sun- 
burnt clime. Compare Greene, Never 
Too Late (Grosart, viii. 200) : " Flora in 
tawnie hid up all her flowers . . . upon 
the barren earth." Elsewhere Greene 
applies the epithet to autumn leaves, 
and to eyes. 

world's debate] warfare. The 

thought may have been suggested by 
the disasters of the recent Spanish 
Armada or Armado. In this sense 
Lyly uses it in The Woman in the 
Moone, 11. i. (ante 1580) : " What telst 
thou me of love. . . . Fyre of debate 
is kindled in my hart." 

177. fire-new] fresh from the mint. 
The expression appears again in Rich- 
ard III., Twelfth Night and King 
Lear. It appears to be a Shake- 
spearian coinage. Craig gives a later 



example in his note to King Lear 
(Arden edition, p. 235). 

182. reprehend] represent. See note 
at " pollusion," iv. ii. 44 ; and see v. 
ii. 500, 502, and line 188 below. 

183. tharborough] thirdborough ; a 
petty constable. In Blount's Glosso- 
graphia (1656) the term is used inter- 
changeably with "headborough." But 
Ben Jonson in his Tale of a Tub 
(1633) discriminates these officers, high 
constable, headborough, petty con- 
stable and thirdborough. He places 
these on the stage, the lowest in rank 
being the thirdborough, a tinker. See 
The Taming of the Shrew, Induction. 

188. contempts] Slender is credited 
with a similar confusion in The Merry 
Wives of Windsor, 1. i. 258. 

189. magnificent Armado] This form 
of the magnificent Armada of Spain 
occurs twice in Greene's Spanish Mas- 
querado, 1589 ; and in the second part 
of Marlowe's Tamburlaine, 1. ii. " Mag- 
nificent" here refers to his language. 



12 LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST [act i. 

Biron. How low soever the matter, I hope in God for 190 

high words. 
Long. A high hope for a low heaven : God grant us 

patience ! 
Biron. To hear? or forbear hearing? 
Long. To hear meekly, sir, and to laugh moderately; or 195 

to forbear both. 
Biron. Well, sir, be it as the style shall give us cause to 

climb in the merriness. 
Cost. The matter is to me, sir, as concerning Jaquenetta. 

The manner of it is, I was taken with the manner. 200 
Biron. In what manner? 
Cost. In manner and form following, sir ; all those three : 

I was seen with her in the manor-house, sitting with 

her upon the form, and taken following her into the 

park; which, put together, is in manner and form 205 

following. Now, sir, for the manner, — it is the manner 

of a man to speak to a woman ; for the form, — in some 

form. 
Biron. For the following, sir ? 
Cost. As it shall follow in my correction ; and God defend 210 

the right ! 
King. Will you hear this letter with attention ? 
Biron. As we would hear an oracle. 
Cost. Such is the simplicity of man to hearken after the 

flesh. 2 1 5 

192. heaven] having Theobald. 194. hearing] Qq, Ff, Steevens (1793) ; 

laughing Capell and modern edd. 

M Standinge altogither uppon termes ing] Another set expression of the time. 

of honour and exquisite formes of Craig refers to Nashe's Unfortunate 

speeches, karriinge a certayne brave Traveller (Gosse's ed. p. 80), 1594. I 

magnificent grace and majestye with find an earlier example in the New 

them " (G. Harvey, Letter to Spenser Eng. Diet, from T. Washington's trans. 

[Grosart, i. 122], 1580). of Nicholay's Voyage, 1585 : " Over 

194. hear or for bear] See Ezekiel ii. 5. their shoulders in the fonrme andmaner 

200. taken with the manner] more as the picture following doth shew." 

properly "mainour," i.e. hand-work, And see Lyly's Mydas, v. ii. (1592): 

an old form of " manoeuvre." Taken in "you shall have the beard, in manner 

the act. Palsgrave's Lesclaircissement and form following." 

(1530) has "I take with the maner, as 210, 211. God defend the right] See 

a thefe is taken with the thefte, or a Richard II. 1. iii. 101 ; 2 Henry VI. 

person in the doyng of any other acte, 11. iii. 55 ; and Greene, Euphues to 

Je prens sur le faict." A legal ex- Philautus, 1587 : " I say therefore God 

pression. and our right ; and with that catching 

305, 206. in manner and form follow- a strong staffe," etc. (Grosart, vi. 258). 



I.] 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



13 



T .ing. [Reads.] Great deputy, the welkin's vicegerent, and sole 
dominator of Navarre, my soul's earth's God, and body's 
fostering patron. 
Cost. Not a word of Costard yet. 
r ing. So it is,— 220 

'est. It may be so ; but if he say it is so, he is, in telling 

true, but so. 
ing. Peace ! 

Cost. Be to me and every man that dares not fight. 
King. No words ! 225 

Cost. Of other men's secrets, I beseech you. 
King. So it is, besieged with sable-coloured melancholy, I did 
commend the black oppressing humour to the most whole- 
some physic of thy health-giving air ; and, as I am a gentle- 
man, betook myself to walk. The time when ? About the 230 

222. true, but so] true : but so Qq, Ff ; true, but so so Hanmer. 



216. welkin] sky. See iv. ii. 5. 
vicegerent] seems to have been 

a term affected by Philip of Spain. 
Greene in The Spanish Masquerado, 
1589 (Grosart, v. 245, 281), refers twice 
to his " Vicegerentes of his Indies." 
"Captain General of the Ocean" was 
another of his titles. In the transferred 
sense here it is used by Stubbes, Ana- 
totnie 0/ Abuses, ii. 104: "The Devill 
himselfe, whose Vice-gerent ... he 
showes himselfe to be " (1583)0 

217. dominator] lord, ruler. The 
word occurs again in Titus Andronicus, 
11. iii, 31, in an astrological sense. The 
only example of the word prior to 
Shakespeare, in the New Eng. Diet., 
is from Mirrour Saluacioun (circa 
1450), applied to the Deity. Shake- 
speare is likely to have met it in Put- 
tenham's Arte of English Poesie ; chap, 
xvi. is headed " In what forme of 
Poesie the great Princes and domin- 
ator s of the world were honored." 

221. It may be so ; but if he say it is 
so] This recalls the jingle in Much Ado 
About Nothing, 1. i. 219: "Like the 
old tale, my lord ; it is not so, nor 
'twas not so, but indeed God forbid it 
should be so." 

222. but so] indifferent, not worth 
much. Equivalent to our " but so so," 
which occurs frequently in Shakespeare. 
Trie phrase "no more but so" was a 
favourite with Marlowe. 



229. as I am a gentleman] frequent 
in Shakespeare. It occurs twice in The 
Merry Wives of Windsor. 

230-235. The time when . . . the 
place where] For "the manner what, "see 
above, line 200. An early example of this 
classical mode of speech is in Gabriel 
Harvey's celebrated Judgement of 
Earthquakes (Grosart, i. 63), 1580 : " We 
are to judge of as advisedly and provi- 
dently, as possibly we can, by the con- 
sideration and comparison of circumstan- 
ces, the tyme when : the place where : the 
qualities and dispositions of the persons, 
amongst whom such." Compare Wil- 
son's Art of Rhetorique (1553) : " Seven 
circumstances whiche are to be con- 
sidered in diverse matters. . . . Who, 
what, and where, by what helpe and 
by whose : Why how and when, doe 
many thinges disclose " (1562 ed. 
fol. 9) ; and Dekker, The Belman of 
London (Grosart, iii. 83) : " The first 
question hee demanded was, if he were 
stalled to the Rogue or no ? The poore 
Hungarian answered, Yes, He was : 
then was he asked by Whom he was 
stalled, and Where, and in What 
manner of complement it was done." 
At the very end of the Arcadia there 
is another example. See also The 
Troublesome Raigne of King John 
(Shakes. Lib. ed. Hazlitt, p. 315), and 
The Schoole ofSalerne, edited by Sir A. 
Cooke, 1830, p. 135. 



14 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



[act I. 



sixth hour ; when beasts most graze, birds best peck, and 
men sit down to that nourishment which is called supper : so 
much for the time when. Now for the ground which ? which, 
I mean, I walked upon : it is ycleped thy park. Then for the 
place where ? where, I mean, I did encounter that obscene 
and most preposterous event, that draweth from my snow- 
white pen the ebon-coloured ink, which here thou viewest, 
beholdest, surveyest, or seest. But to the place where ; it 
standeth north-north-east and by east from the west corner 
of thy curious-knotted garden: there did I see that low- 
spirited swain, that base minnow of thy mirth, — 

Cost. Me? 

King, that unlettered small-knowing soul, — 



235 



240 



241. minnow] minion Johnson conj. 
me ?] Ff, Qq, Globe ; Me. . . . Me. . . 

235. where]" when, where and how" 
occurs in Romeo and Juliet, 11. iii. 61, 
and in Richard II. in. iv. 79. 

236c preposterous] entirely out of 
place, highly improf^r. Compare 
Nashe, Pasquils Returne (Grosart, i. 
121), 1589: " A preposterous Humour 
noted in the Ecclesiasticall Histories." 
See Othello, Arden ed. p. 33. 

237. ebon-coloured] Compare Greene, 
Tullies Love (Grosart, vii. 146), 1589 : 
" Hir eyes like Ariadnes sparkling 
Starres Shone frome the Ebon Arches of 
hir browes." 

239. north-north-east and] The points 
of the compass were very carefully at- 
tended to in the early " ordering of 
gardens." 

240. curious-knotted garden] laby- 
rinths and intricate patterns amongst 
the flower-beds were the glory of early 
gardeners. See Gervase Markham's 
Countrie Farme (Maison Rustique 
trans.), 1616, or H. Dethick, Gardeners 1 
Labyrinth, 1577, for illustrations. 
See Sir Thos. Browne's Cyrus 1 Garden. 
Bacon, Essay of Gardens, writes : "for 
the Making of Knots, or Figures, with 
Diuers Coloured Earths . . . they be 
but Toyes : You may see as good 
sights, many times in Tarts" (1625). 
And compare Shirley, Gentleman of 
Venice, 1. ii. : — 

" When I am digging, he is cutting 
unicorns, 
And lions in some hedge, or else 

devising 
New knots upon the ground, draw- 
ing out crowns, 



242, 244, 246. Me? . . . Me? . . . 
. me. Hanmer, Steevens, Craig. 

And the duke's arms, castles and 

cannons in them : 
Here gallies, there a ship giving a 

broadside : 
Here out of turf he carves a senator 
With all his robes, making a speech 

to Time 
That grows hard by, and twenty 

curiosities, — 
I think he means to embroider all 
the garden." 
Chapter iii. in Parkinson's Paridisi in 
Sole Paradisus (1629) is devoted to this 
subject in The Ordering of Gardens. 
" Knot" and " flower-knot " are still in 
use in Derry dialect. 

240. low-spirited] base. Armado 
corrects here the moderh use. 

241. minnow] Compare Coriolanus, 
in. i. 89. A contemptible little person, 
a shrimp. Nashe, speaking of Gabriel 
Harvey, says : " Let him denie that 
there was another Shewe made of the 
little Minnow his brother. . . . Where- 
upon Dicke came and broke the Col- 
ledge glasse windows " (Have With You 
to Saffron Walden [Grosart, iii. 118], 
1596). Steevens refers to this passage. 
The parallel in Coriolanus is hardlv 
good, since " minnows " there is merely 
a part of the Triton appellation, which 
may have been suggested by one of 
the spectacles presented to Elizabeth 
at Kenilworth in 1575. See Laneham's 
Letter. 

243. unlettered] illiterate, ignorant. 
See Sonnet lxxxv. 6, and again in this 
play, iv. ii. 148 ; and Henry V. 1. i. 55. 
Nashe uses the term in A Wonderfull 



Co 



255 



260 



1.] LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 15 

ost. Me? 

King, that shallow vassal, — 245 

Cost. Still me? 

King, which, as I remember, hight Costard, — 

Cost. O ! me. 

King, sorted and consorted, contrary to thy established pro- 
claimed edict and continent canon, which with— O! with — 250 
but with this I passion to say wherewith, — 

Cost. With a wench. 

King, with a child of our grandmother Eve, a female ; or, for thy 
more sweet understanding, a woman. Him, I, as my ever- 
esteemed duty pricks me on, have sent to thee, to receive the 
meed of punishment by thy sweet grace's officer, Anthony 
Dull, a man of good repute, carriage, bearing, and estimation. 

Dull. Me, an 't shall please you ; I am Anthony Dull. 

King. For Jaquenetta,— so is the weaker vessel called which I 
apprehended with the aforesaid swain, — I keep her as a 
vessel of thy law's fury ; and shall, at the least of thy sweet 

250. which] with, Theobald. 
keep] Qq, Ff 2, 3. 4 5 keeper F 1. 
Prognostication (Grosart, ii. 161), 1591 : 
"insomuch that sundrie unlettered fooles 
should creepe into the ministrie." 

245. vassal] a country bumpkin, or 
clown. Collier's " Corrector " would 
read " vessel " here, which Dyce 
adopted. Compare Lodge's Euphues 
Golden Legacie (Shakes. Lib. 1875, p. 
21), 1590: "In this humour was Sala- 
dyne making his brother Rosader his 
foote boy ... as if he had been the 
sonne of any country vassal." 

249. sorted] associated. 

250. continent canon] restraining 
canon ; or canon enforcing restraint. 
This is the usual explanation, or choice 
of explanations, of Armado's words. But 
he may mean merely, in his pedantic 
way, the edict and the law contained 
therein. Ben Jonson uses the word 
similarly in Every Man out of his 
Humour, Induction : "So in every 
human body, The choler, melancholy 
. . . flow continually In some part and 
are not continent." 

251. passion] grieve, as in Venus and 
Adonis, 1059. Compare Nashe, The 
Unfortunate Traveller, 1594 : " Having 
passioned thus a while, she hastely 
ranne and lookt herselfe in her glasse." 

253. child of . . . Eve] Compare 



254. sweet] omitted in Ff 2, 3, 4. 260. 

261. vessel] vassal Theobald. 

Harvey's Pierce's Supererogation (Gros- 
art, ii. 92), 1592-93: "the sonnes of 
Adam, and the daughters of Eve have 
no neede of the serpentes carrowse to 
sette them agogg " ; and Dekker later : 
" that excellent country Lady, Innocent 
Simplicity, being the first . . . cham- 
ber-maide that our great gran dame Eve 
entertained into service " (GulVs Horn 
Book). 

259. weaker vessel] See 1 Peter iii. 7 
for the expression applied to a wife. 
But the term was proverbial for any 
woman earlier than the time of this 
play. Greene has it twice in Mamillia 
(Grosart, ii. 95, 255), 1583 : " They say 
a woman is the weaker vessel, but sure 
in my iudgement it is in the strength 
of her body, and not in the force of her 
minde " ; and "women sure, whom they 
count the weake vessels, had more neede 
to be counselled than condemned." 
Lyly has it also in Euphues (Arber, 
p. 78) : " men are alwayes laying 
baites for women, which are the weaker 
vessels " ; and again, in Sapho and Phao, 
1. iv. (1584) : " I cannot but oftentimes 
smile to myselfe to heare men call us 
weaker vessels. " 

261. vessel] Compare Romans ix. 21, 
22, 23 (Steevens). 



16 LOVES LABOUR'S LOST [act i. 

notice, bring her to trial. Thine in all compliments of 
devoted and heart-burning heat of duty, 

Don Adriano de Armado. 

Biron. This is not so well as I looked for, but the best that 265 

ever I heard. 
King. Ay, the best for the worst. But, sirrah, what say 

you to this ? 
Cost. Sir, I confess the wench. 
King. Did you hear the proclamation ? 
Cost. I do confess much of the hearing it, but little of the 

marking of it. 
King. It was proclaimed a year's imprisonment to be 

taken with a wench. 
Cost. I was taken with none, sir: I was taken with a 275 

damsel. 
King. Well, it was proclaimed damsel. 
Cost. This was no damsel neither, sir : she was a virgin. 
King. It is so varied too, for it was proclaimed virgin. 
Cost. If it were, I deny her virginity : I was taken with a 280 

maid. 
King. This maid will not serve your turn, sir. 
Cost. This maid will serve my turn, sir. 
King. Sir, I will pronounce your sentence : you shall fast 

a week with bran and water. 285 

Cost. I had rather pray a month with mutton and porridge. 

264. Adriano] Qq ; Adriana Ff. 276. damsel] demsel Q 1 ; damosell Ff, Q 2. 
277, 278. damsel] Q 1 ; damosel Ff, Q 2. 

267. the best for the worst] Compare ham's Kenilworth (1575) : " Well, after 

Dekker's Strange Horse-Race (Grosart, this bride cam thear, by too and too, 

iii. 364) : " The Masquers . . . not a dozen damzels for bridemaides : . . . 

needing any Vizards (their owne az meete for such a bride az a treen 

visages beeing good enough because ladl for a porige pot " (Furnivall's 

bad enough)." But Lyly gives the Captain Cox, Ballad Society, p. 24, 

best parallel: "[Perim danceth] How 1871). 

like you this ; doth he well ? Diog. 279. varied] diversified in language. 

The better, the worse" (Campaspe, v. \.). Compare Sonnet cv. 10, and see this 

Greene quotes this in Tritameron (Gros- play below, iv. ii. g. 

art, iii. 88), 1584 : " I thinke of lovers as 285. bran and water] Compare Mea- 

Diogenes did of dancers . . . the better sure for Measure, iv. iii. 160; and 

the worse." Nashe, Summer's Last Will (Grosart, 

276. damsel] a girl. Some commen- vi. 122), 159^, quoted in the Arden 
tators preserve the old spelling and edition of Measure for Measure. 
make a point of the signification " an 286. mutton and porridge] mutton- 
unmarried lady of noble birth " (Halli- broth. " Porridge " and " pottage " were 
well). But the word was in ordinary used synonymously, the former prob- 
use earlier than this time, as in Lane- ably formed in imitation of the latter 



sc. iL] LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 17 

King. And Don Armado shall be your keeper. 
My Lord Biron, see him deliver'd o'er : 
And go we, lords, to put in practice that 
Which each to other hath so strongly sworn. 290 

[Exeunt King, Longaville, and Dumain. 

Biron. I '11 lay my head to any good man's hat, 
These oaths and laws will prove an idle scorn. 
Sirrah, come on. 

Cost. I suffer for the truth, sir : for true it is I was taken 

with Jaquenetta, and Jaquenetta is a true girl ; and 295 
therefore welcome the sour cup of prosperity ! Afflic- 
tion may one day smile again ; and till then, sit thee 
down, sorrow ! [Exeunt. 

SCENE II.— The Same. 
Enter ARMADO and MOTH. 
Arm. Boy, what sign is it when a man of great spirit grows 

melancholy ? 
Moth. A great sign, sir, that he will look sad. 
Arm. Why, sadness is one and the self-same thing, dear 

imp. 5 

293. Given to Dull in the Collier MS. 

Scene n. 

Scene II.] Capell ; Scene in. Pope. Enter Armado . . .] Enter Armado a Brag- 
gart F 2. 3. Moth] Rowe et seq. and throughout scene ; Boy. F i, Q i. 
4, 7, 11, etc. Arm(ado)] Qq ; Brag., Bra. or Br. Ff. 

from puree. Cotgrave has " La puree my cap for a noble " ; and in A Look- 

de pots : Pease strained, Pease pot- ing Glass for London and England 

age"; and " Potage : Pottage, por- (1594) he has: "I hold my cap to a 

ridge." Nashe speaks of this good noble." See v. ii. 554 (note), and 

nourishment : " Amongst all other Beaumont and Fletcher, Knight of 

stratagems ... to pumpe out mutton the Burning Pestle, in. ii. : " I hold 

and porridge into Fraunce ? this coulde my cap to a farthing he does." 

weather our souldiers . . . poore fielde 295. true] honest, 

mise, they have almost got the colicke 297, 298. sit . . . sorrow] See iv. 

and stone with eating of provant" iii. 4. 
(Four e Letters Confuted[Grosaxt,ii. 285], 

1593). Furness suggests a double mean- Scene 11. 
ing to "mutton," well known, but not 

necessarily implied here. 5. imp] primarily a sapling, a young 

291. lay] bet. "I take six to one shoot; then a child, especially of noble 

saies the Gripe, I lay it saies the vincent, origin ; and, commonly, any child, 

and so they make a bet " (Greene, though now chiefly limited to a " child 

second part of Conny- catching [Gros- of the devil." Compare Euphues (Arbei, 

art, x. 84], 1592). On the title-page of p. 108) : " This is therefore to admonish 

the same tract Greene has : " if you all young Imps and novices in love, not 

reade without laughing, He give you to blow the coales of fancy with desire." 

2 



18 LOVES LABOUR'S LOST [act i. 

Moth. No, no ; O Lord, sir, no. 

Arm. How canst thou part sadness and melancholy, my 
tender juvenal ? 

Moth. By a familiar demonstration of the working, my 

tough senior. 10 

Arm. Why tough senior? why tough senior? 

Moth. Why tender juvenal ? why tender juvenal ? 

Arm. I spoke it, tender juvenal, as a congruent epitheton 
appertaining to thy young days, which we may nomi- 
nate tender. 1 5 

Moth. And I, tough senior, as an appertinent title to your 
old time, which we may name tough. 

Arm. Pretty, and apt. 

Moth. How mean you, sir ? I pretty, and my saying apt ? 

or I apt, and my saying pretty ? 20 

Arm. Thou pretty, because little. 

Moth. Little pretty, because little. Wherefore apt ? 

Arm. And therefore apt, because quick. 

10, 11, 16. senior] signeor Q 1; signeur Ff. 13. epitheton] Ff 2, 3, 4 ; 

apethaton Q 1 ; apathaton F 1, Q 2. 

6. O Lord, sir] surely, certainly, master, that is to say, a Pedagogue, 

Compare Ben Jonson, Every Man out one not a little versed in the disci- 

ofhis Humour, 11. i. : " His lady ! what, plinating of the juvenal frie " {The 

is she fair, splendidious, and amiable ? May-Lady [Nichols' Progresses, ii. 96 

Gent. O Lord, sir I " ; and in Jonson's (1823)] ; Presented before the Queen at 

Case is Altered the ejaculation is so Wanstead, 1578). See Introduction, 

used. See, however, the New Eng. Diet, in 

8. juvenal] youth. The earliest ex- v. Disciplinating, where the word reads 

ample of the word in the New Eng. j uv entail ; and in the edition 1739 

Diet. Later, this term became famous (Dublin) it reads juvenile. 

as a quibbling name for Nashe : " As 9. working] operation. 

Acteon was worried of his owne hound : 13. congruent] suitable. Ben Jonson 

so is Tom Nash of his Isle of Dogs, uses the word in Discoveries (p. 131) : 

Dogges were the death of Euripides, " De Stylo. The congruent and har- 

but bee not disconsolate gallant young monious fitting of parts in a sentence." 

Iuvenall, Linus the sonne of Apollo We have this word again from Holo- 

died the same death " (Meres, Wits femes, v. i. 85. See note for better 

Treasurie, 1598); and Greene speaks examples. 

of " young Iuvenal that byting Satyr- epitheton] an adjective indicating 

ist" in a well-known passage in his some characteristic quality or attribute 

Groatsworth of Wit (Grosart, xii. 143), (New Eng. Diet.). The earliest form of 

which probably (in spite of Dyce) refers the word " epithet." Compare Greene, 

to Nashe. Shakespeare has this word for Planetomachia (Grosart, v. 101), 1585 : 

a youth again in this play (111. i. 60) and in "which naturall and proper qualitie 

1 Henry IV. i. ii. 22, andk Midsummer- in my judgement caused the auncient 

Night's Dream, in. i. 97, with no refer- Poets to attribute this Epitheton unto 

ence to the proper name. The word Venus: Alma. 1 " 

seems to be due to Sir Philip Sidney : 16. appertinent] belonging. See 2 

" I am, Potentissima Domina, a School- Henry IV. 1. ii. 194. 



sc. 



ii] LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 19 



Moth. Speak you this in my praise, master ? 

Arm. In thy condign praise. 25 

Moth. I will praise an eel with the same praise. 

Arm. What ! that an eel is ingenious ? 

Moth. That an eel is quick. 

Arm. I do say thou art quick in answers : thou heatest 

my blood. 30 

Moth. I am answered, sir. 

Arm. I love not to be crossed. 

Moth. [Aside.] He speaks the mere contrary : crosses love 
not him. 

Arm. I have promised to study three years with the duke. 35 

Moth. You may do it in an hour, sir. 

Arm. Impossible. 

Moth. How many is one thrice told ? 

Ann. I am ill at reckoning; it fits the spirit of a tapster. 

Moth. You are a gentleman and a gamester, sir. 40 

Arm. I confess both : they are both the varnish of a com- 
plete man. 

Moth. Then, I am sure you know how much the gross 
sum of deuce-ace amounts to. 

Arm. It doth amount to one more than two. 45 

Moth. Which the base vulgar do call three. 

27. ingenious] Q i, F 4; ingenuous Q 2, Ff 1, 2, 3. 33. mere contrary'] 

Qq, F 1 ; clean contrary Ff 2, 3, 4. 35. three] Q 1 ; Hi Ff 1, 2, Q 2 ; 3 Ff 3, 4. 
duke] King Theobald. 3g. Jits] Ff, Q 2 ; fitteth Q 1, Cambridge. 46. do] 
Q 1 ; omitted Ff, Q 2. 

25. condign] well-merited. Com- king. The term was commonly used 

monly used as here at this time, of a sovereign prince, as in The Tem- 

" Condigne thankes" occurs in Greene's pest, 1. ii. 54, 58, etc. Sidney, in 

Planetomachia (Grosart, v. 85), 1585. Arcadia (bk. v.), calls King Basilius 

33. mere contrary] There is much in "the duke." 

favour of the reading " clean contrary " 39. tapster] a " tapster's arithmetic " 

of the later folios. It was a very popular is mentioned again in Troilus and Cres- 

expression at this date. sida, 1. ii. 123. A " tapster " was re- 

crosses] coins, from many of them garded as a very ignorant person, 

bearing the representation of a cross. Nashe, in his Introduction to Greene's 

A venerable and threadbare pun. Per- Menaphon (1589), speaks of " tapsterly 

haps the commonest form is "The devil terms" as befitting the "mind of the 

may dance in his pocket for he has meanest." 

never a cross there." It occurs in Hoc- 40. gamester] player, gambler. So 

cleve (circa 1420). Nashe (Grosart, ii. in Cooke's Greene's Tu Quoque : 

247)5 J 593i savs ll "hath been a gray- "Primero! why I thought thou hadst 

beard Proverbe two hundred yeares not been so much gamester as to play 

before Tarlton was born." at it." 

35. duke] See above, 1. i. 180. The 46. vulgar] See note at iv. i. 68-69. 



20 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



[act I. 



Arm. True. 

Moth. Why, sir, is this such a piece of study ? Now here 
is three studied ere ye '11 thrice wink ; and how easy 
it is to put years to the word three, and study three 50 
years in two words, the dancing horse will tell you. 

Arm. A most fine figure! 

Moth. To prove you a cipher. 

Arm. I will hereupon confess I am in love; and as it is 

base for a soldier to love, so am I in love with a base 55 



51. dancing horse] Morocco, Banks' 
famous horse. Halliwell believes that 
Banks taught more than one horse 
(Furness, from HalliwelFs Memoranda, 
p. 71). Banks' horse is famous in 
Elizabethan literature, and on down to 
the middle of the seventeenth century. 
Halliwell quotes from an MS. diary 
kept by a native of Shrewsbury : " Sep- 
tember, 1591. Thisyeare . . . Master 
Banckes, a Staffordshire gentile brought 
into the towne of Salop a white horse 
which would doe wonderfull and strange 
things, as thease — wold in a company 
or prese tell how many peeces of money 
by hys foote were in a mans puree . . . 
many people judgid that it were impos- 
sible to be don except he had a famyliar, 
or don by the arte of magicke." Ben 
Jonson (Epigram 133) says they were 
both — old Banks the juggler and the 
learned horse — burned beyond sea for 
one witch, which circumstance accord- 
ing to a quotation, dated 1656, given 
by Reed, took place at Rome by 
command of the Pope. Pepys tells 
of a successor to Banks' horse (1st 
September, 1668). A tract with an 
illustration (reproduced by Chambers, 
Book of Days, i. 225) was published 
in 1596, under the name of " Moroccus 
Exstaticus : or Bankes Bay Horse in 
a Traunce." (Above, the animal is 
said to be white.) One of his most 
famous feats was the ascent of Saint 
Paul's, in 1600, and in one mention 
of this, Dekker calls him the dancing 
horse : " Since the dancing horse 
stood on the top of Powles whilst 
a number of asses stood braying 
below, 17 yeares" (Owles' Almanack 
[quoted by Dyce]). Dekker, in Seven 
Deadly Sinnes (Grosart, ii. 65), 1606, 
tells that " Bankes his horse did his 
tricks only by the eye and the eare." 



There is much confusion. In Marston's 
Pasquil and Katherine, Act i. (1600), 
occurs : " It shall be cronicled next 
after the death of Bankes his horse." 
This was probably some false report. 
See for more references (which are in- 
exhaustible) Nares, Halliwell's Shake- 
speare (Outlines and Memoranda), 
Steevens' Shakespeare, Gifford's Ben 
Jonson, and Douce, who says the best 
account of Banks is to be found in 
Jean de Montlyard's French translation 
of Apuleius' Golden Asse, 1602. The 
horse is frequently mentioned as being 
ridden by an ape or baboon. With 
regard to his arithmetic, see Hall's 
Satires, iv. 2 (1598) : " of strange 
Moroccos dumb arithmetic." In the 
woodcut referred to above, at the 
horse's feet are two dice, one of which 
has ace uppermost, while the other 
shows the deuce to the front. The 
horse is on his hind legs, in a dancing 
posture. This animal seems to have 
been first known in 1591, but our play's 
received date has been 1588 or 1589, 
and the passage would needs be re- 
garded as a later insertion — a disagree- 
able supposition, and it is preferable to 
regard the allusion as evidence of the 
later date. There may have been other 
dancing horses. There is a passage 
in Greene's Groatsworth of Wit (Gros- 
art, xii. 118), 1592 : " my young master 
waxed cranke, and the musicke con- 
tinuing was very forward in dauncing, 
to shew his cunning . . . corvetting 
like a steede of Signor Roccoes teach- 
ing. " Is the resemblance here between 
Signor Rocco and " Ma. " (for Master) 
Rocco a mere coincidence ? It should 
be observed here that Banks is usually 
stated to be a Scotchman. 
52. figure] See v. ii. 408. 



SC. II.] 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



21 



wench. If drawing my sword against the humour of 
affection would deliver me from the reprobate thought 
of it, I would take Desire prisoner, and ransom him 
to any French courtier for a new-devised courtesy. I 
think scorn to sigh : methinks I should outswear 60 
Cupid. Comfort me, boy. What great men have 
been in love ? 

Moth. Hercules, master. 
\rm. Most sweet Hercules ! More authority, dear boy, 
name more ; and, sweet my child, let them be men of 65 
good repute and carriage. 

Moth. Samson, master : he was a man of good carriage, 
great carriage, for he carried the town-gates on his 
back like a porter ; and he was in love. 

Arm. O well-knit Samson ! strong- join ted Samson ! I do 70 
excel thee in my rapier as much as thou didst me in 



59. French courtier for a new -de- 
vised courtesy'] a bow or complimentary 
acknowledgment after any of the new 
French fashions. Compare Richard 
III. 1. iii. 39 : " French nods and apish 
courtesy " ; and Ben Jonson's Case 
is Altered, 11. iii. (1598): "And she 
should make French courVsies so most 
low That every touch should turn her 
over backward." Montaigne (1580- 
1588) refers to our " kissing the hands 
. . . our low-lowting courtesies " 
(Florio's trans. Temple Classics, iii. 
237, bk. ii. chap. xii.). 

60. think scorn] scorn, disdain. A 
frequent expression in Shakespeare, 
Ben Jonson (Cynthia's Revels, v. ii.) 
and others of the time. So Lyly in 
Euphues and his England (Arber rep. 
p. 424), 1580 : "Hee that never tooke the 
oare in his hand must not thinke scorn 
to bee taught " ; and Sir Philip Sidney's 
Arcadia, bk. i. : " thinking foul scorn 
willingly to submit myself to be ruled." 

60, 61. outswear Cupid] " surpass in 
swearing," according to some com- 
mentators and New Eng. Diet. ; " con- 
quer by swearing," Schmidt. I prefer 
the latter sense, i.e. forswear. 

65. sweet my child] See note, m. i. 144. 

66. carriage] for Hercules as a " man 
of carriage" see "Hercules and his 
load" (Hamlet, 11. ii. 382, and notes, 
Arden edition). 

68. carried the town-gates] A passage 



in Middleton's Family of Love, 1. iii. 
(1607), recalls this about Samson : 
"from what good exercise come you 
three ? Gerardius. From a play where 
we saw most excellent Sampson excel 
the whole world in gate-carrying. 
Dryfal. Was it performed by the 
youths ? Lipsalve. By youths ? Why, 
I tell thee we saw Sampson, and I 
hope tis not for youths to play Samp- 
son. Believe it we saw Sampson 
bear the town-gates on his neck from 
the lower to the upper stage, with that 
life and admirable accord, that it shall 
never be equalled, unless the whole 
new livery of porters set their shoul- 
ders." A lost play by Samuel Rowley 
and Edward Juby, called Samson, 
was acted in July, 1602. See Bullen, 
Henslowe's Diary, p. 169 (1904). This 
may be referred to by Middleton as 
Bullen points out. 

70. well-knit] Under knit, the New 
Eng. Diet, refers to Pope's Odyssey, 
xxiii. 259 (1725): "Thy well-knit 
frame . . . speaks thee an hero, from 
an hero sprung." Compare Holland's 
Plinie, xxx. 14 (p. 397), 1601 : " pre- 
serveth woman's breasts plumpe and 
round . . . knit up and well trussed." 
Made up in a good shape as a packet 
(Nashe), or a sack. 

71. my rapier] See note to The 
Merry Wives of Windsor, 11. i. 227 (p. 
79, Arden edition) ; and line 167 below. 



22 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 



[act 



carrying gates. I am in love too. Who was Samson's 

love, my dear Moth ? 
Moth. A woman, master. 
Arm. Of what complexion ? 
Moth. Of all the four, or the three, or the two, or one of 

the four. 
Arm. Tell me precisely of what complexion. 
Moth. Of the sea-water green, sir. 
Arm. Is that one of the four complexions ? 
Moth. As I have read, sir ; and the best of them too. 
Arm. Green indeed is the colour of lovers; but to have 

a love of that colour, methinks, Samson had small 

reason for it. He surely affected her for her wit. 
Moth. It was so, sir, for she had a green wit. 

75, 76. complexion ? Of all the four] 
The commonest sense of "complexion " 
in Shakespeare is the colour of the 
skin. For Moth's quibbling on another 
meaning compare Dekker's Sun's 
Darling, Act v. : " The four known 
complexions have attond a noble league 
and severally put on material bodies ; 
. . . Phlegm and Blood, Choler and 
Melancholy who have stood in con- 
trarieties now meet for pleasure." 
Halliwell endeavoured to show that 
Moth assigned colours to the four 
"medical humours." I think he is 
merely chattering. Compare Dekker : 
" Bellafront. Is my glass there ? and 
my boxes of complexion ? Roger. Yes 
forsooth : your boxes of complexion 
are here I thinke : yes 'tis here : here 's 
your two complexions, and if I had all 
the foure complexions I should nere set 
a good face upon 't, some men I see 
are borne under hard-favoured planets " 
(Honest Whore [Pearson, ii. 25]). 

79. sea-water green] Holland has 
this expression (our " sea-green ") in 
Pliny's Naturall History, trans. 1601 
(bk. xxxvii. chap. v. p. 613) : " Beryls 
. . . which carrie a sea-water green." 
In Ben Jonson's Part of the King's 
Entertainment, 1604, Tamesis has "a 
mantle of sea-green or water-colour." 
The name lives in the "Aquamarine," 
a gem, which is mentioned in Stow's 
Survey (1598) as being " of a sea-water 
green colour." It is mentioned as an 
artist's colour in Rider's Bibliotheca 
Scholastica, 1589 : " A certain medly 



75 



80 



85 



colour, made of hony, rain water, and 
sea water." 

82. Green . . . colour of lovers] This 
statement is supported by a reference 
to "Green sleeves." See The Merry 
Wives of Windsor, 11. i. 61, and v. v. 
21, 22 (Arden ed. pp. 65, 207). Com- 
pare Ben Jonson's Cynthia's Revels, v. 
ii. (1600) : " the green your mistress 
wears is her rejoicing, or exultation in 
his service ; the yellow, suspicion of 
his truth, from her height of affection." 
Green was commonly the colour of 
hope and of rejoicing. Earlier, green 
denoted inconstancy. See Skeat, 
Chaucer, v. 386. 

85. green wit] According to Grant 
White and the Cambridge Shakespeare 
there is an allusion here to the green 
withes (Judges xvi. 7) with which Sam- 
son was bound. Furness says White 
was the first to reveal this pun, as he 
was also the first to prove that " Moth " 
should be pronounced Mote. I doubt 
this ; it seems to be too far-fetched, 
too much of a load for " Moth." " Green 
wit " was a common expression, bound 
to be suggested by the context. Com- 
pare Greene's Never Too Late (Grosart, 
viii. 44), 1590 : "his grave wisdome ex- 
ceedes thy green wit" ; and his Ma- 
millia (1583) : " your talk . . . sheweth 
surely but a green wit, not so full of 
gravity, as . . . age requires" (p. 46) ; 
and again on pp. 49, 79, in the same tale. 
In Lyly's Euphues " green " is used of 
a wit that remains fresh in spite of age. 
Gabriel Harvey in his Epistle Dedi- 



I 

At 



ii.] 



LOVE'S LABOURS LOST 



23 



Arm. My love is most immaculate white and red. 

I Moth. Most maculate thoughts, master, are masked under 
such colours. 
Arm. Define, define, well-educated infant. 
Moth. My father's wit and my mother's tongue assist me ! 90 
rm. Sweet invocation of a child ; most pretty and 

pathetical ! 
oth. If she be made of white and red, 

Her faults will ne'er be known, 
For blushing cheeks by faults are bred, 95 

And fears by pale white shown : 
Then if she fear, or be to blame, 

By this you shall not know, 
For still her cheeks possess the same 

Which native she doth owe. 100 

A dangerous rhyme, master, against the reason of 
white and red. 
Arm. Is there not a ballad, boy, of the King and the 
Beggar ? 
oth. The world was very guilty of such a ballad some 105 
three ages since ; but I think now 'tis not to be found ; 



87. maculate] Q i, Pope et seq. 
3, 4 ; blush-in Qq, F i. 



immaculate Ff, Q 2. 



95. blushing] Ff 2, 



catorie to Foure Letters, etc., says : 
" Greene (although pitifully blasted 
and how wofully faded) still flourish- 
eth in the memory of some greene 
wits " ; and Dekker has " frame his 
green wits in penning love ditties " 
(Batchelars Banquet [Grosart, i. 153], 
1603). Another instance occurs in 
Elizabetha Triumphans, by James 
Aske (Nichols' Progresses [1823], ii. 
546) : " I find that (thereby) this is the 
hardest world that might happen to 
grosse heads and grene wits " (1588). 

86. white and red] Compare A 
Twelfe Night Merriment (Narcissus), 
1602 (ed. M. Lee, p. 12) : " Leave off 
to bragg thou boy of Venus breadd, 
I am as faire as thou for white and 
red." See Pericles, iv. vi. 27: "flesh 
and blood, sir, white and red." 

89. define] explain your meaning. 

92. pathetical] pathetic. The word in 
the text is the earliest form of this term, 



which was introduced and often used by 
Gabriel Harvey. He has it several times 
in his Letters to Spenser : " Dionisius 
... is reported in a certain Patheticall 
Ecstasie to haue cryed out" ("Earth- 
quake Letter") (Grosart, i. 57), 1580; 
and earlier, in 1573, Letter-Book (Cam- 
den Soc). Greene adopted it in his 
Tritameron of Love (part i.), 1584 
(Grosart, iii. 103): "any patheticall 
impression." Schmidt has a very 
erroneous remark at this word, used 
again in As You Like It, iv. i. 196, as 
well as later in this play. 

102. white and red] Alluding to the 
two "complexions" or cosmetics, as 
in the quotation from Dekker above 
(line 75) ; the " Ceruse and Vermillion " 
of the same author in his GulVs Horn 
Book. Ceruse was known as " Spanish 
white." 

103, 104. King and the Beggar] See 
note at iv. i. 65, 66. 



24 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 



[act 



or, if it were, it would neither serve for the writing nor 
the tune. 

Arm. I will have that subject newly writ o'er, that I may 

example my digression by some mighty precedent. 1 10 
Boy, I do love that country girl that I took in the 
park with the rational hind Costard : she deserves well. 

Moth. To be whipped ; and yet a better love than my 

master. [Aside. 

Arm. Sing, boy : my spirit grows heavy in love. 115 

Moth. And that 's great marvel, loving a light wench. 

Arm. I say, sing. 

Moth. Forbear till this company be past. 



Enter DULL, COSTARD, and JAQUENETTA. 

Dull. Sir, the duke 's pleasure is that you keep Costard 

safe : and you must let him take no delight nor no 1 20 
penance, but he must fast three days a week. For 
this damsel, I must keep her at the park ; she is 
allowed for the day-woman. Fare you well. 

Arm. I do betray myself with blushing. Maid. 

Jaq. Man. 125 

Arm. I will visit thee at the lodge. 

no. precedent] Johnson; president (or precedent) Qq, Ff. 115. love] Ff2, 

3, 4 ; loue Qq ; ioue F 1. Enter ... ] Steevens (1793) ; Enter Clown, Con- 
stable, and Wench Qq, Ff. 120. let him] Ff, Q 2 ; suffer him to Q 1. 121. 
he] o'Qi and edd. 



107, 108. for the . . . tunc] The metre 
of Moth's song being widely different 
from that of the ballad. 

no. digression] deviation from the 
proper course ; transgression. See 
Lucrece, 202. Ben Jonson has the 
word in a similar sense in Cynthia's 
Revels, 1. i., in a speech full of affec- 
tations by Amorphus. See the New 
Eng. Diet, for an earlier example from 
Hawes. 

112. rational hind] intelligent clown. 
Theobald suggested a quibble on the 
two senses of hind, rustic and stag. 

116. light] wanton. 

121. penance] Perhaps Dull was think- 
ing of " pleasance," a Shakespearian 
word. 

three days a week] In 1580-81 Eliza- 
beth re-enacted certain Acts (1541 and 



1548) relating to fishing and fisher- 
men, with injunctions " touching cer- 
tain politick constitutions for the 
maintenance of the Navy — that fish 
should be eaten on Wednesdays and 
Saturdays throughout the year — solely, 
however, as a matter of national policy, 
for Her Majesty also enjoins that any 
man who teaches that eating fish has 
the least connection with the service 
of God shall be severely punished" 
(Dawson, St. Lawrence Basin, p. 224, 
1905). These, with Friday, give the 
three days. 

123. allowed for the day-woman] ad- 
mitted or passed as dairymaid. For 
day -woman (correctly dey), see the 
New En?. Diet. Scott has it in The 
Fair Maid of Perth, and it is still in 
provincial use. 



II.) 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 



25 



Jaq. That 's hereby. 

Arm. I know where it is situate. 

Jaq. Lord, how wise you are ! 

Arm. I will tell thee wonders. 130 

Jaq. With that face ? 

Arm. I love thee. 

Jaq. So I heard you say. 

Arm. And so farewell. 

Jaq. Fair weather after you ! 135 

Dull. Come, Jaquenetta, away ! {Exeunt Dull and Jaquenetta. 

Arm. Villain, thou shalt fast for thy offences ere thou be 

pardoned. 
Cost. Well, sir, I hope when I do it I shall do it on a full 

stomach. 140 



127. hereby} Qq ; here by Ff. 131. that] Q 1, Ff 2, 3, 4 ; what F 1, Q 2. 



127. That 's hereby] No doubt Jaque- 
netta has some vulgar wit here, such 
as M over the left shoulder " or " the 
left - hand way," but confirmation is 
lacking. Schmidt (with no authority) 
says " that as it may be." He adopted 
it from Steevens. For this scene be- 
tween Jaquenetta and Armado there is 
a close parallel in one between Silena 
and Candius in Lyly's Mother Bombie 
(ante 1594), ii. 3. Silena has " rackt 
together all the odde blinde phrases 
that help them that know not how to 
discourse, but when they cannot answer 
wisely, either with gybing cover their 
rudenesse, or by some new coined by 
word bewray their peevishnesse." 

131. With that face ?] A piece of slang 
equivalent to " you don't mean it!" 
" you 're not the man," etc. Steevens, 
Dyce and Craig refer to Fielding's 
Joseph Andrews, rather a long way 
down the time. Steevens says it has 
no meaning and was still in use. Com- 
pare Heywood, Fair Maid of Exchange 
(Pearson, p. n), 1607 : " Come, come, 
leave your jesting, I shall putyou downe. 
Mall. With that face ! away, you want 
wit"; and Killigrew's Parson's Wed- 
ding (Hazlitt's Dodsley, xiv. 532), 1663 : 
" Parson. Sir, my business is praying, 
not epilogues. Captain. With that 
face ? " There is a sidenote to the 
line " Despatch him, therefore, while 
we are alone," on page 53 (Hazlitt's 



Dodsley, vi. 53), Conflict of Conscience, 
1581 : " Hipocrisy [aside] On your face, 
sir," which is the same expression 
slightly altered. The gibe is very far 
from being meaningless. I see Halli- 
well detected the passage in Heywood. 

133. So I heard you say] Another 
rural witticism, not in the least likely 
to be obsolete. These things never 
die. I find it in Bartholomew Fair, 
Act iii., by Ben Jonson : " Waspe. 
Yet these will serve to pick the pic- 
tures out of your pockets, you shall 
see. Cokes. So I heard them say. 
Pray thee mind him not, fellow." The 
meaning may be paraphrased by our 
"you don't tell me so." 

I 34i I 35- farewell. Fair weather 
after you] Jaquenetta, who has been 
very ill-treated by the commentators, 
completes the rustic saw. Compare 
Arden of Fever sham, iv. 3 (1592) : 
" See you follow us. . . . Michael. 
So. Fair weather after you 1 " ; and 
Wily Beguiled (Hazlitt's Dodsley, ix. 
251, 252), 1606: "Come, follow us, 
good wench. Peg. Ay, farewell ; fair 
weather after you." It occurs also in 
Middleton. Silena in Mother Bombie, 
ii. 3, has another form, " farewell 
frost." 

139, 140. on a full stomach] The ex- 
pression is in Palsgrave's Lesclaircisse- 
ment, p. 230 (1530), " Full-stomacht." 
" Full-stomacht " occurs in Greene and 



26 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



[act I. 



Arm. Thou shalt be heavily punished. 

Cost. I am more bound to you than your fellows, for they 
are but lightly rewarded. 

Arm. Take away this villain : shut him up. 

Moth. Come, you transgressing slave : away ! 145 

Cost. Let me not be pent up, sir ; I will fast, being loose. 

Moth. No, sir, that were fast and loose: thou shalt to 
prison. 

Cost. Well, if ever I do see the merry days of desolation 

that I have seen, some shall see — 1 50 

Moth. What shall some see ? 

Cost. Nay, nothing, Master Moth, but what they look upon. 
It is not for prisoners to be silent in their words, and 
therefore I will say nothing : I thank God I have as 
little patience as another man, and therefore I can be 155 
quiet. [Exeunt Moth and Costard. 

Arm. I do affect the very ground, which is base, where her 

146. fast] be fast Ff 2, 3, 4. 153. not] omitted Q 2. be silent] Ff , Q 2 ; 

be too silent Q 1, Malone, Cambridge. words] wards Johnson conj. 



Nashe ; and compare Captain Smith 
(Arber, p. 864), i62g : " Excellent, 
swift, stomack full, Tartarian horse." 
With a good heart. 

142. fellows] servants. See 1 Henry 
IV. iv. ii. 68. 

147. fast and loose] a cheating trick. 
Most of the early examples refer it to 
the gipsies, as in Antony and Cleopatra, 
iv. x. 41 ; and a passage in Reginald 
Scot's Discoverie of Witchcraft, chap. 
xxix. (1584), is referred to by Nares to 
the same purpose. Compare Whet- 
stone, Promos and Cassandra (pt. i.), ii. 
5 (p. 24 in Six Old Plays), 1578 : 
" At fast or loose, with my Giptian, I 
meane to have a cast : Tenne to one 
I read his fortune by the Marymas 
fast " (spoken by a hangman) ; and 
Lyly, Euphues and his England, 1580 : 
" Thus with the Egyptian thou playest 
fast or loose " (Arber, p. 326). And 
Ben Jonson assigns it to a gipsy in 
his Masque of the Metamorphosed 
Gipsies. Oliphant (New English, i. 
544) refers to Foxe's Book of Martyrs, 
1558. An elaborate description of a 
" notable feat with beadstones in fast 
or loose " is given by R. Scot. I un- 
derstand, from the editor of King John 
in this series, that this trick is not the 



same as the well-known " trick " or 
" prick-of-the loop" to be seen on 
racecourses, fairs, etc. I believed it 
was ; and I have HalliwelPs support, 
and that of the New Eng. Diet. (Loop). 

149. days of desolation] See Zeph- 
aniah i. 15. 

157-159. base . . . baser . . . basest] 
This toying with a word, and bringing 
in its relatives to the feast, as it were, 
is a characteristic of Sir Philip Sidney's 
Arcadia, rather than of Lyly, who re- 
peats the letter and the sound, not the 
word itself. I may quote one or two 
passages from bk. iii. : " so terrible 
was his force, and yet was his quickness 
more forcible than his force, and his 
judgment more quick than his quick- 
ness " ; " and yet did the one's strength 
excel in nimbleness, and the other's 
nimbleness excel in strength ; but now 
nimbleness and strength were both 
gone " ; " exceedingly sorry for Pamela, 
but exceedingly exceeding that ex- 
ceedingness in fear for Philoclea." 
These ingenious affectations are dis- 
tracting. How much better the plain 
English of a combat in Morte d' Arthur. 
See again Armado's letter, iv. i. 63-64 ; 
and compare Puttenham, p. 213 : 
"Then have ye a figure which the 



SC. II.] 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 



27 



shoe, which is baser, guided by her foot, which is 
basest, doth tread. I shall be forsworn, which is a 
great argument of falsehood, if I love. And how 160 
can that be true love which is falsely attempted? 
Love is a familiar ; Love is a devil : there is no evil 
angel but Love. Yet Samson was so tempted, and 
he had an excellent strength ; yet was Solomon so 
seduced, and he had a very good wit. Cupid's butt- 165 
shaft is too hard for Hercules' club, and therefore too 
much odds for a Spaniard's rapier. The first and 

163. Samson was] Ff, Q 2 ; was Sampson Q 1. 

well gives a long extract (quoted by 
Furness) from Vincentio Saviola's 
Honor and Honorable Quarrels, 1594, 
which is not satisfactory. Furness 
says there may be a book not yet dis- 
covered where these causes of quarrels 
are clearly defined. This seems to me 
undoubted. Is Caranza's Grammar of 
Quarrels no longer extant ? He was a 
native of Seville and governor of Hon- 
duras, who laid down the laws of 
duelling in De la Filosofia de las Armas, 
de su destreza, y de la agresion y de- 
fension Christiana, 1569, 1592 (Wheat- 
ley's ed. of Jonson's Every Man in his 
Humour) ; and that he had been trans- 
lated the many references in Jonson, 
Beaumont and Fletcher, and Mas- 
singer leave no doubt. See Love's 
Pilgrimage, v. iv., and especially Mas- 



Latines call Traductio, and I the 
tranlacer : which is when ye turne and 
tranlace a word into many sundry 
shapes as the Tailor doth his garment, 
and after that sort to play with him 
in your dittie." This is Arcadianism 
exactly, but Armado does not go the 
whole length. Coleridge speaks of the 
" sublime tautology " of Judges v. 27 
in a fine passage (quoted by Rolfe) in 
connection with the line above, " grace 
us in the disgrace of death " (1. i. 3). 
See elsewhere in Judges v., 1 Kings 
x. 10, etc. See Introduction. 

160. argument] proof. 

162. familiar] an attendant spirit; 
as in 1 Henry VI. 111. ii. 122 and 2 
Henry VI. iv. vii. 114 (Schmidt). 
"Behold there is a woman that hath 
a familiar spirit at Endor " (1 Samuel 
xxviii. 7). 

165. Cupid's butt - shaft] " strong 
unbarbed arrows used in the field exer- 
cises of the day' f (Gifford). They hit 
hard but were easily extracted, so that 
they were suitable for Cupid's quiver. 
Compare Romeo and Juliet, 11. iv. 15 : 
" The very pin of his heart cleft with the 
blind bow-boy's butt-shaft." No other 
example has been adduced by the 
authorities, but I find it in Ben Jon- 
son's Cynthia's Revels, v. iii. (again in 
Cupid's possession) : " I fear thou hast 
not arrows for the purpose. Cupid. 
O yes, here be of all sorts — flights, 
rovers and butt-shafts." See note at 
"bird-bolt," iv. iii. 22. 

167. Spaniard's rapier] See Merry 
Wives, 11. i. 227, note in Arden edition. 

167, 168. first and second cause] Com- 
pare As You Like It, v. iv. 52, 6g, and 
Romeo and Juliet, 11. iv. 26. Evidently 
technical terms in the duello. Halli- 



singer's Guardian, in. 



I have 



read Caranza, and find not in his 
Grammar of Quarrels that the injured 
man is bound to seek for reparation 
at an hour." Gifford says in a note 
to this, these writers spoke of him 
" generally with the ridicule which he 
deserves " — an adroit way of pretend- 
ing he knew the book, which we may 
doubt. The Grammar was probably 
earlier than Saviola's work, which is 
too late for illustration of Love's 
Labour's Lost. Moreover Caranza 
was a Spaniard. Other allusions occur 
(as " fight by the booke " in Dekker's 
Gull's Horn Book), especially in Jon- 
son's Alchemist, iv. i. (1610). Jonson 
was an enthusiastic collector of gram- 
mars ; he refers several times to " the 
great Caranza," and he is always the 
best contemporary authority. Subtle 
instructs Kastril on the " grammar and 
logic and rhetoric of quarrelling," and 



28 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 



[act 



second cause will not serve my turn ; the passado he 
respects not, the duello he regards not : his disgrace 
is to be called boy, but his glory is to subdue men. 170 
Adieu, valour ! rust, rapier ! be still, drum ! for your 
, manager is in love ; yea, he loveth. Assist me, some 
extemporal god of rhyme, for I am sure I shall turn 
[a] sonnet. Devise, wit; write, pen; for I am for 
whole volumes in folio. [Exit. 175 

i6g. duello] duella Q 1. 172. manager] Armiger Collier MS. (!) 174. sonnet] 
Ff, Qq ; sonneteer or sonneter Hanmer, etc. ; a sonnet Amyot ; sonnets Verplanck, 
Halliwell ; sonnet-maker, sonnet-monger, sonnetist various modern editors. 

Progresses, iii. 284) : u Item, no Knight 
of this Order shall, in point of honour, 
resort to any grammar-rules out of the 
books De Du[e]llo, or such like." This 
is perhaps a direct reference to Car- 
anza's work. 

172. manager] The earliest example 
of this word in New Eng. Diet. Com- 
pare Jonson, Every Man in his Humour, 
1. iv. (1598) : "You do not manage your 
weapon with any facility or grace to 
invite me." "Manage arms" occurs 
twice in Marlowe's Tamburlaine, part i. 
Armado's mock-dignity here becomes 
the true thing in Othello, in. iii. 350-4. 

173. extemporal] Compare G. Harvey 
(Grosart, i. in), 1579: "To his very 
unfriendly frende th^t procurid ye edi- 
tion of his so slender and extemporall 
devises." 

173, 174. turn [a]sonnet] is such a na- 
tural expression that I prefer it to " turn 
sonneter." But the article is hardly 
necessary, and sonnet may be taken 
generally for verse. For turn in this 
sense, compare " turn his merry note 
Unto the sweet bird's throat " (As You 
Like It, 11. v. 3). Furness thinks that 
Armado means he will become an 
abstract sonnet, he is so saturated with 
love. For " turn a sonnet " compare 
also the parallel "turn a song" in 
Thos. Brewer's (prose) Merry Devil of 
Edmonton, 1608 (p. 50, rep. of 163 1 
edition) : " M. Parson turned his song,' 
and " they turned it to his mind " (ibid.). 
At iv. i. 86 we find the sonnet Armado 
turns. The expression in As You Like 
It occurs earlier in Hall's Satires, vi. i. 
(1598) : " Whiles threadbare Martiall 
turns his merry note." 

174, 175. Devise . . . in folio] Com- 
pare G. Harvey ,Foure Letters (Grosart,i. 
200), 1592 : " a famous deviser in folio. ' 



tells him " You must render causes, 
child, Your first and second intentions, 
know your causes," etc. Marston in 
his Scourge of Villainy (1598) refers to 
Vincentio Saviolo, which is the earliest 
reference I have met with. See next 
note. 

168. passado] See Romeo and Juliet, 
n. iv. 26, and m. i. 88. " A forward 
thrust with the sword one foot being 
advanced at the same time" (New 
Eng. Diet.). From the Spanish 
pasada. Jonson gives it passada in 
Every Man in his Humour. Howell's 
Vocabulary (1659) gives the different 
forms : " To make a pass, Far 7 una 
passata ; Faire une passade ; Hazer 
passada," in Italian, French and Span- 
ish. Marston, quoting from Saviolo 
apparently, has "sly passatas, Strama- 
zones, resolute stocatas " (Scourge of 
Villainy, Sat. xi. [1598]). Saviolo's full 
title is : " Vincentio Saviolo his 
Practise. In two Bookes. The first 
intreating of the use of the Rapier and 
Dagger. The second of Honor and 
honorable Quarrels. London. Printed 
by John Wolfe, 1595." It contains a 
chapter "Of the Duello or Combat." 
The second part is marked " Printed by 
John Wolfe 1594." The whole work is 
a small quarto with six large woodcuts 
of men duelling. It contains 154 
pages. A copy is catalogued by 
Quaritch, February, 1905. 

169. duello] the correct practise of 
duelling. Both this word and " duel- 
list " (Harvey's Pierce's Supererogation, 
1592) preceded " duel " in English use. 
Ben Jonson has it in Cynthia's Revels, 
1. i. (1600) : "one that . . . was your 
first that ever enriched his country 
with the true laws of the duello." Com- 
pare Gesta Grayorum, 1594 (Nichols' 






ACT II 

SCENE l.—The Same. 

Inter the PRINCESS of France, ROSALINE, MARIA, KATH- 
ARINE, BOYET, Lords, and other A endants. 

Boyet. Now, madam, summon up your dearest spirits : 
Consider who the king your father sends, 
To whom he sends, and what 's his embassy : 
Yourself, held precious in the world's esteem, 
To parley with the sole inheritor 5 

Of all perfections that a man may owe, 
Matchless Navarre ; the plea of no less weight 
Than Aquitaine, a dowry for a queen. 
Be now as prodigal of all dear grace 

As Nature was in making graces dear 10 

When she did starve the general world beside, 
And prodigally gave them all to you. 

Prin. Good Lord Boyet, my beauty, though but mean, 
Needs not the painted flourish of your praise : 
Beauty is bought by judgment of the eye, 1 5 

Not utter'd by base sale of chapmen's tongues. 
I am less proud to hear you tell my worth 
Than you much willing to be counted wise 

Enter . . .] Rowe ; Enter the Princesse of France with three attending Ladies 
and three Lords Qq, Ff. 13. Prin.] Ff 2, 3, 4 ; Queen Qq, F 1. Lord] 

L. Qq, Ff. 

1. summon up your dearest spirits] admiration of these Bewties made mee 

bring forward your best wits. Compare so enamoured, and so really in love 

"muster your wits," v. ii. 85 ; an ex- with the inheritor of them." 

pression used by Dekker (Grosart, ii. 6. owe] own ; as at 1. ii. 100 ; and 

95). commonly. 

5. inheritor] owner. See Richard 7. plea] that which is pleaded for. 

III. iv. iii. 34 ; and Dekker, Belman 14. flourish] ornamentation. 

of London (Grosart, iii. 74): "The 1 6. chapmen] merchants, dealers. 

29 



30 



LOVES LABOUR S LOST [act 



In spending your wit in the praise of mine. 

But now to task the tasker : good Boyet, 20 

You are not ignorant all-telling fame 

Doth noise abroad Navarre hath made a vow, 

Till painful study shall outwear three years, 

No woman may approach his silent court : 

Therefore to us seemeth it a needful course, 

Before we enter his forbidden gates, 

To know his pleasure ; and in that behalf, 

Bold of your worthiness, we single you 

As our best-moving fair solicitor. 

Tell him the daughter of the King of France, 

On serious business craving quick dispatch, 

Importunes personal conference with his grace. 

Haste, signify so much ; while we attend, 

Like humble -visaged suitors, his high will. 

Boyet. Proud of employment, willingly I go. 35 

Prin. All pride is willing pride, and yours is so. [Exit Boyet. 
Who are the votaries, my loving lords, 
That are vow-fellows with this virtuous duke ? 

First Lord. Lord Longaville is one. 

Prin. Know you the man ? 

Mar. I know him, madam : at a marriage-feast, 40 

Between Lord Perigort and the beauteous heir 
Of Jaques Falconbridge, solemnized 
In Normandy, saw I this Longaville : 

19. your wit in the praise'] Qq, F 1 ; thus your wit in praise, Ff 2, 3, 4. 21. 
You . . .] Prin. You . . . F 1, Q 2. 32. Importunes] Importuous Q 1. 

34. visaged] Ff, Q 2 ; visage Q 1. 36. [Exit Boyet] Dyce ; Exit Qq, Ff (after 
previous line). 37, 38. Prose in Qq, Ff ; verse Rowe (ed. 2) et seq. 39. 

First Lord. Lord Longaville] Capell ; Lor. Longavill Qq, Ff. 40. Mar.] 

Rowe ; 1 Lady. Qq, Ff. 40-43. madam : at . . . solemnized In] Capell ; 

madame at . . . solemnized. In Qq, Ff. 



20. task the tasker] task him who 
tasks; like the old "the guiler is be- 
guiled " in Gower. 

21. all-telling] reporting everything. 
Shakespeare has many compounds in 
which all is the first member. 

28. Bold] confident. 

29. fair] just, equitable. 

34. humble - visaged] Elsewhere 
Shakespeare has grim-visaged, pale- 



visaged, tripe-visaged. " Sable-visaged 
night M occurs in the Prologue to The 
Merry Devil of Edmonton (circa 1600) ; 
Jonson speaks of the " brass-visagod 
monster Barbarism" (Every Man in 
his Humour) ; Nashe has " Wilt thou 
be so hardy and iron-visaged " (Foure 
Letters Confuted [Grosart, ii. 255]). 

42. solemnized] The last syllable bears 
an accent. 



ti] LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 31 

A man of sovereign parts he is esteem'd , 
Well fitted in the arts, glorious in arms: v ^$y*r- 45 

Nothing becomes him ill that he would well. 
The only soil of his fair virtue's gloss, 
If virtue's gloss will stain with any soil, 
Is a sharp wit match'd with too blunt a will ; 
Whose edge hath power to cut, whose will still wills 50 
It should none spare that come within his power. 

Prin. Some merry mocking lord, belike ; is 't so ? 

Mar. They say so most that most his humours know. 

Prin. Such short-liv'd wits do wither as they grow. 

Who are the rest ? 55 

Kath. The young Dumain, a well accomplish'd youth, 
Of all that virtue love for virtue lov'd : 
Most power to do most harm, least knowing ill, 
For he hath wit to make an ill shape good, 
And shape to win grace though he had no wit. 60 

I saw him at the Duke Alencon's once ; 
And much too little of that good I saw 
Is my report to his great worthiness. 

Ros. Another of these students at that time 

Was there with him, as I have heard a truth, 65 

44. of sovereign parts] Ff, Q 2 ; of soveraigne peerelsse Q 1. 45. in the 
arts] Ff 2, 3, 4 ; in arts Qq, F 1. 47, 48. gloss] glose Q 1. 60. he] she F i, 
Q 2. 61. Alenqon's] Alansoes Qq, F 1. 65. as] Ff, Q 2 ; ifQ I. 

45. " To cure what was supposed to readie scoffers, privie mockers, and 
be the defective rhythm of this line, the ever over light and merry. . . . They 
Second Folio added ' the Arts ' " . . . be like trees that shewe forth faire blos- 
(Furness). " The line, as we have it soms . . . but bring out small and not 
here, is rhythmical if the pause after long lasting fruite . . . amongest a 
'Arts' be properly observed" (John- number of quicke wittes in youthe, fewe 
son). Craig would prefer " Well fitted be found in the end . . . but decay and 
he in arts." vanish, men know not which way." 

46. would well] would do well. Compare Harvey's Foure Letters (Gros- 
54. short-liv'd wits do wither as they art, i. 193) : " Flourishing M. Greene is 

grow] Compare the Latin proverb Is most wofully faded, and whilest I am 

cadit ante senem qui capit ante diem, bemoaning his overpiteous decay ; and 

to which the common one in the six- discoursing the usuall success of such 

teenth century, "soon ripe soon rotten," ranke wittes, loe, his sworne brother, 

is equivalent. It is in Heywood (Shar- M. Pierce Penni-lesse (still more 

man's ed. p. 47), 1546. Ascham, in paltery)," etc. 

The Scholemaster (Arber, pp. 32-34), 60. he] she, of Folio, might be de- 
has much about quick wits : " Quicke fended, as referring to his virtue per- 
wittes commonlie be apte to take, un- sonified, which is placed with a capital 
apte to keepe . . . like over sharpe V. His Shape would win grace, even 
tooles, whose edges be verie soone if his Virtue was devoid of wit. 
turned. ... In youthe also they be 



32 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



Biron they call him ; but a merrier man, 
Within the limit of becoming mirth, 
I never spent an hour's talk withal. 
His eye begets occasion for his wit ; 
For every object that the one doth catch 
The other turns to a mirth-moving jest, 
Which his fair tongue (conceit's expositor) 
Delivers in such apt and gracious words 
That aged ears play truant at his tales, 
And younger hearings are quite ravished ; 
So sweet and voluble is his discourse. 

Prin. God bless my ladies ! are they all in love, 
That eveiy one her own hath garnished 
With such bedecking ornaments of praise ? 

First Lord, Here comes Boyet. 



[act II. 






70 



75 



Re-enter BOYET. 



Prin. Now, what admittance, lord ? 80 

Boyet. Navarre had notice of your fair approach ; 
And he and his competitors in oath 
Were all address'd to meet you, gentle lady, 
Before I came. Marry, thus much I have learnt ; 
He rather means to lodge you in the field, 85 

Like one that comes here to besiege his court, 
Than seek a dispensation for his oath, 

80. First Lord] Lord Q i ; Ma. Ff, Q 2. 84. much] omitted Ff 2, 3, 4. 



69. begets] produces, gets. 

74. play truant] leave their work, 
idle, trifle. See The Merry Wives of 
Windsor, v. i. 27. 

76. voluble] fluent. See again 111. 
i. 60; The Comedy of Errors, 11. i. 
92 ; and Othello, 11. i. 242. In Cot- 
grave, 161 1. Dekker uses it in his 
Lanthorne and Candle-light (Grosart, 
iii. 188), 1609 : " the high and ratling 
Dutch ; the unfruitfull crabbed Irish, 
and the voluble significant Welch." 
But it is to Puttenham we must look 
for a parallel (as in the case of M vul- 
gar," iv. i. 68, 69) : "The utterance in 
prose is not of so great effkacie, be- 



cause . . . not so voluble and slipper 
on the tongue " (p. 24, and again pp. 
134, 168); and at p. 156: "a broad 
and voluble tong, thinne and movable 
lippes, teeth even." And p. in, speak- 
ing of the sphere : " he is even and 
smooth . . . most voluble and apt to 
turne." These last examples suffice 
to illustrate 111. i. 60. It occurs in 
Lyly's Endymion, 111. iii. : " I find my 
tongue voluble,my heart venturous, "etc. 
80. admittance] permission to enter. 

82. competitors] associates, partners. 
Compare The Two Gentlemen of Ver- 
ona, 11. vi. 35. 

83. address'd] made ready. 



sc. i] LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 33 

To let you enter his unpeopled house. 
Here comes Navarre. 

Enter King, Longaville, Dumain, Biron, and 

Attendants. 
King. Fair princess, welcome to the court of Navarre. 90 

Prin. Fair I give you back again ; and welcome I have 

not yet: the roof of this court is too high to be 

yours, and welcome to the wide fields too base to 

be mine. 
King. You shall be welcome, madam, to my court. 95 

Prin. I will be welcome then : conduct me thither. 
King. Hear me, dear lady ; I have sworn an oath. 
Prin. Our Lady help my lord ! he '11 be forsworn. 
King. Not for the world, fair madam, by my will. 
Prin. Why, will shall break it will, and nothing else. 100 

King. Your ladyship is ignorant what it is. 
Prin. Were my lord so, his ignorance were wise, 

Where now his knowledge must prove ignorance. 

I hear your grace hath sworn out house-keeping : 

88. unpeopled] Ff, Q 2 ; unpeeled Q 1, Cambridge (1863). 89. [The Ladies 
mask] Capell. 90. King] Navar. Qq, Ff. 100. it will] Qq, Ff ; it; will 

Capell et seq. 

88. unpeopled] The arguments in word " house-keeping." This was one 

favour of the Quarto reading " un- of the cries of the people, especially the 

peeled " are far from convincing. " poor players," against the rich at the 

Compare As You Like It, in. ii. 134, time. The commentators have argued 

and Richard II. 1. ii. 69. But the term much about the meaning of the words 

here has undoubtedly the sense of with- " deadly sin " to no purpose. Hanmer 

out servants or attendance suitable for reads " Not sin to break it." Halliwell 

such guests. "People," meaning says the Princess merely means the King 

retinue, servants, is very commonly is in a dilemma. Cartwright says " to 

found in Shakespeare, and the King has keep that oath " should read " to break 

forsworn hospitality and womankind. that oath." Dyce adopted Hanmer's 

99. by my will] willingly. reading of Not, but that is as erroneous 

100. it will] its will, that is to say, as unwarrantable. That line merely 
mockingly, your will — my will shall refers, casually, to the sin of perjury, 
break yours. Quibbling with the word See Sir John Oldcastle, 1. iii. : " house- 
" will " was inevitable at this time, keeping decays in every place Even as 
There may be a reference here to the Saint Peter writ, still worse and worse 
usual sense of desire (sensual) occurring . . . your backs, the devil and pride, 
in the common phrase " A woman will has cut the throat of all good house- 
have her will." keeping." And Nashe, Summer's Last 

104. sworn out house- keeping] sworn Will (Hazlitt's Dodsley, viii. 80), 1592 : 

house-keeping ai an end, sworn it away, " there 's many an old god is now gone 

outsworn it, as in 1. ii. 60. An odd con- out of fashion. So is the god of hos- 

struction. But the Princess is alluding pitality." And Massinger, City Ma- 

to the deadly sin of foregoing and ban- dame, v. i. : " Hospitality a virtue 

ishing hospitality, another sense of the grown obsolete and useless." In the 



34 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



[ACT II. 
105 



'Tis deadly sin to keep that oath, my lord, 

And sin to break it. 

But pardon me, I am too sudden-bold : 

To teach a teacher ill beseemeth me. 

Vouchsafe to read the purpose of my coming, 

And suddenly resolve me in my suit. 
King. Madam, I will, if suddenly I may. 
Prin. You will the sooner that I were away, 

For you '11 prove perjur'd if you make me stay. 
Biron. Did not I dance with you in Brabant once ? 
Ros. Did not I dance with you in Brabant once ? 
Biron. I know you did. 

Ros. How needless was it then to ask the question ! 
Biron. You must not be so quick. 

Ros. 'Tis long of you that spur me with such questions. 
Biron. Your wit 's too hot, it speeds too fast, 'twill tire. 
Ros. Not till it leave the rider in the mire. 
Biron. What time o' day ? 
Ros. The hour that fools should ask. 
Biron. Now fair befall your mask ! 



106, 107. And 



Dyce. 



sudden-bold] one line Q 1. 106. And] Not Hanmer, 



no. [Gives a paper.] edd. omitted (Cambridge, Globe). 115, 117. 



etc., to 125. Ros.] Rather. Q 1. 
Capell. 

Three Ladies of London (Hazlitt's 
Dodsley, vi. 317), 1584, Lucre kills 
Hospitality on the stage. Allusions 
are endless. See Harrison's Descrip- 
tion of England, 1577. Avarice and 
Pride, two of the seven deadly sins, 
were the death of house-keeping. See 
Romans xii. 13. 

no. suddenly] immediately. The 
Princess's brusquerie has already ap- 
peared at line gi. It is her natural 
part to affect some chagrin at the dis- 
courtesy of her reception and the King's 
decree. 

118. quick] sharp. 

ng. long of you] owing to you. 
Common provincially. Compare Pals- 
grave, 1530 : "lam longe of this strife : 
je suis en cause de cest estrif." This 
signification has a special article in 
New Eng. Diet, in adverb Along. The 
prefix was dropt about the sixteenth 
century. It is the earliest in examples 
of use of "along." 



116-118. Two lines ending then, quick 



spur . . . questions] " To spur one 
a question " was a phrase in use. I 
have only met it once elsewhere — 
in J. Rainoldes, Overthrow of State 
Plays (ed. i62g, p. 60), 1593 : M You 
were disposed to spurre him idle ques- 
tions" 

ng, 120. wit . . . spur . . . speed] 
spur and speed come together natur- 
ally — both are . frequently applied to 
wit. As " Fresh w its need no spur " 
(Ben Jonson, Case is Altered, 11. iii. 
[i5g8]) ; and "fooled you up In a new 
suit with the best wits in being, And 
kept their speed." And Skelton's 
"Where is my wyt?" "The devyll 
spede whyt " (quickly), in Magnyfy- 
cence, and Why Come ye not to Courte. 

124. fair befall] A very old phrase 
occurring in Langiand's Piers the Plow- 
man (1377), and a favourite with Shake- 
speare. Craig refers to Burns' Lines to 
a Haggis : " Fair fa' your honest son6y 
face." 



sc. i.] LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 35 

Ros. Fair fall the face it covers! 125 

Biron. And send you many lovers ! 

Ros. Amen, so you be none. 

Biron. Nay, then will I be gone. 

King. Madam, your father here doth intimate 

The payment of a hundred thousand crowns ; 1 30 

Being but the one half of an entire sum 

Disbursed by my father in his wars. 

But say that he, or we, as neither have, 

Receiv'd that sum, yet there remains unpaid 

An hundred thousand more; in surety of the which, 135 

One part of Aquitaine is bound to us, 

Although not valued to the money's worth. 

If then the king your father will restore 

But that one half which is unsatisfied, 

We will give up our right in Aquitaine, 140 

And hold fair friendship with his majesty. 

But that, it seems, he little purposeth, 

For here he doth demand to have repaid 

A hundred thousand crowns ; and not demands 

On payment of a hundred thousand crowns 145 

To have his title live in Aquitaine ; 

Which we much rather had depart withal, 

And have the money by our father lent, 

Than Aquitaine, so gelded as it is. 

135. An] Ff, Q 2 ; A Q i. 143. repaid] repaie F 1, Q 2. 145. On] 

Theobald ; One Qq, Ff. 

129. intimate] suggest. Hunter re- 147. depart withal] part with, sur- 
fers to this long speech in a note to render. 

the words " shall relate," 1. i. 170. 149. gelded] impaired, reduced in 
He says there : " The non-fulfilment of power or value. The term was com- 
the expectation which these words raise monly applied to livings where the 
is one proof that in this play Shake- patron put in the incumbent, pocket- 
speare was working on a story formed ing most of the income himself. Nashe 
for him, not inventing one for himself : says that "he that first gelt religion 
and this is further proved, so that there or church livings . . . was Cardinal 
can be no doubt in the world about it, Wolsey" (Unfortunate Traveller[Gtos- 
by the long speech of Ferdinand, in art, v. 55], 1594). " Gelded parsonage " 
which the poet endeavours to express in occurs in Return from Parnassus (H ad- 
verse what is more befitting for prose, the litt's Dodsley, ix. 135), 1602; " gelded 
intractable matter of a money account." chapel " in Hall's Satires, iv. ii. (1598) ; 
Shakespeare found no difficulty in this •' gelded vicarage " in Marston and 
"endeavour," here or elsewhere. But Shirley; and " gelded bishoprick " in 
there must have been a foundation for Sir John Harington (Nug<z Antiquce, 
this tale or fragment of history. i. 101). 



36 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



Dear princess, were not his requests so far 
From reason's yielding, your fair self should make 
A yielding 'gainst some reason in my breast, 
And go well satisfied to France again. 

Prin. You do the king my father too much wrong 
And wrong the reputation of your name, 
In so unseeming to confess receipt 
Of that which hath so faithfully been paid. 

King. I do protest I never heard of it ; 
And if you prove it I '11 repay it back, 
Or yield up Aquitaine. 

Prin. We arrest your word : 

Boyet, you can produce acquittances 
For such a sum from special officers 
Of Charles his father. 

King. Satisfy me so. 

Boyet. So please your grace, the packet is not come 
Where that and other specialties are bound : 
To-morrow you shall have a sight of them. 

King. It shall suffice me : at which interview 
All liberal reason would I yield unto. 
Meantime, receive such welcome at my hand 
As honour, without breach of honour, may 
Make tender of to thy true worthiness. 
You may not come, fair princess, in my gates ; 
But here without you shall be so receiv'd, 
As you shall deem yourself lodg'd in my heart, 
Though so denied farther harbour in my house. 



[act II. 
150 



168. would I] Ff, Q 2 ; J will Q i. 
farther] Ff, Q 2; fair Q 1. 

160. arrest your word] seize your 
word as security. The expression 
occurs again in Measure for Measure, 
11. iv. 134. The New Eng. Diet, has 
these two and no other instances. 
Shakespeare may have found this un- 
common expression in Sidney's Ar- 
cadia, bk. i. (edition 1739, i. 121-122), 
ante 1586 : " She took the advantage 
one day, upon Phalantus's unconscion- 
able praising of her, and certain cast- 
away vows how much he would do 
for her sake, to arrest his word as soon 



172. in] Ff, Q 2 ; within Q i, 



155 



160 



I6 5 



170 



175 



175- 



as it was out of his mouth, and by the 
vertue thereof to charge him to go with 
her." 

*75- farther] I agree with Knight. 
Fair is a weak epithet. Farther of 
the Folio meaning much more ; that 
"the Princess is to be lodged, accord- 
ing to her rank, without the gates — 
although denied a farther advance, 
lodging within the King's house." 
" Farther " becomes almost a mono- 
syllable, by process of slurring, in 
speech. 



sc i.] LOVE'S LABOUR S LOST 37 

Your own good thoughts excuse me, and farewell : 

To-morrow we shall visit you again. 
Prin. Sweet health and fair desires consort your grace ! 
King. Thy own wish wish I thee in every place ! {Exit. 

Biron. Lady, I will commend you to my own heart. 180 

Ros. Pray you do my commendations ; I would be glad 

to see it. 
Biron. I would you heard it groan. 
Ros. Is the soul sick ? 

Biron. Sick at the heart. 185 

Ros. Alack ! let it blood. 
Biron. Would that do it good ? 
Ros. My physic says, ay. 
Biron. Will you prick 't with your eye ? 

Ros. No point, with my knife. 190 

Biron. Now God save thy life ! 
Ros. And yours from long living ! 

Biron. I cannot stay thanksgiving. [Retiring. 

Dum. Sir, I pray you, a word : what lady is that same ? 
Boyset. The heir of Alencon, Katharine her name. 195 

Dum. A gallant lady. Monsieur, fare you well. [Exit. 

Long. I beseech you a word : what is she in the white ? 
Boyet. A woman sometimes, if you saw her in the light. 
Long. Perchance light in the light. I desire her name. 
Boyet. She hath but one for herself; to desire that were a 

shame. 200 

177. we shall] Ff, Q 2 ; shall we Q 1. 180. my own] Ff ; my none Q 1 ; 

mine own Q 2. 180, 183, 185, 187, i8g, 191, 193. Biron] Ber. Q 1 ; Boy. 

Ff, Q 2. 184. soul] Ff, Q 2 ; fool Q 1. " 190. No point] No poynt (italics) 

Qq, Ff. 193. [Retiring] Capell ; [Exit. Enter Dumain Qq, Ff. 195. 

Katharine] Singer (Capell conj.) ; Rosaline Qq, Ff. 198. if] Ff, Q 2 ; and 

(for an) Q 1. 

184. soul] Remembering what a . . . never a whit, no jot, no point as 

favourite expression " poor soul " is the frenchmen say " (Malone). There 

with Shakespeare, and that the word is a pun on the word " point." The 

is used twice elsewhere in this play phrase occurs commonly enough, as in 

(i. i. 243 ; iv. i. 90) meaning person, Doctor Dodypoll in Bullen's Old Plays. 

I give it the preference to fool. See later in the present play, v. ii. 277. 

186. let it blood] bleed him. An ex- 193. / cannot stay thanksgiving] 

pressionof the time, as in Lyly's My das, There is an allusion here to the long 

11. i. : " Hee is the man, that being graces before a meal at this time. See 

let blood, carries his arme in a scarfe notes to Measure for Measure, 1. ii. 15 

of his mistresse favour." (Arden edition, p. 8). 

190. No point] not at all. Florio 199. light] wanton, quibblingly. A 

{World of Words, 1598) has : " Punto, very common sense in Shakespeare. 



38 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST [act n. 



Long. Pray you, sir, whose daughter ? 
Boyet. Her mother's, I have heard. 
Long. God's blessing on your beard ! 
Boyet. Good sir, be not offended. 

She is an heir of Falconbridge. 
Long. Nay, my choler is ended. 

She is a most sweet lady. 
Boyet. Not unlike, sir ; that may be. 
Biron. What 's her name in the cap ? 
Boyet. Rosaline, by good hap. 
Biron. Is she wedded or no ? 
Boyet. To her will, sir, or so. 
Biron. O you are welcome, sir. Adieu. 

Boyet. Farewell to me, sir, and welcome to you. {Exit Biron. 
Mar. That last is Biron, the merry mad-cap lord : 215 

Not a word with him but a jest. 
Boyet. And every jest but a word. 

Prin. It was well done of you to take him at his word. 



205 



[Exit Long. 



210 



203. on] Qq, a Ff. 
you] Q 1 ; You Ff, Q 2. 

203. blessing on your beard] Longa- 
ville, serious before, shows his irritation 
in mocking the waggish Boyet. Satiri- 
cal references to one's beard were very 
common forms of chaff, and were gener- 
ally summed up in the phrase " to play 
with one's beard," i.e. to insult, belittle. 
It occurs in Jonson's Bartholomew's 
Fair, iv. iii. To " make a man's 
beard" was to deceive him (Chaucer). 
See " play with one's beard " in Damon 
and Pithias, 1571. Nashe puts it "set 
him at naught and shake him by the 
beard " in Pierce Penilesse. Any allu- 
sion to one's beard was dangerous or 
unmannerly. Johnson says: "may you 
have sense more proportionate to your 
beard," but he often takes gibes too 
seriously. But see line 255 below. 

211, 212. wedded . . . To her will] 
" wedded to calamity " occurs in Romeo 
and Juliet, in. iii. 3. 

212. or so] " a mere expletive " 
(Schmidt, who collects ten examples 
in Shakespeare). Rather, as Craig says, 
" or something of that sort." See 
again v. i. 144. Compare Lyly's 
Mother Bombie, iv. 2 : "He would 
never tire — it may be he would be so 



210. Rosaline] Singer ; Katherine Qq, Ff. 213. 

214. [Exit Biron] Q 1 ; Exit. Ff, Q 2. 

weary hee would goe no further, 
so." 

213. O you] See note, in. i. 164. 

214. Farewell . . . and welcome] You 
are welcome to go. Hardly obsolete. 

215. mad-cap] The earliest example 
of the word in the New Eng. Diet. 
Compare " mad wenches," line 257 be- 
low, and see note at passage. I reject 
the always violent senses of " mad " 
in this place as given in the New Eng. 
Diet. The word has a playful use, 
nearly our " droll." Greene has " crue 
of Popish madcaps" in The Spanish 
Masquerado (Grosart, v. 265), which is 
probably earlier. There, and again in 
his Orlando Furioso, the word means 
madman, but not here. The word 
"mad-cap" occurs in Lyly's Endy- 
mion, v. ii. : " O lepidum caput, O 
mad-cap master! You were worthy 
to winne Dipsas were she as olde 
againe." 

217. take him at his word] take him 
up, or talk to him in his own strain. 
Not our sense of adopting a suggestion, 
which occurs in The Comedy of Errors, 
1. ii. 17. See also Heywood's If you 
know not me, you know no body (Pear- 



: 



:. i.] 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 



^oyet. I was as willing to grapple as he was to board. 

T ar. Two hot sheeps, marry ? 

toyet. And wherefore not ships ? 

No sheep, sweet lamb, unless we feed on your lips. 220 

T ar. You sheep, and I pasture : shall that finish the jest? 

loyet. So you grant pasture for me. 

T ar. Not so, gentle beast : 

My lips are no common, though several they be. 

toyet. Belonging to whom ? 

T ar. To my fortunes and me. 

*rin. Good wits will be jangling; but, gentles, agree : 225 

This civil war of wits were much better us'd 
On Navarre and his book-men, for here 'tis abus'd. 
Boyet. If my observation which very seldom lies, 
By the heart's still rhetoric disclosed with eyes, 
Deceive me not now, Navarre is infected. 230 

Prin. With what ? 



222. [Offering to kiss her] Capell. 

son, i. 215), 1605 : " bones-a-me, He take 
you at your word, Besides I hope these 
honest gentlemen, Will save my credit." 

219. ships] pronounced like " sheeps " 
at this time, and affording quibbling 
again in The Two Gentlemen of Verona, 
1. i. 73, and in The Comedy of Errors, 
iv. i. 94, two of Shakespeare's earliest 
plays. So engrained was this pun that 
the saying " lose not the sheep for a 
halfp'orth of tar " was sometimes written 
" ship," which serves as well. 

220. feed on your lips] Malone ap- 
propriately cites Venus and Adonis : 
" Feed where thou wilt, on mountain or 
on dale ; Graze on my lips " (Steevens, 

J 793)- 

223. common, though several] " fields 
that were enclosed were called severals, 
in opposition to commons ; the former 
belonging to individuals, the latter to 
the inhabitants generally " (Halliwell). 
Maria says: "no doubt my lips are 
good pasturing, but they are private 
and reserved," with quibbling on 
"several." Boyet immediately sees 
her meaning and asks for whom ? 
Nares and Steevens give several ex- 
amples, but the best is Johnson's : " Of 
a lord that was newly married, one ob- 
served that he grew fat ; * Yes,' said Sir 



Walter Raleigh, 'any beast will grow 
fat, if you take him from the common 
and graze him in the several.'" Ma- 
lone, Nares and other smake a difficulty 
out of the use of " though " here quite 
needlessly. But should they insist 
upon it, the reply is easy : Shakespeare, 
like other writers of the time, gave 
" though " the meaning •' since," " in- 
asmuch as." See Othello, 1. i. 70, and 
in. iii. 146, and notes (Arden edition, 
pp. 10, 133). 

225. Good wits, etc.] Lyly has " Good 
wits will apply " (Sapho and Phao, in. 
ii. [1584]). Dekker put it " Good wits 
love good wine" (The Honest Whore, 
part ii.); and "Good wits jump" be- 
came proverbial later (Wits Recreations, 
1640). 

227. book-men] See iv. ii. 33. 

229. still rhetoric] Malone compares 
Daniel, Complaint of Rosalind (1594) : 
" Sweet silent rhetorick of persuading 
eyes; Dumb eloquence" — which brings 
us back to the present play, iv. iii. 57. 

231-253. With what? . . . lie] Put 
in the margin (with many other previ- 
ous and subsequent passages) by Pope. 
Mentioned merely to show what liber- 
ties the earlier commentators took with 
the text. 



40 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 



[act II, 



Boyet. With that which we lovers entitle affected. 

Prin. Your reason? 

Boyet. Why, all his behaviours did make their retire 

To the court of his eye, peeping thorough desire : 235 

His heart, like an agate, with your print impress'd, 

Proud with his form, in his eye pride express'd : 

His tongue, all impatient to speak and not see, 

Did stumble with haste in his eyesight to be ; 

All senses to that sense did make their repair, 240 

To feel only looking on fairest of fair : 

Methought all his senses were lock'd in his eye, 

As jewels in crystal for some prince to buy ; 

Who, tend'ring their own worth from whence they were 

glass'd, 
Did point out to buy them, along as you pass'd : 245 

His face's own margent did quote such amazes, 



234. did] Q 1 ; doe Ff, Q 2. 
out] Ff, Q 2; point you Q 1. 



244. whence] Ff, Q 2 ; where Q 1. 245. point 



236. like an agate] Figures and 
mottoes were commonly cut in agate 
and worn as rings, the lineal descend- 
ants of the engraved gems of the 
ancients. Compare Doctor Dodypoll 
(Bullen's Old Plays, iii. 111): "See 
there (my Lord) this agget that containes 
The image of that Goddesse and her 
sonne Whom auncients held the sove- 
reignes of Love " ; and in Nichols' Pro- 
gresses, ii. 52, a New Year's gift of 
1576-77 is "an agathe of Neptune 
sett with 6 very small rubyes," etc. 

238. His tongue . . . ] " His tongue, 
not able to endure the having merely 
the power of speaking without that of 
seeing " (Dyce). 

241. fairest of fair] So Lodge in 
Euphues Golden Legacie (Shakes. Lib. 
l8 75> P- 67), 1590: "that Goddesse at 
whose shrine I doe bende all my de- 
votions: the most fay rest of all f aires, 
the Phoenix of all that sexe." 

243. jewels in crystal for some prince] 
One of the New Year's gifts presented 
to Queen Elizabeth in 1573-74 is de- 
scribed as " a juell, being a cristall 
garnished with golde ; Adam and Eve 
enamuled white, and a cristole pen- 
dante garnished with golde, and four 
small perles pendaunte " ; and in 1575- 



76: "a juell, being a cristall sett in 
golde with two storyes appearing on 
both sides with a small pendaunte " 
(Nichols, i. 380; ii. 1). 

244. tend'ring] offering, proffering 
for acceptance. So Gabriel Harvey, 
An Advertisement for Papp-hatchett 
(1589) : " fayre offer of preferment 
handsomely tendered unto some." 

from whence] occurs at least nine 
times in Shakespeare's early plays and 
poems. " From where " seems to be 
" absent." This may be noted as an 
example of the rule editors have made 
to adhere to the Quarto through thick 
and thin. See Introduction. " From 
whence " is Shakespeare's own expres- 
sion. See below, iv. iii. 301. 

glass'd] enclosed in glass, referring 
to the crystal glass the jewels were 
placed in. 

245. point out] Compare Lucrece, 
1086 ; Sonnet cvi. 9 ; Timon of Athens, 
iv. iii. 225. The early use in the Son- 
net decides me in favour of the Folio. 
See note at "from whence," line 244. 

246. margent] Parallel passages, ref- 
erences and comments were commonly 
printed in the margins of books at this 
time. Compare Romeo and Juliet, 1. 
iii. 86, and Lucrece, 102. 



SC I.] 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 



41 



That all eyes saw his eyes enchanted with gazes. 

I '11 give you Aquitaine, and all that is his, 

An you give him for my sake but one loving kiss. 

Prin. Come to our pavilion : Boyet is dispos'd. 250 

Boyet. But to speak that in words which his eye hath disclos'd. 
I only have made a mouth of his eye, 
By adding a tongue which I know will not lie. 

Ros. Thou art an old love-monger, and speak'st skilfully. 

Mar. He is Cupid's grandfather and learns news of him. 255 

Ros. Then was Venus like her mother, for her father is but grim. 

Boyet. Do you hear, my mad wenches ? 

Mar. No. 

Boyet. What then, do you see ? 

Ros. Ay, our way to be gone. 

Boyet. You are too hard for me. 

[Exeunt. 



250. disposed] inclined to be playful 
or merry. It occurs in Peele : M I pray 
let go, Ye are disposed I think " (Edward 
I. [Bullen's Peele, i. 135]). See Nares 
for examples from Beaumont and 
Fletcher's plays, and others. See be- 
low, v. ii. 466. 

254. love-monger] Shakespeare has 
an even dozen of these compounds with 
monger. Nashe has a few others : 
news-monger, star-monger, devil-mon- 
ger, metre - monger, complement - 
monger. 

2 55- grandfather] Boyet is repre- 
sented here as an elderly person, so 
that the beard allusion (line 203) may 
have had a personal reference to his 
stage make-up. 

257. mad wenches] occurs again v. 
ii. 264. See note at " mad-cap above, 
line 215. Compare Lodge, Euphues 



Golden Legacie (Shakes. Lib. 1875, p. 
40) : " Why then doth my Rosalynd 
grieve at the froune of Torismond . . . 
and more (mad lasse) to be melancholy, 
when thou hast with thee Alinda." 
Compare also "madman," v. ii. 338. A 
phrase of Lyly's, Sapho and Phao, 1. iv. 
(1584) : " Wee are mad wenches, if men 
marke our words : for when ... we 
cry away, doe wee not presently say 
go to." And in Mother Bombie, 11. 
iii. 

258. too hard for me] See again, iv. 
i. 136, and .4s You Like It, 1. ii. 51. 
More than I can manage (Sense 7 in 
New Eng. Diet.). Very common pro- 
vincially still. Compare Ben Jonson, 
The Magnetic Lady, in. iv. (Chorus) : 
" The boy is too hard for you, brother 
Damplay ; best mark the play and let 
him alone." 






ACT III 

SCENE \.—The Same. 



Enter ARMADO and Moth. 

Arm. Warble, child : make passionate my sense of hearing. 

Moth. [Sings.] Concolinel. 

Arm. Sweet air! Go, tenderness of years ; take this key, 
give enlargement to the swain, bring him festinately 
hither ; I must employ him in a letter to my love. 

Moth. Will you win your love with a French brawl ? 

Enter Armado and Moth] Enter Braggart and his boy Q i ; Enter Braggart 
and Boys. Song Ff, Q 2. 6. Will you] Ff, Q 2 ; Master, will you Q 1. 



1 . make passionate my sense of hear- 
ing] Puttenham, speaking " Of pro- 
portion by situation" (chap, x.), says: 
" This proportion consisteth in plac- 
ing of every verse in a staffe or ditty 
by such reasonable distaunces as may 
best serve the eare for delight . . . 
which maner of situation, even with- 
out respect of the rime, doth alter the 
nature of the Poesie, and make it either 
lighter or graver, or more merry, or 
mournfull, and many wayes passionate 
to the eare and heart of the hearer" 
(Arber, pp. 97, 98). 

2. Concolinel] The Folio informs us 
a song opens this Act, but it does not 
imply that this word is part of it, or 
even that the song is sung by Moth. 
The Quarto has only Concolinel, which 
has probably no more sense than tirra- 
lirra, etc., and merely means that 
Moth exercised his notes in a warble. 
"Warble" was the technical term for 
such utterances of melody. Compare 
Laneham's Letter (Burns' repr. p. 57), 
1575: "cleared his voice . . . wiped 
his lips . . . tempered a string or two 
with his wrest, and after a little warb- 
ling on his harp for a prelude, came 
forth with a solemn song " ; and at 



42 



page 90: "my deep diapason, my 
wanton warbles, my running, my tim- 
ing, my tuning, and my winkling." 
Perhaps it was a French symbol from 
the immediate mention of a French 
dance below. It seems to my ear that 
the second "c" must be soft, which 
suggests the word "solennel" — "to- 
gether, seriously " — as another ex- 
planation. But probably Moth merely 
hums or warbles a tune, and this 
represents his effort. 

4. enlargement] freedom. See 1 
Henry IV. in. i. 31. 

festinately] in a hurry. The ad- 
jective appears in King Lear, in. vii. 
10; and for both uses Shakespeare is 
the earliest authority in New Eng. Diet. 
The word was not so rare perhaps. 
Nashe has it as a verb in Have With 
You to Saffron Walden (Grosart, iii. 
134): "he would accelerate and /<?$#- 
nate his procrastinating ministers " 
(1596) ; and Ben Jonson uses it in 
The Silent Woman, m. ii. (1609) : 
" Gentlemen, my princess says, you 
shall have all her silver dishes, festi- 
nate." 

6. French brawl] A dance resembling 
the cotillon. Cotgrave makes the word 



.] 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



43 



\rm. How meanest thou? brawling in French? 

T oth. No, my complete master ; but to jig off a tune at 
the tongue's end, canary to it with the feet, humour it 
with turning up your eye, sigh a note and sing a note, ro 
sometime through the throat [as] if you swallowed love 
with singing love, sometime through the nose, as if 

g. the feet] Ff, Q 2 ; your feet Q 1. 10. eye] Ff, Q 2 ; eyelids Q 1, Pope, 

Cambridge. 11. as if] Theobald ; */Qq, Ff. 12. singing love, sometime] 

Theobald ; singing love sometime Q 1 ; singing, love some time Ff, Q 2. 
through the nose] Ff 2, 3, 4 ; through : nose Qq, F 1. 



equivalent to French bransle. The 
dance must have been very popular. 
In Ancient Ballads and Broadsides (p. 
221) there is a ballad of date 1569 (or 
earlier) which begins : " Good fellowes 
must go learne to daunce, The bry- 
deall is full nere a; There is a brail 
come out of Fraunce, The tryxt [tricki- 
est] ye harde this yeare a : For I must 
leape, and thou must hoppe, And we 
must turne all three a; The fourth 
must bounce it lyke a toppe, And so 
we shall agree a. I praye thee, myn- 
strell, make no stoppe For we wyll 
merye be a." In Marston's Pasquil 
and Katharine (Act v.), 1600, one says, 
"what, gallants, have you ne'er a Page 
can entertain the pleasing time with 
some French brawle or song ? " — which 
recalls Moth's position very plainly. 
The same dramatist describes a brawl 
at length in The Malcontent, iv. i. 
(1604), quoted by Steevens : "music! 
— we will dance. Guer. . . . Passa 
regis, or Bianca's brawl? Aur. We 
have forgot the brawl. Fer. So soon ? 
'tis wonder ? Guer. Why, 'tis but two 
singles on the left, two on the right, 
three doubles forward, a traverse of 
six round : do this twice, three singles 
side, galliard trick-of-twenty coranto- 
pace ; a figure of eight, three singles 
broken down, come up, meet, two 
doubles, fall back, and then honour." 
Furness has an interesting extract on 
the French braule or brawl of this time 
in its own country, from Arbeau's 
Orchesographie, 1589 (reprinted Paris, 
1888). In the First Eclogue to Sid- 
ney's Arcadia, bk. i. (ante 1586), there 
is a brawl and song combined : " Then 
would they cast away their pipes, and, 
holding hand in hand, dance, as it 
were, in a braul, by the only cadence 
of their voices, which they would use 
in singing some short couplets, whereto 



the one half beginning, the other half 
should answer, saying — • We love, and 
have our loves rewarded' — the others 
would answer — ' We love, and are no 
whit regarded' . . . etc., etc., then 
joining all their voices and dancing a 
faster measure, they would conclude 
with some such words — ' As without 
breath no pipe can move, No music 
kindles without love.' " For " cadence " 
see below, iv. ii. 115. 

8. jig off a tune] jerk off a tune, in 
the manner of a jig. The earliest use 
of the verb in New Eng. Diet. Com- 
pare Hamlet, m. i. 150. The verb 
occurs in an obscure (probably better 
left obscure) passage in Jonson's Cyn- 
thia's Revels, iv. i. (1600). 

9. canary] dance, as if dancing the 
canaries. See All's Well that Ends 
Well, 11. i. 79. To "dance the can- 
aries" became a common expression 
for dancing in a lively fashion, as in 
Beaumont and Fletcher's Rollo, 11. ii. ; 
Middleton's Spanish Gipsy, iv. iii., and 
see Nares for more. Compare Dekker, 
The Wonderfull Yeare (Grosart, i. 136), 
1603 : " a drunkard, who no sooner 
smelt the winde, but he thought the 
ground under him danced the canaries." 
And Nashe's Pierce Penilesse (Grosart, 
ii. 33), 1592 (quoted in New Eng. Diet.). 
The passage in the text is the earliest 
reference we have to the dance, which 
appears to have been derived from the 
aborigines of the " Fortunate Isles " by 
the Spaniards. It is described by Ar- 
beau (1589), quoted by Furness. See 
note at " French brawl " above, line 6. 

10. turning up your eye] I much prefer 
the Folio here. We may Hit up our 
eyelids (Proverbs xxx. 13), but to turn 
them is not so easy. Turning up 
the eye, or the white of the eye, 
was a usual expression, denoting Puri- 
tanism. 



44 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 



[act 



ill. 



you snuffed up love by smelling love ; with your hat 
penthouse-like o'er the shop of your eyes ; with your 
arms crossed on your thin-belly doublet like a rabbit 1 5 
on a spit ; or your hands in your pocket, like a man 
after the old painting ; and keep not too long in one 
tune, but a snip and away. These are complements, 
these are humours, these betray nice wenches, that 
would be betrayed without these; and make them 
men of note, (do you note, men?) that most are 
affected to these. 

15. thin-belly doublet] Cambridge ; thinbellies doblet Q I ; thin belly doublet 
Ff 1, 2, Q 2 ; thin-belly doublet, Ff 3, 4 ; thin belly-doublet Steevens, Schmidt, 
Craig; thin belly's doublet Collier. 21. men of note, (do you note, men?) that] 
Steevens; men of note : do you note men that Qq, Ff; men of note — do you note 
me? — that Hanmer, Cambridge. 

14. penthouse-like] like an over- 
hanging shed or projecting roof. Com- 
pare Macbeth, 1. iii. 20, and Much Ado 
About Nothing, in. iii. 100. The hat 
over the eyes, penthouse-like, was the 
correct wear for a lover, or a critic, or 
any other malcontent. Compare Jon- 
son, The Devil is an Ass, 1. i. : "Ina 
cloak to thy heel and a hat like a 
penthouse." 

15. arms crossed] See in. i. 172 (note), 
and iv. iii. 132. 

thin-belly doublet] The reading of 
the earliest texts agrees here and is 
correct. " Belly-doublet " is, in fact, 
nonsense, as Staunton says. Some 
doublets were stuffed, others were not ; 
but the reference here is to the thinness 
of the belly, like a spitted rabbit's. 
Compare Dekker, A Strange Horse- 
Race (Grosart, iii. 335), 1613 : " The 
third that came sneaking in was a 
leane, ill-faced, shotten-herring-bellied 
rascall." 

16. 17. like a man after the old paint- 
ing] Steevens' fascinating note here 
cannot be omitted (1793) : " It was a 
common trick among some of the most 
indolent of the ancient masters, to 
place hands in the bosom or the 
pockets, to avoid the labour of re- 
presenting them or to disguise their 
own want of skill to employ them with 
grace and propriety." Shakespeare 
refers here to some especially popular 
or well-known picture in which this 
" most indolent trick " was a prominent 
feature. Probably one that served for 



a " tailor's library." Parallels from old 
paintings are frequently adduced in 
the plays of the time, but we are gener- 
ally favoured with their subject-names 
— omitted here. There is a well-known 
miniature of Sir Philip Sidney (Isaac 
Oliver) at Windsor Castle, figured in 
Jusserand's English Novel in Shake- 
speare's Time, that answers fairly well 
to the description — arms crossed over 
doublet— broad-brimmed hat — and one 
or very nearly both hands concealed. 

18. snip] a scrap or shred. " Snip " 
belongs properly to the scissors, 
whether tailors' or barbers'. See The 
Merry Wives of Windsor, iv. v. 3, and 
note to Arden edition, pp. 185, 186. 

a snip and away] "and away " is dealt 
with in this sense in New Eng. Diet. 
with only later examples. The com- 
mon phrase in Shakespeare's time was 
"a snatch and away," which Dekker 
varies to " a licke at all sorts of learn- 
ing, and away" (GulVs Horn Book 
[Grosart, ii. 258], 1609). Compare 
Higgins, Nomenclator (1584): " Pran- 
dium statarium . . . manger de bout 
en pied. A standing dinner which is 
eaten in haste . . . A snatch and away." 
And G. Harvey, Foure Letters (Grosart, 
i. 230), 1592: "A snatch and away, 
with Neoptolemus, and the common 
sort of students." Travellers reported 
that the dogs of Egypt drank this way 
along the Nile, on account of the 
crocodiles. See v. i. 56. 

21. (do you note, men ?)] I believe 
these words are addressed to the audi- 



SC. I.] 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 



45 



Arm. How hast thou purchased this experience? 

Moth. By my penny of observation. 

Arm. But O, but O — 

Moth. The hobby-horse is forgot. 

Arm. Call'st thou my love hobby-horse? 

24. penny] Hanmer et seq. ; pen (or penne) Qq, Ff. 



25 



ence, a common trick at this time. 
Gilford, in a note to Jonson's Every 
Man in his Humour, 11. ii. (1598) 
(" we may wear motley at the year's 
end, and who wears motley, you 
know"), says "Jonson probably thought 
himself justified by the example of the 
ancients." However that may be, it 
is an indecorum constantly met with 
and justified much more satisfactorily 
by a stage-direction, in some cases, as 
" He speaks to the people " (Maydes 
Metamorphosis [Bullen's Old Plays, 1. 
118], 1600) ; " To one of the auditory " 
{Three Lords and Three Ladies of Lon- 
don [Hazlitt's Dodsley, vi. 395], 1589) ; 
and again, p. 431 : " To the audients." 
Of course it is doubtful who inserted 
these directions, but they are in the 
old editions. See Measure for Measure, 
11. iv. 79 (Arden edition, note, pp. 55, 56). 

24. penny of observation] money of 
my experience. "Penny" was com- 
monly used for money in general. " A 
pennyworth of wit" is an ancient ex- 
pression, and gave its name to a chap- 
book mentioned in Laneham's Letter, 
1575, as The Chapman of a Pennyworth 
of Wit (Burns' repr. p. 38). The ex- 
pression occurs in How a Merchande 
dyd hys Wyfe betray (Hazlitt's Early 
Popular Poetry, i. 198), circa 1500: 
" As thou art my trewe weddyd fere : 
Bye ye me a penyworth of wytt, And 
in youre hert kepe well hyt." 

25, 26. But O, but 0,—The hobby- 
horse is forgot] A frequent lament, of 
which this is perhaps the earliest ex- 
ample. Perhaps the words are a frag- 
ment of a popular song. The hobby- 
horse went out of fashion before the 
Puritanical movement against sports in 
general became rancorous. It was a 
popular adjunct of the morris-dance 
and other May-games, and is mentioned 
as early as 1557 {New Eng. Diet.) as a 
recognised village May-day sport. The 
words in the text occur again in Ham- 
let, ill. ii. 126, and see Steevens' notes 



to the passage. See also Kemp's Nine 
Daies Wonder (ed. Dyce, Camden Soc. 
p. 8}, 1600 : «' With hey and ho, through 
thicke and thin, The hobby horse quite 
forgotten, I followed as I did begin, 
Although the way were rotten." Dyce 
recommends his readers to Sir Walter 
Scott's Abbot, i. chap, xiv., for a de- 
scription of the hobby-horse. The 
lament occurs also in Ben Jonson's 
Bartholomew Fair, v. iii., and in his 
Masque of the Metamorphosed Gipsies, 
and again in his Satyr. It is dwelt upon 
in Beaumont and Fletcher's Woman 
Pleased at some length. See also 
Cooke's Greene's Tu Quoque (quoted 
by Steevens). But the hobby-horse 
was by no means forgotten, so that 
these words are most likely a quotation. 
Two passages in proof of this may be 
given, although the subject is so trite, 
and amply dealt with by Nares and 
others. In Hayes' Narrative of Gil- 
bert's Voyage (ed. Payne, 1880, p. 185), 
I 583, we are told : " Besides for solace 
of our people, and allurement of the 
savages, we were provided of music in 
good variety, not omitting the least 
toys, as Morris dancers, hobby-horse 
and May-like conceits to delight the 
savage people, whom we intended to 
win by all fair means possible." The 
other quotation is no less interesting 
from a widely different point of view. 
It is in a letter of Chamberlain's, dated 
16th March, 1614 {Court and Times of 
James I. i. 304) : " The second night 
[March 8] was a comedy of Clare Hall, 
with the help of two or three good 
actors from other houses, wherein 
David Drummond on a hobby horse, 
and Brakin the recorder of the town, 
under the name of Ignoramus, a com- 
mon lawyer, bore great parts. The 
thing was full of mirth and variety 
. . . but more than half marred by ex- 
treme length." 

27. CaWst thou my love hobby-horse ?] 
i.e. drudge, hackney. Ben Jonson uses 



46 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST [act 



Moth. No, master ; the hobby-horse is but a colt, and your 
love perhaps a hackney. But have you forgot your 
love? 

Arm. Almost I had. 

Moth. Negligent student ! learn her by heart. 

Arm. By heart, and in heart, boy. 

Moth. And out of heart, master : all those three I will prove. 

Arm. What wilt thou prove? 

Moth. A man, if I live ; and this, by, in, and without, upon 
the instant : by heart you love her, because your heart 
cannot come by her ; in heart you love her, because 
your heart is in love with her ; and out of heart you 
love her, being out of heart that you cannot enjoy her. 

Arm. I am all these three. 

Moth. And three times as much more, and yet nothing at 
all. 

Arm. Fetch hither the swain : he must carry me a letter. 

Moth. A message well sympathized: a horse to be am- 
bassador for an ass. 



■ 



30 



35 



40 



45 



36. and this, by] Theobald ; (and this) by Qq, Ff. 



this as a term of abuse in Cynthia's 
Revels, v. ii. (1600) : " Atnorphus. Make 
your play still upon the answer, sir. 
Anaides. Hold your peace, you are a 
hobby-horse. " And of a foolish lecher- 
ous person in The Silent Woman, iv. 
ii. (1609) : " here be in presence have 
tasted of her favours. Clerimont. 
What a neighing hobby-horse is this ! " 
In the latter passage it is equivalent to 
" colt " of line 28. See Othello, ir. i. 
157 (and note, Arden edition, p. 190). 

29. hackney] prostitute. Compare 
Nashe, Christ's Teares (Grosart, iv. 231, 
2 3 2 )» J 593 : " dormative potions to pro- 
cure deadly sleepe, that when the 
hackney he hath payde for lyes by hym, 
hee may have no power to deale with 
her, but shee may steale from hym." 

45. well sympathized] in good har- 
mony. Lyly seems to have introduced 
the words " sympathia " and M sym- 
pathy" (Arber's Euphues, pp. 46, 236, 
etc.), which were both at once adopted 
by Greene (Grosart's Greene, iv. 219, vii. 
41, and ix. 179). Lyly seems also first 
with verbs in ize. He has " Each one 



in course shall signorize awhile" in his 
Woman in the Moone, which cannot be 
later than 1580. A few lines lower he 
has " tyrannize." The word " sympa- 
thize " is perhaps due to Shakespeare. 
It is in Cotgrave, 161 1. The minting 
of words in " ize " proceeded at a great 
rate at this time. Nashe is eloquent 
upon the subject in his To the Reader, 
Christ's Teares (Grosart, iv. 6), 1594 : 
" To the second rancke of reprehenders 
that complain of my boystrous com- 
pound wordes, and ending my Italion- 
ate coyned verbes all in Ize, thus I 
replie. . . . Our English tongue of all 
languages most swarmeth with the 
single money of monosillables, which 
are the onely scandall of it. Bookes 
written in them and no other, seeme 
like shop-keepers boxes that containe 
nothing else, save halfpence, three- 
farthings and two-pences. Therefore 
what did me I, but having a huge 
heape of those worthlesse shreds of 
small English . . . had them to the 
compounders immediately . . . they 
carrie farre more state with them than 



1 

Ar 



u] 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 



47 



rm. Ha, ha ! what sayest thou ? 
Moth. Marry, sir, you must send the ass upon the horse, 

for he is very slow-gaited. But I go. 
Arm. The way is but short : away! 50 

Moth. As swift as lead, sir. 
Arm. Thy meaning, pretty ingenious? 

Is not lead a metal heavy, dull, and slow? 
Moth. Minime, honest master ; or rather, master, no. 
Arm. I say lead is slow. 
Moth. You are too swift, sir, to say so : 55 

Is that lead slow which is fiYd from a gun ? 
Arm. Sweet smoke of rhetoric ! 

He reputes me a cannon, and the bullet, that 's he — 

I shoot thee at the swain. 
Moth. Thump then, and I flee. [Exit. 

Arm. A most acute juvenal ; voluble and free of grace ! 60 

By thy favour, sweet welkin, I must sigh in thy face: 

Most rude melancholy, valour gives thee place. 

My herald is return'd. 



52. Thy] Ff, Q 2 ; The Q 1. 60. voluble] Ff, Q 2 ; volable Q 1. 

Most rude] Moist-eyed Collier MS. (!) 



62. 



any other, and are not halfe so harsh 
in their desinence as the old hobling 
English verbes ending in R." See 
note at v. ii. 667. But for the general 
pedantry of this play, see Introduction. 
Much of it may be referred to the term 
"pindarization," for which see Rabelais, 
ii. 6 : " How Pantagruel met with a 
Limousin who affected to speak in 
learned Phrase." He " pindarizes," Ra- 
belais says. And so most emphatically 
does Clove in Ben Jonson's Every Man 
out of his Humour, iii. etc., and many 
another. Both Shakespeare and Ben 
Jonson frequently refer to Rabelais. 
For an evil coinage with "ize," Sid- 
ney's womanize (Arcadia, bk. i.) may 
be mentioned. 

54. Minime] Latin, by no means. 
Moth gives us more evidence of his 
Latin in v. i. 63. It was proper for 
pages to know Latin. See on this 
point, Introduction. 

59. Thump] represents the sound of 
the cannon. Sometimes early writers 



used " dub a dub " for this purpose, as 
in Peele's Old Wives Tale (1874 ed. p. 
454) and in the ballad Winning of Cales 
(Percy Folio, iii. 454). " Bounce " was 
for smaller fire-arms. Halliwell says 
" thump " refers to the stroke of the 
bullet (as in iv. iii. 22), but the bullet 
is still on its way to the mark. 

60. acute] applied to the intellect. 
This is the earliest example in the New 
Eng. Diet. See below again at iv. ii. 67. 
The adverb occurs in All 's Well that 
Ends Well, I. i. 221. Ben Jonson has 
early parallels for both uses : " the most 
divine and acute lady in court " (Every 
Man in his Humour, in. i. [1598]) ; and 
" she has the most acute ready and face- 
tious wit " (Every Man out of his Hum- 
our, iv. vi. [1599]). 

juvenal] See note, 1. ii. 8, above. 
voluble] See note, n. i. 76, above. 

61. welkin] See below, iv. ii. 5 : 
" coelo, the sky, the welkin, the 
heaven." 



48 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 

Re-enter MOTH with COSTARD. 



[act 



Moth. A wonder, master ! here 's a costard broken in a shin. 
Arm. Some enigma, some riddle : come, thy Penvoy ; begin. 65 
Cost No egma, no riddle, no l'envoy ; no salve in the mail, 

sir. O, sir, plantain, a plain plantain ! no l'envoy, no 

l'envoy : no salve, sir, but a plantain ! 

64-121. A wonder . . . let me loose] Put in the margin by Pope. 65. come, 
thy] Qq, F i ; no Ff 2, 3, 4. V envoy ; begin] Capell ; lenvoy begin Qq, Ff. 

66. the mail] thee male Qq, F I ; the male Ff 2, 3, 4 ; the vale Johnson conj. ; them 
all Knight (Tyrwhitt conj.). 67. O] Q 1, Ff 3, 4 ; Or Q 2, Ff 1, 2. plain] 

pline Q 1. 68. no salve] Qq, F 1 ; or salve Ff 2, 3, 4. 

64. costard] apple, or head : M here 's millia . . . and after he had curteously 

given her the Salve." One word sug- 
gests the other. See again pp. 196, 
197. Both senses are very common in 
Greene, and often, as in " give one a 
salve" only determinable by context. 
To an ignoramus the pun was un- 
avoidable, when puns were desiderata. 
Steevens quoted the same quibble from 
Aristippus, or The Jovial Philosopher, 
1630. And compare Sidney's Arcadia, 
bk. iv. (Dublin edition, 1739, vol. ii. 
p. 309) : " as extreme grief had procured 
his sleep, so extreme care had measured 
his sleep, giving his senses very early 
salve to come to themselves." 

mail] wallet, budget. No oint- 
ment or plaster in the bag. Compare 
Narcissus fed. Miss Lee, pp. 9, 10), 
1602 : " wee may provide a plaster Of 
holsome hearbes to cure this dire dis- 
aster. Ty'resias. If I should tell you, you 
amisse would iudge it : I have one salve, 
one medecine in my budgett." Narcis- 
sus has several echoes of Shakespeare. 
See " keel the pot," note, v. ii. 909. 

67. plantain] Costard wants no high- 
class remedy with a foreign name, but 
the well-known simple, always required 
for the head or for the shin. Com- 
pare Tomkis, Albumazar, iv. n (1614) : 
" Help, Armellina, help : I 'm fall'n 
in the cellar: Bring a fresh plantane 
leaf, I have broke my shin " ; and Ben 
Jonson, The Case is Altered, 11. iv. 
(1598) : " [Martino breaks his head.] 
Onion. Foh, tis nothing, a fillip, a de- 
vice : fellow Juniper get me a plantain ; 
I had rather play with one that had 
skill by half." The plantain (Plantago 
lanceolata, ribgrass ; slan-lus in Irish, 
or healing grass) is much used in the 
north of Ireland, from its cooling pro- 
perties, to apply to bruises. 



a head broken in the shin." 

65. enigma] Compare Greene, Trit- 
ameron, pt. ii, (Grosart, iii. 145), 1587 : 
" she tooke it either for some propheti- 
call JEnigma or els for a bare iest." A 
rare word at this time. 

Venvoy] An address or send-off, 
usually placed at the end of a prose or 
poetical composition ; often taking the 
form of a concise or Obscure commenda- 
tion to the readers. Common in early 
writers as Lydgate, etc. Gabriel Har- 
vey places a L'Envoy at the end of his 
poetical Theme upon Vertue of which 
he was so proud (Grosart, i. 79), 1580. 
He has another at the close of his 
Gorgon Sonnet against Nashe (Gros- 
art, i. 297), 1592. And his use of the 
word in this trivial manner was ex- 
pressly singled out for reprehension 
and ridicule by Nashe in Have With 
You to Saffron Walden in his coarsest 
and wittiest way. See Grosart's edition, 
iii. pp. 14, 168, 170, 197. Nashe makes 
a verb of it: "we shall lenvoy him," 
give him farewell. Harvey's theme, to 
which he appends a L'Envoy, is "In 
commendation of three most precious 
Accidentes, Virtue, Fame and Wealth : 
and finally of the fourth, A good 
Tongue." The parallelism is striking, 
the goose being "the good tongue." 

66. no l'envoy ; no salve] Costard mis- 
takes the word " salve " (as in the old 
salve for a sore) for salve, a salute. 
Since the latter word was used as a 
verb (Chaucer, Spenser), possibly the 
latter syllable was occasionally slurred, 
but in any case the orthography war- 
ranted the pun. Greene at any rate 
thought so. Compare Mamillia (Gros- 
art, ii. 22), 1583 : " so his sodaine sore 
had a new salve ... he espied Ma- 



sc. L ] LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 49 

Arm. By virtue, thou enforcest laughter; thy silly thought, 

my spleen ; the heaving of my lungs provokes me to 70 
ridiculous smiling : O, pardon me, my stars ! Doth 
the inconsiderate take salve for l'envoy, and the word 
l'envoy for a salve ? 
Moth. Do the wise think them other? is not l'envoy a 

salve? 75 

Arm. No, page : it is an epilogue or discourse to make plain 
Some obscure precedence that hath tofore been sain. 
I will example it : 

The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee, 
Were still at odds, being but three. 80 

There 's the moral : now the l'envoy. 
Moth. I will add the l'envoy. Say the moral again. 
Arm. The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee, 

Were still at odds, being but three. 
Moth. Until the goose came out of door, 85 

And stay'd the odds by adding four. 
Now will I begin your moral, and do you follow with 
my l'envoy. 

The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee, 
Were still at odds, being but three. 90 

Arm. Until the goose came out of door, 

Staying the odds by adding four. 

76. page] Moth Rowe (ed. i). 77. sain] Q 1 ; fain Q 2, Ff, 78-86. / will 
. . . four] omitted in Ff, Q 2. 

69, 70. laughter . . . spleen] The ex- norant person. Compare Harvey's 

cesses of mirth or anger were con- New Letter, etc. (Grosart, i. 286) : 

trolled, it was held, by the spleen. See " the shallow breast of inconsiderate 

notes in Othello, iv. i. 89, and iv. iii. youth." 

93 (PP« I ^5» 22 °» Arden edition). Com- 77. precedence] that which has pre- 
pare also Measure for Measure, 11. ii. ceded. Walker (Crit. iii. 36) suggests 
122; and below, v. ii. 117; and Lyly, that these two lines may be a quotation 
Mother Bombie, iv. 2 : " for wee should from some old treatise on composition 
laugh heartily, and without laughing (Furness). 
my spleene would split." g2. adding four] adding a fourth. 

71, 72. Doth the inconsiderate, etc.] There are so many fox and goose 
The whole point of this trifling is here ; apologues that the latter was bound 
and the answer, of course, is "yes." to appear. "The Courtier, after tra- 
The muddle which arises in the minds vaile, tells his Lady a better tale than 
of those who will not understand this of a fox and a goose" (N. Breton, 
may be seen in pages of notes in An Old Man's Lesson, 1605). Homely 
Steevens and in Furness. stuff. 

72. inconsiderate] a thoughtless, ig- 



50 LOVE'S LABOURS LOST [act m. 

Moth. A good l'envoy, ending in the goose: would you 

desire more? 
Cost. The boy hath sold him a bargain, a goose, that 's flat. 95 

Sir, your pennyworth is good an your goose be fat. 

To sell a bargain well is as cunning as fast and loose : 

Let me see ; a fat l'envoy ; ay, that 's a fat goose. 
Arm. Come hither, come hither. How did this argument 

begin ? 
Moth. By saying that a costard was broken in a shin. 100 

Then call'd you for the l'envoy. 
Cost. True, and I for a plantain : thus came your argument in ; 

Then the boy's fat l'envoy, the goose that you bought ; 

And he ended the market. 
Arm. But tell me ; how was there a costard broken in a 105 

shin? 
Moth. I will tell you sensibly. 
Cost. Thou hast no feeling of it, Moth : I will speak that 

l'envoy. 

I, Costard, running out, that was safely within, no 

Fell over the threshold and broke my shin. 
Arm. We will talk no more of this matter. 
Cost. Till there be more matter in the shin. 
Arm. Sirrah Costard, I will.enfranchise thee. 
Cost. O! marry me to one Frances — I smell some l'envoy, 11 

some goose, in this. 

95. sold him a bargain, a goose] made " Sorner. To jest, boord, frump, gull, 

a fool of him. Compare Romeo and sell bargains, speak merrily, talk idly " 

Juliet, 11. iv. 75 (wrongly referenced in (Cotgrave, 1611). Lyly sums up the 

Schmidt) : " was I there with you for position : " Nay, sir, there is no harme 

the goose ? Rom. Thou wast never done ; they have neither bought nor 

with me for anything when thou wast sold, they may be twins for their wits " 

not there for the goose." Similar ex- (Mother Bombie, iv. 2). 
pressions, by which the speaker points 97. fast and loose] See note, 1. ii. 147. 
out that the other is a goose, as here, III. broke my shin] References to 

are numerous. " To sell one a goose the breaking of shins are so abundant 

for a bargain," shortened to " sell one at this time that one is inclined to think 

a bargain " later, has not been earlier they must have been even more sus- 

found than here. Taylor, in The Goose, ceptible than nowadays. " Against the 

puts it : " take my goose amongst you, shins " was a proverbial expression, 

gentlemen "(Works, 1630, p. in). For "Shins" had a broader sense, as in 

a development of the expression " sell Dekker's Wonderfull Yeare (Gros; 

one a bargain," much in vogue in i. 101), 1603: "pared off by the shi 

Queen Anne's time, see Grose's Classi- and made to goe upon stumps." Si 

cal Dictionary ; "To sell one a bargain, The Merry Wives of Windsor (Arden 

Aliquem ludificare" (Ainsworth, 1761) ; edition, pp. 26, 27). 



SC. I.] 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 



51 



Arm. By my sweet soul, I mean setting thee at liberty, 
enfreedoming thy person : thou wert immured, re- 
strained, captivated, bound. 

Cost. True, true, and now you will be my purgation and 120 
let me loose. 

Arm. I give thee thy liberty, set thee from durance; and, 
in lieu thereof, impose on thee nothing but this : bear 
this significant to the country maid Jaquenetta. There 
is remuneration ; for the best ward of mine honour is 125 
rewarding my dependents. Moth, follow. [Exit. 

Moth. Like the sequel, I. Signior Costard, adieu. 

Cost. My sweet ounce of man's flesh ! my incony Jew ! 

[Exit Moth. 
Now will I look to his remuneration. Remuneration ! 
O that's the Latin word for three farthings: three 130 
farthings, remuneration. 'What's the price of this - 

118. immured] Ff 2, 3, 4; emured Qq, F 1. 125. honour] Q 1 ; honours Ff, 

Q 2. 127. adieu] adew Qi,Fi. 128. Jew] jewel Warburton. 



124. significant] signification, inti- 
mation, letter. Compare 1 Henry VI. 
11. iv. 26. Some editors insert the stage- 
direction " Gives a letter " here. Others 
put " Giving him money " after '* re- 
muneration " (next line). 

125. ward] guard. 

127. sequel] that which follows in a 
story or book. Moth continues the tone 
of illustration his masters adopted with 
the V envoy. Compare Nashe, Foure 
Letters Confuted (Grosart, ii. 193), 1593 : 
" hee mist the oratorship of the Uni- 
versitie, of which in the sequele of his 
booke, he most slanderously com- 
plaineth." 

adieu] none of the pun-hunters have 
detected one here. Just as Costard 
comes to grief over the outlandish 
V envoy, so he does here, and " adieu " to 
him is " a Jew " in his rejoinder. See 
V. ii. 617, note. 

128. incony]" delicious." The earli- 
est use of this slang term the origin of 
which is only guessed at. See Murray's 
New Eng. Diet. Jonson, in the latest 
example found (1633), rhymes it with 
" money " in his Tale of a Tub, iv. i. 
The New Eng. Diet, says : " rare, fine, 
delicate, pretty, nice." Cunningham 
(Gifford's Jonson) says : " it seems to 



be a corruption of ' uncanny ' with the 
meaning ' bewitching.' " In the Jonson 
Folio (1640) there is an accent on the 
second syllable. Other examples of its 
occurrence are Doctor Dodypoll (Bul- 
len's Old Plays, Hi. 117) and Brome's 
Northern Lass, iii. The first of these 
is, noted in Steevens' Shakespeare. In 
the early editions of Marlowe's Jew of 
Malta, Act iv., the reading is " Whilst 
I in thy incoomy lap do tumble." Craig 
gives me a further reference, to Dekker's 
Gentle Craft (Pearson, i. 60). 

Jew] Is there any connection be- 
tween this word and " incony ? " The 
cheating of the coney skin-gatherers 
is referred to long before Greene's 
" Conny-catching " tracts; (1592) in The 
Hye Waye to the Spyttel House (circa 
1530). And in the tract (not by Greene) 
The Defence of Conny-catching (Gros- 
art's Greene, xi. 79), 1592, occurs : 
" Was not theis a Jewe and a notable 
Conny-catcher, Maister R. G. ? " But 
the " ounce of man's flesh," applied 
to the diminutive Moth, suggests the 
word "Jew." Compare the old pro- 
verb " worth a J ewe's eye." From 
its Old Testament associations the 
coney fur may have been affected by 
Jews. 






52 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST [act hi. 



inkle ? ' ' One penny ' : * No, I '11 give you a remunera- 
tion ' : why, it carries it. Remuneration ! why it is a 
fairer name than a French crown. I will never buy 
and sell out of this word. 



135 



Enter BlRON. 

Biron. O my good knave Costard ! exceedingly well met. 

Cost. Pray you, sir, how much carnation ribbon may a man 
buy for a remuneration ? 

Biron. What is a remuneration ? 

Cost. Marry, sir, halfpenny farthing. 140 

Biron. O ! why then, three-farthing's worth of silk. 

Cost. I thank your worship. God be wi' you ! 

Biron. O stay, slave ! I must employ thee : 

As thou wilt win my favour, good my knave, 

Do one thing for me that I shall entreat. 145 

132. inkle] yncle Qq, Ff. One penny] i. d. Qq, Ff i, 2; i. de. Ff 3, 4. 

133. carries it. Remuneration t] Theobald; carries it remuneration Qq, Ff 1, 2 ; 
carries it's remuneration Ff 3, 4. 134. a French] Ff, Q 2 ; French Q 1. 139. 
What] O what Q 1. 141, 143, 147, 149, 164. O] Qq, Ff ; omitted in Cambridge. 
141. three- far thing's worth] Ff, Q 2 ; three farthing worth Q 1. 



132. inkle] A kind of linen tape ; or, 
as in Pericles, v. 8 (Gower), the yarn it 
was made from. See also The Winter's 
Tale, iv. iv. 208. Not unfrequently 
mentioned in Shakespeare's time. 
44 Inkle " is spelt " yncle " in Cunning- 
ham's Revels Accounts (Shakes. Soc. 
p. 119), 1576. 

133. it carries it] it bears the prize, 
it wins. See The Merry Wives of 
Windsor, m. ii. 70; All's Well that 
Ends Well, iv. i. 30, etc. ; " Tis not 
thy words proud Queene shall carry it " 
(The Troublesome Raigne of King John, 
1591). 

134. French crown] A pun on the 
coin and on the bald crown produced 
by the " French disease. " See Measure 
for Measure, 1. ii. 52. 

136. exceedingly well met] So in 
Jonson's Bartholomew Fair, v. iii. : 
" Master Cokes ! you are exceedingly 
well met.' 1 

137. carnation ribbon] flesh-coloured 
ribbon. The colour of a man's skin or 
flesh. A very popular colour. Com- 
pare Dekker's Honest Whore (Pearson, 
ti. 49), 1604 : " Sweetest properest gal- 



lant . . . flame-coloured doublet, red 
satin hose, carnation silk stockings " ; 
and Heywood's If you know not me, 
etc., pt. ii. (Pearson, p. 259), ante 
1605 : " carnation girdles and busk- 
point Suitable, as common as coales 
from Newcastle : you shall not have 
a kitchen maid scrape trenchers without 
her washt gloves " ; and in A Warning 
for Faire Women (Simpson's School of 
Shakespeare, ii. 277), Act ii. (circa 1599) : 
" Pray ye bestow a groat or sixpence 
of carnation ribbon to tie my smock 
sleeves ; they flap about my hands." 
It appears several times in the costumes 
of Jonson's masques at court. 

141. O I why] See note, line 164 below. 

three-farthing's] The three- farthing 
coin, six grains, hammered, was issued 
at various dates from 1561 to 1581. 
On the obverse it bears the crowned 
bust, with rose behind the head. See 
King John, 1. i. 143. 

144. good my knave] So " sweet my 
child," 1. ii. 65, above. For the trans- 
position of unemphatic possessive ad- 
jectives, see Abbott, par. 13. Greater 
emphasis is given to " good,"" sweet " 



sc. l] LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 53 

Cost. When would you have it done, sir ? 

Biron. O this afternoon. 

Cost. Well, I will do it, sir. Fare you well. 

Biron. O thou knowest not what it is. 

Cost. I shall know, sir, when I have done it. 150 

Biron. Why, villain, thou must know first. 

Cost. I will come to your worship to-morrow morning. 

Biron. It must be done this afternoon. Hark, slave, it is 
but this : 
The princess comes to hunt here in the park, 155 

And in her train there is a gentle lady ; 
When tongues speak sweetly, then they name her name, 
And Rosaline they call her : ask for her, 
And to her white hand see thou do commend 
This seal'd-up counsel. There 's thy guerdon : go. 160 

Cost. Gardon, O sweet gardon ! better than remuneration ; 
a 'leven-pence farthing better. Most sweet gardon ! I 
will do it, sir, in print. Gardon ! Remuneration ! [Exit. 

Biron. O ! and I forsooth in love ! 

160. go [Gives him money (or shilling)] inserted by some edds. 162. 

a Heven-pence] a levenpence Qq, Ff. 164-169. Q 1 prints as three lines, ending 
whip, constable, magnificent ; Ff as six, ending love, whip, criticke, constable, 
boy, magnificent. 

159. white hand] Why should Rosa- one A per se A, his termes and braveries 
line be allowed to have a white hand ? in print." 

See " whitely," note, line 187 below. It 164. 01] Many editors reject "O" 

seems inconsistent for those who insist here, and in several preceding speeches 

on the blackness of her skin. of Biron's, although the early texts give 

160. guerdon] When Costard devotes no choice whatever in the matter. The 
a speech to explaining that Biron has reason for them, and for their rejection, 
given him a guerdon of a shilling, surely given by the Cambridge editors is that 
a stage-direction " gives him a shilling " " O " crept in from the last letter of 
is a useless excrescence ? Johnson put the stage-direction " Bero." " O " is 
it in first. "Guerdon " was a common an affectation of Biron's, inserted pur- 
word at this time and earlier. Compare posely here and elsewhere for reasons 
Cotgrave (1611) : " Guerdon : guerdon, known to the author of Love's Labour 's 
recompence, meed, remuneration, re- Lost. See his speeches in iv. iii., 
ward; also as Gardon." and see note at iv. ii. 81, and iv. iii. 

163. in print] exactly, most care- 230, etc. 

fully. See The Two Gentlemen of 164-196. / forsooth in love, etc.JFurni- 

Verona, 11. i. 175, and ^45 You Like It, vail points out in The Centurie ofPrayse 

v. iv. 92. Greene uses this expression that Golding's speech in Heywood's 

several times, as in Farewell to Follie Faire Maide of the Exchange (Pearson, 

(Grosart, ix. 308), 1591 : "Setting hir ii. 20) is an imitation of this. "With 

husbande therefore foorth in print, that face ? " (1. ii. 131) has occurred on 

tooke his waye unto the Court"; page n in the same play which, be- 

amillia (ii. 219), 1583 ; and see earlier sides being weak twaddle, is full of 



" 



Harvey (Grosart, i. 84), 1580 : " Every plagiarism. 



54 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 



[act 



III. 



I, that have been love's whip ; 165 

A very beadle to a humorous sigh ; 

A critic, nay, a night-watch constable, 

A domineering pedant o'er the boy, 

Than whom no mortal so magnificent ! 

This wimpled, whining, purblind, wayward boy, 170 

This signior [junior], giant-dwarf, dan Cupid ; 

Regent of love rhymes, lord of folded arms, 



171. signior junior'] senior junior Hanmer 
Junio Pope ; Signior Julio's Upton conj. 



Signior jfunios Qq, Ff ; Signior 
171. dan] Q i ; Don Ff, Q 2. 



170. wimpled] blindfold, muffled. 
The " wimple " was a kind of hood or 
tippet, used as a muffler in the Shake- 
spearian sense. Compare Appius and 
Virginia (Hazlitt's Dodsley, iv. 146), 
1575: "Let first my wimple bind my 
eyes, and then thy blow assail. Now, 
father, work thy will on me . . . [Here 
tie a handkercher about her eyes and 
then strike off her head]"; and Lyly, 
Mydas, 1. i. : " Justice herselfe, that 
sitteth wimpled about the eyes." 

171. signior junior] Hanmer's in- 
genious reading is universally accepted 
nowadays, but I do not like it. The 
title " signior " is more in keeping with 
the context. Cupid was never old. 
" Signior junior " is almost exactly the 
old reading, the idea being to give a 
title to the boy Cupid. This fine pas- 
sage, where Shakespeare feels and 
glories in his early strength, is recalled 
by Heywood in Love's Mistress (Pear- 
son, v. 112-114) : " Clowne. What 
might you call that yong gentleman 
that rules and raignes, revells and 
roares in these walkes of Arcadia. . . . 
2 Swain. It is the god of Love they 
call him Cupid. . . . Clowne. Can any 
of you all give me his true title. ... I 
give you his stile in Folio: Hee is 
King of cares, cogitations, and cox- 
combes ; Vice-roy of vowes and vanities ; 
Prince of passions, prate-apaces and 
pickled lovers ; Duke of disasters, dis- 
semblers, and drown'd eyes ; Marquesse 
of melancholly and mad-folks, grand 
Signior of griefes and grones, Heroe 
of hie-hoes, Admirall of ay-mees, and 
Mounsieur of mutton-laced." Laneham 
has an exordium to Neptune on the 
same lines in his Letter (1575) : " the 
great god of the swelling seas, Prins 



and Gooiphs." These passages bear 
out the reading signior. 

dan Cupid] a variant of "don," 
a contraction of dominus (or its first 
syllable), master, sir. A title of honour 
formerly. Spenser applies " dan " to 
Chaucer. " Dan Cupid " occurs earlier 
than here in lines prefixed to Greene's 
Mamillia (1583) by " Roger Portington 
Esquier, in Commendation of this 
Booke" (Grosart, ii. 11, 12): "This 
Greene deserves a laurel braunch I 
weene, For why ? his pen hath paynted 
out dan Cupid's craft." He has " dan 
Ovid " also. For similar raillery upon 
Cupid, earlier, see Sidney's Arcadia, 
Eclogues concluding book i. (1586-87) : 
" Cupid the wag that lately conquered 
had Wise counsellors, stout captains, 
puissant kings, And tied them fast to 
lead his conquest bad, Glutted with them 
now feasts with meanest things " ; T. 
Howell has the expression earlier still : 
" Then you that fayne dan Cupide is a 
god, Recant in tyme " (Devises [Grosart, 
ii. 230], 1581). 

172-174. folded arms . . . malcon- 
tents] Compare The Two Gentlemen 
of Verona, 11. i. 20, and in the pre- 
sent play, iv. iii. 132. So also Ben 
Jonson, Cynthia's Revels, in. ii. : 
"anon, doth seem As he would kiss 
away his hand in kindness; Then 
walks off melancholie, and stands 
wreathed, As he were pinned up to the 
arras, thus." And in Sidney's Arcadia, 
bk. iii. : " the only odds was that when 
others took breath, he sighed, and when 
others rested, he crossed his arms. 
For love . . . made him still remember." 
And Lodge, Euphues Golden Legacie 
(Shakes. Lib. 1875, p. 66), 1590 : " they 
saw the sodaine change of his lookes, his 



of profundities, and soverain Segnior folded armes, his passionate sighes, they 
of al Lakes, freshwaters, Rivers, Creeks heard him often abruptly cal on Rosa- 

lynd," 



SC. I.] 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 



55 



The anointed sovereign of sighs and groans, 
Liege of all loiterers and malcontents, 
Dread prince of plackets, king of codpieces, 175 

Sole imperator and great general 
Of trotting paritors : O my little heart ! 
And I to be a corporal of his field, 
And wear his colours like a tumbler's hoop ! 
What ! I love ! I sue ! I seek a wife ! 1 80 

180. What I I love I] What ? II I love Malone, Steevens (Tyrwhitt). 



175. plackets . . . codpieces] distinc- 
tive portions of female and male attire 
of the time, and hence women and 
men. Both terms occur several times 
in Shakespeare, and are amply dealt 
with by the commentators. The former 
was used of a petticoat, or the opening 
in it leading to a pocket, and hence a 
pocket itself, as in King Lear, in. iv. 
100. The latter was "a bagged ap- 
pendage to the front of the close-fitting 
hose or breeches worn by men from 
the fifteenth to the seventeenth cen- 
tury; often conspicuous and orna- 
mental " (New Eng. Diet.). For an 
early account see the notes to Rabelais, 
n. xviii. in v. braguette ; and at a late 
date Bulwer describes and condemns 
them in The Artificiall Changeling (p. 
540), 1653. Nashe sets these two terms 
in similar conjunction in his fiercest 
raillery upon Gabriel Harvey in Have 
With You to Saffron Walden (Grosart, 
iii. 191), 1596. His term is " Sir Mur- 
dred of Placards " (punning upon 
" Mordred " and " murdered "). 

177. paritors] officers of the Ecclesi- 
astical Courts, who served citations. 
Johnson says these were most fre- 
quently issued for fornication and such- 
like breaches. This statement is borne 
out by a passage in Greene's Art of 
Conny- catching (Grosart, x. 45), 1592 : 
" shifters and coosners, who learning 
some insight in the civill law, walke 
abrode like parators, sumners and in- 
formers, being none at all either in 
office or credit, and they go spying 
about where any marchant, or mar- 
chants prentice, . . . either accompany 
with anie woman familiarly, or else 
hath gotten some maide with childe 
. . . they send for him . . . telling him 
he must be presented to the Arches, 
and the scitation shal be peremptorily 
served in his parish church. The partie 



afraid to have his credit crackt . . . 
takes composition with this cosner for 
some twentie markes." They were a 
much hated class by the people. " Be- 
like thou art the devil's parator, The 
basest officer that lives in Hell " (Wily 
Beguiled [Hazlitt's Dodsley, ix. 307]). 

178. corporal of his field] " A superior 
officer of the army in the sixteenth and 
seventeenth century, who acted as an as- 
sistant or a kind of aide-de-camp to the 
sergeant-major " (New Eng. Diet.). He 
is mentioned in Gerrard, Art of Warre, 
1591. A field-officer to a general. 

179. wear his colours like a tumbler's 
hoop] a hoop decorated with ribbons, 
twisted round it, or coloured silks. 
With this the tumbler performed feats 
with his juggling sticks, and other 
buffoonery. See Chettle's account of 
Anthony Cuckoo (whose hoop is not 
mentioned) in Kind Hartes Dream 
(New Shakes. Soc. p. 44), 1592 ; and 
see a picture of fourteenth century 
tumbling in Strutt's Sports and Pas- 
times. The reason for trying to explain 
this is that the term might be con- 
founded with the hoop for jumping 
through — which seems to be a later 
accomplishment. Tumbling was very 
popular and courtly at this time. See 
Laneham's Letter (Burns' ed. p. 26) 
for an account of " the feats of agility, 
in goings, turnings, tumblings," etc., 
etc., shown by an Italian before Queen 
Elizabeth at Kenilworth (1575). And 
in 1584 : " divers feats of activity were 
shewed and presented before her 
majestie on New Year's day at night 
at Greenwich by Symons and his fel- 
lows" (Cunningham's Extracts from 
Revels Accounts [Shakes. Soc. p. 188]). 
In the figure in Strutt can the hoop be 
the hoop of the tabor ? If so, the con- 
juring or juggling sticks (they are 
called both names) came usefully. 



56 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 



[act III. 



A woman that is like a German clock, 
Still a-repairing, ever out of frame, 
And never going aright, being a watch, 
But being watch'd that it may still go right ! 
Nay to be perjur'd, which is worst of all ; 
And among three, to love the worst of all ; 
A whitely wanton with a velvet brow, 
With two pitch-balls stuck in her face for eyes ; 
Ay and by heaven, one that will do the deed 
Though Argus were her eunuch and her guard : 
And I to sigh for her ! to watch for her ! 
To pray for her ! Go to ; it is a plague 
That Cupid will impose for my neglect 



185 



190 



181. clock] Ff 2, 3, 4 ; cloak Qq, F 1. 
Ff 1, 2 ; wightly Cambridge ; witty Collier. 



187. whitely] Ff 3, 4 ; whitley Qq, 



181. woman that is like a German 
clock] There can be no doubt the later 
Folios correct "cloak" rightly here, 
since this simile was at once adopted 
by Shakespeare's successors. It is 
made use of" by Ben Jonson, The Silent 
Woman, iv. ii. ; Webster, Westward 
Ho, 1. i. ; Middleton, A Mad World 
my Masters, 1. i. ; Beaumont and 
Fletcher ("Dutch watches"), Wit 
Without Money, iii. ; and Cartwright, 
Ordinary. Dekker has a variant in 
Newes from Hell, 1606 (Grosart, ii. 
106): "their wits (like wheeles in 
Brunswick clocks) being all wound up 
so far as they could stretch, were all 
going, but not one going truly." The 
simile covers the whole article : health, 
wits and apparelling. See Introduction 
for an earlier mention of a " faire Ger- 
maine clocke " in Horsey, 1580. 

187. whitely] pale, sallow. Furness 
gives a passage cited by Arrowsmith 
(Shakespeare's Commentators, etc., p. 
4) from Heywood's Troja Britannica, 
cant. 5, st. 74 : " That hath a whitely 
face and a long nose, And for them 
both I wonderous well esteeme her" 
(1609). Furness also cites Walker 
(Critical Examination, ii. 349) : M In 
North's Plutarch (Life of Brutus) 
Cassius and Brutus are called by 
Caesar 'lean and whitely-iaced fel- 
lows.' " Arrowsmith says Walker 
found this in a note of Malone's on 



The Merchant of Venice, 11. ix. 28. But 
he probably did not do so, for though 
the passage is there, Malone refers it 
by mistake to The Life of Casar, and 
dates North's translation " 1575." The 
passage is on p. 250 (vol. ix.) in Temple 
Classics edition. These two quotations 
are ample confirmation of Shakespeare's 
text, if confirmation be needed. The 
word has been disputed solely on the 
ground that Rosaline was dark. See 
iv. iii. 244-64. How can this be a 
difficulty ? Dark, pale women are, 
happily, abundant. Rosaline was not a 
blackamoor ; her cheeks were probably 
creamy white, as Furness suggests. 
A more southern type of beauty be- 
fitting the scene of the play. The 
word "whitely" is in Johnson and 
several other dictionaries of recent 
date ; and see Cotgrave in v. blanch- 
astre. See v. ii. 203 (note) for a sug- 
gestion about Rosaline's complexion. 

188. pitch-balls . . . eyes] Paralleled 
by the modern "eyes like two burnt 
holes in a blanket"; and compare 2 
Henry IV. 11. ii. 88. 

189. do the deed] Compare The Mer- 
chant of Venice, 1. iii. 86, and The 
Taming of the Shrew, Induction, ii. 58. 

190. Argus] For the tale of Cyllenius 
(Mercury) closing the eyes of Argus, 
whom Juno had set to " duely watch 
and warde" Io, see Golding's Ovid's 
Metamorphoses, i. 770-900. 



SC. I.] 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



57 



Of his almighty dreadful little might. 

Well, I will love, write, sigh, pray, sue, and groan : 

Some men must love my lady, and some Joan. 

195. sue and groan] Ff 2, 3, 4; shue, grone Q 1, F 1. 



195 

[Exit, 



196. lady . . . Joan] Remembering 
the proverbial saying "Joan 's as good 
as my lady." Compare Munday's 
Downfall of Robert Earl of Hunting- 
ton (Hazlitt's Dodsley, viii. 157): "He 
is our lady's chaplain, but serves Joan. 
Don. Then from the Friar's fault per- 
chance it may be The proverb grew, 



Joan 's taken for a lady." Joan was a 
common name in all royal families at 
a much earlier period, but in Shake- 
speare's time it had (as Praed says) 
descended to the cottage and kitchen. 
See the last line of the closing song in 
this play (v. ii. 918): "While greasy 
Joan doth keel the pot." 






ACT IV 

SCENE I.— The Same. 

Enter the Princess, Rosaline, Maria, Katharine, Boyet, 
Lords > Attendants \ and a Forester. 

Prin. Was that the king, that spurr'd his horse so hard 

Against the steep-up rising of the hill ? 
Boyet. I know not ; but I think it was not he. 
Prin. Whoe'er a' was, a' show'd a mounting mind. 

Well, lords, to-day we shall have our despatch ; 5 

On Saturday we will return to France. 

Then, forester, my friend, where is the bush 

That we must stand and play the murderer in ? 
For. Hereby, upon the edge of yonder coppice ; 

A stand where you may make the fairest shoot. 10 

Act iv.] Act in. Theobald. Enter . . .] Enter the Princesse, a Forrester, 

her Ladyes, and her hordes Qq, Ff. 2. steep-up rising] steep up rising Qq ; 

steep uprising F 1 ; steep unrising Ff 2, 3, 4. 3. Boy.] Ff, Q 2 ; Forr. Q 1. 

2. steep-up] Compare Sonnet vii. 5 : Irish expression (Northern). But the 

" having climbed the steep-up heavenly best parallel is in Golding's Ovid's 

hill " ; and The Passionate Pilgrim : Metamorphoses (viii. 873, 4) : " They 

11 Her stand she takes upon a steep-up lagged slowly after with theyr staves, 

hill." "Steep-down "occurs in Othello, and labored sore Ageinst the ry sing of 

v. ii. 280, for which Greene affords us the hill." 

a parallel in The Carde of Fancie 4. mounting mind] Compare Peele, 

(Grosart, iv. 74), 1587: "the rocke Edward I. (Dyce's edition [Routledge, 

was so deepe and daungerous, the 1874, p. 379]), ante 1593 : " Sweet Nell, 

cliffes so steep-downe and feareful, as thou shouldst not be thyself, did not, 

to descend was no lesse daunger than with thy mounting mind, thy gift sur- 

death it selfe." A steep-down place mount the rest." This parallel was 

was a much more serious declivity observed by Dyce. See earlier in Whet- 

than a steep-up ascent to negotiate, stone's Remembraunce of Gascoigne 

" Uprising " is a harsh expression ; the (Arber, p. 18), 1577: "and begging 

Quarto separates the words. sutes from dunghill thoughts proceed : 

rising of the hill] Compare The the mounting minde had rather sterve in 

Two Gentlemen of Verona, v. ii. 46: need." It is found also in The Trouble- 

" meet with me Upon the rising of the some Raigne of King John, 1591. 

mountain-foot." Sidney has " am- 8. stand and play the murderer ii 

bushed his footmen in the falling of a See Introduction on ladies shootir 

hill which was overshadowed with a deer with crossbows at this time. S« 

wood" (Arcadia, bk. iii. [repr. p. 269]). also note at " sorel," iv. ii. 54. 

The " rise of the hill " is a common 10. stand] The technical sportii 

58 



I.] 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



And thereupon thou speak'st the fairest shoot. 
For. Pardon me, madam, for I meant not so. 

In. What, what ? first praise me, and again say no ? 
O short-liv'd pride ! Not fair ? alack for woe ! 
r . Yes, madam, fair. 
Prin. Nay, never paint me now : 

Where fair is not, praise cannot mend the brow. 
Here, good my glass, take this for telling true : 
Fair payment for foul words is more than due. 
For. Nothing but fair is that which you inherit. 
Prin. See, see ! my beauty will be saved by merit. 
O heresy in fair, fit for these days ! 
A giving hand, though foul, shall have fair praise. 
But come, the bow : now mercy goes to kill, 

11-40. / thank . . . lord] Consigned to the margin by Pope. 
again] Q 1 ; and then again F 1, Q 2; then again Ff 2, 3, 4. 
him money] Johnson. 22. fair] faith Collier MS. 

term for a waiting or hiding place wherein the heresy exists 
from whence to strike the game. 



59 



15 



20 



14. and 
18. [giving 



See 
The Merry Wives of Windsor, v. v. 247 
(p. 224, Arden ed. and notes). These 
stands or standings were erected for 
special occasions like the present. In 
Lord North's Household Book for 1575 
occurs : " Making a standing for ye 
Q. in the parke . . . 25^ " (Nichols, 
ii. 238). Called also "bowers." See 
Introduction. 

17. brow] face. See below, iv. iii. 182. 

18. good my glass] See note at in. i. 
144. 

20. inherit] own, possess; as in 1. 
i. 73. A common use. 

21. saved by merit] saved by that for 
which a person deserves recompense 
(as in 1 Henry IV. I. ii. 121) ; but there 
is also a quibble upon the meaning of 
" merit," reward, recompense. Nares 
gives an example of the verb from 
Chapman's Homer's Iliad, ix. 259 : 
"The king will merit it with gifts." 
See Richard II. 1. iii. 156 for another 
example of the substantive. The Prin- 
cess is referring to her "tip" to the 
forester. See Schmidt's Lexicon. But 
" saved by merit " has a signification 
which explains the following words, " O 
heresy in fair," upon which difficulty 
there has been much comment, and, as 
Fumess says, it lies "in specifying 



And as we 
have seen, no two critics exactly agree." 
" Merits " had a papistical sense. I 
find in Barnabe Googe's translation of 
Naogeorgus, The Popish Kingdome, 
1570 (Chiswick, 1880) : "They go and 
buy of other men, that commonly have 
more. But specially of Monkes that 
have the merites chiefe to sell, Sufficient 
both to keepe themselves and other 
men from hell " (Folio 40, The Third 
Booke). And on the following page, 
the " heresy " in the text is made clear : 
" All such as are not Monkes or saved 
by their merites heare, Or in their ship, 
and this makes fooles to buy their 
merites deare." " Merits" appears to 
mean certificates bought from the 
monks, of money bestowed upon them, 
and especially of pilgrimages taken to 
holy places : " If to holy places go, 
and for religion sake, Unto the ymage 
of some saint, they painefull journeys 
make . . . All things they here for 
merites doe." See Introduction upon 
the Princess's use of this expression. 

22. heresy] See last note. See Bar- 
nabe Googe, at the reference above, for 
more on the subject; also note at 
" corner-cap," iv. iii. 50. 

23. A giving hand] See Othello, in. 
iv. 46, 47 (and note, Arden edition, pp. 
167, 168). 



60 LOVES LABOUR S LOST [act iv. 

And shooting well is then accounted ill. 25 

Thus will I save my credit in the shoot : 

Not wounding, pity would not let me do 't ; 

If wounding, then it was to show my skill, 

That more for praise than purpose meant to kill. 

And out of question so it is sometimes, 

Glory grows guilty of detested crimes, 

When, for fame's sake, for praise, an outward part, 

We bend to that the working of the heart ; 

As I for praise alone now seek to spill 

The poor deer's blood, that my heart means no ill. 35 

Boyet. Do not curst wives hold that self-sovereignty 

Only for praise' sake, when they strive to be 

Lords o'er their lords ? 
Prin, Only for praise ; and praise we may afford 

To any lady that subdues a lord. 

Enter COSTARD. 

Boyet. Here comes a member of the commonwealth. 
Cost. God dig-you-den all ! Pray you, which is the head 

lady ? 
Prin, Thou shalt know her, fellow, by the rest that have 

no heads. 45 

Cost. Which is the greatest lady, the highest ? 
Prin. The thickest and the tallest. 
Cost. The thickest and the tallest ! it is so ; truth is truth. 

32. for praise] to praise Ff 2, 3,4. 35. that) tho' Warburton conj. 41-54 
Put in the margin by Pope. 

30. out of question] beyond question, representeth but one certaine bodye 

certainly. compounded of divers members." 

36. curst] shrewish, cross-grained. 42. God dig-you-den] A mutilated 

Usually applied to women, but com- form of " God give you good even." 

pare Ascham, The Scholemaster (Arber, " God deven " occurs in Gammer Gur- 

p. 18), 1570: "the shrewde touches of ton's Needle, 1575. The Folio has 

many curste boyes." " Godgigoden " in Romeo and Juliet, 1. 

41. a member of the commonwealth] ii. 59. See the New Eng. Diet, for other 
See again iv. ii. 71, where we are told varieties. Ben Jonson has " God you 
Holofernes is one also. "Costard the good morrow" in Bartholomew Fair, i.i. 
swain " (1. i. 178) was one of the 48. truth is truth] proverbial. Corn- 
original society of the King's founding, pare Nashe, Have With You to Saffron 
See also The Merchant of Venice, in. Walden, 1596 (Grosart, iii. 94) : " Yet 
v. 37. Compare T. B.'s trans, of De in truth (as truth is truth, and will out 
la Primaudaye's French Academy, chap, at one time or other, and shame the 
54 (1586) : " the whole common-wealth devil) " • and Gascoigne, The Steel 



'•] 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



61 



An your waist, mistress, were as slender as my wit, 
One o' these maids' girdles for your waist should be fit. 50 
Are not you the chief woman ? you are the thickest 
here. 

Prin, What 's your will, sir ? what 's your will ? 

Cost. I have a letter from Monsieur Biron to one Lady Rosa- 
line. 

Prin. O ! thy letter, thy letter ; he 's a good friend of mine. 55 
Stand aside, good bearer. Boyet, you can carve ; 

» Break up this capon. 
et. I am bound to serve. 

This letter is mistook ; it importeth none here : 
It is writ to Jaquenetta. 
Prin. We will read it, I swear. 

Break the neck of the wax, and every one give ear. 60 

49. my wit] your wit Johnson conj. 
Glas 



(Arber, p. 103), 1576 : " I speake 
against my sex, So have I done before, 
But truth is truth and muste be tolde, 
Though daunger kepe the dore." 

49. slender . . . wit] Compare Lyly, 
Sapho and Phao, I. iii. : " Molus. You 
are grosse witted, master courtier. 
Cryti. And you master scholler slender 
witted." 

53. What's your will, sir?] Obvi- 
ously the Princess is snubbing Costard 
for his impertinence. Furness makes 
a doubt of it. 

56, 57. carve ; Break up] A technical 
term, originally for carving a deer, but 
subsequently of extended use. Com- 
pare Florio's Montaigne's Essays, i. 51. 
Montaigne quotes from Juvenal, Sat. 
v. 127 : " Nee minimo sane discrimine 
refert, Quo gesta lepores, et quo gallina 
secetur. What grace we use, it makes 
small difference, when We carve a 
Hare, or else breake up a Hen " (" de- 
couper un lievre ou un poulet"). In 
The Winter's Tale, in. ii. 132, the ex- 
pression occurs of a letter : " Break up 
the seals and read." The words "you 
can carve " are addressed to Boyet with 
a quibble on the sense (used also of 
Boyet) at v. ii. 323 (see note). Craig 
gives me an example from Gascoigne, 
Glass of Government, 1575 : " Oh how 
this comforteth my hart; thys letter 

teth from my younger sonne: I 



will break it up." See also The Mer- 
chant of Venice, 11. iv. 10. 

57. capon] Theobald pointed out that 
" capon is here used like the French 
poulet." Cotgrave has : M Poulet : a 
chicken, also a love-letter or love- 
message." Thackeray uses the term : 
" sate down to pen a poulet ... to 
Mademoiselle" (Vanity Fair, chap, 
xxiv.). French was so commonly 
spoken, I suppose the joke did not 
seem far-fetched, especially as we are 
supposed to be in France. Furness 
refers to Laneham's Letter (1575) for 
a similar expression, " cold pigeon " 
(Burns' repr. p. 89), but it is a bad 
parallel. The expression there is 
equivalent to " cold pie," a rebuke or 
reprimand, and there is no mention of 
a letter. Compare here Lyly's Mother 
Bombie, 1. i. (ante 1594): "my son is 
out of the shell and is growne a pretie 
cock. Dromio. Carve him, master, and 
make him a capon, else all your breed 
will prove cockescomes." 

58. mistook] Compare Speeches to the 
Queen at Rycot, 1592 (Nichols, iii. 170) : 
" a French Page came with three other 
letters : the one written to the Lady 
Squemish, which being mistaken by a 
wrong superscription, was read before 
her Majestie." 

60. Break the neck] Still alluding to 
the capon (Johnson). 



62 



LOVES LABOUR S LOST [act n 



Boyet. [Reads.] By heaven, that thou art fair, is most infallible 
true, that thou art beauteous; truth itself, that thou art 
lovely. More fairer than fair, beautiful than beauteous, 
truer than truth itself, have commiseration on thy heroical 
vassal ! The magnanimous and most illustrate king Cophetua 6 

65. illustrate] illustrious Q 2. 

61, etc.] Halliwell quotes here from 
Wilson's Art of Rhetorique (1584), p. 
165, in ridicule of affected epistolary 
writing. Wilson gives an example of 
such a letter "devised by a Lincoln- 
shire man for a voide benefice to a 
gentleman that then waited upppn the 
Lord Chancellor " (see Furness) which 
Halliwell gives an extract from. It is 
of the encomiastic pedantical form 
familiar in dedications to patrons and 
such-like compositions, whose charac- 
teristics are verbosity and unreadable- 
ness. Armado does not go quite so 
low. He does not coin abominable 
sesquipedalian words from a Latin 
dictionary. The letter is, however, 
none the less a mockery. We have 
other evidences of a familiarity with 
Wilson's work in this play. See " in- 
sinuation," iv. ii. 13 (note); and "time 
when," 1. i. 230 (note). 

63, 64. More fairer than fair . . . 
truer than truth, etc.] See note at 1. ii. 
I 57'59- Compare Sidney's Arcadia, 
bk. i. (Dublin edition [1739], i. 51), ante 
1586 : " That which made her fairness 
much the fairer was that it was a fair 
ambassador of a most fair mind," and 
elsewhere throughout. Below (note, 
lines 68, 69) at " in the vulgar (O base 
and obscure vulgar !)," there is another 
Arcadianism. Compare bk. ii. (p. 278, 
ut supra) : " Which when this good 
old woman perceived — O the good old 
woman ! " and again : " her body (O sweet 
body !) covered," etc. ; and again : " One 
day (O day that shined to make them 
dark! "). Here is another of Sidney's 
" linked sweetnesses " : " His arm no 
ofter gave blows than the blows gave 
wounds, than the wounds gave deaths, 
so terrible was his force ; and yet was 
his quickness more terrible than his 
force, and his judgment more quick 
than his quickness " (bk. iii.). Instead 
of clothing thoughts with words, the 
words are compelled to drag out the 
inanimate thoughts in chains. 

65. illustrate] illustrious. See again 
v. i. 114. The word also had the sense 



resplendent, illuminated, as in Chap 
man's Phyllis and Flora (Minor Poem 
etc., 1875, p. 48), 1595 : " bright in ble 
As stars illustrate bodies be." See th 
New Eng. Diet, for examples as earl 
as 1526 in good English writers. 

65, 66. king Cophetua . . . begga 
Zenelophon] We have already had 
reference to the ballad of the King an 
the Beggar (without names) " whic 
the world was very guilty of som 
three ages since ; but I think 'tis no 
now to be found; or, if it were, 
would neither serve for the writing no 
the tune." It is only reasonable t 
identify Armado' s first ballad with th 
reference he makes to the King an 
the Beggar here. Shakespeare refer 
to the story again in Romeo and Julie 
n. i. 54 (see Dowden's note, Arde 
edition, p. 50) : " When King Cophetu 
loved the beggar maid " ; and the nam 
" King Cophetua " is mentioned (ap 
parently a quotation) in a ranting pas 
sage in 2 Henry IV. v. iii. 106 ; and 
again the title is recalled in Richard 
II. v. iii. 80. Ben Jonson also has 
" as rich as King Cophetua " in Every 
Man in his Humour, m. iv. There is 
a ballad on " King Cophetua and the 
Beggar-maid" in Percy's Reliques (i. 
189-94, e d. J887) from Johnson's Crown 
Garland of Goulden Roses, 1612, where 
its title is " A Song of a Beggar and a 
King." But the language of this ballad, 
as Capell says, " most certainly has not 
the age that Moth speaks of." One 
line in it seems to me more likely to be 
a quotation from Romeo and Juliet than 
vice versd. In this ballad the name of 
the beggar is corrupted to " Penelo- 
phon." But, on Moth's authority, the 
early ballad was very different from the 
dainty and decorously-worded song ii 
Percy. There is a passage in Marston' 
Scourge of Villainy (Bullen's Marstot 
iii. 302), 1598, which alludes to some 
thing more in keeping with Moth' 
reminiscences : " Go buy some ballac 
of the Fairy King, And of the Begga 
wench, some roguy thing, Which thoi 



, 



LOVE'S LABOUR S LOST 



63 



set eye upon the pernicious and indubitate beggar Zenelo- 
phon, and he it was that might rightly say, veni, vidi, vici; 
which to annothanize in the vulgar (O base and obscure 
vulgar !) videlicet, he came, saw, and overcame : he came, 
one ; saw, two ; overcame, three. Who came ? the king : 
why did he come ? to see : why did he see ? to overcome. 



70 



66. Zenelophon] Penelophon Collier. 68. annothanize] Qq, F 1 ; anato- 

mize Ff 2, 3, 4. 69. saw] Ff 2, 3, 4 ; see Qq, F 1. 70. saw] Rowe ; see 

Qq, Ff. overcame] Q 2, Ff 3, 4 ; covercame Q 1, Ff 1, 2. 



mayst chant unto the chamber-maid To 
some vile tune." Moth finds fault also 
with the tune. There seems to have 
been also a drama on the subject, which 
is referred to probably in 2 Henry IV. 
and in D'Avenant's Wits, n. i. (1636): 
"spoke like the bold Cophetua's son ! " 
[See additional note on p. 184.] 

66. indubitate] certain. Not else- 
where in Shakespeare, but a long-used 
(Caxton, 1420), sound word. Schmidt 
suggests that Armado blunders, but 
he does not. An unmistakable beggar 
is set antithetically against a most 
illustrious king. 

67-69. say, veni, vidi, vici . . . came, 
saw, and overcame] None of the com- 
mentators inform us whence Shake- 
speare derived this famous quotation. 
Perhaps it is too well known, but Ar- 
mado' s accuracy deserves corrobora- 
tion; and in the Stanford Dictionary 
(Cambridge, 1892) the present passage 
is the earliest example. It is from 
North's Plutarch {Julius Ccesar), 1579 : 
" Cassar . . . fought a great battell with 
King Pharnaces. . . . And because he 
would advertise one of his friends of 
the suddenness of this victory, he only 
wrote three words unto Anicius at 
Rome : Veni, Vidi, Vici : to wit, I 
came, saw, and overcame. These three 
words ending all with like sound and 
letters in the Latin, have a certain 
short grace, more pleasant to the ear, 
than can be well expressed in any other 
tongue " (Temple Classics, vii. 187). 
This passage, in North's words (from 
"three words" to "overcame"), is 
quoted earlier than by Shakespeare in 
T. Bowes' translation of De la Primau- 
daye's French Academy (1586), in chap, 
xii., "Of Speech and Speaking"; and 
from thence into Greene's prose-tracts 
(Grosart, v. 206, 276), in Penelope's Web 
(1587), and The Spanish Masquerado 
(1589), but without "came, saw, and 
overcame." 



68. annothanize] anatomize. Pos- 
sibly Armado's version of the word 
was suggested by the substantive an- 
notation which was already in current 
use, although the verb was consider- 
ably later. The old editions of Shake- 
speare usually write anathomize in other 
passages for " anatomize." 

68, 69. vulgar [O base . . . vulgar)] 
See for this form of repetition, note at 
lines 63, 64 above. Lyly has the same 
trick (later than Arcadia) in Endymion, 
1. i. : " his person (ah sweet person) 
... his sharpe wit (ah wit too sharpe)," 
etc. 

vulgar (O base and obscure vul- 
gar!)] "Vulgar," meaning vernacular 
tongue, occurs again in As You Like 
It> v. i. 53, in a similar strain : " aban- 
don, which is in the vulgar, leave." 
In 1. ii. 46 above, we have had " the 
vulgar " used absolutely for the com- 
mon people. Compare Henry Porter's 
Two Angry Women of Abingdon (Haz- 
litt's Dodsley, vii. 283, 284), 1599 • 
" Coomes. Faith, sir, like a poor man 
of service. Philip. Or servingman. 
Coomes. Indeed, so called by the vul- 
gar. Philip. Why, where the devil 
hadst thou that word?" And Putten- 
ham, Arte of English Poesie, 1589 (but 
written earlier) : " Offices of service 
and love towards the dead . . . called 
Obsequies in our vulgar " (p. 63); "such 
maner of Poesie is called in our vulgar 
ryme dogrell " (p. 89). See also pp. 
22, 26, in Arber's reprint. " In theyr 
vulgar tongue," the full expression, is 
in " Publike Baptisme," in The First 
Prayer Book of King Edward VI., 

1549- 

69. videlicet] The Stanford Diction- 
ary has a reference (ante 1548) to Ellis' 
Original Letters for the contraction 
viz., and another (1562) to the same 
collection, contracted videl. See As 
You Like It, iv. i. 97. 



64 



LOVES LABOUR S LOST [act iv 



To whom came he ? to the beggar : what saw he ? the 
beggar : who overcame he ? the beggar. The conclusion is 
victory : on whose side ? the king's. The captive is en- 
riched: on whose side ? the beggar's. The catastrophe is a 75 
nuptial : on whose side ? the king's ? no, on both in one, or 
one in both. I am the king, for so stands the comparison ; 
thou the beggar, for so witnesseth thy lowliness. Shall I 
command thy love ? I may. Shall I enforce thy love ? I 
could. Shall I entreat thy love ? I will. What shalt thou 8c 
exchange for rags ? robes : for tittles ? titles : for thyself ? 

74. the king's] Q 2, Ff 3, 4 ; the king Q i, F 1. 






72-75. To whom came he ? to the 
beggar . . . on whose side ? the beg- 
gar's] This is Gabriel Harvey's favour- 
ite style. Compare Pierce's Superero- 
gation (Grosart, ii. 176) : " What the 
saluation of David Gorge ? a nullitie : 
what the deification of N. H. ? a nul- 
litie : what thesanctification of Browne ? 
a nullitie ; what the communitie of 
Barrow ? a nullitie : what the plausi- 
bilitie of Marten ? a nullitie." In 
scene iii. of Pedantius (levelled at G. 
Harvey), circa 1581, there is a parallel 
noticed by Moore Smith (Materialen 
zur kunde des dlteren Englischen Dra- 
mas, Band viii. p. xlvii.) : " Quis in 
Grammatica Congruus? Nonne Ped- 
antius ? Quis in Poetaram hortis flori- 
dus ? Nonne Pedantius ? Quis in 
Rhetorum pompa poteus ? Nonne 
Pedantius ? " See note at " Troyan," 
v. ii. 664. 

78, 79. Shall I command . . . Shall 
I enforce thy love] From Lyly : " I will 
not enforce marriage where I cannot 
compell love" (Campaspe, v. 4 [1584]); 
and " Well Semele, I will not command 
love, for it cannot be enforced : let me 
entreat it " (Endymion, v. 3 [1591]) ; and 
Sapho and Phao, iv. 1 (1584) : " Yeeld 
to me, Phao; I intreat where I may 
command ; command thou, where thou 
shouldst intreat." 

81. exchange for] obtain in exchange 
for. The New Eng. Diet, refers this 
" obsolete " sense to Spenser, Faerie 
Queene, vn. vi. 6. 

for rags ? robes :] " Cupid is blinde 
and shooteth at random, as soone hitting 
a ragge as a robe, and piercing as soone 
the bosome of a Captive as the brest of 
a Libertine " (Lodge, Euphues Golden 
Legacie [Shakes. Lib. Hazlitt's edition, 
p. 33], 1590) ; and again : " Cupid shootes 



at a ragge as soone as at a roabe " (p 
68) ; and again : " Venus jettes in 
Roabes not ragges " (p. 100) ; anc 
" Will Venus joyne roabes and raggei 
together?" (p. 117). Thackeray per 
haps remembered this: "Lady Bare- 
acres ... a toothless bald old woman 
now — a mere rag of a former robe o: 
state" (Vanity Fair, chap. xlix.). 

tittles] jots, particles, points o 
small lines. Commonly used in th< 
"criss-cross row." An early exampl< 
occurs in Halliwell's Sixteenth and 
Seventeenth Century Literature, p. 32 
(Two Italian Gentlemen, by A. Mun- 
day, 1584) : " I, ipse tittle, tittle tittU 
esti, Amen." A standard ending, 
quoted by Nashe in Have With You, 
etc. (Grosart, iii. 66) : " a per se, con 
per se, tittle, est, Amen ! ... he comes 
upon thee with a whole Hornbooke " ; 
and in How a Man may Chuse a Good 
Wife (Hazlitt's Dodsley, ix. 42), circa 
1600 : "I was five years learning to 
crish-cross from great A ... so in 
process of time I came to e per se and 
com per se, and tittle," etc., etc. This 
was probably the most familiar mean- 
ing. The word does not occur again 
in Shakespeare except in " tittle-tattle," 
which may owe somewhat of its origin 
to the present word. A passage in 
Grim the Collier of Croydon (Hazlitt's 
Dodsley, viii. 418), circa 1600, goes a 
long way in support of this. 

for tittles? titles] A quibble of 
Harvey's : " I am alwayes marvellously 
beholding unto you, for your bountifull 
Titles. . . . But to let Titles and Tittle. 
passe, and come to the very point in 
deede" (Letter to Spenser [Grosart, i 
25], 1579). This is pre-euphuist, but 
it is a favourite mode of Lyly's an" 
copied by many writers : for example. 



I.] 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



65 



me. Thus, expecting thy reply, I profane my lips on thy 
foot, my eyes on thy picture, and my heart on thy every part. 
Thine in the dearest design of industry, 

Don Adriano de Armado. 85 

Thus dost thou hear the Nemean lion roar 

'Gainst thee, thou lamb, that standest as his prey ; 

Submissive fall his princely feet before, 

And he from forage will incline to play. 

But if thou strive, poor soul, what art thou then ? 90 

Food for his rage, repasture for his den. 

Prin. What plume of feathers is he that indited this letter ? 
What vane? what weathercock? did you ever hear 
better ? 

85. Adriano] Q 2 ; Adriana Q 1, Ff. Armado] Ff 2, 3, 4 ; Armatho Qq, F 1, 



rayton in his dedications to The Har- 
tie of the Church (1590) : " not as 
:ms of Poets, but prayers of Prophets ; 
and vouchsafe to be their gracious 
Patroness against any graceless Para- 
site " ; and " I speake not of toys in 
Mount Ida, but of Triumphs in Mount 
Sion : not of vanity, but of Verity : not 
of Tales, but of Truths." 

82. profane my lips] " I kiss thy 
hand" was a common, respectful end- 
ing to a letter, especially from a lover 
or suitor. Compare The Shepherdess 
Felismena (Hazlitt's Shakes. Lib. 
p. 284) : " all is mine doth wholly 
consist in your hands, the which, with 
all reverence and dutifull affection, a 
thousand times I kisse " ; and Nashe 
(mockingly), Ded. to Lenten Stuffe 
(Grosart, v. 195) : " and so I kisse the 
shadow of your feetes shadow." 

83. picture] image. 

84. industry] assiduity in ladies' ser- 
vice. In The Queen's Entertainment 
at Cowdray, 1591 (Nichols, iii. 109), 
industry is described as "careful and 
kind diligence." This word was used 
widely and affectedly. Gabriel Harvey 
has it several times while bestowing 
lavish praise on his friend Sidney, and 
his " Countess of Pembroke's Arcadia " 
in Pierce's Supererogation (Grosart, ii. 
99-102): "Lord, what would himselfe 
have prooved in fine, that was the gentle- 
man of Curtesy, the Esquier of Indus- 
try, and the Knight of Valour at those 
yeeres ? Live ever sweete Booke. " Our 
"gallantry." 

86. Nemean lion] So accented in 



Hamlet, 1. iv. 83. The reference is to 
the first of Hercules' labours, which 
Shakespeare recalled from Golding's 
Ovid, ix. 242 : " The Nemean Lyon by 
theis armes lyes dead uppon the ground ' ' 
(1567). Here it was he found his pronun- 
ciation of Nemean, wherein the Greek 
and not the Latin accent is retained. 
This is the sonnet Armado promises us 
at 1. ii. 174, so we must be content. 
We have here too the Armada of " high- 
born words," foreshadowed and fore- 
gone, of 1. i. 171. See Introduction. 
93. vane] " vane " naturally suggests 
weathercock, but it should more pro- 
perly be written here " fane," an 
obsolete word signifying " flag, banner, 
pendant" (New Eng. Diet.), also writ- 
ten " fan " as in Chapman's Two Wise 
Men, etc., iv. iii. (1619) : " I could de- 
vise them a crest as fit as a fan for a 
forehorse." There is a good illustrative 
passage in The Feast of St. George 
observed at Utrecht, 1586 (Nichols' 
Progresses, ii. 457): "Then began the 
trumpets to sound in the service, which 
was most prince-like and aboundant, 
served on the knee, carved and tasted 
to her Majesties trencher ['as if in 
person she had been there '];... 
sundry sortes of musickes continued 
the entring of the first course ; which 
done and avoyded, the trumpets 
sounded in for the second, which was 
all baked meats of beasts and fowles ; 
the beasts, as lions, dragons, leopards, 
and such like bearing phaines or arms ; 
and the fowles, as peacocks, swans, 
pheasants, turkie cocks, and others in 



66 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST [act iv. 



Boyet. I am much deceiv'd but I remember the style. 

Prin. Else your memory is bad, going o'er it erewhile. 95 

Boyet. This Armado is a Spaniard, that keeps here in court ; 

A phantasm, a Monarcho, and one that makes sport 

To the prince and his book-mates. 
Prin. Thou, fellow, a word. 

Who gave thee this letter ? 
Cost. I told you ; my lord. 

Prin. To whom should 'st thou give it ? 
Cost. From my lord to my lady. 1 

Prin. From which lord to which lady ? 



97. phantasm] Ff 2, 3, 4 ; phantasime Qq, F 1 ; phantasma Capell conj. 
archo] monarcho Q 2. 



Mon- 



their natural feathers, spread in their 
greatest pride, which sight was both 
rare and magnificent. This service 
being placed on her Majesties boord, 
the beasts on the one side, and fowles 
on the other, the lyon being couchant 
at her Highnesse's trencher, the usshers 
cryed 'A Hall!' ... the feast ended 
and tables voyded, there was dauncing, 
vaulting and tumbling with the forces 
of Hercules. ... At supper being all 
assembled againe . . . great was the 
feast . . . and after supper beganne 
the barries betweene challengers and 
defendants wherein the Earle of Essex 
behaved himselfe so valiantly." We 
can imagine the challengers on behalf 
of St. George roaring somewhat like 
Armado's Nemean lion " falling his 
princely feet before" her Highness's 
trencher. The plume of feathers and 
the fane belong to the Feast. Compare, 
too, " libbard's head on knee " at v. ii. 
542. For Hercules, compare v. ii. 580, 
581, and v. i. no (notes). 

93. weathercock] Taken as a type of 
showiness, as in The Merry Wives of 
Windsor, in. ii. 18 (see note, Arden 
edition, p. 120). So Sidney, Arcadia, 
bk. iii. (Dublin edition, vol. ii. p. 69 
[1739]) : " proclaiming his blasphemies 
against womankind ; that, namely, that 
sex was . . . the shops of vanities, 
the gilded weathercocks." 

97. Monarcho] A real fantastical 
character of the time. He appears to 
have been a crazy hanger-on to the 
Court, whose vain-gloriousness made 



him a butt. Thomas Churchyard wrote 
a tedious epitaph to The Phantasticall 
Monarke, printed in a collection called 
his Chance (1580) which is given at 
length by Steevens. "Steevens also 
quotes from A briefe Discourse of the 
Spanish State, with a Dialogue an- 
nexed, intituled Philobasilis (1590), p. 
39 : " The actors were that Bergamasco 
(for his phantastick humours) named 
Monarcho, and two of the Spanish 
embassadours retinue, who being about 
foure and twentie yeares past, in Paules 
Church in London, contended who was 
soveraigne of the world : the Monarcho 
maintained himself to be he, and named 
their king to be but his viceroy for 
Spaine, the other two with great fury 
denying it," etc., etc. He is honoured 
by other references in writers of the 
time. Farmer quotes from Meres' 
Wits Commonwealth (p. 178) : " Peter 
Shakerlye of Paules, and Monarcho 
that lived about the court." Steevens 
refers also to Nashe's Have With You 
to Saffron Walden (Grosart, iii. 112), 
1596 : " an insulting monarch above 
Monarcha the Italian, that ware crownes 
in his shoes." Reed gives one from 
B. Riche's Faults and Nothing hut 
Faults, p. 12 : " he looks like a 
Monarcho of a very cholericke com- 
plexion " ; while Douce cites from 
Scot's Discoverie of Witchcraft, 1584, 
to the effect that, like Thrasibulus, he 
was sore oppressed with the like spirit 
or conceipt (see Dr. Nicholson's repr. 
p. 42). 



I.] 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



67 



tit. From my lord Biron, a good master of mine, 

To a lady of France that he call'd Rosaline. 
nn. Thou hast mistaken his letter. Come, lords, away. 

Here, sweet, put up this : 'twill be thine another day. 105 

{Exeunt Princess and train. 
Boyet. Who is the suitor ? who is the suitor ? 
Ros. Shall I teach you to know ? 

Boyet. Ay, my continent of beauty. 
Ros. Why, she that bears the bow. 

Finely put off ! 
Boyet. My lady goes to kill horns ; but if thou marry, 

Hang me by the neck if horns that year miscarry. no 

Finely put on ! 
Ros. Well then, I am the shooter. 
Boyet. And who is your deer ? 

I os. If we choose by the horns, yourself come not near. 
Finely put on, indeed ! 
104. lords] ladies Johnson conj. 106. suitor . . . suitor] Steevens (Farmer) ; 
>nooter Qq, Ff. 106 to end of scene. Pu4#n margin by Pope. 113. horns, 

yourself come] Qq, Ff, Cambridge, Furness ; horns, yourself: come Rowe, Steevens 
seq. 



104. mistaken] taken to the wrong 
son, miscarried. See above, line 58. 

105. thine another day] Mr. Daniel 
thenczum, 13th Oct. 1883) explains 

this idiom "it will be of use to you; 
you will find the benefit of it hereafter." 
It does not occur again in Shakespeare. 
Daniel gives parallels from Jonson's 
Tale of a Tub, 11. i. ; Middleton, The 
Witch, 11. iii. ; and Cooke's Greene's 
Tu Quoque (Hazlitt's Dodsley, xi. 272). 
The passages are certainly equivalent, 
but " it will be your turn another day" 
seems rather what the Princess means 
to say. 

106. sttz'for]Formerly,and still provin- 
cially, pronounced " shooter." Hence 
the quibble. There are three closely- 
written pages on this in Furness. He 
cites a good example from Lyly's 
Euphues (Arber, p. 293) : " There was 
a Lady in Spaine . . . hadde three 
sutors (and yet never a good Archer)." 

107. continent] that which contains ; 
the sum. Compare Greene, Never Too 
Late (Grosart, viii. 50): "they be women 
and therefore the continents of all ex- 
cellence" (1590); and his Alcida (ix. 



208), 1588 : " women, the painted con- 
tinents of flattery, of deceit," etc., etc. 

108-111. put off . . . put on] I find 
these terms in antithesis in Gascoigne's 
Hermit's Tale (Nichols' Progresses, i. 
559). x 576: "charged ... to weare 
this punishment with patience, which 
necessyty did putt on, and destyny 
wold putt off." Perhaps military or 
fencing terms, to hit or strike at, and 
to guard, ward off or parry. Lyly has 
similar ejaculations of encouragement 
to punsters in Mother Bombie : "well 
brought about," " excellently applied," 
etc. 

112. who is your deer?] So in Lyly's 
Gallathea, 11. i. (1592) : " Saw you not 
the deere come this way . . . whose 
dear was it ... I saw none but mine 
own dear." 

113. yourself come not near] Rowe's 
punctuation may be right, and the 
meaning that Rosaline gives Boyet 
"the horns," as common chaff, and 
then says " come not near," to a 
dangerous beast. Furness seems to 
have found a mare's nest here. 






68 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST [act iv. 



1 20 



Mar. You still wrangle with her, Boyet, and she strikes at the 
brow. 1 1 5 

Boyet. But she herself is hit lower : have I hit her now ? 
Ros. Shall I come upon thee with an old saying, that was 
a man when King Pepin of France was a little boy, as 
touching the hit it ? 
Boyet. So I may answer thee with one as old, that was a 
woman when Queen Guinever of Britain was a little 
wench, as touching the hit it. 
Ros. Thou canst not hit it, hit it, hit it, 

Thou canst not hit it, my good man. 
Boyet, An I cannot, cannot, cannot, 125 

An I cannot, another can. 

[Exeunt Ros. and Kath. 
Cost. By my troth, most pleasant : how both did fit it ! 
Mar, A mark marvellous well shot, for they both did hit it. 
Boyet. A mark ! O ! mark but that mark ; a mark, says my 
lady. 
Let the mark have a prick in 't, to mete at, if it may be. 1 30 

125. An] And Q 1 ; omitted Ff, Q 2. 128. hit it] F 4 ; hit Qq, Ff i, 2, 3. 



117. come upon thee with] attack thee 
with (as in Genesis xxxiv. 25). See 
The Taming of the Shrew, 1. ii. 42. 
This use seems to have escaped New 
Eng. Diet, in Come (see 48th section). 

118. King Pepin] The founder of the 
Carlovingian dynasty, died 768. As a 
representative of ancient times we 
meet him again in All's Well that 
Ends Well, 11. i. 79. 

131. Queen Guinever] The name was 
used in contempt. See Nashe, Have 
With You to Saffron Walden (Grosart, 
iii. 150), 1596 : " Since the raigne of 
Queen Gueniver was there never seene 
a worse " ; and Dekker, A Strange 
Horse-Race (Grosart, iii. 358), 1613 : 
" the Divell . . . had no sooner touched 
his old Laplandian Guenevora, but shee 
as speedily quickened." See also 
Dekker's Satiromastix (Pearson, i. 
219) ; Beaumont and Fletcher, The 
Scornful Lady, v. i. ; and Marston's 
Malcontent. The last is quoted in 
Nares. 

123. Thou canst not hit it] The tune 
of this song, or catch, is given in Chap- 
pell's Popular Music of the Olden Time 
(i. 239), from a manuscript at Oxford 



bearing date 1620. It was a dance- 
tune. Chappell gives a single refer- 
ence to it (besides the present), namely, 
" Wily Beguiled, written in the reign 
of Elizabeth," which was printed in 
1606 : " Thou art mine own sweetheart, 
From thee He ne'er depart ; Thou art 
my Ciperlillie And I thy Trangdidowne- 
dilly. . . . And then dance, canst thou 
not hit it ? Ho, brave William Cricket ! " 
(Hazlitt's Dodsley, ix. 327). Stephen 
Gosson refers to it as a dance in his 
Quips for Upstart Newfangled Gentle- 
women, 1595 : " Can you hit it is oft 
their daunce." The song is referred 
to in Rowley's Match at Midnight, 1. i. 
(Hazlitt's Dodsley, xiii. 23) : " A widow 
witty — Is pastime pretty ... an old 
man — Sim. Then will she answer, If 
you cannot a younger can." 

130. mark . . . prick . . . mete at] 
Minshew's Guide into the Tongues (ed. 
1627) has : " a Marke, white or pricke 
to shoote at . . . L(atin). Meta, & 
metendo, quod posita sit in dimenso 
spatio." 

prick] This word had a variety 
of derivative senses in archery, which 
are dealt with by Furnivall at consider- 



I.] 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 



69 



r ar. Wide o' the bow-hand ! i' faith, your hand is out. 

^ost. Indeed, a' must shoot nearer, or he '11 ne'er hit the clout. 

hyet. An if my hand be out, then belike your hand is in. 

?ost. Then will she get the upshoot by cleaving the pin. 
Mar. Come, come, you talk greasily ; your lips grow foul. 135 
Cost. She 's too hard for you at pricks, sir : challenge her to 

bowl. 
Boyet. I fear too much rubbing. 



134. pin] Ff 2, 3, 4 ; is in Qq, F 1. 

able length in a note prefixed to The 
Babees Book, pp. c.-ciii., where many 
references will be found, including, of 
course, Ascham's Toxophilus. We are 
only concerned here with the primary 
meaning of " mark." But it is quite 
possible that this sense arose from the 
use of peeled wands (compare butchers' 



Good night, my good owl. 
[Exeunt Boyet and Maria. 



134. upshoot] upshot. It is so written 
in Bullen's Old Plays, iv. 137 ; and in 
Masques Performed before the Queen, 
1592 (Nichols, iii. 208). Compare 
Nashe, Anatomie of Absurditie (Gros- 
art, i. 9), 1589 : M everie man shotte 
his bolte, but this was the upshot"; 
and in How to Chuse a Good Wife 



pricks) as a mark. Compare Guye of (Hazlitt's Dodsley, ix. 23) : "who could 



K 

I 






Gisborne, one of the earliest Robin 
Hood ballads (Percy Folio, ii. 232) : 
u they cutt them downe the summer 
shroggs Which grew both under a 
Bryar, And sett them 3 score rood in 
twinn To shoote the prickes full neare." 
See line 136 below, note. 

130. to mete at] to measure, to aim or 
level at. 

131. Wide 0' the bow-hand] far from 
the mark ; literally, on the left or bow- 
hand side. An instruction from the 
butts called out to the archer, by those 
who gave aim. This is the earliest 
example of the expression in New Eng. 
Diet. It became common later in the 
dramatists. Compare Sir J. Haring- 
ton, A Brief View, etc. (Nugce Antiques, 
ed. 1779, i. 28), 1608 : " wide of the 
right way, upon the sinister or bow- 
hand, many miles." 

132. hit the clout] The target was 
fixed by a pin or clout (Fr. clou), the 
head of which was painted white and 
marked the centre. Compare Ben 
Jonson, Epilogue to The Staple of 
News : " our hope Is though the clout 
we do not always hit, It will not be 
imputed to his wit." See also Mar- 
lowe's Tamburlaine (pt. ii.), iv. 8 : " For 
kings are clouts that every man shoots 

t." The derivation here given (sup- 

orted by " clout-nail ") may be doubt- 

ul ; I take k from Gifford, but do not 

find it in New Eng. Diet. A "white 

rag " is possibly the true origin. 



miss the clout Having so fair a white, 
such steady aim ; This is the upshot : 
now bid for the game " ; and Middle- 
ton's Family of Love, v. iii. : " an arrow 
that sticks for the upshot against all 
comers." Not necessarily the deciding 
shot, but the best shot in, till it is 
beaten. 

cleaving the pin] This expression 
occurs in Guye of Gisborne quoted 
above : " he clove the good pricke 
wand " ; and in Middleton's No Wit 
no Help like a Woman's, ii. i. : "I '11 
cleave the black pin i' the midst of the 
white." See also Romeo and Juliet, 
11. iv. 15 ; and G. Harvey's Three 
Proper Letters (Grosart, i. 65), 1580 : 
" The second more speciall, as it were, 
hitting the white indeede, and cleaving 
the Pinne in sunder." 

I 35« greasily] indecently, in a 
" smutty " way. Marston speaks of 
" greasie Aretine" (Bullen's edition, iii. 
320) ; and Ben Jonson, Bartholomew 
Fair, 11. i. : " her language grows 
greasier than her pigs." 

136. at pricks] Compare Gesta Gray- 
orum, 1594 (Nichols' Progresses, iii. 
274) : " any forbidden manner of shoot- 
ing ; as at pricks in common highways 
... or at short butts, not being of 
sufficient length and distance, or at 
any roving or unconstant mark." 

137. rubbing] "rub" was a technical 
term in the game of bowls. It was 
definitely used of the touches of the 



70 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 



[act iv. 



Cost. By my soul, a swain ! a most simple clown! 

Lord, Lord, how the ladies and I have put him down ! 
O' my troth, most sweet jests! most incony vulgar 

wit ; 140 

When it comes so smoothly off, so obscenely as it were, 

so fit. 
Armado o' the to side, O ! a most dainty man, 
To see him walk before a lady, and to bear her fan ! 
To see him kiss his hand ! and how most sweetly a' will 

swear ! 



142. Armado] Amado Ff 2, 3, 4; Armatho Q 1 ; 'Armathor F 1, Q 2. o' the 
to] Grant White (ed. 2) ; ath toothen Q 1 ; ath to the F 1, Q 2 ; ath to Ff 2, 3, 4 ; 
al th to Rowe ; o' f one Capell ; o' the one Dyce, Cambridge ; a' th' f other 
Keightley 144. Collier inserted a line of his own here : " Looking babies in her 
eyes his passion to declare." 



bowl aafl pK>thers on its passage to 
the jack^rmistress. But it was em- 
ployed generally of the course of the 
bowl. Sir J. Harington says Martin 
Marprelate took M this taunting scoffe 
that the Bishops would cry Rub, rub, 
rub, to his bowle, and when it was gone 
too farre say, The Divell goe with it " 
(A Brief View, etc., 1608 [Nugce An- 
tiques, i. 21, ed. 1779]). Shadwell, in 
Epsom Wells, Act iii., has " Rub, rub, 
narrow, short, gone a thousand yards, 
and such like words of Bowlers." 

137. owl] rhymes with bowl, which 
was evidently pronounced as owl now 
is. See fior the word in its other sense, 
v. ii. 914, rhyming again with owl. 
Ben Jonson makes a point of this 
rhyme in a passage about " Crambo ! 
another of the devil's games " in The 
Devil is an Ass, v. v. (1616) : " Yes, wis, 
knight, shite, Poul.joul, owJ,foul, troul, 
boul." The word is still heard so "in 
the vulgar." According to Ellis the 
change took place in the fifteenth and 
sixteenth centuries. It is still going 
on. 

140. incony] See 111. i. 128. Shake- 
speare here rebukes loose talk in the 
better classes. Any clown can do that 
as well or better, 

142. 0' the to side] the hither side. 
This is an easier and more probable 
change than Rowe's, which introduces 
the word " one," not in the old editions. 
Compare North's Plutarch (Pompey) 



(Tudor Trans, iv. 280), 1579: "ranne 
with speed on the toe side of the formest 
ranckes," and earlier in vol. iii. The 
expression is frequent in Holland's 
Plinie. See also (N. Breton) Choice, 
Chance and Change, 1607 (Grosart, p. 
66) : " Treades on a worm, and braves 
a flight of flies, Lookes a toside, and 
sweares at every word." 

143. bear her fan] A correct atten- 
tion, presumably, from a gallant of the 
time. Henry Hutton, satirising a gal- 
lant in Folies Anatomie (1616), says : 
" I durst not use my mistres' fan Or 
walk attended with a hackney-man." 
These gentlemen would purloin a feather 
as a keepsake : " this feather grew in 
her sweet/an sometimes" (Ben Jonson, 
Every Man out of his Humour, 11. i.) ; 
and •? A third . . . Will spend his patri- 
mony for a garter Or the least feather 
in her bounteous fan " (Cynthia's 
Revels, in. ii.). We come from the 
sublime to the ridiculous when the 
Nurse in Romeo and Juliet, n. iv. 232, 
says : " Peter take my fanne and goe 
before, and apace" (Q 1, Cambridge 
ed.). Farmer quotes from The Serving 
Man's Comfort, 1598 : " The mistress 
must have one to carry her cloake and 
hood, another her fanne." 

144. To see him kiss his hand] See 
note, v. ii. 324. Malone believed a line 
was lost after line 144. Hence Collier's 
amazing insertion which gave rise to 
some entertaining notes. 



SC. II.] 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 



71 

i45 



And his page o' t' other side, that handful of wit ! 
Ah ! heavens, it is a most pathetical nit. 
Sola, sola ! [Shout within. 

[Exit Costard, running. 






SCENE II.— The Same. 

Enter Holofernes, Sir NATHANIEL, and DULL. 

Nath. Very reverend sport, truly : and done in the testi- 
mony of a good conscience. 

Hoi. The deer was, as you know, sanguis ', in blood ; ripe 
as a pomewater, who now hangeth like a jewel in the 

145. 0' f other] atother Qi, Fi; at other Q 2, Ff 2, 3, 4. 146. a] omitted 

in Qq, F 1. 147. Sola] Sowla Qq, Ff. [Shout within] F 4 ; Shot within 

Q 1 ; Shoote within F 1. . 

Scene n. 
Holofernes] Holofernos, the Pedant Qq, Ff. 3. Hoi.] Ped. Qq, Ff. 4. a] 
Ff, Q 4 ; the Qq i t 2. 









146. pathetical] See 1. ii. 92. 

nit] anything very small, as in 
The Taming of the Shrew , iv. iii. no. 
A speck. Properly the word means the 
egg(lens) of any small insect, especially 
a louse. Florio has : " Lendini, nits 
before they be lice, chits." 

147. Sola] Compare Lancelot's "Sola, 
sola : wo ha ho, sola, sola " (The Mer- 
chant of Venice, v. i. 49). This is given 
as a hunting halloo in A Twelfe Night 
Merriment (Narcissus), 1602 (ed. M. 
Lee, pp. 17, 18) : " The dogges have put 
the hare from quatte, Then woe be unto 
little Watt, Yolp, yolp, yolp ! Hallowe 
in the hind dogges, hallowe, So come 
on then, Solla, Solla . . . Harke how 
Jumball hits it right ! Yolp," etc. 

Scene it, 

1, 2. in the testimony of a good con- 
science] with the approbation or war- 
rant of a good conscience. Compare 
2 Corinthians i. 12. 

3. sanguis, in blood] These Latin 
words are devoid of any special force 
excepting that they are the emblems of 
the pedant's (schoolmaster's) trade, for 
testimony of which they are dragged 
in. " In blood, a term of the chase, 
in a state of perfect health and vigour " 
(Schmidt). Compare 1 Henry VI. iv. 



ii. 48 ; Coriolanus, 1. i. 163, and iv. 
v. 225. No satisfactory parallel has 
been given outside Shakespeare. But 
compare Ben Jonson, The Sad Shep- 
herd, 1. ii. : " Robin. What head ? 
John. Forked : a heart of ten. Marian. 
He is good venison, According to the 
season in the blood." 

4. pomewater] Once a popular apple, 
but long forgotten. I do not find it in 
the Dictionarium Rusticum et Urbani- 
cum (1704), which is very strong on 
apples. N. Bailey (1766) gives it as 
" a large apple, full of watery juice." 
Parkinson (1627) figures it in his Para- 
disus : M The Pomewater is an excellent 
good and great whitish apple, full of 
sap or moisture, somewhat pleasant 
sharp, but a little bitter withal : it will 
not last long, the winter frosts soone 
causing it to rot and perish." It was 
evidently in much demand since it was 
cried by the Irish costermongers. See 
Ben Jonson's Irish Masque at Court, 
1613 : " I sherve ti majesties owne 
cashtermonger, be me trote; and cry 
peepsh [pippins] and pomwatersh in ti 
majesties shervice, tis five year now " ; 
and Dekker, Old Fortunatus, 1600 : 
" Enter Andelocia and Shadow e, like 
Irish costarmongers . . . peeps of 
Tamasco, feene peeps : I fat 'tis de 
sweetest apple in de world, 'tis better 



72 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST [act iv. 



ear of coelo, the sky, the welkin, the heaven ; and anon 

falleth like a crab on the face of terra, the soil, the 

land, the earth. 
Nath. Truly, Master Holofernes, the epithets are sweetly 

varied, like a scholar at the least: but, sir, I assure 

ye, it was a buck of the first head. 
Hoi. Sir Nathaniel, haud credo. 
Dull. 'Twas not a haud credo, 'twas a pricket. 
Hoi. Most barbarous intimation ! yet a kind of insinuation, 

as it were in via> in way of explication ; facer e, as it 

were, replication, or, rather, ostentare, to show, as it 

5. coelo] celo Ff 1, 2, Qq. 
den Pome-water, or apple John." 
Dekker's passage seems to make it the 
same as the " Honeymeal or St. John's 
Apple," an English apple mentioned 
by Cotgrave in v. Pomme de Paradis ; 
and Minshew : " S, Johns apple . . . 
Porno de Paradisi, ob sapor em jucundis- 
simum et colorem tnvitantem (1627). 
Perhaps this assisted Holofernes to- 
wards "coelo . . . the heaven." 

5. coelo] " Cielo. The heaven, the 
skie, the firmament or welkin " (Florio, 
New World of Words, 161 1); "Terra. 
The element called earth . . . Also, 
any land ... or soile " {ibid. 1598). 
These definitions are given here be- 
cause they support Dr. Warburton's 
conjecture that Holofernes stood for 
Florio, in which he was supported 
by Farmer and others. But the date 
of Florio' s Italian Dictionary up- 
sets that slight argument. Marshall 
altered sanguis to an Italian form 
(sanguino), according to the same 
theory probably. 

10. buck of the first head] See below 
at line 54. Steevens quotes here from 
the Return from Parnassus (1602), 
where the names of the " special! 
beasts for chase " are given as in the 
text (Hazlitt's Dodsley, ix. 148, 149 ; 
or Clarendon Press, ed. Macray, pp. 
107, 108). See Howell's Vocabulary, 
1659 (The Third Section, Of Hunting 
or Venery) : " A Buck, the first year 
a Fawn, the 2. a Pricket, the 3. a 
Sorrell, the 4. a Sore, the 5. a Buck of 
the first head, the 6. a compleat Buck " 
["great Buck" in The Gentleman's 
Recreation] ; " The Deer begins to 
head, vix. in two years when the 
spitters come forth " (Howell, ibid.) ; 
" Their heads go by several names : 



5 




15 



The first Head is called a crowned Top, 
because the Croches are ranged in form 
of a crown" (The Gentleman's Recrea- 
tion, ed. 1721, p. 58). 

11. Sir] See The Merry Wives of 
Windsor, 1. i. 1. 

haud credo] This occurs in The 
Troublesome Raigne of King John 
(Hazlitt's ed. of Shakespeare's Library, 
p. 264), ante 1591 : " Haud credo Laur- 
entius, that thou shouldst be pend thus 
In the presse of a Nun we are all un- 
done." See below, v. i. 9, note. 

12, 20. haud credo] Dull is naturally 
annoyed at being told over and over 
again the buck is a doe of any sort. 
An important pun. 

12. pricket] a two-year-old red-deer. 
See Cotgrave in v. Brocart. Compare 
Greene, Carde of Fancie (Grosart, iv. 
68), 1584 : " the Lion seldome lodgeth 
with the Mouse, the Hart seldome 
feedeth with the Pricket." See note 
at line 10, and Gesta Grayorum, 1594 
(Nichols, p. 275) : "young deer, prickets 
or any other game." 

13. insinuation] Compare T. Wilson, 
Art of Rhetorique, 1553 : " A privy be- 
gynnyng, or crepyng in, otherwyse 
called Insinuation, must then and not 
els be used, when the iudge is greaved 
with us, and our cause hated of the 
hearers" (ed. 1562, fol. 53). Prob- 
ably Holofernes has Wilson's, or Cox's 
earlier treatise on the same subject 
in his mind. Sir Philip Sidney has a 
similar passage in Arcadia, bk. i. : " his 
insinuation being of blushing, and his 
division of sighs, his whole oration 
stood upon a short narration." 

14. 15. explication . . . replication] 
Nashe uses the verbs explicate, repli- 
cate, in Lenten Stujfe. "Replication 



II.] 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



73 



were, his inclination, — after his undressed, unpolished, 
uneducated, unpruned, untrained, or rather unlettered, 
or ratherest, unconfirmed fashion, — to insert again my 
haud credo for a deer. 
II. I said the deer was not a haud credo ; 'twas a pricket. 20 
?/. Twice-sod simplicity, bis coctus ! 

O ! thou monster Ignorance, how deform'd dost thou look. 
xth. Sir, he hath never fed of the dainties that are bred in a 
book. 
He hath not eat paper, as it were ; he hath not drunk 

ink : his intellect is not replenished ; he is only an 25 

animal, only sensible in the duller parts ; 
And such barren plants are set before us, that we thankful 

should be, 
Which we [of] taste and feeling are, for those parts that do 

fructify in us more than he ; 
For as it would ill become me to be vain, indiscreet, or a fool, 
So were there a patch set on learning, to see him in a 

school : 30 



27,28. Prose Qq.Ff; verse Hanmere* 
Qq, Ff. do] Q 1, Ff ; omitted in Q 2. 

... a confirmation of one's saying 
with new allegations " (Blount, Glos- 
sographia, 1670). 

18. unconfirmed] Unless there be a 
reference to the religious rite, and the 
word have the sense of " irreligious," 
"heathen," it is difficult to find a 
climax in " unconfirmed." The word 
occurs again in Much Ado About 
Nothing, in. iii. 124. Schmidt in- 
terprets it " inexperienced, raw." The 
expression bis coctus below expressly for- 
bids that meaning here. " Unratified," 
"unconsolidated," "unavouched," might 
be suggested, but each seems feeble as 
a superlatively strong qualification. 

21. Twice-sod . . . bis coctus I] Prob- 
ably a reference to the old proverb or 
aphorism about twice-sodden coleworts, 
used of a tale twice told, or a sentence 
twice uttered, like Dull's. The Greek 
form, Als tcpd/m-fii) ddvaros, is of remote 
antiquity ; and Pliny (xx. 9) says : 
" Coleworts . . . twice sodden, it bindeth 
the bellie " (Holland's trans. 1601). 
The proverbial use occurs in Lyly's 
Euphues (Arber, p. 391) : " they fell to 
the whole discourse of Philautus love, 
who left out nothing that before I put 



seq. 



28. of] Tyrwhitt ; omitted in 



in, which I must omitte, least I set 
before you Coleworts twise sodden." 
See Colewort in the New Eng. Diet. 
for both earlier and later examples. 
In Laurence Humphrey's Oration to 
Queen Elizabeth at Woodstock, 1575 
(Nichols, i. 589), it occurs in Latin : 
" Crambem qui bis coctam apponit 
minister, mortem apponit, et qui eadem 
oberrat chorda citharadus, ridetur, et 
. . . coccysmus seu cuculi cantilena 
audienti insuavis est," etc., etc. Per- 
haps it will be found in some of the 
school-books of the time, like several 
others of the pedant's tags. It is 
in Burton's Anatomy of Melancholy 
(Democritus to the Reader): "an un- 
necessary work, cramben bis coctam 
apponere, the same again and again 
in other words." 

30. So were there a patch set on learn- 
ing] it would be setting a fool to learn. 
" Patch " was a common word for a fool. 
Or we may take it "a fool intent on 
learning." I prefer the more active 
construction. 

patch] fool. There has been 
much written upon this signification 
of the word, which occurs again in 






74 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST [act iv. 



But, omne bene, say I ; being of an old fathers mind, 

Many can brook the weather that love not the wind. 
Dull. You two are book-men : can you tell me by your wit 

What was a month old at Cain's birth, that's not five 
weeks old as yet ? 
Hoi. Dictynna, goodman Dull ; Dictynna, goodman Dull. 3 
Dull. What is Dictynna ? 
Nath. A title to Phcebe, to Luna, to the moon. 
Hoi. The moon was a month old when Adam was no more ; 

And raught not to five weeks when he came to five-score. 

The allusion holds in the exchange. 40 

Dull. 'Tis true indeed : the collusion holds in the exchange. 

33. me] Q 1 ; omitted in Ff, Q 2. 35. Dictynna] Rowe ; Dictisima Q i, F: 

1, 2, 3 ; Dictissima Q 2, F 4. 36. Dictynna] Dictima Qq, F i ; Dictinna Ff 2 
3,4. 39. raught] rought Q 1 ; wrought Ff, Q 2. 






The Tempest, in. ii. 71 ; The Comedy 
of Errors, in. i. 32; and The Merchant 
of Venice, 11. v. 46 ; and see the New 
Eng. Diet. There is no occasion to 
seek for derivations such as Wolsey's 
fool named " Patch " and the Italian 
pazzo (Florio). The word was used as a 
synonym for " pied-coat," from the fool's 
dress. Compare Rider's Bibliotheca 
Scholastica, 1589 : " Pied coate or 
Patch, Sticte." A name for a dog (from 
Ovid). " Patch whose flecked skin w* 
sundrie spots was spred" (Golding's 
Ovid, iii. 258). See below, v. ii. 755. 

31. old father's] Lodge has the same 
expression : " For tragedies and come- 
dies Donate the Grammarian sayth, 
they wer invented by lerned fathers of 
the old time to no other purpose, but 
to yeelde prayse unto God " (Reply to 
Gosson, 1579, 1580) ; and see Gosson's 
Schoole of Abuse (Arber, p. 25), 1579; 
and Golding's Ovid (vii. 449) : " Here 
men (so auncient fathers said that were 
as then alive) did breede of deawie 
Mushrommes." See below, line 138. 

32. weather . . . wind] This is a 
sound saying, but I have no parallel. 
It appears here to be a quotation. I 
suppose the " old father " is the same 
as below, " certain father," merely a 
colourable colour of authority. 

33. book -men] scholars. See above, 
11. i. 227, for the only other use of 
the word in Shakespeare. Compare 



Greene's Looking-Glass for London 
1143, 1144 (Grosart, xiv. 53): "Am 
though the Sailer is no booke-mai 
held, He knowes more Art than ever 
booke-men read." Nashe uses the ex- 
pression in Summer's Last Will. 

35. Dictynna] Steevens says Shake- 
speare might have found this uncommon 
title for Diana in the second book of 
Golding's translation of Ovid's Meta- 
morphoses : " Dictynna garded with her 
traine and proud of killing deere." It 
occurs earlier in one of N. Grimald's 
songs in TotteVs Miscellany (Arber, p. 
97), ante 1557 : " Acteon may teach 
thee Dictynnaes ire." 

39. raught] reached. 

40. The allusion holds in the ex- 
change] "i.e. the riddle is as good 
when I use the name of Adam, as 
when you use the name of Cain" 
(Warburton). " Allusion " meant more 
in Shakespeare's time than now. Com- 
pare Cotgrave : " Allusion : an allusion 
or likening ; an alluding or applying 
of one thing unto another." Blount 
(1670) in Glossographia is more explicit : 
" Allusion : a likening or applying of 
one thing to another, and it is as it 
were a dalliance or playing with words 
like in sound," etc., etc. — in fact 
a pun. For these obsolete senses see 
New Eng. Diet, for early examples; and 
see Camden's chapter of " Allusions " 
in Remaines Concerning Britaine. 



II.] 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



75 



T ol. God comfort thy capacity ! I say the allusion holds 

in the exchange. 
ill. And I say the pollusion holds in the exchange, for 
the moon is never but a month old ; and I say beside 45 
that, 'twas a pricket that the princess killed. 
? . Sir Nathaniel, will you hear an extemporal epitaph 
on the death of the deer ? and, to humour the ignorant, 
[I have] call'd the deer the princess killed, a pricket. 
T ath. Perge, good Master Holofernes, perge ; so it shall 
please you to abrogate scurrility. 50 

'. I will something affect the letter ; for it argues facility. 

49. [/ have] call'd] calVd Qq, Ff ; J have call'd Rowe ; J w ill call Singer ; call 't 
Furness; call I Cambridge. 50. scurrility] squirilie Q 1. 



r . pollusion] See "reprehend," 1. i. 
In a note to this passage Fur- 
ss quotes from " Courthope, iv. 86 " 
listory of English Poetry, London, 
33), to the effect that we owe Shake- 
jare's stage-representation of Dull to 
yly's " Master Constable and the 
fetch " in Endymion, characters further 
ieveloped in Much Ado About Nothing 
and elsewhere. The accepted dates 
of the two plays, perhaps, upset this 
verdict, and instead of Shakespeare 
being " under some obligations to a 
predecessor," it may be the other way 
about. Lyly's Endymion bears the 
date of 1591. See Introduction on this 
point, but especially on the introduction 
of Latin tags which characterises both 
plays. Moreover Lyly's watch, al- 
though they have rusty wits and no 
wise words, do not " mistake words." 
See note at v. ii. 488 and 500, 502. 

47, 48. epitaph on the death of] 
Capell said this should be " epigram " 
(adopted into the text by Rann). 
Furness says "of course, right — there 
cannot be an epitaph on the death of 
anything." Why? Is it not a per- 
fectly common use of the word ? For 
Shakespearian times, see New Eng. 
Diet. ; " An Epitaphe made upon the 
dethe of Frenche " (1532) ; " A Booke 
of Epitaphes made upon the Deathe of 
Sir William Buttes" (1583), etc. 

48. to humour the ignorant] to satisfy 
Dull. But Holofernes has already 
given his decided opinion that the 



Princess's bag was a two-year-old 
pricket, and not a buck of antler, in 
his haud credo. Evidently they are 
introduced arguing the point at the 
opening of the scene, just as Shallow, 
Sir Hugh and Slender open The Merry 
Wives of Windsor. They were by- 
standers. 

49. pricket] See lines 10, 12. The 
word occurs in Eden's Translation of 
Vertomanus, 1503 (Hakluyt ed. 1811, 
iv. 556 [1576]) : " They wandred in that 
mountayne scattered lyke wylde Goates 
or Prekettes." 

50. abrogate scurrility] abolish 
coarseness. Puttenham gives examples 
of " pleasant speeches favouring some 
skurrility " in this sense (pp. 274, 275). 
" Scurrility " had the sense of foulness 
of speech. Gabriel Harvey has " fie 
on grosse scurility and impudent 
calumny " (Foure Letters [Grosart, i. 
204]) ; and compare Webster's West- 
ward Ho, 11. i. : "ha ha! I must talk 
merrily, sir. Justiniano [a Pedant]. 
Sir, so long as your mirth be void of 
all squirrilitie, 'tis not unfit for your 
calling." This spelling (as in Q 1) was 
not rare. See Introduction on Ed- 
wards' Damon and Pithias, where it 
occurs. " Scullery" was spelt " squil- 
lery " likewise. 

51. affect the letter] resort to allitera- 
tion. Compare E. Kirke, Ep. Ded. (to 
G. Harvey) to Spenser's Shepheard's 
Calendar, 1579 : " I scorne and spue 
out the rakehellye route of our ragged 



76 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST [act iv. 



The preyful princess pierc'd and prick'd a pretty pleasing pricket ; 
Some say a sore ; but not a sore, till now made sore with shooting. 
The dogs did yell ; put 1 to sore, then sorel jumps from thicket ; 
Or pricket sore, or else sorel ; the people fall a-hooting. 55 

If sore be sore, then 1 to sore makes fifty sores O sore 1 ! 
Of one sore I an hundred make, by adding but one more 1. 



52. preyful] prayfull Qq, F 1 ; prays/till F 2, Malone. 52-57. Printed as 

twelve lines in Qq, Ff. 54, 56. /] ell Qq, Ff. 56. O sore I] Qq, Ff ; of sorel 
Warburton ; O sore L I Capell ; one sorel Cambridge, Globe. 57. /] Qq ; 

L Ff. 



rymers (for so themselves use to hunt 
the letter)" (Globe edition, p. 442). 
In a letter of Gabriel Harvey's, " To 
my verie friende, M. Immerito" (Spen- 
ser), dated October, 1579, this passage 
occurs (Grosart, i. 18) : " your gentle 
Masterships long, large, lavish, Luxuri- 
ous, laxative letters withall (now a 
God's name, when did I ever in my 
life, hunt the Letter before ? but belike 
there 's no remedies I must needes be 
even with you once in my dayes)." 
Another form of the phrase was " fol- 
low the letter." Sir John Harington, 
in An Anatomy of the Metamorphosed 
Ajax (Chiswick, 1814, p. 17), 1596, 
says : "I say, that that some call 
scurrility, in this book is indeed but a 
check to scurrility : . . . Also the in- 
comparable poet of our age, to give a 
most artificial reproof of following the 
letter too much, commits the same 
fault of purpose. You that do diction- 
ary method bring Into your rhymes, 
running in rattling rows." He tells 
us in a marginal note, M Sir P. Sidney." 
The lines Harington quotes from Sid- 
ney are from his Astrophel and Stella 
(Arber, English Garner, i. 510), 1581. 
And for Spenser, see July, in Shep- 
heard's Calendar : " These wizards 
welter in wealths waves, Pampred in 
pleasures deepe " ; and October (" the 
tenth iEglogue of the foresaid famous 
new Calender," as Harvey quotes it) : 
44 Piers I have pyped erst so long with 
payne." Puttenham says (p. 261) : 
" Many of our English makers use it 
too much, yet we confesse it doth not 
ill but prettily becomes the meetre, if 
ye passe not two or three words in one 
verse and use it not very much." 
George Gascoigne, in his Certayn 
Notes (Arber, p. 36), 1575, has an 



earlier use of " hunt the letter " : " the 
whiche (being modestly used) lendeth 
good grace to a verse : but they do so 
hunte a letter to death, that they make 
it crambe." 

53, 54. sore . . . sorel] See note, line 
10. The term Sorell, for "a young 
buck," is in Palsgrave's Lesclaircisse- 
ment, 1530 ; and see Harrison's De- 
scription of England, bk. iii. chap. iv. 
1577 (New Shakes. Soc. p. 26) : M The 
yoong males which our fallow deere 
doo bring foorth, are commonlie named 
according to their severall ages : for 
the first yeere it is a fawne, the second 
a puckot [pricket], the third a serell, 
the fourth a soare, the fift a bucke of 
the first head ; not bearing the name 
of a bucke till he be five yeers old : and 
from hencefoorth his age is commonlie 
knowne by his head or horns. How- 
beit this notice of his yeers is not so 
certeine ... in some grounds a bucke 
of the first head will be so well headed 
as another in a high rowtie soile will 
be in the fourth." 

54. dogs did yell] See Venus and 
Adonis, 688, for "yell" applied to the 
cry of hounds. The dogs here do not 
apparently agree with the •• sport " at 
Cowdray (see Introduction). But they 
may have been used to wake up the 
unfortunate animals in the paddock. 
See note at " stand," iv. i. 10. English 
ideas have usually separated hunting 
with dogs from shooting. See Queen 
Elizabeth's Entertainments in Lane- 
ham's Letter, 1575 ; and Beaumont and 
Fletcher's Philaster, iv. ii. : " Who 
shoots? . . . The Princess. . . . No, 
she '11 hunt ... she '11 take a stand, I 
say." See Rye's England as Seen by 
Foreigners, for combinations at Wind- 
sor, and see Introduction. 



II.] 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 



77 



Nath. A rare talent ! 

Dull. If a talent be a claw, look how he claws him with a 

talent. 60 

T ol. This is a gift that I have, simple, simple ; a foolish 
extravagant spirit, full of forms, figures, shapes, objects, 
ideas, apprehensions, motions, revolutions : these are 
begot in the ventricle of memory, nourished in the 
womb of pia tnater> and delivered upon the mellowing 65 
of occasion. But the gift is good in those in whom it 
is acute, and I am thankful for it. 
ath. Sir, I praise the Lord for you, and so may my 
parishioners ; for their sons are well tutored by you, 
and their daughters profit very greatly under you: 70 
you are a good member of the commonwealth. 



61. Hoi.] Nath. Qq, Ff (see line 68). 
in whom] whom Q i. 68. Nath 

58. talent] " talon " was commonly 
itten " talent." " The greedie talents 
the Eagles " (Grosart's Harvey, iii. 
20). The pun is unavoidable. 

(59. claw] Quibbling on the word's two 
meanings, to scratch, and to flatter. 
62. figures, etc.] Puttenham dwells 
upon this style : " a stile to be lift up 
and advaunced by choice of wordes, 

{>hrases, sentences, and figures, high, 
oftie, eloquent and magnifik in pro- 
portion" (Arber, p. 164). And again : 
" When so ever we multiply our speech 
by many words or clauses of one sence, 
the Greekes call it Sinonimia. ... Ye 
see that all these words, face, looks, 
favour, features, visage, countenance, 
are in sence all but one. Which store, 
neverthelesse, doeth much beautifie 
and inlarge the matter " (p. 223). See 
v. i. 59 for a different use of the word 

I* figure." Here we may equate it with 
iur idea, imagination. Armado and 
lolofernes share this affectation, which 
s very prevalent in Gabriel Harvey's 
etters; also in Lyly's plays, as: 
" How canst thou thus divine, divide, 
define, dispute, and all on the sodaine ? 
Manes. Wit will have his swing ; I am 
bewitcht, inspired, inflamed, infected " 
(Campaspe, iii. 2 [1584]). See Intro- 
duction on this. 

63. revolutions] Applied to the gifts 
of the intellect, may mean any turning 
of the thoughts. Florio has " Riuolg- 
ment: a revolving, a revolution, a 



65. pia mater] Rowe ; primater Qq, Ff. 
] Hoi. Qq, Ff (see line 61). 

turning and tossing up and downe. 
Also a winding or crankling in and 
out. Also a cunning tricke or winding 
shift. Also a revolt ... or rebellion." 

64. ventricle of memory] Furness 
quotes here from Vicary, The Anatomie 
of the Bodie of Man (E. E. T. Soc. p. 
31), 1548: "Next is the Brayne, of 
which it is marveylous to be considered 
and noted, how this Piamater devideth 
the substaunce . . . into three partes 
or ventrikles. ... In the thirde Ven- 
trikle, and last, there is founded and 
ordeyned the vertue Memorative : in 
this place is registred and kept those 
things that are done or spoken with 
the senses and keepeth them in his 
treasurie." 

65. pia mater] "the fine membrane 
or pellicle called Pia Mater, which im- 
mediately lappeth and enfoldeth the 
braine " (Pliny's Naturall History 
[trans. P. Holland, xxiv. 8], 1601). In 
the Stanford Dictionary (Cambridge, 
1892) there is a quotation from jferome 
of Brunswick's Surgery, 1525: "then 
the panne, than within be ij small 
fleces named dura mater and pia mater, 
than the substance of the braynes." 
And compare Nashe's Christ's Teares 
(Epistle to Reader) (Grosart, iv. 7), 1593 : 
" having a huge heape of those worth- 
lesse shreds of small English in my 
Pia maters purse." See last note, and 
Twelfth Night, 1. v. 119. 

67. acute] See m. i. 60. 






78 



LOVE'S LABOUR S LOST 



[act IV. 



Hoi. Mehercle I if their sons be ingenuous, they shall want 
no instruction ; if their daughters be capable, I will 
put it to them. But vir sapit qui pauca loquitur. 
A soul feminine saluteth us. 



75 



Enter JAQUENETTA and COSTARD. 

Jaq. God give you good morrow, master parson. 
Hoi. Master parson, quasi person. An if one should be 
pierced, which is the one ? 

72. Hoi.] Nath. Qq, Ff. ingenuous] ingenious Capell. 74. sapit] sapis 

Q 1, F 1. 77. Hoi.] Nath. Qq, Ff. parson] Ff 2, 3, 4 ; person Qq, F 1. 

77-83. Put in the margin by Pope. 



72. ingenuous] The old texts have 
ingenuous, ingenous (Q. 1), and in- 
genuous (Q 2, Ff 3, 4) ; so that " in- 
genious" of Capell is not allowable. 

74. vir . . . loquitur] "with few 
words a wise man will compass much " 
(Proverbs of Alfred [Morris, Specimens 
of Early Eng. i. 329], circa 1250). The 
Latin form is in various collections. 

77. parson, quasi person] Referring to 
derivation from Lat. persona. The ex- 
tended use of " parson " to " any 
clergyman " in the song at the end of 
this play, is the earliest example in 
New Eng. Diet. For the double sense 
in the present passage, compare Sel- 
den's Table-Talk (referred to by 
Staunton) (Arber, p. 82) : " Though we 
write Parson differently, yet 'tis but 
Person ; that is, the individual person 
set apart for the service of such a 
church, and 'tis in Latin persona" 

77-81. person . . . Of piercing a 
hogshead] I detect here several points 
unnoticed by the editors. In the first 
place, "hogshead" was not uncom- 
monly applied to a thick-witted person, 
especially in the old phrase "couch a 
hogshead" occurring as early as Cock 
LoreVs Bote. This explains Costard's 
impertinence. Compare Dekker's 
Wonderfull Yeare (Grosart, i. 142) : 
"after they had laid their hogsheads 
togither, to draw out some holesome 
counsel." But the passage with its 
emphatic "of" has an interesting con- 
nection with contemporary writings. 
Nashe's Pierce Peniless appeared in 
1592. In Gabriel Harvey's reply to 
it, Pierce's Supererogation (1592-1593), 



the following passage occurs : " She 
knew what she said, that intituled 
Pierce, the hoggeshead of witt : Pen- 
niles, the tosspot of eloquence : & Nashe 
the very inventor of Asses. She 
it is that must broach the barrell of 
thy frisking conceite, and canonise 
the[e] Patriarke of newe writers." 
" She " is the Countess of Pembroke, 
but the passage is Harvey's own, no 
doubt. It is hard to escape from 
the thought that Shakespeare refers to 
that passage. It must be remembered 
that this raging controversy was the 
most interesting thing, perhaps, of the 
day, on the literary horizon. The 
name of Nashe's tract is more signi- 
ficant with this pronunciation {purse), 
a note, en passant, which I have not 
met with. The pronunciation is un- 
doubted. See Grosart's Nashe, ii. 244, 
e.g. Similar quibbling occurs in Prior 
Bolton's old and popular device or 
rebus in the church of the Priory of 
St. Bartholomew, a bolt through a tun. 
Prior Bolton died in 1532. This rebus 
is quoted by Camden (Remaines Con- 
cerning Britaine), and referred to by 
Ben Jonson, in his New Inn, 1. i. 
" To pierce a hogshead," technically, 
to broach a cask, is in Howell's Vo- 
cabulary, 1659. 

78. pierced] This word was pro- 
nounced as it is spelt in Qq, Ff. (perst.) 
See the quibble in 1 Henry IV. v. iii. 59 : 
" If Percy be alive I '11 pierce him." 
For the spelling compare Puttenham 
Arte of English Poesie (Arber, p. 176) : 
" Her beautie perst mine eye, her speach 
mine wofull hart." Ellis (Early English 



«.] 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 



79 



80 



85 



;;.„_„. _. 

hogshead. 
Hoi. Of piercing a hogshead ! a good lustre of conceit in 

I a turf of earth ; fire enough for a flint, pearl enough 
for a swine : 'tis pretty ; it is well . 
. Good master parson, be so good as read me this letter : 
it was given me by Costard, and sent me from Don 
Armado : I beseech you, read it. 
Hoi. Fauste, precor gelida quando pecus omne sub umbra 

P. Hoi.] Nath. Qq, Ff. Of piercing] Of per sing Qq, Ff. 87. Fauste 

omne] Ff 2, 3, 4; Facile precor gellida quando pecas omnia Qi, Fi. 

poems, who flourished towards the 
latter end of the fifteenth century. He 
died in 15 16. A translation by George 
Turberville appeared in 1567, and was 
in use as a school-book. Greene re- 
fers to " Mantuan's Eglogue intituled 
Alphus " in Mamillia (Grosart, ii. 107). 
There is here again evidence of a con- 
temporary reference. Why is this 
passage thrust in head and shoulders, 
apropos of nothing ? We may be sure 
there was a reason, as there was above, 
for " piercing a hogshead." In Gabriel 
Harvey's Foure Letters (Grosart, i. 
195), he attacks M. Pierce Penilesse 
(p. 194) in these words : " The summe of 
summes is, He lost his imagination a 
thou ,and waies, and I belieue searched 
every corner of his Grammar-Schoole 
witte (for his margine is as deeplie 
learned, as Fauste precor gelida) to see 
if he could finde anie meanes to relieue 
his estate." Nashe, in his reply in 
Foure Letters Confuted (Grosart's 
Nashe, ii. 249), singles out this pas- 
sage thus : " With the first and second 
leafe hee plaies verie pretilie, and in 
ordinarie termes of extenuating, verdits 
Pierce Pennilesse for a Grammar School 
wit: saies his Margine is as deeplie 
learned as Fauste precor gelida, that 
his verse sobbeth and groneth verie 
piteouslie," etc. Here we have the 
words classified by two of the chief 
writers before the public, as the especial 
property of the Grammar School ped- 
ant. Puttenham speaks of Mantuanus : 
" These Eglogues came after to con- 
taine and enforme morall discipline, 
for the amendment of man's behaviour, 
as be those of Mantuan and other 
moderne Poets " {Arte of English Poesie 
[Arber, p. 53], ante 1589). Furness proves 



Pronunciation) says " Pierce, the family 
name, is pronounced Perse in America." 
This is to be noted in connection with 
Nashe's tract, Pierce Peniless. 

78. one] See Quarto reading at 1. i. 
165. Commonly pronounced on or un 
provincially. In Gabriel Harvey's early 
letters "one" is constantly written 
"on" (Grosart, i. 112, etc.). It seems 
to have been an affectation of Harvey's : 
"on of my standinge " (pp. H4-i7),etc. 

81. Of piercing a hogshead] Cam- 
bridge edd. suggest that " Of," which 
commences this line in the old edition, 
was part of the stage- direction, " Ho- 
lof.," which crept into the text. They 
make a similar guess at "O" (from 
"Bero.") at m. i. 164, etc. But how 
can this apply when the old editions 
misprint " Nath." for " Holof." ? I 
disbelieve in the parallel suggestion 
for other reasons. The "of" is pos- 
sibly placed here to enforce an allusion. 
See note at lines 77-81. 

82. turf of earth] clod of earth. 
Compare Ben Jonson, Every Man out 
of his Humour, 1. i. (1599) : " Who can 
endure to see blind fortune dote thus ? 
To be enamoured on this dusty turf, 
This clod, a whoreson puck-fist 1 " 
And again in Tale of a Tub, 1. iii. : 
" Whereas the father of her is a Turfe, 
A very superficies of the earth." 
Jonson considers it a suitable name 
for a high constable. Schmidt here, 
and continually, misjudges the lan- 
guage of Holofernes ; elsewhere also 
of Armado. 

87, 88. Fauste . . . Ruminat] The 
beginning of the first eclogue of 
Mantuanus. Battista Spagnuoli, sur- 
named Mantuanus from the place of 
his birth, was a writer of pastoral 



80 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 



[AC 



Ruminat, and so forth. Ah ! good old Mantuan. I 
may speak of thee as the traveller doth of Venice : 

Venetia, Venetia, 

Chi non ti vede, non ti pretia. 

Old Mantuan ! old Mantuan ! who understandeth thee 
not, loves thee not Ut, re, sol, la, mi> fa. Under 
pardon, sir, what are the contents? or, rather, as 
Horace says in his — what, my soul ! verses ? 9 

Nath. Ay, sir, and very learned. 

Hoi. Let me hear a staff, a stanze, a verse : lege, domine. 

90,91. Venetia . . . ti . . . ti pretia] Cambridge; Vcmchie vencha, que nc 
te unde, que non te perreche Q i, F i (more corrupt in Q 2, Ff 2, 3, 4 
93. loves thee not] Q 1 ; omitted Ff, Q 2. 97. stanze] F 1, Q 2 ; stauze Q i 

stanza Ff 2, 3, 4. 



* 



amply that Mantuan was a school-book 
down to the second half of the seven- 
teenth century. In 1585 he was 
amongst the authors to be read at St. 
Bees, Cumberland, and half a cen- 
tury earlier he was in the lists at 
St. Paul's newly established Grammar 
School. 

90, 91. Venetia . . . pretia] This 
proverb is given by Malone from 
Florio's Second Fruites (1591) : " Vene- 
tia, etc., with a tag, Ma chi ti vede, 
ben gli costa." Theobald was the first 
to correct the old text. Furness states 
it is in Florio's First Fruites (1578) 
with translation: "Venise who seeth 
thee not, praiseth thee not, but who 
seeth thee, it costeth hym well." It 
has also been discovered by Wolfgang 
Keller in The Garden of Pleasure, 
translated by James Sandford from 
the Italian, in 1573. The English 
version is in The Book of Riddels, 
mentioned by Captain Cox in 1575. 
See Furnivall's Captain Cox (Ballad 
Society, 1871), p. cxiii. Howell has a 
very different conclusion in his Italian 
Proverbs, 1659. 

93. Ut . . . fa] He hums the notes 
of the gamut as Edmund does in King 
Lear, 1. ii. (Douce). For these terms 
see Chappell's Popular Music, pp. 14, 
15, where the Latin hymn (about 774) 
for St. John Baptist's Day, from which 
they are taken, will be found. SI for 
B was not settled till nearly the end 
of the seventeenth century, and DO 
replaced UT about the same time, but 



fa 



the French retained UT. See agai 
The Taming of the Shrew, III. i. 70-80 
Pen Jonson uses this in a transfers 
sense in Cynthia's Revels, n. i. : " you 
courtier elementary is one but newl 
entered, or as it were in the alphabe 
or ut-re-mi -fa-sol-la of courtship. 
Nashe has it where we should sa 
"ding dong": " Summer. Will So 
come before us ? Vertumnus. Sol, so 
ut, re, mi, fa, sol. Come to chur< 
while the bell toll " (for the sake of 
quibble) in Summer's Last Will, 1592. 
Holofernes is airing one part of his 
acquirements ; the instruction of chil- 
dren in singing, whether for chapel or 
theatre, was of the first importance. 
A schoolmaster was a singing-master. 
Lyly quotes " sol-fa-la," in the sense 
of "pleasure," in Campaspe, iv. iii. 
(1584). 

97. a staff, a stanze] Equivalent terms. 
The form " stanze " occurs in Armin's 
Two Maides of Moreclacke (Grosart, 
p. no), 1609. Puttenham says: "the 
meetre Heeroicall of Troilus and Cres- 
seid is very grave and stately, keeping 
the staff e of seven [lines] and the verse 
of ten [feet] " (Arber, p. 76) ; and a 
little later: lt Staffe in our vulgs 
Poesie I know not why it should 
so called. . . . The Italian called 
stanza, as if we should say a restii 
place ... a certaine number of vers 
allowed to go altogether and joyne.' 
Florio has: ''Stanza . . . properly 
stanzo or stance or stave of eight 
six verses." 



Nath. 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 



81 



If love make me forsworn, how shall I swear to love ? 

Ah 1 never faith could hold, if not to beauty vow'd ; 
Though to myself forsworn, to thee I '11 faithful prove ; IOO 

Those thoughts to me were oaks, to thee like osiers bow'd. 
Study his bias leaves and makes his book thine eyes, 

Where all those pleasures live that art would comprehend. 
If knowledge be the mark, to know thee shall suffice ; 

Well learned is that tongue that well can thee commend ; 105 
All ignorant that soul that sees thee without wonder ; 

Which is to me some praise that I thy parts admire. 
Thy eye Jove's lightning bears, thy voice his dreadful thunder, 

Which, not to anger bent, is music and sweet fire. 
Celestial as thou art, O 1 pardon love this wrong, 1 10 

That sings heaven's praise with such an earthly tongue. 



99. Ah!] O! Passionate Pilgrim. 100. faithful] constant P. P. 101. 

were] like P. P. 103. would] can P. P. 108. Thy] Thine P. P. bears] 

f*s P. P. no. pardon love this] do not love that P. P. in. That sings] 
sing P. P. ; That sings the S. Walker conj. 



98. If love, etc.] This sonnet was 
appropriated by William Jaggard in 
the collection he published in 1599: 
" The Passionate Pilgrim, by W. Shake- 
speare." It contains pieces by Barn- 
field, Bartholomew Griffin, Weelkes, 
Marlowe, and others besides Shake- 
speare. 

101. Those thoughts to me were oaks] 
okes in the earliest texts. There may 
be a quibble upon " yokes," as in The 
Merry Wives of Windsor, v. v. 111. 
Perhaps I may add a few words to my 
notes upon that passage (Arden edition, 
pp. 216, 217). I have quoted there 
Schmidt's view that " yokes " (the 
reading I adopt) is correct because of 
their resemblance, perhaps, to horns, 
lending a point to the quibble. This 
was also Steevens' view, who reads 
"yokes." The second Folio reads 
"oaks." Other commentators were 
confident the second Folio was right. 
A suggestion (from Marlowe's Doctor 
Faustus) of Mr. Craig's was the nearest 
thing to a confirmation I had to offer, 
but I have met with some interesting 
additional matter since. The yokes 
were known, that is to say the pointed 
extremities, as "horns." In Dekker's 
GulVs Horn Book (Grosart, ii. 260) the 
following passage supplies the needed 
proof: "you are to cherish the un- 
thriftiness of such yong tame pigions, 



if you be a right gentleman : for when 
two are yoakt together by the purse- 
strings, and draw the Chariot of Madam 
Prddigalitie, when one faints in the 
way and slips his homes, let the other 
rejoice and laugh at him." " Horns " 
here is the yoke, whether the beast 
was yoked by the horns or otherwise. 
Further than this, so synonymous were 
the two words, that, according to Ger- 
ard, the hornbeam derived its name 
from the wood being suitable, so hard 
it was, to yoke horned cattle. See 
Prior's Plant Names. It was also 
known as "yoke-elm," though perhaps 
this name was invented by Gerard. 
It is in Howell's Vocabulary, section 
41 : " The yoak-tree, or yoak-elm ; Un 
carpine" (1659). 

102. bias] tendency, bent. 

his book thine eyes] See below, 
iv. iii. 299-301 ; and A Midsummer- 
Night's Dream, 11. ii. 126. So in 
Nashe's Tragedie of Dido, 1594 (Gros- 
art, vi. 36) : " His glistering eyes shall 
be my looking glasse ; . . . His lookes 
shall be my only Librarie." " And 
folly 's all they taught me," adds 
Thomas Moore. 

no. pardonlove this wrong] Wrongly 
punctuated in several modern editions 
(Rowe, Steevens, etc.) pardon, love, this 
wrong. 



1 



82 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST [act iv 



Hoi. You find not the apostrophus, and so miss the accent : 
let me supervise the canzonet. Here are only num- 
bers ratified ; but, for the elegancy, facility, and golden 
cadence of poesy, caret. Ovidius Naso was the man : 1 1 
and why, indeed, Naso, but for smelling out the 
odoriferous flowers of fancy, the jerks of invention? 
Imitari is nothing ; so doth the hound his master, the 
ape his keeper, the tired horse his rider. But, damo- 
sella virgin, was this directed to you ? 120 

112. apostrophus] New Eng. Diet, conjecture ; apostraphas Q 1, Ff 1, 2, Globe 
apostrophas Q 2, Cambridge; apostrophes Ff 3, 4. 113. canzonet] Theobald 
cangenet Qq, Ff. 113-120. Here are . . . to you?] Spoken by Hoi. Theobald 
Qq, Ff give to Nath. 117, 118. invention? Imitari] Theobald; invention 

imitarie Qq, Ff. ng. tired] tyred Qq, Ff ; try 'd Theobald ; tired Capell. 

112. apostroph 71s] Furness calls Mur- facility] fluency. Puttenham ad- 
ray's suggestion in the New Eng. Diet, vises " makers " to use " this or that 
"an emendatio certissima, and an ad- kind of figure, according to the facilitit 
ditional proof that the compositor of of each man's utterance" (Arber, p. 
the Folio followed his ear and not his 304). 

eye." There were but the two forms 115. cadence] Not elsewhere in Shake- 
ol the word, apostrophe or apostrophus, 
meaning the sign (') indicating the 
omission of one or more letters. Ben 
Jonson gives a careful definition (over- 
looked in the New Eng. Diet.) in The 
Second Book of the English Grammar 
(ante 1637): "Apostrophus is the re- 
jecting of a vowel from the beginning 
or end of a word. The note whereof, 
though it many times through the negli- 
gence of writers and printers, is quite 
omitted, yet by right . . . hath his 
mark, which is such a semicircle (') 
placed in the top." It is this negli- 
gence the pedant complains of as 
misleading Nathaniel. Ben Jonson 
confirms the reading I give. 

113. canzonet] T. Morley (1593) is 
the earliest use given in the New Eng. 
Diet, of this term, the present example, 
I suppose, being somewhat uncertain. 
Florio has : " Canzonetta, a canzonet 
or dittie." Ben Jonson uses the word 
early : " I will have a canzonet made, 
with nothing in it but Sirrah ; and the 
burthen shall be, I come" (Cynthia's 
Revels, iv. i. [1600]). 

113, 114. numbers ratified] verses 
brought into proportion or rate. From 
the context this appears to be the 
speaker's meaning. 

114. elegancy] A frequent form of 
" elegance." It occurs in Gabriel Harvey 
and Ben Jonson (Every Man out, etc.). 



speare. In a different sense it will be 
found in a quotation from Sir Philip 
Sidney's Arcadia at the words " French 
brawl" (in. i. 6), and it is worthy oi 
note that the "brawl" does not find 
mention again either. In the sense 
of rhythmical measure the term is in 
Chaucer. Puttenham uses it : " there 
can not be in a maker a fowler fault, 
then to falsifie his accent to serve his 
cadence, or by untrue orthographie to 
wrench his words to helpe his rime 
. . . such a maker is not ... his 
craft's master " (p. 94). 

116. Naso . . . for smelling] Com- 
pare Harvey's Letters (Grosart, i. 85), 
1580 : " Eyed, like to Argus, Earde, 
like to Midas, Nosd, like to Naso." 

117. jerks of invention] strokes or 
sallies of wit. A very proper figure 
for a schoolmaster's use, since "jerk- 
ing" was equivalent to whipping. In 
Greene's Never Too Late (Grosart, viii. 
193), 1590, there is a good example : 
" if they have childrens malladies, 
twere good to use childrens medicines, 
and that 's a rod : for Be they never so 
froward, ajerck or two will make them 
forward. " Shakespeare has not "jerk r 
again, although he uses the verb " yerk " 
twice. 

119. the tired horse] dull-spirited, 
agree with Madden (cited by Furness) 
that Shakespeare here refers to the 



SC. II.] 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



83 



125 



Jaq. Ay, sir, from one Monsieur Biron, one of the strange 
queen's lords. 

HeL I will overglance the superscript. ' To the snow-white 
hand of the most beauteous Lady Rosaline.' I will 
look again on the intellect of the letter, for the 
nomination of the party writing to the person written 
unto: 'Your ladyship's in all desired employment, 
Biron.' Sir Nathaniel, this Biron is one of the votaries 

twith the king ; and here he hath framed a letter to a 
sequent of the stranger queen's, which, accidentally, 
or by the way of progression, hath miscarried. Trip 
and go, my sweet ; deliver this paper into the royal 
23-128. J will . . . Biron] Given to Nath. Qq, Ff, 126. writing'} Rowe; 

written Qq, Ff. 128. Biron. Sir Nathaniel] See collation at iv. ii. 113-120; 
Berowne. Per. Sir Holof ernes Ff; Berowne. Ped. Sir Holof ernes Qq; Biron. 
Sir Nathaniel Capell. 132. royal] Q 1 ; omitted in Ff, Q 2. 



130 



sympathy between horse and rider, as 
in Sonnet 1. : " The beast that bears 
me, tired with my woe, Plods dully 
on " ; and in A Lover's Complaint, 107 : 
" that horse his mettle from his rider 
takes." Furness quotes from Mark- 
ham's Master-peece, showing it to be 
a term of art : " Of Tyred Horses . . , 
every horse that giveth over his labour 
is tyred . . . true tyredness ... (or 
from) dulness of spirit." See a notable 
passage on riding in Arcadia (Dublin 
edition [1739], vol. i. p. 215), and else- 
where in Shakespeare. 

123. superscript] superscription, ad- 
dress. See Greene's Third Parte of 
Conney -catching (Grosart, x. 150) : 
" and sewed an old card upon it, 
whereupon he wrote a superscription 
unto the Maister of the Maide, and at 
what signe it was to be delivered." 
See note at iv. i. 58. 

125. intellect] intelligence conveyed 
in, meaning. Furness quotes from 
Baynes {Shakespeare Studies) a refer- 
ence to Wilson's A rte of Rhetorique, 
where the figure Synecdoche (Putten- 
ham's " Figure o£ quick conceite ") is 
rendered by " intellection." The writer 
parallels Holofernes' use of " super- 
script" above for "superscription," 
and suggests this as the source of 
his far-fetchedr term. 

126. party] person. Several times in 
Shakespeare. Compare Lodge, Euphues 
Golden Legacie (Shakes. Lib. 1S75, p. 



I 



52) : " the party beloved is froward, 
and having curtsie in her lookes, 
holdeth disdaine in her tongues ende." 

130. sequent] follower. I have no 
example of this substantive. 

131, 132. Trip and go] Chappell says 
this was " one of the favourite Morris- 
dances of the sixteenth and seventeenth 
centuries." The expression became 
proverbial and is often made use of. 
"O how she scudded 1 O sweet scud 
how she tripped ! O delicate trip and 
go I " (Ben Jonson, The Case is Altered, 
iv. iv. [1598]) ; and in Nashe's Summer's 
Last Will (Grosart, vi. 95), 1592, a 
morris-dance is introduced, with " three 
clowns and three maids singing this 
song, dancing" : " Trip and goe, heave 
and ho, Up and down, to and fro. . . . 
A Maying, a playing; Love hath no 
gainsaying, So merrily trip and go." 
Chappell gives the music. Nashe re- 
fers to it again in Foure Letters Con- 
futed (Grosart, ii. 204), in the same 
manner as Holofernes does : " Thou 
shalt not breathe a whit, trip and goe " ; 
and in his Introduction to Sidney's 
Astrophel and Stella (Arber's English 
Garner, i. 500), 1591, he says : " my 
style is somewhat heavy-gaited, and 
cannot dance trip and go so lively ; 
with ' O my love ! ' 'Ah my love ! ' 
1 All my love is gone ! ' " etc. See also 
Gosson, Schoole of Abuse (Arber, p. 25), 
1579 : " Trip and goe, for I dare not 
tarry." * 



84 LOVES LABOUR S LOST [act iv. 

hand of the king ; it may concern much. Stay not 
thy compliment ; I forgive thy duty : adieu. 

faq. Good Costard, go with me. Sir, God save your life! 135 

Cost. Have with thee, my girl. 

{Exeunt Costard and Jaquenetta 

Nath. Sir, you have done this in the fear of God, very 
religiously; and, as a certain father saith, — 

Hoi. Sir, tell not me of the father ; I do fear colourable 

colours. But to return to the verses: did they please 140 
you, Sir Nathaniel ? 

Nath. Marvellous well for the pen. 

Hoi. I do dine to-day at the father's of a certain pupil of 
mine ; where, if (being repast) it shall please you to 
gratify the table with a grace, I will, on my privilege 145 
I have with the parents of the foresaid child or pupil, 
undertake your ben venuto ; where I will prove those 
verses to be very unlearned, neither savouring of 
poetry, wit, nor invention. I beseech your society. 

Nath. And thank you too ; for society, saith the text, is 1 50 
the happiness of life. 

Hoi. And, certes, the text most infallibly concludes it. 

[To Dull.'] Sir, I do invite you too: you shall not 

say me nay : pauca verba. Away ! the gentles are at 

their game, and we will to our recreation. 155 

{Exeunt. 

144. being] Ff, Q 2; before Q 1, Capell, Malone et seq. 147. ben venuto] 

Rowe ; bien venuto Q 1, Ff 2, 3, 4 ; bien vonuto F 1, Q 2. 

138. father] See above, line 31. be fewest of number, that be happie 

139, 140. colourable colours] plausible or wise by unlearned experience." 
pretexts. The substantive is common, 150, 151. society . . . happiness of 

but the adjective not elsewhere in life] What is the text alluded to?] 

Shakespeare. I find it in the same Perhaps a copy-book heading, since 

sense in Sidney's Arcadia, bk. ii. : " If Nathaniel's mind is running on pen- 

my soul could have been polluted with craft. Compare the copy-book use of 

treachery, it would likewise have pro- " text " in v. ii. 42. A similar passage 

vided for itself colourable answers." occurs in Damon and Pithias (Hazlitt' 

142. Marvellous well for the pen] See Dodsley, iv. 8) : " Amicitia inter bonos 

below, note at v. ii. 3g, 40. saith a learned man," an expressior 

147. ben venuto] See again the last nearly repeated by Lyly in Endymiot 
words of the first act of The Taming 1. iii. See line 138 above. 
of a Shrew. The French from bien 154. pauca verba] See The Merry 
venue was anglicised much earlier, and Wives of Windsor, 1. i. 123 (and note 
occurs in Peele and Nashe. Arden edition, p. 13). No earlier us 

148. unlearned] illiterate, barbarous, than the present has been quoted, th< 
Compare Ascham, The Scholemaster next being Jonson's Every Man in hi 
(Arber, pp. 61, 62): "And verilie they Humour, 1598. 



III.] 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 



I SCENE III.— The Same. 

Enter BlRON, with a paper. 

Biron. The king he is hunting the deer ; I am coursing 
myself: they have pitched a toil; I am toiling in a 
pitch, — pitch that defiles : defile ! a foul word. Well, 
set thee down, sorrow ! for so they say the fool said, 
and so say I, and I the fool : well proved, wit ! By 
the Lord, this love is as mad as Ajax : it kills sheep ; 
it kills me, I a sheep : well proved again o' my side ! 
I will not love ; if I do, hang me ; i' faith, I will not 
O! but her eye, — by this light, but for her eye, I 
would not love her ; yes, for her two eyes. Well, I 
do nothing in the world but lie, and lie in my throat. 
By heaven, I do love, and it hath taught me to rhyme, 
and to be melancholy ; and here is part of my rhyme, 



85 



.^? 



10 



4. set] Qq, Ff ; sit Hanmer. 13. 

2. pitched a toil] set a snare. " The 
hay's a pitching" [hay = rabbit-net] 
(Ben Jonson, Alchemist, 11. i.). Ben 
Jonson in his translation of Horace 
(" Beatus Me" etc. [Odes, v. ii.]) has : 
" Or hence, or thence, he drives with 
many a hound Wild boars into his 
toils pitched round " (ante 1619). And 
Beaumont and Fletcher's Woman's 
Prize, iv. iv. : " How daintily and 
cunningly you drive me up like a deer 
to the toil." " The Master of the Toyles 
and Tents " is an office at Court men- 
tioned in Powell's Plaine Pathway to 
Preferment (New Shakes. Soc. p. 168). 
And in an Account of the Queen's 
Purse from 1559 to 1569 (Nichols' Pro- 
gresses [1823], i. 269), "The Toyle" 
appears amongst necessary charges for 
the queen's horses and deer : " maiking 
and fynishing 75 clothes for the Toyle." 

2, 3. toiling in a pitch] Is not Biron 
recalling the deep black of Rosaline's 
eyes to which he refers as " two pitch- 
balls " ? (in. i. 188) (Furness). Johnson 
said " alluding to lady Rosaline's com- 
plexion, who is through the whole play 
represented as a black beauty," al- 
though we are distinctly told (in. i. 187) 
she was a " whitely wanton " (with 
snow-white hands). Biron shows at 
once (lines 9, 10) it is her eyes he 
means. He is careful to correct " her 

e " (a pitch) to M her two eyes," 



melancholy] mallichollie Qq, Ff. 

4. set thee down, sorrow I] Costard's 
remark at 1. i. 297-298. 

6. love is as mad as Ajax: it kills 
sheep] "so it kills me" is added by 
Thomas Fuller, M.D., in his Gnomo- 
logia, 1732. It is No. 3287 ; and it is 
needful to be explicit, since Furness 
has an unhappy comment, "confessing 
his ignorance of the work, which was 
referred to by Ritson at the passage. 
Furness refers to Fuller's Worthies. 
Gnomologia is a very good little 
book. See again note at " He 's a 
god," v. ii. 634; and at line 87 of 
this scene. 

mad as Ajax: it kills sheep] This 
occurs again in 2 Henry VI. v. i. 26 : 
"like Ajax Telamonius, On sheep or 
oxen could I spend my fury." There 
were at least two plays concerning 
Ajax acted, one at Court and one at 
Cambridge, before this time. 

n. lie in my throat] occurs several 
times in Shakespeare. In Othello, 111. 
iv. 13 (Arden edition, p. 165), I have 
given a reference to Gabriel Harvey, 
ante 1580 (Grosart, ii. 73). A very deep 
lie. Biron refers here to the perjury 
of his loving. A lie, not of the tongue 
or lips, but coming from the heart. 
Sidney has it: "Thou liest in thy 
throat, said Zelmane" (repr. p. 365, 
1898), ante 1586. 






20 



86 LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST [act tv 

and here my melancholy. Well, she hath one o' my 
sonnets already : the clown bore it, the fool sent it, 1 5 
and the lady hath it: sweet clown, sweeter fool, 
sweetest lady ! By the world, I would not care a pin 
if the other three were in. Here comes one with a 
paper : God give him grace to groan ! [Stands aside. 

Enter the KING, with a paper. 

King. Ay me ! 

Biron. Shot, by heaven 1 Proceed, sweet Cupid: thou 
hast thumped him with thy bird-bolt under the left 
pap. In faith, secrets ! 
King [Reads.] 

So sweet a kiss the golden sun gives not 

To those fresh morning drops upon the rose, 
As thy eye-beams when their fresh rays have smote 
The night of dew that on my cheeks down flows : 
Nor shines the silver moon one half so bright 
Through the transparent bosom of the deep, 
As doth thy face through tears of mine give light ; 
Thou shin'st in every tear that I do weep : 

19. [Stands aside] Gets up into a tree Capell. 26. smote] smot Qq, 

27. night of dew] Qq, Ff ; dew of night Singer. 



' 



16, 17. sweet . . . sweeter , . . sweet- 
est] See note at 1. ii. 157-159. 

17. By the world] Used twice by 
Armado, v. i. 94-95 and 98 ; and in 
The Taming of the Shrew, n. i. 161. 

22. thumped] Greene has " fro mine 
eyes I gave her such a thump on the 
brest that she would scarce say no " 
(Never Too Late [Grosart, viii. 198]). 

bird-bolt] a kind of blunt-headed 
arrow used for shooting birds with. 
Steevens says in a note to Much Ado 
About Nothing, i. i.: "Such are to 
this day in use to kill rooks with, shot 
from a cross-bow." Marston has 
"gross-knobbed birdbolt" in What 
You Will. Playfully applied to Cupid's 
arrows, which are presumably of the 
sharpest and most piercing description, 
probably because used by a boy. Nares 
refers to Greene's Tu Quoque, and Stee- 
vens to Shirley's Love in a Maze. Often 
spelt " burbolt." 

22, 23. lejt pap] Compare A Mid- 
summer-Night's Dream, v. i. 305 : 
" left pap Where heart doth hop." But 



see The Shepherdess Felismena (from B. 
Yonge's translation of Montemayor's 
Diana) (Shaks. Lib. 1875, p. 306), 
ante 1598 : " But Felismena helped him 
out of that trouble, by putting another 
arrow into her bow, the which trans- 
piercing his armour, she left under his 
left pap, and so iustly smote his heart 
that this knight also followed his two 
companions." The expression is also 
in Speed's History of Great Britain (ed. 
1632), at the year 1585 : " Henry Percy, 
Earle of Northumberland . . . being 
upon suspicion of treason committed to 
the Tower of London, he laid violent 
hands upon his owne life, by discharg- 
ing a Dag, charged with three bullets, 
under his left pappe, wherewith he 
pierced his heart." 

24. kiss the golden sun] Compare 
Sonnet xxxiii. : " a glorious morning 
. . . kissing with golden face," etc. 

26. eye-beams] See note below, line 
163. 

27. night of dew] night's allowanc 
of tears. 



SC. III.] 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 



87 



No drop but as a coach doth carry thee ; 

So ridest thou triumphing in my woe. 
Do but behold the tears that swell in me, 

And they thy glory through my grief will show: 35 

But do not love thyself; then thou wilt keep 
My tears for glasses, and still make me weep. 
O queen of queens ! how far dost thou excel, 
No thought can think, nor tongue of mortal tell. 

How shall she know my griefs ? I '11 drop the paper : 40 
Sweet leaves, shade folly. Who is he comes here ? 

[Steps aside. 
What, Longaville ! and reading ! listen, ear. 



Enter LONGAVILLE, with a paper. 

Biron. Now, in thy likeness, one more fool appear ! 

Long. Ay me ! I am forsworn. 

Biron. Why, he comes in like a perjure, wearing papers, 

King. In love, I hope : sweet fellowship in shame ! 

Biron. One drunkard loves another of the name. 

Long. Am I the first that have been perjur'd so ? 

Biron. I could put thee in comfort : not by two that I know. 



45 



36. wilt] Ff ; will Q 1. 



45. perjure] perjured F 2. 



32. coach] See below, line 152. 

43. in thy likeness . . . appear] in 
thy shape, thyself. Compare Romeo 
and Juliet, 11. i. 21, and The Tempest, 
in. ii. 138. Dekker uses this expres- 
sion very violently to our ears, meaning 
in person, in the flesh : "At last the 
wise Gentleman appeared in his like- 
nesse : Are you the Constable saies the 
player; yes that I am for fault of a 
better, quoth he" (Iests to make you 
Merrie [Grosart, ii. 279], 1607) ; " No 
sooner were their backes turned, but 
I that all this while had stood in a 
corner (like a watching candle) ap- 
peared in my likeness" (Belman of 
London [Grosart, iii. 91], 1608). See 
also Nashe, Martins Months Minde 
(Grosart, i. 173), 1589 : " Martin dares 
not land in his likenes at Lambeth 
staiers." 

45. perjure] perjurer. " But now 
black-spotted Perjure as he is, He 
takes a truce with Elnor's damned 
brat" {Troublesome Raigne of King 



John, part i. [Shakes. Lib. ed. 1875, 

P- 35i]».i59i). 

wearing papers] " To sette openly 
with a paper on his hed to be mocked 
in perjury for forging of evidences, or 
such like. Catamidio " (J. Rider, Bib- 
liotheca Scholastica, 1589). And com- 
pare Chettle, Kind Hartes Dreame 
(New Shakes. Soc. p. 73), 1592 : " an 
odd Atturney, was not long since dis- 
graded of his place by pitching over 
the Barre, yet promoted to looke out 
of a wodden window, cut after the 
Dove hole fashion, with a paper over 
his suttle pate, containing the iugling 
before shewed." Steevens gives refer- 
ences to Holinshed (p. 838 [1587]), and 
to Leicester's Commonwealth. In Har- 
rison's England the punishment was 
the pillory and the letter P branded in 
the forehead. The passage in Holin- 
shed attributes the wearing of open 
papers to Cardinal Wolsey, a punish- 
ment that had a deterrent effect, he 
says. See line 122 below, 



88 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 



[ACT IV. 



Thou mak'st the triumviry, the corner-cap of society, 50 

The shape of love's Tyburn, that hangs up simplicity. 
Long. I fear these stubborn lines lack power to move. 

O sweet Maria, empress of my love ! 

These numbers will I tear, and write in prose. 
Biron. O ! rhymes are guards on wanton Cupid's hose : 55 

Disfigure not his [slop]. 
Long. This same shall go. [Reads the Sonnet, 

Did not the heavenly rhetoric of thine eye, 

'Gainst whom the world cannot hold argument, 
Persuade my heart to this false perjury ? 

Vows for thee broke deserve not punishment. 60 

A woman I forswore ; but I will prove, 

Thou being a goddess, I forswore not thee : 
My vow was earthly, thou a heavenly love ; 

Thy grace being gain'd cures all disgrace in me. 
Vows are but breath, and breath a vapour is : 65 

Then thou, fair sun, which on my earth dost shine, 

50. triumviry] Rowe (ed. 2); triumphery Qq, Ff 1, 2; triumphry Ff 3, 4; trium- 
virate Rowe (ed. 1). 56. slop] Theobald ; shop Qq, Ff ; shape Collier MS. 58. 
cannot] could not Passionate Pilgrim. 60. deserve] deserves Q 2. 63. earthly] 
earthy Ff 3, 4. 65. Vows are but breath] My vow was breath P. P. 66. 

which on my earth dost] that on this earth doth P. P. 



50. corner-cap] Was the college-cap 
or mortar-board ever three-cornered? 
In the Queen's Entertainment, 1591, 
Nereus is described as "having a cor- 
nerd-cappe on his curled heade," and 
the picture shows it to be square 
(Nichols' Progresses, iii. 101, no). The 
corner-cap is mentioned in New Cus- 
tom (Hazlitt's Dodsley, iii. 11), ante 1573, 
cited in New Eng. Diet. And in 
Nashe's Martins Months Minde (Gros- 
art, ii. 181), 1589: "neither can he 
well finde fault with the corner cap ; 
that weareth the furd night cappe on 
his head as I did." In Middleton's 
Family of Love, iv. i., it refers again to 
the bishop's mitre. Furness quotes 
from Stubbes' Anatomie of Abuses (New 
Shakes. Soc. p. 69), 1583 : " Cappes 
with three homes, three corners I 
should saie, like the forked cappes of 
Popishe Priestes." This irreverent 
mention recalls the passage above, 
" saved by merit " (iv. i. 21). See 
next note. Lyly, in Sapho and Phao, 
1. iii. (1584), has : " a square die in 
a page's pocket, is as decent as 



a square cap on a graduate's head." 
The reference must be to canonical 
wear. 

51. The shape of . . . Tyburn] Re- 
ferences to the triangular shape of 
the gallows are abundant, and cuts 
of this form of gibbet are frequent, as 
in Holinshed's Chronicle (Halliwell). 
The " tripple tree " is a name for the 
gallows in Harman's Caveat. Others 
were — three trees, tripple trestle, ride 
the three-legged mare, the three foote 
crosse (Chettle) ; three-cornered tree 
(N. Breton). Dekker has a parallel 
allusion : " Well, suppose the sessions 
past, our dreamer awake, and caried 
in a cart to have a corner of Doctor 
Stories cap " (Tests to make you Merrie 
[Grosart, ii. 309], 1607). Doctor Story 
was a " Romish canonical Doctor " 
who was hanged at Tyburn for high 
treason (1st June, 1571). His cap 
became proverbial. 

56. slop] large, loose trousers. 

57. Did not, etc.] This sonnet is in 
The Passionate Pilgrim. See note 
above, iv. ii. 98. 



SC. III.] 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 



89 



Exhalest this vapour-vow ; in thee it is : 
If broken, then it is no fault of mine: 
If by me broke, what fool is not so wise 
To lose an oath to win a paradise ? 70 

Biron. This is the liver vein, which makes flesh a deity ; 
A green goose a goddess ; pure, pure idolatry. 
God amend us, God amend ! we are much out o' the way. 
Long. By whom shall I send this ? — Company ! stay. 

[Steps aside. 

Biron. All hid, all hid ; an old infant play. 75 

Like a demi-god here sit I in the sky, 
And wretched fools' secrets heedfully o'er-eye. 
More sacks to the mill ! O heavens ! I have my wish : 

Enter DUMAIN, with a paper. 

Dumain transform'd : four woodcocks in a dish ! 
Dum. O most divine Kate ! 80 

67. Exhalest] Exhale P. P. 70. lose] break P. P. 72. idolatry] ydotarie 
Q 1. Enter . . . paper] Dyce. 



67. Exhalest] Exhale, " of the sun 
drawing up vapours and thus causing 
meteors " (Schmidt), is used several 
times by Shakespeare, as in Lucrece, 
77g ; 1 Henry IV. v f i. 19 ; Romeo and 
Juliet, in. v. 13. To absorb. So in 
The Troublesome Raigne of King John 

• (Hazlitt's Shakes. Lib. p. 301) : " And 
when their vertue is exhaled drie, I '11 
hang them." 

71. liver vein] vein or style of love. 
The liver was held to be the seat of 
passionate love. " In Aprile and May, 
the liuer veine must be lette bloudde " 
(Paynel, Salarnes Regim., 1538 [New 
Eng. Diet.]). See The Merry Wives of 
Windsor, 11. i. 121 ; Othello, iv. iii. 93 
(Arden edd.). Dr. Dowden sends me 
the following : M But when the whole 
body aboundeth with melancholike 
bloud, it is best to begin the cure with 
letting of bloud, and you must cut the 
liver vaine on the arme" (Philip Bar- 
rough, The Method of Physick, lib. i. 
ch. xxviii. p. 46 [1590]). 

72. green goose] See note 1. i. 97. 
There is here an additional reference 
to the liver or giblets. 

73. out 0' the way] gone wrong. 
Compare Othello, 1. iii. 365. 

75. All hid] " Cline-mucette : The 
game called Hodman-blind ; Harry- 
racket ; or are you all-hid " (Cotgrave, 



161 1). This was one of Les jeux de 
Gargantua (Rabelais, i. 22), translated 
by Urquhart : " Hide and Seek or are 
you all hid." It is mentioned in Jon- 
son's Epicene, iv. ii. : M Truewit [binds 
his eyes]. Come, sir [leads him for- 
ward]. All hid, Sir John ! " Truewit 
is here master of the ceremonies and 
arranging a sport for others to play at. 
Biron is in the same position of super- 
visor. Steevens quotes from Dekker's 
Satiromastix, where the signal is used 
of the game Bo-peep. 

78. More sacks to the mill] plenty of 
drudgery to do ; lots more to come. A 
proverbial expression. Compare Skel- 
ton, Why Come Ye not to Courte ? 
(Dyce, ii. 30) : " Good reason and 
good skyll, They may garlycke pyll, 
Cary sackes to the my 11, Or pescoddes 
they may shyll, Or elles go rost a 
stone : Ther is no man but one That 
hathe the strokes alone" ; and Nashe, 
PasquiVs Apologie (Grosart, i. 235), 
1590 : " To the next, to the next, 
more sacks to the Myll." 

79. woodcocks] simpletons. See note 
at "snipe," Othello, 1. iii. 391 (Arden 
edition, p. 60). The expression was 
used very commonly of a fool. Com- 
pare Chapman's May Day (Pearson, ii. 
399) : " shee must have better skill in 
bakt meats then I, that can discerne a 



90 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



[ACT IV. 



Biron. O most profane coxcomb ! 

Dum. By heaven, the wonder of a mortal eye ! 

Biron. By earth, she is not, corporal ; there you lie. 

Dum. Her amber hairs for foul have amber quoted. 

Biron. An amber-coloured raven was well noted. 

Dum. As upright as the cedar. 

Biron. Stoop, I say; 

Her shoulder is with child. 
Dum. As fair as day. 

Biron. Ay, as some days ; but then no sun must shine. 
Dum. O ! that I had my wish. 
Long. And I had mine ! 

King. And [I] mine too, good Lord ! 
Biron. Amen, so I had mine. Is not that a good word ? 
Dum. I would forget her ; but a fever she 

Reigns in my blood, and will remember'd be. 
Biron. A fever in your blood ! why, then incision 

Would let her out in saucers : sweet misprision ! 

82. of] Ff, Q 2 ; in Q 1. 83. not, corporal] but corporal Theobald. 

J] Johnson ; omitted in Qq, Ff. 



90 



90. 



woodcocke through the crust." " Wood- 
cock-pie " is often mentioned. See 
Grosart's Greene, xii. 18 (Groatsworth 
of Wit). 

83. she is not, corporal] A much- 
disputed passage. Many editors follow 
Theobald, " she is but corporal," using 
" corporal " in the sense of corporeal as 
elsewhere in Shakespeare. Biron, how- 
ever, has already applied the name 
{"corporal of his field," in. i. 178) to 
himself when he discovered he was in 
love. And why not now to Dumain ? 
Besides, Biron means to contradict 
Dumain emphatically ; it is Rosaline, not 
Kate, who is the wonder. Everything 
seems to me against the unlicensed 
alteration. Biron is quibbling as usual, 
and we may take which sense we please. 

85. raven] as a type of foul (fowl), in 
opposition to fair or amber. 

86. Stoop] Biron merely contradicts 
Dumain's " upright," concisely and 
ungrammatically. " Stoop " signified 
a bow or to bow. Compare Henry V. 
v. ii. 168 : " a straight back will stoop " ; 
and Nashe, The Unfortunate Traveller 
(Gfosart, v. 32) : " all feare you, love 
you, stoupe to you. Therefore, good sir, 
be rulde by mee, stoupe your fortune so 



low, as to," etc. Biron's word implies 
an injunction to Dumain to come down 
from his stately images. The ejacu- 
lation reminds one of the command to 
a camel, the type of a hunchback. 

87. shoulder . . . child] The worthy 
Thomas Fuller, M.D. (not Thomas 
Fuller, D.D., of The Worthies), has 
this vulgarism in his Gnomologia, No. 
2493. He had evidently the good sense 
to study Shakespeare when making his 
collection. See note above at " Ajax," 
line 6. 

91. Is not that a good word] is not 
that kind of me ? *• Good word " is 
commonly used meaning an expression 
of kindness in Shakespeare. 

94. incision] blood-letting. A favour- 
ite word with Shakespeare in this sense. 
Nashe speaks of a doctor's " incision- 
knife" (lancet) in The Unfortunate 
Traveller (Grosart, v. 154) ; and see 
Captain Smith (Arber, p. 74), 1607-9 : 
11 to scarifie or make incision, their best 
instruments are some splinted stone." 
I do not find this meaning dealt with 
in the New Eng. Diet. Craig refers to 
Cotgrave in v. Incisier. 

95. saucers] Furness quotes here from 
Halliwell : "The practise of bleeding 



SC. HI.] 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 



91 



Dum. Once more I '11 read the ode that I have writ. 
Biron. Once more I '11 mark how love can vary wit. 

Dum. [reads his sonnet] 

On a day, alack the day ! 

Love, whose month is ever May, 

Spied a blossom passing fair IOO 

Playing in the wanton air : 

Through the velvet leaves the wind, 

All unseen can passage find ; 

That the lover, sick to death, 

Wish'd himself the heaven's breath. 105 

Air, quoth he, thy cheeks may blow ; 

Air, would I might triumph so ! 

But alack ! my hand is sworn 

Ne'er to pluck thee from thy thorn : 

Vow, alack ! for youth unmeet, 1 1 

Youth so apt to pluck a sweet. 

Do not call it sin in me, 

That I am forsworn for thee ; 

Thou for whom Jove would swear 

Juno but an Ethiop were ; 1 1 5 

And deny himself for Jove, 

Turning mortal for thy love. 

[reads his sonnet] Qq, Ff. 99. month is ever May] Q i ; month was ever 

May England's Helicon; month is every May Ff, Q 2. 102. velvet leavss the] 
velvet, leaves the Qq, Ff 1, 2, 3 ; velvet leaves, the] F 4. 103. can] 'gan Theo- 
bald ; gan Passionate Pilgrim and England's Helicon. 104. lover] shepheard 
E. H. 105. Wish'd] Ff 2, 3, 4, P. P. ; Wish Qq, F 1. 108. alack] alas P. P. 
and E. H. is] hath ibid. 109. thorn] E. H., Rowe (ed. '2); throne Qq, 
Ff, P. P. 112, 113. Do . . . fA««J omitted in P. P. and E. H. 114. whom 
Jove] whom ev'n Jove Rowe (ed. 2) et seq. 



in fevers was very common in Shake- 
speare's time, and it was not unusual 
for the barber-chirurgions to exhibit 
their saucers with blood in them as 
signs of their profession. . . ." Amongst 
the MSS. of the Company of Barbers 
in London is the following order under 
the date 1606: "Item, it is ordeyned 
that no person usinge flebothomy or 
bloudlettinge within London . . . shall 
at any tyme hereafter set to open shewe 
any (of) his or their porrengers, saucers 
or measures with bloud, upon peyne to 
forfeyt," etc. These saucers seem to 
be of the rarest mention ; perhaps the 
custom of exhibiting them was short- 
lived. " Bleeding basin " was the ac- 
cepted name a little later for the vessel 
used to receive the blood. 

98. On a day, etc.] This poem is in 



The Passionate Pilgrim. See note 
above, iv. ii. 98. It is also in Eng- 
land's Helicon, 1600. There is a pretty 
little pastoral poem of twenty-six lines, 
by Nicholas Breton, in The Queen's 
Entertainment at the Earl of Hert- 
ford's, 1591 (Nichols' Progresses, iii. 
117), which bears a family likeness to 
this piece. It begins: " In the merrie 
moneth of May, In a morne by breake 
of day, Forth I walked," etc. And 
compare with these two the song in 
The Passionate Pilgrim, by Richard 
Barnfield (1595), beginning " As it fell 
upon a day, In the merrie month of 
May, Sitting in a pleasant shade," etc. 
(Globe Shakespeare, p. 1053). 

115. Ethiop] blackamoor; as a type 
of ugliness. See Much Ado About 
Nothing, v, iv. 38. Ben Jonson uses 



92 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 



[act IV. 



This will I send, and something else more plain, 
That shall express my true love's fasting pain. 

! would the king, Biron, and Longaville, 120 
Were lovers too. Ill, to example ill, 

Would from my forehead wipe a perjur'd note; 

For none offend where all alike do dote. 
Long, [advancing]. Dumain, thy love is far from charity, 

That in love's grief desir'st society : 12 

You may look pale, but I should blush, I know, 

To be o'erheard and taken napping so. 
King {advancing}. Come, sir, you blush; as his your case i 
such ; 

You chide at him, offending twice as much : 

You do not love Maria ! Longaville 1 3< 

Did never sonnet for her sake compile, 

Nor never lay his wreathed arms athwart 

His loving bosom to keep down his heart. 

1 have been closely shrouded in this bush, 
And mark'd you both, and for you both did blush. 135 
I heard your guilty rhymes, observ'd your fashion, 

Saw sighs reek from you, noted well your passion : 
Ay me ! says one ; O Jove ! the other cries ; 
One, her hairs were gold, crystal the other's eyes : 

119. fasting] fesV ring Theobald conjecture; lasting Capell. 127. o'er' 

heard] ore-hard Q i. 128. you blush] do, blush Capell conjecture; blush you 

Collier MS. ; your blush S. Walker conjecture. 130. Maria I] Maria? Qq, 

Ff 1, 2 ; Maria, Ff 3, 4; Maria; Cambridge. 139. One, her] One her Q 1; 

On her F 1, Q 2; Her Ff 2, 3, 4 ; One's S. Walker conjecture. 

this form as a noun. Nashe as an ad- 



jective. " It is a dowry, Methinks 
should make that sun-burnt proverb 
false, And wash the Mthiop white " 
(Webster, The White Devil). 

119. fasting] hungry, " hunger- 
starved," pain of abstinence. 

122. perjur'd note] See notes at 
"perjure" and "wearing papers," line 
45 above. 

125. grief desir'st society] Referring 
to the commonly used proverb, " Sola- 
men miseris socios habuisse dolores " ; 
or as Chaucer writes: " Men seyn, to 
wrecche is consolacioun, To have 
another felawe in his peyne." 

127. taken napping] Oliphant (New 
English) says this occurs in Bishop 
Pilkington's Sermotis (Parker Society), 
about 1560. Harington (Orlando 



Furioso, xxxix. 58) has " At last he said, 
as erst Sileno said, To those that took 
him napping in the cave." " Taken 
napping as Moss caught his mare " was 
a common version, arising out of the 
title of a ballad (1569, 1570), according 
to Hazlitt. See Cotgrave in v. Des- 
prouven. In Ebbsworth's notes to 
Westminster Drollery it appears that 
the mare was caught up a tree. How 
unlucky it is that the words are not 
addressed to Biron, where Capell placed 
him (line 19). 

132. wreathed arms] See in. i. 172, 
" folded arms," note ; and " arms 
crossed," in. i. 15. 

137. sighs reek from you] " love is a 
smoke made with the fume of sighs " 
(Romeo and Juliet, I. i. 196). 



:. hi.] 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



93 



You would for paradise break faith and troth ; [To Long.'] 
And Jove, for your love would infringe an oath. [To Dum.~\ 
What will Biron say when that he shall hear 
Faith infringed, which such zeal did swear ? 
How will he scorn ! how will he spend his wit ! 
How will he triumph, leap, and laugh at it ! 145 

For all the wealth that ever I did see, 
I would not have him know so much by me. 
Biron. Now step I forth to whip hypocrisy. [Advancing. 

Ah ! good my liege, I pray thee, pardon me : 
Good heart ! what grace hast thou, thus to reprove 1 50 
These worms for loving, that art most in love ? 
Your eyes do make no coaches ; in your tears 
There is no certain princess that appears : 
You '11 not be perjur'd, 'tis a hateful thing : 
Tush ! none but minstrels like of sonneting. 155 



140, 141. [To Long.] [To Dum.~\ Johnson. 143. Faith] Qq, F 1; A faith 

Ff 2, 3,4; Of faith, Faith so, Such faith, Faiths various conjectures. 143. zeal] 
a zeal F 2. 145. leap] geap Warburton. 146. /] eye Capell conjecture. 

148. [Advancing] Coming from his tree Capell. 152. coaches] Rowe (ed. 2), 

Pope et seq. ; couches Qq, Ff. coaches ; in] Hanmer ; coaches in Rowe (ed. 2). 



140. faith and troth] So in Lodge's 
Euphues Golden Legacie (Shakes. Lib. 
1875, p. 113), 1540 : " we know fewe 
subtilties, and litle eloquence for that 
we lightly account of flattery: onely 
faith and troth thats shepheards woo- 
ing." And in Nicholas Breton's In the 
Merrie Moneth of May (Nichols' Pro- 
gresses of Queen Elizabeth [1823], iii. 
117) : " Thus with many a pretie Oath, 
Yea and nay and faith and troth Such 
as silly shepheards use, When they will 
not love abuse" (1591). 

145. leap, and laugh at it] " That 
heavy Saturn laugh'd and leaped with 
him " (Sonnet xcviii.). " We should 
certainly read geap, i.e. jeer, ridicule" 
(Warburton). Warburton, who " wrote 
for Warburton and not for Shake- 
speare," meant "jape." Ben Jonson 
has " To sit and clap my hands, and 
laugh and leap, knocking my head 
against my roof with joy " (Every Man 
out of his Humour, i. 1). See below, 
v. ii. 291. 

147. by me] concerning me. Com- 
pare Merchant of Venice, 1. ii. 60 : 



" How say you by the French lord ? " ; 
and 1 Corinthians iv. 4. 

151. worms] Here applied to lovers, 
as in The Tempest, in. i. 31. Compare 
Lyly, Campaspe, v. 4 : " Two loving 
wormes " ; and Mother Bombie, ii. 2 : 
" the loving worme my daughter." 

152. coaches] Referring to the King's 
sonnet above, line 32. Rowe (ed. 2, 
1714) first corrected the misreading 
" couches," according to Furness, and 
was followed by Pope, etc. The same 
misprint occurs in Euphues Golden 
Legacie (by Lodge), 1590 (Shakes. Lib. 
1875, p. 131), where the text reads: 
" No sooner did Phoebus Henchman 
appeare in the skie, to give warning 
that his maisters horses should be 
trapt in his glorious couch." 

155. sonneting] For this contemptuous 
reference to " sonneting " see Two 
Gentlemen of Verona, in. ii. 68, and 
Romeo and Juliet, n. iv. 41-44. But a 
sonnet did not necessarily mean a true 
sonnet. See Twelfth Night, in. iv. 24. 
Shakespeare had no disrespect for 
sonnets later on. 






94 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST [act iv. 



But are you not asham'd ? nay, are you not, 
All three of you, to be thus much o'ershot ? 
You found his mote ; the king your mote did see ; 
But I a beam do find in each of three. 
O ! what a scene of foolery have I seen, 
Of sighs, of groans, of sorrow, and of teen ; 
O me ! with what strict patience have I sat, 
To see a king transformed to a gnat ; 



158. mote . . . mote] Rowe 
bald ; sot Johnson conjecture. 



l6o 



moth . . . moth Qq, Ff. 163. gnat] knot Theo- 



157. o'ershot] astray in your aim; 
gone wrong, as in " out of the way " 
above, line 73. Compare Julius Ccesar, 
in. ii. 155; and Ben Jonson, Silent 
Woman, iv. ii. : " You shall not over- 
shoot yourself to send him that word 
by me." See New Eng. Diet, [over- 
shoot) for a minute analysis of the 
general sense, "fall into error." 

158. mote] There is constant con- 
fusion between the words moth and 
mote. See Othello, 1. iii. 257 (and note, 
Arden edition). Apparently they were 
often used synonymously and spelt at 
haphazard. Compare King John, iv. 
i. 92. " Mote," in our sense, was spelt 
" moth," as it is twice in this line in the 
old editions ; and " moth " seems to have 
been pronounced " mote." R. G. 
White and Ellis agree that " Moth " (the 
name) was pronounced " Mote " ; but 
the probability is it was unfixed. There 
is here an undoubted allusion to the 
figure of the mote and the beam 
(Matthew vii. 3-5 ; Luke vi. 41, 42) ; 
cf. " festu (straw) or a litill mote " and 
" festu other a moV (Wyclif). The 
ancient saying "as thick as motes in 
the sun " helped to produce the con- 
fusion. 

161. teen] grief. A common word 
from Chaucer downwards, especially 
with rhymers, and hardly obsolete with 
them. See The Tempest, 1. ii. 64. In 
Romeo and Juliet, 1. iii. 13, it is used 
non-rhymingly for the sake of a " vile 
pun." 

163. gnat] an insignificant insect ; a 
" worm." The editors have searched 
for a further meaning here, and to 
assist them have imagined that the 
text needed alteration ; " knot," " sot," 
and " quat," having been proposed or 



adopted. But I think " gnat " is sug- 
gested by the moth above, and (like 
" coaches ") by the eye-beams that 
smote the King's cheek in his sonnet. 
The King is a gnat playing, like the 
other moths or motes, in the beams of 
love. Ben Jonson has the same ex- 
pression : " They that before, like 
gnats, played in his beams, And 
thronged to circumscribe him, now 
not seen " (Sejanus, v. 10 [1603]). 
There is no commoner simile from 
Chaucer downwards than " as thick as 
motes in the sun-beam." But it is the 
later emblem or proverb of the moth 
or gnat singeing in the flames that 
illuminates this passage. Whitney's 
emblem, In amore tormentum (edited by 
Greene, p. 219), 1586, gives the King's 
position : " Even as the gnattes, that 
flie into the blaze, Doe burne their 
wings and fall into the fire ; So, those 
too muche on gallant showes that gaze, 
Are captives caught and burne in their 
desire." See Merchant of Venice, 11. 
ix. 79-81. But where is the line to be 
drawn in the quibbling between moth 
and mote, beam of the sun and chip or 
fescue of wood ? It may not have 
been in Wyclif, but it is in the A.V. ; 
and as " Rabbi Zeal-of-the-land Busy, 
a Banbury man," says in his confusion : 
" that remains, as I may say, a beam, 
a very beam, not a beam of the sun, 
not a beam of the moon, nor a beam of 
the balance, neither a house-beam, nor 
a weaver's beam, but a beam in the 
eye, in the eye of the brethren, a very 
great beam, an exceeding great beam " 
(Ben Jonson, Bartholomew Fair, v. 
iii.). Heath said the King was a gnat 
because he sang sonnets, confirmed by 
Maione from Spenser's Faerie Queene, 



III.] 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



95 



To see great Hercules whipping a gig, 
And profound Solomon tuning a jig, 
And Nestor play at push-pin with the boys, 
And critic Timon laugh at idle toys ! 



165 



165. tuning] Ff, Q 2 ; to tune Q 1, Capell, Cambridge. 167. toys] toyles Q 2. 



ix., and " undoubtedly true " accord- 
lg to Monck Mason. " Had reason 
led to brutish beasts ? " 

164, 165, 166, 167. Hercules, Solo- 
ton, Nestor, Timon] Compare Webster, 
T hite Devil (Routledge, 1877, P- 4&) : 
Flamineo. Whither shall I go now ? 
Lucian thy ridiculous purgatory ! to 
ind Alexander the Great cobbling 
loes, Pompey tagging points, and 
Julius Caesar making hair-buttons ! 
Hannibal selling blacking and Augustus 
selling garlic," etc., etc. And see 
Rabelais, ii. 30. 

164. whipping a gig] whipping a top. 
See v. i. 61. Gabriel Harvey uses the 
word : " I may chance rattle him like 
a baby of parchment, or kneade him 
like a cake of dowe, or chearne him 
like a dish of butter, or girke him 
like a hobling gig" (New Letters 
[Grosart, i. 283]). " Whirligig " pre- 
serves this word. 

165. jig] A dance, or the music to it. 
See Greene, James the Fourth (ante 
1592) (Grosart, xiii. 209, 210) : " I have 
two sonnes, that with one Scottish 
gigge shall breake the necke of thy 
Antiques . . . gather uppe your legges 
and daunce me forthwith & gigge worth 
the sight." 

166. play at push-pin] more com- 
monly " put-pin." Halliwell quotes 
from the MS. play of Misogonus (ante 
1577) (Hazlitt) : " That can play at put- 
pin, Blow-poynte and near [ne'er] lin." 
[This reference is quoted, without 
acknowledgment, in Gomme's Tradi- 
tional Games, with the quotation mis- 
takenly ascribed to " Nash's Apologie, 
1593." There is a yet sillier jumble 
in this work, at " cross-questions," from 
a mistaken quotation from Nares.] 
In Nashe's Foure Letters Confuted 
(Grosart, ii. 243) it is again " put-pin " : 
" I will play at put-pinne with thee for 
all that thou art woorth." And also 
in Marston's Scourge of Villainy, 
Satire viii. : " Playing at put-pin, 
doting on some glass. . . . Toying with 



babies." Later, in Beaumont and 
Fletcher, in Massinger and in Herrick, 
it is " push-pin." Strutt says : " Push- 
pin is a very silly sport, being nothing 
more than simply pushing one pin 
across another" (Sports and Pastimes 
of the People of England, ed. Hone). 
This seems like Luettes or Spillikins. 
" Push-penny " is still played by blue- 
jackets on a small board, like shovel- 
board. 

167. critic] critical, censorious. 
" Sitting like a Looker on Of this 
worldes stage, doest note with critique 
pen The sharp dislikes of each con- 
dition " (Edmund Spenser to Gabriel 
Harvey ; " Dublin : this xviii. of July : 
1586 " [Grosart's Harvey, i. 253, 254]). 

critic Timon laugh at idle toys] 
Greene refers to Timon earlier : "Now 
hote now could, first as courteous as 
Traian, and then as currish as Tymon, 
one while a defender of lust, and an 
other time a contemner of love " 
(Tritameron [Grosart, iii. 79], 1584) ; 
and " Tymonlike to condemne those 
heavenlie creatures whose onlie sight 
is a sufficient salve against all hellish 
sorrowes " (Carde of Fancie [iv. 40], 
1587). See Plutarch's Life of Mark 
Anthony. Timon the misanthropist 
was a snarler at everything, and the 
force of this line would seem to be that 
he became as good-humoured and 
cheerful as a sportive kid. But " idle 
toys," or " toys of an idle head," had 
a definite sense of foolish mental or 
literary efforts. There is an interesting 
passage in Puttenham bearing on this. 
After he has written the "eight can- 
celled pages in Ben Jonson's copy " 
(Arber, pp. 115-124) concerning em- 
blems and anagrams, he says : " When 
I wrote of these devices, I smiled with 
my selfe, thinking that the readers 
would do so too, and many say that 
such trifles as these might well have 
been spared ... it is pitie mens heades 
should be fedde with such vanities . . . 
and not to fill and replenish a whole 






96 



LOVE'S LABOUR S LOST 



[act IV. 



Where lies thy grief? O ! tell me, good Dumain, 

And, gentle Longaville, where lies thy pain ? 

And Where my liege's? all about the breast: 170 

A candle, ho ! 
King. Too bitter is thy jest. 

Are we betray'd thus to thy over- view ? 
Biron. Not you by me, but I betray'd to you : 

I, that am honest; I, that hold it sin 

To break the vow 1 am engaged in ; 175 

I am betray'd, by keeping company 

With men like [you], men of inconstancy. 

When shall you see me write a thing in rhyme ? 

Or groan for Joan ? or spend a minute's time 

In pruning me? When shall you hear that I 180 

Will praise a hand, a foot, a face, an eye, 

A gait, a state, a brow, a breast, a waist, 

A leg, a limb ? — 

171. candle] Ff, Q 2 ; caudle Q 1, Rowe, Theobald, Johnson. 173. by me 

. . . to you] Qq, Ff ; by me . . . by you Theobald ; to me ... by you Capell. 
177. men like [you], men of inconstancy] Dyce (S. Walker conjecture) ; men like 
men of inconstancy Qq, F I : men like men of strange inconstancy Ff 2, 3, 4. 
179. Joan] Love Q 1 (Duke of Devonshire copy). 



world full of idle toyes." One step 
more and we find the smiling critic 
Puttenham becomes the laughing critic 
Timon ! At line 198 below Biron 
shows what he means by " a toy " ; his 
own sonnet to Rosaline is " a toy, my 
liege, a toy." Is it a mere coincidence 
again that in ten at least of the fourteen 
lines of iv. ii. 98-111 therein the name 
Rosaline appears anagrammatically, or 
by transposition, as Puttenham calls it ? 
Was Shakespeare having a gentle smile 
himself with Biron ? An adept at the 
Baconian theory will find the cryptic 
" I love Rosaline " abundantly. 

[171. caudle] occurs only once again 
in Shakespeare (in 2 Henry VI.), and 
there as well as here the Folios read 
candle. A warm, thin drink of gruel 
and ale or wine, with sugar, etc., given 
to women, children or sick people. 
Eggs might be used. " Any slop " 
(Halliwell). I let this note stand, but I 
read candle.] 

171. candle] I prefer the Folio read- 
ing. Biron draws near the others and 
pretends to search. A caudle for all 



three seems a far-fetched idea, whereas 
the candle is a natural touch. Plays 
were commonly acted in winter after- 
noons, and the call "a light" in the 
mouths of characters occurs very fre- 
quently. We have it in this play : " A 
light for Monsieur Judas! it grows 
dark, he may stumble" (v. ii. 621). 
And see line 266 below. 

177. men . . . inconstancy] Some re- 
markable exercises of ingenuity have 
found place here. Hanmer read " vane- 
like men of strange inconstancy, 1 ' 
Steevens "moon-like," Collier "men- 
like women of inconstancy ," and so on. 

179. Joan] See above, in. i. 196 
(note). 

180. pruning] preening, or proyning, 
as birds do their feathers; trimming. 
Ben Jonson has " prunes his mus- 
taccio," and "pruning his clothes," in 
Cynthia's Revels (Induction, and in. ii.), 
1600. 

182. state] an " act of standing " as 
opposed to gait (Steevens). A pose. 

brow] the countenance; as above 
at iv. i. 17, and often in Shakespeare. 



III.] 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



97 



ing. Soft! whither away so fast? 

A true man or a thief that gallops so? 
iiron, I post from love ; good lover, let me go. 



185 



<aq. 



Enter JAQUENETTA and COSTARD. 
God bless the king ! 



,ost 



What present hast thou there ? 
Some certain treason. 
ing. What makes treason here ? 

1st. Nay, it makes nothing, sir. 
ing. If it mar nothing neither, 

The treason and you go in peace away together. 
q. I beseech your grace, let this letter be read : 190 

Our parson misdoubts it ; 'twas treason, he said. 
ing. Biron, read it over. [Biron reads the letter. 

Where hadst thou it ? 
laq. Of Costard. 
'ing. Where hadst thou it ? 195 

st. Of Dun Adramadio, Dun Adramadio. 
'.ing. How now ! what is in you ? why dost thou tear it ? 
iron. A toy, my liege, a toy : your grace needs not fear it. 



189. away] omitted Ff 2, 3, 4. 
Ff 1, 2 ; mean Ff 3, 4. 



191. 'twas] it was Ff, Q 2. 197. is in] 



183. whither away so fast] This ex- 
ression occurs four times in Shake- 
speare. Compare King Lear (Shakes. 

Ab. 1875, p. 336), 1593 : " My honest 
riend, whither away so fast ? " 

184. true man] honest man. Very 
unonly set in opposition to a thief, 
in 1 Henry IV. 11. ii. 105, and 

laucer's Squire's Tale: "A true 
ight and a thief thinkest not one." 
Jashe has " One true man is stronger 
than two thieves" (Foure Letters Con- 
futed [Grosart, ii. 236]) ; and Heywood 
(ed. Sharman, p. 158), 1546 : " When 
thieves fall out true men come to their 
good." In The Famous Victories of 
Henry V. (Shakes. Lib. 1875, p. 329) 
occurs : " Theafe. It is not too late for 
true men to walke. [Dericke]. We 
know thee not to be a true man." 
See Measure for Measure, iv. ii. 44 
(Arden edition, note). 



186. present] writing, presentment. 
Compare As You Like It, I. ii. 132; 
and Ben Jonson, Cynthia's Revels, v. : 
" Be it known to all that profess court- 
ship, by these presents, that we" (per 
has literas presentes, legal). Very un- 
usual in the singular. 

188. makes . . . mar] " To make or 
mar " is a proverbial expression traced 
back to Lydgate and Udall's Erasmus 
in New Eng. Diet. This and its 
parallel, " mend or mar," were very 
common in Shakespeare's time. See 
Macbeth, II. Hi. 26; King Lear, 1. i. 
97, etc., etc. Tusser has it in Verses 
(1573) : " to disagree Is ventring all to 
make or mar " (Eng. Dial. Soc. p. 
204). 

191. misdoubts] suspects, mistrusts. 

198. toy] For the " toy " see iv. ii. 
98-111 ; and see note at " idle toys," 
line 167 above. 



I 



98 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST [act iv. 



205 



Long. It did move him to passion, and therefore let 's hear it. 
Dum. [gathers up the pieces]. It is Biron's writing, and here 
is his name. 200 

Biron. [To Costard.] Ah ! you whoreson loggerhead, you were 
born to do me shame. 

Guilty, my lord, guilty ! I confess, I confess. 
King. What? 

Biron. That you three fools lack'd me, fool, to make up the 
mess; 

He, he, and you, and you, my liege, and I, 

Are pick-purses in love, and we deserve to die. 

O ! dismiss this audience, and I shall tell you more. 
Dum. Now the number is even. 
Biron. True, true ; we are four 

Will these turtles be gone ? 
King. Hence, sirs ; away ! 

Cost. Walk aside the true folk, and let the traitors stay. 

[Exeunt Costard and Jaquenetta. 
Biron. Sweet lords, sweet lovers, O ! let us embrace. 

As true we are as flesh and blood can be : 

The sea will ebb and flow, heaven show his face ; 

Young blood doth not obey an old decree : 

We cannot cross the cause why we are born ; 

Therefore, of all hands must we be forsworn. 
King. What ! did these rent lines show some love of thine ? 



210 



215 



200. [gathers up the pieces] Capell. 213. show] shew Q 1 ; will shew Ff, Q 2. 
215. are] Ffi, 2, Q 2; were Q 1, Ff 3, 4. 



201. loggerhead] blockhead. The 
earliest example in New Eng. Diet. It 
is used again in 1 Henry IV. 11. iv. 4. 
Nashe makes an adjective of it : " This 
loggerhead Legend of lyes " (Have 
With You to Saffron Walden [Grosart, 
iii. 104], 1596). 

204. make up the mess] make up the 
party of four. "At great dinners and 
feasts the company was usually arranged 
into fours, which were called messes " 
(Nares), who gives plenty of examples 
of the common expression, as : " Foure 
makes a messe y and we have a messe 
of masters that must be coozened " 
(Lyly, Mother Bombie, 11. i.). See below, 



v. ii, 361, and 3 Henry VI. 1. iv. 73. 
A good example occurs in Lodge's 
Euphues Golden Legacie (Shakes. Lib. 
1875, p. 118), 1590 : " which Ganimede 
espying thinking hee [Saladyne] had 
had his Mistresse long inough at shrift, 
sayd : what, a match or no ? A match 
(quoth Aliena) or els it were an ill 
market. I am glad (quoth Ganimede), 
I wold Rosader were wel here to make 
up a messe.' 1 '' 

205. and you, and you] Both referring 
to "my liege." Reed omitted one 
" and you." 

216. of all hands] on every side. 



III.] 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 



99 



220 



225 



liron. Did they ? quoth you. Who sees the heavenly Rosa- 
line, 
That, like a rude and savage man of Inde, 
At the first opening of the gorgeous east, 
Bows not his vassal head, and strooken blind, 
Kisses the base ground with obedient breast ? 
What peremptory eagle-sighted eye 
Dares look upon the heaven of her brow, 
That is not blinded by her majesty ? 
King. What zeal, what fury hath inspir'd thee now ? 

tMy love, her mistress, is a gracious moon ; 
She an attending star, scarce seen a light. 
iron. My eyes are then no eyes, nor I Biron : 
O ! but for my love, day would turn to night. 
Of all complexions the cull'd sovereignty 
Do meet, as at a fair, in her fair cheek ; 
! 



218. quoth you] omitted Capell. 
4, Cambridge. 



230 



221. strooken] Qq, Ff 1, 2, 3; strucken 



219. man of Inde] Craig quotes from 
Ascham's Toxophilus (Arber, p. 212) : 
" The men of Inde had theyr bowes 
made of a rede." Inde was a common 
early name for India, abundantly illus- 
trated in New Eng. Diet. 

220. gorgeous east] Milton (Todd, ii. 
373) has this in the mundane sense 
(the Orient). Biron repeats this eastern 
adoration, to Rosaline, at v. ii. 201, 202. 

223. peremptory] " unawed, regard- 
less " (Schmidt). See King John, 11. 
i. 454 ; 1 Henry IV. 1. iii. 17, etc. Arro- 
gant, over -confident. 

eagle-sighted] A reference to the 
eagle's supposed power, alone of all 
birds, of looking at the sun. It is 
mentioned in Chaucer's Assembly of 
Foules. See Pliny, 1. xxvii. (Holland's 
translation, p. 160) ; and Greene, Mena- 
phon (Grosart, vi. 105), 1589 : M Pardon 
me, faire shepheardesse, ... for I can- 
not chuse, being Eagle-sighted, but 
gaze on the Sunne the first time I see 
it " ; and in his Mourning Garment (ix. 
157) : " I am not Eagle-sighted, and 
therefore feare to flie too nigh the 
Sunne." 

227, 228. moon . . . scarce seen a 
light] Compare Gesta Grayorum, 1594 
(Nichols, iii. 320) : " at the Royal 
Presence of her Majesty, it appeared 



I 



as an obscured shadow : in this, not 
unlike unto the Morning-star, which 
looketh very cheerfully on the world, so 
long as the Sun looketh not on it." It 
is ascribed to Horace in Entertainment 
of Ambassador to Landgrave of Hesse, 
1596 : " There was the Lady Anna 
. . . and many that waited on the 
Princess. And she herselfe, as Horace 
says of Julium Sidus, stood by her bed- 
side, velut inter ignes luna minores " 
(Nichols' Progresses, iii. 388-g). 

228. attending star\ Staunton says : 
" It was a prevailing notion formerly 
that the moon had an attending star. 
. . . Sir Richard Hawkins, in his 
Observations on a Voyage to the South 
Seas in 1593, remarks : " Some I have 
heard say, and others write, that there 
is a starre which never separateth itself 
from the moon, but a small distance." 
Lodge mentions Hawkins's star in 
Euphues Golden Legacie (Shakes. Lib. 
1875, p. 79), 1590: " for as the Moone 
never goes without the starre Luni- 
sequa, so a lover never goeth without 
the unrest of his thoughts." I doubt 
if Shakespeare refers to it here. He is 
not definite enough. See v. ii 205. 

230, 236, 243, 247, 280, 284, 286, etc. 
O] For Biron's ejaculation " O ! " see 
above, m. i. 164, note. 



100 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST [act iv. 



Where several worthies make one dignity, 

Where nothing wants that want itself doth seek. 

Lend me the flourish of all gentle tongues, — 235 

^ Fie, painted rhetoric ! O ! she needs it not : 

To things of sale a seller's praise belongs ; 

She passes praise ; then praise too short doth blot 

A wither'd hermit, five-score winters worn, 

Might shake off fifty, looking in her eye : 240 

Beauty doth varnish age, as if new-born, 

And gives the crutch the cradle's infancy. 

O ! 'tis the sun that maketh all things shine. 
King. By heaven, thy love is black as ebony. 
Biron. Is ebony like her ? O wood divine ! 245 

A wife of such wood were felicity. 

O ! who can give an oath ? where is a book ? 

That I may swear beauty doth beauty lack, 

If that she learn not of her eye to look : 

No face is fair that is not full so black. 250 

King. O paradox ! Black is the badge of hell, 

The hue of dungeons and the school of night ; 

And beauty's crest becomes the heavens well. 

246. wood] Rowe (ed. 1) ; word Qq, Ff. 252. school] Qq, Ff; scowl Theo- 

bald ; stole Hanmer ; soul, soil, shade, scroll, shroud, seal and suit various con- 
jectures and lections. 



233. worthies] excellencies, things of 
worth. See Two Gentlemen of Verona, 
11. iv. 166. 

235, 236. flourish . . . rhetoric] " let- 
ting pass the flowers of rhetoric " 
occurs in Sidney's Arcadia, bk. v. 

236. Fie] Gascoigne says, in The 
Complaint of Philomene (Arber, p. in), 
1576 : " Hir second note is fye, In 
Greeke and Latin phy, In english fy 
and every toong, That ever yet read I." 

painted rhetoric] Compare Lodge, 
Euphues Golden Legacie (Shakes. Lib. 
1875, p. 18) : " A painted tongue may 
shroud a subtle heart " ; and R. Ed- 
wards, Damon and Pithias (Hazlitt's 
Dodsley, iv. 88), ante 1566: " these 
need no subtle sleight, No painted 
speech the matter to convey." 

242. crutch . . . cradle] " From cradle 
to crutch, from infancy to old age," was 
a symbolical expression used several 
times by Greene: "from the cradle to 
the crouch, and from the crouch had 
one legge in the grave " (Penelope's Web 
[Grosart, v. 224], 1587). He has it later 



in A Looking-Glass for London. In 
other places the antithesis is between 
"cradle " and " saddle." 

244. black as ebony] Compare Hak- 
luyt's Voyages (ed. 181 1, iii. 502), 
Francis de Ulloa : "a conie ... as 
blacke as heben-wood " (1540). 

252. school of night] " * Night ' is fre- 
quently used in Shakespeare as em- 
blematic ' of ugliness,' or ' of sorrow,' 
and the ' nurse of crime ' " (Schmidt). 
It is not a great stretch of imagination 
to give a suitable meaning to the words, 
especially as we have " school " in this 
play (v. ii. 71) in the sense of " learn- 
ing " ; and elsewhere in the common 
sense of a system of doctrine. The 
teachings of night are as black as night 
itself. Schools were not beloved in- 
stitutions at this time ; and if we add to 
this the augmented objectionableness 
of a night-school, we get a good type 
of ugliness. But if this note does not 
satisfy the reader, let him turn to the 
weedy wilderness of words collected by 
Furness at the passage. 



sc. hi] loves labour S LOST 101 

Biron. Devils soonest tempt, resembling spirits of light. 

! if in black my lady's brows be deck'd, 255 
It mourns that painting and usurping hair 
Should ravish doters with a false aspect ; 
And therefore is she born to make black fair. 
Her favour turns the fashion of the days, 
For native blood is counted painting now : 260 
And therefore red, that would avoid dispraise, 
Paints itself black, to imitate her brow. 

Dum. To look like her are chimney-sweepers black. 

Long. And since her time are colliers counted bright. 

King. And Ethiops of their sweet complexion crack. 265 

Dum. Dark needs no candles now, for dark is light. 

Biron. Your mistresses dare never come in rain, 

For fear their colours should be wash'd away. 
King. 'Twere good, yours did ; for, sir, to tell you plain, 

1 '11 find a fairer face not wash'd to-day. 270 
Biron. I '11 prove her fair, or talk till doomsday here. 

King. No devil will fright thee then so much as she. 
Dum. I never knew man hold vile stuff so dear. 
Long. Look, here 's thy love : my foot and her face see. 

[Showing his shoe. 
Biron. O ! if the streets were paved with thine eyes, 275 

Her feet were much too dainty for such tread. 
Dum. O vile ! then, as she goes, what upward lies 

The street should see as she walk'd overhead. 

253. crest] dress, crete, craye, cresset and best various conjectures and lections. 
256. and] F 4 ; omitted Qq, F 1 ; an Ff 2, 3. 263. black] blake Q 1. 265. 
sweet] swart anonymous conjecture. crack] Q 2, Ff 3, 4; crake Q 1, Ff 1, 2. 
268. their] her Q 2. 274. [Showing his shoe] Johnson, Steevens, Craig, etc. 

253. beauty's crest] i.e. lightness or sake you call them beautiful whom 
brightness, as shown by the words you know blacke " (Campaspe, iv. 2 
"spirits of light" in the next line. [1584]). 

" Blackness," "hell" and "night" stand 265. crack] boast. 

for ugliness, as "brightness," "heaven" 274. [Showing his shoe] Furness 

and " light " stand for beauty. writes : " It is almost humiliating to 

254. Devils . . . spirits of light] have to record that a large majority 
Compare 2 Corinthians xi. 14 ; and of editors, following Johnson, have 
Measure for Measure, 11. iv. 17 (note, deemed it necessary to add a stage- 
Arden edition). direction here." I like it. "Shining 

2 5 8 > 2 59- black ... turns the fashion] shoes" were hardly yet become the 

Lyly has the same thought : " such a characteristic wear of the artisan and 

common thing it is amongst you to prentice. See Jonson's Every Man in 

commend, that oftentimes for fashion's his Humour. 



102 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 



[act 



IV. 



King. But what of this ? Are we not all in love ? 

Biron. O ! nothing so sure ; and thereby all forsworn. 280 

King. Then leave this chat ; and, good Biron, now prove 

Our loving lawful, and our faith not torn. 
Dum. Ay, marry, there ; some flattery for this evil. 
Long. O ! some authority how to proceed ; 

Some tricks, some quillets, how to cheat the devil. 285 
Dum. Some salve for perjury. 
Biron. O ! 'tis more than need. 

Have at you then, affection's men-at-arms : 

Consider what you first did swear unto, 

To fast, to study, and to see no woman ; 

Flat treason 'gainst the kingly state of youth. 290 

Say, can you fast ? your stomachs are too young, 

And abstinence engenders maladies. 

And where that you have vow'd to study, lords, 
1 In that each of you have forsworn his book, 

Can you still dream and pore and thereon look ? 295 

For when would you, my lord, or you, or you, 

Have found the ground of study's excellence 

Without the beauty of a woman's face ? 

From women's eyes this doctrine I derive : 

They are the ground, the books, the academes, 300 



280. O I nothing] Qq, F 1 ; Nothing Ff 2, 3, 4, Cambridge. 
tis Qq, Ff 2 ; *fu Cambridge. 



286. 01 'tis] 



285. quillets] subtleties. Compare 2 
Henry VI. in. i. 261 : " do not stand 
on quillets how to slay him : Be it by 
gins, by snares, by subtlety, sleeping 
or waking, 'tis no matter how." The use 
in the text is the earliest in New Eng. 
Diet. Origin obscure, but perhaps a 
variant of " quiddit." Gabriel Harvey 
has " quillity " earlier. Compare also 
Holland's Plinie, xi. 3 (1601) : " to 
judge and determine of these doubtful 
quillets and their causes." Shakespeare 
uses the word several times later. 

289. To fast . . . no woman] So Lucio 
says in Measure for Measure, 1. iv. 60, 
61 : " Blunt his natural edge with 
profits of the mind, study and fast." 

296-301. For when would you . . . 
true Promethean fire] Dyce omits these 



lines, also lines 309-316, on account of 
their repetition either verbally or in sub- 
stance elsewhere in the speech. Capell 
noticed this, and attributed it to the 
intermingling of two different drafts of 
MSS. The editors of the Cambridge 
Shakespeare agree with this, " and 
that the author meant to cancel a 
portion of it," but very properly they 
retained the whole ; all of it being un- 
doubtedly Shakespeare's. They go on : 
" The error is indeed a very instructive 
one. It goes to prove that the first 
Quarto was printed from the author's 
original MS." — and that he revised 
two proofs. See note to v. ii. 806- 
811. 

297. ground] base, foundation. 

300. academes] See note, 1. i. 13. 



>C. III.] 



LOVE'S LABOUR S LOST 



103 



From whence doth spring the true Promethean fire. 
Why, universal plodding poisons up 
The nimble spirits in the arteries, 
As motion and long-during action tires 
The sinewy vigour of the traveller. 305 

Now, for not looking on a woman's face, 
You have in that forsworn the use of eyes, 
And study too, the causer of your vow ; 
For where is any author in the world 
Teaches such beauty as a woman's eye? 310 

Learning is but an adjunct to ourself, 
And where we are our learning likewise is : 
Then when ourselves we see in ladies' eyes, 
Do we not likewise see our learning there ? 
O ! we have made a vow to study, lords, 315 

And in that vow we have forsworn our books : 
For when would you, my liege, or you, or you, h 
In leaden contemplation have found out 
Such fiery numbers as the prompting eyes 
Of beauty's tutors have enrich'd you with ? 320 

Other slow arts entirely keep the brain, 
And therefore, finding barren practisers, 
Scarce show a harvest of their heavy toil ; 
— • But love, first learned in a lady's eyes, 

Lives not alone immured in the brain, 325 

But, with the motion of all elements, 

302. poisons] poysons Qq, Ff. ; prisons Theobald etseq. 305. sinewy] sinnowy 
Qq, Ff. 310. beauty] duty Warburton; leaving Collier MS. 313, 314. eyes, 
Do] Ff 2, 3, 4 ; eyes, With ourselves. Do]Qq, Fi (insertion of half line). 

have altered his spelling — it is too 
spruce, too peregrinate, as I may call 
it.] There is much to be said on both 



301. Promethean fire] Chapman has 
this expression about the same date : 
" Therefore Promethean poets with the 
coals Of their most genial, more than 
human souls, In living verse created 
men like these " (The Shadow of Night, 
1594). Chapman has a note on the word. 

302. poisons up] Dyce pointed out that led to the quaint misprint in Marlowe's 
le Folio misprints poison 1 d for prison' d Tamburlaine (parts 1. and 11. i.) : " His 

arms and fingers long and snowy." The 
old spelling is found in Jonson's Every 
Man out of His Humour, Florio's 
Montaigne's Essays, etc. 

319. fiery numbers] Referring to the 
sonnets and " toys " of the lovers. 

321. keep] inhabit, remain in. 



the 

in 1 Henry VI. v. iv. 120. * Halli- 
well and Furnivall retain " poisons." 
Furnivall says : " You don't want the 
metaphor of nimble spirits struggling 
to burst their prison : you want them 
dulled and numbed by poison " (Intro- 
duction to Grigg's Facsimile, p. v.). [I 



sides, but it is better to adhere to the 
originals. 

305. sinewy] The old spelling " sin- 
nowy " is of interest here, since it has 



104 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



[ACT IV. 



Courses as swift as thought in every power, 
And gives to every power a double power, 
Above their functions and their offices. 
It adds a precious seeing to the eye ; 
A lover's eyes will gaze an eagle blind ; 
-—A lover's ear will hear the lowest sound, 
, When the suspicious head of theft is stopp'd: 
Love's feeling is more soft and sensible 
Than are the tender horns of cockled snails : 
Love's tongue proves dainty Bacchus gross in taste. 
For valour, is not Love a Hercules, 
Still climbing trees in the Hesperides ? 
Subtle as Sphinx ; as sweet and musical 



330 



335 



336. dainty Bacchus] Ff 2, 3, 4; dainty, Bacchus Qq, F I. 



333. suspicious head of theft] Farmer 
says " the head suspicious of theft," 
supporting this by " to watch like one 
that fears robbing," in Two Gentlemen 
of Verona, 11. i. 26. From which slight 
and accidental assistance Furness de- 
clares that this interpretation carries 
conviction. The obvious meaning is 
surely the correct one. Compare 
3 Henry VI. v. vi. 11-12 : " Suspicion 
always haunts the guilty mind : the 
thief doth fear each bush an officer." 
Nashe implies that the thought was 
proverbial : " We carelesse of these 
mischances, helde on our flight, and 
saw no man come after us but we 
thought had pursued us. A theefe 
they say mistakes everie bush for a true 
man ; the winde ratled not in anie bush 
by the way as I rode but I straight 
drew my rapier " (The Unfortunate 
Traveller [Grosart, v. 173], 1594). It 
occurs again in Time's Whistle, Satire 
7, 3485 (1615). This supersensitive- 
ness in the thiefs head meets its 
parallel in the horns of the cockled 
snail two lines later. 

335. cockled] " inshell'd like the fish 
called a cockle " (Steevens). I incline 
rather to the meaning puckered, folded, 
wrinkled. See the figure of " The 
Snail Mount " in Nichols, iii. 101, of 
date 1591, where the shell is forgotten 
when the horns are prominent. 

338. Hesperides] Frequently used as 
the name of the garden in which the 



golden apples grew, watched by the 
daughters of Hesperus, the Hesperides 
of Grecian mythology. Peter Martyr's 
Decades of the Ocean (1516) (translated 
by M. Lok, Hakluyt [1587], ed. 1812, 
vol. v. p. 206) identifies them with the 
Fortunate Isles : " the Islands of 
Hesparides, now called Caboverde." 
Greene frequently refers to these 
gardens, earliest in Perymedes the 
Blacksmith, 1588 (Grosart, vi. 61) : 
"resembling the frute in the Garden 
Hesperades, which glistering like gold, 
toucht presently turned to Ashes." 
One of Greene's characteristic jumbles. 
Other references from his writings 
(later than this play) are cited by 
Malone from his Friar Bacon and 
Friar Bungay (Grosart, p. 59), and by 
Furness from his Orlando Furioso 
(Grosart, p. 120) : " the garden cald 
Hesperides " and " the plot Hesperi- 
des." Sir Philip Sidney calls the gar- 
dens " Hesperian " : " Sweet garden 
nymph ! which keeps the cherry tree, 
Whose fruit doth far th' Hesperian 
taste surpass " (Astrophel and Stella 
[Arber's Eng. Garner, i. 544], circa 
1581-1584). Gabriel Harvey (Grosart, 
ii. 258) speaks of " the Occidental Is- 
lands of the Ocean, called Hesperides " 
(1592). See also Greene's Tullies Love 
(Grosart, vii. 147). 

339. Subtle as Sphinx] " and if I 
coulde have found a Sphinx to have 
expounded ther ridel " (Letters of 



sc. in] LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 



105 



As bright Apollo's lute, strung with his hair ; 340 

And when Love speaks, the voice of all the gods 

Make heaven drowsy with the harmony. 

Never durst poet touch a pen to write 

Until his ink were temper'd with Love's sighs ; 

O ! then his lines would ravish savage ears, 345 

And plant in tyrants mild humility. 



341, 342. the voice . . . heaven} the voice makes all the gods Of heaven Farmer 
conjecture. 346. humility} humanity Mrs. Griffith, Walker, Dyce. 

Elizabeth to James (Camden Soc. p. 
173), ante 1586. The passage in the 
text is the earliest cited in this sense 



in the Stanford Dictionary. 

340. Apollo's . . . hair] Apollo's hair 
is often mentioned by Greene, not as 
lute-strings, but as a type of sunshiny 
loveliness. In Menaphon (Grosart, 
vi. 126), 1587, he writes : " Apollo, 
when my Mistres first was borne, Cut 
off his lockes and left them on her 
head, And said : I plant these wires 
in Naturis scorne, Whose beauties 
shall appeare when Time is dead." 
And in Tullies Love, 1569 (Grosart, 
vii. 105) : " His haire was like the 
shine of Apollo, when shaking his 
glorious tresses, he makes the world 
beauteous." And in his Never Too Late 
(viii. 178) : " like Apollo's locks Me- 
thought appear'd the tramels of her 
haire." Steevens quotes from How a 
Man may Chuse a Good Wife from a 
Bad (Hazlitt's Dodsley, ix. 77), 1602 : 
" Hath he not torn those gold wires 
from your head, Wherewith Apollo 
would have strung his harp, And kept 
them to play music to the gods ? " 
This seems to be a somewhat inco- 
herent echo of the passage in the text. 
Lyly makes Pan say to Apollo : " Tell 
mee, Apollo, is there any instrument 
so sweete to play on as one's mis- 
tresse ? Had thy lute beene of laurell 
and the strings of Daphne's haire thy 
tunes might have been compared to 
my notes " (Mydas, iv. 1 [1592]). 

341, 342. Love speaks . . . Make 
heaven drowsy] Tyrwhitt remarked 
about a century and a half ago, that 
" Few passages have been more can- 
vassed than this " ; and a long list 
of subsequent comments is given by 
Furness. Tyrwhitt alters the point- 
ing ; Farmer transposes words ; War- 
burton changes them (Mark I for 



Makes), which Heath reprints, saying 
Warburton's note is " one of the com- 
pletest pieces of nonsense extant." 
Furness finishes with Knight's words as 
the most satisfactory. He says : " The 
meaning appears to us so clear amidst 
the blaze of poetic beauty, that an 
explanation is hardly wanted. When 
love speaks, the responsive harmony 
of the voice of all the gods makes 
heaven drowsy." Compare Shirley's 
Love Tricks, iv. 2 (about 1625) : " The 
tongue that's able to rock Heaven 
asleep And make the music of the 
spheres stand still." Gifford in his 
edition of Shirley says this explains 
the passage in Love's Labour 's Lost. 
It is a good parallel. It occurs again 
in Shirley in his Witty Fair One (1628), 
in. ii. : " if your ear shall once a 
heavenly music hear, That, that, is 
she, Oh take her to ye, None can . . . 
rock heaven asleep but she." The 
power of harmony to make the hearers 
drowsy is commonly referred to by 
Shakespeare. All the gods are mouth- 
pieces of the musical eloquence of 
Love. The power of " omnipotent 
Love " over all the gods is otherwise 
illustrated in Merry Wives of Windsor, 
v. v. 

346. humility] Halliwell quotes 
Huloet's Abecedarium, 1552 : " Humili- 
tie is a gentlenes of the mynde, or a 
gentle patience withoute all angre or 
wrathe," as a protest against the neces- 
sity of adopting " humanity," as several 
editors took upon themselves to do. 
Schmidt gives the sense of " benevol- 
ence, kindness, humanity," to humility ; 
an interpretation not recognised by 
New Eng. Diet. In this dispute of 
words in Furness the passage is almost 
lost sight of. Humility in the sense 
of meekness is very reasonably placed 
in opposition to the pride that charac- 



106 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST [act iv. 



From women's eyes this doctrine I derive : 
They sparkle still the right Promethean fire ; 
They are the books, the arts, the academes, 
That show, contain, and nourish all the world ; 350 

Else none at all in aught proves excellent. 
Then fools you were these women to forswear, 
Or, keeping what is sworn, you will prove fools. 
I For wisdom's sake, a word that all men love, 
Or for love's sake, a word that loves all men, 355 

Or for men's sake, the authors of these women, 
Or women's sake, by whom we men are men, 
Let us once lose our oaths to find ourselves, 
Or else we lose ourselves to keep our oaths. 
It is religion to be thus forsworn ; 360 

For charity itself fulfils the law ; 
And who can sever love from charity ? 

King. Saint Cupid, then ! and, soldiers, to the field ! 

Biron. Advance your standards, and upon them, lords ! 

Pell-mell, down with them ! but be first advis'd, 365 

In conflict that you get the sun of them. 

Long. Now to plain-dealing ; lay these glozes by : 
Shall we resolve to woo these girls of France ? 

355. loves] moves Hanmer ; leads Mason ; joyes Heath ; learns Bailey. 356. 
authors'] Capell ; author Qq, Ff. 



terises a tyrant. ** This is 'Ercles 
vein, a tyrant's vein ; a lover's is more 
condoling." 

347-349. From women's eyes . . . 
academes'] See notes above, lines 296- 
301. 

355. love ... a word that loves all 
men] love that impresses itself, or in- 
spires its being into all men — makes 
them lovers. The verb seems to be 
given an unique sense. Compare the 
old " to meat," to supply with meat ; 
and Raleigh's use of the verb " scorn " 
in his earliest known verses, prefixed to 
Gascoigne's Steel Glas (1576): "this 
medicine may sufFyse, To scorne the 
rest and seke to please the wise." 
" Scorn " seems perforce to mean 
here " to make subject to scorn." 
Capell explained it " is a friend to," 
or, as Malone put it, M is pleasing 
to," used as the verb " like " ; but 



that seems too mild a sense for the 
antithesis. 

361. charity . . . law] See Romans 
xiii. 8, etc. 

365. Pell-mell] confusedly, with 
violence. Greene has " least love 
entering pell mell with war " (Tullies 
Love [Grosart, vii. 135]). 

367. plain-dealing] Compare New 
Custom (Hazlitt's Dodsley, iii. 14), 
r 573 : " F° r then plain-dealing bare 
away the prize." See also Gascoigne's 
Steel Glas (Arber, p. 50), 1576 ; and 
Nichols' Progresses, iii. 136 (1592) : 
" using piaine dealinge, once counted 
a jewell, nowe beggery." 

glozes] pretences. A favourite 
word with Greene, not used again in 
Shakespeare. " Thought by the glose 
of his painted show to win the sub- 
stance of her perfect mind " (Greene, 
Mamillia [Grosart, ii. 20], 1583). 



- 



III.] 



LOVES LABOUR S LOST 



107 



King. And win them too : therefore let us devise 

Some entertainment for them in their tents. 370 

Biron. First, from the park let us conduct them thither ; 
Then homeward every man attach the hand 
Of his fair mistress : in the afternoon 
We will with some strange pastime solace them, 
Such as the shortness of the time can shape ; 375 

For revels, dances, masks, and merry hours, 
Forerun fair Love, strewing her way with flowers. 

King. Away, away ! no time shall be omitted, 
That will be time, and may by us be fitted. 

Biron. A lions I allons ! Sow'd cockle reap'd no corn ; 380 

And justice always whirls in equal measure : 
Light wenches may prove plagues to men forsworn ; 
If so, our copper buys no better treasure. 

[Exeunt. 

377. her] his Capell conjecture. 379. be time] Qq, Ff; betime Rowe (ed. 2), 
Cambridge. 380. Allons I allons /] Theobald (Warburton) ; Alone, alone Qq, Ff. 



376. revels, dances, masks, and merry 
hours] This line is found in England's 
Parnassus, 1600. See Introduction. 
Taking this line in connection with 
the mask and dancing in v. ii., and 
the scene being Navarre, there is a 
passage of interest in Secret Court Me- 
moirs, Henri IV. of France and Navarre 
(Grolier Society, p. 77). After the in- 
terview at the Castle of St. Brix in 
December, 1586, which " produced 
nothing but new exasperations" (p. 
78), we read : " The rest of the winter 
passed in the two Courts in feasts 
and dances; for notwithstanding the 
miseries and troubles of the kingdom, 
Queen Catherine had introduced the 
custom of dancing in all places and 
at all feasts . . . after the example of 
the court, dances and masks reigned in 
all the realm." Compare here Sidney 
Lee in Gentleman's Magazine (1880). 

380. Allons I allons I] At the last 
words of Act ii. of The Merry Wives 
of Windsor, the Quarto of 1602 reads : 
" Alon, alon, alon." Nashe has the 
expression in Have With You to Saffron 
Walden (Grosart, iii. 363). It occurs 
also in Marston's What you Will, m. 
i. (" aloun, aloun ") ; and in Day's Par- 
liament of Bees, chap. iv. (" all oone"). 
See Arden edition of Merry Wives of 
Windsor ; also v. i. 143 (this play). 



cockle . . . corn] The cockle or corn 
cockle of the present day, excepting 
in proverbial or biblical senses, is the 
Lychnis Agrostemma, which is never 
an injurious weed. In Wyclif s Bible, 
and in some other editions later, in 
Matt. xiii. 25, cockel is used instead 
of tares or darnel. See also Skeat's 
Chaucer's Canterbury Tales (T. 14403) : 
"or springen [sprinkle] cokkel in our 
clene corn." Abundant references are 
to be found in New Eng. Diet. Tur- 
ner's early distinction of the two uses 
is not, however, referred to. He says : 
11 Lolium is named in greke Ara [Aera, 
correction), in english Darnel, in duch 
Kuweitze or Loleh, or dort in french. 
Some take cockel for lolio, but they 
are far decyved as I shall declare at 
large if God wil in my latin herbal. 
Darnel groweth amonge the corne and 
the corne goeth out of kynde into 
Darnel " {The Names of Herbes, 1548 
[English Dialect Soc. 1881]). Writers 
in general meant merely noisome weeds 
perhaps ; much as " quitch " is used 
collectively at the present day. Biron's 
note of warning here comes in rather 
inharmoniously after his magnificent 
address of loyalty to Love. What he 
says amounts to : " we are forsworn, we 
must look out for squalls, these girls may 
bring us the punishment we deserve." 






ACT V 



SCENE l.—TAe Same. 



Enter Holofernes, Sir Nathaniel, and Dull. 

Hoi. Satis quid sufficit. 

Nath. I praise God for you, sir : your reasons at dinner 
have been sharp and sententious ; pleasant without 
scurrility, witty without affection, audacious without 



i. quid] Qq, Ff; quod Rowe et seq. 
Ff2 >3 , 4- 

1. Satis quid sufficit] Correctly " satis 
est quod sufficit" according to some 
lists. Compare Lodge, Euphues Golden 
Legacie (Shakes. Lib. 1875, P« 5 X )> 
1590 : " Mistresse I have so much Latin, 
Satis est quod sufficit." It occurs also 
in A Twelfe Night Merriment (Nar- 
cissus), 1602 (ed. Miss Lee) : " It is a 
most condolent tragedye wee shall 
move. Porter. Dictum puta ; satis 
est quod suffocat. Sec. In faith, I 
tickle them for a good voice. Porter. 
Sufficiente quantttate, a woord is 
enough to the wise " (p. 5). The Eng- 
lish extension " enough is as good as 
a feast " is in Hey wood's Proverbs, 
1546. 

2. 4, 5. reasons . . . audacious . . . 
opinion] " It may be proper just to 
note, that reason here, and in many 
other places, signifies discourse ; and 
that audacious is used in a good sense 
for spirited, animated, confident. 
Opinion is the same with obstinacy 
or opiniatret6" (Johnson). Johnson 
says further : " I know not well what 
degree of respect Shakespeare intends 
to obtain for this vicar, but he has here 
put into his mouth a finished representa- 
tion of colloquial excellence." 

3. sententious] pithy. Puttenham 
has a chapter (xix.) " Of Figures sen- 
tentious, otherwise called Rhetoricall." 



4. affection] Qq, F 1; affectation 



He speaks of" your figures rhethoricall, 
besides their remembred ordinarie ver- 
tues, that is sententiousness and copious 
amplification " ; and he uses the ex- 
pression " sense and sententiousness " 
several times. On page 207 he speaks 
of words " pithie or sententious." 

3-6. pleasant . . . heresy] Furness 
quotes from Chalmers, Supplemental 
Apologie, 1799 (p. 281), to the effect 
that " the original of these lines " is in 
Sidney's Arcadia (p. 17, ed. 1598). It 
is very inaccurately quoted in Furness. 
The words that are somewhat parallel 
to those in the text are : "her speech 
being as rare as precious, her silence 
without sullennesse; her modestie with- 
out affectation ; her shamefacednesse 
without ignorance " (Dublin edition 
[i739]»vol. i. p. 51). There is a structural 
resemblance. Gabriel Harvey delighted 
in this method of apposition when he 
waxed eloquent. See his " Earthquake 
Letter " (Grosart, pp. 69-72) ; and again 
in his Letters, p. 72 (1580). Later, as 
in his Foure Letters (1592), he cannot 
proceed without it. 

4. affection] the act of affecting ; 
affectation. See again v. ii. 407, and 
Hamlet, 11. ii. 473 (Quarto reading). 

audacious] Compare Ben Jonson, 
Cynthia's Revels, v. iii. : "The third, 
in the blush-coloured suit is Eutolmos, 



108 



I.] 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



109 



impudency, learned without opinion, and strange 
without heresy. I did converse this quondam day 
with a companion of the king's, who is intituled, 
nominated, or called, Don Adriano de Armado. 
hi. Novi hominem tanquam te ; his humour is lofty, his 
discourse peremptory, his tongue filed, his eye am- 
bitious, his gait majestical, and his general behaviour 
vain, ridiculous, and thrasonical. He is too picked, 

9. homtnem] Ff 3, 4 ; hominum Qq, Ff 1, 2. 



IO 



duly respecting others as never ne- 
lecting himself ; commonly known by 
the title of good Audacity ; to courts 
and courtly assemblies a guest most 
acceptable." Steevens quotes from 
Jonson's Epicene, n. iii. : " She that 
shall [misquoted '•will," Steevens] be 
my wife must be accomplished, with 
courtly and audacious ornaments." 
Gifford says here in a note, " one of 
the characters in the Utopia is, I think, 
named Eutoltnos." I imagine he forgot 
his own author. 

5. opinion] self-conceit (New Eng. 
Diet.). Better than Johnson's "ob- 
stinacy." New Eng. Diet, parallels 
1 Henry IV. in. i. 185, and Troilus 
and Cressida, 1. iii. 353. 

9. Novi . . . te] I know the man as 
well as I know you. Furness quotes 
from A. H. Cruickshank (Nodes Shake- 
speariance, p. 48) : " in Lyly's Grammar 
1549, the phrase is to be found under 
the head of quasi, among adverbs.' 
Schmidt incorrectly says of this and 
other expressions, " Latin apparently 
composed by the poet himself." See 
haud credo, iv. ii. II. Gabriel Harvey 
has similar expressions in his Letters to 
Spenser (Grosart, i. 74), 1580 : " With 
as many gentle goodnights as be Letters 
in this tedious Letter. Nosti manum 
tanquam tuam " ; and p. 84 : " nosti 
homines, tanquam tuam ipsius cutem. 
See below, v. ii. 664, note. 

10. his tongue filed] polished. "Filed 
tongue " was an old and common ex- 
pression. The first example of the 
verb "to file," in the figurative sense 
of " to smooth, to polish " in New Eng. 
Diet., is from Romaunt of the Rose, 
circa 1400 (381/2) : " His tunge was 
fyled sharpe & square." And see notes 
to Spenser's Colin Cloutes Come Home 
Again in Todd's edition (viii. 27). The 



expression occurs several times in 
Lyly's plays, and in Beaumont and 
Fletcher's Loyal Subject, in. ii. See 
also New Eng. Diet, in v. filed. See 
Edwards' Damon and Pithias (Hazlitt's 
Dodsley, iv. 102), ante 1566. 

11. majestical] grand, stately, as in 
Henry V. iv. i. 284. Compare Lyly's 
Endymion, v. ii. : " O sir your chinne 
is but a quyller yet, you will be most 
majesticall when it is full fledge." An 
earlier form than " majestic," and ap- 
parently introduced by Lyly. 

12. thrasonical] Halliwell refers to 
Stanyhurst. The passage will be found 
on page 143 of Arber's »reprint : "Of a 
craking cutter, extracted owt of Syr 
Thomas Moore his Latin Epigrams. 
Linckt was in wedlock a loftye Thra- 
sonical huf snuffe : In gate al on 
typstau's stalcking, in phisnomye dar- 
ing." This passage appears " some 
Thrasonical huffe snuffe " in Nashe's 
Epistle Dedicatory, prefixed to Greene's 
Menaphon (Grosart, vi. 21), 1589, where 
Stanyhurst is severely handled. Greene 
uses the word elsewhere, as does also 
G. Harvey a couple of times. The 
word is perhaps due to Stanyhurst, 
who began to write in 1570 ; but Fur- 
ness gives a 1578 reference from 
Richard Tarlton. Arber queries the 
date of Stanyhurst's Conceits (printed 
1582). 

picked] neat, elaborate, over - re- 
fined. Compare Nashe, Foure Letters 
Confuted (Grosart, ii. 219) : " Shrouded 
a picked effeminate Carpet Knight under 
the fictionate person of Hermaphro- 
ditus." Furness refers to Grosart's 
Greene's Works (xi. 72), where the 
passage " certayne quaint, pickt and 
neate companions " occurs in the De- 
fence of Conny -catching, 1592 (a piece 
most probably not by Greene). I find 



110 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 



[act v. 



too spruce, too affected, too odd, as it were, too pere- 
grinate, as I may call it. 

Nath. A most singular and choice epithet. 1 5 

[Draws out his table-book. 

Hoi. He draweth out the thread of his verbosity finer than 
the staple of his argument. I abhor such fanatical 
phantasms, such insociable and point-devise com- 
panions ; such rackers of orthography, as to speak 

15. [Draws] Ff 3, 4 ; Draw . . . Qq f Ff 1, 2. 18. phantasms] F 4 ; phan- 

tasims Qq, Ff 1, 2, 3 ; phantasimes Cambridge, Globe. 19. orthography] 

ortagriphie, ortographie, ortagriphy, ortagraphy early edd. 



it in Rider's Bibliotheca Scholastica, 
1589: "Picked or curious. Argutus, 
elegans, accuratus, eximius, exquisitus." 
Ainsworth's seventh sense of argutus is 
•'short, neat, picked." 

13. peregrinate] having the air of a 
traveller or foreigner — like "Italianate." 
No other example in New Eng. Diet., 
excepting in Lytton's My Novel, taken 
from here. 

15. singular] unparalleled, excellent. 
Ascham uses the word frequently in 
this sense : " So singular in wisedome 
(in their owne opinion) as scarse they 
count the best Counsellor the Prince 
hath comparable with them " (The 
Scholemaster [Arber, p. 85], 1568) ; and 
Harvey (i. 85), 1580 : " a passing singu- 
lar odde man." 

17. staple] thread, pile or texture of 
wool or flax. An early use of this 
technical word, which is perhaps im- 
plied in the following passage : " flockes 
Yeelding forth fleeces stapled with 
such woole, As Lecester cannot yeelde 
more finer stuffe " (Greene [Grosart, 
xiii. 71], Friar Bacon and Friar Bun- 
gay). The word " staple " yields an 
interesting article in Trench's Select 
Glossary. 

fanatical] frantic, extravagant. As 
applied to persons this use has es- 
caped the New Eng. Diet., being con- 
siderably earlier than their first ex- 
ample. The meaning of the word was 
hardly fixed. Nashe speaks of " pha- 
natical strange hierogliphicks " where 
he refers to puns and anagrams (Gros- 
art, iv. 5) ; and in another place (Foure 
Letters Confuted [ii. 271]) he calls Har- 
vey " the foresaid fanaticall Phobetor, 
geremumble, tirleriwhisco, or what you 
will." The date of both references is 
1593- 



18. phantasms] fantastical persons. 
A doublet of " phantom." " Phan- 
tasma," a vision or apparition, occurs 
in Julius Casar, 11. i. 65. Harvey 
has a parallel form : " the riotous 
appetite of the ribald, or the humor- 
ous conceit of the phantast " (Pierce's 
Supererogation [Grosart, ii. 107], 

I592-93)- 

insociable] impossible to associate 
with, intolerable. In the sense of " in- 
compatible" the New Eng. Diet, has 
one earlier example from Savile's Taci- 
tus, 1581 ; the passage here is not dealt 
with. " Insociable occurs again in 
this play (v. ii. 788) with the meaning 
unsociable, and is the earliest example 
in the New Eng. Diet. None of these 
three words occur elsewhere in Shake- 
speare. 

point-devise] precise, affectedly exact. 
See As You Like It, in. ii. 401. Gen- 
erally used adverbially with a prepo- 
sition : " Uprist this jolly lover Absolon, 
and him arayeth gay at point devise." 
Nares gives several examples. 

19. orthography] The spelling "or- 
tographie" occurs several times in 
Puttenham (p. 127), but the omission 
of the h would be abominable here. 
Furness gives several extracts from com- 
mentators, and notes, upon the prin- 
ciples of pronunciation dealt with in 
the text. But Holofernes gives much 
more information than any of them, 
and they are mainly conjectural. Fur- 
ness refers to a communication which 
appeared in the New York Times 
Literary Review (July, 1899) by Mr. 
Noyes, "our highest living authority 
on the subject of Elizabethan pro- 
nunciation." He quotes from Baret's 
Alvearie (1573 ?), where it is expressly 
stated that the h was not sounded 



sc. 



•] 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



111 



dout, fine, when he should say doubt ; det, when he 20 
should pronounce debt, — d, e, b, t, not d, e, t ; he 
clepeth a calf, cauf; half, hauf; neighbour vocatur 
nebour ; neigh abbreviated ne. This is abhominable, 
which he would call abominable, it insinuateth me 
of insanie: ne intelligis dornine? to make frantic, 25 
lunatic. 

24. he] we Ff 3, 4. abominable] Ff 3, 4 ; abbominable Q 1 ; abhominable Ff 
1, 2. 25. insanie] Theobald (Warburton conj.) ; infamie Qq, Ff. ne] nonne 
Johnson conj. ; anne Porson conj. MS. 



in " abhominable," and that "negh" was 
pronounced " nay." Apparently, there- 
fore, Holofernes would confute the 
Baret school ? But I have not access 
to Mr. Noyes' communication. Put- 
tenham touches on this. He says : 
" I would as neare as I could observe 
and keepe the lawes of the Greeke and 
Latin versifiers, that is to prolong the 
sillable which is written with double 
consonants or by dipthong . . . and 
to shorten all sillables that stand upon 
vowels if there were no cause of elision, 
and single consonants, and such of them 
as are most flowing and slipper upon 
the tongue as n. r. t. d. 1. and for this 
purpose to take away all aspirations." 
Evidently Holofernes is railing against 
such innovations as a pedant should. 
The whole question was a seething 
one at this time, when spelling was 
go-as-you-please, and spelling books 
unknown or unheeded. There is a 
very interesting and instructive chapter 
upon " Orthography and Orthoepy" in 
the elder Disraeli's Amenities of Litera- 
ture, with special reference to the pas- 
sage in our text. I have not seen it 
anywhere referred to. He gives refer- 
ences to works bearing on this subject 
preceding Shakespeare, as John Hart's 
Orthographic, 1569; Bullokar's Booke 
at large for the Amendment of Or-* 
thographie, 1580 and 1586 ; Richard 
Mulcaster's Elementarie for the right 
writing of our English Tong, 1582, 
from which he gives a copious extract ; 
and others of a later date. Holofernes 
is joining in the current disputes of 
philologers, and is behind the move- 
ment. Ellis' On Early Pronunciation 
(Early English Text Society) must be 
referred to for fuller information. In 
one of his Letters to Spenser (Grosart, 
iii. 103-105), 1580, Gabriel Harvey 



has a similar tirade against absurdities 
of " Orthography or rather Pseudo- 
graphy." Harvey's patron, Sir Thomas 
Smith, was another eminent " racker 
of orthography." See Nichols' Pro- 
gresses, ii. 531. 

23. abhominable] A common spelling 
of the time, and earlier, arising from a 
mistaken etymology, ab homine instead 
of ab omine. It is found in early diction- 
aries : Promptorium, 1450, and Levin's 
Manipulus, 1570. Minshew (ed. 1627) 
has it "Abominable, vide Abhominable" 
Cotgrave has it right in 161 1, but 
Sherwood (1672) sets Cotgrave straight 
with the insertion of the h he omitted. 
Nashe, Harvey, Greene and all writers 
of the time, as well as every use in the 
Shakespeare Folio (1st and 2nd) have 
the h, I believe. Indeed, if we accept 
the Qi " abbominable," it is ap- 
parently the earliest example of the 
omission of the aspirate intentionally. 
The two 6's in the Quarto conform 
with the Italian of John Florio's dic- 
tionary, New World of Words. 

24. 25. insinuateth me of insanie] 
suggests insanity to me. For the pre- 
position "of" here we may thank 
pedantry, although Sidney has " in- 
sinuation of" (see note, iv. ii. 13), but 
in a different sense. The verb " insinu- 
ate " (hint, suggest) occurs several times 
in Puttenham (pp. 121, 163, 206). 
Amorphus, a very affected speaker in 
Jonson's Cynthia's Revels, uses it a 
couple of times (v. ii.). 

25. insanie] No other example of 
this word is known than that adduced 
by Steevens, and given in the New 
Eng. Diet, although Furness says : 
" Unfortunately I cannot verify this 
quotation." The dictionary dates it 
1572. Steevens quotes from " a book 
entitled, The Fall and evil Successe 






112 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 



[act v. 



Nath. Laus Deo, bene intelligo. 
Hoi. Bone bon, fort bon, Priscian ! 
'twill serve. 



a little scratched : 



Enter ARMADO, MOTH, and COSTARD. 

Nath. Videsne quis venit ? 
Hoi. Video, et gaudeo. 
Arm. Chirrah ! 



30 



27. bene] bone Theobald. 28. Bone, bon, fort bon, Priscian I] Cambridge, 

Globe ; Borne boon for boon prescian ; Qq, Ff ; Bone ? — bone for bene ; Priscian 
Theobald, Steevens, Craig. 



of Rebellion from Time to Time, by 
Wilfride Holme : " In the days of sixth 
Henry Jack Cade made a brag, With 
a multitude of people ; but in the con- 
sequence, After a little insanie they 
fled tag and rag, For Alexander Iden 
he did his diligence." Dr. Murray 
accepts the correction of Theobald for 
the present passage. 

28. Bone . . . Priscian] " Bone " 
should not, I think, be altered from 
" Borne " to " bon." We have the best 
authority for the use of the word (Lyly). 
Compare Mydas, iii. 2 : " Lisso. Deus 
bone, is that word come into the 
barber's basin." " Rheum " was the 
word. For " bon " compare Romeo 
and Juliet, 11. iv. 37. 

Priscian I a little scratched] Pris- 
cian, the grammarian, who wrote* 
about a.d. 525, and several of whose 
works have come down to us, gave 
rise to the proverb in English, " to 
break Priscian's head," used to such as 
speak false Latin (" diminuas Prisciani 
caput"). Holofernes means "your 
Latin is a little mutilated" (or wounded). 
The earliest example I have of the pro- 
verb is from Skelton's Speke Parrot, 
1. 176 (15 15) : " Frisian's hed broken 
now handy dandy, And Inter didascolos 
is rekened for a fole." Puttenham has 
it (Arber, p. 258). Sir John Harington 
has an interesting passage in The 
Metamorphosis of A j ax, 1596 (Chiswick 
repr. p. 84) : " Yet least old Priscian 
should say I brake his head when I 
never came near him, I will keep me 
in this," with a marginal note. " There 
is a Comedy called Priscianus vapulans ; 
where if one should say ignem hatic, 
Priscian would cry, his head were 
broken." Hazlitt says of this Latin 



drama that Mr. Fry notes that it was 
" entered on the books of the Stat. Co. 
Feb. 9, 1630." The saying is far older 
than the comedy, and the comedy is 
far older than 1630. See next note. 

30. Videsne quis venit] Furness quotes 
from T. S. Hay ties, Shakespeare Studies 
(1896, p. 181) : " These scraps of Latin 
dialogue exemplify the technical Latin 
intercourse between master and pupils 
in their work, as well as the formal 
colloquies the latter were required to 
prepare as exercises." He then quotes 
from a manual (without date) : " Who 
comes to meet us ? Quis obviam venit ? 
He speaks improperly, Hie incongrue 
loquitur ; He speaks false Latin, Dimi- 
nuit Priscian caput; 'Tis barbarous Latin , 
Olet barbariem." See below, line 73. 
For the speaking of Latin at school, 
see Ascham's Scholemaster (Arber, 
p. 28), who says it is "the best and 
readiest waie, to learne the Latin tong." 
He died in 1568. Judging from the 
school-scenes of this time (see Merry 
Wives of Windsor, Arden ed. pp. 160, 
161), the plan was disused. 

31. Video, et gaudeo] Video &■ taceo 
was " Her Maiesties poesie at the 
great Lotterie in London 1568 : and 
ende 1569" (Whitney's Emblems [ed. 
Greene, p. 61], 1586). Harvey has a 
similar scrap: "Video: taceo : video : 
Dixi " (Grosart, i. 74), 1580. 

32. Chirrah] " Sirrah" was the correct 
title from a master to his page. See 
Merry Wives of Windsor, 1. iii. 88 (and 
note in Arden edition). Armado's form 
of the word sounds rather Italianate 
than Spanish. In Lyly's Woman in the 
Moone, 11. i. (circa 1580), Pandora says 
to her page (" Sir Sauce ") : " Sirra f 
Gunophilus, beare up my traine." 



SC. I.] 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 



113 



Hoi. Quare chirrah, not sirrah ? 

Arm. Men of peace, well encountered. 

Hoi. Most military sir, salutation. 35 

Moth. They have been at a great feast of languages, and 

stolen the scraps. {Aside. 

Cost. O, they have lived long on the alms-basket of words. 
I marvel thy master hath not eaten thee for a word ; 
for thou art not so long by the head as honorificabili- 40 
tudinitatibus : thou art easier swallowed than a flap- 
dragon. 



38. alms-basket] " The refuse of the 
table was collected by the attendants, 
who used wooden knives for the pur- 
pose, and put into a large basket [or 
tub], which was called the alms-basket, 
the contents of which were reserved 
for the poor " (Halliwell). It is men- 
tioned in Greene's Quip for an Upstart 
Courtier : "I sit and dine with the 
Nobility, when thou art faine to waite 
for the reversion of the dimes basket " 
(Grosart, xi. 224). This basket is men- 
tioned often in connection with the pri- 
soner'sgrate. See Merry Wives of Wind- 
sor, 11. ii. 8. The prisoner's basket was a 
chief claimant ; and the term is, it may 
be noted, only relevant to feasts and 
banquets. Ben Jonson has a similar 
metaphor in his " Ode to Himsejf " (New 
Inn) : " For who the relish of these 
guests will fit Needs set them but the 
alms-basket of wit." And see Day, 
Isle of Gulls, 1. i., where " aim's basket 
scraps " reminds one of the present 
passage. In Patient Grissel (1600), 11. 
i., the conversation in ridicule of stilted 
language (see note at " congruent," 
line 85 below) is greeted with : " Now 
the gallimaufry of language comes in." 
Dekker was a faithful scrap-gatherer 
(like Heywood) from Shakespeare. 

40. honorificabilitudinitatibus] " often 
mentioned as the longest word known " 
(Johnson). Steevens refers to Mar- 
ston's Dutch Courtesan and Nashe's 
Lenten Stuff e ; Grey gives Taylor's 
example, who adds a syllable in the 
middle. See, too, Beaumont and 
Fletcher's Mad Lover (Dyce, vi. 132), 
1. i. These are later than Shakespeare. 
Dyce quoted Hunter, who found it 
scribbled somewhere in a MS. of the 
reign of Henry VI. Furness gives an 
exhaustive and learned note from Her- 



mann, Euphorion, 1894, who traces the 
word back, in the Latin schoolmaster 
vein, to Dante's treatise, De vulgari 
eloquentia (circa 1300) ; and to Excerpts 
from Petrus of Pisa, Charlemagne's 
teacher. Hermann finds it in two old 
German comedies of about 1580, both 
of which place their action in the 
schoolroom. He finds it derived from 
Honorifica in a Liber derivationum of 
the twelfth century, and he gives 
several references to its appearance in 
dictionaries from 1200 to 1500. Murray 
(New Eng. Diet.) gives a reference to 
The Complaynt of Scotland, 1548-9. 
The extract was quoted in Notes and 
Queries (June, 1902) by G. Stronach ; 
it concludes : " There vas ane uthir 
that writ in his verkis, [thir langtailit 
vordis,] gaudet honorificabilitudinitati- 
bus." Hermann says this term enfolds 
the names of Dante and Shakespeare ; 
and reveals how a purely literary word 
can survive, by means of the schools 
(as he believes), for nine hundred years 
— a span of life to which neither by 
origin nor by form it had any title. It 
finds its way into New Eng. Diet., as 
an English word, honor ificabilitudinity 
(a mere mouthful), given in Blount's 
Glossographia, and Phillips' New World 
of Words. 

41, 42. easier swallowed than a /lap- 
dragon] Said to be the thing, usually a 
burning plum or raisin, floating and 
snapped at in our Christmas game 
of Snapdragon. " Flapdragon," as a 
swaggering humour, is mentioned 
in Ben Jonson's Cynthia's Revels, 
v. iii. (1600). Like many other drink- 
ing expressions, it seems to have 
been of Dutch extraction. Compare 
the following quotations : " In the 
time a Fleming drinks a flap-dragon " 



' 



114 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 



[act v. 



Moth. Peace ! the peal begins. 

Arm. [To Hoi.] Monsieur, are you not lettered? 

Moth. Yes, yes, he teaches boys the horn-book. What is 

a, b, spelt backward with the horn on his head ? 
Hoi. Ba, pueritia, with a horn added. 
Moth. Ba ! most silly sheep with a horn. You hear his 

learning. 
Hoi. Quis, quis, thou consonant ? 
Moth. The last of the five vowels, if you repeat them; 

or the fifth, if I. 
Hoi. I will repeat them ; a, e, i, — 
Moth. The sheep : the other two concludes it ; o, u. 
Arm. Now, by the salt wave of the Mediterraneum, a 



45 



50 



55 



51. last] Qq, Ff ; third Theobald et seq. 

(Dekker, The Wonder of a Kingdom , 
Act i. [1636]). " My brother swallows it 
with more ease than a Dutchman does 
flapdragons " (Barry, Ram Alley , 161 1). 
" Our Flemish corporal was lately 
choked at Delpt with a flapdragon." 
" Swallowed it likeflapdragons as if you 
had lived with chewing the cud after " 
(Webster, Devil's Law Case, 11. i.[i623]). 
It seems to have been a lover's exploit, 
from the passage at the end of Cynthia's 
Revels : " From stabbing of arms,y?a/>- 
dragons, healths, whiffs, and all such 
swaggering humours, [Chorus] Good 
Mercury, defend us." Gifford gives 
here another reference from A Christian 
turned Turk : " They will devour one 
another as familiarly as pikes doe 
gudgeons, and with as much facility as 
Dutchmen doe flap-dragons " (1. iv.), 
1612. " Snapdragon " is a descendant of 
flapdragon, but what exactly was the 
latter, primarily ? Even the name 
^requires explanation, very greatly — the 
v flap of a dragon's fiery tail ? 

43. the peal begins] as of bells, not 
as Schmidt says, " a mighty sound." 
To ring one a peal was a common 
expression for a torrent of words. " I 
will go ring a peale through both his 
ears for this dishonest behaviour " 
(Menechmus [by W. W.], v. i. [1595]). 

45. horn-book] " A leaf of paper con- 
taining the alphabet (often with the 
addition of the ten digits, some ele- 
ments of spelling, and the Lord's 
Prayer), protected by a thin plate of 
translucent horn, and mounted on a 



55, wave] waue Q 1. 



tablet of wood with a projecting piece 
for a handle " (New Eng. Diet.). " The 
horn-book gradually gave way to the 
' battledore ' and ' primer ' " (Chambers, 
Book of Days). In A. W. Tuer's 
History of the Horn-book it is recorded 
that the last order for them, as school- 
requisites, came from the country about 
1799. From that time the demand 
wholly ceased. Specimens are now 
unobtainable of the early black-letter 
type. There is no earlier example 
than the one in the text of the use 
of the word in the New Eng. Diet. 
The quotation therein from (Lyly's) 
Pappe with a Hatchett preceded 
Love's Labour's Lost, since Harvey 
wrote his answer to it in 1589. The 
earlier name for the primer, or alphabet- 
book, was the Christ's cross-row, or 
Cross-row. 

50. consonant] Compare with this a 
quotation in New. Eng. Diet, from 
Walkington's Optic Glasse, 1607: 
" Like the foole, a consonant when hee 
should bee a Mute." Apparently used 
derisively in the sense of that which 
has no existence alone; a nonentity, 
since it requires the vowel sound. 

51. last] Furness ''suggests that 
Moth purposely framed his answer 
ambiguously, so as to lure the Pedant 
to a repetition of the vowels." A 
slight defence in a slight matter, but 
preferable to tampering with the old 
texts. 

55. salt] Suggested perhaps fr the 
sense of acutely witted, as in Gas- 



SC. I.] 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



115 



sweet touch, a quick venue of wit ! snip, snap, quick 
and home ! it rejoiceth my intellect ; true wit ! 

Moth. Offered by a child to an old man ; which is wit-old. 

Hoi. What is the figure ? what is the figure ? 

Moth. Horns. 60 

Hoi Thou disputest like an infant : go, whip thy gig. 

Moth. Lend me your horn to make one, and I will whip 
about your infamy unciatim. A gig of a cuckold's 
horn! 

Cost. An I had but one penny in the world, thou should'st 65 
have it to buy gingerbread. Hold, there is the very 
remuneration I had of thy master, thou halfpenny 

56. venue} Dyce, Cambridge, Globe ; vene we Q 1, F 1 ; venewe F 2 ; venew 
Ff3, 4. 61. disputest] F 4; disputes Qq, F 1 ; disputes 't Ff2, 3. 63. 

unciatim] unum cita Qq, Ff ; circum circa Theobald et seq. ; manu cita Anon. 
conjecture, Cambridge ; unum, cito ! Furnivall. 

coigne : " unlesse the invention have ment him, & deal as snip snap 
in it also aliquid salis . . . some good snappishly with him as ever he was 



and fine devise, shewing the quicke 
capacitie of a writer" (Arber, p. 31) 
( I 575)» Jonson uses it. 

55. Mediterraneum] Greene has this 
forme : " resting himselfe on a hill that 
over-peered the great Mediterraneum 
noting how Phoebus fetched his 
Lavaltos on the purple Plaines of 
Neptunus . . . the Dolphines (the 
sweete conceipters of Musicke) fetcht 
their carreers on the calmed waves" 
(Menaphon [Grosart, vi. 36], 1587). It 
is a great passage. Is it Greene's 
own ? 

56. touch] stroke, trick, taste of 
one's " quality." Compare Ascham, 
The Scholemaster (Arber, p. 18), 1570: 
" Playing both with the shrewde touches 
of many courste boyes, and with the 
small discretion of many leude Schole- 
masters." 

venue of wit] assault of wit. See 
Merry Wives of Windsor, 1. i. 295 (and 
note, Arden edition, p. 28). It occurs 
in Lodge, Euphues Golden Legacie 
(Shakes. Lib. p. 98), 1590 : " Love . . . 
seeing the parties at the gaze, en- 
countered them both with such a veny, 
that the stroke . . . could never after 
be raced out." 

snip, snap] See Merry Wives of 
Windsor, iv. v. 3, and note to M snap" 
(Arden edition, pp. 185, 186). Nashe 
in his Epistle Dedicatorie to Have With 
You, etc. (Grosart, iii. 13) has : " tor- 



delt with." M Snap " was an early 
name for a bailiff or tipstaff, occurring 
in Damon and Pithias (ante 1566). 
See above, 111. i. 18. 

58. wit-old] The word on which 
Moth quibbles only occurs once in 
Shakespeare, in Merry Wives of Wind- 
sor, 11. ii. 314 (and adverbially, line 284). 
See note, Arden edition, p. 99. It is 
in Greene's Philomela (Grosart, xi. 166), 
of about this date. It does not seem 
common earlier. 

59. figure] Our "figure of speech " ; 
Puttenham's "figurative speech." See 
his chapter " Of Figures and figurative 
speaches" (Arber, p. 116). Puttenham 
uses the word with great latitude, with 
reference either to the thought or idea ; 
and the expression of it. See note at 
" sententious " above, line 3, and at 
iv. ii. 62 for another use. 

61. gig] See iv. iii. 164. Were tops 
ever made of horn ? This passage im- 
plies that they were, but there is some 
buried quibbling here I cannot reach. 
Why should Holofernes be a cuckold ? 

63. unciatim] inchmeal, ounce by 
ounce. This comes nearer the mean- 
ingless text than any suggested ex- 
planation. It occurs in a letter, dated 
1610, in Court and Times of James I. 
(i. 106). See Introduction on pages' 
Latin. 

67, 68. halfpenny purse] These small 
purses, probably for holding the little 



116 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 



[act v. 



purse of wit, thou pigeon -egg of discretion. O, an the 
heavens were so pleased that thou wert but my bastard, 
what a joyful father wouldst thou make me. Go to ; 70 
thou hast it ad dunghill^ at the fingers' ends, as they 
say. 

Hoi. O, I smell false Latin ; dunghill for unguent. 

Arm. Arts-man, preambulate: we will be singled from 

the barbarous. Do you not educate youth at the 75 
charge-house on the top of the mountain ? 

Hoi. Or mons, the hill. 

Arm. At your sweet pleasure, for the mountain. 

Hoi. I do, sans question. 

Arm. Sir, it is the king's most sweet pleasure and afifec- 80 
tion to congratulate the princess at her pavilion in the 
posteriors of this day, which the rude multitude call 
the afternoon. 

Hoi. The posterior of the day, most generous sir, is liable, 



74. preambulate] Cambridge; preambulat Qq, Ff; praambula Theobald. 
singled] Ff, Q 2; singuled Q 1, Cambridge. 76. charge-house] church-house 

Theobald conjecture ; large house Collier MS. 80. most] omitted Q 2. 



silver halfpence of the time, are men- 
tioned again in Merry Wives of Wind- 
sor ; in. v. 149. See note, Arden edition, 
p. 159, giving references to Lyly's 
Mother Bombie and Ben Jonson's 
Bartholomew Fair. 

71-73. ad . . . unguem] to the nail. 
A common proverbial phrase, said to 
be borrowed from sculpture (Horace, 
Satires, 1. v. 31-33). Compare Ben Jon- 
son's translation of Horace, De Arte 
Poetica (" Perfectum decies non casti- 
gavit ad unguem ") : " Not ten times o'er 
corrected to the nail." It was used of 
a lesson learnt perfectly : " But, Sirra, 
see you learne your lesson perfectlie, 
and have it without booke ad unguem " 
(Nashe, Martins Months Minde 
[Grosart, i. 203], 1589). And Webster, 
Westward Ho, ii. 1 : " She has her 
letters ad unguem." Jonson has it 
several times. They are the last words 
in Harvey's much laughed at Judge- 
ment on Earthquakes (Grosart, i. 74), 
1580. 

73. false Latin] See note, line 30. 

74. Arts-man] scholar, learned per- 
son. New Eng. Diet, gives an example 



from Bacon's Advancement of Learning. 
The word was commoner in the sense 
of workman, as in Chapman's Homer. 
We have elsewhere in this play " man 
of peace" and "warman." 

singled] separated. Similarly in 
Greene, Alcida (Grosart, ix. 73), 1588: 
" When wee were in the greene meades, 
Meribates and my daughter had singled 
themselves." 

76. charge-house] school. Not known 
elsewhere. Probably one where children 
were taught at the charge of the parish, 
or else merely a house for their charge 
or care. Florio has the expression 
" chast-house " for a religious house 
(maison pudique) (Montaigne's Essays, 
i. 46). 

82. posteriors] The word occurs in 
the Prologue to Harington's Meta- 
morphosis of Ajax, 1596. 

84. liable] suitable, apt. See King 
John, 11. i. 490. In New Eng. Diet. 
there is a quotation from a letter dated 
1570: "To chewse persons lyable to 
give good information." This quota- 
tion is not satisfactory per se. It may 
mean " likely," which is nearer Sense 3. 




LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 117 



congruent, and measurable for the afternoon : the 85 
word is well culled, chose ; sweet and apt, I do as- 
sure you, sir ; I do assure. 
Arm. Sir, the king is a noble gentleman, and my familiar, 
I do assure ye, very good friend. For what is in- 
ward between us, let it pass; (I do beseech thee, 90 
remember thy courtesy — I beseech thee, apparel thy 



86. chose] Qq, F i ; choise F 2 ; choice Ff 3, 4. 
remember] refrain Capell ; remember not Malone. 



87. yon] omitted Q 2. 91. 



85. congruent] Armado has used this 
word already (1. i. 13), which is not else- 
where in Shakespeare. New Eng. Diet. 
has an early reference to Higden, Rolls 
(ante 1453). Craig quotes from Udall's 
Erasmus (Roberts' repr. p. 93), 1542 : 
" He thought not the name of a manne 
to bee a congruente or a right name for 
such persones as lived not according to 
reason." A stilted and neglected word. 
Sir Owen ap Meredith, the Welsh 
knight in Patient Grissel (by Dekker 
and Chettle), who is an early tribute of 
respect to Sir Hugh Evans of Merry 
Wives of Windsor, overlooked by me in 
my edition, ridicules this word con- 
gruent in 1600 (Collier's edition, pp. 21, 
22). 

measurable] meet, competent. Com- 
pare Coriolanus, 11. ii. 127 : " He can- 
not but with measure fit the honours 
which we devise him." Cotgrave has 
" Moyen : mean, indifferent, moderate, 
measurable, competent, reasonable." 
In the next line, " chose " is for 
" chosen," governed by " well." 

88. familiar] particular friend ; as in 
2 Henry IV. 11. ii. 144. Compare 
Lodge, Euphues Golden Legacie 
(Shakes. Lib. 1875, p. 30) : " Rosader 
. . . accompanyed with a troupe of 
yoong gentlemen that were desirous 
to be his familiars." 

8g. inward] confidential, private. 

91. remember thy courtesy] you for- 
get your hat is off (according to 
Steevens). Holofernes would appear 
to have been bareheaded since M saluta- 
tion," at line 35. Armado notices it 
and tells him to apparel his head. Dyce 
quoted as parallel the following from 
Ben Jonson's Every Man in his 
Humour, 1. ii. : " Servant. ... I was 
required ... to deliver you this letter, 
sir. Knoivell. To me, sir ! What do 
you mean ? Pray you remember your 



courtesy. [Reads.] . . . Nay, pray you be 
covered," where the sense is obviously 
the reverse. Knowell is insulted when 
he says "What do you mean ? " He 
bids him remove his hat by the ex- 
pression, he keeps him bareheaded till 
he has read the letter, he speaks again 
to the servant, and not till then does 
he bid him be covered. Dyce quoted 
this in support of Steevens' explana- 
tion (he had formerly followed Malone's 
" remember not"). To my mind we 
have to take opposite meanings from 
the two passages. Armado reminds 
Holofernes to conclude his courtesy or 
salutation ; Knowell reminds his servant 
to begin it. Parallels to the significa- 
tion given here have been adduced 
from Lusty Juventus (Hazlitt's Dodsley, 
ii. 74), and from Marlowe's Doctor 
Faustus (Bullen, i. 319). The latter 
has nothing to do with the text, except- 
ing that the words "remember your 
courtesy " (make a leg or bow) occur : 
the former (" be remembered and cover 
your head ") carries no weight one 
way or the other. The passage in 
the text may mean what Steevens 
says, but I don't think it does. No 
parallels would make it likely that 
Holofernes had kept off his hat out of 
respect to Armado during the foregoing 
conversation. Malone suggests that 
Armado is boasting of the King's 
familiarity (inserting not) : "I do be- 
seech thee (will he say to me), remember 
not thy courtesy to me ... be covered." 
The text won't permit all this without 
supposing much corruption. I do not 
think the meaning has been yet given, 
but is as follows : it was the custom to 
uncover at the name of the king, or 
during a conversation about the king. 
This is the courtesy Armado claims for 
his friend the King. In Lusty jfuventus 
there is so far a parallelism that 



118 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



[act v. 



head) and among other importunate and most serious 
designs, and of great import indeed, too, but let that 
pass ; for I must tell thee, it will please his grace, by 
the world, sometime to lean upon my poor shoulder, 95 
and with his royal finger, thus, dally with my excre- 
ment, with my mustachio : but, sweet heart, let that 
pass. By the world, I recount no fable : some certain 
special honours it pleaseth his greatness to impart to 
Armado, a soldier, a man of travel, that hath seen the 100 
world : but let that pass. The very all of all is, but, 
sweet heart, I do implore secrecy, that the king would 
have me present the princess, sweet chuck, with some 
delightful ostentation, or show, or pageant, or antic, 

important Q 1 ; important Cambridge. 102. 



92. importunate] Ff, Q 2 
secrecy] secretie Q 1. 

Juventus may have uncovered at 
Hypocrisy's introduction of the Deity 
into the conversation. As a mark of 
deference to the King's mention, a 
passage in Beaumont and Fletcher's 
Noble Gentlemen (Act iii.) drew my 
attention, and be it remembered the 
scene is laid also in France : 
"Shatillion. Can you give me reason 
From whence this great duke sprang 
that walks abroad ? Lady. E'en from 
the king himself. Shat. As you 're a 
woman, I think you may be cover'd: 
Yet your prayer Would do no harm, 
good woman. Lady. God preserve 
him ! Shat. I say Amen, and so say 
all good subjects." If the mode was 
French, no doubt other parallels will 
be found, but this one is so exact as 
to be conclusive. The hat was re- 
moved as evidence that the wearer 
prays for the king upon specific refer- 
ence to him ; as we do at " God save 
the King!" Holofernes may have 
been bare since Armado began to talk 
of the King, and be now released from 
his courtesy; or he may be reminded 
of it by these words. That is a trifle. 
But we get rid of the false notion that 
the courtesy was due to Armado by my 
suggestion. Next to it in probability I 
would place Malone's " boasting" ex- 
planation. 

93, 94. but let that pass] never mind 
about that. Probably a common 
colloquialism. It occurs again in 
Merry Wives of Windsor, 1. iv. 15, and 



in Richard III. Sidney puts it into 
the mouth of Miso, in that much 
abused but highly entertaining part of 
Arcadia (repr. 1898, p. 179) where 
he depicts the dialogue of the people : 
" I might have had another-gains hus- 
band than Dametas. But let that pass. 
God amend him ! And yet I speak it 
not without good cause " (Book ii.). 
Ben Jonson has it in his Staple of News 
(Cunningham's Gifford, ii. 288); and 
see Gesta Grayorum, 1594 (Nichols, iii. 
311) : " Well, let that pass, and to tne 
purpose now." 

94> 95- by the world] See iv. iii. 17. 

96. excrement] "that which grows 
out or forth" (New Eng. Diet.). See 
Merchant of Venice, in. ii. 87, and 
Winter's Tale, iv. iv. 733. In Pooler's 
edition of the former play (Arden ed. 
p. 105) references are given to Kyd, 
Nashe and Dekker. All these are later 
than Love's Labour 's Lost,a.nd Armado 
still holds pride of place for the use of 
the word in this sense (hair, nails or 
feathers). 

101. all of all] sum of everything. 
I have not met this elsewhere. 

103. chuck] chick, or chicken. A 
term of endearment, used familiarly, 
occurring several times in Shake- 
speare. It is in Jonson and Chapman's 
Eastward Ho, v. 1. 

104. ostentation] No other example 
of this use of the word (spectacular 
show) is given in New Eng. Diet. The 
following comes near it : " The lockes 



sc. 



I.] 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



119 



or fire-work. Now, understanding that the curate 105 
and your sweet self are good at such eruptions and 
sudden breaking out of mirth, as it were, I have 
acquainted you withal, to the end to crave your 
assistance. 
Hoi. Sir, you shall present before her the Nine Worthies, no 
Sir, as concerning some entertainment of time, some 
show in the posterior of this day, to be rendered by 



in. Sir] Rowe; Sir Holofemes Qq, Ff; Sir [To Nathaniel] Hanmer; Sir 
Nathaniel Capell, Steevens, Craig. 112. rendered] rended Q 1. 



of haire with their skinnes he hanged 
on a line unto two trees. And thus he 
made ostentation as of a great triumph 
at Werowocomoes " (Captain Smith 
[Arber, p. 82], 1612). 

104. antic] a grotesque pageant. 
Schmidt says Armado mistakes the 
word. He is always blind to the 
beauties of Armado's diction ! The 
word was in regular use. Compare 
Captain Smith (Arber, p. 123), 1608 : 
" Being presently presented with this 
anticke. 30 young women came naked 
out of the woods (only covered behind 
and before with a few greene leaves), 
their bodies all painted . . . every one 
different. . . . The leader had a faire 
paire of stagges homes on her head 
. . . every one with their severall de- 
vises . . . with most hellish cries and 
shouts." Fernando in Ford's Love's 
Sacrifice, in. ii., speaks of " an antic, a 
rare conceit he saw in Brussels" per- 
formed by knights and ladies of the 
Court. Ben Jonson seems to have 
foreseen the strictures of Nares, Gifford 
and others upon this word in The Fox, 
in. vi. : " And my dwarf shall dance, 
My eunuch sing, my fool make up the 
antic, Whilst we, in changed shapes, 
act Ovid's parts." 

105. fire-work] " pyrotechnical ex- 
hibition " (Schmidt). They were very 
popular, especially with James I. See 
Court and Times of James I., i. 65-67; 
and, again, January 5, 1607, 1608; 
also February 4, 1613 (i. 222). See 
Beaumont and Fletcher's Noble Gentle- 
men, ii. 1 : "A solemn christening, or a 
great marriage, or new fireworks." The 
word had several senses. See next note. 

no. Nine Worthies] They were, 
according to Gerard Leigh, Accedens 



of Armory e (who gives all their blazons), 
Duke Josua, Hector, David, Alexander, 
Judas Machabeus, Julius Cesar, King 
Arthure, Charlemayne, Sir Guy (of 
Warwicke). But the latter was some- 
times replaced amongst "the learned 
and authentic fellows" (see Dyce's 
Beaumont and Fletcher, i. 143) by God- 
frey of Bouillon. Douce says it has 
not been accounted for why Shake- 
speare includes Hercules and Pompey. 
In the second part of Whetstone's 
Promos and Cassandra (the source of 
Measure for Measure), 1578, the " nyne 
worthyes " are to " Be so instauld, as 
best may please the eye" (1. iv.), 
amongst the shows and pageants wel- 
coming the king upon his return. Two 
men "apparelled like greene men at 
the Mayor feast, with clubbes of fyre- 
worke " keep a passage clear. The 
only name given of those represented 
is Hercules conquering monsters, 
though it is not stated he was one of 
the Worthies. This may account for his 
inclusionhere. TherecognisedWorthies 
were often trifled with. Nashe says : 
" To Charles the fifte then Emperour, 
they reported how he shewed the nine 
worthies, David, Salomon, Gedeon, and 
the rest, in that similitude and lyke- 
nesse that they lived upon earth " (The 
Unfortunate Traveller [Grosart, v. 77, 
78], 1594). And Greene : " Which if I 
should obtaine, I would count it a more 
rich prize then ever Scipio or any of 
the nine Worthies wonne by conquest " 
(Alcida [Grosart, ix. 49], 1588). Ritson 
(Remarks, 38) gave a specimen of a 
" Pageant of the Nine Worthies *l from 
an original MS. of Edward IV..' s time, 
which is reprinted in Furness's Vari- 
orum edition. 



120 LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST [act v. 

our assistants, the king's command, and this most 
gallant, illustrate, and learned gentleman, before the 
princess; I say, none so fit as to present the Nine 115 
Worthies. 

Nath. Where will you find men worthy enough to present 
them? 

Hoi. Joshua, yourself; myself and this gallant gentleman, 

Judas Maccabaeus; this swain, because of his great 120 
limb or joint, shall pass Pompey the Great ; the page, 
Hercules — 

Arm. Pardon, sir; error: he is not quantity enough for 
that Worthy's thumb : he is not so big as the end of 
his club. 125 

Hoi. Shall I have audience ? he shall present Hercules in 
minority: his enter and exit shall be strangling a 
snake ; and I will have an apology for that purpose. 

Moth. An excellent device ! so if any of the audience hiss, 

you may cry " Well done, Hercules ! now thou crush- 1 30 
est the snake ! " that is the way to make an offence 
gracious, though few have the grace to do it. 

Arm. For the rest of the Worthies ? 

Hoi. I will play three myself. 

Moth. Thrice-worthy gentleman ! 135 

113. assistants] Qq, Ff; assistance Heath conjecture, Steevens (1793), Craig. 
119. myself and] omitted Rowe; myself or Steevens (1793), Craig. 121. pass] 
pass for Capell ; pass as Cambridge edd. conjecture (1863). 

113. assistants] Some editors make a Where he might see his father pass the 
compound alteration here, inserting deed," comes near to it. I cannot find 
" at " from the second Folio, and alter- it in New Eng. Diet, exactly. It seems 
ing assistants to "assistance," with a to me absurd to suppose pass can mean 
revised punctuation. The " assistants " surpass (a common sense) here ; as if 
are, Furness says, the King's command Dull was an actual giant. He is not 
and Armado. But it is quite likely we intended to excel Hercules, only to 
should understand " assistance." As a reproduce him. Malone (followed by 
parallel, compare Nashe's Christ's Furness) is positive pass means surpass. 
Teares (Grosart, iv. 256), " Our lawes 125. club] See above, 1. ii. 166. 

. . . allow no rewarde to theyr temper- 126. have audience] be heard. See 

ate observants'* (i.e. observance). So, As You Like It, v. iv. 157, etc. 

too, " occurrents " and " occurrences " 127. enter] New Eng. Diet, has two 

were indiscriminately used. other examples, both earlier, of the sub- 

114. illustrate] See iv. i. 67 (note). stantive "enter" ; the act of entering. 
121. pass] represent, perform. An 130. Hercules] See note above, line 

easy sense to give a verb of such wide no ; and below, v. ii. 580. " It is my 

powers. The sense of execute, or com- Cradle game To vanquish Snakes" 

plete, in Ben Jonson's Fox, in. vi. : " I (Golding's Ovid's Metamorphoses , ix. 79- 

told his son, brought, hid him here, 80 [1567]). 



SC. I.] 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 



121 



Arm. Shall I tell you a thing? 

Hoi. We attend. 

Arm. We will have, if this fadge not, an antic. I beseech 

you, follow. 
Hoi. Vza> goodman Dull ! thou hast spoken no word all 140 

this while. 
Dull. Nor understood none neither, sir. 
Hoi. A lions ! we will employ thee. 
Dull. I '11 make one in a dance, or so ; or I will play on 

the tabor to the Worthies, and let them dance the 145 

hay. 
Hoi. Most dull, honest Dull. To our sport, away ! 

[Exeunt. 

143. Allons t] Alone Qq, Ff. 144-146. Given as two lines verse, endingplay, 
hay, Halliwell, Dyce, Cambridge, Globe ; as prose, Steevens and old texts. 



138. fadge) suit, succeed, turn out 
well. See Twelfth Night, 11. ii. 34. 
The earliest example of this verb in 
New Eng. Diet, is from Whetstone's 
Promos and Cassandra, part i. (1578). 
The passage in the text would probably 
be the next historically, but it occurs 
again in the second part of the same 
old play. The sixth scene of Act i. — 
to which the words ending " clubbes 
of fyre worke " (note above, line 105) 
are a stage instruction — begins " Phal- 
lax. This gea.xefadgeth now, that these 
fellowes peare." Coupled with the 
remaining allusions, and with the 
exactly parallel use of fadge as refer- 
ring to a pageant, it amounts to a 
certainty that Shakespeare recalled 
Whetstone's play while writing this 
scene. For antic, see above, line 104. 

140. Via] " An adverbe of encourag- 
ing much used by commanders, as also 
by riders to their horses, Goe on, for- 
ward, on, away, goe to, on quickly " 
(Florio, New World of Words, 161 1). 
It seems here to mean rather " buck 
up," " what cheer." It occurs several 
times in Shakespeare, and his con- 
temporaries, Jonson, Fletcher and 
Chapman. The example in the text is 
the earliest yet quoted. 

143. Allons) See iv. iii. 380. 

144. make one] be of the party. See 
Merry Wives of Windsor, 11. iii. 48 (Ar- 
den ed. p. 107). New Eng. Diet, gives 



a reference to Udall's Erasmus, 1542. 
The expression occurs several times in 
Shakespeare. 

or so] See 11. i. 212. 

145. tabor] A small drum played 
with one hand ; with the other the 
musician held his pipe, playing the 
two instruments simultaneously. See 
Winter's Tale, iv. iv. 183. When 
Kemp started on his Nine Daies Won- 
der Performed in a Morrice from 
London to Norwich on " The first 
Mondaye in Lent " (1600), he was 
'« attended by Thomas Slye, hys Ta- 
berer." On the title of his tract is a 
figure of the pair, the tabor being held 
apparently by a single band round the 
left wrist, which hand also holds the pipe 
to the mouth, the right using the short 
stick. The tabor is about twice the 
length of its diameter, covered at each 
end alike. No doubt it was also at- 
tached by a string round the neck. 

145, 146. dance the hay] " A country 
dance, having a winding or serpentine 
nature, or being of the nature of a reel " 
(New Eng. Diet.). " To dance the hay be- 
came a proverbial expression signifying 
to twist about or wind in and out with- 
out making any advance " (Chappell's 
Popular Music, p. 629). There were 
several varieties of the hay. Furness 
quotes from Orchesographie, 1588, al- 
ready referred to in a note to " brawl " 
(hi. i. 6). The French writer gives a 



122 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



[ACT V. 



SCENE II. — The Same. Before the Princess's Pavilion. 

Enter the PRINCESS, KATHARINE, ROSALINE, and MARIA. 

Prin. Sweet hearts, we shall be rich ere we depart, 
If fairings come thus plentifully in : 
A lady wall'd about with diamonds ! 
Look you what I have from the loving king. 

Ros. Madam, came nothing else along with that ? 

Prin. Nothing but this ! yes ; as much love in rhyme 
As would be cramm'd up in a sheet of paper, 
Writ on both sides the leaf, margent and all, 
That he was fain to seal on Cupid's name. 



3, 4. Transposed Hudson (S. Walker conjecture). 8. on] Ff, Q 2 ; aQi 

0' Cambridge, Globe. margent] Qq, Ff ; margin Craig (Little Quarto.) 



description of the Braule de la Haye, 
which Furness quotes, and points out 
its resemblance to the grand chain in 
a quadrille. This may not be the 
English hay, which is mentioned by 
Skelton in 1529. New Eng. Diet, says 
" haye d'allemaigne is used in 15 c. 
French by C. Marot." Marlowe has 
" dance the antic hay " in his Edward 
II. 1. i. (Bullen, ii. 122). I may be 
excused for pointing out that there 
was a special variant called the Irish 
hay which was unusually boisterous. 
Guilpin mentions it in Skialetheia, 
Satire iv. (repr. p. 43), 1598 : " His 
head is like a windmils trunke so bigge 
Wherein ten thousand thoughts run 
whirlegigge, Play at barleybreaive, and 
daunce Irish hay, Civill and peacefull 
like the Centaurs fray " ; and Day, 
Law Tricks, 1608 : " A company of 
bottlenos'd devils dauncing the Irish 
hay " ; and Dekker, Strange Horse- 
Race (Grosart, iii. 365), 1613 : " The 
Daunce was an infernall Irish hay." 

Scene 11. 

2. fairings] Compare Greene's Never 
Too Late (Grosart, viii. 195), 1590 : 
" Oenone chose Paris . . . thinking 
the sweetest face the best fay ring for 
a gentlewoman's eye." In these days 
almost anything, or everything, was 
purchased at fairs. 

come . . . in] See New Eng. Diet. 
(Come, 59, i.). 

3, 4. In the Windsor Shakespeare the 
editor (Dr. Hudson) transposes these 



two lines, with the words in a note : 
" The old editions have these two lines 
transposed ; which makes the passage 
unintelligible. Corrected by Walker." 
Furness remarks that the alteration 
" seems quite harmless." To my 
thinking it is great harm. The Prin- 
cess points to herself bedecked with the 
gems, probably she had others as well, 
and calls herself a lady enclosed in 
diamonds. If we transpose the lines 
her meaning would be that she had 
received a brooch or some such jewel 
representing " a lady " constructed 
with diamonds. " That," in line 5, 
would do in either case. But the 
alteration is unwarrantable. I do not 
know if the " corrector " intends the 
meaning I attribute to him, but a 
reference to Queen Elizabeth s New 
Year's Gifts (Nichols' Progresses, 
1823) will give parallels showing 
that it is not impossible. Here 
is one for 1581-2 : " Item, a juell 
of golde, being the personage of a 
woman . . . garnished, with smale 
rubyes and dymondes, and a smale 
perle pendent geven by Thomas 
Howarde." Plenty more occur. At 
ii. 72 (1577-8) there is " a man of 
golde ennamuled grene, hanging at a 
small cheyne " ; at ii. 79 " a woman 
ennamuled . . . the bodye garneshed 
with sparks of diamunds and rubyes " ; 
and at ii. 419 (1583-4) " a juell of 
golde, being a personage of a woman 
of mother-of-perle, garnished on the 
ohe side with smale diamondes." 



SC. II.] 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



123 



Ros. That was the way to make his godhead wax ; 10 

For he hath been five thousand years a boy. 

Kath. Ay, and a shrewd unhappy gallows too. 

Ros. You '11 ne'er be friends with him : a' kill'd your sister. 

Kath. He made her melancholy, sad, and heavy ; 

And so she died : had she been light, like you, 1 5 

Of such a merry, nimble, stirring spirit, 
She might ha' been a grandam ere she died ; 
And so may you, for a light heart lives long. 

Ros. What 's your dark meaning, mouse, of this light word ? 

Kath. A light condition in a beauty dark. 20 

Ros. We need more light to find your meaning out. 

Kath. You'll mar the light by taking it in snuff; 
Therefore I '11 darkly end the argument. 

11. years] yeare Q i. 12. shrewd] shrowd Q 1. 13. ne'er] neare Q 1. 

17. ha'] a Qq, Ff 1, 2 ; have Ff 3, 4. a grandam] Grandam Q 1. 



10. wax] increase (with quibble). 

11. thousand years a boy] Halliwell 
compares Sidney, Arcadia (p. 174, ed. 
1590) : " This is thy worke, thou God 
for ever blinde ; Though thousands old, 
a Boy entitled still." 

12. shrewd] curst, unlucky, evil. From 
Middle English schrewe, malicious. 



and longer by a day." A frequent 
saying. 

18, 19, 20, ai, 22, 25, 26. light] cheery 
or merry, casual or unimportant, frivol- 
ous or wanton, information, a candle, 
light in weight. 

19. mouse] An endearing term. See 
Hamlet, in. iv. 183. Craig gives 



gallows] gallows bird, one fit for quotation from The Trial of Treasure, 



the hangman. Compare The Tempest, 
I. i. 32 : " his complexion is perfect 
gallows " ; and Measure for Measure, 
iv. ii. 35 : " hanging look." Beau- 
mont and Fletcher's Knight of the 
Burning Pestle gives an example : 
" he be a notable gallows." The term 
is still in common use, plurally, as an 
adjective (" he 's a gallows boy ") 
in Ireland. Shakespeare applies the 
equally uncomplimentary epithet of 
"hangman" to Cupid in Much A do About 
Nothing, in. ii. 11, as an executioner of 
human hearts. This would have sup- 
ported Furness in his incorrect con- 
jecture that "gallows" here means 
" hangman," based on an extract from 
Arcadia. 

14-17. Does not this passage point 
to some historical source of the plot, 
some undeveloped portion of a parent- 
tale ? 

18. a light heart lives long] Udall's 
Ralph Roister Doister (1550) opens 
with "Matthew Merrygreek. [Heenter- 
cth singing.] As long liveth the merry 
man (they say), As doth the sorry man ; 



1567 (Hazlitt's Dodsley, iii. 293), and 
see Nares for several examples. In 
Speeches to the Queen atBisham (1592), 
Pan says to two virgins : "be not 
agaste, sweet mice. . . . Can you 
love ? " (Nichols, iii. 133) ; and Lyly 
(Mother Bombie, No. 2) : " God save 
you, pretty mouse." 

22. taking it in snuff] A very com- 
mon expression representing the ex- 
pression of disgust at the smell of a 
snuffed candle. See 1 Henry IV. 1. iii. 
141 for another example ; and Greene, 
Penelope's Web (Grosart, v. 211), 1587 : 
" Calamus hearing this rough replye of 
his Tenant was driven into a marvellous 
choler, so that scarce affoording her a 
farewell, hee flung out of doores. . . . 
The goodwife glad that he tooke the 
matter so in snuff e, commanded," etc. 
The verb " to snuff," to resent, be angry 
with, is older, and influenced this 
saying. Palsgrave (Lesclaircissement, 
1530) has : " I snoffe, as a man doth or 
a horse, Je reniffle. This boye wyll be 
of a stubborn herte and he lyve, herke 
howe he snoffeth." 



124 LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST [act v. 

Ros. Look, what you do, you do it still i' the dark. 

Kath. So do not you, for you are a light wench. 25 

Ros. Indeed I weigh not you, and therefore light. 

Kath. You weigh me not ? O ! that 's you care not for me. 

Ros. Great reason ; for past cure is still past care. 

Prin. Well bandied both ; a set of wit well play'd. 

But, Rosaline, you have a favour too : 30 

Who sent it ? and what is it ? 
Ros. I would you knew : 

An if my face were but as fair as yours, 

My favour were as great ; be witness this. 

Nay, I have verses too, I thank Biron : 

The numbers true; and, were the numbering too, 35 

I were the fairest goddess on the ground : 

I am cpmpar'd to twenty thousand fairs. 
N O ! he hath drawn my picture in his letter. 
Prin. Any thing like ? 

Ros. Much in the letters, nothing in the praise. »> 40 

Prin. Beauteous as ink ; a good conclusion. x 

Kath. Fair as a text B in a copy-book. 
Ros. Ware pencils, ho ! let me not die your debtor, 

28. cure . . . care] Theobald (Thirlby conjecture) ; care . . . cure Qq, Ff. 
43. pencils] Rowe ; pensalls Q 1 ; pensals F 1 ; pensils (the rest). ho !] Hanmer ; 
How ? Qq, Ff. 

28. past cure . . . past care] Greene Legacie (Shakes. Lib. 1875, p. 80), 
has : " rather remember the olde pro- 1509 : " How like you this sonnet ? 
verbe, not so common as true : past quoth Rosader. Marry, quoth Gani- 
cure, past care, without remedie, with- mede, for the pen well, for the passion 
out remembrance " {Mamillia [Grosart, ill." 

ii. 154], 1583). See Sonnet cxlvii. 41, 42. Both lines, and the last, taunt 

29. bandied] kept up on both sides. Rosaline on her dark colouring, com- 
From the game of tennis. Compare pared to ink " B " probably stands for 
Greene, Menaphon (Grosart, vi. 77), black. 

1589 : " it little fits in this companie 43. Ware] take heed of, beware, 

to bandie taunts of love." Still in sporting use. Compare " Ware 

3°> 33- favour] token of love, per- horns, ho ! " (Troilus and Cressida, 

sonal appearance. See line 2g2 below v. vii. 12) ; and Greene's Mamillia 

(note). (Grosart, ii. 91) : " if thou waver, ware 

37. fairs] beautiful women. The thou dost not as the dogge, loose both 

senses, a beautiful person or beauty bones." 

itself, occurs several times in this play, pencils] small, finely-pointed brushes 

as they both do in Lodge's Euphues for the insertion of spots or lines 

Golden Legacie. (not here for u laying o n colours," as 

39, 40. Any thing like ? Much in Schmidt explains). Rosaline retali- 
the letters] Compare iv. ii. 140-142 ates upon Katharine by calling her 
above: "did they please you? . . . spotty-faced and flame-coloured. Corn- 
Marvellous well for the pen." Lodge pare Greene, Planetomachia (Grosart, 
has the same retort in Euphues Golden v. 75), 1585 : " Diana is painted kissing 



sc. n.] LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 125 

My red dominical, my golden letter : 

O ! that your face were not so full of O's. 45 

Prin. A pox of that jest ! and I beshrew all shrows ! 

But, Katharine, what was sent to you from fair Dumain ? 
Kath. Madam, this glove. 

Prin. Did he not send you twain ? 

Kath. Yes, madam ; and moreover, I 

Some thousand verses of a faithful lover ; 50 

A huge translation of hypocrisy, 

Vilely compil'd, profound simplicity. 
Mar. This, and these pearls to me sent Longaville : 

The letter is too long by half a mile. 
Prin. I think no less. Dost thou not wish in heart 55 

The chain were longer and the letter short ? 
Mar. Ay, or I would these hands might never part. 
Prin. We are wise girls to mock our lovers so. 
Ros. They are worse fools to purchase mocking so. 

That same Biron I '11 torture ere I go. 60 

O ! that I knew he were but in by the week. 



45. not so] Qi; omitted Ff, Q 2. 46. Prin.] Qq, Ff ; Kath. Theobald, 
Cambridge. 47. But] Qq, Ff ; Prin. But Theobald, Steevens, Cambridge. 
53. pearls] pearle Q 1. 

Vertue, and spotting beauties face with " O " was used as a substantive of 

a Pensel." And, again, Penelope's Web anything round, especially of spangles, 

(v. 146 [1575]) : " thrust it out as Myson 46. / beshrew all shrows] I condemn 

did a ragged table bescratcht with a all shrews ; my curse on them. Com- 

Pensell." In Sonnet xvi. the reference pare Dodsley's Old Plays, iv. 69: "I 

is to painting in lines, as it is also used beshrew . . . that great knave's heart." 

(indistinguishably from our pencil) in A common imprecation. The Princess 

Greene's Tullies Love (vii. 173) : " love desires to put an end to their wran- 

hath but drawne one line in your gling and uses strong language. Her 

thoughts with his pensell, . . . blot first expression in this speech was, it 

out love's shadows." If there be any is said, often in Queen Elizabeth's 

covert allusion, it may be to rapping mouth. Ben Jonson says it was u most 

school-children's knuckles with the courtly " (Poetaster, ii. 1 [1600]). 

large pencils in former use, when writ- 61. in by the week] caught, trapped, 

ing badly at their copy-books. Compare Ralph Roister Doister, 1. ii. 

44. My red dominical] So in Sharp- (Hazlitt's Dodsley, iii. 60) : " I told 
ham's Cupid's Whirligig, Act ii. (1607) : you, I, we should woo another wife. 
" he lookes for all the world like the [Aside] R. Roister. Why did God make 
Dominicall Letter in his red Coate." me such a goodly person ? M. Merry. 

golden letter] The excellent, or He is in by the week." A passage in 

Sunday letter, with a reference to Webster'sW / 7t*teZ)mZ(Routledge, 1877, 

Katharine's " amber locks." p. 18) suggests imprisonment : " [Enter 

45. O's] spots, pimples ; pockmarks Flamineo and Marcello guarded, and a 
are implied perhaps by the next line, lawyer.] Lawyer. What, are you in by 



126 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



[act v. 



How I would make him fawn, and beg, and seek, 

And wait the season, and observe the times, 

And spend his prodigal wits in bootless rimes, 

And shape his service all to my behests 65 

And make him proud to make me proud that jests ! 

So pendant-like would I o'ersway his state 

That he should be my fool, and I his fate. 

65. all to my behests] Ff 2, 3, 4; wholly to my device Qq, F 1 ; wholly to my 
hests Dyce (Knight conjecture), Cambridge, Craig. 66. that] Qq, F 1 ; with 

Ff 2, 3, 4. 67. pendant-like] editor ; pertawit-like Ff, Q 2 ; perttaunt-like Q 1 ; 
pedant-like Theobald ; portent-ltke Hanmer ; pageant-like Capell ; potent-like 
Singer ; persaunt-like Grant White. 

the week ? so, I will try now whether 
thy wit be close prisoner." These 
examples and two or three others have 
been quoted, but the phrase is not 
common, nor satisfactorily explained. 
Taken in connection with the Prin- 
cess's words, " mocking merriment " 
(line 139), it is evident Rosaline means 
caught in earnest. 

67. pendant-like] I adopt this read- 
ing from the following considerations. 
Pendant (commonly spelt pendaunt) is 
very near the original, and is also a 
word used several times by Shake- 
speare. In the text the ladies are 
showing their presents, and the last 
mentioned is Maria's chain of pearls. 
"Pendant' ' was a common name for pearl 
ornaments, whether ear-rings, chains, 
or solitaires. Compare the following 
passages : " You faire ladies that spend 
so many houres in looking and prying 
in a glasse to see if this shadow sit 
handsomely, if your Rebatos be well 
set, if the wyers stand even upright 
on your heads, and the pendant 
just in the middle of your fore- 
heads" (Sir J. Harington, Allegory 
of Orlando Furioso [ed. 1634, P- 4 IO ]» 
1591). " Rich velvet gowns, pendents 
and chaines of pearle, Casknets of 
aggats cut with rare device " (Sir J. 
Harington, Epigrams, i. 74). " Behold, 
here, my bracelets from mine arms. 
. . . Take 'em, wear 'em : my jewels, 
chain of pearle, pendants, all I have " 
(Ben Jonson, Cynthia's Revels, iv. 1). 
jonson mentions them as ear-rings, es- 
pecially in his Magnetic Lady. And so 
doesNashe : " I will hang such apayreof 
pendents at both your eares " (PasquiVs 
Returne [Grosart, i. 138], 1539). ■ Nashe 
has the words in the text in combina- 



tion : " My rapier pendant like a round 
sticke" (The Unfortunate Traveller 
[Grosart, v. 39]). Possibly Maria (line 
57) has clasped her hands with the 
chain round her own or over one of the 
other's necks or heads. The idea fits 
the situation better than any of those 
suggested. A reference to Queen 
Elizabeth's New Year's Gifts (Pro- 
gresses) will furnish abundant parallels. 
In the list of presents given by Leices- 
ter (Nichols, i. 527, 528) in 1571-87 
pendants of pearl and of gold are many 
times mentioned. Sometimes the 
word is pendaunte, sometimes appen- 
dant : "pendants of perles of sundry 
bignesses hanging at a smale chaine 
of golde " is one of those described. 
Another is : "a fair juell of gold, being 
a caskenet containing 20 peeces, being 
letters and a sipher in the middest all 
garnished with smale dyamonds, and 
between every letter 2 perles and every 
letter having a smale diamond pendant : 
and at the sipher a pendant," etc. In 
the New Year's Gifts of 1588-9 
(Nichols, iii. 1) these ornaments " pen- 
daunt " occur five times, always so 
spelt ; and on page 13 there is "|a 
bodkyn of silver gilte, with a pendaunt 
like a sonne." They do not appear at 
all in the earliest lists of her reign, and 
they reach a maximum (with this spell- 
ing) about 1590, showing the height of 
royal fashion. A similar collocation 
occurs in Gesta Grayorum, 1594 
(Nichols, p. 268): "The ribband of 
blue, with an helmet pendant in imita- 
tion of St. George." 

pendant-like] Combinations of like 
with substantives to form adjectives 
probably reach a maximum in Shake- 
speare's plays. In New Eng. Diet. 



SC. II.] 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



127 



Prin. None are so surely caught, when they are catch'd, 

As wit turn'd fool : folly, in wisdom hatch'd, 70 

Hath wisdom's warrant and the help of school 
And wit's own grace to grace a learned fool. 

Ros. The blood of youth burns not with such excess 
As gravity's revolt to wantonness. 

Mar. Folly in fools bears not so strong a note 75 

As foolery in the wise, when wit doth dote ; 
Since all the power thereof it doth apply 
To prove, by wit, worth in simplicity. 

Enter Boyet. 

Prin. Here comes Boyet, and mirth is in his face. 

Boyet. O ! I am stabb'd with laughter. Where 's her grace ? 80 



74. wantonness] Ff 3, 4 ; wantonesse F 2 ; wantons be Qq, F 1. 79. is] Q 1 
omitted Ff, Q 2. 80. stabb'd] stable Q 1 ; stuff 'd Keightley conjecture. 



some early examples (1420 to 1550) 
are cited, with the remark: "Some 
particular writers have shown an extra- 
ordinary fondness for this formation; 
e.g., more than 60 occur in Bailey's 
Festus (1839)." But in Schmidt's useful 
"Appendix IV., List of the words form- 
ing the latter part in composition," there 
are seventy-five to " Like,' 1 this number 
being exceeded only by compounds 
with " Man " and " Full." " Godlike " 
and " childlike " are the most prominent 
of those that were in use earlier. The 
majority are Shakespeare's own com- 
position, and " pendant- like " is probably 
the earliest of these. Marlowe has 
"Midas-like" and "curate-like" at 
about the same date in Edward II. 
Compounds with " Wise," and some- 
times with " Fashion," were in use for 
this purpose earlier than Shakespeare, 
who has, however, "Colossus-wise," 
" burden-wise," and " guest-wise." 
" Heart - wise," " skutcheon - wise," 
" scarf-wise" occur in Nichols (1581-2). 
So also do " peascod-fashion and 
"pear-fashion." " Bodkinwise " and 
others occur in Golding's Ovid, 1567. 
Shakespeare promptly rejects these for 
everyday use. 

67. o'ersway his state] control his 
condition ; and in connection with the 
last note there is found the double 
sense, hang or swing over his seat or 
chair of state. Such chairs of estates 



were supplied with the insignia of rank. 
In the passage quoted at "vane " (iv. 
i. 93) there is mention of" a most sump- 
tuous cloth and chayre of estate for the 
Queens Majestie, with her armes and 
styles thereon." " State," " a seat of 
dignity, a canopied chair" (Schmidt), 
is often used by Shakespeare. In 
Nichols (i. 599) we are told that a seat 
was fitted up for Queen Elizabeth in 
the chancel at the Church of St. Law- 
rence in Reading, where she spent some 
days in 1575. The seat had a traverse 
[curtain] and hangings of arras . . . 
" in the Churchwarden's Accompts in 
1602 it is called the state." Therefore 
it had a canopy (Nichols). 

80. stabb'd with laughter] struck 
through with laughter ? I agree with 
Collier, who pronounced this "an 
awkward and unusual expression." 
Furness says dogmatically : " Barron 
Field (Shakes. Soc. Papers, ii. 56) 
rightly interpreted the word 'stabb'd' 
by 'the stitch in the side, which is 
sometimes brought on by laughter.' " 
But " that idiot, laughter," is not half 
the thing it used to be, at least in 
" good society." In lines 115-116 these 
characters, royal and noble, are said 
to " tumble on the ground with zealous 
laughter." And compare Nashe, The 
Unfortunate Traveller (Grosart, v. 28), 
1594 : " If, I say, you had seen but 



128 LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST L*ct v. 

Prin. Thy news, Boyet ? 

Boyet. Prepare, madam, prepare ! 

Arm, wenches, arm ! encounters mounted are 
Against your peace : Love doth approach disguis'd, 
Armed in arguments ; you '11 be surpris'd : 
Muster your wits ; stand in your own defence ; 85 

Or hide your heads like cowards, and fly hence. 

Prin. Saint Denis to Saint Cupid ! What are they 

That charge their breath against us ? say, scout, say. 

Boyet. Under the cool shade of a sycamore 

I thought to close mine eyes some half an hour, 90 

When, lo ! to interrupt my purpos'd rest, 

Toward that shade I might behold addrest 

The king and his companions : warily 

I stole into a neighbour thicket by, 

And overheard what you shall overhear ; 95 

That, by and by, disguis'd they will be here. 

Their herald is a pretty knavish page, 

That well by heart hath conn'd his embassage : 

Action and accent did they teach him there ; 

(< Thus must thou speak, and thus thy body bear " : 100 

And ever and anon they made a doubt 

Presence majestical' would put him out; 

" For," quoth the king, " an angel shalt thou see ; 

Yet fear not thou, but speak audaciously." 

The boy replied, u An angel is not evil ; 105 

I should have fear'd her had she been a devil." 

With that all laugh'd and clapp'd him on the shoulder, 

89. sycamore] siccamore Q i. 93. companions : warily] companions warely 

Q 1. 96. they] thy Q 1. 

halfe the actions that he used , . . News from Hell (Grosart, ii. 95): "I 

you would have laught your face and mustred all rny wits about me." 

knees together." See line 465 below 102. majestical] See v. i. n. Here 

(note). In T. B.'s translation of means " princely." 

Primaudaye's French Academy, 1586, 107. clapp'd him on the shoulder] 

occurs : " Felt such a motion in them patted him on the back in approval, 

of the spleene, that they were stifled Compare Lyly, Campaspe, i. 2 (1584) : 

with laughter " (chap. iii.). " He commendeth one that is an ex- 

82-88. mounted . . . charge] raised cellent musition, then stand I by and 

in readiness, as of cannon. Compare clap another on the shoulder and say, 

King John, 11. i. 381 : " Mounted their this is a passing good cooke." 

battering cannon charged to the Similarly used in Much Ado About 

mouths." Nothing. It also had the sense ot 

85. Muster your wits] So Dekker, " take into custody." 






sc. 



II.] 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



129 



Making the bold wag by their praises bolder. 

One rubb'd his elbow thus, and fleer'd, and swore 

A better speech was never spoke before ; no 

Another, with his finger and his thumb, 

Cry'd " Via ! we will do 't, come what will come J 

The third he caper'd, and cried, " All goes well " ; 

The fourth turn'd on the toe, and down he fell. 

With that, they all did tumble on the ground, 115 

With such a zealous laughter, so profound, 

That in this spleen ridiculous appears, 

To check their folly, passion's solemn tears. 

Prin. But what, but what, come they to visit us ? 

Boyet. They do, they do ; and are apparell'd thus, 120 

Like Muscovites, or Russians, as I guess. 

118. folly, passion's solemn] Theobald; follie pashions solembe Q 1; folly 
passions solemne F 1, Q 2 ; folly passions, solemn Ff 2, 3, 4 ; folly's passion, solemn 
Staunton conjecture. 120. S. Walker thinks a following line may be lost. 

121. as] Qq, Fi; or F 2 ; and Ff 3, 4. 



109. One rubb'd his elbow] When the 
elbows itched it was a sign of satis- 
faction. "Their elbows itch for joy" 
(Nashe, Lenten Stuffe [Grosart, v. 257]). 
Compare 1 Henry IV. v. i. 77: " Gape 
and rub the elbow at the news of hurly 
burly innovation " ; and Guilpin's 
Skialetheia (repr. p. 22), 1598 : " He '11 
cry oh rare ! and scratch the elbow too 
To see two butchers curres fight." 

fleer'd] grinned. Gascoigne speaks 
of "Flearing Flattery" (The Steel 
Glas [Arber, p. 51], 1576). The verb 
occurs several times in Shakespeare. 
See Othello, iv. i. 83 (and note, Arden 
ed. p. 185). 

in. his finger and his thumb] snaps 
his fingers in exuberance of spirits. 

112. Via] See note to line 140 in the 
previous scene. 

114. turn'd on the toe] A light and 
airy gesture of departing. Compare 
Chettle's Kind Hartes Dreame (New 
Shakes. Soc. 1874, P- 66 )» x 59 2 : " So 
wishing the chearefull pleasaunce end- 
lesse ; and the wilful sullen, sorrow 
till they surfet ; with a tume on the toe 
I take my leave. Richard Tarleton." 

115. tumble on the ground] See note 
to line 80, above. " A man's garment, 
and his excessive laughter, and going, 
declare what person he is " (Ecclus. 
xix. 28). 



117. spleen] See in. i. 70, and note. 

118. passion's solemn tears] Theobald 
compares A Midsummer-Night's Dream, 
v. i. 69, 70. 

120. Furness says M Tiessen (Etig. 
Studien, ii. 189 [1878]) kindly supplies 
the [supposed] missing line : ' Hats 
furr'd, bootes piked, in long and motley 
dress.' " How grateful we should feel ! 
Tiessen drew his archaisms from 
Ritson's extract (see next note). 

121. Muscovites, or Russians] Ritson 
quotes from Hall (Henry VIII. p. 6) 
to prove that a mask of Muscovites had 
been previously shown. In the first 
year of Henry VIII., at a banquet for 
the foreign ambassadors at West- 
minster, " came the lorde Henry, Earle 
of Wiltshire, and the lorde Fitzwater, 
in twoo long gounes of yellowe . . . 
after the fashion of Russia or Ruslande, 
with furred hattes of grey . . . and 
bootes with pykes turned up." I have 
omitted two or three lines about dress. 
There is nothing whatever in this 
episode (as given by Ritson) about two 
lords dressed like Russians to indicate 
a masque. Nor is there any reference 
in the text to these costumes (the 
Princess calls their dress " shapeless 
gear"). Sidney Lee dismisses this 
supposed " reminiscence of a compara- 
tively unimportant event more than 



130 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



[act v. 



Their purpose is to parle, to court and dance ; 

And every one his love-feat will advance 

Unto his several mistress, which they '11 know 

By favours several which they did bestow. 125 

Prin. And will they so? the gallants shall be task'd ; 
For, ladies, we will jevery one be mask'd, 
And not a man of them shall have the grace, 
Despite of suit, to see a lady's face. 

Hold, Rosaline, this favour thou shalt wear, 130 

And then the king will court thee for his dear : 
Hold, take thou this, my sweet, and give me thine, 
So shall Biron take me for Rosaline. 
And change your favours too ; so shall your loves 
Woo contrary, deceiv'd by these removes. 135 

Ros. Come on, then ; wear the favours most in sight. 

Kath. But in this changing what is your intent ? 

Prin. The effect of my intent is to cross theirs : 
They do it but in mocking merriment ; 

122. parle, to] Capell ; par lee, to Qq, Ff 1, 2 ; par lee Ff 3, 4. 123. love-feat] 
Q 1, Ff ; love-seat Q 2 ; love-suit Dyce (S. Walker conjecture). 134. your] 

Ff, Q 2 ; you Q 1. too] two Q 1. 139. mocking merriment] Ff, Q 2 ; mockerie 
merriment Q 1. 



eighty years old " as being improbable. 
For Sidney Lee's historical precedent 
for a similar occurrence, when a 
Russian ambassador with a large suite 
came to seek a wife amongst the 
Queen's kinswomen for the Czar in 
1584, and the reception accorded them 
with ludicrous ceremonials, see Intro- 
duction and his Life of Shakespeare 
(note, pp. 51, 52), 1890. He thinks 
these events account for Shakespeare's 
introduction of Russians better than 
anything previously suggested. But a 
passage in Lodge's Reply to Gosson, 
which I have not seen quoted, shows 
that this was not a new device. He 
says : " If I may speak my mind I think 
we shall find but few poets if it were 
exactly wayd what they oughte to be : 
your Muscovian straungers, your 
Scithian monsters wonderful, by one 
Eurus brought upon one stage in ships 
made of Sheepeskins wyll not prove 
you a poet" (1579-1580) (from Saints- 
bury's repr. i8g2, p. 18). This allusion, 
whether it be wholly classical or partly 
modern, seems to me of some import- 



ance. ' ' What would these strangers ? " 
asks Rosaline (line 175.) On this subject, 
see Introduction for a more interesting 
parallel from Gesta Grayorum, 1594. 

122. parle] hold conference, discuss 
matters. Compare Greene, Carde of 
Fancie (Grosart, iv. 57) : " But Castania 
altogether unwilling to parle with her 
new patient, kept herself out of his 
sight." 

123. love-feat] exploit, deed or effort 
prompted by love, or in connection 
with love ; love-affair. Shakespeare 
has a number of such compounds, as 
love-affair, love-book, love-cause, love- 
discourse, love-prate, love-suit. Nashe 
has love-letter, love-dream, love-tale, 
etc., etc. Trie commentators have 
raised difficulties, but needlessly. We 
may give the expression a sarcastic 
touch, since the purport of Boyet's 
speech, as well as the Princess's, is to 
belittle the " mocking merriments " of 
the King and his party. 

130. favour] See below, line 292, 
and above, lines 30, 33. 

139. mocking merriment] These words 






sc. ii] LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 131 

And mock for mock is only my intent. 140 

Their several counsels they unbosom shall 

To loves mistook, and so be mock'd withal 

Upon the next occasion that we meet, 

With visages display'd, to talk and greet. 
Ros. But shall we dance, if they desire us to't ? 145 

Prin. No ; to the death, we will not move a foot : 

Nor to their penn'd speech render we no grace ; 

But while 'tis spoke each turn away her face. 
Boyet. Why, that contempt will kill the speaker's heart, 

And quite divorce his memory from his part. 150 

Prin. Therefore I do it ; and I make no doubt 

The rest will ne'er come in, if he be out. 

There 's no such sport as sport by sport o'erthrown, 

To make theirs ours and ours none but our own : 

So shall we stay, mocking intended game, 155 

And they, well mock'd, depart away with shame. 

[Sound trumpet. 
Boyet. The trumpet sounds : be mask'd ; the maskers come. 

Enter Blackamoors with music ; MOTH with a speech ; the 
KING and the rest of the lords disguised like Russians, 
and visored. 

Moth. All hail, the richest beauties on the earth ! 

148. her] Ff 2, 3, 4 ; his Qq, F i. 149. speaker's] Q 1 ; keepers Ff, Q 2. 

152. ne'er] Ff 2, 3, 4 ; ere Qq, F 1. 156. Sound trumpet] Q 1 ; Sound. Ff, Q 2. 
Enter . . .] Enter Blackmores with musicke, the Boy with a speech, and the rest 
of the Lords, disguised Qq, Ff ; Enter Blackamoors with Music : Moth ; the King, 
Biron, Longaville, and Dumain, in Russian habits and masked Dyce, Cambridge ; 
Enter Blackamoors with music omitted Craig. 

are to be noted ; they rob the Princess's 149. kill the speaker's heart] utterly 
plans of any ill-nature at once. See dishearten him. Compare Winter's 
11 in by the week," above, line 61. Tale, iv. iii. 88 : " offer me no money, 

146. No ; to the death] not as I pray you ; that kills my heart." It 
long as we live; never. Equivalent is an old expression, as in Malory's 
hereto our "to death," with no sug- MortecT Arthur (Globe ed. p. 293): "Fie 
gestion of conflict. Compare Richard upon treason, said Sir Tristram, for it 
J/7, in. ii. 55 : " I will not do it, to the killeth my heart to hear this tale." And 
death " (I will never do it). Schmidt see Heywood's second part of King 
wrongly equates this with the sense Edward the Fourth (Pearson, p. 151). 
mortally, fatally. " Speaker " here refers expressly to 

147. pemt'd speech] The written speech Moth. 

Moth carries in his hand, presently to 157. be mask'd] See below, line 292. 

refresh his memory should they put For masks and dances in this scene, 

him out — although he had conned it by see note at iv. iii. 376. 

heart (lines g8 and 102). The Princess Enter Blackamoors] African ne- 

proposes to annihilate Moth in the first groes. They seem to have become 

instance. See below, line 305. very popular on the stage. Ben Jonson 



132 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



[act v. 



Boyet. Beauties no richer than rich taffeta. 
Moth. A holy parcel of the fairest dames, 160 

[ The Ladies turn their backs to him. 

That ever turn'd their — backs — to mortal views ! 
Biron. u Their eyes," villain, " their eyes." 
Moth. That ever turn'd their eyes to mortal views ! 

Out— 
Boyet. True; "out" indeed. 165 

Moth. Out of your favours, heavenly spirits, vouchsafe 

Not to behold — 
Biron. " Once to behold," rogue. 
Moth. Once to behold with your sun-beamed eyes, — with 

your sun-beamed eyes — 1 70 

Boyet. They will not answer to that epithet ; 

You were best call it "daughter-beamed eyes." 
Moth. They do not mark me, and that brings me out. 
Biron. Is this your perfectness? be gone, you rogue! 

[Exit Moth. 
Ros. What would these strangers ? know their minds, 

Boyet. 175 

159. Boyet.] Theobald ; Berow. Q 1 ; Ber. F 1, Q 2 ; Bir. Ff 2, 3, 4. 160. 
The Ladies . . .] after views (line 161) Qq, Ff. 161. ever] even Q I. 165 and 
171. Boyet.] Qq, F 1 ; Bir. Ff 2, 3, 4. 166. spirits] Qq, F 1 ; spirit Ff 2, 3, 4. 
174. [Moth withdraws] Capell ; [Exit Moth] Cambridge; omitted Qq, Ff. 175. 
strangers] stranges Q 1. 

159. Beauties . . . rich taffeta] all 
their visible beauty is that of their 
taffeta masks. Taffeta was " a fine 
smooth stuff of silk " (Schmidt) ; it is 
hardly known now by that name. 

170-172. sun . . . daughter] This 
grievous pun occurs about a dozen 
times in Shakespeare, collected by 
Schmidt in v. Son. There is one pain- 
ful example (not mentioned by Schmidt) 
in thatmost beautiful of sonnets (xxxiii.). 

173. br ings] puts; as in the expression 
" bring one on his way." 

out] See note at " out of coun- 
tenance," below, line 272. Here 
the meaning is, "out of my part," 
as proved by line 336 below. Compare 
Cynthia's Revels, Induction (1600) : 
" some satisfaction in your prologue, 
or, I '11 be sworne, we have marred all. 
2 Child. Tut, fear not, child, this will 
never distaste a true sense : be not out, 
and, good enough." 



tells all about them in his Masque of 
Blackness (1605), saying it was " her 
majesty's will to have them (the 
masquers) blackmoors." We cannot 
tell when this stage-direction was in- 
serted, or by whom, but it is at least 
as old as 1597. With reference to the 
visors.mentioned often below (lines 227, 
242, 246, etc.), they were a necessary 
element. Speaking of the Mountebank's 
Masque (February 16, 1618), Chamber- 
lain says : " their show, for I cannot 
call it a masque, seeing they were not 
disguised, nor had vizards" (Court 
and Times of James I. ii. 66). The 
blackamoors in the masque here were 
probably boys disguised. In Sidney's 
Arcadia, bk. i. (ante 1586), a mourning 
coach is " drawn with four milk-white 
horses, flourished all in black, with a 
blackamoor boy upon ever^y horse, they 
all apparelled in white,, the coach itself 
... in black and white." 



sc. iij LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 133 

If they do speak our language, 'tis our will 

That some plain man recount their purposes : 

Know what they would. 
Boyet. What would you with the princess? 

Biron. Nothing but peace and gentle visitation. 
Ros. What would they, say they? 180 

Boyet. Nothing but peace and gentle visitation. 
Ros. Why, that they have ; and bid them so be gone. 
Boyet. She says, you have it, and you may be gone. 
King. Say to her, we have measur'd many miles 

To tread a measure with you on the grass. 185 

Boyet. They say, that they have measur'd many a mile 

To tread a measure with you on this grass. 
Ros. It is not so. Ask them how many inches 

Is in one mile : if they have measur'd many, 

The measure then of one is easily told. 190 

Boyet. If, to come hither, you have measur'd miles, 

And many miles, the princess bids you tell 

How many inches do fill up one mile. 
Biron. Tell her we measure them by weary steps. 
Boyet. She hears herself. 
Ros. How many weary steps, 195 

Of many weary miles you have o'ergone, 

Are number'd in the travel of one mile ? 
Biron. We number nothing that we spend for you : 

Our duty is so rich, so infinite, 

That we may do it still without account. 200 

185. you on the] Ff, Q 2 ; her on this Q 1. 

181. visitation] visit. See Measure See As You Like It, v. v. 41. An 

for Measure* 111. ii. 255. " Visit " (sub- earlier use occurs in Gosson's Schoole 

stantive) does not occur in this sense of Abuse (Arber, p. 26), 1579: " Ter- 

in Shakespeare. It is in Jonson, Under- pandrus when he ended the brabbles at 

woods, xxxii. Lacedoemon, neyther pyped Rogero 

185. tread a measure] The proper nor Turkelony, but . . . taught them 
expression to apply to this stately too treade a better measure." 
dance. It is in Greene's Arbasto 200. account]The archaic "accompt" 
(Grosart, iii. 217), 1584: "thinking I is retained here, and in one or two 
must needes treade the measures right other passages where it deals with a 
when Fortune piped the daunce." money reckoning, by several modern 
And in Lyly's Campaspe, iv. iii. (1584) : editors. In the first Folio " accompt " 
M But let us draw in, to see how well occurs thirteen times, and "account" 
it becomes them to tread the measures seventeen times in the sense of reckon- 
in a daunce, that were wont to set the ing. 
order for a march." Common later. 



134 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



[act 



Vouchsafe to show the sunshine of your face, 

That we, like savages, may worship it. 
Ros. My face is but a moon, and clouded too. 
King. Blessed are clouds, to do as such clouds do ! 204 

Vouchsafe, bright moon, and these thy stars, to shine, 

Those clouds remov'd, upon our watery eyne. 
Ros. O vain petitioner ! beg a greater matter ; 

Thou now request'st but moonshine in the water. 
King. Then, in our measure vouchsafe but one change. 

Thou bidd'st me beg ; this begging is not strange. 210 
Ros. Play, music, then ! nay, you must do it soon. 

Not yet ; — no dance : — thus change I like the moon. 



208. request'st] Theobald ; requests Qq, Ff. 209. vouchsafe but] Ff, Q 2 ; 

do but vouchsafe Q 1. 212. Not yet ; — no dance:] Steevens (1793), Craig; 

Not yet no dance: Qq, Ff; Not yet? no dance? Pope, Theobald; Not -yet; no 
dance: Capell; Not yet t no dance t Cambridge. 



202. like savages, may worship] See 
above, iv. iii. 218-222; and Cym- 
beline, in. iii. 

203. face . . . moon . . . clouded] 
Rosaline refers here to her " whitely " 
and dark colouring — perhaps. See in. i. 
187. But her enigmatical words may 
merely be a reference to her mask. 
She does not give herself away by her 
remark. The King thinks she is the 
Princess. 

204. Blessed are clouds] blessed is 
the cloud, veil or mask that does as 
yours does, kisses your face. " These 
happy masks that kiss fair lady's 
brows" (Romeo and Juliet, 1. i. 236). 
The quibbling upon the cloud and mask 
here, and again at iine 297, seems not 
to have been pointed out. It is per- 
fectly necessary for the sense. A cloud 
in this material sense would be familiar 
to dramatists. Compare Cunningham's 
Extracts from Revels Accounts (Shakes. 
Soc. p. 147), 1579 : " For a hoope and 
blew lynnen to mend the clowde that 
was Borrowed and cut," etc. 

205. bright moon, and these thy stars] 
The King makes a similar remark at iv. 
iii. 227-228 : " gracious moon ; She an 
attending star," which tends to show 
that Shakespeare was not referring to 
the supposed star Lunisequa, but to any 
of the stars. Furness quotes Staunton : 
"Lilly calls it Lunisequa" (no refer- 
ence). It is mentioned by Lodge, 



Euphues Golden Legacie (Shakes. Lib. 
1875, p. 79), quoted already. 

208. moonshine in the water] A thing 
of naught, waste of time. An old 
proverbial expression. It is in The 
Proverbs of John Hey wood (Sharman's 
edition, p. 77), 1546 : " Farewell he 
(quoth I), I will as soone be hilt [held ?] 
As waite againe for the mooneshine in 
the watter. But is not this a pretie 
piked matter?" And in North's 
Doni's Moral Philosophic (Jacobs' 
repr. p. 182), 1570 : " How they 
laboured and toyled for life about 
moone shine in the water." Later than 
Love's Labour 's Lost it is common, as 
in Lyly's Endymion, n. ii. ; Burton's 
Anatomy of Melancholy (Democritus to 
the Reader) ; Harington, Epigrams, ii. 
56 ; Ben Jonson, Staple of News, in. i. 
And see Cotgrave in v. Debatre. 
Hence our " its all moonshine." Ellis 
notes that "water" rhymes with 
" matter " in King Lear, in. ii. 81, 82 ; 
Heywood (ut supra) gives an early in- 
stance. 

210. this begging is not strange] The 
King means, although we are strangers 
(foreigners), you understand what beg- 
ging means. 

211. do it soon] There is some 
allusion here I do not understand — 
connecting the ideas of begging and 
dancing apparently. But perhaps it is 
merely a coy refusal. 



sc ii] LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 135 

King. Will you not dance ? How come you thus estranged ? 
Ros. You took the moon at full, but now she's changed. 
King. Yet still she is the moon, and I the man. 215 

The music plays ; vouchsafe some motion to it. 
Ros. Our ears vouchsafe it. 

King. But your legs should do it. 

Ros. Since you are strangers, and come here by chance, 

We '11 not be nice : take hands : — we will not dance. 
King. Why take you hands then ? 
Ros. Only to part friends. 220 

Court'sy, sweet hearts ; and so the measure ends. 
King. More measure of this measure : be not nice. 
Ros. We can afford no more at such a price. 
King. Price you yourselves : what buys your company ? 
Ros. Your absence only. 

King. That can never be. 225 

Ros. Then cannot we be bought : and so adieu ; 

Twice to your visor, and half once to you ! 
King. If you deny to dance, let 's hold more chat. 
Ros. In private then. 
King. I am best pleased with that. 

[ They converse apart. 

216. Given to Rosaline in Qq, Ff ; corrected by Theobald. 220. you] Ff, 

Q 2; wQi, Capell et seq. 224. Price] Rowe (ed. 1) ; Prise Qq, Ff 1, 2, 3 ; 
Prize F 4. you yourselves] Q 1 ; yourselves F 1, Q 2 ; yourselves then Ff 2, 3, 4. 
229, 237, 241. [They converse apart] Capell ; [They walk away, chatting] Furnivall. 

215. Yet . . . man] Theobald be- 227. Twice . . . you] Rosaline means 

lieved this verse about the man in the her courtesy is not given to the King, 

moon to be spurious, because it breaks for whom she has none to spare ; but 

in on the rhyme, and because "the to the mask which is identical with 

conceit of it is not pursued." Capell Biron's. There are two kisses for it. 

omitted it. But the conceit is pur- Furness calls attention to this line, but 

sued. I am a partner for you, will cannot explain it satisfactorily. This 

you dance ? Perhaps an alteration in is the second time Rosaline has amused 

punctuation would make this plainer. herself by doubtful speeches referring 

221. Courfsy] Compare The Tempest, to her not being the Princess (see 

1. ii. 443 : " Curtsied when you have, above, line 203). 

and kist." The curtsy and the kiss 228. deny] refuse. Compare Winter's 

began the dance. The King alludes Tale, v. ii. 139 : " You denied to fight 

to the kiss, perhaps (line 222). with me the other day because I was 

224. Price you] seems to be prefer- no gentleman born." This construc- 
able to Prize in continuation of tion occurs several times in Shake- 
Rosaline's remark. " Price " was very speare (*' deny to wed," Taming of the 
commonly written prise. So, however, Shrew, 11. i. 180, etc.), but I have not 
was " prize." noted it elsewhere. 



136 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



[ACT V. 



Biron. White-handed mistress, one sweet word with thee. 230 
Prin. Honey, and milk, and sugar ; there is three. 
Biron. Nay then, two treys, an if you grow so nice, 

Metheglin, wort, and malmsey : well run, dice ! 

There 's half-a-dozen sweets. 
Prin. Seventh sweet, adieu. 

Since you can cog, I '11 play no more with you. 235 

Biron. One word in secret. 
Prin. Let it not be sweet. 

Biron. Thou griev'st my gall. 
Prin. Gall ! bitter. 

Biron. Therefore meet. 

[ They converse apart. 
Dum. Will you vouchsafe with me to change a word ? 
Mar. Name it. 



232. an] Q 1, F 1 ; and Q 2, Ff 2, 3, 4. 

232. treys'] threes, at dice. Not 
again in Shakespeare, but frequently 
used. Craig gives a quotation from 
Chaucer's The Pardoner's Tale, line 
19 : " Seuen is my chaunce and thyn is 
cink and treye. 7 ' Although the word 
does not stand alone in Shakespeare 
again, it probably forms the first part 
of " £ray-trip," a game at dice, men- 
tioned in Twelfth Night, 11. v. 207. 

nice] subtle, sophistical (Schmidt). 
Compare 1 Henry VI. 11. iv. 7 : 
"These nice sharp quillets of the 
law " ; and 3 Henry VI. iv. vii. 58. 
Our " nice point." 

233. Metheglin] A Welsh drink of 
honey and water, herbs and other in- 
gredients. See Merry Wives of Wind- 
sor, v. v. 167 (note, Arden edition, 
p. 219). 

wort] unfermented beer ; M the sweet 
infusion of malt" (Schmidt). It is 
mentioned in Chaucer's Canterbury 
Tales, and in Holland's Plinie (xviii. 
7, p. 56o[i6oi]) : " The skum or frothe 
that gathereth aloft by the working of 
the woort.' 1 

malmsey] ** A strong sweet wine, 
originally the product of the neighbour- 
hood of Monemvasia (Napoli di Mal- 
vasia), in the Morea, but now obtained 
from Spain, etc. ... as well as from 
Greece" (New Eng. Diet.). It is 
called malvesie in Chaucer. Greene 



speaks of a cheater in a tavern at some 
market-town who there " tipled so much 
malmesie that he had never a ready 
woord in his mouth " (Notable Dis- 
covery of Coosnage, 1591 [Grosart, x. 
11]) ; so that it appears to be rather a 
vulgar drink at this time. Speaking of 
the ale provided for Queen Elizabeth 
on her way to Kenilworth in 1575, 
Lord Leicester writes : " We were fain 
to send to London with bottels, to 
Kenel worth, to divers other places 
where ale was. Her own bere was 
such as there was no man able to drink 
it ; yt had been as good to have drank 
malmsey " (Nichols, i. 526). 

235. cog] cheat. Expressly applied 
to cheating with dice. Compare 
Gabriel Harvey, An Advertisement for 
Papp-hatchett (Grosart, ii. 214), 1589 : 
" He'll cogg with the dye of deceit." 
This is the oldest sense of the verb, 
and is abundantly illustrated from 1532 
downward in New Eng. Diet. It was 
transferred to every sort of deceit. 
Still in use in Ireland. See Lyly's 
Sapho and Phao, i. 3 (1584) : •« We fall 
from cogging at dice to cogge with 
states." 

238. change a word] Compare Much 
Ado About Nothing, iv. i. 185. Inter- 
change a word. Compare Romeo and 
Juliet, in. v. 31 : " Some say the lark 
and loathed toad changed eyes." 



sc. ii] LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 137 

Dum. Fair lady, — 

Mar. Say you so ? Fair lord, — 

Take that for your fair lady. 
Dum. Please it you, 240 

As much in private, and I '11 bid adieu. 

{They converse apart. 
Kath. What ! was your visor made without a tongue? 
Long. I know the reason, lady, why you ask. 
Kath. O ! for your reason ; quickly, sir ; I long. 
Long. You have a double tongue within your mask, 245 

And would afford my speechless visor half. 
Kath. Veal, quoth the Dutchman. Is not veal a calf? 
Long. A calf, fair lady ! 
Kath. No, a fair lord calf. 

Long. Let 's part the word. 
Kath. No, I '11 not be your half: 

Take all, and wean it : it may prove an ox. 250 

Long. Look, how you butt yourself in these sharp mocks. 

Will you give horns, chaste lady ? do not so. 
Kath Then die a calf, before your horns do grow. 
Long. One word in private with you, ere I die. 

240. Take that] Q I ; Take you that Ff, Q 2. 242, 244, 247, 248, 249, 253, 

255. Kath.] Rowe; Mar. Qq, Ff. 251. butt] but to Ff 2, 3, 4. 

245. double tongue . . . mask] Boswell quotes from Doctor Dodypoll 
Compare Ben Jonson, Poetaster, v. 1 : (1600) : " me be right glad for see veale. 
M Lectors, gag him ; do. And put a Hans. What, do you make a Calfe of 
case of vizards o'er his head, that he me, M. Doctor ? Doct. O no pardona 
may look bifronted as he speaks." moy ; I say veil, be glad for see you 
From line 242 the visors here may veil, in good health." In this " miser- 
have been grotesques, like modern able skirmish of puns," as a commen- 
pantomime masks. Perhaps that might tator calls it, why should not V*al 
give some point to this insipid con- stand for Dutch (German) for veil (or 
versation. In James's Account of visor), as it seems to be so pronounced 
Cavendishe's Last Voyage (1593) in Miege? That gives some excuse 
" vizards on their faces like dogs' for the introduction of the word upon 
faces " are spoken of. And compare this scene of " wits so wondered at." 
Jonson's New Inn, iv. iii. : " We are In a note on the dramatis persona, 
not so much troubled with the wrong, Furness says the word veal here clearly 
As with the opinion of the wrong ; intimates the pronunciation Longavm/ 
like children, We are made afraid with for the last speaker's name. Spenser 
visors." The ladies appear to have spelt "veil," veal: "his Moother with a 
been masked constantly (see 11. i. 124). Veale hath covered his face " (Letter 

247. Veal, quoth the Dutchman] to Harvey [Grosart, i. 36], 1580). 

" Veal " is a calf. Compare Cotgrave, 249. your half] your better-half, 

" Veau : A calf or Veal ; also a lozel, your wife. See Julius Ccesar, 1. i. 

hoiden, dunce, jobbernol, doddipole." 274. 



138 LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST [act v. 

Kath. Bleat softly then ; the butcher hears you cry. 255 

{They converse apart. 
Boyet. The tongues of mocking wenches are as keen 
As is the razor's edge invisible, 
Cutting a smaller hair than may be seen ; 

Above the sense of sense ; so sensible 
Seemeth their conference ; their conceits have wings 260 
Fleeter than arrows, bullets, wind, thought, swifter things. 
Ros. Not one word more, my maids : break off, break off. 
Biron. By heaven, all dry-beaten with pure scoff! 
King. Farewell, mad wenches : you have simple wits. 
Prin. Twenty adieus, my frozen Muscovites. 265 

[Exeunt Lords and Blackamoors. 
Are these the breed of wits so wonder'd at ? 
Boyet. Tapers they are, with your sweet breaths pufFd out. 
Ros. Well-liking wits they have ; gross, gross ; fat, fat. 
Prin. O poverty in wit, kingly-poor flout ! 

Will they not, think you, hang themselves to-night ? 270 

257. invisible] invincible Theobald. 259. sense ; so sensible] Pope ; sence so 
sensible; Ff, Q 2 ; sence so sensible, Q 1. 261. bullets] omitted Capell. 265. 
Exeunt . . .] Exeunt F 1 (after line 264) ; omitted Q 1. 4 269. wit, kingly-poor] 
wit, kingly poor Qq, Ff; wit, kilVd by pure Collier MS. ; wit, poor-liking Staunton 
conjecture. 

261. bullets] Capell conjectures that 4; "Their young ones are in good 

M bullets " was a prior word, changed for liking." 

" arrows," and left in the text through Well-liking . . . fat] Rosaline's 

an oversight. " flout " is equivalent to " Fat paunches 

263. dry-beaten] literally, bruised have lean pates " (1. i. 26 : see note), 
without blood drawn. Nashe uses it Fatness and wit were held to disagree 
in the transferred sense, as here, in with one another. Compare Udall's 
Martins Months Minde (Grosart, i. Erasmus (Roberts' repr. p. 128), 1542 : 
z 15)i J 589 : " old Martin first drie " For that sort of men are fedde up 
beaten, & therby his bones broken . . . with the grosse kindes of meates, 
made a Maygame upon the Stage, and which in deed conferres to the body 
so bang'd both with prose and rime on hard braune, and clene strength, but 
everieside." Greene has " dry blows " as for the witte, it maketh as grosse 
similarly several times : " these dry and dulle as can be thought." 

blowes could draw no blood " (Mamillia 269. The Princess retorts upon 

[Grosart, ii. 150]). " Dry bobbers" occurs Rosaline's poverty in wit, in making 

in Gabriel Harvey, An Advertisement, such a grievous pun on " king " in her 

etc. (1589). See Howell's Vocabulary, " -well-liking." She proves that is her 

sect. xliv. (1650) : " To dry baste with thought by continuing it in *' kingly- 

the flat . . . Donneor des Coups de plat poor." I do not believe there is any 

d'espee." further profundity in her remark, which 

264. mad wenches] See 11. i. 257. has been worked into many shapes 
268. Well-liking] in good condition, from the supposition her words refer to 

See Merry Wives of Windsor, 11. i. 54 the King's last speech. Her " kingly- 
(Arden ed. p. 64) ; and 1 Henry IV. m. poor " is merely " well-liking " with an 
iii. 6. Steevens refers to Job xxxix. inserted quibble, mocking Rosaline. 



SC. II.] 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 



139 



Or ever, but in visors, show their faces ? 

This pert Biron was out of countenance quite. 
Ros. O, they were all in lamentable cases ! 

The king was weeping-ripe for a good word. 
Prin. Biron did swear himself out of all suit. 275 

Mar. Dumain was at my service, and his sword : 

No point, quoth I : my servant straight was mute. 
Kath. Lord Longaville said, I came o'er his heart ; 

And trow you what he call'd me ? 
Prin. Qualm, perhaps. 

Kath. Yes, in good faith. 

Prin. Go, sickness as thou art I 280 

Ros. Well, better wits have worn plain statute-caps. 

But you will hear ? the king is my love sworn. 

273. O] Ff 2, 3, 4; omitted Qq, F 1. 



272. put of countenance] disconcerted. 
Hardly distinguishable from Moth's 
" out " at line 173 above. Compare 
Puttenham, Arte of English Poesie 
(Arber, p. 149), 1582 : " These great 
Madames of honour e . . . if they want 
their courtly habillements . . . would 
be halfe ashamed or greatly out of 
countenaunce." See line 612 (note), 
below. 

274. weeping-ripe] See 3 Henry VI. 
1. iv. 172. The expression occurs in 
Sidney's Arcadia, bk. i. (repr. 1898, p. 
86), ante 1586 : " But Lalus, even weep- 
ing-ripe, went among the rest, longing 
to see somebody that would avenge 
Urania's wrong." It occurs also in 
Heywood's Rape of Lucrece (Pearson, 
p. 193), 1608, and in Armin's Italian 
Taylor (Grosart, p. 180), 1609. Else- 
where Shakespeare has reeling-ripe and 
sinking-ripe. Beaumont and Fletcher 
give us dropping -ripe, tumbling-ripe 
and crying-ripe. All seem to be built 
on the expression rope-ripe (fit for 
hanging, crack-halter), which occurs 
in Adlington's Apuleius' Golden Asse, 
chap. 30 (1566) ; and in Wilson's Arte 
of Rhetorique (according to M alone), 
I 553- Dropping-ripe is in Marlowe s 
First Book of Lucan. 

275. out of all suit] out of fitness, 
agreement, or suitability. Compare 
" out of suits with fortune " (As You 
Like It, 1. ii. 258), where the plural is 
equivalent to the collective " all. " Cot- 



grave, Florio and Miege distinguish suit 
in this sense (Quadrer) with the spell- 
ing " sute." The Princess may allude 
to the love-suit Biron wss engaged 
in. " All " was similarly inserted for 
emphasis in several old expressions, 
as: " out of all ho," " out of all cry," 
" out of all nick," " out of all count," 
"out of all scotch and notch ". These 
are all about the date of Love's Labour 's 
Lost, excepting the first two, which are 
earlier. Schmidt explains this expres- 
sion as meaning M out of service." See 
next note. 

276. service] Again connected with 
" suit " in lines 828-829 below. Perhaps 
through the law term " suit and 
service" (Feudal). See Measure for 
Measure, iv. iv. 19. 

277. No point] See 11. i. 190. Not at 
all. 

279. Qualm] There must have been 
more similarity in the pronunciations of 
" qualm " and M came " than at present 
if this quibbling is to be recognised. 
Compare Gabriel Harvey (Grosart, 
ii. 279), Pierce's Supererogation : ** to 
ravish the affections, and even to mealt 
the bowels of bravest mindes : see, see 
what a wondrous quaime." 

281. better wits have worn plain 
statute-caps] Johnson said this line was 
" not universally understood because 
every reader does not know that a 
statute-cap is part of the academical 
habit." Grey quoted from Strype's 



140 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 



[act v. 



Prin. And quick Biron hath plighted faith to me. 

Kath. And Longaville was for my service born. 

Mar. Dumain is mine, as sure as bark on tree. 285 

Boyet. Madam, and pretty mistresses, give ear. 

Immediately they will again be here 

In their own shapes ; for it can never be 

They will digest this harsh indignity. 
Prin. Will they return ? 
Boyet. They will, they will, God knows ; 290 

And leap for joy, though they are lame with blows : 



Annals of Queen Elizabeth (ii. 74) an 
Act of Parliament of 15 71 "for con- 
tinuance of making and wearing wool- 
len caps in behalf of the trade of 
cappers; providing that all above the 
age of six years (except the nobility 
and some others) should on sabbath 
days and holy days, wear caps of wool, 
knit, thicked and dressed in England, 
upon penalty often groats." Johnson, 
however, still stuck to his explanation. 
Halliwell advanced a long passage 
from Stowe's Survey of London (see 
repr. pp. 198, 199), which does not 
seem to me to the purpose, referring 
only to the liveries of the companies 
and their fashions, but not to the en- 
joinment of statutes. Grey's explana- 
tion is generally accepted. However, 
I think I can better it. It does not 
explain the meaning of" plain," and it 
is too universal, applying as it did to 
the whole community almost. Steevens 
quotes two passages from Marston — 
one from his Dutch Courtesan, 1605 : 
" though my husband be a citizen, 
and his cap's made of wool, yet I have 
wit " ; and from Middleton's The 
Family of Love, 1608 : " 'Tis a law 
enacted by the common-council of 
statute-caps." It is obvious that what- 
ever explains these passages is also 
the explanation of the line in the text. 
But there is nothing of citizens in the 
157 1 Act, nor is it an enactment of the 
Common Council. Nor is it so appropri- 
ate as it appears at first. Fuller says, in 
his Worthies (Herefordshire), speaking 
of the proverb, " If my cap be made of 
wool," "all garments were made of 
wool till the reign of Henry VIII., 
when velvet caps discomposed the pro- 
verb." In 1582 there were " Regula- 
tions recommended for the Apparel of 



London Apprentices," and " 'Twas by 
the Lord Mayor and Common Council 
enacted. That from henceforth no 
Apprentice should presume — 1. To wear 
any apparel but what he receives from 
his Master. 2. To wear no hat within 
the City and liberty thereof, nor any 
thing instead thereof, but a woollen 
cap, without any silk in or about the 
same . . . [there are eight more clauses, 
concluding with :] every Apprentice 
offending ... for the first offence to 
be punished at the discretion of his 
Master ; for the second to be publicly 
whipped at the Hall of his Company," 
etc. (Nichols' Progresses, ii. 393, 394)* 
The passage in the play appears to refer 
directly to the prentice caps of London. 
The passages cited by Steevens will be 
found in Bullen's Middleton, iii. 102, 
and Bullen's Marston, ii. 60. Both are 
explained in his notes upon the founda- 
tion of the 1571 Act — wrongly it would 
appear. There were so many statutes 
of apparel that Nashe says : " Why 
they [Harvey's Letters'] are longer than 
the Statutes of Clothing or the Charter 
of London" (1596). Statute-apparel 
" for the new fashions sake " is men- 
tioned in Gesta Grayorum, 1594 
(Nichols, iii. 286). 

285. bark on tree] inseparable, closely 
united, hand and glove. Compare 
J. Heywood, Proverbs (1867, p. 47), 
1562 : M It were a foly for mee, To 
put my hande betwe«ne the barke and 
the tree. . . . Between you " (New 
Eng. Dict.)\ and Marmion, A Fine 
Companion (near the end), 1633 : 
" Master Dotario and my daughter 
Emilia, hand in hand, and married 
together ... there they are, bark and 
tree." 

291. leap for joy] See iv. iii. 145. 



SC. II.] 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



141 



Therefore change favours ; and when they repair, 

Blow like sweet roses in this summer air. 
Prin. How blow ? how blow ? speak to be understood. 
Boyet. Fair ladies, mask'd, are roses in their bud : 295 

Dismask'd, their damask sweet commixture shown, 

Are angels vailing clouds, or roses blown. 
Prin. A vaunt, perplexity ! What shall we do 

If they return in their own shapes to woo ? 
Ros. Good madam, if by me you '11 be advis'd, 300 

Let 's mock them still, as well known as disguis'd. 

Let us complain to them what fools were here, 



296, 297. Dismask'd . . . blown] Or angel-vailing clotuh : are roses blown, 
Dismaskt . . . shewn Theobald (Warburton conjecture). 297. Are . . . 

blown] Are angels (vaVd the clouds) . . . blown Becket conjecture ; Are angels 
veil'd in clouds of roses blown Peck conjecture. vailing] Ff, Q 2 ; varling Q 1. 



292. favours] Some part of the pre- 
sents (ribbons or gloves), or the pre- 
sents themselves, given by the different 
suitors to their mistresses, and worn, 
as we are told, to confuse the donors. 
See lines 30, 130, 134. The masks are 
now removed. See above, " be masked " 
(line i57),where the editors usually insert 
a stage-direction, " The ladies mask." 
Perhaps another, " The ladies dis- 
mask," might be inserted at line 296 for 
uniformity's sake. They are M known " 
now (line 301) and no longer disguised. 
Boyet expresses his approbation at 
line 297. For favours, see, again, line 
455 below. 

296. damask] red and white, like the 
Damascus rose. Compare As You 
Like It, in. v. 125 (quoted in New 
Eng. Diet, as the earliest use in this 
sense) ; and Holland's Plinie, xii. 11 
(1601) : " another tree . . . bearing a 
blossom like to a damaske or incarnate 
rose," where "incarnate" means flesh- 
coloured. More punning. 

commixture] " Commistura, a com- 
mixture, a blending" (Florio's World 
of Words, 1611). Complexion. Shake- 
speare has the word again (from the 
old play) in 3 Henry VI. 11. vi. 6, in the 
sense of " compound." 

297. vailing] lowering, letting fall. 
Commonly used in the nautical expres- 
sion " vail bonnet," which Greene has 
twice (metaphorically) in Arbasto, 



1584. Compare Venus and Adonis, 
314 : " she vailed her eyelids," etc., 
etc. And in Gosson's Schoole of A buse, 
1579 : " vayle the bonnet in token of 
obedience "-(Arber, p. 59). 

angels vailing clouds] angels let- 
ting down (or lowering) clouds or 
veils (or masks) that hid their fairness. 
11 Vailing " has the actual sense of 
unveiling. Johnson put it quite clearly : 
" Ladies unmasked are like angels 
vailing clouds, or letting those clouds 
which obscured their brightness sink 
from before them." This is obvious 
when we give clouds the meaning of 
masks or disguises, which the word seems 
to bear at line 204 above. Compare 
Gosson, Schoole of Abuse (Arber, p. 41), 
1579 : " Meantime if Players bee called 
to accounte for the abuses that growe 
by their assemblyes I would not have 
them to answere, as Pilades did . . . 
we keepe thousandes of idle heads 
occupyed which else peradventure 
would brue some mischiefe. A fit 
cloude to cover their abuse." New 
Eng. Diet, has the verb cloud, "to veil.'" 
The same thought occurs in Lodge's 
Euphues Golden Legacie (Shakes. Lib. 
1875, p. 25), 1590 : " as soone as 
Phcebus had vailed the curteine of 
the night, and made Aurora blush with 
giving her the bezoles labres in her 
silver couch, he gat him up." 



142 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



[act v. 



Disguis'd like Muscovites, in shapeless gear ; 

And wonder what they were, and to what end 

Their shallow shows and prologue vilely penn'd, 305 

And their rough carriage so ridiculous, 

Should be presented at our tent to us. 
Boyet. Ladies, withdraw ; the gallants are at hand. 
Prin. Whip to our tents, as roes run o'er the land. 

[Exeunt Princess, Rosaline, Katharine, and Maria. 

Re-enter the KING, BlRON, LONGAVILLE, and DUMAIN, in 

their proper habits. 

King. Fair sir, God save you! Where is the princess? 310 
Boyet. Gone to her tent. Please it your majesty, 

Command me any service to her thither ? 
King. That she vouchsafe me audience for one word. 

Boyet. I will ; and so will she, I know, my lord. {Exit. 

Biron. This fellow picks up wit, as pigeons pease, 3 1 5 

309. roes run o'er the] Ff 3, 4 ; roes run ore (the rest), Cambridge ; roes run over 
Steevens, Craig. Re-enter . . .] Enter the King and the rest Qq, Ff. 

312. thither] Q 1 ; omitted Ff, Q 2. 315. picks] Ff, Q 2 ; pecks Q 1. 



303. shapeless gear] uncouth dress. 

305. vilely penn'd] See line 147. 

309. Whip] move quickly (to or from 
a place). Still in use provincially. It 
occurs in Greene's Disputation betweene 
a Hee and a Shee Conney -catcher 
(Grosart, x. 219), ante 1592 : " Why 
then, quoth shee, steppe into this 
closet : hee whipt in hastily and never 
remembred his cloathes." And in 
Jonson's Epicene, iv. ii. : "Jack Daw! 
Daw [within]. What say you, sir ? 
Truewit. Whip out behind me sud- 
denly, and no anger in your looks, to 
your adversary." Craig sends me a 
reference to Fenton's Bandello, 1567 
(Henley, ii. 146) : " She whipped into 
the house and shoot the doare upon the 
nose of her amarus clyent." 

roes . . . land] "fleeter than the 
roe " occurs in Taming of the Shrew, 
Induction, ii. 50; and it is an odd 
coincidence that in the old Taming 
of a Shrew (Shakes. Lib. 1875, p. 
496) there is the same defect in 
the metre as here,, from over and 



o'er : " Your hounds stands readie 
cuppeld at the doore. Who in 
Greene has the same simile : " Never 
went roe bucke swifter on the downes 
Than I will trip it till I see my George " 
(Grosart, xiv. 151) ; and Marlowe, 
Tamburlaine, in. 3 : " his foes, like 
flocks of fearful roes Pursued by 
hunters, fly." 

the land] i.e. the "laund" (lawn), 
as in 3 Henry VI. 111. i. 2 : 
" Through this laund anon the deer 
will come." " Laund " is properly an 
open space jn a wood, or surrounded 
by trees. Compare Lodge, Euphues 
Golden Legacie (Shakes. Lib. 1875, 
p. 130) : " She tript alongst the Lawnes 
full of joy." 

315. picks up] "picks up" of the 
first Folio seems preferable. Com- 
pare the old expression, "picks up his 
crumbs," which occurs several times 
in Nashe. In Lyly's Euphues it is 
" gathers his crumbs." Moreover, the 
passage in the text became proverbial. 



, 



II.] 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



143 



And utters it again when God doth please. 
He is wit's pedlar, and retails his wares 
At wakes, and wassails, meetings, markets, fairs ; 
And we that sell by gross, the Lord doth know, 
Have not the grace to grace it with such show. 
This gallant pins the wenches on his sleeve ; 
Had he been Adam, he had tempted Eve. 
He can carve too, and lisp : why, this is he 

316. God] Q 1 ; Jove Ff, Q 2. 323. He can] Ff, Q 2 ; A can Q 1. 



320 



Halliwell quotes from Thomas Coriate, 
Traveller for the English Wits, 16 16 : 
" He pickes up wit as pigeons pease, 
And utters it when God doth please." 
And it appears in the same form in 
Ray's Proverbs (Proverbial Rhymes), 
1678. In Coryat's Crudities, 161 1 
(Panegyrick Verse, by Lionel Cranfield), 
occurs : " He Greeke and Latin speakes 
with greater ease than hogs eate 
akornes, or tame pigeons pease." 
Malone insisted on peck. 

318. wakes] Compare Stubbes, Anat- 
omie of Abuses, 1583: "The manner 
of keepirfg wakesses and feasts in 
England . . . manie spend more at 
one of their wakesses than in all the 
whole year besides." Every village 
had its annual " wake-day." 

wassails] health-drin kings, revels. 
" The jolly wassal walks the often 
round " (Ben Jonson, Forest, iii.). 
Usually applied to a special drink, 
or act of drinking. See Hamlet, 1. 
iv. g. 

319. by gross] by wholesale. Op- 
posed to "retail" in Gabriel Harvey, 
Pierce's Supererogation (Grosart, ii. 34), 
1592 : " Some have called them knaves 
in grose: I have found them fooles 
in retayle." And in William Covell 
[Dowden], Polimanteia (Grosart, p. 54), 
I 595 : " Compelled toretaile that which 
they had bought by grosse." 

321. pins the wenches on his sleeve] 
The idea is probably from the wearing 
of favours on the sleeve. See Othello, 
1. i. 64 (Arden ed. p. 10, note). The 
expression is found in Greene's Mourn- 
ing Garment (Gosart, ix. 173), 1590: 
" What it is for mee to pinne a fayre 
meacocke and a witty milksop on my 
sleepe, who dare not answere with their 
swords in the face of the enemy ? " 
And, again, in Farewell to Follie (ix. 



327), 1591 : " to avoide iealousie, you 
may ever wear her pinde on your sleeve." 
But earlier, in Lyly's Sapho and Phao, 
ii. 4 (1584) : " But bee not pinned 
alwayes on her sleeves, strangers have 
green rushes, when daily guests are 
not worth a rush." 

323. carve] See Merry Wives of 
Windsor, 1. iii. 49 (Arden ed. p. 37, 
note). I have something to add to 
what is there written. " Carve " was a 
fashionable word of the day, difficult 
of explanation, with some such sense 
as " show great courtesy and affability " 
(Schmidt), but especially applying to 
courtship. " She gives the leer of 
invitation " are the succeeding words in 
Merry Wives of Windsor — amounting 
there to a paraphrase. The passages 
adduced are all too late to be satis- 
factory. Dyce comes down to 1675, 
and the earliest, outside Shakespeare, 
is 1604. The following examples have 
not, I think, been quoted. Greene 
has, in his Philomela (Grosart, xii. 
117), printed in 1592 but stated in 
the Epistle Dedicatory to be one ot 
" the first frutes of my witts," the 
following passage : " Feeding upon 
this passion that knaweth like envy 
upon hir owne flesh, he called to minde 
to which of his friends she shewed 
the most gratious lookes, uppon whom 
she glaunst the most smiling favours, 
whose carver she would be at the table, 
to whom she would drink, and who 
had most curteus intertainment at hir 
hands." In his Groatsworth of Wit 
(xii. 118) " Lamilia his carver" bears 
the same sense coupled with the plainer 
meaning. At iv. i. 56, already the 
Princess has ascribed this courteous 
quality to Boyet. For a good example 
of the affected, but actual ceremonial 
use, see quotation at "vane," iv. n 93. 



144 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



[act V. 



That kiss'd away his hand in courtesy ; 

This is the ape of form, monsieur the nice, 325 

That, when he plays at tables, chides the dice 

In honourable terms : nay, he can sing 

A mean most meanly, and, in ushering, 

Mend him who can : the ladies call him sweet ; 

The stairs, as he treads on them, kiss his feet. 330 

This is the flower that smiles on every one, 

To show his teeth as white as whale his bone ; 

324. away his hand] Ff, Q 2 ; his hand away Q i. 332. whale his] Ff 2, 3, 

4, Rowe ; whales Qq, F 1, Steevens ; whale's Cambridge ; whales, Halliwell. 



324. kiss'd away his hand in courtesy] 
Compare Ben Jonson, Cynthia's Revels, 
iii. 11 (1600) : " Another swears His 
scene of courtship over . . . anon, 
doth seem ... As he would kiss away 
his hand in kindness." Jonson's line 
establishes the Folio reading, which is 
rejected by the Cambridge editors. 
Jonson's diatribe upon the Boyets of 
his day extends over sixty or seventy 
verses in this place, in his best vein. 
For other references to the kissing 
hands, or fingers, in courtesy, see 
Othello, 11. i. 173 (Arden ed. p. 78, 
note). The "fore-finger kiss " is 
mentioned in Euphues Golden Legacie 
(1590). The courtesy was of French 
origin appropriate to Monsieur Boyet. 
Compare Florio's Montaigne, bk. ii. 
chap. 12 : "to see them ignorant of the 
French tongue, of our kissing the hands, 
of our low-lowting courtesies." 

325. form] observance of etiquette ; 
as in Hamlet, in. i. 161 : " The glass 
of fashion and the mould of form." 
Our " good form." 

326. tables] backgammon. The oldest 
name for one of the oldest games which 
is said to have been discovered in the 
tenth century as a rival to chess in 
order to combine chance and skill to 
bring together players of unequal 
talents. See Strutt's Sports and Pas- 
times for a figure of players at tables 
of the thirteenth century. It was 
always played with dice on the folding 
boards or tables used also for draughts. 
The word is still used in the game, 
but not usually of the game. Wright 
says (History of Domestic Manners, 
pp. 218, 219) : " It is hardly necessary 
to point out to our readers that . . . 
the mediaeval game of tables was 



identical with our modern back- 
gammon, or rather, we should say, 
that the game of backgammon as now 
played is one of the games played on 
tables." It is mentioned in Chaucer's 
Frankelynes Tale. Rabelais calls them 
" the fair wooden gospels " (les beauex 
evangiles de boyes, e'est a dire force 
tabliers) (i. 22). Brome in the Mad 
Couple uses the name " the two-leaved 
book." 

327, 328. sing A mean] Greene 
quibbles on the musical sense in A 
Mourning Garment (Grosart, ix. 155), 
1590 : " And therefore the meane was 
a merrie song " ; and, again (p. 279) : 
" The meane that grees with countrie 
musicke best." Lyly has it in Gallathea 
(acted 1585 ?), v. 3 : " Can you sing ? 
. . . Basely. . . . And you ? . . . 
Meanly. . . . And what can you doe ? 
... If they double it I will treble 
it." See also Lyly's Love's Meta- 
morphosis, iii. 1. 

328-330. ushering . . . he treads] 
Similarly Jonson speaks of " fine-paced 
huishers" (Devil is an Ass, 11. iii.). 
The gentleman-usher was specially 
selected with "little legs of purpose" 
(Jonson, Every Man out of his Humour, 
iii. 1 [1599]) for the sake of his fine or 
delicate pacing. Compare Latimer, 
Seven Sermons (Arber, p. 126), 1549 : 
" A great state, a Ladye, a Dutchess. 
. . . She hath a gentleman-ussher that 
goeth before her " ; and Histriomastix, 
1599 : " He have one to beare my traine, 
another bare before to usher me." See 
a quotation from Jonson's Cynthia's 
Revels in the Introduction for a parallel 
to Boyet's description. 

332. as white as whale his bone] An 
old simile. It occurs in the romance 



sc ii.] LOVES LABOURS LOST 145 

And consciences, that will not die in debt, 
Pay him the due of honey-tongu'd Boyet. 
King. A blister on his sweet tongue, with my heart, 335 

That put Armado's page out of his part ! 

Re-enter the PRINCESS, ushered by BOYET ; ROSALINE, Maria 
Katharine, and Attendants. 

Biron. See where it comes ! Behaviour, what wert thou 

Till this madman show'd thee ? and what art thou now ? 
King. All hail, sweet madam, and fair time of day ! 
Prin. Fair in all hail is foul, as I conceive. 340 

King. Construe my speeches better, if you may. 
Prin. Then wish me better : I will give you leave. 
King. We came to visit you, and purpose now 

To lead you to our court: vouchsafe it then. 
Prin. This field shall hold me, and so hold your vow : 345 

Nor God, nor I, delights in perjur'd men. 
King. Rebuke me not for that which you provoke : 

The virtue of your eye must break my oath. 

334. due] Q 1 ; duty Ff, Q 2. 338. madman] Qq, Ff, Cambridge, Globe ; 

man Theobald. 

Eglamore (Percy Folio, ed. Furnivall sweete wittie soule of Ovid lives in 
and Hales, ii. 342), ante 1400: "The mellifluous & honey-tongued Shake- 
Erie had noe child but one a maiden speare, witnes his Venus and A donis, his 
as white as whalles bone." And the Lucreece, his sugred Sonnets among his 
Earl of Surrey in TotteVs Miscellany private friends, &c." (Wits Treasuries 
(Arber, p. 218), 1557 : " I might per- 1598). These two are the only early 
ceive a wolfe as white as whales bone." examples in New Eng. Diet. 
And Greene, Never Too Late (Grosart, 336. out of his part] See line 173. 
viii. 213): " Legges as white as whales 338. Till this] Furness says: "For 
bone : so white and cha«te was never other examples of a dissyllabic arsis to 
none." The division to two words re- a dissyllabic thesis at the beginning of 
presenting the old pronunciation seems the second clause, see Goswin, Koenig, 
a necessary modernisation. Whale- iii. 2 (b, p. 87)." Unfortunately I have 
bone here probably meant the ivory of been unable to attend to this, 
the walrus. madman] jester. See notes at " mad- 

333> 334- die in debt, Pay] Compare cap," 11. i. 215 ; and at "mad wenches," 

Romeo and Juliet, 1. i. 244 : " I '11 pay 11. i. 257. 
that doctrine or else die in debt." 339. All hail] The quibble here 

334. honey-tongu'd] It is interesting occurs in The Two Noble Kinsmen, in. 
to note here that Meres, who gives us v. ; and in The Faithful Friend, in. ii., 
the earliest reference to Love's Labour 's both by Beaumont and Fletcher. So, 
Lost by name, and also the earliest too, in Dekker's Old Fortunatus (Pear- 
tribute of praise to Shakespeare by son, p. 113): "Brother all haile. 
name, applies this term to Shakespeare Shadow. There 's a rattling salutation." 
himself. The quotation is classical : These examples, given by Messrs. 
" As the soule of Euphorbus was Walker and Littledale, are brought 
thought to live in Pythagoras : so the together in Furness. 

10 



146 LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST [actv. 

Prin. You nickname virtue ; vice you should have spoke ; 

For virtue's office never breaks men's troth. 350 

Now, by my maiden honour, yet as pure 

As the unsullied lily, I protest, 

A world of torments though I should endure, 

I would not yield to be your house's guest ; 

So much I hate a breaking cause to be 355 

Of heavenly oaths, vow'd with integrity. 

King. O ! you have liv'd in desolation here, 
Unseen, unvisited, much to our shame. 

Prin. Not so, my lord ; it is not so, I swear : 

We have had pastimes here and pleasant game. 360 

A mess of Russians left us but of late. 

King. How, madam ! Russians ! 

Prin. Ay, in truth, my lord ; 

Trim gallants, full of courtship and of state. 

Ros. Madam, speak true. It is not so, my lord : 

My lady, to the manner of the days, 365 

In courtesy gives undeserving praise. 

We four, indeed, confronted were with four 

In Russian habit : here they stay'd an hour, 

And talk'd apace ; and in that hour, my lord, 

They did not bless us with one happy word. 370 

I dare not call them fools ; but this I think, 

When they are thirsty, fools would fain have drink. 

350. men's] Ff 3, 4 ; mens Q 1 ; men Ff 1, 2, Q 2. 352. unsullied] Ff 2, 

3, 4 ; unsallied Qq, F 1. 356. oaths] oath Q 2. 368. Russian] Russia 

F 1, Q 2. 

348, 349. virtue . . . virtue] power 361. mess] See iv. iii. 204 (note). A 
. . . goodness. mess was a set of four. 

349. nickname] "To name by mis- 365. to the manner of the days] 
take : to assert wrongly to be some- according to the fashion of the times, 
thing" (New Eng. Diet, [in press]). 369. talk'd apace] chattered. Tibet 
To miscall. Talkapace is the name of a chatterbox 

352. unsullied] Some editors seem to in Ralph Roister Doister. See Measure 

hanker after the meaningless misprint for Measure, m. ii. 116 (Arden edition, 

(" unsallied ") of the first editions. It note). 

(sally for sully) occurs again in the 372. When . . . drink] One of the 

Quarto, Hamlet, 11. i. 39. Shakespeare numerous paraphrases for " you -re a 

uses each word about half-a-dozen fool." Compare The Penniless Parlia- 

times. The Princess may have the ment of Threadbare Poets, 1608 (Harl. 

lily of France in her thoughts. At the Misc. iii. 73) : " Some shall be so 

beginning of Dekker and Chettle's humorous in their walks as they cannot 

Patient Grissel, "sully not this morn- step one foot from a fool." And the 

ing " is misprinted *' sally" See Scotch "When you're served, a' the 

Collier's edition. geese are watered." 



sc. ii.] LOVE'S LABOUR'S L # OST 147 

Biron. This jest is dry to me. Fair gentle sweet, 

Your wit makes wise things foolish : when we greet, 

With eyes best seeing, heaven's fiery eye, 375 

By light we lose light : your capacity 

Is of that nature that to your huge store 

Wise things seem foolish and rich things but poor. 

Rps. This proves you wise and rich, for in my eye, — 

Biron. I am a fool, and full of poverty. 380 

Ros. But that you take what doth to you belong, 
It were a fault to snatch words from my tongue. 

Biron. O ! I am yours, and all that I possess. 

Ros. All the fool mine ? 

Biron. I cannot give you less. 

Ros. Which of the visors was it that you wore? 385 

Biron. Where ? when ? what visor ? why demand you this ? 

Ros. There, then, that visor ; that superfluous case 
That hid the worse and show'd the better face. 

King. We are descried : they '11 mock us now downright. 

Dum. Let us confess, and turn it to a jest. 390 

Prin. Amaz'd, my lord ? Why looks your highness sad ? 

Ros. Help ! hold his brows ! he '11 swoon. Why look you pale ? 
Sea-sick, I think, coming from Muscovy. 

Biron. Thus pour the stars down plagues for perjury. 

Can any face of brass hold longer out? 395 

373. Fair] Ff 2, 3, 4; omitted Qq, F 1. 374. wit makes] Ff 2, 3, 4; wits 

makes Qq, F 1. 385. was it] what it F I. 390. Dum.] Duman. Q 1 ; Du. 

F 1, Q 2 ; Duke Ff 2, 3, 4. 392. swoon] Pope, Steevens ; sound Qq, F 1 ; 
swound Ff 2, 3, 4. 

375. heaven's fiery eye] Craig quotes did but ache, I knit my handkercher 

Spenser, Faerie Queene, 1. iii. 4 : " The about your brows. . . . And with my 

great eye of heaven " (referring to the hand at midnight held your head " ; 

sun), and Marlowe's Tamburiaine (part and Webster, White Devil: "Rear 

ii.), iv. iv. 7 (1586) : " The horse that up 's head, rear up 's head, his bleeding 

guides the golden eye of Heaven." In inwards will kill him." 
The Troublesome Raigne of King John 395. face of brass] assurance, con- 

(Shakes. Lib. 1875, p. 270) Arthur fident manner. This passage is given 

addresses the heavenly bodies as " You in New Eng. Diet, as the first example 

rowling eyes, whose superficies yet I of the expression. I do not know why 

doo behold with eyes that Nature lent." it is included in square brackets. The 

See also Venus and Adonis, 178; next use is from Fuller, half a century 

Sonnet xlix. 6 ; Sonnet xviii. ; King later. Shakespeare may have found it 

John, in. i. 79, etc., etc. in Whetstone's Promos and Cassandra 

392. hold his brows] Compare King (part ii.), in. i. (1578) : " My troubled 

John, rv. i. 41-45 : " When your head hart with guiltynesse agrev'd Lyke fyre 



148 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 



[act v. 



Here stand I, lady ; dart thy skill at me ; 
Bruise me with scorn, confound me with a flout ; 
Thrust thy sharp wit quite through my ignorance ; 
Cut me to pieces with thy keen conceit ; 
And I will wish thee never more to dance, 
Nor never more in Russian habit wait. 
O ! never will I trust to speeches penn'd, 
Nor to the motion of a school-boy's tongue, 
Nor never come in visor to my friend, 
Nor woo in rhyme, like a blind harper's song, 
Taffeta phrases, silken terms precise, 
Three-pil'd hyperboles, spruce affection, 



400 



405 



396. J, lady ;] Qq, Ff; J; lady, Cambridge. 
Halliwell ; affectation Rowe, Cambridge. 



407. affection] Qq, Ff, Malone, 



doth make my eares and cheekes to 
glow : . . . Well, I wyll set a face of 
brasse upon it." See Appendix to 
Measure for Measure (Arden edition). 

397. flout] a mocking speech. 
" Knowest thou not that a deniall at 
the first is a graunt, and a gentle 
answere a flattering floute?" (Greene, 
Arbasto [Grosart, iii. 214], 1584). 

400. wish thee] entreat thee. 

401. wait] attend upon, do service. 

404. friend] sweetheart. Compare 
Measure for Measure, 1. iv. 29 ; Merry 
Wives of Windsor, m. iii. 124, etc. 

405. like a blind harper's song] Com- 
pare Lyly, Sapho and Phao, iv. iii. : 
" Harping alwaies upon love, till you 
be as blind as a harper." Blind 
harpers were proverbial as early as 
John Heywood's Proverbs (Sharman's 
edition, p. 137), 1542 : " Proface. Have 
among you, blind harpers (say'd I) ; 
the mo the merrier." The race of 
blind harpers and fiddlers is hardly yet 
extinct in Ireland : they were the sur- 
vivors of those (incapacitated by blind- 
ness from smallpox) who were unfitted 
for any profession save that of music. 
Bunting tells of the famous assembly 
of Irish harpers arranged at Belfast for 
a musical competition in 1791. Ten 
responded; of these six were blind. 
Blind harpers are very commonly men- 
tioned in the sixteenth and seventeenth 
centuries. See Nashe's Pierce Peni- 
lesse (Grosart, ii. 108), 1592; and 
Puttenham, Arte of English Poesie 



(Arber, p. 97), 1589 : " Blind harpers 
or such like taverne minstrels that give 
a fit of mirth for a groat." 

406. Taffeta phrases] Similarly used 
by Nashe in his Epistle to the Gentle- 
man Students prefixed to Greene's 
Menaphon (Grosart's Greene, vi. 26), 
1589 : " Suhdrie other sweete gentle- 
men I know that vaunted their pens in 
private devices, and trickt up a com- 
pariie of taffeta fooles with their 
feathers." 

407. Three-piVd'] The best quality as 
of the richest velvet. See Measure for 
Measure, 1. ii. 33 (Arden edition, note). 
Dekker speaks of" three-piVd oaths " in 
A Strange Horse-Race (Grosart, iii. 354). 

hyperboles] Shakespeare uses this 
expression elsewhere only in Troilus 
and Cressida, 1. iii. 161 : " Which 
from the tongue of roaring Typhon 
dropp'd, Would seem hyperboles. At 
this fusty stuff the large Achilles," 
etc. There, as here, the word is 
trisyllabic. Puttenham has a page 
or two (Arber, pp. 202, 203) on the 
" Hyperbole, Or the Over-reacher, other- 
wise called the loud Iyer" (Arte of 
English Poesie, 1589). In the passage 
in the text, Biron, a Frenchman, may 
be supposed to conform to the e mute 
in the French word. The word occurs 
in Gesta Grayorum, 1594 : " Such like 
hyperbolies" (Nichols' Progresses, iii. 
285). 

spruce] affected. See v. i. 13, and 
Taming of the Shrew, iv. i. 116. 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



I.,,., 
Figures pedantical ; these summer flies 
Have blown me full of maggot ostentation 
I do forswear them ; and I here protest, 
By this white glove, — how white the hand, God knows,— 
Henceforth my wooing mind shall be express' d 
In russet yeas and honest kersey noes : 
And, to begin, wench, — so God help me, law ! — 
My love to thee is sound, sans crack or flaw. 
Ros. Sans " sans," I pray you. 






149 



410 



415 



Biron. 

414. law] Qq, Ff ; la Capell et seq. 

See Nares' Glossary for an account of 
this word, which acquired its present 
meaning about this time. Compare 
Nashe, Terrors of the Night (Grosart, 
iii. 251), 1594 : " Whose names if you 
aske, hee claps you in the mouth with 
halfe a dozen spruce titles, never til 
he invented them heard of by any 
Christian." It occurs also in Porter's 
Two Angry Women of Abingdon 
(Hazlitt's Dodsley, vii. 286), 1592: 
"He's a fine, neat fellow, A spruce 
slave," i.e. finely dressed, the primary 
application. 

407. affection] affectation. See 
above, v. i. 4. " Affection " is quadri- 
syllabic here, as above, in 1. i. 9. 
Malone said: "The modern editors 
read affectation. There is no need of 
change." There is every reason 
against it, except a rigid adherence to 
rhyme, which is absolutely no argu- 
ment. Ritson's note here should be 
studied. 

408. Figures] turns of rhetoric 
(Schmidt). See 1. ii. 53 and v. i. 59 
(note). 

pedantical] Compare G. Harvey, 
An Advertisement for Papp-hatchett 
(Grosart, ii. 129), 1589 : " He is no 
boddy, but a few pilfred Similes; a 
little Pedanticall Latin ; and the highest 
pitch of his witt, Bulles motion, alias 
the hangmans apron." Harvey's tract 
was written before Love's Labour 's 
Lost. 

summer flies] See Othello, iv. ii. 67 
(Arden edition, p. 203), and 3 Henry 
VI. 11. vi. 17. 

408, 409. flies . . . blown . . ; maggot] 
New Eng. Diet, has this in v. blow 
(28) ("To fill with eggs") as the 
earliest example. Compare " fly- 



Yet I have a trick 



blown," which occurs in Gabriel 
Harvey, 1573. 

409. ostentation] vanity, affectation, 
"pretentious parade" (New Eng. 
Diet.). The word occurs above (v. i. 
104) in a different use. 

411. By this white glove] Slender 
burlesques this in Merry Wives of 
Windsor (" by these gloves," 1. i. 156, 
161, 168 : see note, Arden edition). 
Ben Jonson has it in Every Man out 
of his Humour. 

413. russet] Fr. rousset, reddish- 
brown (Cotgrave) ; the colour of the 
peasants' cloth. Compare Hamlet, 1. 
i. 166. " Russet-coat " was a term for a 
rustic, as in Porter's Two Angry Women 
of Abingdon (Hazlitt's Dodsley, vii. 
319) ; and Ben Jonson's Tale of a Tub, 
hi. v. Sometimes it was " russeting " : 
"Vile russetings Are matcht with 
monarchs and with mighty kings" 
(Hall, Satires, 1. iii. [1598]). 

kersey] See Measure for Measure, 
1. ii, 35 (and note in Arden edition). 
Plain, homely, unsophisticated. 

414. law] See New Eng. Diet, on 
this interjection, which is held to have 
been perhaps an alteration of La, an 
exclamation to call attention, occurring 
several times in Merry Wives of Wind- 
sor. " Law," generally used as an 
asseveration, is now confounded with 
Lor' for Lord. See also New Eng. Diet. 
(La, Lo). " Law " occurs in Marston 
several times, as in Eastward Ho, 
v. i. " La " is in Jonson's Every Man 
out of his Humour, in. i., and else- 
where. 

416. Sans "sans," I pray you] 
" Sans " is a " spruce affection " ; 
" give it up," Rosaline says. We have 
had it before (v. i. 79). Common 



1 



150 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



[ACT V. 



Of the old rage : bear with me, I am sick ; 
I '11 leave it by degrees. Soft ! let me see : 
Write M Lord have mercy on us " on those three ; 
They are infected, in their hearts it lies ; 
They have the plague, and caught it of your eyes 
These lords are visited ; you are not free, 
For the Lord's tokens on you do I see. 



420 



in Lyly : " The boy hath wit sance 
measure, more than needs " (Mother 
Bombie, 11. i.). 

419. " Lord have mercy on us "] A 
name for the "iliac passion." Compare 
Higgins, Nomenclator, 1585 : " Ileus 
. . . the Iliake passion . . . which 
the homelier sort of Physicians doe 
call, Lord have mercy upon me " (New 
Eng. Diet). Halliwell says: "This 
touching inscription was frequently 
a printed placard which was gen- 
erally surmounted by a red cross. 
... In Shakespeare's time the in- 
habitants of every infected house were 
compelled to place some conspicuous 
mark upon it to denote the fact," etc. 
Steevens gives several quotations, one 
of which is from More Fools Yet, by 
R(oger) S(harpe), 1610 : " A doore be- 
longing to a house infected, Whereon 
was plac'd (as 'tis the custom still) The 
Lord have mercy on us : this sad bill 
The sot perus'd." It is used by Nashe 
in The Unfortunate Traveller (Grosart, 
v. 124), 1594 : " Whiles I was in Rome, 
So it fell out, that it being a vehement 
hot summer . . . there entred such a 
hot spurd plague ... it was but a 
word and a blow, Lord have mercye 
upon us and he was gone." And by 
Dekker, The Dead Tearme (Grosart, iv. 
81), 1608: "Two such Ravens (who 
preied uppon a dead body) flew that 
way, cryed presently out, Lord have 
mercy uppon us, clapping their hard 
handes on their country-breastes, and 
looking more pale than the sheete in 
which the man was buryed." Dekker 
alludes to the inscription in The Seven 
Deadly Sinnes (Grosart, i. 77, 78) : 
"When they perceive that the Armed 
Man hath struck them, yea even when 
they see they have tokens delivered 
them from heaven to hasten thither 
. . . this thy Inhabitants do because 
they are loth & ashamed to have a 
writing over their dores, to tell that 
God hath bin there." See also A Rod 



for Runawayes by the same writer 
(Grosart, iv. 290). The words are the 
burthen of a hymn sung at his ap- 
proaching death by Summer in Nashe's 
Summer's Last Will (Grosart, vi. 153- 
J 54)» 1592: "The plague full swift 
goes bye : I am sick, I must dye : Lord 
have mercy on us." The first quotation 
from Nashe implies that the prayer was 
fixed upon the winding-sheet of the dead 
body passing to burial. Dekker says 
in The Wonderfull Yeare (Grosart, i. 
146), 1603 : " At the name of Londoners 
the Justice, clapping his hand on his 
brest (as who should say, Lord have 
mercie upon us), started backe." This » 
confirms Nashe's hint. And as applied y 
to the pestilence the benediction seems 
unknown earlier than the 1592-1593 
visitation. The worst previous one of 
r 563-i564 does not seem to have 
adopted it. I read in Nichols' Pro- 
gresses (iii. 130) : " Mr. Francis Bacon, 
in his Observations upon a Libel pub- 
lished in 1592, refers to this Plague as 
the only one which the people had telt 
since the beginning of the Queen's 
Reign." 

420. infected] Nashe refers to the 
great plague of 1592 as " this last infec- 
tion " (Foure Letters Confuted [Grosart, 
ii. 240], 1539). 

422. visited] The technical term for 
attacked by plague. Compare Dekker, 
The Wonderfull Yeare (Grosart, i. 115), 
1603 : " let us therefore with bag and 
baggage march away from this sore 
Citie, and visit those that are fled into 
the country. But alas ! Decidis in 
Scyllam, you are peppered if you visit 
them, for they are visited alreadie : the 
broad Arrow of Death flies there up & 
downe as swiftly as it doth here." The 
plague was known as the " visitation " 
distinctively. See Nashe, in Grosart's 
edition, iv. 247, v. 125, etc. The year 
1592-3 was one of the worst visitations : 
" This yeare was no Bartholmew faire 
kept at London for the avoiding of 



I 



sc. ii] LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 151 

Prin. No, they are free that gave these tokens to us. 

Biron. Our states are forfeit : seek not to undo us. 425 

Ros. It is not so. For how can this be true, 

That you stand forfeit, being those that sue ? 
Biron. Peace ! for I will not have to do with you. 
Ros. Nor shall not, if I do as I intend. 

Biron. Speak for yourselves : my wit is at an end. 430 

King. Teach us, sweet madam, for our rude transgression 

Some fair excuse. 
Prin. The fairest is confession. 

Were you not here, but even now, disguis'd ? 
King. Madam, I was. 

Prin. And were you well advis'd ? 

King. I was, fair madam. 
Prin. When you then were here, 435 

What did you whisper in your lady's ear ? 
King. That more than all the world I did respect her. 
Prin. When she shall challenge this, you will reject her. 
King. Upon mine honour, no. 
Prin. Peace ! peace ! forbear : 

Your oath once broke, you force not to forswear. 440 

King. Despise me, when I break this oath of mine. 

433« you not] Ff, Q 2 ; not you Q 1, Cambridge. 

concourse of people whereby the the markes of the plague, commonly 

infection of the pestilence might have called God's markes." 

increased " (Stowe's Chronicles, Abridg- 425. seek not to undo us] we are 

ment, p. 395, 1618). This plague hopeless, it is useless trying to relieve 

passage is not consistent with the re- us of our forfeiture, 

ceived date of the play. In my In- 426, 427. how can . . . sue] how can 

troduction I suggest that this is a you be at once the condemned to for- 

later insertion (1593-4)* alluding to the feit and the suppliant at law. 

1592 visitation. See line 419 (note). 434. were you well advis'd?] was 

423. tokens] plague-spots. See quota- it a rational proceeding? Compare 

tion from Dekker's Seven Deadly Sinnes Comedy of Errors, n. ii. 215. In your 

at line 419 above. Compare " death- sober senses. 

tokens " (Troilus and Cressida, 11. iii. 440. force not] value not. You set 

187), and "tokened pestilence" (Antony no value on your oath. " I force not," 

and Cleopatra, in. x. 9). In the Prin- " it forceth not," " no fors of," are com- 

cess's reply (line 424) she refers to the mon early expressions. " No force of 

pledges of love (" fairings ") at line 2. two straws " (The Four Elements [Haz- 

Cotgrave has " Tac : A kind of rot litt's Dodsley, i. 8], 15 19); "No force 

among sheep; also, a plague-spot or of that" (Whetstone, Promos and 

God's token on one that hath the Cassandra, 11. iv. and v. iv. [1578]) ; 

Plague" (1611). In The Secretes of "if blood be spilt in every place they 

the Reverende Mais ter Alexis (translated force it not a mite" (B. Googe, The 

by William Warde, p. 38), 1568, there Popish Kingdome [repr. p. 8], 1570). 
is : "A very good remedie agaynst 



152 LOVES LABOUR'S LOST [act v. 

Prin. I will ; and therefore keep it. Rosaline, 

What did the Russian whisper in your ear ? 
Ros. Madam, he swore that he did hold me dear 

As precious eyesight, and did value me 445 

Above this world ; adding thereto, moreover, 

That he would wed me, or else die my loven 
Prin. God give thee joy of him ! the noble lord 

Most honourably doth uphold his word. 
King. What mean you, madam ? by my life, my troth, 450 

I never swore this lady such an oath. 
Ros. By heaven, you did ; and to confirm it plain, 

You gave me this : but take s it, sir, again. 
King. My faith and this the princess I did give : 

I knew her by this jewel on her sleeve. 455 

Prin. Pardon me, sir, this jewel did she wear ; 

And Lord Biron, I thank him, is my dear. 

What, will you have me, or your pearl again? 
Biron. Neither of either ; I remit both twain. 

I see the trick on 't here was a consent, 460 

Knowing aforehand of our merriment, 

To dash it like a Christmas comedy. 

Some carry-tale, some please-man, some slight zany, 

446. thereto] Qq, F 1 ; there Ff 2, 3, 4. 454. the] to th % Ff 3, 4. 463. 

slight zany] sleight saine Q i. 

448. joy of] Compare Much Ado uses the verb similarly in Euphues 

About Nothing, II. i. 200 : " I wish him Golden Legacie (Shakes. Lib. 1875, 

joyofhei"; and, again, v. i. 9. p. 133), 1590: "that she might . . . 

455. jewel . . . sleeve] See line 292 not any way dash that merry day 

(note), above. with her dumps." Throw cold water 

459. Neither of either] Compare A on. 

Yorkshire Tragedy, Scene i. (1608): 463. carry -tale] tale-bearer, spy. New 

" But sirrah is neither our young master Eng. Diet, gives an earlier example 

return'd, nor our fellow Sam come from Holinshed's Chronicle of Ireland 

from London ? Ralph. Neither of (Hi. 1062), 1577. Compare Nashe, 

either, as the Puritan bawd says." Pierce Penilesse (Grosart, ii. 118), 

Tyrrell says, in a note to this passage 1592 : " there are spirits called spies 

(the play was attributed to Shake- & tale-cariers, obedient to Ascaroth, 

speare) : " This quiet, good-humoured, whom the Greekes call Daimona, and 

little sarcasm is in the manner of S. John, the accuser of the brethren." 

Shakespeare." It was more in his Shakespeare has the compound again 

manner than the editor had noticed. in Venus and Adonis, 657 ; and com- 

remit] resign, give up. pare "one Mistress Tale- porter," 

460. a consent] an understanding or in Winter's Tale, iv. iv. 273. See 
concert, an agreement. Compare Timon of Athens, in. vi. 104, for 
The Tempest, n. i. 103. a similar diatribe against parasites. 

462. dash] frustrate, spoil. Lodge The word occurs, Mr. Craig tells 



SC. II.] 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



153 



Some mumble-news, some trencher-knight, some Dick, 
That smiles his cheek in years, and knows the trick 465 
To make my lady laugh when she's disposed, 
Told our intents before ; which once disclos'd, 
The ladies did change favours, and then we, 
Following the signs, woo'd by the sign of she. 



465. smiles his] smiles, his Q i ; smites his Jackson conjecture. 
Theobald ; /leers Hanmer ; tears Jackson conjecture. 



years] jeers 



me, in Higgins' Nomenclator (1585) 
at Susurro. And see Ainsworth (ed. 
1761) : " Susurro ... a carry-tale 
or make-bate." 

463. please-man] pick-thank or para- 
site. A claw-back. Thus the old 
ballad: " Please one and please all, Be 
they great, be they small, Be they 
little, be they lowe, — So pipeth the 
Crowe, Sitting upon a wall, — Please 
one and please all " (circa 1570). This 
is referred to in Twelfth Night, m. 
iv. 25. 

zany] A fool's ape, an attendant 
upon the fool or pantaloon in comedy. 
Florio has " Zane, the name of Iohn in 
some parts of Lombardy, but commonly 
used for a silly John, a simple fellow, 
a servile drudge or foolish clowne in 
any commedy or interlude play " {New 
World of Words, 1611). And compare 
Nashe, Pierce Penilesse (Grosart, ii. 
92), 1592 : " Our Sceane is more stately 
furnisht than ever it was in the time of 
Roscius, our representations honour- 
able, and full of gallant resolution, not 
consisting, like theirs, of a Pantaloun, 
a Whore, and a Zanie, but of Emper- 
ours, Kings, and Princes." Ben Jon- 
son gives us a correct example of the 
zany in Nano, in his Fox (1605) : 
" Mount, zany," Volpone says to Nano, 
in 11. i. ; and a little later he calls him 
" Zan Fritada." 

464. mumble-news] prattler. The 
verb was often used of repeating the 
paternoster. Compare Florio : " No- 
vellante. A teller of newes and tidings, 
a teller of tales, fables and fond dis- 
courses. Also, a merry jester, a 
pleasant buffon." 

trencher - knight] Compare carpet- 
knight. One who is a valiant man at 
the trencher or plate. See " trencher- 
friends" (parasites), Timon of Athens, 
in. vi. 106 ; and " trencher-man" Much 
Ado About Nothing, 1. i. 51. Nashe 



has trencher-attendant, trencher-carrier, 
trencher-service. And compare Greene, 
Never Too Late (Grosart, viii. 165), 
1590 : " Oh Francesco (quoth hee), 
how fond hast thou beene lead away 
with every looke, fed uppon with 
Trencher flies, eaten alive with flat- 
terers." Here the word is synonymous 
with the rest, a parasite, table-friend. 

Dick] fellow, companion, jack. A 
contemptuous term, first known in 
the combination " desperate Dick," 
which occurs in Wilson, Arte of Rhe- 
torique, 1553 ; in Triall of Treasure 
(Hazlitt's Dodsley, iii. 280), 1567 ; and 
in Churchyard's Queen's Reception at 
Bristol, 1574, and often later. Nashe 
enumerates various Dicks in his attack 
on Richard Harvey (Grosart, iii. 6). 
As late as 1674, in Kirkman's English 
Rogue (repr. iii. 64), it occurs : " the 
next Dick I picked up for her was," 
etc. Recently it has come again into 
use. " Dapper Dick " was also common, 
as in Greene, Quip for an Upstart 
Courtier (Grosart, xi. 239) : " I might 
see comming downe the hill a brave 
dapper Dicke, quaintly attired in velvet 
and Sattin." 

465. smiles his cheek in years] laughs 
his face into wrinkles. Compare 
Twelfth Night, in. ii. 79 ; Merchant 
of Venice, 1. i. 80 ; 2 Henry IV. v. i. 
96-98; Troilus and Cressida, 1. i. 40. 
Farmer quotes from Webster, Duchess 
of Malta, where a lady cannot endure 
to be in merry company, for she says 
too much laughing . . . fils her too 
full of the wrinkles." For a note on 
laughter at this time, see above, line 80. 

466. disposed] disposed to be merry. 
See above, II. i. 250 (note). 

469. she] mistress, woman. Compare 
As You Like It, m. ii. 10, and Winter's 
Tale, iv. iv. 360. And Nashe, Have 
With You, etc. (Grosart, iii. 163, 164), 
1596 : " hee is as infinite in commend- 



154 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



[act v. 



Now, to our perjury to add more terror, 470 

We are again forsworn, in will and error. 

Much upon this it is: and might not you [To Boyet. 

Forestall our sport, to make us thus untrue ? 

Do not you know my lady's foot by the square 

And laugh upon the apple of her eye ? 475 

And stand between her back, sir, and the fire, 

Holding a trencher, jesting merrily ? 

You put our page out : go, you are allow'd ; 

472. [To Boyet] Rowe. 474. square] F 4, Rowe ; squier Qq, Ff 1, 2, 3, 

Pope, Cambridge ; squire Capell, Malone. 475. apple] appeal Ulfici (Furness 

cit.). 478. allowed] Ff 3, 4 ; aloude Q 1 ; alowd F 1, Q 2. 

ing her, as Saint Jerome in praise of 
Virginitie. . - . ; In one place he calls 
her the one shee, in another the credible 
gentlewoman, in a third the heavenly 
plant, in the fourth a new starre in 
Cassiopeia," etc., etc. 

472. Much upon this it is] it is very 
nearly this way. Compare Measure 
for Measure, m. ii. 242, and iv. i. 17. 

474. know my lady's foot by the 
square] Varied from the older " have 
the length of her foot." It occurs in 
Lyly's Euphues and his England 
(Arber, p. 290), 1580 : " you shall not 
know the length of my foote until by 
your cunning you get commendation." 
And in Pasquils Jests and Mother 
Bunches Merriments (Hazlitt repr. 
p. 31) : " The counterfeiting young 
mistris with kind words and knavish 
wiles, finding the length of his foote, 
gate many tokens of his love." And 
Dekker, The Bachelars Banquet (Gro- 
sart, i. 263), 1603: "having now the 
full length of his foot, then shewes she 
herselfe what she is, unmasking her 
dissembling malice." In the earlier 
examples the expression has the mean- 
ing it has in the text — to know how to 
win one's love; to win one's love. 
Later, as in Mrs. Behn's Roundheads, 
Act i. (1682), and The Bagford Ballads 
(Wade's Reformation, p. 7), etc., etc., it 
had a somewhat baser sense — to know 
one's foibles, to take one's measure, for 
selfish ends. 

square] carpenter's rule. Halliwell 
quotes from Palsgrave (Lesclaircisse- 
ment, 1530) : " Sqyar for a carpentar, 
esquierre" ; and " Squyer a rule, 
riglet." See, again. Winter's Tale, 
in. iv. 348, and 1 Henry IV. 11. ii. 



13. The old form squire or squier is 
retained by most editors. It occurs in 
Chaucer's Canterbury Tales (The Som- 
nour's Tale), and see Skeat's note, 
v. 339. By a curious orthography the 
word seems to have become " square " 
in the transferred usage earlier than this, 
in the expression " wisdom's square." 
Roger Ascham has ''square, rule, and 
line of wisdom " (The Scholemaster, 
1570). And see King Lear, 1. i. 76, 
where Craig gives an example of 
" wisdom's square " from Bodenharn's 
Belvedere, 1600. Higgins' Nomen- 
clator has " Norma, regula ... a 
squire or square." Florio and Cotgrave 
use both spellings indiscriminately. 

475. laugh upon the apple of her eye] 
laugh upon in an intimately affection- 
ate and endearing way. Shakespeare 
only once elsewhere has the expression 
11 apple of the eye," in A Midsummer- 
Night's Dream, m. ii. 104, where it is 
used literally, as here, of the pupil ; 
not in the more familiar sense, of 
the object of one's tenderest solicitude. 
It comes close to the expression 
11 looking babies " in one's mistress's 
eye. Compare T. Bowes' trans, of 
Primaudaye's French Academy, p. 
145 (1586) : " We see our owne eies 
shine within the apples of our neigh- 
bour's eies." 

477. Holding a trencher] See above, 
line 464. The reference is not to a 
menial, but to an attentive sycophant. 

478. You put our page out] See 1. 173. 

you are allow'd] admitted (or per- 
mitted) as a fool, you have license. 
See above, 1. ii. 123. And compare 
" an allowed fool " (Twelfth Night, 1. v. 
101). See " beg us," below, line 490. 



sc. 



II.] 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



155 



Die when you will, a smock shall be your shroud. 

You leer upon me, do you ? there 's an eye 

Wounds like a leaden sword. 
Boyet. Full merrily 

Hath this brave manage, this career, been run. 
Biron. Lo ! he is tilting straight. Peace ! I have done. 



480 



I 



Enter COSTARD. 

Welcome, pure wit ! thou part'st a fair fray. 
Cost. O Lord, sir, they would know, 

Whether the three Worthies shall come in or no. 



485 



481. merrily] merely Q 1. 482. Hath this brave manage] Theobald ; hath 

this brave nuage Q 1 ; hath this brave manager Ff, Q 2. 484. part'st] prat'st 

Ff3, 4- 



479. smock . . . shroud] wholly ef- 
feminate. Perhaps there is a reference 
to an expression occurring a couple of 
times in Greene, of one sentenced by 
a verdict of women, " the verdict of 
the smock' 7 ; "tried by the verdict of 
the smock. Upon this they panneld 
a jurie " (The Art of Conny -catching 
[Grosart, x. 60]). Women will be the 
death of you. 

481. leaden sword] Swords and dag- 
gers of lead or lath are commonly men- 
tioned figuratively as mock-weapons 
in Shakespeare ; familiar as stage- 
properties. 

482. manage] A term from the riding- 
school, an evolution to which a horse 
is trained, " specially a short gallop at 
full speed" (New Eng. Diet.). The 
term occurs in Laneham's Letter 
(Captain Cox, ed. Furnivall, Ballad 
Soc. 1871, p. 24), 1575: "The Bryde- 
groom for preeminens had the fyrst 
coors at the Quintyne, brake hiz spear 
tres hardiments ; but" his mare in his 
manage did a littl so titubate, that 
mooch a doo had hiz manhood to sit 
in his sadl." 

career] A term in horsemanship, 
practically identical with the last in 
meaning. Compare "passed the 
careers in Merry Wives of Windsor, 
1. i. 184 (and see note, Arden edition, 
pp. 19, 20). New Eng. Diet, quotes 
from Holinshed's Chronicle, iii. 1033/2, 
1577-1587 : " They were better practised 
to fetch in booties than to make their 
manage or careire." Both terms be- 
longed specially to the tilting-yard. 



Gabriel Harvey uses the term as it is 
here of any course or action : " Extra 
jocum, and to leave thessame stale 
karreeres you knowe full well it woulde 
suerly quite mare all" (Letters to 
Spenser [Grosart, i. 133], 1573-1580). 
See also p. 118. 

484. part'st . . . fray] occurs again 
in Much Ado About Nothing, v. i. 114. 
Compare G. Whetstone, Promos and 
Cassandra, in. ii. (Shakes. Lib. 1875, 
p. 277), 1578 : " To parte this fraye it 
is hye time, I can tell, My Promoters 
else of the roste wyll smell." See, too, 
Sir P. Sidney's Masque before the 
Queen at Wanstead (The May- 
Lady), 1578 (Nichols' Progresses, 
1823, ii. 96) : " Master Rombus . . . 
came thither with his autoritie to part 
their fray." 

485. 494, 497. O Lord, sir] Ben 
Jonson has this trick of speech in the 
sense of "assuredly," "how can you 
ask," in the mouths of brainless char- 
acters, as in Every Man out of his 
Humour, 11. i. : M His lady ! what, is 
she fair, splendidious, and amiable ? 
Gent. Lord, sir ! " and later (v. 
iv.) in a drinking scene : " 1. Cup. 
I will propose . . . the health of that 
honourable countess. ... Do you 
know her, sir ? 2. Cup. O Lord, sir, 
ay " ; and at in. i. : " as dry an orange 
as ever grew : nothing but salutation, 
and ' O Lord, sir f ' and ' It pleases 
you to say so, sir ! ' " Ben Jonson has 
it also in another comedy of manners — 
The Case is Altered, 1598. 

486. Worthies] See note, v. i. no. 



156 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



[act v. 



Biron. What, are there but three ? 

Cost. No, sir ; but it is vara fine, 

For every one pursents three. 
Biron. And three times thrice is nine. 

Cost. Not so, sir ; under correction, sir, I hope it is not so. 

You cannot beg us, sir, I can assure you, sir ; we know 
what we know: 490 

I hope, sir, three times thrice, sir, — 
Biron. Is not nine. 

Cost. Under correction, sir, we know whereuntil it doth amount. 
Biron. By Jove, I always took three threes for nine. 
Cost. O Lord, sir ! it were pity you should get your living 

by reckoning, sir. 495 



491. hope, sir] hope Ff 3, 4. 

488. pursents] presents, i.e. repre- 
sents. See note, lines 500, 502. 

489. 492. under correction] Not else- 
where in Shakespeare in this form. 
Probably a usual rustic apology in 
addressing a superior. Compare Ben 
Jonson, For the Honour of Wales 
(Cunningham's Gijford, iii. 129 a): "I 
am a subject by my place, and two 
heads is better than one I imagine, 
under correction" See New Eng. Diet. 
for examples, earlier, of " I speak under 
correction," and " under your cor- 
rection " in serious language, as in 
Measure for Measure, n. ii. 10, and 
Henry V. in. ii. 130, and v. ii. 144. 

490. You cannot beg us] Periphrastic 
for " we are not fools," " you cannot beg 
us for fools." The word " fool " is omit- 
ted here, as at line 478. The allusion is 
to the begging of wardship or guardian- 
ship of idiots by favourites. See Nares 
(Beg), who refers to Blackstone (i. 8, 
18) for the writ de idiota inquirendo. 
Nares gives several parallels. Jonson 
says : " One of the legal tests of a 
natural is to try whether he can 
number." See Blackstone's Com- 
mentaries, i. 303. The expression 
was very common, but the words 
" for a fool " are rarely omitted. 
Compare Harington, Metamorphosis of 
Ajax (Chiswick, p. 62), 1596 : " Stul- 
torum plena sunt omnia : the world is 
full of fools, but take heed how you beg 
him for a fool : for I have heard of one 
that was begged in the Court of Wards 



for a fool, and when it came to trial he 
proved a wiser man by much than he 
that begged him." And Ben Jonson, 
Every Man out of his Humour, in. i. 
(1599) : "He were a sweet ass : I 'd beg 
him i' faith." See Lyly's Mother 
Bombie, 1. i. (1594). To beg for con- 
cealment or concealed land was 
similarly used. Lyly unites the two : 
" Thy sonne will be beg'd for a con- 
cealed foole " (Mother Bombie, iv. ii.). 
Jonson has " beg for a riot " in Epicene, 
iv. In Edwards, Damon and Pithias 
(ante 1570), Damon's property is begged 
" for a spy." The Court of Wards 
was established by Henry VIII., and 
suppressed under Charles I. 

4g2, 498. whereuntil] " whereunto " 
occurs in Cymbeline twice. Such 
compounds were often used. Greene 
has " whetherto " in Euphues his 
Censure (Grosart, vi. 228) ; " where- 
out" occurs in Sidney's Arcadia, bk. 
iii.; " whereunder " is in Petty's Nar- 
ration of Drake's Famous Voyage 
(Hakluyt), 1579; and in Histriomastix, 
Act ii. ; and compare " where against " 
in Coriolanus, iv. v. 113. 

493. By Jove] occurs five or six 
times elsewhere in Shakespeare. It 
speedily became wearisome. Compare 
the old play of Timon (Shakes. Lib. 
l8 75. PP- 4 X 4> 472, etc.) : " What a 
dull pate is this ! he nothing hath That 
is his owne but only this, by jfove " 
(11. i.). 

495. reckoning] See 1. ii. 39. 



sc. ii] LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 157 

Biron. How much is it ? 

Cost. O Lord, sir ! the parties themselves, the actors, sir, 
will show whereuntil it doth amount : for mine own 
part, I am, as they say, but to perfect one man in 
one poor man, Pompion the Great, sir. 500 

Biron. Art thou one of the Worthies ? 
Cost. It pleased them to think me worthy of Pompey the 
Great : for mine own part, I know not the degree 
of the Worthy, but I am to stand for him. 
Biron. Go, bid them prepare. 505 

Cost. We will turn it finely off, sir ; we will take some care. 

[Exit. 
King. Biron, they will shame us j let them not approach. 
Biron. We are shame-proof, my lord ; and 'tis some policy 

To have one show worse than the king's and his company. 
King. I say they shall not come. 510 

Prin. Nay, my good lord, let me o'er-rule you now. 
That sport best pleases that doth least know how. 
Where zeal strives to content, and the contents 



499. they] thy Q i. perfect] Ff, Q 2 ; parfect Q 1, Cambridge ; pursent Grant 
White (Walker conjecture) ; present Collier. in] e'en Malone. 502. 

Pompey] Qq, Ff, Capell, Malone; Pompion Rowe (ed. 2), Cambridge, etc. 
509. king's] king Ff 3, 4. 512. least] Ff, Q 2 ; best Q 1. 513, 514. con- 

tents Dies . . . presents] Qq, Ff, Cambridge, Globe (with corrupt-passage mark) ; 
content Dies . . . presents Rowe (ed. 1) ; content Dies in the zeal of that it doth 
Present Hanmer; content Die in the zeal of them which it presents Steevens; 
content Lies in the zeal of those which it present Mason conjecture ; contents Die 
in the zeal of them which it presents Malone, Craig. 

499. perfect] Probably Costard would etc., etc. See Introduction on this 
say " perform," or " present." ** Per- point (and at 1. i. 182, iv. ii. 44). 
form" for "play " (a part) occurs several 502. Pompey] Costard's indecision 
times in Shakespeare. about his words is rather enhanced by 

500. Pompion] pumpkin (for Pom- the legitimate reading, which I see no 
pey). The earliest example of the reason to alter unless we also read 
humour of using wrong words by " Pompion " below after he reappears in 
ignorant people on the stage that I his part. Rowe (ed. 2) made the change, 
have noticed (of constables) is in 513, 514. contents . . . presents] For 
Promos and Cassandra, 1578. See a summary of the explanations, with 
notes in Measure for Measure (Arden or without alteration of the text, 
edition, p. 30). In Sidney's Masque the reader may refer to Furness's 
of the May Lady, 1578, he attributes Variorum edition. " Contents " means 
this pleasant foible to Rombus, a here contentment, the plural form 
schoolmaster ; and also " to Lalus, the occurring for the sake of the rhyme, 
old shepherd," who says " disnounce " as in Richard II. v. ii. 38 (quoted by 
for " announce," " bashless " for "bash- Singer) : " But heaven hath a hand in 
ml" (like "pursent" for " present"), these events, To whose high will we 



158 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



[act V, 



Dies in the zeal of that which it presents ; 
Their form confounded makes most form in mirth, 
When great things labouring perish in their birth. 
Biron. A right description of our sport, my lord. 



515 



Enter Armado. 

Arm. Anointed, I implore so much expense of thy royal 
sweet breath as will utter a brace of words. 
[Converses with the King, and delivers a paper to him, 

Prin. Doth this man serve God ? 520 

Biron. Why ask you ? 

Prin. He speaks not like a man of God's making. 

Arm. That's all one, my fair, sweet, honey monarch; for, 
I protest, the schoolmaster is exceeding fantastical ; 
too, too vain ; too, too vain : but we will put it, as 525 

519. [Converses . . .] Capell ; [Talks apart with the King] Furness. 522. 

He] Ff, Q 2; A Q 1. God's] God his Q 1. 523. That's] That is 



bound our calm contents." The mean- 
ing is that nothing is carried through 
satisfactorily in the sport, except the 
intense interest in producing it. All 
the proper arts and forms are con- 
founded. That is what produces most 
mirth. Furness rightly paraphrases : 
" Where zeal strives to give content, 
and the content dies in the zeal for that 
sport which zeal presents. 1 ' With the 
whole speech, compare A Midsummer- 
Night's Dream, v. r. 81-105. 

519. [delivers a paper] Capell in- 
serted this in order to explain the 
King's speech after Armado's exit. 

522. a man of God's making] A pro- 
verbial expression. Compare Peele, 
Edward I. (Routledge, 1874, p. 382), 
1593 : " My masters and friends, I am 
a poor friar, a man of God's making, 
and a good fellow as you are, legs, 
feet, face . . . right shape and Christen- 
dom." And The Return from Parnas- 
sus, pt. i. (Clarendon Press, p. 43), ii. 1 
(1599) : " Luxurio, as they say, a man of 
God's makinge, as they saye, came to 
my house, as they saye." "A creature 
of God's making " (Jonson and Chap- 
man, Eastward Ho, I. 1. [1605]). See 



also Webster, Westward Ho, iv. i. 
(1607). Day has it in The He of Guls 
(1606), with variations : " a woman of 
God's making and a ladie of his own, 
and wearing their own haire " ; and 
Porter, in Two Angry Women of 
Abingdon (Hazlitt's Dodsley, vii. 355), 
1599 : " He is not a man as God might 
have made him." I have not seen this 
passage illustrated. 

523. honey monarch] A common 
term of endearment in Ireland still. 
Compare Promos and Cassandra (pt. 
i.), iv. vii. (1578): "Sweete honny Grim- 
ball . . . iwny sweete Grimball " ; and 
Sidney's Arcadia (repr. 1898, p. 398) : 
" honey Dorus, tell them me." And 
in Timon (Shakes. Lib. 1875, p. 443), 
in. v. : " Art thou well pleas'd with 
this, my hony ? " Shakespeare makes 
a verb of it in Hamlet, in. iv. 93 : 
" honeying and making love." 

525. too, too] The intensitive re- 
duplication occurs several times in 
Shakespeare, and was very common. 
Formerly the two words were hyphened 
or written as one. See Merry Wives 
of Windsor, 11. ii. 261 (and note, Arden 
edition). 



SC. II.] 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



159 



they say, to fortuna delta guerra. I wish you the 
peace of mind, most royal couplement ! {Exit. 

King. Here is like to be a good presence of Worthies. 
He presents Hector of Troy ; the swain, Pompey 
the Great; the parish curate, Alexander ; Armado's 530 
page, Hercules ; the pedant, Judas Maccabseus. 
And if these four Worthies in their first show thrive, 
These four will change habits, and present the other five. 
Biron. There is five in the first show. 

King. You are deceived, 'tis not so. 535 

Biron. The pedant, the braggart, the hedge-priest, the fool, 

and the boy : — 

Abate [a] throw at novum, and the whole world again 

Cannot prick out five such, take each one in his vein. 

King. The ship is under sail, and here she comes amain. 540 

526. delta guerra] Hanmer, Craig; delaguar Qq, Ff; dela guerra Theobald, 
Cambridge. 527. [Exit] Capell. 538. Abate] Qq, Pi; A bare Ff 2, 3, 4; 

Abate a Malone. 539. prick] Ff, Q 2 ; pick Q 1. in his] in *s Ff, Q 2. 



526. fortuna delta guerra] Compare 
Ben Jonson, Case is Altered, 1. i. (1598) : 
" Juniper. Valentine, I prithee rumi- 
nate thyself welcome. What, fortuna 
de la guerra I " Juniper's business is 
to ridicule " forced words." The ex- 
pression occurs in Middleton's More 
Dissemblers besides Women, v. i. (1623) ; 
and in a letter dated 1624 in Court 
and Times of James I. ii. 461. 
Schmidt has an amazing comment 
(Lexicon, 1427). Sometimes it is ren- 
dered in English : " Once again to 
prove the fortune of warre " (M. 
Lok, 1612 [Hakluyt ed. (1812), v. 
391]). Schmidt includes this expression 
amongst Spanish sentences. And the 
Cambridge editors make the special 
note (reading " de la guerra") : " The 
modern editors who have followed 
Hanmer's reading ' della ' in prefer- 
ence to Theobald's * de la ' have for- 
gotten that Armado is a Spaniard, not 
an Italian." Shakespeare may also 
have forgotten it. The only exactly 
given reference I have found to the 
phrase is in Baretti, Italian and Eng- 
lish Dictionary, 1798 : " To try the 
chance of war. Tentar la fortuna della 
guerra." It is similarly written in 
Chamberlain's Letter {Court and Times), 



and Chamberlain was a good authority. 
See also G. Harvey (Grosart, i. 138). 

527. couplement] couple. New Eng. 
Diet, cites Spenser, Fairie Queene, vi. 
v. 24 : " And forth together rode, a 
comely couplement." 

528. Worthies] See above, v. i. no. 

535. You are deceived] Does the King 
referto his own words,"four Worthies " ? 
(line 532), where he must mean to elimi- 
nate Hercules from his count, as not 
truly a Worthy. See note v. i. no. 

536. hedge-priest] Ascham uses this 
term in The Scholemaster (Arber, p. 
136) : " and therefore did som of them 
at Cambridge (whom I will not name 
openlie) cause hedge-priestes sette out 
of the contrie, to be made fellowes in 
the universitie " (1568). A contemptu- 
ous term for those plying their busi- 
ness under hedges or by the roadside. 
Compare hedge-school, hedge-school- 
master, etc. Nashe has the expression 
" hedge ^kt up termes " (Grosart, iii. 
38) to express illiterateness. 

538. Abate [a] throw] The simplest 
alteration here would be to transpose 
"Abate" into "Bate a," and read 
" Bate a throw at novum." "Bate" is a 
weakened form of " abate," and very 
familiar in the common proverb, " Bate 



160 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



[act V, 



Enter COSTARD for Pompey. 

Cost. I Pompey am, — 

Boyet. You lie, you are not he. 

Cost, I Pompey am, — 

Boyet. With libbard's head on knee. 

Biron. Well said, old mocker : I must needs be friends with 

thee. 
Cost. I Pompey am, Pompey surnam'd the Big, — 
Dum. The Great. 545 

Cost. It is " Great," sir ; Pompey surnam'd the Great ; 

That oft in field, with targe and shield, did make my foe 
to sweat : 
542. Boyet] Ff 2, 3, 4 ; Bero. Q 1 ; Ber. F 1, Q 2. 
me an ace quod Bolton," probably And at p. 122 : 



ace 
taken from " gleek." It occurs in Ed- 
wards' Damon and Pithias (Hazlitt's 
Dodsley, iv. 77), ante 1566 ; in Whet- 
stone's Promos and Cassandra (pt. i.), 
iv. vii. (1578) ; Day, Blind Beggar, 
1600 ; Heywood, Fair Maid of Ex- 
change, 1607, etc., etc. ; and as late as 
Smollett's Humphrey Clinker (Letter, 
September 17, 1771). " Abate " means 
to omit, except. Ben Jonson refers to 
the above saying in Tale of a Tub, 11. 
i. : " Go to, I will not bate him an ace 
on 't," that is to say, I will concede or 
withdraw nothing. See Nares ; and for 
bate see The Tempest, 11. i. 109. "Abate 
a throw " means, reduce or take away 
the players by one. See next note. 

538. novum] A game at dice, properly 
called novum quinque, from the two 
principal throws being nine and five 
(Schmidt). Compare Greene's Tu 
Quoque, or The City Gallant, 1614 
(Hazlitt's Dodsley, xi. 219), referred to 
by Nares : "By the cross of these 
hilts, I '11 never play at gleek again 
whilst I have a nose on my face ; I 
smell the knavery of the game. . . . 
Spendall. Change your game for dice ; 
we are a full number for Novum." 
They were six in number, which being 
reduced by one " throw " (or player) 
becomes five, as in the text. Neverthe- 
less, Furness says this line is " an 
obscurity quite dark enough to justify 
the Globe edition's obelus." Dekker 
mentions the game in The Bclman of 
London (Grosart, iii. 120), 1608. He 
says the principal use of the cheating 
dice known as langrets was at novum. 



• some that will not 
play a groate at Novum will lose a 
hundred pound at Hazard, and he that 
will not lose a shilling at Dyce, will 
play away his patrimony at Cardes." 
This tract ot Dekker's is a rehash of 
Harman's Caveat and a tract by Mihil 
Mumchance attributed formerly to 
Greene, and dated 1592. 

the whole world again] Compare 
The Shepherdess Felismena (Yonge's 
trans, of Montemayor's Diana) (Shakes. 
Lib. p. 293, ed. 1875) : " there was 
not such a master in the whole worlde 
againe." See also Richard III. 1. 
ii. 46. 

542. libbard's head] leopard's head. 
" In old French, the language alike of 
heraldry and of our early statutes, the 
term leopart means a lion passant 
guardant. . . . The leopard's head, 
therefore, is properly the head of a lion 
passant guardant, which in fact is a 
lion's front face " (Cripps' Old Eng- 
lish Plate, p. 46, 1891). Theobald 
quoted Cotgrave : " Masquine. The 
representation of a lion's head, &c, 
upon the elbow, or knee of some old- 
fashioned garments." In Sherwood's 
English-French Dictionary (1672) this 
is given M A libbard's head (on the 
knees or elbows . . .), Masquine." 
See note at " vane," iv. i. 93 for a more 
realistic suggestion. 

544. Pompey . . . Big] See Measure 
for Measure, 11. i. 230 (and note, 
Arden edition). See "Pompey the 
Huge" line 675, below, note. 

547. targe] shield. Common in 
earlier writers. 



SC. II.] 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 



161 



And travelling along this coast, I here am come by chance, 

And lay my arms before the legs of this sweet lass of 
France. 

If your ladyship would say, " Thanks, Pompey," I had done. 
Prin. Great thanks, great Pompey. 551 

Cost. 'Tis not so much worth ; but I hope I was perfect. 

I made a little fault in " Great." 
Biron. My hat to a halfpenny, Pompey proves the best Worthy. 

Enter Sir NATHANIEL/^ Alexander. 

Nath. When in the world I liv'd, I was the world's com- 
mander ; 555 
By east, west, north, and south, I spread my conquering 

might : 
My scutcheon plain declares that I am Alisander, — 

Boyet. Your nose says, no, you are not ; for it stands too right. 

Biron. Your nose smells " no," in this, most tender-smelling 
knight. 

Prin. The conqueror is dismay'd. Proceed, good Alex- 
ander. 560 



559. tkis t ] his Qi; this Ff, Q 2. 

554. My hat to a halfpenny] Halli- 
well quotes from Lodge, Wits Miserie 
(p. 63), 1596 : " Hee is the only man 
living to bring you where the best 
licour is, and it is his hat to a halfe 
penny but hee will be drunke for com- 
panie." See note at " I '11 lay my 
head to any good man's hat " (i. i. 291). 
Biron seems to be fond of betting in 
hats. Caps were commoner in this 
connection ; perhaps earlier. 

558. nose . . . stands too right] refers 
to a well-known physical peculiarity of 
Alexander. Compare North's Plutarch, 
1579: "Lysippus . . . hath perfectly 
drawn and resembled Alexander's 
manner of holding his neck, somewhat 
hanging down towards the left side" 
(Temple edition, vii. 5). And in De la 
Primaudaye's French Academy, 1577 
(trans. T. B., chap. xiii. [1586]) : " Wee 
reade that Alexander the Great and 
Alphonsus, King of Arragon, having 
each of them somewhat a wry necke, 
this by nature, the other through 
custome, the flatterers and courtiers 
held their necks on the one side, to 

IT 



counterfeit that imperfection." This 
part of the French Academy has been 
utilised by Robert Greene, and the 
above passage will be found in his 
Tritameron, part ii. (1587) (Grosart, iii. 
148). Puttenham refers to the feature 
in The Arte of English Poesie (Arber, 
p. 302), 1589 : " It was misliked in the 
Emperor Nero, and thought uncomely 
for him to counterfet Alexander the 
Great, by holding his head a little 
awrie, and neerer toward the tone 
shoulder, because it was not his owne 
naturall." Steevens first drew atten- 
tion to this point. 

559. Your nose smells " no "] Compare 
again North's Plutarch, ut supra : "I 
remember I read also in the com- 
mentaries of Aristoxenus, that his skin 
had a marvellous good savour, and that 
his breath was very sweet, insomuch 
that his body had so sweet a smell of 
it self, that all the apparel he wore next 
unto his body, took thereof a passing 
delightful savour." " Most tender- 
smelling " is therefore a very fitting de- 
scription. Douce noticed this allusion. 



162 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 



[act v. 



Nath. When in the world I liv'd, I was the world's com- 
mander, — 

Boyet. Most true ; 'tis right : you were so, Alisander. 

Biron. Pompey the Great, — 

Cost. Your servant, and Costard. 

Biron. Take away the conqueror, take away Alisander. 565 

Cost. [To Nathaniel^ O! sir, you have overthrown 
Alisander the conqueror. You will be scraped out 
of the painted cloth for this : your lion, that holds 
his poll-axe sitting on a close-stool, will be given to 
Ajax : he will be the ninth Worthy. A conqueror, 570 
and afeard to speak ! run away for shame, Alisander. 
{Nathaniel retires^ There, an't shall please you: 
a foolish mild man ; an honest man, look you, and 
soon dashed! He is a marvellous neighbour, in 
sooth, and a very good bowler ; but, for Alisander, 



571. afeard] Q i ; afraid Ff, Q 2. 
in sooth] Ff, Q 2 ; faith Q 1. 

568. painted cloth] cloth or canvas, 
variously painted in oil, and used as 
hangings, or for decoration, or in form- 
ing partitions in interiors. This may 
be taken as the exact sense here, on 
account of the words " scraped out," 
but the term was also used of the arras 
or tapestry (in spite of Dyce's Glossary) 
which formed the hangings in many 
cases. "The Nine Worthies" was a 
favourite subject: "Thou woven 
Worthy in a piece of arras Fit only to 
enjoy a wall " (The Double Marriage, 
iv. iii. [Dyce's Beaumont and Fletcher, 
vj- 387]). Alexander was the chiefest 
worthy. Compare Whitlock, Zootomia 
(p. 171), 1654, quoted by Nares : " That 
Alexander was a souldier, painted cloths 
will confesse; the painter dareth not 
leave him out of the nine worthies." 

568, 569. lion . . . close-stool] In 
Gerard Leigh's Accedens of Armorie, 
1591, the arms of the worthies are 
given : " The fourth was Alexander, 
the which did beare Geules, a lion 
or, seiante in a charger, holding a 
battle-ax argent" (fol. 23). Toilet 
quoted this ; see Steevens' Shakespeare, 

1793- 

570. Ajax] punning on a jakes, an 
old name for a privy. The word occurs 
again in King Lear, 11. ii. 72. The 



575 



572. [Nath. retires] Capell. 574, 575. 

quibble became very common from the 
title of a work by Sir John Harington, 
The Metamorphosis of Ajax, 1596. 
See Nashe's Works (Grosart, iii. 55). 
"The pithie tractate of Ajax" as 
Henry Hutton calls it, is constantly 
referred to by contemporary writers. 
Sir John was forbidden the Court for it, 
but in 1598 his friend Robert Markham 
wrote to him, saying, "Your book is 
almost forgiven and I may say for- 
gotten, but not for its lacke of wit or 
satyr . . . and tho' her Highness 
signified displeasure in outward sort, 
yet did she like ' the marrow of your 
book ' " (Nugce Antiques, ii. 287) 
(1779). Sir John Harington may have 
borrowed his quibble from this passage, 
but likely enough it was common pro- 
perty earlier. 

573-575. an honest man . . . and a 
very good bowler] Furnivall found this 
saying, "An honest man and a good 
bowler," in Clarke's Parezmiologia, 
1639 (Centurie of Prayse). Like 
Thomas Fuller, M.D., and Ray, Clarke 
turned over his Shakespeare to fill his 
lists. 

574. dashed] dispirited, disheartened. 
See above, line 462, for a slightly 
different use. Compare Othello, 111. 
iii. 214. 



sc. ii] LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 163 

— alas ! you see how 'tis, — a little o'erparted. But 
there are Worthies a-coming will speak their mind 
in some other sort. 
Prin. Stand aside, good Pompey. 

Enter HOLOFERNES for Judas, and MOTH for Hercules. 

Hoi. Great Hercules is presented by this imp, 580 

Whose club kill'd Cerberus, that three- headed canis ; 
And, when he was a babe, a child, a shrimp, 
Thus did he strangle serpents in his manus. 
Quoniam he seemeth in minority, 

Ergo I come with this apology. 585 

Keep some state in thy exit, and vanish. [Moth retires. 
Judas I am, — 

Dum. A Judas ! 

Hoi. Not Iscariot, sir. 

Judas I am, ycleped Maccabaeus. 590 

Dum. Judas Maccabaeus dipt is plain Judas. 

Biron. A kissing traitor. How art thou prov'd Judas ? 

576. 'tis,] Johnson, Cambridge; 'tis Q i, Ff; it's Q 2 ; 'tis ; Capell, Steevens. 
581. canis] Rowe, Cambridge ; canus Qq, Ff. 592. prov'd] F 2 ; proud Q 1 ; 

prou'd F i, Q 2. 

576. o'erparted] given too difficult a Gabriel Harvey uses it in Pierce's 

part. Compare Ben Jonson, Bar- Supererogation (Grosart, ii. 46), 1592 : 

tholomew Fair, in. i. (1614) (Cunning- " Agrippa was an urcheon, Copernicus 

ham's Gifford, ii. 174 b) : " Quarlous. a shrimpe, Cardan a puppy, Scaliger a 

How now, Numps! almost tired m baby, Paracelsus a scab, Erastus a 

your protectorship, overparted, over- patch, Sigonius a toy, Cuiacius a patch 

parted?" New Eng. Diet, quotes this, to this Termagant." And in How a 

580, 581. Hercules . . . club] See note Man may Chuse a Good Wife (Hazlitt's 

at v. i. no. Hercules with his club Dodsley, ix. 40), 1602: "That shrimp, 

was another favourite in the painted that spindle-shank, that wren, that 

cloth, or "worm-eaten tapestry," the sheep biter, that lean chitty-face." 

tailors' libraries of the day. See Much See, too, Ben Jonson, Love's Welcome 

Ado About Nothing, in. iii. 145, 146. at Welbeck ; and Narcissus, edited by 

See an example of "the forces of Miss M. Lee, p. 7 (1602). 
Hercules" introduced, in mummery, at 589. Not Iscariot] From John xiv. 22, 

iv. i. g3 (note). as Furnivall notes. 

580. imp] See 1. ii. 5 (note). 591. dipt] The two senses, to shear 

582. shrimp] Compare 1 Henry VI. and to embrace, are quibbled with, as 

11. iii. 23. Craig quotes from Higgins, well as the word-play with " cleped." 
Nomenclator (1585), in a note at that 592. A kissing traitor] A "Judas kiss" 

passage in the Little Quarto Shake- became proverbial at an early date, 

speare. A term of contempt still in Compare The Booke in Meeter 3/ Robin 

use in the north of Ireland, properly Conscience (Hazlitt, Early Popular 

applied to a diminutive, scraggy person. Poetry, iii. 245), circa 1550 : " And that 



164 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



[ACT V. 



Hol. Judas I am, — 

Dum. The more shame for you, Judas. 

Hol. What mean you, sir ? 

Boyet. To make Judas hang himself. 

Hol. Begin, sir ; you are my elder. 

Biron. Well follow'd : Judas was hang'd on an elder. 

HoL I will not be put out of countenance. 

Biron. Because thou hast no face. 

Hol. What is this? 

Boyet. A cittern-head. 

Dum. The head of a bodkin. 



595 



600 



you have given him many a Judas kisse 
Your act will declare how you have done 
amisse." And see Greene's Arbasto 
(Grosart, iii. 211), 1584; and G. 
Harvey, Notable Letter, 1593. 

597. you are my elder] a proverbial 
bit of chaff. Compare Lyly's Endymion, 
11. ii. : " You will be mine elder, because 
you stand upon a stoole." And see 
Comedy of Errors, v. i. 420. Still in use ? 

5g8. Judas . . . elder] An old legend. 
Dyce quoted Sir John Mandevill 
(p. 112, ed. 1725), 1364 : " And faste 
by, is zit the Tree of Eldre, that Judas 
henge him selfe upon, for despeyt that 
he hadde, when he solde and betrayed 
our Lorde." See also The Vision of 
Piers the Plowman (edited Skeat, i. 
26) : " Judas he japed with the 
Iewes seluer, And on an ellerue tree 
hongede him after." And in Shake- 
speare's time in Marlowe, Jew of 
Malta, iv. vi. 72 (Bullen) : " The 
hat he wears Judas left under the 
elder tree when he hanged himself" ; 
and Ben Jonson, Every Man out of his 
Humour, iv. iv : "He shall be your 
Judas, and you shall be his elder-tree 
to hang on." Brand quotes from 
Gerard's Herbal, ed. Johnson, p. 1428 : 
" The Arbor Judce [Cercis siliquastrum] 
is thought to be that whereon Judas 
hanged himself, and not upon the elder- 
tree, as it is vulgarly said.". It is 
doubtful, to say the least of it, if our 
elder grew within reach of Judas. It 
is not native in Palestine. 

602-622. This personal description 
of Holofernes recalls that of Gabriel 
Harvey by Nashe in Have With You to 
Saffron Walden (Grosart's Nashe, iii. 
137-138, and elsewhere). See note at 



iv. ii. 77-81, and Introduction. Nashe 
gives a woodcut of Harvey (iii. 35). 

602. cittern-head] M The cittern had 
usually a head grotesquely carved at 
the extremity of the neck and finger- 
board" (Nares). Nares cites several 
parallels and compares Gargantua's 
lamentation for " Badebec, who had a 
face like a rebec " (Motteux's Rabelais, 
ii. 24). See Marston's Scourge of 
Villainy (Bullen's Marston, iii. 301) : 
" Shall brainless cittern-heads, each 
jobbernoul, Pocket the very genius of 
thy soul ? " And Dekker, Match mee 
in London, Act i. (Pearson, iv. 137) : 
" Fidling at least half an hour on a 
citterne with a man's broken head at it, 
so that I think 'twas a barber surgeon " ; 
and see Fletcher's Love's Cure : " You 
cittern-head, you ill-countenanced cur." 
For a description of this musical in- 
strument, somewhat like the guitar, see 
Chappell's Popular Music, p. 101. 

603. head of a bodkin] Bodkins, long 
jewelled pins for ladies' hair, appear 
abundantly as New Year's gifts to 
Queen Elizabeth from 1580 to 1590. 
See. Nichols' Progresses of Queen 
Elizabeth, ii. 289-499. The heads or 
tops were various in form, often flowers 
in gold or small precious stones. In 
1586-1587 two occur : " Item twoe 
bodkins of golde, th' one a flye, th' 
other a spider," and " a bodkinne of 
silver with a little ostridge of gold." 
They seem to have been very fashion- 
able at this especial period. Compare 
here Florio's New World of Words : 
** Puntarvob, a bodkin, a head-needle, 
a goldsmith's pouncer. Also a nice, a 
coy, or selfe-conceited fellow, a man 
that stands upon nice faultes, a finde- 



SC. II.] 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



165 



Biron. A death's face in a ring. 

Long. The face of an old Roman coin, scarce seen. 

Boyet. The pommel of Caesar's falchion. 

Durn. The carved bone face on a flask. 

Biron, Saint George's half-cheek in a brooch. 



605 



606. falchion] fauchion Q 1 ; faulchion Ff, Q 2. 
bone Ff, Qq. 



607. carved bone] carv d- 



faulte, a carper, a scrupulous, over- 
weening man." Ben Jonson gives this 
name (Puntarvolo) to one of his best 
delineations (Cynthia's Revels). 

604. death's face in a ring] Death's 
head rings, with the motto memento 
mori, were in early popularity. See 
1 Henry IV. in. iii. 34, 35 ; Merchant 
of Venice, 1. ii. 55 ; and 2 Henry IV. 11. 
iv. 55. The earliest example I have 
found is in Greene's Farewell to Follie 
(Grosart, ix. 239), 1591 : "The olde 
Countesse spying on the finger of 
Seignior Cosimo a ring with a death's 
head ingraven, circled with this poesie, 
Gressus ad vitam." And see Greene's 
Never Too Late (Grosart, viii. 30) for 
the real thing : " I have in my cell A 
dead man's scull which calls this 
straight to mind That as this is so 
must my ending be." 

606. Ccesar's falchion] I presume 
this is also from a painted cloth 
representation of Caesar. Caesar's 
sword is, however, famous in legend. 
Bayle says (Dictionary of History , ed. 
1735, "• 4 X 9> note) : " I forgot an Act 
of Religion which is very curious. 
The Averni boasted to have Julius 
Ccesar's sword, apd showed it still in 
Plutarch's time, hung up in one of 
their Temples. Caesar saw it and 
laughed but would not suffer his Men 
to take it away. He considered it as 
consecrated Thing " (Plutarch, in 
Apoph. p. 720 E). It is a long jump 
from this to the days of Smollett. 
In Peregrine Pickle, chap, xxxiv. (1750), 
this sword is in our own country : 
" The company walked up hill to visit 
[Dover] castle, where they saw the 
sword of Julius Ccesar, and Queen 
Elizabeth's pocket pistol." Caesar 
was much more in evidence in Eliza- 
bethan times than now ; existing 
popularly perhaps, only in "as dead 
as Julius Caesar." But in those 
days Caesar's wine was at Dover (H. 



Peacham, in Coryat). Caesar's bread 
(gone sour) is in Beaumont and Fletcher 
and in Ben Jonson. Deloney saw salt 
and wine in the Tower of London 
which had been there ever since Caesar 
left it : " the wine was grown so thick 
it might have been cut like a jelly." 
Nashe mentions the wine also. Caesar's 
salt beef is in Beaumont and Fletcher's 
Love's Pilgrimage. His money is in 
The Jests of George Peel. These 
imaginings did not arise from any 
pictorial Caesar. 

607. carved bone face on a flask] See 
Romeo and Juliet, in. iii. 132. Cot- 
grave has " Flasque, as Flascon ; also, 
zflask, or box, for powder." There 
are several prints of early flasks in 
Demmin's Arms and Armour (pp. 535, 
536, Bell's ed. 1877). Some are of 
horn of the end of the sixteenth 
century, of German origin, all orna- 
mented with carved work. One is a 
11 German primer " of this period in- 
laid with ivory, circular, with a gro- 
tesque central face. A page in Edwards' 
Damon and Pithias (ante 1566) says : 
"he is but a tame ruffian, that can 
swear by his flask and twich-box, and 
God's precious lady " (Hazlitt's Dods- 
ley, iv. 67). 

608. half-cheek] profile, side-face. 
The same as " half-face " in King 
John, 1. i. 94. 

brooch] an ornament or jewel 
often worn in the hat ; or a badge 
of leather or pewter to indicate the 
wearer's business. Compare Dekker's 
If this be not a good Play (Pearson, 
iii. 289) : " The cittie water-bearers 
(trimly dight) With yellow oaken 
tankards (pind upright) Like brooches 
in their hats." The badge of a servant 
was usually worn on the sleeve. Dek- 
ker mentions the brooch in the hat 
again in Satiromastix (Pearson, i. 217). 
See Nares ; and All's Well that Ends 
Well, 1. i. 171. 



166 LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST [act v. 

Dum. Ay, and in a brooch of lead. 

Biron. Ay, and worn in the cap of a toothdrawer. 610 

And now, forward ; for we have put thee in countenance. 
Hoi. You have put me out of countenance. 
Biron. False : we have given thee faces. 
Hoi. But you have outfaced them all. 

Biron. An thou wert a lion, we would do so. 615 

Boyet. Therefore, as he is an ass, let him go. 

And so adieu, sweet Jude ! nay, why dost thou stay ? 
Dum. For the latter end of his name. 

Biron. For the ass to the Jude? give it him : — Jud-as, away! 
Hoi. This is not generous, not gentle, not humble. 620 

Boyet. A light for Monsieur Judas ! it grows dark, he may 

stumble. \_Holofernes retires. 

Prin. Alas ! poor Maccabaeus, how hath he been baited. 

Enter ARMADO for Hector. 
Biron. Hide thy head, Achilles : here comes Hector in 

arms. 
Dum. Though my mocks come home by me, I will now 625 

be merry. 
King. Hector was but a Troyan in respect of this. 

616. as he is an ass] Q 2, Ff 3, 4 ; as he is, an ass Q 1, Ff I, 2. 627, 664. 
Troyan] Qq, Ff ; Trojan Rowe, etc. 

609, 610. brooch of lead . . . in the and Epigrams, 1562 (Spenser Soc. p. 

cap of a toothdrawer] Compare Taylor, 92) : " An ass was given to a rapacious 

Wit and Mirth (Hindley's repr. p. 62), governor named Jude," etc. A stand- 

1630 : " In Queen Elizabeth's dayes, ing joke. Lyly has the same quibble 

there was a fellow that wore a brooch on the name Mydas (iv. 1). 

in his hat like a toothdrawer, with a 617. adieu . . . Jude] Compare the 

Rose and Crown and two letters." quibbling at 111. i. 127, 128, on adieu 

Halliwell quoted this. and Jew. 

612. out of countenance] See above, 620. humble]" courteous, benevolent, 

line 272, for a reference to Puttenham. kind " (Schmidt). The context sug- 

New Eng. Diet, has an earlier example gests this meaning, but no such sense 

than Love's Labour 's Lost. is admitted in New Eng. Diet. See 

615, 616. lion . . . ass] Suggested by line 726 below. 

iEsop's fable of the ass in the lion's skin. 621. Monsieur Judas] The frequent 

Compare Nashe, Foure Letters Con- use of " Monsieur " reminds us we are 

futed (Grosart, ii. 226), 1593 : " steale in France. 

Tully, steale, Tully, away with the Asse 622. Maccabceus . . . baited] An early 

in the Lion's skinne." And Ben Jonson, example of Jew-baiting. 

Case is Altered : " put off this lion's 625. come home] return whence they 

head, your ears have discovered you." started. 

The application of the fable is gener- by me] in my case. Compare " I would 

ally as here, when the lion is found to thou hadst done so by Claudio " (Meas- 

be an ass he is told to clear out. ure for Measure, v. i. 473) (Schmidt). 

Another quibble is suggested here by 627. Troyan] merely an ordinary kind 

Furnivall, from Heywood's Proverbs of good fellow. See line 664 below. 



SC. II.] 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 



167 



Boyet. But is this Hector ? 

King. I think Hector was not so clean-timbered. 

Long. His leg is too big for Hector. 630 

Dum. More calf, certain. 

Boyet. No ; he is best indued in the small. 

Biron. This cannot be Hector. 

Dum. He 's a god or a painter ; for he makes faces. 

Arm. " The armipotent Mars, of lances the almighty, 635 

Gave Hector a gift," — 
Dum. A gilt nutmeg. 

630. Hector] Ff, Q 2 ; Hectors Q 1 ; Hector's Capell, Cambridge. 632. in] 
with Ff 3, 4. 637. A gilt nutmeg] Ff, Q 2 ; A gift nutmeg Q 1. 



629. clean-timbered] well-built. Com- 
pare Ben Jonson, Every Man out of 
his Humour, Induction : " O, good 
words, good words ; a well-timbered 
fellow, he would have made a good 
column " ; and Greene, A Quip for 
an Upstart Courtier (Grosart, xi. 290) : 
" His Comrade that bare him company 
was a iolly light timber' d lack a 
Napes." Halliwell refers to Nomen- 
clator, 1585, for a "slender timbered 
fellowe." 

631. calf] fool ; as well as part of 
leg. 

632. small] the part of the leg below 
the calf (Schmidt). The expression 
occurs twice in Sidney's Arcadia (ante 
1586) : " in her going, one might 
sometimes discern the small of her leg, 
which, with the foot, was dressed in a 
short pair of velvet buskins" (bk. i.) 
(repr. 1898, p. 64) ; and in bk. v. : 
" Pyrocles came out led by Sympathus, 
clothed after the Greek manner in a 
long coat of white velvet reaching to 
the small of his leg " (p. 456). Craig 
gives me a reference to Hakluyt 
(Maclehose ed. vi. 4): "about their 
armes and smalles of their legs they 
have hoops of golde " (Voyage of John 
Eldred, 1583). 

634. He 's . . . faces] Proverbial, in 
Fuller's Gnomologia. See Mery Tales, 
Wittie Questions and Quicke Answeres, 
Very pleasant to be Readde, 1567 (circa 
1540), edited W. C. Hazlitt, 1864, pp. 
106-107 ; and Taylor, The Sculler, 
1612 (iii. 22 [1630]). 

635. armipotent] a title of Mars. It 
occurs in Chaucer's Knight's Tale, 
ii. 24 : " Ther stood the tempul of 
Marz army potent." 



637. gilt] A sense of gild, equivalent 
to the old cookery term " endore," which 
seems to have escaped the dictionaries 
and commentators. The term is used 
by Hugh Plat (Delights for Ladies), 
1600 ; The Art of Preserving (ed. 
1611) : "a, 13. The making of sugar- 
plate, and casting thereof in carved 
moldes. . . . Set it (the paste) against 
the fire till it bee dry on the inside, 
then with a knife get it out as they 
used to doe a dish of butter, and drie 
the backside, then gilde it on the edges 
with the white of an egge laide round 
about the brim of the dish with a 
pensile, and presse the gold downe 
with some cotton, & when it is drie 
skew or brush off the golde with the 
foote of an Hare or Conie." Probably, 
though not so stated, saffron was used. 
See Theophilus' Arts of the Middle 
Ages, translated by R. Hendrie, 1847, 
p. 41 and elsewhere ; and see New 
Eng. Diet. (Endore). No gold was used 
in this gilding. Was there ever any in 
the "gilded pill " ? There is another 
example in Hugh Plat (op. cit.) : 
" a, 16. To make Jumbolds . . . then 
take a feather and gild them, then put 
them again into the oven." An earlier 
illustration occurs in The Secretes 
of Alexis of Piemont, translated by 
William Warde, 1568 (p. 93, The Fift 
Booke) : "To make a licour that 
maketh a golden colour without golde. 
Another licour of the colour of golde 
for to write, and to gilte yron, woode, 
glasse, bone and other like thyngs." 
Yolk of egg, quicksilver and salt 
armoniak are the ingredients. Hence 
the gilded rosemary, gilt wheat, gilded 
bride-branches, etc., of Ben Jon9on 



168 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



[act v. 



Biron. A lemon. 

Long. Stuck with cloves. 

Dum. No, cloven. 

Arm. Peace! 

" The armipotent Mars, of lances the almighty, 

Gave Hector a gift, the heir of Ilion ; 

641. Peace I] omitted Ff, Q 2. 

and others. And in Nichols, Pro- 
gresses, ii. 78 : "a greate pye of 
quynses and wardyns guilt " (1577-8). 
637- gilt nutmeg] Compare Ben Jon- 
The Gipsies Metamorphosed, 1621 : 



64O 



" I have lost an inchanted nutmeg, all 
gilded over, was inchanted at Oxford 
for me, to put in my sweetheart's ale 
a mornings." In a note to this passage, 
Gifford says " the practise of gilding 
nutmegs however strange it may appear 
was sufficiently common." " Aguilded 
nutmeg, and a race of ginger," occurs 
in the Affectionate Shepherd (Barnfield, 
J 594)» and in many other poems of 
that age. These M many other poems " 
await discovery. But gilt nutmegs are 
met with later sometimes. In an 
Account of Receipts (Harleian Miscel- 
lany, vii. 159) " A dozen of gilt nut- 
megs " occurs in 1660. Halliwell quotes 
from Dryden's Enchanted Island, 
ed. 1676, p. 15 : " This will be a dole- 
ful day with old Bess : she gave me a 
gilt nutmeg at parting." One of these 
references is mine, and no more have 
been advanced. The little silver, or 
silver-gilt, nutmeg holders, double- 
lidded, with a grater inside, are familiar 
enough of the Queen Anne and Geor- 
gian period. These are mentioned 
by Congreve (Love for Love, 11. iii.), 
1695 : " a little nutmeg grater [silver] 
which she had forgot in the caudle 
cup " ; and in Tom Browne (Letters 
from the Dead, pt. iii., circa 1700) : 
" plundered me of a silver spoon and 
nutmeg grater." No doubt the nutmeg 
lasted a long time, a slight sprinkle of 
the strong flavour being sufficient in 
ale, port-wine, etc. The gilding may 
have been a preservative from the 
effects of atmosphere, from dust, and 
also ornamental. Compare the abun- 
dantly mentioned " gilded rosemary " ; 
and see last note. 

638, 639. lemon. Stuck with cloves] 
Oranges were more commonly used in 
this manner, but oranges and lemons 



seem to have been used indiscrimi- 
nately for the same purposes. In the 
little volume of Hugh Plat, quoted from 
at line 637, in the receipt (b, 4) for 
" Spirit of Wine," etc., " Lemmon or 
Orenge pils " are used ; and elsewhere, 
marmalade is made of oranges or 
lemons : " (a, 41). Take ten Lemmons 
or Oranges and boyle them with halfe 
a dozen pippins," etc. But we are 
happily told what the use of the orange 
stuck with cloves was. It was, like 
the nutmeg, for the ale. See (a, 32) : 
"Divers excellent kindes of bottle Ale. 
. . . I cannot remember that ever I 
did drinke the sage ale at any time, as 
that which is made by mingling two or 
three droppes of the extracted oyle of 
sage with a quart of Ale. . . . The 
like is to bee done with the oyle of 
Mace or Nutmegs. But if you will 
have a right gossips cup that shall 
farre exceede all the ale that ever 
Mother Bunch made . . . tunne halfe 
a pinte of white Ipocras. . . . Some 
commende the hanging of roasted 
Oranges prickt full of cloves in the 
vessell of ale, till you finde the taste 
thereof sufficientlie graced to your 
owne liking." Halliwell quotes from 
Bradwell, 1636, that a lemon stuck 
with cloves was a good thing to smell 
occasionally against pestilence ; and 
Dr. Rawlinson states that the execu- 
tioner of Charles I. found an orange 
full of cloves in the king's pocket. 
More to the purpose is Steevens' 
extract from Lupton's Notable Things : 
" Wine wyll be pleasant in taste and 
flavour, if an orenge or a lymon (stickt 
round about with cloaves) be hanged 
within the vessell that it touch not the 
wyne. And so the wyne wyll be pre- 
served from foystines and evyll savor " 
(ii. 36 [1595]). The alliance between 
the orange and clove is very often 
referred to. Compare Ben Jonson's 
characters Orange and Clove, in Every 
Man out of his Humour. 



SC. II.] 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 



169 



A man so breathed that certain he would fight ; yea 

From morn till night, out of his pavilion. 645 

I am that flower," — 

Dum. That mint. 

%■ That columbine. 

Arm. Sweet Lord Longaville, rein thy tongue. 

Long. I must rather give it the rein, for it runs against 
Hector. 

Dum. Ay, and Hector 's a greyhound. 650 

Arm. The sweet war-man is dead and rotten ; sweet 
chucks, beat not the bones of the buried ; when he 
breathed, he was a man. But I will forward with my 
device. Sweet royalty, bestow on me the sense of 
hearing. 655 

Prin. Speak, brave Hector ; we are much delighted. 

644. fight; yea] Qq, Ff, Steevens, Cambridge, Globe; fight ye Rowe (ed. 2), 
Dyce, etc. 652, 653. when he . . . man] Q 1, Capell et seq. ; omitted Ff, Q 2. 
655. [Biron steps to Costard and whispers him] Capell ; [Biron whispers Costard] 
Steevens, Craig ; omitted Cambridge, Globe. 



644. breathed] in such good wind 
and condition that he would fight, yea 
from morn to night. The alteration 
to " ye " enfeebles the sense. For 
" breathed " see Taming of the Shrew, 
Induction, ii. 50; Venus and Adonis, 67%, 
etc. Compare the old play of The 
Taming of a Shrew, 1594 (Shakes. 
Lib. 1875, p. 165), 1. i. : " Make the 
long breathde Tygre broken winded " ; 
and Gascoigne's The Hermit's Tale 
(Nichols, i. 557), 1575 : " My vaunting 
vayne being nowe pretyly well 
breathed " — that is to say, exercised. 

646. columbine] Compare A Twelfe 
Night Merriment (Narcissus), 1602 
(ed. M. Lee, 1893) : " Looke, O thou 
flower of favour, thou marigold of 
mercye and columbine of compassion, 
looke, O loke on the dolourous dewe 
dropps distilld from the limbeckes or 
loopeholes of their eyes." A very 
popular flower at this time. Parkinson 
tells us they were " carefully noursed up 
in our gardens, for the delight both of 
their forme and their colours." It was 
used to pattern from in embroidering : 
" One pettycote of white sarcenett, 
embrothered all over with venyce silver 
plate, and some carnacion silke like 
columbines" (New Year's Gifts to 



Queen Elizabeth [Nichols, iii. 446], 
1600). 

650. Hector . . . greyhound] This 
name is given in a " Catalogue of 
some general Names of Hounds and 
Beagles" in The Gentleman's Recrea- 
tion, by Nicholas Cox, p. 14, ed. 1721. 
This list of 105 names comprises our 
most familiar hound-names to this day. 
Hector is the only H. 

651. war-man] See The Troublesome 
Raigne of King John, 1591 (Shakes. 
Lib. 1875, p. 294) : ** Here comes the 
warmen all." And again at pp. 306, 
308. 

dead and rotten] Not again in Shake- 
speare. See Harrison's Description 
of England, bk. ii. chap. iii. (New 
Shakes. Soc. p. 88), 1577-1587 : " I tell 
you, sirs, that I judge no land in Eng- 
land better bestowed than that which 
is given to our universities ; for by 
their maintenance our realme shall be 
well governed when we be dead and 
rotten." A speech of King Henry the 
Eighth. 

652. chucks] See v. i. 103. 

655. The stage - direction inserted 
here by Capell was for the purpose of 
enabling Costard to obtain his informa- 
tion about Jaquenetta's condition. 



170 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



[act v. 



Arm. I do adore thy sweet grace's slipper. 

Boyet. Loves her by the foot. 

Dam. He may not by the yard. 

Arm. "This Hector far surmounted Hannibal," — 660 

Cost. The party is gone : fellow Hector, she is gone ; she 

is two months on her way. 
Arm. What meanest thou? 
Cost. Faith, unless you play the honest Troyan, the poor 

wench is cast away: she's quick; the child brags in 665 

her belly already : 'tis yours. 
Arm. Dost thou infamonize me among potentates ? Thou 

shalt die. 
Cost. Then shall Hector be whipped for Jaquenetta that 

is quick by him, and hanged for Pompey that is dead 670 

by him. 



661. The party is gone] In italic* as a 

664. Troyan] u Trojan " generally 
stood for a "good fellow" amongst 
Shakespeare's contemporaries, and see 
1 Henry IV. 11. i. 77. This is the sense 
here also, but hardly in Henry V. v. i. 
20, 32, unless Pistol means by " base 
Trojan," thou disgrace to good fellows. 
See line 627, above, for another slang 
example. References may be given to 
Ben Jonson, Every Man in his 
Humour, iv. ii; Dekker, Gentle Craft 
(Pearson, p. 42) ; Heywood, Woman 
Killed with Kindness; Marston, 
Pasquil and Katherine ; Kemp, Nine 
Dates Morrice, etc. In all these the 
name is friendly, or gives the idea of 
some liking. See Wheatley's note to 
Jonson's play. The term is in common 
use provincially. Golding (Ovid, Meta- 
morph. xii. 70-73) gives " Troyan " for 
the noun, " Trojan " for the adjective 
spelling, but he varies elsewhere. 
Wheatley says : " The national liking 
for the Trojans probably originated in 
the once prevalent notion that Brut, the 
descendant of ^Eneas, was the founder 
of the British people ; but Mr. Jerram 
thinks that the idea of trustiness may 
have originated from the fidus Achates." 
A note on this word is pardonable 
since there seems to be no earlier 
trivial use. Nashe attacked Richard 
Harvey (Grosart's Nashe, ii. 124, 125, 
etc.) as " Dick the true brute, or noble 
Trojan, or Dick that hath vow'd to 



stage-direction Qq, Ff. 

live and die in defence of Brute, and 
this our lies first offspring from the 
Troians." R. Harvey " had written an 
antiquarian work on the descent of 
Brutus on our island. The party also 
who at the University attacked the 
opinions of Aristotle were nicknamed 
the Trojans, as determined enemies of 
the Greeks " (Disraeli, Calamities of 
Authors, p. 129, ed. 1859). Another 
slight link between this play and the 
Harvey tribe of pedants. See Intro- 
duction, and notes at Novi hominem 
tanquam, v. i. 9, and at iv. ii. 74, 77, 
and elsewhere. 

667. infamonize] Armado's perver- 
sion of " infamize," to defame. Nashe, 
who was great at verbs in ize (see in. i. 
45), seems to have coined " infamize " : 
" There is no other unlascivious use or 
end of poetry, but to infamize vice and 
magnifie vertue " (Foure Letters Con- 
futed [Grosart, ii. 218], 1592-1593). He 
has it again later in Have With You to 
Saffron Walden (Grosart, iii. 45), 1596 : 
" Bafful and infamize my name when 
I am in heaven." Gabriel Harvey, 
Nashe's antagonist, seized on it in his 
list of expressions from Nashe held up 
to ridicule in Pierce's Supererogation 
(Grosart, ii. 276), 1593 : " infamizers of 
vice." This is a reply to Nashe's 
Foure Letters Confuted. New Eng. 
Diet, has not got this right, and it is of 
some interest here. 



SC. II.] 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



171 



Dum. Most rare Pompey ! 
Boyet. Renowned Pompey ! 

Biron. Greater than great, great, great, great Pompey ! 
4 Pompey the Huge ! 675 

Dum. Hector trembles. 
Biron. Pompey is moved. More Ates, more Ates ! stir 

them on ! stir them on ! 
Dum, Hector will challenge him. 
Biron. Ay, if a' have no more man's blood in 's belly than 680 

will sup a flea. 
Arm. By the north pole, I do challenge thee. 
Cost. I will not fight with a pole, like a northern man : 

I '11 slash ; I '11 do it by the sword. I pray you, let 

me borrow my arms again. 685 

Dum. Room for the incensed Worthies ! 
Cost. I '11 do it in my shirt. 
Dum. Most resolute Pompey ! 
Moth. Master, let me take you a button-hole lower. Do 



678. on I stir] Rowe ; or stir Qq, Ff. 
Cambridge. 

675. Pompey the Huge] See above, 
line 544. Marston recalls this in The 
Malcontent, i. i. (1604) : " And run the 
wildgoose - chase even with Pompey 
the Huge." Noted in Furnivall's Cen- 
turie of Prayse. Pompey the mighty. 
See note to Timon of Athens, 1. ii. 51 
(Arden edition). 

681. sup a flea] Compare Twelfth 
Night, in. ii. 61. For "sup" used 
transitively, see Taming of the Shrew, 
Induction, i. 28. 

683. fight with a pole, like a north- 
ern man] " Out of the north all ill 
comes forth." See Othello, v. ii. 218 
(Arden edition, pp. 244, 245, note). I 
am not satisfied there is any reference 
here to the quarter-staff, as Halliwell 
suggested, which was expressly a 
Devonshire and western game. See 
New Eng. Diet, for quotation from 
Dicke of Devonshire, 1626, who calls it 
" my own country weapon " ; and see 
Strutt's Sports and Pastimes for further 
proof. The reference is rather to out- 
laws and thieves. Borde says, speak- 
ing of " a Scotishe man " (Boke of 
Knowledge, chap. iv. [1542]) : " In these 
partyes be many out lawes and strong 



684. pray] Ff, Q 2 ; bepray Q 1, 

theeves, for much of their lyving 
standeth by stelyng and robbyng." 
Add to this what Harrison says (De- 
scription of England, bk. ii. chap. xvi. 
t I 577- I 5 8 7]) : " I might here speake of 
the excessive staves which diverse that 
travell by the waie doo carrie upon 
their shoulders, whereof some are 
twelve or thirteen foote long, beside 
the pike of twelve inches : but as they 
are commonlie suspected of honest 
men to be theeves and robbers, or at 
the least scarse true men which 
beare them ; so by reason of this . . . 
no man travelleth by the waie without 
his sword, or some such weapon." 
The quarter-staff was about half the 
length of these staves. The pole here 
is that of the border reavers. 

689. take you a button-hole lower] 
help you off with your garment, with 
a reference to the proverbial phrase 
meaning to humiliate one. Moth 
means that he will expose his poverty 
of underwear. Compare Lyly, En- 
dymion, in. iii. : " He hath taken his 
thoughts a hole lower and saith, seeing 
it is the fashion of the world, he will 
vaile bonet to beautie." And Nashe, 



172 LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST [act v. 

you not see Pompey is uncasing for the combat? 690 

What mean you ? you will lose your reputation. 
Arm. Gentlemen and soldiers, pardon me; I will not 

combat in my shirt. 
Dum. You may not deny it; Pompey hath made the 

challenge. 695 

Arm. Sweet bloods, I both may and will. 
Biron. What reason have you for 't ? 
Arm. The naked truth of it is, I have no shirt. I go 

wool ward for penance. 
Boyet. True, and it was enjoined him in Rome for want 700 

of linen ; since when I '11 be sworn he wore none but 

a dishclout of Jaquenetta's, and that he wears next 

his heart for a favour. 

Enter Monsieur MARCADE, a Messenger. 

Mar. God save you, madam ! 

Prin. Welcome, Marcade, 705 

But that thou interrupt'st our merriment. 

702. he] Ff, Q 2 ; o'Qi. 705-708. Prose in Qq, Ff. 

Pierce Penilesse (Grosart, ii. 77) :" The exercise of justice the naked truth 

haire shirt will chase whordome out of freely set down.' " [I regret having 

their boanes, and the hard lodging on been led astray by this spurious reprint : 

the boards, take their flesh downe a Sidney's words are " truth nakedly and 

button hole lower" It meant M take freely set down " (1739 ed. iii. 33).] 

one down a peg." See Cotgrave in v. 698, 699. no shirt . . . go woolward 

" Mettre de Veau dedans le vin Id.. To for penance] " Wolwarde, without any 

temper, cool, tame or take a hole lower." lynnen nexte ones body (Sans chetnyse) " 

Compare also " Serrer le bouton a" (Palsgrave, 1530). See Skeat's edition 

in Cotgrave, an equestrian expression, of Piers the Plowman (ii. 247) and 

which occurs in T. B.'s translation of Nares, where the word is well ex- 

Primaudaye's French Academy, chap, plained : " Dressed in wool only, with- 

xlix. (1586). In Chapman's Humerous out linen, often enjoined by way of 

Days Mirth (Pearson, i. 66), 1599, it penance." See a quotation from Nashe 

occurs again : " Decline me, or take at line 689 for the similar penance of a 

me a hole lower, as the prouerbe is." hair shirt. Nashe has the phrase in 

690. uncasing] undressing. the text also, which was evidently a 

696. bloods] gallant fellows. Occurs standard joke : M Such as have but one 

again in Julius Ccesar and King John, shirt shall go woolward till [while] that 

Greene has it in The Carde of Fancie be a washing" (A Wonderfull Prog- 

(Grosart, iv. 179), 1587 : " Three of nostication [Grosart's Nashe, ii. 158], 

the boldest blouds in Alexandria were 1591). Farmer quotes from Lodge's 

not able to abide the force of Clero- Wits Miserie, 1596 : " When his shirt 

phontes." is a washing then he goes woolward." 

698. naked truth] See 1 Henry VI. And Steevens, from Rowland's Letting 

11. iv. 20. Sidney has the expression of Humous Blood, 1600: " His shirt's 

earlier, in Arcadia, bk. v. (repr. p. 458) : a washing : then hee must goe wooll- 

" ' Pardon me, most honoured judge,' ward." Nares has it from Witts Re- 

saith he, • since I tell you in the sacred creations; 164 1. 



sc. ii.] LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 173 

Mar. I am sorry, madam ; for the news I bring 

Is heavy in my tongue. The king your father — 

Prin. Dead, for my life ! 

Mar. Even so : my tale is told. 710 

Biron. Worthies, away ! The scene begins to cloud. 

Arm. For mine own part, I breathe free breath. I have 
seen the day of wrong through the little hole of dis- 
cretion, and I will right myself like a soldier. 

[Exeunt Worthies. 

King. How fares your majesty? 715 

Prin. Boyet, prepare : I will away to-night. 

King. Madam, not so ; I do beseech you, stay. 

Prin. Prepare, I say. I thank you, gracious lords, 
For all your fair endeavours ; and entreat, 
Out of a new-sad soul, that you vouchsafe 720 

In your rich wisdom to excuse or hide 
The liberal opposition of our spirits, 
If over-boldly we have borne ourselves 
In the converse of breath ; your gentleness 
Was guilty of it. Farewell, worthy lord! 725 

713. day] days Warburton's note. wrong] right Warburton. 71a. 

entreat,] entreat : Qi; entreats: Ff; intreats : Q 2. 

712-714. / have seen . . . soldier] expected, somewhat stilted. Compare 

Armado's character receives in this Hey wood's Proverbs (ed. Sharman, 

speech a pathetic touch to his credit p. 45), 1546 : " I see day at this little 

that has not been noticed. He has hole. For this bood [bud] sheweth 

been publicly insulted, and his sinful- what fruite will follow " ; and North, 

ness has found him out ; and he resolves DonVs Philosophic (Jacobs' ed. p. 196), 

to reform and do justice to himself 1570: "My L. Mayor that had many 

and Jaquenetta as a soldier, a man times put his finger in the fire before 

of honour, should. See for the result . . . and that could spie day at a little 

his next speech, as evidence of his hole " ; and Gabriel Harvey, Letters 

reformation (at line 871) : " I am a (Grosart, i. 138), 1573-1580 : M being on 

votary : I have vowed to Jaquenetta that can as soone as an other spye 

to hold the plough for her sweet love lighte at a little hole " ; and Lyly, 

three years." This is what Armado Euphues and his England (Arber, p. 

refers to; there is no renewal here 318), 1580: "I can see day at a little 

of the preceding paltry quarrel ; his hole, thou must halt cunningly if thou 

thoughts were as much deeper as they beguile a Cripple " ; and as late as 

were more creditable. " The little hole Ravenscroft, Canterbury Guests, v. 5 

of discretion " may be made clearer (1695), and Tom Browne's Works, ed. 

if we give Sense 2, New Eng. Diet., 1708, iii. 27 (Pleasant Letters, 1700). 

■ judgment of others," to the word " dis- Frequent in the early seventeenth cen- 

cretion," a not uncommon early use. tury writers. 

713. seen the day . . . little hole] An 724. converse of breath] intercourse 

"old saw," equivalent to "I am no fool." of breath, conversation. Compare 

Armado's application is, as might be Othello, iv. ii. 5. 



174 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



[ACT V. 



A heavy heart bears not a humble tongue. 

Excuse me so, coming too short of thanks 

For my great suit so easily obtain'd. 
King. The extreme parts of time extremely forms 

All causes to the purpose of his speed, 730 

And often, at his very loose, decides 

That which long process could not arbitrate : 

And though the mourning brow of progeny 

Forbid the smiling courtesy of love 

The holy suit which fain it would convince; 735 

Yet since love's argument was first on foot, 

Let not the cloud of sorrow justle it 

From what it purpos'd ; since, to wail friends lost 

Is not by much so wholesome-profitable 

As to rejoice at friends but newly found. 740 

Prin. I understand you not : my griefs are double. 

726. not] but Collier MS. a humble] Qq, F i ; an humble, Ff 2, 3, 4 ; a 

nimble Theobald, Cambridge. 729. parts] past Theobald ; haste Singer ; dart 
Staunton conjecture. 732. process] process of time Ff 3, 4. 739. wholesome] 
holdsome Q 1. 741. double] Qq, Ff; deaf Capell ; dull Collier MS., Dyce, 

Craig ; hear dully Staunton conjecture. 

726. humble] complimentary, civil. 
Compare Lucrece, 1093- 1098 : " True 
grief is fond and testy as a child," 
etc. ; and see above, line 620, note. 
The inexcusable reading " nimble " has 
nothing to recommend it except in- 
genuity. Furness says of the Princess : 
" out of her new-sad soul she has 
attempted to apologize for her con- 
duct ; but she breaks off abruptly . . . 
saying that sorrow is not humble, is 
too self-centred for apologies, which 
in themselves imply humility." He 
also calls attention to the " sadness 
the aspirated words convey, breathed 
forth like sighs." Compare the Irish 
proverb : " Many an ill word comes off 
an empty stomach." 

729-732. The extreme . . . arbitrate] 
The necessity of a sudden decision 
settles all questions and hesitations. 
That very instant or extremity of 
time's limit, shapes everything to the 
one purpose, speedy resolve. " Ex- 
tremely " has the sense of M to the ex- 
tremity." Compare the King's " latest 
minute of the hour," below, line 
776. 

731. loose] A technical term for the 



discharge of an arrow, hence " the 
critical moment " (Schmidt). The 
term is used figuratively by Jonson in 
The Alchemist, ii. 1. See Puttenham, 
Arte of English Poesie, 1586-1589 
(Arber, p. 289) : " His [Cupid's] bent 
is sweete, his loose is somewhat 
soure, In joy begunne ends oft in 
wofull houre." And, again, p. 185, 
quoted by Dyce : " The Archers terme 
who is not said to finish the feate of 
his shot before he give the loose and 
deliver his arrow from his bow." 
Earlier, in Lyly's Sapho and Phao, 
v. i. (1584): "this arrow . . . must 
Phao be stricken withal ; and cry softly 
to thyself in the very loose, Venus ! " 

741. double] excessive. If we take 
the word literally, which is inadvisable, 
the Princess's second grief would be 
either her coming departure from the 
King, whose intentions she hardly 
understands, or a mere courtesy. She 
gives the King an opening, which he 
takes. France's griefs were indeed 
double at this time, " fighting for and 
against her heir, Henry IV.," as Dow- 
den says. See Comedy of Errors, in. ii. 
125-127. 



,0. 



ii] LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 175 



Biron. Honest plain words best pierce the ears of grief; 
And by these badges understand the king. 
For your fair sakes have we neglected time, 
Play'd foul play with our oaths. Your beauty, ladies, 745 
Hath much deform'd us, fashioning our humours 
Even to the opposed end of our intents ; 
And what in us hath seem'd ridiculous, — 
As love is full of unbefitting strains ; 
All wanton as a child, skipping and vain ; 750 

Form'd by the eye, and therefore, like the eye, 
Full of straying shapes, of habits, and of forms, 
Varying in subjects, as the eye doth roll 
To every varied object in his glance : 
Which party-coated presence of loose love 755 

Put on by us, if, in your heavenly eyes, 
Have misbecom'd our oaths and gravities, 
Those heavenly eyes, that look into these faults, 
Suggested us to make. Therefore, ladies, 
Our love being yours, the error that love makes 760 

Is likewise yours : we to ourselves prove false, 
By being once false for ever to be true 
To those that make us both, — fair ladies, you : 

742. ears] Ff i, 2, Q 2 ; ear Q 1 ; cares Ff 3, 4. 752. straying] Qq, Ff ; stray 
Coleridge conjecture, Knight ; strange Capell et seq. 757. misbecom d] mis- 

becombd Q 1. 759. make] make them Pope. 

749. strains] tendencies. speare has expressions many times from 
752. straying] Capell's emendation, Promos and Cassandra. See my edition 
strange, is generally accepted. In of Measure for Measure, Appendix. No 
support of it, the Cambridge editors doubt " straying " should be pro- 
write : " In the Lover's Complaint nounced as a monosyllable. Compare 
(ed. 1609), 1. 303, 'strange' is spelt Lyly's Woman in the Moone, 11. i. (circa 
4 straing ' ; and in Lyly's Euphues 1580) : M But well I see that every 
(Arber, p. 113), ' straying ' is a misprint time thou stray est, Thy lust lookes 
for ' straunge.' " The n may have been for strumpet stars below" (to Jupiter), 
dropped for the mark of elision, which The context is again conclusive, 
was often afterwards dropped in its 753, 754. subjects . . . object] A 
turn. But compare Promos and Cas- kind of antithesis the Euphuists de- 
sandra (Shakes. Lib. 1875, p. 228), lighted in. " You shall not be as 
iii. 1: "O straying effectes of blinde objects of warre, but as subjects to 
affected Love, From wisdomes pathes, Alexander " (Lyly's Campaspe, 1. i. 
which doth astraye our wittes," etc. [1584]). 

Halliwell quoted the first line here, 753. eye doth roll] Compare A Mid- 

with the simple remark that " straying " summer-Night's Dream, v. i. 14. 
was the same misprint for " strange." 755. party-coated] in motley, like a 

The context shows it is not a misprint, fool. See note at " patch," iv. ii. 30. 
and invalidates the whole argument in 759. Suggested] tempted. See Othello, 

favour of Capell's alteration. Shake- 11. iii. 364 (Arden edition). 






176 LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST [act v. 

And even that falsehood, in itself a sin, 

Thus purifies itself and turns to grace. 765 

Prin. We have receiv'd your letters full of love ; 

Your favours, the ambassadors of love ; 

And, in our maiden council, rated them 

At courtship, pleasant jest, and courtesy, 

As bombast and as lining to the time. 770 

But more devout than this in our respects 

Have we not been ; and therefore met your loves 

In their own fashion, like a merriment. 
Dum. Our letters, madam, show'd much more than jest. 
Long. So did our looks. 

Ros. We did not quote them so. 775 

King. Now, at the latest minute of the hour, 

Grant us your loves. 
Prin. A time, methinks, too short 

To make a world-without-end bargain in. 

No, no, my lord, your grace is perjur'd much, 

Full of dear guiltiness ; and therefore this : 780 

If for my love, as. there is no such cause, 

You will do aught, this shall you do for me : 

Your oath I will not trust ; but go with speed 

To some forlorn and naked hermitage, 

Remote from all the pleasures of the world; 785 

There stay, until the twelve celestial signs 

Have brought about their annual reckoning. 

If this austere insociable life 

767. the] omitted Q 1. 771. this in our] Hanmer ; this our Q 1 ; these 

are our Ff, Q 2 ; these are your Tyrwhitt conjecture. 772. been] seen Tyr- 

whitt conjecture. 775. quote] Hanmer, etc. ; cote, coat, coate old editions. 

787. their] Ff, Q 2 ; the Q 1, Cambridge. 

770. bombast] stuffing of wool for 780. dear] grievous, heartfelt. But 

padding clothes. See Othello, 1. i. 13 no doubt the Princess implies the sense 

(Arden ed. p. 4). of acceptable, forgivable. 

778. world - without - end] Compare 786. signs] of the zodiac. This ex- 
Sonnet lvii. Nashe uses the expression pression for the duration of a year 
in Foure Letters Confuted (Grosart, ii. occurs again in Measure for Measure, 
275), 1592-1593 : "When I parted with 1. ii. 172. Compare Gesta Grayorum, 
thy brother in Pierce Pennilesse I left 1594 (Nichols' Progresses, iii. 268) : 
him to be tormented world without " In his crest, his government for the 
ende of our Poets and writers about twelve days of Christmas was re- 
London." Occurs in the Te Deum sembled to the sun's passing the twelve 
and in Isaiah xlv. 17, where the Wyclif signs." 
reading is " everlasting." 



SC. II.] 



LOVES LABOUR'S LOST 



177 



Change not your offer made in heat of blood ; 

If frosts and fasts, hard lodging and thin weeds, 790 

Nip not the gaudy blossoms of your love, 

But that it bear this trial and last love ; 

Then, at the expiration of the year, 

Come challenge me, challenge me by these deserts, 

And, by this virgin palm now kissing thine, 795 

I will be thine ; and, till that instant, shut 

My woeful self up in a mourning house, 

Raining the tears of lamentation 

For the remembrance of my father's death. 

If this thou do deny, let our hands part ; 800 

Neither intitled in the other's heart. 
King. If this, or more than this, I would deny, 

To flatter up these powers of mine with rest, 

The sudden hand of death close up mine eye ! 

Hence ever then my heart is in thy breast. 805 

Biron. And what to me, my love ? and what to me ? 
Ros. You must be purged too, your sins are rack'd : 



796. instant] Ff, Q 2 ; instance Q 1. 801. intitled] Ff 1, 2, 3 ; intilcd Q 1 ; 

intituled F 4. 803. flatter] fetter Hanmer (Warburton). 805. Hence ever] 
Hence her rite Q 1. 806-811. Included in brackets by Theobald and Globe; 

omitted by Hanmer and Dyce. 807. rack'd] rank Rowe. 



790. weeds] garments. Greene com- 
monly applies the term to a palmer's 
wear. This is the meaning accepted 
by Schmidt, Furness, etc. But " thin 
weeds " may perhaps refer to the pre- 
ceding fasts, with the sense of weak 
or unnourishing herbs and roots. 
Compare a passage from Morte 
d' Arthur, quoted (from Globe edition, 
P- 379) on P« I 3» Merry Wives of 
Windsor (Arden edition). 

801. intitled] having a claim (a legal 
sense). 

803. flatter up . . . with rest] indulge 
in idleness and freedom from cares. If 
I should refuse you anything for the 
sake of my selfish comfort. " Up " often 
occurs after active verbs, which it 
strengthens with a sense of complete- 
ness. "Flatter up" means pamper, 
coddle (New Eng. Diet.). A good deal 
of twisting has been done to the mean- 
ing here by several commentators 
(Heath, Capell, Johnson, Halliwell). 

806-811. And what . . . sick] Rosa- 

12 



line's next speech makes these lines 
redundant. See note at iv. iii. 296-301 
above, where the Cambridge editors' 
note is referred to upon a similar 
occurrence. Their conclusion is : "As 
there can be no doubt that the whole 
came from Shakespeare's pen we do not 
venture to cancel a portion of it." We 
would " lose no drop of the immortal 
man," as Garrick contended. 

807. rack'd] that is, extended " to 
the top of their bent" (M alone). 
Furness says, very wisely : " Rowe's 
emendation rank belongs to the very 
worst class. In its plausibility, followed 
as it is so closely by ' attaint,' lurks the 
poison. Shakespeare's own word is 
rack'd, far stronger than rank . . . 
the durior lectio must be unflinchingly 
preserved." Furness quotes here some 
quaint alterations by Daniel (p. 29), 
apparently seriously advanced, in order 
to make Rosaline's speech " fine tink- 
ling rhyme." 



178 LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST [act v. 

You are attaint with faults and perjury ; 

Therefore, if you my favour mean to get, 

A twelvemonth shall you spend, and never rest, 810 

But seek the weary beds of people sick. 
Dum. But what to me, my love ? but what to me ? 
Kath. A wife ! A beard, fair health, and honesty ; 

With three-fold love I wish you all these three. 
Dum. O ! shall I say, I thank you, gentle wife? 815 

Kath. Not so, my lord. A twelvemonth and a day 

I '11 mark no words that smooth-faced wooers say : 

Come when the king doth to my lady come ; 

Then, if I have much love, I '11 give you some. 
Dum. I '11 serve thee true and faithfully till then. 820 

Kath. Yet swear not, lest you be forsworn again. 
Long. What says Maria ? 
Mar. At the twelvemonth's end 

I'll change my black gown for a faithful friend. 
Long. I '11 stay with patience ; but the time is long. 
Mar. The liker you; few taller are so young. 825 

Biron. Studies my lady ? mistress, look on me. 

Behold the window of my heart, mine eye, 

What humble suit attends thy answer there ; 

Impose some service on me for my love. 

813. A wife I] Theobald, etc.; A wife? Qq, Ff 1, 2, 3 ; A wife, F 4; Dum, 
(line 812) . . . A wife ? Kath. A beard, etc. Cambridge. 829. my] Ff, Q 2 ; 

thy Q 1. 

813. A wife] Furness is very in- commodity (advantage), in King John, 

sistent upon the excellence of the 11. i. 573 ; and of peace, in Richard III. 

" happy emendation " of the Cam- v. v. 33. He may have met it in 

bridge editors in shifting back these Greene's Menaphon (Grosart, vi. 41) : 

words to Dumain, in which they were " Some sweare Love Smoothed face 

followed by Dyce (1866). But the Love Is sweetest sweete that men can 

alteration, besides being wrong in have." It occurs also in The Trouble- 

principle, spoils the effect of Dumain's some Raigne of King John (Hazlitt's 

" I thank you, gentle wife." Shakes. Lib. p. 263) : "A smooth facte 

816. A twelvemonth and a day] Nunne (for ought I know) is all the 
" Halliwell gives quotations from Abbott's wealth." Shakespeare has 
Ducange and from Cowell's Inter- at least twenty-five compounds ending 
preter, which shows that this term in "faced." 

constituted the full legal year both on 823. friend] sweetheart. See line 

the Continent and in England. It is 404 above (note). 

found in Chaucer's Wyf of Bathes 828, 829. suit . . . service] See note 

Tale (Furness). Hence the common at line 276. This recognised phrase in 

expression " a year and a day." courtship occurs in The Shepherdess 

817. smooth-faced] Shakespeare has Felismena, in Yonge's trans, of Mont- 
this compound twice elsewhere ; of mayor's Diana (Shakes. Lib. p. 289, ed. 



sc. ii] LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 179 

Ros. Oft have I heard of you, my Lord Biron, 830 

Before I saw you, and the world's large tongue 
Proclaims you for a man replete with mocks ; 
Full of comparisons and wounding flouts, 
Which you on all estates will execute 
That lie within the mercy of your wit : 835 

To weed this wormwood from your fruitful brain, 
And there withal to win me, if you please, 
Without the which I am not to be won, 
You shall this twelvemonth term, from day to day, 
Visit the speechless sick, and still converse 840 

With groaning wretches ; and your task shall be, 
With all the fierce endeavour of your wit 
To enforce the pained impotent to smile. 

Biron. To move wild laughter in the throat of death ? 

It cannot be ; it is impossible : 845 

Mirth cannot move a soul in agony. 

Ros. Why, that 's the way to choke a gibing spirit, 
Whose influence is begot of that loose grace 
Which shallow laughing hearers give to fools. 
A jest's prosperity lies in the ear 850 

Of him that hears it, never in the tongue 
Of him that makes it : then, if sickly ears, 
Deaf d with the clamours of their own dear groans, 
Will hear your idle scorns, continue then, 
And I will have you and that fault withal; 855 

But if they will not, throw away that spirit, 
And I shall find you empty of that fault, 
Right joyful of your reformation. 

Biron. A twelvemonth ! well, befall what will befall, 

I '11 jest a twelvemonth in an hospital. 860 

836. fruitful] fructful Q i. 853. dear] dere Johnson conjecture ; drear 

Jackson conjecture ; dire Collier MS. 854. then] them Rann conjecture, Dyce. 

1875), 1598: " He should never have got 3, and Hamlet, 1. ii. 182 (" my dearest 

any other guerdon of his sutes and ser- foe "). 

vices, but onely to see and to be seene, 859. befall . . . befall] Compare 

and sometimes to speake to his Mis- " befall what may befall " (2 Henry 

tresse." A term in Feudalism primarily. VI. in. ii. 40, and Titus Andronicus, 

834. all estates] people of all sorts. v. i. 57). Similar to " hap what will," 

842. fierce] ardent, eager. " come what come may," both oi 

853. dear] heartfelt; see line 780 which occur in Greene's Carde of 

(note). Craig parallels Sonnet xxxvii. Fancie, 1587. 



180 LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST [act v. 

Prin. [ To tkeKing.] Ay, sweet my lord ; and so I take my leave. 
King. No, madam ; we will bring you on your way. 
Biron. Our wooing doth not end like an old play ; 

Jack hath not Jill : these ladies' courtesy 

Might well have made our sport a comedy. 865 

King. Come, sir, it wants a twelvemonth and a day, 

And then 'twill end. 
Biron. That 's too long for a play. 

Re-enter ARMADO. 

Arm. Sweet majesty, vouchsafe me, — 

Prin. Was not that Hector ? 

Dum. The worthy knight of Troy. 870 

Arm. I will kiss thy royal ringer, and take leave, I am 
a votary ; I have vowed to Jaquenetta to hold the 
plough for her sweet love three years. But, most 
esteemed greatness, will you hear the dialogue that 
the two learned men have compiled in praise of the 875 
owl and the cuckoo ? it should have followed in the 
end of our show. 

King* Call them forth quickly ; we will do so. 

Arm. Holla! approach. 

873. years] yeare Q i. 

862. bring you on your way] con- amongst " dialogues set as musical 

duct, accompany you on your way. compositions," the earliest example 

The expression occurs again in Winter's being from J. Playford, 1653. I n The 

Tale, iv. iii. 122 ; and in Measure for Queen's Entertainment at the Earl of 

Measure, 1. i. 62 (see note in Arden Hertford's, 1591 (Nichols' Progresses, 

edition). iii. 113), there is a song of a similar 

864. Jack . . . Jill] An old say- structure between " Dem "(and) and 

ing, occurring in Heywood's Dialogue, " Resp "(onse), with an echo to take 

1546 (Dyce) ; and see Sharman's edi- up the closing syllables of each quat- 

tion of Heywood's Proverbs, p. 100. rain. It is " The Song presented by 

And earlier, in Skelton's Magnyfycence Nereus on the water, sung dialogue- 

(Dyce, i. 234), 15 15 : " What avayleth wise, everie fourth verse answered 

lordshyp, yourselfe for to kyll, With with two Echoes." Shakespeare's 

care and with thought, howe Jack bird-notes replace the already stale 

shall have Gyl." Gosson has " Every echo device. 

John and his Joan" {Schoole of A buse, 879. Holla] "a shout to excite at- 

1579). See Ray, ed. 1742, p. 124; Ben tention " (New Eng. Diet.) ; " a call to 

Jonson, Gipsies Metamorphosed, etc. a person to come near " (Schmidt). 

871. royal finger] See above, v. i. Compare Gascoigne, The Steel Glas 
g6. (Arber, p. 72), 1577 : " But holla; here, 

872, 873. hold the plough] See note I see a wondrous sight, I see a swarme 
at lines 712-714 above. of Saints within my glasse. . . . What 

874. dialogue] This use of 'dialogue" should they be (my lord), what should 
is not included by New Eng. Diet, they be ? " 



SC. II.] 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



181 



Re-enter Holofernes, Nathaniel, Moth, Costard, 
and others. 

This side is Hiems, Winter, this Ver> the Spring ; the 880 
one maintained by the owl, the other by the cuckoo. 
Ver, begin. 



THE SONG. 

Spring. When daisies pied and violets blue 
And lady-smocks all silver-white 
And cuckoo-buds of yellow hue 885 

Do paint the meadows with delight, 
The cuckoo then, on every tree, 
Mocks married men ; for thus sings he, 
Cuckoo ; 

Re-enter . . .] Enter all Qq, Ff. 884, 885. Theobald; the order is 

885, 884 in Ff, Qq. 885. cuckoo-buds] cowslip-buds Farmer conjecture ; 

crocus-buds Whalley conjecture. 886. with delight] much bedight War- 

burton. 

smock," like " Lady's Mantle," " Lady's 
Bedstraw." A general provincial name. 
It occurs in Ben Jonson's Pah's Anni- 
versary : u kingspear, holyhocks, Sweet 
Venus-navel, and soft Lady-smocks." 
New Bng. Diet, quotes Gerard's Herbal. 
885. cuckoo-buds] Britten and Hol- 
land, English Plant Names (Eng. 
Dialect Soc. 1886), give this name 
from Northampton and Sussex to 
Ranunculus bulbosus, or Crowfoot, one 
of the first buttercups to bloom. In 
Co. Donegal (S. W.) the name " Cuckoo- 
flower " is applied to Lotus cornicu- 
latus, the Bird's-foot Trefoil. See 
Appendix to my Flora of Donegal. 
Schmidt decides in favour of the cow- 
slip, for which there is not the slightest 
proof or evidence. The choice lies 
between buttercup and bird's-foot (both 
called also crowfoot or crowtoe), and 
I am rather inclined to the latter, 
as a spring meadow flower. Its buds 
are more numerous and more worthy 
of a special name than those of butter- 
cup. Has not the " yellow hue " here 
a special force of jealousy, appropriate 
to the context ? Nym's yellowness, in 
Merry Wives of Windsor, 1. iii. in, 
will be recalled. 

887, 888. cuckoo . . . thus sings he] 
See note at " cuckoo birds do sing," 
Merry Wives of Windsor, 11. i. 124 
(Arden ed. p. 71). 



881. maintained] "represented" 
(Schmidt)? Rather "backed," "sup- 
ported." The "support" is more an 
exercise of the imagination, than a 
real stage property, as is doubtfully 
implied in New Eng. Diet., giving 
no other example. Compare Greene, 
Penelope's Web (Grosart, v. 217), 1587 : 
" he there complayned of the Collyar, 
how he had abused him in mayntayn- 
ing his boy to give him ill language." 
No doubt the performers imitate the 
notes of the birds in the song. 

883. When daisies pied, etc.] Furness 
writes : " Whalley speaks of this song 
1 which gave so much pleasure to the 
Town, and was in everybody's mouth 
about seven years ago.' This must 
have been about 1740. Genest records 
no production of Love's Labour 's Lost 
at or about this date, or in fact at any 
date. But we know that this song was 
introduced into As You Like It ; which, 
Genest says, was acted in November, 
1740, for the first time for forty years. 
It had an unusual run of twenty-five 
nights. This is probably the occasion 
which made the song so popular." 
Whalley's remark was in connection 
with his proposed " crocus-buds " 
(line 885). 

884. lady-smocks] The flowers of 
Cardamine pratensis, or Cuckoo-flower ; 
probably a corruption of " Our Lady's 



182 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



[act v. 



Winter. 



Cuckoo, cuckoo : O word of fear, 
Unpleasing to a married ear ! 

When shepherds pipe on oaten straws, 
And merry larks are ploughmen's clocks, 

When turtles tread, and rooks, and daws, 
And maidens bleach their summer smocks, 

The cuckoo then, on every tree, 

Mocks married men ; for thus sings he, 
Cuckoo ; 

Cuckoo, cuckoo : O word of fear, 

Unpleasing to a married ear 1 

When icicles hang by the wall, 

And Dick the shepherd blows his nail, 

And Tom bears logs into the hall, 
And milk comes frozen Jiome in pail, 

When blood is nipp'd, and ways be foul, 

Then nightly sings the staring owl, 
Tu-whit ; 



89O 



895 



9OO 



905 



905. foul] fall Q 1. 
whit, to-who Capell. 



907, 908. Tu-whit; Tu-who] Qq, Ff: Tu-who; Tu- 



892. pipe on oaten straws] Compare 
T. Watson, Eclogue upon Death of 
Walsingham (Arber, p. 163), 1590: 
"An humble style bentts a simple 
swain, My Muse shall pipe but on an 
oaten quill" And Golding's Ovid, i. 
842 : " Some good plaine soule that 
had some flocke to feede And as he 
went he pyped still upon an Oten 
Reede " (1567). Spenser speaks of the 
shepherd's " oaten pipe " in Shepheard's 
Calendar for January (1579). Gabriel 
Harvey quotes the expression from 
Spenser, in a letter (1580), in Grosart's 
Harvey, i. 92. 

893. larks . . . clocks] "rise with 
the lark " occurs in Lyly's Euphues 
and his England (Arber, p. 229), 1580 ; 
and " up with the lark " in Greene's 
Never Too Late (Grosart, viii. 124). 

902. blows his nail] wait patiently 
while one has nothing to do. Schmidt 
says " to warm his hands," an acci- 
dental property of the saying, arising 
out of idleness in cold. The expres- 
sion occurs again as descriptive of 
listlessness in 3 Henry VI. 11. v. 3. A 
few examples must be quoted : " hee 
was driven to daunce attendaunce 
without doores and blowe his nailes " 
(North, Doni's Philosophic [edited 
Jacobs, p. 231], 1570) ; " who sate all 



the while with the Porter, blowing his 
nailes " {Jests of George Peele [Haz- 
litt's repr. p. 276], 1607) ; " there was 
a time when nothing would have been 
denied her . . . but that heat being 
cooled, she may blow her nails twice 
before it kindle again" (Letter of 
Chamberlain, in Court and Times of 
fames I. ii. 56 [1617]) ; " knocke her 
knees and blow her nailes at the doore 
like a poore black-bitten stal-creeper " 
(Thos. Brewer, Merry Devil of Edmon- 
ton [prose] [repr. of 1631 ed. p. 48], 
1608). We have Cotgrave to explain 
this in v. ceincture : " pull straws, pluck 
daisies, pick rushes, or blow their 
fingers; generally the phrase imports 
an idle and lazie fashion, or posture." 
In Churchyard's Challenge (Nichols, 
iii. 178), 1592 : " picke your fingers' 
endes, Or blow your nailes, or gnaw, 
and bite your thumbs," is descriptive 
of being out of employment of any 
sort ; while in verses by Campion from 
Davison's Poetical Rhapsodie, 161 1 
(quoted by Nichols, iii. 350), cold is 
specified : " But in their brests, where 
Love his Court should hold, Poor 
Cupid sits, and blowes his nailes for 
cold." And see Todd's Spenser, vii. 236. 
907, go8. Tu-whit; Tu-who] Holt 
White refers to Lyly's Mother Bombie 



SC. II.] 



LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST 



183 



Tu-who, a merry note, 

While greasy Joan doth keel the pot. 

When all aloud the wind doth blow, 
And coughing drowns the parson's saw, 

And birds sit brooding in the snow, 
And Marian's nose looks red and raw, 

When roasted crabs hiss in the bowl, 

Then nightly sings the staring owl, 
Tu-whit ; 

Tu-who, a merry note, 

While greasy Joan doth keel the pot. 



9IO 



915 



Arm. The words of Mercury are harsh after the songs of 

Apollo. You, that way : we, this way. 920 

^ [Exeunt. 

919, 920. The words . . . Apollo] In 
that way : we, this way] omitted Q I. 

(written ante 1590), in. iv. : M To whit, 
to who, the owle does cry ; Phip, phip, 
the sparrowes as they fly." Nashe has 
it in the Song of Ver in Summer's Last 
Will (1592). Compare, again, Lyly's 
Endymion, in. iii. : M There appeared in 
my sleep a goodly owle, who sitting 
upon my shoulder, cried twit, twit, and 
before mine eyes presented herselfe the 
expresse image of Dipsas. I marvailed 
what the owle said, till at last, I per- 
ceived twit, twit, to it, to it" 

909. keel the pot] cool the pot, as a 
cook does by " stirring, skimming, or 
pouring on something cold, in order to 
prevent it boiling over" (New Eng. 
Diet.). Steevens quotes from Mar- 
ston's What You Will (opening of the 
play), 1607 : " Faith, Doricus, thy brain 
boils ; keel it, keel it, or all the fat's in 
the fire." And see Marston again, 
Bullen's edition, i. 77. There is a good 
example in A Twelfe Night Merriment 
(Narcissus) (edited M. Lee, 1892, 
p. 32), 1602 : " If the cookes heare that 
the porridg pott of my mouth runnes 
over soe, they will keele it with the 
ladle of reprehension." This writer's 
adherence to Shakespeare has been 
noticed at 111. i. 66 (note). Skeat has 
a note on " keel " in his edition of 
Piers the Plowman (ii. 270). He quotes 
" Kelyn, or make colde, frigefacio" 
(Prompt. Parvulorum). 

914. crabs] crab-apples. See A Mid- 
summer-Night's Dream, II. i. 48. 
Nares quotes from the old song in 



Q 1 printed in larger type. 920. You, 

Gammer Gurton's Needle, Act H. : "I 
cannot eat but little meat . . . I love no 
roast but a nut-brown toast, Or a crab 
laid in the fire." Steevens refers to 
Nashe's Summer's Last Will (Grosart, 
vi. 151), 1592: "Loves no good deeds 
and hateth talke, But sitteth in a corner 
turning crabbes, Or coughing o'er a 
warmed Pot of Ale" — into which the 
wild apples were put when roasted. Ma- 
lone quotes from The Famous Victory of 
Henry the Fifth (Hazlitt's Shakes. Lib. 
P- 338), circa 1585 : " Though we be 
so poore Yet wil we have in store, A 
crab in the fire, With nut-brown ale 
That is full stale Which will a man 
quaile And laie [him] in the mire." 
Both of these passages are incorrect in 
Steevens (1793). Other illustrations 
are given in Nares. And Malone's 
remark that "What is called lamb's 
wool is produced " is confirmed by 
Peele, Old Wives Tale (RoutledVe, 
p. 446), 1595 : " Lay a crab in the fire 
to roast for lamb's wool " (spice and 
sugar being added). See Greene's 
Never Too Late (Grosart, viii. 186-187). 

914, 915. bowl . . . owl] For the 
rhyme see iv. i. 137 (note). 

919, g20. Mercury . . . Apollo] As- 
mado's meaning is that the most 
eloquent prose is unacceptable after 
such divine music. Lyly has the same 
comparison in My das, v. 2 : * Pipenetta. 
Apollo will help me, because I can 
sing. Licio. Mercurie me, because I 
can lie." 






ADDITIONAL NOTES 



i. i. 55-58— 

Biron. What is the end of study ? let me know. 
King. Why, that to know which else we should not know. 
Biron. Things hid and barr'd, you mean, from common sense 
King. Ay, that is study's god-like recompense. 
New English Dictionary has this as the only illustration of the meaning for 
"common sense; ordinary or untutored perception." A passage in Golding 
Ovid (xv. 80), 1567, makes it seem likely that Shakespeare may have had his 
Numa in his thoughts, the philosopher-king who retired to the country to devote 
himself to literary pursuits. Numa — 

" Was glad 
Too make himself a bannisht man. And though this persone weere 
Far distant from the goddes by site of heaven : yit came he neere 
Too them in mynd. And he by syght of soule and reason cleere 
Behild the things which nature dooth too fleshly eyes denye. 






He taught his silent sort 
. . . The first foundation of the world . . . 
What shakes the earth : what law the starres doo keepe theyr courses under 
And what soever other things is hid from common sence. 
He also is the first that did injoyne an abstinence 
Too feede of any lyving thing." 

iv. i. 65. Mr. Craig gives me an early reference to Cophetua and the beggar, 
from T. Deloney's The Gentle Craft (1597-98), edited by A. Lange, 1903, p. 36 : 
M Most aptly is the god of love by cunning painters drawn blind, that so equally 
shoots forth his fiery shafts : for had he eyes to see it were impossible to deal 
in such sort as in matching faire Venus with foul Vulcan, yoking the imperiall 
hearts of Kings to the love of beggars as she did to Cofetua." 






ABERDEEN UNIVERSITY PRESS 



O 



BINDING SECT. JUN 1 1964 



„ _ ^ . , 

PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE 
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET 

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY 



PR Shakespeare, William 
2822 Love's labour's lost 

A2H3 2nd ed. 
1913 



