THE ARDEN SHAKESPEARE 
GENERAL EDITOR : W. J. CRAIG 



THE MERRY WIVES OF WINDSOR 



THE WORKS 

OF 

SHAKESPEARE 

THE MERRY WIVES 
OF WINDSOR 

EDITED BY 
H. C. HART 



^ 



METHUEN AND CO. 

36 ESSEX STREET: STRAND 

LONDON 

1904 



FR 




r^ ^^ '^ /e X 

EB 11955 1 



>^ 'I 



ny cF 



957813 



CONTENTS 

PACE 

Introduction ix 

The Merry Wives of Windsor i 



INTRODUCTION 

The Merry Wives of Windsor is invested with certain 
extraneous points of interest, more perhaps than attach 
themselves to any of Shakespeare's plays, as considered 
apart from their inherent merits. These peculiarities re- 
solve themselves into two groups, which the present Intro- 
duction will deal with later on. They are, first, the 
traditional matter which has come down to us, as we 
believe, regarding not only the production of the play 
but also the actual personality of one of the characters ; 
and, secondly, the picture the play gives us of country 
life, sports, and manners in England, which we have not 
elsewhere drawn for us with the same fulness by Shake- 
speare. The first group of these characteristics is mainly 
debatable and uncertain ground, unfortunately so, for the 
subject is of the utmost interest with regard to the author. 
For the second, those who run may read in the play itself. 

Before going into these matters, let us study the sources 
of our text, and the date of the play's appearance. The 
text of the Merry Wives is that of the 1623 Folio. The 
three later Folios, reproductions of the first, require no 
further mention here. But we have another text, the 
Quarto edition of 1602, which was reprinted (Q 2) in 

Ix 



X INTRODUCTION 

1 619. There was also a quarto edition in 1630, Q 3 of 
the Cambridge edition of Shakespeare, which was a sHghtly 
modernised reprint from the FoHo text of 1623. 

The text of the 1602 Quarto has been reprinted by 
Griggs in facsimile with an admirable introduction by Mr. 
Daniel. It was previously reprinted with notes and intro- 
duction by Halliwell in 1842 for the Shakespeare Society, 
which edition is reproduced in Hazlitt's Shakespeare's 
Library, 1875 (volume the sixth). 

The 1602 Quarto has also been reprinted by the 
Cambridge editors from Capell's copy, which differs in one 
or two places from Halliwell's reprint. - -'-^^^ 

The title of this Quarto is as follows : — 

" A Most pleasaunt and excellent conceited Comedie, 
of Syr lohn Falstaffe, and the Merrie Wiues of Windsor. 
Entermixed with sundrie variable and pleasing humors, 
of Syr Hugh the Welch knight, lustice Shallow^ and his 
wise Cousin M. Slender. With the swaggering vaine of 
Auncient Pistoll and Corporall Nym. By William Shake- 
speare. As it hath been diuers times Acted by the right 
Honorable my Lord Chamberlaines seruants. Both before 
her Maiestie and elsewhere. LONDON Printed by T. C. 
for Arthur lohnson, and are to be sold at his shop in 
Powles Church Yard, at the Signe of the Flower de Leuse 
and the Crowne : 1602." Dr. Farmer remarked that the 
error at " Syr Hugh the Welch knight " was " a proof that 
Shakespeare never superintended the publication of this 
play," which is very obviously true from other considerations. 

As a preliminary to a notice of this text, the words of 
the editors of the Folio of 1623 must be insisted upon. 
They claim there to have collected and published the 



INTRODUCTION xi 

works of their " friend and fellow " as he wrote them, 
with the "height of their care." They give their chief 
reason : " To the Great Variety of Readers . . . you were 
abused with diverse stolne and surreptitious copies, maim'd 
and deformed by the frauds and stealthes of injurious 
imposters, that expos'd them : euen those are now offered 
to your view cur'd and perfect of their limbes ; and all the 
rest, absolute in their numbers, as he conceived them." 

We may be certain that the 1602 Quarto of Merry 
Wives was largely in their minds when John Heminge 
and Henry Condell wrote those words. It is so " maimed 
and deformed " that the Cambridge editors state truly that 
collation cannot be attempted between its text and that 
of the Folio. Halliwell called it a " First Sketch," but 
he subsequently, in his Outlines of the Life of Shakespeare^ 
altered that view and pronounced it to be a " very defective 
copy, one made up by some poetaster, with the aid of 
shorthand notes." Daniel says his " conviction is in 
favour of one common original for both versions " (Folio 
and Quarto). I believe the Folio may be accepted as 
the text of the play in its entirety, with the usual amount 
of press errors assumed and allowed for ; and with also 
the painful possibility, the almost certainty, of corrup- 
tions due to actors' innovations or alterations. But the 
Quarto has been so tinkered and battered that it can 
mainly be made use of as a check to the text in doubtful 
passages, and even then, as a clue, not as an author- 
ity. If we consider the Folio as derived from another 
" original," it is not derived from it in the same unscrupu- 
lous fashion as the Quarto is, but is assuredly in the main 
identical with that original. 



xii INTRODUCTION 

The earliest notice we have of Merry Wives is in the 
Stationers' Registers: " i8 Jan. 1601— 2, John Busby] An 
excellent and pleasant conceited commedie of Sir John 
Faulstof and the Merry Wyves of Windsor." And " Arth. 
Johnson] By assignment from John Busbye a book, An 
excellent and pleasant conceited comedie," etc. (as before). 
This John Busbye was concerned, as Collier pointed out, 
two years before, in the publication of the undoubtedly 
surreptitious and corrupt Henry V, 

The date of the first appearance of the play is, for 
a series of reasons, placed at 1598. There is an entry, 
Anno 1605, i^ Cunningham's Revells Booke (p. 203, Shaks. 
Soc.) : " By his Matis plaiers. The Sunday ffollowinge 
(Hallowas Day) A Play of the Merry Wiues of Winsor." 
But it is open to grave suspicion. See my Introduction 
to Othello. 

Obviously the Quarto must be carefully studied, al- 
though it be corrupt. The question is. What value are we 
to attach to it as a text for the play ? That can only be 
answered by such study, for there is no doubt, from the 
most cursory perusal, it is a spurious production. The fact 
that it is twenty years senior to the Folio must be re- 
membered, and also that it appeared when Merry Wives 
was in the greatest popularity as a nearly new play. But 
how did such a variant from the true text arise? and how 
was it possible for even the most dishonest publisher to 
be successful in offering to the public for sale a text of 
a favourite play, which is cut down to about half or two- 
thirds of its correct dimensions ? My reply to this is some- 
what similar to what Mr. Daniel gives as to the origin of 
the Quarto ; it is, in fact, almost identical, but I arrive at it 



INTRODUCTION xiii 

in a somewhat different manner. Wright has nearly the 
same view of the Henry V. quarto. 

I believe there was a recognised and authorised shortened 
representation of the play in use, reduced from our Folio 
version, for special purposes, whether to convenience a 
smaller company, or for private representation, as, for ex- 
ample, for compression into reduced time after court revels 
or banquets. In order to effect this, certain blocks of the 
play would be omitted, but lines or pieces of these blocks 
would be retained in order to preserve the continuity of 
narrative and action. Possibly the shortened play was the 
one the public were more familiar with, which rendered 
the task of the surreptitious note-taker and purloiner the 
easier, and removed the stumbling-block of a deficiency in 
size. When the full play was to be acted, with a full 
company's strength, these temporarily excerpted portions 
would be reinserted in their proper place in the actors' 
copies ; who would not, however, be always careful to 
expunge those passages which were already retained to 
sustain the thread of the play in its continuity. In this 
way I imagine certain confusions arose, and it was the 
endeavour to explain these confusions in the Folio that 
suggested, after much pondering, this view to me. 

The most obvious confusions are those concerning the 
hours of the morning, or of the afternoon, mentioned in 
connection with Falstaff's meetings with Mrs. Ford in 
the last Scene of the Third Act. These can only be set 
right by the alteration of words in the text. This is not, 
happily, the province of an editor, for it is a complicated 
and unpleasant investigation. Mr. Daniel, in his paper 
" On the Durations of the Action of Shakespeare's Plays " 



xiv INTRODUCTION 

{New Shaks, Soc. Trans. ^ 1877—79), says it is impossible 
as the play now stands to arrange the times consistently. In 
the Irving Shakespeare the matter is thoroughly sifted also. 
For a stage representation, it is of imperative importance. 

Since there has been undoubted garbling of our Folio 
text in these time-details, we are constrained to admit it may 
be possible elsewhere in it; but it is not to be supposed 
from this that the Folio text is in any degree open to sus- 
picion ; except in a very few cases and kinds of cases that 
may be insisted upon. Such are: (i) details of scenic re- 
presentation, tantamount to stage-directions in some cases ; 
(2) trifling alterations, or possibly serious ones, due to 
personal matters ; and (3) ordinary typographical or pub- 
lishers' mistakes, through their own errors or from faulty 
MSS., and the changes made to satisfy the Act against 
profanity in players. 

I imagine we can sort our difficulties in the Folio text 
under the above headings, none of which invalidate its 
authority. There is, indeed, one kind of apparent cor- 
ruption which could not be so dealt with, i.e. where we 
conceive certain lines to be wholly unworthy of Shake- 
speare. That is, of course, very often a matter of opinion ; 
and it is a sort of criticism that it is dangerous to handle 
even with the longest possible pole. I have noticed, es- 
pecially in the Fifth Act, certain lines that are so wretched 
here and there, that they may be assumed to have been 
foisted in by one or other of the actors from time to time, 
and got mixed up with the text. They are mere trifles, 
and we may thank the Folio editors and congratulate 
ourselves they are not much more serious. When Middle- 
ton wrote The Mayor of Quinborough^ he spoke in very 



INTRODUCTION xv 

violent language of "your new additions, they spoil all 
the plays that ever they come in." Heywood has a tirade 
against such malpractices, and more serious ones, in his 
Rape of Lucrece — "Address to Reader." 

In the Fourth and Fifth Acts I think we can find 
evidences of the unexpunged bits of the shortened version. 
They amount to repetitions. It will be necessary here 
to refer occasionally to the Quarto text, but I am dealing 
entirely with that of the present edition, the Folio, which 
gave rise to these views quite independently. 

In the last Scene of the Fourth Act, some thirty lines 
are devoted to prosaic details of the public shame to be 
inflicted upon Falstaff. This is Fenton's account to the 
Host, an official account, for he is at the bottom of the 
plot, and what he tells us is very nearly sufficient to enable 
us to understand all that takes place, including the mysti- 
fication of Caius and Slender, by the colour device. 

Previously to this, in the fourth Scene, about eighty 
lines (nearly the whole Scene) have been devoted, in proper 
dramatic and poetic fashion, to setting forth this plot, as it 
was first compounded, by the wives and their husbands, 
with an even more explicit account of the colour device. 
Here there is much repetition. A very few words would 
have sufficed to let audience or reader know, in the last 
Scene of this Act, that Fenton knew the plot, had taken 
the Host into his confidence, and was at the bottom of all 
the manipulation. 

With these two movements the Quarto agrees, though 
the primary evolution of the plot takes up less than half 
the Folio's space ; a grievous loss, and one of the many 
objectionable elisions in that text. 



xvi INTRODUCTION 

Here, I imagine, Fenton's account is possibly spurious, 
and was a substitution in the supposed shorter edition for 
subsequent matter ; that it got into the Quarto through the 
pirate's lack of discrimination ; and that on the publishing 
of the full text it was allowed to remain in its present 
needlessly expansive and unpoetical garb. 

In the second and third Scenes of the Fifth Act we 
are told again the machinery by which Slender and Caius 
are to be deceived. These are brief passages, and the 
second is necessary as opening the final denouement. The 
Quarto dispenses entirely with these two Scenes, and cer- 
tainly one does not miss them. It is true we lose the 
" mumbudget " episode. It is probable these formed no 
part of the shortened play, though undoubtedly they 
belong to the text. They elaborate the characterisation, 
and draw on the coming events. But we do not need to 
be told again about the sawpit. 

Finally, we have all these minutiae repeated not only in 
the stage-directions before and after the pinching dance, 
but also in the text itself of the fifth Scene, from line 200 
to 220, colours and all, in detail, until even an ordinary 
reader must be surprised at his assumed denseness, while 
a student finds himself reverting backwards, over and over 
again, to look for the reasons thereof. And he only finds 
that he had already been fully informed. 

The Quarto gives evidence here again of faulty con- 
densation. Any one about to compress the Fifth Act would 
infallibly omit "mum " and " mumbudget." This the Quarto 
has done, but has let the words appear abruptly and unex- 
pectedly at the close, the previous key (in V. ii.) being left 
out. 



INTRODUCTION xvii 

There is repetition again in the Folio in the wording at 
Falstafif's two escapes ; the language used to Ford and that 
Ford uses on these two occasions (ill. iii. 211—237 and 
IV. ii. 127—165) having several almost identical expressions; 
they are more than mere parallels, and act as comments 
upon one another. See my notes at IV. ii. 162 and 163. 
These dialogues are sufficiently distinct in the Quarto 
version. The two passages so nearly repeated in the Folio 
occur upon the first occasion in the Quarto but not upon 
the second. Probably the "acting" shorter version saw 
that they could be dispensed with, and in this case the 
pirate may have followed his original. 

It is difficult sometimes to piece the two texts into 
any harmony side by side. It is difficult to grasp the 
events in one version, and then to turn to the other and 
unwind them there. Owing to the faultiness of the Quarto, 
it is in that case sometimes well-nigh impossible, but only 
in minor matters, however. How much more difficult is it 
to lay these discrepancies in any intelligible form before 
the reader who has only one text before him ! In such 
a case the only proper method would be the cumbrous 
one of printing both texts side by side, passage for 
passage, and not separately, as is done by the Cambridge 
edition. I have endeavoured to meet this difficulty by 
placing in my notes the more important passages that 
are peculiar to the Quarto, or are very distinct therein, in 
juxtaposition with the corresponding words in the text. 
For it is absolutely necessary to study certain portions 
of the smaller text (and therefore the whole of it), on 
account of some vital differences it contains. The most 
important of these occur in two connected places dealing 
b 



xviii INTRODUCTION 

with the horse-stealing episode, in iv. iii. and IV. v. 64—95. 
The Quarto throws a different light on this episode, which 
must be dealt with more fully by itself. The alteration of 
the word " garmombles " (a thin disguise for " Mumpell- 
gart ") to " cozen-germans " in the Folio was perhaps 
intentionally made to remove a personal allusion, either 
because it had lost its pith or because it was objected 
to. I am quite aware that some commentators will not 
admit this allusion though wholly unable to explain it 
away. Of that more presently ; I believe in it. 

A few more prominent peculiarities in the Quarto 
version must be referred to. It may give a general idea 
of its impossibility for purposes of detailed collation 
to refer again to the Fifth Act. The Quarto, at the 
beginning of that Act, reaches " Scene xviii.," which com- 
mences " This is the third time " (v. i. 2). In sixteen 
lines from that point the Quarto has arrived at " Do I 
speake like Home the hunter, ha?" (v. v. 31). And 
from that point, at " Enter Sir Hugh," what the Folio 
takes about two hundred and fifty lines to develop, prac- 
tically the last Scene, the Quarto disposes of in two- 
thirds of the number. The omission from the Quarto of 
the whole of the topical speech dealing with Windsor Castle 
and the Order of the Garter I believe to be significant, 
as though the complete play was adapted expressly for 
Windsor, and the shortened one for representation else- 
where. It is hard to avoid the feeling, though it is perhaps 
not capable of proof, that this play was written for and 
acted at Windsor itself This presumption is somewhat 
heightened by the presence in the Quarto of half a dozen 
very inferior lines which replace the Windsor Castle speech, 



INTRODUCTION xix 

and sound pure London. They would come in after Evans's 
speech about the housemaids (v. v. 5 8), and are an inter- 
rupted continuation of that speech in the Quarto — 

Hu. Where is Pead? go you and see where Brokers sleep, 
And Fox-eyed seriants with their mase, 
Go laie the Proctors in the street 
And pinch the lowsie seriants face : 
Spare none of these when they are a-bed, 
But such whose nose lookes blew and red. 

These poor lines bring one back to the Poultry and the 
Counter-Gate. Not that the Windsor Castle speech is 
of any poetical merit. It is prose in verse, but in strict 
appropriateness. 

At the very beginning of the play the Quarto omissions 
are equally, if not more, important. The second line there 
is the thirty-fourth in our text, so that not only Slender is 
here again compelled to hide his diminished head, but all 
the " Lucy " passages are lost ; a very serious deficit in our 
interest in the play, but quite possibly a purposed omission 
in the supposed shorter version. It is probably personal, 
and certainly not necessary to the matter in hand. Here 
the abbreviation is made with some skill, showing a con- 
trast to the supreme carelessness later on, as though the 
condensed version was more carefully obtained and followed. 
The motive here seems to be to cut Slender short. His 
" Cotsall " remarks are omitted. The deer-stealing remarks 
are retained, as are also the incidents connected with the 
robbery of Slender's purse, which form part of the events 
of the play. With regard to Slender, the whirligig of time 
brings in its revenges, and modern criticism regards " this 
very potent piece of imbecility " as the best character in 
the play. 



XX INTRODUCTION 

On the other hand, the Host in the Quarto receives his 
full allowance of space. He is but slightly curtailed in any 
place from his proper position in the Folio, so that he is 
even more in evidence, comparatively, in the Quarto. He 
was undoubtedly a most popular character. Caius and 
Evans receive their due attention in the Quarto, but Quickly 
is greatly cut down, not merely by omitted speeches, but 
by mutilated speeches which are more significant. 

The Wives are treated with scant respect in the Quarto, 
and are shortened beyond their proportions. Fenton is so 
unceremoniously dealt with that he comes in once out of 
his proper order in the play (l. iv.), and in the Fifth Act 
he is made of even less interest than in the Folio, where, 
for Anne's sake, we would like to know him better. Fal- 
staff's speeches are all more or less cut up, but he has his 
full proportionate share. 

One result of this treatment is that we have in the 
Quarto the unusually numerous gallery of actors that the 
full play presents, but in a much reduced space. This 
reduction of limits confuses and crowds the characters, and 
makes the play seem there much more involved than it 
really is. Had we no Folio text, the Quarto would be 
indeed a heart-breaking study. 

One feels sorry for this poor little debased Quarto. It 
gets nothing but abuse, or else the most austere criticism. 
Nevertheless the bulk of it is surely Shakespeare's. The 
Folio " passes it strangely by and scarcely greets it." But 
the Quarto may " ensconce itself within the knowledge of 
its own deserts," for it is of very material interest and 
assistance in several passages and word-difficulties which 
are dealt with in my notes. Before dismissing it, I will 



INTRODUCTION xxi 

call attention to some of these, premising that, wherever a 
passage has received assistance in my text (that of the 
Folio) from the Quarto, the words so introduced have been 
marked off with brackets, as is done by the Cambridge 
editors. This has been done in three cases : at the words 
"for missing your meetings and appointments" (ill. i. 91), 
at " Give me thy hand, terrestrial ; so" (ill. i. 107), and at 
"to say my prayers" (IV. v. 106). In these particular 
instances we are to suppose these words have acci- 
dentally dropped out of the Folio text, and we supply 
them from the Quarto. The Cambridge editors regard 
them as absolutely essential. The middle one of 
these three is, in my opinion, the only one that is 
" absolutely essential," but the others are a very helpful 
improvement, which might be said of several passages 
inserted by former editors from the Quarto, not, however, by 
any means so emphatically. In most of those other cases 
the insertion is merely the personal option of one or other 
editor, which is a depreciation of the value of the Folio, and 
a licence to be steadily opposed. A few of these desirable 
passages may be set down here, for the others I must refer 
to my notes, as also for remarks upon those quoted here. 

After line 129 (l. i.) the Quarto has, "They carried 
mee to the Tauerne and made mee drunke, and afterward 
picked my pocket." This may be regarded as an omission. 

At I. i. 294, the Quarto would read, " I cannot abide 
the smell of hot meate Nere since I broke my shin. He 
tell you how it came By my troth. A Fencer and I plaied 
three venies For a dish of stewed prunes, and I with my 
ward Defending my head, he hot my shin." This is a 
more intelligible fencing metaphor, but the Folio makes 



xxii INTRODUCTION 

Slender appear, as is intended, a greater fool. Moreover, 
it is in proper harmony with the passado and stockado 
fencing terms that the correct version jeers at. Decidedly 
corrupted for simplicity and brevity's sake. 

At I. ii. II, after "pray you," Sir Hugh says in the 
Quarto, " I must not be absent at the grace. I will go make 
an end," etc. This perhaps belongs correctly to the text. 

At I. iii. 25, after " wield," Nym's speech is, " His minde 
is not heroick : is not the humour conceited ? " This remark 
supplements and explains that in the Folio. 

At I. iii. 98, Nym says, "operations in my head" in 
the Quarto. Pope considered the words " in my head " 
had been erroneously omitted. 

At II. i. 7 1, Mrs. Page says in the Quarto, " O most notori- 
ous villaine ! Why what a bladder of iniquitie is this." Fal- 
staff elsewhere compares himself to a bladder in 1 Henry IV, 
At II. i. 112, after "wife," the Quarto has, "When 
Pistoll lies do this," a continuation of Pistol's speech. 
Pistol makes this remark in ^ Henry IV. This, as well 
as the last, may be actors' insertions familiar with the 
dialogues of the earlier plays in the series. 

At II. i. 181, Page says in the Quarto, "And for the 
knight, perhaps He hath spoke merrily, as the fashion of 
fat men Are." This remark is quite characteristic of Page's 
agreeable character, and is itself worthy of a place. 

At II. ii. 2 in the Quarto, Pistol's words are, " I will 
retort the sum in equipage." Though not in the Folio 
text, these words are not merely of archaic interest. They 
are, I think, undoubtedly part of Pistol's speech as Shake- 
speare wrote it ; whether altered or omitted, and where, it 
is impossible to speculate. For some remarkable dis- 



INTRODUCTION xxiii 

crepancies between Pistol's final disappearance from the 
play in the Quarto and Folio texts, see notes at II. ii. 32 
and 144. And see below, where Pistol's position is con- 
sidered with regard to Mrs. Quickly. 

From about this point the Quarto seems to become 
more hastily compressed, and the difficulties are very often 
those of the inextricable tangle of times of the meetings. 
The divergence between the two texts increases, the omis- 
sions in the Quarto are more serious, and the replacements 
more widespread and deleterious. In general terms I have 
noticed the larger anomalies already ; the details cannot 
be dealt with seriatim without parallel texts. The above 
quotations are sufficient to show that the Quarto text needs 
careful study. An exact comparative analysis would take 
up a deal of space, but it is most interesting. There is, 
indeed, need of self-restraint to resist the insertion of some 
of the above passages, in addition to those necessary ones 
already included. Nothing but an unswerving reverence 
for the Folio text enables one to withstand the tempta- 
tion — a reverence that did not belong to the early com- 
mentators. 

For further variations of interest, I must refer to my 
notes. See especially IV. v. 82, where I claim to have dis- 
covered the only Welsh passage yet found in Shakespeare ! 
Two verbal differences must be referred to, however, of a 
different nature. 

In I. i. II 3, where the Folio reads " king," the Quarto 
has " council." This apparent reference to James is ex- 
plained by Mr. Daniel as being neutralised by the " time 
of the play being laid in the reign of Henry IV.," which has, 
I think, a very distant bearing on the point. But he also 



xxiv INTRODUCTION 

refers to the constant reference by Shallow to appeals to 
the " council," and that seems to me sufficient to prevent 
us from being in any way bound to believe it is an altera- 
tion in the Folio made to suit a later date in the reign of 
King James — as some have argued. Upon the same 
grounds (Henry IV. temp^ the editor of the Quarto attaches 
no importance to the words " king's English " (l. iv. 6), 
which have been again advanced in favour of a late date. 
As the passage there seems to be a direct echo from Nashe, 
who has it " Queen's English," the word may have been 
varied to " king " by the later editors of the Folio text. 
See my note at the passage. In proverbs relating to 
" king " or " queen," it is a mere accident, however, whether 
the word be altered or not to suit an existing monarch. 

The Quarto text has now received its meed of atten- 
tion. References to it will of necessity occur from time to 
time in this Introduction ; but for the text itself, and its 
perplexing vagaries, the reader must refer to the facsimile 
by Griggs with Daniel's valuable introduction. Mr. Daniel 
points out a couple of omissions in the Quarto, leaving 
the sense unintelligible, which can be supplied from the 
Folio, showing its undoubted seniority, which is palpable 
in many places. Both Mr. Daniel's instances relate to 
Simple. 

The text of the present edition is emphatically that of 
the Folio. The Quarto only appears in it upon sufferance, 
fenced in, in the three places referred to, by brackets. And 
were it not for the weight of authorities against me, I should 
relegate those three sentences to the footnotes, and accept 
their assistance to intelligibility in that fashion as elsewhere 
throughout the play. 



INTRODUCTION xxv 

I have felt able to follow the Folio more closely, how- 
ever, than any previous editor has done, in several places. 
Simply because after mature consideration I concluded that 
the Folio was right, and that the supposed emendations of 
the early commentators were wrong. For this I take 
credit, and hope to convince other Shakespearian scholars. 
One by one, those old Theobaldian " lunes " are bound to 
disappear and become ghosts, in this as in others of Shake- 
speare's plays. At first I felt disposed, indeed, to make 
considerable use of the Quarto, more so than I even dare 
to think of now. Gradually that view died. The slow 
poison of the debased text killed it. It was not so easy to 
dispense with the other variations (I incline to call them 
corruptions) from the Folio, but I hope I can disprove 
their merits in the following cases, the discussion upon 
which is noticed here in order to direct attention to them. 
They are all debatable ground. 

I restore the Folio reading in the following passages. 
I give the Folio first, that of the Globe edition alongside. 
The instances are not to be taken as of equal importance. 
Some are trifling. Some are not. Nor are the proofs 
equally conclusive in all cases. 

Folio. Globe. 

GOT'S Lords, and his Ladies GOTS lords and his ladies ! 

(L i. 243). 

and to her Boy say I (l iii. 61). and " To her, boy," say I. 

precisian (n. i. 5). physician, 

hundred Psahns (n. i. 60). Hundredth Psalm, 

too-too (n. ii. 261). too too. 

cried game (n. iii. 90). Cried I aim. 

lines (iv. ii. 22). lunes. 

It is a considerable wrench to get rid of the firmly estab- 



xxvi INTRODUCTION 

lished, wholly unauthorised " lunes." So much has it 
become a part of the text that it is freely quoted as 
if genuine. As, for example, by Johnson, Letter to Mrs. 
Thrale, 1778 (Nov. 14): "My master is in his old lunes 
and so am I." 

brib'd buck (v. v. 27). bribe buck. 

In those last two readings I have the support of the 
New English Dictionary, 

In one reading alone I venture upon an original correc- 
tion. At V. iii. 1 3 the Folio reads, " the Welsh devil 
Heme ? " — an undoubted misprint. I prefer to correct it 
by omitting " Heme," and reading " Welsh devil ? " than by 
inserting " Hugh " in place of " Heme." It seems to be a 
less violent alteration, and an easier misprint to have made. 

One reading I would like to make, but it is better to 
put it forward tentatively in the first instance, and let it 
sink or swim. For " Pheezar" (l. iii. 10), I feel sure we should 
read " Vizier." And I think it is very probable " An-heires " 
(II. i. 224) stands for "Amirs," or " Amyras," as it is spelt 
in Harrison's England. I think, for several reasons to 
be found at the passage, it is a preferable conjecture 
to Theobald's " mynheers." It may yet be accepted as 
correct, though its unfamiliarity makes it objectionable at 
first. " Vizier " helps us on the way, and in it I firmly 
believe. 

In two places I imagine the Folio has suffered 
authorised change, if not more. These two places are 
referred to in this Introduction at the notice of Mrs. 
Quickly, and at the Caius and Evans plot. 

I find there is a considerable quantity of ground to be 



INTRODUCTION xxvii 

gone over in this Introduction. I propose to take the 
subjects in the following order. Enough has been said 
about the text. 

1. The Falstaff-in-love, and the play-to-order tradition. 

2. The Lucy and deer-stealing tradition. 

3. Date of appearance of Merry Wives ; and connection 
with Henry IV. and V. cycle. 

4. Date of tale or events of the play, as connected with 
the Mumpellgart episode, and the stealing of the Host's 
horses. 

5. Season during which the play appeared ; and notice 
of the country life depicted in it, birding, etc. 

6. Old woman. Prat, of Brainford. 

7. Topography : Deanery, Frogmore, etc. 

8. Characters in play. 

9. Plots in the play, especially the horse-stealing plot 
and " Mine Host." 

I o. Sources of story. 

11. Plays, etc., illustrative of Merry Wives, both earlier 
and later. 

12. Criticisms of Johnson, Hazlitt, and others. 

(i) Johnson says (at the close of this play in Steevens' 
Shakespeare) " there is a tradition preserved by Mr. Rowe 
{Li/e of Shakespeare, 1709, pp. 8, 9) that it was written at 
the command of Queen Elizabeth, who was so delighted with 
the character of Falstaff, that she wished it to be diffused 
through more plays ; but suspecting that it might pall by 
continued uniformity, directed the poet to diversify his 
manner by showing him in love." Johnson's views with 
regard to the effect of this " order " upon the character of 
Falstaff will be referred to again. 



xxviii INTRODUCTION 

This is not the earliest notice of the tradition, but it is 
the fullest, although the earlier one gives one detail which 
tradition itself probably supplied. This earlier notice is 
given at length in Mr. Halliwell's Introduction to his 1842 
edition of the Quarto, from a long dedicatory epistle to a 
play by John Dennis, called The Comical Gallant^ published 
in 1702, which is a wretched attempt at an improvement 
of the Merry Wives. Dennis gives his reasons for perpe- 
trating this audacity. " First, I knew very well that it had 
pleased one of the greatest queens that ever was in the 
world. . . . This comedy was written at her command, and 
by her direction, and she was so eager to see it acted, that 
she commanded it to be finished in fourteen days ; and was 
afterwards, as tradition tells us, very well pleased at the 
representation." 

In 17 10 Gildon published Remarks on the Plays of 
Shakespeare in the supplemental volume to Rowe's Shake- 
speare. He says : " The fairies in the fifth act make a 
handsome compliment to the queen, in her palace of 
Windsor, who had obliged him to write a play of Sir John 
Falstaff in love, and which I am very well assured he per- 
formed in a fortnight ; a prodigious thing, when all is so 
well contrived, and carried on without the least con- 
fusion." 

These are very circumstantial details, dating back to a 
period that brings us two-thirds of the way back to the 
appearance of the play. They were accepted without any 
suggestion of incredulity, as well-known and admitted facts, 
two centuries ago, when Shakespeare was a fresh memory, 
capable of being spoken of by eye-witnesses to living men. 
They are very good evidence, not sufficient perhaps to upset 



INTRODUCTION xxix 

a title, but quite incapable of rejection. We need not place 
too much stress on the actual fortnight, but I take that to 
mean that Shakespeare was commanded to have a play 
ready for a certain occasion, or period of festivities, which 
gave him about a fortnight, or some short space of time, 
wherein to produce it. Tradition would probably lay a 
finger on that datum. What that occasion was we have 
yet to learn. The natural assumption would be that it was 
some function about to be held at Windsor. I believe, 
however, we have no record of a court being held there in 
1598. See (3) on this point. 

From this tradition one important fact emerges, that 
the position of the play is after the appearance of Henry 
IV.y and before that oi Henry F., when we see the death of 
Falstaff. I merely refer here to that as an obvious infer- 
ence, to my mind, because, since it is disputed by some 
editors, it must be dealt with more fully presently. Let us 
see if we can extract anything else out of this interesting 
tradition. We can follow Johnson, if we like, in finding 
the unsuitability of the superimposed condition to Falstaff 
the cause of the deterioration in his " former power of enter- 
tainment." But I am not prepared to agree with that off- 
hand. We can make allowance for a lack of serious effort, 
or outbursts of poetry, such as we expected from the 
author, by the haste and by the unwelcome restraint in 
subject as well as time — which conditions might be offered 
also in mitigation of what seem to be errors due to such 
haste, in the time-difficulties. But perhaps that is laying 
too heavy a strain upon the least solid portion of the 
traditional structure. Certainly if we were to have Falstaff 
again in a new and unnatural role, he was bound to suffer 



XXX INTRODUCTION 

loss amounting to ruin of his former self. So much for 
Rowe's words. 

From Dennis we learn that the play was a favourite 
with Queen Elizabeth. That part of the tradition is of the 
sort (the earliest part also) that must be true. That is a 
welcome and important fact. But that the Queen's eager- 
ness to see it was the reason that she gave exactly a fort- 
night for its production, neither more nor less, is improbable 
in the last degree. 

From Gildon's words in 1710 it might be gathered 
that he believed the play to have been performed for the 
Queen in her palace at Windsor. But he may only mean 
that the scene was laid there. I incline to think he meant 
the former. But it is very noticeable here, that that part 
of the tradition must refer to the full Folio text, not to the 
private 1602 Quarto. I have already pointed out that 
the fairy's speech to the Queen at Windsor is replaced 
in the Quarto by some wretched lines, more suitable for a 
London stage. So that the play that was produced for 
the Queen, and that she was so pleased with, was not the 
wretched Quarto version, but our Folio text. This is highly 
important. 

Malone says that the information given above by 
Dennis came, it is probable, " from Dryden, who, from his 
intimacy with Sir William Davenant, had an opportunity 
of learning many particulars concerning our author." 

(2) The Merry Wives is invested with a very special 
interest, since it is believed to contain allusions to circum- 
stances in the life of the dramatist. They are perhaps the 
only personal allusions, referring to events in his career, 
that Shakespeare has made in his plays, that are capable of 



INTRODUCTION xxxi 

explanation and corroboration from other sources. The 
subject belongs to the biography of the poet, and forms a 
considerable portion of the ground there traversed. A very- 
ample consideration of it will be found in the article 
" Shakespeare," in the ninth edition of the Eng/. Brit. 
The writer of that article accepts the position that Justice 
Shallow, not only in this play, but in '2 Henry /F., is Sir 
Thomas Lucy of Charlecote, the owner of the coat of arms 
containing the heraldic luces, referred to at the commence- 
ment of Merry Wives. The tradition is supplied in the 
first instance by Rowe, Shakespeare's earliest biographer. 
Rowe says (1709): "He had, by a misfortune common 
enough to young fellows, fallen into ill company, and, 
among them, some that made a frequent practice of deer- 
stealing, engaged him with them more than once in robbing 
a park that belonged to Sir Thomas Lucy of Charlecote, 
near Stratford. For this he was prosecuted by that gentle- 
man, as he thought, somewhat too severely." Rowe goes 
on to say that he (Shakespeare) made a ballad upon Lucy, 
which is lost, and that further prosecution obliged him to 
shelter himself in London. Independent testimony of 
these occurrences comes from Archdeacon Davies of 
Gloucestershire, late in the seventeenth century, who em- 
bellishes them with " frequent whippings," and other prob- 
ably imaginary details, 

Rowe's story, in some of its particulars with regard to 
the park from whence the deer were said to be stolen, is 
demonstrably incorrect ; but it is almost certain that the 
tradition is founded upon fact. This is Dowden's view, 
and Sidney Lee speaks of " the incident revealed by the 
tradition." " The substantial facts in the story are " (says 



xxxii INTRODUCTION 

the writer in Ency. Brit.) " that Shakespeare in his youth 
was fond of woodland sport, and that in one of his hunting 
adventures he came into collision with one of Sir Thomas 
Lucy's keepers, and fell under the severe ban of that local 
potentate," who is described as combining " aristocratic 
pride and narrowness with the harshness and severity of the 
Puritan temper." The writer of this article has imported a 
tinge of personal bitterness into the matter which certainly 
formed no part of Shakespeare's method. Sidney Lee 
assigns the poaching episode to about the year 1585. 

For the allusions to the deer-stealing episode, and to 
the coat of arms containing the luces, see the first scene of 
the play, and my notes, where further information about the 
Lucy family is given. 

The whole position is a very curious one, and in spite 
of all that has been written, there is more to be said. If 
we had no tradition, what should we make of the coat of 
arms passage? It would be utterly unmeaning. On the 
other hand, if we had not that passage, I doubt if any one 
so inclined could be prevented from rejecting the whole 
tradition. I do not think any one should be so inclined, 
for it would be very uncivil to Rowe, to Dennis, and to 
Archdeacon Davies. The probability of the truth of the 
tradition, however, appears to me to hinge upon the passages 
in Merry Wives. The character of Sir Thomas Lucy, an 
important public man, is well known, and neither it nor his 
personal history bears the smallest resemblance to those of 
Justice Shallow in 2 Henry IV. To make the latter the 
original of Justice Shallow, as many commentators endeavour 
to do, is an impossibility. As Mr. Daniel says, " there is no 
recognisable likeness between them." On the other hand, it 



INTRODUCTION xxxiii 

is equally impossible to dissociate Lucy from the luce and 
deer-stealing episodes in Merry Wives once we are supplied 
with the tradition. My view is that Shakespeare upon 
receiving the command to exhibit Falstaff in love (with 
possibly a suggestion of his reformation thrown in) trans- 
ported all his machinery down to Windsor, as a pleasing 
scene to the Queen, perhaps also a suggested one, for the 
play. The country surroundings are developed. Windsor 
Forest and its legends are made use of, and the dramatist 
recalls his own bitter experiences in that kind. The oppor- 
tunity is too good to be lost, and he pays back an old 
grudge in a most good-humoured way, upon Sir Thomas 
Lucy. Shallow is merely the weapon used for this passing 
gibe, which is hardly even malicious, but was very likely 
unpalatable. After it is over we go back to our old friend, 
the foolish justice, and that is all about it. There is 
nothing personal probably in Justice Shallow, except this 
episode. He represents in Henry IV. a, vain, empty- 
headed, self-sufficient man, inordinately proud of his judicial 
importance. It is quite possible such men may still be 
found, but they were certainly to be met with in Shake- 
speare's time. They represent a class in dramatic literature, 
just as Dogberry represents the silliness of the lower grade 
of the representatives of law and order. Plenty of these 
could be named, and when Ben Jonson represents his " wise 
justice of the peace meditant " in Bartholomew Fair he 
indulged in similar character-drawing. The corrupt judge 
of an earlier date was a more serious matter. 

I should not have dwelt upon this, were it not for an 
article in the Fortnightly Review (February 1903) to which 
Dr. Dowden kindly drew my attention. It is written by 



xxxiv INTRODUCTION 

one who has evidently an intimate knowledge of the Lucy 
family side of the question, to disprove and repel the con- 
nection between Sir Thomas and Justice Shallow. The 
views of the writer are in a large measure undoubtedly true, 
but there is no new fact advanced that has any bearing 
upon the question of the identity of Justice Shallow as he 
appears at Windsor {circa 1598) with Lucy. Observe that 
Shallow in Merry Wives is important, largely because of his 
former history, and on account of this opening Lucy 
episode — otherwise he is a kindly, inoffensive old man. 
The writer, however, lays stress upon one or two points, 
basing the argument upon them indeed, when endeavouring 
to remove Sir Thomas from the scene, which must be held 
to be erroneous. It is conceded by every one that Shake- 
speare would not have indulged in this satire were the 
object of it dead, as Sir Thomas Lucy was in 1600. 
Therefore, the writer says, because the allusions to the 
luces do not appear in the Quarto of 1602, Shakespeare 
cannot have meant to refer to him, since these allusions 
appear for the first time in the later Folio, and supposes 
them to be a later insertion, referring to I know not what. 
But the omission of anything from that imperfect text, 
especially when a block is wholly omitted with no replace- 
ment, is of no sufficient moment to argue upon. The 
Folio text is the only one that can be used for such a 
purpose, and it is the parent text of the illegitimate Quarto. 
There is much of interest in the article with reference to 
Justice Shallow, and had I ever intended to identify him of 
Henry IV. with the knight of Charlecote, it would have 
probably shaken my opinion. One final remark, however, 
occurs to me, which the writer does not make. May 



INTRODUCTION xxxv 

not the luce and louse episode have been purposely omitted 
from the Quarto, that is to say, from the enactment of the 
play from which the Quarto was pirated, on account of the 
recent death of the person to whom it was known to relate ? 
If there is any weight to be attached to the circumstance, I 
imagine that is the way the argument works out, and it is, if 
anything, a proof the passage did refer to him. The almost 
exactly suitable date strengthens that view. Another odd 
coincidence occurs to me, to which Ritson would have 
perhaps attached weight (but I do not). When Shallow 
says (ill. i. 5 6), " I have lived four score years and up- 
ward," Ritson believed, from our knowledge of Shallow in 
2 Henry IV., that this should read, "three score year and 
upwards." And I now learn that the age of Sir Thomas 
Lucy in 1598 was 66 \ See Ritson's note in Steevens' 
Shakespeare, where he shows that Shallow should be some- 
where about this age at the end of ^ Henry IV. 

Shakespeare made use of Shallow as a stalking-horse, 
from behind which he aims a dart at Lucy, a successful one, 
since it seems to rankle still, but if my view be taken, it 
was innocuous — stinging perhaps, but barbless. But the 
stalking-horse is not necessarily identified with Lucy, and 
this is where the view held by so many critics seems to be 
erroneous, and to throw the whole matter into difficulties. 
When the dramatists poke fun at Lyly's Euphues (see an 
example quoted in note at "polecat," IV. i.) or at Kyd's 
Spanish Tragedy, they do not identify the speakers with 
Lyly or with Kyd. The practice was a common one, and 
does not in the least involve the necessity of a whole 
personage, like Dekker's Horace {i.e. Ben Jonson), being 
pilloried upon the stage. 



xxxvi INTRODUCTION 

According to local traditioM, Wheatley says the scene 
of Shakespeare's deer adventure was not in Charlecote Park, 
but on the estate of Fulbrooke adjoining. This estate was 
sequestered from its owner (Sir Francis Englefield) on the 
accession of Queen Elizabeth, and it ultimately came into 
the possession of the Lucy family in 1618. According to 
Mr. Henty (quoted by Wheatley) it appears that Lucy 
assumed charge or rangership over the estate, during its 
sequestration, which he may have done of his own magis- 
terial authority, as one of the quorum, for the protection of 
his own stray deer. He had in fact erected a hut, which 
he called a lodge, as a residence for his keeper. 

The writer of the article mentioned above lays stress 
upon Shallow's " low origin " as a proof of the absurdity of 
identifying him with the blue blood of Lucy. This is an 
unfortunate argument, since Shakespeare, as if to meet it, 
introduces Shallow boasting of his " three hundred years' " 
pedigree in Merry Wives — one of the obvious reasons why 
Lucy is meant at that point, since that was about their 
period, I believe, in Warwickshire. Shallow's humble origin 
may be deduced, or presumed perhaps, from Henry IV., 
where he has nothing to do with Lucy. But that is not the 
case in Merry Wives. He has not only his pedigree and 
his justiceship, but also his deer park, his keepers, and his 
coat of arms. He is a judge of a good and fair coursing 
dog. He dwells with becoming decorum upon gravity, 
patience, learning, and self-respect. We have nothing here 
of Will Squele and Dagonet, of the Windmill and bona- 
roba days. Nothing of old Double and the tiny kickshaws. 
This is curious. How much of the old Shallow had to be 
obliterated before we had a Justice fit to bear this " new- 



INTRODUCTION xxxvii 

r 

made honour " that " doth forget men's names." And the 
result is a flawless nonentity, vain enough and decorous 
enough for the " duke de Jaminy " himself. 

(3) Accepting the tradition about the composition of 
Merry Wives for the purpose of bringing Falstaff out again, 
and in love, it is necessary to place this play after Henry 
IF,, when Falstaff had arrived at the zenith of his 
popularity. It seems to me an almost equally rational 
supposition that Merry Wives appeared, whether ordered or 
not, before Henry F., where the Hostess tells us of his 
death. In that play Pistol is disposed of also — he could 
never show his face again — and Bardolph and Nym appar- 
ently come to the gallows. The latter we meet with first 
in the Merry Wives, as a part of its parallelism with Every 
Man in his Humour, Nym being a creation for the purpose 
of ridiculing the use of the word " humour." At the close 
of Henry IV. Shakespeare promised his audience that he 
would " continue the story with Sir John in it." This he 
has not done, and the reason may probably be found in the 
order from the Queen, which amounted indeed to a modifi- 
cation of that intention, for she welcomed the idea, and 
added the condition already mentioned. No doubt the 
plan oi Henry V. was already formed, and perhaps the play 
was in the course of preparation ; but Falstaff was taken 
down to Windsor, instead of across to France, where, in- 
deed, in the camp at Agincourt, he would have been not a 
little out of place. 

Again, at the close of Henry IV,, we are told that 
" He [Henry] hath intent his wonted followers shall all be 
very well provided for ; But all are banish'd till their con- 
versations Appear more wise and modest to the world." 



xxxviii INTRODUCTION 

We may harmonise this with the idea of their being in 
Windsor, under direct supervision of the court. And 
as Falstaff's earthly part passes away in Henry F., so does 
much of his early wit seem to die a natural death at 
Windsor. Moreover, there are signs too, strangely un- 
natural portents they are, of this attempt at conversion on 
the part of Falstaff at Windsor. Mrs. Ford says (ll. i.), 
" he would not swear ; and gave such orderly and well- 
behaved reproof to all uncomeliness," that she was imposed 
upon. And Falstaff himself talks of *' the guiltiness of his 
mind " (v. v.) in a very suspicious manner. Both these 
passages seem like afterthoughts, due to the nearly overlooked 
fact that Falstaff is a " reformed character " at Windsor. 
That is to say, he has to pretend to be so, or his stipend 
may be withheld. Falstaff himself does not allow us to 
forget his former career. At the close of Henry IV., almost 
his last words are, after his banishment is announced, " this 
that you heard was but a colour." He is cherishing the 
hope of his speedy recall in Merry Wives. Ford (as 
Brook) accepts him as one of great influence at court, 
" of great admittance, authentic in your place " ; he speaks 
to Mrs. Ford in the terms of one belonging to court (in III. 
iii.) ; and after he is cudgelled for a witch, he speaks (in 
IV. v.) of how the news of his disgrace will be received at 
court — " they will whip me with their fine wits till I were 
as crestfallen as a dried pear." 

We thus arrive at the date of 1598 for the Merry 
Wives' first appearance. Its connection with the historical 
time of Henry IV. is practically torn asunder or set aside, 
and need scarcely be considered. It cannot be denied that 
Merry Wives falls below the high standard of excellence 



I 



INTRODUCTION xxxix 

arrived at by Shakespeare in this portion of his career. In 
reply to that there is nothing to urge except haste, and 
perhaps distaste in the production. His plans were upset, 
and he obeyed his injunctions unwillingly. He yielded to 
necessity, working in trammels, and throwing no soul into 
the unwelcome task. Nevertheless he knew how to please, 
and did it. 

Twice the Henry IV, cycle of plays is vividly, even 
violently, recalled in Merry Wives (I mean the historical 
period of that cycle, not of course the reissued characters) : 
once when Page says (ill. ii. 73) of Fenton, "he knows 
too much," ..." he kept company with the wild prince 
and Poins " ; and in the Quarto there is a passage in the 
last scene (possibly omitted from the Folio by accident), 
" He lay my life the mad Prince of Wales Is stealing his 
fathers Deare." The last passage is in itself a proof 
that Merry Wives antedated Henry V., when the mad 
prince became the king. Mr. Daniel is sceptical about 
the " traditions," and I differ with him in several other 
points, as in this of the date, which he places after 
Henry V, In spite, however, of these two allusions, our 
play is Windsor, and Windsor life, in the last decade of 
the sixteenth century. It was customary to produce plays 
at Windsor when the court lay there. In Nichol's Pro- 
gr esses we find that Queen Elizabeth had masques and 
tournaments at Windsor Castle in January 1593. And 
there are several entries in Cunningham's Accounts of the 
Revels at Court (Shaks. Soc, 1842) that bear upon this. 
One is " Payde ... at Windsor the ij of Januarye 1569 
To Richarde Ferrante [Scolemaster] to the childeren of 
Wyndsor by way of [her Maits reward] for presentinge a 



xl INTRODUCTION 

playe before her highnes this Christmas " (p. xxviii). This 
schoolmaster, with the children of Windsor, at once recalls 
Evans and his Windsor fairies, who were undoubtedly 
children. And these children of Windsor were so well 
skilled, that her Majesty had them up to London : " Quint 
ffabi [* Four Sons of Fabius '] playd by the children of 
Wynsor ffor Mr. ffarrant on Twelfe daye at nighte lyke- 
wise at Whitehall " (1574). So that the materials for pro- 
ducing a Windsor play, children and all, were ready to her 
Majesty's hand. And in the same volume, at p. TJ , occurs 
the even more explicit item : " Attending and setting foorth 
of Sundry Kynd(s) of Apparell propertyes (and) ffurnyture 
for the Italian Players that ffollowed the progresse and 
made pastyme fyrst at Wynsor and afterward(s) at 
Reading." And p. 80: "hier of iij devells cotes and 
head(s) (and) one olde mannes fries cote for the Italian 
players at Wynsor." They also hired a scythe for Saturn. 
These entries belong to 1574. And in 1578 the children 
of Windsor have a play on the 6th January (p. iio). 
Other points that bear upon this are noticed in the next 
section. See also Gildon's words above, in 1710. 

In Cunningham's Revels, again, at p. 176 (1581), there 
is mentioned, " A Comodie or Morrall devised on a game 
of the Cards shewed on St. Stephen's dale at night before 
her Ma*'* at Wyndsor Enacted by the Children of her 
Ma*" Chappell"; and at p. 181, showing what a hurry she 
sometimes was in for a play, there is an entry : " For Hors- 
hire from Wyndesor to London in poste, and back agayne 
for my Lord Chamberleynes men." 

(4) The next point I propose to consider is also of a 
doubtful and difficult nature, the incident called by Mr. 




INTRODUCTION xli 

Daniel " this Mumpellgart business." The name will serve 
very well. 

This occurrence was brought forward by Charles 
Knight, in 1 840, to explain the references to the German 
visitors to the Garter, the Duke ^'■de jaminie" the horse- 
stealing, and the " cosen-garmombles " of the Quarto. 
How far the explanation to be offered is sufficient must 
be considered. It certainly goes some way, and no other 
of any sort has been offered for what has all the appear- 
ance of referring to some events well known at the time. 
Halliwell believed so fully in Knight's suggestion, that he 
based an argument for an earlier date for the play upon 
it, and all the commentators appear to agree that the view 
has " something in it." 

In the year 1592 Count Mumpellgart, who became 
Duke of Wurtemberg in 1593, visited this country. He 
remained a month in England, visiting the Queen at 
Reading, and was a highly honoured guest. He was there 
from 17th to 19th of August. From thence he went to 
Windsor, where he stayed till the 21st. He was shown 
the " royal castle " by " an old distinguished English lord " 
(I quote from Rye's England as seen by Foreigners ^ 1865), 
and had some deer-shooting in the parks there. He was 
presented with three stags. He cut his name in the lead 
upon the highest tower of Windsor Castle. He was shown 
everything, including Eton College, " wherein however there 
was nothing particular to be seen." He had a second day 
with the Windsor deer on leaving, which he called " glorious 
sport " (Rye trans.). On his way from London to Reading, 
whither he went in a coach despatched by her Majesty for 
him, he passed through Hounslow, sleeping a night at 



xlii INTRODUCTION 

Maidenhead. Subsequently to his Windsor visit he was 
entertained at the Oxford and Cambridge Universities as well 
as several private residences. He was a pompous man, and 
travelled with a retinue in black velvet. He very nearly 
had a highway-robbery adventure at Gad's Hill, and he left 
England from Gravesend on the 6th of September, riding 
over from there with post-horses to visit Rochester, and the 
ships of war lying in the harbour, including Drake's ship, 
the day before he sailed. An account of his visit, written 
by his private secretary, Jacob Rathger, who accompanied 
him, was printed at Tubingen (in German) by Erhardus 
Cellius in 1602. It was called a " Bathing- excursion." 
Before the Count left Windsor he obtained his passport, 
dated 2nd September, from Lord High Admiral Howard, 
which contains the words " Thie Schalbe to wil and com- 
mand you in heer Majtie name ... to see him fournissed 
with post horses in his travail to the sea side ; and ther to 
seecke up such schippiage as schalbe fit for his transporta- 
tions, he pay nothing for the same . . ." 

This excursion of a German Duke through England's 
quiet country towns would live long in a people's memories, 
who regarded foreigners at this time with suspicion and 
aversion. But the Count did not permit himself to be 
forgotten. He was greatly attracted by the Order of the 
Garter, and he believed he had obtained from Queen 
Elizabeth her promise of that distinction, which, however, 
she subsequently denied. But from that time onward, as 
Duke of Wurtemberg, he never ceased to solicit her Majesty, 
sometimes by letter, usually by embassy, for the fulfilment 
of her promise. She allowed his election in 1597, and his 
wish was fulfilled by James I., in 1603, when the insignia 



INTRODUCTION xliii 

were conferred upon him with pride, pomp, and circum- 
stance on the 6th September, at Stuttgard. So that he 
kept his name fresh before the English court — so much so 
indeed that some of the letters from the Queen to " our 
cousin Mumpellgart," as she calls him, betray irritation at 
his persistency, or some other cause of offence. Which 
serves to show that a gibe at him might not be deemed 
unpopular. 

I have given in my notes, at the third and fifth Scenes 
of the Fourth Act, the extracts from the Quarto, alongside 
the parallel ones in the Folio which appear to refer to this 
German Duke. Between the two texts the accumulative 
evidence is incapable of refutation. He visited Maidenhead 
and Reading, sleeping at both, as mentioned in both texts. 
Eton is mentioned in the Folio alone. He was a Duke of 
Germany. He was Cousin Mumpellgart, which, at a time 
when anagrams were inevitable, would at once become 
" cosen garmombles " (of the Quarto), and he obtained 
authority, which would probably be freely abused by his 
servants, to have post-horses free of charge. That docu- 
ment comes in a little late for the cozenage, but he expected 
it, and its provisions may have been anticipated. It was 
with the memory of these things, we suppose, that Shake- 
speare may have entertained his audience and his Queen. 
In the year 1598 (August 14) the Duke wrote to the 
Queen (he had not obtained the insignia) : " I have heard 
with extreme regret that some of my enemies endeavour to 
calumniate me, and prejudice your Majesty against me. I 
have given them no occasion for this. I hope that when 
your Majesty has discovered this report to be false, you 
will have greater reason to continue your affection towards 



xliv INTRODUCTION 

me, and give neither faith nor credit to such vipers," etc. 
The Duke was certainly unpopular in England in the year 
this play was produced, and was probably well known to 
be somewhat in the Queen's black books. 

With regard to the horse-stealing, which is what would 
be of most interest to " mine Host," we must remember 
that it may actually have occurred. We are not told of 
the Count's being the guest of any one. " His lodging " is 
not mentioned, and that may, not improbably, have been the 
Garter Inn. At Reading he was the guest of the Mayor 
of that place. 

Here I may mention a parallel reference to horse- 
stealing, some public case that created a sensation in the 
Duke's year (1592—93). In Nashe's Summer's Last Willy 
which appears to have been written and performed at 
Croydon in 1592—93, he says: "Asses live within their 
bounds : , . . whereas the lusty courser, if he be in a 
barreyne plot, and spye better grasse in some pasture 
neere adjoyning, breakes over hedge and ditch . . . Perad- 
venture the horses lately sworne to be stolne caried that 
youthfull mind, who, if they had been Asses, would have 
bene yet extant," Grosart's Nashe, vi. 97 (or Haz. Dods, 
viii. 21). 

In one part of the Count's travels (Oxford) he speaks 
of being compelled to remain there most unwillingly 
because no post-horses could be procured that evening 
even at double the cost ; which does not read as if he 
was exerting his privilege of " commandeering " them at 
that time. 

The connection between the horses and the German 
Duke is there, however, and may yet be further explained, 



INTRODUCTION xlv 

with reference to Merry Wives. At present it is mainly 
guesswork, but the guess would be that in 1592, during the 
Duke's visit, or immediately after it, certain rogues made 
use of the order he was known to possess, and as either his 
servants or pretending to be his servants, levied and stole 
horses in his name from innkeepers. And Nashe's remark 
shows that at that very time there was a prominent case of 
horse-stealing. And the horse-stealing incident in Merry 
Wives is the outcome of that performance, which is certainly 
a portion of the reminiscences that clung to the German 
Count's excursion. 

At the end of '2 Henry IV. (v. iii. 140) Falstaff says in 
his exuberance, so quickly overthrown, " Let us take any 
man's horses : the laws of England are at my command- 
ment." This shows that Shakespeare was familiar with 
some such unjust proceedings, and had them in his mind 
at the time of writing Merry Wives, 

The relationship of this incident to the rest of Merry 
Wives will be considered later on. 

Halliwell says, with reference to the above occurrences 
(in Introduction to Quarto, 1842), "the above-mentioned 
work is so very rare, that I have not been able to obtain 
a sight of it ... his [Knight's] conjecture would have 
received a strong confirmation, if we knew that Count 
Mombeliard had taken Reading in his outward journey." 
We see that he did do so. 

If we suppose the period of the story to be that of the 
Count's visit to Windsor, or about that time, we come in 
touch with the festivities at Windsor in January 1593, the 
visit having taken place the preceding September. When 
Mrs. Quickly speaks of the great doings " when the court 



xlvi INTRODUCTION 

lay at Windsor," II. ii. 64, as if a recent event, her remarks 
serve to recall and blend together those stirring times. 
They were sufficiently synchronous to harmonise in people's 
memories as of one period. But no doubt the court often 
" lay at Windsor." Even during the progress of the play, 
Dr. Caius is preparing to go to court — " la grand affaire" 
I. IV. 54. It would not be in the least degree an improper 
or unlikely " hit " for Caius to refer there and then to the 
court at Windsor, supposing it to be so, while this very 
play is acting. That is the kind of topical allusion that 
tells on every stage. See above at the end of (3). 

(5) The date of the appearance of the play has been 
shown to be 1598, following Henry /F., "both parts of 
which were written before the entry of the first in the 
Stationers' Register, Feb. 25, 1597-98. For the entry 
shows that the name of the fat knight, who originally 
appeared in both parts under the name of Oldcastle, had 
been already altered to Falstaff " (Dowden). 

Merry Wives was probably produced early in I 598. It 
was written, we are told, in a record time to meet an express 
command, and we may assume that the season of its scenes 
and story are also the season of its appearance. This 
season would be late winter or early spring — a time of year 
which is less vague in the play than it is in our climate. 
One, or two, or even a few references would not be sufficient 
to establish a fact like this, since of course the author may 
use his imagination quite independently of the period at 
which he is at work. But the season here is part of the plot, 
and inseparably fused into it, representing as it does life in 
the country. " Take heed, ere summer comes, or cuckoo 
birds do sing " (ll. i. 1 24). This implies February or March. 



INTRODUCTION xlvii 

" raw rheumatic day " (ill. i. 47), " o'er a country fire " 
(v. V. 254), and "sea-coal fire" (l. iv. 9). These passages 
made me strongly inclined to suggest that " uncape " (ill. 
iii. 176) meant nothing more than a word to the ladies and 
gentlemen at the door of Ford's house, standing gathered in 
the street, waiting for entrance, " take off your capes, and 
come in and search." A dreadfully prosy explanation. See 
note at the passage. 

" Jack - a - Lent " (ill. iii. 27 and v. v. 134). A 
village pastime in Lent, appropriately mentioned in early 
spring. Shakespeare does not elsewhere refer to it. See 
notes. 

" we *11 a birding together : I have a fine hawk for the 
bush " (ill. iii. 246) ; " her husband goes this morning a- 
birding" (ill. v. 45); and IV. ii. 8, 59. See note at the 
first of these passages. This sport was carried on with 
hawks (and sometimes dogs assisted) and fowling-pieces, 
after legitimate hawking was over, any time in winter up to 
the spring. Blackbirds and thrushes were the chief quarry, 
and the sparrow-hawk was the hawk in use. In France it 
was followed by ladies with cross-bows, and rabbits were 
sometimes the game at an earlier period. French falconers 
flew at anything. This pastime can only be appropriately 
introduced in winter — here in late winter or about February 
to March. There are no suggestions of real spring in the 
play, except the metaphorical ones applied to Fenton of 
April, May, and hawthorn buds. They are anticipatory of 
the looked-for season. 

(6) " My maid's aunt, the fat woman of Brainford " 
(IV, ii. y6)\ " her thrummed hat and her muffler " (iv. ii. 79) ; 
" the witch of Brainford " (iv. ii. 1 00) ; " A witch . . . under 



xlviii INTRODUCTION 

the profession of fortune-telling. She works by charms, by 
spells, by the figure . . . Mother Prat" (iv. ii. 1 80-1 91); 
"wise woman of Brainford " (iv. v. 27). In the 1602 
Quarto " my maid's Aunt Gillian of Brainford " (twice) ; 
" a gowne and a muffler " (Quarto). 

Jyll of Brentford is known best by her " Testament," a 
copy of which is in the Bodleian {n,d^ by Copeland. It 
has been reprinted by Furnivall for the Ballad Society. 
It was in Captain Cox's Library, according to Laneham's 
Letter^ I575. Its date is about 1562. A description of 
it will be found in Furnivall's edition of Captain Cox 
(Ballad Society). It was a coarse production, and the 
nature of Gillian's legacies will be found mentioned in 
Nashe's Summer's Last Wz// (Raz. Dods. viii. 19), 1592-93. 
Nashe abuses " Gillian of Braynforde's Will " in a letter 
printed in Grosart's edition (l. Ixiii.). He calls it "Joan a 
Brainford's Will " in his Epistle to the Gentlemen Students 
prefixed to Greene's Menaphon, 1589. Harington refers to 
its contents in Ulysses upon Ajax (Chiswick, p. 13), 1596. 
Dame Gillian (we are told by the tract) was a respectable 
hostess at Brentford, and was therefore, says H alii well, 
suitable company for Mistress Ford : " She kept an inne of 
right good lodgyng For all estates that thyder was comyng." 
How far the whole character was an invention of Robert 
Copeland, the writer of the tract printed by his brother 
William, is unknown. But she became a sort of common 
property amongst writers at the time of the Merry Wives. 
There was a play, not known now, named Friar Fox and 
Gillian of Brentford^ by Thomas Dowton and Samuel 
Rowley, acted (according to Hazlitt) in 1592-93, and 
mentioned by Henslowe again in 1598-99. The loss of 



INTRODUCTION xlix 

these precious plays, " hid in death's dateless night," is one 
of the ills that flesh is heir to. 

So far she has not appeared, unless perhaps in this play, 
as a witch. But in Webster's Westward Ho (v. iii.), 1607, 
a character says : " O Master Linstock, 'tis no walking will 
serve my turn. — Have me to bed, good sweet Mistress 
Honeysuckle. — I doubt that old hag, Gillian of Brentford, 
has bewitched me." Halliwell quotes to the same effect 
from " a manuscript of the time of Charles I. " : " The 
Conjuringe of the Witch. Come away, come away. Thou 
Lady gay ! Hark how shee stumbles ! Hark how shee 
mumbles ! Dame Gillian, Dame Gillian, why when ? why 
when?" etc. (But Brentford does not seem to be men- 
tioned, and this may be only a general term for an old 
woman, a gillian?) 

Possibly two distinct people are mixed up, and the 
witch may have come into existence in the play above 
mentioned. Shakespeare is not likely to have meant 
Copeland's heroine, who was only known for her coarseness, 
or at any rate always spoken of for that characteristic, and 
whose date won't fit into any view of the time of the play. 

Massinger has a passage in The Renegado^ I. iii. (1624), 
that reads like a reference to Shakespeare's witch, combin- 
ing all her attributes : " Cold doings, sir ; a mart do you 
call this ? 'slight ! A pudding wife, or a witch with a thrum 
cap That sells ale underground to such as come To know 
their fortunes in a dead vacation, Have ten to one more 
stirring." 

Gillian was a name for innholders elsewhere, and 
" Berry " comes very near " Brainford." In Beaumont and 
Fletcher, Knight of the Burning Pestle^ there is a snatch : 
d 



1 INTRODUCTION 

" For Jilian of Berry dwells on a hill And she hath good 
ale and wine to sell, And thither will we go now, now, 
now " (IV. v.). 

Why she is " Prat " instead of Gillian, in the Folio, also 
needs explanation. Halliwell found the name Prat in the 
Brentford Registers under date 1624. Perhaps this accounts 
for it; if there were Prats at Brentford, they may have 
asked to have the name changed ; a parallel supposition 
with that of the explanation suggested by the Cambridge 
editors for the reading " Broom " instead of " Brook " at 
II. i. 220-223. Prat was, however, a familiar stage name. 
" Neighbour Prat " is the Constable in The Pardoner and 
the Friar, 1533. 

Heywood's enumeration of the famous " Witches " {circa 
1 6 1 o) in The Wise Woman of Hogsdon is as follows : " You 
have heard of Mother Nottingham, who for her time was 
pretty well skilled in casting of waters : and after her, 
Mother Bombye [Lyly] ; and there is one Hatfield in Pepper- 
Alley, hee doth prettie well for a thing that 's lost. There 's 
another in Coleharbour, that's skilled in the Planets. 
Mother Sturton in Goulden-lane, is Fore-speaking : Mother 
Phillips of the Banke-side is for the weaknesse of the backe : 
and then there's a very reverent Matron on Clarkenwell- 
Green, good at many things : Mistris Mary on the Banke- 
side is for recting a Figure : and one (what doe you call 
her) in Westminster, that practiseth the Booke and the 
Key, and the Sive and the Shears : and all doe well, 
according to their talent. For myselfe, let the world 
speake." 

(7) A great deal of investigation has been made, and 
interesting matter has been written upon the topography 



INTRODUCTION li 

and personal nomenclature in this play. Wheatley refers 
especially to Tighe and Davis, Annals of Windsor (vol. i. 
chap, xxiv.), and to Mr. Halliwell-Phillips, Folio Shakespeare 
(vol. ii.), for illustration showing Shakespeare's familiarity 
with Windsor. 

Mr. Davis found "old inhabitants" of Windsor who 
had traditional knowledge of the houses of the Pages and 
Fords. More curious is the fact that " search in the old 
Windsor Registers of Shakespeare's period discovered the 
names of Ford, Page, Evans, Heme, Brook, and Miller; 
but that of Fenton was not to be found there." 

Mr. Halliwell found the name " Home," the Quarto 
reading for " Heme " at IV. iv. 29, in a manuscript of the time 
of Henry VIII. in the British Museum (MS. Bibl. Reg. 1 7 
cxvi.), where " Rycharde Home, yeoman," occurs among 
" the names of the hunters whiche we examyned and have 
confessed " for hunting in his Majesty's forests. No doubt 
the true name is Heme, but this is a curious coincidence, 
although Halliwell does not say it relates to Windsor. 
Both names were common enough. But with regard to 
the tradition of the ghost, Shakespeare is our sole authority. 
I have quoted a passage from Day's Law Tricks (1608) at 
IV. iv. 50, which may possibly refer to this ghost, but he is 
not named. 

Wheatley refers to a " Plan of the Town and Castle of 
Windsor and Little Park," published by Collier at Eton in 
1742, showing the position of "Sir John Falstaff's Oak," 
on the edge of a pit on the outside of an avenue known in 
the seventeenth century as Queen Elizabeth's Walk. Which 
pit, it is suggested, is where the fairies hid themselves. This 
pit is supposed by Davis to be identical with certain " chalk- 



lii INTRODUCTION 

pits " in the Little Park of Windsor mentioned in the time 
of Charles i., when the Mayor of New Windsor claimed the 
right for his burgesses to carry away chalk and flints from 
there " from time immemorial." 

The oak and the pit were on the right-hand side of 
the old pathway which led from Windsor to Datchet, in 
the Little Park. This oak was living till 1790, when it 
" ceased to vegetate," and was cut down in the spring of 
1796. Halliwell prints some verses "Upon Heme's Oak 
being cut down in the spring of 1796" that were extracted 
from a contemporary newspaper and communicated to him 
by Mr. Wright. They are in the notes to his edition of 
the Quarto, where a dispute on the question is also referred 
to (pp. 188, 189 in Hazlitt's Shaks. Library). The stanzas 
are decidedly pretty. Wheatley refers to other claimants 
for the honour of being the original oak. 

I do not understand the statement that the chalk-pit 
was the place where the fairies were couched, since it is 
stated in the play to be a saw-pit. Are chalk-pits avail- 
able as saw-pits ? 

All this matter, however, is tradition, tradition which 
arose out of the popular play, and apparently crystallised 
itself into concrete form in Collier's map after the lapse 
of about a century and a half There is nothing pre- 
Shakespearian in it, though there is in the occurrence of 
that group of names at Windsor. Is it, however, in any 
degree likely that Shakespeare made use of those names 
because he knew them to belong to Windsor inhabitants ? 
I think it is to the very last degree improbable, and only 
points to the conclusion that they were all common English 
names at the time he wrote the play. Every one of them. 



I 



» 



INTRODUCTION liii 

including Heme, Home, and Fenton, are in Fuller's 

Worthies. 

One point may possibly contain something tangible. 

May not these pits, famous from time immemorial, have 
something to do with the unexplained " pittie-ward " in III. 
i. 5 ? See note at the reference. 

In Tighe and Davis's Annals of Windsor is an ex- 
haustive scrutiny of the localities mentioned in the play 
with the aid of Norden's " Plan of Windsor and the Little 
Park," which appeared in 1607. It appears that Datchet 
Mead was in Shakespeare's time an open field or meadow. 
A muddy ditch existed there, close by the Thames-side, 
previously to the reign of Queen Anne. The road from 
Windsor to Frogmore, as it existed in Norden's Plan of the 
Little Park, was recently altered, and the land added to the 
park. For full reference to these matters the Annals of 

Windsor must be referred to, or Wheatley's edition of the 
play. 

Wheatley tells us that marriages were solemnised both 
at the Parish Church of Eton and at the College Chapel, in 
Shakespeare's time. See IV. iv. 75; IV. v. ; IV. vi., etc. 
" The Deanery was attached to St. George's Chapel, 
Windsor, and the position of the ' Deane's House ' is shown 
in Norden's bird's-eye view of Windsor Castle, 1607" 
(Wheatley). Camden, after describing "the most stately 
church consecrated by King Edward the Third unto the 
blessed Virgine Marie and to Saint George of Cappadocia," 
says, " On the left side of the Church are the houses of the 
Custos or Dean, and twelve Prebendaries." He derives the 
name " of the winding shore " there, giving the earliest 
spelling Wyndleshore " in the Charter of King Edward the 



liv INTRODUCTION 

Confessour," who made a grant of it to the Monks of West- 
minster. But the Monks had not long held it in possession 
when " William of Normandie, by an exchange, drew it 
back again to himself . . . because that place seemed 
profitable and commodious by reason of water hard adjoin- 
ing to it, and the wood fit for game, and many other 
particulars lying there meet and necessary for kings." 
Camden's map marks Datchet, but does not show Frog- 
more. The houses called Frogmore appear to have been 
on the Old Windsor Road, in ground now occupied by the 
Royal Gardens. 

(8) With regard to the characters in the play, a few 
remarks must be offered. The inseparable wives, mistresses 
of households in a well-to-do class of life, have not much 
to discriminate between them. We naturally assume them 
to be both attractive, and since one has a marriageable 
daughter, they may be guessed at about " fair, fat, and 
forty." However, one inclines to put the " heavenly jewel's " 
personal attractions first, since it was Mrs. Ford that 
wrought such havock with knights, earls, and, which is 
more, pensioners, when the court lay at Windsor. It is 
Mrs. Ford who gets Falstaff's kiss, and who twice at least 
is constrained by the exigencies of her plot to find herself 
in Falstaff's arms. Mrs. Page in this respect escapes with- 
out loss of self-respect, although it is she who first receives 
Falstaff's letter, or soonest discloses its contents. This 
state of affairs is consonant with the usual one that makes 
the jealous husband the scapegoat. He comes most near 
to that position. There is no possibility of such a result 
here, except that Ford loses his money. All along 
there is not a suggestion of affection, even of the grosser 



INTRODUCTION Iv 

sort, except what is simulated. The wives have rich 
husbands, and by their means Falstafif will supply his 
diminished exchequer. This is the manner in which 
Shakespeare interprets his royal mistresses' order, and 
probably the spirit in which it was given, entirely lacking 
in delicacy. Anything like a pure passion was out of the 
question with this fat and selfish Falstaff. And the Queen 
was greatly pleased. Mrs. Ford, being the beauty, is 
naturally the wife to have the jealous husband. We know 
nothing of her husband's reasons, we simply find him there 
awaiting his punishment at the hands of his wife through 
Falstaff's instrumentality. A jealous husband is almost a 
necessary property in a play of this time. 

And he does suffer for it. Ford's feelings in his scenes 
with Falstafif as Brooke are not to be envied. His im- 
patience and anguish are real. His reputation is gnawn 
at. He is in very deadly earnest. The two wives are 
in earnest also, upon the first receipt of the letters, when 
they plot their first revenge, and before they have relieved 
themselves in any degree of the imputation cast upon them. 
Outside Fenton and Anne, of whom we get but little, the 
air is not pure enough, there is no true feeling. Though 
Ford is a contemptible person, introduced to make a con- 
temptible passion despicable or ruinous as circumstances 
require, he has this merit in the play. He lives and thinks, 
acts and speaks, up to a certain standard phase, seriously 
and with a true appreciation of it. He is the only 
character to be taken seriously, and the reason he is not 
generally taken so is because he is nauseous — a nasty pill. 
He is, however, only unfortunate, not vicious ; and, like 
Jonson's Kitely, he is cured. 



Ivi INTRODUCTION 

When Shakespeare drew this picture of country life, 
hurriedly and quite outside his projected works, one com- 
forting thing at least occurred to him ; he would escape 
from the city. And if he was compelled to bring with 
him to the country his troop of swindlers and town corrup- 
tions, he would set them down where their surroundings 
would show them off to their discredit. Simplicity, ignor- 
ance, and folly there may be there, but there is also 
honesty and all the other virtues. That is the Windsor 
atmosphere. The foils and vices all come from town. 
There is nothing in any of the villagers' doings to their 
discredit. Sometimes they are bumpkins. But in the end 
they are the people who come off best. Falstaff, with his 
professed contempt for honour, swoops down on them to 
fill his purse and to satisfy his gross passions, down from 
the corrupt life at court in London, and the country folks 
show him what they think of him, and of the ways of such 
as he and his companions. 

Page is a very pleasant person so far as we make his 
acquaintance. Not only does he trust his virtuous wife 
implicitly, but he has the good sense to throw discredit at 
once upon anything coming from such a tainted source as 
those discarded rogues. Even if it be true, however, he 
has no doubt his wife is fit to take care of herself. As 
an English country gentleman of the middle class, he 
is a better type of the class than either of the wives. 
We meet him first desirous of smoothing over the 
quarrel about the deer. Almost his first words are a 
kindly invitation to all the party to dinner. He has 
greyhounds to run a course, and he it is who gets up 
the birding party, and has a good hawk for the bush. 



INTRODUCTION Ivii 

He disapproves of Fenton, and therein shows his sense, 
though probably Fenton is about to follow the prince's 
example. It is Page who is at once down upon Nym 
for his drawling affecting speech — he wouldn't believe 
him at any price. Shallow looks up to him and consults 
him. He is too good-humoured and kindly to quarrel 
with his wife about it, but he agrees to differ with her 
in his choice for their daughter — a trouble that could never 
have been set right, were it not that both their plans were 
defeated. Page all along dissuades his friend Ford from 
his senseless jealousy, but how admirably is that jealousy 
turned to account in the main action of the play ! It is 
a jealousy so unjust and so unreasoning that it recalls 
Kitely's in Every Man in his Humour more than any 
other creation I am aware of. For it is inherent in Ford. 
They were the old lines he lived in before Falstaff came 
on the scene. And at the close, when there is sport afoot, 
Page at once joins in, administering a sharp reproof to 
Ford on the one hand, and ready to deal out sharper 
punishment to that fat unvirtuous knight. And after- 
wards, though unfairly treated as he feels he is, he is ready 
to hold out the hand of good-fellowship where another 
would cherish resentment. The only defect I can find 
in Page is his desire to match his daughter with Slender. 
But that no doubt arose from some desire for social 
position. No one in the play is gifted with any striking 
ability, but such merits as are dealt out are all conspicuous 
in Page. Nym mistook his man very thoroughly when he 
proposed to possess Page with jealousy and " incense him 
to deal with poison." 

Mistress Anne is no doubt attractive — young, well- 



Iviii INTRODUCTION 

off, and fair to look upon, we would like to know her 
better. Considering the important part she plays in 
the story, the main part indeed in the primary business 
of the play, it is remarkable how little we are told 
about her, or rather how seldom we see her. She 
has a firm will of her own, and her choice about the 
turnips in preference to Slender shows her to be decidedly 
original. 

Slender is a capital source of merriment upon the stage, 
and forms an important part of the play in modern repre- 
sentation, more so perhaps than one would judge should be 
allotted to him in the study. Most brainless of youths and 
most incapable of lovers, as Dowden says, he is dear for the 
sake of Anne Page. He is careful to say and do the wrong 
thing in every way upon every occasion. I have called atten- 
tion to several of his lamentable blunders in my notes, 
which need a little explanation to appreciate them. And I 
have an idea why Sir John Falstaff broke his head and 
adds insult to injury by parading the outrage, which per- 
haps sometimes escapes notice. He was one of the keeper's 
party beaten by Sir John. Perhaps this is obvious. 
Slender is in some respects the Silence of the previous 
play. He acts as a toady to Shallow, and he drinks 
too much upon occasions. There is also a suggestion 
of music in Slender, when he wants his song book, recall- 
ing his more entertaining predecessor. Wheatley says 
Slender was the most popular character after Falstaff. 
He then proceeds to quote some verses from Halliwell, 
coarse and blundering, about Simple. 

Dr. Caius, the renowned French physician, has reminded 
me of Ambrose Parey. See my note at III. i. 6i. He 



INTRODUCTION lix 

was in the front rank of Parisian doctors at this time. 
I will not repeat what I have said elsewhere, but further 
research may reveal something of Parey's personality, and 
of his visits to London, which would dispose of this idea 
one way or the other. There are certainly points in 
common. S^eevens refers to Doctor Doddipol for another 
stage French physician, with the statement that "This piece 
appeared at least a year before The Merry Wives of Windsor'^', 
but this is an incorrect view of the dates, Steevens assign- 
ing the present play to the year 1601. French physicians 
appear often in later plays, and must have been as common 
as blackberries. Nashe, however, has a very interesting 
account of what he represents as the impostor French 
doctor, half drugger, half conjurer : " ambitious after pre- 
ferment, agrees to anything, and to Court he goes ; where 
being come to enterview, hee speaks nothing but broken 
English like a French Doctor, pretending to have forgotten 
his naturall tung by travell," Terrors of the Nighty i 5 94, 
From Nashe's account we learn that French doctors were 
in demand at this time, and that there was a class of 
impostors pretending to be such. Dr. Caius is of course the 
real thing. 

Steevens refers to an interesting parallel, also later than 
Merry Wives ^ in Jack of Dover's Quest of Inquirie^ 1604. 
One of the tales, " The Foole of Winsor," begins : " Upon 
a time, there was in Winsor (quoth another of the jurie), 
a certaine simple outlandish doctor of phisicke, belonging 
to the Deane, who on a day being at dinner in Eton 
College," etc. This doctor does not speak in broken 
English. See Hazlitt's Shakespeare's Jest Books ^ 1864, 
p. 339. It is not in the least likely this fool-tale hangs 



Ix INTRODUCTION 

on to the Merry Wives, But there was a real foreign 
doctor at Windsor probably. 

The name Caius is an uncommon one. Besides the 
Cambridge founder, it was the name of Prince Henry's 
drawing-master (spelt " Caus " in Cunningham's Revel's 
Accounts^ in i6io. 

Dr. Caius, valiant at fence, and skilled in the ancients, 
is an excellent " flouting-stock " for mine Host. He is 
rather the cause of wit in others than witty himself. In the 
Quarto he is invariably " Doctor " in his appearances, but 
he is three times called by his full name in the text — each 
time spelt " Doctor Cayus." 

Welsh characters were very frequently placed on the 
stage, to ridicule their unfamiliar language. See my note 
at IV. V. 82 for references. These stage Welshmen are 
generally dull people, devoid of all humour, probably 
intentionally. There is a Welshman in Sharpham's play. 
The Fleire (1607), who bears the name of "Dr. Caius." 
The Welshmen in plays generally speak broken English 
like Evans, but a little later than this Welsh words 
appear in their speeches. Captain Jenkin in Webster's 
Westward Ho^ 1607, is one of the earliest to use his 
own language, as he is also one of the best. Nashe, 
however, has one Welsh expression, if not more, in Have 
with you to Saffron Walden^ 1596. In Rowley's Match 
at Midnight^ Randal is worthy of mention. Evans 
is an excellent character. Like all Shakespeare's school- 
masters, he is at once simple and pedantic. The fact 
that he is a parson seems to be lost sight of a good deal, 
although he remembers grace before dinner in the Quarto. 
He has nothing to do with any of the marriage ceremonies. 



INTRODUCTION ki 

Evans is a much more amusing person than the fussy 
French doctor, and in the duelling scene he is capital. 
We are indebted to Evans for a number of interesting 
allusions. It is satisfactory to find him in an honourable 
position at the close, not in the ignominious situation 
occupied by Caius and Slender. Evans indeed is to be 
regarded altogether as a schoolmaster. I have mentioned 
above (3) the schoolmaster Richard Farrant, who had 
charge of the " children of Winsor," for the representation 
of plays to Queen Elizabeth — both at Windsor and in 
London, some twenty-five years earlier, — an interesting 
parallel to the closing machinery of the Merry Wives. 
Evans and Caius, in combination against the Host, will be 
presently reverted to. 

Mrs. Quickly has nothing in common with " Mrs. 
Quickly" of the historical plays except the name. In 
1 Henry IV. we find her married to the Host of the Boar's 
Head ; in the second part she is a poor widow of East- 
cheap, and Falstaff, she says, swore to marry her and make 
her the lady his wife ; and in Henry V. we find her the 
wife of Pistol, although Nym had been trothplight to her 
according to Bardolph. It is quite impossible, as Halliwell 
says, under any supposition of date to reconcile the two. 
It is a strange thing that Shakespeare should give the name 
to Dr. Caius' nurse. But my supposition would be that 
he brought her down to Windsor with the rest of the 
crew, intending to make use of her. Finding no place 
for her, when the local Host evolved himself, he changed 
her character and position entirely, but did not change her 
name, perhaps because he or some one else forgot. Mrs. 
Quickly of this play is an amusing low type of woman, 



Ixii INTRODUCTION 

devoid of all principle. She is noted sufficiently at her 
appearances in the play. This name remaining unchanged 
may be looked upon as an evidence of haste, as well as her 
indecorous position at the close as Queen of Fairies, where 
it is a sad blot to find her making those harmonious 
speeches — to find the vulgarest character credited with 
almost the only poetry in the play, and uttering the 
usual adulatory address to Queen Elizabeth. The stage- 
direction is probably an error ; how arising or to whom 
due, it is only guesswork to say. See notes at passages, 
and remarks at the beginning of this Introduction. Quickly 
often says delightfully maladroit things, for example, when 
after her discourse upon the wart above Fenton's eye, 
she begins to tell him in confidence of Anne's other 
wooers, whereupon Fenton finds he is in great haste to be 
gone. 

There is, however, something that must be said here 
of Mrs. Quickly, though it belongs more to Henry V. In 
the Quarto Pistol's last appearance is at II. ii. 22, where he 
is angrily dismissed by Falstafif. That should be the end 
of Pistol. However, Falstaff's speech is omitted in the 
Folio (see note), and to our surprise Pistol comes in with his 
nautical metaphors at lines 142-144. Why? He has 
no business whatever to be on the stage. It was most 
improper to keep him standing there listening to Mrs. 
Quickly. That speech is to connect him with his future 
wife, perhaps an afterthought put in to harmonise the two 
characters, which had been overlooked. Next time we 
meet Pistol (in Henry V.) " she is his prize." I have not 
seen this explained before. Mrs. Quickly, therefore, must 
be regarded as continued in Henry V., where she is of 



INTRODUCTION Ixiii 

course the Hostess of Henry IV. The connection, how- 
ever, is altogether fortuitous and inorganic. Nor is it a 
very welcome explanation, on account of its insult to the 
text. But I cannot doubt it. 

Robin was a common diminutive of Robert, and as old 
as Chaucer's Troilus and Cressida, It often appears as a 
servant's name. That our Robin the page is the same as 
Falstaff's page elsewhere is not certain, but probable. He 
is not known in '2 Henry IV. as Robin, but as Falstaff's 
page, where he makes some important remarks. It is 
he who says of the Lord Chief Justice, " here comes the 
nobleman that committed the prince for striking him about 
Bardolph." He is still with Falstaff at the end of that 
play. In Henry V. he is " Boy." He is attached to 
Pistol in France in Henry V. And he is killed there. 
When the prince put him into Falstaff's service in 
2 Henry IV, (l. ii.) he is evidently in gay attire, as befits 
a page and also a Jack-a-Lent, as he is called by Mrs. 
Page. Falstaff probably lends him to Page, who asks for 
him, with ulterior views, which the page does not lend 
himself to. Indeed he is altogether a meritorious quick- 
sighted lad, who sees through his companions in France 
with both wit and perspicacity. That was probably why 
Page wanted him. His smartness commended him. 

We come now to the London element of the play, 
our old friends from Eastcheap, Falstaff and his roguish 
crew. It is hard to know what to say of the sadly 
deteriorated knight. Perhaps enough has been said already 
when dealing with the position of this play with regard 
to the historical trilogy. And special points occur from 
time to time in my notes upon the text. The best that 



Ixiv INTRODUCTION 

can be said for Falstaff is that it is by comparison we 
find him poor. If there were no other delineation of him, 
he would be thought excellent. But that is an inartistic 
excuse. Nevertheless it leads one to the conclusion I 
incline to, that he is deliberately and intentionally knocked 
from his pedestal of popularity with the view of rendering 
the vices he pursues — greed, selfishness, and lust — contemp- 
tible. The pure thing, love, is impossible; let it be the 
impure thing, and down comes the people's idol. When 
wit is bidden to debase itself, compelled in fact to do so, 
compelled to devote itself to the service of the passions, 
the result is inevitable. 

In some such spirit as this, entirely mellowed and 
overspread by his unswerving kindliness of nature, I 
imagine Shakespeare to have given the Queen the knight 
in love, as she called it. And in doing so he read the 
court a wholesome lesson. Not one to be enforced, or 
even seriously insisted upon, but there it is for those who 
choose to understand. This perhaps was a daring line to 
take, but at this time Shakespeare was monarch of the 
stage, and could manipulate his hearers' tastes without 
fear of the result. I prefer to think thus, than to believe 
that the impoverished condition of Falstaff's intellect is 
due to his creator's haste or carelessness. Surely a daring 
line to take, but for once he lays aside his mantle of poesy, 
and trusts mainly to incident and fun. 

When we read the wives' views of Falstaff we see him 
as he is meant to be, " one that is well-nigh worn to pieces 
with age," aping youth and gallantry. 

Perhaps the most unnatural bit of Falstaff in this play 
is the kissing-comfit scene, as it is also his climax. His 



INTRODUCTION Ixv 

images here appear to me so truly absurd, so far-fetched 
and improbable, that it is monstrous to suppose they were 
conceived in anything but the severer spirit of irony of 
the situation which underlies the play. These classical 
images were not uncommon, and in a stilted writer like 
Lyly, who had no sense whatever of proportion or effect, 
they might have appeared in a comedy. But here they 
come in like snow in harvest. Falstaff, a pedant wooer, 
is grotesqueness itself. With regard to the situation, they 
are unnatural ; as a part of Falstaff's caricature on himself 
they alone harmonise. 

All Falstaff's soliloquies, omitting his final remarks 
when he is wholly " dejected," are, however, excellent. I 
mean those moralising remarks after his several trouncings. 
His scene with Simple (iv. v.) is a reminiscence of his old 
self. Although so easily imposed upon, he is also highly 
entertaining in his interview with " Brook " (ll. ii.). Just at 
that point the situations in the play are most admirably 
conceived. At the close of ^ Henry IV. Johnson remarked 
that " no man is more dangerous than he, that with a will 
to corrupt, hath the power to please." Shakespeare cripples 
that power in Merry Wives. 

The name Falstaff, a modification of Fastolfe, has been 
the cause of much laboured research. For Falstaff's name, 
it appears, was originally Oldcastle, and Shakespeare, it is 
stated, took this name from an old play, The Famous 
Victories of Henry the Fifth {ante 1588). This is fully 
discussed in Ward's English Dramatic Literature^ \. 396— 
398 (1875), ^"^^ conveniently summarised in Dowden's 
Shakespeare Primer. 

Pistol of Merry Wives is absolutely the same character 



Ixvi INTRODUCTION 

that he is in 2 Henry IV. and Henry V. He is a bragga- 
docio, full of windy words, and the style is identical in all 
cases. Even his words are repeated from one play to 
another on one occasion. See note at li. i. iii. 

Wheatley gives a curious coincidence from Willis's 
Current Notes, May 1856, p. 44: "In the muster-roll of 
artillerymen serving under Humphrey Fitz-Allan, Earl of 
Arundel, at the siege of St. Laurens des Mortier, dated 
Nov. II, 1435, appear the names of R. Bardoulff and 
Will Pistail." This is a pair of foreigners. Bardolph (see 
next paragraph) is an old German name, and the other 
is probably French. Shakespeare may have taken his 
name Pistol from Soliman and Perseda, with a slight and 
suitable alteration from " Piston " to " Pistol." The play 
was very popular, on account of the character " Basilisco, 
a vainglorious knight," who is mentioned by Shakespeare 
in King John, and by Nashe : " Such a vaine Basilisco, 
and Captaine Crackstone," Have with you to Saffron 
Walden (Grosart, iii. 158), 1596. Nashe's "Crackstone" 
is his variant of Piston. Nashe's passage goes on with the 
words " swarmeth in vile Canniball words," not a bad re- 
minder of Pistol (^ Henry IV. il. iv. 180). Nashe is of 
course referring to his enemy Gabriel Harvey. Soliman 
and Perseda was entered at Stationers' Hall, 1592, but 
probably written several years earlier. Nashe's remark 
implies that Piston was a more martial character on the 
stage than the play as we have it (Haz. Dods. v.) shows 
him. He uses very few stage terms, but he carries " high 
men and low men." He is more a fool than a braggart. 
Basilisco is the more thrasonical of the two. Johnson gives 
Pistol the credit of being perhaps " the model of all the 



p 



INTRODUCTION Ixvii 

bullies that have yet appeared upon the English stage." 
For Pistol's future relationship to Mrs. Quickly, see my 
remarks above on that character. Pistol's legitimate dis- 
appearance from the play is dealt with in the Caius-Evans 
plot. 

Bardolph has the distinction of being the only character 
in all three historical plays, and also in Merry Wives. 
Mrs. Quickly has a similar position, but it is spurious. 
Bardolph is Falstafif's oldest companion since the days of 
the Boar's Head. There is somewhat to be said in favour 
of Bardolph, although he was executed for " stealing a pix " 
— even that was perhaps a record offence. We have this 
on Pistol's authority, and " when Pistol lies . . ." the results 
are unspeakable. In the Merry Wives ^ when Bardolph is 
dismissed, he shows himself above the rest by seeking an 
honest employment. In Henry F., he defies Pistol, the 
coward, and draws upon him. And in 2 Henry IV, we are 
given to understand that the prince took his part against the 
Lord Chief Justice upon a memorable occasion. But what 
attracts one to him is not merely the longevity of his stage 
career, but his loyalty to Falstaff. When he hears that 
" Falstaff he is dead," Bardolph says, " Would I were with 
him, whersome'er he is, either in heaven or in hell." He 
buries all his shortcomings with this sentiment. 

When Slender accuses Falstaff's " cony-catching 
rascals — Bardolph, Nym, and Pistol " — of picking his 
pocket (l. i. 128), Bardolph's name is omitted in the 
Quarto text. He seems to have had only a secondary 
part in the transaction. Bardolph, moreover, has nothing 
to do with the letters, or the revenge. 

Bardolph had been thirty-two years in Falstaff's service 



Ixviii INTRODtrCTIOlSf 

in 1 Henry IV, In 2 Henry IV. he is a corporal, and 
receives courtesy from Shallow. In Henry V. he rises 
higher still and falls altogether. His red nose appears in 
all the plays. 

Bardolph has no knowledge of any of the stratagems 
around him. When he ushers in " Brook " to Falstaff, he 
doesn't know it is Ford or any one in disguise. He is true 
to his old master. And when the horse-stealing takes 
place, Bardolph is not in that business — he is true to the 
Host, his master. Falstaff bought Bardolph in Paul's, and 
he made a good purchase. Halliwell says, " George 
Bardolphe and William Fluellen were fellow-townsmen of 
Shakespeare's at Stratford." (Note at Henry V. II. i., 
Clar. Press.) So the name was familiar. 

Corporal Nym is introduced to us first in the Merry 
Wives. From his military title we may suppose he was 
picked up by Falstaff in the Yorkshire campaign of 
'2 Henry IV.y where, however, he is not mentioned. He 
reappears in Henry V., where his purport is still the same 
— mockery of the fashionable and absurd use of the word 
"humour." Several of his minor characteristics are 
attended to in my notes. But his mystical remarks are 
not always capable of interpretation. " The anchor is deep " 
remains unsolved. As examples of the " idiosyncrasies of 
the commentator-mind," perhaps I may be pardoned if I 
mention a few of the more far-fetched suggestions that 
occurred to me. Anchor means " hermit," with a jocular 
allusion to " Sir John," a clergyman. " The deep old 
rascal ! " The word was in use at this time. See note, 
where I have allowed this idea to stand. Anchor is a 
reference to Drayton's river Anker, mentioned very 



INTRODUCTION Ixix 

strikingly in his Idea before this play ; by the shores of 
which his mistress dwelt. The Anker figures again in 
Drayton's Polyolbion. Brown (of Tavistock) refers to 
Drayton as the poet by the Anker in Britannia's Pastorals, 
Shakespeare was indebted to Drayton in one or two of his 
sonnets. Anchor is suitable to Falstaff, typified as a sea 
of fat, into whom this anchor has sunk deeply. Falstafif 
is a sea on his own showing, when he drops a plummet 
into himself in the last scene. Falstafif in 1 Henry IV. 
I. ii. is a moon's man, governed, as the sea is, by the moon. 
Nym meant something. Johnson thought we should read 
" author." And anchor was a Dutch word {vide Nares) 
signifying a drinking vessel. 

Justice Shallow has been dealt with to some extent 
already in the " Lucy " tradition (2). When Falstaff 
visited Shallow in Gloucestershire, in 2 Henry IV. V. iii., 
it was for the purpose of borrowing a thousand pounds 
from him (iv. iv.). At the end of that play Shallow would 
have been glad to get five hundred for it. In Merry Wives 
he looks upon it, we may assume, as a bad debt for the 
present, since he says nothing about it ; or he may have 
been paid, and that may account for Falstaff 's poverty. 
When did the deer-stealing episode occur? Some time, 
we can suppose (it is all supposition), after Falstafif's 
banishment, when, perhaps, he endeavoured to obtain a 
little more assistance from the Justice, and failing in that, 
poached his venison, for which the injured man pursues 
him down to Windsor. 

Justice Shallow is wholly uninteresting in Merry Wives, 
except in so far as he belongs to tradition, and is one of 
the very few demonstrable personal allusions or vehicles 



Ixx INTRODUCTION 

for allusions in Shakespeare. He is of interest, of course, 
because he is the Shallow of ^ Henry IV,, where he is a 
more prominent character. He refers to his former self in 
Merry Wives in three places (i. i. 40 ; II. iii. 46 ; and II. i. 
231), where he boasts of his old long-sword prowess. Fal- 
stafif never draws him out in Merry Wives, as he did so admir- 
ably in the previous play ; they are now on very different 
terms. We have merely a vain garrulous old man, boastful 
of his long pedigree and little brief authority. He fills a 
space in the plot in a purely unnecessary episode with 
Falstaff, which is introduced for a purpose, and he serves as 
a prop and an introduction for Slender, otherwise he would 
hardly be missed. In a note at II. iii. 46 I have quoted an 
interesting parallel to Shallow's " skip like rats." 

(9) The Merry Wives is written entirely, it may be 
said, in prose. We may add this, perhaps, to the rest of 
the evidence in favour of a rapid production, since even 
Shakespeare himself would probably need more leisure for 
a higher class of effusion. Taking a brief look over the 
characters, it appears at once that poetry, if it were there, 
should centre upon Fenton and Anne Page. The other 
characters are fitter for prose. Fenton and Anne are, 
however, kept in the background, for the purpose of the 
play is merriment — rollicking, riotous mirth — gear that was 
gotten for a holiday, not poetry. There is nothing serious 
in the play. But there is a beautiful picture of country 
life, and a delineation of simple, everyday, unsophisticated 
people, full-blooded and up to anything in the nature of 
fun that make this play a treasured possession, for which 
we could better afford to part with, perhaps, half of the 
author's other works, admittedly superior though several 



INTRODUCTION Ixxi 

of those may be. This may be due to the nature of the 
play, one of action, not of thought, and intelligible to the 
most elementary capacity. Probably it is the earliest to be 
appreciated by most people, omitting those of a senti- 
mental turn of mind. At the first reading few plays would 
be harder to lay down unfinished. 

The incidents, though absurdly impossible when calmly 
considered, are so skilfully contrived and fitted into one 
another that the mind assimilates them at once. No 
doubt there is some overstepping the bounds of propriety 
and decorum, but it is done so plainly in the light of day 
and with so convincingly a healthy moral tone that every 
one must feel the better for the contemplation of it. We 
have indeed, in review, all the good things a townsman 
longs for — coursing, hawking, and shooting, venison and 
sack, and a posset soon at night. Dinner and supper, 
morning and afternoon, to-day and to-morrow are all 
mixed up, and junketings, feastings, and hospitality 
thrown in ; pretty country lasses — Alice Shortcake (how 
well she made it !) and Anne Page — and hospitable homes, 
all in a gallimaufry, everything else set aside, to piece 
together these stirring events amongst the chief people of 
a consequential county town. 

The main plot is the punishment and exposure of 
Falstaff. Side by side with that, but of secondary interest, 
is the wooing and winning of Anne Page. The two are 
interwoven in the ordinary way by the personages interested 
in the one being closely associated with or related to the 
main parties in the other. Mrs. Ford and Mrs. Page, for 
the purposes of the plot, may be regarded as one character. 
They form the connecting bond between the two tales, by 



Ixxii INTRODUCTION 

means of the husband of the one and the daughter of the 
other. 

But besides these main plots there are subsidiary ones, 
most deftly interwoven, so deftly indeed that they are 
easily lost sight of, and unfortunately nearly lost sight of, 
whether through purposed carelessness or accidental 
omission, by the text as we have it. The motive power 
of the Falstafif plot is of course the revenge of Pistol and 
Nym. That is made clear at once. But there is also the 
revenge of Evans and Caius upon the Host. Nothing 
can be clearer than that they come in, one after the other, 
to rejoice and triumph over the Host in his trouble when 
his horses are stolen, trouble which they glory in as their 
own work. Evans tells him so in his " vlouting-stogs." 
For this animosity the cause is to be found at III. i., where 
the two duellists are fooled by the Host. They make 
friends there, and resolve to have vengeance on this same 
scurvy Host. They go out together. There is an interval 
for Mistress Page and Robin. They reappear then with 
Page and Shallow and Slender and the Host, and they are 
captured by Ford " to see this monster." From that time 
they cannot be alone. But in the interval their plot has 
been formed, for they seize a chance on leaving the stage, 
after they have been through the basket scene with Ford, 
to have a few words. " Dat is good," says Caius. " A 
lousy knave to have his gibes," says the other (end of 
III. iii.). Who else is absent from this scene? Only Nym 
and Pistol. Bardolph is at the Garter we know, because 
he attends to Falstaff, with sack, immediately after his 
sousing in the Thames. So that the plot was certainly 
laid with Pistol and Nym. Those two had their reason. 



INTRODUCTION Ixxiii 

At the beginning of I. iii. it is the Host who decides 
Falstaff upon the discharge of Pistol and Nym. And then 
we see how Bardolph is out of it, the Host wishes to keep 
him, and Falstaff asks him to do so. Bardolph has no 
complaint against either Host or Sir John, and is free from 
both plots. Pistol and Nym are united from this forward. 
They are coach-fellows. They both proceed at once to 
abuse Bardolph. Their wrath with Falstaff is confirmed 
as soon as their dismissal is confirmed. Their punctilios 
about the letters would likely have been easily gilded over. 
But Falstaff gives them no chance. Note here that " Exit 
Bardolph " should certainly come after Pistol's " O base 
Hungarian wight " speech, as it does in some but not in 
all (Wheatley, Steevens) editions. Bardolph is meant to 
hear that. The league between those three is dissolved. 
" Exit Bardolph " might even be placed after Nym's speech. 
But Pistol and Nym are as one man in this connection. 
Pistol's disappearance has already been noticed in the 
Quickly connection. There is another person mixed up 
with this plot. We are told there were three German 
cheats. Who is the third ? Caius' servant, Jack Rugby. 
He is with his master, and sees the whole scene where his 
master is made a fool of by the Host. Caius calls Rugby's 
attention to it. When Evans and Caius leave, Rugby is 
with them. They arrange with Nym and Pistol, and when 
they all reappear Rugby is there too. Presently Caius 
says, " Go home, John Rugby." That is Rugby's cue and 
opportunity arranged for him to enact the robbery-joke. Of 
Rugby, Pistol, and Nym we hear no more in the play. 
Those three and Bardolph are exempt from further acting, 
and thus four free actors are left to personate the fairies in 



Ixxiv INTRODUCTION 

the last scene. This may have been a welcome practical 
consideration. Now for the issue. But let it first be 
premised that it is Evans who forms the plot — Evans the 
Welshman. It is he who says, " let us knog our brains 
together," and who reminds Caius, " remembrance to- 
morrow on the lousy knave." Caius assists him with his 
knowledge of the Court events and with the loan of Jack 
Rugby. It is Evans who discloses most of our information 
about the robbery, though it is Caius who knows there is 
no Duke at Court. This is consistent, for Caius has told 
the Host at the end of the Second Act, " I shall pro- 
cure-a you de good guest, de earl, de knight, de lords," etc. 
I have not seen any analysis of this horse-stealing plot 
anywhere, worked out with any degree of care ; neither 
in the preliminary matter already dealt with, nor in the 
more interesting part to come. The early commentators 
leave it untouched, and I am not sure if the later ones 
understand what the text tells us. 

The Host has received orders from the Court at 
Windsor to reserve his inn for a German Duke and his 
retinue, who are daily expected. This accounts for his 
alacrity in agreeing with the Host turning away his 
followers : " Discard, bully Hercules ; cashier, let them 
wag." He wants more room. Emperors, Kaisers, and 
Pheezars are suggested to him. He is in glory ; and when 
Page says, " there is either liquor in his pate, or money in 
his purse," he is full of this good news. He has turned 
away from his doors, and perhaps from the inn, other 
guests, because his rooms are engaged. Then as now, 
distinguished visitors, although invited to Court, are allotted 
rooms at the best hotel. The Host has expected these 



INTRODUCTION Ixxv 

foreigners for a week, by command from the Court. But he 
hasn't seen them yet. He is beginning to be worried 
about it. Then Bardolph comes with word that the Duke 
has arrived, and that three of his horses are needed. See 
how full he is of business when he meets Simple ! " brief, 
short, quick, snap." Bardolph goes with the three supposed 
Germans to look after his master's horses. One of them 
takes him up behind, probably Rugby, whom he may not 
have ever seen. He gets no further than Slough (if we 
accept the pun) from Windsor, when they manage to throw 
him off and gallop away. Mere cozenage ! Bardolph is 
as much deceived as his master. 

Then the two arch conspirators come in and triumph. 
From the Folio (our text) we learn that the whole town 
knew the Duke was coming, and that the Host has been 
making great preparations. But no Duke has come. Three 
cheating Germans have, however, traded on the circum- 
stance, and cozened all the hosts of Reading, Maidenhead, 
and Colebrooke of horses and money. 

From the Quarto we have another story, the German 
Duke has come to Court, a sort of " cosen garmombles " 
(the three " cosen garmombles " is adapted to suit the three 
gentlemen), who has cozened all the hosts of Brentford, 
Reading, and Maidenhead. 

I imagine the Folio was softened down later, because 
the Quarto was too plain-spoken. The Folio disowns the 
Duke's complicity, but leaves it to be supposed the cheat 
was done by those who assumed to be his servants, for 
there can hardly be a question the allusion is to the visit of 
Count Mumpellgart. 

When James I. came to the throne the German Duke 



Ixxvi INTRODUCTION 

immediately applied afresh for his Garter, and got it. This 
placed him on a different footing with regard to the English 
Court, and no doubt it was thought expedient to erase or 
conceal this personal matter. Moreover, there is an im- 
portant sentence added to the explicit Quarto statement, 
as though to contradict it. The Host's speech containing 
" Germans are honest men " is not in the Quarto. 

A sketch of the Duke's visit has been given above (4). 
But one point must be referred to here — the publicity of 
his business with the English Court. In August 1597 
he sent the Queen, as a sop, a present of a handsome 
chandelier to adorn her bedroom, having on the previous 
May written complimentary letters to her and to several 
of her ministers (Rye, Introduction, p. Ixxi) on the subject 
of the coveted order. So that just before this play was 
produced, people were talking of him afresh, and probably 
expecting another visit. All the incidents would be recalled 
at Windsor. 

Another consideration must not be lost sight of. The 
Host's horses are stolen, and here note, by the way, what 
a transformation that effects in him. If Falstaff is 
" dejected " by his overthrow, the Host is completely over- 
whelmed. All his hopes have vanished, and he will give 
over all. He, the influential man of Windsor, is made a 
fool of and cozened by these wretched foreigners in the 
eyes of every one, and, what is worse, has suffered serious 
loss. What has he done to merit such punishment? That 
is a part of the plot that remains in abeyance. For some 
very good reason he is to be humiliated. Ford and 
Falstaff are plain sailing, but there is more in the Host's 
disgrace than meets the eye. 



INTRODUCTION Ixxvii 

Caius and Evans are the machinery for this purpose, 
and also whereby to weave in this telling reference to 
subjects of local interest. It is a free and easy episode this 
practical joke. A foreigner was no matter. They were 
usually represented on the insular stage, at least in comedy, 
as more or less capable of anything. But the Welshman ? 
It is a sad fact that that old Taffy slander was in full swing 
at this time, and the suggestion would have been popular 
and readily accepted. Not seriously, but a jocular sort 
of national characteristic. Andrew Borde says {Boke of 
Knowledge^ 1542): " Many of them [Welshmen] be light- 
fingered and love a purse." Middleton alludes to it in 
Black Book (Bullen's Middleton, viii. 37), 1604: "Your 
Welsh hue and cry . . . the only net to catch thieves." 
And Beaumont and Fletcher, Thiery and Theodoret, v. {ante 
1 6 1 6) : " Did you doubt we could steal . . . Did not I 
speak Welsh ? " It was a recognised sarcasm. It is 
comforting to remember that the Host was not out of 
pocket. Fenton makes that good. But there is no 
suggestion that the real plotters make restitution. In any 
case the Host lost what was probably dearer to him than 
horses or money — his reputation for business acuteness. 
Caius and Evans may arrange with Fenton, but horses in 
the hands of Pistol and Nym would be in a parlous state. 

This disposes of the minor plot of Merry Wives, but I 
have still to say a little more about mine Host. Halliwell 
printed a document in his Folio Shakespeare, showing that 
in I 561 the Host of the Garter was Richard Gallis. He 
was three times Mayor of Windsor, and in 1562 he was 
returned as M.P. for the town. He is described on his 
monument in the parish church as " learned." Halliwell 



Ixxviii INTRODUCTION 

assumes that this is the actual person presented to us, and 
that his leading position and the high estimation in which 
he was held account for the familiar terms he is on with 
his guests. This view of the Host's position and the 
references to Halliwell are given in Wheatley's edition of 
Merry Wives. Richard Gallis, the Mayor, died in the 
sixty-ninth year of his age in 1574 (Tighe and Davis, 
Annals of Windsor ^ i. p. 625, note). 

I do not think it is likely Shakespeare would have 
taken such liberties with a respectable citizen, and one 
apparently in no way worthy of being held up to ridicule 
in the manner this mad Host undoubtedly is. If, however, 
the Richard Gallis referred to in my note at IV. ii. 180 
succeeded him, was his son in fact, he would be a very 
suitable butt. I refer to the man who wrote the " little 
pamphlet of the acts and hanging of foure witches in 
1579," R. Scot's Discoverie of Witchcraft (p. 39, reprint), 
1584. He was "a mad man who hath written according 
to his frantike humour," this " Richard Gallis, a Windsor 
man " (p. 13). He would be a fair mark, and moreover 
Shakespeare was undoubtedly indebted to Reginald Scot's 
work in this play in more places than one. Unfortunately 
the " little pamphlet " is lost. Mine Host gives me the 
impression of being a skit upon one who merited a certain 
amount of sarcasm and ridicule. The character was 
probably very popular. In the shortened Quarto, as I 
have already remarked, his speeches are treated with 
greater respect than those of any other character. He 
was copied in that popular play. The Merry Devil of 
Edmonton^ and Dekker's Tucca in Satiromastix, 1602, has 
traces of him. I should suppose that, next to Falstafif, 



INTRODUCTION Ixxix 

he took the public fancy. Nevertheless he is such 
an unnatural, impossible sort of creation that it seems 
likely he was built upon some living counterpart or 
oddity. 

(lo) No less than six stories of considerable length, 
mostly, if not all, of Italian origin, have been reprinted 
in the Shakespeare Library (2nd ed., 1875, Part I. vol. 
iii.) in connection with this play. They are all concerned, 
as might be foretold, with love, jealous husbands, and the 
concealment of lovers. 

One of these, " The Fishwife's Tale of Brainford," from 
Westward for S melts ^ 1620, was advanced by Malone, 
apparently for no other reason than that it was pitched at 
Windsor. It need be no further referred to, since it is of 
too late a date. 

Another, " The Story of Lucius and Camillus," is re- 
printed from The Fortunate^ the Deceived^ and the Unfortunate 
Lovers y 1632. A lover is concealed "in a heap of linen 
which was but half dry." The tale has hardly any other 
similarity with ours, and is also of too late a date to be of 
any interest. Another version of this story, under the 
name of " The Story of Bucciuolo and Pietro Paolo," from 
// Pecorone di Ser Giovanni Fiorentino^ 1 640, is also given. 

" The Story of Nerisio of Portugal," from Straparola's 
Le tredici piacevoli nottiy 1569 (i. 129), has similarities. 
The lover is concealed amongst clothes, looked for by the 
husband, and afterwards tells his adventures to a friend, 
who is, unknown to him, the husband himself 

There is also another tale from Te tredici of Straparola, 
" The Story of Filenio," which contains resemblances, 
" chiefly consisting in the plurality of lovers, and the 



Ixxx INTRODUCTION 

ladies communicating to each other the addresses of the 
same gallant." 

The last tale to be mentioned is also mainly from 
Straparola. It was printed at an early date in Tarlton's 
Newes out of Purgatorie, 1590, as "The Tale of the two 
Lovers of Pisa." It is not worth reprinting in full, and 
may be found also in Steevens' Shakespeare. The wording 
is similar in some places to that of Merry Wives. 

Lionel tells Mutio, a doctor of laws, how he loves a 
beautiful young woman wedded to an old man. Mutio is 
a stranger to Lionel, and is the old husband. " Trie her 
man, quoth hee, faint heart never woone faire Lady." 
Margaretta makes an appointment with Lionel and he, 
" as joyfuU a man as might be," tells Mutio " that I hope 
to make the old pesant her Husband looke broad headded 
by a paire of brow antlers." " The olde doctor askte when 
should be the time : mary quoth Lionello tomorrow at foure 
of the clocke in the afternoone, we '11 dub the olde Squire 
knight of the forked order." The meeting takes place, 
" but scarse had they kist ere the Maide cried out to her 
Mistresse that her Maister was at the doore. . . . Margarett 
for a shifte chopt Lyonello into a great driefatte full of 
Feathers. . . . Mutio called for the keyes of his Chambers 
and looked in everye place ... he coulde not finde him." 
Lyonello tells all this to Mutio, and, " upon Thursday next 
the old Churle suppeth with a patient of his a mile out of 
Pisa. ... I feare not but to quitte him for all." This 
meeting also takes place, and Mutio again arrives. The 
lover is concealed " between two seelings of a plauncher." 
Mutio " lockt in all the doores, and began to search every 
chamber, every hole, every chest, every tub, the very well : 



INTRODUCTION Ixxxi 

he stabd every featherbed through, and made havocke, like 
a mad man . . . then was Lionello conveighed away." A 
third meeting is arranged, Mutio, as before, having been 
made privy to everything. It takes place. " Alas, alas, 
mistresse, cried the maid, heer is my maister, & i oo men 
with him with bils and staves : we are betraid, quoth Lionel, 
and I am but a dead man " (iv. ii. 44). This time he is 
hidden in a chest of valuable papers, and Margaret sets fire 
to the house. In order to save " his obligations and 
statutes " in the chest, Mutio bade two of his men see it 
safe, and watched his house burning. Subsequently Lionel 
discovers who Mutio is, and tells his friends all those stories 
were inventions, for he (Mutio) " was generally known to 
bee a jealous fool : therefore with these tales I brought 
him into this [fool's] paradice." This jest so plagued Mutio 
that he shortly after died, and . . . ** for that they two 
were the death of the old man, now are they plagued in 
purgatory, and he whips them with Nettles." 

It can easily be seen that Falstaff's adventures are 
founded upon this tale. The resemblance between the 
incidents, and the situation which gives rise to them, is 
too close to be merely accidental. Tarlton, the famous 
actor and comedian, died in 1588. His popularity was 
unbounded, and hardly a name of the time lived longer in 
people's memories, or was oftener mentioned. Probably 
Shakespeare met him in his earliest time in London. 

(11) There are not many works, dramatic or otherwise, 
preceding the Merry Wives of Windsor which can lay 
claim to having been made use of therein by Shakespeare, 
or which even seem to be referred to, so far as we can find 
out, in the most accidental way. I have noticed these 

/ 



I 



Ixxxii INTRODUCTION 

allusions, or coincidences, as they occur, in the play. But 
it may be interesting to call attention to them here in a 
group. Tarlton's Newes out of Purgatorie (i 590) has just 
been mentioned. So also has Reginald Scot's Discoverie 
of Witchcraft (i 584). For the last work, see " Amaimon " 
and " Barbason," II. ii. 312, and "divinity in odd num- 
bers," V. i. 4 (note) ; " Fairies, black, grey, green, and 
white," V. V. 41. And less prominently at I. iii. 61 ; 
V. V. 144. 

The old anti-Spaniard and pre-Armada play. Three 
Lords and Three Ladies of London^ may have supplied the 
terms " cavaliero," II. i. 197, and " Castalion," II. iii. 34. 
They were hardly in use earlier than the date of writing 
that play (1587-88). 

The character of the "Catalans," II. i. 145, was prob- 
ably derived from W. Watreman's Fardle of Facions^ 1555, 
which is the earliest account of them (by that name) I have 
met with. 

For the general idea of satirising the use of the word 
" humour," or rather the abuse of it, Ben Jonson's Every 
Man in his Humour must be referred to. See note at 
I. i. 1 34. There are many parallel passages, but none 
very striking, cited in my notes from Jonson's play. 
They are rather to be regarded as the language of the 
time than allusions. Parallelism may be traced between 
Ford and Kitely, and between Slender and " Master 
Stephen, the country gull." But I am not inclined to 
lay much stress upon it. The duelling terms, " stoccado," 
etc., are also common to both plays, but are found 
earlier. 

Wheatley says : " There seems to be no reason for 



INTRODUCTION Ixxxiii 

doubting that the play was written to Elizabeth's order, 
and under these circumstances Shakespeare must have set 
to work to fulfil the command by emulating the Every Man 
in his Humour^ in which he had played a part." That 
seems to me to go too far, but the last words give us the 
clue to the cause of several trifling similarities. We are 
not positive which play preceded the other. I imagine 
they were almost simultaneous. The passages, " now 
summer is coming on " in Every Man, I. ii. (8<^), and 
"tomorrow being St. Mark's day," give April 25 for its 
date. There is hardly anything in Merry Wives one could 
call indebtedness to Every Man. 

Plays of about the date oi Merry Wives, ox immediately 
succeeding it, often have echoes of it. I must refer to my 
notes for the examples. Perhaps the most unmistakable 
examples are in Porter's Two Angry Women of Abingdon 
(at I. iv. 144; II. i. 2 3 I , etc.) ; Merry Devil of Edmonton (at 
I. iii. 23; III. i. 57, etc.); Wilkins' Miseries of Enforced 
Marriage (at I. iii. 2, etc.) ; and Look About You, a capital 
play in Haz. Dods. (vol. vii.). Furnivall's Centurie of 
Prayse refers to Heywood's Fair Maid of the Exchange, 
1 607, where " the plot of Flower and his wife each prom- 
ising their daughter to a different man while a third gets 
her, is more or less from Merry Wives!' See note at 
V. V. 3. And Beaumont and Fletcher's Mons. Thomas 
(at II. ii. 6), as well as Massinger's Renegado (at IV. ii. 79), 
must be mentioned. These united references are very 
interesting as showing the immediate popularity attained 
by the play. The Merry Devil of Edmonton, " your dear 
delight, the Devil of Edmonton," as Jonson calls it, owes 
much to the Merry Wives, I intended to have drawn a 



Ixxxiv INTRODUCTION 

rigorous comparison, but any reader can do it for himself, 
and I was somewhat deterred by a fact I have not seen 
anywhere noticed. It is capable of proof, from Jonson's 
Staple of NeiuSy that the text we have is not in all 
respects that of the play in Jonson's time. The old 
play followed the prose tract (or agreed with the prose 
tract, which may have followed it) more closely than the 
text we have does. The date of its appearance was about 
1600. 

(12) I will now quote briefly the opinions of a few 
eminent critics upon this play. And first is Dryden. 
When comparing the French and English drama, he says : 
" I could produce even in Shakespeare's and Fletcher's 
works, some plays which are almost exactly formed \i.e, 
with regard to the ' unities ' and classical models] as the 
Merry Wives of Windsor and the Scornful Lady ; but 
because (generally speaking) Shakespeare, who writ first, 
did not perfectly observe the Laws of Comedy, and Fletcher, 
who came nearer to perfection, yet through carelessness 
made many faults ; I will take the pattern of a perfect play 
from Ben Jonson. . . . The Silent Woman',' Dryden, 
Essay on Dramatick Poesie, 1668. 

Pepys' disparaging opinions refer rather to the actors 
than the play. They need only be referred to. A much 
more weighty critic is Dr. Jonson. After dealing with the 
tradition preserved by Rowe, that it was written at the 
command of Queen Elizabeth, he says : " No task is harder 
than that of writing to the ideas of another. Shakespeare 
knew what the queen, if the story be true, seems not to 
have known, that by any real passion of tenderness, the 
selfish craft, the careless jollity, and the lazy luxury of 



INTRODUCTION Ixxxv 

Falstaff must have suffered so much abatement, that little 
of his former cast would have remained. Falstaff could 
not love, but by ceasing to be Falstaff. He could only- 
counterfeit love, and his professions could be prompted, not 
by the hope of pleasure, but of money. . . . This comedy 
is remarkable for the variety and number of the personages, 
who exhibit more characters appropriated and discriminated, 
than perhaps can be found in any other play. . . . The 
conduct of this drama is deficient ; the action begins and 
ends often, before the conclusion, and the different parts 
might change places without inconvenience ; but its general 
power, that power by which all works of genius shall finally 
be tried, is such, that perhaps it never yet had reader or 
spectator who did not think it too soon at the end," Jonson 
in Steevens' Shakespeare, iii. 501, 502, 1793. The passages 
omitted refer to Falstaff's deterioration and the use of pro- 
vincial language, and are unimportant. With regard to the 
" variety and number of personages," Ben Jonson's Bartholo- 
mew Fair forges easily ahead. 

Gervinus has a very good analysis of the play, no doubt 
finding motives rather too abundantly, as is his wont. He 
says at the end : " Great emphasis is laid throughout on 
honest knavery in contrast to Falstaff's knavery. A wife, 
say the two women, may be merry and yet honest too. . . . 
That the tricks played upon Falstaff were not only ' ad- 
mirable pleasures ' but * honest knaveries,' can alone move 
the plain, true, timid, pious pastor to take pleasure in them. 
This simple but honest knavery celebrates its victory 
throughout over cunning and presumption. The crafty 
self-loving dig the pit and fall into it themselves. . . . 
These words may be regarded as the soul of the play. . . . 



Ixxxvi INTRODUCTION 

An egotist like Falstaff can suffer no severer defeat than 
from the honesty in which he does not believe, and from 
the ignorance which he does not esteem," Shakespeare Com- 
mentaries , 1875. I don't find much superfluous piety in 
the schoolmaster-parson. 

Hazlitt says : " The Welsh parson, Sir Hugh Evans, is 
an excellent character in all respects. He is as respectable 
as he is laughable, . . . Nym, Bardolph, and Pistol are but 
the shadows of what they were ; and Justice Shallow him- 
self has little of his consequence left. But his cousin. 
Slender, makes up for this deficiency. He is a very potent 
piece of imbecility. In him the pretensions of the worthy 
Gloucester family are well kept up, and immortalised. He 
and his friend Sackerson, and his book of songs and his 
love of Anne Page and his having nothing to say to her 
can never be forgotten. It is the only first-rate character 
in the play ; but it is in that class. Shakespeare is the only 
writer who was as great in describing weakness as strength," 
Characters of Shakespeare's Plays, ed. 1869 (by William 
Hazlitt, 1st ed., 18 17). 

Dowden says : " The Merry Wives of Windsor is a 
play written expressly for the barbarian aristocrats, with 
their hatred of ideas, their insensibility to beauty, their hard 
efficient manners, and their demand for impropriety. The 
good folk of London liked to see a prince or a duke, and 
they liked to see him made gracious and generous. These 
royal and noble persons at Windsor wished to see the 
interior life of country gentlemen of the middle class. . . . 
The comedy of hearing a French physician and a Welsh 
parson speak broken English was appreciated by these 
spectators . . . Shakspeare did not make a grievance of 



INTRODUCTION Ixxxvii 

his task. . . . But Falstaff he was not prepared to recall 
. . . He dressed up a fat rogue ... in Falstaff's clothes 
. . . he made it impossible for the most laborious nine- 
teenth century critic to patch on the Merry Wives to 
Henry IV." Shakespeare^ His Mind and Art^ p. 370, 

1875. 

Dowden quotes from Hartley Coleridge : " That Queen 
Bess should have desired to see Falstaff making love proves 
her to have been, as she was, a gross-minded old baggage. 
Shakespeare has evaded the difficulty with great skill. But 
the Falstaff of the Merry Wives is not the Falstaff of 
Henry the Fourth. It is a big-bellied impostor. . . . Ford's 
jealousy is of too serious a complexion for the rest of the 
play. The merry wives are a delightful pair. . . . And 
sweet Anne Page, she is a pretty little creature," etc.. 
Essays and Marginalia^ vol. ii. pp. 133, 134. Dowden 
quotes this in support of the view that Falstaff cannot be 
the same person in the two plays or series of plays. In his 
Shakespeare Primer, however, he somewhat modifies this 
opinion. 

My notes I leave to speak for themselves. The 
illustrations in them are almost entirely such as I have 
come across in my own study, and where possible they are 
of a date prior to that of Merry Wives. The New English 
Dictionary has been constantly referred to for necessary 
help and guidance. Thanks to its final decisions, in several 
cases, much futile work of the early commentators can be 
safely set aside. Some of my illustrations and explana- 
tions may be far-fetched, and I would plead for them that 
they be regarded as tentative. Many are undoubtedly 
correct. 




Ixxxviii INTRODUCTION 

My thanks are due to Dr. Dowden and Mr. Craig 
for valuable advice. The latter has kindly helped me 
in the laborious task of correcting the proofs, enab- 
ling me to remedy errors which might have escaped 
notice. 



THE MERRY WIVES OF WINDSOR 



DRAMATIS PERSONAL^ 

Sir John Falstaff. 
Fenton, a Gentleman. 
Shallow, a Country Justice. 
Slender, Cousin to Shallow. 

p ' \ two Gentlemen dwelling at Windsor. 

William Page, a Boy^ Son to Page. 

Sir Hugh Evans, a Welsh Parson.'^ 

Doctor Caius, a French Physician. 

Host of the Garter Inn. 

Bardolph,"! 

Pistol, \ Followers of Falstaff .^ 

Nym, J 

Robin, Page to Falstaff. 

Simple, Servant to Slender. 

Rugby, Servant to Doctor Caius. 

Mistress Ford. 

Mistress Page. 

Anne Page, her Daughter. 

Mistress Quickly, Servant to Doctor Caius. 

Servants to Page, Ford, etc. 

Scene : Windsor, and the Neighbourhood. 

^ Not in Qq, Ff. Inserted by Rowe. 

2 Sir Hugh Evans, a Welsh Parson] Rowe, Steevens (Welch) ei seq, ; Syr 
Hugh the Welch knight Q i (a mistake). 

^ Followers] Rowe, Steevens, Craig, Sharpers Globe. 



THE MERRY WIVES OF WINDSOR 



ACT I 



SCENE I. — Windsor. Before Page's House. 



Enter JUSTICE SHALLOW, SLENDER, and SiR HUGH EVANS. 

Shal. Sir Hugh, persuade me not; I will make a 
Star-chamber matter of it : if he were twenty- 
Sir John Falstaffs, he shall not abuse Robert 
Shallow, esquire. 



I. Sir Hugh] called "the Welch 
knight " by an error on the title-page of 
Q, 1602. "Sir" was the usual trans- 
lation of domimis, the academical title 
of one who had taken his degree as 
bachelor in the University. Hence it 
was commonly applied to clergymen, as 
in As You Like It, Twelfth Night, etc. 
In Ben Jonson's Tale of a Tub " Canon 
Hugh, Vicar of Pancras," is indiscrim- 
inately addressed as * ' Sir " or * ' Canon " 
in the play. " Sir John" was a com- 
mon nickname for a priest in Queen 
Elizabeth's time. The title "Sir" 
applied to a Bachelor of Arts was in 
use in Trinity College, Dublin, and 
printed over the doors of the rooms 
(prefixed, however, only to the sur- 
name) as recently as 1870-1880. 

I, 2. a Star-chamber matter'] Com- 
pare Shirley: "I'll have you all 
Star-chambered" {A Constant Maid, 
V. 3). And Harington, Met. of Ajax 



(Chiswickrept. 56, 57), 1596: "a bill 
should have been framed against you in 
the Star-chamber upon the statute of 
unlawful assemblies." The name Star 
Chamber was given to a high court of 
justice in the 15th, i6th, and 17th 
centuries. It was abolished by the 
Long Parliament in 1641, and is 
first heard of in the reign of Edward 
III., the "chambre des estoiles" in 
Westminster. At the date of this play 
it exercised almost unlimited jurisdic- 
tion. "The place is called the Star 
Chamber, because the roof thereof is 
decked with the likeness of stars gilt : 
there be plaints heard of riots, routs, 
and other misdemeanours " (Stow's 
Survey of London, 1603). The term 
' ' star chamber " is twice used in Beau- 
mont and Fletcher's plays in a literal 
signification: "lightsome, cool star- 
chamber Open to every wind " (Sea 
Voyage, i. 4) ; and " that bright star- 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act I. 



Slen. In the county of Gloucester, justice of peace and 5 

" Coram." 
ShaL Ay, cousin Slender, and " Custalorum." 
Slen, Ay, and " Rato-lorum " too ; and a gentleman 

born, master parson ; who writes himself " Armi- 

gero," in any bill, warrant, quittance, or obligation, i o 

" Armigero." 
ShaL Ay, that I do ; and have done any time these 

three hundred years. 

8. Rato-lorum\ Ff, Rotulortim Q 3. 12. /] We Steevens (Farmer conj.). 

chamber" {Fair Maid of Inn ^ v. 3), 
where it means a cool, elevated apart- 
ment, and figuratively the firmament. 
These early uses are suggestive with 
regard to the origin of the name. The 
same use occurs in Webster and Dekker. 
For a parallel to "if he were twenty," 
etc., a common expression, see quota- 
tion from Lord Cromzvell in note to 
III. ii. 19, below. 

5, 6. Justice of peace and " Coram "] 
* * Coram " here has nothing to do with 
the Latin preposition coram, as stated 
by Schmidt and various other com- 
mentators. The word is a well-estab- 
lished corruption for quorum, the first 
word of the clause in the Commission 
which named the justices — " quorum 
vos . . . unum esse voiumus." The 
expression in the text is common : 
"and of the collections of the scatter- 
ings, a Justice, Tam Marti quant Mer- 
curic, of Peace and of Coram," Nashe, 
Pierce Pennilesse (Gros. ed., ii. 27), 
1592; "we'll have 'em over to some 
country justice of coram, for we scorn 
to be of the peace," Webster, West- 
ward Ho, v. 3, 1607 ; " pretty main- 
tenance to keep a justice of peace and 
coram," Randolph, Muses' Looking- 
glass, and Massinger, New Way to Pay 
Old Debts, iii. 2, 1633, where it is 
quorum in Gififord's edition. 

7. Ctcstalorum'] A contraction (or 
corruption) of custos rotulorum, keeper 
of the rolls : the chief civil officer of a 



county, who is necessarily a Justice of 
the Peace and of the Quorum for the 
county. See Stanford Dictionary, 
Custos. Slender's Rato-lortwi in the 
following line is a purposed blunder to 
show his ignorance. 

10, II. Armigerol '^ Armigero. 
Valiant in arms, warlike, martial " 
(Baretti's Italian Dictionary). Slender, 
Steevens says, "had seen the Jus- 
tice's attestations, signed — furat coram 
me, Roberto Shallow, Armigero ' ; and 
therefore takes the ablative for the 
nominative case of Armiger.'''' Steevens 
was a man of fertile explanation. The 
first example of Armiger in New Eng. 
Diet, is from Horace Walpole, 1762. 
It occurs, however, in Ben Jonson. 
Hilts calls out to Squire Tub : " Armi- 
ger Tub, Squire Tripoly ! " Tale of a 
Tub, i. I (440^, in Cunningham's 
Gifford's Jonson, vol. ii.), 1633. In J. 
Rider's Bibliotheca Scholastica,\^%^, the 
word is defined : "Esquire, Ar?niger.^* 

12. I do . . . have done'] Steevens 
adopted Farmer's suggestion, reading 
"I" for "we." But "I" refers to 
" who writes himself." We must sup- 
pose "we Shallows" understood before 
"have done." Malone remarks here: 
' * Shakespeare has many expressions 
equally licentious." 

13. three hundred years'] Justice 
Shallow in this play has been identified 
with Sir Thomas Lucy of Charlecote in 
Warwickshire. Halliwell-Phillips states 



SC. I.] 



OF WINDSOR 



Slen. All his successors gone before him hath done 't : 

and all his ancestors that come after him may : 15 
they may give the dozen white luces in their 
coat. 

ShaL It is an old coat 

Evans. The dozen white louses do become an old 

coat well ; it agrees well, passant ; it is a familiar 20 
beast to man, and signifies love. 



14. hatKl have F 3, 4. 

that the Lucy family took that name 
[they were previously Charlecotes] in 
the year 1250, which gives somewhere 
about three hundred years to the date of 
the writing of the play. This family 
assumed the arms of the Barons Lucy 
(of the northern marches); "three 
Luces Argent in a shield gules," 
Camden's Britain, Holland's trans, 
p. 564 (1610). "Avon now runneth 
downe from Warwicke with a fuller 
streame by Charle-cot, the habitation 
of the renowned ancient family of the 
Lucies knights, which place long agoe 
descended hereditarily to them from 
the Charlcots," ibid. pp. 534, 535, 
In Peacham's Compleat Gentleman, 
p. 447 (1661), it is given more ex- 
plicitly : ' ' Lucie, tres lucios pisces, or 
three pikes, quartered by the Earls of 
Northumberland, and the coat of that 
noble gentleman, Sir Thomas Lucy of 
Warwickshire, Knight." 

16. gi've'\ Heraldic : to display as an 
armorial bearing. The term occurs 
again in 1 Henry VL i. v. 29. So in 
The Pinner of Wakefield, attributed to 
R. Greene, 1599: " We are gentlemen. 
George. Why, sir, So may I, sir, al- 
though I give no arms." And Soliman 
and Perseda (Haz. Dods. v. 264), 1592 : 
"In France I took the standard from 
the King, And gave the flower of 
Galha in my crest." 

16, 17. dozen white luces in their 
coat] Luce is the old name for the pike, 
as in Chaucer's Canterbury Tales, 



Prologue: "many a luce in stewe." 
Old P>ench, lt(ce ; Low Latin, lucius. 
"The pike, as he ageth, receiveth 
diverse names, as from a frie to a 
gilthed ... to a pod ... to a jacke 
... to a pickerell ... to a pike, and 
last of all to a luce," Harrison, Descrip- 
tion of England, Bk. ill. ch. iii., 1577. 
The reference is to the coat of arms 
of the Lucy family. See last note. 
Wheatley refers to Dugdale's Warwick- 
shire, 1656, p. 348, for "a representa- 
tion of an early monument in Warwick 
church, to the memory of Thomas, son 
of Sir William Lucy," which has "a 
quartering of the Lucy arms exhibiting 
the dozen white luces." However this 
may be, there is no doubt that the 
proper number was three. 

19-21. louses . . . old coat . . . 
love\ Compare N, Breton, Crossing oj 
Proverbs, ante 1616, "A louse is a 
beggar's companion." With regard to 
a beggar's "love" for these nasty 
vermin, compare Beaumont and 
Fletcher, The Widow, i. i : "As long 
taking leave as a beggar of a fat louse " ; 
and Loyal Subject, i. 3 (Uyce's ed., 
V. 21). Steevens quotes an apt illustra- 
tion here from The Pennilesse Parlia- 
ment, 1608. His passage is not to be 
found in Hindley's reprint of the tract. 

20. passant] The luce in the coat is 
blazoned "haurient" (placed perpen- 
dicularly), which would not suit the 
context. The term includes, perhaps, 
the phrase en passant. Compare Court 



6 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act I. 



Shal. The luce is the fresh fish ; the salt fish is an old 
coat. 

Slen. I may quarter, coz. 

Shal. You may, by marrying. 25 

Evans. It is marring indeed, if he quarter it. 

Shal. Not a whit. 

Evans. Yes, py'r lady ; if he has a quarter of your 
coat, there is but three skirts for yourself, in my 
simple conjectures : but that is all one. If Sir 30 
John Falstafif have committed disparagements 

26. marring\ F i, Q 3 ; marrying F 2, 3, 4. 29. skirts\ shirts Q 3. 



and Times of James /., p. 145 : 
"neither was he willing to talk single, 
but, as en passant^ told stories of a 
certain Theatine, of Verona," Letter of 
Chamberlain, 161 1. In Holland's 
Plinie (1601) these words in "ant" 
often occur, non-heraldically. 

22. fresh fish . . . saltfish'\ Shallow 
seems to mean that an ' * old coat " 
should have a salted fish, not a fresh- 
water fish like the luce. The term 
"salt fish" cannot, I think, mean a 
sea fish. Nevertheless, the sea-pike 
is spoken of very highly by Pliny 
(ix. 17), but " the Pikes that are caught 
in the river be better" (see also xxx. 
2). Many notes have been written 
on this passage, endeavouring to ex- 
tract various senses out of the word 
"salt," but to no purpose. Shallow's 
quibble lies in the word "fresh," 
meaning either fresh water, or not 
salted. He endeavours to extend this 
to "salt." It should be noted that 
"fresh fish " had also the signification of 
" novice," as in Hctiry VII 1. Ii. ii. 86. 
Sir Thomas Lucy was at this time an 
elderly man. He died in 1600, at the 
age of sixty-eight. A similar pun or 
quibble [fletire de lice and " lice") has 
been discovered in Holinshed (Stani- 
hurst's Ireland)^ by Rushton. It is 
quoted by Schmidt and Wheatley. 



25. 26. marrying . . . fnarring] So 
in Airs Well, ii. iii. 315: "A young 
man married is a man that's marred," 
and Sharpham, Cupid's Whirligig, 
Act III. (1607): "to marry a child 
that's to mar a man." 

26. quarter'] Heraldic : "to add (an- 
other's coat) to one's hereditary arms," 
New Efig. Diet. "Quartering" and 
"impaling" are the technical terms for 
the modes of exhibiting the conjoined 
arms of husband and wife. In line 28 
the quibble seems to have nothing more 
in it than a departure from the heraldic 
sense. 

27. Not a whit] Not a bit. Occurs 
in most of the plays, sometimes in form 
"no whit," or "ne'er a whit." In 
Roy's Rede jne and be nott wrothe (Arber, 
p. 188), 1530, a different form occurs: 
"The devil of the M'hit that I can." 
The same word as "wight." 

29. three skirts] There is some al- 
lusion here, perhaps to the wear of the 
period. Skirted coats (not cloaks) had 
hardly come into wear amongst the 
upper classes. A little later Davenant 
says in The Unfortunate Lovers, ii. i : 
"What skirt's in fashion now? the 
jacket way Down to the hams ? Fris. 
No, sir, six in a rank." Possibly " four 
skirts " preceded that fashion as early as 
the date of Merry Wives. 



^C. I.] 



OF WINDSOR 



unto you, I am of the church, and will be glad 
to do my benevolence to make atonements and 
compremises between you. 

Shal. The council shall hear it ; it is a riot. 3 5 

Evans. It is not meet the council hear a riot ; there 
is no fear of Got in a riot : the council, look 
you, shall desire to hear the fear of Got, and 
not to hear a riot ; take your vizaments in that. 

Shal, Ha ! o' my life, if I were young again, the 40 
sword should end it. 

Evans. It is petter that friends is the sword, 
and end it : and there is also another device in 
my prain, which peradventure prings goot dis- 
cretions with it: — there is Anne Page, which 45 
is daughter to Master Thomas Page, which is 
pretty virginity. 

34. compremises\ compromises Pope. 35. heai-l F I, Q 3 ; hear of Y 2, 3, 4. 
39. your'\ F I, Q 3 ; you F 2, 3, 4. 46. Thomas'] George Theobald. 



33, 34. make atonements ... be- 
tween yotc] reconciliation. Compare 
Richard III. I. iii. 36: "make atone- 
ment Betwixt the Duke of Gloster and 
your brothers." 

35.] The Quarto may properly be 
said to begin here. It opens " Ne'er 
talk to me, lie make a star-chamber 
matter of it. The Councell shall know 
it." All the coram business, and the 
Lucy references are excluded from the 
Quarto, where Slender is less in 
evidence. 

36. council . . . riot] " By the council 
is only meant the courts of the star- 
chamber, composed chiefly of the 
King's Council sitting in camerd 
stellatd, which took cognisance of 
atrocious riots" (Blackstone). 

39. take your vizaments] make your 
minds up. "To take advisements, to 



take thought, to consider or deliberate, 
. . . hence, to decide, resolve." This 
obsolete expression is illustrated in 
Nezu Eng. Diet., from 1375 to 1597. 
The last is from Daniel's Civil Warres, 
I. xcii. : "And mus'd awhile, waking 
advisement takes of what had past in 
sleepe." The word does not occur again 
in Shakespeare. The form "avise- 
ment " is used by Ben Jonson as an in- 
tentional corruption ( Ta/e of a Tuby 
i. I). 

40.] See II. i. 232, and 11. iii. 47. 

44, 45. goot discretions] good sense. 
See IV. iv. i for this word again from 
Evans. 

46. Thomas] Master Page is called 
George in three places, but the mistake 
may have been Shakespeare's, since it 
is the text of the Folios. Possibly it is 
a transcriber's error. 



8 THE MERRY WIVES [act i. 

Slen. Mistress Anne Page ? She has brown hair, and 
speaks small like a woman. 

Evans. It is that fery person for all the orld, as just 50 
as you will desire ; and seven hundred pounds 
of moneys, and gold and silver, is her grandsire 
upon his death's-bed (Got deliver to a joyful 
resurrections !) give, when she is able to over- 
take seventeen years old : it were a goot motion 5 5 
if we leave our pribbles and prabbles, and desire 
a marriage between Master Abraham and Mistress 
Anne Page. 

Slen. Did her grandsire leave her seven hundred 

pound ? 60 

Evans, Ay, and her father is make her a petter 
penny. 

49. small] F I, Q 3 ; omitted F 2, 3, 4. 55. gooti F i, Q i ; good F 2, 3, 
4 (and at line 44, etc.). 59, 60 and 63, 64.] Given to Shallow by Capell, 
Steevens, etc. 

49. smalt\ treble, shrill. Compare 56. pribbles and prabbles'] A redund- 

Coriolanus, ill. ii. 14, and Midsitmmer ancy for "brabbles." See again V. v. 

Nighfs Dream, i. ii. 52 (adverbial use). i68,andin Fluellen's dialect in Henry V. 

And in the Travels of Captain John I v. viii. 69: " Keep you out of prawls 

Smith, Arber rept., p. 76, 1612: and prabbles." "Brabble" (quarrel), 

"The faces of all their Priests are is in Twelfth Night, v. 68, etc. 

painted as vgly as they can devise, in " Bibble-babble," a common expres- 

their hands they had everyone his Rattle; sion, occurs there also : " their Physicke 

some base [in tune], some smaller." proved nothing but words and bibble- 

$0. for all the orld] Exactly. This babbles," Flolland's Plinie, xxvi. 2. 

expression, hardly obsolete, occurs fre- Compare Lyly's Mother Bombie, v. 3 : 

quently ; " he was for all the world like "Let us not brabble but play, to- 

a forced radish," 2 Henry IV. ill. ii. morrow is a new day." 

334. 59, 60 and 63, 64.] These two 

53. death's-bed] The insertion of the speeches were given to Shallow by 

" s " here, though perhaps correct, is not Capell, followed by Steevens and some 

authorised in literature. It is merely a modern editors. The Folio, the only 

part of the stage Welshman's speech of authority, leaves us no choice in the 

the time, full of the letter. Compare matter. 

Ben Jonson's /■br M^ Honour of Wales 61, 62. a petter penny] something 

{passim); for example, "without all more. Com^ps^xe The London Prodigal, 

piddles or mercies or proprieties or in. i., 1605 :" You '11 do this with forty 

decorums." pounds a year? Civet. Ay, and a 



SC. I.] 



OF WINDSOR 



Slen, I know the young gentlewoman ; she has good 
gifts. 

Evans. Seven hundred pounds and possibilities is 65 
goot gifts. 

Shal. Well, let us see honest Master Page. Is 
Falstafif there? 

Evans. Shall I tell you a lie? I do despise a liar 

as I do despise one that is false, or as I despise 70 
one that is not true. The knight. Sir John, is 
there ; and, I beseech you, be ruled by your well- 
willers. I will peat the door for Master Page. 
\Knocks^^ What, hoa ! Got pless your house here ! 

Page. [ Within?[ Who 's there ? 7 5 



Enter PAGE. 
Evans, Here is Got's plessing, and your friend, 

65. possibilities'] F i, Q 3 ; possibility F 2, 3, 4. 



better penny, sister." And in The 
Mall, by J. D. (Saintsbury's Dry den, 
viii. 517), 1674: "a thousand pound, 
and a better penny." And in Diyden's 
Sir Martin Mar-all, IV. i., 1667: 
* *;^5000 and a better penny. " In Court 
and Times of fames /., ii. 468, in a 
letter from J. Chamberlain, July 1624: 
** The Earl of Holderness married Sir 
William Cockaine's daughter, with 
^10,000 portion, and a better penny, 
as they say." 

65. possibilities] prospects. Halli- 
well - Phillips (followed by Wheatley) 
gives this word here the meaning " pos- 
sessions," from the following words in 
a will dated circa i6io, and written in 
strangely corrupt orthography, "for my 
possebilities is abel to mantayne her." 
This seems as likely to mean "it is 
possible for me to maintain her " as not. 
In any case it is a slender argument 
with which to divest the passage of its 



obvious sense. I find the following 
parallel passage in Peek's Old Wives' 
Tale (1874 ed., p. 455), ante 1595: 
" My own and my own because mine, 
and mine because mine, ha, ha ! Above 
a thousand pounds in possibility, and 
things fitting the desire in possession." 
And in Porter's Two Angry Women of 
Abingdon (Haz. Dods. vii. 310), 1599: 
" If that they like, her dowry shall be 
equal To your son's wealth or possi- 
bility." Halliwell is certainly wrong. 

72, 73. well-willers] Not a coinage of 
Evans', as Schmidt implies. I find it 
in Howell's Arbor of Amitie, Epist. 
Ded. (ed. Grosart, p. 6), 1568, "my 
friendly welwillers," and again on the 
following page. The same author uses 
"ill-wilier." "Well-wilier" occurs 
several times in Holland's Plinie (x. 
24; XXXV. 11), 1601. And in Greene's 
Mamillia (Gros. ii. 252), 1583. 

75. Enter Page] Placed as in Globe 



10 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act I. 



and Justice Shallow; and here young Master 
Slender, that peradventures shall tell you another 
tale, if matters grow to your likings. 

Page. I am glad to see your worships well. I thank 
you for my venison. Master Shallow. 

ShaL Master Page, I am glad to see you : much 
good do it your good heart ! I wished your 
venison better; it was ill killed. How doth 
good Mistress Page? — and I thank you always 
with my heart, la ! with my heart. 

Page. Sir, I thank you. 

Shal. Sir, I thank you ; by yea and no, I do. 



80 



77. here\ F l, Q 3 ; here's F 2, 3, 4. 



85. thank'] love Q r, Steevens. 



and Cambridge. Rowe put the direc- 
tion after line 74 ; Dyce and Craig 
after line 79. 

78, 79. tell you another tale] Pro- 
verbial phrase. So in Merry Jests of 
Wydow Edyth (Hazlitt's reprint, p. 
106), 1523: "I trowe ye shall heare 
another manner of tale." It occurs 
also in Marriage of Wit and Science 
(Haz. Dods. ii. 376), 1570. 

79. liki?igs] contentedness. The 
plural occurs in Othello, in. i. 

81-84. ve7iisoji . . . ill killed] Pre- 
sumably the deer Falstaff is accused 
below of killing illegally (lines 114, 115). 
Justice Shallow's keepers had caught 
him red - handed and recovered the 
venison. This incident, coupled with 
the "luce and louse" sarcasm, both 
supp')rted by tradition, form the evi- 
dence in favour of the supposed satir- 
ising of Sir Thomas Lucy. See Intro- 
duction. 

82, 83. much . . . heart!] An es- 
tablished phrase of courtesy. ' ' Heart " 
is sometimes omitted. See Rhodes' 
Boke of Nurture (Furnivall's Babees 
Book, 81), 1577: "When ye begin 
from boord to ryse, say to your fellowes 



all, ' Much good do it ye,' gently : 
then they curteous will ye call." It 
occurs as part of a grace in Timon of 
Athens, i. ii., where "do it" is cor- 
rupted into "dich." Sometimes it was 
corrupted to " God - dilge," "God 
diche," "Good dich," "much goditch 
ye," "mutchie God ditch," etc. Ex- 
amples of these I have collected as 
the origin of "dich" was disputed. 
The expression in the text occurs in 
Chapman's Gentleman Usher, ii., 
1600 ; Peek's Edward I. (without 
"heart"), 1593; and is frequent in 
Ben Jonson. For the corrupted forms, 
see Gabriel Harvey (ed. Grosart, i. 
25 ; ii. 90 ; iii. 96) for earlier uses ; 
and Mabbe, Celestina, Act ix., and 
Alemans Guzman, i. 109, 1634, for 
later. 

86. la] See below, line 266. 

88. by yea and no] Frequent in 
Shakespeare, as in 2 //enry IV. ii. ii. 
142. It occurs in Sir Thomas Stukely, 
1598, and in Udall's Ralph Roister 
Bolster (Haz. Dods. iii. 59), 1550. A 
phrase affected by the Puritans. See 
quotation at ii. i. 5. 



SC. I.] 



OF WINDSOR 



11 



Page. I am glad to see you, good Master 

Slender. 90 

Slen. How does your fallow greyhound, sir? I 

heard say he was outrun on Cotsall. 
Page. It could not be judged, sir. 
Slen. You '11 not confess, you '11 not confess. 
Shal. That he will not. 'Tis your fault, 'tis your 95 

fault ; 'tis a good dog. 
Page. A cur, sir. 
Shal. Sir, he 's a good dog, and a fair dog : can 

there be more said ? he is good and fair. Is 

Sir John Falstaff here ? 100 

Page. Sir, he is within ; and I would I could do a 

good office between you. 
Evans. It is spoke as a Christians ought to 

speak. 
Shal. He hath wronged me. Master Page. 105 



92.] Cotsall^ The Cotswold Hills in 
Gloucestershire. This passage appears 
to refer to some definite sporting event 
or fixture ; presumably coursing. War- 
ton endeavoured to fix a date for this 
play (1607) on the assumption that 
there was an allusion here to *' Dover's 
Olympicksor the Cotswould games, "as 
R. Brome calls them in Merry Beggars^ 
II. i., 1 64 1. These games were estab- 
lished at the beginning of James i.'s 
reign, and were held annually for some 
forty years with great popularity. See 
Nares' Glossary, Wheatley's Introduc- 
tion to this play, and other commenta- 
tors. Ben Jonson called Dover "his 
jovial good friend" (Cunningham's 
GifforcT s Jonson, iii. 466a). Dancing 
of women, various kinds of hunting, 
and coursing the hare with greyhound 
were some of the games, Warton tells 
us, from Anfialia Dubrensia, 1636. 
The play is too early for reference to 



Dover's " Games," but from an allusion 
in the Anjialia as to the games having 
been practised for forty years, it is 
probable that Captain Dover combined 
and threw into order sports already 
popularly established in a highly suit- 
able country. Drayton tells us that 
shepherds' festivals were commonly held 
there. In a ballad of about 1580, in 
Ancient Ballads and Broadsides, p. 221 
(1870), ''intytuled, Good Fellowesmust 
go learne to daunce," these lines occur : 
" The bryde wyll thanke vs for oure 
glee, 
The worlde wyll us beholde a : 
O where shall all this dauncinge 
bee, 
In Kent or at Cotsolde a ? " 
And compare that " swinge-buckler 
. . . Will Squele, a Cotswold man," 
2 Henry IV. ill. ii. 23. 

95. faulf] misfortune, loss, as in iii. 
iii. 233. See Pericles, IV. ii. 79. 



12 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act I. 



Page. Sir, he doth in some sort confess it. 

Shal. If it be confessed, it is not redressed : is not 
that so. Master Page ? He hath wronged me ; 
indeed he hath ; at a word, he hath, believe me : 
Robert Shallow, esquire, saith, he is wronged. i lo 

Page. Here comes Sir John. 

Enter SiR John Falstaff, Bardolph, Nym, and 
Pistol. 

Fal. Now, Master Shallow, you '11 complain of me 

to the king? 
Shal. Knight, you have beaten my men, killed my 

deer, and broke open my lodge. 115 

Fal. But not kissed your keeper's daughter? 
Shal. Tut, a pin ! this shall be answered. 

113. king\ council Q i, Warburton. 



107. If'\ Even if, though, granted 
that. New Eng. Diet, gives examples 
in this sense, 1340 to 1572. The sense 
here seems to require it. A rare usage 
— compare Tempest^ II. ii. 70. 

107. confessed . . . redressed] Her- 
rick has, '* He pays half that confesses 
his debt" (Grosart's Herrick, i. 165, 
1648). Ray gives, "Confession of a 
fault makes half amends." 

113. king\ This points to the reign of 
King James, or to a correction made in 
the text to suit the play for representation 
before him. From line 112 to line 126 
the words here are identical with those 
in the 1602 Quarto, with the exception 
that the latter reads " Councell " instead 
of "king." A similar reference to the 
king at i. iv. 5 (see note), is merely 
proverbial. The whole passage, especi- 
ally the words from 114 to 116, bear 
reference almost certainly to some 
event, or ballad upon an event, familiar 
to Shakespeare's hearers. Sir Walter 



Scott's view of the legend is worth 
referring to {Kenilworth^ ch. xvii.). 
Deer-stealing was a popular peccadillo 
at this time and far later. Rainoldes, 
in Overthrow of Stage Playes (p. 23 and 
p. 129, ed. 1629), 1593, says to the 
students at Oxford : "it were not fit 
... to rifle in Alehouses, nor to 
carowse in tavernes, nor to steale deere, 
nor to rob orchards." 

114. beaten my men] From lines 124, 
125 we may gather that Slender was 
one of the keeper's party, and got his 
head broken. 

117. Tut] An expression of contemp- 
tuous indignation. "The Bawe-wawe 
of scholars, the Tutt of gentlemen, the 
Tee - hegh of gentlewomen " (Gabriel 
Harvey, Works, ii. 272, 1593). Cot- 
grave quotes it with " Trut, an inter- 
jection importing indignation." 

117. a pin!] a trifle, i.e. rubbish! 
"To displease God they are not afearde 
For the valoure of a pynne, " Roy, Rede 



sc. 



] 



OF WINDSOR 



13 



Fal. I will answer it straight ; I have done all this. 

That is now answered. 
Shal. The council shall know this. 120 

Fal. 'Twere better for you if it were known in 

counsel : you '11 be laughed at. 
Evans. Pauca verba, Sir John ; goot worts. 
Fal. Good worts ! good cabbage. Slender, I broke 

your head : what matter have you against 125 

me? 
Slen. Marry, sir, I have matter in my head against 

you ; and against your cony-catching rascals, 

Bardolph, Nym, and Pistol. 



me and be nott wrothe ( Arber, p. 72), 1 528. 
Cotgrave has : "^ cela ne tienne, For 
that not a pin matter" (161 1). 

121, 122. in counsel'] in secret. 
Steevens quotes from Chaucer, Prologue 
to the Squire's Tale. Compare Gammer 
Gurton's Needle, ii. ii. : "But first for 
you in councel I have a word or twaine. " 
An old and common use, found oftenest 
in the proverbial expressions, "Three 
may keep counsel if two be away" 
(Chaucer, The Cottwiandvients of Love, 
ante 1400), and in Hey wood, 1546. 
Later it became : ' ' Two may keep, 
etc.," as in Shakespeare, Titus 
Andronicus and Romeo and Juliet ; 
and earlier in Lyly's Euphues. G. 
Harvey may be quoted : "Two frendes 
or bretheren may keepe counsell, when 
one of the two is away." 

123. Pauca V erbd\iQ.yN v^'oxAi. Shake- 
speare has this earlier in Lovers Labotir's 
Lost, IV. ii. 171. Ben Jonson tells us 
it is "the bencher's phrase," Every 
Man in his Humour, iv. i. (1598). 
See also Henry V. il. i. 83. Jonson 
has it again in Epicene, ill. i. (1609) : 
" Otter. Nay, good princess, hear me 
pauca verba.'" It is met with as late 
as Shad well's Miser, 1672. Why it is 
the "bencher's phrase" is yet to seek. 
Gifford says it is too high a matter for 
him. Skink uses the expression * * pauca 



verba" in Look About Yotc (Haz. Dods. 
vii. 458), 1600. 

1 24. Good worts ! good cabbage"] Worts 
was the ancient name of all the cabbage 
kind. So, in Beaumont and Fletcher's 
Valentinian : ' ' Planting of worts, of 
onions, any thing " (Steevens). "Cab- 
age or colewort, brassica" (Baret's 
Alvearie, 1580). And in Holland's 
Plinie, xvii. 24 (541, L), 1601 : 
" Neither can the Vine away with 
Coleworts or the Cabbage, nay it 
hateth generally all Woorts or pot- 
hearbs." Wheatley says the "com- 
mentators are clearly wrong when 
they say that worts was the old 
name for cabbage." Plenty more ex- 
amples could be given showing they 
were right. Compare Malory, Morte 
Arthur (Globe ed., p. 379), 1485: 
"A little courtlage, where Nacien the 
hermit gathered worts, as he which 
had tasted none other meat of a great 
while." 

128. cony-catching] cheating. Used 
again in Taming of the Shreiu, v. i. 
102. This term was invented by 
Robert Greene in his tracts on The Art 
of Conny- Catching, 1 591, 1592. It at 
once became popular, being adopted by 
Gabriel Harvey in Pierce's Supereroga- 
tion (1592) and his other writings. 
Greene says (Grosart, x. 33) : " Yet 



14 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act I. 



Bard. You Banbury cheese! 130 

Slen. Ay, it is no matter. 

Pist. How now, Mephistophilus ! 

Slen, Ay, it is no matter. 

Nyni, Slice, I say ! pauca, pauca : slice ! that 's my 

humour. 135 



have they clokes for the raine, and 
shadowes for their vilanies, calling it 
by the name of art or law : as cony- 
catching art, or cony-catching law" 
{1591). The cony is, of course, the 
rabbit, or dupe. ' ' Gentlemen, and 
Marchants, all are caught like Gunnies 
in the hay [net], and so led like lambs 
to their confusion " [ibidefn, p. 8). 
Harvey supplies the earliest example 
I have seen of the literal sense in his 
Trimming of Thomas Nashe (Grosart, 
iii. 48), 1597: "The cunny-catching 
weasel insnared in the parker's net." 
New Eng. Diet, refers to Minsheu, 
161 7. Possibly the wily weasel sug- 
gested the term, which was no doubt 
common property before Greene gave 
it his irnprimatur. However, Minsheu 
says it is '*a name given to deceivers, 
by a metaphor taken from those that 
rob warrens." "A cony-catcher" that 
lives by using his wit is introduced in 
A Merry Knack to Know a Knave, of 
which Henslowe records a performance 
in 1592. This may have antedated 
Greene. Malone inserted here : ' ' They 
carried me to the tavern and made me 
drunk, and afterwards picked my 
pocket," from the Quarto, as being 
necessary to the sense of the scene. 
Sir John, Malone says, could have no 
knowledge of the " picking of Slender's 
purse" (line 166), without them. 
Moreover, Greene tells us, "In case 
hee [the cony-catcher] bring to passe 
that you [the countryman] be glad of 
his acquaintance, then doeth he carry 
you to the Tavernes" {ut supra, p. lo). 
The passage is therefore very proper to 
the situation, though it is not necessary, 
since we can gather all this from the 
subsequent dialogue, and Sir John 



knows his followers' doings no doubt. 
See line 155 and note. 

130. You Banbury cheese"] An allu- 
sion to the thinness implied by his 
name Slender. " Now the fame of 
this toune is for zeale, cheese, and 
cakes," Holland's translation of Cd^m- 
den's Britannia {i^S6), 1610. The ori- 
ginal referred only to "cheese," and 
thereby hangs a tale [see Camden's MS. 
Supplement to the Britannia in the 
Bodleian Encyclopcedia Metropolitand\. 
Wheatley says this cheese was "made 
about an inch in thickness." Appar- 
ently it had a coating that had to be 
pared off, leaving the remnant very 
thin. "I never saw Banbury cheese 
thicke enough." Hey wood, Epigrams, 
5th Hundred, No. 24, 1562: "like a 
Banbury cheese, nothing but paring." 
Marston, Pasquil and Katharine, iii. 
line 178, 1600: "like a Banbury 
cheese that goes away most in parings." 
Court and Ti77ies of Jatnes I., ii. 182, 
Letter of J. Chamberlain, 161 9. 

132. Mephistophilus'] A term of abuse, 
from the devil in Marlowe's Dr. Faustus. 
Ben Jonson used it at the same date, or 
earlier (?): ^^ Onion. Tut! Your witness 
cannot serve. Juniper. 'Sblood, why 
what ! thou art not lunatic, art thou ? 
an thou be'st avoid, Mephistophilus ! " 
Case is Altered, ii. 4 (1598). It is 
similarly used by Dekker in Gentle 
Craft and Satiromastix , and various 
other writers. See below, iv. v. 71. 

134. slice] Nym adopts Bardolph's 
idea and proposes to slice Slender, 
as if he were really a cheese. Nym's 
humour is generally prompt and full 
of action. Probably he puts his hand 
to his sword. The word seems to be 
uncommon at this period, and represents 



SC. I.] 



OF WINDSOR 



15 



Slen. Where 's Simple, my man ? Can you tell, 
cousin ? 

Evans, Peace, I pray you. Now let us understand. 
There is three umpires in this matter, as I 
understand; that is, Master Page, fidelicet 140 
Master Page ; and there is myself, fidelicet 
myself; and the three party is, lastly and finally, 
mine host of the Garter. 

Page. We three, to hear it and end it between 

them. 145 

Evans, Fery goot : I will make a prief of it in 
my note - book ; and we will afterwards ork 
upon the cause with as great discreetly as we 
can. 



Fal. Pistol! 

143. Garier\ Q 3, Gater Ff. 

more violent operations, perhaps, than 
we associate with it. Wheatley says : " It 
is evidently an oath. Professor Hales 
suggests that it may be a corruption of 
God's liche or body (cf. Ods bodikins)." 
I entirely disagree. A passage in Look 
About You (Haz. Dods. vii. 481), 1600, 
is illustration: "I'll mar the hermit's 
tale. Off, gown ; hold, buckler : slice it, 
Bilbo blade." "Pauca" is an abbrevia- 
tion of " pauca verba "above (line 123). 
134, 135. that's my humour] that's 
my fancy or whim. Humour (moisture) 
was primarily applied by the mediaeval 
physiologists to the four chief fluids of 
the body — "sanguine," " phlegmatic," 
'* choleric," and " melancholic." 
Thence, about Shakespeare's time 
[New Eng. Did. gives an unsatisfac- 
tory 1565 example], the word was 
applied to a piece of caprice or conduct 
caused by a peculiar mood or dis- 
position ; a whim or vagary ; as in 
Lovers Labour's Lost, ill. Hne 23 (1588). 
Hence, immediately, the abuse of the 
word was excessive, As Giftbrd says : 



150 



** It was applied upon all occasions 
with as little judgment as wit. Every 
coxcomb had it always in his mouth : 
and every particularity he affected was 
denominated by the name oi htwiour.'''' 
For a defence of the word's proper 
uses, see Ben Jonson's Every Man out 
of his LLumour, Induction (1599). 
For illustration, every play of this 
period almost might be referred to. 
Nym is one of the best. 

143. Garter] Halliwell-Phillips cites 
a document (printed in his folio edition 
of Shakespeare) in which "mine host 
of the Garter," in 1561, was one Richard 
Gallis, a leading inhabitant, and three 
times Mayor of Windsor. " Such a 
personage would naturally be on 
familiar terms with his guests." The 
inn is marked as well as the White 
Hart in Norden's map of "Windsor 
and the Little Park" in 1607. Not 
improbably the site was that of the 
present Star and Garter. See note 
at "witch," IV. ii. 180, for more about 
Gallis. And see Introduction. 



16 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act I. 



Pist. He hears with ears. 

Evans. The tevil and his tarn ! what phrase is this, 
"He hears with ear " ? why, it is affecta- 
tions. 

Fal. Pistol, did you pick Master Slender's purse ? 

Slen. Ay, by these gloves, did he, or I would I 
might never come in mine own great chamber 
again else, of seven groats in mill-sixpences, and 



155 



151. hears with ears] From Job xiii. 
and Psalm xliv. Perhaps a Puritanical 
affectation. So Greene, Defence of 
Conjty- Catching, 1592: "To use the 
figure PleonastJios, Hisce oculis, with these 
eies I have scene . . . and these eares 
hath heard." And see also his Mamillia, 
Grosart, ii. ']']. 

152. The tevil and his tarn!] See 
my note to Othello, iv. i. The devil 
and his wife. The frequent occurrence 
of this phrase at this time {circa 1600) 
may be ascribed perhaps to the popu- 
larity of the old play, " Grim, the 
Collier of Croydon, or The Devil and 
his Dam" {circa 1600). 

153. 154. affectations'] Not in the 
Quarto. This word, in Shakespeare, 
makes its first " printed " appearance in 
the Folio of 1623. It occurs in Lovers 
Labour's Lost and Hamlet, but the 
Quartos have "affection." The earliest 
sense was "a striving after " (1549, New 
Eng. Diet. ). In the present use (as in 
the text) it occurs in Nashe's Christ's 
Teares {is^g^)- Compare Gabriel Har- 
vey, ^n Advertisement to Paphatchet, 
1589 (Grosart, ii. 135) : "What is the 
principall cause of this . . . but affec- 
tation of Nouelty, without ground?" 
And Jonson, Every Man in his Humour, 
III. ii. : " What is that humour ? . . . 
it is a gentleman-like monster, bred in 
the special gallantry of our time, by 
affectation ; and fed by folly." 

155.] Compare this line, and line 188, 
below, with lines 127-129. 

156. by these gloves] Affected oaths 
formed one of the "humours" of the 



time. Carlo Buffone, in Ben Jonson's 
Every Man out of his Humour, i. i. 
(1599)} tells the hind, Sogliardo, who 
wants to be "an accomplished gentle- 
man, that is, a gentleman of the time," 
"and ever (when you lose) have two or 
three peculiar oaths to swear by, that 
no man else swears." There are 
several points in common between these 
plays and those of Shakespeare, levelled 
at the abuse of the word "humour." 
Slender, with "his own great chamber," 
reminds one of a sort of milk-and-water 
Stephen in Every Man in his Humour. 

157. great chamber] About the end 
of the fifteenth century a great improve- 
ment in the furnishing and luxury of the 
chamber (bedroom) took place amongst 
the upper classes. Large rich chairs, 
settles, chests and coffers, ornamental 
candlesticks, etc., were kept there. In 
Wright's History of Domestic Manners, 
chap, xix., a sketch of this development 
is well set forth. Slender's vanity asso- 
ciates him with this form of opulence. 
But it may mean "reception room," as 
Mr. Craig thinks, an instance of which 
use occurs (at court) in Nashe's Unfor- 
tunate Traveller. And Ben Jonson, 
Every Man out" of his Hutnotir (end 
of Act IV.), 1599: "arrived at the 
court-gate, and going up to the great 
chamber." 

158. mill-sixpences] Money, milled 
(struck in a mill), was coined in 
England in Queen Elizabeth's time 
(1561). In Jonson's Gipsies Meta- 
fnorphosed (1621), Clod is robbed of a 
purse containing "a mill-sixpence of 



SC. I.] 



OF WINDSOR 



17 



two Edward shovel-boards, that cost me two 

shilling and two pence a-piece of Yead Miller, i6o 

by these gloves. 
Fill. Is this true, Pistol ? 
Evans. No ; it is false, if it is a pick-purse. 
Pist. Ha, thou mountain-foreigner ! Sir John and master 
mine, 

I combat challenge of this latten bilbo. 165 



159. two Edward shovel-boards'] Tzvofaire shovell boord shillings Q i, 
167.] Prose in F I. 



164- 



my mother's I loved as dearly." Owing 
to its expense in coinage this money 
was struck for a short time only in 
Elizabeth's reign. They may have 
acquired a higher value (as Clod's 
evidently did) on account of their rarity. 
159. Edward shovel - boards] Old 
broad shillings of Edward vi.'s time, 
worn smooth (not being milled), and 
used for the game of shovel-board. 
They were kept for that purpose as 
late as Shadwell's time, according to a 
passage in his Miser, ill. i., 1672. But 
Shad we 11 often remembers his Shake- 
speare. The game is described in 
Strutt's Sports and Pastimes. We are 
told in the Introduction (p. 16, ed. 
1876) that it "was formerly in great 
request among the nobility and gentry ; 
and few of their mansions are without 
a shovel-board, which was a fashionable 
piece of furniture. The great hall was 
usually the place for its reception." A 
description of one is given from Dr. Plot's 
History of Staffordshire, ' ' ten yards one 
foot and one inch long," at Chartley. 
This game is said to be distinct from the 
vulgar sport of "slide-thrift "or " shove- 
groat," mentioned in S Henry /v. ii. iv. 
186, and still existing. This latter 
game was prohibited by law, and called 
a new game in 33rd of Henry viii. 
Probably it was invented as a cheap 
imitation of the former. The two are 
frequently confounded by commen- 
tators, but Douce distinguished them, 



though there is still some confusion. 
The term "shove-groat shilling " occurs 
in Jonson's Every Alan in his Humour, 
iii. 2. Middleton mentions the "shovel- 
board shilling" in Roaring Girl, v. i 
(1607). Burton, writing in 1621 {Ana- 
tomie of Melancholy (p. 344, ed. 1854) 
says : " The ordinary recreations which 
we have in winter . . . are cards, tables 
and dice, shovel -board, chess play," 
etc. Armin, in Foole upon Foole (1605), 
speaks of "slide-groat." See Nares for 
more examples. Pepys went to Hack- 
ney (June II, 1664) "and there light 
and played at shuffleboard, eat cream 
and good cherries." And Dryden, in 
Prologue to King Arthur, 1 69 1, speaks 
of "a long shovel-board in hall of 
knight or lord." That these smooth, 
large coins were in demand for the 
game is perhaps the reason of the high 
price Slender paid his friend for them. 

160. Yead] Presumably for "Ed- 
ward." Compare " Yedward " in 
1 Henry IV. I. ii. 149. Halliwell gives 
the latter as Cheshire dialect. It is given 
also ("Yed") in Leicester and Derby 
Glossaries. 

164. mountain foreigner] Equivalent 
to "wild Welshman." Compare the 
use of " mountaineer " in Cymbeline, I v. 
ii. 100, 120, etc. 

165. / combat challenge] The ortho- 
dox expression in trial by combat by 
law. Compare Court and Times of 

James /., i. 152 (1611), for a late 



I 



18 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act I. 



Word of denial in thy labras here ! 

Word of denial : froth and scum, thou liest ! 
Slen. By these gloves, then, 'twas he. 
Nym. Be avised, sir, and pass good humours : I 

will say " marry trap " with you, if you run 1 70 

the nuthook's humour on me ; that is the VQry 

note of it. 

171. nuthook^s\ base Q i. 



example : " protested ... he would 
never put his life upon a lawyer's mer- 
cenary tongue, and then challenged the 
combat which could not be denied in 
law, and so was granted in Easter 
term" [Egerton and Morgan]. 

165. latten bilbo] Latten was a soft 
composition of metals much in use, but 
very unsuitable to make bilbos or swords 
of. Pistol calls Slender a worthless 
sword, with a reference to his leanness. 
But he probably recalls "the dagger 
(or sword) of lath " (with a pun), the 
weapon of the stage. I suppose one 
was hanging by Slender's side, and he 
uses it as an apt illustration of his figure. 
*'A dagger of lath" is mentioned in 
Twelfth Night, iv. ii. i6i, and 1 Henry 
IV. II. iv. 151; "sword of lath" in 
1 Henry VI. IV. ii. 2, etc. "Lean as 
a lath" was a common simile; "long 
like a lath and of proportion little 
better, " Armin, A^^Ji'/^iV'mwz^j ( Grosart, 
p. 52), 1608. Household articles (such 
as spoons, candlesticks, and basins) were 
made of "latten" at this time. In 
Soliman and Perseda (Haz. Dods. v. 
"^l^i 1592), the braggart Basilisco 
" wears a coloured lath in his scabbard, 
and when 'twas found upon him, he said 
he was wrathful, he might not wear iron." 

165. bilb6\ Swords from Bilbao were 
famous before this time. The earliest 
reference I find (earlier than any in New 
Eng. Diet.) is in Clement Robinson, 
Handful of plesant D elites (rept. p, 
58), 1584: "trust not too much to 
bilbo w blade." In the old Play of 



Stucley, line 573 (1598), William Sharp 
of London furnishes Thomas Stucley 
with his bill for "bilboes, foxes, and 
Toledo blades." 

166. labrasl lips. Pistol's plural of 
L. "labrum" instead of "labra." In 
the Quarto the expression is "Even in 
thy gorge." 

170. marry trap] The interjection 
" marry " was joined familiarly in 
several retorts, as " marry faugh," 
"marry gip," and "marry muff," 
all of which are frequent at this time. 
If this be the explanation of Nym's 
slang, the following line illustrates 
"trap" from Harington, Orlando 
Furioso, xxiii. 2, 1599 (?) : "Who so 
sets a trap may catch himself." The 
sense being that if Slender tries to play 
the catchpoll (or nuthook) he may be 
in trouble. But it is more likely the 
expression was in use at the very 
popular game of ' ' trap, " where much 
dexterity was required. Shirley speaks 
of " trap" as an old game (Hyde Park, 
ii. 4), and see Malcontent, i. i. , 1604. 
See Halliwell \nv. " Trap-ball." The 
more recent phrase "to understand 
trap," is not a great deal later. I find it 
in Crowne's City Politicks, Act I., 1688. 

171. nuthook'' s humour] " base 
humours " in Quarto. Nuthook occurs 
again as a name for a beadle in 2 Henry 
IV. V. iv. The word was in use for 
one who hooked down nuts, in which 
sense Nares gives two examples. Thence 
it was applied to a catchpoll by analogy 
(poll = nut or nott). 



SC. I.] 



OF WINDSOR 



19 



Slen. By this hat, then, he in the red face had it ; 
for though I cannot remember what I did when 
you made me drunk, yet I am not altogether 175 
an ass. 

Fal, What say you, Scarlet and John ? 

Bard. Why, sir, for my part, I say the gentle- 
man had drunk himself out of his five sen- 
tences. 1 80 

Evans. It is his five senses : fie, what the ignorance 
is! 

Bard. And being fap, sir, was, as they say, cashiered ; 
and so conclusions passed the careires. 

184. careires\ car-eires Ff, Q 3 ; careers Capell. 



177. Scarlet and John'] Robin Hood's 
two companions were Will Scarlet and 
Little John. ''Scarlet" refers to Bar- 
dolph's colour, "his face is all bubukles, 
and whelks, and knobs, and flames of 
fire," Henry V. ill. vi. "And Robin 
Hood, Scarlet, and John," 2 Henry IV. 
V. iii. 107. It is from the old ballad of 
Robin Hood and the Pindar of Wake- 
field. 

183. fap\ drunk. New Eng. Diet. 
has a recent example (1818). No other 
has been found, and the later one is 
probably founded on this. 

183. cashiered'] deprived of cash, un- 
cashed, hence "stript" is probably 
Bardolph's sense. So Schmidt says, 
and New Eng. Diet, accepts. Com- 
pare the following lines from Robert 
Davenport, A New Trick to catch the 
Devil, i. 2 (1639) : 

"'tis my Lord 
Must deale in wholesale with her 

Lady-ware 
And I am quite cashiered," 
where he means he has no cash to deal 
with. Cashiered in the sense of dis- 
missed occurs in Greene's Quip, etc., 
1592 {Harl. Misc. ii. 244); and see 
below, I. iii. 6. In the literal sense of 



"strip" it occurs in Look About You 
(Haz. Dods. vii. 419), 1600 : "off with 
you coat. Nay, quick, uncase, I am 
bold to borrow it, I '11 leave my 
gown : change is no robbery . . . 
Quickly cashier yourself: you see me 
stay." Here it deals with robbery from 
the person, as in the text. In Nashe's 
Unfortunate Traveller (Grosart, v. 41), 
1594, this word has the wider mean- 
ing of reduced (in fat) : " Cookes 
that stande continually basting their 
faces before the fire, were nowe all 
cashierd with this sweat into kitchin- 
stuffe" {i.e. melted). This passage 
makes one almost inclined to suggest 
"fat" (ironical) for the unknown 
" fap." 

184. passed the careires] A technical 
phrase for a feat in horsemanship, of 
which numerous examples have been 
adduced. Compare Henry V. ii. i. 
for the applied sense (used by Pistol) : 
"The king is a good king, but it must 
be as it may : he passes some humours 
and careers." I will quote one early 
example which is not in the notes of 
the commentators : " her [C. of Pem- 
broke] hoattest fury may fitly be re- 
sembled to the passing of a brave 



20 THE MERRY WIVES [acti. 

Slen. Ay, you spake in Latin then too ; but 'tis 1 8 5 
no matter : I '11 ne'er be drunk whilst I live 
again, but in honest, civil, godly company, for 
this trick : if I be drunk, I '11 be drunk with those 
that have the fear of God, and not with drunken 
knaves. 1 90 

Evans. So Got udge me, that is a virtuous 
mind. 

FaL You hear all these matters denied, gentlemen ; 
you hear it. 

Enter Anne Page, with wine ; MISTRESS FORD 
and Mistress Page, following. 

Page. Nay, daughter, carry the wine in ; we '11 drink 1 9 5 
within. {Exit Anne Page. 

Slen. O heaven ! this is Mistress Anne Page. 
Page. How now, Mistress Ford ! 

career by Pegasus . . . her pen is a What did he do with ** conclusions " ? 
very Pegasus indeed, and runneth like Compare Nym's "there must be con- 
a winged horse, governed with the elusions" in //<?«r;/ K 1 1, i. 27. Malone 
hand of exquisite skill," Works, ii. 322, gives the above quotation from Gabriel 
1592-93. Schmidt and others, follow- Harvey to Nashe (1596). It is a quota- 
ing Malone, explain that Bardolph tion in Nashe from Harvey, 
meant to apply this to the drunken 197, 198. Mistress\ Applied here in- 
staggering of Slender, which seems to differently, as a term of courtesy, to 
be entirely astray. Bardolph's meaning both women, the one married, the other 
is, "as a natural result, conclusions took not. In the Quarto there is a parallel 
their course, and we robbed him." passage, and Mistress Ford disclaims the 
Markham says, "to passe a careire title. Falstaff says, " Mistresse Foord, 
is but to runne with strength and ability I thinke your name is, If I mistake not. 
such a convenient course as is meete Syr John kisses her. Mrs. Ford. Your 
for his ability," English Horseman, mistake, sir, is nothing but in the Mis- 
ii. 19. " Conclusions " is the nomina- tresse. But my husband's name is 
tive, not "gentleman," to "passed." Foord, sir" (evidently she approved 
This was an orderly term in equestrian- of the kiss). This passage shows that 
ism, very unfit to become a synonym the term mistress belonged at this time 
for intoxication. Malone's words are, (1602) correctly and distinctively to a 
•' he reeled about with a circuitous maid or unmarried woman, 
motion, like a horse, passing a careire " ! 



SC. I.] 



OF WINDSOR 



21 



FaL Mistress Ford, by my troth, you are very well met : 

by your leave, good mistress. \^Kisses her. 200 

Page. Wife, bid these gentlemen welcome. Come, 
we have a hot vension pasty to dinner: 
come, gentlemen, I hope we shall drink down 
all unkindness. 

\Exeunt all except Shal., Slen., and Evans. 

Slen. I had rather than forty shillings I had my 205 
Book of Songs and Sonnets here. 

200. Kisses her.] Pope, Syr ]o\m kisses her Q i. 



199. yon are very well met\ A usual 
greeting, it occurs as here in As You 
Like It, III. iii. 75. It is varied in Shake- 
speare to "fortunately," "happily," 
* * kindly," ' ' heartily, " and ' ' exceedingly 
well." Compare Harman's Caveat, 
1573, ch. xii. : "Quoth I you are very 
well met and somewhat you have pre- 
vented me." 

200. Kisses her.] The English at 
this time were peculiar in this respect. 
See Beaumont and Fletcher's Plays, ed. 
Dyce, vii. 315, 316, etc.; and Appendix 
ii. pp. Ixi, Ixii, to Furnivall's edition 
of Harrison's England. And compare 
Jasper Maynes' Ciiy Nightcap (Haz. 
Dods. xiii. 12) : "he, as ye know their 
[English] custom, though none of ours 
[Italian] makes at her lips first dash." 
And Marston, Dutch Courtezan, iii. i 
(1605): "one of the most unpleas- 
ing, injurious customs to ladies : any 
fellow . . . must salute us on the lips 
as familiarly," etc. In the Quarto 
" Syr John kisses her " is inserted. 

203, 204. drink down all unkindness] 
A similar expression occurs in Greene's 
Loo king- Glass for L^ondon (Routledge, 
p. 128), 1594: 

" And in a full carouse of Grecian 

wine 

Drink down the malice of his deep 

revenge." 

205. / had rather thanfo^iy shillings] 

This expression occurs again in Twelfth 



Night, II. iii. 20. It is not (as Schmidt 
says) used indefinitely, but is something 
of a vulgarism, from familiarity with a 
cheap servant's wages. Compare J. 
Cooke, Greeners Tu Quogue {Ax\c. Brit. 
Drama), ii. p. 542 (1614): "I am 
humble in body and dejected in mind, 
and will do your worship as good 
service for forty shillings a year, as 
another shall for three pounds." And 
R. Armin, Two Maids of Moreclacke 
(Grosart, p. 107), circa 1600 : "all 
the offices A servant owes in dutie to 
his master performe, As naturally as if 
the forty shilling time Were come " {i.e. 
pay-day). And see Marston's What 
You Will, ii. I. 

206. Book of Songs and Sojinets] The 
Earl of Surrey's Songs and SoJtnets were 
first printed in June 1557, and were of 
so great and immediate popularity that 
they were reprinted almost continuously. 
There were four distinct impressions in 
the course of a couple of months. They 
consist of numerous pieces with titles 
such as "Description of the restless 
state of a Lover" and "Complaints of 
a Lover." The term became a catch- 
word. " Painting out in Songs and 
Sonets their great affection," R. 
Greene, Mamillia, 1583. "Our bab- 
ling Ballets and our newfound Songs 
and Sonnets which every rednose Fidler 
hath at his finger's ende," Nashe, Ana- 
to?nie of Absurditie, 1589. And Ben 



22 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act I. 



Enter SIMPLE. 

How now, Simple ! where have you been ? I 
must wait on myself, must I ? You have not 
the Book of Riddles about you, have you ? 

Sim. Book of Riddles! why, did you not lend it to 210 
Alice Shortcake upon All-hallowmas last, a 
fortnight afore Michaelmas? 

Shal. Come, coz ; come, coz ; we stay for you. A 
word with you, coz ; marry, this, coz : there is, 
as 'twere, a tender, a kind of tender, made afar 215 
off by Sir Hugh here. Do you understand me ? 



214. this^ coz] this Q 3. 

Jonson, "especially Bob there . . . and 
songs and sonnets his fellow," Every 
Manin his IIu?nour,iv. i (1598); and 
his Case is Altered, iv. 3 (1598): 
*' Fellow Juniper, no more of thy songs 
and sonnets ; sweet Juniper, no more of 
thy hymns or madrigals." And later in 
Dekker's Satiromastix, 1602 ; Beau- 
mont and Fletcher, Lover's Pilgrimage 
and Elder Brother, etc. 

209. Book of Riddles] This is one of 
the books "in Philosophy both morall 
and naturall " in the famous library of 
Captain Cox, described in Laneham^s 
Letter setting forth the Queen's Majesty's 
entertainment at Killingworth, 1575. 
See Furnival's edition (Ballad Society, 
1 871). Captain Cox distinguishes it 
from The Boo get of Dejuaundes {De- 
maimdes Joyous), printed by Wynkyn 
de W^orde (1511). Collier {Biblio- 
graphical Catalogue^ ii. 264) describes 
an edition of The Booke of Merry 
Riddles, 1600. The earliest edition 
extant is that of 1629, which Halliwell 
beheved to be the same as Shakespeare's 
** Book of Riddles," and reprinted in 
1 85 1. See his Introductory Remarks. 
Hall mentions the book : 

" Worse than the logogriphs of later 
times 



Or Hundredth Riddles slaked to 
sleeveless rhymes." 

{Satires, iv. i, 1598.) 
This is the only other early reference I 
have met with, and it agrees better 
with the old title. The earliest refer- 
ence is that given by Reed in a note to 
Mtuh Ado, II. i., from The English 
Cozirtier (1586); and by Furnivall, ut 
supra, p. xiv. But this seems to be 
merely an extract from Lanehanis 
Letter. I do not think we are entitled 
to assume The Book of Merry Riddles 
is identical with the book of Captain 
Cox, of Shakespeare, and probably of 
Hall. 

211, 212. All-hallowmas . . . afore 
Michaelmas] Probably a blunder pur- 
posely ascribed to Slender. Theobald 
proposed to read Martlemas for 
Michaelmas. 

215,216. fl/Jzr ^] indirectly. Com- 
pare Wifiters Tale, ii. i. 104. Mr. Craig 
gives me an excellent parallel from Sir 
Thomas More, History of Edward V. 
and Richard ILL. (p. 113, ed. 1641) : 
" he moved Cotesby to prove with some 
words cast out affarre off whether he 
could think it possible to winne the 
Lord Hastings to their part." The 
expression is in Cotgrave's Dictionary. 



SCI.] OF WINDSOR 231 

Slen. Ay, sir, you shall find me reasonable ; if it be 
so, I shall do that that is reason. 

Shal. Nay, but understand me. 

Slen. So I do, sir. 220 

Evans. Give ear to his motions. Master Slender: 
I will description the matter to you, if you be 
capacity of it. 

Slen. Nay, I will do as my cousin Shallow says : 

I pray you, pardon me; he's a justice of peace 225 
in his country, simple though I stand here. 

Evans. But that is not the question : the question is 
concerning your marriage. 

Shal. Ay, there 's the point, sir. 

Evans. Marry, is it; the very point of it; to Mistress 230 
Anne Page. 

Slen. Why, if it be so, I will marry her upon any 
reasonable demands. 

Evans. But can you affection the 'oman ? Let us 

command to know that of your mouth or of 235 
your lips ; for divers philosophers hold that the 
lips is parcel of the mouth. Therefore, pre- 
cisely, can you carry your good will to the 
maid ? 

Shal. Cousin Abraham Slender, can you love her ? 240 

Slen. I hope, sir, I will do as it shall become one 
that would do reason. 

218. that that'\ that F 3, 4. 238. carry] F I, Q 3 ; marry F 2, 3, 4. 

226. simple though I stand here] stand here." The expression is fre- 

Compare Ben Jonson, Every Man in quent, and occurs in the Marprelate 

his Htimour, i. 2: "mine uncle here ixaci Hay any work for a Cooper, i^S^ ; 

is a man of a thousand a year ... I and in So/iman and Perseda (Haz. 

am his next heir ... as simple as I Dods. v. 309), 1592. 



24 THE MERRY WIVES [act i. 

Evans. Nay, got's lords, and his ladies ! you must 
speak possitable, if you can carry her your 
desires towards her. 245 

Shal. That you must. Will you, upon good dowry, 
marry her? 

Slen. I will do a greater thing than that, upon your 
request, cousin, in any reason. 

Shal, Nay, conceive me, conceive me, sweet coz : 250 
what I do is to pleasure you, coz. Can you 
love the maid ? 

Slen. I will marry her, sir, at your request : but if 
there be no great love in the beginning, yet 
heaven may decrease it upon better acquaintance, 255 
when we are married and have more occasion 
to know one another ; I hope, upon familiarity 
will grow more contempt : but if you say " Marry 

258. coiiteinpt\ Theobald ; content Ff, Q 3. 

243. gofs lords, atidhis ladies] " got " 244. possitable'] "positively" perhaps, 

has a small "g" in the Folio, and I do 250, conceive ?ne] understand me. 

not think this invocation was addressed 257, 258. tipon familiarity grows 

to the Deity, but rather intended for contempt] Ray quotes from Plutarch, 

the classical Dii consentes. Sir John ' ' Nimia familiaritas contemptum parit, 

Haringt on so designates the greater gods E 'tribus optimis rebus tres parsimas 

and goddesses, in The Aletaf/wrphosis of oriuntur ; e veritate odium, e familiari- 

Ajax (Chiswick, p. 29), 1596: "the tate contemptus, e felicitas invidia." 

greater, which they distinguish by the In The Returne from Parnasns, Part 

name of DiJ consentes^ which are, I. v. i (Clar. Press, p. 71), 1599, 

according to old Ennius'' verse divided Gallic, an ignoramus, attributes the 

into two ranks of lords and ladies : words (purposely in error) to Terence : 

Juno, Vesta, Minerva, Ceresque, " Terrence, thou art a gentleman of 

Diana, Venus. thy worde: familiaritas parit con- 

Mars, Mercurius, Neptunus, Jovis, temptitm I " And in Rare Triumphs 

Vulcanus, Apollo. of Love and Fortune (Ilaz. Dods. vi. 

Of all which, St. Augustine writes most 57), 1587 : ^^ Nimia familiaritas parit 

divinely to overthrow their divinity . . . conte7Hptum, The old Proverb by me is 

These gods were of the privy council verified. By too much familiarity con- 

of Jupiter." This relieves the text of temned is some." " Familiarity bring- 

an unmeaning irreverence, and believ- eth contempt " is in Udall's Erasmus, 

ing "got" to be "Jupiter," I have 1548. It is also in Nashe, Foure 

restored the Folio reading. Letters Confuted, 1594. 



SCI.] OF WINDSOR 25 

her," I will marry her ; that I am freely dissolved, 
and dissolutely. 260 

Evans. It is a fery discretion answer ; save the fall 
is in the ort " dissolutely " : the ort is, according 
to our meaning, " resolutely " : his meaning is 
good. 

Shal. Ay, I think my cousin meant well. 265 

Slen. Ay, or else I would I might be hanged, la ! 

Shal. Here comes fair Mistress Anne. 

Re-enter Anne Page. 

Would I were young for your sake, Mistress 

Anne ! 
Anne. The dinner is on the table; my father desires 270 

your worships' company. 
Shal. I will wait on him, fair Mistress Anne. 
Evans. Od's plessed will ! I will not be absence at the 

grace. [Exeunt Shallow and Evans. 

Anne. Will't please your worship to come in, 275 

sir? 

258. conteinpt\ Theobald's reading is used to introduce or accompany a con- 
accepted by all subsequent editors, ventional phrase or an address, or to 
Steevens says it is supported by the call attention to an emphatic state- 
same intentional blunder in Lovers ment," New Eng. Diet. (O. E. la). 
Labour's Lost : " Sir, the contempts The earliest example in New Eng. 
thereof are as touching me" (i. i. Diet, is from this scene (lines 86, 323). 
191). Shakespeare has used it already in 

259, 260. dissolved, and dissohUely\ Loves Laboui-'s Lost, v. ii. 414, where 
We don't see so much of Slender later in it rhymes with "flaw." See also 
the play, as here ; and he never lapses Dekker's Satiromastix (Pearson, 196), 
into this form of corrupt English again. 1602 ; and Ben Jonson, Bart. Fair, 
No doubt he is affected by the conta- iv. 3 {\c)2b). 

gious example of Evans' grandiloquent 268. Wonld L were'\ So says Bella- 
blunders, and the strange language mont to Doll in Webster's Northwa7'd 
he has been pelted with on all Ho, iv. i (1607): "Why, Medea, 
sides. what spirit ? Would I were a young 
266, Id\ "An exclamation formerly man for thy sake ! " 



26 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act I. 



Slen, No, I thank you, forsooth, heartily ; I am very 
well. 

Anne, The dinner attends you, sir. 

Slen. I am not a - hungry, I thank you, forsooth. 280 
Go, sirrah, for all you are my man, go wait 
upon my cousin Shallow. \Exit Simple?^ A 
justice of peace sometime may be beholding to 
his friend for a man. I keep but three men 
and a boy yet, till my mother be dead : but 285 
what though ? yet I live like a poor gentleman 
born. 

Anne. I may not go in without your worship: they 
will not sit till you come. 

Slen. r faith, I'll eat nothing; I thank you as much 290 
as though I did. 

Anne. I pray you, sir, walk in. 

Slen. I had rather walk here, I thank you. I bruised 

283. sovieti7ne\ sometimes Cambridge. 286. like'\ omitted F 2, 3, 4. 

she is not pleased with their masters 
coming . . . they get them gone be- 
times. ... By the way their lackies 
tell them what the gentleman's boy re- 
ported." 

284, 285. three men and a boy] This 
seems to have been an ordinary group- 
ing of servants on a small scale. 
** Your hoy carries but three men in 
her, and a boy," Jonson, The Fox, 
iv. I. 

286. what though ?] what of it ? 
what though I do? A frequent ex- 
pression in Shakespeare. See Henry V. 
II. i. 9. Slender here again reminds 
one of Ben Jonson's Stephen : "A fine 
jest, i' faith ! 'Slid, a gentleman mun 
show himself like a gentleman," Every 
Man in his Httmozir, i. i. 

293, 294. brtdsed my shin'] The 
bruising of the shin reads more natur- 
ally in the Quarto, "A Fencer and I 



281,282. go wait upon my cousin Shal- 
low] At important banquets and func- 
tions it was customary for those taking 
part in them to be attended by their ser- 
vants as a mark of distinction at all 
times. But Slender's remark points 
to a fashion that I have not found it 
easy to produce a parallel for — that a 
country gentleman should bring his 
servant to wait at table when dining at 
a neighbour's house in a quiet friendly 
way. In Dekker's Batchelors Banquet 
(Gros. i. 216, 217), 1603, the following 
passage occurs : " Towards the end of 
the dinner, he calls for cheese and 
fruit, but there is none in the house, 
so that he is faine to send to the neigh- 
bours for the same, or else he would be 
utterly destitute : meane while his boy 
being at the table with the guestes' 
(seruants), at last tells them how his 
mistresse faines herselfe sicke, because 



SC. I.] 



OF WINDSOR 



27 



my shin th' other day with playing at sword and 
dagger with a master of fence; three veneys for 295 



plaid three venies For a dish of stewd 
prunes, and I with my ward Defending 
my head, he brok my shin." There is 
no "sword and dagger " in Quarto. It 
would belong rather to cudgel play 
than sword and dagger, and the Fencer 
does it for him. There is a parallel 
passage in Nashe's First Part of 
PasquiVs Apologie, 1590, " The 
second venue the Welch-man hath 
bestowed upon vs, is a wipe ouer the 
shinnes of the Non-residents." Slender 
is parading his awkward ignorance. 

294, 295. sword and dagger"] E. 
Howes in Stew's Annals (1615) says 
that sword and buckler fights were con- 
stantly to be seen in the streets, especi- 
ally from April to October in the 
afternoon in London up to 20th Eliza- 
beth, 1577-78, and then Rapier and 
Dagger came into use. These fights 
were usually amongst the followers and 
retainers of the nobility, and hence the 
rapier and dagger fight is, at the time 
of this play, usually held to be the 
fashion amongst serving - men. The 
good old boisterous manly game of 
sword and buckler is constantly sighed 
after. *' Sword and buckler was called 
a good conscience, but that was left 
long ago, that was too manly a fight, 
too sound a weapon for these days . . . 
our lawyers are good sword and dagger 
men, they '11 quickly despatch you," 
Middleton, The Phoenix, ii. 3, 1607. 
In Two Angry Women of Abingdon 
(Haz. Dods. vii. 318), 1599, Coomes, 
a serving-man, says: "I see by this 
dearth of good swords that sword and 
buckler fight begins to grow out ; I am 
sorry for it ; I shall never see good 
manhood again . . . this poking fight of 
rapier and dagger will come up then : 
then a man, a tall man and a good sw. 
and b. man will he spitted like a cat or 
a coney." And in Day's Blind Beggar 
(1600): "Sir Robert, chuse your 
weapon first. Sir Rob. Thanks to my 
liege : the common fight of these same 
serving-men is sword and dagger, there- 



fore I '11 chose the sword and target, 
they are unskilful in't." However, in 
spite of these prejudices, the foreign 
innovation was adopted. In Worke for 
Cutlers, or a Merrie Dialogue between 
Sword, Rapier, and Dagger, acted in a 
show in the famous University of Cam- 
bridge, and printed in 161 5, it is de- 
cided that Sword is for the camp and 
field, Rapier for the court, and Dagger 
to back either as required. At the 
period of the play the method was held 
somewhat in contempt, and appears to 
be put into Slender's accomplishments, 
like most of his efforts, to make him 
lower himself. Harington says in 1 596 : 
" Out ass ! What dost thou tell me of 
these stale fashions of the sword and 
buckler time ? I tell thee they are out 
of request now," "An Apology or 
rather Retractation" {Met. of A fax), 
rept. p. 48. See 11. i. 227 and note. 
Compare Wilkins' Miseries of En- 
forced Marriage (Haz. Dods, ix. 556) : 
"you cowards, three to one! worse 
than fencers that wear long swords." 

295. master of fe^ice"] "The manner 
of the proceeding of our fencers in 
their schools is this ; first they which 
desire to be taught at their admission 
are called scholars, and as they profit, 
they take degrees and proceed to be 
provosts of defence ; and that must be 
wonne by public trial of their skill at 
certain weapons, which they call prizes 
and in the presence and view of many 
hundreds of people ; and at their next 
and last prize, well and sufficiently 
performed, they do proceed to come 
maisters of the science of defence, or 
maisters of fence as we commonly call 
them " (quoted by Strutt from 7'he 
Third University of London, Black 
Letter, 16 15). " Henry viii. made the 
professors of this art a company, by 
letters patent, wherein the act is 
intituled The Noble Science of De- 
fence" (Strutt). The master of defence 
is often referred to by Ben Jonson and, 
with his prizes, as above, forms a part 



28 THE MERRY WIVES [acti. 

a dish of stewed prunes ; and, by my troth, 
I cannot abide the smell of hot meat since. 
Why do your dogs bark so? be there bears i' 
the town ? 

Afine. I think there are, sir; 1 heard them talked 300 
of. 

Slen. I love the sport well ; but I shall as soon 
quarrel at it as any man in England. You 
are afraid, if you see the bear loose, are you 
not? 305 

Anne. Ay, indeed, sir. 

Slen. That 's meat and drink to me, now. I have 
seen Sackerson loose twenty times, and have 

of the interminable Cynthia's Revels, for prostitutes. Halliwell says, " it 

1600. appears from Marroccus Extaticus 

295. veneys'\ Fr. venue, an assault. (1595) and other works that stewed 
*' Vemie, A comming, arrival, etc. ; prunes were commonly placed in the 
also, a venny in fencing" (Cotgrave). windows of a house of disreputable 
Here, again, Slender gives himself character." References may be found 
away. He has not, as Jumper [Case is in Webster's Northward Ho, iv. 3, and 
Altered) says, " the phrases, and the Beaumont and Fletcher's Mad Lover, 
anagrams, and the epitaphs fitting the iv. 5 (Dyce, vi. 191), and in various 
mystery of the noble science." Com- editorial notes. " Hot meat," on the 
pare Ben Jonson, Every Man iti his Quarto's showing, refers to Slender's 
Humour, i. 4 (1598): "But one bruised shin ! See note at 293. "Meat" 
venue, sir. Bobadil. Venue ! fie : here means food, i.e. prunes. 

most gross denomination, as ever I 307. meat and drink to me'\ This 

heard : O, the stoccata, while you live, expression occurs in Gabriel Harvey's 

note that." The term was frequent. Z<?//"^rj- (Camden Society Reprint), «Vra 

" Thou wouldst be loth to play half a 1575 (Oliphant, New English). And 

dozen of venies at wasters with a good in Nashe, Pasquifs Keturne (Grosart 

fellow for a broken head," Beaumont ed., i. 93), 1589: "It is meat and 

and Fletcher, Philaster, iv. 3, 1613. drink to me to see a clown." See As 

296. a dish of stewed prunes'] A dish Yoti Like Lt, v. i. 10. 

hardly fit to be mentioned in the ears 308. Sackerson] A famous bear at 

of a young gentlewoman. See, for its the Bear Garden on the Bankside. He 

associations, 1 Henry LV. 11 1. iii. 128, is mentioned again in Sir Giles Goose- 

Meastire for Measure, il. i. 9, and cap (Bullen's Old Plays, iii. 45), 1606 : 

2 Henry IV. ii. iv. 159. It was the " Never stir if he fought not with great 

recognised dish of dissolute women, Sakerson foure hours to one, foremost 

so much so, that in Every Woman in take up hindmost, and tooke so many 

her Humour (Bullen's Old Plays, iv. loaves from him that he sterved pre- 

364), "stewed prunes" is a synonym sently." And in Epigrams by J. D. 



SC. I.] 



OF WINDSOR 



29 



taken him by the chain ; but, I warrant you, 
the women have so cried and shrieked at it, 310 
that it passed : but women, indeed, cannot 
abide 'em ; they are very ill - favoured rough 
things. 

Re-enter Page. 

Page. Come, gentle Master Slender, come ; we stay 

for you. 3 I 5 

Slen, I '11 eat nothing, I thank you, sir. 

Page. By cock and pie, you shall not choose, sir ! 
come, come. 



(Sir John Davies), In Publiuui, xliii., 
1598, " Publius, a sLudent of the Com- 
mon-Law," goes down (like Slender) 
" amongst the bears and dogs " — 

" for such filthy sport his books 
forsakes, 

Leaving old Ployden, Dyer and 
Brooke alone 

To see old Harry Hunkes and Sacar- 
son." 
Other famous bears of the time were 
George Stone (died 1606) and Ned 
Whiting. Malone thought it probable 
that they took their names from the 
keepers. In Breton's FasquiPs Fooles- 
cap (1600), there is a '* swaggering huff 
cap " who "face to face will meet the 
old blind bear." If this was Sacker- 
son, Slender's feat becomes more char- 
acteristic. This bear is mentioned 
again by Nashe : "all the colhers of 
Romford, who hold their corporation 
by yarking the blind beare at Paris 
Garden," Unfortunate Traveller {Gixos,. 
V- 159), 1594. Slender was in good 
company it seems. At a later date 
(1609) Harry Hunks was blind also. 
Probably a result of their employment. 
"Whipping the blind bear" is made 
a sneer in Dekker's Satiromastix (p. 
260), 1602. 

311. it passed] it was extraordinary, 



or surprising. See again iv. ii. 128, 
"this passes. Master Ford." And 
Troilus and Cressida, I. ii. 182, "all 
the rest so laughed, that it passed." 
"Passing" and "passingly" were 
commonly used in the same sense. 

317. By cock and pie] Supposed to 
be originally for "God," and " pie" the 
ordinal of the Roman Catholic Church. 
New Eng. Diet, refers to Crowley's 
Epigravis (1550), "By cock and by 
pie." A common vulgar oath, occur- 
ring again in 2 Henry IV. v. i. See 
Nares for further examples, and see 
Arber's reprint of Totters Miscellany 
(p. 251), 1557 (quoted in New Eng. 
Diet.). 

317. yoii shall not choose] An estab- 
lished phrase of courtesy. Compare 
Taming of the Shrew, v. i. 12 : " You 
shall not choose but drink before you 
go." Compare N. Breton ("Glean- 
ings," Grosart, p. 8), 1577: "Then 
parting at the door, Believe me now it 
was a sport to see, What stir there was 
who should go out before ; Such curt- 
sies low ; and Pray you pardon me " — 
"You shall not choose" — "In faith 
you are to blame — Good sooth, thought 
I, a man would think the same." 
The passage illustrates the lines follow- 
ing. 



30 THE MERRY WIVES [acti. 

Slen. Nay, pray you, lead the way. 

Page. Come on, sir. 320 

Slen. Mistress Anne, yourself shall go first. 

Anne. Not I, sir; pray you, keep on. 

Slen. Truly, I will not go first ; truly, la ! I will not 

do you that wrong. 
Anne. I pray you, sir. 325 

Slen. I '11 rather be unmannerly than troublesome. 

You do yourself wrong, indeed, la ! [Exeunt. 



SCENE \l.— The Same. 

Enter Sir Hugh Evans and Simple. 

Evans. Go your ways, and ask of Doctor Caius' house 
which is the way: and there dwells one Mistress 
Quickly, which is in the manner of his nurse, or 
his dry nurse, or his cook, or his laundry, his 
washer, and his wringer. 5 

Sim. Well, sir. 

Evans. Nay, it is petter yet. Give her this letter ; for 
it is a 'oman that altogether's acquaintance with 
Mistress Anne Page : and the letter is, to desire 
and require her to solicit your master's desires to 10 

4. dry'l try Ql, Dyce. 5. •wringer] Theobald; ringer Ff, Q 3. 8. alto- 
gether^ s\ Tyrwhitt conj., Steevens et seq. ; altogether s Ff. 

326.] "Better be unmannerly than 327. la!'\ See note line 266. 
troublesome" is a proverb in Ray's 

collection, 1670. It occurs in Ravens- '^'^^^^ ^^' 

croft's Canterbury Guests, Act ill., Enter Sir Hugh, etc.] The Quarto 

1695. In the Quarto the words are, reads here "Enter Sir Hugh and 

*' I have more manners then so, I hope. Simple and one dinner." 

An. Well, sir, I will not be trouble- 3, 4. nurse'\ See iii. ii. 66. 
some." 



SC. III.] 



OF WINDSOR 



31 



Mistress Anne Page. I pray you, be gone : I 
will make an end of my dinner ; there 's pippins 
and seese to come. \Exeunt. 



SCENE III. — A Room in the Garter Inn, 

Enter Falstaff, Host, Bardolph, Nym, Pistol, 
and Robin. 

FaL Mine host of the Garter ! 

Host. What says my bully-rook ? speak scholarly and 
wisely. 



II, 12. pray you . . . I wiir\ Pray you do, I must not be absent at the grace. 
I will (^ I. 13. seese] Dyce, Wheatley, QidiXg', cheese Ff, Q 3, Globe Cam- 
bridge ; to come] behinde Q i. 

Scene iii. 

2. bully -rook] bully Rook Q i, F i. 



12, 13. pippins and seese] The proper 
finish to a meal. Apples ("they be 
very flative") were corrected by "digest- 
ive cheese." Compare Lingua, iv. 5 
(Haz. Dods. ix. 424), 1607: "What 
do you come with roast meat after 
apples? away with it. Digestion, 
serve out cheese." In one of Jonson's 
best epigrams, Inviting a Friend to 
Supper, he says, "Digestive cheese 
and fruit there sure will be." Evans, 
the Welshman, would be sure to recol- 
lect the cheese. See below, ii. ii. 319, 
V. v. 148. Speaking of " the naturall 
disposicions of Welshmen" in 1542, 
Andrew Borde says : " I do love cawse 
boby \_sic], good rosted chese," Boke 
of Knowledge. The Quarto reads 
"pepions and cheese behinde.''^ Evans's 
remark about "grace" in the Quarto 
is also noteworthy. 

Scene in. 

1. Mine host of the Garter] See 
Introduction, 

2. bully] A term of endearment, used 



(like "darling") either as adjective or 
substantive. New Eng. Diet, gives an 
example from Bales' Three Lawes, 
1538 : "It is myne owne swetebullye," 
a fragment of a song that afterwards 
became popular. The word is very 
common in this play and also in Mid- 
summer Night's Dream. Elsewhere, 
until later, it is not often met with. 
Onion uses it in Jonson's Case is Altered 
I. i. (p. 5I9(^, Cuningham's Gifford), 
1598: "Ay, bully, he is above." Jonson 
has also " bully Horace," Poetaster, v. 
i. (254^), 1601 ; "bully boys," Masque 
of Christmas ; and "bully bird," New 
Inn, II. ii. (354/^). The song above is 
in Deloney's Thomas of Reading, 1 590, 
with burthen, dialoguewise : " Yet will 
I still remaine to thee, Trang dilly 
do, Trang dilly, Thy friend and lover 
secretly. Woman — Thou art my owne 
sweet bully." 

2. bully-rook] These words are not 
hyphened in the early editions. New 
Eng. Diet, deals with this expression 
as one word, but gives no help. It 



32 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act I. 



Fal. Truly, mine host, I must turn away some of my 

followers. 5 

Host. Discard, bully Hercules ; cashier : let them wag ; 
trot, trot. 

FaL I sit at ten pounds a week. 



occurs in this play four times. The 
Host uses the term, also "bully Her- 
cules," "bully Hector," and appears 
to use '* Rook " as a style or title. I 
believe that Steevens was right in his 
suggestion that it was taken from the 
rooks at the game of chess. Douce 
rejects this on the authority of a meaning 
for " rook," dating 1680, which is appar- 
ently inapplicable. The rook was the 
castle, the duke, or the warder at chess, 
next in power to the queen. Douce's 
explanation of "rook," "a hectoring, 
cheating sharper," is quite untrue (as 
far as my reading goes) of this date. A 
rook was a simpleton — one easily gulled ; 
and though I would not believe the 
Host deliberately called Falstaff so, he 
may have implied it. For surely the 
cap fits him, where he sits at ;i^iO 
(about ^150 of our money) a week? 
For the word, compare Chapman, May 
Day, iii. {ante 161 1) : "an arrant rook, 
by this light, a capable cheating stock, 
a man may carry him up and down by 
the ears like a pipkin." And Middle- 
ton, Fair Qtiarrel, iv. i., 1617: " Do 
not henceforth neglect your schooling, 
Master Chough. Chough. Call me 
rook, if I do, tutor. Trim. And 
me raven." The "raven" here is 
the plunderer, and the * ' rook " and 
"raven" are similarly set side by side 
previously in Ben Jonson's Fox, i. i. 
(346<5) : "Rook go with you, raven" 
(wrongly explained in the notes by 
Whalley). And in Jonson's Every Man 
in his Htwwur, i. iv. : "Hang him, 
rook ! he ! Why he has no more 
judgment than a malt horse," where 
Wheatley's note (ed. 1877, p. 147), 
"cheat or sharper," knocks the sense 
to pieces. And Ben again : " a gull, 
a rook, a shot-clog to make suppers 



and be laughed at," Poetaster, i. i. 
(211^), 1 60 1. In Every Man Otit of 
his Hu7nour (1599), the word occurs 
twice for a foolish person, a fop : " that 
rook, that painted jay with such a deal 
of outside " (p. ^'^b), and earlier, in the 
Induction (p. 67(3;). As for "bully- 
rook " as one word. New Eng. Did. 
has no other example in this sense 
("boon companion^") till a century 
later, spelt " bully- rocks " ; and in the 
sense of " hired ruffian " none till 1673. 
I can, however, adduce a parallel from 
Shirley, Witty Fair One, in. iv. (Dyce 
ed. , i. 3 1 9) : " suck in the spirit of sack, 
till we be delphick, and prophesy, my 
bully-rook" (1628). Wheatley quotes 
Coles's Lat.- Eng. Diet. {1677?): "A 
Bully Rook (Fellow) vir foriis et 
animosus.^^ For a good example of 
"rook," meaning "dupe," see Wilkins's 
Miseries of Enforced Marriage, ii. 
(Haz. Dods. ix. 489), 1607: "Now 
let me see how many rooks I have 
undone already this term," etc. " My 
young bully " for "my young fellow" 
occurs a little lower down (p. 494) in 
the same play, which more than once 
throws light on Merry Wives. 

6. Discara"] Originally a gaming term. 
"When this valiant Brutus had thus 
discarded the kings and queens out of 
the pack," Harington, Met, of Ajax, 
rept. pp. 58, 59, 1596. "Discard" 
and " cashier " are new words in these 
senses, showing how up to date the 
Host is in his terms. 

8. sit at] live at. Wheatley gives an 
apt illustration from The Man in the 
Moon telling Strange Fortunes, 1 609 : 
' ' frequent the ordinaries . . . how 
they will moove . . . how they 
sit at an unmerciful rent." When a 
certain Mounsieur, a baron, came from 



SC. III.] 



OF WINDSOR 



33 



Host, Thou 'rt an emperor, Caesar, Keisar, and 

Pheezar. I will entertain Bardolph ; he i o 
shall draw, he shall tap : said I well, bully 
Hector ? 

Fal. Do so, good mine host. 

Host. I have spoke; let him follow. \To Bard.'] 

Let me see thee froth and lime : I am at a word ; i 5 



follow. 



[Exit. 



II. shall . . . shall] F i, Q 3 ; 
Steevens ; lyme Q l ; lyve Ff, Q 3. 



will 



will F 2, 3, 4. 



[5 lime] 



the French King to instruct King 
James's men in the French method of 
falconry in 1624, Chamberlain wrote : 
"he and his train stand the King in 
five and twenty or thirty pounds a 
day" [Court and Times of James /., 
ii. 446). 

10. Pheezar] No doubt for Vizier. 
There are signs of Hakluyt in this play, 
or at any rate of the voyages of the time. 
See Falstaffs "Guiana," "East and 
West Indies," below in this scene. The 
word occurs in Shute, 1562 (Stanford's 
Dictionary). And in Hakluyt, ii. i. p. 
304: " Sinan Bassa, the cheefe Vizir" 
(1599). No sense has been made out of 
this word in the commentators' notes. 
See note below (11. i. 224) at "An- 
heires." The'Quarto here has, "Caesar, 
Phessir, and Kesar bully," a very har- 
monious jumble. It also gives us the 
proper reading "lime," adopted by 
Steevens, instead of the "live" of the 
Folio, in line 15. 

11. said I well] So in 2 Henry IV. 
III. ii. 227, "Ha, Sir John, said I 
well." 

15. froth and lime] The Host in 
Jonson's New Inn, li. ii., refers to 
frothing : ' * whose horses may be 
cosened, or what jugs, Filled up with 
froth" (353<^). For "lime" compare 
1 Henry IV. II. iv. 137: "here's 
lime in this sack too : there is nothing 
but roguery to be found in villanous 



man : yet a coward is worse than a cup 
of sack with lime in it." " Frothing " 
refers to ale, and " lime" to wine. In 
Jonson's Bart. Fair, ii. i., Ursula 
tells her tapster, ' ' Froth your cans well 
in the filling, at length, rogue, and jog 
your bottles o' the buttock" (i6ia). 
Mentions of " frothing" are frequent in 
this play — always referring to "bottle- 
ale." Warburton quotes from Sir 
Richard Hawkins' Voyages, p. 379 : 
"Since the Spanish sacks have been 
common in our taverns, which for con- 
servation are mingled with lime in the 
making, our nation complains of calen- 
tures, of the stone, the dropsy, and 
infinite other distempers, not heard of 
before this wine came into frequent 
use." Schmidt insists on the "live" 
of the Ff, froth and Hve, "for frothing 
tankards make thriving tapsters. ' ' Com- 
pare several allusions to Froth's name, 
a character in Measure for Measure, in 
Act II. The passage quoted by War- 
burton is in the notes in Steevens' 
Shakespeare, 2 Henry IV. Steevens 
says gratuitously, lime was put in to 
make it sparkle in the glass. But the 
putting in of lime to remove the sour- 
ness was one of the tricks of the trade 
in Pliny's time, and probably in all 
time. "The Africans use to mitigate 
and allay the tartnesse of their wines 
with plaister, yea and in some parts 
of their country with lime," Holland's 



34 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act I. 



Fal. Bardolph, follow him. A tapster is a good 
trade : an old cloak makes a new jerkin ; a 
withered serving - man a fresh tapster. Go ; 
adieu. 20 

Bard, It is a life that I have desired : I will 
thrive. 

Pist. O base Hungarian wight ! wilt thou the spigot 

wield ? \Exit Bardolph, 

23. Hungarian'\ Ff, Q 3 ; Gongarian Q i, Steevens. 



Pliniey xiv. 19, 160 1. And again : 
*' For as touching those wines which 
are medicined with marble, piastre and 
quicklime, what man is he (were he 
never so healthie and strong) but 
he may be afraid well ynough to 
drinke thereof?" ibidem^ xxiii. i (p. 

153^)- 

15. at a 7vord] i.e. I am a man of 
few words. So in 2 Henry IV. III. ii. 
319: *' I have spoke at a word. God 
keep you." The expression is common 
(see above, i. i. 109), but in connec- 
tion elsewhere with an explanatory 
verb. 

18. an old cloak makes] Compare 
Spanish Tragedy (Haz. Dods. v. 88), 
1594: "Dost thou think to live, till 
his old doublet will make thee a new 
truss ? " 

19. withered serving- man'] Falstaff 
parodies the old proverb, "An old 
serving-man makes a young beggar." 
It is in George-a- Green ; Thom's Early 
Prose Romances, chap. ii. ; Webster's 
Northivard Ho; Distracted Emperor 
(Bullen's Old Plays), etc. N. Breton, 
in Crossing of Proverbs, has another 
variation, "A young courtier, an old 
beggar. " The earlier form was ' ' Young 
saint, old devil." 

23.] Steevens noted here : *' This is a 
parody on a line taken from one of 
the old bombast plays, beginning, ' O 
base Gongarian, wilt thou the distaff 
wield ? ' " He goes on : "I have marked 
the passage down, but forgot to note the 



play." It is a desideratum, as it would 
simpify the allusion in line 25. Shake- 
speare, however, frequently refers to 
the spiritlessness, or effeminacy, of the 
tapster. 

23. Hungarian] Gongarian, the 
Quarto reading, is incapable of ex- 
planation. A punning reference to 
discarded and disbanded soldiers who 
returned from the wars in Hungary 
about this time in a destitute condition. 
Hall notices them : 

" So sharp and meagre that who 
should them see 
Would sware they lately came 
from Hungary." 
The term occurs three times in The 
Merry Devil of Edmonton {circa 
1600): "I have knights and colonels 
in my house and must tend the 
Hungarians," ii. i. line 60; and in 
Webster's Westward Ho, v. iii., and 
other writers of this date. The joke 
received the sanction of the British 
Solomon : "Sir Francis Mitchell, who, 
being a very lean-faced fellow, and 
coming before his Majesty, his Majesty 
asked him what news from Bethlem 
Gabor, telling him he was an Hungarian 
and could not but know," Letter 
dated 1 620-1 621 in Court and Times 
of James /., ii. 242. There is no 
earlier example of the word in this 
sense. There are several parallel 
passages in this play and the Merry 
Devil. See Bohemian Tartar, iv. v. 



SC. III.] 



OF WINDSOR 



35 



Nym. He was gotten in drink: is not the humour 25 

conceited ? 
FaL I am glad I am so acquit of this tinder-box : 

his thefts were too open ; his filching was like 

an unskilful singer ; he kept not time. 
Nym. The good humour is to steal at a minute's 30 

rest. 
PisU "Convey," the wise it call. "Steal!" foh ! a 

fico for the phrase ! 
FaL Well, sirs, I am almost out at heels. 
Pist. Why, then, let kibes ensue. 35 



26. conceitedly Nym's speech (in Q i) after wield? 
and there 's the humour of it " " ' ' 

tinder-box\ tinder Boy Q i. 



His mind is not heroic 
; inserted by Theobald after conceited! 27. 
30. minute s\ minim (Langton conj.), Singer. 



25. gotten"] begotten. An obsolete 
form, of which New Eng. Diet, has only 
two examples, this not being one. Ben 
Jonson uses it once. Compare A Merry 
Knack to K?iow a Knave (Haz. Dods. 
vi. 509) : " when such a gallant as you 
were gotten." 

26.] Steevens inserted here, after 
"conceited," the passage "Hismindeis 
not heroick, And there 's the humour of 
it," from the Quarto, where it is Nym's 
remark after "wield." The words 
make the allusion contained in "gotten 
in drink " more explicit, an allusion 
which Steevens' line about the distaff 
would fully explain. It is a common 
piece of folklore, referred to by Falstaff 
m 2 Henry IV. iv. iii. loi, and stated 
positively in Beaumont and Fletcher's 
Woman Hater, 11. i., and in Middleton's 
Phcenix, II. iii. (BuUen's Middleton, i. 
I55<5), 1607. Nym's humour haslalways 
pith in it, if it can be discovered. 

27. tinder-box] Another reference to 
Bardolph's "flames o' fire." See 
" Scarlet," I. i. 177 (note). For "tinder- 
box," see Othello, i. i. 141 (note). 

30, 31. steal at a minute's rest] Prob- 
ably Nym plays on the expression, 
"steal a minute's rest," or, as Malone 



puts it, " when watchfulness reposes for 
a moment." Nym's humours are so 
involved. The expression was in use. 
Compare T. Brewer's prose Merry 
Devil of Edmonton (reprint of 1631 ed., 
p. 38), 1608 : " Could by no means 
take a minute's rest for him." The 
alteration to minim is an unwarrantable, 
though ingenious, one. 

32. Convey] a polite term for steal. 
So in Hugh Rhodes, Boke of Nurture 
(Furnivall's Babees Book, p. 77), 1577 : 
*' Wype cleane thy spone, I do thee 
reed, leave it not in the dish ; Lay it 
downe before thy trenchoure, thereof 
be not afrayde ; And take heede who 
takes it up, for feare it be convayde." 
Nares refers to Marston's What You 
Will. Conveyance has a similar use 
in 1 Henry VI. i. iii. 2, and in Wily 
Beguiled {HdiZ. Dods. ix. 222) twice. 

32, 33. a tico for the phrase] Sp. ^g. 
A fig for it. Compare Henry V. ill. vi. 
60. The expression occurs in Guilpin's 
Skialetheia (1598), 68, "a fico for the 
criticke spleene." Ben Jonson has the 
word in Every Man in his Humour, 
II. (1598). 

34, 35. out at heels . . . kibes] Kibed 
heels, that is to say, chapped, or ulcer- 



36 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act I. 



FaL There is no remedy ; I must cony-catch ; I must 

shift. 
Pist. Young ravens must have food. 
Fal. Which of you know Ford of this town ? 
Pist. I ken the wight : he is of substance 40 

good. 
Fal. My honest lads, I will tell you what I am 

about. 
Pist. Two yards, and more. 
Fal. No quips now. Pistol! Indeed, I am in the 45 



ated heels, not improbably from bad 
foot wear, seem to have been extra- 
ordinarily common, amounting to a 
plague. With regard to foot wear 
compare the abundance of the proverbs 
(with allusions), "treading one's foot 
awry" and "knowing where the shoe 
pinches," and others. In the Index 
to Holland's Plinie (i6oi) there are 
twenty-two references to ' ' kibed heels, 
how to be cured." Shakespeare refers 
to them again in Hamlet^ v. i. 153, and 
in Lear, i. v. 9. See Craig's note at 
the latter passage in his edition of 
Lear. The passage in the text dis- 
tinctly attributes them to bad boots. 
Holland never confounds kibes with 
" bloudiefalls and blistering chilblains." 
How far the translator follows Pliny 
need not be inquired into here. 
Sharpham makes the connection of 
heels and kibes proverbial: "If I 
come but once neere him, he sweeres 
I am lyke a kybe, always at his heeles," 
Cupid's Whirligig, Act Vil., 1607. 
And Ben Jonson has the words, 
" bribes To make the heel forget it eer 
had kibes," Vision of Delight, 161 7. 
Chilblains, a form of frost-bite, belong 
chiefly to youth, bad circulation, 
and winter. Kibes made no distinc- 
tion. 

j6. cony-catch'] See note, i. i. 



J. 



37. shift] In the Quarto the word is 



"cheat." This meaning is well illus- 
trated by Ben Jonson's Cavalero Shift, 
"a threadbare shark," in Every Man 
Out of his Humour. See Dra?natis Per- 
soncB of that play, and also Jonson's 
Epigram xii., on "Lieutenant Shift." 
It was especially appHed to soldier- 
impostors, and belonged to their cheat- 
ing ways. Nares has two good 
examples of "shifter, a cozener." 
Peele had a rogue character in his 
early play. Sir Clyomon {circa 1 590), 
whom he named Subtle Shift. In 
Wheatley's edition of this play he gives, 
"To sharke or shift or cony-catch for 
money," Taylor's Works, 1630. A 
very wide mark. 

38. Young ravens must have food] 
Steevens says, "An adage. See Ray's 
Proverbs.'''' It is not in Ray. The 
nearest to it is, " Small birds must 
have meat." Shakespeare perhaps re- 
called Job xxxviii. 41, as he does in As 
You Like it, ii. iii. Compare also 
Psalm cxlvii. 9: "He giveth to the 
beast his food, and to the young ravens 
which cry." But no doubt Pistol has 
in mind the more congenial sense of 
"raven," a sharker, which must have 
been in use. See note at "bully- 
rook," line 2. This line is not in 
the Quarto, the surrounding dia- 
logue is. 

45. quips] In the Quarto the word is 
"gibes." 



SC. III.] 



OF WINDSOR 



37 



waist two yards about ; but I am now about no 
waste ; I am about thrift. Briefly, I do mean to 
make love to Ford's wife : I spy entertainment in 
her ; she discourses, she carves, she gives the leer 
of invitation : I can construe the action of her 
familiar style; and the hardest voice of her 



50 



49. carves} craves Q 3. 

46, 47. vjaist . . . ivasfe"] Steevens 
quotes two examples of this standard 
pun, from Hey wood (1562), and from 
Shirley's Wedding, 1629. Jonson has 
it in Discoveries, iii. {De mollibus) : 
" There is nothing valiant or solid to be 
hoped for from such as are always 
kempt and perfumed . . . making the 
waist small, binding it with hoops, 
while the mind runs at waste." The 
expression "waste-thrift" (spendthrift) 
occurs in Beaumont and Fletcher's 
Knight of the Burning Pestle, i. 4. 

48. etitertainmejit} Compare Wilkins, 
Aliseries of Enforced Marriage (Haz. 
Dods. ix. 541), 1607: "I'll but pre- 
pare her heart for entertainment of your 
love." This seems to be the simple 
meaning here. Some commentators 
have found a special ' ' wanton " 
sense. 

49. she carves"] i.e. she is an accom- 
plished, courteous woman. Compare 
Love's Labour's L.ost, v. ii. 323, 4, 5 : 
" A' can carve too and lisp : why this is 
he That kissed his hand away in courtesy : 
This is the ape of form." The word is 
used here absolutely in a somewhat 
violent fashion, and there have been 
many comments. New E?ig. Diet. 
accepts Schmidt's sense, ' ' to show great 
courtesy and affability," and gives these 
twoexamples only. Dyce givesanumber 
of examples illustrating his sense of the 
word, used, he thinks, "to describe 
some particular form of action — some 
sign of intelligence and favour." Carv- 
ing was undoubtedly seized as a 
favourable opportunity of encouraging a 
suitor by word, look, and deed ; and 
all these allusions show that fashionable 



hostesses adopted it as a recognised 
mode of flirtation. Moreover, carving 
was practically one of the fine arts. 
The older books on the subject had laid 
down the laws, and it was the etiquette 
to practise them ostentatiously. A 
survey of the notes on this word reduces 
a man to pulp, and New Eng. Diet, acts 
as a delightful voider to take the refuse 
away, here, as in many other cases. 
Nevertheless, one or two passages (not 
hitherto quoted) will show the wide 
use of the term. In Choice, Chance, 
and Change (by N. Breton), Grosart's 
reprint, p. 59, 1606, occurs: "there 
wanted no part of comfort that might 
be found in Table kindness : as welcome, 
carving, and drinking, and so forth. 
But after dinner was done " — Brinsley 
Nicholson sent Grosart a note to this 
passage: "Carving is metaphorically 
used as descriptive of such gestures of 
deference, etc., as one used at that 
time when carving for an honoured or 
favoured person." He says (and I 
agree) that several of Dyce's quotations 
are not to the point. Compare Webster, 
White Devil, i6i2: "I did nothing 
to displease him, I carved to him at 
supper." In Fallace's delightful de- 
scription of a courtier in Jonson's 
Every Man Out, IV. i., his dainty 
carving is specially mentioned. The 
words in the Quarto from "I spy" 
("espy" Q i) to "invitation" are the 
same, excepting that "leer" is mis- 
written "lyre." Compare also The 
Two Noble Kijismen, iv. 3: "Desire 
to eat with her, carve her, drink to her," 
and see Skeat's note to his edition of 
that play. 



38 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act I. 



behaviour, to be Englished rightly, is, " I am Sir 

John Falstaff's." 
Pist He hath studied her will, and translated her 

will, out of honesty into English. 5 5 

Nyfn. The anchor is deep: will that humour 

pass? 
Fal. Now, the report goes she has all the rule 

of her husband's purse : he hath a legion of 

angels. 60 

Pist. As many devils entertain ; and to her, boy, 

say I. 

54. studied her will] Ff, Q 3, Globe; studied her well C^ I, Pope, Steevens, 
Craig. 54, 55. translated her will] Ff, Q 3 (omitted Q i) ; translated her 

well Pope, Steevens, Craig ; translated her Hanmer ; studied her well and 
translated her will Grant White ; studied her ivell and translated her ill Cam- 
bridge edd. conj. 59. he] she(^\\ a legion] Pope ; a legend Yi, Q3 ; legians 
Q I ; legions Q 3, Capell, Steevens. 61. entertain] Ff, Q 3 ; attend her Q i. 

rascal." The word occurs in the second 
Quarto of Hamlet^ ill. ii. 229. There 
are worse and more far-fetched puns 
than this in Shakespeare. Hall uses 
the word also in Satires, iv. ii. 103 
(1598). No wonder Nym asks, "will 
it pass?" Compare the following 
metaphorical use of the word : ' * Con- 
sider whether you will stoop to so poor 
a prey : at least I should wish you 
would make account of it as ultimtivi 
refugium and the last anchor," Court 
and Times of James I. , i. 89 ; Letter of 
Carleton, 1609. See below, line 90, 
note. 

60. angels] coins worth ten shillings. 

61. As ?nany devils entertain] Pistol 
elaborates the "humour," many bad 
people have many, or have the use of 
many, angels {i.e. money). Steevens 
gets another meaning, and makes 
"entertain" an imperative to Falstaff, 
"do you entertain in your service as 
many devils as she hath angels," reading 
* ' she " with the Quarto. For ' ' legions 
of devils," see note, ii. ii. 312. Compare 
Nashe, Terrors of the Night (Gros. iii. 



52. Englished] told in plain English. 
Compare Ben Jonson, Every Man Out 
of his Humour, Dram. Pers. : "A 
vain-glorious knight, over-englishing 
his travels, and wholly given to singu- 
larity." 

54, 55. will . . . wilf] Pistol means, 
"he hath studied her natural dis- 
position or bent of mind and translated 
it into carnal desire." For the various 
suggestions, see Collation above. The 
constant quibbling on the different mean- 
ings of "will" seem to render them 
unnecessary. 

56. The ajichor is deep] Farmer 
quotes a passage from Fennor's, 
Compter's Commonwealth, 1617, in 
which the words "anchor" and 
"deep" both occur, but it seems to be 
of no further aptness. What Nym 
says amounts to an acceptation of 
Falstaffs scheme ; the plan is fixed 
firmly. But Nym has some other 
sense. Perhaps he jocularly calls 
Falstaff, with a possible reference to 
Sir John, a byname for a clergyman, an 
"anchor," i.e. hermit "the deep old 



SC. III.] 



OF WINDSOR 



39 



Nym. The humour rises ; it is good : humour me 
the angels. 

Fal, I have writ me here a letter to her : and here 6 5 
another to Page's wife, who even now gave me 
good eyes too, examined my parts with most 
judicious (Deillades ; sometimes the beam of her 
view gilded my foot, sometimes my portly belly. 

Pist. Then did the sun on dunghill shine. 70 



()%, ceilladesl illiads Ff, Q 3 ; eyelids Halliwell, Pope conj. 
guided F 2, 3, 4. 



69. gilded] 



228), 1594: "A man that will enter- 
taine them [spirits] must not pollute 
his bodie with any grosse carnall . . . 
desires," etc. 

61. to her, boy] An expression of 
encouragement, perhaps from bear 
baiting. Compare Mucedorus, 1598 : 
^^ Spare her, Bremo ; spare her, do fiot 
kill. Shall I spare her which never 
spared any ? To it, Bremo, to it ; 
essay again. " The speaker is " A wild 
man " in the act of murdering a beauti- 
ful virgin. And again, on page 381: 
"To it, Francis— to it, sister ! " Both 
Quarto and Folio print the words as 
above, running with the text. They 
italicise the words, "I am. Sir John 
Falstafif's" (line 53). See also Beau- 
mont and Fletcher, Knight of Burning 
Pestle, iii. : "To him, Ralph, to him ! 
hold up the giant " ; Wit without 
Money, iv. : " Now to her, sir, fear 
nothing " ; and Merry Devil of 
Edmonton (Haz. Dods. x. 236), circa 
1600 : "To her again, mother." 

63. humour] Shakespeare has used 
this word as a verb in Lovers Labour's 
Lost, III. 13, and iv. ii. 52. And see 
II. i., "the humoured letter," in this 
play. 

66, 67. gave me good eyes] looked at 
me lovingly. Compare Heywood's 
Proverbs, ed. Sharman, p. 109, 1546 : 
"As he to her cast off a loving eye, 
So cast her husband like eye to his 
plate." 



68. «?7/a^(?^] " CEillade : an amorous 
looke, affectionate winke ... a 
sheepe's eye " (Cotgrave). The word 
occurs again in Lear, iv. v. Steevens 
referred to Greene's Disputation between 
a Hee Cony-catcher and a Shee Cony- 
catcher, 1592. The passage is in 
Grosart's edition, x. 199: "What 
flatteries they use to bewitch . . . what 
amorous glances, what smirking Ocyli- 
ades, what cringing courtesies," etc. 

68, 69. bea7}i of her view] The Quarto 
has here, "who even now gave me 
good eies too, examined my exteriors 
with such a greedy intention with the 
beames of her beautie, that it seemed 
as she would a scorged me up like a 
burning glasse." Compare the first 
lines of Sonnet xxxii. One of Watson's 
sonnets in A Centurie of Love (xxiii.) 
has this thought : " For when she first 
with seeming stately grace Bestowed 
on me a loving sweete regard, The 
beames which then proceeded from her 
face were such, as for the same I founde 
no worde, But needes perforce I must 
become content To mealt in minde till 
all my wittes were spent." 

70. sun on dujighill shine] Wheatley 
refers to Lyiy's Euphues, 1581, "The 
sun shineth upon the dunghill." 
Fuller, in Gnomologia, gives a proverb, 
" The sun is never the worse for shining 
on a dunghill." Falstaff shows to great 
disadvantage in receiving such insults 
from these base companions. 



40 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act I. 



Nym, I thank thee for that humour. 

Fal. O, she did so course o'er my exteriors with 
such a greedy intention, that the appetite of her 
eye did seem to scorch me up Hke a burning- 
glass ! Here 's another letter to her : she bears 
the purse too ; she is a region in Guiana, all gold 
and bounty. I will be cheaters to them both, and 
they shall be exchequers to me ; they shall be my 
East and West Indies, and I will trade to them 



75 



73. intention\ intentness. So in 
Jonson's Cynthia's Revels, i. i. 156(5 
(1600), Crites says: 

"my soul, 
Like one that looks on ill-affected 

eyes, 
Is hurt with mere intention on their 
follies." 
The act of fixed and earnest gazing 
(Gifford). 

74, 75. burning-glass !'\ Gabriel Har- 
vey compared the beams of the eye 
to burning-glasses: "Thine eyebeams 
will reflect upon thyself, and will be 
burning glasses to thine own eye," 
Triming of J^hos. Nashe (Grosart, iii. 

38), 1597. 

76. a region in Guiana, all gold] 
Lawrence Keymiss published A Relation 
of the Second Voyage to Guiana, 
dedicated to Sir Walter Raleigh, 1596. 
It dealt with the Spanish reports of the 
golden city of Manoa, or Eldorado. 
The earliest sneer at Guiana gold I 
find is in Nashe, Have with you to 
Saffron Walden (Grosart, iii. 76), 1596: 
* * it is no matter, upon the Returne from 
Guiana, the valuation of them may 
alter, and that which is currant now be 
then copper." In Hall's Satires, iv. 
iii. 28 (1598), we read : "Ventrous 
Fortunio his farme hath sold. And gets 
to Guiane land to fish for gold." To 
which Marston immediately replied 
(Satires, iv. no et seq., 1598), calling 
Hall a "shameless satirist" for sneer- 
ing at the "glorious action " (of Raleigh 



and Cavendish): "some gallant spirit 
Will boldly sail into the rich Guiana." 
Again, in the same year, all the year of 
this play, probably, Guilpin says in his 
Skialetheia {x&'^xvci'i, p. 32), 1598: 

"He hath been in both the Indies, 
East and West, 
Talks of Guiana, China, and the 
rest." 
We have here the combination of 
regions in the text. It was to conquer 
and annex the supposed capital 
(Eldorado) of the assumedly vast empire 
of Guiana that Sir Walter Raleigh's 
expedition of 1595 set forth: "that, 
for the greatness, for the riches, and 
for the excellent seat it far exceedeth 
any in the world." See also 
Harington's Metamorphosis of Aj'ax 
(reprint, p. 121), 1596: "China nor 
the West Indies scarce allows more 
plenty. Briefly, at the very coming in 
you would think you were come to the 
Eldorado in Guiana." 

77. cheaters'] An officer of the 
Exchequer, an escheater. In this 
figurative sense Shakespeare has the 
word again in Sonnet ci. , and in Titus 
Andronicus, v. i. in : "I played the 
cheater for thy father's hand." He 
plays with the gambling sense in 
2 Henry IV. it. iv. in, as no doubt 
he does here. 

79. East and West Indies] Dekker 
has the same thought in Satiromastix , 
1601-1602: "Thou shall be my West 
Indies, and none but Lucca shall 



SC. III.] 



OF WINDSOR 



41 



both. Go bear thou this letter to Mistress Page; 80 
and thou this to Mistress Ford : we will thrive, 
lads, we will thrive. 

Pist. Shall I Sir Pandarus of Troy become. 

And by my side wear steel ? then, Lucifer take all ! 

Nym. I will run no base humour : here, take the 8 5 
humour-letter : I will keep the haviour of re- 
putation. 

Fal. [To Robin?[ Hold, sirrah, bear you these letters tightly; 
Sail like my pinnace to these golden shores. 

83. Pandarus] Panderowes Q i. 88. tightly\ rightly Q 3, F 2, 3, 4. 



discover thee." And Ben Jonson, 
"The Spanish monarchy, with both 
the Indies, Could not buy off the 
treasure of this kiss" {New Inn, iv. i). 

Zt^. Sir Pandarus\ An ally of the 
Trojans at the siege of Troy. In 
mediaeval romance he is represented as 
a procurer. Chaucer's Pandarus is 
Creseida's " middle-aged uncle, with 
blunted perceptions of what is moral " 
(Skeat). " He that was the Pandore 
to procure her," North's Plutarch (tr. 
p. 93, 1612), 1579. Gabriel Harvey 
gives a sketch of Pandarus more suit- 
able to Pistol : ' * dares me, like a bold 
Pandare, with such stout challenges, 
and glorious protestations," Grosart's 
Harvey, ii. 3 (1593). 

86. /^az'zb/^r] external bearing. Com- 
pare Webster's Northward Ho, i. 3 : 
"Set out your haviours towards them 
in such colours As if," etc. Jonson 
uses it similarly in Cynthia's Revels, 
V. 2. And Massinger's Old Law, v. i, 
"the haviour of a funeral." A word 
from "have" formed on parallel lines 
with "behaviour." Compare Twelfth 
Night, III. iv. 226. 

88. sirraKl The word was widely 
used, but it was absolutely the correct 
appellation for a page. In Ben 
Jonson's Cynthia's Revels, ii. i, Cupid, 
disguised as a page, says : " Troth, 
page boy and sirrah, these are all my 



titles " ; and further on in the same 
scene (160^) Asotus summons his page, 
by name, " Prosaites," to which his 
tutor, Amorphus, says, * ' Fie ! I ad- 
monish you of that : in the court, boy, 
lacquey, or sirrah." 

88. tightly\ without any mistake, 
"soundly." So Jonson: "he shall 
hear on't, and that tightly too, an I 
live ifaith," Every Man in his Humour ^ 
II. ii. (i8a) ; and Massinger, Great 
Duke of Florence, i. i : "How to behave 
myself in court and tightly " ; and 
Beaumont and Fletcher, Women 
Pleased, v. i : "he has paid me tightly, 
paid me home mistress." Wheatley, 
misled by Bobadil's remark, or misin- 
trepreting it, in Every Man in his 
Humour, gives the word the meaning 
"quickly." It does not appear to 
have anything to do with time in Fal- 
staff s order. He is deliberate ; and the 
word in provincial use bears no such 
sense. 

89. Sail like my pinnace'] A small 
sailing vessel. The word was commonly 
used for a bawd or go-between. * ' Com- 
mend me to black Luce, bouncing 
Bess, and lusty Kate, and other morsels 
of men's flesh. Farewell, pink and 
pinnace, flibote and carvel, Turnbull 
and Spittal ! I die like a man," Hey- 
wood, P'irst Fsnt Edward IK (Pearson, 
p. 38), 1600. And Chapman: " 'Tis 



42 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act I. 



Rogues, hence, avaunt ! vanish like hailstones, go ; 90 
Trudge, plod away i' the hoof ; seek shelter, pack ! 
Falstaff will learn the humour of the age, 
French thrift, you rogues ; myself and skirted page. 

[Exeunt Falstaff and Robin. 

Pist. Let vultures gripe thy guts ! for gourd and fullam holds. 

And high and low beguiles the rich and poor: 95 



91. i^ the] ith' F I, Q 3 ; otK F 2, 3, 4 et seq. 
Ff, Q 3 ; the-] Ff, Q 3 ; this Q i. 



92. humour] Q i ; honour 



the staid Madam Temperance, a pretty 
pinnace she has been in her days . . . 
a bawd," May Day, 161 1. See also 
Believe as You List, iv. i (Massinger), 
and Beaumont and Fletcher, Woman 
Hater, iv. 3. Ben Jonson has the term 
in Bartholomew Fair, ii. i. "Pink" 
and " flibote " were used with the same 
double signification. For pinnace with 
its legitimate sense compare Greene, 
Spanish Masquerado (Grosart, v. 280), 
1589: "Seeing our ships like little 
Pinasses, and their huge barkes built 
like Castles, ouerpeering ours." And 
Plakluyt, ed. 181 2, v. 13, Descrip- 
tion of a Voyage : '* The same day our 
Pinnace returned againe unto us, bring- 
ing us good newes." 

90. vanish like hailstones] Compare 
Coriolanus, i. i. 178. Johnson sug- 
gested that "The anchor is deep " (line 
56) should be inserted here. He also 
said "anchor" and "author" could 
hardly be distinguished in writing. 

91. plod away f the hoof] "hoof" 
grotesquely used for a man's foot, occurs 
in Day's He of Gulls, 1606, where, 
perhaps, it is a misprint for "hose." 
" To beat upon the hoof" became pro- 
verbial for to trudge later in literature ; 
probably always vulgar slang. It 
occurs in Howell's Letters, 1645. I'^ 
Head and Kirkman's English Rogue, 
iv. 285 (reprint), 1685: "they were 
forced to beat upon the hoof, or be at 
the charge of coaches." Dryden has it 
in Amphitryon, ii. i (1690). This line 
is not in the 1602 Quarto. 



93. French thrift . . . myself and 
skirted page] French pages were the 
fashion at this period, and the discard- 
ing of the excess of serving-men is com- 
monly alluded to. In Middleton's 
Father Hubbard's Tales, 1604, there is 
a good illustration of this economy : 
" With this French page and Italianate 
serving-man was our young landlord 
only waited on, and all to save charges 
on serving-men, to pay it out in 
harlots." And again, "our most 
lamentable landlord . . . that seemed 
rather to wait upon his monkey than 
his monkey upon him . . . looked for 
all the world like a French lord in 
dirty boots." And in Middleton's 
Black Book (1604), a gallant keeps a 
"French lacquey (a great boy with a 
beard) and an English page." The 
blue servant's coat was blouse-shaped 
with skirts: " W^hen he comes forth, 
the skirts of his blue coat will drop like 
a pent-house," Two Angry Women, 
etc., 1599. In Day's Law Tricks 
(1608), Polymetus resolves "to be 
singular and live clean out of the 
fashion, keep no page . . . and enter- 
tain long since banished hospitality." 
And Wilkins, Miseries of Enforced 
Marriage (Haz. Dods. ix. 542), 1607 : 
"And yet in this latter age, the keep- 
ing of men being not in request, I will 
turn aforesaid fourteen into two pages 
and two coaches." 

94> 95-] These two lines do not 
appear in the Quarto. 

94. Let vultures gi-ipe thy guts] The 



SC. III.] 



OF WINDSOR 



43 



Tester I '11 have in pouch when thou shalt lack, 
Base Phrygian Turk ! 



statement, made by Steevens and 
Malone, and since then echoed by 
HalHwell-Phillips, Wheatley, and other 
commentators, that Shakespeare here 
burlesqued a passage in Marlowe's 
Tamburlaine, will bear no investigation. 
The vulture and entrails metaphor or 
image has been the common property 
of all poets since the days of Pro- 
metheus and the Centaur (Tityus). It 
occurs again in Shakespeare in 
2 Henry IV. v. iii. 146 : "Let vultures 
vile seize on his lungs also." Before 
quoting the supposed original in Tam- 
burlaine, I will adduce a few anterior 
examples. In T. Howell's Devises 
(Grosart, ii. 208), 1581, I find : 

" You Tityus like doe play this 

wofull parte, 
Your love the gripe that tyers 

upon your harte." 
And Watson's Centurie of Love, Sonnets 
Ii. and Ixii. (1582). And in Whitney's 
Emblems {^^\\\on Greene, p. 75), 1586 : 
*' To Cawcasus, behoulde Pro- 
metheus chain'de 
Whose lion still, a greedie gripe 

dothe rent." 
And at about the same date Greene 
has in Selimus (line 1345) : 

" The while the vulture tireth on my 

heart 
So Acomat, revenge still gnaws 

thy soul." 
This latter is much nearer Pistol's idea. 
The burlesque consists only in placing 
what was ordained as a lofty poetical 
sentiment in the mouth of ranting 
Pistol. The Tamburlaine quotation is 
from the First Part (Bullen's edition, 
p. 46) : 

* ' And now doth ghastly 

death 
With greedy talens gripe my 

bleeding heart, 
And like a harpy tires on my 

life." 
Malone quoted this much, adding (from 
the next act, p. 94) : 



** Griping our bowels with retorqued 
('retorted,' Steevens) thoughts." 
Wheatley quotes these two passages 
made by different speakers in different 
acts as if they were continuous or nearly 
so. While referring here to Whitney's 
Choice of Etnblejns, I find I omitted to 
do so in my note upon "Occasion is 
bald behind" in Othello. The meta- 
phor in the text appears earlier still 
in Ferrex and Porrex, ii. i (1561): 
"Cruell gripe to gnaw my groaning 
heart," which is almost exactly repro- 
duced in Tancred and Gismunda (Haz. 
Dods. vii. 60), 1 591. One of the 
pictures at Prince Henry's Palace, St. 
James's, in 1613, was "The Plistory of 
Tityus, how he lies, and the eagle 
pecks out his heart," England as seen 
by Foreigners, W. B. Rye. 

94, 95. gonrd and fullam . . . 
high a?td lo^u] Terms for false 
dice. Happily we have JVew Eng. 
Diet, to render assistance here. 
The earliest example of " gourd " 
(possibly from O.F. gow-d, a swindle) 
is from Ascham's Toxophilus (Arber, 
p. 54), 1545: "What false dise use 
they, as . . . dise of a vauntage, 
flattes, gourdes, to chop and chaunge 
whan they liste." We know nothing 
more of them than that they were false 
dice. The latest mention is in Beau- 
mont and Fletcher's Scornful Lady^ 
Act IV., 1 6 10. See Nares in v. Com- 
pare Mihil Mumchance, title, n.d., a 
tract attributed to Greene: "The 
names of false Dyce. ... 7. A bale 
of Fullams of the best making . . . 
10. A bale of Gordes with as many 
high men as low men for Passage." 
There are fourteen "bales of false 
dyce." The title is given in full in 
Dyce's Introduction to Greene's 
Dramatic Works. The term "gourd" 
may not have been, specifically, a die, 
but an instrument or appliance for 
using one. Fullam : " Fullans be 
square outward. Yet being within at 



44 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act I. 



Nym. I have operations which be humours of revenge. 

Pist. Wilt thou revenge ? 

Nym. By welkin and her star! lOO 

Pist. With wit or steel ? 

Nym. With both the humours, I : 

98. operations] Ff, Q 3 ; operations in my head Q i. 100. star'] fairies Q i. 



the corner with lead, or other ponder- 
ous matter, stopped [i.e. loaded, 
minister as great an advantage as any 
of the rest," Dice- Play, circa 1550 
{New Eng. Diet.). This term has 
lasted down to present times. Its 
origin is disputed ; either from filling 
in the ponderous matter, or from the 
place Fulham, "once a noted haunt of 
gamesters." Gifford thinks probably 
because they were made there, in a 
note to the following passage in 
Jonson's Every Man Out of his 
Humour, in. i., "he serve ? 'sblood, he 
keeps high men and low men, he ! he 
has a fair living at Fullam." But the 
passage is meant for quibblings. In 
Rowley's A Woman never Vexed (Haz. 
Dods. xii. 124), the place derivation (or 
the pun) is also implied. All loaded 
dice were so called, and they were 
used also at Tables. See Head and 
Kirkman's English Rogue, iv. 225 
(1680). "High men and low men" 
were called "high fulloms and low 
fulloms," as in Nobody and Somebody 
(Simpson's School of Shakespeare, i. 
337)j 1592. The Compleat Gamester 
(1676 edition) informs us that High- 
Fullams were 4, 5, 6, and Low-Fullams 
I, 2, 3. See Nares and the com- 
mentators for abundant examples of 
the use of these terms. Winter's 
Tale (v. i. 207) seems to contain a 
reference to gambling with " high and 
low." 

96. Tester'\ a coin of varying value, 
but usually standing for sixpence. It 
was written also "teston" and "tes- 
tril." Spelman says, " French coins of 
the value of i8d., so called [teston] from 
a head upon them . . . and coined in 



34th Henry viii., etc. They came 
down to sixpence in Edward vi." 

97. Phrygian Turk'] Turk was an 
unspeakable term of abuse, but the use 
of this adjective is perhaps to remain 
one of the " Phrygian mysteries." 
Gabriel Harvey speaks of the "im- 
petuous Phrygian musique," which is 
appropriate to Pistol's style. Or the 
word may be used as Middleton and 
Dekker use " Lacedemonian," a good 
mouthful, and nothing more. 

98. operations'] The Quarto reads 
"operations in my head," which Pope 
"recovered" and Steevens, Malone, 
and others insert. Nym means that of 
course, but he was the last person to 
say so. I prefer Cotgrave's equivalents, 
"doing, labouring," etc., to Schmidt's 
"agency, effect." He means I am 
working or scheming for revenge. 

100. By welkin and her star] By the 
sky and its star, i.e. the sun. For "star" 
meaning "sun" compare Measure for 
Measure, IV. ii. 219. Compare Boba- 
dil's speech in Every Man in his 
Hutnotir, iv. 5 : " Why, sir, you mis- 
take me : if he were here now, by this 
welkin, I would not draw my weapon 
. . . but I will bastinado him, by the 
bright sun, wherever I meet him." 
And Jonson, Poetaster, i. i: "this 
villainous poetry will undo you, by the 
welkin." The Quarto reads, "By 
Welkin and her Fairies." In Soliman 
and Perseda, Basilisco swears ' ' by the 
marble face of the welkin " (Haz. Dods. 
V. 274, 1592). Basilisco was no bad 
predecessor of Pistol and Bobadil, 
Bessus and Parolles. He is referred to 
in King fohn, and in Nashe's Have 
with you to Saffron Waldcn, 



SC. III.] 



OF WINDSOR 



45 



I 



I will discuss the humour of this love to Page. 
Pist. And I to Ford shall eke unfold 

How Falstaff, varlet vile, 1 05 

His dove will prove, his gold will hold, 
And his soft couch defile. 
Nym. My humour shall not cool : I will incense Page 
to deal with poison ; I will possess him with 
yellowness, for the revolt of mine is dangerous : no 
that is my true humour. 
Pist. Thou art the Mars of malecontents : I second 

thee ; troop on. \Exeunt, 



103, 104. Page . . . Ford] Q 
108. Page] Steevens ; Ford Ff, Q 3. 
mzen Theobald and Steevens. 

103. discuss] See below, iv. v. 2. 

103, 104. Page . . . Ford] These 
names, erroneously transposed in the 
Folio (as is proved in Act ii. scene i.), 
were set right by Steevens. The Cam- 
bridge editors are compelled to admit 
here that ' ' the mistake was not due to 
Shakespeare." See note l. i. 46. 

108. incense] incite. 

no. yellowness] The Quarto reads 
" lallowes." Yellow was the colour 
of jealousy. Chaucer gives Jealousy 
yellow to wear in his Knighfs Tale. 
Very commonly mentioned. 

no. the revolt of mine] Nym's 
language has been a gymnasium for the 
commentators to breathe themselves in. 
Malone fairly tied himself up into a 
knot here. Nym says "this desertion 
of mine is dangerous." Revolt is com- 
monly used absolutely in the sense of 
desertion from duty or friendship. His 
grammatical construction is necessarily 
stilted, being, as he is, Nym. See 



Steevens ; Ford . . . Page Ff, Q 3. 
no. yellowness] lallowes Q i; mine] 



Abbott's Shakespeare s Grammar, 239 : 
"This of yours . . . hers . . . thine." 
He does not refer to the present in- 
stance. This passage is not in the 
Quarto. 

112. Mars of malecontents] In the 
affected language of this time, amongst 
lovers, they were malcontents, and 
Cupid was "the god whom they 
adored." Nym comes under a separate 
category. The word had also a political 
signification. Compare Harington, 
Apology for Met. of Ajax (rept. p. 42), 
1596: "they say he is a malcontent. 
Who saith so ? Nay, who saith not so ? 
Unton is undone ; Markham is malcon- 
tent. A lewd libel made at the death 
of the Lord Chancellor Hatton." And 
see also the Met. of Ajax, Prol. p. i. 
ComY>3iXe Love's Labour's Lost, ill. 185, 
and Two Gentlemen of Verona, ii. i. 20. 
In the Quarto Pistol's words to Nym 
here are, "Sir Corporall Nym troope 
on." 



4e 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act I. 



SCENE IV. — A Room in Doctor Cains' s House, 



Enter MISTRESS QuiCKLY, SIMPLE, and RUGBY. 

Quick, What, John Rugby ! I pray thee, go to the 
casement, and see if you can see my master. 
Master Doctor Caius, coming. If he do, i' faith, 
and find anybody in the house, here will be an 
old abusing of God's patience and the king's 
English. 

Rug, I '11 go watch. 

Quick, Go ; and we '11 have a posset for 't soon at 



5. old'\ plentiful, abundant. Com- 
pare Much Ado, V. ii. 98. In common 
use at this time, and still colloquial. 

5, 6. king's English'] The usual and 
proverbial expression was "to clip the 
king's English," from the analogy of 
"clipping" money, a very serious of- 
fence against the state. This expres- 
sion has been brought forward as an 
argument in favour of the play belong- 
ing to the King's time (James i.) not to 
Queen Elizabeth's. Compare A Woman 
will have her ^z7/ by Haughton, etc., 
1598: "A clipper of the king's Eng- 
lish " ; "here s a stammerer taken clip- 
ping the king's English," Look about 
Vou{lisLZ. Dods, vii. 412), 1600 ; "and 
sayes because thou clipst the Kinge's 
Englyshe," Dekker, Satiromaslix {Fea.!- 
son rept., i. 241), 1601. Here it is 
addressed as in the text to a Welshman. 
And, finally, in Lacy's Sir Hercules 
Buffoon, v. 4, circa 1680 : ^^ Sgu. 
That's not shorthand. 'Tis called 
clipping the King's English." NewEng. 
Diet, adduces only the example in the 
text. The expression is not in the Quarto. 
Since writing the above I have found the 
source, or at any rate an earlier use of 
the phrase in the text, in Nashe's 6'/r<z«^^ 
Newes {Qxo%. ii. 185), 1593: "still he 
must be running on the letter, and abus- 
ing the Queenes English without pittie 



or mercie." This is certainly strongly 
in favour of an alteration in the text 
in the Folio to suit the reign of the king. 
It also militates against the statement 
in New Eng. Diet, under Queen (14). 

8. posset] ' ' a drink composed of hot 
milk curdled by some strong infusion " 
(Nares). It may be, in most cases, 
identified with our "flip," and usually 
contained eggs, but it was often identical 
with the cullice or caudle of much more 
elaborate preparation. An account of 
such a "posset" is given in Marston's 
Malcontent, ii. 3, 1 604. A different 
one is mentioned by Heywood, Eair 
Maid of the West (Pearson, p. 302) : 
" Score a pottle of sack in the Crowne, 
and see at the barre for some rotten 
egges to turne it : we must have some 
tricke or another to vent away our bad 
commodities." Milk was by no means 
necessarily a part of a posset. Wine 
and eggs were the essentials. Early 
English Vocabularies (ed. Wright) and 
the Prompt. Farv. identify the word 
with the mysterious "balductum, a 
crudd" (curd). And in the Index to 
Cotgrave it is given "posson," which 
was a small French measure for milk. 
This is likely to be the source of the 
word which is probably loaned to the 
Irish '^pusoid, posset " (O'Reilly). 

8, 9. soon at night] early to-night, as 



SC. IV. 



OF WINDSOR 



night, in faith, at the latter end of a sea-coal fire. 
[Exit Rugby.'] An honest, willing, kind fellow, lO 
as ever servant shall come in house withal ; 
and, I warrant you, no tell-tale nor no breed- 
bate : his worst fault is, that he is given to 
prayer ; he is something peevish that way : but 
nobody but has his fault ; but let that pass. 1 5 
Peter Simple, you say your name is ? 

Sim. Ay, for fault of a better. 

Quick. And Master Slender 's your master ? 

Sim. Ay, forsooth. 

Quick. Does he not wear a great round beard, like a 20 
glover's paring-knife? 



we would say. See Othello, iii. iv. 196, 
and my note. 

9. sea-coal'\ coal from Newcastle 
or elsewhere brought to London by 
sea, as distinguished from the usual 
charcoal supplied by such people 
as "Grim, the collier of Croydon," 
from our early forests. There was 
a well-known lane, " Sea-coal Lane," 
in the parish of St. Sepulchre (Stowe). 
It is mentioned by Peele and Jon- 
son. A character in Much Ado is 
so called. See also ^ Henry IV. 11. 

i. 93. 

12, 13. breed-batel a matter of con- 
tention. Compare Tell-Trothes New 
Yeares Gift (New Sh. Soc, 1877, p. 39), 
1593 : "He delights not in breed-bates, 
nor doth he glory in the quarrells of 
deerest frendes." Compare 2 Henry 
IV. II. iv. 271, where Falstaff describes 
Poins as one who " breeds no bate with 
telling discreet stories " ; and Venus 
and Adonis, 655. "Make-bate" was 
the usual word. 

17. for fault of a better'] A frequent 
phrase, varied to "for lack of abetter," 
Foxe's "Documents" [fide Oliphant's 
New English), 1530 ; and " for want of 
a better," Three Lords and Ladies, etc. 



(Haz. Dods. vi. 399), 1590, The ex- 
pression in the text occurs in Ben 
Jonson's Poetaster, ii. i and iv. i (1601), 
and elsewhere. And earlier in Har- 
man's Caveat, etc., 1573 : " Marry, sir, 

I am constable for fault of a better." 
It is used by Dean Swift [Polite Con- 
versation). 

20.] The parallel to this line in the 
Quarto is "he has as it were a whay 
coloured beard." This is of some 
interest since the word "wee" does 
not occur, and is not found in Shake- 
speare again except in line 22. The 
expression "whay coloured" gives a 
parallel to "whey face" in Macbeth, v. 
vii. 17, occurring nowhere else in Shake- 
speare. But it is found in T. Brewer's 
prose Merry Devil of Edmonton, 1608 
(reprint of ed. 1631, p. 10). "Wee" 
seems to have been hardly in use in 
the south at the beginning of the seven- 
teenth century, except in the phrase of 
distance, "a wee bit." The com- 
mentators' notes here read very oddly 
nowadays. Cotgrave displays his ignor- 
ance of it (in London, 1611), '■'■ Huqu^e: 

II n!y a qu^ vne huquie (much like our 
northern wee bit) ; you have but a little 
(says the clown, when you have a great) 



48 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act I. 



Sim. No, forsooth : he hath but a little wee face, 
with a little yellow beard, — a cane-coloured 
beard. 



23. cane] Craig, Caine Ff, Kane Q I. 

way to go." Blount, the learned author 
of Glossographia, says the same sort of 
thing half a century later. I believe 
Shakespeare cannot have written "a 
little wee face" in 1598, and that this 
passage crept in later. "Wee bit" 
(printed "wye byt") occurs in Doctor 
/?<?fl'^/^/(Bullen's Old Plays, iii. 139), 
1600. Halliwell evidently believed in 
the imaginary "way-bit." See his 
Dictionary. 

20, 21. great round beard, like a 
glover's paring-knifel Shakespeare's 
father was a glover. For fashions in 
beards, which in the later Tudors and 
early Stuarts occupied close attention, 
see Fairholt's Costume in England, 
1846, where the subject is copiously 
illustrated. A figure of such a beard as 
this ' ' which would do well for FalstafF 
himself" is given at p. 287 (1839). 
Illustrative passages, which are alto- 
gether too long to do more than refer to, 
will be found in Stubbs, Anatomie of 
Abuses, 1583 ; Greene, Quip for an 
Upstart Courtier, 1 592 ; Lyly's Mydas 
(Act III.), 1591 ; Taylor, the Water 
Poet, Stiperbice Flagellujti, 1621 ; and 
Randle Holme's Academy of Armoury, 
1688. Smollett remembered this beard 
of Quickly's imagination : ' ' her chin 
peaked like a shoemaker's paring-knive, " 
Roderick Random, chap, xxxix., 1748. 
There is, however, no counterpart for 
this fashion in 1598 amongst the above 
references, and I find there was a very 
special beard in vogue at that date, to 
which I have no doubt Shakespeare 
refers. It was the "Gales (Gadiz) 
beard," which was all the rage for a 
year or two after the return of the Gadiz 
expedition, of which I have more to say 
in a later note. In B. Guilpin's Skia- 
letheia (1598), a satire upon fashions 
and scandals of this date, there are 
several allusions to this beard, which 



must have been an extravagant one : 
" I know some of their humorous neare 
of kin, Which scorne to speake to one 
who hath not bin In one of these last 
voyages ; or to one Which having bin 
there, yet (though he have none) Hath 
not a Ca^ijx-beard " (p. 39, reprint); 
and again, "He, coynd in newer mint 
of fashion, With the right Spanish 
shrugge shewes passion : There comes 
one in a muffler of Gadz beard Frown- 
ing as he would make the world a 
feard" (p. 47); and lastly, " He weares 
a jerkin cudgeld with gold lace . . . 
his face Furr'd with Gads-beard, his 
poynard on his thigh" (p. 19). The 
word " muffler" gives us a clue to the 
shape, but the above references would 
only suffice to show how prevalent was 
the affectation. Fortunately, Nashe 
comes to our help for the shape, at the 
beginning of his Lenten Stuffe, which he 
tells us himself he wrote in 1598 (p. 295, 
Harl. Misc. reprint). He says: "To 
many more lusty blood Bravemente 
Signiors, with Gales beards, as broad as 
scullers' maples [bowls for baling water 
out of a boat?], that they make clean 
their boats with." A little lower he 
says: "To any other carpet-monger, 
or Primrose Knight of Primero, bring I a 
dedication," referring doubtless to the 
" Knights of Gales" (see below, ii. i.49). 
The reference to the shape, as broad as a 
bowl, and as big as a muffler, seems to 
me, combined with the date, to be un- 
mistakable, and to help to confirm that 
date to an exact nicety. Mrs. Quickly 
probably is thinking of the beard she 
knew best, the great beard of Falstaff, 
which required a muffler to dispose of. 
The Gadiz beard probably originated 
in compliment to the leader of the ex- 
pedition, since Essex is represented 
(Grainger says) by a remarkable red 
beard and black hair. Gompare here 



SC. IV.] 



OF WINDSOR 



49 



Quick, A softly-sprighted man, is he not ? 

Sim. Ay, forsooth : but he is as tall a man of his 

hands as any is between this and his head ; he 

hath fought with a warrener. 



25 



the, "beard of the general's cut" in 
Henry V. III. vi. 82, where there is 
an admirable sketch of a swaggering 
"gull" or rogue-soldier as he appeared 
in London streets at this time, exactly 
comparable with Guilpin's above. The 
"general" (Essex) is referred to un- 
mistakably in Henry V. Act V. 
Chorus. 

23. cane-coIoured'\ "Cain and Judas, 
in the tapestries and pictures of old, 
were represented with yellow beards" 
(Theobald). The Judas-coloured hair 
or beard is often referred to, always as a 
term of opprobrium, and fully illustrated 
by Nares and in the notes to various 
passages in Marston, Middleton, and 
Kyd. There is no parallel to "Cain- 
coloured" in this sense, nor is there 
here any suggestion of treachery or dis- 
sembling. Steevens was inclined to 
believe the term was from "cane" a 
sickly yellow, — a very vague metaphor. 
I have a suggestion to make which 
further research may yet establish. It 
must be remembered we are looking for 
a " colour." Camden tells us, speaking 
of the Irish : " Their garments they die 
with the barkes of trees . . . With the 
boughes, barke, and leaves of the poplar 
tree, they staine their large wide shirts 
of a saffron colour, which now are 
almost out of use, and adding there- 
unto the rine of the wild Arbut tree," 
Holland's trans, of Camden's j5nVa««m, 
Ireland, p. 144, 1610. The Irish name 
of the Arbutus is "cane, caithne" 
(O'Donovan), by which name it is 
known, O'Donovan says, at Killarney, 
and it enters into place-names in Kerry. 
Parkinson says : "It came to us from 
Ireland by the name of the ' Cane 
Apple,' with as great judgment and 
reason as many other vulgar names are," 
Theatr. Bob., 1640. For this ignor- 
ance he is duly corrected by Threlkeld 



(Syttops. Stirp. Hibern.^ Dublin, 1727), 
an excellent authority. The saffron- 
coloured robes of the Irish created 
such a sensation at court, and are 
so often alluded to by writers in 
Elizabeth's time, that the cane, or 
cane apple, is likely to have been men- 
tioned as forming a portion of the 
dye. There is some foundation for 
this suggestion. I can find none at 
all for Cain (the Quarto spelling is 
' ' Kane "). It is not easy to distinguish 
between a yellowish-red beard and a 
red one. 

25. softly -sprighted'\ gentle-spirited. 
" Spirited with wine" occurs in Henry 
V. III. v. 21. Mrs. Quickly's familiar 
chatter is of the nature of toadyism. 
Perhaps "gentle-spirited," as Schmidt 
says, but I think she means soft-voiced, 
using "spright" in the sense of aspira- 
tion, pronunciation. It is so used in 
Ben Jonson's English Grammar^ and 
Penates (1604). And compare the 
following passage from M. Lok's trans, 
of Peter Martyr's Decades of the Sea 
(Hakluyt, ed. 1812, vol. v.), 3rd. Dec, 
7th chap. : "such wordes as in their 
tongue are aspirate, are pronounced 
with like breath and sprite . . . divers 
other such wordes, which they speake 
in a manner with panting breasts and 
vehement sprites." 

26, 27. tall a man of his hands'] a stout 
or valiant man of action, or one well 
able to use his hands. " Tall " is often 
used ironically in Shakespeare ; but see 
"tall ship," i.e. good or strong ship, 
Othello, II. i., and note thereto. The 
phrase here was a usual one, and 
Shakespeare has it again in Winter's 
Tale, V. ii. Ray has it, proverbially, 
with a ridiculous tag. Naunton, in 
Fragment a Regalia, 1630, speaks of it 
as archaic: "such as our fathers were 
wont to call men of their hands. " Com- 



50 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act I. 



Quick. How say you ? — O, I should remember him : 

does he not hold up his head, as it were, and 30 
strut in his gait ? 

Sim. Yes, indeed, does he. 

Quick. Well, heaven send Anne Page no worse 
fortune ! Tell Master Parson Evans I will do 
what I can for your master: Anne is a good 35 
girl, and I wish — 



Re-enter RuGBY. 

Rug. Out, alas ! here comes my master. 

Quick. We shall all be shent. Run in here, good 
young man ; go into this closet : he will not stay 
long. [Shuts Simple in the closet?^ What, John 
Rugby ! John ! what, John, I say ! Go, John, go 



40 



pare the following examples : '* there 
are two brethren beyond the sea, and 
they be kings both, and marvellous men 
of their hands," Sir T. Malory, Morte 
d'Arthure, ed. 1876, p. 32, 1485: '*a 
right good man of his hands," Udall, 
Erasmus (reprint, p. 261), 1542; "a 
valiant man of his hands," North's 
Plutarch, 614, 1579; "a man of your 
hands to match with a mouse," 
Marriage of Wit and Science (Haz. 
Dods. ii. 336), 1570. I find it as 
late as Cotton's Virgil Travestied, 
1664. 

27. between this and his hecuT^ a re- 
cognised expression. ' ' There is not any 
man within forty miles of his head that 
can play with him at maw," Taylor's 
Works, 1630; "there 'snot an honester 
man between this and his head," Brome, 
Merry Beggars, Act V., 1 64 1. And 
Greene, Defence of Conny- Catching 
(Gros. p. 54), 1592 : "He tell you a tale 
of an Usurer done within a mile of a 
knaues head." See also Chapman's 
May Day (Pearson, p. 353) : " there 



cannot be a foole within twenty mile of 
your head, but you engrosse him for 
your owne mirth." I am indebted 
to Mr. Daniel for these last two 
examples, who gives me also a 
reference to Fielding's Mock Doctor, 
sc. xiii. 

28. warrener'l keeper of a warren. 
The word occurs several times in Porter's 
7 wo Angry Women of Abi^tgdon, 1599. 
Judging from the popularity of deer- 
stealing and cony-catching, a warrener 
had good need to be " a tall man of his 
hands." 

38. shent'\ abused, scolded. See 
Twelfth Night, IV. ii. 112 ; Coriolanus, 
V. ii. 104. An archaic word in Shake- 
speare's time and often used earlier in 
the stronger sense. Compare Holland's 
Plinie, xix. 8 (p. 26), 1601 : " Drusus 
Csesar also cared not for them [cole- 
worts] but thought them a base and 
homely meal, for which nice and 
dainty tooth of his he was well 
checked and shent by his father 
Tiberius." 



SC. IV.] 



OF WINDSOR 



51 



inquire for my master ; I doubt he be not well, 
that he comes not home. 

[Singing] And down, down, adown-a, etc. 



Enter DOCTOR Caius. 

Caius, Vat is you sing? I do not like dese toys. 45 
Pray you, go and vetch me in my closet une 
boite en verde, — a box, a green-a box : do intend 
vat I speak ? a green-a box. 

45. dese toys\ Theobald, Steevens, Craig; des-toyes F i, 2, Q 3 ; des toys F 
3, 4. 46, 47. une boite en] unboyteene F i, 2, Q 3 ; unboyteen F 3, 4 ; une 
boitine Craig ; verde] verd Ff, Steevens, Craig (verde) ; vert Globe, Cambridge. 



44. And down, down, adown - a] 
Compare Ophelia's snatch in Hamlet, 
IV. V. : " You must sing, Down a-down, 
and you call him a-down-a." Ritson 
printed this burthen after each line in 
the ballad of "King Edgar" {Ancient 
Songs, p. 151), but apparently it is not 
in the original version. See Percy 
Folio, iii. 485 (ed. Hales and Furnivall). 
So that Mrs. Quickly's tune should 
not be Labandalashotte (nor should 
Ophelia's) as stated in a note to Ancient 
Ballads and Broadsides, p. 78. For 
there seems to be no other connection 
than the inserted burthen. This tune 
{Lavandula, "Lavender," is shot 
(sprouting) ?) is that of the famous old 
"I waile in woe, I plunge in pain." 
Mrs. Quickly's tune is probably the 
very much more suitable one of Donkin 
Dargeson. It was the tune of "A 
merry ballad of the Hawthorn-tree " 
ascribed to George Peele (p. 604, ed. 
1874) ; and also, later, of a country 
dance. Ben Jonson refers to it in Tale 
of a Tub, iv. 3, where an interesting 
evolution of Gifford's memory is re- 
corded in the notes. The tune is in 
Chappell's Popular Music, i. 65. Day 
gives a verse in the He of Guls, 1606 : 

" But lante tanta the girles are ours, 
We have won 'em away to dar- 
gison. 



An ambling nag and a doun, a 

doun, 
W^e have borne her away to 

dargison . . . 
Her cherry red lip a doun, a 

doun." 
The burthen became common in later 
songs. It is often inserted in collec- 
tions (as Chappell's, Ritson's) in order 
to fill up metre. New Eng. Diet, has 
no earlier example than the present 
play. " Ding a ding" was the common 
one previously. In Every Woman in 
her Humour ' ' the old doune a doune " 
is mentioned (1609); and in The 
Tragedy of Hoffman {circa 1600?) it is 
given : " Downe, downe, adowne, hey 
downe, downe; I sung that song." I 
find, however, in Ihree Ladies of 
London (1584), a verse of a song with 
the words "As wind that blows the 
houses down, Sing down adown, down, 
down, down" (Haz. Dods. vi. 327). 
If this is not an interpolation, it is the 
earliest. But Collier edited this play. 

46, 47. une boite en verde] This is 
almost exactly the Folio "vnboyteene 
verd," and may perhaps be accepted as 
the true reading. Grey appears to be 
responsible for the word "boities" (Cam- 
bridge, etc.). Shagreen surgical in- 
strument cases are said to be intended 
(they are of considerable antiquity) by 



52 THE MERRY WIVES acti. 

Quick. Ay, forsooth ; I '11 fetch it you. [Aside.] I 

am glad he went not in himself: if he had 50 
found the young man, he would have been horn- 
mad. 

Caius. Fe, fe^ fe, fe ! ma foi, il fait fort chaud. fe 
nien vais a la cour^ — la grande affaire. 

Quick, Is it this, sir ? 55 

Caius. Oui ; mette le au mon pocket : d^pkhe^ quickly. 
Vere is dat knave Rugby ? 

Quick. What, John Rugby ! John ! 

Rug. Here, sir ! 

Caius. You are John Rugby, and you are Jack 60 
Rugby. Come, take-a your rapier, and come 
after my heel to the court. 

53, 54. nia foi . . . affaire] Rowe ; mai (moi F 2, 3, 4) foy, il fait for 
ehando, le man voi a le court la grand affaires Ff, Q 3. 56. depeche] de-peech 
Ff,Q3. 

this word. But Caius wants a " box of given, is found in Comedy of Errors, 
simples." Compare Cotgrave, *'j9<7i>/<j iii. i. 72 : " as mad as a buck." And 
(or Boite) : a box . . . little casket," in Lingua, ii. 6, 1607 : " stiff"-necked 
2XiA^'' Es petites boistes met on les bons bulls, and many horn - mad stags" 
onguens, Prov., Sweet ointments were points to this sense. Cotgrave has 
put in little boxes." And see New "horn-mad . . . from a goat which in 
Eng. Diet, in v. "Boist," where the his time of heat is mad for lust," in v. 
word is illustrated as English in this "chevre." References to the commonly 
§ense from Chaucer, Chester Plays, etc. quoted Fcenum habet in cormi (hay in 
The diminutive of "boite" was " boi- his horn) do nothing to illustrate this 
tellette" (Cotgrave). The Quarto has proverb, except to show that the con- 
here, *' My simples in a boxe in de dition existed, and needed a warning, 
counting-house." But there is con- in Horace's times. Needless to say, 
fusion between the two texts. the usual application of this expression, 
51, 52. /^^r;?-wa^ From the excitable amongst the Elizabethans, has to do 
state of horned beasts (stags, bulls, (though not here) with cuckoldry. 
goats), especially in the breeding sea- 61. your rapier'] Not, as Wheatley 
son, ready to horn anyone. The older says, his master's, but his own rapier, 
form is " horn- wood," which occurs in Serving - men went armed for their 
the Chester Plays, circa 1380; and in master's protection. They had even 
Heywood's Proverbs (ed. Sharman, p. to provide their own weapons it ap- 
168), 1546. Nashe has "horn-mad" pears. Compare Two Angry Women 
in Have with you to Saffron Walden, of Abingdon (Haz. Dods. vii. 283), 
1596. A similar expression to this, 1599, by Henry Porter : " There shall 
and one which confirms the origin here not a serving man in Berkshire fight 



SC. IV.] 



OF WINDSOR 



53 



Rug. 'Tis ready, sir, here in the porch. 

Cuius. By my trot, I tarry too long. Od's me ! 

Qu'ai-foublie ! dere is some simples in my 65 

closet, dat I vill not for the varld I shall leave 

behind. 
Quick. Ay me, he '11 find the young man there, and 

be mad ! 
Caius. O diable, diable ! vat is in my closet ? 70 

Villainy laron ! \Pulling Simple out.] Rugby, 

my rapier ! 
Quick. Good master, be content. 
Caius. Verefore shall I be content-a? 

Quick. The young man is an honest man. 75 

Caius. Vat shall de honest man do in my closet? 

dere is no honest man dat shall come in my 

closet. 
Quick. I beseech you, be not so phlegmatic. Hear 

71. Villainy\ Ff, Steevens ; Villain Q3, Globe, etc.; laron\ La-roone Ff, Q 3. 
74, 76. shaWX F, Q 3 ; should F 2, 3, 4. 



better for ye than I will do, if you have 
any quarrel in hand : you shall have 
the maidenhead of my new sword : I 
paid a quarter's wages for 't, by Jesus." 
Caius calls for his own weapon below 
(72). And in ii. iii. 13, the words are 
surely explicit enough. Harrison says, 
in 1587 {^Description of England, il. 
xvi. ) : " Our nobilitie weare commonlie 
swords or rapiers with their daggers, as 
dooth euerie common seruing man also 
that followeth his lord and master." 

65. simples] medicinal herbs. Prob- 
ably here, compounded . * ' The manner 
of compounding all these ointments 
was twofold, to wit, either of the juice 
and liquor, or els of the very substance 
and body of the simples," Holland's 
Plinie, xiii. i, 1601. See note at 



" Hibocrates," in. i. 66. A usual 
term. 

71. laron'] thief. The older form 
was " ladrone." Both were anglicised 
at an early date. Halliwell refers to 
Nabbes, The Bride, sig. F. ii., 1640. 
And see Bullen's Old Plays, i. 198: 
The Martyrd Souldier, ' ' Lord over 
these Larroones." Caius uses the term 
"villainy" similarly again, li. iii. 16. 

79. phlegmatic] Mrs. Quickly prob- 
ably picked up this word from her 
master. Compare Holland's Plinie, 
xxxii. 4 (432, M) for a use vague 
enough to warrant hers: "The gall 
of these Tortoises purgeth also phleg- 
maticke humours and corrupt blood out 
of the bodie." "Choleric" was the 
word she wanted. 



54 THE MERRY WIVES [acti. 

the truth of it : he came of an errand to me 80 
from Parson Hugh. 

Cuius. Veil. 

Sim. Ay, forsooth ; to desire her to — 

Quick. Peace, I pray you. 

Caius. Peace-a your tongue. Speak-a your tale. 85 

Sim. To desire this honest gentlewoman, your maid, 
to speak a good word to Mistress Anne Page 
for my master in the way of marriage. 

Quick. This is all, indeed, la ! but I '11 ne'er put my 

finger in the fire, and need not. 90 

Caius. Sir Hugh send - a you ? Rugby, baillez me 
some paper. Tarry you a little - a while. 

[ Writes. 

Quick. [Aside to Simple?)^ I am glad he is so quiet: 
if he had been throughly moved, you should 
have heard him so loud and so melancholy. 95 
But notwithstanding, man, I'll do you your 
master what good I can : and the very yea and 
the no is, the French doctor, my master, — I 
may call him my master, look you, for I keep 
his house ; and I wash, wring, brew, bake, 1 00 

91. baillez] Theobald, Steevens, Wheatley ; bailie Globe, Cambridge ; ballow 
Ff, Q 3. 96. you] Globe; ji?^ F i, Q 3 ;/?;- F 2, 3, 4; omitted Capell, 

Steevens, Craig. 98. the\ Ff, that Q 3. 100. wring] ring Ff, Q 3. 

89. la!] See i. i. 266 (note). bald's suggestion for "ballow" is usually 

89, 90. put my finger in the fire] A accepted. It is not rational to look 

common old proverb. " Put not your for an obsolete English word in the 

finger too far in the fire," Hey wood's mouth of Dr. Caius. In the Quarto he 

Proverbs, ed. Sharman, p. 98, 1546. says, "give me a pen and Inck." 

And North, Doni' s Fhilosophie : "my 97, 98. the very yea and the no] 

L. mayor that had many times put his See note i. i. 88. 

finger in the fire before . . . and that 100. brew] See "brew-house," in. 

could spie day at a little hole." iii. 10. 
91. baillez] deliver, bring. Theo- 



SC. IV.] 



OF WINDSOR 



55 



scour, dress meat and drink, make the beds, and 
do all myself, — 

Sim. [Aside to Quickly^ 'Tis a great charge to come 
under one body's hand. 

Quick, [Aside to Simple.'] Are you avised o' that? 105 
you shall find it a great charge : and to be up 
early and down late ; — but notwithstanding, — 
to tell you in your ear; I would have no 
words of it, — my master himself is in love with 
Mistress Anne Page: but notwithstanding that, 1 10 
I know Anne's mind, — that 's neither here nor 
there. 

Caius, You jack'nape, give-a this letter to Sir Hugh ; 
by gar, it is a shallenge : I will cut his troat 
in de park ; and I will teach a scurvy jack-a- 1 1 5 
nape priest to meddle or make. You may 
be gone ; it is not good you tarry here. — By 
gar, I will cut all his two stones ; by gar, 



103. charge'\ responsibility. Com- 
pare A Merry Knack to Know a 
Knave (Haz. Dods. vi. 541), 1594 : 
"vouchsafe to hear me speak . . . 
Thou man of worth, or citizen, whate'er 
thou be, Weigh but my charge, and 
then thou wilt not swear : I have five 
sons, all pretty tender babes That live 
upon the farm that he would have ; 
Twelve hundred sheep," etc. The 
speaker is about to be defrauded of his 
farm by a *' coney-catcher." 

105. Are yoti avised d' that ?'] Do you 
reflect upon that fact ? Compare Mea- 
sure for Measure , II. ii. 132. Avised is a 
common old form of " advised." Com- 
pare Middleton, A Mad World, My 
Masters : *' are you advised of that, 
my God ? " And Ben Jonson, Bar- 
tholomew Fair, iv. i. (183Z') : "Justice 
Overdo is a very parantory person. 



Bri. O, are you advised of that 1 and 
a severe justicer, by your leave." See 
also Epilogue to Dekker's Satiromas- 
tix, 1602. 

111,112. neither here northere'\ occurs 
again in Othello, iv. iii. 59. I find it 
earlier in Nashe, The Unfortu7iate 
Traveller, 1594 (Gros. v. 15): " it is 
Aqua celestis, but that 's neither heere 
nor there." 

116. meddle or makel occurs again 
in Troilus and Cressida, I. i. 82. In 
Howell's Poems (Grosart, i. 20) the 
following passage gives it (1568) : 
"all Furies fierce that bee I rather 
wishe, than meddle or make with 
thee." 

118.] In the Quarto the threat is 
"cut his nase " (nose) ; on which see 
my note, Othello, iv. i. 443 ; the pro- 
verb is probably referred to there also. 



56 THE MERRY WIVES [acti. 

he shall not have a stone to throw at his 
dog. [Exit Simple. 120 

Quick. Alas, he speaks but for his friend. 

Cuius. It is no matter-a ver dat : — do not you tell-a 
me dat I shall have Anne Page for myself? — 
By gar, I vill kill de Jack priest ; and I have 
appointed mine host of de Jarteer to measure 125 
our weapon. — By gar, I will myself have Anne 
Page. 

Quick. Sir, the maid loves you, and all shall be well. 
We must give folks leave to prate : what the 
good-year! 130 

Cuius. Rugby, come to the court with me. By gar, 
if I have not Anne Page, I shall turn your 
head out of my door. Follow my heels, 
Rugby. \Exeunt Cuius and Rugby. 

125. Jarteer] F i, 2, 3, Q 3, Globe ; Jarterre Steevens ; Garter F 4 ; Jartiere 
Craig. 130. good-year'] good-ier Ff, goujeres Hanmer, goujere Johnson, good 

year Capell. 

119,120. not have a stone to throw at 2 Henry IV. ii. iv. 64. New Eng. 

his dog] The proverb is perhaps correctly Diet, gives an example, as a sakUation, 

** not a word to throw at a dog," as in from Roper, Sir T. More (dating to 

As Yon Like It, i. iii. 2. But it is 1535), and another, earlier than the 

found as in the text in Heywood's present one. The phrase here has led 

Captives (Bullen's Old Plays, iv. 161). to much dispute and suggestion, now 

In Fletcher's Nice Valour, iii., it is happily forgotten. The term "good- 

*' not a bone." The saying with "not year" was used vaguely, much as we 

a word" occurs in Webster's Westward use "luck," or, ironically, "the devil's 

Ho, v. I, and in Hey wood^ s, Fair iMaid luck." And hence this expression was 

of the Exchange (Pearson, p. 54), and tantamount to "what the plague," 

often later. "what the devil." In Ben Jonson's 

129. give folks leave to prate] A Poetaster, ill. i. (230^) is an example 

reference to the common old proverb [not m New Ejtg. Diet.): "You have 

" Give losers leave to talk." It is in Fortune, and the good year on your 

l^itus Adronicus, III. i. 234; Iley- side, you stinkard, you have." And 

wood's Dialogue, 1546; and Nashe's in Dryden's Sir Alartin Alar-all, 

Pierce Pentiilesse (Gros. ii. 14), 1592: iv. i., 1667: "what a goodyer is 

'* I, I, weele give losers leave to talke." the matter, sir?" And Harington's 

129, 130. what the good-year] A Aletamorphosis {Apology), 1596: "the 

meaningless, but recognised, expletive, good yeare of all the knavery and knaves 

Compare Much Ado, i. iii. i, and for me." 



SC. IV.] 



OF WINDSOR 



57 



Quick. You shall have An fool's-head of your own. 135 
No, I know Anne's mind for that : never a 
woman in Windsor knows more of Anne's 
mind than I do ; nor can do more than I do 
with her, I thank heaven. 
Fent. [ Within^ Who 's within there ? ho ! 140 

Quick, Who 's there, I trow ? Come near the house, 
I pray you. 

Enter Fenton. 

Fent. How now, good woman ! how dost thou ? 
Quick. The better that it pleases your good worship 

to ask. 145 



135. have An foofs-head of your 
own] The quibble is unmistakable in 
the Folio, where "An" in Quickly's 
speech is printed each of the three 
times "An." Compare Midsum7ner 
Nighfs Dream, iii. i. 119: "you see 
an ass-head of your own, do you ? " 
One of the multitudinous ways of 
calling a person a fool, which drew its 
significance from the fool's cap. " I '11 
give thee a fool's head, Jack, what wilt 
do with it? lohn. Carry it home to 
my nurse," Armin, Two Maids of 
Moreclack (Gros. p. 82), 1609. To 
make one, or give one, a hoodfull of 
bells, was the archaic expression. 

141. I trow] Not in the usual sense 
of "I am sure," "certainly," but 
equivalent to " I wonder," or nearly 
so, as in this play, 11. i. 61. In each 
case the pronoun would be better 
omitted, and leave the ordinary ex- 
pression "trow." In the sense "I 
wonder," compare Jonson, Every Man 
in his Humour, III. ii. (3i«) : 
" W^hence should this flood of fashion, 
trow, take head ? " And Poetaster, ii. i. 
(22o3) : " Why, now now, Hermo- 
genes ? what ailest thou, trow ? " And 
Bartholomew Fairy IV. i. (185^:) : 
"where should it be, trow? in his 



blood ? " In none of these (and others 
could be quoted) can it bear the sense 
" do you know ? " 

141. Come near the house] Come 
into the house. "Draw near" and 
"come near "both have this sense in 
Shakespeare. Compare Alerchant of 
Venice, v. 223, and Tempest, v. iii. 18. 
And later in this play, ill. iii. 159. 
Without this meaning Quickly's re- 
mark would be absurd. I find it else- 
where : " Wil 't please you to come 
near, sir," How a Man ?nay Choose^ 
etc. (Haz. Dods. ix. 39), 1602. And 
in the applied use, enter into one's 
thoughts, it occurs in Jonson's Case is 
Altered, il. ii. : "Why, now you come 
near him, sir." In Hey wood's First 
Part of King Edward the Fourth 
{ante 1600) there is a good example : 
"Take their horses and walk them, 
and bid them come near house. Nell, 
lay the cloth, and clap supper o' th' 
boord" (Pearson, p. 49). 

144, 145. The better that it pleases . . . 
to ask] This jocular reply to " how are 
you ? " is hardly obsolete provincially 
and at schools. It is in Swift's Polite 
Conversation, and in Wilson, The 
Cheats, li. ii., 1662 ; and in H. Porter's 
Two Angry Women of Abingdon, 



58 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act I. 



Fent. What news ? how does pretty Mistress Anne ? 

Quick. In truth, sir, and she is pretty, and honest, 
and gentle ; and one that is your friend, I can 
tell you that by the way ; I praise heaven for it. 

Fent. Shall I do any good, think'st thou? Shall I 150 
not lose my suit ? 

Quick, Troth, sir, all is in his hands above : but 
notwithstanding, Master Fenton, I '11 be sworn 
on a book, she loves you. Have not your 
worship a wart above your eye ? 155 

Fent, Yes, marry, have I ; what of that ? 

Quick. Well, thereby hangs a tale: — good faith, it 
is such another Nan ; but, I detest, an honest 



which, as these notes show, has several 
direct parallels with Merry Wives of 
Windsor. It is one of the plays in 
Henslowe's Diary ^ bought by him, 
22nd December 1598. The passage 
is: "how now, Proverb? Nicholas 
\Proverbs\ My name is Nicholas, 
Richard ; and I know your meaning, 
and I hope ye mean no harm. I thank 
ye : I am the better for your asking." 

150. Shall I do any good'\ shall I 
thrive. Compare Winter's Tale, li. 

"• 54- . 

152.] Quickly's affectation of piety is 
very noteworthy. She is not intended, 
apparently, to have any good principles, 
but she constantly assumes the cloak 
of religion. 

155. wart above your eye] Mrs. 
Quickly's humour here has a family re- 
semblance to that of Pandarus, upon 
the white hair on Troilus's chin, in the 
first scene between Pandarus and Cres- 
sida in Troilus and Cressida. 

157. thereby hangs a tale] This ex- 
pression occurs again in Taming of the 
Shrew, iv. i. 60 ; As Vou Like It, ii. 
vii. 28 ; and Othello (in punning use), 
III. i. 8. I have found no earlier ex- 
amples, but it occurs twice in Beaumont 
and Fletcher's plays — Double Marriage^ 



Act v., and Faithful Friend, III. ii. 
It is also in Gayton's Festivous Notes^ 
p. 105, 1654. And Swift makes use 
of it. 

157, 158. it is such another Nan] The 
legitimate meaning of this phrase is, 
"another of the same sort," in which 
sense ' ' such another " occurs in Much 
Ado, III. iv. 87, in 2 Henry IV. II. iv. 
275, and in Udall's Roister Doister^ 
III. v., " Pay the like hire, I will make 
you suche an other" (1553). But the 
passage here, and in Othello, IV. i. 50, 
and Troilus and Cressida, I. ii. 282 
(Folio), needs a different, jocular, or 
endearing sense. The word "other," 
from meaning "different," seems to 
have travelled a step farther collo- 
quially, and acquired the sense of 
"special," "peculiar," "remarkable," 
in this context. The expression occurs 
in Ben Jonson's Tale of a Tub, II. i. 
(448<5) : " Come, you are such another 
Master Turfe, A clod you should be 
called." And in Chapman's May- Day, 
II. iii. (1611): "Never fear to imbrue 
your hands with his liver, I warrant 
you. ^m. Come, you are such an- 
other." Mr. Craig gives me a further 
reference to Middleton, Anything for a 
Quiet Life, 11. ii. 



SC. IV.] 



OF WINDSOR 



59 



maid as ever broke bread : — we had an hour's 
talk of that wart. — I shall never laugh but in i6o 
that maid's company ! — But, indeed, she is 
given too much to allicholy and musing : but for 
you — well, go to. 

Fent. Well, I shall see her to-day. Hold, there's 

money for thee; let me have thy voice in my 165 
behalf : if thou seest her before me, commend me. 

Quick. Will I? i' faith, that we will; and I will 
tell your worship more of the wart the next 
time we have confidence ; and of other wooers. 

Fent. Well, farewell ; I am in great haste now. 1 70 

Quick. Farewell to your worship. \Exit Fenton.'\ 
Truly, an honest gentleman : but Anne loves 
him not ; for I know Anne's mind as well as 
another does. — Out upon 't ! what have I 
forgot? [Exit. 175 

ACT II 



SCENE I. — Before Page's House. 

Enter MISTRESS PAGE, with a letter. 

Mrs. Page. What, have I scaped love-letters in the 
holiday-time of my beauty, and am I now a 
subject for them ? Let me see. \Reads. 

I. /] omitted F i. 

158, 162. detest, alluholy] protest, "good." "As good as ever brake 

melancholy. bread or drank drink," Porter, Two 

158, 159. hofiest maid as ever broke Angry Women (Haz. Dods. vii. 356), 

breadi So in Much Ado, in. v. 36: 1599. 

"An honest soul ... as ever broke . j^ ^ 

bread." Dryden has it in Love ^^'- ^^' ^^^^^ ^' 

in a Ntcmiery, v. ii. (1673). More 2. holiday • timel Compare Greene, 

commonly, perhaps, the adjective is Looking- Glass, etc. (1874 ed., p. 125) : 



60 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act II. 



" Ask me no reason why I love you ; for though Love 
use Reason for his precisian, he admits him not for his 
counsellor. You are not young, no more am I ; go to, 
then, there 's sympathy : you are merry, so am I ; ha, ha ! 
then there 's more sympathy ; you love sack, and so do I ; 
would you desire better sympathy? Let it suffice thee. 
Mistress Page, — at the least, if the love of soldier can 
suffice, — that I love thee. I will not say, pity me, — 'tis not 
soldier-like phrase ; but I say, love me. By me, 

Thine own true knight, 

By day or night, 

Or any kind of light. 

With all his might 

For thee to fight.— John Falstaff." 



lO 



15 



^. predsiatt] physician Johnson (conj.), Dyce, Globe, etc.; precision Ff, Q 3. 
10. least] last F 4 ; soldier'] F i, 2, Q 3, Globe ; a soldier F 3, 4, Steevens, Craig. 



"these are but holiday-terms." Fit 
for a holiday ; cheerful. And Nashe, 
" euery Taylors holie day humour" 
{Anatomie of Absurditie, 1589). 

5, 6. precisian . . . counsellor^^ohn- 
son suggested "physician" here for 
the only reading we have in the original 
edition "precisian." Dyce, followed 
by recent editors, adopted this innova- 
tion, supporting it by a reference to 
Sonnet 147, where there is a community 
of words, but not of ideas, with the 
present passage. I think the meaning 
IS to be found by giving to "counsellor " 
the sense here of "confidant." Fal- 
staff" means to say, " Ask not the reason. 
Love uses Reason as his priest or spirit- 
ual adviser, but he doesn't tell him his 
secrets." He goes on to show that 
there is sympathy — let that suffice 
— no matter about reason — " I love 
thee." For " counsellor " in this sense, 
coxix^2^[& Romeo a7id Juliet, i. i. Schmidt 
gives this sense also to Cymbeline, ill. 
ii. 59, and Macbeth, V. ill. 17. With- 
out that the meaning would be merely 
an antithesis between the spiritual 
advice of his puritanical priest, and 
the practical admonition (to be acted 
upon) due to his counsellor, i.e. Love 
lets reason preach, but he has no 
intention that he should dictate the 
ministry of his affairs. For this word 



precisian, compare A Merry Knack 
to Know a Knave (Haz. Dods. vi. 519), 
1594: '^Priest. And I among my 
brethren and my friends, Do still in- 
struct 'em with my doctrine, And Yea 
and Nay goes through the world with 
us . . . Thus do we blind the world 
with holiness And so by that are termed 
pure Precisians." Ben Jonson uses it 
in Every Man in his Hujnour, iii. ii. 
(29(J) : "He's no precisian, that I'm 
certain of, Nor rigid Roman Catholic 
. . . I have heard him swear." In 
this passage the Quarto of Every 
Man reads "puritan." Gabriel Har- 
vey says : "I am as forward an 
admonitioner as any Precisian in Eng- 
land" (Grosart, ii. 159). It is in this 
sense of an exacting adviser Falstaff 
objects. As Harvey says immediately, 
if this be the discipline, "I crave 
pardon." In the Quarto, the parallel 
words are, " Aske me no reason, be- 
cause theyre impossible to alledge." 
With reference to " Love " and " Coun- 
sell," compare Watson's Ceiiturie of 
Love, .Sijww^/lxxxix. (1582), '' Love nexer 
takes good counsell for his frende." 

14. day or night] at all times. A 
common colloquialism, occurring in- 
numerable times in the Bible. 

17.] The diction of this letter, with 
its egotistical tone, is not unlike Fal- 



SC. I.] 



OF WINDSOR 



61 



What a Herod of Jewry is this ! O wicked, 
wicked world ! One that is well-nigh worn to 
pieces with age to show himself a young gallant ! 
What an unweighed behaviour hath this Flemish 
drunkard picked — with the devil's name ! — out 
of my conversation, that he dares in this manner 
assay me ? Why, he hath not been thrice in my 
company ! What should I say to him ? I was 
then frugal of my mirth : Heaven forgive me ! 
Why, I '11 exhibit a bill in the parliament for 
the putting down of men. How shall I be 
revenged on him ? for revenged I will be, as 
sure as his guts are made of puddings. 



20 



25 



30 



18-26.] Printed as verse F 



28. men'\fat men Theobald, Malone. 



staff's letter in 2 Henry IV. Ii. ii.— 
the old F'alstaff. Short passages of 
short-lined verse, neither Skeltonical 
nor song-singing, were occasionally in- 
troduced into old comedies, out of some 
supposed exuberance of originality. A 
good instance occurs in Grim, the 
Collier of Croydon{'Wz.z, Dods.viii. 416), 
where it is also bombastic and defiant 
as here ; and in Merry Devil o/Edfnon- 
ton, II. iii. ; and in other writers as, pas- 
sim, in Rabelais. But compare especially 
the closing words in one of Nashe's 
Martin Mar prelate tracts 1589): "To 
come to a close In Rime or in Prose, In 
spight of thy nose Thine for these 
seaven yeeres : Pasquill of Englande." 

21. tmweighed behaviour'] of no 
weight, light. Shakespeare would have 
given the word this meaning. Compare 
"a very superficial, ignorant, un weighing 
fellow" {^Measure for Measure, iii. ii. 
147), where the word means the same. 
But it maybe taken literally, ' ' unpoised," 
** unbalanced," ''inconsiderate." 

21, 22. Flemish drunkard] See my 
note to "your Hollander," Othello, ii. iii. 
85. Reed quotes here a good extract 
on the subject from Sir John Smythe 



in Certaine Discourses, etc., 1590, to 
which Nashe seems to have been 
indebted in Pierce Pennilesse. 

27. Pll exhibit a bill in parliament] 
New Eng. Diet, gives "exhibited unto 
us a lamentable bill of complaint," from 
an Act dated 1529. A technical ex- 
pression. "Putting down of men" is 
suppressing them, like a public nuisance. 
So Nashe: "put up a supplication to 
the Parliament house that they might 
have a yard of pudding for a half penie," 
Pierce Pennilesse {QxQ%2.x\.,\\. 74), 1 592. 
And the same author in PasquiVs Re- 
turne (Grosart, i. 122), 1589: "had 
never put uppe any Billes of endight- 
ment against her the last Parliament. " 

28. me7i] Theobald inserted "fat" 
here, Malone says, from the Quarto, and 
then shows that this passage is not in 
the Quarto at all. The passage there, 
" I shall trust fat men the worse while 
I live," is lines 52, 53, below. Malone, 
devoid of humour, contended that 
"Shakespeare would never have made 
her threaten to introduce a bill . . . 
for the extermination of the whole 
species." Steevens thought that even 
fat men would be safe from the designs 



62 THE MERRY WIVES [actii. 



Enter Mistress Ford. 

Mrs. Ford. Mistress Page ! trust me, I was going to 

your house. 
Mrs. Page. And, trust me, I was coming to you. 

You look very ill. 
Mrs. Ford. Nay, I '11 ne'er believe that ; I have to 35 

show to the contrary. 
Mrs. Page. Faith, but you do, in my mind. 
Mrs. Ford. Well, I do, then ; yet, I say, I could 

show you to the contrary. O Mistress Page, 

give me some counsel ! 40 

Mj's. Page. What 's the matter, woman ? 
Mrs. Ford. O woman, if it were not for one trifling 

respect, I could come to such honour ! 
Mrs. Page. Hang the trifle, woman ! take the honour. 

What is it? — dispense with trifles; — what is it? 45 
Mrs, Ford. If I would but go to hell for an eternal 

moment or so, I could be knighted. 

33. coming] going Q 3. 

of Parliament, and left out the word, by Schmidt, and as it does now. I do 

There is no choice in the matter. not remember to have seen this noticed 

30. puddings'] sausages. Properly by the commentators. I will quote the 

entrails stuffed with meat, etc. A passage that convinced me of this first, 

pudding-wife was a sausage (or haggise) It is from M. Lok, translation of Peter 

vendor. S>e.&^en]onsoxi^s Bartholomew Martyr (Hakluyt, ed. 1812, vol. v.), 

Fair {passim). In Cockeram's Die- The Eighth Booke of the First Decade : 

tionary\?,'-''Sa'Wsidge^z.Vw^^mg made " haukes belles . . . and such other 

of Capon's guts, Porke and spice." trifelles, the which within the moment 

The word is so common in writers of of an houre, he had exchaunged for 

this time that a note seemed hardly fifteene ounces of their pearles." In 

necessary, but on turning to Schmidt the following passages "space" better 

I find he did not know it. Pie gives explains the meaning: "Holds in 

it "made of meal, milk, and eggs," perfection but a little moment " (6'£'w«(?/ 

which conveys a most erroneous im- xv.) ; "Thy palm some moment keeps" 

pression of Falstaff 's inside. {As You Like It, iii. v. 24); "in this 

47. moment] space (of time). This extant moment" (7><7z7«ja«^Cr^jj-zfl?'a, 

word, in Shakespeare's language, does iv. v. 168). In the later plays the 



sp( 
ify 



not always signify an instant, as stated sense is the ordinary one. 



sc. 



I.] 



OF WINDSOU 



63 



Mrs, Page. What ? thou liest ! Sir Alice Ford ! 
These knights will hack ; and so thou shouldst 
not alter the article of thy gentry. 50 

49. will hack] will lack Warburton, we 7/ hack Johnson conj. 



48. thou liest] Often used jocularly, 
or merely in repartee, as it is here. 
Compare Two Gentlemen of Verona, 
III. i. 292; 1 Henry IV. il. ii. 44, 
and several other passages. 

49. These knights will hack] A moun- 
tain of notes has accumulated here. 
There are two points to be considered, 
the meaning of "hack," and whether 
there is a reference to the creation of 
knights as a means of raising money 
by James i., and thereby a reference 
placing the date of the play after his 
accession, for he commenced the sale 
immediately. Contemptuous references 
to James's knights occur in numerous 
plays, abundantly, of a later date than 
Merry Wives. King James made 
nearly 2500 knights, 900 of whom were 
in his first year. Eastward Hoe, by 
Marston and Jonson, may be referred 
to as about the first denouncement on 
the stage of these ";^300 knights" 
(iv. i.). It was put on the stage in 
1604-05. I do not believe there is this 
reference. It belongs to a later period, 
and we do not find it in Shakespeare's 
later plays, as we do in Middleton, 
Chapman, Jonson, Heywood, Marston, 
and Beaumont and Fletcher at about 
1 6 10. Whatever the meaning of 
"hack" is, no doubt this remark of 
Mistress Page is meant to be condem- 
natory of a certain quantity of knights 
of her time. But there well may be 
a real historical allusion here, which 
would be by no means unpleasing to 
Queen Elizabeth's ears. " These 
knights^' refers probably to the 
" Knights of Cales." The old proverb 
concerning them is given by Fuller, 
Worthies\^Vi\.\z\V % ed. ii. 131), Kent: 
"A Knight of Cales, and a Gentleman 
of Wales, And a laird of the north 
countree, A yeoman of Kent, with his 
yearly rent, Will buy them out all 



three." He continues : " Cales knights 
were made in that voyage, by Robert, 
earl of Essex, anno Domini 1596, to the 
number of sixty, whereof (though many 
of great birth and estate) some were 
of low fortunes ; and therefore Queen 
Elizabeth was half offended with the 
earl for making knighthood so common. " 
A sly hit at these knights would have 
pleased the Queen well. A full account 
of this most popular and successful 
voyage, which literally turned people's 
heads with delight, maybe found in Hak- 
luyt, 1599 (reprint, ii. pp. 29, 30, 1810), 
wherein is given the list of sixty-three 
knights. "The names of such noble 
men and gentlemen, as were knighted 
at Cadiz in June 1 596 by the two most 
honourable Lordes Generall [Essex and 
Lord Charles Howard Lord High Ad- 
mirall]." This conferring of knight- 
hood by Essex undoubtedly displeased 
the Queen. Sir John Harrington says, 
in Nugce Antiques, that Essex "gave 
me and some others the honor of 
knighthood in the field" . . . (which 
provoked not a little the Queen on his 
return home) in 1599 in Ireland. The 
knights had become cheap already. A 
cotemporary passage in the Returne 
from Pai'nassus, Part I. (Clarendon 
Press, p. 53), drew my attention to 
these knights. It was written at the 
end of 1599. Gullio says: "Had I 
cared for that pratinge echo, fame, my 
exploits at Cosmopolis [Constantinople], 
at Cals, at Portuigall voyage, and now 
verie latelie in Irlande, had bene get- 
ting ere this through everie by-streete. 
. . . Ingen. I dare sweare your wor- 
ship scapt knightinge verie hardly. 
Gull. That's but a pettie requitall to 
good deserts. He that esteems mee of 
less worth than a knight is peasande 
and a gull. Give me a new knight 
of them all, in fence -schoole, at a Nim- 



64 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act II. 



Mrs. Ford. We burn daylight : — here, read, read ; 
perceive how I might be knighted. I shall 
think the worse of fat men, as long as I have an 
eye to make difference of men's liking : and yet 
he would not swear ; praised women's modesty ; 5 5 



55. praisedl Theobald ; praise Ff, Q 3. 



brocado or at a Stocado ! Sir Oliver, 
Sir Randal, base, base chamber- 
tearmes ! I am saluted every morning 
by the name of Good morrow, Cap- 
taine, my sworde is at your service ! " 
This somewhat lengthy note may con- 
clude by saying that the Cadiz voyage 
is referred to by Hall {Satires, iii. 7) ; 
by Heywood as " a great success," Fair 
Maid of the West (Pearson, p. 263) ; 
by Ben Jonson, Epicene, i. i. ; by Chap- 
man, Mons D' Olive (Pearson, p. 235) ; 
and Taylor, the Water Poet, says he 
was at it {Pennilesse Pilgrimage), In a 
letter of Thomas Nashe, printed by 
Collier (I take it from Grosart's Intro- 
duction to Nashe, l. Ixiii.) he says: 
"and for the printers, there is such 
gaping among them for the coppy of 
my L. of Essex voyage, and the ballet 
of three score and foure knights, that," 
etc. This shows the tone of the day 
towards these knights. 

49. hack'\ Steevens and Sir W. Black- 
stone explain this word as meaning 
(from "hackneyed") "become cheap 
or vulgar." They do so believing the 
reference is to James's knights, but the 
meaning would be suitable in view of 
Fuller's words quoted above. New 
Eng. Diet, has no proof of this, and 
cannot explain the word. Their earliest 
use of the word in the sense of "to 
make common, vulgar, or stale," is 
1745. The words "hacker" and 
" hackster," from a verb "to hack," in 
the sense of "cutter," "swaggerer," 
seems to be the only refuge, and an 
unsatisfactory one, although the passage 
in Nashe, and the fencing references in 
the Returnefrom Parnassus support it. 
On the strength of a passage (unknown 



to New Eng. Did.) in Three Ladies of 
London (Haz. Dods. vi. 362), 1584: 
"You seem to be sound men in every 
joint and limb, and can ye live in this 
sort to go up and down the country 
a-begging ? O base minds ! I trow 
I had rather hack it out by the high- 
wayside than such misery and penury 
still to abide," the word should mean 
live by violence and the base use of 
weapons for the purpose of robbery. 
The characters whom "Fraud" ad- 
dresses in the above "right excellent 
and famous comedy " at once go for 
their arms and commit a robbery. To 
hack, it seems, must mean to become a 
"hackster," which had every bad sense 
possible, male and female, before this 
time, as Nashe's writings show. It 
generally meant a swaggering ruffian. 
To come to a disreputable course of 
life seems to be the sense. 

50. article of thy gentry\ the tenor, 
or character, of thy rank. The ex- 
pression is a pleonasm for rank, i.e. 
rank by birth. For "gentry," see 
Lucrece, 569, and Wintet's Tale, 
I. ii. 393. 

51. We burn daylight"] We waste 
time. A common expression. " But 
here I daylight burn, while thus I am 
talking," Appius and Virginia (Haz. 
Dods. iv. 121), circa 1560. See Ronieo 
and Jtdiet, ii. i. 143, and the Spanish 
Tragedy {Wzz. Dods. v. 115). 

54. likingl condition of body. Com- 
pare 1 Henry IV. ill. iii. 6. Still in 
provincial use in expression "in good 
liking." Steevens refers to the Book of 
Job. 

55~59' ^^ would not swear . . . 
truth of his words'] Mrs. Ford's descrip- 



SC. I.] 



OF WINDSOR 



65 



and gave such orderly and well-behaved reproof 
to all uncomeliness, that I would have sworn his 
disposition would have gone to the truth of his 
words ; but they do no more adhere and keep 
place together than the hundred Psalms to the 
tune of " Green Sleeves." What tempest, I trow, 



60 



60. hundred Psalms\ Hundredth Psalm Rowe et seq. 



tion of Falstaff here does not seem to 
be meant to be humorous. It is so 
astonishing that it reads Hke an extract 
from another play. Unless, indeed, we 
are to suppose that Falstaff, in order to 
obtain the " competence of life " (prom- 
ised him by the king at the end of 
Henry /V.), is externally "reforming 
himself" See 2 Henry IV. v. iv. 
50-74. This is the one explanation 
possible, though a strained one. It has, 
however, the merit of fitting the play 
into its proper place between Henry 
IV. and Hejiry V. At best it reads 
like a very perfunctory insertion of an 
afterthought. See v. v. 128, and note. 
60.] I restore here the old reading, 
partly on principle, but mainly because 
we lose rather than gain by Rowe's 
alteration. The Psalms of David were 
no doubt to be taken as a whole as 
being dolorous music. The iCXDth 
Psalm is one of praise and cheerfulness. 
In old Prayer-Books, the direction is 
" The Psalms in this Version of four 
lines, etc. (of Psalms of Praise and 
Cheerfulness), may properly be sung as 
the Old 100 Psalm," Baskerville, 1762. 
It is better for the text's sake to recall 
other psalms, such as "syng this after 
the tune of cxxxvii. Psalme, which 
begins. When as we sat in Babylon, or 
such lyke," Ancient Ballads and Broad- 
sides (ed. 1870), circa 1570, a tune re- 
ferred to later in this play ; or this 
other, "we committed ourselves unto 
the Lord and beganne with doleful 
tune and heavy hearts to sing the 12 
Psalme. Helpe Lord for good and 
godly men, etc.," 1 593, Casting away 



of the Tobie, Hakluyt, reprint, iii. 17 
(1810). Any of the "Penitential and 
Mournful Psalms," or all of them will 
do. See III. i. 24, where Evans quotes 
the first line of the cxxxvii. Psalm. 

61. Green Sleeves'] The tune of 
" Green Sleeves" is still a popular one 
to the words "Which nobody can 
deny." "A new Nor theme dittye of the 
Lady Greene Sleeves'''' was licensed to 
Richard Jones by the Stationer's Com- 
pany in September 1580. It attained 
immediate popularity. Chappell says 
that "within twelve days of the first 
entry of Green Sleeves it was converted 
to a pious use, and we have Greene 
Sleeves moralized to the Scripture, de- 
claring the manifolde benefites and 
blessings of God bestowed on sinful 
man." This is ridiculed by Nashe, 
who lampoons "Barnabeofthe Barnes," 
author of Parthenophill and Parthenope 
(chiefly because he was Gabriel Har- 
vey's friend) in Have with you, etc. 
(1596). Speaking of Barnes' Divine 
Centurie of Sonets, he says, with refer- 
ence to the " posie " thereto, "it comes 
as farre short as Paris Garden Cut of 
the height of a Cammell, or a Cocke- 
boate of a Carricke : such another de- 
vise it is as the godly Ballet oi John 
Carelesse, or the song of Greene Sleeves 
moralized." Nashe's parallel. Century 
included, is similar to that in the text. 
The words of the burthen are given in 
Clement Robinson's Handful of Pleas- 
ant Delightes (Arber, p. 17), 1584, in 
A new Courtly Sonet, of the Lady 
Green Sleeves. To the new tune of 
Green Sleeves : " Greensleeves was all 



66 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act II. 



Mrs. 



threw this whale, with so many tuns of oil in 
his belly, ashore at Windsor ? How shall I be 
revenged on him ? I think the best way were 
to entertain him with hope, till the wicked fire 
of lust have melted him in his own grease. Did 
you ever hear the like ? 
Page. Letter for letter, but that the name 
of Page and Ford differs ! To thy great com- 
fort in this mystery of ill opinions, here's 
the twin - brother of thy letter : but let thine 
inherit first ; for, I protest, mine never shall. I 
warrant he hath a thousand of these letters, writ 



65 



70 



my joy, Greensleeves was my delight, 
Greensleeves was my hart of gold, 
And who but Ladie Greensleeves." 
See below, v. v. 21. 

62, 63. whale . . . ashore at Windsor] 
Possibly refers to some real event, not 
exactly at Windsor, but lower down 
the river. Ben Jonson in the Fox, 
II. i. (1605), says : " There was a whale 
discovered in the river As high as Wool- 
wich," an event duly recorded by Stow 
as occurring on the 19th January in that 
year. 

65, 66. fire of lust . . . his own grease] 
An old saying very variously applied. 
The modern use, that of Bismarck and 
Parnell, is, let them suffer or come to 
grief in the troubles they have brought 
about. The older senses were (as here) 
to provoke one to a perspiration either 
of anger, terror, or any cause, and 
leave him there to recover as best he 
might. New Eng. Diet, includes all 
senses in the words "exhaust one's 
strength by violent efforts," which has 
the merit of generalisation. In Chaucer, 
Prologue of Wife of Bath's Tale (486-87), 
the sense is given "in his own grees I 
made him frie For anger and for 
verraie jalousie." Oliphant gives an 
earlier example from Richard Coer de 
Lion (ed. Weber, p. 175), circa 1370. 



It refers usually to anger. We have 
Hey wood's authority: "She frieth in 
her oune grease, but as for my part If 
she be angrie, beshrew her angrie hart ! " 
Sharman's Heywood, p. 78, 1546. In 
Beaumont and Fletcher, Scornful Lady, 
iii. 2 (1616), it is equivalent to caught 
him in his own trap: "By my troth 
the gentleman Has stew'd him in his 
own sauce, I shall love him for it." 
See also Cotton, Virgins Travestie (ed. 
17 15, p. 89), 1664 ; and Holland's 
Plinie, xviii. i, (549): "leaving these 
troublesome spirits to themselves for to 
broile and frie in their owne greace," 
where he is speaking of night-birds and 
such like. 

68.] In the Quarto Mrs. Page says 
" Why this is right my letter. O most 
notorious villaine ! Why what a bladder 
of iniquitie is this ? Let us be revenged 
what so ere we do." Falstaff elsewhere 
compares himself to a bladder (i Henry 
IV. II. iv. 366). 

70. mystery of ill opinions] puzzle 
about the bad characters or reputations 
we seem to have. 

72, 73. I warrant he hath a thousand of 
these letters] In Dekker's Satiromastix 
(Pearson, 212) Horace (Ben Jonson) 
is made to say, " why you Rooke [fool], 
I have a set of letters newly starcht to 



SC. I.] 



OF WINDSOR 



67 



with blank space for different names, — sure, 
more, — and these are of the second edition: he 75 
will print them, out of doubt ; for he cares not 
what he puts into the press, when he would put 
us two. I had rather be a giantess, and lie 
under Mount Pelion. Well, I will find you 
twenty lascivious turtles ere one chaste man. 80 

Mrs, Ford, Why, this is the very same : the very 
hand, the very words. What doth he think of 
us? 

Mrs. Page. Nay, I know not: it makes me almost 

ready to wrangle with mine own honesty. I '11 85 
entertain myself like one that I am not 
acquainted withal ; for, sure, unless he know 
some strain in me, that I know not my- 



my hands, which to any fresh suited 
gallant, that but newlie enters his name 
. . . I send the next morning." It is 
the same passage which contains an 
important reference to Shallow, "these 
true heires of Mr. Justice Shallow," 
the meaning being that the "Children 
of Paules" who acted Satiromastix, 
acted Shallow. I can take no other 
sense out of it. It seems likely that, 
connected with the present passage, 
the reference is to Shallow of this play ; 
and hence we might guess that the 
"Children of Pauls" acted the Merry 
Wives, The "Children" were vari- 
ously called, or variously grouped 
(there were also the "Children of 
Her Majesty's Revels"), and were 
in constant use for their singing 
powers. 

77. press'\ quibble on "squeeze " and 
" print." 

79. under Mount Pelion'] Mrs. Page 
compares herself to Mount Ossa of 
Greek mythology. Such classical allu- 
sions were the recognised mode of 
Shakespeare's time, "Ossa they 



pressed down with Pelion's weight," 
Fitzgeoffrey, Drake, 1596. 

80. lascivious turtles} * ' as true as 
turtle" is a very early phrase. "The 
proverbe looke, as true as turtle on a 
tree," Sir Triamore, Percy Folio (ed. 
Furnivall, ii. 81), ante 1400; and "as 
true as turtle " occurs in Parliament of 
Birds (Haz. E. Pop. Poetry, iii, 183), 
circa 1 520. Shakespeare adds "to her 
mate" in Troilus and Cressida, iii. ii. 
185, the common form later. "Like 
a turtle true " is in Chaucer's Milleris 
Tale. 

86. entertain] treat. 

88. straiti] tendency, disposition. 
Compare Ben Jonson, Cynthia s Revels, 
II. i. {i63<5): "There is a nymph too 
of a most curious and elaborate strain, 
light, all motion, an ubiquitary, she is 
everywhere, Phantaste." In the same 
play, IV, i. (17 13) the word is similarly 
used again: "I do fancy this gear 
that 's long a coming, with an unmeasur- 
able strain," or rather in its legitimate 
meaning "stretch" (stretch of fancy) ; 
while in ill. ii, (167a) it is applied to 



68 THE MERRY WIVES [actii. 

self, he would never have boarded me in this 
fury. 90 

Mrs, Ford. " Boarding," call you it ? I '11 be sure to 
keep him above deck. 

Mrs. Page. So will I : if he come under my hatches, 
I '11 never to sea again. Let 's be revenged on 
him: let's appoint him a meeting; give him 95 
a show of comfort in his suit, and lead him on 
with a fine-baited delay, till he hath pawned 
his horses to mine host of the Garter. 

Mrs. Ford. Nay, I will consent to act any villany 

against him, that may not sully the chariness 100 
of our honesty. O, that my husband saw this 
letter ! it would give eternal food to his jealousy. 

Mrs. Page. Why, look where he comes; and my 
good man too : he 's as far from jealousy as I 
am from giving him cause; and that, I hope, is 105 
an unmeasurable distance. 

colour, *'so painted, pied and full of they give him never so little an amorous 

rainbow strains." The word seems to regard, he presently boords them with a 

have been very indefinitely applied, set speech." 

sometimes as though it were equivalent 93. hatches'] the deck of a ship. See 

to " strand," in the sense of " fibre " in Tempest, i. ii. 230. Nashe, in the same 

a rope. I cannot follow Schmidt's ex- page as the last quotation has, * ' that 

planations with any satisfaction. The he might stow her under hatches in his 

sense of the word "stream" or "to study, and do what he wold with her." 

flow as a river," of which many ex- 97, 98. pawned his horses'] See V. v. 

amples occur, may have assisted the 119. 

meaning in the text. In iii. iii. 196 1 00. chariness] carefulness, nicety. 

" strain " has the same sense as here. Compare the adjective in Hamlet, i. iii. 

89. boarded me] addressed me, ac- 36. 

costed me. "'Accost' is front her, loi, 102. 0,that . . . Jealousy] The 

board her, woo her, assail her," 7a^<j^M Quarto reads here, "O Lord, if my 

Night, I. iii. 60. Lyly has it in Euphues husband should see this letter, Ifaith 

(Arber, p. 332), 1 580, " Philautus . . . this would euen giue edge to his 

began to boord her in this manner." lealousie." 

A common use borrowed from the naval 103. look] See. " Look " with our 

sense, in which Mrs. Ford immediately meaning of "see," so very common in 

adopts it. Compare Nashe, Have Shakespeare, has now almost disap- 

with you (Grosart, iii. 99), 1596 : "if peared from use in favour of the latter. 



SC. I.] 



OF WINDSOR 



69 



Mrs. Ford. You are the happier woman. 

Mrs. Page. Let 's consult together against this greasy 

knight. Come hither. [They retire. 



Enter FORD, with PiSTOL, and PAGE, with Nym. 

Ford. Well, I hope it be not so. 1 1 o 

Fist. Hope is a curtal dog in some affairs : 
Sir John affects thy wife. 

Ford. Why, sir, my wife is not young. 

Fist. He wooes both high and low, both rich and poor. 

Both young and old, one with another. Ford ; 115 

He loves the gallimaufry : Ford, perpend. 

Ford. Love my wife ! 

114-116. Printed as prose Ff, Q 3. 116. the] F I, Q 3 ; thyY 2, 3, 4. 



III. curtal dogi A short, dumpy 
dog, unfit for the chase. A bad dog to 
work with. The word is French courty 
with suffix "al" or ''aid," appHed to 
several stumpy articles. The old Forest 
laws enacted that "no mean man shall 
have or keep . . . Greyhounds. . . . 
But the little dogs, because it manifestly 
appears there is no danger in them 
it shall be very lawful for any mean 
to keep." After the words "thy wife " 
in the next line, the Quarto has ' ' When 
Pistol lies do this. ..." Halliwell 
pointed out in the Introduction to his 
edition of that text, that these identical 
words occur in Pistol's speech in 2 Henry 
IV. V. iii. 123, 124: "When Pistol 
lies do this, and fig me, like The brag- 
ging Spaniard." 

116. He loves the gallimaufry'] He 
loves the mixture or medley of all sorts 
of women. Properly a cookery term 
(of unknown origin), but generally found 
as here in the transferred sense. Cot- 
grave has the word several times, but 
not as French : " Hochepot. An 
hotch-pot, or gallimaufrey ; a confused 
mingle-mangle of divers things jumbled, 



or put together." Compare Gabriel 
Harvey, "A hotchpot for a gallimafry " 
(Grosart's ed., ii. 58), Pierce's Superero- 
gation, 1592-93. And again " to in- 
terteine S. Fame with a homely galli- 
maufry of little Art, to requite her 
dainty slaum paump of little Witt " 
(i. 281), A New Letter, etc., 1593. 
The latter term is another cook's word 
that barely emerged from the kitchen. 
For gallimaufry, see Nares further for 
examples. It was very common, and 
occurs again in Winter's Tale, IV. iii., 
for a medley. 

116. perpend] consider, think over it. 
Compare As You Like It, III. ii. 69, 
and Twelfth Night, v. 307, where it is 
in both cases a clown's word ; and 
Hamlet, li. ii. 105, where the word is 
given to Polonius. Pistol uses the 
word again in Henry V. iv. iv. 8. But 
it had a recognised poetical usage : 
" perpend in hart my dolours great," 
T. Howell, Poems (Grosart, i. p. 22), 
1568, and again at p. 43. Humphrey 
Gifford also uses it (Grosart, p. 84), 
1580. 



70 



THE MERRY WIIVES 



[act II. 



Pist With liver burning hot. Prevent, or go thou, 

Like sir Actaeon he, with Ringwood at thy heels : 

O, odious is the name 1 120 

Ford. What name, sir ? 

Pist The horn, I say. Farewell. 

Take heed ; have open eye ; for thieves do foot by 
night : 



1 18. liver burning hot'\ "by the liver 
we love," BdiXtholovaeWsDe Proprielati- 
bus rerum (translated 1397). See pas- 
sage quoted at Othello, iv. iii. 93, in 
this series. Reference may be made to 
Twelfth Night, ii. iv. loi ; Much Ado, 
IV. i. 233; Lucrece, line 47; and 
various other passages in Shakespeare. 
The same belief appears in Webster's 
Appius and Virginia, iv. i, and fre- 
quently in Beaumont and Fletcher's 
plays. Steevens cites an old Latin 
distich : 

" Corardet, pulmo loquitur, sel com- 
movet iras ; 
Splendidere facit, cogit amare 
jecur." 

119. Like sir Aeteeon] Pistol here and 
below at "sir corporal Nym" recalls 
the romance style or title given to pre- 
eminent names. At ill. ii. 43, 44, be- 
low, the words "a secure and wilful 
Actseon" have reference again to Ovid's 
famous hunter, transformed for his 
rashness to a stag, and destroyed by 
his own hounds. Compare Burton's 
Anatomie of Melancholy (3. 3. 4, i), 
"the emperors themselves did wear 
Actseon's badge." And Ben Jonson, 
in DrummoncPs Conversations, xvii., 
"A judge coming along a hall and 
being stopped by a throng, cried 
Domiftum cognoscite vestrum. One of 
them said, they would, if he durst say 
the beginning of that verse (for he had 
a fair wyfe) : Actceon ego sum cryed he, 
and went on." The emblem was a 
favourite one with the arras makers. 
Wilson specifies "Tempesti's Actaeon" 
in Belphegor^ iii. i, 1690 ; and see 



Ford, Fancies, ii. i, 1638. Alciati and 
Whitney give as the legitimate inter- 
pretation, one pursued to death by his 
own desires. The transference which 
is so constantly made use of (the word 
even became a verb, "to cuckold") 
may have had authority : Actaion de- 
votes himself to sport. He falls in love 
with the goddess of chastity and hunt- 
ing. He neglects his home and his 
wife entirely, with the natural result. 
And he wins a hunter's crown of glory, 
the horns. But his own domestic circle 
(wife and dogs) destroy him. The 
origin given tentatively in New Eng. 
Diet, in V. "Horn " by a German expert, 
from cock's spurs, needs a deal of proof 
and illustration. It never found its 
way to our literature. 

119. Ringwood'\ In Golding's Ovid, 
Ringwood is the name of a hound 
"with a shrill loud mouth" (ist ed., 
1565). Ovid gives the names of thirty- 
five dogs belonging to Actseon. Ring- 
wood was a favourite hound's name. 
Jonson paraphrases it in The Satyr, 
1603: "Better not Actceon had . . . 
The dog of Sparta breed, and good. As 
can ' ring ' within a * wood.' " Jonson's 
words denote the origin of the name. 
In Rider's Bibliotheca Scholastica, 1 589, 
there is a good list of dog's names, 
about sixty in all. Amongst them is 
" Chaunter, or Ringwood, Hylactor, 
Hylax.''^ The name is in Chap- 
man's Gentleman Usher, i. i ; and in 
Taylor's Navy of Land Ships ; and 
earlier in Harington's Metamorphosis, 
1596: "in comes Melampus or Ring- 
wood." 



SC. I.] 



OF WINDSOR 



71 



Take heed, ere summer comes, or cuckoo-birds do 

sing. 
Away, sir corporal Nym ! — 125 

Believe it, Page ; he speaks sense. [Exit. 

Ford, [Aside.] I will be patient ; I will find out 
this. 

iVym. [To Page^ And this is true; I like not the 

humour of lying. He hath wronged me in some 130 
humours : I should have borne the humoured 
letter to her ; but I have a sword, and it shall 
bite upon my necessity. He loves your wife; 
there's the short and the long. My name is 



125, 126. Away . . . sense] Away, Sir Corporal I 
Johnson conj. 126. sense] omitted Farmer conj. 



Nym. Believe 



124. cuckoo-birds do sing] T. Howell 
speaks of " the slaunderous bird " 
(cuckoo) in his Poems, 1568 (Grosart, 
i. 76). Compare the song in Lovers 
Labour^ s Lost, v. ii. (at the end). In 
Mayd Emylyn (Haz. E. Pop. Poetry, 
iv. 85), circa 1520, the belief is intro- 
duced, " Hymselfe all alone To the 
wode he is gone To here the kockowe 
synge. Thus with her playfeere Maketh 
she mery cheere The husband knoweth 
nothinge" (while Actseon is hunting). 
The unlucky summer bird (without the 
present allusion) is referred to by Pliny 
(Holland's trans, xviii. 26) : " that 
Summer-bird which they call the Cuc- 
kow . . . And verily as these birds, 
so their song . . . seemeth to carrie an 
ominous and cursed presage with them." 

129. Nym. [To Page.]] In order to 
understand this dialogue we must 
suppose Ford and Pistol, Page and 
Nym, speaking in pairs. This is made 
obvious by the stage directions, or 
rather by Steevens, who set Dr. 
Jonson's erroneous conjecture right, 
and put it clearly. In this speech we 
see that the word " humour" got fairly 
on Shakespeare's nerves, and with 
this final outburst the word and its 



owner practically disappear from the 
play. 

133. bite upon my necessity] when I 
require it to do so. ' ' Bite " is used in 
the sense of the action of a sword in 
Richard II. I. iii. 303; King Lear, v. 
iii. 206, and allusively in Winter^ s Tale 
(i. ii. 157) of a dagger. It is not 
necessarily the action of the edge alone, 
as Schmidt and others say. Compare 
Chaucer's Knighte^s Tale (Skeat ed., 
line 2546), " Ne short swerd for to 
stoke, with point bytinge." 

134, there'' s the short and the long] 
We transpose these adjections, but this 
is the old form. " Thys ys the schorte 
and longe," The Merchant and his Son 
(Haz. E. Pop. Poetry, i. 135), circa 
1500. "Howsoever it be, this is the 
short and long," Edwards, Damon and 
Pythias (Haz. Dods. iv. 47), ante 1 566. 
W, Walker (1690) in Idiomatic Anglo- 
Latin has "long and short." Nashe 
has a fuller expression, which may be a 
clue to the exact origin: "this is the 
short and the long and the somme of 
all," Death of Martin Alar-prelate^ 
1589. This looks as if the phrase had 
to do with accounts — short accounts 
and long accounts ? 



72 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act II. 



Corporal Nym ; I speak, and I avouch 'tis true : 135 
my name is Nym, and Falstaff loves your wife. 
Adieu. I love not the humour of bread and 
cheese; and there's the humour of it. Adieu. 

{Exit 

Page, " The humour of it," quoth 'a ! here 's a fellow 

frights English out of his wits. 1 40 

Ford. I will seek out Falstaff. 

Page. I never heard such a drawling, affecting 
rogue. 

Ford. If I do find it : — well. 

Page. I will not believe such a Cataian, though 145 

135. avouch 'tis true:'\ Q i, Craig; avouch ; UisY i, 2, Q 3, mod. edd.; avouch^ 
its F 3, 4. 138. and . . . <^ ?V] Q i, Capell et seq. ; omitted Ff, Q 3. 

140. English'] Ff, Q 3, Globe, etc. ; humour Q i, Pope, Steevens, Craig. 



I37> 138. bread and cheese] Nym is 
about to seek his fortune, and has a part- 
ing shot at his stinted rations hitherto. 
No doubt before their discharge, for 
economy's sake, the followers were on 
short commons. Nashe, however, speaks 
of ** bread and cheese " as we would of 
" bread and butter," i.e. enough to live 
upon {Pierce Fennilesse, Grosart, ii. 14, 
1592). The pension went in sack. 

138. and there's the humour of it] 
introduced from Quarto by Capell, but 
omitted in the Folio. 

142. drawling] The earliest example 
in New Eng. Diet, in this sense. Hall 
has it in his Satires, i. vi. 8, of moving 
slowly, " The drawling Spondees." 

142. affecting] full of affectation 
(Schmidt). Compare Romeo and Juliet, 
II. iv. 29. Ben Jonson's "Fastidious 
Brisk," in Every Man out of his Humour 
(i599)> is described as " A neat, spruce 
affecting courtier." 

145. Cataian] This term occurs un- 
expectedly in Twelfth Night, 11. ii. 80: 
* ' My lady 's a Cataian. " Sir Toby has 
just received an angry message from 
her, and the word was probably sug- 



gested by the first syllable of the name, 
a thin disguise for courtesy's sake. 
This has not been suggested before, 
but it appears to me undoubted, and as 
it comes in as a quibble, it does not 
help us in the present passage, where 
it means a liar pure and simple. In 
Dekker's Honest Whore (Pearson, ii. 
143), quoted by Nares, "I'll make a 
wild Cataian of forty such," the word 
(Nares believes) bears the sense of 
sharper, and he gives another example 
in this sense from Davenant's Love and 
Honour, "Hang him, bold Cataian." 
New Eng. Diet, merely quotes Nares, 
and gives the adjective Cathayan, 
Chinese, from Eden's History of 
Travel. Cathay is the old name for 
China in Marco Polo and other 
early travels. The adjective occurs 
in Dekker's Match mee in London 
(Pearson, iv. 156): "the musk upon 
my word, sir, is perfect Cathayne." 
No doubt the bad repute had been 
brought home by travellers, as Nares 
and New Eng. Diet, state, but they 
give no proof. I find, however, from 
Wm. Wa.tTema.n'sEardleofEacions, 1555 



SCI.] OF WINDSOR 73 

the priest o' the town commended him for a 

true man. 
Ford, 'Twas a good sensible fellow : — well. 
Page, How now, Meg ! 

\Mrs, Page and Mrs. Ford come forward. 
Mrs. Page. Whither go you, George? Hark you. 150 
Mrs. Ford, How now, sweet Frank ! why art thou 

melancholy ? 
Fo7'd, I melancholy ! I am not melancholy. Get 

you home, go. 
Mrs, Ford, Faith, thou hast some crotchets in thy 1 5 5 

head now. Will you go. Mistress Page ? 
Mrs, Page, Have with you. You '11 come to dinner, 

George? [Aside to Mrs. Ford.l Look who 

comes yonder : she shall be our messenger to 

this paltry knight. 160 

156. head now.} J onson, Steevens, Craig; head, Now: F i ; head, Now, Q 3; 
head. Now ; F 2, 3, 4 ; head. Now, GlolDe, etc. 

(Part II, ch. viii,), that the Cathayans . . . thei haue in all hadi worckes a 
were a very remarkable people. Pie passing subtitie of witte. ... A 
says: "There is a place betwixt cowardly people and very feareful of 
Gedrosia and the floude Yndus which is death. " The Cataian was famous for 
called Cathainus of the Cathaiens that his subtleties in the sciences, forhisboast- 
enhabyte it. . . . Aitone the Arminian ing and quickness of the senses, and for 
writeth of them in his storie . . . Thei his falseness, and Shakespeare was quite 
passe (saieth he) all other men in quicke justified in taking one as a type of false- 
smelling. And thei saye of themselues ness. Page's words have always to be 
that though all other menne have two taken seriously. As Mrs. Quickly says, 
instruments of sight, yet do none se " truly Master Page is an honest man." 
with both two in dede but thei: all 155, 156. crotchets in thy head noiv.} 
other men in coparison either to haue Compare Gabriel Harvey, Fotire Letters 
no sight, or elles as it ware but with (Gros. i. i. 89), 1592: " Loe a wilde 
one eye. Their wittinesse is greate, head, ful of mad braine and a thousande 
but their boastinge greater. The whole crotchets." And l^ld^she, Lenten Sttiffe 
nacion of the is perswaded, that thei (Harl. Misc. ii. 299, 1809), 1598 : " I 
muche passe all other men in know- had a crotchet in my head." Later 
ledge and the subtilities of sciences examples are given in New Eng. Diet. 
. . . thei are all voyde of the true Cotgrave gives the phrase, " Crochue. 
knowledge which is in Jesus Christe ... A Quaver in Musicke : whence // a des 
Thei knowe not what we meane, whe crochtte en teste (we say) his head is full 
we speake of faithfulnesse or trustinesse of crotchets," 1611. 



74 THE MERRY WIVES [actii. 

Mrs. Ford. [Aside to Mrs. Page.] Trust me, I 
thought on her : she '11 fit it. 

Enter MISTRESS QuiCKLY. 

Mrs. Page. You are come to see my daughter 

Anne ? 
Quick. Ay, forsooth; and, I pray, how does good 165 

Mistress Anne? 
Mrs. Page. Go in with us and see : we have an 

hour's talk with you. 

[Exeunt Mrs. Page, Mrs. Ford, 
and Mrs. Quickly, 
Page. How now. Master Ford ! 
Ford. You heard what this knave told me, did you 170 

not? 
Page. Yes : and you heard what the other told 

me? 
Ford. Do you think there is truth in them ? 
Page. Hang 'em, slaves! I do not think the knight 175 

would offer it : but these that accuse him in 

his intent towards our wives are a yoke of his 

discarded men ; very rogues, now they be out 

of service. 
Ford. Were they his men ? 1 80 

Page. Marry, were they. 
Fo7'd. I like it never the better for that. Does he 

lie at the Garter? 
Page. Ay, marry, does he. If he should intend 

177, 178. yoke of his discarded men] plays. As a part of this speech of Page's 

couple yoked together. Compare 2 the Quarto adds : '* And for the Knight, 

Henry IV. in. ii. 42. "Yoke-devils" perhaps He hath spoke merrily, as the 

and "yoke - fellow" occur in other fashion of fat men Are." 



I 



SC. I.] 



OF WINDSOR 



75 



r 



this voyage toward my wife, I would turn her 185 
loose to him ; and what he gets more of her 
than sharp words, let it lie on my head. 

Ford. I do not misdoubt my wife; but I would be 
loath to turn them together. A man may be 
too confident : I would have nothing lie on my 1 90 
head : I cannot be thus satisfied. 

Page. Look where my ranting host of the Garter 
comes ; there is either liquor in his pate, or 
money in his purse, when he looks so merrily. 



Enter HoST. 
How now, mine host 1 
Host. How now, bully-rook ! thou 'rt a gentleman. 
Cavaleiro-justice, I say ! 



195 



\ 



I 



192. ranting] ramping (^ I. 

185. voyage] Nym may have quoted 
Falstaff s remarks (i. iii. 75-80) to Page. 
The word is used elsewhere [Cymbeline, 
I. iv. 170), however, meaning merely a 
line of action. 

185, 186. turn her loose to hini] 
Compare Middleton, Your Five Gal- 
lants, I. i. 255 (Bullen, iii. 135), 
1607-08: "She's done well, i' faith: 
I fear not now to turn her loose to any 
gentleman in Europe." And Brome, 
Northern Lass, ii. v. : "lie turne my 
master loose to her." I am indebted 
to Mr. Craig for these illustrations. 

191. head] The "horn" allusion. 

196. bully-rook] See note at i. iii. 2. 

197. Cavaleiro-justice] A Spanish 
word apparently introduced when this 
country was threatened by the Armada. 
The earliest reference given is Nashe's 
PasquiVs Returne, 1589. The ex- 
pression occurs several times in Three 
Lords and Three Ladies of London^ by 
R. W. (Haz. Dods. vi. 466, 467, 468), 
printed in 1 590 : ' * Castilian cavalieros, " 
"Three cavalieros Castilianos," and 



"The third grand cavaliero." This 
play was written to mock the approach- 
ing Spanish invasion, and these three 
cavalieros are introduced to be held up 
to ridicule as braving Spaniards, to be 
flouted and put to flight by the English. 
At page 456 Fraud says, "The Spaniards 
are coming with great power"; at page 
458 Policy says, "prepare thy wits for 
war . . . with the proud Castilians." 
The play was therefore written 1 587-88, 
and introduced the word "cavaliero." 
The device or imprese in that play of 
the black horse with a hind-leg on the 
earth, and the motto Non sufficit orbis, 
with much more bravado (pp. 461, 462), 
gives us the lower date, for it is taken 
from Drake's Voyage to West Indies 
(1585-86), where he found this device 
of the King of Spain at Hispaniola. 
"Cavaliero" occurs again in 2 Henry 
IV. V. iii. 62. Nashe, Harvey, and 
Ben Jonson all make contemptuous 
use of it subsequently to the above- 
mentioned play. For a parallel allusion, 
see below, " Castilian," il. iii. 34. For 



76 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act II. 



Enter SHALLOW. 

Shal. I follow, mine host, I follow. Good even and 
twenty, good Master Page ! Master Page, 
will you go with us? we have sport in 200 
hand. 

Host. Tell him, cavaleiro -justice ; tell him, bully- 
rook. 

Shal. Sir, there is a fray to be fought between Sir 

Hugh the Welsh priest and Caius the French 205 
doctor. 

Ford. Good mine host o' the Garter, a word with 

you. [Drawing him aside. 

Host. What say'st thou, my bully-rook ? 

Shal. [To Page.] Will you go with us to behold it? 210 
My merry host hath had the measuring of their 
weapons ; and, I think, hath appointed them 
contrary places ; for, believe me, I hear the 



/ /oZ/ow] At hand 



198. I follow 
den Q i. 

the passage in Nashe, see quotation at 
"buck basket" (ill. iii. 2). Steevens 
refers to the play quoted from above, 
at "Castilian" (iii. i.). So also does 
Malone, but both insufficiently, and 
without reference to its correct date 
and the present word's use. 

198, 199. Good even and twenty\ 
That is to say, " I wish you good 
evening, and twenty times good." 
Compare " sweet and twenty " (twenty 
times sweet). Twelfth Night, 11. iii. 52 ; 
and " farewell and a thousand," Middle- 
ton, Trick to Catch the Old One, iv. 5 ; 
and Peele, Old Wives Tales. Twenty 
means many. Harvey says, * ' I have 
twentie and twentie charmes," etc. 
(Gros. ii. 239), 1592-93. Breton has 
the expression "to play on twenty 



at hand Q i ; Good even] God 



hands. " And compare the old ' * twenty- 
devil -way." 

211,212. measuring of their weapons'] 
See above, l. iv. 125, 126. Arranging 
the preliminaries, to see that neither 
combatant had any advantage unfairly. 
So in Beaumont and Fletcher, Honest 
Mmt s Fo7-tnne,AciiY . ,'wh&xe Longaville 
is arranging a duel: "Who takes asword? 
The advantage is so small, As he that 
doubts hath the free leave to chuse. 
Orleans. Come give me any, and search 
me : 'Tis not the ground, weapon, or 
seconds that can make Odds . . . but 
the cause." Compare Hamlet, IV. ii. 7. 
And Harington's Metamorphosis {An 
Apology), Chiswick, p. 57 : "let him 
send me the breadth of his buckler (I 
should say the length of his rapier)." 



SC. I.] 



OF WINDSOR 



77 



parson is no jester. Hark, I will tell you what 
our sport shall be. \^They converse apart. 215 

Host. Hast thou no suit against my knight, my guest- 
cavaleire ? 

Ford. None, I protest : but I '11 give you a pottle of 
burnt sack to give me recourse to him, and tell 
him my name is Brook; only for a jest. 220 



218-220.] Given to Shallow in Ff, to 
Pope et seq. ; Broome Ff, Q 3. 

219. burnt sack] See again ill. i. 
Ill, and Twelfth Night, ii. iii. 206. 
Burning (or boiling) sack, or any other 
wine, was a custom in vogue to mitigate 
new wine, and probably also to assist 
in melting the sugar so constantly used 
in these decoctions. It is an ancient 
custom, and we have probably added 
nothing to the knowledge of the 
ancients with regard to the juice of 
the grape. **They boile new wine 
sufficiently to the proportion of the 
strength, until the hardnesse do evap- 
orate, and that it wax mild and sweet : 
but being thus ordered, it will not last 
(they say) above one yeere," Holland's 
Plinie, xiv. 19. And later: " But to 
returne againe to our burning and 
sophistication of wines," ibid. ch. xx. 
(p. 425). "Dead sack" is wine so 
treated, and left too long. It is some- 
times mentioned. Burning wine is not 
often referred to in Shakespeare's time, 
nevertheless it was a usual practice. 
Thus in Wilkins' Miseries of En- 
forced Marriage, Act lir., 1607 : 
"Nay, nay, nay. Will: pry thee come 
away, we have a full gallon of sack 
stays in the fire for thee." And S. 
Rowland's Satire, 6, 1600, "To burne 
sacke with a candle till he reeles." 
The drink called sack has been copi- 
ously written about. See Dyce's long 
extract from Henderson's History of 
Wines, in his Glossary. But the more 
of these dissertations one reads, the 
less clear idea one has upon the sub- 
ject. The word was used most vaguely 
of various wines, and of drinks made 



Ford in Qq. 220, 223. Brook] Q i, 

out of wine. To any fixed idea upon 
the subject advanced from one quotation 
from any writer of this time, another 
contradictory one, equally conclusive, 
could be advanced from another. In a 
note to the Clarendon Press edition of 
The Tempest (p. 120) Wright says : 
' ' There were as many kinds of the 
wine as there are etymologies of the 
name." In another note to Twelfth 
Night (p. 116) he pins his colours to 
the derivation, "sec," dry: "not be- 
cause * sac ' was a dry wine in the 
modern sense of the word, but because 
it was made of grapes which in a very 
hot summer were dried almost to raisins 
by the sun, and so contained a large 
quantity of sugar." A most unsatis- 
factory derivation in every way. Sack 
was constantly mixed with sugar, 
showing it did not contain it already. 
And " sec" (not sack) had other mean- 
ings altogether with regard to wine, i.e. 
"neat," "pure." ^^ Boire sec . . . boire 
sans eati" ; and ^^ Da vin est sec , . . 
qu'Il 11^ a point de liqueur,'''' Dictionnaire 
de r Academic. What is still more to 
the point is that Cotgrave has neither 
sack nor ' ' sec " in reference to wine. It 
appears in Sherwood's Index, ''''Sack, 
Vin d'Espagne viti sec" (1662). The 
earliest mention of sack I have meet 
with is in a list of wines in Colyn 
BlowboPs Testament (Haz. E. Pop. 
Poetry, i. loy), circa 1500: " Claret - 
White — Tey nt — Alicaunte — Sake, " etc. 
For derivation, a more satisfactory one 
is implied in the early dictionaries. 
W. Rider, 1589, has " Vinum Hispan- 



78 



THE MERRY A¥IVES 



[act II. 



Host. My hand, bully; thou shall have egress and 
regress ; — said I well ? — and thy name shall be 
Brook. It is a merry knight. Will you go 
An-heires ? 

224. An-heires\ F 1,2, Q3; An-heirs F3; an-heirs F 4, Dyce, Craig; 
wjw^^^rj Theobald, Hanmer (yf^.^ Steevens, 1793); on hearts Steevens (1793, 
ox on heroes {ibid, conj.)); on^ Amj Warburton ; cavaleires {'■^ caulieres") Booden 
conj.. Singer. 



ense saccatum, sacke, or rumney " : 
and " Sacke, a wine that cometh out 
of Spaine. Vinum Hispanense." 
" Sack " from saccatus is hard to avoid. 
Saccatus is " Put in a Sacke" in Rider, 
from which one might believe in a 
reference to the Spanish wine-bags 
known as borrachios. But the earlier 
dictionary, The Nonienclator (1585) is 
most explicit : " Vinum saccatum . . . 
sackt wine, or wine strained through a 
bag, hippocras." It appears to have 
been a part of the wine-maker's business 
to strain wines in early times, and the 
word sack may thus have come to us 
through the Latin saccatus. In Hol- 
land's Plinie, xxiii. I (p. 153), I find 
again corroboration : ' 'Howbeit to speake 
generally, the holesomest wines both of 
the one sort and the other, and for all 
persons, be such as have run through a 
strainer or Ipocras bag, and thereby 
lost some part of their strength." Sack 
was a strong, hot, Spanish wine, in 
need of sugar, and improved by a 
reduction in its strength, whether by 
burning or straining. For "burnt 
wine," see also Dicke of Devonshire 
(Bullen's Old Plays, ii. 36): "Like 
wine that's burnt, you must be set 
light by, and then you'll come to a 
temper." Dekker has "he . . . 
commands a gallon of sacke and 
suger to be burnt for the yeamen," 
Jests to make you Merrie (Gros. ii. 
349), 1607. 

220, 223. Brook] The Folio reads 
Broome. The name must have been 
Brook, on account of the jest in ii. ii. 
157. The Cambridge editors say : "it 
seems likely that the name was altered 
in the stage copies at the instance of 



some person of the name of Brook 
living at Windsor, who had sufficient 
acquaintance with the players, or in- 
terest with their patrons, to get it 
done." 

221, 222. egress and regress] A 
borrowed legal phrase. It was, like 
"ingress and egress," especially used 
at sea with regard to the entry into 
ports, harbours, and dominions. Com- 
pare Hakluyt, edition 181 1, ii. 299, 
Commandement obtained by Hareborne^ 
1584 : " which abovesaid Christians 
will not quietly suffer their egresse and 
regresse into and out of our dominions." 
And Letter of Chamberlain in Court 
and Times of James /., 352, 1614 : 
"Here is a Jew arrested ... he 
pretended to have leave of license 
under the King's hand for his free 
egress and regress, which was not 
believed." 

224. An-heires] Of the many sug- 
gestions and guesses made at this word, 
"mynheers" is to me the most satis- 
factory. But there is no evidence the 
expression was in use at this time in 
England. The correspondent passage 
in the Quarto is " Sed I well Hector?" 
See Halliwell, Nares, and Dyce for the 
question argued out. It appears to me 
that, having already had in " Pheezar" 
an Oriental title, we have here another, 
and that the word intended was 
"Ameers," which agrees very closely 
in spelling, but especially in sound. 
The word was known. "Mahomet 
reigned nine yeares, the first Amiras of 
the Saracens," IJoyd, Consent of Time^ 
p. 300, 1592 {Stanford Diet.). The 
Host was looking for titles — and he 
found them. See note above at 



SC. I.] 



OF WINDSOR 



79 



Shal. Have with you, mine host. 225 

Page. I have heard the Frenchman hath good skill in 

his rapier. 
Shal. Tut, sir, I could have told you more. In these 
times you stand on distance, your passes, stoc- 
cadoes, and I know not what: 'tis the heart, 230 
Master Page; 'tis here, 'tis here. I have seen 



"Pheezar." "Ameers" is the more 
likely, since it was already put forward 
(correctly) as the derivation of Admiral. 
Harrison {Description of England, 
Book ii. chap, xvii., 1587) says: 
*' Admerall, who is so called as some 
imagine of the Greeke word Almiras 
. . . another sort from Amyras the 
Saracen magistrate." This is earlier 
than any quoted example. Camden 
has it in Britannia also. For an ex- 
traordinary word beginning with myn., 
see the Glossary to Hazlitt's Dodsley. 

225. Have with you] come along. 
See Othello, i. ii. 54, and note. 

227. rapierl In Love's Labour-' s Lost, 

I. ii. 183, the rapier is mentioned as the 
Spaniard's weapon. In 2 Henry LV. 

II. iv. 215, FalstafiPs weapon is a rapier. 
Nevertheless the manner of its mention 
here in connection with the sword, 
points to its being unpopular, like the 
*' sword and dagger" of Slender, above 
(i. i. 294), where the weapon intended 
is not a long, but a light Spanish sword 
for the thrust. Wheatley, in his Intro- 
duction to Ben Jonson's Every Man in 
his Humour, gives an early reference 
to Giles Du Guez, circa 1530, Intro- 
ductorie for to . . . speke Frejiche : 
"the Spanische sworde, la rapiere" 
And Cotgrave, ^^ Espa Espagnole — A 
Rapier or Tuck." The word and the 
use both were not yet familiar at the 
time of this play. Stubbes falls foul of 
them and their costly furniture : * * their 
Rapiers, Swoords, and Daggers gilt 
. . . with scabbardes and sheathes 
Velvet," Anatomic of Abuses (New 
Shak. See. p. 253), 1585. They were 



frequently called "Toledo rapiers," as 
in Jonson's play. 

229. distance'] space between duel- 
lists. A technical term in fencing, used 
again in Romeo and Juliet, ii. iv. 22. 
See below, 11. iii. 27. 

229. passes'] "A well-experienced 
hand would pass upon you, at pleasure 
. . . thus, sir, — make a thrust at me 
. . . make a full career at the body : 
the best practised gallants of the time 
name it the passado," Ben Jonson, 
Every Man ift his Humour, i. iv. (14^). 
Both verb and noun occur in Hamlet. 
In the Quarto Shallow uses the word 
"passado." See below, ii. iii. 26. 

229, 230. stoccadoes] Compare Haring- 
ton's Metamorphosis (Chiswick, p. 14), 
1596: "Now I being bound by the 
duello, having accepted the challenge, 
to seek no advantage, but even to 
deal with him at his own weapon, 
entered the lists with him, and fighting 
after the old English manner without 
the stockados, for to foin or strike below 
the girdle, we counted it base." See 
Jonson, ut supra (14a). These terms 
appear to have been introduced by the 
Spaniard, Caranza, whose Grammar of 
the subject is often referred to by 
writers of the time. Vincentio Saviolo, 
The Use of the Rapier and Dagger, 
was translated, 1595. 

231-233. / have seen . . . skip like 
rats] Here we have " mad Shallow, " 
and " lusty Shallow " of Clement's Inn 
recalled from 2 Henry IV. III. ii. ; 
and see above, I. i. 40, and later, 
II. iii. 47. Henry Porter probably had 
Justice Shallow in his thoughts when 



80 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act II. 



the time, with my long sword I would have 
made you four tall fellows skip like rats. 

Host. Here, boys, here, here ! shall we wag ? 

Page. Have with you. I had rather hear them scold 235 
than fight. {Exeunt Host, Shal., and Page, 

Ford, Though Page be a secure fool, and stands so 
firmly on his wife's frailty, yet I cannot put off 
my opinion so easily : she was in his company at 
Page's house ; and what they made there, I know 240 
not. Well, I will look further into 't : and I have 
a disguise to sound Falstaff. If I find her 
honest, I lose not my labour ; if she be otherwise, 
'tis labour well bestowed. \Exit. 

232. long sword'\ two hatid sword Q^ I. 2^^^, frailty'] fealty Thtohdld. 



he wrote in Two Angry Wo??ien of 
Abingdon, 1599 : "I pray God, 
Nicholas prove not a fly . . . that we 
might have half-a-dozen good smart 
strokes. Ha, I have seen the day I 
could have danc'd in my fight, one, 
two, three, four, and five, on the head 
. . . but I have not fought this four 
days, and I lack a little practise of my 
ward" (Haz. Dods. vii. 359). The 
ludicrous conclusion seems to strengthen 
the idea that Coomes is quoting 
Shallow to raise a laugh. There are 
other Shakespearian references in this 
play. See Dyce's edition, referred to 
in Ingleby's Centurie of Prayse (New 
Shak. Soc), p. 427. If this one be 
admitted, it forms the earliest to Merry 
Wives. 

2,y2.. long sword] "two hand sword" 
in the Quarto. Long sword was a 
technical name for the same weapon. 
Gabriel Harvey makes one word of it : 
*'thy slashing Longsword" (ii. 129). 
It was a term transferred, like ** half- 



pike," to drinking bouts. See Mas- 
singer's Old Law, III. ii., 1599. In 
Watreman's Fardle of Facions, chap. x. 
Part II. (1555), it is said of the Tar- 
tares : "Thei cannot handle a target: 
nor but fewe of theim a launce or a 
long sweard." 

233. fellows] " Fencers " in Quarto. 

234. wag] move, go. A favourite 
word in the Host's lips for "go." See 
I. iii. 6; 11. iii. 73, 99. "How the 
world wags " is equivalent to " how the 
world goes " in As Yotc Like Lt, ii. 
vii. S3- 

237,238. stands . . .frailty] Ford must 
be taken as assuming Mistress Page's 
unchastity, and as meaning that Page 
' ' has perfect confidence in his unchaste 
wife." His " wife's frailty " is the same 
as his frail wife (Malone). "Fealty," 
suggested by Theobald, would read 
better, and would occur to most people. 
However, it may mean simply "trusts 
too much to a weak woman." 

240. made] did. 



sc, 



II.] 



OF WINDSOR 



81 



SCENE II. — A Room in the Garter Inn. 



Enter Falstaff and PiSTOL. 

Fal. I will not lend thee a penny. 

Pist. Why, then the world 's mine oyster, 
Which I with sword will open. 

Fal. Not a penny. I have been content, sir, you 
should lay my countenance to pawn : I have 
grated upon my good friends for three reprieves 
for you and your coach-fellow Nym : or else you 

7. coack-fellow"] cotich-fellow Theobald. 

2. world's mine oyster] To open an 
oyster was a metaphor for laying bare 
any difficult matter. It occurs in 
Walker's Paramiologia, 1672, and in 
Ray's Proverbs : " Undone as a man 
would undoe an oyster." Compare 
Haughton, etc., A IVoman will have 
her Will, 1598: "Now will the pack 
of all our slye devises Be quite layde 
ope, as one undoes an oyster." The 
oyster was made use of in several pro- 
verbial expressions. Instead of these 
two lines (2, 3) Pistol says in the 
Quarto, "I will retort the sum in 
equipage." Some editors, following 
Theobald, have tacked this passage on 
to his speech here, quite unjustifiably, 
if we are to follow the Folio. Pistol, 
it is suggested, meant " stuff," probably 
stolen stuff. The word is somewhat 
similarly used by Ben Jonson in the 
mouth of Juniper in Case is Altered, 
IV. iv. (542a;), 1598, where it means 
articles of personal adornment. But 
the expression "in equipage" had 
some odd usages. See Eastward Ho, 
IV. ii. (Bullen, p. 89), where it seems 
to mean "as you go along," making 
Pistol's sense obvious. 

5. countenance'] patronage, weight of 
name or backing, moral support. So 
"under whose countenance we steal," 
1 Henry IV. i. ii. 23. Compare Ben 
Jonson, Every Man out of his Humour, 

6 



in. i. : "You will not serve me, sir, 
will you ? I '11 give you more than 
countenance." And Shirley, Witty 
Fair One, i. 2 : "To whom he gives 
Christian wages and not countenance 
alone, to live on." 

6. grated upon] made burdensome 
demands upon. Compare 2 Henry IV. 
IV. i. 90: "What peer hath been 
suborned to grate on you That you 
should seal this lawless bloody book 
Of forged rebellion ? " And Beau- 
mont and Fletcher's Monsieur Thomas, 
II. i. : "I know your nature's sweet 
enough and tender, Not grated on, nor 
curbed." And Sir John Harington, 
Metamorphosis {Apology), Chiswick 
rept. p. 10, 1596: "to grace some 
that have favoured me, and grate 
against some that had galled me." 

7. coach-fellow] "yoke-fellow," com- 
panion in the same work. See note at 
"yoke" in the last scene (line 181). 
Shakespeare has "yoke-fellow" in 
Henry V. II. iii. 56 ; and lear, ill. 
vi. 39. Steevens refers to Chapman's 
Homer, Tenth Book. The passage 
will be found in Sheppard's edition, 
p. 128: "their king: who in a fatal 
sleep, Lay in their midst ; their chariot 
horse, as they coachfellows were, Fed 
by them " (1598). "Coach-horse," for 
a companion, was a common term, 
used by Marlowe, Ben Jonson, Chap- 



82 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act II. 



had looked through the grate, like a geminy of 
baboons. I am damned in hell for swearing to 
gentlemen my friends, you were good soldiers and 
tall fellows ; and when Mistress Bridget lost the 
handle of her fan, I took 't upon mine honour 
thou hadst it not. 



10 



man {Monsieur D' Olive, iii.), Cooke 
{Greene's Tu Qtioqiie), etc. 

8. looked through the grate] A 
euphemism for being in prison. The 
poorer prisoners were permitted to beg 
for alms and provisions (for which a 
basket was let down) through a grating. 
Compare Middleton, Roaring Girl, iii. 
iii,, i6ii : "I'll make thee peep 
through a grate" ; and Shirley, Bird 
in a Cage, ill. iv. : " howl all day at the 
grate for a meal at night from the 
basket " ; and Bagford Ballads, Ebbs- 
worth's edition (ii. 662), 1680 : " may 
never one want to peep through a 
grate" {Le. may there be always a 
prisoner). FalstafPs credit saved them 
from prison. Wheatley says, ' ' a pair 
of monkeys in a cage," depriving the 
passage of all its force. The passage in 
Shirley supplies the howling, char- 
acteristic both of begging prisoners and 
baboons. 

8. geminy] pair. A metaphor bor- 
rowed perhaps from the constellation, 
the Twins. New Eng. Diet, gives 
examples (later than Merry Wives), 
showing the word was more often used 
of a pair of eyes. There is an excel- 
lent parallel in Ben Jonson which has 
escaped hitherto. Speaking of Clove 
and Orange in the Dramatis Personce 
of Every Man out of his Humour 
(1599)9 iie calls them "An inseparable 
case of coxcombs, city-born ; the 
Gemini, or twins of foppery." 

9. baboons] There was a famous 
great baboon on show in London about 
this time. "The great Baboone that 
was to be scene in Southwarke," Sir 
Gyles Goosecappe (Bullen's Old Plays, 
iii. 7), 1606. And "He walks as 
stately as the great Baboon," Wily Be- 



guiled {}l^z. Dods. ix. 310), ante 1606. 
Ben Jonson mentions him also. The 
baboons here are perhaps not true 
baboons, but the great red howlers 
{Mycetes), called baboons, as seen by 
Sir Robert Dudley in the voyage of 
The Bear, 1595, to Trinidad : 
"fertile and full of fruits, straunge 
beasts and foulis, whereof monkeis, 
babions, and parats were in great 
abundance." The Cynocephalus, or 
true baboon, is an inhabitant of the 
old world, but the term was loosely 
used, like the word " ape " for all the 
larger members of the tribe. Cotgrave, 
in V. Magot, gives it right, "a Baboon 
or ape with a face like a dog." 

12. handle of her fan] Fans were 
made for fashionable persons with very 
costly handles. Amongst the New 
Year's gifts to Queen Elizabeth in 1577 
{Nichols Progi'esses, ii. 68) is "a fan of 
flowers of silke of sundrye colours, the 
handle of an imbrawdry worke set 
with small perle," and p. 75, "a fan of 
feathers of sundrye colours with a 
handill of silver." The handles were 
sometimes of gold. Dekker says in 
London^ s Tempe, 1629: "I must now 
A golden handle make for my wife's 
fanne ; Worke, my fine smugges ! " 
Silver handles are very often men- 
tioned, and from the value here of 
half a crown, was probably the sort 
referred to. At this time feather fans 
were the most used. Dutch fans, 
much like those in use at present, were 
however in vogue at this exact date. 
In Hakluyt (rept, 1810, pp. 22, 23, 
vol. ii.). Voyage to Cadiz, speaking 
of flying fishes, the narrator says 
they are "in all the world like to our 
.gentlewomens dutch Fans, that are 



SC. II.] 



OF WINDSOR 



83 



Pist. Didst not thou share? hadst thou not fifteen 

pence ? i 5 

Fal. Reason, you rogue, reason : think'st thou I '11 
endanger my soul gratis ? At a word, hang no 
more about me, I am no gibbet for you. Go. 
A short knife and a throng ! — To you manor of 
Pickt-hatch ! Go. You '11 not bear a letter for 20 
nie, you rogue ! you stand upon your honour ! 
Why, thou unconfinable baseness, it is as much 



made either of paper or parchment, or 
silke, or other stuffe which will with 
certaine pleights easily runne and folde 
themselves together." These were 
probably of Chinese origin. 

16. Reason^ you rogue, reason"] There 
is good reason for it (my dismissing 
you). He pays no attention to Pistol's 
plea. Compare Coriolanus, iv. v. 247, 
where, however, the use falls in more 
conformably with the conversation. 
Falstaff means to say, " it is absolutely 
necessary," as a separate comment — 
"you must go." I don't imagine 
Falstaff seriously advances his soul as 
an argument. In other passages where 
"reason" and "great reason" (col- 
lected by Schmidt) occur, the cause 
and effect are made obvious by the 
context. I prefer the punctuation of 
the Quarto here, giving a full stop at 
the second "reason." 

19. A short knife and a throng\ 
The desiderata for a cutpurse. Pope, 
followed by one or two editors, altered 
throng to thong, without reason. 

19, 20. To your 7nanor of Pickt-hatchX 
Randolph has similar expressions for 
the haunts of rogues and prostitutes in 
Muses Looking- Glas s \ "The yearly 
value of my fair manor of Clerkenwell 
. . . the lordship of Clerkenwell . . . 
my Pickt-hatch graunge And Shoreditch 
farm and other premises adjoining." 
The exact whereabouts of Pickt-hatch 
is disputed. Gifford says, in a note to 
Every Man in his Humour (perhap^ 



the earliest reference), I. ii.: "it is 
generally supposed to have been in 
Turnmill or Tredmill Street near Clerk- 
enwell Green." Wheatley says : "Its 
situation is marked by Pickax Yard, 
adjoining Middle Row, near the Char- 
terhouse wall in Goswell Road." The 
name is not mentioned in Stow's care- 
ful description of these places. Either 
it was a newer designation or not an 
authorised one. At the same date as 
Merry Wives, "a pickhatch drab "is 
mentioned by Marston, Scourge of Vil- 
lainie, i. iii. The disreputable nature of 
this district is often mentioned by the 
dramatists. In Bartholomew Fair, v. 
iii., where Lanthorn Leatherhead (/.«. 
Inigo Jones) is called a "hogrubber of 
Pickthatch," there seems to be some 
further allusion that may help ; ' ' hog- 
rubber " was, however, an authorised 
term of abuse. 

20. Pickt-hatch] Perhaps the first part 
of this name is the doublet of pitched, 
as in " pitch a camp," etc. Compare 
the name of a well-known house of call 
in the New Forest, the " Picked 
House." 

2 1 . stand upon your honour] * ' where- 
as, those that stand most on their 
honour, have shut up their purses, and 
shift us off with court-hollie-bread," 
Nashe, Pierce Pennilesse (Grosart, ii. 
I5)> 1592. Insist upon it. 

22. unconfinable] that which can't 
be enclosed ; hence boundless, illimit- 
able. 



84 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act II. 



as I can do to keep the terms of my honour 
precise : I, I, I myself sometimes, leaving the 
fear of God on the left hand, and hiding mine 
honour in my necessity, am fain to shuffle, to 
hedge, and to lurch; and yet you, rogue, will 
ensconce your rags, your cat-a-mountain looks, 
your red-lattice phrases, and your bold-beating 



25 



23. konour] hofionor F i. 25. God] Q i ; heaven Ff, Q 3, Steevens (1793). 
27. hedge"] filch Q i. 28. rags] brags Singer (Anon. conj.). 29. bold- 
beating] bull-baiting Hanmer, bold-bearing Warburton. 



27. hedge] In the Quarto this speech 
of Falstafi's, to line 27, is identical, 
the only important variation being at 
this word, where the reading is " filch." 
New Eng. Diet, gives this use as the 
first instance of "go aside from the 
straight path," the next being Troilus 
and Cressida, ill. iii. 158 : " hedge 
aside from the direct forthright." To 
shuffle. The word * ' hedge " was 
associated with many ill-meanings in 
compound substantives, especially 
"hedge-creeper," at an early date. 
The verb here seems to me distinct 
from the other examples given, and 
perhaps belongs to the cony-catcher's 
dialect. 

27. lurch] " To remain in or about a 
place furtively, or secretly, and with 
evil design," New Eng. Diet. The 
verb was used broadly for to steal, as 
in Nashe's Christes Tears (Grosart, 
iv. 105), 1593 ; and in Greene, Defence 
of Conny -Catching (Grosart, xi. 58), 
1592. For the sense of "to hide," see 
Haz. Dods. iv. 150 (1575). 

28. ensconce] shelter, as in a sconce 
or fort. Compare Sonnet xlix. 9. 
Gabriel Harvey has the word in 
Pierced Supererogation (Grosart, ii. 
228). It appears to be a special 
favourite with Shakespeare. 

28. cat-a-mountain] Originally ap- 
plied to the leopard {New Eng. Diet.). 
But the word came into use with the 
idea of a wild cat, a large fierce beast, 



partly imaginary, with highly developed 
cat-like qualities. The illustrations in 
New Eng. Diet, need supplementing. 
Nashe has "Pol-cat and Muske-cat? 
there wants but a Cat-a-mountaine, and 
then there would be old scratching," 
Have with you to Saffron Walden 
(Grosart, p. 73), 1596. Jonson uses it 
expressly of the wild cat : ' ' The owl is 
abroad, and the cat and the toad, And 
so is the cat-a-mountain," Masque of 
Queens. Jonson uses the word as it is 
used in the text, of a fierce, scowling 
person, "cat-a-mountain vapours," 
Bartholomew Fair, iv. iii., applied as 
here to a swaggerer. So does Dekker, 
"a second catamountaine mewes and 
calls me barren," Satiromastix To 
the World {1602). And Taylor, "Like 
a sowre cat-a-mountaine stares and 
scowls. " 

29. red-lattice phrases] language fit 
for an ale-house. The windows of ale- 
houses were of the old type, lattice- 
work, on account no doubt of the price 
of glass and its liability to fracture 
in such places. They were usually 
painted red, though green ones are 
occasionally mentioned. In 2 Henry 
IV. II. ii. 86, the page is unable to 
distinguish Bardolph s face from the 
colour of the red lattice window he is 
peeping through. The red lattice is 
mentioned in Gascoigne's Works ( 1575), 
quoted in New Eng. Diet, as the 
earliest. The term was a synonym for 



sc.ii.] OF WINDSOR 85 

oaths, under the shelter of your honour ! You 30 
will not do it, you ! 
Pist. I do relent : what would thou more of man ? 

Enter ROBIN. 

Rob. Sir, here 's a woman would speak with you. 
Fal. Let her approach. 

Enter MISTRESS QuiCKLY. 

Quick. Give your worship good morrow. 35 

Fal. Good morrow, good wife. 

Quick. Not so, an 't please your worship. 

Fal. Good maid, then. 

Quick. I '11 be sworn ; 

As my mother was, the first hour I was born. 40 

Fal. I do believe the swearer. What with me ? 
Quick. Shall I vouchsafe your worship a word or 

two? 

32. relent] recatti Q i. 35. Give . . . morrow] Good you god den sir Q i. 
39. 77/ 6e sworn] That I am lie be sworne Q i. 

a tavern. "In the meane time walke The Quarto reads "recant." Falstaflf 

with me to the next Red Lattice and replies in the Quarto, ' ' Well, go to, 

I will give thee two Cannes," Hey- away, no more." And we hear no 

wood, A Royal Ki^ig, etc. (Pearson, more of Pistol in the Quarto. See 

p. 9), circa 1600 ; and Tom Brown's below, lines 142-144, note. 
Works (iii. Part ii. p. 107, edition 39. Vll be sworn]\^xo\.t%\.. A fre- 

1708), " at the next Red Lattice, " «Vca quent expression in Shakespeare. See 

1700- below. III. iii. 29, where the expression 

29. bold-beatijig] This expression has is used absolutely as here ; and Te7?iJ)esf, 

called forth many suggested alterations, il. ii. 133, etc. The insertion of the 

It probably means "brow-beating." words "That I am "from the Quarto 

"Bold-faced" occurs in Ventis and is quite unnecessary. 
Adonisy line 6. 42. vouchsafe] A stilted term mis- 

32. relent] soften, relax, literally ; used here, on purpose. So Ben 

and hence to become contrite. Com- Jonson, Every Man in his Hu7/tour, 

pare Humphrey Gifford, A Posie of ill. ii: ** Bobadil. Master Kitely's man, 

Gillijlowers (Grosart, p. 95), 1580, pray thee, vouchsafe us the lighting 

"repent, relent, and call for grace." of this match. Cash. Fire on your 



86 THE MERRY WIVES [actii. 

Fal. Two thousand, fair woman : and I '11 vouchsafe 

thee the hearing. 45 

Quick, There is one Mistress Ford, sir : — I pray, 

come a little nearer this ways : — I myself dwell 

with Master Doctor Caius, — 
Fal. Well, on : Mistress Ford, you say, — 
Quick. Your worship says very true: — I pray your 50 

worship, come a little nearer this ways. 
Fal, I warrant thee, nobody hears ; — mine own people, 

mine own people. 
Quick. Are they so? God bless them, and make 

them his servants ! 55 

Fal, Well, Mistress Ford ; — what of her ? 
Quick. Why, sir, she 's a good creature. — Lord, 

Lord ! your worship 's a wanton ! Well, heaven 

forgive you and all of us, I pray ! 
Fal. Mistress Ford ; — come, Mistress Ford, — 60 

Quick. Marry, this is the short and the long of it; 

you have brought her into such a canaries as 

54. God\ Q I ; Heaven Ff, Q 3. 

match ! no time now but to ' vouch- duction, I. i. And a more remarkable 

safe ' ? " It was a great favourite example is in Cynthia's Revels, IV. i. 

with vainglorious writers like Gabriel (181/J), "make some desperate ways 

Harvey. with myself" (make away with myself). 

47. come . . . this ways'] ways was 61. short and the long] See li. i. 134 

often used colloquially for way, familiar (note). 

from the expression in compounds, 62. canaries] No doubt, as Steevens 

"length- ways," "side-ways," etc. In suggested, Mrs. Quickly would have 

a note to "come on your ways" in said "quandaries." Compare Greene, 

Tempest, II. ii., the Clarendon Press Mamillia (Grosart, ii. 164), "Your 

editor (Wright) says it is probably the strange news hath driven me into a 

old genitive used adverbially. See quandary " ; and Lyly, Galathea, iii. 2 

again As You Like It, iv. i. 186, and (1592), "I am in a quandary." See 

Troilus and Cressida, ill. ii. 47. In also Beaumont and Fletcher, Knight oj 

Ben Jonson's Alchejnist (iv. iv.) Burning Pestle, i. i. ; and Dekker, 

*'Come your ways" means "move ^Sa/zV^waj/z^ (Pearson, p. 236), " leave 

on." "Go thy ways" occurs in the your quandaries and trickes . . . your 

same author's Bartholomew Fair, In- fetches and your fegaries." 



sc.ii.] OF WINDSOR aV 

'tis wonderful. The best courtier of them all, 
when the court lay at Windsor, could never have 
brought her to such a canary. Yet there has been 65 
knights, and lords, and gentlemen, with their 
coaches ; I warrant you, coach after coach, letter 
after letter, gift after gift ; smelling so sweetly, 
all musk, and so rushling, I warrant you, in silk 
and gold ; and in such alligant terms ; and in 70 
such wine and sugar of the best and the fairest, 
that would have won any woman's heart ; and, I 
warrant you, they could never get an eye-wink of 
her : I had myself twenty angels given me this 
morning ; but I defy all angels — in any such sort, 7 5 
as they say — but in the way of honesty : and, I 
warrant you, they could never get her so much 
as sip on a cup with the proudest of them all : 
and yet there has been earls, nay, which is more, 
pensioners ; but, I warrant you, all is one with 80 
her. 

64. when the court lay at Windsor] form of Queen Elizabeth's body-guard, 

This may refer to the series of royal the ' * Band of Pensioners, " is often 

entertainments at Windsor when Queen referred to. See Midstunrner Nighfs 

Elizabeth kept her Court there in 1593. Dream, ii. i. lo. Nashe has "as 

In January of that year, as it appears brave as any Pensioner or Nobleman," 

from Nichols' Progresses, she had Piore Fennilesse{GYO%diX\.,\\. t^i), i^g2. 

masques and tournaments at Windsor They were selected from the highest 

Castle. Dr. Caius speaks several times classes, and usually men of wealth and 

of going to Court [la grande affaire) at fine physique and presence. Tyrwhitt 

Windsor, as though it lived fresh in quotes an apposite passage from 

people's memories. See iv. iii. and Holles's Life of the First Earl of 

IV. V. All this speech of Quickly's is Clare, which is given at length in the 

represented in the Quarto by "she is notes to Midsutnmer Night's Dream 

not the first Hath bene led in a foole's in Clarendon Press edition. It relates 

paradice." to date 1564. Blount says (from Stowe) 

73. eye-wink] Modern poets have (6^/<7i'j-^^'a//^z'a,ed. 1670): " 'Pensioners' 

borrowed this word from Mrs. Quickly, are the more noble sort of guard to the 

as Keats in Endytnion, Browning, and King's person ; and were instituted in 

others. December 1 539, with a yearly ' pension ' 

80. pensioners] the splendid uni- of 50/. to sustain themselves and 2 



88 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act II. 



Fal. But what says she to me? be brief, my good 
she-Mercury. 

Quick. Marry, she hath received your letter ; for 

the which she thanks you a thousand times; 85 
and she gives you to notify, that her husband 
will be absence from his house between ten and 
eleven. 

Fal. Ten and eleven. 

Quick. Ay, forsooth; and then you may come and 90 
see the picture, she says, that you wot of: 
Master Ford, her husband, will be from home. 
Alas, the sweet woman leads an ill life with 
him ! he 's a very jealousy man : she leads a very 
frampold life with him, good heart. 95 



horses a piece. In Henry 8's time 
they were called Speai-men.^^ Haring- 
ton, in his Apology for Met. of Ajax 
(Chiswick, p. 47), 1596, calls them 
"the worthy band of Gentlemen 
Pensioners." They were generally re- 
ferred to by the commentators as of 
Henry viii. and Elizabeth, but they 
were kept up by James i. "The 
king tarries nine nights at Lincoln, 
four at York, and twelve at New- 
castle, besides other places. Half 
the pensioners are gone with him, 
besides twenty-four of the Chapel to 
follow by sea. It is like to prove a 
very costly journey .... never knew 
a journey so generally misliked both 
here and there," Letter of Cham- 
berlain, May 161 7, Court and Times 
of Jatnes /., i. 468. Ainsworth 
designates them "The king's gen- 
tlemen Pensioners " at a still later 
date. 

86. gives you to notify'] wishes you to 
notify, as in the expression used by the 
same speaker above (line 35), "Give 
your worship good morrow," and else- 
where frequently. 



87, 88. ten and elevejt] The Quarto 
has "between eight and nine." From 
those words to her exit, before 
Bardolph's entrance, Mrs. Quickly's 
speeches in the Quarto are comprised 
in seven or eight lines. 

92. her husband, will be from ho?ne'\ 
The Quarto reads, "her husband goes 
a birding." 

95. frampold] cross-grained, peevish, 
worrying. The word is used in this 
sense by various writers of the time. 
The earliest is that quoted by Steevens 
from Nashe's Lenten Sttiffe (Grosart, 
V. 265), which was written in 1598, 
"he was peppered for it . . . the 
churlish frampold waues gaue him 
his belly full of fish-broath." See 
Nares and the notes by Steevens and 
others for quotations from Middleton, 
Day, Fletcher, etc. To which may be 
added the London Prodigal, iv. ii. 
Ben Jonson uses it as equivalent to 
froward, and gives it as a name, Lord 
P'rampul, "given over to extravagant 
delights and peccant humours," in his 
New Inn. 



SC. II.] 



OF WINDSOR 



89 



Fal. Ten and eleven. Woman, commend me to 
her; I will not fail her. 

Quick, Why, you say well. But I have another 
messenger to your worship. Mistress Page hath 
her hearty commendations to you, too : and let 1 00 
me tell you in your ear, she 's as fartuous a civil 
modest wife, and one, I tell you, that will not 
miss you morning nor evening prayer, as any 
is in Windsor, whoe'er be the other: and she 
bade me tell your worship that her husband is 105 
seldom from home; but, she hopes, there will 
come a time. I never knew a woman so dote 
upon a man : surely, I think you have charms, 
la ; yes, in truth. 

Fal. Not I, I assure thee: setting the attraction no 
of my good parts aside, I have no other 
charms. 

Quick. Blessing on your heart for 't ! 

Fal. But, I pray thee, tell me this : has Ford's 

wife and Page's wife acquainted each other how 115 
they love me? 

Quick. That were a jest indeed ! they have not so 



99, 100. hath . . . to you] "sent," 
"wished," or "commissioned" is 
understood. Compare Timon, iv. iii. 
287: '^'' Apemanttis. What wouldst thou 
have to Athens ? Timon. Thee thither 
in a whirlwind." Various irregular and 
elliptical expressions occur with the 
verb "to have." Halliwell quotes a 
letter (dated 1593) with a parallel 
expression, "have our heartie com- 
mendations unto you." 

109. Id] See note, i. i. 266. 

Ill, 112. I have no other charms] I 
have no magical powers, love- philtres. 



as in IV. ii. 185 (below). The Quarto 
reads here, "I use no other inchant- 
ments. " 

117. Thai were a Jest mdeed!] A 
standard expression. "Here's a jest 
indeed ! " IIozu a Man may chtise, etc. 
(Haz. Dods. ix. 78), and again p. 16. 
And in Look About You in the same 
collection, vol. vii. 463 {ante 1600). 
It occurs also in The Merry Devil of 
Edmonton, I. i., and in Ben Jonson s 
Every Man in his Humour, etc., with 
or without " indeed." In the Quarto it 
reads, " there were a jest indeed." 



90 THE MERRY WIVES [actii. 

little grace, I hope : that were a trick indeed ! 
But Mistress Page would desire you to send 
her your little page, of all loves: her husband 120 
has a marvellous infection to the little page ; and, 
truly, Master Page is an honest man. Never a 
wife in Windsor leads a better life than she does : 
do what she will, say what she will, take all, pay 
all, go to bed when she list, rise when she list, 1 2 5 
all is as she will : and, truly, she deserves it ; for 
if there be a kind woman in Windsor, she is one. 
You must send her your page ; no remedy. 

FaL Why, I will. 

Quick. Nay, but do so, then: and, look you, he 130 
may come and go between you both ; and, in 
any case, have a nay-word, that you may know 
one another's mind, and the boy never need to 
understand any thing ; for 'tis not good that 
children should know any wickedness : old 135 
folks, you know, have discretion, as they say, 
and know the world. 



120. oj all loves'] See Othello, ill. i. rigor of cold and frostie weather," 

13, and note. Steevens refers to Book xviii. chap. 28, p. 596 {Plinie, 

Holinshed's Chronicles,^. 1064. See 1601) ; and again, "Tortoise shells 

Nares in z;. "Loves." must be bought, there is no remedie," 

128. no re?nedy] A frequent ejacu- xvi. 43, ibid, (last words). See " what 

lation to close an argument or fill up a remedy," below, v. v. 249. 

sentence. It is sometimes shortened 132. nay-word] watch- word. See 

from the old proverb, " No remedy but again v. ii. 5. A motto, or pass-word, 

patience." See 7'wo Gentlemen, ii. In Twelfth Night, 11. iii. 146, the 

li. 2. **No remedy but patience ; and parallel expression "ay word" occurs: 

to pray to God," Letter of Muscovy "gull him into an ay word, and make 

Company (Hakluyt, i. 332, reprint), him a common recreation/' which is 

1557. See Measure for Measui-e, 11. altered by modern editors to "nay- 

ii. 48 ; Winter's Tale, iv. iv. 67; and word." Perhaps the common phrase 

elsewhere in Shakespeare. It is fre- " yea and nay " produced " yea- words " 

quent with Holland: "and prepare and "nay- words." 
himselfe (no remedie) to withstand the 



SC. II.] 



OF WINDSOR 



1 



Fal, Fare thee well : commend me to them both : 
there 's my purse ; I am yet thy debtor. Boy, 
go along with this woman. \Exeunt Mistress 140 
Quickly and Robin.'] This news distracts me ! 
Pist. This punk is one of Cupid's carriers : 

Clap on more sails ; pursue ; up with your 

fights : 
Give fire : she is my prize, or ocean whelm them 
all! [Exit, 

142. punk'lpink Warburton. 



142-144.] See Introduction on this 
speech of Pistol's. It is not in the 
Quarto. See above, line 32, note. I 
imagine this speech of Pistol's was an 
afterthought, to connect him with the 
Mrs. Quickly, Pistol's wife, of Henry 
V. Pistol has no business here at 
all. 

142. punk'] Warburton's suggestion 
would be an improvement here, since 
Pistol's speech is wrapt up in nautical 
language. The passage quoted from 
Bartholomew Fair, ii. i. {io6b), as a 
reply to Warburton is not by any 
means conclusive, since the word there, 
*' punk, pinnace, and bawd," is used 
as an alternative for the last, and the 
metaphor is not nautical. See quotations 
above at "pinnace," 1. iii. 89. How- 
ever, as it stands, Mistress Quickly 
merely receives an unsavoury and not 
unmerited appellation. It is a coarse 
word, and seldom used (to his'credit) by 
Shakespeare, but very common in most 
of the dramatists of the time. A serious 
objection to " pink " is that it was prob- 
ably not introduced, as yet, from the 
Dutch language. 

143. Clap on more sails] '* to 
clap on canvas, to make more sail," 
Admiral Smyth's Sailor s Word Book, 
1867. Compare "Antony claps on 
his sea-wing," Antony and Cleopatra 
III. X. 20. Apparently not a tech- 



nical sailor's word in Shakespeare's 
time. 

143. fights] low canvas or other 
substance on board ship, to hide or 
protect the men on deck when going 
into action. Also called fighting sails. 
In Towerson's Second Voyage, 1557 
(Hakluyt, ed. 181 1, ii. 500), a vessel 
"went forth ahead of us, because we 
were in our fighting sails." The term 
is often met with. "We made ready 
our fights, and prepared to enter the 
harbour, any resistance to the contrary 
notwithstanding," Hayes, Narrative of 
Gilbert's Voyage, 1583 (Payne, 1880, 
p. 188). See also pp. 197, 284 in the 
same series of reprints. Often used 
metaphorically by poets of this time. 
See Nares. "Close fights" were 
distinct. 

144. Give fire] "Give him a chase 
piece, a broad side, and runne a head," 
Smith's Accidence, 1626. Compare 
Ben Jonson, Alchemist, v. iii. : " Well- 
fare an old harquebusier yet, Could 
prime his powder, and give fire, and 
hit, All in a twinkling ! " 

144. whelm] drown. Compare 
Jonson, Catiline,M. i. : "These whelmed 
in wine, swelled up with meats, and 
weakened." It was used also as we 
use "overwhelm": "Sir Bounteous, 
you even whelmj me with delights," 
Middleton, A Mad World. 



92 



THE MERRY WIVES 



Fal. Say'st thou so, old Jack ? go thy ways ; I '11 
make more of thy old body than I have done. 
Will they yet look after thee ? Wilt thou, after 
the expense of so much money, be now a gainer ? 
Good body, I thank thee. Let them say 'tis 
grossly done ; so it be fairly done, no matter. 



[act II. 
145 



ISO 



Enter Bardolph. 
Bard, Sir John, there's one Master Brook below 
would fain speak with you, and be acquainted 
with you ; and hath sent your worship a 
morning's draught of sack. 

151* I55> etc. Brookl from Q i, Pope; Broom Ff, Q 3 (and elsewhere 
forwards). 



145. Say* St thou so"] is that the case, 
suppose it to be so. Compare Troilus 
and Cressida^ ii. i. 5: "And those 
boils did run, say so ; did not the 
general run then?" But perhaps it 
should be understood, "Is this the 
way you are acting, or getting along," 
taking "say" to mean "do," as in the 
frequent expression "well said" for 
"well done." In Beaumont and 
Fletcher's Wild Goose Chace, li. ii., 
there is a good example: "Ha! say 
you so ? Is this your gravity ? This the 
austerity was put upon you?" where 
the meaning is, ' ' do you behave so ? " 
"Say" in the sense of "suppose" is 
very common, however. 

'53> 154- ^^^^^ your worship . . . 
sack] To send a gift of wine was a 
familiar and orthodox way of paying a 
compliment or of seeking a desired 
introduction. Compare Skelton's 

Garlaude of Laurell : "The umblys of 
venyson, the bottell of wyne, To fayre 
Maistres Anne that shuld have be sent." 
And Every Wo7)ian iJi her Humour 
(BuUen's Old Plays, iv. 333) : "By the 



horison hees a proper man indeede ; he 
gave me the time of day as he went 
by ... I have a gallon of wine for him 
at any time." And London Prodigal, 
I. ii. : "I would be very glad to bestow 
the wine of that gentlewoman." In- 
stances are abundant of the custom in 
taverns. See Beaumont and Fletcher's 
Wit without Money , II. iii., and Reed's 
note. 

154. morning draught] Readers of 
Pepy's Diary will be familiar with the 
prevalence of the "morning draught," 
a custom banished by the use of tea 
and coffee. Compare Head, English 
Rogue (reprint, ii. 83), 1665: "In 
winter for morning draughts we 
furnished our guests with Gravesend 
toasts, which is bread toasted over 
night, our plenty of guests not per- 
mitting us to do it in the morning." 
These toasts were for the purpose of 
taking the chill out of the drink, and 
to give it a head, if beer. The ex- 
pression occurs in Holland's Plinie, 
XX. 16 (p. 63), 1601 : "the gentle 
Savorie as well as the wild is passing 



SC. II.] 



OF WINDSOR 



93 



Fal. Brook is his name ? 155 

Bard. Ay, sir. 

Fal, Call him in. \Exit Bardolph.'] Such Brooks 
are welcome to me, that o'erflow such liquor. 
Ah, ha ! Mistress Ford and Mistress Page have 
I encompassed you ? go to ; via ! 1 60 



Re-enter BARDOLPH, with FORD disguised. 

Ford. Bless you, sir ! 

Fal. And you, sir ! Would you speak with me ? 

Ford. I make bold to press with so little preparation 
upon you. 

Fal. You're welcome. What's your will? — Give 165 
us leave, drawer. {Exit Bardolph. 

Ford. Sir, I am a gentleman that have spent much ; 
my name is Brook. 

Fal. Good Master Brook, I desire more acquaint- 
ance of you. 170 

158. overflow] Capell, oreflows Ff. i6i. Bless yoii\ God save Q i. 



holesome for crudities in the stomach, 
if one spice his morning's draught 
therwith fasting." See below, v. iii. 
And in Nashe, A Prognostication 
(Grosart, ii. 146): "erased Ale 
knights, whose morning draught of 
strong Beer is a great staye to their 
stomachs" (1591). 

158. derJiow\ "to stream with, to 
pour out in abundance" (Schmidt). 
Compare Ben Jonson, Every Man in 
his Humour, ill. i. : *' I am melancholy 
myself, divers times, sir, and then I do 
no more but take pen and paper, 
presently, and overflow you half a score 
or dozen of sonnets at a sitting." 

159, 160. have I encompassed you l'\ 
The Quarto reads here, "have I caught 



you on the hip? go too." A good 
illustration of the wrestling phrase in 
Othello, II. i. 313. See my note at 
that passage. 

160. vial^ away ! come on ! From 
the Italian. "An adverb of en- 
couragement, much used by com- 
manders, as also by riders to their 
horses," Florio (quoted by Schmidt). 
See Henry V. iv. ii. 4 ; and Lovers 
Labour's Lost, v. i. 156, and v. ii. 112 ; 
and Merchant of Venice, 11. ii. 11. 
"Then via for the spacious bounds of 
France," Marlowe, Edwai'd II L li. ii. 
Ben Jonson has it several times. 

165, 166. Give us leave"] give us 
liberty or freedom— hence, leave us 
alone, go. A very common expression . 



94 THE MERRY WIVES [actii. 

Ford, Good Sir John, I sue for yours : not to charge 
you ; for I must let you understand I think 
myself in better plight for a lender than you 
are : the which hath something emboldened me 
to this unseasoned intrusion ; for they say, if 1 7 5 
money go before, all ways do lie open. 

FaL Money is a good soldier, sir, and will on. 

Ford. Troth, and I have a bag of money here troubles 
me: if you will help to bear it. Sir John, take 
all, or half, for easing me of the carriage. 1 8o 

FaL Sir, I know not how I may deserve to be your 
porter. 

Ford, I will tell you, sir, if you will give me the 
hearing. 

Fal. Speak, good Master Brook : I shall be glad to 185 
be your servant. 

Ford. Sir, I hear you are a scholar, — I will be brief 
with you, — and you have been a man long 
known to me, though I had never so good 
means, as desire, to make myself acquainted with 1 90 
you. I shall discover a thing to you, wherein I 
must very much lay open mine own imperfec- 
tion : but, good Sir John, as you have one eye 
upon my follies, as you hear them unfolded, turn 
another into the register of your own ; that I 195 

I75> 176. they say, if money, eU.] scene, one might almost say, the more 

** Money makes masteries, old proverbs unlikely, the one for his excessive 

declare," Liberality and Prodigality baseness, the other for his unreasoning 

(Haz. Dods. viii. 342), 1602 ; "Money credulity. In the Quarto the stratagem 

makes merchantes, I tell you, over all," is still balder. 

Skelton,i^a^wj^f^;z^^, line 1593, 1515 ; 195. register] catalogue. Compare 

" No lock will hold, against the poM^er Antony and Cleopatra, iv. ix. 21. And 

of gold," Ylethexi, jacula Prudentium. Gabriel Harvey has "registered in the 

It is hard to say which. Ford or Fal- Catalogue " ( Works, ed. Grosart, ii. 

staff, is the more objectionable in this loo). In Lucrece, 765, Schmidt 



sc.ii.] OF WINDSOR 95 

may pass with a reproof the easier, sith you your- 
self know how easy it is to be such an offender. 

FaL Very well, sir ; proceed. 

Ford. There is a gentlewoman in this town ; her 

husband's name is Ford. 200 

FaL Well, sir. 

Ford. I have long loved her, and, I protest to you, 
bestowed much on her ; followed her with a 
doting observance ; engrossed opportunities to 
meet her ; fee'd every slight occasion that 205 
could but niggardly give me sight of her ; not 
only bought many presents to give her, but have 
given largely to many to know what she would 
have given ; briefly, I have pursued her as love 
hath pursued me ; which hath been on the wing 2 1 o 
of all occasions. But whatsoever I have merited, 
either in my mind or in my means, meed, I am 
sure, I have received none ; unless experience 
be a jewel that I have purchased at an infinite 
rate, and that hath taught me to say this : 215 

" Love like a shadow flies when substance love pur- 
sues ; 
Pursuing that that flies, and flying what pursues." 

20<). fee'd] free' d Q^Z' 207. bought] brought (^ -i^. 21 /^. Jewel that] Y ^-y 
Jewel, that P" i, 2, 3, Q 3 ; Jewel : that Theobald, Steevens, Wheatley. 2i6, 
217. Love . . . ^Mrj-wiffj] (italics and as quotation) F i. 

wrongly explains the word (and wrongly 204. observance] homage, adoration, 

quotes) : " O comfort-killing Night, See As You Like It, v. ii. 102, 

image of Hell ! Dim register and notary "adoration, duty, and observance." 

of shame ! " The word there is our 205. fee V every slight occasion] pur- 

" registrar," the one who registers, chased every opportunity. 

Compare Gabriel Harvey again : '* the 216, 217. Love . . . pursues] These 

publique Notary of lyes, and the lines (not in the Quarto) are inserted 

Register of Truth," ^ New Letter {■^. as a quotation. The antithesis 

289), 1593. between substance and shadow is 

196. sith]s,mce. common. In Caxton's ^sop, "The 



96 THE MERRY WIVES [actii. 

Fal. Have you received no promise of satisfaction 
at her hands ? 

Ford. Never. 220 

Fal. Have you importuned her to such a pur- 
pose? 

Ford. Never. 

Fal. Of what quality was your love, then ? 

Ford. Like a fair house built on another man's 225 
ground ; so that I have lost my edifice by mis- 
taking the place where I erected it. 

Fal. To what purpose have you unfolded this to 
me? 

Ford. When I have told you that, I have told you 230 
all. Some say, that though she appear honest 
to me, yet in other places she enlargeth her 
mirth so far that there is shrewd construction 
made of her. Now, Sir John, here is the heart 
of my purpose : you are a gentleman of excel- 235 
lent breeding, admirable discourse, of great 
admittance, authentic in your place and person, 

fyfthe fable is of the dogge and similar adaptation of the pursuit of 

of the pyece of flessh," in the First a shadow compared with a woman's 

Book. "Catch not the shadow and courtship, quoted by Halliwell (i6i6 

lose the substance" is the proverbial ed., p. 827). It is the seventh song to 

form. The passage in the text is an Celia in The Forest. 

adaptation of Whitney's Emblem, 225, 226. fair house . . . ground] 

" Mulier umbra viri" (p. 218, ed. 1866), The Quarto reads, "set upon another 

1586, in The Choice of Emblems. The man's foundation." Halliwell-Phillips 

words are : ' * Our shadowe flies if we says {Folio Shak. ii. p. 368) : "By the 

the same pursue : But if wee flie, it law of England a man who built on 

followeth at the heele. So he through ground to which he could not prove his 

love that most doth serue, and sue, Is title forfeited all title to the house." 

furthest off his mistress harte," etc. 233. shrewd\ evil. 

The material idea of wordly welfare in 237. admittance] "The habit or 

the word substance is added here as in faculty of being admitted, admissi- 

the common saying, "When poverty bility" {New Eng. Diet.), which has 

comes in at the door, love leaps out at no other example. In the sense of 

the window." Ben Jonson has a sanction it occurs below, ill. iii. 61. 



sen.] OF WINDSOR 97 

generally allowed for your many war-like, court- 
like, and learned preparations. 

Fat. O, sir ! 240 

Ford. Believe it, for you know it. There is money ; 
spend it, spend it ; spend more ; spend all I 
have ; only give me so much of your time in 
exchange of it, as to lay an amiable siege to the 
honesty of this Ford's wife: use your art of 245 
wooing ; win her to consent to you : if any man 
may, you may as soon as any. 

FaL Would it apply well to the vehemency of your 
affection, that I should win what you would 
enjoy? Methinks you prescribe to yourself 250 
very preposterously. 

Ford. O, understand my drift. She dwells so 
securely on the excellency of her honour, that 
the folly of my soul dares not present itself: she 
is too bright to be looked against. Now, could 255 
I come to her with any detection in my hand, 
my desires had instance and argument to com- 
mend themselves : I could drive her then from 

248. vehemency\ vehemence F 4, veruensie {fervency) Q i. 

See III. iii. 61 for another sense. The Glycerse nitor Splendentis Pario mar- 
meaning here is equivalent to our more purius, Et vultus nimium lubricus 
** admitted into society." aspici." This is a favourite idea in 

237. authentic'^ of recognised repute. Jonson. He has it three times {Sad 

So Ben Jonson, Every Man out, Shepherd, ii. i., Gipsies Metamor- 

Induct. : " these are too nice observa- phased, and Staple of News, iv. i.), 

lions. Mit. They are such as must be each time in the same words, "too 

received by your favour, or it cannot slippery to be looked upon," which 

be authentic." sounds awkward enough, giving 

2"^^. preparations'] acquirements, ac- "slippery" the sense of dangerously 

complishments. An odd use of the word, polished, bright, and smooth. He was 

In II. ii. 163, above, the word has the determined about it at any rate. There 

sense of " notice given," " warning." seems often to be community of thought 

254, 255. she is too bright to be between the two friends, Shakespeare 

looked against] From Horace, " Urit me and Jonson, at this period. 

7 



98 THE MERRY WIVES [actii. 

the ward of her purity, her reputation, her 
marriage- vow, and a thousand other her defences, 260 
which now are too-too strongly embattled against 
me. What say you to 't, Sir John ? 

FaL Master Brook, I will first make bold with your 
money ; next, give me your hand ; and last, as 
I am a gentleman, you shall, if you will, enjoy 265 
Ford's wife. 

Ford. O good sir ! 

Fal. I say you shall. 

Ford. Want no money. Sir John ; you shall want 

none. 270 

Fal. Want no Mistress Ford, Master Brook ; you 
shall want none. I shall be with her, I may 
tell you, by her own appointment ; even as you 
came in to me, her assistant, or go-between, 
parted from me: I say I shall be with her 275 
between ten and eleven ; for at that time the 
jealous rascally knave her husband will be forth. 

261. too-too\ Ff, Q 3, Craig ; too Pope, Steevens ; too too Globe ; too, too Cam- 
bridge (1863). 268. I say'] Master B7'ooke, IsayQ^ i, Theobald, Steevens, etc. 
274. assistant, or] spokes mate, her Q i. 

259. ward] defence, guard. Ameta- One example may be given from Hak- 
phor from fencing, as in "beat from luyt (1811 ed., ii. 281), 1582: "Good 
his best vi^ard," Winter s Tale, i. ii. or bad wooll, some too-too hard spun, 
33. Steevens has twisted this passage some too-too soft spun." But it was 
into a difficulty (followed by Wheatley) chiefly poetically used. Some writers 
in a note about "warding oft" his ad- used many such expressions. Gabriel 
dresses." Otherwise a comment seems Harvey has " great - great, " "new- 
needless. For an example, see quota- new," "many-many," "little-little," 
tion above at 11. i. 231. "mere-mere." "Still-still" occurs also. 

261. too-too] A frequent expression 274. assistant] The word in the 

in early writers, and common in Eliza- Quarto is " spokesmate. " Compare 

bethan times. See Halliwell's Die- Two Gentlemen of Verona, ii. i. 152, 

tionary for references. Shakespeare It is a pity the word has not been 

has it many times {Lucrece, 174, Tzvo introduced instead of the commonplace 

Gentlemen of Verona, 11. iv. 205, etc.). one in the text. 



SC, II.] 



OF WINDSOR 



99 



Come you to me at night ; you shall know how 
I speed. 

Ford. I am blest in your acquaintance. Do you 280 
know Ford, sir ? 

Fal. Hang him, poor cuckoldly knave ! I know him 
not : — yet I wrong him to call him poor ; they 
say the jealous wittolly knave hath masses of 
money; for the which his wife seems to me 285 
well-favoured. I will use her as the key of 
the cuckoldly rogue's coffer ; and there 's my 
harvest-home. 

Ford. I would you knew Ford, sir, that you might 

avoid him, if you saw him. 290 

Fal. Hang him, mechanical salt-butter rogue ! I will 

284, 285. masses of money'] legions of angels Q i. 287. cuckoldly rogue^s] F 
i> Q 3 > cuckold-rogiie" s F 2, 3, 4. 288. harvest-homel randeuowes Q i. 



284. wittolly] cuckoldly. A wittol 
was a contented cuckold. Compare 
Jonson's Fox, V. i. : "do you not know 
I know you an ass And that you would 
most fain have been a wittol If fortune 
would have let you? that you are A 
declared cuckold on good terms?" 
The word does not seem to be common 
in early writers. It occurs in Greene's 
Philomela, 1592. Brome, in City Wit 
(Pearson, i. 338), 1653, uses the 
adverb : " you are a wittally cuckold." 

288. harvest-home] In Nashe's Su7n- 
mer's Last Will (Haz. Dods. viii. 49), 
1592, there is a harvest-home song, 
containing perhaps the earliest use of 
this expression, "Hooky, hooky, we 
have shorn, And we have boun', And 
we have brought, Harvest Home to 
toun" ("toun" means "farm-build- 
ings"). These words are the chorus. 
The word in the Quarto here is 
"randeuowes" (rendezvous). "Har- 
vest-home," literally, occurs in 1 Henry 
IV. I. iii. 35. 

291. mechanical] base, vulgar. 



Used without any reference to a special 
trade. See Cotgrave in z'. " Mecanique. " 
Compare 2 Henry IV. v. v. 38, and 
Nashe, Pierce Petinilesse (Gros. ii. 97) : 
"none but fooles and Idiotes and 
Mechanicall men, that have no learn- 
ing, shall be damned " ; and Jonson's 
Every Man in his Humour, I. ii. : 
"Base fellow! a mechanical serving 
man ! By this cudgel, and 'twere not 
for shame, I would ..." And in 
Court and Times of James /., i. 224, 
Letter of Chamberlain, dated 1613 : 
" But his servants [Sir Thomas Bod- 
ley's] grumble and murmur much, with 
whom he hath dealt very mechanically, 
some of them having served him . . . 
above two and twenty years . . . and 
the best not reaping above twenty 
pounds." 

291. salt • butter] perhaps refers to 
the rank Flemish butter imported at 
this time. See below, line 318. Nashe 
speaks of it as a very objectionable 
article: "a fellow that eates not a 
good meales meat in a week ... be- 



100 THE MERRY WIVES [actii. 

stare him out of his wits ; I will awe him with 
my cudgel : it shall hang like a meteor o'er the 
cuckold's horns. Master Brook, thou shalt 
know I will predominate over the peasant, and 295 
thou shalt lie with his wife. Come to me soon 
at night. Ford 's a knave, and I will aggravate 
his style ; thou, Master Brook, shalt know him 
for knave and cuckold. Come to me soon at 
night. [Exit. 300 

Ford. What a damned Epicurean rascal is this ! 
My heart is ready to crack with impatience. 
Who says this is improvident jealousy? my 
wife hath sent to him ; the hour is fixed ; the 
match is made. Would any man have thought 305 
this ? See the hell of having a false woman ! 
My bed shall be abused, my coffers ransacked, 
my reputation gnawn at ; and I shall not only 

306. fahe\fair Q 3. 

cause he would be seene amongst directly betweene the pointes of her 

cavaliers and brave courtiers, liuing homes" {New Shak. Soc, Introduc- 

otherwise all the yeere long with salt tion, p. Ivii), " Predominate " has here 

Butter and Holland cheese in his an astrological sense, 

chamber," Pierce Pennilesse (Grosart, 297,298. aggravate his styleYy^cxtz.%Q. 

ii. 28), 1592, Andrew Borde says of a his dignity, or enhance his title by the 

Doche man, "A lomp of salt butter addition of another title, 

for me is good meat" (1542); and 299, 300. Come to me soon at night'] 

"they do loue salt butter that is early to-night. See i. iv. 8. 

resty." 301. ^/zV/zr^^zw] sensual, voluptuous. 

293, 294. hang like a meteor . . . Shakespeare has the adjective again in 

horns\ There may be a reference here Antony and Cleopatra^ ii. 1. 24. So 

to a special apparition in the sky. Greene, " Democles . . . spent his 

Hey wood speaks of "a strange comet time Epicure-like in all kindes of 

. . . meteors in the air . . . foretell pleasures that art or expence might 

of dangers imminent" (Pearson, i. affoord, so that for his dissolute life 

292). This is constantly referred to. he seemed another Heliogabalus, " 

But in Harrison's Chronology [Descrip- Mejtaphon (Grosart, vi. 113), 1589. 

tion of England), I find in 1587 : " A 306.] The reading of Q 3, "See the 

starre is seene in the body of the hell of having aya/'r woman," is almost 

moone . . . whereat men marueiled, a paraphrase of the Othello line, "A 

& not without cause, for it stode fellow almost damned in a fair wife." 



SC. II.] 



OF WINDSOR 



101 



receive this villanous wrong, but stand under 
the adoption of abominable terms, and by him 310 
that does me this wrong. Terms ! names ! — 
Amaimon sounds well ; Lucifer, well ; Barbason, 
well; yet they are devils' additions, the names 
of fiends: but Cuckold! Wittol ! — Cuckold! 
the devil himself hath not such a name. Page 315 
is an ass, a secure ass : he will trust his wife ; 
he will not be jealous. I will rather trust a 
Fleming with my butter, Parson Hugh the 
Welshman with my cheese, an Irishman with my 
aqua-vitae bottle, or a thief to walk my ambling 320 

315.] After name Q i has And they may hang hats here, and napkins here 
upon my homes [in Fiord's speech ending Act iii.]. 

310. adoption'] acceptance as one's 
own. So say the dictionaries (Schmidt, 
etc.). But there is a reference to the 
christening of names, as in All's Well 
that Ends Well, I. i. i88 : "pretty, 
fond, adoptions Christendoms." And 
see Measure for Measure, i. iv. 47. 

312. Amaimon . . , Barbasoti] Both 
these titles of devils occur again, the 
former in 1 Henry IV. ii. iv. 370, the 
latter in Henry V. 11. i. 57. " Amon, 
or Aamon, is a great and mightie 
marques, and commeth abroad in the 
likenes of a woolfe . . . and ruleth 
fourtie legends of divels," Reginald 
Scot, Discourse of Witchcraft, xv. 
chap, ii., 1584. '* Marbas, alias Barbas, 
is a great president, and appeareth in 
the forme of a mightie lion . . . under 
his presidencie are thirtie six legions of 
divels conteined," ibid. These two 
stand first and second in the "inven- 
tarie." The third is "Barbatos" (re- 
ferred to by Steevens), but this is not 
the man. In the 29th chapter the same 
writer has " King Baell or Amoimon." 
The spellings of these devils' names are 
open to dispute. Scot has three score of 
them, all described, with their legions. 
** Note that a legion is 6 6 6 6, and now 



by multiplication count how mania 
legions doo arise." They appear to 
have been " made in Germany by one 
Wierius. 

317, 318. trust a Fleming with my 
butter'] *' The Netherlanders in general, 
because they feed much on butter, are 
called buttermouths, and because daily 
passing to and fro in ships they use, for 
avoiding of greater expence in Innes, to 
carry with them boxes of butter. They 
are also called Butter boxes by the 
English," Fynes Moryson, The Itiner- 
ary, Part III. Book i. chap, i, 1616. 
Andrew Borde gives them their name 
" Buttermouth Flemyng" in Boke of 
Knowledge, 1542. 

319. Welshman with my cheese] See 
I. ii. 13 (and note). Compare Webster, 
Northward Ho, i. iii., 1607: "Look 
you, Sir, the Northern man loves white- 
meats, the Southern man sallats . . . 
the Welshman leeks and cheese." In 
Sharpham's Cupid's Whirligig, Act V. 
(1607), there is apparently an allusion 
to a Welsh "rare-bit." 

319, 320. Irishman with my aqua- 
vitce bottle] aqua-vitae is a literal trans- 
lation of the Irish usquebaugh, water 
of life, whisky. While the upper 



102 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act II. 



gelding, than my wife with herself: then she 
plots, then she ruminates, then she devises ; and 
what they think in their hearts they may effect, 
they will break their hearts but they will effect. 
God be praised for my jealousy ! — Eleven 325 
o'clock the hour. I will prevent this, detect 
my wife, be revenged on Falstaff, and laugh at 
Page. I will about it; better three hours too 
soon than a minute too late. Fie, fie, fie ! 



cuckold ! cuckold ! cuckold ! 

325. God] Q I, Globe ; Heaven Ff, Q 3, Steevens. 



{Exit 330 



classes of the English were earning a 
European reputation for hard drinking, 
the Irish had already acquired the habit 
from their native whisky. Camden says 
in Britannia (1586), trans. Holland, 
1610 : " they have an Aqua vitse of the 
best" (margin, "Vske-bah"). In A 
Description of Ireland (Holinshed, vol. 
ii. p. 45), ed. 1586: " Flesh they devoure 
without bread and that halfe raw, the 
rest boileth in their stomachs with aqua 
vitse, which they swill in after such a 
surfet by quarts and pottels." Fynes 
Moryson, Andrew Borde, and Derrick's 
Image of Ireland may also be referred 
to. In 1599 Essex sent Queen Eliza- 
beth a list of '* The cheefe causes of 
want of reformation in Ireland." 
The "27th Item " is : " The releevinge 
of the Irishry with aqua vitoe, made 
plentifully in the Pale, and to them 
conveyed, as well in time of peace as 
during their rebellion to their great 
encouragement," Harington, Nugce 
Antique (ii. 301). 

320, 321. ambling gel diiig] An "am- 
bling nag" or an "ambling gelding" 
was the usual term for a riding-horse. 
Amongst the vessels that carried the 
impedimenta of Prince Charles to Spain 
during his courtship of the Infanta, were 
hired "other two to carry the twenty- 
four ambling geldings," Court and 
Times of James /., ii. 392, Letter 
dated 1623. ** For his horse [he] must 



have an ambling nag," N. Breton, 
Pasquits Fooles-cap (Grosart, xvi. 23<5), 
1600. And see the old song quoted at 
" down, adown," i. iv. 44. " Ambling 
hackney " occurs earlier. 

325, 326. Eleven o\locJi\'Va&\XmQ\i2& 
between ten and eleven (line 276). The 
commentators have all got notes here 
to explain how it is that Ford says it is 
eleven o'clock, when that would make 
him late to interrupt the appointment. 
But it seems to me that Ford is merely 
echoing Falstaff's words, and fixing it 
on his mind, "Eleven o'clock is the 
hour of the appointment." And that 
he is not referring to the actual hour 
at which he speaks at all. Moreover, 
Ford goes on to say he will prevent his 
wife from effecting her purpose by being 
there too soon. It would be absurd of 
him to say this if he knew he was 
already too late. According to his 
words "three hours," it should be 
about seven in the evening now. 

328. better three hours, etc.] "And 
here, remember the old said Saw that 
may well goe for an Oracle, Better two 
dales too soon, than as many too late," 
Holland's Plinie, Book xviii. chap. 
XXX. (p. 602). In the Quarto the words 
are, " Better an houre too soone than a 
minit too late." Instead of "Fie, fie, 
fie !" it reads, "God's my life." See 
V. iii. 10. 

329. Fie-fie, fie I] A citizen's word, 



SC. III.] 



OF WINDSOR 



103 



SCENE III. — A Field near Windsor. 



Enter Caius and RuGBY. 



Caius. Jack Rugby ! 

Rug. Sir? 

Caius. Vat is de clock, Jack ? 

Rug. 'Tis past the hour, sir, that Sir Hugh promised 

to meet. 
Caius. By gar, he has save his soul, dat he is no 

come ; he has pray his Pible well, dat he is no 

come : by gar. Jack Rugby, he is dead already, 

if he be come. 
Rug. He is wise, sir ; he knew your worship would 

kill him, if he came. 
Caius. By gar, de herring is no dead so as I vill kill 

him. Take your rapier. Jack ; I vill tell you 

how I vill kill him. 
Rug. Alas, sir, I cannot fence. 
Caius. Villainy, take your rapier. 
Rug. Forbear ; here 's company. 



lo 



15 



12, 13. IS 



hi Hi] Ff, Q 3 ; <5^ not so dead as I shall make him Q i. 



according to Gabriel Harvey. It was 
used generally in disgust at some im- 
purity. 

Scene in. 

3. Vat is de dock. Jack .?] The Quarto 
has here ^^ John Rugbie goe looke met 
your eies ore de stall And spie and you 
can see de parson." 

7. pray his Pible] Bible does not 
occur again in Shakespeare, and has 
been overlooked in Schmidt's Lexicon. 



"The word" (as below, in. i. 44) is 
the usual term, or else " Holy Writ." 
See Richard II. V. v. 

12. herring is no dead] Caius must 
have the credit for this common saying. 
If it had been in use previously it would 
not have escaped Nashe, who collected 
herring sayings in Lenten Stuffe. It 
is in Mabbe's Aleman^s Guzman, ii. 
342, 1623. And Butler's Httdibrasy 
II. iii. 1138, 1663. 

16. Villainy] See I. iv. 71. 



104 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act II. 



Enter HOST, Shallow, Slender, and Page. 

Host. Bless thee, bully doctor ! 

Shal. Save you. Master Doctor Caius ! 

Page. Now, good master doctor ! 20 

Slen. Give you good morrow, sir. 

Caius. Vat be all you, one, two, tree, four, come 
for? 

Host. To see thee fight, to see thee foin, to see thee 

traverse ; to see thee here, to see thee there ; to 25 
see thee pass thy punto, thy stock, thy reverse, 
thy distance, thy montant. Is he dead, my 

26, 27. thy . . . thy . . .]the . . . the . . . Q^l. 

has a wider signification, but in 2 Henry 
IV. III. ii. 291, it is a word of the 
fencing school, as here. The verb 
occurs several times in Malory's Morte 
d' Arthur^ 1485: ** they fought so long 
tracing and traversing," Globe ed., p. 
244; "they traced and traversed and 
waxed wonderly wroth," p. 256 ; 
"traced and traversed here and there," 

P- 473- 

26. punfo] stroke, "prod." So in 
Every Man in his Humour, IV. v. 
(45 a, b)'. "it must be done like light- 
ning, hey ! {He practises at a post . . . 
an 't be not done in a . . . punto ! "] 
And again, " Your punto, your reverso, 
your stoccata, your introccato, your 
passada, your montanto." 

26. stoch] '* Astoccata, by or with a 
thrust or stoccado, or a phoine," Florio, 
1598. "Astoccata or imbrocata," 
Saviolo, Practise of Rapier, etc. , Book 
i-. 1595- ^' Estocader, To give the 
stoccado : to stab, foin at, prick deep 
into, thrust through." 

26. reverse"] ox x&\tx%o. ^^ Revers, K 
backblow, clap, stroke, whirrit ; or 
blow with the back of a hand or sword," 
Cotgrave. 

27. distance"] "Come on: O, twine 
your body about, that you may fall to a 



18. bully] See I. iii. 2 and note. 

24. foin] thrust. An old French 
word, frequent in Malory's Morte 
d^ Arthur and the early romances. It 
occurs again in 2 Henry IV. ii. i. 17 ; 
II. iv. 252, etc. See Cotgrave in v. 
** Fouine ... a kind of instrument 
... to strike fish with." The word 
in fencing refers to the passes in the air 
to make one keep his distance, rather 
than to thrusts intended to strike. Cot- 
grave has * ' Estoquer, To thrust or foin 
at." And in Marriage of Wit and 
Science (Haz. Dods. ii. 389), 1570: 
* ' See how ye can his deadly strokes 
withstand. Keep at the foin : come not 
within his reach. Until you see what 
good advantage you may catch." So 
in Jonson's Case is Altered, " He foins 
with his rapier " (v. ii. ) has not reference 
to an actual combat. The passage here 
may have been suggested in part by 
one in Malory's Aforte d' Arthur (Globe 
ed., p. 136), 1485: " either gave other 
sad strokes, now here, now there, racing, 
tracing, foining, and hurling like two 
boars." 

25. traverse] "To traverse the ground 
as a fencer, Componere," etc., Ains- 
worth's Eng-. -Lat. Diet. See my note 
to Othello, I. iii. 378. The word there 



sc. nu] 



OF WINDSOR 



105 



Ethiopian? is he dead, my Francisco? ha, 

bully ! What says my -^sculapius ? my Galen ? 

my heart of elder? ha! is he dead, bully-stale? 30 

is he dead ? 
Cuius. By gar, he is de coward Jack priest of de 

vorld ; he is not show his face. 
Host. Thou art a Castalion-King-Urinal. Hector of 

Greece, my boy ! 3 5 



28. Francisco] Francoyes Q i, Warburton. 29. Galen] Gallon Q i. 30. 
bully -stale] bullie's taile Q I. 34. Castalion] Castallian Q i, Casiilian 

Steevens (1793). 



more sweet, comely, gentleman-like 
guard ; so ! indifferent : hollow your 
body more — now, stand fast o' your 
left leg, note your distance, keep your 
due proportion of time," Ben Jonson, 
Every Man in his Htcmour^ I. iv., 
1598. 

27. montant] like the last, this occurs 
(in Italian form) in Every Man in his 
Humour. ^^ Montant, A mountain, an 
upright beam or post in building, . . . 
also an upright blow or thrust ..." 
Cotgrave. In the Quarto this word 
reads "montance," where the spelling 
is particularly infamous. 

27, 28. my Ethiopian] This speech, as 
well as others of the mad Host s, serves 
to show how far afield and to what in- 
congruous resources he goes to seek for 
his epithets. Amir and Vizier are 
decorum itself compared with these. 
The term was used indefinitely of any 
negro or blackamoor, as in Jeremiah 
xiii. 23, in the proverb "Can the 
Ethiopian change his skin ? " which 
Webster ( White Devil) calls a sunburnt 
proverb. 

28. Francisco] The Quarto reads 
"francoyes." The Host means "my 
Frenchman." 

29. my Galen] See note at "re- 
nowned French physician," III. i. 61, 
and at " Hibocrates," ill. i. (>(>. 

30. heart of elder] heart of pith. 
Probably used in opposition to "heart 



of oak," as Steevens says, which was 
already a common expression. The 
Host is very insulting, but Caius does 
not understand him. The "stinking 
elder" whereon Judas hanged himself 
was often abused. 

30. bully-stale] The reference here 
(and at lines 34 and 60) is to the 
"practical physick of that time," as 
Johnson said. Steevens' sneer at the 
revival of this department of path- 
ology is entertaining. It is a frequent 
source of merriment, as in 2 Henry 
IV. I. ii. 2, 3, and Twelfth Night, 
III. iv. 114. And for figurative use, 
see Macbeth, V. iii. 51. Jonson's plays 
abound on the subject. See Earle's 
Microcosmographie : A meere dull Phy- 
sician. 

34. Castalion-King-Urinal] For the 
first term in this compound, see note at 
" Cavaleiro-justice," II. i. 197. The re- 
ference is primarily to the universally 
detested Don Philip the Second of 
Castile, who affected the title of King 
of Spain. The writer of the Voyage of 
Spaine and Portingale (1598) says: 
"this voyage which was an adventure 
of her [Maiestee] and manie honourable 
personages, in revenge of unsupportable 
wrongs offered ... by the Castilian 
King" (Hakluyt, ed. 18 12, v. 564). 
And for our feelings towards Spain, see 
p. 587: "that cowardly proud nation 
. . . whom euerie good Englishman is 



106 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act II. 



Cuius, I pray you, bear vitness that me have stay six 
or seven, two, tree hours for him, and he is no 
come. 

Shal. He is the wiser man, master doctor : he is a 

curer of souls, and you a curer of bodies ; if 40 
you should fight, you go against the hair 
of your professions. Is it not true, Master 
Page? 

Page. Master Shallow, you have yourself been a great 

fighter, though now a man of peace. 45 

Shal. Bodykins, Master Page, though I now be old, 



in nature bound to hate as an implacable 
enemie." And Webster, "a Spaniard, 
a proud nation, Whom naturally our 
countrymen abhor," Sir Thomas VVyat 
{ante 1607). See Nares in v. " Cas- 
tilian," and the satirists Hall, Marston, 
and Guilpin of this year (1598), passim. 
The old play referred to above contains 
the expressions, referring to the intended 
Armada, "Castilian cowards" (Haz. 
Dods. vi. 462), and "these Castilians 
and their accustomed bravado" {ibid. 
450). The idea of cowardice is still 
carried through by the Host. Farmer 
quotes from a sonnet referring to the 
Armada beginning "Thou fond Cas- 
tilian King ! " I have let the spelling 
of the Folio stand, since there is perhaps 
a pun intended, although there can be 
no doubt about the main sense. " Cas- 
talian liquor," suitable for poets from the 
Castalian Spring (of Spenser, Chapman, 
Jonson) ; or Canary wine vid Castille is 
referred to in Jonson's Every Man out 
of his Humour (Induction, 700;), and 
in Dekker's Gentle Craft (Pearson, p. 
23), 1600. Jonson has gone so far as 
to give characters in two of his plays 
a soubriquet for the final term, as a 
contemptuous appellation. For the 
ancient practice, with which Caius is 
scoffed at by the names of -^sculapius 
and Hippocrates, see Pliny, xxviii. 6 



(trans. Holland, p. 306), 1601 ; and 
see note, in. i. 89. 

34, 35. Hector of Greece'\ The Host 
has already used " bully- Hector," i. iii. 
II. 

41. against the hair"] A saying taken 
from rubbing an animal's fur the wrong 
way. N. Breton has "That goes 
against the wool," Dialogue of Anger 
and Patience, 1599, which, though much 
less common, is illustrative. The ex- 
pression in the text is in Palsgrave's 
H Esclaircissement, 1530, and frequently 
in Lyly as Campaspe, Epilogue, 1 584 ; 
Euphues (Arber, p. 394), 1580. And 
in North's Plutarch, Sylla, Tudor trans, 
iii. 272, 1579: "all went utterly 
against the heare with him." 

46. Bodykins'] a diminutive of body. 
An expletive, " God's dear body." See 
Hamlet, ii. ii. 554, where the Quarto 
reads, however, "bodkin," on which 
analogy no doubt the word was founded. 
" 'Sbody " and " 'odsbody " are not un- 
common. Both occur in Jonson's Every 
Alan out of his Humour. Compare 
" 'ods pitykins," Cymbeline, iv. ii. 293. 
The expression occurs (misprinted 
"bodkin") in Heywood's Plays (Pear- 
son, i. 43). " 'Od 's heartlings," below, 
III. iv. 59, is a similarly formed petty 
oath (oathkin or oathling). 



sc.iii.] OF WINDSOR 107 

and of the peace, if I see a sword out, my finger 
itches to make one. Though we are justices, 
and doctors, and churchmen, Master Page, we 
have some salt of our youth in us; we are the 50 
sons of women. Master Page. 

Page. *Tis true. Master Shallow. 

Shal. It will be found so. Master Page. Master 
Doctor Caius, I am come to fetch you home. 
I am sworn of the peace : you have shewed 5 5 
yourself a wise physician, and Sir Hugh hath 
shewn himself a wise and patient churchman. 
You must go with me, master doctor. 

Host. Pardon, guest - justice. — A word, Mounseur 

Mock-water. 60 

Caius. Mock-vater 1 vat is dat ? 

Host. Mock-water, in our English tongue, is valour, 
bully. 

Caius. By gar, den, I have as much mock-vater as 

de Englishman. — Scurvy Jack-dog priest! by 65 
gar, me vill cut his ears. 

47. the\ F I, Q 3 ; omitted F 2, 3, 4. 59. A word, Mounseur] Theobald 
from Q I, a Mounseur F i. 60. Mock- water'] Afuck-water Malone (Farmer 

conj.). 62, 63. valour, bully] valour, bully, valour Ql i, Steevens. 

47. if I see a sword otct] See note, 60. Mock-water] The reference is to 
II. i. 231. "casting the water" of the patient. 

48. to make one] to be of the party. See above, lines 30, 34, and notes. 
The expression occurs several times in Farmer's suggestion, "muck- water" 
Shakespeare. "Zounds, where thou (water from a dunghill), which Steevens 
wilt, lad, I '11 make one ; an I do not, reads, seems very commendable. Mock 
call me villain and baffle me," 1 Henry may, however, have the sense of cheat- 
IV. I. ii. 113. So in The Spanish ing by this means, as suggested in 
Tragedy (Haz. Dods. v. 148): "In 2 Henry IV. I. ii. 2, 3, where the 
faith, Hieronimo, and you be In earnest, doctor mocks Falstaff by the Page. 
I'll make one." d^. Jack-dog] Highly contumelious, 

51. sons of women] In 1 Henry IV. founded upon Jack-daw, but far 

II. iv. Ill, this occurs again: "fewer worse. "Jack" refers to "Sir John," 

words than a parrot, and yet the son of a priest. The Quarto has ' ' Jack 

a woman." priest." 



108 THE MERRY WIVES [actii. 

Host, He will clapper-claw thee tightly, bully. 

Caius, Clapper-de-claw ! vat is dat ? 

Host. That is, he will make thee amends. 

Caius, By gar, me do look he shall clapper-de-claw 70 

me ; for, by gar, me vill have it. 
Host. And I will provoke him to *t, or let him 

wag. 
Caius. Me tank you for dat. 
Host. And, moreover, bully, — But first, master guest, 75 

and Master Page, and eke Cavaleiro Slender, go 

you through the town to Frogmore. {Aside to them. 
Page. Sir Hugh is there, is he? 
Host. He is there : see what humour he is in ; and 

I will bring the doctor about by the fields. Will 80 

it do well ? 
Shal. We will do it. 
Page^ Shal.y and Slen. Adieu, good master doctor. 

{Exeunt Page^ Shal., and Slen. 
Caius, By gar, me vill kill de priest; for he speak 

for a jack-an-ape to Anne Page. 85 

Host. Let him die : sheathe thy impatience, throw 

cold water on thy choler: go about the fields 

with me through Frogmore ; I will bring thee 

68. Clapper-de-claw] clappe^xlaw Q i. 

^T. clapper-claw] occurs again in Grim the Collier of Croydon [ibid. v\\\. 
Troilus and Cressida, v. iv. I. To 446), 1600 (?) : "Now miller, miller 
thrash, to maul. Formed by some dustipoll, I '11 clapper-claw your jobber- 
process from clap (strike) and claw noil." 

(scratch). Nashe has it in The First 73. wag] See above, I. iii. 6, and 

Fart of FasquiTs Apologie (Grosart, i. il. i. 234. 

244), 1590: "you should see me so 85. jack-a-nape] an ape or monkey, 

clapper-claw him for it, that he should See below, iv. iv. 68. The word is 

have no joy to runne into Reformation, exhaustively discussed in its various 

before he be better learned." See also forms in New Eng. Diet. 
the popular old play Look About You 88. Frogmore'] See Introduction. 
(Haz. Dods. vii. 485), ante 1600 ; and 



SC. III.] 



OF WINDSOR 



109 



where Mistress Anne Page is, at a farm-house 
a - feasting ; and thou shalt woo her. Cried 90 
game ; said I well ? 
Cuius. By gar, me dank you vor dat : by gar, I 
love you ; and I shall procure-a you de good 

90, 91. Cried game] Q i, 2, Steevens, 1793 ; Cride-game Ff, Q 3; Cried I 
aim? Dyce (Douce conj.), and Mod. Edd.; Try' d game Theobald; Cock o' th' 
game Hzximex 'y Cry amie Becket conj.j Dry d game Jackson conj.; Curds and 
cream Collier MS. 



90, 91. Cried game] With all due 
deference to previous editors I restore 
the old text. I cannot see how we are 
at liberty to discard the unanimous 
reading of the early editions, whether 
we can understand it or not. The 
Folio gives us the text of the play, 
and the variant of the play in the 
Quarto confirms it. Taking the Folio 
alone, an alteration might be contem- 
plated, but the Host's speeches in the 
Quarto are always worthy of careful 
consideration. The accepted reading 
seems to me also inherently faulty. 
There is no example of the expression 
"cried aim" ; it is always "cry aim," 
meaning to encourage, approve, taken 
from shooting at the butts. See Gif- 
ford's Massinger's Bondman. And see 
below, III. ii, 45. Such an expression 
is very falsely used, applied to one's 
self, as the Host is made to speak it by 
the alteration. What the Host means 
to say is obvious. His jerky form of 
speech is not always grammatical. By 
"cried game," he announces that the 
sport is arranged or proclaimed. The 
game is cried. [I notice in the Folio 
there is a distinct spacing before 
the last letter of he r (thus), and the 
following stop is badly blurred. Pos- 
sibly the pronoun "I" may have 
dropped out. Something seems to have 
happened.] But the words are no 
doubt a piece of a phrase, or the whole 
of a phrase, fully understood at the 
time. It was taken from the language 
of the bearward. In Ben Jonson's 



Epicene, i. i. (408^), Clerimont's Page 
says: "I entreated a bearward one 
day to come down with the dogs of 
some four parishes that way, and I 
thank him he did : and cried his games 
under Master Morose's window : till he 
was sent crying away with his head 
made a most bleeding spectacle." This 
is the Host's expression. For some of 
the "games," see note at i. i. 308. 
"Fighting at head" and "fighting 
low " had reference to special bouts in 
these contests. See Epicene, iv. i., for 
details of the bear-dogs' fight. " Game " 
had, indeed, special reference to bears. 
In jonson's Masque of Augurs this is 
stated distinctly : ' ' Cattle ! what cattle 
does she mean ? Lady. No worse than 
the king's game, I assure you : the 
bears, bears both of quality and fashion, 
right bears, true bears." This is not 
the use of the word in the text exactly, 
but it gives some colour to it. In 
Davies' Epigra7n, xliii., already referred 
to, "he skipping cries 'to head,' 'to 
head,' " is from the bear garden. Anne 
Page has already told us she heard 
that the bears were at Windsor. Hence 
the perfect appropriateness of the Host's 
troublesome expression. It is a pity 
to lose sight of some of the tours de 
force of the conjecturers, especially 
Becket and Jackson. I have given 
them above. However the construction 
be explained, the passage from Jonson 
confirms the original words ; and it 
is an unmixed pleasure to expel "cry 
aim." 



no THE MERRY WIVES [actiii. 

guest, de earl, de knight, de lords, de gentle- 
men, my patients. 95 

Host. For the which I will be thy adversary toward 
Anne Page. Said I well? 

Cuius, By gar, 'tis good ; veil said. 

Host. Let us wag, then. 

Cuius. Come at my heels, Jack Rugby. [Exeunt, 100 



ACT III 



SCENE I. — A Field neur Frogmore, 

Enter SiR Hugh Evans und Simple. 

Evuns. I pray you now, good Master Slender's 
serving-man, and friend Simple by your name, 
which way have you looked for Master Caius, 
that calls himself doctor of physic ? 

Sim. Marry, sir, the pittie-ward, the park- ward, every 5 

100.] Given to Host F 3, 4. 

Act III. Scene i. 
5. pittie-ward] F I, Q 3 ; pitty-wary F 2, 3, 4 ; city-ward Capell, Steevens 
(1793). 

96. adversary] It is the Host's hum- Dictionary. Nashe has it in Have with 

our to use words Caius does not under- you^ etc., 1596 (Gros. iii. 363) : ** Al- 

stand with meanings which should be loune, alloune, let us march." 
distasteful to him in the extreme. This 

is obvious. When Wheatley says this ^^^ ^^^- ^'^^^ ^• 

word is **a malapropism for advocate," 4. doctor of physic] This expression 

he is wrong. But it is much more re- occurs as early as Chaucer's Frologue 

markable to find Schmidt attributing this to Cajiterbury Tales. 

word to Mrs. Quickly in a special note. 5. pittie-ward] Sounds like Petty 

100.] The Quarto reads " Alon, alon, Ward, but the name (if name it be) has 
alon." Marston and Day have simi- baffled all research. Steevens says, 
larly "alloun." "Allons" became a "The author might possibly have writ- 
popular expression long before Dryden's ten (as I have printed) the city-ward, 
time, the earliest given in Stanford's i.e, towards London." One cannot 



SC. 1.] 



OF WINDSOR 



111 



way ; old Windsor way, and every way but the 

town way. 
Evans. I most fehemently desire you you will also 

look that way. 
Sim. I will, sir. {Exit. lo 

Evans. Pless my soul, how full of chollors I am, 

and trempling of mind — I shall be glad if he 

have deceived me. — How melancholies I am ! 

— I will knog his urinals about his knave's costard 

when I have goot opportunities for the ork. — 1 5 



Pless my soul ! — 



\Sings, 



To shallow rivers, to whose falls 
Melodious birds sing madrigals ; 



but resent such liberties. The speech 
is not in the Quarto, There was a place 
named Pitfields at Windsor, where four 
almshouses were founded in 1688 (Lewis, 
Topogr. Diet.). See Introduction. 

5. park-ward^ the way to Windsor 
Great Park. 

6. old Windsor way\ "the way to Old 
Windsor, distant about two miles from 
Windsor (or New Windsor)," Wheatley. 

14. urinals'] See note at line 90. 

14. costard] A ludicrous name for the 
head, from its resemblance to an apple, 
like "mazzard," from its resemblance 
to a bowl. " I shall rappe you on the 
costarde" (Palsgrave, 1530); "Iknocke 
your costarde if ye offer to strike mee," 
Udall, Roister Bolster, ill. v., circa 
1550. And see King Lear, IV. vi. 247. 

17. To shallow rivers'] Evans sings 
to keep up his heart. Bottom does the 
same in Midsumtner Night's Dream : 
•*I will not stir from this place . . . 
and I will sing, that they shall hear I 
am not afraid" (ill. i. 126). See also 
Mrs. Quickly's "down, adown," i. iv. 
44. The lines Evans sings (somewhat 
misquoted) are from Marlowe's well- 
known song, " Come live with me, 
and be my love." It was first printed 
by W. Jaggard in The Passionate 



Pilgrim and other Sonnets by Air, 
William Shakespeare, in 1599. Jag- 
gard is, however, no authority. Izaak 
Walton, in The Ccmpleat Angler, 
says: "That smooth song which was 
made by Kit Marlowe now at least 
fifty years ago ; and an answer to it 
which was made by Sir Walter Raleigh 
. . . old-fashioned poetry, but choicely 
good." In England's Helicon, 1600, 
it is printed with the name *' Chr. 
Marlow." And in Marlowe's Jew of 
Malta (1591), the line "live with me 
and be my love" occurs. Marlowe's 
death took place in 1593. The music 
was found by Sir John Hawkins in W. 
Corkine's Second Book of Ayres (161 2), 
and is given by Chappell, Hullah, etc. 
It was a very popular song. N. Brecon 
refers to it several times, the earliest 
being (first line quoted) in Poste with a 
Packet of Mad Letters (1603). The 
tune must have been earlier. There is 
a canto in T. Deloney's Strange His- 
tories (Percy Soc, p. 28) on "The 
Imprisonment of Queen Ehnor, To the 
tune of Come live with me and be my 
love.'''' This was first printed in 1607, 
and perhaps earlier. Deloney was 
dead in 1600. 

18. madrigals] short pastoral poems. 



112 THE MERRY WIVES [actiu. 

There will we make our peds of roses, 

And a thousand fragrant posies. 20 

To shallow — 

Mercy on me ! I have a great dispositions to cry. 

[Sings. 
Melodious birds sing madrigals — 
Whenas I sat in Pabylon — 

And a thousand vagram posies. 25 

To shallow, etc. 



Re-enter Simple. 

Sim. Yonder he is coming, this way. Sir Hugh. 
Evans. He 's welcome. — \Sings. 

To shallow rivers, to whose falls — 

Heaven prosper the right ! — What weapons is he? 30 
Sim. No weapons, sir. There comes my master. 
Master Shallow, and another gentleman, from 
Frogmore, over the stile, this way. 

24. Whenas . . . Pabylon] There dwelt a man in Babylon Q i. 

The word was newly introduced as a Tales, etc., from the Italian in 1587. 

part of the craze for sonnet writing, See Warton's History of English Poetry. 

from the Italian. In an interesting Nashe gives the name of the Italian, 

passage in Pierce's Supererogation and also a hint about the mournful tone 

(1592-93), Gabriel Harvey attributes of the madrigal: 'Mike Marenzo's 

the introduction to G. Turberville : Madrigals, the mournefull note naturally 

"Had he [Nashe] begun to Aretinize, . . . affected the miserable Ditty, 

when Elderton began to ballat, Gas- Foure Letters Confuted (Gros. ii. 190), 

coine to sonnet, Turberville to madrigal, 1593. 

Drant to versify, Tarliton to extern- 24. Whenas I sat in Pabylon] This 
porize." N. Yonge (reprinted by Arber, is the first line of the (old) cxxxvii. 
English Garner, iii.), writing in 1588, Psalm. See note at ri. i. 60. The 
says: "I had the hap to find in the Quarto has ''There dwelt a man in 
hands of some of my good friends cer- Babylon," the first line of an old ballad, 
taine Italian Madrigals, translated, "The goodly and constant wyfe Sus- 
most of them five years ago by a gentle- anna" (frequently reprinted and men- 
man for his private delight." Probably tioned in l^welfth Night, li. iii.) ; one 
the gentleman was George Turberville, of several songs with the "lady, lady" 
who published a collection of Tragical burthen. 



SCI.] OF WINDSOR 113 

Evans. Pray you, give me my gown ; or else keep it 

in your arms. 35 

Enter PAGE, Shallow, and Slender. 

Shal. How now, master parson ! Good morrow, 

good Sir Hugh. Keep a gamester from the 

dice, and a good student from his book, and it 

is wonderful. 
Slen, [Aside.] Ah, sweet Anne Page ! 40 

Pa^'e. Save you, good Sir Hugh ! 
Evans. Pless you from his mercy sake, all of 

you ! 
S/ial. What, the sword and the word ! do you study 

them both, master parson? 45 

Pa£'e. And youthful still ! in your doublet and hose 

this raw rheumatic day ! 
Evans. There is reasons and causes for it. 
Page. We are come to you to do a good office, 

master parson. 50 

Evans. Fery well : what is it ? 
Page. Yonder is a most reverend gentleman, who, 

38. sttident\ F 3, 4 ; studient F i, 2, Q 3. 

44. the sword and the word'] word is 47. this raw rheumatic day] a day 
"Scripture." See note at "Pible" above, likely to give rheumatism, or any dis- 
II. iii. 7. Compare ^ ^^^z;^ /K IV. ii. orders of the rheum, such as pose, 
10, where Lancaster addresses "My murr, catarrh. Compare " rheumatick 
Lord of York": "to see you here an 6.\scz.sqs" m Midsummer Night's Dream ^ 
iron man Turning the word to sword Ii. i. 105. See Holland's Plinie, xxii. 
and life to death." AndNashe: "They 23 (p. 133): "those fluxes and cat- 
will have some of theyr elders to be arrhes . . . called by the Greekes Rheu- 
governing and preaching elders, to matisms," and xx. 18: "the flux of 
handle the word and the sword together humours which the Greeks name 
. . . whereas our Bishops receive their Rheumatisms,^^ and "collection of 
authoritie from her Maiestie," Paj-f^z^zV'x humours, or by some deflux and 
Apologie (Grosart, i. 246), 1590. An rheumaticke descent" {ibid. xxii. 25 
expression in use among the Mar- (p. 138). 
prelatists, but probably Lutheran. 

8 



114 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act III. 



belike having received wrong by some person, 
is at most odds with his own gravity and patience 
that ever you saw. 5 5 

ShaL I have Hved fourscore years and upward ; I 
never heard a man of his place, gravity, and 
learning, so wide of his own respect. 

Evans. What is he? 

Page. I think you know him ; Master Doctor Caius, 60 
the renowned French physician. 

Evans. Got's will, and his passion of my heart ! I 



56. / have lived fourscore years\ 
Shallow's age, as proved by Ritson and 
other commentators from 2 Henry IV., 
should be threescore years and upwards 
now. His age in that play, historically 
speaking (from its period of action), 
was sixty-one. Malone points out, 
conveniently, that fourscore "was con- 
stantly used with considerable vague- 
ness to express old age." Ritson 
would alter the text. 

57. a man of his place, gravity^ The 
well-known play, 7he Merry Devil 
of Edmonton, acted ante 1608, and for- 
merly attributed to Shakespeare, has a 
good deal of kinship with Merry Wives. 
See Introduction. This passage must 
have occurred to the writer, when 
Brian says (Haz. Dods. x. 250) : ** I 
charge you both to get out of my 
ground. Is this a time for such as 
you, men of place and of your gravity, 
to be abroad a'thieving ? " 

58. wide'l far from the mark. A 
common term, technically in archery, 
in Shakespeare's time: "wide of the 
bow hand," "wide three bows," etc. 

58. respect] reputation. 

61. the renowned French physician] 
If these words, or the character of Caius, 
have any reference to an actual French 
doctor, they may apply to Ambrose 
Parey, who died in 1590. His works 
were not translated until 1634, but his 
"books of Physic" created a consider- 



able sensation on account of their free 
language, and were at first forbidden 
to be printed (Bayle). Ben Jonson ap- 
pears to be considerably indebted to 
him in An Interlude, etc. (Cunning- 
ham's Gifford, iii. 461). "Pare was 
adored by the army and by several 
French kings, but his innovations were 
opposed, as usual, by the faculty, and 
he had to justify the use of the ligature 
as well as he could by quotations from 
Galen and other ancients " {Ency. Brit. , 
article "Surgery," ninth ed.). This 
fits the ' * Frenchman that hath good 
skill in his rapier," and the doctor that 
mine host calls "his Galen" and "his 
yEsculapius. " In his Introductory 
notice to his edition, Wheatley says : 
" The real Dr. Caius (refounder of Gon- 
ville and Caius College, Cambridge) 
in the statutes of his college specially 
excludes Welshmen from holding any 
of his Fellowships." This personal 
animosity would be a reason for the 
name, which suits the character in no 
other respects. In The Returne from 
Parnassus, Theodore, the French phy- 
sician, is borrowed from Dr. Caius. 
He quotes Galen, and he appears to 
come on the stage with one of those 
vessels in his hand referred to by mine 
host. He only appears in 11. iii., 
and is of no consequence whatever. 
Mr. Gollancz has noticed this in the 
Temple Shakespeare. 



SCI] OF WINDSOR 115 

had as lief you would tell me of a mess of 

porridge. 
Page. Why? 65 

Evans. He has no more knowledge in Hibocrates 

and Galen, — and he is a knave besides ; a 

cowardly knave as you would desires to be 

acquainted withal. 
Page. I warrant you, he 's the man should fight with 70 

him. 
Slen. [Aside.] O sweet Anne Page ! 
Skal. It appears so, by his weapons. Keep them 

asunder : here comes Doctor Caius. 

Enter HoST, CaiuS, and RUGBY. 

Page. Nay, good master parson, keep in your weapon. 75 

SAal. So do you, good master doctor. 

Host. Disarm them, and let them question : let 

them keep their limbs whole, and hack our 

English. 
Caius. I pray you, let-a me speak a word with your 80 

ear. Verefore vill you not meet-a me ? 
Evans. [Aside to Caius.] Pray you, use your patience : 

in good time. 
Caius. By gar, you are de coward, de Jack dog, 

John Ape. 85 

77-79. let . . . English'] Given to Shallow Q i. 85.] Q i inserts here 

Hark van urd in your eare. 

66. Hibocrates'] It is appropriate that in all his books, we find no other re- 
Evans, who kept simples in his closet ceits, but hearbs." And for Galen, 
(i. iv. 65), should be an adherent of Nashe says: "my two cunning Philo- 
Hippocrates. Pliny tells us (xxvi. 2) : sophers were driven to studie Galen 
"Hippocrates had this honour . . . anew, and seeke splenative simples to 
hee was the first who wrote with most purge their popular Patients," Pierce 
perspicuitie of Physicke, . . . howbeit, Pennilesse {^xq?>zx\./\\. 107), 1592. 



116 THE MERRY WIVES [actih. 

Evans. [Aside to Cams.] Pray you, let us not be 
laughing - stogs to other men's humours ; I 
desire you in friendship, and I will one way or 
other make you amends. [A loud.] I will knog 
your urinals about your knave's cogscombs [for 90 
missing your meetings and appointments]. 

Caius. Diable ! — Jack Rugby, — mine host de Jarteer, 
— have I not stay for him to kill him ? have I 
not, at de place I did appoint ? 

Evans. As I am a Christians soul, now, look you, 95 
this is the place appointed : I '11 be judgement 
by mine host of the Garter. 

Host. Peace, I say, Gallia and Gaul, French and 
Welsh, soul-curer and body-curer ! 

87. laughing-stogs\ Steevens, etc., Craig; laughing-stocks Old edd., Globe. 
90. urinals] Q I, Capell ei seq. ; urinal Ff, Q 3 ; cogscombs'] cockcomes Q i ; 
cogs-combe Ff, Q 3. 90, 91. \_for . . . appointments] Q i, Pope ; omitted Ff, 
Q 3. 98. Gallia and Gaul] F i, 2, Q 3 {Gaule), Gawle and Gawlia Q i. 

89, 90. knog . . . your knave's cogs- sages dropped out by some accident. 
combs] "To knock a man's pate" was a The editors say, relatively to these pas- 
threat that seems to have been attributed sages : ' * The fact that so many omis- 
especially to Welshmen. It occurs sions can be supplied from such muti- 
several times in Jonson'si^<?rM<?^(?;w«r lated copies as the early Quartos indi- 
of IVales, who was accurate in such cates that there may be many more 
matters: " offer to knock my pate in omissions, for the detection of which we 
the hearing of all these . . . before his have no clue. The text of the Merry 
maiestee," spoken by " Evan, a Welsh Wives given in F i was probably 
Attorney." Doctors carried urinals in printed from a carelessly written copy 
a case: "ensconce themselves in an of the author's MS." I do not under- 
old urinall case," G. Harvey (Grosart, stand this indication of many more 
ii. 228). And again, " it will then ap- clueless omissions. Why are they sug- 
peare as in a clear urinall, whose witt gested ? 

hath the greene - sickness," ibid. ii. 98. Gallia and Gaul] Gallia is for 

324. Wallia. "Wales, called in Latir_ 

90, ()\.\_for missing your meetings and Cambria or Wallia, " Camden's Britain 
appointments] Pope introduced these (Holland's trans., p. 615). Camden 
words from the Quarto. The Cam- has a long discourse on the identity of 
bridge editors retain them, enclosed in Welsh and French inhabitants in early 
brackets ; as they do similarly with times. At p. 22 he quotes George 
"Give me thy hand, terrestrial, so," Buck: " he noteth thus much, that the 
lines 106, 107. Certainly both pas- French at this day doe name that 



SC. I.] 



OF WINDSOR 



117 



Cuius. Ay, dat is very good ; excellent. i oo 

Host. Peace, I say ! hear mine host of the Garter. 
Am I politic ? am I subtle ? am I a Mach- 
iavel ? Shall I lose my doctor ? no ; he gives 
me the potions and the motions. Shall I 
lose my parson, my priest, my Sir Hugh? no; 105 
he gives me the proverbs and the no-verbs. [Give 
me thy hand, terrestrial ; so.] Give me thy hand, 
celestial ; so. Boys of art, I have deceived you 
both ; I have directed you to wrong places : your 
hearts are mighty, your skins are whole, and let 1 1 o 
burnt sack be the issue. Come, lay their swords 
to pawn. Follow me, lads of peace; follow, 
follow, follow. 



106, 107. Give . , . terrestrial; so] Q i, Theobald et seq. ; omitted Ff, Q 3. 
112. lads] Q I, Warburton et seq. ; lad Ff, Q 3. 



country Galles which we call Wales ; 
also that the ancient Scots divided all 
the British nations into Gaol and Galle^ 
that is to say, after his Interpretation, 
into the Gallceci and the Gallic Pos- 
sibly the Host likewise was quoting Sir 
George Buck, the historian, Master of 
Her Majesty's Revels, soon after this 
time (1610). In Sir Thomas Malory's 
Morte d' Arthur ( Globe ed. , p. 420) ' ' the 
king of Northgalis " is another name 
for " the king of North Wales." 

102, 103. Machiavel] As a type of 
crafty policy, he is referred to again 1 
Henry VI. v. iv. 74. And as a type of 
unscrupulous villainy, in S Henry VI. 
III. ii. 193. No recent writer's name 
was so constantly quoted at this time 
as that of the author of The Prince. 
The earliest in the present sense I have 
noted is from T. Howell, Devises 
(Grosart, ii. 221), "Sir Machiauell 
such cunning now hath tough t," 1581. 

106. Give] See note above, lines 90, 
91. 



107. terrestrial] Not a common word, 
like "celestial." Shakespeare has it 
in its literal sense, "the terrestrial 
ball" {i.e. the earth), Richard II. III. 
ii. 41. It is in T. Howell, Poems 
(Grosart, i. 60), 1568: "eche thing 
Terrestriall." 

111. burnt sack] See note, 11. i. 
219. 

112, 113, follow^ follow, follow] In 
the Quarto the words are "Follow me 
lads Of peace, follow me. Ha, ra, la. 
Follow." The opening passage of 
Chettle and Munday's Death of Robert, 
Earl of Huntingdon ( 1 602 ) is : ^'^ Enter 
Friar Tuck. Friar. Holla, holla, 
holla ! follow, follow, follow." And 
as a stage-direction it occurs in Nobody 
and Somebody, printed circa 1607. 
These are the earliest instances I can 
find of the cry raised, probably by the 
constables for assistance in pursuit, 
amongst the crowd. It may be taken 
as a test of date, as a stage-direction, 
in old plays, belonging to the first years 



118 THE MERRY WIVES [actih. 

Shal. Trust me, a mad host. Follow, gentlemen, 

follow. 115 

Slen. [Aside.] O sweet Anne Page ! 

[Exeunt Shal.^ Slen.y Page, and Host. 

Caius. Ha, do I perceive dat? have you make-a de 
sot of us, ha, ha ? 

Evans. This is well ; he has made us his vlouting-stog. 

— I desire you that we may be friends; and let 120 
us knog our prains together to be revenge on this 
same scall, scurvy, cogging companion, the host 
of the Garter. 

Caius. By gar, with all my heart. He promise to 

bring me where is Anne Page ; by gar, he 125 
deceive me too. 

1 14. Trusi me] Afore God Q i. 

of King James. In the following plays his finger in a hole," Pierce's Superero- 

{circa 1607-8) it appears : Sir Tho??tas gation (Grosart, ii. 53, and again, p. 

Wyatt, Miseries of Enforced Marriage, 309). The expression quoted perhaps 

Middleton's Fhanix, Merry Devil of justifies Evans' second use. Ben Jon- 

Ednionton, Jonson's Fox, and Epicene, son has "courting-stocke," Harvey has 

etc. Later it becomes scarce again. In ** mocking - stock," and " whipping- 

Jonson's Fox, ii. i., it is expressly given stock " is perhaps the parent of them all. 

as a cry of the "Mob." Perhaps it was 122. scall, scurvy] abusive epithets, 

part of a hue and cry or proclamation. practically synonymous. The latter is 

118. sot] Malone considered the Fr. common in Shakespeare, the former 
sol was intended here, but the word occurs again, meaning "vile," in A^^wry 
was common in English. It occurs V. v. i. 5, 31, 33, given to Fluellen, 
several times in Shakespeare, and in the Welshman, but correctly spelt there 
Nashe, Anatomie of Absurditie, "good "scald" {i.e. "scalled," from "scall," 
inough for such a sencelesse sotte" a blain or scab). Nashe has it :" a scald 
(1589), and elsewhere. triuiall lying Pamphlet, called Greens 

1 19-123.] The league formed here Gf-oatsworth of Wit, is given out to be 

for revenge upon the Host is to be oivay ^om<g,''^ Fierce Pennilesse, 1592; 

borne in mind. See iii. iii. 255-260. and in Lenten Stuffe, "some scabbed 

119. z'/(3«/m^-j-/£»^] Evans has this term scald squire." "Cogging" (cheating) 
(misused) again at iv. v. 83. Formed occurs again in Othello, iv. ii. 132, and 
on the pattern of "laughing-stock," Troilus and Ores sida, v. vi. Ii : "you 
which occurs in Udall's £raj-w«j, 1542. cogging Greeks." Scall, in its legiti- 
And see above, line 87, Gabriel Har- mate sense, is abundantly referred to 
vey has the expression in the text : "To in Holland's Flinie : "cleanse the bodie 
be a Ciceronian is a flouting stocke : of scurfe, scalls, and dandruffe," xxiii. 8 
poore Homer, a wofull wight, may put (p. 173). 



SC. II.] 



OF WINDSOR 



119 



Evans. Well, I will smite his noddles. Pray you, 

follow. \Exeunt. 



SCENE \\,—The Street, in Windsor, 

Enter MISTRESS PAGE and ROBIN. 

Mrs, Page. Nay, keep your way, little gallant ; you 
were wont to be a follower, but now you are a 
leader. Whether had you rather lead mine 
eyes, or eye your master's heels? 

Rob. I had rather, forsooth, go before you like a man 5 
than follow him like a dwarf. 

Mrs. Page. O, you are a flattering boy : now I see 
you 11 be a courtier. 

Enter FORD. 

Ford. Well met. Mistress Page. Whither go 

you ? 10 

Mrs. Page. Truly, sir, to see your wife. Is she at 
home? 

Ford. Ay ; and as idle as she may hang together, 
for want of company. I think, if your husbands 
were dead, you two would marry. I 5 



127, fwddles] noddle, a contemptuous 
word for "head," occurs again in Tam- 
ing of the Shrew, i. i, 64 ; and in 
Nashe's Have with you, etc. ( 1 596) : 
•*no roofe had he to hide his noddle 
in" (Grosart, iii. 149). 

Scene il. 

4. your master's heels'] Robin is really 
Page's servant, to whom " master" re- 
fers. When Mrs. Quickly asked Fal- 
staff for him for Mistress Page, she 
says *' her husband hath a marvellous in- 



fection to the little page" (11. ii. 121). 
It would easily be supposed here that 
Mrs. Page was referring to Robin's late 
master, Sir John. At line 20, below, 
this is confirmed. Nevertheless in the 
next scene Robin calls Falstaff his 
master twice, showing he was really 
only loaned to Page. 

13. as she may hang together] hold 
together. Schmidt aptly refers to 
Winters Tale, II. ii. 22: "As well as 
one so great and so forlorn May hold 
together." 



120 THE MERRY WIVES [actiii. 

Mrs. Page. Be sure of that, — two other hus- 
bands. 

Ford. Where had you this pretty weathercock? 

Mrs. Page. I cannot tell what the dickens his name 

is my husband had him of. — What do you call 20 
your knight's name, sirrah? 

Rob. Sir John Falstaff. 

Ford. Sir John Falstaff! 

M7's. Page. He, he ; I can never hit on 's name. 

There is such a league between my good man 25 
and he ! — Is your wife at home indeed ? 

Ford. Indeed she is. 

Mrs. Page. By your leave, sir ; I am sick till I see 

her. \Exeunt Mrs. Page and Robin. 

Ford. Has Page any brains? hath he any eyes? 30 
hath he any thinking ? Sure, they sleep ; he 
hath no use of them. Why, this boy will carry 

23.] Omitted F 3, 4, Rowe. 

18. weathercockl usually taken as a dickers [thus, but probably a mis- 
type of change ("as variable as a print] I'll tell him roundly of it, an if 
weathercock "), but here probably refers he were ten lords," Lord Cromwell, 
to the page's gaudy dress, like the iv. ii. (ed. H. Tyrrell), 1602. And 
weather- flag, surmounting the vane. Yie.yyfood.,!/ you know not me, etc. {Vt2ix- 
Cotgrave in v. Pannonceau has "A son, p. 286): " God's dickens, heere 's 
F'ane or Weather-flag, also a Pennon." a jest indeed!" The last quotation 
The final word suggested the meta- corrects the previous one. "Dickens 
phor. See note at " Jack-a-Lent," iii. take ye" occurs in Urquhart's Rabelais, 
iii. 27. Book i., Prologue, 1653. There was 

19. what the dickens] Hey wood has an old proverb, due to some lost anec- 
this expression, " By my hood, ye make dote, which may throw some light on 
me laugh. V^at the dickens ? Is it love it: "No more is got by that than 
that makes ye prate to me so fondly ? " William Dickens got by his wooden 
First Fart of King Edward the Fourth dishes," Middleton, Old Law, v. i. 
(Pearson, p. 40), ante 1600. The (1599?), a saying which is absurdly 
origin of the expression is unknown, misquoted in Clarke's Pantmiologia, 
and the derivation given by Blount 1639, in Ray, and thence by Hazlitt 
{Glossographia, i6';6)from "devilkins" [Ejiglish Ff'overbs). Probably this ex- 
is fanciful, and rendered improbable by pression arose somehow out of Diccon, 
the following quotations : "by God's an old form of Dick, for Richard. 



SC. II.] 



OF WINDSOR 



121 



a letter twenty mile, as easy as a cannon will 
shoot point-blank twelve score. He pieces out 
his wife's inclination ; he gives her folly motion 3 5 
and advantage : and now she 's going to my wife, 
and Falstaff's boy with her. A man may hear 
this shower sing in the wind. And Falstaff's boy 
with her ! Good plots, they are laid ; and our 
revolted wives share damnation together. Well ; 40 
I will take him, then torture my wife, pluck the 
borrowed veil of modesty from the so seeming 
Mistress Page, divulge Page himself for a secure 
and wilful Actaeon ; and to these violent proceed- 
ings all my neighbours shall cry aim. [^Clock 45 



4S> 46. [Clock heard] Capell. 

34. point-blank'] An expression from 
gunnery, not from archery, correctly 
used by Shakespeare here. See Harri- 
son's Description of England, ii. xvi., 
1587: "The names of our greatest 
ordinance are commonlie these . . . 
Basiliske 9000 pounds ... By which 
proportions also it is easie to come by 
the weight of everie shot, how many 
scores it will flee at point blanke." 
Smith, in Accidence for Young Seamen, 
1626, says: "Concerning the shooting 
of great Ordinance ... to know her 
leuell poynt blanke ... A cannon, 
Skores of paces at poynt blanke, 26." 
A Falconet was the only piece that 
was below twelve score (8) at point 
blank. 

34. twelve score] twelve score paces. 
Here a gunnery expression. See Nares 
in V. Score for quotations from Ascham's 
Toxophilus. Compare 1 Henry IV. 
II. iv. 598, and 2 Henry IV. ill. ii. 
52, Ben jonson has the expression, 
independently of archery, as here, in 
Sejanns, v. x. : "That looked for 
salutations twelve score off." Shirley 
has it of archery, ' ' cleave the pin at 



twelve score," Lady of Pleasure, in. ii. 
Ascham does not make use of the x- 
pression "point-blank," I think. 

35. folly] used here by Ford in the 
bad sense, wantonness. See Othello, 
II. i. 138, and v. ii. 132, and notes. 

38. sing in the wind] Compare 
Tempest, ii. ii. 22: "another storm 
brewing ; I hear it sing i' the wind." 

40. revolted wives] faithless wives. 
" Should all despair That have revolted 
wives the tenth of mankind would hang 
themselves," Winter's Tale, i. ii. 199. 
See also Troilus and Cressida, v. ii. 
186. 

41. torture] punish. 

43. divulge] proclaim publicly. New 
Eng. Diet, gives one other example of 
this obsolete sense, from Milton. 

44. Actcson] See note, ii. i. 119. 

45. cry aim] encourage, applaud. 
See Nares in v. aim. Shakespeare has 
the expression again in King John, ii. 
i. 296. The earliest example in Stee- 
vens' notes is from Fenton's Tragical 
Discourses, black letter, 1567 (p. 
1 65<5) : ' ' Standing rather in his window 
to ... cry e ayme, than helpyng any 



122 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act III. 



heard.'] The clock gives me my cue, and my 
assurance bids me search : there I shall find 
Falstaff : I shall be rather praised for this than 
mocked ; for it is as positive as the earth is firm 
that Falstaff is there: I will go. 50 



Enter Page, Shallow, Slender, Host, Sir Hugh 
Evans, Caius, and Rugby. 
Shal.y Page^ etc. Well met. Master Ford. 
Ford, Trust me, a good knot : I have good cheer 

at home ; and I pray you all go with me. 
Shal. I must excuse myself. Master Ford. 
Slen. And so must I, sir ; we have appointed to dine 
with Mistress Anne, and I would not break 
with her for more money than 1 '11 speak of. 



55 



waye to part the fraye." See Kyd's 
Cornelia (Haz. Dods. v. 225), 1594: 
"O Brutus, speak! O say, Servilius ! 
Why cry you aim and see me used 
thus." The expression " to give aim," 
i.e. guide the archers from the butts by 
informing them of the result of each 
shot, is authorised by Ascham in his 
Toxophihis, 1545. Gifford drew a 
careful distinction between the two ex- 
pressions in his notes to Massinger (see 
above, "cried game," ii. iii. 92, and 
note), but the phrases were hardly so 
rigorously used. Both were expressions 
of the bystanders who "stood aloof," 
"willing to see much and do nothing." 
See Dekker, Induction to Seven Deadly 
Sinties, and see The Christ fnas Prince 
(reprint, p. 75), 1607; "sit looking 
on, and as it were giving aim," Letter 
of Chamberlain {Court and Titnes of 
James /., i. 74), 1607. 

47. assurance'\ certainty of the fact, 
certitude, as in Macbeth, iv. i. 83, 
" make assurance doubly sure." 

49. as the earth is firni] Compare 



Macbeth, II. i. 56: "thou sure and 
firm-set earth." The earth does not 
appear to us a good type of firmness. 
But compare Sir J. Davies, Orchestra, 
1596: "Onely the Earth doth stand 
for ever still : Her rocks remove not, 
nor her mountains meet : Although 
some wits enriched with Learning's skill 
say heaven stands firme, and that the 
Earth doth fleet." 

52. knof] See below, IV. ii. 123. 
In the Quarto the words are, "By my 
faith a knot well met." Shakespeare 
uses this word half a dozen times for a 
company of persons. New Eng. Diet. 
has a reference to Hall's Chronicles, 
ante 1548, and another still earlier. 

56, 57. break with her} break faith 
with her, fall out with her, quarrel with 
her. Schmidt refers to Merchant of 
Venice, i. iii. 137, where " if he break " 
means "break a bond." I prefer the 
parallel passage in Coriolanus, iv. vi. 
48: "Go see this rumourer whipp'd. 
It cannot be The Volsces dare break 
with us." 



SC. II.] 



OF WINDSOR 



123 



Shal. We have lingered about a match between Anne 

Page and my cousin Slender, and this day we 

shall have our answer. 
Slen, I hope I have your good will, father Page. 
Page. You have, Master Slender; I stand wholly 

for you : — but my wife, master doctor, is for 

you altogether. 
Cuius. Ay, be-gar ; and de maid is love-a me : my 

nursh-a Quickly tell me so mush. 
Host. What say you to young Master Fenton ? 

he capers, he dances, he has eyes of youth, he 

writes verses, he speaks holiday, he smells April 



60 



65 



69. April] all April Q i. 

58. lingered] tarried. The common 
sense of the word, as in " don't linger 
on the way," " what are you lingering 
about," in provincial use. Johnson 
seems to cavil at the sense of length of 
time implied, but it is not intended. 

62. stand] support, side with, as in 
Cymbeline, III. v. 56 ; Troilus and 
Cressida, V. iii. 36 ; Coriolanus, il. ii. 
45, etc. 

65, 66. my nursh] In i. ii. 4 Evans 
says Mrs. Quickly is "in the manner 
of his nurse, or his dry nurse." But it 
is somewhat unexpected to find Dr. 
Caius recognising this designation, which 
one would imagine Evans had merely 
misapplied (as Schmidt says). But 
that cannot be so. It has the distinct 
sense of " housekeeper " to a grown-up 
person. 

68. he capers] Compare Twelfth 
Night, I. iii. 150 : " it is legs and 
thighs. Let me see thee caper : ha ! 
higher : ha, ha ! excellent ! " A new 
word at this time taken from " capriolcy^ 
a term in the manage. BuUokar has 
"Capriole. Leaping of a horse above 
ground, called by horsemen the goat's 
leap." The modern " buck -jumping " 



would have fitted the use admirably, 
transferred to gallants. "To caper" 
or "to cut a caper" was, in practice, 
to leap about in a certain prescribed 
way, to show that one was full of 
activity and physically " fit." It seems 
very strange that it should have been 
done seriously, in courtship, but it was, 
as a means of winning a lady's favour. 
Compare Sharpham, Cupid'' s Whirligig, 
1607, " He capers three or four times " 
(stage-direction) ; and Chapman, All 
Fools, ii. (1605) : " I am no husband 
of my qualities ! He untrusses and 
capers." In Howell's Letters (i. v., 
vii., 1628): "the Duke did rise up in 
a well-disposed manner out of his bed, 
and cut a caper or two." See also 
Loves Labour'' s Lost, v. ii. 113. And 
compare Sir T. Davies, Orchestra 
(Grosart, i. 187): "With lofty turnes 
and capriols in the ayre. With which 
the lusty tunes accordeth faire." See 
also Rye's England as seen by Foreign- 
ers, p. 122. 

69, 70. he speaks holiday, he sfuells 
April and May] He leaps in the spirit 
of youth, as one fit for holiday times 
and May-games. He is "as fresh as 



124 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act III. 



and May: he will carry 't, he will carry 't; 'tis 70 
in his buttons ; he will carry 't 
Page, Not by my consent, I promise you. The 
gentleman is of no having: he kept company 
with the wild prince and Poins ; he is of too 
high a region; he knows too much. No, he 75 
shall not knit a knot in his fortunes with the 
finger of my substance : if he take her, let him 

71. buttons] betmes Q i. 73, 74. he kept . . . Poins\ Not in Q i. 74. 
Poins\ Steevens, etc., Globe j Poyntz F i, 2, Q 3 ; Poinz F 3, 4. 



flowers in May. " It may be paraphrased 
by Sonnet^ xcviii. : 

"From you have I been absent in 

the spring, 
When proud-pied April, dressed in 

all his trim, 
Hath put a spirit of youth in every 

thing, 
That heavy Saturn laughed and 

leaped with him." 
In 1 Henry IV. i. iii. 46, the "certain 
lord, neat and finely dressed, fresh as 
a bridegroom," spoke in " many hoH- 
day and lady terms." The words re- 
call Chaucer's " Aprill with his showres 
swote," and '* He was as fresh as is the 
moneth of May," in Prologue to Canter- 
bury Tales. 

'JO, 71. he will carry ^f] he will 
win. A common expression. See 
Love's Labour s Lost, ill. 141, etc. Was 
this the word, mistakenly supposed to 
mean he will carry it in his buttonhole, 
that put Steevens on such a wild 
goose chase, referred to in the next 
note? 

70, 71. Uis in his buttons^ he has it 
in him, buttoned up, as it were, inside. 
Probably a colloquial expression. I 
reject all the notes abou^ "bachelors' 
buttons" as being entirely foreign to 
the meaning. One may be referred to, 
too lengthy to quote fully, by " Smith," 
who says : " bachelors carried a plant of 
the Lychnis kind in their pockets. Its 
flowers were like a coat button. And 



they judged of their good or bad success 
(courting) by their growing or not 
growing there" (!) Compare Marston, 
The Fawne, ii. i., 1606: "But what 
hope rests for Nymphadoro ? Thou art 
now within the buttons of the prince. 
Shall the duke his father marry the 
lady?" Here it means "inside the 
prince," i.e. in his confidence. The 
expression occurs also in The Christmas 
Prince, 1607 (reprint, p. 58): "to 
weare of it within his buttons," with a 
pun on stocks of money apparently. 
Compare Comedy of Errors, iv. ii. 34, 
for a close approach to the expres- 
sion. 

73. having] possession, means, pro- 
perty. Compare Twelfth Night, in. 
iv. 379- 

74. Poins] See f Henry IV. Ii. ii. 
for Poins and "the wild prince." And 
see below, in. iv. 8, for a further refer- 
ence to Fenton's "riots past." See 
also note at v. v. 128. 

76, 77' knit a knot in his fortunes with 
the fnger] mend his broken fortunes. 
This is an old saying about marriage 
varied to suit the context. "A woman 
may knit a knot with her tongue, she 
cannot untie with all her teeth, " Greene's 
Mamilia (Grosart, ii. 64), 1583. This 
explains the somewhat odd use of the 
words "with the finger" taken out of 
"with the tongue" in the proverb, 
quoted later as " He hath tied a knot," 
etc., in Ray and others. 



SC. II.] 



OF WINDSOR 



125 



take her simply ; the wealth I have waits on my 
consent, and my consent goes not that way. 

Ford. I beseech you heartily, some of you go home 80 
with me to dinner : besides your cheer, you shall 
have sport ; I will show you a monster. Master 
doctor, you shall go ; so shall you. Master Page ; 
and you. Sir Hugh. 

Shal, Well, fare you well: we shall have the freer 85 
wooing at Master Page's. [Exeunt Shal, and Slen, 

Caius, Go home, John Rugby ; I come anon. 

\Exit Rugby, 

Host. Farewell, my hearts : I will to my honest 

knight Falstaff, and drink canary with him. \Exit, 

Ford. [Aside.] I think I shall drink in pipe-wine 90 



82. I will show you a monster\ Com- 
pare Tempest^ 11. ii. 34-36. Monsters 
of all sorts were in great demand 
amongst sightseers, and the plays of this 
time abound in referei es. Ben Jonson's 
Bartholomew Fair has them, dead and 
alive, and the "man with the monsters," 
is part of the fair. See also his Every 
Man out of his Humour, v. iv, , for earlier 
mention. See below, iv. ii. 204, note 
at "great peard." 

89. drink canary'] wine from the 
Canaries ; sack. See li. i. 219 (note). 
Mrs. Quickly makes a plural out of it 
in 2 Henry IV. 11. iv. 29: "you have 
drunk too much canaries." Often 
mentioned in Spanish prizes captured 
in Elizabeth's time: "certaine pitch 
and 30 tuns of Canarie wines," 

Voyage of Barker of Bristol, 1576 
(Hakluyt, ed. 181 1, xv. p. 5). And 
' * wee found in her . . . three hundred 
buts of Canarie wine, and Niper wine, 
which is made of the palme tree," 
Lancaster, Voyage to East Indies, 1591- 
94 {ibid. ii. 591). 

90. drink in] drink. Malone illus- 
trates this "phraseology of the time" 



from King James' first speech to his 
Parliament (1604), where he uses the 
words "retained their first drunken-in 
liquor." Reed gives another illustra- 
tion. 

90. pipe -wine] wine from the pipe. 
An odd expression, but paralled by the 
usage "bottle-ale" common at this 
time. "A pipe, or halfe a tun, Hemi- 
doliuvi,'' Ryder, 1589. The Quarto 
reads, " I may chance to make him 
drink in pipe-wine first" ("make him 
dance" is omitted in Quarto). "Pipe- 
money " occurs in Ben Jonson's Gipsies 
Metamorphosed (money for the piper). 
I think " pipe- wine " had some signi- 
fication other than wine from the pipe. 
"Pipe "and "dance" were associated 
in many familiar sayings, as in Luke 
vii. 32: "we piped unto you, and ye 
did not dance." " To dance after one's 
pipe," or "dance to every one's pipe," 
"No longer pipe no longer dance," 
occur often earlier. See next note. 
"Pipe -wine" may have meant ex- 
pressly Canary. In Howell's Glossary, 
Sect. L, 1659, the term "pipe" is 
limited to Canary, vat being applied to 



126 



THE MERRY WIVES 



first with him ; I '11 make him dance, 
you go, gentles? 
All. Have with you to see this monster. 



[act III 

Will 
\Exeunt, 



SCENE III. — A Room in Ford's House, 



Enter MISTRESS FoRD and Mistress Page. 



Mrs. Ford. What, John ! What, Robert ! 
Mrs. Page. Quickly, quickly ! — is the 
basket — 



buck 



Rhenish, backrag, Ringo, deal, Mosel; 
butt to.Malage, Sherry, Muscadel ; and 
Ponchons, hogsheads or terces to P'rench 
wines. Malmsey and Tent were also 
in butts. 

91. /'// make him dance] i.e. make 
him dance without a pipe, or without the 
right sort of pipe, or to another pipe or 
tune. Or perhaps simply, " I '11 make 
him skip" or "jump." Compare 
Skelton, Colyn Chute (Dyce, i. 334), 
circa 1520: "They wold pype you 
another daunce." And N. Breton, 
Foste with a Mad Packet^ 1603 : " this 
kinde of love I mean, that makes them 
dance Trenchmore without a pipe." 
See last note. Ford, as a further 
quibble, may refer to the dance called 
the Canary or Canaries, referred to 
again in Love s Labour's Lost, ill. i. 
12. riorio (1598) has '' Castagnette, 
little shels, such as they use that daunce 
the canaries, to make a noise or sound 
or clack with their fingers." And see 
AlPs Well, II. i. 77. And Nashe, 
Pierce Pennilesse (Gros. ii. 33), 159: 
"jets it as gingerly as if she were 
dancing the Canaries." 

93. monster'] See above, line 82, 
(note). 

Scene in. 
2, 3. buck-basket] To buck clothes 



was "to steep or boil in an alkaline 
lye, as a first process in buck-washing 
or bleaching," New Eng. Diet. A 
buck of clothes, or linen, was a quantity 
so steeped; "a wash." A "buck- 
basket," a clothes-basket. None of 
these terms occur elsewhere in Shake- 
speare, but they are not obsolete pro- 
vincially. The process of beating 
clothes in a stream is still a familiar 
one in some districts. This was 
formerly called "beating a buck." 
Hey wood has in Four Prentices, 1615, 
"Send me to the conduit with the 
water-tankard ; I '11 beat linnen-buckes, 
or anything to redeem my negligence." 
And Massinger, Virgin Martyr, vi. ii.: 
" If I were to beat a buck, I can strike 
no harder." And carrying the process 
through was called "driving a buck," 
as in Jonson's Tale of a Tub, III. v. 
(1633): "never leave Crying until our 
maids may drive a buck With my salt 
tears at the next washing-day." Com- 
pare d^so^y^^x zBibliotheca Scholastica, 
1589: " Zb buck clothes, vide wash. 
A bucking of clothes, Lixivarium. A 
bucking stocke, Lixivatorium." The 
examples quoted here are supplemen- 
tary to those in New Eng. Diet., and 
throw further light on the Falstaffian 
machinery. New Eng. Diet, does 
not appear to mention the "bucking 



sc.iii.] OF WINDSOR 127 

Mrs. Ford. I warrant. What, Robin, I say ! 

Enter Servants with a basket. 

Mrs. Page. Come, come, come. 5 

Mrs. Ford. Here, set it down. 

Mrs. Page. Give your men the charge ; we must 
be brief. 

Mrs. Ford. Marry, as I told you before, John and 

Robert, be ready here hard by in the brew-house ; i o 
and when I suddenly call you, come forth, and, 
without any pause or staggering, take this basket 
on your shoulders : that done, trudge with it in 
all haste, and carry it among the whitsters in 
Datchet-mead, and there empty it in the muddy I 5 
ditch close by the Thames side. 

Mrs. Page. You will do it? 

Mrs. Ford. I ha' told them over and over ; they 

stock" or the "beating of the buck," As You Like li, ill. iii. 49. And 

which is referred to by Nares, and Romans iv. 20. 

in the following passage by Nashe, 14. whitsters\ bleachers. An un- 

PasquiVs Returne to England (Gros- common word. Wright, Prov. Dict.^ 

art, i. 136), 1589: "I Cavaliero refers to Taylor's Works, 1630. It 

Pasquill . . . lately knighted in Eng- occurs in Pepys* Diary, Aug. 12, 1667 : 

lande, with a beetle and a bucking tub, " My wife and maids being gone over 

to beat a little reason about Martin's the water to the whitster's with their 

head." clothes, this being the first time of her 

10. brew-house] Private brew-houses trying this way of washing linen." 

were attached to all establishments in " Whitster. A whitener of Linen 

these times. Mrs. Quickly, who kept cloth," N. Bailey, 1766. "Whitning, 

house for Caius, tells us she brewed for in respect of Linnen cloth, is to make 

him (i. iv. 100). This passage, and it white, which is the last thing done in 

Mrs. Quickly's duties may be illustrated that part of Housewifry ; as Bucking is 

by Ben Jonson, Magnetic Lady, v. vi. : to make it something white, by washing 

"We hear his wife is run away from it with Lye made of Gorst- Ashes," 

him . . . the larders have been searched, Dictionarium Rusticum et Urbicuniy 

The bake-houses and boulting tub, the 1704. See below, line 157, at "laun- 

ovens, Wash-house and brew-house, nay dress." 

the very furnace, And yet she is not 15. Z)a/^>^^/-w^^ the tract of ground 

heard of." between Windsor Little Park and the 

12. staggering] hesitating. Compare Thames. See Introduction. 



128 THE MERRY WIVES [actih. 

lack no direction. Be gone, and come when 
you are called. \Exeunt Servants. 20 

Mrs. Page. Here comes little Robin. 

Enter ROBIN. 

Mrs. Ford. How now, my eyas-musket ! what news 
with you ? 

Rob. My master. Sir John, is come in at your back- 
door, Mistress Ford, and requests your com- 25 
pany. 

Mrs. Page. You little Jack-a-Lent, have you been 
true to us? 

Roh. Ay, I '11 be sworn. My master knows not of 

your being here, and hath threatened to put me 30 
into everlasting liberty, if I tell you of it ; for 
he swears he'll turn me away. 

Mrs. Page. Thou 'rt a good boy : this secrecy of 
thine shall be a tailor to thee, and shall make 

22. eyas-musket\ young male spar- to throw at during Lent — as cocks were 
row - hawk, literally. " Eyess is a thrown at in Shrove-tide. Compare 
young Hawk newly taken out of his Nashe, Have zviih you to Saffron 
Nest, not able to Prey for himself," JValden {Gros. iii. 138}, 1596: "suche 
Gent/eman^s Recreation. From the another prettie Jack-a-Lent as boyes 
French, ^^ Niais, a nestling . . . hence throw at in the streete." See note at 
a youngling, novice," etc., Cotgrave, *' weathercock," iii. ii. 18. References 
the initial letter having dropped out to the "Jack-a-Lent" are abundantly 
through confusion with the article (com- given in Nares, etc., but none to this 
pare "nadder, " nuncle," ** nones"), characteristic. Here is another from 
'* Musket," a male sparrow-hawk. See Browne, Britannia's Pastorals, i. iv. 
2ig2anGcntle/nan'sjRecreation,^^S>YidLXxovi- (p. 116, ed. 1868), 1614 : " I, neigh- 
hawk . . . male . . . Musket." Cot- hour, quoth the Taylor (then he bent 
grave has ''^ Mousque ... A nick- His pace to me, spruce \{k.t z. lacke of 
name, or name of contempt, for an Lent''' See below, v. v. 134, 135, for the 
ordinary boy, " etc. And^'Monsqtiet, A. ordinary sense. Assuming that Robin 
Musket (Hawk, or Piece)." And see is the same as Falstaff's page in 
Nomenclator, 1585 : '■'■ Accipiterfringil- 2 Henry IV. i. ii., the reference to his 
larius, . . . asparrowhawk ; amusket." gaudy get-up is accounted for: "fitter 

27. Jack-a-Lent] a puppet, made of to be worn in the cap than to wait at 

straw, and dressed out in gaudy rags, my heels, " etc. 
which was set up in the streets for boys 29. /'// be sworn'] See li. ii. 39. 



sc.iii.] OF WINDSOR 129 

thee a new doublet and hose. I '11 go hide 3 5 

me. 
Mrs. Ford, Do so. Go tell thy master I am alone. 

{Exit Robin.'] Mistress Page, remember you 

your cue. 
Mrs, Page. I warrant thee ; if I do not act it, hiss 40 

me. {Exit, 

Mrs. Ford. Go to, then : we '11 use this unwholesome 

humidity, this gross watery pumpion ; we '11 

teach him to know turtles from jays. 

Enter FaLSTAFF. 

Fal. " Have I caught thee, my heavenly jewel ? " 45 
Why, now let me die, for I have lived long 
enough : this is the period of my ambition : O 
this blessed hour ! 

Mrs. Ford. O sweet Sir John ! 

Fal. Mistress Ford, I cannot cog, I cannot prate, 50 

39. cue] QuF I (and at III. ii. 45). 45. ^^ Have I . , . Jewel?"'] Ff, Q 3 
{thee omitted Q i). 

39. cue] theatrical term. See Othello, courtier resembleth the jay that decketh 

I. ii. 83. Fr. Quetce, a tail. Mrs. Page herself with the feathers of other birds" 

continues the stage language. (Haz. Dods. vi. 552), Merry Knack 

43. pumpion] a water-melon. "In to know a Knave, 1594. And see 
Moesia they lay for to have them passing Ben Jonson, quoted at "bully-rook" (l. 
big and huge. Now when they exceed iii. 2). 

in greatnes, they be called Pepones, i. 45. ^^ Have I caught thee, my heavenly 

Melons or Pompons," Holland's /"/m/V, jeweW''] The Quarto omits "thee," 

xix. 5 (p. 14). Ben Jonson uses the which is not in Sir Philip Sidney's 

word in Time Vindicated, and it occurs Astrophel and Stella, from whence the 

in the early travellers. line is quoted. Several editors make 

44. turtles fr 0771 jays] The turtle was the correction, but when a quotation is 
a type of a truthful, constant woman, made in conversation it is commonly 
See above, 11, i. 80 (and note). The altered to suit circumstances, 

gay, vulgar jay was used to denote a 50. cog] cheat with lying words, 

loose woman. See Cy7nbeli7ie, iii. iv. Compare Richard III. i. iii. 48: "I 

51. The painted jay was held to be cannot flatter . . . smooth, deceive 

a crow in borrowed plumes. "The and cog." And Greene, Defence of 



130 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act III. 



Mistress Ford. Now shall I sin in my wish: 
I would thy husband were dead : I '11 speak it 
before the best lord ; I would make thee my 
lady. 

Mrs. Ford. I your lady, Sir John ! alas, I should 5 5 
be a pitiful lady ! 

Fal. Let the court of France show me such another. 
I see how thine eye would emulate the diamond : 
thou hast the right arched beauty of the brow 
that becomes the ship-tire, the tire-valiant, or 60 
any tire of Venetian admittance. 

59. beauty] bent Q i, Steevens. 60. tire-valiant'] tire-vellet Q i. 61. 
any . . . admittance] anie Venetian attire Q i. 



Conny- Catching, 1592: "to advance his 
yonger brother to so good a marriage, 
was content to lie, cog, and flatter." 

60. the ship-tire] Tire was the usual 
name for head-dress, and the tire- woman 
was the person who dressed it. Wheatley 
quotes here from The Diana of George 
of Montemayor, 1598: "The attyre of 
her head was in form of two little 
ships made of emerauldes, with all the 
shrouds and tackling of cleere saphyres." 
In Nichol's Progresses (ii. 66), a new 
year's gift to Queen Elizabeth was ' ' a 
jewel being a ship of mother of pearl 
garnished with rubyes." In Jonson's 
Cynthia's Revels (1600) Philautia asks 
Phantaste : ' ' What have you changed 
your head-tire ?" and she replies, "we 
cannot have a new peculiar court-tire 
but these retainers will have it. . . . 
I had worn it almost a day . . . but I 
have a tire coming, ifaith, shall ..." 
For jewels in hair, meaning "tire" 
(our tiara), see next note. 

60. tire-valiant] "tire-vellet" in 
Quarto. But the velvet cap was at this 
time distinctively a citizen's wear, so 
that the reading is of no assistance. 
Compare " face -royal," 2 Henry IV. 
I. ii. 20. Steevens and Malone have 
several quotations here, but none to the 



purpose. In some of them "tire" does 
not necessarily refer to head-tire, but 
to any attire. Some of the pictures of 
Queen Elizabeth show marvellous head- 
dressing, notably one by Elstracke, 
printed by Fairholt. In Machin and 
Markham's Du7nb K^iight (Haz. Dods. 
X. 121, 122 ; printed in 1608, but acted 
several years earlier) there is an out- 
burst upon tires : " O the tire, made 
castle upon castle, jewel upon jewel, 
knot upon knot ; crowns, garlands, 
gardings [?], and what not?"; all of 
which and much more is plagiarised 
into Every Woman in her Humour 
(Bullen's Old Plays, iv. 316, 317, 
318), 1608. Breton mentions the 
"steeple-tire" in his Post with a 
Mad Packet, 1603. Compare Ben 
Jonson, Bartholomew Fair, IV. iii., 
"to wear a dressing, top and top- 
gallant." "Tire" in the present sense 
(1598) seems to be a somewhat new 
use. Valiant is a particularly common 
word in Shakespeare, with no usage 
except the common sense. Neverthe- 
less Lyly, in Campaspe, says (falsely) it 
was "a new found tearm " in 1584. It 
came into sudden popularity. Com- 
pare the old play Jeronymo. Trans- 
ferred to things as here, I know no 



SC. III.] 



OF WINDSOR 



131 



Mrs. Ford. A plain kerchief, Sir John : my 
brows become nothing else; nor that well 
neither. 

Fal. By the Lord thou art a traitor to say so : 65 
thou wouldst make an absolute courtier ; and 
the firm fixture of thy foot would give an 
excellent motion to thy gait in a semicircled 
farthingale. I see what thou wert, if Fortune 

65. By the Lord, thou art a traitor] Q i, Singer, Cambridge, etc.; Thou art a 
tyrant Ff, Q 3 ; Thou art a traitor Malone, etc. 67. fixture] F i, Q 3 ; 

fxure F 2, 3, 4. 

caryed the Masking geare and Children 
with their tutors and an Italian Woman 
etc., to Dresse their heads ... to 
Hamton Corte," and "To the Italian 
Woman (and) her daughter for Lending 
the heares ... for the children." 
The children were here Muncaster's 
company. A Httle later (p. 91) a 
Frenchwoman is employed in 1574. 

65. By the Lord] These words are 
omitted in the Folio, no doubt merely 
to meet the provisions of James' Act 
to restrain players, etc. (1606). The 
corrector worked very spasmodically. 

67. fixture] The act of fixing or 
settling. Not elsewhere in Shake- 
speare, and New Eng. Diet, has no 
other example till the end of the eight- 
eenth century. 

68, 69. semicircled farthingale] farth- 
ingales, or hoops, reached a climax at 
this time, although they were not new. 
Strutt is fairly accurate when he says : 
"Hose were worn large, stuffed with 
hair, etc., in Henry viii.'s reign down 
to 8th Elizabeth, when they were 
dropped . . . about 1604 they came in 
again, and it was then ladies in rivalry 
took up farthingales." Heywood men- 
tions the "half-farthingale" in 2nd 
Part Lf you know not ?ne (Pearson, p. 
259) : "our County girls are akinne to 
your London Courtiers ; every month 
sicke of a new fashion . . . your silk 
band, half-farthingales, and changeable 



nearer parallel than the "Reproof 
valiant" in As You Like Lt, v. iv. 
I think, on the whole, it is better to 
take valiant here in Cotgrave's second 
sense : " Vaillant, Valiant, hardy, 
courageous ; also right, honest, of much 
worth." This sense was in use in 
English. Middleton has, in A Trick 
to catch the Old One, i. i. (1607): " four 
hundred a year valiant in woods, in 
bullocks, barns, and in rye-stacks." 

61. tire of Venetian admittance] of 
Venetian sanction or acceptation. This 
word has occurred already in a different 
sense (11. ii. 237). Compare Ben Jonson, 
Discoveries (150, Poesis): "adding 
sonjewhat out of all, worthy of your 
admittance or reception." Italian 
fashions were the rage at court at the 
close of Elizabeth's reign. In Jonson's 
Cynthia^ s Revels, Phantaste says : 
"this [head-tire] is most excellent for 
the device and rare ; 'tis after the 
Italian fashion we looked on 'tother 
night." In that play, as in this pas- 
sage, there is a sort of rivalry between 
the fashions of France and of Italy. 
" Your lady Lives here in Venice for 
intelligence of tires and fashions," Ben 
Jonson, Fox, ii. i. (but "tires" here 
is not necessarily " head - tires "). As 
early as 1574, these entries occur in 
Cunningham's Accounts of Revels at 
Court (pp. 73, 74): "To Bruton of 
Powles wharfe for a Bardge . . . that 



132 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act III. 



thy foe were not, Nature thy friend. Come, 70 
thou canst not hide it. 

Mrs. Ford, Believe me, there's no such thing in 
me. 

Fal. What made me love thee? let that persuade 

thee there's something extraordinary in thee. 75 
Come, I cannot cog, and say thou art this and 
that, like a many of these lisping hawthorn- 

70. foe were not, Nattire\ F 2, 3, 4 ; foe^ were not Nature F i, Q 3 ; foe were 
not, Nature is Pope, Steevens (1798). *]<^. thee there' s\ Q i ; thee. There's 
Ff, Q 3. 



fore -parts are common." A little 
later they are called " French farthin- 
gals" (p. 261) {ante i(iQ(>). *' V^eel 
ferthingales" occurs in the Parson's 
Wedding (Haz. Dods. xiv. 431), and 
** Circling farthingales," Hall's Satires, 
1598-99. Chamberlain says, in a Letter 
dated Feb. 18, 1613 : "One thing I 
had almost forgotten . . . that no lady 
should be admitted to any of these 
sights with a vardingale, which was to 
gain more room, and I hope may serve 
to make them quite left off in time " 
{Court and Times of James /., i. 228). 
In some prints of Queen Elizabeth of 
this date the farthingale does not ex- 
tend in front of the person, it was half- 
hooped. *' Vardn gales" are men- 
tioned several times as actors' properties 
(1573-74) in Cunningham's Accounts of 
Revels. 

69, 70. Fortune thy foe"] The name 
of a very popular tune, and the first 
words of the ballad which was sung to 
it, beginning "Fortune my foe, why 
dost thou frown on me?" The tune 
will be found in Chappell, from Queen 
Elizabeth's Virginal Book. The ballad 
is given in full, under the name of " The 
Lover's Complaint for the Loss of his 
Love," in the Bagford Ballads from the 
Roxburghe Collection. Like "Loath 
to depart " and a few other tune-names, 
these words entered into common speech, 
and formed part of the language. They 



are not very deftly inserted here. 
Chappell tells us that it was the tune 
to which the lamentations of extraordin- 
ary criminals were sung which helped 
to cause its popularity. Hence it was 
known as "the hanging tune" and 
" the preaching tune." From a passage 
in Chapman's kVidow's Tears {Aci ill.), 
it seems to have been the tune often 
mentioned as the "neck - verse." 
Chappell's reference to Collier's extract 
refers to a different ballad altogether. 
An early mention (not quoted) is in 
Gabriel Harvey (Grosart, i. 178), Foure 
Letters, 1592: "Whoever heard me 
complain of ill-lucke, or once say 
Fortune my foe." There is, in Ancient 
Ballads and Broadsides (p. 197), "A 
mournfull Dittie . . . To the tune of 
Fortune'' dated 1590. But I find a 
far earlier reference than any hitherto 
noticed in The Digby Mysteries, Herod's 
Killing of the Children, circa 1 480. 
The first speech of "Herodes" (p. 3, 
ed. Furnivall) begins: "A-boue all 
Kynges under the clowdys Cristall 
Royally I reigne in welthe with-out woo; 
Of plesaunt prosperyte I lakke non at 
all, ffortune I fynde that she is not my 
ffoo." This does not prove the exist- 
ence of either tune or ballad at that 
early time, but it antedates the ex- 
pression by about a century. 

77, 78. hawthorn-buds'l A continu- 
ation of the metaphors at ill. ii. 66-70, 



SC. III.] 



OF WINDSOR 



133 



buds, that come like women in men's apparel, 
and smell like Bucklersbury in simple time ; I 
cannot: but I love thee; none but thee; and 
thou deservest it. 

Mrs. Ford, Do not betray me, sir. I fear you love 
Mistress Page. 

Fal. Thou mightst as well say I love to walk by the 

79. simple] F I, 2, Q 3 J simpling F 2, 3, 4. 



80 



all suggestive of "the spring-time, the 
only pretty ring-time." Reference may 
be made to Chaucer's Court of Love. 
Reginald Scott says that *'the hay- 
thorne, otherwise whitethorne, gathered 
on Maie daie" was good against witches 
and evil spirits," Discourse of Witch- 
craft (rept. p. 218). No doubt it was 
worn to bring luck as well as being 
an emblem. "Hawthorne buds, and 
sweete eglantine" are part of the liveries 
of May in Spenser's Shepheard'' s Cal- 
endar^ brought home to deck church- 
pillars and for merry-making. Burton 
{Anatomie of Melancholy), III. ii. 4, 
quotes from "S. R.,i6oo" (Rowlands?), 
"Thou honeysuckle of the hawthorne 
hedge Vouchsafe in Cupid's cup my 
heart to pledge," etc. See also Nashe's 
Unfortunate 7>'az'^//^r (Grosart, v. no). 
79. Bucklersbury] " The whole street 
called Buckles bury on both the sides 
throughout is possessed of grocers and 
apothecaries towards ths west - end 
thereof," Stow's Survey of London. 
It was situated in Cheap Ward. In 
Webster's Westward Ho occurs "Run 
into Bucklersbury for two ounces of 
Dragon water, some spermaceti," etc. 
And again, " Go into Bucklersbury and 
fetch me two ounces of preserved 
melons, look there is no tobacco taken 
in the shop when he weighs it" (i. ii., 
1607). Ben Jonson has a different 
reference {i.e. to the quantity of paper 
required there for parcels) in an epi- 
gram to his bookseller: " If . . . 
'twill not sell Send it to Bucklersbury, 
there 'twill well." Tobacco was sold 



there, also at the "Black Boy" {Bart. 
Fair, I. i.). See note below at 
" Counter-gate." 

79. ifi simple time] When the herb- 
arists and simplers supplied apothe- 
caries with simples, which was at 
midsummer, and properly those of 
peculiar qualities were gathered by the 
light of the midsummer moon. Cot- 
grave gives the season definitely. 
" Mettre touies des herbes de la S. Jean. 
To imploy all his skill on, or means in : 
(Divers imagine that the herbs, which 
are to be kept for the whole year's store, 
are better gathered on Midsummer's 
day than on any other ; and therefore 
be Markets extraordinarily furnished 
on that day, with all sorts of new 
gathered herbs)," Holland has this 
expression in his translation of Fli^iie, 
xxvi. 2: "to goe a simpling into 
the desarts and forests to seeke and 
gather hearbs at all seasons of the 
yeare, some at one time and some at 
another." 

84, 85. walk by the Counter- gate'\ 
Falstaff probably refers to the noisome 
vapours emanating from the prison, 
carrying on the metaphors of smell. 
Compare The Play ofStukely, lines 1 758, 
1759 (1598): "Will you so much annoy 
your vital powers As to oppress them 
with the prison stink ? " So poisonous 
was the atmosphere, it appears to have 
given its name to a disease. FalstafF 
would be unlikely to regret "passing 
by" the counter. The counter here 
referred to is the ' ' prison house per- 
taining to one of the Sheriffs of London, 



134 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act III. 



Counter-gate, which is as hateful to me as the 85 

reek of a Hme-kiln. 
Mrs. Ford. Well, heaven knows how I love you ; and 

you shall one day find it. 
FaL Keep in that mind ; I '11 deserve it. 
Mrs, Ford. Nay, I must tell you, so you do ; or else 90 

I could not be in that mind. 
Rob, [Within.'] Mistress Ford, Mistress Ford! 

here 's Mistress Page at the door, sweating, 

and blowing, and looking wildly, and would 

needs speak with you presently. 95 

Fal. She shall not see me : I will ensconce me 

behind the arras. 

93. siveating\ F i, Q 3 ; swearing F 2, 3, 4. 



and is called the compter \\n the 
Poultrie ... At the west end of this 
Poultrie, and also of Buckles bury 
beginneth the large street of West 
Cheaping, a market place so called," 
Stow's Survey. Bucklersbury ran due 
south towards the river from the 
Poultry (Wheatley on Norden's Map, 
New Shak. Soc, 1877). The Counters 
are constantly referred to by Ben Jonson 
and other writers, more familiar with 
them than, happily, Shakespeare was. 
There is no other reference in Shake- 
speare, except an allusive one, with a 
pun, in Comedy of Errors, I v. ii. 39. 
Compare Nashe, Foure Letters Con- 
futed, 1593: "Since I knew how to 
separate a knave from an honest man, 
or throw my cloake over my nose, when 
I sailed by the Counters." And Ben 
Jonson, Cynthid!s Revels, Induction, 
1600 : " the very stench of them would 
poison me, I should not dare to come 
in at their gates. A man were better 
visit fifteen jails or a dozen or two of 
hospitals. " 

86. reek of a lime-kiln'] heavy smoke 
or vapour of a lime-kiln. Compare 
** reek o' the rotten fens," Coriolanus, 



III. iii. 121 ; and our "reeking." It 
is not an uncommon thing for tramps 
and beggars to be suffocated and 
poisoned by these fumes, who creep 
to them for warmth on a winter's night. 
Falstaff adopts very strong similes with 
regard to Mrs. Page, who is listening 
for her cue. That is the humour of 
it. 

91. in that mind] in the mind which 
he is to find out " one day," which she 
says he richly deserves (his coming 
punishment). 

96. ensconce] hide. See above, il. 
ii. 28. 

97. behind the arras] between the 
hanging (or tapestry) and the wall, as 
in Hamlet, iv. i. 9, etc. A favourite 
place of concealment, and handy for 
stage manipulation. In Skelton (Dyce, 
i. 128), Poems against Gamesche, it 
takes the form * ' Betweyn the tappet 
and the wall," and in Magnyfycence by 
the same writer (i. 265). In the play 
Elvira (Haz. Dods. xv. 30, 31) will be 
found an account of the space there 
must have been there for " goings-on " ; 
as also in the rare old tract Beware 
the Cat. There is nothing impossible 



sc. III.] OF WINDSOR 135 

Mrs. Ford. Pray you, do so : she 's a very tattling 

woman. S^Falstaff hides himself. 

Re-enter MISTRESS PAGE and ROBIN. 
What 's the matter ? how now ! I oo 

Mrs. Page. O Mistress Ford, what have you done? 
You 're shamed, you 're overthrown, you 're un- 
done for ever ! 

Mrs. Ford. What 's the matter, good Mistress 

Page? 105 

Mrs. Page. O well-a-day, Mistress Ford ! having an 
honest man to your husband, to give him such 
cause of suspicion ! 

Mrs. Ford. What cause of suspicion ? 

Mrs. Page. What cause of suspicion ! Out upon 1 1 o 
you ! how am I mistook in you ! 

Mrs. Ford. Why, alas, what 's the matter ? 

Mrs. Page. Your husband 's coming hither, woman, 
with all the officers in Windsor, to search for a 
gentleman that he says is here now in the house, 1 1 5 
by your consent, to take an ill advantage of his 
absence : you are undone. 

Mrs. Ford. 'Tis not so, I hope. 

in hiding this "gross pumpion " there. Theobald inserted the words, "Speak 

From the stage-directions in the Quarto, louder," in the text as an a^ide. 

however ("Falstaff stands behind the Steevens, Wheatley, and Craig follow 

arras"), we may take it as merely a this alteration, marking *"Tis not so, 

curtain upon the stage. I hope " aloud — the one portion for 

102. overthrown] ruined. Compare Falstaff, the other for the stage. We 

Macbeth, I. iii. ii6: "But treasons may take it for granted Mrs. Page 

capital confessed and proved, Have will speak loud enough without any 

overthrown him." instructions from the other woman, as 

118. ^Tis not so, I hope] The Quarto that is the whole point of the situation, 

reads here, "Speak louder. But I Falstaff is close at hand, "behind the 

hope 'tis not true, Misteris Page." arras." See below, iv. ii. 16. 



136 THE MERRY WIVES Iacthi. 

Mrs. Page. Pray heaven it be not so, that you have 

such a man here ! but 'tis most certain your 120 
husband 's coming, with half Windsor at his 
heels, to search for such a one. I come before 
to tell you. If you know yourself clear, why, 
I am glad of it ; but if you have a friend here, 
convey, convey him out. Be not amazed ; call 125 
all your senses to you ; defend your reputation, 
or bid farewell to your good life for ever. 

Mrs. Ford. What shall I do ? There is a gentle- 
man, my dear friend ; and I fear not mine 
own shame so much as his peril: I had rather 130 
than a thousand pound he were out of the 
house. 

Mrs. Page. For shame ! never stand " you had 
rather " and " you had rather " : your husband 's 
here at hand ; bethink you of some conveyance : 135 
in the house you cannot hide him. O, how have 
you deceived me ! Look, here is a basket : if 
he be of any reasonable stature, he may creep in 
here; and throw foul linen upon him, as if it 
were going to bucking: or, — it is whiting-time, 140 
— send him by your two men to Datchet-mead. 

Mrs. Ford. He 's too big to go in there. What shall 
I do? 

Fal. \Coniing forward?^ Let me see't, let me see't, 

137. basket] buck-basket Q i. 

127. good life'] respectable position expression from Heywood's Gentle 

in life — not " virtuous conduct " surely, Craft (1600). A thousand was very 

as Wheatley says. commonly used for "many." 

130, 131. I had rather than a thou- 140. bucking . . . whiting-time] See 

sand pound] Wheatley quotes the same notes at the beginning of this scene. 



SC. III. J 



OF WINDSOR 



137 



O, let me see't! — I'll in, I'll in. — Follow 145 
your friend's counsel. — I '11 in. 

Mrs. Page, What, Sir John Falstaff! Are these 
your letters, knight ? 

Fal. I love thee. — Help me away. — Let me creep 

in here. — I '11 never — 150 

\Gets into the basket ; they cover him with foul linen, 

Mrs. Page. Help to cover your master, boy. — 
Call your men, Mistress Ford. — You dis- 
sembling knight ! 

Mrs. Ford. What, John ! Robert ! John ! {Exit Robin. 

Re-enter Servants. 

Go take up these clothes here quickly. — 1 5 5 
Where's the cowl -staff? look, how you 
drumble ! — Carry them to the laundress in 
Datchet-mead ; quickly, come. 



145, 146. Follow your f riend' s counsel] 
i.e. "I'll follow," or '* let us follow,"etc. 

149. I love thee] Malone inserted the 
words, "and none but thee," from the 
Quarto. But in his extreme agitation 
these words are quite enough. 

156. cowl-staff] A stout pole used by 
two men for carrying a large tub or 
basket, the pole being passed through 
the two handles. The word cowl is 
still in use of a tub of butter in Ireland. 
The cowl-staff (often misspelt "colt- 
staff") was a familiar household im- 
plement, and, like the smaller bed- 
staves in the chamber, served for a 
weapon. Like many other words in 
this play, it does not occur again in 
Shakespeare, but it is commonly 
mentioned. "To ride a coal-staff" 
(similar to "ride the stang") occurs 
in Lupton's Siquila, 1587. And in 
Pretty's Narrative of Cavendishe's First 
Voyage (Payne, 1880, p. 262), 1588, 



speaking of sea-lions, he says: " It is 
as much as foure men are able to do to 
kill one of them with great cowle- 
staves." A "one-man" cowl-staff is 
mentioned by Cotgrave : * ' Courge . . . 
a Stang, Pale-staff, or Colestaff, carried 
on the shoulder, and notched (for the 
hanging of a Pale, etc.) at both ends." 
157. drumble] hesitate, loiter. A 
provincial word, still in use in some 
districts. A favourite with Nashe, as 
in The Unfortunate Travellers (Grosart, 
V. 27), 1594: "Without more drum- 
bling or pausing, if you will vndertake 
it, and worke it through stitch ... I 
warrant you are made." And again, 
" this iadish course, this iavels course, 
this drumbling course, Have with you 
to Saffron Walden (Gosart, iii. 79), 
1596. And in Terrors of the Night 
{ibid. p. 254): "To make a shaft or 
a bolt of this dnmibling subject of 
dreames . . . this is my definite verdit." 



138 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act 111. 



Enter FoRD, Page, Caius, and Sir Hugh Evans. 

Ford, Pray you, come near : if I suspect without 

cause, why then make sport at me; then let i6o 
me be your jest ; I deserve it. — How now ! 
whither bear you this ? 

Serv. To the laundress, forsooth. 

Mrs, Ford, Why, what have you to do whither they 

bear it? You were best meddle with buck- 165 
washing. 

Ford. Buck ! — I would I could wash myself of the 
buck ! — Buck, buck, buck ! Ay, buck ; I 
warrant you, buck ; and of the season too, it 
shall appear. \Exeunt Servants with the basket?^ 170 
Gentlemen, I have dreamed to-night ; I '11 tell 
you my dream. Here, here, here be my keys : 
ascend my chambers ; search, seek, find out : 
I '11 warrant we '11 unkennel the fox. Let me 



157. laundress] In the Quarto Mrs. 
Ford gives directions to her servants, 
before Sir John's arrival, to carry the 
basket to the "Launderers" instead of 
to the "whitsters," as at III. iii. 14. 

161, 162. How now ! . . . this?'\The 
Quarto has here, "How now who 
goes heare ? whither goes this ? 
whither goes it? Set it doune." 
HaUiwell inserted "who goes there?" 
in the text. See note at iii. v. 103. 

164. what have you to do] what busi- 
ness is it of yours. Compare As You 
Like It, III. v. 129: "what had he to 
do to chide at me ? " And see Ta7ning 
of the Shrew, I. ii. 226, ill. ii. 218, etc. 

169. buck; and of the season] pun- 
ning on the horns of the buck and 
cuckoldry. "Of the season" has also 
a double sense, referring to Falstaffs 
prime condition and to the amorous- 



ness of the doe. For the last sense 
compare Holland's Plinie, viii. 45 
(p. 224): "Their seasoning time 
commonly continueth thirtie days." 
The Gentleman's Recreation says, 
' * The venison of a Roe is never out of 
Season." Malone quotes from Man- 
wood, Forest Laws, 1 598 : ' ' The season 
of the hynd or doe doth begin at 
Holyrood day " ; and from a letter by 
Queen Catharine in 1526: "We wyll 
and command you that ye delyver 
. . . one buck of season." Compare 
"unseasonable doe" in Lucrece, 581. 

174. tinkennel] unearth. Not else- 
where in Shakespeare. Jonson has it 
(with a pun — "unsheath your sword ") 
in Magnetic Lady, i. i. : " Your fox 
there, Unkennelled with a choleric, 
ghastly aspect." Mr. Craig refers me to 
Guillius, Display of Heraldry , ed. 1632. 



sc.iii.] OF WINDSOR 139 

stop this way first. {^Locking the door.] So, 175 

now uncape. 
Page. Good Master Ford, be contented : you wrong 

yourself too much. 
Ford. True, Master Page. Up, gentlemen ; you shall 

see sport anon : follow me, gentlemen. [Exit, i 80 

Evans. This is fery fantastical humours and 

jealousies. 
Cuius. By gar, 'tis no the fashion of France ; it is 

not jealous in France. 
Page. Nay, follow him, gentlemen; see the issue of 185 

his search. [Exeunt Page, Caius, and Evans. 

Mrs. Page. Is there not a double excellency in this ? 
Mrs. Ford. I know not which pleases me better, that 

my husband is deceived, or Sir John. 
Mrs. Page. What a taking was he in when your 190 

husband asked who was in the basket ! 

175. [Locking the door] Capell. 191. husband asked who was in the basket\ 
husband bad them set down the basket Q i ; whd\ what Grant White (Ritson conj. ) 

176. tincape'] uncloak, unhood, dis- Discapellarlo . . . Le deschaperonner, 
close this monster which I have brought cest k dire lui oster le chaperon ; 
you to see. Nashe speaks of "the Quitarle el capirote." So that the 
standing cape of a Dutchman's cloak" meaning may be "let the hawks free." 
(Grosart, v. 146) ; and compare the Hawks and dogs were used together 
* ' Spanish buttoned cape," as Middleton sometimes. 

calls it {Blurt ^ ii. ii.) ; a cloak with a 177. be contented] restrain or contain 

hood, which served to disguise or yourself. So in Lear, ill. iv. 195 : 

conceal a person's real appearance, as "Prithee, nuncle, be contented; 'tis 

in Ben Jonson's Alchemist, v. i. : a naughty night to swim in [Tearing off 

" 'Tis but your putting on a Spanish his clothes]." 

cloak." Hence I think "uncape" is 177-179. you wrong yourself too 

used here figuratively, meaning " un- much. Ford. 7>«^] Page says you do 

mask." No such sporting term has yourself too great a disgrace, and Ford 

been traced, and we are very fully replies, it is true, I do so, I don't 

informed in such matters. Hanmer deserve that I should have to do it. 

took it upon himself to read "un- See below, line 221. 

couple." The nearest truly sporting 190. /a/Cvw^] state, condition of mind, 

term is perhaps "unhood." It is Usually, as here, a state of alarm or 

in Howell's Vocabulary, 1659: "To trouble. Compare Lucrece, 453. 

unhood or unseel or (un)muzzle a hawk. Compare also Merry Devil of Edmonton 



140 THE MERRY WIVES [act m. 

Mrs. Ford. I am half afraid he will have need of 
washing ; so throwing him into the water will 
do him a benefit. 

Mrs. Page. Hang him, dishonest rascal! I would 195 
all of the same strain were in the same 
distress. 

Mrs. Ford. I think my husband hath some special 
suspicion of Falstaff' s being here ; for I never 
saw him so gross in his jealousy till now. 200 

Mrs. Page. I will lay a plot to try that ; and 
we will yet have more tricks with Falstaff: 
his dissolute disease will scarce obey this 
medicine. 

Mrs. Ford. Shall we send that foolish carrion, Mis- 205 
tress Quickly, to him, and excuse his throwing 
into the water ; and give him another hope, to 
betray him to another punishment ? 

Mrs. Page. We will do it : let him be sent for to- 
morrow, eight o'clock, to have amends. 210 

205. foolish] F 2, 3, 4 ; foolishion F I, Q 3. 210. morrow, eight] F i, Q 3 ; 
jHorrow by eight F 2, 3, 4. 

(Haz. Dods. x. 226), where "being Merry Devil of Edmonton (reprint of 

in this taking" means being drunk. 1631 ed., p. 45) laughter is the cause. 

And Nashe, Pierce Pennilesse, "he Reference may be made to Beaumont 

were best get a privilege betimes, Ad and Fletcher's plays especially. For 

imprimendum Solum, forbidding all the question said to be asked here, see 

other to sell waste paper but himselfe, above, line 161 ; and below, ill. v. 103. 

or else he will be in a wofull taking." 196. strain] tendency, disposition. 

The expression is common in provincial See ii. i, 88. 

use (Ireland). 205. carrion] occurs several times as 

190-193. taking . . . washing] The a term of contempt in Shakespeare. 

coarse reference here to a physical or See Henry V. iv. ii. 39 ; Romeo and 

muscular lapse, due to overpowering Juliet, III. v. 157. Nashe applies this 

excitement, is one of the commonest in term to a naughty woman in Christes 

early plays. It is generally found in Teares (Grosart, iv. 230), 1593: "a 

connection with the word "beray,"as Physition . . . hath corners and spare 

in Gammer Gurton's Needle (Haz. chambers to hyde carion in, and can 

Dods. iii. 197). Usually it is associ- coniure up an unphisicall drabbe at all 

ated with fear, but in Brewer's prose times." 



SC. III.] 



OF WINDSOR 



141 



Re-enter FoRD, Page, Caius, and Sir Hugh Evans. 

Ford. I cannot find him : may be the knave bragged 

of that he could not compass. 
Mrs. Page. {Aside to Mrs, Ford.'] Heard you 

that? 
Mrs. Ford. You use me well, Master Ford, do 215 

you? 
Ford. Ay, I do so. 
Mrs. Ford. Heaven make you better than your 

thoughts ! 
Ford. Amen ! 220 

Mrs. Page. You do yourself mighty wrong, Master 

Ford. 
Ford. Ay, ay ; I must bear it. 
Evans. If there be any pody in the house, and 



that? Mrs. Ford.] that? Mrs. Ford. /, I, peace Q i ; that? Mrs. 
ay, peace : — You Theobald, Steevens, Craig ; that ? Mrs. Ford. 



214, 215 
Ford. Ay, 
You Ff, Q 3, Globe. 

215. You use me well] Theobald, 
followed by many editors, inserted 
before those words, '*Ay, ay, peace" 
(addressed to Mrs. Page by Mrs. Ford), 
which he "recovered " from the Quarto. 
But, as in other places, the speeches 
are only correspondent in situation. 
They are not variants of the same 
remarks, nor are the parallelisms exact 
enough to be allowed to check one 
another. In this case, for example, 
Mrs. Ford only says, "I, I, peace," in 
the Quarto. To combine the two texts 
in this fashion is an illegitimate patch- 
work, which once entered upon gives 
unlimited scope to any editor's fancy 
for improvements. 

218, 219. make you better than your 
thoughts'] make you act better, or make 
your actions better than your evil 
thoughts or imaginations, which, as 



Page says (line 230), are suggested by 
a devil. In the similar situation in IV. 
ii. 164, 165, Evans tells] Ford, "you 
must pray, and not follow the imagina- 
tions of your heart." 

221. wrong] disgrace, discredit. 
Wheatley says this passage is a polite 
form of saying, "you are completely 
mistaken." I disagree with this. 
Mrs. Page says what her husband said 
a few lines above in nearly the same 
words. Moreover, there is no occasion 
to attribute a falsehood to Mrs. Page, 
who knows he is not "completely mis- 
taken" in his facts. See below, iv. 
ii. 163, "this wrongs you," for the 
charge made a third time against Ford, 
in the same words ; ' ' you wrong your- 
self," "you do yourself wrong," and 
^' this (your lines of conduct) wrongs 
you," all have the one meaning. 



142 THE MERRY WIVES [actiii. 

in the chambers, and in the coffers, and in the 225 
presses, heaven forgive my sins at the day of 
judgment ! 

Cuius. By gar, nor I too : there is no bodies. 

Page. Fie, fie, Master Ford ! are you not ashamed ? 

What spirit, what devil suggests this imagination ? 230 
I would not ha' your distemper in this kind for 
the wealth of Windsor Castle. 

Ford. 'Tis my fault, Master Page : I suffer for 
it. 

Evans. You suffer for a pad conscience: your wife 235 
is as honest a 'omans as I will desires among 
five thousand, and five hundred too. 

Caius. By gar, I see 'tis an honest woman. 

Ford. Well, I promised you a dinner. — Come, come, 

walk in the park : I pray you, pardon me ; I will 240 
hereafter make known to you why I have done 
this. — Come, wife ; come. Mistress Page. — I pray 
you, pardon me ; pray heartily pardon me. 

Page. Let 's go in, gentlemen ; but, trust me, we '11 

mock him. I do invite you to-morrow morning 245 
to my house to breakfast : after, we '11 a-birding 

226, 227. at . . . Judgment] Y i, (^ -t^; I am an arrant Jew Q i ; omitted 
F 2, 3, 4. 

232. wealth of Windsor Castle'] Some the corresponding passage has, "I 
account of the wealth of " the most pray bear with me, M. Page pardon 
splendid and most magnificent royal me. I suffer," etc. 

Palace of any that be found in England 246. a-birding] The earliest refer- 

— or, indeed, in any other Kingdom," ence in New Eng. Diet, from J. 

will be found in Rye's England as seen Sanford, 1569, is vague : "An other 

by Foreigners, in the narrative of the exercise of hunting, which is termed 

visitof Frederick, Duke of Wirtemberg, fouling or birding." The kind of 

Count Mumpellgart, to this country in fowling referred to here is a very dis- 

1592. tinct one, and the present passage may 

233. ^ Tis my fault] mishap or mis- be considered with the words "hawk 
fortune, as in i. i. 95. In the Quarto for the bush" in the following line, and 



SC. III.] 



OF WINDSOR 



143 



together ; I have a fine hawk for the bush. 

Shall it be so? 
Ford. Any thing. 
Evans. If there is one, I shall make two in the 250 

company. 
Caius. If there be one or two, I shall make- a the 

turd. 



253-255.] Theobald and Steevens (1798) insert here from Q 
your teeth : for shame ! (Scene ix.). 



Evans. In 



the "birding piece" mentioned in 
IV. ii. 59. We have "birding" again 
later, in ill. v. 46, and iv. ii. 8. This 
sport is sometimes called hawking, but 
it must not be mixed up with the royal 
sport of falconry, which the orthodox 
books define as hawking at river or in 
the field — always in the open. Ben 
Jonson, in King James' reign {ante 
161 6), in l^he Forest — To Sir Robert 
Wroth, mentions the present pastime 
after small game : " Or hawking at the 
river or the bush, Or shooting at the 
greedy thrush." It was an amusement 
in the country for friends and guests. 
The hawk employed was the sparrow- 
hawk, as we might have guessed from 
Mrs. Ford's " eyas - musket " (line 
22). W. Lawson, in A New Orchard 
and Garden (161 5), speaks of a " Spar- 
hawke in Winter to make the Black- 
bird stoope into a bush or hedge," 
there to be "potted" by the arque- 
busier. Harting {Ornithology of 
Shakespeare, p, 72) says, " prob- 
ably the goshawk," but Chaucer's 
Sir Thopas tells us expressly that 
hawk was for the river. Further, the 
same authority goes astray in en- 
deavouring to identify Page's diversion 
with legitimate hawking, where of 
course the newly introduced " birding- 
piece " (see note, iv. ii. 59) would be an 
unheard-of monstrosity. As well go 
fox-hunting with a gun. Probably this 
kind of hawking was of French origin. 
Hamlet tells us, " French falconers fly 
at everything," ii. ii. 450; for a good 



illustration of which the reader may 
refer to Court and Times of Jaj7ies I. 
(ii. 446), in a letter of Chamberlain's, 
1623-24. There, however, it is the 
real "chasse," according to French 
views, and was immensely delighted in 
by James. The best illustration of the 
sport in the text is, however, French, 
and will be found in an old treatise on 
domestic affairs entitled, Le Menagier 
de Paris (vol. ii. p. 31 1), quoted by 
Wright {History of Domestic Manners, 
p. 310), with an illustration of the 
pastime, for ladies using a crossbow. 
The text says (Wright) : " when hawk- 
ing of quails and partridges is over, 
and even in winter, you may hawk at 
magpies, at jackdaws, at teal which are 
in river, or others ... at blackbirds, 
thrushes, jays, and woodcocks ; and 
for this purpose you may carry a bow 
and a bolt, in order that, when the 
blackbird takes shelter in a bush, and 
dare not quit it for the hawk which 
hovers over and watches it, the lady 
or damsel who knows how to shoot 
may kill it with the bolt." This pastime 
gives us the time of year of the play, 
late winter or early spring. See 
Introduction. 

250. 7nake two] Evans' attempt to 
pick up the English idiom " make one " 
(see II. iii. 48, note) is capital. 

252.] Caius' speech here is inserted in 
the Quarto before line 85 (iii. ii. ). It is 
followed there by a coarse remark from 
" Sir Hugh," which is found in John 
Heywood, The Four PP. , 1 569 ; and in 



144 THE MERRY WIVES [act m. 

Ford, Pray you, go, Master Page. 

Evans. I pray you now, remembrance to-morrow on 255 

the lousy knave, mine host. 
Caius. Dat is good ; by gar, with all my heart ! 
Evans. A lousy knave, to have his gibes and his 

mockeries ! {Exeunt. 



SCENE IV. — A Room in Page's House. 

Enter Fenton and Anne Page. 

Pent. I see I cannot get thy father's love ; 

Therefore no more turn me to him, sweet Nan. 
Anne. Alas, how then ? 
Pent. Why, thou must be thyself. 

He doth object I am too great of birth ; 

And that, my state being gall'd with my expense, 5 

I seek to heal it only by his wealth : 

Besides these, other bars he lays before me, — 

My riots past, my wild societies ; 

And tells me 'tis a thing impossible 

I should love thee but as a property. 10 

Anne. May be he tells you true. 
Pent. No, heaven so speed me in my time to come ! 

Albeit I will confess thy father's wealth 

Was the first motive that I woo'd thee, Anne : 

Ben Jonson's Bartholomew Fair, and Quarto. So that their scheme is some- 
elsewhere. what more clearly brought out in the 

255-259.] Evans and Caius have Folio, 
formed their plot against the Host. _ 

See above, in. i. 120-126. And see ^cene JV. 

later, IV. v. 65-95, and Introduction, 8. My riots past, my wild societies'] 
pp. Ixxiii-lxxviii. This conversation See ill. ii. 74. 
between Evans and Caius is not in the 



sc.iv.] OF WINDSOR 145 

Yet, wooing thee, I found thee of more value I 5 

Than stamps in gold or sums in sealed bags ; 
And 'tis the very riches of thyself 
That now I aim at. 
Anne. Gentle Master Fenton, 

Yet seek my father's love ; still seek it, sir : 
If opportunity and humblest suit 20 

Cannot attain it, why, then, — hark you hither ! 

\They converse apart 

Enter SHALLOW, SLENDER, and MISTRESS QuiCKLY. 

Shal, Break their talk. Mistress Quickly: my kins- 
man shall speak for himself. 

Slen, I '11 make a shaft or a bolt on 't : 'slid, 'tis but 

venturing. 2 5 

Shal. Be not dismayed. 

Slen. No, she shall not dismay me: I care not for 
that, but that I am afeard. 

Quick. Hark ye ; Master Slender would speak a word 

with you. 30 

Anne. I come to him. \Aside^ This is my father's choice. 

16. stamps in goldl coins, money, whereas the bolt, usually for the cross- 
Compare Macbeth, iv. iii. 153, and bow, would serve, no matter if it was 
V. iv. 24. Not a common term, clumsily done. A very similar expres- 
Wright {Provincial Dictionary) has sion is known in Ireland, " I '11 either 
*^ StaJHp, a halfpenny." See Beau- make a spoon or spoil a horn," i.e. 
mont and Fletcher, The Widow (Dyce, I will risk it, though by no means con- 
iv. 326) : "I will consume myself fident of success. An example of the 
to the last stamp Before thou getst proverb in the text from Nashe will be 
me," In Middleton's Woman beware found in a note to "drumble," ill. iii. 
Woman, v. i., "Your stamp shall go 157. It occurs also in Musarum 
current" has a punning reference to Delicice (reprint, p. 86), 1656. And in 
money. Middleton, A Trick to catch the Old 

22. Break their talk'] break it off, Ofie, ir. i. (Bullen, p. 282), 1607 • '* I 

interrupt them. know there 's enough in you, son, if 

24. make a shaft or a bolt onW]TCi2^Q you once come to put it forth. Free. 

a good or a bad job of it. The shaft I '11 quickly make a bolt or shaft 

for the true bow required skill and care, on 't." 
10 



146 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act III. 



O, what a world of vile ill-favour'd faults 

Looks handsome in three hundred pounds a-year ! 
Quick. And how does good Master Fenton? Pray 

you, a word with you. 35 

Shal. She 's coming ; to her, coz. O boy, thou hadst 

a father ! 
Slen. I had a father, Mistress Anne ; my uncle can 

tell you good jests of him. Pray you, uncle, 

tell Mistress Anne the jest, how my father stole 40 

two geese out of a pen, good uncle. 
Shal. Mistress Anne, my cousin loves you. 
Slen. Ay, that I do ; as well as I love any woman in 

Gloucestershire. 
Shal. He will maintain you like a gentle- 45 

woman. 
Slen. Ay, that I will, come cut and long-tail, under 

the degree of a squire. 
Shal. He will make you a hundred and fifty pounds 

jointure. 5 o 



41. /^«] henloft Q i, Halliwell. 

38, 39. uncle] cousin. The words 
are used interchangeably here. Nephew 
was used in a similarly indefinite way 
for "cousin" or "grandchild." See 
Othello, I. i. 112. In the first scene 
Slender calls Shallow "cousin," as he 
really is according to Dramatis Per- 
sona. 

40, 41. stole two geese out of a pen] 
Nashe tells a tale of how "the poore 
Miller of Cambridge" had all his 
"pulterie" stolen out of a "hen-loft," 
Pierce Pennilesse, 1592. The Quarto 
has "hen-loft." 

47. come cut and long-tail] no matter 
who comes. A common proverbial 
expression, taken from dogs, or perhaps 
from horses as well, to express the 



whole race. Nares quotes from Ful- 
well, Art of Flattery, 1576 : "their verie 
dogs Rug, Rig and Risbie, yea, cut 
and longtaile." Gosson has it in his 
School of Abuse (Arber, p, 45), 1579 : 
" tagge and ragge, cutte and longtaile " ; 
and it occurs in Lanehatn^s Letter y 
1575, the earliest reference cited. 
Nashe has it varied, in Christes Teares 
(Gros. iv. 8), 1594: "short cut and 
long tail." It occurs as late as Van- 
burgh, ^sop, iv. 2, 1697: "six coach 
horses (cut and longtail)." 

47, 48. under the degree of] in the 
condition of. "Under" is commonly 
used thus, as in the expressions "under 
privilege," "under the countenance," 
"under pardon," etc. 



sc.iv.] OF WINDSOR 147 

Anne. Good Master Shallow, let him woo for him- 
self. 

Shal. Marry, I thank you for it; I thank you for. 
that good comfort. She calls you, coz ; I '11 
leave you. 55 

Anne. Now, Master Slender, — 

Slen. Now, good Mistress Anne, — 

Anne. What is your will ? 

Slen. My will ! od 's heartlings, that 's a pretty jest 

indeed ! I ne'er made my will yet, I thank 60 
heaven ; I am not such a sickly creature, I give 
heaven praise. 

Anne. I mean, Master Slender, what would you with 
me? 

Slen. Truly, for mine own part, I would little or 65 
nothing with you. Your father and my uncle 
hath made motions : if it be my luck, so ; if not, 
happy man be his dole ! They can tell you 
how things go better than I can : you may ask 
your father ; here he comes. 70 

Enter Page and Mistress Page. 

Page. Now, Master Slender : love him, daughter Anne. — 
Why, how now ! what does Master Fenton here ? 
You wrong me, sir, thus still to haunt my house : 
I told you, sir, my daughter is disposed of. 

72. Fenton] FenUr F i. 

59. od'' s hearilings]zxv02.'C^v(\g. See of the Shrew, I. i. 144; Winter's Tale, 

" bodykins," II. iii. 46. I. ii. 163; 1 Henry IV. ii. ii. 81). 

68. happy man be his dole] may his The sense varies a little. The expres- 

lot be a happy one (whoever it is has sion is in lleywood's Proverbs (edition 

the "luck"). A common proverbial Sharman, p. 13), 1546, and is hardly 

expression, occurring three times obsolete. It is also in Edwards' Damon 

(besides here) in Shakespeare {learning and Pithias {circa 1560). 



148 THE MERRY WIVES [actiii. 

Pent Nay, Master Page, be not impatient. 75 

Mrs. Page. Good Master Fenton, come not to my child. 

Page. She is no match for you. 

Pent. Sir, will you hear me ? 

Page. No, good Master Fenton. 

Come, Master Shallow ; come, son Slender, in. 
Knowing my mind, you wrong me, Master Fenton. 80 

\Exeunt Page^ Shal.^ and Slen. 

Quick. Speak to Mistress Page. 

Pent. Good Mistress Page, for that I love your daughter 
In such a righteous fashion as I do, 
Perforce against all checks, rebukes and manners, 
I must advance the colours of my love, 8 5 

And not retire : let me have your good will. 

Anne. Good mother, do not marry me to yond fool. 

Mrs. Page. I mean it not ; I seek you a better husband. 

Quick. That 's my master, master doctor. 

Anne. Alas, I had rather be set quick i' the earth, 90 

And bowl'd to death with turnips ! 

Mrs. Page. Come, trouble not yourself Good Master 
Fenton, 
I will not be your friend nor enemy : 

85. advance the colours'] raise or in Steevens' Shakespeare^ who intro- 

wave the standard. Compare Love's duced his note with the remark, ** This 

Labours Lost, IV. iii. 367 ; and King is a common proverb in the southern 

John, II. 207. Metaphorically the counties." In Tale liii. of Tales and 

phrase occurs again in Romeo and Quicke Answeres, which is told in 

Juliet, V. iii. 96. verse by Humphrey Gifford (1580), the 

90, 91. set quick . . . turnips'] Ben worst sort of frantick men, who kept 

Jonson probably recollected this phrase "hawkes, hounds, and other trifles," 

in Bartholomew Fair, ill. i. (i74<3'), were to be healed by being set in the 

when he makes Waspe say, "Would gutter up to the throte. This tale is 

I had been set in the ground, all but referred to by Harington, Metamor- 

the head on me, and had my brains phosis of Aj'ax, 1596, as one of the 

bowled at, or threshed out, when first "Hundred Merry Tales." A similar 

I underwent this plague of a charge ! " expression occurs in Jonson's Tale of a 

This parallelism was noted by Collins Tub. 



sc.iv.] OF WINDSOR 149 

My daughter will I question how she loves you, 
And as I find her, so am I affected. 95 

Till then farewell, sir : she must needs go in ; 
Her father will be angry. 

Pent. Farewell, gentle mistress : farewell, Nan. 

\Exeunt Mrs. Page and Anne, 

Quick. This is my doing now : " Nay," said I, " will 

you cast away your child on a fool, and a physi- lOO 
cian ? Look on Master Fenton " : this is my 
doing. 

Pent. I thank thee ; and I pray thee, once to-night 

Give my sweet Nan this ring : there 's for thy pains. 

Quick. Now heaven send thee good fortune ! \Exit 105 
Penton.'] A kind heart he hath : a woman would 
run through fire and water for such a kind 
heart. But yet I would my master had Mistress 
Anne ; or I would Master Slender had her ; or, 
in sooth, I would Master Fenton had her: I will no 
do what I can for them all three ; for so I have 

100, loi. a fool, and a physiciaii] in 1518, was often expressed, "a 

Like ''phlegmatic" (i. iv. 79), and college of physicians is a college of 

other terms she uses, Mrs. Quickly has fools." 

picked up this expression from her 103. once] one time, some time, 

master. Holland's /"//wz"^ (160 1) seems Cova^axt Juluis Ccesar, iv. iii. 190: 

to refer this saying to Hippocrates in "With meditating that she must die 

Book xxviii. chap. 5. The marginal once, I have the patience to endure it 

note reads, "For every man is to be now." Or it may mean, "one thing 

his owne Physician: whereupon might for certain," as in "that's once" in 

rise this proverbe, ' A foole, or Nashe, Have with you, etc. (Grosart, 

a physician.'" It was ascribed to iii. 189). Or "soon," " quickly," "at 

Tiberius by Montaigne, Florio's Mon- once," as in Wilkins, Misery of En- 

taigne's Essays, III. xiii. (Tudor trans, forced Marriage (Haz. Dods. ix. 546)> 

p. 345), 1603. In Harl. Misc. viii. 1607: "it is scurvy walking for us so 

135, there is a tract called "The near to the two counters; would he 

Quacks Academy ... A new Art to would come once ! " 
cross the old Proverb, and make a Man 107. through fire and water] See 

a Fool and a Physician both at a also Midsunwier Night's Dream, li. ii. 

Time" (title), 1678. It was a common 103. New Eng. Diet, has a reference 

saying, and after Linacre's foundation to a "Psalter," circa 835. 



150 THE MERRY WIVES [actih. 

promised, and I '11 be as good as my word ; but 
speciously for Master Fenton. Well, I must of 
another errand to Sir John Falstafif from my two 
mistresses : what a beast am I to slack it ! 115 

SCENE V. — A Room in the Garter Imi. 

Enter Falstaff and Bardolph. 

Fal. Bardolph, I say, — 

Bard. Here, sir. 

Fal. Go fetch me a quart of sack ; put a toast in 't. 
{Exit Bard.'\ Have I lived to be carried in a 
basket, like a barrow of butcher's offal, and to 5 
be thrown in the Thames ? Well, if I be served 

113. speciously] specially Q i. 

Scene V. 
5, 6. basket ... Thames'] Ff, (^2 et seq.; basket and thrown into the Thames 
like a barrow of butcher's offal Q i, Daniel, Craig, Wheatley (or nearly). 

112. as good as my word] occurs in 1520 : "with a toast in wine by 
Stanyhirst's Description of Ireland the fire I could sit with two dozen 
(OHphant, New English), 1577. It sops the cohc to quell." And Greene, 
is frequent in Shakespeare. Friar Bacon (p. 178, Routledge) : 

113. speciously] specially. Mrs. "a brown toast that will clap a white 
Quickly has it again in iv. v. 116. waistcoat on a cup of good drink." 
" Specially " occurs in Taming of the Joasts were put into either wine or 
Shrew. The word "specious" (pleas- beer. 

ing to look at) is used by Ben 5. barrow] barrowful. Mr. Daniel 
Jonson ( Underwoods). Halliwell gives in his Introduction to his valuable re- 
" speciously" as meaning "especially " print of the Quarto considers the read- 
in Northern dialect. ing there superior to that in the text. 

115. to slack it] to put it off, to be so He is followed by Wheatley and Craig. 

remiss. Compare Othello, iv. iii. 88 : The Quarto words are : " Haue I liued 

"they slack their duties." to be carried in a basket and throwne 

^ into the Thames like a barow (taking 

"^^^"'^ ^' the word literally) of Butcher's offoll ? " 

3. sack; put a toast inH] to warm Mr. Daniel says : " One naturally asks, 

it. See note at "morning draught" Was a (^^zrr^w of butcher's offal carried 

(11. ii. 154); and at "burnt sack "(11. in a basket?" To which I would 

i. 219). Covci^oxQ Calisto and Meliboea, reply, Was a barrow (also literally) 



sc. v.] 



OF WINDSOR 



151 



such another trick, I '11 have my brains ta'en out, 
and buttered, and give them to a dog for a new- 
year's gift. The rogues slighted me into the 
river with as little remorse as they would have 
drowned a blind bitch's puppies, fifteen i' the 
litter : and you may know by my size that I have 
a kind of alacrity in sinking ; if the bottom were 
as deep as hell, I should down. I had been 
drowned, but that the shore was shelvy and 
shallow, — a death that I abhor; for the water 
swells a man ; and what a thing should I have 
been when I had been swelled ! I should have 
been a mountain of mummy. 

II. blind bitcKs\ bitch's blind Tcito\)2Xdi^ Steevens, Wheatley. 



10 



IS 



of butcher's offal thrown into the 
Thames? In either case there is 
a difficulty, unless "barrow" means 
*'barrowful," which it surely and easily 
does. "Barrow" means so much as 
would fill a barrow. 

7, 8. brains . . . buttered'] To have 
buttered brains was a synonym for 
foolishness, probably from the softness 
implied. I have not seen this noticed, 
but the expression existed. Compare 
Beaumont and Fletcher, The Pilgrim, 
IV. ii. (1621): "The thing is mad. 
Abominably mad, her brains are but- 
tered." And Dryden, Wild Galla7it, 
IV. ii. (1669): "He has not brains 
enough, if they were buttered, to feed 
a blackbird." 

8, 9. new-year s gift] This custom 
reached a climax in Queen Elizabeth's 
reign. She received them from all her 
court, in the form of costly jewels, fans, 
and personal ornaments. The lists of 
these in Nichols' Progresses are full of 
interest. She gave presents too, usu- 
ally handing on the one she had re- 
ceived from some one else. 

9, slighted] The Quarto reads 
"slided," and I feel sure that word 



points to the proper word. A very fat 
person would "slide" out of a basket 
into the water when it was overset. I 
take "slighted" to be a variant of 
"slided," i.e. "slid." I see this verb, 
"to slight," in several dictionaries (to 
cast, throw, etc.), on the authority of 
the present passage. The very word 
"slight" is objectionable. Schmidt 
explains it, "treat as insignificant, put 
off with contempt" (as in Winter's 
Tale, IV. iv. 200), which is hardly 
forcible enough. 

1 1 . blind bitch' s puppies] bitch's blind 
puppies. There are abundant examples 
of this loose construction collected in 
Abbott. This one does not seem to be 
mentioned there or by Schmidt. Com- 
pare "bring thy father to his drooping 
chair," 1 Henry IV. iv. v. 5. 

15. shelvy] shallow, from "shelf," 
the usual word at this time for a shoal 
place in water. It occurs in Lucrece, 

335. 

19. motoitain of viummy] That un- 
happy text, the Quarto, reads "moun- 
tain of money." Mummy {i.e. dead 
bodies embalmed) was a very dry sub- 
stance. But there was another sort of 



152 



THE MERRY WIVES [actih. 



Re-enter Bardolph with sack. 

Bard. Here's Mistress Quickly, sir, to speak with 20 

you. 
Fal. Come, let me pour in some sack to the Thames 

water; for my belly's as cold as if I had 

swallowed snowballs for pills to cool the reins. 

Call her in. 25 

Bard. Come in, woman ! 



Enter Mistress Quickly. 

Quick, By your leave ; I cry you mercy : give your 

worship good morrow. 
Fal. Take away these chalices. Go brew me a pottle 

of sack finely. 30 

Bard. With eggs, sir? 



mummy known to physicians, of which 
Pliny says : "Of Pissiphaltum or Mum- 
nie . . . that is best which is of itselfe 
[pure], and come to maturitie and per- 
fection ; the same in boiling swimmeth 
aloft," Holland's Plinie, xxiv. 7 (p. 
184). Blount {Glossographia) says this 
kind of mummy was "by the Simpli- 
cists called cera montana ... & 
mummia nativa.''^ It was used as 
medicine and as a ceruse. The two 
substances were systematically con- 
founded in the dramatists. We may 
regard the term here as conveying the 
idea of an unctuous corpse. 

19.] After the word "mummy," the 
words "Now, is the sack brewed?" 
occurs in the Quarto, which Theobald 
added to the text. This shows care- 
lessness, because in the Quarto Falstaff 
has already told Bardolph to "brew me 
a pottle of sack finely," and therefore 
these subsequent words are appropriate. 
He only gives one order for drink in 
the Quarto. In the text before us the 



order for brewing the sack (heating it 
with spices ?) comes later. 

24. to cool the reins] omitted in 
Quarto. The rest of the speech is 
identical, except that "Thames" reads 
"cold "in Quarto. Holland (Pliny 
trans, xxxiv. 18) says a thin plate of 
lead will " coole the heate of fleshly 
lust . . . bound unto the loines and 
region of the reines" (1601). 

28. good morrow'] See note below 
at line 46. 

29. chalices . . . pottle] A pottle was 
two quarts. A chalice is usually a small 
goblet. Herrick, speaking of " canarie- 
sack," says: "Had Cassius . . . but 
tasted one small chalice of thy franticke 
liquor" {Hesperides' Welcome to Sack, 
1648). The passage here shows how 
impossible it is to explain the term 
" sack "as dry wine, or any particular 
wine, without the context. As long as 
wine was the main ingredient, the word 
was admissible. 



sc.v.] OF WINDSOR 153 

Fal. Simple of itself; I'll no pullet-sperm in my 
brewage. {Exit Bardolpk.'] How now ! 

Quick, Marry, sir, I come to your worship from 

Mistress Ford. 35 

Fal. Mistress Ford ! I have had ford enough ; I 
was thrown into the ford ; I have my belly full 
of ford. 

Quick, Alas the day ! good heart, that was not her 

fault : she does so take on with her men ; they 40 
mistook their erection. 

FaL So did I mine, to build upon a foolish woman's 
promise. 

Quick. Well, she laments, sir, for it, that it would 

yearn your heart to see it. Her husband goes 45 
this morning a-birding; she desires you once 
more to come to her between eight and nine : I 
must carry her word quickly : she '11 make you 
amends, I warrant you. 

32. pullet-sperni\ Fullet-Spersme F i. 46. desires you once] wotild desire 
you of all loves Q i. 47. eight and ttine] to-morrow Sir, betweene ten and 
eleven Q i. 

33. brewage] "a concocted bever- 45, 46. goes . . . a-birding] John 
age," New Eng. Did. The New Rider (1589) has "To go a birding, 
Eng. Diet, quotes this passage (with Aucupor"; and "A birding, or fowl- 
earlier references), giving correctly the ing, Aucupiuni." See in. iii. 246, 
Folio reading "Spersme," which the The ladies did not take part in the 
Cambridge Shakespeare has not yet sport. 

noticed in the collation. The word is 46. this morning] Wheatley says 

not met with again in Shakespeare. It here : ' ' Alter to in the morning or to 

is found is Holland's Plinie (xxiii. i). to-morrow morning, in order to make 

40. take on] rage so furiously. See the time intelligible." Daniel would 
below, IV. ii. 22, Compare Mid- alter "good morrow" above (line 28) 
stimmer Night's Dream, in. ii. 258, to "good even" for the same reason, 
and S Henry VI. II. v. 104. To take The latter may be merely a vagueness 
on is a common provincialism or of speech, not unknown at the present 
vulgarism. day ; but the words here (which are 

41. erection] Mrs. Quickly's mistake not in the Quarto) seem certainly to be 
for direction. See below, line 87. a mistake. 



154 THE MERRY WIVES [acthi. 

Fal. Well, I will visit her: tell her so; and bid her 50 

think what a man is : let her consider his frailty, 

and then judge of my merit. 
Quick. I will tell her. 

Fal. Do so. Between nine and ten, sayest thou ? 
Quick, Eight and nine, sir. 55 

Fal. Well, be gone : I will not miss her. 
Quick. Peace be with you, sir. \ExiU 

FaL I marvel I hear not of Master Brook ; he sent 

me word to stay within : I like his money well. 

— O, here he comes. 60 

Enter FoRD. 

Ford. Bless you, sir ! 

Fal. Now, Master Brook, — you come to know what 
hath passed between me and Ford's wife ? 

Ford. That, indeed. Sir John, is my business. 

Fal. Master Brook, I will not lie to you : I was at 65 
her house the hour she appointed me. 

Ford. And sped you, sir? 

Fal. Very ill-favouredly. Master Brook. 

Ford. How so, sir? Did she change her determin- 
ation? 70 

Fal. No, Master Brook ; but the peaking cornuto 

60. 0, here he comes] By the masse here he is Q I. 67. And sped youl And 
how sped you Q i, Malone, Steevens, Wheatley. 

71. peaking] prying, peering, or ed. 1631), "privily peaking about for 

searching about. Not "mean," "piti- their prey"; and at p. 44, "wentpeak- 

ful," or "sneaking," as the editors ing and prying [misprinted preying] 

explain it. The word undoubtedly had at every corner of the street to find 

the sense to seek, hunt about, as the him." And in Heywood's Iron Age 

following quotations show. In the (Pearson, p. 312), "peaking into the 

prose Merry Devil of Edmonton, by tents of the Greeks." 
Thomas Brewer, 1608 (p. 22, reprint of 71. cornuto] An Italian word signi- 



sc. v.] OF WINDSOR 155 

her husband, Master Brook, dwelling in a con- 
tinual larum of jealousy, comes me in the instant 
of our encounter, after we had embraced, kissed, 
protested, and, as it were, spoke the prologue of 75 
our comedy; and at his heels a rabble of his 
companions, thither provoked and instigated by 
his distemper, and, forsooth, to search his house 
for his wife's love. 

Ford. What, while you were there ? 80 

Fal. While I was there. 

Ford. And did he search for you, and could not find 
you? 

Fal. You shall hear. As good luck would have it, 

comes in one Mistress Page ; gives intelligence 8 5 
of Ford's approach; and, in her invention and 
Ford's wife's distraction, they conveyed me into 
a buck-basket. 

Ford. A buck- basket ! 

Fal. By the Lord, a buck-basket ! — rammed me in 90 
with foul shirts and smocks, socks, foul stock- 
ings, greasy napkins ; that, Master Brook, there 
was the rankest compound of villanous smell 
that ever offended nostril. 

Ford. And how long lay you there? 95 

84. good luck'\ God Q I. 86. in\ (5/ Q i, Theobald, Steevens, Wheatley. 
87. distraction] direction Hanmer, Dyce, Wheatley. 90. By the Lord] Q i, 
Malone ; yes F i. 

fying "cuckold" or the horned one. 73. larum] A common early form of 

New Eng. Diet, has a reference to the alarm (by aphceresis). 

form "cornodo" in Lydgate's ^^<rA«j. 74. encounter] amatory meeting or 

Nashe calls one who "doth not use interview. Frequently so used by 

to wear a night-cap, for his homes Shakespeare, as in Much Ado, III. iii. 

will not let him," " Signior Cornuto 161, and iv. i. 94, etc. 

Diabolo," Pierce Pennilesse (Grosart, 89. buck-basket] See note, ill. 

ii. 16, 17), 1592. iii. 2. 



156 THE MERRY \¥IVES [actih. 

Fal. Nay, you shall hear, Master Brook, what I have 
suffered to bring this woman to evil for your 
good. Being thus crammed in the basket, 
a couple of Ford's knaves, his hinds, were 
called forth by their mistress to carry me in the 1 00 
name of foul clothes to Dachet-lane : they took 
me on their shoulders ; met the jealous knave their 
master in the door, who asked them once or twice 
what they had in their basket : I quaked for fear, 
lest the lunatic knave would have searched it; 105 
but fate, ordaining he should be a cuckold, held 
his hand. Well : on went he for a search, and 
away went I for foul clothes. But mark the 
sequel. Master Brook : I suffered the pangs of 
three several deaths ; first, an intolerable fright, 1 1 o 
to be detected with a jealous rotten bell-wether; 
next, to be compassed, like a good bilbo, in the 
circumference of a peck, hilt to point, heel to 

no. several'] egregious Q i, Pope. 

103. asked them once or twice'] See Gabriel Harvey calls Nashe "the bell- 
note at III. iii. 161. At III. iii. 191, wether of the scribbling flock" (Gros- 
Mrs. Ford says the same thing; but in art, ii. 173), 1592. 

the Folio text the question is not asked. 112. to be compassed] From the 

This is an oversight which the Quarto transitive verb "to compass," to curve 

has right. However, we can be satis- or incurve. For "bilbo," see I. i. 165. 
fied with the reiterated statement that 112, 113. in the circumference of a 

he did ask, whether it is in the text peck] The Quarto reads "pack." In 

or not. the space enclosed, or bounds of a peck. 

III. with] by, as very often in "Peck," that which contains a peck, 

Shakespeare. See below, V. v. 100, a barrel or sack. " Pack," as being of 

and Somtet Ixxiii. : "consumed with greater bulk (" pack of wool" in Af'm- 

that which it was nourished by." ters Tale), seems a happier term. 

III. bell-wether] leader of the rabble ; However, peck was used vaguely, 

"at his heels a rabble" (line 76). A "Ten bushels to the peck" (plenty) 

bell-wether is a castrated ram with a occurs in Marriage of Wit and Science, 

bell round his neck to guide the flock. 1570. Moreover, Falstaff" was "in a 

So in Ben Jonson, Tale of a Ttib,i.\i.: peck of troubles." In Ben Jonson's 

"a great guide to all the parishes! New Inn, "peck" means a vessel or 

The very bell-wether of the hundred." dish. 



sc. v.] 



OF WINDSOR 



157 



head ; and then, to be stopped in, like a strong 
distillation, with stinking clothes that fretted in 115 
their own grease : think of that, — a man of my 
kidney, — think of that, — that am as subject to 
heat as butter ; a man of continual dissolution and 
thaw : it was a miracle to 'scape suffocation. And 
in the height of this bath, when I was more than 1 20 
half stewed in grease, like a Dutch dish, to be 
thrown into the Thames, and cooled, glowing hot, 
in that surge, like a horse-shoe ; think of that, — 
hissing hot, — think of that. Master Brook. 
Ford. In good sadness, sir, I am sorry that for my 125 



114. stopped'] stuffed, filled. Com- 
pare 2 Henry IV. i. i. 78: "stopping 
my greedy ear with their bold deeds." 
And Ben Jonson, Staple of News ^ 11, i. 
(298<3) : " preserve Each hair falls from 
him to stop balls withal." 

115. distillation'] the result of 
distillation. Nashe uses the word 
similarly in Terrors of the Night 
(Grosart, iii. 228) : * * the excellent 
restorative distillations of wit and of 
Alcumie." 

115, 116. in their own grease] See 
n. i. 66. 

116, 117. a man of my kidney] oi my 
constitution. An earlier example of 
the phrase is given in New Eng. Diet., 
from Latimer's Sermons and Remains, 
circa 1555 (Parker Society, 312) : "To 
pronounce all to be thieves except my- 
self, of course, and those men . . . 
that are of my own kidney." It occurs 
in Tom Brown's Works, Letters from 
the Dead, 1700: "others of the 
same kidney " ; and in Smollett's 
Humphrey Clinker (Letter, April 28), 
1771. 

120-124. ^'^ t^^ height . . . Master 
Brook] In the Quarto this passage 
runs thus: "and in the heat of all 
this, To be throwne into Thames 
like horshoo hot : Maister Brooke, 



thinke of that hissing heat, Maister 
Brooke." 

120. height] highest degree. 

121. Dutch dish] Whatever article 
of cookery is referred to, it was sure 
to be overloaded with butter. A Dutch 
bun was a favourite delicacy at the 
Rhenish wine - house in the stillyard 
{Westward Ho, ii. i. ); it is mentioned 
by Cotgrave. The Dutch dish was 
probably a greasy hotch-pot. Nashe 
refers to it : " Neither are these parts 
severally distinguished in this order of 
handling, but like a Dutch stew-pot, 
iumbled together, and linsey - wolsey 
woven one within another," Have with 
you to Saffron Walden (Grosart, iii. 
174), 1596. 

123. surge] Capell conjectured, 
forge " (!) The meaning is obvious, 
and the Quarto is a guide (see note 
120-124 above). He compares his per- 
spiration to a surge, not very forced 
among the surrounding metaphors. He 
is steaming, boiling, hissing hot, and 
the parallel is then continued to the 
pail of water in the blacksmith's forge. 
Schmidt says this "passage is justly 
suspected." If a little imagination is not 
allowed now and then, how much 
of Shakespeare may not as easily be 
"suspected" as this? 



158 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act III. 



sake you have suffered all this. My suit, then, 
is desperate ; you '11 undertake her no more ? 

Fal. Master Brook, I will be thrown into Etna, 
as I have been into Thames, ere I will leave 
her thus. Her husband is this morning gone 130 
a - birding : I have received from her another 
embassy of meeting; 'twixt eight and nine is 
the hour, Master Brook. 

Ford. 'Tis past eight already, sir. 

Fal. Is it? I will then address me to my appoint- 135 
ment. Come to me at your convenient leisure, 
and you shall know how I speed ; and the con- 
clusion shall be crowned with your enjoying her. 
Adieu. You shall have her. Master Brook ; 
Master Brook, you shall cuckold Ford. \Exit. 140 

Ford. Hum ! ha ! is this a vision ? is this a dream ? 
do I sleep ? Master Ford, awake ! awake. Master 
Ford ! there 's a hole made in your best coat. 



134. past eighf] almost tenQ i. 

130. this morning] Here again (see 
above, line 46) the time difficulty 
presents itself. Wheatley would read 
"to-morrow morning." The Quarto 
(an actor's text) felt this, and reads 
*' Between ten and eleven is the houre," 
and omits the words about "gone 
a-birding." Ford says then, "'tis 
almost ten alreadie." 

132. embassy'] The Quarto reads 
"appointment" here, and repeats the 
word in Falstafif's next speech, which is 
nearly identical with that here. The 
deterioration in the Quarto text is note- 
worthy. "Embassy" was a favourite 
word with Shakespeare, and is used as 
here (message) in Sonnet xlv. , "tender 
embassy of love," and elsewhere. The 
corruption is of importance, bearing, as it 
does, upon the authority of the Folio text. 



136. convenient leisure] The Quarto 
reads, "soon at night." The text 
there has a different scheme with regard 
to these interviews. The subject has 
been fully discussed by Mr. Daniel. 
See Introduction. 

1375 138- ^^^ conclusion shall be 
crowned] '■'■ finis coronat opus" one of 
the most popular adages of the time. 

140, Brook . . . Ford] If there be 
any personality intended in this "me- 
chanical salt-butter rogue," his name 
will be found in some equivalent (prob- 
ably Dutch) for "ford" and "brook." 
Several passages seem to be pointed at 
some individual in the character. See 
note at ii. i. 220. 

143. hole made in your best coat] 
Shakespeare has this saying again in 
Henry V. ill. vi. 88 ; and I find it 



sc.v.] OF WINDSOR 159 

Master Ford. This 'tis to be married ! this 
'tis to have linen and buck-baskets! Well, I 145 
will proclaim myself what I am : I will now take 
the lecher ; he is at my house ; he cannot 'scape 
me ; 'tis impossible he should ; he cannot creep 
into a half-penny purse, nor into a pepper-box : 
but, lest the devil that guides him should aid 150 
him, I will search impossible places. Though 
what I am I cannot avoid, yet to be what I 
would not shall not make me tame : if I have 
horns to make one mad, let the proverb go with 
me, — I '11 be horn-mad. [^Exit. 155 



ACT IV 
SCENE I. — A Street. 

Enter MISTRESS PAGE, MISTRESS QuiCKLY, and WiLLIAM. 

Mrs. Page. Is he at Master Ford's already, think'st 

thou? 
Quick. Sure he is by this, or will be presently : but, 

also in Grim, the Collier of Croydon^ or stealing little penny dogs out of the 
1599 (Haz. Dods. viii. 462). Compare Fair" ; and in i. i. : "more than buy- 
Greene, Quip for an Upstart, 1592 ing of gingerbread in the cloister here, 
(Harl. Misc. ii. 233): "if he find a for that we allow him, or gilt pouches 
hole in any man's coat that is of Ai'elth, in the fair." Purses were worn at the 
then he hath his peremptory scita^rion." girdle, and made of soft stuff (leather, 
It is generally used as here, of a flaw in silk network, etc. ), tied at the mouth 
one's reputation or honour. with two strings. These small ones 
148, 149. creep into . . . pepper-box^ were probably expressly for carrying 
Compare Othello, ii. iii. 153, and see the little silver halfpence of the time, 
my note there. In Ben Jonson's Bar- Craig refers to Lyly's Mother Bombie^ 
tholomew Fair, 11. i. {i6^a), 161^, these ill. iv. (1594): "that [an half- penny 
* ' half - penny purses " appear to be purse] is big enough to put thy honesty 
identical with gilt pouches bought in in." 
the fair: "cutting half-penny purses 155. /^^r«-wa(^] Seel. iv. 51, and note. 



160 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act IV. 



truly, he is very courageous mad about his 
throwing into the water. Mistress Ford desires 
you to come suddenly. 
Mrs. Page. I '11 be with her by and by ; I '11 but bring 
my young man here to school. Look, where his 
master comes ; 'tis a playing-day, I see. 

Enter SiR HUGH EvANS. 

How now, Sir Hugh! no school to-day? 
Evans. No ; Master Slender is let the boys leave to 

play. 
Quick. Blessing of his heart ! 
Mrs. Page. Sir Hugh, my husband says my son 

profits nothing in the world at his book. I 

pray you, ask him some questions in his 

accidence. 



10 



15 



4. courageous^ Mrs. Quickly intended 
*' outrageous " probably. 

II. Master Slender is let] Evans 
means that Slender has asked for a 
holiday for the boys. Presumably he 
is the patron of the school. Johnson 
says : " This is a very trifling scene, of 
no use to the plot, and I should think 
of no great delight to the audience ; 
but Shakespeare best knew what would 
please." Marston has a schoolroom 
scene in What you will (1607). It is 
in Act II. scene ii. in Bullen's edition. 
There is also a short one in the first 
part of Returne fro?n Parnassus, 1 599 
(ed. Macray, pp. 49, 50), between 
a schoolmaster and a boy. The jokes 
on the Latin words in this scene, some 
of them at least {hoj'um, harum, 
horuni), as Steevens points out, are 
repeated by Taylor, the Water Poet. 
For similar school- puns, see The Dis- 
obedient Child {UsLZ. Dods. ii. 284, 285), 
circa 1560. This scene has no counter- 
part in the Quarto, one of the many blem- 
ishes of that text. It is inserted to give 



breathing-space to Falstaff, that he may 
not be too soon brought on. The inci- 
dents are rapid, and require a little pause. 
17. accidence] Latin grammar. Ben 
Jonson brings on "Accidence," with 
his eight parts of speech, " four de- 
clined, four undeclined,"in his Masque, 
Lov^s Welcome at Welbeck. Nashe 
has an interesting passage about school- 
boys in Summer s Last Will (Haz. 
Dods. viii. 74, 75), 1592. A piece of it 
may be quoted : " When I should have 
been at school construing Batte, mi 
fili, mi fill, mi Batte, I was close 
under a hedge, or under a barn-wall at 
span-counter or jack-in-a-box . . . Here 
before all this company, I profess my- 
self an open enemy to ink and paper. 
I '11 make it good upon the accidence, 
body [of me], that in speech is the 
devil's paternoster. Nouns and pro- 
nouns I pronounce you as traitors to 
boys buttocks ; syntaxis and prosodia, 
you are tormentors of wit, and good for 
nothing but to get a schoolmaster two- 
pence a week." 



SCI.] OF WINDSOR 161 

Evans, Come hither, William ; hold up your head ; 

come. 
Mrs, Page. Come on, sirrah ; hold up your head ; 20 

answer your master, be not afraid. 
Evans. William, how many numbers is in 

nouns ? 
Will. Two. 
Quick. Truly, I thought there had been one number 25 

more, because they say, " Od 's nouns." 
Evans. Peace your tattlings ! What is " fair," 

William ? 
Will, Pulcher. 
Quick. Polecats ! there are fairer things than polecats, 30 

sure. 
Evans. You are a very simplicity 'oman : I pray you, 

peace. — What is " lapis," William ? 
Will. A stone. 

Evans. And what is " a stone," William ? 35 

Will. A pebble. 

26. Od's nouns] The editor of the felt, heard, or understood. Very 
Temple Shakespeare says this is Mrs. well . . . when he shall hear that 
Quickly's corruption of "Ods wounds." ... he will swear gog's nouns, he 
But it was an old expression, ap- will thrust him out of his selected band 
parently proper to youth, and very of substantial substantives." The ex- 
appropriate here. In Ben Jonson's pression occurs also in Brewer's (prose) 
Devil is an Ass, i. i., 1616, Iniquity Alerry Devil of Edmontott (rept. p. 
says: "To swear by Gogs-nowns, 41). 

like a Lusty Juventus." The expletive Tfi. polecats'] A common term of 

is not in the lips of Lusty Juventus abuse. See below, iv. ii. 195. 

during the period of his lapse, but he Harvey calls Nashe "the poulcat of 

goes very near it (Haz. Dods. ii. 84). Paul's churchyard" (Grosart, ii. 173), 

But corroboration comes from another 1592. Ben Jonson has it several times, 

source, which seems to have suggested "There is a beaste in India called a 

this expression to Shakespeare. In polecatt, that the further shee is from 

Harington's Metamorphosis (Chiswick, youe the less she stinks, and the further 

pp. 126, 127), 1596, occurs the follow- (you are from her) the less you smell 

ing : "Tell me, pretty Will, what is a her," First Part of Retume from 

noun substantive? That may be seen, Farttasst^s {1601-1602). 

II 



162 THE MERRY WIVES [activ. 

Evans. No, it is " lapis " : I pray you, remember in 

your prain. 
Will. Lapis. 
Evans. That is a good William. What is he, William, 40 

that does lend articles? 
Will. Articles are borrowed of the pronoun, and 

be thus declined, Singulariter, nominativo, hie, 

haec, hoc. 
Evans. Nominativo, hig, hag, hog; pray you, mark: 45 

genitivo, hujus. Well, what is your accusative 

case? 
Will. Accusativo, hinc. 
Evans. I pray you, have your remembrance, child ; 

accusativo, hung, hang, hog. 50 

Quick. " Hang-hog " is Latin for bacon, I warrant you. 
Evans. Leave your prabbles, 'oman. — What is the 

focative case, William ? 
Will. O, — vocativo, O. 

Evans. Remember, William ; focative is caret. 5 5 

Quick. And that's a good root. 
Evans. 'Oman, forbear. 
Mrs. Page. Peace ! 
Evans. What is your genitive case plural, 

William ? 60 

Will. Genitive case ! 
Evans. Ay. 
Will. Genitive, — horum, harum, horum. 

50. hung\ Pope ; king Ff, Q 3. 

51. Hang-hog . . . bacon] "Bells, at this period ; it may have some bear- 
bacon, and something else must have ing upon the Baconian theory ! 
hanging," Interlude of Queen Hester, 52. prabbles] prattles, perhaps. But 
1 56 1. The saying occurs several times see i. i. 56, and v. v. 169. 



SCI.] OF WINDSOR 163 

Quick. Vengeance of Jenny's case ! fie on her ! never 

name her, child, if she be a whore. 6$ 

Evans. For shame, 'oman. 

Quick. You do ill to teach the child such words: — 
he teaches him to hick and to hack, which 
they '11 do fast enough of themselves, and to call 
" horum " : — fie upon you ! 70 

Evans. 'Oman, art thou lunatics ? hast thou no under- 
standings for thy cases, and the numbers of the 
genders ? Thou art as foolish Christian creatures 
as I would desires. 

Mrs. Page. Prithee, hold thy peace. 75 

Evans. Show me now, William, some declensions of 
your pronouns. 

Will. Forsooth, I have forgot. 

Evans. It is qui, quae, quod : if you forget your 

" quies," your " quaes," and your " quods," you must 80 
be preeches. Go your ways, and play ; go. 

Mrs. Page. He is a better scholar than I thought he 
was. 

Evans. He is a good sprag memory. Farewell, 

Mistress Page. 85 

64. Jennys] Ginyes Ff, Q 3. 71. lunatics] Capell, Globe, Craig; lunatics 
Ff. Q 3> Cambridge. 79, 80. qux . . . quces] que . . . ques Ff, Q 3 (-^ for q 
Steevens). 

68. to kick and to hack] Compare pain is past," Nashe, Terrors of the 

*' These knights will hack," ii. i. 49, Night, 1594. 

and see note. The verb here perhaps 84. sprag] i.e. "sprack"; quick, 

refers to some evil practices, or mode alert. Nares refers to Coles' Dic- 

of life ; or more likely a mere piece tionary : ' ' sprack, vegetus, vividus^ 

of chatter. agilis." Halliwell says it is a Welsh 

81. /rfj^i-/^^] He means "breeched," provincialism. The substantive occurs 

i.e. whipped. *' He that dreams in Head and Kirkman's ^«j^/zV/4 A'fj^M^, 

merily is like a boy new breecht who iv. 104 (reprint), 1680: " spracknesse of 

leapes and daunces for joy that his my youth." Sir Walter Scott has the 



164 THE MERRY WIVES [activ. 

Mrs. Page. Adieu, good Sir Hugh. [Exit Sir Hugh 

Get you home, boy. Come, we stay too long. 

\Exeunt. 

SCENE \\.—A Room in Ford's House. 

Enter Falstaff and MISTRESS FoRD. 

FaU Mistress Ford, your sorrow hath eaten up my 
sufferance. I see you are obsequious in your 
love, and I profess requital to a hair's breadth; 
not only. Mistress Ford, in the simple office of 
love, but in all the accoutrement, complement, 5 
and ceremony of it. But are you sure of your 
husband now? 

Mrs. Ford. He 's a-birding, sweet Sir John. 

Mrs. Page. [ Witkin.] What, ho, gossip Ford ! what, 

ho ! 10 

word in Waverley^ and Grose has it, in the language, and is paralleled by 

*^ sprag, lively, active," in his Pro- vincit qtd patitur. The word means 

vincial Glossary, i8ii. Steevens heard endurance, patience, in that passage, 

it was in use Sy " the common people 2. obsequious'] devoted, zealous, 

in the neighbourhood of Bath " with Compare Sonnet, cxxv. 9, and Othello, 

the senses of "alert," "sprightly." It I. i. 46. 

was "sprack" with the Bath people. 3. to a hairs breadth] exactly; 

Compare O'Reilly : '■'' spracadh, spraic, within the most exact limits. Compare 

strength, vigour, exertion, sprightli- Reginald Scot, Discoverie of Witch- 

nes.s" Irish-English Dictionary, 1864. craft (rept. p. 80), 1584: "spirits . . . 

Skeat says it is a Scandinavian word, have their lawes and limits prescribed, 

In Stratmann's Middle- English Die- beyond the which they cannot passe 

tionary (edited by Bradley), it is doubt- one haires breadth." Ben Jonson has 

fully dealt with, but Langland is re- "at a hair's breadth" in Poetaster, 

ferred to for " sprak-liche," lively. 11. i. And Nashe, Have with you, etc., 

- (Gros. iii. 12), "be with them at a 

^cene 11. ^ \i2:\x^% bredth that backbite and detract 

2. sufferance] distress, as in Troilus me." 

and Cressida, i. i. 28, and Coriolanus, 5. accoutrement] "the process of 

I. i. 22. But not (as Schmidt wrongly accoutring, or being accoutred," New 

says it is) in the old proverb " of suffer- Eng. Diet. Spelt "accustrement" in 

ance cometh ease" in Z Henry IV. the Folio. 

V. iv. 28. This is one of the oldest 8. a-birding] See in. iii. 246. 



sen.] OF WINDSOR 

Mrs. Ford. Step into the chamber, Sir John. 

Enter MISTRESS PAGE. 



165 



l^Exit Falstaff. 



Mrs. Page. How now, sweetheart ! who 's at home 

besides yourself? 
Mrs. Ford. Why, none but mine own people. 
Mrs. Page. Indeed ! 1 5 

Mrs. Ford. No, certainly. \^Aside to her.'] Speak 

louder. 
Mrs. Page. Truly, I am so glad you have nobody 

here. 
Mrs. Ford. Why ? 20 

Mrs. Page. Why, woman, your husband is in his old 

lines again : he so takes on yonder with my 



[. into the chamber] behind the arras Q I. 



16, 17. Speak louder] See above, III. 
iii. 118. The words are in the Folio 
here, and not in the Quarto. This is a 
good illustration of the accuracy of the 
former text, and of the carelessness of 
some commentators. When Falstaff 
was close by, "behind the arras," such 
an instruction wasquite out of place ; but 
here, where he has gone into another 
room, it is properly made use of. 

22. lines] condition, state of mind, 
" tantrums." The modern editors follow 
Theobald in reading "lunes." The 
Quarto has "in his old vaine again." 
Theobald supported his reading by 
the line in Winter's Tale, li. ii. 30 : 
"These dangerous unsafe lunes o' the 
king," a word found nowhere else, 
except as an echo of Shakespeare's 
(supposed) usage, as in Dr. Johnson, 
and probably a variant of lunacy, or a 
coinage from it. Theobald also read 
"lunes" for "lunacies" in Hamlet, 
III. iii. 7, which Dr. Dowden rejects. 
And the same unexplained word was 



substituted for "lines" by modern 
editors in Iroilus and Cressida, il. iii. 
139: "And underwrite in an observ- 
ing kind His humorous predominance ; 
yea, watch His pettish lines, his ebbs, 
as if The passage and whole carriage 
of this action Rode on his tide " (the 
Quarto here reads "course and time"). 
Compare Rainolde's Overthrow of 
Stage-Plaies (p. 18, ed. 1629), 1593 : 
"Clemens Alexandrinus speaking of 
unholy and amatorie kisses saith : 
Amatorie embracing goeth in the same 
line with amatorie kissing, if not a 
line beyond it." The same writer 
has " the vaine of his speech," p. 89. 
Compare G. Harvey (Grosart, ii. 133): 
" Some few have a civill pleasant 
vaine." New Eng. Diet, quotes these 
two passages from Shakespeare without 
either parallel or explanation. So 
numerous are the shades of meaning to 
this common word, that it is little better 
than guesswork to seek the origin here. 
Even "line of life" had three distinct 



166 THE MERRY WIVES [activ. 

husband ; so rails against all married mankind ; 
so curses all Eve's daughters, of what complexion 
soever; and so buffets himself on the forehead, 25 
crying, " Peer out, peer out ! " that any madness 
I ever yet beheld seemed but tameness, civility, 
and patience, to this his distemper he is in now : 
I am glad the fat knight is not here. 

Mrs. Ford. Why, does he talk of him ? 30 

Mrs. Page. Of none but him ; and swears he was 
carried out, the last time he searched for him, in 
a basket; protests to my husband he is now 
here ; and hath drawn him and the rest of their 
company from their sport, to make another ex- 35 
periment of his suspicion : but I am glad the 
knight is not here; now he shall see his own 
foolery. 

Mrs. Ford. How near is he. Mistress Page ? 

Mrs. Page. Hard by, at street end ; he will be here 40 
anon. 

significations. The word may be trans- Supererogation (Gros. ii. 92), 1592- 

ferred from lines of writing. " Lines" 1593. 

in this sense is always plural, or nearly 26. Peer out!] referring to his 

always. It occurs about fifteen times in budding horns. Henley gave two 

Shakespeare. Compare Two Gentlemen lines, said to be used to snails by 

of Verona, i.ii. 42: " Dare you presume children, beginning with these words; 

to harbour wanton lines ? " and but advanced no authority. There are 

' ' deep premeditated lines " in 1 Henry many interesting nursery rhymes in the 

VI. III. i. I. "Underwrite" in notes to Shakespeare and Ben Jonson. 
Troilus and Cressida is a help to the 40. street end] Perhaps we should 

metaphor; and "railing" in the read " street's end," but compare Mile 

passage in the text makes the senses End. A parallel expression occurs in 

harmonise. ** In his old lines " would TAe Returne fro?n Parnassus (Haz. 

mean in his old style, or vein, or in- Dods. ix. 151), 1602: " Sir, an 't please 

spiration, as of writing or publishing, you, your hobby will meet you at the 

In his old frame of mind. lane's end." "Town's end" occurs 

24. Eve's daughters] "thesonnesof (without article), 1 Henry IV. IV. ii. 

Adam and the daughters of Eve have 10; ^XiA'v!\(Z2XQ.%' Narrative of Drake^s 

no need of the serpentes carrowse to Second Voyage (Hakluyt, 1812 edition, 

sett them agogg," G. Yiz.x\^y, Pierce's iv. 17), 1586, "brought the offender 



sen] OF WINDSOR 167 

Mrs. Ford. I am undone ! — the knight is here. 

Mrs. Page. Why, then, you are utterly shamed, and 

he 's but a dead man. What a woman are you ! 

— Away with him, away with him ! better shame 45 

than murder. 
Mrs. Ford. Which way should he go ? how should I 

bestow him ? Shall I put him into the basket 

again ? 

Re-enter Falstaff. 

FaL No, I'll come no more i' the basket. May I 50 

not go out ere he come ? 
Mrs. Page. Alas, three of Master Ford's brothers 

watch the door with pistols, that none shall issue 

out ; otherwise you might slip away ere he came. 

But what make you here ? 5 5 

FaL What shall I do? — I'll creep up into the 

chimney. 
Mrs. Ford. There they always use to discharge their 

birding-pieces. Creep into the kiln-hole. 

53. pistols] Ptsfol Jackson conj. 59. Creep into the kiln-hole] Given to Mrs. 
Page by Dyce (Malone conj.) ; kiln\ kill F i. 

to the town's end." Without the upon a time, as Tarlton went forth 

article, it is in Brewer's (prose) Merry with a birding piece to kill crowes." 

Devil of Edmont07i ixe^pL p. 48), 1608. New Eng. Diet, gives reference to a 

Compare also note at i. iv. 141 for will, dated 1588, "my birdinge piece 

an illustration from Hey wood. with a little home flaske." Sherwood's 

58, 59. to discharge their birding- Eng.-French Dictionary has, "A 
pieces] As lately as half a century ago birding piece, Harqtiebuse de chasse " 
(and perhaps still in some places) it was (a "fowling-piece" in Cotgrave). 
a common practice in some parts of Harting, Ornithology of Shakespeai-e, 
Ireland, from olden times, to discharge refers to Sir S. D. Scott, who identifies 
a fowling-piece up the chimney to bring it with the snaphance of the Dutch, 
down the soot in gentlemen's houses. In Cunningham's Extracts (Shaks. 
1 have seen no suggestion as to the Soc, 1842, Introduction, p. xii) 
sense of Mrs. Ford's remark, but this occurs, "Powder and shott for byrd- 
is perhaps what she refers to. inge peces," in the expenses of Prince 

59. birding-pieces] One of Tarlton' s Henry, 16 10. According to Meyrick 
Jests [ante 1600) begins: " It chanced {Archceologia) sporting guns date from 



168 THE MERRY WIVES [activ. 

Fal. Where is it ? 60 

Mrs. Ford. He will seek there, on my word. Neither 
press, coffer, chest, trunk, well, vault, but he 
hath an abstract for the remembrance of such 
places, and goes to them by his note : there is 
no hiding you in the house. 65 

Fal. I '11 go out, then. 

Mrs. Page. If you go out in your own semblance, 
you die, Sir John. Unless you go out disguised, — 

Mrs. Ford. How might we disguise him ? 

Mrs. Page. Alas the day, I know not ! There is 70 
no woman's gown big enough for him ; other- 
wise he might put on a hat, a muffler, and a 
kerchief, and so escape. 

Fal. Good hearts, devise something: any extremity 

rather than a mischief 75 

Mrs. Ford. My maid's aunt, the fat woman of Brain- 
ford, has a gown above. 

Mrs. Page. On my word, it will serve him ; she 's as 
big as he is : and there 's her thrummed hat, 
and her muffler too. Run up, Sir John. 80 

67. Mrs. Page] Q i, Malone et seq. ; Mist. Ford Ff, Q 3. 69. Mrs. Ford] 
omitted F 2, 3, 4. 76, 77. the fat . . . above\ Gillian of Brainford, hath a 
gowne abozie Q i. 

early in the sixteenth century, and were 72. mufJer] See "linen," below, 

consequent on the discovery of the line 82. 

wheel-lock. 76, 77. fat woman of Brainford] 

59. Creep into the kiln-hole'] I think Brentford was almost invariably spelt 
there can be little doubt Malone was Brainford. It is constantly mentioned, 
right in giving these words to Mrs. as it was a favourite holiday resort with 
Page. It is hardly worth altering the Londoners. For *' Gillian of Brain- 
text for, but Dyce made the change. ford," as the Quarto calls her, see 

63. abstract] register, summary. Introduction. 

"An abbridgment, register, com- 79. thru?nmed hat] Nashe, in his 

pendious draught, or abstract. Com- abuse of the Danes, says: "they account 

pendiujn . . . summarium " (Ryder, of no man that hath not a battle Axe 

1589). at his girdle to hough dogs with, or 



SC. II.] 



OF WINDSOR 



169 



Mrs. Ford. Go, go, sweet Sir John : Mistress Page 
and I will look some linen for your head. 

Mrs. Page. Quick, quick ! we '11 come dress you 

straight : put on the gown the while. [Exit Falstaff. 

Mrs. Ford. I would my husband would meet him 85 
in this shape: he cannot abide the old woman 
of Brain ford ; he swears she 's a witch ; forbade 
her my house, and hath threatened to beat 
her. 

Mrs. Page. Heaven guide him to thy husband's 90 
cudgel, and the devil guide his cudgel afterwards ! 

Mrs. Ford. But is my husband coming ? 

Mrs. Page. Ay, in good sadness, is he ; and talks of 
the basket too, howsoever he hath had intelli- 
gence. 



weares not a cockes feather in a 
thrumd hat, Hke a cavalier, briefly he 
is the best foole bragart under heaven," 
Pierce Pennilesse (Grosart, ii. 39), 
1592. The thrummed hat and feather 
represent (in the Danes) beggarly pride. 
Thrums are the soft, waste ends of the 
weaver's warp. A cheap, light stuff 
was made from them, A "thrum cap " 
is mentioned in Massinger's Renegado, 
I. iii. (quoted in Introduction). A 
thrummed hat might, however, be a 
costly affair, if the thrum was of silk. 
In A Maske of Knights, presented be- 
fore Elizabeth in 1578, the torch-bear- 
ers wore *' their hatts of crymson silk 
and sylver thrommed and wreathed 
bands with Feathers," Cunningham's 
Revels' Accounts, p. 127. 

82. some linen for your head] for the 
muffler, although the old woman's 
muffler is in the chamber. It was not 
sufficient to hide his features. Com- 
pare Greene's Farewell to Follie 
(Grosart, ix. 265), 1591 : "his mother 
had leant him a newe napkin for a 
muffler," which passage (and a good 



95 



deal more) Robert Greene has plagiar- 
ised from Laneham's Kennilworth 
(reprint, 1821, p. 29), 1575. And 
Nashe gives us Martin Marprelate as 
maid-Marian as a prototype, gown, 
kercher, linen, beard, and all : "Martin 
himselfe is the Mayd-marian, trimlie 
drest uppe in a cast gowne, and a kercher 
of Dame Lawson's, his face handsomlie 
muffled with a Diaper-napken to cover 
his beard," PasquiVs Returne, 1589. 
A remarkable parallel. Cotgrave has 
" Cachelaid, A mask or muffler"; 
" Cache-nez, A mask or muffler " ; and 
" Cache-museau. . . a muffler or mask 
for the face. " Nares refers to Fletcher's 
Monsieur Thomas {circa 1620), where 
that character, about to disguise himself 
as a woman, says, "On with my 
muffler" (iv. 6). See below at "peard." 
Steevens gives references to several en- 
gravings, showing women with these 
mufflers on ; and see Douce's Illustra- 
tions of Shakespeare. 

86, %'J. old woman of Brainforcf] See 
Introduction ; and below, iv. v, 27, 
etc. 



170 THE MERRY WIVES [activ. 

Mrs. Ford. We '11 try that ; for I '11 appoint my men 
to carry the basket again, to meet him at the 
door with it, as they did last time. 

Mrs. Page. Nay, but he '11 be here presently : let 's 

go dress him like the witch of Brainford. i oo 

Mrs. Ford. I '11 first direct my men what they shall 
do with the basket. Go up ; I '11 bring linen 
for him straight. \Exit. 

Mrs. Page. Hang him, dishonest varlet ! we cannot 

misuse him enough. 105 

We '11 leave a proof, by that which we will do. 

Wives may be merry, and yet honest too : 

We do not act that often jest and laugh ; 

'Tis old, but true, — Still swine eats all the draff. 

\Exit. 

Re-enter MISTRESS FoRD with two Servants. 

Mrs. Ford. Go, sirs, take the basket again on your 1 1 o 
shoulders : your master is hard at door ; if he 

104-109. Hang him . . . draffs These lines (varied) appear in Q i, III. iii. 
196, at Hang him. 105. hiifi\ F 2, 3, 4 ; omitted F i, Q3. 108. We 

. . . laugh'] Shall we be condemned because we laugh? Q i, the couplet given to 
Mrs. P'ord. 

107. Wives may be merry ^ and yet 109. Still swine eats all the draff '\ 

honest too] Wheatley quotes a song This old-country saw is in The Proverbs 

"from a MS. in the possession of Mr. of John Heywood (Sharman's ed., 

Halliwell-Phillips," which has these p. 46), 1546. Compare Beware the 

words for a burden, upon the Merry Cat {^\. 22), 1584: "I perceive now ye 

Wives. The first verse is : " We merry olde proverb is true, the still sow 

wives of Windsor, Whereof you make eateth up all the draff." And B. 

your play ; And act us on your stages In Guilpin says in Skialetheia, epigr. 

London day by day : Alass, it doth not 69, 1598: "who knows not the old 

hurt us. We care not what you do, For said saw of the still sow ? " Ben 

all you scoff, we '11 sing and laugh. And Jonson has it in Tale of a Tub, and it 

yet be honest too." It seems to be late is in Camden and all the collections, 

seventeenth century. At the time of this unvaried. " Draff," refuse, 
play Windsor was pronounced, if we ill. hard at door] close to the door. 

i2^e 'Ben ]on^on^s Masque of Gipsies 2iS "Hard by" occurs above, iv. ii. 40; 

authority, to rhyme with "kind sir," and " hard at hand " is in Othello, II. i. 

which was both correct and harmonious. 268. For the omission of the article, 



SC. II.] 



OF WINDSOR 



171 



bid you set it down, obey him : quickly, dis- 
patch. [^Exit. 

First Serv. Come, come, take it up. 

Sec, Serv. Pray heaven it be not full of knight 115 
again. 

First Serv. I hope not ; I had as lief bear so much 
lead. 



Enter FoRD, Page, Shallow, Caius, and 
Sir Hugh Evans. 
Ford. Ay, but if it prove true. Master Page, have 

you any way then to unfool me again? Set 120 
down the basket, villain ! Somebody call my 
wife. Youth in a basket ! — O you pandarly ras- 
cals 1 there 's a knot, a ging, a pack, a conspiracy 
against me : now shall the devil be shamed. — 
What, wife, I say ! — Come, come forth ! Be- 125 

1 1 5. knight] the knight F 2, 3, 4. 117. as lief] F 2, 3, 4 ; liefe aj F i, Q 3. 
122. Youth in a basket] You youth in a basket^ come out here Q i, Malone, 
Steevens (1798). 123. ging] F 2, 3, 4, Malone ; gin F i, Q 3. 

see " at street end, " line 40, above. It youth in a basket," has this sense, 

is very common in archaic poetry. And another instance is in N. Breton's 

120. unfooF] This may be noted in Choice, Chance, and Change (Grosart, 
connection with "uncape" (ill. iii. 176). p. 29), 1606: ** I was fallen upon . . . 
Shakespeare abounds in terms with the a young gallant in shewe . . . this 
prefixes un, over, and out. He has youth in a basket, with a face of Brasse, 
six or seven hundred of these "un" upon a little acquaintance, comes to 
words, as many as half (like the present) me with this salutation." The ex- 
occurring only once. A gallery of them pression occurs later (1664) in Gayton's 
will be found in Cotgrave at "Des." festivous Notes, p. Ii8, in a different 

122. Youth in a basket] Wheatley sense, i.e. a foundling, one left on the 

says, "Mr. Halliwell-Phillips points parish. 

out that this is a proverbial phrase, " but 123. ging] a common word at this 

he gives no references or information, time; the earlier form of *' gang. " It 

It is not noted in Halliwell's edition occurs four or five times in Jonson, in 

of the Quarto. The expression had Drayton, Middleton, etc. 
the sense of "fortunate lover," I do 124. devil be shamed] By the truth 

not know how or why. It is very appearing. "Truth is truth and will 

rarely met with. In A Woman never out at one time or other, and shame 

Vexed (Ilazlitt's Dods. xii. 162), the divell," Nashe, Have with you to 

"Speak, sweet mistress, am I the Saffron Waiden{(jxos2iX\.,\\\. <)^),i$q6. 



172 THE MERRY WIVES [activ. 

hold what honest clothes you send forth to 

bleaching ! 
Page. Why, this passes, Master Ford ; you are 

not to go loose any longer; you must be 

pinioned. 1 30 

Evans, Why, this is lunatics ! this is mad as a mad 

dog! 
Shal. Indeed, Master Ford, this is not well, 

indeed. 
Ford. So say I too, sir. 135 

Re-enter MISTRESS FORD. 

Come hither, Mistress Ford ; Mistress Ford, the 
honest woman, the modest wife, the virtuous 
creature, that hath the jealous fool to her 
husband ! I suspect without cause, mistress, 
do I ? 140 

Mrs. Ford, Heaven be my witness you do, if you 
suspect me in any dishonesty. 

Ford, Well said, brazen-face! hold it out. Come 

forth, sirrah ! \Pulling clothes out of the basket. 

Page. This passes ! 145 

Mrs. Ford. Are you not ashamed? let the clothes 
alone. 

Ford, I shall find you anon. 

Evans. 'Tis unreasonable ! Will you take up your 

wife's clothes ? Come away. i 5 o 

128. this passes'] this surpasses. So tis verie necessarie He were put in 

in Lyly's Endy/nion, ii. ii. (1591): pethlem." 

'■^ Favil. This passeth ! Scmt. Why, 143. hrazen-face ! hold it out] keep 

is he not mad ? " it up. Compare Love's Labour'' s Losty 

131.] The parallel lines in Quarto i v. ii. 395: "Can any face of brass 

read: ^^ Sir Hu. By so kad vdge me, hold longer out?" 



sc.ii.] OF WINDSOR 173 

Ford. Empty the basket, I say ! 

Mrs. Ford. Why, man, why ? 

Ford. Master Page, as I am a man, there was one 
conveyed out of my house yesterday in this 
basket : why may not he be there again ? In 1 5 5 
my house I am sure he is : my intelligence is 
true ; my jealousy is reasonable. Pluck me out 
all the linen. 

Mrs, Ford. If you find a man there, he shall die a 

flea's death. 160 

Page. Here's no man. 

Shal. By my fidelity, this is not well, Master Ford ; 
this wrongs you. 

Evans. Master Ford, you must pray, and not follow the 

imaginations of your own heart : this is jealousies. 165 

Ford. Well, he 's not here I seek for. 

Page. No, nor nowhere else but in your brain. 

Ford. Help to search my house this one time. If 
I find not what I seek, show no colour for my 
extremity ; let me for ever be your table-sport ; 170 
let them say of me, " As jealous as Ford, that 
searched a hollow walnut for his wife's leman." 

162. fidelity^ faith ; hence "word of Pliny says : " Cicero hath recorded that 
honour." the whole Poeme of Homer called 

163. this wrongs you\ this disgraces Ilias was written in a piece of parch- 
you. See lil. iii. 221. min, which was able to be covered 

165. imaginations of your own heart] with a nutshell," Holland's translation, 

See III. iii. 219. vii. 21. Hall ascribes this to Strabo : 

170. table-sport'] Compare Greene, *' But well fare Strabo, which, as 
Farewell to Follie, 1591 : "make thee stories tell, conteined all Troy within 
a table talke amongst friendes." The one walnut shell," Satires, ii. i. 37, 
sameauthorhas " table friende." "Table 1597. Hence, jocularly, a hiding- 
talk" occurs in Lyly's Euphues, 1580. place. 

172. a hollow walnut] Concealment 172. /^wa:«] paramour. Usually femi- 

in a walnut shell dates back to that nine, but see Chaucer, Manciples Tale^ 

well-known instance of Homer's Iliad. 1. 100. 



174 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act IV. 



Satisfy me once more; once more search with 
me. 

Mrs. Ford. What, ho, Mistress Page! come you and 175 
the old woman down ; my husband will come 
into the chamber. 

Ford. Old woman ! what old woman 's that ? 

Mrs. Ford. Why, it is my maid's aunt of Brainford. 

Ford, A witch, a quean, an old cozening quean ! 180 
Have I not forbid her my house ? She comes 
of errands, does she ? We are simple men ; we 
do not know what 's brought to pass under the 
profession of fortune - telling. She works by 
charms, by spells, by the figure, and such 185 



179. aunt of ] Ant, Gillian ofCli. 
profession'] colour Q i. 

180-187. A witch . . , we know 
nothing] This explicit and venomously 
spoken account of witches no doubt 
had a telling effect at the time it was 
written. Whether the play was acted 
for the Queen at Windsor or not, the 
scene was laid there, and the actors 
and audience are all wafted thither 
by the magician's wand. In 1579, 
" Richard Galles of Windesor" printed 
Horrible Acts of Elizabeth Style and 
Others, a book now, I believe, lost, 
probably to our great misfortune. 
Reginald Scot in Discoverie of Witch- 
craft (reprint, p. 455), 1584, says: 
"And note how the witches confesse 
. . . there were not past seventeene or 
eighteene condemned at once at St. 
Osees, in the countie of Essex . . . 
If anie be yet behind, I doubt not, but 
Brian Darcie [Parson Darcie was a 
notorious witch-finder] will find them 
out ; who, if he lacke aid, Richard 
Gallis of Windesor were meete to be 
associated with him ; which Gallis 
hath set foorth another booke to that 
effect, of certeine witches of Windsore 
executed at Abingdon. But with what 



[81. forbid] forewarned Q i . 1 84. 



impudence and dishonestie he hath 
finished it, with what lies and forgeries 
he hath furnished it, what foUie and 
frensie he hath uttered in it ; I am 
ashamed to report, and therefore being 
but a two pennie booke, I had rather 
desire you to buy it, and so to peruse it, 
than to fill my booke with such beastlie 
stuffe." And again, "Ri. Ga., a Wind- 
sor man ; who being a mad man hath 
written according to his frantike humor" 
{ibid. p. 12). See Introduction. 

184. fortune -telling] Compare Mas- 
singer, Renegado, i. iii., for the "witch 
with a thrum cap," that sells ale and 
tells fortunes, who is probably a recol- 
lection of Mother Prat. See Introduc- 
tion, " Old Woman of Brainford." 

184, 185. She works . . . by the figure] 
by the "diagrams of the planets, their 
characters, together with the twelve 
signes of the zodiake, their dispositions, 
aspects, and government," R. Scot, 
Discoverie of Witchcraft (p. 331), 
where the requisite figures are given, 
and at the following pages. ' ' These 
figures are called the Scales of the 
Earth, without the which no spirit will 



SC. II.] 



OF AVINDSOR 



175 



daubery as this is, beyond our element: we 
know nothing. Come down, you witch, you 
bag, you ; come down, I say ! 
Mrs. Ford. Nay, good, sweet husband ! — Good gentle- 
men, let him not strike the old woman. 190 



Re-enter Falstaff in woman^s clothes^ and 
Mistress Page. 

Mrs. Page. Come, Mother Prat ; come, give me 
your hand. 

Ford. I '11 prat her. \Beating him.'] Out of my 
door, you witch, you hag, you baggage, you 
polecat, you ronyon ! out, out! I'll conjure 195 
you, I '11 fortune-tell you. \^Exit Falstaff, 

IQO. nof] omitted F i. 194. hag\ F3, 4, Q; rag 7 i, 2. 

verb, with no sort of pun, and using it 
as a threat, is very Irish to this day 
amongst uneducated people. It is not 
easy to find a parallel in literature, but 
there is one in T. Brewer's (prose) 
Merry Devil of Edmonton, 1608 : " I '11 
fore you yfaith ; come to the fore 
chamber as soon as you will " (p. 28, 
reprint). The speaker has learned 
that one has an appointment with his 
wife in the fore chamber, and is ready 
for him. It would be interesting to see 
what foreign translations (Japanese, 
etc.) make of such a joke. Falstaff 
does it in 1 Henry IV. II. ii. 97 : 
'* You are grand jurors, are ye ? We '11 
jure ye, faith." Craig refers also to 
Coriolanus, ii. i. 152-154. 

194. hag\ is much preferable to 
"rag," probably a mere misprint of the 
first Folio, corrected later. "Rag" 
has some support from a passage in 
Timon of Athens, iv. iii. 271, where it 
is applied abusively to a man. 

195. polecaf] See above, IV. i. 30. 
195. ronyonl from the French, 

^^ RongneuXf Scabbie, mangie, scurvie," 



appeare, except thou have them with 
thee," p. 334 {ibid.). There is much 
about this "figure-flinging" in Ben 
Jonson, who pilloried it in several of 
his plays. See below, iv. v. 27. 

186. daubery'] coarse, specious work. 
New Eng. Diet, has two instances 
from Bale, English Votaries, 1546, 
"daubery of the devyll " and " dongish 
daubery." Compare Hickscomer {\iz.z, 
Dods. i. 159): "there is craft in 
daubing. I can look in a man's face 
and pick his purse." 

186. beyond our element^htyonA our 
scope or business. Seems to have been 
a phrase of Ben Jonson's : "'tis out of 
his element to traduce me . . . (as my 
ningle says), 'tis out of his element." 
Dekker, Satiromastix (Pearson, 195, 
196), 1602, "My ningle" is Horace, 
i.e. Ben Jonson. And again, " He will 
not undertake, it is out of their element, 
he says," Jonson, Masque of Augurs. 
See again in Satiromastix, p. 262. 

193. r II prat her] This bit of humour, 
converting a prominent word in the 
speaker's sentence into a meaningless 



176 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act IV. 



Mrs. Page. Are you not ashamed ? I think you have 

killed the poor woman. 
Mrs. Ford. Nay, he will do it. 'Tis a goodly credit 

for you. 
Ford. Hang her, witch ! 
Evans. By yea and no, I think the 'oman is a 

witch indeed : I like not when a 'oman has a 

great peard ; I spy a great peard under her 

muffler. 
Ford. Will you follow, gentlemen ? I beseech you, 

follow ; see but the issue of my jealousy : if I 

cry out thus upon no trail, never trust me when 

I open again. 



200 



205 



202. By yea and no] Byjeshu Q i. 204. her] Q i, Pope, Steevens, Craig ; 
his Ff, Q 3, Globe, Cambridge. 208. trail] Tryal F 4. 



Cotgrave. Shakespeare has the word 
again in Macbeth, i. iii. 6 ; and the 
adjective "roynish" (probably from 
the same) in As You Like It, 11. ii. 8. 
Gabriel Harvey used the word 
"roinish" earlier, Piercers Superero- 
gation (Grosart, ii. 229), 1592-93. 

204. great peard] A beard was a 
characteristic of a witch. Compare 
Macbeth, i. iii. 46. In Beaumont and 
Fletcher, Honest Man s Forttme, ii. iii., 
beards are said to be "token of a 
witch." Compare Rainoldes, Ove7'throw 
of Stage Plays, 1 593 : ' ' Now if this 
were lawfully done because hee did it, 
then William, Bishop of Ely, who, to 
save his honour and wealth, became a 
green -sleeves, going in womens raiment 
. . . from Dover Castle to the sea-side, 
did therein like a man ; although the 
women of Dover, when they found it 
out, hy plucking down his muffler and 
seeing his new shaven beard, called him 
a monster for it.^' Rainoldes quotes 
this anecdote from Mathew Paris, 
temp. Richard i. There is an odd 



parallelism here between this and Fal- 
staff, who is called a monster by 
Ford. Rainoldes' treatise is levelled at 
Gager's Latin plays at Oxford, and has 
nothing to do, even remotely, with the 
English drama. This passage is at p. 
90, ed. 1629. Chappell quotes it at 
*' Green Sleeves" (Popular Music). 

207-209. if I cry out . . . open 
again] If I cry when there is no scent, 
never trust me when I bark again. 
Compare Hamlet, ii. ii. 47: "how 
cheerfully on the false trail they cry." 
The reference is here best taken as 
hunting with a bloodhound. " Trailles 
... to trail a Deer, or hunt him upon 
a cold scent ; as also to pursue or hunt 
him with a lime-hound," Cotgrave. To 
open was used as "to open and cry." 
' ' When the Hounds or Beagles at first 
finding the scent of their game presently 
open and cry, we then say, they Chal- 
le?ige,^^ Gentleman's Recreation. . . . 
' * When spaniels open in the string (or 
a Grey- Hound in his course) they 
Lapse, " ibid. To give tongue. 



sen.] OF WINDSOR 177 

Page. Let 's obey his humour a little further : come, 210 
gentlemen. 

{Exeunt Ford, Page, Shal., Caius, and Evans, 

Mrs. Page. Trust me, he beat him most piti- 
fully. 

Mrs. Ford. Nay, by the mass, that he did not ; he 

beat him most unpitifully methought. 215 

Mrs. Page. I '11 have the cudgel hallowed and 
hung o'er the altar; it hath done meritorious 
service. 

Mrs. Ford. What think you ? may we, with the 

warrant of womanhood and the witness of a 220 
good conscience, pursue him with any further 
revenge ? 

Mrs. Page. The spirit of wantonness is, sure, scared 
out of him : if the devil have him not in 
fee-simple, with fine and recovery, he will never, 225 
I think, in the way of waste, attempt us again. 

214. by the viass\ This oath seems 225. y^^-j-zw//^] "absolute fee, heredi- 

to have puzzled the editors of the Folio, tary and unconditional property," 

or whoever previously looked after the Schmidt; "fine and recovery," a term 

working of the "Act to restrain the of law denoting absolute ownership," 

abuses (swearing, etc.) of players." Schmidt. Ritson says: "Our author 

Sometimes it is altered and omitted had been long enough in an attorney's 

from the Quartos. Sometimes it office to learn that^i?-«V;///«? is the /ar^(?j/ 

escaped the " restrainers, " It escaped estate, ?in^ fine and recovery \h.t strongest 

(for ever) in Hamlet, ill. ii. 395, its aj-j-z^rawr^ known to English law." See 

latest appearance in Shakespeare. Statute of Fines of Henry vii. 

216, 217. cudgel hallowed and hung 226. wastel Schmidt explains this 

o^er the altar"] Veneration of this sort " corruption . . . never again try to 

seems to have been obtainable by in- seduce us." But the word as used 

fluential parishioners in country churches, in a legal sense, continuing the meta- 

accorded as a personal favour. When phors, has the senses "(i) a spoil made 

Coryat, the much laughed at, but truly in Houses, Woods, Lands, etc., by the 

remarkable traveller, returned from Tenant ... (2) Waste is taken from 

walking nine hundred miles in five those Lands which are not in one man's 

months in one pair of shoes, he hung occupation, but lie common," Diction- 

them up over the altar in the church at arium Urbicum et Rustictim, 1704. Mrs. 

Odcomb, his native place, in Somerset, Page's meaning is, never attempt again 

in 1608. (to spoil us), as if we were common. 

12 



178 THE MERRY WIVES [activ. 

Mrs. Ford. Shall we tell our husbands how we have 
served him ? 

Mrs. Page. Yes, by all means ; if it be but to scrape 

the figures out of your husband's brains. If 230 
they can find in their hearts the poor unvirtuous 
fat knight shall be any further afflicted, we two 
will still be the ministers. 

Mrs. Ford. I '11 warrant they '11 have him publicly 

shamed: and methinks there would be no 235 
period to the jest, should he not be publicly 
shamed. 

Mrs. Page. Come, to the forge with it, then ; shape 

it : I would not have things cool. {Exeunt. 



SCENE III. — A Room in the Garter Inn. 

Enter HOST and Bardolph. 

Bard. Sir, the Germans desire to have three of 
your horses : the duke himself will be to- 
morrow at court, and they are going to meet 
him. 

Host. What duke should that be comes so 5 
secretly ? I hear not of him in the court. Let 
me speak with the gentlemen : they speak 
English ? 

I. Germans desire] Capell et seq.; Germane desires Ff, Q 3. 

230. figures] fancies, as in ^ulius three Gentlemen come from the Duke 
Casar, 11. i. 231. the Stanger [stranger, i.e. foreigner] 

sir, would have your horse." See iv. 
Scene ill. ^ (i\-9l. 

1-4. Sir . . . 7neet him] Bardolph's 5. What duke] For this duke, see 
speech in the Quarto is *'Syr heere be Introduction. 



sc.iv.] OF WINDSOR 179 

Bard. Ay, sir ; I '11 call them to you. 

Host. They shall have my horses ; but I '11 make i o 
them pay ; I '11 sauce them : they have had my 
house a week at command ; I have turned away 
my other guests : they must come off; I '11 sauce 
them. Come. \Exeunt. 



SCENE IV. — A Room in Ford's House, 

Enter PAGE, Ford, Mistress Page, Mistress Ford, 
and Sir Hugh Evans. 

Evans. 'Tis one of the best discretions of a 'oman 

as ever I did look upon. 
Page. And did he send you both these letters at an 

instant ? 
Mrs. Page. Within a quarter of an hour. 5 

Ford. Pardon me, wife. Henceforth do what thou wilt ; 

I rather will suspect the sun with cold 

9. thenil Q i, F 3, Malone et seq.; him F i. 10, ii. Host. They shall 

. . . sauce theni] Host. No Bardolphe, let them alone, lie sauce them Q. i. 
12. house'] Q I, Rowe et seq.; houses Ff, Q 3. 

Scene iv. 
7. cold] Rowe ; gold Ff, Q 3. 

II. /7/ja«r(?M^/;/]I'llpepperthem. Dods. i. 352). It occurs twice in 

Compare As You Like It, ill. v. 69. Jonson's Tale of Tub (a country 

Greene and Nashe use the verb of comedy), and in Case is Altered, iv. iii. 

literary acrimony. See also Haz. Dods. ix. 185. Tyr- 

12. at command] retained for their whitt quotes from Chaucer's Friar's 
use upon their expected arrival. Not Tale, and there are several examples in 
* ' at pleasure " as Schmidt says. But Steevens' Shakspeare. 

this passage has not been understood. „ 

See Introduction. ^icette IV. 

13. come off] pay, and "pay well." i. best discretions of a 'oman] most 
A common expression. "Wherefore sensible, discreet woman. See Evans' 
if ye be willing to buy. Lay downe speech, i. i. 44, 45, and i. i. 148. 
money, come off quickly," John Hey- 7. sttspect] accuse, charge. Compare 
wood, The Four PP., 1540 (Haz. C//z^//(?, iv. ii. 147 : "suspect thee with 



1 



180 THE MERRY WIVES [activ. 

Than thee with wantonness : now doth thy honour 

stand, 
In him that was of late an heretic, 
As firm as faith. 

Page, 'Tis well, 'tis well ; no more : i o 

Be not as extreme in submission 
As in offence. 

But let our plot go forward : let our wives 
Yet once again, to make us public sport. 
Appoint a meeting with this old fat fellow, 1 5 

Where we may take him, and disgrace him for it. 

Ford. There is no better way than that they spoke of 

Page. How ? to send him word they '11 meet him in 
the Park at midnight ? Fie, fie ! he '11 never 
come. 20 

Evans. You say he has been thrown in the rivers, 
and has been grievously peaten, as an old 'oman: 
methinks there should be terrors in him that he 
should not come ; methinks his flesh is punished, 
he shall have no desires. 25 

Page. So think I too. 

Mrs. Ford. Devise but how you '11 use him when he comes. 
And let us two devise to bring him thither. 

Mrs. Page. There is an old tale goes that Heme the 
hunter, 

10. as faith'] F i, Q 3 ; of faith F 2, 3, 4. 11, 12.] One line Ff, Q 3. 21. 
in the rivers'] F i, Q 3 ; into the river F 2, 3, 4. 

the Moor." To explain this by making midst of the account given by the wives 

"with" equal *'of," can scarcely be of what they have done, and what they 

right. "With" meaning "by" occurs are forging. 

above, ill. v. iii, and often. The 29. I'here is . . . Heme the hunter'] 

distinct usage lies in the verb, not in The Quarto spells him "Home." The 

the preposition. words there are : " Oft have you heard 

21. You say] This scene opens in the since Home the hunter dyed, That 



SC. IV.] 



OF WINDSOR 



181 



Sometime a keeper here in Windsor forest, 30 

Doth all the winter-time, at still midnight, 
Walk round about an oak, with great ragg'd horns ; 
And there he blasts the tree, and takes the cattle, 
And makes milch-kine yield blood, and shakes a chain 
In a most hideous and dreadful manner : 3 5 

You have heard of such a spirit ; and well you know 
The superstitious idle-headed eld 
Received, and did deliver to our age. 
This tale of Heme the hunter for a truth. 
Page, Why, yet there want not many that do fear 40 

31. still midnight] F I, Q 3 ; still of midnight F 2, 3, 4. 



women to affright their little children, 
Ses that he walkes in shape of a great 
Stagge." And again, " Weele send him 
word to meet us in the field, Disguised 
like Home, with huge horns on his 
head." That is all the curtailed and 
mutilated text says about Heme. No- 
thing of his nightly deeds. Theobald, 
followed by Malone and various editors, 
insert this line "Disguised," etc., in the 
text of the Folio, in Mrs. Ford's speech 
below, after "shall meet with us" 
(line 43). Theobald inserted both the 
lines quoted here. Malone only the 
last, in which he is followed by Wheat- 
ley and Craig (Oxford ed.), altering 
" Home " to " Heme." The insertion 
is illegitimate, and not indispensable. 
We can easily give the words ' ' in this 
shape" (line 45), coupled with "dis- 
horn the spirit " (line 64), the requisite 
meaning. If there was no Quarto, we 
would feel no difficulty, and the whole 
of the fifth scene is surely explanatory 
enough of the circumstances. Neither 
the Globe nor the Cambridge editions 
follow Theobald. For "Heme the 
hunter," see Introduction. And for a 
guess about him, see "drunkard's 
ghoast" in note to "urchins" (line 50). 
32. ragg'd] rough, uncouth. Com- 
pare 3 Henry VI. v. iv. 27. Nashe 



has "a ragged table" (Gros. i. 10). 
"Ragged rhymes" occurs in several 
early writers. 

33. blasts]h\\^\s,. Compare Fletcher, 
Night-Walker, ii. ii. : "The hour he 
blasts sweet faces, lames the limbs in, 
Depraves the senses." 

33. takes the cattle] bewitches them. 
So in Lear, ill. iv. 61 : "bless thee 
from whirlwinds, star - blasting, and 
taking." And Ben Jonson, Sad Shep- 



herd, II. 



Poor Tom the cook is 



taken ; all his joints Do crack as if his 
limbs were tied with points ; His whole 
frame slackens, and a kind of rack Runs 
down along the spondils of his back." 
Toilet gave a good illustration at this 
word (quoted in Nares) from Markham's 
Treatise of Horses, chap. 8, 1595. 

34. shakes a chain] See v. i. 6 
(note). 

37. eld] old people, or old age per- 
sonified, as in Ben Jonson, Sad Shep- 
herd, II. ii. : "if an old shepherd may 
be heard amongst you ; Not jeered or 
laughed at . . . Scathlock. Who scorns 
at eld peels off his own young hairs." 
The passage in the Quarto (quoted at 
line 29) appears to me to forbid us to 
give the meaning to "eld" that I find 
in New Eng. Diet., "people of the 
olden time ; antiquity personified." 



182 



THE MERRY WIVES [activ. 



In deep of night to walk by this Heme's oak : 
But what of this ? 

Mrs. Ford. Marry, this is our device; 

That Falstaff at that oak shall meet with us, 

Page. Well, let it not be doubted but he '11 come : 

And in this shape when you have brought him 
thither, 45 

What shall be done with him ? what is your plot ? 

Mrs. Page. That likewise have we thought upon, and thus : 
Nan Page my daughter and my little son 
And three or four more of their growth we '11 dress 
Like urchins, ouphes and fairies, green and white, 50 
With rounds of waxen tapers on their heads. 



41. deep of night\ Shakespeare has 
this expression again in Julius Ccesar, 
IV. iii. 225. 

43. meet with tis] For insertion of 
line here from the Quarto, see note 
above at line 29. 

49. growth"] size. See As You Like 
It, I. ii. 130. 

50. urchins'] The old name for the 
hedgehog, which was regarded as pos- 
sessed of evil qualities, and became the 
term for an imaginary, diminutive, evil 
spirit. "An Hedgehog is one of the 
planatanicall beasts, and therefore good 
in magic," Beware the Cat, Part ii., 
1584. "I have twentie and twentie 
charms ... for the biting of madde 
dogs, for the darting of urchins," G. 
Harvey, Pierce's Supererogation (Gros. 
ii. 239). Day uses the term as in the 
text (probably from the text). "No 
urchins, elves, or drunkards ghoasts 
Shove me against wall or posts," Law 
Tricks, 1608. From Day's plagiaristic 
habits we may guess the "drunkard's 
ghoast" to be Heme himself, which 
gives us a clue to the troubles of his 
career. Nashe has an interesting pas- 
sage in connection with the next word 
in Foure Letters Confuted (Gros. ii. 



265), 1593: "the true factor for the 
Fairies and night Urchins, in sup- 
planting and setting aside the true 
children of the English, and suborning 
inkehorne changlings [i.e. "ouphs"] 
in their steade." Nashe has the term 
"you diminutive urchins" to pages, 
in Summer's Last Will{i^^2). Urchins 
were believed to have the power of 
darting their spines, like porcupines. 
See Tempest, i. ii. 326, and ii. ii. 5. 

50. ouphes] A variant of " Auf," the 
earlier form of "Oaf." The word 
" Auf" is cognate with the Old English 
elf, fairy. Nexv Eng. Diet, goes on to 
say (in v. '/Auf"), "An elf's child, 
a goblin child, a changeling left by the 
fairies ; hence, a misbegotten, deformed 
or idiot child, a half-wit, simpleton." 
See Burton, Anatomie of Melancholy 
(3. 2. 4. i), 1621 : "A very monster, 
an aufe imperfect." The word is spelt 
" oph " in Fletcher, and Shirley, Night- 
Walker, I. iv. : " Free us both from the 
fear of breeding fools And ophs, got by 
this walking shadow." Halliwell has a 
quotation from Drayton, in 7^. "Awf." 
See last note for a quotation from Nashe 
in illustration. 



SC. IV.] 



OF WINDSOK 



183 



And rattles in their hands : upon a sudden, 
As Falstafif, she, and I, are newly met. 
Let them from forth a sawpit rush at once 
With some diffused song : upon their sight. 
We two in great amazedness will fly : 
Then let them all encircle him about, 
And, fairy-like, to pinch the unclean knight ; 
And ask him why, that hour of fairy revel. 
In their so sacred paths he dares to tread 
In shape profane. 
Mrs. Ford. And till he tell the truth, 

Let the supposed fairies pinch him sound, 

58. to pinch] Ff, Q 3 ; to-pinch Steevens (1798) (Tyrwhitt conj.) et seq. 

52. rattles] Children's rattles of this 
time were made of parchment, with 
beans or peas inside ; or else bladders. 
They are often called rattle-babies {i.e. 
dolls). "Rattle him, like a baby of 
parchment," G. Harvey (Gros. i. 282). 
There was a phrase at this time, often 
met with : " Three blue beans in a blue 
bladder, rattle, bladder, rattle," hardly 
obsolete as a test of quick vocalisation. 

54. saxvpit] How many children 
could be hidden in a sawpit is a matter 
for experts to decide, but it appears to 
have been a spacious place. Shirley 
talks of two combatants fighting there, 
in Love in a Maze, ill. iii. : "Would we 
were both of us to skirmish in A saw- 
pit" (no escape, d. rotitrance). And 
they were good hiding-places, because 
of some depth: "fell so deep down 
into a sawpit, that he shall repent the 
fall while he lives," N. Breton, Wits 
Trenchmore, 1597. And one couldn't 
get out for one's meals without help : 
' ' as hungry as fellows that work in a 
sawpit," Webster, White Devil {y>- 25, 
ed. 1877), 1 61 2. 

55. diffused] careless, irregular, wild. 
"Diffused" in Henry V. v. ii. 61, 
quoted as a parallel by Wheatley and 
others, is spelt "defused" in the early 



55 



60 



editions. "Diffuse" occurs nowhere 
else in Shakespeare except as a verb, 
"to pour out," to scatter," in Tempest, 
IV. i. 79. Compare Ben Jonson, Cyn- 
thia's Revels, ill. ii. (i67/5) : "I have 
seen, most honoured Arete, The stran- 
gest pageant, fashioned like a court, 
(At least I dreamt I saw it) so diffused, 
so painted, pied, and full of rainbow 
strains," 1600. 

58. to pinch] In deference to such 
texts as the Globe, Cambridge, and 
Oxford, I would like to read "to- 
pinch " ; but there is no authority for it, 
and the intensitive prefix "to" is an 
archaism not found elsewhere in Shake- 
speare. It was obsolete in his time 
apparently. Steevens' examples are all 
erroneous, of "all-to," or else from 
Spenser, from whom it is useless to 
quote in such matters. Both Abbott 
and Schmidt disapprove of this reading, 
and the latter has collected numerous 
parallels of a similar use of the infini- 
tival particle from Shakespeare. Com- 
pare King John, IV. ii. 240; Pericles, 
II. V. 17, etc. The Temple Shakespeare 
reads " to pinch." 

62. pinch hitn sound] soundly. We 
know that fairies pinched human beings 
in Shakespeare's time. See Fletcher's 



184 THE MERRY WIVES [activ. 

And burn him with their tapers. 
Mrs, Page. The truth being known, 

We'll all present ourselves, dis-horn the spirit, 

And mock him home to Windsor. 
Ford. The children must 65 

Be practised well to this, or they '11 ne'er do 't. 
Evans. I will teach the children their behaviours ; 

and I will be like a jack-an-apes also, to burn 

the knight with my taber. 
Ford. That will be excellent. I '11 go buy them vizards. 70 
Mrs. Page. My Nan shall be the queen of all the fairies. 

Finely attired in a robe of white. 
Page. That silk will I go buy. [Aside.] And in that time 

Shall Master Slender steal my Nan away, 

And marry her at Eton. Go send to Falstaff straight. 
Ford. Nay, I '11 to him again in name of Brook : y6 

He'll tell me all his purpose: sure, he'll come. 
Mrs. Page. Fear not you that. Go get us properties 

Faithful Shepherdess, v. iv. 5 ; Ben a puppet stage or some such ridiculous 

Jonson's Alche??nst, iii. ii. ; Comedy idle childish invention." 

of Errors, II. ii. 194 ; and Tempest, 72. in a robe of white'] This is for 

I. ii. 328, II. ii. 4, etc. Also, they Page's ears. At iv. vi. 41, Mrs. Page 

squealed like mice, and said " ti, ti," says she will be enrobed in green, so 

or "wee, wee." that the Doctor may know her. See 

67. / will teach the children] See v. iii. i, and v. v. 213. 
Introduction, pp. xxxix, xl, where a 78. properties] stage requisites, as in 
reference is given to Cunningham's Midstwimer Night's Dream, I. ii. 108. 
Accounts of the Revels at Court, show- In that passage the word is used legiti- 
ing that Evans had his prototype in mately, where there is a play within a 
Richarde Ferrant, "scollmaster," and play. Here the distinction is scarcely 
"The Children of Windsor" in ex- drawn between narrative or dialogue 
hibiting dramatic representation, both and what belongs to stage-direction, 
there and at Whitehall. It is not surprising that this scene con- 

68. jack-an-apes] Properly a monkey, denses in the Quaito to about fifty lines, 
but used of evil sprites by Nashe, Compare Ben Jonson, Cynthids Revels, 
Terrors of the Night {GxosQ.xi,m. 22,6), Induction: "to have his [author's] 
1594: "on those images of memorie presence in the tiring-house, to prompt 
whereon we buyld in the daye, come us aloud, stamp at the book - holder, 
some superfluous humour of ours, lyke swear for our properties, curse the poor 
a lacke-anapes in the night, and erects tireman." 



SC. IV.] 



OF WINDSOR 



185 



And tricking for our fairies. 

Evans. Let us about it : it is admirable pleasures and 80 
fery honest knaveries. \Exeunt Page^ Fordy and Evans, 

Mrs. Page. Go, Mistress Ford, 

Send quickly to Sir John, to know his mind. 

\Exit Mrs. Ford. 
I '11 to the doctor : he hath my good will, 
And none but he, to marry with Nan Page. 85 

That Slender, though well landed, is an idiot ; 
And he my husband best of all affects. 
The doctor is well money'd, and his friends 
Potent at court : he, none but he, shall have her, 
Though twenty thousand worthier come to crave 
her. \Exit. 90 

SCENE V. — A Room in the Garter Inn. 



Enter HOST and Simple. 

Host. What wouldst thou have, boor? what, thick- 
skin ? speak, breathe, discuss ; brief, short, quick, 



snap. 

79. trickifig] adorning. ' ' After trick- 
ing, trimming, and pampering them 
[slaves] up for sale," Holland's Flim'e, 
xxi. 26 (1601). A common sense. 
Cotgrave gives it : " Omement . . . 
an adornment, decking, tricking, trim- 
ming." 

88. his frunds\ I would like to read 
here "has friends." No alteration is, 
however, necessary. 

Scene V. 

I, 2. thick-skin'] Stanyhurst (trans. 
ALneid), 1582, has the adjective " thick- 
skyn." And Cotgrave: "■ Calleux. 
Hard, or thick - skinned, by much 
labour." See Mid. Nts, Drm. ill. ii. 13. 



2. discus s"] make known, declare, 
pronounce. New Eng. Diet, says : 
" The history and place of this sense is 
not clear," giving some early parallels. 
See above, i. iii. 103 ; and several times 
in Henry V. (ill. ii. 65, IV. i. 37, 
IV. iv. 5, 30). The word was in com- 
mon use in the sense of "dispel" 
amongst physicists: "discusseth the 
clouds and mists that troubleth the 
eies," Holland's /Vm/>, xx. 21 (p. 73); 
and again : ' ' the whistling or crashing 
noises . . . within . . . head . . . 
are discussed with the juice of leeks," 
XX. 6 (p. 43). To make clear of 
doubt. 

3. snap\ Compare Lovers Laboui's 



186 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act IV. 



Sim. Marry, sir, I come to speak with Sir John 
Falstaff from Master Slender. 

Host. There's his chamber, his house, his castle, his 
standing - bed, and truckle - bed ; 'tis painted 
about with the story of the Prodigal, fresh and 
new. Go knock and call ; he '11 speak like 
an Anthropophaginian unto thee : knock, I 
say. 



lO 



Lost, V. i. 6i : '* Now, by the 
salt wave of the Mediterraneum, a 
sweet touch, a quick venue of wit ! 
snip, snap, quick and home ! " And 
G. Harvey, Pierce s Supererogation 
(Grosart, ii. 313): "if any whosoever 
will needes be oifering abuse in fact, 
or snip-snapping in termes, sith other 
remedy shrinketh, he may peradventure 
not altogether passe unanswered" 
(1592-93). See also Trijntning of 
Thomas Nashe (last words). "Snip" 
was an old name for a tailor, and "snip- 
snap " (the noise of the scissors) is used 
of tailoring by Greene, Defence of 
Comty-Catching. It was used also 
("snip snap") of the knacking of 
barber's scissors. 

7. truckle-bed'\ As usual the Quarto 
is faithful in the Host's speeches. It 
gives us here the variant " trundle-bed " 
in almost exactly the same speech. 
The truckle-bed was a smaller bed on 
castors that was capable of being pushed 
under the large standing or fixed bed 
when not required. A good illustration 
(No. 260) is given from the MS. of the 
Cofute (TArtois in Wright's Domestic 
Manners. Compare Hall's Satires, 
II. vi. (1598): "A gentle squire would 
gladly entertain Into his house some 
trencher-chappelain, Some willing man 
that would instruct his sons And that 
would stand to good conditions : First, 
that he lie upon the truckle bed Whiles 
his young master lieth o'er his head." 
From troclea, a castor. The Returne 
from Parnassus y II. ii., may also be 



referred to: "when I was in Cam- 
bridge and lay in a trundle-bed under 
my tutor," where Hall's positions are 
reversed. And at a later date, in 
Pepys, Oct. 9, 1667 : "My wife and I 
in the high bed in our chamber, and 
Willet [the maid] in the trundle-bed, 
which she desired to lie in by us." See 
Nares for more. 

8. story of the Prodigal^ seems to 
have been a favourite with Falstaff. 
In 2 Henry IV. II. i. 157, he says: 
"for thy walls, a pretty slight drollery, 
or the story of the Prodigal, or the 
German hunting in water - work." 
Shakespeare refers to it again in Comedy 
of Errors (iv. iii. 19). Chambers 
were decorated with "painted cloth," 
commonly called "painting," some- 
times worked as "arras," sometimes 
' * painted, " as in Love's Labour's Lost, 
V. ii. 275. Compare Middleton, A 
Mad World, II. ii. : "the curtains, 
indeed, were wrought in Venice, with 
the story of the Prodigal child in 
silk and gold ; only the swine are left 
out, my lord, for spoiling the cur- 
tain." The Plost's words may refer to 
Falstaff's bed which had such curtains 
about it ; not to the chamber walls. 
Dekker mentions the " Prodigal child 
in the painted cloth" (Pearson, iii. 

325). 

10. Anthropophaginian'] From An- 
thropophagi, men-eaters, a term used 
in Othello, i. iii. 144 (see my note 
there). This high-sounding word was 
a favourite, and its meaning is some- 



sc. v.] 



OF WINDSOR 



187 



Sim. There's an old woman, a fat woman, gone up 
into his chamber : I '11 be so bold as stay, sir, 
till she come down ; I come to speak with her, 
indeed. 1 5 

Host. Ha ! a fat woman ! the knight may be robbed : 
I '11 call. — Bully knight ! bully Sir John ! speak 
from thy lungs military: art thou there? it is 
thine host, thine Ephesian, calls. 

Fal. [Adove.] How now, mine host! 20 

I/ost. Here's a Bohemian-Tartar tarries the coming 



times a secondary consideration. Nie7v 
Eng. Diet, parallels the form here 
with "Carthaginian." There were 
other words made (like Shakespeare's 
and earlier) out of the classical term. 
They may be quoted here as being 
prior to any in New Eng. Diet. ' ' The 
Anthropophagites (so called for that 
they live by mannes flesh) of alle 
menne are the worste condicioned," 
W. Watreman, Fardle of Facions 
(Hakluyt reprint, 1812, v. 63), 1555. 
And Nashe has "Ratifide it is . . . 
that thou must be Anthropophagiz'd 
by thyne owne Mother," Christes 
Teares (Grosart, iv. 109), 1593. 
17. bully'] See note, i. iii. 2. 
19. Ephesian] Shakespeare uses this 
word again in 2 Henry IV. ii. ii. 164 : 
"What company? Page. Ephesians, 
my lord, of the old church." On the 
strength of these two passages, no other 
having been adduced, Malone called it 
"a cant term of the time." Shake- 
speare probably used it from the ana- 
logy of "Corinthian," a term applied 
to a free liver. I find the two terms 
together, not in any slang sense, but 
in a passage representing riot and 
luxury, in Ben Jonson's Catiline, i. i. 
(1611): "treasure which they pour 
Out in their riots . . . They buy 
rare Attic statues, Tyrian hangings, 
Ephesian pictures, and Corinthian 
plate" (from Sallust). This is not 



a parallel to Shakespeare's use, but it 
shows the sense implied. The words 
"of the old church" in Henry IV. 
are most likely added to a term already 
in use, and do not imply a biblical 
source, but are equivalent to our "of 
the old school." 

21. Bohemian- Tartar] The Tartar or 
Tartarian (he is both in Watreman's 
Fardle of Faeions, 1555) had the worst 
repute, and formed a strong term of 
abuse. Nares has two examples in the 
sense of thief, and see also Beaumont 
and Fletcher, Knight of Burning Pestle, 
II. viii. The word Tartarus (the heathen 
hell) assisted in this meaning no doubt. 
The Tartars might naturally be asso- 
ciated with the Anthropophaginians in 
the Host's ideas. Watreman says : 
" Many of the Tartarres . . . layethem 
downe along and sucke of ye bloud 
[of their slain enemies] a full glout." 
For the Bohemian part of this term, 
which is certainly meant to be abusive, 
it is not so easy to account. But 
compare Jonson's Every Alan in his 
Huinotcr II. iii., where Brainworm 
says he has served "in all the late 
wars of Bohemia, Hungaria, Dalmatia, 
Poland, where not, sir?" We have 
had "Hungarian" already (i. iii. 23); 
why not Bohemian ? There is a good 
deal of community between these two 
plays. Compare "Phrygian Turk," i. 
iii. 97. 



188 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act IV. 



down of thy fat woman. Let her descend, 
bully, let her descend ; my chambers are honour- 
able : fie ! privacy ? fie ! 

Enter Falstaff. 

Fal. There was, mine host, an old fat woman even 25 

now with me ; but she 's gone. 
Sim. Pray you, sir, was't not the wise woman of 

Brainford ? 
FaL Ay, marry, was it, muscle - shell : what would 

you with her? 30 

Sim. My master, sir, Master Slender, sent to her, 

seeing her go thorough the streets, to know, sir, 

whether one Nym, sir, that beguiled him of a 

chain, had the chain or no. 



32. thorough] F I, Q 3 ; through F 2, 3, 4. 



27. wise woman] witch and fortune- 
teller. See Introduction, on the old 
woman of Brainford. She is called 
"witch" at IV. ii. 100. In Heywood's 
Wise Woman of Hogsdon, the " trades" 
of these impostors are satirised : * ' Let 
mee see how many Trades have I to 
live by : First I am a Wise-Woman, 
and a Fortune-teller, and under that 
I deal in Physicke and Fore-speaking, 
in Palmistry, and recovering of things 
lost. Next, I undertake to cure Madd 
folkes. Then I keepe gentlewomen 
lodgers . . . Then I am provided for 
bringing young Wenches to bed ; and 
for a need, you see I can play the 
Match-maker. Shee that is but one, 
and professeth so many may well bee 
tearmed a Wise-woman" (Pearson, p. 
310). Earlier in that play is an inter- 
esting list of the ' ' wise - women " in 
London of the time. One of them, 
"Mistris Mary on the Banke-side, is 



for recting a Figure" (p. 292). See 
IV. ii. 185. This play was acted per- 
haps as early as 16 10. 

29. muscle-shell] Johnson says, " He 
call poor Simple muscle-shell, because 
he stands with his mouth open." That 
seems to me far-fetched. The fact it- 
self is doubtful. I think it means merely 
an empty, worthless object. Besides, 
a muscle-shell can't gape ; it would take 
the whole live mollusc with two shells 
to do that. Skelton has the term 
abusively in reference to its scabbiness 
(scaliness), meaning no doubt the river- 
muscle, in Elinour Rummyng : * ' she 
sat doune in the place. With a sory 
face Wheywormed about ; Garnyshed 
was her snout With here and there 
a puscull, Lyke a scabbyd muscull." 
An oyster (not an oyster-shell) was 
taken as the type of open-mouthed 
gaping. 






sc.v.] OF WINDSOR 189 

Fal. I spake with the old woman about it. 35 

Sim. And what says she, I pray, sir? 

Fal. Marry, she says that the very same man that 

beguiled Master Slender of his chain cozened 

him of it. 
Sim. I would I could have spoken with the woman 40 

herself; I had other things to have spoken with 

her too, from him. 
Fal, What are they ? let us know. 
Host. Ay, come ; quick. 

Sim. I may not conceal them, sir. 45 

Host. Conceal them, or thou diest. 
Sim. Why, sir, they were nothing but about Mistress 

Anne Page ; to know if it were my master's 

fortune to have her or no. 
Fal. 'Tis, 'tis his fortune. 50 

Sim. What, sir ? 
Fal. To have her, or no. Go ; say the woman told 

me so. 
Sim. May I be bold to say so, sir? 
Fal. Ay, sir ; like who more bold. 5 5 

38. Master Slender] Steevens; my master Slender Yi^ Q 3. 45.] Given to 
Falstaff in Ff, Q 3, corrected by Rowe. 45, 46. conceal . . . Conceal] reveal 
. . . Reveal] Farmer conj. 55. Ay, sir ; like] Ff, Q 3 ; / tike Q I ; Ay, 
Sir Tike Steevens (Farmer conj.). 

37. the very same man] The kind of 55. like who more bold] The Quarto 

humour here, and at line 52, was very reading here is, " I tike, vi^ho more 

popular. The second Scene of Act i. bolde," no doubt one of the numerous 

in Loves Labour's I^ost is an example, misprints with which it abounds. 

An instance occurs in the Spanish Farmer, however, made a combination- 

Tragedy. Falstaff is girding at Simple text out of that and the Folio, and 

in the way he complained of being read, "Ay, Sir Tike: who more 

dealt with in 2 Henry IV. i. ii. So bold?" This grotesque reading was 

Piston in Solitnan and Perseda (Haz. adopted by Malone, Steevens, and 

Dods. 308): "I'll be here as soon as many other editors. Dyce, Cambridge, 

ever I come again." and Globe editions restore the Folio 



190 THE MERRY WIVES [activ. 

Sim. I thank your worship : I shall make my master 

glad with these tidings. [^Exit. 

Host. Thou art clerkly, thou art clerkly, Sir John. 
Was there a wise woman with thee? 

Fal. Ay, that there was, mine host ; one that hath 60 
taught me more wit than ever I learned before in 
my life ; and I paid nothing for it neither, but 
was paid for my learning. 

Enter Bardolph. 

Bard. Out, alas, sir ! cozenage, mere cozenage ! 
Host. Where be my horses? speak well of them, 65 
varletto. 

61,62. than ever . . . life] than I learned this y yeare ^\. 65-67. speak 
•well , . . cozeners\ Q i reads here : where be the Germanes 1 Bar. Rid away 
with your horses. 

text. FalstafFs expression has the scholarly {Winter's Tale, i. ii. 392). 

sound of a bit of a ballad, or something Clerkly occurs in its legitimate sense, 

intended as a mock-heroic. He trans- "with penmanship," in 7 wo Gentle- 

fers the sense of bold in "heboid" men of Verona^ ii. i. 115. Compare 

{i.e. take the liberty, be free with) as Skelton's Colyn Cloute (Dyce, i. 339), 

above, * ' make bold with your money " line 724 : ' * maister Damyan Or some 

(II. ii. 263), to its meaning of "valiant," other man That clerkely is and can 

absurdly misapplied to Simple. For Well scrypture expounde." Falstaff 

the construction compare the common appears more like his old self in this 

expression "as who should say," dialogue. 

which occurs often in Shakespeare 63. paid'\ thrashed, beaten. Com- 

(see Schmidt, lOifib), and writers of ^^zxo. 1 Henry IV. Y.\\\. 148: " I have 

the time and earlier. Curiously enough paid Percy." When Smug, the poacher, 

this identical phrase (the verb "is" gets a thrashing in Brewer's (prose) 

being in its place) is in The Three Merry Devil of Edmonton, he says 

Ladies of London (Haz. Dods. vi. 301), (rept. p. 23) : "the keeper is a devill : 

1584: " Usury. Why, then, I will be he hath payd mee, yfaith." In the 

bold to enter. Conscience. Who is Quarto the words " before in my life," 

more bold than Usury to venter?" It read " this 7 yeare." A good example 

might be almost said Shakespeare re- occurs in Captain Smith's Virginia 

membered those lines. Similar expres- (Arber, p. 373): "the unmerciful! 

sions of the time are "who but he" i)lowes that pay them soundly." Many 

(Gabriel Harvey, i. 233), and the well- examples could be adduced, 
known early proverb, "Who so bold 66. varletto'] A would-be Italianate 

as blind Bayard ? " affectation, like Gabriel Harvey's 

^S. clerkly] for "clerk-like," i.e. " bonetto," Nashe's "curvetto," etc. 



sc.v.] OF WINDSOR 191 

Bard. Run away with the cozeners : for so soon as 
I came beyond Eton, they threw me off, from 
behind one of them, in a slough of mire ; and 
set spurs and away, like three German devils, 70 
three Doctor Faustuses. 

Host. They are gone but to meet the duke, villain : 
do not say they be fled; Germans are honest 
men. 

Enter SiR HUGH EvANS. 

Evans. Where is mine host? 75 

Host. What is the matter, sir? 

Evans. Have a care of your entertainments : there is 
a friend of mine come to town, tells me there is 
three cozen-germans that has cozened all the 
hosts of Readins, of Maidenhead, of Colebrook, 80 
of horses and money. I tell you for good will, 

68. Eton\ Maidenhead Q^ I. 79. cozen-germans] cosert garmombles Q i. 

67. Run away with the cozeners]The Marlowe's play (Scene xi.), when " I 

Quarto reads here : ' ' Host. Why man, was no sooner in the middle of the 

where be my horses : where be the pond, but my horse vanished away," 

Germanes ? Bar. Rid away with your being one of the Doctor's evil spirits, 

horses : After I came beyond Maiden- introduced his name appropriately here, 

head, They flung me in a slow of myre, Dr. Faustus is constantly mentioned, 

and away they ran." For this horse- Ben Jonson has him twice {Alchemist y 

stealing episode, and the German duke, iv. iv. ; Tale of a Tub, iv. v.). A 

see Introduction. The Host's next passage in A Treatise on Play {circa 

speech is not in the Quarto. 1600) implies that the name was given 

69. slough] Wheatley finds here a to some notorious gambler of the 
punning reference to Slough, near day : " the yrreverent Doctor Faustus, 
W^indsor. Perhaps so, but casting off or some such grave patron of great 
a snake's slough is a favourite expres- play," Nugcz Antiques (ed. 1789), ii. 
sion with Shakespeare; if there is to 180. 

be a pun. 79-8 1. three cozen-germans . . . 

70. three German devils] See IV. horses and money] The Quarto reads 
iii. I, 2. "three sorts of cosen garmombles, is 

71. Doctor Faustuses] Another cosen all the Host of Maidenhead and 
allusion to Marlowe's play. See i. i. Readings." 

132. The Horse-courser episode in 



192 THE MERRY WIVES [activ. 

look you : you are wise, and full of gibes and 
vlouting-stogs, and 'tis not convenient you should 
be cozened. Fare you well. [Exit. 

Enter DOCTOR Caius. 

Caius. Vere is mine host de Jartiere ? 85 

Host. Here, master doctor, in perplexity and doubtful 

dilemma. 
Caius. I cannot tell vat is dat : but it is tell-a me 
dat you make grand preparation for a duke de 
Jamany : by my trot, dere is no duke dat the 90 
court is know to come. I tell you for good vill : 
adieu. {Exit. 

83.] Q I has here: And can point wrong places. 90, 91. dere is ... I 
tell you] Q i reads : Dear be a Germaine Duke come to de Court Has cosened all 
de host of Branford And Redding : begar I tell you. 

82. and full of . . .] Instead of these can be no doubt they were his vale- 
words to " Fare you well," the Quarto diction. Nashe introduced this expres- 
has : "And can point wrong places, sion perhaps : *'Dick, no more at this 
I tell you for good will, grate why mine time, but Nos-da diu cata-why, " Have 
Host." I have not seen any note on with, you to Saffron Walden, Ep. 
these words "grate why." No doubt Ded. (Gros. iii. 23), 1596. "Nos 
they are Welsh, and the letter "r " is a dawch" is "good-night." 
misprint. They mean " bless you," or 83. vlouting-stogs'] See III. i. 119 
"preserve you " {cadw chwi), as I judge (note). I see no object in spelling the 
from the expression " Du cat a whee " word differently in the two passages, 
(God bless you), which is dealt with by as most texts do, reading "stocks" 
Nares. It occurs three times in Beau- here. Steevens reads "stogs." 
mont and Fletcher's plays {Night- 88-92. / cannot tell vat . . . adieu] 
Walker^ ill. vi. ; Custom of Country, The Quarto reads : "I cannot tell you 
I. iii. ; Monsieur Thomas, i. ii.), as re- vat be dad, But begar I will tell you 
ferred to by Nares. Another example van ting, Dear be a Garmaine Duke 
is in Middleton's Chaste Maid, I. i. come to de Court Has cosened all de 
And there is some unexplained Welsh host of Branfurd, And Redding ; 
in Webster's Northward Ho, ii. i., begar I tell you for good will. Ha, ha, 
which seems to contain it. It is nine Host, am I even met you ? " The 
pleasant, if I am right, to find one order of these two speeches is trans- 
Welsh expression in Evans' mouth, the posed in the Quarto, in which the 
only one, I believe, in Shakespeare. Doctor enters first. The league formed 
From the position of the words at the against the Host at in. i. 120-126 and 
close of this speech it seems to me there at in. iii. 255-259 has borne its fruit. 



sc. v.] 



OF WINDSOR 



193 



Host. Hue and cry, villain, go ! — Assist me, knight. — 
I am undone ! — Fly, run, hue and cry, villain ! — 
I am undone \ {^Exeunt Host and Bard. 9 5 

Fal. I would all the world might be cozened ; for I 
have been cozened and beaten too. If it should 
come to the ear of the court, how I have been 
transformed, and how my transformation hath 
been washed and cudgelled, they would melt me 100 
out of my fat drop by drop, and liquor fisher- 
men's boots with me : I warrant they would whip 
me with their fine wits till I were as crest-fallen as 
a dried pear. I never prospered since I forswore 
myself at primero. Well, if my wind were but 105 



It seems to me that a careful study of 
the play will satisfy anyone that this 
incident has been successfully planned 
as a revenge upon the Host. The 
commentators do not seem to accept 
it — or doubtfully. As for the means 
which the conspirators made use of, 
they found them ready to their hands, 
in the levying of horses free of charge 
by this German duke — an historical 
incident, too long to be more than 
referred to here. See Introduction 
on these interesting passages. 

93. Hue and cry] This expression 
occurs again in 1 Henry IV. ii. iv. 
556, and only there in Shakespeare. 

100, loi. Jtielt . . . my fat] In Cap- 
tain Smith's Virginia (Arber, Ixi., 1607) 
we read of ' ' one Edward Brooke . . . 
whose fat melted within him, by the 
greate heate and droughte . . . and so 
he died." 

1 01, 102. liquor fisher me7t^ s boots] 
Compare Returnefrom Parnassus, First 
Part (Clar. Press, p. 27), i, i., 1599 : 
" Oh ! he was a wise man ! he coulde 
give such fine rules concerning the 
liquoring of boots for the houlding 
out of water." The expression occurs 
also in Marston's Pasquil and Kathar- 

^3 



ine, I. i. (1600). Shakespeare has 
already alluded to it in 1 Henry IV. 
II. i. 94. 

103, 104. crest-fallen as a aried pear] 
flabby, flaccid, shrunken. The word 
is taken from the cock-fighting sense. 
Compare Lyly, Pappe with an Hatchet 
(Saintsbury rept., p. "j^), 1588: "O 
how meager and leane hee lookt, 
so creast falne, that his combe hung 
down to his bill." And Gabriel 
Harvey (Gros. ii. 119): "not . . . 
so seldome as an hundred times [I] 
pittied his creast-falne stile, and his 
socket- worne invention." A reply to 
the previous writer, Lyly. 

105. primero] A game at cards, 
mentioned again in Henry VIII. 
V. i. 7. It was at this time the most 
popular game for high play at cards in 
court. Nares has a long article upon 
it, which, as Bullen says somewhere, 
is "simply distracting." Cotgrave 
gives the French name pri?ne from 
Rabelais (i, 22). Mabbe, in AlematHs 
Guzman (trans.), 1633 (i. 21, 46), 
shows the game to be Spanish, 
" Primera," and played by three 
persons. He speaks of "3 hand 
primera" (ii. 331), and gives much 



I 



194 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act IV. 



I 



long enough [to say my prayers], I would 
repent. 

Enter MISTRESS Quickly. 
Now, whence come you ? 

Quick. From the two parties, forsooth 

Fal. The devil take one party, and his dam the other ! i lo 
and so they shall be both bestowed. I have 
suffered more for their sakes, more than the 
villanous inconstancy of man's disposition is able 
to bear. 

Quick. And have not they suffered ? Yes, I warrant. 



information about it. But it was also 
played by four people, and in fact by 
any number. An anecdote of its play 
from Mabbe may be quoted : ' ' Certain 
good fellows playing at Primera, and 
the third having discarded, the second 
cried I am prime : God be thanked yet 
at last that I have got one game since 
I played. The other country fellow 
. . . that was drawing his cards . . . 
found them all of one linage . . . and 
sayd : not so much as you think, for I 
am Flush." There were two sorts of 
Primero : la grand prime and la petite 
prime. In an article on "Poker" in 
Ency. Brit, (ninth edition), all sorts of 
games are conveniently hustled to- 
gether, and prime, gleek, brag, post 
and pair, and poker are treated like the 
four-and-twenty blackbirds baked in a 
pie. Sir John Harington must be re- 
ferred to when speaking of this game. 
He wrote a long epigram, The Story of 
Narcissus^ Life at Primero (1614?), 
containing all the term, sand quoted 
in notes to Lingua in Dodsley's Old 
Plays. Harington tells a story of for- 
swearing one's self at primero in Nugce 
AntiqucB, A Treatise on Playe : *' Pope 
Julia . . . was a great and wary player 
... a goode companyon and as merry 
as Pope Joane . . • hee played at 
Primero with some great Princes . . . 



115 



two of them wear incountered five and 
fifty : moch mony being sett upp, and 
much more to sett, the Pope being the 
younger 55 . . . smelling the ratt that 
thear was an elder game on the board 
[he] gave it over, swearing, if hee had 
been but one more, hee would have scene 
it : the other . . . allowed him the 
one more, and in the judgment of the 
groom -porters thear lost it. Heer was 
a kind of frawd, but not so full of fawlt 
as of witte." The story is told of 
before 1600. Harington gives another 
anecdote of "King Henry 8 and 
Domingo " at primero, interesting again 
with regard to Shakespeare's other 
mention of the game. See Ben Jonson, 
Every Alan out of his Humour , I. i. 
for another reference to swearing at 
primero, but it is to fashionable 
expletives. 

106. to say my prayers'] These words 
have dropped out of the Folio. Pope 
inserted them from the Quarto, followed 
by all subsequent editors. The long- 
winded prayers of the time were 
notorious. Compare Ben Jonson, 
Alchemist, ill. ii. (where Subtle ad- 
dresses Ananias) : " Leave off to make 
Long-winded exercises : or suck up 
Your ha ! and hum ! " 

no. devil . . . a7td his dafti] See 
I. i. 152. 



sc.v.] OF WINDSOR 195 

Speciously one of them ; Mistress Ford, good 
heart, is beaten black and blue, that you cannot 
see a white spot about her. 

Fal. What tell'st thou n:ie of black and blue ? I was 

beaten myself into all the colours of the rainbow ; 120 
and I was like to be apprehended for the witch 
of Brainford : but that my admirable dexterity 
of wit, my counterfeiting the action of an old 
woman, delivered me, the knave constable had set 
me i' the stocks, i' the common stocks, for a witch. 125 

Quick. Sir, let me speak with you in your chamber: 
you shall hear how things go; and, I warrant, 
to your content. Here is a letter will say some- 
what. Good hearts, what ado here is to bring 
you together ! Sure, one of you does not serve 130 
heaven well, that you are so crossed. 

Fal. Come up into my chamber. \Exeunt. 

116. speciously'] especially. Mrs. 122, 123. dexterity of wif] This ex- 

Quickly used this word already (ill. pression, "dexteritie of witt," occurs 

iv. 113), and see note there. It is in Humphrey Gifford's Fosie of Gillo- 

interesting to note that in both cases flowers (Gros. rept. p. 60), 1580. 

the Quarto reads "specially." The Wheatley cites an example of it, 

prosaic intermeddler banished this little " sodaine dexterity of wit," from 

bit of fun. Certainly Mrs. Quickly Bocaccio's Decameron (trans.), ed. 

said "speciously." Her audacious lie 1620. 

here about Mrs. Ford, for the purpose 130, 131. Sure, one of you . . .] Dr. 

of anticipating Falstaff, is crafty and Johnson is very severe here upon '* the 

amusing. The Quarto says: "Her frequency of expressions so profane " in 

husband hath beaten her that she is all this play. This may rather be regarded 

Blacke and blew poor soule." as a touch of humour, admirably in 

120. all the colours of the rainbow] keeping in the looseness of its morality 

Dryden makes use of this in the with the character of Mrs. Quickly, 

Spanish Friar, V. ii. : " He beat me a low type of woman, necessary for the 

into all the colours of the rainbow." structure of the piece. She is absolutely 

The expression was applied earlier, as true to nature. But Dr. Johnson's 

now, to gaudy clothes by Nashe : strictures must be noticed elsewhere, 

"when presenting himself in all the On the whole he gives this play the 

colours of the rainbow," Have with highest possible praise : pleasant read- 

you to Saffron Walden (Gros. iii. 1 16), ing after the depreciatory newspaper 

1596. criticism of the present day. 



196 THE MERRY WIVES [activ. 



SCENE VI. — The Same. Another Room in the 
Garter Inn. 

Enter Fenton and HOST. 

Host. Master Fenton, talk not to me ; my mind is 
heavy : I will give over all. 

Pent. Yet hear me speak. Assist me in my purpose, 
And, as I am a gentleman, I '11 give thee 
A hundred pound in gold more than your loss. 5 

Host. I will hear you. Master Fenton ; and I will at 
the least keep your counsel. 

Pent. From time to time I have acquainted you 
With the dear love I bear to fair Anne Page ; 
Who mutually hath answer'd my affection, 10 

So far forth as herself might be her chooser. 
Even to my wish : I have a letter from her 
Of such contents as you will wonder at ; 
The mirth whereof so larded with my matter. 
That neither singly can be manifested, 15 

Without the show of both ; fat Falstaff 

5. more than] toward your Q i. i6. fat Falstaff] wherein fat Falstaff (^ i. 

14. larded] interlarded. point. It is FalstafFs scene. Falstaff 

16. fat Falstaff] Malone, followed may have got even fatter in his country 

by several editors, inserted "wherein" life, and perhaps it is to this scene Ben 

here from a line in the Quarto : Jonson refers in Every Man out of his 

"wherein fat Falstaff had a mightie Hiwiour, v. vii. (last words), 1599: 

scare." The whole description there of " beg a plaudite for God's sake : but if 

these proceedings is parallel of course, you, out of the bounty of your good lik- 

but differs too materially to check the ing, will bestow it, why, you may in time 

wording by. Boswell suggests that make lean Macilente as fat as Sir John 

"scare" is a misprint for "share," Falstaffe." Nothing could show Fal- 

which would be a better word than the staff's popularity, and Ben's regard for 

one we have, if "wherein" be illegally the writer, better than that he makes 

inserted ; but not as it stands. The this remark wind up his play. 
Folio reading is much better to the 



sc.vi.] OF WINDSOR 197 

Hath a great scene : the image of the jest 

I '11 show you here at large. Hark, good mine host. 

To-night at Heme's oak, just 'twixt twelve and one. 

Must my sweet Nan present the Fairy Queen ; 20 

The purpose why, is here : in which disguise, 

While other jests are something rank on foot, 

Her father hath commanded her to slip 

Away with Slender, and with him at Eton 

Immediately to marry: she hath consented: 25 

Now, sir. 

Her mother, even strong against that match, 

And firm for Doctor Caius, hath appointed 

That he shall likewise shuffle her away, 

While other sports are tasking of their minds, 30 

And at the deanery, where a priest attends. 

Straight marry her : to this her mother's plot 

She seemingly obedient likewise hath 

Made promise to the doctor. Now, thus it rests : 

Her father means she shall be all in white ; 3 5 

And in that habit, when Slender sees his time 

To take her by the hand and bid her go. 

She shall go with him : her mother hath intended. 

The better to denote her to the doctor, — 

For they must all be mask'd and vizarded, — 40 

17. great scene] mightie scare Q i. 24. Etoii] Catlen Q I. 28. Jinn 

for Doctor Caius'\ Jirme for Doctor Cayus, in a robe of red Ql i. 39. denote'\ 
Capell (Steevens conj.) ; devote Ff, Q 3. 

17. the image of the jesf] vivid de- letter is private, but shows the pro- 
scription of the jest, whether in speech gramme. 

or writing, as in the title of Derricke's 22. rank on foof] rank, used ad- 

Image of Ireland^ 1578. Apparently verbially, meaning "abundantly," 

Fenton has a letter containing a occurs again in Troilus and CressidUy 

script or cast of the enactment to i. iii. 196. 
take place. lie implies that the 31. deanery"] See below, V. iii. 3. 



198 THE MERRY WIVES [act v. 

That quaint in green she shall be loose enrobed, 

With ribands pendent, flaring 'bout her head ; 

And when the doctor spies his vantage ripe, 

To pinch her by the hand, and, on that token, 

The maid hath given consent to go with him. 45 

Host, Which means she to deceive, father or mother? 

Pent. Both, my good host, to go along with me : 

And here it rests, — that you '11 procure the vicar 
To stay for me at church 'twixt twelve and one. 
And, in the lawful name of marrying, 50 

To give our hearts united ceremony. 

Host. Well, husband your device ; I '11 to the vicar : 
Bring you the maid, you shall not lack a priest. 

Pent, So shall I evermore be bound to thee; 

Besides, I '11 make a present recompence. 5 5 

\Exeunt. 

ACT V 

SCENE I. — A Room in the Garter Inn. 

Enter Falstaff and MISTRESS QUICKLY. 
Pal. Prithee, no more prattling ; go. I '11 hold. 

41. That quaint in green she shall be loose enrobedl And by a robe of white , 
the which she weares, IVith ribones pendant flaring bout her head I shall be sure 
to know her Q i. 51. ceremony'] matrimony Q I. 

41. in green . . . enrobed] See note to half the length here given us. The 

at IV. iv. 72; and see V. ii., v. iii. i, Host's speech following, ending some- 

V. V. 213. what incongruously with an assurance of 

50, 51.] These poor lines are hardly a priest, are his last words in the play, 

better in the Quarto: "And tarrie ^ 7^ c 

readie at the appointment place, To ^^^ ^- ^'^^^^ ^' 

give our hearty united matrimonie." i. Pllhold] I'll be true — keep the 

The Quarto condenses Fenton's speech appointment. 



SC. I.] 



OF WINDSOR 



199 



This is the third time; 1 hope good luck Hes in 
odd numbers. Away ! go. They say there is 
divinity in odd numbers, either in nativity, 
chance, or death. Away ! 



2. This is the third time] Compare 
Twelfth Night, v. i. 40: **the old 
saying is, the third time pays for all." 
And A Warning for f aire Women, Act 
II., 1599 : " Have you forgot what the 
old proverb is : the third time pays for 
all?" 

2, 3. / hope good luck lies in odd 
numbers] The number three w^as be- 
lieved to be lucky, and held in repute 
by witches (as in Macbeth, i. iii,, iv. i.) 
since the time of Ovid, and in our 
folk-lore, as the foregoing note illus- 
trates. But evidence seems to be 
wanting that odd numbers as a whole 
were held to be lucky. Virgil is 
quoted by Steevens, Ntunero Deus 
ivipare gaudet. (Eclog. viii.). Pliny 
is more explicit in this respect : "If 
there be nothing in words, how hap- 
peneth it I would faine know, that wee 
have such an opinion of odde numbers, 
beleeving that they be more efifectuall in 
all thinges than the even ? A matter I 
may tell you of great consequence, if 
we doe but observe the criticall dales 
in feavers ? " Holland's trans, of Plinie, 
xxviii. 2 (p. 297, B), 1601. And very 
much of Pliny's folklore has come down 
unaltered to our own time. But had 
this come down to Shakespeare's days ? 
It is merely necessary to refer to " thir- 
teen." Falstaff only utters a hope, and 
Pliny's statement has reference rather 
to "words" than numbers. See the 
following note. Brand has a chapter 
on the subject which is of no use. And 
what is more interesting, Aubrey in his 
Remaines of Gentilis?}i and Judaisme 
(1686-87) can only quote Virgil and 
Pliny, with the one addition, "Our 
housewives, in setting of their egges 
under the hen, do lay [?.<?. place, not lay 
as a hen does] an odde number." The 
saying, " there 's luck in odd numbers," 



seems to be quite modern, and though 
perhaps built upon this, it is built upon 
sand. Were there frequent parallels, 
one would infallibly occur in the play- 
wrights, as, for example, when Sordido 
is going through his almanack in Every 
Man out of his Humour, I. i. (1599). 
In Middlelon's Witch odd numbers 
are very prominent; in malevolent 
situations. 

3, 4. They say there is divinity in odd 
numbers'] The Quarto here reads ' ' old 
numbers" in Mr. Daniel's reprint, and 
there is something to be said for it, for 
the passage probably refers to the old 
divination by numbers, the "Pytha- 
goras' lot," mentioned by Ben Jonson 
in Gipsies Metamorphosed, " Divinity " 
here means divination, an uncommon 
use, but illustrated in New Eng. Diet, 
from Caxton, and the following passage 
in Plolland's Plinie, ii. 58 (p. 28): 
" Which if any man beleeve . . . must 
needs also confesse, that this divinitie 
or fore-telling of Anaxagoras was more 
miraculous," etc. This use does not 
occur again in Shakespeare, nor has it 
been detected here, but I apprehend he 
took this idea from Reginald Scot's 
Discoverie of Witchcraft {^p. 1 59 reprint), 
bk. xi. chap. 10, 1584: "Of Pytha- 
goras' lot . . . which (some sale) Aris- 
totle believed : and that is, where the 
characters of letters have certeine proper 
numbers : whereby they divine (through 
the proper names of men) so as the 
numbers of each letters being gathered 
in a summe, and put together, give 
victorie to them whose summe is the 
greater : whether the question be of 
warre, life, matrimonie, victorie, &c. : 
even as the unequall number of vowels 
in proper names portendeth lacke of 
sight, halting, &c." Falstaff is about 
to test this belief by practical divination. 



200 



THE MERRY 



WIVES [ACTV. 

do what 



Quick. I '11 provide you a chain ; and I 

I can to get you a pair of horns. 
FaL Away, I say ; time wears : hold up your head, 

and mince. \Exit Mrs. Quickly. 



Enter FoRD. 

How now. Master Brook ! Master Brook, the 
matter will be known to-night, or never. Be 
you in the Park about midnight, at Heme's 
oak, and you shall see wonders. 



lO 



6. 77/ provide you a chaiii\ For 
Falstaff, disguised as a devil with horns, 
to shake. See iv. iv. 34. Compare 
Nashe, Terrors of the Night, 1594: 
*' the divell of late is growen a puritan 
and cannot away with anie ceremonies 
. . . In diebus illis when Corineus and 
Gogmagog were little boyes . . . hee 
would iustle men in their owne houses, 
pluck them out of bed by the heeles, 
and daunce in chaynes from one chamber 
to another." And Burton (quoting from 
Cardan) says in Anatomie of Melancholy , 
i. 2, i. 2 (p. 125, ed. 1854), 1621 : 
** Another sort of these there are, which 
frequent forlorn houses (where treasure 
is hid as some think or some murder or 
such like villainy committed), which 
the Italians call foliots, most part in- 
noxious, as Cardan holds. They will 
make strange noises in the night, howl 
sometimes pitifully, and then laugh 
again, cause great flame and sudden 
lights, fling stones, rattle chains," etc. 

8, 9. hold up your head, and mince'\ 
"with a mynsynge pace, le pas mejtti,''^ 
Palsgrave, 1530. The term occurs in 
Isaiah iii. 16 : "the daughters of Zion 
are haughty, and walk with stretched 
forth necks and wanton eyes, walking 
and mincing as they go" ("with ther 
feet in curious goyng," Wyclif) ; " which 
showed their wantonnesse " is the com- 
ment in the Oxford Bible, 1679. And 
"mincing steps" is in Merchant of 



Venice, III. iv. 6^. At this time it was 
properly a dancing term. Dekker uses 
it in The Batchelars Banquet, chap, xi., 
1603: "those places of sportes and 
pleasure where fine Dames and dainetye 
Girles meat, whooe can finely mince 
their measures, have their toongues 
trained up to amorous chat." Marston 
applies it to the capriole (a leap at 
dancing). Satire, xi., 1598 : " His heels 
do caper whilst he eats his meat, His 
very soul, his intellectual Is nothing 
but a mincing capreall. He dreams of 
toe-turns." Falstaff"'s words appear to 
refer to some personal characteristics in 
the mannerism of the actor playing Mrs. 
Quickly, or has it reference to the pre- 
parations for her coming dance, to tickle 
the ears of the groundlings? (see v. v. 
41, V. iv.). 

10-32.] This private triumph that 
Ford has, at Falstaff"'s expense, is en- 
tirely omitted in the Quarto. Ford 
can carry nobody's sympathy, and he 
hardly seems to merit any reward, but 
one wonders he does not make more of 
such a promising situation. 

12,13. about midnight, at Heme' s oak"] 
A similar appointment is made in Wal- 
tham Forest by Brian the keeper with his 
man in The Merry Devil of Edmonton 
(Haz. Dods. p. 247) : " Where the devil 
are my men to-night ? . . . Sirrah, go up 
and wind towards Buckley's lodge : And 
I will meet thee under Cony-oak." 



SC. 1.] 



OF WINDSOR 



201 



Ford. Went you not to her yesterday, sir, as you 

told me you had appointed ? 15 

Fal. I went to her. Master Brook, as you see, like 
a poor old man : but I came from her, Master 
Brook, like a poor old woman. That same knave 
Ford, her husband, hath the finest mad devil 
of jealousy in him. Master Brook, that ever 20 
governed frenzy. I will tell you : — he beat me 
grievously, in the shape of a woman ; for in the 
shape of man, Master Brook, I fear not Goliath 
with a weaver's beam ; because I know also life 
is a shuttle. I am in haste ; go along with me : 2 5 
I '11 tell you all. Master Brook. Since I plucked 
geese, played truant, and whipped top, I knew 



23, 24. I fear not Goliath with a 
weaver's beani\ "The staff of Goliath's 
spear was Hke a weaver's beam," 
2 Sam. xxi. 19. And i Sam. xvii. 7 ; 
I Chron. xi. 23, xx. 5. Compare 
Nashe, Summer's Last Will (Haz. 
Dods. viii. 56), 1592 : "That same Sol 
is a pagan and a proselyte : he shined 
so bright all summer that he burnt more 
grapes than his beams were worth, were 
every beam as big as a weaver's beam." 
And Gabriel Harvey, Pierce's Super- 
erogation (Grosart, ii. 282), 1592-93: 
"I feared the brasen shield and the 
brasen bootes of Goliath, and that same 
hideous speare like a weaver's beam." 
Shakespeare did not originate this as 
an extract from the Bible. It was 
evidently a stock quotation. Probably 
this is one of the profanities Dr. John- 
son took offence at. 

24, 25. life is a shuttle^ "My days 
are swifter than a weaver's shuttle," 
Job vii. 6. Compare also Nashe, Tears 
over Jerusalem (Grosart, iv. 135), 1593 : 
" Your dayes are as swift as a post, yea 
swifter than a weaver's shuttle, they flye 
and see no good thing." One weaver 
suggested the other. 



26, 27. plucked geese"] "To strip a 
living goose of its feathers was formerly 
an act of puerile barbarity," Steevens. 
Halliwell in his folio ed. of Shakespeare 
(ii. 454) refers to " Sherwen MSS., 
c. 1810," for this as a boyish diversion 
in the north (about 1750), with the 
cry "Scholar's law — pull a goose and 
let her go ! " on some wide common. 
Steevens remark is made at random. 
Plucking geese was formerly a recog- 
nised custom, and children found it, 
perhaps, an amusement. In Young's 
Tour in Ireland, 1776-1779 (i. 259, ed. 
1892), amongst the "Singularities of 
Mayo husbandry," it is mentioned on the 
authority of Lord Altamont that ' * They 
pluck their geese alive every year. " And 
in Dictionarium Rusticum et Urbani- 
cmn, 1704, subv. Geese-feathers, we are 
told that " for the gathering of these, tho 
some Authors advise to pull them twice a 
year, viz. in March and August ; yet cer- 
tainly 'tis an ill way . . . 'tis the best 
way to stay till Moulting-time, or that 
you kill her : and then all her Feathers 
may be made use of at pleasure, for 
Beds, Fletchers, &c." 

27. played truant'] the technical term 



202 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act v. 



not what 'twas to be beaten till lately. Follow 
me : I '11 tell you strange things of this knave 
Ford, on whom to-night I will be revenged, and 30 
I will deliver his wife into your hand. Follow. 
Strange things in hand, Master Brook ! Follow. 

[^Exeunt. 



SCENE Ih— Windsor Park. 

Enter PAGE, SHALLOW, and SLENDER. 

Page. Come, come ; we '11 couch i' the castle-ditch till 
we see the light of our fairies. Remember, son 
Slender, my daughter. 

Slen. Ay^ forsooth ; I have spoke with her, and 
we have a nay- word how to know one another : 
I come to her in white, and cry, " mum " ; 



Windsor Park] Pope ; A street Capell. 
3. daughter] omitted F i, Q 3. 



Scenes 11., in. omitted Q i. 



for "miching" or "scheming school." 
It occurs again in a transferred use in 
Lovers Labour's Lost, ii. i. 74. Compare 
How a Man may chuse a Good Wife 
(Haz. Dods. ix. 42), 1602: "I had 
rather play the truant at home than go 
seek my master at school." 

32. Strange things in hajid] Com- 
pare again Merry Devil of Edmonton^ 
V. ii. : "Have we comedies in 
hand ? " 

Scene //. 

I. couch] to lie hidden, to lurk. 

5. nay -word] See 11. ii. 132. A 
pass-word. 

6. mum] "Mum's the word" is a 
very old saying, meaning silence." 
The word is said to be an abbreviation 
or variant of "mumble." " There was 
amonge them then no worde but mum," 
Skelton, Garlande of Lawrell (Dyce, i. 



406) 
cence 
has 
1530 



and again in Skelton's Magnyfy- 
(i. 314), circa 1515. Palsgrave 
' mom ! " amongst interjections, 
It naturally suggested that other 
expression "mumbudget." ^^ Avoir le 
bee gele, to play mumbudget, to be 
tongue-tyed, to say never a word," Cot- 
grave. It occurs in Richard Edwards' 
Damon and Pithias {ante 1566), Haz. 
Dods. iv. 39 : " But mumbudget, 
for Carisophus I espy." Mumbudget 
("silence") is very common. Taylor 
{Works, ii. 97), 1630, has "mumbudget 
of silence" as if it meant the same as 
" budget," a peddlar's bag. " To open 
one's budget " was an old phrase mean- 
ing to open one's mind {New Eng. 
Diet.). Dekker had this scene in liis 
mind when he wrote in Satiromastix 
(Pearson, p. 231) : " I, to Mum withal, 
iDut hee playes mumbudget with me" 
(1602). 



sc.iii.] OF WINDSOR 203 

she cries " budget " ; and by that we know one 
another. 

ShaL That 's good too : but what needs either your 

"mum" or her "budget"? the white will lo 
decipher her well enough. It hath struck ten 
o'clock. 

Page. The night is dark ; light and spirits will 
become it well. Heaven prosper our sport ! 
No man means evil but the devil, and we shall i 5 
know him by his horns. Let 's away ; follow 
me. {Exeunt. 



SCENE III. — A Street leading to the Park. 
Enter MISTRESS PAGE, MISTRESS FORD, and DOCTOR 

Caius. 

Mrs. Page. Master Doctor, my daughter is in green : 
when you see your time, take her by the hand, 
away with her to the deanery, and dispatch it 
quickly. Go before into the Park : we two must 
go together. 5 

Caius. I know what I have to do. Adieu. 

Mrs. Page. Fare you well, sir. \Exit Caius.] My 
husband will not rejoice so much at the abuse 

9. Shal.] Shallow appears to lose 14. become] suit, fit. 

his temper with his "wise cousin" i6. horns] the devil's (Falstaff's) 

Slender, at last. Shallow comes in to badge. See Measure for Measure, II. 

look after his relative's interests, iv. i6, etc. 

Properly speaking, we had done with Scene HI. 
Justice Shallow when he administers a 

dignified reproof to Ford (iv. ii. 162). i. green] See iv. vi. 41, and note; 

In the Quarto he is, however, the first and v. v. 213. 

to greet Falstaff after the pinching song 3. deanery] Attached to St. George's 

with " God save you sir lohn Falstaffe." Chapel. See Introduction. 



204 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act v. 



of Falstaff as he will chafe at the doctor's marry- 
ing my daughter : but 'tis no matter ; better a i O 
little chiding than a great deal of heart-break. 

Mrs. Ford. Where is Nan now and her troop of 
fairies, and the Welsh devil ? 

Mrs. Page. They are all couched in a pit hard by 

Heme's oak, with obscured lights ; which, at 15 
the very instant of Falstafif's and our meeting, 
they will at once display to the night. 

Mrs. Ford. That cannot choose but amaze him. 

Mrs. Page. If he be not amazed, he will be mocked ; 

if he be amazed, he will every way be 20 
mocked. 



13. Welsh devil?] Welsh devil Heme Ff, Q 3 ; Welsh devil Hugh Capell, 
Steevens, Globe, Cambridge ; Welsh devil Evans Theobald. 20. every way] 
omitted F 2, 3, 4. 



I o, 1 1 . better a little, etc. ] This is equival- 
ent to the proverb (given by Ray without 
any reference), " Better a mischief than 
an inconvenience," i.e. a trouble soon 
over than a permanent misfortune. It 
occurs in Gabriel Harvey's New Letter 
(Grosart, i. 284), 1592. The passage in 
the text may well have been proverbial, 
for it is in a framing which was often 
used, though not in the "collections." 
For examples : "Better a little at home 
than a deal abroad " (of good cheer), 
Mabbe, Alematis Gtizman, i. 257 
(1623). And "Better a little well 
kept than a great deal forgotten," 
Latimer, Seven Sermons (Arber, p. 
i3o)> 1549- And see note at 11. ii, 
328. 

13. Welsh devil?] I prefer to print 
the text so, and take the liberty of 
making the alteration. Mrs. Ford 
would hardly use the term "devil" so 
distinctly of her parson. She is going 
over the performers in the scene to be 
acted, in her mind, the fairies and the 
devils. It is more likely that "Heme" 



got up from below, and that that was 
the error, than that it was printed Heme 
for Hugh. That involves a larger mis- 
print, the word being at the close of a 
spacing. Moreover, no one calls the 
parson " Hugh " without any style 
prefixed, excepting " fairy Hugh " (v. v. 
138), which is not offensive. Falstaff 
calls him " that Welsh fairy." Again, 
the names in the Folio are usually in 
italics, but "Heme" is not, in either 
line, which argues against it. If it is 
unusual in one instance, it is still more 
so in two. So that probably no word 
was to have been placed there. Further, 
"Welsh devil" by itself would come 
naturally after having made acquaint- 
ance with Owen Glendower in 1 Henry 
IV., "that Welsh fiend." 

14, 15. pit hard by Herne^s oak] 
Steevens says here : " An oak, which 
may be that alluded to by Shakespeare, 
is still standing close to a pit in Windsor 
forest. It is yet shown as the oak of 
Heme," ed. 1793. See Introduction. 

18. atnaze] terrify. 



sc.iv.] OF WINDSOR 205 

Mrs, Ford. We '11 betray him finely. 

Mrs. Page. Against such lewdsters and their lechery 

Those that betray them do no treachery. 
Mrs, Ford. The hour draws on. To the oak, to the 25 

oak ! {Exeunt. 

SCENE lY.— Windsor Park. 

Enter SiR HUGH EvANS disguised, with others as Fairies, 
Evans, Trib, trib, fairies ; come ; and remember your 
parts : be pold, I pray you ; follow me into the 
pit ; and when I give the watch-'ords, do as I 
pid you : come, come ; trib, trib. {Exeunt, 



SCENE V. — Another part of the Park, 

Enter Falstaff disguised as Heme, with a buck's head 
upon him. 

Fal, The Windsor bell hath struck twelve; the 
minute draws on. Now, the hot-blooded gods 
assist me ! Remember, Jove, thou wast a bull 

23. lewdsters] lewd persons. A 3. Remember, Jove, etc."] Malone 

word not likely to have been invented quotes from Lyly's Euphties, 1580 : "I 

by Skakespeare, but not known else- think in those days love was well ratified 

where earlier. "Lewdsby" occurs in on earth, when lust was so full author- 

the same sense. ized in heaven." Probably the senti- 

,-. ment is common. Compare Watson's 

bce7te V. Passionate Centtirie of Love, Sonnet 

Enter Falstaff, etc.] In the Quarto Ixxi. : "Nay, if thou list, survey the 

the parallel words are " Enter Sir John heavns above, And see how Gods 

with a Buck's head upon him." In themselves are changed by Love, love 

Dekker's Satiromastix a stage-direction steales from skies to lye by Ledaes side 

gives ' ' Horace and Bubo pulled in by the . . . No mervaile then although I 

homes bound both like Satyres. " And change my minde Which am in love 

in Marlowe's Doctor Faustus, a knight with one of heavenly kinde." In the 

has a pair ofhorns set upon him by magic, preceding sonnet, "love, Whose 



206 THE MERRY WIVES [actv. 

for thy Europa ; love set on thy horns. O 
powerful love ! that, in some respects, makes a 5 
beast a man ; in some other, a man a beast. You 
were also, Jupiter, a swan for the love of Led a. 
O omnipotent Love ! how near the god drew to 
the complexion of a goose ! A fault done first 
in the form of a beast; — O Jove, a beastly 10 
fault ! And then another fault in the semblance 
of a fowl ; — think on 't, Jove ; a foul fault ! 
When gods have hot backs, what shall poor 
men do ? For me, I am here a Windsor stag ; 
and the fattest, I think, i' the forest. Send me a 15 
cool rut-time, Jove, or who can blame me to piss 
my tallow ? — Who comes here ? my doe ? 

Enter MISTRESS FoRD and Mistress Page. 
Mrs, Ford. Sir John! art thou there, my deer? my 

male deer ? 
Fal. My doe with the black scut ! Let the sky rain 20 

heavenly heart was toucht with mortall and Neptune a swine, and both for love 
love . . . And broughtst Europa faire of an earthly mistresse. " 
to Creta sande" is treated of (1582). 15, 16. Send me a cool rut-time, etcl 
Heywood recalled these lines in his Farmer quoted from Turberville's Booke 
Fair Maid of the Exchange (Pearson, of Htinti^ig, 1575 : "During the time 
PP- 37> 38)j 1607 : "And yet I need not of their rut, the harts live with small 
be ashamed neither, love when his sustenance. . . . The red mushroome 
love-scapes he attempted ever Trans- helpeth well to make them pysse their 
form'd himselfe, yet ever sped in love greace, they are then in so vehement 
Why may not I then in this strange dis- heate." The expression is in Ray's 
guise? This habit may prove mighty Proverbs. Steevens refers it to a 
in love's power, As beast, or bird, French origin, Jacques de Fouilloux, 
bull, swanne or golden showre." The La Venerie. The phrase is in Mot- 
speaker is disguised as a porter. teux's Rabelais (v. 28), but not in the 

9. co7nplexton\ nature, as in Measure original. 

for Measui-e, ill. i. 24. 20. scut'] tail. Limited to the tail 

9. goose] Suggested by the common of a hare or rabbit in the Gentle?nan's 

saying "All your geese are swans" Recreation, of a later date. "Short" 

perhaps. But Lyly has in Mydas, iv. is probably the primary sense. The 

i., 1592: " Love made Jupiter a goose, word is used in Holland's Plinie 



sc. v.] 



OF WINDSOR 



207 



potatoes ; let it thunder to the tune' of Green 
Sleeves, hail kissing-comfits, and snow eringoes ; 



(xxxii. 5) in a notable passage about 
a frog, where the tail is so short that 
it has disappeared entirely from the 
meaning. 

20. Let the sky rain, etc.] Steevens 
says here, very judiciously, " Shake- 
speare very probably had the following 
artificial tempest in his thoughts . . . 
Holinshed informs us that in the year 
1583, for the entertainment of Prince 
Alasco was performed 'a verie stately 
tragedie named Dido [by William Gager, 
in Latin] wherein the Queen's banket 
(with yEneas' narration of the destruc- 
tion of Troie) was lively described in a 
marchpaine patterne, . . . the tempest 
wherein it hailed small confects, rained 
rosewater, and snew artificial kind of 
snow, all strange, marvellous and 
abundant.' " These " perfumed mists " 
were ordinary stage properties. The 
passage in Holinshed was quoted 
by Warton, with reference iii., 

1355. 

20, 21. rain potatoes] formerly regarded 
as provocatives. Collins collected a 
quantity of references illustrating this, 
which are given in Steevens' Shake- 
speare in a note to Troihis and Cressida, 
V. ii. , and referred to by Nares. The 
earliest reference there is from Greene's 
Ilee and Shee Cony catcher, 1592 (Gros. 
X. 234). Gerarde in his Herbal, 
p. 780, 1597, says : " This plant which 
is called of some Skyrrits of Peru, is 
generally of us called Potatus or Pota- 
toes ... I have had in my garden 
divers roots (that I bought at the 
Exchange in London) where they 
flourished until winter, at which time 
they perished and rotted. They are 
used to be eaten roasted in the ashes. 
Some, when they be so roasted infuse 
them and sop them in wine [rain pota- 
toes] . . . Howsoever they be dressed, 
they comfort, nourish and strengthen 
the bodie, procure bodily lust, and that 
with great greedines." The name 
properly belongs to the Batatas of the 
West Indies, and the two esculents 



were confused in some of the early 
accounts. 

21, 22, Green Sleeves] See 11. i. 61 
(note). From the popularity of the tune 
as a wanton dance, the term became 
transferred to loose women, who adopted 
the wear, as in Jonson's Bartholomew 
Fair, 16 14. Lady Greensleeves is so 
referred to in Beaumont and Fletcher's 
Woman^s Prize, Act III. See note at 
IV. ii. 204 for another earlier example. 

22. hail kissing - comjits] perfumed 
sugar-plums to sweeten the breath. 
Several examples are given by Nares, 
all of a later date than Merry Wives. 
Nashe has the term earlier in Have 
with you to Saffron Walden (iii. 142), 
I594> where Gabriel Harvey has a page 
"halfe a yeere, rubbing his toes, and 
following him with his sprinkling glasse 
and his box of kissing comfits, from 
place to place." The perfume was 
amber grease : * ' Search our pockets, 
if you find there Comfits of amber gris 
to help our kisses, Conclude us faulty," 
Massinger, A Very Woman, i. i., 
Amber gris was much used in cullices, 
and these comfits were more than merely 
perfumes. Harington mentions "an 
ounce or two of kissing comfits " in his 
Metamorphosis, An Apology, 1596. 

22. snow eringoes] The candied roots 
oi Eryngitwi (sea-holly) were a favourite 
sweetmeat. Eringos are commonly men- 
tioned in old plays in connection with 
potatoes, as in Massinger's Picture, 
IV. i. ; and Beaumont and Fletcher's 
Elder Brother, iv. iv. Compare Dek- 
ker, The Bankrotcts Banquet (Gros. 
iii. 371): "After these . . . were 
statutes served up ; and they were 
laden with candyed eringoes ; of pur- 
pose to put spirit into him that should 
eate of this dish." Marston mentions 
candied eringoes in Malcontent, ii. iii., 
and in Insatiate Countess, ii. i. Mon- 
taigne in that extraordinary zenith of 
egotism, his Essay on Experience 
(Tudor trans, xii., xiii. p. 360), says 
he tried eringoes "at the request of 



208 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act v. 



let there come a tempest of provocation, I will 
shelter me here. 

Mrs, Ford. Mistress Page is come with me, sweet- 25 
heart. 

Fal. Divide me like a brib'd-buck, each a haunch : I 
will keep my sides to myself, my shoulders for 
the fellow of this walk, and my horns I be- 
queath your husbands. Am I a woodman, ha? 30 
Speak I like Heme the hunter? Why, now is 

27. hrWd^ Ff, Q 3; bribe Theobald et seg. 31. Hermi Home Q i, 

passim. 

some Ladies," but found them unpro- 
fitable. It was an ancient belief that 
Eryngiwn possessed amatorious pro- 
perties : "the roote of this white 
eryngion (which is very geason and 
hard to be got) . . . if it chaunce that 
a man doe meet with that eryngion 
... he shall be very amiable and 
beloved of women," Holland's Plinie, 
xxii. 8. 

27. briFd-buck'] one that is won 
over to you by a bribe ; a gift to you 
for plunder. As a "bribed judge" is 
bought by (and for) corruption. New 
Eng. Diet, has an early example of the 
expression "bribed judge." But it is 
difficult to understand why the com- 
mentators altered the Folio reading, 
making the expression harder to under- 
stand — "a buck sent for a bribe" (as 
Mr. Theobald observes) "seems non- 
sensical." Ben Jonson uses the verb in 
the same sense, absolutely, for to obtain 
by bribery (of flattery, etc. ) : " No, no, 
no ; Here doth no such humour flow. 
He can neither bribe a grace Nor en- 
counter my lord's face With a pliant 
smile and flatter," The Satyr, 1603. 
As Falstaff speaks, so would the cor- 
rupt judge to his suitors, "I am your 
bribed judge, deal with me as you 
will." 

28. my shoulders'] Harting quotes 
{Ornith. of Shakspeare\ from Dame 



Juliana Berner's Boke of St. Albans^ 
1496: "And the right shoulder, whereso- 
ever he be Bear it to the foster [forester], 
for that is fee." Harrison says: "the 
ordinarie fee, and parts of the deere, 
given unto the keeper by a custome, 
who beside three shillings foure pence, 
or five shillings in monie, hath the skin, 
head, umbles, chine, and shoulders ; 
whereby he that hath the warrant for an 
whole bucke, hath in the end little more 
than halfe," Description of England^ 
II. xix., 1587. See later, Pepys, Sept. 
13, 1665. 

28, 29. my shoulders for the fellow of 
this walk] for my fellow-keeper. A 
keeper's beat in the forest was his walk, 
and the term was also used of the part 
of a forest affected by a particular buck. 
Falstaff has both senses in his purview. 
In the Merry Devil of Edmonton, ii. 
ii., "Brian's walk, the mad keeper," 
occurs. 

30. woodman] One skilled in venery 
and woodcraft. A Sir Tristram or 
hunter. Ben Jonson calls Robin Hood 
"the chief woodman" in The Sad 
Shepherd. And see also his Satyr. 
Compare Lucrece, 580. Steevens sug- 
gests an added sense of wantonness. 
See Measure for Measure, iv. iii. 
170. 

31. Heme the hunter] See Intro- 
duction. 



sc.v.] OF WINDSOR 209 

Cupid a child of conscience; he makes resti- 
tution. As I am a true spirit, welcome ! 

\_Noise within. 
Mrs. Page. Alas, what noise ? 

Mrs. Ford. Heaven forgive our sins ! 3 5 

Fal. What should this be? 

Mrs. Ford.\ ^_, ^ 

Mrs. Page] ^^^^' ^^^^ ' ^^^'^ '''''' ''^' 

Fal. I think the devil will not have me damned, lest 
the oil that 's in me should set hell on fire ; he 
would never else cross me thus. 40 

Enter SiR Hugh Evans, disguised as before; PiSTOL, as 
Hobgoblin; MISTRESS QUICKLY, AnNE Page, and 
others^ as Fairies^ with tapers. 

Quick. Fairies, black, grey, green, and white, 

37. [They run off.] There is a noise of homes, the two women run away Q I. 
40. Enter . . . tapers] Globe, Cambridge ; Enter Sir Hugh Evans, like a satyr ; 
Mrs. Quickly, and Pistol ; Anne Page, as the Fairy Queen, attended by her brother 
and others, dressed like fairies, with waxen tapers on their heads Malone, 
Steevens (and most modern editors nearly) ; Enter Falstaff (etc. , enumerating all 
who take part) Ff ; Enter Sir Hugh like a Satyre, and boyes drest like Fayries, 
Mistresse Quickly, like the Queene of Fayries : they sing about him, and after- 
wards speake Q i. 41. Quick.] (Q i Quic :) Malone, etc., Globe; Qui. Ff, 
Q 3 ; Anne. Dyce, Craig, etc. 

41. Quick.] I follow Cambridge and divell lambe, divels cat and divels 

Globe here. Some editors have inter- dam." Scot takes these colours from 

preted ' * Quic. " and ' ' Qui. " to be errors Bryan Darcie's account of the condemned 

for "Qu." equal "Queen," making witches of St. Osee's, Essex, or per- 

Anne equal Fairy Queen. An ingeni- haps from a ballad made thereon. See 

ous but unlikely conjecture. Mrs. Nicholson's note on above passage. 

Quickly is very undesirable here, but And compare the song in Middleton's 

the Quarto and Folio leave no choice. Witch^ v. ii. : "Black spirits and white, 

The Folio here has only " Enter Fairies. Red spirits and gray, Mingle, mingle, 

Qui. Fairies, black," etc. mingle, You that mingle that may," 

41. Fairies^ black, grey, green, and which Davenant inserted in his version 

whitel So Reginald Scot, Discoverie of oi Macbeth, altering "Red" to "Blue," 

Witchcraft (rept. p. 455), 1584: "his but Maidment edition (v. 369) of 

white spirits and blacke spirits, graie Davenant reads "Red." Similarly in 

spirits and red spirits, divell tode and Beaumont and Fletcher, Monsieur 

14 



210 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act V. 



You moonshine revellers, and shades of night, 
You orphan heirs of fixed destiny, 
Attend your office and your quality. 
Crier Hobgoblin, make the fairy oyes. 45 

Pist. Elves, list your names ; silence, you airy toys. 
Cricket, to Windsor chimneys shalt thou leap : 
Where fires thou find'st unraked and hearths unswept, 

43. orphan] ouphan Theobald (Warburton conj.)- 47. shalt thou leap] 

when thoust leapt Collier MS., having leapt Singer, shall thou leap V (i.e., leap it) 
Dowden conj. 48. tmswept] to sweep S. Verges conj. 



Thomas, iv. viii. : "Be thou ghost that 
cannot rest, Be thou shadow of the 
blest, Be thou black, or white, or 
green, Be thou heard or be thou seen." 

43. You orphan heirs of fixed destiny] 
It is difficult to gain any satisfactory 
sense, or to feel in any way confident 
we have gathered what Shakespeare 
meant, out of these words. Some of 
the explanations are hard to under- 
stand, and are as vague and indefinite 
as the beings themselves. Taking the 
words in broad general senses, ' ' orphan " 
may mean merely bereft, friendless, un- 
protected, applied sympathetically to 
fairies, who are to this day (where 
they are believed in) viewed as sad 
and mournful creatures. ' ' Heirs " 
need not imply parentage, but may be 
taken as in "that flesh is heir to" in 
Hamlet. You bereft creatures, whose 
lot is an unchanging fate. Shirley 
uses "orphan" for any unprotected 
person in The Cardinal, IV. iii. But 
possibly some passages in Spenser's 
Faerie Queene may have been in Shake- 
speare's mind. Spenser's "elfin brood" 
are an incongruous lot, and, as Gifford 
says, "bear no features of the Fairy 
nation." I very much doubt the 
parallels cited by Steevens, etc. Since 
the death of ICing Pan, all fays are 
orphans. Nashe, in Teares over Jer- 
usalem (1593), uses "orphans" and 
"heirs" indiscriminately for the natural 
prey of usurers (pp. 143-147). 

46. Pist.] Malone, objecting to this 



speech being delivered by Pistol, as ill- 
suited to him, observes that neither 
Pistol nor Mrs. Quickly are mentioned 
before (iv. iv. , vi. ) when the plot against 
Falstaff is arranged. He says it is 
highly probable that the performer who 
had represented Pistol was afterwards 
employed amongst the fairies — and that 
his name thus crept into the copies. 
He here represents Puck. Mrs. 
Quickly's last line (45) is, "Give them 
their charge, Puck, ere they go away " 
in the Quarto. And Pistol's part is 
given to Sir Hugh in the Quarto, 
where the former makes no subsequent 
appearance after his banishment to 
"Picthatch." 

46. toys] printed " toyes," to rhyme 
with "oyes" in the Folio. 

47. Cricket] This is the name of a 
fairy in Mad Pranks of Robin Good' 
fellow, 1628. 

48. unraked] To rake up the fire is 
to put the ashes over the embers so as 
leave it smouldering, without going out, 
till morning. A common expression in 
the North, or where peat is used on 
open hearths. The expression forms a 
frequent metaphor, as in Soliman and 
Perseda (Haz. Dods. v. 339): "as the 
fire, That lay, with honour's hand, 
raked up in ashes Revives again to 
flames." And Hey wood's Proverbs 
(ed. Sharman), p. 99, 1546: "We 
parted, and this [quarrel] within a day 
or twaine Was raked up in the ashes, 
and covered agayne." 



sc. v.] 



OF WINDSOR 



211 



There pinch the maids as blue as bilberry : 
Our radiant queen hates sluts and sluttery. 50 

Fal. They are fairies; he that speaks to them shall 
die : 
I '11 wink and couch : no man their works must eye. 

\Lies down upon his face, 
Evans, Where's Bead? Go you, and where you find a 
maid 
That, ere she sleep, has thrice her prayers said, 

53. Bead^ Peane Q i, Wheatley ; Pede Theo- 



52. [Lies . . . face] Rowe. 
bald ; Bede Ff, Q 3 <?/ seq. 

49. pinch the maids as blue as bil- 
berry] Compare Middleton's Witch, i. 
ii.: "Are the flames blue enough? . . . 
Stadlin. The nips of fairies upon 
maids white hips Are not more perfect 
azure." And Ben Jonson's perfect little 
piece, The Satyr (1603): "She that 
pinches country wenches If they rub not 
clean their benches, And with sharper 
nails remembers When they rake not 
up their embers . . . This is Mab, 
the Mistress Faery." And Drayton, 
Nymphidia: "These make our girls 
their sluttery rue By pinching them 
both black and blue." The whole 
passage recalls one in Nashe's 
Terrors of the Night, 1594: "The 
Robin - good - fellowes, elfes, Fairies, 
Hobgoblins of our latter age . . . did 
most of their fantasticall prankes in the 
Night. Then ground they malt, and had 
hempen shirts for their labours, daunst 
in rounds in greene meadowes, pincht 
maids in their sleep that swept not their 
houses cleane, and led poore Travellers 
out of their way notoriously." 

51. he that speaks to them shall die] 
Wheatley refers to the English trans- 
lation of Huon of Bourdeaux, 1601, 
chap. 21, for an allusion to the punish- 
ment of death for speaking to fairies. 
Stage fairies, however, usually converse 
freely with mortals. Nor does this belief 
belong to Celtic fairy lore of the present 
day. To tell of their favours was (and 



is) fraught with evil consequences. 
These are Shakespeare's fairies ; those 
of the French romances belong to a 
different breed. After Spenser's Faerie 
Queene, "all distinctions were con- 
founded," as Keightley says. The 
passage in Huon (trans, in Keightley's 
Fairy Mythology, i. 61) is: "there 
within dwelleth a King, Oberon the 
Fay. He is but three feet in height : 
he is all humpy, but he has an angelic 
face ... he will find how to speak to 
you, but of a surety if you speak to him, 
you are lost for evermore." Probably 
Shakespeare adopts this idea in order to 
make it proper for Falstaff not to scru- 
tinise his tormentors. There was an 
early rendering of Huon de Bordeaux 
by Lord Berners (1535). 

53. Bead] Evans drops all his Welsh 
pronunciation in this scene, so it is 
wrong to read Pead for Bead, as the 
Quarto does. Nevertheless Falstaff 
knows the voice of the Welch fairy. 
Shakespeare uses this name for a fairy 
as he uses the word in Midsummer 
Night's Dream, ill. ii. 330 : " Get you 
gone, you dwarf: You minimus . . . 
You bead, you acorn." See note, line 
148, below. In this speech in the 
Quarto Evans says, "Come hither 
Peane." In the following speech, not 
in the Folio, but quoted in Introduction, 
he says, " Where is Pead?" 



212 THE MERRY WIVES [act v. 

Raise up the organs of her fantasy ; 5 5 

Sleep she as sound as careless infancy : 
But those as sleep and think not on their sins, 
Pinch them, arms, legs, backs, shoulders, sides, and shins. 
Quick, About, about ; 

Search Windsor Castle, elves, within and out : 60 

Strew good luck, ouphes, on every sacred room ; 

That it may stand till the perpetual doom, 

In state as wholesome as in state 'tis fit, 

Worthy the owner, and the owner it. 

The several chairs of order look you scour 65 

With juice of balm and every precious flower : 

Each fair instalment, coat, and several crest, 

With loyal blazon, evermore be blest ! 

And nightly, meadow-fairies, look you sing, 

Like to the Garter's compass, in a ring : 70 

57. as\ that F 4, Craig. 59. Quick.] Qu. F i, 2, Q 3, Malone, Globe; 
Qui. F 3, 4 ; Anne. Dyce, Craig, etc. 63. state as\ site as Hanmer ; seat as 
S. Walker conj., Craig. 

55. Raise up the organs of her Pliny says the Romans did the same to 
/zw/izjj/] Give her elevating and pleasant drive away evil spirits: **Verbenaca 
dreams. . . . with this hearb . . . our houses 

56. Sleep she] May she sleep. also be rubbed and hallov^^ed to drive 
61. ouphes] See iv. iv. 50. avi^ay ill spirits ... if the hall be 
62-64. stand till the perpetual doom sprinkled vi^ith water wherein Vervain 

. . . Worthy the owner] Perhaps a lay steeped ... all that sit at the 

reference to "Queen Elizabeth's Mot table shall . . . make merrie more 

or Empresse," as Camden calls it, jocundly," Holland's Flifiie. 

Semper eadem. See Camden also 67. instalment] "A place or seat 

for a cotemporary account of the wherein some one is installed," New 

Order of the Garter. Eng. Diet. One other reference 

65, 66. scour With juice of balm] (dated 16 10) is given for this rare and 

Posts and doors were perfumed for obsolete word. Shakespeare has the 

weddings. ** Enter a maid strewing word again in its natural sense, act of 

flowers, and a serving-man perfuming installing or instating, in Richard III. 

the doore," Armin, Two Maids of III. i. 163. 

Moreclacke, 1609. And in Fletcher's 70. in a ring] Fairy rings are re- 

Faithful Shepherdess vervain is men- ferred to again in Midsummer Nighfs 

tioned to "sprinkle every post and Dream, 11. i. 9, as "orbs." 
every bough," etc., to produce mirth. 



sc.v.] OF WINDSOR 213 

Th' expressure that it bears, green let it be, 

More fertile-fresh than all the field to see ; 

And Honi soit qui mal y pense write 

In emerald tufts, flowers purple, blue, and white ; 

Like sapphire, pearl, and rich embroidery, 75 

Buckled below fair knighthood's bending knee : 

Fairies use flowers for their charactery. 

Away ; disperse : but till 'tis one o'clock. 

Our dance of custom round about the oak 

Of Heme the hunter, let us not forget. 80 

Evans, Pray you, lock hand in hand ; yourselves in order 
set ; 
And twenty glow-worms shall our lanterns be. 
To guide our measure round about the tree. 
But, stay ; I smell a man of middle-earth. 

FaL Heavens defend me from that Welsh fairy, lest 85 
he transform me to a piece of cheese ! 

Pist. Vile worm, thou wast o'erlook'd even in thy birth. 

72. More] Mote F i, Q 3. 81. Pray you] omitted Pope. 

71. expressure] expression, impres- only earlier example is the title of a 

sion. Shakespeare has this form of work by T. Bright, in 1588, on short- 

*' expression" twice elsewhere, in hand: " Characterie, an Arte of Short, 

Troilus and Ci-essida, III. iii, 204, and Swifte, and Secrete writing " (cited by 

Twelfth Night, ii. iii. 171. The next Douce). 

example in New Eng. Diet, is over 84. man of middle-earth] An old 

half a century later. See my note at expression. Steevens quotes from 

" prompture," Measure for Measure, Gower's Confessio Amaniis. It 

II. iv. 178. occurs in the Chester Plays and the 

74> 75' ^^'^^ • • • sapphire] "on Coventry Mysteries. And as late as 

their left legge somewhat under the Brome, Queens Concubine, i. i., circa 

knee, a blew garter; carrying this 1650: "She is a woman of middle 

Empresse," Camden. This speech is earth yet " (a mortal). In Syr Guy of 

thin stuff, and reminds one of several Warwick the use is similar: "And 

inferior hands {e.g. Peele, Polyhymnia), win the fayrest mayde of middle erde." 

77. charactery] Shakespeare has this An early middle-English term for earth, 

word again va Julius CcBsar, ii. i. 308. "midden eard" (Stratmann). 
" Expression of thought by symbols ^"J. o'erlook'd] A reference to the 

or characters," New Eng. Diet. The " evil eye." In Lear, ill. vii. 82, 



214 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act v. 



Quick. With trial-fire touch me his finger-end : 

If he be chaste, the flame will back descend, 

And turn him to no pain ; but if he start, 90 

It is the flesh of a corrupted heart. 

Pist, A trial, come. 

Evans. Come, will this wood take fire? 

\They burn him with their tapers. 

FaL Oh, Oh, Oh ! 

Quick. Corrupt, corrupt, and tainted in desire ! 

About him, fairies ; sing a scornful rhyme ; 95 

And, as you trip, still pinch him to your time. 



Song. 

Fie on sinful fantasy ! 
Fie on lust and luxury ! 
Lust is but a bloody fire, 
Kindled with unchaste desire. 



100 



92. [They burn 



tapers] Rowe. 



"you have one eye left To see some 
mischief on him," there is probably 
another reference. "Overlooking" is 
a common name for this form of " eye- 
biting," usually involuntary, in some 
parts of the North. Pliny speaks of it : 
"it is an ordinarie thing, that if a 
stranger come in place where a babe 
lieth in the cradle, or looke upon the 
said infant whiles it is asleepe, the 
nurce useth to spit thrice ... to put 
backe any mischiefe," Holland's 
translation, xxviii. 4 (p. 300, L), 1601. 
And in another place (vii. 2, p. 155), 
he speaks of the same power, exerted 
purposely by witches "looking wistly" 
on their victims, especially on grown- 
up people. See also Scot's Discoverie 
of Witchcraft, iii. 15, and v. 9, where 
he speaks of " our old women that are 
said to hurt children with their eies or 
lambs with their looks." "Blink" is 
the verb in commonest use in some 



parts of Western Ireland for bewitch- 
ing with the eye. Overlook, in the 
sense of fascinate, occurs again in 
Merchant of Venice, III. ii. 15. For 
"overseen," probably in the same 
sense, compare Lucrece, 1206. 

88. trial-flre\ Compare Fletcher, 
Faithful Shepherdess, v. ii. : " In this 
flame his finger thrust, Which will 
burn him if he lust ; But if not away 
will turn As loth unspotted flesh to 
burn." And again: "the fairies all 
will run Wildly dancing by the moon, 
And will pinch him to the bone Till 
his lustfull thoughts be gone," ibid. 
III. i., and at v. v. 

96.] Theobald inserted here from the 
Quarto, ^^ Sir Hu. It is right indeed, 
he is full of lecheries and iniquities." 

98. luxury'] lust, lechery. 

99. bloody fire] fire in the blood. 
Compare " bloody drops," As Vou Like 
It, IV. v. 7. 



sc.v.J OF WINDSOR 215 

Fed in heart, whose flames aspire, 

As thoughts do blow them, higher and higher. 

Pinch him, fairies, mutually ; 

Pinch him for his villany ; 
Pinch him, and burn him, and turn him about, 105 

Till candles and starlight and moonshine be out. 

During this song they pinch Falstaff. Doctor Caius comes 
one way^ and steals away a boy in green ; Slender 
another way, and takes off a boy in white ; and Fenton 
comes, and steals away Mrs, Anne Page. A noise of 
hunting is heard within. All the Fairies run aivay, 
Falstaff pulls off his buck's head, and rises. 

Enter PAGE, FORD, MISTRESS Page, and 
Mistress Ford. 

Page. Nay, do not fly ; I think we have watch'd you now : 

Will none but Heme the hunter serve your turn ? 
Mrs. Page. I pray you, come, hold up the jest no higher. 

106. During this . . .] Theobald et seq. ; Here they pinch him, and sing about 
him, and the Doctor . . . boy in red. And Slender . . . boy in greene. And 
Fenton steals Mistress Anne, being in white . . . and rises up Q i. 

106. During this song they pinch he has a direct interest in the climax, 

Falstaff] This part of the scene may since it affects Slender. See line 148 

have been suggested by Lyly's £71- (note). 

^'wzVw, IV. iii. (1591). '■'■ Enter Fairies 107. watch'd yoti] caught you by 

. . . 77/*? Fairies daunce, and rvith a watching or lying in wait for. Com- 

Song pinch him . . . The Third Song pare 2 Tlejiry VI. i. iv. 45: "Lay 

by Fairies. Omnes. Pinch him, pinch hands upon these traitors and their 

him, blacke and blue ; Sawcie mortals trash. Beldam, I think we watch'd 

must not view What the Queen of you at an inch," And line 58, im- 

Stars is doing, Nor pry into our fairy mediately following: "methinks you 

wooing. 1 Fairy. Pinch him blue, watch'd her well : A pretty plot." 

2 Fairy. And pinch him blacke," etc. Perhaps transferred from taming hawks 

107.] The first person to address by watching, as in Othello, III. iii. 23. 

Falstaff in the Quarto is Shallow, with The word "fly" implies it. 
"God save you, Sir lohn Falstaff"; 109. hold up the Jest'] maintain it. 

then Sir Hugh with " God plesse you, So in Midsu??ivier Night's Dream, 

Sir John, God plesse you." Shallow's "hold the sweet jest up." And in Ben 

speech has perhaps dropped out un- Jonson, Epicene, iv. ii. : " How rarely 

intentionally. He should be here, as she holds it up ! " 



216 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act v. 



Now, good Sir John, how Hke you Windsor wives ? i lo 
See you these, husband ? do not these fair yokes 
Become the forest better than the town ? 

Ford. Now, sir, who 's a cuckold now ? Master 
Brook, Falstaff' s a knave, a cuckoldly knave ; 
here are his horns. Master Brook : and. Master 1 1 5 
Brook, he hath enjoyed nothing of Ford's but 
his buck-basket, his cudgel, and twenty pounds 
of money, which must be paid to Master Brook ; 
his horses are arrested for it, Master Brook. 

Mrs, Ford. Sir John, we have had ill luck; we 120 
could never meet. I will never take you for 
my love again ; but I will always count you my 
deer. 

Fal. I do begin to perceive that I am made an 

ass. 125 

Ford. Ay, and an ox too : both the proofs are 
extant. 

III. yokes] yoakesYi^ Q 3 ; okes F 2, 3 ; oaksY 6^. 118. Brook] FoordC^ i. 

III. yokes] Schmidt suggests **the 
horns worn by Falstaff on account of 
their shape," that is to say, resembling 
the curved wooden frame placed on the 
necks of draught oxen. The horns 
may, however, have been framed of 
oak or branches of oak, and thus lent 
themselves readily to Mrs. Page's pun. 
Mr. Craig pointed out to me a passage 
in Marlowe's Doctor Faustus (or rather 
in the i6i6 Quarto edition), where 
''yoked " means "horned," i.e. placed 
or fixed horns upon. "I'll nail huge 
forked horns, and let them hang Within 
the window where he yoked me first " 
(Bullen's Marlowe, i. 308, Appendix to 
Doctor Faustus). But the word may 
mean here merely "subjected." 

119. his horses are arrested] See ii. 
i' 97> 98. This may be the outcome of 



Mrs. Page's remark and the plot of 
the wives, in subsequent conjunction 
with Ford, to enable the latter to 
recover his money, which no one could 
wish him to succeed in. The insertion 
made by Theobald, at line 178, below, 
from the Quarto, if made at all, should 
have come in here. It follows the 
" twenty pounds " in that text. 

119. arrested] Compare Captain J. 
Smith (Arber, p. 226), 1616 : "3600 
crownes worth of goods came a shore 
. . . which I did my best to arrest." 

1 26. an ox too : both the proofs are 
extant] There is no point in this 
remark (except a reference to the dic- 
tion of the tenth commandment), un- 
less "yokes" above refers directly to 
Falstaff 's horns. To my mind it proves 
that Schmidt's suggestion is correct. 



sc. v.] 



OF WINDSOR 



217 



Fal, And these are not fairies ? I was three or four 
times in the thought they were not fairies : and 
yet the guiltiness of my mind, the sudden sur- 130 
prise of my powers, drove the grossness of the 
foppery into a received belief, in despite of the 
teeth of all rhyme and reason, that they were 
fairies. See now how wit may be made a Jack- 
a-Lent, when 'tis upon ill employment ! 135 

Evans. Sir John Falstaff, serve Got, and leave your 
desires, and fairies will not pinse you. 

Ford. Well said, fairy Hugh. 

Evans. And leave you your jealousies too, I pray 

you. 1 40 

Ford. I will never mistrust my wife again, till thou 
art able to woo her in good English. 



Steevens says: "the extremities of 
yokes for cattle, as still used in several 
counties of England, bend upwards, 
and rising very high, in shape resemble 
horns." However, they certainly never 
resembled buck's horns. Halliwell 
tries to combine the two ideas by "a 
substantial bandage passing over the 
head and tied beneath the chin, thus 
resembling the yoke of oxen," which 
is absurd to the last degree. Perhaps 
a further abominable pun was made in 
ox and oaks. 

128.] FalstafF's first speech in the 
Quarto is of interest: "Home the 
hunter quoth you : am I a ghost ? 
'S blood the Fairies hath made a ghost 
of me : What hunting at this time at 
night ? He lay my life the mad Prince 
of Wales is stealing his father's Deare." 
This is another direct reference to the 
period of the Falstaff cycle into which 
this play is fitted. We have had one 
already at iii. ii. 74. See Introduction. 

130. guiltiness of my ??iind, eU.] 
This is most un-Falstaffian language. 
One would like to see it, like Mrs. 



Page's virtue, "thrust out by the head 
and shoulders." See ii. i. 58-59, and 
note. 

132. foppery\ cheating, dupery, de- 
ceit. From the sense of "fop," to 
dupe, in Othello, iv. ii. 197. I have 
given a quotation there from Chettle's 
Kind-hartes Dream (New Shak. Soc, 
P- 59)> 1592, where this meaning in 
" all is foppery " is unmistakable. The 
sense is not given in New Eng. Diet. 

132, 133. in despite of the teeth'] " In 
the spight of his tethe He must pay 
agayne A thousand or twayne," 
Skelton, Why come ye not to Courte? 
(Dyce, ii. 55), 1522. It occurs also 
in Latimer's Seven Sermons (Arber, 
P- 73)> 1549' A common expression, 
which replaced the older * ' maugre 
their teeth." "Rhyme and reason" 
occurs several times in Shakespeare. 
See Hazlitt's Dodsley, Jacob and Esau 
(ii. 258), 1558. Bartlett refers to 
Tyndall, 1530. 

134, 135. Jack-a-Lenf] See HI. iii. 
27. The metaphor here is from the 
puppet to be thrown at by boys. 



218 



THE MERRY WIVES 



[act V. 



FaL Have I laid my brain in the sun and dried it, 
that it wants matter to prevent so gross o'er- 
reaching as this? Am I ridden with a Welsh 145 
goat too ? shall I have a coxcomb of frieze ? 'Tis 
time I were choked with a piece of toasted cheese. 

Evans. Seese is not good to give putter ; your pelly 
is all putter. 

FaL " Seese " and " putter " ? Have I lived to stand i 5 o 
at the taunt of one that makes fritters of English ? 
This is enough to be the decay of lust and late- 
walking through the realm. 

Mrs, Page. Why, Sir John, do you think, though we 

would have thrust virtue out of our hearts by 155 



145, 146. Am I ridden with a Welsh 
goafX i.e. by a Welsh goat or devil. 
" First, as touching the divell [Bodin 
saith) that he dooth most properlie and 
commonlie transforme himselfe into a 
gote," R. Scot, Discoverie of Witch- 
craft, V. i., 1584. An allusion to the 
Ephialtes or Incubus, as in 2 Henry 
IV. II. i. 83: "I will ride thee o' 
nights like the mare." 

145-147. Welsh goat . . .frieze . . . 
toasted cheese"] Captain Jenkin, in Web- 
ster's Northward Ho (1607), illustrates 
all these personalities. Ben Jonson 
brings on a dance of Welsh goats in 
his masque, For the Honour of Wales. 
"Frieze" is mentioned as Welsh in 
Lingua, III. v.; "a Welsh frieze 
jerkin" (1607). But according to 
Walker {Irish Bards) it is mentioned 
as Irish in an Act passed at Westminster 
in the year 1318. It is certainly Irish 
in Andrew Borde, 1542. For "cheese," 
see I. ii. 13 (note). The unfortunate 
Welsh clergyman, John Penry, who 
was executed for his share in the Mar- 
prelate controversy, is severely dealt 
with by Nashe in PasquiVs Apologie, 
In PasquiVs Returne (Gros. i. 134), 
1589, Pasquil says: "I would have 



thee to drop some of them down at 
Penrie the Welsh-man's haunt. Mar- 
tin. Where is it? Pas. Tut, I per- 
ceive you know nothing. At the signe 
of the silver forke and the tosted 
cheese." Harrison in his Description 
of England speaks of the abundance 
of goats in Wales. 

146. coxcomb] fool's cap. 

148.] Evans resumes his natural 
dialect, which he had discarded when 
he spoke as a fairy, although Falstaff 
recognised his voice. In consonance 
with this the Quarto has him amongst 
those who enter (after the pinching 
scene) in his accustomed habit. The 
words there after "rises up" (line 106) 
are: "And enters M. Page, M. Ford, 
and their wives, M. Shallow, Sir 
Hugh." For Shallow, in the last 
scene, see note at v. ii. 9, and at line 
147, above. 

151. make fritters of English] 
Gabriel Harvey uses the same expres- 
sion, when enumerating words and 
phrases from Nashe that he objects to : 
"how many sundry dishes of such 
dainty fritters? rare iunkets, and a 
delicate service," Piercers Supereroga- 
tion (Gros. ii. 276), 1592-93. 



sc. v.] 



OF WINDSOR 



219 



the head and shoulders, and have given ourselves 

without scruple to hell, that ever the devil could 

have made you our delight ? 
Ford. What, a hodge-pudding ? a bag of flax ? 
Mrs. Page. A puffed man ? 
Page. Old, cold, withered, and of intolerable 

entrails ? 
Ford. And one that is as slanderous as Satan ? 
Page. And as poor as Job ? 
Ford. And as wicked as his wife? 
Evans. And given to fornications, and to taverns, 

and sack, and wine, and metheglins, and to 

drinkings, and swearings, and starings, pribbles 

and prabbles? 

l68. starings] F i, Q 3 ; staring F 2, 3, 4. 



160 



165 



159. hodge-pudding] This term is 
unexplained, but supposed to be 
equivalent to hodge-podge (hotch-pot), 
or formed from it, and to mean a 
pudding made up of various ingredients. 
Pope altered it to "hog's-pudding," 
i.e. "the entrails of a hog variously 
stuffed," etc., of which New Eng. 
Diet, has an example, dating 16 14, 
from Selden. This sense of pudding has 
occurred already with regard to Falstaff 
(11. i. 30), and is carried on in Page's 
speech. The word "hodge" has a 
dialectic meaning for the stomach of 
various animals. See English Dialect 
Dictionary. 

161. withered] decayed. 

161. intolerable] extreme, excessive, 
as in "this intolerable deal of sack," 
1 Henry IV. ii. iv. 592. 

164. as poor as Job] See also 2 Henry 
IV. I. ii. 114, where Falstaff says this 
of himself. The saying is as old as 
Gower's Confessio Amantis, 1393. 

167. metheglins] honey and water, 
herbs, etc., fermented and spiced. 



Harrison says: "the Welshmen make 
no less accompt of it (and not without 
cause if it be well handled) than the 
Greeks did of their ambrosia and 
nectar," Description of England, i. vi., 
1577. Massinger {Duke of Florence) 
says it is " a drench to kill a horse." 
Mentioned in Colyn Blowbol, circa 1500. 
Fuller says : ' ' Queen Elizabeth, who 
by the Tudors was of Welsh descent, 
much loved this her native licjuor." 
He gives a receipt — Worthies, iii. 486 
(rept.). 

168. starings] staring had some such 
sense as domineering, swaggering. 
There is an old proverb in Heywood, 
"The difference between staring and 
stark blinde" (p. 141, Sharman's edi- 
tion), which occurs in Gabriel Harvey : 
"he might have spied a difference be- 
tweene staring and starke-blinde ; 
between raging and stark-madd," etc. 
(Gros. ii. 235). Nashe has the expres- 
sion "swearing and staring" twice in 
The Unfortunate Traveller (Gros. v. 
29, 132): "Swearing and staring that 



220 THE MERTIY WIVES [actv. 

Fal. Well, I am your theme: you have the start of 170 
me ; I am dejected ; I am not able to answer 
the Welsh flannel : ignorance itself is a plummet 
o'er me : use me as you will. 

Ford. Marry, sir, we '11 bring you to Windsor, to one 

Master Brook, that you have cozened of money, 175 
to whom you should have been a pandar : over 
and above that you have suffered, I think to re- 
pay that money will be a biting affliction. 

Page. Yet be cheerful, knight : thou shalt eat a 

posset to-night at my house; where I will desire 180 
thee to laugh at my wife, that now laughs at 

172, 173. is . . . der me] is plummet o'er me Q 3 ; has a phwte d* me John- 
son conj.; is a planet o'er me Farmer conj. 178.] After this line Theobald 
inserted from Q i : " Mrs. Ford. Nay husband let that go to make a?fiends : For- 
give that sum and so we 7/ all be friends .''' Keightley added Falstaff's next speech : 
" // hath cost me welly I have been well pinched and washed." 

a man were better be an hangman than ably the author was thinking of the 

an intelligencer " ; and ' ' swearing and position of the man heaving the line 

staring he would teare out her wesand when he wrote "o'er me." Shake- 

if she refused." Andiin Pierce Pennilesse speare twice uses "plummet" in the 

(Gros. ii. 29), 1562: " falles in a Tempest (ill. iii. loi, v. 56) of the 

quarrelling humor . . . and sweares sounding apparatus. This is probably 

and stares . . . that nere such a Pesant the earlier sense, though Chaucer has 

. . . shall keepe him under." Evi- "plomet hanging on a \yr\e'' {Astro 

dently an established phrase. labe), simply for a weight. But where 

168, 169. pribbles and prabbles] See the word occurs, as it does three times, 

I. i. 56. Wheatley refers to Copley's in the Bible, it refers to a carpenter's 

Wits, Fits, and Fancies, 16 14, "a plumb, and the sense is so obscure 

pribble-prabble matter " (troublesome), sometimes that a consideration of those 

172. IVelsh flannel] Flannel was passages would mystify this. "Plum- 
manufactured in Wales early in the six- met " in the naval sense is not in the 
teenth century. The word itself is Authorised Version. But Wyclifs 
probably Welsh. Bible, Acts xxvii. 28, reads : " Thei 

172, 173. ignoranceitself is a plummet kesten doun a plommet, and founden 

i?'<?r wg] ignorance itself has got to the twenti pasis of depnesse. " And in the 

bottom of me, or sounded my deep three cases where we read " plummet " 

plans, like a plummet. The use of in the Bible, the Wyclif version has : 

"o'er "is strained, but helps to imply 2 Kings xxi. 13, "lytyl coorde" ; 

the superiority that ignorance (the Isaiah xxviii. 17, "in mesure"; Zach- 

Welshman) has obtained. It is rather ariah iv. 10, " stoon of tyn. " 
a violent metaphor, and has led to a 181, 182. laughs at thee] "the two 

variety of notes and suggestions. Prob- plots are excellently connected, and the 



sc. v.] 



OF WINDSOB 



221 



thee: tell her Master Slender hath married her 
daughter. 
Mrs. Page. [Aside.] Doctors doubt that : if Anne Page 

be my daughter, she is, by this, Doctor Caius' 185 
wife. 

Enter SLENDER. 

S/en. Whoa, ho, ho ! father Page ! 

Page. Son, how now ! how now, son ! have you 
dispatched ? 

Slen. Dispatched ! I '11 make the best in Gloucester- 1 90 
shire know on 't ; would I were hanged, la, 
else ! 

Page. Of what, son ? 

S/en. I came yonder at Eton to marry Mistress Anne 

Page, and she's a great lubberly boy. If it 195 
had not been i' the church, I would have swinged 
him, or he should have swinged me. If I did 



transition very artfully made in this 
speech," Johnson. 

184. Doctors doubt that"] A "vile 
pun" like "ox" and "oaks" above 
may be intended here, with a northern 
twang. This is a proverbial phrase, 
the forerunner of " Doctors disagree" 
or "differ." Compare Greene, Quip 
for an Upstart Courtier^ 1594 : "The 
doctors doubt of that (quoth Cloth- 
breeches) for I am of a different opinion." 

187. Whoa, ho, ho!] Slender's de- 
lightful country screech occurs again in 
JVmter's Tale, ill. iii. 79, and in 
Merchant of Venice, v. i. 39. It is in 
Merry Devil of Edmonton, III. iii. : 
"Who-ho-ho, boy !" Nares at "Wa- 
ha-how" says, referring to Camden's 
Remaines, that he has failed to find an 
example. It was a falconer's cry, and 
occurs three times as such in Look about 
You (Haz. Dods. vii. 464), 1600. Cot- 



grave has ^^ Reclame'. A Sohoe or 
Heyhaw ; a loud calling, whooting, or 
whooping, to make a Hawk stoop unto 
the Lure." 

191. la] See I. i. 266. 

195. lubberly] clumsy, like a lubber. 
"Who list to have a lubberly load ? " 
is sung by Wentloe in Miseries of 
Mforced Marriage, I. i. (1607), as an 
argument against marriage. The title 
of that play may have been suggested 
to its author Wilkins by line 243, at 
the end of the present one. There are 
several reminiscences of Merry Wives 
in it. Tusser has the word earlier in 
Five Hundred Points of Good Hus- 
bandrie, 1580 (9, 16): "To raise 
betimes the lubberlie Both snorting 
Hob and Margarie." 

197. sivinged] beaten, " whipped " 
(Schmidt). A favourite word with 
Shakespeare : " Saint George that 



222 THE MERRY WIVES [act v. 

not think it had been Anne Page, would I might 
never stir ! — and 'tis a postmaster's boy. 

Page. Upon my life, then, you took the wrong. 200 

Slen. What need you tell me that ? I think so, when 
I took a boy for a girl. If I had been married 
to him, for all he was in woman's apparel, I 
would not have had him. 

Page. Why, this is your own folly. Did not I tell 205 
you how you should know my daughter by her 
garments ? 

Slen. I went to her in white, and cried " mum," and 
she cried " budget," as Anne and I had ap- 
pointed ; and yet it was not Anne, but a post- 210 
master's boy. 

Mrs. Page. Good George, be not angry : I knew of 
your purpose ; turned my daughter into green ; 
and, indeed, she is now with the doctor at the 
deanery, and there married. 215 

Enter Caius. 

Caius. Vere is Mistress Page? By gar, I am 
cozened : I ha' married un gargon, a boy ; un 
paysafiy by gar, a boy ; it is not Anne Page : by 
gar, I am cozened. 

208. white] Pope ; green Ff, Q 3 ; red Q i. 213, 220. green\ Pope ; white 

Ff, Q 3. 217, 218. un paysan] Capell ; oon pesant Ff, Q 3. 

swinged the dragon," King John^ 11. I cried mum and hee cried budget, so 

288. "To swinge soundly" occurs well as ever you heard, and I have 

three times in Shakespeare. An old married him." But the Quarto has not 

word. Early references are given by previously introduced us to Slender's 

Halliwell. device. See Introduction. 

208-211.] Slender's speech here ap- 213. green] See v. iii. i, and IV. 

pears as follows in the Quarto: "I iv. 72. 

came to her in red as you bad me, and 215. deanery] See Introduction. 



sc.v.] OF WINDSOR 223 

Mrs. Page, Why, did you take her in green? 220 

Caius. Ay, by gar, and 'tis a boy : by gar, I '11 raise 

all Windsor. [Exit 

Ford. This is strange. Who hath got the right 

Anne ? 
Page. My heart misgives me : — here comes Master 225 

Fenton. 

Enter Fenton and Anne Page. 

How now, Master Fenton ! 
Anne. Pardon, good father ! good my mother, pardon ! 
Page. Now, mistress, how chance you went not with 

Master Slender? 230 

Mrs. Page. Why went you not with master doctor, 

maid ? 
Pent. You do amaze her : hear the truth of it. 

You would have married her most shamefully, 

Where there was no proportion held in love. 

The truth is, she and I, long since contracted, 235 

Are now so sure that nothing can dissolve us. 

The offence is holy that she hath committed ; 

And this deceit loses the name of craft. 

Of disobedience, or unduteous title ; 

Since therein she doth evitate and shun 240 

A thousand irreligious cursed hours. 

Which forced marriage would have brought upon 
her. 
Ford. Stand not amazed ; here is no remedy : 

225. misgives me\ Compare Othello ^ has an example (** evitate tediousness") 

III. iv. 88, and 3 Henry VI. IV. vi. of this verb from R. Parke, Mendoza's 

94. History of China, translation, 1588. 

240. evitate] avoid. New Eng. Diet, " Evite" was a commoner form. 



224 THE MERRY WIVES [act v. 

In love the heavens themselves do guide the 

state ; 
Money buys lands, and wives are sold by fate. 245 
FaL I am glad, though you have ta'en a special 
stand to strike at me, that your arrow hath 
glanced. 
Page. Well, what remedy? Fenton, heaven give thee 
joy! 
What cannot be eschew'd must be embraced. 250 

Fal. When night-dogs run, all sort of deer are chased. 
Mrs. Page. Well, I will muse no further. Master 
Fenton, 
Heaven give you many, many merry days ! 

251.] After this line Pope, followed by Theobald and others, inserted from Q i : 
** Evans [aside to Fenton], I will dance and eat plums at your wedding." The 
Quarto reading is : "I will also dance, etc." 

246, 247. td^en a special stand] ported it in a quotation from Sir Bevis 

** Stand " was the place where hunts- into his text in a well-known passage 

men lay in wait for game. See Cym- in Lear, iii. iv, 144. Or perhaps he 

beline, li. iii. 74, and III. iv. ill ; and means "game" both there and here — 

see Dowden's note. It was usually beasts to be hunted. This oracular 

a raised platform in ambush. **i line may be taken of good or bad dogs, 

Woodvian. Who shoots ? 2 Wood, and every sort of night chase, so as to 

The Princess. 1 Wood. No, she'll cover the combined situations. Two 

hunt, ^ Wood. She'll take a stand, passages, illustrative of "night-dogs," 

I say," Beaumont and Fletcher, Philas- from Abraham Fleming's translation of 

ter, IV. ii. Falstaff addresses this little Doctor Johannes Caius' (of Cambridge) 

note of comforting triumph to Page Latin treatise, Of Englisshe Dogges, 

especially, upon his discomfiture. 1576, may not inaptly end these notes. 

250. What camiot be, elc.]^^ Coniexit Of the bloodhound he says: "The 
you, madam : thus old Ovid sings, 'Tis owners of such houndes ... let them 
foolish to bewail secureless things," lose at liberty in the night season 
Greene, fames IV. (ed. 1874, p. 200), . . . to follow the fellon in the evening 
ante 1 592. * ' What cannot be cured and solitarie houres of darknesse . . . 
must be endured " (a more reasonable they are taught and trayned up first of 
proverb than one with embraced) does all to hunt cattell as well of the smaller 
not appear to be older than the middle as of the greater grouth." . . . "Of the 
of the seventeenth century. Dogge called the theevishe Dogge . . . 

251. When night-dogs run, all sorts The farmers of the countrey and up- 
of deer are chased] Deer, m. the general landisshe dwellers, call this kinde of 
sense of beasts, was long obsolete in Dogge a nyght curre, because he hunteth 
Shakespeare's time, but he has trans- in the darke." 



sc.v] OF WINDSOR 225 

Good husband, let us every one go home, 
And laugh this sport o'er by a country fire; 255 

Sir John and all. 
Ford. Let it be so. Sir John, 

To Master Brook you yet shall hold your word ; 
For he to-night shall lie with Mistress Ford. 

\Exeunt. 



15 



Printed by 

Morrison & Gibb Limited 

Edinburgh 




Shakespeare, William 

The merry wives of 
Windsor 



PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE 
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET 



UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY 



