
fc~. 



UNIVERSITY OF N.C. AT CHAPEL 

Illllllllil 

10001404455 



HAPELHILL 

ill 

/ICC 



a "to 



THE LIBRARY OF THE 

UNIVERSITY OF 

NORTH CAROLINA 

AT CHAPEL HILL 






ENDOWED BY THE 




DIALECTIC AND PHILANTHROPIC 




SOCIETIES 






PR2828 








• A2 




*s. 




B52 




3f 



s Afayf //( 



L_- 



/^v^-t^n/ Z>- a,^- 



This book is due at the LOUIS R. WILSON LIBRARY on the 
last date stamped under "Date Due." If not on hold it may be 
renewed by bringing it to the library. 


DATE OVT 
DUE RET 


DATE RFT 
DUE 




ilARis *» 






ijg^i v ww 












■ — 
























































































































Form No. 513 













A Typical Shakespearian Stage— Perspective View 

From Albright's The Shaksperian Stage 

(By permission of the Columbia University Press) 



SELECT PLAYS OF 
SHAKESPEARE 

GENERAL EDITOR 
J. C. SMITH 



Oxford University Press 

London Edinburgh Glasgow New York 

Toronto Melbourne Bombay 

Humphrey Milford M.A. Publisher to the University 






C* 






<? 






SHAKESPEARE'S 

MUCH ADO 

ABOUT NOTHING 

EDITED WITH INTRODUCTION 
AND NOTES BY 

F. S. BOAS 



feci 
4117? 






OXFORD 

AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 

1916 







Printed in England 
At the Oxford University Press 



INTRODUCTION 



There are few more joyous adventures for the student 
of literature than to trace the diverse fortunes of some 
of the stories that eventually found their way on to the 
Elizabethan stage. Tales have their several destinies as 
chequered, as seemingly capricious as those of men. 
One may pass from mouth to mouth, from country to 
country, from novel to poem, and from poem to drama, 
and yet remain in essence merely what it was at birth. 
Another, with apparently no loftier credentials at the 
outset, will attract a vates sacer who will give it death- 
less beauty and significance. 

It was the happy fortune of the story which for us is 
linked with the names of Claudio and Hero to be immor- 
talized in epic form by Ariosto and in dramatic by 
Shakespeare. Nothing helps more to illuminate and 
focus its treatment in Much Ado about Nothing than 
an examination of it in its earlier phases. 

The kernel of the story is the duping of a lover, who 
is led to believe that his mistress is false through seeing 
a man outside her chamber-window at night. In all 
the versions — with one notable exception — a maid is an 
agent in the plot. In Chaereas and Callirhoe, a Greek 
romance by the Carian Chariton, which, like Much Ado 
about Nothing, lays its scene in Sicily, though at Syracuse 
(v) 



581515 



INTRODUCTION 

and not Messina, the maid opens the door to the sup- 
posed lover. In the Spanish novel, Tirante el Blanco, 
dating from about 1400, she counterfeits in a leathern 
mask the fictitious paramour — a hideous negro gardener. 
Ariosto, in the Orlando Furioso (15 16), gives her enhanced 
importance by making her the principal mouthpiece of 
the tale. The episode is related in Books IV. 51-72, 
V, and VI. 1-16. 

Rinaldo, storm-bound in Scotland, and in quest of 
adventures, delivers from two murderers on his way to 
St. Andrews a damsel, who tells him how she came 
to be in so dire peril. She was Dalinda, paramour of 
Polinesso, Duke of Albania, and handmaiden to Genevra, 
daughter of the Scottish king. The duke had sought 
the princess in marriage, but she had given her love to 
a young Italian knight, xA.riodante, a favourite at her 
father's court. To prevent their union, Polinesso 
devised a subtle plot. He assured Ariodante that he 
would give him ocular proof of Genevra's unchastity, 
and stationed him in a ruined house opposite her chamber- 
window, whence Dalinda, arrayed in her mistress's gar- 
ments (merely, as she thinks, to satisfy a whim of her 
lover), had let down a rope ladder, by which the duke 
ascended. Ariodante, overcome by the spectacle, would 
have killed himself had he not been restrained by his 
brother Lurcanio, who had been watching at his side. 
He fled from the court, and the news came that he had 
drowned himself. Lurcanio thereupon publicly accused 
Genevra of having caused his brother's death by her 
wantonness. This, according to Scottish law (as inter- 
(vi) 



INTRODUCTION 

preted by Ariosto), involved the doom of the princess 
by fire, unless within a month a champion should 
arise to prove her innocence by killing her accuser in 
a duel. Thereupon Polinesso, fearing that Dalinda 
might reveal his treachery, had, under the plea of send- 
ing her to his castle for safety, suborned two villains to 
murder her on the way. It was from their hands that 
Rinaldo had saved her. 

Here Dalinda's story ends, and the poet himself con- 
tinues the narrative. Rinaldo presses on to St. Andrews, 
which he reaches in time to put a stop to a duel 
between Lurcanio and an unknown knight who has 
appeared on Genevra's behalf. He denounces Polinesso's 
treachery, and slays him in combat. Thereupon the 
stranger knight lifts his helmet, and is seen to be 
Ariodante, whose death had been falsely reported, and 
who is now united to Genevra. Dalinda, on Rinaldo's 
entreaty, is pardoned, and becomes a nun. 

The story, alike in its Greek, Spanish, and Italian 
forms, was a typical product of southern romantic 
imagination. But Ariosto not only decked it out in the 
trappings of mediaeval chivalry, but gave it a ' feminist ' 
moral. Through the mouth of Rinaldo he declared 
(Orlando Furioso, iv. 64-6) that, whether Genevra was 
guilty or not, the law that condemned her, while men 
were free to love where they listed, was an injustice to 
womankind. 

Such a light-hearted moral did not commend itself 
to the sage and serious Spenser when he transplanted 
the story from the Italian epic to Canto iv of the second 
(vii) 



INTRODUCTION 

book of The Faerie Queene. To bend it to his didactic 
purpose he had to give it a tragic complexion, foreign 
to its original spirit. The youthful squire, Phaon, who 
represents Ariodante, is transformed into an example of 
the awful consequences of intemperate fury. Tricked 
by a false friend, Philemon, and a handmaiden, Pryene, 
into the belief that his affianced lady, Claribel, is dis- 
loyal, he forthwith kills her, and, when Pryene reveals 
the plot, he poisons Philemon. He then turns his sword 
upon Pryene, but as he chases her, he is set upon by 
Furor and Occasion, and is being done to death when 
he is rescued by Sir Guyon. In this maddened, blood- 
stained figure it is difficult to recognize the lineaments 
of Ariosto's chivalrous, though too credulous, knight. 

Doubtless Spenser's old schoolmaster, Richard Mul- 
caster, kept closer to the Italian original in his Historie 
of Ariodante and Geneuora, a play acted by the ' children ' 
of Merchant Taylors before the queen at Richmond 
on Shrove Tuesday, 1582-3. 1 This school play has not 
come down to us, but another play, The Partiall Lazv, 
based upon Ariosto's story, has recently been discovered. 2 
Though the manuscript is anonymous and undated, the 
work has the characteristics of the romantic-sentimental 
school of Fletcher and Massinger, and thus presents an 
independent dramatic handling of the Claudio-Hero plot 
in Much Ado about Nothing, though Shakespeare's main 
source, as we shall see, is not Ariosto. 

1 Feuillerat, Documents relating to the Office of the Revels, p. 350. 

2 The unique manuscript was bought at a sale by Mr. Bertram 
Dobell, who printed it with an Introduction in 1 908. 

( viii ) 



INTRODUCTION 

The author of The Parti all Law, while following the 
main outlines of the story in the Orlando Furioso, trans- 
fers the scene from Scotland to Corsica, and changes 
the names of all the personages. Ariodante becomes 
Bellamour, ' a supposed Gentleman of Italy, but Prince 
of Cyprus ' ; and Polinesso, Duke of Albania, is trans- 
formed into Philocres, Prince of Majorca. Genevra 
and Dalinda are renamed Florabella and Lucina. Addi- 
tions are also made to the chivalresque machinery of the 
tale. Thus Philocres, challenging to a tilting all 

Who dare maintain his tenet false, which is. 
That to persist in a neglected love 
Is greater signe of base and abject minde 
Than love or constancy, 

is unhorsed by Bellamour, against whom he thus has 
cause for resentment as his rival both in arms and in 
love. The part of Florabella is elaborated, and our 
sympathies are gained for her by her presentiment of 
evil to come (in. ii), and her noble bearing when slandered 
and in danger of death. 

The denouement is prolonged and made more intricate. 
A veiled figure, supposed to be the princess, is led into 
the lists where two champions offer to fight on her 
behalf. But this veiled figure is Florabella's loyal 
maid, Fiducia, whom she has bidden impersonate her, 
while she appears in martial disguise as her own champion. 
She has, however, to yield the place to Bellamour, who 
fights with her accuser till the arrival of Sylvander (as 
Rinaldo is here named) with Lucina reveals the treachery 
of Philocres, who at once takes to flight. Then follows 



INTRODUCTION 

an effective coup de theatre, when the supposed princess 
is unveiled by the king and proves to his consternation 
to be Fiducia. But all is eventually set right by the 
reappearance of Florabella in her own clothes, and the 
discovery that Bellamour — to whom she is now betrothed 
— is the Prince of Cyprus, whom Sylvander has been 
seeking to fill the throne left vacant by his father's 
death. 

These additions by the dramatist carry the tale even 
further into the realms of fantasy than Ariosto had done. 
And there is another notable addition. Not only do 
two court lords echo the epic poet's protests against 
' the partiall law ' under which Florabella stands for 
sacrifice, but the play ends with 

th' abrogation 
Of this to women too unjust a Law. 

Thus, as in Much Ado about Nothing, though in com- 
pletely different fashion, the fortunes of the sorely tried 
lovers are interlinked with the themes of the status of 
women and the relations between the sexes. 



II 

But long before Ariosto's story was dramatized in 
The Partiall Law, it had gone through a transformation 
which helped to fit it for Shakespeare's use. A prose 
version of it had been included by Matteo Bandello in 
his collection of novels published at Lucca in 1554. By 
skilful changes and a wholesale shifting of values, Bandello 
brought the fantastic tale well within the limits of 

, (x) 



INTRODUCTION 

credibility. He removed the action from a mythical 
Scotland to Messina, and set it against the historic 
background of the Sicilian Vespers (March 1282). This 
tragic event had led King Pedro of Arragon to seize 
Sicily, and after defeating King Charles of Naples in 
a sea-fight, to set up his court in Messina. Here (accord- 
ing to Bandello's novel) King Pedro's favourite, Don 
Timbreo di Cardona, who had distinguished himself in 
the war, fell in love with Fenicia, daughter of Messer 
Lionato di Lionati. Don Timbreo and Fenicia are 
Ariodante and Genevra. But their social positions are 
now reversed, for Don Timbreo is a very wealthy noble- 
man, while Fenicia is the daughter of a poor gentleman, 
though of ancient lineage. Hence it is not till he has 
in vain sought to make her his mistress that he abases 
himself to ask for her hand. His rival is a friend, Signor 
Girondo, who informs him through a young courtier 
that Fenicia is unchaste, and offers to give him proof 
thereof. But in Bandello's version of the midnight plot 
there is no handmaid, nor does the rival lover himself 
take a direct part. Don Timbreo is persuaded of Fenicia's 
guilt by seeing below her window the courtier accom- 
panied by two servants, the one arrayed and perfumed 
as a gallant, the other carrying a ladder, upon which his 
fellow climbs into the house. 

In the omission of the handmaid Bandello's novel 
differs from the previous versions of the story, and in all 
that follows it diverges sharply from Ariosto's chivalresque 
romance. The whole machinery of ' the partiall law 
disappears. Bandello knows nothing of it in Sicily, 
( xi ) 



INTRODUCTION 

though the Jacobean dramatist (as has been seen) lets it 
prevail in the neighbouring island of Corsica. Don 
Timbreo, instead of fleeing heart-broken into solitude, 
at once sends to Lionato to repudiate Fenicia as unchaste, 
though her father looks upon this merely as a pretext 
for getting rid of a girl without a dowry. She thereupon 
falls into a swoon which has the semblance of death, 
and preparations are made for her burial. The funeral 
is in fact carried out with much pomp, though mean- 
while the girl has revived, and has been sent secretly 
to her uncle's country-house, to the intent that ' grow- 
ing and changing looks, as one doth with age, they might 
in two or three years' time marry her under another 
name '. 

Meanwhile, Girondo, struck with remorse, confesses 
his crime to Don Timbreo beside the tomb in which 
Fenicia is supposed to be laid, and begs his deceived 
friend to kill him. But Don Timbreo magnanimously 
forgives the wrongdoer, whom he urges to repair with 
him to Lionato's house to let him know the truth, and 
to entreat his pardon. This Lionato grants on con- 
dition that Don Timbreo will accept hereafter any lady 
whom he may offer him to wife. 

After a year has passed Lionato gives Fenicia, under 
the name of Lucilla, in marriage to Don Timbreo, who 
fails to recognize her. At the wedding-feast he con- 
fesses that though he is right well pleased with his bride, 
yet were he to live thousands and thousands of years, he 
would still love, dead though she be, the maiden first 
betrothed to him. Whereupon his father-in-law joyfully 
(xii) 



INTRODUCTION 

chides him for having espoused Fenicia, and yet not 
known her to be his wife And to crown the measure 
of the joy of the whole company, Girondo asks for the 
hand of her younger sister, Belfiore, to whom he is forth- 
with united. 

Here we have evidently the source of the Claudio- 
Hero plot, though it is impossible to say whether Shake- 
speare drew directly from Bandello's novel, from Belle- 
forest's French version of it (1582), or from some lost 
play founded on one or the other. The third alternative 
is the most probable. A play ' panecia ' was acted on 
New Year's Day, 1574/5, by the Earl of Leicester's men 
before the queen. 1 In the jumbled spelling of the 
official accounts, ' panecia ' not improbably represents 
' Fenicia '. If this be so, Elizabeth saw a play based on 
Bandello's novel eight years before the Merchant Taylors' 
boys acted one at court on the same theme drawn from 
Ariosto. As ' panecia ' was performed by Leicester's men, 
who afterwards became the Lord Chamberlain's players, 
it is possible that the manuscript remained for a quarter 
of a century in the hands of the company, and was 
afterwards worked up by Shakespeare. Some of the 
stage-directions in Much Ado about Nothing suggest that 
it was founded on an earlier play. Thus at the beginning 
of Act 1. i, those who enter with Leonato include (in 
both the Quarto and Folio texts) ' Innogen his wife ', 
who is also mentioned in the stage-direction before 
Act 11. i, though in neither case does she take part in 

1 Feuillerat, Documents relating to the Office of the Revels, 
pp. 238 and 239. 

( xii i ) 



INTRODUCTION 

the dialogue. Leonato's wife may well have figured in 
a play taken at first hand from Bandello's novel. For in 
the novel she is with her husband when Don Timbreo's 
messenger comes to repudiate the betrothal, and it is 
while she is washing Fenicia's body for burial that the girl 
so strangely comes back to life. Her name may thus 
have drifted from an earlier drama into the stage-direc- 
tions of Much Ado about Nothing, though she fills no part 
in the Shakespearian comedy. 1 

Ill 

But whatever may have been the form — dramatic 
or other — in which Bandello's story fell into Shake- 
peare's hands, his handling of it was obviously inspired 
throughout by one dominant motive. The choice of 
title is in itself significant. It is not Ariodante and 
Geneura or Fenicia or The Partiall Law, but Much Ado 
about Nothing. Shakespeare was not now deeply con- 
cerned, as in Romeo and Juliet, with the tragic fortunes 
of two star-crossed lovers, nor, as in The Merchant of 
Venice, with the effect on human destinies of abnormal 
laws and contracts. He wished to produce a play of 
which the essence was a recurring series of misunderstand- 
ings, grave and comic, due partly to calculated treachery, 
but in even greater measure to misinterpretation and 
blundering. For this Bandello's novel offered an admir- 

1 She appears under the name of Verecundia in Jacob Ayrer's 
Die schone Phoenicia, a play almost certainly based upon Belle- 
forest's version of Bandello's story (cf . Furness, Variorum edition, 
xxix-xxxi). 

( xiv ) 



INTRODUCTION 

able basis, in the trick played upon the lover, his pre- 
cipitate rejection of his betrothed, her apparent death 
and mock burial, the remorse of the rivals over her 
supposed tomb, and the marriage in which the bride- 
groom fails to recognize the maiden whom he is taking 
to wife. It was on these elements in the story that 
Shakespeare fastened to the exclusion of all else, and 
his changes and additions are conceived in obedience to 
the same underlying principle of ' much ado about 
nothing '. 

Thus, in the first place, the martial background of 
Bandello's tale is transformed almost beyond recognition. 
The conflict between King Pedro and King Charles 
dwindles into a shadowy ' action ', in which the victors 
lose few gentlemen ' of any sort and none of name ' 
(i. i. 7). It may be inferred, though it is not directly 
stated, that the contest was between Don Pedro of 
Arragon and his bastard brother, Don John, who has 
' of late stood out against ' him (1. hi. 23), and to whom 
he is now ' reconciled ' (1. i. 167). Don John complains 
bitterly that the ' young start-up ', Claudio, whose 
warlike exploits are magnified by the Messenger in the 
opening scene, ' hath all the glory of my overthrow ' 
(1. hi. 71-2). Here is Shakespeare's motive for retain- 
ing any reference to a war, which can have been little 
more than one pour rire. It suited him to represent the 
plot against the lovers as the outcome of a defeated 
enemy's craving for revenge : ' If I can cross him any 
way, I bless myself every way.' Don John has thus 
a more specific motive for his treachery than Spenser's 

U3iA ( xv ) b 



INTRODUCTION 

Philemon, who was prompted merely by envy or by 
natural malice, but he is not, as in Ariosto's and Bandello's 
versions of the tale, a rival wooer. As the fortunes of 
Claudio and Hero are linked in Much Ado about Nothing 
with those of two other lovers, Benedick and Beatrice, 
Shakespeare may have wished to avoid complicating the 
entanglement further by introducing a rival to Claudio. 

With the disappearance of the historic background, 
King Pedro of Arragon's role is curiously changed. He 
is reduced in rank by Shakespeare from a king to a prince, 
and is turned into a bachelor. He no longer plays a 
stately and serious part, but contributes to the general 
' much ado about nothing ' by his genial interference in 
every one's affairs. 

What Don Pedro loses in status is gained by Leonato. 
He keeps the name given him by Bandello, but instead 
of being a gentleman of fallen fortunes, he js_the_wealthy 
Governor of Messina. Though he owes ' duty ' to the 
prince he keeps state and open house on a viceregal 
scale. Hence his position is really closer to that of 
Ariosto's Scottish king than to that of Bandello's simple 
citizen, and the wellnigh tragic fortunes that befall his 
house have thus the added poignancy which attaches 
' casus illustrium virorum '. 

Yet, as has been said above, it was not Shakespeare's 
cue to exploit to the full the romantic elements in the 
story of Hero and her lover. What he could do in this 
kind with an Italian tale he had already shown, tragically, 
in Romeo and Juliet, and was soon to show, lyrically, in 
Twelfth Night. But in the Claudio-Hero plot of Much 
( x vi ) 



INTRODUCTION 

Ado about Nothing, subtle portraiture and highly-wrought 
emotion were to be of less account than ingenious elabora- 
tion of incident. The suit of the young count for the 
' only heir ' of the rich Governor of Messina lacks from 
the first the sentimental interest of the courtier Don 
Timbreo's wooing of the poor but beautiful Fenicia. 
And the banter with which Benedick, in Act i.i. 174 ff., 
receives Claudio's first avowal of his passion helps to 
prevent the development of our emotional sympathy with 
him. Moreover, the attention of the audience is speedily 
diverted to the tangle of misunderstandings which arise 
from Don Pedro's remarkable offer to impersonate 
Claudio during the revelling, and in this disguise to 
win Hero for him (1. i. 341-9). In the next scene, 
Leonato is informed by his brother, on the report of 
a serving-man, that the prince has told Claudio that he 
loves Hero, and means ' to acknowledge it this night 
in a dance ' ; whereupon the governor hastens to 
acquaint his daughter with the news, ' that she may 
be the better prepared for an answer '. Immediately 
afterwards, in Scene iii, Don John is told by his man, 
Borachio, that while acting as a perfumer he had over- 
heard a conversation between Don Pedro and Claudio, 
in which it was agreed that ' the prince should woo 
Hero for himself, and having obtained her, give her to 
Count Claudio '. This report, though nearer to the 
truth than that which had reached Leonato, is far 
enough from it to serve Don John as ' a model to build 
mischief on '. He tells Claudio at the masked dance 
(pretending to take him for Benedick) that Don Pedro 
( xvii ) b 2 



INTRODUCTION 

'is amorous on Hero', while Borachio roundly declares 
that he has heard the prince swear ' he would marry 
her to-night' (n. i. 181-2). The credulous count at 
once believes that Don Pedro is playing false, and. is 
wooing for himself. Benedick evidently takes the same 
view, for with mock condolences he too tells Claudio 
that ' the prince hath got your Hero ', and he afterwards 
rallies Don Pedro on having stolen his friend's bird's- 
nest. But the prince proves to have been true to his 
trust, to have wooed Hero in Claudio's name, and to 
have won her father's consent to the match. Leonato 
himself ends all doubts by bidding the count ' take of 
me my daughter, and with her my fortunes '. 

It has been worth while to trace these entanglements 
in detail, for they are a distinctive feature of the 
play. There is not a hint of them in Bandello's story, 
nor do we find in any other Shakespearian comedy 
a similar series of false starts. The only explanation of 
them is that the dramatist wished to ring all possible 
changes on the theme of ' much ado about nothing '. 
The game of mystification had an inexhaustible attrac- 
tion for Elizabethan audiences. And the medley of 
cross-purposes in these scenes, though without much 
true comic significance, reveals the credulous nature of 
Claudip, and foreshadows the graver complications 
which are to spring from it. 

For the ' seven-night ' which is to elapse between 

Hero's betrothal and wedding gives Don John the 

opportunity for a second, more deeply-laid, stratagem. 

Here Shakespeare, whether consciously or not, combines 

( xviii ) 



INTRODUCTION 

features from Bandello's and Ariosto's narratives. The 
novelist had represented Don Timbreo as deluded into 
believing Fenicia false by seeing a disguised serving- 
man climb up to her chamber. Shakespeare retains the 
serving-man and gives him increased importance ; it 
is Borachio, not Don John himself, who suggests the 
plot on the very night before the intended wedding, 
and arranges its details. The serving-man is necessary 
to the dramatist's purposes, for it is through Borachio's 
overheard conversation with his fellow, Conrade, that 
the crime is eventually brought to light. The watch 
could not have ventured to arrest so highly placed an 
offender as Don John. 

Borachio makes Hero's waiting-woman, Margaret, an 
unconscious accomplice in the plot (n. ii. 42-52). Ban- 
dello, as has been seen, knows nothing of her, though 
she had figured in all other versions of the story. Shake- 
speare may have borrowed her from Ariosto or from 
Spenser. But she may simply be the natural offspring 
of the genius of the play itself, which delights in multi- 
plying disguises and misunderstandings. With Borachio 
masquerading as Hero's lover it was natural that he 
should be given a female counterpart in Margaret im- 
personating Hero, so that Claudio and Don Pedro may 
be doubly deceived. But (as the critics have not failed 
to note) it is ajhjw in the otherwise extraordinarily deft 
workmanship of the play that Margaret should disappear 
in Act iv, though a word from her would have cleared 
her mistress's good name. 

- It is not obvious why Shakespeare, unlike the writer 
(xix ) 



INTRODUCTION 

of The Partiall Law, should have omitted from the 
stage the momentous episode outside Hero's chamber- 
window. It would have made an effective scene, and 
one well suited to the arrangements of the Elizabethan 
theatre. But Borachio's rambling account of the affair 
to Conrade (in. iii. 153 ff.) is thoroughly in the spirit of 
the comedy, adding another to the overheard and mis- 
understood conversations of which it is full. Shakespeare 
seems also to have purposely refrained from bringing on 
the stage an episode which would have diverted part of the 
interest which he focuses on the situation in the church, 
where Claudio throws Hero back with contumely into 
her father's arms. This is the central scene of the play, 
and Shakespeare's art here works at its highest energy. 
The clash of emotions kindles the verse into a sustained 
glow. There is rapid and tumultuous action, but no 
confusion. Each of the leading personages in the bridal 
throng plays his or her distinctive part. In the twinkling 
of an eye the joy of nuptial is transformed into tragic 
sorrow and shame. The theatrical effect is overwhelming. 
The repudiation of the innocent Hero in the face of the 
congregation, and before the altar itself, is the ne plus 
ultra of • much ado about nothing '. 

But Shakespeare has to pay a price for this coup de 
theatre in the complete estrangement of our sympathies 
from Claudio. Ariosto's knight had been so heart- 
broken by the apparent faithlessness of Genevra that he 
had all but taken his own life. Bandello's courtier had 
sent his renunciation of Fenicia's love through a friend 
who bewails that he is the bearer of so grievous a message. 

(XX) 



INTRODUCTION 

Claudio not only rejects Hero publicly, but rains upon 
her epithets as v r ile as those that fall from the lips of 
Othello when maddened by Iago's poison. The Moor is 
consumed in the fires of his own passion ; the count 
foams into a repellent outburst of self-righteous indig- 
nation. 

Leonato also shows to less advantage than in the novel, 
where he never for a moment doubts his daughter's 
innocence, and declares his trust that ' God the Just 
Judge will one day make known the truth '. In the 
play he readily credits the charges against her, and works 
himself into a paroxysm of rage over her senseless form. 
So uncontrollable is his passion even after he has left the 
church that his brother, Antonio, warns him (v. i. i) : 

If you go on thus, you will kill yourself. 

But when Claudio reappears (v. i. 46) it is the turn 
of Antonio to boil over in almost incoherent wrath, 
which Leonato vainly tries to stem. The spirit of the 
play has taken possession of the two greybeards, whose 
frantic outbursts prolong and intensify the ' much ado 
about nothing ' occasioned by the slanderous charge 
against Hero. 

Leonato's belief in her guilt necessitates a departure 
from the novel, where it is the father himself who pro- 
poses, after the girl's recovery from her seeming death, 
that she should be removed to his brother's house, and 
married later under another name. In Much Ado about 
Nothing, Leonato, who in his anguish has prayed for her 
death, is with difficulty persuaded by the sagacious friar 
(xxi) 



INTRODUCTION 

to ' let her awhile be secretly kept in ' till Claudio is 
overcome by remorse. 

In either case, time is above all necessary to make the 
sequel plausible. Shakespeare is here at a disadvantage 
compared with Ra-ndello, who lets a year pass before 
reuniting the lovers. In Much Ado about Nothing, on 
the contrary, the action is throughout at top speed. It 
is true that Borachio's confession in Claudio's hearing of 
the imposture that has been practised (v. i. 241 ff.) gives 
the cue for the count's complete change of front : 

Sweet Hero ! now thy image doth appear 
In the rare semblance that I lov'd it first. 

But he does nothing to regain our forfeited sympathy. 
Don Timbreo, in the novel, magnanimously pardons the 
rival who has wronged him, and is eager to restore the fair 
fame of his slandered mistress. ' Else meseemeth I should 
without cease have her angry shade before mine eyes, 
still crying sore to God for vengeance against me.' Even 
after a year, when he has just wedded (as he thinks) 
another beautiful bride, he proclaims his undying love for 
Fenicia. But Claudio is satisfied with carrying out the 
mild penance imposed by Leonato of hanging an epitaph, 
with music and funeral ceremonial, upon Hero's cenotaph 
— another sombre instance of ' much ado about nothing '. 
On the morrow he is ready, without a further thought 
for the maiden he has wronged, to wed her cousin, ' were 
she an Ethiope ', and he can even, while waiting for her 
to appear, light-heartedly banter Benedick. And when 
the bride, unmasking, is seen to be no other than ' the 
( xxii ) 



INTRODUCTION 

former Hero ', he is merely dumb, though words are not 
with him, as with Don Timbreo, choked back by tears. 
Nor does Hero, truth to tell, seem to feel that there is 
aught that needs expiation on his part. 

An Elizabethan audience, not over-anxious for an 
unduly prolonged fifth act, doubtless made little of all 
this. Nor did it know or care that the chivalrous figures 
of Ariodante and Genevra are scarcely more recognizable 
in Claudio and Hero than the Homeric heroes in their 
unworthy counterfeits in Troilus and Cressida. Even as 
compared with Bandello, Shakespeare had sacrificed 
sympathetic portraiture to the elaboration of a series 
of variations ranging from the trivial to the tragic, on 
the theme of ' much ado about nothing '. 

IV 

The truth is that the Claudio-Hero plot, while it gave 
scope to Shakespeare's ingenuity and his ' sense of the 
theatre ', did not rouse his vital interest. The entangle- 
ments contained in it, though dramatically effective, are 
accidental and superficial. They are the outcome of the 
whimsicality or malice of fortune ; they have no deep 
root in human nature. 

It is one of Shakespeare's crowning achievements in 
comedy to have interwoven this plot with another in 
which the ' much ado about nothing ' has its source in 
the permanent relations between man and woman. 
There is no more enduring ' make-believe ' than the 
profession by either sex of its hostility to the union 
( xxiii ) 



INTRODUCTION 

between them which is essential to the perpetuation of 
the human race. Hence it is beside the mark to look for 
the origin of the Benedick-Beatrice plot, as we have done 
with the Claudio-Hero plot, in earlier poems, novels, or 
plays. Nature herself has supplied the material. 1 

Shakespeare's concern with the duel of sex dates from 
the beginning of his career as a playwright. In Love's 
Labour's Lost he showed the collapse of the scheme 
devised by the King of France and his lords to turn the 
court into a little ' academe ', and to forswear the 
company of women. Though the technique is immature, 
and there is more of lyrical than of dramatic achievement 
in the comedy, it retains its interest as Shakespeare's 
youthful attempt to handle one aspect of the war of the 
sexes — the revolt of man against woman. 

The obverse aspect of the conflict had already found 
expression in English dramatic literature. The revolt of 
woman in its crudest form — the attempt of the wife to 
seize the household reins — had produced the Noah's wife 

1 This, of course, does not imply that Shakespeare may not 
have borrowed hints for his dialogue from popular contemporary 
works. Two that have been suggested are the English version of 
Castiglione's II Cortegiano {The Courtier) and Greene's Farewell 
to Folly. Jacob Ayrer's play, Die sclwne Phoenicia, is almost 
certainly, as Furness has shown (Preface to New Variorum 
edition of Much Adv about Nothing, pp. xxix-xxxi), based on 
Belleforest's version of Bandello's novel, whilst the clown Jahn 
and the lady's maid Anna Maria in the comic sub-plot are in no 
way parallel to Benedick and Beatrice. Ayrer's play is, however, 
in itself of real interest. It is translated in verse in Cohn's Shake- 
speare in Germany, and in prose (in summarized form) in an appen- 
dix to Furness' s edition of Much Ado about Nothing. 
( xxiv ) 



INTRODUCTION 

of the Chester miracle plays, Strife in Tom Tiler, and 
Tyb in J oh an Johan. The remedy of the aggrieved 
husband was the cudgel ; nor was this drastic cure 
approved only by popular playwrights and satirists, and 
those for whom they catered. Grave Oxford doctors of 
law like William Gager and Thomas Gwin maintained 
in Latin poems or theses that it was lawful for husbands 
to beat their wives. 

Thus it has to be remembered that the relation of the 
sexes during the Tudor period was determined largely 
by superiority of physical force. But the flood of new 
influences that came in with the Renaissance, and the 
long reign of a Maiden Queen, raised the problem of 
woman's position in unprecedented ways. Spenser, in 
Book V of The Faerie Queene (Cantos v and vii), pictures 
an Amazonian ' commonweale ' in which brave knights 
are employed in ' spinning and carding all in comely 
rew ', till Britomart, herself the noblest type of militant 
womanhood, 

The liberty of women did repeale, 

Which they had long usurpt ; and them restoring 

To mens subjection, did true Justice deale. 

More ' advanced ' thinkers like William Heale, of Exeter 
College, Oxford, maintained that woman was the equal, 
if not the superior, of man. In his Apologie for Women 
(1609) he asserted that ' if any might challendge pre- 
heminence it should seeme the woman might, whose 
complexion is purer, which argues a richer wit ; whose 
passions are weaker, which pretend a more virtuous 
( xxv ) 



INTRODUCTION 

disposition. We . . . are the monuments of [nature's] 
rougher workmanship.' 

The higher level to which the problem had been 
raised is reflected in the drama of the closing years of the 
sixteenth century. In the anonymous Taming of a Shrezo 
(1596), though Ferando brings Kate to subjection 'with 
curbs of hunger . . . and want of sleep ', he does not lift 
his hand against her, and we feel that his harsh usage is 
merely a grimly humorous method of reforming a wife 
whom he really loves. At the end of the comedy woman's 
subordination to man is based upon the principle of order, 
whereby ' the great Commander of the world ' made all 
things ' stand in perfect course '. When Shakespeare 
adapted the play in The Taming of the Shrew he left his 
audience in no doubt that, however drastic are Petruchio's 
measures with his wife, ' all is done in reverent care of 
her '. But the later dramatist declares the sovereignty of 
the husband in more explicit terms than his forerunner, 
and bases it mainly on the physical fact that women's 
bodies are unfit for the toils whereby men maintain them. 

It must be confessed that neither this doctrinaire 
solution nor the general handling of the situation in 
The Taming of the Shrew prepares us for the atmosphere 
or the technique of Much Ado about Nothing. We 
suddenly pass from primitive domestic relationships into 
a cultured and self-conscious society, and from vigorous, 
but unpolished, workmanship into the region of mellow 
and rounded art. The action of the Benedick-Beatrice plot 
is not dominated by some theory of the relation of the 
sexes or of love and intellect, that can be formulated in 
( xxvi ) 



INTRODUCTION 

a speech from the lips of a Kate or a Biron. It springs out 
of the characters of the two protagonists themselves. 
It is noteworthy that there should be two of them. 
Where Much Ado about Nothing differs from earlier 
English plays of a kindred type is that it does not deal 
with the taming or schooling of a rebel or rebels belonging 
to one sex only. Here the duel is between a man and 
a woman on equal terms, and the result is not the victory 
of one over the other, but the defeat of both by a funda- 
mental principle of life — a defeat which does not dis- 
credit but ennobles them. 

Only in the golden period of his comic art could 
Shakespeare have handled this theme with such buoyancy, 
geniality, and penetrating vision. It was essential to the 
sustained interest of the plot that the duellists, though 
equally matched, should be finely discriminated. As is 
the rule in Shakespearian comedy, the woma.n_shows._to. 
the greater advantage. Beatrice has beauty, intellect, 
a naturally gay temper, and abundant personal popu- 
larity. It is even hinted (and here Shakespeare may 
possibly be referring to an episode in some lost source of 
the plot) that her loudly proclaimed hostility to marriage 
is due to Benedick having once won her heart ' with 
false dice' (n. i, 299). This may well be, for Beatrice is 
naturally ardent 'and loyal, and her rebellious attitude 
would be explained by an earlier wound to her affections. 
But having begun her campaign against matrimony she 
urges it on ruthlessly. ' She speaks poniards and every 
word stabs.' She is far defter and readier in the use of 
these verbal weapons than Benedick, and she easily routs 
( xxvii ) 



INTRODUCTION 

him in every encounter. But her victories are truly 
Pyrrhic. Their result is only to drive him farther away 
from her, not (as in her inmost soul she desires) to bring 
him to her feet. 

For Benedick's pose of being ' a professed tyrant ' to 
the female sex springs mainly from the vanity which is 
the weakness of an otherwise finely-tempered nature, 
'stuffed with all honourable virtues'. Sensitive, like 
a true Renaissance gallant, to beauty and grace, he has 
a swift eye for feminine charms, but piques himself upon 
being proof against them. His recurring defeats in the 
' merry war ' between himself and Beatrice only make him 
more determined not to suffer the crowning humiliation 
of becoming her captive. He is shrewd enough to realize 
that safety is to be found only in flight, and he uses his 
gifts of declamation, wherein he excels Beatrice as much as 
she outdoes him in repartee, to safeguard his retreat. As 
pictured by him she is a Harpy, or the infernal Ate in 
good apparel, or a new and harsher Omphale who would 
have set Hercules not to spin but to turn spit. 

No wonder that when the breach between the pair 
is seemingly irreparable, Don Pedro is tempted to inter- 
vene in his favourite role of matchmaker, and to ' under- 
take one of Hercules' labours ; which is to bring Signior 
Benedick and the Lady Beatrice into a mountain of 
affection, th' one with th' other ' (n. i. 391 ff.). But when 
he goes on to assert, ' if we can do this, Cupid is no longer 
an archer : his glory shall be ours, for we are the only 
love-gods ', he is claiming for himself and his fellow 
conspirators more than is their due. The scenes in which 
( xxviii ) 



INTRODUCTION 

Benedick and Beatrice, hidden in the arbour, overhear 
the dialogues which are supposed to effect their conver- 
sion, are suggested by the arrangements of the Elizabethan 
theatre. On the modern stage, though their charm and 
gaiety ' get over the footlights ', their artificiality is 
revealed. The ease with which two such acute intelli- 
gences are duped is manifestly a piece of theatrical con- 
vention. Don Pedro and his confederates owe their 
success not to their own cleverness but to the fact that 
Nature is their ally. Benedick and Beatrice have been 
engaged in an elaborate game of ' much ado about 
nothing ', a petulant make-believe which has only half 
deceived themselves. 

And now Fate seconds Nature in bringing this make- 
believe once for all to an end. Even after Benedick and 
Beatrice have confessed their true feelings in soliloquy, 
and have become the mark for their friends' raillery on 
their outward transformation, an external crisis is neces- 
sary to bring about their final act of self surrender in 
the mutual avowal of their love. By one of Shakespeare's 
master-strokes of art this avowal springs directly out of 
Claudio's public repudiation of his bride. The keen- 
sighted pair, who had let themselves be so easily trapped 
when they themselves were concerned, leap with a sure 
instinct to the conviction that Hero is the victim of a plot. 
Their common championship of the innocent girl, and 
Beatrice's impassioned appeal for a man to avenge her 
cousin, give Benedick the cue for confessing his love and 
claiming that it is returned. Beatrice does not say him 
nay. She, who had so lately been protesting that it would 
( xxix ) 



INTRODUCTION 

'■ grieve a woman to be overmastered with a piece of 
valiant dust', now realizes that there are crises in which 
the masculine clay, whatever its imperfections, is indis- 
pensable — in which her own sex, isolated, can accomplish 
nothing. ' I cannot be a man with wishing, therefore 
I will die a woman with grieving ' (iv. i. 331-2). When 
Beatrice utters these words she finally hauls down her 
flag and admits defeat. But it is a defeat that secures 
her the triumph which her dialectical victories had gone 
nigh to make impossible. Benedick proclaims to the 
world how completely she has enslaved him, when he 
undertakes for her sake to kill his ' sworn brother ' 
Claudio. Borachio's confession comes in time to clear the 
air and prevent the encounter. But Hero's sufferings 
have not been in vain. Had it not been for them, Bene- 
dick might never have been ' the married man ', and 
Beatrice might have been doomed to ' lead apes in hell \ 

At the very last they make a feint of drawing back, and 
of only taking each other ' for pity ' or * upon great 
persuasion '. But this is nothing more than a final case 
of ' much ado about nothing '. Their surrender when it 
comes is absolute. For unlike Millamant in Congr eve's 
Way of the World, who in beauty, wit, and tempestuous 
charm is closely akin to her, Beatrice has nothing of the 
coquette in her nature. 1 It is impossible to think of her 
making such matrimonial ' conditions ' with her lover 
as Millamant does with Mirabell in Act iv, Scene v, of 
Congreve's comedv, when she ends with the grudging 

1 George Meredith in his Essay on Comedy, p. 35, describes 
The Way of the World as ' The Conquest of a Town Coquette '. 
( xxx ) 



INTRODUCTION 

concession, * These articles subscribed, if I continue to 
endure you a little longer I may by degrees dwindle into 
a wife '. And Benedick.is the last man to lay down ' pro- 
visos ', which admitted, he may prove ' a tractable and 
complying husband '. The Shakespearian lovers are too 
sure of their own and each other's hearts to stand upon 
terms in this fashion. 

A closer kinship may be suggested between Beatrice and 
Benedick and the two protagonists of a brilliant comedy of 
our own day, Man and Superman. Ann Whitefield is intro- 
duced in words that are equally true of Beatrice : ' Vitality 
is as common as humanity, but like humanity it sometimes 
rises to genius, and Ann is one of the vital geniuses.' 
With her father dead, and her mother a nonentity, she 
is as independent as is Leonato's niece. She has even 
some of Beatrice's tricks of speech. Such nicknames as 
• Signor Montanto ' and * Count Comfect ' have their 
counterparts in ' Jack the Giant-Killer' and ' Ricky-Ticky 
Tavy'. She cannot leave Tanner alone because, like 
Beatrice, she is instinctively attracted by the most 
forcible personality in her circle, the rebel, the free- 
lance. Her tactics, however, differ completely from 
those of her Elizabethan forerunner. She seeks to 
capture Tanner not by a frontal attack but by an 
irresistible enveloping movement. 

Tanner's tactics are much closer to those of Benedick. 
They are a combination of truculent defiance and astute 
retreat. Benedick's diatribes against marriage become in 
the jargon of Shavian sociological rage, ' Marriage is to 
me an apostasy, profanation of the sanctuary of my soul, 

143 *-* (xxxi) c 



I 



INTRODUCTION 

violation of my manhood, sale of my birthright, shameful 
surrender, ignominious capitulation, acceptance of defeat '. 
And as Benedick after his surrender seeks to stave off his 
friends' satire by declaring that ' a college of witcrackers 
cannot flout me out of my humour ', so Tanner charac- 
teristically defends himself against their congratulations, 
' I solemnly say that I am not a happy man '. 

Even the Shavian conception of the ' life-force ' 
whereof individuals are merely the instruments has 
a light-hearted anticipation in Benedick's jest, ' the 
world must be peopled ', and is implicit in the idea 
underlying the Benedick-Beatrice plot that the pair are 
fighting against nature. 

The analogy must not be unduly pressed. It is a fax 
cry from Elizabethan spontaneity to twentieth-century 
self-consciousness, from the Shakespearian to the Shavian 
technique and spirit. But the student of the dramatic 
handling of sex relations will learn much from a com- 
parison between the two plays. 



The Claudio-Hero and Benedick-Beatrice plots woulc 
together have amply sufficed for a play of varied interest 
but Shakespeare had to take into account other thar 
dramatic considerations. He had to provide parts fo] 
all the leading members of the Lord Chamberlain'! 
company, and neither of these plots gave a chance tc 
the ' low ' comedians. There would have been trouble 
in the ' cry of players ' and with the audience had a new 
( xxxii ) 



INTRODUCTION 

comedy been staged at the Globe without roles for 
Will Kemp and Dick Cowley. A fortunate accident 
reminds us of this fact, should we be in danger of forget- 
ting it. In Act iv, Scene ii of Much Ado about Nothing, 
both the Quarto and the Folio prefix the names of Kemp 
and Cowley to the speeches of Dogberry and Verges. 
We are thus, as it were, enabled to hear the very accents 
of two of Shakespeare's fellow players in parts created 
by them. Kemp doubtless found the rich and unctuous 
humour of Dogberry more congenial to his talents than 
the thin banter of Peter in Romeo and Juliet. This was 
evidently another of his parts, for in Act iv of the tragedy 
Quartos 2 and 3 have * Enter Will Kempe ', where the 
Folio substitutes ' Enter Peter '. When Kemp left the 
Lord Chamberlain's company he was succeeded in the' 
part of Dogberry by Robert Armin, who in 1609 jestingly 
speaks of himself as having ' been writ downe for an 
Asse in his time '. Like Armin, the ' Jack Wilson ' 
whom the Folio mentions in Act 11, Scene iii as taking 
the part of Balthasar, does not seem to have been the 
original performer. 1 

1 This Jack Wilson was probably ' m r . Willson y e singer', 
who dined with Edward Alleyn on the anniversary of his 
wedding, October 22, 1620 (Alleyn's Diary in Young's History 
of Dulwich College, ii. 192), and who on October 21, 1622, 
was recommended to the Lord Mayor and Aldermen by Lord 
Mandeville for the place of one of the servants of the City 
for music and voice {Remembrancia, viii. 48, 121). Dr. Rim- 
bault has contended in ' Who was Jack Wilson ? ' {Shak. 
Soc. Papers, 1845, vol. ii, p. 3$) that he was the John Wilson 
(1595-16.74) who in 1635 became one of the king's musicians, on 
( xxxiii ) c 2 



INTRODUCTION 

Even when providing parts for the low comedians and 
the musicians of his company, Shakespeare kept steadily 
before him the dominant idea of the play. In his apolo- 
getic words before singing, Balthasar makes ' much ado 
about nothing ', while Dogberry and Verges and their 
henchmen express it in their every utterance and 
action. The bane of petty officialdom has always been 
pompous futility, and the extension of local government 
under the Tudors gave special scope for its display. 
Not but that there were two sides to the picture. Earlier 
in the century the clear-eyed author of Gammer' Gurtorfs 
Needle had shown how the sagacity and tolerance of 
' the Baily ' could quiet the tumult in a village com- 
munity. Shakespeare himself must have seen local 
officials of all grades and types. His father had been 
Bailiff of Stratford, and when on tour with his company 
the dramatist was brought into contact frequently with 
civic authorities, before whom opening performances 

March 10, 1644/5 graduated as Doctor of Music at Oxford, and 
in 1656 became Professor of Music at Oxford. This Dr. John 
Wilson had composed the music for The Maske of Flowers, 
presented by the gentlemen of Gray's Inn on Twelfth Night, 
1 61 3/4, in honour of the marriage of the Earl of Somerset (Groves, 
Diet, of Music, ed. Maitland, v. 529-30). He also composed 
settings of two of Shakespeare's songs, ' Take, take those 
lips away ', in Measure for Measure, and ' Lawn as white as 
driven snow ', in The Winter's Tale. He was thus evidently 
interested in the drama, but the attitude of the university authori- 
ties in the earlier seventeenth century was so hostile to the class 
of professional entertainers that it is improbable that one of 
them should have been elected to the Professorship of Music in 
Oxford. 

( xxx iv ) 



INTRODUCTION 

were generally given. If Aubrey is to be believed— and 
despite an evident confusion between Much Ado about 
Nothing and A Midsummer Night's Dream he is relating 
a well-authenticated tradition — Shakespeare drew Dog- 
berry from a living model : ' The Humour of the Con- 
stable in A Midsomer-Nighf s Dreame he happened to 
take at Grendon in Bucks, w cn is the roade from London 
to Stratford, and there was living that Constable about 
1642, when I first came to Oxon. Mr. Jos. Howe is of 
y* parish, and knew him.' 1 

Whatever be the truth of this, the Dogberry- Verges 
sub-plot, in addition to its technical dramatic interest, 
is specially important as Shakespeare's most elaborate 
study of local officialdom. This aspect has been partly 
obscured in modern editions by the substitution of 
personal names for titles. Thus in Act 111, Scene v, 
where the conventional opening stage-direction is ' Enter 
Leonato with Dogberry and Verges ', the Quarto and 
Folio have ' Enter Leonato, and the Constable and the 
Headborough '. These titles are prefixed to their speeches 
throughout the scene, and in later scenes they are both 
introduced as constables. It is important, therefore, to 
realize that the office of * Petty Constable ', which its 
representatives in Much Ado about Nothing make immor- 
tally ridiculous, was in itself both ancient and important. 
j Down to the latter part of the sixteenth century it is 

1 Aubrey's Brief Lives, ed. A. Clark, ii. 226. This Josias 
Howe, born about 1611, was the son of the Rector of Grendon. 
His testimony is thus of value, especially as he was keenly in- 
terested in poetry and the drama. 

( XXXV ) 



INTRODUCTION 

to the Constable . . . that Parliament entrusts the super- 
vision of beggars, the lodging of the impotent poor, the 
apprenticing of children, and the general superintendence 
of the civil economy of the town or village. . . . The 
Constable, unlike the other officers, was by common 
law a " Conservator of the Peace ", and was authorized, 
not only to apprehend any person who had committed 
a felony, but also, if he saw any minor offence committed 
or even a breach of the peace about to take place, to 
apprehend the offender, and put him in the stocks for 
safe custody, or detain him in the cage where one existed, 
or in his house, until he could bring him before a magis- 
trate. Thus of all these local officers it was the Constable 
who was brought into the closest contact with the 
personal rights and liberties of the inhabitants. His 
staff of office, sometimes affixed to the door of his house, 
was a symbol of real authority.' 1 

Thus, when Dogberry plumes himself upon being - the 
prince's officer ', and cries to Conrade, ' Dost thou not 
suspect my place ? ' he makes himself absurd, not because 
his place (as more modern associations would suggest) 
was unimportant, but because he was so ill fitted for it 
by his pretentious ineptitude. 

There is another office-bearer in the play who presents 
a curious problem. At the beginning of Act iv, Scene ii, 
the constables enter, according to the stage-direction 
in the Quarto and the Folio, with the town-clerk. But 
in 1. 2 Verges calls for a stool and cushion for the sexton, 

1 Sidney and Beatrice Webb, English Local Government : the 
Parish and the County, pp. 26-7. 

( xxxvi ) 



INTRODUCTION 

who thereupon asks, ' Which be the malefactors ? ' and 
throughout the scene advises * master constable ' upon 
points of procedure. This is what might be expected 
of a town-clerk, but not of a sexton, who sometimes 
filled other minor offices, but none of so dignified 
a character. Can it possibly be that Verges in his blunder- 
ing fashion calls the town-clerk a sexton, that Dogberry 
echoes him, and that the printer caught the infection, 
and prefixed the humbler title to the clerk's speeches ? 
However this may be, Shakespeare, in the sub-plot of 
Much Ado about Nothing, does not merely pillory blunder- 
ing officialdom, or introduce incidentally the humours 
of a watch, as Lyly had done in Endimion (iv. ii). With 
consummate art he uses the muddle-headed incompetence 
of Dogberry and Verges, and their subordinates, both to 
heighten, and to relieve, the poignancy of the wellnigh 
tragic scene of the repudiation of Hero. In previous 
versions of the story the plot against the lovers is not 
brought to light till some time after their separation. But 
in Much Ado about Nothing the watch on the wedding- 
eve overhears Borachio's confession to Conrade ; they 
arrest the pair and call up Dogberry and Verges, who wait 
upon Leonato just as he is starting for the church (in. v). 
Were the constables only able to tell a plain tale,they could 
avert the whole catastrophe. But in spite of Leonato's 
repeated appeals to them to come to the point, they are so 
intolerably long-winded that he has to hurry away, leaving 
the examination of the prisoners in their hands. And 
the crowning touch of dramatic irony is that he himself 
delays further the full disclosure of the plot by inviting 
( xxxvii ) 



INTRODUCTION 

the two functionaries to drink some wine before they 
leave his house. Thus at the very moment when the 
crushing blow is falling on Hero, the precious pair who 
might have averted it are making merry under her 
father's roof. Even when the examination does take 
place, Dogberry's inexhaustible genius for following 
will-o'-the-wisps makes further trouble till the sagacious 
Francis Seacoal gets the inquiry back on business lines. 
Then at last the whole truth is brought to light, an 
encounter between Benedick and Claudio averted, and 
Hero's good name restored. Thus by means of the 
sub-plot Shakespeare at once heightens the dramatic 
effectiveness of the catastrophe in Act iv, and solves 
the difficult technical problem (which neither Ariosto 
nor Bandello had to face) of unloosing the entanglement 
within the brief limits to which the action of the play 
is confined. 

VI 

For it is one of the triumphs of Shakespeare's comic 
genius to have fused the plots analysed above into a har- 
monious whole that has the concentration and balance 
typical of classical art. The unity of place is virtually 
observed in the play, for all the scenes are laid in Messina, 
and with a few exceptions in Leonato's house or its 
precincts. There is similar economy in the treatment 
of time. The action altogether covers the period from 
a Monday to the Tuesday in the following week. In 
the middle of this period, however, there seems to be 
a blank, the episodes in Acts i and n. i and ii falling on 
( xxxviii ) 



INTRODUCTION 

the Monday, and those in n. iii to the close on the 
following Saturday to Tuesday. In scarcely any other 
play has Shakespeare been at such pains to furnish 
precise indications of time. 

But the unity of impression left by the play is not due 
merely to its compact structure, nor even to the fact that, 
as has been shown, it is a series of variations upon the 
theme of 'much ado about nothing'. It is the quality 
of the style sustained throughout the various scenes that 
goes far to give the comedy its distinctive place. 

The proportion of verse to prose is smaller in Much 
Ado about Nothing than in any Shakespearian play of 
kindred type. Nor except in the church scene is this 
verse winged for lofty poetic flight. It serves to express 
emotion heightened to a pitch where prose is inadequate 
to its full interpretation, but where verse can retain 
much of the accent and phrasing of familiar talk, as in 
Scott's Introductions to the Cantos of Marmion or some 
of Shelley's poetical Letters. Hence we are conscious 
of no abrupt change in passing from the verse dialogue 
in Much Ado about Nothing to the prose, and the prose 
itself has an unmistakable hall-mark. It is Elizabethan 
court speech transfigured by the dramatist's art. Not 
that it is entirely free from alloy, from the euphuistic 
infection of mechanical alliterative balance, and the 
obsession of punning. And these frailties (as reference 
to the Notes will abundantly show) are common to the 
speech of nearly every character in the play. But w T hen 
they have been taken fully into account, how irresistible 
are the charm and distinction of the dialogue. How deft 
( xxxix ) 



INTRODUCTION 

and sure is the dramatist's handling of varieties of speech 
—the lightning sallies of Beatrice, the slower-paced 
and more heavily freighted harangues of Benedick, the 
sombre bluntness of Don John, the light-hearted gabble 
of the waiting-women, the grotesque floundering of the 
constables in a sea of 'dictionary-terms'. In the flexibility, 
poise, and sparkle of its prose Much Ado about Nothing is 
the flower of Elizabethan familiar speech. The Way of 
the World and The School for Scandal are herein, each for 
its own day, its lineal successors. Modern English comedy, 
though rich in achievement in other ways, has never 
recaptured the secret of that perfect prose dialogue. 

Though from the publication of the Quarto in 1600 
no separate edition of Much Ado about Nothing was 
called for till 1734, there is abundant evidence of its 
popularity. It was one of the plays acted in honour of 
the marriage of Princess Elizabeth to the Elector Palatine 
in the spring of 161 3./ Thomas Heywood in The Fay re 
Mayde of the Exchange (1607), Thomas May in The 
Heir (1620), Henry Glapthorne in Wit in a Constable 
(1640), were amongst those who imitated the humours 
of Dogberry and the watch. Burton, in The Anatomy of 
Melancholy (3rd edition, 1628), borrows an illustration 
from the behaviour of ' Benedict and Betteris in the 
comedy ', and Leonard Digges in his lines prefixed to 
Shakespeare's Poems (1640) declares, 

let but Beatrice 
And Benedicke be seene, loe in a trice 
The Cockpit, Galleries, Boxes all are full. 
(xl) 






INTRODUCTION 

Dryden in his All for Love (1678) makes Ventidius 
denounce Cleopatra to Antony in words borrowed from 
Don John's slander against Hero : 

Ant. Not Cleopatra ? 
Ven. Even she, my Lord. 
Ant. My Cleopatra. 

Ven. Your Cleopatra : Dolabella's Cleopatra : Every- 
man's Cleopatra. 

This is merely an incidental passage in a play suggested 
by Shakespeare's Antony and Cleopatra. Ten years 
previously Davenant had made a tasteless but ingenious 
' contamination ' of the Benedick and Beatrice plot of 
Much Ado about Nothing and the main plot of Measure 
for Measure, which was acted with much success at 
the Duke of York's Theatre. The eighteenth-century 
adapter -of the play, James Miller, in his The Universal 
Passion, acted at Drury Lane in 1736, was chiefly con- 
cerned with the Claudio-Hero plot, which he strangely 
transformed and blended with Moliere's Princess of E lis. 

Two years before, in 1734, Much Ado about Nothing 
was for the first time republished separately since 1600 
by Jacob Tonson. In 1735 Robert Walker issued 
another edition. The first Scottish edition was published 
in Edinburgh in 1754. 

During the same period the play, in its Shakespearian 
form, began to gain a new lease of popularity on the 
stage. It was acted several times in the latter part of 
1737. In 1748 Garrick appeared as Benedick, which was 
considered by many leading critics to be his best comic 
character. Among his most notable successors in the 
(xli) 



INTRODUCTION 

part have been Macready and Irving, while the role of 
Beatrice, created by some ' squeaking ' boy, has been 
the delight of the greatest English actresses from Mrs. 
Pritchard and Mrs. Clive to Helen Faucit and Ellen Terry. 
The Shakespearian production in this Tercentenary year 
will be incomplete if they do not include a revival of 
this golden comedy which saluted the dawn of the 
seventeenth century, and confronts the twentieth with 
the serene gaze of immortal youth. 



(xlii) 



NOTE ON THE TEXT 

On August 4, 1600, an entry was made in the Register of the 
Stationers' Company that four plays, belonging to the Lord 
Chamberlain's men, As You Like It, Henry V, Every Man in his 
Humour, and ' the commedie of muche Adoo about nothing ' , were 
' to be staied '. Application had evidently been made for licence 
to publish them, and for some unknown reason it was refused. 
But Much Ado about Nothing was not long ' staied ', for on 
August 24 it was re-entered, together with 2 Henry IV, by Andrew 
Wise and William Aspley, and was soon afterwards issued in 
Quarto. As the title-page stated that the play had been ' sundrie 
times publikely acted ' by the Lord Chamberlain's servants, it 
must have been written some time before its publication. On 
the other hand, it is not mentioned by Meres in his list of Shake- 
speare's plays in 1598. It probably followed Henry V, and dates 
from the summer or autumn of 1599. 

Whatever may have been the provenance of the manuscript 
from which Aspley and Wise printed the Quarto — and there is 
good reason to believe that it was a play-house copy J — they were 
fortunate in securing a remarkably accurate text. The more 
carefully it is studied, the more reason will be found for doing 
honour to it, ' on this side idolatry ' . Even Heminges and Condell, 
who in their preface to the first Folio (1623) speak so scornfully 
of earlier editions of the plays as 'stolne and surreptitious copies ', 
were content in the case of Much Ado about Nothing to reproduce 
the Quarto text, with the minimum of change, which in nearly 
every case is for the worse. 

Hence the present edition follows Q, except where there is 

a statement to the contrary. This has involved in a few 

passages, for reasons set forth in the notes ad loc, a departure 

1 See notes on IV. ii. 1-2. 

( xliii ) 



NOTE ON THE TEXT 

from generally accepted emendations. In in. iii. 86 the ' statutes ' 
of Q (to which F 2, 3, and 4 revert) has been retained instead 
of the ' statues ' of F, though one surrenders such an inspired 
misprint with a pang. Other places in which the reading of 
Q has been restored are 1. i. 102 (' are you ') ; III. i. 58 (' she'll ') ; 

IV. i. 307 ('a') ; IV. i. 327 (' curtsies'). 

In other passages, with a minimum of repunctuation or re- 
arrangement. Q will give a satisfactory reading. Thus in the 
speech beginning IV. i. 157 there is no need to suppose that there 
is a lacuna. In iv. ii. 73-5, instead of the generally received 
emendation distributing the lines between Dogberry, Verges, and 
Conrade, they have been divided between' Dogberry and Conrade. 
This arrangement keeps the original number of speakers and 
adds (as the note ad loc. shows) to the dramatic propriety of 
Conrade's exclamation. 1 

The punctuation of Q has been restored in 1. i. 6^ and 11. i. 277. 
On the other hand, it has not been kept in ill. iv. 20 and IV. i. 58. 
Even the best manuscripts and texts are liable to errors in the 
prefixes to speeches, and there are some half-dozen cases in which Q 
appears to be wrong, and where the generally received emendations 
have been adopted. But in several of these case (see notes 
ad loc.) the reading of Q, though not plausible, is possible. 

Apart from wrong prefixes and imperfect marking of entrances 
and exits, there remain few passages where Q needs correction, 
and even here only of single words. Three of these, curiously 
enough, occur in one short scene, I. ii, where ' euents ' (1. 8) 
should probably be 'event' ; 'mine' (1. n) should be 'the' ; 
and ' Cousins ' (1. 28) should be ' Cousin '. In 11. iii. 154, ' of us ' 
should be 'us of ' ; III. ii. 29 ' cannot ' should be ' can ' ; and 

V. iii. 10, ' dead ' should be ' dumb '. Other apparent mistakes in 
Q are in II. iii. 47, ' kid-foxe ' for ' hid-foxe ' ; in. i. 45, ' as full ' 
for ' at full ' ; III. ii. 63, ' now crept ' for ' new crept ' ; in. iv. 
48, ' Ye ' for ' Yea ' ; iv. i. 199, ' kind ' for ' curse ' [?] (see note) ; 
IV. i. 204, ' Princesse ' for ' princes ' ; V. i. 16, ' And ' for ' Bid '. 

F transposes the words in 11. iii. 154, and aided by the rhyme 

1 The emendation of ' bands ' for ' hands in 1. 74 has been 
adopted, but it is admittedly conjectural. 
( xliv ) 



NOTE ON THE TEXT 

corrects v. iii. 10. Otherwise it either reproduces Q, 1 except in 
spelling or punctuation, or substitutes an inferior reading. Most 
of the changes are slight, including the frequent 'substitution of 
a literary for a colloquial form in spelling or syntax ', but in 
nearly every case there is a sacrifice of liveliness and aptness. 

F also omits several passages in Q. Three of these, in I. i. 330-1, 
IV. i. 20-1, and v. iv. 63, are probably merely printers' errors. 
The omission of IV. ii. 20-3, in which the name of God occurs 
four times, was doubtless due to the Statute 3 James I, c. 21, 
enacting penalties against ' the great Abuse of the Holy Name 
of God in Stage-plays, Enterludes, May-games, Shews and such 
like'. 

The most important omission is III. ii. 35-8, ' or in the shape 
of two countries at once, as a German from the waist downward, 
all slops, and a Spaniard from the hip upward, no doublet'. It 
is known that Much Ado about Nothing was one of the plays 
performed at the wedding festivities of the Elector Palatine and 
the Princess Elizabeth in the spring of 161 3. Hence it is probable 
that it was for this revival that the jesting reference to a German 
was left out. Heminges, who directed the performances in 
honour of the marriage, was one of the editors of F, and its text 
of Much Ado about Nothing may therefore be supposed to represent 
that used before the court. 

In any case, F, unlike Q, divided the play into Acts. On the 
Elizabethan platform-stage, where there was no drop-curtain 
and the performance was continuous, such a division was often 
little more than formal. The beginning of Acts II, IV, and V seems 
to mark the transition from a front-stage to a whole-stage scene, 
while the division at Act in, though there is no change of scene, 
separates the parallel episodes of the tricking of Benedick and 
of Beatrice. 

The division into Scenes is the work of eighteenth-century 
editors, who also considerably elaborated the stage-directions. 
So far as they confined themselves to piecing out the imperfec- 
tions of Q and F in the marking of entrances and exits, they 

1 The close dependence of F on Q is illustrated in iv. i. 157-60, 
where in both texts the verse is printed as prose. 

( *lv ) 



NOTE ON THE TEXT 

rendered a service to students of the play, and such emendations 
have been utilized in the present edition. The opportunity, 
however, has been taken to correct some traditional errors, e. g. 
after II. i. 91, and before the last sentence in 11. i. 162 (see note 
on 1. 165). 

But the eighteenth-century editors started on a false scent 
when they sought to localize every scene. They did not realize 
the difference between the platform and the picture stage. On 
the former many scenes, especially those acted on the front 
stage, are vaguely localized. Hence such eighteenth-century 
headings to a scene as 'A room in Leonato's house', 'Another 
room in Leonato's house ', are often only approximately, correct, 
and are sometimes actually misleading, as suggesting without 
warrant a change of scene. These traditional headings have 
been retained in this volume only so far as they seem to be com- 
patible with Elizabethan stage conditions. In two instances 
(1. i and v. iii) new headings have been adopted. Only a few 
other stage-directions are included, and it must be borne in mind 
that they have no Shakespearian authority. 



( xlvi ) 



MUCH ADO ABOUT 
NOTHING 



0) 



DRAMATIS PERSONAE 

Don Pedro, Prince of Arragon. 
D.ON John, his bastard Brother. 
Claudio, a young Lord of Florence. 
Benedick, a young Lord of Padua. 
Leonato, Governor of Messina. 
Antonio, his Brother. 
Balthasar, Servant to Don Pedro. 

Si' "™" o' ^n John. 

Dogberry, a Constable. 
Verges, a Headborough. 
First Watchman. 
Second Watchman. 
Friar Francis. 
A Messenger. 
A Sexton. 
A Boy. 
A Lord. 

Hero, Daughter to Leonato. 
Beatrice, Niece to Leonato. 

Ursula ET ' I Waitm g-g entlewomen attending on Hero. 

Musicians, Maskers, Antonio's son, Watchmen, Attendants. 
Scene. — Messina. 



Dramatis Personae . . . Messina om. Q, F : first added by Rowe : 
emend. Ed. 

(2) 



MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING 

ACT I 

Scene I. — In Leonato's Orchard. 

Enter Leonato, Hero, Beatrice and Others, with 
a Messenger. 

Leon. I learn in this letter that Don Pedro 
of Arragon comes this night to Messina. 

Mess. He is very near by this : he was not 
three leagues off when I left him. 

Leon. How many gentlemen have you lost in 
this action ? 

Mess. But few of any sort, and none of 
name. 

Leon. A victory is twice itself when the 
achiever brings home full numbers. I find 10 
here that Don Pedro hath bestowed much 
honour on a young Florentine called Claudio. 

Mess. Much deserved on his part and 
equally remembered by Don Pedro. He hath 
borne himself beyond the promise of his age, 
doing in the figure of a lamb the feats of a 
lion : he hath indeed better bettered expecta- 
tion than you must expect of me to tell you 
how. 

S. D. Enter . . . Messenger Theobald : Enter Leonato gouernour 
of Messina, Innogen his wife, Hero his daughter, and Beatrice his 
neece, with a messenger Q, F i Pedro] Peter Q, F : corr, 

Rowe 

(3) 



Act i, Sc. i MUCH ADO 

Leon. He hath an uncle here in Messina will 20 
be very much glad of it. 

Mess. I have already delivered him letters, 
and there appears much joy in him ; even so 
much that joy could not show itself modest 
enough without a badge of bitterness. 

Leon. Did he break out into tears ? 

Mess. In great measure. 

Leon. A kind overflow of kindness. There 
are no faces truer than those that are so 
washed : how much better is it to weep at 30 
joy than to joy at weeping ! 

Beat. I pray you is Signior Mountanto 
returned from the wars or no ? 

Mess. I know none of that name, lady : 
there was none such in the army of any 
sort. 

Leon. What is he that you ask for, niece? 

Hero. My cousin means Signior Benedick of 
Padua. 

Mess. O ! he 's returned, and as pleasant as 40 
ever he was. 

Beat. He set up his bills here in Messina 
and challenged Cupid at the flight ; and my 
uncle's fool, reading the challenge, subscribed 
for Cupid, and challenged him at the bird- 
bolt. I pray you, how many hath he killed and 
eaten in these wars ? But how many hath he 
killed ? for, indeed, I promised to eat all of his 
killing. 

Leon. Faith, niece, you tax Signior Benedick 50 
too much ; but he'll be meet with you, I doubt 
it not. 

45 bird-bolt Theobald : spelt Burbolt Q, F 
(4) 



ABOUT NOTHING Act i, Sc. i 

Mess. He hath done good service, lady, in 
these wars. 

Beat. You had musty victual, and he hath 
holp to eat it : he is a very valiant trencher- 
man ; he hath an excellent stomach. 

Mess. And a good soldier too, lady. 

Beat. And a good soldier to a lady ; but 
what is he to a lord ? 60 

Mess. A lord to a lord, a man to a man ; 
stuffed with all honourable virtues. 

Beat. It is so, indeed ; he is no less than 
a stuffed man ; but for the stuffing well, we 
are all mortal. 

Leon. You must not, sir, mistake my niece. 
There is a kind of merry war betwixt Signior 
Benedick and her : they never meet but there 's 
a skirmish of wit between them. 

Beat. Alas ! he gets nothing by that. In our 70 
last conflict four of his five wits went halting 
off, and now is the whole man governed with 
one ! so that if he have wit enough to keep 
himself warm, let him bear it for a difference 
between himself and his horse ; for it is all the 
wealth that he hath left to be known a reason- 
able creature. Who is his companion now? 
He hath every month a new sworn brother. 

Mess. Is 't possible? 

Beat. Very easily possible : he wears his 80 
faith but as the fashion of his hat ; it ever 
changes with the next block. 

Mess. I see, lady, the gentleman is not in 
your books. 

55 victuall F : spelt vittaile, Q 
(5) 



Act i, Sc. i MUCH ADO 

Beat. No ; an he were, I would burn my 
study. But, I pray you, who is his companion ? 
Is there no young squarer now that will make 
a voyage with him to the devil ? 

Mess. He is most in the company of the 
right noble Claudio. 90 

Beat. O Lord ! he will hang upon him like 
a disease : he is sooner caught than the pesti- 
lence, and the taker runs presently mad. God 
help the noble Claudio ! if he have caught the 
Benedick, it will cost him a thousand pound ere 
a' be cured. 

Mess. I will hold friends with you, lady. 

Beat. Do, good friend. 

Leon. You will never run mad, niece. 

Beat. No, not till a hot January. 100 

Mess. Don Pedro is approached. 

Enter Don Pedro, Don John, Claudio, Benedick, 
Balthasar, and Others. 

D. Pedro. Good Signior Leonato, are you 
come to meet your trouble ? The fashion of 
the world is to avoid cost, and you encounter it. 

Leon. Never came trouble to my house in 
the likeness of your Grace, for trouble being 
gone, comfort should remain ; but when you 
depart from me, sorrow abides and happiness 
takes his leave. 

D. Pedro. You embrace your charge too no 
willingly. I think this is your daughter. 

85 an Theobald : spelt and Q, F. So passim 96 a' Camb. 

edd. : a Q : he F 99 You will neuer Q : You'l ne're F 

102-3 are you . . . trouble ?] are you . . . trouble : Q : you are 
. . . trouble : F. See note 

(6) 






ABOUT NOTHING Act i, Sc. i 

Leon. Her mother hath many times told me 
so. 

Bene. Were you in doubt, sir, that you 
asked her ? 

Leon. Signior Benedick, no ; for then were 
you a child. 

D. Pedro. You have it in full, Benedick : we 
may guess by this what you are, being a 
man. Truly, the lady fathers herself. Be 120 
happy, lady, for you are like an honourable 
father. 

Bene. If Signior Leonato be her father, she 
would not have his head on her shoulders for 
all Messina, as like him as she is. 

Beat. I wonder that you will still be talking, 
Signior Benedick : nobody marks you. 

Bene. What ! my dear Lady Disdain, are 
you yet living? 

Beat. Is it possible Disdain should die while 130 
she hath such meet food to feed it as Signior 
Benedick ? Courtesy itself must convert to dis- 
dain, if you come in her presence. 

Bene. Then is courtesy a turncoat. But it 
is certain I am loved of all ladies, only you 
excepted ; and I would I could find in my 
heart that I had not a hard heart ; for, truly, 
I love none. 

Beat. A dear happiness to women : they 
would else have been troubled with a pernicious 14c 
suitor. I thank God and my cold blood, I am 
of your humour for that : I had rather hear my 
dog bark at a crow than a man swear he loves 
me. 

no sir om. F 
(7) 



Act i, Sc. i MUCH ADO 

Bene. God keep your ladyship still in that 
mind ; so some gentleman or other shall 'scape 
a predestinate scratched face. 

Beat. Scratching could not make it worse, 
an 'twere such a face as yours were. 

Bene. Well, you are a rare parrot-teacher. 150 

Beat. A bird of my tongue is better than 
a beast of yours. 

Bene. I would my horse had the speed of 
your tongue, and so good a continuer. But 
keep your way, a God's name ; I have done. 

Beat. You always end with a jade's trick : 
I know you of old. 

D. Pedro. That is the sum of all, Leonato. 
Signior Claudio, and Signior Benedick, my dear 
friend Leonato hath invited you all. I tell 160 
him we shall stay here at the least a month, and 
he heartily prays some occasion may detain us 
longer : I dare swear he is no hypocrite, but 
prays from his heart. 

Leon. If you swear, my lord, you shall not 
be forsworn. [To Don John.] Let me bid 
you welcome, my lord ; being reconciled to the 
prince your brother, I owe you all duty. 

D. John. I thank you : I am not of many 
words, but I thank you. 170 

Leon. Please it your Grace lead on ? 

D. Pedro. Your hand, Leonato ; we will go 
together. [Exeunt all but Benedick and Claudio. 

152 yours] your F 155 a Q, F: i' Capell: o' Theobald 

158 That is the sum of all, Leonato.] That is the summe of all : 
Leonato, Q : This is the summe of all : Leonato, F : corr. Collier. 
See note 166-8 forsworn . . . Let ... my lord ; being . . . brother, 
I] forsworne, let . . . my lord, being . . . brother : I Q,F: corr. 
Hanmer 

(8) 



ABOUT NOTHING Act i, Sc. i 

Claud. Benedick, didst thou note the 
daughter of Signior Leonato ? 

Bene. I noted her not ; but I looked on her. 

Claud. Is she not a modest young lady ? 

Bene. Do you question me, as an honest 
man should do, for my simple true judgement ; 
or would you have me speak after my custom, 180 
as being a professed tyrant to their sex? 

Claud. No ; I pray thee speak in sober 
judgement. 

Bene. Why, i' faith, methinks she 's too low 
for a high praise, too brown for a fair praise, 
and too little for a great praise : only this 
commendation I can afford her, that were 
she other than she is, she were unhandsome, 
and being no other but as she is, I do not like 
her. 190 

Claud. Thou thinkest I am in sport : I pray 
thee tell me truly how thou likest her. 

Bene. Would you buy her, that you inquire 
after her ? 

Claud. Can the world buy such a jewel? 

Bene. Yea, and a case to put it into. But 
speak you this with a sad brow, or do you play 
the flouting Jack, to tell us Cupid is a good 
hare-finder, and Vulcan a rare carpenter? 
Come, in what key shall a man take you, to 200 
go in the song ? 

Claud. In mine eye she is the sweetest lady 
that ever I looked on. 

Bene. I can see yet without spectacles and 

I see no such matter : there 's her cousin an 

she were not possessed with a fury, exceeds her 

as much in beauty as the first of May doth the 

(9) 



Act i, Sc. i MUCH ADO 

last of December. But I hope you have no 
intent to turn husband, have you? 210 

Claud. I would scarce trust myself, though 
I had sworn to the contrary, if Hero would be 
my wife. 

Bene. Is 't come to this, in faith ? Hath not 
the world one man but he will wear his cap 
with suspicion? Shall I never see a bachelor 
of threescore again ? Go to, i' faith ; an thou 
wilt needs thrust thy neck into a yoke, wear 
the print of it, and sigh away Sundays. Look ! 
Don Pedro is returned to seek you. 220 

Re-enter Don Pedro. 

D. Pedro. What secret hath held you here, 
that you followed not to Leonato's? 

Bene. I would your Grace would constrain 
me to tell. 

D. Pedro. I charge thee on thy allegiance. 

Bene. You hear, Count Claudio. I can be 
secret as a dumb man, I would have you think 
so, but (on my allegiance, mark you this, on 
my allegiance) he is in love. With who ? now 
that is your Grace's part. Mark how short 230 
his answer is : — with Hero, Leonato's short 
daughter. 

D. Pedro. If this were so, so were it uttered. 

Bene. Like the old tale, my lord : ' it is not 

213 Is 't come to this, in faith ? Hath] 1st come to this ? 
in faith hath Q, F: corr. Pope S. D. Re-enter Don 

Pedro] Enter don Pedro, Iohn the bastard Q, F : corr. Hanmer 
226 Claudio ] Claudio, Q, F {Claudio) : corr. Ed. after Furness 
228-9 s0 » Dut ( on my ... my allegiance) he] so (but on my ... my 
allegiance) he Q, F : corr. Ed. See note 233 Don Pedro 

com. Hudson : Claudio Q, F 

(10) 



ABOUT NOTHING Act i, Sc. i 

so, nor 'twas not so ; but, indeed, God forbid 
it should be so.' 

Claud. If my passion change not shortly, 
God forbid it should be otherwise. 

D. Pedro. Amen, if you love her ; for the 
lady is very well worthy. 240 

Claud. You speak this to fetch me in, my 
lord. 

D. Pedro. By my troth, I speak my thought. 

Claud. And in faith, my lord, I spoke mine. 

Bene. And by my two faiths and troths, my 
lord, I spoke mine. 

Claud. That I love her, I feel. 

D. Pedro. That she is worthy, I know. 

Bene. That I neither feel how she should be 
loved nor know how she should be worthy, is 250 
the opinion that fire cannot melt out of me : 
I will die in it at the stake. 

D. Pedro. Thou wast ever an obstinate 
heretic in the despite of beauty. 

Claud. And never could maintain his part 
but in the force of his will. 

Bene. That a woman conceived me, I thank 
her ; that she brought me up, I likewise give 
her most humble thanks : but that I will 
have a recheat winded in my forehead, or hang 260 
my bugle in an invisible baldrick, all women 
shall pardon me. Because I will not do them 
the wrong to mistrust any, I will do myself the 
right to trust none ; and the fine is, — for the 
which I may go the finer, — I will live a bachelor. 

D. Pedro. I shall see thee, ere I die, look pale 
with love. 

246 spoke] speake F 
(11) 



Act i, Sc. i MUCH ADO 

Bene. With anger, with sickness, or with 
hunger, my lord ; not with love : prove that 
ever I lose more blood with love than I will get 270 
again with drinking, pick out mine eyes with 
a ballad-maker's pen, and hang me up . . . for 
the sign of blind Cupid. 

D. Pedro. Well, if ever thou dost fall from 
this faith, thou wilt prove a notable argument. 

Bene. If I do, hang me in a bottle like a cat 
and shoot at me ; and he that hits me, let him 
be clapped on the shoulder, and called Adam. 

D. Pedro. Well, as time shall try : 

' In time the savage bull doth bear the yoke.' 

Bene. The savage bull may ; but if ever the 281 
sensible Benedick bear it, pluck off the bull's 
horns and set them in my forehead ; and let me 
be vilely painted, and in such great letters as 
they write, ' Here is good horse to hire,' let 
them signify under my sign ' Here you may see 
Benedick the married man.' 

Claud. If this should ever happen, thou 
wouldst be horn-mad. 

D. Pedro. Nay, if Cupid have not spent all 290 
his quiver in Venice, thou wilt quake for this 
shortly. 

Bene. I look for an earthquake too then. 

D. Pedro. Well, you will temporize with the 
hours. In the meantine, good Signior Bene- 
dick, repair to Leonato's : commend me to 
him and tell him I will not fail him at supper ; 
for indeed he hath made great preparation. 

Bene. I have almost matter enough in me 
for such an embassage ; and so I commit you — 3°° 

284 vilely Rowe : spelt vildly Q, F 
(12) 



ABOUT NOTHING Act i, Sc. i 

Claud. To the tuition of God : from my 
house, if I had it, — 

D. Pedro. The sixth of July : your loving 
friend, Benedick. 

Bene. Nay, mock not, mock not. The body 
of your discourse is sometime guarded with 
fragments, and the guards are but slightly 
basted on neither : ere you flout old ends any 
further, examine your conscience : and so 
I leave you. [Exit. 310 

Claud. My liege, your highness now may do 
me good. 

D. Pedro. My love is thine to teach : teach it 
but how, 
And thou shalt see how apt it is to learn 
Any hard lesson that may do thee good. 

Claud. Hath Leonato any son, my lord ? 

D. Pedro. No child but Hero ; she 's his only heir. 
Dost thou affect her, Claudio ? 

Claud. O ! my lord, 

When you went onward on this ended action, 
I look'd upon her with a soldier's eye, 
That lik'd, but had a rougher task in hand 320 

Than to drive liking to the name of love ; 
But now I am return'd, and that war-thoughts 
Have left their places vacant, in their rooms 
Come thronging soft and delicate desires, 
All prompting me how fair young Hero is, 
Saying, I lik'd her ere I went to wars. 

D. Pedro. Thou wilt be like a lover presently, 

And tire the hearer with a book of words. 

If thou dost love fair Hero, cherish it, 

And I will break with her, and with her father, 330 

330-1 and with . . . have her om. F 

(13) 



Act i, Sc. i MUCH ADO 

And thou shalt have her. Was 't not to this end 
That thou began'st to twist so fine a story ? 

Claud. How sweetly you do minister to love, 
That know love's grief by his complexion ! 
But lest my liking might too sudden seem, 
I would have salv'd it with a longer treatise. 

D. Pedro. What need the bridge much broader 
than the flood ? 
The fairest grant is the necessity. 
Look, what will serve is fit : 'tis once, thou lov'st, 
And I will fit thee with the remedy. 340 

I know we shall have revelling to-night : 
I will assume thy part in some disguise, 
And tell fair Hero I am Claudio ; 
And in her bosom I'll unclasp my heart, 
And take her hearing prisoner with the force 
And strong encounter of my amorous tale : 
Then, after to her father will I break ; 
And the conclusion is, she shall be thine. 
In practice let us put it presently. [Exeunt. 

Scene II. — A Room in Leonato's House. 
Enter Leonato and Antonio. 

Leon. How now, brother ! Where is my 
cousin, your son? Hath he provided this 
music ? 

Ant. He is very busy about it. But, brother, 
I can tell you strange news that you yet 
dreamt not of. 

Leon. Are they good ? 

Ant. As the event stamps them : but they 

333 you do] doe you F S. D. Enter Leonato and an old 

man, brother to Leonato Q, F 5 strange om. F 8 event Rowe ; 
euents Q, F. See note 

(14) 



ABOUT NOTHING Act. i, Sc. ii 

have a good cover ; they show well outward. 
The prince and Count Claudio, walking in 10 
a thick-pleached alley in the orchard, were 
thus much overheard by a man of mine : the 
prince discovered to Claudio that he loved my 
niece your daughter, and meant to acknow- 
ledge it this night in a dance ; and, if he found 
her accordant, he meant to take the present 
time by the top and instantly break with you 
of it. 

Leon. Hath the fellow any wit that told you 
this ? 20 

Ant. A good sharp fellow : I will send for 
him ; and question him yourself. 

Leon. No, no ; we will hold it as a dream till 
it appear itself : but I will acquaint my daughter 
withal, that she may be the better prepared for 
an answer, if peradventure this be true. Go' 
you, and tell her of it. [Enter Antonio's son, 
with a musician.] Cousin, you know what you 
have to do. O ! I cry you mercy, friend ; go 
you with me, and I will use your skill. Good 30 
cousin, have a care this busy time. [Exeunt. 

Scene III. — The same. 
Enter Don John and Conrade. 

Con. What the good-year, my lord ! why 
are you thus out of measure sad ? 

D. John. There is no measure in the occasion 

11 the corr. Ed. : mineQ: my F. See note 13 much ow. F 

27 Enter. . musicians add. Ed. after Dyce. See note 28 Cousin] 
Cousins Q, F : corr. Johnson S. D. Enter sir Iohn the bastard, 

and Conrade his companion Q, F 

(^5) 



Act i, Sc. iii MUCH ADO 

that breeds ; therefore the sadness is without 
limit. 

Con. You should hear reason. 

D. John. And when I have heard it, what 
blessing brings it ? 

Con. If not a present remedy, at least a 
patient sufferance. 10 

D. John. I wonder that thou, being, — as 
thou say'st thou art, — born under Saturn, 
goest about to apply a moral medicine to 
a mortifying mischief. I cannot hide what 
I am : I must be sad when I have cause, and 
smile at no man's jests ; eat when I have 
stomach, and wait for no man's leisure ; sleep 
when I am drowsy, and tend on no man's busi- 
ness ; laugh when I am merry, and claw no 
man in his humour. 20 

Con. Yea ; but you must not make the full 
show of this till you may do it without con- 
trolment. You have of late stood out against 
your brother, and he hath ta'en you newly 
into his grace ; where it is impossible you 
should take true root but by the fair weather 
that you make yourself : it is needful that 
you frame the season for your own harvest. 

D. John. I had rather be a canker in a hedge 
than a rose in his grace ; and it better fits my 30 
blood to be disdained of all than to fashion 
a carriage to rob love from any : in this, though 
I cannot be said to be a flattering honest man, 
it must not be denied but I am a plain-dealing 
villain. I am trusted with a muzzle and en- 
franchised with a clog ; therefore I have 

8 brings] bringeth F 9 at least] yet F 26 true om. F 
(16) 



ABOUT NOTHING Act i, Sc. iii 

decreed not to sing in my cage. If I had my 
mouth, I would bite ; if I had my liberty, 
I would do my liking : in the meantime, let 
me be that I am, and seek not to alter me. 40 

Con. Can you make no use of your dis- 
content ? 

D. John. I make all use of it, for I use it 
only. Who comes here ? 

Enter Borachio. 

What news, Borachio? 

Bora. I came yonder from a great supper : 
the prince, your brother, is royally entertained 
by Leonato ; and I can give you intelligence 
of an intended marriage. 

D. John. Will it serve for any model to build 50 
mischief on ? What is he for a fool that betroths 
himself to unquietness ? 

Bora. Marry, it is your brother's right hand. 

D. John. Who ? the most exquisite Claudio ? 

Bora. Even he. 

D. John. A proper squire ! And who, and 
who ? which way looks he? 

Bora. Marry, on Hero, the daughter and 
heir of Leonato. 

D. John. A very forward March-chick ! 60 
How came you to this ? 

Bora. Being entertained for a perfumer, as 
I was smoking a musty room, comes me the 
prince and Claudio, hand in hand, in sad con- 
ference : I whipt me behind the arras, and 
there heard it agreed upon that the prince 

43 make] will make F 53 brother's] bothers Q : brothers F 

65 me om. F 

(17) c 



Act i, Sc. iii MUCH ADO 

should woo Hero for himself, and having 
obtained her, give her to Count Claudio. 

D. John. Come, come ; let us thither : this 
may prove food to my displeasure. That 70 
young start-up hath all the glory of my over- 
throw : if I can cross him any way, I bless 
myself every way. You are both sure, and will 
assist me ? 

Con. To the death, my lord. 

D. John. Let us to the great supper : their 
cheer is the greater that I am subdued. Would 
the cook were a my mind ! Shall we go prove 
what 's to be done ? 

Bora. We'll wait upon your lordship. [Exeunt. 80 



ACT II 

Scene I. — A Hall in Leonato's House. 

Enter Leonato, Antonio, Hero, Beatrice, Mar- 
garet, Ursula and Others. 

Leon. Was not Count John here at supper ? 

Ant. I saw him not. 

Beat. How tartly that gentleman looks ! 
I never can see him but I am heart-burned an 
hour after. 

Hero. He is of a very melancholy disposition. 

Beat. He were an excellent man that were 
made just in the mid-way between him and 
Benedick : the one is too like an image, and 

78 a] of F S. D. Enter Leonato, his brother, his wife, Hero 

his daughter and Beatrice his neece, and a kinsman Q, F See 
note 2 Antonio] Brother Q, F 

(18) 






ABOUT NOTHING Act ii, Sc. i 

says nothing ; and the other .too like my lady's 10 
eldest son, evermore tattling. 

Leon. Then half Signior Benedick's tongue 
in Count John's mouth, and half Count John's 
melancholy in Signior Benedick's face, — 

Beat. With a good leg and a good foot, 
uncle, and money enough in his purse, such 
a man would win any woman in the world, if 
a' could get her good will. 

Leon. By my troth, niece, thou wilt never 
get thee a husband, if thou be so shrewd of thy 20 
tongue. 

Ant. In faith, she 's too curst. 

Beat. Too curst is more than curst : I shall 
lessen God's sending that way ; for it is said, 
6 God sends a curst cow short horns ; ' but to 
a cow too curst he sends none. 

Leon. So, by being too curst, God will send 
you no horns ? 

Beat. Just, if he send me no husband ; for 
the which blessing I am at him upon my knees 30 
every morning and evening. Lord ! I could 
not endure a husband with a beard on his 
face : I had rather lie in the woollen. 

Leon. You may light on a husband that 
hath no beard. 

Beat. What should I do with him ? dress him 
in my apparel and make him my waiting- 
gentlewoman ? He that hath a beard is more 
than a youth, and he that hath no beard is less 
than a man ; and he that is more than a youth 40 
is not for me ; and he that is less than a man, 
I am not for him : therefore I will even take 

18 a' Collier : a Q; he F 34 on] upon F 

(19) C2 



Act ii, Sc. i MUCH ADO 

sixpence in earnest of the bear-herd, and lead 
his apes into hell. 

Leon. Well then, go you into hell ? 

Beat. No ; but to the gate ; and there will 
the devil meet me, like an old cuckold, with 
horns on his head, and say, ' Get you to heaven, 
Beatrice, get you to heaven ; here 's no place 
for you maids : ' so deliver I up my apes, and 50 
away to Saint Peter for the heavens ; he shows 
me where the bachelors sit, and there live we 
as merry as the day is long. 

Ant. [To Hero.] Well, niece, I trust you 
will be ruled by your father. 

Beat. Yes, faith ; it is my cousin's duty to 
make curtsy, and say, ' Father, as it please 
you : ' — but yet for all that, cousin, let him be 
a handsome fellow, or else make another curtsy, 
and say, ' Father, as it please me.' 60 

Leon. Well, niece, I hope to see you one day 
fitted with a husband. 

Beat. Not till God make men of some other 
metal than earth. Would it not grieve a 
woman to be over-mastered with a piece of 
valiant dust ? to make an account of her life 
to a clod of wayward marl? No, uncle, I'll 
none : Adam's sons are my brethren ; and 
truly, I hold it a sin to match in my kindred. 

Leon. Daughter, remember what I told you : 70 
if the prince do solicit you in that kind, you 
know your answer. 

43 bear -herd F3, F4 : spelt Berrord Q, F 51 Saint . . . 

heavens] saint Peter : for the heavens, Q, F {S. Peter) : conj. Pope. 
See note 57 curtsy Wright : spelt cursie Q : curtsie F. Father 



om. F 66 an om. F. 



(20) 



ABOUT NOTHING Act ii, Sc. i 

Beat. The fault will be in the music, cousin, 
if you be not wooed in good time : if the 
prince be too important, tell him there is 
measure in everything, and so dance out the 
answer. For, hear me, Hero : wooing, wed- 
ding, and repenting, is as a Scotch jig, a 
measure, and a cinque-pace : the first suit is 
hot and hasty, like a Scotch jig, and full as 80 
fantastical ; the wedding, mannerly-modest, as 
a measure, full of state and ancientry ; and 
then comes Repentance, and, with his bad legs, 
falls into the cinque-pace faster and faster, till 
he sink into his grave. 

Leon. Cousin, you apprehend passing 
shrewdly. 

Beat. I have a good eye, uncle : I can see 
a church by daylight. 

Leon. The revellers are entering, brother : 90 
make good room. 

Enter Don Pedro, Claudio, Benedick, and Bal- 
thasar, masked, with Don John ^w^Borachio. 

D. Pedro. Lady, will you walk about with 
your friend ? 

Hero. So you walk softly and look sweetly 
and say nothing, I am yours for the walk ; and 
especially when I walk away. 

D. Pedro. With me in your company ? 

Hero. I may say so, when I please. 



S. D. Enter prince, Pedro, Claudio, and Benedicke, and Balthasar, 
or dumb Iohn Q : Enter . . . lohn, Maskers with a drum F : corr. 
Ed. See note. 94 So you F : So, you Q 

(21) 



Act ii, Sc. i MUCH ADO 

D. Pedro. And when please you to say so ? 

Hero. When I like your favour ; for God ioo 
defend the lute should be like the case ! 

D. Pedro. My visor is Philemon's roof ; within 
the house is Jove. 

Hero. Why, then, your visor should be thatch'd. 

D. Pedro. Speak low, if you speak love. 

[Takes her aside. 

Balth. Well, I would you did like me. 

Marg. So would not I, for your own sake ; 
for I have many ill qualities. 

Balth. Which is one? 

Marg. I say my prayers aloud. 

Balth. I love you the better ; the hearers 
may cry Amen. no 

Marg. God match me with a good dancer ! 

Balth. Amen. 

Marg. And God keep him out of my sight 
when the dance is done ! Answer, clerk. 

Balth. No more words : the clerk is an- 
swered. 

Urs. I know you well enough : you are 
Signior Antonio. 

Ant. At a word, I am not. 

Urs. I know you by the waggling of your 120 
head. 

Ant. To tell you true, I counterfeit him. 

Urs. You could never do him so ill-well, 
unless you were the very man. Here 's his 
dry hand up and down : you are he, you 
are he. 

Ant. At a word, I am not. 

102 Jove] Love F 104, 107, no, Balthasar] Benedick Q. F : 
conj. Theobald 

(22> 



ABOUT NOTHING Act ii, Sc. i 

Urs. Come, come ; do you think I do not 
know you by your excellent wit ? Can virtue 
hide itself? Go to, mum, you are he : graces 130 
will appear, and there 's an end. 

Beat. Will you not tell me who told you 
so? 

Bene. No, you shall pardon me. 

Beat. Nor will you not tell me who you 
are ? 

Bene. Not now. 

Beat. That I was disdainful, and that I had 
my good wit ,out of the ' Hundred Merry 
Tales '. Well, this was Signior Benedick that 140 
said so. 

Bene. What 's he ? 

Beat. I am sure you know him well enough. 

Bene. Not I, believe me. 

Beat. Did he never make you laugh ? 

Bene. I pray you, what is he? 

Beat. Why, he is the prince's jester : a very 
dull fool ; only his gift is in devising impossible 
slanders : none but libertines delight in him ; 
and the commendation is not in his wit, but 150 
in his villany ; for he both pleases men and 
angers them, and then they laugh at him 
and beat him. I am sure he is in the fleet : 
I would he had boarded me ! 

Bene. When I know the gentleman, I'll tell 
him what you say. 

Beat. Do, do : he'll but break a comparison 
or two on me ; which, peradventure not 
marked or not laughed at, strikes him into 
melancholy ; and then there 's a partridge 160 

151 pleases] pleaseth Q 
( 23 ) 



Act ii, Sc. i MUCH ADO 

wing saved, for the fool will eat no supper that 
night. We must follow the leaders. 

Bene. In every good thing. 

Beat. Nay, if they lead to any ill, I will 
leave them at the next turning. 

[Dance. Then exeunt all but Don 
John, Borachio, and Claudio. 

D. John. Sure my brother is amorous on 
Hero, and hath withdrawn her father to break 
with him about it. The ladies follow her and 
but one visor remains. 

Bora. And that is Claudio : I know him by 170 
his bearing. 

D. John. Are you not Signior Benedick? 

Claud. You know me well ; I am he. 

D. John. Signior, you are very near my 
brother in his love : he is enamoured on Hero ; 
I pray you, dissuade him from her ; she is no 
equal for his birth : you may do the part of an 
honest man in it. 

Claud. How know you he loves her ? 

D. John. I heard him swear his affection. 180 

Bora. So did I too ; and he swore he would 
marry her to-night. 

D. John. Come, let us to the banquet. 

[Exeunt Don John and Borachio. 

Claud. Thus answer I in name of Benedick, 
But hear these ill news with the ears of Claudio. 
'Tis certain so ; the prince woos for himself. 
Friendship is constant in all other things 
Save in the office and affairs of love : 

S. D. Dance . . . Claudio con. Theobald. : Dance, exeunt Q : 
Exeunt. Musicke for the dance F 

(24) 






ABOUT NOTHING Act ii, Sc. 1 

Therefore all hearts in love. use their own tongues ; 
Let every eye negotiate for itself 190 

And trust no agent ; for beauty is a witch 
Against whose charms faith melteth into blood. 
This is an accident of hourly proof, 
Which I mistrusted not. Farewell, therefore, 
Hero! 

Re-enter Benedick. 

Bene. Count Claudio? 

Claud. Yea, the same. 

Bene. Come, will you go with me ? 

Claud. Whither? 

Bene. Even to the next willow, about your 
own business, county. What fashion will you 200 
wear the garland of? About your neck, like 
a usurer's chain? or under your arm, like a 
lieutenant's scarf ? You must wear it one way, 
for the prince hath got your Hero. 

Claud. I wish him joy of her. 

Bene. Why, that 's spoken like an honest 
drovier : so they sell bullocks. But did you 
think the prince would have served you thus ? 

Claud. I pray you, leave me. 

Bene. Ho ! now you strike like the blind 210 
man : 'twas the boy that stole your meat, and 
you'll beat the post. 

Claud. If it will not be, I'll leave you. [Exit. 

Bene. Alas ! poor hurt fowl. Now will 
he creep into sedges. But, that my lady 
Beatrice should know me, and not know 
me ! The prince's fool ! Ha ! it may be 
I go under that title because I am merry. 

200 county] Count F 
(25) 



Act ii, Sc. i MUCH ADO 

Yea, but so I am apt to do myself wrong ; 
I am not so reputed : it is the base though 220 
bitter disposition of Beatrice that puts the 
world into her person, and so gives me out. 
Well, I'll be revenged as I may. 

Re-enter Don Pedro, Hero, and Leonato. 

D. Pedro. Now, signior, where 's the count ? 
Did you see him ? 

Bene. Troth, my lord, I have played the 
part of Lady Fame. I found him here as 
melancholy as a lodge in a warren. I told him, 
and I think I told him true, that your Grace 
had got the good will of this young lady ; and 230 
I offered him my company to a willow tree, 
either to make him a garland, as being for- 
saken, or to bind him up a rod, as being 
worthy to be whipped. 

D. Pedro. To be whipped ! What 's his 
fault ? 

Bene. The flat transgression of a school-boy, 
who, being overjoy'd with finding a bird's 
nest, shows it his companion, and he steals it. 

D. Pedro. Wilt thou make a trust a trans- 240 
gression ? The transgression is in the stealer. 

Bene. Yet it had not been amiss the rod 
had been made, and the garland too ; for the 
garland he might have worn himself, and the 
rod he might have bestowed on you, who, as 
I take it, have stolen his bird's nest. 

S. D. Re-enter . . . Leonato Capell: Enter the Prince, Hero, 
Leonato, Iohn and Borachio, and Conrade Q : Enter the Prince F. 
See note 229 think I told] thinke, told F 230 good 

om. F 233 up om. F 

(26) 



ABOUT NOTHING Act ii, Sc. i 

D. Pedro. I will but teach them to sing, and 
restore them to the owner. 

Bene. If their singing answer your saying, 
by my faith, you say honestly. 250 

D. Pedro. The Lady Beatrice hath a quarrel 
to you : the gentleman that danced with her 
told her she is much wronged by you. 

Bene. O ! she misused me past the endur- 
ance of a block : an oak but with one green 
leaf on it, would have answered her : my very 
visor began to assume life and scold with her. 
She told me, not thinking I had been myself, 
that I was the prince's jester ; that I was 
duller than a great thaw ; huddling jest upon 260 
jest with such impossible conveyance upon me, 
that I stood like a man at a mark, with a whole 
army shooting at me. She speaks poniards, and 
every word stabs : if her breath were as terrible 
as her terminations, there were no living near 
her; she would infect to the north star. I would 
not marry her, though she were endowed with 
all that Adam had left him before he trans- 
gressed : she would have made Hercules have 
turned spit, yea, and have cleft his club to 270 
make the fire too. Come, talk not of her ; 
you shall find her the infernal Ate in good 
apparel. I would to God some scholar would 
conjure her, for certainly, while she is here, 
a man may live as quiet in hell as in a sanc- 
tuary ; and people sin upon purpose because 
they would go thither, so indeed all disquiet, 
horror and perturbation follows her. 

259 jester ; that] Iester, and that F 
(27) 



Act ii, Sc. i MUCH ADO 

Re-enter Claudio and Beatrice. 

D. Pedro. Look ! here she comes. 

Bene. Will your Grace command me any 280 
service to the world's end ? I will go on the 
slightest errand now to the Antipodes that you 
can devise to send me on ; I will fetch you 
a toothpicker now from the furthest inch of 
Asia ; bring you the length of Prester John's 
foot ; fetch you a hair off the Great Cham's 
beard ; do you any embassage to the Pigmies, 
rather than hold three words' conference with 
this Harpy. You have no employment for me ?. 

D, Pedro. None, but to desire your good 290 
company. 

Bene. O God, sir, here 's a dish I love not : 
I cannot endure my Lady Tongue. [Exit. 

D. Pedro. Come, lady, come ; you have lost 
the heart of Signior Benedick. 

Beat. Indeed, my lord, he lent it me awhile ; 
and I gave him use for it, a double heart for 
his single one : marry, once before he won it of 
me with false^dice, therefore your Grace may 
well say I have lost it. 3°° 

D. Pedro. You have put him down, lady, 
you have put him down. 

Beat. So I would not he should do me, my 
lord. I have brought Count Claudio, whom 
you sent me to seek. 

D. Pedro. Why, how now, count ! where- 
fore are you sad ? 

Claud. Not sad, my lord. 

S. D. Enter . . . Beatrice Q : Enter . . . Beatrice, Leonato, Hero F 
293 my] this F 298 his] a F 

(28) 



ABOUT NOTHING Act ii, Sc. i 

D. Pedro. How then ? Sick ? 

Claud. Neither, my lord. 310 

Beat. The count is neither sad, nor sick, 
nor merry, nor well; but civil count, civil as 
an orange, and something of that jealous com- 
plexion. 

D. Pedro. I' faith, lady, I think your blazon 
to be true ; though, I'll be sworn, if he be so, 
his conceit is false. Here, Claudio, I have 
wooed in thy name, and fair Hero is won : 
I have broke with her father, and his good 
will obtained : name the day of marriage, and 320 
God give thee joy ! 

Leon. Count, take of me my daughter, and 
with her my fortunes : his Grace hath made 
the match, and all grace say Amen to it ! 

Beat. Speak, count, 'tis your cue. 

Claud. Silence is the perfectest herald of 
joy : I were but little happy, if I could say 
how much. Lady, as you are mine, I am yours : 
I give away myself for you and dote upon the 
exchange. 330 

Beat. Speak, cousin ; or, if you cannot, 
stop his mouth with a kiss, and let not him 
speak neither. 

D. Pedro. In faith, lady, you have a merry 
heart. 

Beat. Yea, my lord ; I thank it, poor fool, 
it keeps on the windy side of care. My cousin 
tells him in his ear that he is in her heart. 

Claud. And so she doth, cousin. 

313 that] aF 319-20 and his . . . obtained :] and his . . . 

obtained, Q, F : corr. Pope 325 cue spelt Qu Q, F 

326 herald spelt Herault Q, F 338 her] my F 

(29) 



Act ii, Sc. i MUCH ADO 

Beat. Good Lord, for alliance ! Thus goes 340 
every one to the world but I, and I am sun- 
burnt. I may sit in a corner and cry, heigh-ho 
for a husband ! 

D. Pedro. Lady Beatrice, I will get you one. 

Beat. I would rather have one of your 
father's getting. Hath your Grace ne'er a 
brother like you? Your father got excellent 
husbands, if a maid could come by them. 

D. Pedro. Will you have me, lady ? 

Beat. No, my lord, unless I might have 350 
another for working days : your Grace is too 
costly to wear every day. But, I beseech your. 
Grace, pardon me ; I was born to speak all 
mirth and no matter. 

D. Pedro. Your silence most offends me, and 
to be merry best becomes you ; for, out a' 
question, you were born in a merry hour. 

Beat. No, sure, my lord ; but then there 
was a star danced, and under that was I born. 
Cousins, God give you joy ! 360 

Leon. Niece, will you look to those things 
I told you of ? 

Beat. I cry you mercy, uncle. By your 
Grace's pardon. [Exit. 

D. Pedro. By my troth, a pleasant-spirited 
lady. 

Leon. There 's little of the melancholy ele- 
ment in her, my lord : she is never sad but 
when she sleeps ; and not ever sad then, for 
I have heard my daughter say, she hath often 370 
dreamed of unhappiness and waked herself 
with laughing. 

356 a'] a Q : of F 

(3°) 



ABOUT NOTHING Act ii, Sc. i 

D. Pedro. She cannot endure to hear tell of 
a husband. 

Leon. O ! by no means : she mocks all her 
wooers out of suit. 

D. Pedro. She were an excellent wife for 
Benedick. 

Leon. O Lord ! my lord, if they were but 
a week married, they would talk themselves 380 
mad. 

D. Pedro. County Claudio, when mean you 
to go to church ? 

Claud. To-morrow, my lord. Time goes on 
crutches till love have all his rites. 

Leon. Not till Monday, my dear son, which 
is hence a just seven-night ; and a time too 
brief too, to have all things answer my mind. 

D. Pedro. Come, you shake the head at so 
long a breathing ; but, I warrant thee, Claudio, 390 
the time shall not go dully by us. I will in 
the interim undertake one of Hercules' labours, 
which is, to bring Signior Benedick and the 
Lady Beatrice into a mountain of affection th' 
one with th' other. I would fain have it 
a match ; and I doubt not but to fashion it, if 
you three will but minister such assistance as 
I shall give you direction. 

Leon. My lord, I am for you, though it cost 
me ten nights' watchings. 400 

Claud. And I, my lord. 

D. Pedro. And you too, gentle Hero ? 

Hero. I will do any modest office, my lord, to 
help my cousin to a good husband. 

382 County] Counte F 388 my om. F 394~5 th' 

one . . . th' other] the one with the other F 
(30 



Act ii, Sc. i MUCH ADO 

D. Pedro. And Benedick is not the unhope- 
fullest husband that I know. Thus far can 
I praise him ; he is of a noble strain, of 
approved valour, and confirmed honesty. I will 
teach you how to humour your cousin, that she 
shall fall in love with Benedick ; and I, with 410 
your two helps, will so practise on Benedick 
that, in despite of his quick wit and his queasy 
stomach, he shall fall in love with Beatrice. If 
we can do this, Cupid is no longer an archer : 
his glory shall be ours, for we are the only love- 
gods. Go in with me, and I will tell you my 
drift. [Exeunt. 



Scene II. — Another Room in Leonato's House. 
Enter Don John and Borachio. 

D. John. It is so ; the Count Claudio 
shall marry the daughter of Leonato. 

Bora. Yea, my lord ; but I can cross it. 

D. John. Any bar, any cross, any impedi- 
ment will be medicinable to me : I am sick in 
displeasure to him, and whatsoever comes 
athwart his affection ranges evenly with mine. 
How canst thou cross this marriage? 

Bora. Not honestly, my lord ; but so 
covertly that no dishonesty shall appear in me. 

D. John. Show me briefly how. 

Bora. I think I told your lordship, a year 
since, how much I am in the favour of Mar- 
garet, the waiting-gentlewoman to Hero. 

Do John. I remember. 

Bora. I can, at any unseasonable instant of 
(32) 



ABOUT NOTHING Act ii, Sc. ii 

the night, appoint her to look out at her lady's 
chamber- window. 

D. John. What life is in that, to be the 
death of this marriage? 20 

Bora. The poison of that lies in you to 
temper. Go you to the prince your brother ; 
spare not to tell him, that he hath wronged his 
honour in marrying the renowned Claudio — 
whose estimation do you mightily hold up — 
to a contaminated stale, such a one as Hero. 

D. John. What proof shall I make of that ? 

Bora. Proof enough to misuse the prince, to 
vex Claudio, to undo Hero, and kill Leonato. 
Look you for any other issue ? 30 

D. John. Only to despite them, I will 
endeavour any thing. 

Bora. Go, chen ; find me a meet hour to 
draw Don Pedro and the Count Claudio alone : 
tell them that you know that Hero loves me ; 
intend a kind of zeal both to the prince and 
Claudio, as- — in love of your brother's honour, 
who hath made this match, and his friend's 
reputation, who is thus like to be cozened with 
the semblance of a maid — that you have dis- 40 
covered thus. They will scarcely believe this 
without trial : offer them instances, which 
shall bear no less likelihood than to see me at 
her chamber-window, hear me call Margaret 
Hero ; hear Margaret term me Claudio ; and 
bring them to see this the very night before 
the intended wedding : for in the meantime 
I will so fashion the matter that Hero shall be 

34 Don] on F _ 37-8 as — in . . . match Capell] (as in . . . 

match) Q, F 37 in love] in a love F 

143414 (33) D 



Act ii, Sc. ii MUCH ADO 

absent ; and there shall appear such seeming 
truth of Hero's disloyalty, that jealousy shall 50 
be called assurance, and all the preparation 
overthrown. 

D. John. Grow this to what adverse issue it 
can, I will put it in practice. Be cunning in the 
working this, and thy fee is a thousand ducats. 

Bora. Be you constant in the accusation, and 
my cunning shall not shame me. 

D. John. I will presently go learn their day 
of marriage. [Exeunt. 



Scene III. — Leonato's Orchard. 

Enter Benedick. 

Bene. Boy ! 

Enter a Boy. 

Boy. Signior? 

Bene. In my chamber- window lies a book; 
bring it hither to me in the orchard. 

Boy. I am here already, sir. 

Bene. I know that ; but I would have thee 
hence, and here again. [Exit Boy.] I do 
much wonder that one man, seeing how much 
another man is a fool when he dedicates his 
behaviours to love, will, after he hath laughed 10 
at such shallow follies in others, become the 
argument of his own scorn by falling in love : 
and such a man is Claudio. I have known, 
when there was no music with him but the 
drum and the fife ; and now had he rather 

50 truth] truths F 56 you] thou F S.D. Enter 

Benedicke alone Q F: S.D. Enter a Boy add. Collier (1) 
(34) 









ABOUT NOTHING Act ii, Sc. iii 

hear the tabor and the pipe : I have known, 
when he would have walked ten mile afoot to 
see a good armour ; and now will he lie ten 
nights awake, carving the fashion of a new 
doublet. He was wont to speak plain and to 20 
the purpose, like an honest man and a soldier ; 
and now is he turned orthography ; his words 
are a very fantastical banquet, just so many 
strange dishes. May I be so converted, and see 
with these eyes ? I cannot tell ; I think not : 
I will not be sworn but love may transform me 
to an oyster ; but I'll take my oath on it, till 
he have made an oyster of me, he shall never 
make me such a fool. One woman is fair, yet 
I am well ; another is wise, yet I am well ; 30 
another virtuous, yet I am well ; but till all 
graces be in one woman, one woman shall not 
come in my grace. Rich she shall be, that 's 
certain ; wise, or I'll none ; virtuous, or I'll 
never cheapen her ; fair, or I'll never look on 
her ; mild, or come not near me ; noble, or 
not I for an angel ; of good discourse, an 
excellent musician, and her hair shall be of 
what colour it please God. Ha ! the prince 
and Monsieur Love ! I will hide me in the 40 
arbour. 

Enter Don Pedro, Leonato, and Claudio. 

D. Pedro. Come, shall we hear this music ? 
Claud. Yea, my good lord. How still the even- 
ing is, 
As hush'd on purpose to grace harmony ! 

28 an F : and Q 37 I om. F S. D. Enter prince, Leonato, 
Claudio, Musicke Q : Enter . . . Claudio and lacke Wilson F 

( 35 ) D2 



Act ii, Sc. iii MUCH ADO 

D. Pedro. See you where Benedick hath hid 
himself ? 

Enter Balthasar with music. 

Claud. O ! very well, my lord : the music 
ended, 
We'll fit the hid-fox with a penny-worth. 

D. Pedro, Come, Balthasar, we'll hear that song 
again. 

Balth. O . good my lord, tax not so bad a voice 
To slander music any more than once. 50 

D. Pedro. It is the witness still of excellency, 
To put a strange face on his own perfection. 
I pray thee, sing, and let me woo no more. 

Balth. Because you talk of wooing, I will sing ; 
Since many a wooer doth commence his suit 
To her he thinks not worthy ; yet he woos ; 
Yet will he swear he loves. 

D. Pedro. Nay, pray thee, come ; 

Or if thou wilt hold longer argument, 
Do it in notes. 

Balth. Note this before my notes ; 59 

There 's not a note of mine that 's worth the noting. 

D. Pedro. Why these -are very crotchets that he 
speaks ; 
Notesj notes, forsooth, and nothing ! [Music. 

Bene. Now, divine air ! now is his soul 
ravished ! Is it not strange that sheeps' guts 
should hale souls out of men's bodies ? Well, 
a horn for my money, when all 's done. 



S. D. Enter . . . music om. F 47 hid-fox corr. Warburton : 

kid-foxe Q, F. See note 51-2 Between these lines F repeats 

by mistake 11. 50-1 62 [Music, add. Malone 

(36) 



ABOUT NOTHING Act ii, Sc. iii 

THE SONG 

Sigh no more, ladies, sigh no more, 

Men were deceivers ever ; 
One foot in sea, and one on shore, 

To one thing constant never. 70 

Then sigh not so, 
But let them go, 
And be you blithe and bonny, 
Converting all your sounds of woe 
Into Hey nonny, nonny. 

Sing no more ditties, sing no mo 
Of dumps so dull and heavy ; 
The fraud of men was ever so, 
Since summer first was leavy. 

Then sigh not so, 80 

But let them go, 
And be you blithe and bonny, 
Converting all your sounds of woe 
Into Hey nonny, nonny. 

D. Pedro. By my troth, a good song. 

Balth. And an ill singer, my lord. 

D. Pedro. Ha, no, no, faith ; thou singest 
well enough for a shift. 

Bene. An he had been a dog that should 
have howled thus, they would have hanged 90 
him ; and I pray God hi. bad voice bode no 
mischief. I had as lief have heard the night- 
raven, come what plague could have come 
after it. 

D. Pedro. Yea, marry ; dost thou hear, 
Balthasar ? I pray thee, get us some excellent 
music, for to-morrow night we would have it 
at the Lady Hero's chamber-window. 

Balth. The best I can, my lord. 

78 was] were F 92 liefe F : Hue Q 

(37) 



Act ii, Sc. iii MUCH ADO 

D. Pedro. Do so : farewell. [Exit Bal- ioo 
thasar.] Come hither, Leonato : what was it 
you told me of to-day, that your niece Beatrice 
was in love with Signior Benedick ? 

Claud. O ! ay : — Stalk on, stalk on ; the 
fowl sits. — I did never think that lady would 
have loved any man. 

Leon. No, nor I neither ; but most wonder- 
ful that she should so dote on Signior Benedick, 
whom she hath in all outward behaviours 
seemed ever to abhor. no 

Bene. Is 't possible ? Sits the wind in that 
corner ? 

Leon. By my troth, my lord, I cannot tell 
what to think of it but that she loves him 
with an enraged affection : it is past the infinite 
of thought. 

D. Pedro. May be she doth but counterfeit. 

Claud. Faith, like enough. 

Leon. O God ! counterfeit ! There was 
never counterfeit of passion came so near the 120 
life of passion as she discovers it. 

D. Pedro. Why, what effects of passion shows 
she? 

Claud. Bait the hook well : this fish will bite. 

Leon. What effects, my lord? She will sit 
you, you heard my daughter tell you how. 

Claud. She did, indeed. 

D. Pedro. How, how, I pray you? You 
amaze me : I would have thought her spirit 
had been invincible against all assaults of affec- 130 
tion. 

Leon. I would have sworn it had, my lord ; 
especially against Benedick. 
(38) 



ABOUT NOTHING Act ii, Sc. iii 

Bene, I should think this a gull, but that 
the white-bearded follow speaks it : knavery 
cannot, sure, hide itself in such reverence. 

Claud. He hath ta'en the infection : hold 
it up. 

D. Pedro. Hath she made her affection known 
to Benedick? 140 

Leon. No ; and swears she never will : that 's 
her torment. 

Claud. 'Tis true, indeed ; so your daughter 
says : ' Shall I,' says she, ' that have so oft 
encountered him with scorn, write to him that 
I love him ? ' 

Leon. This says she now when she is begin- 
ning to write to him ; for she'll be up twenty 
times a night, and there will she sit in her 
smock till she have writ a sheet of paper : my 150 
daughter tells us all. 

Claud. Now you talk of a sheet of paper, 
I remember a pretty jest your daughter told 
us of. 

Leon. O, when she had writ it, and was read- 
ing it over, she found Benedick and Beatrice 
between the sheet. 

Claud. That. 

Leon. O, she tore the letter into a thousand 
halfpence ; railed at herself, that she should 160 
be so immodest to write to one that she knew 
would flout her : ' I measure him,' says she, 
' by my own spirit ; for I should flout him, 
if he writ to me ; yea, though I love him, 
I should.' 

Claud. Then down upon her knees she falls, 

154 us of F: of us Q 
(39) 



Act ii, Sc. iii MUCH ADO 

weeps, sobs, beats her heart, tears her hair, 
prays, curses ; ' O sweet Benedick ! God give 
me patience ! ' 

Leon. She doth indeed ; my daughter says 170 
so ; and the ecstasy hath so much overborne 
her, that my daughter is sometimes afeard she 
will do a desperate outrage to herself. It is 
very true. 

D. Pedro. It were good that Benedick knew 
of it by some other, if she will not discover it. 

Claud. To what end ? he would make but 
a sport of it and torment the poor lady worse. 

D. Pedro. An he should, it were an alms to 
hang him. She 's an excellent sweet lady, and, 180 
out of all suspicion, she is virtuous. 

Claud. And she is exceeding wise. 

D. Pedro. In everything but in loving Bene- 
dick. 

Leon. O ! my lord, wisdom and blood 
combating in so tender a body, we have ten 
proofs to one that blood hath the victory. 
I am sorry for her, as I have just cause, being 
her uncle and her guardian. 

D. Pedro. I would she had bestowed this 190 
dotage on me ; I would have daffed all other 
respects and made her half myself. I pray you, 
tell Benedick of it, and hear what a' will say. 

Leon. Were it good, think you ? 

Claud. Hero thinks surely she will die ; for 
she says she will die if he love her not, and she 
will die ere she make her love known, and 
she will die if he woo her, rather than she will 
bate one breath of her accustomed crossness. 

177 make but] but make F 193 a Q : he F 

(40) 



ABOUT NOTHING Act ii, Sc. iii 

D. Pedro. She doth well : if she should make 200 
tender of her love, 'tis very possible he'll scorn 
it ; for the man, — as you know all, — hath a con- 
temptible spirit. 

Claud. He is a very proper man. 

D. Pedro. He hath indeed a good outward 
happiness. 

Claud. Before God, and in my mind, very 
wise. 

D. Pedro. He doth indeed show some sparks 
that are like wit. 210 

Claud. And I take him to be valiant. 

D. Pedro. As Hector, I assure you : and in 
the managing of quarrels you may say he is 
wise ; for either he avoids them with great 
discretion, or undertakes them with a most 
Christian-like fear. 

Leon. If he do fear God, a' must necessarily 
keep peace : if he break the peace, he ought 
to enter into a quarrel with fear and trembling. 

D. Pedro. And so will he do ; for the man 220 
doth fear God, howsoever it seems not in him 
by some large jests he will make. Well, I am 
sorry for your niece. Shall we go seek Bene- 
dick, and tell him of her love ? 

Claud. Never tell him, my lord : let her 
wear it out with good counsel. 

Leon. Nay, that 's impossible : she may wear 
her heart out first. 

D. Pedro. Well, we will hear further of it by 
your daughter : let it cool the while. I love 230 
Benedick well, and I could wish he would 

207 Before] 'Fore F 211 Claudio] Leonato F 213 say] 

see F 215 most om. F 223 seek] see F 
(41) 



Act ii, Sc. iii MUCH ADO 

modestly examine himself, to see how much he 
is unworthy so good a lady. 

Leon. My lord, will you walk? dinner is 
ready. 

Claud. If he do not dote on her upon this, 
I will never trust my expectation. 

D. Pedro. Let there be the same net spread 
for her ; and that must your daughter and 
her gentlewomen carry. The sport will be, 240 
when they hold one an opinion of another's 
dotage, and no such matter : that 's the scene 
that I would see, which will be merely a dumb- 
show. Let us send her to call him in to 
dinner. 

[Exeunt Don Pedro, Claudio, and Leonato. 

Bene. [Advancing from the arbour.'] This can 
be no trick : the conference was sadly borne. 
They have the truth of this from Hero. They 
seem to pity the lady : it seems, her affections 
have their full bent. Love me ! why, it must 250 
be requited. I hear how I am censured : they 
say I will bear myself proudly, if I perceive the 
love come from her ; they say too that she will 
rather die than give any sign of affection. I did 
never think to marry : I must not seem proud : 
happy are they that hear their detractions, and 
can put them to mending. They say the lady 
is fair : 'tis a truth, I can bear them witness : 
and virtuous : 'tis so, I cannot reprove it ; 
and wise, but for loving me : by my troth, it 260 
is no addition to her wit, nor no great argu- 
ment of her folly, for I will be horribly in love 

233 unworthy] vnworthy to haue F 240 gentlewoman F 

250 their] the F 

(42) 



ABOUT NOTHING Act ii, Sc. iii 

with her. I may chance have some odd quirks 
and remnants of wit broken on me, because 
I have railed so long against marriage ; but 
doth not the appetite alter ? A man loves the 
meat in his youth that he cannot endure in his 
age. Shall quips and sentences and these paper 
bullets of the brain awe a man from the career 
of his humour ? No ; the world must be 270 
peopled. When I said I would die a bachelor, 
I did not think I should live till I were married. 
Here comes Beatrice. By this day ! she 's a 
fair lady : I do spy some marks of love in her. 

Enter Beatrice. 

Beat. Against my will I am sent to bid you 
come in to dinner. 

Bene. Fair Beatrice, I thank you for your 
pains. 

Beat. I took no more pains for those thanks 
than you take pains to thank me : if it had 280 
been painful, I would not have come. 

Bene. You take pleasure then in the message ? 

Beat. Yea, just so much as you may take 
upon a knife's point, and choke a daw withal. 
You have no stomach, signior : fare you well. 

[Exit. 

Bene. Ha ! ' Against my will I am sent to 
bid you come in to dinner,' there 's a double 
meaning in that. ' I took no more pains for 
those thanks than you took pains to thank me,' 
that 's as much as to say, Any pains that I take 290 
for you is as easy as thanks. If I do not take 
pity of her, I am a villain ; if I do not love her, 
I am a Jew. I will go get her picture. [Exit. 

(43) 



Act iii, Sc. i MUCH ADO 

ACT III 

Scene I. — Leonato's Orchard. 

Enter Hero, Margaret, and Ursula. 

Hero. Good Margaret, run thee to the parlour ; 
There shalt thou find my cousin Beatrice 
Proposing with the prince and Claudio : 
Whisper her ear, and tell her, I and Ursley 
Walk in the orchard, and our whole discourse 
Is all of her ; say that thou overheard'st us, 
And bid her steal into the pleached bower, 
Where honey-suckles, ripened by the sun, 
Forbid the sun to enter ; like favourites, 
Made proud by princes, that advance their pride 10 
Against that power that bred it. There will she 

hide her, 
To listen our propose. This is thy office ; 
Bear thee well in it and leave us alone. 

Marg. I'll make her come, I warrant you, pre- 
sently. [Exit. 

Hero. Now, Ursula, when Beatrice doth come, 
As we do trace this alley up and down, 
Our talk must only be of Benedick : 
When I do name him, let it be thy part 
To praise him more than ever man did merit. 
My talk to thee must be how Benedick 20 

Is sick in love with Beatrice : of this matter 
Is little Cupid's crafty arrow made, 
That only wounds by hearsay. 

S. D. Enter Hero and two Gentlewomen, Margaret and Ursula Q : 
F has ' two Gentlemen ' 4 Ursley] Ursula F 12 propose] 

purpose F 

( 44) 



ABOUT NOTHING Act iii, Sc. i 

Enter Beatrice, behind. 

Now begin ; 
For look where Beatrice, like a lapwing, runs 
Close by the ground, to hear our conference. 

Urs. The pleasant'st angling is to see the fish 
Cut with her golden oars the silver stream, 
And greedily devour the treacherous bait : 
So angle we for Beatrice ; who even now 
Is couched in the woodbine coverture. 30 

Fear you not my part of the dialogue. 

Hero. Then go we near her, that her ear lose 
nothing 
Of the false sweet bait that we lay for it. 

[They advance to the bower. 
No, truly, Ursula, she is too disdainful ; 
I know her spirits are as coy and wild 
As haggards of the rock. 

Urs. But are you sure 

That Benedick loves Beatrice so entirely? 

Hero. So says the prince, and my new-trothed 
lord. 

Urs. And did they bid you tell her of it, madam ? 

Hero. They did entreat me to acquaint her of it ; 
But I persuaded them, if they lov'd Benedick, 41 
To wish him wrestle with affection, 
And never to let Beatrice know of it. 

Urs. Why did you so ? Doth not the gentleman 
Deserve at full as fortunate a bed 
As ever Beatrice shall couch upon? 

Hero. O god of love ! I know he doth deserve 
As much as may be yielded to a man ; 

42 wrestle spelt wrastle Q, F 45 at full con. Ed. : as full 

Q, F. See note 

( 45 ) 



Act iii, Sc. i MUCH ADO 

But nature never fram'd a woman's heart 

Of prouder stuff than that of Beatrice ; 50 

Disdain and scorn ride sparkling in her eyes, 

Misprising what they look on, and her wit 

Values itself so highly, that to her 

All matter else seems weak. She cannot love, 

Nor take no shape nor project of affection, 

She is so self-endeared. 

Urs. Sure, I think so ; 

And therefore certainly it were not good 
She knew his love, lest she'll make sport at it. 
Hero. Why, you speak truth. I never yet saw 
man. 
How wise, how noble, young, how rarely featured, 
But she would spell him backward : if fair-faced, 61 
She would swear the gentleman should be her 

sister ; 
If black, why, Nature, drawing of an antique, 
Made a foul blot ; if tall, a lance ill-headed ; 
If low, an agate very vilely cut ; 
If speaking, why, a vane blown with all winds ; 
If silent, why, a block moved with none. 
So turns she every man the wrong side out, 
And never gives to truth and virtue that 
Which simpleness and merit purchaseth. 70 

Urs. Sure, sure, such carping is not commend- 
able. 
Hero. No ; not to be so odd and from all fashions 
As Beatrice is, cannot be commendable. 
But who dare tell her so ? If I should speak, 
She would mock me into air : O ! she would 
laugh me 

58 she'll] sheele Q : she F 63 antique] anticke F 

65 agate spelt agot Q, F 

(46) 



ABOUT NOTHING Act iii, Sc. i 

Out of myself, press me to death with wit. 
Therefore let Benedick, like cover' d fire, 
Consume away in sighs, waste inwardly : 
It were a better death than die with mocks, 
Which is as bad as die with tickling. 80 

Urs. Yet tell her of it : hear what she will say. 

Hero. No ; rather I will go to Benedick, 
And counsel him to fight against his passion. 
And, truly, I'll devise some honest slanders 
To stain my cousin with. One doth not know 
How much an ill word may empoison liking. 

Urs. O ! do not do your cousin such a wrong. 
She cannot be so much without true judgement, — 
Having so swift and excellent a wit 
As she is priz'd to have, — as to refuse 90 

So rare a gentleman as Signior Benedick. 

Hero. He is the only man of Italy, 
Always excepted my dear Claudio. 

Urs. I pray you, be not angry with me, madam, 
Speaking my fancy : Signior Benedick, 
For shape, for bearing, argument and valour, 
Goes foremost in report through Italy. 

Hero. Indeed, he hath an excellent good name. 

Urs. His excellence did earn it, ere he had it. 
When are you married, madam ? 100 

Hero. Why, every day to-morrow. Come, go in : 
I'll show thee some attires, and have thy counsel 
Which is the best to furnish me to-morrow. 

Urs. She 's limed, I warrant you : we have 
caught her, madam. 

Hero. If it prove so, then loving goes by haps : 
Some Cupid kills with arrows, some with traps. 

[Exeunt Hero and Ursula. 

79 than] to F 
(47) 



Act iii, Sc. i MUCH ADO 

Beat. [Advancing.'] What fire is in mine ears ? 
Can this be true? 

Stand I condemn'd for pride and scorn so much ? 
Contempt, farewell ! and maiden pride, adieu ! 

No glory lives behind the back of such. no 

And, Benedick, love on ; I will requite thee, 

Taming my wild heart to thy loving hand : 
If thou dost love, my kindness shall incite thee 

To bind our loves up in a holy band ; 
For others say thou dost deserve, and I 
Believe it better than reportingly. [Exit. 



Scene II. — A Room in Leonato's House. 

Enter Don Pedro, Claudio, Benedick, and 
Leonato. 

D. Pedro. I do but stay till your marriage be 
consummate, and then go I toward Arragon. 

Claud. I'll bring you thither, my lord, if 
you'll vouchsafe me. 

D. Pedro. Nay, that would be as great a soil 
in the new gloss of your marriage, as to show 
a child his new coat and forbid him to wear it. 
I will only be bold with Benedick for his com- 
pany ; for, from the crown of his head to the 
sole of his foot, he is all mirth : he hath twice 
or thrice cut Cupid's bow-string, and the 
little hangman dare not shoot at him. He 
hath a heart as sound as a bell, and his tongue 
is the clapper ; for what his heart thinks his 
tongue speaks. 

Bene. Gallants, I am not as I have been. 

Leon. So say I : methinks you are sadder, 
(48) 



ABOUT NOTHING Act iii, Sc. ii 

Claud. I hope he be in love. 

D. Pedro. Hang him, truant ! there 's no 
true drop of blood in him, to be truly touched 20 
with love. If he be sad, he wants money. 

Bene. I have the tooth-ache. 

D. Pedro. Draw it. 

Bene. Hang it. 

Claud. You must hang it first, and draw it 
afterwards. 

D. Pedro. What ! sigh for the tooth- ache ? 

Leon. Where is but a humour or a worm. 

Bene. Well, every one can master a grief but 
he that has it. 30 

Claud. Yet say I, he is in love. 

D. Pedro. There is no appearance of fancy in 
him, unless it be a fancy that he hath to strange 
disguises ; as, to be a Dutchman to-day, a 
Frenchman to-morrow, or in the shape of two 
countries at once, as a German from the waist 
downward, all slops, and a Spaniard from the 
hip upward, no doublet. Unless he have a 
fancy to this foolery, as it appears he hath, he 
is no fool for fancy, as you would have it appear 40 
he is. 

Claud. If he be not in love with somewoman, 
there is no believing old signs : a' brushes his 
hat a mornings ; what should that bode ? 

D. Pedro. Hath any man seen him at the 
barber's ? 

Claud. No, but the barber's man hath been 
seen with him ; and the old ornament of his 
cheek hath already stuffed tennis-balls. 

29 can] cannot Q, F : corr. Pope 35-8 or in the . . . doublet 
om. F 40 appear] to appeare F 43 a' : a Q : he F 

(49) E 



Act iii, Sc. ii MUCH ADO 

Leon. Indeed he looks younger than he did, 50 
by the loss of a beard. 

D. Pedro. Nay, a' rubs himself with civet : 
can you smell him out by that ? 

Claud. That 's as much as to say the sweet 
youth 's in love. 

D. Pedro. The greatest note of it is his 
melancholy. 

Claud. And when was he wont to wash his 
face? 

D. Pedro. Yea, or to paint himself? for the 60 
which, I hear what they say of him. 

Claud. Nay, but his jesting spirit ; which is 
new crept into a lute-string, and now governed 
by stops. 

D. Pedro. Indeed, that tells a heavy tale for 
him. Conclude, conclude he is in love. 

Claud. Nay, but I know who loves him. 

D. Pedro. That would I know too : I war- 
rant, one that knows him not. 

Claud. Yes, and his ill conditions ; and in 70 
despite of all, dies for him. 

D. Pedro. She shall be buried with her face 
upwards. 

Bene. Yet is this no charm for the tooth- 
ache. Old signior, walk aside with me : I have 
studied eight or nine wise words to speak to 
you, which these hobby-horses must not hear. 

[Exeunt Benedick and Leonato. 

D. Pedro. For my life, to break with him 
about Beatrice. 

Claud. 'Tis even so. Hero and Margaret 80 

56 D. Pedro] Prin. F : Bene. Q 63 new crept corr. Ed. : 

now crept Q, F. See note 66 Conclude, conclude] Conclude F 
(5o) 



ABOUT NOTHING Act iii, Sc. ii 

have by this played their parts with Beatrice, 
and then the two bears will not bite one another 
when they meet. 

Enter Don John. 

D. John. My lord and brother, God save you ! 

D. Pedro. Good den, brother. 

D. John. If your leisure served, I would 
speak with you. 

D. Pedro. In private? 

D. John. If it please you ; yet Count Claudio 
may hear, for what I would speak of concerns 90 
him. 

D. Pedro. What 's the matter ? 

D. John. [To Claudio.] Means your lord- 
ship to be married to-morrow ? 

D. Pedro. You know he does. 

D. John. I know not that, when he knows 
what I know. 

Claud. If there be any impediment, I pray 
you discover it. 

D. John. You may think I love you not : let 100 
that appear hereafter, and aim better at me by 
that I now will manifest. For my brother, 
I think he holds you well, and in clearness of 
heart hath holp to effect your ensuing marriage; 
surely suit ill spent, and labour ill bestowed ! 

D. Pedro. Why, what 's the matter? 

D. John. I came hither to tell you ; and 
circumstances shortened, — for she has been too 
long a talking of, — the lady is disloyal. 

Claud. Who, Hero? no 

102-3 brother (I . . . heart) hath Q, F 108 has] hath F 

(51) E2 



Act iii, Sc. ii MUCH ADO 

D. John. Even she : Leonato's Hero, your 
Hero, every man's Hero. 

Claud. Disloyal ? 

D. John. The word 's too good to paint out 
her wickedness ; I could say, she were worse : 
think you of a worse title, and I will fit her to 
it. Wonder not till further warrant : go but 
with me to-night, you shall see her chamber- 
window entered, even the night before her 
wedding-day : if you love her, then to-morrow 120 
wed her ; but it would better fit your honour 
to change your mind. 

Claud. May this be so ? 

D. Pedro. I will not think it. 

D. John. If you dare not trust that you see, 
confess not that you know. If you will follow 
me, I will show you enough ; and when you have 
seen more and heard more, proceed accordingly. 

Claud. If I see any thing to-night why 
I should not marry her to-morrow, in the con- 130 
gregation, where I should wed, there will 
I shame her. 

D. Pedro. And, as I wooed for thee to obtain 
her, I will join with thee to disgrace her. 

D. John. I will disparage her no further till 
you are my witnesses : bear it coldly but till 
midnight, and let the issue show itself. 

D. Pedro. O day untowardly turned ! 

Claud. O mischief strangely thwarting ! 

D. John. O plague right well prevented ! 140 
So will you say when you have seen the sequel. 

[Exeunt. 

130 to-morrow, in conj. Rowe : to morrow in Q, F 137 mid- 
night] night F 

(52) 



ABOUT NOTHING Act iii, Sc. iii 

Scene III. — A Street. 

Enter Dogberry and Verges, with the Watch. 

Dogb. Are you good men and true ? 

Verg. Yea, or else it were pity but they 
should suffer salvation, body and soul. 

Dogb. Nay, that were a punishment too good 
for them, if they should have any allegiance in 
them, being chosen for the prince's watch. 

Verg. Well, give them their charge, neigh- 
bour Dogberry. 

Dogb. First, who think you the most desart- 
less man to be constable? 10 

ist Watch. Hugh Oatcake, sir, or George 
Seacoal ; for they can write and read. 

Dogb. Come hither, neighbour Seacoal. God 
hath blessed you with a good name : to be 
a well-favoured man is the gift of fortune ; but 
to write and read comes by nature. 

2nd Watch. Both which, Master constable, — 

Dogb. You have : I knew it would be your 
answer. Well, for your favour, sir, why, give 
God thanks, and make no boast of it ; and for 20 
your writing and reading, let that appear when 
there is no need of such vanity. You are thought 
here to be the most senseless and fit man for the 
constable of the watch ; therefore bear you the 
lanthorn. This is your charge : you shall com- 
prehend all vagrom men ; you are to bid any 
man stand, in the prince's name. 

Watch. How, if a' will not stand ? 

Dogb. Why, then, take no note of him, but 

S. D. Verges] his compartner Q, F 
(53) 



Act iii, Sc. iii MUCH ADO 

let him go ; and presently call the rest of the 30 
watch together, and thank God you are rid of 
a knave. 

Verg. If he will not stand when he is bidden, 
he is none of the prince's subjects. 

Dogb. True, and they are to meddle with 
none but the prince's subjects. You shall also 
make no noise in the streets : for, for the 
watch to babble and to talk is most tolerable 
and not to be endured. 

2nd Watch. We will rather sleep than talk : 40 
we know what belongs to a watch. 

Dogb. Why, you speak like an ancient and 
most quiet watchman, for I cannot see how 
sleeping should offend ; only have a care that 
your bills be not stolen. Well, you are to call 
at all the alehouses, and bid those that are 
drunk get them to bed. 

Watch. How if they will not ? 

Dogb. Why then, let them alone till they are 
sober : if they make you not then the better 50 
answer, you may say they are not the men you 
took them for. 

Watch. Well, sir. 

Dogb. If you meet a thief, you may suspect 
him, by virtue of your office, to be no true 
man ; and, for such kind of men, the less you 
meddle or make with them, why, the more is 
for your honesty. 

2nd Watch. If we know him to be a thief, 
shall we not lay hands on him ? 60 

Dogb. Truly, by your office, you may ; but 
I think they that touch pitch will be denied. 

38 to talk] talk F 46 those] them F 

(54) 



ABOUT NOTHING Act iii, Sc. iii 

The most peaceable way for you, if you do take 
a thief, is, to let him show himself what he is 
and steal out of your company. 

Verg. You have been always called a merciful 
man, partner. 

Dogb. Truly, I would not hang a dog by my 
will, much more a man who hath any honesty 
in him. 70 

Verg. If you hear a child cry in the night, 
you must call to the nurse and bid her still it. 

2nd Watch. How if the nurse be asleep and 
will not hear us? 

Dogb. Why, then, depart in peace, and let 
the child wake her with crying ; for the ewe 
that will not hear her lamb when it baes, will 
never answer a calf when he bleats. 

Verg. 'Tis very true. 

Dogb. This is the end of the charge. You 80 
constable, are to present the prince's own 
person : if you meet the prince in the night, 
you may stay him. 

Verg. Nay, by 'r lady, that I think, a' cannot. 

Dogb. Five shillings to one on 't, with any 
man that knows the statutes, he may stay him : 
marry, not without the prince be willing ; for, 
indeed, the watch ought to offend no man, and 
it is an offence to stay a man against his will. 

Verg. By 'r lady, I think it be so. 9° 

Dogb. Ha, ah, ha ! Well, masters, good night : 
an there be any matter of weight chances, call 
up me : keep your fellows' counsels and your 
own, and good night. Come, neighbour. 

2nd Watch. Well, masters, we hear our 

86 statutes] statues F. See note 
(55) 



Act iii, Sc. iii MUCH ADO 

charge : let us go sit here upon the church- 
bench till two, and than all go to bed. 

Dogb. One word more, honest neighbours. 
I pray you, watch about Signior Leonato's door; 
for the wedding being there to-morrow, there ioo 
is a great coil to-night. Adieu ; be vigitant, 
I beseech you. 

[Exeunt Dogberry and Verges. 

Enter Borachio and Conrade. 

Bora. What, Conrade ! 

Watch. [Aside.'] Peace ! stir not. 

Bora. Conrade, I say ! 

Con. Here, man, I am at thy elbow. 

Bora. Mass, and my elbow itched ; I thought 
there would a scab follow. 

Con. I will owe thee an answer for that ; 
and now forward with thy tale. no 

Bora. Stand thee close then under this pent- 
house, for it drizzles rain, and I will, like a true 
drunkard, utter all to thee. 

Watch. [Aside.] Some treason, masters ; yet 
stand close. 

Bora. Therefore know, I have earned of Don 
John a thousand ducats. 

Con. Is it possible that any villany should be 
so dear ? 

Bora. Thou wouldst rather ask if it were 120 
possible any villany should be so rich ; for when 
rich villains have need of poor ones, poor ones 
may make what price they will. 

Con. I wonder at it. 

Bora. That shows thou art unconfirmed. 

116 Don] Dun Q 
(56) 



ABOUT NOTHING Act iii, Sc. iii 

Thou knowest that the fashion of a doublet, or 
a hat, or a cloak, is nothing to a man. 

Con. Yes, it is apparel. 

Bora. I mean, the fashion. 

Con. Yes, the fashion is the fashion. 130 

Bora. Tush ! I may as well say the fool 's 
the fool. But seest thou not what a deformed 
thief this fashion is? 

Watch. [Aside.] I know that Deformed ; a' 
has been a vile thief this seven year ; a' goes 
up and down like a gentleman : I remember 
his name. 

Bora. Didst thou not hear somebody ? 

Con. No : 'twas the vane on the house. 

Bora. Seest thou not, I say, what a deformed 140 
thief this fashion is ? how giddily a' turns about 
all the hot bloods between fourteen and five- 
and-thirty ? sometimes fashioning them like 
Pharaoh's soldiers in the reechy painting; some- 
time like god Bel's priests in the old church- 
window ; sometime like the shaven Hercules 
in the smirched worm-eaten tapestry . . . ? 

Con. All this I see, and I see that the fashion 
wears out more apparel than the man. But 
art not thou thyself giddy with the fashion too, 150 
that thou hast shifted out of thy tale into telling 
me of the fashion? 

Bora. Not so, neither ; but know, that I 
have to-night wooed Margaret, the Lady 
Hero's gentlewoman, by the name of Hero : 
she leans me out at her mistress' chamber-win- 
dow, bids me a thousand times good night — 

135 year] yeares F 144 reechy spelt rechie Q, F 

148 and I see] and see F 

(57) 



Act iii, Sc. iii MUCH ADO 

I tell this tale vilely : — I should first tell thee 
how the prince, Claudio, and my master, 
planted and placed and possessed by my 160 
master Don John, saw afar off in the orchard 
this amiable encounter. 

Con. And thought they Margaret was Hero ? 

Bora. Two of them did, the prince and 
Claudio ; but the devil my master, knew she 
was Margaret ; and partly by his oaths, which 
first possessed them, partly by the dark night, 
which did deceive them, but chiefly by my 
villany, which did confirm any slander that Don. 
John had made, away went Claudio enraged ; 170 
swore he would meet her, as he was appointed, 
next morning at the temple, and there, before 
the whole congregation, shame her with what 
he saw o'er night, and send her home again 
without a husband. 

1st Watch. We charge you in the prince's 
name, stand ! 

2nd Watch. Call up the right Master con- 
stable. We have here recovered the most 
dangerous piece of lechery that ever was known 180 
in the commonwealth. 

1st Watch. And one Deformed is one of 
them : I know him, a' wears a lock. 

Con. Masters, masters ! 

2nd Watch. You'll be made bring Deformed 
forth, I warrant you. 

Con. Masters — 

1st Watch. Never speak : we charge you let 
us obey you to go with us. 

163 they] thy F i&l~9 Comrade. Masters . . . us Q, F 

con. Theobald 

(58) 



ABOUT NOTHING Act iii, Sc. iii 

Bora. We are like to prove a goodly com- 90 
modity, being taken up of these men's bills. 

Con. A commodity in question, I warrant 
you. Come, we'll obey you. [Exeunt. 

Scene IV. — Hero's Apartment. 

Enter Hero, Margaret, and Ursula. 

Hero. Good Ursula, wake my cousin Beatrice, 
and desire her to rise. 

Urs. I will, lady. 

Hero. And bid her come hither. 

Urs. Well. [Exit. 

Marg. Troth, I think your other rebato 
were better. 

Hero. No, pray thee, good Meg, I'll wear this. 

Marg. By my troth 's not so good ; and 
I warrant your cousin will say so. 10 

Hero. My cousin 's a fool, and thou art 
another : I'll wear none but this. 

Marg. I like the new tire within excellently, 
if the hair were a thought browner ; and your 
gown 's a most rare fashion, i' faith. I saw the 
Duchess of Milan's gown that they praise so. 

Hero. O ! that exceeds, they say. 

Marg. By my troth 's but a night-gown in 
respect of yours : cloth o' gold, and cuts, and 
laced with silver, set with pearls down sleeves, 20 
side sleeves, and skirts, round underborne with 
a bluish tinsel ; but for a fine, quaint, graceful, 
and excellent fashion, yours is worth ten on 't. 

190' Capell : a Q, F 20 set with pearles, downe sleeues 

Q, F : set with pearls down sleeves Steevens 

(59) 



Act iii, Sc. iv MUCH ADO 

Hero. God give me joy to wear it ! for my 
heart is exceeding heavy. 

Marg. 'Twill be heavier soon by the weight 
of a man. 

Hero. Fie upon thee ! art not ashamed ? 

Marg. Of what, lady ? of speaking honour- 
ably ? Is not marriage honourable in a beggar ? 30 
Is not your lord honourable without marriage ? 
I think you would have me say, ' saving your 
reverence, a husband ' : an bad thinking do not 
wrest true speaking, I'll offend nobody : is 
there any harm in ' the heavier for a husband ' ? - 
None, I think, an it be the right husband and 
the right wife ; otherwise 'tis light, and not 
heavy : ask my Lady Beatrice else ; here she 
comes. 

Enter Beatrice. 

Hero. Good morrow, coz. <P 

Beat. Good morrow, sweet Hero. 

Hero. Why, how now ! do you speak in the 
sick tune ? 

Beat. I am out of all other tune, methinks. 

Marg. Clap 's into ' Light o' love ' ; that 
goes without a burden : do you sing it, and 
I'll dance it. 

Beat. Yea, i Light o' love ' with your heels ! 
then, if your husband have stables enough, 
you'll see he shall lack no barns. 50 

Marg. O illegitimate construction ! I scorn 
that with my heels. 

Beat. 'Tis almost five o'clock, cousin ; 'tis 

45, 48 o' love Rowe : a loue Q, F 48 Yea conj. Capell : Ye 

Q, F 50 see] looke F 

(60) 



ABOUT NOTHING Act iii, Sc. iv 

time you were ready. By my troth, I am 
exceeding ill. Heigh-ho ! 

Marg. For a hawk, a horse, or a husband ? 

Beat. For the letter that begins them all, H. 

Marg. Well, an you be not turned Turk, 
there 's no more sailing by the star. 

Beat. What means the fool, trow ? 60 

Marg. Nothing I ; but God send every one 
their heart's desire ! 

Hero. These gloves the count sent me ; they 
are an excellent perfume. 

Beat. I am stuffed, cousin, I cannot smell. 

Marg. A maid, and stuffed ! there 's goodly 
catching of cold. 

Beat. O, God help me ! God help me ! how 
long have you professed apprehension ? 

Marg. Ever since you left it. Doth not my 70 
wit become me rarely ! 

Beat. It is not seen enough, you should wear 
it in your cap. By my troth, I am sick. 

Marg. Get you some of this distilled Carduus 
Benedictus, and lay it to your heart : it is the 
only thing for a qualm. 

Hero. There thou prick'st her with a thistle. 

Beat. Benedictus ! why Benedictus ? you 
have some moral in this Benedictus. 

Marg. Moral ! no, by my troth, I have no So 
moral meaning ; I meant, plain holy-thistle. 
You may think, perchance, that I think you 
are in love : nay, by 'r lady, I am not such 
a fool to think what I list ; nor I list not to 
think what I can ; nor, indeed, I cannot think, 
if I would think my heart out of thinking, that 
you are in love, or that you will be in love, or 
(61) 



Act iii, Sc. iv MUCH ADO 

that you can be in love. Yet Benedick was 
such another, and now is he become a man : 
he swore he would never marry ; and yet now, 90 
in despite of his heart, he eats his meat without 
grudging : and how you may be converted, 
I know not ; but methinks you look with your 
eyes as other women do. 

Beat. What pace is this that thy tongue 
keeps? 

Marg. Not a false gallop. 

Re-enter Ursula. 

Urs. Madam, withdraw : the prince, the 
count, Signior Benedick, Don John, and all the 
gallants of the town, are come to fetch you to 100 
church. 

Hero. Help to dress me, good coz, good Meg, 
good Ursula. [Exeunt. 

Scene V. — Another Room in Leonato's House. 

Enter Leonato with Dogberry and Verges. 

Leon. What would you with me, honest 
neighbour ? 

Dogb. Marry, sir I would have some con- 
fidence with you, that decerns you nearly. 

Leon. Brief, I pray you ; for you see it is 
a busy time with me. 

Dogb. Marry, this it is, sir. 

Verg. Yes, in truth it is, sir. 

Leon. What is it, my good friends ? 

Dogb. Goodman Verges, sir, speaks a little off 10 

S. D. Enter Leonato, and the Constable, and the Headborough Q, F 
(62) 



ABOUT NOTHING Act iii, Sc. v 

the matter : an old man, sir, and his wits are 
not so blunt, as, God help, I would desire they 
were ; but, in faith, honest as the skin between 
his brows. 

Verg. Yes, I thank God, I am as honest as 
any man living, that is an old man and no 
honester than I. 

Dogb. Comparisons are odorous : palabras, 
neighbour Verges. 

Leon. Neighbours, you are tedious. 20 

Dogb. It pleases your worship to say so, but 
we are the poor duke's officers ; but truly, for 
mine own part, if I were as tedious as a king, 
I could find in my heart to bestow it all of your 
worship. 

Leon. All thy tediousness on me ! ha ? 

Dogb. Yea, an 't were a thousand pound 
more than 'tis ; for I hear as good exclama- 
tion on your worship, as of any man in the 
city, and though I be but a poor man, I am 30 
glad to hear it. 

Verg. And so am I. 

Leon. I would fain know what you have to say. 

Verg. Marry, sir, our watch to-night, except- 
ing your worship's presence, ha' ta'en a couple 
of as arrant knaves as any in Messina. 

Dogb. A good old man, sir ; he will be 
talking : as they say, ' when the age is in, the 
wit is out '. God help us ! it is a world to see ! 
Well said, i' faith, neighbour Verges : well, 40 
God 's a good man ; an two men ride of 
a horse, one must ride behind. An honest 
soul, i' faith, sir ; by my troth he is, as ever 
27 pound] times F 35 ha'] ha Q : havue F 

(63) 



Act iii, Sc. v MUCH ADO 

broke bread : but God is to be worshipped : 
all men are not alike ; alas ! good neighbour. 

Leon. Indeed, neighbour, he comes too 
short of you. 

Dogb. Gifts that God gives. 

Leon. I must leave you. 

Dogb. One word, sir : our watch, sir, hath 50 
indeed comprehended two aspicious persons, 
and we would have them this morning examined 
before your worship. 

Leon. Take their examination yourself, and 
bring it me : I am now in great haste, as it 
may appear unto you. 

Dogb. It shall be suffigance. 

Leon. Drink some wine ere you go : fare you 
well. 

Enter a Messenger. 

Mess. My lord, they stay for you to give 60 
your daughter to her husband. 

Leon. I'll wait upon them : I am ready. 

[Exeunt Leonato and Messenger. 

Dogb. Go, good partner, go, get you to 
Francis Seacoal ; bid him bring his pen and 
inkhorn to the gaol : we are now to examina- 
tion these men. 

Verg. And we must do it wisely. 

Dogb. We will spare for no wit, I warrant 
you ; here 's that shall drive some of them 
to a non-come : only get the learned writer to 70 
set down our excommunication, and meet me 
at the gaol. [Exeunt. 

55 as it] as F 65-6 examination these] examine those F 

(64) 



ABOUT NOTHING Act iv, Sc. i 

ACT IV 

Scene I. — The Inside of a Church. 

Enter Don Pedro, Don John, Leonato, Friar 
Francis, Claudio, Benedick, Hero, Beatrice, 
and attendants. 

Leon. Come, Friar Francis, be brief : only 
to the plain form of marriage, and you shall 
recount their particular duties afterwards. 

Friar. You come hither, my lord, to marry 
this lady ? 

Claud. No. 

Leon. To be married to her, friar ; you come 
to marry her. 

Friar. Lady, you come hither to be married 
to this count ? 10 

Hero. I do. 

Friar. If either of you know any inward 
impediment, why you should not be conjoined, 
I charge you, on your souls, to utter it. 

Claud. Know you any, Hero ? 

Hero. None, my lord. 

Friar. Know you any, count ? 

Leon. I dare make his answer ; none. 

Claud. O ! what men dare do ! what men 
may do ! what men daily do, not knowing 20 
what they do ! 

Bene. How now! Interjections? Why 
then, some be of laughing, as ah ! ha ! he ! 

Claud. Stand thee by, friar. Father, by your 
leave : 

7 her : Frier, you Q, F : conj. Rowe 20-1 not ... do om. F 
23 ah] ha F 

H"* (65) F 



Act iv, Sc. i MUCH ADO 

Will you with free and unconstrained soul 
Give me this maid, your daughter? 

Leon. As freely, son, as God did give her me. 

Claud. And what have I to give you back whose 
worth 
May counterpoise this rich and precious gift ? 30 

D. Pedro. Nothing, unless you render her again. 

Claud. Sweet prince, you learn me noble thank- 
fulness. 
There, Leonato, take her back again : 
Give not this rotten orange to your friend ; 
She 's but the sign and semblance of her honour. 
Behold ! how like a maid she blushes here. 

! what authority and show of truth 
Can cunning sin cover itself withal. 
Comes not that blood as modest evidence 

To witness simple virtue ? Would you not swear, - 
All you that see her, that she were a maid, 41 

By these exterior shows ? But she is none : 
She knows the heat of a luxurious bed : 
Her blush is guiltiness, not modesty. 

Leon. What do you mean, my lord ? 

Claud. Not to be married, 

Not to knit my soul to an approved wanton. 

Leon. Dear my lord, if you, in your own proof, 
Have vanquish'd the resistance of her youth, 
And made defeat of her virginity — 

Claud. I know what you would say : if I have 
known her, 50 

You will say she did embrace me as a husband, 
And so extenuate the 'forehand sin. 
No, Leonato, 

1 never tempted her with word too large ; 
But, as a brother to his sister, showed 

(66) 



ABOUT NOTHING Act iv, Sc. i 

Bashful sincerity and comely love. 

Hero. And seem'd I ever otherwise to you ? 

Claud. Out on thee ! Seeming ! I will write 
against it : 
You seem to me as Dian in her orb, 
As chaste as is the bud ere it be blown ; 60 

But you are more intemperate in your blood 
Than Venus, or those pamper'd animals 
That rage in savage sensuality. 

Hero. Is my lord well, that he doth speak so wide ? 

Leon. Sweet prince, why speak not you ? 

D. Pedro. What should I speak? 

I stand dishonour' d, that have gone about 
To link my dear friend to a common stale. 

Leon. Are these things spoken, or do I but dream ? 

D. John. Sir, they are spoken, and these things 
are true. 

Bene. This looks not like a nuptial. 

Hero. True ! O God ! 

Claud. Leonato, stand I here? 71 

Is this the prince ? Is this the prince's brother ? 
Is this face Hero's ? Are our eyes our own ? 

Leon. All this is so ; but what of this, my lord ? 

Claud. Let me but move one question to your 
daughter ; 
And by that fatherly and kindly power 
That you have in her, bid her answer truly. 

Leon. I charge thee do so, as thou art my child. 

Hero. O, God defend me ! how am I beset ! 
What kind of catechizing call you this ? 80 

Claud. To make you answer truly to your name. 

Hero. Is it not Hero ? Who can blot that name 

58 Out on thee ! Seeming ! conj. Seymour Out on thee seeming, 
Q, F. See note 78 so om. F 

( 67 ) F 2 



Act iv, Sc. i MUCH ADO 

With any just reproach ? 

Claud. Marry, that can Hero : 

Hero itself can blot out Hero's virtue. 
What man was he talk'd with you yesternight 
Out at your window, betwixt twelve and one ? 
Now, if you are a maid, answer to this. 

Hero. I talk'd with no man at that hour, my lord. 

D. Pedro. Why, then are you no maiden. Leonato, 
I am sorry you must hear : upon mine honour, 90 
Myself, my brother, and this grieved count, 
Did see her, hear her, at that hour last night, 
Talk with a ruffian at her chamber-window ; 
Who hath indeed, most like a liberal villain, 
Confess'd the vile encounters they have had 
A thousand times in secret. 

D. John. Fie, fie ! they are not to be named, 
my lord, 
Not to be spoke of ; 

There is not chastity enough in language 
Without offence to utter them. Thus, pretty lady, 
I am sorry for thy much misgovernment. 10 1 

Claud. O Hero ! what a Hero hadst thou been, 
If half thy outward graces had been placed 
About thy thoughts and counsels of thy heart ! 
But fare thee well, most foul, most fair ! farewell, 
Thou pure impiety, and impious purity ! 
For thee I'll lock up all the gates of love, 
And on my eyelids shall conjecture hang, 
To turn all beauty into thoughts of harm, 
And never shall it more be gracious. no 

Leon. Hath no man's dagger here a point for 
me ? [Hero swoons. 

89 are you] you are F 98 spoke] spoken F S. D. Hero 

swoons, add. Hanmer. 

(68) 



ABOUT NOTHING Act iv, Sc. i 

Beat. Why, how now, cousin ! wherefore sink 
you down ? 

D. John. Come, let us go. These things, come 
thus to light, 
Smother her spirits up. 

[Exeunt Don Pedro, Don John and Claudio. 

Bene. How doth the lady ? 

Beat. Dead, I think ! help, uncle ! 

Hero ! why, Hero ! Uncle ! Signior Benedick ! Friar ! 

Leon. O Fate ! take not away thy heavy hand : 
Death is the fairest cover for her shame 
That may be wish'd for. 

Beat. How now, cousin Hero ! 

Friar. Have comfort, lady. 120 

Leon. Dost thou look up ? 

Friar. Yea ; wherefore should she not ? 

Leon. Wherefore! Why, doth not every earthly 
thing 
Cry shame upon her? Could she here deny 
The story that is printed in her blood ? 
Do not live, Hero ; do not ope thine eyes ; 
For, did I think thou wouldst not quickly die, 
Thought I thy spirits were stronger than thy 

shames, 
Myself would, on the rearward of reproaches, 
Strike at thy life. Grieved I, I had but one ? 
Chid I for that at frugal nature's frame? 130 

O ! one too much by thee. Why had I one ? 
Why ever wast thou lovely in mine eyes ? 
Why had I not with charitable hand 
Took up a beggar's issue at my gates, 
Who smirched thus, and mired with infamy, 

S. D. Exeunt . . . Claudio add. Rowe 128 rearward] reward F 
135 smirched] smeered F 

(69) 



Act iv, Sc. i MUCH ADO 

I might have said, ' No part of it is mine ; 
This shame derives itself from unknown loins ? ' 
But mine, and mine I loved, and mine I prais'd, 
And mine that I was proud on, mine so much 
That I myself was to myself not mine, 140 

Valuing of her ; why, she — O ! she is fallen 
Into a pit of ink, that the wide sea 
Hath drops too few to wash her clean again, 
And salt too little which may season give 
To her foul-tainted flesh. 

Bene. Sir, sir, be patient. 

For my part, I am so attired in wonder, 
I know not what to say. 

Beat. O ! on my soul, my cousin is belied ! 

Bene. Lady, were you her bedfellow last night? 

Beat. No, truly, not ; although, until last night, 
I have this twelvemonth been her bedfellow. 151 

Leon. Confirm'd, confirm'd ! O ! that is stronger 
made, 
Which was before barr'd up with ribs of iron. 
Would the two princes lie? and Claudio lie, 
Who loved her so, that, speaking of her foulness, 
Wash'd it with tears ? Hence from her ! let her die. 

Friar. Hear me a little ; 
For I have only been silent so long, 
And given way unto this course of fortune. 
By noting of the lady I have mark'd 160 

A thousand blushing apparitions 
To start into her face ; a thousand innocent shames 
In angel whiteness beat away those blushes ; 
And in her eye there hath appear'd a fire 

145-7 Sir . . . say printed as prose in Q andF 154 two om. F 
157-60 Hear . . . mark'd printed as prose in Q and F : con. Ed. 
See note 163 beat] beare F 

(7o) 



ABOUT NOTHING Act iv, Sc. i 

To burn the errors that these princes hold 
Against her maiden truth. Call me a fool ; 
Trust not my reading nor my observations, 
Which with experimental seal doth warrant 
The tenour of my book ; trust not my age, 
My reverence, calling, nor divinity, 170 

If this sweet lady lie not guiltless here 
Under some biting error. 

Leon. Friar, it cannot be. 

Thou seest that all the grace that she hath left 
Is, that she will not add to her damnation 
A sin of perjury : she not denies it. 
Why seek'st thou then to cover with excuse 
That which appears in proper nakedness ? 

Friar. Lady, what man is he you are accus'd of ? 
Hero. They know that do accuse me, I know 

none ; 
If I know more of any man alive 180 

Than that which maiden modesty doth warrant, 
Let all my sins lack mercy ! O, my father ! 
Prove you that any man with me convers'd 
At hours unmeet, or that I yesternight 
Maintain'd the change of words with any creature, 
Refuse me, hate me, torture me to death. 

Friar. There is some strange misprision in the 

princes. 
Bene. Two of them have the very bent of 

honour ; 
And if their wisdoms be misled in this, 
The practice of it lives in John the bastard, 190 
Whose spirits toil in frame of villanies. 

Leon. I know not. If they speak but truth of 

her, 

169. tenour spelt tenure in Q, F 
(71) 



Act iv, Sc. i MUCH ADO 

These hands shall tear her ; if they wrong her 

honour, 
The proudest of them shall well hear of it. 
Time hath not yet so dried this blood of mine, 
Nor age so eat up my invention, 
Nor fortune made such havoc of my means, 
Nor my bad life reft me so much of friends, 
But they shall find, awak'd in such a kind, 
Both strength of limb and policy of mind, 200 

Ability in means and choice of friends, 
To quit me of them throughly. 

Friar. Pause awhile, 

And let my counsel sway you in this case. 
Your daughter here the princes left for dead, 
Let her awhile be secretly kept in, 
And publish it that she is dead indeed : 
Maintain a mourning ostentation ; 
And on your family's old monument 
Hang mournful epitaphs and do all rites 
That appertain unto a burial. 210 

Leon. What shall become of this ? What will 
this do? 

Friar. Marry, this well carried shall on her 
behalf 
Change slander to remorse ; that is some good : 
But not for that dream I on this strange course, 
But on this travail look for greater birth. 
She dying, as it must be so maintain'd, 
Upon the instant that she was accus'd, 
Shall be lamented, pitied and excus'd 
Of every hearer ; for it so falls out 

199 kind, Q : kinde F : cause conj. Capell. See note 
204 the princesse (left for dead,) Q : the Princesse (left for 
dead) F : the princes left for dead ; con. Theobald. See note 
(72) 



ABOUT NOTHING Act iv, Sc. i 

That what we have we prize not to the worth 220 

Whiles we enjoy it, but being lack'd and lost, 

Why, then we rack the value, then we find 

The virtue that possession would not show us 

Whiles it was ours. So will it fare with Claudio : 

When he shall hear she died upon his words, 

The idea of her life shall sweetly creep 

Into his study of imagination, 

And every lovely organ of her life 

Shall come apparell'd in more precious habit, 

More moving-delicate, and full of life 230 

Into the eye and prospect of his soul, 

Than when she liv'd indeed : then shall he mourn, — 

If ever love had interest in his liver, — 

And wish he had not so accused her, 

No, though he thought his accusation true. 

Let this be so, and doubt not but success 

Will fashion the event in better shape 

Than I can lay it down in likelihood. 

But if all aim but this be levell'd false, 

The supposition of the lady's death 240 

Will quench the wonder of her infamy : 

And if it sort not well, you may conceal her, — 

As best befits her wounded reputation, — 

In some reclusive and religious life, 

Out of all eyes, tongues, minds, and injuries. 

Bene. Signior Leonato, let the friar advise you : 
And though you know my inwardness and love 
Is very much unto the prince and Claudio, 
Yet, by mine honour, I will deal in this 
As secretly and justly as your soul 250 

Should with your body. 

Leon. Being that I flow in grief, 

230 mouing delicate Q, F : moving-delicate conj. Capell 
(73) 



Act iv, Sc. i MUCH ADO 

The smallest twine may lead me. 

Friar. 'Tis well consented : presently away ; 
For to strange sores strangely they strain the cure. 
Come, lady, die to live : this wedding day 
Perhaps is but prolong'd : have patience and 
endure. [Exeunt Friar, Hero, and Leonato. 

Bene. Lady Beatrice, have you wept all this 
while ? 

Beat. Yea, and I will weep a while longer. 

Bene. I will not desire that. 260 

Beat. You have no reason ; I do it freely. 

Bene. Surely I do believe your fair cousin is 
wronged. 

Beat. Ah ! how much might the man deserve 
of me that would right her. 

Bene. Is there any way to show such friend- 
ship ? 

Beat. A very even way, but no such friend. 

Bene. May a man do it ? 

Beat. It is a man's office, but not yours. 270 

Bene. I do love nothing in the world so well 
as you : is not that strange ? 

Beat. As strange as the thing I know not. 
It were as possible for me to say I loved nothing 
so well as you ; but believe me not, and yet 
I lie not ; I confess nothing, nor I deny 
nothing. I am sorry for my cousin. 

Bene. By my sword, Beatrice, thou lovest me. 

Beat. Do not swear and eat it. 

Bene. I will swear by it that you love me ; 280 
and I will make him eat it that says I love 
not you. 

Beat. Will you not eat your word ? 
279 swear] swear by it F 
(74) 



ABOUT NOTHING Act iv, Sc. i 

Bene. With no sauce that can be devised to 
it. I protest I love thee. 

Beat. Why then, God forgive me ! 

Bene. What offence, sweet Beatrice? 

Beat. You have stayed me in a happy hour : 
I was about to protest I loved you. 

Bene. And do it with all thy heart. 290 

Beat. I love you with so much of my heart 
that none is left to protest. 

Bene. Come, bid me do anything for thee. 

Beat. Kill Claudio. 

Bene. Ha ! not for the wide world. 

Beat. You kill me to deny it. Farewell. 

Bene. Tarry, sweet Beatrice. 

Beat. I am gone, though I am here : there 
is no love in you : nay, I pray you, let me 
go. 3°o 

Bene. Beatrice, — 

Beat. In faith, I will go. 

Bene. We'll be friends first. 

Beat. You dare easier be friends with me 
than fight with mine enemy. 

Bene. Is Claudio thine enemy? 

Beat. Is a' not approved in the height a 
villain, that hath slandered, scorned, dis- 
honoured my kinswoman ? O ! that I were 
a man. What ! bear her in hand until they 310 
come to take hands, and then, with public 
accusation, uncovered slander, unmitigated ran- 
cour, — O God, that I were a man ! I would 
eat his heart in the market-place. 

Bene. Hear me, Beatrice, — 



290 it om. F 307 a Q and F : a' Ed. : he Rome. See note 

(75) 



Act iv, Sc. i MUCH ADO 

Beat. Talk with a man out at a window ! 
a proper saying ! 

Bene. Nay, but Beatrice, — 

Beat. Sweet Hero ! she is wronged, she is 
slandered, she is undone. 320 

Bene. Beat — 

Beat. Princes and counties ! Surely, a 
princely testimony, a goodly count ! Count 
Comfect ; a sweet gallant, surely ! O ! that 
I were a man for his sake, or that I had any 
friend would be a man for my sake ! But 
manhood is melted into curtsies, valour into 
compliment, and men are only turned into' 
tongue, and trim ones too : he is now as valiant 
as Hercules, that only tells a lie and swears it. 330 
I cannot be a man with wishing, therefore I will 
die a woman with grieving. 

Bene. Tarry, good Beatrice. By this hand, 
I love thee. 

Beat. Use it for my love some other way 
than swearing by it. 

Bene. Think you in your soul the Count 
Claudio hath wronged Hero ? 

Beat. Yea, as sure as I have a thought or 
a soul. 340 

Bene. Enough ! I am engaged, I will chal- 
lenge him. I will kiss your hand, and so I 
leave you. By this hand, Claudio shall render 
me a dear account. As you hear of me, so 
think of me. Go, comfort your cousin : I must 
say she is dead ; and so, farewell. [Exeunt. 

323 count ! Count Comfect] Counte, Counte Comfect Q : 
Count, Comfect F 327 curtsies spelt cursies Q, F 342 so I] 
so F 

(76) 



ABOUT NOTHING Act iv, Sc. ii 



Scene II. — A Prison. 

Enter Dogberry, Verges, and Sexton, in gowns ; 
and the Watch, with Conrade and Borachio. 

Dogb. Is our whole dissembly appeared ? 

Verg. O ! a stool and a cushion for the 
sexton. 

Sexton. Which be the malefactors ? 

Dogb. Marry, that am I and my partner. 

Verg. Nay, that 's certain : we have the 
exhibition to examine. 

Sexton. But which are the offenders that are 
to be examined ? let them come before Master 
constable. 10 

Dogb. Yea, marry, let them come before me. 
What is your name, friend ? 

Bora. Borachio. 

Dogb. Pray write down Borachio. Yours, 
sirrah ? 

Con. I am a gentleman, sir, and my name is 
Conrade. 

Dogb.- Write down Master gentleman Con- 
rade. Masters, do you serve God ? 

Both. Yea, sir, we hope. 20 

Dogb. Write down that they hope they 
serve God : and write God first ; for God 
defend but God should go before such villains ! 
Masters, it is proved already that you are little 
better than false knaves, and it will go near to 

S. D. Enter the Constables, Borachio, and the Towne clearke in 
gownes Q, F : corr. Capell. See note 1, 2 Dogberry] Keeper : 

Verges] Cowley Q, F On the prefixes to the speeches throughout this 
scene, see note 20-3 Both . . . villains om. F 

(77) 



Act iv, Sc. ii MUCH ADO 

be thought so shortly. How answer you for 
yourselves ? 

Con. Marry, sir, we say we are none. 

Dogb. A marvellous witty fellow, I assure 
you ; but I will go about with him. Come 30 
you hither, sirrah ; a word in your ear, sir ; 
I say to you, it is thought you are false knaves. 

Bora. Sir, I say to you we are none. 

Dogb. Well, stand aside. 'Fore God, they 
are both in a tale. Have you writ down, that 
they are none ? 

Sexton. Master constable, you go not the 
way to examine : you must call forth the watch- 
that are their accusers. 

Dogb. Yea, marry, that 's the eftest way. 40 
Let the watch come forth. Masters, I charge 
you, in the prince's name, accuse these men. 

1st Watch. This man said, sir, that Don John, 
the prince's brother, was a villain. 

Dogb. Write down Prince John a villain. 
Why, this is flat perjury, to call a prince's 
brother villain. 

Bora. Master constable, — 

Dogb. Pray thee, fellow, peace : I do not 
like thy look, I promise thee. 50 

Sexton. What heard you him say else ? 

2nd Watch. Marry, that he had received 
a thousand ducats of Don John for accusing the 
Lady Hero wrongfully. 

Dogb. Flat burglary as ever was committed. 

Verg. Yea, by mass, that it is. 

Sexton. What else, fellow ? 

31 ear, sir : I Rome : eare sir, I Q, F 56 Verg.\ Const' 

Q, F. See note mass] th' masse F 
(73) 



ABOUT NOTHING Act iv, Sc. ii 

1st Watch. And that Count Claudio did 
mean, upon his words, to disgrace Hero before 
the whole assembly, and not marry her. 60 

Dogb. O villain ! thou wilt be condemned 
into everlasting redemption for this. 

Sexton. What else ? 

2nd Watch. This is all. 

Sexton. And this is more, masters, than you 
can deny. Prince John is this morning secretly 
stolen away : Hero was in this manner accused, 
in this very manner refused, and, upon the 
grief of this, suddenly died. Master constable, 
let these men be bound, and brought to Leo- 70 
nato's : I will go before and show him their 
examination. [Exit. 

Dogb. Come, let them be opinioned ! Let 
them be in the bands ! 

Con. Off, Coxcomb ! 

Dogb. God 's my life ! where 's the sexton ? 
let him write down the prince's officer cox- 
comb. Come, bind them. Thou naughty 
varlet ! 

Con. Away ! you are an ass ; you are an ass. 80 

Dogb. Dost thou not suspect my place? 
Dost thou not suspect my years ? O that he 
were here to write me down an ass ! but, 
masters, remember that I am an ass ; though 
it be not written down, yet forget not that 
I am an ass. No, thou villain, thou art full 

70 Leonato's] Leonato F 73-5 Constable. Come let them be 
opinioned. Couley. Let them be in the hands of Coxcombe Q : 
Const. Come let them be opinioned. Sex. Let them be in the hands 
of Coxcombe F : conj. Ed., partly after Warburton. See note 
78 bind them. Thou] bind them, thou Q : bind them thou F 
80 Conrade con. Rowe : Couley Q, F 
(79) 



Act iv, Sc. ii MUCH ADO 

of piety, as shall be proved upon thee by good 
witness. I am a wise fellow ; and, which is 
more, an officer ; and, which is more, a house- 
holder ; and, which is more, as pretty a piece 90 
of flesh as any is in Messina ; and one that 
knows the law, go to ; and a rich fellow enough, 
go to ; and a fellow that hath had losses ; and 
one that hath two gowns, and everything hand- 
some about him. Bring him away. O that 
I had been writ down an ass ! [Exeunt. 



ACT V 

Scene I. — Before Leonato's House. 
Enter Leonato and Antonio. 

Ant. If you go on thus, you will kill yourself ; 
And 'tis not wisdom thus to second grief 
Against yourself. 

Leon. I pray thee, cease thy counsel, 

Which falls into mine ears as profitless 
As water in a sieve : give not me counsel ; 
Nor let no comforter delight mine ear 
But such a one whose wrongs do suit with mine : 
Bring me a father that so lov'd his child, 
Whose joy of her is overwhelm' d like mine, 
And bid him speak of patience ; 10 

Measure his woe the length and breadth of mine, 
And let it answer every strain for strain, 
As thus for thus and such a grief for such, 
In every lineament, branch, shape, and form : 
If such a one will smile, and stroke his beard ; 

91 is ofn. F S.D. Antonio] his brother Q, F 

6 comforter] comfort F 7 do] doth F 

(8q) 



ABOUT NOTHING Act v, Sc. i 

Bid sorrow wag, cry ' hem ' when he should groan, 
Patch grief with proverbs ; make misfortune drunk 
With candle-wasters ; bring him yet to me, 
And I of him will gather patience. 
But there is no such man ; for, brother, men 20 
Can counsel and speak comfort to that grief 
Which they themselves not feel ; but, tasting it, 
Their counsel turns to passion, which before 
Would give preceptial medicine to rage, 
Fetter strong madness in a silken thread, 
Charm ache with air and agony with words. 
No, no ; 'tis all men's office to speak patience 
To those that wring under the load of sorrow, 
But no man's virtue nor sufficiency 
To be so moral when he shall endure 30 

The like himself. Therefore give me no counsel : 
My griefs cry louder than advertisement. 

Ant. Therein do men from children nothing 
differ. 

Leon. I pray thee, peace! I will be flesh and blood; 
For there was never yet philosopher 
That could endure the toothache patiently, 
However they have writ the style of gods 
And made a push at chance and sufferance. 

Ant. Yet bend not all the harm upon yourself ; 
Make those that do offend you suffer too. 40 

Leon. There thou speak'st reason : nay, I will 
do so. 
My soul doth tell me Hero is belied ; 
And that shall Claudio know ; so shall the prince, 
And all of them that thus dishonour her. 

Ant. Here comes the prince and Claudio hastily. 

16 Bid sorrow wag conj. Capell: And sorrow, wagge Q, F. 
See note 
1434 ' 4 ( 81 ) G 



Act v, Sc. i MUCH ADO 

Enter Don Pedro and Claudio. 

D. Pedro. Good den, good den. 

Claud. Good day to both of you. 

Leon. Hear you, my lords, — 

D. Pedro. We have some haste, Leonato. 

Leon. Some haste, my lord ! well, fare you well, 
my lord : 
Are you so hasty now? — well, all is one. 

D. Pedro. Nay, do not quarrel with us, good old 
man. 50 

Ant. If he could right himself with quarrelling, 
Some of us would lie low. 

Claud. Who wrongs him ? 

Leon. Marry, thou dost wrong me ; thou dis- 
sembler, thou. 
Nay, never lay thy hand upon thy sword ; 
I fear thee not. 

Claud. Marry, beshrew my hand, 

If it should give your age such cause of fear. 
In faith, my hand meant nothing to my sword. 

Leon. Tush, tush, man ! never fleer and jest at 
me : 
I speak not like a dotard nor a fool, 
As, under privilege of age, to brag 60 

What I have done being young, or what would do, 
Were I not old. Know, Claudio, to thy head, 
Thou hast so wrong'd mine innocent child and 

me 
That I am forc'd to lay my reverence by, 
And, with grey hairs and bruise of many days, 
Do challenge thee to trial of a man. 
I say thou hast belied mine innocent child : 

67 mine] my F 
(82) ' 



ABOUT NOTHING Act v, Sc. i 

Thy slander hath gone through and through her 

heart, 
And she lies buried with her ancestors ; 
O ! in a tomb where never scandal slept, 7° 

Save this of hers, fram'd by thy villany ! 

Claud. My villany? 

Leon. Thine, Claudio ; thine, I say. 

D. Pedro. You say not right, old man. 

Leon. My lord, my lord, 

I'll prove it on his body, if he dare, 
Despite his nice fence and his active practice, 
His May of youth and bloom of lustihood. 

Claud. Away ! I will not have to do with you. 

Leon. Canst thou so daff me? Thou hast kill'd 
my child ; 
If thou kill'st me, boy, thou shalt kill a man. 

Ant. He shall kill two of us, and men indeed : 80 
But that 's no matter ; let him kill one first : 
Win me and wear me ; let him answer me. 
Come, follow me, boy ; come, sir boy, come, 

follow me. 
Sir boy, I'll whip you from your foining fence ; 
Nay, as I am a gentleman, I will. 

Leon. Brother, — 

Ant. Content yourself. God knows I lov'd my 
niece ; 
And she is dead, slander'd to death by villains, 
That dare as well answer a man indeed 
As I dare take a serpent by the tongue. 90 

Boys, apes, braggarts, Jacks, milksops ! 

Leon. Brother Antony, — 

Ant. Hold you content. What, man ! I know 
them, yea, 
And what they weigh, even to the utmost scruple, 
(83) G2 



Act v, Sc. i MUCH ADO 

Scambling, out-facing, fashion-monging boys, 
That lie and cog and flout, deprave and slander, 
Go antickly, and show outward hideousness, 
And speak off half a dozen dangerous words, 
How they might hurt their enemies — if they durst ; 
And this is all ! 

Leon. But, brother Antony, — 

Ant. Come, 'tis no matter : 

Do not you meddle, let me deal in this. 101 

D. Pedro. Gentlemen both, we will not wake 
your patience. 
My heart is sorry for your daughter's death ; 
But, on my honour, she was charg'd with nothing 
But what was true and very full of proof. 

Leon. My lord, my lord — 

D. Pedro. I will not hear you. 

Leon. No? Come, brother, away. I will be 
heard. — 

Ant. And shall, or some of us will smart for it. 
[Exeunt Leonato and Antonio. 

Enter Benedick. 

D. Pedro. See, see ; here comes the man we went 
to seek. 

Claud. Now, signior, what news? no 

Bene. Good day, my lord. 

D. Pedro. Welcome, signior : you are almost 
come to part almost a fray. 

Claud. We had like to have had our two 
noses snapped off with two old men without 
teeth. 

D Pedro. Leonato and his brother, what 

96 antickly spelt antiquely Q, F 97 speak off] speak of 

Q, F con. Theobald 114 like] likt Q, F 

(84) 



ABOUT NOTHING Act v, Sc. i 

think'st thou? Had we fought, I doubt we 
should have been too young for them. 

Bene. In a false quarrel there is no true 120 
valour. I came to seek you both. 

Claud. We have been up and down to seek 
thee ; for we are high-proof melancholy, and 
would fain have it beaten away. Wilt thou 
use thy wit ? 

Bene. It is in my scabbard ; shall I draw it ? 

D. Pedro. Dost thou wear thy wit by thy 
side ? 

Claud. Never any did so, though very many 
have been beside their wit. I will bid thee 130 
draw, as we do the minstrels ; draw, to pleasure 
us 

D. Pedro. As I am an honest man, he looks 
pale. Art thou sick, or angry ? 

Claud. What, courage, man ! What though 
care killed a cat, thou hast mettle enough in 
thee to kill care. 

Bene. Sir, I shall meet your wit in the career, 
an you charge it against me. I pray you 
choose another subject. 140 

Claud. Nay then, give him another staff : 
this last was broke cross. 

D. Pedro. By this light, he changes more 
and more : I think he be angry indeed. 

Claud. If he be, he knows how to turn his 
girdle. 

Bene. Shall I speak a word in your ear ? 

Claud. God bless me from a challenge ! 

Bene. [Aside to Claudio.] You are a villain ; 
I jest not : I will make it good how you dare, 150 
with what you dare, and when you dare. Do 
(85) 



Act v, Sc. i MUCH ADO 

me right, or I will protest your cowardice. You 
have killed a sweet lady, and her death shall 
fall heavy on you. Let me hear from you. 

Claud. Well I will meet you, so I may have 
good cheer. 

D. Pedro. What, a feast, a feast ? 

Claud. I' faith, I thank him, he hath bid 
me to a calf's-head and a capon, the which if 
I do not carve most curiously, say my knife 's 160 
naught. Shall I not find a woodcock too ? 

Bene. Sir, your wit ambles well ; it goes 
easily. 

D. Pedro. I'll tell thee how Beatrice praised 
thy wit the other day. I said, thou hadst a fine 
wit. ' True,' said she, ' a fine little one.' 
' No,' said I, i a great wit.' ' Right,' said she, 
' a great gross one.' ' Nay,' said I, ' a good 
wit.' ' Just,' said she, ' it hurts nobody.' 
i Nay,' said I, ' the gentleman is wise.' ' Cer- 170 
tain,' said she, ' a wise gentleman.' ' Nay,' 
said I, ' he hath the tongues.' ' That I believe,' 
said she, ' for he swore a thing to me on 
Monday night, which he forswore on Tuesday 
morning : there 's a double tongue ; there 's 
two tongues.' Thus did she, an hour together, 
trans-shape thy particular virtues ; yet at last 
she concluded with a sigh, thou wast the pro- 
perest man in Italy. 

Claud. For the which she wept heartily and 180 
said she cared not. 

D. Ped,ro. Yea, that she did ; but yet, for all 
that, an if she did not hate him deadly, she 

158 I faith I thanke him he Q : I faith I thanke him, he F 
166 said] saies F 

(86) 



ABOUT NOTHING Act v, Sc. i 

would love him dearly. The old man's 
daughter told us all. 

Claud. All, all ; and moreover, God saw 
him when he was hid in the garden. 

D. Pedro. But when shall we set the savage 
bull's horns on the sensible Benedick's head ? 

Claud. Yea, and text underneath, ' Here 190 
dwells Benedick the married man ! ' 

Bene. Fare you well, boy : you know my 
mind. I will leave you now to your gossip -like 
humour : you break jests as braggarts do their 
blades, which, God be thanked, hurt not. 
My lord, for your many courtesies I thank you : 
I must discontinue your company. Your 
brother the bastard is fled from Messina : you 
have, among you, killed a sweet and innocent 
lady. For my Lord Lack-beard there, he and 200 
I shall meet ; and till then, peace be with him. 

[Exit. 

D. Pedro. He is in earnest. 

Claud. In most profound earnest ; and, I'll 
warrant you, for the love of Beatrice. 

D. Pedro. And hath challenged thee ? 

Claud. Most sincerely. 

D. Pedro. What a pretty thing man is when 
he goes in his doublet and hose and leaves off 
his wit ! 

Claud. He is then a giant to an ape ; but 210 
then is an ape a doctor to such a man. 

D. Pedro. But, soft you ; let me be : pluck 
up, my heart, and be sad ! Did he not say my 
brother was fled ? 



(87) 



Act v, Sc. i MUCH ADO 

Enter Dogberry, Verges, and the Watch, with 
Conrade and Borachio. 

Dogb. Come, you, sir : if justice cannot 
tame you, she shall ne'er weigh more reasons 
in her balance. Nay, an you be a cursing 
hypocrite once, you must be looked to. 

D. Pedro. How now ! two of my brother's 
men bound ! Borachio, one ! 220 

Claud. Hearken after their offence, my lord. 

D. Pedro. Officers, what offence have these 
men done ? 

Dogb. Marry, sir, they have committed false 
report ; moreover, they have spoken untruths ; 
secondarily, they are slanders ; sixth and 
lastly, they have belied a lady ; thirdly, they 
have verified unjust things ; and to conclude, 
they are lying knaves. 

D. Pedro. First, I ask thee what they have 230 
done ; thirdly, I ask thee what 's their offence ; 
sixth and lastly, why they are committed ; and, 
to conclude, what you lay to their charge ? « 

Claud. Rightly reasoned, and in his own 
division ; and, by my troth, there 's one mean- 
ing well suited. 

D. Pedro. Who have you offended, masters, 
that you are thus bound to your answer ? this 
learned constable is too cunning to be under- 
stood. What 's your offence ? 240 

Bora. Sweet prince, let me go no further to 
mine answer : do you hear me, and let this 
count kill me. I have deceived even your very 

S. D. Enter . . . with] Enter Constables Q : Enter Constable F 
Placed by Q and F before I. 209 

(88) 



ABOUT NOTHING Act v, Sc. i 

eyes : what your wisdoms could not discover, 
these shallow fools have brought to light ; who, 
in the night overheard me confessing to this 
man how Don John your brother incensed me 
to slander the Lady Hero ; how you were 
brought into the orchard and saw me court 
Margaret in Hero's garments ; how you dis- 250 
graced her, when you should marry her. My 
villany they have upon record ; which I had 
rather seal with my death than repeat over to 
my shame. The lady is dead upon mine and 
my master's false accusation ; and, briefly, I 
desire nothing but the reward of a villain. 

D. Pedro. Runs not this speech like iron through 
your blood? 

Claud. I have drunk poison whiles he utter'd 
it. 

D. Pedro. But did my brother set thee on to 
this ? 

Bora. Yea ; and paid me richly for the practice 
of it. 260 

D. Pedro. He is compos'd and fram'd of 
treachery : 
And fled he is upon this villany. 

Claud. Sweet Hero ! now thy image doth 
appear 
In the rare semblance that I lov'd it first. 

Dogb. Come, bring away the plaintiffs : by 
this time our sexton hath reformed Signior 
Leonato of the matter. And masters, do not 
forget to specify, when time and place shall 
serve, that I am an ass. 

Verg. Here, here comes Master Signior 270 
Leonato, and the sexton too. 
(89) 



Act v, Sc. i MUCH ADO 

Re-enter Leonato, Antonio, and the Sexton. 

Leon. Which is the villain? Let me see his 
eyes, 
That, when I note another man like him, 
I may avoid him. Which of these is he ? 

Bora. If you would know your wronger, look 
on me. 

Leon. Art thou the slave that with thy breath 
hast kill'd 
Mine innocent child ? 

Bora. Yea, even I alone. 

Leon. No, not so, villain ; thou beliest thyself : 
Here stand a pair of honourable men ; 
A third is fled, that had a hand in it. 280 

I thank you, princes, for my daughter's death : 
Record it with your high and worthy deeds. 
'Twas bravely done, if you bethink you of it. 

Claud. I know not how to pray your patience ; 
Yet I must speak. Choose your revenge yourself ; 
Impose me to what penance your invention 
Can lay upon my sin : yet sinn'd I not 
But in mistaking. 

D. Pedro. By my soul, nor I : 

And yet, to satisfy this good old man, 
I would bend under any heavy weight 290 

That he'll enjoin me to. 

Leon. I cannot bid you bid my daughter live ; 
That were impossible : but, I pray you both, 
Possess the people in Messina here 
How innocent she died ; and if your love 
Can labour aught in sad invention, 

S. D. Re-enter . . . Sexton] Enter Leonato F 276 Art thou the] 
Art thou thou the F, which prints Art . . . childe as prose. 
(90) 



ABOUT NOTHING Act v, Sc. i 

Hang her an epitaph upon her tomb, 

And sing it to her bones : sing it to-night. 

To-morrow morning come you to my house, 

And since you could not be my son-in-law, 300 

Be yet my nephew. My brother hath a daughter, 

Almost the copy of my child that 's dead, 

And she alone is heir to both of us : 

Give her the right you should have given her cousin, 

And so dies my revenge. 

Claud. O noble sir, 

Your over-kindness doth wring tears from me ! 
I do embrace your offer, and dispose 
For henceforth of poor Claudio. 

Leon. To-morrow then I will expect your com- 
ing ; 
To-night I take my leave. This naughty man 310 
Shall face to face be brought to Margaret, 
Who, I believe, was pack'd in all this wrong, 
Hir'd to it by your brother. 

Bora. No, by my soul she was not ; 

Nor knew not what she did when she spoke to me ; 
But always hath been just and virtuous 
In anything that I do know by her. 

Dogb. Moreover, sir, — which, indeed, is not 
under white and black, — this plaintiff here, the 
offender, did call me ass : I beseech you, let it 
be remembered in his punishment. And also, 320 
the watch heard them talk of one Deformed : 
they say he wears a key in his ear and a lock 
hanging by it, and borrows money in God's 
name, the which he hath used so long and 
never paid, that now men grow hard-hearted, 
and will lend nothing for God's sake. Pray 
you, examine him upon that point. 
(91) 



Act v, Sc. i MUCH ADO 

Leon. I thank thee for thy care and honest 
pains. 

Dogb. Your worship speaks like a most 330 
thankful and reverend youth, and I praise God 
for you. 

Leon. There 's for thy pains. 

Dogb. God save the foundation ! 

Leon. Go, I discharge thee of thy prisoner, 
and I thank thee. 

Dogb. I leave an arrant knave with your 
worship ; which I beseech your worship to 
correct yourself, for the example of others. . 
God keep your worship ! I wish your worship 340 
well ; God restore you to health ! I humbly 
give you leave to depart, and if a merry meet- 
ing may be wished, God prohibit it ! Come, 
neighbour. [Exeunt Dogberry and Verges. 

Leon. Until to-morrow morning, lords, farewell. 

Ant. Farewell, my lords : we look for you 
to-morrow. 

D. Pedro. We will not fail. 

Claud. To-night I'll mourn with Hero. 

[Exeunt Don Pedro and Claudio. 

Leon. [To the Watch.] Bring you these fellows 
on. We'll talk with Margaret, 
How her acquaintance grew with this lewd fellow. 

[Exeunt. 

Scene II. — Leonato's Orchard. 

Enter Benedick and Margaret. 

Bene. Pray thee, sweet Mistress Margaret, 
deserve well at my hands by helping me to the 
speech of Beatrice. 

(92) 



ABOUT NOTHING Act v, Sc. ii 

Marg. Will you then write me a sonnet in 
praise of my beauty ? 

Bene. In so high a style, Margaret, that no 
man living shall come over it ; for, in most 
comely truth, thou deservest it. 

Marg. To have no man come over me ! why 
shall I always keep below stairs ? 10 

Bene. Thy wit is as quick as the greyhound's 
mouth ; it catches. 

Marg. And yours as blunt as the fencer's 
foils, which hit, but hurt not. 

Bene. A most manly wit, Margaret ; it will 
not hurt a woman : and so, I pray thee, call 
Beatrice. I give thee the bucklers. 

Marg. Give us the swords, we have bucklers 
of our own. 

Bene. If you use them, Margaret, you must 20 
put in the pikes with a vice ; and they are 
dangerous weapons for maids. 

Marg. Well, I will call Beatrice to you, who 
I think hath legs. [Exit Margaret. 

Bene. And therefore will come. 

The god of love, 
That sits above, 
And knows me, and knows me, 
How pitiful I deserve, — 

I mean, in singing ; but in loving, Leander the 30 
good swimmer, Troilus the first employer of 
pandars, and a whole book full of these quon- 
dam carpet-mongers, whose names yet run 
smoothly in the even road of a blank verse, 
why, they were never so truly turned over and 

9-10 me, why shal Q : me, why, shall F 26-9 Printed as 

prose in Q, F 33 names] name F 

(93) 



Act v, Sc. ii MUCH ADO 

over as my poor self, in love. Marry, I cannot 
show it in rime ; I have tried : I can find out 
no rime to ' lady ' but ' baby ', an innocent 
rime; for 'scorn', 'horn', a hard rime; for 
' school', ' fool', a babbling rime ; very ominous 40 
endings : no, I was not born under a riming 
planet, nor I cannot woo in festival terms. 

Enter Beatrice. 
Sweet Beatrice, wouldst thou come when I 
called thee ? 

Beat. Yea, signior ; and depart when you 
bid me. 

Bene. O, stay but till then ! 

Beat. ' Then ' is spoken ; fare you well now : 
and yet, ere I go, let me go with that I came, 
which is, with knowing what hath passed be- 50 
tween you and Claudio. 

Bene. Only foul words ; and thereupon I 
will kiss thee. 

Beat. Foul words is but foul wind, and foul 
wind is but foul breath, and foul breath is 
noisome ; therefore I will depart unkissed. 

Bene. Thou hast frighted the word out of 
his right sense, so forcible is thy wit. But 
I must tell thee plainly, Claudio undergoes my 
challenge, and either I must shortly hear from 6a 
him, or I will subscribe him a coward. And, 
I pray thee now, tell me, for which of my bad 
parts didst thou first fall in love with me ? 

Beat. For them all together ; which main- 
tained so politic a state of evil that they will 
not admit any good part to intermingle with 

37 in om. F 39, 40 rime] time F 42 nor] for F 

(94) 



ABOUT NOTHING Act v, Sc. ii 

them. But for which of my good parts did you 
first suffer love for me? 

Bene. ' Suffer love,' a good epithet ! I do 
suffer love indeed, for I love thee against my 70 
will. 

Beat. In spite of your heart, I think. Alas, 
poor heart ! If you spite it for my sake, I will 
spite it for yours ; for I will never love that 
which my friend hates. 

Bene. Thou and I are too wise to woo peace- 
ably. 

Beat. It appears not in this confession : 
there 's not one wise man among twenty that 
will praise himself. 80 

Bene. An old, an old instance, Beatrice, that 
lived in the time of good neighbours. If a man 
do not erect in this age his own tomb ere he 
dies, he shall live no longer in monument than 
the bell rings and the widow weeps. 

Beat. And how long is that, think you ? 

Bene. Question : why, an hour in clamour 
and a quarter in rheum : therefore is it most 
expedient for the wise — if Don Worm, his con- 
science, find no impediment to the contrary — 90 
to be the trumpet of his own virtues, as I am 
to myself. So much for praising myself, who, 
I myself will bear witness, is praiseworthy. And 
now tell me, how doth your cousin ? 

Beat. Very ill. 

Bene. And how do you ? 

Beat. Very ill too. 

69 epithet spelt epithite Q, F 84 monument] monuments F 
85 bell rings] Bels ring F 92 to myself. So much] to 

myself so much Q. F 

(95) 



Act v, Sc. ii MUCH ADO 

Bene. Serve God, love me, and mend. 
There will I leave you too, for here comes 
one in haste. ioo 

Enter Ursula. 

Urs. Madam, you must come to your uncle. 
Yonder 's old coil at home : it is proved, my 
Lady Hero hath been falsely accused, the 
prince and Claudio mightily abused ; and Don 
John is the author of all, who is fled and gone. 
Will you come presently ? 

Beat. Will you go hear this news, signior? 

Bene. I will live in thy heart, die in thy lap, 
and be buried in thy eyes ;' and moreover I will 
go with thee to thy uncle's. [Exeunt, no 

Scene III. — A Churchyard. 

Enter Don Pedro, Claudio, and three or jour with 
tapers. 

Claud. Is this the monument of Leonato ? 

A Lord. It is, my lord. 

Claud. [Reading Epitaph from a scroll.] 

Done to death by slanderous tongues 

Was the Hero that here lies : 
Death, in guerdon of her wrongs, 

Gives her fame which never dies. 
So the life that died with shame 
Lives in death with glorious fame. 

Hang thou there upon the tomb, 10 

Praising her when I am dumb. 
Now, music, sound, and sing your solemn hymn. 

S.D.k Churchyard add. Ed. : a Church Pope S. D. Claudio 
[Reading . . . scroll] Ed. after Capell : Epitaph Q, F. See note 
1 1 dumb spelt dombe F : dead Q 
(96) 



ABOUT NOTHING Act v, Sc. iii 



SONG 

Pardon, goddess of the night, 
Those that slew thy virgin knight ; 
For the which, with songs of woe, 
Round about her tomb they go. 

Midnight, assist our moan 5 

Help us to sigh and groan, 

Heavily, heavily : 

Graves, yawn and yield your dead, 20 

Till death be uttered, 
Heavily, heavily. 

Claud. Now, unto thy bones good night ! 
Yearly will I do this rite. 
D. Pedro. Good morrow, masters : put your 
torches out. 
The wolves have preyed ; and look, the gentle 
day, 
Before the wheels of Phcebus, round about 

Dapples the drowsy east with spots of grey. 
Thanks to you all, and leave us : fare you well. 
Claud. Good morrow, masters : each his several 
way. 30 

D. Pedro. Come, let us hence, and put on other 
weeds ; 
And then to Leonato's we will go. 
Claud. And Hymen now with luckier issue speed 's, 
Than this for whom we render'd up this woe ! 

[Exeunt. 

17, 18 one line in Q, F 22 Heavily, heavily] Heauenly, 

heauenly F 23 Claudio corr. Rome : Lord Q, F 24 rite] 

right Q, F 33 speed 's conj. Theobald after Thirlby : speeds Q, F. 



(97) 



Act v, Sc. iv MUCH ADO 



Scene TV.— A Room in Leonato's House. 

Enter Leonato, Antonio, Benedick, Beatrice, 
Margaret, Ursula, Friar Francis, and Hero. 

Friar. Did I not tell you she was innocent ? 

Leon. So are the prince and Claudio, who accus'd 
her 
Upon the error that you heard debated : 
But Margaret was in some fault for this, 
Although against her will, as it appears 
In the true course of all the question. 

Ant. Well, I am glad that all things sorts so well. 

Bene. And so am I, being else by faith enforc'd 
To call young Claudio to a reckoning for it. 

Leon. Well, daughter, and you gentlewomen all, 
Withdraw into a chamber by yourselves, n 

And when I send for you, come hither masked. 

[Exeunt ladies. 
The prince and Claudio promis'd by this hour 
To visit me. You know your office, brother ; 
You must be father to your brother's daughter, 
And give her to young Claudio. 

Ant. Which I will do with confirm'd counte- 
nance. 

Bene. Friar, I must entreat your pains, I think. 

Friar. To do what, signior ? 

Bene. To bind me, or undo me ; one of them. 
Signior Leonato, truth it is, good signior, 21 

Your niece regards me with an eye of favour. 

Leon. That eye my daughter lent her : 'tis most 
true. 

Bene. And I do with an eye of love requite her. 

S. D. Antonio] old man Q, F 7 sorts] sort F 

(98) 



ABOUT NOTHING Act v, Sc. iv 

Leon. The sight whereof I think, you had 
from me, 
From Claudio, and the prince. But what 's your 
will? 

Bene. Your answer, sir, is enigmatical : 
But, for my will, my will is your good will 
May stand with ours, this day to be conjoin'd 
In the state of honourable marriage : 30 

In which, good friar, I shall desire your help. 

Leon. My heart is with your liking. 

Friar. And my help. 

Here come the prince and Claudio. 

Enter Don Pedro and Claudio, and two or three 
others. 

D. Pedro. Good morrow to this fair assembly. 

Leon. Good morrow, prince ; good morrow, 
Claudio : 
We here attend you. Are you yet determined 
To-day to marry with my brother's daughter ? 

Claud. I'll hold my mind, were she an Ethiop. 

Leon. Call her forth, brother : here 's the friar 
ready. [Exit Antonio. 

D. Pedro. Good morrow, Benedick. Why, 
what 's the matter, 40 

That you have such a February face, 
So full of frost, of storm and cloudiness ? 

Claud. I think he thinks upon the savage bull. 
Tush ! fear not, man, we'll tip thy horns with gold, 
And all Europa shall rejoice at thee, 
As once Europa did at lusty Jove, 
When he would play the noble beast in love. 

33 om. F S. D. and two or three other Q : with 

attendants F 

(99) H2 



Act v, Sc. iv MUCH ADO 

Bene. Bull Jove, sir, had an amiable low, 
And some such strange bull leapt jour father's cow, 
And got a calf in that same noble feat, 50 

Much like to you, for you have just his bleat. 

Claud. For this I owe you : here comes other 
reckonings. 

Re-enter Antonio, with the ladies masked. 

Which is the lady I must seize upon ? 

Ant. This same is she, and I do give you her. 
Claud. Why, then she 's mine. Sweet, let me 

see your face. 
Ant. No, that you shall not, till you take her 
hand 
Before this friar, and swear to marry her. 

Claud. Give me your hand before this holy 
friar : 
I am your husband, if you like of me. 59 

Hero. And when I liv'd, I was your other wife : 

[Unmasking. 
And when you lov'd, you were my other husband. 
Claud. Another Hero ! 

Hero. Nothing certainer : 

One Hero died defil'd, but I do live, 
And surely as I live, I am a maid. 

D. Pedro. The former Hero ! Hero that is dead ! 
Leon. She died, my lord, but whiles her slander 

liv'd. 
Friar. All this amazement can I qualify : 
When after that the holy rites are ended, 
I'll tell you largely of fair Hero's death : 

S. D. Re-enter . . . masked Capell : Enter brother, Hero, Beatrice, 
Margaret, Ursula Q, F 54, 56 Antonio] Leonato Q, F. See 

note 63 defil'd om. F 

( 10c) 



ABOUT NOTHING Act v, Sc. iv 

Meantime, let wonder seem familiar, 70 

And to the chapel let us presently. 

Bene. Soft and fair, friar. Which is Beatrice? 
Beat. [Unmasking.'] I answer to that name. 

What is your will ? 
Bene. Do not you love me ? 

Beat. Why, no ; no more than reason. 

Bene. Why, then, your uncle and the prince and 
Claudio 
Have been deceived ; for they swore you did. 
Beat. Do not you love me ? 

Bene. Troth, no ; no more than reason. 

Beat. Why, then, my cousin, Margaret, and 

Ursula, 

Are much deceiv'd ; for they did swear you did. 

Bene. They swore that you were almost sick 

for me. 80 

Beat. They swore that you were well-nigh dead 

for me. 
Bene. 'Tis no such matter. Then, you do not 

love me ? 
Beat. No, truly, but in friendly recompense. 
Leon. Come, cousin, I am sure you love the 

gentleman. 
Claud. And I'll be sworn upon 't that he loves 
her ; 
For here 's a paper written in his hand, 
A halting sonnet of his own pure brain, 
Fashion'd to Beatrice. 

Hero. And here 's another, 

Writ in my cousin's hand, stolen from her 
pocket, 

75-6 printed as prose in F 76 for thev corr. Capell : 

they Q, F 80, 81 that om. F 82 such om. F 

(101) 



Act v, Sc. iv MUCH ADO 

Containing her affection unto Benedick. . 90 

Bene. A miracle ! here 's our own hands 
against our hearts. Come, I will have thee ; 
but, by this light, I take thee for pity. 

Beat. I would not deny you ; but, by this 
good day, I yield upon great persuasion, and 
partly to save your life, for I was told you were 
in a consumption. 

Bene. Peace ! I will stop your mouth. 

[Kissing her. 

D. Pedro. How dost thou, Benedick, the married 



man 



Bene. I'll tell thee what, prince ; a college 100 
of witcrackers cannot flout me out of my 
humour. Dost thou think I care for a satire 
or an epigram ? No ; if a man will be beaten 
with brains, a' shall wear nothing handsome 
about him. In brief, since I do purpose to 
marry, I will think nothing to any purpose that 
the world can say against it ; and therefore 
never flout at me for what I have said against 
it, for man is a giddy thing, and this is my con- 
clusion. For thy part, Claudio, I did think to no 
have beaten thee ; but, in that thou art like 
to be my kinsman, live unbruised, and love my 
cousin. 

Claud. I had well hoped thou wouldst have 
denied Beatrice, that I might have cudgelled 
thee out of thy single life, to make thee a double- 
dealer ; which, out of question, thou wilt be, 
if my cousin do not look exceeding narrowly 
to thee. 

98 Benedick con. Theobald : Leonato Q, F S. D. Kissing 

her add. Theobald 108 what om. F 

( T02 ) 



ABOUT NOTHING Act v, Sc. iv 

Bene. Come, come, we' are friends. Let 's 120 
have a dance ere we are married, that we may 
lighten our own hearts and our wives' heels. 

Leon. We'll have dancing afterward. 

Bene. First, of my word ; therefore play, 
music ! Prince, thou art sad ; get thee a wife, 
get thee a wife : there is no staff more reverend 
than one tipped with horn. 

Enter a Messenger. 
Mess. My lord, your brother John is ta'en in 
flight, 
And brought with armed men back to Messina. 

Bene. Think not on him till to-morrow : I'll 130 
devise thee brave punishments for him. Strike 
up, pipers ! [Dance. Exeunt. 



(103) 



NOTES 

Dramatis Personae. Neither Q nor F nor any of the 
later Folios gives a list. It was first added by Rowe, and has 
been emended by later editors, especially Capell. The list 
here given has been enlarged to include all speaking characters. 
Mutae personae are given separately at the end. On Antonio's 
son see note on i. ii. 27. 

ACT I 

Scene i. A full-stage scene. Pope locates it in 'A Court 
before Leonato's House'. Capell's vaguer direction, 'Before 
Leonato's House ', has been adopted by later editors. If the 
proposed emendation in 1. ii. 11 of 'the' be accepted, the 
natural inference is that this scene, like 11. iii. and iii. 1 
and v. ii. is laid in Leonato's orchard, which was evidently in 
front of his house. On the Elizabethan stage an economical 
use of full-stage settings was imperative. Moreover, if the 
scene is laid in the orchard, it is more natural for Benedick 
and Claudio to linger behind after 1. 169 and for Don Pedro 
to come to look for them after 1. 213. The time is Monday, 
probably in the morning or early afternoon, as after Don 
Pedro and his friends have accepted Leonato's invitation there 
has to be sufficient time for the preparations for the revels on 
the same evening. 

6. this action. See Introduction, p. xv. 

16-7. in the figure of a lamb the feats of a lion. The Mes- 
senger, whose mannered phraseology (though Leonato catches 
its infection for the moment) throws into relief the easy con- 
versational rhythm of the speeches of the other characters in 
this scene, here talks pure euphuism. The use of cross- 
alliteration and of imagery from the animal world are two of 
its most distinctive notes. 

20. an uncle. Not mentioned elsewhere in the play, nor in 
any of the other known versions of the tale. The reference 
to him here helps to connect the Florentine Claudia with 
( 105 ) 



Act i, Sc. i NOTES 

Messina, and to explain how he had become acquainted with 
Hero before ' this ended action ' (cf. 11. 318-21). 

25. badge. 'A badge was a mark of service: hence appro- 
priately used for a mark of inferiority, and as such an expression 
of modesty ' (W. A. Wright). 

28. kind . . . kindness : a play upon the original meaning 
of ' kind ' = ' natural '. 

32. Signior Mountanto. The nickname with which Beatrice 
introduces Benedick into the dialogue is borrowed from the 
fencing-school. Bobadil in Every Man in his Humour, iv. v. 
87-9, speaks of ' your punto, your reverso, your stoccato, your 
imbroccato, your passada, your montanto '. It means ' an 
upright blow or thrust ', and thus prepares the audience in 
advance for Benedick's dialectical dexterity. 

39. Padua. The cultured Benedick is a worthy son of 'fair 
Padua, nursery of arts ' (Tarn, of Shr. 1. i. 2. It is curious 
that he comes from Padua to Messina, while Petruchio, his 
rougher prototype, comes from Verona to Padua. 

42-3. set up his bills . . . flight. Combatants issued chal- 
lenges by posting up bills, stating, among other particulars, 
what weapons were to be used. Cf. Nash, Have with you to 
Saffron Walden (hi. 121, ed. McKerrow) : ' hee braves it in- 
definitely in her behalfe, setting vp bills like a Bear-ward or 
Fencer, what fights we shall have, and what weapons she will 
meete me at.' Benedick, the professed mysogynist, challenged 
the God of Love to a match at long-distance shooting. The 
meaning appears to be that Benedick, who boasts that he is 
loved of all ladies ' (1. 135), had claimed to be a more unerring 
marksman at female hearts than Cupid himself. 

43-4. my uncle's fool. The only allusion in the play to 
Leonato's fool. It is remarkable that, while Touchstone and 
Feste are so prominent in As You Like It and Twelfth Night, 
there is no fool in Much Ado about Nothing. 

45. bird-bolt : a short arrow with a flat head, which, as com- 
paratively harmless, was allowed to be used by fools. 

62. stuffed. For this use of the word cf. Rom. and Jul. 
hi. v. 183, ' Stuff' d, as they say, with honourable parts '. 

64-5. a stuffed man . . . mortal. If the punctuation of Q and 
F, which have a comma after 'well', is retained, there is an 
antithesis between ' stuffed ' and ' stuffing well '. Beatrice 
agrees that Benedick is ' stuffed ', probably with reference 
to his achievements as a trencherman • but as to his being 
( ro6) 



NOTES Act i, Sc. i 

crammed with all virtues, he shares the general imperfection 
of humanity. Subsequent editors have, however, adopted 
Theobald's punctuation, ' stuffing, — well, we are '. But it is 
doubtful if this is an Elizabethan use of ' well ', and the 
breaking off of a sentence is not at all characteristic of 
Beatrice's manner of speech. 

73-4. wit . . . warm. A proverbial phrase. Cf. Tarn, of the 
Shr. 11. i. 26 : 

Pet. Am I not wise ? 

Kate. Yes, keep you warm. 

74. difference. A heraldic term : the alteration or addition 
to a coat-of-arms to distinguish a younger or lateral branch of 
a family. Cf. Hamlet, iv. v. 182, ' O, you must wear your 
rue with a difference '. 

78. sworn brother. Fratres iurati were persons vowed to 
assist one another, especially on military expeditions. Thus 
in Henry V, 11. i. 13-14, Bardolph declares that he, Nym, and 
Pistol will ' be all three sworn brothers to France '. 

81-2. fashion . . . block. Rushton, Shakespeare's Euphuism , 
p. 52, aptly quotes in illustration the following passage : ' Thy 
friendship Philautus is lyke a new fashion, which being vsed 
in the morning, is accompted olde before noone, which varietie 
of chaunging, being often-times noted of a graue Gentleman 
in Naples, who hauing bought a Hat of the newest fashion, & 
best block in all Italy, and wearing but one daye, it was tolde 
him y* it was stale, he hung it vp in his studie, & viewing al 
sorts, al shapes, perceiued at y e last, his olde Hat againe to 
come into the new fashion.' Euphues and his England (Lyly's 
Works, ed. Bond, ii. 96). 

83-4. notinyour books, not in favour with you. ' Book ' and 
' books ' are often used by Shakespeare metaphorically in the 
sense of ' record ' or ' register ', e. g. Cor. v. ii. 14-15 : 

I have been 
The book of his good acts. 

86. study, library. Beatrice again retorts on the Messenger 
with a play upon words. 

93. presently, immediately. 

102. are you. It is difficult to see why editors, except 
Collier, have adopted the ' you are ' of F. It is much more 
natural that Don Pedro should address Leonato, who is 
(107) 



Act i, Sc. i NOTES 

awaiting him in the orchard outside his house, with a courteous 
query. 

no. charge, burden, responsibility. 

120. fathers herself, shows who her father is, by her likeness 
to him. 

126. still, always. 

149. as yours were. The verb is attracted with the sub- 
junctive by the ' 'twere ' on which it depends. Wright com- 
pares 11. i. 7, ' He were an excellent man that were made'. 
The emendations that have been proposed are unnecessary. 

154. and so good a continuer, and were so good a stayer. 

156. a jade's trick. Suggested (after the fashion of Beatrice's 
retorts in this scene) by Benedick's reference to his horse. It 
is, therefore, probably superfluous to try to ascertain what 
trick exactly is meant. 

158. That is . . . Leonato. With these words Don Pedro 
ends a discussion of arrangements that he has been making 
with Leonato while Beatrice and Benedick have been having 
their verbal bout. He then turns to Claudio and Benedick 
and gives them Leonato's invitation. F by substituting 
' This ' for ' That ' obscures the sense, as does also the punctua- 
tion of both and F. See textual notes. 

161. at the least a month. See note on in. ii. 1-2. 

166. forsworn . . . Let and F have a comma after 
' forsworn ', but a full stop is necessary, as the words ' Let . . . 
duty ' are addressed to Don John. Hanmer first inserted the 
S.D., which makes this clear. 

172-3. It is a sign of Don Pedro's courtesy that he will 
not take advantage of the royal prerogative to enter the house 
in front of his host. 

176. J noted her not. The changed pronunciation of ' not ', 
which had a long ' o ' in Elizabethan English, obscures the 
play upon words here. It recurs with a further play on 'noting' 
and ' nothing ' in n. iii. 59-62. 

184-7. to ° low . . . afford her. Cf. Euphnes and his England 
(Lyly's Works, ii. 60), ' I know not how I should commend 
your beautie, because it is somewhat to brown, nor your stature 
being somewhat to low'. 

197. sad, serious. 

198. the flouting Jack. Furness notes that in Q and F 
1 iacke ' is spelt without a capital, which shows that the 
word had here lost its personal significance. To ' play the 

( to8) 



NOTES Act i, Sc. i 

Jack with ' = ' play the knave with, mislead ' (cf. TheTempest, 
iv. i. 197-8). ' Flouting ' is explained by Puttenham's defini- 
tion of ' the Broad floute ' (first quoted by Staunton) ' when we 
deride by plaine and flat contradiction, as he that saw a 
dwarfe go in the streete said to his companion that walked 
with him : see yonder gyant ' {Arte of English Poesie, p. 201, 
ed. Arber). Similarly (asks Benedick) does Claudio assert 
that the blind God of Love is sharp-sighted enough to spy out 
a hare in hiding, or that the god who works at the forge is 
a first-rate carpenter ? 

200-1. to go in the song, to be in harmony with you. 

227-9. think so . . . in love. Editors since Theobald have put 
a colon or a full stop after ' allegiance '. The punctuation oiQ 
and F has here been restored with slight modification. With 
this punctuation ' on my allegiance . . . allegiance ' is a 
parenthetical clause = as I have been charged to speak on my 
allegiance. See textual notes. 

233. i/ this . . . uttered, if this were the case, such would be 
the terms in which to announce it. But why should Claudio 
make such an evasive answer ? He has already confessed 
his love for Hero to Benedick, and in 11. 237-8 he reiterates 
this. Probably the line (as Hudson has suggested) is spoken 
by Don Pedro. This would give greater point to Benedick's 
next speech, which would then be a retort to the Prince. 

234. the old tale. The story of the ' Bluebeard ', Mr. Fox, 
and his visitor, Lady Mary, containing the formula quoted by 
Benedick was communicated by Blakeway to the variorum 
edition of 182 1. It is reproduced in full in Furness's edition 
of Much Ado about Nothing, ad he 

241. fetch me in, entrap me. 

245. my two faiths and troths, i. e. to Don Pedro and 
Claudio. 

256. in the force of his will, ' by wilful obstinacy : not by 
argument, or because he believed what he said ' (W. A. Wright). 
There seems to be a reference to the scholastic definition of 
heresy, as not merely error, but a wilful adherence to it. 

264. the fine, the conclusion. The pun on ' finer ' which 
follows is unworthy of Benedick's wit, and is an echo of the 
word-play in Shakespeare's earliest comedies. 

270. lose more blood with love. The sighs of a lover were 
supposed to consume the blood. 

272. a ballad-maker's pen. The punishment would fit the 
( 109 ) 



Act i, Sc. i NOTES 

crime, for lovers were the typical ballad-makers. Cf. As Ton 
Like It, ii. vii. 147-9. 

275. this faith. Don Pedro reverts to the theological 
imagery of 11. 251-6. 

argument, subject for ridicule. 

276. in a bottle, in a basket. Shooting at a cat suspended 
in a basket was a favourite sport for archers. 

278. Adam. Theobald first suggested that the reference 
is to Adam Bell, a famous archer of the Border country, 
whose feats, with those of Clym of the Clough and William 
of Cloudesly, were celebrated in a ballad first printed about 
1550. There is no instance, however, of Adam Bell being 
mentioned merely by his Christian name. 

279. as time shall try. Cf. As Tou Like It, iv. i. 210-11, 
' Time is the old justice that examines all such offenders, and 
let Time try '. 

280. In time . . . yoke. Quoted, with slight variations, from 
Kyd's Spanish Tragedie, 11. i. 3 : ' In time the savage bull 
sustains the yoke.' The line has a long literary ancestry, 
through Watson's Hecatompathia, xxvii. i, and Serafino's 
Sonnets, ciii. 1-2, to Ovid's Tristia, iv. 6. 1-2, or Ars 
Amatoria, i. 471. 

281-2. savage bull . . . sensible Benedick. The euphuistic 
cross-alliteration is noticeable. 

289. horn-mad. The double sense in which the words are 
used is sufficiently illustrated in The Com. of Err. n. i. 57 : 

Dro. E. Why, mistress, sure my master is horn-mad. 

Ad. Horn-mad, thou villain ! 

Dro. E. I mean not cuckold-mad ; but sure he is stark mad. 

291. quiver . . . quake. The alliterative word-play is noticeable. 

Venice, notorious for dissolute living. Coryat in his 

Crudities (Maclehose's edition, 1905), i. 401, states that 'the 

name of a cortezan of Venice is famoused over all Christen- 

dome '. 

294-5. temporize with the hours, come to terms in the course 
of time. ' With ' as in other passages after ' temporize ', e. g. 
King John, v. ii. 125, ' He will not temporize with my en- 
treaties ', has an instrumental sense. 

299. / have almost matter enough in me, I have almost 
sufficient sense. 

300. and so I commit you. Benedick begins the customary 

(no) 



NOTES Act i, Sc. i 

formula ending an Elizabethan letter, which Claudio and Don 
Pedro complete. 

303. The sixth of July. Fleay was right in stating that the 
dates introduced into plays often corresponded to the dates 
of their first production. An instance of this is found in the 
Cambridge play, Silvanus, acted at St. John's College, as the 
title-page mentions, on 13 January 1596/7. In Act in. i. one 
of the characters executes a mock legal document ' sigillo 
meo sigillatas, Datas 13 Januarij '. Hence Furness is not 
justified in ridiculing Fleay because he sought in Don 
Pedro's words a clue to the date of Much Ado about Nothing. 
It is not at all improbable that Much Ado about Nothing was 
first acted on July 6, unless the date was merely chosen, as 
W. A. Wright thinks, because it was ' old Midsummer day, 
an appropriate date for such Midsummer madness '. But 
Fleay characteristically did not stop here. As Leonatoin n. i. 
386-7 speaks of ' Monday . . . which is hence a just seven- 
night ', and as July 6 fell on Monday in 1590 and 1601, but 
not in any intervening year, Fleay concluded that the play 
was first written in 1590 and ' almost recomposed at its repro- 
duction '. It is to be regretted that so ingenious an argument 
yields such an unsatisfactory result. 

308. old ends, tags of prose or verse. Cf. Richard III, 
1. iii. 336-7 : 

And thus I clothe my naked villany 

With odd old ends stol'n forth of holy writ. 

315. Hath . . . son. It is curious that Claudio, whose uncle 
lives in Messina, and who has been sufficiently in Hero's com- 
pany before the ' ended action ' to form an attachment for 
her, should need to ask such a question about the Governor 
of the city. 

316. she's his only heir. Hero thus differs from Fenicia 
in Bandello's novel, whose only dower is her beauty. Her 
position is more akin to that of Genevra. See Introduction, 
pp. vi and xxi. 

327. like a lover. Don Pedro is probably playing upon 
Claudio's distinction between ' liking ' and ' love ' in 1. 321. 

presently, immediately. 

328. a book of words, a bookful of phrases. 
330. break with her, broach the matter to her. 

330-1. and with . . . have her. The omission of these words 
( in ) 



Act i, Sc. i NOTES 

in F is due to the printer mistaking the ' her ' in 1. 330 for the 
' her ' in 1. 331. 

337. What need the bridge much broader, What need (is there 
for) the bridge (to be) much broader ? The line ' does double 
duty, referring alike to Claudio's speech and to Don Pedro's 
answer ' (J. C. Smith). 

338-9. The fairest . . . fit, the best gift to a man is what 
he requires : what will answer his needs is suitable. 

339. 'tis once, once for all. 

344. unclasp. Don Pedro carries on the metaphor of the 
lover as a ' bookworm ' from 1. 328. 

1. ii. A front-stage scene. While this and the following 
scene are being played in front of the traverse, preparations 
are being made behind it for the elaborate full-stage scene in 
Act 11. i. The time is Monday evening, before supper; 

s.d. Antonio. Q and F have ' an old man, brother to 
Leonato ', and prefix ' old ' to his speeches in this scene. 
Leonato calls his brother Anthony in v. i. 91 and 99 ; but 
Ursula, inn. i. 118, addresses him as ' Signior Antonio '. Hence 
Rowe introduced here and in subsequent stage-directions the 
Italian form of this name. 

2. cousin. ' Used of any collateral relative more distant 
than brother or sister ' (Onions). Here it means nephew ; in 
11. i. 69, v. iv. 84, niece ; in Tw. Night, 1. v. 130, uncle; in 
I Henry IV, in. i. 52, brother-in-law ; in Rich. Ill, 11. ii. 8, 
grandchild. 

8. event stamps. and F have ' euents ', and this may be 
right. For the use of the plural ' events ' = issue, cf. Meas. 
for Meas. in. ii. 258-9, ' leave we him to his events, with a 
prayer they may prove prosperous '. But when a plural 
noun takes a singular verb, the verb usually precedes it. 
Probably the final ' s ' in ' events ' was due to the printer's 
eye or ear being caught by the initial ' s ' in ' stamps '. F 2 
and its successors have ' event '. 

11. the orchard. 'Mine', the reading of 0, is almost cer- 
tainly a mistake for ' the ', due to the phrase that follows, 
' a man of mine '. F, probably on account of the jingle caused 
by the repetition of ' mine ', reads ' my orchard '. But 
Antonio, who evidently, like Beatrice, lives with the wealthy 
Governor, must be referring here to the orchard in front of 
Leonato' s house, which is spoken of four times later in the 
(112) 



NOTES Act i, Sc. ii 

play. In n. iii. 4 Benedick bids a boy bring a book ' hither 
to me in the orchard ', and in in. i. 4-5 Hero bids Margaret tell 
Beatrice that she and Ursula ' walk in the orchard ' ; in 
in. iii. 159-62 Borachio relates how ' the prince, Claudio, and 
my master . . . saw afar off in the orchard ' the encounter be- 
tween himself and Margaret ; and in v. i. 249, in confessing the 
plot to Don Pedro, he again speaks of ' the orchard '. More- 
over, the 'thick-pleached alley', mentioned here by Antonio, 
is evidently 'the pleached bower' or alley (in. i. 7 and 16) 
where Hero and Ursula are overheard by Beatrice. 

The apparently slight change of ' mine ' into ' the ' has 
important consequences. If the conversation between the 
Prince and Claudio, here inaccurately reported, took place in 
Antonio's orchard, it evidently could not be the conversation 
between them at the close of the previous scene. But if it 
took place in the orchard before Leonato's house, it doubtless 
was this conversation, the orchard thus being the scene of 
Act 1. i, as well as of Act 11. iii and Act in. i, probably of 
Act v. ii, and possibly of Act 11. i. On this assumption the 
whole difficulty raised by Spedding in a well-known passage 
(New Shakspere Society Transactions, 1877-9, P* 2 °) ^is- 
appears, and with it his proposal to begin a new Act with the 
present scene : ' We are called on to imagine that while the 
scene was merely shifting, the Prince and Claudio have had 
time for a second conversation in Antonio's orchard, and that 
one of Antonio's men, overhearing it, has had time to tell 
him of it. Now this is one of the things which it is impossible 
to imagine. . . . The imagination refuses to be so imposed 
upon.' Shakespeare, it is safe to say, made no such call upon 
the imagination of his audience, and the less so because there 
was no ' scene-shifting ' at this point, but merely a drawing 
of the traverse. 

16. accordant, agreeable. 

23-4. till it appear itself, till it become a definite reality. 
Neither here nor in Cymb. in. iv. 147-8, ' disguise that which, 
a reflexive itself, must not yet be ', is there any need to assume 
t' appear use of the verb. 

27-31. s.d. [Enter Antonio's son . . .] Cousin, you know . . . 
busy time. There is no s.d. in Q or F, but Antonio evidently 
goes out, and Leonato addresses the rest of his speech to other 
persons. Who are they ? Evidently first the ' cousin ' 
(nephew) whom he has asked for in 11. 1-2, and whom, as he 
(113) I 



Act i, Sc. ii NOTES 

enters, he reminds of what he has * to do ', i. e. to provide music 
for the revels. But the ' cousin ' has attended to this, and 
is followed on to the stage by a musician (perhaps carrying 
the drum mentioned in the s.d. of F after n. i. 91). Leonato, 
with an apology to the musician for not noticing him at once, 
bids him follow him, that he may make use of his ' skill ' for 
the entertainment of his guests. Then, satisfied with what 
his nephew has done, Leonato addresses him again more 
affectionately as ' Good cousin '. The sense of the passage 
has been obscured not only by the omission of stage directions 
in Q and F, but by their reading ' cousins ' in 1. 28 instead 
of ' cousin '. The interpolation of a final ' s ' is one of the most 
common of textual errors. 

I. iii. A front-stage scene. The time is Monday night during 
supper. 

12. born under Saturn. A man born under the influence of 
this planet was reputed to be ' misdoing, slowe, and heauie '. 

13-14. a moral medicine to a mortifying mischief, a remedy 
made up of moralizing to a deadly malady. The alliterative 
balance between 'medicine' and ' mischief ' had been used 
by Lyly, Eupbues (Works, I. 247), ' be as earnest to seeke 
a medicine, as you wer eager to run into a mischiefe '. Shake- 
speare doubles the cross-alliterates by adding contrasted 
epithets. 

22. without controlment, without being checked. 

23-4. You have of late stood out against your brother. See 
Introduction, p. xv. 

30-1. my blood, my disposition. Some have interpreted 
' blood ' as base blood, or bastardy. But Don John would 
scarcely speak of this to his retainers, and throughout the 
scene he is making a defiant declaration of his character. 

31-2. fashion a carriage, assume a deportment. 

37. sing in my cage. An abrupt change from the metaphor 
of a muzzled and fettered dog, which is resumed in the next 
sentence. 

43-4. J make all use of it, for I use it only. A play upon 
' use ' in its ordinary meaning and ' use ' in the sense of to 
* keep company with'. Cf. Macbeth, in. ii. 8-10: 
why do you keep alone, 
Of sorriest fancies your companions making, 
Using those thoughts which should indeed have died ? 
(ii4) 



NOTES Act i, Sc. iii 

56. A proper squire, a fine fellow. For this contemptuous 
use of ' squire ', cf . Oth. iv. ii. 145-6 : 

Some such squire he was, 
That turn'd your wit the seamy side without. 

60. A very forward March-chick. The words appear to be 
a petulant gibe at Hero, though they are curiously inapplicable 
to her docile and reticent nature. They may, however, be 
meant for Claudio, who, though a ' young start-up ' (1. 71), 
aspires to the hand of the rich Governor's daughter. 

62-3. Being entertained . . . musty room. For the use of fumi- 
gation to sweeten or dry the atmosphere of rooms when guests 
were expected, cf. Chapman's The Widow's Tears, 111. ii. 9, 
where the usher, before a bridal mask, cries to an attendant, 
'Perfume, sirrah, the room's dampish'. In ignorance of 
this custom Rowe, in his second edition (1714), and Pope made 
the grotesque emendation ' as I was smoking in '. 

63-4. comes me the prince and Claudio. The familiarity with 
which Borachio thus alludes to Don Pedro and his favourite 
makes the use both of the ' ethical dative ' and of the singular 
verb preceding two subjects — unceremoniously thrown into 
one — decidedly piquant here. 

64. sad conference, serious conversation. 

65-8. i" whipt me . . . Claudio. As Borachio had hidden 
behind the arras or tapestry, the conversation that he over- 
heard presumably took place in the ' musty room ', and was 
a continuation of that between Don Pedro and Claudio in the 
orchard. Or if the room overlooked the orchard, he may be 
referring to 1. i. 341-9- See further Introduction, p. xvii. 

70-2. That young . . . overthrow. Cf. 1. i. 10-4 and Intro- 
duction, p. xv. 

72. cross . . . bless. ' Though " cross " here is, of course, 
primarily to thwart, to hinder, yet the use of the word " bless " 
immediately afterwards suggests an allusion to the making of 
the sign of the cross, as by a priest when blessing, or by a lay- 
man when endeavouring to avert a danger, a curse, &c.' 
(Deighton). 

77-8. Would the cook were a my mind. Don John hints that 
he would not object to seeing his enemies got rid of by 
poison. 

("5) 12 



Act ii, Sc. i NOTES 



ACT II 

Scene i. A full-stage scene. But, as the editors of the Cam- 
bridge Shakespeare have pointed out, it is doubtful whether 
the scene is supposed to be within Leonato's house or outside. 
As a rule, in Shakespeare's plays maskers enter the hall where 
a banquet has already taken place. Cf. Rom. and Jul. i. v, 
and Henry VIII, i. iv. Leonato's question in 1. I, 'Was 
not Count John here at supper ? ' taken together with 
his exclamation in 11. 90-1, ' The revellers are entering, 
brother : make good room,' suggests that this is intended to 
be the case here. If so, the stage has been transformed, during 
scenes ii and iii, from an ' orchard ' into a hall. But in 1. 183 
Don John cries, ' Come, let us to the banquet ', and leaves the 
stage with Borachio, while at the close of the scene Don Pedro 
says to those about him, ' go in with me '. Hence the dancing 
may have taken place, not indoors, but in the orchard, on a 
terrace or smooth lawn. The time is Monday night, after 
supper. 

s.d. Enter . . . Others. and F mention here not only Leo- 
nato's wife, but ' a kinsman ', probably Antonio's son of 1. iii. 
On ' Margaret, Ursula ', who are not mentioned in and F, see 
note on s.d. after 1. 91. 

In 1. iii. 76 Don John had proposed to his followers 
to go ' to the great supper '. But from Antonio's answer to 
Leonato's question, the company seems to have risen before 
his arrival. The feasting, however, seems to be resumed after 
the dancing, for, as has been seen above, he cries, 1. 183, ' Come, 
let us to the banquet '. 

4. heart-burned. Heart-burn is caused by acidity. 

io-ii. my lady's eldest son. For illustration of this con- 
temptuous use of the phrase, J. C. Smith quotes from The 
Puritan, 1. ii. 55-7, ' Sonnes and Heyres, and Fooles, and Gulls, 
and Ladyes eldest Sonnes '. 

29. Just, exactly so. 

33. lie in the woollen, sleep between blankets without sheets. 
Capell's interpretation, ' lie in a woollen shroud ', is alien to 
the merry spirit of the dialogue here. It also, as W. A. Wright 
points out, overlooks the fact that burial in woollen did 
not become usual till after the ' Woollen Act ' of 1678. 
(116) 



NOTES Act ii, Sc. i 

43. in earnest, as an instalment. 

bear-herd. and F have ' Berrord ', which F J and 
F 4 expand into ' bear-herd ' . This form is used in 2 Henry IV ' , 
1. ii. 194, 'True valor is turn'd Beare-heard', and in Tarn, of 
Shr. Ind. ii. 21, ' by transmutation a Beare-heard ', the only 
Shakespearian passages in which the word is not contracted. 
Hence it has been adopted in the text, though Collier and 
others have adopted the expansion ' bear-ward '. 

43-4. lead his apes into hell. Apes for exhibitions were often 
part of a bear-ward's stock-in-trade. To ' lead apes in hell ' 
was the proverbial fate of old maids, but no satisfactory ex- 
planation of the phrase has been given. 

51. away to Saint Peter for the heavens; he shows. The 
punctuation of Q and F, ' St. Peter : for the heavens, he 
shows,' has caused difficulty. But the colon has here its 
Shakespearian use before a rounding-off phrase, and the comma 
before 'he' is an instance of 'light stopping'. 'Sentences 
which we should now partition off by semicolons or colons . . . 
were connected by commas if there was a connecting-link in 
the thought ' (P. Simpson, Shakespearian Punctuation, pp. 16 
and 67-8). 

Some editors, however, misinterpreting the punctuation of 
and F, have taken ' for the heavens ' to be the exclamation 
which is found in The Merch. of V en. 11. ii. 12, ' Away, says 
the fiend, for the heavens '. But such an exclamation follow- 
ing the words ' get you to heaven ' would be singularly inapt 
and unworthy of Beatrice. Two of the Hundred Merry Tales, 
mentioned by Beatrice in 1. 139, the 21st and the 78th, intro- 
duce St. Peter as the porter at heaven's gates. 

71. in that kind, in the way of marriage. Leonato's attitude 
is exactly the opposite to that of Polonius when he warns 
Ophelia, ' Lord Hamlet is a prince, out of your sphere '. 

73-6. music . . . time . . . measure . . . dance. A chain of 
verbal quips: ' measure '=' moderation ' and 'a stately 
dance '. 

86. passing. Leonato appears to cap Beatrice's pun on 
' cinque ' and ' sink ' with one on ' pace ' (in its Elizabethan 
pronunciation) and ' passing '. 

91. After this line Capell inserted the stage-direction 
' Leonato and his Company mask ', and this has been adopted 
by the Cambridge editors in the form 'All put on their masks '. 
But it is wrong. It is clear from the dialogue that follows 



Act ii, Sc. i NOTES 

that, as in the similar episode in Henry VIII, i. iv, only 
the gentlemen are masked. Moreover, Q and F give only 
the names of gentlemen as entering here. Hence editors 
since Capell are mistaken in adding the names of Margaret and 
Ursula. Though they do not speak till 11. 105 and 117 re- 
spectively, they have evidently been present, in attendance 
on Hero, from the beginning of the scene, and their names have 
therefore been added to the opening stage-direction, as in 
Rowe's edition. ' dumbe John ' in and F is a mistake for 
' Don John ', which Malone and Collier ascribe to a mishearing 
of the dictated text by the printer, though this is doubtful. 
But the preceding ' or ' suggests that there is some confusion 
in the stage-direction. Don John may have entered here with 
Borachio, though he does not speak till 1. 166. But it is wrong 
to include him, as all modern editions do, among the maskers. 
His character makes this impossible, and his remark, in 1. 169, 
when Claudio is left alone, that ' but one visor remains ', has 
more point if he is not wearing a visor himself. It is not 
improbable that he did not enter till after 1. 165. 

93. friend, lover. 

100-1. When I . . . case ! When I like your appearance, for 
God forbid that the face hidden underneath your visor should 
be like its covering. 

102-3. My visor . . . thatcftd. The allusion is to Ovid's 
story (Met. vn. 650) of how Baucis and Philemon in their 
thatched cottage entertained unawares Jupiter and Mercury. 
Don Pedro's heptameter is probably an imitation of Golding, 
whose translation of the Metamorphoses is in this metre. The 
line describing the cottage is rendefed, ' The roof thereof was 
thatched all with straw and fennish reede'. The story must 
have been running in Shakespeare's head about this time, for 
in As Tou Like It, 111. iii. 8, he again drags in an allusion to it, 
' O knowledge ill inhabited, worse than Jove in a thatch'd 
house'. S. G. Owen has pointed out ('Ovid and Romance,' 
in a volume of Oxford essays on English Literature and the 
Classics, p. 185) that in one or other of Shakespeare's plays 
there are allusions to every one of the fifteen books of the 
Metamorphoses. 

103. Speak . . . love. Hero has retorted to Don Pedro in his 
own Ovidian imagery and in verse. He now completes the 
heptameter, thus reproducing the effect of one of Golding's 
rhyming couplets. 

(118) 



NOTES Act ii, Sc. i 

104, 107, 109-10. These lines sire assigned in and Fto Bene- 
dick, but they doubtless belong, like 1 1 2 and 1 1 5, to Balthasar. 

in. God . . . dancer. Margaret here says a characteristic 
prayer aloud. 

114. clerk. It was the parish clerk's office to say the re- 
sponses in church. 

118. Signior Antonio. It is strange to find Antonio among 
the maskers, for Leonato had told him to ' make good room ' 
(1. 91) when the revellers entered, as if he were merely to be 
a spectator. 

119. At a word, in brief. 

123. do him so ill-well, copy his defects to the life. 

125. dry hand : a sign of cold blood, due, in Antonio's case, 
to age. 

up and down, exactly, all over. But there is probably 
also a play on the literal meaning of the words. 

139. the ' Hundred Merry Tales ' . A collection of mirthful 
stories from many sources, of which the only complete copy 
still extant (in the library of the University of Gottingen) was 
printed by John Rastell in 1526. 

The Merry Tales had thus been current for three-quarters 
of a century, and Beatrice resents the imputation upon her 
originality. So far as wit goes many of the tales would not 
have been unworthy of her, and their frequent coarseness 
would probably not have troubled her. But her favourite 
reading could not have been a book which is largely a satire 
on the follies and vices of women. 

It is noticeable that the 73rd tale is about a priest in 
Stratford-on-Avon (' Stretforth vpon auayne '), and that it 
mentions the village of ' Shoterey not a mile from Strethforth '. 
For possible reminiscences of some of the tales by Shakespeare 
see notes on 11. i. 51, 111. ii. 74, and v. ii. 84-5. 

147. the -prince's jester. Beatrice has already (1. i. 44) put 
Benedick on a level with a professional fool : she now declares 
that he is one. 

148. only his gift, his only gift. Cf. 111. i. 23. 

153. the fleet: the only use of the word by Shakespeare in 
the sense of a company of people. 

154. boarded, accosted. Beatrice keeps up her nautical 
metaphor. 

157. a comparison, a scoffing simile. Cf. L. L. L. v. ii. 852, 
' Full of comparisons and scoffing flouts '. 
(119) 



Act ii, Sc. i NOTES 

162. the leaders, Hero and Don Pedro, who, by virtue of 
their rank, would head the dancers. Cf. 11. 167-8, ' Hero . . . 
the ladies follow her '. 

165. turning: a play on the two meanings of a turning in 
a road and in a dance. 

s.d. Dance . . . Claudio. The direction in 0, ' Dance . . . 
exeunt ', implies that the dance takes place on the stage, in 
view of the spectators, and that afterwards the dancers withdraw. 
F has ' Exeunt ' after Beatrice's speech, and below, ' Musicke 
for the dance'. This would suggest that the dance does not 
take place on the stage, but the audience only hear dance 
music from within. Hence Theobald, who did not know 0, 
inserted a S.d. ' Music within ' before Beatrice's ' We must 
follow the leaders ' in 1. 162. This has been illogically retained 
by some later editors, together with the arrangement in Q. 
Probably this arrangement is right, and that in F is an accident 
of printing, due to the space in 1. 165 after ' turning' being 
scarcely sufficient for the full s.d. See further the next note. 

166-9. From Don John's description it looks as if after 
the dance the masked gentlemen (except Claudio) went out, 
as they had entered, in a body, Don Pedro, however, taking 
Leonato with him. Then the ladies go out separately, headed 
by Hero. 

Sure . . . Hero. This remark of Don John is puzzling. It 
can scarcely be said aloud to deceive Claudio, for from Bora- 
chio's next speech it would appear that Don John has not yet 
recognized the Count through his mask. On the other hand, 
he had accepted Borachio's news that Don Pedro was to woo 
Hero on Claudio's behalf. It looks as if he were now led by the 
Prince's ardour as a suitor to believe that he is, after all, 
wooing Hero on his own account. This would add another 
link to the chain of misconceptions in the play. 

183. the banquet. ' Banquet ' is sometimes used by Shake- 
speare in a specialized sense to mean a light repast of fruit 
or wine at the close of festivities, e.g. Tarn, of the Sbr. v. ii.9-10, 
My banquet is to close our stomachs up 
After our great good cheer, 
and Rom. and Jul. 1. v. 126, where Capulet, after a masked 
dance, cries, 

We have a trifling foolish banquet towards. 

This sense would fit the situation here, but, if so, Don John 

( 120 ) 



NOTES Actii, Sc. i 

seems to have missed the supper, to which he had announced 
his intention of going in I. iii. 76, but at which apparently he 
had not been present (cf. 11. 1-2). 

189. all hearts . . . use, let all hearts use. 

192. faith melteth into blood, 'honour dissolves into passion' 
(J. C. Smith). 

199. willow, the emblem of forsaken love. If the scene is 
laid in the orchard, Benedick's ' offer ' gains additional point. 

202. a usurer's chain. Usury, though forbidden by the 
Church, was practised by some of the wealthy merchants, who 
frequently wore chains. 

210-2. Here again, as in 1. i. 231-3, Benedick's illustration 
from an old tale is so condensed as to be enigmatical. Nor 
has in this case the story been traced. The nearest parallel 
is in the Spanish novel, Lazarillo de Tormes, translated into 
English by David Rowlands in 1586. In chap, i, the hero 
relates how he revenged himself on a blind man, who had 
stolen his sausage, by making him jump against a post. 

213. If it will not be, if what I ask will not be done. 

214-5. V 00r hurt fowl . . . sedges. In this piece of bird-lore, 
as again in 111. i. 24-5, it is the Shakespeare of Stratford, 
rather than of London, whose voice is heard. 

219-21. apt . . . person. The alliterative effect of the re- 
petition of ' p ' and ' b ' in these lines is noticeable. 

220-1. base though bitter, 'willing to wound, and yet afraid 
to strike '. 

s.d. F here makes only Don Pedro enter ; adds Hero, 
Leonato, Don John, Borachio, and Conrade. There is no 
dramatic reason why Don John and his retainers should not 
return at this point from the banquet. But they do not speak 
till the next scene, and they evidently are not present while 
the arrangements about Hero's marriage are being discussed. 
For though Leonato fixes the ceremony for ' Monday . . , 
which is hence a just seven-night ' (11. 386-9), Don John at 
the end of the next scene tells Borachio, ' I will presently go 
learn their day of marriage ' (1. 59). Hence Q must be wrong in 
including them here. 

The question cf whether Hero and Leonato enter here 
or after 1. 278, as in F, is more difficult. It is true, as some 
editors have urged, that it is unnatural for Hero and her father 
to stand by silent while Don Pedro and Benedick debate 
whether the former has wooed her for himself or for Claudioo 
( 121 ) 



Act ii, Sc. i NOTES 

On the other hand, Benedick speaks of ' this young lady ' 
(1. 230). Unless the text is incorrect, the words can only refer 
to Hero present on the stage. Moreover, when Beatrice enters 
after 1. 288 she does not come straight from the banquet 
with Hero and Leonato. She had been sent by Don Pedro 
(like Benedick in 1. 195) to look for Claudio, who had lingered 
behind after the dance, for she announces (11. 304-5), ' I have 
brought Count Claudio whom you sent me to seek '. Hence 
it has seemed preferable to follow the arrangement of 0, by 
which Hero and Leonato enter with Don Pedro after 1. 223, 
while Beatrice and Claudio enter together after 1. 278. 

227. LadyFame. Benedick has a fondness for the title ' Lady '. 
Beatrice is ' Lady Disdain ', and ' Lady Tongue '. Here 
Fame, in its Virgilian sense of ' report ' or ' rumour ' is per- 
sonified with a similar title. In The Mer. of V en. in. i. 7-8, 
Salarino personifies ' Report ' in homelier fashion, ' i'f my 
gossip Report be an honest woman of her word '. 

228. a lodge in a warren, a game-keeper's lodge. The com- 
parison is suggested by the desolate surroundings of such a 
lodge, but it lacks the aptness of most of Benedick's simili- 
tudes. It is curious that Shakespeare nowhere else uses the 
word ' warren ', though ' warrener ' occurs in The Merry Wives 
of Windsor, 1. iv. 28. 

251-2. quarrel to you, cause of complaint against you. 

252-3. the gentleman . . . by you. This gentleman is, of 
course, Benedick himself. Beatrice has put her own inter- 
pretation on her partner's strictures. 

260. duller . . . thaw. This somewhat singular expression is 
of Benedick's own invention. Beatrice had merely called 
him ' a very dull fool ' (11. 147-8). 

261. impossible conveyance, incredibly deft manipulation. 
Cf. 1. 15. 

262. a man at a mark. A reference to the marksman who 
stood near the butts and gave aim to the archers. 

268. had left him, had bestowed upon him by his Creator. 

272. the infernal Ate, the goddess of discord, whose birth- 
place is hell. Cf. Jul. Caes. in. i. 271, ' Ate . . . come hot from 
hell '. 

273-4. some scholar would conjure her, would exorcise her 
in Latin. So when the Ghost appears in Hamlet (1. i. 42), 
Marcellus cries, ' Thou art a scholar : speak to it, Horatio '. 

274-8. for certainly . . . follows her. There is a curious 
( 122 ) 



NOTES Act ii, Sc. i 

twist here in Benedick's logic; He wishes the infernal Ate 
back in hell, not because she causes turmoil on earth, but 
because her absence from hell makes it an abode of peace. 

277-8. go thither, so indeed . . . follows her. Modern editors 
put a semicolon after ' thither ', and commas before and after 
' indeed '. But this obscures the meaning of the passage, 
which is that people sin in order to go to hell, so completely 
do disquiet, horror, and perturbation follow her to earth and 
leave hell free. 

282. the Antipodes, the dwellers on the opposite side of the 
globe. The N.E.D. gives the phrase here its modern inter- 
pretation of locality, but Shakespeare seems always to use 
it of the inhabitants, not the place. Cf . Mer. of V en. v. i. 127-8 : 

We should hold day with the Antipodes 
If you would walk in absence of the sun, 

and Rich. II, 111. ii. 48-9 : 

Who all this while hath revelled in the night 
Whilst we were wandering with the Antipodes. 

284. toothpicker. This and the surviving form were both 
current in Elizabethan English. 

285. Prester John, a fabulous Christian king who was sup- 
posed to reside in the Far East. Mandeville relates that 
this monarch, after seeing a service conducted by priests, 
declared ' he would no more be called Kinge nor Emperour 
but preest, and he would have the name of him that came first 
out of the prestes, and he was called John '. Purchas applies 
the name to the King of Abyssinia, whose title, ' Prestigian ', 
was easily deflected and altered to priest John. 

286. the Great Cham, the Khan or ruler of the Mongols. 

287. the Pigmies, a mythical race of dwarfs located by 
different writers in ' mountaines of Inde ', in ' mountains in 
the North side ', and south of Ethiopia. 

289. Harpy. The spelling of F with a capital is preferable, 
for Benedick is again identifying Beatrice with a mythological 
figure. 

294-300. On this passage, see Introduction, p. xxvii. 

297. use, interest. By uniting her heart with his Beatrice 
had doubled it. 

312-3. civil count, civil . . . orange. The pun on 'civil' and 
' Seville ' was even more obvious in Elizabethan English than 
( 123 ) 



Act ii, Sc. i NOTES 

to-day, owing to the spelling, ' a civil orange '. Cotgrave (as 
Dyce points out) defines Aigre-douce as ' A ciuile orange ; 
or, orange that is between sweet and sower '. This exactly 
expresses Claudio, who is ' neither sad nor sick, nor merry 
nor well'. 

315. blazon: strictly a description of armorial bearings 5 
here ironically used of Beatrice's ' appreciation ' of Claudio. 

324. all grace, 'he who is the fountain of all grace' (W. A. 
Wright). The use of ' grace ' in this sense is frequent. There 
are two instances in All 's Well, 1. iii. 228, ' By grace itself 
I swear', and 11. i. 163, 'The greatest grace leading grace'. 
The play on words in the latter passage, and in Macbeth, v. 
vii. 101, ' bv the grace of Grace', though somewhat mechanical, 
is preferable to Leonato's unctuous pun. 

336. poor fool. A striking use of the phrase as one purely 
of endearment, without any sense of pity, and in application 
to an inanimate object. 

337. keeps on the windy side of care, keeps to the windward 
of care, and thus has the advantage of it. The metaphor is 
a nautical one. 

339. cousin. Claudio already addresses Beatrice as a re- 
lative. 

340. Good Lord, for alliance ! Probably a retort to Claudio's 
familiar ' cousin '. ' Good lord, here have I got a new kinsman 
by marriage ' (Malone). ' Alliance ' seems to be used by 
Shakespeare not for marriage but for the relationships which 
marriage produces. Cf. Rom. and Jul. 11. iii. 91-2: 

For this alliance may so happy prove, 

To turn your household's rancour to pure love. 

J. C. Smith points out that Bacon distinguishes between 
' marriage ' and ' alliance ' in The New Atlantis, ' What is 
marriage to them but a very bargain-, wherein is sought 
alliance, or portion, or reputation ? ' 

340-1. goes . . . to the world. To ' go to the world ' = to 
be married, and ' a woman of the world ' in As Tou Like It, 
v. iii. 5, is 'a married woman '. The origin of the phrase is 
uncertain, but it is used of both sexes. The Clown in 
All's Well, 1. iii. 21, says to the Countess, 'if I may have your 
ladyship's good will to go to the world, Isbel the woman 
and T will do as we mav '. 

( 124) 



NOTES Act ii, Sc. i 

341. sunburnt, scorched, and thus iii-favoured. Cf. Tro. 
and Cress. 1. iii. 282-3 : 

The Grecian dames are sunburnt and not worth 
The splinter of a lance. 

342-3. heigh-ho for a husband : the title of a ballad. Wright 
compares Burton's Anatomy of Melancholy, p. 565, ' Hai-ho 
for a husband, cries she, a bad husband, nay the worst that 
ever was is better than none '. 

354. no matter, nothing serious. In ' matter and imper- 
tinency mixed ', Lear, iv. iv. 179, there is a somewhat different 
contrast, not with mirth but with nonsense". 

363-4. By your Graces pardon. Beatrice apologizes to Don 
Pedro forthe breach of etiquette in quitting the royal presence. 

376. out of suit. There is a play on ' suit ' in the senses 
of a ' love-suit ' and ' a legal action '. 

386-7. Monday . . . which is hence a just seven-night. From 
this statement we learn that the action of the play has opened 
on a Monday, and we are able to date, more or less exactly, 
all the scenes that follow. 

II. ii. A front-stage scene. While it is in progress the 
back part of the stage is being cleared of the properties used 
in the masked-ball scene, and is probably being re-transformed 
into an orchard. The time is either Monday, late at night, 
or Tuesday in the morning, as Don John has just heard of 
Hero's engagement, but not of the ' day of marriage '. 

2. shall, is to. The modern sense of the word here would 
be exactly opposed to Don John's meaning. 

12-3. ayear since. This is one of the touches by which the 
action of the play, compressed into little more than a week, 
is set against a background of earlier episodes. Cf. 1. i. 318-21 
and 11. i. 298-300. 

19-20. life . . . death. Another of the forced antitheses 
which are typical of Don John's frigidly studied speech. 

45. hear Margaret term me Claudio. Theobald first raised 
the question whether ' Claudio ' was the right reading here. 
' In the name of common sense,' he asks, ' could it displease 
Claudio to hear his mistress making use of bis name tenderly ? 
If he saw another man with her, and heard her call him 
Claudio, he might reasonably think her betrayed, but he could 
not have the same reason to accuse her of disloyalty. Besides, 
(125) 



Act ii, Sc. ii NOTES 



how could her naming Claudio make the Prince and Claudio 
believe that she loved Borachio, as he desires Don John to 
insinuate to them that she did ? ' He therefore substituted 
' Borachio ' for ' Claudio ', and he has been followed amongst 
others by Steevens and by Collier in his second and third 
editions. Capell, Halliwell-Phillipps, R. G. White, and W. A. 
Wright are amongst those who have defended the original 
reading. Wright observes, ' The text must be right, for it 
was necessary to the plot to make it appear that Hero was 
endeavouring to conceal her intrigue with Borachio. It was 
also necessary to induce Margaret to take part in it innocently, 
and she would at once have suspected something if she had 
allowed Borachio in his own name to address her as Hero.' 
J. C. Smith points out that Shakespeare has adopted the ' plan 
of doubling the make-believe ' in Ariosto's account of the 
episode where Dalinda dresses in Genevra's clothes (cf. In- 
troduction, p. vi). ' Margaret is induced to personate Hero 
(in fun) by Borachio personating Claudio.' 

50-1. jealousy . . . assurance, suspicion . . . certainty. A 
capital instance of the difference in meaning between the 
Elizabethan and the modern sense of ' jealousy '. 

58-9. i" will . . . marriage. See note on s.d. after 11. i. 223. 

II. iii. A full-stage scene as in 1. i. If, as is probable, the 
serenade which Don Pedro orders for ' to-morrow night . . . 
at the Lady Hero's chamber-window ' (11. 97-8) is intended for 
her. bridal eve, the time of this scene is Saturday evening. 

s.d. In his first edition Collier has the note : ' In the old 
copies Benedick enters alone before the boy makes his appear- 
ance ; and the reason is obvious, for Benedick should ruminate 
and pace to and fro before he calls the boy. In all modern 
editions " Benedick and a Boy " enter together ; a very in- 
judicious arrangement.' Nevertheless in his second edition 
Collier unwisely adopted this ' very injudicious arrangement '. 

3. a book. Another proof of Benedick's literary tastes, 
which are abundantly illustrated in his speeches. 

5-7. I am . . . here again. The boy means that he will be 
' no time ' in executing his errand. Benedick affects to take 
him literally. and F print Exit after 1. 5, though it is 
obvious that the boy does not go out till after ' again ' in 1. 7. 
This is due to the fact that Elizabethan printers insert en- 
trances and exits only at the end of prose speeches. Hence 
(126) 



NOTES Act ii, Sc. iii 

this is the nearest point at which the boy's exit could be 
marked. 

17-19. ten mile afoot . . . ten nights awake. The euphuistic 
alliterative balance is again noticeable. 

20-4. He was wont . . . strange dishes. Benedick is here as 
contemptuous of figures of speech as Henry V when he talks 
to Kate ' plain soldier ' (Henry V, v. ii. 155). But the King's 
language is really simple, while Benedick, with all his wit and 
vivacity, is really more ' fantastical ' in speech than Claudio, 
even when the latter is in love. 

22. orthography. The use of the abstract noun indicates 
the completeness of Claudio's conversion. 

36-7. noble . . . angel. A trite pun on the names of the two 
Elizabethan coins worth respectively 65. %d. and 10s. od. 

40. Monsieur Love. Another of the fancy titles of which 
Benedick is fond. 

s.d. Enter . . . Claudio. Q adds ' Musicke ', but this appears 
to be an anticipation of ' Enter Balthaser with musicke ' after 
I.45. On the 'la eke Wilson' of jFsee Introduction, pp. xxxiii-iv. 

43-4. Cf. Merch. of Ven. v. i. 56-7 : 

soft stillness and the night 
Become of the touches of sweet harmony. 

47. fit the hid-fox with a penny-worth. None of the ex- 
planations of ' kid-foxe ', the reading of and F, is satisfac- 
tory. The emendation by Warburton has therefore been 
adopted, with the interpretation given to it by Capell, who 
pointed out that the reference is to a boy's game of the ' hide- 
and-seek ' type. In Hamlet, iv. ii. 32-3 the Prince leaves the 
stage crying ' Hide fox, and all after ', probably meaning that 
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are to pursue him as boys do 
the ' hid-fox ' in the game. The phrase exactly suits 
Benedick, who has been spied hiding in the arbour. Halli- 
well-Phillipps illustrates ' fit with a penny-worth ' from 
R. Bernard's translation of Terence (16 14), ' De te sumam 
supplicium, I will take my penie-worths of thee ; I will punish 
thee '. 

51-2. ' It is always a proof of excellence to disclaim recogni- 
tion of its own perfection.' 

60. not a note. For the play on words cf. 1. i. 174-6. 

61. crotchets, a play on the two senses of ' musical notes ' 
and ' whims '. Cf. Rom. and Jul. iv. v. 120. 

( 127) 



Act ii, Sc. iii NOTES 

62. Notes . . . nothing : another pun obscured in modern 
pronunciation. ' Nothing ', as J. C. Smith points out, rhymes 
with ' doting ' in Sonnet xx, 11. 10 and 12. 

63-4. divine air . . . sheeps' guts. A stringed instrument 
evidently here begins the accompaniment to Balthasar's song. 
If ' music ' in the s.d. before 1. 46 means (as often) a band of 
musicians, the accompaniment was played by several instru- 
ments. 

64-5. ravished . . . hale . . . out : a play on ' ravished ' in 
its two senses of ' delighted ' and ' pulled forth '. For the 
idea of music drawing the soul from the body cf. Twelfth Night, 
11. iii. 62-3, ' a catch that will draw three souls out of one 
weaver '. 

76. ditties. In Elizabethan English, ' ditty ' denotes the 
words of a song. Cf. As Ton Like It, v. iii. 36, 'There was 
no great matter in the ditty, but the note was very tunable ', 
and Soliman and Perseda, 1. ii. 12-13 : 

When didst thou sing a note that I could heare, 
But I have framed a dittie to the tune ? 
mo : used before plural nouns, or nouns of plural sig- 
nificance. Here ' ditties ' is to be understood. 

77. dumps, melancholy tunes, to which the ' ditties ' of 
1. 76 are the words. Cf. Two Gent, of Ver. in. ii. 85, ' Tune 
a deploring dump '. 

88. a shift, a makeshift. 

92. night-raven : a mythical bird of ill omen, mentioned 
generally with the owl, e. g. Spenser, Epithalamion : 
Let not the scriech owle nor the storke be heard, 
Nor the night Raven, that still deadly yells. 

Goldsmith in his Animated Nature, ii. 185 (1852 edition), 
quoted by Furness, identifies the night-raven with the bittern. 
' I remember in the place where I was a boy with what terror 
the bird's note affected the whole village ; they considered it 
the presage of some sad event ; and generally found or made 
one to succeed it ... If any person in the neighbourhood 
died, they supposed it could not be otherwise, for the night- 
raven had foretold it.' 

95. Yea, marry. These words are probably not addressed 
to Balthasar, but form the close of a short ' aside ', during 
Benedick's last speech, betwen Don Pedro and Claudio, who 
has doubtless suggested the serenade. 
( 128 ) 



NOTES Act ii, Sc. iii 

97. music. See note on 11. 63-4. 

to-morrow night. The serenade appears to be intended 
for the eve of Hero's wedding. As this is fixed for the Monday 
after the betrothal (11. i. 386-7) the present scene seems to 
fall on Saturday. The plan of the serenade prepares the 
audience for the presence of the Prince and Claudio by night 
below Hero's window, even before Don John's proposals in 
Act in. ii. 117 ff. 

104-5. Stalk on . . . fowl sits. The fowler used to shelter 
himself behind a stalking-horse. Sometimes a piece of old 
canvas, shaped into the form of a horse and stuffed and 
painted, was used. 

126 you, you. (1) the ethical dative, (2) addressed to 
Claudio, as the next speech shows. 

135. white -bearded fellow. Though Don Pedro had planned 
the trick upon Benedick, the working out of it is left mainly 
to Leonato, because Benedick would naturally believe him to 
know Beatrice's state of feeling through Hero. 

137-8. hold it up, keep up the trick. Cf. M. N. D. in. ii. 239, 
' hold the sweet jest up '. 

158. That, that was so, precisely. Claudio's interpolation 
would come in more naturally after a question (cf. Jul. Caes. 
11. i. 15, 'Crown him ? — that'). Hence Capell put a note of 
interrogation after 1. 157, but it is not necessary, especially as 
Leonato continues the story in his next speech. 

160. halfpence: made of silver, and thus very small. 

168-9. V ra y s -> curses . . . -patience. The exclamation is cer- 
tainly not a curse. Hence Collier in his second edition sub- 
stituted ' cries ' for ' curses ', and has been followed by some 
editors. But the antithesis with ' prays ' is thus sacrificed. 
There is more to be said for Halliwell-Phillipps's transposition, 
' curses, prays '. But Claudio was perhaps too much occupied 
in drawing a vivid fancy-picture to be entirely logical. 

179. alms: used in its original singular sense. 

1 9 1-2. daffed all other respects, put aside all other con- 
siderations. Don Pedro's only allusion to his royal rank. 

205-6. a good outward happiness, an agreeable exterior. 

226. counsel. The context shows clearly that the word is 
used in the sense of reflection, not of advice from others. 

234. walk, withdraw, retire. 

dinner. This, as J. C. Smith has pointed out, is a slip 
on Shakespeare's part, for it is evening (cf. i. 43). Dinner in 

l434>4 (129) K 



Act ii, Sc. iii NOTES 

the Elizabethan age was an early meal. William Harrison 
says {Description of England, n. vi. 166, ed. Furnivall), 
' With vs the nobilitie, gentrie, and students doo ordinarilie 
go to dinner at eleven before noone, and to supper at five or 
betweene five and six at afternoone '. 

242. and no such matter, and there is nothing of the kind. 
Cf. 1. i. 205. 

243. a dumb-show. As the use of ' scene ' in 1. 242 proves, 
Shakespeare is here alluding to dumb-shows on the stage. 
Elaborate examples of these precede each Act in Gorboduc, 
Jocasta, and The Misfortunes of Arthur, three of the tragedies 
presented by gentlemen of the Inns of Court. So too ' the 
play within the play ' in Hamlet is introduced by a dumb-show 
(in. i. 147 ff.), which, as Ophelia rightly guesses, ' imports the 
argument of the play '. 

247. the conference was sadly borne, the discussion was 
seriously carried on. 

250. have their full bent, are at extreme tension, like a bow 
stretched to the uttermost. 

269. career, the full charge or course. A metaphor from the 
lists. Cf. v. i. 138. 

279. for those thanks, to win those thanks. 

285. stomach, appetite. Beatrice is surprised at Benedick 
lingering to exchange compliments with her, instead of hurry- 
ing in to dinner. 

286-8. Against my will . . . in that. Beatrice's words might 
be twisted into meaning that she would have preferred to 
deliver the message voluntarily, instead of being sent. 



ACT III 

Scene i. The scene is the same as in Act 11. iii. But a day 
has probably intervened. The previous scene was apparently 
on Saturday (cf. note on 11. iii. 97), and this takes place on 
Sunday (cf. 1. 101) in the daytime. 

1. run thee. Abbott points out (Shak. Gram. § 212) that the 
use of ' thee ' instead of ' thou ' in such phrases is not reflexive, 
but euphonic. 

7. -pleached bower. See note on 1. ii. 11. 

13. leave us alone. ' Margaret is thus quietly excluded from 
the delicate trick played on Beatrice. She is too boisterous 
( i3° ) 



NOTES Act iii, Sc. i 

and too nearly concerned in a. more dangerous plot' (J. C. 
Smith). 

23. only wounds by hearsay, wounds by only hearsay. 
Cf. 11. i. 148. 

24-5. lapwing . . . Close by the ground. Shakespeare is fond 
of alluding to this bird's peculiarities, either real, as here and 
in Com. of Err. iv. ii. 27, or fictitious, as in Ham. v. ii. 193-4, 
'This lapwing runs away with the shell on his head'. 

30. woodbine : here identified with honey-suckle (1. 8), 
though in M. N. D. iv. i. 47-8 they are distinguished. 

45. at full. Q and F have ' as full ', but there is no satis- 
factory interpretation of these words, whether they be taken 
to qualify ' as fortunate ' or (with the punctuation of the later 
Folios, ' as full, as fortunate ') ' a bed '. Probably the printer 
mistook ' at ' for ' as ', thinking the comparison would im- 
mediately follow ' deserve ' instead of being preceded by an 
adverbial phrase. ' At full ' is used by Shakespeare in the 
sense of ' fully, completely '. Cf. Meas. for Meas. 1. i. 43, 
' be thou at full ourself '. 

48. yielded, granted (without the modern implication of 
surrender). 

58. lest she'll. The construction is unusual, but it is more 
forcible than the ' lest she ' of F, and has therefore been 
retained. 

60. rarely featufd, finely shaped. 

61. spell him backward. An allusion, as Steevens points 
out, to the supposed practice of witches in saying prayers. 

65. an agate. Small figures were cut in agates ^for seals. 
In two other places Shakespeare uses the agate as an emblem 
of smallness. In 2 Hen. IV, 1. ii. 18, Falstaff says of his page, 
' I was never manned with an agate till now '. In Rom. and 
Jul. 1. iv. 56, Mercutio describes Queen Mab as ' in shape no 
bigger than an agate-stone '. 

70. simpleness, simplicity, integrity, with reference to ' truth ' 
in 1. 69. ' Simplicity,' as used by Shakespeare, is a term of 
contempt, 'silliness'. Cf. Sonnet lxvi. 11, 'simple truth 
miscall'd simplicity '. 

purchaseth. ' Purchase ' is a legal term, used of the 
acquisition of land otherwise than by inheritance. 

72. from, contrary to. 

76. press me to death. A reference to the legal penalty of 
peine forte et dure. 

( 131 ) K2 



Act iii, Sc. i NOTES 

84. honest slanders, untrue charges, but not affecting her 
honour. 

101. every day to-morrow. Hero probably means that from 
to-morrow she will always be married. The ' why ' is an 
exclamation of protest at an unnecessary question. But 
' every day ' may perhaps = ' any day, immediately '. Collier 
quotes from Middleton, Tour Five Gallants, iv. v. 64-6 : ' Gold- 
stone. When shall I see thee at my chamber, when ? Fitz- 
grave. Every day, shortly.' With this interpretation a comma 
or, preferably, a dash should follow ' day '. 

102. some attires. Special attention is directed to Hero's 
dresses. Here she promises to show them to Ursula, and at 
the beginning of Scene iv she discusses with Margaret which 
of them she will wear at her marriage. The introduction of 
these details is probably due to the fact that Margaret dis- 
guises herself for the purpose of the plot in Hero's garments 
(v. i. 250). 

107-16. Beatrice's emotion is symbolized by the lyrical 
form of this speech, which, with an additional quatrain 
before the final couplet, would be a Shakespearian sonnet. 

1 10. Probably ' these qualities do not shelter glory ', though 
the meaning may be ' these qualities are not praised in their 
owner's absence '. 

112. A reference to 11. 35-6. 

116. better than reportingly, on better grounds than hearsay. 



III. ii. A front-stage scene. The time is Sunday, soon 
after the preceding scene. 

1-2. In 1. i. 161 Don Pedro had announced that he would 
stay with Leonato ' at the least a month . It is, therefore, 
probable that his declaration here is merely intended to lead 
up to a mock request for Benedick's travelling companionship. 
2. consummate. Wright points out that here and in Meas. 
for Meas. v. i. 383, the word is used of the completion of the 
marriage ceremony. 

6-7. show . . . wear it. Steevens compares Rom. and Jul. 
in. ii : 

So tedious is this day 
As is the night before some festival 
To an impatient child that hath new robes 
And may not wear them. 
( 132) 



NOTES Act iii, Sc. ii 

8. only, qualifies Benedick. Cf. n. i. 148 and in. i. 23. 

11. cut Cupid's bow-string. Here Don Pedro represents 
Benedick as having disarmed Cupid. Beatrice (1. i. 43) had 
spoken of him as the love-god's rival in archery. 

12. hangman, rascal. Cf. Two Gent. ofVer. iv. iv. 61, 'hang- 
man (Ff. Hangmans) boys '. In Loves Labour 's Lost, v. ii. 12, 
Cupid is called ' a shrewd unhappy gallows ', i. e. gallows- 
bird. Thus he figures both as the executioner and his victim 
— to identical effect. 

19-20. truant . . . true. For the linking of these two words 
J. C. Smith compares Sonnet ci. 1-2 : 

O truant Muse, what shall be thy amends 
For thy neglect of truth in beauty dyed ? 

22. i" have the tooth-ache. Steevens compares Beaumont 
and Fletcher's The False One, n. iii. 109-10, ' You had best 
be troubled with the Tooth-ache too, For Lovers ever are '. 

25. hang . . . draw. Another jesting reference to the severi- 
ties of Elizabethan criminal law. Cf. in. i. 76. 

32-3. fancy ... a fancy. A play on the two meanings of 
* love ' and ' individual taste '. 

33-8. strange disguises . . . no doublet. In this passage 
Don Pedro is really making mock not of ' Signior Benedick 
of Padua ', but of a typical Elizabethan gallant like ' Falcon- 
bridge, the young baron of England ', who, before coming to 
woo Portia, had ' bought his doublet in Italy, his round hose 
in France, his bonnet in Germany ' (Mer. of V en. 1. ii. 79-80). 
In As Tou Like It, iv. i. 36, there is a similar hit at the tra- 
velled Englishman's delight ' to wear strange suits '. The 
prose satirists of the time, e. g. Dekker in The Seven Deadly 
Sinnes, and Lodge in Wit's Miserie, give even fuller details 
of this affectation. 

On the omission of ' or in the shape ... no doublet ' in F, 
see the ' Note on the Text ', p. xlv. 

39-40. fancy to this foolery . . . no fool for fancy. Another 
euphonistic balance of phrase. ' Fool for fancy ' = fool owing 
to love. 

48-9. the old ornament . . . tennis-balls. Claudio's gibe 
gains its point from what was an actual practice. Cf. Rum 
Alley, in. i, ' Thy beard shall serve to stuff those balls, by 
which I get me heat at tennis '. 

58-9. wash his face, i. e. use cosmetics. Furness quotes 
( 133 ) 



Act iii, Sc. ii NOTES 

appositely from Greene's A Ouippe for an Vpstart Courtier 
(Works, ed. Grosart, xi. 247) a passage describing ' Velvet- 
breeches ' at the barber's, where his head is ' curiously washt 
with no woorse then a camphire bal '. 

63-4. now crept . . . new-governed by stops. Walker had 
good reasons for his view (Crit. Exam. ii. 214) that the re- 
petition of ' now ' before ' crept ' and' governed ' in Q and F 
was a printer's error. He therefore proposed to read ' now 
crept . . . and new-governed ', and this emendation has been 
adopted by Dyce in his later editions, and by Hudson. But 
the passage gains in point if ' new ' is substituted for the 
first ' now ' instead of the second. ' Stops ' are the frets on 
the finger-board of the lute or other stringed instrument, 
which tune the strings. There is a play on ' stop ' in its 
sense of cessation or ' check '. 

63. a lute-string. Claudio here makes the lute the symbol 
of Benedick's love-melancholy, as Benedick had associated 
Claudio's passion with ' the tabor and the pipe ' (11. iii. 16). 

72-3. She shall be buried with her face upwards. If this 
reading is correct, Malone may be right in his interpretation, 
which was suggested by Steevens's reference to Winter's Tale, 
iv. iii. 1 32- 1 : 

Not like a corse ; or if, — not to be buried, 
But quick and in mine arms. 

As Perdita here speaks of Florizel being ' buried quick ' 
(i. e. ' alive ') in her arms, so Don Pedro, playing upon ' dies ' 
in 1. 71, prophesies that Beatrice will be ' buried ' alive in 
the arms of Benedick. But it is doubtful if an audience would 
read this meaning into the words, nor is it quite suitable to 
the mocking spirit of the dialogue here. Theobald suggested 
that the true reading was ' with her heels upwards '. To be 
buried with the heels upwards or with the face downwards 
betokened a penal form of interment, especially for suicides. 
Thus Don Pedro would imply that Beatrice's suicidal folly 
in loving Benedick would meet with its proper punishment. 
Hanmer and Capell accepted this emendation, which gives a 
very satisfactory sense. *But it is difficult to see why Q and F 
should have substituted the more unfamiliar phrase if it had 
not manuscript authority. 

74. charm for the tooth-ache. The 39th of the Hundred 
( i34) 



NOTES Act iii, Sc. ii 

Merry Tales relates how a gentleman by means of a mock 
charm cured his cook of tooth-ache. 

jj. hobby -horses, buffoons. In all other places where the 
word is used by Shakespeare of persons it means ' a wanton 
woman', e. g. Love's Labour 's Lost, in. i. 33 and Winter's Tale, 
1. ii. 276. The hobby-horse was one of the figures in the morris- 
dance. 

80. Margaret. Claudio is evidently unaware that it is 
Ursula who has been Hero's accomplice in the trick played on 
Beatrice in the previous scene. 

85. Good den, good ev'n. According to Nares, this salutation 
was used as soon as noon was past. 

101. aim better at me, form a truer estimate of me. 

108. circumstances shortened, cutting short all circumlocution. 

1 14. paint out, depict in full. 

120. love her, then to-morrow. Editors since Hanmer have 
placed the comma after ' then ', but the change, though 
plausible, is not essential. 

136. coldly, coolly. 

III. iii. A full-stage scene, showing the outside of the 
church (1. 96) and a pent-house (1. in), probably attached to 
Leonato's house. The time is Monday in the small hours. 

7. their charge. It was the duty of the constable to give 
the watch their charge. Malone quotes from Marston's 
Insatiate Countess, in. i. 86-7 : ' Come on, my hearts ; we are 
the citie's securitie. He give you your charge, and then, like 
courtiers, every man spye out.' 

10. constable. This office, involving the leadership of the 
watch, and the carrying of the lantern, is of course quite 
distinct from Dogberry's office of petty constable, or ' Con- 
servator of the Peace'. 

15. well-favoured, handsome. 

43-4. how sleeping should offend. Ha Hi well-Phillipps (Memo- 
randa, p. 52) quotes a passage from Parke's Curtaine-Drawer 
of the World (1612), describing how 'some great personage', 
saluted by watchmen at night, ' began to commend our 
diligence and care and good attendance, when before his face 
sate halfe of our company asleep, leaning their heads against 
their bils, and their billes against the wall '. 

45. bills. The bill was a weapon with a wooden handle and 
an axe-shaped head. 

(135) 



Act iii, Sc. iii NOTES 

71. a child cry in the night. Steevens quotes various sections 
from the Statutes of the Streets (1595), among them, ' No man 
shall after the hour of nyne at night, keep any rule, whereby 
any such suddaine outcry be made in the still of the night, 
as making any affray, or beating his wyfe, or servant, or 
singing, or revyling in his house, to the disturbaunce of his 
neighbours, under payne of iiis. iiiid.' 

86. statutes. Most modern editors have adopted the reading 
of F, ' statues ', Furness even declaring that it is ' unquestion- 
ably Dogberry's own word, let the reading of the Quarto, or of 
innumerable Quartos, be what it may '. But Dogberry is 
less likely to have made a mistake in a familiar legal word 
than in the high-sounding phraseology which is dear to him. 
The general character of the text of F makes it much more 
probable that we have here simply a misprint than an ingenious 
correction which has no parallel in F's other departures 
from Q. 

93-4. keep . . . your own. Part of the oath of a grand 
juryman : ' The King's counsel, your fellows' and your own 
you shall observe and keep sacred '. 

96. here upon the church-bench. The bench was in the 
church porch. Evidently the outside of the church, within 
which Act iv. i takes place, forms part of the setting of this 
scene. 

99. Signior Leonato's door. Leonato's house also forms part 
of the setting, and the ' pent-house ' or projecting shed 
spoken of in 1. in was probably attached to it. Hero's 
chamber-window, outside which took place the plot described 
by Borachio in 11. 153 fL, is supposed to be in the part of the 
house invisible from the stage. 

103. What. An exclamation of impatience, frequently used 
in calling to persons. 

106. This indication that the night is pitch-dark, and the 
reference in 1. 112 to the drizzling rain, are touches that help 
to explain the success of Don John's plot. 

107. my elbow itched. An omen of evil near, like the prick- 
ing of the witch's thumb in Macbeth. 

108. scab, a scurvy fellow, with a play on the usual meaning. 
For a similar play cf. Cor. 1. i. 170-2. 

1 12-13. like a true drunkard. Furness is probably right in 
his view that the allusion here is to the proverb 'in vino 
Veritas '. But Borachio may be further punning on his name, 
(136) 



NOTES Act iii, Sc. iii 

which equals Spanish borracho, drunk. Barnabe Barnes in 
The Divels Chamber, v. ii, speaks of ' A Borrachio armed all 
in sacke '. 

121. any villany should be so rich. ' Conrade means "act 
of villainy ", Borachio means " villain ", using the abstract 
for the concrete, a figure of which Shakespeare is very fond. 
His point is " You need not wonder that an act of villany 
should cost so much, but rather that any scoundrel should be 
able to afford it " ' (J. C. Smith). 

126-7. Thou knowest . . . man. Taken in connexion with 
11. 140-7, these words seem to mean that men are ready to 
adopt any fashion. This sudden introduction of the topic of 
dress is apparently intended to lead up to the account of 
Margaret masquerading in Hero's garments, but Conrade's 
interruptions, and Borachio's inability to keep to the point, 
turn the conversation into by-paths. 

132. deformed, deforming, disfiguring. Cf. Com. of Err. v. i. 
299-300 : 

And careful hours, with Time's deformed hand, 
Have written strange defeatures in my face. 

135. thief. Borachio has spoken of fashion as a thief, in the 
sense of one who robs men of their natural appearance. The 
watchman interprets the word professionally. 

143-7. tite Pharaoh's soldiers . . . tapestry. One would 
scarcely have expected a man of Borachio's type to be so 
observant of artistic details. Shakespeare's references to art are 
so comparatively rare that it is curious to find in these few lines 
mention of painting, stained glass, and tapestry. The associa- 
tion of subjects from the Bible, the Apocrypha, and classical 
mythology is typical of the Renaissance. ' Pharaoh's soldiers ' 
probably appeared in a painting of their overthrow in the Red 
Sea, and ' god Bel's priests ' in a window representing their 
destruction after the discovery of their imposture, though the 
window can scarcely have contained the whole ' three score 
and ten '. The ' shaven Hercules ' is in contrast to the usual 
representation of the hero ' with his great beard ' (cf. Mer. 
of Ven. in. ii. 85, 'The beards of Hercules and frowning 
Mars '), but the allusion has not been satisfactorily identi- 
fied. Halliwell-Phillipps quotes from an inventory of the 
' hangings' at Kenilworth in 1588 ' six peeces of the historie 
of Hercules'. 

(137) 



Act iii, Sc. iii NOTES 

151. shifted out of. The phrase keeps up the metaphor of 
a change of dress. 

160. possessed: 'intermediate in meaning between "in- 
fluenced", as in "possessed with a fury" (1. i. 206), and 
"informed", as in "Possess the people in Messina here How 
innocent she died " (v. i. 294-5) ' (J. C. Smith). 

161. the orchard. See note on 1. ii. 11. 

183. a lock, a love-lock, worn under the left ear. These 
locks were denounced by Prynne as ' growne too much in 
fashion with comly pages, youthes, and lewd, effeminate, 
ruffianly persons.' 

1 90-1. a goodly commodity . . . bills. A complicated play 
upon the legal and commercial senses of these words : (a) a 
valuable haul, being arrested by these men's weapons ; (b) a 
valuable piece of merchandise obtained on credit by these 
men's bonds. 

192. A commodity in question, a bargain of doubtful quality, 
subject to examination. 

III. iv. A front-stage scene. The time is almost five o'clock 
(1. 53) on Monday morning. 

6. rebato. In most of the quotations collected by Halliwell- 
Phillipps the word means a wire-support for a ruff, e. g. 
Dent's Pathway to Heaven, p. 42, ' What say you to these great 
ruffes, which are borne up with supporters and rebatoes, as it 
were with poste and raile ? .' and Moryson, Itinerary III, 
Bk. IV, i. 165, ' long ruffes with rebatoes of wire to beare them 
vp '. But the word seems also to have been used of the ruff 
itself, e.g. Dekker's Guls Hornbook (ed. Grosart), p. 211, 
' Your stiffnecked rebatoes that haue more arches for pride 
to row vnder, then can stand vnder fiue London Bridges ', 
and this suits the context better here. Editors since Hanmer 
have adopted the spelling ' rabato ', but there is no need to 
alter the form of the word in and F, which is often found. 

G. Macdonald, Oris, p. 151 (quoted by Furness), makes the 
ingenious suggestion that Margaret's objection to Hero's wear- 
ing this rebato may be due to the fact that she 5 had dressed in 
her mistress's clothes the night before. She might have rumpled 
or soiled it, and so feared discovery '. However this may be, 
this talk about women's dress, like that on men's fashions in 
the previous scene, is evidently suggested by the part that 
clothes played in the deception of Claudio. There is dramatic 
(138) 



NOTES Act iii, Sc. iv 

irony in Margaret's light-hearted discussion of the details 
of the attire that Hero is to wear at the wedding, which by 
dressing up in her mistress's robes the girl has unwittingly 
frustrated. 

13. tire, head-dress, here evidently of false hair. Cf. Mory- 
.son, Itinerary, vol. iv, p. 254 (Maclehose), ' Gentlewomen 
virgins . . . goe bareheaded, with their haire curiously knotted, 
and raised at the forehead, but many against the cold (as 
they say) weare caps of haire that is not their owne '. 

within. This seems to refer to the inner trimming of the 
head-dress. It can scarcely mean, as has been suggested, 
'in an inner room', for Margaret is evidently fingering and 
talking over different items of apparel that are lying about 
in Hero's apartment. 

15-6. the Duchess of Milan's. Is this 'the Duchesse of 
Millayne ' mentioned by Lyly in Euphues and his England 
(Works, ii. 53), whose love ' a young Gentleman ' obtained ? 

17. exceeds: used absolutely with much the same meaning 
as the modern colloquialism, ' beats everything '. 

18. night-gown : not a night-dress, but a gown worn over it. 
Cf. Macbeth, v. i. 6, ' I have seen her rise from her bed, throw 
her night-gown upon her '. 

19-22. cloth 0' gold . . . tinsel. These sumptuous details 
have many parallels in the inventories of theatrical garments 
in the accounts of the Revels' Office. Shakespeare and his 
fellows must have been thoroughly familiar with matters of 
the kind. See Feuillerat, Documents of the Revels Office, 
passim. 

19. cuts, 'indentations on the edge of a gown, showing an 
inlay of different material. Distinguished from " slashes " 
which were in the body of the garment ' (J. C. Smith). 

20-2. set with pearls . . . tinsel. ' Side sleeves ' seem to be 
here long sleeves hanging from the shoulders. Laneham, in 
the Entertainment at Kenilworth, p. 50, speaks of a gown 
' with syde sleevez dooun to midlegge '. But no mention has 
been found of ' down sleeves ', and Steevens's reading has 
therefore been adopted, omitting the comma after ' pearls ' 
and taking ' down ' as a preposition. The gown is thus de- 
scribed as set with pearls down the arm-sleeves, the hanging 
shoulder sleeves, and the skirt, and lined underneath with a 
bluish tinsel. But Margaret is such a breathless ' rattle ' that 
the correct interpretation must remain doubtful. 
( 139) 



Act iii, Sc. iv NOTES 

30. marriage honourable in a beggar. Shakespeare probably 
had in mind either the words in the Church Service, ' holy 
matrimony, which is an honourable estate instituted of God ', 
or the Epistle to the Hebrews, xiii. 6, ' Marriage is honourable 
in all '. 

32-3. say . . . husband. The punctuation adopted is that of 
the Cambridge editors, whose view is that ' Margaret means that 
Hero was so prudish as to think that the mere mention of the 
word " husband " required an apology '. Many editors, from 
Pope downwards have punctuated, ' say (saving your re- 
verence) " a husband ",' but this makes Margaret use the 
apologetic phrase of her own accord instead of at Hero's 
instigation. 

33-4. an bad . . . true speaking, unless evil thoughts mis- 
construe honest words. 

45. Clap 's into, then strike up. ' Clap into ' is used of 
starting a song briskly. Cf. As Ton Like It, v. iii. 8 ff. : 

Touch. Come sit, sit, and a song . . . 
First Page. Shall we clap into 't roundly ? 

's = us, the dative, not the accusative. 

Light 0' love : a lively dance tune, as is shown by 
Shakespeare's previous mention of it in Two Gent, of Ver. 
1. ii. 80-2 : 

Jul. Best sing it to the tune of ' Light o' Love. 

Luc. It is too heavy for so light a tune. 

Jul. Heavy ! belike it hath some burden, then ? 

The words of the original song are not extant, but it is men- 
tioned in a Gorgious Gallery of Gallant Inventions,! 578, and there 
is an undated ' very proper dittie ' by Lenard Gibson to the 
tune of ' Lightie Love '. 

46. burden, bass or undersong. ' Margaret says that the 
song goes without a burden because there was no man or men 
present on the stage ' (Chappell, Popular Music of the Olden 
Time, p. 222). There is a play also on ' heavy ' in the dialogue 
above ; cf. the lines just quoted from the Two Gent, of Verona. 

48. Yea. The ' Ye ' of and F is in all probability corrupt, 
for though Beatrice addresses Margaret as ' you ' in 11. 69, 
72, and 78, she could not use ' ye ' in speaking to her alone. 
Moreover, the verbal use of ' Light o' love ' is awkward. 
CapelF's conjecture of ' Yea ' has been adopted, though it is 
( 140 ) 



NOTES Act iii, Sc. iv 

possible that the manuscript reading was ' y e ', and that the 
printer mistook it for ' Ye '. 

50. barns. This word for child (a dialectical form of ' bairn ') 
is used twice elsewhere by Shakespeare. The Shepherd in 
The Wint. Tale, in. iii. 70-1, on finding Perdita, cries 'Mercy 
on 's, a barne ; a very pretty barne ' ; and the Clown in All 's 
Well, 1. iii. 28, quotes the saying, ' Barnes are blessings '. 
Probably Beatrice, in her punning use of this pronunciation, 
is also quoting a proverbial saying. 

51. construction, interpretation. 

51-2. / scorn that with my heels. Cf. Mer. of Fen. 11. ii. 9-10, 
' scorn running with thy heels '. 

53. five o'clock. For a parallel for so early an hour for a 
marriage, J. C. Smith quotes from The Puritan, v. i. 7-8, ' Hie 
thee, 'tis past five ; bid them open the church dore ; my 
sister is almost ready '. He points out that ' morning marriages 
are a relic of the Roman Catholic practice of taking the 
nuptial mass after the ceremony ; the mass was taken fasting '. 

56-7. The letter ' h ' and the noun ' ache ' were pronounced 
alike. Beatrice plays upon this, and on the two senses of 
' for ', (1) with desire of, (2) because of. 

58. turned Turk, become a renegade from your vows of 
celibacy. 

59. the star, the pole-star. Cf. Son. cxvi. 7, ' the star to 
every wandering bark '. 

60. trow, i.e. I trow, I wonder. 

63-4. gloves . . .an excellent perfume. J. C. Smith compares 
the line in Autolycus' song about his wares (The Wint. Tale, 
iv. iii. 222), ' Gloves as sweet as damask roses '. 

65. / am stuffed, I have a heavy cold. 

69. professed apprehension, become expert in quickness of wit. 

70. it. ' The " it " does not refer to " apprehension " with 
the meaning of quickness of wit, as Beatrice uses it, but to 
apprehension in its more usual meaning of seeing clearly. 
Thus understood, the speech of Margaret is an allusion to the 
deception on Beatrice which the latter failed to " apprehend " 
or see through ' (Furness). 

74-5. Carduus Benedictus. W. A. Wright quotes from 
Cogan's Haven of Health (1584), Ch. 46, a description of the 
' notable effects ' of ' Carduus benedictus, or blessed Thistell, so 
worthily named for the singular virtues that it hath '. 

79. moral, hidden meaning. 

(141) 



Act iii, Sc. iv NOTES 

91-2. eats his meat without grudging, acquiesces in the 
common lot of man. 

97. a false gallop, an artificial canter, here used with a 
play on the two senses of ' false '. Touchstone calls doggerel 
' the very false gallop of verses ', As Tou Like It, 111. ii. 120. 

98-101. the -prince, the count . . . to church. By taking part 
in the bridal escort, Don Pedro and Claudio keep up appear- 
ances to Hero till the last minute. 

III. v. A front-stage scene. The time is soon after five 
o'clock on Monday morning. 

18. palabras. Dogberry's exclamation, like Sly's ' paucas 
pallabris ' (Tarn, of the Shrew, Ind. i. 5), is a perversion of the 
Spanish ' pocas palabras ' = few words. The phrase had been 
made notorious by Kyd in The Spanish Tragedie, in. xiv. 118. 

22. the poor duke's officers. Dogberry means the duke's poor 
officers. But it is Shakespeare himself who seems to blunder 
in speaking of ' the Duke '. He seems to have forgotten that 
the Prince of Arragon is also the ruler of the Sicilies (cf. ' the 
prince's own person', in. iii. 81-2), with Leonato as his re- 
presentative in the governorship of Messina. 

38-9. when the age . . . out. Dogberry's own variant of the 
proverb, ' When the wine [or the ale] is in, the wit is out '. 

39. it is a world to see, it is wonderful to see. Cf. Tain, of 
the Shrew, n. i. 305. 

41. God's a good man. Another proverbial phrase. Cf. 
Lusty Juventus, p. 73 (Hazlitt-Dodsley), ' He will say that 
God is a good man '. 

58. Drink some wine ere you go. See Introduction, p. xxxvii. 

64. Francis Seacoal. This is doubtless ' the sexton ' who 
takes part in the examination in iv. ii. Francis Seacoal 
cannot be the same person as George Seacoal of in. iii. 11-12, 
because the latter is the second watchman who is appointed 
' constable of the watch ', and gives evidence against Conrade 
and Borachio in iv. ii. 52-4. 

65. to examination. The use of the noun for the verb is to 
be accepted on the superior authority of Q, though it is not one 
of Dogberry's most characteristic or amusing blunders. 

69. here 's that. Dogberry taps his forehead. 

70. non-come, i.e. non compos mentis, but Dogberry means 
non plus. 

(142) 



NOTES Act iv, Sc. i 



ACT IV 

Scene i. A full-stage scene. The scene is about six o'clock 
on Monday morning. 

i. be brief. Leonato is fussily eager to hurry through the 
ceremony. Thus in 1. 9 he explains away the bridegroom's 
unexpected ' No ', and in 1. 19 takes the answer out of his 
mouth. His impatience thus helps to precipitate the cata- 
strophe. 

12-14. The friar's exhortation is closely modelled on that 
in the Marriage Service, ' I require and charge you both . . . 
that if either of you know impediment, why ye may not be 
lawfully joined together in matrimony, ye do now confess it'. 

20-1. not knowing . . . do. The omission of this clause in 
F is doubtless due to the compositor overlooking a fourth 
exclamation ending in ' do '. 

22-3. Interjections . . . ah! ha! he! Benedick's pun upon 
' interjections ', with his quotation from the grammar-book, 
is another instance of his fertility of illustration. His choice 
of examples ' of laughing ' has an ironical effect in view of 
what is to follow. More in keeping with the situation would 
have been Sir Tophas's exclamation in Lyly's Endymion, in. iii. 
5-6 : ' An interjective, whereof some are of mourning : as 
eho, vah.' 

24. Father. The use of this word also has an ironical effect. 
But the contract of betrothal established a more formal con- 
nexion in the Elizabethan period than now. Cf. 11. 49-51. 

31. render her again. The double meaning in Don Pedro's 
words gives Claudio the cue for repudiating his betrothed. 

39. modest evidence, evidence of modesty. 

47. in your own proof, in your own trial of her virtue. 

51. she did embrace me as a husband. The betrothal con- 
tract seems to have been often regarded in Elizabethan 
England as virtually equivalent to the marriage ceremony. 
Thus Claudio in Meas.for Meas. 1. ii. 155 ff. claims that he has 
done Juliet no wrong : 

She is fast my wife, 
Save that we do the denunciation lack 
Of outward order. 

52. the 'forehand sin, the sin of anticipation. 

( *43 ) 



Act iv, Sc. i NOTES 

58. Out on thee ! Seeming ! With this repunctuation of 
the text, Claudio first exclaims against Hero, and then apostro- 
phizes ' seeming ' = hypocrisy, as Isabella does, in Meas. for 
Meas. 11. iv. 151, 'Seeming, seeming!' But it must be ad- 
mitted that though this reading gives a satisfactory sense, it 
involves a complete departure from the punctuation of and F, 
and it makes Claudio address Hero as ' thee ', though in the 
succeeding lines he uses ' you '. The first of these difficulties 
is obviated if we read ' Out on thee, seeming ' = Out on thee, 
playing the hypocrite, but the use of ' it ' after this construc- 
tion is awkward. Knight conjectured ' Out on the seeming ! ' 
and this is not impossible. 

write against it, denounce it. Cf. Cymbeline, 11. v. 32-3 : 

I'll write against them, 
Detest them, curse them. 

70. True. Hero echoes in amazement the last word of Don 
John's speech. 

80-1. catechizing . . . name. As earlier in the scene Shake- 
speare has used the words of the Marriage Service, here he is 
evidently referring to the Church Catechism. 

84. Hero itself. The name Hero (by which Borachio had 
addressed Margaret). 

95-6. This ' confession ' was apparently made by Borachio 
between his dialogue with Margaret and his account of the 
episode to Conrade. Cf. in. iii. 167-70, 'partly by the dark 
night, which did deceive them, but chiefly by my villany, 
which did confirm any slander that Don John had made, 
away went Claudio enraged'. 

101. thy. It is noticeable that though Don Pedro has 
addressed Hero as ' you ', Don John permits himself to use the 
over-familiar second person singular. Claudio also, who has 
hitherto, with the possible exception of 1. 58, used 'you', in 
the speech that follows addresses Hero throughout as ' thou '. 

106. With this conceit, the outcome of a revulsion of feeling, 
Furness compares Juliet's ejaculations after she hears of 
Romeo's slaying of Tybalt, e. g. Rom. and Jul. in. ii. 75-6 : 

Beautiful tyrant ! fiend angelical ! 
Dove-feather' d raven ! wolvish-ra veiling lamb ! 

124. that is -printed in her blood, that reveals itself in the 
( 144 ) 



NOTES Act iv, Sc. i 

' thousand blushing apparitions ' of which the friar speaks 
in 1. 161. 

128. on the rearward of reproaches, after reproaches had been 
exhausted. The metaphor is from an army with reserve 
forces in its rear. Cf. Sonnet xc. 5-6 : 

Ah ! do not, when my heart hath 'scap'd this sorrow, 
Come in the rearward of a conquer'd woe. 
129-31. Furness aptly compares old Capulet's words, 
Rom. and Jul. in. v. 165-7 : 

we scarce thought us bless'd 
That God had lent us but this only child ; 
But now I see this one is one too much. 

130. frame, arrangement, plan. 

141. Valuing of her. Making comparison of her with myself. 
157-60. These lines are printed in Q (which is followed by 
F) in prose form as follows : ' Heare me a little, for I haue 
only bin silent so long, & | giuen way vnto this course of 
fortune, by noting of the lady, I | haue markt.' It is doubtful 
whether, as the Cambridge editors believed, the type was 
' accidentally dislocated ' ; or, as P. A. Daniel suggests in the 
Introduction to Praetorius's facsimile of 0, the lines were com- 
pressed to get them into the page, the next page having been 
already set up by another compositor. In any case Daniel 
appears to be right in his view that there is no lacuna. In the 
case of so good an authority as Q a lacuna should only be 
postulated, if the text defies interpretation. But this is not 
the case here, though Daniel's arrangement is unsatisfactory. 
He suggests : 

Hear me a little ; 

For I have only been silent so long, 

And given way unto this course of fortune, 

By noting of the lady : I have marked . . . 

This gives ' by ' a force that it will not bear, and it breaks the 
smooth flow of the verse. Editors have been misled by taking 
'only' as an adverb, to be followed by a causal sentence, instead 
of as an adjective = alone. The lines should be arranged : 

Hear me a little ; 

For I have only been silent so long, 

And given way unto this course of fortune. 

By noting of the lady I have mark'd . . . 

( 145 ) L 



Act iv, Sc. i NOTES 

The friar appeals for a hearing on the ground that he alone 
among the company has hitherto kept silence, and has let 
this train of events run its course. 

164-6. afire . . . truth. This metaphor of a fire in which 
the errors of heretics will be purged away is appropriate on 
the lips of the friar, though it seems scarcely suitable to the 
gentle Hero. 

167-8. observations . . . doth warrant. 'Observation' would 
balance better with ' reading ', and has been adopted by many 
editors. But if Q and F are right, the singular ' doth ' is 
probably due to the intervention of ' seal '. 

168-9. Wh^h . . . my book, which attest with the seal of 
experience the results of my study. ' Tenour ' is a law term, 
' the copy of an instrument not fully set out, but containing 
only the substance or purport of it' (Onions). 

188. have the very bent of honour, stretch honour to its 
utmost limits. Cf. note on 11. iii. 250. 

190. ' John the bastard has brought the plot into being.' 

199. such a kind. The reading of Q and F is almost cer- 
tainly corrupt, not only because of the unpleasant jingle in 
the rhyming of ' kind ' with ' find ' in this line and with 
' mind ' in 1. 200, but because the meaning of ' kind ' must be 
strained, if the passage is to be made intelligible. ' Curse ' 
has been suggested by Capell, and adopted by some later 
editors, but no conjectural reading here can be really satis- 
factory. 

204. The reading of Q and F cannot be lightly set aside, 
for it is intelligible, and the punctuation shows clearly how it 
is to be interpreted. But there are three objections to it. 
(1) Hero is not a ' princess ', though the friar might possibly 
give this title to the daughter of the Governor, as Claudio is 
counted among the ' princes '. (2) There is no reason why 
Hero should be doubly described as ' your daughter ' and ' the 
princess '. (3) The clause ' left for dead ', standing by itself, 
is not sufficiently definite. Theobald's emendation has there- 
fore been adopted. But instead of putting a full stop or 
colon at the end of the line, it is preferable to take ' the princes 
left for dead ' as a relative clause with ' whom ' understood, 
and thus to preserve the flow of rhythm unbroken in 
11. 204-6. 

207. a mourning ostentation, a show of mourning. 

209. Hang mournful epitaphs. It was the custom to affix 
(146) 



NOTES Act iv, Sc. i 

poetical epitaphs to monuments on graves. Cf. John Eliot, 
Poems, p. 39, in an elegy on the Marchioness of Winchester : 
Let others the sad Epitaphs invent, 
And paste them up about thy moniment. 
211. What shall become of this? What will be the conse- 
quence of this ? 

226. idea, mental image 5 almost a Platonic use of the word. 

227. his study of imagination, the study of his imagination, 
his imaginative reflections. 

228. organ. The word blends here the two senses of ' in- 
strument ' and ' part of the body '. For the latter cf. Mer. 
of V en. in. i. 60-4, ' hath not a Jew hands, organs ', &c. 

230. moving -delicate. On the whole it is preferable to take 
these words as a compound epithet, ' touchingly delicate '. 
But they may be each an independent epithet. 

full of life. The repetition of ' life ', already used in 
11. 226 and 228, is intended to point the contrast with Hero's 
assumed death. But the use of ' life ' in 1. 228 for ' being ', and 
in this line for • vitality ', is awkward. 

233. had interest in, had a claim to possession of. The use 
of the phrase is legal. 

liver : the supposed seat of passion. 

239-41. ' But if we should not hit the mark in any other 
respect, at least the belief that the lady is dead will allay the 
excitement caused by her wantonness.' 

25 1 . flow in, am melted away in. ' Flow ', as used by Shake- 
speare, has often the sense of ' overflow ', ' abound in to 
excess '. 

254. Furness compares Hamlet, iv. iii. 9-10 : 

diseases desperate grown 
By desperate appliance are reliev'd. 

261. Even in her grief Beatrice cannot resist giving a twist 
to Benedick's words. He had meant ' I should wish you not to 
weep ', but she interprets it as ' I will not ask you to do that ', 
and answers, ' You need not ; I do it of my own accord '. 

270. ' These words are not to be regarded, as by some they 
have been, as spoken in Beatrice's usually sarcastic vein. 
She only means that being neither a kinsman, nor in any way 
connected with Hero's family, he cannot step forward to do 
her right. In this sense the words are understood by Benedick, 
who takes the most direct way of removing the difficulty by 
(i47) L2 



Act iv, Sc. i NOTES 

the avowal of his love ' (Lady Martin, Shakespeare's Female 
Characters, p. 320). 

273. as the thingl know not, as I don't know what. Beatrice 
probably starts to say ' as strange as that I love you ', but 
breaks off into this non-committal phrase. 

278. Beatrice, thou. After Beatrice's thinly veiled avowal 
of her feelings, Benedick at once calls her by her name (a privi- 
lege of which he makes the most throughout the rest of the 
scene), and uses the affectionately familiar ' thou \ 

279. Do not swear and eat it, Do not swear and eat your 
oath. The reading of F obscures the sense. 

288. stayed, delayed, interrupted, by asking for what offence 
Beatrice desired forgiveness. 

290. And do it, do it then. 

307. a'. Modern editors, by adopting Rowe's substitution 
of ' he ' for the contemptuous ' a' ' of the original texts, have 
weakened the force of Beatrice's outburst. 

310. bear her in hand, keep up pretences to her. The play 
upon ' hand ' in this phrase and in ' take hands ' matrimonially 
gives edge to Beatrice's sarcasm. 

323. count. The use of ' testimony ' suggests a pun on 
* count ' in its sense of ' accusation '. Cf. Hamlet, iv. vii. 17, 
' Why to a public count I might not go '. 

323-4. Count Comfect. A further double play upon these 
words in the senses of (1) made-up, counterfeit accusation, 
and (2) a sugar-plum nobleman. Hence the further quibble, 
' a sweet gallant '. 

327. curtsies. Most editors modernize the ' cursies ' of 
and F into ' courtesies '. But Beatrice is evidently thinking 
of ' obeisance ', as in 11. i. 57. 

328-9. only turned into tongue, turned into tongue only. 

329. trim, fine, with the same ironical sense as ' proper '. 

337. Think you in your soul. In this solemn adjuration 
Benedick reverts to the more formal second person plural. 

343. By this hand: probably here the hand of Beatrice. 

IV. ii. A front-stage scene. The time is early on Monday 
morning. 

s.d. Sexton. On the substitution of this word for the Town 
Clerk of and F see Introduction, pp. xxxvi-vii. 

1. The prefix in and F is Keeper ; in 1. 5 it is Andrew, and 
1. 11 it is Kemp. These speeches, and those to which Kemp, 
(148) . 



NOTES Act iv, Sc. ii 

Kern, Kee, or Ke are afterwards prefixed, are manifestly by 
Dogberry. Hence it is evident that Kemp played this part, and 
that was printed from a play-house copy, in which his name 
was entered before Dogberry's speeches. Keeper seems to be 
merely a blundering expansion by the printer of Kee. But 
Andrew is baffling. The current explanation that it was 
a nickname of Kemp from his playing the part of Merry 
Andrew is far from convincing. It is most unlikely that such 
a nickname would be prefixed to a single line while his real 
name was used throughout the rest of the scene. The printer 
has probably misread the manuscript. Though Kemp appears 
here accidentally, he figures as a character in more than one 
Elizabethan play. In Part II of The Return from Parnassus, 
iv. iii, he is introduced together with Burbage ; in John Day's 
Travels of Three English Brothers he turns up suddenly in 
Venice and talks with Sir Anthony Shirley. On the title-page 
of the anonymous A Knacke to Knowe a Knave (1594) ' Kemps 
applauded Merriments of the men of Goteham, in receiving 
the King [Edgar] into Goteham ' are mentioned as a special 
feature of the play. 

2. The prefix in and F here and in 1. 6 is Cowley, the name 
of the actor who played the part of Verges. On the general 
points suggested by the mention of Kemp's or Cowley's 
names here see Introduction, pp. xxxii-iii. 

2-3. a stool and a cushion for the sexton. These words are 
so irrelevant to Dogberry's question that Malone may be right 
in suggesting that they are intended to ridicule Hieronimo's 
order in The Spanish Tragedie, iv. iii. 16, 'Bring a chaire and 
a cushion for the King '. 

7. exhibition. The usual Elizabethan sense is an ' allow- 
ance ', but it is here substituted by Verges for 'commission' or 
some kindred word. Cf. Leonato's instruction to Dogberry, 
in. v. 54, ' Take their examination yourself '. 

16. a gentleman. Conrade is insulted at being called 
' sirrah '. 

20-3. On the omission of these lines see the 'Note on the 
Text ', p. xlv. 

30. go about with, circumvent. 

34-5. they . . . tale, they both tell one story. 

56. Verg. Q and F have Const., which is sometimes pre- 
fixed to Dogberry's speeches, e. g. in 1. 73, and in in. v. 57, 
but never to those of Verges. Possibly the manuscript had 
( 149) 



Act iv, Sc. ii NOTES 

Cow or Cou for Cowley, and the printer misread the prefix, 
and expanded it wrongly. 

66-j. Prince John . . . away. He had doubtless heard of 
the arrest of Borachio and Conrade, and knew that the plot 
would be unmasked. 

67-8. in this manner accused, in this very manner refused. 
The euphuistic balance and assonance are noticeable. 

73—5. Q reads ; 

Constable. Come let them be opinioned. 
Couley. Let them be in the hands of Coxcombe. 

F has substantially the same text, except that it gives the 
second line to Sexton, and spells Coxcombe in italics as if it were 
intended to be a proper name. The editors of F apparently 
recognized that Verges could not call his partner ' coxcomb ', 
but their emendation is very unhappy, for the phrase was 
equally inappropriate on the lips of the Sexton, who moreover 
had evidently made his exit afterl. 72, though this isnotmarked 
in Q or F. It was Warburton who first saw that ' of Coxcombe ' 
= ' Off, Coxcomb ' (for ' of ' = ' off ' cf. v. i. 97), and that 
these words were spoken by Conrade, while ' Let them be in 
the hands ' belonged to another speaker. This speaker he and 
later editors have taken to be Verges. But the prefix Couley 
of Q is probably a mistake, as in 1. 80, for Conrade. There is 
no instance in Q of a prefix being omitted (as Warburton's 
arrangement implied), though they are often incorrect. The 
printer of has apparently not only used the wrong prefix, but 
has given part of Dogberry's speech to Conrade (misnamed 
Cowley). In the present text the words are restored to Dog- 
berry, and Conrade's outburst gains in dramatic force if it 
immediately follows the master constable's order, without the 
intervention of Verges. Possibly Dogberry wishes to say ' in 
the hands of the prince's officers ', or some such phrase, when 
he is interrupted by Conrade. But more probably ' hands ' 
is a misprint for ' bands ', due to the printer's misinterpreta- 
tion of the following ' of '. 

78-9. Come, . . . varlet ! has only a comma after ' them ', 
and thus does not make it clear that ' thou naughty varlet ' is 
addressed to Conrade. F omits the comma, as if the words 
were addressed to a member of the watch. 

90-1. as pretty . . .Messina. Cf. Twelfth Night, 1. v. 30, ' as 
witty a piece of Eve's flesh as any in Illyria \ 
(150) 



NOTES Act iv, Sc. ii 

94. two gowns. A reference -to his official dress. Cf. the 
s.d. at the beginning of this scene in Q and F, ' Enter the 
Constables ... in gownes '. 

ACT V 

Scene i. Probably a front-stage scene. It cannot be 
located precisely, but it appears to be a street through 
which the constables have to pass with their prisoners from 
the jail to Leonato's house. The time is Monday morning, 
immediately after Act iv. ii. 

10. Hanmer and some later editors read ' speak to me ', 
which would be metrically correct, and may be right. But 
as this may be ' a broken line, natural in passionate speech ' 
(J. C. Smith), the text of Q and F has been retained. 

12. strain. The senses of ' emotion ' and an echoing 
' musical note ' appear to be blended here. 

16. Of the numerous emendations of this line none need 
be considered which do not accept ' sorrow wag ' as cor- 
rect. CapelPs conjecture of 'Bid' for 'And' involves the 
change of only two letters, and has been adopted in the text. 
It is possible, however, that Johnson was right in reading 
' And, Sorrow wag ! cry 5 hem when he should groan '. This 
has the advantage of retaining the words of Q and F, though 
the separation of ' cry ' from ' hem ' is more than an ordinary 
change of punctuation. But the rhythm of ' And, Sorrow 
wag ! cry ' is extremely harsh. 

17-18. make . . . candle -wasters. Either (a) drink away 
sorrow with midnight revellers or (b) stupefy sorrow with the 
discourses of scholars. The second interpretation has in its 
favour the general character of 11. 20 ff., and Ben Jonson's 
use of ' candle-waster ' as = ' a book-worm ' in Cynthia's 
Revels, III. ii. 3. On the other hand (a) suits better with 
' drunk ' and obviates the elliptical use of ' candle-wasters '. 

18. yet. ' I suppose that the train of thought in Leonato's 
mind is " it will be very hard to find such a man yet if you do, 
bring him to me "; and then, his thoughts growing clearer, he 
asserts outright " there is no such man ! " ' (Furness). 

24. preceptial medicine, medicine consisting of precepts. 

28. wring, writhe. Cf. Cymbeline, in. vi. 78, ' He wrings at 
some distress '. 

(15O 



Act v, Sc. i NOTES 

30. To be so moral, to be so ready with moralizing. Cf. As 
You Like It, 11. vii. 31 : 

When I did hear 
The motley fool thus moral on the time. 

32. cry louder than advertisement, drown the voice of ad- 
monition. 

33. Antonio takes ' cry ', in 1. 32, literally. 

37. the style of gods, ' exalted language : such as we may 
suppose would be written by beings superior to human 
calamities ' (Steevens). 

38. made a push at, attacked, set at defiance. 

46. Good den. The day is still early, but Leonato uses the 
afternoon salutation. 

49. Are you so hasty now? This probably refers to the 
Prince's earlier promise to ' stay here at the least a month ' 
(1. i. 161). 

53. thou. Leonato uses the pronoun of contempt to 
Claudio. 

62. to thy head. For this phrase = ' to thy face ', cf. Mid. 
Night's Dream, 1. i. 106, 'Demetrius, I'll avouch it to his head '. 

65. bruise. For the metaphor here Wright compares, ' My 
unbruised youth ', Rom. and Jul. 11. iii. 37. 

82. Win me and wear me : an alliterative proverbial saying. 
answer me, i.e. with his weapon. 'Answer' (the noun) 
is a technical term in fence. Cf. Tzvel. Night, in. iv. 308, and 
Ham. v. ii. 283. 

91. Jacks : cf. note on 1. i. 198. 

94. fashion-monging, who exploit the fashions. As parallel 
forms, e. g. ' money-monging ', ' law-monging ', are found in 
Elizabethan English, there is no need to adopt the modernized 
' fashion-mongring ' of the later Ff. ' These fashion-mongers ' 
is used in Rom. and Jul. n. iv. 35. 

96. and show. There is no need to omit ' and ', as Dyce 
and others have done. The stress on ' antique ' (cf. in. i. 63) 
and ' antiquely ' in Elizabethan English was on the first 
syllable ; ' -ly ' is elided before ' and '. 

97. speak off. For the spelling ' of ' in Q and F, where ' off ' 
seems to be meant, cf. iv. ii. 75. 

dangerous, threatening. 
102. wake your patience, rouse your patience into rage. 
Cf. Cor. in. i. 97-8, ' awake Your dangerous lenity '. 
( 152 ) 



NOTES Act v, Sc. i 

123. high-proof, in the highest degree. The metaphor is 
probably from the proving or testing of a weapon. 

130-2. i" will . . . pleasure us. ' Just as we bid minstrels 
draw their instruments from the cases to give us pleasure, 
so I bid you draw your wit from the scabbard for the same 
purpose.' 

135-7. c°wa£e . . . care killed a cat . . . kill care. The alli- 
terative balance is noteworthy. 

138. in the career, in full onset. Cf. 11. iii. 269. 

141. staff, lance-shaft. 

142. was broke cross. It was dishonourable for a tilter to 
have his lance broken crosswise instead of lengthways against 
his opponent's shield. Cf. As Tou Like It, in. iv. 41 ff., ' he . . . 
swears brave oaths, and breaks them bravely, quite traverse, 
athwart the heart of his lover ; as a puisny tilter, that spurs 
his horse but on one side, breaks his staff like a noble goose '. 

143. changes, changes colour. 

145-6. turn his girdle. The full form of this proverbial 
phrase was ' turn the buckle of his girdle '. Steevens quotes 
from Winwood's Memorials, i. 453, the reply of an Englishman 
in Paris to a rebuke by Winwood, ' If I were angry I might 
turne the buckle of my girdle behinde me '. J. C. Smith 
quotes Cromwell's saying (Sept. 17, 1656), ' If any man be 
angry at it — I am plain and shall use an homely expression : 
let him turn the buckle of his girdle behind him ! If this 
were to be done again I would do it.' This quotation supports 
the interpretation, ' Let him employ himself till he cools down.' 
Another view is the phrase means ' to challenge ', as belts 
were worn with the buckle before, but for wrestling it was 
turned behind, to give the adversary a fairer grip. But 
Claudio's exclamation in 1. 148 shows that he had not been 
thinking of a challenge from Benedick. 

158. I'. The ' I ' of Q and F may be ' Ay '. 

159. a calfs head and a capon. There is probably, as Capell 
suggested, a pun upon ' cap on ', as in Cymb. 11. i. 25, ' You 
are a cock and capon too, and you crow, cock, with your 
comb on '. 

161. woodcock: the emblem of stupidity. Cf. Ham. v. i. 
115, 'springes to catch woodcocks'. 

1 j 1. a wise gentleman: apparently an ironical phrase for 
a simpleton, but no other instance of it seems to have been 
traced. 

(153) 



Act v, Sc. i NOTES 

172. hath the tongues, can talk various languages. Cf. Two 
Gent, of Ver. iv. i. 33-4 : 

Sec. Outlaw. Have you the tongues ? 

Vol. My youthful travel therein made me happy. 

183-4. if she . . . dearly. Cf. Euphues (Lyly's Works, i. 138), 
' I haue hearde that women either loue entirely or hate 
deadly '. 

184-5. T h e oW man's . . . all. An echo of 11. iii. 125-6, 'My 
daughter tells us all '. But the courtly Prince would scarcely 
have spoken of Hero in this way before her defamation. 

186-7. &°d - • • garden. With this profane reference to 
Genesis iii. 8, Claudio alludes to 11. iii. 40 ff. 

188-91. The reference is to 1. i. 280-7. 

207-9. when he goes . . . his wit. The point of the jest lies 
in the play on the literal and metaphorical senses of ' leaves 
off '. ' Man cuts a pretty figure, when he divests himself of 
his intelligence, and attires himself only in his clothes.' 

210-11. He is then . . . man. ' He is then as far surpassed 
by an ape in wisdom, as he exceeds an ape in stature.' 

212. let me be, leave me alone. 

212-13. pluck up, my heart, and be sad, rouse thyself, my 
heart, and be grave. The apostrophe, occurring in the midst 
of Don Pedro's banter, sounds like a quotation from a con- 
temporary play. Just before the revelation of the plot, the 
Prince gets an inkling that there is something amiss. 

s.d. Enter Dogberry . . . Borachio. As this s.d. is placed 
by Q and F before 1. 209, Furness thinks that we have here 
' another proof of a stage copy, wherein the entrances of 
actors are set down, some lines before they actually enter, in 
order that the prompter may warn them to be in readiness '. 

216. reasons: a pun on ' raisins ', as in I Hen. IV, 11. iv. 
214, ' If reasons were as plentiful as blackberries '. 

218. once. The word has here a vaguely limiting sense, 
' at any time ', ' at all '. 

235-6. one meaning well suited. ' One meaning put into 
many different dresses ; the Prince having asked the same 
question in four modes of speech ' (Johnson). 

238. bound to your answer, under legal obligation to answer 
the charge against you ; with a further play on ' bound ' 
= (1) ' pinioned ', and (2) on the way to (cf. 11. 241-2, ' let 
me go no further to mine answer'). 
(154) 



NOTES Act v, Sc. i 

250. in Hero's garments. ' This important touch is added 
for the first time in this, the last account of the midnight 
episode ' (J. C. Smith). 

252. upon record, set down in writing; a legal phrase. 

253-4. rather seal . . . my shame. This euphuistic balance 
of phrase, with its transverse alliteration, is somewhat artificial 
in the mouth of Borachio. 

298. sing it to-night. See note at opening of scene. 

303. she alone is heir. This is part of Leonato's fiction. 
Antonio's son is mentioned in 1. ii. 2. 

307. dispose. This is usually taken to be a verb in the im- 
perative mood, in which case there is a break in the construction 
after ' I do embrace '. But it may be a noun=' disposal'. 

310. To-night. See note at opening of scene. 

312. was packed, was a confederate. Cf. Com. of Err. 
v. i. 210-11 : 

The goldsmith here, were he not pack'd with her, 
Could witness it. 

334. God save the foundation! The formula used by those 
who received alms at the gates of religious houses. 

335. I discharge thee of, I unburden you of. Cf. 2 Hen. IV, 
11. iv. 145, ' Discharge yourself of our company '. 

V. ii. Probably a full-stage scene, apparently laid in the 
orchard. As the Cambridge editors pointed out, it cannot 
be in Leonato's house, where Pope located it, for in 1. 102 
Ursula cries ' Yonder 's old coil at home '. The time is 
Monday, in the later morning or the afternoon. 

6-7. so high a style. . .come over it. The Elizabethan spelling 
' stile ' makes the pun upon the two senses of the word more 
evident ; ' come over ' is also used in the two senses of ' sur- 
pass ' and ' get over '. 

8. comely, befitting ; suggested by ' come '. 

9. come over me, take possession of me. 

10. keep below stairs. Various examples of the phrase 
' below stairs ' collected by H. C. Hart from Ben Jonson 
and Chapman in New Sh. Soc. Trans., 1877-9, P* 47 1 ? an< ^ 
quoted with further comments by Furness, indicate that it 
refers to the servants' quarters. Hence, Margaret seems to 
ask, ' Shall I always be a dependant ? ' But as a retort to 
Benedick's previous speech this lacks sufficient point for the 

(155) 



Act v, Sc. ii NOTES 

compliment that follows on her ' wit '. There is probably 
some quibble to which the clue is lacking. 

17. I give thee the bucklers, I own myself beaten ; a meta- 
phor from sword-and-buckler play. Dyce quotes from Cot- 
grave's Dictionarie, ' Ie te le donne gaigne. I grant it, I yield 
it thee ; I confesse thy action 5 I give thee the bucklers.' 

21. put in the pikes with a vice, put in the spikes with a 
screw. ' Pikes ' were the detachable spikes in the centre of 
circular shields. 

26-9. These lines are the beginning of a song by William 
Elderton. It must have been familiar before 1584, when, as 
Collier notes, a song on ' The ioy of Virginitie ' appeared to 
this tune in The Handefull of pleasant delites. In this mis- 
cellany the title is quoted as ' The Gods of loue ', but the 
metre and phrasing of ' The ioy of Virginitie ' correspond 
with Elderton's song. 

30-1. Leander . . . Troilus. These ' patterns of love ' are 
coupled together with more elaborate irony by Rosalind in 
As Tou Like It, iv. i. no. 

33. carpet-mongers : a more derisive form of ' carpet-knights '. 
Another contemptuous variant is ' knight ... on carpet con- 
sideration ' in Tw. Night, in. iv. 260-1. 

34. in the evt.~ road of a blank verse. Troilus was to be 
afterwards made a subject of Shakespeare's own blank verse, 
though ' run smoothly ' and ' even road ' are not phrases 
suitable to Troilus and Cressida. Marlowe's Hero and Leander, 
from which Shakespeare quotes a line in As Tou Like It, in. 
v. 82, is in couplets. 

42. festival terms. Cf. / Hen. IV, 1. iii. 46, ' holiday and 
lady terms '. 

69. epithet, phrase. Cf. Oth. 1. i. 14, ' stuff d with epithets 
of war '. 

82. in the time of good neighbours, i.e. when men praised one 
another. 

84-5. he shall live . . . weeps, there will be no more lasting 
memorial of him than the tolling of his funeral bell and his 
widow's tears. The 10th and nth of the Hundred Merry 
Tales satirize the shortness of a widow's mourning. 

89. Don Worm, his conscience. Halliwell-Phillipps calls 
attention to an entry amongst the expenses for the Coventry 
Mysteries, ' payd to ij wormes of con-science, xyj d '. 

102. old coil, great disturbance. 
(156) 



NOTES Act v, Sc. iii 

no. uncle's. Rowe and some later editors have substituted 
' uncle ' for 'uncle's ' of Q and F, but cf. ' to Leonato's ', i. i, 
222 and 296. 

V. iii. Probably a front-stage scene. Pope located it in 
' a church ', and has been followed by later editors. But 
11. 25-8 are much more appropriate if the monument is in 
a churchyard, out-of-doors. The time is from midnight on 
Monday to the earliest dawn of Tuesday. 

3-1 1. Q and F preface 11. 4-1 1 with the heading Epitaph 
forming part of the same line as 'A Lord's speech '. It is possible 
that this lord or another attendant reads the epitaph for 
Claudio, but probably he does so himself. Capell's heading 
'Claud, [reading out of a Scrowl]' has therefore been adopted 
in substance, though ' Epitaph ' has been retained from Q 
and F. 

8. with shame, owing to shame. 

io-n. This couplet is indented in and F, and probably 
does not form part of the Epitaph, but, like 11. 21-2, is a 
rhyming valediction by Claudio. 

12. music: probably here = ' musicians '. Cf. Love's 
Labour's Lost, v. ii. 212, ' Play, music, then '. 

sing your solemn hymn. The hymn is an addition to the 
ceremonial. Leonato had bidden Claudio sing the epitaph 
itself (v. i. 297-8). 

13-14. night . . . knight. The rhyming of these words, as in 
Mer. Wives of Wind. 11. i. 15-16, points to a difference of pro- 
nunciation between them in Elizabethan English. 

14. virgin knight. Cf. All's Well, 1. iii. 121-2, where 
Helena is called a ' poor knight ' of ' Dian . . . queen of 
virgins '. 

21-2. The parallelism of these lines with 18-19 and the 
repetition of ' Heavily, heavily ' make it clear that ' uttered ' 
here = proclaimed, commemorated. 1. 21 may thus be ren- 
dered ' till the death-dirge be sung '. Hence it is not necessary 
to discuss interpretations which explain ' uttered ' as ' ousted ' 
or ' expelled ', or which are based on F's misprint in 1. 22, 
' Heavenly, heavenly '. 

26. prey'd. With the constant play upon words throughout 
Much Ado, Don Pedro, as he leaves the church, may here be 
punning upon ' pray'd '. 

26-8. Shakespeare had already pictured a similar dawn 
(i57) 



Act v, Sc. iii NOTES 

of day with greater detail and intensity in Rom. and Jul. 
ii. iii. 1-4: 

The grey-ey'd morn smiles on the frowning night. 
Chequering the eastern clouds w'th streaks of light, 
And flecked darkness like a drunkard reels 
From forth day's path and Titan's fiery wheels. 

See note at the beginning of the scene. 

33. speed , s. Though this contraction for ' speed us ' is some- 
what harsh, a wish is so much more natural on Claudio's lips 
here than a prophecy, that ' speeds ' in Q and F probably = 
' speed 's '. 

V. iv. A full-stage scene. As so many characters appear in 
the scene, and it contains much movement, ending with 
a dance, it probably takes place in the hall of Leonato's house, 
like 11. i. The time is Tuesday morning. 

20. undo : a play on the two senses of ' unfasten ' and ' ruin '. 

43. he thinks . . . bull. Cf. 1. i. 280-7 and v. i. 188-91. 

46-7. Shakespeare may have read the story of Europa in 
Golding's version of the Metamorphoses, Book II ; he had 
already drawn upon Book VIII for the story of Baucis and 
Philemon (11. i. 102-3). 

54, 56-7. and F give these lines to Leonato. But in view 
of 11. 15-16 Theobald and most later editors have transferred 
54 to Antonio. This is almost certainly correct, but, if so, 
56-7 should be similarly transferred. 

63. died defiVd. F's omission of the epithet is probably 
merely a printer's error, and it is surprising to find Furness 
inclined to defend the omission on the ground that ' the few 
words in the next line are an adequate reference to the past'. 
Nor is there any difficulty in Hero's use of the epithet, as the 
Hero who died is merely a creature of the imagination. 

76. for they swore. On the grounds of metre, construction, 
and parallelism with 1. 79, Capell's addition of ' for ' before 
' they ' has been adopted. and F have ' deceiued ' in this 
line, which suggests that the last syllable was to be stressed, 
but ' deceiu'd ' in 1. 79. 

84. cousin. See note on 1. ii. 2. 

86-8. Probably the ill-rhymed verses whose endings Bene- 
dick had quoted in the orchard (v. ii. 36-41). 

97. a consumption. ' This is the only place where Shake- 
(153) 



NOTES Act v, Sc. iv 

speare uses this word apparently in its modern sense. Timon's 
use of it, " Consumptions sow in hollow bones of men ", is less 
appropriate, and Lear's " Consumption catch thee ! " is less 
definite ' (Bucknill). 

98. Theobald was right in giving this line to Benedick, 
though Q and F prefix ' Leonato '. ' Stop your mouth ' is a 
customary Elizabethan phrase for ' Kiss you '. Cf. 11. i. 332, 
'stop his mouth with a kiss '. Benedick's action accounts for 
Don Pedro's exclamation in the next line, which recalls 
I. i. 287. 

103-5. tf a man • • • a boiit him, if a man is to allow himself 
to be beaten by a shower of ridicule, he will have to dispense 
with anything ornamental about him — be it clothes or a wife. 

1 12-13. my cousin. Benedick, like Claudio in 11. i. 339, 
immediately claims kinship with the relations of his affianced 
bride. 

1 16-17. out of thy . . . double-dealer, out of your bachelor 
life into matrimony : with a play on ' double-dealer ' = an 
unfaithful husband. 

126-7. no staff . . . horn. The allusion is probably to the 
staves used by elderly people, which were often tipped with 
a cross-piece of horn. 

-s.d. Dance. This is the only play of Shakespeare that ends 
with a dance. 



(159) 



APPENDIX I 

STRUCTURE AND STAGING OF THE PLAY 

A. Structure 

The structure of Much Ado about Nothing (as has been 
shown in the Introduction) is determined largely by the 
manifold changes that Shakespeare rings upon the title. 
Three plots are interwoven, each illustrating a different type 
of ' much ado about nothing ', and there are minor varia- 
tions on the theme. 

In the opening scene the two main ' actions ' are set in 
motion by the tongue-fence between Benedick and Beatrice, 
and by Claudio's announcement of his love for Hero. Don 
Pedro's offer to impersonate Claudio at the masked dance, 
and to woo Hero for him in disguise, starts the series of mis- 
understandings which have been traced in detail [Intro- 
duction, pp. xvii-xviii), and gives Don John the chance of 
practising his first deceit upon Claudio. The Count's readi- 
ness to believe that Don Pedro is playing him false prepares 
the audience — according to a favourite Shakespearian device 
— for his grosser credulity when the honour of his affianced 
bride is in question. But the earlier misunderstanding is 
short-lived and the marriage is fixed ' hence a just seven- 
night'. Thereupon Don John, at Borachio's suggestion, lays 
his second and deadlier plot (n. ii). 

While he seeks to frustrate the marriage of the ' romantic ' 
hero and heroine, Don Pedro and his friends form a con- 
spiracy to bring about the union of the protagonists in the 
comic action. In n. iii and in. i, Benedick and Beatrice 
are in turn successfully tricked by the plotters, including 
Claudio and Hero, who are serenely unconscious of the 
machinations that have been set on foot against themselves. 

In in. iii, exactly the middle of the play, the action is 
complicated by the introduction of the underplot of the 
Watch. As has been shown in the Introduction (pp. xxxvii- 
( 161 ) ' M 



APPENDIX I 

xxxviii), it does not only add to the humours of the comedy 
but is necessary to the final solution of the entanglements. 
Meanwhile it contributes the element of dramatic irony. 
The calamity that overwhelms Hero is the more poignant to 
the audience because they know that but for the circum- 
locution of Dogberry and Verges it might have been averted. 

The opening scene of Act IV, in which the blow falls, 
is, as often in Shakespearian drama, the climax of the action. 
Emotion rises to wellnigh tragic intensity, marked by the 
much longer consecutive use of verse than elsewhere in the 
play. The repudiation of Hero by her wooer is not only the 
crowning scenic episode, but reacts upon the relations of 
Benedick and Beatrice, the last barrier between whom it 
breaks down. 

This effected, Shakespeare hastens the revelation of Don 
John's villany. But the vapourings of Dogberry, the senile 
frenzy of Leonato and Antonio, the sprightly encounters 
of Benedick with Margaret and Beatrice, and Claudio's 
elegy over an empty tomb protract and diversify the interest, 
before all entanglements are straightened out in the final 
scene. 

The structural compression that has brought Bandello's 
diffuse romance almost within the limits of the Classical 
1 unities ' has been illustrated in the Introduction and the 
Notes. 

B. Staging 

Much Ado about Nothing is a typical product of the Eliza- 
bethan theatre, with its platform stage, of which ' a per- 
spective view ' is given in the Frontispiece to this volume. 

' It had two proscenium doors, set slantwise, and above 
them a balcony. . . . Between the stage doors, hanging 
from the front of the balcony, was a curtain, called the 
" traverse ", which divided the stage into an inner and an 
outer part. The middle stage was shielded from the rain 
by a lofty canopy, called the " heavens ". . . . 

' When the traverse was open, the whole stage made one 
scene, which took its location from the properties on the 
inner stage. When the traverse was closed, the front stage 
still remained available for scenes that required no properties 
— outdoor scenes, mostly, which happened "somewhere" in 
the open ; but with traverse and stage-doors closed the front 
(162) 



APPENDIX I 

stage might also represent a room, but a room without 
properties, a room " somewhere ". While such scenes were 
acting, fresh properties could be set out on the inner stage 
behind the closed traverse. Thus, by a succession of front- 
stage scenes, or by skilful alternation of front-stage and full- 
stage scenes, a whole play could be acted without a break. 
A break was unavoidable only if two full-stage scenes came 
together.' x 

The failure to recognize that there was no scene-shifting, 
in the modern sense, on the Elizabethan stage has led even 
so acute a critic as Spedding into error in his proposed 
rearrangement of the Acts in Much Ado about Nothing. In 
the present edition the arrangement of the Acts in the first 
Folio has been retained, together with the division into 
scenes adopted by the eighteenth-century editors. 

But though full-stage and front-stage scenes can usually 
be distinguished, definite localization is often impossible. 
Instances of this in Much Ado about Nothing are n. i, where 
it is doubtful whether the scene is laid in the hall or the 
orchard of Leonato's house ; and v. iii, where it may be 
either inside a church or in a churchyard. On the other hand, 
in ii. iii Benedick's order to the boy to bring a book ' hither 
to me in the orchard ' ; in in. i Hero's similar reference to 
the orchard ; and in in. iii the second watchman's words, 
'let us go sit here upon the church bench ', definitely localize 
the scenes. So, too, Ursula's announcement to Hero (in. iv. 
98 ff .) that the bridal party have come to fetch her ' to church ', 
and Dogberry's order to Verges (in. v. 71-2) to meet him 
' at the gaol ', indicate sufficiently the scene of iv. i and iv. ii. 

The action of the play is continuous. Thus during the 
two short front-stage scenes, 1. ii and iii, preparations could 
be made behind the traverse for the elaborate full-stage scene 
of the revels, n. i. So also during n. ii the stage could be set 
for the orchard scenes, 11. iii and in. i. The further alternations 
between front-stage and full-stage scenes are indicated in the 
Notes, from which it will be seen that in the last Act there is 
some difficulty in distinguishing them. 

Many of Shakespeare's plays contain much verbal ' scene- 
painting ', but there is a minimum of this in Much Ado about 

1 From Appendix I by the General Editor in Richard II 
and Macbeth in this series. 

( 163 ) m 2 



APPENDIX I 

Nothing. The only passages of the kind are those describing 
' the pleached bower ' (in. i. 7 ff.) and the dawn (v. iii. 26-8). 
These may be suggested by the absence of painted scenery, 
but it is important not to exaggerate the simplicity of Eliza- 
bethan stage-arrangements. All recent investigation proves 
that properties and costumes were much more elaborate than 
has been usually believed. In in. iv Shakespeare shows 
that he was familiar with the elegancies of feminine attire, 
though, of course, the parts of Beatrice and Hero were acted 
by boys. 

Though there is little action in Much Ado about Nothing, 
it is rich in spectacular effects. The entry of the masked 
revellers, the orchard scenes, the broken-off nuptials, the 
examination in the gaol, the midnight mourning, and the dance 
that closes the play, form a varied series of stage-pictures 
that can never lose their attractive power. 



(164) 



APPENDIX II 

SHAKESPEARE'S PROSE 

In earlier volumes of this series Shakespeare's prosody 
has been discussed, especially in its relation to Richard II and 
Macbeth. As Much Ado about Nothing is predominantly 
a prose play, the opportunity may be taken of saying some- 
thing about Shakespeare as a writer of prose. 1 For it should 
never be forgotten that the dramatist's achievements in this 
medium are as great as in verse, and are, from some points 
of view, even more wonderful. The genius for poetry was 
the dower of the Elizabethans, though none shared it in so 
supreme degree, or allied with such other powers, as Shake- 
speare. But prose did not come with equal facility or felicity 
to the pens of his contemporaries. There is, of course, a great 
body of Elizabethan prose of varied interest and attraction, 
but in the main it has a curiously tentative, experimental, 
fluctuating quality. The peculiarity of Shakespeare's prose, 
in all its varieties, is its precision and lucidity, its exact 
adaptation to the dramatist's immediate purpose. 

In his earlier plays Shakespeare, as a rule, uses prose 
somewhat rarely. There is, however, one striking exception. 
In Love's Labour 's Lost, his first comedy, more than one-third 
of the dialogue is in prose. Sir Sidney Lee has suggested 
that this was due ' to the influence of foreign example ', as 
prose was the generally accepted instrument of Italian, and 
afterwards of French comedy, and had been transplanted to 
England by Gascoigne and Lyly. 2 However this may be, in 
the other early comedies and in the early history plays verse 
is predominant, and in Richard II and King John is solely 
used. 

1 The prosody of Much Ado about Nothing has been dis- 
cussed by the General Editor of this series in his edition of the 
play in the 'Warwick Shakespeare' series, Appendix B. 

2 A Life oj William Shakespeare (1915), p. 101 n. 

(165) 



APPENDIX II 

It was in the last years of the sixteenth century that 
Shakespeare somewhat suddenly began to introduce prose 
largely into his plays. There is a remarkable contrast 
between Richard II, a purely poetic drama, and its sequel, 

1 Henry IV, with its wealth of comic prose scenes. In 

2 Henry IV, Henry V, and The Merry Wives of Windsor, and 
in the three comic masterpieces, Much Ado about Nothing, As 
Tou Like It, and Twelfth Night, prose continues to be exten- 
sively employed. But with the beginning of the great tragic 
period early in the seventeenth century Shakespeare's use of 
it becomes more intermittent. There is much prose in 
Hamlet, but comparatively little in the kindred tragedy of 
Julius Caesar. There is a similar contrast between King Lear 
and Macbeth, and between Coriolanus and Antony and Cleo- 
patra. In his last period of authorship The Winter's Tale 
contains considerably more prose than the Tempest or 
Cymbeline. The plot or the characterization accounts for 
some of these differences, but not for all. Shakespeare's 
choice of one instrument or the other must often have 
depended on the mood of the moment. When he wrote 
Much Ado about Nothing he showed a more sustained prefer- 
ence for prose than at any other time. 

But though it is not always clear why in particular scenes 
he chose prose in preference to verse, we cannot fail to note 
the almost unfailing mastery with which he adapted it to„ 
various uses and situations. In a discussion of Shakespeare's 
prose 1 Churton Collins distinguished five different styles : 
(i) the euphuistic, (2) the coarse colloquial prose, modelled 
on the language of vulgar life, (3) the prose of higher comedy, 
(4) prose professedly rhetorical, (5) highly wrought poetical 
prose. 

The two last-named types are not found in Much Ado about 
Nothing. Shakespeare's rhetorical prose is found mainly in 
certain highly wrought passages of his English and Roman 
history plays, such as the king's speech in Henry V, iv. i, 
* For though I speak it to you, I think the king is but a man, 
as I am', &c, or Brutus' address to the mob in Julius Caesar, 
in. ii, ' Romans, countrymen, and lovers ! hear me for my 
cause ; and be silent, that you may hear ', &c. 

1 { Shakespeare as a Prose Writer ' in The Gentleman's Maga- 

735-47- 

(166) 



APPENDIX II 

The examples of poetic prose are rare. They occur chiefly 
in certain passages in the tragedies, where in the midst of 
prose dialogue the thought soars to a pitch where verse would 
be natural, but where the dramatist does not think well to 
change suddenly from one instrument to the other. The 
greatest of such passages is to be found in Hamlet, n. ii, where 
the Danish prince avows that ' this goodly frame, the earth, 
seems to me a sterile promontory ', &c. Others come from 
the lips of the distraught and outcast Lear. 

The three other types of prose distinguished by Churton 
Collins are all illustrated in Much Ado about Nothing. But in 
the case of the first, the ' euphuistic ', some discrimination is 
necessary. There are a few passages in Shakespeare's writings 
where he deliberately parodies Lyly's style — its transverse 
alliteration, its similes, and rhetorical questions. Such is 
Falstaff's exhortation to Prince Hal in I Henry IV, n. iv, 
' though the camomile, the more it is trodden on the faster it 
grows, yet youth, the more it is wasted the sooner it wears ', 
&c. Other affectations of speech, not strictly euphuistic, are 
caricatured in Armado in Love's Labour's Lost and Osric in 
Hamlet. 

But while Shakespeare had an eye for the extravagances of 
euphuism, and could turn them to ridicule, he had himself 
caught much of the infection of Lyly's style both for good and 
for ill. Lyly's clearness and precision are carried on and 
transfigured in Shakespeare's finer prose, but too much of his 
studied balance and word-play is often also retained. Nowhere 
is this more fully illustrated than in Much Ado about Nothing, 
as is abundantly evident from the Notes in this volume. 

Colloquial prose takes varied forms in Shakespeare's hands. 
In the speech of citizens, clowns, messengers, servants, and 
women of the lower orders, it generally reproduces the vulgar 
idiom of the time, individualized by the dramatist's art. 
Launcelot Gobbo and Sly the tinker, Mistress Quickly, and 
the Nurse in Romeo and Juliet, are among those who use this 
vernacular, each after his or her own fashion. Of such racy 
speech there is little in Much Ado about Nothing. The 
dependants in the play, messengers, serving men, and waiting 
women have all caught something of the accent and diction 
of their superiors. 

But there is a form of colloquialism ' with a difference ' 
that Shakespeare is fond of putting into the mouth of half- 
(167) 



APPENDIX II 

educated personages who make pretensions to elegance or 
profundity of speech. Such is the language of Bottom the 
Weaver, ' I will move storms, I will condole in some measure ' ; 
of ancient Pistol, though his mouthings are in verse, not in 
prose ; and of Elbow in Measure for Measure, ' the poor 
duke's constable ', who appears ' with two notorious bene- 
factors ' in charge. Dogberry and Verges are the classic 
mouthpieces of this grotesque medley of the vernacular and 
misunderstood ' inkhorn ' terms. 

But it is in the prose of high comedy that Much Ado about 
Nothing stands pre-eminent. There is no need to repeat here 
what has already been said on this point in the Introduction, 
pp. xxxix-xl. It will be enough to add that the claim here 
advanced for it does not rest upon the speeches of the 
protagonists alone. The wit of Falstaff cuts deeper even 
than that of Benedick, and Rosalind's words fly with an airier 
grace than those of Beatrice. But nowhere else do we find 
all the members of a courtly company bearing their part in 
such gay and well-graced dialogue as in the halls and orchards 
of the Messina of Much Ado about Nothing. 



( 168 ) 



GLOSSARY 



abused, v. ii. 104, deceived. 

accident, 11. i. 193, occur- 
rence. 

advertisement, v. i. 32, ad- 
monition. 

affection, n. ii. 7, inclination. 

antickly, v. i. 96, fantasti- 
cally. 

antique, in. i. 63, a grotesque 
figure, 

approved, iv. i. 46, convicted. 

argument, n. iii. 12, subject ; 
n. iii. 261, proof; in. i. 96, 
power of reasoning. 

assurance, n. ii. 51, certainty. 

attired, iv. i. 146, enwrapped. 

authority, iv. i. 37, warranty. 

baldrick, 1. i. 261, belt. 

bird-bolt, 1. i. 46, short arrow 
with a flat head, which, as 
comparatively harmless, was 
allowed to be used by fools. 

biting, iv. i. 172, afflicting. 

block, 1. i. 82, the mould on 
which a hat is shaped. 

blood, n. iii. 187, passion. 
Cf. 11. i. 192. 

bring, in. ii. 3, escort. Cf. 
Henry V, 11. iii. 1-2, ' let me 
bring thee to Staines '. 

canker, 1. iii. 29, a wild rose. 
tarried, iv. i. 212, managed. 
(1 



censured, 11. iii. 251, judged, 
estimated. Cf. Cor. 11. i. 
28, ' how you are censured 
here in the city '. 

cheapen, 11. iii. 35, bid for. 

cinque-pace, 11. i. 79, a lively 
dance, the steps of which 
are supposed to be based on 
the number five. 

circumstances, in. ii. 108, 
circumlocution. 

claw, 1. iii. 19, flatter. 

close, in. iii. in, hidden. 

cog, v. i. 95, cheat. 

coil, in. iii. 101, v. ii. 102, 
disturbance, turmoil. 

complexion, 1. i. 334, appear- 
ance. 

conceit, 11. i. 317, conception, 
idea. 

confirmed, 11. i. 408, immu- 
table ; v. iv. 17, unmoved. 

conjecture, iv. i. 108, sus- 
picion. 

contemptible, n. iii. 202, 
contemptuous. 

conveyance, 11. i. 261, trick- 
ery, jugglery. 

cross, 11. ii. 8, thwart. 

cunning, v. i. 239, clever. 

curiously, v. i. 160, care- 
fully. 

curst, 11. I. 22, vicious- 
tempered. 
69) 



GLOSSARY 



daff, ii. iii. 192, v. i. 78, put 

aside. 
dear happiness, 1. i. 138, *a 

precious piece of good luck ' 
(W. A. Wright). On the 
Shakespearian uses of 'dear', 
which represents two words 
of different origin, see 
Onions, A Shakespeare Glos- 
sary, p. 53.^ 

dearness, in. ii. 103, fondness. 

deprave, v. i. 95, defame. 

discovers, n. iii. 121, reveals. 

drift, 11. i. 407, plan, scheme. 

dumps, n. iii. jj, melancholy 
tunes. 



ecstasy, n. iii. 171, frenzy. 
eftest, iv. ii. 40, most con- 
venient. 
engaged, iv. i. 341, pledged. 
even, iv, i. 268, plain. 

familiar, v. iv. 70, an every- 
day affair. 

flat, n. i. 237, downright, 
absolute. 

foining, v. i. 84, thrusting (a 
term in fencing). 

frame, iv. i. 130, arrange- 
ment, plan; iv. i. 191, 
framing. 

giddy, v. iv. 109, pickle. 

good-year, 1. iii. 1, an ex- 
pletive of uncertain deriva- 
tion. 

guarded, 1. i. 306, trimmed, 
ornamented. 

gull, n. iii. 134, trick. 

( 



habit, iv. i. 229, garb. 
haggard, in. i. 36, a wild 
female hawk. 

important, n. i. 75, impor- 
tunate. 

impossible, n. i. 148, incon- 
ceivable. 

incensed, v. i. 247, instigated. 

injuries, iv. i. 245, insults. 

instance, v. ii. 81, illustrative 
saying. 

instances, n. ii. 42, proofs. 

intend, n. ii. 36, pretend. 

invention, iv. i. 196, mental 
initiative. 

inwardness, iv. i. 247, in- 
timacy. 

jealousy, n. ii. 50, suspicion. 

kindly, iv. i. j6, natural. 

laced, in. iv. 20, trimmed. 

large, 11. iii. 222, broad ; iv. 
i. 54, gross. 

largely, v. iv. 69, abundantly. 

learn, iv. i. 32, teach : a fre- 
quent Elizabethan use. 

lewd, v. i. 349, base. 

liberal, iv. i. 94, licentious. 

limed, in. i. 104, caught with 
bird-lime. 

luxurious, iv. i. 43, lustful- 

meet, 1. i. 51, even, quits. 

metal, 11. i. 64, material. 

misgovernment, iv. 1". 101, 
misconduct. 

misprising, in. i. 52, under- 
valuing. 
170) 



GLOSSARY 



misprision, iv. i. 187, mis- 
understanding. 

mistrusted, 11. i. 194, sus- 
pected. 

misuse, 11. ii. 28, deceive. 

misused, 11. i. 154, abused. 

model, 1. iii. 50, ground-plan. 
Cf. 2 Hen. IV, 1. iii. 41-2, 
' When we mean to build, 
We first survey the plot, 
then draw the model'. 



odd quirks, 11. iii. 263, irre- 
levant gibes. 

out-facing, v. i. 94, brow- 
beating. 



pleasant, 1. i. 40, amusing. 

politic, v. ii. 65, skilfully 
constituted. 

possess, v. i. 294, inform. 

prized, in. i. 90, estimated. 

project, in. i. 55, notion, idea. 

prolonged, iv. i. 256, post- 
poned. 

proper, 11. iii. 204, handsome. 

propose, in. i. 12, conversa- 
tion. Cf. proposing. 

proposing, in. i. 3, conversing. 

prospect, iv. i. 231, range of 
vision. 

protest, v. i. 152, proclaim 
publicly. 

prove, 1. iii. 78, test. 

purchaseth, in. i. 70, acquires, 
earns. 



quaint, in. iv. 22, dainty. 
qualify, v. iv. 67, abate. 
queasy, 11, i. 412, squeamish. 

(1 



rack, iv. i. 222, stretch to the 

uttermost. 
recheat, 1. i. 260, a series of 

notes sounded on the horn 

for rallying the hounds. 
reclusive, iv. i. 244, retired. 
reechy, in. iii. 144, dirty, 

begrimed. 
remorse, iv. i. 213, pity. 
reprove, 11. iii. 259, disprove. 



salv'd, 1. i. 336, palliated. 
scab, in. iii. 108, scurvy 

fellow. 
scambling, v. i. 94, pushing, 

contentious. 
second, v. i. 2, support, back 

sentences, n. iii. 268, senten- 
tious saws. 

shrewd, 11. i. 20, sharp. 

sort, iv. i. 242, turn out. 

squarer, 1. i. 87, quarreller. 

stale, n. ii. 26, iv. i. 6j, 
woman of ill fame. 

state and ancientry, 11. i. 82, 
stateliness and old-time 
formality. 

strain, 11. i. 407, lineage. 

subscribe, v. ii. 61, pro- 
claim. 

success, iv. i. 236, issue. 

sure, 1. iii. 73, trustworthy. 



tax, 1. i. 50, censure, accuse ; 
11. iii. 491, task. 

temper, 11. ii. 22, mix, com- 
pound. 

terminations, 11. i. 265, terms, 
expressions. 

TO 



GLOSSARY 



trans -shape, v. i. 177, distort. 

treatise, 1. i. 336, story. Cf. 
Macbeth, v. v. 12, ' Would 
at a dismal treatise rouse 
and stir'. 

unconfirmed, in. iii. 125, in- 
experienced. 



uncovered, iv. i. 312, open, 

undisguised. 
undergoes, v. ii. 59, lies under. 

vex, n. ii. 29, afflict. 

wide, iv. i. 64, far from the 
purpose. 



