THE ARDEN SHAKESPEARE 
GENERAL EDITOR : W. J. CRAIG 



PERICLES 



THE WORKS 

OF 

SHAKESPEARE 

L^l 

PERICLES 

EDITED BY 
K. DEIGHTON 



METHUEN AND CO. 

36 ESSEX STREET: STRAND 
LONDON 



First Published in 





CONTENTS 



PAGE 



INTRODUCTION ..... vn 
PERICLES 



INTRODUCTION 

OF facts as to the publication of Pericles a synopsis is here 
given from the Cambridge Shakespeare. 

The play was first published, in Quarto, in 1609, with 
the following title-page : 

THE LATE, | And much admired Play, | called | Peric 
les, Prince | of Tyre. | With the true Relation of the whole 
Historic, | aduentures and fortunes of the said Prince : | As 
also, | The no lesse strange, and worthy accidents, | in the 
Birth and Life, of his daughter | MARIANA. | As it hath 
been diuers and sundry times acted by | his Maiesties 
Seruants, at the Globe on | the Banck-side. | By William 
Shakespeare. | Imprinted at London for Henry Gossan, and 
are | to be solde at the signe of the Sunne in | Paternoster 
Row, etc. | 1609. | 

Another edition was issued in the same year ; and as 
the title-pages are identical, it had been generally supposed 
that there was but one edition, and that the discrepancies 
between the copies were due to the printers' corrections 
made while the sheets were passing through the press. 
From a careful examination, however, of the different copies, 
the Cambridge Editors are convinced that there were two 
distinct editions. In the British Museum there is a unique 
copy of an edition in Quarto dated 161 1, and, except for 

vii 



viii INTRODUCTION 

the place of publication and name of publisher, the title- 
page is identical with that of the two earlier impressions 
In 1619 a fourth Quarto appeared with an abbreviated 
title-page. This was followed in 1630 by a fifth Quarto 
which is extremely incorrect. Five years later appeared 
another edition printed from the fourth Quarto. 

"The play of Pericles was not included in either the 
first or the second Folio. It was however reprinted, to 
gether with six other plays wrongly attributed to Shake 
speare, in the Folio of 1664 an d in that of 1685. The text 
of the third Folio is taken from that of the sixth Quarto, 
but with a considerable number of conjectural alterations. 

(< A duodecimo reprint of Pericles, taken from the fourth 
Folio, appeared in 1734. 

" Rowe included, in both his editions, Pericles and the 
other plays given as Shakespeare's in the third and fourth 
Folios but not found in the first and second. They were 
excluded by Pope and subsequent editors, nor were they 
republished in any edition of Shakespeare till Malone printed 
them in his Supplement to Steevens' Shakespeare of 1778, 
which appeared two years later. Malone, acting on the 
suggestion of Farmer, included Pericles in his edition of 
Shakespeare published in 1790. Steevens in 1793 followed 
his example, and Pericles has been republished by all sub 
sequent editors except Mr. Keightley. . . . The plot was 
founded on Twine's novel called The Patterne of Painefulle 
Aduenters : first published in 1576 and reprinted by Mr. 
Collier in the first volume of Shakespeare's Library, together 
with the story of Appollinus, the Prince ofTyr, from Gower's 
Confessio Amantis^ a poetical version of the same romance. 



INTRODUCTION ix 

Another novel by George Wilkins, avowedly based on the 
acted drama, was published in 1608, with the following 
title-page : 

"THE | Painefulle Aduentures \ of Pericles Prince of \ 
Tyre. | Being the true History of the play of Pericles, as it 
was | lately presented by the worthy and an- | cient Poet 
lohn Gower. | AT LONDON | Printed by T. P. for Nat. 
Butler, | 1608. | " (The Cambridge Editors). 

Those curious as to the Apollonius Saga, from which 
the story of Pericles is ultimately drawn, are referred to 
Professor Mommsen's Preface to Wilkins's novel and to 
Professor Smyth's Shakespeare's Pericles and Apollonius of 
Tyre, Philadelphia, MacCalla & Co. 

Previous to the publication in 1709 of Rowe's edition of 
Shakespeare no doubts had been put forward as to his being 
sole author of our play. Contemporary writers ascribe it 
to him, and Dryden (Prologue to Davenant's Circe] expressly 
says : 

Shakespeare's own muse her Pericles first bore ; 
The Prince of Tyre was elder than the Moor ; 
'Tis miracle to see a first good play ; 
All hawthorns do not bloom on Christmas day. 

The genuineness of the play and its early production 
were at first maintained by Malone, who in his Supplement 
to Steevens's edition of 1778 sets out his theory at great 
length, but accompanies it by a dissertation in which 
Steevens propounds his doubts as to Shakespeare's share. 1 
Later on, however, he became a convert to Steevens's view, 
and in his edition of 1790 his mature convictions are thus 

] For the discussion between these two critics, see the Variorum of 1821, 
vol. xxi., pp. 221-253. 



x INTRODUCTION 

stated. " The congenial sentiments, the numerous expres 
sions bearing a striking similitude to passages in his un 
disputed plays, some of the incidents, the situation of many 
of the persons, and in various places the colour of the style 
combine to set the seal of Shakespeare on the play before 
us, and furnish us with internal and irresistible proofs that a 
considerable portion of this piece, as it now appears, was 
written by him. The greater part of the three last Acts 
may, I think, on this ground be safely ascribed to him ; and 
his hand may be traced occasionally in the other divisions. 
. . ." Steevens, after a lengthy criticism of the Choruses, 
and a few remarks as to the Dumb Shows, passes on to 
more general considerations. " The drama before us," he 
says, " contains no discrimination of manners (except in the 
comick dialogues), very few traces of original thought, and 
is evidently destitute of that intelligence and useful know 
ledge that pervade even the meanest of Shakespeare's un 
disputed performances. To speak more plainly, it is neither 
enriched by the gems that sparkle through the rubbish of 
Love's Labour's Lost, nor the good sense that so often 
fertilises the barren fable of The Two Gentlemen of Verona. 
Pericles, in short, is little more than a string of adventures 
so numerous, so inartificially crowded together, and so far 
removed from probability, that, in my judgment, I must 
acquit even the irregular and lawless Shakespeare from 
having constructed the fabrick of the drama, though he has 
certainly bestowed some decoration on its parts. ... I do 
not recollect a single plot of Shakespeare's formation (or 
even adoption from preceding plays or novels) in which the 
majority of the characters are not so well connected, and so 



INTRODUCTION xi 

necessary in respect of each other, that they proceed in 
combination to the end of the story. ... In Pericles this 
continuity is wanting. , . . And even with the aid of Gower 
the scenes are rather loosely tacked together, than closely 
interwoven. We see no more of Antiochus after his first 
appearance. His anonymous daughter utters but one un 
intelligible couplet, and then vanishes. Simonides likewise 
is lost as soon as the marriage of Thaisa is over ; and the 
punishment of Cleon and his wife, which poetick justice 
demanded, makes no part of the action, but is related in a 
kind of epilogue by Gower. This is at least a practice 
which in no instance has received the sanction of Shake 
speare. From such deficiency of mutual interest, and liaison 
among the personages of the drama, I am further strengthened 
in my belief that our great poet had no part in constructing 
it. Dr. Johnson long ago observed that his real power is 
not seen in the splendor of particular passages, but in the 
progress of his fable, and the tenour of his dialogue : and 
when it becomes necessary for me to quote a decision 
founded on comprehensive views, I can appeal to none in 
which I should more implicitly confide. ... I admit with 
out reserve that Shakespeare ... is visible in many scenes 
throughout the play. But it follows not that he is answer 
able for its worst part, though the best it contains may be, 
not dishonourably, imputed to him. . . . To conclude, the 
play of Pericles was in all probability the composition of 
some friend whose interest the 'gentle Shakespeare' was 
industrious to promote. He therefore improved his dialogue 
in many places ; and knowing by experience that the strength 
of a dramatick piece should be augmented towards its catas 
trophe, was most liberal in the last Act. . . ." 



xii INTRODUCTION 

The conclusion at which Malone arrived as to Shake 
speare's share has, with more or less difference of detail, been 
largely accepted in modern times ; though there are those 
who, with Knight, still maintain that the play is wholly 
Shakespeare's, but written at different periods, perhaps 
distant from each other by some twenty years. " That it 
was an early work," remarks that critic, " we are constrained 
to believe ; not from the evidence of particular passages, 
which may be deficient in power or devoid of refinement, 
but from the entire construction of dramatic action. The 
play is essentially one of movement, which is a great re 
quisite for dramatic success ; but that movement is not held 
in subjection to unity of idea. The writer, in constructing 
the plot, had not arrived to a perfect conception of the 
principle c that a tragedy is tied to the laws of poesy, and 
not of history, not bound to follow the story, but having 
liberty either to feign a quite new matter, or to frame the 
history to the most tragical convenience'. But with this 
essential disadvantage we cannot doubt that, even with very 
imperfect dialogue, the action presented a succession of 
scenes of very absorbing interest. The introduction of 
Gower, however inartificial it may seem, was the result of 
very profound skill. The presence of Gower supplied the 
unity of idea which the desultory nature of the story wanted ; 
and thus it is that in ' the true history ' formed upon the 
play, the unity of idea is kept in the expression of the title- 
page, * as it was lately presented by the worthy and ancient 
poet, John Gower '. Nevertheless, such a story, we believe, 
could not have been chosen by Shakspere in the seventeenth 
century, when his art was fully developed in all its wondrous 



INTRODUCTION xiii 

powers and combinations. With his perfect mastery of the 
faculty of representing, instead of recording, the treatment 
of a story which would have required perpetual explanation 
and connection would have been painful to him, if not im 
possible." 

This belief in an early production revised in its author's 
later days had many years before commended itself " as 
every way probable " to the judgment of Verplanck, 1 who 
writes : " Pericles having, from its first appearance, by means 
of its story, its dumb-show, and by its comparative merit re 
latively to its rivals for popular favour, succeeded and kept 
possession of the stage, the author would not feel himself 
called upon to rewrite a play which answered its main end, 
and the subject of which presented no peculiar attractions 
to him, while the re-examination of his own boyish, half- 
formed thoughts would naturally expand and elevate them 
into nobler forms, and re-clothe them in that glowing 
language he had since created for himself. . . . Neverthe 
less, the other solution of the difficulty . . . may still be the 
true one : that the original Pericles was by some inferior 
hand, perhaps by a personal friend of Shakespeare's, 
and that he; without remodelling the plot, undertook to 
correct and improve it, beginning with slight additions, and 
his mind, warming as it proceeded, breaking out towards 
the close of the drama with its accustomed vigour and 
abundance." 

Other supporters of the view that the play is wholly 
Shakespeare's are Drake and Procter, together with the 
German critics, Ulrici and Franz Horn. Dyce, with whom 

1 Quoted by Rolfe, Introduction to Pericles^ pp. 22, 23, 



xiv INTRODUCTION 

Grant White substantially agrees, remarks : " The greater part 
of Pericles is undoubtedly by some very inferior dramatist : 
but here and there, more particularly towards the close, the 
hand of Shakespeare is plainly seen, and the scenes and 
shorter passages in which we trace him manifestly belong 
to his latest style of composition. Whether it had ever been 
acted before it received those vivifying touches from our 
poet, we cannot determine perhaps it was the Pericles in 
which Alleyn wore the 'spangled hoes 5 mentioned in an 
inventory of his theatrical apparel (vide Collier's Memoirs 
of Alleyn, p. 21): we at least may be sure that it was 
originally composed at a period long antecedent to its 
appearance at the Globe Theatre in 1607 or 1608 ; and we 
may conjecture that Shakespeare bestowed on it certain 
additions and improvements for the benefit of that 
theatre." 

In the Jahrbuch der Deutschen Shakespeare-Gesellschaft, 
1868, pp. 175-204, Delius examines the whole question with 
his usual admirable thoroughness. His general conclusion 
is that Wilkins was the original author of Pericles, and he 
thinks it probable that when Shakespeare took the play in 
hand it had already been acted in another shape. Out 
lining the plot of Wilkins's one extant play, The Miseries of 
Enforced Marriage, he finds a striking similarity to the earlier 
Acts of Pericles in point of language, metre and structure. 
Particularly he notices a predilection for weaving rhymed 
lines and blank verse together, and quotes a number of 
passages from those Acts in support of his view. In illus 
tration of similarity of incident and language he compares 
Pericles, II. v. 87-92, and The Miseries, etc., v. s.f. : 



INTRODUCTION xv 

Pericles : 

Sim. What ! are you both pleas'd ? 

Thai, Yes, if you love me, sir. 

Per. Even as my life my blood that fosters it. 

Sim. What ! are you both agreed ? 

Thai. Per. Yes, if it please your majesty. 

Sim. It pleaseth me so well, that I will see you wed ; 

And then with what haste you can, get you to bed. 

The Miseries, etc. : 

Scarborow. And are all pleas'd ? 

All. We are. 

Scarborow. Then if all these be so, 

I am new wed, so ends old marriage woe ; 

And in your eyes so lovingly being wed, 

We hope your hands will bring us to our bed. 

Even the prose, he thinks, betrays a family likeness, e.g. 
in Thaliard's speech, I. iii., and the dialogue of the fisher 
men, II. i. He further notices the clumsy antitheses and 
metaphors, the phrases of empty bombast, that are common 
to both plays. In his analysis of the title-page of Pericles he 
dwells at considerable length on questions which have already 
been discussed, and in that of the Acts taken separately 
notices many points of minor importance. 

In corroboration of Delius's theory, Mr. R. Boyle * cites 
various parallels from The Miseries, etc. ; from The Travels 
of the Three English Brothers, by Day, Wilkins, and Rowley ; 
and from Day's Law Tricks, in which Wilkins probably had 
a hand. I extract the more important of these. 

1 " On Wilkins's share in the play called Shakespeare's Pericles " (A paper 
read at the 76th Meeting of the New Shakespeare Society, loth February, 
1882). 

b 



xvi INTRODUCTION 

(a) Pericles, I. Gower, 15, 16: 

I life would wish, and that I might 
Waste it for you like taper-light. 

The Travels, etc., sc. 2 : 

Our lives are lighted tapers that must out. 

(b) Pericles, I. i. 64, 65 : 

I am no viper, yet I feed 

On mother's flesh which did me breed. 

The Miseries, etc., p. 522, Hazlitt's Dodsley: 

John. He is more degenerate 

Than greedy vipers that devour their mother, 
eat on her but to preserve themselves. 



And again, p. 565 : 

Butler. But will not suffer 

The husband viper-like to prey on them 
That love him, and have cherished him. 

(c) Pericles, II. i. 28-46 : 

Third Fisherman. Master, I marvel how the fishes live in the sea. 

First Fisherman. Why, as men do a-land ; the great ones eat up the 
little ones. I can compare our rich misers to nothing so fitly 
as to a whale ; a' plays and tumbles, driving the poor fry before 
him, and at last devours them all at a mouthful. Such whales 
have I heard on o' the land, who never leave gaping till 
they 've swallowed the whole parish, church, steeple, bells, 
and all. 

Pericles [Aside.] A pretty moral. 

Third Fisherman. But, master, if I had been the sexton, I would have 
been that day in the belfry. 

Second Fisherman. Why, man ? 

Third Fisherman. Because he should have swallowed me too ; and 
when I had been in his belly, I would have kept such a 
jangling of the bells, that he should never have left till he 
cast bells, steeple, church, and parish, up again. 



INTRODUCTION xvii 

Law Tricks, I 2, p. 25, Bullen's Reprint : 

Joculo. Welcome to Genoa, madam ; and to make a short cut of our 

long travel, faith tell me, how do you feel yourself since you 

came ashore ? 
Emilia. Feel myself? Why, with my hands : a What idle question 's 

that! 
Joculo. Then, pray, be you better occupied in your answer. But, 

madam, do you remember what a multitude of fishes we saw 

at sea ? And I do wonder how they can all live by one 

another. 
Emilia. Why, fool, as men do on the land ; the great ones eat up the 

little ones. 

And i. 2, p. 26 : 

Emilia. Are you a lawyer ? 

Julio. Faith, madam, he has sat on the skirts of law any time this 

thirty years. 

Adam. Then he should be a good trencherman by his profession. 
Lurdo. Your reason, Adam ? 
Adam. I knew one of that faculty in one term eat up a whole town, 

church, steeple, and all. 

Julio. I wonder the bells rang not all in his belly. 
Adam. No, sir, he sold them to buy his wife a taffety gown and 

himself a velvet jacket. 2 

Also The Miseries, etc., p. 539 : 

O the most wretched season of this time ! 
These men, like fish, do swim within one stream, 
Yet they'd eat one another. 

1 This pitiful joke occurs also in The Miseries, etc., Act iv. 

2 It is perhaps worth while to notice that this extract is not conclusive 
against the author of Pericles, n. i. as being the borrower. Law Triiks was 
published in 1608, the same year in which Pericles was entered by Blount in 
the Stationers' Register ; and as the latter play had been " divers and sundry 
times " acted before the first Quarto was issued, it may be that Day " con 
veyed" the joke. Moreover, while it comes naturally in a dialogue between 
fishermen, it appears rather to have been lugged in by the ears in Law 
Tricks. 



xviii INTRODUCTION 

(d) Pericles, II. i. 62-64 : 

A man whom both the waters and the wind, 
In that vast tennis-court, have made the ball 
For them to play upon. 

The Travels, etc., x. 6, p. 41 : 

I think that the seas 

Play'd with us as great men do a-land, 

Hurl'd us now up, then down. 

Fleay, Shakespeare Manual, pp. 209-233, follows Delius 
in ascribing Acts I. and II. to Wilkins, but in Act IV. 
detects a third hand, that of Rowley. 1 Shakespeare, he 
argues, would never have chosen a story of incest which 
has no tragic horror in it ; still less would he have grafted 
on to it a filthy episode devoid of all humour. His share 
in the play is the Marina portion, which "gives a perfect 
artistic and organic whole ". This, however, as insufficient 
for dramatic purposes, was put into other hands for com 
pletion ; the result being the present composite work. In 
confirmation of his theory, Fleay points to the absence of 
Pericles from the Folio of 1623 ; to the publication of the 
first Quarto by booksellers who dealt mainly in surrepti 
tious editions ; the wretched condition of the text, indicating 
Shakespeare's utter neglect of the play ; the omission of the 
names of Boult, Bawd, and Pander from the list of actors 
(i.e. dramatis personae) in the first Quarto ; 2 the facts that the 
Gower parts in Acts IV. and V. are in lines of five measures 
instead of four as in the earlier Acts ; the superiority, so 

1 This tripartite division was first made by Sidney Walker, who suggested 
Dekker as the third hand. 

2 As no such list is given in any of the Quartos, this argument falls to 
the ground. 



INTRODUCTION xix 

far as mere literature is concerned, of the brothel scenes to 
anything in the first two Acts ; the impossibility of Shake 
speare's marrying Marina to a man like Lysimachus ; the 
alterations of, and additions to, the Shakespeare work by 
which Wilkins in his novel fancied he could improve the 
narrative. The difference of style and metre in the blank 
verse Fleay illustrates by a comparison between Act III. i. 
1-6, Act IV. vi. 167-175, Act II. i. i-n, and of the rhym 
ing verse in various places ; his contention as to Wilkins's 
share he supports by a metrical analysis of that dramatist's 
Miseries of Enforced Marriage ; and his belief in the presence 
of Rowley by a reference to his style, and to the fact that 
about the time when Pericles may be supposed to have been 
written he was associated with Wilkins and Day in The 
Travels of the Three English Brothers. 

Closely allied with the question of Wilkins's share in the 
play is that of the authorship of the brothel scenes. With 
these, in the opinion of most modern commentators, Shake 
speare had no concern ; while some hold with Fleay that 
they are due to Rowley. Nevertheless there are sound 
scholars who refuse assent to either doctrine. Thus Boas, 
Shakspere and his Predecessors, p. 554, while admitting the 
possibility of a third hand, remarks that " their Shaksperean 
authorship is not to be so decisively rejected as some critics 
assume. The most repellent features in the scenes mentioned 
may be paralleled from Measure for Measure^ and here as 
there, they are not introduced from sheer love of foulness. 
They throw the virginal figure of Marina into brilliant relief 
by exhibiting her untainted purity amidst the most contam 
inating surroundings. And in the dialogue there are touches 



xx INTRODUCTION 

worthy of the great dramatist, e.g. the sudden rise from 
prose to verse in Act IV. vi., when Marina appeals to Lysi- 
machus in lines that have a true Shakesperean ring : 

If you were born to honour, show it now ; 

If put upon you, make the judgement good 

That thought you worthy of it. ... 

O ! that the gods 

Would set me free from this unhallow'd place, 

Though they did change me to the meanest bird 

That flies i' the purer air. 

So too the opening lines of Act V., 1 describing her oc 
cupations after her escape from captivity, contain distinc 
tively Shaksperean expressions and ideas : e.g. : 

Deep clerks she dumbs ; and with her neeld composes 
Nature's own shape, of bud, bird, branch, or berry, 

That even her art sisters the natural roses ; 
Her inkle, silk, twin with the rubied cherry. 

Here the word ' inkle ' which occurs in The Winter s Tale 
and the description of Marina's needlework as counterfeiting 
nature to the life, both suggest the hand of Shakspere, who 
always adopts this realistic criterion of art." 

I go much farther than Boas, and believe that through 
out the three scenes, IV. ii. v. vi., Shakespeare's presence is 
distinctly visible in characteristic expressions and turns of 
thought. These, indeed, are to my mind so striking and 
abound so largely that while space does not admit of my 
instancing them, I am astonished at their being supposed to 
come from any mint but one. What, however, impresses 

1 With the five-measure Gower parts in iv. iv., and in this Chorus (though 
the rhymes here are alternate and not consecutive) we should, I think, com 
pare The Winter's Tale, iv. i., Enter Time, the only other Chorus in which 
Shakespeare uses rhymed lines. 



INTRODUCTION xxi 

me even more forcibly is a consideration of structure. In 
Wilkins's novel Lysimachus is a profligate roue. The Bawd 
describes him as " a fauorer of our calling, one that will as 
soone haue his hand in his pocket, as such a pretty dilling 
as thou shalt come in his eye, and not as most of our Gentle 
men doe, draw it out empty, but filling it full of golde, will 
most Joue-like rayne it downe into his Danaes lap ". This 
portrait, originally outlined by Twine, Lysimachus subse 
quently acknowledges for his own. Yet Pericles is shown us 
as cheerfully giving his daughter in marriage to a man of 
notoriously evil life. To Shakespeare such a denouement 
was impossible. While therefore he was bound to the 
brothel episode, he has, I maintain, taken upon himself to 
give us his own reading of Lysimachus's character. It has 
been pointed out that in their general scope these scenes 
have much in common with certain others in Measure for 
Measure. This likeness may, I think, be extended to a 
particular fact. The Duke there uses his disguise, assumed 
for a special purpose, as a means of informing himself upon 
the manner of life of his subjects, who owing to the laxity 
of his rule had fallen into dissolute ways. Similarly, it 
seems to me, Shakespeare may have conceived Lysimachus 
as wishing to probe the plague-sores of the city of which he 
was governor. Wilkins in his novel, following Twine's lead, 
preferred the baser presentation of Lysimachus's character, 
and his version in the play of the interview with Marina 
would no doubt have been on the same lines. For the 
reason mentioned above, Shakespeare was debarred from 
accepting such a situation. At any rate, whatever the object 
that led Lysimachus to visit the brothel, his conduct there 



xxii INTRODUCTION 

is quite in keeping with motives other than those by which 
he is actuated in the prose narratives of the story. With 
the Bawd and Pander he naturally assumes the role of an 
ordinary trafficker in the wares they had to utter and talks 
to them in their own language. Towards Marina his atti 
tude is wholly different. While making trial of her virtue, 
he gives vent to none of the threats, displays none of the 
coarseness and violence, which Wilkins plentifully imputes 
to him. Instead of compelling her to protracted entreaties, 
he quickly recognises her genuine purity, and at the close of 
the interview, so far from confessing his vile intentions, 
emphatically protests that he never had the design of violat 
ing her honour. The language of his self-exculpation could 
hardly be more vigorous. " Had I," he says : 

Had I brought hither a corrupted mind, 

Thy speech had alter'd it. Hold, here 's gold for thee ; 

Persever in that clear way thou goest, 

And the gods strengthen thee ! . . . 

For me, be you thoughten 

That I came with no ill intent, for to me 

The very doors and windows savour vilely. 

Farewell. Thou art a piece of virtue, and 

I doubt not that thy training hath been noble. 

Hold, here 's more gold for thee. 

A curse upon him, die he like a thief, 

That robs thee of thy goodness ! If thou dost 

Hear from me, it shall be for thy good. 

So too with fierce indignation he turns upon Boult in these 
words : 

Avaunt ! thou damned door-keeper. Your house, 
But for this virgin that doth prop it, would 
Sink and overwhelm you. Away ! 



INTRODUCTION xxiii 

Surely these speeches have the full ring of truth, in every 
line bear the impress of Shakespeare, and, no less surely, 
I submit, exhibit him as rewriting a scene which in its first 
shape had followed the course of the Paineful Aduentures. 
There with maudlin emotion, wiping the tears from Marina's 
eyes, and longing to reward her virtue with a chaste kiss, 
Lysimachus whimpers out, " I hither came with thoughtes 
intemperate, foule and deformed, the which your paines so 
well have laued, that they are now white, continue still to 
all so, and for my parte, who hither came but to have payd 
the price, a peece of golde for your virginitie, now giue you 
twenty to releeve your honesty ". Equally in Twine's novel, 
though the details vary, we are left in no doubt as to the 
character and intentions of Athenagoras, the counterpart of 
Lysimachus. Being outbidden at the public auction when 
seeking to purchase Marina, he consoles himself with the 
reflection, "if I should contend with the bawd to buy her 
at so hie a price, I must needes sell other slaves to pay for 
her, which were both losse and shame unto me. Wherefore 
I will suffer him to buy her; and when he setteth her 
to hire, I will be the first man that shall come unto her, and 
I will gather the floure of her virginitie, which shall stand 
mee in as great steade as if I had bought her." Like 
Lysimachus, too, in Wilkins's account, moved by Marina's 
sad plight, Athenagoras abandons his avowed design. From 
the Confessio Amantis the incident of the governor's visit 
to the brothel is altogether absent. 

Of course it is not necessary to my view that Shake 
speare should have written the whole of these scenes. In 
deed, if he had originally taken the plot into his hands, I 



xxiv INTRODUCTION 

can imagine that he would have omitted certain details, 
would have brought the different parts into more complete 
harmony, and left us in no doubt as to points that have 
given rise to debate. While, therefore, as regards the 
dialogue I hold that wherever Marina is on the stage, Shake 
speare is present too, and that throughout the rest his con 
tributions are manifold, my main contention is that not 
without set purpose did he pourtray Lysimachus as we have 
him in the sixth scene, nor without a motive sufficiently 
obvious. 

Apart from these scenes, with perhaps the Gower parts, 
the Dumb Show and the Vision, no question is made as to 
Shakespeare's authorship of the last three Acts. If, how 
ever, we suppose with Fleay that he had nothing to do with 
the first two, there is to me a stumbling-block impossible to 
get over. His work concludes the play. Now, while he 
would not have considered these three Acts sufficient in 
themselves for an acting drama, it is almost equally beyond 
belief that he should have begun in the middle, or that, 
having so far worked out the details of the plot as to put its 
climax into final shape, he should have left himself the task 
of adapting the earlier portions to the incidents that follow. 
To a piece of work so preposterous, in the strict sense of the 
word, so useless for theatrical purposes, so unsuitable for 
publication, the history of literature affords, I think, no 
parallel. Had the fragment been one commencing the story, 
we could account for its being laid aside for various reasons : 
a reversal of the process is to my mind inconceivable. Nor 
can I admit that the Marina portion " gives a perfect artistic 
and organic whole," especially when stripped of the Gower 



INTRODUCTION xxv 

parts, which Fleay repudiates as non-Shakespearean ; for 
some introduction of the characters and some outline of 
previous events would be necessary to the understanding of 
the story. 

If, then, we may take it for granted that Shakespeare 
wrote the greater part of the last three Acts ; that he could 
not have left behind him a headless torso ; that metrical 
tests, coupled with considerations of style, prove almost the 
whole of the first two Acts to be by some other author ; and 
that in the brothel scenes there are abundant manifestations 
of Shakespeare's hand : there seems to me no option left 
but to believe that he furbished up a play already in the 
possession of the Globe Theatre a play which as it stood 
did not in the opinion of the company promise to be a 
success. That he did at times revise the work of other 
dramatists is admitted ; and, since he would regard such re 
vision as little else than a matter of business, we need feel 
no surprise at his handling a theme that would have been 
repugnant to his own free choice. When, therefore, to 
Wilkins's declared interest in the story there is superadded 
a similarity on so many points between the earlier Acts of 
Pericles and his one extant drama, there seems no extrava 
gance in supposing him to have been the author of the whole 
of our play in its first form. The facts that he was attached 
to the Globe Theatre as one of its staff, and that his Miseries 
of Enforced Marriage had there been staged shortly before 
the first Quarto of Pericles was published, add, I think, not 
a little to the likelihood of this inference. 

Upon such hypotheses, I conceive Shakespeare's treat 
ment of the material before him to have been somewhat of 



xxvi INTRODUCTION 

this kind. Finding that the Antiochus and Simonides 
stories were worked out in a fairly adequate manner, and 
feeling little interest in those stories, he was at no great 
pains to interfere with the original author ; though, if we 
may judge from the prose versions, he improved both Acts by 
compression, and, unless I am mistaken, rewrote in a great 
measure the first Scene of the second Act. When he came 
to the Marina story, he saw in it a subject congenial to his 
mind and one affording scope for effective development. 
He therefore made this portion wholly his own, rejecting all 
but the outline of events on which it was based. The 
brothel scenes were integral to the plot as narrated in the 
original sources. These he largely revised, strengthening 
and vivifying the dialogue with humour of his own, and, 
in particular, so presenting Lysimachus that his union with 
Marina should not offend against consistency and good taste : 
while at the close of the play he discarded many details found 
in the Confessio Amantis and Twine's novel as not essential 
or suitable to a dramatic ending. If in the first draft of the 
play Wilkins, as in the novel, had closely followed those 
authorities, we have only another proof of Shakespeare's 
finer judgment in the omission of such superfluities. 

Such a theory, I submit, holds together throughout, 
removes all difficulties as to the composition of the play, 
and avoids recourse to fanciful assumptions. 

By more than one critic it has been sought to strengthen 
Wilkins's claim to a share in Pericles by asserting that he 
calls it " a poore infant of my braine ". He does nothing of 
the sort. The words occur in the dedication of his novel 
and refer to that only. That there may be no doubt on this 



INTRODUCTION xxvii 

point, I quote the whole passage. " A poore infant of my 
braine comes naked vnto you without other clothing than 
my loue, and craves your hospitalitie. If you take this to 
refuge, her father dooth promise, that with more labored 
houres he can inheighten your Name and Memorie, and 
therein shall appeere he will not die ingrateful. Yet 
thus much he dare say, in behalfe of this, somewhat it con- 
taineth that may inuite the choicest eie to reade, nothing 
heere [sic ? hee] is sure may breede displeasure to arise. So 
leauing your spare houres to the recreation thereof, and my 
boldenesse now submitting it selfe to your censure, not willing 
to make a great waie to a little house, I rest Most desirous 
to be held all yours, GEORGE WlLKINS." Upon this the 
very utmost that can be conjectured is that Wilkins may 
possibly be darkly hinting at the fact of his play not having 
been allowed to come to full maturity in other words, at its 
passing under the parentage of Shakespeare. As, however, 
similar periphrastic forms of dedication were so frequent, 
I see no reason whatever why the expression should not be 
taken in its most natural sense. Be this as it may, to 
assert categorically that in these words Wilkins claims 
Pericles as his own is to torture language beyond endurance. 
Fleay adds that Wilkins " plumes himself on the arrange 
ment of the Gower choruses as his own". There being 
nothing in the Dedication or the Argument or the body of 
the novel that will bear such construction, Fleay must refer 
to the opening lines of the first chorus. But this is to beg 
the question of authorship and to assume that Wilkins 
speaks in his own person. " Gower " is the deus ex machina, 
neither more nor less than "Rumour" in the Induction to 



xxviii INTRODUCTION 

the Second Part of Henry the Fourth and " Time " in the 
first scene of the fourth Act of The Winters Tale. How 
ever certain, therefore, we may feel that Wilkins was the 
original author of the play, we have again an inference only. 
One other small point it is perhaps worth while to notice 
here. Delius suggests the possibility of Pericles having 
been acted before it came under Shakespeare's revision. If 
this were so, ingenuity might find a special significance in 
the wording of the title-page of the novel, " Being the true 
history of the play of Pericles ". Such phrases as " the true 
chronicle history of the life and death of King Lear," " the 
tragical history of Hamlet," "the excellent history of The 
Merchant of Venice," are frequent enough. But here it is 
" the true history of the play" etc., and though the words 
probably mean nothing more than the true history of Pericles 
as told in the play, it is just conceivable that Wilkins was 
alluding to his own version as having been tampered with 
by Shakespeare. In regard to the date at which Pericles -, 
in whatever form, was first acted, we have no evidence, nor 
of course need the "divers and sundry times" be more 
rigidly interpreted than a modern advertisement. But the 
novel was published a year before the first Quarto. 

In the Introduction to Troilus and Cressida I have ac 
knowledged my obligations to the Cambridge Editors. In 
the present play, corrupt as it is beyond any other of Shake 
speare's, that debt has been multiplied many times over. 
For, though I have had before me almost all the chief 
modern editions, including the Variorum of 1821, it would, 
in default of access to the old copies, have been impossible 
for me to register with any fulness the various readings to 



INTRODUCTION xxix 

be found in the Cambridge Shakespeare, or even to do 
justice to the conjectures with which later criticism abounds. 
I have not of course given a twentieth part of the valuable 
material recorded with such minute accuracy in that edition ; 
but, except for those who desire a complete collation of the 
Quartos and Folios, my extracts will, I think, supply all 
that is needed. 



PERICLES 



DRAMA TIS PERSONS 



I two Lords of Tyre. 



ANTIOCHUS, King of Antioch. 

PERICLES, Prince of Tyre. 

HELICANUS, 

ESCANES, 

SIMONIDES, King of Pentapolis. 

CLEON, Governor of Tarsus. 

LYSIMACHUS, Governor of Mitylene. 

CERIMON, a Lord of Ephesus. 

THALIARD, a Lord of Antioch. 

PHILEMON, Servant to Cerimon. 

LEONINE, Servant to Dionyza. 

Marshal. 

A Pandar. BOULT, his Servant. 

The Daughter of Antiochus. 

DIONYZA, Wife to Cleon. 

THAISA, Daughter to Simonides. 

MARINA, Daughter to Pericles and Thaisa. 

LYCHORIDA, Nurse to Marina. 

A Bawd. 

Lords, Ladies, Knights, Gentlemen, Sailors, Pirates, 
Fishermen, and Messengers. 

DIANA. 

GOWER, as Chorus. 
SCENE : Dispersedly in various Countries. 

* " No list of Dramatis Personae is found in any Quarto edition. It is first 
given after the play in the third Folio and prefixed to it in the fourth. It is 
called in both ' The Actors names '. Antiochus is there described as ' a 
Tyrant of Greece'. Then follows ' Hesperides, Daughter to Antiochus'. 
4 Dionyza' is called ' Dionysia,' and ' Mytilene ' ' Metaline'. Another char 
acter is introduced, viz., ' Philoten, Daughter to Cleon', The errors and 
omissions were partly corrected by Rowe and partly by Malone in his sup 
plement to Steevens' edition of 1778, published two years afterwards. He 
also added the words ' SCENE dispersedly in various countries ', , , ." 
(The Cambridge Editors.) 



PERICLES 

ACT I 

Enter GOWER. 

Before the Palace of Antioch. 

To sing a song that old was sung, 

From ashes ancient Gower is come. 

Assuming mans infirmities -, 

To glad your ear, and please your eyes. 

It hath been sung at festivals^ 5 

On ember-eves and holy-ales ; 

6. holy -ales] Steevens; Holy day es Qq i, 3 ; Holy dayes Q 2; holy-dales 
Qq 4, 5 ; holi-dayes Q 6 ; holy-day es Ff 3, 4. 

ACTI] " The Folios have here A ctu s ting on again the frail body of mor- 

Primus. Scena Prima. In the rest tality. 

of the play the Acts are marked, but 6. ember-eves] The vigils of ember- 

not the scenes. There is no indica- days, the four periods of fasting and 

tion of either in the Quartos " (The prayer appointed by the Church to be 

Cambridge Editors). observed respectively in the four sea- 

Enter Gower] Here and through- sons of the year. Each of these fasts 

out the play the stage-directions as to occupies three days, viz., a Wednes- 

place at the beginning of each scene day and the following Friday and 

are due to Malone. Saturday after (i) the First Sunday 

1. old] if sound, is here used ad- in Lent, (2) the Feast of Pentecost, 
verbially = of old. Steevens, on Ma- (3) I4th September, (4) I3th Decem- 
lone's conjecture, reads " of old " for ber. The origin of the element 
" that old ". " ember " in this compound is doubt- 

2. Gower] The author of Confessio ful. See New Eng, Diet. 
Amantis in which this story is told. 6. holy-ales'] An ale was " a rural 

3. Assuming man's infirmities'] put- festival, where of course much ale was 

3 



PERICLES 



[ACT i. 



And lords and ladies in their lives 
Have read it for restoratives : 
The purchase is to make men glorious ; 
Et bonum quo antiquius, eo melius. 
If you, born in these latter times, 
When wit's more ripe, accept my rimes, 
And that to hear an old man sing 
May to your wishes pleasure bring, 
I life would wish, and that I might 
Waste it for you like taper-light. 
This Antioch, then, Antiochus the Great 
Built up, this city, for his chiefest seat, 
The fairest in all Syria, 
I tell you what mine authors say : 
This king unto him took a fere, 



IO 



20 



21. fere] Peere Qq ; Peer Ff 3, 4. 
consumed. . . . There were bride-ales, 
church-ales, give-ales, lamb-ales, 
leet-ales, Midsummer-ales, Scot-ales, 
Whitsun-ales, and several more " 
(Nares, Glossary), such as help-ales, 
soule-ales, dirge-ales. Stubbes in his 
Anatomy of Abuses, 1583 (ed. Furni- 
vall, pp. 150, 151), attacks these 
" ales," and says : " In this kind of 
practice they continue six weeks, a 
quarter of a yeer, yea, half a yeer 
togither, swilling and gulling, night 
and day, till they be as drunke as 
Apes, and as blockish as beasts". 

8. restoratives] sc. of their spirits. 
Compare Romeo and Juliet, v. iii. 166. 

9. purchase] gain, profit. Clarke 
quotes The Advancement of Learning 
[ii. 23, 37] : " Some fall in love with 
accesse to princes, others with popular 
fame and applause, supposing that 
they are things of great purchase. 
. . ." Add id. i. 2, 5: "taking 
pleasure in the action itself, and not 
in the purchase ". The verb in such 
sense is frequent in the dramatists. 



10. antiquius] Steevens points out 
that the common saying has com- 
munius. 

11. // you] For that omitted and 
afterwards inserted, see Abbott, 
Shakespearian Grammar, 285. 

12. wit] intelligence, knowledge. 
16. Waste . . . taper-light] spend 

it freely on your behalf like a candle 
burnt by bookworms. See Introduc 
tion. 

18. his chiefest seat] Steevens 
quotes Twine's Patterne of Painefull 
Aduenters, originally taken from the 
Gesta Romanorum : " The most 
famous and mighty King Antiochus, 
which builded the goodlie citie of 
Antiochia in Syria, and called it after 
his owne name, as the chiefest seat of 
all his dominions". 

20. mine authors] the authorities 
from whom I draw the materials of 
my story. 

21. fere] companion, partner, 
whether male or female. Often spelt 
" pheere " by imitators of the antique, 



PROLOGUE] 



PERICLES 



Who died and left a female heir, 
So buxom , blithe, and full of face 
As heaven had lent her all his grace ; 
With whom the father liking took, 
And her to incest did provoke. 
Bad child, worse father ! to entice his own 
To evil should be done by none. 
But custom what they did begin 
Was with long use account no sin. 
The beauty of this sinful dame 
Made many princes thither frame, 

30. account] Malone ; accounted (or accounted) Qq ; counted Ff 3, 4. 



though " fere " is really the older form. 
Compare Titus Andronicus, iv. i. 
89:- 

" And swear with me, as with the 

woeful fere 
And father of that chaste dis- 

honour'd dame " ; 

Golding's Ovid, Metamorphoses, ii. : 
"Apollo loves and longs to have this 
Daphne for his/ere ". 

23. buxom] literally flexible, pliant ; 
from " bow," to bend, and " some " 
(the affix) ; but "exhibiting a singular 
change of meaning, from the original 
notion of obedience to that of brisk, 
cheerful, healthy in the confined 
application of modern times. . . . 
As pliableness and gentleness are 
the distinguishing features of a 
woman, the word seems to have been 
mainly applied as a term of com 
mendation to a young woman, and 
so to have passed on to designate 
other admired characteristics of 
female society, cheerfulness, liveliness, 
and what tends to produce it " (Wedg 
wood, Dictionary). 

23. full of face] replete with every 
facial charm. 

25. With whom . . . took] with 
whom the father fell in love. 



29, 30. But custom . . . sin] A 
blending of " But by custom (familiar 
ity) what they did begin was with long 
use accounted no sin," and " But cus 
tom caused what they did begin to be 
accounted no sin " . In the Confessio 
Amantis : 

"And such delite he tooke ther 

inne, 

Hym thouht that it was no synne, 
And she dorst hym no thinge 

withseye ". 

For the curtailed form of the par 
ticiple, see Abbott, Shakespearian 
Grammar, 342. 

32. frame] " shape or direct their 
course " i Malone). Of " frame " used 
thus absolutely, I have met with no 
other instance ; but Heywood, The 
Shipwreck (Pearson, vi. 100), has 

"O, if I can 
But get to land safe, pilgrimage 

I 'II frame 
Unto the blessed Maid of Wal- 

singhame " ; 

and Spenser, Faerie Queene, iii. i, 
20 : 

" A stately castle far away she 

spied 

To which her steps directly she 
did frame ". 



6 PERICLES [ACT i. 

To seek her as a bedfellow y 
In marriage-pleasures playfellow : 
Which to prevent he made a law, 35 

To keep her still, and men in awe, 
That whoso astid her for his wife, 
His riddle told not, lost his life ; 
So for her many a wight did die, 
As yon grim looks do testify. 40 

What now ensues, to the judgement of your eye 
I give, my cause who best can justify. \Exit. 

SCENE l.Antioch. A Room in the Palace. 

Enter ANTIOCHUS, PERICLES, and Attendants. 

Ant. Young Prince of Tyre, you have at large receiv'd 
The danger of the task you undertake. 

36. To keep . . . awe] to keep her Scene i. 
for his own enjoyment, and to keep 

men in awe ; a zeugma. Tenter . . . Pericles] Malone quotes 

38. His riddle] the riddle made and an epigram of Flecknoe, 1670, "On 

propounded by him (the father). the Play of the Life of Pyrocles" and 

40. grim looks] the heads of those Steevens argues that the hero of 
who had failed to solve the riddle, Sidney's Arcadia was also the hero 
fixed on the gate of the palace, of this play. " It is remarkable," he 
Steevens quotes the Confessio Aman- says, " that our ancient authors were 
tis, bk. viii. : ambitious to exhibit Sidney's worthies 

" And thus there wer6 many dede, on the stage ; and when his sub- 

Her hedes standing on the gate " ; ordinate agents were advanced to 

and remarks, " I suppose the audience such honour, how happened it that 

were here entertained with a view of Pyrocles, their leader, should be over- 

a kind of Temple Bar at Antioch". looked? " Quotations from the Ar- 

41, 42. the judgement . . . jus- cadia, which will be found in the 
tify] to be witnessed and judged by notes, support this conjecture. 

you who can best decide as to the i. Prince] "It does not appear in 

merits of the matter with which I deal, the present drama that the father of 

For cause we might perhaps read Pericles is living. By prince, there- 

" course " as more in keeping with fore, throughout this play, we are to 

ensues, though cause suits justify : understand prince regnant. See Act 

who, by some taken as = which ; n. iv. and in the epitaph, Act m. iii. 

rather, I think, referring to " you " In the Gesta Romanorum, Apollonius 

in your. is King of Tyre ; and Appolyn, in 



SC. I.] 



PERICLES 



Per. I have, Antiochus, and, with a soul, 

Embolden'd with the glory of her praise, 
Think death no hazard in this enterprise. 

Ant Bring in our daughter, clothed like a bride, 
For the embracements even of Jove himself; 
At whose conception, till Lucina reign'd, 
Nature this dowry gave, to glad her presence, 
The senate-house of planets all did sit, 
To knit in her their best perfections. 



10 



3-5. 7 ... enterprise.'] Arranged as by Malone; in Qq, Ff 3, 4, lines 3, 4 
end emboldned . . . hazard. 8. reign'd] Ff 3, 4; rained Q i; raigned 

Qq 2, 3 ; reigned Qq 4, 5, 6. 



Copland's translation from the French, 
has the same title. Our author, in 
calling Pericles a prince, seems to 
have followed Gower " (Malone). 

6. Bring in, etc.] The old copies 
give " Musicke, bring in," etc., which 
Malone first saw to be a stage-direc 
tion for the musicians to be ready 
with their music. 

7. For the . . . himself] clothed as 
a bride fit for, etc. 

8-n. At whose . . . perfections'] 
Malone says, " I think the construc 
tion is, ' at whose conception the 
senate-house of planets all did sit,' 
etc., and that the words 'till Lucina 
reign'd, Nature,' etc., are parenthet 
ical," but he does not explain the con 
struction of those parenthetical words. 
Mason, taking till as = while, renders, 
" At whose birth, during the time of 
her mother's labour, over which 
Lucina was supposed to preside, the 
planets all sat," etc. This, again, 
fails to take into account the words 
" Nature . . . presence," while, fur 
ther, conception and birth are con 
founded. Steevens conjectured "by 
whose concession," i.e., by whose (sc. 
Jove's) grant or leave, nature," etc., 
or would read " her conception ". I 
suggest 



" At whose conception, till Lucina 
reign'd, 

Nature rich dowry gave ; to glad 
her presence 

The senate-house," etc., 
i.e., at her conception, and while she 
was yet in the womb, Nature en 
dowed her richly ; at her birth, to 
give comeliness to her appearance 
on life's stage, the planets in council 
combined to invest her with every 
perfection. It would not be at her 
conception, as Malone says, but at her 
birth, according to the belief in plan 
etary influence, that such influence 
would be exercised. In Wilkins's novel 
the passage runs : " This Antiochus 
had increase by his Queene one onely 
daughter so excellent in beauty, as if 
Nature and all Perfection had long 
studied to seeme only absolute at her 
birth. This Ladie growing to like ripe 
ness of age, as shee had full endow 
ment of outward ornaments," etc. 
For the two last lines, Steevens com 
pares Sidney's Arcadia, bk. ii., " The 
senate-house of the planets was at no 
time so set for the decreeing of perfec 
tion in a man," etc. 

8. Lucina] the goddess of light, as 
bringing children into the world. 



8 PERICLES [ACT i. 

Music. Enter the Daughter of ANTIOCHUS. 

Per. See, where she comes apparell'd like the spring, 
Graces her subjects, and her thoughts the king 
Of every virtue gives renown to men ! 
Her face the book of praises, where is read 15 

Nothing but curious pleasures, as from thence 
Sorrow were ever raz'd, and testy wrath 
Could never be her mild companion. 
You gods, that made me man, and sway in love, 
That have inflam'd desire in my breast 20 

To taste the fruit of yon celestial tree 
Or die in the adventure, be my helps, 
As I am son and servant to your will, 
To compass such a boundless happiness! 

Ant. Prince Pericles, 25 

Per. That would be son to great Antiochus. 

Ant. Before thee stands this fair Hesperides, 

With golden fruit, but dangerous to be touch'd ; 

13-15. king Of . . . men / . . . praises,] Pointed as by Malone ; King, . . . 
men. . . . prayses, Qq, Ff 3, 4. 17. raz'd] ras'd Malone ; racte Qq i, 2; 

racket Q 3 ; rackt Qq 4, 5, 6, Ff 3, 4. 

14. gives] sc. which gives ; the garden of trees with golden fruit, but 
common ellipsis of the relative. mistaken by many old writers for the 

15. the book of praises] the volume garden itself. Thus Shakespeare, 
in which everything worth praise is Love's Labour's Lost, iv. iii. 341, has 
bound up. Compare Romeo and " climbing trees in the Hesperides " ; 
Juliet, i. iii. 81-88 ; Love's Labour 's Greene, Orlando Furioso, pp 90/1 (ed. 
Lost, iv. ii. 113. Dyce), "And richer than the plot 

16. curious] choice, exquisite. Hesperides " ; Friar Bacon and Friar 
Compare Cymbeline, v. v. 361: Bungay, p. 167/2, " That watch'd the 

11 He, sir, was lapp'd garden call'd Hesperides". Malone 

In a most curious mantle ". points out that the mistake in the 

18. her mild companion] the com- original list of dramatis persons of 

panion of her gentle nature. giving Hesperides as the name of the 

20. desire] a trisyllable here. king's daughter was due to this line 

23. As] according as. in which for the treasures of her 

27. Hesperides] properly the daugh- beauty she is likened to the garden 

ters of Hesperus who dwelt in the of the Hesperides. 



sc. i.] PERICLES 9 

For death-like dragons here affright thee hard : 
Her face, like heaven, enticeth thee to view 30 

Her countless glory, which desert must gain; 
And which, without desert, because thine eye 
Presumes to reach, all thy whole heap must die. 
Yon sometimes famous princes, like thyself, 
Drawn by report, adventurous by desire, 35 

Tell thee with speechless tongues and semblance pale, 
That without covering, save yon field of stars, 
They here stand martyrs, slain in Cupid's wars ; 
And with dead cheeks advise thee to desist 
For going on death's net, whom none resist. 40 

Per. Antiochus, I thank thee, who hath taught 
My frail mortality to know itself, 
And by those fearful objects to prepare 
This body, like to them, to what I must ; 
For death remember' d should be like a mirror, 45 

29. For . . . hard] for the terrors riage, Act ii. (Hazlitt's Dodsley, ix. 

of death here face you with cruel as- 505), we have a very similar expres- 

pect. Daniel conjectures, " For death, sion for the body : "I'll ... make 

like dragons, here affrights"; and a consumption of this pile of man". 

Walker, affront for affright. Malone 34. sometimes] sometime, once, 

inserted the hyphen which is wanting Shakespeare has both "sometimes" 

in Qq, Ff. and " sometime " in this sense. 

31. countless] infinite. As Malone 40. Forgoing . . . net] from run- 
says, the poet was probably thinking ning yourself into death's snare : for, 
of the stars, the "countless eyes " of literally, to prevent, or, from fear of. 
heaven (line 73). Clarke remarks that on is here for the 

31. which . . . gain] which noth- more usual "in," because driving 
ing but desert can win. headlong on to the net as well as 

32, 33. And which . . . die] and entering headlong into the net is 
because, without desert, your eye pre- thus implied. 

sumes to reach that fruit, you must 41. who hath] For the second 

perish, head and body. The word person of the verb when the antece- 

heap has been considered a difficulty dent is in the third person, see Abbott, 

here, and Collier conjectured " all thy Shakespearian Grammar, 247. 

whole head," which is little more than 44. to what I must] to inevitable 

nonsense ; and Bailey, shapes. But death. For to we should have ex- 

in Wilkins's Miseries of Enforced Mar- pected " for " . 



10 PERICL [ACT i. 

Who tefls us fife's but breath, to trust it, error. 
IH make my will then; and as sick men do, 
Who know the world, see heaven, but feeling 

woe, 

Gripe not at earthly joys as erst they did: 
So I bequeath a happy peace to yon : : 

And all good men, as every prince should do; 
My riches to the earth from whence they came, 
[7* /&* Princess.} But my unspotted fire of love to 

you. 

Thus ready for the way of life or death, 
I wait the sharpest blow. 5: 

Ant. Scorning advice, read the conclusion then; 
Which read and not expounded, 'tis decreed, 
As these before thee thou thyself shalt bleed. 



48,43. Whokn** . . . <KJ]"Tbe 55-57- 

ineanmg/'say* Mak>ne,"maybe<I Quarto, followed substantially by the 

win act as sick men do, who hating rest, has here 

had experience of the pleasures of the I wayte the sharpest Wow (4ti0- 

world, and only visionary and distant cMri 

prospect of heaven, kavt luglttUd the Scorning adaice; read die con 

fab/or tlu former ; but a* *** eMoji Aea : 

feeling themselves decaying, grasp no Which read, etc.' 

longer at temporal pleasures, but pre- The Folios : 

pare calmly for futurity V Though * I watte the sharpest blow (Antio- 

some modern editors accept this ex- chos) 

planation, I cannot believe that s Scorning advice. Readethecon- 

heaven embraces anything like so dHHMi t'r.tr.. 

comprehensive an idea. Mason con- X*/. Which read, etc. 1 

jectures "now in die world see (or Malone first made the correction 

seek) heaven " ; Staonton, " know die adopted in oar text. Steevens gave 

world's heaven " ; while Delias for die following arrangement : 

fa* would substitute " by ". Reading ' I wait die sharpest blow, Antio- 

" their" for j/ f I would render the chus, 

lines, "I'll make my will, then, and, as Scorning advice. Read the con- 

is done by sick men who know die elusion then ; 

world at dieir heaven, but feeling . . . Which read, etc.'" (The Cam- 

did, will bequeath," etc. Compare bridge Editors). 

2 Henry VI. n. i. 19 : " Thy heaven 56. ihe conclusion] die riddle, 

is on earth ". v..".;:.h ^urr.i u~ th= matter in hand. 



SC. I.] 



PERICLES 



11 



Daugh. Of all, 'say'd yet, may'st thou prove prosperous ! 

Of all, 'say'd yet, I wish thee happiness. 60 

Per. Like a bold champion, I assume the lists, 

Nor ask advice of any other thought 

But faithfulness and courage. 

[He reads the riddle ^\ 

I am no viper , yet I feed 

On mothers flesh which did me breed; 65 

59, 60. 'say'd] Percy conj. ; sayd Qq i, 2, 3 ; said (the rest). 

59. Of all, 'say'd yet] of all who 
have as yet made this attempt. Of 
course he is not one of those who 
have as yet made it ; but the Grecism 
is a common one. Compare, e.g., A 
Midsummer-Night's Dream, v. i. 252 ; 
Macbeth, v. iv. 8; Paradise Lost, iv. 

61. assume the lists] enter the lists 
and take up the combat. 

62, 63. Nor ask . . . courage] 
Steevens quotes as the source of 
these words book iii. of Sidney's 
Arcadia : " Whereupon asking ad 
vice of no other thought but faith- 
fulnesse and courage, he presently 
lighted from his own horse," etc. 

62. thought] prompting. 

64, 65. / am . . . breed] For a 
curious myth as to the death of the 
parent vipers, Topsell, Historie of 
lining Serpents, refers to Herodotus. 
The passage in question (iii. 190) runs 
thus : " vvv 5 5 eireav [at e^iSvat] Bop- 
vfixavrai Kara evyea /cat eV avrf/ rj & 
epfft}v rrj (Kiroiriffi, airie/j.vov avrov rrjv 
yovriv T] 0rj\ea airrerai TTJS Setpfjs Kal 
ij.(pv<Ta OVK aviei irplv av 8ia(pdyrj. 6 
/itv 5r) fpffi]v o 
fj.ev<?, TI 5e 07j> 



- 
TTJ yaffrpl f6vra TO. TSKVO. 8i<r6(ei rr} 



ovrca rrju tutiwiv irotterai." So Aris- 
totle, Mirab. 165 : " TOV TrepKvov e^cws 



fv rfj 
. 5tek 

rovro Kal ra Teuva, Saffirep rbv Qavarov 
TOV Trarpbs /j.eTepx6/jLfva, TTJV yaffrepa 
TTJS /j.7]Tpbs Siappfiyvvatv " (quoted by 
Jebb, on Antigone, 531). Pliny (ii. 
37), though affirming the manner of 
the father's death, accounts differently 
for the action of the young : " Terres- 
trium," he says, " sola vipera inter se 
parit ova unius colons, et mollia, ut 
pisces. Tertia die intra uterum catu- 
los excludit, deinceps singulos singulis 
diebus parit viginti fere numero " 
(so far following Aristotle, Hist. 
Anim. v. 28). Itaque ceterae tardi- 
tatis impatientes perrumpunt latera 
occisa parente. Topsell further re 
fers to Galen, Plutarch, Aelian, Lucan, 
etc., as agreeing in regard to the 
revenge taken by the young brood, 
and Theophrastus, etc., as being 
sceptical on the point. The eggs are 
hatched, as Aristotle and Pliny say, 
within the mother viper ; and as soon 
as the embryo gets outside, it unfolds 
itself and springs into life, often as 
suming what looks like a hostile 
attitude. There was also a belief 
that in times of danger the young 
vipers took refuge in the mother's 
mouth. Naturalists do not think this 
impossible, but hold the facts un 
proved. If there is any truth in it, 
the action may further have fostered 



12 PERICLES [ACT i. 

/ sought a husband, in which labour 

I found that kindness in a father. 

He 's father y son> and husband mild, 

I mother, wife, and yet his child. 

How they may be, and yet in two, 70 

As you will live, resolve it you. 

[Aside.} Sharp physic is the last : but, O you 

powers ! 

That give heaven countless eyes to view men's acts, 
Why cloud they not their sights perpetually, 
If this be true, which makes me pale to read it? 75 
Fair glass of light, I lov'd you, and could still, 
Were not this glorious casket stor'd with ill : 
But I must tell you, now my thoughts revolt ; 
For he 's no man on whom perfections wait 
That, knowing sin within, will touch the gate. 80 
You are a fair viol, and your sense the strings, 

the idea of matricidal design. In 79. on whom . . . wait] This, 

Julius Casar, v. iii. 70, 71, we have says Malone, " means no more than 

another allusion to the superstition : he 's no honest man, that knowing," 

" O Error, soon conceived, etc., and so Clarke. But surely the 

Thou never comest to a happy idea is that of some creature perfect 

birth, outwardly, but vile inwardly, who 

But kiil'st the mother that en- awaits the coming of a visitor. To 

gender'd thee " . receive the welcome of such a 

For a parallel in Wilkins's Miseries of creature, no one worth the name of a 

Enforced Marriage, see Introduction, man will make the slightest approach. 

71. As . . . live] by the hope you In gate there is a blending of the 
have of living. literal and the figurative. 

72. the last] these last words. 81. viol] a stringed instrument of 

73. eyes] Malone compares A Mid- the violin type. Shakespeare men- 
summer-Night's Dream, in. ii. 188 : tions the base viol and the viol-de- 
" all yon fiery oes and eyes of light " . gamboys (or viol taken between the 

74. Why cloud . . . perpetually] legs in playing). 

Compare Macbeth, i. iv. 50, 51 : 81. sense'] probably here the unin- 

"... Stars, hide your fires ; fleeted plural, as in Macbeth, v. i. 99; 

Let not light see my black and Othello, iv. iii. 95. 
deep desires " . 



sc. i.] PERICLES 13 

Who, finger'd to make man his lawful music, 
Would draw heaven down and all the gods to 

hearken ; 

But being play'd upon before your time, 
Hell only danceth at so harsh a chime. 85 

Good sooth, I care not for you. 

Ant. Prince Pericles, touch not, upon thy life, 
For that 's an article within our law, 
As dangerous as the rest. Your time's expir'd : 
Either expound now or receive your sentence. 90 

Per. Great king, 

Few love to hear the sins they love to act ; 
'Twould braid yourself too near for me to tell it. 
Who has a book of all that monarchs do, 
He 's more secure to keep it shut than shown ; 95 
For vice repeated is like the wandering wind, 
Blows dust in others' eyes, to spread itself; 

82. finger'd} For the word in the Mason refers to Massinger's Un- 

sense of playing on an instrument, natural Combat, iii. 4, when Beaufort, 

compare The Taming of the Shrew, betrothed to the daughter of the 

ii. i. 151 ; Cymbeline, n. iii. 16. On incestuous father, touches her hand, 

the latter passage Dowden compares 88. our law] the law I have laid 

Drayton, Polyolbion, iv. 173, 174 : down on this matter. 

"Some with their nimbler joints 93. braid] probably only an aphetic 

that struck the warbling string ; form of abraid, upbraid. Marston, 

In fingering some unskill'd, but Antonio and Mellida (pt. ii.),i. ii. 209, 

only used to sing " . and The Malcontent, iv. i. 236, has 

87. Prince . . . life] Steevens imbraid in the same sense ; and 

notices this stroke of nature in the Greene, Alphonsus, ii. 2, " darst thou 

incestuous king who cannot bear to abraid me in my land". 

see a rival touch the hand of the 96, 97. For vice . . . itself] for the 

woman he loves, and compares noising abroad of vicious deeds re- 

Antony and Cleopatra, in. xiii. 124- sembles the action of that chartered 

126 : libertine, the wind, which, in giving 

"... to let him be familiar with itself free way, blows dust in men's 

My playfellow, your hand ; this eyes. 

kingly seal 97. to spread itself] the indefinite 

And plighter of high hearts " . infinitive. 



14 PERICLES [ACT i. 

And yet the end of all is bought thus dear, 
The breath is gone, and the sore eyes see clear 
To stop the air would hurt them. The blind mole 

casts 100 

Copp'd hills towards heaven, to tell the earth is 

throng'd 
By man's oppression; and the poor worm doth die 

for't. 

] Kings are earth's gods ; in vice their law 's their will ; 
And if Jove stray, who dares say Jove doth ill ? 
It is enough you know; and it is fit, 105 

What being more known grows worse, to smother it. 
All love the womb that their first being bred, 
Then give my tongue like leave to love my head. 
Ant. [Aside.} Heaven ! that I had thy head ; he has 

found the meaning ; 

99, ioo. clear To . . . them. The} Steevens (Mason conj.); clears: To 
. . . them, the Qq i, 2, 3 ; cleare. To ... them, the Qq 4, 6; cleare. To 
them . . . the Q 5 ; clear. To ... them, the Ff 3, 4. 

98-100. And yet . . . them] and of his action by being thus discovered 

yet the only result is that the breath and killed by men. 

which carries abroad this dust passes 102. poor worm] Here an expression 

away, and the sore eyes again see of pity, as in The Tempest, in. i. 31 : 

clearly enough to keep off the blast " Poor worm, thou art infected " ; 

which would annoy them. In the while in The Merry Wives of Windsor, 

words "the end . . . dear," the v. iii. 87, and Love's Labour's Lost, iv. 

metaphor does not walk on all fours, iii. 154, it is one of contempt. So, 

for while the publishers of these ru- when used by Shakespeare of a snake 

mours suffer for their rashness, the the word has the contemptuous idea 

wind of course goes free. of a creeping thing. 

101. Copp'd] peaked; from cop, 105. It is . . . known} sc. that I 
head. Compare Gascoigne, Steel have your secret. 

Glass, Epil. (1576) : " Women with 106. it] redundant. 

high copt hattes " ; Aubrey (1697), 108. Then give . . . head] then 

Nat. Hist, of Surrey, "They show allow my tongue by being silent to 

you ... a copped Hill whereon . . . show similar love to my head of 

formerly stood a Castle " (quoted in which it is the child. 

New Eng. Diet.]. 109. Heaven I . . . head} Compare 

102. The poor . . . for 't] the line 144 below, 
wretched creature pays the penalty 



sc. i.] PERICLES 15 

But I will gloze with him. Young Prince of Tyre, 1 10 
Though by the tenour of our strict edict, 
Your exposition misinterpreting, 
We might proceed to cancel of your days ; 
Yet hope, succeeding from so fair a tree 
As your fair self, doth tune us otherwise : 115 

Forty days longer we do respite you ; 
If by which time our secret be undone, 
This mercy shows we '11 joy in such a son : 
And until then your entertain shall be 
As doth befit our honour and your worth. 120 

[Exeunt all but Pericles. 

Per. How courtesy would seem to cover sin, 
When what is done is like an hypocrite, 
The which is good in nothing but in sight ! 

113. cancel of] Malone; cancel offFf 3, 4 ; counsell (or counsel) o/Qq. 

no. gloze] use specious language. 117. undone] solved. 

See note on Troilus and Cressida, n. 118. This mercy] the respite I now 

ii. 165 (Arden ed.). grant. 

112. Your . . . misinterpreting] 119. entertain] entertainment, 
since your interpretation of the riddle Compare Marston, Antonio and Mel- 
is a wrong one. lida (pt. i.), I. i. 66 : 

113. to cancel of] Here cancel is " With most obsequious sleek- 
usually taken as a substantive. It brow'd entertain". 

may be, as Schmidt thinks, the verb 120. As doth . . . worth] Steevens 

enforced by the adverb " off," as the conjectures" As doth befit ourhonour, 

Folios read, or possibly the infinitive your degree," or " As doth our honour 

used as a verbal. fit and your degree ". 

114. succeeding] naturally issuing, 121. would seem] would speciously 
resulting from. endeavour. 

116. Forty] Malone and Steevens 123. The which] " is generally used 
point out that in all the " authors " either where the antecedent, or some 
the time allowed is thirty days. The word like the antecedent, is repeated, 
latter suggests that forty is the vague or elsewhere such a repetition could 
use of the number for something in- be made if desired. In almost all 
definite, as so frequently in the dra- cases there are two or more possible 
matists. antecedents from which selection 

117. // by which] For the hypal- must be made " (Abbott, Shake- 
lage, compare n. iv. 47, " If in which spearian Grammar, 270), 

time ... he not return ". 



16 PERICLES [ACT i. 

If it be true that I interpret false, 

Then were it certain you were not so bad 125 

As with foul incest to abuse your soul ; 

Where now you're both a father and a son, 

By your untimely claspings with your child, 

Which pleasure fits a husband, not a father ; 

And she an eater of her mother's flesh, 130 

By the defiling of her parent's bed ; 

And both like serpents are, who though they feed 

On sweetest flowers, yet they poison breed. 

Antioch, farewell ! for wisdom sees, those men 

Blush not in actions blacker than the night, 135 

Will shun no course to keep them from the light. 

One sin, I know, another doth provoke ; 

Murder's as near to lust as flame to smoke. 

Poison and treason are the hands of sin, 

Ay, and the targets, to put off the shame : 140 

Then, lest my life be cropp'd to keep you clear, 

By flight I '11 shun the danger which I fear. 

{Exit. 

Re-enter ANTIOCHUS. 

Ant. He hath found the meaning, for which we mean 
To have his head. 

136. shun] Malone; shew Qq, Ff 3, 4. 143, 144. He . . . head.] 

Arranged as in Malone ; the first line ends meaning, in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

124, 125. be . . . were] Here both 128. untimely] not "prematurely" 

words indicate doubt, disbelief. For or "ill-timed," but "improper," 

the difference between be and is in "hateful". 

hypothetical statements, compare 135. Blush not] The relative again 

Othello, in. iii. 384: "I think my omitted. 

wife be honest, and think she is 140. targets] shields, defences, 

not". 140. put off] avert. 

127. Where] whereas. 141. clear] free from, suspicion, 



sc. i.] PERICLES 17 

He must not live to trumpet forth my infamy, 145 

Nor tell the world Antiochus doth sin 

In such a loathed manner ; 

And therefore instantly this prince must die, 

For by his fall my honour must keep high. 

Who attends us there? 

Enter THALIARD. 

Thai. Doth your highness call? 150 

Ant. Thaliard, 

You are of our chamber, and our mind partakes 

Her private actions to your secrecy ; 

And for your faithfulness we will advance you. 

Thaliard, behold, here's poison, and here's gold; 155 

We hate the Prince of Tyre, and thou must kill him : 

It fits thee not to ask the reason why, 

Because we bid it. Say, is it done? 
Thai. My lord, 

Tis done. 

Ant. Enough. 160 

Enter a Messenger. 

Let your breath cool yourself, telling your haste. 
Mess. My lord, Prince Pericles is fled. [Exit. 

151-155. Thaliard, . . . gold;] Arranged as by Collier; five lines, end 
ing Chamber, Thaliard, . . . actions, . . . faythfulnes . . . Thaliard: . . . 
Gold: in Qq i, 2, 3 ; five lines, ending chamber, . . . actions . . . faith- 
fulnesse . . . Thaliard: . . . gold, in the rest. 158, 159. My . . . 

done.] Divided as by Steevens ; one line in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 160, 161. Enough. 
. . . haste.] Divided as by Malone ; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

152. You . . . chamber] you are cates. Compare The Winter's Tale, 

our chamberlain. Compare Macbeth, v. iii. 132: "your exultation Partake 

II. iii. 106 : " Those of his chamber, as to every one ". 

it seem'd, had done V; and The 161. Let your . . . haste] let your 

Winter's Tale, i. ii. 235-237. breath, which evidences your haste, 

152. partakes] imparts, communi- etc. 

2 



18 PERICLES [ACT i. 

Ant. As thou 

Wilt live, fly after; and like an arrow shot 
From a well-experienc'd archer hits the mark 
His eye doth level at, so thou ne'er return 165 

Unless thou say " Prince Pericles is dead. ;) 

Thai. My lord, 

If I can get him within my pistol's length, 
I '11 make him sure enough : so, farewell to your 
highness. 

Ant. Thaliard, adieu ! {Exit Thaliard. 

Till Pericles be dead, 170 

My heart can lend no succour to my head. {Exit. 

SCENE II. Tyre. A Room in the Palace. 

Enter PERICLES. 
Per. {To those without^ Let none disturb us. Why 

should this change of thoughts, 
The sad companion, dull-eyed melancholy, 
Be my so us'd a guest, as not an hour 

162-166. As thou . . . dead.] Divided as by Malone ; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 
167-169. My lord, . . . highness.] As in Dyce ; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

Scene n. 

I. Let . . . thoughts,] One line in Qq i, 2, 3 ; two in the rest. 3. Be . . . 
as] Dyce ; By me so usde (or us'de or used or us'd) a guest as (with or without 
commas after used and guest) Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

163. like] as (which the Folios Scene n. 
read). 

171. My heart . . . head] my heart i. change of thoughts] sc. from his 

refuses to support with any degree of usually serene frame of mind. Stee- 

confidence the plans which my head vens conjectured charge = weight, 

makes. Malone compares Hamlet, burden, pressure, which Malone and 

iv. iii. 70 : others adopt. Various other altera- 

11 ... till I know 'tis done, tions have been proposed. 
Howe'er my haps, my joys were 
ne'er begun ". 



sc . IL] PERICLES 19 

In the day's glorious walk or peaceful night, 

The tomb where grief should sleep, can breed me 

quiet ? 5 

Here pleasures court mine eyes, and mine eyes shun 

them, 

And danger, which I fear'd, is at Antioch, 
Whose arm seems far too short to hit me here; 
Yet neither pleasure's art can joy my spirits, 
Nor yet the other's distance comfort me. 10 

Then it is thus : the passions of the mind, 
That have their first conception by mis-dread, 
Have after-nourishment and life by care ; 
And what was first but fear what might be done, 
Grows elder now and cares it be not done. 15 

And so with me : the great Antiochus, 
'Gainst whom I am too little to contend, 
Since he 's so great can make his will his act, 
Will think me speaking, though I swear to silence ; 
Nor boots it me to say I honour him, 20 

If he suspect I may dishonour him ; 
And what may make him blush in being known, 
He'll stop the course by which it might be known. 

4. day's . . . walk] " the radiant anticipation of evil, but takes pre- 

march of the sun-god, Apollo "(Craig), cautions against the coming of that 

8. arm] Compare Troilus and Ores- evil. 

sida, n. iii. 15 : " short-arm'd ignor- 18. Since . . . act] since he is so 

ance ". Dyce here reads aim, and powerful that he can translate his will 

there "short-aim^". into action. 

13. care] anxiety. The thought 20. boots it] is it of any advantage, 

here and at the beginning of the " Boot," A.S. hot, profit, advantage, 

speech somewhat resembles Mes- 22,23. And what . . . known]&nd 

sala's reflections in Julius Cczsar, v. he will take care to stop the course of 

i. 66-71. those means that might make known 

15. Grows , . . done} having come the infamy which it would shame him 

to riper growth is not content with to have published abroad. 



20 PERICLES [ACT i. 

With hostile forces he'll o'erspread the land, 

And with the ostent of war will look so huge, 25 

Amazement shall drive courage from the state, 

Our men be vanquished ere they do resist, 

And subjects punish'd that ne'er thought offence : 

Which care of them, not pity of myself, 

Who am no more but as the tops of trees, 30 

Which fence the roots they grow by and defend them, 

Makes both my body pine and soul to languish, 

And punish that before that he would punish. 

Enter HELICANUS and other Lords. 

First Lord. Joy and all comfort in your sacred breast ! 
Second Lord. And keep your mind, till you return to us, 35 

Peaceful and comfortable ! 
HeL Peace, peace ! and give experience tongue. 

They do abuse the king that flatter him ; 

For flattery is the bellows blows up sin ; 

The thing the which is flatter'd, but a spark, 40 

To which that blast gives heat and stronger glowing; 

Whereas reproof, obedient and in order, 

25. th' ostent] Malone (Tyrwhitt conj.) ; the stint Qq, Ff 3, 4. 30. 

Who are] Steevens (Farmer conj.); Who once Qq, Ff 3, 4. 41. blast] 

Collier (Mason conj.) ; sparke (or spark) Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

25. ostent of war] warlike display. 31. they grow by] to which they 

Malone compares Richard II. n. iii. owe their growth. 

95 : " With ostentation of despised 33. And punish . . . punish] and 

arms " ; Steevens, Chapman's trans- afflict myself by fearful anticipation, 

lation of [Homer's] Batrachomuio- 37. give . . . tongue] listen to the 

mac hi a : "Both heralds bearing the counsels which my experience teaches. 

ostents of war " ; and Dekker's Enter- 40. but a spark] i.e. being but, etc. 

tainment of Barnes I. (1604): "And 42,43. Whereas . . . err] whereas 

why you bear, alone, th' ostent of reproof, when accompanied with re- 

warre". verence and decorum, is suitably ad- 

29. Which . . . them] and his dressed to kings in their capacity as 

anxiety about them. men, a capacity in which they are 

31. fence] give shelter to. liable to error. 



sc. ii.] PERICLES 21 

Fits kings, as they are men, for they may err: 
When Signior Sooth here does proclaim a peace, 
He flatters you, makes war upon your life. 45 

Prince, pardon me, or strike me, if you please; 
I cannot be much lower than my knees. 

Per. All leave us else; but let your cares o'erlook 
What shipping and what lading's in our haven, 
And then return to us. [Exeunt Lords. 

Helicanus, thou 50 

Hast moved us ; what seest thou in our looks ? 

Hel. An angry brow, dread lord. 

Per. If there be such a dart in princes' frowns, 

How durst thy tongue move anger to our face? 

Hel. How dare the plants look up to heaven, from 

whence 5 5 

They have their nourishment? 

Per. Thou know'st I have power 

To take thy life from thee. 

Hel. [Kneeling.} I have ground the axe myself; 

Do you but strike the blow. 

Per. Rise, prithee, rise; 

Sit down; thou art no flatterer: 
I thank thee for it; and heaven forbid 60 

That kings should let their ears hear their faults hid ! 

44. Signior Sooth] Compare The cipatory of the voyage he is about to 

Winter's Tale, i. ii. 196 : "Sir Smile, make, or does he apprehend the com- 

his neighbour". So Middleton, ing of Antiochus with a fleet ? 

Blurt, Master Constable, i. ii. 175 : 53. such a dart] such an ominous 

" Signior No". For sooth = flattery, terror. 

cajoling, compare Richard III. in. iii. 61. should let . . . hid] should 

136 ; Jonson, The Silent Woman, v. allow their faults to be covered over 

i : " with a sooth or two more I had by flattering excuses. Dyce, reading 

effected it ". chid for hid, takes let as = hinder. 

49. What . . . haven] Is this anti- 



22 PERICLES [ACT i. 

Fit counsellor and servant for a prince, 

Who by thy wisdom mak'st a prince thy servant, 

What would'st thou have me do? 

HeL To bear with patience 

Such griefs as you yourself do lay upon yourself. 65 

Per. Thou speak'st like a physician, Helicanus, 
That minister'st a potion unto me 
That thou would'st tremble to receive thyself. 
Attend me then : I went to Antioch, 
Where as thou know'st, against the face of death 70 
I sought the purchase of a glorious beauty, 
From whence an issue I might propagate, 
Are arms to princes and bring joys to subjects. 
Her face was to mine eye beyond all wonder ; 
The rest, hark in thine ear, as black as incest ; 75 
Which by my knowledge found, the sinful father 
Seem'd not to strike, but smooth; but thou know'st 

this, 

Tis time to fear when tyrants seem to kiss. 
Which fear so grew in me, I hither fled, 
Under the covering of a careful night, 80 

Who seem'd my good protector; and, being here, 
Bethought me what was past, what might succeed. 
I knew him tyrannous; and tyrants' fears 

65. Such , . . yourself] such 77. Seem'd . . . strike] made a 

griefs as are only in your imagina- show of not striking. Compare I. i. 

tion. 121 above. 

72. issue] A noun of multitude = 77. smooth] beguile, flatter. Corn- 
sons, pare Richard III. i. iii. 48. 

73. A re arms] that are arms (if the 80. a careful night] a night that 
text is sound). Walker conjectures had me in its care; night being a 
that a line such as " Worthy to heir quasi-personification. In the novel, 
my throne ; for kingly boys " has " the next darknesse being his best 
been lost, conductor ", 



sc. ii.] PERICLES 23 

Decrease not, but grow faster than the years. 

And should he doubt it, as no doubt he doth, 85 

That I should open to the listening air 

How many worthy princes' bloods were shed, 

To keep his bed of blackness unlaid ope, 

To lop that doubt he'll fill this land with arms, 

And make pretence of wrong that I have done him; 90 

When all, for mine, if I may call offence, 

Must feel war's blow, who spares not innocence : 

Which love to all, of which thyself art one, 

Who now reprovest me for it, 

Hel. Alas! sir. 

Per. Drew sleep out of mine eyes, blood from my cheeks, 95 
Musings into my mind, with thousand doubts 
How I might stop this tempest ere it came ; 
And finding little comfort to relieve them, 
I thought it princely charity to grieve them. 

Hel. Well, my lord, since you have given me leave to 
speak, 100 

Freely will I speak. Antiochus you fear, 
And justly too, I think, you fear the tyrant, 
Who either by public war or private treason 

85. doubt it] Malone (Steevens) ; doo' t, Q i ; doo 't Qq 2, 3 ; think* (or 
think) (the rest). 

84. but grow . . . years] instead 92. who] for " which," sc. war. 

of decreasing as time goes on, become 98. them] apparently his "mus- 

doubly strong year by year; fast as ings " and " doubts ". 

the years go by, faster still is the 99. I thought . . . them] I thought 

growth of fears. it was only charity to myself to grieve 

85. doubt] suspect. over them ; thus showing to myself 

86. to the . . . air] even to the the same princely charity I should to 
air, though none were by to listen. others in like circumstances. 

91. for mine . . . offence] for what 103. treason] treachery. 
I cannot call an offence on my part. 



24 PERICLES [ACT i. 

Will take away your life. 

Therefore, my lord, go travel for a while, 105 

Till that his rage and anger be forgot, 

Or till the Destinies do cut his thread of life. 

Your rule direct to any; if to me, 

Day serves not light more faithful than I '11 be. 

Per. I do not doubt thy faith; no 

But should he wrong my liberties in my absence? 

Hel. We '11 mingle our bloods together in the earth, 
From whence we had our being and our birth. 

Per. Tyre, I now look from thee then, and to Tarsus 

Intend my travel, where I '11 hear from thee, 1 1 5 

And by whose letters I '11 dispose myself. 

The care I had and have of subjects' good 

On thee I lay, whose wisdom's strength can bear it. 

I '11 take thy word for faith, not ask thine oath ; 

Who shuns not to break one will sure crack 

both. 1 20 

But in our orbs we'll live so round and safe, 
That time of both this truth shall ne'er convince, 
Thou show'dst a subject's shine, I a true prince. 

{Exeunt. 

104-109. Will . . . be] Arranged as by Rowe ; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

109. faithful] adverbially. 116. dispose myself] make my plans 

in. liberties'] "royal rights, pre- to suit, 
rogatives " (Schmidt). 121. our orbs] our different spheres. 

115. Intend] bend, direct. Com- An allusion to the Ptolemaic system, 

pare Antony and Cleopatra, v. ii. on which see note to v. i. 227 below. 

201 : 122. convince'] confute, disprove. 

" Caesar through Syria Compare Othello, iv. i. 28 ; Cymbe- 

Intends his journey". line, i. iv. 104. 

In the novel, " he intends for Tyre, 123. shine] Compare Timon of 

puts againe to Sea," etc. Athens, in, v. 101, 



sc. in.] PERICLES 25 

SCENE III. The Same. An Antechamber in the 
Palace. 

Enter THALIARD. 

Thai. So this is Tyre, and this the court. Here must 
I kill King Pericles; and if I do it not, I am 
sure to be hanged at home : 'tis dangerous. 
Well, I perceive he was a wise fellow, and had 
good discretion, that, being bid to ask what he 5 
would of the king, desired he might know none 
of his secrets : now do I see he had some reason 
for 't ; for if a king bid a man be a villain, he 's 
bound by the indenture of his oath to be one. 
Hush! here come the lords of Tyre. 10 

Enter HELICANUS, ESCANES, and other Lords. 

Hel. You shall not need, my fellow peers of Tyre, 

Further to question me of your king's departure : 
His seal'd commission, left in trust with me, 
Doth speak sufficiently he's gone to travel. 

11-25. You . . . death] Verse first by Rowe ; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

4, 5. / perceive . . . discretion] agreements made out in duplicate, 

" Who this wise fellow was, may be of which each party kept one. Both 

known from the following passage in were written on the same sheet, which 

Barnabie Riche's Souldiers Wisfie to was cut in two in a crooked or in- 

Britons Welfare, or Captaine Skill dented line (whence the name), in 

to Captaine Pill (1604), p. 27 : 'I will order that the fitting of the two parts 

therefore commend the poet Phili- might prove the genuineness of both 

pides, who being demanded by the in the case of dispute" (The Clarendon 

King Lisimachus, what favour he Press Editors on Hamle't, v. i. 119). 

might doe unto him for that he loved Compare Beaumont and Fletcher, 

him, made this answere to the King, The Knight of the Burning Pestle, 

that your majesty would never impart iv. ii. 18, 19: "prentice to a grocer 

unto me any of your secrets'" in the Strand, By deed indent of 

(Steevens). which I have one part". This part 

9. indenture'] "Indentures were was galled the " counterpane ", 



26 



PERICLES 



[ACT i. 



Tkal.[Aside.'\ How! the king gone! 15 

Hel. If further yet you will be satisfied, 

Why, as it were unlicens'd of your loves, 

He would depart, I '11 give some light unto you. 

Being at Antioch 

Thal.[Aside.] What from Antioch? 

Hel. Royal Antiochus, on what cause I know not, 20 

Took some displeasure at him, at least he judg'd 
so; 

And doubting lest that he had err'd or sinn'd, 

To show his sorrow he'd correct himself; 

So puts himself unto the shipman's toil, 

With whom each minute threatens life or death. 25 
Thal.[Aside.~] Well, I perceive 

I shall not be hang'd now, although I would ; 

But since he J s gone, the king's ears it must please, 



17. as it . . . loves} so to speak, 
without your loving assent being 
given. 

24. So puts . . . toil] subjects 
himself to all the discomfort that 
mariners have to undergo. The 
words can hardly mean that the 
prince actually played the part of a 
sailor. 

25. threatens . . . death] Though 
threatens applies to death only, the 
sense is clear : it is every moment 
a matter of life or death of life, if 
the sailor does his work properly and 
the elements are not too much for 
him ; of death, if he fails in his duty 
or the elements baffle his skill. A 
somewhat similar expression occurs 
in As You Like It, in. v. 7 : 

" will you sterner be 
Than he who dies and lives by 

bloody drops," 

where " who dies ... drops " means 
that to the executioner his profession 



is a matter of life and death, i.e. 
"that by which he lives and failing 
which he dies " (Ingleby). For " or 
death," Daniel conjectures "with 
death". 

27. although I would] Malone 
compares The Winter's Tale, iv. iv. 
862-864: "If I had a mind to be 
honest, I see Fortune would not 
suffer me : she drops booties in my 
mouth". 

28, 29. But since . . . seas] Malone 
first printed lines 26-30 as verse. The 
reading ears . . . seas is Dyce's. In 
the old copies they stand as "the 
king's seas must please". Percy 
conjectured "the king it sure must 
please " (which Steevens adopted) ; 
Perring, " the king this news must 
please ". For at Steevens con 
jectured "on " ; but at was sometimes 
used where we should now say " on," 
as in Othello, iv. iii. 32 : " to go hang 
my head all at one side ". 



sc. iv.] PERICLES 27 

He 'scap'd the land, to perish at the seas. 

I '11 present myself. Peace to the lords of Tyre ! 30 

Hel. Lord Thaliard from Antiochus is welcome. 

Thai. From him I come 

With message unto princely Pericles ; 

But since my landing I have understood 

Your lord has betook himself to unknown travels, 35 

My message must return from whence it came. 

Hel. We have no reason to desire it, 

Commended to our master, not to us: 
Yet, ere you shall depart, this we desire, 
As friends to Antioch, we may feast in Tyre. 40 

[Exeunt. 



SCENE IV. Tarsus. A Room in the Governor's House. 

Enter CLEON, DIONYZA, and Attendants. 

Cle. My Dionyza, shall we rest us here, 

And by relating tales of others' griefs, 
See if 'twill teach us to forget our own ? 

Dio. That were to blow at fire in hope to quench it ; 

For who digs hills because they do aspire 5 

Throws down one mountain to cast up a higher. 
O my distressed lord ! even such our griefs are ; 

30. /'//... myself] Steevens 38. Commended] it being corn- 
gives " But I '11 present me ". mended. 

36. from whence] to that place from 40. we may feast] i.e. together, 
which it came. 

37. to desire it] sc. a knowledge Scene IVt 
of it ; desire being read as a trisyl 
lable. Walker suggests " enquire," 5. digs hills] endeavours to lessen 
and Hudson reads " inquire of". by digging. 



28 PERICLES [ACT i. 

Here they 're but felt, and seen with mischief's 

eyes, 

But like to groves, being topp'd, they higher rise. 
Cle. O Dionyza, 10 

Who wanteth food, and will not say he wants it, 
Or can conceal his hunger till he famish? 
Our tongues and sorrows do sound deep 
Our woes into the air; our eyes do weep 
Till lungs fetch breath that may proclaim them 
louder; 15 

That if heaven slumber while their creatures want, 
They may awake their helps to comfort them. 

13-17. Our tongues . . . them.'] Arranged as by Collier ; six lines, ending 
deepe : . . . weepe . . . proclaims . . . while . . . awake . . . them, in 
Qq, Ff 3, 4. 14. do] Malone (1780) ; to Qq, Ff 3, 4 ; too Malone (1790). 

17. helps} Malone; helpers Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

8, 9. Here . . . rise] For mis- Have after-nourishment and life 
chiefs Steevens conjectured " mist- by care ". 

ful " ; Singer, "mistie"; Walker, 13, 14. Our tongues . . . air] If 

"misery's"; Kinnear, "weakness", the reading is sound, tongues and 

The sense apparently is, as matters sorrows must be a hendiadys for 

now are, we feel and see our griefs " sorrowful tongues ". But Hudson's 

in the light in which misfortune conjecture 

shows them, i.e. merely as they really " Our tongues do sound our sorrows 

are, whereas if we seek to lessen them, and deep woes 

by a comparison with those of others Into the air," 

that we have heard of, we shall but is very attractive. With Malone, 

increase them, just as groves when he ends the five lines at woes . . . 

lopped only grow to a greater height, lungs . . . that . . . want, . . . 

Mischief, in the sense of calamity, them. 

misfortune, is frequent in Shake- 15. lungs] is Steevens's conjec- 

speare. ture. Dyce, who adopts it, thinks 

9. topp'd] lopped in order to that tongues is partly justified by 
stimulate their growth. Compare Richard II. i. iii. 173 : " Which 
Jeronimo (pt. i.) : robs my tongue from breathing 

"I'll top thy head for that am- native breath"; but there is some 

bitious word ". difference between breathing and 

For the general sentiment, compare fetching breath, 
i. ii. 11-13, above: 17. They] For heaven used with a 

" the passions of the mind, plural verb compare Macbeth, n. i. 4 ; 

That have their first conception Hamlet, in. iv. 173. 
by mis-dread, 



sc. iv.J PERICLES 29 

I 'II then discourse our woes, felt several years, 
And wanting breath to speak help me with tears. 

Dio. I'll do my best, sir. 20 

Cle. This Tarsus, o'er which I have the government, 
A city on whom plenty held full hand, 
For riches strew'd herself even in the streets; 
Whose towers bore heads so high they kiss'd the 

clouds, 

And strangers ne'er beheld but wonder'd at ; 25 
Whose men and dames so jetted all-adorn'd, 
Like one another's glass to trim them by: 
Their tables were stored full to glad the sight, 
And not so much to feed on as delight ; 
All poverty was scorn'd, and pride so great, 30 

The name of help grew odious to repeat. 

Dio. O ! 'tis too true. 

Cle. But see what heaven can do ! By this our change, 
These mouths, who but of late, earth, sea, and air, 
Were all too little to content and please, 35 

Although they gave their creatures in abundance, 

19. help} do you help. Compare 26. jetted] strutted, threw them- 

Much Ado About Nothing, v. i. selves into arrogant postures. A 

303 : word very frequent in the dramatists. 

" I do embrace your offer ; and For arid I have given all, since 

dispose " adorn " is never used reflexively. 

From henceforth of poor 27. them] themselves. Craig com- 

Claudio " ; pares 2 Henry IV. n. iii. 21-22. Add 

i.e. do you dispose. Cymbeline, i. i. 49. 

22. on] seems here to be used for 31. The name . . . repeat] all were 
" over," the image being that of the ashamed to talk of such a thing as 
cornucopia held aloft. help. 

23. riches] singular and feminine 34. who] For the neglected inflec- 
as representing the French richesse. tion, frequent even after a preposition, 

24. kiss'd the clouds] Compare compare Macbeth, in. i. 123, iv. iii. 
Troilus and Cressida, iv. v. 220 : 171 ; Cymbeline, iv. ii. 75. 

" Yond towers, whose wanton tops 36. creatures'] including all created 

do buss the clouds, things, whether animate or inanimate. 

Must kiss their feet". A frequent usage of old. Compare 



30 PERICLES [ACT i. 

As houses are defil'd for want of use, 
They are now starv'd for want of exercise ; 
Those palates who, not yet two summers younger, 
Must have inventions to delight the taste, 40 

Would now be glad of bread, and beg for it ; 
Those mothers who, to nousle up their babes, 
Thought nought too curious, are ready now 
To eat those little darlings whom they lov'd. 
So sharp are hunger's teeth, that man and wife 45 
Draw lots who first shall die to lengthen life. 
Here stands a lord, and there a lady weeping; 
Here many sink, yet those which see them fall 
Have scarce strength left to give them burial. 
Is not this true? 50 

39. two summers} too (or to) sauers (or savers) Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

The Tempest, ui. iii. 74: "Incensed 42. nousle] a corruption of 

the seas and shores, yea, all the "nurstle"; nurse, cherish. Rolfe 

creatures," i.e. the winds, thunder, etc. quotes The Faerie Queene, i. vi. 

Bacon's Essays, Of Truth : " The 23 : 

first creature of God in the works of " Whom, till to ryper years he 

the days was the light of the sense ". gan aspyre, 

38. for . . . exercise] for want of He nousled up in life and man- 
any thing on which to exercise them- ners wilde " ; 

selves. and again, v. i. 6, vi. iv. 35. The 

39. not yet . . . younger] This word is apparently the same with 
reading, now generally accepted, is " nuzzle," for which Malone quotes 
Mason's, who explains : " Those The Strange Birth . . . of Famous 
palates, who, less than two years ago, Arthur, etc. (1601) : " Being nuzzled 
required some new inventions of in effeminate delights ". So Marston, 
cookery to delight their tastes would Antonio and Mellida (pt. ii.), Pro- 
now be glad of plain bread ". The logue, 16 : " And nuzzled 'twixt the 
conjecture is confirmed beyond all breasts of happiness"; and What 
doubt by a passage in Wilkins's You Will, in. ii. 58 : 

novel, quoted by the Cambridge " Makes my coy minx to nuzzle 

Editors : " The ground of which fierce 'twixt the breasts 

lamentation was, to see the power of Of her lull'd husband " ; 

change, that this City, who not two the idea being that of pressing close 

summers younger did so excell in to the breasts of the female with a 

pompe," etc. The old copies give yet. view to nutriment. 

40. Must have] demanded to have ; 43. curious] exquisite, sought with 
an obsolete use of " must " as a past. care. 



sc. iv.] PERICLES 31 

Dio. Our cheeks and hollow eyes do witness it. 

Cle. O ! let those cities that of plenty's cup 
And her prosperities so largely taste, 
With their superfluous riots, hear these tears : 
The misery of Tarsus may be theirs. 55 

Enter a Lord. 

Lord. Where 's the lord governor ? 
Cle. Here. 

Speak out thy sorrows which thou bring'st in haste, 

For comfort is too far for us to expect. 
Lord. We have descried, upon our neighbouring shore, 60 

A portly sail of ships make hither ward. 
Cle. I thought as much. 

One sorrow never comes but brings an heir 

That may succeed as his inheritor ; 

And so in ours. Some neighbouring nation, 65 

Taking advantage of our misery, 

Hath stufFd these hollow vessels with their power, 

To beat us down, the which are down already; 

And make a conquest of unhappy me, 

Whereas no glory's got to overcome. 70 

57-59. Here. . . . expect."} Verse first by Malone ; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 
67. Hath] Rowe (ed. 2) ; That Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

54. superfluous riots] riotous indul- see note on Troilus and Cressida, iv. 

gence in superfluities. Compare v. 162 (Arden ed.). 

King Lear, iv. i. 70 : " the superfluous 61. make] making, directing their 

and lust-dieted man ". course. 

54. hear these tears] hear these 63. One sorrow . . . heir] Steevens 

tearful lamentations. Collier con- compares Hamlet, iv. v. 79 : 

jectures "heed" for "hear". " When sorrows come, they come 

58. which . . . haste] with which not single spies, 

your haste shows you to be charged. But in battalions ". 

61. portly] imposing. Compare 67. power] armed forces. 

The Merchant of Venice, I. i. 9, and 70. Whereas] when, in whose case. 



32 PERICLES [ACT i 

Lord. That's the least fear; for, by the semblance 

Of their white flags display'd, they bring us peace, 
And come to us as favourers, not as foes. 

Cle. Thou speak'st like him 's untutor'd to repeat : 

Who makes the fairest show means most deceit. 75 

But bring they what they will and what they can, 

What need we fear ? 

The ground 's the lowest and we are half way there. 

Go tell their general we attend him here, 

To know for what he comes, and whence he comes, 80 

And what he craves. 

Lord. I go, my lord. {Exit. 

Cle. Welcome is peace if he on peace consist; 
If wars we are unable to resist. 

Enter PERICLES, with Attendants. 

Per. Lord governor, for so we hear you are, 85 

Let not our ships and number of our men 
Be like a beacon fir'd to amaze your eyes. 
We have heard your miseries as far as Tyre, 
And seen the desolation of your streets : 

71-73. That's . . . foes.} Arranged as by Malone; in Qq, Ff 3, 4, the first 
line ends ztfeare, the rest is prose. 74. him 's] Malone; himnes, hy nines, 
hymmes, hywwes, hymns Qq, Ff. 77, 78. What . . . lowest} Arranged as 
by Malone; one line in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 78-81. and . . . craves.} Arranged as 
by Malone; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

71. That 's . . . fear} we need not and the fact that the Folios give line 

fear that in the least. 75 in italics perhaps indicates a 

71. semblance} a trisyllable. quotation. Possibly we might read : 

74. like him '5 ... repeat} The " Thou speak'st like him is tutor' d 

reading in the text is Malone's. to repeat," i.e. mere parrot gabble, 

Steevens explains, " Deluded by the what you have been " coached " to 

pacifick experience of this navy, you say without knowing what it means. 

talk like one who has never learned 83. if he . . . consist] "if he 

the common adage, that the fairest stands on peace. A Latin sense" 

outsides are most to be suspected " ; (Malone). 



sc. iv.] PERICLES 33 

Nor come we to add sorrow to your tears, 90 

But to relieve them of their heavy load ; 
And these our ships, you happily may think 
Are like the Trojan horse was stuff d within 
With bloody veins, expecting overthrow, 
Are stor'd with corn to make your needy bread, 95 
And give them life whom hunger starv'd half 
dead. 

All. The gods of Greece protect you! 
And we'll pray for you. 

Per. Arise, I pray you, rise: 

We do not look for reverence, but for love, 
And harbourage for ourself, our ships, and men. 100 

Cle. The which when any shall not gratify, 

Or pay you with unthankfulness in thought, 
Be it our wives, our children, or ourselves, 

98-100. Arise, . . , men.] Arranged as by Rowe ; two lines, the first ending 
reuerence, Qq i, 2, 3 ; prose in the rest. 

90. sorrow] i.e. fresh sorrow, those words io you inline 92, which 

Walker conjectures " hearts " for seems impossible. I suggest " bloody 

tears, and the word is more in keep- arms importing overthrow ". In 

ing with the next line. Wilkins's novel, " and those his 

93. was stuff' d] The relative omit- shippes which their feares might 
ted. For stujfd, compare Heywood, cause them to think were fraughted 
The Iron Age, ii., " this steed's huge with their destruction, were in- 
bulk is stuff' d with Greekish guile ". treasured with cornefor their reliefe ". 

94. With bloody . . . overthrow] The same confusion of " arms " and 
This line can hardly be sound. For " veins " appears to occur in Shirley's 
veins, Steevens conjectured "views," Love Tricks, iv. v., where the much- 
which Malone adopted ; Collier, wounded soldier implores compassion 
"banes"; Bailey, "foes". To me on "a forlorn gentleman, that have 
a greater difficulty is in "expecting lost the use of my veins ". Compare 
overthrow". Even if veins could Euripides, Troades,n, "4'yKvfj.6i'"l'rrirov 
mean the armed men within the horse, revxewv ". 

or if we read "banes" or "foes," 95. your needy bread] the bread of 

expecting overthrow could mean which you have such sore need. 

nothing else but " expecting their 102. in thought] in so much 

own overthrow ". Rolfe endeavours as thought. Malone conjectured 

to get over the difficulty by referring " aught ". 



34 PERICLES [ACT i. 

The curse of heaven and men succeed their evils ! 
Till when, the which I hope shall ne'er be seen, 105 
Your grace is welcome to our town and us. 
Per. Which welcome we '11 accept ; feast here awhile, 
Until our stars that frown lend us a smile. 

\Exeunt. 

104. their evils] their return of evil 107. feast . . . awhile] i.e. we 
for good, whether indeed or thought, will feast, etc. 






ACT II. 

Enter GOWER. 

Here have you seen a mighty king 

His child, I wis, to incest bring ; 

A better prince and benign lord, 

That will prove awful both in deed and word. 

Be quiet then as men should be, 5 

Till he hath passd necessity. 

I V/ show you those in trouble's reign 

Losing a mite, a mountain gain. 

The good in conversation, 

To whom I give my benison, I o 

Is still at Tarsus, where each man 

Thinks all is writ he speken can; 

2. / wis] properly ywis, from A.S. title of the chapter in Gesta Roman- 
gewis, certain, used adverbially = orum in which the story of Apol- 
certainly ; but without doubt taken lonius is told, viz., " De tribulatione 
by the Elizabethans for the personal temporal* quae in gaudium sempi- 
pronoun and verb. termim postremo commutabitur ". 

3, 4. A better . . . word] i.e. you 9. The . . . conversation] the man 
have also seen, etc. (if the text is of blameless life (Pericles). For 
sound) ; but the construction is most conversation, compare Antony and 
abrupt, and it is conjectured that two Cleopatra, n. vi. 131 ; Peter iii. n. 
lines have fallen out here. 12. Thinks . . . can] " pays as 

6. Till . . . necessity] till the ex- much respect to whatever Pericles 
tremity of evil is passed: he, as though says as if it were holy writ . . ." 
the antecedent had been singular. (Malone). 

7, 8. / '// show . . . gain] I have 12. speken] an obsolete form of 
edited trouble's for troubles, removing " speak," is Grant White's correction 
the comma after reign. Malone sus- of " spoken," the reading of the old 
pects that the author had in view the copies. 

36 



36 PERICLES [ACT ii. 



to remember what he does, 
Build his statue to make him glorious: 
But tidings to the contrary 15 

A re brought your eyes ; what need speak I ? 

Dumb-show. 

Enter at one door PERICLES, talking with CLEON ; all 
the Train with them. Enter at another door a Gentle 
man, with a letter to PERICLES ; PERICLES shows the 
letter to CLEON ; then gives the Messenger a reivard, 
and knights him. Exeunt PERICLES, CLEON, etc., 
severally. 

Good Helicane, that stay'd at home, 

Not to eat honey like a drone 

From others* labours ; for though he strive 

To killen bad, keep good alive ; 20 

And to fulfil his prince' desire, 

Sends word of all that haps in Tyre : 

21. prince'} Malone ; prince Qq i, 2, 3 ; princes (the rest). 

13. remember} commemorate. way out of the difficulty is, with 

14. Build] Steevens, quoting Kyng Hudson, to omit for. Possibly the 
Appolyn of Tyre (1510), " in remem- pseudo Gower may have written far 
brance they made an ymage or statue = afar off, in which case, putting a 
of dene gold," reads " gild," which comma only after alive, we might 
seems unnecessary. He also omits render, " Good Helicane, though afar 
the words " to make him ". off he administers the government in 

19. for . . . strive] No satisfactory accordance with justice and his 

explanation has here been given, prince's wishes, yet at the same time 

Steevens reads " forth," i.e. thor- sends," etc. 

oughly, from beginning to end, com- 21. prince'] the uninflected genitive. 

paring Measure for Measure, v. i. 22. Sends word] This conjecture of 

255, " Whom it concerns to hear this Steevens, adopted by Malone, is con- 

matter forth," though there the sense firmed by a passage from the novel 

is "on," "forward," "to a further quoted by the Cambridge Editors: 

extent". Nicholson, putting "that "Good Helycanus as provident at 

. . . labours" in a parenthesis, and home, as his prince was prosperous 

reading " keeps " in line 20, con- abroade, let no occasion slip wherein 

jectures " for-though ". The simplest hee might send word to Tharsus of 



PROLOGUE] PERICLES 37 

How Thaliard came full bent with sin 
And had intent to murder him; 
And that in Tarsus was not best 25 

Longer for him to make his rest. 
He, doing so, put forth to seas, 
Where when men been, there 's seldom ease ; 
For now the wind begins to blow ; 
Thunder above and deeps below 30 

Make such unquiet, that the ship 
Should house him safe is wreck* d and split ; 
A nd he, good prince, having all lost, 
By waves from coast to coast is tost. 
All perishen of man, of pelf , 35 

Ne aught escapen but himself', 
Till fortune, tird with doing bad, 
Threw him ashore, to give him glad: 
And here he comes. What shall be next, 
Pardon old Gower, this longs the text. \Exit. 40 

what occurrents soeuer had happened marks, " Dr. Percy asks if we should 

in his absence," etc. The old copies not read ' to make him glad ' . Per- 

give " Sau'd (or Sav'd) one " . haps we should ; but the language of 

28. been] archaic for " are " . our fictitious Gower, like that of our 

32. Should\ which should. pseudo Rowley, is so often irrecon- 

35. All . . . pelf] men and goods cilable to the practice of any age, 

perished alike. Pelf, "O.F. pel/re, that criticism on such bungling 

booty, allied to pelfrer (Burguy) " imitations is almost thrown away." 

(Skeat, Ety. Diet.}. 40. this . . . text] the succeeding 

38. give him glad] Steevens re- events belong to the text of the play. 



38 PERICLES [ACT 11. 

SCENE l.Pentapolis. An open Place by the Sea-side. 

Enter PERICLES, wet. 

Per. Yet cease your ire, you angry stars of heaven ! 
Wind, rain, and thunder, remember, earthly man 
Is but a substance that must yield to you ; 
And I, as fits my nature, do obey you. 
Alas ! the sea hath cast me on the rocks, 5 

Wash'd me from shore to shore, and left me breath 
Nothing to think on but ensuing death: 
Let it suffice the greatness of your powers 
To have bereft a prince of all his fortunes ; 
And having thrown him from your watery grave, 10 
Here to have death in peace is all he'll crave. 

Enter three Fishermen. 
First Fish. What, ho, Pilch ! 
Second Fish. Ha ! come and bring away the nets. 

Pentapolis] " This is an imaginary his contemporaries for that * most 

city, and its name might have been sweet robe of durance, a buff jerkin', 

borrowed from some romance. We Nash speaks of a carman in a leathern 

meet indeed in history with Penta- pilch e ; and Decker [The Untrussing 

politana regio, a country in Africa, of the Humorous Poet (Pearson, i. 

consisting of Jive cities ; and from 229)] twits Jonson more than once 

thence perhaps some novelist fur- with wearing it : ' Thou hast forgot 

nished the sounding title of Penta- how thou ambled'st in a leather pilche 

polis which occurs likewise in the 37th by a play waggon, and took'st mad 

chapter of Kyng Appolyn of Tyre Jeronimo's part to get service amongst 

(1560), as well as in Gower, the Gesta the mimicks ' " (Gifford's note on the 

Romanorum, and Twine's translation Poetaster, iii. i). Here the name of 

from it " (Steevens). the garment is given to the wearer of 

12. Pilch I] The old copies give it, as Patch-breech (line 14). In 

" What, to pelch ? " whence Malone, Twine's novel (chap, iii.) the fisher- 

" What, ho, Pilch !" Tyrwhitt having man approaches with "a filthie 

conjectured, "What, Pilche!" " Pil- leathern pelt upon his back, unseemely 

ches or pilchers are skins (from pellis), clad and homely to behold ". 

and, in a more general sense, coverings 13. bring away] bring here without 

of furs, woollen, etc. Shakespeare delay. Compare King Lear, n. ii. 

[Romeo and Juliet, in. i. 84] uses the 146 : " Come, bring away the stocks. 

word for the sheath of a sword; and [Stocks brought out.]" 



sc. i.] PERICLES 39 

First Fish. What, Patch-breech, I say ! 

Third Fish. What say you, master? 15 

First Fish. Look how thou stirrest now ! come away, 

or I '11 fetch thee with a wanion. 
Third Fish. Faith, master, I am thinking of the poor 

men that were cast away before us even now. 
First Fish. Alas ! poor souls ; it grieved my heart to 20 

hear what pitiful cries they made to us to help 

them, when, well-a-day, we could scarce help 

ourselves. 
Third Fish. Nay, master, said not I as much when 

I saw the porpus how he bounced and tumbled? 25 

they say they 're half fish, half flesh ; a plague 

16-50. Look . . . honey. ~\ Prose first by Malone ; irregular lines in Qq, 
Ff 3, 4, except that lines 20-23 are verse, ending heare . . . them . . . our 
selues. 

16. how . . . now t] how dilatory wayloway,as'miheConfessioAmantis) 
you are ! was softened to well-away, and then 

17. with a wanion] This phrase, so to well-a-day. Malone here corn- 
common in the literature of the day, pares The Winter's Tale, in. iii. 
and evidently equivalent to " with a 91-98. 

vengeance," "with a curse to you," 24, 25. when . . . porpus] Malone 
has never been accounted for. Mr. compares Webster's Duchess of Malfi: 
Craig in the Little Quarto Shakespeare " He lifts up his nose like a foul porpus 
points out that the older form of the before a storm ". Add Eastward 
word, waniand, is found in More, Ho, in. iii. 153-155 : " there was a 
Latimer and Fox ; and that Skeat, porepisce even now seen at London 
following an idea of Nares, thinks Bridge, which is always the messenger 
that the original meaning may have of tempests, he says ". Mason re- 
been " in the waning of the moon," marks that what was supposed to be 
whence the phrase came to mean merely a superstition among sailors 
" with a diminution, detriment, ill- was confirmed as a truth by Captain 
luck". Cook who mentions the playing of 

20-22. Alas 1 . . . them] Compare porpoises round the ship as a certain 

Miranda's words, The Tempest, i. ii. sign of a violent gale of wind : and 

8, 9 : modern naturalists note that these 

" O, the cry did knock mammals are very sensitive to coming 

Against my very heart. Poor changes of weather. 

souls, they perished." 26. half fish, half jlesh] Compare 

22. well-a-day] ah, woe, alas ! The the description of the otter, 1 Henry 

original exclamation, wa-la-wa (or IV. in. iii. 142. 



40 PERICLES [ACT 11. 

on them ! they ne'er come but I look to be 
washed. Master, I marvel how the fishes live in 
the sea. 

First Fish. Why, as men do a-land ; the great ones 30 
eat up the little ones. I can compare our rich 
misers to nothing so fitly as to a whale ; a' plays 
and tumbles, driving the poor fry before him, 
and at last devours them all at a mouthful. 
Such whales have I heard on o' the land, who 35 
never leave gaping till they've swallowed the 
whole parish, church, steeple, bells, and all. 

Per. [Aside.] A pretty moral. 

Third Fish. But, master, if I had been the sexton, I 

would have been that day in the belfry. 40 

Second Fish. Why, man? 

Third Fish. Because he should have swallowed me 
too; and when I had been in his belly, I would 
have kept such a jangling of the bells, that he 
should never have left till he cast bells, steeple, 45 
church, and parish, up again. But if the good 
King Simonides were of my mind, 

Per. [Aside.] Simonides ! 

28. washed] drenched. virginity and devours up all the fry 

30. a-land] Steevens mentions that it finds ". 

this word is frequent in Twine's 38. moral] piece of sententious 

novel. wisdom. 

30-37. the great ones . . . all] See 39, 40. I would have been] 1 wish 

Introduction. I had been. 

32. a'] A frequent form of " he " in 42. he should] he would have been 
rapid utterance. compelled to. 

33. fry] a swarm of fishes lately 45. cast] vomited. A word on 
spawned ; literally, seed, offspring, which the dramatists love to play, 
Compare All's Well that Ends Well, especially with reference to drunk- 
iv. iii. 249, 250: "a dangerous and ards. Compare, e.g., Macbeth, n. iii. 
lascivious boy, who is a whale to 46. 



SC. 



I.] 



PERICLES 



41 



Third Fish. We would purge the land of these drones, 

that rob the bee of her honey. 50 

Per. [Aside.] How from the finny subject of the sea 
These fishers tell the infirmities of men ; 
And from their watery empire recollect 
All that may men approve or men detect ! 
Peace be at your labour, honest fishermen. 55 

51. Jinny} Malone (Steevens) ; fenny Qq, Ff 3, 4. 



49, 50. drones . . . honey] Com 
pare 2 Henry VI. iv. i. 109. 

51. subject] A noun of multitude. 
Compare Hamlet, i. i. 72. In the 
novel the corresponding passage 
runs : " and Prince Pericles wondring 
that from the Jinny subjects of the sea 
these poore country people learned 
the infirmities of man, more than 
mans obduracy and dulnes could 
learn one of another," etc. 

52. tell] reckon by analogy. 

53. their . . . empire] the empire 
of the sea with whose nature they 
are so intimately conversant. 

53. recollect] gather up and apply. 

54. detect] sc. as being guilty. 
Compare Heywood, // you know 
not Me, etc. (Pearson, i. 206) : " Men 
may much suspect, But yet . . . none 
can my life detect"; also Measure 

for Measure, in. ii. 130 : " I never 
heard the absent duke much detected 
for women ". 

55-58. Peace . . . it] The text as 
it stands is meaningless, nor has 
emendation been successful. Malone, 
inserting a note of admiration after 
Honest, adopts Steevens's " scratch 
it " for search, with " will " before 
look. Steevens would further insert 
" not " before a day ; but both critics 
admit that something must have been 
lost to which day refers. Farmer 
supposes an allusion to Cicero's dies 
honestissimus, which seems almost 
ludicrous, and Douce, with greater 
probability, to the lucky and unlucky 
days that are set down in some of 



the old calendars. The first Quarto 
gives " Honest good fellow," etc. ; 
the rest, " Honest, good fellow," etc. 
Taking these words therefore as the 
fisherman's rejoinder to "honest 
fisherman," I suggest that, at the 
end of his soliloquy, Pericles, in order 
to attract the fishermen's attention, 
exclaimed : 
"Hoy day I 
Peace be at your labour, honest 

fishermen." 

This not very common exclamation 
would account for the fisherman's di 
lemma ; and as " and (i.e. an if) 
nobody look after it " clearly means 
in case nobody take care to prevent 
your purloining it, for search I would 
read "tear it," as being so easily 
mistaken for that word. The sense 
would then be good enough : If it be 
a day that suits you, is likely to prove 
lucky to you, tear it out of the calen 
dar, provided you can do so without 
being caught in the act. To " search 
out of the calendar" or to " scratch 
it out of the calendar," would be no 
thing to the purpose ; what the fisher 
man advises is that Pericles should 
appropriate it. " Hoyday," written 
also " hoy-day," " hoida," "hey-day," 
and more frequent as an exclamation 
of surprise, wonder, etc., was also 
used like our "hallo," "ho," being 
from G. heida, with that sense. There 
seems to be allusion to these lucky 
and unlucky days in The Winter's 
Tale, in. iii. 142 ; Macbeth, iv. i. 
134- 



42 PERICLES [ACT ii. 

Second Fish. Honest good fellow, what 's that ? If 

it be a day fits you, search out of the calendar, 

and nobody look after it. 

Per. May see the sea hath cast me upon your coast. 
Second Fish. What a drunken knave was the sea, to 60 

cast thee in our way ! 
Per. A man whom both the waters and the wind, 

In that vast tennis-court, have made the ball 

For them to play upon, entreats you pity him ; 

He asks of you, that never us'd to beg. 65 

First Fish. No, friend, cannot you beg ? here 's them 

in our country of Greece gets more with begging 

than we can do with working. 
Second Fish. Canst thou catch any fishes then? 
Per. I never practised it. 70 

Second Fish. Nay, then thou wilt starve, sure ; for 

56-58. Honest . . . it.] Prose first in Malone ; two lines, the first ending 
you, in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 60, 61. What . . . way I] Prose first in Malone; 

two lines in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 66-68. No, . . . working.] Prose first in 

Malone; three lines in Qq, Ff, 3, 4. 

59. May see . . . coast] So the peep and pry " Into the actes of mor- 

Quartos, except that in the two first tall tennis balls ". Metaphors from 

there is only a colon after coast. The tennis abound in writers of the time, 

Folios give " Y' may see the sea hath the game being much more in vogue 

cast me," etc. In his edition of 1780 than at present. Compare, e.g., 

Malone reads, " You may see the sea Henry V. i. i. 262-267 > Webster, 

hath cast me," etc. ; in that of 1790, The White Devil (p. 36, ed. Dyce) ; 

" Nay, see, the sea hath cast upon Beaumont and Fletcher, The Scorn- 

your coast " the conjecture of Stee- ful Lady,i. i. 139, 140 (ed. Bond); 

vens. The Passionate Morrice (1593), p. 94 

63. In . . . tennis cotirt] Steevens (New Shakespeare Society reprints) : 
compares Sidney's Arcadia, bk. v., " In "Love shall be banded away with 
such a shadow, etc., mankind lives, the racket of dissimulation, and 
that . . . they . . . are like tenis bals beaten at last into the hazard De- 
tossed by the racket of the higher spaire by his sporting enemie". 
powers " ; and so in The Returnefrom 69. Canst . . . then ?] sc. if you 
Pernassus, in. iv., Phcebus is said to cannot beg. 



sc . L] PERICLES 43 

here 's nothing to be got now-a-days unless thou 
canst fish for 't. 

Per. What I have been I have forgot to know, 

But what I am want teaches me to think on; 75 

A man throng'd up with cold ; my veins are chill, 

And have no more of life than may suffice 

To give my tongue that heat to ask your help ; 

Which if you shall refuse, when I am dead, 

For that I am a man, pray see me buried. 80 

First Fish. Die, quoth-a ? Now gods forbid ! I have 
a gown here ; come, put it on ; keep thee warm. 
Now, afore me, a handsome fellow ! Come, thou 
shalt go home, and we'll have flesh for holidays, 
fish for fasting-days, and moreo'er puddings and 85 
flap-jacks ; and thou shalt be welcome. 

Per. I thank you, sir. 

Second Fish. Hark you, my friend; you said you 
could not beg. 

Per. I did but crave. 90 

Second Fish. But crave ! then I '11 turn craver too, 
and so I shall 'scape whipping. 

81. quoth-a ?] Malone ; ke-tha ; (or ke tha,) Qq, Ff 3, 4. 85. moreo'er] 
Malone (Farmer conj.) ; more; or Qq, Ff3, 4. 91, 92. But . . . whip 

ping.] Prose first in Malone ; two lines in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

73. fish] with a play upon the word tarpaulin. Compare " sea-gown," 

in the figurative sense of "angle". Hamlet, v. ii. 13. 

Compare Troilus and Cressida, iv. iv. 83. afore me] on my soul, by my 

105. life (as frequently). 

76. throng'd up] clemmed, shri- 86. flap-jacks} pancakes, fritters, 

veiled up. Rolfe says that the word, obsolete 

78. heat] warmth enough to enable with us, is in common use in New 

him to move his tongue now almost England. Craig shows from Taylor's 

cleaving to the roof of his mouth. Great Eater of Kent that flapjacks 

81, 82. Die . . . here] die, does he and pancakes were not always iden- 
say, while I have a gown here ? what tical. 

nonsense! 91. then . . . craver] if it is a 

82. gown] overcoat made of mere matter of terms and by calling 



44 PERICLES [ACT ii. 

Per. Why, are all your beggars whipped then ? 
Second Fish. O ! not all, my friend, not all ; for if 

all your beggars were whipped, I would wish no 95 

better office than to be beadle. But, master, 

I '11 go draw up the net. 

\Exeunt Second and Third Fishermen. 
Per. \_AsideJ\ How well this honest mirth becomes their 

labour ! 

First Fish. Hark you, sir; do you know where ye are? 
Per. Not well. 100 

First Fish. Why, I '11 tell you : this is called Penta- 

polis, and our king the good Simonides. 
Per. The good King Simonides, do you call him ? 
First Fish. Ay, sir; and he deserves to be so called 

for his peaceable reign and good government. 105 
Per. He is a happy king, since he gains from his 

subjects the name of good by his government. 

How far is his court distant from this shore? 
First Fish. Marry, sir, half a day's journey ; and I '11 

tell you, he hath a fair daughter, and to-morrow is no 

her birthday ; and there are princes and knights 

come from all parts of the world to just and 

tourney for her love. 
Per. Were my fortunes equal to my desires, I could 

wish to make one there. 115 

101, 102. Why, . . . Simonides.] Prose first in M alone; two lines in Qq, 
Ff3, 4. 104-108. Ay, . . . shore ?] Prose in M alone ; five lines in Qq, 

Ff3,4. 114, 115. Were . . . there] Prose first in M alone ; two lines 

inQq, Ff 3 , 4. 

myself a craver I shall escape whip- 112. just] tilt ; literally, approach, 
ping, the penalty of a beggar, then come near ; Lat.juxta. 
I '11 turn craver. 115. to make one there] to be one of 

the tilters. 



sc. i.] PERICLES 45 

First Fish. O, sir ! things must be as they may; 
and what a man cannot get, he may lawfully 
steal for his wife's soul. 

Re-enter Second and Third Fishermen, drawing up a net. 

Second Fish. Help, master, help ! here 's a fish hangs 

in the net, like a poor man's right in the law; 120 
'twill hardly come out. Ha ! bots on 't, 'tis 
come at last, and 'tis turned to a rusty armour. 

Per. An armour, friends ! I pray you, let me see it. 
Thanks, Fortune, yet, that after all thy crosses 
Thou giv'st me somewhat to repair myself; 125 

And though it was mine own, part of mine heritage, 
Which my dead father did bequeath to me, 
With this strict charge, even as he left his life, 
"Keep it, my Pericles, it hath been a shield 
'Twixt me and death" ; and pointed to this brace ; 130 
" For that it sav'd me, keep it ; in like necessity, 
The which the gods protect thee from ! may defend 
thee." 

124. thy} Delius (from Wilkins) ; omitted Qq, Ff 3, 4. 130. brace] 

M alone ; prayse Q 5 ; brayse (the rest). 

116. things . . . may] For this v. i: "A bots 'found you all!" 
apparently proverbial saying, com- Randolph, Poems, p. 254 (ed. Hazlitt) : 
pare Henry V. n. i. 22. " now a bots take all the red-nosed 

117, 118. and what . . . soul] I tribe of 'em ". 

have edited Williams's conjecture, 122. 'tis turned] it proves to be. 

with Malone's insertion of a dash 126. And though . . . heritage] 

after for, taking get as = gain by probably means " I do so (sc. give 

honest means. The old copies give thanks) even though it is what was 

deal. Steevens conjectured " deal already my own ". " And " for " an " 

for. His wife's soul " the sentence was often used by Elizabethan writers 

being interrupted by the re-entry of with the indicative, 

the other fishermen. 130. brace] armour for the arm. 

121. bots on 't] plague upon it! Fr. bras. Compare Troilus and 

"bots" being worms that breed in Cressida, i. iii. 297. 
cattle. Compare Sir John Oldcastle, 



46 PERICLES [ACT n. 

It kept where I kept, I so dearly lov'd it; 
Till the rough seas, that spare not any man, 
-Took it in rage, though calm'd have given 't again. 135 
I thank thee for't; my shipwreck now's no ill. 
Since I have here my father's gift in 's will. 

First Fish. What mean you, sir? 

Per. To beg of you, kind friends, this coat of worth, 

For it was sometime target to a king; 140 

I know it by this mark. He lov'd me dearly, 

And for his sake I wish the having of it ; 

And that you'd guide me to your sovereign's court, 

Where with it I may appear a gentleman ; 

And if that ever my low fortune 's better, 145 

I '11 pay your bounties ; till then rest your debtor. 

First Fish. Why, wilt thou tourney for the lady? 

Per. I '11 show the virtue I have borne in arms. 

First Fish. Why, do'e take it; and the gods give 

thee good on't. 150 

Second Fish. Ay, but hark you, my friend ; 'twas we 
that made up this garment through the rough 
seams of the waters ; there are certain condole- 
ments, certain vails. I hope, sir, if you thrive, 
you'll remember from whence you had it. 155 

133. It kept . . . kept] it was al- 153. condolements] "blunderingly 

ways with me, never left me. used by the fisherman perhaps some- 

" Keep " in the sense of " reside " is how confused with dole ( = share, 

still in use at Oxford and Cambridge portion) " (Rolfe). Compare the 

of occupying rooms. Clown's coinages " impeticos " and 

140. target] armour of defence. " gratillity," Twelfth Night, n. iii. 27. 

145. my low . . . better] Dyce, 154. vails] customary douceurs, 

after Mason, reads " fortunes," and especially to servants. Compare 

takes better as a verb. The London Prodigal, ii. 4: "our 

151-153. 'twas . . . waters] in made year's wages and our vails will scarce 

up and seams there is an allusion to pay for broken swords and bucklers 

sempstress terms. that we use in your quarrels". 



sc. i.] PERICLES 47 

Per. Believe 't, I will. 

By your furtherance I am cloth'd in steel ; 

And spite of all the rapture of the sea, 

This jewel holds his building on my arm : 

Unto thy value will I mount myself 160 

Upon a courser, whose delightful steps 

Shall make the gazer joy to see him tread. 

Only, my friends, I yet am unprovided 

Of a pair of bases. 
Second Fish. We '11 sure provide ; thou shalt have 165 

my best gown to make thee a pair, and I '11 

bring thee to the court myself. 
Per. Then honour be but a goal to my will, 

This day I'll rise, or else add ill to ill. 

\Exeunt. 

163,164. Only, . . . bases. ] Divided as by Malone ; one line in Qq, Ff 3,4. 
165-167. We 'II . . . myself.] Prose in Malone; three lines in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

158-161. And spite . . . courser} and in a semi-literal sense, The 

In the novel, "... and one furnish- Puritan (1607), i. 4: "Look, what 

ing him with an old gowne to make ridiculous raptures take hold of his 

Caparisons for his horse, which horse wrinkles ". 

he"e prouided with a lewel, whom all 164. bases} "strictly speaking, bases 

the raptures of the sea could not be- were a kind of short petticoat, some- 

reaue from his arme, and other fur- what like the philibegs of the High- 

nishing him with long sideskirtes of landers, and were probably suggested 

their cassocks, to make him bases," by the military dress of the Romans, 

etc. The jewel therefore was an Thus in [Massinger's] The Picture [ii. 

armlet which so firmly held its place 2] : " Your petticoat serves for bases 

(" his building") that the waves could to this warrior" (Gifford on velvet 

not tear it off ; apostrophising which, bases, Jonson, The Poetaster, iii. i). 

he proposes to barter it for the noblest In The Fatal Dowry, iv. i, Massinger 

steed its value would buy. For rap- again uses the word, but in the 

tare, in this literal sense, compare singular, " the base of a piccadille in 

Chapman, Iliad, xxii. 271 : puncto". In The Insatiate Countess, 

"And look how an eagle from her n. i. 31, Marston speaks of " bakers 

height in their linen bases ". 
Stoops to the rapture of a lamb, 168. a goal to} Dyqe conjectures 

or cuffs a timorous hare " ; " goal unto ". 



48 PERICLES [ACT n. 

SCENE ll.The Same. A public Way or Platform 
leading to the Lists. A Pavilion near it, for the 
reception of the King, Princess, Ladies, Lords, etc. 

Enter SlMONIDES, THAISA, Lords, and Attendants. 

Sim. Are the knights ready to begin the triumph ? 

First Lord. They are, my liege ; 

And stay your coming to present themselves. 

Sim. Return them, we are ready; and our daughter, 

In honour of whose birth these triumphs are, 5 
Sits here, like beauty's child, whom nature gat 
For men to see, and seeing wonder at. 

[Exit a Lord. 

Thai. It pleaseth you, my royal father, to express 
My commendations great, whose merit 's less. 

Sim. Tis fit it should be so; for princes are 10 

A model, which heaven makes like to itself: 
As jewels lose their glory if neglected, 
So princes their renowns if not respected. 
'Tis now your honour, daughter, to entertain 
The labour of each knight in his device. 15 

Thai. Which, to preserve mine honour, I '11 perform. 

i. triumph'} a public festivity of gold and silver which would be tar- 
any kind, particularly a tournament, nished by neglect. The word is used 
Frequent in the language of the time, by Shakespeare of rings, bracelets 

4. Return them] acquaint them in (as above), and even of a picture, 

return. 14. honour] honourable duty. 

8,9. to express . . . less] to mag- Steevens conjectured "office" for 

nify my merits which little deserve honour, and Dyce would transpose 

such praise. honour and labour. 

n. model] of old used for (i) 14. entertain] is generally altered 

pattern of something to be made, fa)' to " explain," Steevens's conjecture, 

copy or image of something already though some editors prefer Schmidt's 

in existence, as here. Compare "interpret". But Thaisa neither 

Henry VIII. iv. ii. 132. explains nor interprets ; she only 

12. jewels] Here embracing not describes. To me entertain seems to 

merely precious stones, but articles of mean "give reception to as they pre- 



sc. ii.] PERICLES 49 

Enter a Knight ; he passes over the stage, and his Squire 
presents his shield to the Princess. 

Sim. Who is the first that doth prefer himself? 

Thai. A knight of Sparta, my renowned father; 
And the device he bears upon his shield 
Is a black Ethiop reaching at the sun ; 20 

The word, Lux tua vita mihi. 

Sim. He loves you well that holds his life of you. 

The Second Knight passes over. 

Who is the second that presents himself? 
Thai. A prince of Macedon, my royal father ; 

And the device he bears upon his shield 25 

Is an arm'd knight that's conquer'd by a lady; 
The motto thus, in Spanish, Piu por dulzura que 
por fuerza. 

The Third Knight passes over. 
Sim. And what 's the third ? 
Thai. The third of Antioch ; 

27. Piu . . . fuerza] Dyce ; Pue Per doleera kee per forsa Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

28-30. The third . . . apex.] Divided as by Steevens ; two lines in Qq, Ff 
3,4- 

sent themselves," the words " The 21. word] motto, as frequently in 

labour of ... device" being equi- the dramatists. Compare the ex- 

valent to " the knights with their de- tended sense of word in Richard II. 

vices, on which they have spent so i. iii. 132 and Richard III. v. iii. 349. 

much ingenuity ". This interpretation So The Advancement of Learning, 

seems to be borne out by the novel, I. ii. 13 : " therefore these times may 

in which the corresponding passage justly bear in their word not only plus 

is, " which [sc. the shields] being by ultra, in precedence of the ancient 

the knights Page deliuered to the non ultra" etc. 

Lady, and from her presented to the 22. that holds . . . yoti] who re- 

King her father, hee made playne to presents the tenure of his life as being 

her the meaning of each imprese " ; dependent on you. 
and see the stage-direction to the text. 27. Piu] Malone points out that 

17. prefer] presents himself for this should be Mas, the rest of the 

reception. motto being Spanish, not Italian. 



50 PERICLES [ACT ii 

And his device, a wreath of chivalry; 

The word, Me pompcz provexit apex. 30 

The Fourth Knight passes over. 

Sim. What is the fourth? 

Thai. A burning torch that 's turned upside down ; 

The word, Quod me alit> me extinguit. 
Sim. Which shows that beauty hath his power and will, 

Which can as well inflame as it can kill. 35 

The Fifth Knight passes over. 

Thai. The fifth, a hand environed with clouds, 

Holding out gold that 's by the touchstone tried ; 
The motto thus, Sic spectanda fides. 

The Sixth Knight, PERICLES, passes over. 

Sim. And what's 

The sixth and last, the which the knight himself 40 
With such a graceful courtesy deliver'd ? 

Thai. He seems to be a stranger; but his present is 
A wither'd branch, that 's only green at top ; 
The motto, In hac spe vivo. 

Sim. A pretty moral ; 45 

From the dejected state wherein he is, 
He hopes by you his fortunes yet may flourish. 

30. pompce] Malone (Steevens) ; Pompey Qq, Ff 3, 4. 33. Quod] Malone ; 
Qui Qq, Ff 3, 4. 39-41- And what's . . . delivered?] As in Dyce ; two 

lines in Q i, the first ending which; prose in the rest. 45-47- A pretty 
. . . flourish.] As in Rowe ; two lines in Qq i, 2, 3 ; prose in the rest. 

29. a wreath of chivalry] a wreath 41. deliver'd] presented, 

with a motto which speaks of chi- 42. his present] that which he offers 

valrous attempt. to our view. 

34. his] its. 46. From] emerging from. 

41. courtesy] obeisance. 



sc. ii.] PERICLES 51 

First Lord. He had need mean better than his outward 
show 

Can any way speak in his just commend ; 

For by his rusty outside he appears 50 

To have practis'd more the whipstock than the lance. 
Second Lord. He well may be a stranger, for he comes 

To an honour'd triumph strangely furnished. 
Third Lord. And on set purpose let his armour rust 

Until this day, to scour it in the dust. 55 

Sim. Opinion's but a fool, that makes us scan 

The outward habit by the inward man. 

But stay, the knights are coming; we'll withdraw 

Into the gallery. 

\Exeunt. Great shouts^ and all cry, " The mean 
knight / " 

58, 59. But . . . gallery.] Divided as by Malone ; one line in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

48, 49. He had . . . commend] his he is sure to be rolled by his oppon- 

endeavour must be far better than his ent. 

outward show if he is justly to win 56. Opinion] customary estimate ; 

any commendation. not, I think, "reputation, public 

51. whipstock] handle of a whip; opinion" (Schmidt). 
i.e. he looks more like a carter than 57. The outward . . . man] Stee- 

a knight. Compare Jonson, The vens would transpose outward and 

New Inn, iii. i : " Let him go, base inward. But probably we have only 

whipstock ". In The Spanish Trag- an inversion, says Malone, as in The 

edy, iv. i. 10, we have the form Merchant of Venice, u. ix. 26 : " that 

" whip stalk ". ' many ' may be meant By the fool 

53. honour'd] dignified with every multitude ". 
mark of pomp and pageantry. " The mean knight I "] i.e. Hurrah 

55. to scour . . . dust] sc. in which for the knight in the rusty armour ! 



52 PERICLES [ACT n. 

SCENE III. The Same. A Hall of State. A Banquet 

prepared. 

Enter SlMONlDES, THAISA, Ladies, Lords, Knights from 
tilting, and Attendants. 

Sim. Knights, 

To say you 're welcome were superfluous. 

To place upon the volume of your deeds, 

As in a title-page, your worth in arms, 

Were more than you expect, or more than 's fit, 5 

Since every worth in show commends itself. 

Prepare for mirth, for mirth becomes a feast : 

You are my guests. 

Thai. But you, my knight and guest; 

To whom this wreath of victory I give, 
And crown you king of this day's happiness. 10 

Per. 'Tis more by fortune, lady, than by merit. 

Sim. Call it by what you will, the day is yours ; 
And here, I hope, is none that envies it. 
In framing an artist art hath thus decreed, 
To make some good, but others to exceed; 15 

i, 2. Knights, . . . superfluous.] Divided as in Malone ; one line in Qq, 
Ff 3, 4. ii. my merit] Qq i, 2, 3 ; by merit (the rest). 

4. As in a title-page] The title- guests were not princes, and the in- 
pages of the day were frequently far sertion spoils the metre, 
more elaborately embellished than is 14, 15. In framing . . . exceed] art, 
the custom now. when engaged in the production of 

6. Since . . . itself] since all real her disciples, determines that they 

merit best commends itself by being shall have different degrees of excel- 

shown in deed. lence, and you are the scholar on whom 

8. You are my guests] The old she has spent her best pains. Stee- 

copies read " You are princes and my vens, on Malone's conjecture, gives 

guests ". With Steevens I have " artists " for an artist. 
omitted " princes and," since all the 



sc. HI.] PERICLES 53 

And you're her labour'd scholar. Come, queen o' 
the feast, 

For, daughter, so you are, here take your place ; 

Marshal the rest, as they deserve their grace. 
Knights. We are honour'd much by good Simonides. 
Sim. Your presence glads our days; honour we love, 20 

For who hates honour hates the gods above. 
Marshal Sir, yonder is your place. 

Per. Some other is more fit. 

First Knight. Contend not, sir; for we are gentlemen 

That neither in our hearts nor outward eyes 

Envy the great nor do the low despise. 25 

Per. You are right courteous knights. 
Sim. Sit, sir; sit. 

[Aside.] By Jove, I wonder, that is king of thoughts, 

These cates resist me, he but thought upon. 
Thai. By Juno, that is queen of marriage, 

All viands that I eat do seem unsavoury, 30 

Wishing him my meat. Sure, he J s a gallant gentle 
man. 
Sim. He 's but a country gentleman ; 

27, 28. By yove . . . upon] In the that the king mentions Pericles shows 

second of these lines I have adopted that he is thinking upon him. 

Dyce's conjecture "but" for not, 27. / wonder] to my astonishment, 

which the following passage quoted 28. cates] delicacies ; originally 

by him from Wilkins's novel seems acates, things purchased. O.F. and 

to demand : " In the end, all being Norman acat, purchase. Jonson al- 

seated by the Marshall at a table ways uses the longer form, as in The 

placed directly over against where Staple of News, n. i. 16, The Sad 

the king and his daughter sate, as it Shepherd, i. i. 49, and acater for cater, 

were by some divine operation both id. ii. 2. 

king and daughter at one instant were 28. resist me] are distasteful to me, 

50 strucke in lone with the noblenesse go against my appetite. 

of his woorth, that they could not spare 29. marriage] a trisyllable. 

so much time to satisfie themselves 32. He 's but . . . gentleman] he 

with the delicacie of their viands for is nothing more than an ordinary 

talking of his prayses ". The fact squire, 



54 PERICLES [ACT n. 

Has done no more than other knights have done, 
Has broken a staff or so ; so let it pass. 

T/iai.To me he seems like diamond to glass. 35 

Per. Yon king's to me like to my father's picture, 
Which tells me in that glory once he was; 
Had princes sit, like stars, about his throne, 
And he the sun for them to reverence. 
None that beheld him, but like lesser lights 40 
Did vail their crowns to his supremacy; 
Where now his son 's like a glow-worm in the night, 
The which hath fire in darkness, none in light: 
Whereby I see that Time 's the king of men ; 
He's both their parent, and he is their grave, 45 
And gives them what he will, not what they crave. 

Sim. What, are you merry, knights? 

First Knight. Who can be other in this royal presence? 

Sim. Here, with a cup that's stor'd unto the brim, 

As you do love, fill to your mistress' lips, 50 

We drink this health to you. 

Knights. We thank your grace. 

Sim. Yet pause awhile; 

Yon knight doth sit too melancholy, 

As if the entertainment in our court 

Had not a show might countervail his worth. 55 

Note it not you, Thaisa? 

35. diamond} a trisyllable. similarly I am unable to show my- 

35. to] when compared to. self as a shining light among great 

36. like . . . picture} like to a pic- men. 

ture of my father. 50. to] in honour of. 

41. vail] lower (as frequently both 55. Had not . . . worth] was not 
literally and figuratively). adequate in its magnificence to his 

42. Where] whereas. deserts. For countervail, compare 

43. The which . . . light] sc. and Romeo and Juliet, n. vi. 4. 



sc. HI.] PERICLES 55 

Thai. What is it 

To me, my father? 

Sim. O ! attend, my daughter : 

Princes in this should live like gods above, 
Who freely give to every one that comes 
To honour them ; 60 

And princes not doing so are like to gnats, 
Which make a sound, but kill'd are wonder'd at. 
Therefore to make his entrance more sweet, 
Here say we drink this standing-bowl of wine to 
him. 

Thai. Alas ! my father, it befits not me 65 

Unto a stranger knight to be so bold ; 
He may my proffer take for an offence, 
Since men take women's gifts for impudence. 

Sim. How ! 

Do as I bid you, or you'll move me else. 70 

Thai. [Aside.} Now, by the gods, he could not please me 
better. 

Sim. And furthermore tell him, we desire to know of him, 
Of whence he is, his name, and parentage. 

Thai. The king my father, sir, has drunk to you. 

59-62. Who . . . at.] Divided as by Dyce ; three lines, ending them : . . . 
Gnats . . . at. in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 69, 70. How I . . . else.] As in Steevens ; 
one line in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

61, 62. And princes . . . at] and and entrance is certainly suspicious, 
princes that show no princely virtues Compare line 54 above, 
are like to noisy gnats ; they make 64. standing-bowl] a bowl with a 
a great fuss, but when they are foot or pedestal. Compare Heywood, 
no more, every one wonders at the The Silver Age, ii. i (stage-direction) : 
attention which was paid to their " They present him with a standing- 
doings, bowl " ; The Iron Age, i. i : 

63. entrance] a trisyllable. Dyce " Fill me a standing-bowl of Greek- 
adopts Walker's conjecture, entertain, ish wine ", 



56 



PERICLES 



[ACT n. 



Per. I thank him. 75 

Thai. Wishing it so much blood unto your life. 

Per. I thank both him and you, and pledge him freely. 

Thai. And further he desires to know of you, 

Of whence you are, your name and parentage. 

Per. A gentleman of Tyre ; my name, Pericles ; 80 

My education been in arts and arms ; 
Who, looking for adventures in the world, 
Was by the rough seas reft of ships and men, 
And after shipwreck driven upon this shore. 

Thai. He thanks your grace; names himself Pericles, 85 
A gentleman of Tyre, 
Who only by misfortune of the seas 
Bereft of ships and men, cast on this shore. 

Sim. Now, by the gods, I pity his misfortune, 

v And will awake him from his melancholy. 90 

Come, gentlemen, we sit too long on trifles, 
And waste the time which looks for other revels. 
Even in your armours, as you are address'd, 
Will very well become a soldier's dance. 
I will not have excuse, with saying this 95 

86, 87. A gentleman . . . seas] Divided as by Collier ; one line in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 



80-84. A gentleman . . . shore] In 
the novel this passage is reproduced 
almost literatim : " Pericles . . . thus 
returneth what hee is, that hee was a 
gentleman of Tyre, his name Pericles, 
his education beene in Artes and 
Armes, who looking for adventures 
in the world, was by the rough and 
vnconstant Seas, most vnfortunately 
bereft both of shippes and men, and 
after shipwrecke throwen vpon that 
shoare ", For been (line 81) Singer 



conjectures and Hudson reads lt 's 
been ". 

88. Bereft . . . shore] We might 
perhaps read, " Was, reft . . . men, 
cast," etc. 

93, 94. Even . . . dance] A blend 
ing of " Even in your armour, a 
soldier's dance will be very be 
coming," and k 'Even in your armour, 
you will very well become a soldier's 
dance ". 

93. addressed] equipped, furnished, 



sc. in.] PERICLES 57 

Loud music is too harsh for ladies' heads, 
Since they love men in arms as well as beds. 

\The Knights dance. 

So this was well ask'd, 'twas so well perform'd. 
Come, sir ; 

Here is a lady that wants breathing too: ioo 

And I have heard, you knights of Tyre 
Are excellent in making ladies trip, 
And that their measures are as excellent. 

Per. In those that practise them they are, my lord. 

Sim. O ! that 's as much as you would be denied 105 
Of your fair courtesy. 

\The Knights and Ladies dance. 

Unclasp, unclasp ; 

Thanks, gentlemen, to all ; all have done well, 
[To Pericles.} But you the best. Pages and lights, 

to conduct 

These knights unto their several lodgings ! Yours, sir, 
We have given order to be next our own. no 

Per. I am at your grace's pleasure. 

Sim. Princes, it is too late to talk of love, 

109, no. Yours, . . . own.] Divided as by Malone ; one line in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

96. Loud music] "i.e. the loud 101. And . . . heard] Malone in- 
noise made by the clashing of their serts " often " before heard. 
armour " (Malone). 102. trip] with a quibble. 

97. arms] probably with an equi- 103. measures] used of dances 
voque. generally, but especially a grave and 

98. So this . . . perform'd] this solemn dance. Compare Much Ado 
has been so skilfully performed that About Nothing, u. i. 80: "as a 
it well justifies my having made the measure, full of state and ancientry ". 
request. 105, 106. that's . . . courtesy] that 

ioo. breathing] exercise. Compare answer is as much as if you would 
All 's Well that Ends Well, I. ii. 17 ; have it said that you yourself can 
Hamlet, v, ii. i8{. claim no praise for such courtly 

accomplishments. 



58 PERICLES [ACT n. 

And that 's the mark I know you level at ; 
Therefore each one betake him to his rest ; 
To-morrow all for speeding do their best. 115 

[Exeunt. 

SCENE IV. Tyre. A Room in the Governors 
House. 

Enter HELICANUS and ESCANES. 

Hel. No, Escanes, know this of me, 

Antiochus from incest liv'd not free ; 

For which, the most high gods not minding longer 

To withhold the vengeance they had in store, 

Due to this heinous capital offence, 5 

Even in the height and pride of all his glory, 

When he was seated in a chariot 

Of an inestimable value, his daughter with him, 

A fire from heaven came and shrivell'd up 

Their bodies, even to loathing; for they so stunk, 10 

That all those eyes ador'd them ere their fall 

Scorn now their hand should give them burial. 

Esca. 'Twas very strange. 

Hel. And yet but justice; for though 

This king were great, his greatness was no guard 
To bar heaven's shaft, but sin had his reward. 1 5 

Esca. Tis very true. 

3-6. For . . . glory,] Arranged as by Malone. 7-9. When . . . up] 

Arranged as by Dyce. I 3" I 5- And . . . reward.] Divided as by Malone ; 

the lines end great, . . . shaft, . . . reward, in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

115. for speeding] to ensure success. 8. his] I have struck out and be 
fore this word as making the metre 
Scene IV. rougher even than it need be, and as 

being unnecessary to the sense. 

3. minding] being of the mind, 13. justice] Steevens reads "just", 
proposing. 15. his] its. 



sc. iv.] PERICLES 59 

Enter two or three Lords. 

First Lord. See, not a man, in private conference 
Or council has respect with him but he. 

Second Lord. It shall no longer grieve without reproof. 

Third Lord. And curs'd be he that will not second it. 20 

First Lord. Follow me then. Lord Helicane, a word. 

Hel. With me ? and welcome. Happy day, my lords. 

First Lord. Know that our griefs are risen to the top, 
And now at length they overflow their banks. 

Hel. Your griefs! for what? wrong not the prince you 
love. 2 5 

First Lord. Wrong not yourself then, noble Helicane; 
But if the prince do live, let us salute him, 
Or know what ground 's made happy by his breath. 
If in the world he live, we '11 seek him out ; 
If in his grave he rest, we '11 find him there ; 30 
And be resolv'd he lives to govern us, 
Or dead, gives cause to mourn his funeral, 
And leaves us to our free election. 

Second Lord. Whose death 's indeed the strongest in our 
cenjsure : 

18. but he] sc. Escanes. earlier Quartos have give 's, i.e. give 

19. It shall . . . reproof] such dis- us, and with that reading, cause would 
courteous treatment shall no longer mean by telling us the truth of the 
go without remonstrance from us. matter. 

23. griefs] grievances (as fre- 33. leaves] So Malone for leave. 

quently). This correction seems to be confirmed 

27. let its . . . him] let us pay him by the novel: "that even now, the 

our respects in person. power being, by his death, in their 

31. And be . . . us] sc. " If in the hands, they would create to them- 

world he live ". selves a new soueraigne ". 

31. resolv'd] assured. 34. Whose . . . censure] us who feel 

32. gives] Here, with Rowe (ed. 2) most strongly convinced of his death, 
and Malone, I follow Q 5. The 34. censure] opinion, judgment, 



60 PERICLES [ACT ii. 

And knowing this kingdom is without a head, 35 
Like goodly buildings left without a roof 
Soon fall to ruin, your noble self, 
That best know how to rule and how to reign, 
We thus submit unto, our sovereign. 
All. Live, noble Helicane ! 40 

Hel. For honour's cause forbear your suffrages: 
If that you love Prince Pericles, forbear. 
Take I your wish, I leap into the seas, 
Where's hourly trouble for a minute's ease. 
A twelvemonth longer, let me you entreat 45 

For to forbear the absence of your king ; 
If in which time expir'd he not return, 
I shall with aged patience bear your yoke. 
But if I cannot win you to this love, 
Go search like nobles, like noble subjects, 50 

And in your search spend your adventurous worth ; 
Whom if you find, and win unto return, 
You shall like diamonds sit about his crown. 
First Lord. To wisdom he 's a fool that will not yield ; 

41. For honour's cause] Singer, ed. 2 (Dyce) ; Try honour's cause ; Qq, Ff 
3,4- 

35. is'} Malone gives " if," putting pecially in entreaties and commands, 
the two next lines in a parenthesis Compare All 's Well that Ends Well, 
and inserting "will" before fall (line v. iii. 181 ; The Winters Tale, i. ii. 
37). Steevens reads "Will soon," 427; Hamlet, i. ii. 175. Steevens 
etc. gives " To forbear choice i' the " ; 

36. Like] possibly = as. Compare Hudson, on an anonymous con- 
above, i. i. 163. Otherwise we must jecture, "Still to"; Nicholson pro- 
suppose an ellipsis: "like goodly poses " Yet to ". 

buildings which being left," etc. 47. // in . . . expir'd] if at the 

43. Take . . . wish] if I accede to expiration of that time. Compare 

your wish. i. i. 117, above. 

43. seas] figuratively. 48. aged patience] the endurance 

45. you entreat] Hudson's trans- of an old man not equal to so heavy 
position of entreat you. a burden. 

46. For to forbear} So I have edited 49. to this love] to show me so 
for the sake of the metre. The much consideration as to wait this 
phonasm was frequent of old, es- time, 



sc. v.] PERICLES 61 

And since Lord Helicane enjoineth us, 55 

We with our travels will endeavour it. 
Hel. Then you love us, we you, and we '11 clasp hands : 
When peers thus knit, a kingdom ever stands. 

{Exeunt. 

SCENE V. Pentapolis. A Room in the Palace. 

Enter SlMONlDES, reading a letter ; the Knights 
meet him. 

First Knight. Good morrow to the good Simonides. 

Sim. Knights, from my daughter this I let you know, 
That for this twelvemonth she'll not undertake 
A married life. 

Her reason to herself is only known, 5 

Which yet from her by no means can I get. 

Second Knight. May we not get access to her, my lord ? 

Sim. Faith, by no means ; she hath so strictly tied 
Her to her chamber that 'tis impossible. 
One twelve moons more she'll wear Diana's livery ; 10 
This by the eye of Cynthia hath she vow'd, 
And on her virgin honour will not break it. 

2. this . . . know] Clarke remarks, their transgression in daring to fall 

" The expedient here devised by in love with each other without his 

Simonides for having the suitors leave. Steevens solemnly demurs to 

'well despatched,' is, indeed, not very this conduct of Simonides; yet, 

consonant with the dignity of truth ; though it may not be ' ingenuous,' it 

but it is quite characteristic of the is perfectly in character diplomati- 

waggish tendency to stratagem shown cally as well as dramatically." 

by the royal old gentleman, in pro- 10. One twelve moons} This idiom 

ceeding to ' dissemble ' his satisfaction is frequent enough with substantives 

at his daughter's choice, and to play of duration, measure, weight, etc. 

off a pretended anger at the lovers' Compare Coriolanus, iv. i. 55 : " one 

mutual affection, that he may keep seven years "; Macbeth, v. v. 37 : "this 

them in a flutter of suspense until he three mile ". So, strictly speaking, 

choose to join their hands and bid "a sennight," "a fortnight", 
them wed at once as the penalty of 



62 PERICLES [ACT 11. 

Third Knight. Loath to bid farewell, we take our leaves. 

\Exeunt Knights. 

Sim. So, 

They are well dispatch'd ; now to my daughter's 
letter. 1 5 

She tells me here, she '11 wed the stranger knight, 
Or never more to view nor day nor light. 
'Tis well, mistress ; your choice agrees with mine ; 
I like that well : nay, how absolute she 's in 't, 
Not minding whether I dislike or no ! 20 

Well, I do commend her choice, 
And will no longer have it be delay'd. 
Soft ! here he comes : I must dissemble it. 

Enter PERICLES. 

Per. All fortune to the good Simonides ! 

Sim. To you as much, sir ! I am beholding to you 25 
For your sweet music this last night : I do 
Protest my ears were never better fed 
With such delightful pleasing harmony. 

14-16. So, . . . knight,] Arranged as by Malone ; three lines, ending dis- 
patcht: . . . heere, . . . Knight, in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 21-23. Well, . . . 

it.] Divided as by Malone (1790) ; the lines end longer . . . comes, . . . it. 
in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 26, 27. I do . . . fed] Divided as by Malone ; one line 

in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

13. Loath . . . leaves] Steevens Compare Hamlet, v. i. 148: "how 

reads " Though loath," etc. Abbott, absolute the knave is ! " 

Shakespearian Grammar, 480, gives 25. beholding] The active participle 

the value of a dissyllable to fare in originated in a mistake for "be- 

farewell. holden," the passive participle, in 

17. to view] The construction is as the sense of under an obligation, 
though he had said " she vows to wed a sense not found in other parts of 
or never to view," etc. the verb, though a natural one of 

1 8. 'Tis well, mistress] Steevens behold. See New Eng. Diet, s.v., 
transposes, " Mistress, 'tis well ". and Abbott, Shakespearian Gram- 

19. absohtte] determined, positive, mar, 372. 



sc. v.] PERICLES 68 

Per. It is your grace's pleasure to commend, 

Not my desert. 

Sim. Sir, you are music's master. 30 

Per. The worst of all her scholars, my good lord. 
Sim. Let me ask you one thing. 

What do you think of my daughter, sir ? 
Per. A most virtuous princess. 

Sim. And she is fair too, is she not? 35 

Per. As a fair day in summer; wondrous fair. 
Sim. My daughter, sir, thinks very well of you ; 

Ay, so well, sir, that you must be her master, 

And she will be your scholar : therefore look to it. 
Per. I am unworthy for her schoolmaster. 40 

Sim. She thinks not so ; peruse this writing else. 
Per. [Aside.] What's here? 

A letter that she loves the knight of Tyre ! 

Tis the king's subtilty to have my life. 

O ! seek not to entrap me, gracious lord, 45 

A stranger and distressed gentleman, 

That never aim'd so high to love your daughter, 

But bent all offices to honour her. 
Sim. Thou hast bewitch'd my daughter, and thou art 

A villain. 

32, 33. Let . . . sir ?] As in Qq, Ff; prose by Camb. Editors. 42, 43. 
What's . . . Tyre I] Divided as by Malone ; one line in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 
49, 50. Thou . . . villain.'] Divided as by Malone ; the first line ends 
daughter, in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

41. peruse . . . else] sc. if you do 48. all offices] my whole duty, 

not believe me. Compare King John, 49. Thou . . . daughter] Com- 

iv. i. 108. pare A Midsummer-Night's Dream, 

47. so . . . to love] For the omission i. i. 27 ff. ; Othello, i. ii. 63 : 

of as or of so, and sometimes of both, " Damn'd as thou art, thou hast en- 

in relatival constructions, see Abbott, chanted her," said by Brabantio to 

Shakespearian Grammar, 281. Othello. 



64 PERICLES [ACT n. 

Per. By the gods, I have not : 50 

Never did thought of mine levy offence ; 

Nor never did my actions yet commence 

A deed might gain her love or your displeasure. 
Sim. Traitor, thou liest. 
Per. Traitor ! 

Sim. Ay, traitor. 

Per. Even in his throat, unless it be the king, 55 

That calls me traitor, I return the lie. 
Sim. [Aside.] Now, by the gods, I do applaud his 

courage. 
Per. My actions are as noble as my thoughts, 

That never relish'd of a base descent. 

I came into your court for honour's cause, 60 

And not to be a rebel to her state; 

And he that otherwise accounts of me, 

This sword shall prove he's honour's enemy. 
Sim. No? 

Here comes my daughter, she can witness it. 65 

50-53. By . . . displeasure.] Divided as by Rowe. 

51. levy offence} as though a traitor " gives me the lie i' the throat, 

levying arms against a sovereign. As deep as to the lungs " ; 

55, 56. Even . . . lie] Staunton in and in Webster, The DeviVs Law 

a note on 2 Henry IV. i. ii. 94, quotes Case, TV. ii. : " I '11 give the lie in the 

from a curious old Italian treatise on stomach, That's somewhat deeper 

War and the Duello a passage in than the throat". For the reserva- 

which the different gradations of tion here, compare Richard II. i. i. 

giving the lie are enumerated, as the 58-60. 

simple " Thou liest"; then, "Thou 59. That never . . . descent] which 

liest in the throat ";" Thou liest in never had the slightest flavour of mean 

throat like a rogue " ; " Thou liest birth. Compare Hamlet, in. i. 120 : 

in the throat like a rogue as thou " for virtue cannot so inoculate our 

art"; the last being an insult which old stock but we shall relish of it" 

could not be passed by without a (sc. original depravity), 

challenge to combat. In Hamlet, n. 65. it] sc. that you are guilty of 

ii. 601, we have : treachery. 



sc. v.] PERICLES 65 

Enter THAISA. 

Per. Then, as you are as virtuous as fair, 

Resolve your angry father, if my tongue 
Did e'er solicit, or my hand subscribe 
To any syllable that made love to you? 

Thai. Why, sir, say if you had, 70 

Who takes offence at that would make me glad ? 

Sim. Yea, mistress, are you so peremptory? 

[Aside.} I am glad on't with all my heart. 

I '11 tame you ; I '11 bring you in subjection. 

Will you, not having my consent, 75 

Bestow your love and your affections 

Upon a stranger? [Aside] who, for aught I know, 

May be, nor can I think the contrary, 

As great in blood as I myself. 

Therefore hear you, mistress ; either frame 80 

Your will to mine; and you, sir, hear you, 

Either be rul'd by me, or I will make you 

Man and wife. 

Nay, come, your hands and lips must seal it too ; 

And being join'd, I'll thus your hopes destroy; 85 

And for a further grief, God give you joy! 

What ! are you both pleas'd ? 

Thai. Yes, if you love me, sir. 

Per. Even as my life my blood that fosters it. 

70,71. Why, . . . glad ?] Divided as by Malone ; the first line ends offence 
inQq, Ff 3 , 4. 

67. Resolve] solve his doubts by Quartos read as in the text, in which 

saying, etc. case the sense will be " even as my 

72. peremptory] absolute, positive, life loves the blood which fosters 

Compare line 19, above. it ". Dyce, Delius, Staunton, Clarke 

88. Even . . . it] The earlier and others give "life, or," follow- 

5 



66 PERICLES [ACT n. 

Sim. What ! are you both agreed ? 

Thai. Per. Yes, if it please your majesty. 90 

Sim. It pleaseth me so well, that I will see you wed; 
Then with what haste you can, get you to bed. 

[Exeunt. 

ing the later copies. Steevens "As dear to me as are the ruddy 

compares Julius Cczsar, n. i. 289, drops 

290 : That visit my sad heart ". 



ACT III 

Enter GOWER. 

Now sleep y-slaked hath the rout ; 
No din but snores the house about, 
Made louder by the der-fed breast 
Of this most pompous marriage-feast. 
The cat, with eyne of burning coal> 5 

Now couches fore the mouses hole ; 
And crickets sing at the oven's mouth, 
E'er the blither for their drouth. 
Hymen hath brought the bride to bed, 
Where, by the loss of maidenhead, IO 

A babe is moulded. Be attent, 
And time that is so briefly spent 
With your fine fancies quaintly eche ; 
What *s dumb in show I V/ plain with speech. 

i. y-slaked] See note on line 35 of the old copies. Steevens conjec- 

below. turedAs; Delius gives All (Taylor's 

i. rout] sc. of revellers. conjecture). 

4. pompons'] magnificent, full of n. attent] Compare Hamlet, i. ii. 
pomp. Compare As You Like It, v. 193. 

iv. 188 ; Richard II. iv. i. 250. The 13. With . . . eche} with play 

sinister sense in which we now use of your ingenious fancies eke out the 

the word was unknown to the short interval. 

Elizabethans, while we have quite lost 13. eche] an old spelling of eke 

the sense it had with them. found in the first Folio of Henry V. 

5. eyrie] The archaic plural occurs in. Chorus, 35, and in the later 
frequently in Shakespeare, but only Quartos of The Merchant of Venice, 
for the sake of rhyme. in. ii. 33. 

8. E'er] Dyce's conjecture for Are 

67 



68 PERICLES [ACT in. 

Dumb-show. 

Enter PERICLES and SlMONIDES at one door, with At 
tendants ; a Messenger meets them, kneels, and gives 
PERICLES a letter : PERICLES shows it to SIMONIDES ; 
the Lords kneel to PERICLES. Then enter THAISA 
with child, and LYCHORIDA : SlMONIDES shows his 
daughter the letter; she rejoices: she and PERICLES 
take leave of her father, and all depart. 

By many a dern and painful perch 15 

Of Pericles the careful search 
By the four opposing coigns, 
Which the world together joins, 
Is made with all due diligence, 
That horse and sail and high expense, 20 

Can stead the quest. At last from Tyre, 
Fame answering the most strange inquire, 
To the court of King Simonides 
Are letters brought, the tenour these : 
Antiochus and his daughter dead; 25 

The men of Tyrus on the head 
Of Helicanus would set on 
The crown of Tyre, but he will none : 
The mutiny he there hastes f oppress ; 
Says to 'em, if King Pericles 30 

15. dern] O.E. dcrne, secret, ob- 21. Can . . . quest] can aid the 

scure ; hence solitary, wild, drear. search. For stead, compare The 

15. perch] a measure of land = five Tempest, i. ii. 165. 

and a half yards. 22. strange] apparently means en- 

17. coigns] corners. Fr. coign, a quiry made in strange, distant lands, 

corner ; Lat. cuneus, a wedge. Of Malone reads strong. 

old spelt indifferently " coign " and 29. oppress] crush. 
"coing". Compare Coriolanus, v. 
iv. i ; Macbeth, i. vi. 7. 



PROLOGUE.] PERICLES 69 

Come not home in twice six moons, 
fie, obedient to their dooms, 
Will take the crown. The sum of this, 
Brought hither to Pentapolis^ 

Y-ravished the regions round, 35 

And every one with claps can sound, 
" Our heir-apparent is a king ! 
Who dream' d, who thought of such a thing?" 
Brief, he must hence depart to Tyre : 
His queen, with child, makes her desire, 40 

Which who shall cross ? along to go ; 
Omit we all their dole and woe; 
Lychorida, her nurse, she takes, 
And so to sea. Their vessel shakes 
On Neptune's billow ; half the flood 45 

Hath their keel cut: but fortune's mood 
Varies again ; the grisled north 
Disgorges such a tempest forth, 

35. Y-ravished] Malone (Steevens) ; Iranyshed Q i ; Irauy shed Q 2 ; 
Irony shed (the rest). 46. fortune's mood] Malone (Steevens) ; fortune 
mou'd (or moou'd or mov'd) Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

32. dooms] judgments, what they hath,' but the necessity of the rhyme, 

deem. and the diminished sense of the gram- 

35. Y-ravished] " The participial matical force of the participial prefix, 

prefix y- is only two or three times made him alter the construction " 

used in Shakespeare's plays : y-clept, (Abbott, Shakespearian Grammar, 

y-clad, y-slaked. In E.E. y- is pre- 345). Peele, the most archaic of the 

fixed to other forms of speech beside dramatists, has y-clypped, y-blinded, 

participles, like the Germany-. But y-born, y-comen, y-clad, etc. 

in Elizabethan English the y- was 36. can] = gan, ginnan, to begin, 

wholly disused except as a participial See Mr. Craig's note in the Little 

prefix, and even the latter was archaic. Quarto Shakespeare. 

Hence we must explain as follows 37. heir-apparent] sc. by marriage 

[the passage in the text]. Shake- with Thaisa, Simonides's only child, 

speare was probably going to write 40. with child] being enceinte, 

(as in the same speech, line i, 'y- 47. grisled] originally "grey," Fr. 

slaked hath ') 'y-ravished the regions gris, then " sombre ". 



70 



PERICLES 



[ACT in. 






That) as a duck for life that dives, 

So up and down the poor ship drives. 50 

The lady shrieks^ and well-a-near 

Does fall in travail with her fear ; 

And what ensues in this fell storm 

Shall for itself itself perform. 

I nill relate, action may 55 

Conveniently the rest convey, 

Which might not what by me is told. 
\ In your imagination hold 

This stage the ship, upon whose deck 
/ The sea-tost Pericles appears to speak. {Exit. 60 

SCENE I. 

Enter PERICLES, on shipboard. 

Per. Thou god of this great vast, rebuke these surges, 
Which wash both heaven and hell ; and thou, that 

hast 

Upon the winds command, bind them in brass, 
Having call'd them from the deep. O! still 
Thy deafening, dreadful thunders; gently quench 5 
Thy nimble, sulphurous flashes. O ! how, Lychorida, 

60. sea-tost] Rowe ; seas tost Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

51. well-a-near] well-a-day, alas. 
Halliwell, Diet. Arch, and Prov. 
Words, gives " Well-an-ere, Alas ! 
North ". 

57. Which might . . . told] which 
(action) could not represent the facts 
that I, as Chorus, have related. 



Scene I. 

i. vast] a substantive, as in The 
Winter's Tale, i. i. 33 ; The Tempest, 



i. ii. 327 ; and vast, wast, waste, 
Hamlet, i. ii. 198. 

3. bind . . . brass] " in their brazen 
caves. Compare 2 Henry VI. in. ii. 
89 ; also Nash, Jack Wilton (Gosse, 
p. 187), ' If there ever be a blasphemous 
conjurour, that can call the windes 
from their brazen caves ' " (Craig). 

4. call'd] Dyce (ed. 2) reads re- 
calVd. 

6. Thy nimble . . . flashes] com 
pare King Lear, ii. iv. 167, iv. vii. 34. 



sc. i.] PERICLES 71 

How does my queen ? Thou stormest venomously ; 

Wilt thou spit all thyself? The seaman's whistle 

Is as a whisper in the ears of death, 

Unheard. Lychorida ! Lucina, O ! 10 

Divinest patroness, and midwife gentle 

To those that cry by night, convey thy deity 

Aboard our dancing boat; make swift the pangs 

Of my queen's travails. 

Enter LYCHORIDA, with an infant. 

Now, Lychorida ! 
Lye. Here is a thing too young for such a place, 15 

Who, if it had conceit, would die, as I 

Am like to do. Take in your arms this piece 

Of your dead queen. 

Per. How, how, Lychorida ! 

Lye. Patience, good sir; do not assist the storm. 

Here 's all that is left living of your queen, 20 

A little daughter: for the sake of it, 

Be manly, and take comfort. 
Per. O you gods! 

Why do you make us love your goodly gifts, 

And snatch them straight away? We here below 

7, 8. Thou stormest venomously ; Wilt] Dyce ; then storme venomously, Wilt 
Qq, Ff 3, 4. ii. midwife} Malone ; my wife Qq, Ff3, 4. 15-18. Here 

. . . queen.] Divided as by Malone ; three lines, ending place, . . . doe. 
. . . Queene. in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

12. cry] sc. in the throes of child- here in a more literal sense as flesh 

birth. of her flesh. 

12. deity] godhood. Compare The 19. do not . . . storm] do not add 

Winter's Tale, iv. iv. 26. to the general turmoil. In The Tern- 

16. conceit] faculty of conceiving, pest, i. i. 15, " You do assist the 
Compare The Winter's Tale, i. ii. 224. storm" has a slightly different sense, 

17. piece] frequently of persons, as that of interfering with the work of 
in The Winter's Tale, v. i. 94, but the sailors. 



72 PERICLES [ACT in. 

Recall not what we give, and therein may 25 

Vie honour with you. 
Lye. Patience, good sir, 

Even for this charge. 
Per. Now, mild may be thy life ! 

For a more blust'rous birth had never babe : 

Quiet and gentle thy conditions ! for 

Thou art the rudeliest welcome to this world 30 

That e'er was prince's child. Happy what follows ! 

Thou hast as chiding a nativity 

As fire, air, water, earth, and heaven can make, 

To herald thee from the womb ; even at the first 

Thy loss is more than can thy portage quit, 35 

With all thou canst find here. Now the good gods 

Throw their best eyes upon 't ! 

26, 27. Patience, . . . charge.] Divided as by Malone ; one line in Qq, Ff 
3 4 34'37- To . . . upon 't I] Divided as by Steevens ; the lines end 

wombe : . . . can . . . heere. . . . upon'tt in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

26. Vie] Mason's conjecture for 32. chiding] noisy. Compare 1 
Use of Qq, Ff 3, 4, adopted by most Henry IV. m. i. 45. 

modern editors, though the Cambridge 34-36. even . . . here] whatever 

Editors retain Use. Compare iv, good hap may hereafter attend you 

Prologue, 33, and see note there. in this new sphere, nothing can make 

27. Even . . . charge] if only for up for the loss you have sustained 
the sake of the babe left to your (in the death of your mother) at the 
care. very moment of your safe arrival in 

29. conditions] generally taken as the harbour of life. 

= temper, disposition, as so fre- 35. portage] is only once again 

quently. The two next lines, how- used by Shakespeare, Henry V. m. 

ever, seem to indicate the sense of i. 10, and there it means "port-hole", 

state, manner of life. Here the word seems to be used like 

30. welcome'] altered by Malone "harbourage" in i. iv. 100, though 
to welcomed, is supported by the that scene is not Shakespeare's. In 
text of Wilkins's novel, quoted by Titus Andronicus, i. i. 73 (whoever 
Staunton : " Poor inch of nature the author), we have "she weighed 
(quoth he) thou art as rudely wel- her anchorage" which Schmidt ex- 
come to the worlde as ever Princess plains as " the anchor and all the 
Babe was, and hast as chiding a necessary tackle for anchoring ". To 
nativitie as fire, ayre, earth and water me the phrase seems rather to be a 
can affoord thee ". blending of " weighed her anchor " 

31. Happy what follows I] may and " left her anchorage ". 
your after-life be happy ! 35. quit] requite. 



sc. i.] PERICLES 73 

Enter two Sailors. 

First Sail. What courage, sir ? God save you ! 
Per. Courage enough. I do not fear the flaw; 

It hath done to me the worst. Yet for the love 40 

Of this poor infant, this fresh-new sea-farer, 

I would it would be quiet. 
First Sail. Slack the bolins there! Thou wilt not, 

wilt thou? Blow, and split thyself. 
Second Sail. But sea-room, an the brine and cloudy 45 

billow kiss the moon, I care not. 
First Sail. Sir, your queen must overboard : the sea 

works high, the wind is loud, and will not lie 

till the ship be cleared of the dead. 

47-49. Sir, . . . dead.] Three lines, ending hie, . . . Ship . . . dead, in 
Qq i, 2, 3 ; three lines, ending ouer board, . . . lowd, . . . dead, in Qq 
4,5, 6, Ff 3 , 4. 

39. flaw} Dyce (Glossary) quotes 48. works high] runs high. Craig 

Cotgrave : " A flaw (or gust) of wind : quotes Drayton, Polyolbion, Song 

Tourbillon de vent " ; and Smith's Sea xxii. : " the high-working sea ". 

Grammar (1627), P- <0 : "A flaw of 48, 49. will not . . . dead] Steevens 

wind is a gust, which is very violent quotes Twine's translation : " My lord, 

upon a sudden, but quickly endeth ". pluck up your hearte, and be of good 

43. bolins] " are ropes for steady- cheere, and consider, I pray you, that 
ing a sail when the wind is strong, the ship may not abide to carry the 
fastened to the weather side of a dead carkas, and therefore commaund 
sail by ' bridles ' and passing to the it to be cast into the sea, that we may 
larboard or starboard bow. Captain the better escape ". Compared Cure 
Smith (Accidence for Young Seamen) for a Cuckold, by Webster and Row- 
has the opposite command (see Arber, ley (p. 202, ed. Dyce) : 
Virginia, p. 798), ' hawle close your " Less. Shall I go over 
main bowline ' . . . " (Craig). In the same bark with you ? 
Steevens quotes The Two Noble Bou. Not for yon town 
Kinsmen, iv. i. 148, 149: Of Calais; you know 'tis danger- 

<f the wind is fair : ous 

Top the bowling ". At sea with a dead body." 

43,44. Thou wilt . . . thou?] On this superstition, which though 

apostrophising the storm. prevalent among sailors, is not con- 

44-46. Blow . . . not] Compare fined to them, some discussion will 

The Tempest, i. i. 8 : " Blow till thou be found in the pages of Notes and 

burst thy wind, if room enough ". Queries at various dates between 2gth 



74 PERICLES [ACT in. 

Per. That's your superstition. 50 

First Sail. Pardon us, sir ; with us at sea it hath 
been still observed, and we are strong in custom. 
Therefore briefly yield her, for she must over 
board straight. 

Per. As you think meet. Most wretched queen! 55 

Lye. Here she lies, sir. 

Per. A terrible childbed hast thou had, my dear; 
No light, no fire: the unfriendly elements 
Forgot thee utterly ; nor have I time 
To give thee hallow'd to thy grave, but straight 60 
Must cast thee, scarcely coffin'd, in the ooze; 
Where, for a monument upon thy bones, 
And aye-remaining lamps, the belching whale 

63. aye-remaining} Steevens (Malone) ; ayre (or air) remanying (or re 
maining) Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

September, 1900, and i6th February, prose throughout and to transfer 

1901. Many instances are quoted, the words "for she must overboard 

the earliest being from Plutarch's Life straight " from Pericles (as in the old 

of Cato Uticensis, who, when bring- copies) to the First Sailor. For a full 

ing back the ashes of his brother from history of the text and the various 

Thrace to Italy, was begged by his conjectures made, see note in the 

friends to put them in a separate ship. Cambridge Shakespeare at the end of 

This he refused to do, and out of all the play. 

the fleet his vessel alone had a peril- 52. we are . . . custom] Here custom 

ous passage. Fuller is cited in regard is Boswell's conjecture for easterne, 

to the body of Saint Louis which was and it is proved by the words of the 

thrown overboard because " a ship novel : " But the Maister going on, 

cannot abide to be made a bier ". It tolde him, that by long experience they 

is also stated that sailors believe had tried, that a shippe may not abide 

the presence of a corpse causes the to carry a dead carcase . . ."; and 

vessel in which it is borne to sail again : " but we that by long practise 

slower. But no explanation is have tried the proofe of it," etc. 

offered as to the origin of the super- 59. Forgot thee utterly'] hadnocon- 

stition. Sailors are no doubt much cern for your perilous plight, 

given to omens and prognostications, 61. ooze] muddy bed of the sea ; 

and there is to them apparently some- A.S. waze and wos. Compare The 

thing uncanny in the association of Tempest, in. iii. 10 : " my son in the 

the living and the dead as shipmates, ooze is bedded ". 

51-55. Pardon . . . queen] Malone 62. for] in place of. 

was the first to read this passage as 63. aye-remaining] ever kept alight. 



sc. i.] PERICLES 75 

And humming water must o'erwhelm thy corpse, 
Lying with simple shells. O Lychorida ! 65 

Bid Nestor bring me spices, ink and paper, 
My casket and my jewels ; and bid Nicander 
Bring me the satin coffer: lay the babe 
Upon the pillow. Hie thee, whiles I say 
A priestly farewell to her : suddenly, woman. 70 

{Exit Lychorida. 

Second Sail. Sir, we have a chest beneath the hatches, 
caulked and bitumed ready. 

Per. I thank thee. Mariner, say what coast is this? 

Second Sail. We are near Tarsus. 

Per. Thither, gentle mariner, 75 

Alter thy course for Tyre. When canst thou reach 
it? 

Second Sail. By break of day, if the wind cease. 

68. coffer} Malone ; Coffin Qq, Ff 3, 4. 71, 72. Sir, . . . ready.] Prose 
in Malone ; two lines, the first ending hatches, Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

An allusion to the Roman custom of 69. Hie thee] make haste : Hie, 

placing lighted lamps in tombs. originally to strive, exert oneself, 

63. belching'] spouting. Compare pant ; hence hasten. 

Troilus and Cressida, v. v. 23 : "like 70. A priestly farewell] the Service 

scaled sculls before the belching for the Dead, or portions of it. 

whale". 72. caulked . . . ready] Steevens 

66. spices] for embalming the body, quotes Twine's translation : "... a 

67. My casket . . . jewels] i.e. the large chest, and we will scare it all 
casket containing my jewels. over with pitch and rozen melted to- 

68. the satin coffer] It is disputed gether," etc. 

whether the coffer was that in which 72. bitumed] made water-tight 

she was afterwards laid, or merely a with bitumen. 

coffer from which Pericles takes the 76. thy . . . Tyre] your course 

cloth of state to be used as a shroud, now set for Tyre ; or possibly for is 

Further, whether it was a coffer lined used as = instead of for Tyre, Alter 

with satin, or one containing satins and being used as an equivalent to " make 

other rich materials for dress. Later your course otherwise than ". Delius, 

on, in. iv. i, 2, we have, "this letter quoting Wilkins's novel, reads/row, 

. . . Lay with you in your coffer," a conjecture which he ascribes to 

but the word there may be used of Mommsen, and which was also made 

the chest here offered by the sailor. by Collier. 



76 
Per. 



PERICLES 



[ACT in. 



O ! make for Tarsus. 

There will I visit Cleon, for the babe 

Cannot hold out to Tyrus ; there I '11 leave it 80 

At careful nursing. Go thy ways, good mariner; 

I'll bring the body presently. {Exeunt. 



SCENE II. Ephesus. A Room in Cerimoris House. 

Enter CERIMON, with a Servant ', and some Persons who 
have been shipwrecked. 

Cer. Philemon, ho ! 

Enter PHILEMON. 

Phil. Doth my lord call? 

Cer. Get fire and meat for these poor men ; 

'T has been a turbulent and stormy night. 
Serv. I have been in many ; but such a night as this 5 

Till now I ne'er endur'd. 
Cer. Your master will be dead ere you return ; 

There 's nothing can be minister'd to nature 

That can recover him. [To Philemon^ Give this to 
the 'pothecary 

And tell me how it works. 

\Exeunt all but Cerimon. 



81. thy ways] on your way. The old 
genitive, as in whiles, line 69, above. 

82. presently] without delay; not 
"immediately," as more frequently 
in Shakespeare. 

Scene II. 

5, 6. but such . . . endur'd} Malone 
quotes Macbeth, n. iv. 1-4 ; King 
Lear, in. ii. 45-48 ; Julius Ccesar, 
I. iii. 5-10. 



9. Apothecary'} an aphetic form of 
" apothecary ". Compare Romeo and 
Juliet, v. iii. 289. Malone remarks: 
" The recipe that Cerimon sends to 
the apothecary, we must suppose, is 
intended either for the poor men 
already mentioned, or for some of 
his other patients. The preceding 
words show that it cannot be designed 
for the master of the servant intro 
duced here ". 



sc. ii.] PERICLES 77 

Enter two Gentlemen. 

First Gent. Good morrow. 10 

Second Gent. Good morrow to your lordship. 

Cer. Gentlemen, 

Why do you stir so early ? 

First Gent. Sir, 

Our lodgings, standing bleak upon the sea, 
Shook as the earth did quake; 15 

The very principals did seem to rend, 
And ail-to topple. Pure surprise and fear 
Made me to quit the house. 

Second Gent. That is the cause we trouble you so early ; 
'Tis not our husbandry. 

Cer. O ! you say well. 20 

First Gent. But I much marvel that your lordship, having 

ii, 12. Gentlemen, . . . early?] Divided as by Steevens; one line in Qq, 
Ff 3, 4. 16-18. The very . . . house.] Arranged as by Malone ; two lines, 
the first ending topple, in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 21-24. But strange,] Ar 

ranged as by Malone ; three lines, ending Lordship, . . . howers . . . strange, 
inQq, Ff 3 , 4. 

15. Shook . . . quake] Compare probable construction " (Abbott, 
Macbeth, ii. iii. 65, 66. Shakespearian Grammar, 28), add- 

16. principals] chief supports ; ing in a footnote, " Or, adopting this 
whether these were " the strongest construction, we may take ' all ' to 
rafters in the roof of a building " mean the whole house. ' The prin- 
(Malone), or "the four corner-posts cipals did seem to rend, and the 
of a house " (Craig), seems doubtful. whole house to topple.' " 

17. ail-to] " Some connect ' to- 20. husbandry] economy of time 
topple,' believing that here and in in rising early. Compare Macbeth, 
M. W. of W. iv. iv. 57, ' to-pinch,' ii. i. 4 ; Troilus and Cressida, I. 
' to ' is an intensive prefix, as in E.E. ii. 7. 

But neither of the two passages 21, 22. having . . . you] this may 

necessitates the supposition that mean " that you should be up and 

Shakespeare used this archaism. . . . dressed in such rich attire," or merely 

We can, therefore, either write ' all- " that you who live so daintily, 

to,' . . . and treat it as meaning should," etc. Schmidt dubiously 

' altogether,' or suppose that ' all ' explains tire as " furniture of any 

means ' quite,' and that 'to topple,' kind," which does not help us much, 

like ' to rend,' depends upon ' seem '. Steevens has the wretched conjecture 

This last is the more obvious and Such towers for Rich tire. 



78 



PERICLES 



[ACT HI. 



Rich tire about you, should at these early hours 
Shake off the golden slumber of repose. 
'Tis most strange, 

Nature should be so conversant with pain, 25 

Being thereto not compell'd. 

Cer. I hold it ever, 

Virtue and cunning were endowments greater 
Than nobleness and riches ; careless heirs 
May the two latter darken and expend, 
But immortality attends the former, 30 

Making a man a god. 'Tis known I ever 
Have studied physic, through which secret art, 
By turning o'er authorities, I have, 
Together with my practice, made familiar 
To me and to my aid the blest infusions 35 

That dwell in vegetives, in metals, stones ; 
And I can speak of the disturbances 
That nature works, and of her cures; which doth 

give me 

A more content in course of true delight 
Than to be thirsty after tottering honour, 40 



26-39- I hold . . . delight] Arranged as by Malone. 26, 27. Ever . . . 
cunning were] Malone; Euer Vertue and Cunning, Were Qq i, 2, 3; euer 
virtue and cunning, Were (the rest). 

25. Nature . . . pain] any human 
being should care to have so much 
to do with painful matters. 

26. hold] Malone corrects held, to 
agree with were. 

27. cunning] skill (the primary 
meaning of the word). 

da 



29. arken] sully the gloss of. 
Compare Antony and Cleopatra, i. 
iv. ii : " Evils enow to darken all his 
goodness ". 



Compare The Winter's Tale, iv. iv. 
816. 

36. vegetives] plants, herbs. Com 
pare Massinger, The Old Law, i. i. 

325: 

" And make us better than those 

vegetives 

Whose souls die with them". 
39. A more content] For " more " 
and " most " used as the comparative 
and superlative of " great," see Ab- 



35, infusions] medicinal extracts, bott, Shakespearian Grammar, 17, 



sc. ii.] PERICLES 79 

Or tie my treasure up in silken bags, 
To please the fool and death. 
Second Gent. Your honour has through Ephesus pour'd 

forth 

Your charity, and hundreds call themselves 
Your creatures, who by you have been restor'd : 45 
And not your knowledge, your personal pain, but 

even 

Your purse, still open, hath built Lord Cerimon 
Such strong renown as time shall ne'er decay. 

Enter two or three Servants with a chest. 

First Serv. So ; lift there. 

Cer. What is that? 

Serv. Sir, even now 

Did the sea toss upon our shore this chest : 50 

'Tis of some wreck. 
Cer. Set it down; let's look upon 't. 

43, 44. Your . . . themselves] Divided as by Malone ; the first line ends 
Ephesus in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 46, 47. but . . . Cerimon] As in Malone ; one line 
in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 49-51. Sir, . . . wreck.] Divided as by Malone ; two lines, 
the first ending shore, in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

42. To please . . . death] to make process " ; adding much further 

myself the mock and sport of the matter, partly derived from Douce, 

clown and death. Malone thought as to the dance of Death and the 

that the allusion here was to the old Merry Andrew, which will be found 

Moralities in which the Fool and in the Variorum edition and in Dyce's 

Death were principal personages. Glossary. 

Steevens, " after long and repeated 48. decay] Dyce supplied raze to 

enquiries," asserts that " no Morality complete the line, which in the earlier 

in which Death and the Fool were Quartos ends with never. The later 

agents ever existed among the early Quartos and the Folios give never 

French, English or Italian stage- shall decay (obviously nothing more 

representations ". He mentions " an than a guess), from which Staunton 

old Flemish print in which Death is gives " shall ne'er decay ". Some 

exhibited in the act of plundering a editors mark a dash after never as 

miser of his bags, and the Fool (dis- though the speech was broken off by 

criminated by his bauble, etc.) is the entrance of the servants. The 

standing behind, and grinning at the Cambridge Editors mark a laguna, 



80 



PERICLES 



[ACT in. 



Second Gent. 'Tis like a coffin, sir. 

Cer. Whate'er it be, 

'Tis wondrous heavy. Wrench it open straight ; 

If the sea's stomach be o'ercharg'd with gold, 

'Tis a good constraint of fortune it belches upon 
us. 55 

Second Gent. 'Tis so, my lord. 
Cer. How close 'tis caulk'd and bitum'd ! 

Did the sea cast it up? 
First Serv. I never saw so huge a billow, sir, 

As toss'd it upon shore. 
Cer. Come, wrench it open. 

Soft! it smells most sweetly in my sense. 60 

Second Gent. A delicate odour. 
Cer. As ever hit my nostril. So, up with it. 

O you most potent gods ! what 's here ? a corse ! 
First Gent. Most strange ! 
Cer. Shrouded in cloth of state ; balm'd^and entreasur'd 65 

With full bags of spices ! A passport too ! 

Apollo, perfect me i' the characters ! 

52,53. Whatever . . . straight;] Arranged as by Malone ; the first line 
ends heauie. in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 56. bitumed] Wilkins's novel ; bittm'd Malone ; 
bottomed (or bottomd) Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

55. 'Tzs a good . . . us] it is a made rich with full bags of costly 

fortunate constraint by which the sea spices (not with full bags of gold as 

vomits upon us the load on its one perhaps might have hoped). See 

stomach ; or, possibly, it is a good in. i. 66, above. 



constraint which the sea vomits upon 
us, the abstract constraint for the con- 



66. passport] a document descrip 
tive of its contents ; since in permis- 



crete load that it is constrained to give sions given to travel in a foreign 

country the person of the traveller was 



up. 



56. How close . . . bitum^dl] See described. 



note on in. i. 72, above. 



67. perfect me i' the characters] 



62. up with it] lift it up ; or, per- enable me to read clearly what is 



haps, prise up the lid. 
65, 66. entreasitr'd 



. spices] 



written. 



sc. ii.] PERICLES 81 

Here I give to understand. 

If eer this coffin drive a-land, 

/, King Pericles, have lost 70 

This queen, worth all our mundane cost. 

Who finds her, give her burying ; 

She was the daughter of a king : 

Besides this treasure for a fee, 

The gods requite his charity ! 75 

If thou liv'st, Pericles, thou hast a heart 
That even cracks for woe ! This chanc'd to-night. 
Second Gent. Most likely, sir. 

Cer. Nay, certainly to-night ; 

For look how fresh she looks. They were too rough 
That threw her in the sea. Make fire within; 80 
Fetch hither all my boxes in my closet. 

[Exit a Servant. 

Death may usurp on nature many hours, 
And yet the fire of life kindle again 
The o'erpress'd spirits. I have heard 

78-86. Nay, . . . recovered.] Divided as by Dyce. 84. have heard] 

Malone and Steevens ; heard Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

71. all . . . cost] all earthly read of some Egyptians, who after 

wealth. four houres death (if man may call it 

74. treasure] sc. the jewels men- so) have raised impoverished bodies, 

tioned in in. i. 67, above. like to this, unto their former 

77. This . . . to-night] she must health " ; and, to bring the lines into 
have been committed to the seas this accordance with this, Hudson some- 
last night. For " to-night " used of what boldly conjectures : 
past time, compare Much Ado About " Of an Egyptian 
Nothing, m. v. 33 ; The Winter's Tale, I have heard who had by good 
n. iii. 10. appliances 

79. too rough] apparently over- Recovered bodies nine hours 

hasty. Compare our "rough and lying dead ". 

ready ". As far as metre goes, we might read : 

84-86. / have heard . . . recovered] " Of an Egyptian 

That the passage is corrupt seems I 've heard that had nine hours 

certain. Wilkins's novel, quoted by lien dead ". 

Staunton, runs as follows: "I have ("hours" being a dissyllable), and 
6 



82 PERICLES [ACT m. 

Of an Egyptian that had nine hours lien dead, 85 
Who was by good appliances recovered. 

Re-enter Servant^ with boxes^ napkins , and fire. 

Well said, well said ; the fire and cloths. 

The rough and woeful music that we have, 

Cause it to sound, beseech you. 

The viol once more ; how thou stirr'st, thou block ! 90 

The music there ! I pray you, give her air. 

Gentlemen, 

This queen will live; nature awakes, a warmth 

Breathes out of her; she hath not been entranc'd 

Above five hours. See ! how she 'gins to blow 91 

Into life's flower again. 
First Gent. The heavens, 

Through you, increase our wonder and set up 

Your fame for ever. 
Cer. She is alive ! behold, 

Her eyelids, cases to those heavenly jewels 

92-96. Gentlemen, . . . again.] Divided as in Steevens ; four lines in Qq, 
Ff 3, 4. 96-98. The . . . ever.] As in M alone ; two lines, the first end 

ing wonder, in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 98-105. She . . . be I] As in Cambridge Shake 
speare; six lines in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

perhaps might infer that being an the former seems certain. It has 

Egyptian he was recovered by one of been objected that the order having 

his own countrymen. In Othello, in. been just given, Cerimon would not 

iv. 56, Shakespeare speaks of an say once more. But, as Rolfe replies, 

Egyptian " charmer ". this may mean " I say once more " ; 

87. Well said] well done (as fre- and this seems confirmed by the words 

quently). " how thou stirr'st, thou block ! " i.e. 

87. the fire and cloths] sc. hand "how tardy you are!" We have 
me. heard nothing of a phial. For 

88. rough] piercing, mournfully Shakespeare's belief in the efficacy of 
vibrating, as the tones of a violin in music as a restorative, see King Lear, 
a long-drawn note. iv. vii. 

go. The viol once more] It is dis- 99. cases] Compare The Winter's 
puted whether the musical instrument Tale, v. ii. 14 ; King Lear, iv. vi. 
or a small bottle is meant. To me 147. 



sc. IL] PERICLES 83 

Which Pericles hath lost, 100 

Begin to part their fringes of bright gold ; 

The diamonds of a most praised water 

Do appear, to make the world twice rich. Live, 

And make us weep to hear your fate, fair creature, 

Rare as you seem to be ! 

Thai. O dear Diana ! 105 

Where am I ? Where 's my lord ? What world is 
this? 

Second Gent. Is not this strange? 

First Gent. Most rare. 

Cer. Hush, my gentle neighbours! 

Lend me your hands; to the next chamber bear 
her. no 

Get linen; now this matter must be look'd to, 
For her relapse is mortal. Come, come ; 
And ysculapius guide us! 

[Exeunt, carrying Thaisa away. 

105, 106. O . . . this?] Divided as by Malone ; two lines in Qq, Ff 3, 4, 
the first line ending lord. 109-113. Hush, . . . us I] Divided as by 

Malone ; four lines in Qq, Ff 3, 4. % 

101. fringes] Compare The Tern- ing she has just recovered from her 
pest, i. ii. 408 : " The/ringed curtains childbirth trance, addresses Lucina 
of thine eye advance ". under another of her names. 

102. a most . . . water] a most ex- in. now] without delay. 

cellent lustre. Compare Timon of 112. For . . , mortal] for should 
Athens, i. i. 18. she have a relapse, it would be 

105. dear Diana I] Thaisa, fancy- fatal. 



84 



PERICLES 



[ACT in. 



SCENE III. Tarsus. A Room in Cleans House. 

Enter PERICLES, CLEON, DIONYZA, LYCHORIDA, with 
MARINA in her arms. 

Per. Most honour'd Cleon, I must needs be gone ; 

My twelve months are expir'd, and Tyrus stands 
In a litigious peace. You and your lady 
Take from my heart all thankfulness; the gods 
Make up the rest upon you ! 5 

Cle. Your shafts of fortune, though they hurt you 

mortally, 
Yet glance full woundingly on us. 

Dion. O your sweet queen ! 

That the strict fates had pleas'd you had brought 

her thither, 
To have bless'd mine eyes with her! 

Per. We cannot but obey 

The powers above us. Could I rage and roar 10 
As doth the sea she lies in, yet the end 
Must be as 'tis. My gentle babe Marina, whom, 
For she was born at sea, I have nam'd so, here 

1-5. Most . . . you!] Arranged as by Malone; in Qq i, 2, 3 Most . . . 
peace, is prose, and You . . . you I two lines, the first ending thankfulnesse. 
7-9. O . . . her 1] Divided as by Rowe. 9-17. We . . . born.'} Divided 

as by Steevens; seven lines in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 



3. a litigious peace} a peace dis 
turbed by constant bickerings. 
Schmidt explains litigious as " pre 
carious ". 

5. Make . . . you} shower down 
upon you blessings other than mine 
that may complete your happiness. 

6. Your . . . fortune} an inversion 
of " the shafts of your fortune ". 



6, 7. though ... MS] though they 
do not wound us mortally as they 
do you, yet incidentally they touch 
us near by causing us to lose you. 

7. woundingly} is Schmidt's con 
jecture for wondringly. Steevens 
gave wand'ringly. 

13. For] since. 



sc. in.] PERICLES 85 

I charge your charity withal, and leave her 
The infant of your care, beseeching you 15 

To give her princely training, that she may be 
Manner'd as she is born. 

Cle. Fear not, my lord, but think 

Your grace, that fed my country with your 

corn, 
For which the people's prayers still fall upon 

you, 

Must in your child be thought on. If neglection 20 
Should therein make me vile, the common body, 
By you relieved, would force me to my duty; 
But if to that my nature need a spur, 
The gods revenge it upon me and mine, 
To the end of generation ! 

Per. I believe you ; 25 

Your honour and your goodness teach me to't, 
Without your vows. Till she be married, madam, 
By bright Diana, whom we honour, all 
Unscissar'd shall this hair of mine remain, 

17-25. Fear . . . generation I] Divided as by Malone ; eight lines in Qq, 
Ff 3, 4. 25-29. / believe . . . remain,] Divided as by Malone ; four lines 
inQq, Ff 3 , 4 . 

14. withal] with, governing " My 25. To the . . . generation] to all 
gentle babe Marina". succeeding generations. 

15. The infant . . . care] as an 26. Your honour] regard for your 
infant needing all your care. own honour. 

17, 18. but . . . grace] but be 29. Unscissar'd] This, Steevens's 

assured that the generosity, etc. correction of unsisterd or unsister'd 

20. Must . . . on] assuredly will of the old copies, is confirmed by 

be remembered in our dealings with Wilkins's novel quoted by the Cam- 

your child. bridge Editors : " vowing solemnely 

20. neglection] Compare Troilus by othe to himselfe, his head should 
and Cressida, i. iii. 127. grow vnscisserd, his beard vntrimmed, 

21. common body] commonalty, himselfe in all vncomely, since he 
Compare Coriolanus, n. ii. 57. had lost his Queene," etc. 



86 



PERICLES 



[ACT in. 



Though I show ill in't. So I take my leave. 30 

Good madam, make me blessed in your care 

In bringing up my child. 
Dion. I have one myself, 

Who shall not be more dear to my respect 

Than yours, my lord. 

Per. Madam, my thanks and prayers. 

Cle. We '11 bring your grace e'en to the edge o' the 

shore; 35 

Then give you up to the mask'd Neptune and 

The gentlest winds of heaven. 
Per. I will embrace 

Your offer. Come, dear'st madam. O ! no tears, 

Lychorida, no tears : 

Look to your little mistress, on whose grace 40 

You may depend hereafter. Come, my lord. 

\Exeunt. 

32-34. / have . . . lord.'] Divided as by Malone ; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 
37-41. / will . . . lord.] Divided as by Malone (1780); prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 



30. ill] this correction of will is 
claimed by Dyce. The Cambridge 
Editors ascribe it to Malone, but in the 
Variorum edition of 1821 that critic 
is quoted as defending will, and there 
is no mention of this conjecture. 

36. mask'd] who now wears the 
mask of tranquillity. Dyce proposes 
vast, Walker moist, both of which 
seem weak and prosaic in comparison 
with this allusion to the perils from 



which Pericles had suffered. In 
Wilkins's novel there are numerous 
references to the treacherous calms, 
followed by tempestuous fury, by 
which Pericles had been beguiled at 
the outset of his various voyages. 

40, 41. on whose . . . hereafter] 
on whose favour, according as you 
cherish her, you may hereafter be 
dependent. 



sc. iv.] PERICLES 87 

SCENE IV. Ephesus. A Room in Cerimoris House. 
Enter CERIMON and THAISA. 

Cer. Madam, this letter, and some certain jewels, 
Lay with you in your coffer; which are now 
At your command. Know you the character? 

Thai. It is my lord's. 

That I was shipp'd at sea, I well remember, 5 

Even on my eaning time; but whether there 

Delivered, by the holy gods, 

I cannot rightly say. But since King Pericles, 

My wedded lord, I ne'er shall see again, 

A vestal livery will I take me to, IO 

And never more have joy. 

Cer. Madam, if this ye purpose as ye speak, 
Diana's temple is not distant far, 
Where you may abide till your date expire. 
Moreover, if you please, a niece of mine 15 

Shall there attend you. 

Thai. My recompense is thanks, that 's all ; 

Yet my good will is great, though the gift small. 

\Exeunt. 

?, 3. Lay . . . character?] Divided as by Malone ; two lines, the first end 
ing command: in Qq, F 3; three lines, ending coffer; . . . command: . . . 
character ? in F 4. 4-11. It . . . joy.] Divided as by Steevens ; prose in 

Qq, Ff 3, 4. 6. eaning] Ff 3, 4 ; learning Qq. 

1. some certain] generally taken to the young. Compare The Merchant 
mean no more than "some," seems of Venice, I. iii. 88; Jonson, The Sad 
to me always to have in Shake- Shepherd, i. ii. 119. 

speare the sense of some particular 10. A vestal . . . to] I will live the 

or well-known object which is hinted life of a vestal virgin. She after- 

at. wards becomes high priestess in the 

2. coffer] Dyce suspects that we temple of Diana at Ephesus. 
should have read "coffin ". 14. your date] the period of life 

3. character] handwriting. allotted to you. Malone conjectures 
6. eaning time] time of delivery, "'bide until"; Fleay, "Where till 

" Ean" = "yean," to bring forth your date expire, you may abide ". 



ACT IV 



Enter GOWER. 

Imagine Pericles arrived at Tyre> 
Welcomed and settled to his own desire. 
His woeful queen we leave at Ephesus^ 
Unto Diana there a votaress. 
Now to Marina bend your mind, 
Whom our fast-growing scene must find 
At Tarsus , and by Cleon train d 
In music y letters ; who hath gained 
Of education all the grace, 

Which makes her both the heart and place I o 

Of general wonder. But, alack ! 
That monster envy, oft the wrack 
Of earned praise, Marina's life 
Seeks to take off by treasons knife. 
And in this kind hath our Cleon 15 

4. there] Malone ; ther's (or there's) Qq, Ff. 10. her . . . heart] Malone 
(Steevens) ; hie (or high] . . . art Qq, Ff 3, 4. 15, 16. hath our Cleon . . . 
a wench full grown,] Malone (Steevens); our Cleon hath . . . a full grown 
wench, Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

heart-felt wonder," unless it is a 
licentious expression for " the general 
wonder of all hearts and places". 

praise] which 



6. fast-growing scene] Malone com 
pares The Winter's Tale, iv. i. 15- 
17 : 

" Your patience this allowing, 12, 13. oft . 
I turn my glass, and give my oftentimes is the 

scene such growing 
As you had slept between ". 



10, ii. the heart 



uin of those de 
servedly praised. 

14. treason] treachery. 



wonder] 15. in this kind] Cleon like Pericles. 



seems to mean " the very centre of Daniel conjectures " Knife, and in 

88 



PROLOGUE.] PERICLES 89 

One daughter^ and a wench full grown. 
Even ripe for marriage-rite : this maid 
Hight Philoten, and it is said 
For certain in our story , she 

Would ever with Marina be : 20 

Be V when she weaved the sleided silk 
With fingers long, small, white as milk ; 
Or when she would with sharp neeld wound 
The cambric, which she made more sound 
By hurting it ; or when to the lute 2 5 

She sung, and made the night-bird mute, 
That still records with moan ; or when 
She would with rich and constant pen 
Vail to her mistress Dian ; still 

26. n'ght-bird] Malone ; night-bed Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

this kind : Cleon doth own," etc. persons) to practise or sing a tune in 

Hudson gives " knife, and in his kind, an undertone; to go over it quietly 

Cleon doth own," etc. or silently. Palsgrave, 681/2, ' This 

17. rite] Collier's conjecture ; the byrde recordeth all redy, she will 
old copies have sight. Percy con- synge within a whyle '. Fletcher, M . 
jectured "rites". Malone edited Thomas, iii. 3, 'Ye may record a 
" fight," a conjecture of Steevens, little, or ye may whistle, As time 
who also suggested " night". shall minister ; but for main singing, 

18. Hight] past tense of hoten, a Pray ye satisfy yourselves': (b) to 
passive verb = be called. sing or warble, Lodge, Rosalind, 27, 

21. sleided silk] " untwisted silk, ' Partlie to heare the melodic of the 

prepared to be used in the weaver's sweete birdes which recorded ' " 

sley or slay 1 ' (Percy). Compare A (New Eng. Diet.). Compare also 

Lover's Complaint, 48, 49 : The Two Gentlemen of Verona, v. 

" With sleided silk feat and iv. 6. So, of Marina, in Wilkins's 

affectedly novel, " she began to record in 

Enswathed, and seal'd to envious verses, and there withall to sing so 

secrecy". sweetely, that Pericles," etc., a pas- 

23. neeld] a syncopated form of sage copied verbatim from Twine, 

" needle," adopted by many editors with the substitution of " Pericles " 

here, as in A Midsummer-Night's for " Apollonius". 

Dream, n. ii. 204; King John, v. ii. 28. with rich . . . pen] with the 

157 ; and in v. v. Gower Prologue, exquisite poesy she is ever pouring 

below. forth. 

27. still] ever. 29. Vail] do homage to. Malone con- 
27. records] " of birds (rarely of jectured " Wail " ; Steevens " Hail ", 



90 



PERICLES 



[ACT iv. 



This Philoten contends in skill 

With absolute Marina : so 

With the dove of Paphos might the crow 

Vie feathers white. Marina gets 

All praises, which are paid as debts , 

And not as given. This so darks 

In Philoten all graceful marks, 

That Cleans wife, with envy rare, 

A present murderer does prepare 

For good Marina, that her daughter 

Might stand peerless by this slaughter. 

The sooner her vile thoughts to stead, 

Lychorida, our nurse, is dead ; 

And cursed Dionyza hath 

The pregnant instrument of wrath 

P rest for this blow. The unborn event 

I do commend to your content : 

Only I carry winged time 



35 



40 



45 



32. With the dove 
the crow Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

31. absolute] perfect in all accom 
plishments. Compare The Merry 
Wives of Windsor, in. iii. 66 ; Beau 
mont and Fletcher, The Queen oj 
Corinth, i. 2 : 

" Since for the country's good we 

have brought home 
An absolute man " ; 
Lodge, Euphues Legacie, p. 33, " a 
man in every way absolute as well 
for his inward life as for his outward 
lineaments ". 

33. Vie . . . white] claim to have 
feathers as white, For " vie " used 
transitively, compare Heywood, The 
Iron Age (Pearson, iii. 414) : " Where 
every marble ... In emulation doth 
vie tears with us"; Jonson, Every 



the crow] Steevens (Mason) ; The Doue . . . with 
47. carry] Steevens; carried Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

Man in his Humour, iv. i : "here's 
a trick vied and revied " ; terms used 
in the old card game of Gleek. 

35. darks] darkens, robs of all 
lustre. Used intransitively in Troilus 
and Cressida, v. viii. 7. 

41. The sooner . . . stead] and, 
which helps her vile purpose, etc. 

44. pregnant] apt, prompt. 

45. Prest] ready. O.F. prest, mod. 
F. pret. Compare The Merchant of 
Venice, i. i. 160. 

46. / do . . . content] I leave to be 
developed by action, hoping that in 
such action you will find pleasure. 

47. winged time] Malone compares 
The Winter's Tale, iv. Chorus, 3, 4; 
Henry V. in. Chorus, i. 



sc. i.] PERICLES 91 

Post on the lame feet of my rime ; 

Which never could I so convey. 

Unless your thoughts went on my way. 50 

Dionyza doth appear^ 

With Leonine, a murderer. \Exit. 

SCENE I. Tarsus. An open place near the 
Sea-shore. 

Enter DIONYZA and LEONINE. 

Dion. Thy oath remember ; thou hast sworn to do 't : 
Tis but a blow, which never shall be known. 
Thou canst not do a thing i' the world so soon, 
To yield thee so much profit. Let not conscience, 

1-8. Thy . . . purpose.} Divided as by Rowe and Malone ; prose in Qq, 
Ff3,4- 

48. Post] in post haste. jecture for " Inflame "). Not being 
50. went . . . way] were eager to able to understand how "cold con- 
accompany me. science" can "inflame," I have 

edited a conjecture of my own in 

Scene i. which the change is very slight, for 
Injlaue (the word being written 

Enter Dionyza and Leonine] With with the long s) hardly differs at all 
this scene Mr. Craig compares " the from Inflame: too nicely, with un- 
parallel one in Cymbeline, i. vi., where necessary scruple. Dionyza men- 
the wicked queen tries to poison the tions three possible hindrances, 
mind of Pisanio against his mistress conscience, love, and pity, as likely 
Imogen and her husband ". to deter Leonine, and an obvious 
3. soon] quickly and with ease. antithesis between " cold conscience " 
4-7. Let not . . . thee] The Quartos and " flaming love " seems to be in 
here have inflaming thy loue bosome, tended. Objection has been taken 
except that the first puts a comma to "cold" as applied to "con- 
after flaming ; the Folios, inflaming science " ; but surely that monitor 
thy love bosome. Malone gave "in- when contrasted with ardent passion 
flame love in thy bosome," omitting may fitly be described as cold, severe, 
"Inflame too nicely"; Singer, "in- austere, or as chilling into inaction, 
flaming love, thy bosom"; Knight, the "coward conscience" of Rich- 
who is followed by most modern ard III. v. iii. 179. In 3 Henry VI. 
editors, "inflaming love i' thy v. vi. 68, we have nearly the same 
bosom"; Hudson, "enforcing law, combination of motives: " I that have 
thy bosom Inform" (Collier's con- neither pity, love, nor fear ". 



92 



PERICLES 



[ACT iv. 



Which is but cold, or flaming love thy bosom 5 
Enslave too nicely; nor let pity, which 
Even women have cast off, melt thee, but be 
A soldier to thy purpose. 

Leon. I '11 do 't ; but yet she is a goodly creature. 

Dion. The fitter, then, the gods should have her. Here 10 
She comes weeping for her only nurse's death. 
Thou art resolv'd ? 

Leon. I am resolv'd. 



Enter MARINA, with a basket of flowers. 

Mar. No, I will rob Tellus of her weed, 

To strew thy green with flowers ; the yellows, blues, 
The purple violets, and marigolds, I 

Shall as a carpet hang upon thy grave, 

10-12. The . . . resolv'd?] As by Malone (1790); three lines, the first two 
ending her. . . . death, in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 13-20. No, . . .friends.] Divided 
as by Rowe; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 14. green] greene Qq ; grave Ff 3, 4. 



7, 8. but be . . . purpose} but show 
yourself in your courage and deter 
mination equal to the occasion. 
Compare Cymbeline, in. iv. 186- 
188: 

" this attempt 
I am a soldier to, and will abide 

it with 
A prince's courage". 

10. The Jitter . . . her] Steevens 
compares Richard III. I. ii. 105, 
106: 

"Anne. O, he was gentle, mild, 

and virtuous. 

Glouc. The fitter for the king of 
heaven, that hath him." 

11. only nurse's death} This is 
Nicholson's conjecture for "onely 
Mistresse (or Mistress) death " of the 
old copies, which could only mean 
the death of the only mistress she 



has had in teaching her all her 
accomplishments ; but Dionyza was 
not likely at this moment to empha 
size such a point. Percy conjectured 
old nurse's. 

13. No, . . . weed] Fleay's in 
genious and poetical insertion, 
" rob'd " before Tellus, is very at 
tractive; Rowe conjectured "gay 
Tellus". 

13. weed] garment, dress ; A.S. 
weed, a garment. 

74. thy green] the green of your 
grave. 

16. carpet] Knight remarks : " It is 
evident that the Poet was thinking of 
the green mound that marks the last 
resting-place of the humble, and not 
of the sculptured tomb to be adorned 
with wreaths. Upon the grassy 
grave Marina will hang a carpet of 



SC. I.] 



PERICLES 



93 



While summer-days do last. Ay me ! poor maid, 
Born in a tempest, when my mother died, 
This world to me is like a lasting storm, 
Whirring me from my friends. 20 

Dion. How now, Marina ! why do you keep alone ? 

How chance my daughter is not with you ? Do 

not 

Consume your blood with sorrowing ; you have 
A nurse of me. Lord ! how your favour 's chang'd 
With this unprofitable woe. Come, 25 

Give me your flowers, ere the sea mar it. 
Walk with Leonine ; the air is quick there, 



flowers she will strew flowers, she 
has before said. The carpet of Shake 
speare's time was a piece of tapestry, 
or embroidery, spread upon tables ; 
and the real flowers with which 
Marina will cover the grave of her 
friend might have been, in her 
imagination, so intertwined as to 
resemble a carpet, usually bright 
with the flowers of the needle." 
Craig compares The Taming of the 
Shrew, iv. i. 53-55, and adds: "In 
dialect there was the beautiful expres 
sion ' carpet way ' for a green way, 
a way over the turf". 

17. While . . . last] Malone quotes 
the beautiful lines of Arviragus in 
Cymbeline, iv. ii. 219-225. 

19. lasting] For this not very 
pertinent epithet Malone conjectures 
" blasting" ; Craig, " lashing ". 

20. Whirring] hurrying in its 
sweep. Compare Dekker, Old For- 
tunatus (Pearson, i. 152) : 

" Even with such fury was I 

wherryed up 
And by such force held prisoner 

in the clouds". 

22. How chance , . .] Compare 
A Midsummer-Night 1 s Dream, i. i. 
129 : " How chance the roses there 



do fade so fast ? " Possibly there is a 
blending of two constructions, " How 
does it chance that," and " What 
chance is there that". Compare 
Much Ado About Nothing, i. i. 318: 
" What need the bridge much broader 
than the flood ? " which may be either 
" Why need the bridge be broader," 
or " What need is there that the 
bridge be, etc." See Abbott, Shake 
spearian Grammar, 37, 297. 

22, 23. Do not . . . sorrowing] 
" Alluding to the old notion that each 
sigh took a drop of blood from the 
heart" (Rolfe). Compare A Mid 
summer-Night's Dream, in. ii. 97 ; 
3 Henry VI. in. ii. 63 ; Romeo and 
Juliet, in. v. 58 ; Hamlet, iv. vii. 
123. 

24. favour] appearance, looks. 
See note on Troilus and Cressida, 
i. ii. 89 (Arden ed.). 

26. flowers} Malone and Walker 
both conjecture " wreath of flowers ' '. 

26, 27. ere . . . with] Hudson 
(1881) reads " on the sea margent 
Walk with," etc. For " mar it, 11 
Knight gives " mar them ". 

27. Walk] Malone conjectured 
"Walk on the shore"; Steevens 
gives " Walk forth ". 



94 



PERICLES 



[ACT iv. 



And it pierces and sharpens the stomach. Come, 
Leonine, take her by the arm, walk with her. 

Mar. No, I pray you ; 3 

I '11 not bereave you of your servant. 

Dion. Come, come ; 

I love the king your father, and yourself, 

With more than foreign heart. We every day 

Expect him here; when he shall come and find 35 

Our paragon to all reports thus blasted, 

He will repent the breadth of his great voyage ; 

Blame both my lord and me, that we have ta'en 

No care to your best courses. Go, I pray you ; 

Walk, and be cheerful once again ; reserve 

That excellent complexion, which did steal 

The eyes of young and old. Care not for me ; 

I can go home alone. 

Mar. Well, I will go; 

But yet I have no desire to it. 

Dion. Come, come, I know 'tis good for you. 41 

30, 31. No, . . . servant.] One line in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 32-42. Come, . . 

old.] Divided as by Rowe ; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 42, 43. Care . . . alone.] 

As in Rowe ; prose in Qq i, 2, 3 ; as a separate line in Qq 4, 5, 6, Ff 3, 4. 



28. And it . . . sharpens] Steevens 
reads " Piercing and sharpens well," 
ending the line at Come. Walker 
conjectures sharps, citing examples 
of the verb from Sackville, Spenser, 
etc. 

34. With . . . heart] "with the 
same warmth of affection as if I was 
his countryman" (Malone). 

36. Our . . . reports] who, accord 
ing to all the reports he has received, 
was a thing of supreme excellence. 
Malone explains, " Our fair charge, 
whose beauty was once equal to all 



that fame said of it ". For to, com 
pare Richard III. i. iii. 309 ; 2 Henry 
IV. v. v. 114. 

38, 39. that . . . courses] that we 
have taken no care to bring you up 
in the best possible way. 

40. reserve] guard, preserve. 
Malone compares Sonnet xxxii. 7: 
"Reserve them for my love, not for 
their rhyme ". 

41. complexion] Here, as in modern 
usage, of the colouring of the face, 
but frequently in Shakespeare of the 
external appearance generally. 



sc. i.] PERICLES 95 

Walk half an hour, Leonine, at the least. 

Remember what I have said. 

Leon. I warrant you, madam. 

Dion. I '11 leave you, my sweet lady, for a while. 

Pray you, walk softly, do not heat your blood : 

What! I must have care of you. 

Mar. My thanks, sweet madam. 50 

[Exit Dionyza. 

Is the wind westerly that blows ? 
Leon. South-west. 

Mar. When I was born, the wind was north. 
Leon. Was 't so ? 

Mar. My father, as nurse said, did never fear, 

But cried " Good seamen ! " to the sailors, galling 

His kingly hands, haling ropes; 55 

And, clasping to the mast, endur'd a sea 

That almost burst the deck. 
Leon. When was this ? 
Mar. When I was born : 

Never was waves nor wind more violent; 60 

And from the ladder-tackle washes off 

48-50. I 'II . . . you.'] Divided as by Rowe ; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 50, 51. 

My . . . blows ?] Divided as by Malone ; prose in Qq, Ff 3,4. 53-57- 

My . . . deck.] Divided as by Malone ; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 59-65. 

When . . . confusion.] Prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 59-63. When . . . skip} 
Divided as by Rowe. 

49. do not . . . blood} do not speare does not elsewhere use the 
weary yourself by too great exer- intransitive verb with to. 

tion. 60. was] The inflection in -5 with 

50. What I] reproachfully, " don't plural nouns is more common in 
you know well that," etc. Shakespeare when the verb precedes 

55. haling ropes] Malone ekes out the subject, when, that is, " the sub- 
the metre by " with hauling of the ject is as yet future and, as it were, 
ropes". unsettled". See Abbott, Shake- 

56. clasping to] clinging to. Shake- spearian Grammar, 333, 335. 



96 



PERICLES 



[ACT iv. 



A canvas-climber. "Ha!" says one, " wilt out?" 
And with a dropping industry they skip 
From stem to stern ; the boatswain whistles, and 
The master calls, and trebles their confusion. 65 

Leon. Come ; say your prayers. 

Mar. What mean you ? 

Leon. If you require a little space for prayer, 
I grant it. Pray; but be not tedious, 
For the gods are quick of ear, and I am sworn 70 
To do my work with haste. 

Mar. Why will you kill me? 

Leon. To satisfy my lady. 

Mar. Why would she have me killed ? 

Now, as I can remember, by my troth, 

I never did her hurt in all my life. 75 

I never spake bad word, nor did ill turn 

To any living creature ; believe me, la, 

I never kill'd a mouse, nor hurt a fly; 

Nor trod upon a worm against my will, 

64, 65. From . . . confusion.] Divided as by Malone. 68-71. If . . . 

haste.] Divided as by Malone; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 73-82. Why . . . 

danger ?] Divided as by Malone ; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

62. a canvas-climber] a sailor in the etc. (pt. ii.) (Pearson, i. 268): "We 



act of furling or unfurling sails. 
62. ''wilt out?' 1 ] perhaps 



will 



shall be dropping dry if we stay 
here ". 



you not cease?" apostrophising the 65. master] the correct official term 
storm. Mr. Craig suggests "Perhaps for the captain of a merchant vessel. 



Shakespeare wrote ' wilt thou ? ' 70. are 



ear] do not need long 



which we find elsewhere as an ex- prayers in order to understand what 



pression addressed to a person at 
tempting to make an attack (compare 
2 Henry IV. n. i. 56, ' Wilt thou ? 



you ask of them. 

79. Nor trod] Daniel's conjecture 
for " / trod," which seems to me al- 



wilt thou ? '). The sailor is perhaps most necessary, since the words 

addressing the shroud which the " But I wept for it," i.e. without 

wind blows out." weeping for it, evidently apply to all 

63. dropping] dripping wet. Com- three actions, and "I" may easily 

pare Heywood, // you know not Me, have been caught from the line above. 



sc. i.] PERICLES 97 

But I wept for it. How have I offended, 80 

Wherein my death might yield her any profit, 

Or my life imply her any danger? 
Leon. My commission 

Is not to reason of the deed, but do 't. 
Mar. You will not do't for all the world, I hope. 85 

You are well favour'd, and your looks foreshow 

You have a gentle heart. I saw you lately, 

When you caught hurt in parting two that 
fought ; 

Good sooth, it showed well in you ; do so 
now; 

Your lady seeks my life; come you between, 90 

And save poor me, the weaker. 
Leon. I am sworn, 

And will dispatch. [Seizes her. 

Enter Pirates. 

First Pir. Hold, villain ! [Leonine runs away. 

Second Pir. A prize ! a prize ! 

Third Pir. Half-part, mates, half-part. Come, let 's 95 
have her aboard suddenly. 

[Exeunt Pirates with Marina. 

85-91. You . . . weaker.} Divided as by Rowe; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 
91, 92. 7 ... dispatch.} Divided as by Malone ; one line in Qq, Ff. 

81. Wherein] that therein, that for have a gentle look, not that of a 

it. Steevens, perhaps rightly, omits murderer. 

any in both lines, 81, 82, and ends 95. Half-part] Shares! Compare 

the former with or. Heywood, The Four Prentices of 

85. You will . . . hope] you will London (Pearson, ii. 209) : " But 
not do it, nor would you do it, I hope, Godfray with the rest would cry 
for anything in the world. half part ". 

86. You are well favour'd] you 



98 PERICLES [ACT iv. 

Re-enter LEONINE. 

Leon. These roguing thieves serve the great pirate Valdes ; 
And they have seiz'd Marina. Let her go : 
There 's no hope she '11 return. I '11 swear she 's dead, 
And thrown into the sea. But I'll see further; IOO 
Perhaps they will but please themselves upon her, 
Not carry her aboard. If she remain, 
Whom they have ravish'd must by me be slain. 

{Exit. 

SCENE II. Mitylene. A Room in a Brothel. 

Enter Pandar, Bawd, and BOULT. 

Pand. Boult! 

Boult. Sir? 

Pand. Search the market narrowly, Mitylene is full 
of gallants ; we lost too much money this mart 
by being too wenchless. 5 

Bawd. We were never so much out of creatures. 
We have but poor three, and they can do no 
more than they can do ; and they with con 
tinual action are even as good as rotten. 

97-102. These . . . remain,'] As in Rowe; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

97. roguing} Mason conjectured and sent to Dartmouth. . . . The mak- 

" roving," which Steevens adopts, ing one of this Spaniard's ancestors 

But Craig aptly quotes Cotgrave, a pirate was probably relished by the 

" Roder, to roam, wander, vagabond- audience in those days." 

ise it, rogue it abrod ". 101. please . . . her] satisfy their 

97. Valdes] " The Spanish Armada, lusts by ravishing her. 
I believe," says Malone, " furnished 

our author with the name. Don Scene II. 
Pedro de Valdes was an admiral in 

that fleet, and had commanded the 4. this mart] on the occasion 

great galleon of Andalusia. His ship this last sale, 

being disabled, he was taken by Sir 6. creatures] used contemptuous! 

Francis Drake, on the 22nd July, 1588, of wenches. 



sc. ii.] PERICLES 99 

Pand. Therefore let's have fresh ones, whate'er we 10 
pay for them. If there be not a conscience to 
be used in every trade, we shall never prosper. 

Bawd. Thou sayest true ; 'tis not the bringing up 
of poor bastards, as I think I have brought 
up some eleven 15 

Boult. Ay, to eleven ; and brought them down again. 
But shall I search the market? 

Bawd. What else, man ? The stuff we have a 
strong wind will blow it to pieces, they are 
so pitifully sodden. 20 

Pand. Thou sayest true ; they 're too unwholesome, 
o' conscience. The poor Transylvanian is 
dead, that lay with the little baggage. 

Boult. Ay, she quickly pooped him ; she made him 

roast-meat for worms. But I'll go search the 25 
market. {Exit. 

ii, 12. // there . . . prosper] we As I subscribe not that, nor any 

shall never thrive if we do not use other " ; 

that conscience which ought to be Antony and Cleopatra, I. iv. 22. The 
used in every trade. bawd would have concluded by saying 
14. as] What Ingleby (Shakespeare, "that will bring us prosperity," or 
The Man and the Book, i. 147) calls words to that effect, 
"the conjunction of reminder, being 16. to eleven] sc. years of age. 
employed by Shakespeare to intro- 16. and brought . . . again] and 
duce a subsidiary statement, qualify- then undoing all your goodness by 
ing, or even contradicting, what goes turning them to evil courses, 
before, which the person addressed is 18. The stuff] the wretched worn- 
required to take for granted ". Com- out material for sale, 
pare As You Like It, in. v. 38 : 24. pooped] foundered (figuratively). 
" What though you have no In the literal sense, to strike a ship in 
beauty, the stern, to sink it. Mr. Craig sends 
As, by my faith, I see no more me the following illustration from 
in you Nash's Have with you to Saffron 
Than without candle may go W olden (ed. McKerrow, iii. 114) : 
dark to bed " ; " But wee shall lenvoy him, and 
Measure for Measure, n. iv. 89 : trumpe and poope him well enough, 
"Admit no other way to save his if the winde come in that doore ". 
life,- 



100 PERICLES [ACT iv. 

Pand. Three or four thousand chequins were as 
pretty a proportion to live quietly, and so give 
over. 

Bawd. Why to give over, I pray you ? is it a shame 30 
to get when we are old ? 

Pand. O ! our credit comes not in like the com 
modity, nor the commodity wages with not the 
danger; therefore, if in our youths 'we could 
pick up some pretty estate, 'twere not amiss 35 
to keep our door hatched. Besides, the sore 
terms we stand upon with the gods will be 
strong with us for giving over. 

Bawd. Come, other sorts offend as well as we. 

Pand. As well as we ! ay, and better too ; we 40 
offend worse. Neither is our profession any 
trade ; it 's no calling. But here comes Boult. 

Re-enter BOULT, with the Pirates and MARINA. 

Boult. Come your ways. My masters, you say she's 

a virgin? 
First Pir. O ! sir ; we doubt it not. 45 

27-29. Three . . . over'] if we could slaves ". For wages, compare An- 

make some three or four thousand tony and Cleopatra, v. i. 31: "His 

chequins, that would be a comfortable taints and honours Waged equal 

provision to retire upon. with him ". 

27. chequins] the Italian Zecchino, 34-36. if in . . . hatched] if while 

a gold coin worth about seven or we are still young we could put 

eight shillings. together a fair amount, it would be 

32-34. our credit . . . danger] our well to shut up shop, 
credit does not keep pace with the in- 36. hatched] closed with a half- 
coming of the merchandize in which door. A reference, as Dyce says, to 
we traffic, nor is it commensurate the hatch or half-door, with spikes 
with the danger incurred. For com- upon it, which was the mark of a 
modity, contemptuously used of brothel. For the substantive hatch, 
persons, compare 1 Henry IV. iv. ii. compare King John, i. i. 171. 
19 : " such a commodity of warm 39. sorts] classes of people, trades. 



sc. ii.] PERICLES 101 

Boult. Master, I have gone through for this piece, 
you see : if you like her so ; if not I have 
lost my earnest. 

Bawd. Boult, has she any qualities? 

Boult. She has a good face, speaks well, and has 50 
excellent good clothes ; there 's no further 
necessity of qualities can make her be refused. 

Bawd. What 's her price, Boult ? 

Boult. I cannot be bated one doit of a thousand 

pieces. 5 5 

Pand. Well, follow me, my masters, you shall have 
your money presently. Wife, take her in ; 
instruct her what she has to do, that she 
may not be raw in her entertainment. 

\Exeunt Pandar and Pirates. 

Bawd. Boult, take you the marks of her, the colour 60 
of her hair, complexion, height, age, with war 
rant of her virginity, and cry <( He that will give 
most shall have her first." Such a maidenhead 

46. gone through] bidden for her qualities as to cause you to refuse 

as being resolved to buy her. In the her ". 

novel : " he"e [the pander] ... in the 54, 55. I cannot . . . pieces] Ma- 
end, went thorow, and bargained to lone would give this to the pirate, or 
have her," etc. Compare Measure would explain " I cannot get them to 
for Measure, n. i. 285 : " I do it for bate me one doit," etc. Dyce, who 
some piece of money, and go through says that the preceding speech shows 
with all ". this one to belong to Boult, suggests 

46. piece] Here used scornfully. " It cannot," etc. The sense may 

See note on iv. vi. 115. be, " I must have the full thousand 

48. earnest] handsel to secure ulti- pieces if I am to complete the pur- 
mate possession. See note on Timon chase ". 

of Athens, iv. iii. 47 (Arden ed.). 55. pieces] probably no particular 

49. any qualities] anything to re- coin or sum, though in Jonson's Mag- 
commend her. netic Lady, iv. i = a sovereign. 

51, 52. there '5 ... refused] a 56. my masters] addressing the 

blending of " there 's no need of any pirates. 

other qualities to make her accept- 59. her entertainment] sc. of cus- 

able," and " there 's no such want of tomers. 



102 



PERICLES 



[ACT iv. 



were no cheap thing, if men were as they have 

been. Get this done as I command you. 65 

Boult. Performance shall follow. {Exit. 

Mar. Alack ! that Leonine was so slack, so slow. 

He should have struck, not spoke; or that these 
pirates, 

Not enough barbarous, had not o'erboard thrown me 

For to seek my mother ! 70 

Bawd. Why lament you, pretty one? 
Mar. That I am pretty. 

Bawd. Come, the gods have done their part in you. 
Mar. I accuse them not. 
Bawd. You are light into my hands, where you are 75 

like to live. 
Mar. The more my fault 

To 'scape his hands where I was like to die. 
Bawd. Ay, and you shall live in pleasure. 
Mar. No. 80 

Bawd. Yes, indeed shall you, and taste gentlemen 

of all fashions. You shall fare well ; you shall 

have the difference of all complexions. What ! 

do you stop your ears? 

67-70. Alack I . . . mother!] Arranged as by Malone (1790); prose in 
Qq i, 2, 3 ; four lines ending slow : . . . spoke, . . . barbarous, . . . 
mother ! in the rest. 77, 78. The . . . die.] Divided as by Malone (1790); 
prose in Qq i, 2, 3 ; two lines, the first ending hands, in the rest. 



64. were 



thing] would be an 75, 76. where 



live] where you 



article for which men would readily will piobably have to live for the 



pay a high price. 
68-70. or that 



future. In the novel : " come, come, 
mother I] the these droppes auaile thee not, thou 



exclamation alack ! goes on with the arte now mine, and I will make my 



second clause. 

73. the gods . . . you] the gods 
have been bounteous to you in the 
matter of good looks. 

75. light] lighted, chanced to fall. 



best of thee 

77. fault] here apparently = mis 
chance. Collier conjectured "The 
worse my fate ". 

83. the difference . . . complexions] 



sc. ii.] PERICLES 103 

Mar. Are you a woman ? 85 

Bawd. What would you have me be, an I be not a 
woman ? 

Mar. An honest woman, or not a woman. 

Bawd. Marry, whip thee, gosling; I think I shall 

have something to do with you. Come, you 're 90 
a young foolish sapling, and must be bowed 
as I would have you. 

Mar. The gods defend me! 

Bawd. If it please the gods to defend you by men, 

then men must comfort you, men must feed 95 
you, men must stir you up. Boult 's returned. 

Re-enter BOULT. 

Now, sir, hast thou cried her through the market ? 
Boult. I have cried her almost to the number of 

her hairs ; I have drawn her picture with my 

voice. i oo 

Bawd. And I prithee tell me, how dost thou find 

the inclination of the people, especially of the 

younger sort? 
Boult. Faith, they listened to me as they would have 

hearkened to their father's testament. There 105 

was a Spaniard's mouth so watered, that he 

went to bed to her very description. 
Bawd. We shall have him here to-morrow with his 

best ruff on. 

men of every variety of race. In the 89. gosling] Compare Coriolanus, 

novel : " have the benefite of all v. iii. 35. 

nations". 89, 90. I shall . . . you] I shall 

89. whip thee] a petty malediction, have some trouble with you. 

Compare Lingua (1607), iii. 3 : 98-100. almost . . . voice] any 

" Untruss thy points, and whip thee, number of times and with infinite 

thou paltry," etc. exactness of description. 



104 



PERICLES 



[ACT iv. 



Boult. To-night, to-night. But, mistress, do you 1 10 
know the French knight that cowers i' the 
hams? 

Bawd. Who? Monsieur Veroles? 

Boult. Ay; he offered to cut a caper at the pro 
clamation ; but he made a groan at it, and 1 1 5 
swore he would see her to-morrow. 

Bawd. Well, well ; as for him, he brought his dis 
ease hither : here he does but repair it. I 
know he will come in our shadow, to scatter 
his crowns in the sun. 120 

Boult. Well, if we had of every nation a traveller, 
we should lodge them with this sign. 

Bawd. [To Marina.} Pray you, come hither awhile. 
You have fortunes coming upon you. Mark 
me: you must seem to do that fearfully which 125 
you commit willingly ; despise profit where you 
have most gain. To weep that you live as 
ye do makes pity in your lovers ; seldom but 
that pity begets you a good opinion, and 
that opinion a mere profit. 130 

Mar. I understand you not. 

113. Veroles} Malone ; Verollu Q 5 ; Verollus (the rest). 

in, 112. cowers . . . hams] here, to be an allusion to " crowns of the 

apparently, in consequence of his sun," gold coins of Louis the Eleventh 

diseased condition. Compare Romeo of France, frequently mentioned in 

and Juliet, n. iv. 57. the dramatists. Mason has an idea 

114. offered] attempted; as fre- that the sun was the sign of the 
quently in Shakespeare, e.g., The house. 

Winter's Tale, iv. i. 805 ; Coriolanus, 122. we should . . . sign] they 

v. i. 23. would all be attracted hither by such 

119, 120. he will . . . sun] may signal charms ; with an equivoque on 

mean "he will repair to the shelter the sign of an inn, house, etc. 

of this house to spend his money in 126. despise] i.e. seem to despise, 

the rays of beauty ". There seems 130. a mere profit} substantial gain. 



sc. ii.] PERICLES 105 

Boult. O ! take her home, mistress, take her home ; 
these blushes of hers must be quenched with 
some present practice. 

Bawd. Thou sayest true, i' faith, so they must; for 135 
your bride goes to that with shame which is 
her way to go with warrant. 

Boult. Faith, some do, and some do not. But, mis 
tress, if I have bargained for the joint, 

Baivd. Thou mayest cut a morsel off the spit. 140 

Boult. I may so? 

Bawd. Who should deny it? Come, young one, I 
like the manner of your garments well. 

Boult. Ay, by my faith, they shall not be changed 

yet 145 

Bawd. Boult, spend thou that in the town ; report 
what a sojourner we have ; you '11 lose nothing 
by custom. When nature framed this piece, 
she meant thee a good turn; therefore say 
what a paragon she is, and thou hast the 150 
harvest out of thine own report. 

Boult. I warrant you, mistress, thunder shall not so 
awake the beds of eels as my giving out her 

136. shame] bashfulness. Till that tempestuous winds, or 

I 36, 137. which . . . warrant] to thunder, teare 

which she is justified in going. Their slimy beds," 

144, 145. they shall . . , yet] Does remarks, " Thunder is not supposed 

this mean " they will be good enough to have an effect on fish in general, 

for some time to come," or is there but on eels only, which are roused by 

an equivoque here ? it from the mud, and are there fore more 

152, 153. thunder . . . eels] Whalley, easily taken ". Craig adds Beaumont 

quoting Marston's Scourge of and Fletcher, The False One : 

Villainy, n. vii. 78-80 : " And you '11 see me how I '11 

" They are naught but eeles, that break like thunder 

never will appeare, Amongst these beds of slimy 

eels ". 



106 PERICLES [ACT iv. 

beauty stir up the lewdly-inclined. I '11 bring 

home some to-night. 15 

Bawd. Come your ways ; follow me. 
Mar. If fires be hot, knives sharp, or waters deep, 

Untied I still my virgin knot will keep. 

Diana, aid my purpose ! 
Bawd. What have we to do with Diana? Pray 

you, will you go with us ? [Exeunt. 

SCENE III. Tarsus. A Room in Clean's House. 
Enter CLEON and DIONYZA. 

Dion. Why are you foolish? Can it be undone? 

Cle. O Dionyza ! such a piece of slaughter 
The sun and moon ne'er look'd upon. 

Dion. I think 

You'll turn a child again. 

Cle. Were I chief lord of all this spacious world, 
I J d give it to undo the deed. O lady ! 
Much less in blood than virtue, yet a princess 
To equal any single crown o' the earth 
I' the justice of compare. O villain Leonine! 

3, 4. I ... again.] Divided as by Steevens; one line in Qq, Ff 3, 
5-46. Were . . . done.] Arranged as by Malone; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

157. If fires . . . deep] Malone lechery"; The Winter's Tale, iv. 
compares Antony and Cleopatra, iv. iv. 695 : " I thought it a piece 
xv. 25, 26, and Othello, in. iii. 388-390. honesty ". 

3, 4. I think . . . again] Compart 
Scene in. King Lear, i. iii. 19 :" Old fools are 

babes again ". 

2. piece of slaughter] This use of 7-9. Much . . . compare] more so 
piece as a mere periphrasis is very in point of virtue than of descent, anc" 
frequent in Shakespeare, e.g., Much yet one who in mere rank might 
Ado About Nothing, in. iii. 180 : justly be compared with any soverei^ 
" the most dangerous piece of in the world. 



sc. HI.] PERICLES 107 

Whom thou hast poison'd too; 10 

If thou hadst drunk to him 't been a kindness 
Becoming well thy fact ; what can'st thou say 
When noble Pericles shall demand his child ? 

Dion. That she is dead. Nurses are not the fates, 

To foster it, nor ever to preserve. 15 

She died at night ; I '11 say so. Who can cross 

it? 

Unless you play the pious innocent, 
And for an honest attribute cry out 
" She died by foul play." 

Cle. O ! go to. Well, well, 

Of all the faults beneath the heavens, the gods 20 
Do like this worst. 

Dion. Be one of those that think 

The petty wrens of Tarsus will fly hence, 
And open this to Pericles. I do shame 
To think of what a noble strain you are, 
And of how coward a spirit. 

Cle. To such proceeding 25 

Who ever but his approbation added, 

12. fact] Singer, ed. 2 (Dyce) ; face Qq, Ff 3, 4. 17. pious] Collier 

(Mason conj. and Wilkins's novel) ; impious Qq i, 2, 3; the rest omit. 

11,12. If thou . . . fact] if, as you 18. for an . . . attribute] for the 

offered him the cup, you had pledged sake of earning the title of honest 

him with a first taste, the courtesy man. 

would have been suited to the deed 19. go to] an expression sometimes 

of poisoning him ; i.e. you would of rebuke, contempt, but sometimes 

have done well to poison yourself at also of encouragement, 

the same time. 25-28. To such . . . courses] no 

14, 15. Nurses . . . it] nurses, one who ever gave his approval to 

however much may be expected of such a course, even though he was 

them or however great their care, are not accessory to the deed, could come 

not the fates to foster a child or to of honest parentage, 
keep it alive. 



108 



PERICLES 



[ACT 



Though not his prime consent, he did not flow 
From honourable sources. 

Dion. Be it so, then ; 

Yet none does know but you how she came dead, 

Nor none can know, Leonine being gone. 

She did distain my child, and stood between 

Her and her fortunes ; none would look on her, 

But cast their gazes on Marina's face, 

Whilst ours was blurted at and held a malkin 

Not worth the time of day. It pierc'd me thorough ; 3 

And though you call my course unnatural, 

You not your child well loving, yet I find 

It greets me as an enterprise of kindness 

Perform'd to your sole daughter. 

Cle. Heavens forgive it 

Dion. And as for Pericles, 

What should he say ? We wept after her hearse, 
And yet we mourn ; her monument 

27. prime consent] Dyce ; prince consent Qq i, 2, 3 ; whole consent (the 
rest). 28. sources] Dyce; courses Qq, Ff 3, 4. 31. distain] Singer 

(Steevens) disdaine Qq, Ff 3,4. 



30. know] Dyce conjectures " now 
know". 

31. distain] cast a slur upon (by 
the comparison drawn between them). 

34. blurted at] pooh - poohed, 
treated with scorn. Malone com 
pares Edward III. (1596) : 

" This day hath set derision on 

the French, 
And all the world will blurt and 

scorn at us ". 

Blurt, or blirt, was a contemptuous 
exclamation frequent at the time. 
Compare Marston, Antonio and 
Mellida (pt. i.), iv. i. 251: "Blirt 
on your 'ay me's ' ! " ; The Mal 
content, i. i. 130 : " Blirt o' rhyme ! 
blirt o' rhyme ! " 



34. malkin] a diminutive of Moll 
(Mary), generally used in a con 
temptuous sense for a coarse wench ; 
often written "mawkin". Compare 
Coriolanus, u. i. 224 : 

" the kitchen malkin pins 
Her richest lockram round her 
reechy neck ". 

35. Not worth . . . day] not worth 
greeting. 

38, 39. It greets . . . daughter] 
the course I have taken smiles upon 
me as being an act of affection 
undertaken in behalf of her who 
is your only daughter (and one 
therefore for whose sake you too 
should have been ready to run some 
risk). 



sc. iv.] PERICLES 109 

Is almost finish'd, and her epitaphs 

In glittering golden characters express 

A general praise to her, and care in us 45 

At whose expense 'tis done. 

Cle. Thou art like the harpy, 

Which, to betray, dost, with thine angel's face, 
Seize with thine eagle's talons. 

Dion. You are like one that superstitiously 

Doth swear to the gods that winter kills the flies ; 50 
But yet I know you'll do as I advise. [Exeunt. 

SCENE IV. Before the monument of Marina at Tarsus. 

Enter GOWER. 

Thus time we waste, and longest leagues make short ; 
Sail seas in cockles ', have and wish but for y t ; 
Making, to take imagination^ 

43. epitaphs] So the first three the seasons in killing the flies; i.e. 

Quartos ; the rest have epitaph, which you cannot believe that any merciful 

here perhaps is more appropriate, being would be guilty of putting out 

But it was customary of old for friends of the world so insignificant a crea- 

to affix to the hearse or the grave short ture as even a fly. To her the removal 

laudatory poems, epitaphs, etc. Com- of Marina is a deed no worse than 

pare Much Ado About Nothing, iv. i. that of nature in killing off the flies 

209, and see Gifford's note to Jonson's in winter. 
Underwoods, ci. 

46-48. Thou art . . . talons] 

Though the expression is confused, i. waste] make no account of in 

the sense is plain : you are like the our reckoning. 

harpy, who seizes with its eagle talons 2. cockles] Malone sees here an 

that which its angel-like appearance allusion to the belief that witches 

has deluded. Malone conjectures could sail in egg-shells, cockles, or 

" dost wmrthine angel's face ; Seize," mussel-shells. 

etc., and Hudson edits "doth use an 2. have and . . . for 't] have what- 

angel's face, Then seize," etc. ever we want merely for the wishing. 

49, 50. You are . . . flies'] This 3. Making] proceeding on our 

seems to mean, you are like one, who course. 

in a reverence for the gods which re- 3. take] captivate. With Hudson, 

fuses to attribute any cruelty to them, I have omitted our before imagina- 

complains to them of the rigour of tion. 



110 



PERICLES 



[ACT iv. 



From bourn to bourn, region to region. 

By you being pardoned we commit no crime 

To use one language in each several clime 

Where our scenes seem to live. I do beseech you 

To learn of me^ who stand i the gaps to teach you, 

The stages of our story. Pericles 

Is now again thwarting the wayward seas, I 

Attended on by many a lord and knight, 

To see his daughter, all his lifes delight. 

Old Helicanus goes along. Behind 

Is left to govern it, you bear in mind, 

Old Escanes, whom Helicanus late I 

Advanced in time to great and high estate. 

Well-sailing ships and bounteous winds have brought 

This king to Tarsus think this pilot thought, 

8. stand i' the] Malone (Steevens) ; stand with Qq i, 2, 3 ; stands in (tl 
rest). 18. this pilot] This Pilat (or Pilate) Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

Is left to gouerne it, you beare ii 

mind, 
Old Escanes, whom Helicam 

late 
Aduancede in time to great ar 

hie estate.' 
1 8, 19. think . 
stituting "his" 



4. bourn] limit ; not connected 
with " bourn," or " burn," a brook. 

10. thwarting] crossing. 

10. wayward] " originally a head 
less form of aweiward, adverb. . . . 
Thus wayward is away-ward, i.e. 
turned away, perverse. ... It is a 
parallel formation to fro-ward. It 
is now often made to mean bent on 
one's way ..." (Skeat, Ety. Diet.). 
In much the same sense we have awk 
ward in 2 Henry VI. in. ii. 83 : 
" awkward wind " ; and in Marlowe, 
Edward II. iv. vi. 35 : " With awk- 
ward winds and sore tempests driven," 
awkward meaning literally "left- 
handed," "perverted," "perverse". 
Compare v. i. 92, below. 

13-16. Old . . . estate] The punc 
tuation here is Daniel's. The first 
Quarto, followed substantially by the 
rest, gives : 

" Old Helicanus goes along be 
hind, 



. . grow on] sul 
for this, Malor 

explains, " Suppose that your imagina 
tion is his pilot"; Steevens, " think 
that his pilot had the celerity of 
thought, so shall your thought keep 
pace with his operations " ; Mason, 
retaining this and conjecturing />z/o- 
thought, " Keep this leading circum 
stance in your mind, which will serve 
as a pilot to you, and guide you 
through the rest of the story, in such 
a manner, that your imagination will 
keep pace with the King's progress ". 
Of these versions I much prefer 
Mason's, which seems to be supported 
by lines 21, 22, of the Gower Prologue 
to Act, v. : 



sc. iv.] PERICLES 111 

So with his steerage shall your thoughts grow on, 
To fetch his daughter home, who first is gone. 20 
Like motes and shadows see them move awhile ; 
Your ears unto your eyes I'll reconcile. 

Dumb-show. 

Enter PERICLES, with his Train, at one door ; CLEON and 
DlONYZA at the other. CLEON shows PERICLES the 
tomb of MARINA ; whereat PERICLES makes lamenta 
tion, puts on sackcloth, and in a mighty passion departs. 
Then exeunt CLEON and DlONYZA. 

See how belief may suffer by foul show ! 
This borrow' d passion stands for true old woe ; 
And Pericles, in sorrow all devour d, 2$ 

With sighs shot through, and biggest tears o'er- 

shower d, 

Leaves Tarsus and again embarks. He swears 
Never to wash his face, nor cut his hairs ; 
He puts on sackcloth and to sea. He bears 
A tempest, which his mortal vessel tears^ 30 

A nd yet he rides it out. Now please you wit 

ig. grow on] Malone ; grone Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

" In your supposing once more belief may be misled by base hypo- 
put your sight crisy ! 

Of heavy Pericles ; think this 24. borrowed passion} pretence of 

his bark " ; grief- Whether old means of long 

but I believe that thoughts (line 19) continuance, or " woe that was felt in 

has been caught from thought in the primitive times" (Steevens), or is 

line above, displacing some such merely intensive, is perhaps doubtful, 
word as " voyage " or "course ". 30. his mortal vessel] his body. 

20. who . . . gone] who before Compare Timon of Athens, v. i. 204; 

his arrival has been carried off from " nature's fragile vessel". 
Tarsus. 31. rides it out] survives it, 

23. See how . . . show I] see how 31. wit] know. 



112 



PERICLES 



[ACT iv. 



The epitaph is for Marina writ 
By wicked Dionyza. 

[Reads the inscription on Marina's monument 

The fairest, sweet'st, and best, lies here, 

Who wither'd in her spring of year : 

She was of Tyrus the king's daughter, 

On whom foul death hath made this slaughter. 

Marina was she call'd ; and at her birth, 

Thetis, being proud, swallow'd some part o' the earth : 

Therefore the earth, fearing to be o'erflow'd, 

Hath Thetis' birth-child on the heavens bestow'd : 

Wherefore she does, and swears she '11 never stint, 

Make raging battery upon shores of flint. 

No visor does become black villany 

So well as soft and tender flattery. 

Let Pericles believe his daughter's dead. 

And bear his courses to be ordered 

By Lady Fortune ; while our scene must play 

His daughter's woe and heavy well-a-day 

In her unholy service. Patience then, 5< 

And think you now are all in Mitylen. [Exit. 

32, 33. The . . . Dionyza} As in Malone ; one line in Qq i, 2, 3 ; in the 
later Qq and the Ff the three lines run, Now take we our way to the Epitaph 
for Marina, writ by Dionizia. 48. scene} Malone (1790) ; Steare Qq, Ff 
3, 4. 51. Mitylen} Steevens ; Mittelin Q i ; Metaline (the rest). 



35. her . . . year} the spring time 
of her years. 

39. Thetis} See note on Troilus and 
Cressida, i. iii. 39 (Arden ed.). " The 
poet ascribes the swelling of the sea 
to the pride which Thetis felt at the 
birth of Marina in her element ; and 
supposes that the earth, being afraid 
to be overflowed, bestowed this birth- 
child of Thetis on the heavens ; and 



that Thetis, in revenge, makes raging 
battery against the shores. ..." 
(Mason). 

42. stint] cease. Compare Romeo 
and Juliet, i. iii. 48, 57, 58. More 
common in a transitive sense. 

47. bear . . . ordered} suffer his 
actions to be regulated. 

49. well-a-day} used as a substan 
tive, lamentation. See note on n. i. 22. 



sc. vi.] PERICLES 113 

SCENE V.Mitylene. A Street before the Brothel. 

Enter, from the brothel, two Gentlemen. 
First Gent. Did you ever hear the like? 
Second Gent. No, nor never shall do in such a place 

as this, she being once gone. 
First Gent. But to have divinity preached there ! did 

you ever dream of such a thing? 5 

Second Gent. No, no. Come, I am for no more 

bawdy - houses. Shall 's go hear the vestals 

sing? 
First Gent. I '11 do any thing now that is virtuous ; 

but I am out of the road of rutting for ever. 10 

{Exeunt. 

SCENE VI. The Same. A Room in the Brothel. 
Enter Pandar, Bawd, and BOULT. 

Pand. Well, I had rather than twice the worth of 
her she had ne'er come here. 

Bawd. Fie, fie upon her ! she is able to freeze the god 
Priapus, and undo a whole generation ; we must 
either get her ravished, or be rid of her. When 5 
she should do for clients her fitment, and do 

4. divinity'} religion. 10. rutting} Compare Airs Well 

7. shall 's] " Shall, originally that Ends Well, iv. iii. 243 ; The 

meaning necessity or obligation, and Merry Wives of Windsor, v. v. 

therefore not denoting an action on 15. 
the part of the subject, was used in 

the South of England as an imper- Scene vi. 

sonal verb ... So Chaucer, ' MS 

oughte,' and we also find ' as us wol,' 4. Priapus] " The present mention 

i.e. ' as it is pleading to us '. Hence in of this deity was perhaps suggested 

Shakespeare, ' Say where shall 's lay by the ! ollowing passage in Twine's 

him,' Cymbeline, iv. ii. 233 . . ." (Ab- translation: ' Then the bawde brought 

bott, Shakespearian Grammar, 215). her into a certaine chappell where 

7. the vestals] priestesses of Vesta, stood the idoll of Priapus made of 

then chaste maidens generally. gold," etc. (Steevens). 
8 



114 PERICLES [ACT r 

me the kindness of our profession, she has me 
her quirks, her reasons, her master-reasons, her 
prayers, her knees ; that she would make a 
puritan of the devil if he would cheapen a kiss I 
of her. 

Boult. Faith, I must ravish her, or she '11 disfurnish us of 
all our cavaliers, and make our swearers priests. 

Pand. Now, the pox upon her green-sickness for me ! 

Bawd. Faith, there 's no way to be rid on 't but by 15 
the way to the pox. Here comes the Lord 
Lysimachus, disguised. 

Boult. We should have both lord and lown if the 
peevish baggage would but give way to cus 
tomers. 20 
Enter LYSIMACHUS. 

Lys. How now! How a dozen of virginities? 
Bawd. Now, the gods to-bless your honour! 

22. to-bless] Hyphened by Malone (Tyrwhitt conj.). 

7. she has me] For this me in nar- in Womankind But the green sickness 

rative, see Abbott, Shakespearian of the mind" (quoted in New Eng. 

Grammar, 220. Diet.). 

10. cheapen a kiss] bargain with 18. lown] or "loon," low-bred 

her for a kiss. fellow. 

14. green-sickness] an anaemic 19. give -way to] receive with 

disorder to which early maidenhood favour. 

is subject. Compare Romeo and 19. customers] here whoremon- 

Juliet, in. v. 157; Antony and gers ; more commonly of prostitutes, 

Cleopatra, in. ii. 6; Jonson, The Al- as in Othello, iv. i. 23. So, in 

chemist, iv. 4: "the waiting-maid M easure for Measure, Mistress Over- 

with the green-sickness " ; The Mag- done complains that, owing to the 

netic Lady,\\. i : " the green-sickness, war, she is "custom-shrunk". 

The maiden's malady". But here 21. How . . . virginities?] Com- 

squeamishness, figuratively, as often, pare 2 Henry IV. HI. ii. 42 :" How 

Compare Nash (1596), Saffron Wai- a good yoke of bullocks at Stamford 

den (Grosart, iii. 166) : " It will then fair ? " and the modern racing slang, 

appear . . . whose wit hath the " What price Eclipse ? " 

greene sicknes" ; Cleveland (1658), 22. to-bless] the intensive prefix 

Antiplatonic, iv. : " Virtue's no more common in Early English. 



sc. vi.] PERICLES 115 

Boult. I am glad to see your honour in good health. 
Lys. You may so ; 'tis the better for you that your 

resorters stand upon sound legs. How now ! 25 

wholesome iniquity, have you that a man may 

deal withal, and defy the surgeon ? 
Bawd. We have here one, sir, if she would but there 

never came her like in Mitylene. 
Lys. If she 'd do the deed of darkness, thou would'st 30 

say. 
Bawd. Your honour knows what 'tis to say well 

enough. 

Lys. Well; call forth, call forth. 
Boult. For flesh and blood, sir, white and red, you 35 

shall see a rose; and she were a rose indeed 

if she had but 
Lys. What, prithee? 
Boult. O ! sir, I can be modest. 

Lys. That dignifies the renown of a bawd no less than 40 
it gives a good report to a number to be chaste. 

[Exit Boult. 
Bawd. Here comes that which grows to the stalk ; 

never plucked yet, I can assure you. 

Re-enter BOULT with MARINA. 
Is she not a fair creature ? 

24, 25. 'tis the better . . . legs] it gains for a number of women the 

is fortunate for you when your re- credit of being chaste. For a number, 

sorters are in sound health. "an anchor," i.e. anchorite, "a 

26. wholesome iniquity] ironically murderer," "a pander," "a lecher," 

addressing the bawd. " a wanton," " a maiden," the last of 

32. what 'tis to say] what one which is edited by Hudson, have 

should say to express my meaning. been suggested. There seems no 

40, 41. That dignifies . . . chaste] need of change, though the first 

the profession of modesty gives an clause is of course ironical, 
air of decency to a bawd, just as it 



116 



PERICLES 



[ACT iv. 



Lys. Faith, she would serve after a long voyage at 45 

sea. Well, there's for you; leave us. 
Bawd. I beseech your honour, give me leave ; a word, 

and I '11 have done presently. 
Lys. I beseech you, do. 
Bawd. [To Marina.'] First I would have you note, this 

is an honourable man. 
Mar. I desire to find him so, that I may worthily 

note him. 
Bawd. Next he 's the governor of this country, and 

the man whom I am bound to. 51 

Mar. If he govern the country, you are bound to 

him indeed ; but how honourable he is in that 

I know not. 
Bawd. Pray you, without any more virginal fencing, 

will you use him kindly ? he will line your 

apron with gold. 
Mar. What he will do graciously, I will thankfully 

receive. 

Lys. Ha' you done ? 
Bawd. My lord, she 's not paced yet ; you must take 65 

some pains to work her to your manage. Come, 

we will leave his honour and her together. 
Lys. Go thy ways. 

[Exeunt Bawd, Pandar, and Boult. 



45, 46. she would . . . sea] praise 
in disparagement. 

47. give . . . word] allow me to 
say a word to Marina in private. 

52, 53. worthily note him]give him 
the honour he deserves for being so. 

59. virginal fencing] pretended 
defence of your chastity. 



60. kindly] perhaps with a quibble. 

62. graciously] with honourable 
intention. 

65, 66. paced . . . manage} terms 
taken from the schooling of horses. 

68. Go thy ways} M alone gives 
these words to Lysimachus. 



sc. vi.] PERICLES 117 

Now, pretty one, how long have you been at 
this trade? 70 

Mar, What trade, sir? 

Lys. Why, I cannot name't but I shall offend. 

Mar. I cannot be offended with my trade. Please 
you to name it. 

Lys. How long have you been of this profession ? 75 

Mar. E'er since I can remember. 

Lys. Did you go to 't so young ? Were you a 
gamester at five or at seven ? 

Mar. Earlier too, sir, if now I be one. 

Lys. Why, the house you dwell in proclaims you to 80 
be a creature of sale. 

Mar. Do you know this house to be a place of such 
resort, and will come into 't ? I hear say you 
are of honourable parts, and are the governor 
of this place. 85 

Lys. Why, hath your principal made known unto 
you who I am ? 

Mar. Who is my principal? 

Lys. Why, your herb woman ; she that sets seeds 

and roots of shame and iniquity. O ! you have 90 
heard something of my power, and so stand 
aloof for more serious wooing. But I protest 
to thee, pretty one, my authority shall not see 

92. aloof] Rowe ; aloft Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

72. but . . . offend] without being 91, 92. and 50 ... wooing] and so 

guilty of indecorum. affect coyness till you are sure that I 

78. gamester] a common eu- am in earnest, 

phemism. 93, 94. my authority . . . thee] 

83. and will come into 't ?] and do you have nothing to fear from 

you notwithstanding frequent it ? me in my capacity as governor ; 

89, 90. Why, . . . iniquity] Com- I shall wink at your manner of 

pare Othello, i. iii. 323-330. life. 



118 



PERICLES 



[ACT iv. 



thee, or else look friendly upon thee. Come, 

bring me to some private place; come, come. 95 
Mar. If you were born to honour, show it now; 

If put upon you, make the judgement good 

That thought you worthy of it. 

Lys. How 's this ? how 's this ? Some more ; be sage. 
Mar. For me, 

That am a maid, though most ungentle fortune 100 

Hath plac'd me in this sty, where, since I came, 

Diseases have been sold dearer than physic, 

O ! that the gods 

Would set me free from this unhallow'd place, 

Though they did change me to the meanest bird 105 

That flies i' the purer air. 
Lys. I did not think 

Thou could'st have spoke so well; ne'er dream'd 
thou could'st. 

Had I brought hither a corrupted mind, 

Thy speech had alter'd it. Hold, here's gold for 
thee; 

Persever in that clear way thou goest, no 

And the gods strengthen thee! 

Mar. The gods preserve you ! 

Lys. For me, be you thoughten 

96-98. If . . . of it.] Verse first by Rowe ; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 99-106. 
For . . . air.] Arranged by Collier; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 106-111. / did 
. . . thee 1] Arranged as by Rowe ; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 112-120. For . . . 
good.] As in Malone, except line 119 ; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

99. be sage] Malone takes this as wise and yield ". But I cannot be- 

a sneer " Proceed with your fine lieve the text to be sound, 
moral discourse". For Some more, no. Persever] accented, as usually 

Daniel conjectures " No more," or in Shakespeare, on the penultimate. 
" Come now " ; Eltze, " Once more " ; no. clear] pure, 
and with any of these readings be 112. be you thoughten~\ assure your- 

sage might perhaps be taken as "be self. Participles in-^w are frequent in 



sc. vi.] PERICLES 119 

That I came with no ill intent, for to me 

The very doors and windows savour vilely. 

Farewell. Thou art a piece of virtue, and 115 

I doubt not but thy training hath been noble. 

Hold, here J s more gold for thee. 

A curse upon him, die he like a thief, 

That robs thee of thy goodness ! If thou dost 

Hear from me, it shall be for thy good. 120 

Re-enter BOULT. 

Boult. I beseech your honour, one piece for me. 

Lys. Avaunt ! thou damned door-keeper. Your house, 
But for this virgin that doth prop it, would 
Sink and overwhelm you. Away ! [Exit. 

Boult. How's this? We must take another course 125 
with you. If your peevish chastity, which is 
not worth a breakfast in the cheapest country 
under the cope, shall undo a whole household, 
let me be gelded like a spaniel. Come your 
ways. 1 30 

Mar. Whither would you have me ? 

Boult. I must have your maidenhead taken off, or 

. iig, 120. If . . . me,] As in Dyce. 122-124. Avaunt I . . . Away !] 

Arranged as by Steevens ; verse first in Rowe ; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

Shakespeare, and in King Lear, n. iii. 6, 122. door-keeper] pander. Com- 
we have "I am bethought". The words pare Troilus and Cressida, v. x. 52: 
here may therefore be a condensed " ho Id-door trade", 
equivalent to "be you bethought". 126-129. If your . . . spaniel] i.e. 
Schmidt explains thought** as " hav- we are not going to allow cur 
ing a thought, thinking," and says it selves to be ruined by creatures like 
is not a participle. you professing chastity; we must 
115. a piece of virtue] here express- use other means than kindness to 
ing supreme excellence ; of the very you. 

stock of virtue. Compare The Tern- T26. peevish'} wayward, but with 

pest, i. ii. 56 ; Antony and Cleopatra, the notion of foolish also, 
in. ii. 28. 128. cope] sc. of heaven. 



120 



PERICLES 



[ACT iv. 



the common hangman shall execute it. Come 
your ways. We'll have no more gentlemen 
driven away. Come your ways, I say. 135 

Re-enter Bawd. 

Bawd. How now ! what 's the matter ? 

Boult. Worse and worse, mistress ; she has here 

spoken holy words to the Lord Lysimachus. 
Bawd. O ! abominable. 
Boult. She makes our profession as it were to stink 140 

afore the face of the gods. 
Bawd. Marry, hang her up for ever ! 
Boult. The nobleman would have dealt with her like 

a nobleman, and she sent him away as cold 

as a snowball; saying his prayers too. 145 

Bawd. Boult, take her away ; use her at thy 

pleasure; crack the glass of her virginity, and 

make the rest malleable. 
Boult. An if she were a thornier piece of ground 

than she is, she shall be ploughed. 150 

Mar. Hark, hark, you gods ! 
Bawd. She conjures ; away with her ! Would she 

had never come within my doors ! Marry, 

hang you ! She 's born to undo us. Will you 

not go the way of women-kind ? Marry, 155 



138. holy] pious. 

142. Marry] a corruption of Mary, 
sc. the Virgin Mary ; a form used in 
order to avoid the penalties for pro 
fane swearing. For various other 
forms of the imprecation, see note 
on Timon of Athens, i. i. 86 (Arden 



147, 148. and make . . . malle 
able] and so make her pliable for 
general use. 

150. ploughed] Compare Antony 
and Cleopatra, n. ii. 233 : "He 
ploughed her, and she cropp'd ". 

152. conjures] calls upon the gods 
to aid her. 



sc . vi.] PERICLES 121 

come up, my dish of chastity with rosemary 
and bays ! [Exit. 

Boult. Come, mistress ; come your ways with me. 

Mar. Whither wilt thou have me? 

Boult. To take from you the jewel you hold so 160 
dear. 

Mar. Prithee, tell me one thing first. 

Boult. Come now, your one thing. 

Mar. What canst thou wish thine enemy to be? 

Boult. Why, I could wish him to be my master, 165 
or rather, my mistress. 

Mar. Neither of these are so bad as thou art, 

Since they do better thee in their command. 
Thou hold'st a place, for which the pained'st fiend 
Of hell would not in reputation change; 170 

Thou art the damned door-keeper to every 
Coistrel that comes inquiring for his Tib ; 
To the choleric fisting of every rogue 
Thy ear is liable ; thy food is such 
As hath been belch 'd on by infected lungs. 175 

171-175. Thou . . . lungs.] Arranged as by Malone ; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

I 56, 157. my dish . . . bays] ings, would change reputations with 

" Anciently many dishes were served you. 

up with this garniture, during the 171. door-keeper] see note on line 

season of Christmas. The bawd 122, above. 

means to call her a piece of ostenta- 172. coistrel] a variant of "custrell," 

tious virtue " (Steevens). a groom to a knight ; thence a base 

165, 166. to be . . . mistress] i.e. fellow. 

to be as miserable a creature as, 172. Tib] " A low, common woman 

etc. (' A tib, mulier sordida ') (Coles's Lat. 

168. Since . . . command] since and Eng. Diet.) " (Dyce, Glossary). 
they are at all events in authority, 173, 174. To the . . . liable] the 
while you are but a slave. meanest fellow in the world would 

169, 170. Thou hold'st . . . change] not hesitate, if angry, to box your 
your office as their tool is one so foul ears. Mr. Craig suggests the inser- 
that no devil, whatever his suffer- tion of here after " fisting ", 



122 



PERICLES 



[ACT iv. 



Boult. What would you have me do? go to the 
wars, would you ? where a man may serve 
seven years for the loss of a leg, and have 
not money enough in the end to buy him a 
wooden one? 180 

Mar. Do any thing but this thou doest. Empty 
Old receptacles, or common sewers, of filth ; 
Serve by indenture to the common hangman : 
Any of these ways are yet better than this ; 
For what thou professest, a baboon, could he 

speak, 185 

Would own a name too dear. O ! that the gods 
Would safely deliver me from this place. 
Here, here's gold for thee. 
If that thy master would ga:n by me, 
Proclaim that I can sing, weave, sew, and dance, 190 
With other virtues, which I '11 keep from boast ; 
And I will undertake all these to teach. 
I doubt not but this populous city will 
Yield many scholars. 

Boult. But can you teach all this you speak of? 195 

Mar. Prove that I cannot, take me home again, 

185-188. For . . . ihee.] Arranged as by Malone (1790); prose in Ff 3, 4. 
189-194. If that . , , scholars.'] Divided as by Malone ; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 



178. for the loss . . . leg] as if that 
were a reward. 

181-188. Do any . . . thee] The 
arrangement here is Malone's ; in the 
old copies the whole passage is prose. 

184. ye* better} Malone trans 
poses better yet. 

186. Would own . . . dear] would 
declare to be a name that he could 
not afford to bear. 



189. would gain] Malone (1780) 
gives " gain aught " ; Hudson, " make 
gain " ; Kinnear conjectures " have 
gain ". 

193, 194. / doubt . . . scholars] 
Malone points out that the scheme 
by which Marina effects her release 
from the brothel is described in the 
Confessio Amantis, and Steevens that 
it is found also in Twine's translation. 



sc. vi.] PERICLES 123 

And prostitute me to the basest groom 
That doth frequent your house. 

Boult. Well, I will see what I can do for thee ; if 

I can place thee, I will. 200 

Mar. But amongst honest women. 

Boult. Faith, my acquaintance lies little amongst 
them. But since my master and mistress 
have bought you, there's no going but by 
their consent ; therefore I will make them 205 
acquainted with your purpose, and I doubt 
not but I shall find them tractable enough. 
Come, I '11 do for thee what I can ; come 
your ways. \Exeunt. 

I 97- groom] low fellow ; the original 206, 207. / doubt . . . tractable] 
sense is a stable lad. Compare cois- since her remaining in the brothel 
trel, line 172, above. would only be to their loss. 



ACT V 

Enter GOWER. 

Marina thus the brothel * scapes, and chances 

Into an honest house, our story says. 
She sings like one immortal, and she dances 

As goddess-like to her admired lays ; 
Deep clerks she dumbs ; and with her neeld composes 5 

Nature's own shape, of bud, bird, branch, or berry, 
That even her art sisters the natural roses ; 

Her inkle, silk, twin with the rubied cherry : 
That pupils lacks she none of noble race, 

Who pour their bounty on her ; and her gain IO 
She gives the cursed bawd. Here we her place, 

And to her father turn our thoughts again, 
Where we left him, on the sea. We there him lost ; 

Whence, driven before the winds, he is arrived 
Here where his daughter dwells : and on this coast 1 5 

Suppose him now at anchor. The city strivd 

her embroidery. Compare Twelfth 
Night, v. i. 230 : 

" An apple, cleft in two, is not 

more twin 
Than these two creatures ". 

8. inkle'] properly a kind of tape, 
but, according to Steevens, a kind 
of crewel or worsted with which 
ladies worked flowers. 

16. The city striv'd] Here Steevens 
conjectured "The city's hived,' 1 



5. dumbs] Compare Antony and 
Cleopatra, i. v. 50. The New Eng 
lish Dictionary quotes Sylvester, 
Sonn. on Late Mirac. Peace, xxv. 316 : 
" Beaming the windes, dumbing the 
loudest thunders ". 

7. sisters . . . roses'] the creations 
of her art are as sisters to the reality. 

8. Her inkle . . . cherry"] the 
natural cherry does not glow with 
more sparkling hue than those of 



124 



sc . i.] PERICLES 125 

God Neptune's annual feast to keep ; from whence 

Lysimachus our Tyrian ship espies. 
His banners sable, trimmd with rich expense ; 

And to him in his barge with fervour hies. 20 

In your supposing once more put your sight 

Of heavy Pericles ; think this his bark 
Where, what is done in action, more, if might, 

Shall be discovered; please you, sit and hark. \Exit. 

SCENE I. On board Pericles' ship, off Mitylene. A 
Pavilion on deck, with a curtain before it ; Pericles 
within it, reclined on a couch. A barge lying beside 
the Tyrian vessel. 

Enter two Sailors, one belonging to the Tyrian vessel, 
the other to the barge; to them HELICANUS. 

Tyr. Sail. [To the Sailor of Mitylene .] Where is Lord 

Helicanus? he can resolve you. 
O ! here he is. 

Sir, there 's a barge put off from Mitylene 
And in it is Lysimachus, the governor, 
Who craves to come aboard. What is your will ? 5 

Hel. That he have his. Call up some gentlemen. 

Tyr. Sail. Ho, gentlemen ! my lord calls. 

1-5. Where . . . will?] As in Steevens ; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

which Singer adopts. The corre- more imagine you behold Pericles, 

spending passage in the Confessio For heavy, compare Julius Ccesar, 

Amantis runs thus : u. i. 275. 

" The lordes bothe, andthecomune 23. more, if might] and more if it 

The hithe feste of Neptune, were possible. 
Uppoun the stronde att ryvage, 

And as it was custume and usage, Scene I. 
Solemlich they by syhe ". 

21,22. In your . . . Pericles]once i. resolve] satisfy your doubts. 



126 



PERICLES 



[ACT v. 



Enter two or three Gentlemen. 

First Gent. Doth your lordship call ? 

Hel. Gentlemen, there's some of worth would come 

aboard ; 

I pray ye, greet him fairly. 10 

[Gentlemen and Sailors descend, and go 

on board the barge. 



Enter from thence LYSIMACHUS and Lords ; the Tyrian 
Gentlemen and the two Sailors. 

Tyr. Sail. Sir, 

This is the man that can, in aught you would, 
Resolve you. 

Lys. Hail, reverend sir ! the gods preserve you ! 

Hel. And you, sir, to outlive the age I am, 15 

And die as I would do. 

Lys. You wish me well. 

Being on shore, honouring of Neptune's triumphs, 
Seeing this goodly vessel ride before us, 
I made to it to know of whence you are. 

Hel. First, what is your place? 20 

Lys. I am the governor of this place you lie before. 

11-13. Sir, . . . you.] Divided as by Malone ; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 
15, 16. And . . . do.] Divided as by Malone (1790) ; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 



9. some of worth] Malone con 
jectures " some one " ; others alter 
him, in the next line, to them. 
Barron Field (apud Staunton) cites 
a passage from Heywood's Fortune 
by Land and Sea, ii. 3, to show that 
" some " was formerly used for 
" some person " : 

" Besides a sudden noise 



Of some that swiftly ran towards 

your fields : 
Make haste ; 'twas now ; he 

cannot be far off". 
17. Neptune's triumphs'] public 
festivities in honour of Neptune. 
See ii. ii. i, above. 

20. place] official position. 



sc. 



PERICLES 127 



Hel. Sir, 

Our vessel is of Tyre, in it the king ; 

A man who for this three months hath not spoken 

To any one, nor taken sustenance 25 

But to prorogue his grief. 

Lys. Upon what ground is his distemperature ? 
Hel. 'Twould be too tedious to repeat; 

But the main grief springs from the loss 

Of a beloved daughter and a wife. 30 

Lys. May we not see him ? 
Hel. You may; 

But bootless is your sight : he will not speak 

To any. 

Lys. Yet let me obtain my wish. 

Hel. Behold him. [Pericles discovered. 

This was a goodly person, 35 

Till the disaster that, one mortal night, 

Drove him to this. 
Lys. Sir king, all hail ! the gods preserve you ! 

Hail, royal sir ! 
Hel. It is in vain ; he will not speak to you. 40 

22-26. Sir, . . . grief.] Divided as by Steevens ; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 
28-30. 'Twould . . . wife.] The lines end as in Malone ; prose in Qq, Ff 
i, 4. 32-34. You . . . any.] As in Collier ; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 38, 39. 
Sir king, . . . sir I] Prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

26. prorogue] linger out, keep alive. 35. Pericles discovered] In the 
Compare Antony and Cleopatra, n. original representation of this play, 
i. 26 : Pericles was probably placed in the 

" That sleep and feeding may back part of the stage, concealed by 

prorogue his honour a curtain which was here drawn 

Even till a Lethe'd dulness ". open. The ancient narratives repre- 

27. distemperature] mental, as in sent him as remaining in the cabin 
Romeo and Juliet, n, iii. 40 ; physical of his ship . . ."(Malone). 

in The Comedy of Errors, v. i. 82. 



128 



PERICLES 



[ACT v. 



First Lord. Sir, 

We have a maid in Mitylene, I durst wager, 
Would win some words of him. 

Lys. 'Tis well bethought 

She questionless with her sweet harmony 
And other choice attractions, would allure, 41 

And make a battery through his deafen'd ports 
Which now are midway stopp'd : 
She is all happy as the fair'st of all, 
And with her fellow maids is now upon 
The leafy shelter that abuts against 
The island's side. 

[ Whispers a Lord, who goes off in the barge 

of Lysimachus. 

Hel. Sure, all 's effectless ; yet nothing we '11 omit 

That bears recovery's name. But, since your kindness 
We have stretch'd thus far, let us beseech you 
That for our gold we may provision have, 55 

Wherein we are not destitute for want, 
But weary for the staleness. 

O ! sir, a courtesy 



Lys. 



41-43. Sir, . . . him.] As in Dyce ; prose in 
. . sorrow.] Divided as by Malone ; prose in 



q, Ff 3 , 4. 
,F 3t4 . 



43-62. 'Tis 



45. choice] chosen. 

48. She is . . . all] I take this to 
mean, " She is alike perfectly happy 
and the fairest of all maidens ". 
Clarke explains, " She is entirely and 
happily graced as the fairest of all 
women ". 

49, 50. upon . . . shelter] in the 
neighbourhood of a spot sheltered by 
foliage that fronts the sea-coast. For 
upon, compare Julius Ccesar, v. i. 17. 

Whispers . . . Lysimachus] Malone 



points out that when Pericles was 
first acted, there being no apparatus 
by which a ship could be represented, 
the actor would merely walk off the 
stage and return in a few minutes 
leading in Marina. Imagination 
would do the rest. 

56, 57. Wherein . . staleness] as 
to which it is not that we are in 
actual want of supplies, but that we 
are weary of fare that has lost all its 
freshness. 



sc. i.] PERICLES 129 

Which if we should deny, the most just gods 
For every graff would send a caterpillar, 
And so afflict our province. Yet once more 60 
Let me entreat to know at large the cause 
Of your king's sorrow. 

Hel. Sit, sir, I will recount it to you ; 

But see, I am prevented. 

Re-enter, from the barge, Lord, with MARINA and a 
young Lady. 

Lys. O ! here is 

The lady that I sent for. Welcome, fair one ! 
Is 't not a goodly presence ? 

Hel. She's a gallant lady. 65 

Lys. She's such a one, that, were I well assur'd 
She came of gentle kind and noble stock, 
I 'd wish no better choice, and think me rarely 

wed. 

Fair one, all goodness that consists in bounty 
Expect even here, where is a kingly patient : 70 
If that thy prosperous and artificial feat 
Can draw him but to answer thee in aught, 

58. gods] Dyce ; God Qq, Ff 3, 4. 62, 63. Sit, . . ; prevented.] Divided 
as by Collier; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 63-65. O/ . . . presence?] Divided 

as by Steevens; two lines, the first ending/or, in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 71. feat] 

Steevens (Percy conj.) ; fate Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

59- g ra ff] the older and more cor- the text is sound). Malone gives 

rect form, the verb " to graft " being afflict. 

properly the participle " grafted," and 63. prevented'] anticipated, 
the substantive "graft" being made 67. She came of gentle] Hudson's 

from this mistaken form of the verb, emendation of " Came of a gentle ". 
Compare As You Like It, in. ii. 124 ; 71. thy . . . feat] the fortunate 

Henry IV. v. iii. 3. application of your art. For arti- 

60. And so . . . province] inflict- ficial compare Titnon of Athens, 

ing this as a penalty on our land (if i. i. 40. 

9 



130 PERICLES [ACT v 

Thy sacred physic shall receive such pay 
As thy desires can wish. 

Mar. Sir, I will use 

My utmost skill in his recovery, provided 75 

That none but I and my companion maid 
Be suffer'd to come near him. 

Lys. Come, let us leave her ; 

And the gods make her prosperous! 

[Marina sings. 
Mark'd he your music? 

Mar. No, nor look'd on us. 

Lys. See, she will speak to him. 80 

Mar. Hail, sir ! my lord, lend ear. 

Per. Hum ! ha ! 

Mar. I am a maid, 

My lord, that ne'er before invited eyes, 

But have been gaz'd on like a comet ; she speaks, 85 

My lord, that, may be, hath endur'd a grief 

Might equal yours, if both were justly weigh'd. 

Though wayward fortune did malign my state, 

My derivation was from ancestors 

Who stood equivalent with mighty kings ; 90 

But time hath rooted out my parentage, 

And to the world and awkward casualties 

77, 78. Come, . . . prosperous /] Divided as by Steevens ; prose in Qq, Ff 
3, 4. 83-95. /am ... speak.} Divided as by Malone ; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

73. Thy sabred physic] the means of the Latin hexameters in the 

which you piously employ to effect a Gesta Romanorum. 
cure. 88. wayward] See note on iv. iv. 10, 

75. recovery} Walker conjectures above. 
recure, which Hudson adopts. 88. malign] treat malignantly. The 

78. Marina sings] Steevens here verb is now used only of speaking e> 
quotes five stanzas from Twine's 92. awkward] See note on iv. 
translation which are an exact copy 10, above. 



sc. L] PERICLES 131 

Bound me in servitude. [Aside.'} I will desist ; 

But there is something glows upon my cheek, 

And whispers in mine ear " Go not till he speak." 95 
Per. My fortunes parentage good parentage 

To equal mine ! was it not thus ? what say you ? 
Mar. I said, my lord, if you did know my parentage, 

You would not do me violence. 
Per. I do think so. Pray you, turn your eyes upon me. 100 

You are like something that What countrywoman ? 

Here of these shores? 
Mar. No, nor of any shores ; 

Yet I was mortally brought forth, and am 

No other than I appear. 
Per. I am great with woe, and shall deliver weeping. 105 

My dearest wife was like this maid, and such a one 

My daughter might have been: my queen's square 
brows ; 

Her stature to an inch; as wand-like straight; 

As silver-voic'd ; her eyes as jewel-like, 

And cas'd as richly; in pace another Juno; no 

96-99. My . . . violence.'] As in Malona ; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 100-102. 
I do . . . shores ?] As in Dyce; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 102-131. No, . . . 
open'd.] Divided as by Malone ; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

94. But . . . cheek] but some in- 103. Yet . . . forth] i.e. I am not 

ward prompting causes my cheek to a spirit, but of the breed of mankind, 

glow with enthusiasm. Compare below, lines 151, 152: 

99. You would . . . violence] " But are you flesh and blood ? 

"This refers to a part of the story Have you a working pulse ? and 

that seems to be made no use of in are no fairy ? " 

the present scene. Thus, in Twine's 105. and shall . . . weeping] and 

translation, ' Then Apollonius fell in shall be brought to birth of tears, 

rage, and forgetting all courtesie, Compare line 159 below. Malone 

etc., rose up sodainly and stroke compares Richard II. n. ii. 62-66. 

the maiden,' etc." (Steevens). no. And . . . richly] Here there 

102. nor . . . shores] she having seems to be a blending of two ideas, 

been born at sea. that of the setting of jewels and 



132 



PERICLES 



[ACT v. 



Who starves the ears she feeds, and makes them 

hungry, 

The more she gives them speech. Where do you 
live? 

Mar. Where I am but a stranger ; from the deck 
You may discern the place. 

Per. Where were you bred ? 

And how achiev'd you these endowments which 115 
You make more rich to owe? 

Mar. If I should tell my history, it would seem 
Like lies, disdain'd in the reporting. 

Per. Prithee, speak ; 

Falseness cannot come from thee, for thou look'st 
Modest as justice, and thou seem'st a palace 120 
For the crown'd truth to dwell in. I '11 believe thee, 
And make my senses credit thy relation 
To points that seem impossible ; for thou look'st 
Like one I lov'd indeed. What were thy friends? 
Didst thou not say when I did push thee back, 125 
Which was when I perceiv'd thee, that thou cam'st 
From good descending? 

Mar. So indeed I did. 

120. palace} Malone ; Pallas (in italics) Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

that of their being kept in a handsome 
case. Compare in. ii. 99, above. 

no. in pace . . . Juno} Compare 
Aeneid, v. 409 : " vera incessu patuit 
dea ". 

in. Who starves . . . hungry] 
Compare Antony and Cleopatra, n. ii. 
241-243 : 

" Other women cloy 
The appetite they feed : but she 

makes hungry 
Where most she satisfies". 



116. to owe] by owning. " Owe " 
= " own " is frequent in the drama 
tists. 

1 1 8. Like . . . reporting] like lies 
that are no sooner uttered than they 
are treated with scorn. 

121. the crown'd truth] Truth 
in all its majesty. 

124. friends] relations. Compare 
Two Gentlemen of Verona, in. i. 106. 

126. perceiv'd] took notice of. 

127. descending] lineage, descent. 



sc. i.] PERICLES 133 

Per. Report thy parentage. I think thou said'st 
Thou hadst been toss'd from wrong to injury, 
And that thou thought'st thy griefs might equal 
mine, 130 

If both were open'd. 

Mar. Some such thing 

I said, and said no more but what my thoughts 
Did warrant me was likely. 

Per. Tell thy story ; 

If thine consider'd prove the thousandth part 
Of my endurance, thou art a man, and I 135 

Have suffer'd like a girl ; yet thou dost look 
Like Patience gazing on kings' graves, and smiling 
Extremity out of act. What were thy friends? 
How lost thou them ? Thy name, my most kind 

virgin ? 
Recount, I do beseech thee. Come, sit by me. 140 

Mar. My name is Marina. 

Per. O ! I am mock'd, 

And thou by some incensed god sent hither 
To make the world to laugh at me. 

Mar. Patience, good sir, 

Or here I'll cease. 

131-133. Some . . . likely.] Divided as by Collier; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 
I 33- I 43- Tell . . . me.} Divided as by Malone ; prose in Qq, Ff 3,4. 139. 
thou them? Thy name,] Malone; thou thy name, Qq, Ff, 3, 4. 

134-136. If thine . . .girl] if yours 137, 138. smiling . . . act] "By 
when considered prove a thousandth her beauty and patient meekness 
part as great as what I have endured, disarming Calamity, and prevent- 
then you deserve the title of a man, ing her from using her uplifted 
and I to be called a girl for the weak- sword " (Malone). For out of act, 
ness which I have shown. compare All 's Well that Ends Well, 

137. Like Patience . . . graves] I. ii. 20. 
Compare Twelfth Night, n. iv. 117. 



134 



PERICLES 



[ACT v. 



Per. Nay, I'll be patient. 

Thou little know'st how thou dost startle me, 145 

To call thyself Marina. 
Mar. The name 

Was given me by one that had some power; 

My father, and a king. 
Per. How! a king's daughter? 

And call'd Marina? 
Mar. You said you would believe me ; 

But, not to be a troubler of your peace, 1 50 

I will end here. 
Per. But are you flesh and blood ? 

Have you a working pulse ? and are no fairy ? 

No motion ? Well ; speak on. Where were you 
born ? 

And wherefore call'd Marina? 
Mar. Call'd Marina 

For I was born at sea. 

Per. At sea ! what mother ? 155 

Mar. My mother was the daughter of a king ; 

144-149. Nay, . . . Marina?] Divided, substantially, as by Steevens ; 
prose in Qq, Ffs, 4. 149-151. You . . . here.] Divided as by Malone 

(1780); prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 154-159. Call'd . . . weeding.] Divided as 

by Malone ; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 



147. had some power] was a man 
wielding authority. Walker thinks 
we should arrange as follows : 

" The name was given me 
By one that had some power ; 
My father and a king " ; 
i.e. that had some right to name 
me. 

153. No motion ?] The insertion of 
No, with a note of interrogation, is 
due to Steevens, who explains "no 
puppet dress'd up to deceive me," 
comparing The Two Gentlemen of 
Verona, n. i. 100 : " O excellent mo 



tion I O exceeding puppet ! " Dyce 
takes Motion I to be an exclamation 
by Pericles on feeling Marina's pulse. 
Knight adopts Mason's conjecture : 
" Have you a working pulse ? and 
are no fairy motion ? " Collier gives: 
" Have you a working pulse ? and 

are no fairy 
Motion ? " 

Clarke believes that no before fairy 
is to be elliptically understood as 
repeated before motion, and Grant 
White that motion is a stage-direction 
which has got into the text. 



sc. i.] PERICLES 135 

Who died the minute I was born, 
As my good nurse Lychorida hath oft 
Deliver'd weeping. 

Per. O ! stop there a little. 

[Aside.] This is the rarest dream that e'er dull 
sleep 1 60 

Did mock sad fools withal ; this cannot be. 
My daughter 's buried. Well ; where were you bred ? 
I '11 hear you more, to the bottom of your story, 
And never interrupt you. 

Mar. You scorn : believe me, 'twere best I did give 

o'er. 165 

Per. I will believe you by the syllable 

Of what you shall deliver. Yet, give me leave : 
How came you in these parts ? where were you bred ? 

Mar. The king my father did in Tarsus leave me, 

Till cruel Cleon, with his wicked wife, 170 

Did seek to murder me ; and having woo'd 
A villain to attempt it, who having drawn to do't, 
A crew of pirates came and rescu'd me; 

159-161. O! stop . . . withal ;] As in Malone ; two lines, the first ending 
dream, in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 160-168. This . . . bred? ] Arranged as by Malone ; 
prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

157. Who died . . . born] Malone one. Staunton gives " You scorn to 

inserts very before minute. believe me," which Delius and Clarke 

159. Deliver'd] stated. receive. 

165. You scorn . . . o'er] Appa- 166. by the syllable] syllable by 

rently Marina takes the words " O ! syllable, i.e. to the minutest point, 

stop there a little " as expressive of 172. who having drawn] For the 

incredulity (perhaps also remember- nominative absolute compare The 

ing lines 151-153), and his after words, Merchant of Venice, iv. i. 133-135 : 

"Well; where were you bred?" as " My currish spirit 

indicating that in spite of the improba- Govern'd a wolf, who, hang'd 

bility of her story, he will hear her for human slaughter, 

to the end. Malone's conjecture, Even from the gallows did his 

" You 'II scarce believe me," adopted fell soul fleet ". 

by many editors, is rather a violent 172. drawn] sc. his sword. 



136 PERICLES [ACT v. 

Brought me to Mitylene. But, good sir, 

Whither will you have me ? Why do you weep ? 
It may be 175 

You think me an impostor; no, good faith, 

I am the daughter of King Pericles, 

If good King Pericles be. 
Per. Ho, Helicanus ! 

Hel. Calls my lord? 180 

Per. Thou art a grave and noble counsellor, 

Most wise in general; tell me, if thou canst, 

What this maid is, or what is like to be, 

That thus hath made me weep? 
Hel. I know not ; but 

Here is the regent, sir, of Mitylene, 185 

Speaks nobly of her. 
Lys. She never would tell 

Her parentage; being demanded that, 

She would sit still and weep. 
Per. O Helicanus ! strike me, honour'd sir ; 

Give me a gash, put me to present pain, 190 

Lest this great sea of joys rushing upon me 

174-178. But, . . . be.] Arranged as by Steevens ; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 
182-184. Most . . . weep?] Arranged by Malone ; prose in Qq i, 2, 3 ; two 
lines, the first ending is, in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 184-186. / know . . . her.] 

Arranged as by Malone; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 186-188. She . . . weep.] 
Arranged as by Malone ; two lines, the first ending parentage, in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 
189-193. O . . . hither,] As in Malone ; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

175. Whither . . . me?] to what 191-193. Lest . . . siveetness] 

point will you lead me ? to what point Malone compares The Merchant of 

are you drawing me on by your in- Venice, in. ii. 112-115 : 

quiries and strange behaviour ? " O love, be moderate; allay thy 

181. grave] dignified. ecstasy ; 

182. Most . . . general] of great In measure rein thy joy ; scant 
wisdom in most matters. this excess. 

183. or what . . . be] or, if you do I feel too much thy blessing : 
not know who she is, what we may make it less, 

conjecture of her. For fear I surfeit." 



1 



sc. i.] PERICLES 137 

O'erbear the shores of my mortality, 

And drown me with their sweetness. O ! come 

hither, 

Thou that begett'st him that did thee beget; 
Thou that wast born at sea, buried at Tarsus, 195 
And found at sea again. O Helicanus ! 
Down on thy knees, thank the holy gods as loud 
As thunder threatens us ; this is Marina. 
What was thy mother's name ? tell me but that, 
For truth can never be confirm'd enough, 200 

Though doubts did ever sleep. 

Mar. First, sir, I pray, what is your title? 

Per. I 

Am Pericles of Tyre : but tell me now 
My drown'd queen's name, as in the rest you said 
Thou hast been godlike perfect, the heir of king 
doms, 205 
And another like to Pericles thy father. 

Mar. Is it no more to be your daughter than 
To say my mother's name was Thaisa ? 

207-210. Is it . . . began.] As in Malone ; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

194. that begett'st him] you give Am Pericles of Tyre, the heir of 

a new birth to him. kingdoms : 

201. Though . . sleep] though all But tdl me now > as in the rest 

doubts were laid to rest. y u " . 

Thou hast been godlike perfect, 

202-206. I . '. . father] Lines 202- an( j so ^ e 

204 are here given as in Malone; Another life to Pericles thy 

lines 205, 206, as in the old copies. father 

In their notes at the end of the play, My drown'd queen's name ". 
the Cambridge Editors record a large Here life is due to Steevens. Corn- 
variety of readings and arrangements p are n ne IQ4> above: "Thou that 
of the lines as edited or proposed by begett'st him that did thee beget ". 
Malone, Steevens, Mason, Jackson, 2O7> 2O 8. Is it . . . Thaisa?] Is 
Singer, Collier, Dyce, and Hudson. no more req uired to prove myself 
I should like to arrange and read as your daughter than to tell you the 
follows : name of my mo ther, Thaisa ? 



138 PERICLES [ACT v. 

Thaisa was my mother, who did end 

The minute I began. 210 

Per. Now, blessing on thee ! rise ; thou art my child. 
Give me fresh garments ! Mine own, Helicanus ; 
She is not dead at Tarsus, as she should have been, 
By savage Cleon ; she shall tell thee all ; 
When thou shalt kneel, and justify in knowledge 215 
She is thy very princess. Who is this ? 

Hel. Sir, 'tis the governor of Mitylene, 

Who, hearing of your melancholy state, 
Did come to see you. 

Per. I embrace you. 

Give me my robes ; I am wild in my beholding. 220 
O heavens ! bless my girl. But hark ! what music ? 
Tell Helicanus, my Marina, tell him 
O'er point by point, for yet he seems to doubt, 
How sure you are my daughter. But what music ? 

Hel. My lord, I hear none. 225 

Per. None ! 

The music of the spheres ! List, my Marina. 

212-219. Give . . . you.] Arranged as by Malone; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 
219-224. I . . . music ?] Divided as by Malone (1790) ; five lines, ending 
robes; . . . girle. . . . Marina, . . . doat, . . . music ke ? in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

210. The minute I began} Malone the story told us, she should have 

compares The Winter's Tale, v. iii. been. 

44-46 : 215, 216. When thou . . . princess] 

" Lady, and you shall then kneel and be able 

Dear queen, that ended when I to assure yourself beyond all doubt 

but began, that she is indeed your princess. 

Give me that hand of yours to 220. / am . . . beholding] my 

kiss". amazement is such that I can scarce 

212. Give . . . garments] In the believe what I see. 
Dumb-show in iv. iv. Pericles "puts 224. How sure] how certainly. 

on sackcloth," which, like his " un- 227. The music . . . spheres the 

scissard hair," he may be supposed music made by the heavenly spheres 

to retain. in their revolution. According to the 

213. as ... been] as, according to Ptolemaic system of astronomy, round 



SC. I.] 



PERICLES 



139 



Lys. It is not good to cross him ; give him way. 

Per. Rarest sounds ! Do you not hear ? 

Lys. My lord, I hear. 

Per. Most heavenly music ! [Music. 230 

It nips me unto list'ning, and thick slumber 
Hangs upon mine eyes; let me rest. [Sleeps. 

Lys. A pillow for his head. 

So, leave him all. Well, my companion friends, 
If this but answer to my just belief, 235 

I '11 well remember you. {Exeunt all but Pericles. 

DIANA appears to PERICLES as in a vision, 

Dia. My temple stands in Ephesus ; hie thee thither, 
And do upon mine altar sacrifice. 

230. Music'] In the text before My lord Qq, Ff 3, 4. 233, 234. A pillow 

. . . all.] Divided as by Steevens ; one line in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 234-236. Well, 
. . . you.] Divided as by Steevens ; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 



about the earth, which was the centre 
of the system, were nine hollow 
spheres, containing the seven planets, 
the fixed stars or firmament, and the 
Primum Mobile, the last of which 
whirled the others round the earth 
in twenty-four hours. Compare 
Twelfth Night, in. i. 121 ; The Mer 
chant of Venice, v. i. 60-62. 

230. Music] "Mr. Dyce first sug 
gested that ' Music ' should be printed 
as a stage-direction, and in this he 
has been followed by Mr. Staunton, 
Mr. Grant White, Dr. Delius, and, 
though with some hesitation, by our 
selves in the Globe edition. No 
music is mentioned in Wilkins's 
novel, and any music of earth would 
be likely to jar with that ' music of 
the spheres ' which was already lull 
ing Pericles to sleep. Perhaps the 
passage might be arranged thus : 

' Lys. Music, my lord ? 
Per. I hear most heavenly 
music ' " (The Cambridge 
Editors). 



231. nips] Collier conjectures raps 
(i.e. rapts). Possibly pins. 

233-236. A pillow . . . you] Malone 
would give this speech to Marina. 
"But," observes Clarke, "though 
there is plausibility in the suggestion, 
we think the whole tone of the speech 
shows it rather to pertain to Lysi- 
machus. There is the tone of com 
mand and direction more suitable to 
the Governor of Mytilene than to the 
young girl Marina, princess though 
she be; and there is the unassured 
conviction implied in the line, ' If 
this but answer to my just belief,' 
which rather befits the admirer of 
Marina than Marina herself, who is 
thoroughly aware that she is none 
other than Pericles' own daughter." 
Moreover, Marina would hardly ad 
dress Lysimachus and the rest as 
" my companion friends ". 

Diana . . . vision] Stage-direc 
tion. First inserted by the Cam 
bridge Editors in the Globe edition. 
The older editors here mark a fresh 



140 PERICLES [ACT v. 

There, when my maiden priests are met together, 

Before the people all, 240 

Reveal how thou at sea didst lose thy wife ; 

To mourn thy crosses, with thy daughter's, call 
And give them repetition to the life. 

Perform my bidding, or thou liv'st in woe ; 

Do it, and happy ; by my silver bow ! 245 

Awake, and tell thy dream! {Disappears. 

Per. Celestial Dian, goddess argentine, 
I will obey thee ! Helicanus ! 

Re-enter LYSIMACHUS, HELICANUS, and MARINA. 

HeL Sir? 

Per. My purpose was for Tarsus, there to strike 

The inhospitable Cleon ; but I am 250 

For other service first ; toward Ephesus 

Turn our blown sails : eftsoons I '11 tell thee why. 

237-246. My . . . dream /] Divided, substantially, as by Rowe ; My . . . 
Ephesus as one line, the rest prose, in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 249-255. My . . . 

need ?] Divided as by Malone ; My . . . sails as three lines, the rest prose, 
in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

scene; Dyce was the first to con- 245. and happy] sc. and you will 

tinue the scene to line 261. " Fleay live happy. 

says that he regards this little episode 245. by . . . bow] I swear by, 

of Diana as no more Shakespeare's etc. 

work than the vision in Cymbeline ; 247. argentine] silvery, silver- 

and we are inclined to agree with shining. 

him " (Rolfe), as most critics will 252. blown] inflated, swollen by 

probably do. the winds. 

239. my maiden priests] the vestal 252. eftsoons] by-and-by ; " eft," 

virgins. adverb, again, moreover, afterwards 

242. call] loudly give voice. and " soon," the 5 being added by 

243. And give . . . life] and re- analogy with adverbs from genitive 
count them in full detail. cases, as "whiles," "twice " (twies), 

244. or] Malone ejects this word, etc. The word occurs frequently in 
but it is perhaps hardly worth while Twine's novel. Compare Ford, The 
to regulate the metre of such a Lady's Trial, iv. i : " eftsoon began 
passage. to speak". 



sc. ii.] PERICLES 141 

Shall we refresh us, sir, upon your shore, 

And give you gold for such provision 

As our intents will need? 255 

Lys. Sir, 

With all my heart; and when you come ashore, 

I have another suit. 
Per. You shall prevail, 

Were it to woo my daughter ; for it seems 

You have been noble towards her. 

Lys. Sir, lend your arm. 260 

Per. Come, my Marina. \_Exeunt. 



SCENE II. Before the Temple of Diana at Ephesus. 
Enter GOWER. 

Now our sands are almost run ; 

More a little, and then dumb. 

This, my last boon, give me, 

For such kindness must relieve me, 

That you amply will suppose 5 

What pageantry, what feats, what shows> 

What minstrelsy, and pretty din, 

The regent made in Mitylene 

258-260. You . . . her.] As by Malone; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

260. lend y our arm]i.e. let mehelp you gives as my, conjectured by Steevens, 
by your taking my arm (if the arrange- who also suggested Then, as my. For 
ment is sound) ; but I feel persuaded give Dyce conjectured " deign to 
that the speech should be continued give"; Staunton, "freely give"; 
to Pericles to the end of the scene. while Hudson edits " pray you 

give ". 

6. feats] Walker proposed feasts. 
3. This . . . me] For my Malone 



142 PERICLES [ACT v. 

To greet the king. So he thrived, 

That he is promised to be wiv'd 10 

To fair Marina ; but in no wise 

Till he had done his sacrifice. 

As Dian bade : whereto being bound, 

The interim, pray you, all confound. 

In feathered briefness sails are fiWd, 1 5 

And wishes fall out as they're wilFd. 

At Ephesus, the temple see, 

Our king and all his company. 

That he can hither come so soon, 

Is by your fancy's thankful doom. [Exit. 20 

SCENE III. The Temple of Diana at Ephesus ; 
Thaisa standing near the altar, as high priestess ; 
a number of Virgins on each side ; Cerimon and 
other Inhabitants of Ephesus attending. 

Enter PERICLES, with his Train ; LYSIMACHUS, HELI- 

CANUS, MARINA, and a Lady. 
Per. Hail, Dian ! to perform thy just command, 
I here confess myself the King of Tyre ; 
Who, frighted from my country, did wed 
At Pentapolis the fair Thaisa. 
At sea in childbed died she, but brought forth 5 

3-13. Who, . . . daughter.] Divided, except lines 10, u, as by Rowe ; 
prose in Qq, Ff3, 4. 

12. he] sc. Pericles. gination. For doom Steevens gives 

14. confound] crush together, con- boon. 

dense in your thoughts Scme 7//< 

15. In . . . briefness] with winged 

speed. For briefness, compare King 3. country] a trisyllable here. 
Lear, n. i. 20. 4. At . . . Thaisa] Malone would 

20. Is by . . . doom] is due to transpose At Pentapolis to the end 

the grateful allowance of your ima- of the line. 



sc. HI.] PERICLES 143 

A maid-child call'd Marina ; who, O goddess ! 
Wears yet thy silver livery. She at Tarsus 
Was nurs'd with Cleon, whom at fourteen years 
He sought to murder ; but her better stars 
Brought her to Mitylene, 'gainst whose shore 10 
Riding, her fortunes brought the maid aboard us, 
Where, by her own most clear remembrance, she 
Made known herself my daughter. 

Thai. Voice and favour ! 

You are, you are O royal Pericles ! [Faints. 

Per. What means the nun ? she dies ; help, gentlemen ! 1 5 

Cer. Noble sir, 

If you have told Diana's altar true, 
This is your wife. 

Per. Reverend appearer, no : 

I threw her overboard with these very arms. 

Cer. Upon this coast, I warrant you. 

Per. 'Tis most certain. 20 

Cer. Look to the lady. O ! she 's but o'erjoy'd. 
Early in blust'ring morn this lady was 
Thrown on this shore. I oped the coffin, 
Found there rich jewels ; recover'd her, and placed 

her 
Here in Diana's temple. 

16-18. Noble . . . wife."] Divided as by Malone ; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 
18-19. Reverend . . . arms.] Divided as by Malone; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 
21-25. Look . . . temple.} Divided as by Malone (1790) ; Looke . . . over 
joy de as one line, the rest prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

7. thy silver livery'} the white robe muse. Grant White quotes two 
of chastity. passages from Wilkins's novel in 

8. with Cleon} by Cleon, or in which Thaisa is spoken of as a nun. 
Cleon's house. 22. in] Malone conjectures one. 

ii. Riding] as we rode at anchor. For blust'ring compare The Winter's 
15. nun] Collier's correction of Tale, in. iii. 4. 



144 PERICLES [ACT v. 

Per. May we see them ? 25 

Cer. Great sir, they shall be brought you to my house, 
Whither I invite you. Look ! Thaisa is 
Recovered. 

Thai. O ! let me look. 

If he be none of mine, my sanctity 

Will to my sense bend no licentious ear, 30 

But curb it, spite of seeing. O ! my lord, 

Are you not Pericles ? Like him you speak, 

Like him you are. Did you not name a tempest, 

A birth, and death ? 

Per. The voice of dead Thaisa ! 

Thai. That Thaisa am I, supposed dead 35 

And drown'd. 

Per. Immortal Dian ! 

Thai. Now I know you better. 

When we with tears parted Pentapolis, 
The king my father gave you such a ring. 

[Shows a ring. 

Per. This, this : no more, you gods ! your present kind 
ness 40 
Makes my past miseries sports : you shall do well, 
That on the touching of her lips I may 

26-34. Great . . . death ? ] Divided as by Malone ; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 
35, 36. That . . . drowned.'] Divided as by Malone; one line in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 
40-44. This, . . . arms.] Divided as by Malone; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

29. 30. my sanctity . . . ear] my 38. parted] departed from. Corn- 
professed holiness will give no en- pare Richard II. in. i. 3 : " Since 
couragement to any impure thought, presently your souls must part your 

30. sense] sensual inclination. bodies " ; but I know of no instance 

31. spite of seeing] even though to in which the verb is so used of a 
see him prompts me to love him. place. 

37. Now . . . better] now I am 41. you . . . well] I cannot ask 
more fully convinced that I am right any greater happiness from you (the 
in my belief. gods) than that, etc. 



sc. in.] PERICLES 145 

Melt and no more be seen. O! come, be buried 

A second time within these arms. 
Mar. My heart 

Leaps to be gone into my mother's bosom. 45 

[Kneels to Thaisa. 
Per. Look ! who kneels here. Flesh of thy flesh, Thaisa ; 

Thy burden at the sea, and call'd Marina 

For she was yielded there. 

Thai. Bless'd, and mine own ! 

Hel. Hail, madam, and my queen! 
Thai. I know you not. 

Per. You have heard me say, when I did fly from Tyre, 50 

I left behind an ancient substitute; 

Can you remember what I call'd the man? 

I have nam'd him oft. 

Thai. 'Twas Helicanus then. 

Per. Still confirmation ! 

Embrace him, dear Thaisa ; this is he. 5 5 

Now do I long to hear how you were found, 

How possibly preserv'd, and who to thank, 

Besides the gods, for this great miracle. 
Thai. Lord Cerimon, my lord ; this man, 

Through whom the gods have shown their power ; 
that can 60 

From first to last resolve you. 

46-58. Look! . . . miracle.'] Divided as by Rowe; prose Qq, Ff 3, 4. 
59-64. Lord . . . re-lives ? ] Divided as by Steevens ; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 

43, 44. be buried . . . arms} 48. yielded] delivered, brought into 

Compare The Winter's Tale, iv. iv. the world. 

131, 132 : 57. who] Malone gives whom, 

" Not like a corse ; or if, not to be but the uninflected relative is fre- 

buried quent. 

But quick and in my arms". 59. this man] Dyce edits Walker's 

48. For] because. conjecture, " this is the man ". 
10 



146 PERICLES [ACT v. 

Per. Reverend sir, 

The gods can have no mortal officer 

More like a god than you. Will you deliver 

How this dead queen re-lives? 
Cer. I will, my lord : 

Beseech you, first go with me to my house, 65 

Where shall be shown you all was found with her; 

How she came placed here in the temple; 

No needful thing omitted. 
Per. Pure Dian! bless thee for thy vision; I 

Will offer night-oblations to thee. Thaisa, 70 

This prince, the fair-betrothed of your daughter, 

Shall marry her at Pentapolis. And now 

This ornament 

Makes me look dismal will I clip to form ; 

And what this fourteen years no razor touch'd, 75 

To grace thy marriage-day I'll beautify. 
Thai. Lord Cerimon hath letters of good credit, sir, 

My father's dead. 
Per. Heavens make a star of him ! Yet there, my queen, 

We'll celebrate their nuptials, and ourselves 80 



64-68. / will, . . . omitted,] Divided as by Malone ; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 
69-78. Pure . . . dead.] Arranged as by Dyce; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 
79-82. Heavens . . . reign.] Verse first in Rowe ; prose in Qq, Ff 3, 4. 



62. mortal officer] human agent 73. This ornament] this hair and 
of their wills. beard which should be an ornament. 

63. deliver] explain. Compare Much Ado About Nothing, 
67. How she . . . temple] Compare in. ii. 46 : " the barber's man hath 

the situation in The Comedy of Errors, been seen with him, and the old 

v. i., where Emilia, the lost wife of ornament of his cheek hath already 

JEgQon, appears as the abbess of the stuffd tennis balls ". 

priory. 74. Makes] which makes. 

71. the fair-betrothed] he to whom 79. make . . . him t] place him 

with justice I have affianced our among the stars ! Compare Romeo 

daughter. and Juliet, in. ii. 22. 






sc. in.] PERICLES 147 

Will in that kingdom spend our following days; 
Our son and daughter shall in Tyrus reign. 
Lord Cerimon, we do our longing stay 
To hear the rest untold. Sir, lead's the way. 

[Exeunt. 

Enter GOWER. 

In Antiochus and his daughter you have heard 85 
Of monstrous lust the due and just reward : 
In Pericles ; his queen, and daughter, seen, 
Although assail' d with fortune fierce and keen, 
Virtue preserved from fell destruction's blast, 
Led on by heaven, and crown' d with joy at last. 90 
In Helicanus may you well descry 
A figure of truth, of faith, of loyalty. 
In reverend Cerimon there well appears 
The worth that learned charity aye wears. 
For wicked Cleon and his wife, when fame 95 

Had spread their cursed deed, and honoured name 
Of Pericles, to rage the city turn, 
That him and his they in his palace burn : 
The gods for murder seemed so content 
To punish them; although not done, but meant. 100 
So on your patience evermore attending, 
New joy wait on you ! Here our play has ending. 

[Exit. 

83, 84. we do . . . untold] we will of the gods to inflict punishment on 

delay for a while our longing to hear them for a crime intended, though not 

the rest that is to be told. committed. Malone supplies them 

95. fame] report. after punish for the sake of the metre. 

99. The gods . . . content] it Hudson edits an anonymous conjee- 
seemed thus to be the good pleasure ture.mw*, which gives a construction. 



THE ABERDEEN UNIVERSITY PRESS LIMITED 



NOV A 2 1993 



VET 
tRY 



