

1 




ill 




sf 



If 



:>i\S 



Tf^ 

W 



:s^$^ 




THE ARDEN SHAKESPEARE 
GENERAL EDITOR : W. J. CRAIG 



THE SECOND PART 



OF 



KING HENRY THE SIXTH 



THE WORKS 

OF 

SHAKESPEARE 

THE SECOND PART OF 
KING HENRY THE SIXTH 

EDITED BY 
H. C. HART 



? 



METHUEN AND CO. 

36 ESSEX STREET: STRAND 
LONDON 



First Published in igog 



\,V^ ^^ ^i ^ 



<^''.. 




C> 



Fi 



957822 



,"■"' " -^ 



CONTENTS 



PAGE 



Introduction vii 

The Second Part of King Henry the Sixth . . . % 



INTRODUCTION 

The text of 2 Henry VI. as here presented, is that of the first 
Folio (1623) ; with a few very sHght, but not unimportant 
emendations due to the play on which it is founded : The 
1 First Part of The Con | tention betwixt the Two Fam- 
ous Houses of Yorke | and Lancaster, with the death of the 
good I Duke Humphrey : | And the banishment and death of 
the Duke of | Suffolke, and the tragicall end of the proud 
Cardinall | of Winchester, with the notable Rebellion | of 
lacke Cade : | And the Duke of Yorkes first claime unto the \ 
Crowne. [T. C.'s device and motto] LONDON. Printed by 
Thomas Creed, for Thomas Millington, | and are to be sold at 
his shop under Saint Peters | church in Cornwall | I594- | 

As I have collated the Contention (Q i) into the Folio text, 
collation with the late Folios became impossible. It is, however, 
needless, and in the very few instances where an iliteresting 
reading arises from the later Folios it is noticed in the notes, or 
intended to be so. 

A second edition of the Quarto appeared in 1600, "Printed 
by Valentine Simms for Thomas Millington." Otherwise the 
titles are the same. This is a careless reprint of the first 
edition with unimportant variations. 

A third edition (Q 3) appeared, undated, in 1619. It was 
printed by Isaac Jeffard, and included The True Tragedy of 
Richard, Duke of York. It was titled : The | Whole Conten- 
tion I betweene the two Famous | Houses, Lancaster and | 
Yorke. | With the tragicall ends of the good Duke ] Humfrey, 
Richard Duke of Yorke, ] and King Henrie the ] Sixt. ] 
Divided into two parts : And newly corrected and | enlarged. 
Written by William Shakespeare, Gent. ] Printed at London 
for T. P. I 

The words at the end of this title are catchpenny insertions 

vii 



viu THE SECOND PART OF 

of T. P.'s (Thomas Pavier), who has been called the pirate 
publisher. They are said to be no proof of Shakespeare's hand 
in this Quarto. But this third edition contains four main 
changes and a considerable number of smaller changes from 
Q I . They all tend to be real corrections or improvements, 
and their tendency leads to the belief that the publisher had 
access to some material, whether manuscripts or player's copies, 
which was that from which the Folio text was printed. They 
are preliminary indications of the forthcoming authorised ver- 
sions oi Henry VI. Parts II. and III. Furnivall, who summar- 
ised and examined these changes carefully in the facsimile 
reprint of 1619, Q i, thinks that none of them are due at first 
hand to Shakespeare. And Miss Jane Lee coincides. Furni- 
vall's words on the title-page of the facsimile reprint " (Q i having 
been revised by Shakespeare, Marlowe, and Greene into ' The 
second part of Henry the Sixt ') " are, in my humble opinion, 
very regrettable in such a position. It is obvious that a num- 
ber of them are merely common-sense corrections of misprints, 
but their consideration has no place here. However, they 
emphasise one all-important fact, and that is the badness of the 
state of the text of Q i, the text collated into this edition. It 
abounds in three sorts of mistakes — mistakes in spelling, errors 
against simplest grammar and misdivision of lines to the 
destruction of poetic reading. 

I think it is well to ponder on this for a second. It im- 
plies that when Shakespeare worked out, with or without help, 
the final state of 2 Henry VI. from The Contention, he had a 
better state of that latter text to work on than any we now 
possess. Probably it was his own manuscript copy. Surely 
this is more than admissible — it is most probable. It enables 
one to explain away some anomalous discrepancies between 
the two printed states if we keep before the memory the 
phantom of this better text of Q i in the worker's hands. 

The consideration of the texts is a comparatively simple 
matter, and in view of the amount of work called for in some 
shape or other in this Introduction no more need be said about 
them, but more will appear from time to time in matters of 
detail. I will give you a sketch-plan here of the matters I 
propose to deal with, which are by no means of equal im- 
portance. 



KING HENRY THE SIXTH ix 

I. Robert Greene's Attack on Shakespeare (and 

Others) in 1592. 

" Greene's Groatsworth of Wit, bought with a MilHon of 
Repentaunce. Describing the follie of Youth, the falsehoode 
of makeshift flatterers, the miserie of the negligent, and mis- 
chiefes of deceiving Courtesans. Written before his death, and 
published at his dying request." — was written in 1 592 and pub- 
lished immediately afterwards by his friend Henry Chettle, in 
the same year, the year of Greene's death. It is practically 
an autobiography of Roberto, i.e., Robert Greene. I am using 
here Grosart's edition of Greene's works which prints the tract 
from the 1596 edition, in vol. xii. The edition of 1596 is 
the earliest now known : but as Chettle's Ki7id Harts Dream 
alludes to the book, and was registered in December 1592, 
Greene's tract must have been printed before that date. At- 
tention was first directed to this important passage by Tyr- 
whitt in 1766 according to Grant White. At 137 he says: 
" Heere (gentlemen) breake I off Robertos speech whose life 
in most parts agreeing with mine, found one selfe punishment 
as I haue doone. Heereafter suppose me the said Roberto, and 
I will go on with that hee promised : Greene will send you 
now his groatsworth of wit, that neuer shewed a mitesworth in 
his life ... (p. 1 39) : Learne wit by my repentance (gentlemen) 
and . . . (p. 141) : to my fellow Schollers about this Cittie, will 
I direct these few ensuing lines. To those Gentlemen his quon- 
dam acquaintance, that spend their wits in tnakifig Plates, R. 
G. wisheth a better exercise, and wisdome to preuent his ex- 
tremities. If woefull experience may mooue you (Gentlemen) to 
beware, or vnheard of wretchednes intreate you to take heed : 
I doubt not but you will looke backe with sorrow on your time 
past, and endeuour with repentance to spend that which is to 
come. Wonder not (for with thee wil I first (p. 142) begin), 
thou famous gracer of Tragedians, that Greene, who hath said 
with thee like the foole in his heart. There is no God, should 
now giue glorie vnto his greatnesse : for penitrating is his 
power, his hand lies heauie vpon me, he hath spoken vnto me 
with a voice of thunder, and I haue felt he is a God that can 
punish enemies. Why should thy excellent wit, his gift, be so 
blinded, that thou shouldst give no glory to the giuer ? Is it 



X THE SECOND PART OF 

pestilent Machiuilian follie that thou hast studied ? O punish 
follie ! What are his rules but meere confused mockeries, able 
to extirpate in small time, the generation of mankinde. For 
if Sic volo, sicjubeo, hold in those that are able to command ; 
and if it be lawfull, Fas & nefas to doe any thing that is bene- 
ficiall, onely Tyrants should possesse the earth and they striuing 
to exceede in tyranny, should each to other bee a slaughter 
man : till the mightiest outliuing all, one stroke were left for 
Death, that in one age man's life should ende. The brother of 
this Diabolicall Atheisme is dead, and in his life had neuer the 
felicitie he aimed at ... (6 lines) and wilt thou my friend 
(143) be his Disciple? Looke vnto me, by him perswaded to 
that libertie and thou shalt finde it an infernal bondage . . . 
(6 lines). 

" With thee I ioyne young luvenall, that byting Satyrist, 
that lastlie with mee together writ a comedie, Sweete boy, 
might I aduise thee, be aduised, and get not many enemies by 
bitter words ... (5 lines) treade on a worme and it will turne : 
then blame not schollers vexed with sharpe lines if they re- 
proue thy too much libertie of reproofe. 

" And thou no lesse deseruing then the other two, in some 
things rarer, in nothing inferiour ; driuen (as my selfe) to ex- 
treame shifts, a little have I to say to thee ; and were it not an 
idolatrous oth, I would sweare by sweet S. George, thou art 
unworthie better hap, sith thou dependest on so meane a stay. 
Base minded men al three of you, if by my miserie ye be 
not warned: for vnto none of you (like me) (144) sought 
those burres to cleaue : those Puppits (I meane) that speake 
from our mouths, those Anticks garnisht in our colours. Is it 
not strange that I, to whome they all haue beene beholding : is it 
not like that you, to whom they al haue beene beholding, shall 
(were ye in that case that I am now) be both at once of them 
forsaken ? Yes trust them not : for there is an vpstart Crow, 
beautified with our feathers, that with his Tygers heart wrapt in a 
Players hide, supposes he is as well able to bumbast out a blanke 
verse as the best of you : and being an absolute lohannes fac- 
totum, is in his owne conceit the only Shake-scene in a countrie. 
O that I might intreate your rare wits to be imployed in more 
profitable courses : & let those Apes imitate your past excel- 
lence, and neuer more acquaint them with your admired in- 



KING HENRY THE SIXTH xi 

uentions. I know the best husband of you all will neuer proue 
an Usurer, and the kindest of them all will neuer prooue a 
kinde nurse ; yet whilst you may, seeke you better Maisters ; 
for it is pittie men of such rare wits, should be subiect to the 
pleasures of such rude groomes. 

" In this I might insert two more, that both haue writ against 
these buckram Gentlemen : but let their owne works serue to 
witnesse against their owne wickednesse, if they perseuer to 
mainteine any more such peasants. For other new commers, 
I leaue (145) them to the mercie of these painted monsters, 
who (I doubt not) will driue the best minded to despise them : 
for the rest it skils not though they make a ieast at them. 

" But now returne I againe to you three, knowing my 
miserie is to you no news : and let me heartily intreate you to 
bee warned by my harmes . . . (20 lines). Trust not then (I 
beseech yee) (146) to such weake stales: for they are as change- 
able in minde, as in many attires. Well, my hand is tired and 
I am forst to leaue where I would begin ; for a whole booke 
cannot containe these wrongs, which I am forst to knit vp in 
some few lines of words. Desirous that you should Hue, though 
himselfe be dying, Robert Greene." 

II. What this attack on Shakespeare means: with 
Contemporary References to it: and views of 
SOME Critics. 

The three quondam acquaintances that spend their wits in 
making plays, are Marlowe, Nashe and Peele. Marlowe is 
obvious. Nashe is called Juvenal by Meres and others of the 
time ; Dyce (followed by Fleay) believed the biting satirist was 
Lodge, because of his having written with Greene A Looking 
Glassefor London, and because of his satires A Fig for Momus. 
But Lodge was abroad at this time and his satires have not 
any bite, like Nashe's. The weight of evidence is in favour of 
Nashe, I think, but the question is not vital here. The play 
may be one of the many unknown, or unidentified. There is 
more reason to place Lodge as one of the two buckram 
gentlemen. 

The third acquaintance is Peele, " Sweet S. George " gives 
evidence enough of that identification. This tirade of Greene's 
against the players should be read in connection with words of 



xii THE SECOND PART OF 

his (on pages 136, 137) immediately preceding the above ex- 
tract. He describes himself there as "liuing in extreame 
pouerty, and hauing nothing to pay but chalke, which now his 
Host accepted not for currant, the miserable man lay languish- 
ing, hauing but one groat left." The unhappy man had been 
depending on monies from the sale of his plays — from the actors 
and their companies — and he can get no more. His bitterness 
is levelled against his paymasters and their profession, and in 
advising his friends Marlowe, Nashe (or Lodge) and Peele to be 
no longer beholding to them, incidentally he levels his animosity 
against Shakespeare (Shake-scene), a successful actor, who had 
the audacity to write blank verse himself, and who beautified 
himself with the feathers of all three of them. He can do any- 
thing this upstart crow, or Johannes factotum, whether it is to 
act plays or to write them. So far the inferences are easy. 
But whether the words ''beautified with your feathers" mean 
acting in our plays, or mean that in his writings he (Shake- 
speare) made use of theirs (or of their titbits) is more con- 
jectural. Probably Greene means the latter implied in the 
former — that is to say he means both. After these words, he 
clinches his reference to Shakespeare by quoting in a parody 
a line from The True Tragedy (also in j Henry VI. I. iv. 137) : 
" O tiger's heart wrapp'd in a woman's hide." A speech un- 
doubtedly by Shakespeare in both those places, and quoted (or 
parodied) as his by Greene. 

Greene is evidently incensed with the whole crew of them, 
but especially angry and jealous against Shakespeare. He has 
a much more ill-omened crow than -^sop's to pluck with our 
"gentle Willie." We get at least a limit of date for The True 
Tragedy (it is fresh in Greene's memory in 1592): and we 
might fairly infer that the play in which it occurs is an especi- 
ally sore subject, whether from its success or because it contains 
his feathers. Or we might go a step further in the latter in- 
ference and let the part include the whole, and not unfairly 
conceive that Greene was enraged at the success of the whole 
trilogy (now finished so far as Part I., Contention, and True 
Tragedy are concerned, for certain — and probably so far as 
Parts I. H. and HI.). But these can only be inferences. Yet 
there hangs on to Greene's tract a little more contemporary 
matter that must be now looked into. 



KING HENRY THE SIXTH xiii 

In "a lytel plaunflet" by R. B. Gent, 1594, in the Bodleian 
Library, there is the following passage, the ninth "sonnet" in 
the tract : — 

Greene is the pleasing of an eie : 
Greene pleasde the eies of all that lookt vpon him. 
Greene is the ground of euerie Painters die, 
Greene gaue the ground to all that wrote vpon him, 
Nay more, the men that so eclipst his fame 
Purloyned his plumes, can they deny the same. 

This is confirmation of the inference that Shakespeare was 
accused by Greene of having plagiarised from him, purloined 
Greene's plumes and beautified himself with his feathers. 
Others are included in the charge here, just as Greene added 
the other three to those purloined from. At this date, 1592, 
it must be remembered, Shakespeare had produced (besides 
Henry VI.) Love's Labour 's Lost, The Two Gentlemen of Verona, 
and The Comedy of Errors — these plays may therefore also 
contain some of the plumes. No doubt they do, but trifling 
affairs. Greene meant something serious. However, " R. B. 
Gent." reads to me like an importunate partisan, echoing Greene's 
words, of no weight in himself And is there not something 
grotesque in Greene's daring to accuse another writer of plagi- 
arism, if he does so? Greene, who in his tales insets many 
pages word for word from another writer, without a trace of 
acknowledgment except the self-convicting one in change of 
style — that other writer being Thomas Bowes' translation of 
Peter de la Primaudaye's French Academy ? — to say nothing of 
yet other writers. I hardly think he can have made the charge 
seriously (such proceedings being deemed quite usual at the 
time), but that his invective against Shakespeare arose from 
jealousy and a depleted purse. No doubt if he considered the 
latter arose from an unfair use of his own work in the dramatic 
market, plagiarism became a different sort of sin altogether. 
In that feeling, which is hard to read into the wording, he may 
have written . At best, excepting with regard to the history of 
these plays, the passage is a poor exhibition of personal grudg- 
ing and ill-will. 

Upon publishing Greene's Groatsworth of Wit, Chettle 
wrote an introduction "To the Gentlemen Readers" to his 
Kind Harts Dreame (Dec. 1592) containing the following 



xiv THE SECOND PART OF 

passage {New Shakespeare Society, 1874, p. 37). He is a 
prosy writer, and to be curtailed : " It hath beene a custome, 
gentlemen ... to begin an Exordium to the Readers, . , . 
To obserue custome, ... He shew reason for my present 
writing, and after proceed to sue for pardon. About three 
moneths since died M. Robert Greene, leauing many papers 
in sundry Booke sellers hands, among others his Groatsworth 
of wit, in which a letter written to diuers play-makers, is 
offensively by one or two of them taken ; and because on the 
dead they cannot be auenged, they wilfully gorge in their 
conceits a liuing Author : and after tossing it to and fro, no 
remedy ; but it must light on me. How I haue all the time of 
my conuersing in printing hindred the bitter inueying against 
schollers, it hath been very well knowne ; and how in that 1 
dealt, I can sufficiently prooue. With neither of them that 
take offence was I acquainted, and with one of them, I care 
not if I neuer be : The other, whome at that time I did not so 
much spare, as since I wish I had, for that as I haue moderated 
the heate of liuing writers, and might haue usde my owne 
discretion (especially in such a case) the Author being dead, 
that I did not I am as sory as if the originall fault had beene 
my fault, because my selfe haue seene his demeanor no lesse 
ciuill, than he exelent in the qualitie he professes : Besides, 
diuers of worship haue reported his uprightness of dealing, 
which argues his honesty, and his facetious grace in writing, 
that approues his Art. For the first, whose learning I reuer- 
ence, and at the perusing of Greene's Booke, stroke out what 
then in conscience I thought he in some displeasure writ: 
or had it been true, yet to publish it was intollerable : him I 
would wish to use me no worse than I deserue. I had onely 
in the copy this share : it was il written, as sometimes Greene's 
hand was none of the best : licened it must be, ere it could bee 
printed, which could neuer be if it might not be read. To be 
briefe, I writ it ouer ; and as neare as I could, followed the 
copy ; onely in that letter I put something out, but in the 
whole booke not a worde in ; for I protest it was all Greene's, 
not mine nor Maistre Nashe's, as some uniustly haue affirmed. 
Neither was he the writer of an epistle to the second part of 
Gerileon, though by the Workemans error T, N., were set to the 
end ; that I confesse to be mine and repent it not. Thus gentle- 



KING HENRY THE SIXTH xv 

men, hauing noted the priuate causes that made me nominate 
my selfe in print; being as well to purge Master Nashe of that 
he did not, as to iustifie that I did, and with all to confirme 
what M. Greene did : I beseech ye accept the publike cause 
. . . under the Title of Kind-hearts Dreame. . . . Henrie 
Chettle." 

In this valuable testimony to Shakespeare's merits, Chettle 
defends him against dishonest dealing, which can only refer to 
Greene's suggestion that he had made an unjustifiable use of 
his (Greene's) material. That is to say, he defends him as 
being incapable of such conduct. Both Marlowe and Shake- 
speare had evidently complained to Chettle, or of Chettle for 
publishing the Groatsworth, and both had sufficient cause. 
But Chettle deals with Shakespeare's complaint, as though he 
was one of the play writers to whom Greene's letter was written, 
and this is not the case. Shakespeare does not come in that 
way at all, but quite collaterally, and expressly as an actor who 
also wrote. I suppose this is Chettle's inaccuracy with no 
further meaning. Chettle did not hear that Peele complained 
nor had he any reason to. Chettle's anxiety to purge Nashe of 
having been the writer of the Groatsworth, is taken as an argu- 
ment by Malone and others, against his being the Juvenal in 
the piece — since he could not have been thought to have been 
the writer, if part of it had been addressed professedly to him- 
self. This is too laboured. Those who thought it by Nashe 
may have identified or noticed that passage about him, but 
only the prominent features, the attacks on Marlowe and the 
actors, including Shakespeare. Moreover those who thought 
so had unimportant opinions, since the Groatsworth is not in 
the least like Nashe's work. 

III. The Views of some Critics. 

Very much more has been read into Greene's letter than it 
seems to me to be capable of sustaining, by some writers. But 
the generally accepted effect is important enough, and that is 
that he (Greene) accused Shakespeare of plagiarising from 
himself, from Marlowe, from Peele, and from Nashe (or Lodge). 
Some are not nearly content with this, Furnivall says (Introd. 
to Contention facsimile) the passage " is of course a sneer at 
Shakespeare, and a claim by Greene that he — if not also all 



xvi THE SECOND PART OF 

or some of Marlowe, Lodge and Peele — were part authors of 
the Third Part of King Henry the Sixth, in which "Oh Tygres 
Heart, etc., occurs." This is quite reckless. At the very 
highest the words quoted need only refer to The True Tragedie, 
But I disagree with the line of argument entirely. Greene used 
Shakespeare's line as an appropriate vehicle to enforce his 
personal attack and make it more personal. Of course if we 
are to assume that Shakespeare had no hand in The True 
Tragedy (an impossible assumption), or that Greene thought 
he had no hand in it when he wrote (which we have no right 
to imagine) then the quotation must refer to j Hemy VI., be- 
cause it is Shakespeare's. This seems to me to be Miss Jane 
Lee's position, and it is important, because it enables her to 
put the whole trilogy before the date of summer, 1592. I don't 
believe she has any right to that argument. But then she does 
not (or did not, I hope she changed) believe " that any part of 
The Contention or of The True Tragedy was written by Shake- 
speare." Here she is constrained to say that Shakespeare 
did not write the Cade scenes in 2 Henry VI., since they are 
practically identical with those in The Contention, but the reason 
she gives is that he was too young. And many passages in 
3 Henry VI., must be denied to Shakespeare on the same 
grounds. Take Clifford's dying speech (j Hejiry VI. II. vi.) 
for example, which is in The True Tragedie word for word : or 
Gloster's solo in ill. ii., at the end, which has most of its best 
lines identical with those in The True Tragedie ; which of the 
three victims could have written these ? And much more the 
same. 

In a Table, at the end of her careful and most praiseworthy 
attempt. Miss Lee gives Marlowe's and Greene's shares. The 
latter has all the Cade scenes, and at least two-thirds of The 
Contention, Marlowe the remainder. In The True Tragedie 
she allots the major part to Marlowe and the remainder to 
Greene, with two or three doubtful ascriptions to Peele, his only 
innings. 

I differ so radically here that I will not further specify 
these allotments. But it surprises one that after finding cer- 
tain strong resemblances to and evidences of Peele's work, in 
her paper (see pages 257-260, footnotes), she should dismiss 
him so unceremoniously in her Table. 



KING HENRY THE SIXTH xvii 



IV. Further Views of Critics. 

In my Introduction to Part I., I have given a slight general 
survey of the views of some of the best-known critics with re- 
gard to authorship, especially dwelling upon what seems to me 
the ablest, the best reasoned, and the most clearly written 
essay on the subject — that of Grant White {Shakespeare s 
Works, vol. vii. Boston, i88i). He does what is necessary, 
except for those who will do it for themselves — he makes 
copious extracts from the old plays side by side with their 
resultant forms in the final play. This is done by my collation. 
He quotes what he deems to be some of the most noteworthy 
passages in Marlowe's, Greene's and Peele's plays that serve as 
parallels for passages in the plays in dispute. There is no 
space for such an exponential method here ; but my notes will, 
I trust, serve instead. He extracts as a sample from Marlowe's 
best work outside Edward the Second (which is he says without 
a doubt his best play) the speeches of Barabas in The Jezv of 
Malta beginning "Ay, policy! that's their profession" to 
"appointed me" (Dyce's one-vol. edition, p. 150). And he 
makes this important statement with regard to Edward the 
Second, so constantly referred to as affording opposite parallels 
in this dispute — and erroneously made use of — " in which, 
especially in the scene of Edward's murder, he attained a drama- 
tic power and a freedom of versification not found elsewhere in 
his own undoubted works or in those of any other of Shake- 
speare's early contemporaries. But this play affords unmis- 
takable evidence that it was Marlowe's last ; and he was killed 
in a fray in June, 1593, the year in which Edward the Second 
was entered upon the Stationers' Register. Whereas The True 
Tragedy had surely been long enough upon the stage when 
Greene died, in 1592, to be well known — a year or two, we may 
safely assume ; and The True Tragedy was a later play than the 
First Part of the Contention . . . Edward the Second was written 
some time after the appearance of The True Tragedy and still 
longer after that of the First Part of the Contention. . . ." 

" Peele's plays afford no better lines than these from David 
and Bethsabe : ' Cusay. The stubborn enemies to David's peace, 
. . . And bursts with burden of ten thousand griefs ' " (Dyce's 
one-vol. edition, pp. 484, 485). 

b 



xviii THE SECOXD PART OF 

Of Greene, as a " comedian," he says " the following passage 
... is cleaner and cleverer than it was his wont to be." He 
quotes from A Looking Glasse for London and England : ^^ First 
Ruffian. Come on. Smith ... a horse of thine own this seven 
year" (Dyce's one-vol. edition, pp. 119, 120). And as serious 
poetry he quotes again from Greene's Alphonsus, King of Arra- 
gon, the speech of " Belinus. Thus far, my lords, we trained 
have our camp" (p. 228) ; and again from A Looking Glasse 
for London, a passage in his best style, " Rasni. So pace ye on, 
triumphant warriors" (the first speech). Furnivall gives an 
abstract of Grant White's arguments and extracts in his Intro- 
duction to the 1594 Contention fascimile. Grant White dwells 
largely on one — his main position. He assigns to Shakespeare 
all the matter in the two old plays that is obviously by the 
same hand as the identical matter in 2 and j Henry VL. This 
is a logical and comfortable standpoint. It is based on the 
view that Shakespeare only took what was his own into the 
final plays. But to turn this argument the other way, as is his 
tendency, and assume on the basis of Greene's attack I pre- 
sume, that all that is quite different from anything in the 
finished plays which occurs in the old ones is of a necessity by 
Marlowe, Greene, or Peele — that is where I do not agree. I do 
not think the Greene attack warrants the idea to start with ; 
and I do think that in many places Shakespeare wrote and 
altered his own original {Contention) work, with something 
almost wholly new. I should mention here that at the close 
of Furnivall's abstract, he seems to identify his views with those 
of Miss Lee. 

There is a footnote in Grant White (p. 443) that should be 
quoted. I had already thrown out a hint to the same effect. 
He says : " After much consideration of the subject, I have little 
or no doubt that Greene alludes to other plays besides the 
Second and Third Parts oi King Henry VI.,to The Taming of 
the Shrew and perhaps to Titus Andronicus and even A Mid- 
summer Night' s Dream and the old King fohn." This is true 
in purport even if we disagree with the chosen plays, and it 
affords a fortunate breach for us in the chain armour of those 
who insist on Henry VI. alone being referred to by Greene. 
Indeed Grant White here rather overlooks what he has said on 
p. 412: "this line is one of the large number in the Third 



KING HENRY THE SIXTH xix 

Part of King Henry the Sixth which are taken bodily from The 
True Tragedy which was published in 1595. It was to a share 
in the latter play, therefore, that Greene meant to set up a 
claim. . . ." So that the critics, in endeavouring to affix certainty 
where there is the barest vagueness, disagree with themselves 
as well as each other. Grant White continues here : " We have 
already seen that The True Tragedy was published as having 
been ' sundrie times acted by the Right Honourable the Earle of 
Pembroke his servants' " ; and there is this support of Greene's 
claim, — that while Shakespeare is not known to have had any 
connection with the Earl of Pembroke's servants, we have the 
testimony of Nashe, in his Apologie for Pierce Penilesse, pub- 
lished in 1593, that Greene was "chief agent of the companie, 
for he wrote more than four other." And in this paragraph 
he concludes with the words " he would show himself either 
incompetent or foolhardy, I think, who denied that Greene's 
title to the older versions of those two plays (for one is but the 
continuation of the other) was thus far more clearly established 
than Shakespeare's." Grant White says this on the strength of 
Greene's passage, Chettle's apologia, and R. B.'s lines. At the 
utmost Greene's title is but a part title. But he quotes one 
sentence from the body of Chettle's Kind Hart's Dream of 
interest : " of whom (Greene) however some suppose themselves 
injured, I have learned to speak, considering he is dead, nil 
nisi necessariuni. He was of singuler plesaunce, the verye 
supporter, and, to no man's disgrace bee this intended (Chettle 
was a play-writer) the only Comedian of a vulgar writer in 
this country." This is a sort of defence of Greene by Chettle 
against Shakespeare's umbrage. 

As Grant White has quoted one paragraph from Pierce 
Penilesse, another which refers to this subject should be also 
cited, from Nashe's epistle prefixed to it : " Other newes I 
am aduertized of, that a scald triuiall lying Pamphlet, called 
Greens Groatsworth of wit is given out to be of my doing. 
God neuer haue care of my soule, but vtterly renounce me 
if the least word or syllable in it proceeded from my penne 
or if I were any way priuie to the writing or printing of it " 
(Grosart's Nashe, ii. 7). This should be set beside Chettle's 
denunciation of Greene's words about Shakespeare. 

It is my misfortune to be compelled to differ with Grant 



XX THE SECOND PART OF 

White in his conclusions. I approached the subject in a differ- 
ent manner, arguing rather from the particular to the general 
and endeavouring to construct a whole piecemeal, from minutiae 
and details. Accepting the consensus of opinion that those 
two old plays, as well as probably the three final parts, have 
amongst them portions and parcels of the work of Marlowe, 
Greene and Peele, I studied those authors with as much care 
as I was capable of. Insensibly I arrived at certain conclusions 
at first largely in support of Greene's being the major hand, 
the usual verdict : but by degrees in the play which we are now 
dealing with (or rather its original The Contention) Peele came 
more and more to the front and shouldered Greene out of court 
into a back place. I will now bring forward what evidence I 
have for this view, 

I had written this much when I obtained through Doctor 
Bowden's kindness (always so helpful to me when the need of a 
special Shakespearian volume is felt), Fleay's Who Wrote 
Henry VI. ? (Macmillan, Nov. 1875). I have read it carefully 
and though greatly at variance with it, one or two points are 
useful. I will specify them first. He decides that Peele is 
largely concerned in these plays, giving him a more prominent 
position than any other critic does. He believes the " principal 
arranger or plotter" of j Henry VI. to be Marlowe and Peele 
his subordinate. But Fleay is very vague ; even here, who 
does the writing ? He gives the best poetry in 2 Henry VI. 

III. iii. and ix. to Marlowe but the Cade scenes are necessarily 
allotted to Peele, and the wooing scene between Edward and 
the widow in Part HI., as being impossible by Marlowe. He 
allots / Henry VI. to Marlowe with the exception of IV. iv. ; 
V. i. ; V. v. which belong to some one else, not Greene or Peele 
or Marlowe. And one scene in that play (ll. iv.) is certainly 
by Shakespeare, while another (II. v.) is " neither Marlowe's 
nor Greene's; is it Shakespeare's?" But this last Marlowe (of 
/ Henry VI.) is the Marlowe of Tamburlaine, not of Faustus 
and Edward II. ; while " an inferior hand, exactly in Greene's 
style has . , . written I. ii. ; I. iv. ; I. v. ; I, vi. ; II. i. ; il. ii. ; 
II. iii. ; III. ii. ; III. iii. ; IV, ii, ; IV. iii. ; IV. iv. ; IV. v. ; IV. vi. ; 

IV. vii, ; V. ii. So that Fleay's general conclusion here is " that 
7 Henry VI. is the production of Marlowe and Greene, with a 
few additions ; 2 Henry VI. and j Henry VI. of Marlowe and 



KING HENRY THE SIXTH xxi 

Peele ; that Marlowe was the original plotter and constructor of 
all three plays." With regard again to 2 Henry VI. he selects 
Beaufort's death speech (III, iii.) and places it alongside Mar- 
lowe's Faustus's death with the remark that "not even in 
Shakespeare is there a death scene of despair like either of 
these two" — both are therefore Marlowe's. (But see Marlowe's 
parallels from King John and Macbeth) 

I am glad to find that I arrived at agreement with Fleay 
with regard to Peele and Greene. I merely replace Marlowe 
by Shakespeare, speaking very generally, and only with regard 
to /, 2 and 3 Henry VI. But there is so much in Fleay that 
rouses opposition that I will not inflict myself upon him much 
longer. He entirely agrees with Mr. Simpson that the Groats- 
worth refers to Shakespeare only as a player. That I maintain 
is not demonstrable by Fleay, Simpson or any other critic. 
But Fleay is so positive that one cannot reason with him. He 
finds " a little point" in the position of the quoted line in the 
Groatszvorth which is not in the paragraphs addressed to Mar- 
lowe or Juvenal, but comes closest to that addressed to Peele 
— an argument that the line may be Peele's — the line not being 
taken from Shakespeare according to Fleay's views. And it 
cannot certainly be his (Greene's own) says Fleay, " This little 
point seems to indicate Peele as one of them (authors of The 
Contention) and Greene as not one of them. Peele and Mar- 
lowe are therefore (a great leap from a little point) so far the 
winning horses for the authorship of The Contention, and all 
three for that of Henry VI. " " The Contention " here is the 
two plays Contention and True Tragedy {i.e., the First and 
Second Contention, the two old plays, issued in 1600 as The 
Whole Contention). That is the result of Fleay's external 
evidence, which includes, besides the passage in the Groats- 
zvorth, an examination into the connection of those three writers 
with the various companies of players (Lord Strange's, Earl of 
Pembroke's and the Admiral's or Chamberlain's) and their 
rights of possession in the plays and their copyrights. I set 
no great faith in this evidence. It is built upon sandy plains 
of presumption and probabilities. But his conclusion on this 
evidence must be quoted, that it "simply goes to exclude 
Shakespeare from any authorship of The Whole Contention as 
he was never in connection with any company but the Cham- 



xxii THE SECOND PART OF 

berlain's (afterwards the King's, 1603), and perhaps Lord 
Strange's ; and even in the title-page of The Whole Contention 
in 1600 only the Earl of Pembroke's servants, and not the 
Chamberlain's, are mentioned. A sackful of this evidence will 
not weigh with me against a handful of what the writings them- 
selves advance. None of the writers about it agree amongst 
themselves in any detailed or hard-and-fast platform. All 
their " facts " are open to contingencies or built on probabilities. 
So is Fleay's paper continuously in this part. It is a matter of 
" What can be traced." 

One final word on Fleay's position. He opens his paper 
with the words : "I shall merely promise that there is no 
evidence whatever for Shakespeare's having any share in either 
the early or late editions, except the solitary fact that the 
editors of the first Folio included Henry VI. in their collection." 
And he closes: "But there is a greater difficulty behind. 
There is such a similarity between parts of 2 and j Henry VI. 
and Richard III. as distinctly to show a unity of authorship. 
Phrases not occurring elsewhere in Shakespeare are frequently 
repeated in these plays and there is continuity in the plot, and 
in the character of Richard III., that is unmistakable." After 
some special pleading and an assumption or two that are useful 
to his argument, if argument it be, he gets out of this dilemma 
by the following structure. Peele wrote a play of Richard III. 
which he left unfinished (to complete the trilogy of 2 and j 
Henry VI.) and Shakespeare hurriedly revised and finished it 
into the 1597 Quarto of Richard III. There is one pleasing 
note in all this — a tribute to Peele's powers. I see little else 
but increasing confusion and weariness of soul. I notice in 
the Introduction to this last play in the Arden edition that 
Fleay is stated to ascribe the early Richard III. to Marlowe, 
and I find in Fleay's Chronicle History of Shakespeare (1886, 
p. 279) that he believes " the anterior play was Marlowe's " ; 
with no apology for the words (Macmillan, p. 60) quoted 
about Peele of whom he seems to have wearied. But Marlowe 
is given far too big a burthen for his working years these days. 
The date of Marlowe's death (i 593) is not suitable for the above 
ascription. 

With respect to the allotment of parts to Marlowe above, 
in 2 Henry VI., Fleay gives little or no proof. Two or 



KING HENRY THE SIXTH xxiii 

three quotations and a metrical note on a supposed extra 
syllable in the mid-line. A similar remark might be made 
(with all due apologies) about Miss Jane Lee's attributions to 
Greene dealt with specifically. In both cases they are no more 
than personal opinions. 

For the late Mr. Craig's views, see Introduction to Part III. 

IV. Something About Peele. Peele the Author 
OF The Life and Death of Jack Straw. 

George Peele was about half a dozen years older than 
Shakespeare. He died probably in 1597. Nashe outlived 
him three or four years while he (Peele) survived Greene for 
about five years and Marlowe a year less. It must be remem- 
bered here that it does not in the least follow that any of these 
writers agreed with Greene in his hostility towards Shake- 
speare. On the contrary his rancour might have been en- 
hanced by their attraction towards him. Nashe had no such 
feelings. At a later date Marlowe is referred to in almost 
affectionate terms by Shakespeare (in As You Like It, in. v. 
82). Peele gives one a pleasant feeling of amiability in his 
ways. I believe he was generally beloved and may have been 
naturally enough a friend, even a useful friend, of Shakespeare's, 
and worked with him. Peele and Shakespeare had a warm 
patriotism in common. Peele's love for England and her 
heroes is constantly cropping up. It is one of the pleasantest 
points about him. Peele was steeped in Spenser, there was 
that in common. His Arraignment of Paris, his best piece, 
shows that to be the case. The T amburlaine influence, that 
of Marlowe, was bad for him, yet he had a nice natural gift in 
ranting of his own according to the method of his days and of 
earlier days — a gift that is badly lost and badly needed in these 
prosaic artificial times of critical self-consciousness and intro- 
spection. Peele had the saving gift of humour, in a sort of 
Shakespearian way, such as few of his contemporaries were 
blessed with. Nashe, in his address prefixed to Menaphon (by 
Greene) speaks very highly of him when referring to his 
Arraignment of Paris, and when Peele ventures to tread rather 
heavily on Gabriel Harvey's sensitive toes, in his Old Wives' 
Tale, the latter seems to have borne it patiently and made no 
retort that I can find — evidence of goodwill towards him in an 



xxiv THE SECOND PART OF 

unexpected quarter — perhaps from a mutual regard for Spenser. 
He was employed as a civic and state poet and seems to have 
had influential friends and patrons. He wrote blank verse 
addresses on public events with ease and grace and dignity. 
His David and Bethsabe is usually selected as his best piece, or 
the best to select samples from, but there are passages in his 
other plays I far prefer, such as the opening of Edward /., or 
parts of his Arraignment of Paris. David a7id Bethsabe is an 
unnatural piece in many ways, full of stilted and unnatural 
quasi-Biblical writing that becomes wearisome with its load of 
thous and thees and thys, Peele's natural writing is ver}^ good 
English indeed, as a rule, and often comes nearer, in choice of 
language, to that of Shakespeare than most of those of his time. 
Without any great depth of thought or gift of characterisation 
he has a harmonious method of descriptive writing, coupled with 
plenty of swing and energy, that carries one along with him. 

We have a good deal of signed work of Peele's. In addition 
to that there is plenty of evidence of his hand in anonymous 
plays of the time. Chettle has told us of the quantity of 
matter Greene left unfinished in the booksellers' hands — prob- 
ably mainly dramatic, as was Greene's latest work. It is 
likely that Peele revised, expanded, or finished Greene's work 
on several occasions possibly acquired or supplied to him from 
such sources. Mr. J. M. Robertson has proved, I think, that 
he had a share in the final state of Titus Andronicus, no very 
welcome ascription to " Sweet St. George." Many notes in 
my pages of these plays will further that belief. Again, I have 
no doubt, he assisted in the play of Locrine, a very compound 
production, with a curious blend of excellence and inanity 
running through its composition in a most puzzling and interest- 
ing way. Selimiis also had some polish or rearrangement 
from him. 

Amongst the many shots at a venture that Fleay makes at 
the authorship of anonymous plays or other identifications — 
shots which are often as good as they can be, often as bad as 
they can be — he made an undoubted hit when he wrote down 
Jack Straw as Peele's. It was the parallelism of scenes and 
situations in this unimportant little play, with some of the Cade 
work in The Contention that made me feel on sure ground with 
regard to Peele. I studied Jack Straw when I found the Wat 



KING HENRY THE SIXTH xxv 

Tyler rebellion in Cade : and I found Peele at once in the 
play. It will be appropriate and indeed necessary here to try 
and establish this. My edition is that of Hazlitt's Dodsley, 
vol. V. It was first printed in 1593. Fleay dates it confid- 
ently as written in 1587 on very insufficient evidence. He 
ascribes it to Peele on the strength of his " sign-manual," the 
" sandy plain," near the end, but there are plenty more echoes 
and signs manual of Peele in Jack Straw. In the first place 
the metre at once strikes the reader with surprise. It begins 
with lines of irregular length, only to be sorted by their rhymes 
— lines that give one the feeling they were food for revision and 
very easily digested, but evidently this play never had a second 
handling. There is plenty of such unscannable verse in Peele's 
Edivaf'd I. and Arraignment of Paris, dependent for harmony 
on the rhyme, but usually the lines are long, often fourteeners. 
Then it breaks into a page or two of lines with four feet or 
accents, still rhyming and quite musical, just as Peele does in The 
Old Wives' Tale every now and then. And a little later when 
dignity comes on the stage in the shape of the " Lord Treasurer, 
Lord Archbishop and Secretary," we have regular orthodox 
well-finished blank verse of which there is plenty (see Act iv.) 
in the Arraignmetit. Moreover, we get Peele's favourite 
trochaic endings, as on p. 388, lenity, extremity, injury, courtesy, 
policy, doing yeoman's work for rhyme. A lesson he learned 
from the Faerie Queene in its early career. No other writer 
comes near Peele in this fluidity of verse at this time, and this 
evidence greatly strengthens Fleay's attribution. It also 
supports his date, which he places from an allusion in the 
words "this last benevolence" (p. 384) to the great distress in 
1587 in London, when money and ships were raised; the 
insurrection of apprentices in the previous year, and there 
being no mention of the Armada. I will give a i&y^ parallels. 
In Jack Straw, here is a parson's character (p. 381): — 

What, is he an honest man ? The devil he is ! he is the parson of the 

town ; 
You think there's no knavery hid under a black gown ? 
Find him in a pulpit but twice in the year, 
And I '11 find him forty times in the ale-house tasting strong beer. 

In the Old Wives' Tale (p. 450) a Friar is introduced "with a chine 
of beef and a pot of wine," solely for the purpose of these remarks: "Is 



xxvi THE SECOND PART OF 

this the veriest knave in all Spain ? Sac. Yes. Del. What, is he a friar ? 
Sac. Yes, a friar indefinite and a knave infinite." He appears only 
here. 

Jack Straw (p. 382) : " But merrily with the world it went, When men 
ate berries of the hawthorn-tree. An thou help me, I '11 help thee." 
Old Wives' Tale (p. 447) : " Hips and haws, and sticks and straws! why, 
is that all your food, father ? " 

Jack Straw (p. 384): "it seemeth strange. . . . That being won 
with reason and regard Of true succeeding prince, the common sort 
Should be so slack to give." And p. 399 : ^^ King. It is enough ; believe 
me, if you will ; For as I am your true succeeding prince, I swear." 
The Battle of Alcazar (p. 434): "calls for wars, Wars^ wars, to plant the 
true succeeding prince." And p. 440 : " From him to thee as true-suc- 
ceeding prince. With all allegiance." "True-succeeding seed " occurs 
on p. 422 in the same play. I know no other examples. True suceeders 
occur in Richard III. v. v. 30. 

Jack Straw (pp. 385 and 409) : " Well I wot." In Peele's Tale of Troy 
(p. 556, a) ; and Honour of the Garter (p. 587, a, twice). Not especially 
Peele's, but characteristic of Spenser, Greene and Peele. 

Jack Straw (p. 387) : " I have his wife and children pledges. . . . 
T. M. Let him take heed ... or else his pledges goes to the pot.' 
Edward I. (389, b): " we will admit no pause, For goes this wretch, this 
traitor, to the pot." 

Jack Straw (p. 387): "Gog's blood, Jack have we . . . ? " Sir Clyomon 
(p. 502) : " Nay, Gog's blood, I '11 bee gone." 

Jack Straw (p. 387) : " have we the cards in our hands ? " And p. 411 : 
" I would lay a surer trump Ere I would lose so fair a trick." Peele is 
fond of illustrations from cards. Edward I. (p. 387) : "Aye there's a 
card that puts us to our trump." And at p. 393 : "since the King hath 
put us amongst the discarding cards, and, as it were, turned us with 
deuces and treys out of the deck." And Old Wives' Tale (p. 446) : 
" What, shall we have a game at trump or ruff to drive away the time ? " 

Jack Straw (p. 390) : " I cannot think so good a gentleman As is that 
knight. Sir John Morton I mean, Would entertain so base and vile a 
thought." Speeches at Theobald's (p. 577, b) : "with sacred rites Prepared 
myself to entertain good thoughts." For "I mean" here, see note 
7 Henry VI. v. v. 20. And Sir Clyomon (p. 522, a). 

Jack Straw (p. 390) : " Were it not for fear or policy, So true a bird 
would file so fair a nest." Anglorum Ferice (p. 596, b) : "He durst not 
openly disgorge at home. In his own nest filed with so foul a bird." 

Jack Straw (p. 384): "Tyburn, standfast; I fear you will be loden." 
Sir Clyomon (p. 509, b) : " there was never poor ass so loaden ! " 

Jack Straw (p. 392): "And so amidst the stream may hover safe." 
(at Greenwich). Tale of Troy (p. 554, b) : " The flower of Greece . . . 
For want of wind had hover'd long in Aulis. " 

Jack Straw (p. 395) : " It was a world to see what troops of men." 
Sir Clyomon (p. 515): "But 'tis a world to zee what merry lives we 
shepherds lead." 



KING HENRY THE SIXTH xxvii 

Jack Straw (p. 395): " 'Gan strew the gravel ground and sandy 
plain." Anglortim Ferice (p. 595, a): "Over the wild and sandy Afric 
plains." See note at 2 Henry VI. i. iv. 39. And Battle of Alcazar 
(p. 440, a) : " The fields and sandy plains we have survey'd." 

Jack Straw (p. 395) : " did an echo rise, That pierced the ears of our 
renowned king." Battle of Alcazar (p. 436, a): "the reasons of the 
king, Which so effectually have pierc'd mine ears." And Descensus 
Astrcece (p. 541, a): "Whose pure renown hath pierced the world's large 
ears." In Spenser's Daphnaida. 

Jack Straw (p. 398): "have secret wreak in store." David and 
Bethsabe (p. 472, a) : " in the holy temple have I sworn Wreak of his 
villany" (the noun is much less common than the verb). 

Jack Straw (p. 400): "It skills not much: I am an Englishman." 
Sir Clyomon (p. 493, b) : "Whither I go, it skills not, for Knowledge is my 
name." 

Jack Straw (p. 401): "I have read this in Cato, Ad concilium anti- 
quum voceris : Take good counsel, while it is given." Edward I. (p. 
401): " I remember I read it in Cato's Pueriles, that Cantabit vacuus 
coram latrone viator ; a man purse-penniless may sing before a thief." 

Jack Straw (p. 402) : " Riddle me a riddle, what 's this, I shall be 
hanged, I shall not be hanged. Here he tries it with a staff." Old Wives' 
Tale (p. 449, a) : " if it be no more but . . . ' riddle me, riddle me what 's 
this ' ? I shall have the wench." 

Jack Straw (p. 403) : " But there 's no such matter ; we be no such 
fools." Arraignment of Paris (p. 352): "There's no such matter, Pan; 
we are all friends." 

Jack Straw (p. 404): " Parson Ball, I will tell thee, And swear it of 
mine honesty. Thou shalt be hanged as well as we." The run of these 
lines is exactly Peek's. See Edward I. p. 392-95 in several places, e.g. 

Jack Straw (p. 407) : " Lord Mayor, and well-belov'd friends." 
Battle of Alcazar, p. 423, a : " for no distrust Of loyalty, my well-beloved 
friends, But that," etc. 

Jack Straw (p. 408) : "mercy in a prince resembleth right The glad- 
some sunshine in a winter's day." David and Bethsabe (p. 468) : " The time 
of year is pleasant for your grace. And gladsome summer in her shady 
robes." . . . "Gladsome beams " occurs in p. 485, b (same play). 

Jack Straw (p. 409) " Pleaseth your grace, they have been rid apace. 
. . . And yet survives this Ball." The Tale of Troy (p. 556, a): "Sir 
Paris than With poisoned arrow rid the heedless man." And Edward I. 
(p. 408, a) : "I rid her not ; I made her not away." But frequent at this 
time. 

A few more general points might be mentioned, as the 
touch of heraldry about the city arms and knighting of William 
Walworth (p. 413); the verbal iteration, as in p. 385, " Your 
words . . . tend unto the profit of the king, Whose profit is the 
profit of the land " ; and the culling of bits of prophecy from 



^^Hh. 



xxviii THE SECOND PART OF 

Grafton (or other chroniclers), as at p. 381, "when Adam 
delved " (see Edward I. passim) : these are all in Peele's manner. 
I am satisfied this piece is an early product of Peele's, and it 
seemed a useful link in the chain of evidence connecting Peele 
with 2 Henry VI. (or The Contention). Presently, when we 
come to look for Peele in these two plays, we shall see that 
certain passages or incidents occurring in Jack Straw, occur 
identically in them, in the rebellion of Jack Cade, where they 
are historically untrue. But the rebellions have so much 
similarity that if Peele had anything to do with the Cade scenes 
he would be certain to weave in, consciously or unconsciously, 
memories of his previous work. Or put the case the other way, 
Peele would be put on to that job (in company with Shake- 
speare) on account of his extant work and his knowledge of 
the chronicles. I say " in company with Shakespeare " be- 
cause the latter did the larger part of the Cade scenes, but 
another hand (Peele's) is unmistakably present, so much so 
that we have two Cades in detail. I am not claiming for Peele 
a work of any importance in Jack Straiv. It is only a slight 
four-act piece, written to flatter and amuse the people, very 
likely, as Fleay says, at a time of popular commotion — and 
hardly worthy of the name of a drama. There are some 
passions in it, but no characters distinctly drawn. 

It is as well to give here another "sign manual" of Peele, 
though not in these plays. It is " numberless " ; which may 
be added to "true-succeeding" and "sandy plains" as his 
especial badges. He uses it in Alcazar (p. 434, b) : " Besides a 
number almost numberless Of drudges " ; Order oj the Garter 
(585, b) ; "A number numberless appointed well For tourna- 
ment " ; Angloruni Ferice (596, b) : " Small number of a number 
numberless." And he introduces himself into 5^/mz^j- (Grosart, 
xiv. 197) : " Gathering to him a number numberless Of big- 
bond Tartars." 

Peele's fashion of rhetorical repetition in his poetry, not 
silly iteration, but purposeful {Epanadiplosis, Epanalepsis, Ana- 
phora, etc.), is more apparent in his later work than in The 
Arraignment and other his earlier work. This was due perhaps 
to the Faerie Queene's example, where such methods are largely 
and suitably used, though not appropriate in dramatic poetry. 
They were not due to Spenser, but greatly beautified and de- 



KING HENRY THE SIXTH xxix 

veloped by him. In Peele they are nowhere so abundant (and 
misplaced) as in Alcazar, and David and Bethsabe. 

It is perhaps the same case with that I have called sing-song 
or trochaic endings. In Faerie Queene, II. i. 57, lingered 
mortality, tyranny, regality, linfirmity ; and see again in II. xii. 
16 and elsewhere. But there the melody is suitable, and more- 
over the sing-songishness is checked by intervening lines. But 
when Marlowe uses it in / Tamburlaine, I. i. (Dyce, p. 8, b), and 
II. i. and elsewhere, it is a blemish. In Peele's Arraignment of 
Paris, it is less out of place. Later in Peele's work he became 
a slave to it. In such plays as Locrine (Greene) it becomes 
most irksome. Some patches of it occur in Jack Straw. And 
here and there in all three parts of Henry VI. Whether it is 
the least displeasing or the most tiresome form of end-stopped 
line depends upon taste, or upon its excess. All forms occur 
in I Henry VI., and yet there is good poetry. But there is 
more beautiful poetry in Edward III. {anon.), almost wholly of 
end-pausing lines, with little or none of the sing-song — a later 
play than any of those just mentioned. See / Henry VI. II. i. 
43, III. ii. 137 for notes and examples from Greene, who 
murdered the device with surfeiting the trespass of the lyric 
muse. The steady decrease of end-pausing from Henry VI. 
(Part I.) to Richard III. is always to be observed — to Shake- 
speare's credit. 

VI. Evidences of Peele in Phrases, Passages, and 
Composition in 2 Henry VI. : with a Running 
Comment on the Texts Compared. 

Only prominent ones are selected ; others will be found in 
my notes, which should be referred to also for further informa- 
tion on those here given since the context is usually important, 
and dwelt upon there. And those from Peele are in earlier 
work. 

I. i. 65, 66. till term of eighteen months Be full expired. Peele, Sir 
Clyonion (Dyce's one-vol. ed. p. 506): "Now are the ten days full ex- 
pired wherein." Not in Q. Perhaps merely legal or technical. 

I. i. 79. Summer's parching heat. Peele, An Eclogue Gratulatory 
(p. 562, b) : " where he with swink and sweat Felt foeman's rage and 
summer's parching heat." This speech should also be compared with 
David and Bethsabe (p. 468, b) about " Joab and his brother in the fields 



XXX THE SECOND PART OF 

suffering the wrath of winter." See note in passage here on the develop- 
ment from the last scene but one in 1 Henry VI. Parching heat occurs 
in Lucrece, but was not an old expression. "Summer's parching heat" 
has been borrowed from Peele into Arden of Feversham (1592) also (Act 
II.) attributed by Fleay to Kyd. Open fields in the preceding line is in 
Peele's Old Wives' Tale (p. 452, b). Peele has names in books of memory 
twice in later work (1593), Dyce, pp. 601, 602. 

I. i. 123. In Contention, has my thrice valiant son. See Introduction 
to Part I. on this construction, a favourite with Peele and Shakespeare. 
At I. i. 157-159 three lines about Humphrey occur (in Q) that are nearly 
repeated below at in. i. 20 in Q, and there carefully omitted. 

Shakespeare opened the Act, as he usually (or often) does and wrote 
the first scene with Peele's help here and there. Peele has less to do 
with this scene (which is Shakespeare's) in Contention than in Part II., 
where both developed it together. 

I. ii. 25. office-badge. Peele, Honour of the Garter (p. 587, a): "his 
office-badge Was a black rod whereof he took his name." 

I. ii. 64. remove stumbling blocks. Peele, Edward I. : " 'tis a deed of 
charity to remove this stumbling block." Not in Q. 

I. ii. 82-86. In the Duchess's speech here in Q occurs " backside 
of my Orchard." (Shakespeare has " backside of the town" in Cymbeline.) 
Peele, Old Wives' Tale (p. 455, a): " He looks as though he crept out of 
the backside of the well, and speaks like a drum perished at the west 
end." But earlier in New Eng. Diet. 

I. ii. 82-86. In the same speech occurs " And cast their spells in 
silence of the night." See i. iv. 16, note at "silent of the night" 
perhaps a mere misprint. "Silence of the night" as in Q again below. 
Peele, Battle of Alcazar, 11. i. : " Nor may the silence of the speechless 
night (Dire) architect of murders and misdeeds." ("Quiet silence of 
the night" occurs in Selimus, later, a play in which Peele had a final 
hand.) Joan has used spells in Part I. v. iii. 2. 

I. ii. 99. And buz these conjurations in her brain. Peele, Tale of Troy 
(P- 55i> a-). 1589 : "Till one, I say, revengeful power or other Buzz'd in 
the brain of her unhappy mother A dreadful dream." Greene often uses 
" buz in the ears " of a slander, etc. 

The opening of Scene ii. is again Shakespeare's, who with Peele did 
the expansion in the finished play. Note the many Shakespearianisms 
introduced in the opening speech. The stage business of Hume, Jour- 
dain and Bolingboke would be allotted to Peele, who wrote this part 
alone in Q. 

I. iii. 133-135. See note at iii. i. 61, 62 on the repetition of these 
charges against Gloucester. And again at i. iii. 107-118 in Gloucester's 
reply, where the racking of the Commons is repeated from i. iii. 125, 126, 
the Cardinal's accusation. See notes at i. iii. 210, 211 and in. i. 292. 
The confusion and repetition is due to a divided, or a distributed 
authorship. 

I. iii. 137. In Q the stage direction is "The Queene . . . hits the 
Duches of Gloster a boxe on the eare." This incident is paralleled by 



KING HENRY THE SIXTH xxxi 

one in Peek's Edward I. (p. 392) where the Queen " longs to give your 
Grace a boxe on the ear," and does it. It may have been introduced by 
him into the play, but there is little evidence of any hand other than 
Shakespeare's in either play in this scene, but much of his. The im- 
provements are very considerable, and the eliminations are noticeable, 
as " Somerset . . . Regent over the French " twice in four lines (Q) at 
the end of scene. There is revising and inserting in these first three 
scenes showing the Cardinal's implacable hate for Gloucester (Hum- 
phrey) which does not appear in Contention. This is what would be 
natural in Shakespeare, whether author of Contention or not, who had 
constructed 7 Henry VI. A later play than Contention. 

I. iv. 22,23. It thunders and lightens . . . spirit. Adsum." Peele 
has similar arranging in The Old Wives' Tale where Sacrapant is the 
magician: " Re-enter Sacrapant : it lightens and thunders: the second 
Brother falls down [Jourdain grovels on the earth here]. . . . Sacrapant 
. . . Adeste, dcsmons ! Enter two Furies (p. 450, b). . . . ' It thunders and 
lightens.'" Again at p. 454, b. But Marlowe was familiar with all such 
machinery, and to him the passages in Q (that are completely altered) 
are due, Peele's modelling remaining and being even extended in the 
present play. See under " Marlowe " in this Introduction. 

I. iv. 16. silent of the night. See above at i. ii. 82-86. This speech 
is Shakespeare's, the variation of the good expression of Peele's is 
quaint, but both hands are at work. Not in Q. 

I. iv. 17. The time of night when Troy was set on fire. Compare 
Peele, Tale of Troy (p. 557, b) : " It was the time when midnight's sleep and 
rest With quiet pause the town of Troy possess'd. . . . Now Troy as 
was foretold began to burn." Not in Q. 

I. iv. 36, 68. Sandy plains. See above at Jack Straw (p. 395). 
InQ. 

I. iv. 38. / hardly can endure. Similarly a spirit (angel of provid- 
ence) says to Neronis in Peele's Sir Clyomon (p. 521, a) : " Let desperation 
die in thee — I may not here remain. [Ascends^ " In Q : " I must hence 
again." 

I. iv. 75. A sorry breakfast for my Lord Protector. Peele, Edward I. 
(p. 398, a) : " By Gis, fair lords, ere many days be past England shall give 
this Robin Hood his breakfast"; and (p. 407, a): "Ah, gentle Richard, 
many a hot breakfast haue we been at together ! " Not in Q. 

With regard to these "blind prophecies/' and their frequent use by 
Peele, see note at i. iv. 62. And also above at Jack Straw "(when Adam 
delved)." This repetition here in identical words side by side is not so 
inartistic in Q on account of the interposition there of the next scene 
(II. i.). 

Act II. 

II. i. 24. Tanta^ne animis ccelestibus irce ? Peele might have sug- 
gested this quotation ; he used it in Speeches to the Queen at Theobalds 
(1591). It was used also in Speeches to the Queen at Sudely (1592). 
Nichols, III. 137. 



xxxii THE SECOND PART OF 

I attribute this scene in both plays wholly to Shakespeare under 
Peek's guidance with regard to stage-directions. A few touches of his 
hand (perhaps) appear in illustrations from him, but none of weight. 
Note sing-song end-paused lines at the end of the scene. 

Henry's holiness begins to be attended to here, as compared with 
Q. See also in last Act at i. iii. 54-59. And in this at 11. i. 66. And 
so throughout. See in. ii. 232, iv. iv. 35, etc. 

II. ii. Chiefly genealogical. Shakespeare had a bias for royal pedi- 
gree-work, and down to Warwick's last speech in Q i, the readings are al- 
most identical with some corrections of genealogy in Folio (see note at 
1. 4). This part also connects us with 1 Henry VI. (11. iv. and iv. v.). 
Warwick's speech often lines (53-62) becomes two lines in 2 Henry VI., 
and is replaced by one to Buckingham by Shakespeare. This is the sort 
of place the scent gets warm. It is a bit of rant by Peele that is ex- 
punged, at least most likely by Peele, but certainly not by Shakespeare. 
See note at 11. ii. 78. Shakespeare closes the scene. 

II. iii. Down to the entrance of the Armourer, it is Peele's in Q, 
re-written very carefully by Shakespeare in 2 Henry VI., and extended 
from forty to sixty lines. One of the rejected lines " For sorrowes teares 
hath gript my aged heart" (an allusion to "blood-drinking sighs," etc.) 
is recalled in 3 Henry VI. i. iv. 171. Peele uses the noun similarly 
" Winding about his heart with mortal gripes " {David and Bethsabe, (p. 
475, a) and elsewhere. " Fountains of mine eyes " is not again in Shake- 
speare, and is properly Peele's unless it belongs earlier to Kyd. 
" O eyes no eyes but fountains of my tears " {Spanish Tragedy). But I 
am wholly unable to separate Peele from some of Kyd's accepted work 
{i.e. Soliman and Perseda). See again David and Bethsabe {p. 475, a): 
"David's soul dissolves, Lading the fountains of his drowned eyes." 
We then have depart twice in four lines (" depart away" occurs in 
Romeo and Juliet). Humphrey's succeeding speech is altogether in 
Peele's manner of harping on a string or two, " as willing . . . thine, 
as erst . . . mine, and even as willing . . . leave it, as others . . . 
receive it." This is left standing. 

We are surely indebted to Peele also for the interesting stage in- 
structions prefixed to the trial by combat. In this scene the Queen's 
"manliness" is developed (1. 28). In the next her hatred of Gloucester 
(iv. 52) receives attention as compared with Q. 

II. iv. I. See note at "mourning cloaks " (stage-direction). 

II. iv. 6. " Ten is the houre," etc. Hard at hand, with reference to 
time, occurs here in Q. It is a favourite expression (referring to place) 
with Peele, and occurs in Marlowe's Tamburlaine (Dyce, p, 15, b). But the 
Shakespearian use in Othello, iii. i. 267. The opening words, the note of 
the scene, are added by Shakespeare in 2 Henry VI. On the whole 
evidence the opening of the scene is Shakespeare's in Q, and is Shake- 
speare's improved in 2 Henry VI. But there is no need to dwell upon 
other writers in this pathetic scene, which is wholly Shakespeare's in 
both plays. Plenty of Shakespearian touches occur. Eleanor's speeches 
after Gloucester leaves (in Q) are much improved in the revision, and 



KING HENRY THE SIXTH xxxiii 

as usual commonplace writing has been deleted, whether bits of Peele's 
work or his own. 

Act hi. 

In this Act one of the noticeable results in the reformation of the 
old play is the production of harmony by the alteration, often, of a 
single word or so, from lines that won't scan to lines that will, or from 
lines that will to others that will more musically. One of the broadest 
Shakespearian results. Take iii. ii. 275 : " But all the honour Salisbury 
hath got," and sound it with " But all the honour Salisbury hath won." 
This is an extreme example in delicacy. Shakespeare put out this use 
of got elsewhere, in " get the day." 

III. i. There are a few expressions of Peele's in the revised play, 
as, " heart unspotted " (iii. i. 100) ; the metaphor of " choking weeds " (iii. 
i. 31), etc. But none of any consequence. " Thrice-noble " is here the 
property of 2 Henry VI., not of Q. " It skills not," noted on at Jack 
Straw above, is also inserted, and not in Q. " Now or never " (iii. i. 
331), and "make commotion" (iii. i. 358) are also used earlier by Peele 
(the latter in Jack Straw, see note). All of these, I believe, belong only 
to 2 Henry VI. (not Q). The whole scene is Shakespeare's written 
lightly for a shorter play and expanded fully by the same writer. At 
11. 154-160 certain changes of epithets to Beaufort and Suffolk, seem to 
be merely capricious. 

in. ii. Note the careful stage-instructions in Q, at the opening. The 
same conclusion as in the last scene, holds good of authorship in this, but 
there are even fewer signs of Peele in either play. See note at "The 
commons like an angry hive of bees " (125) with parallel from Jack Straw, 
and at " breathless corpse " (132) ; "three days space " (295) ; " chalky 
cliffs" (ioi'> ; " grove of cypress trees" (323); "serpent's hiss" (326). 
All from the finished play. Shakespeare develops greatly in this scene. 
He has made Warwick and Margaret all his own no matter who started 
them. None of the suspected ones could have approached the varied 
and powerful language in Margaret's and Suffolk's dialogue ; both of 
which abound in unmistakable Shakespearianisms (as my notes amply 
demonstrate), not a few of which are also in the earlier Quarto form. 
The Quarto affords another "thrice " adjective, "thrice-famous " altered 
to "thrice-famed " (157). There is hardly a line in it to challenge, and 
hardly a line not accepted for the final play. Scene iii. is all Shake- 
speare's. The alterations from one text to the other are unimportant in 
any respect other than that of gracing the old and careless text, which 
contains some sad corruptions, if metre was considered. There are 
signs of Peele in the short original. See note at "gripe " replaced by 
" grin " (24) ; " Forbear to " (31) ; and the last line " see his funerals be 
performde " is illustrated by the last line in Peele's Battle of Alcazar : 
" So to perform the prince's funerals." We may allot this part of Act 
III., and only this part (in Q), to Peele. As the play progresses so does 
Peele stand aside in important situations. Note in Scene iii., the ex- 
cision of a patch of Oh's from the final play. A like experience occurred 

c 



xxxiv THE SECOND PART OF 

in Lovers Labour's Lost. Note corrupt readings in Q (as at in. ii. 197). 
Shakespeare's own work, corrected by Shakespeare. 

Act IV. 

IV. i. Opened by Shakespeare, and the opening seven lines awk- 
wardl_y tacked on to Peele's opening, for I think he wrote this scene 
down to Suffolk's exit in Q. The stage direction here is both explicit 
and important since it gives us Walter (Water) Whitmore's name. 
Note too the prophecies and the quibbling on "Pole" (70) as in Jack 
Straw (see note). But the revision is Shakespeare's work, although a 
few touches or rememberings of Peele occur, as in "gaudy day" (i) ; 
" name and port of" (ig) ; " senseless winds " (77). He is probablj', the 
borrower (in Q) of Greene's Abradas, altered to Bargulus by Shake- 
speare. See an odd note at the end of iv. i. on the Quarto expression 
" Come let 's go." The omission of the ship passage (Q) " like as it were 
a fight at sea " from the final play is interesting. Possibly it was found 
too difficult of stage management. In this scene The Contention supplies 
the Folio with a missing line (48). The same thing happens a couple 
of times in Part III. 

IV. ii. 8. 'twas nevermerry world . . . since gentlemen came up. Peele, 
Jack Straw (Hazlitt's Dodsley, v. 382). " But merrily with the world it 
went. When men ate berries of the hawthorn tree." From Grafton (see 
note at 1. 68). 

IV. ii. 18. labouring men. Peele, Old Wives' Tale {p. 453, b) " Go get 
you in, you labouring slaves." 

IV. ii. 61. his coat is of proof . Peele, David and Bethsabe (p. 465, a) : 
" He puts on armour of his honour 's proof." 

IV. ii. 133. Adam was a gardener. Feele, Jack Straw {p. ^81): "When 
Adam delved and Eve span." 

IV. ii. 145. His son am I, deny it if yon can. Peele, Old Wives' Tale 
(p. 455, b) : " are not you the'man, sir, deny it if you can, sir," etc. In Q. 

IV. ii. 151. That speaks he knows not what. Peele, Edward L (p. 413, 
a) : " Bereav'd her sense and memory at once, so that she spoke she knew 
nor how nor what." Not in Q. 

IV. ii. 182. 'tis for liberty. Peele, Jack Straw (p. 399) : " we will 
have wealth and liberty." [Cry all: Wealth and Liberty !] King. " It is 
enough . . . You shall have liberty." 

The parallelism with Peele's work here lies more in the as- 
sumption that Jack Strazv was written by Peele, connected with 
the fact that Shakespeare makes use of Jack Straw's rebellion 
from the chroniclers, as shown in my notes. Two passages in 
this scene in Q, here (47-52 and 77-82) are transferred to 
Scene vii. in the final play (6-1 1, 8, 9). But there is little 
omitted or altered from one scene to the other: the difference 
lies mainly in extension. There is, however, one suggestive 



KING HENRY THE SIXTH xxxv 

little point. In Q Dick Butcher is knighted before 
Stafford's entry, by Cade at the same time as he knights him- 
self, to encourage him to the fight, and the result is satisfactory. 
This little structural detail need not have been rejected. It is 
quite in Peek's way since he celebrates knighthood and knights 
and orders in and out of season. Peele's sympathy is much 
more with the people (as in Jack Straw) ; he does not address 
them as " filth and scum of Kent, marked for the gallows." 

IV. iii. 7, 8. a hundred lacking one. See note at passage, from 
Peele, Old Wives' Tale (p. 451, b). In Q. 

IV. iii. 16. break open the gaols and let out the prisoners. Peele, Jack 
Straw (396): "they have ... let out all the prisoners, broke up the 
Marshalsea and the King's Bench." Not in Q. 

This scene is reduced to five lines in Q, that is to say to Cade's single 
speech (11. 3-8). The development as well as the original may be byPeele. 
But the belief grows that they worked out Cade together in both plays. 

IV. iv. 10-12. / myself . . . will parley with Jack Cade. In Peele's 
Jack Straw (391). Richard II. says: " Tell them that we ourselves will 
come to them " by Sir John Morton's advice : " Thus would I deal with 
these rebellious men: I would find time to parley with some of them." 
It appears from Neia^ Eng. Diet, the verb was not common before 1600. 
In Q Shakespeare opened this scene with ten added lines, calculated 
to make Margaret's character more objectionable, not to say abomin- 
able. 

IV. iv. 40. " Ah, were the Duke of Suffolk now alive " is found lower 
down in Scene ix. (Q). Unaccountable change. 

IV. V. 10. gather head. Peele, Battle of Alcazar (p. 432,' a): "The 
Spaniard ready to embark himself. Here gathers to a head." The 
expression has occurred already in Q. See note. In Q. 

IV. vii. I, 2. pull down the Savoy ; others to the Inns of Court : down 
with them. This from the 1381 rebellion. The Inns of Court are re- 
ferred to in Jack Straw : "We '11 not leave a man of law, Nor a paper 
worth a haw," etc. (394). In Q. 

IV. vii. g-ii. John's and Smith's asides should have remained where 
they were in Scene ii. in Q. They belong there from 6 to 12. See note. 

IV. vii. 14. burn all the records of the realm. See extract from Fabyan 
at IV. vii. I. Peele, Jack Straw (401); "Enter Tom Miller to burn 
papers ... I have made a bonfire here Of a great many bonds and 
indentures, And obligations: faith I have been amongst The ends of the 
Court, and among the records ... in the Guildhall." In Q. 

IV. vii. 18, 19. all things shall be in common. And above at ii. 68, 
All the realm shall be common. Feele, Jack Straw (^82): "it were better 
to have this community, Than to have this difference in degree." In Q 
(in first quotation). This scene. 

IV. vii. 120-122. tribute . . . maidenhead. Peele, Jack Straw (be- 
ginning). See note at passage in text. 



xxxvi THE SECOND PART OF 

This scene in both plays is by Shakespeare, with trifling 
hints from Peele. The humour is altogether of a higher class, 
and more witty, than anything of Peele's for so long a spell. 
We have to remember always not only what is before us, but 
to reflect upon what probably would have been there, or the 
sort of writing that would have inevitably appeared, had it 
been all Peele's — from a knowledge of his writing. I am not 
referring here to grossness of quality. See note at 1. 124, 
dealing with two slight scenes (of Q) omitted from final play. 
Note the reduction of repetition of " head " in Cade's speech 
(105-112) and around it. 

IV. viii. The scene between Buckingham with Clifford and Cade 
in Q has been entirely rewritten by Shakespeare. I have given in a 
note at 1. 14, several arguments pointing to Peele as the writer of the 
original, which need not be repeated here. Cade's speech (in Q) is 
quite impossible. Peele must have been thinking of his Parson Ball in 
Jack Straw. In altering this extravagant departure, Shakespeare dealt 
gently with his coadjutor's work leaving in the feather simile and 
"through the midst of you" — but Cade is spoiled. He becomes too 
wise and eloquent. Cade's speech in Q (the one preceding the feather 
speech) is entirely appropriate to Parson Ball's principles in Jack Straw, 
see note at 1. 26, but not to the present rebellion. Shakespeare has left 
it so in matter, but not in the same words. And he has imported 
into it the "ravish your wives" of the omitted scene or passage between 
Dick, Sergeant and Cade, also belonging to the Jack Straw system. 
See note at 1. 29. 

IV. ix. The preliminary speech of the King's is added by Shake- 
speare to the situation. In Q, Buckingham, Clifford, and the Rebels 
with halters, together, and Clifford addresses the King with their sub- 
mission, which Henry receives, with the news of Cade's flight, and 
makes a pious thankful speech. To which say, All. "God save the 
King, God save the King." This is the whole of Scene ix. in Q, ac- 
counting for that in the facsimile. Scene ix. being treated as non-existent. 
Probably by Peele in Q. The King's speech that follows it (unrepre- 
sented in 2 Henry VI.): " Come let us haste to London " is in the stock 
style of either Peele or Greene, but more like Peele who uses "laud" 
(noun) several times. The rest of the scene is wholly Shakespeare's. 
See notes. 

IV. X. Note the realistic stage instruction. In Q Cade is coarser, 
using an objectionable expression (omitted here) and used before (at viii. 
63) and omitted also. He indulges also in unsuitable language, " Thou 
hast slaine the flower of Kent for chivalry," which Shakespeare refused, 
but admitted word for word (Kent = Europe) into Part III. But "best 
blood of the Realme" in Q is not much more unsuitable to Cade 
(speaking of himself) than his " unconquered soul" in Part II. Too 



KING HENRY THE SIXTH xxxvii 

many cooks spoilt Cade. There are signs of Nashe. See notes at 57-59. 
And for Peele, see note at last line, and observe Iden's verse, in finished 
scene as a foil to the prose of Cade. In Iden's last speech in the 
finished play — a very revolting one — we have the version of Stafford 
(iv. ii. 122, 123) recalled, and certainly those murderous wretches are en- 
titled to no gentle thoughts. It is very different in Q however. One 
is inclined to suggest Marlowe's hand, or at any rate his influence. One 
might also suggest that it was a relief to escape for a little from the 
strain of Henry's elaborated and unpleasing piety. It is the boastful- 
ness of the victor that makes up the needless brutality, 

V. i. 1-5. Agrees with Q very closely, and here Peele seems to have 
opened ; but Marlowe has similar lines, which are merely descriptive of 
what took place. From this point to the entry of King Henry (55) the 
part is rewritten (by Shakespeare) and nearly doubled in length. In Q 
we have again those wretched lines about leaving Somerset, and the 
towns in France, the former is saved for 61 below. But the latter 
we have three times elsewhere in the play. Several other lines in Q 
are accounted for, three in York's last speech (44-47), and "these abject 
terms " (25). There is no proof here that this part is due to Peele in 
Q, beyond the improvement in the later stage which is after all not re- 
markable. There is proof of the revision being Shakespeare's in several 
places. See note at " Ajax Teiamonius " (26). But he never wrote " ap- 
proach so neere. . . . Whereas the person of the king doth keep." See 
note at 22. From the entry of King Henry we are assured of Shake- 
speare's hand, he is accountable for him always, and has modified the 
description of Cade's head, adding the usual religious exclamations or 
sentiments. Compare Peele's knighting again with Jack Straw, and 
Sir William Walworth, already noted upon (79). The Q description of 
Cade's head recalls Marlowe again. See notes at 71-79. 

V. i. 87-105. York's speech is wholly rewritten by Shakespeare. 
He used one line of the original in Q above (6) : "Nor will I subject be 
to such a king, that knowes not how to governe nor to rule " ; and again 
here at 94. Points like these enforce the conviction that Shakespeare 
had a large share in Q here, and the Marlovian passages may be re- 
garded simply as the results of examples set. We have here some of 
the plumes that worried Greene (100). 

V. i. 105-216 (end of scene). Forty-eight lines in Q are expanded 
into a hundred and ten. Both are absolutely by the same hand, 
Shakespeare's, and the steady bettering in metre, in imagery and in 
poetic dignity is most noticeable. It is not true to say the Q is re- 
written here — it is added to, and in a harmonious way that could only 
belong to the one writer of both. The chief addition lies in King Henry, 
what he says or what is said to him. He is only allowed three lines in 
Q, but his growth in the full play is always attended to. 

V. ii. There is considerable alteration in composition and structure 
in this scene from one copy to the other. Peele opens it with his pro- 
phecy, which is shortened and removed from its too prominent position 
in the revision. There is much evidence of Peele in Q and not much 



xxxviii THE SECOND PART OF 

of Shakespeare ; vice versa there is little of Peele left in, and we find 
numerous undoubted evidences of Shakespeare in the final play. I 
refer to my note at the end of the scene, at the word "uncurable " (86). 
There is no need for repetition. There is one pair of lines (14, 15), 
identical in both plays (nearly), which belong to Shakespeare, and which 
he repeats (nearly) in 3 Henry VI. 11. iv. 11, 12. One of the many little 
strands in those complicated plays that bind them together with a rope 
of undivided, or at least of prominent, if not single, authorship. When 
Peele's prophecy was cut short, we may allot to him the line " Priests 
pray for enemies, but princes kill " (71), not altogether on the grounds 
of inferiority — he clung to alliterative clauses ; such as " for want of a 
priest the priest's part I will play " (518, b), and " Meat of a princess, for 
a princess meet " (428, b). Another startling line in this scene (4), " And 
dead men's cries do fill the empty air " may be given to Peele. He has 
a very similar one in Jack Straw : " That fill'd the air with cries and 
fearful noise " (395). From Spenser. By dead men he means ghosts. 
Peele was fond of ghosts who talked. He has a jocular ghost in Old 
Wives' Tale (455, b) ; a good idea. Just below there are two omitted 
lines of prose poetry undoubtedly Peele's ; he has " hew a passage with 
your conquering swords " in A Farewell to the General (549, b). " Faint- 
ing troops " (failing in courage) is not Shakespeare's, probably Peele's or 
Marlowe. Another line in this scene " Come stand not to expostulate, 
let 's go " at the end of Q, which is here omitted, is used in 3 Henry VI. 
II. v. 135 to close. 

V. iii. seems to be a joint production of Peele and Shakespeare in 
Q. "Thickest throng" omitted here, and omitted again from True 
Tragedie is noted on in 3 Henry VI. 11. i. 13. The parallels between 
Clifford's fightings here and in 3 Henry VI. afford several similarities. 
But the last two scenes in this play betray a weariness of the work. 
There are reminders again of Marlowe in Q ("faint heart," "eternised," 
"thickest throng"), but he would have thrown much more carnage about 
were it his work. Peele copies him in a mild way. See note at line 7. 

VII. Evidences of Greene or Nashe in 2 Henry VI. 

From the preceding section it will be surmised that I do not 
attach great weight to such evidence — but nevertheless it must 
be dealt with and summarised. 

The most prominent reminders of Greene are the Abradas 
one at IV. i. 108 in Q. We may regard this as one of the plumes 
whose pulling hurt Greene, and it might also be argued that 
Shakespeare relieved himself of the imputation by erasing it 
in Part II. For the scene is by Shakespeare. 

The other prominent passage is the Achilles' spear allusion 
(v. i. 100). But that was common property perhaps. See 
note. Several minor echoes occur (such as " alderliefest " "my 



KING HENRY THE SIXTH xxxix 

princely head," "map of honour") but they are of little conse- 
quence. Several more that have been confidently advanced as 
Greene's by previous editors are, my notes will show, unavail- 
ing. Some, such as "pick a sallet" (iv. x. 8), though only 
illustrated by me from Greene, have merely a fictitious value 
and quite likely were commonly used. 

Marlowe's influence appears in several places. Whether he 
appears himself is beyond decision finally, perhaps. I do not 
find myself able to come to a conclusion that he does so appear. 
Some of his case disappears if the Edward II. passages are re- 
garded as taken from here by him. See I. iii. 49, 50 ; I. iii. 79 ; 
III. i. 282, The middle one of these Marlovian passages is not 
in the first edition, but appears in Q 3 (16 19). The others are 
in Q, and also in 2 Henry VI. but altered, especially the last. 
It may be said therefore that Marlowe wrote these passages 
into Q, and made use of his own property in Edward II. 
The fact of Shakespeare altering or omitting them as his own 
final work, points the same way. 

In The Contention also I. iv. 14-20 (in this play), is un- 
doubtedly Marlowe's work, carefully revised out of recognition 
as his in 2 Henry VI. 

But Marlowe in connection with Henry VI. is best con- 
sidered by a study of Tainburlaine (both parts), and I reserve 
that for Introduction to Part III. Very interesting conclusions 
are arrived at. 

There remains but the young Juvenal, Nashe. He appears 
here and there in meteoric fashion, much as he did, but not so 
vividly, in i Henry VI. Close below Abradas (IV. i. 134, 135), 
the terms " bezonian " and " banditto," are best illustrated from 
Nashe's writings. In the Cade scenes also Nashe is recalled, 
as in the " cade of herrings " (IV. ii. 34) ; in the " hooped pots " 
and "small beer" (iv. ii. 66-68); "burly-boned" and "hob 
nails" (IV. X. 57-59)- Nashe may have learned all these things 
here. Nashe's work being mainly prose, is not to be traced in 
poetry, except sporadically. 

VIII. Other Influences: Bible, Golding. 

There are a good many Biblical passages referred to. They 
come in with King Henry's pious tone of language. The refer- 
ences here are to A.V. (161 1), which of course was not Shake- 



xl THE SECOND PART OF 

speare's Bible. Notes at some passages, therefore, become his- 
torically unavailing, as for example at slaughter-men in Part I. 
III. iii. 75. I have checked the ones referred to with an earlier 
version, the Geneva text, I. iii. 37; I. ii. 64; II. i. 184; II. iii. 
25 (A.V. reads lamp; R.V. lost an opportunity); iii. i. 71 ; 
III. i. 381 ; IV. vii. 31 ; IV. ix. 13 ; iv. iv. 37 ; v. ii. 33-35. In 
another reference (iv. iv. 10) both examples of " perish by 
the sword " in Job read " pass by the sword " in the earlier 
versions. (See, however, Matthew xxvii.) The above cuUings 
do not exhaust the examples in my notes. 

A number of parallels have been adduced from Golding's 
Ovid, a favourite volume with Shakespeare in his early days. I 
refer to this with the proviso that the examples from Golding 
are not cited as necessarily containing the earliest use of the 
expressions dealt with. Generally speaking they do. See i. 
iii. 75; il. i. 17; III. ii. 103; III. ii. 162; ill. ii. 315; III. ii. 
358; III. ii. 371, 391 ; III. ii. 403 ; III. iii. 16; IV. i. 62; iv. i. 
84, 85; IV. ii. 124; IV. ii. 148; IV. ii. 82; IV. ii. 124. Several 
of these are desiderata in New Eng. Did. 

In order to economise space the words or phrases illustrated 
are not quoted here (as in Part I. Introduction). But in most 
cases they will be found worth turning to, and I plead for their 
examination. 

It is well known that Drayton affords several parallels in his 
Heroical Epistles. It is enough to refer to them. They are 
obviously from Shakespeare in these plays at the same situa- 
tions, on which they were founded. 

IX. Spenser. 
I had intended merely to collect and refer to the passages 
where my notes indicate that the author of 2 Hemy VI. had 
Spenser in his memory. But on closer examination of the 
selected ones, I found they were of more importance than I 
thought. These are conspicuous examples — very likely there 
are others. They disclose an interesting fact — with barely 
one exception they do not occur in The Contention. 

I. ii. 11-13. Put forth thy hand, . . . heaved it up. Faerie Queene, i. 
vii. 14: " His heavie hand he heaved up on hie." 

II. i. 18. The treasury of everlasting joy ■ Astrophel, st. 27: "And 
her faire brest, the threasury of joy, She spoyled thereof and filled with 
annoy." 



KING HENRY THE SIXTH xli 

II. ii. 26. As all you know. All refers to two expressly here, and 
again (as Malone pointed out) in 2 Henry IV. iii. i. 35. Compare 
Faerie Queene, 11. i. 61 : "The dead knight's sword out of his sheath he 
drew, With which he cutt a lock of all their haire. Which medling with 
their blood and earth he threw Into the grave." All are the parents, 
Mordant and Amaria. 

III. iii. 22. the busy meddling fiend That lays strong siege unto this 
wretch's soul. Faerie Queene, 11. xi. 8, g: "All those were lawlesse lustes 
. . . Those same against the bulwarke of the sight Did lay strong 
siege." And 11. xi. 5 (in a literal sense): "that wicked band of 
villeins . . . lay strong siege about it." 

IV. i. 3-5. the jades that drag . . . the night . . . with flagging 
wings. The Dragon in Faerie Qtieene, i. xi. 10 has "His flaggy wings, 
when forth he did display, Were like two sayles." Possibly the adop- 
tion of the dragon's wings here explains how Shakespeare in other 
places {Midsummer Nighfs Dream, Troilus and Cressida, Cymbeline), makes 
the horses of the night (Ovid's noctis equi) dragons ; a much finer con- 
ception when Spenser's dragon is considered. 

IV. viii. 44. / see tliem lording it in London Streets (playing the 
lord). Spenser, Shepheards Calender, July. " They reigne and rulen over 
all. And lord it as they list." 

v. ii. 4. cries do fill the empty air. See note. This from Jack 
Straw in a Peele part, rather than Shakespeare's. But " empty air " is 
in Faerie Queene, i. viii. 17: "scourging th' emptie ayre with his long 
trayne " — probably earlier than Faerie Queene ? 

v. ii. 52. tears virginal. Compare Faerie Queene : " mildnesse 
virginall " (11. ix. 20) ; and " honour virginall " (11. i. 10). 

For further proof of Shakespeare's indebtedness to or affec- 
tion for Faerie Queene, I must refer to my Introduction to 
Part I., where it is more evident. But a good deal of my 
evidence there relates to this play also. I think there is suffi- 
cient to show it in both cases. How does it happen then that 
little or no sign of that great poem appears in The Contention, 
where I maintain that Shakespeare had a considerable share ? 
I answer that by the following positions : — 

Shakespeare had no knowledge of the Faerie Queene until it 
was a published work in 1590. 

The Contention was written before 1590. Any evidence or 
influence of Spenser in that play may be Peele's work ; as for 
example at the last line quoted (v. ii. 4) ; and the adjectives 
with " thrice-" which Peele had worked out long before, and 
which occur in The Contention ; and those numerical emphases of 
"ten thousand," and "Thrice . . . Thrice . . . And twice"; 
and the line-formations of " Was never " . . . " The fairest 



xlii THE SECOND PART OF 

ever , . . " — all of these are from earlier works than Faerie 
Queene. 

Peele, being a Londoner, was probably long in possession 
of a copy of, or a knowledge of the manuscript of Faerie 
Queene (written as early as i 580) ; which Marlowe quotes from 
as early as 1586. Shakespeare, recently come to town, may 
not have had this advantage until its printed appearance. 

These assumptions, if well founded, would place the Q or 
First Part of The Contention before 1 590 ; / Henry VI. im- 
mediately after, or in, 1 590 ; followed closely by 2 Henry VI. 
Certainly The Contention has all the appearance of being an 
earlier play than / Henry VI., although it follows it historically. 
That is, however, a matter of detail. There is more evidence 
to be brought forward. 

X. Kyd, The Spanish Tragedie. 

One of the few plays preceding " harey the vj." in Henslowe's 
Diary is " spanes comodye donne oracoe." This may or 
may not be the Spanish Tragedy — Boas says not. But a little 
below comes Jeronymo the 14th of March, 1591, just a week 
after Henry the Sixth. This is no doubt The Spdnish Tragedy. 
It is the only play therein that rivals Henry the Sixth in 
popularity, judging from its appearances ; and from external 
evidence no play of the time got such a hold of the people's 
fancy as the old Jeronymo. The earliest known dated edition 
is that of 1594. But an undated edition in the British 
Museum is probably of 1 592, in which year The Spanish 
Tragedy was entered in the Stationers' registers. 

I mention this much because the correlation of the date of 
this play with the plays here dealt with is of much interest. 
Ben Jonson's words in Bartholomew Fair (1614) are taken 
literally by Boas, and are his main argument for a date possibly 
as early as 1584. Jonson's words are "He that will swear 
leronimo or Androniciis are the best plays yet, shall pass unex- 
cepted at here as a man whose judgment shows it is constant, 
and hath stood still these five and twenty or thirty years." 
Therefore says Boas: "This fixes the date between 1584-9." 
In my opinion it does not. Jonson was born in I573' ^'^^ ^t 
the age of ten or eleven his observations on plays would be a 
little too previous. His first connection with the stage was in 



KING HENRY THE SIXTH xliii 

1597. These years, I take it, are merely a random shot 
equivalent to " when I was a boy." The coupling of two 
plays makes the remark yet vaguer. But one piece of evidence 
that is quite reliable is found in Nashe's famous preface to 
Greene's Menaphon in 1589, where Kyd receives rough hand- 
ling. This has been ably dealt with by Professor J. Selrick in 
his excellent edition of TJie Spanish Tragedy (Dent & Co., 
1898). No doubt then the play was written before 1589, and 
since it appears to be a pre-Armada play, dealing as it does 
with bits of Peninsular history with no allusion to the coming 
invasion, or to the preparations against it — it may date to 
1587-8. There are many more arguments, very subtle ones, 
tending to an earlier allocation. But enough has been said to 
show that it probably preceded the First Part of Henry VI. 
taking that as "harey the vj." in Henslowe. Preceded it, 
I mean, in composition. Let us examine the internal evidence 
of parallels, or loans, that I have collected. Once a play was 
acted, it must be remembered, quotations from it were regarded 
as public property. No known play was ever so promptly 
afforded this proof of popularity, that of being immediately 
quoted from, as The Spanish Tragedy. Shakespeare himself 
quotes from it in The Taming of the Shrew (Induction, 11. 7-10). 

In these excerpts I shall, if necessary, include Cornelia 
(undoubtedly Kyd's) ; and Solirnan and Perseda, certainly Kyd's 
(in part). The two prose pieces {The Householders Philo- 
sophie, and The Murder of I ohn Breiuen) included in Professor 
Boas's edition of Kyd are not dealt with. With regard to 
these plays of Kyd's and their dates, together with that of Arden 
of Fevers ham (1592) ascribed to Kyd by Fleay and proved, I 
think, to be so by Mr. Charles Crawford, I will make some 
further remarks a little later, embodying the results of Mr. 
Crawford's careful researches. Let us first see how matters 
stand in the present inquiry, with regard to that epoch-making 
piece The Spanish Tragedy. And in order to present a total 
result we may consider here the effect of that play on the 
whole Henry VI. series. 

I Henry VI. and The Spanish Tragedy may be rapidly dis- 
posed of. Two expressions only are common to both, that 
demand notice so far as I have observed. To have a fling at 
a person (III. i. 64) is in ill. xii. 21 of Kyd's play, but it is 



xliv THE SECOND PART OF 

earlier in Greene's Mamillia and elsewhere. And " to exclaim 
on a person " (ill. iii. 60) is well illustrated from The Spanish 
Tragedy (ill. xiv. 70). These being the only ones, show with 
emphasis that there is no community of thought or workman- 
ship between the two plays. There is, however, one exception. 
The general's stirring and elaborate description of the battle 
(l. ii. 22-84) illustrates almost every unfamiliar military expres- 
sion of the time : as " squadrons pitched " (IV. ii. 23) ; " Cornet " 
(IV, iii. 25) ; "chosen shot" (I. iv. 53). And a little later in The 
Spanish Tragedy (I. iv. 60-65), where another short notice of the 
battle appears, "wondrous feats of arms" is paralleled in 
/ Henry VI. I. i. 64. 

There is an important bearing in these latter parallels. 
They are found in many cases in Peele's work, from whom I 
have illustrated some of them (" launciers," not in Shakespeare, 
is in Peele), and they point to a conclusion borne out in many 
other ways and places that Peele made free use of Kyd, either 
copying him or working in parallel lines. There is much mili- 
tary writing in The Battle of Alcazar (later than The Spanish 
Tragedy ?) of the same description. As a concise whole, Kyd's 
battle-piece probably fixed itself at once as an exemplar in the 
minds of the dramatists. But as all used some well-known 
text-book of the time on warfare, too much stress cannot be 
laid here. 

2 Henry VI., and The Spanish Tragedy. 

Act I. 

I. i. 180. Behoves it us to labour for the realm. The Spanish Tragedy, 
IV. iii. 27 : " Behooues thee then, Hieronimo, to be reuenged." Not in 

I. i. 214. the state of Normandy, Stands on a tickle point, now they are 
gone. The Spanish Tragedy, iii. iv. 78 : " Now stands our fortune on a 
tickle point." Not in Q. 

I. i. 256. And, force perforce, I'll make him yield the crown. The 
Spanish Tragedy, in. ix. 12 : "Well, force perforce, I must constraine 
myselfe To patience, and apply me to the time." Not in Q (but it is in 
True Tragedy at 3 Henry VI. 11. iii. 5 ; it is omitted there in 3 Henry VI., 
but Shakespeare uses it elsewhere in King John and 2 Henry IV.) 

I. i. 81. And did my brother Bedford toil his wits, To keep ? The 
Spanish Tragedy, in. vi. 8 : "This toyles my body, this consumeth age." 
Not in Q. 

I. ii. 79. A spirit raised from depth of underground. The Spanish 



KING HENRY THE SIXTH xlv 

Tragedy, i. vi. i, 2. Andrea (Ghost) : " Come we for this from depth of 
under ground, To see him feast that gave me my deaths wound ? " See 
again 11. i. 172, below. In Q. 

I. ii. 88. Marry and shall. The Spanish Tragedy, iii. xiv. 156: "I 
marry, my Lord, and shall." Not in Q. See below at 3 Henry VI. v. 
V. 42. It occurs also in 7 Henry IV. v. ii. 34; in Richard III. iii. iv. 
36 ; in True Tragedy and in 3 Henry VI. v. v. 42. 

I. ii. go. The business asketh silent secrecy. The Spanish Tragedy, 11. 
iv. 23 : " Why sit we not ? for pleasure asketh ease." Not in Q. 

I. iii. 22. I am but a poor petitioner for a whole township. The Spanish 
Tragedy, in. xiii. 46 : " Heere are a sort of poore Petitioners." In Q. 

I. iv. 39. Descend the darhiess and the burning lake. The Spanish 
Tragedy, iii. i. 55 : " He lend a hand to send thee to the lake, Where 
those thy words shall perish with thy workes " ; iii. xii. 11 : "the lake 
where hell doth stand." Not in Q. 

I. iv. 14. to this gear, the sooner the better. The Spanish Tragedy, iii. 
vi. 23 : " come on, when shall we to this geere ? " Ibid. 42, 43 : " To doo 
what, my fine officious knave?" Hangman. "To goe to this geere" 
(but probably older). Not in Q. 

Act II. 

II. i. 172. Raising up wicked spirits from underground. The Spanish 
Tragedy, 1. vi. i, 2 (quoted above at i. ii. 79). 

II. iv. 34. The ruthless flint doth cut my tender feet. The Spanish 
Tragedy, iii. vii. 71 : "Wearing the flints with these my withered feet." 
" Ruthless" is in the The Spanish Tragedy, i. iv. 23. In Q. 

Act III. 

III. i. 54. As next the king he was successive heir. The Spanish Tragedy, 
III. i. 14 : " The onely hope of our successive line." Not in Q. Better 
in Marlowe. 

III. i. 272. Say but the word and I will be his priest. The Spanish 
Tragedy, in. iii. 37 : " Who first laies hands on me, He be his Priest." 
This is from the Watch's scene in The Spanish Tragedy which furnished 
a hint or two for 3 Henry VI. iv. ii. Not in Q. 

III. i. 302, 303. a raging fire of wind and fuel be brought to feed it with. 
The Spanish Tragedy, in. x. 74 : "That were to adde more fewell to your 
fire." See 3 Henry VI. v. iv. 70. Not in Q. 

in. i. 325. And so break off ; the day is ahnost spent. The Spanish 
Tragedy, iv. iv. 74 : "Here breake we off our sundrie languages." Not 
inQ. 

III. i. 331. Now, York, or never, steel thy fearful thoughts. The Spanish 
Tragedy, in. iv. 29 : " Now, Pedringano, or never play the man." See 3 
Henry VI. iv. iii. 24. Also in Peele. Not in Q. See 3 Henry VI. 

in. ii. 142,143. todraine Upon his face an ocean of salt tears. The Span- 
ish Tragedy, 11. v. 23 : " To drowne thee with an ocean of my teares." 
Not in Q. 

III. ii. 318. My hair be fixed on end as one distract. The Spanish 



xlvi THE SECOND PART OF 

Tragedy, iii. xii. 89: "Distract and in a manner lunaticke." But in 
earlier use. In Q. 

III. ii. 340. That I may dew it {thy hand) with my mournful tears. The 
Spanish Tragedy, i. iv. 36: "There laid him downe, and dew'd him with 
my teares." And twice in Cornelia. Not in Q. 

III. ii. 404. though parting be a fretful corrosive It is applied to a 
deathful wound. The Spanish Tragedy, 11. v. 22: " darke and deathfull 
shades." And for applied, meaning adapted (suitable), see quotation 
at I. i. 256, above. " Fretful " here, is earliest in New Eng. Diet. (1593 ?). 
See Kyd's Cornelia, v. i. 352 : " Say, freatfuU heavens, what fault have I 
committed?" And 1. 387, "thy freatfuU ielosie." The latter expres- 
sion occurs also in Arden of Fever sham (see Crawford's Concordance), 1592. 
Deathful, meaning deadly, was an old, but a rarely used word. Not in Q. 

Act IV. 

IV. I. loi. And to conclude, reproach, etc. The Spanish Tragedy, in. 
xiii. 20 : " And to conclude, I will revenge his death." Again in Cornelia. 
See also 3 Henry VI. 11. v. 47. Not in Q. 

IV. ii. 179. hang'd up for example. . . . The Spanish Tragedy, 11. v. 
10 : " A man hang'd up." Not in Q. 

IV. vii. 124. as free as heart can wish {think Q), or tongue can tell. 
The Spanish Tragedy, i. i. 57, 58 : "I saw more sights then thousand 
tongues can tell. Or pennes can write, or mortall harts can think." In 
Q. See, however, Halliwell's note about " ancient grants" in his edition 
ofQ. 

J Henry VI. and The Spanish Tragedy. 

Act I. 

I. i. 13. Whom I encountered as the battles joined; and 11. i. 13. Me- 
thought he bore him in the thickest troop. As doth a lion. The Spanish 
Tragedy, i. iii. 60, 61: "When both the armies were in battell ioynd, 
Dom Balthazar, amidst the thickest troupes, To winne renowne did 
wondrous feates of armes." The first is in Q, the second not in Q 
(here). " Wondrous feats " is in 1 Henry VI. i. ii. 64 (already noted). 
See at Marlowe, Introduction, Part III. Here is evidence of Tambur- 
laine in Tlie Spanish Tragedy. 

I. iv. 15. To triumph, like an Amazionian trull, Upon their woes 
whom fortune captivates. The Spanish Tragedy, 11. i. 130, 131 : "Thus hath 
he tane my body by his force, And now by sleight would captivate my 
soule." In Q. 

Acts i.-ii. 
I. iv. 49. I stain'd this napkin with the blood That valiant Clifford 
with his rapier's point, Made issue from, the bosom of the boy. And 11. i. 62: 
The ruthless queen gave him to dry his cheeks A napkin steeped in the Harm- 
less blood Of sweet young Rutland, The Spanish Tragedy, 11. v. 52, 53 : 
"Seestthou this handkercher besmerd with blood? It shall not from 
me till I take reuenge." And iv. iv. 133-124 : " this bloudie hand-kercher. 



KING HENRY THE SIXTH xlvii 

Which at Horatios death I weaping dipt Within the riuer of his bleed- 
ing wounds." In Q the queen says : " I dipt this napkin in the blood " 
(first passage) ; and the messenger says : "gaue him a handkercher . . . 
dipt in the blood " (second passage). Not unlikely The Spanish Tragedy 
furnished the idea. Note Shakespeare's developed uses of "issue." 

Act II. 

II. i. 187. Ne'er may he live to see a sunshine day, That cries " retire." 
The Spanish Tragedy, iii. vi. 5, 6: "But shall I never live to see the day 
That I may come." In Q. (Very likely older but I have no example.) 

II. ii. 124. By Him that made us all, I am resolved, That. The 
Spanish Tragedy, 11. i. 89: "I sweare to both, by him that made us all." 
In Q (a line lost here ?) 

II. iii. 40. thy brazen gates of heaven may ope. And give sweet passage 
to my sinful soul. The Spanish Tragedy, iii, vii. 9, 10 : ",And broken 
through the brazen gates of hell, Yet still tormented, is my tortured 
soule." In Q. 

II. v. 47. And to conclude, the shepherd's homely curds, etc. See 2 
Henry VI. above, iv. i. loi. Not in Q. 

Act III. 

III. i. 42-47. Compare this with Balthazar's speech, The Spanish 
Tragedy, i. ii. 161-165: "To him in curtesie, to this perforce: He spake 
me faire, this other gave me strokes; He promisde life, this other 
threatned death ; He wan my love, this other conquered me ; And 
sooth to say I yield myselfe to both." In Q. 

III. i. 57. A man at least, for less I should not be. The Spanish 
Tragedy, 1. iv. 40 : "Yet this I did, and lesse I could not doe : I saw him 
honoured." In Q. 

III. ii. 33-35. Lords, give us leave . . • Ay, good leave have yoti ; for 
you will take leave, Till youth take leave and leave you to the crutch. The 
Spanish Tragedy, iii. xi. 1-3 : " By your leaue Sir. Hier. Good leave 
have you : nay, I pray you goe. For He leaue you if you can leaue me 
so," In Q. 

III. ii. 58, 59. His the fruits of love I mean. L. Grey. The fruits of 
love I mean, my love's liege. The Spanish Tragedy, 11. iv. 55 : " I thus, and 
th«s: these are the fruits of love. They stab him." Not in Q. 

III. iii. 55-59. to grant . . . thy fair sister To England's king in law- 
ful marriage. Queen. If that go forward Henry's hope is done. The 
Spanish Tragedy, u. iii. 17, 18: "He grace her marriage with an uncle's 
life ; And this it is : in case the match goe forward." In Q. 

III. iii. 81. fohn of Gaunt, Which did subdue the greater part of Spaine. 
See The Spanish Tragedy, i. iv. 48-52 (quoted at passage). 

III. iii. 200. And I forgive and quite forget old faults. The Spanish 
Tragedy, in. xiv. 112 : " We have forgotten and forgiven that." 

Act IV. 

IV. iii. 1-28. Compare the Watchmen's scene (not in Q) with The 
Spanish Tragedy, in. iii. 16-48 (end). See note at iv. iii. i. First watch- 



xlviii THE SECOND PART OF 

man. Come on, my masters, each man take his stand. The Spanish 
Tragedy, iii. iii. i6: " Heere therefore will I stay and take my stand." 

IV. iii. 20. halberds. See above (The Spanish Tragedy, iii. i. 31). 

IV. iii. 23. now or never. See Part II. iii. i. 331. 

IV. vii. 57. Fie, brother, fie, stand you upon tearmes ? Q. The Spanish 
Tragedy, in. x. 20 : " And if she hap to stand on tearmes with us." 

Act V. 

V. IV. 34. // case some of you would. The Spanish Tragedy, 11. i. 58: 
" If case it lye in me." But see note. Earlier in Peele. 

V. VI. 66. // any spark of life be yet remaining. The Spanish 
Tragedy, 11. v. 17 : " O speak if any sparke of life remaine." 

V. iv. 70. I need not add more fuel to your fire. See above (Part II. 
IV. i. 302) for this expression from The Spanish Tragedy. 

v. V. 42. Marry, and shall. See at 2 Henry VI. above (i. ii. 88). 

V. V. 62. How sweet a plant have you untimely cropt. The Spanish 
Tragedy, 11. v. 47 : " Sweet lovely Rose, ill pluckt before thy time." Kyd 
repeats this (nearly) in Soliman and Perseda, v. iv. 

Perhaps it is wrong to make those last references here, and 
not in Introduction to Part III.: but it seems better to clear 
the way, and finish with Kyd's play. 

There is practically nothing of The Spanish Tragedy in 
/ Henry VI. ; in the same way that that play bears little evid- 
ence of Peele's workmanship. 

But in 2 Henry VI., and in j Henry VI. (in a less degree), 
there is unassailable proof that The Spanish Tragedy was made 
use of. This applies, oddly enough, to the two foundation 
plays in an opposite direction. Were it not for a single ex- 
pression (repeated), at I. ii. 79 and XL i. 172, the influence of 
the earlier play in The Contention is indiscernible. But that one 
cannot be lightly set aside. In 2 Henry VI. there are enough 
parallels, in Shakespearian parts of the play, to make it certain 
that Shakespeare knew The Spanish Tragedy well at that time. 
The suggestions may have arisen from Peele who is often hard 
to separate from Kyd. In reading Soliman and Perseda Peele 
is constantly recalled. When Mr. Robertson followed Mr. 
Fleay in ascribing Arden of Fever sham to Kyd (further estab- 
lished by Mr. Crawford) he says (in Did Shakespeare Write 
Titus Andronicus? p. 153): "In Arden as in Soliman, there 
are several words and phrases which seem to belong to the 
special vocabulary of Peele." The " revenge model " (of play) 
was common to Peele and Kyd" (p. 85) : " In one or two places 



KING HENRY THE SIXTH xlix 

it {Cornelia) suggests that phrases which we have been led to 
assign to Peele might be Kyd's" (pp. 114, 115) and so on. 
Here, however, we are on firmer ground. We have the Kyd 
passages undoubtedly. It is likely that The Spanish Tragedy 
preceded all these plays. We find nothing of that play in / 
Hoiry VI. (where Greene is chiefly in evidence besides Shake- 
speare), so little that it may be assumed it had not made its 
mark — or that Shakespeare did not know it — for I do not 
hesitate to say that the introduced bits of Kyd are due to him 
at least as much as to Peele. And the almost total absence of 
Kyd in The Contention, like the total absence of Spenser in the 
same play, tends to disassociate it by some space of time from 
2 Henry VI. (where both are in strong evidence), and to push 
it backward to a date even earlier than / Henry VI. It is an 
interesting fact that the later standard quotations from The 
Spanish Tragedy do not appear in these plays. Probably be- 
cause of their non-standardisation, as yet, by some well-graced 
actor. We have rather the memories of a reader. 

It might be said here, would it not simplify this bit of dis- 
cussion to assign a part of the authorship actually to Kyd ? I 
would reply that it is better to confine ourselves to the original 
quartette — Shakespeare, Peele, Marlowe and Greene, with a pos- 
sible fifth (Nashe or Lodge), to keep them in a ring-fence and 
let in no outsiders. That is where Greene placed the issue. 
Moreover, Kyd was never a chronicle drama writer, as were 
these four. I am aware that Mr. Fleay draws Kyd (usually 
with a query) into the welter two or three times in his Life a?td 
Work of Shakespeare (pp. 258, 270, 273, 274), but I can find 
no evidence from him ; only the mention of the name. Further, 
I find Mr. Crawford says in Collectanea (ist series, p. 113): 
" An exhaustive and painstaking examination of Kyd's work 
convinces me that The Spanish Tragedy, and, perhaps, Soliman 
and Perseda, as we know them now, are old plays revised." 
Possibly he may have ascribed some pieces of the revision in 
The Spanish Tragedy, to a date later than 2 Henry VI., in order to 
simplify this difficulty, and let the reviser have borrowed from 
our play. He gives no reasons for it, and it is better to omit 
any further confusion of dates. He goes further still and says : 
" It can be proved that they did not assume any of their known 
forms prior to the year 1590." With regard to The Spanish 

d 



1 THE SECOND PART OF 

Tragedy, the proof will needs be very cogent indeed. With 
regard to the others there is no question he is right. His proof 
will depend on the dates of matter borrowed (probably) from 
Spenser or Marlowe. 

But one conclusion he comes to is of interest, that " there 
has been gross copying by Kyd" — chiefly, it seems, from Mar- 
lowe's Edward 11. , to which is given "the accepted date" of 
1590. To place The Spanish Tragedy after Edward II., would 
relegate all chronological order of those years plays to the 
melting pot. 

These reminiscences from Kyd's play by the young author, 
Shakespeare, are harmless pieces of ingenuousness. They are 
unimportant but unmistakable, and an instance of what seems 
to have been a common and recognised practice (in spite of 
Greene's denunciations) amongst the brotherhood of actors and 
playwrights. 

We will leave Kyd now for the present. His later work is 
of no such importance as The Spanish Tragedy, and probably 
comes later than 2 Henry VI. After this date outside in- 
fluences — influences outside his own teeming imagination — are 
an ever-diminishing factor in Shakespeare's work. 

I hope Mr. Crawford, to whose accuracy and research I am 
continually and delightedly indebted, will forgive me for dis- 
agreeing with him in these points. Perhaps his proofs may 
yet be too much for me. 

I leave it to my notes to point out a continuously running 
series of Shakespearianisms in 2 Henry VI. It is interesting to 
see how many times parallels appear from Lucrece, from Venus 
and Adonis, and oddly enough from King Lear. In i Henry VI. 
some such evidence had to be adduced, to convince, if it were 
possible, those unbelievers in Shakespeare's presence there at 
all. But I believe there are fewer supporters of those tenets 
nowadays. 

At the end of my notes above on The Spanish Tragedy, I 
have concluded that The Contention preceded 2 Henry VL by 
some considerable space of time, and preceded also / Henry 
VI. in all probability, and I conceive that this is a likely 
statement from the nature of the plays themselves although 
dislocating their natural sequence. To that question I propose 
to return at the proper place in Introduction to Part III. But 



KING HENRY THE SIXTH li 

I was greatly satisfied to find this view confirmed by Grant 
White. He says, " The First Part of King Henry the Sixth, 
though primitively nude and puerile in its structure and stage 
effect, is much less antiquated in its fashioning, and more 
polished in its diction and versification, than The First Part of 
the Contention and The True Tragedy, and is very far superior 
to any other surviving play that was produced before 1 590 or 
1592." Nor does Part I. (in my opinion) present any appear- 
ance what ever of having been a twice written, or a re-written 
play. For a continuation of this line of argument, see Introduc- 
tion to Part III., on Soliman and Perseda. And again on the 
parallels found in Marlowe's Tamburlaine. 

The following is P. A. Daniel's summary of his Time- 
analysis of this play {New Shaks. Soc., 1 879) : " The interval 
between the First and the Second Part of Henry VI., is sup- 
posed to be occupied by Suffolk's negotiations for the marriage 
of the King with Margaret of Anjou. . . . Time of this play, 
fourteen days represented on the stage : with intervals, sug- 
gesting a period in all of say, at the outside, a couple of years. 
Day I. Act l. Scene i., interval (?) eighteen months: Day 2. 
Act I. Scenes ii.-iv. Day 3. Act II. Scenes i. and ii., interval, 
a month at least. Day 4. Act II. Scene iii., interval, at least 
two days. Day 5. Act II. Scene iv., interval, about twenty- 
seven days. Day 6. Act ill. Scene i., interval, a few days. 
Day 7. Act III. Scenes ii. and iii., interval, three days or more. 
Day 8. Act III. Scene i. Day 9. Act IV. Scenes ii. and iii. 
Day 10. Act IV. Scenes iv. to vii. Day 11. Act IV. Scene viii. 
Day 12. Act IV. Scene ix., interval, three or four days. Day 
13. Act IV. Scene x. Day 14. Act V. Historic Period, 22 
April, 1445, to 23 May, 1455. 

The interval between The Second Part and The Third Part 
of Henry VI., is to be supposed no greater than would be re- 
quired for the flight and pursuit from St. Albans to London. 
Richard makes his appearance in Scene i. with the head of 
Somerset, cut off in the battle. 

In conclusion, I have to mention that my Introductions to 
each of these three plays cannot be judged separately. They 
form a continuous whole in many ways, and I have distributed my 
matter among them in the way that seemed feasible, according 
as it accumulated. I must refer to the last (3rd) Introduction 



lii KING HENRY THE SIXTH 

for one section, my "Table of Continued Expressions" which 
covers all three plays as well as the Quartos, and appeared to 
me a useful and desirable piece of work. Whether my con- 
clusions find supporters or not, I have at least placed an 
armoury of weapons for use to demolish them in the hands of 
those who wish to do so. A determined believer in Marlowe's 
authorship will point triumphantly to the schedule of Tanibur- 
laine parallels in the same Introduction as the very thing that 
was needed. I take another meaning from it. 



THE SECOND PART OF 
KING HENRY THE SIXTH 



DRAMATIS PERSONS 

King Henry the Sixth. 

Humphrey, Duke of Gloucester, his Uncle. 

Cardinal Beaufort, Bishop of Winchester, Great-uncle to the King. 

Richard Plantagenet, Duke of York. 

Edward and Richard, his Sons. 

Duke of Somerset. 

Duke of Suffolk. 

Duke of Buckingham. 

Lord Clifford. 

Young Clifford, his Son. 

Earl of Salisbury. 

Earl of Warwick. 

Lord Scales, Governor of the Tower. 

Lord Say. 

Sir Humphrey Stafford and William Stafford, his Brother. 

Sir John Stanley. 

Vaux. 

Matthew Goffe.^ 

Walter Whitmore. 

A Sea Captain, Master, and Master s-Mate. 

Two Gentlemen, Prisoners ivith Suffolk. 

John Hume a;?^/JoHN Southwell, Priests. 

Bolingbroke, a Conjurer. 

Thomas Horner, an Armourer. 

Peter, his Alan. 

Clerk of Chatham. 

Mayor of Sai?it Albans. 

SiMPCOX, an Impostor. 

Jack Cade, a Rebel. 

George Bevis, John Holland, Dick the Butcher, Smith the 

Weaver, Michael, etc., Followers of C\T)'E. 
Alexander Iden, a Kentish Gentleman. 
Two Murderers. 

Margaret, Queen to King Henry. 
Eleanor, Duchess of Gloucester. 
Margery Jourdain, a Witch. 
Wife to Simpcox. 

Lords, Ladies, and Attendants ; Herald ; Petitioners, Aldermen, 
a Beadle, Sheriff, and Officers ; Citizens, 'Prentices, Fal- 
coners, Guards, Soldiers, Messetigers, etc. 

A Spirit. 

Scene: In various Parts of England. 

I Dramatis PersoncB] Cambridge (first given imperfectly by Rowe). 
8 Matthew Goffe] Cambridge. 

2 



THE SECOND PART OF 
KING HENRY THE SIXTH 

ACT I 

SCENE I. — London. The palace. 

Flourish of trumpets : then hautboys. Enter the KING, Duke 
Humphrey, Salisbury, Warwick, and Cardinal By. au- 
FORT on the one side ; the OUEEN, led in by SUFFOLK ; 
York, Somerset, and Buckingham, on the other. 

Suf. As by your high imperial majesty 

I had in charge at my depart for France, 

Note 

Collation : The text being that of the First Folio, notice is taken only of 
variations from it, in order to save space to present the parallel lines in The 
Contention to the reader. The Contention, first printed in 1594, is the 
foundation of the present play. It is styled here Q i. A second edition (Q 2) 
appeared in 1600; and a third (Q 3) in i6ig. All preceded the Folio, 1623. Q 2 
contains a few important corrections. Q 3 has only trifling literal variations from 
Q 2. The text of Q i is that printed in Cambridge Shakespeare, vol. ix. 
I. iuajesty] Maiesties command Q i. 

1-3. Asby . . . procuratorlThe O'p&n- able ceremonies ended, the Marques had 

ing of this play is a direct continuation the Lady Margaret to him delyuered, 

from Part I. In the last speech, Suffolk which in great estate, he conueyed 

announces his departure to procure through Normandy to Deepe, and so 

Lady Margaret ; he has now returned to transported her into Englande, where she 

present her to the king. The espousals landed at Portesmouth, in the Moneth 

are thus told in Grafton (The XXIIJ ofAprill." She was " coupled in matri- 

Yere) : " This noble company came to monie " at " the toun of Southwike in . 

the Citie of Toures in Tourayne, where Hamshire," after which " she was . . . 

they were honorably receyued both of conveyed to London, and so to Westmin- 

the French King, and of the King of ster, where upon the xxx day of May, 

Sicile. Where the Marques of Suffolke, she . . . was crowned Queene" (p. 625). 

as procurator to King Henry, espoused i. your high imperial ma}esty]Sha.ke- 

the sayde Lady, in the Church of saint speare uses this expression "yonr most 

Martins. At which mariage were pre- imperial majesties " in Henry V. v. ii. 26. 

sent . . . the Dukes of Orleaunce, of Compare Greene, James the Fourth 

Calaber, of Alaunson, and of Britayne, (xiii. 2ig): "Most gratious and im.- 

Seauen Erles, xij Barons, xx Bishops, periall Alaiestie." Marlowe preferred 

beside knightes and gentlemen. There " imperious " ; Shakespeare is about 

were triumphant lustes, costly feastes, equally divided, 

and delicate banquets . . . these honor- 2. at my depart] Compare Greene, 



4 THE SECOND PART OF [act i. 

As procurator to your excellence, 

To marry Princess Margaret for your grace, 

So, in the famous ancient city, Tours, 5 

In presence of the Kings of France and Sicil, 

The Dukes of Orleans, Calaber, Bretagne, and Alengon, 

Seven earls, twelve barons, and twenty reverend bishops, 

I have performed my task, and was espoused : 

And humbly now upon my bended knee, 10 

In sight of England and her lordly peers. 

Deliver up my title in the queen 

To your most gracious hands, that are the substance 

Of that great shadow I did represent ; 

The happiest gift that ever marquess gave, 1 5 

The fairest queen that ever king received. 

King. Suffolk, arise. Welcome, Queen Margaret : 
I can express no kinder sign of love 
Than this kind kiss, O Lord ! that lends me life, 
Lend me a heart replete with thankfulness ; 20 

For thou hast given me in this beauteous face 
A world of earthly blessings to my soul, 
If sympathy of love unite our thoughts. 

Queen. Great King of England and my gracious lord, 

3. to'] for Q I, ^. famous ancient [^auncient famous (^ i. 8, twenty] then 
the Q I. 9, have performed] did performe Q i. 10. humbly now upon] 

now, most humbly on Q i. knee] knees Q i. 11, lordly] royall Q i. 13. To 
your most gracious hands] Vtito your gratious excellence Q i. 16. received] 

possest Q I, ly-iQ- Quehi Margaret . . . kind kiss] Queene Margaret to 

English Henries Court, The greatest shew of kindnesse yet we can bestow. Is 
this kinde kisse Q i, 19. O , . , life] 20. Oh gracious God of heaven Q i. 

21, For . . . face] 22. For in this bcautious face thou hast bcstowde Q i, 

22. earthly . . . sonl]22,. pleasures to my perplexed souleQ^i. 23. If sympathy 
. . . thoughts] omitted Q i. 24-31. Great King . , . doth minister] 24-29, 
T/t' excessive love I beare unto your grace. Forbids me to be lavish of my tongue. 

James the Fourth (xiii. 212): "And 13, 14. substance . . . shadow] See 

since thy griefe exceeds in my depart, I note at i Henry VI. v. iv. 133-135. And 

leave my Dorithea." He has it several at Merry Wives of Windsor, 11. ii. 216, 

times again in the same play. New 217 (Arden edition, p. 95). 
Eng. Diet, quotes fvom Spenser's Faerie 15,16. The happiest . . . The fairest] 

Queene. See again 3 Henry VI. iv. i. See Introduction to Parti. A Spenserian 

92 ; Tivo Gentlemen of Verona, v. iv. construction. Compare the lines begin- 

96. Not uncommon and usually as here, ning " A braver ... A gentler " in Part 

3. procurator] substitute, procurer for I. in. ii. 134, 135. 
another. Only here in Shakespeare. 20. replete with] See Part I. i. i. 11 

From the Chroniclers. and i. vi. 15 (notes). 

II. lordly] Occurs only in 1 and 2 22. A world of] See Part I, 11. ii. 48 

Henry VI. and Lucrece. See note at and iv. iv. 25 (notes). Compare (Peele's) 

Part I. III. i. 43. "Lordly peers" Jack Straw (Hazlitt's Dodsley, v. 

occurs a second time in Q at line 36 399) : " a mean to shed a world of 

below. One of the most noticeable blood." 

points in the remodelling of the old play 24. lavish of my tongue] Omitted here, 

is the regular reduction of repetitions, but in Q is noted elsewhere. An older 

See note at "proud prelate," line 140. expression than "lavish tongue," 
Greene uses it more than once. 



sc. i] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 5 

The mutual conference that my mind hath had 25 

By day, by night, waking, and in my dreams, 

In courtly company, or at my beads, 

With you mine alderliefest sovereign. 

Makes me the bolder to salute my king 

With ruder terms, such as my wit affords, 30 

And over joy of heart doth minister. 

King. Her sight did ravish, but her grace in speech, 
Her words y-clad with wisdom's majesty, 
Makes me from wondering fall to weeping joys ; 
Such is the fulness of my heart's content. 35 

Lords, with one cheerful voice welcome my love. 

All\kneeling\ Long live Queen Margaret, England's happiness ! 

Queen. We thank you all. S^Flourish. 

Suf. My lord protector, so it please your grace, 

Here are the articles of contracted peace 40 

Between our sovereign and the French King Charles, 
For eighteen months concluded by consent. 

Glou. " Imprimis, It is agreed between the French King 
Charles and William de la Pole, Marquess of Suffolk, 
ambassador for Henry King of England, that the said 45 
Henry shall espouse the Lady Margaret, daughter unto 

Least I should speake more than besecmes a woman ; Let this suffice, my blisse is 
in your liking. And ywthing can make poore Margaret miserable, Vnlesse the 
frowne of mightie Englands King Q i. 32-36. Her sight . . . my love] Her 

lookes did wound, but tiow her speech doth pierce. Lovely [Queene Margaret sit 
doTn'i by my side : And vnckle Gloster, and you Lordly Peeres, With one voice 
welcome my beloiied Queene Q i. 38. {Flourish] Sound trumpets (after We 

thank you all 35) Q i. 40. of contracted \ 37. confirmde of (^ 1. 42. For 
. . . consent] 39. Till terme of eighteene months be full expirde. 46. shall 

espouse] 42, 43. shal wed and espouse Q i. 46. unto] to Q i. 

28. alderliefest] dearest of all. Not latest used perhaps in " yclept," as in 

again in Shakespeare. Greene has Love's Labour's Lost, i.'i. 7.i^2 [ycXeTpftd) 

"mine aldertruest love" in jfames the and v. ii. 602 (ycliped) ; "y-ravished" 

Fourth (Grosart, xiii. 322). " Alderlie- and " y-slaked " are in Pmc/f5. Greene 

fest" occurs several times in Chaucer, has "yblent" (viii. 122). Spenser em- 

from " alder," the old genitive plural of ploys it very commonly. Not in Q. 
"all." See New Eng. Diet, in v. All, D3. 34. weeping joys] Malonesays: " This 

It was in use down to 1600. Not in Q. weeping joy, of which there is no trace 

31. over joy] greater, higher joy. in the original play, Shakespeare was 

"Over" is an adjective here. "Lavish extremely fond of ; having introduced it 

of my tongue," in Q (25), is noted on at in Much Ado About Nothing, King 

" lavish tongue," Part I. 11. v. 47. In Richard II., Macbeth and King Lear." 
the same speech "Let this suffice" 43. /w^Wwns] in the first place. See 

(27) is a Shakespearian expression. See again Two Gentlemen of Verona, m. i. 

Winter's Tale, i. ii. 235 ; 3 Henry IV. 274, 302, and Taming of the Shrew, IV. 

III. ii. 178. It is in Greene's Orlando i. 68, iv. iii. 135. In Marlowe's J^je' 0/ 

Furioso several times. Not in Q. Malta (1590) and Greene's Looking 

33. y-clad] an archaism, at this time ; Glasse for London {ante 1592) in trivial 

the old past participle with ge. It was use. 



6 THE SECOTs^D PART OF [act i. 

Reignier King of Naples, Sicilia, and Jerusalem, and 
crown her Queen of England ere the thirtieth of May 
next ensuing. Item, that the duchy of Anjou and 
the county of Maine shall be released and delivered 50 
to the king her father " — {^Lets the paper fall. 

King. Uncle, how now ! 

Glou. Pardon me, gracious lord ; 

Some sudden qualm hath struck me at the heart 
And dimmed mine eyes, that I can read no further. 

King. Uncle of Winchester, I pray, read on. 55 

Car. " Item, It is further agreed between them, that the 
duchies of Anjou and Maine shall be released and de- 
livered over to the king her father, and she sent over 
of the King of England's own proper cost and charges, 
without having any dowry." 60 

King. They please us well. Lord marquess, kneel down : 
We here create thee the first Duke of Suffolk, 

47, Raynard . . . Sicilia] 44. Regnier . . . Cysscls Q i. 48. thirtieth of 
May next ensuing'] 45. 30 of the next month Q i. 49. Item, that] 46. Item. 
It is further agreed betweene them that Q i. " Q 1 " will be omitted in future ; 
collations not otherwise referenced will belong to Q i. 50- delivered] 47. 
delivered over. 51. Lets the paper fall] 48. Duke Humphrey lets it fall Q; 
omitted Ff. 52. Uncle . . . lord] 50, 51. How now vnkle, whats the matter 
that you stay so sodenly. Humph. Pardon, my lord. 53. some . . . heart] 
50. a sodain qualme came over my heart. 54. And dimmed . . . further] 51. 
which dimmes . . . more. 55. King. Uncle . . . read on] 52. Vncle . . . you 
reade on. 57. Maine] 54. of Mayne. 60. without having any dowry] 56. 
without dowry. 61-68. They please . . .] prose in Q i. 62. the] 58. 
omitted Q. 

48. ere the thirtieth of May] See under " Charge." " Upon their own 
extract at beginning of scene. For the proper costs and charges " is a translation 
remainder of this "article," and the oi suis &' eoi-um propriis sumptibus &• 
following " item " relative to Anjou and expensis in Letters Patents granted to the 
Maine, see Part I. v, iii. 154 and notes. Cabots by Henry VII., 1495 (Hakluyt 

53. sudden qualm] "Qualm" is in edition, 1810-1812, pp. 25-26, vol. ni.), 

Love's Labour '5 Lost, v. ii. 279 (see note, 1600. Compare Peele, Old Wives Tale 

Arden edition) and in Much Ado (Dyce, 452, a) : " I '11 bestow one peal 

About Nothing. "Sudden qualm" is of Jack at mine own proper costs and 

in Greene's iames the Fourth (xiii. charges." And in Nashe, Unfortunate 

297) :— Traveller (Grosart, v. 70), 1594- See 

" Woes me, for him I moane : below, 1. 132. 

Helve now helpe a. suddaine qualme 62. create thee the first Duke of 

Assayles my heart" Suffolk] This occurred the year after- 

(fwa 1590-1591). Kyd used this in wards (1445, The XXIIIJ Yere) :" This 

Soliman and Perseda, 11. i. 49-50; and Marques thus gotten up into fortunes 

(probably) in Arden of Feversham, v. trone, not content with his degree, by 

i' 308. the meanes of the Queene was shortly 

=^7.' released] surrendered, given up. erected to the estate and degree of 

An old use. a Duke, & ruled the King at his 

59. own proper cost and charges] An pleasure" (Grafton, p. 627). He had 

old expression generally used in connec- been raised from Earl to Marquis before 

tion with large expenses involved in sailing to France for the conveyance of 

state affairs. Not dealt with in New the Queen. In the same year (1445), 

Eng. Diet, although this passage is cited Grafton says (p. 626) : " It was openly 



sc. I.] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 7 

And girt thee with the sword. Cousin of York, 

We here discharge your grace from being regent 

r the parts of France, till term of eighteen months 65 

Be full expired. Thanks, uncle Winchester, 

Gloucester, York, Buckingham, Somerset, 

Salisbury, and Warwick ; 

We thank you all for this great favour done, 

In entertainment to my princely queen. 70 

Come, let us in, and with all speed provide 

To see her coronation be performed. 

[Exeunt King^ Queen, and Suffolk. 
Glou. Brave peers of England, pillars of the state, 
To you Duke Humphrey must unload his grief, 
Your grief, the common grief of all the land. 75 

What ! did my brother Henry spend his youth. 
His valour, coin, and people, in the wars ? 
Did he so often lodge in open field, 
In winter's cold, and summer's parching heat, 

63. girt'\ Q, Ff ; gird, Cambridge. 65. /' the\ Ff ; in the Q. 67. Bucking- 
ham] 62. ami Buckingham. 72. Exeunt . . . ] 65. Exet . . . and Duke 
Humphrey staies all the rest. Exit . . . Manet the rest. F i. 73. Glou.] 67. 
Humphrey (and throughout). 74. unload] 68. unfold. 75. Your . . . land] 
omitted Q. 76. spend Jiis youtli] 6g. toyle Iiiinselfe. 77-8o. His valour . . . 
inheritance] 70. And waste his subjects for to conqucre France? 

knowen, that the French king was redie That might strike terror to our 

in all thinges to make open warre, if daring foes ? " 

no peace . . . were agreed. For which 78. lodge in . . . field] Compare 

consideracion, money was graunted, men Love's Labour's Lost, 11. i. 85: "He 

were appoynted, and a great armie rather means to lodge you in the field." 

gathered together, and the Duke of " Lodge " in the sense of " lie " is a 

Sommerset was appoynted Regent of favourite verb with Shakespeare. A 

Normandie, and tlie Duke of Yorke common Biblical sense. It occurs com- 

thereof discharged" (Hall, p. 206). monly in the Chroniclers, as in Grafton's 

See line 64. military operations of Edward the III. : 

63. girt] See Part I. in. i. 171 and " /orf^e^ on the sandes " (363); "lodged 

note. in the feldes" {^jo). 

" My colours I advance, 78. open field] Not elsewhere in 
And girt me with my sword, and Shakespeare. Compare Peele, Old 
shake my lance " Wives Talc (452, b) : "Away with 
(Peele, Descensus Astrcrce (Dyce, 542, him into the open fields." See quota- 
fa), 1591). And see pp. 549, a, and 557, b, tion from Locrine at " burgonet," v. i. 
for other examples. Compare "rents," 204. 

Part HI. III. ii. 175. In Greene and 79. In winter's cold . . . parching 

Spenser. heat] Compare Lucrece, 1145 : "That 

65,66. term . . .full expired] Com- knows not parching heat nor freezing 

pare Peele, SiV C/>'o?MOM (506, b) :" Now cold"; "Sun's parching heat" occurs 

are the ten days full expired wherein," in Part 1. 1. ii. 77. Compare this speech 

etc. and the succeeding ones by York and 

73. pillars of the state] Similarly in Warwick with those by York and War- 

Locrine, v. i. : — wick to the same purpose in the last 

" Now who is left to helpless Albion, scene but one of Part I. They are less 

That as a pillar might uphold our developed here in the Quarto. This 

state, may imply that the Quarto is by the 



8 THE SECOND PART OF [act i. 

To conquer France, his true inheritance ? 80 

And did my brother Bedford toil his wits, 

To keep by policy what Henry got? 

Have you yourselves, Somerset, Buckingham, 

Brave York, Salisbury, and victorious Warwick, 

Received deep scars in France and Normandy ? 85 

Or hath mine uncle Beaufort and myself, 

With all the learned council of the realm, 

Studied so long, sat in the council-house 

Early and late, debating to and fro 

How France and Frenchmen might be kept in awe? go 

And hath his highness in his infancy 

Crowned in Paris, in despite of foes? 

And shall these labours and these honours die ? 

Shall Henry's conquest, Bedford's vigilance, 

Your deeds of war and all our counsel die ? 95 

O peers of England ! shameful is this league, 

Fatal this marriage, cancelling your fame, 

Blotting your names from books of memory, 

Razing the characters of your renown, 

81. And . . . toil his 'o.'its]ji. And . . . spend his time. 82. To . . . got?] 
72. To kcepe in awe that stout vnruly Realme ? S3-85. Have you . . Nor- 
mandy] omitted Q. 86-95. Or hath mine tincle Beaufort . . . all our counsel 
die ?] 7 V75. And have not I and mine vncle Bewford here, Done all we could to 
keepe that lande in peace? And is all our labours then spent in vaine. 96- 
loi. peers . . . had fiever been] ~g-Si. Ah lords, fatall is this marriage can- 
selling our states. Reversing Monuments . . . as none had nere bene done 

same hand as Part I., in this position, 88. council-house] Occurs again, 

and that he did not feel called on to Richard III. iii. v. 38. Not in Q. 
labour those peers' grumbling a second 89. to and fro] See Part I. 11. i. 69; 

time. "Summer's parching heat" is and below, iv. viii. 57 ; and A'iw^ L^nr, 

an expression of Peele's. See An iii. i. 11. Not in Q in either passage 

Eclogue Gratulatory (Dyce, 562, b), in this play. In Kyd, Spanish Tra- 

1589 : — gedie ; Golding's Ovid ; Spenser, Faerie 

"From sea, from shore, where he Q'leene, etc. 

with swink and sweat, 97- cancelling . . . fame] Often so 

Felt foeman's rage and summer's used in Shakespeare : " cancel all 

parching heat, grudge " {Two Gentlemen of Verona, 

Safe is he come." v. iv. 143) ; " ca7icell'd love" {Romeo 

And for the whole passage, compare ".^^d yidiet, iii. iii. 98); '' cancelled 

Peele's David and Bethsabe (468, b) :— '^°^<, ^^P"!"-^^ ^°^- . . . 

" Joab and his brother m the fields, , 9^' ^^''^^l^'S ■ • .600.^5] Compare 

Suffering the wrath of winter and I-'icrece,g^b : To blot old books and 

the sun " ^ '" '"^u' contents. 

98. 600^5 o/;«fwor>'] This expression 

Note omission of " for to " from Q. See is in Part 1. 11. iv. loi. Not in Q. Peele 

Tamburlame, Part II. in. n. (55, a) for uses it similarly, but later. Compare 

parallel. It is found later (1592) in Marlowe, raw6«r/a»Ktf, Part II. iii. i.:— 
Arden of Feversham, Act n., attributed "all the world should blot his 

to Kyd by Fleay. dignities 

81. toil his wits] Kyd has "This Out of the book of base-born 

toyles my body, this consumeth age " infamies." 

{Spanish Tragedy, in. vi. 8). gg. Razing . . . renown] Compare 



SC. I.] 



KING HENRY THE SIXTH 



9 



Defacing monuments of conquered France, lOO 

Undoing all, as all had never been. 
Car. Nephew, what means this passionate discourse, 

This peroration with such circumstance ? 

For France, 'tis ours ; and we will keep it still. 
Glou. Ay, uncle ; we will keep it, if we can ; 105 

But now it is impossible we should. 

Suffolk, the new-made duke that rules the roast, 

Hath given the duchy of Anjou and Maine 

Unto the poor King Reignier, whose large style 

Agrees not with the leanness of his purse. 1 10 

Sal. Now, by the death of Him that died for all. 

These counties were the keys of Normandy. 

But wherefore weeps Warwick, my valiant son ? 

102. Nephew . . . discourse'] 82. Why how now cosin Gloster, what needs this ? 
103, 104. This peroration . . . keep it still] omitted Q. 105, 106. Ay, uncle 
. . . we should] omitted Q. 107-110. Suffolk . . . purse] (transfer to Glou- 
cester's last speech) 76-78. For Suffolke he, the new made . . . roast, Hath given 
away for our King Henries Queene, The Dutches of Anioy and Maync unto her 
father. in, 112. Sal. Now by . . . keys of Normandy] omitted Q. 113. 
But . , . %)aliant son?] (transferred to Salisbury's next speech, last line, 130 
But . . . noble sonne. 



Sonnet 25 : "Is from the book of 
honour razed quite." Not in Q. 

103. peroration] Not again in Shake- 
speare. The earliest example in New 
Eng. Diet, in the untechnical sense. 
Not in Q. 

107. new-made duke] See note, 1. 62. 

107. rules the roast] domineers, takes 
the lead — as if presiding over the head 
of the table. Not again in Shakespeare. 
An attempt to translate this phrase into 
"rule the roost" is against the history 
of the expression and entirely false. 
A few early references may be given, 
but it is needless to quote so common 
a phrase which is in all the collections. 
It occurs in Debate of the Carpenter's 
Tools (Hazlitt, Early Popular Poetry, i. 
85), circa 1500 in Skelton, Colin Clout 
(1518), and his Why Come Ye not to 
Courte (1522) ; in Heywood, The Four 
PP. (Hazlitt's Dodsley, i. 361), circa 
1540 ; in Udall's Erasmus (Robert's re- 
print, p. 294), 1542 ; in North's Plutarch, 
Solon (Tudor Trans, i. 223), 1579 ; in 
Lyly's Euphues (Arber, p. 134), 1580 ; 
in Watson's Poems (Arber, p. 82), 
ante 1590, and abundantly later. It is 
possible some writers capriciously gave 
it the roosting sense. Here, however, 
we are concerned with Greene's inter- 
pretation, which is undoubted. Com- 



pare Mamillia (Grosart, ii. 285), 1583 : 
" as the common prouerbe saith, to 
rule the rost after her owne diet." 
Greene repeats these words in The 
Carde of Fancie (Grosart, iv. 133), 
1587. The expression is appropriate 
here, since it occurs in Hall and 
Grafton, of Queen Margaret : " Which 
then ruled the rost and bare the whole 
rule" (TheXXXIIJ Yere). 

log. large style] grandiose title. The 
closing \yords of this speech are un- 
doubtedly Shakespeare's. Grafton has : 
" For King Reyner, her father, for all 
his long style, had to short a pursse, 
to send his daughter honorably to the 
king her spouse " (p. 625). 

111. by . . . Him . . . all] Compare 
Kyd, Spanish Tragedy : " I sweare to 
both by him that made us all" (11. i. 89) 
(Boas). And Peele's yack Straw (Haz- 
litt's Dodsley, v. 406) : " By him that 
died for me I will not dine Till I," etc. 
See Part III. 11. ii. 124. 

112. keys of Normandy] See note at 
line 214 below. The expression occurs 
in a different connection in Grafton (and 
Hall). The XXVJ Yere: " Pount- 
larche taken and surprised, which 
towne was the key and passage over 
the Riuer of Some, from Fraunce to 
Normandie" (p. 633). 



10 THE SECOND PART OF [act i 

War. For grief that they are past recovery : 

For, were there hope to conquer them again, 1 1 5 

My sword should shed hot blood, mine eyes no tears. 

Anjou and Maine ! myself did win them both ; 

Those provinces these arms of mine did conquer : 

And are the cities, that I got with wounds, 

Delivered up again with peaceful words? 120 

Mort Dieu ! 

York. For Suffolk's duke, may he be suffocate. 
That dims the honour of this warlike isle ! 
France should have torn and rent my very heart 
Before I would have yielded to this league, 125 

I never read but England's kings have had 
Large sums of gold and dowries with their wives ; 
And our King Henry gives away his own, 
To match with her that brings no vantages. 

Glou. A proper jest, and never heard before, 130 

That Suffolk should demand a whole fifteenth 

114-121. War. For grief . . . Mort Dicii !] 131-134. War. For griefe tJiat 
all is lost that Warivick won. Sonnes, Anjoy, and Maine, both giuen away at 
once, Why, Warwick did win them &• must that then which we wonnc with our 
swords he giuen away with wordes. 122-125. For Suffolk's duke . . . this 

league] omitted Q. 126-128. I never read . . . his own] 135-137. As I have 

read, our Kingcs 0/ England were woont to have large dowries with their wives, 
but our . . . his owne. 129. To match . . . vantages] om\X.t& A C^. 130-135. 
Glou. A proper jest . . . grow too hot] omitted Q. 

118. these arms of mine] Occurs This wrathful hand should strike 

again Part III. 11. v. 114 : " These arms thee to the heart." 

of mine shall be thy winding sheet." 122. Suffolk . . . suffocate] This is 

The construction is frequent in Shake- paralleled by the Maine quibble below, 

speare. See note at the latter line 1. 207. And see protector in Part I. (i. 

for reference to Marlowe. " Of thine" iii. 8, 9) ; and the nominal puns at i. iv. 

occurs several times, but only, I think, 107 (Part I.). See too Pool and Pole at 

in the earliest work. See Part I. 11. iv. i. 70. 

iii. 39: "I will chain these legs and 129. match with] Compare Part I. v. 

anns of thine." And Marlowe, Tarn- v. 66. Match (verb), meaning " marry," 

burlainc. Part II. iv. iii. (65, a) : " This is frequent in Shakespeare. Not in Q. 

unconquered arm of mine," and else- 129. vantages] advantages. Common 

where. in Shakespeare. Not in Q. 

iig, 120. got with wounds, Delivered 130. A proper jest] Compare Much 

. . . with words] "Won w\\.\\ swords" Ado About Nothing, i. iii. 54: "A 

and "given with words," in Q, is proper squire!"; and iv. i. 312: "A 

neater ; and it is not forgotten. See proper saying ! " And Henry VIII. i. i. 

Merry Wives of Windsor, iii. i. 44, and 98 : "A proper title ! " 

note in Arden edition, p. 113. And in 1^1. fifteenth] a tax of one-fifteenth 

2 Henry IV. iv. ii. 10. It is in Gosson, levied on personal property. The term 

School of Abuse (Arber, p. 52), 1579: occurs often in the Chronicles. See 

"Let . . . the word and the sword be note at Part I. v. v. 93. Grafton has 

knit togither." (XIX Yere of Edward the Thirdc) : 

121. MorifDJf?(./] This expletive is not "And in the sayde Parliament was 

again in Shakespeare. It is used by graunted unto the king toward the 

Marlowe, Massacre at Paris (237, a) : — finishj-ng and ending of his v.-arres with 

" Mort Dieu ! were not the fruit Fraunce, of the commons and of the 

within thy womb . . . Townes and Cities of the Realme of Eng- 



sc. i] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 11 

For costs and charges in transporting her ! 

She should have stayed in France, and starved in France, 

Before — 
Car. My Lord of Gloucester, now ye grow too hot : 135 

It was the pleasure of my lord the king. 
Glou. My lord of Winchester, I know your mind : 

'Tis not my speeches that you do mislike. 

But 'tis my presence that doth trouble ye. 

Rancour will out: proud prelate, in thy face 140 

I see thy fury. If I longer stay 

We shall begin our ancient bickerings. 

Lordings, farewell ; and say, when I am gone, 

I prophesied France will be lost ere long. {Exit. 

Car. So, there goes our protector in a rage. 145 

'Tis known to you he is mine enemy. 

Nay, more, an enemy unto you all. 

And no great friend, I fear me, to the king. 

135, 136. Car. My Lord . . . the king] 82-87. Card. Why how now cosin 
Gloster, what needs this? As if our king were bound unto your will, And might 
not do his will without your leave, Proud Protector envy in thine eyes I see, The 
big swolne venonie of thy hatefull heart. That dares presume gainst that thy 
Soueraigne likes. 137-144. Gloji. My lord . . . ere long] 88-92. Humphr. 

Nay my Lord tis not my words that troubles you, But tny presence, proud Prelate 
as thou art : But He begone and giiie thee leave to speakc. Farewell my Lords, 
and say when . . . would . . . ere long. 145, 146. So, there goes . . . mine 
enemy] 93, 94. There goes . . . My Lords you know he is my great enemy. 
147-155. Nay, more . . . be wise and circumspect] omitted Q. 

lande, foure fiftenes to be paide in two 140. proud prelate] A.i2i.vo\inte{orma.- 

yeres next folowing. And likewise ye tion of Greene's, especially when allit- 

Clergy graunted unto him three fiftenes eration lent its artful aid. In The 

to be paid in three yeres " (p. 358). In Contention "Proud Protector" occurs 

Arnold's Chronicle (1500), in "A Proui- four lines higher up than "proud pre- 

sion to brynge Henry the VI. oute of the late," and a little lower down is " proud 

debt," the term is a quynzymc. Lancaster." Shakespeare omits the 

132. costs and charges] See note first of these. See note at " lordly," line 

above, line 59, Frequent in Hall and 11. 

Grafton. See the latter at p. 233 {King 142. bickerings] wranglings, conten- 

lohn, The VIIJ Yere) : "Of his awne tion. In this secondary sense Gabriel 

costes and charges he sent his messen- Harvey uses the word earlier (1573). 

gers vnto Rome " ; and p. 379: " he hath 143. Lordings] An early form of ad- 

suftered me to abide here so long, the dress equivalent to "Sirs!" " Gentle- 

which hath beene greatly to my costes men!" amply illustrated in New Bug, 

and charges." It occurs in Grafton's Diet, back to 1200. The contemptuous 

earlier Continuation 0/ Hardyjig,^. ^^8 sense of "little lord" (See Puttenham, 

{1543). 1589, Arber, p. 229) is not present here. 

135, 136. big-swolne] In the Cardinal's Shakespeare uses the word again in 

speech here Q has " big-swolne Winter's Tale. Not in Q. Peele is 

venom." See note at Part III. 11. ii. iii very fond of it : '^ Lordings adieu" (Fto\. 

where this line occurs (almost) in Trw^ to Arraignment); " Lordings behold" 

Tragedie and in the final text. One of {Descensus Astrcece) ; and elsewhere, 

the many proofs of continuity of author- And Locrine, i. i. : "And in you, lord- 

ship in these plays. " Big swolne ings, doth the substance lie." See 3 

phrases " occurs in jferonvmo, i. i. 56 Henry VI. i. i. 50 (note). 
(1605). 



12 THE SECOND PART OF [act i. 

Consider, lords, he is the next of blood, 
And heir apparent to the English crown : 150 

Had Henry got an empire by his marriage, 
And all the wealthy kingdoms of the west, 
There 's reason he should be displeased at it. 
Look to it, lords ; let not his smoothing words 
Bewitch your hearts ; be wise and circumspect. i 5 5 

What though the common people favour him. 
Calling him "Humphrey, the good Duke of Gloucester," 
Clapping their hands, and crying with loud voice 
" Jesu maintain your royal excellence ! " 
With " God preserve the good Duke Humphrey ! " 160 
I fear me, lords, for all this flattering gloss, 
He will be found a dangerous protector. 
Buck. Why should he then protect our sovereign, 
He being of age to govern of himself? 

156-160. What though the common people . . . good Duke Humphrey] 97-100. 
For well you see, if he but walke the streets, The comttion people swarme about 
him straight, Crying, lesiis hlesse your royall exellence. With . . . Hum- 
phrey. 161, 162. I fear me . . . protector] 95-96 and loi, 102. And though he 
be Protector of the land. And thereby covers his deceit full thoughts, . . . And 
many things besides that are not knowne, Which time will bring to light in 
smooth Duke Humphrey. 163, 164. Why should . . . of himself ] omitted Q. 

165-167. Cousin of . . . his seat] 106-108.' Cosen of Somerset be rulde by me, 
Weele watch Duke Humphrey and the Cardinall too. And put them from the 
marke they faine would hit. 163-166. Btick . . . join . . . Suffolk] 109. 

Somerset, thanks cosin Buckingham, joyne thou with me. And both of us . . . 
Suffolke. 

154. Look to it] be on your guard, yet wanted he backbiters and privie en- 
Characteristic of Shakespeare. vyers " (p. 630). This passage is neither 

154. smoothing words] Occurs again in Hall nor Holinshed. Again, at p. 
in Richard HI. i. ii. i6g. Not in Q. 633 : "that William de la Poole, late 

155. circumspect] Shakespeare uses created Duke of Suffolke, and diuers 
this word again only in Richard III. iv. other, were the occasion of the death 
ii. 31. Not in Q. It is in (Peele's) of the sayd Duke of Gloucester, which 
yack Straw : — was the very father of the countrie, and 

" A little spark hath kindled all this the shielde and defence of the poore 

fire Commonaltie." See note at iii. i. 20: 

Which must be quench'd with cir- " Humphrey is no little man." 

cumspect Tegavd" 157. calling him ''Humphrey"] See 
(Hazlitt's Dodsley, v. 389). And Seli- note below at iii. i. 20. 
mus (Grosart's Greene, xiv. 222): "be 161. ^/oss] A favourite term in Shake- 
close and circumspect." It is not a speare, both literally and in transferred 
Greene word. use. Not in Q. 

156,157- the common people . . .good 162, 163. protector . . . protect our] 
Duke of Gloucester] Gva.i:tonha.s: " And See note at suffocate, above, 1. 122. 
thus much for the noble prowesse and Two lines in Q (loi, 102) omitted here, 
vertue, ioyned with lyke Ornamentes of appear below (with a little difference in 
knowledge and learning shyning in this the first) at iii. i. 64, 65, gi/en to Buck- 
Duke : For the which as before hath ingham. 

appered, he was both loued of the com- 163, 164. Why should he then . . . 

mons and well spoken of of all men, and being of age] Grafton says this of Queen 

no lesse deserving the same, being called Margaret (pp. 628, 629) : " This woman 

the good Duke of Gloucester : so neythei perceyving that her husbande . . . did 



sc. I] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 13 

Cousin of Somerset, join you with me, 165 

And all together, with the Duke of Suffolk, 

We'll quickly hoise Duke Humphrey from his seat. 
Car. This weighty business will not brook delay ; 

I '11 to the Duke of Suffolk presently. \Exit. 

Som. Cousin of Buckingham, though Humphrey's pride 170 

And greatness of his place be grief to us, 

Yet let us watch the haughty cardinal : 

His insolence is more intolerable 

Than all the princes' in the land beside : 

If Gloucester be displaced, he'll be protector. 175 

Buck. Or thou or I, Somerset, will be protector, 

Despite Duke Humphrey or the cardinal. 

\_Exeuni Buckingham and Somerset. 
Sal. Pride went before, ambition follows him. 

While these do labour for their own preferment, 

Behoves it us to labour for the realm. 180 

167. Buck. . . . We 'II . . . seat] 112. Somerset. . . . Weele quickly heave 
Duke Humphrey from his seate. 168, 169. Car. This weighty . . . presentlyl 
103-104. (end of speech beginning 93) But I will after him, and if I can He laie 
a plot to heave him from his seate. Exet. Cardinall. 170-171. omitted Q. 
172. Somerset. . . . Yet let us watch this hanghtie Cardinally 105. Buck. But 
let us watch this hanghtie Cardinall. 173-175. His insolence . . . protector] 
omitted Q. 176, 177. Buck. Or thou or I . . . Cardinal] 112, 113. Buck. 

Content, Come then let ns about it straight. For either thou or I will be Protector. 
Exet. Buckingham atid Somerset . 178-180. Pride . . . for the realm] 11^-116. 
Pride . . . follows after. Whilst these do seeke their owne preferments thus, 
My Lords, let us seeke for our Countries good. 

all thing by the aduise and counsayle Ft«m50 (xiii. 185) :" To vaile thy plumes 

of Humfrey, Duke of Gloucester . . . and heave thee from thy pompe." The 

determined ... to take uppon her the latter expression is also in Peele. See 

rule and regiment . . . least men should note at v. i. 61. And below, 1. 241. 

say and report that she had neyther wyt 172. haughty cardinal] See note at 

nor stomack, which would permit and Part I. i. iii. 23, 85. "Let us watch" 

suffer her husband, being of perfite age in this line is repeated in the Quarto, 

... to be governed by the disposition next line but one. 

of an other man." See below, iii. 45, 46. 175. displaced] See quotation at " de- 

167. hoise . . . from his seat] The faced," below, iv. i. 42. 
process of rewriting is interesting here. 178. Pride went before, ambition fol- 
The expression "hoise from his seat" is lows him] A modification of an ancient 
not again in Shakespeare. In the Con- proverb (in Ray, ed. 1742, p. 148) : 
;tf»ifJOM it is "heave from his seat," which ''Pride goes before, and shame follows 
is repeated immediately afterwards. This after." See Skelton, Poems against 
would necessitate its elimination ; but at Garnasche (Dyce, i. 131), circa 1500; 
V. i. 36 below, "heave proud Somerset Barclay, Ship of Fooles (Reprint, ii. 
from out the court" in the Contention 164), 1509; Heywood's Proverbs (ed. 
is altered to "remove proud Somerset Sharman, p. 46), 1546; Nashe, Pierce 
from the king," while at v. i. 61 " To Penilesse (Grosart, ii. 14), 1592 ; Jon- 
heave the Duke of Somerset from son. Chapman and Marston, Eastward 
hence" is hardly changed. In this Ho! iv. i (1605); Taylor's Works, ii. 
speech the Quarto {Contention) has " the 133 (1630). And in Camden's Remaines 
mark they fain would hit." This occurs Halliwell gives a reference to Wyntoun's 
below{inboth)at 1. 241. Hence its omis- Chronicle (circa 1400). 
sion here. Compare Greene, Orlando 180. Behoves it us] Compare Spanish 



14 



THE SECOND PART OF 



[act 



I never saw but Humphrey, Duke of Gloucester, 

Did bear him like a noble gentleman. 

Oft have I seen the haughty cardinal 

More like a soldier than a man o' the church, 

As stout and proud as he were lord of all, 185 

Swear like a ruffian and demean himself 

Unlike the ruler of a commonweal. 

Warwick, my son, the comfort of my age. 

Thy deeds, thy plainness, and thy house-keeping. 

Hath won the greatest favour of the commons, 190 

Excepting none but good Duke Humphrey : 

And, brother York, thy acts in Ireland, 

In bringing them to civil discipline, 

181,182. I never . . . Jioble gentlemaji] omitted Q. iS^-iSy. Oft have I seen 
... a commo7iweal] 117-iig. Oft . . . this haughtie Cardinall sweare, and 
forsweare himselfe, and brave it out, More like a Rtiffin then a man of Church. 
188-190. Warivick,my son . . . favour of the commo)is] I2yi2^. And thou, brave 
Warwicke, my thrice valiant sonne, Thy simple plainnesse and thy house-keeping. 
Hath wonne thee credit amongst the common sort. igi. Excepting . . . Hum- 
phrey] omitted Q. 192-196. And, brother Yorke . . . the people] 120, 121. 
Cosin Yorke, the victories thou hast wonne, In Ireland, Normandie, and in France, 
Hath wonne thee immortal praise in England. 



Tragedy, iv. iii. 27: " Behooues thee 
then, Hieronimo, to be reueng'd." 

186. demean himself] behave himself. 
See Comedy of Errors, iv. iii. 83 and 
V. i. 88. And below, i. iii. 106 ; and 
Part III. I. iv. 7. In Q at i. iii. 106. 

187. commonweal] In his later plays, 
excepting once in Measure for Measure, 
II. i. 42, Shakespeare has " common- 
wealth." " Commonweal " occurs four 
times in this play, four times in Titus 
Andronicns, and once in Part I. Not 
in Q. 

188. Warwick, my son] " Thrice- 
valiant son" of the Contention. The 
adjective occurs in Tit^is Andronicns 
and in Henry V. It occurs in Peele's 
Edward I. {circa 1589) : " Simon de 
Montfort, her thrice-valiant son." See 
Introduction to Part I. 

188-190. Warwick . . . thy house- 
keeping . . . favour of the cointnons] 
Grafton says : " Erie of Warwike . . . 
This Richard was not only a man 
of excellent qualities, but also from 
his youth . . . set himselfe forward 
with wittie and gentle demeanour, to 
all persons of high and of lowe 
degree, that among all sortes of 
people he obteyned great love ... by 
fiis abundant liberalitie and plentifull 
house keeping ... by reason of which 
doings, he was in suche favour and 
estimation among the common people, 



that they iudged him able to doe all 
things" (p. 652, The XXXIJ Yere). 
This is a much more satisfactory source 
than that quoted by Boswell Stone 
from Holinshed. See below, i. iii. 72. 
i8g. house-keeping] hospitahty. See 
Love's Labour's Lost, 11, i. 104 (and 
note, Arden edition). 

191. good Duke Humphrey] See note 
at line 156. 

192. 193. York . . . in Ireland . . . 
civil discipline] In the twenty-seventh 
year (p. 634) Grafton writes: "A new 
rebellyon began in Ireland, to the 
great displeasure of the King and 
his counsaill ; for repressing whereof, 
Richard Duke of Yorke, with a con- 
venient number of men, was sent 
thether as lieutenant to the king, which 
not onely appeased the fury of the 
wilde & savage people there, but also 
gat him such loue and favor of the 
countrey and the inhabitaunts that their 
sincere loue and friendly aifection coulde 
never be separated from him and his 
lignage, as in the sequele of this storie 
you shall more plainely perceive." 
See below, iii. i. 309, 310. 

193. to civil discipline] Compare 
(Peele's) Jack Strazi' (Hazlitt's Dods- 
ley, v. 39S) :— 

" If clemency may win their raging 
minds 
To civil order I '11 approve it first." 



I 



sc. I] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 15 

Thy late exploits done in the heart of France, 

When thou wert regent for our sovereign, 195 

Have made thee feared and honoured of the people. 

Join we together for the public good, 

In what we can to bridle and suppress 

The pride of Suffolk and the cardinal, 

With Somerset's and Buckingham's ambition ; 200 

And, as we may, cherish Duke Humphrey's deeds, 

While they do tend the profit of the land. 

War. So God help Warwick, as he loves the land, 

And common profit of his country ! 204 

York. [Aside.] And so says York, for he hath greatest cause. 

Sn/. Then let 's make haste away, and look unto the main. 

War. Unto the main ! O father, Maine, is lost ! 

That Maine which by main force Warwick did win. 
And would have kept so long as breath did last : 
Main chance, father, you meant ; but I meant Maine, 210 
Which I will win from France, or else be slain. 

[Exeunt Warwick and Salisbury. 

York. Anjou and Maine are given to the French ; 
Paris is lost ; the state of Normandy 
Stands on a tickle point now they are gone. 

197-202. yoin we together . . . profit of the land] 126-129. The reverence of 
mine age, and Nevels name, Is of no little force if I command. Then let us 
ioyne all three in one for this. That good Duke Humphrey may his state 
possesse. 198-200. In what . . . ambition] omitted Q. 203-205. Omitted 

Q. 206-211. Then let 's . . . the main . . . be slain] 138-142. Come sonnes 
away and lookc . . . War. Which Warivicke by tnain force did win from France 
. . . or else be slaine. Exet Salsbjiry atidWarwicke. 212-233. Anjoii • • • of 
Calydon] omitted Q. 

194. exploits] military undertakings. 206. look unto the main] A gambling 

A favourite word in Shakespeare, term. It occurs in Lyly's Euphues, 

familiar from the Chroniclers' usage. 1580: "Always have an eye to the 

"Employed upon the cxployte and wa)'«^, whatsoeuer thou art chaunced 

expedition of the full fynishing and at the buy" (Arber, p. 430). See 

ending of the warres with Fraunce " Grosart's Greene, vol. x. Name 

(Grafton, Edward the Thirde, The quibbling is plentiful in these plays, 

XVIIJ Yere, p. 358). And in the and always in Shakespeare. 

XX Yere (p. 366): "For Goddes sake 213, 214. the state of Normandy . . . 

asswage somewhat your courage . . . no7u they are gone] See above, line 112 : 

ye have a great exployt to do before " These counties were the keys of Nor- 

ye come to Calice." mandy." Grafton says (p. 625) : "For 

197. Join we] See note at " embrace her mariage, the Duchie of Aniow, the 

we," Part I. 11. i. 13. An old construe- Citie of Mauns, and the whole Countie 

tion very much affected by Shakespeare, of Mayne were delivered and released 

Not in Q. to King Reyner her father, which 

ig8, 199. bridle . . . the pride] See Countries were the very stayes and 

below, IV. vii. 112 ("bridle remorse") ; backestandes to the Duchie of Nor- 

and Part III. iv. iv. ig (" bridle pas- mandie." 

sion"). Restrain. An ancient usage, not 214. tickle] Greene has the word 

common in Shakespeare, but frequent earlier in Mamillia and in The Carde 

in Greene, in Alphonsiis, and elsewhere, of Fancie. Compare Hamlet, 11. ii. 337. 



16 



THE SECOND PART OF 



[act I. 



Suffolk concluded on the articles, 215 

The peers agreed, and Henry was well pleased 

To change two dukedoms for a duke's fair daughter. 

I cannot blame them all : what is 't to them ? 

'Tis thine they give away, and not their own. 

Pirates may make cheap pennyworths of their pillage, 220 

And purchase friends, and give to courtezans, 

Still revelling like lords till all be gone ; 

While as the silly owner of the goods 

Weeps over them, and wrings his hapless hands, 

And shakes his head, and trembling stands aloof, 225 

While all is shared and all is borne away. 

Ready to starve and dare not touch his own : 

So York must sit and fret and bite his tongue 

While his own lands are bargained for and sold. 

Methinks the realms of England, France, and Ireland 230 

Bear that proportion to my flesh and blood 

As did the fatal brand Althaea burned 

Unto the prince's heart of Calydon. 

Anjou and Maine both given unto the French ! 

234-257. Anjou and Maine . . . fair England down^ii\yiQ6.Yorke, Anioy and 
Maine . . . faire England downe. Q reads: 236. £^2^/a>^rf's soiZj 145. England. 



See, too, Lodge, The Wounds of Civil 
War (Hazlitt's Dodsley, vii. 128): — 

" The greatest townsand lords of Asia 
Have stood on tickle terms through 
simple truth " 
{ante 1594). But the expression here, 
"stands on a tickle point," is in Kyd's 
Spa}iish Tragedy, iii. iv. 78. See note 
at " now or never," 3 Henry VI. iv. iii. 
24. See Introduction. 

220. pennyworths] value. " Make 
cheap pennyworths" means make easy 
bargains. To equate the word with 
" trifles," as Schmidt does throughout, 
is quite wrong. See Winter's Tale, iv. 
iv. 650 ; Merchant of Venice, i. ii. 77. 
And Greene, Mamillia (Grosart, ii. 92) : 
" I should stand to my pennyworth, 
having made my market like a foole." 

222. revelling like lords] Compare 
"lording it," iv. viii. 47 below. "To 
swear like a lord " occurs in Elyot, The 
Governour (1884 edition, p. 87), 1531. 

223. While as] while ; " as " is super- 
fluous, as it often is with expressions of 
time, such as now, then (or tho'), yet, etc. 
In Golding's Ovid it constantly occurs 
superfluously, though it stands the first 
word of the connection. Compare 
" whereas " and "whenas" ; also " while- 
are" {Tempest,iu. ii. 127) for "ere while." 



224. hapless] unlucky. Only in 
Shakespeare's earliest works : in these 
three Parts, Lucrece, Two Gentlemen 
of Verona, and Comedy of Errors. 
Often in Greene's plays : " haplesse 
hour" (xiv. 197); "haplesse breath" 
(xiv. 241); " haples hap" (xiii. 398). 

228. bite his tongue] keep silence. 
See 3 Henry VI. i. iv. 47. 

232, 233. Althcsa . . . Calydon] 
"Althasa . . . 
There was a certaine firebrand 
which when Denies wife did lie 
In childebed of Meleager, she 

chaunced to espie 
The Destinies putting in the fire : 

and in the putting in, 
She hearde them speake these 
words as they his fatall threede 
did spin : 
O lately borne, like time we give 

to thee and to this brand. 
And when they so had spoken, they 

departed out of hand, 
Immediatly the mother caught the 

blazing bough away, 
And quenched it . . . 
And now . . . she like a foe did 
kindle fire thereto" 
(Golding's Ovid, viii. 594-605). See 2 
Henry IV. 11. ii. 93-96. 



SC. I.] 



KING HENRY THE SIXTH 



17 



Cold news for me, for I had hope of France, 235 

Even as I have of fertile England's soil. 

A day will come when York shall claim his own ; 

And therefore I will take the Nevils' parts 

And make a show of love to proud Duke Humphrey, 

And, when I spy advantage, claim the crown, 240 

For that 's the golden mark I seek to hit. 

Nor shall proud Lancaster usurp my right, 

Nor hold the sceptre in his childish fist, 

Nor wear the diadem upon his head, 

Whose church-like humours fits not for a crown. 245 

Then, York, be still awhile, till time do serve : 

Watch thou and wake when others be asleep, 

To pry into the secrets of the state ; 

Till Henry, surfeiting in joys of love, 

With his new bride and England's dear-bought queen, 250 

And Humphrey with the peers be fallen at jars: 

Then will I raise aloft the milk-white rose, 

With whose sweet smell the air shall be perfumed. 

And in my standard bear the arms of York, 

To grapple with the house of Lancaster ; 255 

245. fits] 154- fit- 255. grapple] 164. graffle. 



235. Cold news] See again, iii. i. 86, 
87 below. Unwelcome, disagreeable, 
bad news. Often used by Shakespeare 
in this sense. " Cold comfort " occurs 
in King yohn, and in The Taming of a 
Shrew ; " colder tidings" is in Richard 
III. ; " cold words " is in Two Angry 
Women of Abingdon (Hazlitt's Dodsley, 
vii. 334) ; in Day, and in Heywood. 
" Cold comfort " is several times in 
Nashe. In Kyd's Soliman and Perseda, 
in. i. 155, " Colde and comfortles news " 
occurs. 

236. fertile . . .soil] Compare (Peele's) 
Jack Straw : " loyal hearts . . . Shall 
grow like grains sown in a fertile soil " 
(Hazlitt's Dodsley, v. 413). 

240. spy advantage] A favourite use. 
Elsewhere Shakespeare has ^^ spy en- 
tertainment " ; " spy comfort " ; " spy 
marks of love " ; " spy a kind of hope " ; 
"spy some pity," etc. etc. Cf. Spanish 
Tragedy : " I spy your knavery " (in. 
vi. 47) (Boas). 

241. golden mark I seek to hit] See 
note at line 167 above. The " golden 
mark " is here the crown, not the centre 
of the target, which was white. Other- 
wise this might do duty for " hit the 
gold." Peele has " If honour be the 



marke whereat thou aimst" in Alcazar, 
n. iv. (430, b). 

244. wear the diadem] So Peele, 
Edward I. (396, a) : " And wears the 
royal Scottish diadem." 

245. Whose church-like humour s] See 
note at line 156 above. And at iii. 53, 

54- 

249. Till] while. 

249. surfeiting] cloyed, oversatiated, 
sick from excess. A thoroughly Shake- 
spearian sense. See Measure for 
Measure, v. i. 102, etc. etc. 

251. fallen at jars] Compare iv. viii. 
43. Earlier examples are given in New 
Eng. Diet, of "living at jar," etc., but 
it does not occur in Shakespeare. 

252. tnilk-white rose] See note below 
at II. iii. 78. 

255. grapple with] contend with. 
Compare King John, v. i. 61, Equiva- 
lent to " buckle with," used in these 
plays. See note at i. ii. 90 below. 

256. force perforce] by force. See 
again King John, in. i. 142, and 2 
Henry IV. iv. i. ii5. " Perforce " is very 
frequently used by Shakespeare. In 3 
Henry VI. 11. iii. 5, " spite of spite " 
reads " force perforce " in The True 
Tragedie (Quarto). The expression is 



18 



THE SECOND PART OF 



[act I. 



And, force perforce, I '11 make him yield the crown, 
Whose bookish rule hath pulled fair England down. 



[Exi'L 



SCENE II. — T/ie Duke of Gloucester's house. 

Enter Duke HUMPHREY, and his wife ELEANOR. 

Duch. Why droops my lord, like over-ripened corn, 
Hanging the head at Ceres' plenteous load ? 
Why doth the great Duke Humphrey knit his brows, 
As frowning at the favours of the world ? 
Why are thine eyes fixed to the sullen earth. 
Gazing on that which seems to dim thy sight ? 
What seest thou there ? King Henry's diadem 
Enchased with all the honours of the world ? 
If so, gaze on, and grovel on thy face. 
Until thy head be circled with the same. 



10 



Scene ii. The . . . house'] Theobald. Enter . . .] Ff; Enter Duke 

Humphrey, and Dame Ellanor Cobham his wife Q. i. Duch.] i. Elnor. 

(and throughout). 2. Ceres'] 2. Cearies. 3-16. Why doth . . . the ground] 
3-7. What seest thou Duke Humphrey King Henries Crowne ? Reach at it, and 
if thine arme be too short. Mine shall lengthen it. Art not thou a Prince, 
Vnckle to the King, and his Protector? Then what shouldst thou lacke that 
might content thy minde. 



in Kyd's Spanish Tragedy. See Intro- 
duction. 

257. bookish] See Othello, i. i. 24, and 
Winter's Tale, iii. iii. 73. " Bookish " 
occurs frequently in Greene, as in Fare- 
well to Follie, ix. 248 : " You are farre 
more bookish than wise " ; and in Seli- 
vius (xiv. 204) : " The schoolemen are 
prepard To plant 'gainst me their 
bookish ordinance." 

The last part of this speech, 143-166, 
is identical with The Contention ; and 
it is clear proof that the latter play is 
not only not wholly due to Greene, but 
is partly due to Shakespeare. Greene 
was incapable of this composition. It 
has the stamp of Shakespeare, and of 
no one else. 

Scene ii. 
I. over-ripened] No other example 
of this is known (except Q). Shake- 
speare uses a large assortment of such 
terms for the first time. 

I. droops . . . like . . . corn] A 
similar simile occurs in 1 Henry VI. 
II. V. 12 : — 

" like to a wither'd vine 
That droops his sapless branches." 
3. knit his brows] Only in 2 Henry 



VI., 3 Henry VI., and Lucrece. See 
note at 3 Henry VI. ii. ii. 20. In 
Grafton (1543). 

5. sullen earth] See Sonnet 29. Not 
in Q. Gloomy, dark. Seel Henry IV. 
I. ii. 236. 

8. Enchased with] studded, adorned 
with. A favourite phrase of Greene's 
but not again in Shakespeare. Com- 
pare Menaphon (Grosart, vi. 79) : " His 
face is not inchacte with anie rusticke 
proportion " ; and later (p. 123) in a 
beautiful " Eglogue " : — 

" Hir christall chin like to the purest 
molde 
Enchac'dc with daintie daysies soft 
and white." 
It occurs earlier in Spenser, Faerie 
Queene (11. ix. 24) ; — 

" a wandering vine 
Enchaced with a wanton yvie 
twine." 
And in Marlowe's T amburlaine , Part I. 
(Dyce, 10, b), 1586: '' Enchas'd with 
precious jewels of mine own." Not 
in Q. 

10. circled with] Compare 3 Henry 
VI. IV. viii. 21 ; Titus Andronic7is, iii. 
i. 277, and Richard III. iv. iv. 382. 
Not in Q. 



sc. H] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 19 

Put forth thy hand, reach at the glorious gold. 

What ! is 't too short ? I '11 lengthen it with mine ; 

And, having both together heaved it up, 

We '11 both together lift our heads to heaven, 

And never more abase our sight so low 15 

As to vouchsafe one glance unto the ground. 

Glou. O Nell, sweet Nell, if thou dost love thy lord, 
Banish the canker of ambitious thoughts : 
And may that thought, when I imagine ill 
Against my king and nephew, virtuous Henry, 20 

Be my last breathing in this mortal world. 
My troublous dream this night doth make me sad. 

Duck. What dreamed my lord ? tell me, and I '11 requite it 
With sweet rehearsal of my morning's dream. 

Glou. Methought this staff, mine office-badge in court, 25 

Was broke in twain ; by whom I have forgot. 
But, as I think, it was by the cardinal ; 

17-22. O Nell, sweet Nell . . . make me sad] 8-11. My louely Nell, far be it 
from my heart, To thinke of Treasons gainst my soveraigne Lord, But I was 
troubled with a dreame to night, And God I pray, it do betide no ill. 23, 24. 
What dreanid . . . morning's dream] 12-14. What drempt my Lord. Good 
Humphrey tell it me. And He interpret it, and when thats done, He tell thee 
then, what I did dreame to night. 25-31. Methought this staff . . . God 

knows] 15-19. Th/i'! night when I was laid in bed, I dreampt that This my . . . 
in two, and on the ends were plac'd, The heads of the Cardinall of Winchester, 
And William de la Poule first Duke of Suffolke. 

13. heaved it up] Occurs again (of " morning hastes to come in view 

hands) Venus and Adonis, 351, and And all the morning dreams are 

Lucrece, 11. 11 1, 638 ; and (of a leg) Two true." 

Gentlemen of Verona, iv. iv. 40. In Pantagruel, it will be recalled, directs 

Peele's Edward I. (Dyce, 410, b), he Panurge " to try the Future good or 

uses it of another part of the human bad luck of his Marriage by dreams, 

body : — . . . when the jolly and fair Aurora 

" Lluellen, after much ado, draweth aside the Curtains of the Night 

Should in spite heave up his chin . . . bend your spirits wholly to the 

And be the highest of his kin ? " Task of sleeping sound" (iii. 13). 

See, too, Spenser, Faerie Queene, vi. 25. office - badge] Compare Peele, 

viii. 15 : " His dreadfull hand he heaved Honour of the Garter (587, a) : — 

up aloft." " his office-badge 

21. my last breathing] my last (or Was a black rod, whereof he took 

latest) gasp, which occurs several times his name." 

in these plays. See note, Part I. i. ii. 26. in ttvain] " in two" in Q. Very 

127. Compare the two following quota- much used by Shakespeare, 

tions in New Eng. Diet. : " Forsake me 27. by the cardinal] See what Somer- 

not, I pray thee, in my last breathing " set says of the Cardinal, line 177 above. 

(Hieron, Works, i. 736, 1608) ; and The two hang together and are addi- 

" surrendered up his last breathings at tional to Q. Inserted perhaps to 

his house " (Wood, Atheii. Oxon. i. emphasise the Cardinal's hatred of 

260, 1691). Not in Q. Peele has "all Duke Humphrey, a leading motive 

the hope oiUie a.nd breathing" m yack of Part I. and II. See Part I. i. iv. 

Straw (Hazlitt's Dodsley, v. 408). and iii. i. We have yet another in- 

24. morning's dream] the true dream, sertion to the same effect in line 94 

An ancient superstition. So Ben Jon- below; and see note at line 117 (scene 

son, Love Restored : — iii.). 



20 THE SECOND PART OF [act i. 

And on the pieces of the broken wand 

Were placed the heads of Edmund Duke of Somerset, 

And WilHam de la Pole, first Duke of Suffolk. 30 

This was my dream : what it doth bode, God knows. 
Dzich. Tut ! this was nothing but an argument. 

That he that breaks a stick of Gloucester's grove 

Shall lose his head for his presumption. 

But list to me, my Humphrey, my sweet duke : 3 5 

Methought I sat in seat of majesty 

In the cathedral church of Westminster, 

And in that chair where kings and queens are crowned ; 

Where Henry and Dame Margaret kneeled to me, 

And on my head did set the diadem. 40 

Glou. Nay, Eleanor, then must I chide outright : 

Presumptuous dame ! ill-nurtured Eleanor ! 

Art thou not second woman in the realm, 

And the protector's wife, beloved of him ? 

Hast thou not worldly pleasure at command, 45 

Above the reach or compass of thy thought ? 

And wilt thou still be hammering treachery, 

To tumble down thy husband and thyself 

From top of honour to disgrace's feet ? 

32-40. Tut I this was nothing . . . set the diadem] 20-28. Titsh my Lord, this 
signifies nought but this That . . . grove, Shall for th' offence, make forfeit of 
his head. But now my Lord, He tell you what I dreampt, Me thoxight I ivas in 
the . . , At . . . and seated in the chaire Where . . . and at my feete Henry 
and Margaret with a Crowne of golde Stood readie to set it on my Princely head. 
41-50. Nay, Eleanor . . . no more] 29-33. -P'^ Nell. Ambitious woman as thou 
art, Art thou . . . in this land, And the . . . of him, Ajid wilt . . . treason 
thus. Away I say . . . no more. 

40. wj /;(?arf] The alteration from " my menne " (Grafton's Continuation of 

princely head " is worthy of note. Hardyng, p. 600, 1543). 

Stukely speaks of " my lordly breast " 45. at command'] when you wish it, 

in Alcazar, n. ii. (427, b). And in available. Compare Merry Wives of 

Selimus (Grosart, xiv. 288) : " scorn to Windsor, iv. iii. 12. Earlier in New 

stoupe or bend my Lordly knee." Lng. Diet. Not in Q. 

42. Presjcmptuous dame I] See note, 46. Above the reach] See Titus An- 

Part I. III. i. 8. dronicus, 11. i. 4. Compare Peele, Battle 

42. ill-mirtured] ill-bred, ill-natured, of Alcazar, i. i. : "whose pride doth 

Occurs again Venus and Adonis, 134. swell to sway beyond his reach" (423, a). 

Compare Greene, George - a - Greene 46. compass] reach. Common in 

(Grosart, xiv. 175) : — Shakespeare, Not in Q. 

" Nay, good my Liege, ill-nurtured 47. hammering] devising, designing, 
we were, then : A favourite expression of Greene's, 
Though we Yorkeshire men be usually within the head, or brains 
blunt of speech, added. See Philomela (xi. 117): 
And little skill'd in court, or such " hammering thus betwixt feare and 
quaint fashions, hope he built castles in the ayre"; 
Yet nature teacheth vs duetie to our and p. 159: " liamring how he might 
king." bring both Lutesio and her to con- 
Compounds in "nurtured" are old, as fusion." The nearest parallel in Shake- 
"all well-nurtered and gentle wedded speaiTe is in Titus Andronicus, 11. in. 'ig. 



sc. II.] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 21 

Away from me, and let me hear no more ! 50 

Duch. What, what, my lord ! are you so choleric 

With Eleanor for telling but her dream ? 

Next time I '11 keep my dreams unto myself, 

And not be checked. 
Glou. Nay, be not angry ; I am pleased again. 5 5 

Enter Messenger. 

Mess. My lord protector, 'tis his highness' pleasure 
You do prepare to ride unto Saint Alban's, 
Where as the king and queen do mean to hawk. 

Glou. I go. Come, Nell, thou wilt ride with us ? 

Duch. Yes, my good lord, I '11 follow presently. 6o 

[Exeunt Gloucester and Messenger. 
Follow I must ; I cannot go before, 
While Gloucester bears this base and humble mind. 
Were I a man, a duke, and next of blood, 
I would remove these tedious stumbling-blocks 
And smooth my way upon their headless necks ; 65 

51-54. What, what . . . be checked] 34-36. How now my Lord, What angry 
with your Nell For . . . drcame. The next I haue He keepe to my selfe, and not 
be rated thus. 55. Nay . . . again] 37, 38. Nay Nell, He give no credit to a 
dreame, but I would haue thee to thinke on no such things. 56-58. My lord 
. . . mean to hazvk] 39-41 (prose). And it please your grace, the King and Queene 
to morrow morning will ride a hawking to Saint Alboncs, and craves your company 
along with them. 59. I go . . . tis] 42, 43. With all my heart, I will attend 
his grace: Come Nell, thou wilt go with us I am sure. Exet. Humphrey. 
60-67. Yes, my good lord . . . Fortune's pageant] 44-46. He come after you, for 
I cannot go before. But ere it be long. He go before them all, Despight of all 
that seeke to crosse me thus. 

Grafton (and Hall) refer to Glou- 64. remove . . . stumbling-blocks] 

cester's marriage with Eleanor Cobham Compare Peele, Edward I. {ante 

the end of "The ThirdeYere" (1424-5) 1588?): "'tis a deed of charity to 

(he had been previously illegally united retnove this stumbling-block, a fair 

to Lady laquet or lacomyne, wife of wench " (382, a). The compound word 

the Duke of Brabant) : " he, by wanton is old and familiar from its Biblical fre- 

affection blinded, toke to his wyfe Elianor quency. Not in Q. 

Cobham daughter to the Lorde Cobham, 65. smooth my way] Compare Henry 

of Sterborow, which before (as the fame V. 11. ii. 188 : " Every rub is smoothed 

went) was his soueraigne Lady and on our way." Not in Q. 

paramour, to his great slaunder and 65. headless necks] This elaborately 

reproche. And if he were vnquieted bloodthirsty line is too smooth for 

wyth his other pretenced wyfe, truely Greene, and not grandiose enough for 

he was ten tymes more vexed, by oc- Marlowe. Like a good many other 

casion of this woman, as you shall here- lines, it recalls the hand of Peele 

after playnely perceyue: so that he (Battle of Alcazar). In the 1619 

beganne his mariage with euill, and Quarto the line corresponding to this 

ended it with worse " (Grafton, p. 561). reads : " I'de reache to th' crowne, or 

63. next of blood] Not again in Shake- make some hop headlesse " (Halliwell's 

speare. A very old expression, found in edition for Shakespeare Library). New 

Robert de Brunne's Chronicle {circa Etig. Diet, finds this " grimly jocular " 

1330). expression for beheading back as far as 



22 THE SECOND PART OF [act i. 

And, being a woman, I will not be slack 

To play my part in Fortune's pageant. 

Where are you there ? Sir John ! nay, fear not, man, 

We are alone ; here 's none but thee and I. 

Enter HuME, 

Hume. Jesus preserve your royal majesty ! 70 

Duch. What say'st thou ? majesty ! I am but grace. 
Hume. But, by the grace of God, and Hume's advice, 

Your grace's title shall be multiplied. 
Duch. What say'st thou, man ? hast thou as yet conferred 

With Margery Jourdain, the cunning witch, 75 

And Roger Bolingbroke, the conjurer ? 

And will they undertake to do me good ? 
Hume. This they have promised, to show your highness 

A spirit raised from depth of under-ground, 

68, 6g. Where are you . . . and I. Enter Hume.] ^y, ^S. Who is within there ? 
Enter Sir lohn Hum. What Sir lohn Hum, what newes with you ? 70. Hume] 
49. Sir lohn (and throughout). 70. your royal majesty] 49. your maicstic. 
71. What . . . grace] 50. My Maiestie. Why man I . . . grace. 72. Hume] 
51. Hum (and throughout). 72, 73. But, by the . . . be multiplied] 51, 52. /, 
but by the . . . state shall be aduaiist ere long. 74-77« What sayst thou . . . 
good?] 53-55 (prose). What hast thou confcrd . . . Witch of Ely, with Roger 
Bullingbrooke and the rest, and . . . good? 78-81. This they . . . A spirit 
rais'd from . . . propounded him] 56-58 (prose). / have Madame, and they have 
promised me to raise a Spirite from . . . that shall tell your grace all questions 
you demaund. 

Robert de Brunne's Chronicle [circa 68. Sir jfohn] A common early desig- 

1330). See Greene, in his play, James nation for clerks in holy orders. See 

the Fourth (Grosart, xiii. 255) : — Grafton's Chronicle, i. 241 : " Till the 

" On paine of death, proud Bishop, king had payde all which their Clergie 

get you gone, had demaunded . . . yea every sawcy 

Vnlesse you headlesse mean to Sir Ihon for his part," 

hoppe away." 6g. silence of the night (Contention)] 

Compare Tlie Troublesome Raigne of See below, i. iv. 16, note. For " back- 

King John (a play where Greene's side of my orchard," compare " backside 

hand is evident) ; Hazlitt's Shake- of the well," Peele, Old Wives Tale 

speare Library, p. 255 : " He make (455, a). 

him hoppe headlesse " (1591). And in 75, 76. Jourdain . . . Bolingbroke] 

The True Chronicle History of King See extract from Grafton at the be- 

Leir (Shakespeare Library, p. 342) : ginning of Scene iv. below. 

" I will make him hop without a head " 76. conjurer] See Part I. i. i. 26. 

(1593). 77. do me good] enable me to succeed. 

66, 67. slack to play] See quotation Compare Merry Wives of Windsor, i. 
at common sort, Part III. v. v. 87. iv. 152 ; and below, in this play, iv. lii. 

67. play . . . pageant] Compare Hall, 17. Similarly in Golding's Ovid (bk. 
Chronicle (Xlth Yere), p. 169: "This xiv. I.411): " Where for the thicknesse 
pageant plaied, the Regent sent Peter of the trees a horse myght doe no 
of Luxenborough ... to besiege the good." See below, iii. i. 19. " Do thee 
toune of Sainct Valerie." And again, good " occurs twice in Soliman and 
p. 279 : " The Erie of Warwickes Perseda. 

doynges, which must needes play a 79. depth of under-ground'] See 11. i. 
pageaunt in this enterlude, or else the 172. And The Spanish Tragedy (i. vi. 
plai wer at a poynt." i, 2) (Boas) : — 



sc. II.] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 23 

That shall make answer to such questions 80 

As by your grace shall be propounded him. 
Duch. It is enough : I '11 think upon the questions. 

When from Saint Alban's we do make return 

We '11 see these things effected to the full. 

Here, Hume, take this reward ; make merry, man, 85 

With thy confederates in this weighty cause, \Exit. 

Hume. Hume must make merry with the duchess' gold ; 

Marry and shall. But how now, Sir John Hume ! 

Seal up your lips and give no words but mum : 

The business asketh silent secrecy. 90 

Dame Eleanor gives gold to bring the witch : 

Gold cannot come amiss, were she a devil. 

Yet have I gold flies from another coast : 

I dare not say from the rich cardinal 

82-86. It is enough . . . this weighty cause. Exit.] 59-67. Thanks, good Sir 
lohn. Some two dales hence I gesse Will fit our time, then see that they be here : 
For now the King is riding to Saint Albones. And all the Dukes and Earles along 
with him, When they be gone, then safely they may come. And on the backside of 
my orchard here, There cast their Spelles in silence of the night. And so resolue vs 
of the thing we wish. Till when, drinke that for my sake. And sofarwell. Exet 
Elnor. 87-91. Hume must . . . witch] 68-71. Now Sir lohn Hum, No words 
but mum, Seale vp your lips, for you must silent be, These gifts ere long will make 
me mightie rich. The Duches she thinks now that all is well. 92, 93. Gold 
cannot . . . another coast] 72. But I have gold comes from another place. 94-99. 
I dare not . . . in her brain] 73-80. From one that hyred me to set her on. To 
plot these Treasons gainst the King and Peeres, And that is the mtghtie Duke of 

"Come we for thee from depth of 89. no words but mum] Compare 

under ground Peele, Old Wives Tale (457, a) : 

To see him feast that gave me my " What, not a word but mum ? " And 

deaths wound." Skelton, Garlande of Laurell (Dyce, i. 

Spenser has : — 406), 1515 : " There was amonge them 

" Merlin whylome wont (they say) no worde then but mum." The pro- 

To make his wonne, low under- verbial form is not in Shakespeare, 

neath the ground " exactly, again. 

{Faerie Queene, iii. iii. 7). 90. asketh] requires. Compare Tam- 

Si. propounded] Not elsewhere in ing of the Shrew, u. i. 115 : " My busi- 

Shakespeare. Greene uses it of evi- ness asketh haste " ; and elsewhere in 

dence in his Philomela (Grosart, xi. 187). Shakespeare. Not in Q. Compare 

The Duchess is fuller in her arrange- Kyd, Spanish Tragedy : " Why si*- we 

ments in the Quarto, for the obvious not ? for pleasure asketh ease " (Act 11. 

reason, that there is repetition to be iv. 23). 

avoided. See note at "silence of the 90. silent secrecy] See below, 11. ii. 

night," I. iv. 10 below. It is more 68. Not in Q. 

artistic to shift these details to their 93. coasi] quarter, direction. Schmidt 

place of action. omits to distinguish this sense, which 

88. Marry and shall] See again 1 is not met with again in Shakespeare. 
Henry IV, v. ii. 34, and Richard III. In the Quarto it is " place." 

in. iv. 36. Compare Kyd's Spanish 94. from the rich cardinal] Yet 

Tragedy (ii.xiv. 156) (Boa.a) : "Imarry, another insertion to lay stress on the 

my Lord, and shall." cardinal's relentless hate for Gloucester. 

89. Sea/ z</>] Frequent in Shakespeare, In the Contention (or Quarto) Hume 
with " eyes," " mouth," etc. distinctly states his other source is 

89. mum] Note the rhyming couplet Suffolk alone. 
(Hum, mum) in the Quarto, 1. 68. 



24 THE SECOND PART OF [act i. 

And from the great and new-made Duke of Suffolk ; 95 

Yet I do find it so : for, to be plain, 

They, knowing Dame Eleanor's aspiring humour, 

Have hired me to undermine the duchess 

And buz these conjurations in her brain. 

They say " A crafty knave does need no broker " ; 100 

Yet am I Suffolk and the cardinal's broker. 

Hume, if you take not heed, you shall go near 

To call them both a pair of crafty knaves. 

Well, so it stands ; and thus, I fear at last 

Hume's knavery will be the duchess' wrack, 105 

And her attainture will be Humphrey's fall. 

Sort how it will I shall have gold for all. [Exit. 

SCENE 111.— The pa/ace. 

Enter three or four Petitioners, PETER, the Ar^nourer's inan^ 

being one. 

First Petit. My masters, let 's stand close : my lord pro- 
tector will come this way by and by, and then we 
may deliver our supplications in the quill. 

Sttffolke. For he it is, but I must not say so, That by my meanes must worke 
the Duches fall, Who now by Conjurations thinkcs to rise. But whist Sir lohn, 
no more of that I trow, For feare you lose your head before you goe. Exet. 

Scene hi. 

Scene ///.] omitted Q. Enter . . .] Enter two petitioners, and Peter the 
Armourer's man. Q. 1-3. First Petit. My masters . . . quill] 1-3 (verse). 

97. aspiring hiimour~\ See note at should appeare that there can hardlie 

" aspiring French," Part I. v. iv. 99. bee a craftier knave then a Broker " 

99. buz] This verb occurs again, {Third Part of Conny Catching 
3 Henry VI. 11. vi. 95 and v. vi. 86. (Grosart, x. 185), 1592). It is also in 
And in Titus Andronicus, iv. iv. 7, Nashe (/I Prognostication, Grosart, ii. 
and Richard II. 11. i. 26. See, too, i5i) in the plural. Not in Q. 

Henry VIII. 11. i. 148. Not in Q. 105. wrack] See Part I. iv. i. 56 

Peele has it exactly in The Tale of (note). 

Troy (551, a), 1589: — 106. attainture] disgrace. Compare 

"Till one, I say, revengeful pov/er taifiture, 11. i. 188 below. New Eng. 

or other Diet, gives the word here the sense 

JB!<s2'(i in the brain of her unhappy of attainder, conviction, with earlier 

mother illustrations. 
A dreadful dream." 

Greene often has " buzz in the ears " Scene hi. 

of a tale, or slander. 2. by and by] immediately. Very 

100. A crafty knave does need no frequent in Shakespeare. Compare 
broker] The old form of this proverb, Edward's £)a;«o« a«(/ Pi^/zias (Hazlitt's 
which was very common, was " Two Dodsley, iv. 93) : " do thine office 
fase knaves need no broker," which is in by and by." And Sidney's Arcadia : 
Heyvvood's Proverbs (edited Sharman, " And by and by called him to fight 
p. 62), 1546. Greene, however, always with him, protesting that one of them 
used it as in the text : " It hath been two should die " (bk. i.). Not in Q. 
used as a common byword, a craftie 3. in the quill] simultaneously {New 
knave needeth no Broker, wherby it Eng. Diet.). Unexplained. Compare 



sc. 



iii.J KING HENRY THE SIXTH 25 



Second Petit. Marry, the Lord protect him, for he 's a 

good man ! Jesu bless him ! 5 

Enter SUFFOLK and QuEEN. 

Peter. Here a' comes, methinks, and the queen with him. 

I '11 be the first, sure. 
Second Petit. Come back, fool ! this is the Duke of Suffolk, 

and not my lord protector. 
Suf. How now, fellow! would'st any thing with me? 10 

First Petit. I pray, my lord, pardon me : I took ye for 

my lord protector. 
Queen. " To my Lord Protector ! " Are your supplications 

to his lordship ? Let me see them : what is thine ? 
First Petit. Mine is, an 't please your grace, against John 15 

Goodman, my lord cardinal's man, for keeping my 

house, and lands, and wife, and all, from me. 
Suf. Thy wife too ! that 's some wrong indeed. What 's 

yours ? What 's here ! " Against the Duke of Suffolk, 

I. Peti. Come sirs let 's linger here abouts a while, Vntill my Lord Protector come 
this way, That we may show his Grace our sexicirall causes. 4, 5. Second 

Petit. Marry . . . bless him /] 4-8. 2. Peti. I pray God sane the good Duke 
Humphries life. For but for him a many were undone That cannot get no succour 
in the Court, But see where he comes with the Queene. 6, 7. Peter. Here 

a' comes . . . sure] included in Second Petitioner's last speech. 8, 9. Second 
Petit. Come . . . protector] Enter the Duke of Suffolke with the Queene, and 
they take him for Duke Humphrey and give him their writings. 1. Peti. Oh 
we are undone, this is the Duke of Suffolke. 10. How now . . . with me] 
g. Queene. Now good fellowes, whom would you spcake withall ? 11-14. First 
Petit. I pray . . . Queen. " To my . . ." thine?] 11-15. Queene. Are your sutes 
to his grace. Let us see them first, Looke on them my Lord of Suffolke. Suffolke. 
A complaint against the Cardinals man, What hath he done ? (as if verse). 
15-17. Mine is . . . from me] 16, 17. 2 Peti. Marry my Lord, he hath stole 
away my wife, And th' are gone togither, and I ktiow 7iot where to finde them 
(as verse). 18, 19. Thy wife, . . . What's yours ?] 18, 19. Hath he stole thy 
wife, thats some iniury indeed, But what say you ? 19-21. Whafs here ! 

Against the . . . Melford . . . knave] ^^-^S. W hats here ? A complaint against 
. . . long Melford . . . knave. 

The Devonshire Damsel's Frolic, 1685 19. Against the Duke of Suffolk] 

(Appendix to Ebsworth's Westminster The " articles proponed by the commons 

Drollery, p. 341):^ — • against the Duke of Suffolke" are set 

" Thus those Females were all in a forth by Grafton in ten Items in " The 

quill XXVIIJ Yere" (1450). They relate 

And following on their pastime chiefly to the King's marriage and 

still." other French affairs. At the close of 

See Davie's Supplementary English them it is stated : " All these obiections 

Glossary for quotations from Roger he utterly denied, or faintly auoyded, 

North's Examen, 1740. See, too, Ains- but none fully excused. Diuers other 

worth's Latin Dictionary (1741), "ex crimes were laide to his charge, as en- 

compacto agere." " Qu'lls " at the date ryching hymselfe with the King's goods, 

of this play meant water-pipes, as in and landes, gathering together and 

North's Plutarch, Cato (Tudor Trans, making a Monopoly [' money pollde ' 

iii. 26). Many unavailing alterations in Hall] of officies, fees, wards and 

and explanations have been offered, fermes " (p. 639). The special act of 

Not in Q. enclosing here referred to has not been 



26 THE SECOND PART OF [act i. 

for enclosing the commons of Melford." How now, 20 

sir knave ! 
Second Petit. Alas ! sir, I am but a poor petitioner of our 

whole township. 
Peter. Against my master, Thomas Horner, for saying 

that the Duke of York was rightful heir to the 25 

crown. 
Queen. What sayest thou ? did the Duke of York say he 

was rightful heir to the crown ? 
Peter. That my master was ? No, forsooth : my master 

said that he was, and that the king was an 30 

usurper. 
Suf. Who is there ? 

Enter Servants. 

Take this fellow in, and send for his master with a 
pursuivant presently. We '11 hear more of your matter 
before the king. [^Exeunt Servants with Peter. 35 

Queen. And as for you, that love to be protected 
Under the wings of our protector's grace, 

22, 23. Second Petit. Alas ! sir, I am . . . of . . . township] 39, 40. i Peti. 
I beseech your Grace to pardon me, me, I am . . . town-ship. He teares the 
papers. 24-26. Peter. Against . . . crown] 20-24. Peter Thump. Marry sir I 
come to tel you that my maister said, that the Duke of Yorke was true heire unto 
the Crowne, and that the King was an vsurer. Queene. An usurper thou wouldst 
say. Peter. I forsooth an usurper. 27-31. Queen. What sayest . . . usurper] 
25. Queene. Didst thou say the king was an usurper ? Peter. No forsooth, I saide 
tny maister saide so, th' other day, when we were scowring the Duke of Yorks 
Armour in our garret. 32-35. Suf. Who is . . . before the King] 29-33. 

Suffolke. I marry this is something like. Whose within there ? Enter one or two. 
Sirra take in this fellow and kccpe him close. And send out a Piirseuant for his 
maister straight, Weele . . . of this . . . King {verse). Exet. with the Armorer's 
man. 36-39. Queen. And as . . . let them go] 41-43. Suffolke. So now show 
your petitions to Duke Humphrey, Villaines get you gone and come not neare 
the Court, Dare these pesants write against me thus. Exet. Petitioners. 

noted upon. Long Melford, in Suffolk, 1. igo. For the authority for the Ar- 

had for its chief family, in Henry Vlth's mourer incident, see note below, iv. 175. 
time, de Clopton (Lewis). The allu- 29. /Hrts^cr] The first three Folios have 

sion here may be to an occurrence of the misprint " mistress," first altered by 

Shakespeare's times. Warburton. But possibly Peter got 

22. poor petitioner] Perhaps an usual confused about the Jady he was talking 
term, as in Spanish Tragedy, in. xiii. to. He has already (Q) used "usurer" 
46 : " Heere are a sort of poore Peti- for " usurper." 

tioners." 32. Who is there ?] The expression 

23. township] Not again in Shake- " this is something like " of the Quarto 
speare. Compare Golding's Ovid, viii. is noteworthy. It is still common col- 
858: "all this wicked towneship shall loquially. "This is somewhat yet" 
Abye their gylt " (1567). occurs in Narcissus (1602J, p. 4. It 

23-26. In the collation here Peter is means " now we're getting at it," half 

"Peter Thumpe" in the Contention, contemptuously. 

See II. iii. 82-84. And for "scouring 37. Under the wings] Compare Part 

armour " of the next lines, see below, I. v. iii. 57. In King John, 11. i. 14, 



sc. 



Ill] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 



27 



Begin your suits anew, and sue to him. 

[ Tears the petition. 

Away, base cullions ! Suffolk, let them go. 
All. Come, let 's be gone. [Exeunt Petitioners. 40 

Queen. My Lord of Suffolk, say, is this the guise, 

Is this the fashion in the court of England ? 

Is this the government of Britain's isle, 

And this the royalty of Albion's king? 

What ! shall King Henry be a pupil still 45 

Under the surly Gloucester's governance ? 

Am I a queen in title and in style. 

And must be made a subject to a duke ? 

I tell thee, Pole, when in the city Tours 

Thou rann'st a tilt in honour of my love, 50 

40. All. Come let 's be gone] omitted Q. 41-48. My lord . . . to a dtike] 
44-51. My lord of Suffolke, you may see by this, The Commons lone unto that 
haughtie Duke, That seekes to him more then to King Henry, Whose eyes are 
alwaies poring on his booke, and nere regards the honour of his name, But still 
must be protected like a childe, And governed by that ambitious Duke, That scarse 
will move his cap nor speake to us. 49-53- / tell thee, Pole . . . proportion] 
59-62. / tell thee Poull, when thou didst runne at Tilt, And stolst away our 
Ladaies hearts in France, I . . . been like to thee. Or else thou hadst not brought 
me out of France. 



the same phrase refers to the wings of 
a battle. The metaphor here is from 
the Bible, Ruth ii. 12 (and elsewhere). 

39. cullions] wretches. Compare 
Peele, Old Wives Tale (452, b) : 
" Hence, base cullion ! " Not in Q. 
Shakespeare uses this opprobrious 
epithet again in Taming of a Shrew, 
and in Henry V. It is in Gammer 
Gurton's Needle, v. ii. 

40. Exeunt Petitioners] For the 
source of the Armourer's episode, see 
extract at 11. iii. (end). Note the 
omission of "Marry" in the opening 
conversation, which occurs three times 
in Q. 

41. guise] recognised custom or 
fashion ; as in Cymbeline, v. i. 32. 
The word was often used as here of 
the custom of a country, as in Timothie 
Kendall's Floivers of Epigrams (reprint, 
p. 54), 1577 : " all disordered lye my 
locks, after the Spanish guise." And 
several times in Golding's Ovid : 
"When judgement should bee giuen 
it was the giiyse in auncient tyme " 
(bk. XV. 1. 48). These first four lines 
{41-44) have no parallel in The Conten- 
tion. " Guise of the court" occurs in 
Caxton's Reynard the Fox, 1481. 

44. Albion] Shakespeare only uses 
" Albion " while working at the 



Chronicles, once in King Lear, once in 
Henry V., and twice in this and twice 
in the following part of Henry VI. 
Greene has it often in Frier Bacon. 
Not in Q. The queen's speech here 
differs more from Q than anything we 
have yet met with. Note passage here 
in Contention : " eyes . . . poring on 
his book." Shakespeare has this twice 
in Love's Labour 's Lost — nowhere else. 

45, 46. King Henry be a pupil . . . 
Gloucester's governance] See note above, 
I. i. 163, 164. Almost the exact words 
are in Hall and Grafton (The XXV 
Yere) : "like a yong Scholer or inno- 
cent Pupile to be governed by the dis- 
position of an other man " (p. 629) ; and 
a little higher, he (King Henry) " passed 
not much on the aucthoritie and govern- 
aunce of the realme." " Governance " 
is not found again in Shakespeare. It is 
frequent in Hall (p. 242, i8og, e.g.). And 
in Hawes' Pastime of Pleasure, 1509. 

49, 50. Pole, when in the city Tours 
Thou rann'st a tilt] at the " triumphant 
lustes" held there when Suffolk went 
for the queen as procurator. See ex- 
tract, I. i. 1-3, These lines recall or are 
imitated by Marlowe in Edward the 
Second (220, a) : — 

" Tell Isabel the queen, I look'd not 
thus, 



28 



THE SECOND PART OF 



[act I. 



And stol'st away the ladies' hearts of France, 

I thought King Henry had resembled thee 

In courage, courtship, and proportion: 

But all his mind is bent to holiness, 

To number Ave-Maries on his beads ; 

His champions are the prophets and apostles, 

His weapons holy saws of sacred writ, 

His study is his tilt-yard, and his loves 

Are brazen images of canonised saints, 

I would the college of the cardinals 

Would choose him pope, and carry him to Rome, 

And set the triple crown upon his head : 

That were a state fit for his holiness. 



55 



60 



54-63. But all his mind 



his holiness'] See 11. 46, 47, quoted at 1. 44 above. 



When for her sake I ran at tilt in 
France, 

And there unhors'd the Duke of 
Cleremont." 
It is important that they occur also in 
The Contention. The expression is in 
Grafton's Continuation of Hardyng 
(466), 1543 : " the duke of Albany 
. . . fled into Fraunce, & there was 
kylled runnynge at the tylte in 
Parys." 

54-63. bent to holiness . . . his holi- 
ness] Boswell Stone quotes here a de- 
scription of Henry given at his murder 
in the Tower, in the tenth year of King 
Edward IV, But the living description 
of him in the Chroniclers is to be pre- 
ferred for many reasons. It is a piece 
of the same account as the queen's 
manly disposition (The XXV Yere) : 
" King Henry . . . was a man of a 
meeke spirite, and of a simple witte, 
preferring peace before wane . . , And 
to the intent, that all men might per- 
ceiue, that there coulde be none, more 
chaste, more meeke, more holye, nor a 
better creature : In him raigned shame- 
fastnesse [note in 3 Henry VI. iv. viii. 53, 
"the shame-faced Henry"], modesty, 
integritie and patience to be maruayled 
at , , , hewasgouernedof them whome 
he shoulde have ruled . . . He gaped 
not for honor, nor thristed for riches 
but studied onelye for the health of hys 
soule : the sauing whereof, he esteemed 
to be the greatest wisedome, and the 
losse thereof, the extremest folic that 
coulde be " (Grafton, p. 628), See the 
opening of Scene vi. in the last Act of 
Part III, Henry's holiness is again 



made prominent in iv, i, 18, by lines not 
in the original, in several places, 

55. number Ave-Maries on his beads] 
Repeated in 3 Henry VI. 11, i, 162 ; see 
lines from Faerie Quecne there quoted, 

59. canonised saints] Polydore Vergil 
bears the fullest testimony to Henry's 
holiness. He says (Camden Society, 
p, 157) ; " These and suche lyke actions 
and offices of parlyte holynes, made, that 
for his cause God shewj'd many myracles 
in hys lyfe time. By reason whereof 
King Henry the Vllth not without 
desert, began a few yeres past to pro- 
cure at the hande of Julius byshop of 
Rome that he might be canonyzd for a 
Saint, but being preventid by hasty 
death he could not perform that honor- 
able fact," We have one of these 
miracles presently. See 3 Henry VI. 
II, i, 156, 

62, triple crown] of the pope. This 
expression Shakespeare found in Hall 
(or Grafton), See extract at the be- 
ginning of HI, iii. It is used also by 
Peele in a rant against popery in A 
Farewell to the Generals (Portugal 
Voyage), 1589 ;— 

" To steel your swords on Avarice' 
triple crown, 
And cleanse Augeas' stalls in Italy " 
(Dyce, 549, b). And also by Marlowe, 
Massacre at Paris, iii. 5 (240, a) (as 
pointed out by Robertson in Did Shake- 
speare write Titus Andronicus ? who 
does not give this ulterior source). 
Spenser's l3uessa is sometimes given 
the mitre {Faerie Queene, i, viii, 25); 
sometimes the " triple crown " (i, vii, 
16), 



sc. Ill] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 29 

Stif. Madam, be patient ; as I was cause 

Your highness came to England, so will I 65 

In England work your grace's full content. 

Quee?z. Beside the haughty protector, have we Beaufort 
The imperious churchman, Somerset, Buckingham, 
And grumbling York ; and not the least of these 
But can do more in England than the king. 70 

Suf. And he of these that can do most of all 

Cannot do more in England than the Nevils : 
Salisbury and Warwick are no simple peers. 

Queen. Not all these lords do vex me half so much 

As that proud dame, the lord protector's wife: 75 

She sweeps it through the court with troops of ladies, 
More like an empress than Duke Humphrey's wife. 
Strangers in court do take her for the queen : 
She bears a duke's revenues on her back, 
And in her heart she scorns our poverty. 80 

Shall I not live to be avenged on her ? 
Contemptuous base-born callat as she is, 

64-66. Madam , . . content'\^'>,-^^. Madame content your ^elfealittle luhile, As 
I was cause of your camming to England, So will I in England worke yoJtr full 
content. 67. haughty protector] 45. haughtie Duke. 67-70. Queen. Beside 
the . . . ^/i^ ^/h^] speech omitted Q. 71-73- Suf . And he . . . no simple peers] 
speech omitted Q. 74. Not all . . . much] omitted Q. 75-78. As that proud 
dame . . . queen] ^2-5^. And his proud wife, high minded Elanor, That ruffles it 
with such a troope of ladies. As strangers in the Court takes her for the Queene. 
79. She . . . back] Q 3 (1619) inserts after 54. She beares a dukes whole 
reuennewes on her backe. 80-82. And in her heart . . . as she is] omitted Q. 

"] 2. in England than the Nevils] Qee Miserie : "A weakling of womankind 

I. i. 188-igi, and note. to weare whole lordships and manor- 

75. lord protector's wife] Replaces houses on her backe." And several times 
" high-minded Elanor " of Contention, in Ben Jonson. For Gloucester's 
See note, Part I. i. v. 12. " wife's attire," see below, 11. 129, 130. 

76. sweeps it through the court] See note above at 11. 49, 50. 
Compare Henry V. iii. v. 48. And 82. Contemptuous] despicable, con- 
Goldmg's Ofjfi, xi. 217, 218 : — temptible. Occurs again (disdainful) in 

" Apollo after this revenge from King John, 11. i. 384 ; and the adverb 

Tmolus tooke his flyght : (disdainfully) in Tivo Gentlemen of 

And sweeping through the ayre, did Verona, i. ii. 112. These words in tuous 

on the selfsame syde alyght." (sumptuous, presumptuous, tempestuous 

79. She bears . . . revenues on her and virtuous) seem to be just receiving 

6at:;t] This line, accidentally dropt out in acceptation. Not in Q. Compare 

Q I, is restored in Q 3 (i6ig). Or it Marlowe, Tamburlaine, Part II. iv. 3 : 

may be regarded as an interpolation in " To bridle their contemptuous cursing 

the latter from Shakespeare's play before tongues." 

us. Compare Marlowe, Edward the 82. base-born] Occurs again below, 

Second (193, a) : " He wears a lords iv. viii. 39, and in Part III. n. ii. 143. 

revenue on his back." It became a very Earlier in New Eng. Diet, in Spenser, 

common sentiment in those days of 1541. Peele has 

extravagance in dress. Cyril Tourneur " What, am I then a friar's base-born 

has the line " walk with a hundred acres brat ? 

on their backs " in The Revenger's Presumptuous wretch, why press 

Tragedy (Act ii.). And Lodge, Wits [prease] I 'fore my king ?" 



30 THE SECOND PART OF [act i. 

She vaunted 'mongst her minions t' other day, 
The very train of her worst wearing gown 
Was better worth than all my father's lands, 85 

Till Suffolk gave two dukedoms for his daughter. 
Suf. Madam, myself have limed a bush for her, 
And placed a quire of such enticing birds 
That she will light to listen to the lays. 
And never mount to trouble you again. 90 

So, let her rest : and, madam, list to me ; 
For I am bold to counsel you in this. 
Although we fancy not the cardinal, 
Yet must we join with him and with the lords 
Till we have brought Duke Humphrey in disgrace. 95 
As for the Duke of York, this late complaint 
Will make but little for his benefit : 
So, one by one, we '11 weed them all at last, 
And you yourself shall steer the happy helm, 

83-85. She vaunted . . . father's lands] 55-5S. The other day she vanted to 
her maides, That the very traine of her worst gowne, Was worth more wealth 
then . . . lands, Can any grief e of tninde be like to this (this last line (5 ^) may 
be equated with half of 74 above). 86. Till . . . daughter] omitted Q. 87- 
gi. Madam, myself . . . let her rest] 66-69. And as for proud Duke Humphrey 
and his wife, I have set lime-twigs that will intangle tliem. As that yojcr grace 
ere long shall understand. But stale Madame, here comes the King. 91-99- 

And, madame list to me . . . happy helm] omitted Q. Sound a sennet . . .] Enter 
King Henry, and the Duke of Yorke and the Duke of Somerset on both sides of the 
King, whispering with him, and enter Duke Humphrey, Dame Elnor, the Duke of 
Buckingham, the Earle of Salsbury, the Earle of Warwicke, and the Cardinall 
of Winchester. 

[Edward I. 413, b). Not in Q. Peele 87. limed a bush] smeared it with 

hsis the word a.\so in David and Bethsabe birdlime. The alteration from "set 

{465, b). Stern-born, home-born, free- lime-twigs" is Shakespeare's method, 

born and true-born all occur in Kyd's He has the verb "to lime" in Much 

Cor«cZia (flH^^ 1595), probably later than Ado About Nothing, All's Well that 

this play. Often in Tamburlaine, Part Ends Well, Twelfth Night 2ind Hamlet, 

I. : " base-born Tartars," ii. 2. as well as again in this play and twice 

82. callat] An abusive term to a in Part III. See note 3 Henry VI. v. 
woman used by Skelton. See Othello, vi. 13. 

IV. ii. 122, and note, Arden edition, p. 88. quire of such enticing birds]decoy 

206. Also in Winter s Tale, 11. iii. 90, birds. Compare Cymbeline, iii. iii. 43. 

and 3 Henry VI. 11. ii. 145. In Lodge " Enticing " has the sense of bewitchmg, 

andGieene's Looking Glasse for London enchanting by magic. Compare Peele, 

(xiv. 57) it is correctly applied to an Old Wives Tale (457, a): "because 

old woman : " What, succour me ? false you shall not be enticed with his (the 

callet hence, avant ; Old dotard, pack." magician's) enchanting speeches, with 

(Irish, calliagh or calliasht.) Golding this same wool I '11 stop your ears." 

has it in his Ovid's Metamorphoses, bk. See note at "incaged birds," 3 Henry 

VI. line 170. Not in Q. VI. iv. vi. 12. 

83. minions] sen.ile favourites. So 91. So, let her rest] Compare Peele, 
Grafton (p. 637) : " the Queene with her Alcazar (end) : " So let it rest, and on 
Minions and vnprofitable Counsaylors." this earth bestow this princely corse." 

86. two dukedoms] We have had this No more about that. See " But let it 
before, i. i. 217. It is not in the Con- rest" in Contention below at line 144. 
tention. 99- helm] helm, or rudder, of state. 



sc. Ill] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 31 

Sound a sennet. Enter tJie KiNG, Duke HUMPHREY of 
Gloucester, Cardinal Beaufort, Buckingham, York, 
Somerset, Salisbury, Warwick, and the Duchess of 
Gloucester. 

King. For my part, noble lords, I care not which ; lOO 

Or Somerset or York, all 's one to me. 
York. If York have ill demeaned himself in France, 

Then let him be denayed the regentship. 
Som. If Somerset be unworthy of the place, 

Let York be regent ; I will yield to him. 105 

War. Whether your grace be worthy, yea or no, 

Dispute not that: York is the worthier. 
Car. Ambitious Warwick, let thy betters speak. 
War. The cardinal 's not my better in the field. 
Buck. All in this presence are thy betters, Warwick. no 

War. Warwick may live to be the best of all. 
Sal. Peace, son ! and show some reason, Buckingham, 

Why Somerset should be preferred in this. 
Queen. Because the king, forsooth, will have it so. 
Glou. Madam, the king is old enough himself 1 1 5 

To give his censure : these are no women's matters. 
Queen. If he be old enough, what needs your grace 

To be protector of his excellence ? 

100, loi. For my part . . . to me] 70, 71 (prose). My lords I . . . who be 
Regent in France, or York, or Somerset, all's . . . me. 102, 103. If York 

. . . regentship] 72, 73. My Lord, if . . . himself e, Let Somerset enjoy his place 
and go to France. 104, 105. // Somerset . . . to him] 74, 75. Then whom 
your grace thinke wort hie, let him go, And there be made the Regent oner the 
French. 106, 107. Whether . . . worthier] 76, 77. Whom soeuer you account 

worthie, Yorke is the worthiest. 108. Ambitious . . . speak] 78. Pease War- 
wicke. Give thy betters leaue to speake. log, no. The Cardinal's . . . betters, 
Warwick] 79, 80. The Cardinals . . . this place , . . betters farre. iii. 

Warwick . . . of all] 81. And Warwicke . . . of all. 112, 113. Sal. Peace, son I 
. . . in this] omitted Q. (Compare collation above, line 108). 114. Because 
. . . it so] 82. My Lord in mine opinion, it were best that Somerset were Regent 
oner France (prose). 115, 116. Madame the king . . . matters] 84, 85. Madame 

our King is . . . his answ ere without your consent. iij, iiS. If he be . . . of 
his excellence ?] 86, 87. If he be . . . ouer him so long. 

103. denayed] Occurs again Twelfth Fenton, 1579. See note at " protector- 

Night, II. iv. 127. An old form. Com- ship," 11. i. 30. 

lia.reGreene, A Maidens Dreame: "The 115. old enough] See i. i. 163; and 

poore were neuer at their neede denaid " 11. 45, 46 below. 
(Grosart, xiv. 310). 117, 118. what needs your grace To 

103. the regentship] In 1445 (The be protector] This intrigue against 

XXIIIJ Yere) (Grafton, p. 626) "the Gloucester is thus told: "first of all 

Duke of Sommerset was appoynted she excluded the Duke of Gloucester 

Regent of Normandie, and the Duke of from all rule and gouvernaunce, not pro- 

Yorke thereof discharged." The term hibityng suche as she knewe to be his 

"regentship" is in Contention; see mortall enemies, to inuent and imagine 

collation below at 11. 121 -126. An earlier causes and griefes agaynst him and hys : 

example is in New Eng. Diet, from so that by her permission and favour 



32 THE SECOND PART OF [act i. 

Glou. Madam, I am protector of the realm, 

And at his pleasure will resign my place. 120 

Suf. Resign it then and leave thine insolence. 

Since thou wert king, as who is king but thou ? 

The commonwealth hath daily run to wrack ; 

The Dauphin hath prevailed beyond the seas ; 

And all the peers and nobles of the realm 125 

Have been as bondmen to thy sovereignty. 
Car. The commons hast thou racked ; the clergy's bags 

Are lank and lean with thy extortions. 
So7n, Thy sumptuous buildings and thy wife's attire 

Have cost a mass of public treasury. 130 

Buck. Thy cruelty in execution 

Upon offenders hath exceeded law, 

And left thee to the mercy of the law. 
Queen. Thy sale of offices and towns in France, 

If they were known, as the suspect is great, 135 

Would make thee quickly hop without thy head. 

\^Exit Gloucester. The Queen drops her fan. 

iig, 120. Madam . . . place] 8g, 90. Madame I am but Protector ouer the 
land. And when it please his grace, I will resigne my charge. 121-126. Resign 
. . . sovereignty] 90-95. Resigne it then for since that thou wast King, As who 
is King hut thee. The common state Doth as we see, all wholly go to wracke, 
And Millions of treasure hath bene spent And as for the Rcgentship of France, I 
say Somerset is more worthie then Yorke. 127-136. Car. The Commons . . . 
hop without thy head] omitted Q. 136. Exit Gloucester . . .] 129. Exet Hum- 
phrey. 136. The Queen drops her fan] 133. Exit with them (Suffolk and " the 

. . . the Duke of Suffolke, and the her, to looke into the revenewes of the 

Duke of Buckyngham to be the chiefe, Crowne, to call for an accompt thereof, 

not unprocured by the Cardinall of and so should she well understande that 

Winchester and the Archebishop of the duek had used the same, not for 

Yorke. Dyuers articles both heynous the common wealth but for his owne 

and odious were layde to hys charge private commoditie." This is Somer- 

in open counsayle, and in especiall one, set's charge (130). 

that he had caused men admdged to 121-126. Suffolk's charges and like- 
dye, to be put to other execution, then wise that of Queen Margaret concerning 
the law of the land had ordered or France, are the charges (some of them) 
assigned : for surely the Duke being that were " put up to the King and the 
very well learned in the law ciuill, de- Lordes" by the Commons of the nether 
testing malefactors, . . . gat great house (pp. 628, 629) against Suffolk 
malyce and hatred of such, as feered to himself! This seems rather a crafty 
have condigne reward for their . . . point. The Cardinal's charge comes 
mischieuous doyngs " (Grafton, p. 629). under the same heading. See extract at 
This last paragraph is Buckingham's the passage (iii. 19, 20) about Suffolk's 
accusation (131-133). It is very notice- enclosure of the commons. The 
able that there is no charge on the Cardinal's charge against " the good 
Cardinal's part in the Co7i<eM<Jo«, though Duke Humphrey" is especially out- 
it is authentic, at this " open counsayle." rageous. For more about all this, see 
See note line 27 above in Scene ii. iii. i. 58-118. 

Polydore Vergil says (p. 71, Camden 127. racked] See above, i. ii. 105 

Soc.) : " There were forthwith a com- (note). 

panye readie to sedition . . . who . . . 136. hop without thy head] See note 

did urge forwarde, exhorte, and perswade above (ii. 65) at " headless necks." 



sc. Ill] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 



33 



Give me my fan : what, minion ! can ye not ? 

\_S he gives the Duchess a box on the ear. 
I cry you mercy, madam ; was it you ? 

Dudi. Was 't I ! yea, I it was, proud Frenchwoman : 

Could I come near your beauty with my nails 140 

I 'd set my ten commandments in your face. 

King. Sweet aunt, be quiet ; 'twas against her will. 

Duch. Against her will ! Good king, look to 't in time ; 
She '11 hamper thee and dandle thee like a baby : 
Though in this place most master wear no breeches, 145 

Armourer and his man," entered 1, 105). The Queene lets fall her gloue, and 
hits the Ditches of Gloster a box on the eare. 137. Give . . . not ?] 134. Give 
. . . glove. Why Minion can you not see ? She strikes her. 138. was it you] 
^^35) I36. I did mistake, I did not thinke it had bene you. 139-141. Was''t I 
. . . your face] 137-139. Did you not proud French-woman, Could . . . daintie 
vissage . . . face. 142. Sweet . . . will] 140, 141. Be patient gentle Aunt It 
was . . . will. 143-146. Against . . . unrevenged] 142-145. Against . . . 

sheele dandle thee, If thou wilt alwaies thus be rulde by her. But let it rest. 
As sure as I do Hue, She . . . unrevengde. 

142. Sweet aunt, be quiet] The king's 
only remonstrance at this outrage reads 
very lamely. One would not expect to 
find his temperate rebuke to the Queen 
(Q) omitted. 

144. hamper] fetter, clog, obstruct. 
Perhaps with a back-sense of the cradle. 
Not in Shakespeare again. Not in Q. 
A common early word. 

144. dandle . . . a baby] Compare 
Titus Andronicus, iv. ii. 161 ; the only 
parallel in Shakespeare. The expression 
" But let it rest" here, in Contention, is 
found in Peele's Battle of Alcazar, Act 
V. (Dyce, 440, a), noted already. 

145. tnost master] the greatest master, 
i.e. the King. But the sense is con- 
fused. Craig thinks a line has been 
dropped out after 144. Not in Q. 

145. wear no breeches] Compare 3 
Henry VI. v. v. 24, where " breech " 
stands for breeches — an old sense. The 
proverb seems to have been originally 
used as here, of the husband being in 
command (wearing the breeches) and 
transferred later. Compare Heywood 
(ed. Sharman, p. 100), 1546 : " Who had 
the worse end of the staffe (quoth I), 
now ? Shall the mayster weare a 
breeche, or none, say you ? " And The 
Boke of Mayd Emlyn (Hazlitt, Early 
Popular Poetry, vol. iv. 88),«rtai5i5 : — 
" All women be suche, 
Thoughe the man here the breche, 
They w^'U be euer checkemate. 
Faced lyke an aungell, 
Tonged lyke a deuyll of hell, 
Great causers of debate ! " 



137. can ye not ?] Our " can't you ? " 
The contraction occurs only in Corio- 
lanus. 

137. She gives the Duchess a box on 
the ear] This incident recalls one in 
Peele's Edward I. (Dyce, 392), where 
the Queen "longs to give your grace 
a box on th' car," and accomplishes it. 
Q have the phrase in full. There is 
much transposition in this scene from Q. 
At a later date (1608) Chapman had to 
withdraw a scene from Byron's Con- 
spiracie, introducing the Queen of 
France rating a lady of the court and 
boxing her ears (Ward). 

138. I cry you mercy] See Part I. v. 
iii. 109 (note). 

141. set my ten command mefits] An old 
expression. Compare Hey^vood, The 
Four PP. (Hazlitt's Dodsley, i. 381), 
1540:— 

" Nay ten times I beseech him that 
high sits. 
Thy wife's ten commandments may 
search thy five wits " 
(cited by Steevens). And Udall's 
Erasmus (Roberts' reprint, p. 27), 1542 : 
" To auenge soche a naughtie touche or 
pranke, with his tenne commandements." 
And Selimus, by Greene and Marlowe 
(Grosart's, Greene, xiv. 264), 1594 : " I 
would set a tap abroach and not Hue 
in daily feare of the breach of my wiues 
ten command ements." The most exact 
parallel is from Locrine, iv. ii. : " fearing 
she would set her ten commandments in 
my face " (a play, be it remarked, that 
bears strong marks of Peele's hand). 

3 



34 THE SECOND PART OF [act i. 

She shall not strike Dame Eleanor unrevenged. [Exit. 
Buck. Lord cardinal, I will follow Eleanor, 

And listen after Humphrey, how he proceeds : 
She 's tickled now ; her fume needs no spurs, 
She '11 gallop far enough to her destruction. 1 50 

{Exit. 

Re-enter GLOUCESTER. 

Glou. Now, lords, my choler being over-blown 

With walking once about the quadrangle, 

I come to talk of commonwealth affairs. 

As for your spiteful false objections, 

Prove them, and I lie open to the law : 155 

But God in mercy so deal with my soul 

As I in duty love my king and country ! 

But to the matter that we have in hand. 

I say, my sovereign, York is meetest man 

To be your regent in the realm of France. 160 

Suf. Before we make election, give me leave 

To show some reason, of no little force, 

That York is most unmeet of any man. 

147-150. Buckingham. Lord Cardinal . . . destruction] omitted Q. (Bucking- 
ham's speech replaced by) King. Bcleeue me my love, thou wart much to blame, 
I would not for a thousand pounds of gold, My noble vnckle had bene here in 
place. Enter Duke Humphrey. But see where he comes, I am glad he met her 
not. Vnckle Gloster, what answer makes your grace Concerning our Regent for 
the Realme of France, Whom thinks your grace is meetest for to send (145-151). 
151-160. Now, lords . . . realm of France] 153-158. My gratious Lord, then this 
is my resolue, For that these words the Armourer should speake (transferred to 
the speech of Gloucester after Armourer's entry, 11. 205, 206). 161-163. Suf. 
Before . . . any man] omitted Q. 

In Heywood's Epigrams upon Proverbs 149, 150. spurs , . . gallop] a com- 

(1562) there is a useful parallel : — mon proverb, modified. See Richard 

" The master weareth no breech : IL iv. i. 72. And Lodge, Euphues 

then I protest! Golden Legacie (1590): "The words 

The master is a girl, a boy, or a of Saladyne were but spurres to a free 

beast." horse " (Shakespeare Library, p. 25) : 

This continues the sense of the king spur a free horse, he '11 run himself 

being a child. Not in Q. to death" (Ben Jonson, Tale of a Tub, 

148. listen after] endeavour to hear. iii. iv.). 

Compare 2 Henry IV. i. i. 29: "whom 151. over-blown] blown over. Com- 

I sent ... to listen after news." It pare Richard II. iii. ii. 190. And 

occurs in The True Tragedie of Richard Peele's Tale of Troy (551, b) : "that 

the Third (Hazlitt's Shakespeare Lib- this fear mighit soon be overblown." 

rary, p. 86) : " But hearst thou Catesbie, "Let this wind overblow" occurs in 

meane whilel will/zs^^Ha/if^r successeof Heywood's Proverbs; see 3 Henry VI. 

the Duke of Buckingham." An oldexpres- v. i. 53 (note), 
sion, seemingly revived by Shakespeare. 152. quadrangle] The earliest example 

149. fume] passion, rage. Occurs in New Eng. Diet., and only one in 
again Venus and Adonus, 316 (also of Shakespeare. 

a horse, metaphorically). 



sc. Ill] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 35 

York. I '11 tell thee, Suffolk, why I am unmeet : 

First, for I cannot flatter thee in pride ; 165 

Next, if I be appointed for the place, 

My Lord of Somerset will keep me here, 

Without discharge, money, or furniture. 

Till France be won into the Dauphin's hands. 

Last time I danced attendance on his will 170 

Till Paris was besieged, famished, and lost. 

War. That can I witness ; and a fouler fact 
Did never traitor in the land commit. 

Suf. Peace, headstrong Warwick ! 

War. Image of pride, why should I hold my peace? 175 

Enter HORNER the Armourer, and his man PETER, 

guarded. 

Suf. Because here is a man accused of treason : 

Pray God the Duke of York excuse himself! 
York. Doth any one accuse York for a traitor ? 
King. What mean'st thou, Suffolk ? Tell me, what are these? 
Suf. Please it your majesty, this is the man 180 

That doth accuse his master of high treason. 

His words were these : that Richard Duke of York 

Was rightful heir unto the English crown, 

And that your majesty was an usurper. 

164, 165. Yovke. I 'II tell thee . . . fiattcr thee in pride] 96, 97 Yorke. lie tell 
thee Suffolkc why I am not worthie, Because I cannot flatter as thou canst. 
166-171. Next . . . lost] omitted Q. 172, 173. War. That can I 2vitness . . . 
cotmnit] 98, gg. And yet the worthie deeds that York hath done, should make him 
worthie to be honoured here, 175. Image . . . peace] loi. Image of pride, 
wherefore should I peace ? 176, 177. Suf. Because . . . himself] 102-104. Suf. 
Because . . . do cleare himsclfc Ho, bring hither the Armourer and his man. 
Enter the Armourer and his man. 178, 179. York. . . . traitor ? King. . . . 
these?] omitted Q. 180-184. Please it . . . usurper] 105-108. prose (continued 
to Suffolk's last speech). If it please your grace this fellow here, hath accused 
his master of high Treason, And his . . . That the Duke . . . lawfull . . . the 
Crowne, and that your grace . . . usurper. 

168. furniture] equipment for war ; datince attendaunce at the dore." And 

stores and arms. Compare Golding's earlier in North, Doni's Philosophie 

Ovid, xii. 514: "His furniture was (Jacob's edition, p. 231), 1570. 
then a swoord, a target and a lawnce, 175. Itnage of pride] type, typical 

/Emathian like." Frequent in the representation of pride. Compare King 

general sense in the Chronicles : "And Lear, iv. vi. 162: "the great image 

then leauyng sufficient furniture for of authority." The only earlier illustra- 

defence in Scotland, he returned into tion in New Eng. Diet, (from Hall's 

England" (Grafton, i. 308). See 1 Chronicle) is not good. See Kyd's 

Henry IV. iii. iii. 226. Spanish Tragedy : ^^ the lively image of 

170. Last time] See Part I. iv. iii. my grief" and " this earth, image o/my 

170. danced attendance] See again melanchollie." 
Richard 1 1 1. m.V\\.^Q3.n^ Henry VIII. 176. accused of treason] For the Ar- 

V. ii. 31. Compare Gascoigne, Steel mourer incident, see below (extract from 

Glas (Arber, p. 75): " while suitours Chronicle) at the combat, end of 11. iii. 



36 THE SECOND PART OF [act i. 

King. Say, man, were these thy words ? 185 

Hor. An 't shall please your majesty, I never said nor 

thought any such matter : God is my witness, I am 

falsely accused by the villain. 
Pet, By these ten bones, my lords, he did speak them to 

me in the garret one night, as we were scouring my 190 

Lord of York's armour. 
York. Base dunghill villain, and mechanical, 

I '11 have thy head for this thy traitor's speech. 

I do beseech your royal majesty 

Let him have all the rigour of the law, 195 

Hor. Alas ! my lord, hang me if ever I spake the words. 

My accuser is my prentice ; and when I did correct 

him for his fault the other day, he did vow upon 

his knees he would be even with me : I have good 

witness of this : therefore, I beseech your majesty, 200 

do not cast away an honest man for a villain's 

accusation. 

185. Say . . . words] iii. Come hether fellow, didst thou speake those words? 
186-188. Hor. An't . . . said nor thought . . . villain] 113, 114. Arm. Ant 
. . . said . . . villain here. iSg-igi. By these . . . armour'] 115. Tis no 

matter for that, you did say so (for Peter's other words here, see collation at 
ii. 27-31). 192-195. Base dunghill villain . . . the law] log, no. I beseeche 
your grace let hitn haue what punishment the law will afford, for his villaney 
(and) 116. / beseech your grace, let him haue the law. 196-202. Hor. Alas I 
my lord . . . knees he would . . . therefore, I beseech . . . accusation] 117-122. 
Arm. Alasse my Lord . . . knees that he would . . . And therefore I beseech 
. . . accusation. 

189. By these ten bones] an ancient At the date 1435 (14th year) Speed says : 

adjuration. It occurs in The Digby " Each man hereupon (saith Serres) 

Mysteries (ed. Furnival, p. 4), circa 1485 : sharpens his sword and scowres his 

"by thes bony s ten" ; and in Hie kscorner Armes, to recover that by force." 

(Hazlitt's Dodsley, i. 155), 1520: "Now, 192. dunghill villain] See note at 

by these bones she hath beguiled me" "dunghill groom," Part I. i. iii. 14. 

(Thcrsites (Hazlitt's Dodsley, i. 429), Not in Q. "Dunghill thoughts" is in 

I537)- "By these ten bones" (Roy, Gascoigne, 1576 (Arber, p. 18). 

Rede mc, etc. (Arber, p. 71), 1528). And 192. mechanical] Compare Merry 

in Greene, yatncs IV. iii. ii., and in Wives of Windsor, 11. ii. 290; and see 

Beaumont and Fletcher's Woma7i's note in Arden edition, page 99. Not 

Prize, Coxcomb, and Monsieur Thomas, in Q. 

Dekker has "by these two hands" 195. rigour of the law] "law" only 

(Match mee in London). In Jonson in Q. Compare Romeo and jfuliet, v. 

and Davenport. It must have been in iii. 269: "rigour of severest law" ; and 

common colloquial or provincial use. Winter's Talc, iii. ii. 115 : "'tis rigour 

igo,iqi. scouring .. .armour]Tx3ins- and not laio"; an expression which 

ferred here from Peter Thump's appear- Shakespeare took from his original, 

ance (Scene iii.) in Co«^CM/JOK. Compare Greene's Pandosto (Grosart, iv. 256): 

Golding's Ovid, ix. 320-324 : — " if she were condemned without any 

" And as the serpent slye further proofe, it was rigour and not 

In casting of his withered slough. Law." 

renewes his yeeres thereby 201. cast away] ruin, destroy. Fre- 

And wexeth lustyer then before, quent in Shakespeare, as in Love's 

and looketh crisp and bryght Labour 's Lost, v. ii. 682. 

With scoured scales." 



sc. Ill] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 37 

King. Uncle, what shall we say to this in law ? 
Glou. This doom, my lord, if I may judge : 

Let Somerset be regent o'er the French, 205 

Because in York this breeds suspicion ; 

And let these have a day appointed them 

For single combat in convenient place ; 

For he hath witness of his servant's malice. 

This is the law, and this Duke Humphrey's doom, 210 
Som. I humbly thank your royal majesty. 
Hor. And I accept the combat willingly. 
Pet. Alas ! my lord, I cannot fight ; for God's sake ! pity 

my case ; the spite of man prevaileth against me. O 

Lord ! have mercy upon me ; I shall never be able to 2 1 5 

fight a blow. O Lord ! my heart. 
Glou. Sirrah, or you must fight or else be hanged. 
King. Away with them to prison ; and the day 

203. Uncle . . . law'\ 123. Vnckle Gloster, what do you thinke of this ? 
207-210. And let , . . Humphrey's doom'\ 124-126. The law my Lord is this 
by case, it rests suspitious, That a day of combat be appointed, And there to trie 
each others right or zvrong (continued at 218-220). 204-206. This doom . . . 

suspicion] 153-157. My gratioiis Lord, then this is my resolue. For that these 
words the Armourer should speake Doth breed suspiiion on the part of Yorke, 
Let Somerset be Regent oner the French, Till trials made, and Yorke may cleare 
himselfe. 211. Som. Thank . . . majesty] 158-165. King. Then be it so 

my Lord of Somerset. We make your grace Regent over the French, And to 
defend our rights gainst forraine foes. And so do good vtito the Realme of 
France. Make haste my Lord, tis time that you n; ere gone, The time of Truse 
I thinke is full expirde. Somerset, I humbly . . . majesty. And take my leaue 
to poste with speed to France. Exet Somerset. 212. Hor. And . . . 

willingly] 130. And . . . willingly. 213-216. Alas I my lord . . . my 

heart] 131. Alasse my Lord, I ajn not able to fight. 217. Glou. Sirrah . . . 
hang'd] 132, 133. Suffolke. You must cither fight sirra or else be hangde : Go 
take them hence agaiiie to prison. Exet with them. 218. King. Away . . . 
prison] (see Suffolk's last speech) : and the day . . . next month] (Humphrey's 
speech at 207-210 continued) Which shall be on the thirtieth of this month. With 
Eben staves, and standbaggs combatting In Smythficld, before your Royall 
Majestic, Exet Humphrey. 

205. Let Somerset be regent] In the on his appointment." He gives this as 
XXnn Yere : " The Kyng called his evidence that this play, " however after- 
high court of Parliament . . . and the wards worked up by Shakespeare," was 
Duke of Somerset was appoynted Regent the work of another author originally, 
of Normandy, and the Duke of Yorke and that the Quarto was printed from 
thereof discharged" (Hall, p. 206). See that author's copy. It certainly is 
III. i. 83. evidence, though not very weighty, in 

210, 211. Theobald, followed by that direction. He (Malone) was 

Steevens (1793), inserted between these arguing against Steevens, who thought 

two lines the two (15S, 159) from the the Contention might be " an imperfect 

Contention, wherein the King gives surreptitious copy of Shakespeare's 

Somerset the appointment. Malone play," obtained piecemeal from players' 

says that this speech " was not intended or other transcripts. See below, in. i. 

to be preserved, appears from the con- 292, in note. 

eluding line of the present scene in 217-220. For " Eben staves and stand- 

which Henry addresses Somerset ; bagges " in the Contention here, see 

whereas in the Quarto Somerset ^o^son^ below, 11. iii. 58, 59. 



38 



THE SECOND PART OF 



[act I. 



Of combat shall be the last of the next month. 
Come, Somerset, we '11 see thee sent away. 220 

\Flourish. Exeunt. 



SCENE IV. — Gloucester's Garden. 
Enter Margery Jourdain, Hume, Southwell, and 

BOLINGBROKE. 

Hume. Come, my masters ; the duchess, I tell you, expects 

performance of your promises. 
Baling. Master Hume, we are therefore provided. Will 

her ladyship behold and hear our exorcisms ? 
Hume. Ay ; what else ? fear you not her courage. 



220. Come 



away'\ (see two last lines of King's speech at 211. King's 



speech in Q reads at this close) 165-168. Come vnckle Gloster, now let 's liaue 
our horse, For ive will to Saint Albones presently, Madame, your Hawke they 
say, is swift of flight, And we will trie how she willflie to day. Exet omnes. 



Scene iv. . . . 1-12. Come 



Scene iv. 



Scene iv. 

. to our zvork] omitted Q (see below, line 13). 



Enter Margery Jourdain . . .] Graf- 
ton's account (from Hall) is as follows 
(XXth Yere) : " Divers secret attempts 
were aduanced forward this season, 
agaynst the noble Duke Humfrey. . . . 
For first this yere. Dame Elyanour 
Cobham, wyfe to the sayde Duke was 
accused of treason, for that she by 
sorcerie and enchaunment entended to 
destroy the King, to the entent to 
aduaunce and promote her husbande to 
the crowne : upon thys she was examined 
in Saint Stephens Chapell, before the 
Bishop of Canterbury, and there by 
examination conuict and judged to doe 
open penaunce, in three open places, 
within the Citie of London, and after 
that adiudged to perpetuall prison in the 
Isle of Man, vnder the keeping of Sir 
lohn Stanley knight. At the same 
season were arrested as ayders and 
counsaylers to the sayde Duches, 
Thomas Southwell priest and Chanon 
of saint Stephens in Westminster, lohn 
Hum priest, Roger Bolyngbroke, a 
cunning Nigromancier, and Margery 
lourdayne, surnamed the Witch of Eye, 
to whose charge it was layde, that they 
at the request of the Duches, had 
deuised an Image of waxe, representing 
the King, which by their sorcery, a little 
and little consumed entendyng thereby 
in conclusion to wast, and destroy the 



kings person, and so bring him to 
death, for the which treason, they were 
adiudged to dye, and so Margery 
lordayne was brent in Smithfield, and 
Roger Bolyngbroke was drawen and 
quartered at Tyborne, taking upon his 
death, that there was neuer any such 
thing by them imagined, lohn Hum 
had his pardon, and Southwell died in 
the towre before execution : the Duke 
of Gloucester toke all things paciently 
and sayde little " (i. p. 622, 1441-1442). 
Southwell does not appear in the Con- 
tention, but in all the Chronicles, 
Stowe has not Hum, or Hume, but 
he agrees with Shakespeare and the 
Contention in rejecting the waxen image. 
See note at the end of Act ii. 

4. exorcisms'\ Improperly used here 
of a conjuration for raising spirits. 
The same remark applies to Cymbeline, 
IV. ii. 276 ; All 's Well that Ends 
Well, V. iii. 305 ; and Julius Ccesar, 
II. i. 323. New Eng. Diet, has a 
reference to Lydgate for a similar use 
of exorcism. Correctly used by Greene, 
A Looking Glasse for London (xiv. 62). 
Not in Q. 

5. what else ?] a strong affirmation 
— certainly. See Atitony and Cleo- 
patra, III. vii. 29. Very commonly 
used by Jonson. See Lyly's Midas : 
" But canst thou blow it ? H. What 
else ? " And A Warning for Faire 
Women : " Must I go to Greenwich, 



sc. iv] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 39 

Boling. I have heard her reported to be a woman of an 
invincible spirit : but it shall be convenient, Master 
Hume, that you be by her aloft while we be busy 
below ; and so, I pray you, go, in God's name, and 
leave us. \^Exit Hiiuie.\ Mother Jourdain, be you lO 
prostrate, and grovel on the earth ; John Southwell, 
read you ; and let us to our work. 

Enter DuCHESS aloft, HUMY. following. 

Duck. Well said, my masters, and welcome all. To this 

gear, the sooner the better. 
Boling. Patience, good lady ; wizards know their times : 1 5 

II. prostrate . . . earth (transferred to Witches' speech (9-13)). 12. 

Enter Dtichess . . . ] Cambridge ; Enter Elianor aloft Ff ; Enter Elenor, with 
Sir lohn Hum, Koger (Roger, Q 3), Bullenbrooke a Conitirer and Margery 
lourdaine a Witch. 13, 14. Duch. Well said . , . the better] 1-13. Elnor. 

Here Sir lohn, take this scrole of paper here, Wherein is writ the questions you 
shall aske, And I will stand upon this Tower here, And here the spirit what 
it saies to you, And to my questions, write the answeres downc. She goes vp to 
the Tower. Sir lohn. Now sirs begin and cast your spels about. And charm the 
fendcsfor to obey your wils. And tel Dame Elnor of the thing she askes. Witch. 
Then Roger Roger Bullenbrooke about thy taske, And frame a Cirkle here upon 
the earth, Whilst I thereon all prostrate on my face. Do talke and whisper with 
the diuels below. And coniure them for to obey my will. She lies downe upon her 
face. Bullenbrooke makes a Cirkle. 15-22. Boling. Patience . . . verge] 

14-20. Bullen. Darke Night, dread Night, the silence of the Night, Wherein the 
Furies maskc in hellish troupes, Send up I charge you from Sosetus lake, The 
spirit Askalon to come to me, To pierce the bowels of this Centricke earth, And 

sir ? Barnes. What else ? And Kyd, 15-20. Bohngbroke's speech in the 

Spanish Tragedy, iii. xiv. 164 (Boas Contention (14-20) bears evidence of 

edition). Marlowe's hand at this point. He has 

7. invincible spirit] Com^parel Henry "Ye Furies that can mask invisible" 

VI. IV. ii. 32. in Tamburlaine, Part I. iv. iv. (Dyce, 

II. grovel on the earth] " Grovel on 29, a); and "Furies from the black 

thy face " is found above, figuratively Cocytus' lake " {ibid. v. i., 34, a) ; and 

(ii. 9) ; but the expression is not in " the island where the Furies mask " 

Shakespeare again. [Tamburlaine, Part II. iii. ii., 54, b) ; 

13. Well said] Well done. Fre- and " Infernal Dis is courting of my 
quently so used by Shakespeare, irrela- love Inventing masks" {ibid. iv. ii., 64, 
tively of any conversation. Compare b). Dis is in Bohngbroke's next speech 
Peele's Old Wives Tale (453, b) : but one, a name for Pluto. Again, 
"Well said, thou pliest these pioners " The substance of this centrick earth " 
well." And Marlowe, Tamburlaine, is a line in Marlowe's Faustus, vi. 
Part II. V. I (69, b), where Dyce noted {circa 1590), and is the earliest example 
this sense. of the word in New Eng. Diet. But 

14. To this gear] let us get on with although Marlowe undoubtedly wrote, 
the business in hand. Compsire Richard or dressed, this scene in the Conten- 

III. I. iv. 158, and Titus Andronicus, tion, it is obvious that Shakespeare 

IV. iii. 52. And in (Peele's) Jack eliminated his peculiarities carefully. 
Straw : " let us roundly to this gear. See note at i. iii. 49 and 79. For Ditis 
'Tis more than time that we were (nigrantis regia Ditis) and Styx to- 
gone " (Hazlitt's Dodsley, v. 383). gether, see Albanact's dying speech 
And several times in The Spanish (in Latin) in Locrine, 11. v. See on 
Tragedy. And in Tamburlaine, Part Marlowe again at iii. i. 282. See 
!• II. ii. I. Faerie Queene, 1. i. 37-39. 



40 



THE SECOND PART OF 



[act I. 



Deep night, dark night, the silent of the night, 

The time of night when Troy was set on fire ; 

The tin:ie when screech-owls cry, and ban-dogs howl, 

And spirits walk, and ghosts break up their graves, 

That time best fits the work we have in hand. 20 

Madam, sit you, and fear not : whom we raise 

We will make fast within a hallowed verge. 

[^Here they do the ceremonies belonging, and make the 
circle; Bolijtgbroke or Southwell reads, Conjuro 
te, etc. It thunders and lightens terribly ; then 
the Spirit riseth. 
Spir. Adsum. 
M. Jourd. Asmath ! 

By the eternal God, whose name and power 25 



hither come in twinkling of an eye, Askalon, Assenda, Assenda. It thunders and 
lightens, and then the spirit riseth vp. 23-27. Spir. Adsum. M, Jourd. Asmath I 
. , . hence] omitted Q. 



16. Deep flight] Compare " deep of 
night" (Merry Wives of Windsor and 
Julius Casar), and " deep midnight " 
(Midsummer Night's Dream, i. i. 223). 
"Silent night" occurs in Faerie 
Queene, iii. iii. 61, and in Visions of 
the World's Vanitie. Also in Kyd's 
Spanish Tragedy, i. i. 

16. silent of the night] may be a 
mere slip for "silence of the night" 
which we have twice in Q (i. ii. 65, 
I. iii. 14). Peele has the expression in 
The Battle of Alcazar, 11. i. : " Nor 
may the silence of the speechless night, 
(Dire) architect of murders and mis- 
deeds" (Dyce, 425, a). And in Selimus 
(Grosart's Green, xiv. 278) : " in the 
quiet silence of the night . . . ere the 
windows of the morne be ope " (partly 
by Peele). 

17. The time of night] Compare 
Midsummer Night's Dream, v. i. 
386 ; Hamlet, iii. ii. 406, and i. i. 
46. 

17. The time of night when Troy] 
Compare Peele's Tale of Troy, 1589 
(557. b) :- 

" It was the time when midnight's 

sleep and rest 
With quiet pause the town of Troy 

possess'd . . . 
Now Troy, as was foretold, began 

to burn." 

18, 19. screech-owls cry, and ban- 
dogs howl, And spirits walk] Shake- 
speare had Golding's Ovid in his mind 
here. See note to " Julius Cassar's 



star," Part I. i. i. 60. Golding has 
(XV. 887-895) :— 

" The moone had also spottes of 

blood. The screech-owle sent 

from hell 
Did with her tune unfortunate in 

every corner yell . . . 
The doggs did howle, and 

everywhere appeered ghastly 

spryghts." 
"Screech-owls" appears againbelow,iii. 
ii. 327, and elsewhere ; the " ban-dog " is 
here only. In another place in Golding 
(bk. V.) the " sluggish screeching owl " 
is termed a " filthy fowl." In Thersites 
(Hazlitt's Dodsley, i. 399) Cerberus is 
called the "bandog". Sometimes it was 
" banddogge " in early writers ; one tied 
on account of his ferocity. See King 
Henry's last speech in Part III. v. vi. 
44-46. 

19. break up their graves] Occurs 
again Henry V. iv. i. 22. 
22. verge] border, circle. 
22, 23. It thunders and lightens . . . 
Adsum] This machinery is like Peele's 
in the Old Wives Tale (Sacrapant is 
a magician) : " Re-enter Sacrapant : 
It lightens and thunders : thy second 
Brother falls down . . . Sacrapant . . . 
Adeste, daemones ! Enter Two Furies " 
(450, b). " It thunders and lightens " 
again at p. 454, b. 

24. Asmath] Probably " Asmenoth, 
guider of the North," in Greene's 
Frier Bacon. See note at " monarch 
of the north," Part I. v. iii. 6. 



sc. IV.] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 41 

Thou tremblest at, answer that I shall ask ; 

For till thou speak thou shalt not pass from hence. 
Spir. Ask what thou wilt. That I had said and done ! 
Baling. " First, of the king : what shall of him become ? " 

{^Reading out of a paper. 
Spir. The duke yet lives that Henry shall depose; 30 

But him outlive, and die a violent death. 

\As the Spirit speaks, Southwell tvrites the answer. 
Boling. " What fates await the Duke of Suffolk ? " 
Spir. By water shall he die and take his end. 
Boling. " What shall befall the Duke of Somerset ? " 
Spir. Let him shun castles : 35 

Safer shall he be upon the sandy plains 

Than where castles mounted stand. 

Have done, for more I hardly can endure. 
Boling. Descend to darkness and the burning lake : 

False fiend, avoid ! 40 

[ Thunder and lightning. Exit Spirit. 

28. spir. Ask . . . done I] 21. Now Bnllenbrooke what would'st thou have me 
do ? 2g. Boling. (Bullen always in Q) First . . . of him become ?] 22. First 
. . . become of him ? 30, 31. The . . . depose ; . . . death] 23, 24. The . . . 
depose . . . death. 31. [As the spirit . . .] omitted Q. 32. fates] 25. fate. 
34. befall] 27. betide. 35-38. Let him . . . can endure] 28-30 (prose). Let 

him . . . stand. Now question me no more, for I must hence againe. He sinkes 
downe againe. 39, 40. Descend . . . avoid /] 31-37. Then downe I say, unto 
the damned ponle, where Pluto in his frie Waggon sits, Ryding amidst the 
singde and parched smoakes. The Rode of Dytas by the Riuer Stykes, There 
howle and burne for ever in those flames. Rise lordaine rise and staie thy charm- 
ing spels. Sonnes, we are betraide. Enter the Duke of Yorke, and the Duke of 
Buckitigham and others. 

28. That I had said and done !] 38. / hardly can endure] See note 
Steevens says here, that spirits who at 1. 28 above. The Quarto has " I 
remained above ground, answered must hence again." See Hamlet, i. v. 
questions with reluctance. Malone re- 4-7. In Peele's Sir Clyomon (521, a) 
fers to " Dismiss me, enough! " {Mac- the angel " Providence " says similarly 
beth, IV. i. 72). to Neronis : " Let desperation die in 

29. Bolingbroke] Shakespeare fol- thee, I may not here remain . . . 
lows the Contention in giving Boling- [Ascends]." 

broke the reading of the questions, 39. the burning lake] This is a piece 

forgetting that he has said (1. 11) : of Marlovian rant that escaped the 

" Southwell, read you." That is to reviser ; see note at 11. 15-20 above. It 

say, he forgets his own alterations, occurs again in Titus Andronicns, iv. 

for there is no Southwell in Q. iii. 43. Pistol takes it in hand in 

34, 35. Somerset . . . Let him shun 2 Henry IV. 11. iv. 170 ("to Plutos 

castles] See v. ii. 6g (note). damned lake, by this hand "). It has 

36. sandy plains] An expression of the Tamburlaine taint. In Part II. 

Peele's in The Battle of Alcazar (at occurs "the burning gulf," "the lake 

the end) : " The fields and sawfi^y //aj«s of hell," etc. etc. The Contention 

we have survey'd." Every little helps I has " damned poule " here. Kyd has 

And in his Anglorum Ferice : " Over " the lake where hell doth stand," 

the wild and saw^j Afric//a?Hs. " And and the " firie lakes," in Spanish 

see quotation at " hive of bees," in. ii. Tragedie. Perhaps he set the ex- 

125 (note). Fleay makes this expression ample, 
a test of Peele's writings. 



42 THE SECOND PART OF [act i. 

Enter YORK and BUCKINGHAM, hastily, ivith their guard. 

York. Lay hands upon these traitors and their trash. 
Beldam, I think we watched you at an inch. 
What ! madam, are you there ? the king and commonweal 
Are deeply indebted for this piece of pains : 
My lord protector will, I doubt it not, 45 

See you well guerdoned for these good deserts. 

Duch. Not half so bad as thine to England's king, 
Injurious duke, that threatest where 's no cause. 

Buck. True, madam, none at all. What call you this ? 

Away with them ! let them be clapped up close, 50 

And kept asunder. You, madam, shall with us : 
Stafford, take her to thee. 

\Exeunt above Duchess and Hume, guarded. 
We '11 see your trinkets here all forthcoming. 
All, away! 

[Exeunt guard, with Southwell, Bolingbroke, etc. 

41-46. York, hay hands . . . good deserts] 38-42. Yorke. Come sirs, laie hands 
on them, and bind them sure, This time was well zvatch'd. What Madame are 
you there ? This will be great credit for your husband. That you are plotting 
Treasons thus with Cuniiirers, The King shall have notice of this thing. Exet 
Elnor above. 47, 48. Duch. Not . . . cause] omitted Q. 49-54- Buck. 

True . . . away!] 43. Bucking. See here my Lord what the diiiell hath ivrit. 

42. Beldam] old woman, hag. See and p. 404: "Now I lie Clapt up 

again King John, iv. ii. 185, and Mac- in Irons and with bolts of Steele." 

beth. III. V. 2. Schmidt's lumping together of all the 

42. at an inch] closely, at close " clap up's " in Shakespeare is quite 

quarters. So in Laneham's Letter indigestible. 

(Burn's reprint, p. 88), 1575: " if the 53. trinkets] trifles of any sort, but 

Council sit I am at hand : wait at an usually of wearing articles, ornaments 

i?2c// I warrant you." See also Mamag-f and suchlike. Pentacles and conjuring 

of Wit and Science (Hazlitt's Dodsley, garb, as well as the writings, may 

"• 338» 365), 1570; and Greene, Third be included. " Triviall trinkets and 

Part of Conny Catching (Grosart, x. threedbare trash " (in writing) occurs 

180) : " The rest following the gentle- in one of the " Conny Catching " 

man at an inch " (where Grosart tracts attributed to Greene (Grosart, xi. 

volunteers the characteristic remark, 49). 

" usually at inches "). Greene has it 53. see . . . forthcoming] A proper 

again in Frier Bacon, quoted by Craig, legal term of any person or thing given 

who also quotes the Marriage of Wit into one's charge. See below, 11. i. 

and Science passages. Not in Q, and 179 ; and Taming of the Shrew, v. i. 

not in Shakespeare. 96. " I will give my word hee shall 

46. guerdoned^ rewarded. As a verb, hefoorth comming to-morrow morning " 

again, only in 3 Henry VI. iii. iii. 191. (Greene, Hee and Shce Conny Catcher, 

But common. Grosart, x. 220). " I will take a course 

50. clapped up close] shut up, or im- to see you forthcoming'' (Naunton, 

prisoned, closely. From the clapping of Frag?nenta Regalia (Harl. Misc. v. 124), 

the door, as in 1 Henry IV. n. iv. 305. 1641). " Bounde to keepe him forth- 

See Greene's Alphonsus (Grosart, xiii. coming" (Miles Philips in Hakluyt, iii. 

^02) : — 568 (reprint 1811), 1582). See below, 

" But call to mind that thou a 11. i. 177 for another example. Not 

prisoner art, in Q. 

Clapt up in chaines " ; 



sc. IV.] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 43 

York. Lord Buckingham, methinks you watched her well: 55 
A pretty plot, well chosen to build upon ! 
Now, pray, my lord, let 's see the devil's writ. 
What have we here ? 

" The duke yet lives that Henry shall depose ; 
But him outlive, and die a violent death." 60 

Why, this is just 

" Aio te, ^acida, Romanos vincere posse." 
Well, to the rest : 

" Tell me what fate awaits the Duke of Suffolk ? 
By water shall he die and take his end. 65 

What shall betide the Duke of Somerset ? 
Let him shun castles : 
Safer shall he be upon the sandy plains 
Than where castles mounted stand." 

Come, come, my lords ; these oracles 70 

Are hardly attained, and hardly understood. 
The king is now in progress towards Saint Alban's ; 
With him the husband of this lovely lady: 
Thither go these news as fast as horse can carry them : 

55-58. York. Lord Buckingliam . . . here ?'] 44, 45. Yorhe. Give it me my 
Lord, He show it to the King. Go sirs see them fast lockt in prison. Exet 
with them. 59-75- The duke yet lives . . . lord protector] omitted Q. 

52. Aiofe . . . ^osse] The ambiguous the comfort of those blinde prophecies 

answer the Pythian Apollo gave Pyrrhus many insurrections and rebellions have 

{according to the Annals of Ennius) bene stirred up in this Realme, as that 

when he inquired whether he would of lacke Strawe and lacke Cade in 

vanquish Rome (Cicero, Dc Divin. ii. Richard the seconds time." This 

56). It may mean either " I affirm passage from Puttenham sums up the 

that thou, descendant of ^acus, position in such a remarkable way that 

mayest conquer the Romans," or " I one feels it is more than a coincidence, 

affirm that the Romans may vanquish I have endeavoured to show in Love's 

thee, descendant of ^acus " (Craig). Labour '5 Lost that Puttenham was a 

Puttenham deals with this subject favourite with Shakespeare. With re- 

(Arte of English Poesie, Arber, p. 267, gard to these blind prophecies of the 

1586-89) under the heading of Am- Chroniclers, sneered at by the later 

phibologia, or the Ambiguous: "these ones (like Grafton in several places), 

doubtfull speaches were vsed much in no contemporary of Shakespeare seems 

the old times by their false Prophets more at home amongst them than Peele. 

as appeareth by the Oracles of Delphos See his Edward the First and his Old 

and of the Sybilles prophecies deuised Wives Tale. For further examples of 

by the religious persons of those " Sibillaes goulden prophesies " forward 

days to abuse the superstitious . . . and backward thus the same, with 

Lucianus, the merry Greeke, reciteth a double sense, see Lyly's Woman in the 

great number of them devised by a Moone, in. i. (circa 1580). And see 

coosening companion, one Alex- Marlowe's Edward the Second (Dyce, 

ander, to get himselfe the name and 217, b) : " Edwardum occidere nolite 

reputation of the God ^sculapius, and timere bonum est." With reference 

in effect all our old Brittish and Saxon to Puttenham, see a quotation from 

prophesies be of the same sort, that, him in Part I. i. vi. 27. 

turne them on which side ye will, the 68. sandy plains'] See note above, 1. 

matter of them may be verified ... by 39. 



44 



THE SECOND PART OF 



[act 



A sorry breakfast for my lord protector. 
Buck. Your grace shall give me leave, my Lord of York, 

To be the post, in hope of his reward. 
York. At your pleasure, my good lord. Who 's within 
there, ho ! 



75 



Enter a Servingnian. 

Invite my Lords of Salisbury and Warwick 
To sup with me to-morrow night. Away ! 



80 

[Exeunt. 



76, 77. Buck. Your grace . . . reward] 46, 47. Bucking. My lord, I pray 
you let me go post vnto the King Vnto S. Albones, to tell this newes. 78-80. 
York. At your . . . /I way /] 48-54. Yorke. Content, Away then, about it straight. 
Buck. Farewell, tny lord. Exet Buckingham. Yorke. Whose within there ? 
Enter one. One. My lord. Yorke. Sirrha, Go will the Earles of Salsbury and 
Warwicke, to sup with me tonight. Exet Yorke. One. I will my lord. Exet. 



75. A sorry breakfast] Shakespeare 
does not give us another example of 
this figure of speech, which sounds 
provincial. But it occurs in Peele : — 
" By Gis, fair lords, ere many days 
be past, 
England shall give this Robin 
Hood his breakfast " 



{Edward I., Dyce, 398, a). And again : 
" Ah, gentle Richard, many a hot 
breakfast have we been at together 1 " 
(ibid., 407, a). Not in Q. 

79, 80. Invite . . . to sup] Q has 
" will the Earles ... to sup," which 
is paralleled in Henry V. u. iv. 77, and 
Titus Andronicus, v. i. 160. 



ACT II. sc. I] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 45 



ACT II 
SCENE \.—Samt Albafis. 



Enter the KING, QuEEN, Gloucester, Cardinal, and 
Suffolk, with Falconers halloing. 

Queen. Believe me, lords, for flying at the brook, 
I saw not better sport these seven years' day : 
Yet, by your leave, the wind was very high. 
And, ten to one, old Joan had not gone out. 

King. But what a point, my lord, your falcon made, 



5 



Enter the King and Queenc with her Harvke on her fist, and Duke Humphrey 
and Suffolke, and the Cardinally as if they came from hawking. 1-4. Queen. 
Believe me . . . gone out] 1-3. Qneene. My lord how did your grace like this 
last flight ? But as I cast her off the winde did rise. And 'twas ten . . . gone 
out. 5-8. King. But what . . . climbing high] 4-7. King. How wonderfull 
the Lords workes are on earth, Eticn in these silly creatures of his hands, Vnckle 



with Falconers] We have had 
notice of this hunting scene at i. ii. 
56-58 ; and it has a semi-historical 
basis. In the XXX VI J Yere Graf- 
ton writes : " Queene Margaret, whose 
breath ruled . . . caused the king to 
make a progresse into Warwickeshire, 
for hys health and recreation, and so 
with Hawking and hunting, came to 
the Citie of Couentrey, where were 
diuers wayes studied priuely . . . her 
hartes ease and long desired purpose : 
which was the death and destruction 
of the Duke of Yorke, the Erles of 
Salisburie and Warwick . . . they 
auoyded this net and narrowly escaped 
the snare " (p. 657). These three peers 
were the last referred to in the pre- 
vious scene, and though they escape 
this snare, which serves another pur- 
pose and place, the queen's hawking 
holds good. 

I. at the brook] See my note to 
" we '11 a-birding together," Merry 
Wives of Windsor, in. iii. 246 (Arden 
edition, pp. 142, 143). Hawking at 
the river or brook was the true royal 
sport of falconry ; mallards, herons, 
etc., being the quarry. Craig gives a 



quotation from Drayton's Polyalbion, 
Song XX. Chaucer, in Sir Thopas, tells 
that the goshawk was expressly for the 
river. James I. delighted in it to the 
end of his days. " The king looked 
abroad in his litter, to see some flights 
at the brook " {Court and Times of 
jfames I., Letter dated Jan. 8, 1624-5). 
2. these seven years' day] This ex- 
pression occurs in Heywood's Pro- 
verbs (edited by Sharman, p. 124), 
1546 ; and see note at " This seven 
year," Part I. iv. iii. 37. Lyly has 
"at every five yeeres day" in Gal- 
lathea, i. i. (Fairholt, p. 221). Com- 
pare (Peek's) Jack Straw : " Myself 
was not so scared this seven years " 
(Hazlitt's Dodsley, v. 396). 

4. gone out] taken her flight. 
Scarcely a necessary remark, but 
Johnson suggested that the meaning 
was " flown quite away," making a 
question where none exists. It is even 
more obvious in Q. 

4-7. The Contention here contains 
the hawking term " soused." Shake- 
speare has a good show of hawking 
language ; see King John, v. ii. 150. 

5. point . . . falcon made] gained 



46 



THE SECOND PART OF 



[act II. 



And what a pitch she flew above the rest ! 

To see how God in all his creatures works ! 

Yea, man and birds are fain of climbing high. 
Suf. No marvel, an it like your majesty, 

My lord protector's hawks do tower so well; lo 

They know their master loves to be aloft, 

And bears his thoughts above his falcon's pitch. 
Glou. My lord, 'tis but a base ignoble mind 

That mounts no higher than a bird can soar. 
Car. I thought as much ; he 'd be above the clouds. 1 5 

Glou. Ay, my lord cardinal ? how think you by that ? 

Were it not good your grace could fly to heaven ? 
King. The treasury of everlasting joy. 
Car. Thy heaven is on earth ; thine eyes and thoughts 

Glostcy, how hie yotir Hawke did sore? And on a sodaine sonst the Partridge 
doune. 9-12. No marvel . . . falcons pitch} S-zo. No mar iiell if it please . . . 
done toure . . . He knowes his . . . aloft. 13, 14. Glou. My lord . . . soar'] 

II, 12. Humphrey . Faith my Lord, it is but a base minde That can sore no 
higher then a Falkons pitch. 15. / . . . clouds'\ 13. / . . . your grace 

would be . . . cloudcs. 16, 17. Ay . . . that ? Were . . . heaven P] 14, 

15. / . . . heaven (omitting hoiv . . . that ?). 18. King. . . .] omitted Q. 

ig-22. Thy . . . thine eyes . . . pernicious . . . That smoothest it so . . . 



a secure position to windward, from 
whence she could wait the fowl. " The 
Lanner never lieth upon the Wing 
after she hath flown to Mark, but 
after once stooping she maketh a Point, 
and then, like the Goshawk, waits the 
Fowl. . . . They are excellent Hawks 
for the River, lying long upon the 
Wing, and will fly the Field also very 
well " (Nicholas Cox, The Gentleman's 
Recreation, pp. 180-181, ed. 1721). 
Seems to be an uncommon expression, 
judging from the editor's notes to it. 
I have not found it elsewhere. Schmidt 
and Harting are wide of the mark. It is 
to be noticed that the flight is not at 
the brook in Q ; it is a partridge that 
is soused at. The alteration is very 
proper, since partridges did not require 
high-flying hawks. 

6. pitch] The recognised expression 
for the falcon's height, especially ex- 
tremest height, of flight. See note at 
Part I. II. iv. II. And figuratively in 
yulius Ccssar, i. i. 78 ; and compare 
line 12. Compare too Brewer's Lingua, 
v. 16 : — 

" And by the lofty towering of their 

minds. 
Fledged with the feathers of a 

learned muse 
They raise themselves unto the 

highest pitch." 



10. tower] soar, fly high. Hawking 
language also. See Macbeth, 11. iv. 
12, and Lucrece, 506. It occurs in 
Golding's Ovid, bk. xii. 11. 581, 582 : 
" For he did see a broune Bird flying 
from amid the stacke and towrtng 
up and downe " ; and again, 11. 624, 
625 :— 

" hee towring lay 
Among the cloudes." 
Note the archaism done {doen, they do) 
in Q I. Spenser uses it. 

14. mounts . . . soar] Compare 
Richard IL i. i. 109, " How high a 
pitch his resolution soars," with the 
Contention (line 12) here. 

15. above the clouds] See Romeo and 
jfulict, IV. V. 74: '^ Above the clouds, 
as high as heaven itself." 

16. how think you by that ?] what 
mean you by that ? What does that 
import you to be thinking of. 

18. treasury of . . . joy] Compare 
Spenser's Astrophel (1588), stanza 27 : — 
" And her faire brest, the threasury 
of joy. 
She spoyld thereof and filled with 
annoy." 
18. everlasting joy] Omitted in the 
Contention, where Henry's holiness is 
not insisted upon as it is here. See the 
development at i. iii. 54-64. And see 
below, 11. 66, 67, and elsewhere. 



sc. I] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 47 

Beat on a crown, the treasure of thy heart ; 20 

Pernicious protector, dangerous peer, 

That smooth'st it so with king and commonweal ! 
Glou. What! cardinal, is your priesthood grown peremptory? 

TantcBfie aniniis coslestibus ircB ? 

Churchmen so hot? good uncle, hide such malice ; 25 

With such holiness can you do it ? 
Suf. No malice, sir ; no more than well becomes 

So good a quarrel and so bad a peer. 
Glou. As who, my lord ? 
Suf. Why, as you, my lord ; 

An 't like your lordly lord-protectorship. 30 

Glou. Why, Suffolk, England knows thine insolence. 
Queen. And thy ambition, Gloucester, 
King. I prithee, peace, 

Good queen, and whet not on these furious peers ; 

For blessed are the peacemakers on earth. 
Car. Let me be blessed for the peace I make 35 

Against this proud protector with my sword. 

commonweal] 16-18 (prose). Thy . . . thy words . . . proude . . . to smooth it 
thus . . . commonwealth. 23-26. What I ... do if] 19, 20. How now my 

Lord, why this is more than tieeds, Churchmen so hole. Good vnckle can yon 
doate. 27, 28. No malice . . . peer] 21. Why not Hauing so good a 

quarrell <&> so bad a cause. 29, 30. ^5 who . . . Why as you . . . An't . . . 
lord-protectorship] 22-24. As how . . . As yon . . . And it . . . Lords Pro- 
tectorship. 31. thine] 25. thy. 32-34. And . . . I prithee, peace, Good 
queen . . . furious peers For . . . earth] 26-29 (prose). And . . . cease gentle 
Queene . . . furious Lordes to wrath, for . . . earth. 35, 36. Let me . . . 
sword] 30, 31. Let me . . . sword. 

20. Beat on a crown] hammer, or simply " can you behave so, in the 

ponder upon (Schmidt). So the sun's presence of such holiness " (as the 

rays beat upon a thing. See The King's) ? Staunton and others would 

Tempest, v. i. 246. See Steevens' excel- read " dote," from the Contention, where 

lent note and parallels, to the confusion the word is certainly an interesting 

of Johnson's suggested falcon sense, misprint. 

Compare Marlowe, Tamburlaine, Part 30. lordly] A favourite word, as 

I. V. i. (33, a) : — already noted at " lorldly sir " (Part I. 

" And every warrior that is rapt with in. i. 43), with Greene ; but only used 

love in Lucrece and 1 and 2 Henry VI, in 

Of fame, of valour, and of victory, Shakespeare. Peele uses it in a stilted 

Must needs have beauty beat on his fashion : " my lordly breast " (Battle 

conceits." of Alcazar, 11. ii., Dyce, 427, b). And 

And see Marlowe, Edward IL (Dyce, see note, Part I. in. i. 43 ; also note 

192, a). above at i. ii. 40. 

22. smooth'st it] flatters it. See i. 30. protectorship] See again below, 

i. 156 above, and Richard IIL i. iii. 48. iii. i. 60; iii. i. 21. Only in this play. 

24. Tantane . . . ires] Virgil, Mneid, Compare " regentship," i. iii. 103, which 

i. II. Peele quotes this in Speeches to is also peculiar to this play. Both from 

the Quee7i at Theobald's, i^gi. See also the Contention. Similarly we have 

Speeches to the Queen at Sudeley "attorneyship" in Part I. v. v. 56, and 

(Nichols (1592), iii. 137). not elsewhere. The formation is much 

26. With . . . do it] This line is older. " Portership " (as an office) is 

held to be corrupt, and many emenda- quoted for circa 1450, New Eng. 

tions have been proposed. It may mean Diet. 



48 THE SECOND PART OF [act n 

Glou. [Aside to Car.] Faith, holy uncle, would 'twere come to 

that! 
Car. [Aside to Glou.'] Marry, when thou darest. 
Glou. [Aside to Car.] Make up no factious numbers for the 
matter ; 
In thine own person answer thy abuse. 40 

Car. [Aside to Glou.] Ay, where thou dar'st not peep: an if 
thou dar'st, 
This evening on the east side of the grove. 
King. How now, my lords ! 

Car. Believe me, cousin Gloucester, 

Had not your man put up the fowl so suddenly, 
We had had more sport. [Aside to Glou.] Come with 
thy two-hand sword. 45 

Glou. True, uncle. 

Car. [Aside to Glou.] Are ye advised ? the east side of the 
grove. 

37. would 'twere] 32. I would it were. 38. Marry] 33. Even. 39, 

40. Make . . . numbers . . . abuse] 40, 41 (transferred). Make . . . numbers, 
but even in thine own person mecte me at the East end of the groue (prose). 41, 
42. Ay, where . . . grove] 33-39. Even when thou darest. Humphrey. Dare, I 
tell thee Priest, Plantagenets could neuer brooke the dare. Card. I am Plantagenet 
as well as thou, and sonne to lohn of Gaunt. Hump. In Bastardie. Cardin. I 
scorne thy words. 43. Hoiv . . . my lords I] 43. Why, how now. Lords? 

43-45. Believe me . . . sword] 44-46. Faith, Cousin Gloster, had not your tnan cast 
off so soone, we had had more sport to-day. Come with thy swoord and buckler 
(prose). 46.] omitted Q. 47. Are ye . . . grove] 42. Hcres my hand, I will. 

39. factious] joining in the quarrel, hung up over fire-places or in halls, 

partisan. See Richard III. 1. iii. 128 Nashe speaks of its rust in Foure 

and II. i. 20. Different from the usual Letters Confuted : " Flourishing about 

sense, rebellious. my lares with his two hande sworde of 

44. put tip the fowl] sprung, sprung Oratory and Poetry, peradventure shakes 
up, flown, raised or started (the game) some of the rust of it on my shoulders " 
are the usual words at this date, and I (Grosart, ii. 186), 1592-1593. Peele 
have no example of so early a use as brings it in ludicrously in the Old 
this of our common expression. Schmidt Wives Tale (Dyce, 448, b), 1595: 
says it means put the hawk up (in a " Enter Huanebango with his two- 
bag?) and take him away! Which is /mwi sworrf, and Corebus " (and several 
terrible. The Cow /c«<Jo« has the normal times in the play); while in Jonson's 
hawking phrase " cast off," for beginning Epicene, iv. ii., it is spoken of as a 
the sport, viewed from another stand- curiosity (1G09) : " He has got some 
point. The alteration is due to the body's old two-hand sword, to mow 
transference of the pastime from field to you off at the knees ... he is so 
river, probably — but it is not easy to say hung with pikes, halberds, petronels, 
why. " Fowl " is always prey or game calivers, and muskets, that he looks like 
in this connection. See Measure for a justice-of-peace's hall." N. Breton 
Measure, in. i. 92 ; Peele, David and compares the tongue to a two-hand 
Bethsabe (Dyce, 484, a), etc. etc. sword (Pasquils Fooles-cap), from the 

45. two-hand sword] Not {onnd again two-edged sword of the Bible. The 
in Shakespeare ; " sword and buckler " sword and buckler of the Quarto was 
in Quarto. In the Merry Wives of not dignified enough for these grim 
Windsor (Quarto), at 11. i. 131, " two- sirs ; at this date it was becoming 
hand sword " is changed into " long vulgar. Often in Peele's play. 
sword" in the received version (11. i. 47. Are ye advised] See "are you 
232). It was out of use probably, and avised," Merry Wives of Windsor, 1. 



SC. I.] 



KING HENRY THE SIXTH 



49 



Glou. [Aside to Car.] Cardinal, I am with you. 

King. Why, how now, uncle Gloucester ! 

Glou. Talking of hawking ; nothing else, my lord. 50 

\A side to Car.] Now, by God's mother, priest, I'll shave 
your crown 

For this, or all my fence shall fail. 
Car. [Aside to Glou.] Medice, teipsum 

Protector, see to't well, protect yourself. 
King. The winds grow high; so do your stomachs, lords. 55 

How irksome is this music to my heart ! 

When such strings jar, what hope of harmony ? 

I pray, my lords, let me compound this strife. 



Enter One, crying " A miracle ! " 

Glou. What means this noise ? 

Fellow, what miracle dost thou proclaim ? 
One. A miracle ! a miracle ! 



60 



49, ^o. King. . . . uncle Gloucester. Glou. Talking of hawking . . .] omitted 
Q. 51)52. Now by . . . fail] ^j. Faith priesi, He shave your crowne. 53, 

54. Medice . . . yourself] 48. Protector, protect thyselfe well. 55-58. The 

winds . . . strife]/^g. The wind growes high, so doth your chollojtr Lords. Enter 
one crying, A miracle, a miracle. 59, 60. Glou. What . , . proclaim] 50. 

King. How now, now sirrha, what miracle is it? 61, 62. A miracle . . . 
zvhat miracle] omitted Q. 



iv. 106, and note, Arden edition, p. 55 ; 
and also Measure for Measure, 11. ii. 
132. Ben Jonson has it in Bartholomew 
Fair, iv. i. ; and in Gipsies Metamor- 
phosed (Cuningham's Gifford, iii. 152, b). 
Have you taken it in ? Not in Q. 
Compare Kyd's Spanish Tragedie : 
" Hieronimo, you are not well advisde " 
(hi. xii. 67) (Boas edition). 

48. I am with you] I '11 meet you, I 'II 
match you. Compare Romeo and yuliet, 
II. iv. 78 : "Was / with you there for 
the goose ? " 

51. I'll shave your crown] Compare 
" bald pate " to the friar in Measure for 
Measure, v. i. 329, 357. No other direct 
personal reference to the tonsure, I 
think, occurs in Shakespeare. Com- 
pare Peele, Edward I. (Dyce, 381, a) : 
" Friar. Here swear I by my shaven 
crown. Wench," etc. 

52. fence] fencing ; as in " Master of 
Fence" {Merry Wives of Windsor, i. 
i. 295). Compare Much Ado About 
Nothing, V. i. 75 ; Twelfth Night, iii. 
iv. 312 ; and elsewhere. Not in Q. 

53. Medice, teipsum] From Luke iv. 
23- 

55. stomachs] tempers. " Cholers " 
in Q. 



57. jar] grow out of tune. A 
favourite word in this musical sense 
with Shakespeare. Not in Q. 

58. compound this strife] Occurs 
again in Taming of a Shrew, 11. i. 343 ; 
and in Richard III. 11. i. 74. " Com- 
pound this quarrel " is also in Taming 
of a Shrew, i. ii. 27. An expression of 
Peele's also : " To calm, to qualify, and 
to compound Th' ambitious strife of 
Scotland's climbing peers " {Edward I., 
Dyce, 385, a), circa 1590 ? And Faerie 
Queene, iii. iii. 23 : " Till universall 
peace compound all civill jarre." 

61. A miracle] Shakespeare probably 
took this from Grafton (it is not in Hall 
or Holinshed), who found it in Sir 
Thomas More's Dialogue, 1530. Graf- 
ton says it is " in the xiiij. chapter of the 
same booke, in thys wise following. 
In the time of King Henry the sixt as 
he roade in Progresse, there came to 
the towne of Saint Albons a certaine 
begger with hys wyfe, and there was 
walking about the towne begging fiue 
or six dayes before the kinges comming 
thether, sayeng that he was borne blinde 
and never sawe in all his life, and was 
warned in his dreame that he should 
come out of Berwike, where he sayd 



50 



THE SECOND PART OF 



[act II. 



Suf. Come to the king and tell him what miracle. 
One. Forsooth, a blind man at Saint Alban's shrine, 

Within this half hour hath received his sight; 

A man that ne'er saw in his life before. 
King. Now, God be praised, that to believing souls 

Gives light in darkness, comfort in despair ! 



65 



Enter the Mayor of Saint Alban's and his brethren ; and SlMP- 
COX, borne between two persons in a chair ; his Wife and a 
great multitude following. 

Car. Here comes the townsmen on procession, 

To present your highness with the man. 
King. Great is his comfort in this earthly vale, 70 

Although by his sight his sin be multiplied. 

63-65. One. Forsooth . . . before] 51, ^2. One. And it please your grace, there 
is a man that came blinde to S. Albones, and hath recemcd his sight at his shrine. 
66, 67. Now . . . despair I] 53. Goe fetch him hither, that wee may glorifie the 
Lord with him. Enter . . . brethren with Miisicke, bearing the man that had 
bene blind, betweene two in a chaire. 68, 69. Here . . . man\ omitted Q. 
70, 71. Great . . . multiplied'] 55, 56. Thou happie man, gitie God eternall 
praise. For he it is that thus hath helped thee. 



that he had ever dwelled, to seke Saint 
Albon, and that he had bene at his 
Shrine, and was not holpen, and there- 
fore he would go seeke him at some 
other place : For he had heard some 
saye sence he came, that Saint Albons 
body should be at Colyn, and in dede 
such a contention hath there bene. . . . 
But to tell you foorth when the King 
was come, and the towne full of people, 
sodainely this blind man at Saint Albons 
Shryne had his sight & the same was 
solemnply rong for a miracle, and Te 
Deum songen, so that nothing was talked 
of in all the towne, but this miracle. So 
happened it then that Duke Humfrey of 
Gloucester, a man no lesse wise, then 
also well learned, hauing great ioy to 
see suche a miracle, called the poore 
man vnto him, and first shewying him- 
selfe ioyous of Gods Glorie, so shewed 
in the getting of his sight, and exhort- 
ing him to mekenesse, and to no 
ascribyng of any part of the worship to 
himselfe, nor to be proude of the peoples 
praise, which would call him a good 
& a godly man therby, at the last he 
looked well upon his eien, & asked 
whether he could euer see anything at 
al in all his life before. And when as 
well his wife as himselfe affirmed fastly, 
no, then he looked aduisedlj' upon his 
eyen agayne, and sayde, I beleue you 



very well, for me thinketh that ye cannot 
see well yet. Yes Sir quoth he, I 
thanke God and his holy Martir, I can 
see now as well as any man : yea can, 
quod the Duke, what colour is my 
Gowne ? Then anone the begger told 
him. What colour quod he is this mans 
Gowne ? he tolde him also without anye 
stayeng or stomblyng, and tolde the 
names of all the coloures that coulde 
be shewed him. And when the Duke 
sawe that he bade him \\alke Faytoure, 
and made him to be set openly in the 
stockes : For though he could haue sene 
sodaynely by miracle the difference be- 
twene dyuers coloures, yet could he not 
by sight so sodainely tell the names of 
all these coloures, except he had knowne 
them before, no more then he coulde 
name all the men whome he should 
sodainely see, thus farre mayster Moore " 
(The XXV Yere). For a reference to 
miracles shown in Henry's lifetime, on 
account of his " parfyte holines," see in 
Polidore Vergil, at i. iii. 59 above (note). 

66, 67. God be praised . . . comfort 
in despair] Here as in earlier passages 
(see note at 1. 18 above). Henry's piety 
is enlarged upon from the Contention. 
See too 11. 84-S6. 

70. earthly vale] Shakespeare is fond 
of this metaphorical use. See Comedy 
of Errors, v. i. 120 ; Othello, iii. iii. 266. 



sc. I ] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 51 

Glou. Stand by, my masters ; bring him near the king : 

His highness' pleasure is to talk with him. 
King. Good fellow, tell us here the circumstance, 

That we for thee may glorify the Lord. 75 

What ! hast thou been long blind, and now restored ? 
Simp. Born blind, an 't please your grace. 
Wife. Ay, indeed, was he. 
Suf. What woman is this ? 

Wife. His wife, an 't like your worship. 80 

Glou. Hadst thou been his mother, thou could'st have 

better told. 
King. Where wert thou born ? 

Simp. At Berwick in the north, an 't like your grace. 
King. Poor soul ! God's goodness hath been great to thee : 

Let never day nor night unhallowed pass, 85 

But still remember what the Lord hath done. 
Queen. Tell me, good fellow, cam'st thou here by chance, 

Or of devotion, to this holy shrine ? 
Simp. God knows, of pure devotion ; being called 

A hundred times and oftener in my sleep, 90 

By good Saint Alban ; who said, " Simpcox, come; 

Come, offer at my shrine, and I will help thee." 
Wife. Most true, forsooth ; and many time and oft 

Myself have heard a voice to call him so. 
Car. What ! art thou lame ? 
Simp. Ay, God Almighty help me ! 95 



72, 73. Stand by . . . with him] 57. Where wast thou born ? 74-76. Good 
fellow . . , restored?] omitted Q (see 53 above). 76. King. . . . hast thou 

been long blind] 6g. Humph. But tell me wart thou borne blinde ? 77. Simp. 
Born . . . grace] 70. Poore man. I truly sir. 78. Wife. Ay . . . he] 71. 

Woman. I indeed, sir, he ivas borne blinde. 79. Suf. What . . . tins ?] 72. 
Hufnphrey. What art thou his tnother ? 80. Wife. His . . . worship] 73. 

Woman. His wife sir. 81. Glou. Hadst . . . told] 74, 75. Humphrey. Hadst 
. . . told (two lines). 82. King. Where . . . born ?] 57. Humphrey. Where 

wast thou borne? 83. Simp. At . . . grace] ^S, 59. Poore man. At Barwicke 
Sir, in the North. Humphrey. At Banvicke, and come thus far for helpe. 
84-86. Poor soul I . . . Lord hath done] omitted Q. 87, 88. Queen. Tell me 
. . . shrine ?] omitted Q. 89-92. Simp. God knows . . . help thee] 60, 61, 

Poore man. I sir, it was told me in my sleepe, That sweet saint Albones, should 
give me my sight againe. 93, 94. Wife. Most true ... so] omitted Q. 95. 
Car. What I . . . lame ?] 62. Humphry. What art thou lame too ? 95. Simp. 
Ay . . . me] 63. Poore man. I indeed sir, God helpe me. 

77, 83. your grace] The tiresome itera- times in Shakespeare : as The Merchant 

tion of this expression, or title, is notice- of Venice, i. iii. 107; 1 Henry IV. 1. 

able in these plays; but perhaps most ii. 56, etc. See, too, Disobedient Child 

so in Richard III. It is a characteristic (Hazlitt's Dodsley, ii. 292), circa 1560; 

with Peele. It occurs fifteen times in and Nashe, Christes Teares (Grosart, 

the first Act of yacA S/razw. A popular iv. 196), 1593. It occurs in Golding's 

trick of the time in stage-dialogue. Ovid, i. 93 ; and as " full many a time and 

93. many time and oft] Several 0/^," four or five times, later (1565-1567). 



52 THE SECOND PART OF [act ii. 

Suf. How cam'st thou so ? 

Sirup. A fall off of a tree. 

Wife. A plum-tree, master. 

Glou. How long hast thou been blind ? 

Simp. O ! born so, master. 

Glou. What ! and would'st climb a tree ? 

Simp. But that in all my life, when I was a youth. 

Wife. Too true; and bought his climbing very dear. lOO 

Glou. Mass, thou lov'dst plums well, that would'st venture 

so. 
Simp. Alas ! master, my wife desired some damsons, 

And made me climb with danger of my life. 
Glou. A subtle knave ! but yet it shall not serve. 

Let me see thine eyes: wink now: now open them. 105 

In my opinion yet thou see'st not well. 
Simp. Yes, master, clear as day, I thank God and Saint 

Alban. 
Glou. Say'st thou me so? What colour is this cloak of? 
Simp. Red, master ; red as blood. 
Glou. Why, that 's well said. What colour is my gown 

of? no 

Simp. Black, forsooth ; coal-black as jet. 

96. How cam'st thou so ?] 64. Humphry. How cam'st thou lame ? 96, 97. 
Simp. A . . . tree. Wife. A . . . master] 65. Poorc man. With falling off on 
a plum-tree. 97, 98. Glou. How . . . blind ? Simp. 1... master] omitted 
Q. 98. Glou. What I . . . tree?] 66. Humph. Wart thou blind &> wold clime 
plumtrees ? 99. Simp. But . . . youth] 66, 67. Poore man. Never but once sir 
in all my life, My wife did long for plums (see text 102. wife . . . damsons). 
100-105. Wife. . . . Simp. . . . Glou. A subtle . . . them] omitted Q. 105, 
106. Let me see . . . yet . . . well] 76. Humphry . . . Why let me see I thinke 
thou canst not see yet. 107. Yes . . . Alban] 77. Yes truly maistcr, as cleare 
as day. 108. Say'st . . . cloak of] 78. Saist thou so. What colours his 

cloake ? log. Red . . . blood] 79. Why red . . . as red . . . 110-112. 

Glou. Why ...of. Simp. Black . . . jet. King. Why . . . jet is of] 80-86. 
Humphry. And his cloake? Poore man. Why thats greene. Humphry. And 
what colours his hose ? Poore man. Yellow maister, yellow as gold. Humphry. 
And what colours my gowne ? Poorc man. Black sir, as black as leat. King. 
Then belike he knowes what colour leat is on. 

107. clear as day] Gabriel Harvey meygernesse and coleblacke hue " (1567). 
has " Is it not cleerer than the sonne Marlowe has " The Ocean, Terrene, 
at noonedayes ?" (Letters to Spenser and the Coal-black sea." in Tamburlaine, 
(Grosart, i. 123), 1580). Not in Shake- Part I. iii. i. (1586). In Shakespeare 
speare again. it occurs again in Richard II. v. i. 

108. Say'st thou me so] A favourite 49 ; in 5 Henry VI. v. i. 54, and three 
mode with Shakespeare, Nashe and times in Titus Androtiicus. Not in Q. 
others. Schmidt gives a good collec- It occurs in Chaucer, and very often 
tion (pp. 565, 566). in the Faerie Queene. 

log. reti as i/00^] Not in Shakespeare iii. black as jet] Again only in 

again. Several times in Peele's Old Titus Andronicus, v. ii. 50. It occurs 

Wives Tale (Dyce, 446, b ; 447, b). in the fourth book of Golding's Ovid, 

III. coal-black] In Golding's Ovid 1. 602: "The poastes began to quake 

(book vii. 824) : " Did shift their and doores looke blacke as jet." And 



sc. I] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 53 

King. Why then, thou know'st what colour jet is of ? 

Suf. And yet, I think, jet did he never see. 

Glou. But cloaks and gowns before this day a many. 

Wife. Never, before this day, in all his life. 115 

Glou. Tell me, sirrah, what 's my name ? 

Simp. Alas ! master, 1 know not. 

Glou. What 's his name ? 

Simp. I know not. 

Glou. Nor his ? 120 

Simp. No, indeed, master. 

Glou. What 's thine own name ? 

Simp. Saunder Simpcox, an if it please you, master. 

Glou. Then, Saunder, sit there, the lyingest knave in 

Christendom. If thou hadst been born blind, thou 125 
might'st as well have known all our names as thus to 
name the several colours we do wear. Sight may 
distinguish of colours, but suddenly to nominate them 
all, it is impossible. My lords, Saint Alban here hath 
done a miracle; and would ye not think his cunning 130 
to be great, that could restore this cripple to his legs 
again ? 

Simp. O master, that you could ! 

113. Suf. And . . . see\ Sy. Suffolke. And . . . see. 114 and 116. Glou. 
But . . . name ?'\ 88, 8g. But . . . ere this day many a one. But tell . . . 
name? 115. Wife. Never . . .] omitted Q. 117. Alas . . . not'\go. Alasse 
maister . . . not. 1 18-120. Glou. What's . . . his] 91-93. Humphry. Whats 
. . . his. 121. No . . . master] g^-qb. No truly sir. Humph. A^or his name .^ 
Poore man. No indeed maister. 122. What's . . .] 97. Whats . . . 123. 
Saunder Simpcox . . .] 98. Sander, and it please you maister. 124-132. Then 
Saunder . . . Alban (Albones Q) . . . ye not think (you not think Q) . . . 
again ?] 99-105. Then Sander . . . againe. 133. that] 106. / would. 

in Peele, Polyhymnia (Dyce, p. 570, a), " the prettiest Kate in Christendom " 

1590 ; and Marlowe's Tamburlaine, (same play, 11. i. 188) ; and " The 

Part II. I. iii. It is in Hawes' Pastime bluntest wooer in Christendom" (5 

o/P/fasz(>'e(reprint, p. 135) : " Andevery Henry VI. iii. ii. 83). New Eng, 

tothe as blacke as any gete." Diet, has an example in a serious use 

114. a many] "many a one" in Q. of date 1460: the "mightest King in 
As a noun, again in ^ Henry IV. i. iii. Christendom." Crawford (Collectanea, 
gi ; and still, and earlier, in expression pp. 118, iig) dwells on the occurrence 
" a good many." of this expression in Soliman and 

124. sit there] there you are, or there Perseda, and in Arden of Feversham. 

you go. You are proclaimed. There See note at 3 Henry VI. iii. ii. 83 : 

you have your existence. Compare " The bluntest wooer in Christendom." 

" them that sit in darkness and in the 128. nominate them] give them their 

shadow of death" (Psalm 107). true names; implying recognition. 

124,125. the lyingest knave in Christ- Earlier in Love's Labour's Lost, i. ii. 

endom] The line occurs again in Tam- 16, but the sense is different. Compare 

ing of a Shrew, Induction, 2-26, an un- Greene, Blacke Booke (Grosart, xi. 6) : 

usual occurrence in Shakespeare, and " to shadowe his villany the more would 

apparently overlooked by the commen- nominate himselfe to be a Marshall 

tators, down to the Arden edition of man." A favourite word with Gabriel 

Taming of a Shrew. Compare, too, Harvey. 



54 THE SECOND PART OF [act n. 

Glou. My masters of Saint Alban's, have you not beadles 

in your town, and things called whips? 135 

Mayor. Yes, my lord, if it please your grace. 

Glou. Then send for one presently. 

Mayor. Sirrah, go fetch the beadle hither straight. 

{Exit an Attendant. 

Glou. Now fetch me a stool hither by and by. Now, 

sirrah, if you mean to save yourself from whipping, 140 
leap me over this stool and run away. 

Enter Beadle. 

Simp. Alas ! master, I am not able to stand alone : 

You go about to torture me in vain. 
Glou. Well, sir, we must have you find your legs. Sirrah 

beadle, whip him till he leap over that same 145 
stool . 
Bead. I will, my lord. Come on, sirrah ; off with your 

doublet quickly. 
Simp. Alas ! master, what shall I do ? I am not able to 

stand. 1 50 

[After the Beadle hath hit him once, he leaps over the 
stool and runs away ; and they follow and cry, 
" A miracle ! " 

134-138. My masters . . . straight. [Exit an Attendant] 107-112. My Maisters 
. . . straight. Exet one. 139-150. Now fetch me . , , to stand] 113-122. 

{Humphry and ' Poore man ') Noiv fetch me . . . to stand. 150. [After . . . 
hit him once . . . A miracle t] 122. After . . . hit him one girke . . . ruu after 

135. things called whips] " A humor- " Deepest hell 

ous method of expression, occasionally Where bloudie furies shake their 

used satirically at the present day" whips of Steele" 

(Halliwell). Collier noticed that these (i. i. 65) (Boas), from Virgil's Mneid. 

vfoxd?, occviV in Armms' Nest of Ninnies, But Peele is better in Tlie Battle of 

160S : "There are as Hamlet says, Alcazar: — 
things called whips in store " (Grosart's " Furies . . . 

reprint, p. 58). He continually has Range through this army with your 

playscraps from Shakespeare. The ex- iron whips " 

pression occurs in Jonson's additions (436, b). And : — 

to Kyd's Spanish Tiagedie (iii. x.) " Nemesis with bloody zei/ii/" in hand, 

(Boas) : — Thunders for vengeance " 

"heaven is heaven still, (425, a). And especially : — 
And there is Nemesis, and Furies, " Nemesis, high mistress of revenge, 

And things called whippes." That with her scourge keeps all 

The date of these additions is 1602. the world in awe " 

It is suggested that the quotation (for (421, b). I say especially, because these 

such it seems), or tag, is out of the old last words occur in Hamlet, v. i. 238 : 

Hamlet, probably by Kyd, in which " Kept the world in awe " — establishing 

Armins appears to have acted. Evi- a connection between Peele and the old 

dently the words in the original referred Hamlet. Nemesis is especially Peele's. 

to the whips (of iron or steel) of Professor Boas's parallels from Hamlet, 

Nemesis and the Furies. These appear Q i, with Kyd's Spanish Tragedy are 

in Locrine and Selimus (of Erynnis and not so weighty as this. 
Furies), later plays. Earlier Kyd has : — 150. hit him once] " hit him one 



sc. I ] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 55 

King. O God ! seest thou this, and bearest so long ? 

Queen. It made me laugh to see the villain run. 

Glou. Follow the knave ; and take this drab away. 

Wife. Alas ! sir, we did it for pure need. 

Glou. Let them be whipped through every market-town 155 

till they come to Berwick, from whence they came. 

\Exeunt Mayor, Beadle, Wife, etc. 
Car. Duke Humphrey has done a miracle to-day. 
Suf. True ; made the lame to leap and fly away. 
Glou. But you have done more miracles than I ; 160 

Vou made in a day, my lord, whole towns to fly. 

Enter BUCKINGHAM. 

King. What tidings with our cousin Buckingham ? 
Buck. Such as my heart doth tremble to unfold. 

A sort of naughty persons, lewdly bent. 

Under the countenance and confederacy 165 

Of Lady Eleanor, the protector's wife, 

him, crying, A miracle, a miracle. 151-154. King. O God I . . . Long ? . . . 
Wife. Alas I . . . need] omitted Q. i55-i57- Let . . . came'] 123-126. A 

miracle, a miracle, let Iiim be taken againe, &> whipt through euery Market 
Towne til he comes at Barwick where he was borne. Mayor. It shall be done 
my Lord. Exet. Mayor. 158, 159. Car. . . . to-day. Suf. . . . away] 127, 
128. Suffolke. My Lord Protector hath done wonders to-day, He hath made the 
blinde to see, and halt to go. 160, 161. Glou. But . . . to fly] 129-132. 

Humph. I but you did greater wonders, when you made whole Dukedoms file 
in a day. Witnesse France. King. Haue done I say, and let me hear no more 
of that. Enter the Duke of Buckingham. 162. What . . . Buckingham] 

133. What 7iewes brings Duke Humphrey of Buckingham .^ 163-174. Siich as 
. . . understand] 134-142. /// new es for some my Lord, and this it is. That proud 
dame Elnor our Protectors wife. Hath plotted treason Against the King and Peerse, 
By zvichcrafts, sorceries and conitirings. Who by such meanes did raise a spirit 

girke" of the Contention is a neat displace"; and p. 244: " Burne up the 

stage-direction ; and it is worthy of fields, and ouerthrow whole towns." 

note that Peele has a most interesting Peele had a hand in Selimus. But 

series of stage-directions in all his Tamburlaine, Part II., mentions a 

signed plays. They continually repay greater miracle: "And make whole 

study. "Jerk," the proper word for a cities caper in the air" (iii. ii., 55, a), 

stroke of a whip, is only used once in 164. A sort of naughty persons] a 

Shakespeare, metaphorically, in Love's crew, pack. Used contemptuously 

Labour 's Lost, iv. ii. 129. In a note often : " A sort of vagabonds " 

to the Arden edition of that play (p. (Richard IIL v. iii. 316) and "a 

82), I have given a good example from sort of tinkers" (below, iii. ii. 277). 

Greene's Never too Late to Mend Similarly in Grafton (King John, The 

(Grosart, viii. 193), 1590. XIII Yere), p. 241 : 'M sort also there 

153. <fm6]Seenote to Partl.v.iv. 32. were of prelates that time which were 

161. whole towns] An exaggerated not pleased . . . yea euery sawcy Sir 

form of speech found in Peele, Ihon for his part." Not in Q. 

Edward I. (Dyce, 388, a) : " Sending 164. bent] inclined. 

whole centuries of heathen souls to 165. confederacy] league, conspiracy. 

Pluto's house." And in Selimus In this bad sense Shakespeare uses the 

(Grosart's Greene, xiv. 201) : " And word several times (King Lear, Mid- 

seeke with swoord whole kingdomes to sitmmer Night's Dream, etc.) Not in Q. 



56 THE SECOND PART OF [act h. 

The ringleader and head of all this rout, 

Have practised dangerously against your state, 

Dealing with witches and with conjurers : ' 

Whom we have apprehended in the fact ; 170 

Raising up wicked spirits from underground, 

Demanding of King Henry's life and death, 

And other of your highness' privy council, 

As more at large your grace shall understand. 

Car. And so, my lord protector, by this means 175 

Your lady is forthcoming yet at London. 
This news, I think, hath turned your weapon's edge ; 
'Tis like, my lord, you will not keep your hour. 

Glou. Ambitious churchman, leave to afflict my heart : 

Sorrow and grief have vanquished all my powers; 180 

And, vanquished as I am, I yield to thee, 
Or to the meanest groom. 

vp. To tell her what hap should betide the state, But ere they had finisht their 
diuellish drift, By Yorke and my selfe they were all surprisde, And heres the 
answere the diiiel did make to them. 175.] 143-153. King. First of the King, 
what shall become of hitn ? Reads. The Duke (as at i. iv. 23, 24, Yet for Btit} : 
146. Gods will be done in all : 147, 148. What . . . end (as at i. iv. 25, 26) : 149, 
150. Suffolke. By water must the Duke of Snffolke die ? It must be so or else 
the diiiel doth lie. 151-153. Let Somerset . . . For safer . . . stand (as at i. iv, 
27-29). 175-178. Car. And so . . . hour] 154-156. Heres good stuffe, how now 
my Lord Protector This newes I think hath turndc your weapons point, I am in 
doubt youle scarsly keepe yo7ir promise. 179-182 and 187-196. Ambitious . . . 
groom, (and) Madam . . . honest name] 157-165. Forbeare ambitious Prelate to 

167. ringleader] Not elsewhere in SLnd Midsummer Nigh fs Dream : in Two 

Shakespeare. Occurs in Udall's Eras- Gentlemen of Verona and Comedy of 

mus (Roberts, p. 373), 1542 : "One of Errors; but in no late work. Probably 

the chief ringleders and capitaines." one of the many instances that could be 

And in Heywood's Proverbs (ed. Shar- adduced of the result of his early (per- 

man, p. 41), 1546 : — haps earliest) reading for his work, in 

" Shee is as sure to hold as an eele the Chronicle Histories. Not in Q. 

by the taile, 176. forthcoming] See note, i. iv. 53. 

Shee is neither fish nor flesh nor 177. turned . . . edge] Surely an im- 

good red herring, provement on " turned the point " in the 

Shee is a ringleader there." Contention, especially of a sword. See 

And in Hall's Chronicle (1809, p. 242), below, iv. x. 60, for another example. 

I548' 178. keep your hour] Compate Comedy 

i6y. head] leader. So in (Peele's) 0/ Errors, iii. i. 2 :" My wife is shrewish 

yack Strajv : " Following desperately when I keep not hours." The Contention 

your lewd and misgoverned heads, has " promise." This and the last are 

which have haled you on " (Hazlitt's the evidence that comes in grains to 

Dodsley, v. 410). make up the weight for the work of a 

171. spirits from underground] See different hand in the text, 

above, i. ii. 72. 179. Ambitious churchman] The ad- 

174. at large] at length, in full detail, jective is used thus, in addressing, half 

This is a characterism of Shakespeare's a dozen times in the three parts, but 

historical and earlier plays. It occurs not, I think, elsewhere in Shakespeare, 

half a dozen times in the first two parts 179-182. Ambitious . . . meanest 

of Henry VL up to this ; and twice groom] These touching and dignified 

each in Richard II. and Henry V.; in words have no counterpart in the 

" Henry IV., Merry Wives of Windsor original. They at once win our 



o 



sc. 1] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 57 

King. O God ! what mischiefs work the wicked ones, 

Heaping confusion on their own heads thereby. 
Queen. Gloucester, see here the tainture of thy nest, 185 

And look thyself be faultless, thou wert best. 
Glou. Madam, for myself, to heaven I do appeal, 

How I have loved my king and commonweal ; 

And, for my wife, I know not how it stands. 

Sorry I am to hear what I have heard : 19O 

Noble she is, but if she have forgot 

Honour and virtue, and conversed with such 

As, like to pitch, defile nobility, 

I banish her my bed and company, 

And give her as a prey to law and shame, 195 

That hath dishonoured Gloucester's honest name. 
King. Well, for this night we will repose us here : 

To-morrow toward London back again, 

To look into this business thoroughly. 

And call these foul offenders to their answers ; 200 

And poise the cause in justice' equal scales. 

Whose beam stands sure, whose rightful cause prevails. 

{^Flourish. Exeunt. 

urge my grief e. And pardon me my gratious Soueraigne, For here I sweare vnto 
your Maiestie, That I am guiltlasse of those hainous crimes Which my ambitious 
wife hath falsly done, And for she would betraie her soueraigne Lord, I here 
renounce her from my bed and boord. And leaue her open for the law to iudge, 
Vnlesse she cleare her selfe of this foiile deed. 183-185. King. O God I . . . 
Queen. Gloucester] omitted Q. 197-202. King. Well . . . prevails. Exeunt] 
166-170. King. Come my Lords this night weele lodge in S. Albones, And to 
morrow we will ride to London, And trie the utmost of these Treasons forth, Come 
vnckle Gloster along with us, My mind doth tell me thou art innocent. Exet omnes. 

sympathy for Gloucester as they are 193. pitch, defile] Again in Much Ado 

meant to do, forming a corollary to the About Nothing, in. iii. 60. 

second scene in the play. 194. bed and compatiy] " bed and 

183. the wicked ones] the wicked, hoard" in the Cotitention ; which occurs 

Compare Lomwe (by Peele and Greene?), transposed in As You Like It, v. iv. 

i. i:— 148. 

"wear a wreath of sempiternal 199. thoroughly] Notice here the 

fame trochaics or triple-endings so plentiful 

Sorted amongst the glorious happy in this scene ; thoroughly, repose us 

ones." here, company, nobility, how it stands, 

Biblical (Matthew xiii. 38). in the style of Peele. This metrical 

185. tainture] blemish, defilement, fashion may have been due to Spenser's 

Compare " attainture," above, i. ii. 106. Faerie Queene. It abounds in the plays 

Both are peculiar to this play in of about this date, but not in earlier 

Shakespeare, but neither occurs in the ones. Shakespeare soon shook it off. 

Contention. 201. poise . . . injustice' . . . scales] This 

190, 191. Sorry I am . . . Noble metaphor, including the beam, occurs 

she is] This ineffective transposition, again in All's Well that Ends Well, 

smacking of a beginner, is not peculiar 11. iii. 161. And compare Othello, i. 

to this passage. " Sorry I am "occurs iii. 331, and Hamlet, iv. v. 157. 

in Richard IIL iii. vii. 88 ("sorry 202. beam] "A needle or tongue 

am I" is frequent). ''Noble she was, of a balance or beam (Examen)" (J. 

and thought I stood engaged," is in Rider, Bibliotheca Scholastica, Oxford, 

All's Well that Ends Well, v. iii, 95. 1589). 



58 THE SECOND PART OF [act h. 

SCENE II. — London. The Duke of Yo^yC'^, Garden. 
Enter YORK, SALISBURY, and Warwick. 

York. Now, my good Lords of Salisbury and Warwick, 

Our simple supper ended, give me leave 

In this close walk to satisfy myself, 

In craving your opinion of my title, 

Which is infallible, to England's crown. 5 

Sal. My lord, I long to hear it at full. 
War. Sweet York, begin ; and if thy claim be good, 

The Nevils are thy subjects to command. 
York. Then thus : 

Edward the Third, my lords, had seven sons : 10 

The first, Edward the Black Prince, Prince of Wales ; 

The second, William of Hatfield ; and the third, 

Lionel Duke of Clarence ; next to whom 

Was John of Gaunt, the Duke of Lancaster ; 

The fifth was Edmund Langley, Duke of York; 15 

Scene ii, . . . Garden] omitted Q (as throughout). Enter . . .] Enter the 
Diike of . . . and the Earles of . . . 1-5. York. Now . . . crozvn] 1-4. My 
Lords our simple supper ended, thus, Let me reueale vnto your honours here. The 
right and title of the house of Yorke, To Englands Crowne by liniall desent. 
6. Sal. My . . . full] omitted Q. 7, 8. War. Sweet York . . . command] 

5, 6. Then Yorke . . . command. 9, 10. Then . . . sons] 7, 8. Then thus 

my Lords. Edward the third had seuen sonnes. 11. The first . . . Wales] 
9, 10. The first was . . . Wales. 12. The second . . . Hatfield] 11, 12. The 
second was Edmund of Langley, Duke of Yorke. 12, 13. And the third . . . 

Clarence] 13. The third was Lyonell , . . Clarence. 13, 14. next . . . Lan- 
caster] 14, 15. The fourth was lohn . . . Lancaster. 15. The fifth . . . York] 
16. The ffth zvas Roger Mortemor, Earle of March. 

3. close] private. edition from Holinshed. There must 

4. title] We have had this before, on have been a variant text of the first. 
a smaller scale in Part I. 11. iv. and The confusion between Sir Edmund 
VI. V. Boswell Stone deals with this Mortimer (brother to Roger Mortimer, 
intricate question, shovi'ing that Shake- fourth earl of March), and Edmund 
speare drew from Holinshed, who took Mortimer, fifth earl of March (from 
the pedigree from Stow's Annates. It Holinshed) is increased on the next 
is noteworthy that the Contention has page (11. 41, 42). See note at line 41 
three mistakes of its own : at the second below. 

son ; at the order of the sixth and 5. Which is infallible] Grafton has 

seventh sons ; and at the fifth son. the words " the very true and infallible 

The edition of 1619 corrects these in heyre" in his summary of York's title 

the Contention, reading as the amended (p. 666). The earlier part of the 

play does in the Folio. This 1619 pedigree is given more fully in Grafton 

edition has another difference here, at the end of Edward the Third's reign 

giving (from Holinshed) after "died (pp. 411, 412). The words " by lineal 

before his father " (line 18) the following descent" used here in the Contention 

words : " Leaning behinde him two are found in Part I. iii. i. 166, when 

sonnes; Edward, borne at Angolesme, the King is restoring to Plantagenet 

7vho died young, and Richard that was his rights, in an unhappy moment, 

after crowned King." It is not in the Grafton has : " I am the very true and 

least probable that these words were lyneall heyre which discent all you 

expressly introduced into the third (1619) cannot justly gayne say" (p. 667). 



sc. II ] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 59 

The sixth was Thomas of Woodstock, Duke of Gloucester ; 

William of Windsor was the seventh and last. 

Edward the Black Prince died before his father, 

And left behind him Richard, his only son, 

Who, after Edward the Third's death, reigned as king ; 20 

Till Henry Bolingbroke, Duke of Lancaster, 

The eldest son and heir of John of Gaunt, 

Crowned by the name of Henry the Fourth, 

Seized on the realm, deposed the rightful king, 

Sent his poor Queen to France, from whence she came, 25 

And him to Pomfret ; where, as all you know. 

Harmless Richard was murdered traitorously. 

War. Father, the duke hath told the truth ; 

Thus got the house of Lancaster the crown. 

York. Which now they hold by force and not by right ; 30 
For Richard, the first son's heir, being dead. 
The issue of the next son should have reigned. 

Sal. But William of Hatfield died without an heir. 

York. The third son, Duke of Clarence, from whose line 

I claim the crown, had issue Philippe, a daughter, 35 



16, The sixth . . . Gloucester] 17. The sixt was sir Thomas of Woodstocke. 
17. William . . . last.] 18. William . , . last. 18-20. Edward , . . king] 
ig-2i. Now, Edward the blacke Prince he died before his father, and left behinde 
him Richard, that afterwards was King, Crownde by the name of Richard the 
second, and he died without an heire. 21-27. Till Henry . . . traitorously] 
27-33. Now sir. In thy time of Richards raigne, Henry of Bullingbrooke, sonne 
and heire to lohn of Gaunt, the Duke of Lancaster fotirth sonne to Edward the 
third, he claimde the Croivne, deposde the Mcrthfull King, and as both you know, 
in Pomphret Castle harniclesse Richard was shamefully murthered. 28, 29. 
War. Father . . . crown] 32, 33. (continued from murthered) and so by Richards 
death came the house of Lancaster vnto the Crowne. 30-33. York. Which . . . 
heir] omitted Q. 34-38. The third son . . . Clarence . . . Elinor] 22-27. Edmund 
of Langley Duke of Yorke died, and left behind him two daughters, Anne and 
Elinor. Lyoncll Duke of Clarence died and left behind Alice, Anne and 
Elinor, that was after married to my father, and by her I clainie the crowne, as 
the true heire to Lyonell Duke of Clarence, the third sonne to Edivard the third. 
(Now sir, etc.). 

24. rightful king] " MerthfuU king" With which he cutt a lock of all 

in the Contention (1600 and i6ig). The their heare, 

word appears in 3 Henry VI. v. vii. 43 ; Which medling with their blood 

nowhere else. and earth he threw 

26. as all you know] All is used Into the grave." 

again by Shakespeare, addressing only " All " are the parents, Mordant and 

two persons in 2 Henry IV. iii. i. 35 : Amavia. 

"Why then good morrow to you all, 27. traitorously] Three times in this 

my lords" (addressing Warwick and pla}'. Elsewhere only in All's Well 

Surrey). Malone called attention to that Ends Well. Compare Peele, Sir 

this. I find a good example in the Clyomon (532, a) : " And traitorously 

Faerie Qtieene, 11. i. 61 : — did them betray in prison for to 

" The dead knights sword out of keep." 
his sheath he drew, 



60 THE SECOND PART OF [act n. 

Who married Edmund Mortimer, Earl of March ; 

Edmund had issue, Roger, Earl of March ; 

Roger had issue, Edmund, Anne, and Eleanor. 
Sal. This Edmund, in the reign of Bolingbroke, 

As I have read, laid claim unto the crown ; 40 

And, but for Owen Glendower, had been king, 

Who kept him in captivity till he died. 

But to the rest. 
York. His eldest sister, Anne, 

My mother, being heir unto the crown. 

Married Richard, Earl of Cambridge, who was son 45 

To Edmund Langley, Edward the Third's fifth son. 

By her I claim the kingdom : she was heir 

To Roger, Earl of March, who was the son 

Of Edmund Mortimer, who married Philippe, 

Sole daughter unto Lionel Duke of Clarence : 50 

So, if the issue of the elder son 

Succeed before the younger, I am king. 
War. What plain proceeding is more plain than this ? 

39-43. Sal. This Edmund . . . to the resf] 34-36. Sals. Sailing your tale 
my Lord, as I haue heard, in the raigne of Bullenbrooke, the Duke of Yorke did 
claime the Crowne, and but for Owin Glendor, had bene King. 43-52. York. 

His eldest . . . king] 37-41. True. But it so fortuned then, by meanes of that 
monstrous rebel Glendor, the noble Duke of Yorke was done to death, and so etier 
since the heires of lohn of Gaunt haue possessed the Crowne. But if the issue of 
the elder should sucsecd before the issue of the yonger, then am I lawfull heire 
vnto the kingdome. 53-62. What pain . . . crown] 42-49. What plaine pro- 

ceedings can be more plaine, hee claimes it from Lyonel Duke of Clarence, the 

42. kept him in captivity till he died] which he was Lord of by his aforesayd 

" He appears to have been at liberty mother. But while he was there oc- 

during the whole reign of King Henry cupied about the same, the wylde Irishe 

V. — and there is no proof that he ever came upon him in a great number, and 

was confined, as a state-prisoner, by slue him and many of his company. 

King Henry IV. . . . The historian has This Sir Roger had issue, Edmond, and 

confounded Mortimer with Lord Gray Roger, Anne, Alice, and Alianor that 

of Ruthvin, who was likewise taken was made a Nonne. The two afore- 

prisoner by Glendower, and actually sayd sonnes dyed without issue, and 

did marry his daughter " (Malone). See Anne the eldest daughter was maryed 

Part L II. V. It is better here to quote to Richarde Erie of Cambridge, which 

Grafton about these Mortimers (IX Richard had issue by the sayd Anne, 

Yere of Richarde the Seconde, p. 431), Isabell ladie Boucher, and Richard that 

and the title then : " and by aucthoritie was after Duke of Yorke, and father 

of the same Parliament, Sir Roger to King Edward the fourth, which 

Mortimer Erie of March, and sonne sayd Richard Erie of Cambridge was 

and heyre unto Sir Edmond Mortimer, put to death by Henrie the fift at 

and of Dame Philip eldest daughter Southhampton." 

and heyre unto Sir Lyonell the second 53. proceeding] " process, course," 

Sonne of Edward the thirde, was sone says Schmidt, who equates it with 

after proclaymed heyre apparaunt to " your hate's proceeding " in Romeo and 

the Crowne of Englande. The which Juliet, in. i. 193. The Contention (Q i) 

Sir Roger shortly after sayled into Ire- has it in the plural. The word refers to 

land, to suppresse the rebellion . . . of theproceedingor process of events in the 

the people of his Lordship of Wolster, pedigree, not to the narration of them. 



sc. II ] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 61 

Henry doth claim the crown from John of Gaunt, 

The fourth son ; York claims it from the third. 55 

Till Lionel's issue fails, his should not reign : 

It fails not yet, but flourishes in thee. 

And in thy sons, fair slips of such a stock. 

Then, father Salisbury, kneel we together, 

And in this private plot be we the first 60 

That shall salute our rightful sovereign 

With honour of his birthright to the crown. 

Both. Long live our sovereign Richard, England's king ! 

York. We thank you, lords ! But I am not your king 

Till I be crowned and that my sword be stained 65 

With heart-blood of the house of Lancaster ; 

And that 's not suddenly to be performed. 

But with advice and silent secrecy. 

Do you as I do in these dangerous days, 

Wink at the Duke of Suffolk's insolence, 70 

At Beaufort's pride, at Somerset's ambition, 

At Buckingham and all the crew of them, 

Till they have snared the shepherd of the flock. 

That virtuous prince, the good Duke Humphrey: 

'Tis that they seek ; and they in seeking that 75 

Shall find their deaths, if York can prophesy. 

third Sonne to Edward the third, and Henry from lohn of Gaunt the fourth 
Sonne. So that till Lyonels . . . flourisheth (57) . . . brauc slips . . . noble father 
. . . both togither . . . place, be we the first to honor him with birthright to the 
Crown. 63. Long . . . king] 49. Long line Richard Englands royall King. 
64-66. York. We thank . . . Lancaster] 50-52. Yorke. I thanke you both. But 
Lords I am not your King, vntil this sword be sheathed euen in the hart blood of 
. . . Lancaster. 67-76. And that's not . . . prophesy] omitted Q. 

58. slips] cuttings. Still in use 83. Always so in Shakespeare ; occurs 
amongst gardeners. A favourite word in each of the three Parts, three times 
with Shakespeare, and occurring again in Richard IL and in Troilus and 
in this play, in. ii. 214. See note Cressida once. The term here is from 
thereto. Compare Soliman and Per- the Contention. In the Trne Tragedie, 
seda, I. ii. 75 (Boas's Kyd): "Yong 11. i. 52, 53, occurs : — 

slippes are neuer graft in windy dales" " I cannot joy till this white rose be 

(1592). dide 

59. 60, 77. kneel we ... be we .. . Euen in the hart blond of the house 
break we] The first two of these are in of Lancaster." 

the Contention, the third not. See These lines are omitted in 3 Henry VI. 

note to Part I. 11. i. 13 ; and see Schmidt 11. i. 79-87. The repetition is eliminated 

(1343, a) for the extreme prevalence of at this distance, showing Shakespeare's 

this trick in the historical plays. But carefulness perhaps, for all the passages 

it occurs in several others as well. See are his. And see 1 Henry VL 11. iv. 61. 
below, II. iv. 106. 68. advice] deliberate consideration ; 

60. private plot] "private place" in as in King John, iii. iv. 11, and else- 
original. Capell places this scene in where. Peele has : — 

the Duke of York's garden ; Pope had " For wisdom govern'd by advice 

" Palace." The Folio does not separate Makes many fortunate and wise " 

it. {Old Wives Tale, Dyce, 451, a). 

66. heart-blood] See note, Part 1. 1. iii. 75, 76. 'Tis that they seek . . . Shall 



62 THE SECOND PART OF [act n. 

Sal. My lord, break we off; we know your mind at full. 

War. My heart assures me that the Earl of Warwick 
Shall one day make the Duke of York a king. 

York. And, Nevil, this I do assure myself: 80 

Richard shall live to make the Earl of Warwick 
The greatest man in England but the king. {Exeunt. 

SCENE III .—A hall of justice. 

Sound trumpets. Enter the YjmG, the Qx^^Y.^, GLOUCESTER, 
York, Suffolk, and Salisbury ; the Duchess of Glou- 
cester, Margery Jourdain, Southwell, HuxME, and 
Bolingbroke, under guard. 

King. Stand forth, Dame Eleanor Cobham, Gloucester's wife. 
In sight of God and us, your guilt is great : 

77. Sal. My lord . . . full] omitted Q. 78, 79. Way. My heart . . . king] 
53-61. War. Then Yorke adnise thy sclfe and take thy time, Clainie thou thee 
Crowne, and set thy standard vp. And in the same adiiance the milke-white Rose, 
And then to gard it, will I rouse the Beare, Inuiron' d with ten thousand Ragged- 
staues To aide and helpe thee for to win thy right, Maugre the proudest Lord 
of Henries blood. That dares deny the right and claime of Yorke, For why my 
minde presageth I shall Hue To see the noble Duke of Yorke to be a king. 80- 
82. York. And Nevil . . . king] 63-65. Yorke. Thanks noble Warwicke, and 
Yorke doth hope to see. The Earle of Warwicke live, to be the greatest man in 
England but the King. Come let's goe ; Exet omnes. 

Scene hi. 

Enter King Henry, and the Qiieene, Duke Humphrey, the Duke of Suffolke, 

and the Duke of Buckinghain, the Cardinall, and Dame Ehior Cobham led zvith 

the officers, and then enter to them the Duke of Yorke, and the Earlcs of Salsbury 

and Warwicke. 1-13. King. Stand . . . Isle of Man] 1-9. King. Stand . . . 

yzKrf] This is Peele's style, but it is also why I make it not so great desert" 

Sidney's ; and a greater than either is {Battle of Alcazar (427, a)), meaning 

Spenser : " Her now I seeke . . . And because (often in Golding's Ovid, Peele's 

seeking misse, and missing doe lament" favourite book). He is nearly as fond 

{Daphnaida, st. 24). But Spenser was of" the proud" or "the proudest people" 

not enslaved by it. as Greene : " spare not the proudest he 

78. lyarwic^] The notable bit of rant That," etc. (Edward I. {406, a.)). And 

here, in the Contention, omitted from there is not in the Contention passage 

the revised play is very much in the the repetition of words inevitable in every 

manner of Greene, or his imitator few lines of Greene. In the Battle of 

Peele ; characteristically so. He has Alcazar, "Myself, environ'd \vith my 

"milk-white steed" and "milk-white way" trust}' guard Of janizaries" (435, b), is a 

in The Arraignment of Paris and in Ed- good parallel, for the expression is more 

ward I. (both from Golding's Ovid), often used of hostile surroundings. The 

He has "maugre" several times, but "ragged-staff" occurs below, v. i. 203, 

Greene much oftener (in his prose), in company with the bear, the Nevil's 

Both of them rejoice continually in the cognizance. The "milk-white rose" we 

wretched "for to" often (Alphonsus, have had already at i. i. 252 in an almost 

Grosart, xiii. 342, 362,363 (twice) and identical line (in both plays). Hence its 

Selimus, xiv. 246), and in Peele's un- omission here. 

doubted work : "in despair and torture 82. cotnc let's goe] m Q. See note at 

for to dwell " [Old Wives Tale, Dyce, 3 Henry VI. i. ii. 75. It occurs again 

450, b), and "shifts for to defer your three times in Q. See note at iv. i. 

labour " (453, a). Peele too has " For 141 below, in this play. 



sc. Ill] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 63 

Receive the sentence of the law for sins 

Such as by God's book are adjudged to death. 

You four, from hence to prison back again ; 5 

From thence unto the place of execution : 

The witch in Smithfield shall be burned to ashes, 

And you three shall be strangled on the gallows. 

You, madam, for you are more nobly born, 

Despoiled of your honour in your life, lo 

Shall, after three days' open penance done, 

Live in your country here in banishment, 

With Sir John Stanley, in the Isle of Man. 

Duch. Welcome is banishment ; welcome were my death. 

Glou. Eleanor, the law, thou seest, hath judged thee : 1 5 

I cannot justify whom the law condemns. 

{^Exeunt Duchess and other Prisoners, guarded. 
Mine eyes are full of tears, my heart of grief. 

Duches of Gloster, and here the sentence pronounced against thee for these Treasons, 
that thou hast committed against vs, our States and Peeres, First for thy 
hainous crimes, thou shalt two dales in London do penance barefoote in the 
streetes, with a white sheete about thy bodie, and a waxe Taper burning in thy 
hand. That done, thou shalt be banished for euer into the He of Man, there to 
ende thy wretched daies, and this is our sentence irreuocable. Away with her. 
14. Welcome . . . death] 10-14. Etien to ?ny death, for I have lined too long. 
Exet some with Elnor. King. Greene not noble vncle, but be thou glad, Ifi that 
these Treasons are thus come to light, Least God had pourde his vengeance on thy 
head. For her offences that thou heldst so deare. 15, 16. Eleanor . . . con- 

demns] omitted Q. 17-21. Aline eyes . . . ease] 15-19. Oh gratious Henry, 

giue me leaue awhile, To Icaue your grace and to depart away. For sorrowes 
teares hath gript my aged heart, And makes the fountaines of mine eyes to swell. 
And therefore good my Lord, let me depart. 

3. Receive the sentence] See extract whose sorcery and witchcraft the said 

at the beginning of i. iv. " This trial is Elianor had long time used, wherefore 

an historical anachronism, having actu- the same witch was burnt in Smithfield " 

ally taken place some time before (Stow, Abridgment, p. 172 (1618)). 

Henry's marriage " (Halliwell). It took ?>. strangled] hznged; choked with a 

place in 1441 ; the marriage in 1444. halter, as in 1 Henry IV. 11. iv. 547. 

The duplication of the enactments of Compare (Peele's) Jack Straw : — 

the sentence, here and at its execution " so many of my countrymen 

(sc. iv.) in the Contoition, is erased in All done to death and strangled in 

the revision. But there is a much more one day " 

needful addition in the complete play, (Hazlitt's Dodsley, v, 408). 

the sentence upon the four confederates. 13. Sir John Stanley] This name is 

This must be unintentionally absent not in the Contention. Shakespeare 

from the Contention. I see no allusion here, as in many places, follows Hall 

to it. Grafton tells that " the gallows " (or Grafton for choice). Holinshed has 

was Tyborne, a place Shakespeare seems Sir Thomas Stanlie, which happens to 

purposely to avoid mentioning (excepting be also correct (Fabian, Stow). "In 

allusion, Love 's Labour 's Lost). Stow 1446 it was ordered that letters under 

says {Abridgment, p. 172): "The 18 Henry's privy seal should be directed to 

of November, Roger Bolinbroke was Sir Thomas" Stanley, authorizing him 

araigned, drawne from the Tower to to convey Eleanor Cobham to the Isle 

Tiburne, and there hangedand quartered, of Man" {Proc. Priv. Co. vi. 51 (Bos- 

7. Smithfield] " Then was taken also well Stone). See note at " Sir John 

Margerie Gurdmain, a witch of Ely, Montgomery," Part III. iv. vii. 4T. 



64 THE SECOND PART OF [act n. 

Ah ! Humphrey, this dishonour in thine age 

Will bring thy head with sorrow to the ground. 

I beseech your majesty, give me leave to go ; 20 

Sorrow would solace and mine age would ease. 

King. Stay, Humphrey, Duke of Gloucester : ere thou go, 
Give up thy staff: Henry will to himself 
Protector be ; and God shall be my hope, 
My stay, my guide, and lantern to my feet. 25 

And go in peace, Humphrey, no less beloved 
Than when thou wert protector to thy king. 

Queen. I see no reason why a king of years 
Should be to be protected like a child. 
God and King Henry govern England's realm ! 30 

Give up your staff, sir, and the king his realm. 

Glou. My staff ? here, noble Henry, is my staff : 
As willingly do I the same resign 
As e'er thy father Henry made it mine ; 
And even as willingly at thy feet I leave it 35 

As others would ambitiously receive it. 
Farewell, good king ! when I am dead and gone, 
May honourable peace attend thy throne. \^Exit. 

22-27. S/oy . . . king\ 20-23. With all my hart good vnkle, when you please, 
Yet ere thou gocst, Hmnphrey, resigne thy staffc, For Henry will be no more 
protected, The Lord shall be tny guide both for my land and me (and) 31-33. 
Vnkle Gloster, stand vp and go in peace, No Icsse beloucd of us, then when 
Thou 7S)eart Protector ouer my land. Exct Gloster, 28-31. Queen. I see . . . 
rcaltn] omitted Q. 32-38. My staff . . . throne] 24-30. My staffe, I noble 

Henry, my life and all. My staffc I yeeld as willing to be thine, As erst thy 
noble father . . . as willing . . . And long hereafter when . . . throne. 

21. Sorrow . . . ease] Johnson ex- and in various other places. A note- 
plains this wretched line by giving worthy instance is in line 52 (Scene 
"would" thesenseof" requires "in both iv.), where the words in the Contention 
cases. For the line here containing (spoken by the Duchess to Gloucester), 
"gripes" in Q, see Introduction at " her that loves him so " — i.e. the queen 
Peele's part in this play ; and 3 Henry that loves Suffolk so — are very neatly 
VI. I. iv. 171. altered into "her that hateth thee" — 

25. lantern to my feet] " Thy word a wholly different meaning, enforcing 

is a lantern to my feet " (Psalm cxix. what I refer to. 

105 (Prayer-Book, Geneva and Wyclif ; 29. protected like a child] See quota- 

" lamp " in Authorised Version). For tion from Marlowe at 1 Henry VI. i. i. 

some occult reason Shakespeare (appar- 36 : " like a schoolboy." 

ently) and his editors are still in some 31. Give up your staff] There is no 

cases undecided how best to spell this historical authority for Gloucester's dis- 

word. In Bartlett's Concordance it is six missal from office consequent upon his 

on one and half a dozen on the other wife's disgrace. The nearest approach 

(lantern). to this political change lies in a passage 

28, 39, 52. Queen] These speeches of quoted at i. i. 163, 164 ; and see i. iii. 

the queen's displaying her animosity 45, 46 (note). For a reference to 

against Gloucester, and the manly dis- Henry's coronation at Westminster 

position told of her by the Chroniclers, (when nine months old), see 3 Henry 

are not in the original play, or only in a VI. i. i. 112. 

lesser degree. In the last scene, at line 37. dead and gone] See Part I. i. iv. 

184, we see the same process at work, 93 (note). 



sc. in] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 



65 



Queen. Why, now is Henry king, and Margaret queen ; 

And Humphrey Duke of Gloucester scarce himself, 40 

That bears so shrewd a maim : two pulls at once; 

His lady banished, and a limb lopped off; 

This staff of honour raught : there let it stand, 

Where it best fits to be, in Henry's hand. 
Suf. Thus droops this lofty pine and hangs his sprays ; 45 

Thus Eleanor's pride dies in her youngest days. 
York. Lords, let him go. Please it your majesty 

This is the day appointed for the combat ; 

And ready are the appellant and defendant. 

The armourer and his man, to enter the lists, 50 

So please your highness to behold the fight. 

39-44. Queen. Why, now . . . hayid^^ 34. 35. Queene. Take up the staffe, 
for here it ought to stand, Where should it be, but in King Henries hand? 
45, 46. Suffolke. Thus . . . days} omitted Q. 47-51. Lords . . .fight} 36- 

39. Please it . . . day That was appointed for the combating Betweene the 
Armourer and his man, my Lord, And they are readie when your grace doth 
please. 



41. maim} mutilation, disablement. 
" Shrewd " (evil, bad) is a favourite word 
with Shakespeare. Kyd (?) has " a 
shrewd losse " in Soliman and Perseda. 
Note that these lines are not in Q. 

41. pull} that which is pulled or torn 
off. An uncommon sense in literature ; 
but a pull, or plucking, of fruit, etc., is, 
I think, common provincial ly. The two 
pulls which go to make up poor Glou- 
cester's mutilation are, of course, his 
wife and his staff. These words in the 
queen's mouth give an intenseness to 
her malice, not found in the Contention 
(see above at 1. 28). 

42. lopped} cut, pruned. Compare 
Spenser, Faerie Queene, vii. vii. 42 : 
" And from the trees did lop the need- 
lesse spray." And Peele, Edward L : 
" I must lop his longshanks " (Dyce, 
403, a). 

43. raught} snatched or torn from 
me. An old preterite of " reach." The 
nearest parallel in Shakespeare is in 
Antony and Cleopatra, iv. ix. 30 : " The 
hand of death hath raught him." Spen- 
ser uses it somewhat similarly, and 
Golding, but Peele gives exactly the 
sense : " This gallant bow raught from 
the oaken tree" {Arraignment of Paris, 
Dyce, 354, a) ; and again :— 

" the fatal 1 fruit, 
Raught from the golden tree of 
Proserpine " 
(351. a). 
45. pine} The same metaphor occurs 



in Antony and Cleopatra, iv. xii. 23. 
It is a very familiar one, whether fir, 
cedar or pine. Compare Zachariah 
xi. 2. 

45. sprays} young growth. See 
Richard IL iii. iv. 34, and 3 Henry 
VI. II. vi. 50. See quotation from 
Spenser at " lopped, " line 42. 

46. youngest days} Eleanor is not, 
nor even supposed to be, a young 
woman here. Either " her " refers to 
pride, or else we are to suppose that 
her ambition for the crown had only 
just begun to exist. These two lines 
have the air of being crammed in here 
from some other connection ; as if they 
belonged to Part III. 11. vi. 46-49, for 
example (Rutland), 

49. appellant and defendant} chal- 
lenger and challenged in single com- 
bat. New Eng. Diet, gives an example 
from Caxton. Grafton uses the terms : 
" In thys yeare (1383) also was a Bat- 
taile or Combate done and holden in 
the Kings Palayce at Westminster, 
betwene one called Garcon Appel- 
launt, and Sir lohn Anslye Knight 
Dcfendaunt, of the which fight the 
knight was at length the Victour and 
forced his enemie to yeelde vnto him. 
For the which the sayde Garcon was 
immediatly from that place drawen to 
Tiborne and there hanged for his false 
accusation " (p. 430). See Richard II. 
I. iii., in several places. And Ben 
Jonson's New Inn, in. ii. 



66 



THE SECOND PART OF 



[act II. 



Queen. Ay, good my lord ; for purposely therefore 
Left I the court to see this quarrel tried. 

King. O' God's name, see the lists and all things fit : 
Here let them end it ; and God defend the right ! 

York. I never saw a fellow worse bested, 

Or more afraid to fight, than is the appellant, 
The servant of this armourer, my lords. 



55 



Enter, at one door, the Armourer, and his Neighbours drinking 
to him so much that he is drunk ; and he enters bearing his 
staff with a sand-bag fastened to it ; a drum before him : 
at the other door, his man with a drum and sand-bag ; and 
Prentices drinking to him. 

First Neigh. Here, neighbour Horner, I drink to you in 
a cup of sack : and fear not, neighbour, you shall do 
well enough. 



60 



Second Neigh. 
charneco. 



And here, neighbour, here 's a cup of 



52, 53. Queen. Ay, good . . . tried] omitted Q. 54-55. King. O' God's name 
. . . right] 40. King. Then call them forth, that they may trie their rightes. 
56-58. York. I never . . . lords] omitted Q. Enter . . . to him] Enter . . . 
that he is drunken . , . to him. 



55. God defend the right] See Love's 
Labour 's Lost, i. i. 216, and Richard 
II. I. iii. loi. 

56. bested] situated, circumstanced. 
A favourite word with Spenser ; and 
occurs several times in Golding's Ovid. 
Not elsewhere in Shakespeare. 

58. sand-bags] Warburton wrote : 
" According to the old laws of duels, 
knights were to fight with the lance 
and sword ; so those of inferior rank 
fought with an ebon staff or battoon, 
to the further end of which was fixed 
a bag cramm'd hard with sand " (one 
would think he saw them at it !). He 
quotes from Hudibras. Halliwell, sad 
to say, merely repeats Warburton's re- 
marks without acknowledgment : and 
that is all ; echoed again by Grant 
White, Rolfe and others. There is no 
mention in Strutt on this practice of 
antiquity, and he is very full on the 
subject. Stowe {Survey of London, re- 
print, 142, 143) rehearses " joustings in 
Smithfield," and thus " Trial by battle " 
(more satisfactorily told by Grafton) ; 
but there are no sand-bags, no ebony 
battoons. Perhaps the fullest account 
of a trial by combat (amongst com- 
moners) is that of Thome and Nailer 
in 1571, in Nichols' Progresses, i, 277- 



279. George Thome had *' his baston 
(a staffe of an ell long, made taper wise, 
tipt with home) with his shield of hard 
leather." In the story of Othello, told 
by Cinthio, the Moor kills Desdemona 
with a stocking full of sand — still heard 
of, and supposed to leave little evidence 
behind. I find ebon staves as the staves 
of pilgrims in The Seven Champions 
(1595). A "speare of heben wood" is 
mentioned in Faerie Queene, i. vii. 37. 
See I. iv. 217 (in collation). 

63. charneco] There are frequent 
later mentions of this wine, but none 
earlier has been traced. New Eng. 
Diet, has an odd collocation of dates 
for these two plays at this word, not 
adhered to later, fortunately. It is 
stated there (and elsewhere) that 
Steevens derived " charneco " from the 
name of a village near Lisbon, but he 
does not do so in 1793 edition. [Steevens 
got his information from " the European 
Magazine for March, 1794.] On the con- 
trary, after several later quotations, he 
says : " None of these passages (as Mr. 
Malone observes) ascertain either its 
quality or where it is produced." War- 
burton said that charneca was the name 
of a kind of turpentine-tree. That were 
a jest indeed. See Nares. From the 



sc. Ill] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 67 

Third Neigh. And here 's a pot of good double beer, 

neighbour: drink, and fear not your man. 65 

Hor. Let it come, i' faith, and I '11 pledge you all ; and a 
fig for Peter ! 

First Pren. Here, Peter, I drink to thee ; and be not 
afraid. 

Second Pren. Be merry, Peter, and fear not thy master : 70 
fight for credit of the prentices. 

Peter. I thank you all : drink, and pray for me, I pray 
you ; for I think I have taken my last draught in 
this world. Here, Robin, an if I die, I give thee my 
apron ; and. Will, thou shalt have my hammer : and 75 
here, Tom, take all the money that I have. O Lord, 
bless me ! I pray God, for I am never able to deal 
with my master, he hath learnt so much fence already. 

Sal, Come, leave your drinking and fall to blows. Sirrah, 

what 's thy name ? 80 

Peter. Peter, forsooth. 

Sal. Peter ! what more ? 

Peter. Thump. 

Sal. Thump! then see thou thump thy master well. 

Hor. Masters, I am come hither, as it were, upon my man's 85 
instigation, to prove him a knave, and myself an 
honest man : and touching the Duke of York, I will 
take my death I never meant him any ill, nor the 
king, nor the queen : and therefore, Peter, have at 
thee with a downright blow. 90 

64. And here's] 44. Heres. 65. drink, and fear not] 45. drink And be merry, 
andfearcnot. 66. Hor. Let . . . and I'll] a^Q. Armourer. Let . . . He. 6g. 
afraid] 48. ajfeard. 70, 71. Second P. Be merry . . . prentices] 49-51. 2 

Pren. Here, Peter, heres a pintc of Claret-wine for thee. 3 Pren. And heres a 
quart for me, and be tnerry Peter, Andfeare not thy maister, fight for the credit of 
the Prentises. 72-74. I thank you . . . in this world] $2. I thanke you all, but 
He drinke no more. JA'^A- Here, Robin . . . thy master well] 53-63. Here 

Robin . . . thy maister. 85-go. Horner. Masters . . . downright blow] 64-68. 
Armour. Heres to thee neighbour, Jill all the pots againe, for before we fight, 

omission of "claret-wine" here (from iii. 322, note (Arden edition, p. 53), for 

the Contention), Shakespeare may have early examples : "a^?^ For all my uncle's 

deemed there was repetition — that the friendship " (Marlowe, Edward II., 

words had the same meaning. Howell's Dyce, 207, a). The " claret-wine " of 

Vocabulary, Section xviii., 165,9, has : the Contention occurs later, iv. vi. 4, in 

" Claret wine ; Vino chiaretto, b chiar- the revised play, where the Contention 

ello." " Charneco " maybe a corruption has " red wine." 

of that Italian name — which is also in 87, 88. / will take my death] I will 

Florio. " Claret-wine" occurs later, IV. die on it. See 3 Henry VI. i. iii. 35, 

vi. 4. " Take one's death " of cold, and is 

66. Let it come] let the glass go common provincially. Not again in 

round. A drinking expression. See Shakespeare. 

2 Henry IV. v. iii. 59, 60. 90. downright blow] Warburton (fol- 

67- a fig for Peter I] See Othello, i. lowed by Steevens) inserted into his 



68 



THE SECOND PART OF 



[act II. 



York. Dispatch : this knave's tongue begins to double. 

Sound, trumpets, alarum to the combatants. 

[Alarujn. They fight, and Peter strikes him down. 
Hot. Hold, Peter, hold ! I confess, I confess treason. \^Dies. 
York. Take away his weapon. Fellow, thank God, and 

the good wine in thy master's way. 95 

Peter. O God ! have I overcome mine enemies in this 

presence ? O Peter ! thou hast prevailed in right. 
King. Go, take hence that traitor from our sight ; 

For by his death we do perceive his guilt : 

And God in justice hath revealed to us 100 

The truth and innocence of this poor fellow, 

Which he had thought to have murdered wrongfully. 

Come, fellow, follow us for thy reward. 

[Sound a flourish. Exeunt. 

looke you, I tvill tell you my minde,for I am come hither as it were of my mans 
instigation, to proue my selfe a?i honest man, and Peter a knave, and so haue at 
you Peter with down-right blowes, as Beuys of South-hampton fell vpon Askapart. 
91, 92. York. Dispatch . . . combatants] omitted Q. [Alarum . . . down.] 
93. Hor. Hold . . . treason. [Dies.] 68-70. Peter. Law you now, I told you hees 
in his fence alreadie. Alarmes, and Peter hits him on the head and fels him. 
Armou. Hold Peter, I confesse, Treason, treason. He dies. 94,95. York. Take 
. , . way] omitted Q. 96, 97. Peter. O God . . . right] 71, 72. Peter. God 
I giue thee praise. He kneeles downe. Pren. Ho well done Peter. God sane the 
King. 98-103. King. Go take . . . reward. Exeunt] 73-78. King. Go take 
. . . reward. Exet omnis {murthered for murder' d, 102). 



edition the words about Bevis and 
Ascapart from the Contention. The 
" downright blow " is not mentioned 
in that romance as belonging especially 
to Morglay, the famous sword of Bevis. 
Bevis is more often mentioned in con- 
temporary literature than any of the 
heroes perhaps. See Todd's notes to 
Spenser, Laneham's Letter (or Captain 
Cox, edited Furnivall), Gabriel Harvey, 
Ben Jonson, etc. etc. " Downright 
blow" occurs again in 3 Henry VI. i. 
i. 12. Cotgrave has " aplomb : m. A 
perpendicular, or downe-right fall, seat, 
or forme; a plumpe descent." See 
note in 3 Henry VL i. i. 12. 

91. to double] to talk thick, or double, 
from intoxication. Peele has a similar 
expression : — 

" Nemesis upon her doubling 
drum, 
Mov'd with this ghastly moan " 
(Battle of Alcazar, n. (425, a^). The 
sounds run into one another. 

The incident in the play is founded on 
history. Grafton says (p. 628) : " This 
Yere (The XXIIIJ Yere) an Armorers 
servaunt of London, appeled his Master 



of Treason, which offered to be tried 
by battaile. At the day assigned, the 
frends of the master, brought him 
Malmesye and Aqua vite to comforte 
him with all, but it was the cause 
of his and their discomfort : for he 
poured in so much, that when he came 
into the place in Smithfelde where he 
should fight, both his witte and strength 
fayled him : and so hee being a tall 
and hardie personage, overladed with 
hote drinkes, was vanquished of his 
seruaunt, being but a cowarde and a 
wretch, whose bodie was drawen to 
Tiborne, and there hanged and be- 
hedded." Stow [Survey of London, 
edited by Thoms, p. 143) tells their 
names, " John David appeached his 
master Wil. Catur." He adds (omitting 
the dead body " drawen to Tiborne," 
etc.) : " but that False servant (for he 
falsely accused his master) lived not 
long unpunished, for he was after 
hanged at Teyborne for felony. Let 
false accusers note this . . . John Davy, 
a false accuser of his master, of him 
was raised the by-word, — If ye serve 
me so, I will call you Davy," 



SC. IV.] 



KING HENRY THE SIXTH 



69 



SCENE IV.— A street. 

Enter GLOUCESTER and his Serving men, in inour7iing 

cloaks. 

Glou. Thus sometimes hath the brightest day a cloud ; 
And after summer evermore succeeds 
Barren winter, with his wrathful nipping cold : 
So cares and joys abound, as seasons fleet. 
Sirs, what 's o'clock ? 

Serv. Ten, my lord. 5 

Glou. Ten is the hour that was appointed me 

Enter . . .] Enter Duke Humphrey and his men, in mourning cloakes. 1-4. 
Glou. Thus . . . fleet] omitted Q. 5. Sirs . . . lord] i, 2. Humph, sirrha, 

what's a clock? Serving. Almost ten my Lord. 6-9. Ten is . . . tender- 

feeling feet] 3-5. Then is that wofull houre hard at hand, That tny poore Lady 
should come by this way. In shamefull penance ivandring in the streetes. 



For the sentence and punishment of 
the Duchess, see extract at the beginning 
of I. iv. Stowe gives further details (I 
quote from the Abridgment (1618), p. 
172) : " The ninth of November, dame 
Elianor appeared before the Archbishop 
and others and receiued penance, which 
she performed. On the xvii of Novem- 
ber she came from the temple bridge, 
with a taper of waxe of two pound in 
her hand through Fleet streete to Paules, 
where she offered her Taper at the Alter. 
On the Wednesday next she went 
through Bridge-streete, Grace-church 
streete to Leaden-hall, and so to Christ- 
Church by Algate. On Friday she went 
through Cheape to St. Michaels in 
Cornehill, in form aforesaid." 

mourning cloaks] from Q. The 
expression is not in Shakespeare. Peele 
has {Old Wives Tale, 451, b) : "he 
gave fourscore and nineteen mourning 
gowns to the parish." Peele may have 
been, it seems to me, entrusted with 
the stage-directions in this play {Con- 
tention). They are very copious, and 
much condensed in the finished versions. 
Peele was the eldest of the syndicate at 
work, as far as publication goes, his 
Arraignment at Paris (1584) preceding 
any dramatic piece of Marlowe's or 
Greene's, so far as we know. Unusual 
attention was paid to stage-directions in 
that play as in his later work. Terms 
of interest occur that occur also in the 
plays undoubtedly due to the author. 
The arrangement of stage-direction 
would involve a good deal more of the 
dramatic craftsman. 



1. brightest day a cloud] Compare 
All 's Well that End's Well, v. iii. 35 ; 
or Sonnet 33. 

2. 3. summer , . . winter] These 
simple sentiments or metaphors are 
constantly found in Shakespeare's work ; 
the lines are not in the Contention. 
Compare Spatiish Tragedy, i. i. 11, 12 : — 

" in the haruest of my summer 
ioyes 
Deaths winter nipt the blossomes 
of my blisse." 

3. winter . . . nipping cold] Compare 
Golding's Ovid, xiii. 954, 955 (1567) : — 

" No Sun in sommer there 

can swelt, 
No nipping cold in wintertyme 

within the same is felt." 
In the same passage Galatea is said to 
be " More fleeting than the waves " ; 
and in bk. x. 1. 596 : " Away slippes 
fleeting time unspyde and mocks us too 
our face." Peele speaks of " the wrath 
of winter" in David and Bethsabe (Dyce, 
468, b) ; and of " wrathful storms of 
winter's rage " {Lovely London (538, a), 
1585). Spenser has " wrathful wreck " 
of " wintry storm " {Faerie Queene, i, xi. 

4. fleet] See last note. Shakespeare 
uses the verb "fleet" (slip away, float, 
glide by) several times, as in Merchant 
of Venice, iii. ii. 108 ; iv. i. 135, etc. 

6. Ten is the hour] The words in the 
Contetition ^^ hard at hand" point, like 
the rest of the lines of Humphrey's 
speech, to Peele. Shakespeare uses it 
once, it is true, in Othello, 11. i. 268, 
But it was a favourite earlier with Peele : 



70 THE SECOND PART OF [act n. 

To watch the coming of my punished duchess : 

Uneath may she endure the flinty streets, 

To tread them with her tender-feeling feet. 

Sweet Nell, ill can thy noble mind abrook lo 

The abject people gazing on thy face 

With envious looks, laughing at thy shame, 

That erst did follow thy proud chariot wheels 

When thou didst ride in triumph through the streets. 

But soft ! I think she comes ; and I '11 prepare 1 5 

My tear-stained eyes to see her miseries. 

Enter the Duchess of GLOUCESTER, in a white sheet, feet bare, 
and a taper burning in her hand ; with SzVJOHN STANLEY, 
the Sheriff, and Officers. 

Serv. So please your grace, we '11 take her from the sheriff. 
Glou. No, stir not, for your lives ; let her pass by. 
Duch. Come you, my lord, to see my open shame? 

10-14. Sweet Nell . . . the streets] 6-10, Sweete Nell . . . the streetes. 15, 
16, But soft ! . . . miseries] omitted Q. 16. Enter . . . Officers] Theobald (not 
in Ff). 10. Enter Dame Elnor Cobham bare-foote, and a white sheet about her, 
with a waxe candle in her hand, and verses ivrittcn on her backe and pind on, and 
accompanied with the Sheriffes of London, and Sir lohn Statidly, and Officers, 
with billes and holbards. 17, Serv. So . . . sheriff] 11, 12. Serving. My 

grations Lord, see where my Lady comes. Please it your grace, wcele . . . Sheriffes ? 
18. No . . . by] 13-15. / charge you for your Hues stir not afoote. Nor offer once 
to draw a weapon here, But let them do their office as they should. 19, 20. 
Come . . . Now thou . . . too] 16, 17. Come . . . Ah Gloster, now . . . too 
{doest for dost). 

" here hard At hand two slaves do work 10. abrook] brook, endure. The 
and dig ior gold" {Old Wives Tale, prefix "a" is very commonly used as a 
Dyce, 453, a) ; and " How Greeks poetical license by Spenser. Compare 
with all their power were hard at hand" "agazed" in Part L 
{Tale of Troy (555, a)) ; and in Poly- 12. envious] malicious, spiteful. 
hymnia (572, b). And Marlowe, Tambur- 13. erst] formerly. Occurs in ^45 You 
laine. Part L 11. iii. : " The king your Like It and Henry V. Peele uses it 
brother, is now hard at hand." And in frequently (Dyce, 464, b (twice) ; 471, a, 
Spenser, Faerie Qtieene, 11. xii. 18: " hard etc.) ; and Spenser. 
at hand they spy That quicksand." In " 15. But soft!] This, and "soft!" 
all the places I have met with the phrase, occur perhaps fifty times in Shake- 
it means close by in place. But in speare's undoubted work. We may take 
Othello diwdi here in Contention \i x&iexs them as tests. "So// you!" occurs in 
to time. In Faerie Queene (later), vi. Greene, George-a-Greene ; and in Peele, 
ix. 16, "night arrived hard at hand," Edward L : " So/^ you now I " "Sofia. 
is parallel. while" and "But soft" ate both in 

8. Uneath] with difficulty, uneasily. Whetstone's Promos and Cassandra. 

Not again in Shakespeare, but especially Peele has " soft you, now " ; " but, soft 

in Spenser, from Chaucer downwards, now"; "Nay, so//." 
Compare Golding's Ovid, ii. 378, 379 : — 16. tear stained] Elsewhere " tear- 

" Behold how Atlas ginnes to faint, stained face" is in Ardcn of Feversham, 

his shoulders though full strong, iii. vi. 85. Shakespeare has given us 

Unneth are able to uphold the "blood-stained" {1 Henry IV.) and 

sparkling Extree long." "lust-stained" {Othello). Not in Q. 

Not in Q. For " flinty," see Part I. 11. ig. opeti shame] public disgrace. 

i. 27. Shakespeare has the expression again in 



SC. IV.] 



KING HENRY THE SIXTH 



71 



Now thou dost penance too. Look ! how they gaze. 20 

See ! how the giddy multitude do point, 

And nod their heads, and throw their eyes on thee. 

Ah ! Gloucester, hide thee from their hateful looks, 

And, in thy closet pent up, rue my shame, 

And ban thine enemies, both mine and thine. 25 

Glou. Be patient, gentle Nell ; forget this grief. 
Duch. Ah! Gloucester, teach me to forget myself; 

For whilst I think I am thy married wife, 

And thou a prince, protector of this land, 

Methinks I should not thus be led along, 30 

Mailed up in shame, with papers on my back. 

And followed with a rabble that rejoice 

20-25. hook . . . thine] 18-22. See how the giddie people looke at thee, Shak- 
ing their heads, and pointing at thee heere, Go get thee gone, and hide thee from 
their sights, And in thy pent vp studie rue . . . enemies. Ah mine and thine. 
26. Be patient . . . grief] 23, 24. Ah Nell, sweet Nell, forget this extreme 
grief. And beare it patiently to ease thy heart. 27, 28. Ah . . . married 

wife] 25-27. Ah . . . wedded wife, Then thought of this doth kill my wofull 
heart. 29. And . . . land] omitted Q. 30, 31. Methinks . . . back] 31, 

32. And thus with bnrning Tapor in my hand,Malde . . . backe. 32, 33. And 
. . . deep-fet groans] omitted Q. 



Lucrece, 890 ; and in Comedy of Errors, 
IV. iv. 70. In Hebrews vi. 6 : " put 
him to an open shame " (" scorn " in 
Wyclif). But it is found in the third 
book of Golding's Ovid (328, 329) : 
" Now (with a mischiefe) she is bagd and 
beareth out before Hir open shame," 
whence probably it became familiar. 
This expression has eluded my search in 
New Eng. Diet. 

21. giddy] See Part III. iv. viii. 5. 

22. nod their heads] a nod, or to nod. 
Occurs several times in Shakespeare in 
the sense of a contemptuous gesture or 
grimace. 

24. closet] Altered from "study" in 
Co7itention. We have had " study " al- 
ready in a passage, not in Q and un- 
doubtedly Shakespeare's (i. iii. 62) : 
" whose study is his tilt-yard." Shake- 
speare is often as careful to avoid 
repetition as Peele and Greene were to 
adopt it. Having used the word in his 
earlier insertion, he was careful to re- 
move it from occurring so soon again. 

24. pent up] See Lovers Labour's 
Lost, I. ii. 160; and Part III. i. iii. 
12. 

31. Mailed up] packed up, made up 
into a parcel like a mail-bag or wallet. 
The ' 'up" is a frequent addition by Shake- 
speare to verbs already implying com- 
pleteness or finality, to render them 



more so. Compare " poisons up " 
{Love's Labour's Lost, iv. iii. 305) ; 
" finish up " (3 Henry VL u. v. 28) ; 
" kill them up " {As You Like It, 11. i. 
62) ; and " eat up," " drink up," " kill 
up," in several passages. Drayton uses 
this line in his Heroical Epistles, 1598. 
I purposely refrain from transcribing 
further from Drayton, since these 
Epistles constantly reproduce the 
thoughts and words of Shakespeare, 
on whose situations they are founded. 
The verb to mail had a special hawk- 
ing sense. Dyce quotes from Randle 
Holmes's Academy of Armory : " ' Mail 
a hawk ' is to wrap her up in a handker- 
chief or other cloth, that she may not 
be able to stir her wings or to struggle." 
[See "muster up," iii. i. 319.] Peele 
has "shrined up in mould" in Sir 
Clyomon (522, a), circa 1580. 

31. with papers] See Love's Labour's 
Lost, IV. iii. 45, and note, Arden 
edition, p. 87. But the Coyitention 
stage-direction (line i5 above) is the 
best comment. The papers narrating 
the culprit's offence were part of the 
public penance. 

32. followed with] Compare King 
Lear, ii. iv. 255 : " But kept a reserva- 
tion to be follow' d With such a num- 
ber." Seems to be the only legitimate 
parallel. 



72 THE SECOND PART OF [act n. 

To see my tears and hear my deep-fet groans. 

The ruthless flint doth cut my tender feet, 

And when I start, the envious people laugh, 35 

And bid me be advised how I tread. 

Ah ! Humphrey, can I bear this shameful yoke ? 

Trow'st thou that e'er I '11 look upon the world, 

Or count them happy that enjoy the sun ? 

No ; dark shall be my light, and night my day ; 40 

To think upon my pomp shall be my hell. 

Sometime I '11 say, I am Duke Humphrey's wife, 

And he a prince and ruler of the land : 

Yet so he ruled and such a prince he was 

As he stood by whilst I, his forlorn duchess, 45 

Was made a wonder and a pointing-stock 

To every idle rascal follower. 

But be thou mild and blush not at my shame ; 

Nor stir at nothing till the axe of death 

Hang over thee, as, sure, it shortly will ; 50 

For Suffolk, he that can do all in all 

34-36. The . . . tread] 28-30. The ruthlesse Jlints do . . . cruell people . . . 
And bids . . . tread. 37. Ah . . . yoke] 33. Ah, Gloster, can I endure this 
and Hue. 38-41. Trow'st thou . . . my hell] omitted Q. 42, 43. Sometime 
. . . ruler of the land] 34, 35. Sometime . . . Protector of the land. 44, 45. 
Yet so . . . Duchess] 36, 37. But so . . . Duches. 46, 47. Was . . . pointing- 
stock, To . . . follower] 38, 39. Was led with shame, and made a laughing stocke, 
To , , . rascald follower. 47, 48. Additional speech] 40-43. Humphrey. My 
louely Nell, what wouldst thou haue me do ? Should I attempt to rescue thee 
from hence, I should incurre the danger of the law, And thy disgrace would not 
be shadowed so. 48-30. But be . . . will] 44-46. Elnor. Be thou milde and stir 
not at my disgrace Vntill the axe of death hang ouer thy head As shortly sure 
it will. 51. he that can] 46, 47. he. The new-made Duke, that may. 

33. deep-fet] deep-fetched. Compare stoode as they had bene turned into 
Henry V. iii. i. 18 ; and " far-fet," stones for wonder of this shamefull 
below, III. i. 293. A familiar archaic sermond." Peele's David and Bethsabe 
form, living long in proverbs, such as (466, b), where the clouds " bear this 
" far fet and dear bought is good for wonder round about the world," the tale 
ladles." The author of Arden of of Thamar's dishonour and disgrace. 
Feversham (Kyd) remembered this ex- 46. pointing-stock] butt. See note at 
pression : "What pity-moving words, " flouting-stock " (" vlouting-stog ") in 
\\\\2lX. deep-fetched ii\gh&" (in. i.) [See Merry Wives of Windsor, in. ii. iig 
Crawford's Collectanea, pp. 121, 122.] (Arden edition, p. 118), It is an im- 

34. ruthless flint] Peele has the same provement here to read this instead of 
thought in David and Bethsabe: "to "laughing-stock." Sidney has" gazing- 
cast thee on her (Israel's) ruthless stock" {Arcadia); and Gascoigne has 
stones" ^Dyce, 475, a). See Spanish " mocking stocke " in The Steele Glas 
Tragedy, in. vii. 71 : " Wearing the (Arber, p. 65), 1576. 

/lints with these my withered feet." 51. do all in all] See again Richard 

35. envious] malicious, ill-natured. ///. iii.i. 168. "All in all" occurs else- 

36. bid me be advised] See Richard where several times in Shakespeare. 
///. n. i. 107. Be deliberate, cautious. Compare Three Ladies of London 

46. wonder] disgraceful exhibition. (Hazlitt's Dodsley, vi. 249), 1584 : 
Compare Grafton's Continuatioti of " 'Tis Lucre now that rules the rout ; 
Hardyng, p. 507 : " The people . . . 'tis she is all in all." And Barnaby 



sc. IV.] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 73 

With her that hateth thee, and hates us all, 
And York, and impious Beaufort, that false priest, 
Have all limed bushes to betray thy wings ; 
And, fly thou how thou canst, they '11 tangle thee : 55 

But fear not thou, until thy foot be snared. 
Nor never seek prevention of thy foes. 
Glou. Ah ! Nell, forbear : thou aimest all awry ; 
I must offend before I be attainted ; 

And had I twenty times so many foes, 60 

And each of them had twenty times their power, 
All these could not procure me any scath, 
So long as I am loyal, true, and crimeless, 
Would'st have me rescue thee from this reproach ? 
Why, yet thy scandal were not wiped away, 65 

But I in danger for the breach of law. 
Thy greatest help is quiet, gentle Nell : 
I pray thee, sort thy heart to patience ; 
These few days' wonder will be quickly worn. 

Enter a Herald. 

Her. I summon your grace to his majesty's parliament, 70 
holden at Bury the first of this next month. 

52. hateth thee] 48. loues him so. 53. York . . . Beaufort] 49. impious 

Yorke and Bewford. 54, 55. Have . . . thee] 50, 51. Have . . . can they 

will intangle thee. 56-69. But fear . . . quickly worn] omitted Q. (Gloucester 
speaks above, 47, 48.) See below, 63-65. 64-66. Would'st have . . . law] 

40-43. (above at 47, 48), 69. worn. Enter a Herald] 51. intangle thee. 

Enter a Herald of Armes. 70, 71. I . . . month] 52, 53. / . . . vnto his 

highnesse . . . saint Edmunds-Bury, the first of the next month. 

Googe's Popish Kingdom (reprint, p. 59. attainted] See 1 Henry VI. 11. iv. 

36), 1570: " Shee is all in all, and 96. Compare Peele, Arraignment of 

heares and sees what can be done or Paris, iv. i. : — 

thought." " I bring the man whom he did late 

52. her that hateth thee] An in- attaint, 

teresting alteration from the Contention To answer his indictment orderly" 

reading. See note above (iii. 28, 39), (365, a). 

showing how the queen's hatred is 62. scath] injury, damage. Else- 
developed in the finished play. where in King John, Richard III. and 

54. /fm«rf 6?<5/!fs] See note at I. iii. 31. Titus Andronicus. 

5J. seek prevention]look{ov hindrance. 63. crifneless] There was a vogue 

The foregoing speech is pregnant with amongst writers, especially dramatists 

interest. It is (in the Contention) prob- (Peele, Marlowe), for coining words 

ably some of Shakespeare's earliest with -less. Part I., Introduction, 

work, rewritten and perfected to this 67. Thy greatest help] Johnson says 

beautiful form. Both are obviously here :" The poet has not endeavoured to 

and undoubtedly Shakespeare's. raise much compassion for the duchess, 

58. aimest all awry] Compare who indeed suffers but what she had 

(Peele's) fack Straw : — deserved. Shakespeare's two earliest 

" And ii I ta.ke my aim not all awry, women, if these be they, are not 

The Multitude," etc. attractive." 

(Hazlitt's Dodsley, v. 384). 69. few days' wonder] A reference to 



74 THE SECOND PART OF [act n. 

Glou. And my consent ne'er asked herein before ! 

This is close dealing. Well, I will be there. 

{^Exit Herald. 

My Nell, I take my leave : and, Master sheriff, 

Let not her penance exceed the king's commission. 75 
Sher. An 't please your grace, here my commission stays, 

And Sir John Stanley is appointed now 

To take her with him to the Isle of Man. 
Glou. Must you, Sir John, protect my lady here ? 
Stan. So am I given in charge, may 't please your grace. 80 
Glou. Entreat her not the worse in that I pray 

You use her well. The world may laugh again ; 

And I may live to do you kindness if 

You do it her: and so, Sir John, farewell. 
Duck. What! gone, my lord, and bid me not farewell. 85 

Glou. Witness my tears, I cannot stay to speak. 

[^Exeunt Gloucester and Servingmen. 
Duch. Art thou gone too ? All comfort go with thee ! 

72, 73. And . . . there] 54-56. A Parliament and our consent neuer craude 
Therein before. This is sodeine. Well, we will be there. Exet Herald. 74, 
75. My Nell . . . cow»u'ssfo«] 57, 58. Maister Sheriff e, I pray proceede no further 
against tny Lady, then the course of law extendes (prose). 76-78. An 't please 
. . . Man] 59-61. Please it your grace, my office here doth end. And I must 
deltuer her to Sir lohn Standly, To be conducted into . . . Man. 79. protect] 
62. conduct my lady ? 80. Stan. So . . . grace]bi,6^. Stayidly. I my gratious 
Lord, for so it is decreede. And I am so commanded by the King. 81, 82. 
Entreat . . . well] 65, 66. I pray you Sir lohn, Vse her neare the worse, hi 
that I i7itreat yoti to vse her well. 82-84. ^^^ • • • la^gh . . . kindness . . . 
farewell] 67-69. The . . . smile . . . favour . . . farewell. 85, 86. What 
. . . me not . . . tears . . . to speake] 70, 71, What . . . not me . . . bleeding 
heart . . . to speake. Exet Humphrey and his men. 87-93. Art thou . . . com- 
manded] 72-75. Then is he gone, is fioble Gloster gone. And doth Duke Humphrey 
710W forsake me too ? Then let me haste from out faire England's boundcs, Come 
Standly come, and let vs haste away. 

the old saying " a nine days' wonder " ; of " the commission." See Introduc- 

see again 3 Henry VI. in. ii. 113, 114, tion to Merry Wives of Windsor (Arden 

and ^s yo»LJ^d' //, III. ii. 185. The pro- edition). The word is not in the Co n- 

verbial phrase is in Chaucer's Troilus and tention. Compare : — 
Cressida (iv. 1. 588), and in Heywood's " He hath commission from my wife 

Proverbs, 1546 (ed. Sharman, p. go). and me 

73. c/ose rf^a/Jw;?'] secret contriving or To hang CordeHa " 

plotting. A favourite use with Shake- {Kiyig Lear, v. iii. 3, 252). Compare 

speare. He has hard dealing, bad deal- Grafton, i. 338 : " It was aunswered by 

ing, open dealing, elsewhere. Here Q the Englishe Ambassadors, that their 

has " This is sudden," as in Measure commission stretched not so farre, 

for Measure, 11. ii. 83. neyther that their Prince had geuen 

75, 76. king's commission] royal or them any suche aucthoritie." And 

state warrant, or instrument. A favour- Jack Straw (Hazlitt's Dodsley, v. 379): 

ite term with Shakespeare. He uses it " thou goest beyond the commission of 

most often of an unpleasant use or un- the king " (to a collector of tasks), 

popular exercise of authority, as it is 82. The world may laugh again] 

here. In his early days he is believed better times may be in store. Why 

to have had an unpleasant experience alter " smile " ? 



sc. IV.] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 75 

For none abides with me : my joy is death ; 

Death, at whose name I oft have been afeard, 

Because I wished this world's eternity. 90 

Stanley, I prithee, go, and take me hence ; 

I care not whither, for I beg no favour, 

Only convey me where thou art commanded. 
Stan. Why, madam, that is to the Isle of Man ; 

There to be used according to your state. 95 

Duck. That's bad enough, for I am but reproach : 

And shall I then be used reproachfully ? 
Stan. Like to a duchess, and Duke Humphrey's lady : 

According to that state you shall be used. 
Duch. Sheriff, farewell, and better than I fare, lOO 

Although thou hast been conduct of my shame. 
Sher. It is my office ; and, madam, pardon me. 
Duch. Ay, ay, farewell ; thy office is discharged. 

Come, Stanley, shall we go ? 
Stan. Madam, your penance done, throw off this sheet, 105 

And go we to attire you for our journey. 
Duch. My shame will not be shifted with my sheet : 

No ; it will hang upon my richest robes, 

And show itself, attire me how I can. 

Go, lead the way; I long to see my prison. 110 

\Exeunt. 

94-101. Why, madam . . . my shatne] omitted Q. 105, 106. Madam . . . 

journey'] 76, 77. Madam lets go vnto some house hereby. Where you may shifte 
your selfe before we go. 107-110. My shame . . . prison] 78-81. Ah, good Sir 
lohn, tny shame cannot be hid, Nor put away with casting off my sheete, But come 
let vs go, maister Sheriffe farewell, Thou hast but done thy office as thou shoulst. 
Exet omnes. 

8g. afeard] Nearly as common as above. And in Part I. 11. i. 13. Much 

"afraid" in Shakespeare. commoner in the historical plays than 

go. / wished . . . eternity] Compare elsewhere. A mannerism grown out of 

iii. 46, above. The Duchess is ap- later. 

parently a very would-be-young and no. I long to see my prison] "One 

worldly woman. of those touches that certainly came 

loi. conduct] conductor, guide. See from the hand of Shakespeare . . . 

Romeo and Juliet, iii. i. 129; v. iii. not in the old play" (Malone). 

116. no. come let 's go] in Q. See above 

106. go we] See note at 11. ii. 59 at the end of 11. ii. 



76 THE SECOND PART OF [act. m. 



ACT III 

SCENE I. — The Abbey at Bury St. Edutmids. 

Sound a sennet. Enter King, Margaret, Beaufort, SUF- 
FOLK, York, Buckingham, Salisbury, and Warwick, 
to the Par'liament. 

King. I muse my Lord of Gloucester is not come : 

'Tis not his wont to be the hindmost man, 

Whate'er occasion keeps him from us now. 
Queen. Can you not see ? or will ye not observe 

The strangeness of his altered countenance ? 5 

With what a majesty he bears himself, 

How insolent of late he is become, 

How proud, how peremptory, and unlike himself? 

We know the time since he was mild and affable, 

Sound a sennet . . . Parliament] Enter to the Parlameni, Enter two Heralds 
before, then the Duke of Buckingham, and the Duke of Suffolke, and then the 
Duke of Yorke, atid the Cardinall of Winchester, and then the King and the 
Queene, a7id then the Earle of Salisbury, and the Earle of Warwicke. _ 1-3. 
King. . . . I wonder . . . long] i. King. 1 wonder our Vnkle Gloster stales so 
long. 4. Can . . . observe] 2. Ca}i . . . you not perceiue. 5-8. The . . . 

himself] 3. How that ambitious Duke doth use himself e ? g. We know . . . 
affable] 3, 4. The time hath bene, but now that time is past, That none so humble 
as Duke Humphrey was. 

I. / tnuse] I wonder. Shakespeare For cause she was foriudged for 

is fond of tiiis opening. He has it in sossery, 

Coriolanus, Richard III., King John, For enchaunmentees, that she was 

2 Henry IV. and 1 Henry VI. 11. ii. in workyng 

19. Compare Spenser, Faerie Queene, Agayne the churche and kyng cur- 

II. i. 19 : — sedly, 

" much I muse By helpe of one mayster Roger 

How that same knight should doe Oonly : 

so fowle amis." And into Wales he went of froward- 

And Peele, Sir Clyomon (504, a) : — nesse 

" but much / muse, indeed, And to the kyng had greate heuy- 

What he means to do." nesse " 

Boswell Stone quotes here from Har- (Ellis, 400, 1812). 

dyng's Chronicle (1461), in proof of 9. affable] Hardly inco mmon use ; 

Gloucester's altered demeanour (which " affability " is oftener met with. 

was to be expected) : — " Affable and curteous at meales " 

"He waxed then straunge eche day (Puttenham (Arber, p. 298), 1586-1589). 

unto ye kyng, Not in Q ; four times in Shakespeare. 



SC. I.] 



KING HENRY THE SIXTH 



77 



And if we did but glance a far-off look, 
Immediately he was upon his knee, 
That all the court admired him for submission : 
But meet him now, and, be it in the morn. 
When every one will give the time of day, 
He knits his brow and shows an angry eye, 
And passeth by with stiff unbowed knee, 
Disdaining duty that to us belongs. 
Small curs are not regarded when they grin, 
But great men tremble when the lion roars ; 
And Humphrey is no little man in England. 
First note that he is near you in descent, 
And should you fall, he is the next will mount. 
Me seemeth then it is no policy, 
Respecting what a rancorous mind he bears. 
And his advantage following your decease, 
That he should come about your royal person 
Or be admitted to your highness' council. 
By flattery hath he won the commons' hearts, 
And when he please to make commotion, 
'Tis to be feared they all will follow him. 



lo 



15 



20 



25 



30 



10-12. And if . . . submission] omitted Q. 13, 14. But . . . day] 6, 7. But 
now let one meete him euen in . . . day. 15-19. He knits . . . lion roars] 8-12. 
And he will neither moue nor speake to vs. See yon not how the Commons follow 
him In troupes, crying, God saue the good Duke Humphrey, And with long life, 
lesus preserve his grace (this line omitted 1619 Q), Honouring him as if he were 
their King. 20. And . . . England] 13. Gloster is no litle . , . England. 

21-28. First note . . . commons' hearts] omitted Q. 29, 30. And when . . . 
him] 14, 15. And if he list to stir commotions, Tys likely that the people . . . him. 



10. far-off'] indistinct, doubtful, un- 
certain. Compare " afar off," Merry 
Wives of Windsor, i. i. 215 (note, Ar- 
den edition, p. 22). Both expressions 
are frequent in the Bible. 

14. give the time of day] the day's 
greeting, good-morrow. Compare 
Love's Labour's Lost, v. ii. 339: "All 
hail, sweet madame, and fair time of 
day ! " A rattling salutation. See P. 
Stubbs, A Perfect Pathway to Felicitie, 
1592 : " When thou goest forth of thy 
chamber salute thy bedfellow (if thou 
hast anie) giving him the time of day, 
and in meeting others doe the like for 
so civilitie requireth." 

18. curs] Used contemptuously of 
human beings many times by Shake- 
speare. Compare Greene, Arbasto 
(Grosart, iii. 236), 1584: " Doest thou 
thinke with the spaniell by fawning 
when thou art beaten to make thy foe 
thy friend ? no, let others deeme of 



thee what they list, I will still compt 
thee a curre." And Marlowe, Tatn- 
burlaine. Part II. iv. i : "ye cankered 
ctirs of Asia." 

18. grin] show the teeth. Compare 
Marlowe, Tamburlaine, Part II. in. 5 : 
" legions of devils . . . grin with their 
teeth." 

20. Humphrey is no little man] Very 
much the reverse. Akin to the use 
(ironical) in " here 's no knavery," 
"here's no vanity," etc. The passage 
in the Contention preceding these 
words, which is omitted in our text, has 
occurred before in both texts in almost 
identical words at i. i. 156-160 above ; 
and see 11. 190, igi in the same scene. 
Hence the omission here. But these 
repetitions have not been always erased. 
Tliere is a noteworthy example immedi- 
ately below, at " cold news" (11. 87, 88). 

29. make commotion] See below, in. i. 
358. To raise an insurrection. 



78 THE SECOND PART OF [act m. 

Now 'tis the spring, and weeds are shallow-rooted ; 
Suffer them now and they '11 o'ergrow the garden, 
And choke the herbs for want of husbandry. 
The reverent care I bear unto my lord 
Made me collect these dangers in the duke. 35 

If it be fond, call it a woman's fear; 
Which fear if better reasons can supplant, 
I will subscribe and say I wronged the duke. 
My Lord of Suffolk, Buckingham, and York, 
Reprove my allegation if you can; 40 

Or else conclude my words effectual. 
Suf. Well hath your highness seen into this duke ; 
And had I first been put to speak my mind, 
I think I should have told your grace's tale. 
The duchess by his subornation, 45 

Upon my life, began her devilish practices : 
Or if he were not privy to those faults, 
Yet, by reputing of his high descent, 

31-35. Now His . . . duke] omitted Q. 36. //. . .fear] 16, 17. My Lorde, 
if you imagine there is no such thing, Then let it passe, and call . . . fear. 
37) 38. Which . . . duke] 20, 21. And by your speeches if you can reproue me, I 
will . . . Duke. 39, 40. My lord . . . can;] 18, ig. My Lord . . . Disproue 
my Alligations . . . can. 41. Or . . . effectual] omitted Q. 42-44. Well 
hath . . . tale] 22-2^. Well . . . grace foreseen . , . that Duke, And if I had bene 
licenst first to speake, I thinke . . . talc. 45-52. The duchess . . . fall] omitted Q. 

31-33. weeds . . . choke the herbs] Coh^^k^jom reads "disprove." New Eng. 

Compare Richard II. iii. iv. 42-44. Diet, brings this word back to Chaucer, 

And Peele, Edward I. (Dyce, 407, a) : — Boethius, in this sense. 

" O gracious fortune, that me happy 40. allegation] assertion. Only once 

made again in Shakespeare (in the legal sense 

To spoil the weed that chokes fair which is eldest), below, at 1. 181. It 

Cambria ! " is used by Greene, Quip for an Upstart 

35. collect] gather. Shakespeare's Courtier (Grosart, xi. 226) : " Whereas 
thoughts are still in the garden, whence thou doost boast that I am little re- 
he loved to draw imagery. See Hamlet, garded ... I grant thy allegation in 
III. ii. 268 ; IV. vii. 175. part, but not in whole." 

36. fond] foolish. For the omitted 41. effectual] " to the point, per- 
expression " let it pass," see Love's tinent, conclusive " {New Eng. Diet., 
Labour '5 Lost, v. i. go. " Let that which gives this passage as earliest in 
pass " is much commoner. See Arden the obsolete sense). Not in the Cow- 
edition of Love's Labour 's Lost, v. i. tention. The queen's speech affords 
g3, note, p. 118. another excellent study in develop- 

38. SMfcsm'fei^] yield, admit I am wrong, ment. Her character, the king's, and 

Compare Part I. 11. iv. 44, and King the characters of the Gloucesters seem 

Lear, iii. vii. 65. Compare Greene, to have interested Shakespeare and been 

Never too Late (Grosart, viii. 170): — entrusted to him. He doubles her speech 

" Thus he whom love and errour did here. 

betray, 45. subornation] instigation to crime : 

Subscribes to thee, and takes the a transferred use from the proper sense 

better way." of procurement for perjury, or perjury 

But with " to " it is frequent. itself. See below, line 145 ; and 1 

40. Reprove] disprove, confute. See Henry IV. i. iii. 163. 

Venus and Adonis, 787, and Much 48. reputing of] thinking of (Intro- 

Ado About Nothing, 11. iii. 241. The duction). An uncommon use. See 



sc. I] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 79 

As next the king he was successive heir, 

And such high vaunts of his nobility, 50 

Did instigate the bedlam brain-sick duchess 

By wicked means to frame our sovereign's fall. 

Smcoth runs the water where the brook is deep, 

And in his simple show he harbours treason. 

The fox barks not when he would steal the lamb : 55 

No, no, my sovereign ; Gloucester is a man 

Unsounded yet, and full of deep deceit. 

Car. Did he not, contrary to form of law, 

Devise strange deaths for small offences done ? 

York. And did he not, in his protectorship, 60 

Levy great sums of money through the realm 
For soldiers' pay in France, and never sent it ? 
By means whereof the towns each day revolted. 

Buck. Tut ! these are petty faults to faults unknown. 

Which time will bring to light in smooth Duke Hum- 
phrey. 65 

53. Smooth . . . deep] 25. Smooth . . . brooke whereas the streame is deepest. 
54. And . . . treason] omitted Q. 55. The fox . . . lamb] 121. The foxe . . . 
lambe (later speech of Suffolk). 56, 57, No, no . . . deceit] 26, 27. No, no 
. , . deceit. 58-81. Did he not . . . fraudful man] omitted Q. (lines 64, 65, 
the latter identical, are given to Cardinal, Q i, i. loi, 102). 

New Eng. Diet. It occurs in Jonson's in Shakespeare they are coupled in 

Cynthia's Revels. Measure for Measure, v. i. ■^00; Troilus 

49. successive heir] So in Marlowe's and Crcssida, iii. ii. 200 ; Timon of 

Tamburlaine, Part II. in. i : "son and Athens, iv. iii. 331, etc. The nearest 

successive heir to the late mighty em- sentiment to the one here I can recall 

peror Bajazeth." Kyd has •' successive is in Greene's Mamillia (Grosart, ii. 

line " in the S^awjs/i Tragedy, ui. i. i^. 27): "The Foxe wins the favour of 

See Titus Andronicus, i. i. 4. the lambcs by play, and then deuoures 

51. bedlam] frantic. See below, v. them." 

i. 132. " Like a bedlam " occurs three 57. Unsounded] in the literal sense, 

times in Golding's Ovid : " lyke a in Two Gentlemen of Verona, in. ii. 81. 

bedlem with her toong " (ix. 757). For 58, 59. contrary to . . . laiv . . . small 

" brainsick " see Part I. iv. i. 3 (note). offences] This is a repetition of Buck- 

53. Smooth runs the water] Lyly ingham's charge (i. iii. 130-132). And 
gives us this proverb (often varied later yet once more below,by York, 11. 121-123. 
to " still water," etc.) earlier : "Where 61, 62. money . . .pay in France] 
the stream runs smoothest the water The queen broached these French ac- 
is deepest" [Euphues (Arber, p. 287), cusations already (i. iii. 133-135). And 
1580) ; and in Sapho and Phao, 11. iv. : see the charges collected again in 
"water runneth smoothest, where it is Gloucester's reply below, 11. 107-118, 
deepest" (1584). It is frequent later, where the taxing ("racking," Cojz<f;ih'oM) 
Of the many similes in these speeches, of the Commons is mentioned again 
to the entry of Somerset with his cold from i. iii. 125, 126, the cardinal's 
news, this is the only one in the Con- accusation. The developed play has 
tention. enhanced these repetitions in a very 

54. harbours] makes a home for, inartistic way. See the notes at i. iii. 
entertains. See iv. vii. 109, and Two 210, 211, and iii. i. 292. 

Gentlemen of Verona, i. ii. 42. 64, 65. faults . . . smooth Duke 

55. fox . . . lamb] The fox and lamb Humphrey] Repeated (but not in the 
occur in a variety of adages and fables ; Contention) from i. i. loi, 102. 



80 



THE SECOND PART OF 



[act III. 



King. My lords, at once : the care you have of us, 
To mow down thorns that would annoy our foot, 
Is worthy praise ; but shall I speak my conscience, 
Our kinsman Gloucester is as innocent 
From meaning treason to our royal person, 70 

As is the sucking lamb or harmless dove. 
The duke is virtuous, mild, and too well given 
To dream on evil, or to work my downfall. 

Queen. Ah ! what 's more dangerous than this fond affiance. 
Seems he a dove ? his feathers are but borrowed, 75 

For he 's disposed as the hateful raven : 
Is he a lamb ? his skin is surely lent him, 
For he 's inclined as is the ravenous wolf 
Who cannot steal a shape that means deceit? 
Take heed, my lord ; the welfare of us all 80 

Hangs on the cutting short that fraudful man. 



67. ajinoy] injure. See Henry V. ii. 
ii. 102, and elsewhere. 

68. speak my conscience] tell my sin- 
cere belief in what is true. See Henry 
V. IV. i. 123, where the expression occurs 
again. And in Menechmi, ii. i. (Hazlitt's 
Shakespeare Library, Part II, vol. i. p. 
11): "Wei yet I must speake my con- 
science.'" New Eng. Diet, has an ex- 
ample of " tell my conscience " earlier, 
from Foxe. 

71. sucking lamb . . . harmless dove] 
I Samuel vii, g ; Matthew x. i6. Natur- 
ally the king uses Biblical language. See 
the Contention below at in. ii. 19-22, and 
note. 

72. given] addicted. Occurs half a 
dozen times so in Shakespeare, with an 
adverb as here. 

73. work my downfall] See Locrine, 
V. I : " And seek to work her downfall 
and decay." 

74. affiance] confidence. Compare 
Cymbeline, i. vi. 163, and Henry V. 
II. ii. 127. Compare Peele, Battle of 
Alcazar, 11. iii. :— 

" when this haughty offer takes 
effect 
And works affiance in Sebastian." 
And The Troublesome Raigne of King 
John: "There 's no affiance after per- 
jury." Hall has it in this connection 
(XXV Yere) : " Such affiance had he 
(Gloucester) in his strong truthe, and 
such confidence had he in indifferent 
iustice " (p. 209). 

75,76. dove . . . raven] Compare "a 
raven's heart within a dove " (Twelfth 
Night, V. i. 134). 



77, 78. lamb ? his skin . . . wolf] 
An ancient saying : " truste not these 
prechours, for thei be not good, fPor thei 
flatter and lye as thei wer wood ; ther is 
a wolfe in a lombe skynne, ya, I wyll no 
more row a-geyn the fflode, I wyll sett 
my soule on a mery pynne " (Digby 
Mysteries (ed. Furnivall, pp. 155, 156), 
circa 1485). " Of trothe she is a wolfe 
in a lambe's skinne " (Heywood's Pro- 
verbs (ed. Sharman, p. 48), 1546). And 
Peele, Sir Clyomon (515, a) : " For, like 
a wolf in lambskin clad, he cometh with 
his aid." 

81. cutting short] Craig thinks a re- 
ference to shortening by the head (as in 
Richard II. iii. iii. 12) is here intended. 
See note at " headless necks," i. ii. 65. 
" Shorter by the head" occurs in Mar- 
lowe's Edward II. (Dyce, 212, a). And 
in Grafton, i. 627 : " He (Duke of Suf- 
folke) . . . was taken upon the Sea and 
made shorter by the head." And see 
Hall, p. 275, quoted at 3 Henry VI. 
IV. iii. 54. But I think it is merely 
the phrase " cut him off," as below : 
" bloody war shall cut them short " (iv. 
iv. 12). Exterminate him. But com- 
pare Lodge, Wounds of Civil War 
(Hazlitt's Dodsley, vii. 129) : — 

" Enter the chamber where as Marius 
lies, 
hnA cut him short ; the present of 

whose head 
Shall make the Romans praise us." 

Si. fraudful] "full of deep deceit" 
(line 57) ; treacherous. New Eng. 
Diet, brings this word back to 1400 
in Scottish writers, Dunbar (1500-1520) 



SC. I.] 



KING HENRY THE SIXTH 



81 



Enter SOMERSET. 

Som. All health unto my gracious sovereign ! 

King. Welcome, Lord Somerset. What news from France ? 

Som. That all your interest in those territories 

Is utterly bereft you : all is lost, 85 

King. Cold news, Lord Somerset : but God's will be done ! 
York. [Aside.] Cold news for me ; for I had hope of France 

As firmly as I hope for fertile England. 

Thus are my blossoms blasted in the bud, 

And caterpillars eat my leaves away ; 90 

But I will remedy this gear ere long. 

Or sell my title for a glorious grave. 

82. E7iter Somerset. So7n. All . . . sovereign I] 27, 28. Enter the Duke of 
Somerset. 83. King. Welcome . . . France ?~\ 28. King. Welcome . . . France ? 
84, 85. Som. That . . . lost] 29-31. Somer. Cold newes, my lord, and this it is, 
That all your holds and Townes within those Territores, Is overcome, my Lord, 
all is lost. 86. Cold news. Lord . . . done] 32, 33. Cold newes indeed, Lord 
. . . done. 87, 8S. Cold news . . . Eiigla7id] 34, 35. Cold newes . . . Euen 
as I have of fertill England (these lines, reading England's soil, occur in both 
texts above, i. i. 235-236). 89-92. Thtis . . . grave] omitted Q. 



yielding an example. Shakespeare has 
several words, seemingly introduced 
from Scottish historians, in these plays. 
This term was immediately seized on 
by Kyd (?) in Soliman and Perseda, and 
(probably) by him also in Arden of 
Feversham. See Crawford's Collec- 
tanea, p. 129. See below at "slaughter- 
house," 1. 212. 

83. Somerset. What news from 
France] Somerset was appointed Re- 
gent of France (i. iii. 205). The Con- 
tention informs us at that point (11. 
iS"^. 159) that he is to make haste tor 
the time of truce is expired. At the 
yielding of Caen (1449, Hall) " The 
Duke of Somerset . . . made an agre- 
ment with the Frenche kyng, that he 
would rendre the toun so that he and 
all of his might depart in sauegardwith 
all their goodes and substaunce ; whiche 
offre the Frenche kyng gladly accepted 
. . . Sir Davie Hall . . , departed to 
Chierburgh and from thence sailed into 
Irelande to the Duke of Yorke, making 
relacion to hym . . . whiche thyng 
kyndeled so greate a rancoure in his 
harte & stomache that he never left 
persecutynge of the Duke of Somer- 
sette . . . Now rested English onely 
the toune of Chierburgh. . . . Thus 
was the riche duchie of Normandy lost 
6 



ye whiche had continued in the english- 
mennes possession XXX. yeres, by the 
conquest of Kyng Henry the fifth . . . 
Other say, that the Duke of Somerset, 
for his owne peculiar profit, kept not 
halfe his nombre of souldiors, and put 
their wages in his purse " (Hall, pp. 
215, 216). 

85. bereft you] Similarly used in 
Othello, I. iii. 258. 

86. God's will be done] A little earlier 
in Hall (212, 213) : " Which mischiefes 
(while the kyng, as thinges of the world, 
and of no great moment, did neglect 
and omit, as he which preferred and ex- 
tolled godly thinges aboue all worldly 
affaires . , .) dayly so muche increased 
. . . the French nacion knew in what 
case the realme of England stode." 

87. 88. Cold news . . . England] 
Another repetition. See collation 
above ; and see note, i. i. 235. Hey- 
wood has this expression in If You 
Know Not Me, Part II. (Pearson, vol. i. 

P- 293)- 

89. blasted in the bud] See Two 
Gentlemen of Verona, i. i. 48. " Blast" 
in this sense is frequent in Shakespeare. 
See reference to Golding's Ovid at Part 
III. IV. iv. 23. Peele has it frequently, 
as in Battle of Alcazar, 11. iii. and i. ii. 
(425, b ; 427, b), etc. 



82 THE SECOND PART OF [act m. 



Enter GLOUCESTER. 

Glou. All happiness unto my lord the king ! 

Pardon, my liege, that I have stayed so long. 

Siif. Nay, Gloucester, know that thou art come too soon, 95 
Unless thou wert more loyal than thou art. 
I do arrest thee of high treason here. 

Glou. Well, Suffolk, thou shalt not see me blush, 
Nor change my countenance for this arrest : 
A heart unspotted is not easily daunted. roo 

The purest spring is not so free from mud 
As I am clear from treason to my sovereign. 
Who can accuse me ? wherein am I guilty ? 

York. 'Tis thought, my lord, that you took bribes of France, 
And, being protector, stayed the soldiers' pay ; 105 

By means whereof his highness hath lost France. 

Glou. Is it but thought so ? What are they that think it ? 
I never robbed the soldiers of their pay, 
Nor ever had one penny bribe from France. 
So help me God, as I have watched the night, no 

Ay, night by night, in studying good for England, 
That doit that e'er I wrested from the king, 

93, 94. Enter Gloucester. Glou. All . . . long] 35. Ejiter Duke Humphrey. 
Hum. Pardon . . . long: 95-97- Nay . . . here] 37-39. Nay . . . proue more 
. . . We do . . . (on for of) here. 98, gg. Well, Suffolk . . . this arrest] 40, 
41. Why Suffolkesi Duke . . . thine arrest. 100-102. A heart . . . sovereign] 
omitted Q. 103. Who . . . guilty ?] 42. Whereof am I guilty, who are my 
accusers? 104. Aly lord that you] 43. My lord, your grace. 105. And, being 
protector, stay'd] 44. And stopt. 106. By . . . France] 45. By which his 

Maiestie hath lost all France. 107. Is it . . . What . . . it] 46. Is it . . . 
and who are they that thinkc so? 108. I . . . pay] 51. / . . . . paie. log, 
114. Nor ever . . . France (and) Be . . . day] 49, 50. That penie that euer I 
tooke from France, Be brought against me at the iudgement day. no, in. 

So . , . night, Ay . . . England'] 47, 48. So . . . night, Eucr intending good for 
England still. 112, 113. That doit . . . use] omitted Q. 

97. arrest thee of] Occurs in Richard " But though from court to cottage 
//., Henry IV. (Part II.), Henry V. and he depart, 

Henry VIII. See below, v. i. 106. The His saint is sure of his unspotted 

Contention reads " on," as in King Lear, heart." 

v.iii.82. ItoccuvsinMailowe'sEdward loi. spring . . . mud] Compare 

//. Sonnet 35 : " Roses have thorns and 

98. Sz<_^oi^] Malonesupphed "duke" silver fountains mud." No one fault- 
from the old play for the sake of the less. See also Titus Androtiicus, v. ii. 
metre, followed by some modern editors. 171. 

Steevens added "yet" from the second 108. robbed . . . soldiers of . . . pay] 

folio. This was expressly charged against 

100. A heart unspotted] Compare 1 Somerset. See 1. 83 (extract). 

Henry VI. v. iii. 182. The expression 112. doit] Occurs half a dozen times 

occurs in Peele's sonnet, " His golden in Shakespeare. Not in Coyitention, 

locks " (Po()'/jyw;ifa, 1590) : — which reads "penie." See note, on 



sc. I] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 83 

Or any groat I hoarded to my use, 

Be brought against me at my trial-day ! 

No ; many a pound of mine own proper store, 1 1 5 

Because I would not tax the needy commons, 

Have I dispursed to the garrisons, 

And never asked for restitution. 
Car. It serves you well, my lord, to say so much. 
Glou. I say no more than truth, so help me God ! 1 20 

York. In your protectorship you did devise 

Strange tortures for offenders, never heard of, 

That England was defamed by tyranny. 
Glou. Why, 'tis well known that, whiles I was protector, 

Pity was all the fault that was in me ; 125 

For I should melt at an offender's tears, 

And lowly words were ransom for their fault. 

Unless it were a bloody murderer, 

Or foul felonious thief that fleeced poor passengers, 

115. No; many . . . store\ 52. Many . . . cost. 116. tax] 54. racke, 

117. Havel . . . garrisons] ^^. Have I sent oner for the soldiers wants. 118, 
And . . . restitution] omitted Q. 119, 120. Car. It serves . . . Glou. I say 
no . . . ] omitted Q. 121-123. York. In your . . . tortures . . , tiever heard 
of, That . . . tyranny] Car. In your . . . torments . . . by which meanes Eng- 
land hath bene . . . tyrannie. 124, 125. Why . . . whiles . . . in me] 58, 
59. Why . . . whilst . . . in me. 126, 127. For I . . . fault] omitted Q. 
128-132. Unless it . . . trespass else] 60-62. A murthcrer or foule felonous theefe, 
that robs and murthers silly passengers, I turtord aboiie the rate of common 
law. 

this charge, at I. iii. 117 (from Polydore 124. whiles] v^hWst. Not unfrequent 

Vergil). in Shakespeare. It occurs in the 

114. trial-day I] See Richard II. i. i. Faerie Queene, 11. i. 27 : " Whiles cursed 
151. "Judgment-day" of Contention Steele against that badge I bent." 

was perhaps altered to give an air of jus- 129. fieeced] plundered. See I Henry 

tice to the arrest ; Gloucester no doubt IV. 11. ii. 90. New Eng. Diet, quotes 

expected a trial, though he got none. from Holinshed, 1579. Greene has it 

115. own proper] for "own proper once in The Art of Conny-Catching 
cost " and " rack the commons " in this (Grosart, x. 28), 1591 : "he laughs in 
speech (in Contention), see i. i. 61 and his sleeue, thinking he hath fleest the 
I. iii. 13 1; barnacle of all." 

117. (/is/«;'s^(/] The fourth Folio reads 129. poor passengers] poor wayfarers 
"disbursed." This is probably again or travellers on foot. One of these 
from some Scottish chronicle. The only foot-passengers meets with a crocodile 
other example in New Eng. Diet, is from just below (1. 227). " Poor passengers " 
Scottish Acts, 1625-1640. For "gar- and silly women are liable to outrages in 
risons," see Part I. v. iv. 168 (note). Two Gentlemen of Verona, iv. i. i ; or 
121. protectorship] See 11. i. 30, note. " some unhappy passenger " is held in 
121-123. devise . . . tortures . . . chase (ibid. v. iv. 15) ; or they are 
tyranny] See note at 11. 58, 59 above, robbed [Richard II. v. iii. g) ; or they 
"Defamed by tyranny" — by the report perish from thirst (Venus and Adonis, 
of tyranny. More properly with " of." gi). But they never have happy men- 
Compare Grafton, i. 453 : " That where- tion in Shakespeare, since everyone rode 
as , . . Gloucester . . . Arondell and who was not prohibited by poverty. In 
. . . Warwike have bene defamed of Spenser's Faerie Queene, 11. ii. 22, a bear 
Treason by certeyne of our counsaylors: and tiger give up their own quarrel to 
We." divide " a traveller with feete surbet." 



84 THE SECOND PART OF [act m. 

I never gave them condign punishment: 130 

Murder indeed, that bloody sin, I tortured 

Above the felon or what trespass else. 
Suf. My lord, these faults are easy, quickly answered ; 

But mightier crimes are laid unto your charge, 

Whereof you cannot easily purge yourself. 135 

I do arrest you in his highness' name ; 

And here commit you to my lord cardinal 

To keep, until your further time of trial. 
King. My Lord of Gloucester, 'tis my special hope 

That you will clear yourself from all suspense: 140 

My conscience tells me you are innocent. 
Glou. Ah ! gracious lord, these days are dangerous. 

Virtue is choked with foul ambition, 

And charity chased hence by rancour's hand ; 

Foul subornation is predominant, 145 

And equity exiled your highness' land. 

133. My lord . . , answered] 63. Tush my Lord, these be things of no account. 
12-^. mightier crimes] 6^. greater matters. 135. Whereof . . . yourself ] omitted 
Q. 1^6. you in . . . name] 64. thee on high treason here. 137. Here commit 

you . . . lord] 66. commit thee . . . good Lord. 138. To . , . trial] 67. Untill 
such time as thou canst cleare thy selfe. 139-141. My Lord . . . innocent] 

68-70. Good vnkle obey to his arrest, I haue no doubt but thou shalt cleare thy 
selfe My . . . thou art innocent. 142. Lord] 71. Henry. 143-147. Virtue 
. . . life] omitted Q. 

1^0. condign] well - deserved. See " Suspense" (doubt) is not elsewhere in 

Love's Labour 's Lost, i. ii. 27. An Shakespeare, so it may be well to 

old word, but not a favourite in poetry. quote a few parallels. " In suspense " 

132. /e/on] Is " felon " used here in the occurs three times in the Geneva 

early sense [Cursor Mundi) of felony? Version {1560), Luke iii. 15, xii. 29, 

" Felonious" (1. 129) replaces" felonous" and John x. 24. Spenser has it as an 

of Q, a much earlier form, as in Faerie adjective. Faerie Queene, iv. vi. 34. 

Queene, 11. vii. 62 : "And did acquite a J. Rider, Bibliotheca Scholastica, 1589, 

muTdrer felonous." has it only " in suspense." Cotgrave 

132. what trespass else] whatever as an adjective. Gabriel Harvey gives 

other trespass. Compare 3 Henry VL a good example : " They that know 

III. i. 51. Peele has similar wording: the daunger of Truces . . . mustbegge 

" What dukedom, island, or province leave to ground their repose upon more 

else, to me now are not tributary ? " cautels, then one : and to proceede 

(Sir Clyomon (498, a)). Sir Climclam in termes of suspence, or Pause, till 

might do as name for this weary piece, they may be resolued with infallible 

which Peele may have touched up, but assurance" (A New Letter (Grosart, 

not redeemed. i. 287), 1593). The fact of it occurring 

136. / do arrest you] Suffolk says nowhere in Shakespeare is no argu- 

this twice in both texts. The Con- ment. But as a biblical word it com- 

tention has "arrest thee on" each mended itself for the King's use. 

time. Moreover it is an object to avoid 

140. clear yourself ] A repetition of the repetitions of words so irksomely 

these words is saved in " purge your- common with Greene, and not much 

self " above, 1. 135. less so with Peele. " Suspect " occurs 

140. suspense] " suspence " is the read- a few lines below, 

ing of the old editions. Capell altered it 145. subornation] See above, line 45. 

to •• suspect," followed by modern edi- 146. exiled] Not used without 

tors, including Cambridge {2nd edition), "from" elsewhere in Shakespeare. 



SC. I.] 



KING HENRY THE SIXTH 



85 



I know their complot is to have my h'fe ; 

And 'f my death might make this island happy, 

And prove the period of their tyranny, 

I would expend it with all willingness ; 150 

But mine is made the prologue to their play ; 

For thousands more, that yet suspect no peril. 

Will not conclude their plotted tragedy. 

Beaufort's red sparkling eyes blab his heart's malice, 

And Suffolk's cloudy brow his stormy hate; 155 

Sharp Buckingham unburthens with his tongue 

The envious load that lies upon his heart ; 

And dogged York, that reaches at the moon, 

Whose overweening arm I have plucked back, 

By false accuse doth level at my life : 160 

148-150. And if . . . willingness] 72, 73. And would my death might end these 
miseries, And staic their moodes for good King Henries sake. 151. mine is] 
74. / am. 152, 153. For thousands . . . tragedy] 75, 76. And thousands more 
must follow after me That dreads not yet their Hues destruction. 154. Beau- 
fort's . . . malice] 78. Bewfords firie eyes showes his envious minde. 155. 
And Suffolk's . . . hate] 77. Suffolkes hatefull tongue blabs his harts malice, 
156, 157. Sharp Buckingham . . . heart] 79. Buckinghams proud looks bewraies 
this cruel thoughts. 158, 159. reaches at . . . pluck'd back] 80, 81. leuels up 
. . . held backe. 160. By . . . life] omitted Q. 



147. complot] The substantive is 
found elsewhere only in Richard III. 
and Titus Andronicus ; the verb in 
Richard II. alone. Shakespeare found 
it in Holinshed, 1577 (see New Eng. 
Diet.). It occurs in Selimus and in 
Kyd's Spanish Tragedy. 

151. prologue] Compare Greene's 
Farewell to Follie (Grosart, ix. 249) : 
" you sir, induce a souldiour as prologue 
to your comedie of pride, whereas you 
schollers ought to be formost in the 
scene " ; and Selimus \x\v. 200) : — 

" But this his marriage with the 
Tartars daughter 
Is but the prologue to his crueltie." 
The alteration in this line is perhaps 
significant. 

154. blab his heart's malice] Several of 
these trifling changes seem capricious, 
and even, as here, for the worse. It 
is better to speak of tongues blabbing, 
than of eyes. See Twelfth Night, i. 
ii. 63. And why transpose these 
personal traits of Beaufort, Suffolk and 
Buckingham ? They are presumably 
imaginary. Certainly the rhythm is 
often improved. 

155. cloudy . . . stormy] These words, 
used of persons and passions, are quite 
Shakespeare-like. " Stormy passions " 
is in 2 Henry IV. i. i. 165. " Cloudy " 



in several places. " Furrowes of her 
clouding brow " occurs in Soliman and 
Perseda. Compare Spenser's "stormy 
wind Of malice" {Faerie Queene, 11. 
vi. 8). 

158. dogged York] " dogged war " 
occurs in King John, as does also 
" dogged spies " (iv. i. 129 ; iv. iii. 149). 
Peele has " Cerberus . . . the dogged 
fiend " in Sir Clyomon (492, b). 

158. reaches at the mooti] Compare 
Pericles, 11. ii. 20. To cast beyond the 
moon was a common earlier expression. 

160. accuse] This reminds one of 
Lodge, who takes an adjective or a 
verb and nouns it at his will. In 
The Wojinds of Civil War, Lodge has 
the substantives resist, clear, repent, 
relent. Lodge has most of the tricks 
of his contemporaries, with a con- 
siderable fluency of language. But he 
is distinctly dull. Compare Osric's 
"assigns" (Hamlet, v. ii. 157). 

160. level at my life] In 3 Henry VI. 
n. ii. 19, occurs " Ambitious York did 
level at thy crown." The change in 
1. 158 above to " reaches " was made to 
allow this line. Sometimes one feels 
as if the altering of so many words 
had the simple sordid explanation of 
proper costs and charges for such and 
such a quantity of reformation. See 



86 



THE SECOND PART OF 



[act III, 



And you, my sovereign lady, with the rest, 

Causeless have laid disgraces on my head, 

And with your best endeavour have stirred up 

My liefest liege to be mine enemy. 

Ay, all of you have laid your heads together ; 

Myself had notice of your conventicles, 

And all to make away my guiltless life. 

I shall not want false witness to condemn me, 

Nor store of treasons to augment my guilt ; 

The ancient proverb will be well effected : 

A staff is quickly found to beat a dog ! 



165 



170 



161, And . . , rest] 82. And you my gratious Lady and soucraignc mistresse. 
162. disgraces on] 84. complaints upon. 163, 164. And , , . enemy] omitted Q, 
165. Ay . . . together] 82. All you have ioynd to betraie me thus. 166, 167. 
Myself . . . life] omitted Q. 168, i6g, 7 , , . witness to condemn me, Nor 
, , . guilt] 85, 86, / . . . witnesses inough, That so amongst you, you may haue my 
life. 170, The , . . effected] 87. The Prouerbe no doubt will be well performed. 
171, A . . . dog] 88, ^ . . . dog. 



Cunningham's Revels Accounts (Shake- 
speare Society), p. 92, 1574 (and often) : 
" For his paines in perusing and 
Reformyng of plays." 

162. Causeless] causelessly. A very 
old use. 

164. My liefest liege] See i. i. 28. 
" Liefest " is not again in Shakespeare. 
Peele has " My liefest lord and sweetest 
sovereign " (Edwatd I., Dyce, 388, b). 
Greene has " our liefest liege " and 
" my liefest Lord" in James the Fourth 
(Grosart, xiii. 303, 313). One of the 
many examples that might be adduced 
of Spenser's influence. " My liefest 
liefe" occurs in the Faerie Queene, in. 
ii. 33 (last vifords) and " My liefest 
Lord," II. ii. 30. Greene's jfames the 
Fourth is often quoted from in these 
notes. A passage at page 216 contains 
a reference to the pretty song " Love 
in my bosom like a bee " in Lodge's 
Euphues Golden Legacie (1590), in the 
issuing of which I believe Greene had 
a hand : — 

And weele 1 wot I heard a shepheard 
sing 
That like a Bee, Love hath a little 
sting." 
This gives a lower limit, 1590, for the 
date of the play. 

165. laid your heads together] This 
expression is played upon by Marlowe, 
Edward the Second (Dyce, 206, b) : — 

" thou seest 
These barons lay their heads on 
blocks together." 
It occurs in the old play of Leir. 
Shakespeare has it again in The Taming 



of the Shrew, i. ii. 139, He may have 
taken it from Grafton, i. 155 (reprint, 
1809), 1568 : " But for all that, at the 
last they laid all their heades together 
and aduysed themselues howe and which 
way they might honestly submit them 
selues vnto the sayde Duke " {William 
Conquerour, The First Yere). See 
again, below, iv. viii. 57. This expres- 
sion, as well as the following, have 
been adduced as proof of Marlowe's 
hand — mistakenly. Grafton has it in 
his Continuation of Hardyng, 1543, 
p. 458 : " The quene counsayled theim 
all to laye their heedes together, and 
caste all the wayes." 

166. conventicles] irregular or clan- 
destine meetings of a supposed sinister 
character (New Eng. Diet.). Frequently 
so used in the Chronicles, Fabyan, 
Hall, Grafton, etc., and occurring at 
this particular juncture as here in Hall 
(37th Year) : " The Erles of March 
and Warwicke, and other beyng at 
Calice, had knowledge of all these 
Aoynges. a.n&sQCX&iQconucnticles " (1809, 
p. 242). 

167. make away] destroy. Compare 
Venus and Adonis, 763, and Sonnet 11, 
1. 8. It occurs in Mai\o-we's Edward the 
Second, II. ii. (quoted in New Eng. 
Diet.). Compare Edward's Damon and 
Pythias (Hazlitt's Dodsley, iv. 46), ante 
1566 :- 

" To make means to them which 
can do much with Dionysius, 
That he be not made away, ere his 
cause be fully heard." 

170, 171, ancient proverb . . . A 



sc. i] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 87 

Car. My liege, his railing is intolerable. 

If those that care to keep your royal person 

From treason's secret knife and traitors' rage 

Be thus upbraided, chid, and rated at, 175 

And the offender granted scope of speech, 

'Twill make them cool in zeal unto your grace. 

Suf. Hath he not twit our sovereign lady here 

With ignominious words, though clerkly couched, 

As if she had suborned some to swear 180 

False allegations to o'erthrow his state ? 

Queen. But I can give the loser leave to chide. 

Gloii. Far truer spoke than meant : I lose, indeed ; 
Beshrew the winners, for they played me false ! 
And well such losers may have leave to speak. 185 

Buck. He '11 wrest the sense and hold us here all day. 
Lord cardinal, he is your prisoner. 

Car. Sirs, take away the duke, and guard him sure. 

Glou. Ah ! thus King Henry throws away his crutch 

172-177. Car. My liege . . . grace] omitted Q. 178-181. Hath he . . . his 
state'] 89-91. Doth he not twit our Soueraigne Lady here. As if that she with 
ignomious wrong, Had sobornde or hired some to sweare against his life. 182. 
But I . . . chide] 92. / but I . . . speake. 183, 184. Far . . . me false] 93, 
94. Far . . . Beshrow the winners hearts, they plaie me false. 185. And . . . 
speak] omitted Q. 186. hold] 95. keep. 187. Lord . . . prisoner] 96. My 
Lord of Winchester, see him sent away. 188. Sirs . . . sure] 97, 98. Who's 
within there? Take in Duke Humphrey, And see him garded sure within my 
house. 189. Ah I . . . throws] 99. 01... casts. 

staff] I have only one earlier example, 179. clerkly] Greene uses this adverb 

from Udall's Diotrephes (Arber reprint, (which is also in Two Gentlemen of 

p. 24), 3588: "was there ever any man Verona, 11. i. 114) in Never too Late : 

that went to beat a dogg but he could " all her sweet potions were found to bee 

easily find out a staff to doe it ? " It is poysons, though shee covered them 

in Camden's Remaines, and in Tell neuer so darkly" (Grosart, viii. 143). 

Troths New Years Gift (New Shaks. Adroitly, cleverly. 

Soc. p. 14), 1593. 179. clerkly couched] cleverly framed. 

178, 179. twit . . . With] See Part I. Compare Greene, Card of Fancie (iv. 

III. ii. 55, note. Not afew of the expres- 13): " each line so perfectlie co!/c/r^rf " ; 
sions in Part I. are echoed in Parts II. and again p. 179. 

and III. See v. v. 40, in Part III., 181. allegations] See above, line 40 
and Two Gentlemen of Verona, iv. ii. 8. (note). 

179. ignominious] See note, Part I. 182. give the loser leave to chide] See 

IV. i. 97; and see below, iv. viii. 66. again Titus Andronicus, iii. i. 233. 
Nowhere else in Shakespeare, but " igno- "When winners boast, leesers speak 
miny " occurs in 1 Henry IV. " Ignomy" their fill " (Harington, Orlando Furioso, 
(a word used by Peele and Greene) is xxiii. 27 (1591 ?)). And in Nashe's 
in Shakespeare three times, Titus An- Pierce Penilesse (Grosart, ii. 14), 1592: 
dronicus being one. The Contention '^ ^&&\egiue leasers leaiie to taXke" ; 2inA 
has " ignomious wrong " here ; a word " Alway to let the losers haue their 
of Peele's also : " Wherein, as well as words " (Heywood's Proverbs (Shar- 
famous facts, ignomious placed are" man's edition, p. 31), 1546). 

{Sir Clyomon (Dyce, 490), Prologue). 186. wrest the sense] d\^tovt the m&a.vi- 
Later in the same drama (496, a) " Ig- ing. 
nomy " occurs. 



88 



THE SECOND PART OF 



[act III. 



Before his legs be firm to bear his body : 190 

Thus is the shepherd beaten from thy side, 

And wolves are gnarling who shall gnaw thee first. 

Ah ! that my fear were false ; ah ! that it were ; 

For, good King Henry, thy decay I fear. [^Exit, guarded. 
King. My lords, what to your wisdoms seemeth best, 195 

Do or undo, as if ourself were here. 
Queen. What ! will your highness leave the parliament ? 
King. Ay, Margaret ; my heart is drowned with grief, 

Whose flood begins to flow within mine eyes. 

My body round engirt with misery, 200 

For what 's more miserable than discontent? 

Ah ! uncle Humphrey, in thy face I see 

The map of honour, truth, and loyalty ; 

igo. he firm to . . . body'\ loo. can . . . bodie up. igi. Thus . . . side'\ 
loi. And puts his watchfull shcpheard from his side. 192. And . . . first] 
102. Whilst wolues stand snarring who shall bite him first. 193, 194. Ah! 
. . . I fear] 103, 104. Farewell my soneraigne, long maist thou enioy. Thy fathers 
happie dates free from annoy. Exet Humphrey with the Cardinals men. 195. 
seemeth] 105. shal seem. 196. or undo] 106. and undo. 197, 198. What 
. . . drown' d with grief. 107, 108. What . . . kild with grief e. 199-220. 

Whose blood . . . vowed enemies] omitted Q. 



192. gnarling] snarling: "snarring" 
in Contention. Craig quotes from 
Nashe's Have with you : " What will 
not a dogge doo that is angered ? bite 
and gnarle at anie bone" (1596). An 
onomatopoeic word with no fixed 
spelling. Golding has : — • 

" Queene Hecub ronning at a stone, 
with gnarring seazed theron, 
And wirryed it . . . in stead of 
speche she barkt" 
(Ovid's Metamorphoses, xiii. 680-682). 
And : " Tone of them callde Jolly boy 
. . . the tother Chorle who euer gnoor- 
ring went" (iii. 268, 269). 

igS. my heart is drowned with grief] 
"kill'd with grief" in Contention points 
to Peele ; "slain my wretched heart" 
and " slays my heart with grief" occur 
in David and Bcthsabe ; and see 11. iv. 
29 above, where " killes my wofull 
heart " is left out from the present play. 
But the expression is old and probably 
common. See my note in Love's 
Labour's Lost, v. ii. 149 (Arden edition, 
p. 131). See Robertson's Did Shake- 
speare write Titus Andronicus ? for 
references to Marlowe, to Arden of 
Feversham, and to Alphonsus, Emperor 
of Germany, in which Peele is claimed 
by him to have had a hand. The ex- 



pression is in Titus Andronicus, in. ii. 

54- 

200. engirt] See v. i. gg lor this 
word in literal use. And Lucrece, 
221, 1173 ; Venus and Adonis, 364; 
but not in the later works of Shake- 
speare. Marlowe has it in Edward 
the Second (see below, v. i.), and 
Spenser later (1596) in Globe edition, 
602, b. Surrounded. 

202, 203. in thy face I see The map of 
honour] An expression apparently due 
to Greene, originally. Perhaps one of 
the borrowed plumes here that raised 
the row, for there is nothing of Greene's 
writing in this speech. See Euphties his 
Censure (Grosart, vi. 234) : " Hector, 
whose countenance threatned warres, & 
in whose face appeared a map of mar- 
tiall exploits" ; and Never too Late 
(viii. 39) : " Her countenance is the 
verie map of modestie " ; and Meva- 
phon (vi, 44) : " In his face appeared 
the mappe of discontent " ; and in 
Orpharion (xii. 14) : " Thy face the 
map of sorrowes." These are earlier 
than Henry VL The simile became a 
favourite. See Titus Andronicus, iii. 
ii. 12, and Richard H. v. i. 12. In 
Twelfth Night, in. ii. 85, it is made a 
flouting-stock of. The expression seems 



sc. I] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 89 

And yet, good Humphrey, is the hour to come 

That e'er I proved thee false, or feared thy faith. 205 

What low'ring star now envies thy estate. 

That these great lords, and Margaret our queen, 

Do seek subversion of thy harmless life ? 

Thou never didst them wrong, nor no man wrong ; 

And as the butcher takes away the calf, 210 

And binds the wretch, and beats it when it strays. 

Bearing it to the bloody slaughter-house ; 

Even so, remorseless, have they borne him hence ; 

And as the dam runs lowing up and down, 

Looking the way her harmless young one went, 2 1 5 

And can do nought but wail her darling's loss ; 

Even so myself bewails good Gloucester's case 

With sad unhelpful tears, and with dimmed eyes 

Look after him, and cannot do him good ; 

So mighty are his vowed enemies. 220 

His fortunes I will weep ; and 'twixt each groan 

Say " Who 's a traitor ? Gloucester he is none." 

[Exeunt all but Queen, Cardinal, Suffolk, and York. 
Somerset standing apart. 
Queen. Free lords, cold snow melts with the sun's hot beams. 

221, 222. His fortunes . . . he is none] log, no. Where I may sit and sigh in 
endlesse mone, For who's . . . he is none. Exet King, Salsbury and Warwicke. 
223-230. Free lords . . . excellent] omitted Q. 

to have supplanted " mirror " and " pat- speare again (see deep-fet, fraudful) : 
tern" for a time. And in Kyd's Spanish " To leade a lambe into the slaughter- 
Tragedy (ill. X. 91) (Boas) : " Thine house" in Soltman and Pcrscda. See 
ivorie front ; my sorrowes map." Crawford's Collectanea, First Series, 

208. subversioji] Not elsewhere in p. 129. See " sudden qualm," i. i. 54. 

Shakespeare. It is frequent in Hall 218. dimmed eyes] See above, i. i. 55 ; 

and Grafton. Overthrow. " To bring and Part III. v. ii. 16. "Dimm'deyes" 

this your realme vnto subuersio7i " occurs in the Faerie Qtieene, bk. i. 

(Grafton, i. 269), and again p. 305, are (earliest in New Eng. Diet.). 

examples. 219. do him good] further his cause, 

212. slaughter-house] and slaughter- profit him. See above, i. ii. 77; and 

man are met with several times in 3 Henry VI. in. ii. 39. In Genesis 

Shakespeare, especially in the histori- xxxii. 12, and often elsewhere. 

cal plays. They seem to be charac- " Promiseth aid of arms, and swears 

teristic. The butcher and the calf, by us 

lamb, or heifer ; the chicken and the kite ; To do your majesty all the good he 

the fox — these metaphors appeal to can " 

Shakespeare, in preference to the bears, (Peele, Battle of Alcazar, in. i. (p. 

tigers, lions and dragons of his greatest 431, b)). 

contemporary, Spenser, who followed 220. vowed enemies] sworn foes, 

more closely the romance writings as " Vowed friend " occurs in Part III. 

was his province. "Slaughterman" in. iii. 50. Later, in Shakespeare, 

occurs twice in the Bible (Authorised "sworn friend" (Winter's Tale) and 

Version, 1611), but not in early texts. " sworn enemy" [Twelfth Night) appea-t 

See note at " crocodile," 1. 226. It once each, 

is noticeable that Kyd follows Shake- 223. Free lords] lords who are not 



90 



THE SECOND PART OF 



[act III. 



Henry my lord is cold in great affairs, 

Too full of foolish pity; and Gloucester's show 225 

Beguiles him as the mournful crocodile 

With sorrow snares relenting passengers ; 

Or as the snake, rolled in a flowering bank, 

With shining checkered slough, doth sting a child 

That for the beauty thinks it excellent. 230 

Believe me, lords, were none more wise than I, 

And yet herein I judge mine own wit good, 

This Gloucester should be quickly rid the world, 

231-234. Believe me . . . of him] 111-115. Queene. Then sit we downe againe 
my Lord Cardinall, Suffolke, Buckingham, Yorke and Somerset. Let us consult 
of proud Duke Humphries fall. In mine opinion it were good he dide, For safetie 
of our king and commomvealth. 



tied up by such precise regard to re- 
ligion as the king (Warburton) — " men 
of the world who know how to live." 
This, I opine, is nonsense. "Free" is 
an old and honourable epithet, meaning 
generous, magnanimous, etc. See 
New Eng. Diet. Best known in the 
expressions " fair and free " (in old 
romances), and in "frank and free" 
(three times in Golding's Ovid). A 
later example is in The Interlude of 
Youth (1554): "that \d.&y free" (Haz- 
litt's Dodsley, ii. 28). See Spenser, 
Faerie Queene, i. x. 6. 

224. cold] not zealous or interested. 
See note at " God's will be done," 
above, 1. 86. The only great affairs to 
Queen Margaret are affairs of state. 

225. foolish pity] ill-advised sym- 
pathy. There was an old proverb, 
" Peevish pity {foolish pity, too much 
pity were variants) spoils a city." " An 
olde proverb, over much pittie spoileth 
a cittie" (Whetstone, Censure of a Loyal 
Subject, Collier's Early English Prose 
Literature, p. 11, 1587). 

226-228. crocodile . . . snake] Hall 
has these two metaphors coupled in 
Hejiry VI. (XXXVII Yere) : " Thys 
cancard crocodryle (corrected in Graf- 
ton) and subtile serpent coud not longe 
lurke in malicious hertes nor venomous 
stomackes." Perhaps a subconscious 
reminiscence. The best account of 
the crocodile myth came home with 
Hawkins' Second Voyage, 1565. See 
Sparke's Narrative in Hakluyt. It is 
also in Sir John Mandeville, but not in 
Pliny or Physiologus. See, however, 
Trevisa's translation of Bartholome's 
De Prop. Rcrum, 1397 : " If the croco- 
dile fineth a man by the brim of the 



water, or by the cliff, he slayeth him, 
if he may, and then he weepeth upon 
him and swalloweth him at the last." 
These are the true "crocodile's tears." 
Greene revels in the crocodile. See 
a good parallel passage in Selimus 
(Grosart, xiv. 209). But it is to the 
Faerie Queene, i. v. 18, we should turn 
for poetical use. 

1228. S7iake, rolled] See Titus Androni- 
cus, II. iii. 13. 

229. checkered slough] Golding has 
this simile (ix. 320) in Ovid, quoted at 
"scouring armour," above, 1. iii. 191. 
And in Grafton, i. 657 : " In the serpent, 
lurcking under the grasse, and under 
sugred speeche, was hid pestyferous 
poyson." Shakespeare has the snake's 
slough elsewhere in Twelfth Night and 
in Henry V. Golding has it again, 
" freckled slough," iii. 77 (rhyming 
with tough, enough ; elsewhere in 
Golding tough rhymes with though, 
and plough with rough ; we haven't 
improved). For the snake in the grass 
(latet anguis in herba), see Chaucer's 
Somnours Tale, 1. 286. " Checkered " 
(" chequered ") occurs again in Titus 
Androniciis, 11. iii. 15, and the verb in 
Romeo and Juliet and in Venus and 
Adonis. Greene has it several times. 
A much older word in the sense of 
" diversified with different colours." 

233. rid the world] cleared out of the 
world. " Rid " is very common provin- 
cially (northern) in this use. " Rid " can 
mean destroyed, but the following words 
forbid that sense here. Peele has " I rid 
her not ; I made her not away," in 
Edward I. (408, a). Frequent in Shake- 
speare. See 3 Henry VI. v. iii. 21 
(note). And see Grafton's Continua- 



SC. I.] 



KING HENRY THE SIXTH 



91 



To rid us from the fear we have of him. 
Car. That he should die is worthy policy ; 235 

But yet we want a colour for his death. 

'Tis meet he be condemned by course of law. 
Suf. But in my mind that were no policy : 

The king will labour still to save his life ; 

The commons haply rise to save his life ; 240 

And yet we have but trivial argument, 

More than mistrust, that shows him worthy death. 
York. So that, by this, you would not have him die. 
Suf. Ah ! York, no man alive so fain as I. 
York. 'Tis York that hath more reason for his death. 245 

But, my lord cardinal, and you, my Lord of Suffolk, 

Say as you think, and speak it from your souls, 

Were 't not all one an empty eagle were set 

To guard the chicken from a hungry kite. 

As place Duke Humphrey for the king's protector? 250 
Queen. So the poor chicken should be sure of death. 



235-237. Car. That he . . . of law'\ 126, 127. Car. Then let him die before the 
Commons know, Forfeare that they doe rise in Armes for him. 238-251. Suf. 

But in my mind . . . Queen . . . sure of death] omitted Q. 



tion of Hardyng (519) : " He thought 
therfore without delaye to ryd theim, 
as though the kyllyng of his kynsmen 
might ende his cause." 

234. To rid ns . . . of him] In both 
plays the queen is the first to pronounce 
the murder necessary. But there is one 
important structural alteration in the 
final play. The Folio has " Manent 
Queen, three lords," to plot his death. 
The Conteyition represents the queen as 
summoning the five (Cardinal, Sufi"olk, 
Buckingham, York, Somerset) to the 
conspiracy. But they agree in leaving 
the deed to the Cardinal and Suffolk for 
execution. Hall says : " Diuers writers 
affirme, the Duke of Suffolke, and the 
Duke of Buckyngham to be the chiefe, 
not unprocured by the Cardinall of Win- 
chester, and the Archebishop of Yorke." 
He was arrested at a parliament kept at 
Bury " by the Lorde . . . high con- 
stable . . . the Duke of Buckyngham, 
and other." For dates and further 
authorities on the facts, see Boswell 
Stone. See below at 1. 240. 

236. colour] excuse. I fear the 
Cardinal must be credited with a very 
unseemly pun. But it is not unique. 
Compare Narcissus (ed. Miss Lee, 
p. II):— 



" Shall wee dye quickly both ? 
I pray what colour." 

240. commons haply rise] " his Capitall 
enemies and mortall foes, fearing that 
some tumult or commocion might arise, 
if a Prince so well beloued of the people, 
should be openly executed . . . de- 
termined to trap and vndoe him " (Graf- 
ton, p. 629). Hence the parliament at 
Bury. See note, 1. 234. 

241. trivial] unimportant, worthless. 
In Cotgrave : " Triuiall, common ... of 
small worth." "Taught and used in com- 
mon high waies" (Trivialis, J. Rider), 
1589. Shakespeare has the word several 
times ; it was used by Gabriel Harvey, 
who calls Greene " a Triviall and trio- 
bular [three half-penny] Autor for knaves 
& fooles " [Foiire Letters (Grosart, i. 190), 
1592). And in The Trimming of Thomas 
Nash (Grosart, iii. 6) : " To tell you 
what the man is, and the reason of 
this book, were but triviall and super- 
fluous." And Peele, Honour of the 
Garter (Dyce, 584, Prol.) : " With trivial 
humours to pastime the world" (1593). 

245. York . . . hath more reason] Ex- 
plained by the two last lines in this 
scene. 

249. chicken . . . kite] See note at 
"puttock," below, iii. ii. 191. 



92 THE SECOND PART OF [act m. 

Suf. Madam, 'tis true ; and were 't not madness then 
To make the fox suiveyor of the fold ? 
Who, being accused a crafty murderer, 
His guilt should be but idly posted over 255 

Because his purpose is not executed. 
No ; let him die, in that he is a fox, 
By nature proved an enemy to the flock. 
Before his chaps be stained with crimson blood. 
As Humphrey, proved by reasons, to my liege, 260 

And do not stand on quillets how to slay him : 
Be it by gins, by snares, by subtilty. 
Sleeping or waking, 'tis no matter how. 
So he be dead ; for that is good deceit 
Which mates him first that first intends deceit. 265 

Queen. Thrice-noble Suffolk, 'tis resolutely spoke. 

Suf. Not resolute, except so much were done ; 

For things are often spoke and seldom meant : 

But that my heart accordeth with my tongue, 

Seeing the deed is meritorious, 270 

And to preserve my sovereign from his foe, 

Say but the word and I will be his priest. 

Car. But I would have him dead, my Lord of Suffolk, 

252-265. Suf. Madam, His true . . . intends deceit] 116-125. Suffolke. And so 
thinke I Madame, for as you know, If our King Henry had shooke hands with 
death, Duke Humphrey then would looke to be our King: And it may be by 
pollicie he workes. To bring to passe the thing which now we doubt. The Foxe 
(see above, 1. 55) . . . Lambc, But if we take him ere he do the deed. We should 
7iot question if that he should Hue. No. Let him die, in that he is a Foxe, 
Least that in lining he offend us more. 266-272. Queen. Thrice-Jioble . . . his 
priest] omitted Q. 273-277. Car. But I . . . my liege] 130. Car. Agreed, for 
hee's already kept within my house. 

255. posted over] hurried over, gone has " If holy David so shook hands 

through with haste and negligence, with sin " in David and Bethsabe 

From the sense of post-haste. Com- (470, a). 

pare 3 Henry VI. iv. viii. 40; and 266. Thrice-noble] a very favourite 

"over-posting" in ^ if ^nrv/F. I. ii. 171. construction with Shakespeare. But 

"In post" for " in haste " was a common his predecessor Peele abounds in such 

expression. Greene has " in posting adjectives. See Introduction to Part I. 

pace " twice in Alphonsus. All seem to take their rise from Spenser's 

261. quillets] subtleties. See note at " thrice-happy," which was also used by 

Part I. n. iv. 17. Several times in Kyd later, but not extended by him. 

Shakespeare, as in Love's Labour's Compare here Marlowe's Tamburlaine, 

Lost, IV. iii. 285 (note, Arden edition). Part I. i. ii. : " Thrice-noble Tambur- 

265. mates] confounds, subdues. See laine" (Dyce, p. 12, b). 

Macbeth, v.i. 86, and Venus and Adonis, 272. I will be his priest] An expres- 

909. Spenser and Peele usually wrote sion of Kyd's : " Who first laies hand 

" amate." Golding has : " The surges on me. He be his Priest " {Spanish 

mounting up aloft did seeme too mate Tragedie, in. iii. 38 (ed. Boas)). It is 

the skye " (xi. 573). in the watchman's scene, which gave 

265. Shakespeare quotes the lines Shakespeare several hints, in Part III. 

containing "shook hands with death" iv. iii. Similarly Peele has " For want 

{Contention) in Part III. i. ix. 102, when of a priest the priest's part I will play " 

Margaret is murdering York. Peele {Sir Clyomon (518, b)). 



sc. i] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 93 

Ere you can take due orders for a priest : 

Say you consent and censure well the deed, 275 

And I '11 provide his executioner ; 

I tender so the safety of my liege. 
Suf. Here is my hand, the deed is worthy doing. 
Queen. And so say I. 
York. And I : and now we three have spoke it, 280 

It skills not greatly who impugns our doom. 

Enter a Post. 

Post. Great lords, from Ireland am I come amain, 

To signify that rebels there are up, 

And put the Englishmen unto the sword. 

Send succours, lords, and stop the rage betime, 285 

Before the wound do grow incurable ; 

For, being green, there is great hope of help. 
Car. A breach that craves a quick expedient stop ! 

What counsel give you in this weighty cause ? 
York. That Somerset be sent as regent thither. 290 

278. Suf. Here is . . . doing] 129. Suffol. Let that be my Lord Cardinals 
charge &= mine. 279. Queett. And . . . I] omitted Q. 280, 281. York. And 
I . . , doom] 128. Yorke. Then do it sodainly my Lords. 282-287. Enter . . . 
Great lords . . . of help] 131-135. Enter a Messenger. Queen. How now sirrha, 
what newes ? Messen. Madame I bring you new es from Ireland, The wilde Onele, 
my Lords, is up in Artnes, With troupes of Irish kernes that tincontruld, Doth 
plant themselues within the English pale. 288,289. Car. A breach . . . cause] 
136. Queene. What redresse shal ive haue for this my Lords? 290-292. York. 
That . . . France] 137-141. Yorke. Twere very good thai my Lord of Somerset 

277. I tender so the safety] am so wild O'Neil with swarms of Irish kerns 

solicitous and careful of. See Part I. Lives uncontroll'd within the English 

IV. vii. 10 (note). Compare Locrine, i. pale " (197, a). Dyce first collected 

i. : " And if thou tend'rcst these my these parallels. See above, i. iii. 49 

latest words . . . Cherish and love thy and 79, and i. iv. 15, 16. 

new-betrothed wife." 282. come amain] This and " march 

281. It skills not greatly] it matters amain" occur often in Part III.; and 
not g'reatly. "It skills not much" see below, v. i. 114, and Tifws /I w^roni- 
occurs in Taming of the Shrew and in cus, iv. iv. 65, and Love's Labour's 
Twelfth Night. An old phrase. The Lost, v. ii. 549. Frequent in Peele, 
root meaning is discern, separate, differ Polyhymnia, etc. 

(Skeat). Compare Peele, Sir Clyomon 282, 283. Irelatid . . . rebels there 

(493, b) : " Whither I go jf s^i/Zi woi" ; are up] See note below, 11. 309, 310. 

and yack Straw (Hazlitt's Dodsley, v. See Grafton, Continuation of Hardyng, 

400) : " What countryman art thou ? p. 574 : " When the kyng was shewed 

Wat Tyler. It skills not much ; I am of this by his auditours that they were 

an Englishman." " Nay, sky I not a up, ... he thoughte fyrste to scoure 

whit" occurs in Part II. of Whet- his realme of suche rebelles." 
stone's Promos and Cassandra, iv. ii. 283. sigfiify] announce, inform. So 

(1578). in Marlowe, Tamburlaine, Part II. iii. 

282. Irelatid] The two lines in the ii. : " To signify she was a princess 
Contention about the O'Neill are to be born." 

noted. They occur (very nearly) in 288. breach . . . stop] See below, v. 
Marlowe's Edward the Second : " The ii. 282, 283. 



94 THE SECOND PART OF [act m. 

'Tis meet that lucky ruler be employed ; 

Witness the fortune he hath had in France. 
Som. If York, with all his far-fet policy, 

Had been the regent there instead of me. 

He never would have stayed in France so long. 295 

York. No, not to lose it all, as thou hast done. 

I rather would have lost my life betimes 

Than bring a burden of dishonour home, 

By staying there so long till all were lost. 

Show me one scar charactered on thy skin : 300 

Men's flesh preserved so whole do seldom win. 
Queen. Nay then, this spark will prove a raging fire 

If wind and fuel be brought to feed it with. 

No more, good York ; sweet Somerset, be still : 

Thy fortune, York, hadst thou been regent there, 305 

Might happily have proved far worse than his. 
York. What! worse than nought? nay, then a shame take all. 
Som. And in the number thee, that wishest shame. 
Car. My Lord of York, try what your fortune is. 

That fortunate Champion were sent ouer, And burnes and spoiles the Country as 
they goe (this line properly follows English pale (135) and so in Qq 2, 3), To 
keepe in awe the stnbborne Irishmen, He did so much good when he ivas in France. 
293-295. If York . . . so long] 142, 143. Had Yorke bene there with all his 
far fetcht Pollices, he might haue lost as much as I. 296-301. No, not to . . . 
seldom win] 144, 145. /, for Yorke would haue lost his life before, That France 
should haue retiolted from Englands rule. 302-304. Queen. Nay then . . . be 
still] omitted Q. 305, 306. (Queen) Thy fortune . . . worse than his] 146. 
Somer. I so thou mighfst, and yet haue governed worse than I. 307. York. 
What . . . nought? nay, then . . . ] 147. Yorke. What . . . )iought, then . . . 
308. And . . . shame] 148. Shame on thy selfe, that wislieth shame. 309-314. 
Car. My Lord . . . Irishmen?] 149-152. Queene. Somerset forbeare, good Yorke 
be patient (see 304) And do thou take in hand to crosse the seas. With troupes of 
Armed men to quell the pride Of those ambitious Irish that rebell. 

292. fortune he hath had in France] fighting in the field ; Charactering 
The line here in the Contention, " He honor in his batt'red shield . . . 
did so much good when he was in gathering to him a number number- 
France," has been used (nearly) by lesse " (an opening speech by Peele). 
the king to Somerset when making Compare, too, Soliman and Perseda, i. 
him regent [Contention, i. iv, 160) : iv. 5-7 : — 
" We make your grace Regent over " We may see 
the French . . . And so do good unto What warlike wrinkles time has 
the Realme of France." So that charactered 

York's words are a bitter gibe. See With ages print upon thy warlike 

I. iii. 205, and 210, 211 (note). Shake- face." 

speare omits the expression " do good" 302, 303. fire . . . fuel] See 3 Henry 

or " do much good " in both cases, VI. v. iv. 70 ; and quotation from 

though often using it elsewhere. Spanish Tragedy, in. x. 74 (Boas). 

■zgj,. far-fet] far-fetched. See " deep- 309,310. My Lord of York . . . Ire- 

fet," II. iv. 33. land] See i. i. 192, 193, which implies 

300. charactered] written, inscribed, that York had already been employed 

Compare Selimus (Grosart's Greene, in Ireland. But both passages refer 

xiv. 197) : " Was at the last slaine confusingly to the same rebellion. See 



SC. I.] 



KING HENRY THE SIXTH 



95 



The uncivil kerns of Ireland are in arms 310 

And temper clay with blood of Englishmen : 

To Ireland will you lead a band of men, 

Collected choicely, from each county some, 

And try your hap against the Irishmen ? 
York. I will, my lord, so please his majesty. 3 1 5 

Suf. Why, our authority is his consent, 

And what we do establish he confirms : 

Then, noble York, take thou this task in hand. 
York. I am content : provide me soldiers, lords, 

Whiles I take order for mine own affairs. 320 

Suf. A charge. Lord York, that I will see performed. 

But now return we to the false Duke Humphrey. 

315-326. York. I will . . . that event] i^yidi. Yorke. Well Madame sith your 
grace is so content, Let me hauc some bands of chosen soldiers, And Yorke shall 
trie his fortune against those kernes. Queene. Yorke thou shall. My Lord of 
Buckingham, Let it be your charge to muster vp such souldiers As shall suffise 
him in these necdfull luarres. Buck. Madame I will and leavie such a band As 
soone shall ouercome those Irish Rebels, But Yorke, where shall those soldiers stale 
for thee ? 



extract from Grafton at i. i. 192 (the 
XXVII. year, 1448). The O'Neilles (see 
Contention) were in ceaseless commo- 
tion at this period. In the year 1450 
{Annals of the Four Masters) we are told 
" great depredations were committed by 
the son of MacGeoghegan on the 
English . . . during that commotion 
... he spoiled an immense deal during 
that war. The English of Meath, and 
the Duke of York, with the king's 
standard, marched to Mullingar." And 
the O'Neill was up all the time. See 
Marlowe quotation above, 1. 2S2. 

310. kerns of Ireland] See Richard II. 
II. i. 156 for the character they bore in 
England. " And as to their footemen 
they haue one sort which be harnessed in 
mayle and bassenettes, hauing euery one 
of them his weapon called a spare . . . 
and they were named gallowglasses [Irish 
galloglach, a servant, a heavy-armed 
soldier, ^«o/Za servant, ^/acajm I wrestle, 
struggle] and for the most part their boys 
beare for them three darts a piece. . . . 
The other sorte called kerne are nakid, 
but onely their shertes and small coates ; 
and many tymes when they come to the 
bycker, but bare nakid . . . and these 
haue dartes and short bowes " (Anthony 
Saint Leger, 6th April, 1543, Letter to 
Henry VIII., State Papers). See Ulster 
Journal, vi. 198, igg. See notes to 
Macbeth, Steevens' Shakespeare. 

311. temper clay with blood] Compare 



King Lear, i. iv. 326, and Titus An- 
dronicus, v. ii. 200. Moistened, as of 
mortar. Peele uses the word : " The 
mortar of these walls, temper'd in peace " 
[Descensus Astrcece, 1591). 

312. band of men] "troops of armed 
men" in Contention (1. 151) occurs in 
1 Henry VI. 11. ii. 24. " Troops of . . ." 
occurs three times in 70 lines here in Q. 
318. take thou this task] In a note on 
" attask'd " [King Lear, i. iv. 366), under 
"Task," Schmidt says "Compare the 
modern to take to task." But it isn't 
modern. Peele uses it in Polyhymnia : — 
" The last, not least, of these brave 
brethren . . . 
Bowes takes to task with strong and 
mighty arm " 
(572, a). 

319. provide me soldiers] "muster up 
such soldiers " in Contention here (1. 157) 
occurs in Part III. iv. viii. 11, and iv. viii. 
18 ; and in Richard III. iv. iv. 489, and 
Richard II. 11. ii. 118. The "up" is 
characteristic of Shakespeare. See note 
at "mailed up," 11. iv. 31. 

320. take order for] arrange. See 
I Henry VI. iii. ii. 126 (note). Peele 
has this phrase several times : " Accord- 
ing to the order ta'cn herein, what do 
you say?" [Sir Clyomon (523, b), circa 
1584). 

322. return we] A favourite transposi- 
tion with Shakespeare — already noted 
upon. 



96 



THE SECOND PART OF 



[act III. 



Car. No more of him ; for I will deal with him 
That henceforth he shall trouble us no more. 
And so break off; the day is almost spent. 325 

Lord Suffolk, you and I must talk of that event. 

York. My Lord of Suffolk, within fourteen days 
At Bristol I expect my soldiers ; 
For there I '11 ship them all for Ireland. 

Sicf. I '11 see it truly done, my Lord of York. 330 

[Exeunt all but York. 

York. Now, York, or never, steel thy fearful thoughts, 
And change misdoubt to resolution : 
Be that thou hopest to be, or what thou art 
Resign to death ; it is not worth the enjoying. 
Let pale-faced fear keep with the mean-born man, 335 
And find no harbour in a royal heart. 
Faster than spring-time showers comes thought on thought, 

327-329. York. My Lord of Suffolk . . . Ireland] 162. Yorkc. At Bristow, I 
wil expect them ten dales hence. 330. Suf. I II . . . York] 163-168. Buc. 
Then thither shall they come, and so farewell. Exet Buckingham. Yorke. 
Adieu tny Lord of Buckingham. Queene. Suffolke remember what you haue to 
do. And you Lord Cardinall concerning Duke Humphrey, Ttvere good that you 
did see to it in time. Come let us go, that it may be performde. Exet omnis, Manit 
Yorke. 331-340. York. Now, York . . . mine enemies] 169-171. York. Now 
York bethink thy selfe and rowse thee vp. Take time whilst it is offered thee so 
faire. Least when thou wouldst, thou canst it not attaine. 



325. break off] enough talk. Often 
in Shakespeare: Love's Labour's Lost, 
V. ii. 262, etc. Compare Kyd's Spanish 
Tragedy, iv. iv. 74, 75 : — 

" Heere breake we off our sundrie 
languages 
And thus conclude I in our vulgar 
tung." 
325. day . . . spent] Compare Faerie 
Queene, 11. ii. 46: — 

"Night was far spent; and now in 
Ocean deep, 
Orion flying fast." 
331. Nozv . . . or never] Peele has 
this expression twice: "What let me 
brave it now or never, Ned ! " (Edward /., 
Dyce, 379, b) ; and :— 

" Now, now or never, bravely execute 
Your resolution sound and honour- 
able " 
[Battle of Alcazar, iv. ii. (436, a)). " Be- 
hold, thrice-noble lord," and " you thrice- 
valiant lords" occur in the same speech 
as the last quotation. See above, line 
266. See 3 Henry VL iv. iii. 24, and note, 
for references to Kyd's Spanish Tragedy. 
331. steel thy . . . thoughts] See 
note at 3 Henry VI. 11. ii. 41. 



331. come let's goe] in Q. See above, 
end of II. ii. 

332. misdoubt] See 2 Henry IV. iv, 
i. 206. The noun is not elsewhere in 
Shakespeare ; the verb several times. 

335. pale-faced] Occurs again Venus 
and Adonis, 569 ; Richard II. (twice) ; 
and in I Henry IV. Compounds with 
" faced " were especially affected by 
Shakespeare. He has a remarkable 
collection of them, about thirty in 
number. Venus and Adonis has the 
earliest example in New Eng. Diet. See 
"bold-faced," Part I. iv. %'i. 12. "Red- 
faced" in North's Plutarch seems 
earlier. Sylvester (1591) has " wrinkle- 
faced" and "lean-faced." See iii. ii. 
315 below. 

335. mean-born] See again Richard 
III. IV. ii. 54. Of humble origin. 
" Base-born " occurs in the same sense 
twice in this play and once in Part III. 
See I. I. iii. 86, and iv. viii. 49. Earlier 
in Peele. See note at " true-born," Part 
I. II. iv. 27. 

337. spring-time showers] See Taming 
of the Shrew, 11. i. 248, and Hetiry VI. 
Part III. II. iii. 47. 



SC. I.] 



KING HENRY THE SIXTH 



97 



And not a thought but thinks on dignity. 

My brain, more busy than the labouring spider, 

Weaves tedious snares to trap mine enemies. 340 

Well, nobles, well ; 'tis politicly done, 

To send me packing with an host of men : 

I fear me you but warm the starved snake. 

Who, cherished in your breasts, will sting your hearts, 

'Twas men I lacked, and you will give them me : 345 

I take it kindly ; yet be well assured 

You put sharp weapons in a madman's hands. 

Whiles I in Ireland nourish a mighty band, 

1 will stir up in England some black storm 

Shall blow ten thousand souls to heaven or hell ; 350 

And this fell tempest shall not cease to rage 

Until the golden circuit on my head, 

Like to the glorious sun's transparent beams. 

Do calm the fury of this mad-bred flaw. 

And, for a minister of my intent, 355 

I have seduced a headstrong Kentishman, 

John Cade of Ashford, 

341-345. Well nobles . . . give them me'] 172. Twas men I lacki, and now they 
giue them me. 346, 347. I take it . . . hands] omitted Q. 348. Whiles 
. . . band] 173. And now whilst I am busie in Ireland. 349-355- I ^iH stir 
. . . my intent] omitted Q. 356, 357. / have . . . Ashford] 174, 175. / have 
. . . Ashford. 



343) 344- snake . . .in . . . breasts] Com- 
pare Chzncex,MarchaHnts Tale: "Lyk to 
the naddre in bosom sly untrewe." And 
see Skeat's excellent note. From a fable 
in Gesta Romanorum, and in Phcedrtis. 

347. put . . . weapons in a madman's 
hands] Proverbial. " It is ill putting a 
naked sword in a madman's hand " 
(Heywood's Proverbs (edited Sharman, 
p. 149), 1546). " The madman is un- 
mete a naked sword to gide " (Tot- 
tel's Miscellany (Arber's reprint, p. 269), 
I557)' Common later, and in Camden's 
and Ray's collections. 

350. ten thousand sonls] Used where 
we say " thousands of." Often by Shake- 
speare. See in this Act, at ii. 218 and 
354 ; and often elsewhere. And in 
Peele, David and Bethsabe (485, a) : 
" Whose heart . . . bursts with burden 
of ten thousand griefs." See " twenty 
thousand kisses," in. ii. 142. Peele 
has it again : " Welcome eke ten 
thousand times " {Sir Clyomon (532, a)). 
Compare Spenser's Faerie Queene, 11. 
iv. 28 :— 

" Me liefer were ten thousand deathes 
priefe, 



Then wounde of gealous worme." 
Common in Biblical language. 

352. circuit] crown, diadem. See 
note at 3 Henry VI. i. ii. 30. " Golden 
round " occurs in Macbeth ; " golden 
rigol " in 5 Henry IV. 

354. fiaiv] squall, gust. " Oft times 
to Weast, ofttimes to East, did drive 
him many 2. flaw " (Golding's Ovid, iv. 
769). 

354. mad-bred] Perhaps the earliest 
combination with "bred," and over- 
looked in New Eng. Diet. " Home- 
bred" occurs in Part III. iv. i. 38. 

356. Kentishman] John Ball says of 
Jack Straw (Hazlitt's Dodsley, v. 400) : 
" Marry sir, he is a Kentishman " (one 
word). 

357-375. yohu Cade . . . house and 
claim of York] " For although Richard 
Duke of Yorke was in person (as the 
king's Deputie) in the realm of Ireland 
. . . yet his breath puffed ... in many 
partes of this realme . . . the friendes, 
kinsmen and allies of the Duke . . . 
putting into mens heades secretly his 
right to the Crowne . . . it was thought 
necessary to cause some great commo- 



98 



THE SECOND PART OF 



[act III. 



To make commotion, as full well he can, 

Under the title of John Mortimer. 

In Ireland have I seen this stubborn Cade 360 

Oppose himself against a troop of kerns. 

And fought so long, till that his thighs with darts 

Were almost like a sharp-quilled porpentine : 

And, in the end being rescued, I have seen 

Him caper upright like a wild Morisco, 365 

358. To . . . can] 177. To raise commotion, and by that meanes. 359. Under 
. . . Mortimer] 176. Vnder . . . Mortimer: Sir jfohn Mortimer Q 2: Mortimer, 
{For he is like him euery kinde of way), Q 3. 360-371. In Ireland . , . 

substitute] omitted Q. 



cion, and ye risyng of the people to be 
made agaynst the king . . . And be- 
cause the Kentishemen be impacient in 
wronges . . . this matter was put foorth 
in Kent. ... A certaine yong man of a 
goodly stature, and pregnant wit, was 
entysed to take upon him the name of 
lohn Mortimer, although his name were 
lohn Cade, and not for a small pollicie, 
thinkyng that by that surname, the Ijne 
and lynage of the . . . Erie of Marche 
. . . should be to him both adherent and 
favourable " (p. 640) (1450). See iv. ii. 
4, 119 (notes). 

358. make commotion] Compare 
Peele's jfack Straw (Hazlitt's Dodsley, 
V. 390): — 

" a crew of rebels are in field, 
And they have made commotions 
late in Kent." 

363. porpentine] The old spelling, 
occurring again in Troilus and Cressida, 
Hamlet, and as an inn-name in The 
Comedy of Errors. Greene spells it "por- 
cupine" and "porcuntine,"earlier. Roger 
Ascham says : " Claudiane the poete 
sayth, that nature gave example of 
shotyng first by the Porpentine, which 
doth shote his prickes" (Toxophilus (re- 
print, p. 31, Arber), 1545). Marlowe 
has " hair . . . like the quills of 
porcupines," in Tamburlaine, Part II. i. 
iii. The old belief alluded to by 
Ascham, that the porcupine shot his 
quills, is not far astray. When the 
animal flicks out his tail, the quills 
penetrate an assailant deeply and re- 
main there. "Jack London" tells of 
" White Fang," the wolf, how he 
" had once sniffed too near. . . . One 
quill he had carried away in his muzzle, 
where it had remained for weeks, a 
rankling flame " (p. 62). And on 
page 66, a lynx sprang savagely at a 
wounded porcupine which flicked out 



its tail again. " Then she fell to 
backing away and sneezing, the nose 
bristling with quills like a monstrous 
pin-cushion. She brushed her nose 
with her paws, trying to dislodge the 
fiery darts ... all the time leaping 
about, ahead, sidewise in a frenzy 
of pain and fright . . . she suddenly 
leaped without warning, straight up into 
the air." In this remarkable passage 
Shakespeare seems to have anticipated 
Holland and "Jack London." 

365. caper] The earliest illustration 
of this verb in New Eng. Diet, is from 
Love's Labour's Lost, v. ii. 113. At 
the same reference as that for " por- 
cupine " above (in Marlowe) occurs " to 
dance and caper in the air " ; probably 
earlier. And in Peele's jfack Straw 
(Hazlitt's Dodsley, v, 383) : " Tis . . . 
credit to caper under the gallows all 
save the head." Compare Richard III. 
I. i. 12 with the Marlowe lines in full. 

365. a wild Morisco] Moorish, or 
morris-dancer. The word occurs earlier 
in Greene's Mamillia (Grosart, ii. 220) : 
" Needlesse noughts, as crisps, and 
scarphes, worne Alia Morisco." And 
in Will Barret, 1584 (Hakluyt, ii. 406, 
407, ed. 1811) : "The said mamedine 
is of silver, having the Moresco stampe 
on both sides." But Holland's Plinie 
affords the proper parallel : " The 
Curets taught to daunce in armour, 
and Pyrrhus the Morisk, in order of 
battell " (bk. vii. ch. Ivi. p. 189 (1601)). 
And bk. vii. ch. iii. : " A common thing 
it was among them to fling weapons 
and darts in the aire ... to flourish 
also beforehand, yea, and to encounter 
and meet together in fight like sword- 
fencers, and to make good sport in 
a kinde of Moriske daunce." The 
morrice has not been traced earlier 
than Henry's VII.'s time. 



sc. I] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 99 

Shaking the bloody darts as he his bells. 

Full often, like a shag-haired crafty kern, 

Hath he conversed with the enemy, 

And undiscovered come to me again, 

And given me notice of their villanies. 370 

This devil here shall be my substitute ; 

For that John Mortimer, which now is dead. 

In face, in gait, in speech, he doth resemble : 

By this I shall perceive the commons' mind, 

How they affect the house and claim of York. 375 

Say he be taken, racked, and tortured, 

I know no pain they can inflict upon him 

Will make him say I moved him to those arms. 

Say that he thrive, as 'tis great like he will, 

Why, then from Ireland come I with my strength, 380 

And reap the harvest which that rascal sowed ; 

For Humphrey being dead, as he shall be, 

And Heniy put apart, the next for me. [Exit. 

372, 373- Foy that John . . . resemble] See line 176, Q 3, at 359 above. 
374. 375- By this . . . York] 178, 179. I shall perceiue how the common people, 
Do affect the claime and hojise of Ynrke. 376-378. Say he be , . . those 

arms] 183, 184. Now if he should be taken and condemd, Heele nere confesse that 
I did set him on. 379-381. Say that he . . . rascal sow' d] 180-182. Then if 

he haue successe in his affaires, From Ireland then comes Yovke againe. To . . . 
coystrill sowed. 382, 383. For Humphrey . . . for me. Exit.] 185-192. And 

therefore ere I go He send him word. To put in practise and to gather head, That 

-i^tei. Shaking ... bells]ThemoTncQ- Dodsley, v. 340). It is a frequent 

bells were fixed to the dancer's legs, thought. 

Compare Return from Parnassus (Haz- 381. rascal] "coystrill" in the Con- 

litt's Dodsley, ix. 164): — tention, a word that Shakespeare uses 

" like a morrice-dance only in Twelfth Night, i. iii. 43. Ap- 

Hath put a bell or two about his parently he disliked it, for he would have 

legs." none of it in King John, though it oc- 

See, too, The Witch of Edmonton, in. curs in The Troublesome Raigne : " Coy- 

iv. strill, loathsome dunghill swad " (1591). 

367. shag-haired] See note to Mac- From " kestrel," a mousing unsporting 

beth, Steevens' Shakespeare, vii. 521. hawk. Compare Faerie Queene, 11. iii. 

Occurs in the old King Leir : "A 4 : — 

shag-haired murdering wretch " ; and " Ne thought of honour euer did 

in Golding's Ovid (bk. xiii. 1. 1084) of assay 

a goat. This passage reads like a His baser brest, but in his kestrell 

later interpolation. kynd 

379- great like] very likely. Com- A pleasing vaine of glory he did 

pare " had like to," Mtich Ado About fynd." 

Nothing, V. i. 115 ; As You Like It, Shakespeare forbore from abusing this 

V. iv. 48 ; Winter's Tale, iv. iv, 750. pleasing and useful bird. It occurs in 

Compare "'tis like," below, iii. ii. 184; Soliman and Perseda, 11. ii. 57 : " But 

and elsewhere. hopes the coystrell to escape me so ? " 

381. reap . . . sozved] reaping where 382. to gather head] In the Conten- 

another sowed, or another's harvest, tion here, occurs later in the play, iv. 

from Luke xix. 22. Sometimes " thrust v. 10, See note. 

in sickle" (Revelation xiv. 15), as in 382, 383. For Humphrey being dead 

Kyd's Soliman and Perseda (Hazlitt's . . . next for me] See above, 1. 245. 



100 THE SECOND PART OF [act m. 

SCENE II. — Bury St. Edmunds. A Room of State. 
Enter certain Murderers, hastily. 

First Mur. Run to my Lord of Suffolk ; let him know 
We have dispatched the duke, as he commanded. 

Second Mur. O, that it were to do ! What have we done ? 
Didst ever hear a man so penitent ? 

First Mur. Here comes my lord. 5 

Enter Suffolk. 

Suf. Now, sirs, have you dispatched this thing ? 

First Mur. Ay, my good lord, he's dead. 

Suf. Why, that 's well said. Go, get you to my house ; 

I will reward you for this venturous deed. 

The king and all the peers are here at hand. lo 

Have you laid fair the bed ? Is all things well, 

According as I gave directions ? 

50 soone as I am gone he may begin To rise in Armes with troupes of country 
swaines, To helpe him to performe this enterprise. And then Duke Humphrey, he 
well made away. None then can stop the light to Englands Crowne, But Yorke 
can tame and headlong pull them downe. Exet Yorke. 

Scene ii. 

Enter • . . ] Then the Curtaines being drawne, Duke Humphrey is discouered 
hi his bed and two men lying on his brest and smothering him in his bed. And 
then enter the Duke of Suffolk to them. 1-5. First Mur. Run . . . my lord] 
omitted Q. 6. Enter Suffolk. Suf. Now . . . thing ?]i. Suffolk. Ho7v now, 
sirs, what haue you dispatcht him? 7. First Mur. Ay . . . dead] 2. One. 

I my lord, hees dead I iv arrant you. 8-12. Why . . . directions?] 3-5. Then 
see the cloathes laid smooth about him still, That when the King comes, he may 
perceive, No other, but that he dide of his owne accord. 

^. O . . . do !] Compare the Spirit's ment : other write that he was stiffled 

ejaculation, i. iv. 28 : " That I had said or smoldered betweene two feather beds, 

and done ! " After whose death, none of his seruantes 

5. of his own accord] In the Conten- (although they were arraigned and at- 

tion ; spontaneously, with no outside tainted) were put to death : for the Duke 

agency. An odd use. It occurs of a of Suffolke shewed openly their pardon, 

door : " Which to them opened of his but this doyng appeased not the grudge 

owne accord " in Faerie Queene, 11. vii. of the people " (p. 629, 1446). And at 

31. p. 633 : "That William de la Poole late 

7. he's dead] Grafton has : " The created Duke of Suffolke, and diuers 
Duke the night after his imprisonment, other, were the occasion of the sayd 
was found dead in his bed, being the Duke of Gloucester, which was the 
xxiiij. day of Februarij, and his bodye very father of the countrie, and the 
shewed to the Lordes and Commons, shielde and defence of the poore Com- 
as though he had died of a palsey or monaltie." The savage atrocity referred 
impostume : but all indifferent persons to by Grafton said to be perpetrated 
well knewe, that he dyed of no naturall upon Gloucester described more fully 
death, but of some violent force : some as the means by which King Edward I. 
iudged him to be strangled : some a ffirme was done to death at Corfe Castle 
that a bote spit was put in at his funda- (Grafton, 1326-1327, p. 328). 



sc II.] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 101 

First Mur. 'Tis, my good lord. 

Suf. Away ! be gone. {^Exeunt Murderers. 

Sound trumpets. Enter the KING, the QuEEN, Cardinal 
Beaufort, Somerset, with Attendants. 

King. Go, call our uncle to our presence straight ; 1 5 

Say we intend to try his grace to-day, 

If he be guilty, as 'tis published. 
Stcf. I '11 call him presently, my noble lord. [^Exit. 

King. Lords, take your places ; and, I pray you all, 

Proceed no straiter 'gainst our uncle Gloucester 20 

Than from true evidence, of good esteem. 

He be approved in practice culpable. 
Queen. God forbid any malice should prevail 

That faultless may condemn a nobleman ! 

Pray God he may acquit him of suspicion ! 25 

King. I thank thee, Nell ; these words content me much. 

13. Tis . . . lord] 6. 2 [Mtird.]. All things is hansome now my lord. 14. 
Away I . . . gone] 7, 8. Then draw the Curtaines againe and get you gone. And 
you shall haue your Jirme reward anon. Exet mnrtherers. 15. Sound Trumpets 
. . . ] 9. Then enter ike King and Queene, the Duke of Buckingham, a?id the 
Duke of Somerset, and tlie Cardinall. 15-17. Go . . . published] 9, 10. My 
Lord of Suffolke go call our vnkle Gloster, Tell him this day we will that he 
do chare himself e. 18. I'll . . . lord] 11. I will, my Lord. 19-22. Lords 
. . . culpable] 12-15. -^"^ good my Lords proceed no further against our vnkle 
Gloster, Then by just proofs you can affirmc, For as the sucking childe or home- 
lesse lambe, So is he innocent of treason to our state. 23-26. God forbid . . . 
}nuch] omitted Q. 

14. be gone] The words, " You shall abominable falseness and hypocrisy are 
have your firm reward" of the Conten- powerful delineations in the following 
tion have no parallel in the play before speeches, hardly found in the Conten- 
us. " Firm reward " for fixed or deter- tion. 

mined reward is not Shakespearian ; but 25. acquit him] The Contention Vine, 

compare " firm proposed natures " (of innocent as " sucking child or harmless 

articles) in Henry V. v. ii. 362. Dis- lamb," has already been used by the 

tinctly stated. See again below, when king of Gloucester (Scene i. 71), in the 

Iden presents Cade's head to the king final play. 

(v. 1). 26. Nell] A mistake for " Meg" per- 

17. published] asserted, stated. haps. Capell altered the text to " Meg." 

20. straiter] rigorously. Theobald read " Well." The reading 

22. approved^ proved. So Peele in his "Nell" is confirmed by the occurrence of 

Pageant, Lovely London (Dyce, 538, b), " Elianor " at 11. 79, 100 and 120, instead 

1585: — of "Margaret." Shakespeare was think- 

" Whose excellent and princely ingof the Duchessof Gloucester. Similar 

majesty mistakes occur in Henry V. v. i. 75, 

Approves itself to be most for- and elsewhere. See Cambridge Shake- 

tunate." speare. In the Contentioti the queen is 

And see Othello, 11. iii. 211. rarely given her Christian name, but 

23-25. God forbid . . . suspicion] there is a great deal of "Nell" (Duchess) 

This speech, which has no parallel in up to Act iii. Peele's abundant use of 

the Confe?ition, is well calculated to "Nell" for Edward the First's queen 

place the queen more unfavourably may be recalled. Possibly this mistake 

before us, according to design. Her was Peele's. 



102 THE SECOND PART OF [act m. 



Re-enter SUFFOLK. 

How now! why look'st thou pale? why tremblest thou? 

Where is our uncle ? what 's the matter, Suffolk ? 
Suf. Dead in his bed, my lord ; Gloucester is dead. 
Queen. Marry, God forfend ! 30 

Car. God's secret judgment : I did dream to-night 

The duke was dumb and could not speak a word. 

[ The King swoons. 
Queen. How fares my lord ? Help, lords ! the king is dead. 
Som. Rear up his body ; wring him by the nose. 
Queen. Run, go, help, help! O, Henry, ope thine eyes! 35 
Suf. He doth revive again : madam, be patient. 
King. O heavenly God ! 

Queen. How fares my gracious lord ? 

Suf. Comfort, my sovereign ! gracious Henry, comfort ! 
King. What, doth my Lord of Suffolk comfort me ? 

Came he right now to sing a raven's note, 40 

Whose dismal tune bereft my vital powers, 

27, 28. Re-enter Suffolk. How now . . . Suffolk ?] i6. Enter Suffolke. How 
now Suffolke, where' s our V7ikle? 29. My lord; Gloucester'] 17. My lord 

Gloster . . . The king falles in a somid. 30-32. Marry ... a word] omitted 
Q. 33. How . . . dead] 18. Ay-me, the king is dead; help, help, my lords. 
35-^7. Run, go . . . gracious lord i'] omitted Q. 3S. sovereign] ig. Lord. 39. 
comfort me] 20. bid me comfort. 40. right now] 21. even now. 41. Whose 
. . . powers] omitted Q. 

34. Rear up his body] Compare such perfection between vhe Contention 

y^rowiwo (Hazlitt's Dodsley, iv. 375) : — and Part III. in many places. Every 

" Lay hands on him ; some rear up line in the Contention is used up and 

The bleeding body to the light." improved, every thought given scope, 

This was only to identify the murdered and nine lines grow to seventeen from 

man in Kyd's (?) play. Sometimes bend his earlier to his later passage, 

the body, or bow the body. Webster 40. right now] "even now" in the 

has it several times. Contention. Exactly at this time or 

34. wring him by the nose] to arouse juncture. This expression is not found 

circulation, and bring back to life, as in again in Shakespeare, but if it was 

Venus and Adonis, 475. Greene has going out of fashion here, it has survived 

" wring by " : " Did not Cresida wring in a lively manner in America. Com- 

Troylus by the hand, when her heart pare Golding's Ovid : " That stoode 

was in the tents of the Greecians " right now uppon this shore " (viii. 1066). 

{Alcida, Grosart, ix. 97); and "want And Peele(aloverof GoIding)has it also, 

could not wring him by the finger " 40. raveji's note] An often alluded 

(Mourning Garment, ix. 180). " Sound " to superstition at this date, and through- 

in the Contention here for " swoon " is out Shakespeare. Outside Shakespeare 

also the word in the Folios, the common Marlowe's jfew of Malta, and Peele's 

old spelling. These lines are not in the David and Bethsabe contain good 

Contention. In these two long scenes passages. Dyce quotes from Sylvester's 

the process is one of development and Du Bartas (1591) in a note to Peele's 

addition. See note at 1. 39. lines (469-470). See note at Part III. 

39'55- This speech gives an interest- v. xii. 45-47 ; and at Othello, iv. i. 21 

ing study of the process carried out to (Arden edition). 



sc. II.] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 103 

And thinks he that the chirping of a wren, 
By crying comfort from a hollow breast, 
Can chase away the first-conceived sound ? 
Hide not thy poison with such sugared words ; 45 

Lay not thy hands on me ; forbear, I say : 
Their touch affrights me as a serpent's sting. 
Thou baleful messenger, out of my sight ! 
Upon thy eye-balls murderous tyranny 
Sits in grim majesty to fright the world. 50 

Look not upon me, for thine eyes are wounding : 
Yet do not go away ; come, basilisk, 
And kill the innocent gazer with thy sight ; 
For in the shade of death I shall find joy. 
In life but double death, now Gloucester's dead. 55 

Queen. Why do you rate my Lord of Suffolk thus ? 
Although the duke was enemy to him. 
Yet he, most Christian-like, laments his death : 
And for myself, foe as he was to me. 
Might liquid tears or heart-offending groans 60 

42, 43. And . . . hreast\ 22, 23. And . . . through a hollow voice. 44. Can 
. . . sound?] 24. Can satisfie my grief es, or ease my heart. 45-47- Hide . . . 

sting] omitted Q. 48-50. Thou . . . world] 25, 26. Thou . . . For etien in 

thine eye-bals murther sits. 51. Look. . . . wounding] omitted Q. 52, 53. 
Yet . . . sight] 27, 28. Yet . . . {away omitted) . . . silly gazer . . . lookes. 
54, 55. For . . . dead] omitted Q. 56. Qtieen. Why . . . thus] 29. Queen. 

Why . . . thus. ^y-ji. Althojigh . . . infamy] ^0-^2. As if that he had causde 

42. chirping of a wren] Shakespeare moost stigryd eloquence " of Henry the 
loved the "wren with little quill." VII. (1811, p. 678) (1576). 

No better a musician than the wren. 49. eye-balls] Perhaps the Contention 

43. hollow breast] insincere, false, is the earliest example of this as one 
deceitful. See " hollow friend " below, word. It occurs also in Venus and 
1, 66; and compare "hollow heart," Adonis ^.wd. in L?<c?'£Cf, whose language 
Part I. III. i. 136. The subtle alteration has much in common with Henry VI. 
in this line, of " hollow voice " to See iii. ii. 169. 

" hollow breast," is to be noticed. 52, basilisk] A very old belief, oc- 

44. first-conceived] Compare " new- curring in Sir John Maundevile, circa 
conceived," Measure for Measure, 11. ii. 1400, and earlier. See 1. 324 below, 
96. Marlowe used it in Tamburlaine, and Part III. iii. ii. 187. 

Part I. III. ii. 12: "As it hath changed 53. gazer] Again with "basilisk" in 

ray first-conceived disdain." 3 Henry VI. The word is in Faerie 

45. sugared words] See Part I. iii. Queene, 11. iii. 22 : "gazer's sense." 
iii. 18 (note). " Sugared speache " 60. liquid tears] Conveys the sense 
occurs in Hall's Chronicle in this reign of quantities, floods of tears. Compare 
(XXXV Yere). Hawes gets very near Peele, David and Bethsabe (Dyce, 
it in Pastime of Pleasure\xeTpr{nt, Percy 475, a) : — 

Soc, p. 159), 1509 : " These men, with " O would our eyes were conduits to 

sugred mouthes so eloquente." Peele has our hearts, 

" With sugred words how hath she fed And that our hearts were seas of 

my senses night and day " (Sir Clyomon, liquid blood." 

Dyce, 516, b), which is probably as And Marlowe, Tamburlaitie, Part II. 

early as anything of Greene's. Marlowe v. iii. (73, b) : "our hearts all drown'd 

has "sugred words" near the end of in tears of blood." 

Tamburlaine, Part II. Fabyan speaks 60. heart-offending] Compare "eye- 

of the " moost excellent wysdome and offending," Twelfth Night, i. i. 30. As 



104 



THE SECOND PART OF 



[act III. 



Or blood-consuming sighs recall his life, 

I would be blind with weeping, sick with groans, 

Look pale as primrose with blood-drinking sighs. 

And all to have the noble duke alive. 

What know I how the world may deem of me ? 65 

For it is known we were but hollow friends : 

It may be judged I made the duke away : 

So shall my name with slander's tongue be wounded, 

And princes' courts be filled with my reproach. 

This get I by his death : ay me, unhappy ! 70 

To be a queen, and crowned with infamy ! 

King. Ah ! woe is me for Gloucester, wretched man. 

Queen. Be woe for me, more wretched than he is. 
What, dost thou turn away and hide thy face ? 
I am no loathsome leper ; look on me. 75 

What! art thou, like the adder, waxen deaf? 

Duke Humphreys death ? The Duke and I too, you know were enemies. And you 
had best say that I did murther him. yz-for . . . man] ^s-for wretched Glosters 
death. 73. is] 34. was. 74, 75. What, dost . . . me] 35,36, What dost . . . 
leoper . . . me. 76-81. What I art thou . . , alehouse sign] omitted Q, 



'sap- 

1. 312. 

{199, 



sighs consume blood so groans hurt the 
heart. Compare Merchant of Venice, 

I. i. 82 : " Let ... my heart cool with 
mortifying groan." 

61. blood-consuming] Compare 
consuming," Comedy of Errors, v. 
Compare Marlowe's Edward II. 
b):- 

" the miserable queen 
Whose pining heart her inward 
sighs have blasted." 

63. pale as primrose] Compare 
Golding's Ovid, xiii. 929 (Polyphemus' 
courtship) : " More whyght thou art 
then Primrose leaf" (meaning the leaf 
of the flower). 

63. blood-drinking] preying on the 
blood. We have had the word already 
in sense of "blood-thirsty" (i Henry VI. 

II. iv. 108). In Titus Andronictis (11. 
iii. 224) it means soaked with blood. 
Craig writes here : " It was believed that 
sighing was injurious to the heart- 
blood." Compare Hamlet, iv. vii. 123, 
124; and Midsummer Nighfs Dream, 

III. ii. 97. In Part III. iv. iv. 22, 
"blood-sucking sighs" has the same 
sense. See " blood-sucker," below, 1. 226. 
See note in Part III. The idea is 
developed in Warwick's speech below, 
11. 160-167. Warwick is all Shake- 
speare's be it remembered. This idea 
is still found in Northern folk-lore. 

66. hollow friends] See Part III. 
i. 139. 



IV. 



67. / made the duke away] The 
Contention words, "you had best say 
that," etc., are often found in Shake- 
speare — " you had best," or " you were 
best," and are still used provincially. 

68. slande/s tongue] More often 
" slanderous tongue," as in Measure 

for Measure, Much Ado About Nothing, 
and Richard III. 

76. like the adder] See Psalm Iviii. 
4; and Sonnet 112, and Troilus and 
Cressida, 11. ii. 172. A common belief 
or reference. It is in Greene, Farewell 
to Follie (Grosart, ix. 273) : " like the 
deafe Addar that heareth not the 
sorcerers charme." And again at p. 
310; and elsewhere in Greene. But it 
is not generally known how the adder 
does it. Peter de la Primaudaye (trans, 
by T. Bowes, 1586) tells us in bk. i. 
chap. vi. {French Academic): "do as 
the serpent doth that stoppeth her eares 
with her taile to the ende she may 
not heare the charmes and sorceries of 
the inchanter." Steevens quotes from 
Gower's Confessio Atnantis, i. fol. x. : — 
" He leyeth downe his one eare all 
plat 
Unto the grounde and halt it fast : 
And eke that other eare als faste 
He stoppeth with his taille." 
Primaudaye left a vagueness about that 
other ear. 

76. waxen deaf] Compare Greene's 
Georgc-a-Greene (Grosart, xiv. 125) : 



sc. II.] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 



105 



Be poisonous too and kill thy forlorn queen. 

Is all thy comfort shut in Gloucester's tomb ? 

Why, then, Dame Eleanor was ne'er thy joy : 

Erect his statue and worship it, 80 

And make my image but an alehouse sign. 

Was I for this nigh wrecked upon the sea, 

And twice by awkward wind from England's bank 

Drove back again unto my native clime ? 

What boded this, but well forewarning wind 85 

Did seem to say " Seek not a scorpion's nest. 

Nor set no footing on this unkind shore " ? 

What did I then, but cursed the gentle gusts 

And he that loosed them forth their brazen caves ; 

And bid them blow towards England's blessed shore, 90 

Or turn our stern upon a dreadful rock. 

Yet yEolus would not be a murderer, 

But left that hateful office unto thee : 

The pretty vaulting sea refused to drown me, 

82-84. Was I . . . cZi»ze.^]37, 38. Was I . . . wrackt . . . thrise . . . winds 
driiien back from Englands bounds. 85, 85. What . . . nest] 39, 40. What 
might it bode, but that well foretelling Winds, said, seeke not a scorpions neast. 
.87-121. Nor set no . . . live so long] omitted Q. 



" Why, men of Wakefield, are you 
waxen madde." But Peele has " waxen 
dim" (of eyes) earlier, in The Arraign- 
ment of Paris (369, a), and in The Tale 
of Troy (556, a). 

80. statue] To be pronounced (as it 
often was) statue, or statua. Most 
editors spell it "statua," and there is 
authority for the word at this date. 
But none in the Folio. See Kyd's 
Cornelia, iv. ii. 190 : — 

" And his statues new set 
With many a fresh-flowrd Coronet." 
And in Marlowe (end of Act ii.), Tam- 
burlaine, Part II. : " And here will I set 
up her statue." 

81. alehouse sign] See again below, 
V. ii. 67, and Titus Andronicus, iv. ii. 
98. 

83. awAwarrf] adverse, contrary. Mal- 
one quotes Marlowe's Edward II. : — 

"With awkward wind, and with 
sore tempests driven 
To fall on shore " 
(iv. vi.). Here it belongs to the earlier 
Contention, and the expression suggests 
Marlowe's hand therein at this point. 

83. England's bank] England's shore. 
New Eng. Diet, has several earlier 
examples, this being the latest of ' ' bank " 
meaning the sea-shore. " England's 
bounds " in Contention. " The banks 



of England" occurs in 1 Henry IV. 
" Bounds of France " occurs 1 Henry 
VI. I. ii. 24. " And of that parte that 
is nygh to the Scotish bancke he layed 
watches that none shoulde goo oute " 
(Grafton's Continuation of Hardyng, 

P- 437, 1543)- 

85. well forewarning] predicting 

truthfully. "Well foretelling" of the 

Contention would have done nicely ! 

Here, as in the last example, and in 

many other cases, the changes seem to 

have been made quite arbitrarily in 

pursuance of a pre-arrangement. Why 

change "thrice" to "twice" at line 

83 ? Simply for rewriting's sake. 

89. brazen] extremely strong, im- 
pregnable. Compare "brazen gates" 
(5 Henry VI, 11. iii. 40) and " brazen 
wall " {ibid. 11. iv. 4). See quotation 
from Peele's Edward I. (Dyce, 378, a) at 
I. iv. 45 in Part I. Golding places the 
winds of jEoIus in " pryson cloce." See 
Virgil's jEneid, i. 52-54, for the cave. 
"Brazen walls" is in Jeremiah i. 18, 
XV. 20 (Wyclif). 

90. Engla7id's blessed shore] For 
" blessed," see Richard II. 11. i. 50 ; ap- 
plied to England. And see quotation at 
" chalky cliffs " (1. loi) for "England's 
shore." 

94. pretty vaulting sea] agreeable 



106 



THE SECOND PART OF 



[act III. 



Knowing that thou would'st have me drowned on shore 95 

With tears as salt as sea through thy unkindness : 

The splitting rocks cowered in the sinking sands, 

And would not dash me with their ragged sides, 

Because thy flinty heart, more hard than they, 

Might in thy palace perish Eleanor, 100 

As far as I could ken thy chalky cliffs. 

When from the shore the tempest beat us back, 

I stood upon the hatches in the storm, 

And when the dusky sky began to rob 

My earnest gaping sight of thy land's view, 105 

I took a costly jewel from my neck, 

A heart it was, bound in with diamonds. 

And threw it towards thy land : the sea received it, 

And so I wished thy body might my heart : 

And even with this I lost fair England's view, 1 10 

And bid mine eyes be packing with my heart. 

And called them blind and dusky spectacles 



bounding sea. Rather a nerveless ex- 
pression, made worse by Dyce's hyphen. 
Dyce revelled in hyphens. " Pretty " 
applies to the sea, not to its jumping 
habit ! 

97. splitting rocks] rocks formed for 
the purpose of splitting (ships). At 
line 411 below, the "splitted bark" is 
the comment often applied to a ship by 
Shakespeare, as in Tempest, Twelfth 
Night, 3 Henry VI. v. iv. 10, Pericles 
and Comedy of Errors. 

g8. ragged] Applied to a rock again 
in Two Gentlemen of Verona, i. ii. 121, 
and in 3 Henry VI. v. iv. 27. Com- 
pare Golding's Ovid, vi. 92, 93 : — 

" Neptune 's standing striking with 
his long threetyned blade 
Upon the ragged Rocke." 
It is in Spenser, Faerie Queene, i. xi. 21. 

99. flinty heart] See Part III. 11. i. 
202. Compare Greene, A Looking 
Glasse for London (Grosart, xiv. 14) : 
" whose flintie hearts have felt no sweet 
remorse." But it occurs earlier in 
Latimer. 

100. perish] destroy. 

loi. ken] to discern at sea. An old 
nautical use. "Within a ken" occurs 
twice in Shakespeare (Cymbeline and 
2 Henry /K.), and "within akenning," 
formerly used the same way, is still 
heard. Compare Golding's Ovid, vii. 
627, 628 : — 

" the Cretish fleete he kend 

Which thitherward with puffed 

sayles and wind at will did tend." 



loi. chalky cliffs] See Comedy of 
Errors, in. ii. 129. This is in Peele. 
Compare A Farewell (549, a), 1589 : — 
" Bid England's shore (see 1. 90 above) 
and Albions chalky cliffs 
Farewell : bid stately Troynovant. 
adieu." 
And in The Old Wives Tale (447, a) :— 
" Upon these chalky cliffs of Albion 
We are arrived now." 
Shakespeare is indebted to Peele here; 
but Peele never wrote this speech. 

103. / stood upon the hatches] Com- 
pare Golding's Ovid, bk. xi. 537, 538 
(one of the loveliest passages in a 
lovable book) : — 

" Shee lifting up her watrye eye, be- 
hind her husband stand 
Uppon the hatches, making signes 
by beckening with his hand" 
(Alcyone seeing King Ceyx's departure). 
And see xi. 614 : " Uppon the hatches 
like a fo victoriously it gat " (the 
tenth wave). " Dusky night " occurs 
XV. line 35. 

104. dnsky]^ee Part I. 11. ii. 27; and 
last note. 

107. heart . . . bound in with 
diamonds] See note at " A lady wall'd 
about with diamonds," Love's Labour 's 
Lost, V. ii. 3, Arden edition. 

111. be packing] get away (with the 
heart ornament). 

112. spectacles] The eyes are com- 
pared to blurred or broken spectacles. 
Schmidt's " organs of vision " is surely 
misleading. 



sc. II ] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 107 

For losing ken of Albion's wished coast. 

How often have I tempted Suffolk's tongue, 

The agent of thy foul inconstancy, 1 1 5 

To sit and witch me, as Ascanius did 

When he to madding Dido would unfold 

His father's acts, commenced in burning Troy ! 

Am I not witched like her? or thou not false like him ? 

Ay me ! I can no more. Die, Eleanor ! 120 

For Henry weeps that thou dost live so long. 

Noise within. Enter WARWICK, SALISBURY, and many 

Commons. 

War. It is reported, mighty sovereign, 

That good Duke Humphrey traitorously is murdered 

By Suffolk and the Cardinal Beaufort's means. 

The commons, like an angry hive of bees 125 

That want their leader, scatter up and down, 

And care not who they sting in his revenge. 

Myself have calmed their spleenful mutiny, 

Until they hear the order of his death. 

King. That he is dead, good Warwick, 'tis too true; 130 

But how he died God knows, not Henry. 

122-129. Noise within . . . War. It is reported . . . death] 41-44. Enter the 
Earles of Warwicke and Salisbury. War. My Lord, the Commons . . . bees (line 
125) Run vp and downe, caring not whom they sting, For good Duke Humphreys 
death, whom they report To be murthered by Suffolke and the Cardinall here. 
130, 131. King. That . . . not Henry] 46, 47. King. That . . . not Henry. 

113. losing ken] See note, 1. no, above. (447, b, and again 457, b). And " these 
113. iuished]\ongeA for. See Part I. madding Greeks" occurs in his Tale of 
III. iii. 28; Comedy of Errors, i. i. 91. Troy (555, a), 1589. 
Compare Peele : — 120. I can no more] Occurs again line 
" And welcome wished England, on 365 below ; and often elsewhere in 
whose ground Shakespeare, as Hamlet, v. ii. 331 ; 
These feet so often have desir'd to Antony and Cleopatra, iv. xv. 59, etc. 
tread" My strength fails m.; (Schmidt). 
{Edward I., Dyce, 378, a). And see 125. commons . . . hive of bees] Corn- 
note at Part I. iii. iii. 28. pare (Peele's) jfack Straw : — 

116. witch me] bewitch me. This " It was a world to see what troops 
is Theobald's accepted correction. The of men 

Folios read " watch." Like bees that swarm about the 

117. madding] A favourite word with honeyhive, 

Peele, Kyd, etc. :— 'Gan strew the gravel ground and 

" What grief, what pinching pain, sandy plain " 

like young men's love, (Hazlitt's Dodsley, v. 395). For " sandy 

That makes me madding run thus plains," see above, i. iv. 39 (note). 

to and fro ? " 128. spleenful] See Titus Andronicus, 

{Edward I., Dyce, 391, b). And The 11. iii. 191. "Hot, eager" (Schmidt). 

Old Wives Tale : — Shakespeare is particularly fond of 

"See where Venelia, my betrothed drawing illustrations and expressions 

love from the spleen. He has also 

Runs, madding, all enraged, about " spleeny " and " splenetive." 

the woods " 129. order] manner. 



108 



THE SECOND PART OF 



[act III. 



Enter his chamber, view his breathless corpse, 

And comment then upon his sudden death. 
War. That I shall do, my liege. Stay, Salisbury, 

With the rude multitude till I return. 135 

[Exeunt Warzvick and Salisbury. 
King. O ! thou that judgest all things, stay my thoughts. 

My thoughts that labour to persuade my soul 

Some violent hands were laid on Humphrey's life. 

If my suspect be false, forgive me, God, 

For judgment only doth belong to thee. 140 

Fain would I go to chafe his paly lips 

With twenty thousand kisses, and to drain 

Upon his face an ocean of salt tears, 

To tell my love unto his dumb deaf trunk, 

And with my fingers feel his hand unfeeling : 145 

But all in vain are these mean obsequies. 

And to survey his dead and earthy image 

What were it but to make my sorrow greater ? 

132, 133. Enter . . . death'] 47. War. Enter his prude chamber my Lord and 
view the bodie. 134, 135. War. That I shall . . . return'] 48, 49 {War.) Good 
father staie you with the rude multitude, till I returne. Salb. I will sonne. Exet 
Salisbury. 136-148. King, O thou . . . greater] omitted Q. 



132. hreathless]\\ie\e.5S,. Seel Henry 
IV. V. iii. 16; Richard II. v. vi. 31, and 
King John, iv. iii. 66. The passage in 
King jfohn is the earliest in New Eng. 
Diet. But it is a Peele and Greene 
word : — 

" till my gasping ghost 
Do part asunder from my hreath- 
lesse corpes " 
(Greene, Alphonsus of Arragon, Grosart, 
xiii. 364). Peele has it in Edward I. : 
"Breathless he lies and headless too, 
my lord" (409, b) ; and: — 

" see in royal pomp 
These breathless bodies be en- 
tombed straight 
With 'tired colours cover'd all with 
black" 
(414, b), likely to be Peele's, since he 
coined many such words. See quota- 
tion at " bloodless," line 162 below. 

133. comment] The verb is only in 
Shakespeare's earl}' work: Tzvo Gentle- 
men of Verona, 11. i. 42, Venus and 
Adonis, 714, and Sonnets 15 and 8g. 
To make remarks, or pass opinions on ; 
to reason about. First used by Shake- 
speare in this manner. 

139. suspect] suspicion. Several 
times in these early plays, and in the 
poems. See note at " suspense," iii. i. 
140. 



141. chafe his lips] warm them. The 
same expression is in Venus and Adonis, 
477, the same stanzas as "wring his 
nose," above, line 34: — 

" He bends her fingers, holds her 
pulses hard, 
He chafes her lips." 
See Faerie Qucene, i. vii. 21 : — 

" To rubbe her temples and to chaufe 
her chin . . . 
So hardly he the flitted life does 
win." 
"To rub the temples" occurs in Othello. 

141. paly] See again Henry V. iv. 
(Chorus, 8), and Romeo and jfulict, iv. i. 
100. 

142. twenty thousand] See above, in. 
i. 350 (note), " ten thousand souls." 
Meaning " a great many " ; this is only a 
little less common than "ten thousand" 
in Shakespeare. See below, iii. ii. 206, 
and Coriolanus, in. iii. 70, etc. Com- 
pare Daniel vii. 10: " thousand thousands 
ministered unto him, and ten thousand 
times ten thousand stood before him." 

143. ocean of salt tears] "an ocean 
of his tears" occurs in Two Gejitlemen 
of Verona, n. vii. 69. " Seas of tears " 
is found in 3 Henry VI. 11. v. 106. " To 
drowne thee with an ocean of my teares " 
is in Kyd's Spanish Tragedy, 11. v. 23 
(Boas). 



sc II ] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 109 

Re-enter WARWICK and others, bearing GLOUCESTER'S body 

on a bed. 

War. Come hither, gracious sovereign, view this body. 

King. That is to see how deep my grave is made ; 150 

For with his soul fled all my worldly solace, 

For seeing him I see my life in death. 
War. As surely as my soul intends to live 

With that dread King that took our state upon him 

To free us from his Father's wrathful curse, 155 

I do believe that violent hands were laid 

Upon the life of this thrice-famed duke. 
Siif. A dreadful oath, sworn with a solemn tongue ! 

What instance gives Lord Warwick for his vow ? 
War. See how the blood is settled in his face. 160 

Oft have I seen a timely-parted ghost, 

Of ashy semblance, meagre, pale, and bloodless, 

Being all descended to the labouring heart ; 

149. Re-enter Warwick . . . War. Come . . . hody\ 49. Warwicke drawes the 
curtaines and shoives Duke Humphrey in his bed (for line 149, see 131 above). 
150-152. King. That is . . . in death] 50, 51. King. Ah vnkle Gloster, heauen 
receiue thy soule. Farewell poore Henries ioy, now thou art gone. 153, 154. 

War. As surely , . . upon him] 52. War. Now by his soule that tooke our shape 
vpon him. 155-157. To free . . . duke] 53-55. To free . . . dreadfull curse, 
I am rcsohied . . . thrise famous Duke. 158, 159. A dreadfull . . . his vow ?] 
56, 57. A dreadfull . . . these words? 160. See how . . . face] 60, 61. But 
loe . , . face, More better coloured then when he liu'd. 161, 162. Oft . . . 

bloodless] 58, 59. Oft . . . (meagre omitted) . . . bloodless. 163-171. Being 
all . . . strtiggling] omitted Q. 

157. thrice-famed] "thrice famous" 161. timely-parted ghost] a dead 

in Contention. "Thrice-famed" occurs in person departed in a timely or natural 

Troilus and Cressida, 11. iii. 254, again, manner. Compare " untimely," 5 Henry 

See note at "thrice-noble," iii. i. 266. VI. iii. iii. 187. And for "ghost" 

And see Introduction. " Thrice valiant" meaning a dead body, see Hamlet, i. iv. 

has occurred above in Q i, i. 85. " Part " (verb) meaning " die " 

159. instance] proof; as often in occurs several times (Macbeth, 1 Henry 
Shakespeare. See Troilus and Cressida, VI., etc.). 

V. ii. 153, 155. 161, 162. ghost . . . bloodless] In 

160. blood is settled] The symptoms Golding's Ovid, x. 43 : " the bloodlesse 
are carefully elaborated from the Conten- ghostes shed teares." And in Peele's 
tion. " Settled " means stagnated ; see Arraignment of Paris (VxoXogne): — 
further in 2 Henry IV. iv. iii. H2 ; and " bloodless ghosts in pains of 
in Romeo and Juliet, iv. v. 26. For endless date 

" more better " here in Contention, see Fill ruthless ears with never-ceas- 

many illustrations in Schmidt at " more " ing cries." 

(739, a). "More better" occurs in See Malone and Steevens here for other 

The Tempest and Midsummer Night's examples of " ghost " meaning corpse. 

Dream. 162. ashy semblance] Compare Gold- 

161. Oft have I seen . . .] See "Oft ing's Ovid, iv. 324: "a pale ashcolourd 
have I heard . . ." below, iv. iv. i. herbe cleane voyde of bloud." Malone 
And in 3 Henry VI. 11. i. 149. Compare quotes from Spenser's Ruins of Rome : 
Kyd's Cornelia, v. i. 4 : " Oft have I " Ye pallid spirits and ye ashy ghosts." 
scene the ends of mightier men," etc. 162, 163. bloodless, Being all 
GoJding has " So have I seen . . ." descended] because the blood is all 
several times, to introduce a simile. descended. See above, line 63. 



110 



THE SECOND PART OF 



[act in. 



Who, in the conflict that it holds with death, 

Attracts the same for aidance 'gainst the enemy ; 165 

Which with the heart there cools, and ne'er returneth 

To blush and beautify the cheek again. 

But see, his face is black and full of blood, 

His eye-balls further out than when he lived. 

Staring full ghastly like a strangled man ; 170 

His hair upreared, his nostrils stretched with struggling ; 

His hands abroad displayed, as one that grasped 

And tugged for life, and was by strength subdued. 

Look, on the sheets his hair, you see, is sticking ; 

His well-proportioned beard made rough and rugged, 175 

Like to the summer's corn by tempest lodged. 

172,173. His hands . . . sjibdiied] 6^, 6^. His fingers spred abroad as one that 
graspt for life, Yet was by strength surprisde. 174. Look, . . . sticking] 

omitted Q. 175. His . . . rugged] 62. His . . . sterne. 176. Like . . . 

lodged] omitted Q. 



165. aidance] assistance. Another 
Venus and Adonis word (line 330), oc- 
curring nowhere else in Shakespeare. 
It is not known elsewhere until a later 
date. 

169. eye-balls] See note at line 49 
above. Compare Cyril Tourneur, Athe- 
ists Tragedy, 11. iv. (Pearson, i. 54) : — 
" Dead be your tongues ! Drop out 
■ Mine eyeballs, and let envious 
Fortune play 
At tennis with 'em." 

171. upreared] raised. See Sonnet 
49, and 2 Henry IV. 11. iv. 214. This 
inharmonious form of compound was not 
a favourite with Shakespeare. Spenser 
has several of them, including the present 
one : — 

" So beene they both at one, and 
doen upreare 
Their bevers bright each other for 
to greet " 
(Faerie Queene, 11. i. 29), and several 
times elsewhere. 

172. abroad] Malone quotes Peacham, 
Complete Gentleman, 1627 : " hold up his 
hand, stretch his fingers abroad," where 
we say " widely." Compare Kyd's 
Cornelia, iii. i. 102 : — 

" I mou'd mine head and flonge 
abroade mine armes 
To entertaine him " 
(Boas). 

172. displayed] spread about, stretched 
out. The earliest signification of the 
word : — 



" And the old woman carefully dis- 
played 
The clothes about her round " 
(Faerie Queene, in. ii. 47). 

175. well-proportioned] well-shaped. 
Very much importance was attached to 
the wear of the beard at this time. 
See notes to Merry Wives of Windsor, 
I. iv. 20, and Midsummer Night's Dream, 

I. ii. 92 seq., etc. This compound 
adjective occurs again in Venus and 
Adonis, 290. Nothing could be more 
probably disclosed than that Shake- 
speare wrote this scene at the same 
time as he wrote Verms and Adonis (eye- 
balls, aidance, chafe lips, wring nose, 
comment). " Well-proportioned " is in 
Soliman and Pcrseda, in. i. 

175. rough and rugged] Note that 
" rough and stern " of Contention here 
is transferred to " Suffolk's imperial 
tongue is rough and stern," below (iv. 
i. 125) ; an emendation that points to 
one workman, and he a very careful 
one. Compare "stern" below, in line 
213. 

176. corn . . . lodged] See Richard 

II. III. iii. 162, and Macbeth, iv. i. 55. 
In provincial use. See Holland's Plinie, 
xviii. chap. xvii. p. 574, 1601 : " the 
come standeth not upright, but is lodged 
and lieth along." "Along'" here (at 
length) parallels " abroad " above. 
This, of Holland, is the only literary use 
I know of, of the date. An expressly 
Shakespearian application. 



sc II.] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 111 

It cannot be but he was murdered here ; 

The least of all these signs were probable. 
Suf. Why, Warwick, who should do the duke to death ? 

Myself and Beaufort had him in protection ; i8o 

And we, I hope, sir, are no murderers. 
War. But both of you were vowed Duke Humphrey's foes, 

And you, forsooth, had the good duke to keep : 

'Tis like you would not feast him like a friend, 

And 'tis well seen he found an enemy. 185 

Queen. Then you, belike, suspect these noblemen 

As guilty of Duke Humphrey's timeless death. 
War. Who finds the heifer dead, and bleeding fresh, 

And sees fast by a butcher with an axe. 

But will suspect 'twas he that made the slaughter ? 190 

Who finds the partridge in the puttock's nest, 

But may imagine how the bird was dead, 

Although the kite soar with unbloodied beak ? 

Even so suspicious is this tragedy. 
Queen. Are you the butcher, Suffolk? where 's your knife? 195 

Is Beaufort termed a kite ? where are his talons ? 
Suf. I wear no knife to slaughter sleeping men ; 

177, 178. It cannot be . . . probable] Q^d), 65. the least of these are probable, 
It cannot chuse btit he was niurthered. 179-181. Stif. Why, Warwick . . . 
murderers'] 66, 67. Queene. Suffolke and the Cardinall had him in charge, And 
they I trust sir, are no murtherers. 182-185. War. But both . . . enemy] 68, 
69. War. I, but twas well knowne they were not his friends, And . . . some 
enemies. 186,187. Queen. Then you . . . timeless death] jo. Card. But haue 
you no greater proofes than these? 188-194. War. Who finds the . . . fast by 
. . . may imagine . . . was dead . . . unbloodied . . . tragedy] 71-77. War. 
Who sees a . . . hard by . . . will imagine . . . came there . . . vnbloodie 
. . . Tragidie. 195. Queen, butcher, Suffolk . . . knife?] 78. Queene. kyte 
Bewford . . . talents ? 196. Is . . . talons] 79. Is Suffolke the butcher, 

Where's his knife? 197-202. / wear no . . . ease . . . dar'st . . . faulty 

. . . death] 80-85. / weare no . . . case . . . dare . . . guiltie . . . death. 
Exet Cardinall. 

177. It cannot be] Midsummer Night's by Shakespeare in his metaphors instead 
Dream, in. li. 56, repeats this line: of dragons and tigers. Spenser identifies 
" It cannot be but thou hast murdered the puttock with the kite in the Faerie 
him." Queene, v. v. 15, a part of that poem that 

178. The least of all these] Compare may have been written later than the 
Locrine (by Peele and Greene ?) : " God Contention. " Puttok bryd. Milvus " 
knows it were the least of all my (Prompt. Parv. [circa 1440)). Compare 
thought " {i. i.). Nashe, Christes Teares : " The Henne 

184. 'Tis like] see "'tis great like," clocketh her Chickins . . . The Henne 

at the end of last scene. shieldeth them and fighteth for them 

187. titneless] untimely. See Part I. against the Puttocke" ^Grosart, iv. 62), 

V, iv. 5 (note). " Timeless death " is an 1593. On these poetical images see 

expression of Marlowe's (end of Tarn- above, iii. i. 212. 

burlaijie, Part II.) 193. unbloodied] A more vivid word 

191. puttock] kite. One of the many than the previous "unbloody." See note 

homely provincial terms made use of at " rough and rugged," line 175 above. 



112 



THE SECOND PART OF 



[act III. 



But here 's a vengeful sword, rusted with ease, 

That shall be scoured in his rancorous heart 

That slanders me with murder's crimson badge. 200 

Say, if thou dar'st, proud Lord of Warwickshire, 

That I am faulty in Duke Humphrey's death. 

[^Exeunt Cardinal and others. 

War. What dares not Warwick, if false Suffolk dare him ? 

Queen. He dares not calm his contumelious spirit. 

Nor cease to be an arrogant controller, 205 

Though Suffolk dare him twenty thousand times. 

War. Madam, be still, with reverence may I say ; 
For every word you speak in his behalf 
Is slander to your royal dignity. 

Suf. Blunt-witted lord, ignoble in demeanour! 210 

If ever lady wronged her lord so much. 
Thy mother took into her blameful bed 
Some stern untutored churl, and noble stock 
Was graft with crab-tree slip ; whose fruit thou art, 

203. What . . . him ?\ 86. What . . . him ? 204-206. He dares . . . 

thousand titties] 87-89, He dares tiot . . . hundredth times. 207-209. Madam 
, . . say ; For . . . behalf . . . digttify] go-92. Madame . . . say it, That . . . 
defence . . . Maiestie. 210-215. Blunt-witted . . . demeanour . . . itito her 
. . . noble race]g^-g8. Blunt-witted . . . thy words . . . vnto her . . . noble race. 



ig8. vengeful] Occurs again Sonnet 
99, and Titus Androtiicus, v. ii. 51. 

198. rusted with ease] "case" of 
Contention is corrected in its later 
editions. Compare Love's Labour's 
Lost, I. ii. 187 : " Adieu valor, rust 
rapier " ; and Coriolanus, iv. v. 234 : 
" Peace is nothing but to rust iron." 

igg. scoured] See " scouring armour," 
above, i. iii. 195. Note the absolute 
identity of these two speeches, so 
thoroughly Shakespearian as they are 
undoubtedly, with the Contention 
version. 

199. rancorous] See in. i. 24 ; Part I. 

IV. i. 185 ; and Cotnedy of Errors, i. i. 6. 
Not in his later work. 

202. faulty] guilty. See Henry 
VIII. V. iii. 75. 

204. contumelious] See Part I. i. iii. 
58, and I. iv. 39 ; and Timon of Athens, 

V. i. 177. Not in any of the later work. 

205. controller] censorious critic, de- 
tractor. New Eng. Diet, quotes from 
Drant's Horace, 1566. Shakespeare has 
it again only in Titus Attdronicus, 11. iii. 
60. Side by side with Venus and Adonis, 
that play affords various parallels for 
Henry VI. words, hardly found else- 
where in Shakespeare, not common 



anj'where. In the case of the play 
we cannot disassociate ourselves from 
Peele. See " black as jet," above, 11. 
i. 112; and " vengeful,'' 1. 198. And 
" gloomy," Part I. v. iv. 89. 

206. twenty thousatid times] See note 
at " twenty thousand kisses," 1. 142, 
above. 

210. Blunt-witted] Compare " quick- 
witted " [Tattling of the Shrew, v. ii. 38), 
" beef-witted," " fat-witted," etc. There 
are ten of them altogether in Shake- 
speare. Nashe has " tame-witted " 
(Grosart, iii. 72). 

213. stern] rough, rugged. See note 
at these words, 1. 175 above. Used here 
in a general sense. 

213. untutored] See again 5 Henry 
VI. v. V, 32. Occurs also in Lncrece, 
Ded. 3 (of verses), and in Sonnet 138. 
Ignorant, boorish, unmannered. 

214. crab-tree slip] See note at "slips 
of such a stock," 11. ii. 58 above. " SHp " 
in this sense is used several times by 
Shakespeare, as a sliver or cutting. 
" Scion," perhaps a correct word, is used 
also in Winter's Tale, Henry V. and 
Othello, I. iii. 337 (see note, Arden 
edition, p. 54). For the crab-tree graft, 
see Coriolanus, 11. i. 206. Compare 



sc. II.] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 113 

And never of the Nevils' noble race. 2 1 5 

War. But that the guih of murder bucklers thee, 
And I should rob the deathsman of his fee, 
Quitting thee thereby of ten thousand shames, 
And that my sovereign's presence makes me mild, 
I would, false murderous coward, on thy knee 220 

Make thee beg pardon for thy passed speech. 
And say it was thy mother that thou meant'st ; 
That thou thyself wast born in bastardy : 
And after all this fearful homage done, 
Give thee thy hire and send thy soul to hell, 225 

Pernicious blood-sucker of sleeping men ! 

Su/. Thou shalt be waking while I shed thy blood, 
If from this presence thou dar'st go with me. 

War. Away even now, or I will drag thee hence : 

Unworthy though thou art, I '11 cope with thee, 230 

And do some service to Duke Humphrey's ghost 

[Exeunt Suffolk and Warwick. 

King. What stronger breastplate than a heart untainted ! 
Thrice is he armed that hath his quarrel just, 

216-226. But that . . . deathsman . . . mild . . . knee . . . beg pardon . . . 
mean'st . . . wast . . . sleeping men] 99-109. But that . . . deathsman . . . 
mute . . . knees . . . craue pardon . . . meants . . . was . . . sleeping men. 
227, 22S. Thou shalt . . . while . . . dar'st . . . me] no, in. Thou shouldst 
. . . whilst . . . dare . . . with me. 229. War. Away . . . hence]ii2. War. 
Away . . . hence. (Warwicke puis him out.) 230, 231. Unworthy . . . 

ghost] omitted Q. 232-235. King. What stronger . . . corrupted. A noise 

. . , ] omitted Q. 

Grafton's Continuation of Hardyng, p. 226. blood-sucker] "a bloodthirsty or 

506 : " bastarde slyppes shall never take bloodguilty person ; one who draws or 

depe rootes." [See Apocrypha, Wisdom sheds the blood of another " {New Eng. 

iv. 3.] Diet.). This instance is not quoted, but 

216. bucklers] shields. " 'Tis not the there are earlier ones in that great work ; 
king can buckler Gaveston " (Marlowe, *' The seventh blood-sucker after Nero " 
Edward II. (191, b)). (i577, tr- Bullinger's Decades (1592), p. 

217. deathsman] executioner. See 315). But there may be some other 
3 Henry VI. v. v. 67, and King Lear, allusion. See note at " blood-drinking," 
IV. vi. 263. A favourite word with 1. 63 above. 

Greene. New Eng. Diet, quotes from 232. breastplate] From the figura- 

Menaphon (vi, 143), 1589. See also live use in the Bible, " breastplate of 

Tullie's Love (Grosart, vii. 145) ; righteousness," " breastplate of faith." 

Metamorphosis (ix. no, 112); Groats- This speech with the ancient and ortho- 

worth of Wit (xii. 145). In the latter dox maxims is not in the Contention. 

passage it occurs figuratively, immedi- It is part of the developed holiness of 

ately after the " upstart crow " passage. Henry's character, already noticed. 

This is one of the " feathers." 233. quarrel just] For the converse 

218. ten thousand] See note at "ten sentiment, see Much Ado About No- 
thousand," iii. i. 350. thijig, v. i. 120. Malone quotes " Mar- 

221. passed] uttered. low &'& Lusfs Dominion" : — 

222. meant'st] See Introduction. " Come, Moor ; I'm arm'd with more 
Compare " suckedst " (J Henry VI. v. than complete steel, 

iv. 28), and " dippedst " (5 Henry VI. The justice oi my quarrel." 

I. iv, 157). This vile and unnatural play, without a 

8 



114 THE SECOND PART OF [act m. 

And he but naked, though locked up in steel, 
Whose conscience witli injustice is corrupted. 235 

[A noise within. 
Queen. What noise is this ? 

Re-enter SUFFOLK and WARWICK, with their weapons drawn. 

King. Why, how now, lords ! your wrathful weapons drawn 
Here in our presence ! dare you be so bold ? 
Why, what tumultuous clamour have we here ? 

Suf. The traitorous Warwick, with the men of Bury, 240 

Set all upon me, mighty sovereign. 

Sal. [to the Commons entering]. Sirs, stand apart ; the king shall 
know your mind. 
Dread lord, the commons send you word by me, 
Unless false Suffolk straight be done to death, 
Or banished fair England's territories, 245 

They will by violence tear him from your palace 
And torture him with grievous lingering death. 
They say, by him the good Duke Humphrey died ; 
They say, in him they fear your highness' death ; 
And mere instinct of love and loyalty, 250 

Free from a stubborn opposite intent. 
As being thought to contradict your liking, 

236. Queen. What . . . this ?] omitted Q. 237. Re-enter Suffolk . . .King. 
Why . . . Lords !] 113. Exet Warwicke and Snffolke, and then all the Commons 
within, cries, doivne with Snffolke, doivne with Suffolke. And then enter againe, 
the Duke of Suffolke and Warwicke, with their weapons drawne. King. Why 
how now Lords? 240, 241. Suf. The traitorous . . . sovereign'] 114, 115. The 
Traitorous . . . soueraigne. The Commons againe cries, downe with Suffolke, 
downe with Suffolke. And then enter from them the Earle of Salbury. 242. 
Sal. Sirs . . . mind] omitted Q. 243-249. Dread lord . . . send . . . Utiless 
. . . straight . . . They . . . palace And . . . death (line omitted). They say 
. . . died ; They say . . . death] 116-121. My Lord . . . sends . . . The unlesse 
. . . here . . . That they will erre from your high^iesse person. They say . . . died, 
They say by him they feare the riiine of the realtne. 250-269. And mere . . . 
bereft of life] 122, 123. Atid therefore if you loue your subiects weale, They wish 
you to banish him from foorth the land. 

redeeming quality, was printed with Mar- seched the King, that such persons as 
lowe's name in 1657. It is difficult to assented to the relese of Angeow and 
imagine how Malone endorsed such a deliueraunce of Maine might be ex- 
slander. It is in Hazlitt's Dodsley, vol. tremely punished, and tormented . . . 
xiv. they accused, as principall, the Duke of 

244. done to death] See Much Ado Suffolke" (Grafton, p. 639). See note 

About Nothing, v. iii. 3, and elsewhere, at iv. i. 86. 

See Peele's Battle of Alcazar (at the 252. contradict] oppose, thwart, 

end) : " do7ie to death with many a Compare Locrine, i. i. : — 

mortal wound." " far be it from any maiden's 

245-247. banished . . . and torture thoughts 

Am]" The Commons of the lower house. To contradict her aged father's 

not forgetting their olde grudge, be- will." 



sc. II] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 115 

Makes them thus forward in his banishment. 

They say, in care of your most royal person, 

That if your highness should intend to sleep, 255 

And charge that no man should disturb your rest 

In pain of your dislike or pain of death, 

Yet, notwithstanding such a strait edict, 

Were there a serpent seen, with forked tongue, 

That slily glided towards your majesty, 260 

It were but necessary you were waked, 

Lest, being suffered in that harmful slumber. 

The mortal worm might make the sleep eternal : 

And therefore do they cry, though you forbid. 

That they will guard you, whe'r you will or no, 265 

From such fell serpents as false Suffolk is ; 

With whose envenomed and fatal sting. 

Your loving uncle, twenty times his worth. 

They say, is shamefully bereft of life. 

Commons. [ Wi't/im.] An answer from the king, my Lord of 
Salisbury ! 270 

Su/. 'Tis like the commons, rude unpolished hinds, 
Could send such message to their sovereign ; 
But you, my lord, were glad to be employed, 
To show how quaint an orator you are : 
But all the honour Salisbury hath won 275 

Is that he was the lord ambassador, 
Sent from a sort of tinkers to the king. 

270. Commons. An answer . . . Salisbury 1] omitted Q. 271-277. S»f. 'Tis 
like . . . Could . . . To shozv . . . are . . . won . . . ambassador . . . king} 
124-130. Suf, Indeed tis like . . . Would . . , To trie . . . were . . . got . , . 
Embassador . . . King. 

259. serpent] The snake in the grass 269. bereft of life] See Part III. 11. 

is an abundantly common simile and has v. 93, and Titus Andronicus, 11. iii. 282 ; 

occurred already ; and in the Chronicles both in different construction from 

often. But it is very uncouthly dragged the phrase as here. Compare Locrine, 

in here in the very heat of an uproar, i. i. : — 

Written for stuffing ? It is not in the " by the weapons of unpartial 

Contention. death 

263. mortal] deadly, fatal. Is clove asunder and bereft of life." 

263. worm] snake. Golding has Where the use of " impartial " is as 

" uncouth worm " with " flecked spots " often in Peele. Compare Kyd, Soliman 

of a lizard (Ovid, v. 570-574). Often a)id Perseda, v. v. 5, where Death says : 

in Shakespeare. " But I bereft them both of love and 

265. wi^l or no] See Part I. iv. vii. life." 

25, and Richard III. iii. i. 23; and in 270. Commons [Within] Note the 

Twelfth Night, etc. And in (Peele's) profuse stage-directions here, in the 

Jack Straw (Hazlitt's Dodsley, v. 390) : Contention. 

" be they men of any worth or no ? " 274. quaint] clever, skilful. See 

See next scene, 1. 10, where the ex- Part I. iv, i. 102. 

pression here occurs again, in both 277. sort of tinkers] See 11. i. 166 

texts. (note) ; and Richard JI. iv. i. 247. 



116 THE SECOND PART OF [act n, 

Commons. [ Within?^ An answer from the king, or we will all 

break in ! 
King. Go, Salisbury, and tell them all from me, 

I thank them for their tender loving care ; 280 

And had I not been cited so by them, 

Yet did I purpose as they do entreat ; 

For sure, my thoughts do hourly prophesy 

Mischance unto my state by Suffolk's means : 

And therefore, by His majesty I swear, 285 

Whose far unworthy deputy I am, 

He shall not breathe infection in this air 

But three days longer, on the pain of death. 

\Exit Salisbury. 
Queen. O Henry ! let me plead for gentle Suffolk. 
King. Ungentle queen, to call him gentle Suffolk ! 290 

No more, I say ; if thou dost plead for him 

Thou wilt but add increase unto my wrath. 

Had I but said, I would have kept my word, 

But when I swear, it is irrevocable. 

If after three days' space thou here be'st found 295 

On any ground that I am ruler of. 

The world shall not be ransom for thy life. 

Come, Warwick, come, good Warwick, go with me ; 

I have great matters to impart to thee. 

\Exeunt all but Queen and Stiffolk. 

278. Commons. An answer . . . break hi] (130, 131. Stage-direction) The 
Commons cries, an answere from the King, my Lord of Salsbury. 279-288. 
King. Good . . . death] 131-136. King. Good Salsbury go backe againe to them. 
Tell them we thartke them all for their toning care, And had I not bene cited thus 
by their tneancs, My selfe had done it. Therefore here I sweare, If Suffolke be 
found to breathe in any place, Where I hauc rule, but three daies more, he dies. 
Exet Salisbury. 289. Queen. O Henry . . . Suffolk] 137. Queen. Oh Henry, 
retcerse the doome of gentle Suffolkes banishment. 290-292. King. Ungentle 
. . . Suffolk I No . . . ivrath] 138, 139. King. Vtigentle . . . Suffolke, Speake 
not for him, for in England he shall not rest. 293, 294. Had I . . . But 
when I . . , irrevocable] 140. If I say, I may relent, but if I . . . erreuocable. 
295-297. // after . . . thy life] 135-136. (See King's last speech). 298, 299. 
Come, Warwick . . . go . . . I have . . . thee]i^i, 142. Come good Warwicke 
and go thou in . , . For I have . , . thee. 

281. cited] urged, incited. See in 3 Henry VI. 11. v. 90 (Quarto read- 

3 Henry VI. 11. i. 34, and Two Gentlemen ing). 

of Verona, 11. iv. 85. 295. three days' space] Compare 

286. deputy] See Richard II. i. ii. "three years' space" (Love's Labour's 
38, III. ii. 57, and iv. i. 126. Lost, i. i. 52 and 151). Peele has it 

287. breathe infection in] breathe in- earlier in Sir Clyomon (Dyce, 524, a) : 
fection into, contaminate. For Suffolk's " To see if that in three hours' space 
banishment and subsequent fate, see no champion will come in." Probably 
below, IV. i. 86 (note). much older. See Peele again, Speeches 

294. irrevocable] Note the much at Theobald's (577, a), 1591 : — 

solemner oath, though also called " I am a hermit that this ten years' 

" irrevocable," here, than in the Conten- space 

Hon. The misprint " erreuocable " here Have led a solitary and retired 

recalls the " ironious " for " erroneous " life." 



sc. II] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 117 

Queen. Mischance and sorrow go along with you ! 300 

Heart's discontent and sour affliction 

Be playfellows to keep you company ! 

There 's two of you ; the devil make a third ! 

And threefold vengeance tend upon your steps ! 
Suf. Cease, gentle queen, these execrations, 305 

And let thy Suffolk take his heavy leave. 
Queen. Fie, coward woman and soft-hearted wretch ! 

Hast thou not spirit to curse thine enemy ? 
Suf. A plague upon them ! wherefore should I curse them ? 

Would curses kill, as doth the mandrake's groan, 310 

I would invent as bitter-searching terms, 

As curst, as harsh and horrible to hear, 

Delivered strongly through my fixed teeth, 

With full as many signs of deadly hate. 

As lean-faced Envy in her loathsome cave. 315 

My tongue should stumble in mine earnest words ; 

Mine eyes should sparkle like the beaten flint ; 

My hair be fixed on end, as one distract ; 

300-302. Queen. Mischance . . . company I] 143. Queen. Hell fire and ven- 
geance go along with you. 303. a third] 144. the third. 304-306. And 
therefore . . , Suf. Cease . . . leave] omitted Q. 307, 308. Queen. Fie . . . 
enemy ?] 145. (to last speech). Fie womanish man, canst thou not curse thine 
enemies? 309-328. Suf. A plague . . . would . . . doth . . . groan . . . as 
bitter searching, As curst . . . to hear (line omitted) Delivered . . . full as . . . 
lean fac'd . . . distract ; Ay . . . even now . . . that they taste . . . Their 
chief est . . . basilisks (line omitted) Their softest . . . as the serpents . . . con- 
cert . . . hell] 146-163. Suffolkc. A plague . . , could . . . do . . . groans . . . 
as many bitter . . . Deliucred . . . twise as . . . leaue fast . . . distraught 

300. Mischance and sorrow] It was sins, as in Marlowe's Faustus, and in 

a pity to alter the forcible words of Spenser's Faerie Queene, i. iv. And in 

the queen {Contention) to this tame Whitney's Emblems (1586) " lean " is, 

line. as elsewhere, one of her descriptive 

309. wherefore should I curse] Peele terms. But the cave points to Gold- 
gives us a specimen cursing speech, ing's Ovid, ii. 950-980 : — 

"where I may curse my fill," in the "She goes me straight to Envies 

Battle of Alcazar, but there is only a house, a foule and irksome 

general parallel. He deals more in cave 

astrology (Act v.). But see Act i.. Replete with blacke and lothly 

quoted below, 1. 323. Spenser's filth . . . 

DapJinaida atTords a parallel, but There saw she Envie . . . 

devoid of gall. See Selimus (Grosart, Hir bodie leane as any Rake." 

xiv. 261) and Locrine, iii. vi. See also Mucedonus ; Nichols' Pro- 

310. mandrake's groan] See Romeo gresses of Queen Elizabeth, iii. 405 ; 
and jfuliet, iv. iii. 47 (Arden edition, Hazlitt's Dodsley, ix. 41 ; and Pro- 
Dowden's note) ; and see Othello, iii. logue to Jonson's Poetaster. See note 
iii. 331 (Arden edition, note) ; and at " pale-faced," above, iii. i. 335. 
commentators' notes (Johnson, Reed, 316. tongue should sttimble] Compare 
Steevens) in Steevens' Shakespeare. Love's Labour's Lost, 11. i. 239. 

See Nares. 318. distract] mad, distraught, dis- 

313. fixed teeth] clenched teeth. traded. Compare Spanish Tragedy, 

315. lean-fcued Envy] Envy is often in. xii. 89 : "Distract, and in a manner 

depicted as one of the seven deadly lunatick." Often later in Shakespeare. 



118 THE SECOND PART OF [act m 

Ay, every joint should seem to curse and ban : 

And even now my burdened heart would break 320 

Should I not curse them. Poison be their drink ! 

Gall, worse than gall, the daintiest that they taste ! 

Their sweetest shade a grove of cypress trees ! 

Their chief est prospect murdering basilisks ! 

Their softest touch as smart as lizards' stings ! 325 

Their music frightful as the serpent's hiss. 

And boding screech-owls make the concert full ! 

All the foul terrors in dark-seated hell — 
Queen. Enough, sweet Suffolk; thou tormentest thyself; 

And these dread curses, like the sun 'gainst glass, 330 

Or like an overcharged gun, recoil 

And turn the force of them upon thyself. 
Suf. You bade me ban, and will you bid me leave ? 

Now, by the ground that I am banished from, 

Well could I curse away a winter's night, 335 

Though standing naked on a mountain top, 

Where biting cold would never let grass grow, 

And think it but a minute spent in sport. 
Queen. O ! let me entreat thee, cease. Give me thy hand, 

That I may dew it with my mournful tears ; 340 

And . . . now me-thinks . . . thing they taste . . . Their softest . , . like the 
serpents . . . consort . . . hell. 329. Queen. Enough . . . thyself] 164. Queen. 
Inough . . . torments thy sclfe. 330-332. And these . . . upon thysclj] omitted Q. 
333-338. Suf. You bade . . . leave? . . . the ground . . . though standing 
. . . sport] 165-170. Suf. You bad . . . sease ? . . . this ground . . . And stand- 
ing . . . sport. 339. Queen. 01... cease] 171. Queen. No more. 339(J)- 
342. Give me . . . momiments] omitted Q. 

323. grove of cypress trees] Compare And wound the earth with anguish 
Peele, Battle of Alcazar, Act i. Sc. of their stings ! " 

ii. : — {Alcazar, 11. iii., Dyce, 428, a). The 
"roll on, my chariot wheels, noun "hiss" is not elsewhere in Shake- 
Restless till I be safely set in shade speare. The structure of these lines 
Of some unhaunted place, some recalls Spenser {Colin Cloufs Come 
blasted grove Home Again, e.g.). Compare also 
Of deadly yew or dismal cypress Spenser's Faerie Queene earlier, i. ii. 9 : 
tree, " For her he hated as the hissing snake." 
Far from the light or comfort of 327. screech-owls] See i. iv. 18, 19, 
the sun, above, and note. And 3 Henry VI. 
There to curse heaven " v. vi. 45. 
(Dyce, 425, a, b). Peele would have 330. these dread curses] Margaret's 
had the night-raven and owl here curse at the beginning of Richard III. 
inevitably. becomes proverbial and prophetic in 

324. basilisks] See in. ii. 52. that play. 

325. lizards' stings] Occurs again in 331. gun, recoil] An earlier instance 
3 Henry VI. 11. ii. 138. Lizards have is in New Eng. Diet. : " See howe 
not stings. yonder gonne reculeth or ever she 

^zt. serpent's hiss] Compare Peele lowse" (Palgrave, 1530) ; the next being 

again : — over a century later. 

" Adders and serpettts hiss at my 333. leave] cease, leave off. 

disgrace, 340. dew it with . . . tears] Com- 



sc. II] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 119 

Nor let the rain of heaven wet this place, 
To wash away my woeful monuments. 

! could this kiss be printed in thy hand, 
That thou might'st think upon these by the seal, 
Through whom a thousand sighs are breathed for thee. 345 
So, get thee gone, that I may know my grief ; 

'Tis but surmised whiles thou art standing by, 
As one that surfeits thinking on a want. 

1 will repeal thee, or, be well assured, 

Adventure to be banished myself; 350 

And banished I am, if but from thee. 
Go ; speak not to me ; even now be gone. 
O ! go not yet. Even thus two friends condemned 
Embrace and kiss and take ten thousand leaves. 
Loather a hundred times to part than die. 355 

Yet now farewell ; and farewell life with thee. 
Suf. Thus is poor Suffolk ten times banished, 

Once by the king, and three times thrice by thee. 

343-347. O could this . . . standing by] 176-179. Oh let this . . . when thou 
seest it, thou maist thinke on me. Away, I say, that . . . feele my griefe For it 
is nothing whilst thou standest here. 348. As one . . . want] omitted Q. 
349. 350. / will . . . Adventure . . . myself] 174, 175. And long thou shall not 
state, but He haue thee repelde, Or venture . . . myself. 351-356. And banished 
. . . life with thee] omitted Q. 357, 35S. Stif. Thus . . . and three . . , thee] 
180, 181. Suf. Thus . . . but three . . . thee. 

pare "bedew King Henry's hearse," Richard III. i. iii. 116: " I dare adven- 

1 Henry VI. i. i. 104. The expression ttire to be sent to the Tower." And 

here was affected by Kyd : — Peele's Jack Straw: " I have adventured 

" There laid him downe, and dewd To show your majesty my mind herein " 

him with my teares, (Hazhtt's Dodsley, v. 392). 

And sighed and sorrowed " 354. ten thousand] See above, 1. 218. 

(Spanish Tragedy, i. iv. 36). And Compare Tamburlaine, Part I. i. i. : 

Cornelia, iii. i. 12 : " dewes hym with " Theridamas, farewell te7i thousand 

her teares " ; and again, v. i. 420 : " dewe times." 

your selves with springtides of your 357. ten times] See below, iv. vii. 26. 
teares." Not in Q. And in Marlowe, Feele often has this " ten times treble 
Tamburlaine, Part II. iv. ii. : — thanks" {David and Bethsabe (479, b)) : 
" this earth, dew'd with thy " t en-time s-trehle happy men " (Fare- 
brinish tears, well to the Generals (550, b)). 
Affordes no herbs whose taste may 358. three times thrice] Occurs several 
poison thee." times, as in Lovers Laborer's Lost, v. 
Marlowe is probably earliest, but there ii. 486, 491 ; Merchant of Venice, i. iii. 
is little or no parallelism between those 161. It is here, however, a poetical 
two famous plays. expression first, arithmetical afterwards. 
343, 344. kiss . . . seal] A frequent No doubt founded on the lucky number 
expression in Shakespeare ; see " seals nine, and taken from the classics, 
of love," Measure for Measure, iv. i. 6, especially Golding's Ovid; followed so 
and note, Arden edition, p. 92. See often by Peele, Marlowe and Shake- 
Midsummer Night's Dream, iii. ii. speare : "people which by dyving i/zrjce 
144; Taming of the Shrew, iii. ii. three tymes in Triton lake Become all 
125; Romeo and jfuliet, v. iii. 114, fethred" (bk. xv. 11. 393, 394); and 
etc. " the space of thryce three nyghts they 
350. Adventure to be] Compare counted it a sin " (x. 497) ; " thryce 



120 THE SECOND PART OF [act m. 

'Tis not the land I care for, wert thou thence ; 

A wilderness is populous enough, 360 

So Suffolk had thy heavenly company : 

For where thou art, there is the world itself, 

With every several pleasure in the world, 

And where thou art not, desolation. 

I can no more : live thou to joy thy life ; 365 

Myself no joy in nought but that thou livest. 

Enter Vaux. 

Queen. Whither goes Vaux so fast ? what news, I prithee ? 

Vaux. To signify unto his majesty 

That Cardinal Beaufort is at point of death ; 

For suddenly a grievous sickness took him, 370 

That makes him gasp and stare and catch the air, 

Blaspheming God, and cursing men on earth. 

Sometime he talks as if Duke Humphrey's ghost 

Were by his side ; sometime he calls the king, 

And whispers to his pillow, as to him, 375 

The secrets of his overcharged soul : 

And I am sent to tell his majesty 

That even now he cries aloud for him. 

Queen. Go, tell this heavy message to the king. {Exit Vaux. 

359-366. Tis not the . . . thou livest^ omitted Q. 367. Queen. Whither 
. . .prithee?'] 182. Enter Vaivse. Quecne. How now, whither goes Vawse so 
fast? 368, 369. Vaux. To signify . . . death] 183, 184. Vawse. To signifie 
. . . death. 370-372. For suddenly . . . on earth] omitted Q. 373-376. 
Sometime he . . . soul] 185-188. Sometimes he raues and cries as he were madde, 
Sometimes he cals upon Duke Humphries Ghost, And whispers to his pillow as to 
him. And sometime he calks to speake vnto the King. 377, 378. And . . . cries 
. . . him] 189, 190. And I am going to certific vnto his grace . . . cald aloude 
for him. 379. Queen. Go . . . king] 191. Queen. Go then good Vawse and 
certijie the King. Exet Vawse. 

nyne tymes with witching mouth " And thrise three times did fast from 

(xiv. 65). Golding has also " twyce five any bitt " 

dayes and twyce five nyghts togither " (i. iii. 13, 14); and Shepheard's Calen- 

(xi. 107) ; " Twice six wee were the dar (Sept.) : " Thryse three Moones 

sonnes of Nele . . . Twice six of us " bene fully spent." And Faerie Qxieene, 

(xii. 613, 614) ; " Full twyce five yeares " 11. i. 53: "Cynthia . . . thryse three 

(xii. 643). Peele affords " Well near tymes had fild her crooked homes." 
twice-twenty squires " (PoZj^jwnra (569, 365. / can no more] See note, 1. 120 

b)). But for arithmetical poetry Shake- above. 

speare bears the prize. Parallel with 371. gasp and stare] Compare Gold- 

these "twice twenty" and "twice ten" ing's Ovid, vii. 1113-1115 : — 
thousands, noted above. Spenser must " as long as that she coud 

also be recalled : — See ought, she stared in my face, 

" Nine hundred Pater nosters every and gasping still on me, 

day, Even in my mouth she breathed 

And thrise nine hundred Aves she forth hir wretched ghost " 

was wont to say . . . (Procris). For the source of this ac- 

Thrise every week in ashes shee did count of the cardinal's death-bed, see 

sitt . . . next scene. 



sc. II] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 121 

Ay me ! what is this world ! what news are these ! 380 
But wherefore grieve I at an hour's poor loss, 
Omitting Suffolk's exile, my soul's treasure ? 
Why only, Suffolk, mourn I not for thee, 
And with the southern clouds contend in tears, 
Theirs for the earth's increase, mine for my sorrows? 385 
Now get thee hence : the king, thou know'st, is coming ; 
If thou be found by me thou art but dead. 
Suf. If I depart from thee I cannot live ; 

And in thy sight to die, what were it else 

But like a pleasant slumber in thy lap ? 39O 

Here could I breathe my soul into the air. 

As mild and gentle as the cradle babe 

Dying with mother's dug between its lips ; 

Where, from thy sight, I should be raging mad, 

And cry out for thee to close up mine eyes, 395 

To have thee with thy lips to stop my mouth : 

So should'st thou either turn my flying soul, 

380-387. Ay mel . . . but dead] 192-196. Oh what is worldly pompe, all 
men must die. And woe am I for Bewfords heaide ende But why mourne I for 
him, whilst thou art here? Sweete Suffolke hie thee hence to France, For if the 
King do come, thou sure must die. 388, 389. If I depart . . . to die] 197. And 
^f I go I cannot line : but here to die. 389-391. What were it . . . could I 
. . . air] 19S-200. What were it . . . could I, could I . . . aire. 392. As mild 
. . . cradle babe] 201. As milde . . . new borne babe. 393. Dying . . . its] 
202. That dies . . . his. 394, 395. Where . . . And cry out . . . close up] 203, 

204. Where . . . And call . . . close. 396,397. To have thee . . . flying soul] 

205. Or with thy lips to stop my dying soule. 

380. what is this world!] what a "All is but lost, that living we 

world is this ! bestow, 

384. with the southern clouds contend If not well ended at our dying 
in tears] A good example of the ex- day," 

travagant overstretching of a figure of 391. Here could I breathe my soul] 
speech, common in Shakespeare's early See quotation at " gasp," 1. 371. 
plays, from the effect of preceding and 392. cradle babe] "Cradle" used ad- 
contemporary writers who held the jectively. Compare Golding's Ovid, ix. 
stage and public taste. Nevertheless 79, 80 : — 

this parting scene is full of beauty. " It is my cradle ga.me 

Compare Golding's Ovid : " Southerne To vanquish Snakes, O Acheloy." 

winde . . . with watry wings," and 394. raging mad] In Vertus and 

"The clowdysowth" (pp. 27 and 234, Adonis, 1151. See "raging wood," 

Moring) ; and Spenser's "watry South- also Part I. iv. vii. 35. I was in hopes 

winde " [Faerie Queenc, in. iv. 13). "raging mad" had escaped the hyphen 

385. earth's increase] See Tempest, iv. everywhere, but I see Schmidt has 
i. no; and "land's mcvez.s<t," Richard nailed it. " Raging wood" never had a 
///. V. v. 38. Both frequent in the Bible chance. It is time to lay an embargo 
(increase of the earth . . . of the land), on these hyphens. Compare (Peele's) 

387. thou art but dead] Compare Jack Straw (Hazlitt's Dodsley, v. 398) : 

Genesis xx. 3 : " Behold thou art but " If clemency may win their raging 

a dead man for the woman which thou minds." 

hast taken, for she is a man's wife." 395. close up mine eyes] See below, 

And Faerie Queene, i. x. 41 : — iii. iii. 32. 



122 



THE SECOND PART OF 



[act III. 



Or I should breathe it so into thy body, 

And then it lived in sweet Elysium. 

To die by thee were but to die in jest ; 400 

From thee to die were torture more than death. 

! let me stay, befall what may befall. 
Queen. Away ! though parting be a fretful corrosive. 

It is applied to a deathful wound. 

To France, sweet Suffolk : let me hear from thee ; 405 

For wheresoe'er thou art in this world's globe, 

1 '11 have an Iris that shall find thee out. 
Suf. I go. 

Queen. And take my heart with thee. 

Suf. A jewel, locked into the woefull'st cask 

That ever did contain a thing of worth. 410 

Even as a splitted bark so sunder we : 

This way fall I to death. 
Queen. This way for me. 

\_Exeunt severally. 



398-402. Ov I should . . . Elysium. To die by thee . . . torture . . . befall] 
206-210. That I might . . . Elyziam, By thee to die, . . . torment . . . befall. 
403, 404. Queen. Away I . . . wound] omitted Q. 211-213. Queen. Oh 
mightest thou staie with safetie of thy life, Then shouldest thou staie, 
but heavens deny it, And therefore go, but hope ere long to be repelde. 
405-407. To France . . . globe . . . Iris . . . out] 171-173. Sweete Suffolke 
hie thee hence to France, Or Hue where thou wilt within this worldes 
globe . . . Irish . . . out. 408. Suf. I go . . . thee] 214, 215. Suff. I 

go . . . thee. She kisseth him. 409-412. A jewel . . . did contain . . . Even 
. . . for me.] 216-221. A jewell . . . yet containde . . . Thus . . . me. Exet 
Suffolke (at 220). Exet Queene (at 221, two half-lines). 



402. befall what may befall] Again 
in Love's Labour 's Lost, v. ii. 880, and 
in Titus Andronicus, v. i. 57. 

403. fretful] This is given as earliest 
in New Eng. Diet. It occurs in 
Kyd's Cornelia (twice). And in Ardeji 
of Feversham. 

403. corrosive] Variously spelt cor- 
sey, corsie, corsive, corrosive. Not 
unfrequent a little earlier than Shake- 
speare's time. See note at 1 Henry VI. 
III. iii. 3 ; the only other example in 
his plays. Golding uses the word 
similarly twice at least : " It was a 
corsie to hir heart hir hateful teares 
to keepe " (ii. 997 and loio) ; and: — 
" did shrowde in secret hart 
An inward corsie comfortlesse " 
(v. 531, 532). And in Hall's Chronicle 
(XXXVIII Yere) of this reign : " Which 
was a great displeasure to ye Kyng, 



& a more corasey (" corrasey " in Graf- 
ton) to the quene" (1548). These 
are earlier, and better examples than 
New Eng. Diet. 

404. deathful] See Spanish Tragedy, 
II. V. 22 : " amidst these darke and 
deathfull shades " (Hieronimo's fa- 
mous speech, " What outcries pluck 
me "). 

407. Iris] Juno's messenger and the 
goddess of the rainbow. Edward II. 
sends his messenger " As fast as Iris " 
for his sweetheart Gaveston in Mar- 
lowe's play (192, b). See All 'sW ell that 
End's Well, i. iii. 158, and Lucrece, 
1586. 

409. cask] casket. A mintage of 
Shakespeare's own. 

411. splitted] See note at "splitting 
rock," III. ii. 97. 



sc. Ill ] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 123 

SCENE III. —A bedchamber. 

Enter the KING, SALISBURY, WARWICK, to the Cardinalin bed. 

King. How fares my lord ? speak, Beaufort, to thy sovereign. 
Car. If thou be'st death, I '11 give thee England's treasure, 

Enough to purchase such another island, 

So thou wilt let me live, and feel no pain. 
King. Ah, what a sign it is of evil life 5 

Where death's approach is seen so terrible ! 
War. Beaufort, it is thy sovereign speaks to thee. 
Car. Bring me unto my trial when you will. 

Died he not in his bed ? where should he die ? 

Can I make men live whe'r they will or no? 10 

O, torture me no more ! I will confess. 

Alive again ? then show me where he is : 

I '11 give a thousand pound to look upon him. 

He hath no eyes, the dust hath blinded them. 

Comb down his hair ; look ! look ! it stands upright, 1 5 

Enter the King . . .] Enter King and Salsbury, and then the Curtains be 
drawne, and the Cardinall is discoiiered in his bed, rauing and staring as if he 
were mad de. i. King. Hoiv fares . . . sovereign'] omitted Q. 2-4. If thou 
. . . no pain] 1-2. Oh death, if thou will let me line but one whole yeare, lie 
giue thee as much gold as will purchase such another Hand. 5, 6. King. Ah 
what . . . terrible !] 3, 4. King. Oh, see my Lord of Salsbury, how he is troubled, 
Lord Cardinall, remember Christ must saue thy soule. 7. War. Beaufort . . . 
thee] omitted Q. 8. Car. Bring . . . will] omitted Q. 9, 10. Died . . . 
bed? where . . . die? Can . . . no?] 5-7. Car. Why died . . . bed? What 
would you haue me do then? Can . . . no? 11-13. O, torture . . . upon him] 
omitted Q. i4-i7' He hath no eyes . . . some drink] 9-1 1. Oh see where Duke 
Humphreys ghoast doth stand, And stares me in the face. Looke, looke, coame 
downe his haire. So now hees gone againe ; Oh, oh, oh. 

2. // thou be'st death] Grafton (and so I am deceyued: praiyng you all to 

Hall) give the following account (The pray for me" (Grafton, 631). "The 

XXVJ Yere) : " Doctor John Baker his fond and folishe talke of the bishop 

priuie counsaylor and his Chapelyne, of Winchester." The chronicler gives 

wrote, that he liyng on his death bed, here also a terrible character of this 

sayd these wordes. Why should I die, ungodly and covetous prelate. The 

hauyng so much ryches; if the whole expression "triple crowne" in this pas- 

realme would saue my lyfe, I am able sage (Hall, 1548) has occurred already 

either by poUicie to get it, or by riches in the play (i. iii. 62). See note there, 

to bie it. Fye, will not death be hyred, 10. will or no ?] See last scene, 1. 

nor will money doe nothyng? When 265. Malone parallels these lines 

my Nephewe of Bedforde died I thought with King jfohti, iv. ii. 91, 92. 

myselfe halfe up the wheele, but when 13. I'll give a thousand pound] I '11 

I sawe mine other nephew of Gloucester give anything. See Merry Wives of 

disceased, then I thought myselfe able Windsor, iii. iii. 131 ; and 1 Henry IV. 

to be equall with kings, & so thought 11. iv. 162. And Peele, Sir Clyomon 

to encrease my treasure, in hope to (503, b) : " Nay, I '11 not come in his 

haue worne a triple Crowne. But I sight, if you would give me a thousand 

see nowe the worlde fayleth me, and pounds." 



124 



THE SECOND PART OF 



[act III 



Like lime-twigs set to catch my winged soul. 
Give me some drink ; and bid the apothecary- 
Bring the strong poison that I bought of him. 

King. O thou eternal Mover of the heavens ! 

Look with a gentle eye upon this wretch ; 20 

O ! beat away the busy meddling fiend 
That lays strong siege unto this wretch's soul, 
And from his bosom purge this black despair. 

War. See how the pangs of death do make him grin ! 

Sal. Disturb him not ; let him pass peaceably. 25 

King. Peace to his soul ! if God's good pleasure be. 
Lord cardinal, if thou think'st on heaven's bliss, 
Hold up thy hand, make signal of thy hope. 
He dies, and makes no sign. O God, forgive him ! 

War. So bad a death argues a monstrous life. 30 

i7(§), 18. and hid . . . of him] 8. Sirra, go fetch me the strong poison which 
the Pothicary sent me. 19-23. King. O thou . . . despair] omitted Q. 24. 
War. See . . . do make him grin I] 12. Sal. See . . . doth gripe his heart. 
25. Sal. Disturb . . . peaceably] omitted Q. 26-29. Kirig, Peace . . . for- 

give him] 13-16. King. Lord Cardinall, if thou diest assured of heauenly blisse, 
Hold up thy hand and make some signe to vs. The Cardinal dies. Oh see he 
dies, and makes no signe at all, O God forgiuc his soule. 30. War. So . . . 



16. lime -twigs] Not elsewhere in 
Shakespeare, who always uses the 
verb " to lime," " lime a bush," etc. 
The phrase " set lime-twigs " has oc- 
curred already in the Contention (i. iii. 
87), where it is replaced by " limed a 
bush." See also 11. iv. 54. See Geld- 
ing's Ovid, XV. 528 : " Away with guyle- 
full feates : for fowles no lymetwiggs 
see ye set." 

ig. O thou eternal Mover of the 
heavens] Compare Selimus, 1. 1440 
(Temple edition) :— 

" But oh, thou Supreme Architect of 

all, 

First mover of those tenfold crystal 

orbs." 

See a similar " Primus Motor" address 

in The Jew of Malta, Act i. (Dyce, 150, 

a). And Sylvester's Du Bartas (Seventh 

Day), 1591 : " God (the first Mover) in 

his holy waies " (p. 149, ed. 1621). And 

Tamburlaine, Part I. iv. ii. (Dyce, 26, b). 

22. lays strong siege] Compare Spen- 
ser, Faerie Queenc, 11. xi. 5 : " That 
wicked band of villeins . . . lay strong 
siege about it (castle) far and wyde." 
See the allegorical sense in a passage 
quoted at " respite," 1 Henry VI. iv. i. 
170 (from Faerie Queene). 

24. pangs of death] So in Grafton's 
Continuation of Hardyng, p. 520 



(1543) : " strugglyng with the panges 
of deathe." 

24. make him grin I] "gripe his 
heart" of the Contention. Compare 
3 Henry VI. i. iv. 171 : " To see how 
inly sorrow gripes his soul." Compare 
Peele, David and Bethsabe {475, a) : — 

" traitors to his breast 
Winding about his heart with 
mortal gripes." 
Milton remembered this : " Death 
Grinned horrible a ghastly smile " 
{Paradise Lost, ii. 845). See King 
John, III. iv. 34. 

25. pass] die. See King Lear, iv. 
vi. 47, and v. iii. 313. Craig quotes 
from Soliman and Perseda (Hazlitt's 
Dodsley, v. 371) : " Trouble me not, 
but let me pass in peace " (Arden edi- 
tion of King Lear, p. 193). The ex- 
pression is not in the Contention, and 
the frequent parallelism of words and 
expressions in this play and King Lear 
has already been noticed. " Pass " in 
this sense is an early use (Chaucer, 
Squyere's Talc) revived. Frequent in 
early Bibles. 

28. signal] Compare Part I. 11. iv. 
121, 123: "In signal of my love to 
thee . . . Will I upon thy party wear 
this rose." Token. 

30. argues . . . life] Compare Part 



sc. 



III.] 



KING HENRY THE SIXTH 



125 



King. Forbear to judge, for we are sinners all. 
Close up his eyes, and draw the curtain close ; 
And let us all to meditation. 



{Exeunt. 



life] 17, 18. Salb. So bad an ende did nevey none behold, But as his death, so was 
his life in all. 31-33. King. Forbear . . . meditation] 19-21. King. Forbeare 
to itidge, good Salsbtiry forbeare, For God will iudge vs all Go take him hence, and 
see his funerals be performde. Exet omnes. 



I. V. iv. 15 (death of Joan). Peele 
has a similar use : — 

"this princely mind in thee 
Argues the height and honour of 
thy birth ! " 
(Battle of Alcazar, in. iv. (434, a)); 
and earlier (426, b), 11. ii. : — 

" These welcomes, worthy governor 
of Lisbon, 
Argue an honourable mind in 
thee." 

31. Forbear to judge] Compare "for- 
bear to murder me," below, iv. vii. 76 ; 
and '• forbear to fawn," 3 Henry VI. iv. 
i. 75. Also in Richard III. iv. iv. 118 : 
" forbear to sleep." Abstain from judg- 
ing ; but the construction with the in- 
finitive is not found in Shakespeare's 
better work. An archaism. Peele has 
it in David and Bethsabe (472, b) : 
" Why then do we forbear to give 
assault," etc. etc. The last line in Q 
is paralleled by the last line in Peele's 
Battle of Alcazar (440, b) : "So to 
perform the prince's funerals." 

32. Close up his eyes] See again 
Love's Labour 's Lost, v. ii. 825 ; and 
above, iii. ii. 395. In these passages 
the reference is to the actual closing 



of the eyelids after death ; but " to 
close one's eyes" meant to give death 
to. Without " up," see AlVs Well 
that Ends Well, v. iii. 118. In King 
John (v. vii. 51) it is "set mine eye." 
Compare Marlowe, Tamburlaine, Part 
I. V. i. :— 

"my heart with comfort dies. 
Since thy desired hand shall close 
mine eyes." 
And Edward II. v. : " Come Death and 
with thy fingers close my eyes" (213, 
b). See too Tancred and Gismrinda 
(Hazlitt's Dodsley, vii. 91) : " I kiss thy 
paled cheeks and close thine eyes " ; and 
the Spanish Tragedy (Hazlitt's Dodsley, 
V. 59). Usually, and used still, as a 
mark of extreme affection, as in Spenser, 
Daphnaida, 1. 511: "And when life 
parts, vouchsafe to close mine eye." 

33. meditation] religious contempla- 
tion ; prayer. An early use ; see New 
Eng. Diet. " Of God and goodnes 
was his meditation " {Faerie Queene, i. 
X. 46). And Gabriel Harvey, Pierces 
Supererogation (Grosart, ii. 184), 1589 : 
" Whiles their mindes are abstracted 
from worldly thoughts, to a high medi- 
tation." And in the Bible. 



126 



THE SECOND PART OF 



[act IV. 



ACT IV 



SCENE I. — The coast of Kent. 

Alarum. Fight at sea. Ordnance goes off. Enter a Captain, 
a Master, a Mastef^s-Mate, WALTER Whitmore, and 
others ; with them, SUFFOLK and others, prisoners. 

Cap. The gaudy, blabbing, and remorseful day- 
Is crept into the bosom of the sea, 
And now loud-howling wolves arouse the jades 

Alarum . . . ] Alarmes within, and the chambers be discharged, like as it were 
a fight at sea. And then enter the Captaine of the ship and the Maister, and the 
Maisters Mate, <&> the Duke of Stiffolke disguised, and others with him, and 
Water Whickmore. Q. 1-14. Cap. The gaudy . . . thy share^ 1-6. Cap. 

Bring forward these prisoners that scorn'd to yeeld, Vnlade their goods with speed 
and sincke their ship Here Maister, this prisoner I giiie to you This other, the 
Maisters Mate shall haue, And Water Whickmore, thoti shall haue this man, And 
let them paie their ransomes ere they passe. 



1-7. The gaudy . . . air] These 
obviously additional lines, inartistically 
joined to the scene by the word " there- 
fore " (1. 8) bear impress of Shakespeare's 
earliest Marlovian style, or rather 
Peeleian, but vastly more powerful 
and more musical. Peele has : " The 
gaudy Morn out of her golden sleep 
Awak'd " (Honour of the Garter (589, b)). 
Marlowe has " remorseful blood " in 
Tamburlaine, Part IL iv. i. (63, a). 

1. blabbing] telling the secrets of 
night. Compare " Revealing day" in 
Lucrece, 1086. "Remorseful" means full 
of sorrow and pity for the guilt of night 
which it reveals. 

2. crept into the bosom] Transferred 
here from the human sense. Compare 
1 Henry IV. i. iii. 266; and Greene's 
James the Fourth (Grosart, xiii. 221), 
1591 :— 

" Had I the mind as many Courtiers 

have. 

To creepe into your bosome for your 

coyne." 

But it is much older : " She speaks as 

she would creep into your bosom " (Hey- 

wood's Proverbs (edited by Sharman, p. 



40), 1546). It is Shakespeare's method 
often to use proverbs out of their wonted 
sense. 

3. jades] Abusive language to horses. 
Compare the " pampered jarffs of Asia " 
in 2 Henry IV. 11. iv. 178, wherein at a 
later date Shakespeare ridicules Mar- 
lowe's Tamburlaine style. But it is 
not generally known that Marlowe 
took the expression, though not the 
application, from Golding's Ovid 

(1567) ■■- 

" What ? is it I that did behold the 
pampred Jades of Thrace 
With Maungers full of flesh of 
men " 
(ix. 238, 239). Golding being a favourite 
of Shakespeare's, the sneer at Marlowe 
is mitigated. For the horses of the 
night, see again in Marlowe, Edward 
the Second (Dyce, 208, b) : — 

" Gallop apace, bright Phcebus, 
through the sky ; 
And, dusky Night, in rusty iron 
car . . . 

shorten the time " 
— a passage recalled by Shakespeare in 
Romeo and Juliet, iii. ii. The idea is 



sc. I] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 127 

That drag the tragic melancholy night ; 

Who with their drowsy, slow, and flagging wings 5 

Clip dead men's graves, and from their misty jaws 

Breathe foul contagious darkness in the air. 

Therefore bring forth the soldiers of our prize, 

For whilst our pinnace anchors in the Downs 

Here shall they make their ransom on the sand, lO 

Or with their blood stain this discoloured shore. 

Master, this prisoner freely give I thee ; 

And thou that art his mate make boot of this ; 

The other, Walter Whitmore, is thy share. 

First Gent. What is my ransom, master? let me know. 15 

Mast. A thousand crowns, or else lay down your head. 

Mate. And so much shall you give, or off goes yours. 

Cap. What ! think you much to pay two thousand crowns, 
And bear the name and port of gentlemen ? 
Cut both the villains' throats ! for die you shall : 20 

The lives of those which we have lost in fight 
Be counterpoised with such a petty sum ! 

15. First Gent. What . . . know] 2^. 2 Priso. But what shall our ransome be ? 
i6. Mast. A thousatid . . . head] 24. Mai. A hundreth pounds a piece, either 
pay that or die. 17. Mate. And . . . yours] omitted Q. 18-22. Cap. What 
. . . sum I] omitted Q. 

from Ovid's Amor. i. xiii. 40 : " Lente " This climate o'er-lowering with 

currite, noctis equi," quoted in Doctor black congealed clouds 

Faustus by Marlowe (Dyce, loi, a). That take their swelling from the 

In later plays (Cymbeline, Midsummer marish soil, 

Night's Dream) Shakespeare uses Fraught with infectious fogs and 

dragons, not horses, as the coursers misty damps." 

of the Night. See "flagging wings," A little farther on (393, b) Peele has: 

note. " Nor influence of contagious air should 

5. flagging] hanging, drooping, touch." 

Jonson uses it so in Chloridia : "Their 11. rfJsco/o?^r^(^] Used again of stained 

hair flagging as if they were wet " with blood several times [Henry V., 

(Seventh entry). The word is common King John and Romeo and Juliet). 

provincially, but not again in Shake- 13. make boot] Shakespeare has this 

speare. Spenser has "flaggy wings" phrase again in / Henry IV. 11. i. 91 

of the Dragon in Faerie Queene, i. xi. 10. (with a pun) ; in Henry V. i. ii. 194 ; 

6. Clip] "cleape" in Folio. Em- and in Antony and Cleopatra, iv. i. g. 
brace, fondle. Compare Golding's I have no earlier example. 

Ovid : " Venus . . . deeping Jove did 19. bear the name and port] Peele 

thus with him persuade " (xiv. 666, has this phrase in Sir Clyonion : 

667). The image is a beautiful one. " Bearing the name and port of knight, 

6. dead men's] A favourite expres- enchantments for to use " (Dyce, 501, 

sion, with various substantives, oc- b). Elsewhere he has : " Her port 

curring about twenty times in a dozen and grace " (Arraignment of Paris, 

plays. 352, b). " Port " was generally used so : 

6. misty] Only in Shakespeare's " eche of them kept a great estate and 

earliest work; he seems to have /or^' (Grafton, i. 339). Peele could not 

dropped it. It is in Lncrece, Venus have written this opening, but his writ- 

and Adonis, Titus Andronicus, and ings are remembered. The sinking of 

Romeo and Juliet. Peele uses it the captured ship is omitted from the 

earlier in Edward I. (390, b) : — Contention, as needless. 



128 THE SECOND PART OF [act iv. 

First Gent. I '11 give it, sir ; and therefore spare my life. 
Second Gent. And so will I, and write home for it straight 
Whit. I lost mine eye in laying the prize aboard, 25 

And therefore to revenge it shalt thou die ; \To Suffolk, 

And so should these if I might have my will. 
Cap. Be not so rash : take ransom ; let him live. 
Suf. Look on my George ; I am a gentleman. 

Rate me at what thou wilt, thou shalt be paid. 30 

Whit. And so am 1 ; my name is Walter Whitmore. 

How now ! why start'st thou ? what, doth death affright ? 
Suf. Thy name affrights me, in whose sound is death. 

A cunning man did calculate my birth. 

And told me that by water I should die: 35 

23. First Gent. IHl . . . life] 25. 2. Priso. Then saue our Hues, it shall be paid. 
24. Second Gent. And so . . . straight] omitted Q. 25-27. Whit. I lost . . . 
my will] 20-22. Water. I lost mine eye in boarding of the ship, And therefore ere 
I merchantlike sell blood for gold, Then cast me headlong downe into the sea. 
28. Cap. Be not . . . live] omitted Q. 29, 30. Suf. Look on . . . be paid] 18, 
19. Suf. I am a Gentleman looke on my Ring, Ransome me at what thou wilt, it 
shalbe paid. 31. Whit, my name is Walter Whitmore] see line 5 Q. 32. 
How now . . . affright?] 7-9. Suffolke. Water I He starteth. Water. How now, 
what doest feare me ? Thou shalt haue better cause anon. 33. Suf. Thy . . . 
me] 10. It is thy . . . me. 33. in . . . death] 10. not thy selfe. 34, 35. A 
. . . my birth And told . . . die] 11, 12. I do remember well, a cunning Wyssard 
told . . . die. 

25. laying the prize aboard] Coming Scot calls this breed of astrologers. Very 

to close quarters, or tackling with her. common in Jonson. 

Craig refers to Smith's Accidence 34. calculate] The earliest example in 

(Arber's Captain Smith, p. 797) for the New Eng. Diet, of this use, as in casting 

expression. Ben Jonson uses it trans- or calculating a horoscope. Dr. Dee 

ferredly several times : " Now were a fine seems to have used the word first in any 

time for thee, Winwife, to lay aboard sense. Jonson puts it " cast nativities" 

Xhy \\'\Ao\v" {Bartholomew Fair, 111. I.); {Devil is an Ass, iv. i.). But compare 

and again in New Inn, 11. ii. To Greene's Mamillia (Grosart, ii. 35) : 

board. " Whether it be that Mercuric is Lord 

29. George] a jewelled figure of St. of their birth, or some other peeuish 

George, one of the insignia of the planet predominant in the calculation 

Order. See again Richard III. iv. iv. of their nativitie, I know not." Hawes 

366-369; and foresaw " calculate " : — 

" Edward . . . the Third . . . began, " on his boke he began to calke 

. . . How the Sonne entred was in 

The Order of Saint George . . . GemjTie " 

The Order of the Garter so y-clept" {Pastitne of Pleasure (p. 77, Percy 

{Peele, Hotwjir of the Garter (Dyce, 5S6, reprint), 1509). 

a)). Amongst Queen Elizabeth's New 35. by water I should die] See above, 

Years Gifts in Nichols' Progresses (1575- i. iv. 68-70 and 33. Readers of Dumas 

1576) is a " coUer of the Order of St. will remember the terrible tale of The 

George with a 0^0;-^^ hanging at it." Regent's Daughter in which Pontealec 

34. cjinning man] a wise man or is foretold by a witch that he shall die 

wizard. Grafton has " a Saxon, feyning by the sea. Therefore he does not fear 

himselfe a Briteyne, and a cunning man execution. But the executioner's name 

in Physick" (i. 82). Here he is a proves to be "La mer," and he is be- 

" figure-caster or cozening witch " as headed. 



sc. I] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 129 

Yet let not this make thee be bloody-minded ; 

Thy name is Gualtier, being rightly sounded. 
W/ii^. Gualtier or Walter, which it is, I care not. 

Never yet did base dishonour blur our name 

But with our sword we wiped away the blot : 40 

Therefore, when merchant-like I sell revenge, 

Broke be my sword, my arms torn and defaced, 

And I proclaimed a coward through the world ! 
Suf. Stay, Whitmore ; for thy prisoner is a prince, 

The Duke of Suffolk, William de la Pole. 45 

WAit. The Duke of Suffolk muffled up in rags ! 
Suf. Ay, but these rags are no part of the duke : 

[Jove sometime went disguised, and why not I ?] 
Cap. But Jove was never slain, as thou shalt be. 
Suf. Obscure and lowly swain, King Henry's blood, 50 

The honourable blood of Lancaster, 

Must not be shed by such a jaded groom. 

Hast thou not kissed thy hand and held my stirrup ? 

Bare-headed plodded by my foot-cloth mule, 

36, 37. Yet . . . this . . . name . . . sounded] 13-15. Yet . . . that . . . {he 
omitted) name being rightly sounded. Is Gualter, not Water. 38. Gualtier 
. . . care not] 16, 17. Water. Gualter or Water, als one to me, I am the man 
must bring thee to thy death. 39, 40. Never . . . blot] omitted Q. 41- 

43. Therefore . . . world!] see 21, 22 Q. above. 44, 45. Suf. Stay, Whit- 

more for thy . . . Pole] 26-29. Water. Come sirrha, thy life shall be the ransome 
I will have. Stiff. Staie villaine, thy . . . Poull. 46. Whit, muffled up] 30. 
Cap. folded up. 47, 48. Suf. Ay . . . not I ?] 31, 32. Suf. I sir . . . not I ? 
(48. Pope's accepted necessary insertion from Q.) 49. Cap. But] 33. Cap. I 
but. 50-52. Suf. Obscure . . . swain. King . . . Lancaster, Must . . . jaded 
groom] 34-36. Suf. Base ladie groom. King . . . Lancaster, ca^mot . . . lowly 
swaine. 53-55. Hast thou . . . Bare-headed . . . shook my head] 57-59. Hast 
not thou . . . And barehead . . . smilde on thee? 

36. ft/ooiiy-wMjrffif] See again Part III. herds weed" (Tamburlaine, Part I. i. 

II. vi. 33; but not later. This word is ii. (12, a)). 

in Contention; as is also "merchant- 51. The honourable blood of Lan- 
like " (1. 41), not in Shakespeare again, caster] Suffolk had none of this blood in 
Peele has " merchant-wise " in Sir his veins, according to Blakeway. But 
Clyomon. " Bloody-minded cruell men " Hall says that Suffolk assumed a good 
occurs in Kyd's Cornelia, iv. ii. 203 ancestry. " A natural ebullition of his 
(Boas). vanity'' (Halliwell). 

42. my arms torn and defaced] Com- 52. jarf^-^f] basely-bred, ignoble. Com- 
pare Richard II. in. i. 24, and see Tp3iTe Henry VIII. in. n.2So, and Antony 
Malone's notes to the passage. Com- and Cleopatra, in. i. 34. Altered from 
pare Faerie Queette, 11. xii. 80. And the odd ''jady " of Contention. 
compare jfack Straw {382) :— 54. foot-cloth] long ornamental hous- 
" We will have all the rich men ings or hangings for horses used by 
displaced noblemen, judges and others, especially 
And all the bravery of them de- in state processions. As an attribute of 
faced." grandeur and dignity, the term was 

48. yove . . . /] Pope inserted this common. See below, iv. vii. 51, and 

hne from the Quarto Contention, to Richard III. in. iv. 86. See note to 

complete the sense. Marlowe has the latter play, and also Nares for a good 

"jfove sometime masked in a shep- note. And Harington's Mei. 0/ /Ija;^ ; 

9 



130 THE SECOND PART OF [act iv. 

And thought thee happy when I shook my head ? 55 

How often hast thou waited at my cup, 

Fed from my trencher, kneeled down at the board, 

When I have feasted with Queen Margaret ? 

Remember it and let it make thee crest-fall'n ; 

Ay, and allay this thy abortive pride. 60 

How in our voiding lobby hast thou stood 

And duly waited for my coming forth ? 

This hand of mine hath writ in thy behalf, 

And therefore shall it charm thy riotous tongue. 
Whit. Speak, captain, shall I stab the forlorn swain ? 65 

Cap. First let my words stab him, as he hath me. 
Suf. Base slave, thy words are blunt, and so art thou. 
Cap. Convey him hence, and on our long-boat's side 

Strike off his head. 
Suf. Thou dar'st not for thy own. 

Cap. [Yes, Pole. 
Suf. Pole !] 

Cap. Pool ! Sir Pool ! lord ! 70 

56. How often . . . cup~\ 5. Suffolke. Has not thou waited at my Trencher. 
57, 58. Fed from . . . When I . . . Margaret] 56. When we . . . Margaret. 
59-62. Remember . . . forth .■'] omitted Q. 63, 64. This . . . tongue] 60, 61. 
This hand hath writ in thy defence, Then shall I charme thee, hold thy lavish 
tongue. 65-67. Whit. Speak ... 50 art thou] omitted Q. 68-70. Cap. 

Convey . . . Suf. Pole I] 39-43. Cap. Go Water take him hence (half-line) And on 
. . . Chop off . . . Suffolke Poull. 70-73. Cap. Pool ! . . . yawning mouth] 
Cap. I Poull, puddle, kennell, sinke and durt, He stop that yawning mouth of thine. 

An Apology (reprint, p. 16), 1596 : " I " Those carelesse limbes of thyne " (ix. 

would they could ride on afootcloth and 287) ; and " The mothers heart of 

had a house and a tax of their own." hirs " (vi. 794). Peele has this form 

59. crest-fall'n] Occurs again in often, but I think it is a characteristic 
Richard II. and in Merry Wives of with Shakespeare. 

Windsor, iv. v. 103. See note to the 64. charm thy . . . tongue] Occurs 

latter passage, Arden edition, p. 193. several times in Shakespeare. See Part 

The term was applied to a hawk. " A III. v. v. 31 ; and Othello, v. ii. 183, 

meagre crestfaln hawk" is in Howell's and note, Arden edition. For "lavish 

Vocabulary, Sect. iv. (1659). tongue " here, in Q, see Part I. 11. 

60. abortive] fruitless, unsuccessful, v. 47. It is from Golding's Ovid. 
A peculiar use, instanced later in New " Charm thy tongue " is not in Q. 
£h^. Df'c^, but earliest here. 70. Yes, Pole . . . Pole I] Inserted 

61. voiding lobby] ante-room, wait- from Q by Capell. For the Pool quibble, 
ing-room. " Voiding-knife" occurs in compare "suffocate," above, i. i. 121, 
Brewer's Lingua. For the verb in and note. Quite Shakespearian. In 
this sense, see Golding's Ovid, vii. Peek's yack Straw (Hazlitt's Dods- 
336-339 : " When all were voyded, shee ley, v. 412) similar quibbling on a 
With scattred heare about hir eares . . . similar occasion occurs: — 

about the burning Altars goes." " Why, Morton, are you so lusty, 

63. of mine] Very frequent in Shake- with a pox? 

speare. See Schmidt for a collection, I pulled you out of Rochester 

and his correct remark on a prepos- Castle by the poll ! 

terous reading in Merry Wives of Morton. And in recompense I will 

Windsor, i. iii. no (see Arden edition, help to set your head on z pole. 

note). " Of thine " occurs often also in Wat Tyler. Pray you, let's be 

Shakespeare. Compare Golding's Oz;jti; polVd first." 



SC. I.] 



KING HENRY THE SIXTH 



131 



Ay, kennel, puddle, sink ; whose filth and dirt 

Troubles the silver spring where England drinks. 

Now will I dam up this thy yawning mouth 

For swallowing the treasure of the realm : 74 

Thy lips, that kissed the queen, shall sweep the ground ; 

And thou that smiled'st at good Duke Humphrey's death, 

Against the senseless winds shalt grin in vain, 

Who in contempt shall hiss at thee again : 

And wedded be thou to the hags of hell, 

For daring to afify a mighty lord 80 

Unto the daughter of a worthless king, 

Having neither subject, wealth, nor diadem. 

By devilish policy art thou grown great. 

And, like ambitious Sylla, overgorged 

With gobbets of thy mother's bleeding heart. 85 

By thee Anjou and Maine were sold to France, 

74. Foy . . . realm] omitted Q. 75, 76. Thy lips, that kiss'd . . . Hum- 
phrey's death] 46-48. Those lips of thine that so oft have kist . . . death. 77. 
Against . . . in vain] 49. Shalt line no longer to infect the earth. 78-106. 
Who in contempt . . . base men proud] omitted Q. 



74. For swallowing] for fear of its 
swallowing. A frequent use, not 
always obvious. See again Sonnet 
52, 1. 4 ; and Two Gentlemen of Verona, 
I. ii. 136. And Peele, Edward I. 
(410, a) : " Hold up your torches for 
dropping." A provincialism, still cur- 
rent. 

77. senseless winds] Compare Peele, 
David and Bethsabe (465, a) : " And 
makes their weapons wound the 
senseless winds." Insensible. 

79. hags of hell] the Furies. Com- 
pare Peele, Battle of Alcazar (436, b) : — 

" You bastards of the Night and 
Erebus, 
Fiends, Furies, hags." 
And Locriue, iii. ii. : — 

" the triple Cerberus 
And all the army of his hateful 
hags." 
All this ranting is reminiscent of Peele, 
yet not Peele's. None of these charges 
occur here in the Contention, against 
Suffolk ; but we have had them all. 
And see below. 

80. aj9^] betroth. See Taming of the 
Shrew, iv. iv. 49. New Eng. Diet, has 
an earlier example of this use from 
Lambarde's Perambulation of Kent, 
1576. Drayton uses the verb in the 
Legend of Pierce Gaveston, recalling it 
from here. 



84. overgorged] Not in Shakespeare 
again. Golding's Ovid furnishes the 
earliest use I know : — 

" Latona, feede, yea feede thy selfe, 
I say, upon my woe, 
And overgorge thy stomacke " 

(vi. 352, 353)- 

85. gobbets] Similarly Progne and 
her sister deal with Itys's limbs : — 

" In gobbits they them rent : whereof 

were some in Pipkins boyled . . . 

To this same banket Progne bade 

. . . hir husband . . . 
King Terens . . . 
Swallowed downe the selfe same 
flesh that of his bowels bred " 
(Golding, Ovid, vi. 815). The word 
occurs again in the xivth book of 
Golding's translation ; and in the 
Faerie Quecne, i. i. 20 : " great lumps 
of flesh and gobbets raw." See below, 
V. ii. 58. 

86. Anjou and Maine] See i. i. 214. 
" the people of the realme . . . began 
first to make exclamacion aga5'nst the 
Duke of Suffolke, affirmyng him to be 
the onely cause of the deliueryof ^Mt'ow 
and Main, the chiefe procurer of the 
death of the good Duke of Glocester, 
the very occasion of the losse of Nor- 
mandie, the most swallower up & con- 
sumer of the kings treasure. . . . By 
reason of this exclamacion, the queene 



132 



THE SECOND PART OF 



[act IV. 



The false revolting Normans thorough thee 

Disdain to call us lord, and Picardy 

Hath slain their governors, surprised our forts, 

And sent the ragged soldiers wounded home. 90 

The princely Warwick, and the Nevils all, 

Whose dreadful swords were never drawn in vain, 

As hating thee, are rising up in arms : 

And now the house of York, thrust from the crown 

By shameful murder of a guiltless king, 95 

And lofty proud encroaching tyranny, 

Burns with revenging fire ; whose hopeful colours 

Advance our half-faced sun, striving to shine, 

Under the which is writ Invitis nubibus. 

The commons here in Kent are up in arms ; 100 



somewhat fearyng the destruction of 
the Duke, but more the confusion of 
herselfe, caused the Parliament, before 
begon at the black Friers in London, 
to be adiourned to Leycester " (Grafton, 
i. 637, 638). Articles against him were 
here proposed and denied. " The 
queene, . . . fearyng that some com- 
mocion and trouble might rise, if he 
were let goe unpunished, caused him 
to be committed to the Towre . . . after 
that a moneth was expired, she im- 
agening the people to be pacified with 
this open emprisonment, caused him 
both to be delyuered and also to be 
restored to the Kinges favour and grace. 
. . . But thys doing Incensed the furye 
of the mutable commons, muche more 
then before. . . . The commons of the 
lower house . . . accused as principall 
(Anjou and Maine loss) the Duke of 
Suffolke, with lohn Bishop of Salis- 
bury, and Sir James Fynes, Lord Say, 
and others. . . . King Henrye ... to 
begin a short pacification . . . se- 
questred the Lord Say, beyng treasurer 
of England, and other the Dukes ad- 
herentes . . . and . . , put in exile the 
Duke of Suffolke, for the terme of 
fyve yeres . . . meaning ... to re- 
uocate hym to his olde estate. But 
fortune would not that he should so 
escape, for when he was shipped in 
Suffolke, entending to be transported 
into Fraunce, he was encountered with 
a shippe of warre, appertayning to the 
Duke of Excester, the Constable of the 
Towre of London. [The] capitaine of 
the same barke with small fight, 
entered into the Dukes shippe, and 
perceiuing his person present, brought 
him to Douer Rode, & there on the 



one syde of a cocke bote, caused his 
heade to be striken off, & left his body 
with the heade upon the sandes of 
Douer, which corps was there founde 
by a Chaplayne of his, & conueied 
to Wingfelde coUedge in Suffolke, 
and there buryed" (Grafton, 639, 640) 

(1450). 

94. thrust from the crown] An ex- 
pression of Peele's in David and 
Bcthsabe (467, b) : "I'll thrust the 
flattering tyran from his throne." See 
note at 3 Henry VI. iii. iii. 190, where 
"thrust from" in Q is altered to "put 
from." 

96. encroaching] Not again in Shake- 
speare in any use, and the earliest ex- 
ample (? 1593) of the participial adjective 
in New Eng. Diet. But it is earlier in 
Greene, and similarly placed : " such a 
proud busie couetous and incroching 
humor " (Quip for an Upstart Courtier, 
Grosart, xi. 251). And in G. Harvey, 
Pierces Supererogation (Grosart, ii. 52) : 
" an infectious bane or an incroching 
pocke." 

98. half-faced sun] Compare Dray- 
ton's enumeration of county devices 
at the battle of Agincourt (stanza 68) : 
" Suffolk, a sun half-risen from the 
brake ; Norfolk, a triton on a dolphin's 
back." Malone refers to Camden : 
" Edward the third bare for his deuice 
the rayes of the sunne dispersing them- 
selues out of a cloud, and in other 
places a golden trunke of a tree " {Re- 
maines concerning Britaine, p. 183, ed. 
1623). (Malone never gives full refer- 
ences.) Is it not a notable discrepancy 
that the captain who speaks here is 
Exeter or one of his party, on King 
Henry's side ? 



sc I] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 133 

And to conclude, reproach and beggary 

Is crept into the palace of our king, 

And all by thee. Away ! convey him hence. 
Suf. O ! that I were a god, to shoot forth thunder 

Upon these paltry, servile, abject drudges. 105 

Small things make base men proud : this villain here, 

Being captain of a pinnace, threatens more 

Than Bargulus the strong Illyrian pirate. 

Drones suck not eagles' blood but rob bee-hives. 

It is impossible that I should die 1 10 

By such a lowly vassal as thyself. 

Thy words move rage and not remorse in me : 

I go of message from the queen to France ; 

I charge thee waft me safely cross the Channel. 
Cap. Walter! 115 

Whit. Come, Suffolk, I must waft thee to thy death. 
Suf. Gelidus timor occupat artus : it is thee I fear. 

106-112. this villain . . . remorse in me] 50-53. This villain being bui Captain 
of a Pinnais, Threatens more plagjies then mightie Abradas, The great Masa- 
donian Pyrate, Thy words addes fury and not remorse in me. 113, 114. I go 
. . . from . . . safely . . . Channel'] 37, 38. / am sent Ambassador for . . . 
waffe me crosse the channell safe. 115, 116. Cap. Walter! . . . death^^Q- 
(half-line) Cap. He waffe thee to thy death. 117. Gelidus . . . fear] omitted Q. 

loi. And to conclude] See again 3 tators. This is probably Shakespeare's 

Henry VI. 11. v. 47. And in Macbeth, source for the quotation, and no doubt 

Much Ado About Nothing, Taming of this was one of the sorest feathers he 

the Shrew SLXxdl Henry IV. Thoroughly plucked from Greene. For the occur- 

Shakespearian. Used by Kyd also. rence of the passage in Greene is not 

105. servile] See note at iv. vii. 14. enough to prove that he wrote this part 

A favourite term of Peele's (and Spen- of the Contention, which has no other 

ser's). Compare jfack Straw (Hazlitt's resemblance to his style. The very 

Dodsley, v. 406) ; " What' tis, a. servile next line, which is not in the Contcn- 

slave to brave a king ! " Common in tion, comes much nearer Greene ! I 

Kyd. fully expected to find " Abradas " in 

108. Bargulus] From Tully's Offices, Primaudaye, towards whom Greene 

II. xi. Steevens quotes Dr. Farmer, who acted the " strong pirate," but he is 

observes that " Sliakespeare might have still at large. See note at " pirates," 

met with this pirate in two translations, below, iv. ix. 34. 

Robert Whytinton, 1533, calls him 109. Drones . . . rob bee-hives] This 

Bargulus, a pirate upon the see of bit of folklore occurs twice in Pericles, 

Illiry " ; and N. Grimoald : " Bar- and is much older, but I have not noted 

gulus, the Illyrian robber." Warburton it in Greene. It is in (T. Bowes) transla- 

was the first to point out his where- tion of Primaudaye, but varied : " prac- 

abouts. " Bargulus " replaces " the titioners who devoure the substance of 

mightie Abradas" of the CoK^t'w^Jo?!, who poore men, as Drones eate up the hony 

was first located by Steevens. He be- of Bees " (ch. 62, French Academic) ; 

longs to Greene : " Abradas the great and in George Gascoigne (Arber, p. 20), 

Macedonian Pirat thought euery one 1577 : " As the Drone the hony hive 

had a letter of mart that bare sayles in dooth rob." And in the same form as 

ye Ocean " (Penelopes Web, Grosart, v. the last quotation in N. Breton, Pas- 

197). These identical words occur again qtiil's Procession, 1600. 

in Greene's Afe«a//zow (vi. 77, 78), 1587, 117. Gelidus . . . artus] Steevens 

which has not, I think, been noticed ; quotes from Virgil, bk. xi. : " cur ante 

certainly not by the early commen- tubam tremor occupat artus ? " which 



134 THE SECOND PART OF [act iv. 

Whit. Thou shalt have cause to fear before I leave thee. 

What ! are ye daunted now ? now will ye stoop ? 
First Gent. My gracious lord, entreat him, speak him fair. 120 
Suf. Suffolk's imperial tongue is stern and rough, 

Used to command, untaught to plead for favour. 

Far be it we should honour such as these 

With humble suit : no, rather let my head 

Stoop to the block than these knees bow to any 125 

Save to the God of heaven, and to my king; 

And sooner dance upon a bloody pole 

Than stand uncovered to the vulgar groom. 

True nobility is exempt from fear : 

More can I bear than you dare execute. 130 

Cap. Hale him away, and let him talk no more. 
Suf. Come, soldiers, show what cruelty ye can, 

That this my death may never be forgot. 

Great men oft die by vile bezonians. 

A Roman sworder and banditto slave 135 

118-120. Thou shalt . . . him fair'] 62, 63. Cap. Away with him, Water, I 
say, and off with his hed. 1 Priso. Good my Lord, intreat him mildly or your 
life. 121-130. Suffolk . . . execute] 64-68. First let this necke stoupe to the 
axes edge. Before this knee do bow to a7iy, Sane to the God of heauen and to my 
king: Siiffolkes imperiall toong cannot plead e To such a ladie groonie. 131, 
Cap. Hale him . . . work] 69, 70. Water. Come, come, why do we let him speake. 
I long to haue his head for ramisome of mine eye. 132-134. Stif. Came soldiers 
. . . bezonians] omitted Q. 135-138. Roman, savage islanders Pompey the 

great] 71-73. (these words) omitted Q. 

seems to be the nearest known to the pattern of a Senecan line in Kyd's 

Suffolk's quotation. But see Mneid, Cornelia (11. i. 297) (Boas) : " true 

vii. 446 : " Subitus tremor occupat noblesse never doth the thing it should 

artus" (Schmidt). The first Folio has not." Compare Richard II. iv. i. iig, 

" Pine " before " gelidus." Malone reads and Titus Andronicus, i. i. 119 and i. i. 

" pene." Some unintelligible misprint. 271. 

iig. daunted] Only in this Part and 131. Hale] haul. Fishermen in 

Part I. The verb is in Taming of the Lough Swilly speak of " haling the 

Shreit) and Titus Andronicus, Often in nets" (pronounced "hail"). 

Spenser and Peele. 134. bezonians] See again in 2 Henry 

121. Suffolk's imperial tongue] Per- IV. v. iii. 119. Base fellows, beggars, 
haps vain-gloriousness is excusable at Properly besogno, beggar (Italian), and 
such a crisis. Shakespeare would not so used by Jonson, Massinger, and Beau- 
have used it later. It is very much in mont and Fletcher. Compare Gabriel 
Greene's method, who gives "lordly "and Harvey, Fourc Letters (Grosart, i. 208), 
" princely " to speakers of themselves. 1592: "the other sorry Magnifico as 

127. dance upon a . . . pole] Compare very Bisotiian, as he for hys life." Nashe 

Lyly's Pappe with an Hatchet (Preface) : uses the word in Pierce Pcnilesse (Gros- 

" Martin beware your gilles, for He art, ii. 86), earlier than Harvey. In 

make you daunce at the poles end" Garrard's .i4r^ 0/ H^rtrr^ (1591) the word 

(1588-89). occurs in a different sense. " Bisonians 

127. pole] More punning? pole, poll, andfresh water soldiers" (S/an/orrf DJc- 

and de la Pole. There is plenty about tionary.) 

head on a pole in Scene iii. Peele drags 135. A Roman sworder and banditto 

some of this very inaptly into Jack slave] " i.e., Nerennius a centurion, and 

Straw. See note, line 70. Popilius Laenas, tribune of the soldiers" 

129. True nobility . . .] This is after (Steevens). See Plutarch's Lives 



SC. I.] 



KING HENRY THE SIXTH 



135 



Murdered sweet TuUy ; Brutus' bastard hand 
Stabbed Julius Caesar; savage islanders 
Pompey the Great ; and Suffolk dies by pirates. 

\Exeunt Whitmore and others with Suffolk. 
Cap. And as for these whose ransom we have set, 

It is our pleasure one of them depart : 140 

Therefore come you with us and let him go. 

\Exeunt all but the First Gentleman. 

Re-enter Whitmore, zvith Suffolk's body. 

Whit. There let his head and lifeless body lie, 

Until the queen his mistress bury it, [Exit. 

138. and . . . pirates'] 74. And . . . Pyrates on the seas. Exet Suffolke and 
Water. 139-141- Cap. And as . . . let him go] 75-78. Cap. Off with his head 
and send it to the Qiieene, And ransotnelesse this prisoner shall go free. To see it 
safe deliuered vnto her. Come lets goe. Exet Omnes. 142-147. There . . . 
held him dear] omitted Q. 

(Cicero). " Sworder" occurs again in 
Antony and Cleopatra. " Banditto," in 
Contention, is the earliest use known 
of this word in English. Nashe has 
it several times in The Unfortunate 
Traveller (1594), spelt as in F and Q, 
bandetto or bandeto (Grosart's Nashe, 
118, 125, 176). 

135-138. Roman sworder . . . Briitiis 
. . . Pompey] These uncouth thoughts 
like Bargulus and Sully above, are best 
paralleled by the similarly abrupt intro- 
ductions in 1 Henry VI. i. ii. (Goliases, 
Rowlands, Deborah, Mahomet, Saint 
Philip, etc.). We may set them down 
as youthful ebullitions of an overflowing 
imagination. But they were the vogue. 
Nashe is full of such embellishments. 

136. Brutus'' bastard hand] Steevens 
says " Brutus was the son of Servilia, 
a Roman lady, who had been concubine 
to Julius Caesar." This does not make 
the words in the text true, which they 
are not, unless we use " bastard " as 
meaning merely "base." 

137, 138. savage islanders stabbed 
Pompey] Steevens points out this 
classical error (not in Contention). 
Malone says : " Pompey being killed by 
Achillas and Septimius at the moment 
that the Egyptian fishing-boat in which 
they were reached the coast, and his 
head being thrown into the sea [in 
North's Plutarch], his mistake does not 
appear more extraordinary than," etc. 
See Kyd's Cornelia, m. iii. 7-13 (Boas 
ed.) :— 

" One selfe-same shyp containd us, 
when I saw 



The murdring Egiptians bereaue 
his lyfe . . . 

on the strond upon the Riuer 
side . . . 
1 woave a coffyn." 
141. let him go] The captain's last 
words in Q, " Come lets goe," are possibly 
of interest. This closing tag, to clear 
the stage, occurs before (in Q) four 
times : p. 34, " come let us go that it 
may be performde. Exet omnes " ; 29, 
" But come let us go. . . . Exet omnes " ; 
p. 25, " the greatest man in England, 
but the king. Come lets goe. Exet 
omnes." With a word of address, as 
"Madam," "Sirs," between "come" 
and " let us " it occurs continually, but in 
these examples it seems peculiar and I 
have not noticed it elsewhere. It should 
be looked for at the end of a scene, and 
may prove useful for identification. 
Probably the expression may be re- 
garded as a player's contraction, a 
hybrid stage-direction, a form to be 
used, ceteris paribus, with the words 
needful inserted. Thus, " come, soldiers, 
let us go. Exit " (Lodge, Wounds of 
Civil War, Hazlitt's Dodsley, vol. vii. 
p. 125). See note already at end of 11. ii. 
I find "come lets goe" twice in True 
Tragedy, at 3 Henry VI. i. ii. (end). 
" Come let's go " often is formed into 
a whole line with a clause interjected, 
as " Come stand not to expostulate lets 
go." See note. Part IIL 11. iii. 135. 
Marlowe has " Come let j(s go and ban- 
quet in our tents" (Tamburlatne, Part 
n. I. i. (end of)), which is near. 



136 THE SECOND PART OF [act iv. 

First Gent. O barbarous and bloody spectacle ! 

His body will I bear unto the king : 145 

If he revenge it not, yet will his friends ; 
So will the queen, that living held him dear. 

{Exit with the body. 

SCENE \\.—Blackheath. 
Enter GEORGE Bevis and John Holland. 

Geo. Come, and get thee a sword, though made of a lath : 

they have been up these two days. 
John. They have the more need to sleep now then. 
Geo. I tell thee, Jack Cade the clothier means to dress the 

commonwealth, and turn it, and set a new nap upon 5 

it. 
John. So he had need, for 'tis threadbare. Well, I say it 

was never merry world in England since gentlemen 

came up. 
Geo. O miserable age ! Virtue is not regarded in handi- 10 

craftsmen. 

Enter George Bevis . . .] Enter two of the Rebels with long stanes. i, 2. 
Geo. Come . , . they . . . rfoys] 1-3. Geo. Come away Nick, ajid ptit along staff e 
in thy pike, and proiiide thy selfe, for I Can tell thee, they . . . this two daies. 
3. John. They . . then] 4, 5. Niche. Then they had more need to go to bed now, 
But sirrha George whats the matter ? 4-6. / tell thee . . . and . . . ^ipon it] 
6, 7. Wliy sirrha, lack Cade the Diar of Ashford here, He meanes to turne this 
land, and . . . on it. 7-g. So . . . came up] 8, 9. / marry he had need so, 
for tis growne threedbare, Twas never merry zvorld with us, since these geritle men 
came up. 10, 11. Geo. O miserable . . . handicraftsmen] omitted Q. 

I. sword . . . of lath] See note at ment belongs to the earlier rebellion in 

" latten bilbo" {Merry Wives of Wind- Richard Il.'s time. See note, line 68, 

sor, I. i. 165, Arden edition, p. 18) for below. And in Jack Straw (Hazlitt's 

references. Dodsley, v. 382) : — 

4. jfack Cade] See note at "John " But mem/>' with the world it went. 

Cade of Ashford," above, in. i. 361-375. When men ate berries of the haw- 

Rolfe quotes from the Issue Roll 29 thorn-tree." 

Henry VL the certificate of 1,000 marks 9. came up] came into fashion. No 

paid to Iden, wherein is: "John Cade, example in Shakespeare. Jonson has it 

an Irishman, calling himself lohn Mor- in Every Man out of his Humour in 

teymer." Brisk's famous duel : " I had on a gold 

5-7. set a new nap . . . threadbare] cable hatband then new come up, which 

Compare Lyly's Endymion, v. ii. : " in I wore about a murrey French hat." 

your love you have worne the nappe of And Grafton, Continuation of Hardyng, 

your wit quite off and made it thread- 1543 (437) : " so that in hys tyme thys 

bare" (Fairholt, p. 71, 1591). For kinde of coyne f a«z£ t</>." 

" sirrha" here, in Contention, see below, 9. up] up in arms. See 1 Henry IV. 

line 96, note. iii. ii. 120; 2 Henry IV. 1. i. 189; 

j-g. it was never merry ... since gentle- Richard III. iv. iv. 530, and several 

men came up] See Measure for Measttre, times agam in this play. An expres- 

III. ii. 6, and note in Arden edition, pp. sion of Peele's (?) in jack Straw, of the 

76, 77. The saying is also found in earlier rebellion : " The Commons now 

Twelfth Night, and seems to have been are iip in Kent" (Hazlitt's Dodsley, v. 

first levelled at Cardinals. The senti- 385). See Introduction. 



sc. II.] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 



137 



John. The nobility think scorn to go in leather 

aprons. 
Geo. Nay, more ; the king's council are no good work- 
men. 1 5 

John. True ; and yet it is said, labour in thy vocation : 
which is as much to say as, let the magistrates be 
labouring men ; and therefore should we be magis- 
trates, 
Geo. Thou hast hit it; for there's no better sign of a 20 
brave mind than a hard hand. 

Johi. I see them! I see them! There's Best's son, the 
tanner of Wingham, — 

Geo. He shall have the skins of our enemies to make dog's- 

leather of. 25 

John. And Dick the butcher, — 

Geo. Then is sin struck down like an ox, and iniquity's 
throat cut like a calf. 

John. And Smith the weaver, — 

Geo. Argo, their thread of life is spun. 30 

John. Come, come ; let 's fall in with them. 

12, 13. jfohn. The nobility . . . aprons] lo, ii. Geo. I warrant thee, Thou 
skalt neicer see a Lord weare a leather aperne now a-daies. 14-21. Geo. Nay, more 
. . . hard hand] omitted Q. 22-31. John. I see them . . . with them] 12-19. 
Nick. But sirrha, who comes more beside lack Cade ? Geo. Why theres Dicke the 
Butcher and Robin the Saddler, and Will that came a wooing to our Nan last 
Sunday, and Harry and Tom, and Gregory that should haue your Parnill, and a 
great sort more is come from Rochester and from Maydstone, and Canterbury and 
all the Townes here about, and we must all be Lords or squires assoone as lack 
Cade is King. Nicke. Harke, harke, I here the Drum, they be comming. 



12. think scorn] See Love's Labour 's 
Lost, I. ii, 60, and note, Arden edition, 
p. 21. 

12, 13. leather aprons] The wear of 
many sorts of mechanics and workmen, 
waiters, barbers and others. See 2 
Henry IV. 11, ii. 189, and jfulius Casar, 
I, i, 7. Compare Thomas Brewer's 
(prose) Merry Devil of Edmonton (re- 
print, 1631, p. 13), 1608 : " A hard 
handed laborer, a poore leathern apron- 
wearer." 

16. labour in thy vocation] See 1 
Henry IV. i. ii, 117. And in Nashe, 
An Almond for a Parrot, 1589 : " What 
would he doe . , . if he had two good 
legges that will thus bestirre himself in 
his vocation with one," 

17. as much to say as] Usually "as 
much as to say," which occurs in Comedy 
of Errors, Much Ado About Nothing, 
Twelfth Night and several other plays, 
meaning " in other words." 

18. labouring men] Compare Peele, 



Old Wives Tale (453, b) ; " Go get you 
in, you labouring slaves." 

24, 25. dog's-leather] for gloves. Com- 
pare Ben Jonson, Gipsies Metamorposed: 
"And I (lost) my knife and sheath, and 
my fine dog's leather gloves." One of 
Meercraft's projects in The Devil is an 
Ass, is of dressing dog's skins for which 
the king's glover offered him nine 
thousand pounds. See Introduction to 
Love's Labour's Lost, Arden edition, 
p. xxxii, 

30. Argo] corrupt for ergo. Nares 
gives a quotation from the play. Sir 
Thomas Moore {circa 1565) (ed, Shaks, 
Soc, Dyce). Compare "argal," Hamlet, 
V. i. 13. Craig refers to Middleton, 
The PhceniX; iv. iii. 

30, thread of life is spun] Compare 
1 Henry VI. i. i, 34 (see note), and 
Pericles, i, ii. 108, Two expressions 
are comprised here : " O wife, I have 
spun a fair thread" (Locrine, 11. ii.). 
The latter is very common and older. 



138 THE SECOND PART OF [act iv. 

Drum. Enter Cade, Dick Butcher, Smith the Weaver^ and a 
Sawyer, with infinite numbers. 

Cade. We John Cade, so termed of our supposed 
father, — 

Dick. [Aside.] Or rather, of stealing a cade of her- 
rings. 35 

Cade. For our enemies shall fall before us, inspired with 
the spirit of putting down kings and princes, — Com- 
mand silence. 

Dick. Silence! 

Cade. My father was a Mortimer, — 40 

Dick. [Aside to line 62,] He was an honest man, and a good 
bricklayer. 

Cade. My mother a Plantagenet, — 

Dick. I knew her well ; she was a midwife. 

Cade. My wife descended of the Lacies, — 45 

Dick. She was, indeed, a pedlar's daughter, and sold 
many laces. 

Smith. But now of late, not able to travel with her furred 
pack, she washes bucks here at home. 

Cade. Therefore am I of an honourable house. 50 

Dick. Ay, by my faith, the field is honourable, and there 

Drum. Enter Cade . . .] Enter lacke Cade, Dicke Btitcher, Rohin, Will, Tern, 
Harry and the rest, with long staues. 32, 33. Cade. We . . . father'] 22. Cade. 
I John Cade so named for my valiancie. 34, 35. Dick. Or . . . herrings'] 23. 
Dicke. Or rather for stealing of . . , sprats. 36, 37. For . . . princes] omitted 
Q. 37. Command] 20. Proclahne. 39. Dick. Silence I] 21. All. Silence. 

40-42, 43 and 45. My mother . . . Lacies] 26. My mother came of the Erases 
{Lacies Q 3). 44. I knew her] omitted Q. 46, 47. She . . . laces] 27. She 
. . . lases {indeed after daughter, spoken by Will). 48, 49. Smith. But . . . 
home] 28, 29. Robi)i. And now being not able to occupie her furd packe. She washeth 
buckes up and doitne the countrie. 50. am I] 30. / am. 51. Dick. Ay . . . 
honourable] 31. Harry. I for the . . . honourable. 51-53' cind there was he 
. . . never a house . . . cage] 31, 32. for he was . . . no house . . . cage. 

34, 35. cade of herrings] Compare (Johnson). Another name-pun like Pool, 

Nashe, Lenten Stuffe (v. 301) : " The re- Suffocate, Main and Lacie. 

bel Jack Cade was the first that deuised 46, 47. sold . . . laces] Compare the 

to put redde herrings in cades, and from pedlar's song in Winter's Tale, iv. iv. 

hym they haue their name." Nashe 322. 

is not to be taken seriously. See 48. furred] made of fur. Nashe has 

Arnold's Chronicle {circa 1519) (p. 263, "furred night-cap" similarly (Grosart, 

edited 1811): " xx. cades rede hering i. 181). Made of skin with the hair 

is a last, v. c. in a cade, vi. score iiij. outward, as was formerly common. See 

heringis for the c." The term (a small Boswell's note in Malone's Shakespeare, 

barrel) was used of sprats also. At xviii. 296 (Halliwell). 

the same reference is: "The drifte 49. bucks] linen for washing. On 

sprottis is the best ; x. cades maketh this word see Merry Wives of Windsor, 

a last, xij. c. in every cade.'" iii. iii. 2, note, Arden edition, p. 126. 

■^b. fall before us] "He alludes to ^i. field] Referring to heraldic field, 

his name Cade from cado (Lat.), to fall " field of war. 



sc. II.] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 139 

was he born, under a hedge ; for his father had never 

a house but the cage. 
Cade. Valiant I am. 

Smith. A' must needs, for beggary is vaHant. 55 

Cade. I am able to endure much. 
Dick. No question of that, for I have seen him whipped 

three market-days together. 
Cade. I fear neither sword nor fire. 
Smith. He need not fear the sword, for his coat is of 60 

proof. 
Dick. But methinks he should stand in fear of fire, being 

burnt i' the hand for stealing of sheep. 
Cade. Be brave then ; for your captain is brave, and vows 

reformation. There shall be in England seven half- 65 

penny loaves sold for a penny ; the three-hooped pot 

54' 55' Valiant . . . is valiant] omitted Q. 56. I . . . much] 34. I . . . 

much. 57, 58. No . . . that, for . . . three . . . together] 34, 35. George. 

That's true, I know he can endjire anything. For . . . two . . . togither (printed 
as verse, also 28, 29 above), 59-6i. I fear . . . Smith. He . . . proof] 36, 37. 
I fear . . . IVilL He . . . proof. 62, 63. Stand in fear of . . . burnt i' . . . 
sheep] 38, 39. feare the . . . so often burnt in . . . sheep. 64, 65. 5« . . . 
then; for . . . reformation] 40, 41. Therefore be brave, for . . . reformation. 
65, 66. There . . . England seven . . . penny] 41, 42. You shall haue seuen . . . 
(omit sold) penny. 66. the three] and the three. 

53. cage] prison, quad, jug, lock-up. Com^diXe Two Angry Women of Abing- 

" We yet talk of jail-bird " (Malone). rfoH (Hazlitt's Dodsley, vii. 383) : — 

Compare ^^ cage of rushes," As You "Nor that same hiss that by a fire 

Like It, III. ii. 389. doth stand 

55' beggary is valiant] Perhaps a And hisseth T or F upon the hand." 

reference to the old proverb (from Beaumont and Fletcher's Night- 

Juvenal) " Cantabit vacuus coram Walker, iii. 6 (Dyce, xi. 175) : " Was 

latrone viator"; translated by Peele, never thieves and robberies; Here is no 

" A man purse-pennilesse may sing sindge in her hands, warrant her " ; 

before a thief . . . which makes me and Henry Hutton, Folies Anatomy : — 

so pertly pass through these thickets " " Once burnt i' the hand he will 

(Edward I. (401, a)). The term " valiant example give 

beggar" (sturdy beggar) is of later date. To such base turncoats as by 

The word "valiant" itself though so turncoats live." 

common in Shakespeare was a hardly See Flaistrir, Cotgrave. " Buzzed in 

familiar loan from the French. See the fist," at a later date. 

Lyly's Campaspe, v. ii. (Fairholt, p. 66. three-hooped pot] Nashe, after 

141) ; but it is in the chronicler Hall, telling the well-known yarn (from 

Is this akin to the mysterious Nashe- Grafton) of King Edgar's setting pins 

Kyd " bloud is a begger " in the Epistle in the cups and making it a penalty to 

to il/ewa//«ow? (Grosart's Greene, vi. 15). drink beyond chem, says: "And, if 

60, 61. coat . . . of proof] tested, re- Stories were well searcht, I beleeue 

liable. Peele has the expression in Da^^jf/ hoopes in quart pots were inuented to 

and Bethsabe: "He puts on armour oihis that ende, that euery man should take 

honour's/rao/" (Dyce, 465, a). "Targe his hoope and no more" (Pierce Peni- 

of proof" is in Soliman and Perseda. lesse (Grosart, ii. 80), 1592). This was 

" Armour of proof " is in Tambiirlaine, written later than the Contention. Cade 

Part n. I. iii. means that for a quart he will get over 

63. burnt V the hand for stealing] three quarts, just as for the penny loaf 

branded with the letter T for thief, he will get more than three loaves. He 



140 THE SECOND PART OF [act iv 

shall have ten hoops ; and I will make it felony to 
drink small beer. All the realm shall be in common, 
and in Cheapside shall my palfrey go to grass. And 
when I am king, as king I will be, — • 70 

All. God save your majesty ! 

Cade. I thank you, good people: there shall be no 
money; all shall eat and drink on my score; and I 
will apparel them all in one livery, that they may 
agree like brothers, and worship me their lord. 75 

Dick. The first thing we do, let 's kill all the lawyers. 

Cade. Nay, that I mean to do. Is not this a lamentable 
thing, that of the skin of an innocent lamb should . 
be made parchment ? that parchment, being scribbled 
o'er, should undo a man ? Some say the bee stings ; 80 
but I say, 'tis the bee's wax, for I did but seal once to 
a thing, and I was never mine own man since. How 
now ! who 's there ? 

67. hoops ; and . . . it felony] 42, 43. hoopes, and it shall be felony, 67-69. 
to . . . beer. All the . . . go to grass] 43. to . . . beer {All the . . . go to grass 
omitted Q). 69, 70. And when I am . . . be] 43. And if I be . , . be. 71, 
72. God. . , people] 44, 45. God . . . people. 72, 73. there . . . nioiiey ; all 
shall . . . on . . . score] 45, 46. you shall all . . . of . . . score. 73, 74. and 
. . . livery] 46. and go all in my liuerie. 74-83. that they may . . . who's 
there?] 46-54. And iveele haue no writing, but the score & the Tally, and there 
shal be no laives but such as comes from my mouth. Dicke. We shall have sore 
lawes then, for he was thrust itito the motith the other day. George. I and 
stinking law too, for his breath stinks so, that one cannot abide it (for 47-52 here, 
see below, Sc. vii. 6-11 ; and for 77-82, see vii. 8, 9). 

is quite logical in his ideas. Compare common, and that there be no Villeynes 

Dekker's Guls Horn-Booke : " How to nor gentlemen, but that we be all as 

take . . . the Englishman's healthes, his one, and that the Lordes be no greater 

hoopes, cans, halfecans . . . qualities of than we be" (Grafton, 417, 418). This 

the truest tospots " (Grosart, ii. 206); " lewde company lay on Blackheth" like- 

and The Wonderfull Yeare : " Most wise. See note at " poor at gate," x. 

valiant robpots . . . strooke downe only 23. And Jack Straw (382): — 

with two hoopes (quantity up to second " it were better to have this 

hoop)." Hunter's " hoop " is also men- community, 

tioned. Than to have this difference in 

68. small beer] See again 2 Henry degrees." 

IV. II. ii. 8, 13 ; and Othello, 11. i. 161. 76. kill all the lawyers] See vii. i, 

Compare Nashe again : " Wherein . . . note. 

was but one single kilderkin of small 81. seal] sign or agree to a mortgage 

beere, that wold make a man, with a or bond of some ruinous nature. Com- 

carrouse of a spooneful, runne through pare Ben Jonson, Every Man in His 

an Alphabet of faces. Nor vsd they any Humour, 11. iii. : "Bait 'em with the 

glasses or cups (as other men) but onely young chambermaid to seal " ; and 

little farthing ounce boxes" {Pierce Peni- Alchemist, 11. i. : " the young heir that 

lesse, p. 25). must Seal at all hours in his shirt." See 

68. All . . . shall be in common] " burn all the records " (vii. 16). 

From John Wall's rebellion, 1380- 82. never mine own man since] An 

1381 : " A good people, matters go not old phrase meaning " never master of 

wel to passe in England in these dayes, myself since. " Nares gives a quotation 

nor shall not do vntill euerything be (" Terence MS."), " He is his owne 



sc. u.] 



KING HENRY THE SIXTH 



141 



Enter some, bringing forward the Clerk of Chatham. 

Smith. The clerk of Chatham : he can write and read and 

cast accompt, 85 

Cade. O monstrous ! 

Smith. We took him setting of boys' copies. 

Cade. Here 's a villain ! 

Smith. Has a book in his pocket with red letters 

in 't. 90 

Cade. Nay, then he is a conjurer. 

Dick. Nay, he can make obligations, and write court- 
hand. 

Cade. I am sorry for 't : the man is a proper man, of 

mine honour; unless I find him guilty, he shall not 95 
die. Come hither, sirrah, I must examine thee. 
What is thy name ? 

Clerk. Emmanuel. 

Enter Will with the Clarke of Chatham. Will. Oh Captaine a pryze. Cade. 
Whose that Will ? 84, 85. Smith. The Clerk . . . accompt] 55, 56. Will. The 
Clarke . . . account. 87 and 89, 90. We took . . . Has a book . . . letters in't] 
56, 57. (continued to Dick's speech, 55) / tooke . . . and hee has . . . letters 
(in't omitted). 86 and 88. O . . . villain] omitted Q. 91-98. Cade. Nay, 

then . . . Clerk. Emmanuel] 58-60, Cade. Sonnes, hee's a conjurer bring him 
hither. Now sir, whafs your name ? Clarke. Emmanuel sir, and it shall please you. 



man ; lie liveth as he list ; he is under 

no man's controlment," which exactly 

defines it. Compare Golding's Ovid : — 

" Achimenides, his owne man 

freely now, 

And not forgrowen as one forlorne " 

(xiv. 195, ig6). See too Ben Jonson's 

Alchemist, iv. iii., when Face has lost 

his wits or is beside himself : " I ne'er 

must hope to be mine own man again." 

87, boys' copies] Compare Love's 
Labour 's Lost, v. ii. 42 : " Fair as a 
text B in a copy-book." One of the 
standard words to practise letters on 
was till a recent date, Emmanuel. I 
incline to think that it is the reference 
at 1. 98, in spite of the " fourteen private 
(undated) epistles." 

92, 93. court-hand] " Used in the 
law-courts from the i6th century till 
George II., when it was abolished by 
statute " (Craig). Compare Brome, 
Northern Lasse, in. ii. (Pearson, vol. 
iii. p. 59) : " Alas, Sir, that a fair hand 
should make such blots ! vv'hat hand 
is it ? Secretarie, Roman, Court, or 
Text ? I have not seen the like : 'tis 
all dominical letters, red ink." Dapper, 
the lawyer's clerk in }onson's Alchemist, 
says (i. i.) : " By this hand of flesh, 



Would it might never write good court- 
hand more, If I discover." 

96. sirrah] Generally used by a 
superior to an inferior. In Shake- 
speare's later work, a master says it 
to his page, as in Merry Wives of 
Windsor. There is an opposition to 
this tendency in the Contention, where 
in the beginning of Scene ii, " sirrha " 
occurs three times in half a dozen 
lines, amongst equals. Of course this 
repetition had to be corrected, so all 
three were omitted, and this is the first 
appearance of the word. Yet the be- 
ginning of that scene is Shakespeare's 
own work. 

98. Emmanuel] Formerly prefixed 
to letters, deeds, etc., to convey the 
impression of piety. Staunton says : 
" We can refer to one MS. alone in 
the British Museum (Add. MSS. 
19,400), which contains no less than 
fourteen private epistles headed Emane- 
well or Jesus Immanuel." It was used 
also on royal seals. Steevens quotes 
from The Famous Victories of Henry 
V. : " Under our broad seal Emanuel." 
See above, however (for a doubt), at 
" copies," 1. 87. The evidence is in- 
sufficient. 



142 THE SECOND PART OF [act iv. 

Dick. They use to write it on the top of letters. 'Twill go 

hard with you. lOO 

Cade. Let me alone. Dost thou use to write thy name, 
or hast thou a mark to thyself, like an honest plain- 
dealing man ? 

Clerk. Sir, I thank God I have been so well brought up 

that I can write my name. 105 

All. He hath confessed : away with him ! he 's a villain 
and a traitor. 

Cade. Away with him ! I say : hang him with his pen and 

ink-horn about his neck, {^Exeunt one with the Clerk. 

Enter MICHAEL. 

Mich. Where 's our general ? i lO 

Cade. Here I am, thou particular fellow. 

Mich. Fly, fly, fly ! Sir Humphrey Stafford and his brother 

are hard by, with the king's forces. 
Cade. Stand, villain, stand, or I '11 fell thee down. He 

shall be encountered with a man as good as himself: 115 

he is but a knight, is a' ? 
Mich. No. 
Cade. To equal him, I will make myself a knight presently. 

{^Kneels^ Rise up Sir John Mortimer. Now have at 

him! 120 

gg, 100. They use to . . . 'Twill . . . you] 6i, 62. It will go . . . you, I 
can tell you, For they use to . . . that oth top of letters. 101-103. Let me . . . 
man] 63-65. Atid what do you vse to write your name ? Or do you as auncicnt 
forefathers have done, Vse the score and the Tally? (written as verse, also 58, 
5g, and 61, 62). 104, 105. Clerk. Sir, I thank . . . my name] 56, 67. Clarke. 
Nay, true sir, I praise . . . mine owne name. 106, 107. All. He hath , . . 
traitor] omitted Q. 108, log. Away . . . neck] 6S,6g. Oh hes confest, gohang 
him with his penny-inckhornc about his necke (Q 3 reads pen and inkhorne). 
Exet one with the Clarke. Enter Tom. 110-113. Mich. Whereas . . . king's 
forces] 70, 71. Tom. Captainc, Newes, newes, sir Humphrey Stafford and his 
brother are camming with the king's power, and mean to kil vs all. 114-116. 
Stand . . . knight is a' ?] 72. Let them come, hees but a knight is he? 117. 
Mich. No] 73. Tom. No, no, hees but a knight. 118, iig. To ... a knight 
presently] 74. Why then to . . . knight. iig, 120. [Kneels] Rise up . . . at 

102, 103. plain-dealing] See note in ink-horn at his back for he would be 

Love's Labour's Lost, iw'ni.-i&J (hxAen known to be bookish" (reprint, 29). 
edition). 118. make myself a knight] Similarly 

108, 109. pen and ink-horn] In 1381 in yack Straw (Hazlitt's Dodsley, v. 

the rebels, " if they found any to haue 383) Wat Tyler says; " We'll be lords, 

pen and inke they pulled off his hoode, my masters, everyone." 
and all with one voice of crying, 119. jfohn Mortimer] Hall gives 

'Hale him out, and cut off his head'" Cade's rebellion at considerable length, 

(Stow : quoted by Boswell Stone). And followed by Grafton. The dialogues are 

see below, iv. vii. 33-37. Compare however original in matter and manner, 

Laneham's Letter, 1575 : " a pen and and entirely Shakespeare's, both in this 



SC. II.] 



KING HENRY THE SIXTH 



143 



Enter Sir Humphrey Stafford, and his brother, with 

drum and soldiers. 

Staf. Rebellious hinds, the filth and scum of Kent, 

Marked for the gallows, lay your weapons down ; 

Home to your cottages, forsake this groom : 

The king is merciful, if you revolt. 
Bro. But angry, wrathful, and inclined to blood, 125 

If you go forward : therefore yield, or die. 
Cade. As for these silken-coated slaves, I pass not : 

It is to you, good people, that I speak, 

hint] 75-80. Kneele downe lohn Mortemer, Rise vp sir lohn Mortemcr. Is there 
any more of them that be Knights? Tom. I his brother. He knights Dickc 
Batcher. Cade. Then kneele doune Dicke Butcher, Rise vp sir Dicke Butcher. 
Noiv sound vp the Drumme. Enter . . . souldiers (as above, and Ff). 121-124. 
Staf. Rebellious . . . r^wo/i] 83-85. Stafford. Why, country-men, what meane you 
thus in troupes. To follow this rebellious Traitor Cade? Why his father was but 
a Brick-laier. 125, 126. Bro. But . . . die] omitted Q. 127, 128. Cade. As 
. . . pass not : It is . . . speak] 81, 82. Cade. As . . . passe not a pinne, Tis 
. . . speake. 



play and in the original Contention. 
Of that there can be no doubt, and 
it affords food for reflection. The 
previous scene is also Shakespeare's. 
Grafton says here : " This Capteine 
[Jack Cade who named himselfe lohn 
Mortimer] not only suborned by teachers, 
but also enforced by priuie Schole- 
maisters assembled together a great 
company of tall personages ; assuryng 
them that their attempt was both honour- 
able to God and the king and also profit- 
able to the common wealth, promisyng 
them, that if either by force or poUicy 
they might once take the king, the 
Queene, and other their Counsaylors 
. . . they would honourably entreat the 
king, and so sharply handle his Coun- 
saylors, that neither fiftenes should 
hereafter be demaunded, nor once any 
imposicions or tax should be spoken of. 
These perswasions, with many other 
fayre promises ... so animated the 
Kentishe people, that they . . . came 
to the plain of Blackheath ... he 
[Jack Cade] . . . sent to him [the King] 
an humble supplication with louyng 
wordes, but with malicious entent . . . 
This prowde Bill was both of the King 
and his Counsayle disdeinefully taken 
... it was concluded that such prowde 
rebelles should rather be suppressed . . . 
Whereupon the king assembled a great 
army; & marched toward them which 
had been on black Heath by the space 
of vij. dayes . . . lack Cade . . . brake 
up his campe and retyred backeward 



to the towne of Sevenock . . . The 
Queene, which bare the rule . . . sent 
syr Humprey Stafforde knight, and 
Wylliam his brother with many other 
Gentlemen, to follow the chace of the 
Kentishmen ... at the first skyrmishe 
both the Staffordes were slaine, and all 
their companie shamefully discomfited " 
(640, 641). See Grafton, 418-426, for 
John Wall, Wat Tyler and Jack Straw. 
And see note at " inns of court," scene 
vii. 1. I. 

121. sctim of Kent] Marlowe has 
" cruel pirates of Argier . . . the scum 
of Africa " {Tambnrlaine, Part I. iii. iii. 
(22, a)). See Richard III. v. iii. 317. 

122. Marked for the gallows] Com- 
pare The Tempest, i. i. 31 : " He hath 
no drowning mark upon him : his com- 
plexion is perfect galloivs." For this 
view of the rebels, see Introduction, and 
compare Iden's last speech in this Act. 

124. revolt^ return. The last sense 
in Cotgrave of " revolter " : " also, to re- 
turn, or make a new turn." Compare 
Golding's Ovid, x. 68: "And then 
revolted too the place in which he had 
her found." Turn over a new leaf. 

127. //ass wo^] I care not. Compare 
Greene's Alphonsus (Grosart, xiii. 342) : 
" Who ere it be, I do not passe a pinne." 
Commoner with prepositions " of" or 
"for." New Eng. Diet, has references 
to Udall's Erasmus, and others, earlier. 
The Contention reading here is "passe 
not a pinne." In Tambnrlaine, Part I. 
I. i. 



144 THE SECOND PART OF [act iv. 

O'er whom in time to come I hope to reign ; 

For I am rightful heir unto the crown. 130 

Staf. Villain ! thy father was a plasterer ; 

And thou thyself a shearman, art thou not? 
Cade. And Adam was a gardener. 
Bro. And what of that ? 
Cade. Marry, this: Edmund Mortimer, Earl of March, 135 

Married the Duke of Clarence' daughter, did he not ? 
Staf. Ay, sir. 

Cade. By her he had two children at one birth. 
Bro. That's false. 
Cade. Ay, there 's the question ; but I say, 'tis true. 140 

The elder of them, being put to nurse, 

Was by a beggar-woman stol'n away ; 

And, ignorant of his birth and parentage, 

Became a bricklayer when he came to age : 

His son am I ; deny it if you can. 145 

Dick. Nay, 'tis too true ; therefore he shall be king. 
Smith. Sir, he made a chimney in my father's house, and 

the bricks are alive at this day to testify it ; therefore 

deny it not. 

129, 130. O'cY whom . . . crown\ omitted Q. 131, 132. Staf. Villain ! 
. . . not?] omitted (see 85 above) Q. 133, 134. And . . . that?] 86. Cade. 
Well, and Adam was a gardner, what then? (no speech credited to Brother). 
iSSi 136. Cade. Marry, this . . . he not ?] go, 91. For looke you, Roger Mortemer 
the Earle of March, Maried the Duke of Clarence daughter. 137, 138. 

Staf. Ay, sir. Cade. By . . . birth] 92, 93. Stafford. Well that's trite: But 
what then? Cade. And by ... a birth. 139-145. Bro. That's false. 

Cade. Ay, there's . . . deny . . . can] g^-gg. Stafford. That's false. Cade. I, 
but I say, tis true. All. Why then tis true. Cade. And one of them was stolne 
away by a beggar woman. And that was my father, and I am his sonne. Deny it 
and you can. 146-149. Dick. Nay . . . King omitt. Sir . . . not] 100-102. 
Dicke. Nay looke you, I know twas true, For his father built a chimney in my 
fathers house, and . . , to testife, 

132. shearman] one who sheared the though you know not me ; are you 
woollen cloth in manufacturing it. not the man, sir, deny it if you can, 
" The Shermen " were one of the sir, that came from a strange place." 
trades who acted in the Chester Plays Perhaps from a song. 

(p. 7) ; but they are not included in 148. bricks alive . , . to testify it] 

Stowe's list of guilds. " Scharman, or An ancient bit of humour to seal up 

scherman, Tonsor, attonsor, tonsarius " a figment with. " If you don't believe 

(Prompt. Parvulorum, Way). my word, the bricks," etc. Compare 

133. Adam] " Why should we be Golding's Ovid, viii. 902-905 : — 

thus kept in servitude and bondage ? " The Phrygians in that park 
We be all come from one father and Doo at this present day still shew 
one mother, Adam and Eve" (Grafton, the trees that shaped were 
p. 418 {1380-1381)). See note, iv. ii. Of theyr twoo bodies, growing yit 
119. And yack Strarv {Ha.z]itt's Dods- togither joyntly there, 
ley, v. 381) : " When Adam delved and These things did auncient men re- 
Eve span," etc. port of credit uerie good. 

145. deny it if you can] A stereo- For why there was no cause why 

typed expression. Compare Peele's Old they should lye." 
Wives Tale (455, b) : "I know you, 



sc. II.] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 145 

Staf. And will you credit this base drudge's words, 1 50 

That speaks he knows not what ? 

All. Ay, marry, will we ; therefore get ye gone. 

Bro. Jack Cade, the Duke of York hath taught you this. 

Cade. [Aside.] He lies, for I invented it myself Go to, 

sirrah; tell the king from me, that for his father's 155 
sake, Henry the Fifth, in whose time boys went to 
span-counter for French crowns, I am content he 
shall reign ; but I '11 be protector over him. 

Dick. And furthermore, we'll have the Lord Say's head 

for selling the dukedom of Maine. 160 

Cade. And good reason ; for thereby is England mained 
and fain to go with a staff, but that my puissance 
holds it up. Fellow kings, I tell you that that Lord 
Say hath gelded the commonwealth and made it an 
eunuch; and more than that, he can speak French ; 165 
and therefore he is a traitor, 

Sla/. O gross and miserable ignorance ! 

150-152. Staf. And . . . All. Ay, marry . . , gone] omitted Q. 153, 154. 
Bro. Jack . . . Cade. He . . . myself] 88, 89. Stafford. I, the Duke . . . You 
that. Cade. The Duke of York, nay, I learnt it myselfe. 154-158. Goto . ... 
over him] 103-106. Cade. But doest thou heare Stafford, tell the King, that for 
his fathers sake, in whose time boyes plaide at spatme-cotmter with Frenche 
Crownes, I am content that hee shall be King as long as he lives Marry alwaies 
provided. He be Protector ouer him. 159-166. Dick. And . . . Maine. Cade. 
And good . . . traitor] 108-114. Cade. And tell him, weele haue the Lord Sayes 
head, and the Duke of Somersets, for deliuering up the Dukedomcs of Anioy and 
Mayne, and selling the Townes in France, by which meanes England hath bene 
maimde euer since, and gone as it were with a crouch, but that my pidssance 
held it vp And besides they can speake French and therefore they are traitors. 
Stafford. As how I prethie ? 167. Staf. O . . . ignorance!] 107. Stafford. O 
monstroxis simplicitie. 

151. speaks he knows tiot what] Com- {The Fleise, Act iv. by E. Sharpham). 

pare Chapman (?), Two Wise Men, 11. See Nares and Strutt's Sports and Pas- 

i. {Minor Poems, p. 390), 1619 : " You times. In Kirkman's English Rogue, 

talk you know not what." And Peele, iv. 121 (1680), it is called " span- 

Edward I. (Dyce, 413, a) :— farthing." 

" Bereav'd her sense and memory at 159. Lord Say's head] See extract 

once, from Grafton at "Anjou and Maine," 

So that she spoke she ktiew nor iv. i. 86. 

how nor what." 160, 161. Maine . . . mained] See i. 

See below in Q: "You did take in i. 211 for more quibbling on "Maine." 

hand you know not ivhat " (in Scene ix.) Malone quotes from Daniel's Civil 

153. York hath taught you] See note Wars, 1595 : " Anjou and Maine, the 

at Scene x. 1. i. maim that foul appears." " Main " was 

157. span-counter] A game similar to an accepted early form or spelling of 

pitch and toss, as played nowadays. " maim." 

Very often mentioned and popular with 163. Fellow kings] In Marlowe's 
pages and such-like. Dekker and Web- Tamburlaine, Part II. i. iii. : " Loving 
ster mention it in Northward Ho (Pear- friends and fellow -kitigs." 
son, iii. 10), with a quibble on the counter 164. gelded the commotiwealth] Corn- 
prison: '' lie go to spa7tcounter with a.ny pare Love's Labour's Lost, u. i. 149, 
page in Europe for his best garters " and see note, Arden edition. 
10 



146 THE SECOND PART OF [act iv. 

Cade. Nay, answer if you can : the Frenchmen are our 
enemies ; go to then, I ask but this : can he that 
speaks with the tongue of an enemy be a good coun- 1 70 
seller, or no ? 

All. No, no ; and therefore we '11 have his head. 

Bro. Well, seeing gentle words will not prevail. 
Assail them with the army of the king. 

Staf. Herald, away; and throughout every town 175 

Proclaim them traitors that are up with Cade ; 
That those which fly before the battle ends 
May, even in their wives' and children's sight. 
Be hanged up for example at their doors. 
And you that be the king's friends, follow me. 180 

\Exeunt the two Staffords and Forces. 

Cade. And you that love the commons, follow me. 
Now show yourselves men ; 'tis for liberty. 
We will not leave one lord, one gentleman : 
Spare none but such as go in clouted shoon, 

168-171. Cade. Nay . . . or no P'l 115-118. Cade. Why the French men are 
our enemies he they not ? And then can hee that speakes with the tongue of an 
enemy be a good subject? Anstsjer me to that. 172-174. All. No . . . head. 
Bro. Well . . , king] 1 19-124. Stafford. Well sirrha, wilt thou yeeld thy selfe 
vnto the Kings mercy, and he will pardon thee and these their outrages and 
rebellious deeds ? Cade. Nay, bid the King come to me and he will, and then He 
pardon him, or otherwayes He hatie his Crowne tell him, ere it be long. 175-180. 
Staf. Herald . . . follow me] 125-127. Stafford. Go Herald, proclaime in all the 
Kings Townes, That those that will forsake the Retell Cade, Shall haue free 
pardon from his Maiesiie. Exet Stafford and his men. 181-189. Cade. And 
you . . .forward!] 128. Cade. Come sirs. Saint George for us and Kent. Exet 
omnes. 

169. I ask but this] "Answeremeto Richard III. in. iv. 81: "The rest 

that," the reading in Q, is paralleled by that love me, rise and follow me." 

"Answer me to what I ask you," Mac- And Peele, Battle of Alcazar, iv. ii. 

beth, IV. i. 60; and see 1 Henry IV. n. (435, b) : "And they that love my 

iii. 88. It may be regarded as a special honour follow me." And see the fol- 

idiom ; but " me " is perhaps merely lowing line in confirmation of the 

superfluous. formula. And Marlowe, Tamburlaine, 

174. Assail . . . with] Compare Cyw- Part II. i. iii. : " If thou wilt love the 

beline, 11. iii. 44. And Peele, Edward wars and follow me." 

I.: "My dreadful soul, assaiVd with 182. 'tis for liberty] This was the cry, 

doleful speech " (Dyce, 413, b). See or part of it, in the villeins' rebellion 

note at " overborne," Part I. 11. v. 10. (1381) ; " Now we be gotten together, 

179. hanged up] So in Spanish we will have wealth and liberty. [Cry 

Tragedy, 11. v. 10 : "A man hang'd all : Wealth and liberty.] King. . . . 

up and all the murderers gone." And as I am your true-succeeding prince 

in Marlowe, Tamburlaine, Part II. v. ... You shall have liberty and pardon 

i. (68, b) : " Take them and hang them all " (Jack Straw (v. 399)). 

both up presently." 184, clouted shoon] came to be a 

i8o. And you . . . friends, follow me] name for boors or country bumpkins. 

This line is a sort of standing dish " Where is more craft than in the 

where there is trouble. Compare 3 clouted shoen " {Mirror for Magistrates, 

Henry VI. iv. i. 123: "You that love 1563 [New Eng. Diet.)). And Greene's 

me and Warwick, follow me " ; and Quippe for an Upstart Courtier 



sc. Ill] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 147 

For they are thrifty honest men, and such 185 

As would, but that they dare not, take our parts. 

Dick. They are all in order, and march toward us. 

Cade. But then are we in order when we are most out of 

order. Come : march ! forward ! \Exeunt. 

SCENE \\\.— Another Part of Blackheath. 

Alarums to the fight, wherein both the Staffords are slain. 

Enter Cade and the rest. 

Cade. Where 's Dick, the butcher of Ashford ? 

Dick. Here, sir. 

Cade. They fell before thee like sheep and oxen, and 
thou behaved'st thyself as if thou hadst been in thine 
own slaughter-house : therefore thus will I reward 5 
thee, the Lent shall be as long again as it is ; and 
thou shalt have a license to kill for a hundred lacking 
one. 

Dick. I desire no more. 

Cade. And, to speak truth, thou deservest no less. This 10 
monument of the victory will I bear ; and the bodies 

Alarums to the battaile, and Sir Humphrey Stafford and his brother is slaine. 
Then enter lacke Cade againe and the rest. i, 2. Cade. Where's Dick . . . 

sir] omitted Q. 3-8. Cade. They . . . lacking one] 1-4. Sir Dicke Butcher, 

thou hast fought to day most valiantly, And knockt them down as if thoti hadst 
bin in thy slaughter house. And thus I will reward thee. The Lent shall be 
as long againe as it was. Thou shalt haue licence to kil for foure score &• one 
a week. g-ij. Dick. I desire . . . Cade. Fear . . . i/jee] omitted Q. 

(Grosart, xi. 214, 237) ; " I might bidden to kill meat during Lent (in 

perceine certaine clownes in clow ted Elizabeth's reign), excepting by special 

shoone gather it, & eate of it"; license for a certain number each week 

" An Vpstart, quasi start vp from for those who could not do without 

clow ted shoone.'^ An old expression to animal food (Malone). 

a rustic. Noe's wife, in her wrangling, 7, 8. a htmdred lacking one] Compare 

says : " Yei Noe, go cloute thi shone, Peele, Old Wives Tale (451, b) : " Look 

the better wille thai last" (Towneley you, sir ; he gave fourscore and nineteen 

Mysteries, p. 29, circa 1400). Northern, mourning gowns to the parish, when 

And Locrine, u. ii. : "will you any old he died, and because he would not 

shoes or buskins, or will you have your make them up a full hundred, they 

shoes clouted ? I will do them as well would not bury him; was not this good 

as any cobbler in Caithness." Schmidt dealing ? " 

has some obstinate view here. 10, 11. This monument of the victory] 

Steevens quotes here from Holinshed : 

SCENE III. "Jack Cade, upon his victory against 

I. the Staffords are slain] Steevens the Staffords, apparelled himself in Sir 

says " Sir Humphrey Stafford who was Humphrey's brigandine, set full of gilt 

killed at Sevenoke in Cade's rebellion, nails, and so in some glory returned 

is buried at Broomsgrove in Stafford- again toward London." Grafton says : 

shire (Vaillant)." " When . . . the covetous Cade, had thus 

5. slaughter-house] See above, iii. i. obtained victorie, and slayne the two 

212 (note). valyant Staffordes, he apparelled himselfe 

7. license to kill] Butchers were for- in their rich armure, and so with pompe 



148 THE SECOND PART OF [act iv. 

shall be dragged at my horse heels till I do come to 

London, where we will have the mayor's sword borne 

before us. 
Dick. If we mean to thrive and do good, break open the 1 5 

gaols and let out the prisoners. 
Cade. Fear not that, I warrant thee. Come ; let 's march 

towards London. [Exeunt. 

SCENE IV. — London. The palace. 

Enter the King with a supplication, and the Queen with 
Suffolk's head, the Duke of Buckingham, and the 
Lord Say. 

Queen. Oft have I heard that grief softens the mind, 
And makes it fearful and degenerate ; 
Think therefore on revenge, and cease to weep. 
But who can cease to weep and look on this ? 
Here may his head lie on my throbbing breast ; 5 

But where 's the body that I should embrace ? 

17, 18. Come . . . London] 5, 6. Drumme strike vp, for now weele march to 
London, for to morrow I meane to sit in the Kings seate at Westminster (speech 
1-4 continued). Exet omnes. 

Scene iv. 

Enter the King reading of a Letter, and the Qneene, zvith the Duke of Suffolk es 
head, and he Lord Say, with others. i-ii. Queen. Oft . , . the sword] 

omitted Q. 

and glorie returned againe towarde 15, 16. open the gaols and let out the 

London " (641). The brigandine has prisoners'] See extract from Fabyan at 

been so firmly accepted (from Holin- vii. i. (" inns of court"). And in yac^ 

shed) that it has found its way into the Strazv (by Peele) (Hazlitt's Dodsley, 

Cambridge edition as an instruction, v. 396) : " They have spoiled all South- 

and into Schmidt as an explanation, work, let out all the prisoners, broke up 

I propose to banish it for a much the Marshalsea and the King's Bench, 

happier word, "sallet." " Brigandine" and made great havoc in the borough." 

is not in the play anywhere. Fabyan's 17. Fear not that] don't be alarmed, 

account is : " And as soon (as) lak Cade that will be done. " Never fear that" 

had thus ouer comyn the Staffordes, he in Julius Ccesar. More often simply 

anone apparaylled h^ with the Knyghtes " Fear not." 

apparayll, and dyd on hym his brygan- 17. / warrant thee] I '11 guarantee it, 

ders set with gylt nayle, and his salet In common use in Ireland, 
and gylt sporys' (181 1 edition, p. 623), 

15 16. Clear proof that Shakespeare Scene iv. 
referred to Fabyan, since (in Scene x.) i. Queen. Oft have I heard] The 
Cade retains his sallet and addresses Queen's mourning is barely touched 
it as having saved his life many a time, upon in Q, A single line (see below. 
No doubt by this, when a fugitive, the 21) suffices for her. Shakespeare pays 
more costly articles were discarded, special attention always to this bold 
A helmet is more in keeping with a bad queen. Note later the number of de- 
monument than a brigandine. And capitated heads that appear in this Act. 
Cade found the " sallet was born to 5. throbbing breast] with grief. Com- 
do him good," with unmistakable stress, pare Faerie Queene, 11. iv. 17: "With 
15. thrive and do good] See note at hart then throbbing and with watry 
III. i. 292, on the expression in Q. eyes." 



sc. IV.] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 149 

Buck. What answer makes your grace to the rebels' sup- 
plication ? 

King. I '11 send some holy bishop to entreat ; 

For God forbid so many simple souls lO 

Should perish by the sword ! And I myself, 
Rather than bloody war shall cut them short, 
Will parley with Jack Cade their general. 
But stay, I '11 read it over once again. 

Queen. Ah ! laarbarous villains, hath this lovely face 1 5 

Ruled like a wandering planet over me, 
And could it not enforce them to relent, 
That were unworthy to behold the same ? 

King. Lord Say, Jack Cade hath sworn to have thy head. 

Say. Ay, but I hope your highness shall have his. 20 

King. How now, madam ! 

Still lamenting and mourning for Suffolk's death ? 

I fear me, love, if that I had been dead. 

Thou wouldest not have mourned so much for me. 

Queen. No, my love; I should not mourn, but die for thee. 2$ 

11-14. King. . . . And I myself . . . their . . . But the . . . it over once] 1-5, 
King. Sir Humphrey Stafford and his brother is slaine, And the Rebels march 
amaine to London, Go back to them and tell them thus from me, He come and 
parley with their . . . yet . . . the Letter ouer againe. Reade (before Yet staie). 
15-18. Queen. Ah I barbarous . . . the same?] omitted Q. 19. sworn] 6. 

solemnely vowde. 20. Say. Ay, . . . his] 7. Say. I . . . his. 21-24. How 
now . . . me, love, if that I . . . for me] 8-10. Hozv now . . . my love, if I . . . 
for me (as prose), 25. No . . . for thee] 11. No . . . for thee. 

7, 8. rebels' supplication] For this I would find time to parley with 

" humble supplication," see extract at some of them." 

"John Mortimer," iv. ii. 119. The expression occurs again in King 

11. perish by the sword] See Job John znd Love's Labour's Lost. Also 
xxxiii. 18, xxxvi. 12. The King's pious in the Contention. New Eng. Diet, is 
speech with his " holy bishop " are all too late with the term (1600). 
additional to Q. But in Shakespeare's 15. this lovely face] this episode re- 
Bible these texts read "pass by the calls that of another Queen Margaret 
sword." See, however, Matthew xxvi. (of Navarre) told by Dumas with respect 
52, ^^ perish ivith the sword." And Mar- to her lover, La Mole, whose head she 
lowe's Tamburlaine, Part I. iv. ii. : "Not obtained from the executioner. 

one should scape, but perish by our i5. wandering planet] In Holland's 

swords." Plinie, xviii. ch. 25 (p. 5S5), "Wan- 

12. cut them short] See note at in. dering stars or Planets" are treated 
i. 81 above: " Cutting short that fraud- of. 

ful man." Compare 2 Kings x. 32. 21. How now, madam] When the king 

11-13. I myself . . . will parley with] reproved Margaret for boxing the 

In Jack Straw (Hazlitt's Dodsley, v. Duchess Gloster's ear (i. iii.) he begins 

391), by Peele, the King (Richard II.) his speech in Q (wholly omitted in the 

says: "Tell them . . . Ourselves will finished play): " Beleeue me my love 

meet with them," after Sir John Morton thou wert much to blame." He is stiffer 

has advised : — now. Certainly the position is tightly 

"Thus would I deal with these re- strained here, 

bellious men ; 



150 THE SECOND PART OF [act iv. 

Enter a Messenger. 

King. How now ! what news? why com'st thou in such haste? 

Mess. The rebels are in Southwark ; fly, my lord ! 
Jack Cade proclaims himself Lord Mortimer, 
Descended from the Duke of Clarence' house, 
And calls your grace usurper openly, 30 

And vows to crown himself in Westminster. 
His army is a ragged multitude 
Of hinds and peasants, rude and merciless : 
Sir Humphrey Stafford and his brother's death 
Hath given them heart and courage to proceed, 35 

All scholars, lawyers, courtiers, gentlemen, 
They call false caterpillars, and intend their death. 

King. O graceless men ! they know not what they do. 

Buck. My gracious lord, retire to Killingworth, 

Until a power be raised to put them down. 40 

Queen. Ah, were the Duke of Suffolk now alive. 
These Kentish rebels would be soon appeased ! 

26. King. How now . . . /las^^r.''] omitted Q. 27-37. Mess. The rebels . . . 
their death] 12-17. Messen. Oh fiie my Lord, the Rebels are entered Southwarke, 
and haue almost wonne the Bridge, calling your grace an usurper, And that 
monstrous Rebell Cade hath sworne To Crowne himselfe King in Westminster, 
Therefore flie my Lord, and poste to Killingworth. 38. King. Ok . . . they do] 
omitted Q. 39. Buck. My . . . Killingworth] Compare lost line, Messenger, 
above. 41, 42. Queen. Ah, were . . . appeased I] omitted Q (but see below, 
Sc, ix. 11. 6-8). 

27. The rebels are in Southwark] 38. O graceless men I . . . do] Here, 
" The king . . . doubting as much his as at 11. 8-10 in this scene, the religious 
familier seruants, as his vTiknowen side of Henry is again brought promin- 
subiectes (which spared not to speake ently forward, as throughout the play, 
that the Capitaines cause was profitable Neither passages are in Q. " Graceless" 
for the common wealth) departed in all is met with again in Part I. v. iv. 14 ; 
haste to the Castell of Kylingworth in in King jfohn, and in Lucrece. Peele 
Warwikeshire, leaving onely behinde uses it: "graceless wretches murder'd 
him the Lorde Scales to keepe the Towre him by night " {Honour of the Garter 
of London. The Capitaine, being (Dyce 587, b), 1593). The Chronicler 
aduertised of the Kings absence, came calls them an "ungracious company." 
first into Southwarke, and there lodged See note at v. 7 below. Let us hope 
at the whyte Hart, prohibyting to all this scene was Peele's in conception, 
men murder, rape, or robbery : by which It is only 25 lines in the original, where 
coulour he allured to him the harts of " march amaine to London " is like 
the common people" (Grafton, 641, Peele. See Luke xxiii. 34: "Father, 
642). But he broke these fair pretences, forgive them; for they know not what 
which was his ruin. they do." 

37. caterpillars] " affirming his com- 39. retire to Killingworth] See at line 

myng, not to be against [the King], but 26 above. 

against . . . oppressors of the poore i^i. were . . . Suffolk fiow alive]This 

Commonaltie, flatterers . . . suckers of remark occurs later in Q ; see Sc. ix. 

his pursse and robbers of his subiectes " below. There is a deal of puzzling 

(641). This old term (caterpillars of transposition in the later play, in these 

the state) was very common, with its scenes. 

opportunity for quibbling — pillars of the 41,42. This remark of the Queen's 

state, and pillers (robbers). has fallen from its place in the Conten- 



sc. IV.] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 151 

King. Lord Say, the traitors hate thee, 

Therefore away with us to Killingworth. 
Say. So might your grace's person be in danger. 45 

The sight of me is odious in their eyes ; 

And therefore in this city will I stay, 

And live alone as secret as I may. 

Enter another Messenger. 

Second Mess. Jack Cade hath gotten London bridge ; 

The citizens fly and forsake their houses ; 50 

The rascal people, thirsting after prey, 

Join with the traitor ; and they jointly swear 

To spoil the city and your royal court. 
Buck. Then linger not, my lord ; away ! take horse. 
King. Come, Margaret : God, our hope, will succour us. 55 
Queen. My hope is gone, now Suffolk is deceased. 
King. Farewell, my lord : trust not the Kentish rebels. 
Buck. Trust nobody, for fear you be betrayed. 
Say. The trust I have is in mine innocence, 

And therefore am I bold and resolute. 60 

[Exeunt. 

43, 44. Lord Say . . . Killingworth'] 18-22. Go bid Buckingham and Clifford, 
gather An Army up, and meete with the Rebels. Come Madame, let us haste to 
Killingworth. Come on Lord Say, go thou along with us. For feare the Rebell 
Cade do finde thee out. 45-5S. Say. So might . . . Buck. Trust nobody . . .] 
omitted Q. 59, 60. Say. The trust . . . resolute. Exeunt} 23-26. Say. My 

innocence my Lord shall pleade for me. And therefore with your highnesse leave. 
He staie behind. King. Euen as thou wilt my Lord Say, Come Madame, let vs 
go. Exet omnes. 

tion (which should be here) to the their armes, amased and appalled, lept 

beginning of Scene ix. See note there into the river : other . . . were in 

at 1. I. their houses suffocat (here was the 

43. Lord Say, the traitors hate thee] great Suffolk pun) and smoldered . . . 

Lord Say was included in the accusa- in conclusion, the rebels gate the 

tion of the Commons against the Duke drawe bridge and drowned many, and 

of Suffolk, for the loss of Anjou and slue lohn Sutton Alderman . . . with 

Maine. See note, iv. i. 86. many other, beside Mathew Gough. . . . 

49. London bridge] " The multitude This hard and sore conflict endured on 

of the rebels draue the Citezens from the Bridge till ix. of the clocke in the 

the stoulpes at the bridge foote, to the mornyng, in doubtfull chaunce . . . 

drawe bridge, and beganne to set fyre sometyme the Londoners were bet back 

in diuers houses. Alas what sorrowe it to the stulpes at Saint Magnus corner, 

was to beholde that miserable chaunce ; and sodainly agayne the rebels were 

for some desyring to eschewe the fyre, repulsed and driuen backe to the stulpes 

lept on his enimies weapon and so in Southwarke " (642, 643). " Saint 

died; fearefuU women with children in Magnus' corner" appears below, viii. i, 



152 THE SECOND PART OF [act iv. 



SCENE V. — London. The Tower. 

Enter Lord SCALES upon the Tower, walking. Then enter two 

or three Citizens below. 

Scales. How now ! is Jack Cade slain ? 

First Cit. No, my lord, nor likely to be slain; for they 
have won the bridge, killing all those that with- 
stand them. The lord mayor craves aid of your 
honour from the Tower, to defend the city from the 5 
rebels. 

Scales. Such aid as I can spare you shall command ; 
But I am troubled here with them myself; 
The rebels have essayed to win the Tower. 
But get you to Smithfield and gather head, lO 

And thither I will send you Matthew Goffe ; 
Fight for your king, your country, and your lives ; 
And so farewell, for I must hence again. 

\^Exeimt. 

Enter the Lord Skayles upon the Tower ivalles walking. Enter three or foure 
Citizens below. i-6. Scales. How . . . First Citizen. No . . . craves . . . 

rebels] 1-6. Lord Scales. How . . . i. Citizen. No . . . craueth . . . Rebels (as 
verse). 7-13. Scales. Such aid . . . essay'd . . . he}ice again] 7-13. Lord 

Scales. Such aide . . . attempted . . • hence againe. Exet omnes. 

I. How now I] Very common in don, with Mathew Gough, the often 
Shakespeare's plays from first to last, named Capitaine in Normandie . . . 
It is perhaps more abundant even in they purposed to make them priuie . . . 
the Contention than in the revision, of their entent. The Lord Scales pro- 
Greene uses it in Alphonsus, etc., but mised them his ayde, with shooting of 
I doubt if any writer has it so pat as ordinaunce, and Mathew Gough was by 
Shakespeare. However, Kyd couldn't him appointed, to assist the Mayre and 
get on without it either. Used where the Londoners" (p. 642). Scene v. 
we say " How," " Well " or " what should precede the latter part of 
news," interrogatively. It is fortunately Scene iv., historically soalso should 
not easy to remember always that many Cade's speech in Scene iv., which is 
such expressions which have a pleasant obviously misplaced, 
archaic ring, and are further consecrated 10. gather head] This expression has 
by their use in favoured authors and occurred earlier in the Contention, at 
writings, were mere common-places in the end of in. i. 382, 383. So Peele 
speech. in the Battle of Alcazar, iii. i (Dyce, 

7. Such aid as I can spare you shall 432, a) : — 
command] " The wise Maior and sage " The Spaniard ready to embark 

Magistrates . . . determined with force himself, 

to repell and expulse this mischieuous Here gathers to a head" ; 

heade, with his vngracious company, i.e. collects together a force. Used in 

And because the Lorde Scales was a different sense in The Tempest. See 

ordeyned Keeper of the Toure of Lon- Part I. i. iv. 100, and note. 



sc. VI.] KING HENRY THE SIXTH ] 53 



SCENE VI, — London. Cannon Street. 

Enter Jack Cade and the rest, and strikes his staff on 

London-stone. 

Cade. Now is Mortimer lord of this city. And here, sitting 
upon London-stone, I charge and command that, of 
tiie city's cost, the pissing-conduit run nothing but 
claret wine this first year of our reign. And now 
henceforward it shall be treason for any that calls me 5 
other than Lord Mortimer. 

Enter a Soldier, running. 

Sold. Jack Cade ! Jack Cade ! 

Cade. Knock him down there. \T hey kill him. 

Smith. If this fellow be wise, he '11 never call you Jack 

Cade more : I think he hath a very fair warning. 10 

Dick. My lord, there 's an army gathered together in Smith- 
field. 

Cade. Come then, let's go fight with them. But first, go 

I. here\ now, Q. 2, 3. / charge . . . cost\ 2, 3. We command, That the 

first yeare of our raigne. 4. claret wine . . . reign] 4. red wine. 4, 6. 

And . . . other than Lord Mortimer] 5-7. Attd . . . any otherwise then Lord 
Mortemer (Cade's speech printed as if verse). Enter a souldicr. 7, 8. Sold, 
yack . . . there] 8, 9. Sould. lacke . . . Cade. Sounes, knock hiw downe. 
They kill him. g, 10. Smith. If this . . . warning] omitted Q. 11-15. Dick. 
My lord, there's . . . in Smithfield . . . go and set . . . on fire . . . away] 
10-15. Dicke. My Lord, theirs . . . into Smythfield . . . go on and set . . . 
afire . . . away. Exet omnes. Alarmcs, and then Matthew Goffe is slaine, 
and all the rest with him. Then enter lacke Cade again, and his company. 

I, 2. Mortimer lord of this city ... 4. claret wine] Already mentioned 

London-stone] Grafton places this event in the Contention. See note at 

before the London bridge fight, at the " charneco," 11. iii. 63 : "I pledged 

time Cade was at the White Hart him in a cup of neate claret-wine." 

in Southwark : " But after that, he Occurs in a tract {1588), reprinted as 

entered into London, and cut the Kyd's by Boas (p. 247). 
ropes of the draw bridge, striking his 8. Knock him down] The Contention 

sworde on London stone, saiyng : now is printers have at last arrived at a reason- 

Mortimer Lorde of this Citie " (p. 642). able printing of " zounds." It is 

■i. pissing-conduit] "The little Con- "sounes" here. Earlier as "sonnes" 

duite called the pissing Conduife, by it caused confusion, 
the Stokes Market" (Stow's Survey of 9, 10. he'll never call you Jack Cade 

London). It is mentioned by Nashe, T/ze more] An insult to the Knight. Per- 

Unfortjtnate Traveller (Grosart, v. 20), haps suggested by : " He also put to 

written in 1593. This last reference is execucion in Southwarke diuers persons 

referred to by Ritson (Steevens' Shake- . . . of his old acquaintaunce, least they 

speare) in an unintelligible manner, should blase and declare his base birth, 

Steevens has a further note, illustrating and lowsy lynage, disparagyng him from 

the expression from French historical his vsurped surname of Mortimer" 

records, date 1453. It occurs very (Grafton, p. 642). 
often in the Contention. 



154 



THE SECOND PART OF 



[act IV. 



and set London bridge on fire, and, if you can, burn 
down the Tower too. Come, let's away. 15 

[Exeunt. 

SCENE VII. — London. Smithfield. 

Alarums. Matthew Goffe is slain and all the rest. Then 
enter Jack Cade with his company. 

Cade. So, sirs. Now go some and pull down the Savoy ; 

others to the inns of court : down with them all. 
Dick. I have a suit unto your lordship. 
Cade. Be it a lordship, thou shalt have it for that 

word. 5 

Dick. Only that the laws of England may come out of 

your mouth. 
John. [Aside.] Mass, 'twill be sore law then ; for he was 

thrust in the mouth with a spear, and 'tis not whole 

yet. 10 

I, 2. Cade. So, . . . them all] i, 2. Cade. So, . . . them all, 3-5. / have 

... a lordship, thou . . . word] 3-5. / haue ... a Lordship Dicke, and thou 
. . . word. 6-12. Only that . . . cheese] omitted here, but see above, Scene 
ii. 74-83 collation. 



14. set London bridge on fire] See 
note at iv. 48 for the Chronicle version ; 
and below (iv. vii. 124) for the Contention 
passage. 

Scene yii. 

Matthew Goffe is slain] See note 
at iv. 48. 

I, 2. Savoy . . . inns of court] Fwm 
Fabyan's account of the 1381 rebellion. 
Holinshed does not mention the " Inns 
of Court." See Introduction upon 
yack Straw. Fabyan says (430, 
edited 1811) : "They . . . came vnto 
ye duke of Lancasters place standyng 
without ye Temple Barre, callyd Sauoy, 
& spoyled that was therin & after set 
it upon fyre & brent it. . . . Than 
they entryd the cytie & serchied the 
Temple and other inns of Court, & 
spoyled theyr places & brent theyr 
bokys of lawe, & slewe as many men 
of lawe & questmongers as they myght 
fynde ; & that done they went to Seynt 
Martyns ye Graunde, & toke with them 
all seyntwary men, & the prysons of 
Newgate, Ludgate, & of bothe Counters, 
& distroyed theyr registers & bokis, 
& in lyke maner they dyd with the 
prysoners of the Marshalse & Kynges 
Benche in Southwerke " (Fol. C. xlviii.). 



Fabyan names the leaders as follows : 
" In this mayers yere and ende of the 
thyrde yere of Kyng Richard ... ye 
comons arose sodeynly and ordeynyd 
to them rulers and capytaynys, & 
specially in Kent and Essex, the whiche 
namyd theyr leders lacke Strawe, Wyl 
Wawe, Watte Tyler, lacke Shepeherde, 
Tomme Myller, and Hobbe Carter." 
The Contention gives a Will and a Tom. 
Compare here (Peele's jfack Straw, 
Hazlitt's Dodsley, v. 393, 394) : " Re- 
enter Tom Miller, with Jack Straw, 
Wat Tyler, Hob Carter . . . 
Hob. And we '11 not leave a man of law 
Not a paper worth a haw. 
And make him worse than a daw 
That shall stand against Jack 
Straw." 

6, 7. that the laws of England may 
come out of your mouth] Boswell Stone 
quotes Holinshed (iii. 432) : " putting 
his [Watt Tyler] hand to his lips, that 
within foure dales all the lawes of 
England shotild come foorth of his 
mouth." 

9-11. thrust in the mouth with a 
spear . . . stinking law] These lines, 
John's and Smith's asides, have been 
transposed hither from Cade's first ap- 
pearance, Scene ii. in the Contention, 



sc. VII ] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 



155 



Smith. [Aside.] Nay, John, it will be stinking law ; for 
his breath stinks with eating toasted cheese. 

Cade. I have thought upon it ; it shall be so. Away ! burn 
all the records of the realm : my mouth shall be the 
parliament of England. 1 5 

/o/in. [Aside.] Then we are like to have biting statutes, 
unless his teeth be pulled out. 

Cade. And henceforward all things shall be in com- 
mon. 

Enter a Messenger. 

Mess. My lord, a prize, a prize ! here 's the Lord Say, 20 
which sold the towns in France ; he that made us 

13-15. Cade, I have . . . England] 6-8. Dicke. That we may go burne all the 
Records, And that all writing may be put dowjie, And nothing tisde but the score 
and the Tally. i6, 17. John. Then . . . out] omitted Q. 18, ig. (Cade. 
And . . . common] 8-16. Cade. Dicke it shall be so, and . . . common Cade's 
speech here in Q continues. Scene ii. 76-82 above, reading) Why ist not a 
miserable thing . . . parchment be made, &■ then with a litle blotting ouer with 
inke, a man should vndo himself e. Some saies tis . . . their waxe,for I am sure 
I neuer scald to anything but once, and . . . since (see below, vii. 125, for close 
of Contention dialogue here). Enter George. 20, 21. Mess. My lord . . . 

France] 22, 23. George. My Lord . . . France. 21-23. he that . . . subsidy] 
omitted Q. 



They should have remained there. 
Cade, now victorious, is too great a 
personage for such slights, and they 
belong to that dialogue. From 7 to 
12 have rambled here by some error. 

14. records of the realm] See note at 
1. I of this scene. " Parchment" in ii. 
79 has the same reference. Compare 
(Peele's) Jack Straw (Hazlitt's Dods- 
ley, V. 398) : " Making foul slaughter 
of your noblemen. Burning up books 
and matters of records, Defacing 
houses." And at page 401 : " Enter 
Tom Miller to burn papers ... I 
have made a bonfire here. Of a great 
many of bonds and indentures. And 
obligations ; faith I have been 
amongst The ends of the court, and 
among the records ... in the Guild- 
Hall." 

16,17. biting statutes . . . teeth] See 
note at " forfeits in a barber's shop " 
(Measure for Measure, v. i, 323, Arden 
edition). Since I wrote that note I 
have met the following passage in 
Plaine Percevall (reprint 1842, p. 19) : 
" Speake a blooddy word in a Barbors 
shop, you make a forfet ; and good 
reason too, Caphim sirra, if he pay it 
not." This tends to invalidate my note. 

18, 19. all things shall be in common] 
See note at " all the realm shall be in 



common," above, ii. 68. From the earlier 
rebellion account in Grafton. 

20. here '5 the Lord Say] This event 
took place before London Bridge battle, 
while Cade was at the White Hart in 
Southwark, according to Hall and Graf- 
ton : " And upon the third day of lulij, 
he caused syr James Fynes Lorde Say, 
and Threasorer of England, to be 
brought to the Gylde hall of London, 
and there to be arrayned : which being 
before the king's Justices put to aun- 
swere, desyred to be tryed by his peeres, 
for the lenger delay of his lyfe. The 
Capitaine perceiuing his dilatorie pie, 
by force tooke him from the officers, 
and brought him to the standard in 
Chepe, and there caused his head to be 
striken off, and pitched it on a high 
pole, which was openly borne before 
him through the streete. And this 
cruell tyraunt not content with the 
murder of the Lorde Say, went to Myle 
ende, and there apprehended syr lames 
Cromer, then Shriefe of Kent, and 
Sonne in lawe to the sayde Lorde Say, 
and caused him there likewise to be 
hedded, and his head to be fixed on a 
Pole, and with these two heades, thys 
blooddy Butcher entred into the Citie 
agayne, and in dispite caused them in 
euery strete, to kisse together " (p. 642). 



156 



THE SECOND PART OF 



[act IV. 



pay one-and-twenty fifteens, and one shilling to the 
pound, the last subsidy. 

Enter GEORGE Bevis, with the Lord Say. 

Cade. Well, he shall be beheaded for it ten times. Ah, 
thou say, thou serge, nay, thou buckram lord ! now- 
art thou within point-blank of our jurisdiction regal. 
What canst thou answer to my majesty for giving 
up of Normandy unto Mounsieur Basimecu, the 
Dauphin of France ? Be it known unto thee by these 
presence, even the presence of Lord Mortimer, that I 



25 



30 



24. Well . . . times] omitted Q. 24, 25. Ah, . . . lord] 24. Cade, Come hither 
thou Say, thou George, thou buckrum lord. 25, 26. Now . . . regal] omitted 
Q. 27-29. What . . . France .^] 25-27. What answere canst thou make vnto 
my mightinesse, for deliuering vp the townes in France to Mounsier bus mine 
cue, the Dolphin of France ? 29-32. Beit . . , thou art] omitted Q. 



22. fifteens] See note at " John 
Mortimer," iv. ii. 119. But the refer- 
ence is to fifteen taken up for the trans- 
porting of Queen Margaret to England. 
See I. i. 134. 

23. subsidy] special assessment. 

25. say] More name - quibbling. 
Walter, Cade, Maine, Pole, Suffolk, 
Lacy. A strong and common stuff, 
fit to supply an abusive epithet. The 
punishment for a woman of the lowest 
order is thus given in Whetstone's 
Promos and Cassandra, Part II. iv. ii. 
(1578) :- 

" Into a carte they did the queane 

convay 

Apparelled in colours verie gaye 

Both hoode and gowne of greene 

and yellow saye." 

Whatever it was, it was durable, cheap, 

and probably nasty. Some kind of 

coarse silk cloth. Holland speaks of 

" that fine say whereof silke cloth is 

made " (Plinie, xi. 23). The resolve to 

connect say with soie (saye) has led to 

error. Prompt. Parvulorum has " Saye, 

cloth, Sagum." Even in Cotgrave the 

two are not connected where reference 

should first have been made ; he has 

" seyette, serge or sey." Palsgrave 

(1530) has a similar gloss. See also 

Howell's Vocabulary, Section xxv. : 

" Silk serge ; Saia di Seta ; Serge de 

soie." And " Serge ; saia rascia " ; 

" Mixt serge ; saia mischio," etc. etc. 

25. serge] Another cheap, common 

stuff, fit to slight a nobleman with. 

Ben Jonson was continually reproached 

for his shabby clothes, made of per- 



petuana. When Hedon, in Cynthia's 
Revels, in. ii., is blackguarding Crites 
(Jonson), he says : " By this heaven, 
I wonder at nothing more than our 
gentlemen ushers that will suffer a 
piece of serge or perpetuana to come 
into this presence : methinks they 
should, out of their experience, better 
distinguish the silken disposition of 
courtiers, than to let such terrible 
coarse rags mix with us, able to fret 
any smooth or gentle society to the 
threads with their rubbing devices." 
A pity Ben didn't mention " say" here. 
There isn't a note on this passage in 
the commentators that did not either 
enlarge an earlier muddle or create a 
new one. Halliwell says there was a 
quibble between George and serge ! 
Halliwell's sense of humour is suspect- 
ful. 

25. buckram] " coarse linen stiffened 
with glue ' ^Schmidt). It was used (as 
now) for making bags (Grosart's Greene, 
X. 77 ; Grosart's Nashe, ii. 17) and cur- 
tains (Greene, x. 272) ; and giants for 
the stage (Nashe, ii. 131). 

26. point-blank] range, reach. Used 
in. the literal (gunnery) sense in Merry 
Wives of Windsor, iii. ii. 34, and see 
note, Arden edition, p. 121. 

29, 30. by these presence] Corrected 
to " presents " in F. 4. Compare As 
You Like It, I. ii. 132. Legal (per has 
literas presentes), and commonly used 
in mandates. See Love's Labour 's Lost, 
IV. iii. 186 (Arden edition, note, p. 97). 
In Jonson's Cynthia's Revels, v. : " Be it 
known to all that profess courtship by 



sc. VII.] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 157 



am the besom that must sweep the court clean of such 
filth as thou art. Thou hast most traitorously cor- 
rupted the youth of the realm in erecting a grammar- 
school ; and whereas, before, our forefathers had no 
other books but the score and the tally, thou hast 35 
caused printing to be used ; and contrary to the king 
his crown, and dignity, thou hast built a paper-mill. 
It will be proved to thy face that thou hast men about 

32-34. Thou hast . . . school] 28, 29. Atid more then so, thou hast most traitor- 
ously erected a grammer schoole, to infect the youth of the realme. 34-36. and 
whereas . . . used] omitted Q (but see 1. 7 above, and iv. ii. 47, also Contention 
for score and tally). 36, 37. and contrary to . . . built a . . . mill] 29, 30. 
and against . . . built vp a . . . mill. 38-41. It will be . . . talk of . . . 
can . . . hear] 30-33. nay it wil be said to thy . . . face, that thou kepst men in 
thy house that daily reades of bookes with red letters, and talkes of ... is able 
to endure it. 



these presetits." And Greene's Looking 
Glasse for London : " Then, friends, 
know ye by these preseitts, I will eate up 
all my meate" (Grosart, xiv. log). See 
too Marlowe's Doctor Fanstus, the 
agreement between Mephistopheles and 
the Doctor. And the old play of Timon, 
IV. ii. 

31. the besom that must sweep] " I 
will also make it a possession for the 
bittern . . . and I will sweep it with the 
besom of destruction " (Isaiah xiv. 23). 
Not again in Shakespeare. 

33i 34' grammar-school] Holinshed 
says that in 1381 the rebels obliged 
" teachers of children in grammar 
schooles to sweare neuer to instruct 
any in their art . . . it was dangerous 
among them to be knowne for one that 
was lerned ; and more dangerous, if 
any men were found with a penner and 
inkhorne at his side ; for such seldome 
or neuer escaped from them with life " 
(Boswell Stone). See above, iv. ii. 109. 
" Pen and inkhorn " occurs again, Much 
Ado About Nothing, in. v. 63. " Gram- 
mar-school " not elsewhere. 

34) 35' ''" other books] See note at 
" records," above, 1. 14. 

35. score and tally] Cade uses these 
words three times in the text of the 
Contention, where jumbling seems to 
have taken place largely in this Act. 
Not in Shakespeare again. Skeat re- 
fers to this passage in his edition of 
Piers the Plowman, ii. 56. A tally was 
a rod of hazel, with notches to mark 
accounts of monies lent, etc. The 
other of the pair was in the customer's 
hands. The combination of terms in 
the text has not been noted else- 



where. In Arden of Feversham, v. i., 
Black Will meets a brewer's cart : 
" I made no more ado, but went to 
the clerk and cut all the notches of 
his tallies, and beat them about his 
head." 

37. paper-mill] In 1588, that inex- 
haustible writer, Thomas Churchyard, 
published " A Sparke of Friendship and 
Wavme Good-will . . . with a descrip- 
tion and commendation of a Paper-Mill, 
now and of late set up (neere the Town 
of Darthford) by an High Germayn, 
called M. Spilman, Jeweller to the 
Qu. most excellent Majestie." The 
Paper-Mill is described in a poem as 
an entirely new thing : — 

" Though some do say, in France, 
and other place, 

Are Paper-Mills, as fayre and 
straunge as this ; 

What 's that to us ? this gives our 
Country grace. 

And to aU Kent a double honour 
is." 
Spill-man is " Help-man," because 
" Six hundred men are set at worke by 
him That else might starve." No 
wonder a Kentish socialist was incensed. 
Capital was in sight. The tract will be 
found at the end of the second volume 
of Nichols' Progresses of Queen Eliza- 
beth. The words about printing may 
have been suggested: — 

" Now stripling yong but late cam„e 
out of shell. 

To schoole good boyes . . . 

Now Printer's presse . . . 

Besturre the stampe." 
And the anachronism was overlooked. 
See " base-born," note, i. iii. 84. 



158 THE SECOND PART OF [act iv. 

thee that usually talk of a noun, and a verb, and such 
abominable words as no Christian ear can endure to 40 
hear. Thou hast appointed justices of peace, to call 
poor men before them about matters they were not 
able to answer. Moreover, thou hast put them in 
prison ; and because they could not read, thou hast 
hanged them ; when indeed only for that cause they 45 
have been most worthy to live. Thou dost ride in a 
foot-cloth, dost thou not ? 

Saj^. What of that? 

Cade. Marry, thou oughtest not to let thy horse wear a 

cloak, when honester men than thou go in their hose 50 
and doublets. 

Dick. And work in their shirt too ; as myself, for example, 
that am a butcher. 

Say. You men of Kent, — 

Dick. What say you of Kent ! 55 

Saj/. Nothing but this : 'tis " bona terra, mala gens." 

Cade. Away with him ! away with him ! he speaks 
Latin. 

Say. Hear me but speak, and bear me where you will. 

Kent, in the Commentaries Csesar writ, 60 

Is termed the civil'st place of all this isle : 

41-44. Thou hast . . . prison'] 34, 35. And besides all that, thou hast appointed 
certaine Justices of peace in euery . . . to hang honest men that stcale for their 
living. 44, 45. and . . . hanged them] 35, 36. and . . . hung them vp. 45- 
47. when indeed . , . that , . . have been . . . dost ride in . . . not ?] 36-38, 
Onely for which . . . were . . , ridest on . . . not ? 48. What] 39, Yes, 
what. 49-51. Marry, thou . . . honester men than thoxi go . . . their . . . 
doublets] 40-42. Marry, I say thou . . . an honester man than thy selfe, goes 
. . . his . . . doublet. 52,53. Dick. And . . . butc her] omitted Q. 54-58. 

Say. You men . . . Latin] 43-49. Say. You men of Kent. All. Kent, what of 
Kent? Say. Nothing but bona terra. Cade. Bonum terrmn, sounds what ^s that? 
Dicke. He speakes French. Will. No tis Dutch. Nicke. No tis outtalian, I 
know it well inough. 59. Say. Hear . . . speak . . . will] 52, The^i noble 
Country-men, heare . . . spcake. 60, 61. Kent . . . writ, Is term'd the . . . 
isle] 50, 51, Say. Kent . . . wrote Termde it the . . . land. 

47, foot-cloth] See note above, iv. i. . , , Of all the inhabitants of this 

54, isle the civilest are the Kentishfolke " 

50,51, hose and doublets] In his later (Steevens). And Lyly, as Malone 

plays " doublet and hose " means a points out, quotes these words exactly 

male with Shakespeare {Much Ado in Euphues (Arber, p. 247), 1580. 

About Nothing, As You Like It, etc). Golding's translation appeared in 1565. 

54. men of Kent] Grosse says this In Euphues the reading is " Kentish- 
title belongs "to those east of the folke." See 3 Henry VI. i. ii. 41-43, 
Medway, the rest are called Kentish- where this passage is partly repeated. 
men." Modern. That the Kentishmen were full of spirit 

60, 6r. Kent . . . civil'st place] Gold- in those times appeared often in the 

ing translates the passage (Caesar's Com- Chronicles. Whenever there were 

mentaries, bk. v.) : " Ex his omnibus tempestuous broils in London, they 

sunt humanissimi qui Cantium incolunt came up to look for sport — or spoil. 



sc. vii] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 



159 



Sweet is the country, because full of riches ; 

The people liberal, valiant, active, wealthy ; 

Which makes me hope you are not void of pity. 

I sold not Maine, I lost not Normandy ; 

Yet, to recover them, would lose my life. 

Justice with favour have I always done ; 

Prayers and tears have moved me, gifts could never. 

When have I aught exacted at your hands, 

But to maintain the king, the realm, and you ? 

Large gifts have I bestowed on learned clerks, 

Because my book preferred me to the king, 

And seeing ignorance is the curse of God, 

Knowledge the wing wherewith we fly to heaven, 

Unless you be possessed with devilish spirits, 

You cannot but forbear to murder me : 

This tongue hath parleyed unto foreign kings 

For your behoof, — 

Cade. Tut, when struck'st thou one blow in the field ? 

Say. Great men have reaching hands : oft have I struck 
Those that I never saw, and struck them dead. 



65 



70 



75 



62-64. Sweet . . . pifyl omitted Q. 
mandie. 66-89. Yet, to recover them 

64. void of pity] "devoid of pity" is 
in Titus Andronicus, Shakespeare's (?) 
only use of " devoid." Spenser has 
"devoid of" (Faerie Queene, in. iv. 35), 
and in other places. ' ' Void of " was 
much commoner (Golding, Peele, 
Spenser, etc.). 

69, 70. exacted at your hands But to 
maintain the king] In Arnold's Chronicle 
(reprint 18 11, p. 179) there is " A Proui- 
sion by Acte of Parlement to brynge 
Kynge Henry the VI. out of the dett, 
ccc. Ixxxij. M.li." It was a general re- 
sumption of grants made since the 
beginning of his reign, with special 
exceptions in favour of the queen's 
dower, or freehold, the Colleges of 
Cambridge and Eton, and the Churches. 
Also the mayors and city burgesses and 
the Admiral of England were exempt, 
It was " to begynne and take effecte 
the fyrst daye of your parlement holden 
at Westmynster the XXVIIJ. yere of 
your regne." It announced that "the 
comons be so improvyshed by taking of 
vitayle for your houshold and other 
thinges in your sayd reame and nought 
payde for, and the quynzysne (fifteens) 
by your saide comons afore this tyme 
so often graunted . . . and by the 
graunte of subsidye upon the wulles 



80 



Nor- 



65. / . . . Normandy] 53. / . 
. . help of hatchet] omitted Q. 

(wools) and other grauntes . . . the 
comons be full nye dystroyed." The 
resumption was to take the place of 
fifteens and various other subsidies. 
" Prouided also that thys acte be not 
p'iudicial to your Chauncelor and 
Tresorer of England [Lord Say], 
priuie sel justice, barons, etc. . . . nor 
to ani other of your officers in the 
Curtis of recorde . . . sergeaunts of 
lawe, etc." This was the year of the 
rebellion, and affords a good insight to 
the people's state of mind, and plenty 
of grounds for hostility against Lord 
Say and his quinziemes. He was lord- 
treasurer in 1449, sequestered in 1450 
for Anjou and Maine, and handed over 
to Cade on the 4th July, 1450. The 
gifts on learned clerks is illustrated by 
the reserves in favour of Cambridge and 
Eton. " Maintaining the king " is " re- 
lieving your high estate." 

72. my book] book-knowledge, learn- 
ing. Compare Lovers Labour 's Lost, 
IV. ii. 113: "makes his book thine 
eyes." Study. 

76. forbear to mnrder] See note at 
" Forbear to judge," in. iii. 31. 

80. Great men have reaching hands] 
Compare Selimus (by Greene, Peele 
and Marlowe (Grosart's Greene, xiv. 



160 THE SECOND PART OF [act iv. 

Geo. O monstrous coward ! what, to come behind folks ! 
Say. These cheeks are pale for watching for your good. 
Cade. Give him a box o' the ear, and that will make 'em 

red again. 85 

Say. Long sitting, to determine poor men's causes, 

Hath made me full of sickness and diseases. 
Cade. Ye shall have a hempen caudle then, and the help 

of hatchet, 
Dick. Why dost thou quiver, man ? 90 

Say. The palsy, and not fear, provokes me. 
Cade. Nay, he nods at us ; as who should say, I '11 be 

even with you : 1 '11 see if his head will stand steadier 

on a pole or no. Take him away and behead 

him. 95 

Say. Tell me wherein have I offended most ? 

Have I affected wealth or honour ? speak. 

Are my chests filled up with extorted gold ? 

Is my apparel sumptuous to behold? 

Whom have I injured, that ye seek my death ? 100 

These hands are free from guiltless blood-shedding, 

90. Dich. Why . . . man ?\ 54. Cade. But wherefore doest thou shake thy head 
so? 91. The . . . provokes me] 55. It is the . . . that makes me. 92-111. 
Nay, he nods . . . two poles hither] 56-61. Cade. Nay thou nodst thy head, as who 
say, thou wilt be euen ivith me, if thou getst away, but He make thee sure inough, 
now I haue thee. Go take him to the standerd in Cheapside and chop of his head, 
and then go to milende greenc, to Sir lames Cromer his sonne in law, and cut off 
his head too, and bring them to me upon two poles presently. Away with him. 
Exet one or two, with the Lord Say. 

277): " Know'st thou not, Solyma, pen caudle" and "help of hatchet" 

kings haue long hands ? " A transla- speech below, are omitted in the Con- 

tion of an old saying in R. Edward's tention. 

Damon and Piihias (ante 1566) (Haz- 88, 89. caudle . . . hatchet] Com- 

litt's Dodsley, iv. 35) ; " leave off this pare the title of Lyly's tract above, 1. 

talk of King Dionysius. Carisophus. 84. Steevens read " pap of a hatchet " 

Why, sir ? he cannot hear us. Damon. (1793). He is to be hanged first and 

What then ? An nescis longas regi- beheaded, for the pole, afterwards, 

bus esse manus ? It is no safe talking Hanged and headed. " Caudle " is 



o"- 



of them that strikes afar off." Say's "candle" in Ff. For "hempen," with 

lines are a paraphrase of Damon's, reference to hanging, New Eng. Diet. 

"Great lords have long arms, but gives "hempyn lane" (Hoccleve, 1420). 

they do not reach to heaven," is Ger- Lodge has " hempen windows " {A 

man, and " kings have long arms," is Figge for Momus, 1595) ; Marlowe 

Italian. has " hempen tippit " in Jew of Malta. 

84. box 0' the ear] From the title "Caudle" must be a right emendation 

of Lyly's " Pappe with an Hatchet, here, though not so, I believe, in 

Alias, A figge for my God sonne. Or, Lovers Labour ^s Lost, iv. iii. 174; 

Cracke me this nut. Or, A Countrie see note, Arden edition. " Hempen 

cuffe, that is, a sound boxe of the wisp " occurs in this tract;"- and Nashe 

eare," etc. The earliest example of has half a dozen uses of the word. 
" box of the ear " in New Eng. Diet. 101. guiltless blood-shedding] shed- 

This passage as well as the " hem- ding of guiltless blood. 



sc. vii] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 161 

This breast from harbouring foul deceitful thoughts. 
O ! let me live. 

Cade. [Asz'de.] I feel remorse in myself with his words ; 

but r 11 bridle it : he shall die, an it be but for plead- 105 
ing so well for his life. Away with him ! he has a 
familiar under his tongue ; he speaks not o' God's 
name. Go, take him away, I say, and strike off his 
head presently ; and then break into his son-in-law's 
house, Sir James Cromer, and strike off his head, and 1 10 
bring them both upon two poles hither. 

A//. It shall be done. 

Say. Ah ! countrymen, if when you make your prayers, 
God should be so obdurate as yourselves, 
How would it fare with your departed souls ? 115 

And therefore yet relent and save my life. 

Cade. Away with him ! and do as I command ye. 

[Exeunt some with Lord SAY. 
The proudest peer in the realm shall not wear a head 
on his shoulders, unless he pay me tribute : there shall 
not a maid be married, but she shall pay to me her 120 
maidenhead, ere they have it. Men shall hold of me 
in capite ; and we charge and command that their wives 
be as free as heart can wish or tongue can tell. 

118-123. The proudest . . . wear . . . unless he . . . there . . . but she . . . 
Men . . . and . . . that their . . . wish or . . . tell] 62-67. There shall not a 
noble man weare . . . But he shall . . . for it. Nor there . . . but he shal fee 
to me for her Maydenhead or else, He haue it my self e, Marry I will that married 

102. harbouring foul deceitful affirmed that she was under age. He 

thoughts'] See above, in. i. 54 and 3 says to the Collector : — 

Henry VI. iii. ii. 164. Used in this "Thou hast thy task-money for all 

bad sense again in King Lear, 11. ii. that be here, 

108. The use in Spenser is not so : My daughter is not fourteen years 

" The noble hart that harbours vertuous old, therefore she goes clear." 

thought" {Faerie Queen, \. v. i). See Introduction on yack Straw. 

105. bridle] restrain; see above, i. i. 120, \21.maid be married . . . maiden- 
198, and Part III. iv. iv. ig. Also in head] Halliwell has a note in the Con- 
Comedy of Errors, but not elsewhere in tention here on "The disgusting custom 
Shakespeare. Greene uses it several of Mercheta Mulierum, with an extract 
times. See note above. One of many from Skene." See Cowell's Law Dic- 
expressions, cast off perhaps after tionary. Often referred to. See Beau- 
Greene's attack. It is not in Kyd. mont and Fletcher's Custom of the 

107. familiar] See note at Part I. in. County, which is founded upon it. Also 

ii. 122. Massinger's Guardian, i. v. (of tenants' 

11^. obdurate] See note, 3 Henry VI. daughters); and the question is dis- 

I. iv. 142. Marlowe's pronunciation, cussed in Gesta Grayorum, Part II. 

as in Tambtirlaine, Pa.rt I. v. i. : "your (Nichols' Progresses of Queen Elizabeth, 

obdurate breasts." iii. 329). See also Blount's Glosso- 

119-121. tribute . . . maidenhead] graphia, in v. Marcheta. 

jfack Straw (by Peele) opens with 122. in capite] in chief; by direct 

Jack's slaying of a " Collector of Tasks" grant from the Crown. Law term, 

(taxes, as in Grafton) for searching of 123, as free . . . tell] Halliwell says 

his daughter in his presence. He had {Contention, Shakespeare Library) : 

II 



162 THE SECOND PART OF [act iv. 

Dick, My lord, when shall we go to Cheapside and take 

up commodities upon our bills ? 125 

Cade. Marry, presently. 
All. O! brave. 

Re-enter one with the heads. 

Cade. But is not this braver ? Let them kiss one another, 
for they loved well when they were alive. Now part 
them again, lest they consult about the giving up 130 

men, . . . And that their . . . thinke,oy . . . tell (SiS verse). 124-127. DJcA. My 
lord . . . brave] (see above, 1. 20) 17-21. Nicke. But zvhcn shall we take vp those 
commodities Which yon told vs of. Cade. Marry he that will lustily stand to it, 
Shall go with me, and take vp these commodities following : Item, a gowne, a 
kirtle, a petticoatc, and a smocke. 123-128. (Two short scenes in Contcntioti ioWow 
toong can tell, wholly omitted in revision) 68-84. Enter Robin. Robin. O Captaine, 
London bridge is afire. Cade. Riinne to Billingsgate, and fetch pitch and flaxe 
and sqnench it. Enter Dicke and a Sargiant. Sargiant. Justice, iustice, I pray 
you Sir, let me hauc iustice of this fellow here. Cade. Why what has he done? 
Sarg. Alasse sir he has ranisht my wife. Dicke. Why my Lord he would haue 
rested me. And I went and entred my Action in his wines paper house. Cade. 
Dicke follow thy sute in her commoti place, You horson villaine you are a Sargiant 
voule. Take any man by the throate for tweliie pence, And rest a man when hees at 
dinner, And haue him to prison ere the meate be out of his mouth. Go Dicke take 
him hence and cut out his toong for cogging. Hough him for running, and to con- 
clude, Brane him with his owne mace. Exet with the Sargiant. Enter two with 
the Lord Sayes head, and Sir lames Cramers, upon two poles. 128-135. But is 

. . . kiss. Away /] 85-86. So, come carry them before me, and at euery lanes ends, 
let them kisse togither. 

" There are several ancient grants from speare's. Note "and to conclude"; 
our early kings to their subjects, written " rest" for " arrest," [Comedy of Errors, 
in rude verse, and empowering them to four times) ; " take by throat" [As You 
enjoy their lands as ' free as heart can Like It, but usual) ; " brain him with " 
wish or tongue can tell.' Nearly the [1 Henry IV. 11. iii. 24); "have one (to 
precise words occur in the Year Book a place)" often occurs; and "follow a 
of Henry VII." Halliwell's statement suit" (Merchant of Venice and Comedy 
is difficult to know what to do with, of Errors). "Hough" is not in Shake- 
But the expression occurs in Nashe, speare but it is Biblical (Joshua xi. 6). 
Have with you, etc. (Grosart, iii. 47), And to conclude, the omitted parts are 
1596 : " so rascally printed and ill inter- by Shakespeare. In the second omitted 
preted as heart can thinke, or tongue scene Cade turns the tables of immor- 
can tell." I would rather have my ality on the ruling classes. See note 
little modest Nashe note. Compare above, 11. 121, 122 ; and below, viii. 29. 
too Kyd's Spanish Tragedie, i. i. : — For " hough," see note at " burly-boned" 
" I saw more sights than thousand x. 57. "Cog" is frequent in Shake- 
tongues can tell, speare. And for " Brain him with his 
Or pennes can write, or mortall own mace," compare " Brain him with 
harts can think." his lady's fan," in I Henry IV. 11. iii. 24. 
See Faerie Queene, i. xi. 40 and 11. 124, 125. take up commodities] This 
i. II. speech may have been also curtailed (like 
123. tongue can tell] After those words that in last note) in order to omit gross- 
occur (in Contention) two short scenes ness from Contention. For " commodi- 
wholly omitted in the revision. The ties" in this sense (goods), see Measure 
first merely states that London bridge for Measure, iv. iii. v. (and note, Arden 
has been fired, as Cade ordered in scene edition). And for the quibbling on 
vi. (and see note, iv. 48). The second is " bills " (which is not in Contention), see 
indecent, but the language is Shake- Muck Ado About Nothing, in. iii. 190. 



sc. viii] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 



163 



of some more towns in France. Soldiers, defer 
the spoil of the city until night ; for with these 
borne before us, instead of maces, will we ride through 
the streets ; and at every corner have them kiss. 
Away! [Exeunt. 135 

SCENE Ylll.—Soutkwark. 

Alarum and retreat. Enter Cade and all his rabblement. 

Cade. Up Fish Street! down Saint Magnus' Corner! 
kill and knock down ! throw them into Thames ! 
[Sound a parley.'] What noise is this I hear ? Dare 
any be so bold to sound retreat or parley, when I 
command them kill ? 5 



Alarum . . . Enter Cade . . . Cade. Up Fish Street . . . kill I] omitted Q. 
Etiter Buckingham . . . ] Enter the Duke of Buckingham and Lord Clifford the 
Earle of Comberland. 6-18. Buck. Ay, here . . . Clif. What say . . . 



Scene viii. This scene lias been en- 
tirely rewritten by Shakespeare. The 
original one in the Contention bears 
stronger evidence of Peele's work than 
we have had for some little time ; cer- 
tainly since Cade's appearance. To 
begin with, Cade's speech (gg-104) is 
not that of Shakespeare's Cade. It 
is Peele's " servile yokes." Compare 
" overwearied with the yoke 

And servile bondage of these Eng- 
lishmen " 
(Edward the First, Dyce, 405, b). 
" Servile" is a favourite with Peele (fol- 
lowing Spenser). " Pull them down," 
often in Peele ; " pull down lions and 
untamed beasts," same play (428, a). 
And " warlike friends," twice in twenty 
lines, is like Peele; " warlike " is con- 
stantly in his plays. " Muster your 
selves," " mustering of his men," 
Battle of Alcazar, iv. i. " If honour 
be the marke whereat thou aim'st " is 
a line of Peele's, Battle of Alcazar, 11. 
iv. (430, b). 

" our forefathers wonne, 

And winne again that thing " 
— that is quite in Peele's catchword 
style of repetition. 

" We come to fight, and fighting vow 
to die, 

Or else to win the thing for which 
we came," 
will suffice, from his Battle of Alcazar, 
IV. ii. (435, b), but there are plenty 



more. Cade's word " valiancy " also 
is Peele's Cade, not Shakespeare's ; 
" forc'd for want of valiancy my 
freedom to provoke" (Sir Clyomon 
(501 b)). For "pull them down," see 
I. i. 257 ; and Selimus (Grosart's Greene, 
xiv. 228) : " I my selte will pull them 
downe " ; and p. 221 : " Strong enemies 
to pull me downe againe." 

rabblement] Occurs in Julius Casar, 
I. ii. 245. In Faerie Queene, i. vi. 8, 
and elsewhere. 

1. Saint Magnus' Corner] See note 
at " London Bridge," above, iv. 48. 
A church at the bottom of Fish Street 
hill, London Bridge. Arnold gives a 
list of " Th' Articles founde by the 
Inquisitours at the Visitacion last done 
in Churche of Saint Magnus." It is 
singularly shocking 1 " Item, that 
diuers of the prestis and clarkes, in 
tyme of dyuyne seruise, be at tauerns 
and alehowsis, at fyshing, and other 
trifils, wherby dyuyne seruyce is let." 
And no accounts kept. This recalls 
a passage quoted from Peele's Jack 
Strain (381) in the parallels above. 

2. Thames'] Without article, in the 
old style, occurs again in Merry Wives 
of Windsor, iii. v. 129; and Henry V. 
IV. i. 120. 

3. sound retreat] Occurs again in 1 
Henry IV. v. iv. 163 ; and Henry V. 
III. ii. 94. See too 1 Henry VI. 11. ii. 
3 ; and note at 3 Henry VI. i. i. 5. 



164 THE SECOND PART OF [act iv. 

Enter Buckingham <3:«(^ Clifford, attended. 

Buck. Ay, here they be that dare and will disturb thee. 
Know, Cade, we come ambassadors from the king 
Unto the commons whom thou hast misled ; 
And here pronounce free pardon to them all 
That will forsake thee and go home in peace. lO 

Clif. What say ye, countrymen ? will ye relent 
And yield to mercy, whilst 'tis offered you, 
Or let a rabble lead you to your deaths ? 
Who loves the king, and will embrace his pardon, 
Fling up his cap, and say " God save his majesty ! " 15 
Who hateth him, and honours not his father, 
Henry the Fifth, that made all France to quake, 
Shake he his weapon at us, and pass by. 

All. God save the king ! God save the king ! 

Cade. What! Buckingham and Clifford, are ye so brave? 20 
And you, base peasants, do ye believe him ? will you 
needs be hanged with your pardons about your necks ? 
Hath my sword therefore broke through London 
gates, that you should leave me at the White Hart in 
Southwark? I thought ye would never have given 25 
out these arms till you had recovered your ancient 
freedom ; but you are all recreants and dastards, and 
delight to live in slavery to the nobility. Let them 

pais hy'\ 87-97. Why country-men and warlike fiiends of Kent, What meanes this 
mutinous rebellions, That you in troopes do muster thus your selues, Vnder the 
conduct of this Traitor Cade? To rise against your soueraigne Lord and King, 
Who mildly hath his pardon sent to you, If you forsake this monstrous Rcbell here? 
If honour be the marke zvhereat you aime. Then haste to France that our forefathers 
wonne, Aytd winne againc that thing which now is lost, And leaue to secke your 
Countries overthrow. 19. All. God . . . king 1^ 98. All. A Clifford, a Clifford. 
They forsake Cade. 20-32. Cade. What . . . upon you all] 99-104. Cade. 

Why how tww, rvill you forsake your generall. And ancient freedome which you 
haue possest ? To bend your necks vnder their servile yokes, Who if you stir, will 
straightwaies hang you vp, But follow me, and you shall pull them downe, And 
make them yeeld their linings to your hands. 

15. Fling up his cap} Compare 25, 26. given out] surrendered. No 

" throws up his cap for joy," Part III. other example of this use is in Shake- 

II. i. 196 ; " hurl'd their caps up," speare. 

Richard III. iii. vii. 35 ; " cast their 26, 27. ancient freedom] From the Con- 

caps up," Antony and Cleopatra, iv. tention (1. 100). Cade's speech here is 

xii. 12 ; " threw caps up," Coriolanus, in accordance with the villeins' demands 

IV. vi. 135. And Peele, Honour of the in 1381. Cade said nothing of this sort. 

Garter, 1593 : " As little boys with " And the King entered in among them, 

flinging tip their caps Congratulate and spake unto them gently ... I am 

great kings and warriors " (at the end), your King, what lack ye ? What doe 

18. Shake he his weapon] This com- ye say? Then such as heard him sayd, 

mon structure in Shakespeare has been that ye will make us free for euer, our 

noticed already. elues, our heyres, and oure landes, and 

20. are ye so brave ?] Are ye so that we be called no more bondmen " 

audacious, so overbearing. See Corio- (Grafton, p. 423). 
lanus, IV. V. 19. 



sc. vm] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 165 

break your backs with burdens, take your houses over 
your heads, ravish your wives and daughters before 30 
your faces : for me, I will make shift for one, and so, 
God's curse light upon you all ! 

All. We '11 follow Cade, we '11 follow Cade! 

Clif. Is Cade the son of Henry the Fifth, 

That thus you do exclaim you '11 go with him ? 35 

Will he conduct you through the heart of France, 

And make the meanest of you earls and dukes ? 

Alas ! he hath no home, no place to fly to ; 

Nor knows he how to live but by the spoil, 

Unless by robbing of your friends and us. 40 

Were 't not a shame, that whilst you live at jar, 

The fearful French, whom you late vanquished, 

Should make a start o'er seas and vanquish you ? 

Methinks already in this civil broil 

I see them lording it in London streets, 45 

Crying " Villiago ! " unto all they meet. 

Better ten thousand base-born Cades miscarry 

Than you should stoop unto a Frenchman's mercy. 

To France, to France ! and get what you have lost ; 

33. All. We'll . . . Cade I] 105. All. A Cade, a Cade. They runne to Cade 

againe. 34-52. Clif. Is Cade . . . victory^ io5-iii. Cliff. Bratie warlike 

friends heare me but speak a word, Refuse not good whilst it is offered you, The 

King is mercifull, thett yeeld to him, And I my selfe will go along with you, To 

Winsore Castle whereas the King abides, And on mine honour you shall haue no hurt. 

30. ravish your wives] A back re- 46. Villiago I] Florio has " Villacco 

ference to the omitted scene between (Vigliacco), a rascall, a base varlet, a 

Dicke, Sergeant, and Cade. For the knauish scoundrel, a scurvy fellow." 

" daughter " reference, see Jack Straw, Capell altered it to Florio's word, 

at the commencement. In the omitted Theobald " corrected it," Malone says, 

scene the tables are turned. to " Villageois I " A passage in The 

34-52. Clifford says here in the Famous Victories makes Florio's word 

Contention, that the King is at certain: "Derick. O good Mounser. 

" Winsore Castle " ; whereas in Scene Frenchman. Come, come, you villeaco " 

iv. he departed for Killingworth. This (Hazlitt, Shakespeare Library, Part 

is corrected in revision. This part II. vol. i. p. 368). Ben Jonson has the 

of the Contention is by Peele, which word in Every Man Out of His Humour, 

explains the confusion. v. iii. Shakespeare may have seen it in 

41. live at jar] quarrelling. See The Three Lords and Three Ladies of 

above, i. i. 253. London, 1587-1583 (Pride is a Lord 

43. start] sudden outburst. of Spain) : " S. Pride. Fuoro Viliagos ! 

45. lording it] Not due to Greene fuoro Lutheranos Ingleses ! fuoro, sa, 

(as has been stated), but from Spenser's sa, sa! Pomp. Their shields are ours; 

Shepheards Calender (July), 1579: they fled away with shame" (Hazlitt's 

" They reigne and rulen over all And Dodsley, vi. 474). Apparently Spanish 

lord it as thy list." See Greene's for villains. For " sa, sa, sa," see King 

Frier Bacon (Grosart, xiii. 34) ; Nashe, Lear, iv. vi. 207. 

Foure Letters Confuted (Grosart, ii. 47. base-born] See note at i. iii. 84 
280) ; and The Unfortunate Traveller above. Shakespeare may have taken 
(v. 120). Greene has "prince it "also this word from Churchyard's "Paper- 
in Frier Baco7t. Mill " poem referred to above, vii. 37. 



166 THE SECOND PART OF [act iv. 

Spare England, for it is your native coast. 50 

Henry hath money, you are strong and manly ; 
God on our side, doubt not of victory. 

All. A Clifford! a Clifford! we'll follow the king and 
Clifford. 

Cade. Was ever feather so lightly blown to and fro as 55 
this multitude ? The name of Henry the Fifth hales 
them to an hundred mischiefs, and makes them leave 
me desolate. I see them lay their heads together to 
surprise me. My sword make way for me, for here is 
no staying. In despite of the devils and hell, have 60 
through the very midst of you ! and heavens and 
honour be witness, that no want of resolution in me, 
but only my followers' base and ignominious treasons, 
makes me betake me to my heels. \^Exit. 

Buck. What, is he fled ? go some, and follow him; 65 

And he that brings his head unto the king 
Shall have a thousand crowns for his reward. 

\Exeunt some of them. 
Follow me, soldiers : we '11 devise a mean 
To reconcile you all unto the king. 

\Exeunt. 

53, 54. All. A Clifford . . . and Clifford] 112. All. A Clifford, a Clifford, 
God sane the Ki7ig. 55-64. Cade. Was ever . . . to my heels] 113-117. Cade. 
How like a feather is this rascall company Blowne enery way, But that they 
may see there want no valiancy in me, My staffe shall make way through the 
midst of you. And so a poxe take you all (as if verse). He runs through them 
with his staffe, and Jiies away, 65-69. Buck. What, is he . . . the king] 
118-121. Buc. Go some and make after him, and proclaime, That those that can 
bring the head of Cade, Shall haue a thousand Crownes for his labour, Come 
march away (verse). Exet omnes. 

55. Was ever feather . . .] This text occurs in Stubb's Anatomie of 

thought is developed in 3 Hejiry VI. Abuses, 1583 (quoted in New Eng. 

III. i. 84-89. Diet.). For Cade's flight and the 

55. to and fro] Only in King Lear sequel, see beginning of Scene x. 

outside Parts I. and II. See Part I. (extract). Peele has " I '11 take me to 

II. i. 6g. my legs" {Sir Clyomon (531, b)). 

58. desolate] all alone by myself. 67. thousaiui crowns] Note the repe- 

58. lay their heads together] See tition in the Contention, a few lines 

note above, at in. i. 165. below, corrected in revision. 

63. ignominious] See note, in. i. 179. 68. a mean] See Part I. iii. ii. 10; 
Not in Q. and Two Gentlemen of Verona, iii. i. 

64. betake me to my heels] " betake 38. See quotation from Jack Straw, 
him to his legs " occurs in Romeo and " a mean to shed a world of blood," at 
Juliet, I. iv. 34. The expression in the i. i. 22 above. 



sc. IX] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 167 

SCENE IX. — Kenilworth Castle. 

Sound trumpets. Enter King, Queen, and SOMERSET, on the 

terrace. 

King. Was ever king that joyed an earthly throne, 
And could command no more content than I ? 
No sooner was I crept out of my cradle 
But I was made a king at nine months old : 
Was never subject longed to be a king 5 

As I do long and wish to be a subject. 

Enter BUCKINGHAM and CLIFFORD. 

Buck. Health and glad tidings to your majesty ! 
King. Why, Buckingham, is the traitor Cade surprised? 
Or is he but retired to make him strong ? 

Enter below, multitudes, with halters about their necks. 

Clif. He 's fled, my lord, and all his powers do yield ; lO 

And humbly thus, with halters on their necks, 
Expect your highness' doom, of life or death. 

King. Then, heaven, set ope thy everlasting gates. 

Enter King Henry and the Queene, and Somerset. 1-7. King. Was ever 
. . . subject. Buck. Health . . . majesty /] omitted Q (but compare g-i6 below 
after rebels' entry). 8,9. King. Why, Buckingham . . . strong?'] 1-8. King. 
Lord Somerset, what newes here you of the Retell Cade? Som. This, my 
gratious Lord, that the Lord Say is don to death, And the Citie is almost sackt. 
King. Gods will be done, for as he hath decreede, so must it be : And be it as he 
please, to stop the pride of those rebellious men. Queene. Had the noble Duke 
of Suffolkc bene aliue. The Rcbell Cade had bene supprest ere this, And all the 
rest that do take part with him (see for Queen's speech above, iv. 40, 41). 
Enter below . . . ] Enter the Duke of B^ickingham atid Clifford, with the Rebels, 
with halters aboiit their necks. 10-12. Cliff. He 's Jied . . . death] 9-16. 
Cliff. Long Hue King Henry, England's lawfull king. Loe here my Lord, those 
Rebels are subdude, And offer their Hues before your highnesse feete. King. But 
tell me Clifford, is there Captaine here. Clif. No, my gratious Lord, he is fled 
away, but proclamations are sent forth, that he that can but bring his head, shall 
haue a thousand crownes. But may it please your Maiestie, to pardon these their 
faxilts, that by that traitors meanes were thus misled. 13-21. King. Then, 
heaven . . . countries] 17-21. King, Stand vp you simple men, and giue God 

Enter . . . Queen] Queen Mar- speare's time. Compare Spenser, 

garet does not speak In this scene, Faerie Queene, ii. 10, 53 : — 

but perhaps she is introduced because " and him succeeded Marius, 

she does in the Contention (6-8). Her Who joyd his dayes in great tran- 

remark has been already used in iv. iv. quillity." 

40,41 above, where the rebellion is at Peele uses it in the more active sense : — 

its height. At this stage (in the Con- " thy looks shalt be reliev'd, 

tentioyi) it is altogether misplaced. But And thou shalt joy her as thy soul 

the last words of the king (" Come, desires " 

wife ") show she is here. {David and Bethsabe (466, a)), 

1-5. Was ever . . . Was never] A 13. ope] Shakespeare had a great 

favourite method with Spenser. See affection for this old word, both verb 

Introduction, Part I. and adjective. He has it about forty 

I. joyed] enjoyed. An archaic or times. Spenser has it once (at least) 

rather poetic expression in Shake- later in Faerie Queene : — 



168 



THE SECOND PART OF 



[act IV. 



To entertain my vows of thanks and praise ! 
Soldiers, this day have you redeemed your lives, 15 

And showed how well you love your prince and country: 
Continue still in this so good a mind, 
And Henry, though he be infortunate, 
Assure yourselves, will never be unkind : 
And so, with thanks and pardon to you all, 20 

I do dismiss you to your several countries. 
All. God save the king! God save the king! 

Enter a Messenger. 
Mess. Please it your grace to be advertised 

praise. For you did take in hand you know not what, And go in peace obedient 
to your King, And line as subiects, and you shall not want. Whilst Henry Hues, 
and weares the English Crowne. 22. All. God . . . king I] 22-26. All. God . . 
king. King. Come let us hast to London now with speed. That solemne prosessions 
may be sung, In laud and honour of the God of heauen. And triumphs of this 
happie victorie. Exetomnes. 23-49. Messenger. Please it . . . wretched reign"] 
omitted Q. 



" did softly smite the raile 
Which straight flew ope " 
(iv. iii. 46). And Peele has the verb 
once : — 

" Ope, earth, and take thy miserable 
son 
Into the bowels of thy cursed 
womb " 
{David and Bethsabe (480, b)). But it 
is nowhere in such demand as in Shake- 
speare, and I suppose this is an argu- 
ment in favour of placing this wretched 
speech to his discredit, especially with 
the piety evinced by the king. Kyd 
uses the verb " to ope" three times in 
Cornelia, and he has "break ope" for 
" break open, " there, and in Spanish 
Tragedy. Both were archaic and also 
Biblical. In the old Te Deum of Stein- 
hold and Hopkins (1570 ?) occurs : 
" Thou heavens kingdom didst set 
ope." 

14. To entertain my vows] to receive 
them favourably, to give them a home. 
Compare Peele, Speeches at Theobalds 

" Then, having many days with 

sacred rites 

Prepared myself to entertain good 

thoughts" 

(577i b). A common use. In the 

speech in the Contention, the king begins 

with " God's will be done " when he 

hears of Say's murder. At iii. i. 33 

(hi. i. 86 above) in the Contention he 

says the same when Somerset announ- 



ces the loss of those towns in France. 
Hence the omission here. Somerset 
is an unlucky envoy. 

16. You know ?iot what] In Q. See 
above, ii. 151. 

16. take in hand] In this speech in 
the Contention. Occurs in Lucrece, 
1235. And in Faerie Queene, i. ii. 
36:— 

" Whose forged beauty he did take 
in hand 
All other Dames to have exceeded 
far." 
Make it one's business. 

18. infortunate] Only here and in 
King John, 11. i. 178. And twice in 
Othello doubtfully. A favourite word 
with Greene (from Euphues), who 
never, I think, uses " unfortunate." 
Compare the modern and inharmoni- 
ous "infrequent." There is no rule. 

20. pardon to you all] See note at 
Scene x. i. 

22. prosessions] in the king's speech 
here (Contention) illustrates, or is 
illustrated by, " Shall in procession 
sing her endless praise," Part I. i. 
vi. 20. Litanies. See Puttenham 
(Arber, p. 61) : " Our generall pro- 
cessions or Letanies, with bankets." 

23. advertised] informed. See 3 
Henry VI. 11. i. 116; iv. v. 9; and v. 
iii. 18. And elsewhere in Shakespeare, 
who seems to have had a free hand to 
this scene's end. 



sc. IX.] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 



169 



And ask him what 's the reason of these arms. 
The Duke of York is newlj come from Ireland, 
And with a puissant and a mighty power 25 

Of gallowglasses and stout kerns 
Is marching hitherward in proud array ; 
And still proclaimeth, as he comes along, 
His arms are only to remove from thee 
The Duke of Somerset, whom he terms a traitor. 30 

King. Thus stands my state, 'twixt Cade and York distressed ; 
Like to a ship that, having 'scaped a tempest. 
Is straightway calmed, and boarded with a pirate. 
But now is Cade driven back, his men dispersed. 
And now is York in arms to second him. 35 

I pray thee, Buckingham, go and meet him, 



24. York . . . from Ireland] See 
note. III. i. 309, 310. 

26. gallowglasses and stout kerns] 
See note, in. i. 310. 

28-30. still proclaimeth . . . to re- 
move . . . Somerset] York's return 
from Ireland was in September, 1450, 
He says below (v. i. 61, 62) he came 
to heave out Somerset and fight Cade. 
The latter part was rendered unneces- 
sary by Cade's discomfiture before his 
arrival. But the purpose about Somer- 
set was not declared until the XXX. 
year — nearly two years later. More- 
over, York declared himself against 
Somerset, at the head of an army in 
London, a second time, Somerset 
having been again released ; and it is 
this latter event that fits in with the 
thread of the story in the play, though 
entirely out of place with regard to 
Cade. Grafton says (Hall, p. 231) : 
" amongest all imaginations, one 
seemed most necessarye for his pur- 
pose, which yet againe was . . . 
against the Duke of Somerset, who 
only ruled the king , . . the Duke . . . 
chieflye entertayned two Richardes, 
and both Neuelles, the one of Salis- 
burye, the other of Werwike beyng 
Erles, the first the father, the second 
the son . . . Salisburie was second 
Sonne to Raufe Neuell, Erie of West- 
merland, whose daughter the Duke of 
Yorke had maried . . . Richarde the 
eldest Sonne espoused Anne, the sister 
and heire of the entire blood to Lorde 
Henry Beauchampe . . . after Duke of 
Warwike ... in whose right and tytle 
he was created and named Erie of War- 
wike, and not by hys awne progeny 



or parentage . . . When the Duke of 
Yorke had fastened his Chaine betweene 
these two strong pillers, he ... so pol- 
litiquely handled his businesse, that the 
Duke of Somerset was arrested in the 
Quenes great Chamber, and sent to the 
Towre of London ... it was put in 
suspence ... by the Queenes procure- 
ment ... set at liberty ; by which 
doyng grew great envy . . . The Duke 
of Yorke . . . determined to reuenge 
their quarrell, and obteyne their purpose 
by open warre and Marciall adventure 
. . . gathered a great power, and . . . 
marched toward London " (Grafton, 
652, 653). It was by the above marriage 
that Warwick obtained the right to 
the badge of the bear and ragged 
staff. 

32. Like to a ship] A remembering 
of Spenser. See Faerie Qiieene, i. vi. 
I ; V. ii. 50 ; vi. iv. i ; vi. xii. i. Spenser's 
ships usually escape without ever a 
pirate. An old simile. " Like as a 
gaily" in Golding's Ovid; Spenser's 
introduction is " As when " or " Like 
as " generally. For a highly elaborated 
parallel, see the queen's speech before 
Tewksbury (Part III. v. iv.) at her final 
wreck. 

33. calmed] becalmed, as in Othello, 
I. i. 30. "With" means "by," as it 
often does in Shakespeare. 

33. pirate] A similar intervention by 
pirates is used illustratively in Richard 

III. I. iii. 158. Shakespeare often uses 
pirates as an adjunct in his poetry, 
specifying their names even as above 
at IV. i. 108 ; and Measure for Measure, 

IV. iii. 75 ; and Atitofiy and Cleopatra, 
I. iv. 48 ; and Pericles, iv. i. 97. 



170 THE SECOND PART OF [act iv. 

Tell him I '11 send Duke Edmund to the Tower ; 

And, Somerset, we will commit thee thither, 

Until his army be dismissed from him. 40 

Som. My lord, 

I 'II yield myself to prison willingly, 

Or unto death, to do my country good. 
King. In any case, be not too rough in terms, 

For he is fierce and cannot brook hard language. 45 

Buck. I will, my lord ; and doubt not so to deal 

As all things shall redound unto your good. 
King. Come, wife, let 's in, and learn to govern better ; 

For yet may England curse my wretched reign. 

\Exeunt. 

SCENE X. — Kent. Ideris Garden. 

Enter Cade. 

Cade. Fie on ambition ! fie on myself, that have a sword, 
and yet am ready to famish ! These five days have 

Enter Cade] Enter lacke Cade at one doore, and at the other, maister 
Alexander Eydcn and his men, and lack Cade lies downe picking of hearbes 
and eating them. 1-15. Cade. Fie on ambition . . . feed oti] omitted Q. 

44. terms] words, language. this pardon (ye more then of the greate 

47. redound] result, conduce. Not lubile of Rome) . . . the whole multi- 
in Shakespeare elsewhere. tude, without bydding farewell to their 

48. Come, wife] The King is very Capitaine, retired the same night. . . . 
lenient and forgiving after Scene iv.. But lohn Cade desperate of succours, 
where he last spoke to her as (which by the friends of the Duke of 
" Madame," and " Margaret," with Yorke were to him promised) . . . mis- 
Suffolk's head on her lap. But earlier trusting the sequele of the matter, 
(in the Contention) she was " my love " departed secretly in habite disguysed, 
(where she boxed Duchess Gloucester's into Sussex ; but all his Metamorphosis 
ears). or transfiguration little preuayled, for 

Cf-p^p Y after a proclamation made, that who- 

soeuer could apprehend the sayde lack 
Enter Cade] The Contention stage- Cade, should haue for his paine a 
direction is much more realistic. Graf- thousand Markes, many sought for hym, 
ton says (after London bridge and but fewe espied hym, till one Alexander 
Saint Magnus corner) : " both parties Iden Esquire of Kent, founde him in a 
beyng faynt, werie and fatigate, agreed garden, and there in his defence man- 
to desist from fight . . . the lustie fully slue the caytife Cade, and brought 
Kentish Capitayne . . . brake up the his dead bodie to London, whose head 
gaytes. . . . The Archebishop of was set on London bridge. Thys is 
Cauntorbury, beyng then Chauncellor of the ende of all rebelles . . . where men 
England . . . called to him [to Tower] stryve agaynst the streame, their bote 
the Byshop of Wynchester. . . . These neuer commeth to his pretensed porte" 
two prelates . . . passed the ryuer of (Grafton, p. 643). Ritson quotes W. 
Thames from the Towre into South- Wyrcester, p. 472: "This Iden was, 
warke bringing with them vnder the in fact, the new Sheriff of Kent, who 
kings great scale a generall pardon had followed Cade from Rochester." 
. . . openly proclamed and published. I do not find this verified by Stone. 
Lorde, how glad the people were of Holinshed is not followed here. 



sc x] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 171 

I hid me in these woods and durst not peep out, for 
all the country is laid for me ; but now am I so 
hungry, that if I might have a lease of my life for a 5 
thousand years I could stay no longer. Wherefore, 
on a brick wall have I climbed into this garden, to see 
if I can eat grass, or pick a sallet another while, which 
is not amiss to cool a man's stomach this hot weather. 
And I think this word sallet was born to do me good : lO 
for many a time, but for a sallet, my brain-pan had 
been cleft with a brown bill ; and many a time, when 
I have been dry and bravely marching, it hath served 
me instead of a quart-pot to drink in; and now the 
word sallet must serve me to feed on. 15 

Enter Iden. 

Iden. Lord ! who would live turmoiled in the court, 
And may enjoy such quiet walks as these ? 
This small inheritance my father left me 
Contenteth me, and worth a monarchy. 

16-23. T^den. Lord t who . . . my gate] 1-5. Eyden. Good Lord, how pleasant 
is this country life, This title land my father left me here. With my contented 
minde serties me as well. As all the pleasures in the Court can yeeld, Nor would 
I change this pleasttrc for the Court. 

4. all the country is laid for me] rutter's helmet. Craig gives an early 

warrants and watches issued and sent example of the pun from Thersites 

out. Compare Jasper Mayne, The (Hazlitt's Dodsley, i. 399). Not in 

City Match : " The country has been the Contention. The word occurs in 

laid and warrants granted to apprehend North's Plutarch. Brutus has a drink 

him"; and Tomkins' Albumazar, v. ix. from a sallet (Steevens). But Shake- 

(Dodsley, xi. 417) : " Lose not your speare took the word, and the incident 

patience too. Leave this lamenting of Cade's wearing one, from Fabyan 

And lay the town; you may recover (1516). See note at Scene iii. 1. 11, 

it" ; and Soliman and Perseda, 11. i. : — above. 

" that he may not scape, 12. brown bill] Again only in Kitig 

Weele lay the ports and havens Lear, iv. vi. 92. The arm (preserved in 

round about." "bill-hook") carried by watchmen and 

The full expression, " laid watches constables among others. Compare 

that," occurs at the beginning of Much Ado About Nothing, ni. iii. 44. 

Grafton's Continuation of Hardyng, And Pappe with an Hatchet, 1588, 

1543. And later (p. 530): "in everie 1589: "We challenge him at all 

coaste and corner of the realme laied weapons, from the taylors bodkin to 

wondrefull wayte and watche to take the watchman's browjie bil " (reprint, 

... the said duke." p. 68). And in Golding's Ovid, v. 97 : 

8. pick a sallet] " like an unthanke- " in his hand did holde A brode 

full Hackney-man, she meant to tourne browne Byll." 

him into the bare leas, and set him 16. turmoiled] worried. Compare 

as a tyrde iade to picke a sallet " Golding's Ovid, vii. 152, 153 : " their 

(Greene, Never Too Late (Grosart, viii. boyling brests Turmoyling with the 

102), 1590). And Nashe, Pierce Pent- firie flames enclosed in their chests." 

lesse (Grosart, ii. 71) : " Good thriftie 19. Contenteth . . . monarchy] See 

men, they drawe out a dinner with note at " My crown is called content" 

saWe^s, Hke a Swart-rutter's sute." Here 3 Henry VI. in. i. 64. 
is, I suppose, the quibble on the swart- 



172 THE SECOND PART OF [act iv. 

I seek not to wax great by others' waning, 20 

Or gather wealth I care not with what envy : 
Sufficeth that I have maintains my state, 
And sends the poor well pleased from my gate. 

Cade. Here 's the lord of the soil come to seize me for a 

stray, for entering his fee-simple without leave. Ah, 25 
villain, thou wilt betray me, and get a thousand crowns 
of the king by carrying my head to him ; but I '11 
make thee eat iron like an ostrich, and swallow my 
sword like a great pin, ere thou and I part. 

Iden. Why, rude companion, whatsoe'er thou be, 30 

I know thee not ; why then should I betray thee ? 
Is 't not enough to break into my garden, 
And like a thief to come to rob my grounds. 
Climbing my walls in spite of me the owner, 
But thou wilt brave me with these saucy terms? 35 

Cade. Brave thee ! ay, by the best blood that ever was 
broached, and beard thee too. Look on me well : 
I have eat no meat these five days ; yet, come thou 

24-29. Cade. Here 's . . , soil come . . . Ah, villain . . . me and crowns . . . 
I 'II make . . . pin . . . part] 6-9. Cade. Sounes, heres . . . soyle, Stafid villaine 
. . . me to the King, and . . . crownes for my head, but ere thou goest He make 
. . . pintle. 30-35. Why rude . . . saucy terms'\ 10-13. Why sawcy companion, 
why should I betray thee ? 1st not inough that thou hast broke my hedges, And 
enterd into my ground without the leaue of me the oivner. But thou wilt braue 
me too. 36-41. Brave thee t . . . too. Look on . . . yet, come . . . as dead 
. . . more] 14-17. Braue thee and beard thee too, by the best blood of the Realme, 
looke on . . . yet and I do not leaue thee and thy fue men as dead . . . more 
(read this five dayes). 

20. wax . . . waning] Compare in Lyly's Pappe with an Hatchet 

Sylvester, Du Bartas (Fourth Day), (Saintsbury's reprint, 1892, p. 54), 1588- 

(p. 88, edited 1621): "Thus dost thou 15S9 : "His conscience hath a colde 

wex ajid wane" (to the Moon), 1591. stomacke. Cold? Thou art deceived, 

Iden"s speech here is not much altered 'twil digest a cathedral church as easilie 

from Peele's (as I think) in the Conteti- as an Estriche a two-penie naile." And 

tion. Peele is constantly dwelling on in Gabriel Harvey, Pierces Supereroga- 

sweet content and solace. So also was tion (Grosart, ii. 236) : " The Oestridge 

poor Greene. The Folio here reads can deuoure the rust of Iron." Later, 

" warning." Rowe corrected. in Marston, Satire i. ; and Ben Jonson, 

23. well pleased] Occurs before, i. i. Every Man in His Humour, iii. i. 

218, but not again in Shakespeare, 30. companion] common fellow, in a 

Frequent in the Bible, as is the senti- bad sense, often in Shakespeare. So 

ment in the line. Compare Jack in Kyd's Spanish Tragedy, in. ii. 115 : 

Straw (Hazlitt's Dodsley, v. 381) : — " better its that base companions dye." 

" England is grown to such a pass " Panion," in this sense, is older ; a 

of late, contraction. 

That rich men triumph to see the 35. saucy] See note in Part I. iii. i. 

poor beg at their gate." 45, and in. iv. 33. A favourite word. 

24. lord of the soil] Not elsewhere 37. broached] shed (of blood). See 
in Shakespeare. Part I. iii. iv. 40 ; and Part HI. 11. iii. 16. 

25. stray] vagrant, vagabond, " mas- 37. beard] defy to face. Compare 
terless man." Part I. i. iii. 44, 45 ; and 1 Henry IV. 

28. eat iron like an ostrich] Earlier iv. i. 12. 



sc. x] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 173 

and thy five men, and if I do not leave you all as 
dead as a door-nail, I pray God I may never eat grass 40 
more. 

Iden. Nay, it shall ne'er be said, while England stands, 
That Alexander Iden, an esquire of Kent, 
Took odds to combat a poor famished man. 
Oppose thy steadfast-gazing eyes to mine, 45 

See if thou canst outface me with thy looks : 
Set limb to limb, and thou art far the lesser ; 
Thy hand is but a finger to my fist ; 
Thy leg a stick compared with this truncheon ; 
My foot shall fight with all the strength thou hast ; 50 
And if mine arm be heaved in the air 
Thy grave is digged already in the earth. 
As for words, whose greatness answers words. 
Let this my sword report what speech forbears. 

Cade. By my valour, the most complete champion that 55 
ever I heard ! Steel, if thou turn the edge, or cut not 
out the burly-boned clown in chines of beef ere thou 

42-44. Nay . . . stands, thai . . . combat . . . man] 18-20. Nay, it neuer 
shall he saide whilst the world doth stand, that . . . combat with afamisht man. 
45-54. Oppose thy . . . forbears] 2o(^)-22. looke on me, my limmes are equall vnto 
thine, and euery way as big, then hand to hand, He combat thee. Sirrha fetch me 
weapons and stand you all aside (prose, verse Q 3). 55-59' By my . . . hob- 

40. as dead as a door-nail] Compare 53>54' words . . . sword] See Merry 

2 Henry IV.w.m. 127: " Is the old king Wives of Windsor, in. i. 44, for these 

dead? ... As nail in door." An ancient words in opposition; and note, Arden 

saying revived. See Skeat's editions of edition, p. 113. And in Tamburlaine, 

Piers the Plowman and William of Part I. i. i. : " Thy words are swords." 

Palerne {circa 1350), where it is some- And add to the references, Gosson, 

times " door-tree." In Nashe's S^rawg-^ School of Ah^tse (Arber, pp. 49, 52). 

News (Grosart, ii. 180), 1593, etc. etc. Spenser illustrates here : " He never 

From the continual hammering upon it, meant with zvords, but swords, to plead 

in shutting and in knocking (?). his right " (Faerie Qneene, i. iv. 42). 

44. odds] advantage. 57. burly-boned] Nashe uses this 

45. steadfast-gazing] Compa.^e" still- word figuratively in Almond for a 
gazing," Lucrece, 84. Parrot, 1589. It is a term affected 

46. outface] Often in Shakespeare, by Nashe : " The Danes, who stand 
from Love's Labour 's Lost, v. ii. 626, so much upon their unweldy burli- 
onwards. boand souldiery, that they account of 

50. hand to hand] See note at 5 no man that hath not a battle Axe at 
Henry VI. 11. i. 73. It is in Kyd's his girdle to hough dogs with " {Pierce 
Spanish Tragedy, but earlier examples Penilesse (Grosart, ii. 39), 1592). See 
could be quoted. Here it is omitted. " hough " above in the Contention, vii. 

51. arm . . . heaved] See note above, i. 124 (note). Neither of these terms are 
ii. 13, Generally used in this connec- in Shakespeare elsewhere. See " big- 
tion with "up," as in Faerie Queene, i. vii. boned " at v. iii. i-io in Part III. 

14 : " His heavie hand he heaved up 57. chines of beef] Compare Peele, 

on hye." Peele has " Heave tip your Old Wives Tale (450, a) : " Enter a 

swords" in Battle of Alcazar, iollowing Friar with a chine of beef and a pot of 

Spenser. The sentiment here is tersely wine " ; and again (in the text) : " A 

put by Sidney, Arcadia, bk. ii. : " His chine of English beef, meat for a king " 

arm seemed still a postillion of death." {ibid.). And Nashe, Foure Letters 



174 THE SECOND PART OF [act iv. 

sleep in thy sheath, I beseech God on my knees thou 
mayest be turned to hobnails. 

[Here they fight. Cade falls. 
O, I am slain ! Famine and no other hath slain me : 60 
let ten thousand devils come against me, and give me 
but the ten meals I have lost, and I 'd defy them all. 
Wither, garden ; and be henceforth a burying-place 
to all that do dwell in this house, because the uncon- 
quered soul of Cade is fled. 65 

Iden. Is 't Cade that I have slain, that monstrous traitor ? 
Sword, I will hallow thee for this thy deed, 
And hang thee o'er my tomb when I am dead : 
Ne'er shall this blood be wiped from thy point, 
But thou shalt wear it as a herald's coat, 70 

To emblaze the honour that thy master got. 

naiWl 23-26. Now sword, if thou doest not hew this burlybond churle into chines 
of beefe I beseech God thou maist fall into some smiths hand, and be turnd 
to hobnailes. Eyden. Come on thy way. {They fight &> Cade fals dozvne.) 
60-65. O, I am slain! . . . Cade is fied] 27-31. Oh villaine, thou hast slain 
the fioure of Kent for chiualrie, but it is famine &• not thee that has done it; 
for come ten thousand diuels, and giue me but the ten meales that I wanted this 
fine daies, and He fight with you all, and so a poxe rot thee, for lacke Cade must 
die. He dies. 66-71. Is't Cade . . . master got] 32-36. lack Cade, &• tvas it 
that monstrous Retell which I haue slaine. Oh sword He honour thee for this, 
and in my chamber shalt thou hang as a monument to after age, for this great 
sendee thou hast done to me. He drag him hence, and with my sword cut off his 
head, and beare it (prose, verse Q 3) Exet. 

Confuted (Grosart, ii. 194) : " Lies as laine, Part II. iv. iii. : " this unconquer^d 

big as one of the Guardes chynes of arm of mine." And see a repeated hne 

beefe^^ (i593)- in Tamburlainc, Part II. v. iii.: "And 

59. hobnails] Another word of shdM I die d^nd. \his unconquered ? " 
Nashe's : " Soales, as full of the hob- 67. Sword, I will hallow thee] Com- 
nayles of repression [? reprehension] as pare Merry Wives of Windsor, iv. ii. 
they could strike" (Foure Letters Con- 216; and note, Arden edition, p. 177. 

futed (To the Gentlemen Readers), ii. Compare Notes Upon Russia, trans. 

187). Nashe has the word several times from Baron Herberstein by R. H. Major 

later. Shakespeare uses it later in 1 (Hakluyt Society, 1852, ii. 25), circa 

Henry IV. See Introduction to Lowe's 1530: "The merchants of that place 

Labour 's Lost. The above group of [Novorogod] earnestly begged me, after 

Nashe words all belong to the Con- I had travelled thither from Augsburg in 

tention. one and the same carriage, to leave them 

60. I am slain] Note the poetic flight the vehicle in which I had accomplished 
in Cade's prose speech here. It is so great a journey that they might place 
transported bodily into Part III. 11. i. 70, it in their church." Of weapons, the 
71 ; and "hand to hand" (1. 50, above custom is of classical antiquity: — 

in Contention) goes with it. Neither " I late ago in Junos Church at 

are in True Tragedy. These interlace- Argos did behold 

ments, so often occurring, make one And knew the target which I 

feel there is a Primus Motor all through. [Numa] in mv left hand there 

The phrase is in Grafton, and earlier did hold" 

in Hawes, etc. (Golding's Ovid, xv. 181, 182). The 

64. unconquered] Again in Part I. iv. sentiment here is much exalted from 

ii. 32 ; and Lucrece, 408. Not in Con- that in the Contention, 

tention. Compare Marlowe, Tambur- 71. ^;w6/a«£] describe or depict heraldi- 



sc. X.] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 175 



Cade. Iden, farewell ; and be proud of thy victory. Tell 
Kent from me, she hath lost her best man, and exhort 
all the world to be cowards ; for I, that never feared 
any, am vanquished by famine, not by valour. \_Dies 

Iden. How much thou wrong'st me, heaven be my judge. 
Die, damned wretch, the curse of her that bare thee ! 
And as I thrust thy body in with my sword, 
So wish I I might thrust thy soul to hell. 
Hence will I drag thee headlong by the heels 
Unto a dunghill which shall be thy grave, 
And there cut off thy most ungracious head ; 
Which I will bear in triumph to the king, 
Leaving thy trunk for crows to feed upon. 



75 



80 



{Exit. 



76-84. Iden. How much . . . feed tipon] omitted Q. 



cally. Greene uses the word often. 
New Eng. Diet, quotes him from Or- 
lando Furioso in a slightly differing 
sense. But compare Penelopes Web 
(Grosart, v. 142), 1587 : " tyme the 
Heralt that best emblazeth affections." 

79. sonl to hell] This abominable 
speech has no parallel in Q. One might 
import Marlowe here, sooner than leave 
it to Shakespeare. When the Mayor 
stabs Jack Straw (Hazlitt's Dodsley, 
V. 406, 407), he uses similar language, 
calling him a "dunghill bastard born." 
Outside these plays, and Titus An- 
dronicus in several places, compare 
Twelfth Night, iii. iv. 237; King 
jfohn, I. i. 272, etc., and : — 

" Drag this accursed villain through 
the streets 
To strike a terror to the rebels 
hearts." 
See IV. ii. 122, 123, and note. 

80. headlong] head foremost (but 
horizontally). Compare Kyd's Cornelia : 
" Headlong to runne and reck no after 



harmes." Elsewhere in Shakespeare's 
plays it has the sense of down, or down 
from. 

84. trunk] See next note. 
84. crows to feed upon] Compare 
Peele, Edward I. (406, a) : " thou mayst 
Hang in the air for fowls to feed upon." 
And Old Wives Tale (452, b) :— 

" Away with him into the open fields, 
To be a ravening prey to crows and 
kites." 
I believe that Peele wrote Scene x. 
in Contention; and tliat Shakespeare 
altered it with his (Peele's) help and 
some of his additions. It is noticeable, 
and evidence of a set purpose, that 
Cade's prose is made tamer, as a foil to 
Iden's verse which is constant here (but 
not in Contention) and greatly dignified. 
But compare also Marlowe, Tambur- 
laine, Part II. n. iii.: — 

" We will both watch and ward shall 
keep his trunk 
Amidst these plains for fowls to 
prey upon." 



176 THE SECOND PART OF [act v. 



ACT V 

SCENE I. — Fields between Dartford and Blackheath. 

Enter YORK and his army of Irish, with drum and colours. 

York. From Ireland thus comes York to claim his right, 
And pluck the crown from feeble Henry's head : 
Ring, bells, aloud ; burn, bonfires, clear and bright, 
To entertain great England's lawful king. 
Ah ! sancta majestas, who would not buy thee dear? 5 
Let them obey that know not how to rule ; 
This hand was made to handle nought but gold : 
I cannot give due action to my words. 
Except a sword or sceptre balance it. 

A sceptre shall it have, have I a soul, lO 

On which I '11 toss the flower-de-luce of France. 

Enter Buckingham. 

Whom have we here ? Buckingham, to disturb me ? 
The king hath sent him, sure : I must dissemble. 
Buck. York, if thou meanest well, I greet thee well. 

Enter . . .] Enter the Duke of Yorke with drtim and soiildiers. i, 2. Yorke. 
From . . . head] 1. Yorke. In Amies from Ireland comes Yorke amain. 3-5. 
Ring . . . bright To . . . lawful . . . dear] 2-4. Ring belles aloud, bonfires 
perfume the ayre, To . . . royall . . . dear ? 6-1 1. Let them obey ... France] 
omitted Q. 12, 13. Enter Buckingham. IVhom have . . . dissemble] 5. 

Enter the Duke of Buckingham. But soft, who comes here, Buckingham, what 
newes with him? 14. Buck. Yorke, . . . meanest . . . well] 6, Buc. Yorke, 
. . . meane . . . so. 

I. From Ireland thus comes York] See 11. toss . . . flower-de-luce] hea.T 

note at iv. ix. 28. triumphantly. Compare 1 Henry IV. 

3. hells . . . bonfires] See Part I. i. iv. ii. 71, and 3 Henry VI. i. i. 244. 

vi. 10, II, note. For " flower-de-luce," see Part 1. 1. i. 80, 

5. sancta majestas]Q,2L^e\\ conjectured and i. ii. 99. So in Edward the Third, 

" santa maesta," as being nearer Q. i. 70 :" Dare he already crop theT^ower- 

Pope read "majesty" (alone) for har- de-luce?"; and again : — 

mony's sake. These first five lines " a lion, roused in the west 

are practically adopted from CoK/mrJo», Shall carry hence the flow er-de- 

where Peele's hand in the scene is luce of France " 

evident, to the entrance of the Queen, (in. ii. 42, 43). 
Peele's favourite "amain" is omitted. 



sc. I] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 177 

York. Humphrey of Buckingham, I accept thy greeting, 1 5 
Art thou a messenger, or come of pleasure ? 

Buck. A messenger from Henry, our dread liege, 
To know the reason of these arms in peace ; 
Or why thou, being a subject as I am. 
Against thy oath and true allegiance sworn, 20 

Should'st raise so great a power without his leave, 
Or dare to bring thy force so near the court. 

York. [AsiWe.] Scarce can I speak, my choler is so great : 
O, I could hew up rocks and fight with flint, 
I am so angry at these abject terms ; 25 

And now, like Ajax Telamonius, 
On sheep or oxen could I spend my fury. 
I am far better born than is the king, 
More like a king, more kingly in my thoughts ; 
But I must make fair weather yet awhile, 30 

15, 16. York. Humphrey .../... pleasure] 7, 8. Humphrey . . . welcome 
I sweare ; What comes thou in hue or as a Messenger? 17-19. A messenger 
. . . To . . . why thou . . . am'] g-ii. / come as a Messenger from our dread 
Lord and soueraign Henry. To , . . that thou . . . am. 20-22. Against 

. , . court] Shouldst thus approach so neare with colours spred, Whereas the 
person of the King doth keepe ? 23-37. Scarce can I speak . . . to the state] 
14-23. A subiect as he is. O hozu I hate these spiteful abiect termes, But York 
dissemble, till thou meete thy sonnes Who now in Armes expect their fathers sight. 

22. n^ar //i<? co?<rf J The wretched line, all, having nobody else to kill, poor 
" Whereas the person of the king doth man killed himself" (p. 2, Chiswick 
keep," was naturally cut out. It would reprint). For another parallel passage 
be almost worth while to count how to Harington's book, see again Love's 
many whereases are expunged from the Labour's Lost, v. ii. 570. Both passages 
Contention, in its old sense of where, so are noted upon in the Arden edition, 
common in Spenser and Peele. With This event is not touched upon in Ovid's 
the meaning "at which place" it is account in the Metamorphoses ; where 
scarcely found in Shakespeare's genuine Ajax is credited with immediate self- 
work, destruction. It is taken from the Ajax 

26. like Ajax Telamonius] See Love's of Sophocles. A play named " Ajax 

Labour's Lost, IV. iii. 7. Ajax, son of and Ulysses" was "showen on New 

Telamon, destroyed a flock of sheep, in yeares daie at nighte by the Chyldren 

a fit of blind fury, believing them to be of Wynsor " (1571-72) (Cunningham's 

his enemies, after Ulysses was awarded Revels' Accounts, Shaks. Soc. p. 13). 

Achilles' arms in preference to him- Kyd refers to some such performance 

self. He then committed suicide. The probably in Spanish Tragedy, iv. iv. 80 

only contemporary account I know is (Boas) : — 

in Harington's Metamorphoses (1596): '< we doo as all Tragedians doo : 

" First he killed all the horned beasts To die to-day for fashioning our 

he met, which made Agamemnon and Scene . . . 

Menelaus now more afraid than The death of Ajax or some Romaine 

Ulysses ; whereupon he was banished peere . . ." 

the towns presently, and then he went 30. make fair weather] go with the 

to the woods and pastures, and imagin- times. See again Much Ado About 

ing all the fat sheep he met to be of kin Nothing, i. iii. 25. And allusively 

to the coward Ulysses, because they perhaps in Richard II. in. iii. 161 

ran away from him, he massacred a and Henry VIII. i. iv. 22. Compare 

whole flock of sheep not ewes. Last of Heywood's Proverbs, 1546 (Sharman's 

12 



178 THE SECOND PART OF [act v. 

Till Henry be more weak, and 1 more strong, 

O Buckingham, I prithee, pardon me, 

That I have given no answer all this while ; 

My mind was troubled with deep melancholy. 

The cause why I have brought this army hither 35 

Is to remove proud Somerset from the king. 

Seditious to his grace and to the state. 
Buck. That is too much presumption on thy part : 

But if thy arms be to no other end, 

The king hath yielded unto thy demand : 40 

The Duke of Somerset is in the Tower. 
York. Upon thine honour, is he prisoner ? 
Buck. Upon mine honour, he is prisoner. 
York. Then, Buckingham, I do dismiss my powers. 

Soldiers, I thank you all ; disperse yourselves : 45 

Meet me to-morrow in Saint George's field. 

And not farre hence I know they cannot be. Humphrey Dtike of Buckingham, 
pardon me, That I answerdc not at first, my mind was troubled, I came to renioue 
that monstrous Rcbell Cade, And heaue protid Somerset from out the Court, That 
basely yielded vp the Townes in France. 38-41. That is . . . Tower] 24-27. 
Why that was presumption on thy hehalfe. But if it be no otherwise btit so, 
The king doth pardon thee, and grantst to thy request. And Somerset is sent unto 
the Tower. 42. Upon , . . he prisoner] 28. Vpon . . . it so ? 43. Upon 
. . , prisoner] 29. Yorke, he is upon mine honozir. 44-47- Then, Buckingham 
. . , Meet . . . field . . . wish] 30-32. Theji before thy face, I here dismisse my 

edition, p. 114) : " They can currifavell " When I was young like him, 

and make fayre wether." And North's I had my words and foynes and 

Plutarch, Themistocles (Tudor Trans. quarter blows 

i. 318): "So make fayre weather Andlinew my wa.y into St. George's 

again with the governour." And in fields, 

Lodge, Euphues Golden Legacy (Haz- Twice in a morning, Tuttle, Fins- 

litt's Shakespeare Library, p. 96), bury, 

1590. I knew them all " 

36. Sowfrs^^] " that basely yielded up [Wise Woman of Hogsdon, Pearson, 

the towns in France" is omitted as a vol. i. p. 330). In Nichols' Progresses 

charge against Somerset here, seeing of Queen Elizabeth, (i. 296) in 1572 : 

that Say has been twice charged with " On the five and twentieth and six 

this in Scene vii. above (lines 23, 141). and twentieth of March, 1572, by the 

In I. i. 135 it is a charge against commandement of the Queen's Maiestie 

Gloucester. " A staff is quickly found," hir Councell, the Citizens of London 

etc. assembling at their several Halles ; the 

46. Saint George's field] Mentioned Maisters collected and chose out the 

again in 2 Henry IV. iii. ii. 207. "An most likelie and active persons ofeverie 

open space of great extent, on the their Companies, to the number of three 

Surrey side of the Thames, lying be- thousand. . . . To these were appointed 

tween Southwark and Lambeth, and so diverse valiant Captains, who, to traine 

called from the adjoining church of St. them up in warlike feats mustered them 

George the Martyr in Southwark " thrise every weeke, sometimes in the 

(Cunningham and Wheatley's London Artillerie Yard, teaching the gunmen 

Past and Present) ; where plenty of to handle their peaces, sometimes at 

information is given, but a few additional the Mile's end, and in Saint George's 

references may be cited. It was one of Field, teaching them to skirmish." A 

the chief drill-grounds for the trained proper trysting place for York to meet 

bands. Heywood says : — his soldiery. 



sc. I.] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 179 

You shall have pay, and every thing you wish. 
And let my sovereign, virtuous Henry, 
Command my eldest son, nay, all my sons, 
As pledges of my fealty and love ; 50 

I '11 send them all as willing as I live : 
Lands, goods, horse, armour, any thing I have, 
Is his to use, so Somerset may die. 
Buck. York, I commend this kind submission : 

We twain will go into his highness' tent. 55 

Enter KiNG and Attendants. 

King. Buckingham, doth York intend no harm to us, 

That thus he marcheth with thee arm in arm ? 
York. In all submission and humility 

York doth present himself unto your highness. 
King. Then what intend these forces thou dost bring ? 60 

Yoj^k. To heave the traitor Somerset from hence, 

And fight against that monstrous rebel, Cade, 

Who since I heard to be discomfited. 

Enter Iden, with Cade's head. 

Men. If one so rude and of so mean condition 

May pass into the presence of a king, 65 

Lo ! I present your grace a traitor's head, 
The head of Cade, whom I in combat slew. 

King. The head of Cade ! Great God, how just art Thou ! 

troopes, Sirs, meete . . .fields, And there yon shall receiiie your pate of me. 
Exet sotildiers. 48-53. And let . . . may die] omitted Q. 54, 55. York . . . 
tent] 33, 34. Come Yorke, thou shalt go speake vnto the king, But see, his grace 
is comming to meete with vs. Enter King Henry. 56, 57. Buckingham . . . 
arm in arm?] 35,36. How now Buckingham, is Yorke friends with vs, That thus 
thou bringst him hand in hand with thee? 58-63. York. In all submission 
. . . discomfited] 37-43. Buc. He is my Lord, and hath dischargde his troopes 
Which came with liim, but as your grace did say. To heaue the Duke of Somerset 
from hence (line 61 below) And to subdue the Rebels that were vp. King. Then 
welcome cousin Yorke, giue me thy hand. And tliankes for thy great sendee done 
to vs, Against those traitorous Irish that rebeld. Enter maister Eyden with 
lacke Cades head. 64-67. If one so . . . slew] 44-47. Long hue Henry in 

triumphant peace, Lo here my Lord vpon my bended knees, I here present the 
traitorous head of Cade That hand to ha^id in single fight I slue. 68-71. King. 
The head . . . slew him ?] 44-57. King. First thanks to heauen, &■ next to thee 
my friend. That hast subdude that wicked traitor thus. O let me see that 
head that in his life, Did worke me and my land such cruell spight, A visage 

57. arm in arm] Only again in Part I. that heaves me hence" (Battle of Alcazar, 

II. ii. 29. The Contention's "hand in end of Act i. (425, b)). The expression 

hand" is much commoner in Shake- "heave Somerset" occurs immediately 

speare, but less suitable here. The above, in Contention, slightly varied, 

expression "arm in arm" is as old as The repetition is obliterated here; 

Chaucer's Troilus. "remove" replaces "heave" at line 

61. heave . . . Somerset from hence] 36. See note at i. i. 167, where 

See note iv. ix. 30 above. Compare Peele's (?) repetitions in Contention are 

Peele : " There to curse heaven and he similarly handled. 



180 



THE SECOND PART OF 



[act v. 



O, let me view his visage, being dead, 

That Hving wrought me such exceeding trouble. 70 

Tell me, my friend, art thou the man that slew him ? 
Ide7i. I was, an 't like your majesty. 
King. How art thou called, and what is thy degree ? 
Iden. Alexander Iden, that 's my name ; 

A poor esquire of Kent, that loves his king. 75 

Buck. So please it you, my lord, 'twere not amiss 

He were created knight for his good service. 
King. Iden, kneel down. \^He kneels.'] Rise up a knight. 

We give thee for reward a thousand marks ; 

And will that thou henceforth attend on us. 80 

Iden. May Iden live to merit such a bounty, 

And never live but true unto his liege. 

sterne, cole blacke his curled locks, Deep trenched furrowes in his frowning brow, 
Presageth warlike humors in his life. Here take it hence and thou for thy 
reward. Shall be immediately created Knight. Kneele downe my friend, and tell 
me whats thy name ? 72-78. Iden. I was . . . king . . . kneel down] omitted 
Q (see last line). 78-82. Rise up . . . liege] 58-67. Eyden. Alexander Eyden 
if it please your Grace, A poore Esquire of Kent (see 74, 75). King. Then rise up 
Sir Alexander Eyden knight, And for thy maintenance, I freely giue A thousand 
marks a yeare to maintaitie thee, Beside the firme rewarde that was proclaimde, 



69. visage] The description of the 
" visage " in Contention recalls Marlowe, 
as well as Peele. Marlowe has in 
Tamburlaine, Part II. i. iii. : — 

" And in the furrows of his frowning 
brows 
Harbours revenge " 
(Dyce, 47, a). And in Edward the 
Second (Dyce, 184, b) : — 

" The sword shall plane the furrows 
of thy brows. 
And hew these knees." 
It is not an expression of Shakespeare's. 
Coal-black is often in Peele, See note 
at II. i. 112 above. And in Part III. v. 
i. 54, " coal-black hair " occurs. Greene 
has "deeper furrowes in his browe," 
and " furrows of revenge Within the 
browes " (Looking Glasse for London, 
Grosart, xiv. 46, 57). But he is using 
Marlowe, and so, I think, is Peele in 
the Contention here. Compare Lamen- 
tations iv. 8 : " Their visage is blacker 
than a coal." " Furrows of her clouding 
brow " is in Soliman and Perseda, i. ii. 
78. kneel down . . . rise up] Simi- 
larly Peele (?) has the knighting scene 
of William Walworth for killing Jack 
Straw. The parallel is exact: — 

" Kneel down, William Walworth, 
and receive. 
By mine own hand the Order of 
Knighthood : 



Stand up. Sir William, first knight 

of thy degree. 
But henceforth all which shall suc- 
ceed thy place. 
Shall have like honour for thy 

noble deed. 
Besides, that time shall ne'er abridge 

thy fame 
The City arms shall bear for 

memory 
The bloody dagger the more for 

Walworth's honour. 
Call for your herald and receive 
your due " 
(fack Straw, Hazlitt's Dodsley, v. 413). 
Peele dearly loved heraldry and the 
" Honour of Knighthood." 

79. marks] A mark is a great improve- 
ment on a crown, 13s. 4d. against 5s. 
But in Contention the king is more 
liberal. He gives Iden an annuity of a 
thousand marks, besides the promised 
reward, and no doubt that line " Beside 
the firme reward that was proclaimed" 
should be inserted here. " Firm reward," 
in Contention, means fixed, decided upon. 
Spenser uses it as a verb : " Upon his 
card and compas firmes his eye " (Faerie 
Queene, 11. vii. i). The expression has 
occurred before at the murder of 
Gloucester (m. ii.). 



sc. I.] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 181 

King. See, Buckingham, Somerset comes with the queen : 
Go, bid her hide him quickly from the duke. 

Enter Queen and Somerset. 

Queen. For thousand Yorks he shall not hide his head, 85 

But boldly stand and front him to his face. 

York. How now ! is Somerset at liberty ? 

Then, York, unloose thy long-imprisoned thoughts 

And let thy tongue be equal with thy heart. 

Shall I endure the sight of Somerset ? 90 

False king ! why hast thou broken faith with me, 

Knowing how hardly I can brook abuse? 

King did I call thee ? no, thou art not king ; 

Not fit to govern and rule multitudes, 

Which dar'st not, no, nor canst not rule a traitor. 95 

That head of thine doth not become a crown ; 

Thy hand is made to grasp a palmer's staff. 

And not to grace an awful princely sceptre. 

That gold must round engirt these brows of mine, 

Whose smile and frown, like to Achilles' spear, loO 

Fov those that could performe this worthie act, And thou shalt waight upon the 
person of the king. Eyden. I humbly thank your grace, and I no longer Hue, 
Then I prone iust and loyall to my king. Exet. Enter the Queene with the Duke 
of Somerset. 83,84. See, . . . duke] 68, 6g. O Buckingham see where Somerset 
comes. Bid kirn go hide himself e till Yorke be gone. 85, 86. For . . . face] 
70, 71. He shall not hide himselfe for feare of Yorke, But beard and braue him 
proudly to his face. 87-105. How now! . . . ruler] 72-81. Whose that, proud 
Somerset at libertie } Base fearefull Henry that thou dishonor'st me. By heaven, 
thou shalt not gouerne oner me : I cannot brooke that Traitors presence here. Nor 
will I subiect be to sitch a King That knowes not how to gouerne nor to rule, 
Resigne thy Croivne proud Lancaster to me. That thou vsurped hast so long by 
force, For now is Yorke resolu'd to claime his owne. And rise aloft into faire 
Englands Throane. 

87. Somerset at libertie] The only Engirt the temples of his hateful 

words in common with York's parallel head " 

speech in the Contention, which is very (Edward the First, Dyce, 213, a), 

poor stuff. Shakespeare rewrote it to 100. Achilles^ spear] Malone quotes 

some purpose. from Greene's Orlatido Furioso [ante 

97. palmer's staffs Pilgrim's ebon 1592) : — 

staves are mentioned in The Seven " Where I tooke hurt, there have I 

Champions. This line and the fol- heal'd myselfe, 

lowing are paralleled in Richard II. As those that with Achilles' launce 

HI. iii. 151 : " My sceptre for a palmer's were wounded, 

walking staff." Peele, in the Old Fetcht help at selfesame poynted 

Wives Tale, mentions " a palmer's speare " 

staff of ivory, and a scallop-shell of (Grosart, xiii. 139). Perhaps one of 

beaten gold " as a gift to a holy Greene's " feathers " here. I believe 

father. this part since Queen Margaret's entry 

99. engirt] See iii. i. 200, note above, to be Shakespeare's. Compare Ed- 
Marlowe has : — zvard III. 11. i. 392, 393 : — 

"Or, like the snaky wreath of Tisi- " The poets write that great Achilles' 

phon, spear 

Could heal the wound it made." 



182 THE SECOND PART OF [act v. 

Is able with the change to kill and cure. 

Here is a hand to hold a sceptre up, 

And with the same to act controlling laws. 

Give place : by heaven, thou shalt rule no more 

O'er him whom heaven created for thy ruler. 105 

Som. O monstrous traitor ! I arrest thee, York, 

Of capital treason 'gainst the king and crown. 

Obey, audacious traitor ; kneel for grace. 
York. Would'st have me kneel ? first let me ask of these 

If they can brook I bow a knee to man. 1 10 

Sirrah, call in my sons to be my bail : \^Exit Attendant. 

I know ere they will have me go to ward. 

They '11 pawn their swords for my enfranchisement. 
Queen. Call hither Clifford ; bid him come amain. 

To say if that the bastard boys of York 115 

Shall be the surety for their traitor father. 

\Exit Buckingham. 
York. O blood-bespotted Neapolitan, 

Outcast of Naples, England's bloody scourge ! 

The sons of York, thy betters in their birth, 

Shall be their father's bail ; and bane to those 120 

That for my surety will refuse the boys ! 

Enter EDWARD and RICHARD. 
See where they come : I '11 warrant they '11 make it good. 

Enter CLIFFORD and his Son. 

Queen. And here comes Clifford, to deny their bail. 

Clif. Health and all happiness to my lord the king ! [Kneels. 

York. I thank thee, Clifford : say, what news with thee? 125 
Nay, do not fright us with an angry look : 
We are thy sovereign, Clifford, kneel again ; 
For thy mistaking so, we pardon thee. 

106-108. O momtrous . . . grace'] 82-85. Proud Traitor, I arrest thee on high 
treason. Against thy soueraigne Lord, yeeld thee false Yorke, For here I sw care, 
thou shalt unto the Tower, For these proud words which thou has giuen the 
king. iog-113. Wouldst . . . enfranchisement] 86-88. Thou art deceined, my 
sonnes shal be my baile. And send thee there in dispight of him. Hoc, where 
are you boyes ? 114-116. Call . . .father] 89. Call Clifford hither presently. 
117-121. York. O blood-bespotted . . . boys t] omitted Q. Enter . . . ] Enter 
the Duke of Yorkes sonnes, Edward the Earle of March and crook-backe Richard, 
at the one doore, with Drumme and soldiers, and at the other doore, enter 
Clifford and his sonne, with Drumme and souldiers, and Clifford kneeles to Hetiry, 
and speakes. 122, 123. See where . . . their bail] omitted Q. 124. Clif 
Health . . . king I] 90. Cliff. Long Hue my noble lord, and soueraigne King. 
125-128. I thank . . . pardon thee] 91-93. We thanke thee Clifford. Nay do not 
affright vs ivith thy lookes, If thou didst mistake, we pardon thee, kneelc agaitie. 



sc. I.] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 183 

Clif. This is my king, York ; I do not mistake ; 

But thou mistak'st me much to think I do. 130 

To Bedlam with him ! is the man grown mad ? 
King. Ay, Clifford ; a bedlam and ambitious humour 

Makes him oppose himself against his king. 
Clif. He is a traitor ; let him to the Tower, 

And chop away that factious pate of his, 135 

Queen. He is arrested, but will not obey : 

His sons, he says, shall give their words for him. 
York. Will you not, sons ? 
Edw. Ay, noble father, if our words will serve. 
Rich. And if words will not, then our weapons shall. 140 

Clif. Why, what a brood of traitors have we here ! 
York. Look in a glass, and call thy image so ; 

I am thy king, and thou a false-heart traitor. 

Call hither to the stake my two brave bears, 

That with the very shaking of their chains 145 

They may astonish these fell-lurking curs : 

Bid Salisbury and Warwick come to me. 

Enter the Earls ^/WARWICK and SALISBURY. 

Clif Are these thy bears ? we '11 bait thy bears to death, 
And manacle the bear-ward in their chains, 

129-131. This is . . . mad] 94, 95. Why, I did no way mistake, this is my king. 
What is he mad? to Bedlam with him. 132, 133. Ay, Clifford . . . king] 
96, 97. /, a bedlam frantike humor drines him thus To leany Armes against his 
lawfull King. 134, 135. He . . . his] 98. Why doth not your grace send 

him to the Tower? 136, 137. He . . . says . . . him] 99-100. He . . . saith, 
shall be his baile. 138. Will . . . sons?] loi. How say you boyes, will you 
not? 139. Edw. Ay . . , serve] 102. Edward. Yes . . . serve. 140. Rich. 
And . . . shall] 103. Richard. And if our words will not, our swords shall. 
141-143. Why what a brood . . . traitor] omitted Q. 144. Call . . . brave 
bears] 104. York. Call . . . rough beares. 145-147. That with . . . to me] 
omitted Q. Drums. Enter . . .] placed after 194, q.v. 148-150. Clif. Are 
these . . . baiting-place] 108, 109. Cliff. Are these thy beares? weele bayte 
them soone, Dispight of thee and all the friends thou hast. 

132. bedlam] See in. i. 5 (note), astonied, astynishd) in the sense of 

Ritson pointed out that there is no stun. 

anachronism here from Stow, 1598, 146. fell-lurking] A daring com- 
p. 127. The Hospital] of S. Mary of pound : fell-barking, fell-looking, fell- 
Bethlehem was founded by Simon Fitz lurching have been conjectured. Capell 
Mary, 1246. Edward the Third granted would read "fell-lurking," which I should 
a protection, the 14th year of his reign, readily agree with except for Folios. 
"It was an hospitall for distracted " Fell, lurking curs" (cruel, treacherous 
people." curs) is more easy but perhaps mere 

1^},. false-heart] "false-hearted" is modern. " Lurking " is used of treason 

in Troilus and Cressida, v. i. 95. New in Henry V., and of adders and serpents 

Eng. Diet, has no other instance of elsewhere, 

"false-heart." 148. bait thy bears] See note at 

146. astonish] terrify, frighten out of " bears' chains," 3 Henry VI. v. vii. 10, 

one's wits. Compare Lucrece, 1730. ii,andquotation from the Fame Qt(^£«^. 

Frequent in Spenser (astond, astound, 149. bear-ward] " beard " in the first 



184 THE SECOND PART OF [act v. 

If thou dar'st bring them to the baiting-place. 1 50 

Rich. Oft have I seen a hot o'erweening cur 

Run back and bite, because he was withheld ; 

Who, being suffered with the bear's fell paw, 

Hath clapped his tail between his legs and cried : 

And such a piece of service will you do, 155 

If you oppose yourselves to match Lord Warwick. 
Clif. Hence, heap of wrath, foul indigested lump, 

As crooked in thy manners as thy shape ! 
York. Nay, we shall heat you thoroughly anon. 
Clif. Take heed, lest by your heat you burn yourselves. 160 
King. Why, Warwick, hath thy knee forgot to bow ? 

Old Salisbury, shame to thy silver hair. 

Thou mad misleader of thy brain-sick son ! 

What ! wilt thou on thy death-bed play the ruffian, 

And seek for sorrow with thy spectacles? 165 

O ! where is faith ? O ! where is loyalty ? 

If it be banished from the frosty head. 

Where shall it find a harbour in the earth ? 

Wilt thou go dig a grave to find out war. 

And shame thine honourable age with blood ? 170 

Why art thou old and want'st experience ? 

Or wherefore dost abuse it, if thou hast it ? 

For shame ! in duty bend thy knee to me, 

151-191. Oft have I seen . . . sophister] omitted Q. 

two Folios. Corrected by Pope. Craig " Me thinkes a troubled thought is 

quotes from Gammer Gurtons Needle, thus exprest 

I. ii. 6 : " Sche were better to bee a To be a chaos rude and indigesf." 

bearsward and set to keepe bears " ; in The source is obvious. 

answer to Schmidt who reads " bear- 162. silver hair] For variants, beauti- 

herd" (which occurs in The Taming of fully expanded, see 2 Henry IV. iv. i. 

the Shrew and 2 Henry IV.) here, and 43, and below, v. ii. 47. And Sonnet 12, 

throughout Shakespeare. For an ac- " silver beards " occurs several times. 

count of bear-baiting, see Laneham's 163. brain-sick] See above, iii. i. 51 ; 

Letter (1575), describing the Queen's and Part I. iv. i. 3 (note). 

entertainments at Kenilworth. 165. spectacles'] See above, iii. ii. 112. 

151. Oft have I seen . . .] Richard It may be excusable to call attention 

begins at once with his tropes and at this fine speech and well expressed 

figures, afterwards (Part III.) abundant, imagery to the continual bettering 

and gaining him the name of " currish of the Shakespearian parts. Henry's 

^sop." character, as well as the Queen's, is 

153. being suffered] being made Shakespeare's throughout. Part I. is 

suffer, wounded. almost devoid of such poetry as this 

157. foul indigested lump] Compare last act yields in Part II. 
Ovid's "chaos, rudis indigestaque 170. honourable age] "honourable 

molis " (Metamorphoses, i. 7). The eld " (Faerie Queene, i. viii. 47). 
earliest example in New Eng. Diet. 173. For s/i awe/] be ashamed. Very 

Compare Sonnet 114: "monsters and often in Shakespeare. Is it old ? Peele 

things indigest." And see King John, has it in An Eclogue Gratulatory, 1589 

V. vii. 26. In W. Browne's Britannias (Dyce, 562, b) : " For shame, I say, give 

Pastorals (bk. i., song 2) : — virtue honours due ! " 



sc. I.] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 185 

That bows unto the grave with mickle age. 
Sal. My lord, I have considered with myself 175 

The title of this most renowned duke ; 

And in my conscience do repute his grace 

The rightful heir to England's royal seat. 
King. Hast thou not sworn allegiance unto me ? 
Sal. I have. 180 

King. Canst thou dispense with heaven for such an oath ? 
Sal. It is great sin to swear unto a sin, 

But greater sin to keep a sinful oath. 

Who can be bound by any solemn vow 

To do a murderous deed, to rob a man, 185 

To force a spotless virgin's chastity, 

To reave the orphan of his patrimony, 

To wring the widow from her customed right, 

And have no other reason for this wrong 

But that he was bound by a solemn oath ? 190 

Queen. A subtle traitor needs no sophister. 
King. Call Buckingham, and bid him arm himself. 
York. Call Buckingham, and all the friends thou hast, 

I am resolved for death or dignity. 
Cllf. The first I warrant thee, if dreams prove true. 195 

War. You were best to go to bed and dream again, 

To keep thee from the tempest of the field. 
Clif. I am resolved to bear a greater storm 

192. King. Call . . . himself '\ 105. King. Call . . . himselfe. 193, 194. York. 
Call . . . hast, . . . dignity] 106, 107. Call . . . hast, Both thou and they, shall curse 
thisfatallhoure. Enter at one doore, the Earles of Salsbtiry and Warwicke, with 
Drumme and souldiers. And at the other, the Duke of Buckingham, with Drumme 
and soiildiers. 195. Clif. The first . . . true] omitted Q. 196, 197. You . . . 

dream . . . thee . . . field] no, in. You had best go dreame . . . you . . .field. 
198-201. Clif. I am . . . badge] 112-115. Cliff. I am . . . badge. 

174. mickle age] Has occurred al- Mustapho. You reason Hali like a 

ready, Part I. iv. vi. 35 (note). " Mickle " sophister ; 

occurs several times in Gelding's Ovid As if 'twere lawfull for a subiect 

and in the Faerie Queene. Greatly prince 

affected by Greene. To rise in Armes against his 

181. dispense with] make arrange- soueraigne, 

ments with, come to terms with. See Because he will not let him haue 

Measure for Measure, iii. i. 134, note his will." 

in Arden edition. See also Mamillia (ii. 17) and Planeto- 

187. reave]htrezve. ^ee.AlVsWell machia (v. 100). These interspersed 

that Ends Well, v. iii. 86, and Venus sentences or maxims are frequent. See 

and Adonis, j66. above, v. i. 5, and iv. i. 129, etc.; 

igi. sophister] Not again in Shake- and below, v. ii. 28. Seneca's influ- 

speare. Compare Selimus (Grosart's ence perhaps. Or rather a type-line, 

Greene, xiv. 226) : — like " A crafty knave needs no 

" Why should it be vnlawfull for the broker." 

Sonne, 194. death or digiiity] Rowe's correc- 

To leauie Armes gainst his in- tion; the Folios read "and." 



lunous sire 



? 



186 THE SECOND PART OF [act v. 

Than any thou canst conjure up to-day ; 

And that I 'II write upon thy burgonet, 200 

Might I but know thee by thy household badge. 
War. Now, by my father's badge, old Nevil's crest, 

The rampant bear chained to the ragged staff, 

This day I '11 wear aloft my burgonet. 

As on a mountain top the cedar shows 205 

That keeps his leaves in spite of any storm, 

Even to affright thee with the view thereof. 
Clif. And from thy burgonet I '11 rend thy bear, 

And tread it under foot with all contempt, 

Despite the bear- ward that protects the bear. 210 

Y. Clif. And so to arms, victorious father. 

To quell the rebels and their complices. 
Rich. Fie ! charity for shame ! speak not in spite, 

For you shall sup with Jesu Christ to-night. 

202-207. War. Now by my father's badge . . . thee . . . thereof '\ 116-121. 
War. Now by my father's age . . . the . . . thereof. 208-210. Clif. And . . . 
I'll rend thy . . . it under foot . . . the bear] 122-124. Clif And . . . will I 
rend the . . . him vnderfoote . . . him so. 211, 212. Y. Clif And so . . . 
complices] 125, 126. Yoong Clif. And so renowned soueraigne to Armes, I quell 
these Traitors and their compleases. 213, 214. Rich. Fie I . . . speak not 
. _. . j^esus . . . night] Richard. Fie, . . . Speake it not . . . lesu . . . 
night. 

201. household badge] evnb\e.m oi the — helmet and visor attached. Again in 

family. The Contention is made use of Antony and Cleopatra, i. v. 24. And in 

here. The Folio reading is " housed Golding's Ovid : " Peleus bare his 

badge " (F i) ; " houses " (Ff 2, 3, strokes uppon his burganet " (xii. 408). 

4)- And compare Selimus (11. 1568-1569) : — 

203. rampant bear . . . ragged staff] " But we shall soone with our fine- 
See Whitney's Emblems, 1586 (ed. tempered swords 

Greene, pp. 106, 107), for the device Engraue our prowesse on their 

and a dedicatory poem " In praise of burganets." 

the two noble earles, Warwicke and And see the same sentiment in 3 

Leycester," whose cognizance this was Henry VI. 11. i. 163. See too Locrine, 

in his time. See note at iv. ix. 28-30, 11. i. : — 

for Warwick's right. A passage in R. " I '11 meet young Albanact in the 

Harvey's Plaine Percevall is of interest open field 

here, since it throws light on the re- And crack my lance upon his bur- 

quirements of the staft": "It is good gonet 

as a bearebayting for them which loue To try the valour of his boyish 

neither, to see either touze other so strength." 

bedlamlike. Never a beadle sturring ? 205. As on a mountain top the 

nor bear-heard at hand to put his staff c cedar shows] Compare " Like to a 

in the mouth of the beare, or pull off ship," above, iv. ix. 32. The cedar is 

these dogs ? This will proue foule often brought in illustratively, but the 

play." No wonder the staff was sturdy usual figure is to the eftect that low 

and ragged from its uses. This gives shrubs may outlive high cedars. See 

also another sense for the proverbial note at "Jove's tree" (oak). Part III. 

" Shall I set in my staff ? " as peace- v. ii. 14. 

maker. For the heraldic bears again, 210. bear-ward] The same as " bear- 
see Part III. II. i. 15 ; v. vii. g, 10. herd." Shakespeare uses both forms. 

204. burgonet] a close-fitting helmet See note above, 1. 203. 



sc. II.] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 



187 



Y. Clif. Foul stigmatic, that 's more than thou canst tell. 215 
Rich. If not in heaven, you '11 surely sup in hell. 

[Exeunt severally. 

SCENE II. — Saint Albans. 

Alarums to the battle. Enter WARWICK. 

War. Clifford of Cumberland, 'tis Warwick calls : 
And if thou dost not hide thee from the bear, 
Now, when the angry trumpet sounds alarum, 
And dead men's cries do fill the empty air, 
Clifford, I say, come forth and fight with me! 5 

Proud northern lord, Clifford of Cumberland, 
Warwick is hoarse with calling thee to arms. 

Enter YORK. 
How now, my noble lord ! what ! all afoot ? 

215, 216. F. Clif. Foul . . . that's . . . tell. Rich. If not . . . hell] i2g, 130. 
Yoong Clif. Foule . . . thou canst not tell Rich. No,forifnot . . . hell. Exetomnes. 

Scene ii. 
1-7. Alarums . . . War. Clifford . . . dost . . . when . . . trumpet . . . 
alarm . . . arms] g-19. Alarme again, and Enter the Earle of Warwicke alone. 
War. Clifford . . . doest . . . whilst . . . trompets . . . Alarmcs . . . arms. 
Clifford speakes within. Warwicke stand still, and view the way that Clifford 
hewes with his murthering Curtelaxe, through the fainting troopes to finde thee 
out (prose). Warwick stand still, and stir not till I come. Enter Yorke. 8. 
How . . . afoot ?] 20, 21. How now my Lorde, what afoote ? Who kild your horse ? 



215. stigmatic] branded deformity. 
Greene, Harvey and Nashe all used the 
adjective " stigmatical " in this sense. 
Harvey has " stigmaticall, that is burnt 
with an hot iron" (Grosart, iii. 41, 
Trimming of Thomas Nashe). This is 
in reply to a passage of Nashe's about 
a "stigmaticall Master of Arts," in 
Have with you, etc. (Grosart, iii. 21). 
Greene speaks of "stigmaticall trulls" 
in a passage referring (inaccurately) to 
Marlowe's Tamburlaine in Menaphon 
(vi. 84), 1589. Later the word was 
very commonly used. " Stigmatic " 
occurs again in 3 Henry VI. 11. ii. 136 ; 
and Craig quoted from Robert, Earl of 
Huntington, by Chettle and Munday 
(1600) : " that prodigious bloody stig- 
matic" (Hazlitt's Dodsley, viii. 309). 
Drayton takes it from here into Eng- 
land's Heroical Epistles (King John to 
Matilda), 1597 : — 

" As hospitals were for the sore and 
sick, 
These for the crook'd, the halt, the 
stigmatick." 



Scene it. 

3. sounds alarum] Sounds the call to 
arms. Occurs again 1 Henry VI. 1. ii. 
18, and above, 11. iii. 95. More common 
as a stage-direction. 

4. dead men's cries] dead before their 
cries travelled thus far. Shakespeare 
has "dead man" (or men) very often. 
But this line may be Peele's, and he 
means ghosts, as he often has them. 

4. cries . . . fill . . . air] Compare 
Peele's Jack Straw (Hazlitt's Dodsley, 

V. 395) :— 

"troops of men . . . 
That fill'd the air with cries and 
fearful noise." 
And Faerie Qucene : — 

" a roaring hideous sound 

That all the ayre with terror filled 

wyde," 

and elsewhere. See, too, Marlowe, 

Tamburlaine, Part II. iv. i. : " Fill all 

the air with troublous bellowing." 

4. empty air] Spenser has a dragon 

" scourging the cmptie ayre with his 

long trayne" (Faerie Qucene, i. viii. 17). 

8. a/bo/] on foot. Not the commonest 



188 THE SECOND PART OF [act v. 

York. The deadly-handed Clifford slew my steed ; 

But match to match I have encountered him, lo 

And made a prey for carrion kites and crows 
Even of the bonny beast he loved so well. 

Enter CLIFFORD. 

War. Of one or both of us the time is come. 

York. Hold, Warwick ! seek thee out some other chase, 

For I myself must hunt this deer to death. 1 5 

War. Then, nobly, York ; 'tis for a crown thou fight'st. 

As I intend, Clifford, to thrive to-day, 

It grieves my soul to leave thee unassailed. \Exit. 

Clif. What seest thou in me, York ? why dost thou pause? 
York. With thy brave bearing should I be in love, 20 

But that thou art so fast mine enemy. 
Clif. Nor should thy prowess want praise and esteem. 

But that 'tis shown ignobly and in treason. 
York. So let it help me now against thy sword 

As I in justice and true right express it. 25 

Clif. My soul and body on the action both ! 
York. A dreadful lay ! Address thee instantly. 

9-12. The . . . well] 22-26. The deadly hand of Clifford. Noble Lord. Fine 
horse this day slaine vndcr me, And yet braue Warwicke I remaine aline, But 
I did kill his horse he lov'd so well. The boniest gray that ere was bred in North. 
Enter Clifford, and Warwicke offers to fight with him. 13. War. Of one 

. . . come] omitted Q. 14, 15. York. Hold . . . seek . . . For I myself . . . 
death] 26, 27, Hold . . . and seeke . . . Myselfe . . . death. 16-18. Then 

. . . 'tis , . .fight'st. As I . . . thrive . . . unassaird]2g-T,i. Braue Lord, 'tis 
. . . fights, Clifford farewell, as I . . . prosper well . . . unassaild. Exet 
Warwicke. 19-28. Clif. What seest . . . ceuvres] 32-39. Yorke. Now Clifford, 
since we are singled here alone. Be this the day of doome to one of vs. For now 
my heart hath sworne immortall hate To thee and all the house of Lancaster, 

sense of "in motion and action," in Henry VL 11. iv. 11, 12, with "seek 

Shakespeare. thee " altered to "single," and "deer" 

g. the way that Clifford hews] In altered to " wolf." They are addressed 

Q. See note on this scene in Introduc- there " Nay, Warwick," instead of 

tion. "Hold, Warwick." 

g. deadly-handed] Compare " deadly- 14. chase] game. Compare Winter's 

standing," Titus Andronicus, 11. iii. 32. Tale, iii. iii. 57. Craig quotes from 

Altered from " the deadly hand," Q. Beaumont and Fletcher, The Sea 

11. prey for carrion kites and crows] Voyage, 11. ii. : — 

Peele has : — " Nor do I love hunting so, 

" Away with him into the open fields But I had rather be the chase my- 

To be a ravening /^^-j /or kites and self" 

crows " (hunted by her lover). New Eng. Diet. 

(Old Wives Tale {452, b)). See above, quotes from Turbervile's Venerie (1575) : 

IV. X. 90. Peele has " preys of carrion " "And kill at force . . . hart, hind, and 

in David and Bethsabe (482, a). even chase." 

12. bonny beast] A pity to have dropt 20. bearing] behaviour. See Love's 
the old northern line. Labour 's Lost, i. i. 272. 

14, 15. Hold . . . death] These lines 27. lay] wager, stake. See Othello, 
(from ContentioTi) are repeated in 5 11. iii. 330. 



sc. II.] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 189 

Clif. La fin couronne les ceuvres. 

[ They fight ^ and Clifford falls and dies. 
Yoj'k. Thus war hath given thee peace, for thou art still. 

Peace with his soul, heaven, if it be thy will ! \Exit. 30 

Enter Young CLIFFORD. 

Y. Clif. Shame and confusion ! all is on the rout : 
Fear frames disorder, and disorder wounds 
Where it should guard. O war, thou son of hell, 
Whom angry heavens do make their minister. 
Throw in the frozen bosoms of our part 35 

Hot coals of vengeance ! Let no soldier fly : 
He that is truly dedicate to war 
Hath no self-love ; nor he that loves himself 
Hath not essentially, but by circumstance, 

Clifford. And here I stand, and pitch my foot to thine, Vowing neuer to stir, till 
thou or I be slaine, For 7ieuer shall my heart be safe at rest, Till I haue spoyld 
the hatefull house of Yorke. Alarmes and they fight, and Yorke kits Clifford. 
29-30. York. Thus . . . will /] 40-42. Yorke. Now Lancaster sit sure, thy sinowes 
shrinke, Come fearfulle Henry grouelling on thy face, Yeeld vp thy Crowne vnto 
the Prince of Yorke. Exet Yorke. Alarmes, then enter yootig Clifford alone. 
31-40. Y. Clif. Shame and . . . valour'] 43, 44. Yoong Clifford. Father of Comber- 
land, Where may I seeke my aged father forth ? 

28. La fin ... ceuvres^Vmi?, coronet son of slaughter, the sword, silence, 
opus. — The end crowns the work. Com- earth, physic, noise. Lodge calls al- 
pare Greene, George-a-Greene : " Nay, chemists " sons of subtlety " in A Fig 
the end tries all, but so it will fall out" for Momus, 1595. Often paralleled in 
(Dyce, 1874, p. 261, b). " Th' end shall Eastern imagery in the Bible, 
crown all " (Chapman's Homer, Odyssey, 35, 36. Throw in . . . coals of venge- 
bk. v., edited 1875, p. 340, a). The first ance] Compare Spenser, Faerie Queene, 
Folio reads, " Corrone les eumenes," to i. vii. 27 : " And love fresh coles unto 
which Steevens says : " The players her fire did lay." See a similar ex- 
read : ' La fin corrone les eumenes.' " pression in 3 Henry VI. 11. i. 83, and 
Why not printers? The death of Clifford Psalm 140, verse 10. In Selimus 
is said to be " by the swords of common (Grosart, xiv. 201) occurs: " Nourish the 
soldiers " in 3 Henry VI. i. i. 9. The coales of thine ambitious fire." A 
historical record is that he fell at St. Biblical expression. 
Albans. But the circumstance here, 35. part] party, side, as below again, 
afterwards overlooked, is consistent 1. 87. Often in the historical plays, 
with young Clifford's vengeance later, but not common at this time, though 

32. /rawtfs] forms, makes. "Frame" early, 

had a much more popular and extended 37. dedicate] Compare Measure for 

use than now. Spenser and Peele use Measure, 11. ii. 154. And Peele, An- 

the verb very widely. Compare Gold- glorum FericB (597, a), 1595 : — 

ing's Ovid : " Love gave him power to " all their lives 

frame His talke at will " (vi. 599, 600). Right humbly were and purely 

And: dedicate" 

" be content to frame (" to whose worthiness "). 

Thy selfe too him that loveth thee " ^g. not essentially, but by circum- 

(adapt, fit), (xiv. 879, 880). stance] not in his nature or essence, but 

33. O war, thou son of hell] A favour- as a mere contingent. The same mean- 

ite trope with Shakespeare. He has ing is found in 1 Henry IV. 11. iv. 540 : 

son of darkness, fortune, chivalry. Ben " thou art essentially mad, without seem- 

Jonson was very fond of it also, using ing so." And in Hamlet, in. iv. 187. 



190 THE SECOND PART OF [act v. 

The name of valour. [Seez'ng- his dead father. 

O ! let the vile world end, 40 

And the premised flames of the last day 
Knit earth and heaven together ; 
Now let the general trumpet blow his blast, 
Particularities and petty sounds 

To cease ! Wast thou ordained, dear father, 45 

To lose thy youth in peace, and to achieve 
The silver livery of advised age, 
And, in thy reverence and thy chair-days thus 
To die in ruffian battle ? Even at this sight 
My heart is turned to stone : and while 'tis mine 50 

It shall be stony. York not our old men spares ; 
No more will I their babes : tears virginal 
Shall be to me even as the dew to fire ; 
And beauty, that the tyrant oft reclaims, 
Shall to my flaming wrath be oil and flax. 55 

40-61. O let the vile world . . . Clifford's house] 45-52. O J dismall sight, 
see where he breathlesse lies. All smear d and weltred in his Inke-warme blood. 
Ah, aged pillar of all Comberlands true house, Sweete father, to thy tnurthred 
ghoast I sweare, Immortall hate vnto the house of Yorke, Nor neuer shall I 
sleepe secure one night, Till I haue furiously reuengde thy death. And left not 
one of them to breath on earth. He takes him vp on his backe. 

41. premised] prearranged or pre- 48. chair-days] Compare " the droop- 
ordained. He asks to have them now ; ing chair," Part I. iv. v. 4, 5. 
he doesn't say they have come (sent 50, 51. /j^ar^ . . . stotiy]See2 Hemry 
before their time), as the commentators IV. iv. v. 108 ; and 1 Henry IV. 11. ii. 
have it, but that he wants them. The 28 ; " the stony heart," Ezekiel xi. 19. 
word is used in a formal sense by Mar- 51, 5^. old men . . . babes] "this 
lowe, Edward the Second (208, b), in a thred-bare name of good : Leave to old 
letter: " My duty to your honom pre- men and babes that kind of follie" 
mw^rf, etc., 1 have, according to instruc- (Selimus, 11. 178, 179, Grosart, xiv. 
tions." Here it means understood and 202]. 

accepted. 52. virginal] Occurs again in Corio- 

44. Particularities] trifles, details, lanus and Pericles. Shakespeare was 

particulars. Occurs again in Henry V. indebted perhaps to Spenser for it : — 
III. ii. 142. Sidney uses it similarly near " Where gentle court and gracious 

the end of the second book of ^rca^^m. delight 

Very frequent in Gabriel Harvey : Shee to them made with mild- 

" A fewe such parficulariries and dis- nesse virginall " 

tinctions compendiously and familiarly {Faerie Queene, 11. ix.20). Nares quoted 

coursed over " {Letters (Grosart, i. 59), this. "Virginal" was in earlier use 

1580). (Levins, 1570) of a musical instrument. 

47. silver livery] See "silver hair" And Faerie Queene, 11. i. 10: "chastity 

above, v. i. 162 (note). Compare Gas- and honour virginall." 

coigne. The Complaint of Philomene 55. o?Za«(i7?a^] In the omitted scene 

(Arber, p. 102), 1576 : — or lines about London bridge being afire 

" The heavens had whirld aboute in the last Act (Scene vii.) the words 

Twelve yeeres in order due, "fetch pitch and flaxe to squench it" 

And twelve times euery flowre and may have dwelt in Shakespeare's mind. 

plant Setting " fire and flax " together is in 

Their liveries did renew." Greene, Nicholas Breton and Dekker. 

" Livery " is frequently used figuratively Heywood has it " fire and tow " {Pro- 

by Shakespeare. verbs, ed. Sharman, p. 127). 



sc. II.] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 191 

Henceforth I will not have to do with pity : 
Meet I an infant of the house of York, 
Into as many gobbets will I cut it 
As wild Medea young Absyrtus did : 

In cruelty will I seek out my fame. 6o 

Come, thou new ruin of old Clifford's house : 
As did yEneas old Anchises bear, 
So bear I thee upon my manly shoulders ; 
But then ./Eneas bare a living load, 

Nothing so heavy as these woes of mine. 65 

[Exit, bearing off his father. 

Enter Richard and Somerset to fight. Somerset is 

killed. 

Rich. So, lie thou there ; 

For underneath an alehouse' paltry sign. 
The Castle in Saint Alban's, Somerset 

62-65. ^^ ^'^ • • • txoes of mine] 53-61. And thus as old Ankyses sonne did 
beare His aged father on his manly baeke, And fought with him against the 
bloodie Greeks, Eiien so will I. But stale, heres one of them, To zvhom my soull 
hath sworne immortall hate. Enter Richard, and then Clifford laies downe his 
father , fights with him, and Richard flies away againe. Out crooktbacke villaine, 
get thee from my sight, But I will after thee, and once againe When I haue home 
my fatlier to his Tent, He trie my fortune better with thee yet. Exet yoong 
Clifford with his father. 66-71. Enter Richard . . . Richard. So, lie thou 
there; . . . princes kill.] Alarnies to the battaile, and then enter the Duke of 

58. gobbets] See iv. i. 85 (note). Jourdain's prediction at the end of Act 
Nowhere else in Shakespeare. Mouth- i.: "Let him shun Castles." Forthepre- 
fuls, lumps. For Clifford's oath of re- liminaries to this battle, see note at iv. 
venge here (and in Q) see Part III. i. i. ix. 28-30. Continued from there (p. 
9, 55 ; and i. iii. 5. 653) Grafton says : " The King . . . 

59. Medea . . . Absyrtus] When assembled an host, intendyng to mete 
Medea fled with Jason from Colchos, with the Duke in the North part, be- 
she murdered her brother Absyrtus, and cause he had so many friendes about the 
cut his body into several pieces, that Citie of London, and . . . accompanied 
her father might for some time be pre- with the Dukes of Sommerset and Buck- 
vented from pursuing her. See Ovid, ingham, the Erles of Stafford, Nor- 
Trist.. lib. iii. ix. 25-28 (Malone). The thumberland, and Wiltshire, with the 
Folios read Absirtis ; corrected by Theo- Lord Clifford, and diuers other Barons, 
bald. Not in Q. A considerable number departed out of Westminster, the XX. 
of these classical illustrations have oc- day of May toward the towne of Saint 
curred, and more follow. But in this Albones : of whose doynges the Duke of 
speech depicting the horrors of civil Yorke beyng advertysed by his espials, 
war, the manner in which real human with all his power coasted the Countries, 
tragedy is suggested as compared with and came to the same towne, the third 
the lakes of blood and the unchained day next ensuyng . . . While King 
furies of hell of contemporary poets, Henry more desyrous of peace than of 
Shakespeare makes a noble departure. warre, was sendyng forth his Orators, 

62. jEneas old Anchises bear] Re- at the one ende of the towne : the Erie 
peated in jfulitis CcEsar, i. ii. 112. of Warwike with the Marchemen, en- 

63. my manly shoulders] Hardly im- tered at the other ende of the towne 
proved from " his manly back " {Co7i- and fiercely set on the kinges forwarde, 
tention). and them shortly discomfited. Then 

68. Castle at Saint Alban's] See came the Duke of Sommerset . . . with 



192 THE SECOND PART OF [act v. 

Hath made the wizard famous in his death. 

Sword, hold thy temper ; heart, be wrathful still : 70 

Priests pray for enemies, but princes kill. \^Exit. 

Fight. Excursions. Enter KiNG, QUEEN, and others. 

Queen. Away, my lord ! you are slow : for shame, away ! 

King. Can we outrun the heavens? good Margaret, stay. 

Queen. What are you made of? you '11 nor fight nor fly ; 

Now is it manhood, wisdom, and defence, 75 

To give the enemy way, and to secure us 
By what we can, which can no more but fly. 

{^Alarum afar off. 
If you be ta'en, we then should see the bottom 
Of all our fortunes ; but if we haply 'scape. 
As well we may, if not through your neglect, 80 

We shall to London get, where you are loved, 
And where this breach now in our fortunes made 
May readily be stopped. 

Somerset and Richard fighting, and Richard kils him vnder the signe of the 
castle in Saint Albones. Rich. So Lie thou there, and breathe thy last. WhaVs 
here, the signe of the Castle ? Then the prophesie is come to passe, For Somerset 
was forewarned of Castles, The which he alwaies did obserue. And now 
behold, vnder a paltry Ale-house signe. The Castle in saint Albones, Somerset 
hath . . . by his death (1. 69 in text). 72. Fight. . . . Qiteen. Away, my 
lord I . , . away l'\ 62-64. Alarmes againe, and then enter three or four e, bear- 
ifig the Duke of Buckingham wounded to his Tent. Alarmes still, and then 
enter the King ajid Queene. Queene. Away, ftiy Lord, ayid fiie to London 
straight. Make hast, for vengeance comes along with them, come stand not to 
expostulate, lets go. 73. Kitig, Can we . . . stay] 65-67. Come then faire 
Queene to London let vs hast, And summon a Parliament with speede To 
stop the fury of these dyre euents. Exet King and Queene. 74-83. Queene. 

the kinges power, which fought a sore 72. come stand not to expostulate, 

andcruell battaile . . . the kinges army lets goe] In Q. See 3 Henry VL 11. 

was overthrowne . . . there dyed under v. 135, where this Hne is used, 

the signe of the Castel, Edmond Duke 73. outrun] escape from; as in the 

of Sommerset, who long before was expression " outrun the constable," 

warned to eschew all Castelles, and which occurs in Marlowe's jfew of 

besyde him, lay Henry the Second Erie Malta at the beginning of Act v. 

of Northumberlande, Humfrey Erie of {ante 1593). See 3 Henry VL i. ii. 

Stafford sonne to the Duke of Bucking- 14. 

ham, lohn Lord Clifford, and viij 74. nor fiy] The queen's words here 
thousand men and more. Humpfrey in the Contention, " stand not to ex- 
Duke of Buckingham . . . and lames postulate," occur in Part III. 11. v. 135 
Butler Erie of Wilshire and Ormond (note). Peele uses the word, 
seyng Fortunes lowryng chaunce, left 76. secure us] make ourselves safe, 
the King post alone, and with a great See Cymbeline, iv. iv. 8, 
number fled away. This was the ende 78, 79. bottom of all our fortunes] 
of the first battaile at Saint Albones Compare 1 Henry IV. iv. i. 50. A 
which was fought on the Thursday thoroughly Shakespearian passage, like 
before the feast of Pentecost, beyng the rest of the speech. Note the 
theXXIIJ.dayofMay. In thisXXXIIJ. rhythm and the running on in the 
yere of the kinges reigne." lines. 

71. Priests ... kill] See on this line, 82, 83. breach . . . stopped] See 

in Introduction, at Peele. above, in. i. 288. 



sc. Ill] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 



19a 



Re-enter Young CLIFFORD. 

y. Clif. But that my heart 's on future mischief set, 

I would speak blasphemy ere bid you fly ; 85 

But fly you must : uncurable discomfit 

Reigns in the hearts of all our present parts. 

Away, for your relief! and we will live 

To see their day and them our fortune give. 

Away, my lord, away ! [Exeunt. 9a 

SCENE III . — Fields near Saint A Iban^s. 

Alarum. Retreat. Enter YORK, Richard, Warwick, 
and Soldiers, with drum and colours. 
York. Of Salisbury, who can report of him ? 
That winter lion, who in rage forgets 

What are . . . stopfd] omitted Q. 83-90. Re-enter . . . Y. Clif. But that 
. . . away /] omitted Q. 

Scene in. 
Alarum . . . 1-7. York. Of Salisbury . . . be lost] Alarmes, and then a 
flourish, and enter the Duke of Yorke and Richard. 68-75. Yorkc. How 

Clyomon), and " lukewarm spring dis- 
tilling from his eyes" {Edward the 
First (413, a)). " Furiously " is not in 
Shakespeare ; it is in Peele's Battle of 
Alcazar (426, a) : " he furiously implores 
Sebastian's aid." The alteration in 
structure here is remarkable. In the 
Contention young Clifford makes a 
final speech, fighting, with his father 
sometimes up, and sometimes down, 
and that is the last of him. It seems 
much more seemly to let him depart 
with his burthen and re-enter for his 
final speech, which has no parallel in 
the Contention. The transposition of 
the prophecy, which is by no means 
dignified enough to open a scene (as it 
does in Q), is also striking. Peele put 
those lines there ; they are curtailed 
and postponed here. 

87. parts] See above, line 35. 

8g. give] display, from the heraldic 
sense. Unless the passage means 
" live to see our fortune give them 
their day." 



86. uncurable] See above, iii. i. 286. 
Later, in Shakespeare, the word is "in- 
curable." "In Shakespeare" is said 
here on purpose, since it is easy to 
see the revisionary hand in this scene. 
Clifford (young) and the queen belong 
to Shakespeare, with a few lines, very 
few, of the old play left standing. 
Young Clifford's first speech is a 
notable instance. In the Contention 
(which is mainly Peele's) Spenser is 
recalled. Peele, after the appearance 
of the Faerie Queene, became imbued 
with it. We find " Grovelling on thy 
face " ; see i. ii. g, and i. iv. 14 (notes) ; 
and Faerie Queene, 11. i. 45, and iii. i, 
38. " Thy sinewes shrink " (nowhere 
in Shakespeare) ; Peele has " Alas, my 
veins are numb'd, my sinews shrink " 
[Old Wives Tale (457, a)) ; Spenser 
has " shrunken synewes of her chosen 
knight " (Faerie Queene, i. ix. 20). 
" He breathless lies " ; Peele has 
" Breathless he lies and headless too 
my lord " [Edward the First (409, b)). 
" Smear'd and weltred in his luke- 
warme blood." " Smeared ... in 
blood " only in 3 Henry VI. v. ii. 23 ; 
in Golding and in Selimus (Greene's 
part) it is " besmeared." " Wallow'd 
in his owne yet lukewarme blood" 
(Faerie Queene, i. ix. 36). " Weltered" 
is not in Shakespeare, but "weltered in 
his blood" is twice in Golding's Ovid 
(Moring's reprint, pp. 65, 145), con- 
stantly followed by Peele. He has 
" weltering waves " (Prologue to Sir 
13 



Scene in. 

I. Of Salisbury] As has been often 
the case, the opening of the scene 
is Shakespeare's. In the Contention 
speech occurs the adjective " faint- 
heart " (in Marlowe, Tamburlaine, Part 
II.), and "buckle with" (fight with), 
see Part I. i. ii. 97. " Buckle to fight" 
occurs twice in the first book of Faerie 
Queene, meaning made ready to fight ; 
a different but interwoven sense. 



194 



THE SECOND PART OF 



[act v. 



Aged contusions and all brush of time, 
And, like a gallant in the brow of youth, 
Repairs him with occasion ? This happy day 5 

Is not itself, nor have we won one foot, 
If Salisbury be lost. 
Rich. My noble father, 

Three times to-day I holp him to his horse. 

Three times bestrid him ; thrice I led him off. 

Persuaded him from any further act : lO 

But still, where danger was, still there I met him ; 

And like rich hangings in a homely house, 

So was his will in his old feeble body. 

But, noble as he is, look where he comes. 

now boyes, fortunate this fight hath bene, I hope to vs and ours, for Eng- 
lands good, And our great honour, that so long we lost. While faint-heart 
Henry did vsurpe our rights. But did you see old Salsbjiry, since we. With 
bloodie minds did brickie with the foe, I would not for the losse of this 
right hand. That ought but well betide that good old man. 7-T-4- Rich. 

My noble . . . he comes] 76-81. Rich. My lord, I saw him in the thickest 
throng. Charging his Lance with his old weary amies, And thrise I saw him 
beaten from his horse, And thrise this hand did set him up againe. And still 



3. contiisioyis] bruises. The earliest 
example in New Eng. Diet, of the word 
meaning " the act ot contusion." 

3. brush of time] Compare Timon of 
Athens, iv. iii. 264; and "brushes of 
war," Troilus and Crcssida, v. iii. 34. 
Bruises, rubs. Ben Jonson uses brush 
= blow, New Inn, iii. ii. 

4. brow of youth] Schmidt says 
aspect, appearance, as in " brow of 
justice" {I Henry IV. iv. iii. 83); and 
" brows of grace " {Macbeth, iv. iii. 23). 
Steevens takes " top of youth " to be 
the sense, as in the brow of a hill. 
Compare " brow of night " (King John, 
V. i. 49). Several changes suggested. 

7. Salisbury be lost] The speech by 
York in Contention, that this one re- 
places, is of interest. Who wrote it ? 
It contains Greene's " buckle with," but 
Shakespeare uses that several times in 
these plays — not later. It contains the 
adjective fai7it- heart found in Marlowe's 
Tamburlaine, Part II. (1590), and often 
in Locrine. But the line of " for the loss 
of this right hand " is like Shakespeare ; 
see 3 Henry VI, 11. vi. 80. There is none 
of Marlowe's bounce. The expression 
" good old man " delighted Shakespeare, 
he uses it with gusto many a time. I 
believe it is Shakespeare's ; and very 
poetically rewritten by him. The scene 
seems to me by Peele and Shakespeare 
in Contention, or by Peele alone. And 



rewritten by Shakespeare here, as is 
usually the case in important positions, 
such as the opening or closing of an 
Act, or even a prominent scene. 

8, 9. Three times . . . Three times 
. . . thrice] Not much differing from 
Contention's " And thrise . . . And 
thrise." Compare Hemy V. iv. vi. 4. 
Much in the descriptive style of the 
Faerie Queene (i. vii. 24) : — 

" Thrise did she sinke adowne in 
deadly swownde, 
And thrise he her revived with busie 
paine." 
In the same speech " charging his 
lance" is not Shakespearian. Peele 
has — 

"as if some angry man of war 
Had charged his lance " 
{Anglorum Ferice (597, a)). And a few 
lines below "bud" is used in a non- 
Shakespearian sense. Compare " fresh 
budd of vertue " in Faerie Queene, i. viii. 
27 (to a person). " Bud" is drawn in with 
canker, to a similar use in King John, 
HI. iv. 82. For " thickest throng " see 
Part III. II. i. 13 (note). " Remainder 
of my weary life " is paralleled only in 
Titus Andronicus, ill. i. 132. 

9. bestrid him] strode over him to 
defend him. See Comedy of Errors, v. 
i. 192, and Coriolanus, 11. ii. 96. Earlier 
in this sense in North's Plutarch {New 
Eng. Diet.). 



sc. HI.] KING HENRY THE SIXTH 195 

Enter SALISBURY. 

Sal. Now, by my sword, well hast thou fought to-day ; 1 5 

By the mass, so did we all. I thank you, Richard : 

God knows how long it is I have to live ; 

And it hath pleased him that three times to-day 

You have defended me from imminent death. 

Well, lords, we have not got that which we have : 20 

'Tis not enough our foes are this time fled, 

Being opposites of such repairing nature. 
York. I know our safety is to follow them ; 

For, as I hear, the king is fled to London, 

To call a present court of parliament : 25 

Let us pursue him ere the writs go forth. 

What says Lord Warwick ? shall we after them ? 
War. After them ! nay, before them, if we can. 

Now, by my faith, lords, 'twas a glorious day : 

Saint Alban's battle, won by famous York, 30 

Shall be eternized in all age to come. 

Sound drums and trumpets ! and to London all : 

And more such days as these to us befall ! 

\Exeunt. 

he fought with courage gaitist his foes, The boldest sprited man that ere mine eyes 
beheld. Enter Salsbury and Warwicke. 15-22. Sal. Now, by my . . . fiature] 
82-88. Edward. See noble father, where they both do come, The only props vnto 
the house of Yorke. Sals. Well hast thou fought this day, thou valiant Duke, 
And thou braue bud of Yorkes encreasing house. The small remainder of my weary 
life, I hold for thee, for with thy warlike arme. Three times this day thou hast 
preseru'd my life. 23-27. York. I know . . . the . . . London . . . What 

. . . them ?] 89-91. Yorke. What say you Lords, the . . . London ? There as I 
here to hold a Parliament. What . . . them ? 28-33. War. After them I . . . 
Alban's . . . eterniz'd . . . befall I] 92-97. War. After them . . . Albones . . . 
eternest . . . befall. Exet omnes. 

22. opposites . . . nature'] foes with cepting Shakespeare. It occurs very 

such power of recovery. near the beginning of Sidney's Arcadia : 

31. eierwJz^rf] Not elsewhere in Shake- "mankinde by all means seeking to 

speare, but in Spenser, Greene, Peele, eternize himself so much the more as 

Marlowe,Kyd,Nasheand Harvey earlier, he is near his end." 

Spenser has " to be eternized " in Faerie 32, Sound drums and trumpets'] Several 

Queene, i. x. 59. The earliest in New times again in Part III, and in Richard 

Eng. Diet, is " Countess of Pembroke ///. Compare (Peele and Greene's) 

(1580)." Perhaps introduced by Gabriel Locritie, i. i. : Sound drums and trum- 

Harvey, and adopted by every one ex- pets : march to Troynovant." 



ABERDEEN : THE UNIVERSITY PRESS 



PR Shakespeare, V/illiejii 
2815 The second part of King 

A2H3 Henry the Sixth 
cop. 3 




PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE 
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET 

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY 







4' 




I- : 





