LIBRARY OF CONGRESS 




DDODBlfiEST^ 









^♦'^ .♦ 















V « (i 












■ V 




O N 
















'0 A o^ 



^^^ ' • • ■ V* 









o 



V • ' • «' C^ 




'^<^ 















* • o 






?^^. --' 



„^^ •^■^. 



Zi, -." 



* '^'' 



I 



im LAKE ENGLISH CLASSICS 

General Editor LINDSAY TODD DAMON, A. B. 
Professor of Rhetoric in Brown University 

ADDISON— The Sir Roger De Coverley Papers— Abbott 30c 

AMERICAN POEMS— English Requirements— Greever -c 

BROWNING- Selected Poems— Retnoi^ds 40c 

BUNYAN— The Pilgrim's Progress— Lath am 30c 

BURKE— Speech on Conciliation with America— Denney 25c 

CARLYLE— Essay on Burns- Atton 25c 

CHAUCER— Selections- Greenlaw 40c 

COOPER— Last of the Mohicans— Lewis 40c 

COLERIDQE -The Ancient Mariner, I , , ,^ ,, 

LOWELL-Visionof SirLaunfal, / 1 vol.-MoODY 25c 

DEFOE— Robinson Crusoe— Hastings — c 

DE OUINCEY— Joan of Arc and Selections— Mood y 25C 

DE OUINCEY— The Flight of the Tartar Tribe— French 25c 

DICKENS— The Tale of Two Cities— Balwin 40c 

DICKENS— A Christmas Carol, etc.— Bjioadtjs 30c 

DICKENS -David Copperfield— Baldwin — c 

DRYDEN— Palamon and Arcite— OooK 25c 

EMERSON— Essays and Addresses— He ydrick 35c 

FRANKLIN— Autobiography— Griffin 30c 

GEORGE ELIOT— Silas Marner— Hancock 30c 

GOLDSMITH- The Vicar of Wakefield— Morton 30c 

HA WTHORNE— The House of the Seven Gables— Herric k 35c 

HAWTHORNE— Twice=Told Tales— Herrick and Bruere 40c 

IRVING— Life of Goldsmith— Krapp 40c 

IRVING- The Sketch Book— Krapp 40c 

IRVING— Tales of a Traveller— and parts of The Sketch Book— Krapp 40c 

LINCOLN, WASHINGTON, WEBSTER— Addresses— Denney — c 

LONGFELLOW— Narrative Poems— Po weld 40c 

MACAULAY— Essays on Addison and Johnson— Newcomer 30c 

MACAULAY— Essays on Milton and Addison Newcomer 30c 

MACAULAY— Essays on Clive and Hastings— Net\^COmer 3Sc 

MILTON— L'Allegro, 11 Penseroso, Comus, and Lycidas— Neidson 25c 

MILTON— Paradise Lost, Books I and II— Farley 25c 

PALGRAVE— Golden Treasury— Newcomer 40c 

POE— Poems and Tales, Selected— Newcomer 30c 

POPE— Homer's Iliad, Books, I, VI, XXII, XXIV— Oressy and 

Moody 25c 

RUSKIN— Sesame and Lilies— Linn 25c 

SCOTT— Ivanhoe- Simon DS 45c 

SCOTT— Lady of the Lake— Moody 30c 

SCOTT- Lay of the Last Minstrel- Moody and Widdard 25c 

SCOTT— Marmion-MooDY and Widdard 40c 

SCOTT— Ouentin Durward— Simon DS 45c 

SHAKSPERE— The Neilson Edition— Edited with Introductions, 
Notes, and Word Indexes by W. A. Nett.son. As yu 
Like It, Hamlet, Henry the Fifth, Julius Caesar, Macbeth, Midsummer^ 

Night's Dream, Twelfth Night, each 25c 

SHAKSPERE-Merchant of Venice— Lovett 25c 

STEVENSON— Treasure Island— B ro A dus 25c 

THACKERAY— Henry Esmond— Phedps SOc 

TENNYSON— Gareth and Lynette, Lancelot and Elaine, The Psssing of Arthur, 

any other Poems— Reynolds 35c 

TENNYSON— The Princess-OOPELAND 25c 

SCOTT, FORESMAN AND COMPANY 

Educational Publishers 
378 WABASH AVENUE CHICAGO, ILLINOIS 



^be Xafte jeneUeb (Elaaeica 

KDITED BY 

LINDSAY TODD DAMON, A. B. 

Prof4etor of Bhetoric in Brown University 



€]^e lafee cEngltjS]^ ClaissiicjS 

SHAKSPERE'S 

HENRY THE FIFTH 



EDITED BY 

WILLIAM ALLAN NEILSON, Ph. D. 

PROFESSOR OF ENGLISH, HARVARD UNIVERSITY 



CHICAGO 

SCOTT, FOEESMAN AND COMPANY 









Copyright, 1909 

BY 

SCOTT, EOEESMAN & COMPANY 



iC!.A25ie,7f)f 



. PEEFACE. 

The text of Henry V used in the present vol- 
ume is based upon that in the first folio, the 
spelling and punctuation being modernized, with 
a few emendations drawn from the early quartos 
and from the suggestions of modern editors. It 
has not been thought wise, except in rare cases, to 
burden the notes with the materials or the con- 
troversies of textual criticism, since the bearing 
of these is not easily made evident to students at 
that stage of Shaksperean study for which this 
edition is prepared. The introduction is meant ta 
give an idea of the place of the play in the his- 
tory of English Literature; to sketch the life of 
the author and outline his literary activity; to- 
supply information as to the date and sources of 
the play; to describe the main characteristics of 
the meter; and to draw attention to the more im- 
portant differences between Elizabethan English 
and that of our own day. In addition to point- 
ing out the derivation of the plot from the 
Chronicles of Holinshed, the main changes and 
additions made by Shakspere have been noted ; and 
much may be done towards leading students to an 
appreciation of the art of the dramatist by ex- 

9 



10 PEEFACE 

panding the hints here given at the appropriate 
points in the reading of the text. All the pas- 
sages from the old historian which there is any 
trace of Shakspere^s having used are collected and 
arranged by Mr. W. G. Boswell- Stone in his 
Shakspere's Holinshed, a volume which should be 
in every school library, and to which the present 
editor acknowledges his obligation. 

The aim of the notes has been in the first place 
to supply the information necessary to make the 
language and allusions of the text thoroughly in- 
telligible. This must surely be regarded as the 
first step in the teaching of any literary master- 
piece. At the beginning of the scenes short notes 
of a different kind have, as a rule, been inserted, 
suggesting to the student the significance in the 
development of plot or character of the scene that 
follows. The purpose of these is not so much a 
full statement of such significance, as the cultiva- 
tion of the habit of testing all the elements in a 
work of art in order to find the justification of 
their presence. 

Apart from this, the task of aesthetic interpre- 
tation has been usually left to the teacher. The 
present play stands in contrast to, say, Julius 
CcBsar or Macbeth in this respect, that little of 
typical dramatic structure is to be learned from 
it. It has here the characteristic defects of the 
Chronicle History, the main principle of its con- 



PEEFACE IX 

struction being merely the chronological order of 
events, and the unity depending on the dominant 
interest in the hero. In the characterization of 
Henry himself, in the enthusiastic and patriotic 
tone of the whole, in the rousing eloquence of the 
speeches, and in the humor of the scenes of com- 
edy, must be found the main themes for kindling 
the student's interest; and here the material is 
surely abundant. 

It is an obvious pedagogical temptation to use 
such a play as this for the teaching of English 
history. To do this thoroughly, it would be neces- 
sary to supply a considerable background in order 
to make intelligible such matters as the causes of 
the Hundred Years' War between England and 
France, and the methods by which the House of 
Lancaster reached the throne of England. But it 
must be realized that in so doing there is consider- 
able risk of killing the interest in the action of the 
play by an overdose of genealogical detail, and of 
blurring the portrait which Shakspere has painted. 
As a rule, it will be well to reserve correction of 
historical detail until the mind of the pupil has 
been well impressed with the dramatist's creation, 
so that the claims of the piece as literature may 
not be injured by a zeal to make it a medium for 
the conveying of historical information. 

For further details on the life and work of 
Shakspere, the following may be referred to: 



12 PEErACE 

Dowden^s Shakspere Primer and Shahspere, His 
Mind and Art; Sidney Lee^s Life of William 
:S}iakespeare (revised edition, 1909) ; and ShaJc- 
spere and His Predecessors, by F. S. Boas. For 
a general account of the English Drama of the 
period see A. W. Ward's History of English Dra- 
matic Literature (revised edition, 1899) and F. E. 
Schelling's Elizabethan Drama, both of which are 
rich in bibliography. For questions of language 
and grammar, see A. Schmidt^s SJiahespeare Lexi- 
con; J. Bartlett's Concordance to S'haJcespeare; 
and E. A. Abbott's Shakespearian Grammar. G. 
R. French's Shakspeareana Genealogica is a con- 
venient source of information on the dynastic and 
similar questions that arise in connection with the 
historical plays. 

I wish to thank Mr. R. G. Martin for substan- 
tial assistance in the preparation of the present 
edition. W. A. N. 

Harvard University, July, 1909. 



CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

Preface 9 

Introduction 

i. shakspere and the 

english drama . . .15 

II. Henry the Fifth ... 34 

Text . . . ... .49 

Notes 199 

Word Index 235 



UsTTEODUCTION". 

I. SHAKSPERE AND THE ENGLISH DRAMA. 

The wonderful rapidity of the development of 
the English drama in the last quarter of the six- 
teenth century stands in striking contrast to the 
slowness of its growth before that period. The 
religious drama, out of which the modern dramatic 
forms were to spring, had dragged through centu.- 
ries with comparatively little change, and was still 
alive when, in 1576, the first theatre was built in 
London. By 1600 Shakspere had written more 
than half his plays and stood completely master of 
the art which he brought to a pitch unsurpassed 
in any age. Much of this extraordinary later 
progress was due to contemporary causes; but 
there entered into it also certain other elements 
which can be understood only in the light of the 
attempts that had been made in the three or four 
preceding centuries. 

In England, as in Greece, the drama sprang 

from religious ceremonial. The Mass, the centre 

of the public worship of the Eo- 

The Drama be l-^an church, contained dramatic 
lore Sjia£spere> ' 

material in the gestures of the 
officiating priests, in the narratives contained in 
the Lessons, and in the responsive singing and 

15 



16 INTEODUCTION 

chanting. Latin^ the language in which the serv-. 
ices were conducted, was nnintelligible to the mass 
of the people, and as early as the fifth century the' 
clergy had begun to use such devices as tableaux 
vivants of scenes like the marriage in Cana and 
the Adoration of the Magi to make comprehen- 
sible important events in Bible history. Later, 
the Easter services were illuminated by repre- 
sentations of the scene at the sepulchre on the 
morning of the Eesurrection, in which a wooden, 
and afterwards a stone, structure was used for the 
tomb itself, and the dialogue was chanted by differ- 
ent speakers representing respectively the angel, 
the disciples, and the women. From such begin- 
nings as this there gradually evolved the earliest 
forms of the Mieacle Play. 

As the presentations became more elaborate, 
the place of performance was moved first to the 
churchyard, then to the fields, and finally to the 
streets and open spaces of the towns. With this 
change of locality went a change in the language 
and in the actors, and an extension of the field 
from which the subjects were chosen. Latin gave 
way to the vernacular, and the priests to laymen; 
and miracle plays representing the lives of patron 
saints were given by schools, trade guilds, and 
other lay institutions. A further development 
appeared when, instead of single plays, whole 
series such as the extant York, Chester, and 



SHAKSPEEE AND ENGLISH DEAMA 17 

Coventry cycles were given, dealing in chrono- 
logical order with the most important events in 
Bible history from the Creation to the Day of 
Judgment. 

The stage used for the miracle play as thus 
developed was a platform mounted on wheels, 
which was moved from space to space through 
the streets. Each trade undertook one or more 
plays, and, when possible, these were allotted with 
reference to the nature of the particular trade. 
Thus the play representing the visit of the Magi 
bearing gifts to the infant Christ was given to the 
goldsmiths, and the Building of the Ark to the 
carpenters. The costumes were conventional and 
frequently grotesque. Judas always wore red 
hair and a red beard; Herod appeared as a fierce 
Saracen; the devil had a terrifying mask and a 
tail; and divine personages wore gilt hair. 

Meanwhile the attitude of the church towards 
these performances had changed. Priests were 
forbidden to take part in them, and as early as 
the fourteenth century we find sermons directed 
against them. The secular management had a 
more important result in the introduction of 
comic elements. Figures such as Noah's wife and 
Herod became frankly farcical, and whole episodes 
drawn from contemporary life and full of local 
color were invented, in which the original aim 
of edification was displaced by an explicit attempt 



18 INTEODUCTION 

at pure entertainment. Most of these features 
were characteristic of the religious drama in gen- 
eral throughout Western Europe. But the local 
and contemporary elements naturally tended to 
become national; and in England we find in these 
humorous episodes the beginnings of native 
comedy. 

Long before the miracle plays had reached their 
height, the next stage in the development of the 
drama had begun. Even in very early perform- 
ances there had appeared, among the dramatis 
personce drawn from the Scriptures, personifica- 
tions of abstract qualities such as Righteousness, 
Peace, Mercy, and Truth. In the fifteenth cen- 
tury this allegorical tendency, which was prevalent 
also in the non-dramatic literature of the age, 
resulted in the rise of another kind of play, the 
MoEALiTY, in which all the characters were per- 
sonifications, and in which the aim, at first the 
teaching of moral lessons, later became frequently 
satirical. Thus the most powerful of all the Mo- 
ralities, Sir David Lindesay^s Satire of the Three 
Estates^ is a direct attack upon the corruption in 
the church just before the Eeformation. 

The advance implied in the Morality consisted 
not so much in any increase in the vitality of the 
characters or in the interest of the plot (in both 
of which, indeed, there was usually a falling off), 
as in the fact that in it the drama had freed 



SHAKSPEKE AND ENGLISH DKAMA 19 

itself from the bondage of having to choose its 
subject matter from one set of sources — the Bible, 
the Apocrypha, and the Lives of the Saints. This 
freedom was shared by the Interlude, a form 
not always to be distinguished from the Morality, 
but one in which the tendency was to substitute 
for personified abstractions actual social types 
such as the Priest, the Pardoner, or the Palmer. 
A feature of both forms was the Vice, a humorous 
character who appeared under the various disguises 
of Hypocrisy, Fraud, and the like, and whose 
function it was to make fun, chiefly at the expense 
of the Devil. The Vice is historically important 
as having bequeathed some of his characteristics 
to the Fool of the later drama. 

John Heywood, the most important writer of 
Interludes, lived well into the reign of Elizabeth, 
and even the miracle play persisted into the reign, 
of her successor in the seventeenth century. But 
long before it finally disappeared it had become 
a mere medieval survival. A new England had 
meantime come into being and new forces were at 
work, manifesting themselves in a dramatic litera- 
ture infinitely beyond anything even suggested by 
the crude forms which have been described. 

The great European intellectual movement 
known as the Eenaissance had at last reached 
England, and it brought with it materials for an 
unparalleled advance in all the living forms of 



20 INTEODUCTION 

literature. Italy and the classics, especially, sup- 
plied literary models and material. Not only were 
translations from these sources abundant, but 
Italian players visited England, and performed 
before Queen Elizabeth. France and Spain, as 
well as Italy, flooded the literary market with 
collections of tales, from which, both in the 
original languages and in such 'translations as 
are found in Paynter's Palace of Pleasure (pub- 
lished 1566-67), the dramatists drew materials 
for their plots. 

These literary conditions, however, did not do 
much beyond offering a means of expression. 
For a movement so magnificent in scale as that 
which produced the Elizabethan Drama, some- 
thing is needed besides models and material. In 
the present instance this sometliing is to be found 
in the state of exaltation which characterized the 
spirit of the English people in the days of Queen 
Elizabeth. Politically, the nation was at last one 
after the protracted divisions of the Eeformation, 
and its pride was stimulated by its success in the 
fight with Spain. Intellectually, it was sharing 
with the rest of Europe the exhilaration of the 
Eenaissance. !N'ew lines of action in all parts of 
the world, new lines of thought in all departments 
of scholarship and speculation, were opening up; 
and the whole land was throbbing with life. 

In its very beginnings the new movement in 



SHAKSPEEE AND ENGLISH DEAMA' gl 

England showed signs of that combination of 
native tradition and foreign influence which was 
to characterize it throughout. The first regular 
English comedy, Udairs Ralph Roister Doisier 
was an adaptation of the plot of the Miles 
Gloriosus of Plautus to contemporary life. After 
a short period of experiment by amateurs working 
chiefly under the influence of Seneca, we come on 
a band of professional playwrights who not only 
prepared the way for Shakspere, but in some 
instances produced works of great intrinsic worth. 
The mythological dramas of Lyly with the bright 
repartee of their prose dialogue and the music of 
their occasional lyrics, the interesting experiments 
of Greene and Peele, and the horrors of the 
tragedy of Kyd, are all full of suggestions of what 
was to come. But by far the greatest of Shaks- 
pere's forerunners was Christopher Marlowe, who 
not only has the credit of fixing blank verse as the 
future poetic medium for English tragedy, but 
who in his plays from Tamburlaine to Edward II. 
contributed to the list of the great permanent 
masterpieces of the English drama. 

It was in the professional society of these men 
that Shakspere found himself when he came to 

London. Born in the provincial 
Barfy ^ffef town of Stratford-on-Avon in the 

heart of England, he was bap- 
tized on April 26, 1564 (May 6th, according to 



22 INTEODUCTION 

our reckoning). The exact clay of l;is birth is 
unknown. His father was John Shakspere, a 
fairly prosperous tradesman, who may be supposed 
to have followed the custom of his class in edu- 
cating his son. If this were so, William would be 
sent to the Grammar School, already able to 
read, when he was seven, and there he would be 
set to work on Latin Grammar, followed by read- 
ing, up to the fourth year, in Cato's Maxims, 
^sop's Fables, and parts of Ovid, Cicero, and 
the medieval poet Mantuanus. If he continued 
through the fifth and sixth years, he would read 
parts of Yergil, Horace, Terence, Plautus, and 
the Satirists. Greek was not usually taught in 
the Grammar Schools. Whether he went through 
this course or not we have no means of knowing, 
except the evidence afforded by the use of the 
classics in his works, and the famous dictum of 
his friend, Ben Jonson, that he had "small Latin 
and less Greek." What we are sure of is that 
he was a boy with remarkable acuteness of ob- 
servation, who used his chances for picking up 
facts of all kinds; for only thus could he have 
accumulated the fund of information which he 
put to such a variety of uses in his writings. 

Throughout the poet's boyhood the fortunes of 
John Shakspere kept improving until he reached 
the position of High Bailiff or Mayor of Stratford. 
When William was about thirteen, however, his 



SHAKSPEEE AND ENGLISH DEAMA 23 

father began to meet with reverses, and these are 
conjectured to have led to the boy's being taken 
from school early and set to work. What business 
he was taught we do not know, and indeed we 
have little more information about him till the 
date of his marriage in November, 1582, to Anne 
Hathaway, a woman from a neighboring village, 
who was seven years his senior. Concerning his 
occupations in the years immediately preceding 
and succeeding his marriage several traditions 
have come down, — of his having been apprenticed 
as a butcher, of his having taken part in poaching 
expeditions, and the like — but none of these is 
based upon sufficient evidence. About 1585 he 
left Stratford, and probably by the next year he 
had found his way to London. 

How soon and in what capacity he first became 
attached to the theatres we are again unable to 
say, but in 1592 he had certainly been engaged 
in theatrical affairs long enough to give some 
occasion for the jealous outburst of a rival play- 
wright, Eobert Greene, who, in a pamphlet pos- 
thumously published in that year, accused him 
of plagiarism. Henry Chettle, the editor of 
Greene's pamphlet, shortly after apologized for his 
connection with the charge, and bore witness to 
Shakspere's honorable reputation as a man and 
to his skill both as an actor and a dramatist. 

Eobert Greene, who thus supplies us with the 



24 INTKODUCTION 

earliest extant indications of his rival's presence 
in London, was in many wa3^s a t^^pical figure 
among the playwrights with whom Shakspere 
worked during this early period. A member of 
both universities, Greene came to the metropolis 
while yet a young man, and there led a life of the 
most diversified literary activity, varied with bouts 
of the wildest debauchery. He was a writer of 
satirical and controversial pamphlets, of romantic 
tales, of elegiac, pastoral, and lyric poetry, a 
translator, a dramatist, — in fact, a literary jack- 
of-all-trades. The society in which he lived con- 
sisted in part of "University Wits" like himself, 
in part of the low men and women who haunted 
the vile taverns of the slums to prey upon such as 
he. "A world of blackguardism dashed with 
genius," it has been called, and the phrase is fit 
enough. Among such surroundings Greene lived, 
and among them he died, bankrupt in body and 
estate, the victim of his own ill-governed passions. 
In conjunction with such men as this Shakspere 
began his life-work. His first dramatic efforts 
were made in revising the plays of his predeces- 
sors with a view to their revival on the stage; and 
in Titus Andronicus and the first part of Henry 
VI. we have examples of this kind of work. 
The next step was probably the production of 
plays in collaboration with other writers, and to 
this practice, which he almost abandoned in the 




SHAKSPEEE AND ENGLISH DEAMA 25 

middle of his career, lie seems to have returned in 
his later years in such plays as Pericles, Henri/ 
VIII., and The Two Nolle Kinsmen. How far 
Shakspere was of this dissolute set to which his 
fellow-workers belonged it is impossible to tell;, 
but we know that by and by, as he gained mastery 
over his art and became more and more independ- 
ent in work and in fortune, he left this sordid 
life behind him, and aimed at the establishment 
of a family. In half a dozen years from the time 
of Greene's attack, he had reached the top of his 
profession, was a sharer in the profits of his. 
theatre, and had invested his savings in land and 
houses in his native town. The youth who ten- 
years before had left Stratford poor and burdened 
with a wife and three children, had now become 
"William Shakspere, Gentleman." 

During these years Shakspere's literary work 
was not confined to the drama, which, indeed, 
was then hardly regarded as a form of literature. 
In 1593 he published Yenus and Adonis, and in 
1594, Lucrece, two poems belonging to a class of 
highly wrought versions of classical legends which 
was then fashionable, and of which Marlowe's 
Hero and Leander is the other most famous ex- 
ample. For several years, too, in the last decade 
of the sixtenth century and the first few years 
of the seventeenth, he was composing a series 
of sonnets on love and friendship, in this, too. 



26 INTEODUCTION 

following a literary fashion of the time. Yet 
these give ns more in the way of self-revelation 
than anything else he has left. From them we 
seem to be able to catch glimpses of his attitude 
towards his profession, and one of them makes ns 
xealize so vividly his perception of the tragic risks 
of his surroundings that it is set down here : 

O, for my sake do you witli Fortune chicle, 

The guilty goddess of my harmful deeds, 
That did not better for my life provide 

Than public means which public manners breeds. 
Thence comes it that my name receives a brand. 

And almost thence my nature is subdued 
To what it works in, like the dyer's hand: 

Pity me then and wish I were renewed; 
Whilst, like a willing patient, I will drink 

Potions of eisel 'gainst my strong infection; 
No bitterness that I will bitter think. 

Nor double penance to correct correction. 
Pity me then, dear friend, and I assure ye 

Even that your pity is enough to cure me. 

It does not seem possible to avoid the inferences 
lying on the surface in this poem; but whatever 
confessions it may imply, it serves, too, to give us 
the assurance that Shakspere did not easily and 
blindly yield to the temptations that surrounded 
the life of the theatre of his time. 

For the theatre of Shakspere's day was no very 
reputable affair. Externally it appears to us now 

a very meagre apparatus — almost 
Theatie^^^^*^*^ absurdly so, when we reflect on 

the grandeur of the compositions 



SHAKSPEKE AND ENGLISH DEAMA 27 

for which it gave occasion. A roughly circular 
wooden building, with a roof over the stage and 
over the galleries, but with the pit often open to 
the wind and weather, having very little scenery 
and practically no attempt at the achievement of 
stage illusion, — such was the scene of the produc- 
tion of some of the greatest imaginative works 
the world has seen. Nor was the audience very 
choice. The more respectable citizens of Puritan 
tendencies frowned on the theatre to such an 
extent that it was found advisable to place the 
buildings outside the city limits, and beyond the 
jurisdiction of the city fathers. The pit was 
thronged with a motley crowd of petty tradesfolk 
and the dregs of the town; the gallants of the 
time sat on stools on the stage, "drinking" tobacco 
and chaffing the actors, their efforts divided be- 
tween displaying their wit and their clothes. The 
actors were all male, the women's parts being 
taken by boys whose voices were not yet broken. 
The costumes, frequently the cast-oS clothing of 
the gallants, were often gorgeous, but seldom ap- 
propriate. Thus the success of the performance 
had to depend upon the excellence of the piece, 
the merit of the acting, and the readiness of 
appreciation of the audience. 

This last point, however, was more to be relied 
upon than a modern student might imagine. 
Despite their dubious respectability, the Eliza- 



28 INTEODUCTION 

Lethan play-goers must have been of wonderfully 

keen intellectual susceptibilities. For clever feats 

in the manipulation of language, for punS;, happy 

alliterations, delicate melody such as we find in 

the lyrics of the times, for the thunder of the 

pentameter as it rolls through the tragedies of 

Marlowe, they had a practiced taste. Qualities 

which we now expect to appeal chiefly to the 

closet student were keenly relished by men who 

could neither read nor write, and who at the same 

time enjoyed jokes which would be too broad, and 

stage massacres which would be too bloody, for a 

modern audience of sensibilities much less acute 

in these other directions. In it all we see how 

far-reaching was the wonderful vitality of the 

time. 

This audience Shakspere knew thoroughly, and 

in his writing he showed himself always, with 

whatever growth in permanent ar- 
Shakspere's ,. ,. ,.,. ,-■ , „ 

Dramatic tistic qualities, the clever man oi 

Development. i . ii i • ,i 

business with his eye on the mar- 
ket. Thus we can trace throughout the course 
of his production two main lines; one indicative 
of the changes of theatrical fashions; one, more 
subtle and more liable to misinterpretation, show- 
ing the progress of his own spiritual growth. 

The chronology of Shakspere's plays will prob- 
ably never be made out with complete assurance, 
but already much has been ascertained (1) from 



SHAKSPEEE AND ENGLISH DEAMA 29 

external evidence such as dates of acting or pub- 
lication, and allusions in other works, and (2) 
from internal evidence such as references to books 
or events of known date, and considerations of 
meter and language. The arrangement on the fol- 
lowing page represents what is probably an ap- 
proximately correct .view of the chronological 
sequence of his works, though scholars are far 
from being agreed upon many of the details. 

The first of these groups contains three comedies 
of a distinctly experimental character, and a num- 
ber of chronicle-histories, some of which, like the 
three parts of Henry VI., were almost certainly 
written in collaboration with other playwrights. 
The comedies are light, full of ingenious plays 
on words, and the verse is often rhymed. The 
first of them, at least, shows the influence of 
Lyly. The histories also betray a considerable 
delight in language for its own sake, and the 
Marlowesque blank verse, at its best eloquent and 
highly poetical, not infrequently becomes ranting, 
while the pause at the end of each line tends to 
become monotonous. 'No copy of Romeo and 
Juliet in its earliest form is known to be in 
existence, and the extent of Shakspere's share in 
Titus Andronicus is still debated. 

The second period contains a group of comedies 
marked by brilliance in the dialogue; wholesome- 
ness, capacity, and high spirits in the main char- 



30 



INTEODUCTION 



I 


^ :=! 


Ci o 




^rQ 


O c3 


Oi 


iO r— 


^ m 




— oo 








. > 




. a 


W 




H 


• 


1— ( 




« 


• -i-i 


M 


• Q^ r<s 








o 




• r3 ^ 




• Oj !=l 




: ^ 




. o 




. O w 




• S5 




PhH 



w 
o 



CO ?H 



o 

&J0 






H WM 



JM a 



02 O 



75 'H 



g^OoOr^ 



^ i S 

O IS o 



Q5 'Tr! 






-- Y- 



CO 
OS 

o 

OS 



O) 


cc n3 




a 
H 


03 


ai 




> 




n 


■M-f 




■+J 


O 


fH 






H) 




-»J 


S 


o 


Qi 


a^ 


pa 


ri 




o 


V) 


r/) 




Ti 


IL 



5:; bX) 



o-?. 



^^<1 



O '-^ 
03 O 

S ^ Si 03 



Oi 
Oi 



CX3 

Oi 
CO 
Ci 



o 

o 

CO 
rH 

Oi" 
Oi 




tH CM (TO TitH lO 

O O O O O 

CO ^ CO CO CO 

f-l rH r-l !— I I— I 



SHAKSPEEE AND ENGLISH DEAMA 31 

acters, and a pervading feeling of good-hnmor. 
The histories contain a larger comic element than 
in the first period, and are no longer suggestive of 
Marlowe. Rhymes have become less frequent;, and 
the blank verse has freed itself from the bonda'ge 
of the end-stopped line. 

The plays of the third period are tragedies, or 
comedies with a prevailing tragic tone. Shaks- 
pere here turned his attention to those elements 
in life which produce perplexity and disaster, and 
in this series of masterpieces we have his most 
magnificent achievement. His power of perfect 
adaptation of language to thought and feeling 
had now reached its height, and his verse had 
become thoroughly flexible without having lost 
strength. 

In the fourth period Shakspere returned to 
comedy. These plays, written during his last 
years in London, are again romantic in subject 
and treatment, and technically seem to show the 
influence of the earlier successes of Beaumont and 
Fletcher. But in place of the high spirits which 
characterized the comedies of the earlier periods 
we have a placid optimism, and a recurrence of 
situations which are more ingenious than plausi- 
ble, and which are marked externally by reunions 
and reconciliations and internally by repentance 
and forgiveness. The verse is singularly sweet 
and highly poetical; and the departure from the 



22 INTEODUCTION 

'«nd-stopped line has now gone so far that we see 
clearly the beginnings of that tendency which 
went to such an extreme in some of Shakspere's 
;-successors that it at times became hard to dis- 
tinguish the meter at all. 

In Tivo Nohle Kinsmen and Henry VIII.j 
,-Shakspere again worked in partnership, the col- 
laborator being, in all probability, John Fletcher. 

Nothing that we know of Shakspere^s life from 
-external sources justifies us in saying, as has 
frequently been said, that the changes of mood in 
his work from period to period corresponded to 
changes in the man Shakspere. As an artist he 
certainly seems to have viewed life now in this 
light, now in that; but it is worth noting that 
the period of his gloomiest plays coincides with 
the period of his greatest worldly prosperity. It 
has already been hinted, too, that much of his 
-change of manner and subject was dictated by the 
variations of theatrical fashion and the example 
of successful contemporaries. 

Throughout nearly the whole of these marvel- 

ously fertile years Shakspere seems to have stayed 

in London; but from 1610 to 

last Yeari -^^-^^ ^^ ^^^ making Stratford 

more and more his place of abode, 

..and at the same time he was beginning to write 

less. After 1611 he wrote only in collabora- 

:tion; and having spent about five years in peace- 



SHAKSPEEE AND ENGLISH DEAMA 33 

fill retirement in the town from which he had 
set out a penniless youth, and to which he re- 
turned a man of reputation and fortune, he died 
on April 23, 1616. His only son, Hamnet, having 
died in boyhood, of his immediate family there 
survived him his wife and his two daughters, 
Susanna and Judith, both of whom were well 
married. He lies buried in the parish church of 
Stratford. 




II. HEJsTRY THE FIFTH. 

It is seldom that tlie date of one of Shakspere's 
plays can be fixed with such exactitude as is pos- 
sible in the case of Henry Y. In 

Date. 

the Prologue to the fifth act occur 
the following lines: 

As, by a lower but loving likelihood, 

Were now the general of our gracious empress, 

As in good time he may, from Ireland coming, 

Bringing rebellion broached on his sword, 

How many would the peaceful city quit 

To welcome him! 

The general here referred to was the Earl of 
Essex, who left for Ireland on April 15, 1599, 
and returned on September 28 of the same year. 
Since, then, there is no reason to suspect that this 
prologue was not written at the same time as the 
rest of the play, it is practically certain that the 
work was composed in the summer of 1599. 

The form of drama to which Henry V belongs, 
the so-called Chronicle History, was popular when 
Shakspere began^ writing, and it is probable that 
his first attempts were made in revising plays of 
this class, such as the three parts of Henry VI. 
The Chronicle History had been at first little more 
than the translation of the narrative prose of the 

34 



HENEY THE FIFTH 35 

English Chronicles into dialogue and action. The 
dialogue took the form of a series of speeches in 
sonorous blank verse with little attempt at dra- 
matic appropriateness; and the action consisted of 
a succession of scenes at court or in the field, the 
sequence of events being determined chiefly by 
their chronological order in history, and show- 
ing but slight relation of cause and effect. In 
Shakspere's hands the type underwent considerable 
modifications, the chief being the introduction of 
a large element of comedy. The two parts of 
Henry IV, which probably immediately preceded 
the present play, are almost exactly half comed3r 
and half history; and the success of these plays 
was due more to the humor of Falstaff than ta 
the scenes at the council table and at the wars. The 
same tendency appears here, the characters of 
Pistol and his group being carried over from 1 and 
2 Henry TV. But the political action is by 
no means overshadowed in the present instance 
by the comic by-play. The patriotic enthusiasm 
which was one of the main causes of the existence 
of this dramatic type, finds here its most elo- 
quent expression, and in Henry himself Shakspere 
displays the ideal figure of the triumphant Eng- 
lish king. 

With this drama Shakspere abandoned the 
writing of Chronicle History. Henry VIII, it is 
true, belongs to a later period in his career, but 



:36 INTEODUCTION 

it is only in part his work, and it is almost as 
much pageant as history. Henry V, then, in its 
strong national feeling, its. splendid eloquence, 
:and the brilliance of the central royal figure 
who sums up and embodies the aspirations of his 
people, may be regarded as the work in which the 
'dramatist carried this kind of play to a climax 
and bade it farewell. 

The play first appeared in print in 1600, and 
was reprinted in 1602 and 1608. But in this 

form the text is barely half the 
the ^Textf length of that here printed, which 

is taken from the version in the 
^'Tirst Folio,'^ the collected edition issued by two 
'of Shakspere's fellow-actors, Heminge and Con- 
dell, in 1623. Not only is the 1600 version shorter, 
but it is so mangled and corrupted that it is gen- 
'Crally thought to have been published by a pirati- 
cal bookseller who obtained his copy from a re- 
porter sent to take it down from the lips of the 
.actors in the theater. 

The exploits of Henry V had been set forth 
upon the London stage before Shakspere wrote 

his play. More than ten years 
?^« «i^JP^ earlier there had been acted a 

xne Plot. 

crude mixture of history and com- 
edy called The Famous Victories of Henry Y, and 
from this Shakspere took a number of hints for 
^oth the comic and the serious episodes in Henry 



HENRY THE FIFTH 37 

IV. In Henry V he used it less; but one may 
find in it f or eshado wings of the elaboration of the 
presentation of the tennis-balls, a group of char- 
acters speaking dialect, and the wooing of the 
Princess. 

The main source of the political plot is the 
Chronicles of Holinshed, the chief mine from 
which Shakspere dug his historical material. The 
general order of the events in Holinshed is pre- 
served, but in the Chronicles the happenings pre- 
sented in the play extend over six years. The 
longer speeches are little indebted to Holinshed^ 
with the exception of that by the Archbishop of 
Canterbury giving the genealogical argument for 
Henry's claim to the French crown, and the enu- 
meration of the dead at Agincourt; in these in- 
stances Shakspere follows his original slavishly. 
The parallel passages here given illustrate his 
method in these cases. In the Chronicles we jS.nd,, 
^^The verie words of that supposed law are these: 
'In terram 8alicam mulieres ne succedant; that is, 
to sale, ^Into the S alike land let not women suc- 
ceed.' Which the French glossers expound to be the 
realm of France, and that this law was made by 
King Pharamond; whereas yet their owne authors 
affirme, that the land S alike is in Germanic, be- 
tween the rivers of Elbe and Sala; and that when 
Charles the great had overcome the Saxons, he 
placed there certeine Frenchmen, which having 



38 INTEODUCTION 

in disdeine the dishonest manners of the Germane 
^omen, made a law, that the females should not 
succeed to any inheritance within that land, which 
at this daie is called Meisen." 

Compare this with the speech in I. ii. 38 ff, 

*^ 'III terrain Salicam muUeres ne succedant,' 

'* No woman shall succeed in Salique land ; ' 

IVhieli Salique land the French unjustly gloze 

To be the realm of France and Pharamond, 

The founder of this law and female bar. 

Yet their own authors faithfully af&rm 

That the land Salique is in Germany, 

Between the floods of Sala and of Elbe; 

Where Charles the Great, having subdu'd the Saxons, 

There left behind and settled certain French; 

"Who, holding in disdain the German women 

For some dishonest manners of their life. 

Establish 'd there this law, to-wit, no female 

Should be inheritrix in Salique land; 

Which Salique, as I said, 'twixt Elbe and Sala, 

Is at this day in Germany call 'd Meisen. ' ' 

In some cases a detail is added to the fact given 
by Holinshed in order to increase the effective- 
ness of the situation. Thus the historical epi- 
sode of the conspiracy in II. ii. is made much 
more telling by the invented incident of the free- 
ing of the man who had railed against the king, 
in connection with which the traitors are led to 
pass judgment on themselves. A number of 
changes are made to increase the sympathy of 



A 

HENEY THE FIFTH 39 

the audience for the English side. Such are the 
elaboration of the relations between Henry and 
old Erpingham, of the death scene of York and 
Suffolk, of the picture of good-fellowship between 
the king and the common soldiers, of the con- 
trast between the behaviors of the two armies on 
the eve of battle. The main lines of Henry's 
character are laid down in the Chronicles, but by 
such inventions as the soliloquy and prayer be- 
fore Agincoiirt, the martial eloquence of the 
speeches before Harfleur and on St. Crispin's Day, 
and the lofty moralizing upon "ceremony," the 
impression of his piety, leadership, and wisdom 
is greatly heightened. Pistol and his friends are, 
of course, entirely the creations of the dramatist, 
as are the characters of Fluellen, Captain Jamy, 
Macmorris, Williams, and Bates. When one con- 
siders to what extent the interest of the play de- 
pends on such elements as those just enumerated, 
it is possible to realize how small a part of the 
literary value of the play is, after all, due to the 
source. 

These changes are all made, however, for artis- 
tic reasons; with the accuracy of facts or reason- 
ing in the CJironicles Shakspere does not seem to 
have concerned himself. For example, the elabor- 
ate argument of Canterbury in I. ii is en- 
tirely directed against the attempy to disprove- 
Henry's claim to the French crown on the ground 



40 INTEODUCTION 

of the Salique Law. It is true that the Salique 
Law was not intended to refer to the royal suc- 
cession?- at all, but only to private property in 
land ; but it is also true that this might have been 
granted by the French without weakening their 
case, since, granting the validity of succession 
through the female, Henry's claim still had fatal 
flaws. But for dramatic purposes these intrica- 
cies of genealogy could not be too nicely traced; 
for Shakspere, like Holinshed, it was sufficient to 
bring in a show of expert advice in order that the 
popular king might be represented as going to 
war with a clear conscience as to the Tightness 
of his cause. 

• The verse of the play is the blank verse which, 
since Marlowe, had been the standard meter of 

the Ensflish drama. The normal 
Meter. ° 

type has five iambic feet, that is, 
ten syllables with the stress falling on the even 
syllables. From this regular form, however, 
Shakspere deviates with great freedom, the com- 
monest variations being the following: 

1. The addition of an eleventh syllable, e. g.: 

The breath | no soon | er left | his fath [ er's bo | dy, 

I. i. 25. 
Had nob | les rich ] er and | more loy | al sub ] jects, 

I. ii. 127. 
"Whom he j hath duU'd | and eloy'd ] with gra | clous 

fa I vours, II. ii. 9. 



HENEY THE FIFTH 41 

Occasionally this extra syllable occurs in the 
middle of the line, at the main pause known as 
the caesura, which is most frequent after the third ■ 
foot, e. g.: 

Crouch for | employ | ment.\ \ But par | don, gen | - 

ties all I, I. Prol. 8. 
Shall not | be wink'd [ at, [ j how shall | we stretch j 

our eye [, II. ii. 55. 

2. Frequently what seems an extra syllable is 
to be slurred in reading; thus, "We are" is to be 
pronounced "We 're/' in 

We are glad ] the Dau | phin is so | pleasant [ with 
us I, I. ii. 259. 

So the middle syllable of "temporal'' is slurred 
ill 

For all [ the tern ] yoral lands [ which men | devout ],. 
I. i. 9. 

In some lines it is doubtful whether a syllable 
is to be slurred or sounded as a light extra sylla- 
ble; as, e. g., the second syllable of "governor" in 

How yet | resolves | the gov | ernor of ] the town? |, 
III. iii. 1. 

3. Short lines, lacking one or more feet, occur;, 
e. g.: 

As pure as sin with baptism, I. ii. 32. 
Or else what follows? II. iv. 96. 
That goddess blind, III. vi. 30. 



42 INTEODUCTION 

4. Long lines of twelve or thirteen syllables 
occnr; e. g.: 

And sheathe for lack of sport. Let us but blow on 

them, IV. ii. 23. 
An oath of mickle might; and fury shall abate, II. i. 73. 
Than is your majesty. There's not, I think, a subject, 

II. ii. 26. 

Usually in such lines some words bearing the 
metrical accent are quite nnemphatic in reading, 
as in the last foot of the first example; and fre- 
quently it is a matter of opinion whether exam- 
ples belong to this class or those noted under 2. 

5. Frequently, especially in the first foot, a 
trochee is substituted for an iambus, i. e., the 
accent falls on the odd instead of on the even 
syllable, e. g.: 

6 for I a Muse of fire that would ascend, I. Prol. 1. 
Never ] was such a sudden scholar made, I. i. 32. 
Gently ] to hear, | kfndly | to judge our play. I. 

Prol. 34. 

In the following line the first foot is an ana- 
paest, i. e., has two unstressed syllables before 
the accent: 

By the which | marriage the line of Charles the Great, 
I. ii. 84. 

6. It must be remembered, however, that some 
■ words have changed their pronunciation since 



HENEY THE FIFTH 43 

Shakspere's time. Tlius the noun '^^aspect" had 
the accent on the second syllable, as in 

Then lend the eye a terrible aspect; III. i. 9. 

So precepts in III. iii. 26; and conversely, 
relapse in IV. iii. 107, antique in V. Prol. 26, etc. 

The pronunciation was sometimes varied to suit 
the exigencies of the meter ; thus, executors in I. ii. 
203, but executors in lY. ii. 51. 

Again, terminations like "-tion" were often dis- 
syllabic, as in invent-i-on, I. Prol. 2, act-i-on, I. 
ii. 114, desolat-i-on, II. ii. 174, consci-ence^ I. ii. 
79, val-i-ant, TY. i. 46, etc. 

7. Occasional rhymes occur. These are found 
chiefly, though not always, at the end of scenes 
or of speeches of some length; e. g.: I. Prol. 33-4, 
I. ii. 309-10, II. ii. 193-4, III. iii. 42-3; III. v. 
67-8. 

Although differences between the language of 
Shakspere and that of our own day are obvious 
to the most casual reader, there 
is a risk that the student may un- 
derestimate the extent of these differences, and, 
assuming that similarity of form implies identity 
of sense, miss the true interpretation. The most 
important instances of change of meaning are 
explained in the notes; but a clearer view of the 
nature and extent of the contrast between the 
idiom of Henry Y and that of modern English 



44 INTKODUCTION 

will be gained by a classification of tlie most fre- 
quent features of this contrast. Some of the 
Shaksperean usages are merely results of the 
carelessness and freedom which the more elastic 
standards of the Elizabethan time permitted; 
others are forms of expression at that time quite 
accurate, but now become obsolete. 

1. Nouxs. Abstract nouns are often used in 
the plural; e. g.: "manhoods/^ IV. iii. Q^, "wis- 
doms/^ V. ii. 87. This is a common usage with 
riuellen, e. g.: "disciplines/^ III. ii. 65; "con- 
cavities/' III. ii. QQ ; "directions/' III. ii. 71, etc., 
where it is, of course, used for humorous effect. 

2. Pronouns, (a) The nominative is some- 
times used for the objective, especially after prepo- 
sitions; e. g.: ''who to disobey," IV. i. 155; ^^wlio 
serv'st thou under ?'' IV. vii. 159. 

(b) The possessive "its" did not come into 
common use until after the middle of the seven- 
teenth century, and in Shakspere, as in other early 
writers, we find ^Tiis" for the neuter as well as 
for the masculine; e. g.: "summer grass . . . 
crescive in his faculty." I. i. ^Q-, "rock o'erhang 
and jutty his confounded jjase," III. i. 13; "bend 
up every spirit to his full height," 111.1717; "for 
it (the sun) shines bright and never changes, but 
keeps his course truly." V. ii. 175. 

(c) "His" is sometimes used instead of the 



HENEY THE FIFTH • 45 

sign of the possessive case; e. g.: ^^King Lewis 
his satisfaction/^ I. ii. 88. 

(d) Confusion between the personal and the 
reflexive forms is common; e. g.: "And do sub- 
mit me to your highness' mercy." II. ii. 77 ; 
*^That we should dress us fairly for our end." IV. 
i. 10; "And rouse him at the name of Crispian. 
IV. iii. 43 ; ''myself have play'd/' V. Prol. 42. 

(e) The ethical dative is commoner in Shaks- 
pere than in modern speech; e. g.: "Ask me this 
slave in French," IV. iv. 25; "He smiFd me in 
the face/' IV. vi. 21. 

(f) The modern distinction among the relative 
pronouns whoy which, that, as, is not observed by 
Shakspere; e. g.: "night who, like a foul and ugly 
witch, doth limp," IV. Prol. 21; he which hath no 
stomach to this fight," IV. iii. 35 ; ^Tiad you been 
as 1 took you for," IV. viii. 60. 

(g) The relative is sometimes omitted; e. g.: 
"play a set shall strike," I. ii. 262. 

(h) The objective case of the personal pro- 
nouns is at times used reflexively where modern 
English requires no object; e. g.: ^Turn thee 
back," III. vi. 161 ; "Gets him to rest," IV. i. 291. 

3. Adjectives, (a) Double comparatives oc- 
cur: e. g.: "more sharper," III. v. 39. 

(b) Adjectives are sometimes used as nouns; 



46 • INTEODUCTION 

e. g.: ''gentles all/' I. Prol. 8, II. Prol. 35; 
"Speak, my fair, and fairly/' Y. ii. 179. 

4. Verbs, (a) A Singular verb is often found 
with a plural subject; e. g.: "The fiat nnraised 
spirits that hath dar'd/^ I. Prol. 9; "As is our 
wretches/* I. ii. 243; "Thus comes the English/' 
II. iv. 1 ; "The darnel, hemlock, and rank fumitory 
Doth root upon/* V. ii. 46. This is a frequent 
usage of Fluellen's; e. g.: "the mines is not/* III. 
ii. 65, etc. 

(b) Conversely, plural verbs appear with sin- 
gular subjects, through the attraction of an in- 
tervening plural ; e. g. : '^The venom of such looks, 
we fairly hope, Have lost their quality,** V. ii. 19. 

(c) The "n*' is frequently dropped from the 
ending in the past participle of strong verbs; e. g.: 
"writ** for "written,** I. ii. 98; "spoke" for "spo- 
ken,** II. i. 134, "broke** for "broken/* IV. v. 6. 
When the word thus produced might be mistaken 
for the infinitive, the form of the past tense is 
found; e. g.: "mistook** for "mistaken,** III. vi. 
90; "shook** for "shaken,** V. ii. 194. On the 
other hand the old -en ending is preserved in 
"well-foughten/* IV. vi. 18. 

(d) Verbs of motion are at times omitted; e. 
g.: "and would to bed/* II. i. 90; "We will 
aboard,'* II. ii. 12 ; "They bid us to the English 
dancing schools," III. v. 32. 



HENEY THE FIETH 47 

(e) "Be" is sometimes used for "are" in the 
plural of the present indicative; e. g.: "Minding 
true things by what their mockeries he," IV. Prol. 
53; ^Tiis fears . . . he of the same relish/' IV. 
i. 115. 

(f) "To" is sometimes omitted with the infini- 
tive where it is used in modern English ; e. g.: 
"Desires you let the dukedoms/' I. ii. 256; "Will- 
ing you overlook this pedigree/' II. iv. 90. 

(g) The infinitive with "to" is sometimes used 
for the gerund with another preposition; e. g.: 
"That fears his fellowship to die (=in dying) with 
us/' IV. iii. 39. 

5. Adverbs, (a) Double negatives are used 
with a merely intensive force ; e. g. : "Nor never/' 
I. i. 35; "Though war nor no known quarrel/' II. 
iv. 17; "nor I have no cunning/' V. ii. 150. Cf. 
also II. iv. 85; IV. i. 314; V. ii. 380. 

(b) The form of the adjective is often used for 
the adverb, e. g: "The Gordian knot of it he will 
unloose Familiar as his garter/' I. i. 47; ''sore 
charged/' I. ii. 283 ; "till it were full ripe/' III. 
vi. 141; "We may as hootless spend/' III. iii. 24. 

(c) An adverb is sometimes used where good 
modern usage requires an adjective; e. g.: "But 
freshly looks/' IV. Prol. 39. For "look greenly/' 
see note on V. ii. 149. 



48 INTEODUCTION 

6. Prepositions, (a) These are sometimes 
omitted; e. g.: "List his discourse/' I. i. 43. 

(b) Occasionally prepositions were used where 
in modern English the verb takes a direct object; 
e. g. : "consider of his ransom/' III. vi. 145. 

(c) The usage in prepositions was less definite 
than it is today. Thns "of =:"on" in "Hear him 
debate of commonwealth affairs/' I. 1. 41, and 
"Take pity of your town and of your people/' III. 
iii. 28; "of"="by" in "With good acceptance of 
his majesty/' I. i. 83 ; "upon"="at" in ^'upon that 
instant/' I. i. 91. 

7. Conjunctions. These are sometimes omitted. 



THE LIFE OF HENEY THE FIFTH 



^officers in King Henry's 
army. 



DRAMATIS PEESONiE. 

King Henry V. 

Duke of Gloucester, ) u ^-^ 4. ^.^ t-- 

Duke of Bedford, [brothers to the King. 

Duke of Exeter, uncle to the King. 

Duke of York, cousin to the King. 

Earls of Salisbury, Westmoreland, and Warwick. 

Archbishop of Canterbury. 

Bishop of Ely. 

Earl of Cambridge. 

Lord Scoop. 

Sir Thomas Grey. 

Sir Thomas Erpingham, 

GOWER, 

Fluellen, 

Macmorris, 

Jamy, 

Bates, "^ 

Court, |> soldiers in the same. 

Williams, J 

Pistol. 

Nym. 

Bardolph. 

Boy. 

A Herald. 

Charles VI, king of France. 

Lewis, the Dauphin. 

Dukes of Burgundy, Orleans, and Bourbon. 

The Constable of France. 

EamBURES, / tt, 1 t 1 

Grandpre, [French Lords. 

Governor of Harfleur. 

MoNTJOY, a French Herald. 

Ambassadors to the King of England. 

Isabel, queen of France. 

Katharine, daughter to Charles and Isabel. 

Alice, a lady attending on her. 

Hostess of a tavern in Eastcheap, formerly Mistress 

Qu'ckly, and now married to Pistol. 
Chorus. 

Lords, Ladies, Officers, Soldiers, Citizens, Messengers, and 
Attendants. 

Scene: England; afterwards France. 



^ENEY THE FIFTH. 

Prologue. 
,.^""""^ Enter Chor^us. 

CJior. for a Muse of fire, that would ascend 
The brightest heaven of invention, 
A kingdom for a stage, princes to act, 
And monarchs to behold the swelling scene ! 
5 Then should the warlike Harry, like himself. 

Assume the port of Mars; and at his heels, 
Leash'd in like hounds, should famine, sword, 

and fire 
Crouch for employment. But pardon, gentles 

all. 
The flat unraised spirits that hath dar^d 
10 On this unworthy scaffold to bring forth 

So great an object. Can this cockpit hold 
The vasty fields of France? Or may we 

cram 
Within this wooden the very casques 
That did affright the air at Agincourt? 
15 0, pardon ! since ' a crooked figure may 

Attest in little place a million; 
And let us, ciphers to this great accompt, 
On your imaginary forces work. 
Suppose within the girdle of these walls 
20 Are now confined two mighty monarchies, 

51 



52 



PEOLOGUE 



[Prologue 



Whose high upreared and abutting fronts 
The perilous narrow ocean parts asunder^ 
Piece out our imperfections with your 

thoughts ; 
Into a thousand parts divide one man. 
And make imaginary puissance; 25 

Think, when we talk of horses, that you see 

them 
Printing their proud hoofs i' the receiving 

earth. 
For 'i is your thoughts that now must deck 

our kings. 
Carry them here and there, jumping o'er 

times, ' 
Turning the accomplishment of many years 30 
Into an hour-glass : for the which supply. 
Admit me Chorus to this history; 
Who, prologue-like, your humble patience 

Pi"ay, 
Gently to hear, kindly to judge, our play. 

[Exit. 






ACT FIEST. 

Scene I. 

London. An ajite-cliamher in the King's palace. 

Enter the Archbishop of Canterbury and the 
Bishop of Ely. 

Cant. My lord, I '11 tell you: that self bill is 
urg'd, 
Which in the eleventh year of the last king's 

reign 
Was like, and had indeed against us pass'd, 
But that the scambling and unquiet time 
5 Did push it out of farther question. 

Ely. But how, my lord, shall we resist it now? 
Cant. It must be thought on. If it pass against 
us. 
We lose the better half of our possession; 
For all the temporal lands, which men devout 
10 By testament have given to the Church, 

Would they strip from us ; being valu'd thus : 
As much as would maintain, to the King's 

honour, 
Full fifteen earls and fifteen hundred knights, 
Six thousand and two hundred good esquires; 
15 And, to relief of lazars and weak age, 

53 



54 HENEY THE FIFTH [Act I, Sc. i 

Of indigent faint souls past corporal toil, 
A hundred almshouses right well supplied; 
And to the coffers of the King beside, 
A thousand pounds by the year. Thus runs 
the bill. __ 

Ely. This would drink deep. 

Cant. 'T would drink the cup and all. 20 

Ely. But what prevention? 

Cantj< The King is full of grace and fair re- 
gard. ^ 

Ely. And a true lover of the holy ChurclL^ / 

Card. The courses of his youth promis'd it not. 
The breath no sooner left his father's body, 25 
But that his wildness, mortifi'd in him, 
Seem'd to die too; yea, at that very moment 
Consideration like an angel came 
And whipp'd the offending Adam out of him, 
Leaving his body as a paradise . 30 

To envelope and contain celestial spirits. 
Never was such a sudden scholar made; 
JSTever came reformation in a flood 
With such a heady currance, scouring faults; 
Nor never such Hydra-headed wilfulness 35 
So soon did lose his seat, and all at once. 
As in this king. 

Ely. We are blessed in the change. 

Cant. Hear him but reason in divinity. 

And, all-admiring, with an inward wish 
You would desire the King were made a 
prelate; - 40 



Act I, Sc. i] 



HEiS'EY THE FIFTH 



00 



Hear him debate of commonwealth affairs, 
You would say it hath been all in all his 

study ; 
List his discourse of war, and you shall hear 
A fearful battle rend'red you in music; 

45 Turn him to any cause of policy, 

The Gordian knot of it he will unloose, 
Familiar as his garter; that, when he speaks. 
The air, a chartered libertine, is still. 
And the mute wonder lurketh in men's ears, 

50 To steal his sweet and honey'd sentences; 

So that the art and practice part of life 
Must be the mistress to this theoric : 
Which is a wonder how his Grace should 

glean it. 
Since his addiction was to courses vain, 

55 His companies unlettered, rude, and shallow, 

His hours fill'd up with riots, banquets, 

sports, 
And never noted in him any study, 
Any retirement, any sequestration 
From open haunts and popularity. 

60 Ely. The strawberry grows underneath the nettle, 
And wholesome berries thrive and ripen best 
Neighboured by fruit of baser quality; 
And so the Prince obscur'd his contempla- 
tion 
Under the veil of wildness; which, no doubt, 

65 Grew like the summer grass, fastest by night. 

Unseen, yet crescive in his faculty. 



56 HENEY THE FIFTH [Act I, Sc. i 

Cant. It must be so ; for miracles are ceas'd. 
And therefore we must needs admit the 

means 
How things are joerfected. 

Ely. But, my good lord, 

How now for mitigation of this bill 70 

Urg'd by the commons ? Doth his Majesty 
Incline to it, or no ? 

Cant. He seems indifferent, 

Or rather swaying more upon our part 
Than cherishing the exhibiters against us ; 
For I have made an offer to his Majesty, 75 
Upon our spiritual convocation 
And in regard of causes now in hand, 
Which I have opened to his Grace at large, 
As touching France, to give a greater sum 
Than ever at one time the clergy yet 80 

Did to his predecessors part withal. 

Ely. How did this offer seem received, my lord? 

Cant. With good acceptance of his Majesty; 

Save that there was not time enough to hear. 
As I perceiv'd his Grace would fain have 

done, 85 

The severals and unhidden passages 
Of his true titles to some certain dukedoms, 
And generally to the crown and seat of 

France 
Deriv'd from Edward, his great-grandfather. 

Ely. What was the impediment that broke this 

off? 90 



Act I, Sc. ii] HENEY THE FIFTH 57 

Cant. The French ambassador upon that instant 
Crav'd audience; and the honr, I think, is 

come 
To give him hearing. Is it four o'clock? 
Ely. It is. 
95 Cant. Then go we in, to know his embassy; 

Which I could with a ready guess declare^ 
Before the Frenchman speak a word of it. 
Ehj. I'll wait upon you, and I long to hear it. 

[Exeunt. 



Scene II. 

Tlie same. The presence cliamber. 

Enter King Henry, Gloucester, Bedford, Exeter, 
Warwick, Westmoreland and Attendants. 

K. Hen. Where is my gracious Lord of Canter- 
bury? 

Exe. Not here in presence. 

K. Hen. Send for him, good uncle. 

West. Shall we call in the ambassador, my liege? 

K. Hen. Not yet, my cousin. We would be re- 
solv'd, 
5 Before we hear him, of some things of weight 

That task our thoughts, concerning us and 
France. 



58 HENEY THE FIETH [Act I, Sc. ii 

Enter the Archbishop of Canterbury and the 
Bishop of Ely. 

Cant. God and his angels guard yonr sacred 

throne 
And make you long become it ! 
K. Hen. Sure, we thank you. 

My learned lord, we pray you to proceed 
And justly and religiously unfold 10 

Why the law Salique that they have in France 
Or should, or should not, bar us in our claim ; 
And God forbid, my dear and faithful lord. 
That you should fashion, wrest, or bow your 

reading. 
Or nicely charge your understanding soul 15 
With opening titles miscreate, whose right 
Suits not in native colours with the truth ; 
For God doth know how many now in health 
Shall drop their blood in approbation 
Of what your reverence shall incite us to. 20 
Therefore take heed how you impawn our 

person. 
How 5^ou awake our sleeping sword of war. 
We charge you, in the name of God, take 

heed; 
For never two such kingdoms did contend 
Without much fall of blood, whose guiltless 

drops 25 

Are every one a woe, a sore complaint 



Act I, Sc. ii] HENEY THE FIFTH 59 

'Gainst him wliose wrong gives edge unto the 

swords 
That makes such waste in brief mortality. 
Under this conjuration speak^ my lord; 
30 For we will hear^ note, and believe in heart 

That what you speak is in your conscience 

washed 
As pure as sin with baptism. 
Cant. Then hear me, gracious sovereign, and 
you peers,. 
That owe yourselves, your lives, and services 
35 To this imperial throne. There is no bar 

To make against your Higness' claim to 

France 
But this, which they produce from Phara- 

,mond : 
'In terram Salicam mulieres ne succedant," 
'1^0 woman shall succeed in Salique land;'' 
40 Which Salique land the French unjustly 

gloze 
To be the realm of France, and Pharamond 
The founder of this law and female bar. 
Yet their own authors faithfully affirm 
That the land Salique is in Germany, 
45 Between the floods of Sala and of Elbe; 

Where Charles the Great, having subdu'd the 

Saxons, 
There left behind and settled certain French ; 
Who, holding in disdain the German women 
For some dishonest manners of their life. 



60 HENEY THE FIETH [Act I, Sc. ii 

Establish'd then this law^ to wit^ no female 50 
Sho'dld be inheritrix in Saliqiie land; 
Which Saliqiie, as I said, 'twixt Elbe and 

Sala, 
Is at this da}^ in Germany call'd Meisen. J) 
Then doth it well appear the Salique law 
Was not devised for the realm of France; 55 
Nor did the French possess the Salique land 
Until four hundred one and twenty years 
After defunction of King Pharamond, 
Idly supposed the founder of this law, 
Who died within the year of our redemption 60 
Four hundred twenty-six; and Charles the 

Great 
Subdu'd the Saxons, and did seat the French 
Beyond the river Sala, in the year 
Eight hundred five. Besides, their writers 

say. 
King Pej)in, which deposed Childeric, 65 

Did, as heir general, being descended 
Of Blithild, which was daughter to King 

Clothair, 
Make claim and title to the crown of France. 
Hugh Capet also, who usurp'd the crown 
Of Charles the Duke of Lorraine, sole heir 

male 70 

Of the true line and stock of Charles the 

Great, 
To find his title with some shows of truth, 



Act I, Sc. ii] HENEY THE FIFTH 61 

Though, in pure truth, it was corrupt and 

naught, 
Convey'd himself as the heir to the Lady Lin- 
gare, 
75 Daughter to Charlemain, who was the son 

To Lewis the Emperor, and Lewis the son 
Of Charles the Great. Also, King Lewis the 

Tenth, 
Who was sole heir to the usurper Capet, 
Could not keep quiet in his conscience, 
80 Wearing the crown of France, till satisfied 

That fair Queen Isabel, his grandmother. 
Was lineal of the Lady Ermengare, 
Daughter to Charles, the foresaid Duke of 

Lorraine ; 
By the which marriage the line of Charles 
the Great 
85 Was re-united to the crown of France. 

So that, as clear as is the summer's sun. 
King Pepin's title and Hugh Capet's claim. 
King Lewis his satisfaction, all appear 
To hold in right and title of the female. 
90 So do the kings of France unto this day, 

Howbeit they would hold up this Salique law 
To bar your Highness claiming from the fe- 
male. 
And rather choose to hide them in a net 
Than amply to imbar their crooked titles 
95 Usurp'd from you and your progenitors. 



62 HENEY THE FIFTH [Act I, Sc. U 

K. Hen. May I with right and conscience make 

this claim? 
Cant. The sin upon my head, dread sovereign ! 
For in the book of Numbers is it writ, 
AVhen the man dies, let the inheritance 
Descend nnto the daughter. Gracious lord, lOO 
Stand for your own ! Unwind your bloody 

flag! 
Look back into your mighty ancestors ! 
Go, my dread lord, to your great-grandsire's 

tomb. 
From whom you claim; invoke his warlike 

spirit. 
And your great-uncle's, Edward the Black 

Prince, 105 

Who on the French ground played a tragedy. 
Making defeat on the full power of France, 
Whiles his most mighty father on a hill 
Stood smiling to behold his lion's whelp 
Forage in blood of French nobility. no 

noble English, that could entertain 
With half their forces the full pride of 

France 
And let another half stand laughing by. 
All out of work and cold for action ! 
Ely. Awake remembrance of these valiant dead, lis 
And v/ith your puissant arm renew their feats. 
You are their heir ; you sit upon their throne ; 
The blood and courage that renowned them 



Act I, Sc. ii] HENEY THE FIFTH 63 

Euns in your veins; and my thrice-puissant 
liege 
120 Is in the very May-morn of his youth, 

Eipe for exploits and mighty enterprises. 
Exe. Your brother kings and monarchs of the 
earth 
Do all expect that you should rouse yourself. 
As did the former lions of your blood. 
125 West. They know your Grace hath cause and 
means and might; 
So hath your Highness. I^ever King of Eng- 
land 
Had nobles richer, and more loyal subjects, 
Whose hearts have left their bodies here in 

England 
And lie pavilion'd in the fields of France. 
130 Cant. 0, let their bodies follow, my dear liege. 
With blood and sword and fire to win your 

right; 
In aid whereof we of the spirituality 
Will raise your Higness such a mighty sum 
As never did the clergy at one time 
135 Bring in to any of your ancestors. 

K. Hen. We must not only arm to invade the 
French, 
But lay down our proportions to defend 
Against the Scot, who will make road upon 

us 
With all advantages. 
140 Cant. They of those marches, gracious sovereign, 



^4 HENEY THE FIFTH [Act I, Sc. ii 

Shall be a wall sufficient to defend 
Our inland from the pilfering borderers. 
K. Hen. We do not mean the coursing snatchers 
only, 
Eut fear the main intendment of the Scot, 
Who hath been still a giddy neighbor to us ; 145 
Eor you shall read that my great-grandfather 
Never went with his forces into France 
But that the Scot on his unfurnished king- 
dom 
Came pouring, like the tide into a breach, 
With ample and brim fullness of his force, 150 
Galling the gleaned land with hot assays. 
Girding with grievous siege castles and towns ; 
'That England, being empty of defence. 
Hath shook and trembled at the ill neigh- 
bourhood. 
€ant. She hath been then more fear'd than 

harmM, my liege; 155 

For hear her but exampl^d by herself: 
When all her chivalry hath been in France, 
And she a mourning widow of her nobles. 
She hath herself not only well defended 
But taken and impounded as a stray 160 

The King of Scots; whom she did send to- 

France 
To fill King Edward's fame with prisoner 

kings. 
And make her chronicle as rich with praise 
As is the ooze and bottom of the sea 



Act I, Sc. ii] HENEY THE FIFTH 65 

165 With sunken wreck and sumless treasuries. 

West. But there's a saying very old and true, 
"If that you will France win, 
Then with Scotland first begin." 
For once the eagle England being in prey, 
170 To her unguarded nest the weasel Scot 

Comes sneaking and so sucks her princely 

eggs, 
Playing the mouse in absence of the cat, .. 
To tear and havoc more than she can eat. 
Exe. It follows then the cat must stay at home; 
175 Yet that is but a crush'd necessity, 

Since we have locks to safeguard necessaries, 
And pretty traps to catch the petty thieves. 
While that the armed hand doth fight abroad. 
The advised head defends itself at home; 
180 For government, though high and low and 

lower. 
Put into parts, doth keep in one consent, 
Congreeing in a full and natural close, 
Like music. 
Cant. Therefore doth heaven divide 

The state of man in divers functions, 
185 Setting endeavour in continual motion. 

To which is fixed, as an aim or butt, 
Obedience; for so work the honey-bees, 
Creatures that by a rule in nature teach 
The act of order to a peopled kingdom. 
190 They have a king and officers of sorts, 



66 HENEY THE FIETH [Act I, Sc. ii 

Where some, like magistrates, correct at 

home, 
Others, like merchants, venture trade abroad, 
Others, like soldiers, armed in their stings. 
Make boot upon the summer^s velvet buds. 
Which pillage they with merry march bring 

home 195 

To the tent-royal of their emperor; 
Who, busied in his majesty, surveys 
The singing masons building roofs of gold, 
The civil citizens kneading up the honey. 
The poor mechanic porters crowding in 200 

Their heavy burdens at his narrow gate. 
The sad-eyed justice, with his surly hum. 
Delivering o^er to executors pale 
The lazy yawning drone. I this infer, 
That many things, having full reference 205 

To one consent, may work contrariously. 
As many arrows, loosed several ways. 
Come to one mark; as many ways meet in 

one town; 
As many fresh streams meet in one salt sea; 
As many lines close in the dial's centre; 210 
So many a thousand actions, once afoot. 
End in one purpose, and be all well borne 
Without defeat. Therefore to France, my 

liege ! 
Divide your happy England into four. 
Whereof take you one quarter into France, 215 
And you withal shall make all Gallia shake. 



Act I, Sc. ii] HENEY THE FIETH 67 

If we, with thrice such powers left at home, 
Cannot defend our own doors from the dog. 
Let us be worried and our nation lose 
220 The name of hardiness and polic}^ 

K. Hen. Call in the messengers sent from the 

Dauphin. \_Exeu7it som,e Attendants. 

Now are we well resolv'd; and, by God's 

help, 
And yours, the noble sinews of our power, 
France being ours, we '11 bend it to our awe, 
225 "Orfl)reak it all to pieces. Or there we '11 sit, 
Euling in large and ample empery 
O'er France and all her almost kingly duke- 
doms. 
Or lay these bones in an unworthy urn, 
Tombless, with no remembrance over them. 
230 Either our history shall with full mouth 

Speak freely of our acts, or else our grave. 
Like Turkish mute, shall have a tongueless 

mouth, 
ISTot worshipp'd with a waxen epitaph. 

Enter Ambassadors of France. 
Now are we well prepar'd to know the pleas- 
ure 
235 Of our fair cousin Dauphin; for we hear 

Your greeting is from him, not from the 
King. 
1. Amh. May 't please your Majesty to give us 
leave 



€8 



HENEY THE FIETH 



[Act 1, Sc. ii 



Freely to render what we have in charge, 
Or shall we sparingly show you far off 
The Dauphin's meaning and our embassy? 
K. Hen. We are no tyrant, but a Christian king. 
Unto whose grace our passion is as subject 
As is our wretches fett'red in our prisons; 
Therefore with frank and with uncurbed 

plainness 
Tell us the Dauphin's mind. 
1. Amh. Thus, then, in few. 

Your Highness, lately sending into France, 
Did claim some certain dukedomsj^ in the right 
Of your great predecessor. King Edward the 

Third. 
In answer of which claim, the prince our 

master 
Says that you savour too much of your youth, 
And bids you be advis'd there 's nought in 

France 
That can be with a nimble galliard won. 
You cannot revel into dukedoms there. 
He therefore sends you, meeter for your 

spirit, 
This tun of treasure; and, in lieu of this. 
Desires you let the dukedoms that you claim 
Hear no more of you. This the Dauphin 

speaks. 
K. Hen. What treasure, uncle? 
Exe. Tennis-balls, my liege. 



II 

240l 



245 



250 



255 



260 



ACT I, Sc. ii] HENEY THE FIETH Q^ 

K. Hen. We are glad the Dauphin is so pleasant 
with us. 
His present and your pains we thank you for. 
When we have matched our rackets to these 

balls. 
We will, in France, by God's grace, play a 

set 
Shall strike his father's crown into the haz- 
ard. 
Tell him he hath made a match with such a 
wrangler • 
265 That all the courts of France will be dis- 

turbed 
With chaces. And we understand him well. 
How he comes o'er us with our wilder days, 
Not measuring what use we made of them. 
We never valu'd this poor seat of England; 
270 And therefore, living hence, did give ourself 

To barbarous license ; as 't is ever common 
That men are merriest when they are from 

home. 
But tell the Dauphin I will keep my state. 
Be like a king, and show my sail of greatness 
275 When I do rouse me in my throne of France. 

For that I have laid by my majesty 
And plodded like a man for working-days. 
But I will rise there with so full a glory 
That I will dazzle all the eyes of France, 
280 Yea, strike the Dauphin blind to look on us. 

And tell the pleasant prince this mock of his 



70 HENEY THE FIFTH [Act I, Sc. ii 

Hath turn'd his balls to gun-stones, and his 

soul 
Shall stand sore charg'd for the wasteful 

vengeance 
That shall fly with them; for many a thou- 
sand widows 
Shall this his mock mock out of their dear 

husbands, 285 

Mock mothers from their sons, mock castles 

down ; 
And some are yet ungotten and unborn 
That shall have cause to curse the Dauphin's 

scorn. 
But this lies all within the will of God, 
To whom I do appeal ; and in whose name 290 
Tell you the Dauphin I am coming on 
To venge me as I may, and to put forth 
My rightful hand in a well-hallow'd cause. 
So get you hence in peace; and tell the 

Dauphin 
His jest will savour but of shallow wit, 295 

When thousands weep more than did laugh 

at it. — 
Convey them with safe conduct. — Fare you 

well. [Exeunt Ambassadors. 

Exe. This was a merry message. 
K. Hen. We hope to make the sender bluch at it. 
Therefore, my lords, omit no happy hour 300 
That mav give furtherance to our expedition; 



Act I, Sc. ii] HENEY THE FIFTH 71 

For we have now no thought in ns but 

France, 
Save those to God, that run before our busi- 
ness. 
Therefore, let our proportions for these wars 
Be soon collected, and all things thought 

upon 
That may with reasonable swiftness add 
More feathers to our wings; for, G-od before, 
We ^11 chide this Dauphin at his father's door. 
Therefore let every man now task his thought, 
310 That this fair action may on foot be brought. 

lExeunt. 



305 



ACT SECOND. 

Prologue. 
Flourish. Enter Chorus. 

Chor. Now all the youth of England are on 

fire. 
And silken dalliance in the wardrobe lies. 
Now thrive the armourers, and honour's 

thought 
Eeigns solely in the breast of every man. 
They sell the pasture now to buy the horse, 5 
Following the mirror of all Christian kings. 
With winged heels, as English Mercuries. 
For now sits Expectation in the air. 
And hides a sword from hilts unto the point 
With crowns imperial, crowns, and coronets, jq 
Promised to Harry and his followers. 
The French, advis'd by good intelligence 
Of this most dreadful preparation. 
Shake in their fear, and with pale policy 
Seek to divert the English purposes. 15 

England ! model to thy inward greatness. 
Like little body with a mighty heart. 
What mightst thou do, that honour would 

thee do. 
Were all thy children kind and natural ! 
72 



20 



Prologue] HENEY THE FIETH 73 

But see thy fault ! France hath in thee found 
out 

A nest of hollow bosoms, which he fills 

With treacherous crowns ; and three corrupted 
men, 

One, Eichard Earl of Cambridge, and the sec- 
ond, 

Henry Lord Scroop of Masham, and the third, 
25 Sir Thomas Grey, knight, of Northumberland, 

Have, for the gilt of France, — guilt in- 
deed ! — 

Confirmed conspiracy with fearful France ; 

And by their hands this grace of kings must 
die, 

If hell and treason hold their promises, 
30 Ere he take ship for France, and in South- 

ampton. 

Linger your patience on, and we '11 digest 

The abuse of distance, force a play. 

The sum is paid ; the traitors are agreed ; 

The King is set from London; and the^scene 
35 Is now transported, gentles, to Southampton. 

There is the playhouse now, there must you 
sit; 

And thence to France shall we convey you 
safe. 

And bring you back, charming the narrow 
seas 

To give you gentle pass; for, if we may, 

"We '11 not oifend one stomach with our play. 



40 



^^4: HENRY THE FIFTH [Act II, Sc. i' 

But, till the King come forth, and not till 

then, 
Unto Southampton do we shift our scene. 

[Exit. 



Scene I. 
London. A street. 

Enter Corporal Nym and Lieutenant Bardolph. 

Bard. Well met. Corporal Nym. 

Nym. Good morrow. Lieutenant Bardolph. 

Bard. What, are Ancient Pistol and you friends 
yet? 

Nym. For my part, I care not. I say little; but 5 
when time shall serve, there shall be smiles; 
but that shall be as it may. I dare not fight, 
but I will wink and hold out mine iron. It 
is a simple one, but what though? It will 
toast cheese, and it will endure cold as an- 10 
other man's sword will; and there 's an end. 

Bard. I will bestow a breakfast to make you 
friends; and we '11 be all three sworn broth- 
ers to France. Let it be so. Good Corporal 
Nym. 15 

Nym. Faith, I will live so long as I may, that 's 
the certain of it; and when I cannot live any 
longer, I will do as I may. That is my rest, 
that is the rendezvous of it. 



Act II, Sc. i] HENEY THE FIFTH 75 

20 j^ard. It is certain, corporal, that he is married 

to Nell Quickly; and certainly she did you 

wrong, for you were troth-plight to her. 

Nym. I cannot tell. Things must be as they 

may. Men may sleep, and they may have 

25 their throats about them at that time; and 

some say knives have edges. It must be as it 
ma}^ Though patience be a tired mare, yet 
she will plod. There must be conclusions. 
Well, I cannot tell. 

Enter Pistol and Hostess, 

30 Bard. Here come Ancient Pistol and his wife. 
Good corporal, be patient here. How now, 
mine host Pistol ! 
Fist. Base tike, calFst thou me host? 

Now, by this hand, I swear, I scorn the term ; 
35 Nor shall my Nell keep lodgers. 

Host. No, by my troth, not long; for we cannot 
lodge and board a dozen or fourteen gentle- 
women that live honestly by the prick of their 
needles, but it will be thought we keep a 
40 bawdy house straight. [Nym and Pistol draw.~\ 

well a day, Lady, if he be not drawn now ! 
We shall see wilful adultery and murder 
committed. 
Bard. Good lieutenant ! good corpo: al ! offer 
45 nothing here. 

Nym. Pish ! 



76 HENEY THE FIETH [Acx II, Sc. i 

Pist. Pish for thee, Iceland dog! thou prick- 
ear'd cur of Iceland! 

Host. Good Corporal i^jm., show thy valour, and 
put up your sword. 

Nym. Will you shog oS ? I would have you 50 
solus. 

Pist. "Solus," egregious dog I viper vile ! 
The "solus" in thy most mervailous face; 
The "solus" in thy teeth, and in thy throat, 
And in thy hateful lungs, yea, in thy maw, 

perdy, 55 

And, which is worse, within thy nasty mouth ! 
I do retort the "solus" in thy bowels ; 
For I can take, and PistoPs cock is up. 
And flashing fire will follow. 

Nym. I am not Barbason ; you cannot conjure 60 
me. I have an humour to knock you indif- 
ferently well. If you grow foul with me. 
Pistol, I will scour you with my rapier, as I 
may, in fair terms. If you would walk off, I 
would prick your guts a little, in good terms, 65 
as I may; and that ^s the humour of it. 

Pist. braggart vile and damned furious wight! 
The grave doth gape, and doting death is 

near, 
Therefore exhale. 

Bard. Hear me, hear me what I say. He that 70 
strikes the first stroke, I ^11 run him up to 
the hilts, as I am a soldier. [Draws. 



ACT II, Sc. i] HENEY THE FIFTH 77 

Pist. An oath of mickle might; and fury shall 
abate. 
Give me thy fist, thy fore-foot to me give. 
75 Thy spirits are most tall. 

Nym. I will cut thy throat, one time or other, in 

fair terms: that is the humour of it. 
Pist. ''Couple a gorge T 

That is the word. I thee defy again. 
80 hound of Crete, think 'st thou my spouse to 

get? 
No ! to the spital go. 
And from the powdering tub of infamy 
Fetch forth the la^ar kite of Cressid's kind, 
Doll Tearsheet she by name, and her espouse. 
85 I have, and I will hold, the quondam Quickly 

For the only she ; and— pauca, there 's enough. 

Go to. 

Enter the Boy. 
Boy. Mine host Pistol, you must come to my 
master, and you, hostess. He is very sick, and 
90 would to bed. Good Bardolph, put thy face 

between his sheets, and do the office of a 
warming-pan. Faith, he's very ill. 
Bard. Away, you rogue ! 

Host. By my troth, he '11 yield the crow a pud- 
95 ding one of these days. The King has kill'd 

his heart. Good husband, come home pres- 
ently. 

- [Exeunt Hostess and Boy. 



78 HENEY THE FIFTH [Act II, Sc. i 



Bard. Come, shall I make you two friends? We 
must to France together; why the devil 
should we keep knives to cut one another's loo 
throats ? 

Pist. Let floods o'erswell, and fiends for food 
how 1 on ! 

Nym. You '11 pay me the eight shillings I won 
of you at betting ? 

Pist. Base is the slave that pays. 105 

Nym. That now I will have: that's the humour 
of it. 

Pist. As manhood shall compound. Push home. . 

[They draw. 

Bard. By this sword, he that makes the first 
thrust, I '11 kill him ; by this sword, I will, iio 

Pist. Sword is an oath, and oaths must have their 
course. 

Bard. Corporal Xym, an thou wilt be friends, be 
friends; an thou wilt not, why, then, be ene- 
mies with me too. Prithee, put up. 

Nym. I shall have my eight shillings I won from 115 
you at betting? 

Pist. A noble shalt thou have, and present pay; 
And liquor likewise will I give to thee. 
And friendship shall combine, and brother- 
hood. 
I'll live by ^Rym, and ^N'ym shall live by me. 120 
Is not this just? For I shall sutler be 
Unto the camp, and profits will accrue. 
Give me thy hand. 

Nym. I shall have my noble? 



4 



Act II, Sc. i] HENEY THE EIETH 79 

125 Pist. In cash most justly paid. 

Nym. Well, then, that's the humour of 't. 

Re-enter Hostess. 

Host. As ever you come of women, come in quickly 

to Sir John. Ah, poor heart ! he is so shak'cl 

of a burning quotidian tertian, that it is 

i-,o most lamentable to behold. Sweet men, come 

to him. 

Nym. The King hath run bad humours on the 

knight; that's the even of it. 
Pist. Nym, thou hast spoke the right. 
135 His heart is fracted and corroborate. 

Nym. The King is a good King; but it must be 
as it may; he passes some humours and ca- 
reers. 
Pist. Let us condole the knight; for, lambkins, 
we will live. 

[jExeunt. 
Scene II. 

Southampton. A council-chamher. 

Enter Exeter, Bedford, and Westmoreland. 

Bed. Tore God, his Grace is bold, to trust these 
traitors. 

Exe. They shall be apprehended by and by. 

West. How smooth and even they do bear them- 
selves ! 



so HENEY THE FIETH [Act II, Sc. ii 

As if allegiance in their bosoms sat 

Crowned with faith and constant loyalty. 5 

Bed. The King hath note of all that they intend, 
By interception which they dream not of. 

Exe. Nay, but the man that was his bed-fellow, 
Whom he hath dulFd and cloy'd with gracious 

favours. 
That he should, for a foreign purse, so sell 10 
His sovereign's life to death and treachery. 

Trumpets sound. Enter King Henry, Scroop, 
Cambridge, and Grey. 

K. Hen. Now sits the wind fair, and we will . 

aboard. 
My Lord of Cambridge, and my kind Lord 

of Masham, 
And you, my gentle knight, give me your 

thoughts. 
Think you not that the powers we bear 

with us 15 

Will cut their passage through the force of 

France, 
Doing the execution and the act 
For which we have in head assembled them ? 
Scroop. No doubt, my liege, if each man do his 

best. 20 

K. Hen. I doubt not that, since we are well per- 
suaded 
We carry not a heart with us from hence 
That- grows not in a fair consent with ours. 



Act II, Sc. ii] HENEY THE FIFTH 81 

Nor leave not one behind that doth not wish 
Success and conquest to attend on ns. 
25 Cam. Never was monarch better fear'd and lov'd 
Than is your Majesty. There's not^ I think, 

a subject 
That sits in heart-grief and uneasiness 
Under the sweet shade of your government. 
Grey. True; those that were your father's ene- 
mies 
30 Have steep'd their galls in honey, and do serve 

you 
With hearts create of duty and of zeal. 
K. Hen. We therefore have great cause of thank- 
fulness, 
And shall forget the office of our hand 
Sooner than quittance of desert and merit 
35 According to the weight and worthiness. 

Scroop. So service shall with steeled sinews toil. 
And labour shall refresh itself with hope. 
To do your Grace incessant services. 
K. Hen. A¥e judge no less. Uncle of Exeter, 
40 Enlarge the man committed yesterday, 

That rail'd against our person. We consider 
It was excess of wine that set him on. 
And on his more advice we pardon him. 
Scroop. That's mercy, but too much security. 
45 Let him be punish'd, sovereign, lest example 

Breed, by his sufferance, more of such a kind. 
K. Hen. 0, let us yet be merciful. 



SZ HENEY THE FIFTH [Act II, Sc. il 

Cam. So may your Highness, and yet punish too. 
Grey. Sir, 

You show great mercy if you give him life so 
After the taste of much correction. 
K. Hen. Alas, your too much love and care of me 
Are heavy orisons Against this poor wretch ! 
If little faults, proceeding on distemper. 
Shall not be winked at, how shall we stretch 

our eye 55 

When capital crimes, chew'd, swallowM and 

digested. 
Appear before us? We^ll yet enlarge that 

man. 
Though Cambridge, Scroop, and Grey, in 

their dear care 
Aiid tender preservation of our person. 
Would have him punishM. And now to our 

French causes. 60 

Who are the late commissioners? 
Cam. I one, my lord. 

Your Highness bade me ask for it to-day. 
Scroop. So did you me, my liege. 
Grey. And I, my royal sovereign. 65 

K. Hen. Then, Eichard Earl of Cambridge, there 
is yours; 
There yours. Lord Scroop of Masham; and, 

sir knight, 
Grey of Northumberland, this same is yours. 
Eead them, and know I know your worthi- 
ness. 



Act II, sc. ii] HENEY THE FIFTH gg 

70 My Lord of Westmoreland, and uncle Exeter, 

We will aboard to-night.— Why, how now,' 

gentlemen ! 
What see you in those papers that you lose 
So much complexion?— Look ye, how they 

change ! 

Their cheeks are paper.— Why, what read you 
there, 
75 That have so cowarded and chas'd your blood 

Out of appearance ? 
Cam. I do confess my fault. 

And do submit me to your Highness' mercy. 
Scroop. "1 
Grey. J "^^ ^^^^^^^ ^^ ^^^ appeal. 

K. Hen. The mercy that was quick in us but late. 
By your own counsel is suppressed and kill'd. 
You must not dare, for shame, to talk of 

mercy. 
For your own reasons turn into your bosoms. 
As dogs upon their masters, worrying you. 
See you, my princes and my noble peers, 
85 These English monsters ! My Lord of Cam- 

bridge here. 
You know how apt our love was to accord 
To furnish him with all appertinents 
Belonging to his honour; and this man 
Hath, for a few light crowns, lightly con- 
spir'd 
90 And sworn unto the practices of France 

To kill us here in Hampton ; to the which 



80 



84: HENKY THE FIFTH [Act II, Sc. ii 

This knight^ no less for bounty bound to us 
Than Cambridge is, hath likewise sworn. 

But, 
What shall I say to thee, Lord Scroop? thou 

cruel, 
Ingrateful, savage, and inhuman creature ! 95 
Thou that didst bear the key of all my coun- 
sels. 
That knew'st the very bottom of my sou], 
That almost mightst have coined me into gold, 
Wouldst thou have practis'd on me for thy 

use, — 
May it be possible that foreign hire lOO 

Could out of thee extract one spark of evil' 
That might annoy my finger ? 'Tis so strange. 
That, though the truth of it stands off as 

gross 
As black and white, my eye will scarcely 

see it. 
Treason and murder ever kept together, 105 

As two yoke-devils sworn to either's purpose, 
Working so grossly in a natural cause 
That admiration did not whoop at them ; 
But thou, Against all proportion, didst bring in 
Wonder to wait on treason and on*murder; no 
And whatsoever cunning fiend it was 
That wrought upon thee so preposterously 
Hath got the voice in hell for excellence; 
And other devils that suggest by treasons . 
Do botch and bungle up damnation lis 



Act II, Sc. ii] HENEY THE FIFTH 85 

With patches, colours, and with forms being 

fetched 
From glist'ring semblances of piety. 
But he that tempered thee bade thee stand up, 
Gave thee no instance why thou shouldst do 
treason, 
120 Unless to dub thee with the name of traitor. 

If that same demon that hath gulFd thee thus 
Should with his lion gait walk the whole 

world. 
He might return to vasty Tartar back, 
And tell the legions, "I can never win 
125 A soul so easy as that Englishman's." 

0, how hast thou with jealousy infected 
The sweetness of affiance ! Show men dutiful ? 
Why, so didst thou. Seem they grave and 

learned ? 
Why, so didst thou. Come they of noble 
family ? 
130 Why, so didst thou. Seem they religious? 

Why, so didst thou. Or are they spare in diet, 
Free from gross passion or of mirth or anger. 
Constant in spirit, not swerving with the 

blood, 
Garnish'd and deck'd in modest complement, 
135 N'ot working with the eye without the ear, 

And but in purged judgment trusting 

neither ? 
Such and so finely bolted didst thou seem. 
And thus thy fall hath left a kind of blot 



86 HENEY THE FIFTH [Acx II, Sc. ii 

To mark the full-fraught man and best in- 
dued 
With some suspicion. I will weep for thee ; i40 
For this revolt of thine, methinks^ is like 
Another fall of man. Their faults are open. 
Arrest them to the answer of the law; 
And God acquit them of their practices! 
Exe. I arrest thee of high treason, by the name of 145 
Eiehard Earl of Cambridge. 
I arrest thee of high treason, by the name of 

Henry Lord Scroop of Masham. 
I arrest thee of high treason, by the name of 
Thomas Grey, knight, of Northumber- 150 
land. 
Scroop. Our purposes God justly hath discovered. 
And I repent my fault more than my death. 
Which I beseech your Highness to forgive. 
Although my body pay the price of it. 155 

Cam. For me, the gold of France did not seduce, 
Although I did admit it as a motive 
The sooner to effect what I intended. 
But God be thanked for prevention, 
Which I in sufferance heartily will rejoice, leo 
Beseeching God and you to pardon me. 
Grey. Never did faithful subject more rejoice 
At the discovery of most dangerous treason 
Than I do at this hour joy o'er myself, 
Pre\iented from a damned enterprise. i65 

My fault, but not mj- body, pardon, sov- 
ereign. 



Act II, Sc. ii] HENEY THE EIETH 87 

K. Hen. God quit you in his mercy ! Hear your 
sentence. 
You have conspir'd against our royal person, 
Join'd with an enemy proclaim^, and from 
his coffers 
170 Eeceived the golden earnest of our death; 

Wherein you would have sold your king to 

slaughter, 
His princes and his peers to servitude. 
His subjects to oppression and contempt, 
And his whole kingdom into desolation. 
175 Touching our person seek we no revenge; 

But we our kingdom^s safety must so tender. 
Whose ruin you have sought, that to her laws 
We do deliver you. Get you therefore hence. 
Poor miserable wretches, to your death, 
180 The taste whereof God of his mercy give 

You patience to endure, and true repentance 
Of all your dear offences ! Bear them hence. 
[Exeunt Cambridge, Scroop, and Grey, guarded. 
Now, lords, for France ; the enterprise whereof 
Shall be to you, as us, like glorious. 
185 We doubt not of a fair and lucky war. 

Since God so graciously hath brought to light 
This dangerous treason lurking in our way 
To hinder our beginnings. We doubt not 

now 
But every rub is smoothed on our way. 
190 Then forth, dear countrymen ! Let us deliver 

■ Our puissance into the hand of God, 



HENEY THE FIFTH [Act II, Sc. iii 

Putting it straight in expedition. 
Cheerly to sea ! Tlie signs of war advance ! 
No king of England, if not king of France ! 

[^Flourish. 



Scene III. 

London. Before a tavern. 

Enter Pistol, Nym, Bardolpli, Boy, and Hostess. 

Host. Prithee honey, sweet hnsband, let me bring 

thee to Staines. 
Pist. No ; for my manly heart doth yearn. 

Bardolph, be blithe; N3^m, rouse thy vaunt- 
ing veins; 
Boy, bristle thy courage up; for Falstaff he 

is dead, 5 

And we must yearn therefore. 
Bard. Would I were with him, wheresome'er he 

is, either in heaven or in hell ! 
Host. Nay, sure, he's not in hell. He's in Ar- 
thur's bosom, if ever man went to Arthur's lo 
bosom. 'A made a finer end and went away an 
it had been any christom child. 'A parted even 
just between twelve and one, even at the turn- 
ing o' the tide: for after I saw him fumble 
with the sheets, and play with flowers, and 15 
smile upon his fingers' ends, I knew there 
was but one way; for his nose was as sharp 



Act II, Sc. iii] HENRY THE FIETH 8^ 

as a pen, and ^a babbled of green fields. 
*'How now, Sir John !" qnotb I ; "what, man ! 
20 be o' good cheer." So 'a cried out, "God, 

God, God!" three or four times. Now I, to 
comfort him, bid him 'a should not think of 
God; I hop'd there was no need to trouble 
himself with any such thoughts yet. So 'a 
25 bade me lay more clothes on his feet. I put 

my hand into the bed and felt them, and 
they were as cold as any stone; then I felt 
to his knees, and they were as cold as any 
stone; and so upward and upward, and all 
30 was as cold as any stone. 

Nym. They say he cried out of sack. 
Host. Ay, that ^a did. 
Bard. And of women. 
Host. Nay, that ^a did not. 
35 Boy, Yes, that 'a did ; and said they were devils- 
incarnate. 
Host. 'A could never abide carnation; 't was a 

colour he never lik'd. 
Boy. ^A said once, the devil would have him 
40 about women. 

Host. 'A did in some sort, indeed, handle women ; 
but then he was rheumatic, and talk'd of the 
whore of Babylon. 
Boy. Do you not remember, 'a saw a flea stick 
45 upon Bardolph's nose, and ^a said it was a 

black soul burning in hell-fire? 



90 HENEY THE FIFTH [Act II, Sc. lii 

Bard. Well, the fuel is gone that maintain'd that 

fire. That's all the riches I got in his service. 
Nym. Shall we shog? The King will be gone 

from Southampton. 50 

Pist. Come, let's away. My love, give me thy lips. 

Look to my chattels and my movables. 

Let senses rule ; the word is "Pitch and Pay." 

Trust none; 

For oaths are straws; men's faiths are wafer- 
cakes, 55 

And hold-fast is the only dog, my duck; 

Therefore, Caveto be thy counsellor. 

Go, clear thy crystals. Yoke-fellows in arms. 

Let us to France; like horse-leeches, my boys. 

To suck, to suck, the very blood to suck ! 60 
Boy. And that's but unwholesome food, they say. 
Pist. Touch her soft mouth, and march. 
Bard. Farewell, hostess. [Kissing her. 

Nym. I cannot kiss; that is the humour of it; 

but, adieu. 65 

Pist. Let housewifery appear. Keep close, I thee 

command. 
Host. Farewell; adieu. [Exeunt. 



Acr II. sc. ivj HENEY THE FIFTH 



91 



Scene IV. 

France. The King's palace. 

Flourish. Enter the French King, the Dauphin, 
the DuJces of Berri and Bretagne, the Con- 
stable, and others. 
Fr. King. Thus comes the English with full power 
upon us. 
And more than carefully it us concerns 
To answer royally in our defences. 
Therefore the Dukes of Berri and of Bretagne, 
5 Of Brabant and of Orleans, shall make forth, 

And you. Prince Dauphin, with all swift dis- 
patch. 
To line and new repair our towns of war 
With men of courage and with means de- 
fendant ; 
For England his approaches makes as fierce 
10 As waters to' the sucking of a gulf. 

It fits us then to be as provident 
As fears may teach us out of late examples 
Left by the fatal and neglected English 
Upon our fields. 
Dau. My most redoubted father, 

15 It is most meet we arm us 'gainst the foe ; 

For peace itself should not so dull a kingdom. 



92 HENEY THE FIFTH [Act II, Sc. iv 

Though war nor no known quarrel were in 
question. 

But that defences, musters, preparations. 
Should be maintained, assembled, and col- 
lected. 
As were a war in expectation. 20 

Therefore, I say, 't is meet we all go forth 
To view the sick and feeble |)arts of France. 
And let us do it with no show of fear ; 
No, with no more than if we heard that Eng- 
land 
Were busied with a Whitsun morris-dance; 25 
For, my good liege, she is so idly king'd. 
Her sceptre so fantastically borne 
By a vain, giddy, shallow, humorous youth, 
That fear attends her not. 
Con. peace. Prince Dauphin ! 

You are too much mistaken in this king. 30 

Question your Grace the late ambassadors 
With what great state he heard their em- 
bassy. 
How well supplied with noble counsellors. 
How modest in exception, and withal 
How terrible in constant resolution, 35 

And you shall find his vanities forespent 
Were but the outside of the Eoman Brutus, 
Covering discretion with a coat of folly. 
As gardeners do with ordure hide those roots 
That shall first spring and be most delicate. 40 
Dau. Well, ^t is not so, my Lord High Constable ; 



• Act II, Sc. iv] HENEY THE FIFTH 93 

But though we think it so, it is no matter. 
In cases of defence 't is best to weigh 
The enemy more mighty than he seems, 
45 So the proportions of defence are filFd; 

Which, of a weak and niggardly projection. 
Doth, like a miser, spoil his coat with scant- 
ing 
A little cloth. 
Fr. King. Think we King Harry strong ; 

And, Princes, look you strongly arm to meet 
him. 
50 The kindred of him hath been flesh'd upon us ; 

And he is bred out of that bloody strain 
That haunted us in our familiar paths. 
Witness our too much memorable shame 
When Cressy battle fatally was struck, 
55 And all our princes captiv'd by the hand 

Of that black name, Edward, Black Prince 

of Wales; 
Whiles that his mountain sire, on mountain 

standing. 
Up in the air, crown'd with the golden sun. 
Saw his heroical seed, and smil'd to see him, 
60 Mangle the work of nature and deface 

The patterns that by God and by French 

fathers 
Had twenty years been made. This is a stem 
Of that victorious stock ; and let us fear 
The native misrhtiness and fate of him. 



94 HENEY THE FIFTH [Act II, Sc. iv 

Enter a Messenger. 

Mess. Ambassadors from Harry King of England 65 

Do crave admittance to your Majesty. 
Fr. King. We'll give them present audience. 
Go^ and bring them. 

[Exeunt Messenger and certain Lords.^ 
Yon see this chase is hotly followed, friends.. 
Dau. Turn head^ and stop pursuit; for coward 
dogs 
Most spend their mouths when what they 

seem to threaten 70 

Euns far before them. Good my sovereign, 
Take up the English short, and let them 

know 
Of what a monarchy you are the head. 
Self-love, my liege, is not so vile a sin 
As self-neglecting. 

Enter Exeter. 

Fr. King. From our brother of England ? 75 

Exe. From him; and thus he greets your Maj- 
esty : 
He wills you, in the name of God Almighty, 
That 3^ou divest yourself, and lay apart 
The borrowed glories that by gift of heaven. 
By law of nature and of nations, longs 80 

To him and to his heirs; namely, the crown 
x\nd all wide-stretched honours that ^^ertain 
By custom and the ordinance of times 



ACT II, Sc. iv] HENEY THE FIFTH 95 

Unto the crown of France. That yon may 
know 
85 'T is no sinister nor no awkward claim 

Picked from the worm-holes of long-vanish'd 

days, 
]^or from the dust of old oblivion rak'd. 
He sends yon this most memorable line, 
In every branch truly demonstrative; 
90 Willing you overlook this pedigree; 

And when you find him evenly derived 
From his most fam'd of famous ancestors, 
Edward the Third, he bids you then resign 
Your crown and kingdom, indirectly held 
95 From him, the native and true challenger. 

Fr. King. Or else what follows? 
Exe. Bloody constraint ; for if you hide the crown 
Even in your hearts, there will he rake for it. 
Therefore in fierce tempest he is coming, 
100 In thunder and in earthquake, like a Jove, 

That, if requiring fail, he will compel; 
And bids you, in the bowels of the Lord, 
Deliver up the crown, and to take mercy 
On the poor souls for whom this hungry war 
105 Opens his vasty jaws; and on your head 

Turning the widows' tears, the orphans' cries, 
The dead men's blood, the pining maidens' 

groans. 
For husbands, fathers, and betrothed lovers. 
That shall be swallowed in this controversy. 



96 . HENEY THE FIFTH [Act II, Sc. iv 

This is his claim, his threat'ning, and 1113^ 

message ; no 

Unless the Dauphin be in presence here. 
To whom expressly I bring greeting too. 
Fr. King. For ns, we will consider of this fur- 
ther. 
To-morrow shall you bear our full intent 
Back to our brother of England. 
Dau. For the Dauphin, 115 

I stand here for him. What to him from 
England ? 
Exe. Scorn and defiance. Slight regard, con- 
tempt. 
And anything that may not misbecome 
The mighty sender, doth he prize you at. 
Thus says my king : an if your father's High- 
ness 120 
Do not, in grant of all demands at large. 
Sweeten the bitter mock you sent his Majesty, 
He'll call you to so hot an answer of it, 
That caves and womby vaultages of France 
Shall chide your trespass and return your 125 

mock 
In second accent of his ordinance. 
Dau. Say, if my father render fair return. 
It is against my will ; for I desire 
Nothing but odds with England. To that 

end. 
As matching to his youth and vanity, 130 

I did present him with the Paris balls. 



Act II, Sc. iv] HENEY THE FIFTH 97 

Exe. Hell make your Paris Louvre shake for it, 
Were it the mistress-court of mighty Europe ; 
And, be assur'd, you'll find a difference, 
135 As we his subjects have in wonder found, ' 

Between the promise of his greener days 

And these he masters now. I^ow he weighs 

'■.J 
time ^ 

Even to the utmost grain. That you shall 

read (^^ 

In your own losses, if he stay in France. _Q- 
140 Fr. King. To-morrow shall you know our mind 
at full. [Flourish. 

Exe. Dispatch us with all speed, lest that our 
king 
Come here himself to question our delay; 
For he is footed in this land already. 
Fr. King. You shall be soon dispatch'd with fair 
conditions. 
145 A night is but small breath and little pause 

To answer matters of this consequence. 

[Exeunt. 



ACT THIRD. 

Prologue. 

Flourish. Enter Chorus. 

Chor. Thus with imagin'd wing our swift scene 
flies 
In motion of no less celerity 
Than that of thought. Suppose that you have 

seen 
The well-appointed king at Hampton pier 
Embark his royalty^ and his brave fleet 5 

With silken streamers the young Phoebus fan- 
ning. 
Play with your fancies, and in them behold 
Upon the hempen tackle ship-boys climbing; 
Hear the shrill whistle which doth order give 
To sounds confus'd; behold the threaden lo 

sails, 
Borne with the invisible and creeping wind, 
Draw the huge bottoms through the furrow'd 

sea. 
Breasting the lofty surge. 0, do but think 
You stand upon the rivage and behold 
A city on the inconstant billows dancing; 15 
For so appears this fleet majestical. 



Frologue] HENEY the FIFTH 99 

Holding due course to Harfleur. Follow, fol- 
low ! 
Grapple your minds to sternage of this navy, 
And leave your England, as dead midnight 
still, 
20 Guarded with grandsires, babies, and old 

women, 
Either past or not arriv'd to pith and puis- 
sance. 
For who is he, whose chin is but enrich'd 
With one appearing hair, that will not follow 
These culPd and choice-drawn, cavaliers to 
France ? 
25 Work, work your thoughts, and therein see a 

siege ; 
Behold the ordnance on their carriages, 
With fatal mouths gaping on girded Har- 
fleur. 
Suppose the ambassador from the French 

comes back, 
Tells Harry that the King doth offer him 
30 Katharine his daughter, and with her, to 

dowry. 
Some petty and unprofitable dukedoms. 
The offer likes not ; and the nimble gunner 
With linstock now the devilish cannon 
touches, 

[Alarum, and chambers go of. 

And down goes all before them. Still be kind, 

35 And eke out our performance with your mind. 

[Exit. 



100 HENKY THE FIFTH [Act III, Sc. i 



Scene I. 

France. Before Harfteiir. 

Alarum. Enter King Henry, Exeter, Bedford, 
Gloucester, and Soldiers, with scaling ladders. 

K. Hen. Once more unto the breach, dear friends^ J 

once more. 
Or close the wall up with our English dead. 
In peace there's nothing so becomes a man 
As modest stillness and humility; 
But when the blast of war blows in our ears, 5 
Then imitate the action of the tiger; 
Stiffen the sinews, summon up the blood, 
Disguise fair nature with hard-favour'd rage; 
Then lend the eye a terrible aspect; ) 
Let it pry through the portage of tKe head 10 
Like the brass cannon; let the brow o'er- 

whelm it 
As fearfully as does a galled rock 
O'erhang and jutty his confounded base, 
iSwill'd with the wild and wasteful ocean. 
I 'Now set the teeth and stretch the nostril 

wide, 15 

Hold hard the breath, and bend up every 

spirit 



AcTlII, Sc. i] HENEY THE FIFTH 101 

To his full height. On^ on, you noblest Eng- y 
lish, -^ 

Whose blood is f et from fathers of war-proof I 
Fathers that, like so many Alexanders, 
20 Have in these parts from morn till even 

fought. 
And sheath'd their swords for lack of argu- 
ment. 'Y 
Dishonour not your mothe:^ ; now attest 
That those whom you calfd fathers did beget 

you. 
Be cop3^ now to men of grosser blood, 
25 And teach them how to war. And you, good 

yeomen, 
Whose limbs were made in England, show us 

here 
The mettle of your pasture; let us swear 
That you are worth your breeding, which I 

doubt not; 
For there is none of you so mean and base, 
30 That hath not noble lustre in your eyesi)' 

I see you stand like greyhounds in the slips. 
Straining upon the start. The game's afoot ! 
Follow your spirit, and upon this charge 
Cry, "God for Harry ! England and Saint 
George !" 
[Exemit. Alarum J, and chambers go off. 



102 HENKY THE FIFTH [Act III, Sc. ii 



1 



Scene II. 

The same. 

Enter Nym, Bardolph, Pistol, and Boy. 

Bard. On, on, on, on, on! To the breach, to the 

breach ! 
Nym. Pray thee, corporal, stay. The knocks are 
too hot; and, for mine own part, I have not 
a case of lives. The hiimonr of it is too hot; 5 
that is the very plain-song of it. 
Pist. The plain-song is most jnst, for hnmours do 
abound. 
^^Knocks go and come ; God's vassals drop and 
die; 

And sword and shield, 
In bloody field, 10 

Doth win immortal fame.'' 
Boy. Wonld I were in an alehonse in London ! I 
would give all my fame for a pot of ale and 
safety. 
Pist. And I. 15 

"If wishes wonld prevail with me, 
My purpose should not fail with me. 
But thither would I hie." 
Boy. '^As duly, but not as truly. 

As bird doth sing on bough." 20 



25 



Act III, Sc. ii] HENEY THE FIFTH 103 

Enter Fluellen. 

Flu. Up to the breach, you dogs ! Avaunt, you 
cullions ! [Driving them fomuard.] 

Fist. Be merciful, great Duke, to men of mould. 
Abate thy rage, abate thy manly rage, 
Abate thy rage, great Duke ! 
Good bawcock, bate thy rage; use lenity, 
sweet chuck! 
Nym. These be good humours ! Your honour wins 
•bad humours. [Exeunt all hut Boy.] 

Boy. As young as I am, I have observed these three 

30 swashers. I am boy to them all three; but all 

they three, though they would serve me, could 
not be man to me; for indeed three such 
antics do not amount to a man. For Bar- 
dolph, he is white-liver'd and red-fac'd; by 

35 the means whereof 'a faces it out, but fights 

not. For Pistol, he hath a killing tongue and 
a quiet sword ; by the means whereof 'a breaks 
words, and keeps whole weapons. For Nym, 
he hath heard that men of few v^ords are 

40 the best men; and therefore he scorns to say 

his prayers, lest 'a should be thought a cow- 
ard. But his few bad words are match'd with 
as few good deeds; for 'a never broke any 
man^s head but his own, and that was against 

45 a post when he was drunk. They will steal 

an3^thing, and call it purchase. Bardolph stole 
a lute-case, bore it twelve leagues, and sold it 



104 HENEY THE FIFTH [Act III, Sc. ii 

for three half -pence. iSTym and Bardolph are 
sworn brothers in filching, and in Calais they 
stole a fire-shovel. I knew by that piece of 50 
service the men would carry coals. They 
would liave me as familiar with men's pockets 
as their gloves or their handkerchers ; which 
makes much against my manhood, if I should 
take from another^s pocket to put into mine ; 55 
for it is plain pocketing up of wrongs. I 
must leave them, and seek some better service. 
Their villainy goes against my weak stoniach, 
and therefore I must cast it up. [Exit. 

Enter Gozver and Fluellen. 

Goiv. Captain Fluellen, you must come presently 60 
to the mines. The Duke of Gloucester would 
speak with you. 

Flu. To the mines ! Tell you the Duke, it is not 
so good to come to the mines; for, look you, 
the mines is not according to the disciplines of 65 
the war. The concavities of it is not suffi- 
cient; for, look you, the athversary, you may 
discuss unto the Duke, look you, is digt him- 
self four yard under the countermines. By 
Cheshu, I think 'a will plow up all, if there 70 
is not better directions. 

Goto. The Duke of Gloucester, to whom the order 
of the siege is given, is altogether directed by 
an Irishman, a very valiant gentleman, i' 
faith. 75 



AcTlII, Sc. ii] HENKY THE FIFTH 105 

Flu. It is Captain Macmorris, is it not? 

Goiv. I think it be. 

Flu. By Cheshn, he is an ass, as in the world. I 

will verify as mnch in his beard. He has no 

80 more directions in the true disciplines of the 

w^ars, look you, of the Eoman disciplines, than 

is a puppy-dog. 

Enter Macmorris and Captain J amy. 

Gow. Here ^a comes; and the Scots captain, Cap- 
tain Jamy with him. 
85 Flu. Captain Jamy is a marvellous falorous gen- 
tleman, that is certain; and of great expedi- 
tion and knowledge in the aunchient wars, 
upon my particular knowledge of his direc- 
tions. By Cheshu, he will maintain his argu- 
90 ment as well as any military man in the 

world, in the disciplines of the pristine wars 
of the Eomans. 

Jamy. I say gud-day, Captain Fluellen. 

Flu. God-den to your worship, good Captain 
95 James. 

Gotv. How now, Captain Macmorris! have you 
quit the mines? Have the pioners given o'er? 

Mac. By Chrish, la ! 'tish ill done. The work ish 
give over, the trompet sound the retreat. By 
100 my hand I swear, and my father's soul, the 

work ish ill done; it ish give over. I would 
have blowed up the town, so Chrish save me, 
la! in an hour. 0, 'tish ill done, 'tish ill 
done ; by my hand, 'tish ill done ! 



106 HENEY THE FIFTH [Act III, Sc. ii 

Flu. Captain Macmorris, I beseech you now, will 105 
you voutsafe me, look you, a few disputations 
with you, as partly touching or concerning the 
disciplines of the war, the Eoman wars, in the 
way of argument, look you, and friendly com- 
munication ; partly to satisfy my opinion, and no 
. partly for the satisfaction, look you, of my 
mind, as touching the direction of the mili- 
tary discipline; that is the point. 

Jamy. It sail be very gud, gud feith, gud captains 
bath : and I sail quit you with gud leve, as 1 115 
may pick occasion; that sail I, marry. 

Mac. It is no time to discourse, so Chrish save me. 
The day is hot, and the weather, and the 
wars, and the King, and the Dukes. It is no 
time to discourse. The town is beseech'd, 120 
and the trumpet call us to the breach, and we 
talk, and, be Chrish, do nothing. ^T is shame 
for us all. So God sa' me, 't is shame to stand 
still; it is shame, by my hand; and there is 
throats to be cut, and works to be done ; and 125 
there ish nothing done, so Chrish sa' me, la ! 

Jamy. By the mess, ere theise eyes of mine take 
themselves to slomber, I '11 de gud service, or 
. I Tl lig i' the grund for it ; ay, or go to death ; 
and I'll pay 't as valourously as I may, that 130 
sail I suerly do, that is the breff and the long. 
Marry, I wad full fain heard some question 
'tween you tway. 

Flu. Captain Macmorris, I think, look you, under 



Act III, Sc. ii] HENEY THE FIFTH 



107 



135 your correction, there is not many of your 

nation — 

Mac. Of my nation ! What ish my nation ? Ish a 

viMain, and a bastard, and a knave, and a 

rascal? A¥hat ish my nation? Who talks of 

140 my nation? 

Flu. Look you, if you take the matter otherwise 
than is meant, Captain Macmorris, peradven- 
ture I shall think you do not use me with that 
affability as in discretion you ought to use 
145 me, look you, being as good a man as your- 

self, both in the disciplines of war, and in 
the derivation of my birth, and in other par- 
ticularities. 
Mac. I do not know you so good a man as myself. 
150 So Chrish save me, I will cut off your head. 

Goiv. Gentlemen both, you will mistake each 

other. 
Jamy. Ah ! that's a foul fault. 

[A parley sounded. 
Goiv. The town sounds a parley. 
155 Flu. Captain Macmorris, when there is more bet- 
ter opportunity to be required, look you, I 
will be so bold as to tell you I know the dis- 
ciplines of war; and there is an end. 

[Exeunt. 



108 HENKY THE FIFTH [Act III, Sc. iii 



Scene III. 

The same. Before the gates. 

The Governor and some Citizens on the Walls; the 

English forces heloiu. Enter King 

Henry and his train. 

K. Hen. How yet resolves the governor of the 

town? 
This is the latest parle we will admit; 
Therefore to our best mercy give yourselves^ 
Or like to men proud of destruction 
Defy us to our worst ; for, as I am a soldier, 5 
A name that in my thoughts becomes me best, 
If I begin the battery once again, 
I will not leave the half-achieved Harfieur 
Till in her ashes she lies buried. 
The gates of mercy shall be all shut up, lo 

And the fiesh'd soldier, rough and hard of 

heart. 
In liberty of bloody hand shall range 
With conscience wide as hell, mowing like 

grass 
Your fresh fair virgins and your flow'ring 

infants. 
What is it then to me, if impious War, 15 

Array^l in flames like to the prince of fiends, 



ACTIII, Sc. iii] HENEY THE FIFTH 109 

Do with his smirch'd complexion all fell feats 
Enlink'd to w?.ste and desolation? 
What is 't to me, when you yourselves are 
cause, 
20 If your pure maidens fall into the hand 

Of hot and forcing violation? 
What rein can hold licentious wickedness 
When down the hill he holds his fierce career? 
We may as bootless spend our vain command 
25 Upon the enraged soldiers in their spoil 

As send precepts to the leviathan 
To come ashore. Therefore, you men of Har- 

fleur, 
Take pity of your town and of your people, 
Whiles yet my soldiers are in my command, 
30 Whiles yet the cool and temperate wind of 

grace 
O'erblows the filthy and contagious clouds 
Of heady murder, spoil, and villainy. 
If not, why, in a moment look to see 
The blind and bloody soldier with foul hand 
35 Defile the locks of your shrill-shrieking 

daughters ; 
Your fathers taken by the silver beards. 
And their most reverend heads dash'd to the 

walls; 
Your naked infants spitted upon pikes. 
Whiles the mad mothers with their howls con- 
fus'd 



110 HENEY THE FIFTH [Act III, Sc. iii 

Do break the clouds, as did the wives of 

Jewry 40 

At Herod^s bloody-hunting slaughtermen. 
What say you ? Will you yield, and this avoid. 
Or, guilty in defence, be thus destroyed? 

Gov. Our expectation hath this day an end. 

The Dauphin, whom of succours we entreated, 45 
Eeturns us that his powers are yet not ready 
To raise so great a siege. Therefore, great 

King, 
We yield our town and lives to thy soft mercy. 
Enter our gates ; dispose of us and ours ; 
For we no longer are defensible. 50 

K. Hen. Open your gates. Come, uncle Exeter, 
Go you and enter Hariieur ; there remain. 
And fortify it strongly 'gainst the French. 
Use mercy to them all. For us, dear uncle. 
The winter coming on, and sickness growing 55 
Upon our soldiers, we will retire to Calais. 
To-night in Harfleur will we be your guest ; 
To-morrow for the march are we addrest. 

[Flourish. The King and his train 
enter the town. 



ACTIII, Sc. iv] HENEY THE FIFTH HI 



Scene IV. 

The French King's palace. 

Enter Katharine and Alice, an old Gentle- 

luoman. 

Kath. Alice, tu as ete en Angleterre, et tu paries 

bien le langage. 
Alice. Un peu, madame. 

Kath, Je te prie, m'enseignez ; il faut que 
5 j'apprenne a parler. Comment appelez-vous 

la main en Anglois? 
Alice. La main? Elle est appelee de hand. 
Kath. De hand. Et les doigts? 
Alice. Les doigts? Ma foi, j'oublie les doigts; 
10 mais je me souviendrai. Les doigts? Je 

pense quails sont appeles de fingres; oni, de 

fingres. 
Kath. La main, de hand; les doigts, de fingres. 

Je pense que je suis le bon ecolier ; j'ai gagne 
15 deux mots d' Anglois vitement. Comment 

appelez-vous les ongles ? 
Alice. Les ongles? Nous les appelons de nails. 
Kath. De nails, ficoutez; dites-moi, si je parte 

bien : de hand, de fingres, et de nails. 
2Q Alice. C'est bien dit, madame; il est fort bon 

Ans^lois. 



112 HENEY THE FIFTH [Act III. Sc. iv 

Kath. Dites-moi TAnglois pour le bras. 

Alice. De arm, madaine. 

Kath. Et le coude? 

AlicQ. D' elbow. 25 

Kath. D' elbow. Je m'en fais la repetition de 

tons les mots que vous m'avez appris des a 

present. 
Alice. II est trop difficile, madame, comme je 

pense. 30 

Kath. Excnsez-moi, Alice ; ecoutez : D' hand, de 

fingres, de nails, d' arma, de bilbow. 
Alice. D' elbow, madame. 
Kath. Seigneur Dieu, je m'en oublie ! D' elbow. 

Comment appelez-vous le col? 35 

Alice. De nick, madame. 
Kath. De nick. Et le menton? 
Alice. De chin. 

Kath. De sin. Le col, de nick ; le menton, de sin. 
Alice. Oui. Sanf votre honnenr, en verite, vous 40 

prononcez les mots anssi droit que les natifs 

d^Angleterre. 
Kath. Je ne doute point d^apprendre, par la grace 

de Dieu, et en peu de temps. 
Alice. N^avez vous pas deja oublie ^e que je vous 45 

ai enseigne? 
Kath. N'on, je reciterai a vous promptement: d' 

hand, de fingres, de mails, — 
Alice. De nails, madame. 

Kath. De nails, de arm, de ilbow. 50 

Alice. Sauf votre honneur, de elbow. 



Act III, Sc. V] HENEY THE FIFTH 113 

Katli. Ainsi dis-je; d' elbow, de nick, et de sin. 

Comment appelez-vous le pied et la robe? 
Alice. De foot, madame; et de coun. 

55 Katli. De foot et de coun ! Seigneur Dieu ! ce 
sont mots de son mauvais, corruptible, gros, et 
impudique, et non pour les dames d'honneur 
d'user. Je ne voudrais prononcer ces mots 
devant les seigneurs de France pour tout le 

60 monde. Foh ! le foot et le coun ! Neanmoins, 

je reciterai une autre fois ma legon ensemble : 
d'hand, de fingres, de nails, d'arm, d'elbow, 
de nick, de sin, de foot, de coun. 
Alice. Excellent, madame ! 

65 Katli. C'est assez pour une fois : allons-nous a 
diner. [Exeunt. 



scE^^E y. 

The same. 

Enter the King of France, the Dauphin, the Duke 

of Bourhon, the Constable of France, 

and others. 

Fr. King. 'T is certain he hatli pass'd the river 

Somme. 
Con. An if he be not fought withal, my lord. 
Let us not live in France ; let us quit all 
And give our vineyards to a barbarous people. 
5 Dau. Dieu vivant ! shall a few sprays of us, 



114 HENEY THE FIFTH [Act III, Sc. v 

The emptying of our fathers' luxury, 
Our scions put in wild and savage stock, 
Spirt up so suddenly into the clouds, 
And overlook their grafters? 
Bour. Normans, but bastard Normans, Norman 
bastards ! lO 

Mort de ma vie! if they march along 
Unfought withal, but I will sell my dukedom. 
To buy a slobbery and a dirty farm 
In that nook-shotten isle of Albion. 
Con. Dieu de hataiUes! where have they this met- 
tle? 15 
Is not their climate foggy, raw, and dull, 
On whom, as in despite, the sun looks pale. 
Killing their fruit with frowns? Can sodden 

water, 
A drench for sur-rein'd jades, their barley- 
broth. 
Decoct their cold blood to such valiant heat ? 20 
And shall our qu^ck blood, spirited with wine. 
Seem frosty ? 0, for honour of our land. 
Let us not hang like roping icicles 
Upon our houses' thatch, whiles a more frosty 

people 
Sweat drops of gallant youth in our rich 

fields ! 25 

Poor we may call them in their native lords. 
Dau. By faith and honour, 

Our madams mock at us, and plainly say 
Our mettle is bred out, and they will give 



Act III, Sc. v] HENKY THE FIFTH 115 

30 Their bodies to the lust of English youth 

To new-store France with bastard warriors. 
Boar. They bid us to the English dancing-schools, 
And teach lavoitas high, and swift corantos; 
Saying our grace is only in our heels, 
35 And that we are most lofty runaways. 

Fr. King. Where is Montjoy the herald? Speed 
him hence. 
Let him greet England with our sharp de- 
fiance. 
Up, princes ! and, with spirit of honour edged 
More sharper than your swords, hie to the 
field ! 
40 Charles Delabreth, High Constable of France ; 

You Dukes of Orleans, Bourbon, and of Bern', 
Alengon, Brabant, Bar, and Burgundy; 
Jacques Chatillon, Rambures, Vaudemont, 
Beaumont, Grandpre, Eoussi, and Faucon- 
berg, ■ 
45 Foix, Lestrale, Bouciqualt, and Charolois; 

High dukes, great princes, barons, lords, and 

knights, 
For your great seats now quit you of great 

shames. 
Bar Harry England, that sweeps through our 

land 
With pennons painted in the blood of Har- 
fleur. 
50' Rush on his host, as doth the melted snow 

Upon the valleys, whose low vassal seat 



11(5 HENEY THE FIFTH [Act III, Sc. vi 

The Alps doth spit and void his rheum upon. 
Go down upon him, you have power enough, 
And in a captive chariot into Rouen 
Bring him our prisoner. 

Con. This becomes the great. 55 

Sorry am I his numbers are so few, 
His soldiers sick and f amish'd in their march ; 
For I am sure, when he shall see our army. 
He '11 drop his heart into the sink of fear 
And for achievement offer us his ransom. 60 

Fr. King. Therefore, Lord Constable, haste on 
Montjoy, 
And let him say to England that we send 
To know what willing ransom he will give. 
Prince Dauphin, you shall stay with us in 
Eouen. 

Dau. Not so, I do beseech your Majesty. 65 

Fr. King. Be patient, for you shall remain with us. 
Now forth. Lord Constable and princes all. 
And quickly bring us word of England's fall. 

[Exeunt. 



\\, Scene VI. 

The English camp in Picardy. 

Enter Gower and Fluellen meeting. 

Gow. How now, Captain Fluellen! come you 
from the bridge? 



ACTIII, Sc. vi] HENEY THE FIFTH 117 

Flu. I assure 3^011, there is very excellent services 
committed at the bridge. 
5 Goiu. Is the Duke of Exeter safe ? 
Flu. The Duke of Exeter is as magnanimous as 
Agamemnon; and a man that I love and 
honor with my soul, and my heart, and my 
duty, and my live, and my living, and my ut- 
10 termost power. He is not — God be praised 

and blessed ! — any hurt in the world ; but 
keeps the bridge most valiantly, with excel- 
lent discipline. There is an aunchient lieu- 
tenant there at the pridge, I think in my very 
15 conscience he is as valiant a man as Mark 

Antony; and he is a man of no estimation 
in the world, but I did see him do as gallant 
service. 
Gow. What do you call him? 
■-^0 Flu. He is called Aunchient Pistol. 
GoiD. I know him not. 

Enter Pistol. 

Flu. Here is the man. 

Pist. Captain, I thee beseech to do me favours. 
The Duke of Exeter doth love thee well. 
25 Flu. Ay, I praise God ; and I have merited some 
love at his hands. 
Pist. Bardolph, a soldier, firm and sound of heart, 
And of buxom valour, hath, by cruel fate, 
And giddy Fortune's furious fickle wheel, 
30 That goddess blind. 



118 HENEY THE FIFTH [Act 111, Sc. vi 

That stands upon the rolling restless stone — 

Flu. By your patience, Aunchient Pistol. For- 
tune is painted blind, with a muffler afore 
his eyes, to signify to you that Fortune is 
blind ; and she is painted also with a wheel, 35 
to signify to you, which is the moral of it, 
that she is turning, and inconstant, and muta- 
bility, and variation; and her foot, look jovi, 
is fixed upon a spherical stone, which rolls, 
and rolls, and rolls. In good truth, the poet 40 
makes a most excellent description of it. For- 
tune is an excellent moral. 

Pist. Fortune is Bardolph's foe, and frowns on 
him; 
For he hath stolen a pax, and hanged must ^a 

be, — 
A damned death ! 45 

Let gallows gape for dog ; let man go free. 
And let not hemp his windpipe suffocate. 
Bu.t Exeter hath given the doom of death 
For pax of little price. 
Therefore, go speak; the Duke will hear thy 

voice ; 50 

And let not Bardolph's vital thread be cut 
"With edge of penny cord and vile reproach. 
Speak, captain, for his life, and I will thee 
requite. 

Flu. Aunchient Pistol, I do partly understand 
your meaning. 55 

Pisi. Why then, rejoice therefore. 



Act III, Sc. vi] HEXEY THE lirTH 119 

Flu. Certainly, aimchient, it is not a thing to 
rejoice at; for if, loolv you, he were my 
brother, I would desire the Duke to use his 
60 good pleasure, and put him to execution; for 

discipline ought to be used. 
Pist. Die and be damn'd ! and figo for thy friend- 
ship ! 
Flu. It IS well. 

Fist. The fig of Spain. [Exit. 

65 Flu. Very good. 

Gow. Why, this is an arrant counterfeit rascal. 

I remember him now; a bawd, a cutpurse. 

Flu. I'll assure you, 'a uttered as prave words at 

the pridge as you shall see in a summer's 

70 day. But it is very well; what he has spoke 

to me, that is well, I warrant you, when time 

is serve. 

Gotu. Why, 't is a gull, a fool, a rogue, that now 

and then goes to the wars, to grace himself 

75 at his return into London under the form of 

a soldier. And such fellows are perfect in 

the great commanders' names; and they will 

learn you by rote where services were done; 

at such and such a sconce, at such a breach, 

80 at such a convoy; who came off bravely, who 

was shot, who disgrac'd, what terms the 

enemy stood on; and this they con perfectly 

in the phrase of war, which they trick up 

with new-tuned oaths : and what a beard of 

85 the general's cut and a horrid suit of the 



120 HENEY THE FIFTH [Act III, Sc. vi 

camp will do among foaming bottles and ale- 
wash'd wits, is wonderful to be tlionght on. 
But you must learn to know such slanders of 
the age, or else you may be marvellously mis- 
took. 90 

Flu. I tell you what, Captain Gower; I do per- 
ceive he is not the man that he would gladly 
make show to the world he is. If I find a 
hole in his coat, I will tell him my mind. 
[Drum heard.] Hark you, the King is com- 95 
ing, and I must speak with him from the 
pridge. 

Drum and colours. Enter King Henry, Glouces- 
ter and his poor Soldiers. 

God bless your Majesty ! 

K. Hen, How now, Fluellen ! cam^st thou from 

the bridge? lOO 

Flu. Ay, so please your Majesty. The Duke of 
Exeter has very gallantly maintain^ the 
pridge. The French is gone off, look you; 
and there is gallant and most prave pas- 
sages. Marry, th^ athversary was have pos- 105 
session of the pridge: but he is enforced to 
retire, and the Duke of Exeter is master of 
the pridge. I can tell your Majesty, the 
Duke is a prave man. 

K. Hen. What men have you lost, Fluellen ? no 

Flu. The perdition of the athversary hath been 
very great, reasonable great. Marry, for my 



AcTlII, Sc. vi] HENEY THE FIFTH 121 

part, I think the Duke hath lost never a 
man, but one that is like to be executed for 

115 robbing a church, one Bardol^Dh, if your 

Majesty know the man. His face is all bu- 
bukles, and whelks, and knobs, and flames 
o' fire; and his lips blows at his nose, and 
it is like a coal of fire, sometimes plue and 

120" sometimes red; but his nose is executed and 

his fire^s out. 

K. Hen. We would have all such offenders so cut 

off; and we give express charge, that in our 

marches through the country, there be noth- 

125 ing compelled from the villages, nothing 

taken but paid for, none of the French up- 
braided or abused in disdainful language; 
for when lenity and cruelty play for a king- 
dom, the gentler gamester -is the soonest 

130 winner. 

Tuclcet. Enter Montjoy. 

Mont. You know me by my habit. 

K. Hen. Well then I know thee. What shall I 

know of thee ? 
Mont. My master's mind. 
135 K. Hen. Unfold it. 

Mont. Thus says my King : Say thou to Harry of 

England: Though we seem'd dead, we did 

but sleep; advantage is a better soldier than 

rashness. Tell him we could have rebuFd 

140 him at Harfleur, but that we thought not 



122 HENEY THE FIFTH [Act III, Sc. vi 

good to bruise an injury till it were full ripe. 
ISTow we speak upon our cue^ and our voice is 
imperial. England shall repent his folly, see 
his weakness, and admire our sufferance. Bid 
him therefore consider of his ransom; which 145 
must proportion the losses we have borne, . 
the subjects we have lost, the disgrace we 
have digested; which in weight to re-answer; 
his pettiness would bow under. For our 
losses, his exchequer is too poor ; for the ef- 150 
fusion of our blood, the muster of his king- 
dom too faint a number; and for our dis- 
grace, his own person, kneeling at our feet, 
but a weak and worthless satisfaction. To 
this add defiance ; and tell him, for conclu- 155 
sion, he hath betrayed his followers, whose 
condemnation is pronounc'd. So far my 
King and master; so much my office. 
K. Hen. What is thy name ? I know thy quality. 
Mont. Montjoy. I60 

K. Hen. Thou dost thy office fairly. Turn thee 
back. 
And tell thy King I do not seek him now. 
But could be willing to march on to Calais 
Without impeachment; for, to say the sooth. 
Though 't is no wisdom to confess so much 165 
Unto an enemy of craft and vantage. 
My people are with sickness much enfeebled, 
My numbers lessened, and those few I have 
Almost no better than so many French; 



Act hi, Sc. vi] HENEY THE FIFTH 123 

170 Who when they were in health, I tell thee, 
herald, 
I thought upon one pair of English legs 
Did march three Frenchmen. Yet, forgive 

me, God, 
That I do brag thus ! This your air of 

France 
Hath blown that vice in me. I must repent. 
175 . Go therefore, tell thy master here I am; 

My ransom is this frail and worthless trunk. 
My army but a weak and sickly guard ; 
Yet, God before, tell him we will come on. 
Though France himself and such another 
neighbour 
180 Stand in our way. There's for thy labour, 

Mont joy. 
Go, bid thy master well advise himself. 
If we may pass, we will ; if we be hind'red, 
We shall your tawny ground with your red 

blood 
Discolour; and so, Montjoy, fare you well. 
185 The sum of all our answer is but this : 

We would not seek a battle, as we are; 
!N"or, as we are, we say we will not shun it. 
So tell your master. 
Konl. I shall deliver so. Thanks to your High- 
ness. \Ex%i^^ 
190 Glou. I hope they will not come upon us now. 
K. Ken. We are in God's hands, brother, not in 
theirs- 



124 HENKY THE FIFTH [Act III, Sc. vii 

March to the bridge; it now draws toward 

night. 
Beyond the river we'll encamp ourselves, 
And on to-morrow bid them march away. 

[Exeunt. 



SCEXE VII. 

The French camp, near Agincourt. 

Enter the Constable of France, the Lord Bam- 
bures, Orlemis, Dauphin, with others. 

Con. Tut ! I have the best armour of the world. 
Would it were day ! 

Orl. You have an excellent armour; but let my 
horse have his due. 

Con. It is the best horse of Europe. 5 

Orl. Will it never be morning ? 

VoM. My Lord of Orleans, and my Lord High 
Constable, you talk of horse and armour? 

Orl. You are as well provided of both as any 
prince in the world. lo 

Dau. What a long night is this ! I will not change 
my horse with any that treads but on four 
pasterns. Ca, ha! he bounds from the earth 
as if his entrails were hairs; le cheval volant, 
the Pegasus, chez les narines de feu I AVhen 15 
I bestride him, I soar, I am a hawk; he trots 
the air; the earth sings when he touches it; 



AcTlII, Sc. vii] HENEY THE FIFTH 



125 



the basest horn of his hoof is more musical 
than the pipe of Hermes. 

20 Orl. He^s of the colour of the nutmeg. 

Dau. And of the heat of the ginger. It is a 

beast for Perseus. He is pure air and fire; 

and the dull elements of earth and water 

never appear in him, but onl}^ in patient still- 

25 ness while his rider mounts him. He is in- 

deed a horse, and all other jades jou may call 
beasts. 
Con. Indeed, my lord, it is a most absolute and 
excellent horse. 

30 Dau. It is the prince of palfreys ; his neigh is 
like the bidding of a monarch, and his coun- 
tenance enforces homage. 
Orl. No more, cousin. 
Dau. Nay, the man hath no wit that cannot, from 

35 the rising of the lark to the lodging of the 

lamb, vary deserved praise on my palfrey. It 
is a theme as fluent as the sea ; turn the sands 
into eloquent tongues, and my horse is argu- 
ment for them all. 'T is a subject for a 

40 sovereign to reason on, and for a sovereign's 

sovereign to ride on ; and for the world, 
familiar to us and unknown, to lay apart 
their particular functions and wonder at 
him. I once writ a sonnet in his praise and 

45 began thus : "Wonder of nature," — 

Orl. I have heard a sonnet begin so to one's mis- 
tress. 



126 HENEY THE FIFTH [Act III, Sc. vii 

Dau. Then did they imitate that which I com- 
pos'd to my courser, for my horse is my 
mistress. ^ 

•j» ^ V ^ 

Bam. My Lord Constable, the armour that I saw 
in your tent to-night, are those stars or suns 
upon it? 

Con. Stars, my lord. 

Dau. Some of them will fall to-morrow, I hope. 55 

Con. And yet my sky shall not want. 

Dau. That may be, for you bear a many superflu- 
ously, and ^t were more honour some were 
away. 

Con. Even as your horse bears your praises ; who 60 
would trot as well, were some of your brags 
dismounted. 

Dau. Would I were able to load him with his 
desert ! Will it never be day ? I will trot 
to-morrow a mile, and my way shall be paved 65 
with English faces. 

Con. I will not say so, for fear I should be fae'd 
out of my way. But I would it were morn- 
ing; for I would fain be about the ears of 
the English. 70 

Ram. Who will go to hazard with me for twenty 
prisoners ? 

Con. You must first go yourself to hazard, ere 
you have them. 

Dau. ^T is midnight ; I'll go arm myself. [Exit. 75 

Orl. The Dauphin longs for morning. 



I 
I 



Act III, Sc. vii] HENEY THE FIFTH 



127 



Ram. He longs to eat the English. 
Con. I think he will eat all he kills. 
Orl. By the white hand of my lady, he's a gal- 
80 lant prince. 

Con. Swear by her foot that she may tread out 

the oath. 
Orl. He is simply the most active gentleman of 

France. 
85 Con. Doing is activity; and he will still be doing. 
Orl. He never did harm, that I heard of. 
Con. Nor will do none to-morrow. He will keep 

that good name still. 
Orl. I know him to be valiant. 
90 Con. I was told that by one that knows him 

better than yon. 
Orl. What's he ? 
Con. Marry, he told me so himself; and he said 

he car'd not who knew it. 
95 Orl. He needs not ; it is no hidden virtue in him. 
Con. By my faith, sir, but it is; never anybody 

saw it but his lackey. 'T is a hooded valour ; 

and when it appears, it will bate. 
Orl. "Ill will never said well." 
100 Con. I will cap that proverb with "There is flat- 
tery in friendship." 
Orl. And I will take up that with "Give the 

devil his due." 
Con. Well plac'd. There stands your friend for 
105 the devil ; have at the very eye of that proverb 

with "A pox of the devil." 



128 HENKY THE FIFTH [Act III, Sc. vii 

Orl. Yon are the better at proverbs, by how much 

"A fool^s bolt is soon shot." 
Con. Yon have shot over. 
Orl. 'T is not the first time yon were overshot. no 

Enter a Messenger. 

Mess. My Lord High Constable, the English lie 
within fifteen hundred paces of your tents. 

Con. Who hath measured the ground? 

Mess. The Lord Grandpre. 

Von. A valiant and most expert gentleman. 115 
Would it were day ! Alas, poor Harry of 
England, he longs not for the dawning as 
as we do. 

Orl. What a wretched and peevish fellow is this 
King of England, to mope with his fat- 120 
brain'd followers so far out of his knowledge ! 

Con. If the English had any apprehension, they 
would run away. 

Orl. That they lack; for if their heads had any 
intellectual armour, they could never wear 125 
such heavy head-pieces. 

Rain. That island of England breeds very valiant 
creatures. Their mastiffs are of unmatchable 
courage. 

Orl. Eoolish curs, that run winking into the 130 
mouth of £t Eussian bear and have their heads 
crushed like rotten apples ! You may as well 
say, that's a valiant flea that dare eat his 
breakfast on the lip of a lion. 



AcTlll, Sc. vii] HENRY THE FIFTH 



129 



135 Con. Just, just; and the men do sympathize with 
the mastiffs in robustious and rough comino- 
on, leaving their wits with their wives; and 
then, give them great meals of beef and iron 
and steel, they will eat like wolves and fight 
140 like devils. 

Orl. Ay, but these English are shrewdly out of 

beef. 

Con. Then shall we find to-morrow they have 

only stomachs to eat and none to fight. Now 

145 is the time to arm. Come, shall we about it? 

Orl. It is now two o'clock; but, let me see, by ten 

We shall have each a hundred Englishmen. 

[Exeunt. 



ACT FOUETH. 

Prologue. 

Enter Chorus. 

CJior. Now entertain conjecture of a time 

When creeping niiirmnr and the poring dark 

Fills the wide vessel of the universe. 

From camp to camp through the foul womb 

of night 
The hum of either army stilly sounds, 
That the fix'd sentinels almost receive 5 

The secret whispers of each other's watch; 
Fire answers fire, and through their paly 

flames 
Each battle sees the other's umber'd face; 
Steed threatens steed, in high and boastful 

neighs 10 

Piercing the night's dull ear; and from the 

tents 
The armourers, accomplishing the knights, 
With busy hammers closing rivets up. 
Give dreadful note of preparation. 
The country cocks do crow, the clocks do toll, 15 
And the third hour of drowsy morning name. 
Proud of their numbers and secure in soul, 
The confident and over-lusty French 

130 



Prologue] HENEY THE FIFTH 131 

Do the low-rated English play at dice; 

20 And chide the cripple tardy-gaited ISTight 

Who, like a foul and ugly witch, doth limp 
So tediously away. The poor condemned 

English, 
Like sacrifices by their watchful fires 
Sit patiently and inly ruminate 

25 The morning's danger; and their gesture sad,. 

Investing lank-lean cheeks and war-worn 

coats. 
Presented them unto the gazing moon 
So many horrid ghosts. now, who will 

behold 
The royal captain of this ruin'd band 

30 Walking from watch to watch, from tent to 

tent. 
Let him cry, "Praise and glory on his head !'^ 
For forth he goes and visits all his host, 
Bids them good morrow with a modest smile. 
And calls them brothers, friends, and coun- 
trymen. 

35 Upon his royal face there is no note 

How dread an army hath enrounded him; 
Nor doth he dedicate one jot of colour 
Unto the weary and all-watched night. 
But freshly looks, and over-bears attaint 

40 With cheerful semblance and sweet majesty; 

That every wretch, pining and pale before, 
Beholding him, plucks comfort from his looks. 
A largess universal like the sun 



132 HENKY THE FIFTH [Act IV, Sc. i 

His liberal eye doth give to every one, 
Thawing cold fear, that mean and gentle all 45 
Behold, as may nnworthiness define, 
A little touch of Harry in the night. 
And so our scene must to the battle fly. 
Where — for pity ! — we shall much disgrace 
With four or five most vile and ragged foils, 50 
Right ill-dispos'd in brawl ridiculous, 
The name of Agincourt. Yet sit and see, 
Minding true things by what their mockeries 
be. lExit. 



Scene I. 

The English camp at Agincourt. 

Enter King Henry, Bedford, and Gloucester. 

K. Hen. Gloucester, 'i is true that we are in 
great danger; 
The greater therefore should our courage be. 
Good morrow, brother Bedford. God Al- 
mighty ! 
There is some soul of goodness in things evil, 
AYould men observingly distil it out,; 5 

For our bad neighbour makes us early stirrers, 
Which is both healthful and good husbandry. 
Besides, they are our outward consciences. 
And preachers to us all, admonishing 
That we should dress us fairly for our end. lo 



Act IV, Sc. i] HENEY THE FIFTH I33 

Thus may we gather honey from the weed, 
And make a moral of the devil himself. 

Enter Erpingham. 

Good morrow, old Sir Thomas Erpingham. 
A good soft pillow for that good white head 
15 Were better than a churlish turf of France. 

Erp. Not so, my liege; this lodging likes me 
better. 
Since I may say, "Now lie I like a king." 
K. Hen. ^T is good for men to love their present 
pains 
Upon example ; so the spirit is eased ; 
20 And when the mind is quick'ned, out of 

doubt. 
The organs, though defunct and dead before^ 
Break up their drowsy grave and newly move. 
With casted slough and fresh legerity. 
Lend me thy cloak. Sir Thomas. Brothers 
both, 
25 Commend me to the princes in our camp ; 

Do my good morrow to them, and anon 
Desire them all to my pavilion. 
Glou. We shall, my liege. 
Erp. Shall I attend your Grace? 
K. Hen. No, my good knight; 

30 Go with my brothers to my lords of England- 

I and my bosom must debate a while, 
And then I would no other company. 



134 HENEY THE FIFTH [Act IV, Sc. i 

Erp. The Lord in heaven bless thee, noble Harry ! 

[Exeunt all hut King. 
K. Hen. God-a-mercy, old heart! thou speak^st 
cheerfully. 

Enter Pistol. 

Pist. Qui va Id? 35 

K. Hen. A friend. 

Pist. Discuss unto me; art thou officer? 

Or art thou base, common, and popular? 
X. Hen. I am a gentleman of a company. 
Pist. Trail'st thou the puissant pike ? 40 

K. Hen. Even so. What are you? 
Pist. As good a gentleman as the Emperor. 
K. Hen. Then you are a better than the King. 
Fist. The King's a bawcock, and a heart of gold, 

A lad of life, an imp of fame; 45 

Of parents good, of fist most valiant. 

I kiss his dirty shoe, and from heart-string 

I love the lovely bully. What is thy name? 
K. Hen. Harry le Roy. 
Pist. Le Eoy! a Cornish name. Art thou of 

Cornish crew? 50 

K. Hen. No, I am a Welshman. 
Pist. Know'st thou Fluellen? 
K. Hen. Yes. 
Pist. Tell him, I'll knock his leek about his pate 

Upon Saint Davy's day. 55 

K. Hen. Do not you wear your dagger in your 

cap that day, lest he knock that about yours. 



Act IV, Sc. i] HENRY THE FIFTH 135 

Pid. Art thou his friend? 
K. Hen. And his kinsman too. 
60 Fist. The figo for thee, then ! 

K. Hen. I thank 3^ou. God be with you ! 

Pist. My name is Pistol calFd. [Exit. 

K. Hen. It sorts well with your fierceness. 

Enter Fluellen and Gower. 

Gow. Captain Fluellen ! 

65 Flu. So ! in the name of Jesu Christ, speak lower. 
It is the greatest admiration in the universal 
world, when the true and aunchient preroga- 
tifes and laws of the wars is not kept. If you 
would take the pains but to examine the wars 

70 of Pompey the Great, you shall find, I war- 

rant you, that there is no tiddle taddle nor 
pibble pabble in Pompey's camp. I warrant 
you, you shall find the ceremonies of the 
wars, and the cares of it, and the forms of it, 

75 and the sobriety of it, and the modesty of it, 

to be otherwise. 
Gotu. Why, the enemy is loud; you hear him all 

night. 
Flu. If the enemy is an ass and a fool and a 

80 prating coxcomb, is it meet, think you, that 
we should also, look you, be an ass and a 
fool and a prating coxcomb? In your own 
conscience, now? 
Gow. I will speak lower. 



136 HENEY THE FIFTH [Act IV, Sc. i 

Flu. I pray you and beseech you that you will. 85 

[^Exeunt Gower and Fluellen. 
K. Hen. Though it appear a little out of fashion. 
There is much care and valour in this Welsh- 
man. 

Enter three soldiers, John Bates, Alexander Court, 
and Michael Williums. 

Court. Brother John Bates, is not that the morn- 
ing which breaks yonder? 

Bates. I think it be ; but we have no great cause 90 
to desire the approach of day. 

Will. We see yonder the beginning of the day, 
but I think we shall never see the end of it. 
Who goes there? 

K. Hen. A friend. 95 

Will. Under what captain serve you? 

K. Hen. Under Sir Thomas Erpingham. 

Will. A good old commander and a most kind 
gentleman. I pray you, what thinks he of 
our estate? lOO 

K. Hen. Even as men wreck'd upon a sand, that 
look to be wash'd off the next tide. 

Bates. He hath not told his thought to the King? 

K. Hen. No; nor it is not meet he should. For, 
though I speak it to you, I think the King i05 
is but a man, as I am. The violet smells 
to him as it does to me ; the element shows to 
him as it doth to me ; all his senses have but 
human conditions. His ceremonies laid by, 



Act IV, Sc. i] HENEY THE FIFTH 137 

110 in his nakedness he appears but a man; and 

though his affections are higher mounted 
than ours, yet, when they stoop, they stoop 
with the like wing. Therefore, when he sees 
reason of fears as we do, his fears, out of 

115 doubt, be of the same relish as ours are; yet,, 

in reason, no man should possess him with 

any appearance of fear, lest he, by showing it,, 

should dishearten his army. 

Bates. He may show what outward courage he 

120 will ; but I believe, as cold a night as ^t is, he 

could wish himself in Thames up to the neck ; 

and so I would he were, and I by him, at all 

adventures, so we were quit here. 

K. Hen. By my troth, I will speak my conscience 

125 of the King : I think he would not wish him- 

self anywhere but where he is. 
Bates. Then I would he were here alone; so 
should he be sure to be ransomed, and a 
many poor men's lives saved. 

130 K. Hen. I dare say you love him not so ill, to 
wish him here alone, howsoever you speak 
this to feel other men's minds. Methinks I 
could not die anywhere so contented as in 
the King's company, his cause being just 

135 and his quarrel honourable. 

Will. That's more than we know. 
Bates. Ay, or more than we should seek after; 
for we know enough, if we know we are the 
King's subjects. If his cause be wrong, our 



138 HENEY THE FIFTH [Act IV, Sc. i 

obedience to the King wipes the crime of it 140 

out of IIS. 

Will. But if the cause be not good, the King him- 
self hath a heavy reckoning to make, when 
all those legs and arms and heads, chopp'd 
off in a battle, shall join together at the latter 145 
day and cry all, "We died at such a place"; 
some swearing, some crying for a surgeon, 
some upon their wives left poor behind them, 
some upon the debts they owe, some upon 
their children rawly left. I am afeard there 150 
are few die well that die in a battle; for how 
can they charitably dispose of anything, 
when blood is their argument ? Now, if these 
men do not die well, it will be a black mat- 
ter for the King that led them to it ; who to 155 
disobey were against all proportion of sub- 
jection. 

K. Hen. So, if a son that is by his father sent 
about merchandise do sinfully miscarry upon 
the sea, the imputation of his wickedness, 160 
by your rule, should be imposed upon his 
father that sent him; or if a servant, under 
his master's command transporting a sum of 
money, be assailed by robbers and die in many 
irreconcil'd iniquities, you may call the busi- 165 
ness of the master the author of the servant's 
damnation. But this is not so. The King is 
not bound to answer the particular endings 
of his soldiers, the father of his son, nor the 



Act IV, Sc. i] HENRY THE FIFTH I39 



170 



master of his servant; for they purpose not 
their death, when they purpose their services. 
Besides, there is no king, be his cause never 
so spotless, if it come to the arbitrement of 
swords, can try it out with all unspotted sol- 
ids diers. Some peradventure have on them the 
guilt of premeditated and contrived murder; 
some, of beguiling virgins with the broken 
seals of perjury ; some, making the wars their 
bulw.ark, that have before gored the gentle 
180 bosom of Peace with pillage and robbery. 
Now, if these men have defeated the law and 
outrun native punishment, though they can 
outstrip men, they have no wings to fly from 
God. War is his beadle, war is his vengeance ; 
185 so that here men are punish'd for before- 
breach of the King's laws in now the King's 
quarrel. Where they feared the death, they 
have borne life away; and where they would 
be safe, they perish. Then if they die un- 

190 provided, no more is the King guilty of their 
damnation than he was before guilty of those 
impieties for the which they are now visited. 
Every subject's duty is the King's; but every 
subject's soul is his own. Therefore should 

191 every soldier in the wars do as every sick 
man in his bed, wash every mote out of his 
conscience; and dying so, death is to him ad- 
vantage ; or not dying, the time was blessedly 
lost wherein such preparation was gained; 



140 HENEY THE FIFTH [Act IV, Sc. i 

and in him that escapes, it were not sin to 200 
think that, making God so free an offer, He 
let him outlive that day to see His greatness 
and to teach others how they should prepare. 

Will. 'T is certain, every man that dies ill, the 
ill upon his own head, the King is not to an- 205 
swer it. 

Bates. I do not desire he should answer for me; 
and yet I determine to fight lustily for him. 

K. Hen. I myself heard the King say .he would 
not be ransom'd. 210 

Will. Ay, he said so, to make us fight cheerfully ; 
but when our throats are cut, he may be ran- 
som'd, and we ne'er the wiser. 

K. Hen. If I live to see it, I will never trust his 
word after. 215 

Will. You pay him then. That's a perilous shot 
out of an elder-gun, that a poor and a private 
displeasure can do against a monarch! You 
may as well go about to turn the sun to ice 
with fanning in his face with a peacock's 220 
feather. You'll never trust his word after ! 
Come, 't is a foolish saying. 

K. Hen. Your reproof is something too round. T 
should be angry with you, if the time were 
convenient. 225 

Will. Let it be a quarrel between us, if you live. 

K. Hen. I embrace it. 

Will. How shall I know thee again? 

K. Hen. Give me any gage of thine, and I will 



Act IV, Sc. i] HENRY THE FIFTH 141 

230 wear it in my bonnet ; then, if ever thou dar'st 

acknowledge it, I will make it my quarrel. 
Will. Here's my glove; give me another of thine. 
K. Hen. There. 

Will. This will I also wear in my cap. If ever 
235 thou come to me and say, after to-morrow, 

"This is my glove," by this hand, I will take 
thee a box on the ear. 
K. Hen. If ever I live to see it, I will challenge it. 
Will. Thou dar'st as well be hang'd. 
240 K. Hen. Well, I will do it, though I take thee in 
the King's company. 
Will. Keep thy word; fare thee well. 
Bates. Be friends, you English fools, be friends. 
We have French quarrels enow, if you could 
245 tell how to reckon. [Exeunt soldiers. 

K. Hen. Indeed, the French may lay twenty 
French crowns to one they will beat us, for 
thev bear them on their shoulders; but it is 
no English treason to cut French crowns, and 
25Q to-morrow the King himself will be a clipper. 

Upon the King ! let us our lives, our souls, 
Our debts, our careful wives, 
Our children, and our sins lay on the King ! 
We must bear all. hard condition, 
255 Twin-born with greatness, subject to the 

breath 
Of every fool, whose sense no more can feel ■ 
But his own wringing! What infinite heart's- 
ease 



142 HENEY THE FIFTH [Act IV, Sc. i 

Must kings neglect, tliat private men enjoy ! 
And what have kings, that privates have not 

too, 
Save ceremony, save general ceremony? 260 

And what art thou, thou idol Ceremony? 
What kind of god art thou, that suffer'st 

more 
Of mortal griefs than do thy worshippers? 
What are thy rents? What are thy comings 

in? 
Ceremony, show me but thy worth! 265 

What is thy soul of adoration? 
Art thou aught else but place, degree, and 

form, 
Creating awe and fear in other men? 
Wherein thou art less happy being fear'd 
Than they in fearing. 270 

What drink'st thou oft, instead of homage 

sweet. 
But poison'd flattery? 0, be sick, great 

greatness, 
And bid thy Ceremony give thee cure! 
Think' st thou the fiery fever will go out 
With titles blown from adulation? 275 

Will it give place to flexure and low bending ? 
Canst thou, when thou command'st the beg- 
gar's knee, 
Command the health of it? No, thou proud 

dream. 
That play'st so subtly with a king's repose; 



•I 



Act IV, Sc. i] HENRY THE FIFTH 14^ 

280 I am a king that find thee, and I know '^.^^^ 
^T is not the balm, the sceptre, and the ball, 
The sword, the mace, the crown imperial. 
The intertissTied robe of gold and pearl. 
The farced title running 'fore the King, 
285 The throne he sits on, nor the tide of pomp 

That beats upon the high shore of this worlds 
No, not all these, thrice-gorgeons Cere- 
mony, — 
Not all these, laid in bed majestical, \ 

Can sleep so soundly as the wretched slave, j 
290 Who with a body filFd and vacant mind -~ 

Gets him to rest, cramm'd with distressful 

bread, 
Never sees horrid night, the child of hell, 
But, like a lackey, from the rise to set 
Sweats in the eye of Phoebus, and all night 
255 Sleeps in Elysium; next day after dawn. 

Doth rise and help Hyperion to his horse. 
And follows so the ever-running year. 
With profitable labour, to his grave: 
And, but for ceremony, such a wretch, 
300 Winding up days with toil and nights with 

sleep. 
Had the fore-hand and vantage of a king. 
The slave, a member of the country's peace. 
Enjoys it, but in gross brain little wots 
What watch the King keeps to maintain the 
peace, 
S05 "WHiose hours the peasant best advantages. 



144 HENKY THE FIFTH [Act IV, Sc. i 

Enter Erpingham. 

Erp. My lord, your nobles, jealous of your ab- 
sence, 

Seek through your camp to find you. 
K. Hen. Good old knight, 

Collect them all together at my tent. 
Ill be before thee. 
Erp. . I shall do 't, my lord. 

[Exit. 
K. Hen. God of battles! steel my soldiers' ■ 
hearts. 310 

Possess them not with fear. Take from them 

now 
The sense of reckoning, if the opposed num- 
bers 
Pluck their hearts from them. Not to-day, 

Lord, 
0, not to-day, think not upon the fault 
My father made in compassing the crown ! 315 
I Eichard's body have interred new. 
And on it have bestow'd more contrite tears 
Than from it issued forced drops of blood. 
Five hundred poor I have in yearly pay, 
Who twice a day their withered hands hold up 320 
Toward heaven, to pardon blood; and I have 

built 
Two chantries, where the sad and solemn 

priests 
Sing still for Eichard's soul. More will I do ; 



Act IV, Sc. i] HENEY THE FIFTH 145 

Though all that I can do is nothing worth, 
325 Since that my penitence conies after all, 

Imploring pardon. 

Enter Gloucester. 

Glou. My liege ! 

K. Hen. My brother Gloucester's voice? Ay; 
I know thy errand, I will go with thee. 
330 The day, my friends, and all things stay for 

me. [Exeunt. 

Scene II. 

The French camp. 

Enter the Dauphin, Orleans, Rambures, and 

others. 

Orl. The snn doth gild our armour; up, my 

lords ! 
Dau. Montez a cheval! My horse, varlet! lackey! 

ha! 
Orl. brave spirit! 
Dau. Via! les eaux et la terre. 
5 Orl. Rien puis? L'air et le feu. 
Dau. del, cousin Orleans. 

Enter Constahle. 

Now, my Lord Constable ! 
Con. Hark, how our steeds for present service 
neigh ! 



146 HENEY THE FIFTH [Act IV, Sc. ii 

Dau. Mount them, and make incision in their 
hides. 
That their hot blood may spin in English 

eyes, lo 

And dont them with superfluous courage, ha ! 
Bam. What, will you have them weep our horses' 
blood ? 
How shall we, then, behold their natural 
tears ? 

Enter Messenger. 

Mess. The English are embattl'd, you French 

peers. 
Con. To horse, you gallant princes ! straight to 

horse ! 15 

Do but behold yond poor and starved band, 
And your fair show shall suck away their 

souls, 
Leaving them but the shales and husks of 

men. 
There is not work enough for all our hands; 
Scarce blood enough in all their sickly veins 20 
To give each naked curtle-axe a stain. 
That our French gallants shall to-day draw 

out. 
And sheathe for lack of sport. Let us but 

blow on them. 
The vapour of our valour will o'erturn them. 
'T is positive 'gainst all exceptions, lords, 25 



Act IV, Sc. ii] HENEY THE FIFTH 147 

That our superfluous lackeys and our peas- 
ants, 

Who in unnecessary action swarm 

About our squares of battle, were enow 

To purge this field of such a hilding foe, 
30 Though we upon this mountain's basis by 

Took stand for idle speculation, 

But that our honours must not. What's to 
say? 

A very little little let us do, 

And all is done. Then let the trumpets 
sound 
3j The tucket sonance and the note to mount; 

For our approach shall so much dare the 
field 

That England shall crouch down in fear 
and yield. 

Enter Grandpre. 

Grand. Why do you stay so long, my lords'^ of 
France ? 
Yond island carrions, desperate of their 
bones, 
40 Ill-favouredly become the morning field. 

Their ragged curtains poorly are let loose, 
And our air shakes them passing scornfully. 
Big Mars seems bankrupt in their beggar'd 

host 
And faintly through a rusty beaver peeps; 
45 The horsemen sit like fixed candlesticks 



148 



HENKY THE FIFTH [Act IV, Sc. ii 



With torch-staves in their hand; and their 
poor jades 

Lob down their heads, drooping the hides 
and hips. 

The gum down-roping from their pale-dead 
eyes, 

And in their pale dull mouths the gimmal bit 

Xies foul with chew'd grass, still, and motion- 
less ; 50 

And their executors, the knavish crows, 

Ply o'er them, all impatient for their hour. 

Description cannot suit itself in words 

To demonstrate the life of such a battle. 

In life so lifeless as it shows itself. 55 

Con. They have said their prayers, and they stay 

for death. 
Dau. Shall we go send them dinners and fresh 
suits 

And give their fasting horses provender. 

And after fight with them? 
€Jon. I stay but for my guard ; on to the field ! eo 

I will the banner from a trumpet take. 

And use it for my haste. Come, come, away ! 

The sun is high, and we outwear the day. 

[Exeunt. 



Act IV, Sc. iii] HENEY THE FIFTH 14^ 



Scene III. 

Tlie English camp. 

Enter Gloucester, Bedford, Exeter, Erpingham, 

with all his host: Salisbury and Westmoreland. 
Glou. Where is the King? 
Bed. The King himself is rode to view their 

battle. 
West. Of fighting men they have full three-score 

thousand. 
Exe. There's five to one ; besides, they all are 
fresh. 
5 Sal. God's arm strike with ns ! 't is a fearfnH 
odds. 
God be wi' you, princes all ; I'll to my charge.. 
If we no more meet till we meet in heaven, 
Then, joyfully, my noble Lord of Bedford, 
My dear Lord Gloucester, and my good Lord! 
Exeter, 
10 And my kind kinsman, warriors all, adieu I 

Bed. Farewell, good Salisbury, and good IucKl 

go with thee ! 
Exe. Farewell, kind lord; fight valiantly to-day t 
And yet I do thee wrong to mind thee of it. 
For thou art fram'd of the firm truth of 
valour. [Exit Salisbury. 



150 HENEY THE FIFTH [Act IV, Sc. i-i 

Bed. He is as full of valour as of kindness. 15 
Princely in both. 

Enter the- King. 

West. that we now had here 

But one ten thousand of those men in Eng- 
land 
That do no work to-day! 
K. Hen. What's he that wishes so? 

My cousin Westmoreland? No, my fair 

cousin. 
If we are mark'd to die, we are enow 20 

To do our country loss; and if to live, 
The fewer men, the greater share of honour. 
God's will! I pray thee, wish not one man 

more. 
By Jove, I am not covetous for gold, 
Nor care I who doth feed upon my cost; 25 
It yearns me not if men my garments wear ; 
Such outward things dwell not in my desires ; 
But if it be a sin to covet honour, 
I am the most offending soul alive. 
ISTo, faith, my coz, wish not a man from Eng- 
land. 30 
God's peace ! I would not lose so great an 

honour 
As one man more, methinks, would share 

from me 
Eor the best hope I have. 0, do not wish 
one more ! 



AOTIV, Sc.iii] HENEY THE FIFTH 151 

Eather proclaim it, Westmorelandj through 

my host, 
35 That he which hath no stomach to this 

fight, 
Let him depart. His passport shall be made, 
And crowns for convoy put into his purse. 
We would not die in that man's company 
That fears his fellowship to die with us. 
40 This day is call'd the feast of Crispian. 

He that outlives this day, and comes safe 

home. 
Will stand a tip-toe when this day is named, 
And rouse him at the name of Crispian. 
He that shall live this day, and see old age, 
45 Will yearly on the vigil feast his neighbours. 

And say, "To-morrow is Saint Crispian." 
Then will he strip his sleeve and show his 

sears, 
And say, "These wounds I had on Crispin's 

day." 
Old men forget; yet all shall be forgot, 
50 But he'll remember with advantages 

What feats he did that day. Then shall our 

names. 
Familiar in his mouth as household words, 
Harry the King, Bedford, and Exeter, 
Warwick and Talbot, Salisbury and Glouces- 
ter, 
55 Be in their flowing cups freshly remembered. 

This story shall the good man teach his son ; 



152 HENEY THE FIFTH IAct iv, Sc. m 

And Crispin Crispian shall ne'er go by, 
From this day to the ending of the world, 
But we in it shall be remembered, 
We few, we happy few, we band of brothers, eo 
For he to-day that sheds his blood with me 
Shall be my brother; be he ne'er so vile, 
This day shall gentle his condition; 
And gentlemen in England now a-bed 
Shall think themselves accurs'd they were 

not here, 65 

And hold their manhoods cheap whiles any 

speaks 
That fought with us upon Saint Crispin's 

day. 

Re-enter Salisbury. 

SaL My sovereign lord, bestow yourself with 
speed. 
The French are bravely in their battles set. 
And will with all expedience charge on us. 70 
K. Hen. All things are ready, if our minds be so. 
West. Perish the man whose mind is backward 

now! 
K. Hen. Thou dost not wish more help from 

England, coz? 
West. Grod's will ! my liege, would you and I 
alone, 
Without more help, could fight this royal 
battle ! 75 



ACTIV, Sc. iii] HENEY THE FIFTH 153 

K. Hen. AVhy, now thou hast unwish'd five thou- 
sand men. 
Which likes me better than to wish us one. 
You know your places. God be with you all ! 

Tuchet. Enter Montjoy. 

Mont. Once more I come to know of thee, King 
Harry, 
80 If for thy ransom thou wilt now compound. 

Before thy most assured overthrow; 
For certainly thou art so near the gulf. 
Thou needs must be englutted. Besides, in 
mercy, n 

The Constable desires thee thou wilt mind 
85 Thy followers of repentance; that their souls 

May make a peaceful and a sweet retire 
From oif these fields, where, wretches, their 

poor bodies 
Must lie and fester. 
K- Hen. Who hath sent thee now? 

Mont. The Constable of France. 
90 K. Hen. I pray thee, bear my former answer 
back: 
Bid them achieve me and then sell my bones. 
Good God! why should they mock poor fel- 
lows thus? 
The man that once did sell the lion's skin 
While the beast liv'd, was killed with hunting 
him. 
95 A many of our bodies shall no doubt 



154 HENEY THE FIFTH [Act IV, Sc. iii 

Find native graves, upon the which, I trust, 
Shall witness live in brass of this day's work ; 
And those that leave their valiant bones in 

France, 
Dying like men, though buried in your dung- 
hills. 
They shall be fam'd; for there the sun shall 

greet them, lOo 

And draw their honours reeking up to 

heaven ; 
Leaving their earthly parts to choke your 

clime. 
The smell whereof shall breed a plague in 

France. 
Mark then abounding valour in our English, 
That being dead, like to the bullet's grazing, 105 
Break out into a second course of mischief, 
Killing in relapse of mortality. 
Let me speak proudly: tell the Constable 
We are but warriors for the working-day. 
Our gayness and our gilt are all besmirch'd no 
With rainy marching in the painful field; 
There's not a piece of feather in our host — 
Good argument, I hope, we will not fly — 
And time hath worn us into slovenry; 
But, by the mass, our hearts are in the trim; 115 
And my poor soldiers tell me, yet ere night 
They'll be in fresher robes, or they will pluck 
The gay new coats o'er the French soldiers' 

heads 




ACTIV, Sc.iii] HENEY THE FIFTH 155 

And turn them out of service. If they do 
this — 
120 As, if God please, they shall, — my ransom 

then 
Will soon be levied. Herald, save thon thy 

labour. 
Come thou no more for ransom, gentle 

herald. 
They shall have none, I swear, but these my 

joints ; 
Which if they have as I will leave 'em them, 
125 Shall yield them little, tell the Constable. 

Mont. I shall. King Harry. And so fare thee 
well: 
Thou never shalt hear herald any more. 

[Exit. 
K. Hen. I fear thou 'It once more come again for 
ransom. 

Enter YorTc. 

Yorh. My lord, most humbly on my knee I beg 
130 The leading of the vaward. 

K. Ren. Take it, brave York. Now, soldiers, 
march away; 
And how thou pleasest, God, dispose the day ! 

[Exeunt. 



156 HENEY THE FIFTH [Act IV, Sc. iv 



Scene IV. 

The Field of Battle. 

Alarum. Excursions. Enter Pistol, French Sol- 
dier and Boy. 

Pist. Yield, cur ! 

Fr. Sol. Je pense que vous etes le gentilhomme 

de honne qualite. 
Pist. Qualtitie calmie custure me I Art thou a 
gentleman ? What is thy name ? Dis- 5 
cuss. 
Fr. Sol. Seigneur Dieu! 
Pist. 0, Signieur Dew should be a gentleman. 

Perpend my words, Signieur Dew, and 
mark: 

Signieur Dew, thou diest on point of fox, lo 

Except, signieur, thou do give to me 

Egregious ransom. 
Fr. Sol. 0, prenez misericordel ayez pitie de 

moi ! 
Pist. Moy shall not serve ; I will have forty moys, 15 

Or I will fetch thy rim out at thy throat 

In drops of crimson blood. 
Fr. Sol. Est-il impossible d'echapper la force de 

ton bras? 
Pist. Brass, cur ! 20 



AcTiV, Sc. iv] HENKY THE FIFTH 157 

Thou damned and luxurious mountain goat, 
Offer'st me brass? 
Fr. Sol. pardonnez moil 

Pist. Say'st thou me so ? Is that a ton of moys ? 
25 Come hither, boy ; ask me this slave in French 

What is his name. 
Boy. Ecoutez: comment etes-vous appeU? 
Fr. Sol. Monsieur le Fer. 
Boy. He says his name is Master Fer. 
30 Pist. Master Fer ! Ifll fer him, and firk him, 
and ferret him. Discuss the same in French 
unto him. 
Boy. I do not know the French for fer, and fer- 
ret, and firk. 
35 Pist. Bid him prepare ; for I will cut his throat. 
Fr. Sol. Que dit-il, monsieur? 
Boy. II me commande a vous dire que vous faites 
vous pret; car ce soldat ici est dispose tout 
a cette heure de couper votre gorge. 
40 Pist. Owy, cuppele gorge, permafoy, 

Peasant, unless thou give me crowns, brave 

crowns ; 
Or mangled shalt thou be by this my sword. 
Fr. Sol. 0, je vous supplie, pour Vamour le Dieu, 
me pardonner! Je suis le gentilhomme de 
45 tonne maison; gardez ma vie, et je vous don- 

nerai deux cents ecus. 
Pist. What are his words? 
Boy. He prays you to save his life. He is a 



158 HENEY THE FIFTH [Act IV, Sc. iv 

gentleman of a good house; and for his ran- 
som he will give you two hundred crowns. 50 

Pist. Tell him my fury shall abate, and I 
The crowns will take. 

Fr. Sol. Petit monsieur, que dit-il? 

Boy. Encore quil est contre son jurement de par- 
donner aucun prisonnier; neanmoins, pour 55 
les ecus que vous Vavez promts, il est content 
de vous donner la liberte, le franchisement. 

Fr. Sol. Sur mes genoux je vous donne mille 
remercimens; et je m'estime heureux que je 
suis tomhe entre les mains d'un chevalier, je 60 
pense, le plus brave, vaillant, et tres distingue 
seigneur d'Angleterre. 

Pist. Expound unto me, boy. 

Boy. He gives you upon his knees, a thousand 
thanks ; and he esteems himself happy that 65 
he hath fallen into the hands of one, as he 
thinks, the most brave, valorous, and thrice- 
worthy seigneur of England. 

Pist. As I suck blood, I will some mercy show. 
Follow me ! 70 

Boy. Suivez-vous le grand capitaine. [Exeunt 
Pistol and French Soldier.] I did never 
know so full a voice issue from so empty a 
heart; but the saying is true, "The empty 
vessel makes the greatest sound.^' Bardolph 75 
and 'Njm had ten times more valour than 
this roaring devil i' the old play, that every 
one may pare his nails with a wooden dagger ; 



Act IV, Sc. v] HENEY THE FIFTH 159 

and they are both hang'd; and so would this 
be, if he durst steal anything adventurously. 
I must stay with the lackeys with the luggage 
of our camp. The French might have a good 
prey of us, if he knew of it ; for there is none 
to guard it but boys. [Exit. 



Scene V. 

Another part of the field. 

Enter Constable, Orleans, Bourbon, Dauphin, and 
Rambures. 

Con. Viable I 

Orl. seigneur! le jour est perdu, tout est 

perdu I 
Dau. Mort de ma vie ! all is confounded, all ! 
Eeproach and everlasting shame 
5 Sits mocking in our plumes. mechante 

fortune I 
Do not run away. [A short alarum. 

Con. Why, all our ranks are broke. 

Dau. perdurable shame ! let's stab ourselves. 
Be these the wretches that we play'd at dice 
for? 
Orl. Is this the king we sent to for his ransom ? 
10 Bour. Shame and eternal shame, nothing but 
shame ! 



160 HENKY THE FIFTH [Act IV, Sc. vi 

Let^s die in honour ! Once more back again ! 
And he that will not follow Bourbon now, 
Let him go hence, and with his cap in hand, 
Like a base pandar, hold the chamber door 
Whilst by a slave, no gentler than my dog, 15 
His fairest daughter is contaminated. 

Con. Disorder, that hath spoil'd us, friend us 
now! 
Let us on heaps go offer up our lives. 

Orl. We are enow yet living in the field 

To smother up the English in our throngs, 20 
If any order might be thought upon. 

Bour. The devil take order now ! I'll to the 
throng. 
Let life be short, else shame will be too long. 

[Exeunt. 



Scene YI. 

Another part of the -field. 

Alarum. Enter King Henry and his train, with 

prisoners. 

K. Hen. Well have we done, thrice valiant coun- 
trymen. 
But alFs not done; yet keep the French the 
field. 
Exe. The Duke of York commends him to your 
Majesty. 



Act IV, Sc. vi] HENEY THE FIFTH 161 

K. Hen. Lives he, good uncle? Thrice within 
this hour 

5 I saw him down; thrice up again, and fight- 

ing. 
From helmet to the spur all blood he was. 
Exe. In which array, brave soldier, doth he lie. 
Larding the plain ; and by his bloody side, 
Yoke-fellow to his honour-owing wounds, 

10 The noble earl of Suffolk also lies. 

Suffolk first died ; and York, all haggled over, 
Comes to him, where in gore he lay insteeped, 
And takes him by the beard ; kisses the gashes 
That bloodily did yawn upon his face. 

15 He cries aloud, "Tarry, my cousin Suffolk ! 

My soul shall thine keep company to heaven; 
Tarry, sweet soul, for mine, then fly abreast. 
As in this glorious and well-foughten field 
We kept together in our chivalry !" 

20. Upon these words I came and cheer'd him up. 
He smird me in the face, raught me his hand, 
And, with a feeble gripe, says, "Dear my lord, 
Commend my service to my sovereign." 
So did he turn and over Suffolk's neck 

25 He threw his wounded arm and kiss'd his 

lips ; 
And so espous'd to death, with blood he seal'd 
A testament of noble-ending love. 
The pretty and sweet manner of it forc'd 
Those waters from me which I would have 
stopp'd ; 



162 HENKY THE FIFTH [Act IV, Sc. vii 

But I had not so mucli of man in me, 30 

And all my mother came into mine eyes 
And gave me np to tears. 
K. Hen. I blame you not; 

For, hearing this, I must perforce compound 
With mistful eyes, or they will issue too. 

\^Alarum. 
But, hark ! what new alarum is this same ? 35 
The French have reinforc'd their scattered 

men. 
Then every soldier kill his prisoners; 
Give the word through. [Exeunt. 



Scene VII. 
Another part of the field. 
Enter Fluellen and Gower. 

Flu. Kill the poys and the luggage ! ^T is ex- 
pressly against the law of arms. ^T is as ar- 
rant a piece of knavery, mark you now, as 
can be offer^t; in your conscience, now, is it 
not? 5 

Gow. 'T is certain there's not a boy left alive; 
and the cowardly rascals that ran from the 
battle ha' done this slaughter. Besides, they 
have burned and carried away all that was 
in the King's tent ; wherefore the King, most id 






Act IV, Sc. vii] HENEY THE FIFTH IQS 

worthily, hath caus'd every soldier to cut his 
prisoner's throat. 0, *t is a gallant king ! 
Flu. Aj, he was porn at Monmouth, Captain 
Gower. What call you the town's name 
15 where Alexander the Pig was born! 

Gow. Alexander the Great. 

Flu. Why, I pray you, is not pig great? The 
pig, or the great, or the mighty, or the huge, 
• or the magnanimous, are all one reckonings,. 

20 save the phrase is a little variations. 

Gow. I think Alexander the Great was born in 
Macedon. His father was called Philip of 
Macedon, as I take it. 
Flu. I think it is in Macedon where Alexander 
25 is porn. I tell you, captain, if you look in 

the maps of the 'orld, I warrant you sail find, 
in the comparisons between Macedon and 
Monmouth, that the situations, look you, is 
both alike. There is a river in Macedon ; and 
30 there is also moreover a river at Monmouth. 

It is called Wye at Monmouth; but it is out 
of my prains what is the name of the other 
river ; but 't is all one, 't is alike as my fingers 
is to my fingers, and there is salmons in both. 
35 If you mark Alexander's life well, Harry of 

Monmouth's life is come after it indifferent 
well; for there is figures in all things. Alex- 
ander, God knows, and you know, in his 
rages and his furies and his wraths, and his 
40 cholers, and his moods, and his displeasures,, 



164 HENRY THE FIFTH [Act IV, Sc. vii 

and his indignations, and also being a little 
intoxicates in his prains, did, in his ales and 
his angers, look yon, kill his best friend, 
Cleitus. 

Gow. Our King is not like him in that. He 45 
never kill'd any of his friends. 

Flu. It is not well done, mark you now, to take 
the tales out of my mouth, ere it is made 
and finished. I speak but in the figures and 
comparisons of it. As Alexander kill'd his so* 
friend Cleitus, being in his ales and his cups ; 
so also Harry Monmouth, being in his right 
wits and his good judgements, turn'd away 
the fat knight with the great belly doublet. 
He was full of jests, and gipes, and knav- 55 
eries, and mocks; I have forgot his name. 

Gow. Sir John Falstaff. 

Flu. That is he. I'll tell you there is good men 
porn at Monmouth. 

Gow. Here comes his Majesty. 60 

Alarum. Enter King Henry and forces; War- 
ivichj, Gloucester^ Exeter, with pris- 
oners. Flourish. 

K. Hen. I was not angry since I came to France 
Until this instant. Take a trumpet, herald; 
Eide thou unto the horsemen on yond hill. 
If they will fight with us, bid them come 

down, 
Or void the field; they do offend our sight. 65 



70 



Act IV, Sc. vii] HENEY THE FIFTH 165 

If they^ll do neither, we will come to them, 
And make them skirr away^, as swift as stones 
Enforced from the old Assyrian slings. 
Besides, we^ll cut the throats of those we 

have, 
And not a man of them that we shall take 
Shall taste onr mercy. Go and tell them so. 



Enter Montjoy. 

Exe. Here comes the herald of the French, my 

liege. 
Olou. His eyes are hnmbler than they ns'd to be. 
K. Hen. How now ! what means this, herald ? 
Know^st thon not 
75 That I have fin'd these bones of mine for 

ransom ? 
Com'st thou again for ransom? 
Mont. No, great King; 

I come to thee for charitable license, 
That we may wander o'er this bloody field 
To book our dead, and then to bury them; 
80 To sort our nobles from our common men. 

For many of our princes — woe the while ! — 
Lie drown'd and soak'd in mercenary blood; 
So do our vulgar drench their peasant limbs 
In blood of princes ; and their wounded steeds 
85 Fret fetlock deep in gore, and with wild rage 

Yerk out their armed heels at their dead mas- 
ters, 



IQQ HENEY THE FIFTH [Act IV, Sc. vii 

Killing them twice. 0, give us leave^ great 

King, 
To view the field in safety, and dispose 
Of their dead bodies ! 

K. Hen. I tell thee truly, herald, 

I know not if the day be onrs or no ; 90 

For yet a many of your horsemen peer 
And gallop o'er the field. 

Mont. The day is yours. 

K. Hen. Praised be God, and not our strength, 
for it ! 
What is this castle call'd that stands hard by? 

Mont. They call it Agincourt. 95 

K. Hen. Then call we this the field of Agincourt, 
Fought on the day of Crispin Crispianus. 

Flu. Your grandfather of famous memory, an 't 
please your Majesty, and your great-uncle 
Edward the Plack Prince of Wales, as I have 100 
read in the chronicles, fought a most prave 
pattle here in France. 

K. Hen. They did, Fluellen. 

Flu. Your Majesty says very true. If your 
Majesties is rememb're'd of it, the Welshmen 105 
did good service in a garden where leeks did 
grow, wearing leeks in their Monmouth caps; 
which, your Majesty know, to this hour is an 
honourable badge of the service; and I do be- 
lieve your Majesty takes no scorn to wear the no 
leek upon Saint Tavy's day. 

K. Hen. I wear it for a memorable honour; 




Act IV, Sc. vii] HENEY THE FIFTH 167 

For I am Welsh, you know, good countryman. 
Flu. All the water in Wye cannot wash your 

115 Majesty's Welsh plood put of your pody, I can 

tell you that. God pless it and preserve it, as 
long as it pleases His grace, and His majesty 
too! 
K. Hen. Thanks, good my countryman. 

120 Flu. By Jeshu, I am your Majesty's countryman, 
I care not who know it. I will confess it to 
all the 'orld. J. need not to be ashamed of 
your Majesty, praised be God, so long as your 
Majesty is an honest man. 

125 K. Hen. God keep me so ! 

Efiter Williams. 

Our heralds go with him; 
Bring me just notice of the numbers dead 
On both our parts. Call yonder fellow hither. 
[Exeunt Heralds with Montjoy.] 
Exe. Soldier, you must come to the King. 
K. Hen. Soldier, why wear'st thou that glove in 
130 thy cap? 

Will An 't please your Majesty, 't is the gage of 
one that I should fight withal, if he be alive. 
K. Hen. An Englishman? 

Will. An 't please your Majesty, a rascal that 

135 swagger'd with me last night; who, if alive 

and ever dare to challenge this glove, I have 

sworn to take him a box o' the ear; or if I 

can see my glove in his cap, which he swore, 



168 HENEY THE FIFTH [Act IV, Sc. vii 

as he was a soldier, he would wear if alive, I 
will strike it out soundly. 140 

K. Hen. What think you, Captain Fluellen? Is 
it tit this soldier keep his oath? 

Flu. He is a craven and a villain else, an ^t please 
your Majesty, in my conscience. 

K. Hen. It may be his enemy is a gentleman of 145 
great sort, quite from the answer of his de- 
gree. 

Flu. Though he be as good a gentleman as the 
devil is, as Lucifer and Belzebub himself, it 
is necessary, look your Grace, that he keep 150 
his vow and his oath. If he be perjur'd, see 
you now, his reputation is as arrant a villain 
and a Jack-sauce, as ever his black shoe trod 
upon God's ground and His earth, in my con- 
science, la ! 155 

K. Hen. Then keep thy vow, sirrah, when thou 
meet'st the fellow. 

Will. So I will, my liege, as I live. ^ • 

K. Hen. Who serv'st thou under ? 

^Yill. Under Captain Gower, my liege. 160 

Flu. Gower is a good captain, and is good knowl- 
edge and literatured in the wars. 

K. Hen. Call him hither to me, soldier. 

Will. I will, my liege. [Exit. 

K. Hen. Here, Fluellen ; wear thou this favour 165 
for me and stick it in thy cap. When Alen- 
qon and myself were down together, I pluck'd 
this glove from his helm. If any man chal- 






ACTIV, Sc. vii] HENEY THE FIFTH IQ^, 

lenge this^ he is a friend to Alengon, and an 
170 enemy to onr person. If thou encounter any 

such, apprehend him, an thou dost me love. 
Flu. Your Grace doo's me as great honours as 
can be desirM in the hearts of his subjects. 
I would fain see the man, that has but two 
175 legs, that shall find himself aggrief'd at this 

glove; that is all. But I would fain see it 
once, an please God of His grace that I might 
see. 
K. Hen. Know^st thou Gower? 
180 piu. He is my dear friend, an please you. 

K. Hen. Pray thee, go seek him, and bring him to 

my tent. 
Flu. I will fetch him. [Exit. 

K. Hen. My Lord of Warwick, and my brother 
Gloucester, 
185 Follow Fluellen closely at the heels. 

The glove which I have given him for a 

favour 
May haply purchase him a box o' the ear. 
It is the soldier's ; I by bargain should 
Wear it myself. Follow, good cousin War- 
wick. 
190 If that the soldier strike him, as I judge 

By his blunt bearing he will keep his word, 
Some sudden mischief may arise of it; 
For I do know Fluellen valiant 
And, touch'd with choler, hot as gunpowder^ 
195 And quickly will return an injury. 



170 HENKY THE FIFTH [Act IV, Sc. viii 

Follow, and see there be no harm between 

them. 
Go yon with me, uncle of Exeter. [Exeunt. 



Scene VIII. 

Before King Henry's pavilion. 

Enter Goiver and Williams. 

Will. I warrant it is to knight yon, captain. 

Enter Fluellen. 

Flu. God^s will and his pleasure, captain, I be- 
seech you now, come apace to the King. There 
is more good toward you peradventure than 
is in your knowledge to dream of. 5 

Will. Sir, know you this glove? 

Flu. Know the glove ! I know the glove is a glove. 

Will. I know this; and thus I challenge it. 

[Strikes him. 

Flu. 'Sblood ! an arrant traitor as any is in the 
universal world, or in France, or in England ! lo 

Gow. How now, sir ! you villain ! 

Will. Do you think I '11 be forsworn? 

Flu. Stand away. Captain Gower. I will give 
treason his payment into plows, I warrant 
yon. 15 

Will. I am no traitor. 

Flu. That 's a lie in thy throat. I charge you in 



ACT IV, Sc. viii] HENRY THE FIFTH 171 

his Majesty's name, apprehend him; he's a 
friend of the Duke Alengon's. 

Enter Warwich and Gloucester. 

20 War. How now, how now! what 's the matter? 
Flu. My Lord of Warwick, here is — praised be 
God for it ! — a most contagions treason come 
to light, look yon, as yon shall desire in a 
summer's day. Here is his Majesty. 

Enter King Henry and Exeter. 

25 K. Hen. How now! what 's the matter? 
Flu. My liege, here is a villain and a traitor, that, 
look your Grace, has struck the glove which 
your Majesty is take out of the helmet of 
Alengon. 

30 Will. My liege, this was my glove ; here is the 
fellow of it ; and he that I gave it to in change 
promis'd to wear it in his cap. I promis'd 
to strike him, if he did. I met this man with 
my glove in his cap, and I have been as good 

35 as my word. 

Flu. Your Majesty hear now, saving your Ma- 
jesty's manhood, what an arrant, rascally, 
beggarly, lousy knave it is. I hope your Ma- 
jesty is pear me testimony and witness, and 

40 will avouchment, that this is the glove of 

Alengon that your Majesty is give me; in 
your conscience, now? 



172 HENEY THE FIFTH [Act IV, Sc. viii 

K. Hen. Give me thy glove, soldier. Look, here 
is the fellow of it. 
^T was I, indeed, thou promisedst to strike ; 45 
And thou hast given me most bitter terms. 

Flu. An it please your Majest}^, let his neck 
answer for it, if there is any martial law in 
the world. 

K. Hen. How canst thou make me satisfaction? 50 

Will. All offences, my lord, come from the heart. 
iS'ever came any from mine that might offend 
your Majesty. 

K. Hen. It was ourself thou didst abuse. 

Will. Your Majesty came not like yourself. You 55 
appear'd to me but as a common man; wit- 
ness the night, your garments, your lowli- 
ness; and what your Highness suffer'd under 
that shape, I beseech you take it for your own 
fault and not mine ; for had you been as 1 60 
took you for, I made no offence; therefore, I 
beseech your Highness, pardon me. 

K. Hen. Here, uncle Exeter, fill this glove with 
crowns, 
And give it to this fellow. Keep it, fellow ; 
And wear it for an honour in thy cap 65 

Till I do challenge it. Give him his crowns; 
And, captain, you must needs be friends with 
him. 

Flu. By this day and this light, the fellow has 
mettle enough in his belly. Hold, there is 
twelve pence for you ; and I pray you to serve 70 



Act IV, Sc. viii] HENRY THE FIFTH 173 

God, and keep you out of prawls, and prab- 
bles, and quarrels^ and dissensions, and, I 
warrant you, it is the better for you. 
Will. I will none of your money. 
75 Flu. It is with a good will ; I can tell you, it will 
serve you to mend your shoes. Come, where- 
fore should you be so pashful? Your shoes 
is not so good. *T is a good silling, I war- 
rant you, or I will change it. 

Enter an English Herald. 

80 K. Hen. Now, herald, are the dead numbered ? 
Her. Here is the number of the slaught'red 

French. 
K. Hen. What prisoners of good sort are taken, 

uncle ? 
Exe. Charles Duke of Orleans, nephew to the 
King ; 
John Duke of Bourbon, and Lord Bouciqualt : 
85 Of other lords and barons, knights and 

squires. 
Full fifteen hundred, besides common men. 
K. Hen. This note doth tell me of ten thousand 
French 
That in the field lie slain; of princes, in this 

number, 
And nobles bearing banners, there lie dead 
90 One hundred twenty-six; added to these, 

Of knights, esquires, "and gallant gentlemen, 



174 HENKY THE FIFTH [Act IV, Sc. viii 

Eight thousand and four hundred; of the 

which, 
Five hundred were but yesterday dubb'd 

knights ; 
So that, in these ten thousand they have lost, 
There are but sixteen hundred mercenaries ; 95 
The rest are princes, barons, lords, knights, 

squires. 
And gentlemen of blood and quality. 
The names of those their nobles that lie dead : 
Charles Delabreth, High Constable of France; 
Jacques of Chatillon, Admiral of France; loo 
The master of the cross-bows. Lord Eam- 

bures ; 
Great Master of France, the brave Sir Gui- 

chard Dauphin, 
John Duke of Alengon, Anthony Duke of 

Brabant, 
The brother to the Duke of Burgundy, 
And Edward Duke of Bar; of lusty earls, 105 
Grandpre and Eoussi, Fauconberg and Foix, 
Beaumont and Marie, Yaudemont and Le- 

strale. 
Here was a royal fellowship of death ! 
Where is the number of our English dead? 

[Herald shows him another paper.'] 
Edward the Duke of York, the Earl of Suf- 
folk, 110 
Sir Eichard Ketly, Davy Gam, esquire; 
None else of name ; and of all other men 



AcTiV, Sc. viii] HENEY THE FIFTH I75 

But five and twenty. — God, thy arm was 

here ; 
And not to us, but to thy arm alone, 
115 Ascribe we all ! When, without strategem, 

But in plain shock and even play of battle, 
Was ever known so great and little loss 
On one part and on the other ? Take it, God, 
For it is none but thine ! 
^^^' 'T is wonderful ! 

120 K. Hen. Come, go we in procession to the village ; 
And be it death proclaimed through our host 
To boast of this or take that praise from God 
Which is His only. 
Flu. Is it not lawful, an please your Majesty, to 
tell how many is kilFd? 
125 K. Hen. Yes, captain, but with this acknowledge- 
ment, 
That God fought for us. 
Flu. Yes, my conscience, He did us great good. 
K. Hen. Do we all holy rites. 

Let there be sung Non nobis and Te Deum, 
130 The dead with charity enclosed in clay. 

And then to Calais; and to England then. 
Where ne'er from France arriv'd more happy 
^en. [Exeunt. 




ACT FIFTH. 

Prologue. 
Enter Chorus. 

€hor. Vouchsafe to those that have not read 

the story, 
That I may prompt them; and of such as 

have, 
I humbly pray them to admit the excuse 
Of time, of numbers, and due course of 

things, 
"Which cannot in their huge and proper life 5 
Ee here presented. Now we bear the King 
. Toward Calais ; grant him there ; there seen, 
Heave him away upon your winged thoughts. 
Athwart the sea. Behold the English beach 
Pales in the flood with men, with wives and 

boys, 10 

Whose shouts and claps out-voice the deep- 

moutFd sea, 
Which like a mighty whiffler 'fore the King 
Seems to prepare his way. So let him land. 
And solemnly see him set on to London. 
So swift a pace hath thought that even now 15 
You may imagine him upon Blackheath, 
Where that his lords desire him to have borne 

176 



Prologue] HENEY THE FIFTH . 177 

His bruised helmet and his bended sword 
Before him through the city. He forbids it, 
20 Being free from vainness and self -glorious 

pride ; 
Giving full trophy, signal, and ostent 
Quite from himself to God. But now behold. 
In the quick forge and working-house of 

thought. 
How London doth pour out her citizens ! 
25 The mayor and all his brethren m best sort, 

Like to the senators of the antique Eome, 
With the plebeians swarming at their heels. 
Go forth and fetch their conquering Caesar in ; 
As, by a lower but loving likelihood, 
30 Were now the general of our gracious em- 

press. 
As in good time he may, from Ireland com- 
ing. 
Bringing rebellion broached on his sword. 
How many would the peaceful city quit. 
To welcome him! Much more, and much 
more cause, 
35 Did they this Harry. Now in London place 

him ; 
As yet the lamentation of the French 
Invites the King of England's stay at home, — 
The Emperor's coming in behalf of France, 
To order peace between them; — and omit 
40 All the occurrences, whatever chanc'd. 

Till Harry's back-return again to France. 



178 HENEY THE FIFTH [Act V, Sc. i 

There must we bring him; and myself have 
played 

The interim, by rememb'ring you 't is past. 

Then brook abridgement, and your eyes ad- 
vance 

After your thoughts, straight back again to 
France. [Exit. 45 



Scene I. 
France. The English camp. 
Enter Fluellen and Gower. 

Gow. Nay, that's right; but why wear you your 
leek to-day? Saint Davy's day is past. 

Flu. There is occasions and causes why and 
wherefore in all things. I will tell you asse 
my friend, Captain Gower. The rascally, 5 
scald, beggarly, lous}^, pragging knave, Pistol, 
which you and yourself and all the world 
know to be no petter than a fellow, look you 
now, of no merits, he is come to me and 
prings me pread and salt yesterday, look you, 10 
and bid me eat my leek. It was in a place 
where I could not breed no contention with 
him; but I will be so bold as to wear it in 
my cap till I see him once again, and then I 
will tell him a little piece of my desires. 15 



Aci'V, Sc. i] HENEY THE FIFTH 179 

Enter Pistol. 

Gow. Why, here he comes, swelling like a turkey- 
cock. 
Flu. 'T is no matter for his swellings nor his 
turkey-cocks. God pless you, Aunchient Pis- 
20 tol ! you scurfy, lousy knave, God pless you ! 

Pist. Ha ! art thou bedlam ? Dost thou thirst, 
base Troyan, 
To have me fold up Parca's fatal web? 
Hence ! I am qualmish at the smell of leek. 
Flu. I peseech you heartily, scurfy, lousy knave, 
25 at my desires, and my requests, and my peti- 

tions, to eat, look you, this leek. Because, 
look you, you do not love it, nor your affec- 
tions and your appetites and your disgestions 
doo^s not agree with it, I would desire you to 
30 eat it. 

Pist. Not for Cadwallader and all his goats. 
Flu. There is one goat for you. {8trilces him.) 

Will you be so good, scald knave, as eat it? 
Pist. Base Troyan, thou shalt die. 
35 Flu. You say very true, scald knave, when God's 
will is. I will desire you to live in the mean 
time, and eat your victuals. Come, there is 
sauce for it. [StriJces him.'] You calFd me 
yesterday mountain-squire; but J will make 
40 you to-day a squire of low degree. I pray 

yoii, fall to; if you can mock a leek, you can 
eat a leek. 



180 HENEY THE FIFTH [Act V, Sc. i 

Gow. Enough, captain; you have astonish'd him. 
Flu. I say, I will make him eat some part of my 

leek, or I will peat his pate four days. Bite, 45 

I pray you; it is good for your green wound 

and your ploody coxcomb. 
Pist Must I bite? 
Flu. Yes, certainly, and out of doubt and out of 

question, too, and ambiguities. 50 

Pist. By this leek, I will most horribly revenge. 

I eat and eat, I swear — 
Flu. Eat, I pray you. Will you have some more 

sauce to your leek? There is not enough 

leek to swear by. 55 

Fist. Quiet thy cudgel; thou dost see I eat. 
Flu. Much good do you, scald knave, heartily. 

Nay, pray you, throw none away; the skin is 

good for your broken coxcomb. When you 

take occasions to see leeks hereafter, I pray 60 

you, mock at 'em; that is all. 
Pist. Good. 
Flu. Ay, leeks is good. Hold you, there is a groat 

to heal your pate. 
Pist. Me a groat ! 65 

Flu. Yes, verily and in truth you shall take it; 

or I have another leek in my pocket, which 

you shall eat. 
Pist. I take thy groat in earnest of revenge. 
Flu. If I owe you anything, I will pay you in 70 

cudgels. You shall be a woodmonger, and 

buy nothing of me but cudgels. God be wi' 



ActV, Sc. ij HENEY THE FIFTH 181 

yoU;, and keep you, and heal your pate. 

[Exit. 

Fist. All hell shall stir for this. 

75 Gow. Go, go; you are a counterfeit cowardly 

knave. Will you mock at an ancient tradition, 

begun upon an honourable respect, and worn 

as a memorable trophy of predeceased valour, 

and dare not avouch in your deeds any of 

80 your words? I have seen you gleeking and 

galling at this gentleman twice or thrice. You 

thought, because he could not speak English 

in the native garb, he could not therefore 

handle an English cudgel. You find it other- 

85 wise; and henceforth let a Welsh correction 

teach you a good English condition. Fare ye 

well. [Exit. 

Pist. Doth Fortune play the huswife with me 

now? 

News have I, that my Doll is dead i' the spital 

■90 Of malady of France; 

' And there my rendezyous is quite cut off. 
Old I do wax ; and from my weary limbs 
Honour is cudgell'd. Well, bawd I '11 turn, 
And something lean to cutpurse of quick 
hand. 
95 To England will I steal, and there I '11 steal ; 

And patches will I get unto these cudgell'd 

scars, 
And swear I got them in the Gallia wars. 

[Exit 



183 HENEY THE FIFTH [ActV, Sc.ii 



Scene II. 

France. A royal palace. 

Enter, at one door. King Henry, Exeter, Bedford, 
Gloucester, Warwick, Westmoreland, and 
other Lords; at another, the French King, 
Queen Isabel, the Princess Katharine, Alice, 
and other Ladies; the Duke of Burgundy, 
and other French. 

K. Hen. Peace to this meeting, wherefore we are 

met ! 
Unto our brother France, and to our sister, 
Health and fair time of day; joy and good 

wishes 
To our most fair and princely cousin Kath* 

arine ; 
And, as a branch and member of this royalty, 5 
By whom this great assembly is contriv'd. 
We do salute you, Duke of Burgundy; 
And, princes French, and peers, health to 

you all ! 
Fr. King. Eight joyous are we to behold your 

face. 
Most worthy brother England ; fairly met ! 10 
So are you, princes English, every one. 
Q. Isa. So happy be the issue, brother England, 



ActV, Sc. ii] HENSY THE FIFTH 183 

Of this good day and of this gracious meeting, 
As we are now glad to behold your eyes; 
15 Yonr eyes, which hitherto have borne in them 

Against the French that met them in their 

bent 
The fatal balls of murdering basilisks. 
The venom of such looks, we fairly hope, 
Have lost their quality, and that this day 
20 Shall change all griefs and quarrels into love. 

K. Hen. To cry amen to that, thus we appear. 
Q. Isa. You English princes all, I do salute you. 
Bur. My duty to you both, on equal love. 

Great Kings of France and England! That 
I have labour'd, 
25 With all my wits, my pains, and strong en- 

deavours. 
To bring your most imperial Majesties 
Unto this bar and royal interview, 
Your mightiness on both parts best can wit- 
ness. 
Since then my office hath so far prevailed 
30 That, face to face and royal eye to eye, 

You have congreeted, let it not disgrace me, 
If T demand, before this royal view. 
What rub or what impediment there is. 
Why that the naked, poor, and mangled 
Peace, 
35 Dear nurse of arts, plenties, and joyful births, 

Should not in this best garden of the world, 
Our fertile France, put up her lovely visage? 



184 HENEY THE FIFTH [Act v. Sc. ii 

Alas, she hath from France too long been 

chas'd, 
And all her husbandry doth lie on heaps, 
Corrupting in it own fertility. ^o 

Her vine, the merry cheerer of the heart, 
Unpruned dies; her hedges even-pleach'd, 
Like prisoners wildly overgrown with hair, 
Put forth disordered twigs; her fallow leas 
The darnel, hemlock, and rank fumitory 45 

Doth root upon, while that the coulter rusts 
That should deracinate such savagery; 
The even mead, that erst brought sweetly 

forth 
The freckled cowslip, burnet, and green 

clover. 
Wanting the scythe, all uncorrected, rank, so 
Conceives by idleness, and nothing teems 
But hateful docks, rough thistles, kexes, burs. 
Losing both beauty and utility; 
And all our vineyards, fallows, meads, and 

hedges, 
Defective in their natures, grow to wildness. 55 
Even so our houses and ourselves and children 
Have lost, or do not learn for want of time, 
The sciences that should become our country ; 
But grow like savages, — as soldiers will 
That nothing do but meditate on blood, — 60 
To swearing and stern looks, diffused attire, 
And everything that seems unnatural. 
Which to reduce into our former favour 



ActV, Sc. ii] HENEY THE FIFTH 185 

You are assembled; and my speech entreats 
65 That I may know the let, why gentle Peace 

Should not expel these inconveniences 
And bless us with her former qualities. 
K. Hen. If, Duke of Burgundy, you would the 
peace, 
Whose want gives growth to the imperfec- 
tions 
70 Which you have cited, you must buy that 

peace 
With full accord to all our just demands; 
Whosp tenours and particular effects 
You have enscheduFd briefly in your hands. 
Bur. The King hath heard them; to the which 
as yet 
75 There is no answer made. 

K. Hen. Well, then, the peace, 

AVhich you before so urg'd, lies in his an- 
swer. 
Fr. King. I have but with a cursorary eye 

O'erglanc'd the articles. Pleaseth your Grace 
To appoint some of your council presently 
80 To sit with us once more, with better heed 

To re-survey them, we will suddenly 
Pass our accept and peremptory answer. 
K. Hen. Brother, we shall. Go, uncle Exeter, 
And brother Clarence, and you, brother Glou- 
cester, 
85 Warwick, and Huntingdon, go with the King ; 

And take with you free power to ratify, 



186 HENEY THE FIFTH [Act V, Sc. ii 

Augment, or alter, as your wisdoms best 
Shall see advantageable for our dignity, 
Anything in or out of our demands, 
And we ^11 consign thereto. Will you, fair 

sister. 
Go with the princes, or stay here with us ? 

Q. Isa. Our gracious brother, I will go with them. 
Haply a w^oman^s voice may do some good. 
When articles too nicely urg'd be stood on. 

K. Hen. Yet leave our cousin Katharine here 
with us: 95 

She is our capital demand, comprised 
Within the fore-rank of our articles. 

Q. Isa. She hath good leave. 

[Exeunt all except Henry, Katha- 
rine and Alice']. 

K. Hen. Fair Katharine, and most fair. 

Will you vouchsafe to teach a soldier terms 
Such as will enter at a lady's ear lOO 

And plead his love-suit to her gentle heart? 

Katli. Your Majesty shall mock at me; I cannot 
speak your England. 

K. Hen. fair Katharine, if you will love me 
soundly with your French heart, I will be i05 
glad to hear you confess it brokenly with your 
English tongue. Do you like me, Kate? 

Kath. Parclonnez-moi, I cannot tell wat is "like 
me.'' 

K. Hen. An angel is like you, Kate, and you are no 
like an angel. 



ActV, Sc. ii] HENEY THE FIFTH 187 

Kath. Que dit-il? Que je suis semMdble a les 
anges ? 

Alice. Oui, vraiment, sauf voire grace, ainsi dit-il. 
115 K. Hen. I said so, dear Katharine ; and I mnst 
not blush to affirm it. 

Kath. hon Dieu! les langues des hommes sont 
pleines de tromperies. 

K. Hen. What says she, fair one? That the 
120 tongues of men are full of deceits? 

Alice. Oui, dat de tongues of de mans is be full 
of deceits : dat is de Princess. 

K. Hen. The Princess is the better English^ 

woman. V faith, Kate, my wooing is fit for 

125 thy understanding. I am glad thou canst 

speak no better English; for, if thou couldst, 

thou wouldst find me such a plain king that 

thou wouldst think I had sold my farm to 

buy my crown. I know no ways to mince it 

130 . in love, but directly to say, "I love you" ; then 

if 3^ou urge me farther than to say, "Do you 

in faith ?'^ I wear out my suit. Give me your 

answer; i' faith, do; and so clap hands and a 

bargain. How say you, lady? 

135 Kath. Sauf votre honneur, me understand well. 

K. Hen. Marry, if you would put me to verses, or 
to dance for your sake, Kate, why you undid 
me ; for the one, I ; have neither words nor 
measure, and for the other I have no strength 
140 in measure, 3^et a reasonable measure in 

strength. If I could win a lady at leap-frog. 



188 HENEY THE FIFTH [ActV, Sc.ii 

or by vaulting into m}^ saddle with my ar- 
mour on my back, under the correction of 
bragging be it spoken, I should quickly leap 
into a wife. Or if I might buffet for my 145 
love, or bound my horse for her favours, I 
could lay on like a butcher and sit like a 
jack-an-apes, never off. But; before God, 
Kate, I cannot look greenly, nor gasp out 
my eloquence, nor I have no cunning in pro- 150 
testation: only downright oaths, which I 
never use till urg'd, nor never break for urg- 
ing. If thou canst love a fellow of this tem- 
per, Kate, whose face is not worth sunburn- 
ing, that never looks in his glass for love of 155 
anything he sees there, let thine eye be thy 
cook. I speak to thee plain soldier. If thou 
canst love me for this, take me ; if not, to say 
to thee that I shall die, is true; but for thy 
love, by the Lord, no ; yet I love thee too. leo 
And while thou liv'st, dear Kate, take a fel- 
low of plain and uncoined constancy; for he 
perforce must do thee right, because he hath 
not the gift to woo in other places; for these 
fellows of infinite tongue, that can rhyme 165 
themselves into ladies' favours, they do al- 
ways reason themselves out again. What! a 
speaker is but a prater; a rhyme is but a 
ballad. A good leg will fall; a straight back 
will stoop ; a black beard will turn white ; a i70 
curl'd pate will grow bald ; a fair face will 



ActV, Sc. ii] HENEY THE FIFTH 189 

wither; a full eye will wax hollow; but a good 
heart, Kate, is the sun and the moon; or 
rather the sun and not the moon ; for it shines 

175 bright and never changes, but keeps his 

course truly. If thou would have such a one, 
take me; and take me, take a soldier; take a 
soldier, take a king. And what say'st thou 
then to my love ? Speak, my fair, and fairly, 

180 I pray thee. 

Katli. Is it possible dat I should love de enemy 

of France? 
K. Hen. No; it is not possible you should love 
the enemy of France, Kate; but, in loving 

185 me, you should love the friend of France ; for 

I love France so well that I will not part 
with a village of it, I will have it all mine; 
and, Kate, when France is mine and I am 
yours, then yours is France and you are mine. 

190 Katli. I cannot tell wat is dat. 

K. Hen. No, Kate? ( I will tell thee in French; 
which I am sure will hang upon my tongue 
like a new-married wife about her husband's 
neck, hardly to be shook off. ) Je quand sur 

195 le possession de France, et quand vous avez 

le possession de moi, — let me see, what then ? 
Saint Denis be my speed ! — done voire est 
France et vous etes mienne. It is as easy for 
me, Kate, to conquer the kingdom as to speak 

200 so much more French. I shall never move 

thee in French, unless- it be to lau^h at me. 



190 HENEY THE FIFTH [ActV, Sc. ii 

KatJi. Sauf voire lionneur, le Frangois que vous 
parlez, il est meilleur que V Anglois lequel je 
parle. 

K. Hen. No, faith, is 't not, Kate ; but thy speak- 205 
ing of my tongue, and I thine, most truly- 
falsely, must needs be granted to be much at 
one. But, Kate, dost thou understand thus 
much English: canst thou love me? 

Kath. I cannot tell. 210 

K. Hen. Can any of your neighbours tell, Kate? 
I ^11 ask them. Come, I know thou lovest 
me; and at night, when you come into your 
closet, you '11 question this gentlewoman about 
me ; and I know, Kate, you will to her dis- 215 
praise those parts in me that you love with 
your heart. But, good Kate, mock me merci- 
fully; the rather, gentle princess, because I 
love thee cruelly. If ever thou beest mine, 
Kate, as I have a saving faith within me tells 220 
me thou shalt, I get thee with scambling, and 
thou must therefore needs prove a good sol- 
dier-breeder. Shalt not thou and I, between 
Saint Denis and Saint George, compound a 
boy, half French, half English, that shall go 225 
to Constantinople and take the Turk by the 
beard? Shall we not? What say'st thou, my 
fair flower-de-luce? 

Kath. I do not know dat. 

K. Hen. No ; 't is hereafter to know, but now to 230 
promise. Do but now promise, Kate, you will 



i 



ActV, Sc. ii] HENEY THE FIFTH 191 

endeavour for your French part of such a 
boy; and for my English moiety, take the 
word of a king and a bachelor. How answer 
235 yon, la plus helle Katharine du monde, mon 

tres cliei' et devin deesse? 
Katli. Your Majestee ave fausse French enough 
to deceive de most sage demoiselle dat is en 
France. 

240 K. Hen. Now, fie upon my false French ! By mine 
honour, in true English, I love thee, Kate; 
by which honour I dare not swear thou lovest 
me; yet my blood begins to flatter me that 
thou dost, notwithstanding the poor and un- 

245 tempering effect of my visage. Now, be- 

shrew my father's ambition ! he was thinking 
of civil wars when he got me; therefore was 
I created with a stubborn outside, with an 
aspect of iron, that, when I come to woo 

250 ladies, I fright them. But, in faith, Kate, 

the elder I wax, the better I shall appear. 
My comfort is, that old age, that ill layer up 
of beauty, can do no more spoil upon my face. 
Thou hast me, if thou hast me, at the worst; 

255 and thou shalt wear me, if thou wear me, 

better and better ; and therefore tell me, most 
fair Katharine, will you have me? Put off 
your maiden blushes; avouch the thoughts of 
your heart with the looks of an empress ; take 

260 me by the hand, and say, Harry of England, 

I am thine : which word thou shalt no sooner 



192 HENEY THE FIFTH TScr 

bless mine ear withal, but I will tell tliee 
aloud, England is thine, Ireland is thine, 
France is thine, and Henry Plantagenet is 
thine; who, though I speak it before his face, 265 
if he be not fellow with the best king, thou 
shalt find the best king of good fellows. Come, 
your answer in broken music; for thy, voice 
is music and thy English broken; therefore, 
queen of all, Katharine, break thy mind to 270 
me in broken English. Wilt thou have me? 

Katli. Dat is as it shall please de roi mon pere. 

K. Hen. Nay, it will please him well, Kate; it 
shall please him, Kate. 

Kath. Den it sail also content me. " 275 

K. Hen. Upon that I kiss your hand, and call 
you my queen. 

Kath. Laissez, mon seigneur, laissez, laissez! Ma 
foij je ne veux point que vous ahaissez votre 
grandeur en haisant la main d'une indigne 280 
serviteur. Excusez-moi, je vous supplie, mon 
trespuissant seigneur. 

K. Hen. Then I will kiss your lips, Kate. 

Kath. Les dames et demoiselles pour etre haisees 
devant leur noces, il nest pas la coutume de 285 
France. 

K. Hen. Madam my interpreter, what says she? 

Alice. Dat it is not be de fashion pour les ladies 
of France, — I cannot tell wat is laiser en 
Anglish. ■ 290 

K. Hen. To kiss. 



ActV, Sc. ii] HENEY THE FIFTH 193 

Alice. Your Majesty entendre bettre que moi. 
K. Hen. It is not the fashion for the maids in 
France to kiss before they are married, would 
295 she say? 

Alice. Oui, vraiment. 

K. Hen. Kate, nice customs curtsy to great 
kings. Dear Kate, you and I cannot be con- 
fined within the weak list of a country's 
300 fashion. We are the makers of manners, 

Kate; and the liberty that follows our places 
stops the mouth of all find-faults, as I will 
do yours, for upholding the nice fashion of 
your country in denying me a kiss ; therefore, 
305 patiently and yielding. [Kissing her.'] You 

have witchcraft in your lips, Kate; there is 
more eloquence in a sugar touch of them 
than, in the tongues of the French council; 
and they should sooner persuade Harry of 
310 England than a general petition of monarchs. 

Here comes your father. 
Re-enter the French Power and the English Lords. 
Bur. God save your Majesty! My royal cousin, 

teach you our princess English? 
K. Hen. I would have her learn, my fair cousin, 
315 how perfectly I love her; and that is good 

English. 
Bur. Is she not apt? 

K. Hen. Our tongue is rough, coz, and my condi- 
tion is not smooth; so that, having neither 
320 the voice nor the heart of flattery about me, 



194 HENEY THE FIFTH [Act V, Sc. ii 

I cannot so conjure up the spirit of love in 
her, that he will appear in his true likeness. 

Bur. Pardon the frankness of my mirth, if I 
answer you for that. If you would conjure in 
her, you must make a circle ; if conjure up 825 
Love in her in his true likeness, he must ap- 
pear naked and blind. Can you blame her 
then, being a maid yet ros'd over with the 
virgin crimson of modesty, if she deny the 
appearance of a naked blind boy in her naked 330 
seeing self? It were, my lord, a hard condi- 
tion for a maid to consign to. 

K. Hen. Yet they do wink and yield, as love is 
blind and enforces. 

Bu7\ They are then excus'd, my lord, when they 335 
see not what they do. 

K. Hen. Then, good my lord, teach your cousin 
to consent winking. 

Bur. I will wink on her to consent, my lord, if 
you will teach her to know my meaning ; for 340 
maids, well summer'd and warm kept, are 
like flies at Bartholomew-tide, blind, though 
they have their eyes; and then they will en- 
dure handling which before would not abide 
looking on. 345 

K. Hen. This moral ties me over to time and a 
hot summer; and so I shall catch the fly, 
your cousin, in the latter end, and she must 
be blind too. 

Bur. As love is, my lord, before it loves. 350 



ActV, Sc. ii] HENKY THE FIFTH 195 

K. Hen. It is so; and you may, some of you, 
thank love for my blindness, who cannot see 
many a fair French city for one fair French 
maid that stands in my way. 

355 Fr. King. Yes, my lord, you see them perspective- 
ly, the cities turnM into a maid; for they are 
all girdled with maiden walls that war hath 
never ent'red. 
K. Hen. Shall Kate be my wife? 

360 Fr. King. So please you. 

K. Hen. I am content, so the maiden cities you 
talk of may wait on her; so the maid that 
stood in the way for my wish shall show me 
the way to my will. 

365 Fr. King. We have consented to all terms of 
reason. 
K. Hen. Is ^t so, my lords of England? 
West. The King hath granted every article; 
His daughter first, and then in sequel all, 

370 According to their firm proposed natures. 

Exe. Only he hath not yet subscribed this : where 
your Majesty demands, that the King of 
France, having any occasion to write for mat- 
ter of grant,, shall name your Highness in 

375 this form and with this addition, in French, 

Notre tres-cher fils Henri, Roi d'Angleterre, 
Heritier de France; and thus in Latin, Frce- 
clarissimus filius noster Henricus, Rex An- 
glicB, et Hceres Francice. 

380 Fr. King. Nor this I have not, brother, so denied. 



196 HENKY THE FIFTH [Act V, Sc. ii 

But your request shall make me let it pass. 
K. Hen. I pray you then, in love and dear alli- 
ance, 

Let that one article rank with the rest; 

And thereupon give me your daughter. 
Fr. King. Take her, fair son, and from her blood 

raise up 385 

Issue to me; that the contending kingdoms 

Of France and England, whose very shores 
look pale 

With envy of each other's happiness. 

May cease their hatred, and this dear con- 
junction 

Plant neighbourhood and Christian-like ac- 
cord 390 

In their sweet bosoms, that never war ad- 
vance 

His bleeding sword 'twixt England and fair 
France. 
Lords. Amen ! 

K. Hen. Now, welcome, Kate; and bear me wit- 
ness all, 

That here I kiss her as my sovereign queen. S95 

[Flourish. 
Q. Isa. God, the best maker of all marriages, 

Combine your hearts in one, your realms in 
one ! 

As man and wife, being two, are one in love, 

So be there 'twixt your kingdoms such a 
spousal, 



ActV, Sc. ii] HENEY THE FIFTH 197 

400 That never may ill office, or fell jealousy, 

Which troubles oft the bed of blessed mar- 
riage, 
Thrust in between the paction of these king- 
doms. 
To make divorce of their incorporate league;. 
That English may as French, French Eng- 
lishmen, 
405 Receive each other. God speak this Amen I. 

All. Amen! 

K. Hen. Prepare we for our marriage; on which 

day. 

My Lord of Burgundy, we '11 take your oath,. 

And all the peers', for surety of our leagues.. 

410 Then shall I swear to Kate, and you to me; 

And may our oaths well kept and prosperous 

be ! \_Sennet. Exeunt^ 



198 HENEY THE FIFTH 

EPILOGUE. 

Enter Chorus. 

Chor. Thns far, with rough and all-nnable pen, 
Onr bending author hath pursu'd the story, 
In little room confining mighty men. 

Mangling by starts the full course of their 
glory. 
Small time, but in that small most greatly 
lived 5 

This star of England. Fortune made his 
sword, 
By which the world's best garden he achieved, 

And of it left his son imperial lord. 
Henry the Sixth, in infant bands crown'd 
King 
Of France and England, did this king suc- 
ceed ; 10 
Whose state so many had the managing. 
That they lost France and made his Eng- 
land bleed; 
Which oft our stage hath shown; and, for 

their sake. 
In your fair minds let this acceptance take. 

[Exit.] 



NOTES 

ABBREVIATIONS. 

C— Shakspere in "The Cambridge Poets," ed. W. A. 
Neilson. 

G.— Globe Edition of Shakspere, Ed. Clark and Wright. 

References to other plays of Shakspere's than Henry V. 
are according to these Editions, which are numbered alike. 

N. E. D. — New English Dictionary, Ed. Murray. 

ACT I. 

Prologue. In Shakspere's time plays were often prefaced 
by a prologue explaining the subject matter of the plot 
Henry V. is notable in that each act is introduced by one 
of these prologues, which bridge the gaps in time between 
the acts and give the audience necessary information of 
what has occurred during the intervals. They are re- 
markable for their sustained heroic style, far superior to 
that of the ordinary prologue or chorus. 

6. Port. Carriage, bearing. 

7. Leash'd in like hounds. Cf. Julius Caesar, III. i. 273, 
"let slip the dogs of war." According to Holinshed, Henry 
told the people of Rouen "that the goddesse of battell, 
called Bellona, had three handmaidens, ever of necessitie 
attending upon hir, as blood, fire and famine ..." 

8. Gentles. Cf. Introd., p. 46, 3, b. 

9. Flat tinraised spirits. In contrast with the mounting 
spirit of the "Muse of fire." Hath. Cf. Introd., p. 46, 4, a. 

10. Scaffold. Stage. 

11. Cockpit. Cock-fighting was a favorite Elizabethan 
amusement, and was carried on in a small circular area; 
hence the term is here used contemptuously. One of the 
Elizabethan theaters was named the Cockpit. 

13. This tvooden 0. The circular interior of the theater 
in which the play was produced, either the Globe or the 
Curtain. Casques. Helmets. 

199 



20U NOTES 

16. Attest. Stand for. Since a cipher in small space 
oiay indicate a million. 

17. Accompt. A spelling of "account." 

18. Imaginary forces. Forces of imagination. Cf. 
"imagln'd wing," III. Prol. 1. 

22. Narrow ocean. The English Channel. Cf. "narrow 
seas," II. Prol. 38. 

25. Puissance. Here and in II. ii. 191 a trisyllable ; 
in III. Prol. 21 it is a dissyllable. 

31. For the which supply. For which service. 

I. i. The first scene prepares the audience to hear the 
news of the war with France, and also informs them of 
the difference in character between King Henry V. and 
the Prince Hal whose madcap escapades they bad seen in 
Henry IV. It also suggests the motives which later are 
seen to prompt the bishops to advocate war. 

I. i. 1. Self. Same. 

I. i. 3. Was like . . . pass'd. Ellipsis : was likely to 
pas.<3 and would have passed. 

I. i. 4. ScamNing. Scrambling, unsettled. 

I. i. 5. Question. Discussion, consideration. 

I. i. 9. Cf. Introd., p. 41, 2. 

I. i. 15. Lazars. Lepers, so called from Lazarus in the 
parable. 

I. i. 29. Offending Adam. "As paradise, when sin and 
Adam were driven out by the angel, became the habitation 
of celestial spirits, so the King's heart, since consideration 
has driven out his follies, is now the receptacle of wisdom 
and of virtue." (Johnson.) 

I. i. 34. Heady currance. Headlong current. 

I. i. 35. Nor never. Cf. Introd., p. 47, 5, a. 

Hydra-headed. Alluding to the fable of the Lernaean 
Hydra, overcome by Hercules. 

I. i. 36. His. Cf. Introd., p. 44, 2, b. All at once. "All 
the rest, everything else." (Schmidt.) 

I. i. 43. List. Listen to. Cf. Introd., p. 48, 6, a. 

I. i. 45. Cause of policy. Problem of statesmanship. 

I. 1. 46. Oordian knot. Gordius, a poor peasant who 
had become King of Phrygia, dedicated his wagon to the 
gods and tied the pole to the yoke with a knot of bark so 
cunningly that it could not be undone. An oracle declared 
that whoever should unloose the knot should reign over 
all Asia. Alexander the Great performed the task by cut- 



NOTES 201 

ting the knot witn his sword. Applied proverbially to 
any difficult problem. 

I. i. 47. Familiar. An adverb. Cf. Introd., p. 47, 5, b. 
That. So that. _ 

I. i. 48. Chartered UT)ertine. "The wind bloweth where 
it listeth," John iii, 8. Cf. As You Like It, II. vii. 48 : 

"I must have liberty 
Withal, as large a charter as the wind, 
To blow on whom I please." 

I. i. 49. And the mute wonder, etc. Men are silent in 
wonder. 

I. i. 51. Practic. Practical. Opposed to theoric, theory. 
Since the King was not given to study in his youth, his 
theoretical knowledge must have been gained from practi- 
cal experience. 

I. i. 54. Addiction. Inclination, tendency in conduct. 

I. i. 55. Companies. Companions, with a shade of col- 
lective meaning. 

I. i. 59. Popularity. Low society. 

I. i. 63. Obscured his contemplation. Concealed under 
an appearance of wild behavior the observation that he 
was really busied in all the while. 

I. i. 64. Which. I. e. his contemplation. 

I. i. 66. Crescive in his faculty. Tending to grow in 
its strength. 

1. i. 73. Swaying more upon our part. Inclining to 
our side. 

I. i. 74. Exhihiters. The technical term for the intro- 
ducers or movers of a bill in Parliament. 

I. i. 76. Upon our spiritual convocation. On behalf of 
the assembly of the bishops and clergy. 

I. i. 81. ^Yithal. With. 

I. i. 86. Beverals. Details. Unhidden passages. Well 
known facts. 

I. i. 89. Edward. Edward III., who claimed the throne 
of France through his mother Isabella, daughter of 
Philip IV. 

I. i. 95. Go we in. Let us go in. 

I. ii. This scene, which seems tedious to us, was in- 
tensely interesting to an Elizabethan audience, because it 
explained fully the grounds for the English claims to the 
French throne, which made Henry feel justified in declaring 
war. Shakspere here follows Holinshed with remarkable 



202 



NOTES 



closeness. The plot of the churchmen to stir up war in 
order to distract attention from the proposal to deprive 
them of their temporal lands, is further developed. 

I. ii. 4. Cousin. Not strictly used, but "a term given 
by princes to other princes and distinguished noblemen." 
(Schmidt). Would he resolved. Desire to be thoroughly 
informed. 

I. ii. 10. Justly. Exactly. 

I. ii. 11. Law halique. See Introd., p. 40. 

I. ii. 14. Reading. Interpretation. 

I. ii. 15. Or nicely . . . soul. Be so foolish as to 
burden your soul which really knows. 

I. ii. 16. Opening. Examining. Miscreate. Illegiti- 
mate. 

Approbation of. Proving. 

Impawn our person. Pledge us to a course of 



Wrong. Wrong-doing. 
Mortality. Human life. 
Under this conjuration. 



On the basis of this 



I. ii. 19. 
I. ii. 21. 

action. 

I. ii. 27. 

I. ii. 28. 

I. ii. 29. 
solemn appeal. 

I. ii. 40. Gloze. Interpret. 

I. ii. 46. Charles the Great. Charlemagne, 

I. ii. 57. Four hundred one and twenty. Shakspere here 
follows Holinshed's inaccurate subtraction. Cf. Introd., p. 
39. 

I. ii. 58. Defunction. Death. 

I. ii. 66. Heir general. Heir to the whole kingdom. 

I. ii. 72. Find. Provide. Shoivs. Appearances. 

I. ii. 74. Convey'd. Passed himself off. 

I. ii. 75. Charlemain. Not Charles the Great, but 
Charles the Bald. 

I. ii. 82. Lineal of. Lineally descended from. 

I. ii. 88. Lewis his. Cf. Introd., p. 44, 2, c. 

I. ii. 93. Hide them in a net. Take refuge behind 
claims that afford no better protection than a net and are 
as easily seen through ; or, "bury themselves in a maze 
of contradictions" (Moore Smith). 

I. ii. 94. Imhar. Either bar in, defend, make secure ; 
or bar out, exclude. Schmidt says that the word is used 
in the same sense as "bar" in 1. 92, and interprets thus : 
"they strive to exclude you, instead of excluding amply, 
i. e. without restriction or subterfuge, their own false 



NOTES 203 

titles." The former interpretation seems to be the better. 
I. ii. 98. In . . . Numbers. Numbers xxvii. 8 : "If a 
man die, and have no son, then shall ye caus6 his inherit- 
ance to pass unto his daughter." 

I. ii. 106. Play'd a tragedy. The battle of Crecy, 1346. 
The incident alluded to is thus described by Holinshed : 
"The earle of Northampton and others sent to the King 
[Edward III.], where he stood aloft on a windmill-hill; the 
King demanded if his Sonne were slaine, hurt, or felled 
to the earth. No, said the knight that brought the mes- 
sage, but he is sore matched. Well, (said the King) re- 
turne to him and them that sent you, and sale to them, 
that they send no more to me for any adventure that 
falleth, so long as my son is alive ; for I will that this 
journeye be his, with the honor thereof." 

I. ii. 114. Gold for action. For want of action. Cf. 
Macbeth, I. v. 37, "dead for breath" ; Cymheline, III. vi. 17, 
"to sink for food." 

I. ii. 118. Renowned. Made famous. 

I. ii. 137. Lay down our proportions. Estimate the 
numbers necessary. 

I. ii. 138. Road. Inroad. 

I. ii. 139. With all advantages. Whenever opportunity 
offers. 

I. ii. 140. Marches. Borders. 

I. ii. 143. Coursing snatchers. Swiftly riding raiders. 

I. ii. 144. Intendment. Intention. 

I. ii. 145. Still. Ever ; a very common use in Shakspere. 

I. ii. 148. Unfurnish'd. Unprotected. 

I. ii. 151. Gleaned. Stripped of defenders. Assays. 
Attacks. 

I. ii. 153. That. So that. 

I. ii. 154. Shook. Cf. Introd., p. 46, 4, c. 

I. ii. 155. Fear'd. Frightenea. 

I. ii. 160. Impounded as a stray. As straying cattle are 
shut up in a pound. 

I. ii. 161. King of Scots. David Bruce, taken prisoner 
in 1346, while Edward III. was in France. 

I. ii. 165. Sumless treasuries. Inestimable treasures. 

I. ii. 173. Havoc. Destroy. 

I. ii. 175. Crush'd. "Forced, strained" (Schmidt) : or, 
already exploded. 

I. ii. 179. Advised. Considerate. 

I. ii. 180. For government, etc. The various offices of 





il. 


190. 




ii. 


194. 




ii. 


199. 




ii. 


202. 




ii. 


203. 




ii. 


207. 




ii. 


212. 




ii. 


216. 




ii. 


219. 



204 NOTES 

government work together for one common end, even as 
the voices in a part song produce harmony. 

I. ii. 181. Consent. There is apparently some confusion 
of the word as thus spelled with concent, meaning concord, 
harmony, and in a figurative sense, accord. See N. E. D. 
under both spellings. Shakspere had both meanings in mind. 
I. ii. 182. Congreeing. Agreeing. Close. "The conclu- 
sion of a musical phrase, theme, or movement ; a cadence." 
{N. E. D.) 

Of sorts. Of various ranks. 
Boot. Booty. 
Civil. Peaceful, orderly. 
Bad-eyed. Grave-looking. 
Executors. Executioners. 
Several ways, irom several directions. 
Well tome. Successfully managed. 
Gallia. France. 

Worried. As a bear is worried or harassed 
by dogs. 

I. ii. 220. Name of hardiness and policy. Reputation 
for bravery and statesmanship. 

I. ii. 224. Our awe. Awe of us. 

I. ii. 225. Or. Either. 

I. ii. 226. Empery. Empire, sovereignty. 

I. ii. 233. Not epitaph. Not honored with an 

epitaph even of wax, one of the least durable of materials, 
much less one of stone. 
I. ii. 242. Grace. Virtue. 
I. ii. 243. 7s. Cf. Introd., p. 46, 4, a. 
I. ii. 252. . Galliard. A lively dance. 

I. ii. 255. Tun of treasure. The stage direction of The 
Famous Victories reads, "He delivereth a Tunne of Tennis 
balles." 

I. ii. 263. Hazard. The name of one part of a tennis 
court ; a stroke into the hazard would be a winning stroke. 
There is also a pun on the ordinary meaning of the word, 
as is the case with courts and chaces below. 
I. ii. 264. Wrangler. Opponent. 

I. ii. 266. Chaces. Chace seems to have been used both 
as the name of a kind of stroke and as the point gained 
by such a stroke. Shakspere uses it in a loose sense as 
equivalent to game or match. 

I. ii. 267. Comes o'er. Taunts. 

I. ii. 269ff. Henry is making an ironical contrast be- 



NOTES 205 

tween the value he seems to have placed on the throne of 
England during the wild days of his youth and that which 
he intends to place upon the throne of France. 

I, ii. 274. Show my sail of greatness. Display myself 
in all my glory, like a ship under full sail. 

I. ii. 282. Gun-stones. The first cannon balls were of 
stone. 

I. ii. 300. Ha'ppy hour. Suitable occasion. 

I. ii, 304. Proportions. Levies, forces. 

1. ii. 307. God before. God going before as guide and 
helper. 

11. Prologue. This fills the interval in time between 
Acts I and II by describing the preparations for the war, 
and the treason of the three English lords, the heinousness 
of which is emphasized and its punishment announced. 

2. Silken dalliance. The silk clothing suitable for court 
is laid aside in favor of armor, and with it courtly dalliance. 

7. Winged heels. Alluding to the winged sandals of 

Mercury. 

9. Hilts. We use the singular, but the plural form 
was commonly used by Shakspere, and was suggested by 
the projection on either side of the blade of the single bar 
of steel that formed the guard. The artistic representa- 
tion of victory in war by a crown-encircled sword was fre- 
quent and there was actually such a wood-cut in the first 
edition of Holinshed, which Shakspere may have had in 
mind. 

12. Advis'd. Informed, 

14. Policy. In its bad sense of intrigue, underhand 
scheming. 

18. Would thee do. Would desire thee to do, 

19. Kind. Almost synonymous with natural, in its 
sense of being true to nature and kinship. 

26. Gilt . . . guilt. For the pun, cf. 2 Henry IV., IV. 
V. 129, "England shall double gild his treble guilt," and 
Macbeth, II. ii. 56, "I'll gild the faces of the grooms withal, 
For it must seem their guilt." 

28. Grace of kings. Noblest ornament of the kingly 
title, practically equivalent to noblest of kings. 

31. Linger . . . on. Prolong. We'll digest . . . dis- 
tance. We will satisfactorily dispose of the abuse of stage 
conventions as to distance in the transference of the scene 
from London to Southampton. 



NOTES 

32. Force ^^f^/T We will "force events to adjust them- 
selves to the requirements and compass of a drama." 
(Evans). 

35. Gentles. CI I. Prol. 8, and note. 

39. Pass. Passage. 

40. We'll not . . . play. We'll guarantee that no one 
shall be sea-sick while we are taking him across the chan- 
nel, and that there is nothing in this play to offend any 
one's taste. 

41. Till. When. 

II. i. The group of comic characters with whom the 
audience had become acquainted in 1 and 2 Henry IV. are 
reintroduced with the addition of Nym, but with the excep- 
tion of the most popular of all, Falstaff, for the announce- 
ment of whose death the scene prepares. The characters of 
Bardolph, Pistol, and Nym are perfectly differentiated. The 
first conceals a thievish and not over valorous disposition 
under the exterior of a bluff, hard-swearing soldier ; Pistol 
is a swaggering coward, whose speech is largely made up 
of scraps picked up at the theater, and big sounding wordi 
unintelligently used ; Nym is absurdly dark and mysterious, 
saying little but hinting much, and given to the use of 
almost meaningless formulas. 

The group as a whole has no effect on the main action 
of the play, and the scenes in which they occur are an 
illustration of the practice of Shakspere in his later his- 
tories of lightening the serious action with what is almost 
Independent comedy. 

II. i. 3. Ancient. Ensign. Sometimes spelled Aunchient. 

II. i. 8. WinJc. Shut my eyes. Iron. Sword. 

II. i. 14. To France. For omission of verb of motion, 
cf. Introd., p. 46, 4, d. 

II. i. 18. Rest. Determination. 

II. i. 19. Rendezvous. That's what it all comes to. 

II. i. 22. Troth-plight. Betrothed. 

II. i. 24. Men may sleep . . . edges. One of Nym's dark 
hints, expressive of what might happen to Pistol. 

II. i. 28. Conclusions. There must be an end to every- 
thing. 

II. i. 33. Tike. Cur. 

II. i. 41. Lady. An oath by the Virgin. Be not drawn. 
Has not drawn his sword. 

II. i, 47. Iceland dog. Dogs from Iceland were common 



NOTES 207 

pets in Elizabethan England, but there is no special 
signification in Pistol's taunt. 

II. i. 50. Shog. A form of jog. 

II. i. 51. Solus. Nym uses the word comprehendingly,. 
but Pistol, in his ignorance of Latin, takes it as some 
strange insult. 

II. i. 55. Maw. Stomach. Perdy. A corruption of the 
French oath par Dieu. 

II. i. 58. Pistol is here, of course, punning on his name. 

II. i. 60. Barhason. The name of a devil. Conjure. 
You cannot scare me with your unintelligible lingo. 

II. i. 61. Humour. Inclination. 

II. i. 63. Scour. More punning on Pistol's name. Nym 
will run Pistol through as one would scour a pistol-barrel, 
grown foul from shooting. 

II. i. 69. Exhale. Breathe your last ; or perhaps, draw 
your sword. 

II. i. 73. Alickle. Great. 

II. i. 75. Tall. Brave. 

II. i. 78. Couple a gorge. Pistolese French for couper 
la gorge. 

II. i. 80. Hound of Crete. Rather indefinite in mean- 
ing like Iceland dog above. 

II. i. 81. Spital. Hospital. 

II. i. 82. Powdering tul). A tub used for powdering 
or salting meat ; the treatment for certain diseases was 
sweating in a heated tub. 

II. i. 83. Lazar kite of Cressid's kind. Shakspere later 
dramatized the story of the Trojan Troilus and the Greek 
maiden Cressida, who was false to her lover. According 
to Henryson's sequel to Chaucer's version of the story 
Cressida was punished with leprosy for her faithlessness. 
Kite was used as a term of reproach for a loose woman. 

II. i. 85. Quondam. Former. 

II. i. 86. She. For similar use of "she" for "woman," 
cf. Ticelfth JSiight, I. v. 259, "Lady, you are the cruell'st 
she alive," and As You Like It, III. ii. 10, "The fair, the 
chaste and unexpressive she." Pauca. I. e. "pauca verba," 
few words. 

II. i. 87. Go to. A contemptuous expression, as we 
would say "Get out." 

II. i. 92. Warming-pan. The fiery color of Bardolph's 
face furnishes the point of many a jest in this play and in 



^08 ■ NOTES 

Henry IV. III. A stronger word in Shakspere's time than 
now, implying actual bodily suffering. 

II. i. 95. The King has kilVd his heart. Broken his 
heart by casting him off. See the close of 2 Henry IV. 

II. i. 96. Presently. At once. 

II. i. 108. Compound. Settle the bill. 

II. i. 113. An. If. 

II. i. 117. Nolile. Eight shillings and sixpence. Present. 
Immediate. 

II. i. 121. Sutler. A camp follower who sells provisions. 

II. i. 125. Justly. Exactly. 

II. i. 129. Quotidian tertian. One of Mrs. Quickly's 
frequent blunders. In a quotidian fever the fits occur daily, 
in a tertian every third day. 

II. i. 135. Fracted. Broken. Corroborate. Pistol did 
not know the meaning of the word but used it because it 
sounded well. 

II. i. 137. Some humours and careers. Some queer 
courses of action. 

II. ii. This scene continues the glorification of the 
King's character by depicting the cleverness with which he 
forces the traitors to open confession and to pronouncing 
judgment on themselves (an idea which is Shakspere's own), 
and his disavowal of personal malice against them. 

II. ii. 2. By and hy. Presently. 

II. ii. 8. Bedfellow. For a nobleman to be invited to 

share the King's bed was naturally a sign of high favor. 

II. ii. 14. Oentle. Noble, of gentle birth. 

II. ii. 18. Head. Armed force. 

II. ii. 22. Grows not in a fair consent. Is not in 
perfect agreement. 

II. ii. 23. Nor . . . not. For double negative, cf. Introd., 
p. 47, 5, a. 

II. ii. 31. Create. A past participle. Cf. miscreaie, 
I. ii. 16. 

II. ii. 34. Quittance. Requital. 

II. ii. 40. Enlarge. Release. 

II. ii. 43. On his more advice. On his thinking the 
matter over further. 

II. ii. 44. Security. Confidence, carelessness. 

II. ii. 46. By his sufferance. By suffering him to go 
unpunished. 

II. ii. 53. Orisons. Petitions. 



NOTES 209 

II. ii. 54. On distemijer. From physical disturbance. 
Distemper was used of any disorder of mind or body. 

II. ii. 61. Late. Lately appointed. 

II. ii. 79. Quick. Living. 

II. ii. 86. Apt . . . to accord. Ready to consent. 

II. ii. 87. All appertinents. Everything that apper- 
tained. 

II. ii. 90. Practices. Plots. 

II. ii. 99. Practised on. Conspired against. 

II. ii. 103. Gross. Apparent, easily perceived. 

II. ii. 107-8. Working . . . at them. Working together 
in a common cause with such obvious, natural propriety that 
their companionship never excited a cry of wonder. 

II. ii. 109. 'Gainst all proportion. Contrary to all fit- 
ness. 

II. ii. 113. Voice. Verdict, vote. 

II. ii. 114. Suggest. Tempt. The general sense of 11. 
114-120 is. this: Other devils, when they tempt a man to 
commit treason, clumsily try to conceal the damnable 
nature of the act {botch and hungle up damnation) by giv- 
ing it an appearance of piety ; but the devil that moulded 
(tempered) thee to his purpose, simply ordered thee to 
stand up to do his service, and gave thee no better reason 
why thou shouldst do treason than that thou mightst be 
called a traitor. 

II. ii. 121. Gull'd. Deceived. 

II. ii. 122. Lion gait. 1 Peter, v. 8 : "your adversary 
the devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom 
he may devour." 

II. ii. 123. Tartar. Tartarus, the hell of classical 
mythology. 

II. ii. 124. Legions. /. e., of devils. Cf. Mark, v. 9 : 
"My name is legion." 

II. ii. 126. Jealousy. Suspicion. 

II. ii. 127. Affiance. Confidence, trust. Show. Appear. 

II. ii. 133. Swerving with the Hood. Swayed by pas- 
sion. 

II. ii. 134. Modest complement. Outward appearance 
of modesty ; or, a complete set of all those qualities that 
make for moderation. 

II. ii. 135. islot . . . neither. Not trusting the evidence 
of the eye unless it was supported by that of the ear, and 
trusting neither of these until the evidence had been sub- 
jected to scrutiny by the reason. 



210 fllH Nt)TES 

II. ii. 137. Bolted. Sifted, i, e., purged of all undesir- 
able qualities. 

II. ii. 139. Full-fraught. Fully equipped. Best indued. 
Endowed with all virtues. 

II. ii. 151. Discovered. Revealed. 

II. ii. 154. Which. Referring to fault. 

II. ii. 158. Cambridge's real reason for joining in the 
conspiracy was that he hoped, when Henry was out of the 
way, the throne would fall to his wife's brother, the Earl 
of March. 

II. ii. 167. Quit. Acquit, pardon. 

II. ii. 170. Earnest. A part paid beforehand as a pledge. 

II. ii. 176. Tender. Regard, hold dear. 

II. ii. 182. Dear. Grievous. The adjective was used 
or anything that concerned one nearly. 

II. ii. 189. Ruli. Obstacle ; in the game of bowls a rub 
was any obstacle that turned the ball from its course. 

II. ii. 191. Puissance. For pronunciation, .cf. Introd., 
p. 42, 6. 

II. ii. 193. The signs of tear advance. Raise the 
standards. 

II. iii. Certainly one of the most daring and most per- 
fect scenes in all drama in its combination of humor and 
pathos. The most striking thing about it is its simplicity 
and naturalness : each character speaks in his or her own 
peculiar fashion ; Mrs. Quickly makes her customary errors, 
Bardolph is twitted about his red nose, Pistol rants as 
usual. Yet there is the most poignant appeal to our 
sympathies as we thus bid FalstafE a last farewell. Like 
II. 1., it has no influence upon the main plot. 

II. iii. 1. Bring. Accompany. 

II. iii. 3. Yearn. Grieve. 

II. iii. 10. Arthur's hosom. 'Mrs. Quickly's rendering of 
"Abraham's bosom." Cf. the parable of Lazarus. 

II. iii. 12. Christom. Chrisom, or christening robe. A 
chrisom child was one in its first month, still wearing the 
white garment in which it was baptized ; hence, an inno- 
cent child. 

II. iii. 13. At the turning o' the tide. It was an old 
superstition that death came when the tide was at its 
lowest ebb. 

II. iii. 18. 'A dabbled of green fields. The most famous 
of all Shaksperean emendations, made by Theobald. Fi reads : 
"and a Table of greene fields." Various other readings have 



NOTES 211 

been proposed, but this is supported by "play with flowers," 
and is in the most perfect accord with the rest of the 
description. 'A. He ; a dialect form. 

II, iii. 31. Of sack. Against sack, Falstaff's favorite 
drink. 

II. iii. 49. 8hog. Cf. II. i. 50, note. 

II. iii. 53. Senses. Common sense. ''Pitch and Pay." 
Lay down your money, no credit given ; proverbial. 

II. iii. 55. Faiths are wafer-calces. Oaths are as easily 
broken as thin cakes. 

II. iii. 56. Hold-fast is the only dog. The proverb runs, 
"Brag is a good dog, but Hold-fast is a better." 

II. iii. 57. Caveto. Be cautious. 

II. iii. 58. Clear thy crystals. Wipe your eyes. 

II. iii. 66. Keep close. Don't go gadding round. 

II. iv. The King is here exalted by putting his praise 
into the mouths of the French themselves. The prelimi- 
naries to the war are here concluded, and we are ready for 
the main action. The elaborateness of Shakspere's pre- 
liminary exposition of the King's virtues is an indication 
of the extent to which his personality is to be the main 
theme of the play. 

Comes. Cf. Introd., p. 46, 4, a. 
Make. Go, as often. 
Line. Strengthen. 
Defendant. Of defence. 
England. The King of England. 
Gulf. Whirlpool. 

Fatal and neglected. Fatally negle^-ted, fatal 
because neglected. 

II. iv. 17. Nor no. Double negative. 

II. iv. 19. The three verbs correspond respectively to the 
three nouns in the preceding line. 

II. iv. 20. As ivere. As if a war were. 

II. iv. 25. Whitsun morris dance. The morris was a 
dance in which the performers were variously and fantastic- 
ally attired in ribbon, bells and other trinkets, and which 
came to be associated with the festivities of May-day and 
Whitsunday, the seventh Sunday after Easter. The word 
morris is supposed to be connected with "Moorish," as 
indicating a somewhat doubtful origin of the dance. 

II. iv. 28. Humourous, i.uled by whims, capricious. 

II. iv. 34. Modest in exception. Moderate in taking ex- 
ception. 





iv. 


1, 




iv. 


5, 




iv. 


7. 




iv. 


8, 




iv. 


9, 




iv. 


K 




iv. 


i; 



gl2 NOTES 

II. iv. 37. Brutus. When perfecting his plans to drive 
the Tarquins from Rome, Brutus, the better to conceal his 
purpose, feigned madness. 

II. iv. 45ff. In this way the forces necessary for de- 
fence are made up, which, if planned on a niggardly scale, 
would be inadequate, even as a coat is spoiled by a stingy 
tailor who does not allow cloth enough. 

II. iv. 50. Flesh'd. Made fierce by feeding on flesh, as 
dogs are encouraged by being fed with flesh of the game 
they are hunting. 

II. iv. 51. Strain. Breed, race. 

II. iv. 57 fE. Cf. I. ii. 106 ff., and note. 

II. iv. 64. Fate. What he is destined to do. 

II. iv. 67. Present. Instant. 

II. iv. 70. Spend their mouths. Bay. 
. II. iv. 71. Good my. My good ; the possessive has be- 
come so closely associated with the noun that the adjective 
has been forced out of its regular position. 

II. iv. 80. Longs. Belongs ; note singular form. 

II. iv. 85. Sinister . . . awkward. Left-handed . . . 
back-handed ; hence both are practically equivalent to illegi- 
timate. 

II. iv. 88. Memorahle line. Pedigree which calls to 
memory his claims to the throne of France. 

II. iv. 90. Willing you. Desiring you to. For omission 
of to see Introd., p. 47, 4, f. 

Evenly. Directly. 

Indirectly. Unjustly ; contrasted with evenly. 
Challengei\ Claimant. 
Requiring. Asking ; not so forcible a word 

Bowels of the Lord. A Biblical phrase ; the 
compassion of the Lord. 

II. iv. 124. Womhy vaultages. Hollow caverns. 

II. iv. 126. Second accent. Echo. 

II. iv. 132. Louvre. The royal palace. 

II. iv. 133. Mistress court. The chief court, whether for 
tennis or of a king. 

II. iv. 136. Greener. Younger, cruder. 

II. iv. 137. Masters. Possesses, with an idea of making 
the best use of, as opposed to the frivolity of his "greener 
days." 

II. iv. 143. Footed. Landed. 



II. iv. 


91. 


II. iv. 


94. 


II. iv. 


95. 


II. iv. 


101. 


as now. 




IL iv. 


102. 



NOTES 213 

III. Prologue 1. Imagin'd wing. Wing of imagination. 
Cf. I. Pi-ol. 18. 

4. Appointed. Equipped. 

5. Brave. Making a gallant show. 

14. Rivage. Banks. A collective formation in-age 

which appears again in sternage, 1. 18, and portage. III. 
i. 10. 

18. Sternage. Sterns. 

20. With. By. This is a common usage in Shakspere. 
Cf. Introd., p. 48, 6, c. 

32. Likes. Pleases. 

33. Linstock. Stick to hold the gunner's match. 

S. D. Chambers. Small cannon. It was such a dis- 
charge that caused the burning of the Globe theater in 1613. 

Ill, i. This is the first of several splendid pictures of 
Henry as a soldier, a name that in his thoughts became him 
best, as he says in III. iii. 6. Beyond this displaying of the 
hero, the scene merely indicates the progress of the 
campaign. 

III. i. 4. Modest. Moderate. 

III. i. 9. Aspect. For accent see Introd., p. 42, 6. 

III. i. 10. Portage. Portholes. 

III. i. 11. O'eriohelm. Project over. 

III. i. 12. Galled. Worn. 

III. i. 13. Jutty. Project over. His. See Introd., p. 
44, 2, b. Confounded. Destroyed, wave-worn. 

III. i. 14, SicilVd. Washed. 

III. i. 17. Noblest. Noblest in blood, as distinguished 
from yeomen below. 

III. i. 18. Fet. Fetched. Of tvar-proof. Proved in war. 

III. i. 21. Argument. Matter for a fight, i. e. opposition. 

III. i. 27. Mettle of your pasture. Quality of your 
feeding, 

III. i. 31. Slips. Leashes, from which the hounds were 
let slip when game was started. 

III. i. 32. Upon the start. To bring about the start. 

III. i. 34. There are two battle-cries in this line. 

III. ii. This scene, with its introduction of English, 
Welsh, Scotch and Irish soldiers, illustrates the enthusiastic 
union of soldiers from all parts of the British Isles under 
Henry's leadership. The dialect peculiarities are introduced 
for comic effect, and are not carried through with any great 
consistency. 



214 



NOTES 



III. ii. 5. Case of lives. Set of lives. A case of pistols 
or rapiers is a pair. 

III. ii. 6. Plain-song. The simple melody without varia- 
That's the plain truth about the matter. 

etc. These may be snatches of popular songs 



tions. 


That' 


III. 


ii. 8, 


of the 


day. 


III. 


ii. 22. 


III. 


ii. 23. 


mortal 


men. 


III. 


ii. 26. 


III. 


ii. 30. 


III. 


ii. 33. 


III. 


ii. 34. 


III. 


ii. 35. 


III. 


ii. 46. 


sort. 




III. 


ii. 51. 



Cullions. Base wretches. 
Men of mould. Men made 



of earth, poor 



BatvcocJc. Fine fellow. Fr. heau coq. 

Sivashers. Swash-bucklers, swaggerers. 

Antics. Buffoons. 

White-liver'd. Cowardly. 

'A. Dialect pronunciation of he. 

Purchase. Thieves' slang for booty of 



any 



Carry coals. Submit to any degrading ser- 
vice or affront. 

III. ii. 56. Pocketing up of wrongs. Cf. our expression 
"to pocket an insult." 

III. ii. 68. Discuss. Tell. 

III. ii. 69. Under the countermines. What Fluellen 
really means is that the French had dug countermines four 
yards under the English mines. 

III. ii. 77. Be. Subjunctive of indirect discourse. 
Ood-den. Good evening. 

Pioners. Pioneers, who made roads, dug 
ip fortifications, etc. 
Quit. Requite, give you answering argu- 

Marry. An oath by the Virgin Mary ; cf. 

Beseech'd. Besieged. 

Mess. Mass, the church service. 

Lig. Lie. 

Breff. Brief, short. 

The hot-headed Macmorris takes the mere 
mention of his nation as an insult. 

III. ii. 155. More better. Cf. Introd., p. 45, 3, a. But 
this may be meant for Fluellen's broken English. 
III. iii. 2. Latest parle. Last parley. 
III. iii. 11. Flesh'd. Cf. xl. iv. 50, note. 
III. iii. 16. Like to. In the shape of. 
III. iii. 24. Bootless. An adverb ; vainly. 



IIL 


ii. 


94. 


IIL 


ii. 


97. 


mines, 


threw i 


III. 


ii. 


115. 


meuts 






III. 


ii. 


116. 


Lady, 


II. 


i. 41 


III. 


ii. 


120. 


III. 


ii. 


127. 


III. 


ii. 


129. 


IIL 


ii. 


131. 


III. 


ii. 


137. 



NOTES 215 

III. iii. 26. Preccpis. According to Schmidt, when the 
word means mandates, commands, as here, the accent is on 
the second syllable. Cf. Introd., p. 42, 6. 

III. iii. 31. O'erbloios. Blows away. Contagious. It 
was a common idea in Shakspere's time that contagion was 
carried in cloud or mist. 

III. iii. S2. Heady. Headlong. Cf. I. i. 34. 

III. iii. 41, The slaughter of the innocents, described in 
Mattlieic, ii. 16-18. 

III. iii. 46. Returns us that Ms poioers. Sends us back 
word that his forces. 

III. iii. 50. Defensible. With an active meaning, able 
to defend ourselves. 

III. iii. 58. Adclrest. Prepared. 

III. iv. The authenticity of this scene has been doubted 
by several critics, but there is no good reason for supposing 
that Shakspere did not write it. As Johnson says of it : 
"The scene is indeed mean enough when it is read ; but the 
grimaces of the two French women, and the accent with 
which they uttered the English, made it divert on the stage." 
In other words it is a distinctly comic scene, the whole point 
of which would he lost if the ladies did not speak in French, 
the feature to which objection has chiefly been raised. More- 
over, it gives a rather pleasing picture of the young French 
princess in her desire to be able to converse in his own 
language with her royal lover, for she must be aware of the 
offer of her hand to Henry. Finally, from the standpoint of 
dramatic construction, it serves to introduce a character 
with whom the audience ought to be acquainted before the 
final scene in which she plays an important part. 

The translation follows : 

Kath. Alice, you have been in England, and you speak 
the language well. 

Alice. A little, madame. 

Kath. Teach me, I beg you ; I must learn to speak. What 
do you call la main in English? 

Alice. La main? It is called de hand. 

Kath. De hand. And les doigtsf 

Alice. Les doigtsf My faith, I forget les doigts ; but I 
shall remember, Les doigts? I think that they are called 
de flngres ; yes, de fingres. 

Kath. La main, de hand ; les doigts, de fingres. I think 
that I am a good scholar ; I have learned two words of 
English quickly. What do you call les angles ? 



216 



NOTES 



Alice, Les ongles? We call them de nails. 

Kwtn. De nails. Listen ; tell me if I speak well : de 
hand, de flngres, and de nails. 

Alice, That is well said, madame ; it is very good 
English. 

Katli. Tell me the English for le bras. 

Alice. De arm, madame. 

Katli. And le coiide? 

Alice. D'elbow. 

Kath. D'elbow. I will repeat all the words you have 
taught me up to now. 

Alice. It is too difficult, madame, I think. 

Kath. Excuse me, Alice ; listen : D'hand, de fingres, de 
nails, d'arma, de bilbow. , 

Alice. D'elbow, madame. 

O Lord, I forget ! D'elbow. What do you call 



Kath. 
le col? 
Alice. 
Kath. 
Alice. 
Kath, 
Alice. 



De nick, madame. 
De nick. And le nienton? 
De chin. 

De sin. Le col, de nick ; le menton, de sin. 
Yes, Saving your presence, truly you pronounce 
the words as correctly as the natives of England. 

Kath. I do not doubt that I shall learn, by God's grace, 
and in a short time. 

Alice. Have you not already forgotten what I have 
taught you? 

Kath. No ; I will recite to you promptly : d'hand, de 
fingres, de mails, 

Alice. De nails, madame. 

Kath. De nails, de arm, de ilbow. 

Alice. Saving your presence, de elbow. 

Kath. So I said ; d'elbow, de nick, and de sin. What do 
you call le pied and la rohe? 

Alice. De foot, madame ; and de coun. 

Kath. De foot and de coun. O Lord, these are words of 
bad, corrupt, coarse, and immodest sound, and not to be used 
by honorable ladies. I will recite once more my whole les- 
son : d'hand, de fingres, de nails, d'arm, d'elbow, de nick, de 
sin, de foot, de coun. 

Alice, Excellent, madame ! 

Kath. That is enough for one time : let us go to dinner. 

III. V. The contempt here expressed for the English by 
the French is in strong contrast with their sufficiently hum- 





V. 6. 




V. 7. 




V. 8. 




V. 11, 




V. 13. 




V. 14, 


necks 


and c 



NOTES 217 

ble attitude after the battle, and with the piety and mutual 
affection displayed in the English camp. 

III. V. 5. O Dieu vivant ! G living God ! 
Luxury. Lust. 

Scions. Shoots, cuttings, grafts. 
Spirt. Sprout. 

Mort cle ma vie. Death of my life ! 
SloMery. Wet and dirty, sloppy. 
Nook-shotten. Either shooting out into many 
and capes, full of nooks ; or shot ofE into a remote 
corner of the world. The latter seems preferable, as being 
more contemptuous. 

III. V. 15. Dieu de hatailles ! God of battles ! Batailles 
has three syllables here. 

III. V. 18. Sodden. Boiled. Sodden tcater and tarley- 
troth are scornful terms for beer. 

III. V. 19. Sur-rein'd. Over-ridden. 

III. V. 20. Decoct. Heat. 

III. V. 26. Them. The rich fields of France. 

III. V. 29. Bred out. Degenerated through successive 
breedings. 

III. V. 33. Lavoltas. A dance which involved a good 
deal of high jumping. Corantos. Also a lively dance, but 
more gliding. 

III. V. 39. More sharper. See Introd., p. 45, 3, a. 

III. V. 47. For the sake of your high positions clear 
yourselves from great shame. 

III. v. 52. Rheum. Moisture. 

III. V. 60. For achievement. As his chief exploit. 

III. vi. This scene falls into two parts. The first is 
merely a continuation of the comic dialogue used to lighten 
the heroics of the main action ; the second serves to empha- 
size the cocksureness of the French and the quiet restraint 
of the English king. 

III. vi. 7. Agamemnon. Leader of the Greeks in the 
war against Troy. 

III. vi. 15. Mark Antony. Caesar's friend and avenger ; 
later one of the three Romans who ruled the world. 

III. vi. 16. Estimation. Reputation. 

III. vi. 20. Aunchient. The spelling indicates the Eliza- 
bethan pronunciation of ancient, ensign. 

III. vi. 28. Buxom. Brisk ; the earlier meaning was 
bending, supple, and there is considerable unintentional 
humor on Pistol's part in applying to Bardolph's valor aa 



218 



adjective whicli describes it so much, more accurately than 
the sense in which Pistol- takes 'buxom. 

III. vi. 43. There was an old ballad entitled "Fortune, 
my foe !" 

III. vi. 44. Pax. A small tablet stamped with a figure 
of Christ on the cross, which was offered to the congrega- 
tion to be kissed at one point in the mass. Pax is the Folio 
reading, but in Holinshed the object of the theft was a pix 
(pyx), the casket in which was kept the consecrated wafer. 
III. vi. 62. Figo. Same as iig of Spain below. The "fig" 
was an insulting gesture borrowed from Spain. 

Learn. Teach, tell. 

Sconce. Small round fortification. 

Bravely. Finely. 

Stood on. Held out for. Con. Learn by 

Beard of the general's cut. There were sev- 
eral well recognized fashions of trimming the beard, and 
certain professions seem to have adopted certain shapes. 
Horrid. Rough. 



III. 


vi. 


77, 


III. 


vi. 


79, 


III. 


vi. 


80, 


III. 


vi. 


82, 


heart. 






III. 


vi. 


85. 



III. vi. 


88. 


III. vi. 


90. 


III. vi. 


111. 


III. vi. 


116. 


III. vi. 


117. 


III. vi. 


130. 


Mont joy. 


The 


rank. 




III. vi. 


131. 


was sleeveless 


III. vi. 


133. 


III. vi. 


138. 


tunity. 




III. vi. 


142. 


for us to 


speak 


actor. 




III. vi. 


144. 


patience. 




III. vi. 


148. 


III. vi. 


149. 


III. vi. 


159. 


III. vi. 


164. 


III. vi. 


166. 


III. vi. 


178. 



Slanders of the age. 
Mistook. See Introd 

Perdition. Loss. 

Buhukles. Pimples. 

Whelks. Boils. 

S. D. Tucket. Signal 



Slanders on their time, 
p. 46, 4, c. 



on the trumpet. 



The official name of the French herald of highest 

Hahit. Coat ; in the case of a herald this 
nd richly adorned. 

Oy. From. Cf. Introd., p. 48, 6, c. 
Advantage. Watching for favorable oppor- 



Upon our cue. The proper time has come 
a figure from Shakspere's own profession of 

Admire our sufferance. Wonder at our 

Re-anstver. Make amends. 

Pettiness. Small resources. 

Quality. Profession. 

Impeachment. Hindrance. Sooth. Truth. 

Of . . . vantage. Having the advantage. 

God before. Cf. I. ii. 307, note. 



NOTES 219 

III. vL 189. Deliver. Report. 

III. vii. This depiction of the supercilious contempt of 
the French for the English, inferior in numbers, poorly 
•equipped and worn by hard compaigning, serves, of course, 
to increase the glory of Henry's victory, and the caricature 
of the French nobility must have tickled mightily the Eliza- 
bethan sense of humor and national prejudice. The punning 
and capping of proverbs, which strike us as rather flat, were 
regular features of the conversation of Shakspere's day, 
when ingenuity of repartee was part of a courtier's equip- 
ment for social success. 

III. vii. 13. Pasterns. The pastern is that part of a 
horse's leg between the fetlock and the joint next above it. 

III. vii. 14. Hairs. Tennis balls were then stufEed with 
hair. Le cJieval volant. The flying horse, i. e. Pegasus, 1. lo. 

III. vii. 15. Chez les narines de feu! With nostrils of 
fire. 

III. vii. 19. Pipe of Hermes. The shepherd's pipe in- 
vented by Hermes. 

III. vii. 23. Dull elements. It was formerly believed 
that all things were compounded of the four elements — air, 
fire, earth, and water, and that the higher the form of life 
the more of the first two elements it contained. 

III. vii. 28. Absolute. Perfect. 
Argument. Subject. 
Fac'd out of my way. Outfaced, put to 



III. 


vii. 


38. 


III. 


vii. 


67. 


shame. 






III. 


vii. 


71. 



Go to hazard. Risk a wager. Hazard is, 
in the next line, used in its ordinary sense. 
III. vii. 85. Still. Ever. 

III. vii. 97, 98. Hooded . . . hate. A pun based on 
terms of the popular sport of falconry. The hawk was kept 
hooded until it was allowed to fly at its game ; as soon as 
the hood was removed the bird flapped its wings, or baited. 
The pun is with the regular meaning of bate, to abate, to 
dwindle. 

A pox of. Like our "Plague take." 

Peevish. Silly, childish. 

Mope. Act without thought. Fat-brain'd. 



III. vii. 


106. 


III. vii. 


119. 


III. vii. 


120. 


Stupid. 




III. vii. 


122. 


III. vii. 


130. 



Apprehension. Understanding, intelligence. 

Winking. With their eyes shut. Bear- 
baiting was a very popular sport, particularly with the lower 
classes. 



220 NOTES 

III. vii. 135. Sympathize. Are of the same disposition. 
III. vii. 141. Shrewdly. Cursedly. 

III. vii. 144. Stomachs. With a pun on stomach in the 
sense of courage. 

IV. In the fourth act we come at last to the battle field. 
First we have a picture of the English camp the night before 
the battle, contrasting with the last scene of Act III. ; then 
two scenes of contrast between the two camps in the morn- 
ing, immediately before the battle ; then four scenes on the 
field, and lastly the announcement of complete victory. In 
this act the play reaches its climax. 

IV. Prologue. This contains some of the finest descrip- 
tion in the play, in few lines differentiating sharply the ap- 
pearance and attitude of the two camps and exalting the 
soldier King. 

1. Entertain conjecture. Picture to yourselves. 

2. Poring. That makes men pore, strain their eyes, to 
see. 

5. Stilly. Softly. 

8. Paly. Cf. vasty. 

9. Battle. Battalion, army. Um'ber'd. Darkened, shaded 
in the fire-light. Umber was used by actors to stain the 
skin ; cf. As You Like It, I. iii. 114, where Celia says, "And 
with a kind of umber smirch my face." 

12. Accomplishing. Putting the finishing touches on. 

13. Rivets. The helmet had to be riveted to the body 
armor after it was donned by the knight. 

14. Preparation. Five syllables. See Introd., p. 43, 6. 

17. Secure. Confident. 

18. Over-lusty. Over-merry. 

19. Play at dice. Holinshed says, "The soldiers the 
night before had plaid the Englishmen at dice." 

25. Gesture. Bearing. 

26. Investing. "Giving an air of sadness to" (Innes). 
36. Enrounded. Surrounded. 

38. All-watched. Spent in watching. 

39. Freshly. See Introd., p. 47, 5, c. Over-hears at- 
tairtt. Represses the effects of anxiety and exhaustion. 

45. Mean and gentle all. Those of low or of high birth. 

46. As may unworthiness define. In so far as their 
coarser natures can appreciate it. 

47. Touch. Slight description ; or, better, a dash, smack. 
50. Four or five most vile and ragged foils. Sir Philip 



NOTES 221 

Sidney, in his Defense of Poesy, has the same contemptuous 
attitude toward the inadequacy of stage battles : "Two 
Armies flye in, represented with foure swords and bucklers, 
and then what hard heart will not receive it for a pitched 
field?" 

53. Minding true things. Getting the realities into your 
minds. 

IV. i. This scene, besides giving us one of the most 
poetical speeches in the play, is the finest example that we 
have of Shakspere's prose style, strong, supple, and 
picturesque. The King's character is further idealized by 
the piety exhibited in his prayer, an idea which is 
Shakspere's own. 

IV. i. 10. Dress us. Prepare ourselves. 

IV. i. 16. Likes. Pleases." Cf. III. Prol. 32. 

IV. i. 19. Upon example. By comparison with the pains 
of others. 

IV. i. 23. Casted slough. Cast off, as is its skin, or 
slough, by a snake. Legerity. Lightness, nimbleness. 

IV. i. 27. Desire. Invite. 

IV. i. 34. God-a-mercy. God have mercy ; almost equiva- 
lent to gramercy, thank-you. 

IV. i. 35. Qui va Id? Who goes there? 

IV. i. 38. Common, and popular. One of the common 
people. 

IV. i. 40. TraiVst . . . pike. On the march, since 
the pike was long and heavy, it was held just below the 
head, while the foot was allowed to trail on the ground. 

IV. i. 42. The head of the Holy Roman Empire was, 
nominally at least, the greatest secular prince of the world. 

IV. i. 44. BawcocTc. Cf. III. ii. 26, note. 

IV. i. 45. Imp. Scion, shoot. 

IV. i. 51. WelsJiman. He was born at Monmouth, on 
the Welsh border, in a county practically Welsh. 

IV. i. 55. St. Davy's Day. On March first the Welsh 
wore the leek in memory of a battle won over the Saxons 
by the Welsh under the lead of St. David, who had, on that 
occasion, commanded his followers to wear leeks in their 
caps. 

Figo. Cf. III. vi. 62, note. 
Sorts. Fits, agrees. 

Conscience. Inmost thought— not moral. 
Be. Cf. III. ii. 77, note. 
Element. Sky. Shows. Appears. 

/ 



IV. i. 


60. 


IV. i. 


63. 


IV. i. 


83. 


IV. i. 


90. 


IV. i. 


107. 



222 NOTES 

IV. i. 111. His affections are higher mounted. His feel- 
ings are of a finer grade. 

IV. i. 112. Stoop. Become depressed. Mount and stoop 
are terms of falconry ; the hawk was said to stoop when 
descending on its prey. 

IV. i. 122, 3. At all adventures. Come what would. 

IV. i. 129. A many. Though the use of the article with 
"many" has gone out, we still say "a few." 

IV. i. 148. Upon. About. 

IV. i. 150. Raicly. Unprovided for. Cf. Maclieth, IV. 
iii. 26: "Why in that rawness left you wife and child?" 

IV. i. 152. Charitably. In charity, love. 

IV. i. 153. Argument. What they have to do with. 

IV. i. 155. Who. See Introd., p. 44, 2, a. 

IV. i. 156. Against all proportion of suhjection. Con- 
trary to what is becoming in subjects. 

IV. i. 159. Sinfully miscarry. Die in a state of sin. 

IV. i. 165j Irreconcil'd. For which he has not become 
reconciled with Heaven. 

IV. i. 176. Contrived. Plotted. 

IV. i. 179. BulicarJc. Enlisted in order to escape the 
penalty for their crimes. 

IV. i. 182. Naiive. At home. 

IV. i. 184. Beadle. A messenger, who summons persons 
to appear in court. 

IV. 1. 187. The death. The article gives the force of 
judicial punishment. 

IV. i. 190. Unprovided. Unprepared. 

IV. I. 217. Elder-gun. Pop-gun. 

IV. i. 223. Round. Plain-spoken, direct. 

IV. i. 236. Take. Give. It was used of the transfer of 
anything, either way. 

IV. i. 247. Crowns. A pun on the double meaning of 
crown as a coin and the head. The French may lay odds 
of twenty to one, since they so many times outnumber the 
English. Since coins were not milled it was a common 
practice to pare or clip their edges. Such debasing of the 
coinage was treason, but for Englishmen to clip French 
coins, or to cut off French heads, is no treason against Eng- 
land ; hence Henry proposes to do some clipping on his own 
account. 

IV. i. 252. Careful. Anxious. 

IV. i. 256, 7. Whose sense . . . wringing. Who is 
sensitive only to his own petty suffering. 



NOTES 223 

IV. i. 266. Thy soul of adoration. The soul, i. e. the 
essential nature, of the adoration paid thee. 

IV. i. 275. Blown. Breathed. 

IV. i. 276. Flexure. Same as henOing. 

IV. i. 280. Find. Find out. 

IV. i. 281. Balm. The consecrated oil with which a 
king is anointed at his coronation. Ball. The orh carried 
in the king's left hand, as the sceptre in the right, both 
emblems of sovereignty. 

IV. i. 282. Sword . . . mace. These were carried 
before the king in a procession, as symbols of authority. 

IV. i. 283. Jntertissued. Interwoven with gold and 
pearls. 

IV. i. 284. Farced. Stuffed with high-sounding phrases. 

IV. i. 291. Distressful. Got by distressing labor. 

IV. i. 295. Elysium. The abode of the blessed spirits in 
classical mythology. 

IV. i. 296. Hyperion. The sun-god. The peasant rises 
before the sun. 

IV. i. 302. Memher. One who shares in. 

IV. i. 303. Gross. Stupid. Wots. Knows. 

IV. i. 305. Advantages. Benefits. For singular form, 
see Introd., p. 46, 4, a. 

IV. i. 314. Fault. Henry IV. had deposed Richard II. 
and was responsible for his murder. 

IV. i. 315. Compassing. Obtaining. 

IV. i. 316. Interred new. Henry had caused the body 
to be taken from its first resting place and buried in West- 
minster Abbey. 

IV. i. 325. Penitence comes after all. Not all that I 
can do is enough to enable me to dispense with penitence. 

IV. ii. Once more the over-confidence of the French is 
emphasized, in order to bring out the greatness of Henry's 
victory. 

IV. ii. 2. Monies d cheval ! To horse ! 

IV. ii. 4. Yia ! les eauce et la terre. Away ! water and 
earth. 

IV. ii, 5. Bien puis? L'air et le feu. Nothing more? 
Air and fire. If it is necessary to find any particular mean- 
ing in these exclamations, they may perhaps be referred 
back to III. vii. 22 ff. 

IV. ii. 6. del. Heaven. 

IV. ii. 9. Incision. I. e. with your spurs. 



.224 NOTES 

IV. ii. 11. Dout. Do out, put out. Cf. don, do on, and 
doff, do off. 

IV. ii. 18. Shales. Shells. 

IV. ii. 21. Curtle-axe. A corruption of "cutlass," a 
ishort sword. Neither the word nor the weapon has orig- 
inally any connection with "axe." 

IV. ii. 29. Hilding. Base, contemptible. 

IV. ii. 31. Speculation. Looking-on. 

IV. ii. 35. Tucket sonance. Trumpet call. 

IV. ii. 36. Dare the field. ''To dare the field is a term 
in faldonry. Birds are dared when by the falcon in the air 
they are terrified from rising, so that they will be sometimes 
taken by the hand." (Johnson.) 

IV. ii. 39. Desperate of. Despairing of. 

IV. ii. 41. Curtains. Banners. 

IV. ii. 42. Passing. Surpassingly. 

IV. ii. 44. Beaver. The visor of a helmet, which de- 
fended the face, and could be raised and lowered at will. 

IV. ii. 47. Lob. Droop. 

IV. ii. 49. Gimmal. Made of rings or links. 

IV. ii. 51. Executors. Which will dispose of their re- 
mains after the battle. 

IV. ii. 54. Battle. Army. 

IV. ii. 61. Trumpet. Trumpeter. 

IV. iii. The famous speech of the King also expresses 
confidence, but its manly tone is in the strongest possible 
contrast to the contemptuous undervaluation of their enemies 
by the French. 

IV. iii. 2. Rode. See Introd., p. 46, 4, c. 
Mind. Remind. 
Yearns. Grieves, vexes. 
Stomach. Inclination. 
Convoy. Travelling expenses. 
Fears his felloivship to die ivith us. Is 
afraid to be our companion in dying, or at the risk of his 
life. For to die see Introd., p. 47, 4, g. 

IV. iii. 40. Crispian. Oct. 25. The brothers Crispinus 
and Crispianus came from Rome to France to preach the 
gospel, and suffered martyrdom in the fourth century. They 
were shoemakers by trade, and hence became the patron 
saints of that craft. 

IV. iii. 45. Vigil. The evening before the feast day. 

IV. iii. 50. Advantages. Some exaggeration. 



IV. 


iii. 


13. 


IV. 


iii. 


26. 


IV. 


iii. 


35. 


IV. 


iii. 


37. 


IV. 


iii. 


39. 



NOTES 225 

IV. iii. 63. Gentle. Make gentle, raise to the rank of 
gentleman. 

IV. li. 68. Bestow yourself. Take your position. 

IV. iii. 70. Expedience. Expedition, speed. 

IV. iii. 83. Englutted. Swallowed up. 

IV. iii. 84. Mind. Cf. 1. 13 above. 

IV. iii. 86. Retire. A verb used as a noun, as gentles, 
I. Prol. 8, is an adjective so used. 

IV. iii. 91. Achieve. Get. 

IV. iii. 96. Native. At home in England. 

IV. iii. 105. Lilce to the tulleVs grazing. As a bullet 
glances off from the first object it has hit and strikes 
another, continuing to do damage. 

IV. iii. 107. Relapse of mortality. Having a deadly 
reaction. On accent, see Introd., 43, 6. 

IV. iii. 130. Vaivard. Vanguard. 

IV. iv. If it was necessary at all to 

"disgrace 
With four or five most vile and ragged foils, 
Right ill-dispos'd in brawl ridiculous, 
The name of Agincourt," 
it is less incongruous to have this scene, the only one of 
actual contact between the opposing forces (except the 
"excursions" of the stage directions), take place between 
Pistol and a French soldier than between the leaders 
on either side. In the latter case the effect would be to 
belittle the greatness of the characters ; as it is, both the 
comedy of the play and the greatness of the victory are 
increased by making the cowardly Pistol strut as victor. 
The scene lets us down easily and naturally from the tower- 
ing heights of heroic rhetoric reached by Henry in his great 
speech. 

IV. iv. 2. Je pense . . . qiialite. I think that you 
are a gentleman of good birth. 

IV. iv. 4. Qualtitie calmie custure me! The first word 
is Pistol's attempt at qualite. In the rest of the jargon 
some have found the burden of an Elizabethan song, "Galea 
o custure me," supposed to be Irish. 

IV. iv. 6. O Seigneur Dieu ! O Lord God ! Pistol takes 
this exclamation for the announcement of- the Frenchman's 
name, and concludes from the "seigneur" that he must be 
a person of some consequence. 

IV. iv. 9. Perpend. Weigh, consider. 

IV. iv. 10. Fox. Slang for sword. 



226 NOTES 

IV. iv. 13. prenez . . . moi. O take pity ! have 
pity on me ! 

IV. iv. 15. Moi/. A moi was a Portuguese gold coin, 
wortti about seven dollars. Moidore is simply moi de ore, 
gold moi. But it is not necessary to suppose that Pistol 
had any definite coin or amount of money in mind by this 
perversion of moi. He simply considered it an offer of 
ransom of some sort, and was determined to extort as great 
a sum as possible from the frightened Frenchman. 

IV. iv. 16. Rim. Midriff. 

IV. iv. 18. Est il . . . bras? Is it impossible to 
escape the force of your arm ? 

IV. iv. 23. O pardonnez moi! O pardon me! 

IV. iv. 24. Me. Ethical dative. See Introd., p. 45, 2, e. 

IV. iv. 27. £!coutez . . . appele. Listen : what is 
your name? 

IV. iv. 30. Fer. For a similar repetition of a name in 
a threat to produce comic effect, cf. Merry Wives of Windsor, 
IV. ii. 191 ff. : 

"Mrs. Page. Come, Mother Prat ; come, give me your 
hand. 

Ford. I'll prat her. (Beating him.)" 
Firk. Beat. Ferret. Worry like a ferret. 

IV. iv. 36. Que dit-il, monsieur? What does he say, sir? 

IV. iv. 37-39. II me . . . gorge. He bids me tell 
you to make yourself ready ; for this soldier is disposed to 
cut your throat immediately. 

IV. iv. 43. O, je vous . . . ecus. O I pray you, for 
the love of God, pardon me ! I am a gentleman of a good 
house ; save my life, and I will give you two hundred crowns. 

IV. iv. 53 ff. Little sir, what does he say? 

Boy. Again that it is contrary to his oath to pardon any 
prisoner ; however, for the crowns that you have promised, 
he is willing to give you liberty, x-elease. 

Fr. Sol. On my knees I give you a thousand thanks ; and 
I think myself happy to have fallen into the hands of a 
knight who is, I think, the bravest, most valiant and most 
dis^tinguished lord of England. 

IV. iv. 71. Suives . . . capitaine. Follow the great 
captain. 

IV. iv. 77. Roaring devil i' the old play. One of the 
chief functions of the Devil in the old miracle plays was. 
promiscuous roaring. To this he was often incited by the 
Vice, or bflffoon, who belabored him with a lath sword or 



IV. 


vi. 


8. 


IV. 


vi. 


9. 


IV. 


vi. 


11. 


IV. 


vi. 


18. 


IV. 


vi. 


21. 


IV. 


V. 


31. 



NOTES 227 

dagger, with which also the Vice pretended to pare his tra- 
ditionally long nails. That . . . his nails. Whose nails. 

IV. V. This scene and the next are, in their bald con- 
trast between the behavior of the French and English, a 
direct appeal to the patriotic prejudices of the audience. 

IV. V. 1 ff. Con. O Dialile ! O the devil ! 

Orl. O seigneur! . . . perdu! O lord! the day is 
lost, all is lost ! 

Dau. Mort de ma vie ! Death of my life ! O mechante 
fortune! O evil fortune! 

IV. V. 7. Perduraltle. Lasting. 

IV. V. 18. On heaps. An old use of "on" where we now 
say "in." Cf. Introd., p. 48, 6, c. 

Larding. Enriching with his blood. 
Honour-oiving. Honour-owning, honourable. 
Haggled. Hacked. 

Well-fougJiten. Cf. Introd., p. 46, 4, c. 
Me. Ethical dative. Raiight. Reached. 
All my mother. The tender part of my nature 
which I inherited from my mother. 

IV. vi. 33. Compound with mistful eyes. Make a bar- 
gain with my eyes and allow them to be misty, or else they 
will shed tears. 

IV. vi. 37. This is according to Holinshed, who says : 
"But when the outcrie of the lackies and boies which ran 
away for feare of the Frenchman thus spoiling the campe, 
came to the Kings eares, he doubting least his enimies 
should gather togither againe, and begin a new field ; and 
mistrusting further that the prisoners would be an aid to 
his enimies, or the verie enimies to their takers indeed if 
they were suffered to live, contrarie to his accustomed gen- 
tlenes, commanded by sound of trumpet that everie man 
(upon pain of death) should incontinentlie slaie his pris- 
oner." Gower in the next scene misunderstands the King's 
motive, and ascribes the killing of the prisoners to a desire 
for revenge. 

IV. vii. In this scene and the next the strenuous in- 
terest of the battle relaxes, and the little underplot of the 
King's glove is played out, with Fluellen as the chief figure 
in the comedy. 

IV. vii. 37. Figures. Points of comparison. 

IV. vii. 44. Cleitus. One of Alexander's generals, killed 
by him in a fit of drunkenness. 

IV. vii. 49. Great heUy dou'blet. The doublet was a sort 



228 NOTES 

of tight-fitting vest, originally of two thicknesses, between 
which a great deal of padding was sometimes nlaced, par- 
ticularly over the stomach. 

IV. vii. 65. Void. Avoid, leave. 

IV. vii. 67. Skirr. Scurry. 

IV. vii. 68. Enforced. Discharged. 

IV. vii. 75. Fin'd . . . for ransom. Set as the price 
at which I will ransom myself. 

IV. vii. 79. Book. Make a list of. 

IV. vii. 82. Mercenary Wood. The blood of common 
soldiers who were paid for their service. 

IV. vii. 86. Yerk. Jerk, kick. 

IV. vii. 91. Peer. Appear. 

IV. vii. 104 flf. Fluellen here gives an account of the 
"wearing of the leek different from the historical one. Cf. 
IV. 1. 55, note. 

IV. vii. 112. Memorable. Commemorative. 

IV. vii. 126. Just. Exact. 

IV. vii. 146. Sort. Rank ; so in IV. viii. 82. From the 
answer of his degree. Raised above the necessity of answer- 
ing a challenge from a common soldier. 

IV. vii. 148. As good a gentleman as the Devil. Cf. 
Lear, III. iv. 148, "The prince of darkness is a gentleman." 

IV. vii. 153. Jack-sauce. Saucy Jack. 

IV. vii. 159. Who. See Introd., p. 44, 2, a. A similar 
instance occurs in 1. 135 above. 

IV. vii. 171. An. It. 

IV. vii. 194. Choler. Anger. 

IV. Tiii. 9. 'Silood. God's blood, a common oath. 

IV. viii. 36. Saving your majesty's manhood. Fluellen 
is apologizing for the unbecoming words he is about to use, 

IV. viii. 81 ff. The list of losses is taken almost verbatim 
Irom Holinshed. Note how the act closes with a return to 
a higher level in the picture of the King's piety. 

IV. viii. 112. Of name. Bearing a title. 

V. Dr. Johnson objected to "the emptiness and narrow- 
ness of the last act, which a very little diligence might have 
-avoided," and says, "Tne truth is, that the poet's matter 
failed "him in the fifth act, and he was glad to fill it up 
with whatever he could get ; and not even Shakespeare can 
write well without a proper subject." It might be said in 
defense of Shakspere, if he needs defense, that almost 
.anything would be in the nature of an anti-climax after 



NOTES 229 

the battle of Agincourt. The dramatist had two groups of 
characters whom he had to dispose of in some fashion ; the 
first scene makes an effective ending for the comic group, 
and the final scene is most cleverly managed, giving us a 
vivid portrayal of the King's bluff, soldierly wooing, aud 
ending with his complete triumph over his erstwhile enemies, 
even to the granting of the least points of the treaty. The 
same kind of symmetry that we look for in a tragedy or a 
comedy cannot be expected in a chronicle play, where the 
dramatist must adhere to the main facts of history ; and 
Shakspere has here done all that is necessary to bring to a 
triumphant conclusion the stage career of his ideal English, 
hero. 

V. Prologue. This bridges a gap of five years from 1415 
to 1420, during which Henry waged a second campaign in 
France, which was ended by the treaty of Troyes. 

10. Pales in. Hems in, encloses. 

12. Whiffler. One who goes in front of a procession to 
clear the way. 

21-22. Giving full . . . God. "Transferring all the 
honours of conquest, all trophies, tokens, and shows, from, 
himself to God." (Johnson.) 

25. Sort. Style, manner. 

29 ff. By a loioer hut loving likelihood. By a comparison 
between persons of higher and lower rank, but showing our 
love for both. One of Shakspere's few allusions to con- 
temporary events or personages. The Earl of Essex left 
London on March 27, 1599, to put down a rebellion in. 
Ireland, and returned unsuccessful on Sept. 28. For the 
bearing of this passage on the date of the play, see Introd.,. 
p. 34. 

32. Broached. Spitted. 

38. The Emperor's coming. Sigismund's. 

43 . Rememh'ring. Reminding. 

44. Brook ahridgement. Endure this curtailing of events. 

y. i. 6. Scald. Scabby, scurvy. 

V. i. 21, Bedlam. Mad ; a corruption of Bethlehem^ the 
name of a lunatic asylum in London. Troyaii. Trojan. 
The word was used contemptuously in Shakspere's time. 

V. i. 22. Parca's fatal iveb. The web of life spun by the 
Parcae, or Fates. 

V. i. 31. Cadwallader. The last of the Welsh kings. 
Pistol's reply is irritating to the last degree, in its implica- 
tion that even Welsh kings were little better than goatherds.. 



V. 


i. 43. 


V. 


i. 46. 


V. 


i. 47. 


V. 


i. 63. 


V. 


i. 77. 


V. 


i. 78. 


since 


dead. 


V. 


i. 80. 


V. 


i. 86. 


V. 


i. 88. 


V. 


i. 89. 



230 NOTES 

V. i. 39. Motaitain-squire. In allusion to the mountain- 
ous character of Wales. 

V. i. 40. Squire of loio degree. This was the title of a 
very popular metrical romance. Fluellen plays on low as 
opposed to mountain. 

Astonish'd. Stunned. 

Green. Fresh. 

Coxcoml). Head. 

Groat. Fourpence. 

Respect. Consideration, reason. 

Predeceased valour. The valour of men long 

GleeJiing and galling. Scoffing and sneering. 
Condition. Temper, disposition. 
Husivife. Hussy. 

Doll. A slip. It was Nell Quickly that Pistol 
married. Spital. Hospital. 

V. i. 94. Cutpurse. Purses were worn hanging from 
the girdle ; hence, a thief would cut the purse away. 

V. i. 97. Gallia. An adjective here : French. Exit. 
Says Johnson : "The comick scenes of the The History of 
Henry the Fourth and Fifth are now at an end, and all the 
comick personages are now dismissed. Falstaff and Mrs. 
■Quickly are dead ; Nym and Bardolph are hanged ; Gadshill 
was lost immediately after the robbery ; Poins and Peto have 
vanished since, one knows not how ; and Pistol is now beaten 
into obscurity. I believe every reader regrets their de- 
parture." 

V. ii. Whatever may be said about anti-climax, it is clear 
that without this scene, a very charming side of Henry's 
character would have been left unrevealed. He is as irre- 
sistible as a lover as he was in the field. 

v. ii. 1. Wherefore. Eeferring to peace. 

V. ii. 16. Bent. Directed glance. 

V. ii. 17. Balls. Of eyes and of cannon. Basilisks. The 
basilisk, or King snake, was a fabulous creature whose 
glances were fatal. The name was afterward given to a 
large cannon. 

V. ii. 19. Have. See Introd., p. 46, 4, a. 

V. ii. 27. Bar. Perhaps the place of meeting where the 
terms of the treaty were to be arranged ; or, very possibly, 
referring to an actual barrier between the two parties. 

V. ii. 31. Congreeted. Greeted each other. 

V. ii. 33. Rub. Obstacle. Cf. II. ii. 189, note. 



NOTES 231 

V. ii. 37. Put up. Lift up, show again. 
V. ii. 40. It. Its. Cf. Lear, I. iv. 235-6 : 

"The hedge-sparrow fed the cuckoo so long 
That it had it head bit off by it young." 
V. ii. 42. Ev en-pleach' d. "Interwoven so as to have a 
smooth and even surface." (Schmidt.) 

V. ii. 44. Fallow leas. Uncultivated meadows. 
V. ii. 46. Coulter. The blade of the plow. 
V. ii. 47. Deracinate. Uproot. 
V. ii. 48. Erst. Formerly. 
V. ii. 51. Teems. Produces. 
V. 11. 52. Kexes. Dried hemlock stalks. 
V. ii. 61. Diftus'd. Disordered. 
V. ii. 63. Favour. Appearance. 
V. ii. 65. Let. Hindrance. 
V. ii. 68. Would. Desire. 

V. ii. 72. Tenours. General bearing. Particular effects. 
Specific details. 

V. ii. 73. EnscheduVd. Drawn up, listed. 
V. ii. 77. Cursorary. Cursory, hasty. 
V. ii. 78. Pleaseth. May it please. 

V. ii. 82. Accej}t. Acceptance. Peremptory answer. 
Final, unconditional answer. 

V. 11. 90. Consign. Agree, join in signing. 

94. Nicely. Punctiliously. Stood on. Insisted on. 
112. Kath. Que dit-il . . . anges? What does 
That I am like the angels ? 
Yes, truly, save your grace, so he says. 
133. Clap. Clasp. 

145. Buffet. Win her by fisticuffs. 

146. Bound. Make prance. 

148. JacJc-an-apes. Monkey. 

149. Greenly. Foolishly, like an inexperienced boy. 
V. ii. 150. Nor . . . no. Also nor . . . never. 

See Introd., p. 47, 5, a. 

V. ii. 156. Let thine eye he thy coot. Let your eye 
look on me lovingly, and dress me up in charming qualities, 
as a cook would give a plain dish an attractive appearance. 

V. ii. 162. Uncoined constancy. Constancy that has 
never been impressed by other loves, like metal that has 
never been stamped into coin. 

V. ii. 169. Fall. Fall away, shrink. 

V. ii. 175. His. See Introd., p. 44, 2, b. 

V. ii. 194. Je quand . . . moi. Henry's poor French 



V. 


ii. 


V. 


ii. 


he say? 


Alice. 


V. 


ii. 


V. 


ii. 


V. 


ii. 


V. 


11. 


V. 


ii. 



232 NOTES 

for "When I have possession of France, and you have pos- 
session of me." 

V. ii. 197. Saint Denis. An appropriate supplication to 
the patron saint of France to help him in speaking the 
French language. Done . . . mienne. Then France is 
yours and you are mine. 

V. ii. 202. Sauf votre . . . parle. Save your honor, the 
French that you speak is better than the English that 
I speak. 

V. ii. 206. Truly-falsely. "With true meaning, but badly 
expressed." (Swan.) 

V. ii. 221. Scam'bUng. Scrambling. 

V. ii. 228. FJou:er-de-luce. Fleur-de-lis, the emblem of 
France. 

V. ii. 233. Moiety. Part. 

V. ii. 235. La plus . . . deesse. The most beautiful 
Katharine in the world, my very dear and divine goddess. 

y. ii. 245. JJntempering. Lacking the power to temper 
or soften you. 

V. ii. 268. Broken music. Music arranged for different 
instruments, concerted music. 

v. ii. 273-4. Will . . . shall. Note the change from 
simple futurity to determined assurance. 

V. ii. 278. Laissez . . . seigneur. Let be, my lord, 
let be, let be ! My faith, I do not at all wish that you lower 
your greatness by kissing the hand of an unworthy servant. 
Excuse me, I beg you, my most powerful lord. 

V. ii. 284. Les dames . . . France. It is not the 
French custom for ladies and young girls to be kissed 
before their marriage. 

V. ii. 293. Entendre . . . moi. Understands better 
than I. 

V. ii. 296. Oui, iraiment. Yes, truly. 

V. ii. 297. Nice. Scrupulous ; so in 1. 303. 

V. ii. 299. List. Barrier. 

V. ii. 318. Condition. Cf. V. i. 86, note. 

V. ii. 333. Wink. Shut their eyes. 

V. ii. 342. Bartholomeiv-tide. Aug. 24. 

V. ii. 355. Perspectivehj. As through a perspective, a 
glass which produced optical illusions. Cf. All's Well, V. 
ill. 48-9 : 

"Contempt his scornful perspective did lend me, 
Which warp'd the line of every other favour." 

V. ii. 378. Fraeclarissimus. Most famous. Shakspere 



NOTES 233 

here followed the reading in Holinshed, probably a typo- 
graphical error for praecarissimus, corresponding to tres- 
cher. 

V. ii. 386. That. So that. 

V. ii. 387. Look pale. Alluding to the chalk cliffs on. 
either side of the English Channel. 

V. ii. 389. Dear conjunction. "Solemn union." (Moore 
Smith). 

V. ii. 402. Paction. Compact. 

V. ii. 411. S. D. Sennet. A set of notes on the trumpet. 

Epilogue. Note the sonnet form. 

2. Bending. Unable to sustain the weight of his task. 

4. Mangling ip starts. By giving only a fragmentary 
representation. 

18. Which oft our stage hath shoicn. In the three 
parts of Henry VI., probably written before 1592. 



WOED INDEX 



'A, II. iii. 18; III. ii. 35. 
absalute, III. vii. 28. 
accept, V. ii. 82. 
accomplishing, IV. Prol. 12. 
accompt, I. Prol. 17. 
achieve, IV. iii. 91. 
achievement, III. v. 60. 
addiction, I. i. 54. 
addrest, III. iii. 58. 
advantage, III. vi. 138. 
advantages, IV. i. 305; IV. iii. 

50. 
advice, II. ii. 43. 
advised, I. ii. 179; II. Prol. 12. 
affiance, II. ii. 127. 
Agamemnon, III. vl. 7. 
all at once, I. 1. 36. 
all-watched, IV. Prol. 38. 
A many, IV. i. 123. 
an, II. i. 113; IV. vii. 171. 
ancient, II. i. 3. 
antics. III. ii. 83. 
appertinents, II. ii. 87. 
appointed, III. Prol. 4. 
apprehension, III. vii. 122. 
approbation, I. ii. 19. 
apt, II. ii. 86. 
argument, III. 1. 21; III. vii. 38; 

IV. i. 153. 
Arthur's bosom, II. iii. 10. 
assays, I. ii. 151. 
astonish'd, V. 1. 43. 
attest, I. Prol. 16. 
aunchient, III. vi. 20. 
awkward, II. iv. 85. 



Barbason, II. i. 60. 

Bartholomew-tide, V. ii. 342. 

basilisks, V. ii. 17. 

bate, III. vii. 98. 

battle, IV. prol. 9; IV. ii. 54. 

bawcock. III. ii. 26; IV. i. 44. 

be. III. ii. 77; IV. i. 90. 

beadle, IV. i. 184. 

beaver, IV. ii. 44. 

bedlam, V. i. 21. 

bending, Epil. 

bent, V. ii. 16. 

beseech'd. III. ii. 120. 

bestow, IV. iii. 68. 

blood, II. ii. 133. 

blown, IV. i. 275. 

bolted, II. ii. 137. 

book, IV. vii. 79. 

boot, I. ii. 194, 

bootless. III. iii. 24. 

borne, I. ii. 212. 

bound, V. ii. 146. 

bowels of the Lord, II. iv. 102. 

brave, III. Prol. 5. 

bravely, III. v. 80. 

breff. III. ii. 131. 

bring, II. iii. 1. 

broached, V. Prol. 32. 

broken music, V. ii. 268. 

brook, V. Prol. 44. 

Brutus, II. iv. 37. 

bubukles. III. vi. 116. 

buffet, V. ii. 145. 

buxom. III. vi. 28. 

by and by, II. ii. 2. 



Babbled of green fields, II. iii. 18. 
baU, IV. i. 281. 
balm, IV. i. 281. 
bar, V. ii. 27. 



Cadwallader, V. i. 31. 
careful, IV. i. 252. 
case, III. ii. 5. 
casques, I. Prol. 13. 



235 



236 



WOED INDEX 



casted slough, IV. i. 23. 

cause of policy, I. 1. 45. 

Caveto, II. ill. 57. 

chaces, I. li. 266. 

challenger, II. iv. 195. 

chambers, III. Prol. S. D. 

charitably, IV. 1. 152. 

Charlemain, I. ii. 75. 

choler, IV. vli. 194. 

christom, II. ill. 12. 

civil, I. ii. 199. 

clap, V. ii. 133. 

Cleitus, IV. vii. 44. 

close, I. ii. 182. 

cockpit, I. Prol. 11. 

cold for action, I. ii. 114. 

comes o'er, I. ii. 267. 

companies, I. i. 55. 

compassing, IV. 1. 315. 

complement, II. ii. 134. 

compound, II. 1. 108; IV. vi. 33. 

con, III. vi. 82. 

conclusion, II. 1. 28. 

condition, V. 1. 86; V. ii. 318. 

confounded. III. i. 13. 

congreeing, I. ii. 182. 

congreeted, V. ii. 31. 

conjecture, IV. Prol. 1. 

conjuration, I. ii. 29. 

conscience, IV. i. 83. 

consent, I. ii. 181; II. ii. 22. 

consign, V. ii. 90. 

contagious, III. iii. 31. 

contemplation, I. i. 63. 

contrived, IV. i. 176. 

convey'd, I. ii. 74. 

convoy, IV. iii. 37. 

corantos. III. v. 33. 

corroborate, II. i. 135. 

coulter, V. ii. 46. 

coursing snatchers, I. ii. 143. 

cousin, I. ii. 4. 

coxcomb, V. i. 47. 

create, II. ii. 31. 

crescive, I. i. 66. 

Cressid, II. i. 83. 

Crispian, IV. iii. 40. 

crowns, IV. i. 247. 



crush'd, I. ii. 175. 
crystals, II. iii. 58. 
cue. III. vi. 142. 
cullions, III. ii. 22. 
currance, I. i. 34. 
cursoraiy, V. ii. 77. 
curtains, IV. ii. 39. 
curtle-axe, IV. ii. 21. 
cutpurse, V. i. 94. 

Dare the field, IV. ii. 36. 
dear, II. ii. 182. 
dear conjunction, V. ii. 389. 
decoct, III. V. 20. 
defendant, II. iv. 7. 
defensible, III. iii. 50. 
defunction, I. ii. 58. 
degree, IV. vii. 146. 
deliver. III. vi. 189. 
deracinate, V. ii. 47. 
desperate of, IV. ii. 39. 
diffus'd, V. il. 61. 
discover'd, II. ii. 151. 
discuss. III. ii. 68. 
distemper, II. ii. 54. 
distressful, IV. i. 291. 
doublet, IV. vii. 49. 
dout, IV. ii. 11. 
dress, IV. i. 10. 

Earnest, II. ii. 170. 

effects, V. ii. 72. 

elder-gun, IV. i. 217. 

element, IV. i. 107. 

elements. III. vii. 23. 

Elysium, IV. i. 295. 

empery, I. ii. 226. 

enforced, IV. vii. 68. 

englutted, IV. iii. 83. 

enlarge, II. ii. 40. 

enrounded, IV. Prol. 36. 

enschedul'd, V. ii. 73. 

erst, V. ii. 48. 

estimation, III. vi. 16. 

even-pleach'd, V. ii. 42. 

evenly, II. iv. 91. 

example, IV. i. 19. 

executors, I. ii. 203; IV. ii. 51. 

exhale, II. i. 69. 



WOED INDEX 



337 



exhibiters, I. i. 74. 
expedience, IV. iii. 70. 

Fac'd out, III. vii. 67. 

faculty, I. i. 66. 

fall, V. ii. 169. 

familiar, I. i. 47. 

farced, IV. i. 284. 

fat-brain'd. III. vii. 120. 

fate, II. Iv. 64. 

favour, V. ii. 63. 

fear'd, I. ii. 155. 

fer, IV. iv, 30. 

ferret, IV. iv. 30. 

fet. III. i. 18. 

figro. III. vi. 62; IV. i. 60. 

figures, IV. vii. 37. 

find, I. Ii. 72; IV. i. 280. 

fin'd, IV. vii. 75. 

firk, IV. iv. 30. 

flesh'd, II. iv. 50; III. iii. 11. 

flexure, IV. 1. 276. 

flower-de-luce, V. ii. 228. 

footed, II. iv. 143. 

foughten, IV. vi. 18. 

fox, IV. iv. 10. 

fracted, II. i. 135. 

freshly, IV. Prol. 39. 

full-fraught, II. ii. 139. 

Galled, III. 1. 12. 

Gallia, I. ii. 216; V. 1. 197. 

galliard, I. ii. 252. 

galling, V. i. 80. 

gentle (adj.), II. ii. 14; iv. Prol. 

45. 
gentle (vb.), IV. iii. 63. 
gentles, I. Prol. 8; II. Prol. 35. 
gesture, IV. Prol. 25. 
gilt . . . guilt, II. Prol. 26. 
gimmal, IV. ii. 49. 
gleaned, I. ii. 151. 
gleeking, V. i. 80. 
gloze, I. ii. 46. 
go to, II. i. 87. 
God-a-mercy, IV. i. 34. 
God before, I. ii. 307; III. vi. 

178. 



god-den, III. ii. 94. 

good my, II. iv. 71. 

Gordian knot, I. i. 46. 

grace, I. ii. 242. 

green, V. i. 46. 

greener, II. iv. 136. 

greenly, V. ii. 48. 

groat, V. i. 63. 

gross, II. ii. 103; IV. I. 303. 

gulf, II. iv. 10. 

gull'd, II. ii. 121. 

Habit, III. vi. 131. 

haggled, IV. vi. 11. 

hath, I. Prol. 9. 

have, V. ii. 19. 

havoc, I. ii. 173. 

hazard, I.ii. 263; III. vii. 71. 

head, li. ii. is. 

heady, I. i. 34; III. iii. 32. 

heir general, I. ii. 66. 

hilding, IV. ii. 29. 

hilts, II. Prol. 9. 

his, I. i. 36; III. i. 13; V. ii 175. 

honour-owing, IV. vi. 9. 

horrid. III. vi. 85. 

humour, II. i. 61; II. i. 137. 

humourous, II. iv. 28. 

huswife, V. i. 88. 

Hydra-headed, I. I. 35. 

Hyperion, IV. i. 296. 

Ill, II. i. 92. 

imaginary forces, I. Prol. 18. 

imagin'd. III. Prol. 1. 

imbar, I. ii. 94. 

imp, IV. i. 45. 

impawn, I. ii. 21. 

impeachment, III. vi. 164. 

indirectly, II. iv. 94. 

indued, II. ii. 139. 

intendment, I. ii. 144. 

intertissued, IV. i. 283. 

investing, IV, Prol. 26. 

iron, II. i. 8. 

irreconcil'd, IV. i. 165. 

is (with plural subject), I. ii. 

243. 
it, V. ii. 40. 



238 



)EX 



Jack-an-a,pes, V. ii. 148. 
Jack-sauce, IV. vii. 153. 
jealousy, II. ii. 126. 
just, IV. vii. 126. 
justly, I. ii. 10; II. i. 125. 
jutty. III. i. 13. 

Kexes, V. ii. 52. 
kind, II. Prol. 19. 
kite, II. i. S3. 

lady, II. i. 41. 

larding-, IV. vi. 8. 

late, II. ii. 61. 

lavoltas, III. y. 33. 

lazars, I. i. 15; II. i. 83. 

learn. III. vi. 77. 

leas, V. ii. 44. 

leash'd, I. Prol. 7. 

legerity, IV. i. 28. 

legions, II. ii. 124. 

let, V. ii. 65. 

Lewis his, I. ii. 88. 

lig, III. ii. 129. 

like to. III. iii. 16. 

likes. III. Prol. 32; IV. i. 16. 

line, II. iv. 7. 

lineal of, I. ii. 82. 

linger ... on, II. Prol. 31. 

linstock. III. Prol. 33. 

list, I. i. 43; V. ii. 299. 

lob, IV. ii. 47. 

longs, II. iv. 80. 

Louvre, II. iv. 132. 

luxury. III. v. 6. 

Make, II. iv. 5. 
marches, I. ii. 140. 
Mark Antony, III. vi. 15. 
marry. III. ii. 116. 
masters, II. iv. 137. 
maw, II. i. 55. 
me, IV. iv. 24; IV. vi. 21. 
mean, IV. Prol. '45. 
memher, IV. i. 302. 
memorahle, IV. vii. 112. 
mess, III. ii. 127. 
mickle, II. i. 73. 



mind, IV. iii. 13; IV. iii. 84. 
minding, IV. Prol. 53. 
miscarry, IV. i. 159. 
miscreate, I. ii. 16. 
mistook. III. vi. 90. 
mistress court, II. iv. 133. 
modest, II. iv. 34; III. i. 4. 
moiety, V. ii. 233. 
Montjoy, III. vi. 130. 
mope, III. vii. 120. 
more better. III. ii. 155. 
more sharper. III. v. 39. 
Morris dance, II. iv. 25. 
mortality, I. ii. 28. 
mould. III. ii. 23. 
mountain-squire, V. i. 39. 
mounted, IV. i. 111. 
moy, IV. iv. 15. 

Native, IV. i. 182; IV. iii. 96. 
nice, V. ii. 297; V. ii. 303. 
nicely, V. ii. 94. 
noble, II. i. 117. 
nook-shotten. III. v. 14. 
nor never, I. i. 35; V. ii, 152; 
nor no, II. iv. 17; V. ii. 150. 
nor . . . not, II. ii. 23. 

O'erblows, III. iii. 31. 
o'erwhelm. III. i. 11. 
of name, IV. viii. 112. 
offending Adam, I. i. 29. 
on heaps, IV. v. 18. 
opening, I. ii. 16. 
orisons, II. ii. 53. 
our awe, I. ii. 224. 
over-bears, IV. Prol. 39, 
over-lusty, IV. Prol. 18. 

Paction, V. ii. 402. 
pales in, V. Prol. 10. 
paly, IV. Prol. 8. 
Parca's . . . web, V. i. 22. 
parle, III. iii. 2. 
pass, II. Prol, 39. 
passing, IV. ii. 42. 
pasterns, III. vii. 113. 
pax. III. vi. 44. 



WOKD INDEX 



239' 



peer, IV. vii. 91. 

peevish, III. vii. 119. 

perdition, III. vi. 111. 

perdurable, IV. v. 7. 

perdy, II. i. 55. 

peremptory, V. ii. 82. 

perpend, IV. iv. 9. 

perspectively, V. ii. 355. 

pettiness, III. vi. 149. 

pike, IV. i. 40. 

pioners, III. ii. 97. 

plain-songr, III. ii. 6. 

pleaseth, V. ii. 78. 

policy, I. ii. 220; II. Prol. 14. 

popularity, I. i. 59. 

poring, IV. Prol. 2. 

port, I. Prol. 6. 

portage, III. 1. 10. 

powdering tub, II. i. 82. 

pox of, III. vii. 106. 

practic, I. 1. 51. 

practices, II. ii. 90. 

practis'd on, II. ii. 99. 

praeclarissimus, V. ii. 378. 

precepts, III. iii. 26. 

present, II. iv. 67. 

presently, II. i. 96. 

proportion, II. ii. 109. 

proportions, I. ii. 137; I. ii. 304. 

puissance, I. Prol. 25; II. ii. 191; 

III. Prol. 21. 
purchase, III. ii. 46. 
put up, V. ii. 37. 

Quality, III. vi. 159. 

question, I. 1. 5. 

quick, II. ii, 79. 

quit, II. ii. 167; III. 11. 115. 

quittance, II. ii. 34. 

quondam, II. i. 85. 

quotidian, II. i. 129. 

Raught, IV. vi. 21. 

rawly, IV. i. 150. 

reading, I. ii. 14. 

re-answer. III. vi. 148. 

relapse of mortality, IV. iii. 107. 

rememb'ring, V. Prol. 43. 



rendezvous, II. i. 19. 

renowned, I. ii. 118. 

requiring, II. iv. 101. 

resolv'd, I. ii. 4. 

respect, V. i. 77. 

rest, II. i. 18. 

retire, IV. iii. 86. 

returns. III. iii. 46. 

rheum. III. v. 52. 

rim, IV. iv. 16. 

rivage, III. Prol. 14. 

rivets, IV, Prol. 13. 

road, I. ii. 138. 

roaring devil, IV. iv. 77. 

rode, IV. iii. 2. 

round, IV. i. 223. 

rub, II. ii. 189; V. ii. 33. 

Sad-eyed, I. ii. 202. 

Saint Denis, V. ii. 197. 

'sblood, IV. viii. 9. 

scaffold, I. Prol, 10. 

scald, V. i. 6. 

scambling, I. i. 4; V. ii. 221. 

scions. III. V. 7. 

sconce, III. vi. 79. 

second accent, II. iv. 126. 

secure, IV. Prol. 17. 

security, II. ii. 44. 

self, I. i. 1. 

sennet, V. ii. 411. 

senses, II. iii. 53. 

severals, I, i. 86. 

shales, IV. ii. 18. 

she, II. i. 86. 

shog, II. i. 50; II. iii. 49. 

shook, I. ii. 154. 

show, II. ii. 127. 

shows, I. ii. 72; IV. i. 107, 

shrewdly. III. vii. 141. 

sinfully, IV. i. 159. 

sinister, II. iv. 85. 

skirr, IV, vii. 67. 

slips. III. i. 31. 

slobbery. III. v. 13. 

sodden, III. v. 18. 

solus, II. i. 51. 

sooth. III. vi. 164. 



240 



WOED INDEX 



sort. V. Prol. 25. 

sorts, I, ii. 190; IV. i. 63; IV. 

vii. 146; IV. vlii. 82. 
soul of adoration, IV. i. 266. 
speculation, IV. ii. 31. 
spend their mouths, II. iv. 70. 
spirt, III. V. 8. 
spital, II. i. 81 ; V. i. 89. 
squire of low degree, V. i. 40. 
St. Davy's Day, IV. i. 55. 
sternage. III. Prol. 18. 
still, I, ii. 145; III. vii. 85. 
stilly, IV. Prol. 5. 
stomach, IV. iii. 35. 
stood on. III. vi. 82; V. ii. 94. 
stoop, IV. i. 112. 
strain, II. iv. 51. 
subjection, IV. i. 156. 
suflferance, II. ii. 46; III. vi. 144. 
suggest, II. ii. 114. 
supply, I. Prol. 31. 
sur-rein'd. III. v. 19. 
sutler, II. 1. 121. 
swashers. III. ii. 30. 
swill'd. III. i. 14. 
sympathize, III. vii. 135. 

Take, IV. i. 236. 
tall, II. i. 75. 
Tartar, II. ii. 123. 
teems, V. ii. 52. 
tender, II. ii. 176. 
tenours, V. ii. 72. 
tertian, II. i. 129. 
that, I. ii. 158; V. ii. 386. 
the death, IV. i. 187. 
theoric, I. i. 52. 
tike, II. i. 33. 
till, II. Prol. 41. 
to die, IV. iii. 39. 
touch, IV. Prol. 47. 
treasuries, I. ii. 165. 
troth-plight, II. i. 22. 



Troyan, V. i. 21. 
truly-falsely, V. ii. 206. 
trumpet, IV. ii. 61. 
tucket. III. vi. 130. 
tucket sonance, IV. ii. 35. 

Umber'd, IV. Prol. 9. 
uncoined, V. ii. 62. 
unfumish'd, I. ii. 148. 
unhidden passages, I. i. 86. 
unprovided, IV. i. 190. 
untempering, V. ii. 245. 
unworthiness, IV. Prol. 46. 
upon, IV. i. 148. 
upon the start. III. i. 32. 

Vaultages, II. iv. 124. 
vaward, IV. iii. 130. 
vigil, IV. iii. 45. 
voice, II. ii. 113. 
void, IV. vii. 65. 

War-proof, III. i. 18. 
whelks. III. vi. 117. 
whiffler, V. Prol. 12. 
white-liver'd. III. ii. 34. 
who, IV. i. 155; IV. vii. 135; 

IV. vii. 159. 
willing you, II. iv. 90. 
wink, II. i. 8; V. ii. 333. 
winking. III. vii. 130. 
with. III. Prol. 20. 
withal, I. i. 81. 
womhy, II. iv. 124. 
wooden 0, I. Prol. 13. 
wots, IV. i. 303. 
would, II. Prol. 18; V. ii. 68. 
wrangler, I. ii. 264. 
wringing, IV. i. 257. 
wrong, I. ii. 27. 

Yearn, II. iii. 3; IV. iii. 26. 
yerk, IV. vii. 86. 



W32 







.V 






















Deacidified i 



** A."^ '^ **oV!j^\)* °®^°'^'f'6d "Sing the Bookkeeper process. 
^ -V-V-. - X* ^^ * ^^^ ^ Neutralizing agent: Magnesium Oxide 

^ ' • • « * \ > <^ ■'o ♦ k » Treatment Date: Feb. 2009 




g agent: iVIagnesium Oxide 
•C^ ■'o ♦ k » Treatment Date: Feb. 2009 

>% \. « PreservationTechnologies 

^ * %^ ()> A WORLD LEADER IN COLLECTIONS PRESERVATION 

. • 4 o ^^^ Thomson Park Drive 

^o >i> '--U Cranberry Township, PA 16066 

(724)779-2111 



» .<> "^ 



v/iairuciiy lUWll 

(724)779-2111 



T ^ 



'^^r^^ 




" • • • 



,^^ ... ^^. 














"°. 















^ 4» 




^^!lfe.\ V ...^' .rr 



,^^^^ >^ 

















«6 -o ♦ 

xV . - . X*. • • • « 















