1 






SANS 



PI^YS OF 

EDITED 
I \VVITH INTKQDUCTI0N5 ^ NOTESy 

BY 

ilMIDSlMMEE 
MGHT5 DREi^^M 

OXFORP 
HT THE CLflRJENDONTF^ 



\ i 



r ' 



> rw > i nw wi! i aw i i» i' ,.j j J tF.naaifBa BBn': 



>«J 






Digitized by the Internet Archive 

in 2009 with funding from 

Ontario Council of University Libraries 



http://www.archive.org/details/shakespearemidwestOOshak 



PLAYS OF SHAKESPEARE 



EDITED WITH INTRODUCTIONS AND NOTES 



G. S. GORDON, M.A. 

FELLOW OF MAGDALEN COLLEGE, OXFORD 



OXFORD 

AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 

LONDON: HENRY FROWDE 

AND AT EDINBURGH, GLASGOW, NEW YORK 
TORONTO AND MELBOURNE 



The following plays are now ready (May 1912) 

HAMLET 

CORIOLANUS 

A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM 

AS YOU LIKE IT 

THE TEMPEST 

Others arc in preparation 



SHAKESPEAEE'S 

V MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM 

EDITED WITH INTRODUCTION AND NOTES 



G. S. GORDON, M.A. 

FELLOW OF MAGDALEN COLLEGE, OXFORD 



OXFORD 

AT THE CEARENDON PRESS 

1912 



PEEFACE 

IT is a common complaint against editors ot Shakespeare 
that tliey exceed their part ; that by doing too much for 
their author they gain readers for themselves at his expense. 
In preparing this edition I have tried always to remember 
that it is better for an editor to say too little than too much, 
and that the first aim of an editor of Shakespeare should 
be to gain readers for Shakespeare. The Notes, therefore, 
are concerned about one thing only, the meaning of the 
text. Everything which seemed in any degree to need ex- 
planation has been explained, and care has been taken to 
explain nothing else. 

The Introductions are written with more freedom. They 
are full, and so far as they have a common spirit it is a spirit 
of inquiry. No question of history or criticism has been 
treated dogmatically when it could be treated otherwise. 
There is indeed no part of literary history where dogma is 
less in place. 

It is impossible for any editor of Shakespeare to write a 
preface without remembering his debts. There are parts 
of these Introductions where I am conscious of no obligation, 
but wherever scholarship or learning or interpretation was 
needed I have found my best guides in the eighteenth-century 
editors, in Dr. Aldis Wright, and in the Oxford Dictiojiari/. 



G. S. G. 



Oxford 

May 1, 1912 



A JVIIDSUMMER-NIGHTS DREAM 
INTRODUCTION 

Sources of the Play : The Fairies and Classical Mythology 

To talk solemnly of the sources of A Midsummer-Night' s Dream, Nature of 
as if it were derived from something stated and precise, is to fall ® ^^' 
into the sin of formaUty. In the sense in which most of Shake- 
speare's plays are said to have a source, as being founded on some 
known story or chronicle, A Midsummer -NigMs Dream has no 
source at all. The story or plot of the play is the least thing in it, 
and may have come from anywhere. It is at best an excuse for 
other things, for poetry, fancy, and foolery : for a display of 
the vagaries of lovers, the whims of fairies, and the follies of clowns. 
The play, indeed, is not so much a play with a plot as a series of 
variations upon a central theme, the theme of Love, Youth, and 
Fantasy, the agents and contrivers of these variations being an 
airy and diminutive race which lives in the fancy of men, to whom 
the earthy humours of Bottom and his company are offered as 
a counterpoise, lest too much airiness make the play light. 

To ask, then, for the sources of such a play is as much as to ask Its source 

for a history of Shakespeare's literary youth. The play is an ^^ Shake- 

■^ . . -^ . . . speare a 

extravaganza, into which all the lighter riches of his youth are youth. 

poured. In the collection of these riches, if he contracted any 

debts, they were mainly to himself ; in all such matters he was 

his own chief creditor. The traditionary mythology of the Fairies 

he learned iu his boyhood, and enriched in his later youth with the 

fancies of the poets ; the language of Love, which shines in a kind 

of moonlight through the play, was neither new nor difficult to the 

author of the Venus and Adonis and the Sonnets ; the stories and 

myths of the Ancients were the studies of his early manhood, and, 

after life itself, the chief nourishment in those days of his imagina- 



vi A MIDSUMMER -NIGHT'S DREAM 

tion. Last of all, to come back to native earth, the merry and 
tragical humours of village actors, and the learning of the tiring- 
room on which Bottom had raised himself to a proud supremacy 
among his fellows, were nothing if not familiar to one who had 
lived from birth to manhood in the county of Warwick and had 
spent the last eight or nine years of his Hfe as an actor and play- 
wright in London. 
Elves and With this general proviso we may proceed to consider some 
questions of source which are both pertinent and interesting . 
The chief agents and best drawn personages in the play are the 
Fairies. But they are not ordinary fairies. No rustic gossip of 
Warmckshire or of any other county ever conceived for them 
so courtly and royal a government as they enjoy in this play. 
Shakespeare, not out of pure invention, but adding his own fancy 
to poetical precedent, has blended the tiny and wily simphcity 
of the village elf with the mediaeval courtliness of the fays or fairies 
of romance. ' His Fairies,' says Keightley, in his charming book 
on fairy mythology, ' agree with the former in their diminutive 
stature, — diminished, indeed, to dimensions inappreciable to 
village gossips, — in their fondness for dancing, their love of cleanli- 
ness, and their child-abstracting propensities. Like the fays, they 
form a community, ruled over by the princely Oberon and the 
fair Titania. There is a court and chivalry ; Oberon would have 
the Queen's sweet changeling to be a " Knight of his train, to trace 
the forests wild." Like earthly monarchs he had his jester, the 
" shrewd and knavish sprite call'd Robin Goodfellow." ' 

The first and homely race of fairies was known to Shakespeare 
from the traditions of the people ; the second from the traditions 
of the poets. ' Fairies in his time,' says Dr. Johnson, ' were much 
in fashion ; common tradition had made them famiUar ; and 
Spenser's poem had made them great.' He does not add, what 
puzzles every child who follows these adventures, that Spenser's 
poem makes them tall. The Fairy Knights of the Faerie Queene are 
the best-grown men of their day. They have nothing of the fairy 
about them, in our famiUar sense of fairy, except as they hve in 
Fairyland ; and the Fairyland in which they Uve is not so much 
the land of fairies as the land of romance in general. Oberon, who 



INTRODUCTION vii 

first appears in his royal character in the old French romance 
of Huon of Bordeaux, is king of the Fairies in Spenser as in Oberon. 
Shakespeare ; and from Spenser's poem he may have passed into 
Shakespeare's play. But how unhke the King Oberon of the poem 
is to the Bang Oberon of the play may be seen from the tenth 
canto of the second book, where he is made the representative 
in allegory of the portliest and mightiest of EugUsh monarchs, 
King Henry VIII. Indeed, if oiir object be to find in the English 
poetry of that time a system of fairy empire resembling Shake- 
speare's, the poet to consult is not Spenser, but Drayton. Spenser's 
fairies are fays ; Drayton's, Uke Shakespeare's, are fairies and fays 
in one. In his delightful Nimfhidia, which Shakespeare might 
have written with pleasure, the conjunction of diminutiveness 
and majesty is managed with a delicate art and a perfect attention 
to scale which many who never read the poem have thought 
peculiar to Shakespeare's play. 

The resemblance goes further. Neither Drayton nor Shake- Puck, 
speare was able to dispense with Puck. Puck is the very elf 
of village stories, and is presented by both in his proper character, 
unspoiled by the manners of courts or the ideas of chivalry. 
To the dapper courtiers who wait upon Titania he is a ' lob of 
spirits ' (ii. i. 16). While they are about their boudoir work of 
hanging pearls in cowslips' ears he is frighting the maidens of the 
villagery, curdling milk, and upsetting grandams. He likes a rough 
frolic, and to be ' fear'd in field and town ' is the breath of life to 
him. When he is challenged by Titania's fairy (ii. i. 32 f.), and 
confronted with his title of Hobgoblin and the Ust of his misdeeds, 
he is so far from being abashed that he adds to the list in a style 
of homespim dialect deliberately calculated to offend a courtier's 
ear. Throughout the poem and the play aUke he is Oberon's man. 
Oberon has a value for him, and puts his shrewdness and knavery 
to good account. In both poem and play he is appointed to keep 
an eye upon Titania, of whose fidehty Oberon seems rarely 
sure ; and to make his position at a king's court more natural 
Shakespeare has given him the post of jester. ' I jest to Oberon 
and make him smile,' he tells the pearl-hanging fairy, with becom- 
ing pride. 



vm 



A MIDSmiMER-NIGHT'S DREAM 



Queen 
Mab to 
Titania. 



Shake- 

spsareand 

Chaucer. 



Oberon, we saw, had been king of the Fairies among all good 
romancers for many years before Shakespeare. Titania, on the 
other hand, is almost a new creation ; and not merely, as one is 
apt to think. Queen Mab with a new classical name in the place 
of her old Enghsh one. The queen of the Fairies is Queen 
Mab in Drayton, and elsewhere in Shakespeare. How he came 
to think of Titania is stated by Keightley. ' It was the belief of 
those days,' he writes, ' that the Fairies were the same as the 
classic nymphs, the attendants of Diana ' ; and he quotes from 
King James I, who calls these nymphs, in his Daemonologie, ' that 
fourth kind of spirits, quhilk be the gentiUs was called Diana, and 
her wandering court, and amongst us called Phairie.^ The queen 
of the Fairies, on this system, becomes the same as Diana ; 
and Diana, as Keightley points out, is by Ovid in his Meta- 
morphoses (iii. 173) styled Titania. 

This is a long process towards baptism, and sets us wondering 
why Shakespeare, who is not usually so painstaking about his 
names, should have travelled so far for this name. One reason at 
least he had, sufficient to account for all his travel. He wished to 
accommodate his fairies to the scene of the play b}'- giving their 
queen a classical name ; Queen Mab in the palace wood at Athens 
seemed incongruous even to so free a dramatist as Shakespeare, 
What he sought he partly found in the legend of Diana as queen 
of Fairies ; but he was still in difficulty about a name. To call a 
married queen Diana would have been, if anything, more incon- 
gruous still, for Diana was the very type and head of virginity. He 
had still to discover, among the various names by which Diana 
was known, some one less alien to wedlock. This he looked for 
and found in the mythologist Ovid, and was happy to call her, 
after Ovid's example, by a name so well sounding and so suitable 
to verse as Titania. 

It was the opinion of Tyrwhitt, the editor of Chaucer, that ' the 
true progenitors of Shakespeare's Oberon and Titania ' were 
Pluto and Proserpine in Chaucer's Merchant'' s Tale. What put 
him upon this idea I do not know, but it is possible to guess. He 
not only thought that a resemblance Avas visible between the 
personages named ; he must have thought it likely in itself that 



INTRODUCTION ix 

Shakespeare had read this Tale. Let us consider the second sup- 
position first. It raises another question of source which will 
iiot detain us long, and may as well be answered now. 

Three of the names in A Midsummer -Night's Dream, Theseus, Story of 
Hippolyta, and Philostrate, are to be found in another Tale of chaucer"^ 
Chaucer's, the KnigMs Tale, It is a tale of the rival love of two and 
brothers, Palamon and Arcite, for Emily, the sister-in-law of ^**^''^^- 
Theseus ; and Philostrate is the name which Arcite assumed when 
he came to Theseus's court in disguise. Tyrwhitt may have 
reasoned that since Shakespeare about this time read the KnigMs 
Tale, he may well have gone further and read the MercJiant's Tale 
also. To this it might be answered that such reasoning is very 
unsafely appUed to so unmethodical a reader as Shakespeare, who 
must have turned over a hundred books for one that he stopped to 
read, and dipped into as many more for one that he read through. 
But it is enough to show that, for anything we can see, lie need 
not have read even the KnigMs Tale. If names were his object 
(and there is nothing in common between the play and the Tale 
but these three names), he had them all at hand in North's 
translation of the Lives of Plutarch, one of the few books which 
he thought it worth while to read through and master. All the 
Greek names of the play are there, in the Life of Theseus : Duke 
Theseus himself and Hippolyta, Egeus, Lysander, Demetrius, and 
Philostrate. We conclude from this, that while Shakespeare must 
have consulted Plutarch's Theseus for his play, for anything that 
we can yet see he need not have looked into Chaucer at all. 

Tyrwhitt's suggestion, then, that Oberon and Titania were Chaucer's 
drawn from Chaucer's Pluto and Proserpine, must rest upon ^^^^o and 
resemblance alone. To a reader acquainted only with the classical pine, 
mythology, the suggestion may seem at first sight improbable 
and absurd ; for Pluto in classical mythology is the king of 
Hades, the land of shades and departed spirits, and Proserpine is 
his unwilUng wife. In Chaucer's Merchant's Tale, however, Pluto 
appears strangely as the king, and Proserpine as the queen of the 
Fairies. He is grisly Pluto no more, and Proserpine has forgotten 
to be sad. She dances and sings under a tree, and is as happy 
as a fairy born. How they came to change with such apparent 



A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM 



Compared 
Avith 
Oberon 
and 

Titania. 



Titania's 

name 

again. 



The Faiiy 
System in 
M. N. D. 



completeness both their natures and their functions it would be 
diflEicult to determine. The Middle Ages played many strange 
pranks with the dignified business of classical mythology. But 
what, I imagine, must have struck Tyrwhitt as he contemplated 
the queen of Shades dancing on earth as queen of Fairies was this, 
that Oberon, Shakespeare's king of Fairies, is dehberately styled, 
if not the king of Shades, at any rate the ' king of shadows ' 
(ill. ii. 347). His subjects are called ' shadows ' in Puck's 
speech at the end of the play (v. ii. 54). They ' follow darkness like 
a dream '. This does look, it must be confessed, as if Shakespeare 
had had some memory of a fairy Pluto when he wrote his play ; 
and where was he so likely to come upon him as in the Merchants 
Tale of Chaucer ? 

It is possible that Tyrwhitt merely guessed, and did not work 
it out. If he had worked it out, he might have come upon 
a better and more interesting explanation of these ' shadow ' 
phrases in the play. I may remind the reader of the unusual 
trouble which Shakespeare took to find a new name for his 
Fairy queen. He came upon a legend that the queen of the 
Fairies in ancient times had been Diana ; and he seized at once on 
her name of Titania for his purpose. One reason for this has been 
already suggested. But he had a further and less obvious reason, 
which is the pith of our argument. He wished to make play 
Avith Diana in her other characters. 

Diana the huntress-goddess was also, as Shakespeare very 
well knew,i goddess of the moon, in her title of Phoebe, and 
in her title of Hecate, goddess of the underworld, the world 
of shades. She is mentioned in her three characters in the 
play. She is ' the triple Hecate ' of v. ii. 14 ; ^ it is her team 
that the fairies follow as they run from the presence of the sun, 
' following darkness like a dream ' (v. ii. 13-16). The queen 
of the Fairies, who is on earth Titania or Diana, and haunts 
the woods with her forester husband, Oberon,^ is by symbol the 
queen of the moon in Heaven, and the queen of the Shades in 

1 Cp. As You Like It, ra. ii. 2-5. 

' See the note on this line. 

= Cp. II. i. 25 ; in. ii. 390. Also 1 Henry IV, i. u. 28-30. 



INTRODUCTION xi 

Hades. It is the moon in the darkness which the Fairies follow 
like a dream, shunning the sun. Their life is spent in the regions 
of darkness and moonlight under the guidance of their queen, who 
as Phoebe and Hecate commands both light and shade. They 
follow the darkness across the world. When the sun sets in the 
Avest they come riding behind her chariot from the east. A moment 
before he entered the wood at Athens, Oberon the huntsman was 
on ' the furthest steppe of India ' (ii. i. 69). Titania speaks with 
afiection of ' the spiced Indian air ', and of her gossips on the yellow 
Indian sands (ii. i. 124 f.). Everywhere in the play these fairy 
conditions are observed. When ' the iron tongue of midnight ' 
speaks, ' 'tis almost fairy time,' says Theseus (v. ii. 372-3) ; and as 
the lovers and revellers depart to bed. Puck comes in to herald the 
fairies and explain their coming. At the first entrance of Oberon 
and Titania, in his first words of greeting, Oberon speaks of moon- 
light as we should speak of day ; and the play is bathed in moon- 
light, from the first scene to the last. It lights the lovers to their 
meetings, the craftsmen to their hawthorn brake, and the fairies 
to their tasks and pleasures. 

This is the scheme of fairy mythology which Shakespeare Where 
planned, by a skilful extension and adaptation of ideas already f^Q^"^'' 
old. That it is related to the scheme which put Pluto and Proser- 
pine in the throne of the Fairies cannot be doubted ; but how the 
relation came about, or how it afiected Shakespeare, if it affected 
him at all, could not easily be made out. Chaucer's Pluto and 
Proserpine may have set him thinking : he had all his life a 
fondness for the speculations of mythology. But it is probable 
that he reached his finished conception of the fairy world, not by 
way of Pluto and Proserpine, but by way of Diana, the ' triple 
Hecate '. 

Many a reader may be inclined to think that Shakespeare has Studied 
here been credited with a science of mythology beyond his reach. ^^^ ^^J' 
It is enough to assure them that the poetical mythologists of his Milton. 
time would not have shared their opinion. Neither Drayton, 
the student of folklore, nor Milton, the student of the classics, 
disdained to borrow from Shakespeare's mythology what they 
wanted for their poems. How much Drayton in his Nimphidia 



xii A MIDSUIVBIER-XIGHT'S DREAM 

owed to this play a glance at his poem will disclose ; Milton's 
debt, though less obvious and more subtly acquired, was vastly 
greater. In his U Allegro, his Comus, and his II Penseroso you 
may track Shakespeare everywhere, in words, lines, images, and 
ideas. Two plays above all caught his fancy, and dictated his 
early harmonies : A Midsummer-Night'' s Dream and The Tempest. 
He loved them for their elves and fairies, their spritely magic, their 
tripping melodies, and their shifting colours of nature. He has 
even, the critics say, been enticed by Shakespeare into the last 
frailty that we should look for in Milton, an error in mythology.^ 
Shake- Shakespeare, with ready insight, early perceived the advantages 

aassTca" ^^^ic^ mythology offered to one whose only Alma Mater was his 
Mytho- mother wit. With chronology, geography, and such branches of 
'ogy- learning, in which he was never strong, mythology in itself has 

nothing to do. A man may be a good mythologist and yet be 
ignorant of all that is taught in the schools ; for a good myth, 
like a good fairy-tale, is superior to time and place, and if trans- 
planted and cared for, will blossom anywhere in any age. This is 
why Ovid's Metamorphoses became the manual of poets and 
romancers in Europe for centuries. His stories, though they were 
the stories of Greek and Roman mythology, were everywhere at 
home. To feel and understand them a man need know nothing 
of either Greeks or Romans : all that was wanted was wits and 
some gift of fancy. The ordinary stories could be learned without 
reading a line, from pictures and the painted hangings which 
then hung in all good houses. For the rest, one need not, by 
Shakespeare's day, know any language but one's own. Ovid's 
stories and images were the stock-in-trade of every aspiring poet 
who boasted acquaintance with the classics, and, besides, there 
was a translation to make all easy. 
Golding's Arthur Golding's translation of the Metamorphoses of Ovid, 
(1565-7' which was published in parts between 1565 and 1567, was by 
every sign a favourite book with Shakespeare all his life. He used 

^ ' While C\-nthia checks her dragon yoke Gently o'er th' accustomed 
oak ' {11 Penseroso, 11. 59, 60). He i > thought to have had in mind the 
' night's swift dragons ' of ni. ii. 379. But mythologists declare that only 
Geres had a dragon yoke. 



INTRODUCTION xiii 

it in A Mid summer- Night's Dream, which he wrote before he was 
thirty ; he used it in The Tempest, nearly twenty years later, 
when the stage and he were parting company. In A Mid- 
summer -Night's Dream, it must be confessed, he has made no 
great efEort, to impart to the speeches of his Athenians a Grecian 
air. He resorts, therefore, to images of classical mythology less 
often than might have been expected. His journey in search of 
Titania, which brought him to the meeting-point of fairy and 
classical legend, seems to have cooled his desire for adventure in 
these southern lands. The story of Pyramus and Thisbe (though How used 
his language shows that he had read it in Golding) he must have ^^ Shake- 
known well from his acquaintance with the stage ; passages like 
that in i. i. 169 f., where Cupid's arrows are distinguished, may 
be found in every other sonnet of the time ; and the Hst of pieces 
offered to Duke Theseus (v. i. 44 f .) is a perfunctory attempt to 
make classical colour at small expense. There is only one passage 
in the play (but it is one of the finest) which can be compared with 
those mythological pictures at the opening of the Fifth Act of The 
Merchant of Venice, where painting and poetry go hand in hand : 
the hunting of the homids in i v. i. 1 1 1 f . The poetry of this passage 
is Shakespeare's ; the ground of it is the description of Actaeon's 
hounds in Golding's translation of the third book of the Meta- 
morphoses. 

The sense and feeling which Shakespeare everywhere displays Shake- 
for classical mythology was a constant source of wonder to his ^P^*'"^ 
earlier critics, who thought that no man who was not a classical Keats, 
scholar could so have rendered to the Hfe the legends of the 
Ancients. Keats has since taught us how it may be done ; and 
that wonder has ceased to trouble. It will happen, of course, to 
such poets, luxuriating in the freedom of mythology from the 
petty accuracies of time, to confuse dates and confound chronolo- 
gies. These confusions and confoundings are what critics call 
Anachronisms. How Shakespeare's anachronisms should be 
understood, and how irrelevant they are Ub the truth of poetry 
and imagination, it will be our business to disclose in some part 
of the next section. 



xiv A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM 

Construction and Design 

Plays and It used to be said, in the days when literature had its laws and 
legislators, that every play must stand or fall by its plot ; that 
the plot was the ' soul ' of a play. This was the creed of 
critics many centuries before Shakespeare, and, in spite of some 
protests, it continued to be their creed for nearly a century after 
his death. To be ' a good plotter ', as the phrase went, was the 
first merit of a dramatist ; passion, humour, fancy, wit were 
qualities rather to be hoped for than demanded, and anyhow 
a good plotter could not fail to be good at other things as well. 
On this theory the best English dramatist was Ben Jonson, and 
so he was accounted by many, long after Shakespeare and he 
had written their last plays. When critics are as obstinate as 
this, the only remedy is Time. It was found, as the years passed, 
that Shakespeare's plays lived while Ben Jonson's died ; and 
sensible men (reflecting that the ' soul ' of a thing is that which 
gives it life and may make it immortal) began to ask themselves 
how it could any longer be maintained that the ' soul ' of a play 
was its plot, since Ben Jonson's plays, which had so much of this 
' soul ', were dying, and Shakespeare's, which had so little, seemed 
immortal. In this way, by the course of time, that fallacy was 
killed which had enabled one critic to call Othello a ' bloody farce ', 
and one playgoer to call A Midsummer-Night's Dream the ' most 
insipid ridiculous play ' that ever he saw in his life,^ 
Plot dis- What Mr. Pepys and his friends most valued in a play was a 
from Con- ''^ell-contrived ingenious plot, with surprises in it, after the manner 
struction. of the Spanish romances. To such playgoers A Midsummer- 
Nighfs Dream was bound to appear insipid ; for no play was ever 
less dependent for success upon its plot. It is, as we observed 
already, not so much a play with a plot as a series of variations 
upon a central theme, the theme of love and fantasy. The plot 
of the four lovers is in itself no more than a fairy tale ; and the 
fairy tale became a play only because the fairies were at hand to 
make it one. Let us abandon, then, in what follows, the language 

* The critic was Mr. Rymer, in his Short View of Tragedy (1693); the 
playgoer was Mr. Pepys [Diary, Sept. 29, 1662). 



INTRODUCTION xv 

f plots, and talk some other language less alien to Shakespeare's 
ractice and intentions. The old error is by no means rooted out. 
7e are still too much indined to talk of the ' plot ' of a play 
^hen we should be talking of its ' construction '. The two things 
lay be very different. Shakespeare's plays, if considered as 
xercises in plot-making, are mostly failures ; if considered as 
xercises in dramatic construction, they arO; with all their generous 
lults, productions of the highest genius. To study Shakespeare's 
lots is to study the last thing in his plays that he cared for. 

study the construction of his plays is to study one of the chief 
leans at his disposal for producing that total impression which 
e cared for most. 

The construction of A Midsummer-NigM s Dream is as skilful Construe 
3 the plot is slight. Given lovers and fairies, the problem was ^heme o 
) find some reasonable excuse for bringing them together. M. N. D. 
i was necessary to attach their adventures to some established 
3casion or event, and to connect them by such ties of time and 
lace as should seem natural and convincing. Where all was 
himsy and nothing remained the same, some stable centre of 
^uiUbrium was wanted. This established occasion, this centre of 
juilibrium, was supplied by the nuptials of Duke Theseus and 
ippolyta, who preside, however remotely, over all the doings of 
leir subjects. The play opens with their stately love-talk, and 
leir longings for the death of the old moon and the birth of the 
3W. All Athens, we hear, is in festival for Theseus's victory and his 
Dproaching marriage ; and all Athens waits, like its Duke, for 
le new moon. Thus, in Shakespeare's manner, the chief chord 

1 the harmony of the play is passionately sounded in the first 
ords spoken. Love and moonhght, festival and marriage, are 
le stated elements of the play ; everything that follows is 
kind of improvisation which weaves them together. 

Theseus and Hippolyta, as presidents of the play, give a date to The Presi- 
1 its occurrences. Everything turns on the day of their marriage. ^-^^ |° 
hiis is what brings Oberon from India to Athens on that night 

all m"ghts in the year, as jealous Titania is careful to remind 
m (ii. i. 68-73). He has a hking for Hippolyta. This is what 
•ings Titania too : she has no liking at all for Hippolyta, but, 



XVI 



A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM 



if the retort of a provoked husband is to be beheved, she takes 
a more than common interest in Theseus, having helped him 
in love-affairs before. Whatever their private motives, their 
purpose is the same (ibid. 11. 74-80). Each has come, with a train 
of fairies, to bless the marriage. They settle in the palace wood 
(by Quince's reckoning a mile, by Hermia's a league beyond the 
city), and are there awaiting the appointed day when the minor 
Their adventures which make up the play begin. The date of the 
marriage ^^cal marriage equally determines the moment of the other and 
every- human occurrences of the play. This is what drives Bottom and 
thing. }iig friends to rehearse interludes by moonhght. This is the 
reason of their sweating and conning of parts, when they should 
have been at work or in bed. They rehearse as loyal subjects of 
the duke what they may perform as simple artists at his marriage 
festival. The lovers are equally dependent. This, and this 
only, drives them to so precipitate a flight. This, and this only, 
sends them abroad on the very night that the fairies arrive. 
The date of the marriage is the date of their despair, for when 
the new moon rises and the marriage day comes, Hermia must 
choose either to wed Demetrius and reject Lysander, or to die or 
turn nun. 

Having contrived that all the parties in the play should be in 
motion at one time, on the night of the new moon, and that all 
their action should revolve round one fixed and determined event, 
the marriage of Theseus and Hippolyta, Shakespeare went further 
and concluded his scheme by contriving that all the parties should 



Every- 
body 
meets in 



the palace meet in one place. The two lovers escape to the palace wood, 
^°°'^' and are lost there ; the other two go after, one to find them, 
the other to follow the finder. The fairies set up their court there 
as on their natural ground, for Oberon is a forester and Titania 
is not Diana's namesake for nothing. Bottom and his company 
go there for privacy, to be out of the way of their fellow-craftsmen 
in the city. Last of all, that no one may be omitted, there come 
to the wood Theseus and Hippolyta themselves, with Egeus the 
angry father in their train, to hunt and keep May morning. 
They make a fine show with their hounds and horns, and their 
arrival on the scene of adventure at the moment when all has 



INTRODUCTION xvii 

been put right enables the dramatist to conclude the night's cross 
purposes on the very spot on which they had been displayed. 

Throughout all the adventures of the play Theseus and Hippo- Propriety 
lyta are never quite forgotten. When the wits of young Athenian of Theseus 
love are most shaken and its course least smooth, we remember, Hippo- 
however faintly, the sanity and equabiUty of theirs, and the ^y*^- 
rational certainty of its consummation. When all love whatso- 
ever seems laughable and absurd in the palace wood, we recall, 
with a sense of correction, the stately pomp of love at the palace. 
Those who find fault with Theseus because he behaves like a 
country gentleman of title home from the wars, and with Hippo - 
lyta because she shares his tastes, cannot have thought much about 
their part in the play, nor had much acquaintance with military 
heroes in private life. ' Theseus, the associate of Hercules,' 
says Malone, ' is not engaged in any adventure worthy of his rank 
and reputation, nor is he in reality an agent throughout the play. 
Like King Henry VIII he goes out a-Maying. . . . ' Why a soldier, 
whatever his associates, his rank, or his reputation, should be 
expected to do anything else but amuse himself quietly in his 
marriage week, after a fatiguing and victorious war, it is difficult 
to see. But the bookish man is always hardest upon his heroes. 
If his hero be a man of action, as he is likely to be, he must be 
always heroic and always adventuring ; never sleep but in 
armour nor eat without a sword at his elbow ; and so must pass 
without rest from encounter to encounter till he drop at last, 
dead as much of weariness as of wounds. Shakespeare is less 
exacting. He allows his heroes sometimes to rest and be 
natural. Theseus and Hippolyta are so perfectly at ease and 
so completely adequate to their fimctions that any heightening 
of efEect either in their parts or in their characters must have 
disturbed the whole balance of the play. 

The chief agents of the play, and its best drawn personages, Chief 
are the fairies. Who they were, how they lived, and where they f'S^^*^' 
got their king and queen, has already been told in the last section. Fairies. 
They take a hand in everything that goes on. Theseus may be 
Duke of Athens, but in his own palace wood, though he will not 
believe it, he is a mere vassal to the fairy king. Oberon has 

b 



xvm 



A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM 



come for one express purpose, to give a fairy blessing to tlie 
marriage ; but time bangs, and be must fill up tbe waiting interval. 
A wbole nigbt is to be spent, and be must still be doing. From 
the moment that tbey enter, be and Puck are seldom ofi tbe stage. 
Tbeir entrances are frequently xmmarked : tbey use tbeir invisi- 
bility to come in and go out as tbey bave a mind. Oberon's 
cbance encoimter witb tbe lovers determines tbeir fate ; bis 
jester's cbance encounter witb tbe weavers and bellows-menders 
partly determines Bottom's. To fill up tbe nigbt, to give Puck 
and bis master sometbing more to do, to make use of sucb a 
paramour as Bottom, and to display more fully tbe graces of 
Titania and ber court, Sbakespeare even contrived an indepen- 
dent action witbin tbe fairy world itself : tbe dissension of its king 
and queen. Poor Bottom, tbe victim at once of Puck, of cbance, 
and of bis own conceit, falls in witb Oberon's ruse upon tbe queen 
more bappily even tban tbe wit of Oberon bad devised ; and 
tbe wooing scenes wbicb follow bis ' translation ' are, upon tbe 
stage at any rate, tbe very marrow of tbe play.^ Bottom's 
position of momentary superiority to tbe company of Cobwebs 
and Peaseblossoms is employed by Sbakespeare to point a moral 
pecuUarly congenial to bis mind : tbe comic effect of social 
distinctions upon tbe minds of common men. He treats 
bis fairy attendants witb tbe same mixture of famiHarity and 
hauteur as be would bave expected from bis own superiors in 
buman society. Tbe dialogue wbicb be conducts witb tbem is 
one of tbe most amusing in tbe play, and we are not surprised 
to find tbat it was tbougbt worthy of imitation.^ In all these 
transactions, then, tbe fairies are tbe prime agents and connect 
everything. The pomps of Theseus's marriage are not too stately 

' Drolleries were acted under Bottom's uame when the regular theatres 
were closed by the Puritans; and after the Restoration, in 1661, we hear 
of a piece called ' The Merry Conceited Humors of Bottom the Weaver,' 
which contains nothing but the fairies and the clowns. 
^ Mopso. I pray, sir, what may I call you ? 
1st Fairy. My name is Penny. 
Mopso. I am sorry I cannot purse you. 
Frisco. I pray you, sir, what might I call you ? 
2nd Fairy. My name is cricket. 
Frisco. I would I were a chimney for your sake. 

{The, Maid' a Metamorphosis : -prd. 1600 : anon.) 



INTRODUCTION xix 

for their blessings, uor the rude mimicry of the hard-handed 
men of Athens too homely for their jests. They are everywhere 
with their charms, their songs, their dancing, and their laughter, 
and we should not know the play without them. 

As the fairies are the chief agents of the action, so their victims. The 
the four young lovers, are its playthings. They serve to exhibit ^^^^^'^^ 
the whimsicalities of love, and to bring in their enchanters. In Four 
themselves they have no interest. We find it difficult, after ^°^®'^^' 
a lapse of time, to recall their names. They have names, because 
it is convenient that they should : but First and Second Lady, 
First and Second Gentleman, would convey as much, even to our 
recollections, as Hermia and Helena, Demetrius and Lysander. 
They are only lovers ; and have nothing to distinguish them from 
hundreds of other persons in hundreds of other plays but the 
primitive candour of their manners. They are, indeed, as Helena 
complains, far from civil. The men are selfish and inclined to 
be brutal ; the women are forward or fawning, and incHned to 
scratch. Helena's behaviour is doglike enough to excuse Deme- 
trius's scorn, if not his language : it is to be hoped, however, that 
he did not kick her, as Helena seems to imply (iii. ii. 225). When 
the troubles reach their height the two women are on the point of 
fighting, and the men look on as if they would not be surprised if 
they did. 

It may be said by an apologist that the women are so Hermia 
because Shakespeare did not trouble to make them lifelike. ^^ 
But the truth is, that in their peculiar manner of conducting 
a controversy they are very like real women indeed, but women 
of a certain class. Nor can their behaviour be put down to 
enchantment. At the time of these occurrences the only one of 
the four who is enchanted is Lysander, whose extravagant abuse 
of Hermia may on that account be pardoned. It is, indeed, 
difficult to escape the conviction that in these scenes Shakespeare 
was irresponsible, and wished to make his audience laugh more 
than was good for it. The passage of arms between Hermia and 
Helena about their height (iii. ii. 288 f.) cannot otherwise be 
understood. It is a ridiculous and unedifying scene : partly 
suggested, let us imagine, by the figure of some particular 

b2 



XX A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM 

actors in the company. Massinger took the scene in the right 
way when he parodied its climax almost literally in his Duke of 
Milan} 

That such manners should co-exist with love is not, however, 
incredible. There is but little wanted to make a lover in the 
climate of A Midsummer -Night's Dream : it is enough to be young 
and to have eyes. If any modern reader desire to know how 
'fancy ' in Elizabethan poetry came to mean love, let him read this 
play ; and along with it, that song in the Merchant of Venice which 
the attendants sing while Bassanio reflects upon the caskets : 

* Tell me where is fancy bred, 
Or in the heart or in the head ? 

It is engender'd in the eyes, 
With gazing fed ; and fancy dies 
In the cradle where it lies.' 

Oberon knew this, when he set about curing the afEections of 
the lovers in the wood. There was no need of surgery, no need of 
incision : a touch on their eyeUds and all was done. Such love 
is the love of the prime, which comes as naturally as the mating 
of birds on St. Valentine's day. All the young people in the 
play are ' poor fancy's followers ', and the course of their love, 
therefore, runs far from smooth. Hermia's head is full of the lore 
of love: she knows its statutes by book (i. i. 168 f.). These 
lovers, it is soon observed, make much use of the moon, but only 
as she is the concealer of love's flights. Of the moon as the 
patroness of single life they think singularly little ; and of single 
life itself nothing at all. Barren ceUbacy is a wintry thing, unfit 
for the spring of youth. This is the text of Theseus's sermon to 
Hermia in the opening scene. He deUvers it with the fervour 
natural in a man four days before his wedding, but not too fer- 
vently for the convictions of his younger hearers. The grandeur 
of perpetual virginity is not denied ; but it is a thing too high, 

* Marcella. For you, puppet — 
Mariana. What of me, pine-tree ? 
... that I could reach you! 
The little one you scorn so, with her nails 
Would tear yom' painted face, and scratch those eyes out. 
[Duke of Milan : 1623 : n. i.) 



INTRODUCTION xxi 

a thing for queens. This is how Shakespeare accomplishes the 
difficult task of at once condemning virginity and praising its 
chief representative in England, Queen Elizabeth (ii. i. 155 f.). 
To be a votaress, which in itself is a barren thing, becomes fine 
when the votaress is imperial. 

The story of A Midsummer-Night's Dream ends, as all stories The 
of young love should end, ' like an old play ' : Jack hath Jill, and •'^""''^S- 
nought goes ill.^ Theseus, who has a kind heart, and is not so 
selfishly happy as to be insensible to the happiness of others, 
takes all four lovers under his care, and has them married according 
to their desires, along with himself and Hippolyta. When the 
marriages are over and the day's feasting is done, when Pyramus 
and Thisbe have stabbed themselves with their scabbards, and 
only Moonshine and Lion are left to bury the dead, it is he who 
dismisses the play, in language as suitable to its conclusion as 
his first words were suitable to its opening : ' Lovers, to bed ; 'tis 
almost fairy time.' It is singular, indeed, how often Theseus 
says the right thing. His remark about the interlude of Pyramus 
and Tkishe is the sharpest sentence that has been made upon plays 
and acting : ' The best in this kind are but shadows, and the worst 
are no worse, if imagination amend them' (v. i. 215-7). If we M.N. D, 
consider the difficulty of representing such a play as A Mid- °^g^„^^ 
summer-NigMs Dream, we may be inclined to think that the 
work of amendment is better done at home. Stage moonlight 
and stage woodlands are dreary things, difficult for any but the 
youngest imagination to amend. What the stage does do for a 
reader is not to suggest a wood which he could not better imagine, 
but to remind him how Hterally true it is that the play is in 
a wood. What Quince said of his company might be said of all 
the players in the action : their stage is a green plot, and a 
hawthorn brake is their tiring-room. All this is best tasted when 
a man is by himself, and is more visible to the eye of the mind 
than of the body. 

It is usual, in speaking of this play, to say something disparaging 
' Cp. III. ii. 461-3; and Lovts Labmr's Lost, v. ii. 882-3 : 

•Our wooing doth not end like an old plaj-; 
Jack hath not Jill.' 



xxii A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM 

The or apologetic about its classical setting : to condemn its anachron- 

S ttfa^ f ^s'^"*^' 0^ explain tliem. Theseus and his court, it is generally 
31. N. D. allowed, have few of the marks of Greece about them but their 
names ; the four lovers, for all that their speech or manners can 
tell us about the coimtry of their birth, might have been lost as 
well in the forest of Arden as in a wood of Attica ; and the com- 
pany of Quince and Bottom do not pretend by so much as a name 
to be anything but pure bred English artisans, hailing from about 
the neighbourhood of Warwickshire. Some explain these things 
as a whim of Shakespeare's ; some say that he knew no better ; 
others are ready to show that in all that he did in this way 
Shakespeare proceeded on the strictest principles of philosophy. 
None of these explanations hits the truth. The truth is that 
Shakespeare followed tradition. He did what writers had been 
doing for centuries, in England and out of it : giving to every age 
and country the manners of their oAvn. This was the method 
of the Middle Ages, which were much nearer to Shakespeare than 
we are inclined to remember. The popular idea, derived from 
descriptive headings in historical manuals, that when the 
spirit of the Renaissance came into England in the reign of 
Henry VIII the spirit of the Middle Ages promptly went out, 
is absurdly untrue. The traditions of centuries cannot be so 
neatly dispatched. North, in his translation of Plutarch's Lives ; 
Shakespeare, in his dramas from classical times ; Spenser, in his 
sage and serious epic, were all in their way followers of the 
mediaeval method. 

This method was simple and easy. To the mediaeval romancer 
the events and personages of ancient history were like the events 
and personages of ancient mythology : all that could or need 
be said of them was that they came to pass or existed in Europe 
a long time ago. The whole course of ancient times seemed to 
him like one age, and he gave it without compunction the habits 
and manners of the age in which he lived. To make Theseus 
a duke, and Hercules a great paladin of chivalry ; to turn Diana's 
nymphs into fairies, and raise Pluto and Proserpine from the dead 
to undertake new cares of royalty under heaven,^ was as natural 

* Sffi fVifi nrpp.prlincr nprtinn nn. iv— x. 



INTRODUCTION xxiii 

to tlift mediaeval story-teller as story-telling itself, and will always 

be natural so long as there are people who care more for stories 

than for history. North, in his translation of Plutarch's Life of 

Theseus, puts nunneries in ancient Athens, as Shakespeare does 

in this play (r. i. 70 f.) ; and the historian Froude, in his Life of 

Julius Caesar, published not so many years ago, calls the Pontifex 

Maximus the Pope of Rome. Though three centuries di^^de 

these authors, their spirit is the same. 

On such a method strict anachronisms of time or date are Anachron 

obviously impossible. Where the whole of ancient times are ^^^ 

regarded simply as one time, dates no longer exist, and anachron- speare 

ism becomes strictly a word of no meaning. This is the true ^^ 

, Spenser. 

explanation of what are called the anachronisms of Shakespeare. 

That they could ever have been ascribed to mere ignorance is 

a strange thing to think of, when the example of Spenser so clearly 

proves its folly. Spenser was a scholar, and knew the truth of 

these matters. But there are as many anachronisms in Spenser 

the scholar as in Shakespeare the natural wit ; and the reason is 

that both, in their handling of past history and mythology, 

worked under the influence of the mediaeval idea. It is idle, 

therefore, to torment a reader by pointing to Dido and Aeneas in 

T. i. 170, and telling him that Shakespeare did wrong to make 

Hermia talk of them in the time of Theseus ; or to quarrel with 

the chronology which makes Cadmus, Hercules, and Hippolyta 

contemporaries (iv. i. 112). Within the system — which was the 

system of Chaucer and Spenser as of all mediaeval romancing 

whatsoever — Hermia was as likely to know the story of Dido 

and Aeneas as we are, and Cadmus, Hercules, and Hippolyta 

were indeed contemporaries. 

There remain to be discussed, before this section can be con- Time of 

eluded, two questions of detail which could not well be discussed *' ® P**-^' 

before : the time of the play, and the meaning of its title. The 

play is supposed to begin on April 27, four days before the new 

moon and the first day of May (i. i. 2). The lovers escape on 

the next night, the night of April 28, and are discovered in the 

morning by Theseus, who assumes that they have come out 

a-Maying (iv. i. 138). That is to say, what should be April 29 



xxiv A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM 

turns out to be May 1. Now this was certainly what Theseus 
desired, when he abused the old moon for being so long a-dying 
([. i. 3-6) ; but it is to be doubted if even fairy aid could have 
helped him to remove two days from the calendar. The pro- 
bability is that Shakespeare forgot, as he went on, what he had 
made Theseus say at the beginning ; if Theseus's ' four happy 
days ' be read as ' two ', the difficulty ceases. What is clear is 
that everything in Act i happens on the first day ; everything 
from Act ti to Act iv on the night of the second day, or the early 
morning of the third, which is May day and the day of the wedding ; 
everything in Act v on the night of the third day, which is the 
marriage night of all three couples. 

This difficulty in the time of the play has been complicated for 
modern readers by the ambiguity of its title. ' I know not,' says 
Dr. Johnson, ' why Shakespeare calls this play A Midsummer- 
Nighfs Dream when he so carefully informs us that it happened 
on the night preceding 3Iat/ day.' The title of the play, however, 
has nothing to do with the time of the action ; it is an intimation 
of the nature of the play, a description of its contents. Mid- 
summer Eve, in popular tradition, was peculiarly a time of 
dreams, spectres, and apparitions ; and Puck points the title in 
his apologetic epilogue (v. ii. 54 f .), when he begs the audience to 
imagine that they had but fallen asleep and that all they had seen 
was a dream. 

The Date op Composition : An Illustration op the Methods 

OP Dating 

The problem of the date of A Midsummer-NigWs Dream raises 
so many of the typical questions involved in the dating of a Shake- 
spearean play ; discloses so many of the methods, good and bad, 
commonly employed to solve them ; and touches so frequently 
the history of Shakespeare's earlier writings, that I have thought 
it worth while to lay the whole matter before the reader, fully and 
in order. To know the probable date of a play is no doubt some- 
thing ; to Icnow why the date is only probable is knowledge much 
more worth having. For one thing, so much may be learned 
in the process about the play, and about the other plays as well. 



INTRODUCTION xxv 

This play, it is pointed out in the next section, was in print by Meres's 
the winter of 1600. But we have an earUer and equally certain y^^"f** 
date from another source. We know that it must have been both (1598). 
written and performed at least as early as 1598. In that year 
a book was published which has become famous in a way never 
contemplated by its author : Francis Meres's Palladis Tamia or 
Wifs Treasury, a sturdy duodecimo, containing in one part of it 
a list of Shakespeare's plays up to date. To tbis list, which 
occupies some four or five lines, the book owes its resurrection ; 
and indeed it has been of the first importance to students of 
Shakespearean chronology. The passage has been often quoted, 
and will now be quoted again : 

' As Plautus and Seneca are accounted the best for Comedy and 
Tragedy among the Latines, so Shalcespere among ye English is the 
most excellent in both kinds for the stage ; for Comedy, witnes 
his Gentlemen of Verona, his Errors, his Love labors lost, his Love 
labours wonne^ his Midsummers night dreame, and his Merchant 
of Venice : for Tragedy his Richard the 2, Richard the 3. Henry 
the 4. Ki7ig John, Titus Andronicus and his Romeo and Juliet. 

' As Epius Stolo said, that the Muses would speake with Plautus 
tongue, if they would speak Latin : so I say that the Muses would 
speak with ShaJcespeares fine filed phrase, if they would speake 
English.' 

Beyond the information which this passage supplies, we cannot Tlie Use 
go a step with certainty. The play was wTitten by 1598. Nothing jecture. 
else is sure ; and all attempts to find an earlier date must proceed 
by conjecture alone. How dim a light conjecture may yield, 
when it is pursued for its own sake, and how little the conjectural 
critic minds the dark, has been nowhere more strikingly exhibited 
than in the discussions of this very question, when A Midsummer- 
Night's Dream was written. The play has been ransacked for 
clues, and passages breathing the very breath of innocence put 
to the most exquisite tortures for the sake of the date they were 
thought to conceal. 

Two passages in particular have been singled out for suffering : 
Titania's description of the disordered seasons in ii. i. 88 f. ; and 
' Another name, probably, for All's Well that Ends Well. 



XXVI 



A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM 



the couplet title of one of the pieces submitted to Duke Theseus 
(' The thrice three Muses mourning for the death Of Learning, late 
deceased in beggary ' : v, i. 52-3). 

Antiquaries have found that in the years 1594 and 1595 England 
was visited mth great storms of wind and rain, which ' over- 
turned trees, steeples, barns, houses ', flooded the fields, and 
spread pestilence in every part. It has therefore been concluded 
that Titania's description is a picture of these events, and that 
the play was composed in 1594 or 1595. How this conclusion will 
strike the reader I do not know ; but it is based on supposition 
alone. And I should think that any confidence one might have 
in this kind of supposition must be rudely shaken when one 
finds so cool a critic as Dr. Johnson declaring positively, on this 
very passage, that here, if anywhere, Shakespeare owes a debt to 
the classics. ' There are not,' he says, ' many passages in Shake- 
spear which one can be certain he has borrowed from the Ancients ; 
but this is one of the few that, I think, will admit of no dispute. 
Our Author's admirable description of the miseries of the Country 
being plainly an imitation of that which Ovid draws, as con- 
sequent on the grief of Ceres, for the loss of her daughter.' Plainly 
between this supposition and the other no reconcilement can be 
effected. The first is possible ; the second is not impossible. It 
is equally possible and much more likely that the picture drawn 
by Titania owes nothing either to history or to the Ancients, 
but is, like Titania herself, a product of the dramatist's 
imagination. 
V. i. 52-3 ^^^ second passage has been variously treated. Some think it 
(Spenser is a reference to the death of Spenser ; others that it is a reference 
Greene?). ^^ ^^® death of Robert Greene, the dramatist and pamphleteer. 
The two men had this (if nothing else) in common, that both were 
well-known authors and died in want. If the passage refers 
to the death of Spenser, it must have been inserted after the 
appearance of the play upon the stage ; for the play was acted in 
1598, and Spenser died in 1599. If it refers to Greene (who died in 
1592), we must credit Shakespeare with an act of generosity almost 
too complicated to be credible. For Greene had attacked him as 
a plagiarist in the last thing he ever wrote; and even if Shakespeare 



INTRODUCTION xxvii 

desired to return good for evil, he cannot have imagined that his 
audience would perceive beneath so vague a word as ' Learn- 
ing' the fiffure of Robert Greene. Greene was a writer with 
a public, and his end was known. The miserable story of his 
life and last days, written in penitence from his death-bed, had 
made a stir at the time. But time had passed, and Greene was 
no Otway or Chatterton to survive the sensation of the day. 
This conjecture, therefore, may be dismissed. It has nothing 
but the interest of Greene's name to recommend it, and it has 
detained us too long. 

A third conjecture, that Shakespeare, when he wrote this title, Spenser's 
was thinking of the title of Spenser's poem. The Teares of the J|^l^^//^°l^ 
Muses, or the neglect and contempt of learning, has more to be said (1591). 
for it. I say ' thinking ' of this title ; not ' alluding ' to it, as 
these things are generally put. There is nothing to allude to. 
It ran in his head as he was thinking of titles. But even so 
we are no better of? ; for Spenser's poem appeared in 1591. And 
since nobody was ever in any danger of supposing that Shake- 
speare wrote A Midsummer-Night^ s Dream before that date, we 
have still all the years to choose from between 1591 and 1598. 

It has been thought, with great probabiUty of truth, that this A 
play was written for some special occasion : to celebrate, per- ^^^^^^S^ 
haps, some noble marriage. We know that in these years Shake- 
speare became intimate with the noble playgoers of the time, and 
came to be a favourite dramatist at the Court. The play is of 
the sort that was usually presented at such festivities, and the 
Queen herself may have been present to hear the charming com- 
pliments paid to her beauty, her majesty, and singleness of state 
in II. i. 157 f. But when we have got so far we are no nearer to 
a date than ever. Which of the Court marriages between 1591 
and 1598 is to be selected for this honour ? Some fooUsh people, 
playing a sort of children's game of ' I choose ', have pinned their 
faith to this marriage and to that. But we need not imitate their 
folly. Where there are no grounds for judgement it is childish, 
and may be mischievous, to play at preferences. 

The help that we might expect to receive from the style and 
manner of the piece, from its diction and versification, is here 



xxviii A MIDSUMMER -NIGHT'S DREAM 

Style, scarcely to be had. The poetry of the play, ' glowing with the 
Verse, &c. ^y^rmth of a youthful imagination, the many scenes which it 
contains of almost continual rhyme, the poverty of the fable, and 
want of discrimination among the higher personages ', all disposed 
Malone to believe that it was ' one of our author's earliest attempts 
at comedy '. Now it is true that much rhyme in a Shakespearean 
play is normally a sign that the play is early. It is also true that 
the play we are considering is full of youthful imagination, that 
it contains more poetry than drama, that the plot is thin, and 
the serious characters undeveloped. These, too, are normally 
the signs of an early play. But when it is remembered that 
our play was almost certainly a festival play, a kind of masque, 
this system of signs loses much of its force. Such plays were 
naturally rhyming plays : rhymes were expected. They were 
naturally youthful, for it is the nature of all festivity to assume 
the air of youth. Their plots were naturally thin, and their 
characters undramatic, because of the demand which they had to 
satisfy for pageant, and because pageant, a spectacular thing, is 
incompatible with real drama. So far as all this goes, then, 
Shakespeare might have written A Midsummer -Night's Dream at 
any time in the first ten years of his authorship. Malone himself, 
the most careful of men, found this out as he went on, and pro- 
posed as many as three dates at three different times. 
Meres's Defeated once more in our search for truth, we retire from sup- 

list again, position to fact. Francis Meres's list is at any rate a real thing. 
How are the plays which it contains to be distributed over the 
nine years from 1589, when Shakespeare commenced playwright 
in his own name, to 1598, the year when the list was published ? 
To the plays in the list must be added the three parts of Henry VI, 
in which Shakespeare unquestionably had a share, and his poems, 
the Venus and Adonis, Lucrece, and the Sonnets. Even with this 
plainer problem before us we cannot look to come, except by 
accident, within more than a year or two of the truth. It is by 
no means easy, in the almost total absence of precise dates, to fit 
so many compositions into so small a number of years. The feat 
has been performed, however, by the patience of scholars ; and 
what we have to do, after reviewing the distributions upon which 



INTRODUCTION xxix 

they are fairly agreed, is to iind some likely gap in tlie years Cou- 
witli room for still another play. If we take it this way, the year 159^^*^ * 
1594 will probably appear to be as likely a date as any. This was 
Malone's last choice, and it will serve our turn. 

The Text : Folios and Quartos 

Since I shall have occasion, in what follows, to speak of Folios Qnartos 
and Quartos. I shall begin by explaining what they mean. The Ydios. 
early editions of Shakespeare's plays are of two kinds. There are 
the editions of single plays, most of which appeared in the author's 
lifetime ; and there are the collected editions of his plays which 
appeared after his death. The first are called Quartos, because 
they are of quarto size ; the second are called Fohos, because they 
are of folio size. Seventeen of the plays appeared in various 
Quarto editions ; the remaining twenty were printed for the first 
time in the First Folio edition of 1623. 

This edition was prepared by two of Shakespeare's friends and TheFirst 
fellow-actors, John Heminge and Henry Condell, seven years ,iq^\ 
after his death. It was meant to settle, so far as possible, which 
of the plays attributed to Shakespeare were really his, and what 
should be the standard text of the plays admitted to be genuine. 
Their aim was laudable, friendly, and enlightened. We owe 
twenty of the plays to their exertions ; for these twenty their 
edition is the sole authority. For all but one of the other 
seventeen, though some of the Quarto versions are sometimes 
preferable, the First Folio supplies, on the whole, an excellent 
working text. Three FoUo editions followed the first, in 1632, 
1663, and 1685, each a copy of its predecessor, with errors and 
alterations of its own. They were the last of the seventeenth- 
century editions of Shakespeare. With the opening of the 
eighteenth century began the age of the modern edition. 

A Midsummer-Night's Dream is one of the plays which appeared M. N. 1). 
first in quarto. Two such editions were published. The first Qg^ °^ 
appeared in 1600 ; the second, which is also dated 1600, we now 1619). 
know to have been printed iu 1619. The two editions are generally 
styled, in discussions of this play, the First and Second Quartos. 
No others were published before the First Folio of 1623. 



A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM 



Fi follows Wheu, in order to construct the best possible text, we compare 
^^' these three editions together, two things become apparent. It 

becomes apparent that the First Quarto edition is nearer to the 
original than the other two, and that the First Folio editors 
followed not the First Quarto but the Second. The evidence on 
which these two conclusions rest, if fully stated, would convince 
a court of law. It will be enough to mention some of the more 
interesting variations. 

The persons responsible for the Second Quarto version had 
ideas, unfortunately, about diction, and took something of the 
same freedom with Shakespeare's text as was taken by the earUer 
eighteenth- century editors. When a word or a form seemed 
strange they were apt to substitute some harmless equivalent, 
nearer to the mode of ordinary town-bred speech. In a play so 
full of provincial dialect and deliberate archaism as A Midsummer- 
Nighfs Dream this tendency had ample scope. It is one of the 
marks of authenticity in the First Quarto that it has so many 
original spelhngs. The Second Quarto changes 'thorough' to 
' through ' (ii. i. 3, &c.), ' sprite ' to ' spirit ' (ii. i. 33), ' steppe ' to 
' steepe ' (ii. i. 69), and so on, without compunction ; and the 
Folios follow mildly in its track. Sometimes, though this is rare, 
it corrects the First. It does so in iii. ii. 237, where the First 
Quarto reads ' I do. Persever '. The Second Quarto reads instead 
' I, do, persever ', which appears in our text, ' Ay, do, persever. 
* I ' was the EUzabethan printers' way of speUing ' Ay ' ; hence 
this mistake, and many others in other plays. The conclusion 
would seem to be that the Second Quarto, though inferior in 
many ways to the First, is not to be despised. It presents a 
damaged text, but in one or two places it has preserved the truth. 
The editors of the First FoHo, with all their shortcomings, were 
meritorious workmen. For their chief mistake, the using of the 
inferior Quarto, it is hard to blame them. The two Quartos had 
the same date on their title page ; and even if they knew that 
one was later than the other, they may well have thought, as the 
untrained mind is apt to think, that of two editions the later was 
probably the better. In any case they were far from following 
the Second Quarto bUndly. Their besetting sin was neither care- 



INTRODUCTION xxxi 

lessness nor indifference, but over-zeal. They were so keen to put 
all right. An ill-sounding or halting line seldom appealed to 
them in vain. In ii. i. 210 (' Than to be used as you use your 
dog ') they changed ' use 'to 'do ', thinking, apparently, that 
too many ' uses ' spoil the line. In iii. ii. 220 (' I am amazed 
at your passionate words ') ' passionate ' is due perhaps to 
a desire that all the lines should give good measure. It is in 
neither of the Quartos, and yet you will find it in most modern 
texts. In IV. i. 198-9 they extended their solicitude for metre so 
far as to omit altogether two half-lines, which seemed to them to 
hurt the scansion ('Are you sure That we are awake ? '). It is 
impossible to approve of methods like these, but they were well 
meant, and applied on intelligible principles. 

In drawing conclusions about the work of the First Folio Two 
editors on this play, I should lay stress on two passages. In the Passages 
first they make a small but real correction of a certain kind ; in 
the second they put forward a remarkable reading which is quite 
independent of either of the Quartos. 

In both the Quartos the speech of Wall is dehvered by Flute v. i. 158. 
(' I, one Flute by name, present a wall,' v. i. 158). But this is 
a mistake. In the distribution of characters it is plainly laid down 
that Snout is to be Wall, and Flute is to be Thisby. The First 
Folio, therefore, changed ' Flute ' to ' Snout '. But to be able to 
make a change of this sort while the printing of the play was going 
forward, argues not only soHcitude in the editors, but practical 
knowledge of the play. No doubt Heminge and Condell had 
acted in it. 

In the other passage, v. i. 210-11 (' Now is the mural down v. i. 210- 
between the two neighbours') the reading of the First Folio ^^' 
has supplied the basis of the commonly accepted version. It 
reads ' Now is the morall down,' and Pope cleverly emended 
* morall ' to ' mural '. But the reading of the two Quartos is 
something entirely different : ' Now is the Moon used.' The 
Folio editors were dissatisfied with this, as well they might be, 
and replaced it by something else. The question is, where did 
they get it ? Either they had some other version of this part of 
the play, or they were indebted to their memory as actors. Which- 



xxxii A MTDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM 

ever be the true explanation, they went far to redeem their error 
in following the Second Quarto by the caution with which they 
received its readings when they seemed bad, and by the anxiety 
which they displayed for sense and metre in passages where 
neither Quarto gave any help. 
Con- The text of the present edition, and indeed of all modern 

editions, is a composite thing, made up of a selection of the best 
readings obtainable from these early texts. There are still in the 
play some battered phrases and passages that defy emendation : 
like V. i. 59, which has bred more conjectures than there are 
letters in the line, and iii. i. 85 f., a foolish passage which it is 
perhaps unwise to trouble about. But on the whole we have 
little reason to complain. 



A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM 



DRAMATIS PERSONAE 



Theseus, Duke of Athens. 
Egeus, Father to Hermia. 
Lysander, ) in love with Hei-^ 
Demetrius,) mia. 
Philostrate, Master of the 
Revels to Theseus. 

1 Quince, a Carpenter. ^ 

Snug, a Joiner. 
Bottom, a Weaver. 
Flute, a Bellows-mender. 
Snout, a Tinker. 
Starveling, a Tailor. 

HiPPOLYTA, Queen of the Ama- 
zons, betrothed, to Theseus. 



Hermia, Daughter to Egeus, in 

love with Lysander. 
Helena, in love with Demetrius. 

Oberon, King of the Fairies. 
TiTANiA, Queen of the Fairies. 
Puck, or Robin Goodfellow. 
Pease-blossom, | 

Cobweb, Fairies. 

Moth, 

Mustabd-seed, ) 

Other Fairies attending their 
King and Queen. Atten- 
dants on Theseus and Hippo- 
lyta. 



Scene. — Athens, and a Wood near it. 



ACT I. 
Scene I. — Athens, The Palace of Theseus. 

Enter Theseus, Hippolyta, Philostrate, and Attendants. 

Theseus. Now, fair Hippolyta, our nuptial hour 
Draws on apace : four liappy days bring in 
Another moon ; but ! methinks how slow 
This old moon wanes ; [slie lingers my desires, 
Like to a step-dame, or a dowager 5 

Long withering out a young man's reven ueT ] 

Hippolyta. Four days will quickly steep themselves in night ; 
Four nights will quickly dream away the time ; 
And then the moon, like to a silver bow 
New-bent in heaven, shaU. behold the night 10 

Of our solemnities. 

Theseus. Go, Philostrate, 

Stir up the Athenian youth to merriments ; 
Awake the pert and nimble spirit of mirth ; 
Turn melancholy forth to funerals ; 

The pale companion is not for our pomp. 15 

[Exit Philostrate. 



2 A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM act i 

Hippolyta, I woo'd thee with my sword, 

And won thy love doing thee injuries ; 

But I will wed thee in another key, 

With pomp, with triumph, and with revelling. 

Enter Egeus, Hermia, Lysander, and Demetrius. 

. Egeus. Happy be Theseus, our renowned duke ! 20 

Theseus. Tiianks, good Egeus : what 's the news with thee ? 

Egeus. Full of vexation come I, with complaint 
Against my child, my daughter Hermia. 
Stand forth, Demetrius. My noble lord, 
This man hath my consent to marry her. 25 

Stand forth, Lysander : and, my gracious duke. 
This man hath bewitch'd the bosom of my child : 
Thou, thou, Lysander, thou hast given her rimes, 
And interchang'd love-tokens with my child ; 
Thou hast by moonlight at her window sung, 30 

With feigning voice, verses of feigning love ; 
And stol'n the impression of her fantasy 
With bracelets of thy hair, rings, gawds, conceits. 
Knacks, trifles, nosegays, sweetmeats, messengers 
Of strong prevailment in unharden'd youth ; 35 

With cunning hast thou filch'd my daughter's heart ; 
Turn'd her obedience, which is due to me. 
To stubborn harshness. And, my gracious duke, 
Be it so she will not here before your Grace 
Consent to marry with Demetrius, 40 

I beg the ancient jDrivilege of Athens, 
As she is mine, I may dispose of her ; 
Which shall be either to this gentleman, 
Or to her death, according to our law 
Immediately provided in that case. 45 

Theseus. What say you, Hermia ? be advis'd, fair maid. 
To you, your father should be as a god ; 
One that compos'd your beauties, yea, and one 
To whom you are but as a form in wax 
By him imprinted, and within his powei: 50 

To leave the figure or disfigure it. 
Demetrius is a worthy gentleman. 

Hermia. So is Lysander. 

Theseus. In himself he is ; 

But, in this kind, wanting your father's voice. 
The other must be held the worthier. 55 



sc. I A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM 3 

Hcrmia. I would my father look'd but with my eyes. 

Theseus. Rather your eyes must with his judgment look. 

Hermia. I do entreat your Grace to pardon me. 
I know not by what power I am made bold, 
Nor how it may concern my modesty CO 

In such a presence here to plead my thoughts ; 
But I beseech your Grace, that I may know 
The worst that may befall me in this case, 
If I refuse to wed Demetrius. 

Theseus. Either to die the death, or to abjure 65 

For ever the society of men. 
Therefore, fair Hermia, question your desires ; 
Know of your youth, examine well your blood, 
Whe'r, if you yield not to your father's choice. 
You can endure the livery of a nun, 70 

For aye to be in shady cloister mew'd, 
To live a barren sister all your life. 

Chanting faint hymns to the cold fruitless moon. ^^ 

fTl irice blessed they that master so their blood, .^ 

To undergo such maiden pilgrimage ; 75 

Sut earthlier happy is the rose distill'd, 
Tlian that which withering on the virgin thorn 
Grows, lives, and dies, in single blessednesST) 0. 

Hermia. So will I grow, so live, so die, Tny lord, -^ 

Ere I will yield my virgin patent up 80 

Unto liis lordship, whose unwished yoke 
My soul consents not to give sovereignty. 

Theseus. Take time to pause ; and, by the next new 
moon, — 
The sealing-day betwixt my love and me 
For everlasting bond of fellowship,^ 85 

Upon that day either j^repare to die 
For disobedience to your father's will, 
Or else to wed Demetrius, as he would ; 
Or on Diana's altar to protest 
For aye austenty and single life. 90 

Demetrius. Relent, sweet Hermia ; and, Lysander, yield 
Thy crazed title to my certain right. 

Lysander. You have her father's love, Demetrius ; 
Let me have Hermia's : do you marry him. 

Egeus. Scornful Lysander ! true, he hath my love, 95 
And what is mine my love shall render him ; 
And she is mine, and all my right of her 

B 2 



4 A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM act i 

I do estate unto Demetrius. 

Lysatider. I am, my lord, as well deriv'd as he, 
As well possess'd ; my love is more than his ; 100 

My fortunes every way as fairly rank'd 
If not with vantage, as Demetrius' ; 
And, which is more than all these boasts can be, 
I am belov'd of beauteous Hermia. 

Why should not I then prosecute my right ? 105 

Demetrius, I'll avouch it to his head, 
Made love to Nedar's daughter, Helena, 
And won her soul ; and she, sweet lady, dotes, 
Devoutly dotes, dotes in idolatry, 
Upon this spotted and inconstant man. 110 

Theseus. I must confess that I have heard so much. 
And with Demetrius thought to have spoke thereof ; 
But, being over-full of self-affairs, 
My mind did lose it. But, Demetrius, come ; 
And come, Egeus ; you shall go with me, 115 

I have some private schooling for you both. 
For you, fair Hermia, look you arm yourself 
To fit your fancies to your father's will. 
Or else the law of Athens yields you up, 
Which by no means we may extenuate, 120 

To death, or to a vow of single life. 
Come, my Hippolyta : what cheer, my love ? 
Demetrius and Egeus, go along : 
I must employ you in some business 

Against our nuptial, and confer with you 125 

Of something nearly that concerns yourselves. 

Egeus. With duty and desire we follow you. 

[Exeunt Theseus, Hippolyta, Egeus, Demetrius, 

and Train. 

Lysander. How now, my love ! Why is your cheek so 
pale ? 
How chance the roses there do fade so fast ? 

Hermia. Belike for want of rain, which I could well 130 
Beteem them from the tempest of mine eyes. 

Lysander. Ay me ! for aught that ever I could read. 
Could ever hear by tale or history, /i 

The course of true love never did run smooth ; f 

But, either it was different in blood, — 135 

Hermia. cross ! too high to be enthrall'd to low. 

Lysander, Or else misgraffed in respect of years, — 



SC. I 



A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM 



^ 



Hermia. spite ! too old to be engag'd to young. 

Lysander. Or else it stood upon the choice of friends, — 

Hermia. ]iell ! to choose love by another's eye. 140 

Lysander. Or, if there were a sympathy in choice, 
War, death, or sickness did lay siege to it, , 

Making it momentany as a sound, | 

Swift as a shadow, short as any dream, p,^ 

Brief as the lightning in the coUied night, 146 O 

That, in a spleen, unfolds both heaven and earth, 
And ere a man hath power to say, ' Behold ! ' 
The jaws of darkness do devour it up : 
So quick bright things come to confusion. 
"" Hermia. 'Tf then true lovers have been ever oross'd, 150 
It stands a's^an edict in destiny : 
Then let us teach our trial patience, 
Because it is a customary cross^ j 
As due to love as thoughts and dreams and sighs, 
Wishes and tears, poor fancy's followers. 155 

Lysander. A good persuasion : therefore, hear me, Hermia. 
I have a widow aunt, a dowager 
Of great revenue, and she hath no child : 
From Athens is her house remote seven leagues ; 
And she respects me as her only son. IGO 

There, gentle Hermia, may I marry thee. 
And to that place tlie sharp Athenian law 
Cannot pursue us. If thou lov'st me then, 
Steal forth thy father's house to-morrow night, 
And in the wood, a league without the town, 105 

Where I did meet thee once with Helena, 
To do observance to a morn of May, 
There will I stay for thee. 

Hermia. My good Lysander ! 

I swear to thee by Cupid's strongest bow, 
By his best arrow with the golden head, 170 

By the simplicity of Venus' dov^es, 
By that which knitteth souls and prospers loves, 
And by that fire which burn'd the Carthage queen, 
When the false Troyan under sail was seen, 
By all the vows that ever men have broke, — 175 

In number more than ever women spoke, — 
In that same place thou hast appointed me, 
To-morrow truly will I meet with thee. 

Lysander. Keep promise, love. Look, here comes Helena. 



6 A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM act i 

Enter Helena. 

Hermia. God speed fair Helena ! Whither away ? 180 

Helena. Call you me fair ? that fair again unsay. 
Demetrius loves your fair : happy fair ! 
Your eyes are lode-stars ! and your tongue's sweet air 
More tuneable than lark to shepherd's ear, 
When wheat is green, when hawthorn buds appear^ 18r> 
Sickness is catching : ! were favour so, 
Yours would I catch, fair Hermia, ere I go ; 
My ear should catch your voice, my eye your eye, 
My tongue should catch your tongue's sweet melody. 
Were the world mine, Demetrius being bated, 190 

The rest I'd give to be to you translated. 
! teach me how you look, and with what art 
You sway the motion of Demetrius' heart. 

Hermia. I frown upon him, yet he loves me still. 

Helena. ! that your frowns would teach my smiles such 
skill. 195 

Hermia. I give him curses, yet he gives me love. 

Helena. ! that my prayers could such affection move. 

Hermia. The more I hate, the more he follows me. 

Helena. The more I love, the more he hateth me. 

Hermia. His folly, Helena, is no fault of mine. 200 

HeleTia. None, but your beauty : would that fault were mine ! 

Hermia. Take comfort : he no more shall see my face ; 
Lysander and myself will fly this place. 
Before the time I did Lysander see, 

Seem'd Athens as a paradise to me : 205 

! then, what graces in my love do dwell, 
That he hath turn'd a heaven unto a hell. 

Lysander. Helen, to you our minds we will unfold. 
To-morrow night, when Ejb ^peb e doth behold 
Her silver visage in the wat'ry glass, 210 

Decking with liquid pearl the bladed grass, — 
A time that lovers' flights doth still conceal, — 
Through Athens' gates have we devis'd to steal. 

Hermia. And in the wood, where often you and I 
Upon faint primrose-beds were wont to lie, 215 

Emptying our bosoms of their counsel sweet, 
There my Lysander and myself shall meet ; 
And thence from Athens turn away our eyes, 
To seek new friends and stranger companies. 



sc. I A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM 7 

Farewell, sweet playfellow : pray thou for us ; 220 

And good luck grant thee thy Demetrius ! 

Keep word, Lysander : we must starve our sight 

From lovers' food till morrow deep midnight. 

Lysander. I will, my Hermia. — [Exit Hermia.] Helena, 
adieu : 
As you on him, Demetrius dote on you ! [Exit. 

Helena. How happy some o'er other some can be ! 22G 
Through Athens I am thought as fair as she ; 
But what of that ? Demetrius thinks not so ; 
He will not know what all but he do know ; 
And as he errs, doting on Hermia's eyes, 230 

So I, admiring of his qualities. 

Things base and vile, holding no quantity, / 

Love can transpose to form and dignity. / | 

Love looks not with the eyes, but with the mind. 
And therefore is wing'd Cupid painted blind. ^ 

Nor hath Love's mind of any judgment taste : 
Wings and no eyes figure unheedy haste : J f v • 
And therefore is Love said to be a child, / 

Because in choice he is so oft beguil'd. 

As waggish boys in game themselves forswear, 240 

So the boy Love is perjur'd every where ; 
For ere Demetrius look'd on Hermia's eyne, 
He hail'd down oaths that he was only mine ; 
And when this hail some heat from Hermia felt. 
So he dissolv'd, and showers of oaths did melt. 245 

I will go tell him of fair Hermia's flight : 

Then to the 5X)od will he to-morrow night / i 

Pursue her ; andjfor this intelligence / / 

If I have thanks, it is a dear expense : 

But herein mean I to enrich my pain, 250 

To have his sight thither and back again. [Exit. 

Scene II. — The Same./ A Room in Quince's House. 
i/w/er Quince, Snug, Bottom, Flute, Snout, awt? Starveling. 

Quince. Is all our company here ? 

Bottom. You were best to call them generally, man 
by man, according to the scrip. 

Quince. Here is the scroll of every man's name, which 
is thought fit, through all Athens, to play in our interlude 5 



% 



fiL^fl^ ^^ 



8 A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM act i 

before the duke and the duchess on his wedding-day at 
night. 

Bottom. Eirst, good Peter Quince, say what the play 
treats on ; then read the names of the actors, and so 
grow to a point. 10 

Quince. Marry, our play is, The most lamentable 
comedy, and most cruel death of Pyramus and Thisby. 

Bottom. A very good piece of work, I assure you, and 
a merry. Now, good Peter Quince, call forth your actors 15 
by the scroll. Masters, spread yourselves. 

Quince. Answer as I call you. Nick Bottom, the 
weaver. 

Bottom. Ready. Name what part I am for, and 20 
proceed. 

Quince. You, Nick Bottom, are set down for Pyramus. 

Bottom. What is Pyramus ? a lover, or a tyrant ? 

Quince. A lover, that kills himself most gallantly for 25 
love. 

Bottom. That will ask some tears in the true perform- 
ing of it : if I do it, let the audience look to their eyes ; 
I will move storms, I will condole in some measure. To 
the rest : yet my chief humour is for a tyrant. 1 could 30 , /\ 
play Ercles rarely, or a part to tear_a _cat Jn, to make />^ 

all split. 

The raging rocks 

And shivering shocks 35 

Shall break the locks 

Of prison gates: 
And Phibbus' car y^A\/f\^ 

Shall sliine from far 
And make and mar ^ 40 

The foolish Fates. 

This was lofty ! Now name the rest of the jjlayers. This 
is Ercles' vein, a tyrant's vein ; a lover is more condoling. 

Quince. Erancis Flute, the bellows-mender. 45 

Flute. Here, Peter Quince. 

Quince. You must take Thisby on you. 

Flute. What is Thisby ? a wandering knight ? 

Quince. It is the lady that Pyramus must love. 

Flute. Nay, faith, let not me play a woman ; I have 50 
a beard coming. 

Quince. That 's all one : you shall play it in a mask, 
and you may speak as small as you will. 




sc. II A MIDSUIVIMER-NIGHT'S DREAM 9 

Bottom. An I may hide my face, let me play Thisby 
too. I'll speak in a monstrous little voice, ' Thisne, 55 
Tliisne ! ' ' Ah, Pyramus, my lover dear ; thy Thisby 
dear, and lady dear ! ' 

Quirice. No, no ; you must play Pyramus ; and Flute, 
you Thisby. 

Bottom. Well, proceed. 60 

Quiyice. Robin Starveling, the tailor. 

Starveling. Here, Peter Quince. 

Quince. Robin Starveling, you must play Thisby's 
mother. Tom Snout, the tinker. 

Snout. Here, Peter Quince. 65 

Quince. You, Pyramus's father ; myself, Thisby's 
father ; Snug, the joiner, you the lion's part : and, I hope, 
here is a play fitted. 

Snug. Have you the lion's part written ? pray you, if 
it be, give it me, for I am slow of study. 70 

Quince. You may do it extemp ore, for it is nothing 
but roaring. 

Bottom^ Let me play the lion too, I will roar, that 
I will do any man's heart good to hear me ; I will roar, 
that I will make the duke say, ' Let him roar again, let him 75 
roar again.' 

Quince. An you should do it too terribly, you would 
fright the duchess and the ladies, that they would shriek ; 
and that were enough to hang us all. 80 

All. That would hang us, every mother's son. 

Bottom. I grant you, friends, if that you should fright 
the ladies out of their wits, they would have no more 
discretion but to hang us ; but I will aggravate my voice , 
so that I will roar you as gently as any sucking dove ; "85 
I will roar you as 'twere any nightingale. 

Quince. You can play no part but Pyramus ; for 
Pyramus is a sweet-faced man ; a proper man, as one shall 
see in a summer's day ; a most lovely, gentleman-like 90 
man ; therefore, you must needs play Pyramus. 

Bottom. Well, 1 will undertake it. What beard were I 
best to play it in ? 

Quince. Why, what you will. 95 

Bottom. I will discharge it in either your straw-colour 
beard, your orange-tawny beard, your purple-in-grain 
beard, or your French-crown colour beard, your perfect 
yellow. 



10 



A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM acti. sc. ii 



Quince. Well, masters, here are your parts ; and I am 100 
to entreat you, request you, and desire you, to con them 
by to-morrow night, and meet me in the palace wood, 
a mile without the town, by moonlight : there will we 
rehearse ; for if we meet in the city, we shall be dogged 
with company, and our devices known. In the meantime 
I will draw a bill of properties, such as our play wants. I 
pray you, fail me not. 

Bottom. We will meet ; and there we may rehearse 
more obscenely and courageously. Take pains ; be per- 
fect ; adieu. 

Quince. At the duke's oak we meet. 

Bottom. Enough ; hold, or cut bow-strings.' [Exeunt. 115 



105 



110 



/^ 



ACT II. 

Scene I. — A Wood near Athens. 

Enter a Fairy on one side, and Puck on the other. 

Puck. How now, spirit ! whither wander you ? 
Fairy. Over hill, over dale, 

Thorough bush, thorough brier, 
Over park, over pale. 

Through flood, thorough fire, 
I do wander every where. 
Swifter than the moone's sphere ; 
And I serve the fairy queen, 
To dew her orbs upon the green : 
The cowslips tall her pensioners be ; 
In their gold coats spots you see ; 
Those be rubies, fairy favours, 
In their freckles live their savours : 
I must go seek some dew-drops here, 
And hang a pearl in every cowslip's ear. 
Farewell, thou lob of spirits : I'll be gone ; 
Our queen and all her elves come here anon. 

Puck. The king doth keep his revels here to-night. 
Take heed the queen come not within his sight ; 
For Oberon is passing fell and wrath. 
Because that slTe as her attendant hath 
A lovely boy, stol'n from an Indian king ; 
She never had so sweet a changeling ; 



.v^ 



V 



10 



]5 



20 



ACT II. SCI A MIDSUMMER- NIGHT'S DREAM 11 

And jealous Oberon would have the child 

Knight of his train, to trace the forests wild ; '25 

But she, perforce, withholds the loved boy, 

Crowns him with flowers, and makes him all her joy. 

And now they never meet in grove, or green, 

By fountain clear, or spangled starlight sheen, 

But they do square ; that all their elves, for fear, 30 

Creep into acorn-cups and hide them there. 

Fairy. Either I mistake your shape and making quite, 
Or else you are that shrewd and knavish sprite 
Call'd Robin Goodfellow : are you not he 

That frights the maidens of the village ry ; /, . 35 , 

Skim milk, and sometimes labour in the quern, tvfX^^^ ' •'Vv-.'*'^^ 
And bootles s make the breathless house wifc~churn ; 
And sometime make the drink to bear no barm ; ^t-^t-'V'V'V-- 
Mislead night-wanderers, laughing at their harm ? 
Those that Hobgoblin call you and sweet Puck, 40 

You do their work, and they shall have good luck 
Are you not he ? 

Puck. Eairy, thou speak'st ariglit ; 

I am that merry wanderer of the night. 
I jest to Oberon, and make him smile 

When I a fat and bean-fed horse beguile, 45 

Neighing in likeness of a lilly foal : 
And sometime lurk I in a gossip's boAvl, 
In very likeness of a roasted crab ; 
And, when she drinks, against her lips 1 bob 
And on her wither'd dewlap pour the ale. 60 

The wisest aunt, telling the saddest talc. 

Sometime for three-foot stool mistaketh mo ; , i 

Then slip 1 from her, and down topples she, j i 

And ' tailor ' cries, and falls into a couglijj 
And then the whole quire hold their hij)s and loff ; 65 

And waxen in their mirth, and neeze, and swear 
A merrier hour was never wasted there. 
But, room, fairy ! here comes Oberon. 

Fairy. And here my mistress. Would that he were gone ! 

Enter Oberon /rom one side, with his Train ; and Titania from 
the other, with hers. 

Oberon. Ill met by moonlight, proud Titania. 00 

Titania. What ! jealous Oberon. Fairies, skip hence : 
I have forsworn his bed and company. 



12 A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM act ii 

i Oberon. Tarry, rash wanton ! am not I thy lord ? 

\ Titania. Then, I must be thy lady ; but I know 

^i When thou hast stol'n away from faixy land, 65 

And in the shape of Corin ^at all day. 
Playing on pipes of corn, and versing love 
To amorous Phillida. Why art thou here, 
Come from the furthest steppe of India ? 
But that, forsooth, the bouncing Amazon, 70 

Your buskin'd mistress and your warrior love, 
To Theseus must be wedded, and you come 
To give their bed joy and prosperity. 

Oberon. How canst thou thus for shame, Titania, 
Glance at my credit with Hippolyta, 75 

Knowing I know thy love to Theseus ? 
Didst thou not lead him through the glimmering night 
And make him with fair Aegle break his faith, 
With Ariadne, and Antiopa ? ^j, !',,/; '(irrirv VvUx^ ^^ 

Titania. These are tlie forgeries of' jealousy*: 
And never, since the middle summer's spring, 
Met we on hill, in dale, forest, or mead, 
t By paved fountain, or by rushy brook. 

Or in the beached margent of the sea, 85 

To dance our ringlets to the whistling wind, '^ 

But with thy brawls thou hast disturb'd our sport. 
Therefore the winds, piping to us in vain, 
V4^ As in revenge, have suck'd up from the sea 
^^ Contagious fogs ; which, falling in the land, ^ 90 

Have every pelting river made so proud 
;. That they have overborne their continents : 
■'-' The ox hath therefore stretch'd his yoke in vain, 
■=^ The ploughman lost his sweat, and the green corn 
^ Hath rotted ere his youth attain'd a beard : 95 

,J The fold stands empty in the drowned field, ,^ --. 

^ And crows are fatted with the murrion flock ; 
'^■^ The nine men's morris is fill'd up with mud, ^ 

And the quaint mazes in the wanton green v\ 

Eor lack of tread are undistinguishable : 100 

The human mortals want their winter here : 
No night is now Avith hymn or carol blest : 
Therefore the moon, the governess of floods, 
Pale in her anger, washes all the air. 

That rheumatic diseases do abound : 1^5 

And thorough this distemperature we see 



sc. I A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM 13 

The seasons alter : hoary-headed frosts ^ 

Fall in the fresh lap of the crimson rose, > 

And on old Hiems' thin and icy crown 

An odorous chaplet of sweet summer buds 110 

Is, as in mockery, set. The spring, the summer, 

The chiding autumn, angry winter, change \); 

Their wonted liveries, and the mazed world, ^ 

By their increase, now knows not which is which. 

And this same prog ejiy ,of evil comes 115 

From our debate, from our dissension : 

We are their parents and original. 

Oberon. Do you amend it then ; it lies in you. 
Why should Titania cross her Oberon ? 

I do but beg a little changeling boy, 120 

To be my henchman. 

Titania. Set your heart at rest ; 

The fairy land buys not the child of me. / \ J -y^ 

His mother was a votaress of my order : /Jn\t IMM/i-'vU) V^^ ^ 
And, in the spiced Indian air, by night. 
Full often hath she gossip'd by my side, 125 

And sat with me on Neptune's yellow sands, 
Marking the embarked traders on the flood ; 
But she, being mortal, of that boy did die ; 135 

And for her sake I do rear up her boy. 
And for her sake I will not part with him. 

Oberon. How long within this MOod intend you stay ? 

Titania. Perchance, till after Theseus' wedding-day. 
If you will patiently dance in our round, 140 

And see our moonlight revels, go with us ; 
If not, shun me, and I will spare your haunts. 

Oberon. Give me that boy, and I will go with thee. 

Titania. Not for thy fairy kingdom. Fairies, away ! 
We shall chide downright, if I longer stay. 145 

[Exit Titania with her Train. 

Oberon. Well, go thy way : thou shalt not from this grove 
Till I torment thee for this injury. 
My gentle Puck, come hither. Thou remember'st 
Since once I sat upon a promontory, 

And heard a mermaid on a dolphin's back 150 

Uttering such dulcet and harmonious breath. 
That the rude sea grew civil at her song. 
And certain stars shot madly from their spheres 
To hear the sea-maid's music. 



14 A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM act ii 

Puck. I remember, 

Oheron. That very time I saw, but thou couldst not, 155 
Plying between the cold moon and the earth, 
Cupid all arm'd : a certain aim he took 
At a fair vestal throned, by. the west, 
And loos'd his love-shaft smartly from his bow. 
As it should pierce a hundred thousand hearts ; 100 

But I might see young Cupid's fiery shaft 
Quench'd in the chaste beams of the wat'ry moon. 
And the imperial votaress passed on. 
In maiden meditation, fancy-free. 

Yet mark'd I where the bolt of Cupid fell : 165 

It fell upon a little western flower, 
Before milk-white, now purple with love's wound, 
And maidens call it. Love-in-idleness. 
Fetch me that flower ; the herb I show'd thee once 
The juice of it on sleeping eyelids laid 170 

Will make or man or woman madly dote 
Upon the next live creature that it sees. 
Fetch me this herb ; and be thou here again 
Ere the leviathan can swim a league. 

Puck. I'll put a girdle round about the earth 175 

In forty minutes. {Exit. 

Oheron. Having once this juice 

I'll watch Titania Avhen she is asleep, 
And drop the liquor of it in her eyes : 
The next thing then she waking looks upon, 
Be it on lion, bear, or wolf, or bull, 180 

On meddling monkey, or on busy ape, 
She shall pursue it with the soul of love : 
And ere I take this charm off from her sight, 
As I can take it with another herb, 

I'll make her render up her page to me. 185 

But who comes here ? I am invisible. 
And I "will overhear their conference. 

Enter Demetrius, Helena following him. 

Demetrius. 1 love thee not, therefore pursue me not. 
Where is Lysander and fair Hermia ? 

The one I'll slay, the other slayeth me. 190 

Thou told'st me they were stol'n into this wood ; 
And here am I, and wood within this wood. 
Because I cannot meet my Hermia. 



sc. I A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM 15 

Hence ! get thee gone, and follow me no more. 

Helena. You draw me, you hard-hearted adamant : 105 
But yet you draw not iron, for my heart 
Is true as steel : leave you your power to draw. 
And I shall have no power to follow you. 

Demetrius. Do I entice you ? Do I speak you fair ? 
Or, rather, do I not in plainest truth 200 

Tell you I do not nor I cannot love you ? 

Helena. And even for that do I love you the more. 
I am your spaniel ; and, Demetrius, 
The more you beat me, I will fawn on you : 
Use me but as your spaniel, spurn me, strike me, 205 

Neglect me, lose me ; only give me leave, 
Unworthy as I am, to follow you. 
What worser place can I beg in your love, 
And yet a place of high respect with me, 
Than to be used as you use your dog 't 210 

Demetrius. Tempt not too much the hatred of my spirit, 
For I am sick when I do look on you. 

Helena. And I am sick when I look not on you. 

Demetrius. You do impeach your modesty too much, 
To leave the city, and commit yourself 
Into the hands of one that loves you not. 

Helena. Your virtue is my privilege : for that 220 

It is not night when I do see your face, 
Therefore I think I am not in the night ; 
Nor doth this wood lack worlds of company, 
Eor you in my respect are all the world : 
Then how can it be said I am alone, 225 

When all the world is here to look on me ? 
^ Demetrius. I'll run from thee and hide me in the brakes, 
i^ And leave thee to the mercy of wild beasts. 
-^ Helena. The wildest hath not such a heart as you. 
2^Run when you will, the story shall be chang'd ; 230 

Apollo flies, and Daphne holds the chase ; 
The dove pursues the griffin ; the mild hind 
Makes speed to catch the tiger : bootless speed, 
When cowardice pursues and valour flies. 

Demetrius. I will not stay thy questions : let me go ; 235 
Or, if thou follow me, do not believe 
But I shall do thee mischief in the wood. 

Helena. Ay, in the temple, in the town, the field, 
You do me mischief. Fie, Demetrius ! 



16 A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM act ii 

Your wrongs do set a scandal on my sex, 240 

We cannot fight for love, as men may do ; 

We should be woo'd and were not made to woo. 

[Exit Demetrius. 
I'll follow thee and make a heaven of hell,_^ « n 

To die upon the hand I love so well._] [Exit. ' 

Oberon. Fare thee well, nympli : ere he do leave this grove, 
Thou shalt fly him, and he shall seek thy love. 246 

Re-enter Puck. 

Hast thou the flower there ? Welcome, wanderer. 

Puck. Ay, there it is. 
. Oberon. I pray thee, give it me. 

A know a bank whereon the wild thyme blows, 
^ Where oxlips and the nodding violet grows . 250 

] Quite over-canopied with luscious woodbine, M' U 
! With sweet musk-roses, and with eglantine,: '^l^^x. / ' 
There sleeps Titania some time of the night, ^^^-^^B-v 

Lull'd in these flowers with dances and delight ; 
And there the snake throws her enamell'd skin, 255 

Weed wide enough to wrap a fairy in : 
And with the juice of this I'll streak her eyes. 
And make her full of hateful fantasies. 
Take thou some of it, and seek through this grove : 
A sweet Athenian lady is in love 260 

With a disdainful youth ; anoint his eyes ; 
But do it when the next thing he espies 
May be the lady. Thou shalt know the man 
By the Athenian garments he hath on. 

Effect it with some care, that he may prove 265 

More fond on her than she upon her love. 
And look thou meet me ere the first cock crow. 

Puck. Fear not, my lord, your servant shall do so. [Exeunt. 

Scene II. — Another Part of the Wood. 

Enter Titania, with her Train. 

Titania. Come, now a roundel and a fairy song ; 
Then, for the third of a minute, hence ; 
Some to kill cankers in the musk-rose buds. 
Some war with rere-mice for their leathern wings, 
To make my small elves coats, and some keep back 5 



if i/tM 



sc. II A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM 17 

The clamorous owl, that nightly hoots, and wonders 
At our quaint spirits. Sing me now asleep ; 
Then to your offices, and let me rest. 

The Fairies sing. 

I. 

You spotted snakes with double tongue. 

Thorny hedge-hogs, be not seen ; 10 

Newts, and blind-worms, do no wrong ; 
Come not near our fairy queen. 

Philomel, with melody, 
Sing in our sweet lullaby ; 
LuUa, lulla, lullaby ; luUa, lulla, lullaby : 15 

Never harm. 
Nor spell, nor charm. 
Come our lovely lady nigh ; 
So, good night, with lullaby. 

II. 

Weaving spiders come not here ; 20 

Hence, you long-legg'd spinners, hence ! 

Beetles black, approach not near ; 
Worm nor snail, do no offence. 

Philomel, with melody, &c. 

Fairy. Hence, away ! now all is well. 25 

One aloof stand sentinel. 

[Exeunt Fairies. Titania sleeps. 

Enter Oberon, and squeezes the /lower on Titania's eyelids. 

Oheron. What thou seest when thou dost wake, 
Do it for thy true-love take ; 
Love and languish for his sake : 

Be it ounce, or cat, or bear, 30 

Pard, or boar with bristled hair, 
fJn thy eye that shall appear 
when thou wak'st, it is thy dear. 
Wake when some vile thing is near. [Exit, 

Filter Lysander and Hermia. 

Lysander. Fair love, you faint with wandering in the wood ; 
And to speak troth, I have forgot our way : 36 

We'll rest us, Hermia, if you think it good, 
And tarry for the comfort of the day. 



/ C 



18 A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM act u 

Hermia. Be it so, Lysandcr : find you out a bed, 
For I upon this bank will rest my head. 40 

Lysander. One turf shall serve as pillow for us both ; 
One heart, one bed, two bosoms, and one troth. 

Hermia. Nay, good Lysander ; for my sake, my dear. 
Lie further off yet, do not lie so near, 

Lysander. ! take the sense, sweet, of my innocence, 45 
Love takes the meaning in love's conference. 
I mean that my heart unto yours is knit, 
So that but one heart we can make of it ; 
Two bosoms interchained with an oath ; 
So then two bosoms and a single troth. 50 

Then by your side no bed-room me deny, 
For, lying so, Hermia, I do not lie. 

Hermia. Lysander riddles very prettily : 
Now much beshrew my manners and my pride, 
If Hermia meant to say Lysander lied. 55 

But, gentle friend, for love and courtesy 
Lie further off ; in human modesty. 
Such separation as may well be said 
Becomes a virtuous bachelor and a maid, 
So far be distant ; and, good night, sweet friend. CO 

Thy love ne'er alter till thy sweet life end ! 

Lysander. Amen, amen, to that fair prayer, say I ; 
And then end life when I end loyalty ! 

{Retires a little distance. 
Here is my bed : sleep give thee all his rest ! A 

Hermia.^Nith half that wish the wisher's eyes be press'd ! 65 / 
^ — [They steep. j 

Enter Puck. 
Puck. Through the forest have I gone, 
But Athenian found I none, 
On whose eyes I might approve 
This flower's force in stirring love. 
Night and silence ! who is here ? 70 

Weeds of Athens he doth wear : 
This is he, my master said. 
Despised the Athenian maid ; 
And here the maiden, sleeping sound, 
On the dank and dirty ground. 75 

Pretty soul ! she durst not lie 
Near this lack-love, this kill-courtesy. 

[Squeezes the flower on Lysander's eyelids.] 



so. n A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM 19 

j^y^yfi^fyfs Chuv\, upon thy eyes I throw 

All the power this charm doth owe. 

When thou wak'st, let love forbid SO 

Sleep his seat on thy eyelid : 

So awake when I am gone ; 

For I must now to Oberon. [Exit. 

Enter Demetrius and Helena, running. 

Helena. Stay, though thou kill me, sweet Dem-etrius. 

Demetrius. I charge thee, hence, and do not haunt me thus. 

Helena. ! wilt thou darkling leave me ? do not so. 86 

Demetrius. Stay, on thy peril : I alone will go. 

[Exit Demetrius. 

Helena. ! I am out of breath in this fond chase. . ^ 

/ *f he more my prayer, the lesser is my grace. ' / o 

i<*fiappy is Hermia, wheresoe'er she lies ; ' 90 

For she hath blessed and attractive eyes. 
How came her eyes so bright ? Not with salt tears : 
If so, my eyes are oftener wash'd than hers. 
No, no, I am as ugly as a bear ; 

For beasts that meet me run away for fear ; 95 

Therefore no marvel though Demetrius 
Do, as a monster, fly my presence thus. 
What wicked and dissembling glass of mine 
Made me compare with Hermia's sphery eyne ? 
But who is here ? Lysander ! on the ground ! 100 

Dead ? or asleep ? I see no blood, no wound. 
Lysander, if you live, good sir, awake. 

Lysander. [Awaking.] And run through fire I will for thy 
sweet sake. 
Transparent Helena ! Nature shows art. 
That through thy bosom makes me see thy heart. 105 

Where is Demetrius ? ! how fit a word 
Is that vile name to perish on my sword. 

Helena. Do not say so, Lysander ; say not so. 
Wliat though he love your Hermia ? Lord ! what though ? 
Yet Hermia still loves you : then be content. llO 

Lysander. Content with Hermia ! No : I do repent 
The tedious minutes I with her have spent. 
Not Hermia, but Helena I love : 
Who will not change a raven for a dove ? 
The will of man is by his reason sway'd, Ho 

And reason says you are the worthier maid. 

c 2 



20 A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM act ii. sen 

Things growing are not ripe until their season ; 

So I, being young, till now ripe not to reason ; 

And touching now the point of human skill, 

Reason becomes the marshal to my will, 120 

And leads me to your eyes ; where I o'erlook 

Love's stories written in love's richest book. 

Helena. Wherefore was I to this keen mockery born ? 
When at your hands did I deserve this scorn ? 
Is't not enough, is't not enough, young man, 125 

That I did never, no, nor ever can, 
Deserve a sweet look from Demetrius' eye, 
But you must flout my insufficiency ? 
Good troth, you do me wrong, good sooth, you do, 
In such disdainful manner me to woo. 130 

But fare you well : perforce I must confess 
I thought you lord of more true gentleness. 
! that a lady of one man refus'd. 
Should of another therefore be abus'd. {Exit. 

Lysander. She sees not Hermia. Hermia, sleep thou there ; 
And never mayst thou come Lysander near. 136 

For, as a surfeit of the sweetest things 
The deepest loathing to the stomach brings ; 
Or, as the heresies that men do leave 

Are hated most of those they did deceive : 140 

So thou, my surfeit and my heresy, 
Of all be hated, but the hiost of me ! 
And, all my powers, address your love and might 
To honour Helen, and to be her knight. {Exit. 

Hermia. {Awaking.'] Help me, Lysander, help me ! do thy 
best 145 

To pluck this crawling serpent from my breast. 
Ay me, for pity ! what a dream was here ! 
Lysander, look how I do quake with fear : 
Methought a serpent eat my heart away. 
And you sat smiling at his cruel prey. 150 

Lysander ! what ! remov'd ? — Lysander ! lord ! 
What ! out of hearing ? gone ? no sound, no word ? 
Alack ! where are you ? speak, an if you hear ; 
Speak, of all loves ! I swound almost with fear. 
No ! then I well perceive you are not nigh : 155 

Either death or you I'll find immediately. {Exit. 



ACT III. SCI A MIDSmVIMER-NIGHT'S DREAM 21 

ACT III. 

Scene I. — A Wood. Titania lying asleep. 

/ y 

£'wfer Quince, SNilfo, Bottom, Flute, Snout, a/w/ Starveling. 

Bottom. Are we all met ? 

Quince. Pat, pat ; and here's a marvellous convenient 
place for our rehearsal. This green plot shall be our stage, 
this hawthorn-brake our tiring-house ; and we will do it 
in action as we will do it before the duke. 5 

Bottom. Peter Quince, — 

Quince. What sayst thou, bully Bottom ? 

Bottom. There are things in this comedy of Pyramus 
and Thisby that will nev^er please. First, Pyramus must 10 
draw a sword to kill himself, which the ladies cannot 
abide. How answer you that ? 

Snout. By 'r lakin, a parlous fear. 

Starveling. I believe we must leave the killing out, 15 
when all is done. 

Bottom. Not a whit : I have a devnce to make all well. 
Write me a prologue ; and let the prologue seem to say, 
we will do no harm with our swords, and that Pyramus 
is not killed indeed ; and, for the more better assurance, 20 
tell them that I, Pyramus, am not Pyramus, but Bottom 
the weaver : this will put them out of fear. 

Quince. Well, we will hav^e such a prologue, and it 
shall be written in eight and six. 25 

Bottom. No, make it two more : let it be written in 
eight and eight. 

Snout. Will not the ladies be afeard of the lion ? 

Starveling. I fear it, I promise you. 30 

Bottom. Masters, you ought to consider with your- 
selves : to bring in, — God shield us ! — a lion among ladies, 
is a most dreadful thing ; for there is not a more fearful 
wild-fowl than your lion living, and we ought to look 
to it. 35 

Snout. Therefore, another prologue must tell he is not 
a lion. 

Bottom. Nay, you must name his name, and half his 
face must be seen through the lion's neck ; and he himself 
must sjjeak through, saying thus, or to the same defect, 40 
'Ladies,' or, 'Fair ladies,' 'I would wish you,' or, 'I 



22 A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM act hi 

would request you,' or, ' I would entreat you, not to fear, 
not to tremble : my life for yours. If you think I come 
hither as a lion, it were pity of my life : no, I am no such 45 
thing : I am a man as other men are ; ' and there indeed 
let him name his name, and tell them plainly he is Snug 
the joiner. 

Quince. Well, it shall be so. But there is two hard 
things, that is, to bring the moonlight into a chamber ; 50 
for, you know, Pyramus and Thisby meet by moonlight. 

Snug. Doth the moon shine that night we play our 
play ? 

Bottom. A calendar, a calendar ! look in the almanack ; 55 
find out moonshine, find out moonshine. 

Quince. Yes, it doth shine that night. 

Bottom. Why, then may you leave a casement of the 
great chamber-window, where we play, open ; and the CO 
moon may shine in at the casement. 

Quince. Ay ; or else one must come in with a bush of 
thorns and a lanthorn, and say he comes to disfigure, or 
to present, the person of Moonshine. Then, there is C5 
another thing : we must have a wall in the great chamber ; 
for Pyramus and Thisby, says the story, did talk through 
the chink of a wall. 

Snug. You can never bring in a wall. What say you, 70 
Bottom ? 

Bottom. Some man or other must present Wall ; and 
let him have some plaster, or some loam, or some rough- 
cast about him, to signify wall ; and let him hold his 
fingers thus, and through that cranny shall Pyramus and 75 
Thisby whisper. 

Quince. If that may be, then all is well. Come, sitdown, 
every mother's son, and rehearse your parts. Pyramus, 
you begin : when you have spoken your speech, enter into 
that brake ; and so every one according to his cue. 80 

Enter Puck, behind. 

Puck. What hempen home-spuns have we swaggering 
here. 
So near the cradle of the fairy queen ? 
What ! a play toward ; I'll be an auditor ; 
An actor too perhaps, if I see cause. 85 

Quince. Speak, Pyramus. — Thisby, stand forth. 

Bottom. Thisby, the flowers have odious savours sweet, — 



so. I A MIDSUMMER -NIGHT'S DREAM 23 

Quince. Odorous, odorous. 

Bottom. — odours savours sweet : 

So hath thy breath, my dearest Thisby dear. 90 

But hark, a voice ! stay thou hut here awhile. 

And by and by I will to thee appear. [Exit. 

Puck. A stranger Pyramus than e'er play 'd liere ! [Exit. 

Flute. Must I speak now ? 

Quince. Ay, marry, must you ; for you must under- 95 
stand, he goes but to see a noise that he heard, and is to 
come again. 

Flute. Most radiant Pyramus, most lily-white of hue. 

Of colour like the red rose on triumphant brier, 
Most'brisky juvenal, and eke most lovely Jew, 100 

As true as truest horse that yet would never tire, 
ril meet thee, Pyramus, at Ninny^s tomb. 

Quince. ' Ninus' tomb,' man. Why, you must not 
speak that yet ; that you answer to Pyramus : you speak 
all your part at once, cues and all. Pyramus, enter : 105 
your cue is past : it is ' never tire.' ^.. ^_ 

Flute. ! — As true as truest horse, that yet would never 
tire. 

Re-enter Puck, and Bottom with an ass's head. 

Bottom. If I ivere, fair Thisby, I were only thine. 

Quince. monstrous ! strange ! we are haunted. HO 
Pray, masters ! fly, masters ! — Help ! [Exeunt Clowns. 

Puck. I'll follow you, I'll lead you about a round, 

Through bog, through bush, through brake, through 
brier : 
Sometime a horse I'll be, sometime a hound, 

A hog, a headless bear, sometime a fire; 115 

And neigh, and bark, and grunt, and roar, and burn, 
Like horse, hound, hog, bear, fire, at every turn. [Exit. 

Bottom. Why do they run away ? this is a knavery 
of them to make me afeard. 

Re-enter Snout. 

Snout. Bottom, thou are changed ! what do I see 120 
on thee ? 

Bottom. What do you see ? you see an ass-head of 
your own, do you ? [Exit Snout. 



24 A MIDSUIVOIER-NIGHT'S DREMI act iri 

Re-enier Quince. 

Quince. Bless thee, Bottom ! bless thee ! thou art 
translated. {Exit. 125 

Bottom. I see their knavery : this is to make an ass of 
me ; to fright me, if they could. But I will not stir from 
this place, do what they can : I will walk up and down 
here, and I will sing, that they shall hear I am not afraid. 130 

The ousel -cock, so black of hue, 

With orange-tawny bill. 
The throstle with his note so true, 

The wren with little quill. 

Titania. [Awaking.] What angel wakes me from my 135 
flowery bed ? 

Bottom. The finch, the sparrow, and the lark, 
The plain-song cuckoo gray, 
Whose note full many a man doth mark, 

And dares not answer, nay ; 140 

for indeed, who would set his wit to so foolish a bird ? 
who would give a bird the lie, though he cry ' cuckoo ' 
never so ? 

Titania. I pray thee, gentle mortal, sing again : 
Mine ear is much enamour'd of thy note ; ; 145 

So is mine eye enthralled to thy shaj^e ; _ 
And thy fair virtue's force, perforce, doth move me, / 

On the first view, to say, to swear, I love thee. 

Bottom. Methinks, mistress, you should liave little 
reason for that : and yet, to say the truth, reason and 150 
love keep little company together now-a-days. The more 
the pity, that some honest neighbours will not make them 
friends. Nay, I can gleek upon occasion. 

Titania. Thou art as wise as thou art beautiful. 155 

Bottom. Not so, neither ; but if I had wit enough to 
get out of this wood, I have enough to serve mine own turn. 

Titania. Out of this wood do not desire to go : 
Thou shalt remain here, whe'r thou wilt or no. ICO 

I am a spirit of no common rate ; 
The summer still doth tend upon my state ; 
And 1 do love thee : therefore, go with me ; 
I'll give thee fairies to attend on thee. 

And they shall fetch thee jewels from the deep, 1G5 

And sing, while thou on pressed flowers dost sleep : 




sc. 1 A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM 25 

And I will purge thy mortal grossness so '^ i/"^ 

That thou shalt like an airy spirit go. 

Pease-blossom ! Cobweb ! Moth ! and Mustard-seed ! 6 

Enter Four Fairies. 

Pease-blossom. Ready. 

Cobweb. And I. 

Moth. And I. 

Mustard-seed. And I. 

All Four. Where shall we go? 170 

Titania. Be kind and courteous to this gentleman ; 
Hop in his walks, and gambol in his eyes ; 
Feed him with ajjricocks and dewberries, 
With purple grapes, green figs, and mulberries. 
The honey-bags steal from the humble-bees, 175 

And for night -tapers crop their waxen thighs. 
And light them at the fiery glow-worm's eyes, 
To have my love to bed, and to arise ; 
And pluck the wings from painted butterflies 
To fan the moonbeams from his sleeping eyes : 180 

Nod to him, elves, and do him courtesies. 

Pease-blossom. Hail, mortal ! 

Cobweb. Hail ! 

Moth. Hail ! 

Mustard-seed. Hail ! 185 

Bottom. I cry your worships mercy, heartily : I be- 
seech your worship's name. 

Cobweb. Cobweb. 

Bottom. I shall desire you of more acquaintance, good 
Master Cobweb : if 1 cut my finger, I shall make bold 190 
with you. Your name, honest gentleman ? 

Pease-blossom. Pease-blossom. 

Bottom. I pray 3'ou, commend me to Mistress Squash, 
your mother, and to Master Peascod, your father. Good 195 
Master Pease-blossom, 1 shall desire you of more acquain- 
tance too. Your name, I beseech you, sir ? 

Mustard-seed. Mustard-seed. 

Bottom. Good Master Mustard-seed, I know your 200 
patience well : that same cowardly, giant -like ox-beef 
hath devoured many a gentleman of your house. I pro- 
mise you, your kindred hath made my eyes water ere 
now. I desire you of more acquaintance, good Master 
Mustard-seed. 205 



20 A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM act hi 

Titania. Come, wait upon him ; lead him to my bower. 
The moon methinks, looks with a watery eye ; 
And wlien she weeps, weeps every little flower. 
Lamenting some enforced chastity. 
Tie up my love's tongue, bring him silently. {Exeunt. 210 

Scene II. — Another Part of the Wood. 

Enter Oberon. 

Oheron. I wonder if Titania be awak'd ; 
Then, what it Mas that next came in her eye, 
Which she must dote on in extremity. 
Here comes my messenger. 

Enter Puck. 

How now, mad spirit ! 
What night-rule now about this haunted grove ? 5 

Puck. My mistress with a monster is in love. 
Near to her close and consecrated bower, 
While she was in her dull and sleeping hour, 
A crew of patches, rude mechanicals, 

That work for bread upon Athenian stalls, 10 

Were met together to rehearse a play 
Intended for great Theseus' nuptial day. 
The shallowest thick-skin of that barren sort, 
Who Pyramus presented in their sport 

Forsook his scene, and enter'd in a brake, 15 

When I did him at this advantage take ; 
An ass's nowl I fixed on his head : 
Anon his Thisbe must be answered. 
And forth my mimick conies. When they him spy. 
As wild geese that the creeping fowler eye, I 20 

Or russet-pated choughs, many in sort, \_^ 

Rising and cawing at the gun's report, T t:^jb 

Sever themselves, and madly sweep the sky ; j ^ ■ 

So, at his sight, away his fellows fly, / 

And, at our stamp, here o'er and o'er one falls ; 25 

He murder cries, and help from Athens calls. 
Their sense thus weak, lost with their fears thus strong. 
Made senseless things begin to do them wrong ; 
For briers and thorns at their apparel snatch ; 
Some sleeves, some hats, from yielders all things catch. 30 



sc. II A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM 27 

I led them on in this distracted fear, 
And left sweet Pyramus translated there ; 
When in that moment, so it came to pass, 
Titania Mak'd and straightway lov'd an ass. 

Oberon. This falls out better than I could devise. 35 

But hast thou yet latch'd the Athenian's eyes 
Witii the love-juice, as I did bid thee do ? 

Puck. I took him sleeping, — that is finish'd too, — 
And the Athenian woman by his side ; 
That, when he wak'd, of force she must be ey'd. 40 

Enter Demetrius a7id Hermia. 

Oberon. Stand close : this is the same Athenian. 

Puck. This is the woman ; but not this the man. 

Demetrius. ! why rebuke you him that loves you so ? 
Lay breath so bitter on your bitter foe. 

Hermia. Now I but chide ; but I should use thee worse, 45 
For thou, I fear, hast given me cause to curse. 
If thou hast slain Lysander in his sleep, 
Being o'er shoes in blood, plunge in knee deep, 
And kill me too. 

The sun was not so true unto the day 60 

As he to me. Would he have stol'n away 
From sleeping Hermia ? I'll believe as soon 
This whole earth may be bor'd, and that the moon 
May through the centre creep, and so displease 
Her brother's noontide with the Antipodes. 55 

It cannot be but thou hast murder'd him ; 
So should a murderer look, so dead, so grim. 

Demetrius. So should the murder'd look, and so should I, 
Pierc'd through the heart with your stern cruelty ; 
Yet you, the murderer, look as bright, as clear, 60 

As yonder Venus in her glimmering sphere. 

Hermia. What's this to my Lysander ? where is he ? 
Ah ! good Demetrius, wilt thou give him me ? 

Demetrius. I had ratl)er give his carcass to my hounds. 

Hermia. Out, dog ! out, cur ! thou driv'st me past the 
bounds 65 

Of maiden's patience. Hast thou slain him then ? 
Henceforth be never number'd among men ! 
O ! once tell true, tell true, e'en for my sake ; 
'!Durst thou have look'd upon him being awake,^ 
And hast thou kill'd him sleeping ? brave touch ! 70 



28 A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM act hi 

Could not a Avorm, an adder, do so much ? 

An adder did it ; for witli doubler tongue +--^ .a^i^Cv^ 

Than thine, thou serpent, never adder stung. \fy^Mf 

Demetrius. You spend your passion on a mispris'd mood : 
I am not guilty of Lysander's blood, ' 75 

Nor is he dead, for aught that I can tell. 

Hermia. I pray thee, tell me then that he is well. 
Demetrius. An if I could, what should I get therefore ? 
Hermia. A privilege never to see me more. 
And from thy hated presence part I so ; 80 

See me no more, Avhe'r lie be dead or no. [Exit. 

Demetrius. There is no following lier in this fierce vein : 
Here therefore for awhile I will remain. 
So sorrow's heaviness doth heavier grow . 
For ^eht that bankrupt sleeji doth sorrow o\yQ ; 85 

, WMch now in some slight nreasurej^t will pay, 
/ inffor his tfi^p*" here I make some stay. [Lies down and sleeps. 
^J Oberon. What hast thou done ? thou liastjnis taken quite, 
'^And laid the love-juice on some true-love's sight : 
> Of thy misprision must perforce ensue 90 

\ Some true-lov^e turn'd, and not a false turn'd true. 

Puck. Then fate o'er-rules, that, one man holding troth, 
A million fail, confounding oath on oath. 

Oheron. About the wood go swifter than the wind, 
And Helena of Athens look thou find : 95 

All fancy-sick she is, and pale of cheer 
With sighs of love, that ^post the :__fi:psli^_b1ood df^-^JJ't 
By some illusion see thou bring her here : 
I'll charm his eyes against she do appear. 

Puck. I go, 1 go ; look how I go ; 100 

Swifter than arrow from the Tartar's bow. [Exit. 

Oberon. Flower of this purple dye, 
Hit with Cupid's archery, 
Sink in apple of his eye. 

W^hen his love he doth espy, 105 

Let her shine as gloriously 
As the Venus of the sky. ' 

When thou wak'st, if she be by, 
Beg of her for remedy. 

Re-enter Puck. 

Puck. Captain of our fairy band, 110 

Helena is here at hand. 



sc. II A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM 29 

And the youth, mistook by me, l> M. 

Pleading for a lover's fee. J/AA-f^ i 

Shall Ave their fond pageant see k 

Lord, what fools these moFEals be ! 116 

Oberon. Stand aside : the noise they make 

Will cause Demetrius to awake. 
Puck. Then will two at once woo one ; 

That must needs be sport alone ; 

And those things do best pl^se me 120 

That befall prepos terousl y 




Enter Lysander and Helena 



Lysander. Why should you think that I should woo in 

scorn ? /Uuf^i ''^ '^3&\^^ 

Scorn and derision ne^er come in teaiis : 
Look, when I vow, I weep ; and vows so born. 

In their nativity all truth appears. 125 

How can these things in me seem scorn to you, 
Bearing the badge of faith to prove them true ? 

Helena. You do advance your cunning more and more. 

When truth kills truth, O devilish-holy fray 



These vows are Hermia's : will you give her o'er ? \ 130 
/Weigh oath with oath, and you will nothing weighV ^ y 

cr\ Your vows, to her and me, put in two scales, ^ c<i, / 

(,Will even weigh, and both as light as tales. — ^ 

Lysander. I had no judgment when to her I swore, 
Helena. Nor none, in my mind, now you give her o'er. 135 
Lysander. Demetrius loves her, and he loves not you. 
Demetrius. [Awaking. '[ Helen ! goddess, nymph, 
perfect, divine ! 

To what, my love, shall I compare thine eyne ? 

Crystal is muddy. O ! how ripe in show 

Thy lips, those kissing cherries, tempting grow ; 140 

This pure congealed white, high Taurus' snow, 

Fann'd with the eastern wind, turns to a crow 

When thou hold'st up thy hand. O ! let me kiss 

That princess of pure white, this seal of bliss. 

Helena. O spite ! hell ! I see you all are bent 145 

To set against me for your merriment : 

If you were civil and knew courtesy. 

You would not do me thus much injury. 

Can you not hate me, as I know you do, 

But you must join in souls to mock me too ? 150 



30 A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM act hi 

If you were men, as men you are in show, 
You would not use a gentle lady so ; 
To vow, and swear, and superpraise my parts, 
When I am sure you hate me with your hearts. 
You both are rivals, and love Hermia, 155 

And now both rivals, to mock Helena : 
jsA trim exploit, a manly enterprise, 

To conjure tears up in a poor maid's eyes ,- 
' With your derision ! none of noble sort , 

Would so offend a virgin, and extort iCO 

A poor soul's patience, all to make you sport. 

Lysander. You are unkind, Demetrius ; be not so ; 
For you love Hermia ; this you know I know : 
And here, with all good will, Avith all my heart, 
In Hermia's love I yield you up my part; 105 

And yours of Helena to me bequeath, 
Whom I do love, and will do to my death. 

Helena. Never did mockers waste more idle breath. 

Demetrius. Lysander, keep thy Hermia ; I will none. 
If e'er I lov'd her, all that love is gone. 170 ^(\ 

/My heart with her but as guest-wise sojourn'd, «/ / 

i ^nd now to Helen it is home return'd, ' 

(There to remain. 

Lysander. , , Helen, it is not so. 

Demetrius. Disparage not the faith thou dost not know, 
Lest to thy peril thou aby it dear. 175 

Look ! where thy love comes : yonder is thy dear. 

Enter Hermia. 

Hermia^ Dark night, that from the eye his function takes^ 
The ear more quick of apprehension makes ; \^ 

AVherein it doth impair the seeing sense, 1=5' 

.It pays the hearing double recompense. 180 J 

Thou art not by mine eye, Lysander, found ; 
Mine ear, I thank it, brought me to thy sound. 
But why unkindly didst thou leave me so ? 

Lysander. Why should he stay, whom love doth press to go? 

Hermia. What love could press Lysander from my side ? 

Lysander. Lysander's love, that would not let him bide, 18G 
Fair Helena, who more engilds the night 
Than all yon fiery oes and eyes of light. 
Why seek'st thou me ? could not this make thee know, 
The hate I bear thee made me leave thee so ? 190 



sc. II A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM 31 

Hermia. You speak not as you think : it cannot be. 
Helena. Lo ! she is one of this confederacy .- 
Now I perceive they have conjoin'd all three 
To fashion this false sport in spite of me. 
Injurious Hermia ! most ungrateful maid ! 195 

Have you conspir'd, have you with these contriv'd 
To bait me with this foul derision ? 
Is all the counsel that we two have shar'd, 
The sister-vows, the hours that we have spent. 
When we have chid the hasty-footed time 20O 

For parting us, O ! is it all forgot ? 
All school-days' friendship, childhood innocence ? 
We, Hermia, like two artificial gods, 
Have with our neelds created both one flower, 
Both on one sampler, sitting on one cushion, 205 

Both warbling of one song, both in one key, 
As if our hands, our sides, voices, and minds, 

^j(__ Had been incorpoj^'ate. So we grew together, 

J Like to a double cherry, seeming parted, 
I But yet an union in partition ; 210 

Two lovely berries moulded on one stem ; 
So, with two seeming bodies, but one heart ; 
Two of the first, like coats in heraldry, 
Due but to one, and crowned with one crest. 
And will you rent our ancient love asunder, 215 

To join with men in scorning your poor friend ? 
It is not friendly, 'tis not maidenly : 
Our sex, as well as I, may chide you for it. 
Though I alone do feel tlae injury. 

Hermia. I am amazed at your passionate words. 220 
I scorn you not : it seems that you scorn me. 

Helena. Have you not set Lysander, as in scorn, 
To follow me and praise my eyes and face, 
And made j'our other love, Demetrius, — 
Wlio even but now did spurn me with his foot, — 225 

To call me goddess, nymph, divine and rare. 
Precious, celestial ? Wherefore speaks he this 
To her he hates ? and wherefore doth Lysander 
Deny your love, so rich within his soul. 

And tender me, forsooth, affection, 230 

But by your setting on, by your consent ? 
What though I be not so in grace as you, 
So hung upon with love, so fortunate, 



32 A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM act. hi 

But miserable most to love unlov'd ? 

This you should pity rather than despise. 235 

Hermia. I understand not what you mean by this. 

Helena. Ay, do, persever, counterfeit sad looks, 
Make mouths upon me when I turn my back ; 
Wink each at other ; hold the sweet jest up : i ,- 

This sport, well carried, shall be chrpnicled A^ ^-j^^^^-^ 240 
If you have any pity, grace, or manners. 
You would not make me such an argument. 
But, fare ye well : 'tis partly mine own fault, 
Which death or absence soon shall remedy. 

Lysander. Stay, gentle Helena ! hear my excuse : 245 
My love, my life, my soul, fair Helena ! 

Helena. O excellent ! 

Hermia. Sweet, do not scorn her so. 

Demetrius. If she cannot entreat, I can compel, 

Lysander. Tliou canst compel no more than she entreat : 
Thy threats have no more strength than her weak prayers, 250 
Helen, I love thee ; by my life, I do : 
I swear by that which I will lose for thee. 
To prove him false that says I love thee not. 

Demetrius. I say I love thee more than he can do. 

Lysander. If thou say so, withdraw, and prove it too. 255 

Demetrius. Quick, come ! 

Hermia. Lysander, whereto tends all this? 

Lysander. Away, you Ethiop ! 

Demetrius. No, no, he'll . . . 

Seem to break loose ; take on, as you Avould follow, 
But yet come not : you are a tame man, go ! 

Lysander. [To Hermia.] Hang off, thou cat, thou burr ! 
vile thing, let loose, 260 

Or I will shake thee from me like a serpent. 

Hermia. Why are you groAvn so rude ? what change is this, 
Sweet love, — 

Lysander. Thy love ! out, tawny Tartar, out ! 
Out, loathed medicine ! hated poison, hence ! 

Hermia. Do you not jest ? 

Helena. Yes, sooth ; and so do you. 265 

Lysander. Demetrius, I will keep my word with thee. 

Demetrius. I Avould I had your bond, for I perceive 
A weak bond holds you : I'll not trust your word. 

Lysander. What ! should I hurt her, strike her, kill her dead ? 
Although I hate her, I'll not harm her so. 270 



sc. II A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM 33 

Hermia. What ! can you do me greater harm than hate ? 
Hate me ! ^vherefore ? me ! what news, my love ? 
Am not I Hermia ? Are not you Lysander ? 
I am as fair now as I was erewhile. 

Since night you lov'd me ; yet, since night you left me : 275 
Why, then you left me, — 0, the gods forbid ! — 
In earnest, shall I say ? 

Lysander. Ay, by ray life ; 

And never did desire to see thee more. 
Therefore be out of hope, of question, doubt ; 
Be certain, nothing truer : 'tis no jest, 280 

That I do hate thee and love Helena. 

Hermia. me ! you juggler ! you canker-blossom ! 
You thief of love ! what ! have you come by night 
And stol'n my love's heart from him ? 

Helena. Fine, i' faith ! 

Have you no modesty, no maiden shame, .285 

No touch of bashfulness ? What ! will you tear 
Impatient answers from my gentle tongue ? 
Fie, fie ! you counterfeit, you puppet you ! 

Hermia. Puppet ! wliy, so : ay, that way goes the game. 
Now I perceive that she hath made compare 290 

Between our statures : she hath urg'd her height ; 
And with her personage, her tall personage. 
Her height, forsooth, she hath prevail'd with him. 
And are you grown so high in his esteem. 
Because I am so dwarfish and so low ? 295 

How low am I, thou painted maypole ? speak ; 
How low am I ? I am not yet so low 
But that my nails can reach unto thine eyes. 

Helena. I pray you, though you mock me, gentlemen, 
Let her not hurt me : I was never curst ; 300 

I have no gift at all in shrewishness ; ^ 

1 am a riglit maid for my cowardice : ^^D 

Let her not strike me. You perhaps may think, 
Because she is something lower than myself. 
That I can match her. 

Hermia. Lower ! hark, again. 305 

Helena. Good Hermia, do not be so bitter with me. 
I evermore did love you, Hermia, 
Did ever keep your counsels, never wrong'd you ; 
Save that, in love unto Demetrius, 
I told him of your stealth unto this wood. 310 



34 A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM act hi 

He follow'd you ; for love I follow'd liim ; 

But he hath chid me hence, and threaten'd me 

To strike me, spurn me, nay, to kill me too : 

And now, so you will let me quiet go, 

To Athens will I bear my folly back, 315 

And follow you no further : let me go : 

You see how simple and how fond I am, 

Hermia. Why, get you gone. Who is't that hinders you ? 

Helena. A foolish heart, that I leave here behind. 

Hermia. What 1 with Lysander ? 

Helena. With Demetrius. 320 

Lysander. Be not afraid : she shall not harm thee, Helena. 

Demetrius. No, sir; she shall not, though you take her part. 

Helena. ! when she's angry, she is keen and shrewd. 
She was a vixen when she went to school : 
And though she be but little, she is fierce. 325 

Hermia. ' Little ' again ! nothing but ' low ' and ' little ! * 
Why will you suffer her to flout me thus ? 
Let me come to her. 

Lysander. Get you gone, you dwarf ; 

You minimus, of hindering knot-grass made ; 
You bead, you acorn ! 

Demetrius. You are too officious 330 

In her behalf that scorns your services. 
Let her alone ; speak not of Helena ; 
Take not her part, for, if thou dost intend 
Never so little show of love to her, 
Thou shalt aby it. 

Lysander. Now she holds me not ; 335 

Now follow, if thou dar'st, to try whose right, 
Or thine or mine, is most in Helena. 

Demetrius. Follow ! nay, I'll go with thee, cheek by jole. 
{Exeunt Lysander and Demetrius. 

Hermia. You, mistress, all this coil is 'long of you : 
Nay, go not back. 

Helena. I will not trust you, I, 340 

Nor longer stay in your curst company. 
Your hands than mine are quicker for a fray, 
My legs are longer though, to run away. [Exit. 

Hermia. I am amaz'd, and know not what to say. [Exit. 

Oberon. This is thy negligence : still thou mistak'st, 345 
Or else commit'st thy knaveries wilfully. 

Puck. Believe me, king of shadows, I mistook. 



sc. II A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM 35 

Did not you tell me I should know the man 

By the Athenian garments he had on ? 

And so far blameless proves my enterprise, 350 

That I have 'nointed an Athenian's eyes ; 

And so far am I glad it so did sort, 

As this their jangling I esteem a sport. 

Oheron. Thou see'st these lovers seek a place to fight: 
Hie therefore, Robin, overcast the night ; 356 

The starry welkin cover thou anon 
With drooping fog as black as Acheron ; 
And lead these testy rivals so astray. 
As one come not within another's way. 

Like to Lysander sometime frame thy tongue, 360 

Then stir Demetrius uj) with bitter wrong ; 
And sometime rail thou like Demetrius ; 
V ^ And from each other look thou lead them thus. 
Till o'er their brows death -counterfeiting sleep 
With leaden legs and batty wings doth creep : 305 

Then crush this herb into Lysander's eye ; 
Whose liquor hath this virtuous property. 
To take from thence all error with his might, 
And make his eyeballs roll with wonted sight. 
When they next wake, all this derision 370 

Shall seem a dream and fruitless vision ; 
And back to Athens shall the lovers wend, 
With league whose date till death shall never end. 
Whiles I in this affair do thee employ, 

I'll to my queen and beg her Indian boy ; 375 

And then I will her charmed eye release 
From monster's view, and all things shall be peace. 

Puck. My fairy lord, this must be done witli haste. 
For night's swift dragons cut the clouds full fast, 
And yonder shines Aurora's harbinger ; 380 

At whose approach, ghosts, wandering here and there, 
Troop home to churchyards : damned spirits all, 
That in cross-ways and floods have burial, "^ ^^^x,^ 
Already to their wormy beds are gone ; ^'*^ 

For fear lest day should look tlieir shames upon, 385 

They wilfully themselves exile from light, 
And must for aye consort with black-brow'd night, 

Oheron. But we are spirits of another sort. 
I with the morning's love have oft made sport ; 
And, like a forester, the groves may tread, 390 

D 2 



/ 

36 A MIDSUMMfeR-NIGHT'S DREAM act hi 

Even till the eastern gate, all fiery-red, 
Opening on Neptune with fair blessed beams, 
Turns into yellow gold his salt green streams. 
But, notwithstanding, haste ; make no delay : 394 

We may effect this business yet ere day. [Exit Oberon. 

Puck. Up and down, up and down ; 

I will lead them up and down : 

I am fear'd in field and town ; 

Goblin, lead them up and down. 
Here comes one. 400 

He-enter Lysander. 

Lys. Where art thou, proud Demetrius ? speak thou now. 
Puck. Here, villain ! drawn and ready. Where art thou ? 
Lysander. I will be with thee straight. 
Puck. Follow me, then. 

To plainer ground. [Exit Lysakder as following the voice. 

lie-enter Demetrius. 

Demetrius. Lysander ! speak again. 

Thou runaway, thou coward, art thou fled ? 405 

Speak ! In some bush ? Where dost thou liide thy head ? 

Puck. Thou coward ! art thou bragging to the stars, 
Telling the bushes that thou look'st for wars, 
And wilt not come ? Come, recreant ;, come, thou child; 
I'll whip thee with a rod : he is defiled \. 410 

That draws a sword on thee. ' , -rlc^^ti^ 

Demetrius. Yea, art thou there ? j ^"^"^ 

Puck. Follow my voice : we'll try no manhood here. 

[Exeunt. 
Pe-enter Ly'Sander. 

Lysander. He goes before me and still dares me on : 
When I come where he calls, then he is gone. 
The villain is much lighter-heel'd than 1 : 415 

I follow'd fast, but faster he did fly ; 
That fallen am I in dark uneven way, 

And here will rest me. [Lies doivn.l Come, thou gentle day! 
For if but once thou show me thy grey light, 
I'll find Demetrius and revenge this spite. [Sleeps. 420 

He-enter Puck and Demetrius. 

Puck. Ho ! ho ! ho ! Coward, why com'st thou not ? 
Demetrius. Abide me, if thou dar'st ; for well I wot 



sen A MIDSUMMER-NIGHrS DREAM 37 

Thou runn'st before me, shifting every place, 
And dar'st not stand, nor look me in the face. 
Where art thou now ? 

Puck. Come hither : I am here. 425 

Demetrius. Nay then, thou mock'st me. Thou shalt buy_ 
this dear, 
If ever I thy face by daylight see : 
Now, go thy way. Faintness constraineth me 
To measure out my length on this cold bed : 429 

By day's approach look to be visited. {Lies down and sleeps. 

Re-enter Helena. 

Helena. weary night ! long and tedious night, 
Abate thy hours ! shine, comforts, from the east ! 
That I may back to Athens by daylight, 

From these that my poor company detest : 
And sleep, that sometimes shuts up sorrow's eye, 435 

Steal me awhile from mine own company. [Lies downand sleeps. 
Puck. Yet but three ? Come one more ; 
Two of both kinds make up four. 
Here she comes, curst and sad : 
Cupid is a knavish lad, 440 

Thus to make poor females mad. 

Re-enter Hermia. 

Hermia. Never so weary, never so in woe. 
Bedabbled with the dew and torn with briers, 
I can no further crawl, no further go ; 

My legs can keep no pace with my desires. 445 

Here will I rest me till the break of day. 
Heavens shield Lysander, if they mean a fray ! 

[Lies down and sleeps. 
Puck. On the ground 

Sleep sound : 

I'll apply 450 

To your eye. 
Gentle lover, remedy 

{Squeezing the juice on Lysander's eyes. 
When thou wak'st, 
Thou tak'st 

True delight 455 

In the sight 



38 A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM actiii. sen 

Of thy former lady's eye : 

And the country proverb known, 

That every man should take his own, 

In your waking shall be shown : 460 

Jack shall have Jill ; 

Nought shall go ill ; 
The man shall have his mare again, 
And all shall be well. [Exit. 



ACT IV. 

Scene I. — A Wood. Lysander, Demetrius, Helena 
and Hermia lying asleep. 

Enter Titan ia ajid Bottom, Fairies attending ; Oberon 
behind unseen. 

Titania. Come, sit thee down upon this flowery bed, 

While I thy amiable cheeks do coy. 
And stick musk-roses in thy sleek smooth head, 

And kiss thy fair large ears, my gentle joy. 

Bottom. Where's Pease-blossom ? 6 

Pease-blossom. Ready. 

Bottom. Scratch my head, Pease-blossom. Where's 
Mounsieur Cobweb ? 

Cobweb. Ready. 

Bottom. Mounsieur Cobweb, good mounsieur, get your 10 
weapons in your hand, and kill me a red-hipped humble- 
bee on the top of a thistle ; and, good mounsieur, bring 
me the honey-bag. Do not fret yourself too much in the 
action, mounsieur ; and, good mounsieur, have a care the 15 
honey-bag break not ; I would be loath to have you over- 
flown with a honey-bag, signior. Where's Mounsieur 
Mustard-seed ? 

Mustard-seed. Ready. 

Bottom. Give me your neaf, Mounsieur Mustard-seed. 20 
Pray you, leave your curtsy, good mounsieur. 

Mustard-seed. What's your will ? 

Bottom. Nothing, good mounsieur, but to help 
Cavalery Cobweb to scratch. I must to the barber's, 25 
mounsieur, for methinks I am marvellous hairy about the 
face ; and I am such a tender ass, if my hair do but tickle 
me, I must scratch. 



ACT IV. sc. I A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM 39 

Titania. What, wilt thou hearsome music, ray sweet love? 30 

Bottom. I have a reasonable good ear in music : let us 
have the tongs and the bones. 

Titania. Or say, sweet love, what thou desir'st to eat. 35 

Bottom. Truly, a peck of provender : I could munch 
your good dry oats. Methinks I have a great desire to 
a bottle of hay : good hay, sweet hay, hath no fellow. 

Titania. I have a venturous fairy that shall seek 40 

The squirrel's hoard, and fetch thee thence new nuts. 

Bottom. I had rather have a handful or two of dried 
pease. But, I pray you, let none of your people stir me : 
I have an exposition of sleep come upon me. 45 

Titania. Sleep tliou, and I will wind thee in my arms. 
Fairies, be gone, and be all ways away. {Exeunt Fairies. 
So doth the woodbine the sweet honeysuckle 
Gently entwist ; the female ivy so 
Enrings the barky fingers of the elm. 50 

! how I love thee ; how I dote on thee ! [They sleep. 

Enter Puck. 

Oberon. [Advancitig.] Welcome, good Robin. See'st thou 
this sweet sight ? 
Her dotage now I do begin to pity : 
For, meeting her of late behind the wood, 
Seeking sweet favours for this hateful fool, 65 

1 did upbraid her and fall out with her ; 
For she his hairy temples then had rounded 
With coronet of fresh and fragrant flowers ; 
And that same dew, which sometime on the buds 

Was wont to swell like round and orient pearls, 60 

Stood now within the pretty flowerets' eyes 

Like tears that did their own disgrace bewail. 

When I had at my pleasure taunted her, 

And she in mild terms begg'd my patience, 

I then did ask of her her changeling child ; 65 

Which straight she gave me, and her fairy sent 

To bear him to my bower in fairy land. 

And now I have the boy, I will undo 

This hateful imperfection of her eyes : 

And, gentle Puck, take this transformed scalp 70 

From off the head of this Athenian swain, 

That he, awaking when the other do, 

May all to Athens back again repair, 



40 A MIDSUMxMER-NIGHT'S DREAM act iv 

And think no more of this night's accidents 

But as the fierce vexation of a dream. 75 

But fii'st I will release the fairy queen. 

{Touching her eyes with an herb. 
Be as thou wast wont to be ; 
See as thou wast wont to see : 
Dian's bud o'er Cupid's flower 
Hath such force and blessed power. 80 

Now, my Titania ; wake you, my sweet queen. 

Titania. My Oberon ! what visions have I seen ! 
Methought I was enamour'd of an ass. 
Oberon. There lies your love. 

Titania. How came these things to pass ? 

! how mine eyes do loathe his visage now. 85 

Oberon. Silence, awhile. Robin, take off this head. 
Titania, music call ; and strike more dead 
Than common sleep of all these five the sense. 

Titania. Music, ho ! music ! such as charmeth sleep. {Music. 
Puck. When thou wak'st, with thine own fool's eyes peep. 
Oberon. Sound, music ! [Still, music.'] Come, my queen, 
take hands with me, 91- 

And rock the ground whereon these sleepers be. 
Now thou and I are new in amity, 
And will to-morrow midnight solemnly 

Dance in Duke Theseus' house triumphantly, 95 

And bless it to all fair prosperity. 
There shall the pairs of faithful lovers be 
Wedded, with Theseus, all in jollity. 
Puck. Fairy king, attend, and mark : 

I do hear the morning lark. 100 

Oberon. Then, my queen, in silence sad, 
Trip we after the night's shade ; 
We the globe can compass soon. 
Swifter than the wandering moon. 
Titania. Come, my lord ; and in our flight 105 

Tell me how it came this night 
That I sleeping here was found 
With these mortals on the ground. 

{Exeunt. Horns unnded within. 

Enter Theseus, Hippolyta, Egeus, and Train. 

Theseus. Go, one of you, find out the forester ; 
For now our observation is perform'd ; 110 



sc. I A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM 41 

And since we have the vaward of the day, 

My love shall hear the music of my hounds. 

Uncouple in the western valley ; let them go : 

Dispatch, I say, and find the forester. 

We will, fair queen, up to the mountain's top, 115 

And mark the musical confusion 

Of hounds and echo in conjunction. 

Hippolyta. I was with Hercules and Cadmus once, 
When in a wood of Crete they bay'd the bear 
With hounds of Sparta : never did I hear 120 

Such gallant chiding ; for, besides the groves, 
The skies, the fountains, ev^ery region near c^ 

Seem'd all one mutual cry. I^ever heard ^' 

So musical a discord, such sweet thunder. 

Theseus. My hounds are bred out of the Spartan kind, 125 
So flew'd, so sanded ; and their heads are hung 
With ears that sweep away the morning de\A' ; 
Crook-knee'd, and dew-lapp'd like Thessalian bulls ; 
Slow in pursuit, but match'd in mouth like bells. 
Each under each. A cry more tuneable 130 

Was never holla'd to, nor cheer'd with horn, 
In Crete, in Sparta, nor in Thessaly : 
Judge, when you hear. But, soft ! what nymphs are these ? 

Egeus. My lord, this is my daughter here asleep ; 
And this, Lysander ; this Demetrius is ; 135 

This Helena, old Nedar's Helena : 
I wonder of their being here together. 

Theseus, No doubt they rose up early to observe 
The rite of May, and, hearing our intent, 
Came here in grace of our solemnity. 140 

But speak, Egeus, is not this the day 
That Hermia should give answer of her choice ? 

Egeus. It is, my lord. 

Theseus. Go, bid the huntsmen wake them with their horns. 
[Horns and shout within. Lysander, Demetrius, Hermia, 

and Helena, wake and start up. 
Good morrow, friends. Saint Valentine is past : 145 

Begin these wood-birds but to couple now ? 

Lysander. Pardon, my lord. [He and the rest kneel. 

Theseus. I j^ray you all, stand up. 

I know you two arc rival enemies : 
How comes this gentle concord in the world. 
That hatred is so far from jealousy, 130 



42 A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAJM act iv 

To sleep by hate, and fear no enmity ? 

Lysander. My lord, I shall reply amazedly, 
Half sleep, half waking : but as yet, I swear, 
I cannot truly say how I came here ; 

But, as I think, — for truly would I speak, 155 

And now I do bethink me, so it is, — 
I came with Hermia hither : our intent 
Was to be gone from Athens, where we might, 
Without the peril of the Athenian law — 

Egeus. Enough, enough, my lord ; you have enough : 160 
I beg the law, the law, upon his head. 
They would have stol'n away ; they would, Demetrius, 
Thereby to have defeated you and me ; 
You of your wife, and me of my consent, 
Of my consent that she should be your wife. 165 

Demetrius. My lord, fair Helen told me of their stealth, 
Of this their purpose hither, to this wood ; 
And I in fury hither follow'd them. 
Fair Helena in fancy following me. 

But, my good lord, I wot not by what power, — 170 

But by some power it is, — my love to Hermia, 
Melted as doth the snow, seems to me now 
As the remembrance of an idle gaud /^w^/;?S 
Which in my childhood I did dote uponif 
And all the faith, the virtue of my heart, * 175 

The object and the pleasure of mine eye, 

Is only Helena. To her, my lord, - 

lyas 1 betroth'd ere I saw Hermia : *^ P / 

y But, like in sickness, did I loathe this food ; ] 
A But, as in health, come to my natural taste, | 180 

/ Now do I wish it, love it, long for it, / 

v_And will for evermore be true to it. j 

Theseus. Fair lovers, you are fortunately met : 
Of this discourse we more will hear anon. ^,y^ ^^-^.^ 

Egeus, I will Qverbear your wi ll, '-n^-^ "k-^**^ Zfjw»7^^^ 
For in the temple. By and by, Avith us, «-^w^ 

These couples shall eternally be knit : 
And, for the morning now is something worn, 
Our purpos'd hunting shall be set aside. 
Away with us, to Athens : three and three, lOO 

We'll hold a feast in great solemnity. 
Come, Hippolyta. 

[Exeunt Theseus, Hippolyta, Egeus, and Train. 



sc. I A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM 43 

Demetrius. These things seem small and undistingu ishable, 
Like far-off mountains turned into clouds. ^''^^^'^"ts^ 

Hermia. Mcthinks I see these things with parted eye, 195 ^ 
When everything seems double. 

Helena. So methinks : 

And I have found Demetrius, like a jewel, 
Mine own, and not mine own. 

Demetrius. Are you sure 

That we are awake ? It seems to mo 

That yet we sleep, we dream. Do you not think 200 

The duke was here, and bid us follow him ? 

Hermia. Yea ; and my father. 

Helena. And Hippolyta. 

Lysander. And he did bid us follow to the temple. 

Demetrius. Why then, we are awake. Let's follow him; 
And by the way let us recount our dreams. {^Exeunt. 205 

Bottom. [Awaking.] When my cue comes, call me, and 
I will answer : my next is, ' Most fair Pyramus.' Heigh- 
ho ! Peter Quince ! Flute, the bellows-mender ! Snout, 
the tinker ! Starveling ! God's my life ! stolen hence, 
and left me asleep ! I have had a most rare vision. I have 210 
had a dream, past the wit of man to say what dream it 
was : man is but an ass, if he go about to expound this 
dream. Methought I was — there is no man can tell what. 
Methought I was, — and methought I had, — but man is but 215 
a patched fool, if he will offer to say what methought I had. 
The eye of man hath not heard, the ear of man hath not 
seen, man's hand is not able to taste, his tongue to con- 
ceive, nor his heart to report, what my dream was. I will 220 
get Peter Quince to write a ballad of this dream : it shall 
be called Bottom's Dream, because it hath no bottom ; 
and I will sing it in the latter end of a play, before the 
duke : peradventure. to make it the more gracious, I shall 225 
sing it at her dearar^<,/t«, [Exit. 



Scene II. — Athens. A Room in Quince's House. 
Enter Quince, Flute, Snout, and Starveling. 

Quince. Have you sent to Bottom's house ? is he 
come home yet ? 

Starveling. He cannot be heard of. Out of doubt he 
is transported. 



44 A MIDSmiMER-NIGHT'S DREMI act iv. sc. ii 

Flute. If he come not, then the play is marred : it goes 5 
not forward, doth it ? 

Quince. It is not possible : you have not a man in all 
Athens able to discharge Pyramus but he. 

Flute. No ; he hath simply the best wit of any handi- 10 
craft man in Athens. 

Quince. Yea, and the best person too ; and he is a very 
paramour for a sweet voice. 

Flute. You must say, ' paragon' : a paramour is, God 
bless us ! a thing of naught. 15 

Enter Snug. 

Snug. Masters, the duke is coming from the temple, 
and there is two or three lords and ladies more married : 
if our sport had gone forward, we had all been made 
men. 

Flute. sweet bully Bottom ! Thus hath he lost 20 
si:^eftee a day during his life ; he could not have 'scaped 
sixpence a day : an the duke had not given him sixpence 
a day for playing Pyramus, I'll be hanged ; he would have 
deserved it : sixpence a day in Pyramus, or nothing. 25 

Enter Bottom. 

Bottom. Where are these lads ? where are these hearts ? 

Quince. Bottom ! most courageous day ! O most 
happy hour ! 

Bottom. Masters, I am to discourse wonders : but ask 30 
me not what ; for if I tell you, I am no true Athenian. 
I will tell you everything, right as it fell out. 

Quince. Let us hear, sweet Bottom. 

Bottom. Not a word of me. All that I will tell you is, 35 
that the duke hath dined. Get your apparel together, 
good strings to your beards, new ribbons to your pumps ; 
meet presently at the palace ; every man look o'er his 
part ; for the short and the long is, our play is preferred. 
In any case, let Thisby have clean linen ; and let not him 40 
that plays the lion pare his nails, for they shall hang out 
for the lion's claws. And, most dear actors, eat no onions 
nor garlic, for we are to utter sweet breath, and I do not 
doubt but to hear them say, it is a sweet comedy. No 45 
more words : away ! go ; away. [^Exeunt. 




ACT V. SCI A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM 45 

ACT V. 1^ 

Scene I. — Athens. An Apartment in the Palace of Theseus. 

Enter Theseus, IIippolyta, Philostrate, Lords, and 

Attendants. .« = 

Hippolyta. 'Tis strange, my Theseus, that these lovers 

speak of. 
Theseus. More strange than true. I never may believe 
These antique fables, nor these fairy toys. 
Lovers and madmen have such seething brains. 
Such shaping fantasies, that apprehend 5 

N. More than cool reason ever comprehends. 
V The lu natic, the lover, and the poet. 
\^ Arg_n rTni a.g;7n ai , i on all compact : 
^ One sees more devils than vast hell can hold, 

, That is, tlie madman ; the^ loyer^ all as frantic, 10 

^ See Hele n's beauty^ in a brow of Egypt : 
^ The poet's eye, in a fine frenzy rolling, 
r^ Doth glance from heaven to earth, from earth to heaven ; 
And, as imagination bodies forth 

The forms of things unknown, the poet's pen 15 

Turns them to shapes, and gives to airy nothing 
A local habitation and a name. 
Such tricks hath strong imagination, 
That, if it would but apprehend some joy, 
It comprehends some bringer of that joy ; 20 

Or in the night, imagining some fear. 
How easy is a bush suppos'd a bear ! 

Hippolyta. But all the story of the night told over. 
And all their minds transfigur'd so together. 
More witnesseth than fancy's images, 25 

And grows to something of great constancy. 
But, howsoever, strange and admirable. 

Theseus. Here come the lovers, full of joy and mirth. 

Enter Lysander, Demetrius, Hermia, and Helena. 

Joy, gentle friends ! joy, and fresh days of love 
Accompany your hearts ! 

Lysander. More than to us 30 

Wait in your royal walks, your board, your bed ! 

Theseus. Come now ; what masques, what dances shall 
we have, 
To wear away this long age of three hours 



46 A MIDSUJVIMER-NIGHT'S DREAM act v 

Between our after-supper and bed-time ? 

Where is our usual manager of mirth ? 35 

What revels are in hand ? Is there no play, 

To ease the anguish of a torturing hour ? 

Call Philostrate. 

Philostrate. Here, mighty Theseus. 

Theseus. Say, what abridgment have j'ou for this evening ? 
What masque ? what music ? How shall we beguile 40 

The lazy time, if not with some delight ? 

Philostrate. There is a brief how many sports are ripe ; 
Make choice of which your liighness will see first. [Gives a paper. 

Theseus. The battle ivith the Centaurs, to be sung 
By an Athenian eunuch to the harp. 45 

We'll none of that : that have I told my love, 
In glory of my kinsman Hercules. 
The riot of the tipsy Bacchanals, 
Tearing the Thracian singer in their rage. 
That is an old device ; and it was play'd 60 

When I from Thebes came last a conqueror. 
The thrice three 3Iuses mourning for the death 
Of Learning, late deceased in beggary. 
That is some satire keen and critical. 

Not sorting with a nuptial ceremony. C5 

A tedious brief scene of young Pyramus 
And his love Thisbe ; very tragical mirth. 
Merry and tragical ! tedious and brief ! 
That is, hot ice and wonderous strange snow. 
How shall we find the concord of this discord ? 60 

Philostrate. A play there is, my lord, some ten words long. 
Which is as brief as I have known a play ; 
But by ten words, my lord, it is too long, 
Which makes it tedious ; for in all the play 
There is not one word apt, one player fitted. 65 

And tragical, my noble lord, it is ; 
For Pyramus therein doth kill himself. 
Which when I saw rehears'd, I must confess. 
Made mine eyes water ; but more merry tears 
The passion of loud laughter never shed. 70 

Theseus. What are they that do play it ? 

Philostrate. Hard-handed men, that work in Athens here, 
Which never labour'd in their minds till now, 
And now have toil'd their unbreath'd memories 
With this same play, against your nuptial. 75 



sc. I A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM 47 

Theseus. And we Avill hear it. 

Philostraie. No, my noble lord ; 

It is not for you : I have heard it over, 
And it is nothing, nothing in the world ; 
Unless you can find sport in their intents 
Extremely stretch'd and conn'd with cruel pain, 80 

To do you service. P / 

Theseus. I will hear that play ; 

For never anything can be amiss. 
When si mplnnpss n.nd Hutv tender i t. 
Go, bring them in : andtake your places, ladies. 

{Exit Philostrate. 

Hippolyta. I love not to see wretchedness o'ercharg'd, 85 
And duty in his service jjerishing. 

Theseus. Why, gentle sweet, you shall see no such thing. 

Hippolyta. He says they can do nothing in this kind. 

Theseus. The kinder we, to give them thanks for nothing. 
Our sport shall be to take what they mistake : 90 

And what poor duty cannot do, noble respect 
Takes it in might, not merit. 
Where I have come, great clerks have purposed 
To greet me with premeditated welcomes ; 
Wliere I have seen them shiver and look pale, 95 

Make periods in the midst of sentences, . 

Throttle their practis'd accent in their fears, ^^ 

And, in conclusion, dumbly have broke off. 
Not paying me a welcome. Trust me, sweet, 
Out of this silence yet I pick'd a welcome ; 100 

And in the modesty of fearful duty 
I read as much as from the rattling tongue 
Of saucy and audacious eloquence. 
Love, therefore, and tongue-tied simplicity 
In least speak most, to my capacity. 105 

Re-enter Philostrate. 

Philostraie. So please your Grace, the Prologue is address'd. 
Theseus. Let him approach. [Flourish of Trumpets. 

Enter Quince for the Prologue. 

Prologue. If we offend, it is with our good will. 

That you should think, we come not to offend, 
But with good will. To show our simple skill, HO 

That is the true beginning of our end. 



48 A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM ' act v 

Consider then we come but in despite. 

We do not come as minding to content you. 

Our true intent is. All for your delight, 

We are not here. That you should here repent you, 115 

The actors are at hand ; and, by their show, 

You shall know all that you are like to know. 

Theseus. This fellow doth not stand upon points. 

Lysander. He hath rid his prologue like a rough colt ; 
he knows not the stop. A good moral, my lord: it is not 120 
enough to speak, but to speak true. 

Hippolyta. Indeed he hath played on his prologue like 
a child on a recorder ; a sound, but not in government. 125 

Theseus. His speech was like a tangled chain ; nothing 
impaired, but all disordered. Who is next ? 

Enter Pyramus and Thisbe, Wall, Moonshine, 
and Lion, as in dumb show. 

Prologue. Gentles, perchance you wonder at this show ; 

But wonder on, till truth make all things plain. 130 

This man is Pyramus, if you would know ; 

This beauteous lady Thisby is, certain. 
This man, with lime and rough-cast, doth present 

Wall, that vile Wall which did these lovers sunder ; 
And through WalVs chink, poor souls, they are content 135 

To whisper, at the which let no man wonder. 
This man, with lanthorn, dog, and bush of thorn, 

Presenteih Moonshine ; for, if you, will know. 
By moonshine did these lovers think no scorn 

To meet at Ninus' tomb, there, there to woo. 140 

This grisly beast, which Lion hight by name, 
The trusty Thisby, coming first by night. 
Did scare away, or rather did alright ; 
And, as she fled, her mantle she did fall. 

Which Lion vile with bloody mouth did stain. 145 

Anon comes Pyramus, siveet youth and tall, 

And finds his trusty Thisby' s mantle slain : 
Whereat, with blade, with bloody blameful blade. 

He bravely broached his boiling bloody breast ; 
And Thisby, tarrying in mulberry shade, 150 

His dagger drew, and died. For all the rest. 
Let Lion, Moonshine, Wall, and lovers twain. 
At large discourse, while here they do remain. 

[Exeunt Prol , Pyr., Thisbe, Lion, and Moonshine. 



sc. I A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM 49 

Theseus. I Avonder, if the lion be to speak. 

Demetrius. No wonder, my lord : one lion may, when 155 
many asses do. 

Wall. In this same interlude it doth befall 

That I, one Snout by name, present a wall ; 

And such a wall, as I would have you think, 

That had in it a crannied hole or chink, 160 

Through ivhich the lovers, Pyramus and Thisby, 

Did whisper often very secretly. 

This loam, this rough-cast, and this stone^oth show 

That I am that same wall ; the truth is so ; 

And this the cranny is, right and sinister, 165 

Through which the fearful lovers are to whisper. 

Theseus. Would you desire lime and hair to speak 
better ? 

Demetrius. It is the wittiest partition that ever I 
heard discourse, my lord. 

Theseus. Pyramus draws near the wall : silence ! 170 

Re-enter Pyramus. 

Pyramus. grim-look' d night ! night with hue so black/ 

night, which ever art when day is not ! 
night ! night ! alack, alack, alack ! 

1 fear my Thisby's promise is forgot. 175 
And thou, O wall ! sweet, lovely wall I 

That stand' st between her father's ground and mine ; 
Thou wall, wall ! sweet, and lovely ivall ! 

Show me thy chink to blink through with mine eyne. 
[Wall holds up his fingei-s. 
Thanks, courteous wall : Jove shield thee well for this J 180 

But what see I ? No Thisby do I see. 
wicked wall ! through whom I see no bliss ; 
Curs'd be thy stones for thus deceiving me / 
Theseus. The wall, methinks, being sensible, should 
curse again. 185 

Pyramus. No, in truth, sir, he should not. ' Deceiving 
me,' is Thisby's cue : she is to enter now, and I am to spy 
her through the wall. You shall see, it will fall pat as 
I told you. Yonder she comes. 100 

Re-enter Thisbe. 

Thisbe. wall f full often hast thou heard my moans^ 
For parting my fair Pyramus and me : 



50 A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM act v 

My cherry lips have often kissed thy stones. 
Thy stones with lime and hair knit up in thee. 

Pyramus. I see a voice : now will I to the chink, 195 

To spy an I can hear my Thisby^s face. 

Thishy ! 

Thishy. My love ! thou art my love, I think. 

Pyramus. Think what thou wilt, I am thy lover'' s grace; 

And, like Limander, am I trusty still. 200 

Thishy. And I like Helen, till the Fates me kill. 

Pyramus. Not Mb^LJO^l^s^ Procrus was so true. 

Thishy. As Shctfc^ni^^Torroexv^^ to you. 

Pyramus. 0! kiss me througnmehole of this vile wall. 

Thishy. I kiss the walVs hole, not your lips at all. 205 

Pyramus. Wilt thou at Ninny'' s tomb meet me straightway.^ 

Thishy. 'Tide life, ''tide death, I come without delay. 
[Exeunt Pyramus and Thisbe. 

Wall. Thus have I, Wall, my part discJiarged so ; 
And, being done, thus Wall away doth go. [Exit. 

Theseus. Now is the mural down between the two 210 
neighbours. 

Demetrius. No remedy, my lord, when walls are so 
wilful to hear without warning. 

Hippolyta. This is the silliest stuff that ever I heard. 

Theseus. The best in this kind are but shadows, and 215 
the worst are no worse, if imagination amend them. 

Hippolyta. It must be your imagination then, and 
not theirs. 

Theseus. If we imagine no worse of them than they of 220 
themselves, they may pass for excellent men. Here come 
two noble beasts in, a man and a lion. 

Re-enter Lion and Moonshine. 

Lion. You, ladies, you, whose gentle hearts do fear 
The smallest monstrous mouse that creeps on floor. 
May now perchance both quake and tremble here, 

When lion rough in wildest rage doth roar. 
Then know that I, one Snug the joiner, am 
A lion- fell, nor else no lion's dam : 

For, if I should as lion come in strife 230 

Into this place, Hwere pity on my life. 
Theseus. A very gentle beast, and of a good conscience. 
Demetrius. The very best at a beast, my lord, that 
e'er I saw. 235 



sc. I A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM 51 

Ly Sander. This lion is a very fox for his valour. 

Theseus. True ; and a goose for his discretion. 

Demetrius. Not so, my lord ; for his valour cannot 
carry his discretion, and the fox carries the goose. 240 

Theseus. His discretion, I am sure, cannot carry his 
valour, for the goose carries not the fox. It is well : leave 
it to his discretion, and let us listen to the moon. 

Moon. This lanthorn doth the horned moon present ; — 245 

Demetrius. He should have worn the horns on his 
head. 

Theseus. He is no crescent, and his horns are invisible 
•within the circumference. 

Moon. This lanthorn doth the horned moon present ; 250 
Myself the man i ' the moon do seem to be. 

Theseus. This is the greatest error of all the rest. The 
man should be put into the lanthorn : how is it else the 
man i' the moon ? 

Demetrius. He dares not come there for the candle ; 
for, j'ou see, it is already in snuff. 256 

Hippolyta. I am aweary of this moon : would he would 
change ! 

Theseus. It appears, by his small light of discretion, 
that he is in the wane ; but yet, in courtesy, in all reason, 260 
we must stay the time. 

Ly Sander. Proceed, Moon. 

Moon. All that I have to say, is, to tell you that the 
lanthorn is the moon ; I, the man in the moon ; this thorn- 
bush, my thorn-bush ; and this dog, my dog. 265 

Demetrius. Why, all these should be in the lanthorn ; 
for all these are in the moon. But, silence ! here comes 
Thisbe. 

Re-enter Thisbe. 

Thisbe. This is old Ninny's tomb. Where is my love ? 270 
Lion. \Iioaring^ Oh — . [Thisbe runs off. 

Demetrius. Well roared. Lion. 
Theseus. Well run, Thisbe. 

Hippolyta. Well shone. Moon. Truly, the moon shines 
with a good grace. 275 

[The Lion tears Thisbe's mantle, and exit. 
Theseus. Well moused. Lion. 
Demetrius. And then came Pyramus. 
Lysander. And so the lion vanished. 

e2 



52 A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM act v 

Re-enter Pyramus. 

Pyramus. Sweet moon, I thank thee for thy sunny 
beams; 
I thank thee, moon, for shining now so bright, 280 

For, by thy gracious, golden, glittering streams, 
I trust to taste of truest Thisby^s sight. 
But stay, O spite ! 
But mark, poor knight, 
What dreadful dole is here ! 285 

Eyes, do you see ? 
How can it be ? 
dainty duck ! dear ! 
Thy mantle good, 

What ! stain'd with blood ! 290 

Approach, ye Furies fell! 
Fates, come, come. 
Cut thread and thrum ; 
Quail, crush, conclude, and quell .' 
Theseus. This passion, and the death of a dear friend, 295 
would go near to make a man look sad. 

Hippolyta. Beshrew my heart, but I pity the man. 
Pyramus. Oh ! wherefore. Nature, didst thou lions 

frame ? 
Since lion vile hath here deflowered my dear ? 
Which is — no, no — which was the fairest dame 300 

That liv'd, that lov'd, that liFd, that look'd with cheer. 
Come tears, confound ; 
Out, sword, and wound 
The pap of Pyramus : 

Ay, that left pap, 305 

Where heart doth hop : 
Thus die I, thus, thus, thus. [Stabs himself. 
Now am I dead, 
Now am I fled ; 
My soul is in the sky : 310 

Tongue, lose thy light ! 
Moon, take thy flight ! [Exit Moonshine. 
Now die, die, die, die, die. [Dies. 

Demetrius. No die, but an ace, for him ; for he is but 
one. 315 

Lysander. Less than an ace, man, for he is dead ; he is 
nothing. 



sc. I A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM 53 

Theseus. With the help of a surgeon, lie might yet 
recover, and prove an ass. 

Hippolyta. How chance Moonshine is gone before 320 
Thisbe comes back and finds her lover ? 

Theseus. She will find him by starlight. Here she 
comes ; and her passion ends the play. 

Re-enter Thisbe. 

Hippolyta. Methinks she should not use a long one for 
such a Pyramus : I hope she will be brief. 325 

Z' Demetrius. A mote will turn __the balaacfi-,— which ^ /u / 
Pyramus,. which Thisbe. is the bett er : he fo r ^^ Tnan^ find — I / ' 

t warrant us : she for a woman, OojrMjlessji^s. ( 

Lysander. She hath spied him already with those "^ 
sweet eyes. 330 

Demetrius. And thus she moans, videlicet : — 
Thisbe. Asleep, my love? 

What, dead, my dove ? 
Pyramus, arise ! 

Speak, speak ! Quite dumb? 335 

Dead, dead ! A tomb 
Must cover thy sweet eyes. 
These lily lips. 
This cherry nose. 
These yellow cowslip cheeks, 340 

Are gone, are gone : 
Lovers, make moan / 
His eyes were green as leeks. 
0, Sisters Three, 

Come, come to me, 345 

With hands as pale as milk ; 
Lay them in gore. 
Since you have shore 
With shears his thread of silk. 

Tongue, not a word : 350 

Come, trusty sword : 
Come, blade, my breast imbrue : [Stabs herself. 
And farewell, friends ; 
Thus Thisby ends : 
Adieu, adieu, adieu. [Dies. 355 

Theseus. Moonshine and Lion are left to bury the dead. 
Demetrius. Ay, and Wall too. 
Bottom. No, I assure you ; the wall is down that parted 



54 A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM act v 

their fathers. Will it please you to see the epilogue, or to 360 
hear a Bergomask dance between two of our company ? 

Theseus. No epilogue, I pray you ; for your play needs 
no excuse. Never excuse ; for when the players are all 
dead, there need none to be blamed. Marry, if he that 305 
writ it had played Pyramus, and hanged himself in 
Thisbe's garter, it would have been a fine tragedy : and so 
it is, truly, and very notably discharged. But come, your 
Bergomask : let your epilogue alone. {A dance. 370 

The iron tongue of midnight hath told twelve ; 
Lovers, to bed ; 'tis almost fairy time. 
I fear we shall out-sleep the coming morn, 
As much as we this night have overwatch'd. 375 ^^ 

"^is pa^lpable^gross pla y hath w ell beguil'd f ^ 

Theheavy ga it of night. Sweet friends, to bed. 
A fortnight hold we this solemnity, 
In nightly revels, and new jollity. [Exeunt. 



Scene II. 
Enter Puck. 

Puck. Now the hungry lion roars, 

And the wolf behowls the moon ; 
Whilst the heavy ploughman snores, 

All with weary task fordone. 
Now the wasted brands do glow, 5 

Whilst the screech-owl, screeching loud. 
Puts the wretch that lies in woe 

In remembrance of a shroud. 
Now it is the time of night 

That the graves, all gaping wide, 10 

Every one lets forth his sprite. 

In the church-way paths to glide : 
And we fairies, that do run 

By the triple Hecate 's team, 
Erom the presence of the sun, 15 

Eollowing darkness like a dream, 
Now are frolic ; not a mouse 

Shall disturb this hallow'd house : 
I am sent with broom before. 

To sweep the dust behind the door. 20 



sc. II A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM 55 

Enter Oberon and Titania, with their Train. 

Oberon. Through the house give glimmering light 
By the dead and drowsy fire ; 

Every elf and fairy sprite 

Hop as light as bird from brier ; 

And this ditty after me 25 

Sing and dance it trippingly. 
Titania. First, rehearse your song by rote, 

To each word a warbling note : 

Hand in hand, with fairy grace, 

Will we sing, and bless this place. 30 

[Song and dance. 
Oberon. Now, until the break of day. 

Through this house each fairy stray. 

To the best bride-bed will we, 

Which by us shall blessed be ; 

And the issue there create 35 

Ever shall be fortunate. 

So shall all the couples three 

Ever true in loving be ; 

And the blots of Nature's hand 

Shall not in their issue stand : 40 

Never mole, hare-lip, nor scar, 

Nor mark prodigious, such as are 

Despised in nativity, 

Shall upon their children be. 

With this field-dew consecrate, 45 

Every fairy take his gait 

And each several chamber bless. 

Through this palace, with sweet peace ; 

And the owner of it blest. 

Ever shall in safety rest. 60 

Trip away ; 
Make no stay ; 

Meet me all by break of day. 

[Exeunt Oberon, Titania, and Train. 
Puck. If we shadows have offended, 

Think but this, and all is mended, 65 

That you have but slumber'd here 

While these visions did appear. 

And this weak and idle theme, 

No more yielding but a dream, 



56 A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM act v. sen 

Grentles, do not rej^rehend : O^yJtCc^^ ^ 

If you pardon, we wiirmend. ^^-^-^^ 

And, as I'm an honest Puck, 

If we have unearned luck 

Now to 'scape the serpent's tongue, 

We will make amends ere long ; C5 

Else the Puck a liar call : 

So, good night unto you all. 

Give me your hands, if we be friends. 

And Robin shall restore amends. \Ex%t. 



NOTES 

Act I, Scene I. 4. lingers, used transitively = makes linger, delays. 
13. pert, brisk. Cp. Tempest, iv. i. 58 : ' Now come, my Ariel ! . . . 
appear, and pertly ! ' 

15. companion. Used contemptuously, like ' fellow ' now. 

pomp. Used especially of the spectacular or processional part of 
a festival : the original sense, from Greek nofivy (pompe), a procession. 
So 1. 19. 

16. I wodd thee with my sword. Theseus had just conquered the 
Amazons. 

19. triumph', a public exhibition or show in celebration of some 
event (originally of a victory in war). 

32. stoVn the impression of her fantasy, dishonestly caught her fantasy 
or fancy and stamped his image there. 

33. gawds, baubles, toys. 

conceits, fanciful devices. To ' conceit ' then meant to ' conceive ' ; 
and the noun ' conceit ' meant ' conception ' or ' something conceived ', 
fancy, or idea. 

34. knacks, knick-knacks. 

46. he advised, i. e. deliberate. To do a thing ' on advice ' then meant 
to do it on deliberation, or, as we say, ' advisedly.' 

50. within his power = (it is) within his power. A number of examples 
of this ellipse might be quoted from Shakespeare : e. g. Macbeth, iv. iii. 
16 : ' And [it is] wisdom To offer up a weak poor innocent lamb.' 
So As You Like It, i. i. 15, &c. It occurs in the hurry of speech, when 
the speaker is hastening to a conclusion. 

54. in this kind, in this respect. So As You Like It, ii. i. 27, &c. 

60. concern, touch, affect. 

65. to die the death : i. e. ' the death prescribed by law '. 

69. Whe^r, for ' whether ' : spelt as pronounced. 

71. mew'd, cooped up (from Fr. mne, a coop in which fowls were 
fattened). 

75. pilgrimage. In the Scriptural sense of our ' pilgrimage through 
Ufa.' 

76. But earthlier happy is the rose distilVd. The rose which renders 
up its essence of sweetness has more earthly happiness. 

80. virgin patent, i. e. the privilege of virginity. Privileges were con- 
ferred by letters patent. 

89. protest, solemnly profess. 
92. crazed, with a flaw in it. 

M.K.I>, -^ 



58 NOTES TO A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM 

98. estate, settle (as an estate). So in As You Like It, v. ii. 3, Tempest, 
IV. i. 85, &c. 

100. As well possessed, as well furnished with possessions. 

106. avouch it to his head. We should say, ' to his face.' 

110. spotted : the opposite of ' spotless '. 

120. extenuate, minimize, mitigate : the original sense (Lat. ex- 
tenuare, from ex- and tenuis, slight). 

129. How chance the roses, &c. For ' How chances it the roses ', &c. 
Cp. V. i. 320. 

131. Beteem, allow, permit : with a reference, probably, to the other 
sense of ' pour ', which survives in North English and Scots dialects. 

136. cross / 'Cross' here means 'that which crosses or thwarts', 
'vexation '. 

137. misgra§ed, misgrafted. 

141. 5)/?rt2>ai%, agreement, correspondence : to be distinguished from 
the modern sense. So ' sympathize with ' = to be like, in Henry V, 
III. vii. 163. 

143. momentany, momentary (Fr. momentane, Lat. momentaneus). 

145. collied, grimy, sooty (lit., made ' colly ' or black with coal- 
dust). 

146. in a spleen, in a sudden fit. 

155. fancy's followers. ' Fancy ' = love. So ii. i. 164, iii. ii. 96, &c. 

157. revenue : to be read ' revenue '. 

160. respects, regards, considers. Cp. ii. i. 224. 

167. To do observance to a morn of May, i. e. to go a-maying. 

170. his best arrow with the golden head. Cupid's arrows were said 
to be of two sorts : those tipped with gold, to incite love, and those 
tipped with lead, to repel it. 

171. Venus' doves. The chariot of Venu.s, Cupid's mother, was drawn 
by doves. Cp. Tempest, iv. i. 92 : 

' I met her deity 
Cutting the clouds towards Paphos, and her son 
Dove-drawn with her.' 

173-4. Queen Dido of Carthage, who burned herself alive after 
Aeneas the Trojan deserted her for Ital)'. The story is told in the Fourth 
Book of Virgil's Aeneid. 

182. your fair, i. a. your faii-ness or beauty. Cp. As You Like It, 
III. ii. 99 : ' Let no face be kept in mind But the fair of RosaUnd.' 
Or Venus and Adonis, 1. 589 : ' Whereat a sudden pale [i. e. paleness] . . . 
Usurps her cheek.' In Shakespeare's usage almost any adjective could 
ba made to do duty as a noun, just as any noun almost might be 
made to do duty as a verb. The parts of speech were highly inter- 
changeable. 

184. tuneable, tuneful. The word is active here, and in iv. i. 130. 



ACT I, SC. I. 98— SC. II. 38 59 

So in Richard II, ii. iii. 84, ' deceivable ' (wliich now meana ' capable 
of being deceived ') is used to mean ' capable of deceit ', ' deceitful '. 

186. favour, outward appearance (especially of the face) : with 
a play on the other sense of the word. 

190. bated, excepted. 

191. translated, transformed. Cp. in. i. 125, &c. 
209. Phoebe : a name for the moon. See v. ii. 14 n. 
212. still, ever, continually. 

215. U 1)071 jaint j)rimrose-beds were wont to lie. ' Faint ' gives the 
note of the line : it is not so much the primroses as those who lie upon 
them who are faint. Cp. As You Like It, ii. vii. 1.32 : ' Oppress'd with 
two weak evils, age and hunger.' Here ' weak ' in the same way gives 
the note of the line : it is the person oppressed who is ' weak ', not the 
' evils ', and it is precisely his ' weakness ' which the speaker wishes to 
emphasize. Shakespeare is very fond of these ' colouring-epithets '. 

219. stranger companies. 'Companies' = companions (as in Hen?-?/ F, 
I. i. 55, &c.); and the phrase means 'companions who are strangers'. 

226. other some, i.e. others. We say, not ' other some', but 'some 
others '. 

232. holding no quantity, holding no proportion to love's estima- 
tion of them, i. e. far below love's estimation of them. Cp. Hamlet, 
m. ii. 179 : ' women's fear and love holds quantity ' (i. e. are in direct 
proportion to each other, so that the more ^omen love the more they 
fear). 

242. ei/tie, eyes : the OE. plural. So ii. ii. 99, &c. It is used for 
the rhyme. 

249. // I have thanks, it is a dear expense, i. e., the thanks are dearly 
bought. 

251. his sight, the sight of him. 

Act I, Scene II. 2. You ivere best : an idiom grammatically = ' for 
you it were best '. 

3. scrip, scrip or script, i. e. the scroll or written list. 

5. interlude. The name for a short and usually light di'amatic piece, 
such as was often acted at this time in the houses of noblemen and 
wealthy merchants. The word means a dramatic diversion (Lat. infer, 
and Indus, play). 

12. Pyramus and Thisby. The story of Pyramus and Thisbe was 
drawn from Ovid's tale in the Metamorphoses, iv. 55. 

29. condole, mourn, lament. So 1. 44. 

31. / could play Ercles, i. e. Hercules. This was a stock ranting part 
in the old plays. 

32. a part to tear a cat in, i. e. a violent ranting part. Cp. Middleton's 
Roaring Girl, v. i. : 'I am called by those who have seen my valour, 
Tear-cat ' (Steevens). 

38. Phibbus' car, the car of Phoebus, the sun-god. 

f2 



60 NOTES TO A MIDSUIVOIER-NIGHT'S DREAIVI 

44, condoling. Cp. 1. 29 above. 

84. aggravate my voice. Mrs. Quickly misuses the words in the same 
way : ' I beseek you now, aggravate your choler ' (2 Henry IV, ii. 
iv. 175). Bottom and she mean just the contrary of what they say. 

97. purple-in-grain, i. e. natural purple, that will not wash out. 

98. French-crown colour : the colour of the French gold crown-piece. 
103. con, learn by heart. 

109. bill of properties, list of theatrical 'properties' or stage 
requisites. 

112. obscenely. Misused also by Costard in Lovers Labour's Lost, 
IV. i. 145 : ' when it comes so smoothly ofF, so obscenely as it were, 
so fit.' Cp. ' aggravate ', 1. 84 above. These words from the Latin 
were even more in vogue in Shakespeare's day than in Sheridan's, 
and were equally maltreated by ambitious ignorance. Sheridan's 
Mrs. Malaprop, in his play The Rivals, has given a name to the type. 

115, hold, or cut bow-strings. Hold (i.e. keep your engagement) or 
cut your bowstrings and give up archery (i. e. throw up the game). 



Act II, Scene I. 7. the moone's sphere, the moon's orbit. Sound 
the 'e' of 'moone's.' It is a survival of the old English genitive 
in -es. 

9. orbs, the fairy rings. Rings on the grass were thought to be due 
to their dancing. Cp. 1. 86 ; and Tempest, v. i. 37 (Prospero's address 
to the elves and fairies) : ' you demi-puppets, that By moonshine do 
the green sour ringlets make.' 

10. pensioners, bodyguard : with a reference to Queen Elizabeth's 
splendid bodyguard of ' pensioners ' drawn from the noblest and 
handsomest young men about the court. 

16. lob, lubber, lout. 
20. fell, fierce. 

ivrath, wi'oth : used for the sake of the rhyme. 
23. changeling. A child left or taken by the fairies in place of another. 

29. starlight sheen. ' Sheen ' is probably a substantive = shining, 
brightness ; and ' starlight ' an adjective. 

30. square, quarrel, brawl. So we talk in this sense of ' squaring up ' 
33, shrewd, miscMevous (lit. 'cursed'). 

34-6. ' Skim ', ' labour ', &c., refer to ' you ' in 1. 34. ' Frights ' 
alone refers to ' he ' in 1. 34. 
36. quern, handmill. 

38. Sometime. ' Sometime ' and ' sometimes ' are used indifferently. 
barm, yeast. Still common in dialect. 

47. a gossip's bowl. ' Gossip ' or ' godsib ' meant originally a sponsor 
at a christening ; and so, as here, a crony, Cp, Fr, commere. 

48. a roasted crab, i. e. crab-apple, put in to flavour the liquor. 



ACT I, SO. II. 44— ACT II, SC. 1. 109 61 

50. dewlap: properly the loose skin which hangs from the tlu'oats 
of cattle. 

51. aunt : familiar for an old woman. ' Mother ' is still so used. 
53-4. dow7i topples she. And 'tailor^ cries. Because in such a case 

one ' falls as a tailor squats upon his board ' (Johnson). 

55. quire, company : the same word as ' choii' ', from Lat. chorus, 
loff, laugh : spelt as pronounced. 

56. waxen, old plm'al = wax, i. e. increase, 
neeze, sneeze (OE. niesan). 

57. toasted, consumed, spent (not necessarily without profit, as in 
the modern use of the word). Cp. As You Like It, u. iv. 95-6 : ' I like 
this place. And willingly could waste my time in it.' So in v. ii. 5 
below, ' wasted brands ' does not mean that the brands have not been 
of service, but simply that they have burned out. 

66-8. Corin . . . Phillida. These were stock literary names for a 
shepherd and a shepherdess. 

71. Your buskin'd mistress, &c., i.e. wearing the 'buskin' or long 
hunting boot. The Amazons were huntresses and warriors. 

76. Glance at, hint at, covertly attack. 

79-80. Aegle was a nymph for the love of whom Theseus deserted 
Aiiadne of Crete, who had helped him to slay the Minotaui-. Antiopa 
was an Amazon and daughter of Mars, in love with Theseus. 

82. the middle summer's spring, the beginning of niidsummer. 

84. paved fountain : not artificially paved, but with a hard pebbly 
bottom. 

86. ringlets, rings or rounds. Cp. 1. 9 n. 

91. pelting, paltry. Cp. Richard II, ii. i. 60, where Gaunt complains 
that England had been leased out to taxgatherers, ' like to a tenement, 
or pelting farm.' 

92, continents, i. e, what contains them, their banks (Lat, continers, 
continens). 

97. marrion flock, the ' mmxain ' flock, i. e. the cattle dead of this 
disease. 

98. Nine men's morris. A country game, also called ' nine men's 
merrils ', played on turf cut into figm-es. Each party had nine men, 
and the counters played with were called ' Merrils ' (Fr. merelles). 

99. the quaint mazes, &c., labyrinths on the village green. It was 
a sport with boys to run courses over them. ' Quaint ' = artfully 
contrived, ingenious. Cp. u. ii. 7 below. 

the wanton green. ' Wanton ' here = playful, sportive : and so 
frequently in Shakespeare and his contemporaries. 

101. want their ivinter, i. e. their winter pastimes. 

106. distemperature, disorder of the weather. 'Thorough', of coui'se, 
= through, as in the opening lines of the scene. 

109. Hiems : the Latin name for Winter. 



62 NOTES TO A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM 

112. childing autumn, i.e. autumn that brings fortli. 

114. By their increase, by their products. 

117. original, souiee or origin, 

161. might see, could, was able to see. 'May' and 'might' then 
meant what ' can ' and ' could ' mean now. Cp. Merchant of Venice, 
III. ii. 161-3 : ' Happy in this, she is not yet so old But she may 
learn ; happier than tliis, She is not bred so dull but she can learn.' 
Here ' may ' = has it in her power to ; ' can ' = has the knowledge 
or skill to. This is the original distinction. Cp. v. i. 2 (' may '). 

163. the imperial votaress. A compliment to Elizabeth, the virgin 
queen. The goddess of the moon is the virgin Diana or Phoebe (see 
V. ii. 14 «,.), of whom Elizabeth is regarded as a votaress. 

164. fancy-free, i. e. heart-free, or free from the power of love. For 
'fancy' cp. i. i. 155. 

168. Love-in-idleness : the pansy or heartsease. 

174. the leviatlmn : here meant for the whale. 

192. wood, mad (OE. loid). Cp. Scots ' wud '. 

195. adamant, the loadstone, which di-aws iron to it (cp. next line). 
Its proverbial hardness is also alluded to. 

201. nor I cannot : emphatic double negative. 

208. ivorser. This sort of double comparative is not uncommon in 
Shakespeare's time. Cp. ' lesser ', u. ii. 89. 

214. impeach, bring into question, or expose to detraction. 

220, my privilege, i. e. that which secm'es me immunity. 

224, in my respect, in my regard. Cp. i. i. 160. 

231. Apollo flies, &c. Reference to Apollo's pursuit of the nymph 
Daphne (Ovid, Metamorphoses, i. 452 f.). 

232. griffin : a fabulous monster, half beast, half bird of prey. 
235. stay thy questions, wait and talk with you. ' Question,' here and 

often elsewhere in Shakespeare, means simply ' discom'se ' , ' discussion ' , 
' conversation '. Cp. Merchant of Venice, iv. i. 346 : ' I'll stay no 
longer question ' ( = I will discuss no longer with you). 

244. to die upon the hand. Cp. the phrase ' to die upon his sword ', &c. 

252. eglantine, sweet-briar. 

256. weed, dress (OE. weed). Cp. ii. ii. 71. 

266. fond on her, i. e. foolishly doting upon her. Cp. u, ii. 88. 



Act II, Scene II. 1. roundel, round (cp, n. i. 140) or roundelay. 
That is, either a part song, or (as here) a round dance. 

4. rere-mice, bats (OE. hrere-mus). 

7. quaint, dainty, artful, elegant. Cp. ii. i. 99 above ; and Tempest, 
1. ii. 317 : ' Fine apparition ! My quaint Ariel.' 

9. double tongue, i. e. forked tongue. 



ACT II, SC. I. 112— ACT III, SC. I. 65 63 

13. Philomel. The nightingale, from Philomela, the unfortunate 
daughter of Pandion, who was transformed into one. 

30. ounce : loosely used for the smaller animals of the leopard 
species. 

cat, wild cat. 

31. Pard, leopard. 

45. take the sense . . . of my innocence, i. e. understand my innocent 
meaning. 

46. Love takes the meaning, &c. , i. e. the proper meaning. For ' take ' 
cp. V. i. 90. 

54. beshrew, plague upon (lit. ' curse ') : a playful oath. Connected 
with ' shrewd ', in its original meaning (see n. i. 33 and iii. ii. 300). 

68. approve, prove, confirm. 

71. Weeds. Cp. ii. i. 256. 

79. oive, own, possess. Cp. Tempest, l. ii. 451 : ' Thou dost here 
usm-p The name thou ow'st not.' 

86. darkling, in the dark. 

88. fond, foolish, with the sense of ' doting ', which it has in ii. i. 266. 

97. Do, as a monster, fly my presence thus. ' As a monster ' is in appo- 
sition with ' my presence '. 

99. sphery eyne, eyes like the spheres or stars. For ' eyne ' cp. 
I. i. 242. 

118. ripe not to reason, do not grow ripe or matm'e in reason. 

119. the point of Imman skill, i. e. the highest point of human skill. 
132. gentleness, gentlemanliness. 

140. hated . . . of. 'Of =by. So 1. 142. 
154. Of all loves, by all that is loving. 

Swound, swoon. 
156. Either : to be sounded as one syllable. Cp ' whe'r ' for 
* whether ' (iir. i. 160) : spelt as pronounced. 

Act III, Scene I. 2. pat, exactly. 

4. tiring-house, dressing-room. 

7. hully, a slang term meaning a dashing, fine fellow, 

14, By'r lakin,hy our ladykin or little lady,i. e. the Virgin, A common 
oath. 

parlous : a form of ' perilous ', used as we use ' awful ', ' terrible '. 

25. in eight and six, i. e. in verses of alternate eight and six syllables. 
This was the ordinary ballad-metre. 

40. to the same defect. A commentator must not spoil these blunders 
by explaining them. Cp. r. ii. 112/i; and below, 1. 64 (' disfigure ') &c. 

45. it were pity of my life. A common exclamation, = it were a pitiful 
thing for my lite, i- e- my life would lie a pitiful business. 

65. present, represent : a players' term. Cp. in. ii. 14. 



64 NOTES TO A MIDSUMMER-NIGHT'S DREAM 

84. a play toward, i. e. coming on. 

100. Juvenal, youth (Lat. juvenis) : an affected word of the time. 

103. Nimis' tomh. Ninus was a legendary King of Assyria, to whom 
the foundation of Nineveh was attributed. Pyramus was a Babylonian 
j'outh. 

114. Sometime. Cp. ii. i. 38. 

125. translated. Cp. i. i. 191. 

131. ousel-cock. An ' ousel ' is a blackbud. 

133. throstle, thi'ush. 

138. the plain-song cuckoo : so called because of his unvarying note, 
' plain-song ' being the simple melody without variations. 

141. set his wit to, match his wit against. 

154. gleek, flout, scoff. 

160. Whe'r, for ' whether '. Cp. ii. ii. 156 n. 

162. still, ever. 

173. apricocks and dewberries, apricots and gooseberries. 

178. To have my love to bed, and to arise, i. e. to conduct him to bed, 
and assist at his rising. 

186. / cry your worships mercy, I pray your worships, pardon me. 

189. / shall desire you of more acquaintance. ' Desire,' in this idio- 
matic phrase, means ' request ', ' make a request to '. 'Of means 
■ in the matter of '. The literal meaning, then, is this : ' I shall make 
a request to you in the matter of more acquaintance,' i, e. I shall ask 
you to let us be better acquainted. So Merchant of Venice, iv. i. 102 : 
' I humbly do desire your grace of pardon ; ' As You Like It, v. iv. 56 : 
' I desire you of the like,' &c. 

194. Squash, A ' squash ' is an unripe peascod. 

209. some enforced chastity. ' Enforced ' = violated. For the moon 
as the type and patroness of chastity, cp. ii. i. 163 n. 

Act III, Scene II. 3. in extremity, to excess. 

5. Wliat night-rule now . . . 1 what rule for the night's diversions ? 

9. patches, clowns, fools : so called from the professional jester's 
patched or motley coat. So ' a patched fool ', iv. i. 216 below ; 
' a motley fool,' As You Like It, ii. vii. 13. 
mechanicals, mechanics. 

13. that barren sort, that dull-witted crew. For ' sort ' cp. 1. 21. 

14. preseyiied. Cp. ni. i. 65. 

15. enteid in. ' In ' = into. Cp. Richard II, ii. iii. 160 : 'to enter 
in the castle ; ' Merchant of Venice, v. i. 55-6 : ' Let the sounds of music 
Creep in our ears ' : and the common phrase, ' fall in love.' 

17. nowl, noddle. 

21. russet-pated choughs, jackdaw s with their greyish-coloured heads. 
tnany in sort, many in company. Cp. 1. 13. 



ACT III, SC. I. 84— SC. II. 175 65 

25. at our stamp, at the stamp of our footsteps running. 

30. Some sleeves, some hats, from yielders all things catch. Commen- 
tators seem to find no difficulty in tliis line, for they say nothing about it. 
And yet several meanings could be extracted from it, no one more 
convincing than another. Let us take ' briers and thorns ' of 1. 29 to 
be the subject of ' catch ', and the meaning is that while they catch some 
sleeves and some hats from the others, from those who give way 
{'yielders') they catch everything. Those who give way to the briers, 
instead of bursting through them, only become more completely 
entangled. 

32. translated. Cp. m. i. 125. 

36. latch'd, laid hold of, caught (OE. laecan). 

40. of force, perforce. 

41. stand dose. ' Close ' — out of sight, concealed. 
53. This whole earth, i. e. solid, in one piece. 

55. Her brother^ s noontide, i. e. the sun's. 

71. a ivorin, a small snake. Cp. Macbeth, iii. iv. 29 : ' There the 
grown serpent lies ; the worm that 's fled,' &c. 

74. a misprised mood, a mood or humour due to a misprision or 
mistake. ' Misprised ' = mistaken ; from Old French mesprcndre, 
modern meprendre. 

87. his tender, its offer (keeping up the financial figure). 'His' for 
' its ' was the common usage then ; ' its ' did not come in till later. 

90. misprision. Cp. 1. 74 above. 

92-3. The meaning is : For one man who keeps faith, a million 
fail, breaking oath upon oath. For ' confound ' = destroy, cp. v. i. 
302, &c. 

96. fancy-sick, love-sick. Cp. i. i. 155. 
cheer, expression, countenance (ME. chere, the face). 

100. against she do appear, in preparation for her appearance. 

114. their fond pageant, the foolish spectacle they present. 

119. sport alone, i.e. unrivalled sport. 

124. vows so born, i. e. vows (being) so born. 

128. advance your cunning, i. e. bring it into view. 

133. Will even weigh, will weigh even. 

141. Taurus : a liigh mountain-range in Asia Minor. 

147. // you were civil, if you had decent or civilized manners. 
' Civility ' had a wider meaning then than now : namely, the refinement 
winch civilized fife implies. 

160-1. extort A poor soul's patience, i. e. wring it from her, deprive 
her of it. 

169. / will none.l will none of her. That is, I desire to have nothing 
to do with her. 

175. ahy it dear, pay dear for it. ' Aby ' is from ' a- ' = out, away, 
-I- ' buy ', OE. bycgan. 



66 NOTES TO A MIDSUM^IER-NIGHT'S DREAM 

188. oes, circles, orba. C]). Antony and Cleopatra, y.ii. 83 : ' the little 

0, the Earth.' 

195. Injurious, insulting. Cp. ' injury ' in ii. i. 147, and in 11. 148, 
219 of this scene. In each case the notion of 'insult' is uppermost. 
So with ' wrong ', 1. 301. 

196. contriv'd, plotted. 

203. artificial. We use this word always in the passive = created 
by art. Here it is active = creating by art. Cp. i. i. 184 (' tuneable '). 

204. neelds, needles : an old form. 

213-14. ' Two of the first ' — two bodies : referring to the order 
of the terms in the preceding line, viz. (1) ' bodies ', (2) ' heart '. This 
was the technical method of reference in heraldiy to the terms of a pre- 
ceding description. We may then explain, with Douce : ' we had two 
bodies, like coats of heraldry belonging to man and wife (who are 
two bodies) as to one person, and having, like our one heart, one crest.' 

215. rent, rend : an old form. 

237. persever : read ' persever '. So always in Shakespeare. 

sad, grave, serious. Tliis is the normal meaning of the word in 
Shakespeare. When he talks, as he does, of ' sad ' or ' sad-ey'd ' 
justices and counsellors, we must not take him to mean that they 
were melancholy, but only that they were grave. 

239. hold the sweet jest up, i. e. keep the jest up. 

240. toell carried, well managed. 

242. Such an argument, a subject for such treatment. ' Ai'gument ' 
is used in its original Latin sense of theme, subject-matter, or business 
in hand. Cp. Henry V, ui. i. 21, where it is said of the English that they 
' sheathed their swords for lack of argument ', i. e. for lack of matter 
to fight about. 

257. Ethiop, Ethiopian, black-a-moor. 

257-8. No, no, he'll . . . Seem to break loose. Hermia has laid hold 
of Lysander to detain him, Demetrius begins to address her, and 
then breaks off to taunt Lysander with only pretending to break loose, 
insinuating that he has no great desire to fight. 

272. what neivs ? i. e. what new tiling has happened ? 

274. erewhile, a short time ago. 

290. Compare, comparison. 

300. citrsi, slu-ewish. So 11. 341, 439. ' Curst ' is the literal meaning 
of ' shrewd ', whence ' shrewish ', ' shi-ewishness '. (Cp. ii. i. 33, and 

1. 323 below). 

310. your stealth, your stealing away. So iv. i. 166. 
317. fond. Cp. II. ii. 88. 

323. shrewd, shrewish, with a biting tongue. Cp. 1. 300 n. 
329. minimus : anything very small, from Lat. minimus, smallest. 
hindering knot-grass. Knot-grass was thought to check the growth 
of children. Cp. ' put him into a strait pair of gaskins, 'twere worse 



ACT III, SC. II. 188— ACT IV, SC. I. 72 67 

than knot-grass : he would never grow after it ' (Beaumont and 
Fletcher, Knight of the Burning Pestle, ii. ii). 
335. ahij. Cp. m. ii. 175. 

338. cheeh by jole, cheek by jowl (jaw), i. e. close alongside. 

339. coil, turmoil. 
341. cAirsL Cp. 1. 300. 
352. sort, turn out. 

356. welkin, sky (OE. woken, cloud). 
anon, forthwith. 

357. Acheron, a river of hell, according to the ancients. 
361. wrong, insult. Cp. ' injury ', iii. ii. 195 n. 

367. virtuous property. The * virtue ' of a thing, in one sense of the 
word, is that for which it is efficacious. This is the sense of ' virtue ' 
in ' virtuous ' here. 

368. his, for ' its '. Cp. 1. 87. 

380. Aurora's harbinger. Aurora was the goddess of the dawn, 
and her harbinger the morning star. 

382-3. Suicides were buried at cross-roads, with a stake through their 
hearts. They and the drowned were thought by the ancients to roam 
about for a certain number of years because they had not been properly 
buried. 

439. curst. Cp. 1. 300. 

Act IV, ScEJJE I. 2. amiable, lovable, lovely (Lat. amabilis). 
coy, play coyly with, caress. 

17. overflown, overflowed, and so drowned. So in Titus Andronicus, 
111. i. 230 : ' overflow'd and drown'd.' 

20. ncaf, fist. Still used in Soots dialect. 

25. Cavalery, Cavalero or Cavalier. 

38. a bottle of hay, a bundle of hay : a term now mainly in local 
use. 

45. exposition, for ' disposition ', probably. 

47. be all ways away, get away in all directions. 

48. The ' woodbine ' and the ' honeysuckle ' being properly the 
same, this line has caused difficulty. But ' woodbine ' was and is 
rather loosely vised for several climbing plants, of which the honey- 
suckle is one. 

49. the female ivy : ' female ', because regarded as ' married to the 
elm '. 

60. orient pearls. ' Orient,' from meaning (as it still does) ' from the 
East ', ' from the quarter of the rising sun ', came to mean ' bright ', 
' shining ', as here. So ' an orient drop ' (a tear), in Venus and Adonis, 
1. 981, and ' orient colom's ' in Milton, Paradise Lost, i. 546. 

72. the other, the others. ' Other ' is an older plural. 



68 NOTES TO A MIDSUINIMER NIGHT'S DREAM 

73. May all, i. e. they may all. 

79. Dianas hud . . , Cupid's flower, ' Dian's bud ' may be the bud 
of the Agnus castus, or the tree of Holy Chastity, a branch of which 
is borne by Diana, the Goddess of Chastity, in the Chaucerian poem, 
The Flower and the Leaf, 1. 173. Cupid's flower is 'love-in-idleness', 
the pansy or heartsease, mentioned u. i. 168. 

101. sad. Cp. m. ii. 237. 

110. observation, observance (i.e. of May morning.) Cp. I. i. 167. 

111. vaward, vanguard. In Henry V, iv. iii, 130, &c., it is used in its 
literal sense, of the vanguard of an army. 

118. Hercules . . . Cadmus. Cadmus was the founder of Thebes, in 
Boeotia. The chronology which places Cadmus, Hercules, and Hip- 
polyta together is loose : but such points are of no importance here. 

120. hounds of Sparta. Spartan hounds were famous among the 
ancients for speed and scent. 

121. chiding : used of echoing noises, where the one noise seems to 
rebuke the other. 

126. flew'd. The ' flews ' of a hound are its chaps. 
so sanded, of such a sandy colour. 

128. deW'lapp'd. Cp. u. i. 50. 

129-30. match'd . . . Eg.ch under each, i. e. their notes arranged in 
a scale. 

130. tuneable, tuneful. Cp. i. i. 184. 

140. our solemnity, the festivities preparatory to the solemnization of 
their marriage. So i. i. 11. 

145-6. On Saint Valentine's Day (Feb. 14) bii-ds begin to couple 
and the sexes choose their mates. 

152. amazedly, confusedly; like one not master of Ids senses. The 
word ' amazement ' had a stronger meaning then than now. It implied 
distraction, and sometimes even horror. 

159. Without the peril, &c., i.e. outside, beyond its reach. 

160. You have enough, i. e. enough to convict him : addressed to 
Theseus. 

166. their stealth. Cp. lu. i. 310. 

169. fancy, love. Cp. i. i. 155, &c. 

173. gaud. Cp. i. i. 33 (gawd). 

195-6. Methinks I see with parted eye, &c., i. e. with parted eyes. 
Her eyes, it seems to Hermia, do not work together, but each sees 
independently, apart from the other. Consequently everything seems 
double. 

216. a patched fool, a motley fool (from the patched or motley dress 
which a jester wore). Cp. in. ii. 9. 

226. I shall sing it at her death : probably, at Thisbe's death. 



ACT IV, SC. I. 73— ACT V, SC. I. 53 69 

Act IV, Scene II. 4. transported, i. e. removed from this world 
to the next. 

20. bully Bottom. Cp. in. i. 7. 

20-1. sixpence a day, &c., i. e. in pension : possibly alluding to some 
contemporary pensioned actor. 

37. good strings to your beards, i. e. to tie on their false beards. 

39. preferred, recommended for acceptance. Cp. Juliiis Caesar, 
V. V. 62 : ' Ay, if Messala will prefer me to you ' (i. e. recommend me 
to you to be your servant). 

Act V, Scene I. 1. that, that which. 

2. may, can. Cp. ii. i. 161 n. 

8. compact, composed, lit. fastened or bound together. 

11. Helen's beauty. Helen of Greece, the most beautiful woman of 
antiquity. She was carried off from her husband by Paris the Trojan. 
The result was the war between Greece and Troy, celebrated in the Iliad, 
a brow of Egypt, i. e. a dark, gipsy brow. 

26. constancy, consistency. 

27. admirable, to be wondered at, marvellous : the original Latin 
sense {admirari, to wonder ; admirabilis). So the verb ' admire,' e. g. 
in The Tempest, v. i. 154 : ' these lords At this encounter do so much 
admire " (i. e. marvel) ; and Macbeth, ni. iv. 110: ' with most admired 
disorder ' (where ' admired ' = marvelled-at). 

32. masques. Masques or pageants were in great favour in Shake- 
speare's time, especially at courtly and noble festivities. What they 
were like may be seen from the masque in The Tempest, iv. i. 60 f. 

34. after-supper : the last course of supper, called the rere- 
supper. 

39. abridgment, epitome of life, or life in little ; that is, a drama, a play. 
It was a technical term. Cp. Hamlet, ii. ii. 448, ' look where my abridg- 
ments come : ' said by Hamlet as the players enter. It is in this sense 
that in 1. 555 of the same scene he describes the players as ' the 
abstracts and brief chronicles of the time '. 

42, brief, short list or programme. 
ripe, i. e. ready for performance. 

44. The battle with the Centaurs. The Centaurs were a fabulous race., 
half man, half horse. They became outrageous at a certain marriage- 
feast to which they were invited — the feast of the Lapithae, — and 
were only routed by Hercules (mentioned in 1. 47). 

48-9. The ' Thracian singer ' is Orpheus, the mythical Greek poet 
and musician whose power in song was such that he could move trees 
and rocks, and tame wild beasts by it. He was torn alive on the 
Thracian hills by the mad devotees of the wine-god Bacchus. 

52-3. The thrice three Muses, &c. Perhaps suggested by Spenser's 
Tears of the Muses, on the neglect of learning. See the discussion 
on p. xxvii of the Introduction. 



70 NOTES TO A MIDSUINOIER -NIGHT'S DREAM 

59. The last three words of this line have defied emendation. 

70. The passion of loud laughter, ' Passion ' was then used of any 
violent commotion of the mind (from the original sense of ' suffering ' : 
Lat. patior, passus sum), and often, as here and in II. 295, 323, of the 
outward expression of such emotion. Cp. especially Two Gentlemen 
of Verona,iy. iv. 172: ' 'Twas Ariadne passioning For Theseus' injury.' 
The emotion is usually one of grief, and its use here, of laughter, is 
exceptional. 

73. Which. ' Which ' was then used in all tliree genders. 

74. unbreath'd, i. e. unexercised. 

90. take, take the meaning of. Cp. n. ii. 46. 

91-2. The metre is defective. The meaning is that in such a case 
noble respect or consideration judges the performance, not by its merit, 
but by tlie effort which is made to please. 

93. Great clerks, great scholars {clerici, because at one time learning 
was almost confined to the clergy). 

96. periods, full stops. 

106. address' d, ready, prepared. Cp. 2 Henry IV, iv. iv. 5 : ' Our 
navy is addressed.' 

118. doth not stand upon points. There is a play here upon two 
meanings : (1) is not very punctilious about what he says; and (2) does 
not mind his stops. The Prologue's neglect of punctuation has made 
him say the opposite of what was intended. 

120. the stop. A pun : see previous note. 

125. recorder, a kind of flute or flageolet. 

not in government. This phrase may be explained by the following 
passage in Hamlet, in. ii. 373 f. : ' Will you play upon this pipe ? . . . 
'Tis as easy as lying ; govern these ventages [i. e. wind-holes] with your 
finger and thumb, give it breath with your mouth, and it will discourse 
most eloquent music' 

132. certain : a favourite word with the old ballad- makers, to fill 
up the line. 

140. Ninus. Cp. in. i. 103. 

141. hight, called (OE. hdtan) : common in old writers, and here an 
intentional archaism, like ' certain ' above. 

144. fall, let fall. Cp. Tempest, ii. i. 304 : ' Mine eyes, even sociable 
to the show of tliine, Fall fellowly drops.' 

148-9. Tills is wi'itten in ridicule of the excessive alliteration practised 
by the minor poets of the day. 

157. interlude. Cp. i. ii. 5. 

164. sinister, left : the original Latin sense. 

184. sensible, capable of sensation. 

200-1. Limander . . . Helen. ' Limander ' is for Leander ; and 
' Helen ', probably, for Hero. The story of Leander, who nightly 
swam the Hellespont to meet his sweetheart Hero, and was at last 



ACT V, SC. I. 59— SC. II. 14 71 

drowned there, was well known from Marlowe's poem of Hero and 
Leander. Rosalind makes fun of it in As You Like It, iv. i. 97 f. 

202. Shafalus . . . Procrus. For Cephalus and Procris. Cephalus 
was a Thessalian prince, and Procris, an Athenian princess, was liis 
wife. He shot her by mistake while hunting, and when she died he 
committed suicide. 

207. 'Tide : for ' betide '. 

210. mural: from Lat. murus, a wall. On this reading see Introd. 

p. XXX. 

229. lion-fell, a lion's skin. 

231. Hivere pity on my life. Cp. iii. i. 45. 

252. The greatest error of all the rest. It is usual to quote for this 
construction JNIilton's Paradise Lost, iv. 323-4 : ' Adam the goodliest 
man of men since born His sons, the fairest of her daughters Eve.' 
It is a confusion of ' greatest of all ' and ' greater than all the rest ' 

256. in snuff. A pun on the phrase ' to be in snuff ' = to be offended. 

293. thrum: the loose end of weavers' tlu-eads. The three Fates 
were supposed to superintend the thread of life. 

294. quell, destroy. In Macbeth, i. vii. 72, it occurs as a noun : 
' who shall bear the guilt Of our great quell ' (viz. the murder of Duncan). 

295. fassion. Cp. 1. 70 n. 

297. Beshreiu, cm-se, a plague upon : used playfully. Cp. ii. ii. 54. 

301. cheer, cheerfulness. 

302. confound. Cp. iii. ii. 93. 

314 f. They pun. 'Die' the vb. suggests 'die' the sing, of 'dice', 
which suggests ' ace ', which m 1. 319 suggests ' ass '. 

320. How chance, &c. Cp. i. i. 129. 

323. passion. Cp. 1. 70 n. 

326-7. which Pyramus, which Thisbe is the better, whether Pyramus 
or whether Thisbe is the better. ' Which ' here seems to be ' used 
for the kindi-ed " whether " ' (Abbott). 

344. Sisters Three. These are the Fates of 1. 292. 

352. imbrue, make bloody, shed the blood of. Cp. 2 Henry IV ^ 
II. iv. 210 : ' What ? Shall we have incision ? Shall we imbrue ? ' 

361 . a Bergomask dance. ' A rustic dance, framed in imitation of the 
people of Bergamasco, a province in the state of Venice, who are 
ridiculed as being more clownish in their manners and dialect than any 
other people in Italy ' (Nares). 

376. palpable-gross, palpably gross. 

Act V, Scene II. 4. fordone, exhausted : ' for- ' is intensive. 
5. wasted : simply = consumed. Cp. ii. i. 57 n. 
14. the triple Hecate : the ' thrice crowned queen of night ' of As You 
Like It, III. ii. 2, who, under her three names of Phoebe, Diana, and 



72 NOTES TO A MDSUMMER -NIGHT'S DREAM 

Hecate, was respectively the moon goddess in heaven, the \drgin 

huntress-goddess on earth, and goddess of the dark underworld. 
35. create, created. So in 1. 45, ' consecrate ', for ' consecrated ', 
42. 'prodigious, monstrous, portentous (lit. of the nature of a 

•prodigy'). 
46. take his gait, take liis own way. Cp. ' go your gait '. 
63-4. If we have the unmerited luck to escape being hissed, 
68. Give me your hands, i. e. applaud. So ' lend me your ears ', in 

Antony's famous speech {Julius Caesar, lu. ii. 79), for ' listen '. 



A<^<yu^r<rv^ Jl lf^M&^^ 



I ' 1 



HMM^it^i^tfUiMH 



tmts^mililgm 



,^tf-*;v<^?->: y*^ 



m/i^ 



