
THE LIBRARY 

OF 

THE UNIVERSITY 
OF CALIFORNIA 

LOS ANGELES 

GIFT OF 

Professor 
Llewelyn M. Buell 

WITHDRAWN 



THE ARDEN SHAKESPEARE 
GENERAL EDITOR : W. J. CRAIG 



THE TRAGEDY OF OTHELLO 



THE WORKS 

OF 

SHAKESPEARE 



Lhr 



THE TRAGEDY OF OTHELLO 

EDITED BY 

H. C. HART 



METHUEN AND CO. 

36 ESSEX STREET: STRAND 

LONDON 

1903 



SRLF 



CONTENTS 

PACE 

INTRODUCTION ix 

THE TRAGEDY OF OTHELLO, THE MOOR OF VENICE . . i 



INTRODUCTION 

THE best text we have of Othello is that of the Folio of 
1623. On this text the following edition is mainly founded ; 
and it is that of the Globe, Cambridge, and other modern 
and reliable versions. 

We have to consider the following editions of the play. 
The first appearance in print was in Quarto, of the date 
1622, with the following title : 

THE Tragedy of Othello, The Moore of Venice. As 
it hath beene diuerse times acted at the Globe, and at the 
Black Friers, by his Maiesties Seruants. Written by William 
Shakespeare. LONDON, Printed by N. O. for Thomas 
Walkley, and are to be sold at his shop, at the Eagle and 
Child, in Brittans Burffe. I622. 1 

This is the first Quarto, Q i. 

The next appearance of Othello was in the well-known 
first Folio, F I, November 1623. 

In 1630 Richard Hawkins issued a second Quarto of 
Othello, with the same title-page, differing only in the 
vignette, the date, and the words " Printed by A. M. for 
Richard Hawkins, and are to be sold at his shoppe in 
Chancery Lane, neere Sergeants Inne." 

1 There is a vignette of clasped hands grasping a caduceus, flanked by cornu- 
copise, and surmounted by a Pegasus, which does duty again on the title of Lear, 
Quarto i. It appears to be the device of Nicholas Okes. 

ix 



x INTRODUCTION 

This is the second Quarto, Q 2. 

In 1655 another Quarto (Q 3) was " Printed for William 
Leak at the Crown in Fleet Street between the two Temple 
Gates." And in 1 68 1 , a Player's Quarto appeared, reprinted 
in 1687 and 1695. 

The second, third, and fourth Folios were printed in 
1632, 1663, and 1685. 

We may dismiss the texts of the Quartos after the 
second, except as curiosities ; and practically speaking the 
four Folios may be regarded as one text. The third 
Quarto is a worthless reprint of the second. 

The first Quarto appears to have been printed from an 
independent MS., which had been an early acting copy. 
This circumstance is rendered probable by the fact that it 
contains many oaths, expletives, and adjurations which are 
either omitted altogether, or much modified in all the later 
editions. These alterations were probably made in accord- 
ance with the "Act against Swearing" (1606); and would 
tend to prove that the first Quarto was printed from a copy 
of a date prior to 1605 or 1606. Further mention of this 
evidence will be found in the notes at I. i. 4. 

In the interval between the printing of the first and 
second Quartos the Folio appeared, for which Shakespeare's 
friends and fellow-actors John Heming and Henry Condell 
were responsible. The title-page states that the plays 
therein are printed " according to the true originall copies " ; 
and there is a similar statement in their Dedication. 

We are to believe, then, that the play as printed in the 
Folio came from Shakespeare's authorised version, a tran- 
script belonging to the theatre ; and unless the Quarto can 
establish a prior claim, the Folio must be accepted as the 



INTRODUCTION xi 

primary text of Othello. This latter was the form in which 
we may assume that it was known to and authenticated by 
Shakespeare himself. Of the Quarto we have no history 
except that contained in the title-page, and the following 
prejiminary remarks by the publisher : 



"THE STATIONER TO THE READER. 

" To set forth a booke without an Epistle, were like to the 
old Englishe prouerbe, A blew coat without a badge, 1 and 
the Author being dead, I thought it good to take that piece of 
worke upon mee. To commend it, I will not, for that which 
is good, I hope euery man will commend, without intreaty : 
and I am the bolder, because the Author's name is sufficient 
to vent his worke. Thus leauing euery one to the liberty 
of iudge-ment : I haue ventered to print this Play, and 
leaue it to the generall censure. Yours, 

" THOMAS WALKLEY." 

From the study of the texts referred to, we learn the 
following facts : 

(1) The second Quarto is a great improvement upon 

Q i; 

(2) The Folio is better than either ; and 

(3) The reason the second Quarto has improved in so 
many respects upon the first, is from the assistance obtained 
from the text of the intervening Folio. 

1 Compare N. Breton, Wits Trenchmore, 1597 : "Olde ling without mustard 
is like a blew coate without a cognisaunce." They were left off soon after the 
accession of James. " Since Blew Coats were left off, the kissing of the hand is 
the servingman's badge, you shall know him by't" (Sharpham, The Fleire, 
Act ii., 1607). The badge or cognisance was the master's arms in silver fastened 
to the left arm. 



xii INTRODUCTION 

This is a peculiarity with regard to Othello. As a rule, 
the text of the plays in the Folio has been taken from 
the Quarto, where one previously existed. The texts in 
the case of Othello must have been from independent MSS., 
as indeed might have been almost expected from their 
nearly simultaneous appearance. Why the Quarto appeared 
at all may be a question, but the obvious answer is that 
Walkley knew of the intended publication of the Folio, and, 
being the possessor of an Othello MS., snatched the oppor- 
tunity of putting a little money in his purse. 

The superiority of the Folio is easily proved. In the 
first place, it contains about 1 60 lines, undoubtedly genuine, 
omitted in the first Quarto. In most cases these omissions 
are set right by the second Quarto. Again, there are very 
many errors or misprints in the first Quarto which are 
correctly rendered by the Folio. There are, indeed, a cer- 
tain number of important exceptions, where the readings of 
the 1622 Quarto are better than the Folio. These are, 
usually, common to the second Quarto, with the exception 
of a few readings, as Mr. Evans points out in his valuable 
Introduction to the reprint. Examples may be found at 
the words in the present text " toged consuls," I. i. 25; 
"officers of night" I. i. 183; "list to sleepe," II. i. 104; 
" againe to inflame it," II. i. 230; "supervisor? III. iii. 395 ; 
" good faith" IV. iii. 23. To refer to the numerous passages 
where the Folio gives the correct reading, would be merely 
to anticipate the collation set forth in the following pages. 
For this collation I am considerably indebted to the Cam- 
bridge Shakespeare and to Furness' Variorum edition of 
this play. I have, however, gone through the whole care- 
fully with regard to the three principal texts, and made 



INTRODUCTION xiii 

constant use of several of the more important later editions. 
I had, indeed, extended the collation altogether beyond the 
prescribed limits, that is to say beyond what is here pro- 
duced ; but the condensation was simple, and the labour 
expended was all to the good for an intimate knowledge of 
the text. 

The question arises, How came these omissions to be 
made in the first Quarto? Or, on the other hand, were 
the 1 60 odd lines subsequent additions to the original 
text? To arrive at any guess consonant with probability 
we must consider the more important omissions. In the 
first place, it is generally held that Shakespeare did not 
revise his work, and it is therefore more unlikely that the 
passages are additions due to afterthoughts, or improve- 
ments, than that they are either excisions or careless 
omissions in the first Quarto. Internal evidence connected 
with the date argument is of no weight here, since all we 
know of the date of the MS. of the first Quarto is its 
publication ; and that its original version probably was 
prior to 1605 or 1606, but whatever treatment the MS. 
received in the way of alterations from that time to 1622 
may belong to any portion of that period. 

In many cases the omitted lines or passages are clearly 
due to carelessness. This applies especially to dropt words 
or short paragraphs, sometimes to the palpable injury of 
the sense or of the metre. But in other cases the difference 
seems to arise from a set purpose ; either of addition to the 
one text or omission from the other. Take, for example, 
to refer to the last Act first, the lines from " My mistress 
here lies murdered in her bed," V. ii. 183-191. These 
must have been cut out merely to shorten the play. They 



xiv INTRODUCTION 

are of great importance with regard to Emilia's demeanour. 
And it is hardly possible to imagine their being additions. 
The same remark applies, only not quite so forcibly, to the 
preceding lines 149 152, in the " iteration " passage ; and 
to several others. On the other hand, it is hard to conceive 
any reason, even that gross one of abridgment, which would ' 
induce any hand to omit purposely such a passage as the 
lines beginning " Be not afraid, though you do see me 
weapon'd," V. ii. 264270; and these lines are not incap- 
able of being subsequent additions. Nor are they capable 
of being by any hand but Shakespeare's. This applies to 
the beautiful protest of Desdemona beginning " Here I 
kneel," IV. ii. 152165, with equal force; and to the mag- 
nificent passage beginning " Never, lago. Like to the Pontic 
sea," III. iii. 454-461. There never could have been an 
Indian base enough to throw such pearls away intentionally ; 
and their accidental omission seems equally unlikely. It is 
a simple solution to imagine such passages as being possibly 
later insertions ; and if this can be the case, possibly it may 
assist us with regard to one or two passages, such as the 
" new heraldry " metaphor (ill. iv. 47), suggestive of a later 
date. 

The text of Othello, as given to us by the Folio, is, on 
the whole, an excellent text. There is no reason to assert 
in any place that the reading is either certainly corrupt, or 
undoubtedly spurious, as there is in many of Shakespeare's 
other plays. There are assuredly several passages which 
are of exceeding difficulty, and where we can be by no 
means satisfied that we have arrived at the author's mean- 
ing, or in some cases at any certain sense at all. This may 
be because we have still to learn the force of language used 



INTRODUCTION xv 

at that time in a growing state words whose budding 
meaning it is almost impossible to be certain of. They 
may have rendered an obvious sense to Shakespeare, 
and even if he did on any occasion revise his work, it 
does not seem to have ever occurred to him to illuminate 
passages to us obscure since to the writer no doubt they 
presented no such obscurity. This observation is made 
only with reference to the abstruse passages in the present 
play. 

There are a few places where certain commentators 
would appear to vote for excision of a few lines. Some of 
these (they are duly noticed in the notes) are of a revolting 
nature, but I do not agree in the freely expressed opinion 
of these editors that they are not by Shakespeare. Such 
an assertion is entirely unwarrantable. Reference may be 
made to V. i. 33-36; V. ii. 313 et seq. In the scene 
between Desdemona and lago (II. i.), an inferior hand 
seems to me possibly to have lent unwelcome assistance, 
but this is the merest conjecture, and based partly on 
parallels referred to in the notes, which may be accepted by 
others in an opposite direction. 

The later Folios, and in a minor degree the later Quartos, 
are useful when the premier editions afford misprints. They 
often lend us assistance in orthography, or in grammatical 
constructions; but in bare punctuation they usually make 
confusion worse confounded. But it is in the gradual 
modernisation of archaic spelling and certain idiomatic 
forms of speech that the later Folios are of most interest. 
Here they occasionally confirm expressions to which some 
doubt attached. For this reason I have in many cases 
preserved their collation in my notes. This is not the place 



xvi INTRODUCTION 

to deal fully with these topics, which have received ample 
consideration in the preliminary matter to the various re- 
prints of the early texts, and which develop themselves in 
collation. 

In this edition the text is practically that of the Globe, 
keeping the Folio reading rigidly paramount where there 
was left an open question. A very few deviations will be 
found, chiefly in punctuation marks and in division of lines, 
where it appeared to me desirable ; sometimes leaning 
towards the Cambridge Shakespeare reading, sometimes 
towards that of my friend Mr. Craig, the editor of the 
Oxford Shakespeare. 

One or two departures in this text are of sufficient im- 
portance to be mentioned here. At II. iii. 328, 1 read "the 
denotement of her parts and graces," not denotement, and 
herein I am justified by the elder texts. There has been 
an error here in the collation which I hope I have set 
right. 

At III. iii. 1 24 I read " close dilations," following the 
Folios ; while at the stumbling-block " in me defunct " 
(I. iii. 265) the Folio reading "my" is necessary to the 
sense I give the words. 

At IV. ii. 65 I read "I here" with the elder texts, 
not " Ay, there," of modern editions. My chief reason 
for doing so is that I believe the words " thou young 
and rose-lipp'd cherubin " must be addressed to Des- 
demona. 

A couple of other alterations have been suggested, but 
not made; at the beginning of Act III. (line 20) "ye '11 
away," i.e. "ye must away," may be a preferable sugges- 
tion to those hitherto advanced. At present the passage 



INTRODUCTION xvii 

seems to be incorrect. 1 One or two other mild proposed 
invasions had better perhaps be left to slumber in my 
notes. I had intended to place in the Introduction a 
short summary of what appeared the more interesting of 
my notes and explanatory illustrations, but I found they 
were too numerous, and would waste so much space. 
Possibly, too, they will be more mercifully dealt with in 
quiet places. 

The date of the appearance of Othello has been a 
matter of much controversy. It is finally placed at 1604, 
upon an almost unsupported statement of Malone, whose 
accuracy and veracity in such matters are deemed unim- 
peachable. Other circumstances tend to confirm this date, 
while there have not been wanting critics with evidence in 
favour of a date as late as 1 6 1 1 . 

The following are Malone's statements. I quote from 
Evans's Introduction to Quarto I. In a note to Dry- 
den's Grounds of Criticism, edition 1800, p. 258, Malone 
says : " I formerly thought that Othello was one of our 
great dramatick poet's latest compositions, but I now 
know from indisputable evidence that this was not the 
case." Mr. Evans refers here to Athenceum, July 18, 
1885, p. 90. Again, in Boswell's Malone, ii. p. 404, the 
words occur, due to Malone : " We know it [Othello} was 
acted in 1604, and I have therefore placed it in that 
year." 

Whence, then, did Malone obtain this knowledge ? 

1 With regard to this crux another suggestion occurs to me. Cassio has 
already ordered one tune, " Good morrow " by name. Can the words " for I '11 
away " refer to another ? This punning reference to the catchword of a tune was 
in constant use. The popular ballad of this period " Christmas's Lamentation " 
had for its refrain " I '11 away, I '11 away, I '11 away, for here 's no stay. " The 
ballad is in Chappell, and in Collier's Roxborough Ballads. 

b 



xviii INTRODUCTION 

Unfortunately here two things occurred which place us at 
a loss for the full reply to this enquiry. The one was 
Malone's death before he completed his second edition of 
his Shakespeare ; the other was the " wicked and senseless 
forgery " which tampered with a MS. in the Record Office, 
entitled " The Accompte of the Office of the Reuelles of 
this whole Yeres charge, in anno 1604 untell the last of 
October 1605." The entry in that MS., which is believed 
to be a forgery, is copied into Halliwell-Phillip's Outlines of 
the Life of Shakespeare. It was exposed by Sir Thomas 
Hardy. It runs as follows : 

Ano 1605. 

The Plaiers Hallamas Day being the first The Poete wch 

By the kings of November A play in the mayd the plaies 

Matis plaiers Banketinge house at Whithall Shaxberd. 

called the Moor of Venis. 

" Shaxberd " in the original is placed opposite Mesur. for 
Mesur. See "[BOOK XII.] THE REUELLES BOOKE," 
Cunningham's Extracts, Shakespeare Society, 1842, p. 203. 
Now, although this entry is a forgery, inserted into a genuine 
book, whereof several leaves are spurious, it is believed that 
the statements are correct. It appears that Malone, in the 
year 1791, obtained permission from Sir William Musgrave, 
the First Commissioner of the Board of Audit, to make an 
examination of the ancient manuscripts in his office, and 
that he availed himself of the opportunity. This is proved 
by a reference to his Variorum Shakespeare, iii. 361, 363. 
And among the papers found in the portion of his library 
which the Bodleian obtained, is a leaf which is not in his 
handwriting, and which gives no clue to its origin, but which 
contains the following : 



INTRODUCTION xix 

" 1604 and 1605. Edd. Tylney. Hallamas in the 
Banquetting hos. at Whitehall the Moor of Venis perfd. 
by the K.'s players." 

This entry is believed to be a portion of the original 
material from which the forger drew for his entries. Malone 
perhaps obtained the extract from Sir W. Musgrave, and 
afterwards verified it. At anyrate it may be taken for 
granted it is the information upon which Malone made his 
statement "we know Othello was acted in 1604." The 
question is discussed in Halliwell - Phillip's Outlines at 
length. 

There was another forgery relating to the date of Othello. 
In 1836 Collier (New Particulars, p. 58) disputed Malone's 
date, and announced his discovery that Othello was written 
in 1602. He asserted this upon the strength of Accounts 
preserved at Bridgewater House relating to the expenses of 
entertaining Queen Elizabeth at Harefield in that year. 
The whole most interesting subject is fully detailed in 
Furness' invaluable Variorum edition of Othello (pp. 346 
et seg.~). Staunton was the first to reject the evidence 
formally. He says : " The suspicion long entertained that 
the Shakespearian documents in that [Bridgewater] collec- 
tion are modern fabrications having now deepened almost 
into certainty, the extract in question is of no historical 
value." This wretched group of forgeries has been fully 
exposed by Ingleby in his Complete View of the Shak- 
spere Controversy, pp. 261265. 

These mysteries and occurrences with regard to the 
first appearance of Othello seem to have arisen partly out 
of an undoubted peculiarity in the first printed edition of 
the play. In 1622 there were nineteen of Shakespeare's 



xx INTRODUCTION 

plays imprinted, and known only upon the stage. Troilus 
and Cressida and Pericles were published in 1 609. Why, 
then, after a lapse of thirteen or fourteen years, was Othello 
selected for publication, and all the others passed by? 
And this, too, on the eve of the appearance of the Folio. 
These are questions asked by Grant White when endeavour- 
ing to establish a late date for the play. I presume it was 
the mere coincidence of Thomas Walkley owning a MS., 
and the high popularity of Othello. But whatever be the 
cause, it is an accident which gave rise to much opportunity 
for diversifying the text at the time, establishing as it did 
the two parallels of Quarto and Folio texts on different 
lines ; and to much fabrication of dates, as we see, hereafter. 
The argument in favour of a late date is based upon 
the " new heraldry " passage (ill. iv. 46, 47), and was 
advanced by Warburton. See note to passage. The new 
heraldry supposed to be referred to here was the order of 
baronets created in i6ii,and granted the "bloody hand 
of Ulster" for their arms in 1612. Malone at first believed 
in this, but rejected the date on account of the proof he 
obtained subsequently of the 1 604 date. He refers also to 
a passage (quoted in my note) from Sir William Cornwallis, 
which cannot refer to the baronetcy creation, and is very 
similar to Shakespeare's words ; but it does not contain the 
gist of the allusion " new heraldry." Any other evidence 
of a later date is unimportant. The above passage, I am 
inclined to believe, is an insertion of a later date, and does 
bear the reference attributed to it. But I am not in the 
least confident about it. In my note I adduce earlier 
parallels for the " hands and hearts " antithesis, which 
appears to have been a form of speech built upon a saying 



INTRODUCTION xxi 

of Burleigh to Queen Elizabeth. It occurs in both Greene 
and Peel. But to my mind it is the words " new heraldry " 
that have to be dealt with. " Insertions " are extremely 
obnoxious things to support or admit, and it would be 
much preferable to reject the idea entirely. But why 
" new " ? The instances I quote prove that the sentiment 
was in vogue about I 5 90, or earlier ; but these words seem 
to relate to an added meaning which has to be explained. 

It will be seen that there is nothing reliable in support 
of the 1602 date of performance. Nevertheless that may 
well be correct, and may yet be established. It seems to be 
a likely date for the composition of the play, since several 
thoughts in Othello appear to be taken from Holland's 
translation of Pliny's Natural History \ which appeared in 
1 60 1. Malone mentioned this with regard to the Pontick 
sea allusion in III. iii. 455 ; and a further illustration from 
Pliny, which I quote, will strengthen the parallel. But 
there are other passages which point quite as plainly to 
this source, and, taking them as a total, their evidence 
seems to me irrefutable. I refer to parallels in the notes of 
this edition quoted at Anthropophagi, and men whose heads, 
etc., I. iii. 144; at to! en out, III. iii. 297; at eclipse of 
sun and moon, V. ii. 98, 99; at chrysolite, V. ii. 143; at 
Drop tears as fast as the Arabian trees Their medicinal gum, 
V. ii. 348, 349 ; and in several other passages. I have 
met no better parallels to any of these passages in any 
writer of an earlier date than Othello, and to most of them 
none at all. Critics may reject this one or that one, but 
as a general rule they may not be gainsaid. Indeed 
outside Plutarch's (North's edition) Lives, it would be 
difficult to produce an author so definitely honoured by 



xxii INTRODUCTION 

Shakespeare's recognition as Philemon Holland in this 
play. 

Judged by metrical tests, Othello belongs to this period 
of the dramatist's writings. An excellent analysis of these 
will be found in Macmillan's Introduction to his edition of 
this play, based upon Fleay's calculations (New Sh. Soc., 
1874), and resolved into percentages. Macmillan gives 
a wholesome caveat against " The Metrical Test pressed 
too far." In the percentage of double-endings in blank 
verse Othello is credited with 24.2 ; Macbeth^ 24.5 ; and 
Hamlet, 24. This agrees closely with the assigned date. 
This test is perhaps the only one worth the labour which 
has been expended upon them, as affording anything like 
reliable evidence. The test of the sense of the line con- 
tinued into the next has yielded assistance. The pro- 
portion of these also grows greater in Shakespeare's later 
plays. By this test Fleay arrived at the date 1605 for 
Othello. This is a subject upon which such different 
opinions are entertained, that it is better to refer the reader 
to the Discussion on it in the Transactions of the New 
Sh. Soc. above referred to. 

I have already mentioned an important testimony with 
regard to the date, that of the omission of many oaths in 
editions printed presumably from MSS. of a later date than 
that from which the first Quarto was printed which con- 
tains these expressions. Their admission and subsequent 
omission must be attributed to the Act passed to restrain 
the Abuses of Players in 1605-1606. 

With regard to the historical period in which the 
action of the play is placed, Reed says : " Selymus the 
Second formed his design against Cyprus in 15 69, and 



INTRODUCTION xxiii 

took it in 15/1. This was the only attempt the Turks 
ever made upon that island after it came into the hands 
of the Venetians (which was in the year 1473), wherefore 
the time must fall in with some part of that interval. We 
learn from the play that there was a junction of the 
Turkish fleet at Rhodes, in order for the invasion of Cyprus, 
that it first came sailing to Cyprus, then went to Rhodes, 
there met another squadron, and then resumed its way to 
Cyprus. These are real historical facts which happened 
when Mustapha, Selymus's general, attacked Cyprus in 
May 1570, which therefore is the true period of this 
performance. See Knolles's History of the Turks, pp. 838, 
846, 867." Knolles tells us that " Neere unto the haven 
[Famagusta] standeth an old castle, with four towers after 
the ancient manner of building" (Malone). This is the 
castle of the play. 

I have let Reed's note remain. But it does not release 
the passage at I. iii. 2030 from an historical inconsistency, 
if we accept Reed's explanation. Malone pointed out that 
Rhodes had been taken by the Turks in the famous siege of 
1522. For a full account of the fall of Rhodes in 1522, 
and of Cyprus in 1572,866 Hakluyt, vol. ii. (1599). At 
p. 182 (reprint 1809) of "The losse of Rhodes" is a 
passage showing that demonstrations against Rhodes had 
become a byword amongst the Turks, in connection with 
an attack upon Cyprus, before the loss of either, " for the 
spies . . . brought tidings to the castle of St. Peter and to 
Rhodes, of all that was sayd and done in Turkic. Never- 
thelesse, the sayd lord gaue no great credence to all that 
was brought and told, because that many yeeres before, the 
predecessors of the great Turke had made great armies : 



xxiv INTRODUCTION 

and alway it was sayd that they went to Rhodes, the which 
came to none effect. And it was holden for a mocke and a 
by-word in many places, that the Turke would goe to besiege 
Rhodes. And for this reason doubt was had of this last 
armie, and some thought that it should have gone into 
Cyprus or to Cataro, a land of the lordship of Venice." 

The above passage appears to weaken Reed's historical 
facts, or at least the force of them, and I am inclined to regard 
them as mere coincidences with the action of the play. We 
seem to be bound to take a period for the story prior to the 
fall of Rhodes, one of those periods " many yeeres before " 
mentioned by the " Reuerend Lord Thomas Dockwra," 
Prior of Jerusalem, in the year 1524, the author of the 
above account. 

The story of Othello is taken from The Hecatomithii of 
Giraldi Cinthio, where it forms the seventh of the Third 
Decade. It was originally published at Monteregale, in 
Sicily, in 1565, and frequently reprinted in Italy, but not 
^translated to English till 1795 by W. Parr. Farmer says he 
saw an unfaithful translation by Gabriel Chappuys, Paris, 
1 5 84, which has been reprinted by Victor Hugo. A 
Spanish edition appeared in 1590 (Ency. Brit.'}. 

The tale is a poor one, and although supplying Shake- 
speare with the outlines of his plot, he departs widely from 
the original. None of the characters in it are named, 
except Disdemona, a virtuous lady of marvellous beauty 
(una virtuosa Donna, di maravigliosa bellezzd). 

The original story in full, with Parr's translation, is 
given in the Shakespeare Library. Furness gives it with a 
translation by J. E. Taylor, 1855. 

The tale in Cinthio, though belonging to the period in 



INTRODUCTION xxv 

which the Venetians occupied Cyprus (1473-1572), makes 
no reference to the Turkish attack. The following is a 
condensed version. 

There lived at Venice a valiant Moor (un Moro molto 
valoroso), who was held in great esteem for his services 
and his military talent by the republic. A virtuous lady 
of marvellous beauty, named Desdemona, fell in love with 
him, moved thereto by his valour, not by feminine passion 
(appetito donnescd). The Moor returned her love, and in 
spite of her parents' opposition, who wished her to take 
another husband, she married him, and they lived in the 
greatest happiness. It occurred that the Venetian signiors 
(i Signori Venetiani) resolved to appoint the Moor to the 
command of Cyprus, a great honour, which, however, to 
his wife's grief and surprise, he seemed to be troubled at. 
I On questioning him he told her that his enjoyment of 
"the rank conferred upon him was rendered insupportable 
by the reflection that he should be separated from her, 
never doubting that Desdemona would be loath to under- l 
take the risks and fatigues of the journey. Upon this 
she rallied him for distressing himself, saying that where 
he went she would go with him, were it through fire 
instead of water, so entirely was she devoted to him ; 
and she bade him prepare for her voyage with all the 
dignity suitable to the occasion. Overjoyed at this, the 
Moor made the arrangements, and embarked with his wife 
and his troops on board ship, arriving at Cyprus with a 
perfectly tranquil sea. Amongst his troops he had an 
ensign (un Alfierd), a man of extreme personal attractions, *-- 
but utterly depraved. The Moor's simplicity was quite 
imposed on by this man, to whom he was much attached. 



xxvi INTRODUCTION 

The ensign took also his wife, a handsome and honest 
woman (la quale era bella, et honesta giovane)> who was 
greatly beloved by Desdemona. There was also a captain 
(un Capo di squadrd}, who was very dear to the Moor, and 
to whom Desdemona was very kind, knowing her husband's 
regard for him. 

Now this wicked ensign became desperately enamoured 
of Desdemona, but he soon perceived his secret suit was 
useless, and he dared not avow it openly. He persuaded 
himself this was because she loved the captain, and he 
determined to get rid of him. Moreover, his love for her 
became the bitterest hate, and he resolved to destroy her 
husband's love for her. He thought over many plans, all 
detestable ; but a chance soon arrived. The captain got 
into disgrace for a brawl, and was degraded from his rank. 
Desdemona was very sorry for him, and importuned the 
Moor to restore him, so that he told the wicked ensign he 
feared he must restore the captain. The ensign seized the 
chance, and insinuated that his wife had good reason to be 
kind to him, and, by poisoning the Moor's mind, succeeded 
in causing him to quarrel with his wife when she again 
interceded on behalf of the cashiered officer. He again 
consulted the ensign, in great trouble, and the latter told 
him more plainly than before, and after feigning great 
reluctance, and that he must in duty tell, and so forth, that 
her chief pleasure was with the captain, since she had taken 
an aversion to her husband's blackness (e venuta anoia questa 
vostra nerezzd], 

Then the Moor, although believing him, threatened 
him furiously for this slander, and told him it would be 
better for him to be born without a tongue, unless he made 



INTRODUCTION xxvii 

him an eye-witness of what he told him. And the ensign 
said he looked for that reward for his faithful offices 
(amorevole ufficio}, that he was sorry he spoke, and that the 
captain himself had boasted of his happiness. 

The ensign now, knowing Desdemona's chastity, saw 
how difficult it would be to satisfy the Moor, while the 
latter waited in misery for the proof he was promised. He 
determined at last to steal a certain handkerchief (pannicello 
di naso) the Moor had given her. It was most skilfully 
worked in the Moorish fashion (lavorato alia moresca 
sottillissamente), and equally precious to both of them. 
With this he proposed to lay a snare, and while Desdemona 
was playing one day with his little daughter (a child of 
three) in his house, to whom she was devoted, he stole it 
from her girdle so cleverly, for she carried it with her, 
that she never missed it. When she did miss it a few 
days later she was much alarmed. Meanwhile the crafty 
scoundrel stole into the captain's bedroom, and left the 
handkerchief at the head of his bed, where he found it the 
next morning. Not able to imagine how it got there, and 
knowing it was Desdemona's, he thought it best to give it 
to her, and as soon as the Moor left his house he went to the 
back door and knocked. Fate helped the ensign, for at that 
instant the Moor returned, and, hearing the knock, he called 
out in a rage, " Who knocks ? " The captain fled without 
answering, and the Moor asked Desdemona, who said she 
did not know, which put the Moor into a fury he restrained 
with difficulty. He told the ensign what had occurred, who 
was greatly elated at this lucky accident. He told the 
Moor that, if he concealed himself, he would so place him 
that he would hear and see him in conversation with the 



xxviii INTRODUCTION 

captain while he asked him all about this affair, as the 
Moor requested. This was arranged, and the Moor was 

'- deceived by the various movements the ensign made with 
his head and his hands, and by his laughter, though he and 
the captain were talking of every other thing rather than 
his wife. As soon as they parted, the ensign, with great 
reluctance, said the captain told him he visited his wife 
whenever the Moor was away, and that, the last time, she 
presented him with the handkerchief he had given her at 
their marriage. When the Moor found that Desdemona 
could not produce the handkerchief, he no longer doubted 

- her guilt, and only considered how he could put both his 
wife and the captain to death without incurring the blame. 
He became very morose and strange to his wife, to her 
great distress, nor would he satisfy her, though she ques- 
tioned him again and again. She even questioned the 
ensign's wife, weeping bitterly the while, and knowing the 
ensign was in her husband's confidence. She said she 
feared she would be a warning to Italian ladies not to 
marry against their parents' wishes, and not to marry those 
whom Nature and Heaven and manner of life estranged 
from them. But the ensign's wife would tell her nothing, 

^ although she knew the whole truth. Her husband had 
indeed attempted to make use of her to kill Desdemona, 
but she would not consent. Fearing her husband, she 
would not disclose a single thing (il tutto sapeva . . . 
temendo del Marito, non ardiva di dirle cosa alcund). She 
merely warned her to be careful not to make her husband 
suspicious. 

i! The Moor now wanted finally to see the handkerchief 
in the possession of the captain. It so happened the latter 



INTRODUCTION xxix 

had a wife at home who worked beautifully in embroidery, 
and who on seeing the handkerchief determined to work 
one like it before it was returned. As she did so at her 
window the ensign points her out to the Moor, who was 
quite convinced now that his most chaste wife was an 
adulteress. 

The Moor promising a large reward (for the captain 
was a brave and skilful man) persuaded the ensign to 
undertake to kill them both. He waylaid the captain on 
his way to visit a courtesan one dark night, and cut off his 
right leg with a blow of his sword. However, the captain 
kept on his defence, and raising the cry of " Murder," 
some soldiers came up, upon which the ensign fled, but 
returned again with the crowd attracted by the noise. He 
pretended to sympathise with the captain as though he had "" 
been a brother, believing he would die. 

On the following morning the kind-hearted Desdemona 
was greatly grieved to hear of this occurrence, which in- 
flamed the Moor so much that he consulted with the 
ensign how she was to be killed forthwith. After re- 
volving many plans, they agreed to the ensign's, which 
was to beat her to death with a stocking full of sand, so 
that the body would show no violence. They were then 
to pull down a portion of the ceiling (which was old), and 
say it had killed her. For this purpose the ensign 
was concealed in a closet opening into the chamber. On 
his making a noise there Desdemona rose, at her husband's 
bidding, to see what it was, whereupon the ensign struck 
her to the ground. And the Moor, instead of responding 
to her call for help, reviled her as the wickedest of women, 
who had met with her just reward for placing horns upon V 



xxx INTRODUCTION 

her husband's head (coma in capo}. Another blow given 
by the ensign completed the murder. They then laid 
her on the bed, and, wounding her on the head, pulled 
down part of the ceiling, calling aloud for help, and that 
the house was falling. Great was the grief of the neigh- 
bours when they found Desdemona lying dead beneath a 
rafter. 

Subsequently the Moor became almost mad with grief, 
searching about the house for Desdemona. Then he con- 
ceived the greatest hatred for the ensign, who was the 
cause of her loss, and longed to kill him, fearing only the y 
laws of Venice. But by degrading him from his rank, 
there arose such hatred between them that the ensign 
determined to injure the Moor. He sought out the captain, 
who still lived, and inflamed him to have revenge, stating 
that it was the Moor who had sought to kill him on 
account of jealousy ; and for that he had murdered her, 
saying the roof fell in. Upon this the captain accused the 
Moor to the State on both charges, and called the ensign to 
witness, who supported him, declaring the Moor had told 
him everything. When the Venetian Signioria heard of 
these crimes committed by a barbarian (usata dal Barbara) 
they caused him to be brought pinioned from Cyprus to 
Venice ; but no torture, of which they tried many sorts, > 
would make him confess. He therefore escaped death, 
but was sentenced to banishment, in which he was eventually 
killed by his wife's relations. The ensign, continuing in 
his villanies, died a miserable death in prison from internal 
injuries received while being tortured in connection with 
some further crimes. Thus was divine vengeance executed 
upon the murderers of the innocent Desdemona ; and these 



INTRODUCTION xxxi 

events were related in full by the ensign's wife, after his 
death, for she was privy to them all. [With reference to 
the Moor's blackness (nerezza), see note at " sooty bosom," 
I. ii. 70.] 

To some readers it will seem likely that Shakespeare 
had some other or fuller version of the story than the 
above as his material. The absence of any of his names 
except Desdemona is an argument in support of this. 
One or two positive pieces of evidence, such as Cassio's 
commercial pursuits (I. i.) and the names " Sagittary " and 
" Marcus Luccicos " (I. iii.), denoting some important per- 
sonage connected with the historical events, together with 
the general trend of the latter, suggest a foundation un- 
known to us. 

But the play on the whole, if we except the start and 
the conclusion, agrees in much detail with the story. It is 
unnecessary to call attention to the obvious discrepancies. 
It may seem a matter of surprise that two highly dramatic 
incidents were not made use of. I refer to the purloining of 
the handkerchief by the little girl's unintentional assistance ; 
and to the effective scene where the ensign leads the Moor 
past the captain's window to enable him to see the wife of 
the latter working at the " taking out " of the Moorish 
embroidery. The rest of the story is a bare narration of 
facts of no power whatever. All the characterisation and 
delineation of intense passion ; all the subtle analysis of 
motives, and portrayal of human nature at its very best and 
at its very worst, belong to the master hand. 

We have seen that the name Desdemona is the only 
one which Shakespeare takes from Cinthio's tale. This name 
is probably derived from Juo-Sat'/zwi^that is, the " unfortunate." 



xxxii INTRODUCTION 

The name Othello is found, Steevens says, in Reynolds's 
God's Revenge against Adultery, where the name I ago also 
occurs. Both the names occur likewise in the History of 
Euordanus, 1605. But both these works are of later date 
than Othello. 

lago is the Italian Jacob (or James), which means the 
supplanter, another form of lachimo, whose disposition in 
Cymbeline is in some respects a mild reflex of lago's. 
Bardsley says : " It would almost seem as if Shakespeare 
had had the original meaning of Jacob in his mind when he 
took its Italian derivations for his two greatest villains, 
lago, who is regarded as a masterpiece of intellectual 
wickedness, and lachimo, whose cruel stratagem is one of 
the stories common to the whole world, from the Highlands 
to Mount Etna " (History of Christian Names, i. p. 5 8). 

Emilia was a familiar name since the days of Chaucer 
and Boccaccio's Teseide, when it was adopted all over 
Europe. 

The name lago occurs in Holinshed, Book III., ed. 
1578, p. 14, as Mr. Craig has informed me: " I Ago \sic\ 
or lago . . . was made governour of Brytayne, in the next 
yere of the worlde, iiii. M.v.Clxx." The name Jago occurs 
as a Staffordshire name in Fuller's Worthies. It is not 
uncommon. 

lago is the name of a nonentity in Dekker's Match 
Mee in London, "an old play in 1625 "; and in Swetnam, 
the Woman-hater (1620), lago is an honourable nobleman 
of Sicilia. 

The names of the characters in Shakespeare's plays are 
rarely of real importance. He made his character, and 
christened him as fancy suggested. In this he differed 



INTRODUCTION xxxiii 

from his greatest contemporary Ben Jonson, whose names 
are constantly of carefully imposed significance. The name 
of Cassio may be, however, of import. See notes, I. i. 

19-31. 

A great deal has been written concerning the duration 

of time necessary for the action of the play. Briefly speak- 
ing, we are confronted with " two times " which do not in 
the least degree harmonise. In the first place, the events of 
the play carry us quickly along, so that, allowing whatever 
we please for the journey to Cyprus, the subsequent occur- 
rences comprise themselves into a brief space of from 
Saturday to Sunday. The beginning of III. iii. informs us 
that they all arrived in Cyprus on Saturday, if we are to 
take the words " to-morrow night or Tuesday morn " 
literally, since there has already been the morning after 
their arrival when (ill. i.) Cassio provided the music. 
After that there seems little room for a gap. Othello 
goes at once in all probability to inquire from his wife 
about the handkerchief. Bianca says (iv. i.) she received 
it " even now." Lodovico is invited to supper that night, 
in the same scene, and a little later in the next scene 
the supper takes place, and at its close Othello accom- 
panies Lodovico to his lodgings, after sending Desdemona 
to bed, returning to her forthwith. There is therefore no 
room for any lapse of time beyond these two days, or 
parts of days, from the time when Othello married 
Desdemona privately (he starts for Cyprus " that very 
night," I. iii. 279), except that which the voyage occupied, 
a distance of thirteen or fourteen hundred miles, and 
sufficient to account for the space of about a week. 

On the other hand, there are numerous places in the 
c 



xxxiv INTRODUCTION 

play where we are compelled to feel that a long time is 
being made use of. Of the more important cases, that 
which brings Lodovico to Cyprus, in order to recall Othello 
and substitute Cassio in his place, almost as soon as they 
arrived, is the most glaring; for we must imagine an 
interval sufficient for the Council at Venice to have heard 
from him, and considered over such an important matter 
sufficiently, ere sending to depose him. Another notice- 
able point (they are numerously alluded to in my notes) 
lies in the beginning of IV. ii. This cross-examination of 
Emilia implies a residence of some days, a week or two 
at least, in Cyprus. Roderigo's complaint of his great ex- 
penditure, and his being " every day " put off, in the same 
scene, forces the same feeling upon us. And a dozen 
other passages may easily be referred to, many of them 
seeming to require not only a considerable period of 
married life between Desdemona and Othello, but also 
a continued sojourn at Cyprus. These things are held by 
critics to be a great difficulty, to violate the laws of unity 
of time, and to need explanation. Professor Wilson 
(" Christopher North ") has treated the subject exhaus- 
tively and at great length, dialoguewise, in BlackivoocFs 
Magazine (1850). This review is given by Furness, and 
a general summary of the conclusions arrived at. The 
theory is known as the " Two Times " theory ; " the Short 
Time for maintaining the tension of the passion, the Long 
for a thousand general needs." The theory is very ingeni- 
ous, but far too long to be more than barely referred to 
here. It afforded opportunities for a most interesting 
disquisition on the events of the play, and, however far it 
carries or fails to carry conviction, it is an oasis in the arid 



INTRODUCTION xxxv 

waste of criticism. Furness believes in it. Daniel rejects 
it. Fleay offered another theory. Probably Shakespeare 
troubled himself little about the question. It satisfied him 
that he produced a work unequalled in power whether for 
the stage or the study. How many careful readers do 
actually find the time question a stumbling-block, unless 
they are called upon to worry over it? And to what 
extent does it produce any incongruity in the action ? Do 
not the intervals, to be made use of as our fancy pleases, 
from Scene to Scene, and from Act to Act, smooth over and 
polish out of existence all these imaginary or exaggerated 
structural difficulties ? Perhaps not always, but in this 
play it seems to me they do. I cannot bring myself to 
attach the apparently requisite importance to this depart- 
ment of Othello criticism ; or to regard it indeed as much 
more than an intricate and highly instructive intellectual 
puzzle, to which there is probably no satisfactory solution. 
The fact seems to be that Shakespeare follows, on the one 
hand, the time occupied by the telling of the original story 
to the end, where he closes up its dilated conclusions into 
one grand climax, entirely his own conception. On the 
other hand, it is needful that these be compressed into a 
" more continuate time," for the purposes of action ; a neces- 
sity that none had better practical dramatic knowledge to 
enable him to carry out than Shakespeare. 

The duration of this tale does not need such great 
breaches of the unities, as is found in some plays, for 
example, in the case of the Winter's Tale, and these are 
not therefore placed prominently before us, or explained 
away by any of the devices adopted in such emergencies. 
He therefore lets the story fit itself into the time of action, 



xxxvi INTRODUCTION 

seeing that its doing so involved no material incon- 
gruity. 

Othello stands in the front rank of Shakespeare's plays. 
With the three tragedies, Lear, Hamlet, and Macbeth, the 
highest pitch of greatness in dramatic art is reached, and 
there are not wanting eminent critics who place Othello 
at the very apex of this glorious pinnacle. 

A mass of criticism and eulogy has arisen around 
Othello. Some of it is excellent, and from that down to 
puerility and odiousness (Rymer) we get it in varied shades. 
Furness's Variorum edition is here of the utmost help, 
enabling us to contrast the conclusions and weigh the 
opinions of many minds. Into these I have no intention 
to enter in any detail. Space alone is a sufficient deterrent. 
Some, of especial merit, must, however, be placed before the 
reader ; and if this part of this Introduction seems to be of 
unsuitable brevity, I would call attention to the various 
passages in my notes, where, as the action moves onward, 
I have done more than enter into purely verbal criticism 
and explanation, but have called attention to the develop- 
ments and situations ; sometimes venturing to comment 
upon their excellences, or analyse the motives and feelings 
of the actors. 

Dr. Johnson says of Othello : " The beauties of this play 
impress themselves so strongly upon the attention of the 
reader, that they can draw no aid from critical illustration. 
The fiery openness of Othello, magnanimous, artless and 
credulous, boundless in his confidence, ardent in his affec- 
tion, inflexible in his resolution, and obdurate in his 
revenge ; the cool malignity of lago, silent in his resent- 
ment, subtle in his designs, and studious at once of his 



INTRODUCTION xxxvii 

interest and his vengeance ; the soft simplicity of Desde- 
mona, confident of merit, and conscious of innocence, her 
artless perseverance in her suit, and her slowness to 
suspect that she can be suspected, are such proofs of 
Shakespeare's skill in human nature as I suppose it is in 
vain to seek in any modern writer. 

" The gradual progress which I ago makes in the Moor's 
conviction, and the circumstances which he employs to 
enflame him, are so artfully natural that, though it will not 
perhaps be said of him [Othello] as he says of himself, that 
he is ' a man not easily jealous,' yet we cannot but pity 
him, when at last we find him ' perplexed in the extreme ' 
. . . the virtue of Emilia is such as we often find, worn 
loosely but not cast off, easy to commit small crimes, but 
quickened and alarmed at atrocious villanies . . . Had the 
scene opened in Cyprus, and the preceding incidents been 
occasionally related, there had been little wanting to a 
drama of the most exact and scrupulous regularity." 

At these last words Coleridge has some remarks to 
make upon the " unities." He finds occasion to make 
./-'exception to the " unity of action " (the other two being 
" place" and "time") in noteworthy language. He says it 
" would perhaps have been as appropriately, as well as 
more intelligibly, entitled the unity of interest. With this 
last the present question has no immediate concern ; in 
fact, its conjunction with the former two is a mere delusion 
of words. It is not properly a rule, but in itself the great 
end, not only of the drama, but of the epic poem, the lyric 
ode, of all poetry." 

Mrs. Jameson in her Characteristics of Women wrote : 
" The character of Hermione is addressed more to the 



xxxviii INTRODUCTION 

imagination, that of Desdemona to the feelings. All 
that can render sorrow majestic is gathered round Hermi- 
one; all that can render misery heart-breaking is assem- 
bled around Desdemona . . . the injured and defenceless 
innocence of Desdemona so wrings the soul ' that all for 
pity we could die.' . . . The character of Othello is 
perhaps the most greatly drawn, the most heroic of any of 
Shakespeare's actors ; but it is perhaps that one also of 
which his reader last acquires the intelligence. . . . Emilia 
in this play is a perfect portrait from common life, a 
masterpiece in the Flemish style ; and though not 
necessary as a contrast, it cannot be but that the thorough 
vulgarity, the loose principles of this plebeian woman, 
united to a high degree of spirit, energetic feeling, strong 
sense, and low cunning, serve to place in bright relief the 
exquisite refinement, etc., of Desdemona." 

Maginn endeavours to defend lago. He says : " lago 
had been affronted in the tenderest point. He felt that he 
had strong claims on the office of lieutenant. . . . When he 
first conceived his hatred against Othello he had no notion 
that it would be pushed to such dire extremity." Maginn 
says also : " lago is the sole examplar of studied personal 
revenge in the plays." I think Maginn is lago's sole 
champion. 

Of all the commentators who have dealt at length with 
Othello, none gives to me such pleasure as William Hazlitt. 
After a few cogent and original remarks about tragedy in 
general, he says (I quote from Bohn's edition, 1880): 
" It \Othello\ excites our sympathy to an extraordinary 
degree. The moral it conveys has a closer application to 
the concerns of human life than that of almost any other 



INTRODUCTION xxxix 

of Shakespear[.$7<:]'s plays. It comes directly home to the 
bosoms and passions of men. The pathos in Lear is 
indeed more dreadful and overpowering ; but it is less 
natural, and less of everyday's occurrence. We have not 
the same degree of sympathy with the passions described 
in Macbeth. The interest in Hamlet is more remote and 
reflex. That of Othello is at once equally profound and 
affecting . . . 

" The movement of passion in Othello is exceedingly dif- 
ferent from that of Macbeth. In Macbeth there is a violent 
struggle between opposite feelings, between ambition and 
the stings of conscience, almost from first to last : in Othello 
the doubtful conflict between contrary passions, though 
dreadful, continues only for a short time, and the chief 
interest is excited by the alternate ascendency of different 
passions, by the entire and unforeseen change from the 
fondest love and the most unbounded confidence to the 
tortures of jealousy and the madness of hatred. . . . The 
nature of the Moor is noble, confiding, tender, and generous ; 
but his blood is of the most inflammable kind. . . . It is in 
working his noble nature up to this extremity through 
rapid but gradual transitions . . . that Shakespeare has 
shown the mastery of his genius and of his power over the 
human heart. The third Act of Othello is his finest display, 
not of knowledge or passion separately, but of the two com- 
bined, of the knowledge of character with the expression of 
passion, of consummate art in the keeping up of appearances 
with the profound workings of nature, and the convulsive 
movements of uncontrollable agony, of the power of in- 
flicting torture and of suffering it. ... If anything could 
add to the force of our sympathy with Othello, or compas- 



xl INTRODUCTION 

sion for his fate, it would be the frankness and generosity 
of his nature, which so little deserve it. ... The character 
of lago is one of the supererogations of Shakespeare's 
genius. Some persons, more nice than wise, have thought 
this whole character unnatural, because his villainy is with- 
out a sufficient motive. Shakespeare, who was as good a 
philosopher as he was a poet, thought otherwise. He knew 
that the love of power, which is another name for the love 
of mischief, is natural to man." The whole essay is excel- 
lent, and should be read in full. Hazlitt selects passages 
from the play to illustrate his expositions as he goes along. 
Some critics place Othello first, if comparison be either 
desirable or possible, amongst Shakespeare's plays. Mac- 
beth is regarded (or was) as the most successful as an 
acting play. Dowden places Lear as his " greatest single 
achievement." Craig is inclined to place Othello above Lear. 
Goethe has been quoted as regarding Hamlet as the " finest 
manifestation of Shakespeare's genius " (Macmillan). Cole- 
ridge considers Othello displays " the whole mature powers of 
the author's mind in admirable equilibrium." While Mac- 
aulay makes the emphatic statement that " Othello is, 
perhaps, the greatest work in the world " (Essay on Dante], 
Whatever the verdict be, nothing has ever surpassed it in 
tragedy. Whether we consider the many exquisite beauties 
of poetic diction continually recurring, the perfect skill with 
which the situations and incidents are contrived, or the 
power of the author to lead us by the hand into scenes of 
the most harrowing mental suffering, of the most pitifully 
moving sorrow, and then rack us with poignant regrets 
and heartfelt sympathy none the less moving because 
hopeless none the less real because fictitious, in which- 



INTRODUCTION xli 

ever of these moods we arise from a study of Othello^ we 
feel that perfection has been attained. The beauty and 
skill are unequalled ; the strain of interest has reached its 
utmost limit. 

Why should we be made to suffer thus ? Is it good 
for us ? Yes, because the one result obviously is that, 
as Dowden says, " it is I ago whose whole existence has 
been most blind, purposeless, and miserable a struggle 
against the virtuous powers of the world by which he 
stands convicted and condemned." Othello dies " upon a 
kiss." He perceives his calamitous error. He recognises 
Desdemona pure and loyal as she was. 

To my thinking Othello is the most perfect play that 
Shakespeare wrote. The central interests are more absorb- 
ing and continuously in evidence than elsewhere. We are 
not asked to fritter away our sorrows on any minor griefs. 
Cassio's leg is nothing. A tempest hardly arouses our 
interest. Never for a fraction of a scene do we lose 
sight of the point at issue will this thorough-paced 
villain succeed in his outrageous plots ? We sorrow for 
Desdemona, and we suffer with Othello. We are horrified, 
while we marvel, at lago's malignant skill ; and all the 
while we feel that one purpose travels through the pages 
and will have its way, and that purpose is revenge, lago's 
baseless but self-satisfying vengeance. As ambition is 
the keynote of Macbeth, ingratitude of Lear, intellect 
strained to insanity of Hamlet, so the guiding principle 
here is revenge. lago is indeed an embodied vengeance. 
All the players are his puppets. Other villains are sus- 
pected or watched. lago has the complete confidence of 
everyone from start to finish. He is always " honest 



xlii INTRODUCTION 

lago " to everybody. Roderigo needs a touch of the 
whip now and then, but that is a device to show lago's 
skill in doing it. In other plays the characters, as it were, 
unfold one another. lago unfolds them all, including him- 
self. If he had not been condescending enough to take us 
into his confidence, what should we know of him ? Nothing. 
No one gets to the bottom of him except Fate, and that 
not till all his plans have succeeded ; for his personal success, 
his captainship, and his suggestions of a fancy for Desde- 
mona are mere " nifles and trifles " alongside of his revenge 
and his glory in the skill of it. When he has succeeded he 
closes his mouth. Probably he died quite happily in his 
tortures. 

A study of lago's soliloquies is of much interest. It 
is a device that Shakespeare has used more powerfully 
in Othello perhaps than elsewhere. I mean his scene- 
ending soliloquies (like Ford's in Merry Wives), which 
develop the plot. lago in this respect dominates the 
actions as much as Prospero does (but how differently !) 
in The Tempest. lago is not thrasonical. His purpose is 
not loud but deep. It is no part of his " compliment extern," 
and his mocking nature is as proof against emotion as it is 
against the stings of conscience, or as Cassio's coat was 
against Roderigo's sword. He joins his wits to his purpose, 
and the former interest him more than the latter stirs him. 

Two scenes there are more or less independent of lago. 
One of these, the third in the first Act, down to line 300, 
ought, in my opinion, to be a separate scene, letting the 
conversation between lago and Roderigo form the fourth 
in the Act. Neither have spoken before, and the rest of 
the characters leave the stage. The previous part of that 



INTRODUCTION xliii 

scene, between Othello and the senators, is Othello's own 
proud and unbiassed glory of the whole play. In the bed- 
chamber scene, it is all lago's handicraft ; it is there, and 
in the preamble to it at the end of the previous Act (a part 
of the same scene) where Emilia assists to undress her 
mistress, it is there that Desdemona most fully occupies 
our undivided attention. We love her there entirely for 
her own sake, and know her apart from the actions and 
reports of others. But lago is looking over our shoulders. 

A few words with regard to Othello before the world 
of Shakespeare's time and soon afterwards, and I have done. 
The earliest known reference to the play is in the journal of 
the visit of Prince Lewis of Wirtemberg to England in 1610, 
written by his secretary Wurmsser, where the following 
entry occurs : 

" Lundi, 30 [April, 1610] S. E[minence]. Alia au 
Globe, lieu ordinaire ou Ton Joue les Commedies, y fut 
represente 1'histoire du More de Venise." 

In a folio MS. in Huth's library (pp. 99, 100) there is 
an elegy printed by Collier, Annals of the Stage, i. 430, 
and verified by Ingleby and Furnivall. This elegy is 
entitled, " A funerall elegie on ye Death of the famous 
Actor Richard Burbedg, who dyed on Saturday in Lent the 
13 March, 1618." It contains these lines: "hee's gone 
& w th him what A world are dead, which he reuiu'd to be 
reuiued soe, no more young Hamlett, ould Heironymoe, Kind 
Leer, the Greued Moore, and more beside, that liu'd in him." 

There are not many more references earlier than the 
revival of the theatres after the Civil War times. These re- 
ferences are tabulated at the end of Furnivall's Supplement 
to Ingleby's Centurie of Prayse (New Sh. Soc.). If we take 



xliv INTRODUCTION 

them as a test of popularity there were few plays before 
Othello in the years preceding 1642. These were Hamlet ', 
Romeo and Juliet, and Richard III. But in the succeeding 
years, from 1642 to 1693, Hamlet alone takes precedence. 

Two of these later notices are interesting. Samuel 
Pepys says, August 20, 1 666 : " To Deptford by water, 
reading Othello, Moor of Venice, which I ever heretofore 
esteemed a mighty good play, but having so lately read 
The Adventures of Five Houres, it seems a mean thing.' 
This play, reprinted in Hazlitt's Dodsley, is nearly as 
absurd as Pepys's opinion. "Thomas Jordan, 1660-1664 
... A Prologue to introduce the first Woman that came 
to Act on the Stage in the Tragedy, call'd The Moor of 
Venice." 

Finally, I have the pleasure of thanking, for their help 
and valuable advice, two friends, whose names are land- 
marks in modern Shakespearian study Professor Dowden 
and Mr. W. J. Craig. 



ERRATUM 

At page 4 there is an error in my notes. Ben Jonson {Masque of 
Owls) refers probably to a later Act. Early in May 1621 "an Act 
came up from the Commons, passed in the said House, against swear- 
ing, blaspheming, and drunkenness," Court and Times of James /., ii. 
253, 254. In my Introduction, therefore (p. x), the words should read, 
"Act to restrain the abuses of players," etc. 

H. C. H. 



THE TRAGEDY 



OF 



OTHELLO, THE MOOR OF VENICE 



v 



DRAMATIS PERSONS 

DUKE OF VENICE. 

BRABANTIO, a Senator. 

Other Senators. 

GRATIANO, Brother to Brabantio. 

LODOVICO, Kinsman to Brabantio. 

OTHELLO, a noble Moor in the service of the Venetian State. 

CASSIO, his Lieutenant. 

IAGO, his Ancient. 

RODERIGO, a Venetian Gentleman. 

MONTANO, Othelltfs predecessor in the government of Cyprus. 

Clown, Servant to Othello. 

DESDEMONA, Daughter to Brabantio and Wife to Othello. 
EMILIA, Wife to lago. 
BIANCA, Mistress to Cassio. 

Sailor, Messenger, Herald, Officers, Gentlemen, Musicians, and 
Attendants. 

SCENE : Venice : a Seaport in Cyprus. 



Dramatis Personse] At the end of the play in F I ; prefixed first in F 4 ; 
omitted Q i, 2. "The Names of the Actors." "Othello, the Moore" heads 
the list; then "Brabantio, Father to Desdemona. Cassio, an Honourable 
Lieutenant. lago, a Villaine. Rodorigo, a gtiltd Gentleman. Duke of 
Venice. Senators. Montano, Governour of Cyprus. Gentlemen of Cyprus. 
Lodovico and Gratiano, two Noble Venetians. Saylors. Clowne. Desdemona, 
Wife to Othello. ^Emilia, Wife to lago. Bianca, a Curtezan." 



THE TRAGEDY 



OF 



OTHELLO, THE MOOR OF VENICE 

ACT I 

SCENE I. Venice. A Street. 
Enter RODERIGO and lAGO. 

Rod. Tush, never tell me; I take it much unkindly 
That thou, lago, who hast had my purse 
As if the strings were thine, shouldst know of this. 

lago. 'Sblood, but you will not hear me : 

If ever I did dream of such a matter, 5 

Abhor me. 

Act I, Scene /.] Acts and scenes not marked in Qq, except at beginning of 
Acts II., III., IV., V., marked throughout in Ff. Venice. A Street] Capell. 

I. Tush] Qq, omitted Ff ; much] Qq, F I ; very F 2, 3, 4. 2. thou] Ff, Q 2 ; 
you Q ; had] held Capell conj. 4. 'Sblood] Q r, omitted in the rest ; you will] 
Q I ; you'lY I, 2. 

I. Tush] an old interjection ; "tussch ! marriage of Othello. And we are to 

for youre tales, pai touche not entente," understand a course of previous dealing 

York Mystery Plays, circa 1400, Toul- for Desdemona between Roderigo and 

min Smith, p. 324. See note at "pish," lago, the former assuming already that 

II. i. 268. Cotgrave equates Tush with he has been "fobbed." 

French Trut, " an interjection import- 4. 'Sblood] This form of profanity was 

ing indignation " (1611). rebuked by Chaucer in the Pardonere's 

3. this] We are at once introduced to Tale and the Persons'* Tale : " For 

a mainspring of the plot, the secret Christe's sake me swereth not so sin- 

3 



OTHELLO 



[ACT i. 



Rod. Thou told'st me thou didst hold him in thy hate. 

I ago. Despise me, if I do not. Three great ones of the city, 
In personal suit to make me his lieutenant, 
Off-capped to him : and, by the faith of man, i o 

I know my price, I am worth no worse a place : 
But he, as loving his own pride and purposes, 
Evades them, with a bombast circumstance 
Horribly stuff' d with epithets of war ; 
And, in conclusion, i 5 

Nonsuits my mediators ; for, " Certes," says he, 
" I have already chose my officer." 
And what was he ? 

io. Off-capped] Off-capt Ff; Oft capt Qq ; Oft capped Rowe, Steevens, and 
others. 14. epithets} F 3, 4 ; epithites Qq, F I, 2. 15. And, in conclusion] 
Q I ; omitted Ff, Q 2, 3. ij. chose] Ff, Q 2, 3 ; chosen Q I. 



fully, in dismembringe of Crist, by soule, 
herte, bones and body." See Skeat's 
Chaucer, v. 275, 276. For the bearing 
of these expressions upon the date of 
Othello, see Introduction, p. I. In 1605 
an Act was passed, known as the Act 
against Swearing (Ben Jonson, Masque 
of Owls), " to restrain the abuses of 
players." 

io. Off-capped] "stood cap in hand 
soliciting," Theobald. Hardly so strong ; 
the meaning is, tendered their request 
with a salutation, the force lying in the 
fact that they were "great ones." 
Compare Ant. and Cleop, II. vii. 64, 
" I have ever held my cap off to thy 
fortunes." " To cap " (take off the cap 
to one) and "to be capped" (keep it 
on) both occur, but the present phrase 
appears to be unique. 

13. bombast] inflated or stuffed as with 
cotton. " Cottonnee, bombasted or 
stuffed with cotton," Cotgrave, 1611. 
As applied to language, Gabriel Harvey 
has " bombasted terms or Babylonian 
phrases." A New Letter, etc., 1593, 
Grosart's Harvey, i. 290 : And Putten- 
ham, ' ' using such bombasted wordes, 



as seem altogether farced full of 
wind." Arber's reprint, p. 266 (ante 

1589). 

13. circumstance] prolixity, diffuse- 
ness, circumlocution. " To use great 
circumstance of woordes, to goe about 
the bushe, circuitione uti," Baret's 
Alvearie, 1580. "What need this 
circumstance ? Pray you, be direct, " 
Ben Jonson, Every Man in his Humour, 
ii. i, 1598. 

14. epithets'] Epithite, the spelling of 
the earliest editions, seems to have been 
introduced to our language by Gabriel 
Harvey. See his Letter Book, ante 1 580 
(" names and epithites ") ; and A New 
Letter, etc., 1593, "it is Aristotle's 
epithite." Grosart ed., i. 115, ii. 19, 
and ii. 156 (1589). 

16. Nonsuits] a legal term. " Per- 
emption d" instance. A nonsuit or let- 
ting a suit fall ; a quitting or forsaking 
a cause," Cotgrave, 1611. 

1 6. Certes] certainly, assuredly. Fur- 
ness points out that Schmidt erred in 
saying this word was monosyllabic here. 
In Peele, Spenser, and other writers of 
this time it is always a dissyllable. 



sc. i.] THE MOOR OP VENICE 



Forsooth a great arithmetician, 

One Michael Cassio, a Florentine, 

A fellow almost damn'd in a fair wife ; 



20 



20, 21. Cassio, . . . wife ;] Cassio ; ("the Florentine's A . . . wife;} Theo- 
bald ; Cassio (A Florentine's A . . . -wife} Warburton ; Cassio, Florentine, (A 
fellow' s almost damned in a fair wife !) [Aside] Jennens. 21.] in brackets Ff. 



19. arithmetician] A sneer parallel 
with " bookish theoric," line 24. Old 
books on military tactics have page 
upon page of what looks like arithmetic 
rows and columns of numerals, the 
arrangement of troops represented by 
figures. William BarrifTs Military 
Discipline (1643) ma y be instanced. 
This sense will not, however, suffice for 
line 31. Dowden supplies the follow- 
ing : " Stratarithmetrie is the skill 
appertaining to the warre to set in 
figure any number of men appointed : 
differing from Tacticie, which is the 
wisdom and the oversight," Sylvanus 
Morgan, 1652, Horologiographica 
Optica. I am inclined to think we must 
resort to Cassio's name for the sugges- 
tion. See note, line 31. 

21. A fellow . . . -wife ;] Dr. John- 
son says, " This is one of the passages 
which must for the present be resigned 
to corruption and obscurity " ; and 
many will be inclined to agree with this 
easy method and leave it so. Furness 
gives the views of many commentators 
in five closely printed pages. Only a 
few of these appear to convey any 
degree of conviction even to their 
writers. Taking the passage as it 
stands (numerous unwarrantable altera- 
tions have been proposed), it seems 
necessarily to refer to Cassio's entangle- 
ment with Bianca, to be developed 
later in the play. " She gives it out 
that you shall marry her," says Jago 
(IV. i. 119), and Cassio remarks, 
' ' prithee bear some charity to my wit. " 
He would, he implies, be damned " in 
her " indeed if he did so insane a thing. 
But the cry was going that he was to 
marry her, so that he may be said to 
be almost "damned." He is not, as 



Steevens puts it, "completely damned 
because he is not absolutely married." 
Malone agrees with the above explana- 
tion, and replies, in answer to the 
objection that Cassio appears to have 
first met Bianca as a courtesan of 
Cyprus: "Cassio, who was a Floren- 
tine, and Othello's lieutenant, sailed 
from Venice in a ship belonging to 
Verona, at the same time with the 
Moor ; and what difficulty is there in 
supposing that Bianca, who, Cassio 
himself informs us, ' haunted him 
everywhere,' took her passage in the 
same vessel with him, or followed him 
afterwards ? lago, after he has been at 
Cyprus but one day, speaks of Bianca 
(iv. i. 95-100) as one whom he had 
long known." It somewhat strengthens 
this view if we imagine lago indulging 
in a little introspection over these 
words. If ever anyone was surely 
damned it must have been lago, and he 
lays it partly at the door of his own 
fair wife. He might mutter reflectively, 
" this fellow is almost married to a 
loose woman, he will then be in the 
same position as I am in my faithless 
wife." Tyrwhitt finds a great stumbling- 
block in the sentiment itself. But it is 
quite consonant with the estimation in 
which the average Italian of that day 
held the moral worth of the sex. 
Emilia's speech at the end of the fourth 
Act may be taken as an exposition. 
This line should be divested of its 
personal garb and regarded as a pro- 
verbial ejaculation, uttered, as it is, 
parenthetically. As a matter of fact, it 
is a proverb, and Shakespeare, imbued 
at present with the romance and sonnet 
literature of Italy, had assimilated it. 
Or he may have heard it from John 



OTHELLO 



[ACT i. 



That never set a squadron in the field, 
Nor the division of a battle knows 
More than a spinster ; unless the bookish theoric, 
Wherein the toged consuls can propose i 

As masterly as he : mere prattle without practice 
Is all his soldiership. But he, sir, had the election ; 
And I, of whom his eyes had seen the proof 
At Rhodes, at Cyprus, and on other grounds 



25. toged} Q I ; tongued Ff, Q 2, 3. 
2 ; Ciprus F. 

Florio. The proverb is, L'kai tolta 
bella ? Tuo danno. Which translates, 
" You have married a fair wife [a 
beauty]? You are damned." A fuller 
version of the saying is S. Rowland's, 
Diogenes Lanthome, 1607, where a 
white horse is added on. And Alex- 
ander Niccholes says, "As the Italian 
proverbe is, 

' Whose horse is white and wife is fair, 

His head is never void of care ' " 
Discourse of Marriage and Wiving, 
Harl. Misc. iii. 259. Swetnam in his 
Arraignment of Women, ch. i., 1615, 
calls this an old saying. This view 
seems to reconcile one to the presence 
of the line, which some authorities (e.g. 
Schmidt) deem fit to omit altogether. 

23. battle} battle-array. Compare 
Dekker, ' ' Your battailes thus I'le put. 
The first blow given shall run clean 
through my heart," If this be not a good 
Play, etc., 1612. See Macbeth, V. vi. 4, 
and Henry V. IV. iii. 69. 

24. bookish] erudite, learned. See 
S Henry VI. I. i. 259, and Winter's 
Tale, in. iii. 73. Webster gives a 
reference to Bishop Hall, "bookish 
skill." " Un-bookish " occurs in this 
play, iv. i. 102. 

24. theoric} Theory as opposed to 
practice. This form is found also in 
All's Well, iv. iii. 162, and Henry V. 
i. i. 52. It is one of the terms Ben 
Jonson ridicules, and appears to have 



29. Cyprus} F 2, 3, 4; Cipres Q I, 



been introduced by Gabriel Harvey in 
his Letters to Spenser, ' ' Theoricks and 
Practicks" (Grosart's Harvey, i. 130), 
circa 1573. A passage in a letter of 
Sir John Harington from the Irish wars, 
I 599> illustrates lago here : "And as to 
warr, joyning the practise to the theory, 
and reading the book you prays'd, and 
other books of Sir Griffin Markhams, 
with his conference and constructions, 
I hope at my coming to talke of counter- 
scarpes and cazamats with any of our 
captains," Nugce Antiquce, ii. 15, ed. 
1779. 

25. toged] Wearing a toga, gowned. 
This form has not been elsewhere met 
with. Naunton in his Fragmenta 
Regalia (1641) speaks of the " Togati " 
(the Council) as if it was a familiar 
Elizabethan expression ; ' ' this great 
instrument among the Togati" (Cecil). 
See Harl. Misc.(ed. 1809), v. 130, 133, 
J 37> J 38- The word descended into 
cant. " Togeman, a cloak," occurs 
in Dekker's English Villanies, and 
in Head's English Rogue (reprint, i. 
148). 

25. consuls'] councillors. The rulers 
of the state or civil governors. The 
word is used by Marlowe in the same 
sense in Tamburlaine, 1590 (Pt. I. i. 2). 
" Both we will raigne as consuls of the 
earth" (Malone). Venice was originally 
governed by consuls (Steevens). The 
word was similarly used in France. 



sc.i.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 7 

Christian and heathen, must be be-lee'd and calm'd 30 

By debitor and creditor : this counter-caster, 

He, in good time, must his lieutenant be, 

And I God bless the mark ! his Moorship's ancient. 



30. Christian] Q I, F 3, 4; Christen 1 'dY I, 2 ; Christ*? d Q 2, 3 ; be be-lee'd] 
Ff, Q 2 ; be led Q I, be let Warburton, be lee'd Malone. 31. creditor: this} 
creditor, this counter-caster: Qq, creditor. This counter-caster, Ff. 33. / 
God bless the mark .'] I, God blesse the marke Q I , / (blesse the marke) Ff, / Sir 
(blesse the marke) Q 2, 3 ; Moorship's'] Worships Q I. 



30. be-lee'd] placed on the lee, an 
unfavourable position. The meaning 
is, " that Cassio got the wind of him and 
becalmed him from going on "(Steevens). 
Verbs commencing with be-, de-, and 
en- (or in-) were freely coined by 
writers of this time. There is a group 
of them in the present play. 

31. debitor and creditor] i.e. an 
account-book or keeper of one. Compare 
Cymbeline, v. iv. 171 : "O the charity 
of a penny cord ! it sums up thousands 
in a trice : you have no true debitor and 
creditor but it." Compare the follow- 
ing : " Wee have appoynted that hee 
which shall abide at Colmogro . . . 
shall have with him there such of our 
yong men as can best skill in keeping 
ofaccompts, after the maner of Mer- 
chants, that is, by Debitor and Creditor," 
Letter of the Moscovie Companie, 1577 
(Hakluyt, i. 334, reprint, 1809), 1598. 

31. counter-caster] an arithmetician. 
' ' Augrym, algorisme ... To cast an 
accomptes after the comen maner, with 
counters, compter par icct," Palsgrave's 
Lesclarcissement, 1530. The method 
of computation by casting counters on 
the abacus or counting-board (the 
earliest method known) was falling now 
into disuse in favour of numerals, but 
never has become obsolete. The dia- 
gram of squares in military formation 
may without any great stretch of fancy 
be likened to representations of 
counting-boards. And thus we would 
have a continuation of the former sar- 
casm. For the reference to the Floren- 
tines as famous for " book-keeping and 



everything connected with a counting- 
house " (C. A. Brown) will not be 
readily accepted as apposite. But this, 
on the other hand, detracts from the 
force of ''debitor and creditor." 
Several passages could be adduced from 
Shakespeare showing a contemptuous 
bearing towards reckoning, as "it 
fitteth the spirit of a tapster," Love's 
Labour's Lost, I. ii. 143. Perhaps a 
pun is intended here on casting up 
counter-work in fortification, such as 
counter-scarps, counter-mines, counter- 
wall, counter-mote, etc. But may not 
the name be responsible for the allu- 
sion ? In Ben Jonson's Every Man in 
his Humour (1598), Kitely's cashier is 
named Cash. Here we have the double 
signification of the "cashiered one" 
(cassare), and a cashier (cassiere). lago 
may merely be having a cheap sneer at 
Cassio for his name. " Cass was a fre- 
quent form of ourword "cashier." Com- 
pare Bacon, Observations on a Libel 
(1592), quoted in Spedding's Life of 
Bacon, i. 175, as illustrative of Othello, 
"whereon it came that I was cast" 
(v. ii. 327) : " I have read and heard 
that in all estates upon cassing or dis- 
banding of soldiers many have endured 
necessity." 

33. God bless the mark /] in 1 Henry 
IV. and Romeo and Juliet the expression 
is "save." Used simply as an inter- 
jection, but, according to Schmidt, 
"originally a phrase to avert the evil 
omen." Probably Schmidt is right, 
though the origin of this has never been 
satisfactorily explained. In the North 



8 OTHELLO [ACT i. 

Rod. By heaven, I rather would have been his hangman. 

lago. Why, there 's no remedy ; 'tis the curse of service, 3 5 
Preferment goes by letter and affection, 
And not by old gradation, where each second 
Stood heir to the first. Now, sir, be judge yourself 
Whether I in any just term am affined 
To love the Moor. 

Rod. I would not follow him then. 40 

lago. O, sir, content you ; 

I follow him to serve my turn upon him : 

We cannot all be masters, nor all masters 

Cannot be truly follow'd. You shall mark 

Many a duteous and knee-crooking knave, 45 

That doting on his own obsequious bondage 

Wears out his time, much like his master's ass, 

For nought but provender, and when he's old, cashier'd: 

35. Why,'] Ff, But Qq. 37. And . . . old~\ Ff, Not by the aide Qq, 

Steevens, Not (as of old) gradation Warburton. 39. affined] assin'd Q I. 
43. all be] be all Q i. 48. nought] noughe Q I, naught F i. 

the expression "God bless it" is still word again in Measure for Measure, 

held necessary to avert the evil eye, but IV. iii. 104. "Old gradation, that is, 

chiefly after praising any person or gradation established by ancient prac- 

thing. The fuller expression in Beau- tice " (Johnson). 

mont and Fletcher's Noble Gentleman, 39. just term] Schmidt says "justly, 

iv. 4, 1625, supports this view : " God in any respect ; the only instance of the 

bless the mark and every good man's singular." 

child." The phrase in the text occurs 39. affined] occurs again II. iii. 218. 

as late as Swift, 1738. " Do I stand within any such terms of 

35. there's no remedy] a very common propinquity or relation to the Moor, as 
ejaculation, equal to our " there it is." that it is my duty to love him " (John- 

36. letter} letter of recommendation, son). This is the only example given 
i.e. favour. The term "preferment" in New Eng. Diet, of this word mean- 
occurs in Humphrey Gifford's Poems ing "bound by any tie." "Affined" 
(Grosart, p. 22), 1580. " Letter " in this (related) occurs in J. King, Jonah, 
exact sense is met with in an old pro- 1597. 

verb, " Money will do more than my 45. knee-crooking] so in Hamlet, 

lord's letter." It occurs in Ben Jonson's " crook the pregnant hinges of the knee 

Every Man in his Humour, ii. 3. Where thrift may follow fawning " 

37. gradation] Shakespeare uses this (ill. ii. 66). 



sc. i.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 9 

Whip me such honest knaves. Others there are 
Who, trimm'd in forms and visages of duty, 50 

Keep yet their hearts attending on themselves, 
And throwing but shows of service on their lords 
Do well thrive by them, and when they have lined 

their coats 
Do themselves homage : these fellows have some 

soul, 

And such a one do I profess myself. For, sir, 5 5 
It is as sure as you are Roderigo, 
Were I the Moor, I would not be lago : 
"In following him, I follow but myself; 
Heaven is my judge, not I for love and duty, 
But seeming so, for my peculiar end : 60 

For when my outward action doth demonstrate 
The native act and figure of my heart 
In compliment extern, 'tis not long after 

54. these] Those Qq, These Ff. 55. For, sir] omitted Pope ; separate line 
Capell, Steevens, and later editors ; restored to original position Globe, Craig. 
6l. doth] does Q i. 

50. trimm'd] decked, dressed, to be, " Could I be the master you may 

"And needy nothing trimmed in be sure I would not be the man." 

jollity," Sonnet 66. Oliphant gives an 60. peculiar] own particular, private, 

early reference, "Well - trimmed" See again ill. iii. 80, and IV. i. 70. 

(equipped), Ellis' Letters, circa 1500 63. compliment extern] external 

(New English, i. 369). show, outward form or appearance. 

53. lined their coats'] equivalent to Compare " The poorness of your com- 

our "lined their pockets." Barnaby pliment" (i.e. manners, general ex- 

Riche has " line a purse " in his Fare- terior), Beaumont and Fletcher, Mad 

well to Military Profession, 1581 ; and Lover, i. I. The affected use of this 

Pericles, "he will line your apron with term was ridiculed by Jonson, Marston, 

gold " (iv. vi. 63). Chapman, etc. The Latin doublet 

$$.]Abbott(S&a&espearutrt Grammar, " complement " was also used without 
512) reads "For, sir," as an "interjec- any constant distinction. " Extern " for 
tional line" out ofthe regular verse, after external (like "intern" and "etern") is 
the practice in Greek poetry. He gives occasionally met with for metrical pur- 
several examples from Shakespeare. poses. See Ben Jonson's Alchemist, iv. 

56, 57. The meaning may be taken i. p. 51^, Cunningham's Giffbrd. 



10 OTHELLO [ACT i. 

But I will wear my heart upon my sleeve 

For daws to peck at: I am not what I am. 65 

Rod. What a full fortune does the thick-lips owe, 
If he can carry 't thus ! 

I ago. Call up her father ; 

Rouse him, make after him, poison his delight, 
Proclaim him in the streets, incense her kinsmen, 
And though he in a fertile climate dwell, 70 

Plague him with flies : though that his joy be joy, 
Yet throw such changes of vexation on 't 
As it may lose some colour. 

Rod. Here is her father's house ; I '11 call aloud. 

65. daws} Dawes Ff, Q 2, 3 ; Doves Q I, Malone. 66. full] Qq, fall Ff ; 
thick-lips'] thicks-lips F I. 69. streets, incense] slreete, incense Q I, Streets. 
Incense Ff, streets ; incense Steevens, etc. 70. And though] Qq, Ff; And, 
though modern editors. 72. changes] Qq, chances Ff ; on V] Ff, out Qq. 

64. JA metaphor taken from the custom flowing, good fortune. So in Antony 
of wearing ladies' favours on the sleeve and Cleopatra, IV. xv. 24, "the full- 
as a defiance to any impertinent person fortuned Caesar " ; and see also Cym- 
to challenge or question ("|peck at") it. define, v. iv. 1 10. " Owe," as in many 
Compare " Gentility is pinned upon thy other places in Shakespeare, means 
sleeve" (Time's Whistle, Sat. ii. 784, "possess." 

1615). This, however, refers rather to 68. make after him] Not a common 

the pinning of a badge of employment expression in literature, but probably 

in that position, which gave rise to a still a provincialism. To pursue, run 

frequent saying of close connection, after. " Being near them with our 

But the two ideas grade into one barge and wherries, we made after 

another. A passage from Lyly's them, and ere they could land came 

Euphues, 1580 (Arber, reprint, p. 322), within call," Sir W. Raleigh, Discovery 

is frequently quoted here in illustration : of Guiana. 1595 (Payne's Voyages, ed. 

" all is not truth that beareth the shew 1880, p. 366). 

of godliness, nor all friendes that beare a 70. though] since, inasmuch as, 

faire face, if thou pretend such love to See III. iii. 146. A good instance of 

Euphues carry thy heart on the back of this use occurs in Robert Greene's 

thy hand. ... I [am] more willing Never too Late, 1590. It is quoted at 

that a Raven should pecke out mine eyes, "haggard," in. iii. 261. 

then a Turtle pecke at them." The 70, 71. though . . . flies'] That is to 

reading of Q I, "doves," was adopted say, in the same way that flies are the 

by Malone on account of this parallel, chief- curse in a fertile climate, so make 

Compare also the serving man s badge him in his blessed condition be a victim 

on the left sleeve (Introduction, p. ii, of petty annoyances. Compare fertile 

note). = bountiful (Schmidt), Winter's Tale, 

66. full fortune} complete, over- I. ii. 113, Twelfth Night, i. ii. 274. 



sc. i.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 11 

I ago. Do ; with like timorous accent and dire yell 7 5 

As when, by night and negligence, the fire 

Is spied in populous cities. 

Rod. What, ho, Brabantio ! Signior Brabantio, ho ! 
lago. Awake! what, ho, Brabantio! thieves! thieves! thieves! 

Look to your house, your daughter and your bags ! 

Thieves ! thieves ! 8 1 

BRABANTIO, above, at a window. 

Bra. What is the reason of this terrible summons ? 

What is the matter there ? 
Rod. Signior, is all your family within ? 
lago. Are your doors lock'd ? 

Bra. Why, wherefore ask you this ? 85 

lago. 'Zounds, sir, you 're robb'd ; for shame, put on your 
gown ; 

Your heart is burst, you have lost half your soul ; 

77. spied] spred Warburton. 79. thieves /] three times in Qq, twice in Ff. 
80. your daughter} you Daughter Q I. 8l, 82. Brabantio . . . Bra.] Bra- 
bantio appears above, etc. Theobald ; Bra. Above Ff ; Brabantio at a window. 
Brab. Qq. 85. your} all Q I ; lock'd} lockts Q I. 86. 'Zounds} zounds Q 
I, omitted in the rest. 

75. timorous} awful, terrifying. This ' ' Arrest him at my suite . . . thou 

is probably the sense here. Compare shalt have irons 

Skelton : And usage such as I '11 deny to 

" With that I harde the noyse of a dogs : 

trumpe, Away with him. 

That longe tyme blewe a full Charles. You are too timorous ; but 

timorous blaste, trouble is my master, 

Lyke to the boryall wyndes whan And I will serve him truely." 

they blowe Here it means ' ' terrifying. " 

76.] "The meaning, "as Mr. Edwards 

The dredefull dinne drove all the has observed, "is ' not that the fire 

rowte on a rowe ; was spied by negligence, but the fire, 

Some tremblid, some girnid, some which came by night and negligence, 

gaspid, some gasid" was spied' " (Malone). 

(Garlande of Laurell, circa 1520, Dyce 87. burst} fractured, broken. Corn- 
ed., ii. 372). And in Heywood's pare Ben Jonson, "hath your feighting 
Woman Kild -with Kindnes (Pearson, ram burst his hard horn," Sad Shcp- 
p. 115), Shafton says to a Sergeant : herd, II. ii. p. 501*$, Cunningham's 



12 OTHELLO [ACT i. 

Even now, now, very now, an old black ram 

Is tupping your white ewe. Arise, arise ; 

Awake the snorting citizens with the bell, 90 

Or else the devil will make, a grandsire, of you : 

Arise, I say. 

Bra. What, have you lost your wits ? 

Rod. Most reverend signior, do you know my voice ? 

Bra. Not I : what are you ? 

Rod. My name is Roderigo. 

Bra. The worser welcome : 9 5 

I have charged thee not to haunt about my doors : 
In honest plainness thou hast heard me say 
My daughter is not for thee ; and now, in madness, 
Being full of supper and distempering draughts, 
Upon malicious knavery, dost thou come 100 

To start my quiet. 

Rod. Sir, sir, sir, 

Bra. But thou must needs be sure 

My spirit and my place have in them power 
To make this bitter to thee. 

88. now, now] F i, z ; now Qq, F 3, 4. 95. worser] worse Qq. 100. 
knavery] Ff, Rowe, Craig; bravery Qq, etc., Steevens, Globe. 101. quiet. ~\ 
Ff, quiet? Qq. 103. spirit} Qq, spirits Ff ; them] Qq, their Ff. 

Gifford; and Middleton, "though on the very brink, To neigh with 

back be almost burst with iron's cope," spirit." Homer's Iliad, Book xii. 

The Wisdom of Solomon Paraphrased (1598). 

(Bullen's ed., viii. 224), 1597. Shake- 99. distempering] intoxicating. Com- 
speare uses "burst" frequently in the pare Hamlet, III. ii. 312. And Mas- 
sense of "break." singer, "more than distempered . . . 

89. tupping] "to tup, to cover an stark drunk" (Great Duke of Florence, 
ewe," Bailey's Dictionary, 1721. iv. i) ; and again : 

90. snorting] snoring, as in 1 Henry " the courtiers reeling 
IV. II. iv. 578. "To snore, or snort, And the duke himself, I dare not 
Ronfler," Sherwood's App. to Cotgrave, say distempered 

1672. The words were used synony- But kind, and in his tottering chair 

mously. Chapman has the converse, carousing" 

"they could not get their horse To (Duke of Milan, i. i). Shirley also has 

venture on, but trample, snore, and the word. 



sc. i.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 13 

Rod. Patience, good sir. 

Bra. What tell'st thou me of robbing? this is Venice; 105 
My house is not a grange. 

Rod. Most grave Brabantio, 

In simple and pure soul I come to you. 

lago. 'Zounds, sir, you are one of those that will not 
serve God, if the devil bid you. Because we 
come to do you service and you think we are no 
ruffians, you '11 have your daughter covered with 
a Barbary horse ; you '11 have your nephews neigh 
to you ; you '11 have coursers for cousins, and 
gennets for germans. 

Bra. What profane wretch art thou ? 115 

lago. I am one, sir, that comes to tell you your 
daughter and the Moor are now making the 
beast with two backs. 

Bra. Thou art a villain. 

lago. You are a senator. 

Bra. This thou shalt answer; I know thee, Roderigo. 120 

Rod. Sir, I will answer any thing. But, I beseech you, 
If 't be your pleasure and most wise consent, 

104. good} omitted Seym. conj. 105. What teWst} Ff, What, tetfst Qq. 
108. 'Zounds} Zouns Q I, omitted in the rest, and by Rowe, Pope, etc. no. 
service and you} service, and you Ff, service, you Qq. 117. timv} Qq, omitted 
Ff. 119. are a} Upton, Capell, etc.; are a, Qq Ff. 122-138. Ift be . . . 
yourself:} these lines are omitted in Q I. 

106. grange"} a lonely farm. Com- 115. profane~} coarse, foul-mouthed, 

pare Measure for Measure, ill. i. 278. See II. i. 163. 

112. nephews} grandsons or any lineal 116-118.] From Rabelais, i. 3: "Et 

descendants. Lat. nepos. Halliwell faisoyent eux deux souvent ensemble la 

cites the fact that Shakespeare in his beste a deux dos." It is wrongly quoted 

will speaks of his granddaughter Eliza- and referenced by Steevens. An Eng- 

beth Hall as his niece. lish " Gargantua " (unhappily lost) 

114. germans~\ relations. Spenser appeared in 1592. Cotgrave has " Faire 

uses the word as a substantive (Faerie la beste a deux dos ensemble. To 

Queene, II. viii. 46). leacher" (1611). 



14 OTHELLO [ACTI. 

As partly I find it is, that your fair daughter, 

At this odd-even and dull watch o' the night, 

Transported with no worse nor better guard 125 

But with a knave of common hire, a gondolier, 

To the gross clasps of a lascivious Moor, 

If this be known to you, and your allowance, 

We then have done you bold and saucy wrongs ; 

But if you know not this, my manners tell me 1 30 

We have your wrong rebuke. Do not believe 

That, from the sense of all civility, 

I thus would play and trifle with your reverence : 

Your daughter, if you have not given her leave, 

I say again, hath made a gross revolt, 135 

Tying her duty, beauty, wit and fortunes, 

In an extravagant and wheeling stranger 

124. odd-even] Odde Even Ff, od euen Q 2, hyphened by Malone, etc. 
126. gondolier] Gundelierfi, Q 2, 3. 127. Moor, ] Malone et scq. t Moore: 
old editions. 

123.] If the word "is" be transferred 126. gondolier] the accent is to be 

from its present position to after taken from the last syllable, as in 

" daughter," it would complete the sen- pioner, enginer, muleter, etc., Walker, 

tence ; reading ' ' As partly I find it, that Shakespeare's Versification, p. 218. 

your fair daughter is Transported," etc. 128. and your allowance] the verb 

124. odd-even] Compare Macbeth : "be" is carried through, "and be your 

" What is the night ? allowance " or approval. "Allowance, 

Lady M. Almost at odds with accepcion, or estimation, Acceptio," 

morning, which is which " Huloet, 1552. 

(ill. iv. 126). This would suggest the 137. extravagant] wandering, vag- 
meaning " midnight," that is to say, it rant, vagabond. The classical sense 
is a toss up, odd or even, whether it is as elsewhere in Shakespeare. Chap- 
night or morn. "Odd or even" was man recalled this line in Byron's 
a common form of gambling, similar to Tragedy, v. i. (1608): "this extrava- 
" handy-dandy." It is one of Gar- gant and errant rogue." The word 
gantua's games; "a pair ou non," had decidedly a bad sense: "enter- 
translated by Urquhart "at even and taining extra vagants and vagabonds," 
odd." ' ' Odde or even " occurs as early Nobody and Somebody (Simpson's School 
as Gower's Conf. Amantis, 1393 (iii. of Shakespeare, line 148), 1600; and 
138, fidS Oliphant, New English, i. "the college of extra vagants yclept 
174). Bridewell," Rowley, Match at Midnight 

124. dull] has here the sense of dead, (Haz. Dods. x. 12), 1624. 

lifeless. Compare " O sleep, lie dull 137. wheeling] erring about. Compare 

upon her," Cymbeline, II. ii. 31. Coriol. I. vi. 19; Tr. and Ores. v. vii. 



sc. i.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 15 

Of here and every where. Straight satisfy yourself: 
If she be in her chamber or your house, 
Let loose on me the justice of the state 1 40 

For thus deluding you. 

Bra. Strike on the tinder, ho ! 

Give me a taper ! call up all my people ! 
This accident is not unlike my dream : 
Belief of it oppresses me already. 
Light, I say ! light ! [Exit above. 

lago. Farewell ; for I must leave you : 

It seems not meet, nor wholesome to my place, 146 
To be produced as, if I stay, I shall 
Against the Moor : for I do know, the state, 
However this may gall him with some check, 
Cannot with safety cast him ; for he 's embark'd 150 
With such loud reason to the Cyprus wars, 
Which even now stand in act, that, for their souls, 
Another of his fathom they have none 

139. her] Qq, F I ; your F 2, 3, 4. 141. thus deluding you] this delusion 
Q i. 145. [Exit above] Exit F I, omitted the rest. 146. place] pate 
Q i. 147. prodiiced] produc' d QQ, productedYi. 152. stand] Pope, etc.; 
stands Qq, Ff. 153. none} not Q I, Capell, Steevens, etc. 

2 (Schmidt). Equivalent to, and con- ridge says, " The old careful senator, 

founded with, "whirl." In the North being caught careless, transfers his 

a wheelbarrow is commonly called a caution to his dreaming power at last " 

whirlbarrow. Cotgrave has " Vire- (Notes, etc., 249). This touch of 

voulter, to veer, whirl, turn or wheel superstition prepares us for Brabantio's 

round about, fetch many a frisk about. " witchcraft beliefs below. 

141. Strike on the tinder] Amongst 149. check] rebuke, as in III. iii. 68. 

"Notes of Commodities for Cathay" 150. cast] The technical military term 

(for Export) is, in 1580: "Tinder for dismissed, as in Ben Jonson, "a 

Boxes with Steele, Flint, and Matches, cast commander" (Alcht. n. ii. 430) ; 

the Matches to bee made of luniper to and Beaumont and Fletcher, Bonduca, 

avoid the Smell of Brimstone," Hakluyt ii. 2, "captain, cast with loss of 

(i. 499, reprint, 1809). honours, flung out o' the army." The 

144. already] Brabantio would pre- term occurs later in this play in a less 

tend here that he has already (previous specialised sense, 

to this) been oppressed by this belief, 153. fathom] depth of intellect and 

on account of a dream he had. Cole- power, as in our "unfathomable." 



16 



OTHELLO 



[ACT i. 



To lead their business : in which regard, 

Though I do hate him as I do hell-pains, 155 

Yet for necessity of present life, 

I must show out a flag and sign of love, 

Which is indeed but sign. That you shall surely find 

him, 

Lead to the Sagittary the raised search ; 
And there will I be with him. So farewell. \Exit. 

155. hell-pains'] hyphened by Dyce, Globe, Craig, etc.; hell-pains Capell, 
Steevens, etc.; hells paines Q i; hell opines F i; hell F 2, 3, 4. 158. Which 
. . . sign} in brackets F I, signe) that Ff, signe, that Qq, sign: that Rowe 
(ed. i). 159. Sagittary] Sagitar Q 2, 3, F 4 ; Sagittar Q i, Capell, Malone. 



155. hell-pains'] torments of hell. 
"I would it were hell-pains for thy 
sake." All's Well, n. iii. 245. Shake- 
speare has several similar compounds, 
which were much in vogue. Middleton 
has hell-wain, hell-cat, Hell-tree, etc. 
Compare " in the hell-dark night when 
we could not see any shore," James, 
Account of Cavendishes Last Voyage, 
1593 (Payne, ed. 1880, p. 317). 

157. flag] A flag or a banner was the 
ordinary sign to proclaim that some- 
thing or some show or play was going 
on inside. See Middleton, The Widow, 
iv. I, iv. 2 (Dyce's Beaumont and 
Fletcher, iv. 355), and Knight of the 
Burning Pestle ; Ben Jonson, Bart. 
Fair, v. I (Cunningham's Gifford, v. 
1953, vol. ii.). See Nares' Flag. 

159. Sagittary} And at I. iii. 115. 
The place signified here has given rise 
to much dispute. Knight says " it 
was the residence at the Arsenal of the 
commanding officers of the navy and 
army of the republic. The figure of 
an archer with his drawn bow, over the 
gates, still indicates the place. Prob- 
ably Shakespeare had looked upon 
that structure." Rolfe replies, " We 
cannot find any evidence that the 
Arcenal at Venice was ever called ' the 
Sagittary ' ; probably this is a mere 
conjecture of Knight's. . . . The figure 
mentioned by Knight is not ' over the 



gates, ' but is one of four statues stand- 
ing in front of the structure. It re- 
presents a man holding a bow . . . 
but we cannot imagine why it should 
suggest to him to call the place the 
Sagittary. That word means, not an 
ordinary archer, but a centaur with a 
bow, as in the familiar representations 
of the zodiacal sign Sagittarius. . . . 
That the Sagittary in the present passage 
cannot be the Arsenal is, however, 
sufficiently clear from I. iii. 121. The 
Arsenal was by far the largest and most 
prominent public building, or collection 
of buildings, in all Venice, its outer 
walls being nearly two miles in circuit. 
To suppose that anybody in the employ 
of the Government would need the help 
of lago in finding the place is absurd 
(Rolfe's Othello (New York, 1886), 
p. 210). I attach no weight to Rolfe's 
reply ; rather I think it conveys its 
own refutation. In the first place, the 
primary meaning of Sagittarius is, of 
course, archer. In Barretti's Italian 
Dictionary ' ' Sagittario, an archer, a 
bowman," is a distinct term; and in 
Cotgrave, "Sagittaire: An Archer, 
Bowman, Shooter ; and hence, the 
heavenly Archer, or sign Sagittarius." 
Why, therefore, should not this statue 
have been so called ? And what more 
natural than that one portion of this 
enormous extent of buildings should 



sc. i.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 17 

Enter, below, BRABANTIO, and Servants with torches. 

Bra. It is too true an evil : gone she is ; 161 

And what 's to come of my despised time 
Is nought but bitterness. Now, Roderigo, 
Where didst thou see her ? O unhappy girl ! 
With the Moor, say'st thou? Who would be a 
father! 165 

How didst thou know 'twas she ? O, she deceives me 
Past thought I What said she to you ? Get more 

tapers. 
Raise all my kindred. Are they married, think you ? 

Rod. Truly, I think they are. 

Bra. O heaven ! How got she out ? O treason of the 
blood ; 170 

Fathers, from hence trust not your daughters' minds 
By what you see them act. Is there not charms 

163. bitterness. Now\ Ff, bitterness now Qq. 166. she deceives'} thou 

deceivest Q I. 167. more'] Qq, moe Ff. 170. the blood} Qq, F I ; my blood 
F 2, 3, 4. 172. />] Are F 2, 3, 4. 

receive this distinctive name ; which Shakespeare's mind and fancy fed 

portion we are to presume was that in themselves. 

which officers of Othello's rank had 159. search] an organised search- 
official apartments or transacted their party. In Barry's Ram Alley (1611) 
business ? Rolfe insists on the vast the parties of constables whose business 
extent of these buildings ; is it unlikely, it was to patrol the suburbs are called 
then, that lago, who "best knows the the "searches" (Hazlitt's Dodsley, x. 
place," should be deputed as a guide 376, 377). See "quest," I. ii. 46. 
to this particular department? It is 162. despised time] Johnson compares 
not necessary to divest the name Macbeth, n. iii. 98-101 ; and the ex- 
"Sagittary" of its zodiacal meaning, pression below, "time of scorn" (IV. 
It would still be a suitable name for the ii. 55), is parallel. 

statue of an archer. In the absence of 1 66, 167. deceives me Past thought /] 

any other explanation (Rolfe gives no See ill. iii. 207. 

alternative) this suggestion may be 172, 173.] "And finallie he saith, 

acceptable. It must always be borne that all beautiful things whatsoever, 

in mind that we have not access to are soone subject to be bewitched ; as 

one-tenth of the matter upon which namelie, goodlie young men, faire 



18 OTHELLO 

By which the property of youth and maidhood 

May be abused ? Have you not read, Roderigo, 

Of some such thing ? 

Rod. Yes, sir, I have indeed. 175 

Bra. Call up my brother. O, would you had had her ! 

Some one way, some another. Do you know 

Where we may apprehend her and the Moor ? 
Rod. I think I dan discover him, if you please 

To get good guard and go along with me. 1 80 

Bra. Pray you, lead on. At every house I '11 call ; 

I may command at most, Get weapons, ho ! 

And raise some special officers of night. 

On, good Roderigo ; I '11 deserve your pains. 

\Exeunt* 

173. maidhood~\ Ff, manhood Qq. 175. Yes . . . indeed'} I have sir Q i. 
176. would] that Q I. 177. you] yon Q I. 181. you, lead] leade me Q I, 
183. night] Q i, etc. ; might Ff, Q 2, 3, Rowe, Capell. 184. I'll] He Q i, 2 ; 
He Q 3 ; / will Ff. 

women," etc. Reginald Scot, Dis- officers of the night are six, and six 

coverie of Witchcraft, Booke 12, ch. xx., likewise are those meane officers, that 

1584. have only power to correct base vaga* 

173. maidhood] virginity. Used bonds and trifling offences . . . Out 

again by Shakespeare in Twelfth Night, of every tribe (for the city is divided 

III. i. 162. A Middle-English term, into six tribes) there is elected an 

Strattrhan gives three references, circa officer of the night, and a head of the 

1 200, in v. meid-had. It seems to be tribe. The duty of eyther of these 

a rare word, but I find it twice in officers is ... to make rounds about 

A Merry Ballad of the Hawthorn Tree, his quarter, till the dawning of the day, 

attributed to G. Peele (ed. 1874, p. 605). being always guarded and attended oil 

180. go] Abbott says in a note to with weaponed officers and sergeants, 

Midsummer Night's Dream, I. i. 123: and to see that there be not any dis- 

" Note, that here, as in Taming of the order done in the darkness of the 

Shrew, IV. v. 7 ; # Henry IV. II. i. night" (pp. 97,99). Furness says, " This 

191; Othello, i. i. 1 80, 'go' is used note of Malone seems to have satisfied, 

where we should say ' come.' " Shake- with the exception of Delius, all modern 

spearian Grammar, 30. editors." This extract gives also point 

183. officers of night} Malone sup- to the word "special," as distinct from 

ports this reading of a disputed "those meane officers" of the night, 

passage by a reference to Lewkenor's We find in this passage also the un- 

translation of Contareno'sF<?wzV<f (1599), common adjective "weaponed," used 

a highly popular book at this time, below, V. ii. 266. 
The passage is (curtailed): "These 



sc. ii.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 19 

SCENE II. Another Street. 
Enter OTHELLO, I AGO, and Attendants with torches. 

lago. Though in the trade of war I have slain men, 
Yet do I hold it very stuff o' the conscience 
To do no contrived murder : I lack iniquity 
Sometimes to do me service : nine or ten times 4 

I had thought to have yerk'd liim here under the ribs. 

Oth. Tis better as it is. 

lago. Nay, but he prated 

And spoke such scurvy and provoking terms 

Against your honour, 

That, with the little godliness I have, 

I did full hard forbear him. But I pray you, sir, 10 

Are you fast married ? Be assured of this, 

That the magnifico is much beloved, 

2. stuff <? the] stuff o 1 tW Ff, stuff of Q I. 3. lack] lake F 2, 3 ; take F 4. 
IO. you] omitted Qq. 1 1 . Be assured] Ff, For be sure Qq. 

1. trade of war] course of war. (1584), " I am afraid shee will yerke me 

2. stuff] The word has here its old if I strike her. " I have no example of 
signification, "material," "substance," its use, "stab." Rowley, A Shoemaker 
as in "We are such stuff as dreams are A Gentleman, uses it in the sense of 
ma.de of "(Tempest, iv. i.). The gradual drive a nail home. Shoemaker (ad- 
descent of the term to its modern mean- dressing his journeyman), ' ' Good boyes, 
ing " folly " was now taking place. yirke it home." The following technical 

3. contrived] planned or plotted, care- use (a shoemaker's awl) is exactly illus- 
fully arranged, as in Henry V. IV. i. 171, trative. Simon Eyre, the master shoe- 
" premeditated and contrived murder." maker in Dekker's Gentle Croft (1600), 

5. yerKd] An old form of "jerk," says to his men: "my lads, commit 

almost invariably, however (as in their feet to our apparelling, put grosse 

Henry V, iv. vii. 83), applied to a worke to Hans : yarke and seame : 

horse's kick. "He yerketh at her yarke and seame. " The meaning here 

fiercely with his heels" (Harington, is " pierce, "" prod, "" bore. " 

Orl. Furioso, xxxiii. 78, 1591). Nares 5, 6. him, he] lago refers in both 

gives two instances of it meaning places probably to Roderigo, as 

"lash with a whip." All his others Steevens suggested and Knight as- 

(and Halliwell's) are horse-kicking, serted. Observe, in support of this, 

In Harvey's New Letter (Gros. i. 283, lago's ready attack, at line 58. 

r 593) "yirked him like a hobbling 12. magnifico] "The chief men of 

gig " (top) refers again to whipping. Venice are by a peculiar name called 

Compare Lyly, Sapho and Phaon, i. i Magnifici, i.e. Magnificoes," Minshew 



20 



OTHELLO 



[ACT i. 



Oth. 



And hath in his effect a voice potential 
As double as the duke's : he will divorce you, 
Or put upon you what restraint and grievance 
That law, with all his might to enforce it on, 
Will give him cable. 

Let him do his spite : 



15. and] Qq, or Ff. 16. That} Q I, The the rest. 



(quoted by Toilet). Ben Jonson uses the 
term as Venetian in The Fox, equivalent 
to "clarissimo," 1605. It appears to 
have been introduced by the Italianated 
Gabriel Harvey, "What a Magnifico 
would he be were his purse as heavy as his 
head were light " ( Works, ed. Grosart, 
ii. 220), An Advertisement for Papp- 
hatchett, 1589. Spenser used it in 
Mother Hubbard" s Tale (line 665), 1591. 
Harvey used the word in Letters to 
Spenser '(1573-1580), Grosart, 1.84. Lyly 
has it in Euphues (1580), Arber, p. 260. 

13. potential] powerful. Compare 
Lear, n. i. 78. This word is limited 
now to the sense of "possible." Com- 
pare Pliny (xxx. 8), Holland's trans- 
lation : "The flies called cantharides 
mixed with quicklime, are a good 
potentiall cauterie." This may, how- 
ever, be a technical surgical sense. 

14. double] A long note is given 
here by Steevens (ed. 1793). He 
quotes Malone's extract from Conta- 
reno's Venice, which being almost 
certainly a book in Shakespeare's use, 
may be deemed best worthy of con- 
sideration. The words are : "So great 
is the prince's authoritie, that he may, 
in whatever court, adjoine himselfe to 
the magistrate therein, being president, 
as his colleague and companion, and 
have equal power with the other presi- 
dents" (p. 41). "Thus we see," con- 
tinues Malone, ' ' though he had not a 
double voice in any one assembly, yet 
as he had a vote in all the various 
assemblies, his voice thus added to the 
voice of each of the presidents of those 
assemblies, might with strict propriety 
be called double, and potential (i.e. 



powerful). Malone's commentary is 
especially levelled at the difficulty pro- 
pounded by Steevens from an earlier 
work than Contareno's, Thomas' His* 
tory of Italy, 1560: "Whereas," says 
Thomas, "many have reported, the 
duke in ballotyng should have two 
voices ; it is nothing so, for in giving 
his voice he hath but one ballot as all 
others have." Steevens goes on then 
to suppose that Shakespeare may have 
gone on this report ; but supposing he 
had learnt that it was an error, he 
might still (as Malone believed) rely on 
Contareno. Henley supposed the refer- 
ence was to the optional power of either 
divorcing or punishing. Others take 
the word to mean ' ' strong " as opposed 
to "single," "weak," "as applied to 
liquors and perhaps to other objects " 
(Steevens). To an ordinary reader 
this would commend itself in the first 
instance. An example may be given 
from Lyly : " Such double coistrels as 
you be " (meaning thorough, complete), 
Mother Bombie, ii. I. But the sense 
here is twofold, "thorough" and 
"counterfeit." Davenant speaks of a 
"strong tall double gelding," The 
Platonick Lovers, Act IV. The word is 
so used provincially ; a " double " snipe 
is a full or complete snipe, as opposed 
to the "single* or small jacksnipe in 
the North ; and " double double" is a 
very strong adjective denoting excess. 
I am inclined to reject the learned and 
technical interpretation. For the power 
of the duke's voice, see note below at 
"signiory" (line 18). 

17. cable] or as we say, give him 
"rope." 



sc.n.l THE MOOR OF VENICE 



21 



My services, which I have done the signiory, 

Shall out-tongue his complaints. Tis yet to know 

Which, when I know that boasting is an honour, 20 

I shall promulgate I fetch my life and being 

From men of royal siege, and my demerits 

May speak unbonneted to as proud a fortune 

18. services'] service Q 3. 20. Which . . . know] omitted Q I. 21. pro- 
mulgate] provulgate Q I. 22. siege] F 3, 4 ; seige F I, 2 ; height Q I, 2 ; 
hight Q 3. 23. unbonneted] unbonnetting Pope, Warburton ; e'en bonnetted 
Hanmer; and, bonnetted Theobald, Steevens ; (unbonnetted) Ff ; to} omitted Q 2, 3. 



1 8. signiory] "To tell you of the Duke 
of Venice, and of the Seignory : there is 
one chosen that ever beareth the name of 
a duke, but in trueth hee is but seruant 
to the Seignorie, for of himselfe hee can 
doe litle : ... Of the Seignory there 
be about three hundredth, and about 
fourtie of the priuie Counsell of Venice, 
who usually are arayed in gownes of 
crimsen Satten, or crimsen Damaske, 
when they sit in Counsell," First Voyage 
of Master Laurence Aldersey, 1581 
(Hakluyt, ed. 1811, ii. 268, 269). 

21. promulgate} publish. In Pals- 
grave, 1530. Derivation unknown. The 
Quarto spelling supports a supposed 
origin. 

22. siege} literally "seat, "but theterm 
here has reference to the more dignified, 
early sense of "throne." See Cotgrave 
in v. Early writers commonly spelt it 
" sege," which is probably more correct. 

22. demerits} Cotgrave is best here : 
" Demerit e : m. Desert, merit, deserv- 
ing ; also (the contrary), a disservice, 
demerit, misdeed, ill carriage, ill 
deserving ; in which sense it is most 
commonly used at this day," 1611 (ed. 
1673). Shakespeare uses the word in 
both senses. Othello here refers to the 
services he has done the State, as in 
v. ii. 339, not to his inherent excellence. 
Compare Patten, Expedition into Scot- 
land, 1548 (Arber's English Garner, 
iii. 57): "What honour and reverence 
condign, for these his notable demerits 
ought our Protector to receive ? " 



23. unbonneted] A much disputed 
expression. Without mentioning the 
various comments, often very dis- 
tracting, it is enough to say that the 
word may well mean what it should 
mean (i.e. with hat on), and therefore, 
I take it, it must mean that. In a 
passage in Coriolanus (ii. ii. 30), the 
verb " bonnet " means to " take off the 
cap " ; according to Schmidt and others, 
who have the support of Cotgrave, 
1 ' Bonneter, to put off his cap unto " 
(1611). Schmidt says, "The common 
explanation is, without the addition of 
patrician or senatorial dignity : the 
bonnet, as well as the toge, being at 
Venice a badge of aristocratic honours. 
But nowhere, not even in those plays 
the scene of which is Venice, is the 
word bonnet found in this sense." This 
"common explanation" is that of Fu- 
seli, and appears to me very forced. 
Schmidt may be replied to from Lingua 
(Hazlitt's Dods. ix. 371), where " Com- 
munis Sensus, a grave man, in a black 
velvet cassock like a councillor," speaks 
of a bonnet (over a velvet cap) as a 
necessary mark of dignity. But it is 
too great a strain to import into the 
sense the ceremonial finesse required 
by Fuseli. Standing bareheaded while 
addressing a superior was a much more 
usual custom in those days than now. 
This is evidenced often by the appear- 
ance of the quaint old phrase " remem- 
ber thy courtesy," meaning "remember 
your hat's off, be covered." 



22 



OTHELLO 



[ACT i. 



As this that I have reach'd : for know, lago, 

But that I love the gentle Desdemona, 25 

I would not my unhoused free condition 

Put into circumscription and confine 

For the sea's worth. But, look ! what lights come 

yond? 
lago. Those are the raised father and his friends : 

You were best go in. 
Oth. Not I ; I must be found : 30 

My parts, my title and my perfect soul, 

Shall manifest me rightly. Is it they ? 
lago. By Janus, I think no. 

28. yond] Ff ; yonder Qq, Pope, Steevens. 29. Those] Ff, These Qq. 

32. me rightly] Q I, Ff ; my right by Q 2, 3 ; Is it they?] It is they Q I. 



26. unhoused] "not tied to a house- 
hold and family " (Schmidt). Whalley 
says, " It is only by recollecting the way 
in which the Italians use cassare, that 
we arrive at its true meaning, which 
is unmarried." " Unhoused" in its 
normal sense occurs in Timon. Here 
it simply means "free," a dweller in 
the "tented field." Compare I. i. 126. 

27. sea's worth] Compare Winter's 
Tale, IV. iv. 500-502 ; and Henry V. I. 
ii. 163-165. Davenant borrows this 
expression in The Cruel Brother (Maid- 
ment, p. 131). A more apposite illus- 
tration is that of a chapter (book ix. 
ch. xxxiiii.) in Holland's Pliny, 1601, 
on "The riches of the Sea." It is 
only a few lines, and it is to be re- 
garded as an introduction to the follow- 
ing most interesting and lengthy disserta- 
tion " Of Pearles : how and where they 
are to be found." The " riches of the 
sea " are " varietie of dishes " ; " dain- 
tie and delicate fishes," but these are 
"small trifling matters," and "all 
ryot and superfluitie proceedeth from 
these shell fishes" in the form of 
pearls. Pliny (i.e. Holland) goes on 
to say "The richest merchandize of all, 



and the most soveraigne commoditie 
throughout the whole world are these 
Pearles." Steevens referred to Pliny, 
and Furness dismisses the note 
unjustifiably. So pre - eminent were 
pearls, both in poetry and practice, that 
it is not unreasonable to suppose the 
" sea's worth " much enhanced thereby. 
Compare : 

"she is mine own ; 

And I as rich in having such a jewel, 

As twenty seas, if all their sand were 
pearl " 

(Two Gentlemen, n. iv. 170). 
And again, "A sea of melting pearl, 
which some call tears" (ibid. in. i. 224). 
Compare also Chester's Love's Martyr 
(Grosart, p. 108), 1601 : " I will here 
expresse . . . The salt Seas unseene, 
unknowne worthinesse." Pliny's dis- 
sertation may have suggested the 
metaphor to Shakespeare. 

31. perfect] " fully prepared for what 
may occur," or "knowing what to do 
or say," as Schmidt says. Compare 
Measure for Measure, v. 82. 

33. Janus] Warburton rightly says 
"there is great propriety in making 
the double lago swear by Janus, who 



ac.ii.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 23 

Enter CASSIO, and certain Officers with torches. 

Of/i. The servants of the duke, and my lieutenant. 

The goodness of the night upon you, friends ! 3 5 

What is the news ? 
Cas. The duke does greet you, general, 

And he requires your haste - post - haste appear- 
ance, 

Even on the instant 

Oth. What is the matter, think you ? 

Cas. Something from Cyprus, as I may divine : 

It is a business of some heat : the galleys 40 

Have sent a dozen sequent messengers 

This very night at one another's heels ; 

And many of the consuls, raised and met, 

Are at the duke's already. You have been hotly 
call'd for; 

35. you] your Q r. 38. What is] Ff, What's Qq. 41. sequent] fre- 
quent Q i. 42. at one] one at Q 2, 3. 44. already. You] Ff, Craig ; 
already ; you Qq and editors. 

had two faces." lago does so because " He that is a iourney man, and rydeth 
he glories in his duplicity. Ben Jonson upon an other mannes horse, yf he 
uses the "bifronted God's" name ryde an honest pace, no manne wyll 
similarly. Macilente (Every Man Out, dysalowe hym : But yf he make Poste- 
I. i. 76), 1599, addresses Carlo Buffone, haste bothe he that oweth the horse, 
" an open throated, black mouthed and he peradventure also that after- 
caar,"as "good Janus." Amore forcible warde shal bye the horse, may chaunce 
instance is found in Poetaster (v. i. to curse hym," Ascham, Toxophilus 
2593), 1601, "That he may look bi- (Arber's reprint, p. 115), 1545. A pro- 
fronted as he speaks." minent character in that mouldy old 

35-] A poetical paraphrase of " good- play, Histriomastix (circa I599)> is 

night." Compare "The best and named Post-haste. Mr. Simpson in- 

wholesomest spirits of the night En- deed had the daring to identify him 

velop you," Measure for Measure, iv. with Shakespeare. See I. iii. 46. 

ii. 76. And the Irish " The top of the 40. galleys} See note at "Castle," 

morning to you. " in. i. I. 

37. haste post - haste] The words 43. consuls'] See I. i. 25. 
written on dispatches sent express. 



24 OTHELLO [ACT i. 

When, being not at your lodging to be found, 45 

The senate hath sent about three several quests 
To search you out. 

Oth, 'Tis well I am found by you. 

I will but spend a word here in the house, 
And go with you. \Exit. 

Cas. Ancient, what makes he here ? 

I ago. Faith, he to-night hath boarded a land carrack : 50 
If it prove lawful prize, he 's made for ever. 

Cas. I do not understand. 

I ago. He 's married. 

Cas. To who ? 

Re-enter OTHELLO. 

lago. Marry, to Come, captain, will you go ? 

Oth. Have with you. 

Cas. Here comes another troop to seek for you. 

46. abouf] Ff ; aboue Q i, 2 ; above Q 3. 50. carrack] Q i ; carract F I ; 
carack Malone, Steevens, Globe ; carrack (Skeat), Craig. 53. Have -with 
you] Ff, Ha, with who ? Q I. 

46. quests'] bodies of searchers, or 52.] "How came Cassio such a 

search-parties. Schmidt equates it stranger to this affair when it after- 

with "search," I. i. 159. wards (in. iii. 71, 72) appears he went 

49. makes] does. See in. iv. 167. awooing with Othello and took his part 

50. carrack~\ ' ' A name given by the in the suit ? " (Theobald). Blackstone 
Spaniards and Portuguese to the vessels replies (quoted by Steevens, 1793), 
they sent to Brazil and the East Indies ; "Cassio's seeming ignorance of Othello's 
large, round built, and fitted for fight courtship or marriage might only be 
as well as burden. Their capacity lay affected, in order to keep his friend's 
in their depth, which was extraordinary, secret till it became publicly known. " 
English vessels of size and value were 53- Have with you] I 'm in agree- 
sometimes so called, " Admiral Smyth's ment with you. Come along. Nashe's 
Sailor's Word Book (1867). The board- well-known attack upon Gabriel Harvey 
ing of carracks, from the voyages of is entitled Have with you to Saffron 
Drake, Cavendish, and others, was a Walden, 1596. Other forms of the 
familiar idea. Blount says "of the forcible imperative are Have at it, Have 
Italian word carico, or carco, a burthen to it, and Have through (in Shake- 
or charge ; you have this word," Glosso- speare). 

grafhia, 1670. 



sc. ii.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 25 

I ago. It is Brabantio : general, be advised ; 5 5 

He comes to bad intent. 

Enter BRABANTIO, RODERIGO, and Officers with torches 
and weapons, 

Oth. Holla ! stand there ! 

Rod. Signior, it is the Moor. 

Bra. Down with him, thief! 

[They draw on both sides. 

lago. You, Roderigo ! come, sir, I am for you. 

Oth. Keep up your bright swords, for the dew will rust them. 
Good signior, you shall more command with years 60 
Than with your weapons. 

Bra. O thou foul thief, where hast thou stow'd my daughter ? 
Damn'd as thou art, thou hast enchanted her ; 
For I '11 refer me to all things of sense, 
If she in chains of magic were not bound, 65 

Whether a maid so tender, fair and happy, 
So opposite to marriage that she shunn'd 
The wealthy curled darlings of our nation, 
Would ever have, to incur a general mock, 
Run from her guardage to the sooty bosom 70 

57. [They . . .] Rowe et seq.\ omitted Qq, Ff. 65. If . . . bound] line 
omitted in Q i, in brackets Ff, Q 2. 

55. be advised] be cool and careful, his ear, perfumed gloves," etc. Burton's 

" Who, in my rage, kneel'd at my feet Anatomy (p. 576, ed. 1852), 1621. A 

and bade me be advised ? " (Richard volume might be written, as indeed was 

///. II. i. 107). done by Prynne, about these love-locks, 

68. curled'] fashionable, elegant. The which were most carefully curled. See 

badge of an exquisite was a love-lock Epicene, iii. 2 (Cunningham's Gifford's 

and curled hair. Compare Lear, in. iv. Jonson, i. 4300). 

88, and Timon, iv. iii. 160. '"Tis the 70. guardage] guardianship. Webster 
common humour of all suitors to trick up says "Old French." It is not in Cot - 
themselves, to be prodigal in apparel, grave or Palsgrave. It is probable 
neat, combed and curled with powdered Shakespeare took the word from Hoi- 
hair, with a long love-lock, a flower in land's Plinie : ' ' hee was come from 



26 



OTHELLO 



[ACT i. 



Of such a thing as thou ; to fear, not to delight. 
Judge me the world, if 'tis not gross in sense 
That thou hast practised on her with foul charms, 
Abused her delicate youth with drugs or minerals 



71. as thou ;] as thou: Ff, as thou? Qq, omitted Seymour conj. 
Judge . . . thee"] omitted Q I. 



72-77- 



his younger brother, who had recom- 
mended his daughter to his tuition and 
guardenage " (vii. 53). The word is so 
divided by the lines " guarde-nage," that 
the would easily drop out. ' ' Guardian- 
age" is better than "guardage." Hol- 
land has elsewhere the word "garden- 
age," of wholly different origin. New 
Eng. Diet, quotes from Beaumont and 
Fletcher, Thierry and Theod. v. I : 
"You see this cardicue, the last, and the 
only quintessence of fifty crowns distill'd 
in the limbeck of your gardage." This 
instance has not the appropriate sense 
that Holland's word has. 

70. sooty] This seems to be a suitable 
place to refer to a disputed topic, the 
colour of Othello. Garrick's Othello 
is said to have been a failure, compara- 
tively, because he assumed the garb of 
a negro. Kean first substituted, and 
Coleridge endeavoured to justify, the 
tawny hue of the light brown Moor of 
Mauritania ; the complexion of the 
' ' burnished sun " ascribed to Portia's 
suitor, the Prince of Morocco. Knight, 
Grant White, and others support 
the Mauritanian view. Halliwell says, 
"Was Othello a negro? Certainly 
not. He was. a Moor of lofty line- 
age, thick lips (l. i. 66) and a very 
dark complexion. The reference to 
Mauritania, iv. ii. 257, surely settles 
the disputed question." But the 
evidence deduced from the one passage 
about Mauritania is no make-weight 
against the present word "sootie," the 
"black Othello" of II. iii. 33, and 
III. iii. 264, the previous "thick lips," 
and the " begrimed and black As mine 
own face" of in. iii. 387. The geo- 
graphical term Mauritania was, indeed, 
wide enough to include Ethiopia (see 
Holland's Plinie's Naturall Historic 



(v. i). And compare Bk. VI. ch. xix., 
' ' Beyond the river Ganges . . . the 
people are caught with the sunne, and 
begin to be blackish ; but yet not all 
out so sunburnt and black indeed as 
the Moores and ^Ethiopians" (1601). 
Sir Thomas Elyot calls the Ethiopians, 
Moors. Wilson says, "Coleridge al- 
most always thought, felt, wrote, and 
spoke finely as a critic, but may I 
venture, in all love and admiration of 
that name, to suggest that the removal 
which the stage makes of a subject from 
reality must never be forgotten?" 
(Black-wood's Magazine, April 1850, 
p. 484). The conclusion seems to be 
that Shakespeare wrote of a Negro 
(negrezza in Cinthio), a " Negro Moor," 
as Peele calls Muly Mahamet in the 
Battle of Alcazar ; and that actors and 
sensitive readers, revolting at such an 
union, are unable to digest him in his 
sooty garb. The evidence as to our 
author's idea is very definite, and, prac- 
tically, wholly of one kind. Charles 
Lamb (Works, 1870, iii. 102) finds 
nothing offensive in the reading of 
Desdemona wedding with a coal-black 
Moor. But the seeing is another matter. 

71. to fear] to terrify. A common 
sense formerly, as in our ' ' fearful. " 

72. gross in sense] easily discernible, 
palpable, in apprehension or percep- 
tion (Schmidt). 

73. practised] plotted. A common 
use. 

74. minerals] powerful or poisonous 
drugs. See Cymbeline, V. v. 50. Com- 
pare Ben Jonson, "Nor barren fern, 
nor mandrake low, Nor mineral to kill," 
Golden Age Restored (ante 1616) ; and 
Chapman's Alphonsus, iv. 2. " a mineral 
not to be digested, Which burning eats 
and eating burns my heart," 



sc. ii.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 27 

That weaken motion : I '11 have 't disputed on ; 75 

'Tis probable, and palpable to thinking. 

I therefore apprehend and do attach thee 

For an abuser of the world, a practiser 

Of arts inhibited and out of warrant. 

Lay hold upon him : if he do resist, 80 

Subdue him at his peril. 
Oth. Hold your hands, 

Both you of my inclining and the rest : 

Were it my cue to fight, I should have known it 

Without a prompter. Where will you that I go 

To answer this your charge ? 
Bra. To prison, till fit time 85 

Of law and course of direct session 

Call thee to answer. 
Oth. What if I do obey ? 

75- weaken motion} Rowe, Ritson, etc. ; weakens motion Ff, Q 2, 3 ; waken 
motion Hanmer, Johnson, Steevens. J&. For] Such Q I. 83. cue] Qu Q I. 
84. Where] Qq ; Whether F I ; Whither F 2, 3, 4. 85. To} And Q I. 87. 
if I do~\ if do F I ; */"/Pope, Hanmer. 

75. weaken motion] " Sense, per- (Skeat) ; arrest : a legal term, frequent 
ceptivity, mental sight " (Schmidt), in the historical plays. 
[Schmidt has a misprint here, "All's" 83. cue~] motive, hint, from the thea- 
should be " Ant."] The context seems trical term. Compare " the clock gives 
to require a little more than this ; the me my cue," Merry Wives, in. ii. 46 ; 
will or power of free choice are what and Hamlet, n. ii. 587. Believed to be 
are weakened. Cotgrave gives " Mouve- derived from the French queue, a tail ; 
ment : m. A moving, stirring : motion, the tail-word or catch-word. Some- 
agitation, course : agility, moveable- times written Q from the sound. An 
ness ; an inclination, disposition, free early instance occurs in T. Howell's 
will." This may possibly, however, Devises, 1581 : 

have the sense of "motion" in that "Take heede therefore, and kepe 

intolerable conjecture which reads eche cue so right, 

" wakens motion, "parallelling the word That Heaven for hyre unto thy 

with that in I. iii. 95. Many are satis- lotte may light." 

fied with Ritson's explanation (equiva- And Lyly's /"a/ wz'M an Hatchet (\<ffi>} : 

lent to Schmidt's), "impairs the facul- "they must be hangd. Hangde is the 

ties." Que, and it comes just to my pur- 

75. disputed on] argued in court pose." 

(Rolfe). 86. course of direct session] regular, 

77- attach] "take and hold fast" or ordinary course of session. 



OTHELLO [ACT i. 

How may the duke be therewith satisfied, 

Whose messengers are here about my side, 

Upon some present business of the state 90 

To bring me to him ? 

Tis true, most worthy signior ; 
The duke 's in council, and your noble self, 
I am sure, is sent for. 

Bra. How ! the duke in council ! 

In this time of the night ! Bring him away : 
Mine's not an idle cause: the duke himself, 95 

Or any of my brothers of the state, 
Cannot but feel this wrong as 'twere their own ; 
For if such actions may have passage free, 
Bond-slaves and pagans shall our statesmen be. 99 

[Exeunt. 

SCENE III. A Council-Chamber. 

The Duke and Senators sitting at a table ; Officers attending. 

Duke. There is no composition in these news 
That gives them credit. 

91. bring] Ff, beare Qq. 

Scene ill. 

I. There is] There's F I ; these] Q I, 2 ; this Ff ; his Q 3. 

99. pagans'] used contemptuously with explain. Heath thinks there is a refer- 

reference to Othello's nationality, ence in "bond-slaves" to Othello's 

Malone says, "A very common expres- actual experience of slavery (l. iii. 138). 

sion of contempt." I do not recollect ,, 
it in those past-masters of abuse 

Marston, Dekker, and Middleton. I. composition] accord, agreement. 

Malone's reference to 2 Henry IV. I. news'} tidings. Usually a singular 

(II. iii. 168) is not, I submit, to the in Shakespeare, and in several passages 

point. The word there has a special the Folios alter the Quarto reading of 

feminine signification, which a reference "these" to "this," as they do here, 

to Massinger's City Madam (ii. 2) will The transition was taking place. Com- 



sc. in.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 29 

First Sen. Indeed they are disproportion'd ; 

My letters say a hundred and seven galleys. 

Duke. And mine, a hundred and forty. 

Sec. Sen. And mine, two hundred : 

But though they jump not on a just account, 5 
As in these cases, where the aim reports, 
'Tis oft with difference, yet do they all confirm 
A Turkish fleet, and bearing up to Cyprus. 

Duke. Nay, it is possible enough to judgement : 

I do not so secure me in the error, 10 

But the main article I do approve 
In fearful sense. 

Sailor. [ Within] What, ho ! what, ho ! what, ho ! 

Off. A messenger from the galleys. 

4. And\ Qq, F 4 ; omitted F I, 2, 3. 6. the] Ff, they Qq ; aim] ayntd 
Ql. IO. in] Ff, to Qq. II. article'} articles Q I. 13. galleys'] 
galley Q I. 

pare N. Breton, " Newes here are none Compare Holland's Plinie : " In their 

but old or false," Post with a Packet, swimming they descry no land by the 

etc. (Grosart reprint i. letter 64), 1603. eye, but only by their smelling have an 

Skeat gives a reference to Berner's aime thereat " (viii. 32). 
Froissart, 1523. 8. bearing up to] taking her course 

5. jump] agree. A frequent word in to. Compare Tempest, in. ii. 3 : 
Shakespeare's time (compare Merchant "therefore bear up and board 'em." 
of Venice, n. ix. 62 ; Richard III. in. A nautical expression, as in Hayes' 
i. Ii), but generally followed by with. Narrative of Gilberfs Voyage, 1583 
See Ben Jonson, Epicene, ii. 3: "My (Payne, 1880, p. 199): "bearing to 
speeches jump right with what you the south, even for our lives, into the 
conceive." wind's eye." 

5. just'] exact. Frequent in Shake- 10. secure] hold myself secure on 
speare. Ben Jonson uses it : account of the error or disagreement. 

" just twenty nobles. To make careless or confident (Schmidt), 

Face. O, you are too just" as in Timon, II. ii. Compare "security 

(Alchemist, in. ii. 440). Is mortal's chiefest enemy" (Macbeth, 

6. aini] "Where there is no better ill. v. 32), where this sense has its 
ground for information than conjee- fullest force. 

ture" (Warburton). "Aim," with the II. approve] admit, assent to. 

sense of "guess," "conjecture," occurs 12. fearful] full of fear. A very 

in 2 Henry IV. in. i. 83: "A common sense. Compare " timorous, ' 

man may prophesy with a near aim." I. i. 75. 



30 OTHELLO [ACT i. 

Enter Sailor. 

Duke. Now, what 's the business ? 

Sail. The Turkish preparation makes for Rhodes ; 

So was I bid report here to the state I 5 

By Signior Angelo. 

Duke. How say you by this change ? 

First Sen. This cannot be, 

By no assay of reason : 'tis a pageant 
To keep us in false gaze. When we consider 
The importancy of Cyprus to the Turk, 20 

And let ourselves again but understand 
That as it more concerns the Turk than Rhodes, 
So may he with more facile question bear it, 
For that it stands not in such warlike brace, 
But altogether lacks the abilities 2 5 

13. -what's} omitted Qq. 1 6. By . . . Angelo] omitted Q I. 24-30. 
For . . . profitless} omitted Q I. 25. Buf\ Ff ; Who Q 2, 3. 

17. How say you by\ What say you "for the weighty shield So long sus- 

of. Occurs again in Merchant of tained, employ the facile sword " 

Venice, I. ii. 58; Hamlet, II. ii. 128. (Sejanus, iv. iii. 3080:, 1603). The 

Compare "He knows some notorious sense, easily handled, is exactly parallel, 

jest by this gull " (Ben Jonson, Every 24. brace"} an attitude of defence. 

Man Out, IV. iv. Ii83, 1599); and Brace means literally protection for 

"meant by Caesar," "meant by us" the arm, as in bracer, vambrace, Halli- 

(Poetaster, v. i. 253). well refers the substantive here used 

17, 18. This . , , reason"] this will to the verb "to brace," to brave, to 
not stand any reasonable test. It is defy, which is used several times by 
highly improbable. Skelton : "Suche boste to make, To 

18. pageant} show, delusion ; from prate and crake, To face, to brace," 
the theatrical sense. Compare Tempest, Against the Scottes (Dyce's Skelton, i. 
"this insubstantial pageant" (iv. 155). 183) ; and see Dyce's excellent note, ii. 

20. importancy} importance. A rare 216. Palsgrave has "I brace or face, 

word. "The importancy or urgency Je braggue." 

of the cause," Act 32, Henry VIII., 25, 26. abilities . . . dressed] To be 

1540 (New Eng. Diet.). "dressed in abilities" sounds forced in 

23. facile question bear it] carry it modern ears, though the meaning is 

with easier opposition. Observe that obvious, referring to fortresses, etc. 

"it" in lines 22, 23, 24 refers to "Abilities" was connected with garb, 

Cyprus. " Facile " does not occur again or outward show through its doublet, 

in Shakespeare. Compare Ben Jonson : " habilaments" perhaps. Compare the 



SC.IIL] THE MOOR OF VENICE 31 

That Rhodes is dress'd in : if we make thought of this, 
We must not think the Turk is so unskilful 
To leave that latest which concerns him first, 
Neglecting an attempt of ease and gain, 
To wake and wage a danger profitless. 30 

Duke. Nay, in all confidence, he 's not for Rhodes. 
Here is more news. 

Enter a Messenger. 

Mess. The Ottomites, reverend and gracious, 

Steering with due course toward the isle of Rhodes 
Have there injointed them with an after fleet 35 

First Sen. Ay, so I thought. How many, as you guess ? 

Mess. Of thirty sail : and now they do re-stem 

Their backward course, bearing with frank appearance 
Their purposes toward Cyprus. Signior Montano, 
Your trusty and most valiant servitor, 40 

With his free duty recommends you thus, 
And prays you to believe him. 

29, 30. ease . . . wake and] as in Q 2, 3, F 3, 4 ; ease, andgaine To -wake, and 
1*1,2. 31. Nay, ] And Q i. 35. Mew] omitted Q I. 36,37. First Sen. 
Ay, . . . guess? Mess.] omitted Q I. 37. thirty] 30 Qq ; re-stem] Ff, 
resterine Q i, resterite Q 2, 3. 

following passage in Chettle's Kind- 31. he's not for Rhodes'] On this 

hartes Dreame (New Sh. Soc. p. 74), feigned attack upon Rhodes, see In- 

1592 : " This shifter forsooth carried no troduction. 

lesse countenance than a gentleman's 33. Ottomites~\ Ottomans or Turks, 
abilitie, with his two men in blue See also line 235 and 11. iii. 171. This 
coates." Cockeram has ' ' Habilitie, form is unusual, if not unique, 
handsomenesse." "Dressed" may be 35. injointed'} allied, joined. Corn- 
taken, however, meaning simply " pre- pare our "disjointed," a verb formed 
pared," and "ability," power. from the similar past participle. "In- 

30. wage} to hazard, to attempt, to join " (injungo) in this sense is in Ains- 
venture on (Schmidt). Compare King worth's Eng.-Lat. Diet. The omission 
John, I. 266. Hardly distinguishable of " them" (Q I ) seems preferable here, 
in sense from ' ' wage " in the sense of Hudson adopted it. 

"wager," i.e. "risk" in the modern 42. to believe hint] not to doubt the 
use. truth of this intelligence (Johnson). 



32 OTHELLO [ACT i. 

Duke. 'Tis certain then for Cyprus. 

Marcus Luccicos, is not he in town ? 

First Sen. He's now in Florence. 45 

Duke. Write from us to him ; post-post-haste dispatch. 
First Sen. Here comes Brabantio and the valiant Moor. 

Enter BRABANTIO, OTHELLO, lAGO, RODERIGO, and 
Officers. 

Duke. Valiant Othello, we must straight employ you 

Against the general enemy Ottoman. 

[To Brabantio} I did not see you; welcome, gentle 
signior. 50 

We lack'd your counsel and your help to-night. 
Bra. So did I yours. Good your grace, pardon me ; 

Neither my place nor aught I heard of business 

Hath raised me from my bed, nor doth the general care 

44. Luccicos] Qq, Ff; Lucchesc Capell, Malone, Steevens ; not he] F I, 2, 
Q 2, 3 ; not here Q I ; he not F 3, 4. 46. to him ; post} -wish him post Q I ; 

post-post-haste] hyphened by Steevens, reading -wish as Q I. 47. valiant] 
omitted F 2, 3, 4. 51. lacKd\ lacke Q I, lac&t Ff. 53. nor] Qq ; hor F I ; 

for F 2, 3, 4. 54. nor] nolQi. 

44. Marcus Luccicos] Nothing is Venice, to the same effect :" Fearing, " 

known of this personage. The mention the latter adds, " I thinke, Caesar's ex- 

of this name points to some historical ample." Compare Webster's White 

source for this play with which we are Devil : " Saw you not yet the Moor 

unacquainted. that's come to court? . . . He hath, 

46. post-post-haste] See note at I. ii. by report, served the Venetian In 

37. Candy these twice seven years, and 

48, 49. ] Malone says it is part of the been chief In many a bold design " 
policy of the Venetian State never to (Dyce's Webster, ed. 1877, p. 35^). 
entrust the command of an army to a The Moor in this play (of whom there 
native. He quotes from Lewkenor's is a noble description at the place 
Contareno: "Their charges and yearly cited) is, however, no Moor, but Fran- 
occasions of disbursement are likewise cisco de Medicis "disguised like 
very great: for always they do entertain Mulinassar." The date of the play is 
in honourable sort, with great provision, 1612. 

a captaine generall, who alwaies is a 49. Ottoman] this term is found in 

stranger borne." Reed quotes from T. Shute's Commentaries, 1562 (Stan- 

the earlier work, Thomas, Hist, of ford Dictionary}. 



8c.ni.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 



33 



Take hold on me ; for my particular grief 5 5 

Is of so flood-gate and o'erbearing nature 
That it engluts and swallows other sorrows, 
And it is still itself. 

Duke. Why, what 's the matter ? 

Bra. My daughter ! O, my daughter ! 

All. Dead ? 

Bra. Ay, to me ; 

She is abused, stol'n from me and corrupted 60 

By spells and medicines bought of mountebanks ; 
For nature so preposterously to err, 
Being not deficient, blind, or lame of sense, 
Sans witchcraft could not. 



55. hold on] Ff, any hold of Q I, hold of Q 2, 3 ; grief] grief es Q i. 
All] Qq, Sen. Ff. 63. Being . 



line in brackets Ff, Q 2. 

56. flood-gate] Shakespeare has this 
metaphor twice elsewhere ( Veil, and 
Ad. 959 and 1 Henry IV. II. iv. 435). 
In both cases it refers to the eyes as 
the floodgates for tears, as it does also 
in the following lines from Fitzgeoffrey's 
Z)ra/&;(Grosart, reprint, p.26), 1596: "at 
your pleasures drawe or else let downe 
The flood-hatches of all spectators eies." 
Collier absurdly says of this passage, ' ' it 
is the earliest allusion to Shakespeare's 
Henry IV." An early use of this 
metaphor will be found in Gabriel 
Harvey's Advertisement to Papp- 
hatchett (Grosart, ii. 153), 1589: "an 
open fludgate to drown Pollicy with 
licentiousness." 

57. engluts] swallows. The word is 
found also in Henry V. IV. iii. 83, 
and in Timon, n. ii. 175. See 
Cotgrave, " Engloutir : To devour, 
inglut, ingulf, swallow up." Gabriel 
Harvey uses it, " didst englut thyself," 
Pierce's Supererogation (Grosart, ii. 

"4), 1593- 
61. mountebanks] ' ' Fellows, to mount 



sense'] omitted Q I 



. - 59- 

not] omitted Q 3 ; 



a bank. Did your instructor In the 
dear tongues, never discourse to you Of 
the Italian mountebanks?" Ben Jon- 
son, The Fox, ii. I. Ben Jonson has 
the best account of these " ciarlitani," 
who came from Italy about this time. 
See also Coryat's Crudities (1611). 
The word made its appearance earlier 
in Comedy of Errors, I. ii. 101 (1590). 
Warburton quotes here the Venetian 
law, against giving love-potions, held 
very criminal. 

62. preposterously} literally " in the 
wrong order, that first which ought to be 
last," as in Midstimmer Nigh fs Dream, 
III. ii. 121. Compare Ben Jonson: 
" In witness whereof, as you have pre- 
posterously put to your seals already, 
which is your money, you will now add 
the other part of your suffrage, your 
hands," Bartholomew Fair, Induction 
(1480). 

64. Sans] without. Used in English 
literature from Chaucer's time down to 
Evelyn's. Occurs about a dozen times 
in Shakespeare. 



34 OTHELLO [ACTI. 

Duke. Whoe'er he be that in this foul proceeding 65 

Hath thus beguiled your daughter of herself 
And you of her, the bloody book of law 
You shall yourself read in the bitter letter 
After your own sense ; yea, though our proper son 
Stood in your action. 

Bra. Humbly I thank your grace. 70 

Here is the man, this Moor ; whom now, it seems, 
Your special mandate for the state-affairs 
Hath hither brought. 

All. We are very sorry for 't. 

Duke. [To Othello] What in your own part can you say to 
this? 

Bra. Nothing, but this is so. 75 

Oth. Most potent, grave, and reverend signiors, 
My very noble and approved good masters, 
That I have ta'en away this old man's daughter, 
It is most true ; true, I have married her : 
The very head and front of my offending 80 

Hath this extent, no more. Rude am I in my 

speech, 

And little blest with the soft phrase of peace ; 
For since these arms of mine had seven years' pith, 
Till now some nine moons wasted, they have used 
Their dearest action in the tented field ; 8 5 

69. your] Ff, its Qq ; sense ; yea, though} Ff ; sense, tho Q I ; sense, yea 
tho Q 2, 3 ; sense ; though Pope. 81. am I] / am Q 2, 3. 82. soft] Ff, 
set Qq, Warburton, Steevens. 

70. Stood in your action] "Stand" is 76.] Compare "Most reverend and 
equivalent almost to the auxiliary verb grave elders," Corio/anus, II. ii. 
" to be," in this and several other 46. 

passages in the plays (Schmidt). Com- 85. dearest] See note at line 260, 
pare I. iii. 70 and II. i. 51. 



sc. in.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 35 

And little of this great world can I speak, 

More than pertains to feats of broil and battle ; 

And therefore little shall I grace my cause 

In speaking for myself. Yet, by your gracious 

patience, 

I will a round unvarnish'd tale deliver 90 

Of my whole course of love ; what drugs, what 

charms, 

What conjuration and what mighty magic 
For such proceeding I am charged withal 
I won his daughter. 
Bra. A maiden never bold ; 

Of spirit so still and quiet that her motion 95 

Blush'd at herself ; and she, in spite of nature, 

Of years, of country, credit, every thing, 

To fall in love with what she fear'd to look on ! 

It is a judgment maim'd and most imperfect, 

90. unvarnish'd'] unravisKd Q 2, 3. 93. proceeding] Ff, proceedings Qq ; 
/ am] Ff, am I Qq. 94. daughter] daughter with F 2, 3, 4. 94, 95. 
bold; Of spirit so] so in Ff; line 94 ends bold of spirit, Q i, ends bold, Q 2. 
98. on /] on ? Qq, on ; Ff. 99. maim'd] main'd F I. 

90. round] "plain, direct" (Rolfe). ment, charm or sorcery, to the intent 

We may add, perhaps, the sense of to provoke any person to unlawful 

"sincere," "earnest" as found in the love," the penalty upon conviction is a 

adverb "roundly." It occurs (e.g. ) in year's imprisonment. Steevens takes 

Troilus and Cressida : ' ' and fell so the view that this is the Act Shakespeare 

roundly to a large confession, to angle relied on; Ritson, that he was acquainted 

for your thoughts" (in. ii. 161). And with the Venetian law (see note at i. 

Ben Jonson's Magnetic Lady, i. I : 171). 

"Set to him roundly, aye and swinge 93. withal~\ "=with, as placed at 

him soundly." the end of the sentence" (Schmidt's 

90. unvamish' 'd] Gabriel Harvey Lexicon). 

has this applied sense earlier: "var- 95.96. motion . . . herself} Schmidt 

nished phrases " occurs in A Notable interprets ' ' motion " here ' ' movement 

Letter, etc. (Grosart, i. 284) 1593. of the soul, tendency of the mind, im- 

93. charged withal] Grey, cited by pulse." Abbott ( Grammar) says, "Her 

Furness at line 61, adduces a law of is very often applied by Shakespeare to 

Jac. cap. xii. to the effect, "That if the mind and soul, which tends to 

any person or persons should take upon confirm Schmidt." Grant White says 

him or them, by witchcraft, inchant- "motion" means "natural desires." 



36 OTHELLO [ACT i. 

That will confess perfection so could err 100 

Against all rules of nature ; and must be driven 
To find out practices of cunning hell, 
Why this should be. I therefore vouch again, 
That with some mixtures powerful o'er the blood, 
Or with some dram conjured to this effect, 105 

He wrought upon her. 

Duke. To vouch this, is no proof, 

Without more certain and more overt test 
Than these thin habits and poor likelihoods 
Of modern seeming do prefer against him. 

First Sen. But, Othello, speak : no 

Did you by indirect and forced courses 
Subdue and poison this young maid's affections ? 
Or came it by request, and such fair question 
As soul to soul affordeth? 

Of/i. I do beseech you, 

Send for the lady to the Sagittary, 115 

100. perfection] affection Theobald ; could] Ff, would Qq. 106. upon] upon 
F I ; Duke] omitted F i ; vouch] youth Q I. 107. certain} wider Ff, Globe, 
Rolfe ; overt test] Q 1 , 2 ; over Test F I ; over- Test F 2,3,4; over test Q 3. 108. 
Than these] Ff, These are Qq, Coll. 109. seeming] seemings Q I, 2 ; do] Ff, you 
Qq. 115. Sagittary] Sagittar Q I ; Sagitary F I, 2, 3 ; Sagittary Q 2, 3, F 4. 

TOO. perfection] excellence. Compare and Cressida, v. ii. 122. This seems to 

Sonnet 66, " right perfection wrong- be Schmidt's view, 
fully disgraced." 109. modern] trivial, commonplace, 

105. conjured] The accent is simi- valueless. The modern sense does not 

larly placed in III. iii. 294. Schmidt occur in Shakespeare's time, but it must 

cites three other similar pronunciations have been in use, since it is the only 

(Comedy of Errors, ni.i. 34 ; Romeoand one in Cotgrave (1611): "Moderns: 

Juliet, II. i. 26 ; Hamlet, V. i. 279). Modern, new, of this age, of these 

Abbott overlooked this in s. 490. times, in our times." Compare Ben 

107. overt test] " open proofs, exter- Jonson, "a kind of modern happi- 

nal evidence " (Johnson). "Test" may ness" (iv. i. 470), where the sense is 

mean (i) "witness," (2) "trial." See exactly parallel, i.e. "transparently 

Webster. For the sense Jonson gives, worthless, " hence fictitious, 
"test" would be equivalent to or con- 115. Sagittary] See note I. i. 159. 
tracted from "attest," as in Troilus 



sc.ni.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 37 

And let her speak of me before her father : 
If you do find me foul in her report, 
The trust, the office I do hold of you, 
Not only take away, but let your sentence 
Even fall upon my life. 

Duke. Fetch Desdemona hither. 120 

Oth. Ancient, conduct them ; you best know the place. 

\Exeunt lago and Attendants. 
And till she come, as truly as to heaven 
I do confess the vices of my blood, 
So justly to your grave ears I '11 present 
How I did thrive in this fair lady's love 125 

And she in mine. 

Duke. Say it, Othello. 

Oth. Her father loved me, oft invited me, 
Still questioned me the story of my life 
From year to year, the battles, sieges, fortunes, 130 
That I have pass'd. 

I ran it through, even from my boyish days 
To the very moment that he bade me tell it : 
Wherein I spake of most disastrous chances, 
Of moving accidents by flood and field, 135 

Of hair-breadth scapes i' the imminent deadly breach, 
Of being taken by the insolent foe, 

118. The . . . you] omitted Q i. 122. till] tell F I ; truly] faithful Q I. 
123. 7 ... blood] omitted Q i. 129. story} storyes Q 3. 130. fortunes] 
Qc[,f0rtttnef. 134. spake] Qq, spoke Ff. 135. accidents by]accident of Q i. 

124. justly] exactly, conformably Compare "frith and fell." Anallitera- 

with the truth. Jonson has the adjec- tive touch, not common in the later plays, 
live in Neptune's Triumph : "sprightly 136. scapes] This form occurs per- 

green, Just to the colour of the sea." haps twice as often as "escape" in 

Compare 2 Henry IV. in. ii. 89. Shakespeare, and is a legitimate word. 

135. flood and field] sea and land. At eschappi Cotgrave places it before 

Field means any open space of land, "escape." 



38 



OTHELLO 



[ACT i. 



And sold to slavery, of my redemption thence, 
And portance in my travel's history : 
Wherein of antres vast and deserts idle, 1 40 

Rough quarries, rocks, and hills whose heads touch 

heaven, 

It was my hint to speak, such was the process ; 
And of the Cannibals that each other eat, 
The Anthropophagi, and men whose heads 

138. slavery, of] slavery, and Q I, slavery. OfFf, slavery ; 0/Q2, 3, Rowe, 
Steevens, etc. 139. portance in my~\ Ff, Q 2, with it all my Q I ; travel's} 
Pope, Steevens, etc. , Craig ; travels' Globe, travells Qq, Travellours Ff. 
140. antres] Antrees Q i, Antars Q 2, 3, Ff ; idle] Qq, F I ; wilde F 2, 3 ; 
wild F 4, Pope, Hanmer, Gifford (in Ben Jonson's Sejanus). 141. and} 
omitted F I ; heads'] head F I. 142. the] Q I ; my Ff, Q 2, 3. 143. 
other] Qq, F 3, 4 ; others Ff. 144. Anthropophagi] F 2, 3, 4 ; Anthropophagie 
Qq ; Antropophague F I. 



139. portance] behaviour, demeanour, 
port. Compare Spenser: "a woman 
of great worth, And by her stately 
portance borne of heavenly birth," 
Faerie Queene, II. iii. 21 ; and Tomlds, 
Albumazar, iv. 2 : " through what a 
grace And goodly countenance the 
rascal speaks ! What a grave port- 
ance ! " 

139. travel's} This seems to be better 
than "travels'," as it is frequently 
printed. Shakespeare commonly uses 
"travel," where we would use "travels." 

140. antres] a French word. "Antre, 
A cave, den, grot, cavern, hole or hollow- 
ness under the ground," Cotgrave 
(1611), ed. 1673. The Latin form is 
given as English in Bailey's Dictionary. 
Keats used the word ' ' antres " in Endy- 
mion, bk. ii. line 230. See Chalmers' 
note on this line quoted by Furness. 

140. idle] useless, unprofitable. 
Compare Ben Jonson : " a poor and 
idle sin" (Sejanus, I. i. 1603); and 
Comedy of Errors, "usurping ivy, 
brier, or idle moss" (n. ii. 180). "Idle 
is an epithet used [Saxon ydael} to 
express the infertility of the chaotic 
state in the Saxon translation of the 
Pentateuch" (Johnson). And see 



Gifford's note to Sejanus. The reading 
' ' wild " arose out of a blunder. 

143. Cannibals that each other eat] 
Cannibal was a man-eating Carib ; a 
recent word in Shakespeare's time. 
In Arber's Eden (p. 29) mention is 
made " of the people called Cannibales 
or Anthropophagi, which are accus- 
tomed to eate man's flesh" (1555). 
Again In Frobisher : ' ' Supposed us 
belike to be Cannibals, or eaters of 
man's flesh " (Best's Narrative of Fro- 
bisher 's Second Voyage (Payne, ed. 
1880, p. 56), 1577). Sir Walter Raleigh 
confirms the derivation (Discovery 
of Guiana, 1595). The term became 
common in metaphorical use, as in 
Jonson : " make our cannibal-christians 
Forbear the mutual eating one another, 
Which they do more cunningly than 
the wild Anthropophagi, that snatch 
only strangers" (Staple of News, III. i. 
3083). 

144. Anthropophagi] This people (of 
Scythia) appear first in Herodotus, and 
thence into Pliny's Nattiral Historic. 
The term was revived in English in 
Edward VI. 's reign: "Histories make 
mention of a people called anthropo- 
phagi, men-eaters," B. Gilpin, Sermon 



8c.ui.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 



39 



Do grow beneath their shoulders. This to hear 145 

Would Desdemona seriously incline : 

But still the house-affairs would draw her thence ; 

Which ever as she could with haste dispatch, 

She 'Id come again, and with a greedy ear 

Devour up my discourse : which I observing, 150 

Took once a pliant hour, and found good means 

145. Do grow] Qq, Grew Ff ; This] ; this Q I, These things Ff, ; these Q 2, 3. 
147. thence} Qq, hence Ff. 148. Which] And Q I. 



before Edward VI., 1552 (Stanford 
Dictionary). Subsequently it was fre- 
quently used, as in Eden's Newe India 
(Arber, reprint, p. 23), and Scott's Dis- 
coverie of Whitchcraft ( 1 584). Dekker 
calls Ben Jonson an Anthropophagist, 
because he devours his patrons ; Satiro- 
mastix (Pearson, reprint, p. 234), 1602. 
It seems likely, however, that Shake- 
speare's direct source here was Holland's 
Plinie's Nat. Hist. (1601) : "Above 
those (Arimaspians) are other Scythians 
called Anthrophagi . . . The former 
Anthropophagi or eaters of men's flesh, 
whom we have placed about the North 
Pole " (bk. vil. ch. ii. ). Greene perhaps 
was the first to introduce this resounding 
word into poetry in his Selimus, line 
1421, 1594: 

"Ah 1 cruel tyrant and unmerciful, 
More bloody than the Anthropo- 
phagi, 
That fill their hungry stomachs 

with men's flesh." 

Greene was a great enricher of the 
English language from all sorts of 
sources. 

144, 145. men . . . shoulders'] "on 
that branch which is called Caora, are 
a nation of people whose heads appear 
not above their shoulders . . . They 
are called Ewaipanoma. They are 
reported to have their eyes in their 
shoulders, and their mouths in the 
middle of their breasts," Sir W. 
Raleigh, Discovery of Guiana (Payne's 
Voyages, ed. 1880, p. 376), 1595. 
Raleigh goes on, " such a nation was 



written of by Mandevile, those reports 
were holden for fables many years . . . 
Whether it be true or not the matter is 
not great, neither can there be any profit 
in the imagination : for mine own part I 
saw them not." He regrets he did not 
chance to hear of them in time, as " I 
might have brought one of them with 
me to put the matter out of doubt" 
(ibid. p. 377). At p. 390 mention is 
made again of "divers nations of Canni- 
bals and of those Ewaipanoma without 
heads." We find these people also in 
Pliny : ' ' Again, beyond those (Troglo- 
dytes) westward, some there bee with- 
out heads standing upon their neckes 
who carry eies in their shoulders " 
(Holland's Plinie, xii. 2). Shakespeare 
refers again to this fable in the Tempest 
(ill. iii. 46). In De prodigiis ostentis 
per conradum Lycostheneum (p. 670), 
1557) there is an engraving of one of 
these headless men. 

149. greedy ear] Malone quotes 
Spenser : 

" Whylest thus he talkt, the Knight 

with greedy eare, 

Hong still upon his melting mouth 
attent " 

(Faerie Queene, vi. ix. 26). 
Steevens refers to aures avida of Cicero's 
Orations, and to Ovid, De Ponto. 

151. pliant"} easily bent, yielding. 
Hence suitable, convenient. Not 
found elsewhere in Shakespeare, and 
not then a common term. It is found 
in Gabriel Harvey's A New Letter, etc. 
(Grosart, i. 268), 1593: "the prompt 



40 OTHELLO [ACT i. 

To draw from her a prayer of earnest heart 

That I would all my pilgrimage dilate, 

Whereof by parcels she had something heard, 

But not intentively : I did consent, 155 

And often did beguile her of her tears 

When I did speak of some distressful stroke 

That my youth suffer'd. My story being done, 

She gave me for my pains a world of sighs : 

She swore, in faith, 'twas strange, 'twas passing 

strange ; 1 60 

'Twas pitiful, 'twas wondrous pitiful : 
She wish'd she had not heard it, yet she wish'd 
That heaven had made her such a man : she thank'd 

me, 

154. parcels] parcel! Q I. 155. intentively] Qq ; instinctively F I ; dis- 
tinctively F 2, 3, 4. 157. distressful] distressed Q I. 159. sighs] Qq, kisses Ff. 

and pliant Nature." Compare "Traict- prepared to Hue and die, and to receiue 
able, tractable, pliant, facile, intreat- his enemies as they ought to bee re- 
able, courteous, gracious " (Cotgrave). ceiued." 

153. dilate] to relate at large, to 159. world of sighs] vast, immense 

enlarge upon. So in Comedy of Errors, quantity of sighs. A favourite expres- 

" dilate at full What hath befallen." sion with Shakespeare. Compare "a 

This word is found spelt "delate," which world of curses " (1 Henry IV. I. iii. 

leads to confusion. In a letter of Eliza- 164). And Holland's Plinie, xxxv. 

beth to James (Jan. 1595-6, Camden 14: "the earth thus infarced, con- 

Soc. 1849, p. 113), I find the words tinueth a world of yeers, and perisheth 

"whos praise, if I shuld not lessene not." 

in praising, I could more delate, but 163. her] There is a difference of 

thus muche I must tell you, that I can- opinion as to whether the pronoun 

not imagin," etc. Minshew has "To here is accusative or dative. The 

delate or speak at large of anything ; accusative is more pleasing, and more 

see to Dilate." Compare the following : consonant with the bright and perfect 

' ' In my delating brains a thousand innocence of Desdemona's character, 

thoughts were fed," T. Howell, Devises She listens, rapt in hero-worship, and 

(Grosart, ii. 192), 1581. what more natural than the expression 

155. intensely'] attentively. Cot- of the familiar feminine thought, "Oh 
grave has " Ententiveinent : Inten- that I were a man to do such gallant 
lively, busily, earnestly, attentively, care- deeds. " The sense of the dative be- 
fully, needfully." Steevens cites two ex- longs to an ordinary, not to say to a for- 
amples from Chapman's Homer. Com- ward temperament. Desdemona's ad- 
pare Hakluyt, ii. 196 (rept. 1809), 1599 : miration for her " warrior's " deeds is a 
"his knights intentiuely ready, and corner-stone of the play, and Othello 



sc. in.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 41 

And bade me, if I had a friend that loved her, 

I should but teach him how to tell my story, 165 

And that would woo her. Upon this hint I spake : 

She loved me for the dangers I had pass'd, 

And I loved her that she did pity them. 

This only is the witchcraft I have used. 

Here comes the lady ; let her witness it. 1 70 

Enter DESDEMONA, lAGO, and Attendants. 

Duke. I think this tale would win my daughter too. 
Good Brabantio, 

Take up this mangled matter at the best : 
Men do their broken weapons rather use 
Than their bare hands. 

Bra, I pray you, hear her speak : 175 

If she confess that she was half the wooer, 
Destruction on my head, if my bad blame 
Light on the man ! Come hither, gentle mistress : 
Do you perceive in all this noble company 
Where most you owe obedience ? 

Des. My noble father, 1 80 

I do perceive here a divided duty : 
To you I am bound for life and education ; 

1 66. hint'] Ff, heate Qq. 167. had\ Qq, F I ; have F 2, 3, 4. 177. on my 
heaa\ Ff, light on me Qq (lite Q i). 

in recognising this keen sympathy calls lators. The earlier commentators say 

her his "fair warrior" (n. i. 184); nothing. 

to which pet name that she loved I73-] settle this as well as you can: 
she refers back in the plaintive words take up, to make up, to settle, as in 
" unhandsome warrior as I am" (in. As Yon Like It, v. iv. 50 and v. iv. 104, 
iv. 149). For the thought, compare and elsewhere in Shakespeare (Schmidt). 
Condemns^ \. i. 235. Furness agrees, At the best, "How fare you?" "Ever 
hesitatingly, with the above view. He at the best, hearing well^of your lord- 
cites Knight, Cowden-Clarke, Rolfe, ship" (as well as possible), Timon of 
Hudson, and Purnell in favour of the Athens, III. vi. 29. Clarke, I think, 
dative, as well as the German trans- suggested " mingled " here. 



42 OTHELLO [ACTI. 

My life and education both do learn me 
How to respect you ; you are the lord of duty, 
I am hitherto your daughter: but here's my hus- 
band, 185 
And so much duty as my mother show'd 
To you, preferring you before her father, 
So much I challenge that I may profess 
Due to the Moor my lord. 

Bra. God be with you ! I have done. 

Please it your grace, on to the state-affairs : 1 90 

I had rather to adopt a child than get it. 
Come hither, Moor : 

I here do give thee that with all my heart, 
Which, but thou hast already, with all my heart 
I would keep from thee. For your sake, jewel, 195 
I am glad at soul I have no other child ; 
For thy escape would teach me tyranny, 
To hang clogs on them. I have done, my lord. 

Duke. Let me speak like yourself, and lay a sentence 

Which, as a grise or step, may help these lovers 200 
Into your favour. 

184. the lord of] lord of all my Q I. 189. God. . . done.] God bu'y, I ha 
done: Qq. 194. Which . . . heart] omitted Q I. 200. as] Qq, F i; 
like F 2, 3, 4. 201. Into your favour] omitted in Ff. 

183. learn] teach. Common in Shake- Stella (second song). It stands there : 

speare and writers of his time. Now a "Have I caught my heavenly jewel." 

frequent vulgarism. It occurs (once) in See Dyce's note to passage in Merry 

Chaucer : ' ' Thus was I ones lerned of a Wives. There it is grotesque ; here it 

Clerk," The Chanouns Yemannes Tale. is bitter in the extreme. 

194. all] omitted, Pope. This editor 199. like yourself] as if I was in your 
omitted a word for metrical purposes, or position in full sympathy with you. 
made contractions, at his will. These Other meanings are suggested by Rolfe. 
alterations are not noticed in this edition. Johnson explains, ' ' sententiously. " 

195. jewel] Falstaff uses this term of But " hang clogs" can hardly be called 
endearment in Merry Wives, "Have a "sentence." 

I caught thee, my heavenly jewel," 200. grise] degree, step. SeeTwe/ftA 
quoting from Sidney's Astrophel and Night, HI. i. 135. A common word in 



sc. in.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 43 

When remedies are past, the griefs are ended 
By seeing the worst, which late on hopes depended. 
To mourn a mischief that is past and gone 
Is the next way to draw new mischief on. 205 

What cannot be preserved when fortune takes, 
Patience her injury a mockery makes. 
The robb'd that smiles steals something from the thief; 
He robs himself that spends a bootless grief. 
Bra. So let the Turk of Cyprus us beguile; 210 

We lose it not so long as we can smile. 
He bears the sentence well, that nothing bears 
But the free comfort which from thence he hears ; 
But he bears both the sentence and the sorrow, 
That, to pay grief, must of poor patience borrow. 2 1 5 

203. the worst'] worst F 3, 4. 205. new] Ff, more Qq. 207. mockery] 
mocKry F r, mocker Q 3. 208. from the] from a Q 3. 210. So let] So, let 
Theobald. 

Ben Jonson. Variously epelt, grice, will be found In Leonato's speech in 

grise, grize, greece, gree, grece, etc. Much Ado, V. i. He is also mourning 

See Baret, Alvearie (1580), "grises or over the loss of a daughter: 

steps were made to go into the entry : "Patch grief with proverbs, make 

gradibus surgitant limina " ( Virgil). misfortune drunk 

202.] Equivalent to "past cure, With candle- wasters . . . 

past care," a saying found in Greene's Charm ache with air and agony 

Mamilia (Grosart ed., ii. 154), 1583; with words: 

and in Love's Labours Lost, v. ii. 28. No, no : 'tis all men's office to 

204, 205.] Compare "He that will speak patience . . . 

seek harm, shall find harm " Caxton's Therefore give me no counsel." 

Reynard the Fox (Arber, p. 50), 1483 ; 212. sentence] maxim, proverb, as 

or its more modern form, ' ' Harm watch, above (line 199) and again in this speech. 

Harm catch" (Ben Jonson, Bart. Fair, See also Much Ado, n. iii. 249, etc. 

v. 2). 213-215.] He must not only put up 

208, 209.] Compare " He well abides with gratuitous counsel, but resort after- 

that can well endure, quoth Hendyng," wards to patience to console himself. 

ante 1300; or as Shakespeare puts it 215. poor patience] There was a variety 

in Merry Wives, "What cannot be of proverbs about "poor patience." 

eschewed must be embraced." Vincit As " Patience perforce "; "There's no 

qui patitur, or "Of sufferance cometh remedy but patience" ; " Patience is a 

ease," are other parallels of an earlier pack-horse " (cf. Henry V. n. i. 26) ; 

date. " Let patience grow in your garden 

211-219.] The best parallel illustra- always"; " Purse penniless and patience 

tion to Brabantio's string of ' ' sentences " remediless," etc. 



44 



OTHELLO 



[ACT i. 



These sentences, to sugar or to gall, 
Being strong on both sides, are equivocal : 
But words are words ; I never yet did hear 
That the bruised heart was pierced through the ear. 
I humbly beseech you, proceed to the affairs of state. 
Duke. The Turk with a most mighty preparation 221 
makes for Cyprus. Othello, the fortitude of 
the place is best known to you ; and though 
we have there a substitute of most allowed suf- 
ficiency, yet opinion, a sovereign mistress of 225 

219. ear\eares~F I. 220. 7. . . proceed to] F i, 2 ; Beseech you now, to Qq ; 
7 humbly beseech you to proceed to F 3 (7 omitted F 4) ; Beseech you, now to 
Theobald; of state] Ff, of the state Qq. 221. a] omitted Qq. 225. a sove- 
reign] Qq, Steevens, Globe ; a more sovereign Ff, Rowe. 



216, 217. to sugar . . . equivocal]^ 
sweeten, or to annoy, etc. The passage 
is explained by rendering "sugar" and 
"gall" as infinitives (Schmidt). This 
gives an awkward sound to the verb 
"to sugar," not warranted by other 
Shakespearian usage. Might the sense 
be taken " these sentences (or maxims), 
strong on both sides, have doubtful 
sense, they are equal either to sugar or 
to gall " ? Possibly Shakespeare wished 
to write "equivalent," but the exigency 
of rhyme demanded this substitute. The 
Latin word "equivocal" was hardly 
established, and was perhaps somewhat 
vague. New Eng. Diet, has only one 
earlier example : Fulbecke, 1601-2 
(excluding the "nonce-word" in All's 
Well). What is it we are to sugar ? Is 
it Brabantio or things in general ? 

219. pierced] entered, penetrated, 
reached ; as in Lear, I. iv. 368 : "how 
far your eyes may pierce I cannot tell." 
The word here, however, as Furness 
remarks, needs to mean "penetrated 
with a soothing or consoling power," 
and numerous suggestions, alterations, 
and illustrations have been advanced to 
that effect. Schmidt's fourth sense of 
"pierce" is "to affect, to touch, to 



move deeply," and he has a dozen ex- 
amples of that use. The first suffices : 
"plain words best pierce the ear of 
grief" (Love's Labour's Lost, V. ii. 763). 

222. fortitude] power to resist attack. 
No other example in this sense has been 
adduced ; the following from New Eng: 
Diet, comes nearest to it : "a beast 
. . . excelling other beastes in fortitude 
and strength " (Eden's Travels (Arber, 
reprint), 1553). But it is not a good 
example, as its sense is not defined by 
the context. The word might, however, 
be well replaced by "strength." But 
I know no other instance of its being 
applied to inanimate objects. The 
" beast" use is a step that way. 

225, 226. opinion . . , effects] public 
reputation, which governs outward show 
or manifestation. "Effects" here has 
escaped Schmidt, perhaps through a 
misprint for "success," which occurs 
where this passage is cited at "opinion." 
Opinion (like " opportunity") was often 
made the subject of a quasi-personal 
address or attack. Guilpin has a lengthy 
tirade in Skialetheia (1598). He ad- 
dresses her as "innovation's mistris." 
See also Marston, Scourge of Villainy 
(Bullen ed., iii. 370). 



sc. in.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 



45 



effects, throws a more safer voice on you : you 
must therefore be content to slubber the gloss 
of your new fortunes with this more stubborn 
and boisterous expedition. 

Oth. The tyrant custom, most grave senators, 230 

Hath made the flinty and steel couch of war 
My thrice-driven bed of down : I do agnize 
A natural and prompt alacrity 

226. safer} Qq, F I ; safe F 2, 3, 4. 227. gloss} glosse Qq, F I ; grossc F 2 ; 
gross F 3, 4, Rowe. 230. grave} great Q I. 231. couch} Cooch Qq, Coach 
Ff. 233. alacrity} Alacartie F i. 



226. more safer} The doubled com- 
parative and superlative were in frequent 
use. See Abbott's Grammar, s. II. 
Ben Jonson, quoting an instance in each 
from Sir Thomas More, defends the 
practice as "an elegant phrase of 
speech" {English Grammar, ii. iv.). 

227. slubber} soil, sully (Schmidt); 
The more usual sense (hardly separable) 
is "slur over," "smear," or "perform 
in a slovenly way," "I slubber, I fyle 
[defile] a thyng" (Palsgrave). Shake- 
speare has the word again in Merchant 
of Venice, II. viii. 39 ; and " beslubber," 
1 Henry IV. II. iv. 341. In a letter 
of Elizabeth to James (Camden Society, 
p. 121, 1597-8) this passage occurs: 
" Looke you not therefore that without 
large amends I may or will slupper-up 
such indignities." And in Chapman's 
continuation to Marlowe's Hero and 
Leander (4th sest. line 212), 1598, 
" slubbered duties" is another example. 
See also Halliwell's Dictionary. Stee- 
vens quotes from Jeronymo (Hazlitt's 
Dodsley, iv. 374), 1588. This meta- 
phor, with "slubber" varied to "soil," 
occurs in Much Ado, ill. ii. 6. 

229. boisterous~\ fierce, violent and 
rough. A word of a stronger meaning 
formerly than it has at present. Com- 
pare "base and boisterous sword," As 
You Like It, ii. iii. 31. So Gabriel 
Harvey, "boysterous and fierce crea- 



tures" (Grosart's ed., i. 49), Three 
Proper Letters, 1580. 

232. thrice driven} thoroughly sifted 
(as by the wind), or prepared. "Thrice" 
is commonly used by Shakespeare "by 
way of general amplification." Gabriel 
Harvey has ten such compounds ad- 
ditional to those in Shakespeare. 
" Driven," i.e. driven before the wind, 
and therefore that which is sorted out from 
the coarser particles, purified and sifted. 
Similarly we have "as white as driven 
snow" (Winter's Tale, iv. 3); an in- 
tensitive form of the much earlier "as 
white as snow. " "Driven snow "was 
used earlier by Nashe, Martin s Month 
Mind (Grosart's Nashe, i. 186), 1589. 
A " doun-bed " is spoken of as excessive 
luxury in Cambyses (Hazlitt's Dodsley, 
iv. 175), 1578. Shelley borrows this 
expression in The Cenci, ii. 2 : " thrice- 
driven beds of down and delicate food." 
Shelley has several Shakespearian 
reminiscences in this tragedy. 

232. agnize} to recognise the exist- 
ence of, to acknowledge, to confess. 
" Unthankful is he that doth not agnise 
and knowledge the unmeasurable kind- 
ness of this most excellent prince " 
(Becon, Polity of War, 1543, New Eng. 
Diet. ). Malone gives another early ex- 
ample. See Cockeram's and Bulloker's 
Dictionaries. 



46 OTHELLO [ACTI. 

I find in hardness ; and do undertake 

These present wars against the Ottomites. 235 

Most humbly therefore bending to your state, 

I crave fit disposition for my wife, 

Due reference of place and exhibition, 

With such accommodation and besort 

As levels with her breeding. 
Duke. If you please, 240 

Be 't at her father's. 

Bra. I '11 not have it so. 

Oth. Nor I. 
Des. Nor I, I would not there reside, 

To put my father in impatient thoughts 

By being in his eye. Most gracious duke, 

To my unfolding lend your prosperous ear, 245 

234. dd\ would Q I. 235. These . . . wars] Malone ; This . . . Warres 
Q I, F I ; This . . . warre Q 2, F 2 (war Q 3, F 3, 4). 238. reference] F i, 
2, Q 2, 3 ; reuerence Q I, reverence F 3, 4, Rowe, Hanmer, etc.; preference John- 
son conj. 240, 241. If . . . father's] divided as by Capell, one line Qq ; Why 
at her Fathers? F I ; Why, at her Fathers. F 2, 3, 4. 242. Nor /, I -would 
not~\ Qq, Nor would I Ff, Rowe. 245. your prosperous"] Ff, Globe ; a 
gracious Qq, Capell, Steevens, Malone; your gracious Pope, Theobald, Craig. 

234. hardness] hardship. Compare elsewhere, formed from "sort, "in the 
2 Tim. ii. 3: "Thou therefore endure sense of "rank," "quality," as in 
hardness, as a good soldier of Jesus Much Ado, i. i. 7 : "but few of any 
Christ." And see Cymbeline, in. sort and none of name." This con- 
vi. 21. struction implies a verb, which verb 

235. Ottomites] See above, line 33. occurs in Lear, i. iv. 244 : " such men 
238. reference] assignment, appoint- as may besort your age." These are 

ment (Schmidt). Compare Cotgrave, the only examples in New Eng, Diet. 

"Remise ... a reference, referring, 240. levels with] is equal or even 

or committing unto ." with. The adjective occurs in the 

238. exhibition] provision, allowance, same sense in Antony and Cleopatra, 
Still in use in the universities. See iv. xv. 66: "Young boys and girls 
Two Gentlemen of Verona, I. iii. 69, are level now with men." 

and Lear, Cymbeline, and later (iv. 245. unfolding] communication, ex- 

iii. 75) in this play. Compare Ben planation. Equivalent to our "dis- 

Jonson, "Good truth, I'll pay you closure." Often used by Shakespeare, 

again at my next exhibition, Every Compare Ben Jonson: " What riddle is 

Man Out, ii. ii. 93^ (1599). Jonson this? unfold yourself, dear Robin" 

uses the term half a dozen times. {Sad Shepherd, n. ii. 502^). 

239. besort] a substantive, not known 245. prosperous] auspicious, favour- 



sc. in.] T : HE MOOR OF VENICE 



47 



And let me find a charter in your voice 

To assist my simpleness. 
Duke. What would you, Desdemona ? 
Des. That I did love the Moor to live with him, 

My downright violence and storm of fortunes 250 

May trumpet to the world : my heart 's subdued 

Even to the very quality of my lord : 

I saw Othello's visage in his mind, 

246. charter} Qq, F I ; character F 2, 3, 4. 247. To . . . simpleness.} And 
if my simplenesse. Q I. 248. you, Desdemona?} you speake. Q I. 249. 
did} omitted Ff. 250. and . . . fortunes} and scorne of Fortunes Q I, and scorn 
of Fortune, Johnson conj. ; fortunes] Fortune Keightley. 252. very quality} 
utmost pleasure Q I. 



ing, propitious. Compare Ben Jonson, 
"Besides in taking your last augury, 
No prosperous bird appeared," Sejanus, 
v. i. 315*, (1603). And see Timon of 
Athens, v. i. 168, " prosperous gods. 

246. Let . . . voice] Let your favour 
privilege me (Johnson). "Voice" here 
is equivalent to "vote," as in I. ii. 13 
and i. iii. 226. The classical favete 
linguis. 

250.] A debatable line, with variants 
in the readings and explanations. 
Singer explains it, " the stormy violence 
I have used against my fortunes." 
Rolfe separates the two figures: "the 
bold action I have taken, and the 
stormy fortunes I have voluntarily 
encountered " (in order to marry 
Othello). Rolfe's paraphrase is prefer- 
able, conveying, as it does, a wider 
force. This speech of the gentle 
Desdemona justifies the appellation of 
"warrior." Should a crisis arise, 
"like many women whose gentleness 
of nature has been wrought into timidity 
by a too rigid strictness on the part of 
those who bring them up, she is capable 
of bold action and self-assertion on rare 
occasions " (Cowden-Clarke). Rolfe's 
explanation above is that of Edwards, 
followed by Malone. 

251, 252. subdued . . . to] subject to, 
subjugated by. Compare Sonnet ill : 



"And almost thence ray nature is 

subdued 

To what it works In, like the dyer's 
hand." 

252. quality] Malone, followed by 
Dyce, Singer, and others, gives this 
word the sense "profession, which it 
frequently bears in Shakespeare and 
other writers of his time. He says the 
purport of her speech is, that as she 
had married a soldier, so she was ready 
to accompany him to the wars, and he 
calls upon the Quarto reading to sup- 
port him. The speech is a practical 
one, suggesting immediate action, and 
this view seems more natural than that 
of Schmidt, etc., making quality = 
nature. For quality in the sense of 
"profession," "trade," compare Ham- 
let, ii. ii. 333 and 411. The earliest 
reference I have is a good one : ' ' Voca- 
tion, Profession, or Qualitie," G. 
Harvey, Advertisement for Papphatchett 
(Grosart, ii. 199), 1589. 

253. ] It must raise no wonder that I 
loved one of Othello's visage ; I saw 
his face only in his mind : the greatness 
of his character reconciled me to his 
appearance. There is no occasion to 
make this line conflict with the sense 
given to ' ' quality " above, as several 
editors do. Desdemona at once adverts 
again to his "valiant parts." as a 



48 OTHELLO [ACTI. 

And to his honours and his valiant parts 
Did I my soul and fortunes consecrate. 255 

So that, dear lords, if I be left behind, 
A moth of peace, and he go to the war, 
The rites for which I love him are bereft me, 
And I a heavy interim shall support 
By his dear absence. Let me go with him. 260 

Oth. Let her have your voices. 

Vouch with me, heaven, I therefore beg it not, 

To please the palate of my appetite ; 

Nor to comply with heat, the young affects 

In my defunct and proper satisfaction; 265 

258. which] Qq, -why Ff. 261. Let . . . voices] Dyce et seq., Let . . . 
voice Ff, Your voyces Lords ; beseech you let her will, Have a free way, Qq. 
262. Vouch . . . heaven,] omitted Q I, the lines ending will, . . . not; in Q 2, 
3 Have a free way forms a separate line. 264, 265. heat, the young affects 
In my defunct] Qq, Ff (effects F 2, 3, 4) ; heat, the young affects, In my distinct 
Theobald, Steevens ; heat, (the young affects In me defunct} Upton, Capell, Dyce, 
Globe, etc. ; heat, the young affects, In my disjunct Malone. 

soldier, and to them and the honours John Chamberlain, 1613 (Court and 
gained thereby she consecrates herself. Times of James the First, i. 264). 
This line is a sort of parenthetical 258. rites] ' ' the duties in the inter- 
apology for his colour, given with the course of love " (Schmidt). Compare 
most loving delicacy. It is the one and Sonnet xxiii. 6, " The perfect ceremony 
only reference she deigns to make of love's rite," and All's Well, n. 
throughout the play to the reproaches iv. 42. 

levelled at his " sooty " exterior. 260. dear] "grievously felt" (Schmidt). 

257. moth] "An idle eater "(Schmidt). "Dear is used of whatever touches us 

It may be suggested here that "moth" nearly either in love or hate, joy or sor- 

was an obsolete form of "mote," as in row," Wright (apud Hamlet, I. ii. 182, 

the 1604 Quarto of Hamlet, I. i. 112, Clar. Press, q.v.). The term was there- 

and the Folio of King John (iv. i.). If fore often used of disagreeable, or even 

we read "mote," the sense would be hateful affections. Compare "Here's 

"an insignificant trifle" or "useless no dear villainy !" Middleton Mayor of 

atom." See Nares in v. And see note Quinborough, iv. 2. Compare I. iii. 85. 

in Clarendon Press to the above passages, 264, 265. heat . . . defunct] A very 

and to Midsummer Nighfs Dream, difficult and much debated passage. The 

V. i. 306, and Henry V. iv. i. 170. reading of the text differs from that of 

But the expression in the text has a the Globe and Cambridge editors, based 

poetical status of its own, too thoroughly upon Capell's reading " me " for "my." 

accepted to be disturbed. Compare The present is the earliest known use 

"But you had not meet with many such in English of this Latin participle. Its 

poor moths as Master Pory, who must meaning of "dead" in that language 

have both meat and money," Letter of was a late use, first due perhaps to 



sc.m.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 



49 



But to be free and bounteous to her mind : 

And heaven defend your good souls, that you think 

I will your serious and great business scant 

For she is with me. No, when light-wing'd toys 

Of feather'd Cupid seel with wanton dullness 270 

My speculative and officed instruments, 

266. to her} of her Q I. 268. great} Ff, good Qq. 269. For] Qq, 
When Ff. 270. Of} Ff, And Qq ; seel} F 4; seelc F I, 2, 3 ; foyles Qq. 
271. officed} offic'dfi, active Qq ; instruments} Qq, instrument Ff. 



Pliny ( = cadaver), in which sense 
Shakespeare uses it in Cymbeline t IV. 
ii. 358. The first Quarto reads : 

"Nor to comply with heate, the 

young affects 

In my defunct, and proper satis- 
faction, 
But to be free and bounteous to 

her mind." 

The first Folio differs only in omitting 
the comma after " heat," and in placing 
a full stop at "satisfaction," and in a 
couple of spellings. The primary sense 
of defunctus is "discharged from." 
Othello immediately states that it is only 
her mental desires he wishes to comply 
with, and calls upon himself all disgrace 
if he gives way to his appetites, thereby 
scanting or neglecting the great business 
of the State. Therefore he determines, 
and announces his determination, not to 
yield to natural inclinations in his " dis- 
charged" (or "laid aside") marriage 
"rites." Littre has an early French 
example (La Fontaine), " marquise de- 
funct," where the meaning is one who 
has been deposed or dismissed; an 
"ex-marquise." Othello means to rid 
himself from these " light- winged toys," 
though entirely his own, till his busi- 
ness is done. In Ryder's Bibliotheca 
Scholastica (1589), "rid from" and 
"discharged from" are equivalents to 
defunctus. If this explanation is not 
accepted I would read " deferred " in- 
stead of "defunct," used, as elsewhere 
In Shakespeare, for "postpone," "de- 
lay," "adjourn," "suspend." Compare 
"I have but an hour Of love," lines 



299, 300. The signification "dead" 
for "defunct" here, is quite intoler- 
able. 

269. For} because. A common usage 
of the time. 

269. light-wing' d] volatile. Winged 
with light. Bullen's " Middleton " had 
already used this poetical expression in 
Blurt Master-Constable, II. i. (1602): 

"Well, I will go, 
And with a light-winged spirit insult 

o'er woe." 

270^ seel} blind. A term in falconry. 
See also in. iii. 210. "Seeling is when 
a hawk first taken is so blinded with a 
thread run through the eyelids, that she 
seeth not or very little, the better to 
make her endure the hood" (Gentle- 
man's Recreation}. Compare Jonson's 
Catiline, Act I. (84^) : " Are your eyes 
yet unseeled ? " " Foil " (the Qq read- 
ing)is supported in the sense of disgrace, 
degrade, by the following passage in 
Capt. John Smith's Works (Arber, p. 
926), 1631: "although all our planta- 
tions have been so foyled and abused, 
their best good willers . . . discour- 
aged," etc. 

271.] " My visual and active powers " 
(Rolfe). "Speculative," as yet a rare 
word, had been used by Gabriel Harvey 
before 1583 (Letter Book, Grosart's 
Harvey, i. 127). In the sense required 
here, "pertaining to vision," Webster 
refers to Bacon. 

271. officed} having a place, or func- 
tion (Schmidt). Compare Winter's 
Tale, I. ii. 172. For "taint," see n, 
i. 274. 



50 OTHELLO [ACTI. 

That my disports corrupt and taint my business, 

Let housewives make a skillet of my helm, 

And all indign and base adversities 

Make head against my estimation ! 275 

Duke. Be it as you shall privately determine, 

Either for her stay or going : the affair cries haste, 

And speed must answer it. 
First Sen. You must away to-night. 
Oth. With all my heart. 

Duke. At nine i' the morning here we'll meet again. 280 

Othello, leave some officer behind, 

And he shall our commission bring to you ; 

With such things else of quality and respect 

As doth import you. 
Oth. So please your grace, my ancient ; 

A man he is of honesty and trust : 285 

275. estimation] Ff, reputation Qq. 277. her] omitted Q I ; affair cries'} 

affaires cry Q I. 278. answer it.~\ Ff, ansiver, you must hence to-night Qq, 
answer. You must hence to-night Pope, etc., answer 't ; you must hence to- 
night Camb., answer it, etc. (as here) Globe, Craig. 279. First Sen. You 
. . . to-night} Desd. To-night, my Lord? Duke. This night Qq, Theobald, 
Warburton / seq. Camb.; Des. To-night, my lord, to-night? Pope and Hanmer ; 
omitted in Ff. 280. nine] ten Q I. 283. With] Qq, And Ff, Rowe, 
Steevens ; and] or Q I. 284. import] concerns Q I ; So~\ Ff, omitted Qq. 

273. skillet] a small saucepan with minde ; bees to make their hives in 

a long handle. The term is in pro- souldier's helmets" (Campaspe, iv. 3, 

vincial use (Irish sgileid, saucepan, or 1584). This idea forms one of Alciati's 

skillet). In Skelton's Elynour Rum- Emblems, reproduced by Whitney, 1586. 
myng (circa 1515) the word is spelt 274. indign] unworthy, shameful, 

"skellet,"asin Qq. It is a diminutive of Lat. indignus. Compare Spenser: 

" skele " (a dairy vessel), still in use in "Sith she herself was of his grace 

Yorkshire. See Herrtage's note in indigne" (Faerie Queene, IV. i. 30). 

Catholicon Anglicum. To convert a Nares errs in saying Chaucer uses this 

helmet to debased usage was not a new word. He uses "undigne" twice in the 

thought. Peele's lines, "His helmet same sense in The Clerk Js Tale and 

now shall make a hive of bees," are The Persone's J^ale. 
well known. Compare also Beaumont 284. import] concern. Compare 

and Fletcher's Cupid's Revenge, iv. 2. Antony and Cleopatra, I. ii. 125 : 

So Lyly :" for what else do we see now "What else more serious Impprteth 

than a kinde of softnes in every man's thee to know." 



sc.ni.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 51 

To his conveyance I assign my wife, 

With what else needful your good grace shall think 

To be sent after me. 
Duke. Let it be so. 

Good night to every one. And, noble signior, 

If virtue no delighted beauty lack, 290 

Your son-in-law is far more fair than black. 
First Sen. Adieu, brave Moor ; use Desdemona well. 
Bra. Look to her, Moor, if thou hast eyes to see : 

She has deceived her father, and may thee. 

\Exeunt Duke, Senators, Officers, &c. 
Oth. My life upon her faith! Honest lago, 295 

My Desdemona must I leave to thee : 

I prithee, let thy wife attend on her ; 

And bring them after in the best advantage. 

Come, Desdemona ; I have but an hour 

Of love, of worldly matters and direction, 300 

To spend with thee : we must obey the time. 

\Exeunt Othello and Desdemona. 

289. [To Brab.] Capell, Globe, [To Brabantio.] Steevens ; omitted Qq, Ff, 
Rolfe. 293. if thou hast eyes} have a quick eye Q I, Johnson, Steevens. 294. 
and may} may doe Q i. 298. them} Ff, her Qq ; the} Qq, F I ; theirY 2, 3, 4. 
300. worldly} Qq, wordly F I, 4 ; matters} Qq, matter Ff. 301. spend} Qq, 
F I, speaks F 2, speak F 3, 4 ; the} the thef i. 

287.] i.e. "With what else your good sentiment here with Twelfth Night, 

grace shall think needful." Compare III. iv. 401-403. New Eng. Diet. 

Hamlet, III. iii. 3 : "I your commis- quotes at this word Sir T. Herbert, 

sion will forthwith dispatch." See Travels, 1634: "by supping a delighted 

Abbott's Shakespearian Grammar, cup of extreame poyson. " 
where many similar "transpositions" 293, 294.] Note this presentimental 

are cited. passage, which, as Coleridge says, 

289.] The insertion of a stage direction Shakespeare "provides for his readers, 

"To Brabantio" is needless here, as and leaves it to them." 
Rolfe remarks, since the speech itself 298. best advantage"} most favourable 

shows to whom it is addressed. opportunity ; " best advantage " occurs 

290. delighted'} delighting, delight- in the same sense in King John, II. i. 
some. Compare Measure for Measure, 40, and in Antony and Cleopatra, iv. 
in. i. 121. Steevens compares the ii. 4. 



52 OTHELLO [ACT i. 

Rod. I ago ! 

I ago. What say'st thou, noble heart ? 

Rod. What will I do, thinkest thou ? 

lago. Why, go to bed and sleep. 305 

Rod. I will incontinently drown myself. 

lago. If thou dost, I shall never love thee after. 
Why, thou silly gentleman ? 

Rod. It is silliness to live when to live is torment ; 

and then have we a prescription to die when 310 
death is our physician. 

lago. O villanous ! I have looked upon the world 
for four times seven years; and since I could 
distinguish betwixt a benefit and an injury, I 
never found man that knew how to love him- 315 
self. Ere I would say I would drown myself 
for the love of a guinea-hen, I would change 
my humanity with a baboon. 

307. If} Ff, Well, /Qq, Steevens ; after. } Ff, after it, Qq. 308. gentleman ?] 
Ff ; gentleman. Q i, 2; gentleman! Rowe tt seq. 309. torment] Ff, Globe ; a 
torment, Qq, Steevens. 310. have we] Ff, we have Qq. 312. O villanous} 
omitted Q I. 314. betwixt} Ff, betweene Qq. 315. man] Ff, a man Qq. 
317. guinea-hen] Ginny Hen Qq, Gynney Hen F I, 2, 3 ; Guinea-hen Johnson. 

306. incontinently] immediately. Clarke). As lago is an ensign looking 

The adjective was more commonly for and expecting his promotion to the 

used adverbially, as elsewhere in Shake- rank of lieutenant as his right, he must 

speare. It was the same in French, be a young man. This may be the 

" Incontinent, incontinently, instantly, right age for him to expect a step, 

immediately, presently, forthwith, out There is a slight clue to his age in the 

of hand, as soon as may have " (Cot- novel : he is said to have a child aged 

grave). three. 

313. four times seven years] "It is 317. guinea- hen] Steevens stated 
remarkable that Shakespeare has here this was a cant term for a prostitute, 
taken pains to specify the exact age of From the known salacity of these birds 
lago, as he has specified that of Hamlet, it may have become so, but this is no 
They are, perhaps, the most intellectual proof it had this sense at the date of the 
characters that our poet has drawn ; and present play. Steevens' only reference 
he has made them nearly of the same to Glapthorne's wretched production, 
age, as if at that period of life a man's Albertus Wallenstein(\(>qS), is not con- 
intellect were at the culminating point vincing. The passage will be found in 
of activity and energy " (Cowden- Pearson's reprint, ii. p. 53. The term is 



sc.m.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 



53 



Rod. What should I do ? I confess it is my shame 

to be so fond; but it is not in my virtue to 320 
amend it. 

Jago. Virtue ! a fig ! 'tis in ourselves that we are thus 
or thus. Our bodies are our gardens ; to the 
which our wills are gardeners : so that if we will 
plant nettles or sow lettuce, set hyssop and weed 325 

323. our gardens] Ff, Steevens, Globe, Craig ; gardens Qq, Collier, Dyce, 
Camb. 325. hyssop] F 4, Isop Qq, Hisope F I. 



there applied, scurrilously, to one of 
a pair of virtuous lovers, and the 
speaker afterwards calls her a virgin. 
Ben Tonson applies the term "ginney 
hen to Dol Common (Alchemist, iv. 
i. 47^), 1610, but the context does not 
bear out Steevens' sense ; it is rather a 
term of endearment. I find it in 
Armin's Two Maids of Moreclacke 
(Grosart, p. 92), ante 1609: "Wife 
coop up our ginny hen that wants the 
treading," said of a forward maid. 
Armin was an actor in Shakespeare's 
plays (he stands sixth in the Folio list), 
and constantly recalls "play- ends" of 
the great dramatist. He may have 
recalled this very passage. In lines 
prefixed to Coryat's Crudities (1611) by 
Henry Peacham, these birds are said to 
be one of the sights of London ; appar- 
ently on show at St. James" Fair, 
Piccadilly. I think the accepted and 
unpleasant meaning given by all com- 
mentators and dictionaries, is open to 
challenge. Grose has not got it ; Farmer 
and Henley only on Steevens' dictum. 

322. a fig!] Compare n. i. 256. An 
old expression, as : "A figge for all her 
chastity," Court of Love (Aldine 
Chaucer, Pickering, vi. p. 152, Oli- 
phant), circa 1520; "a fig for it," 
Appius and Virginia (Haz. Dods. iv. 
135), 1568. And in 2 Henry VL II. 
Hi. 67. 

325. set] plant. See quotations from 
Turner, below. 

325, 326. nettles . . . lettuce . . . 
hyssop . . . thyme] It is hard to 



gather any method out of lago's illus- 
trations. The first two may be regarded 
as food-plants. The two latter are 
desirable for their fragrance. Again, of 
the two first operations, the one is 
injurious (regarding nettles as bad 
weeds), the other profitable ; and the 
same may be said of the last, in reversed 
order. For hyssop, though now regarded 
as of no account, was formerly, Cul- 
pepper says, " well known to be an 
inhabitant in every garden." Perhaps 
there may be some further "balance " 
in the juxtaposition of these plants, yet 
to be discovered. Turner (1548) says : 
' ' The true Netel [Vrtica] groweth not 
in England e out of gardines, but it 
groweth in Italy and at Mense in 
Germany vnset or sowen abrode in the 
fieldes and hedges." Herbalists held 
the nettle to be under the government 
of Mars, hot and dry (Culpepper), while 
Lactuca (lettuce) "is measurably cold 
and moist " (Turner). And Ellacombe 
quotes from Lyly (Arber, p. 37) : "good 
gardeners in their curious knots rnixe 
Hisoppe with Time as ayders the one 
to the growth of the other ; the one 
beeing drye, the other moist." But 
lago departs from this instruction (unless 
indeed " weed up " be taken " free from 
weeds"), although the antithesis re- 
mains. Compare also "Wash her, O 
Lord, with Hysope and with Thyme" 
(Chester, Love's Martyr, 1601). Peele 
in The Gardener's Speech to the Queen 
at Theobalds, 1591 (1874, pp. 578, 579), 
says : "I cast it into four quarters. In 



54 



OTHELLO 



[ACT i. 



up thyme, supply it with one gender of herbs or 
distract it with many, either to have it sterile 
with idleness or manured with industry, why, 
the power and corrigible authority of this lies 
in our wills. If the balance of our lives had not 330 
one scale of reason to poise another of sensuality, 
the blood and baseness of our natures would 
conduct us to most preposterous conclusions : 
but we have reason to cool our raging motions, 
our carnal stings, our unbitted lusts ; whereof 335 
I take this, that you call love, to be a sect or 
scion. 

326. thyme] Pope, Time Qq Ff. 330. balance] ballance Q I, 2; braine F I, 
2; beam Theobald, Capell, Steevens. 335. our carnal} our carnall Qq, F i; 
or carnall F 2, 3 (carnal F 4) ; our unbitted] Qq, or unbitted Ff. 336. sect] 
set Johnson. 337. scion"] Steevens (1793), syen Qq, Seyen Ff. 



the first I framed a maze, not of hyssop 
and thyme." 

326. gender] kind. The original 
sense of the word, 'as in Hamlet, IV. vii. 
1 8. Lyly has a similar metaphor in the 
Prologue to Campaspe, 1584: "Wee 
have mixed mirth with councell and 
discipline with delight, thinking it not 
amisse in the same garden to sow pot- 
hearbes that we set flowers." 

327. distract] confuse, harass, as if 
by too great a variety or oversupply. 
Schmidt explains it " parcel out," but 
I do not agree with that interpretation. 
The use of ' ' with " forbids it. Compare 
his other example in Antony and Cleo- 
patra, in. vii. 44. 

328. manured] Compare 2 Henry 1 V, 
IV. iii. 129. I find this metaphorical use 
in Greene's Selimus (ed. Grosart, line 
381), 1594: " It argueth an unmanured 
wit." 

334. 335- motions . . . stings] Com- 
pare Measure for Meastire, I. iv. 59 : 
" the wanton stings and motions of the 
sense"; and "The brutish sting," As 
You Like It, n. vii. 66. 

336. sect] So the old editions have it, 



but Johnson's reading of "set" would 
be very acceptable. There does not 
seem to be any such word (unless it be 
here) as " sect," a contraction from 
' ' section, " a cutting. Our word 
"sect" is from "sequor," but "sec- 
tion " has a different derivation. The 
contraction, with the analogy from " bi- 
sect," no doubt would be very natural. 
"Set" is synonymous with "scion." It 
occurs in Tusser's Husbandrie, 1557 : 
"no poling nor wadling [wattling] till 
set be far out " ; where it means a young 
shoot (Eng. Dial. Soc. p. 83). Cot- 
grave has " Plante : A plant, or set; 
the ciens of a tree or slip of an herb, 
set or fit to be set, also a vine set of a 
ciens or slip (called so till it be come 
to its full growth), also the sole of 
the foot." From which it will be 
gathered that "cutting" is a false 
trail : that word itself is probably 
modern in this sense. Schmidt's ex- 
planation of scion, definitely, as a 
"graff," is not, I think, supportable. 
However, it was vaguely used. Com- 
pare Higgin's Nomenclator : " Stolones 
. , . young shootes or sciences that 



sc. in.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 55 

Rod. It cannot be. 

lago. It is merely a lust of the blood and a permission 

of the will. Come, be a man: drown thyself! 340 
drown cats and blind puppies. I have professed 
me thy friend, and I confess me knit to thy 
deserving with cables of perdurable toughness : 
I could never better stead thee than now. Put 
money in thy purse; follow thou the wars; 345 
defeat thy favour with an usurped beard ; I say, 
put money in thy purse. It cannot be that 
Desdemona should long continue her love to the 
Moor put money in thy purse nor he his to 
her : it was a violent commencement in her, 350 

341. professed] profest Ff, professe Qq (have omitted). 345. thou the] Ff, 
these Qq. 347, 348. be that . . . shoiild long] be, that . . . should long Q I, 
2 ; be long that , . . should Ff. 348. to] Ff, iinto Qq. 349. his] 
omitted Qq. 350. commencement in her,] Ff, Rowe, Craig, etc. ; commence' 
ment Qq, Steevens, Globe. 

growe out of the rootes or sides of the 345. follow thou the wars] Roderigo 

stocke " ; and " Surculus . . . agraffe, volunteers in disguise for Cyprus. See 

or science." Hence our plant-name II. i. 270 and n. iii. 56, etc. 

"close-sciences." 346. defeat] disfigure (Schmidt). 

343. perdurable] " Perdurable: per- Similarly in Cotgrave : li Vn visage 
turable, perpetual, everlasting, aye- desfaicte : grown very lean, pale, wan : 
during" (Cotgrave). Shakespeare uses or, decayed in features and colour." 
this strong form in Henry V. IV. v. 7. The word "defeat" applied to the 
Compare " The mighty and perdurable countenance has not been illustrated 
God be his guide, " Calisto and Melibea from any writer. The word had a 
(Haz. Dods. i. 64), 1520. Examples wider use than it now has. Cockeram 
of this and the following are in Nares. (1642) has " Defeat, to deceive, to be- 

344. stead] help, benefit, stand to. guile, to take craftily from one." Rode- 
Shakespeare uses this verb several rigo is therefore to take his appear- 
times, as in Two Gentlemen of Verona, ance craftily from himself with a false 
II. i. 119, and Meastire for Measure, beard. 

I. iv. 117. Compare Ben Jonson : 346. favour] features, countenance. 

"Arise, great soul ! fame by surrep- Shakespeare has the term frequently, as 

tion got in Much Ado About Nothing, n. i. 97. 

May stead us for the time, but So Ben Jonson : ' ' You did never hear 

lasteth not," A phrenetic so in love with his own 

Prince Henry 's Barriers (vol. iii. 64^), favour " (Devil is an Ass, iv. iii. 2600) ; 

l6io, and Cotgrave: "Mine: The counts- 



56 



OTHELLO 



[ACT i. 



and thou shalt see an answerable sequestration ; 
put but money in thy purse. These Moors are 
changeable in their wills : fill thy purse with 
money, The food that to him now is as luscious 
as locusts, shall be to him shortly as bitter as 355 

355. bitter as] acerbe as the Q I. 



nance, look, cheer, visage ; the gesture 
or posture of the face ; also, favour, 
phisnomy, feature, outward face, or 
shew." 

351. sequestration} separation. Pro- 
perly a legal term. " Enforcement : a 
sequestration, sequestering, or putting 
into a third hand" (Cotgrave). See 
Henry V. I. i. 58. 

3S4> 355- as luscious as locusts} 
Beisley and Ellacombe state that 
"locusts" here means the fruit of the 
carob tree ( Ceratonia siliqua}. There 
is reason to believe that the beans of 
that tree were called "locusts" in 
Shakespeare's time. Gerarde (1597) 
says: "The cods (of the carob) are 
so full of sweet juice that it is used to 
preserve ginger . . . both young and 
old feed thereon with pleasure . . . 
This is of some called St. John's bread, 
and thought to be that which is trans- 
lated locusts whereon St. John did feed 
when he was in the wilderness." 
Shakespeare may have borrowed his 
metaphor from this very passage. Pliny 
(Holland, i. 447) says: "The fruit 
called carobes or caracts ... so pass- 
ing sweet they be ... their cods also 
are good to be eaten." In both the 
passages relating to St. John's food in 
the wilderness (Matt. iii. 4, Mark i. 8) 
the later Wycliffite (Purvey's) reading 
is not "locusts," but "his meat was 
honysoukis and hony of the woode" 
(Forshall and Madden, 1850). The 
name "locust" for the Ceratonia or 
Caroub occurs in Chambers's Cyclo- 
pedia in the middle of the eighteenth 
century. Blount refers to the idea that 
"locusts" may bear the meaning as- 
cribed to it of "buds" (Glossographia^ 



1670). Schmidt says: " Mentioned as an 
aliment of very sweet taste . . . per- 
haps from its being placed together with 
wild honey in St. Mark iii. 4." It will 
be seen from the above that there was 
more than a mere juxtaposition possible; 
the word "locusts" was equated with 
" honeysoukis " as early as 1393. 
Locusts, in the sense of carobs, is not 
found in Britten and Holland, nor in 
Prior. Mr. Bradley (editor of New 
Eng. Diet. ) has kindly given me further 
information. He writes : "I have no 
direct evidence to show that 'locust* 
was used in Shakespeare's time for a 
fruit. But the passage from Othello 
seems strongly to suggest that inter- 
pretation, the admissibility of which is 
infirmed by the fact that already in 
Turner's Names of Herbes (1548), s.v. 
Siliqua, it is stated that the ' tree and 
fruite which is called in Greek Ceretia, 
or Ceratonia, in Italian Carobe? is 
called in duche 'saynte lohans Brot.' 
This 'duche 1 appellation proves that 
the ' locustse ' of the Vulgate were sup- 
posed to be carob-fruits in the first 
half of the sixteenth century, and I do 
not think we need hesitate to assume 
that Shakespeare knew of this inter- 
pretation. As you say, Purvey's 
' honysoukis ' indicates a knowledge of 
the traditional explanation of ' locustse ' 
as something belonging to the vegetable 
kingdom." I find there are earlier 
examples than Turner's. One is " From 
a Pictorial Vocabulary of the latter 
part of the Fifteenth Century " [Wright, 
p. 264] in English Plant Names, by 
John Earle, 1880. In this list occurs 
"Hec locusta, a sokyll-blome," to 
which the editor has a note: "This 



sc. in.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 



57 



coloquintida. She must change for youth : when 
she is sated with his body, she will find the 
error of her choice : she must have change, she 
must : therefore put money in thy purse. If thou 

356. She . . . youth'] omitted Q I. 358. error] Qq, errors Ff. 358, 359. 
she . . . she must} Qq, omitted Ff. 



seems to indicate the same plant as 
Ligustrum hunisuce, p. 30, namely, 
Lonicera Periclymenum, and perhaps 
'locusta' is a mere corruption of 
ligustrum." And it is a striking coin- 
cidence that the only other passage in 
which Shakespeare uses the word 
"luscious" is in Midsummer Nighfs 
Dream (ii. i. 251), where he applies it 
to the woodbine, or honeysuckle, in the 
sense of pleasant (for shade). Honey- 
suckles (i.e. " locusts") for food is met 
with in Trevisa, Bartholomew, De 
Prop. Rer. (ed. Steele, p. 75, 1893), 
1397: "Other men of Ethiopia live 
only by honeysuckles dried in smoke 
and in the sun, and these live not past 
forty years. " This is Trevisa's render- 
ing of "locusta." The passage he 
quotes from will be found, with the 
reading " locusts," in Holland's Plinie, 
tome i. p. 147 (bk. vi. ch. xxx.) 
at the foot of the page. On the 
whole, it seems to me, the weight 
of evidence is rather against the 
" carob." 

355, 356. as bitter as coloquintida~\ 
A long known Eastern simple. It is 
the wild trailing gourd, Cucumis 
(Citrullus) colocynthis, found in the 
Sinaitic Desert, and (as Gerard rightly 
stated) on the shores of the Southern 
Mediterranean (Gaza, etc.). It is 
mentioned by Pliny : " So is there of 
Gourds and Cucumbers both, a certain 
savage kind. [Marginal reference, 
Colocynthis or Coloquintada.'} Such 
are not for the kitchen, but for the 
Apothecarie's shop, and good onely in 
Physicke." He says he reserves the 
discourse about it for another place, 
but it is not in his Natural History 
(Holland's Pliny, bk. XIX. ch. v.). 
From the dried fruit a powerful purge 



is extracted. The bitterness of the fruit 
is well known : " the taste is nauseous 
and intensely bitter " (Materia Medico). 
The leaf appears to be bitter also : 
" one leafe of coloquintada marreth and 
spoyleth the whole pot of porridge," 
Lyly, Euphues (Arber, p. 39), 1579. 
Reed quotes from Bullein (Bulvaarke 
of Defence), 1579 ; he says "it is most 
bitter . . . and thus do I end of 
coloquintada, which is most bitter and 
must be taken with discretion." The 
bitterness lies in the very hard orange- 
coloured rind of the dry fruit. Com- 
pare also Day {He of Gulls], 1 606 : 
" look askance like a pothicarie's wife 
pounding colliquintada," and see Cot- 
grave. Craig supports the Q I read- 
ing "acerb," from the substantive 
acerbity in Cotgrave. Bailey's Diction- 
ary has : ' ' Acerb : A taste between sour 
and bitter, such as most fruits have 
before they are ripe." Not by any 
means so good as the simple "bitter." 
Kersey has the adjective also. Trevisa, 
in Bartholomew's De Prop. Rer. , says it 
is "a manere herbs that is most bitter " 
( r 397)' "As bitter as coloquintada " 
occurs in Greene's Mamilia (Grosart, 
iii. 117), 1583. 

356. coloquintida] There is a touch 
of local colour here. Will. Barret, 
1584, tells us "whence drugs come," 
in Hakluyt (ed. 1810, ii. 413). Amongst 
those mentioned is "Coloquintada, from 
Cyprus." 

359, etc. put money in thy purse"] 
Compare Merry Wives, n. ii. 175 : 
"They say, if money goes before, all 
ways do lie open." Holland (trans. 
Pliny) says : ' ' No arts and professions 
are now set by and in request, but 
such as bring pence into our purses " 
(Proeme to bk. XI V.). 



58 



OTHELLO 



[ACT I. 



wilt needs damn thyself, do it a more delicate 360 
way than drowning. Make all the money thou 
canst : if sanctimony and a frail vow betwixt an 
erring barbarian and a supersubtle Venetian be 
not too hard for my wits and all the tribe of 
hell, thou shalt enjoy her; therefore make money. 365 
A pox of drowning thyself! it is clean out of the 
way: seek thou rather to be hanged in compassing 
thy joy than to be drowned and go without her. 

Rod. Wilt thou be fast to my hopes, if I depend on 

the issue? 370 

lago. Thou art sure of me : go, make money : I 
have told thee often, and I re-tell thee again 

363. a] omitted Qq. 366. of drowning] Ff, a drowning Qq ; thyself] 
omitted Qq. 369,370. if . . . issue] omitted Q I. 372. re-tell] Ff, tell Qq. 



363. erring] See I. i. 137, and 
Hamlet, I. i. 154. " Erring barbarian " 
means a wanderer or stranger from a 
barbarous country. Malone suggests a 
rover from Barbary, which Ritson sets 
in opposition to the Venetian's subtilty 
with a few additional adjectives applied 
to Othello. " Barbarian " in both senses 
is far older than the date of Othello, in 
English. For "erring" compare the 
following passages from Chapman's 
Honier : 

" Comest thou from Troy but now, 

enforced to err 

All this time with thy soldiers ? " 
Odyssey, xi. (Shepherd's reprint, 1875, 
p. 4010). And a few lines below : 

" For I came nothing near Achaia, 
But, mishaps suffering, erred from 
coast to coast." 

363. supersubtle\ Shakespeare has 
several similar compounds, as "super- 
serviceable" and " superfinical " in 
Lear, and " superdainty " in Taming 
of the Shrew, So Gabriel Harvey 
has "supermetaphysical," "superexcel- 
lent," and " superhappy " ; while Ben 



Jonson indulges in "superlunatical," 
"supervexation," and "superdainty." 

366. dean] completely. Frequent in 
Shakespeare, and still a common 
colloquialism. It occurs in the Vul- 
gate. Compare Ben Jonson, Every 
Man in His Htimour, ill. ii. 286 : 
"That's true: fool on me! I had clean 
forgot it." 

367, 368. hanged . . . drowned] 
Probably this is a reference to the 
proverb, " He that is born to be hanged 
shall never be drowned," which is 
mentioned more unmistakably in 
Tempest, I. i. : "This fellow . . . hath 
no drowning mark upon him, his com- 
plexion is perfect gallows." lago 
chuckles to himself as he says, "you 
talk of drowning yourself, but I '11 see 
that you're hanged instead." The 
earliest reference I have to this pro- 
verb immediately precedes Othello's 
date. It is in N. Breton's Crossing 
of Proverbs, 1603. A reference at 
"hanged" to Cotgrave, s.v. Couilla- 
tris (in Furness) is as nauseous as it is 
inappropriate. 



sc. in.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 59 

and again, I hate the Moor : my cause is 
hearted ; thine hath no less reason. Let us be 
conjunctive in our revenge against him: if thou 375 
canst cuckold him, thou dost thyself a pleasure, 
me a sport. There are many events in the 
womb of time, which will be delivered. Tra- 
verse ; go ; provide thy money. We will have 
more of -this to-morrow. Adieu. 380 

Rod. Where shall we meet i' the morning ? 

I ago. At my lodging. 

Rod. I '11 be with thee betimes. 

lago. Go to ; farewell. Do you hear, Roderigo ? 

Rod. What say you? 385 

lago. No more of drowning, do you hear ? 

Rod. I am changed : I '11 go sell all my land. 

lago. Go to ; farewell ! put money enough in your purse. 

\Exit Roderigo. 
Thus do I ever make my fool my purse; 389 

375. conjunctive\comrmmicativeQ\. 377. me]andmeQl. 384-387. Go 
to . . . land} as in Q 2 ; Q I omits /'// . . . land ; Ff omit Rod. What . . . 
changed (385-387), so also Rowe, Pope ; Hanmer omits drowning . . . changed 
(386, 387); Capell omits Do you . . . changed and go (384-387); Theobald as 
here to land (387). 387. go] omitted Ff. 388.] as in Q i, Steevens, Craig ; 
omitted in Ff, Q 2, 3, Rowe, Globe. 

374. hearted] in the heart. Compare to work, stir yourself." As a word of 

III. iii. 448. combat it often occurs in early writers, 

375. conjunctive] conjoined, closely but this applied sense is peculiar, 
united. Compare Hamlet, IV. iv. 379. provide thy money} Compare 
17. Ben Jonson for this repeated advice : 

378, 379- Traverse} Compare % Henry "Get money; still get money, boy; 

IV. in. ii. 291 ; where Steevens No matter by what means ; money will 
says it is a military term. Malone do More, boy, than my lord's letter" 
cites Bulloker, "To march up and (Every Man in his Humour, n. iii. 
down." In Ainsworth's Eng.-Lat. 226). Jonson thinks probably of 
Diet, the term occurs at a later date Horace : " Rem, facias rem ; si possis 
(ed. 1761) in Steevens' sense: "To recte, si non, quocunque modo rem." 
traverse the ground as a fencer Com- 384. Go to} See in. iii. 209. 
ponere ad prceliandum gradum, Petr. 389. ] There is something decidedly 
Arb. 95." The meaning here is, " Set youthful in the conceited brag of lago's 



60 OTHELLO [ACTI. 

For I mine own gained knowledge should profane, 

If I would time expend with such a snipe 

But for my sport and profit. I hate the Moor ; 

And it is thought abroad that 'twixt my sheets 

He has done my office: I know not if't be true; 

But I for mere suspicion in that kind 395 

Will do as if for surety. He holds me well ; 

The better shall my purpose work on him. 

Cassio 's a proper man : let me see now ; 

To get his place, and to plume up my will 

In double knavery How, how ? Let 's see : 400 

After some time, to abuse Othello's ear 

391. snipe} snpe F I ; swain F 2, 3, 4, Rowe. 394. He has} F 3, 4 ; ffa's 
Qq, She Aa's F I, He ha's F 2. 395. Bttt} Ff, Yet Qq. 399. his} F I, 
this Qq ; to plume} to make O i. 400. /] Ff, A Qq ; knavery ] Qq, 
knavery. Ff ; Let's} Ff, let me Qq. 401. ear} Qq, eares Ff. 

in his own villainy, although the latter 396. holds me well} holds me in good 

is perfect enough to be worth the glory- esteem ; thinks well of me. Compare : 

ing in. He revels as he finds his power ' ' He holds you well, and will be led 

for devilment developing itself before At your request a little from himself," 

his mind's eye. Troilus and Cressida, II. iii. 190. 

391. snipe} "Woodcock" was in And in Much Ado, in. ii. 101, the 

common use for a fool from Stephen same expression occurs. 
Gosson (1579) down to Motteux's Rabe- 398. proper} handsome, fine, present- 

lais, 1708; and especially favoured by able. At iv. iii. 35 we are told that 

Jonson and Shakespeare. It had not " Lodovico is a proper man . . . a very 

the wit to keep its neck out of the handsome man." Further, lago ap- 

noose. In Love s Labour's Lost, iv. iii. pears to be jealous of Cassio's good 

82: " Four woodcocks in a dish," i.e. looks in v. i. 19,20. In the original tale 

four fools together, is a proverbial the " man of handsome figure " is lago. 

phrase. Heywood varies this into : Cassio's appearance is not referred to. 
"Two snights to a dish," Fair Maid 399. plume up my will} glorify, or 

of Exchange (Pearson, reprint, p. 69), put more pride into my intention, by 

1607 a confirmation of the reading doubling the knavery, 
in the first Folio. Halliwell's example 401. abuse} parallel uses of this word 

of "snipe-knave, a worthless fellow," are in Measure for Measure, v. 139, 

is an error. It should be a worthless, " I have heard your royal ear abused " ; 

or \&\i-snipe (i.e. jack=knave). The All's Well, V. iii. 395, "She doth 

"snite" may be regarded as Cotgrave abuse our ears" ; Hamlet, \. v. 58, and 

does="a little woodcock." Lear, n. iv. 310. The sense is " put- 

395, 396. I for . . . for surety} "I ting to a wrong use," "corrupting"; 

because of a bare suspicion of that kind, but ' ' in all these cases the idea of 

will treat it for a certainty." deception is prevailing" (Schmidt). 



sc.m.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 61 

That he is too familiar with his wife. 

He hath a person and a smooth dispose 

To be suspected ; framed to make women false. 

The Moor is of a free and open nature, 405 

That thinks men honest that but seem to be so ; 

And will as tenderly be led by the nose 

As asses are. 

I have 't. It is engender'd. Hell and night 409 

Must bring this monstrous birth to the world's light. 

[Exit. 

ACT II 

SCENE I. A Sea-port in Cyprus. An open place 
near the Quay. 

Enter MoNTANO and two Gentlemen. 

Mon. What from the cape can you discern at sea ? 
First Gent. Nothing at all : it is a high-wrought flood ; 

405. is of] omitted Q I ; rtature,"] nature too, Q I. 406. seem] Ff, seems Qq. 

403. dispose] disposition. Shake- "high." From "high-battled" and 

speare uses this noun again in Troilus "high-blown" to "high-swoln" and 

and Cressida, II. iii. 174. "high-viced," taking them in alpha- 

407, 408.] " Menar uno per il naso. betical order, his plays contain about 
Ital. TT}S p6s ?\/ceo-0at. This is an two dozen such combinations. This is 
ancient Greek proverb. Erasmus saith interesting, since it seems to be peculi- 
the metaphor is taken from buffaloes, arly Shakespearian. Milton followed 
who are led and guided by a ring put him with another set, as ' ' high-climb- 
into one of their nostrils. ... So we ing," "high- towered," "high-blest," 
in England are wont to lead bears" etc. about a dozen in all. I do not 
(Ray). Compare Winter's Tale, IV. find these "high" compounds prevailing 
iv. 832. See also North's Plutarch in other Elizabethan writers. Middleton 
(Tudor Trans, iii. n), 1579: "you are revels in hyphened adjectives. See his 
all content to be ledde by the noses," Wisdom, of Solomon Paraphrased, 1597. 
where it is amongst the sayings of Cato. Drayton has the expression "high- work- 
There are several variants. ing sea " in his Polyolbion (1613). 

..... c 2. flood] heavy surge. See Julius 

Act 11. Scene I. Casar, I. ii. 103. Cotgrave has "/%*, 

2. high wrought] Shakespeare re- a wave, surge, flood." In T. Howell's 

joices in adjectival compounds with Poems (ed. Grosart), 1568-81, the 



62 OTHELLO [ACT n. 

I cannot, 'twixt the heaven and the main, 
Descry a sail. 

Mon. Methinks the wind hath spoke aloud at land ; 5 

A fuller blast ne'er shook our battlements : 
If it hath ruffian'd so upon the sea, 
What ribs of oak, when mountains melt on them, 
Can hold the mortise ? What shall we hear of this ? 

Sec. Gent. A segregation of the Turkish fleet: 10 

For do but stand upon the foaming shore, 
The chidden billow seems to pelt the clouds ; 
The wind-shaked surge, with high and monstrous mane, 
Seems to cast water on the burning bear, 
And quench the guards of the ever-fixed pole : I 5 

3. heaven~\ haven Q I, Mai one. 5. hath spoke] Ff, does speake Q i, 2. 
8. mountains melt on them,'} F 3, 4 ; Mountaines melt on them, F i, 2, Q 3 ; the 
huge mountaine meslt, Q I ; mountaine melt on them, Q 2. 9. mortise~\ morties 
Qq, Ff. II. foaming] banning Q I. 12. chidden] Ff, chiding Q<\; billow] 
billowes Q 2, 3. 13. mane] Knight, mayne Qq, mains F I, 2 ; main F 3, 4, 
Rowe. 15. ever-fixed] Ff, ever-fired Qq. 

word flood is constantly applied (with parallel use of the word. Compare the 

a qualifying adjective as here) to an en- sense of to ruffle (King Lear, II. iv. 

raged sea. We have ' ' foming floodes, " 304): "the high winds Do sorely 

p. 67; "the surge of furious foming ruffle." 

flood," p. 85; "furious floodes," p. 10. segregation] separation from, 

95; "the Furious vigour of the Flood," hence dispersal. "Segregation: a 

p. 245. Never of a quiet sea. segregation, separation, severing from " 

5. at land] on land. The more reg- (Cotgrave). The word had hardly come 

ular expression, like our " ashore, " was into English use. " Segrego : to take 

"aland." Compare "cast a-land in out of the flock, to lay apart" 

another island adjoining," Amadis and (Blount). 

Barlow's Voyage (Payne, 1880, p. 219), 13. wind-shaked] " wind - shaken " 

1584; and Holland's Plinie: "both occurs in Coriolanus, V. ii. 117. Knight 

kinds being cast up a land, turne into first gave the true reading "mane" in 

the pumish stone (bk. xm. ch. xxv.). this line, formerly erroneously spelt 

7. ruffian! d\ played the ruffian, "mayne" and "maine." 
One of numerous examples of the verb 14. btirning] shining. Compare 

formed from the noun by Shakespeare. Tempest, I. ii. 336. 
Compare ' ' mammocked " ( Coriolanus, 1 5. guards . . . pole] The guards are 

I. iii. 21). A long list (not including the two principal stars, next in bright- 

these two) will be found in Abbott's ness to the Pole Star, of the constella- 

Grammar, 290. "The ruffian Boreas" tion known as the Little Bear (Ursa 

(in Troilus and Cressida, I. iii. 38) is a Minor). They lead directly to the Pole 



sc.i.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 



63 



I never did like molestation view 
On the enchafed flood. 

Mon. If that the Turkish fleet 

Be not enshelter'd and embay'd, they are drown'd ; 
It is impossible they bear it out. 

19. they] Q I, Steevens, Globe, Craig, etc.; to Ff, Q 2, 3, Dyce, Cambridge. 



Star along the Little Bear's very long 
tail, the extremity of which is the Pole. 
One of them, the nearest "guard," is 
brighter than any other star nearly as 
close to it. But the term sometimes 
included the Cynosure itself, as the 
Pole Star was called. These stars were 
known also as "load-stars" or "lead- 
ing-stars." " Before this invention 
[compass], pilots were directed in their 
night voyages by certain stars ; they 
took notice of, especially, the Pleiades, 
or Charles' Wain, and the two stars 
in the tail of the Bear, called Helice 
and Cynosure [i.e. the Lesser Bear, 
called also Helice and Cynosure], 
which are therefore called load-stars, 
or leading-stars" (Philipott, Discozirse 
on History of Navigation, 1661 ; Harl. 
Misc., ed. 1810, vii. 167). Sir Robert 
Ball in his Story of the Heavens (p. 375, 
ed. 1890) says: "The two principal 
stars of this group [Little Bear], next in 
brightness to the Pole Star, are some- 
times called the ' Guards. ' " Rolfe's 
statement, that the "Guards" was 
another name for the " Pointers " (the 
well-known stars of the Great Bear, 
/3 and a), is unsupported. Jonson, 
misled by the derivation of Arcto- 
phylax (another name for Arcturus), 
is still further away. The two stars 
here mentioned are /3 and 7 of Ursae 
Minoris, but variously placed in the 
fanciful depicting of the animal. Fur- 
ness tells us these stars " were more 
observed in Shakespeare's time than 
now for the purposes of navigation." 
Norman's Safeguard of Sailors, 1587, 
has a chapter, " Howe to knowe the 
houre of the night by the Guards." 
Greene has a similar thought : 



" And Neptune with a calm did 

please his slaves, 
Ready to wash the never-drenched 
bear" 

(Never Too Late), 1590. 

16. molestation] trouble. Low-Latin, 
molestatio. In Smith's Virginia (ed. 
Arber, p. 655), 1616, the term is used 
with reference to the sea : " they would 
build him a boat . . . should go a 
fishing all weathers. . . . Having made 
choise of a place most fit from molesta- 
tion, they went forward with that ex- 
pedition, that in a short time shee was 
brought to perfection." Disturbance of 
the water. 

17. enchafed'} Compare Holland: "of 
all other beasts, he alone after this 
manner enchaufeth himselfe, and giveth 
an edge to his anger" (Plinie's Nat. 
Hist, bk. via. ch. xlv.), 1601. Shake- 
speare uses the word again (later) in 
Cymbeline. 

1 8. enshelter'd] The formation of 
verbs with en or em and in or im pre- 
fixed seems to have arisen with Spenser 
and Gabriel Harvey. But no one 
adopted these forms more often than 
Shakespeare. The letter /;/ usually 
does duty, as a labiate should, before b 
and p. There are a few of Harvey's 
prior to the examples in New Eng. 
Diet, that may be adduced : ' ' enfreight, " 
1593 (Gros. ii. 17); "engraced," 1592 
(Gros. i. 219) ; " ensconce," 1593 (Gros. 
ii. 228); "ensweeteneth," 1593 (Gros. 
"95)- Jonson has some, "enstyled," 
" engallanted," etc. Spenser set the 
fashion which Shakespeare adopted 
and developed. In the present play it at- 
tains its height. Earlier and established 
Anglo-Norman forms, existing from the 



64 OTHELLO [ACTII. 

Enter a third Gentleman. 

Third Gent. News, lads 1 our wars are done. 20 

The desperate tempest hath so bang'd the Turks, 
That their designment halts : a noble ship of Venice 
Hath seen a grievous wreck and sufferance 
On most part of their fleet. 

Man. How 1 is this true ? 

Third Gent. The ship is here put in, 25 

A Veronesa ; Michael Cassio, 
Lieutenant to the warlike Moor, Othello, 
Is come on shore: the Moor himself 's at sea, 
And is in full commission here for Cyprus. 

Mon. I am glad on 't ; 'tis a worthy governor. 30 

Third Gent. But this same Cassio, though he speak of comfort 

20. lads'] lords Q I, Steevens, Malone. 21. Turks] Turke Qq. 22. a 
noble] Another Q I. 24. their] the Q I, 3. 25, 26. in, A Veronesa;} 
in: A Veronessa, Qq; in: A Verennessa, Yi;in: A Veronesso, F 2, 3, 4 ; in, A 
Veronese ; Johnson. 28. on shore] Ff, ashore Q I, a shore Q 2, 3 ; the Moor 
himselj "s] Steevens, Craig, etc. 5 the Moor himself Ff, Qq, Globe. 

time of Chaucer, paved the way. See occurs in Hakluyt : "he continued 

note at " enwheel," line 87. his former designment and purpose," 

1 8. embay 'd] Not the Spenserian Hayes' Narrative of Gilberts Voyage 

word (Faerie Queene, II. viii. 55 and II. (Payne, 1880, p. 180), 1583. 

xii. 60) which signifies "embathed," or 23. sufferance} distress, disaster, 

"steeped in," as later in Milton; but quasi " suffering." An abnormal use 

the legitimate and forcible term of the the old word "suffraunce" meaning 

early mariners, meaning " sheltered as properly patience, 

in a bay." Compare " Embay'd in the 26. Veronesa] A disputed reading. 

Grand Bay," Hayes' Narrative of Malone pointed out that Verona was 

Gilberfs Voyage (Payne, 1880, p. 187), a city belonging to Venice, and may 

1583; "a great dead fish, which as it therefore be supposed to have fitted 

should seem had been embayed with out ships for her use. The people of 

ice," Best's Narrative of Frobisher's Verona are called the Veronesi in 

Second Voyage (to. p. 79), 1577. Thomas's History of Italy (e.g. Paolo 

21. bang'd] implies many repeated Veronese). The "Third Gentleman" 
blows: "battered," like the French has had conversation with Cassio, and 
battu. Compare Cotgrave, il Fripper\ knows all the details. Elze invented a 
To beat, bang, belam, belabour." word verrinessa, which Furness trans- 

22. designment} design, plan. See lates "cutter, "and is inclined to accept. 
Corio/anus,v,\i. 35. An earlier example 30. 0;/V]ofit. 



sc. i.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 65 

Touching the Turkish loss, yet he looks sadly 
And prays the Moor be safe ; for they were parted 
With foul and violent tempest. 

Mon. Pray heaven he be ; 

For I have served him, and the man commands 35 
Like a full soldier. Let 's to the seaside, ho ! 
As well to see the vessel that 's come in 
As to throw out our eyes for brave Othello, 
Even till we make the main and the aerial blue 
An indistinct regard. 

Third Gent. Come, let 's do so ; 40 

For every minute is expectancy 
Of more arrivance. 

Enter CASSIO. 

Cas. Thanks, you the valiant of this warlike isle, 

That so approve the Moor 1 O, let the heavens 

34. heaven] Qq, Capell, Steevens, Craig ; heavens Ff, Globe. 39, 40. Even 
. . . regard} omitted Q I. 39. the aerial} Pope ; tK Eriall F I, 2, 3 ; tK 
Ayre all Q 2, 3 ; tK Erial F 4. 42. more arrivance~\ Qq, more Arrivancie 
F r. 43. Thanks, you the] Thankesyou, the Ff, Thankes to the Qq ; warlike} 
Ff, worthy Q i, omitted Q 2, 3. 44. O, let} Oh let Ff, and let Qq. 

32. sadly} gravely, seriously. and rose of the fair state." "Expectance" 

34. With} the causal "by." (expectation) is in Trot/us, iv. v. 146. 

36. full} accomplished, perfect. Both forms are used at present, amongst 

Rolfe's citation from Ant. and Cleop. lawyers chiefly ("estate in expectancy"). 

(ill. xiii. 87) is hardly apposite, as " Expectancy " is first instanced in New 

Schmidt points out. Compare Webster, Eng. Diet, from Holland's Livy, 1600. 

White Devil, i. 1(1612), " Have a full 42. arrivance} arrival. The"arriv- 

man within you." ancie " of the Folios was used later by 

40. regard] view, aspect. The Sir Thomas Browne. The present is 
French sense. See The Lover's Com- the earliest example in New Eng. Diet, 
plaint, 213. Compare Holland's Plinie, The number of words of this form in 
xxvn. ix. : " Empetron . . . groweth Othello is noteworthy. 

upon mountains regarding the sea, and 43, 44.] Cassio has had time to receive 

commonly upon rocks and stonie cliffs." some demonstrations of welcome ; and 

41. expectancy} expectation, hope, the " third gentleman " heard the news. 
The latter sense, since there is anxiety Furness makes a difficulty of this in a 
about Othello, is better. Compare note on line 26, q.v. 

Hamlet, in. i. 160 : "the expectancy 



66 



OTHELLO 



[ACT ii. 



Give him defence against the elements, 45 

For I have lost him on a dangerous sea. 
Mon. Is he well shipp'd? 
Cas. His bark is stoutly timber'd, and his pilot 

Of very expert and approved allowance ; 

Therefore my hopes, not surfeited to death, 50 

Stand in bold cure. 

[ Within : " A sail, a sail, a sail ! " 

Enter a fourth Gentleman, 

Cas. What noise? 

Fourth Gent. The town is empty ; on the brow o' the sea 



45. the] Ff, their Qq. 
F I, 2, Q 2 ; hope's not . 



50. hopes, not . . . death,} hope's (not 
. death, Q i, as above F 3, 4. 



death) 



48, 49. pilot , . . allowance'] pilot 
who is allowed (acknowledged) to be 
very expert and approved (experienced). 
Other paraphrases are suggested, but 
this seems a simple one. 

50. hopes, not . . . death] The words 
in this strongly disputed passage, from 
"not" to "death," are enclosed as a 
parenthesis in the Folios, a circumstance 
which sometimes assists the meaning. 
The enclosed words, replaced by some 
such expression as "by no means in 
great abundance," give good sense. 
"On account of his good ship and his 
expert pilot, my hopes, not by any 
means (far from it) excessive, stand 
boldly in hope of being fulfilled." In 
order to give this sense, " to death " 
must be regarded as meaning merely 
"immoderately," as it frequently does 
in Shakespeare: "broiled to death," 
"frozen to death," " Falstaff sweats to 
death," etc. The sense of the word 
"surfeited" (taken greedily) is natural 
enough. " Gorged " has a parallel use. 
A man may gorge food greedily, or 
gorge himself with food greedily. This 
kind of involved difficulty seems to me 
quite Shakespearian. The parenthesis, 



it will be seen, has no reference to the 
welfare of the hopes, but merely act as 
an aside to characterise their quantity. 
However, a simpler explanation is, 
I think, available, if the above be re- 
jected. It is, that the included words 
be taken as a case of that figure of 
speech wherein an idea is rendered 
more forcible by being contrasted with 
its opposite. "My hopes, not im- 
moderately lusty (certainly not, they 
were meagre in the extreme), grow 
healthy." Such a mode of speech is, 
and I suppose has always been, common. 
Compare iv. ii. 67 : "honest ... as 
summer flies are in the shambles." 

51. Stand in bold cure] Compare 
"Stand in hard cure," Lear, in. vi. 
107. 

53. the brow o 1 the sea] the margin 
or edge of the sea. The shore. This 
phrase would hardly be used now in 
ordinary language, but it is common, 
provincially, in the North of Ireland, 
pronounced ' ' broo. " Such expressions 
as " the broo of a river," " the broo of 
the lough" are familiar. One said to 
me recently, " the tide came up to the 
broo of the road" (Lough S willy). 



sc. i.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 67 

Stand ranks of people, and they cry " A 

sail ! " 

Cas. My hopes do shape him for the governor. 5 5 

\Guns heard. 
Sec. Gent. They do discharge their shot of courtesy : 

Our friends at least. 
Cas. I pray you, sir, go forth, 

And give us truth who 'tis that is arrived. 
Sec. Gent. I shall. [Exit. 

Mon. But, good lieutenant, is your general wived ? 60 

Cas. Most fortunately : he hath achieved a maid 

That paragons description and wild fame ; 

One that excels the quirks of blazoning pens, 

55. governor} Ff, government Qq. 56. their} Ff, the Qq. 57. friends} 
Ff, friend Qq. 63. quirks of} omitted Q I. 

56. courtesy] Compare " he gave the verb (Paradise Lost, x. 426) which 
them certaine pieces of ordinance after seems to have been introduced by 
the curtesie of the Sea for their wel- Shakespeare. Nares refers (erroneously) 
come" (Sir John Hawkins, Second to Sidney. 

Voyage to West Indies, 1564 (Hakluyt 63. quirks} a conceit, or quick term 

ed., 1810, ii. 532, 1599). of thought or speech. Shakespeare's 

60. wived} Shakespeare frequently Much Ado (n. iii. 345) is an early 
uses the Old English verb, "wive." It reference (1598). Probably originally 
was preserved in several proverbs, as a lawyer's expression. Compare Ben 
"There's thriving in wiving"; "A Jonson (who constantly uses it) : "This 
man may not wive and thrive all in one is your lawyer's face, a contracted, 
year"; "Hanging and wiving go by subtle, and intricate face, full of quirks 
destiny." and turnings," Cynthia's Revels, II. i. 

61. achieved} obtained, gained. l6cvz (1600). Blount gives as the 

62. paragons} The verb occurs three second meaning of Quiddity, ' ' a querk 
times in Shakespeare, this being the or subtle question." And the translator 
first use. Schmidt gives to the other of Rabelais (iv. 52) renders quolibetz, 
examples (Henry VIII. ii. iv. 230, and "quirks." 

Antony and Cleopatra, I. v. 71) dis- 63. blazoning} praising. Compare 
tinct senses. All belong to the French Romeo and Juliet, ii. vi. 26. " Bla- 
word from which it is taken : "Para- sonner, to blaze arms ; also, to praise, 
gonner, to paragon ; equal, match, or extol, commend ; or, to publish the 
compare with ; also, to examine, or praises, divulge the perfections, pro- 
trie the goodness of a thing, by com- claim the virtues of; also (the con- 
paring it with other (excellent) things " trary), to reprove . . . ; in which 
(Cotgrave). The last is the required sense we also use the word blaze " 
meaning fully set forth. Milton uses (Cotgrave). 



68 



OTHELLO 



[ACT n. 



And in the essential vesture of creation 
Does tire the ingener. 



Re-enter Second Gentleman. 

How now ! who has put in ? 65 

65. tire the ingener] Steevens conj., Dyce, Globe, Craig, etc. ; tyre the Inge- 
niucr. Ff; beare all excellency : Q I, Pope, Steevens, Malone ; beare an excel- 
lency Q 2, 3, Rowe. 



64.] Shakespeare does not use the 
word "essential "elsewhere, and perhaps 
its meaning is more doubtful than the 
other terms in this and the following 
disputed lines. " 'Essential,' belonging 
to the essence or being of a thing 
(Blount) came into use as a theological 
or philosophical term. Gabriel Harvey 
has it only once, and he is a regular 
museum of neology ; he places it along- 
side of "practicable" (Grosart, ii. 36, 
1593)) m tne sense of real, existent. 
But a better clue to Shakespeare's sense 
may be derived from his use of ' ' essence " 
in this play : " Her honour is an es- 
sence that 's not seen" (iv. i. 16). There 
the term means elemental substance. 
Shakespeare formed his adjective from 
this word, and his meaning is of a more 
spiritual tendency than the word's pre- 
sent use contains. This would give 
some such sense to the line as "the 
etherially pure, or celestial, garb of her 
nature does tire," etc. "Creation" is 
equivalent to "nature," as in Sonnet 
127, and Merchant of Venice, III. ii. 
116. This appears to be the meaning, 
though the wording renders it difficult 
to arrive at. Johnson's sense of "real 
qualities with which creation has in- 
vested her " (accepted by Rolfe) would 
refer to her substantial or physical en- 
dowments. Cassio (who is intimate 
with "the divine Desdemona") aims 
at a higher flight than this. In those 
respects she "paragons description." 
And in the supremer consideration of 
her pure and higher nature, her eulogy 
would wear out the contriver. 

65. tire the ingener] weary the one 



who designs, or attempts, to describe 
it ; or compose the narration of it. 
" Tire " has a strong sense of extreme or 
over weariness several times in Shake- 
speare, as in " Tired with all these for 
restful death I cry " (Sonnet 66). The 
word otherwise seems trivial. ' ' Ingener " 
in the sense of "contriver" is abund- 
antly common, and its spelling is of no 
moment. See the collection of variants 
in New Eng. Diet. One instance will 
suffice; it is quoted by Halliwell : "Our 
worthy poets, inginers of wit, Pourtray 
these knights in colours" (Middleton, 
Time's Metamorphosis, 1608). The 
passage from Sejanus, i. i, is a bad 
example, since the word has there a 
distinctly bad sense of "scheming 
plotter," as it has again at the end of 
the fourth Act of Eastward Ho (Jonson, 
Chapman, etc.), which are both plays 
date for date almost with Othello. But 
the word was common. Brinsley 
Nicholson reaches so high a pitch of 
elaboration that one cannot see the 
wood for the trees. I totally disagree 
with his sense of the word " tire," from 
the "head-dress." Similarly, Steevens 
refers it to a well - known form of 
"attire"; but both these senses (prac- 
tically identical) add much to the 
difficulty of unfolding the construction 
of the sentence. Most of the notes are 
wasted energy over the meaning, de- 
rivation, or orthography of the word in 
the first Folio, "ingeniver," which, as 
Nicholson says, is merely the French 
ingenieur, a naturalised word in various 
shapes. An extraneous example of 
"tired" in the stronger sense of 



sc.i.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 



69 



Sec. Gent. 'Tis one lago, ancient to the general. 

Cas. He has had most favourable and happy speed : 

Tempests themselves, high seas, and howling winds, 

The gutter'd rocks, and congregated sands, 

Traitors ensteep'd to clog the guiltless keel, 70 

As having sense of beauty, do omit 

Their mortal natures, letting go safely by 

The divine Desdemona. 

Mon. What is she? 

Cas. She that I spake of, our great captain's captain, 

67. Cas.] Cassio Ff, omitted Qq giving all speech to Sec. Gent. ; He has] Qq, 
Has Ff. 68. high] by Q I. 70. ensteep'd\ Ff, Q 2, 3 ; enscerped Q l ; en- 
scarp' 1 d Grant White ; clog] Qq ; encloggt F I, 2, 3. 72. mortal} Ff, common Qq. 



" forwearied," worn out, or to death, 
may be cited : 

" Whose trust is tyer'd, whose toyle 

in vaine is spente 

Whose pensive plaintes did beate 
the barren ayre " 

(T. Howell, Devises, 1581). 
65. put in] put into the harbour. 
The verb "to put" had and has many 
distinct nautical applications, coupled 
with various adverbs, all implying 
"move" or "go." Nares quotes 
the substantive " puttings-in " (ports) 
formed from the expression here. It 
occurs in Dekker's Dead Term (1608). 
To " put into the bay," "put to sea," 
" put forth," " put off," and " put out" 
occur of going or coming by water in 
Shakespeare. 

69. gutter d rocks'] channelled rocks. 
New Eng. Diet, quotes from Turner's 
Herbal, ii. 88 (1562): "Every lefe of 
the pine tree (is) . . . furrowed or 
guttered as sum kinde of yong grasse 
is." This is the only example prior to 
Othello. I find in Sherwood's Index to 
Cotgrave (1672) : "To gutter, caneler" 
and "guttered, caneW ; and in Cot- 
grave (1611): " Caneleure, a fluting, 
channelling, stroking, furrowing ; gut- 
ter- worke (in stone or timber)." 

70. ensteep'd} White followed Q I, 



reading "enscarped" (Old French, 
escarp^), because Shakespeare "never 
uses 'steep' in the sense of 'submerge,' 
but always in that of ' lave ' or 
'soak.' On Dyce (2nd ed.) remind- 
ing White that Henley referred to 
Othello, IV. ii. 60, White adopted 
'ensteeped' in his 2nd ed., and 
'enscarped' was heard of no more" 
(Furness). This detail is given because 
Rolfe's note (ed. 1886) is misleading. 
For verbs with the prefix en, see note 
above at " ensheltered," line 18. The 
word may be taken ' ' in his habit as he 
lived " without the extra syllable. 

72. mortal] deadly, fatal ; as in our 
"mortal wound." A favourite word 
with Shakespeare. Ben Jonson plays 
on the two meanings : 

" Whilst he himself is mortal let him 

feel 

Nothing about him mortal in his 
house " 
(Love's Welcome at WelbecK). 

74. captain's captain] Malone aptly 
refers to Richard III. IV. iv. 336 : 
" And she shall be sole victress, Caesar's 
Caesar." See below, II. iii. 325 : "Our 
general's wife is now the general." 

74. captain] Othello's style is else- 
where " general." Perhaps Cassio re- 
fers to his command ot ' ' his tall ship " 



70 



OTHELLO 



[ACT ii. 



Left in the conduct of the bold lago; 
Whose footing here anticipates our thoughts 
A se'nnight's speed. Great Jove, Othello guard, 
And swell his sail with thine own powerful breath, 
That he may bless this bay with his tall ship, 
Make love's quick pants in Desdemona's arms, 
Give renew'd fire to our extincted spirits, 
And bring all Cyprus comfort. 

Enter DESDEMONA, EMILIA, IAGO, RODERIGO, 
and Attendants. 

O, behold, 
The riches of the ship is come on shore ! 



75 



80 



80. Make 
omitted Ff. 



. . in] Ff, And swiftly come to Qq. 
83. on shore] ashore Q I. 



82. And . . . comfort] Qq, 



from which he has just landed. A 
little lower in this scene (line 211) 
Othello speaks of the "master" of 
the ship. I think Othello himself 
"captained" her. Compare the first 
words of Smith's Accidence for Young 
Sea-men, 1626 : " The captaine's charge 
is to command all, and tell the Maister 
to what Port he will go or to what 
height. In a fight he is to give direc- 
tion for the managing thereof, and the 
Maister is to see to the cunning the 
ship, and trimming the sailes." 

75. conduct] escort. Compare Mer- 
chant of Venice, iv. i. 148 ; and Jonson : 
" Come, gentlemen, I will be your 
conduct" (Every Man Out, n. i. 

1599). 

77. sennight] seven night, week. 
Shakespeare uses the term again in 
As You Like It and Macbeth. Com- 
pare Jonson: "feed it about this day 
sev'n-night" (Alchemist, v. 2), and 
elsewhere in Ben Jonson. 

77- Jove] The heathen deity is com- 
monly, and seriously, invoked many 
times in Shakespeare's plays and in 



those of his contemporaries. Malone 
cavilled at the word here, and Hudson 
actually altered it to " God." 

79. tall ship] fine, gallant. In the 
sense of stout, courageous, the adjec- 
tive was very commonly applied to a 
person. The early navigators employed 
the present expression : ' ' the loss of 
a tall ship, and (more to his grief) of a 
valiant gentleman, Miles Morgan," 
Hayes' Narrative of Gilberfs Voyage 
(Payne, ed. 1880, p. 180), 1583. See 
also Merchant of Venice, III. i. 6, and 
Richard II. n. i. 286. 

80. pants] Compare the finer use of 
"pants" in this sense in Antony and 
Cleopatra, IV. viii. 16. 

8 1. extincted] Lat. extinctus, 
quenched. An unrecognised word. 
The Old French extinction seems to 
have been the first introduction. It 
occurs in Humphrey Gifford, 1580. 

83. riches'] Schmidt distinguishes the 
cases where Shakespeare uses this word 
as a singular or as a plural. Its de- 
rivation from French richesse makes 
the former more correct, but the gram- 



sc. i.] THE MO.OR OF VENICE 71 



Ye men of Cyprus, let her have your knees. 

Hail to thee, lady! and the grace of heaven, 8$ 

Before, behind thee, and on every hand, 

Enwheel thee round ! 
Des. I thank you, valiant Cassio. 

What tidings can you tell me of my lord ? 
Cas. He is not yet arrived : nor know I aught 

But that he 's well and will be shortly here. 90 

Des. O, but I fear How lost you company? 
Cas. The great contention of the sea and skies 

Parted our fellowship But, hark ! a sail. 

[ Within : " A sail, a sail ! " [Guns heard. 
Sec. Gent. They give their greeting to the citadel : 

This likewise is a friend. 
Cas. See for the news. \Exit Gentleman. 95 

Good ancient, you are welcome: \To Emilid\ wel- 
come, mistress : 

Let it not gall your patience, good lago, 

That I extend my manners ; 'tis my breeding 

That gives me this bold show of courtesy. 

[Kissing her. 
lago. Sir, would she give you so much of her lips I oo 

As of her tongue she oft bestows on me, 

84. Ye] Qq, You Ff. 85. thee, lady} the lady Q (1695). 88. me] omitted 
F I. 89. yef\ omitted F 2, 3, 4. 92. the sea} sea F I. 94. their] Qq, 
this Ff. 95. See . . . news'] So speakes this voyce Q I. 100. Sir,] For 
Q I. IOI. oft bestows} Ff, has bestowtd Qq ; on"] Qq, F I ; ofY 2, 3, 4, Rowe. 

matical law was often neglected. Walker quotes from Beaumont and 

Chaucer makes "richesse" plural in Fletcher, The Pilgrim, I. ii. 17 (ed. 

Canterbury Tales. Dyce) : ' ' Heaven's grace in-wheel you, 

87. Enwheel} Here the prefix is used And all good thoughts and prayers 

in its proper sense of enclosing. Com- dwell about you." Obviously an echo 

pare ' ' How dread an army hath en- of Shakespeare, 

rounded him " (Henry V. IV. Prol. 96. ancient} ensign. 
36. The meaning is "encompass." 



72 



OTHELLO 



[ACT ii. 



Alas, she has no speech. 



You 'Id have enough. 
Des. 
lago. In faith, too much ; 

I find it still when I have list to sleep : 

Marry, before your ladyship, I grant, 105 

She puts her tongue a little in her heart 

And chides with thinking. 
Emit. You have little cause to say so. 
lago. Come on, come on ; you are pictures out of doors, 

102. You' Id} You would Ff. 103. In faith,] I know Q I. 104. it still 
when] Ff, it, I ; for when Q \,it still, for when Q 2, 3 ; list] Q I ; leave Ff, Q 2, 
3. 109-112. Come . . . beds] prose in F i. 109. of doors] of doore F I, 
adores Q i. 



104. list] inclination, desire. The 
verb is common, but the substantive 
seems to be rare. Compare Chaucer, 
Troilus, iii. 187 : 

" 'Y-wis,' quod she, ' myn owne 

hertes list, 
My ground of ese, and al myn 

herte dere.'" 

It may, however, be a variant of ' ' lust " 
here ; or rather the two derivations 
from the same root were not yet dis- 
tinguished. They are in the Prompt. 
Parv. (1440), where " lust " = voluptas, 
libido; and " list " = delectatio. 

109-112.] This censure of women, so 
suitable to the lips of lago, is developed 
from "a report by Mistress Shore" from 
the chronicles, according to Puttenham, 
Arte of Poesie (p. 299, Arber's ed.). 
"We limit the comely parts of a 
woman to consist in foure points, that is, 
to be a shrewe in the kitchin, a saint in 
the Church, an Angell at the bourd, 
and an Ape in the bed, as the chronicle 
reportes by Mistresse Shore paramour 
to King Edward the Fourth." Putten- 
ham's words are followed (nearly) in 
Middleton's Blurt, iii. 3. 1602 ; and 
in Wilkins' Miseries of Enforced Mar- 
riage, 1607. Line in, in the above, 
is additional to the original, and the 
alteration from "apes" to "housewives" 



(line 112) helps to confirm the sense 
given to the latter word elsewhere. 
See below, line 112. The last line has 
its periphrasis in line 115. 

109. Come on, come on] "like the 
simple ' come,' used as an interjection, 
implying an exhortation or rebuke" 
(Schmidt). Frequent in Shakespeare. 

109. pictures] refers to the painted 
faces of ladies of fashion, generally at- 
tacked by all the writers of the time. 
But this direct application of the word 
' ' picture " quasi ' ' woman " is rare. 
Here is, however, an even stronger 
example : 

" Upon a louing foole, as you shall 

heare ; 
A foole that knowes not how to use 

his eies, 
But takes a picture for an Angell's 

face, 

And in his thoughts strange won- 
ders will devise, 
To bring his wits into a piteous 

case " 

(Choice, Chance, and Change [N. 
Breton], Grosart, reprint, p. 66, 1606). 
This work was published anonymously ; 
but a careful study of Breton's works 
enables me to state positively (as 
Grosart suggested) that it is by that 
voluminous writer. 



sc. i.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 73 

Bells in your parlours, wild-cats in your kitchens, 1 10 
Saints in your injuries, devils being offended, 
Players in your housewifery, and housewives in your 
beds. 

Des. O, fie upon thee, slanderer ! 

lago. Nay, it is true, or else I am a Turk : 

You rise to play, and go to bed to work. 115 

Emit. You shall not write my praise. 

lago. No, let me not. 

Des. What wouldst thou write of me, if thou shouldst 
praise me ? 

lago. O gentle lady, do not put me to 't ; 

For I am nothing if not critical. 119 

Des. Come on, assay There 's one gone to the harbour ? 

lago. Ay, madam. 

Des. I am not merry ; but I do beguile 

The thing I am by seeming otherwise. 

113. Des.] omitted Q I, Emil. Jennens, Em. Anon. MS. (Devonshire Q i). 

no. Bells in your parlours] Robert bodily business As well as she, I am a 

Tofte in his translation of Benedetto Turk." Probably varied from the earlier 

Varchi's Blazon of Jealousy, likens a " to turn Turk," i.e. to undergo some sort 

shrew's tongue to a bell: "the shrew of great disimprovement. The present 

is reported to be of middle stature, and expression is parallel to our ' ' if I don't, 

somewhat pale or sallow of colour, I 'm a Dutchman " ; which is as old as 

with a thin lip, a Hawke's eye, and a Ben Jonson's Fox (1605). Compare 

shrill voice, that sounds as a bell" (p. also the expression " I am a Jew, " Muc h 

34, ed. 1615); and'a few lines down on Ado, II. iii. 272. 

the same page, "she scoldeth shrill 119. critical] censorious. Shake- 
like a Bell." In Peele's Old Wives speare had already used this term in 
Tale, Lampriscus says his first wife had Midsummer Night's Dream, v. i. 54- 
a tongue that " sounded in my ears The earliest reference in New Eng. 
like the clapper of a great bell." Diet, is that of Midsummer Nighfs 

112. house-wives} undoubtedly had a Dream, but the word had been intro- 

bad sense both here and later in this duced by Barnabe Barnes : " Good 

play (iv. i. 87). Compare Henry V. Sir, arise and confound those Viperous 

v. i. 85, and 2 Henry IV. in. iii. Cryticall monsters, and those prophane 

341. Atheistes of our Commonwealth," B. 

1 14. or else I am a TurK\ Compare Barnes to Gabriel Harvey (prefixed to 
Beaumont and Fletcher, The Captain, Pierce's Supererogation), Grosart's 
iv. 4 : " But if I go not about mine own Harvey (ii. 19), 1593. 



74 OTHELLO [ACT ii. 

Come, how wouldst thou praise me ? 
lago. I am about it; but indeed my invention 125 

Comes from my pate as birdlime does from frize ; 

It plucks out brains and all : but my Muse labours, 

And thus she is deliver'd. 

If she be fair and wise, fairness and wit, 

The one's for use, the other useth it. 130 

Des. Well praised ! How if she be black and witty ? 
lago. If she be black, and thereto have a wit, 

She '11 find a white that shall her blackness fit. 
Des. Worse and worse. 

Emit. How if fair and foolish ? 135 

lago. She never yet was foolish that was fair ; 

For even her folly help'd her to an heir. 
Des. These are old fond paradoxes to make fools 

laugh i' the alehouse. What miserable praise 

hast thou for her that's foul and foolish? 140 

lago. There 's none so foul, and foolish thereunto, 

But does foul pranks which fair and wise ones do. 
Des. O heavy ignorance ! thou praisest the worst 

125-128. / am . . . deliver W] as in Qq, arranged as prose in Ff. 127. 
brains] braine Qq. 129, 130; 132, 133; 136, 137; 141, 142; 147-157, and 159 
are in italics in Ff, Q 2, 3. 130. useth\ using Q I. 133. fif\hitQ i. 137. 
her to an heir.'} her, to a haire Q I. 138. fond} omitted Qq. 

125. invention'} composition ; men- about a dozen passages in Shakespeare 
tal device. I disagree with Schmidt (see V. ii. 132 for a good example), 
here, and at IV. i. 198, on this word. which gives sense to a line which evolved 

126, 127.] Steevens compares a some extraordinary remarks from earlier 
passage in The Puritan, 1607: "The commentators. See Lucrece, 556, 557 : 
excuse stuck upon my tongue, like ship- "Her sad behaviour feeds his vulture 
pitch upon a mariner's gown." Com- folly, A tyrant gulf that even in plenty 
pare Lyly, Mother Bombie, iv. 2, 1594 : wanteth." The sense was French. 
"A scrivener's shop hangs to a Serjeant's Cotgrave has " Folie aux gardens. 
mace, like a burre to a freeze coat." Leachery ; and hence Faire folie. A 

133. white'} Schmidt calls attention woman to play false," etc. Compare 

to the pun on "wight." Deuteronomy xxii. 21 ; Hoseaii. 10, etc. 

137. folly} inordinate desire, wanton- 138. fond] foolish, silly. The com- 

ness. Schmidt finds this meaning in monest sense of the word at this time. 



sc. i.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 



75 



best. But what praise couldst thou bestow on 
a deserving woman indeed, one that in the 145 
authority of her merit did justly put on the 
vouch of very malice itself? 
lago. She that was ever fair and never proud, 

Had tongue at will and yet was never loud, 

Never lack'd gold and yet went never gay, 150 

Fled from her wish and yet said " Now I may ; " 

She that, being anger'd, her revenge being nigh, 

Bade her wrong stay and her displeasure fly ; 

She that in wisdom never was so frail 

143. thou praises f\ Ff, that praises Qq. 146. merit} Ff, merrits Q I, merits 



144 et seq.} Steevens (ed. 1793) wrote 
"The hint for this question, and the 
metrical reply of lago, is taken from a 
strange pamphlet, called Choice jChance, 
and Change, or Conceits in their Colours, 
1606 ; when after Tidero has described 
many ridiculous characters in verse, 
Arnophilo asks him, ' but, I pray thee, 
didst thou write none in commendation 
of some worthy creature?' Tidero 
then proceeds, like lago, to repeat 
more verses. " The only objection to be 
made to this entirely apt parallel, is 
that, according to the accepted date of 
Othello (1604), the "hint" came from 
Shakespeare to Breton (see above, note 
to line 109), and not vice versd. The 
author of the pamphlet (reprinted by 
Grosart) varies his metre to the regular 
alternately rhymed lines in his ' ' Epi- 
grammaticall Sonnets," of which there 
are a dozen well worth perusal. The 
prose in this tract is the thinnest possible 
stuff, unworthy even of " N. B." 

145-147. one that . . . malice itself} 
one whose great merit even malice itself 
would vouch for. 

148.] One of the sonnets referred to 
above begins 

" She that is neither faire, nor riche, 
nor wise 



And yet as proude as any Pea- 
cocke's taile, 

Mumps with her lippes and winketh 
with her eies, 

And thinkes the world of fooles will 

never faile." 

In connection with the date of Othello, 
the parallel is of interest. 

149. Had tongue at will} Mr. Craig 
gives me a good instance : "in short 
time he became a perfect pleader, and 
had tongue at will," North's Plu- 
tarch's Lives, Cato, p. 370 (ed. 1596), 
1579. See also Cotgrave, " Ernbabille. 
Un courtisan bien em. Well-spoken ; 
that hath tongue at will, or that wants 
no Babil" (ed. 1673). This appears 
therefore to have been a recognised ex- 
pression. "At will," i.e. "at pleasure," 
occurs several times in Shakespeare. 
Compare Chester's Love's Martyr, ' ' to 
the inward sence gives strength at will " 
(Grosart, p. 102), 1601 ; and later, p. 
ill. And see T. Howell : "Sithe 
wee are now in pleasaunt place, Where 
cache may speake his minde at will " 
(Poems, ed. Grosart, ii. 142, 1568). 
"Wind at will" occurs early (1580) in 
Hakluyt, and in Peele's Tale of Troy, 
1589. 



76 



OTHELLO 



[ACT ii. 



To change the cod's head for the salmon's tail ; 155 
She that could think and ne'er disclose her mind, 
See suitors following and not look behind ; 
She was a wight, if ever such wight were, 



157. See . . . behind] omitted Q I. 
F I) ; if . . . were] in brackets Ff, Q 2. 
To Des. Seymour. 

155. To change the cod's head for the 
salmon's tail] "Cod's head" had a very 
definite meaning long before and after 
this was written = a fool. "To couch 
a cod's head " was an old witticism for 
putting a fool (i.e. " one's self") to bed. 
See Marriage of Wit and Science (Haz. 
Dods. ii. 365), 1570. lago pays Des- 
demona's wisdom the compliment of 
preferring even a bit of the best of 
fishes, a thing of true worth, for all of 
an empty-headed courtier. A few early 
instances of this word must be given. 
Nares has two late ones. Halliwell 
implies that it is still in use. " He that 
fishes for him might be sure to catch a 
cod's head" (Gascoigne, Supposes, \ 566); 
" Thou, that hast great experience . . . 
to be handled like a cod's head in thy 
olde dayes," North, Dent's Philosophy, 
(Jacob's ed., p. 170), 1570. At the 
beginning of the second Act of Beau- 
mont and Fletcher, Woman Hater, 
4 ' A fish-head ? Gond. Whence comes 
it ? Sero. From the court. Gond. Oh, 
'tis a cod's head," seems to place this 
sort of fool naturally at court, like the 
"wealthy curled darlings" of Venice. 
Shakespeare does not use this term 
again, and only once refers to salmon. 
The "tail" is put in merely in apposi- 
tion to the ' ' head " of the previous 
expression, which it is worth mentioning 
is used again unmistakably in the Choice, 
Chance, and Change sonnets. The line 
has a proverbial ring, and may be 
paralleled by an Old English one in Hey- 
wood and Camden : " The leg of a lark 
is better than the body of a kite." The 
meaning given here to "cod's head" 
does not seem to have been previously 
suggested. Steevens quoted an extract 
from Queen Elizabeth's Household Book 



158. wight] Qq, wights Ff (wightes 
158, 159. were, Des. 70] were, 

(43rd year) : " Item, the Master Cookes 
have to fee all salmon's tailes," etc. 
This shows them naturally to have 
been perquisites of some value, though 
Steevens draws an opposite conclusion. 
In confirmation of the value of the tail 
of the salmon, I find in Holland's 
Plinie (ix. 15): "howsoever in other 
fishes [excepting the Tunney] the taile- 
piece is in greatest request, as being 
most stirred and exercised " so that 
"even a bit" above may read "the 
best bit." 

158. wight} person, either male or 
female. Nares quotes from Drayton's 
Muses Elizium and from Ferrex and 
Porrex for the latter sense. Halliwell 
gives an earlier example. This jingle 
consists much in playing upon words. 
Why not add another, and carry over 
the "white" and "wight" from above 
to the present line, and make the white 
to "chronicle small beer," have a refer- 
ence to chalking it on the post ? It 
is a very old phrase, and the practice 
was most familiar. Two instances will 
suffice : " But when they would walke, 
Were fayne with a chalke, To score on 
the balke," Skelton, Elynour Rum- 
myng(Dyce, p. 114), circa 1515. And 
" Besides he [the Vintner] hath some 
scores, which if you looke ; they make 
his postes look white and black his 
booke" (Taylor, Travels of Twelvepence, 
p. 70, ed. 1630). And see Nashe's 
Pierce Penniless (Grosart, ii. 18), and N. 
Breton, Pasquils Foole's Cap (Grosart, 
pt. xvi. 210), circa 1600. The ordinary 
explanation, duetoSteevens, of "keeping 
the accounts of a household" is no doubt 
correct. This was a part of the duty. 
Compare, too, Greene's Groatsworth 
of Wit: "living in extreme poverty, 



sc. i.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 



77 



Des. To do what ? 

lago. To suckle fools and chronicle small beer. 160 

Des. O most lame and impotent conclusion ! Do 
not learn of him, Emilia, though he be thy 
husband. How say you, Cassio ? is he not a 
most profane and liberal counsellor? 

Cas. He speaks home, madam: you may relish him 165 
more in the soldier than in the scholar. 

lago. [Aside] He takes her by the palm : ay, well 
said, whisper: with as little a web as this will 
I ensnare as great a fly as Cassio. Ay, smile upon 

169 fly} Flee Q i, Flie Q 2. 



having nothing to pay but chalke, which 
now his host accepted not for currant." 
1 60. chronicle} This word came to 
have a trivial sense from the " minute 
industry " with which Fabian, Holling- 
shed, Stow, Baker, etc., registered every 
unimportant event in their "useful but 
desultory pages." See Gifford, note to 
Massinger's A New Way to Pay Old 
Debts, iv. 2. So Day, " 'Twas admir- 
able, does not this jest deserve to be 
chronicled?" (Law Trickes, 1608). 
When leaving this somewhat puerile 
and unworthy dialogue, it seems hard 
to say much in favour of it. One would 
be almost glad to find somehow that it 
was a later insertion, foisted in by an 
author-actor (Armin, e.g.} to tickle the 
ears of the groundlings. To my mind 
Breton's sonnets on the same lines 
(referred to above) contain more grit 
and wit both. One would rather think 
an inferior hand "took a hint" from 
them. For the resemblance is too palp- 
able to be accidental. That abominable 
Rymer (see Furness' Othello, passim 
et ad nauseam) is more justified in his 
vulgarities here than usually. He says, 
' ' Now follows a long rabble of Jack- 
pudding farce . . . below the patience 
of any country kitchenmaid with her 
sweetheart," etc. (Short View of Tra- 
gedy, 1693). 



160. small beer] So Bobadil, "A 
cup of small beer, sweet hostess " (Ben 
Jonson, Every Man in his Humour, 
i. 4). Often called "single beer." 

164. profane'} coarse in speech. lago 
had already earned this epithet. Com- 
pare 2 Henry IV. v. v. 54, and Cym- 
beline, II. iii. 129. 

164. liberal] wanton, free-spoken. 
See below, v. i. 218. Compare Hamlet, 
iv. vii. 171. Steevens quotes, "But 
Vallinger, most like a liberal villain, 
Did give her scandalous, ignoble terms " 
(Fair Maid of Bristow}. Nares cites 
Beaumont and Fletcher, The Captain : 
' ' And give allowance to your liberal 
jests upon his person." 

164. counsellor'] talker. Seeffam/et, 
III. iv. 213 ; Tempest, I. i. 23. | 

165. home} unreservedly. Often used 
by Shakespeare in this sense. " She '11 
tax him home" (Hamlet, in. iii. 29, 
etc. ). 

167. palni\ See note, line 260. 

167, 168. well said} well done. See 
below, iv. i. 107 and V. i. 98. Dyce 
pointed this out in a note to The 
Maid's Tragedy, i. 2, in his edition ot 
Beaumont and Fletcher. Compare 
"Enter servants with a banquet; well 
said, I thank you " (Beaumont and 
Fletcher, Wit at Several Weapons, v. I, 
and again v. 5). It is very common. 



OTHELLO 



[ACT n. 



her, do; I will gyve thee in thine own courtship. 170 
You say true ; 'tis so, indeed : if such tricks as 
these strip you out of your lieutenantry, it had 
been better you had not kissed your three ringers 
so oft, which now again you are most apt to play 
the sir in. Very good ; well kissed ! an ex- 175 

170. gyve thee] F 2; give thee F I, 3, 4; catch you Qq ; thine] Ff, your 
Qq ; courtship] courtesies Q I. 1 75- Very] omitted Q I ; an] Q I ; andFf, 
Q2.3- 



170. gyve] fetter. The substantive 
occurs several times {Romeo and Juliet, 
II. ii. 180, and Cymbeline, v. iv. 14, 
etc.), the verb only here in Shakespeare. 
Compare Ben Jonson : 

"Where yet she had gyved 

Them so in chains of darkness, as no 
might 

Should loose them hence " 

(Masque of Beauty, 1608-9). 

170. courtship] courteousness. Com- 
pare Lovers Labour s Lost, V. ii. 363, and 
Richard II, I. iv. 24. So Massinger : 
"Yet grant him this Which a mere 
stranger in the way of courtship, Might 
challenge from you "(A Very Woman,\.i). 

1 72. lieutenantry'] office oflieutenant, 
lieutenancy. In Antony and Cleopatra, 
in. ii. 39, the word has a different sense : 
"he alone dealt on lieutenantry," i.e. 
acted by proxy. It is curious that the 
word "tenantry" has an obsolete form 
" tenancy," although the sense grew on 
different lines from the word under 
consideration. 

173. kissed . . .fingers] This was 
the courtesy of the time on coming into 
the presence of a lady. Shakespeare 
refers to it in Love's Last's Labour, IV. i. 
148 ; Taming of the Shrew, iv. i. 97 ; 
As You Like It, III. ii. 50, and Twelfth 
Night, ill. iv. 36. It seems to have 
varied in degrees of intensity and in the 
number of ringers kissed from time to 
time. It occurs as early as 1580. 
Gabriel Harvey speaks of "fore-finger 
kiss and brave embrace to the foote- 
warde" (Grosart, i. 84), as the vogue 



at that date. N. Breton has "observ- 
ing all fine ceremonies, with kissing his 
hand in putting off his hat, with a Passa 
measure pace, coming towards her sweet 
presence," Wits Trenchmore (Grosart, 
p. 15), 1597. In the pamphlet already 
referred to the lines occur : "A dapper 
fellow that is fine and neate . . . 
Can smile and simper, congey, kisse 
the hand," Choice, Chance, and Change, 
1606 (Grosart, p. 62). At the same date 
in Sir Gyles Goosecappe (Bulleris Old 
Plays, iii. 64), a gallant "tooke time 
Still as the conference served to shew my 
courtship In the three quarter legge and 
settled looke The quicke kisse of the top 
of the forefinger "; he calls this the "good 
accost." And finally in Beaumont and 
Fletcher, Nice Valour, i. i. (circa 
1624): "-Enter the Passionate Lord; 
he makes a congee or two to nothing 
. . . See how it kisses the forefinger 
still, Which is the last edition." This 
last play was probably written earlier. 
These illustrations serve to show that 
Cassio's demeanour was that of an 
accomplished courtier, which lago wil- 
fully distorts to his base interpreta- 
tions. With reference to the repeated 
kissing hands, Ben Jonson speaks of 
one that seems "As he would kiss 
away his hand in kindness " in presence 
of a lady (Cynthia s Revels, iii. 2, 
1600). 

*74> I 75- to play the sir] to play the 
fine gentleman. The word was often 
used substantively for a man ; and sar- 
castically as here in Cymbeline, I. i. 



sc.i.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 79 

cellent courtesy ! 'tis so, indeed. Yet again 
your fingers to your lips? would they were 
clyster-pipes for your sake ! [Trumpet within.'] 
The Moor ! I know his trumpet 

Cas. 'Tis truly so. 180 

Des. Let 's meet him and receive him. 

Cas. Lo, where he comes ! 

Enter OTHELLO and Attendants. 

Oth. O my fair warrior ! 

Des. My dear Othello ! 

Oth. It gives me wonder great as my content 

To see you here before me. O my soul's joy! 185 

If after every tempest come such calms, 

May the winds blow till they have waken'd death ! 

And let the labouring bark climb hills of seas 

Olympus-high, and duck again as low 

As hell's from heaven ! If it were now to die, 190 

'Twere now to be most happy ; for I fear, 

My soul hath her content so absolute 

177. to} Ff, at Qq. 1 86. calms} Ff, calmenesse Qq. 

1 66 : "To draw upon an exile! O height, and Sidney Lee has pointed 

brave sir ! " Compare Ben Jonson : out Shakespeare's indebtedness to 

" Here stalks me by a proud and Ronsard, especially in his sonnets, in 

spangled sir, common with other English writers of 

That looks three handfuls higher the time (Life of Shakespeare, pp. 

than his foretop " III, 112), ed. 1899. 

Cynthia's Revels, m. ii. 1673(1600). 1 86.] This proverb, "After a storm 

178. clyster - pipes} The earliest comes a calm," is frequently met with, 
known use of this term. It occurs in and is as old as Piers the Plowman (ante 
Ben Jonson's Gipsies Metamorphosed, 1377). It is in the collections of Ray 
1621: " The devil's glyster-pipe." (who gives French and Italian equiva- 

182. warrior] See below, III. iv. lents) and Camden. " Faire weather 

151. And see note at I. iii. 163. cometh after storms tempestuous" 

Steevens tells us that Ronsard, the (Calisto and Melibcea, 1530) ; "after all 

French sonneteer, " frequently calls his this foule weather ensueth a calm" 

mistresses guerrieres." The sonneteer- (Nashe, Foure Letters Confuted, 1593). 
ing vogue had already reached its 



80 OTHELLO [ACTII. 

That not another comfort like to this 

Succeeds in unknown fate. 
Des. The heavens forbid 

But that our loves and comforts should increase, 195 

Even as our days do grow ! 
Oth. Amen to that, sweet powers ! 

I cannot speak enough of this content ; 

It stops me here ; it is too much of joy : 

And this, and this, the greatest discords be 

[Kissing her. 

That e'er our hearts shall make ! 
lago. \Aside\ O, you are well tuned now ! 200 

But I '11 set down the pegs that make this music, 

As honest as I am. 

199. discords] Ff, discord Qq ; [Kissing her.] omitted Ff, they kisse. Q I, 
Kisse. Q 2, 3. 201. make] makes Q 2, 3. 

201. set down the pegs] This expres- a couple of examples. In Chappell's 

sion is probably an adaptation of the Popular Music (i. 49) there is a good 

phrase, "to take one a peg lower," one :" 1502, Jan. 7th, To one that sett 

that is to say, to "set one down." the King's clevycordes . . . IDS. 4d." 

"Take you a pegg lower" occurs in The best illustration I find conies from 

Gabriel Harvey's Advertisement to Ainsworth, 1736 (ed. 1761), though 

Papp-hatchett (Grosart, ii. 127), 1589; somewhat late: " Verticillum : A pin 

Harvey takes it from Lyly's tract, which or peg of a musical instrument to set 

he attacks, and it became common in the strings high or low." It simplifies 

the latter half of the next century. The the meaning to suppose that lago, in his 

phrase probably had a musical origin, direct cruelty, means the two lovers, 

as indeed the present passage suggests, by the pegs that are making the sweet 

Compare the far older "to set one's music; taking the musical pegs for the 

heart on a merry pin," which was also musical instrument itself. The expres- 

probably musical in its origin. In the sion "on a merry pin," so very common 

earlier examples of that saying (Digby in and before Shakespeare's time, seems 

Mysteries and Foure Elements) the verb to go, part passu, with the present one ; 

is "set." And it has no reference to and it has been the cause of much waste 

"drinking by pins" as is suggested, of ink and paper. I find the word 

"Peg" and "pin" were synonymous " peg " in the musical sense in Holland's 

terms when both were wooden. Both Plinie, Book ix. ch. 10 (1601) : "The 

expressions, like most old ones, are of Troglodytes have among them certaine 

obscure origin, but whatever explains Tortoises, with broad homes like the 

one will throw light on the other. The pegges in a Lute or Harpe." See also 

verb "to set "had a musical significa- Howell's Vocabulary, Musical Terms, 

tion, " to tune," of which Malone gives 1659. 



sc. i.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 81 

Oth. Come, let us to the castle. 

News, friends ; our wars are done, the Turks are 

drown'd. 

How does my old acquaintance of this isle ? 
Honey, you shall be well desired in Cyprus; 205 

I have found great love amongst them. O my sweet, 
I prattle out of fashion, and I dote 
In mine own comforts. I prithee, good lago, 
Go to the bay, and disembark my coffers ; 
Bring thou the master to the citadel ; 210 

He is a good one, and his worthiness 
Does challenge much respect. Come, Desdemona> 
Once more well met at Cyprus. 

\Exeunt all but lago and Roderigo. 

lago, Do thou meet me presently at the harbour. 

204. do'es my] do's my Ff, doe our Q i> dos my Q 2; of this] of the Q I. 
209. my\ thy F 2, 3, 4. 214. thou] you F 2, 3, 4. 

202 castle'] See note in. i. i. " Ajax. An all men were o' my 

205. Honey] A common term of mind 

endearment provincially, especially in Ulyss. Wit would be out of 

Ireland, where it is applied indiscrimin- fashion " 

ately to all ages and sexes. It does (il; iii. 225, 226). 

not occur again in Shakespeare, the 208. comforts] joys, delights. So in 

passage in Henry V, (il. iii. i) being Tempest, "weigh our sorrow with our 

wrongly adduced by Schmidt. Middle- comfort" (il. i. 9); and frequently in 

ton uses it several times in The Widow, the Sonnets, etc. 

iv. i. Marston says it is a "citizen's 209. coffers'] The usual sense was a 

term" (Dutch Courtezan, iii. I, 1605), money-chest or jewel-case. Here it 

and one is inclined to endorse that. means " trunks. " Compare Cotgrave, 

205. desired] loved, beloved. Com- " Coffre : A coffer, chest, hutch, ark." 

pare Cymbeline, III. v. 62: "her The reading in Pericles ("coffer"), in. 

desired Posthumus." This is Schmidt's i. 68, is doubtful. At line 291 below, 

illustration, but the word may naturally lago tells us these were his "necessaries." 

have the sense of "much wanted" or 210. master} The epithet for the 

"wished for "in the latter passage, which captain or commander of a merchant 

is unsuitable here. Cotgrave gives " De- ship, or one not in commission. See 

sire : Desired, coveted, wished, or longed Smyth's Sailor's Word Book, who 

for ; affected, fancied; lusted after." quotes, "we spoke the Dragon, where- 

207. out of fashion] inappropriately, of Master I vie was maister," Weld, 

in an unfitting or unreasonable way. Voyage to Benin, 1590. Earlier, it 

Compare 7*roilus and Cressida : meant the pilot (Palsgrave, 1530). 

6 



82 



OTHELLO 



[Act It, 



Come hither. If thou be'st valiant as, they 215 
say, base men being in love have then a nobility 
in their natures more than is native to them 
list me. The lieutenant to-night watches on 
the court of guard* First, I must tell thee this : 
Desdemona is directly in love with him. 220 

Rod. With him 1 why, 'tis not possible. 

215. hither} Qq, thither Ff. 215-2171 as . . them} Aside as . . . them 
Anon, conj.j in brackets Ff, Q 2, 3. 2191 must] Ff, will Qq. 219, 22O 
thee this : Desdemona] Ff ; thee, this Desdemona Q l> Theobald, Q 2> 3; 



215-217. as, they say i . . native to 
them] Professor Butler (Shakspeariana, 
p, 444, Sept. 1885) refers for this senti- 
ment to Plato's Symposium (p. 1790, 
ed. Hermann). The passage he trans' 
lates, ' ' No man is such a coward that 
love would not inspire him to valor 
[or virtue in the classical sense] that he 
would become like him who is bravest 
[best] by nature." This takes some 
reading "between the lines." But 
though this be cited as the earliest and 
highest authority, ' ' they say " requires 
some current or recent reference. 
Burton, in his Anatomy of Melancholy, 
has the thought exactly, a little later 
(1621), "There is no man so pusillani- 
mous, so very a dastard, whom love 
would not incense, make of a divine 
temper, and an heroical spirit" (Part 
iii. sec. 3, mem. 3, p; 574, ed. 1854). 
On the previous page Burton gives 
another reference : " As it [Love] makes 
wise men fools, so many times it makes 
fools become wise ; it makes base fellows 
become generous, cowards courageous " ; 
with footnote quoting from Cardan, 
liber 2, de Sap.: "ex vilibus generosos 
efficiere solet, ex timidis audaces, ex 
avaris splendidis, ex agrestibus civiles, 
ex crudelibus mansuetos, ex impiis re- 
ligiosos, ex sordidis nitidis atque cultos, 
ex duris misericordes, ex mutis elo- 
quentes" Cardan wrote in the middle 
of the previous century. His popular 
writings had already been translated to 
English. 



216; base men] Cowden-Clarke calls 
attention to lago's openly expressed 
and insolent contempt for Roderigo ) 
"it imposes upon his victim and tames 
him into unquestioning submission." 
It is certainly remarkable. Possibly 
this may have been spoken as an 
aside. It is quite in keeping with 
lago's buoyant villany to gloat over 
his victims from behind corners and 
round "asides." He delights in 
"asides." 

219. court of guard] "Corps de 
garde. A court of guard in a camp 
or fort" (Cotgrave). The term here 
used octiurs again in Antony and Cleo- 
patra, tv. ix. The word "court" 
appears to be a mere corruption of 
"corps," and has led to confusion in 
giving the unnecessary sense of "place." 
The military term was introduced about 
1590 to England, and came to have the 
two senses (i) a company of soldiers 
on guard, and (2) a watch-post, a station 
occupied by soldiers on guard (Stanford 
Dictionary). The latter is the sense in 
Shakespeare. Compare "For if the 
round or court of guard did hear Thou 
or thy men were braying at the walls " 
(Greene, Orlando Furioso, 1591). This 
is the earliest example of the Shake- 
spearian spelling. Compare also Ra- 
leigh, Discovery of Guiana (Payne, 
1880, p. 335), "taking a time of most 
advantage, I set upon the corps de 
garde "(1595). 



sc. r.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 83 

lago. Lay thy finger thus, and let thy soul be in- 
structed. Mark me with what violence she first 
loved the Moor, but for bragging and telling her 
fantastical lies : and will she love him still for 225 
prating ? let not thy discreet heart think it. Her 
eye must be fed ; and what delight shall she have 
to look on the devil ? When the blood is made 
dull with the act of sport, there should be, again 
to inflame it and to give satiety a fresh appetite, 230 
loveliness in favour, sympathy in years, manners 
and beauties ; all which the Moor is defective 
in : now, for want of these required conveni- 
ences, her delicate tenderness will find itself 
abused, begin to heave the gorge, disrelish and 235 

a"22. finger] fingers F 4. 223. first] omitted F 2, 3. 225. and will she 
love] Qq, To love Ff. 226. thy} Ff, the Qq ; it] so Q I. 229. be, again] 
Hanmer; be again Q I, Theobald; be, again Capell, Steevens, etc. 5 be a game 
Ffi Q 2, 3, Rowe, Pope. 230. to give} Ff, give Qq ; satiety} society Q i, 2. 
231. loveliness} Love lines Q I. 

222. Lay thy finger thus] That is to Q I, 2 is not accidental, Furness re- 
say, "Don't interrupt me, but listen." marks, but is the same as that in the 
lago puts his own ringer to his lips to three other instances in Shakespeare, 
"instruct" Roderigo's mouth. The word "satiety" was recently intro- 

224. but for] only because of. For duced. It occurs in G. Harvey's Letter- 

the separate uses, see Abbott, 128, Book (Grosart, i. 149), circa 1580. 
151. Oddly enough this instance is 231. favour] face, personal appear- 

omitted in the collected examples of ance. See I. iii. 337 (note), 
"but for," both from Schmidt and 233, 234. conveniences] agreeable- 

Cowden-Clarke. Nor do I find its ness, comfort. So in Troilus and 

sense paralleled exactly elsewhere. Cressida, "exposed myself From cer- 

Schmidt's sense of "but for = were it tain and possessed convenience, To 

not for, without," does not apply here, doubtful fortunes" (ill. iii. 7). 
as it does in his twenty-five examples. 235. begin to heave the gorge] as if 

"But" has passed from its sense of about to vomit. "Gorge "is the stomach. 

" except " to that of " only " (merely). Sometimes it means that which is 

228. devil] An allusion to Othello's swallowed. In Holland's Plinie (1601) 

colour; the devil was always " painted xx. 15, occurs: "cummin seed . . . 

black." will stay immoderate vomit, yea, and 

230. satiety] satiation. The word is the sick heaving of the stomach, as if it 

used in the same sense, dealing with would cast and cannot." The term 

the affections, Venus and Adonis, 19. occurs again in Pliny, " the inordinate 

It is the third sense in Cotgrave, "a heaving of the stomach and the vain 

glutting or cloying." The spelling in proffers to vomit" (xx. 23), and else- 



84 



OTHELLO 



[ACT ii. 



abhor the Moor; very nature will instruct her 
in it and compel her to some second choice. 
Now, sir, this granted as it is a most pregnant 
and unforced position who stands so eminently 
in the degree of this fortune as Cassio does? a 240 
knave very voluble ; no further conscionable 
than in putting on the mere form of civil and 
humane seeming, for the better compassing of 
his salt and most hidden loose affection ? why, 
none; why, none: a slipper and subtle knave; 245 

237. in *V]Ff, to zVQq. 238, 239. as . . . position] in brackets F i. 238. 
a] omitted Q 2, 3. 239. eminently'} Qq, eminent Ff. 243. humane seem- 
ing} hand-seeming Q I ; compassing"} Qq, compasse Ff. 244. most hidden loose} 
hidden Q I ; affection ?~\ Ff, affections Qq. 244, 245. why, none ; why, none :] 
omitted Q i. 245. slipper and subtle] slipper, and subtle F I ; slippery, and 
subtle F 2, 3 ; subtle slippery Qq. 



where. I do not think there is any 
hawking allusion here. 

235. disrelish} distaste, dislike. 
Shakespeare has not this word else- 
where. Milton used it in Paradise Lost. 
" For dinner savoury fruits, of taste 

to please 
True appetite, and not disrelish 

thirst 
Of nectarous draught between " 

v. SOS-SOS- 

238. pregnant] full of significance. 
The word was loosely used metaphoric- 
ally. Chaucer has "pregnant argu- 
ment" (Troiltts, iv. 1179). From the 
sense "full of promise," which is the 
nearest to the Shakespearian use (com- 
pare Hamlet, III. ii. 66) to "evident," 
the gradation is natural. Compare 
Measure for Measure, II. i. 23 ; and 
Ben Jonson, "you make them smooth 
and sound . . . still you increase your 
friends. Tribulation. Ay, it is very 
pregnant " (Alchemist, iii. 2). 

239. position} See in. iii. 235. 

241. voluble'} Not as we use it, but in 
the derived sense. " Voluble', voluble; 
easily rolled. . . . Hence fickle, in- 
constant . . . ; glib, nimble, rolling, 



always running, ever turning." Com- 
pare Lovers Labour's Lost, III. 67, 
where, however, Q I reads "volable." 

241. conscionable] " which is con' 
scionable, consciencious, of a good 
conscience, or full of conscience, con- 
scientieux" (Sherwood's Index to Cot- 
grave). Not used by Shakespeare 
elsewhere. Skeat says, " an ill-coined 
word ... a sort of compromise between 
conscible and conscience-able." Compare 
"a wise and conscionable man," G< 
Harvey (Grosart, ii. 185), 1587. 

242, 243. civil and humane] welU 
mannered and courteous. " Humain \ 
gentle, courteous . . . affable ; also, 
humane, manly," etc. (Cotgrave). 

244. salt] lecherous. Halliwell gives 
"maris appetens," in which sense it is 
common in early writers on Natural 
History, as Holland's Plinie, 1601. 
Compare Measure for Measure, V. 406 
and below (in this play), in. iii. 404. 

245. slipper} slippery. Sliper is the 
early Anglo-Saxon form. "Slipper" 
occurs in Spenser's Shepheard's Cal- 
endar. The present is perhaps its 
latest appearance. Slipper was a 
favourite adjective to apply to fortune. 



sc.i.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 85 

a finder out of occasions ; that has an eye can 
stamp and counterfeit advantages, though true 
advantage never present itself: a devilish knave ! 
Besides, the knave is handsome, young, and hath 
all those requisites in him that folly and green 250 
minds look after : a pestilent complete knave ; 
and the woman hath found him already. 

Rod. I cannot believe that in her ; she 's full of most 
blessed condition. 

lago. Blessed fig's-end ! the wine she drinks is made 255 
of grapes : if she had been blessed, she would 
never have loved the Moor : blessed pudding ! 

246. a finder out of occasions] Qq, a finder of occasion Ff; has] he's F I. 
247, 248. counterfeit . . . itself:] cottnterfeit the true advantages never present 
themselves: Q i. 248. a devilish knave] omitted Qq. 252. hath] Ff, has Qq. 
254, 255, 256, 257. blessed] Globe, Craig, blest Qq, Cambridge, bless'd Ff. 
256. blessed pudding] Bless'd pudding Ff, omitted Qq. 

"To slipper happes annexed are their 255. fig's-end] A worthless thing, 

dayes " (T. Howell, Devises, 1581). Nares has a reference to Withal's 

246. occasions] opportunities. Com- Dictionary. Compare ' ' Tut, a fig's- 
pare Taming of the Shrew, n. 36, "till end!" Warning for Faire Women, I. 
I find occasion of revenge." The line 438 (Simpson's School of ^ab- 
original and classical sense, speare), 1599. Cotgrave has " Trut 

247. stamp] make valid or current, avant : A fig's end, no such matter, 
Compare Coriolanus, v. ii. 22. The you are much deceived." 

meaning is, if he never meet with a 257. blessed pudding /] Slang of the 
real advantage (opportunity) he can time, equivalent to ' ' blessed fiddle- 
forge one. sticks." As this expression is not in 

251. pestilent] plaguy. The same the dictionaries, nor elsewhere in 
expression, "pestilent knave," occurs Shakespeare, a few notes may be given, 
in Romeo and Juliet, iv. v. 147. The "A stale pudding's-end " (nothing) 
bare recital of his attractions irritates Nashe, Have with You (Grosart, iii. 
lago, who is developing a very real 57), 1596; " Ide make thee eat thy 
hate for Cassio. words, or ... eat a pudding's-end," 

252. found Aim] "taken his mea- Day, Blind Beggar, 1600; "Why, I 
sure," gauged him. Compare All's told you, Davy Bristle . . . come, 
Well, II. iii. 216, "I have now found come, you told me a pudding, Toby, a 
thee"; and Hamlet, in. i. 193. Ben matter of nothing," Ben Jonson, Bart. 
Jonson has it, "you are found, enough. Fair, iii. I, 1614 ; "lose the hour and 
A notable old pagan "(Time Vindicated), ourselves too? . . . Lose a pudding," 

254. condition] disposition. Compare Beaumont and Fletcher, The Coxcomb, 
Merchant of Venice, I. ii. 143 : " the i. 3, 1613. With these later drama- 
condition of a saint, and the complexion tists it was a favourite. It occurs in 
of a devil." Hudibras, I. iii. 220. "Horse" and 



86 



OTHELLO 



[ACT ii. 



Didst thou not see her paddle with the palm of 
his hand? didst not mark that? 

Rod. Yes, that I did ; but that was but cour- 260 
tesy, 

lago. Lechery, by this hand ; an index and obscure 
prologue to the history of lust and foul thoughts. 
They met so near with their lips that their 
breaths embraced together. Villanous thoughts, 265 
Roderigo ! when these mutualities so marshal 
the way, hard at hand comes the master and 

259. didst not mark that?} omitted Q I. 260. that I did] Ff, omitted 
Qq. 265. Villanous thoughts] omitted Q I. 266. Roderigo~\ Rodorigo Ff, 
omitted Qq ; mutualities] Qq, mutabilities Ff. 267. hard at hand] Ft, hand 
at hand Qq. 267, 268. comes . . . main] Ff, comes the main Q I, comes 
Roderigo, the master and the maine Q 2, 3. 



" dog" were similarly used. " Grand- 
mother " seems to be modern. 

258. paddle with the palm} Com- 
pare "paddling palms and pinching 
fingers" (Winter's Tale, I. ii. 115 and 
226). The use of the word palm here 
and at line 167 has significance, as a 
few quotations will show. The palm 
was taken to be the touchstone of 
warm desires ; dry and cold, it implied 
bareness and torpidity ; hot and moist, 
the reverse. Compare, in Shakespeare, 
" his sweating palm, The precedent 
of pith and livelihood " ( Venus and 
Adonis, 24, 25, and Antony and Cleo- 
patra, i. ii. 47). In Ben Jonson, Nano 
sings : " Would you be ever fair and 
young . . . Moist of hand ? and light 
of foot ? " ( The Fox, n. ii. 356 a, b) ; 
and in Devil is an Ass, i. 2 : " Love is 
brought up with those soft migniard 
handlings, His pulse lies in her palm." 
So also Beaumont and Fletcher : ' ' Ay, 
here 's a promising palm ! What a soft 
Handful of pleasures here " ( Wit at 
Several Weapons, Act II.). The above 
passages give the full force of Othello's 
remarks in ill. iv. 36-39, and show the 
absurdity of Steevens' remark referred 
to at that passage. 



262. index} The "index" was origi- 
nally a finger (" pilcrow ") placed in the 
margin of books to direct attention to 
the striking passages. Thence it came 
to mean a list or table of these placed 
in the front of the book. This is well 
illustrated by two passages in Mas- 
singer's Fatal Dowry, iii. I and iv. I : 

" Would I had seen thee graved with 

thy great sin, 
Ere lived to have men's marginal 

fingers point 

At Charalois, as a lamented story" ; 
and " Even as the index tells us the 
contents of stories, and directs to the 
particular chapters, even so does the 
outward habit . . . demonstratively 
point out (as it were a manual note from 
the margin) all the internal quality and 
habiliment of the soul." Gifford says 
here : ' ' Massinger follows Shakespeare 
in drawing his illustrations from the 
most familiar objects." Compare 
Hamlet, in. iv. 52. 

266. mutualities'} interchanges, re- 
ciprocations. Probably a coinage of 
Shakespeare. 

267. hard at hand] close by. Com- 
pare Barry's Ram- Alley, iii. I (1611): 
"But where's mad Small - Shanks ? 



sc. i.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 87 

main exercise, the incorporate conclusion : pish ! 
But, sir, be you ruled by me : I have brought 
you from Venice. Watch you to-night ; for 270 
the command, I '11 lay 't upon you : Cassio 
knows you not : I '11 not be far from you : do 
you find some occasion to anger Cassio, either 
by speaking too loud, or tainting his discipline, 
or from what other course you please, which the 275 
time shall more favourably minister. 

Rod. Well. 

I ago. Sir, he is rash and very sudden in choler, and 
haply may strike at you : provoke him, that he 
may; for even out of that will I cause these of 280 
Cyprus to mutiny; whose qualification shall 

268. fish!} omitted Qq. 270, 271. for the} Ff j for your Q I 5 for 

Q 2, 3. 275. course} cause Q I. 279. may} -with his Trunchen may Qq, 
Steevens. 

Beard. O, hard at hand, And almost pugning " (Rolfe). Compare Henry 
mad with loss of his fair bride." And VIII. in. i. 56 ; and Ben Jonson : 
Peele, Tale of Troy (1874, p. $5S a )> "There was never so willing a jest 

1589: "How Greeks with all their broken . . . Macilante. O, this ap- 

power were hard at hand. " plause taints it foully" (Every Man 

268. pish!} Occurs again, IV. i. 43 ; Out, v. 3, 1599). Schmidt finds eight 

and in Henry V. n. i. 43, 44. An different meanings for the verb in 

expression of contempt. Not by any Shakespeare. The sense he gives for I. 

means one of the common or earliest iii. 272 above is "prejudice," "injure." 

forms, like "tush" (i. i. i). Nash uses Several of them seem indistinguishable. 

it, " Pish, pish ! what talke you of olde Peele uses the word as here in the Tale 

age or balde pates?" Pierce Pennilesse of Troy (1589) : " His peers as loyal to 

(ed. Collier, p. 29, Shaks. Soc.), 1592. their royal lord As might ne tainted be 

And see Cotgrave, " Nargues : Tush, for word or deed." 
blurt, pish, fie, it cannot be so." 281. qualification} mitigation, temper- 

271. 272. Cassio knows you not} ing, appeasement. Johnson gives a 

This probably refers to Roderigo's dis- different and involved paraphrase which 

guise. See I. iii. 346. Cassio doesn't does not seem necessary. The verb 

recognise him. Cassio would certainly from which this substantive is derived is 

have known Desdemona's suitor in common in Shakespeare. See Two 

Venice. Gentlemen of Verona, II. vii. 22, etc. 

274. tainting} " throwing a slur The substantive is in Cotgrave : 

upon " (Johnson). "Discrediting, im- "Mitigation". A mitigation, qualifica- 



88 OTHELLO [ACT n. 

come into no true taste again but by the dis- 
planting of Cassio. So shall you have a shorter 
journey to your desires by the means I shall 
then have to prefer them, and the impediment 285 
most profitably removed, without the which there 
were no expectations of our prosperity. 

Rod. I will do this, if I can bring it to any oppor- 
tunity. 

Jago. I warrant thee. Meet me by and by at the 290 
citadel : I must fetch his necessaries ashore. 
Farewell. 

Rod. Adieu. \Exit. 

lago. That Cassio loves her, I do well believe it ; 

That she loves him, 'tis apt and of great credit : 295 

The Moor, howbeit that I endure him not, 

Is of a constant, loving, noble nature ; 

And I dare think he '11 prove to Desdemona 

282. taste] trust Q I ; again] again' t Qq. 286. the -which] Ff, which Qq. 
288. if I can] Qq, if you can Ff. 297. loving, noble] Ff, noble, loving Qq. 

tion, allaying, tempering, asswaging, " And then telling some man's jest, 
appeasing." Compare also, "My Thinking to prefer his wit, 
friends, depart, and qualify this stir, And Equal with his suit by it, 
see peace kept within thy walls I charge I mean his clothes ? " 
ye," Three Lords and Three Ladies of Satyr (575), 1603. 
London (Haz. Dods. vi. 460), 1599. Not 287. prosperity] successful attain- 
elsewhere in Shakespeare. ment. 

282, 283. displanting] deposing. Not 290. by and by] presently, as in V. 

elsewhere in this sense in Shakespeare, ii. 90. 

nor have I seen an instance quoted. 295. apt] fitting, suitable ; and there- 

The following is from Raleigh's Dis- fore to be expected. ' ' Apte : Apt, fit, 

covery of Guiana (Payne's Voyages, suitable, well-fitting, meet, convenient" 

1880, p. 381), 1596: "And because," Cotgrave. "Of great credit," very 

said he, " they would the better dis- credible. 

plant me . . . they have gotten a 297. constant, loving] Walker sug- 

nephew of mine ... by whom they gests a hyphen between these words, 

seek to make a party against me." since Othello's nature, though true and 

285. prefer] advance, promote. See manly, can hardly be called emphati- 

Two Gentlemen of Verona, n. iv. 157. cally a loving one. Critical Examina- 

And compare Ben Jonson ; tion, etc., i. 29 (1859), Furness. 



sc.i.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 



89 



A most dear husband. Now, I do love her too, 

Not out of absolute lust, though peradventure 300 

I stand accountant for as great a sin, 

But partly led to diet my revenge, 

For that I do suspect the lusty Moor 

Hath leap'd into my seat : the thought whereof 

Doth like a poisonous mineral gnaw my inwards ; 305 

And nothing can or shall content my soul 

Till I am even'd with him, wife for wife ; 

Or failing so, yet that I put the Moor 

At least into a jealousy so strong 

That judgement cannot cure. Which thing to do, 310 

If this poor trash of Venice, whom I trash 

302. led] Ff, lead Qq. 303. lusty} Ff, etc. ; lustfull Qq. 306. or} Ff, 
nor Qq. 307. even'd} even Qq, Steevens ; for wife} for wist F I. 311. 
trash . . . I trash} Steevens ; trash . . . I crush Q I ; Trash . . . I trace Ff, 
Q2.3- 



2 99> 3O7-] Of lago's own intentions 
or views with regard to Desdemona we 
hear no more. Yet he is very definite 
here. But jealousy and the lust for 
revenge carries every minor feeling 
away. His "inwards" are gnawed, 
and all else must go till he is even with 
Othello. 

303, 304.] See the note at i. iii. 380, 
381. lago is rapidly improving that 
which was merely " thought abroad " 
into a "surety." 

305. mineral} See the quotation from 
Chapman's (?) Alphonsus, at I. ii. 74. 

305. inwards} entrails. Compare Cax- 
ton's Reynard Fox (Arber, p. 92) : 
" The moghettes Lyver longes and the 
Inward shal be for your chyldren/' 
Compare also Holland's Plinie, xxx. 5 : 
" by this one word Prcecordia, I meane 
the inwards or entrailes in man or 
woman (the bowels, as heart, liver, 
lights, etc.)." The expression "a pain 
in the inwards " is sometimes used still. 

307. am evened} made even or quits. 
No exact parallel occurs in Shakespeare, 



but Nares gives two : " But now the 
walls be even'd with the plain," Tan- 
cred and Gismond (Old Plays ; ii. 212, 
Dodsley) ; and another example from 
Heywood's Iron Age, Pt. II. To be 
even with (the Q reading) was a common 
phrase at this time, and is perhaps 
preferable. 

311. trash ... 7 trash} This is 
Steevens' reading, which is generally 
adopted, though somewhat difficult of 
explanation. The first ' ' trash " means 
"rubbish" (referring to Roderigo), in 
which personal sense it still exists ; 
" Trash, a good for nothing character," 
Robinson, Whitby Glossary (E. Dial. 
Soc.), as Mr. Craig pointed out to me. 
See also below v. i. 85. Steevens 
justified the second "trash" for the 
early " trace " as follows : "To trash is 
still a hunter's phrase, and signifies 
[compare Tempest, I. ii. 81] to fasten a 
weight on the neck of a dog, when his 
speed is superior to that of his com- 
panions." Thus, says Caratach, in 
Bonduca I. i. (Beaumont and Fletcher) : 



90 



OTHELLO 



[ACT H. 



For his quick hunting, stand the putting on, 
I '11 have our Michael Cassio on the hip, 
Abuse him to the Moor in the rank garb ; 
For I fear Cassio with my night-cap too ; 



315 



314. rank] Qq, right Ff. 
night-cap} Night -cape F I. 



315. with] wore Anon. MS. (Devonshire Q i) ; 



" I fled too, But not so fast ; your 
jewel had been lost then, Young 
Hengo there : he trash'd me, 
Nennius." That is to say he clogged, 
checked, or restrained me. lago's 
meaning is that Roderigo was a poor 
hound, and so eager in the chase that 
he required restraint and control. The 
word "trash" as a clog for a dog's 
neck who was too forward, is mentioned 
in Markham's Country Contentments 
(l. i. 15), 1615 (Dyce). Instances of the 
verb are given in Todd's Johnson (see 
Nares). Halliwell (followed by Fur- 
ness) supports the Folio reading "trace," 
for a directly opposite purpose ; he 
makes "for his quick hunting" mean 
"in order to make him hunt quickly." 
This is not Roderigo's own view of lago's 
operations. See below, iii. 339 et seq. 
But I doubt the meaning Halliwell is 
compelled to give to " trace," i.e. 
"carefully watch him in order to 
quicken his pace." 

312. putting on] inciting. Compare 
Coriolanus, II. iii. 60. This refers, as 
Rolfe remarks, to the picking a quarrel 
with Cassio, not to this "quick hunt- 
ing " of Desdemona. 

313. have . . . on the hip] have at 
an advantage. A term in wrestling. 
Johnson in his Dictionary derives the 
expression from hunting, "and with 
more probability," Dyce adds (Re- 
marks, p. 52). Both these authorities 
appear to have come round to that view 
in order to continue the hunting meta- 
phors. Several of the instances adduced 
by Nares (who adopts the hunting 
origin) and by Dyce and others, give 
no clue to the origin. The meaning is 
obvious. Many more might be given 
(for it was a very common expression), 



but the following two confirm the 
"wrestling" view. The first is con- 
clusive because it is from the earliest 
and highest authority on proverbs. John 
Heywood cannot refer to hunting here : 
11 Then have yee him on the hip, or 

on the hirdell [loins], 
Then have yee his head fast under 

your girdell " 

Sharman's Heywood (1874), p. 124, 
1546. This is the " cross-buttock " of 
the Westmoreland system. In Beau- 
mont and Fletcher, Two Noble Kins- 
men, ii. 2, the first countryman is afraid 
to wrestle with the second countryman 
because he has a "vengeance trick o' 
the hip." See Merchant of Venice, I. 
iii. 47, and IV. i. 334 for Shakespearian 
examples. 

314. the rank garb] the grossest 
manner. "Garb" is usually employed 
in a creditable connection, but Jonson 
has "apish customs and forced garbs." 
Malone adds the sense of ' ' lustful " to 
" rank." 

315. night-cap] The allusion is to the 
cap of a cuckold becoming disturbed 
and badly fitting by his horns. There 
is a similar allusion in Much Ado, I. i. 
200. Compare Lyly's Euphues and his 
England (Arber, p. 284), 1580: "of all 
my apparel I would have my cap fit 
close." And for a late example see 
The City Night -Cap (Hazlitt's Dods. 
xiii. 130) : "So, a city night-cap go with 
thee." Unperceived allusions produce 
pointless passages. lago seems to have 
some glimmer of the duties of conscience 
when he finds it expedient to invent 
these excuses or motives for his actions. 
He did not, however, appear honestly 
satisfied when Cassio kissed Emilia 
(line 99, above). The allusion to 



sc. ii.] THE MOOR OF VEjNICE 91 

Make the Moor thank me, love me and reward me, 
For making him egregiously an ass 
And practising upon his peace and quiet 
Even to madness. 'Tis here, but yet confused : 
Knavery's plain face is never seen till used, 320 

[Exit. 

SCENE II. A Street. 

Enter a Herald with a proclamation ; People following. 

Her. It is Othello's pleasure, our noble and valiant 
general, that upon certain tidings now arrived, 
importing the mere perdition of the Turkish 
fleet, every man put himself into triumph ; some 

^i 

to dance, some to make bonfires, each man to 5 

d&^o*^ 

what sport and revels his addiction leads him : 

4. every] Ff, that every Qq. 5. to make\ Ff, make Qq. 6, addiction'} 
Q 2, 3 ; addition Ff ; minde Q I ; mind's addiction Anon. conj. 

"night-cap" appears also, perhaps working out and using of his powers, 

oftener, under its more usual name of he knows that his knavery will become 

"biggin," as in Lyly's Papp with a complete in its fashioning. 
Hatchet ( 1 588- 1 589) : ' ' That made you 

bastards, and your dad a cuckold, scene II. 

whose head is swolne so big that he had 3. mere perdition] total loss, absolute 

neede sende to the cooper to make him destruction. 

a biggin " [cooper is a Marprelate pun]. 4. put himself into triumph] place 

See also Webster's Westward Ho, himself in a condition of exultation and 

ii. I. festivity. Compare "put the Moor 

317. egregiously] exceptionally, espe- . . . into a jealousy," above (n. i. 308, 

cially. These lines should be dwelt 309). " Triumph " has here rather the 

upon in order to endeavour, if possible, special sense of an announced public 

to realise the depths of lago's com- festivity, than merely "exultation," as 

plicated and elaborate baseness. Ac- Schmidt says. Compare Pericles, II. 

cordingly as he unfolds his visions of ii. 5, etc. 

treachery, he grasps at them with 6. addiction] what one is addicted to, 

exultation : realising at once, by the inclination or taste. Shakespeare uses 

light of hell, his own fiendish ingenuity, this word again in Henry V, i. i. 54. 

in which he revels ; and the terrible The latter is the earliest known use of 

resulting misery to Othello, upon which the word (New Eng. Diet, credits 

he gloats. It is not all hatched yet. Othellowith being thefirst(P)). It occurs 

It is a little confused. But in the inPeacham's Compleat Gentleman, 1634. 



92 OTHELLO [AC. 

for, besides these beneficial news, it is the cele- 
bration of his nuptial. So much was his pleasure 
should be proclaimed. All offices are open, and 
there is full liberty of feasting from this present 10 
hour of five till the bell have told eleven, _j 
Heaven bless the isle of Cyprus and our noble 
general Othello! [Exeunt. 



. 

SCENE III. A Hallin the Castle. 

Enter OTHELLO, DESDEMONA, CASSIO, and Attendants. 
Good Michael, look you to the guard to-night : 

' r |' | '' " * ^"Kl-'V*^* 

's teach ourselves that honourable stop, 

Not to outsport discretion. 
Cos.- lago] hath direction what to do ; 

But notwithstanding with my personal eye 5 

Will I look to't. 
Oth. I ago is most honest. 

Michael, good night : to-morrow with your earliest 

8. nuptial} F I, 2, 3 ; Nuptialls Qq. IO. of feasting] omitted Qq. II. 
five] nine Capell conj.; told] Qq, F I, 2 ; toll'dY 3, 4, Rowe, Pope, etc. 12. 

Heaven] Qq, omitted Ff. 

Scene Iff. 
2. that] the Q I. 4. direction] directed Q I. 

Compare Chapman, Widow's Tears, refers to this : " Every office open, 

ante 1612: " tooke occasion to question When poor men that have worth, and 

of you, what your addictions were " want an alms, May perish ere they pass 

(Act II.). the porter's lodge" (The Sisters, 

9. offices] The parts of houses, such iii. i). 

as kitchens, buttery-hatch, etc., appro- Scene III. 

priated to servants in large establish- 
ments, where food and drink were pre- 3. outsport] revel beyond discretion, 

pared and served. Compare Timon, This word is not elsewhere in Shake- 

II. ii. 167: " where all our offices have speare. As a substantive (a place of 

been oppressed With riotous feeders" ; liberty or recreation) it is in use in the 

and Macbeth, n/i. 14, and Richard II. north of Ireland. 

1.11.69. Nares has a full note on the word 7. with your earliest] very early, as 

which has called forth dispute. Shirley early as possible. This odd construe- 



sc. in.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 93 

Let me have speech with you. Come, my dear love, 
The purchase made, the fruits are to ensue ; 
That profit's yet to come 'twixt me and you. IO 

Good night. 

[Exeunt Othello, Desdemona, and Attendants. 

Enter I AGO. "-^ 




Cas. Welcome, lago ; we must to the watch. 

lago. Not this hour, lieutenant ; 'tis not yet ten o' 
the clock. Our general cast us thus early for 
the love of his Desdemona; who let us ndt^ 15 /-, 
therefore blame : he hath not yet made ^vantop *^ 
the night with her, and she is sport for Jove. 

Cas. She's a most exquisite lady. 

lago, And, I '11 warrant her, full of game. 

Cas. Indeed she's a most fresh and delicate 20 
creature. 

lago. What an eye she has ! methinks it sounds 
parley to provocation. 

8. [To Desd.] Johnson, etc., Globe, Craig, after line 9; To Desdemona 
SteeVens (1793). 10. That} The Q I ; profit's} Ff, profits Qq ; 'twixt} twixt 
Qq, tweene Ff. 13, 14. ten o' the clock} ten aclock Qq. 15. who} Qq, F I, 
Dyce> Globe ; whom F 2, 3, 4, Steevens (1793), Malone. 23. to} Ff, 0/"Qqi 

tion, once in general use, occurs again Man in his Humour, I. iv. 15^, and 

in Shakespeare in a later play: "Go, "a great deal with the biggest" New 

And with your speediest bring us what Inn, II. i. 3490 ; Shirley has u some ; 

she says" (Antony and Cleopatra, V. i. thing of the farthest," Gamester, Act 

67). It is not common, and does not III.; while a late appearance is " stayed 

appear to be noticed by Abbott, with the longest," City Nightcap, 1661 

Schmidt, or the commentators. The (Haz. Dads. xiii. 116). Compare also 

earliest example I find is in Udall's Fletcher's Woman's Prize, iii. 5 :" what 

Erasmus (Roberts' reprint, p. 242), think you of his pulse ? Doctor. It beats 

1542: "something with the soonest." with busiest." See Greene'sjames IV. 

These words occur again in Chapman's I. ii. (ante 1592). 

Revenge for Honour, n. i ("of" in- 14. cast} dismissed, 

stead of "with"); and in Massinger's 23. parley} conference. Compare 

Emperor of the East, n. i. Ben Jonson 1 Henry IV. III. i. 204. 
has "somewhat with the least," Every 



94 



OTHELLO 



[ACT n. 



Cas. An inviting eye; and yet methinks right 

modest. 2 5 

I ago. And when she speaks, is it not an alarum to 
love ? 

Cas. She is indeed perfection. 

lago. Well, happiness to their sheets! Come, lieu- 
tenant, I have a stoup of wine; and here 30 
without are a brace of Cyprus gallants that 
would fain have a measure to the health of 
black Othello. 

Cas. Not to-night, good lago : I have very poor and 

unhappy brains for drinking : I could well wish 3 5 
courtesy would invent some other custom of 
entertainment. 

Togo. O, they are our friends ; but one cup : I '11 
drink for you. 

Cas. I have drunk but one cup to-night, and that 40 
was craftily qualified too, and behold what in- 
novation it makes here: I am unfortunate in 

26, 27. is it not an . . . love ?] Ff, tis an . . . love Qq. 30. stoup] stof>e 
Qq, Ff. 32, 33. of black] of the black Qq. 4^- unfortunate] Qq, infortu- 
nate Ff. 



30. stoup] This word is spelt " slope " 
in the early editions of Othello. It is 
in use in Donegal, but dying out (like 
"noggin" and "piggin") since the 
introduction of metal vessels. A stoup 
is a wooden vessel for carrying water, 
square in section, and larger by about a 
third at the base than at the top. It is 
especially useful for carrying water over 
rough ground, as it does not splash. It 
is commonly about two feet high, and 
about six inches across the middle. 
The vessel has to be carried in one 
hand, the handle being a crossbar 
between two of the sides an inch or two 
below the top. Irish stabh, tub or 
keeve ; Old English, stoppa . . . 



bucket, wooden mug (Stratmann). A 
' ' stoup of wine " might therefore repre- 
sent several gallons. Nash and Dekker 
both use the word " stoap " of a 
measure of wine. 

33. black Othello] See note at "sooty," 
I. ii. 70. 

41. craftily qualified] slyly tempered 
or diluted with water. We must sup- 
pose Cassio has already had a "mea- 
sure " with some of the Cypriotes, where 
his loyalty compelled him to toast 
Othello. See note n. ii. 43. 

42. innovation] alteration, but used 
here in the special sense of ' ' disturb- 
ance," "commotion"; I suppose, 
alluding to his features. This meaning 



sc.m,] THE MOOR OF VENICE 95 



the infirmity, and dare not task my weakness 

with any more. 
lago. What, man! 'tis a night of revels: the gallants 45 

desire it 

Cas. Where are they ? 

lago. Here at the door ; I pray you, call them in, 
Cas, I '11 do 't ; but it dislikes me. [Exit, 

lago. If I can fasten but one cup upon him, 50 

With that which he hath drunk to-night already, 

He '11 be as full of quarrel and offence 

As my young mistress' dog, Now, my sick fool 
Roderigo, 

Whom love hath turn'd almost the wrong side out, 

To Desdemona hath to-night caroused 5 5 

Potations pottle-deep ; and he 's to Watch : 

54, out] Ff, ottMard Qq Steevens* 



appears to have escaped the many com- 
mentators on Hamlet (n. ii. 347), but 
it certainly existed, and may be helpful 
there. Compare 1 Henry IV. V. 
L78: "hurly burly innovation." And 
Chettle, Kind Hearfs Dreame (New 
Shak. Soc. p. 66), 1592 : "to see the 
shameful disorder and routes that some- 
time in such publike meetings [plays] 
are used. The beginners are neither 
gentlemen, nor citizens, nor any of both 
their seruants, but some lewd mates 
that long for innovation ; and when 
they see advantage . . . they will . . . 
make boote of clothes, hats, purses, or 
whatever they can lay holde on in a 
hurley bur ley" In Beaumont and 
Fletcher {Four Plays in One] "the inno- 
vation laid again " has the same sense. 
Chettle's passage, however, is conclusive, 
and requires no sense of "change," 
merely a "row" or "ruction"; a 
" hurly burly," as both he and Shake- 
speare call it. 

49. dislikes} displeases. Compare 



Romeo and Juliet, ii. ii. 61. A frequent 
use, as in Daniel, Sonnet, 54 : 

"Like as the lute delights, or else 

dislikes, 
As is his heart that plays upon the 

same 

So sounds my muse." 
And Ben Jonson, ' ' would I had broke 
a joint, When I devised this that so 
dislikes her." Every Man Out, II. ii. 

55. caroused] Carouse was a technical 
drinking term introduced from the 
Dutch " gar aus, trinken," to drink all 
out, empty the bowl. It occurs twice 
in Rabelais ; " to quaffe carowse " is the 
first example (in any sense) of the word 
in New Eng. Diet, from Drant's Horace, 
1567. The English term for this sort 
of drinking was "All-out" (Palsgrave, 
1530). Cotgrave has " Alluz : All-out, 
or a carouse fully drunk up." 

56. pottle-deep] To the bottom of the 
tankard. A pottle was properly two 
quarts. 

56. he's to -watch] See II. i. 270, 271. 



96 



OTHELLO 






[ACT H. 




Three lads of Cyprus, noble swelling spirits, 

That hold their honours in a wary distance, 

The very elements of this warlike isle, 

Have I to-night, fluster'd with flowing cups, 60 

And they watch too. Now, 'mongst this flock of 

drunkards, 

Am I to put our Cassio in some adtion 
That may offend the isle. But here they come : 
If consequence do but approve my dream, 
My boat sails freely, both with wind and stream. 65 



Re-enter CASSIO ; with him MoNTANO and Gentlemen ; 
Servants following with wine. 

Cas. Fore God, they have given me a rouse 
already. 

57. lads'] Qq, else Ff, elks Jackson conj., elves Collier MS. Ls (abbrevia- 
tion for Lords) Delius (apud Furness). 58. honours'] Ff, honour Qq. 
6l. they] Ff, the Qq. 62. Am /] F i, 2 ; lam Qq ; And 7F 3, 4. 66. 
God] Qq ; heaven Ff, Steevens, etc. 



57. swelling] Schmidt compares this 
metaphorical use with " swelling like 
a turkey-cock " in Henry V. V. i. 15, 
and see Antony and Cleopatra, II. ii. 
215. 

58.] That treat their honours with 
careful consideration or respect, and 
are therefore apt to quarrel. 

59. elements] as though the first 
principles, i.e. the "masterspirits" of 
the isle. 

60. fluster'd] excited, or partly in- 
toxicated. "Flustered . . . somewhat 
disordered with drink" Bailey's Diction- 
ary, ed. 1766. N. Bailey refers to 
Skinner for a derivation, whose Etymolo- 
gicon appeared in 1671. In Farmer 
and Henley's Slang and its Analogues 
is the following: "Another to com- 
pleat his daily task, Flustered with 
claret, seizes on a mask " ( Common- 
wealth of Women, ProL, 1686). Grose 



gives it simply, "Drunk" (Classical 
Dictionary, 1789). The word "drunk- 
ards" immediately following leaves us 
at liberty to attach a strong meaning 
to " flustered." 

65. stream] a current of water in the 
ocean as in our "Gulf Stream." Conv 
pare Comedy of Errors, I. i. 87. And 
Smith's Virginia (Arber, p. 727), 1616 : 
"angling with a hooke, and crossing 
the sweete aire from He to He, over the 
silent streames of a calme Sea." A 
technical term. 

66. a rouse] a deep draught. A 
Danish word introduced about this time. 
See Hamlet, I. ii. 127 ; i. iv. 8 ; II. i. 
58. It is mentioned with "stoups" in 
the 1616 ed. of Marlowe's Doctor 
Faustus (not in early editions): "he 
took his rouse with stoups of Rhenish 
wine." Dekker speaks of "the Danish 
rouse," Gufs Hornbook, 1609. 



sc. in.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 



97 



Mon. Good faith, a little one ; not past a pint, as I 

am a soldier. 
lago. Some wine, ho ! 

[Sings] And let me the canakin clink, clink ; 
And let me the canakin clink : 
A soldier 's a man ; 
A life 's but a span ; 
Why then let a soldier drink. 
Some wine, boys ! 
Cas. Fore God, an excellent song. 
lago. I learned it in England, where indeed they 
are most potent in potting: your Dane, your 



70 



75 



71-75, 91-98. in italics Qq, Ff. 
life Y] Qq, Oh, mans life's Ff. 77- 



72. clink] clinke, clinke Qq. 74. A 

God\ Q I, heaven ; Ff, Q 2, 3. 



68, 69. as I am a soldier] Compare 
" he does swear the legiblest of any man 
christened \ ... as I am a gentleman 
and a soldier \ " Ben Jonson, Every 
Man in his Humour, I. iii., 1598. And 
see Henry V. II. i. 69, and IV. vii. 135. 

71. canakin] Diminutive of can. 
Steevens quotes from Barclay's Ship of 
Fools, 1 509. See next note. 

71. let me the canakin clink] Probably 
an old toping stave. The following ex- 
tract is from New Eng. Diet. : " carruse 
and hold the cannikin klynclene," Scot- 
tish Poems, 1 6th cent., Legend of 
Bishop of St. Andrews (Jamieson), 1570. 
Halliwell quotes from The Knave in 
Grain New Vampt, 1640: "Lod. Clinke, 
boyes. Toma. Drinke, boyes. Stult. 
And let the cannikin clinke, boyes." 
Compare ' ' Whereto hee willingly con- 
senting, they dranke a carouse, euery 
man his canikin," Herodotus' Euterpe, 
the second Book. Englished by B. R. 
1584 (reprint 1888, p. 115). 

74. A life ' s but a span] This pro- 
verbial expression is from the Prayer- 
Book version of Ps. xxxix. ver. 6 : " Be- 
hold thou hast made my days as it were 
a span long." See As You Like It, in. 



ii. 189. Compare also Bacon's (?) "The 
World's a bubble, and the life of man, 
Less than a span," Merry Drollery, ed. 
Ebsworth, p. 1 10 (att. to Bp. Ussher), 
ante 1661. See also Brown, Britan- 
nia's Pastorals, Pt. II., 1625, etc. 

78, 79. England . . . potent in pot- 
ting] Where one nation attacks another's 
foibles, the evidence must be weighed. 
Rabelais long before this (1530) wrote 
' ' Saoul comme ung Anglaise, " trans- 
lated by Urquhart (correctly as the 
context shows) "as drunk as an English- 
man." At a later period Nash attri- 
buted the excess of drinking in England 
to the war with the Low Countries : 
" Superfluitie in drink : a sinne that ever 
since we have mixed ourselves with 
the Low Countries is counted honour- 
able ; but before we knew their ling- 
ring warres was held in the highest 
degree of hatred," Pierce Pennilesse 
(Gros. ii. 78), 1592. It was in James 
First's reign, under the example of the 
Danes, that the custom attained its 
height. In Beaumont and Fletcher's 
Captain, iii. 2 (1613), Englishmen are 
called "stubborn drinkers," and able 
(as here) to "knock a Dane down." 



OTHELLO 



[ACT n. 



German, and your swag-bellied Hollander, 80 
Drink, ho ! are nothing to your English. 

Cas. Is your Englishman so expert in his drinking? 

I ago. Why, he drinks you with facility your Dane 
dead drunk ; he sweats not to overthrow your 
Almain; he gives your Hollander a vomit ere 85 
the next pottle can be filled. 

82. Englishman} Englishmen F I ; English man Qq; Englishman^ 2, 3, 4 ; 
expert} Q I ; exquisite Ff, Q 2, 3. 

sweares F 2, 3 ; swears F 4, Rowe. 

83. 84. drinks . . . Dane dead 
drunk} See above note, line 78. Com- 
pare Hamlet, I. iv. Nash had already 
loaded the Danes with abuse for their 
intemperance. He calls a Dane ' ' a 
foule drunken bezzle," and goes on: 
" The Danes are bursten-bellied sots, 
that are to be confuted with nothing 
but tankards or quart pots," etc., Pierce 
Pennilesse, 1592. Nash says, earlier 
still (1591): " it is to bee feared that the 
Danes shall this yeare be greatly given 
to drink," Wonderful Prognostication. 
Compare also Ben Jonson (?) : "The 
Danes that drench their cares in wine " 
Ode prefixed to Pancharis, ante 1603 
(Cunningham's Gi/ord,iu.$29, 530); and 
in Penates ( 1604) he addresses the Danish 
Queen of James I. : "By this hand, I 
believe you were born a good drinker." 

84. dead drunk} Not elsewhere in 
Shakespeare. Florio had already used 
the expression in Montaigne's Essays 
(Tudor Translation, II. ii. 16), 1603. 

85. Almain} a German. 

84, 85. overthrow your Almain} It 
was only a trifle to overthrow a German. 
They were beginnersattheart of bezzling. 
But their time came soon. Middleton 
says, " It 's as rare to see a Spaniard a 
drunkard as a German sober, Spanish 
Gipsy, i. i., circa 1620. And Burtoni n 
his Anatomy of Melancholy has : " Ger- 
many hath not so many drunkards, 
England tobacconists [smokers], France 
dancers. Holland mariners, as Italy 
alone hath jealous husbands " (p. 630, 
ed. 1854), 1621. See next note. 



sweats'] Q I, 3 ; sweates F I Q 2 

85. your Hollander} To the Dutch 
must unhesitatingly be awarded the 
chief European reputation for drink- 
ing, in the i6th century and later. 
They had drinking terms and drinking 
bouts technically established, circa 
1500. See Dyce's Skelton, i. 128, 
387, and ii. 192. See also Hazlitt's 
Early Pop. Poetry, i. 26, 27, and i. 88. 
Some of the terms at these accounts 
referred to appear to be Scandinavian. 
But the majority are Flemish. Andrew 
Borde refers to their habits in 1542 : 
they kept ' ' a great tub under the table 
where they quaff" to save them from 
rising. There is a Dutch drinking 
contest in Massinger's Old Law (iii. 2), 
1599. In Merry Wives, ii. i. Shake- 
speare speaks of "this Flemish drunk- 
ard " as a natural appellation. Taylor 
says it was the custom to make Dutch 
criminals dead drunk, so that they 
might be hanged senseless, in 1617 
( Travels from London to Hamburgh) ; 
and see also Shirley's Constant Maid, 
iii. I. In Marston's Malcontent, iii. 
I, 1607, is a general summary applicable 
to this period : " amongst a hundred 
Frenchmen, forty hot-shots ; amongst 
a hundred Spaniards, three score brag- 
garts ; amongst a hundred Dutchmen, 
four score drunkards ; amongst a hun- 
dred Englishmen, four score and ten 
madmen ; amongst a hundred Welsh- 
men, four score and nineteen gentle- 
men." The passage in Andrew Borde 
above referred to is taken from the 
English Politie of Keeping the Sea 



so. m.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 



99 



Cas. To the health of our general ! 

Mon. I am for it, lieutenant, and I '11 do 

justice, 
I ago. O sweet England ! 

\Sings\ King Stephen was a worthy peer, 

His breeches cost him but a crown 
He held them sixpence all too dear, 
With that he call'd the tailor lown. 



you 



90 



91. a] Q i ; and-a Ff ; and a Q 2, 3. 
3, 4 ; to the rest. 

of temp. Henry VI. (circa 1436), which 
states that the Flemings got their love 
of " Beerekin " from the High Dutch- 
men of Pruse. 

88, 89. do you justice] Probably a re- 
collection of the pledging phrase, ' ' To 
do one right, " which occurs in 2 Henry 
IV. v. iii. Nares gives an instance of 
" I '11 do you reason, sir " (Adventures 
of Five Hours, Old Plays, xii. 26). The 
phrase was very common. It meant 
finishing the bumper. Compare Mas- 
singer, Great Duke of Florence, IV. i. : 
1 ' I know the fashion [Drinks all off] ; 
now, you must do me right, sir." And 
Urquhart's Rabelais, Book I. (Pre- 
fatory) : "But hearken, joltheads . . . 
off with your bumper, I will do you 
reason, O pull away," etc. See note at 
line 145, with reference to Montano. 

91. King Stephen] This is the seventh 
verse of the song " Bell my Wiffe" in 
Percy Folio MS. (vol. ii. p. 322, ed. 
Hales and Furnivall). The version 
there is : 

"King Harry was a very good 



I trow his hose cost but a crowne; 

he thought them I2d. ouerto deere 

therefore he called the taylor 

clowne ; 

he was king and wore the Crowne, 

and thouse but of a low degree ; 

itts pride that putts this cumtrye 

downe ; 

man ! put thye old cloake about 
thee!" 



93. them} Ff, 'em Qq ; too'] Q I, F 

There are eight verses, and each has 
the last line almost identical, which 
appears to have been the name 
of the tune. Chappell says the tune 
is evidently formed out of "Green 
Sleeves" (mentioned in Merry Wives), 
and has little doubt that words and 
music are both of English origin. 
Chappell never willingly admits a tune 
to be either Scotch or Irish. The 
Percy Folio editors say "The dialect 
in which it is written, and the general 
character of the piece . . . clearly 
imply a northern origin." Shakespeare 
probably alludes to this verse again in 
Tempest, iv. i. 221. King Stephen's 
breeches, that " cost but a poor noble 
a pair," are referred to again in Greene's 
Quip for an Upstart Courtier (Grosart, 
xi. 234), 1592; and in Dekker's GuCs 
Hornbook, chap, i., 1609. " Cast your 
old cloke about you" is mentioned in 
Heywood's Golden Age (Pearson reprint, 
p. 71), ante 1611. A more modern 
version is in Allan Ramsay's Tea Table 
Miscellany (circa 1728). The verse in 
Othello, as well as the references to the 
song given above, show that there was 
probably an earlier English version than 
that of the Percy Folio. Another 
reference is in Lyly's Mother Bombie, ii. 
5, 1594: "it was as much as bought 
Rufus, sometime King of this land, a 
paire of hose." 

94. lown"] lout, stupid fellow. Still 
in use provincially. This word and 
" auld," below, are decidedly Scotch. 



100 OTHELLO [ACT n. 

He was a wight of high renown, 95 

And thou art but of low degree : 
'Tis pride that pulls the country down ; 

Then take thine auld cloak about thee. 
Some wine, ho ! 
Cas. Why, this is a more exquisite song than the 100 

other. 

lago. Will you hear 't again ? 

Cas. No; for I hold him to be unworthy of his 
place that does those things. Well : God 's 
above all; and there be souls must be saved, 105 
and there be souls must not be saved. 
lago. It's true, good lieutenant. 

Cas. For mine own part no offence to the general, 
nor any man of quality I hope to be 
saved. 1 1 o 

lago. And so do I too, lieutenant. 
Cas. Ay, but, by your leave, not before me ; the 
lieutenant is to be saved before the ancient. 
Let 's have no more of this ; let 's to our affairs. 
God forgive us our sins ! Gentlemen, let 's look 1 1 5 
/-to our business. Do not think, gentlemen, I am 

t*j ,V V >; /, ' o ' 

? drunk : this is my ancient : this is my right 
hand, and this is my left. I am not drunk 

V i *^ 

now; I can stand well enough, and speak well 
enough. 1 20 

98. Then} Qq, And Ff; thine} Qq, thy Ff; auld} Q 2, 3 ; owd Q I ; 
awFd Ff. 100. Why} Fore God Q I. 103. to be} omitted Qq. 104. 
things. Well:} Ff ; things : well Q I ; things well, Q 2, 3 ; God's} Q I ; heav'ns F 
I, 2; heaven's Q 2, 3, F 3, 4. 105. must be} PY, that must be Qq. 106. 
and, . . saved} omitted Qq. III. too} omitted Qq. 115. God} Q i; 

omitted Ff, Q 2, 3 ; us} omitted F 3, 4. 118. left} Ff, left hand Qq. 119. 
and} Qq, and I Ff. 



SC.MI.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 



101 



All. Excellent well. 

Cas. Why, very well then ; you must not think then 

that I am drunk. \Exit. 

Mon. To the platform, masters ; come, let 's set the 

watch. 
lago. You see this fellow that is gone before ; 

He is a soldier fit to stand by Caesar 

And give direction : and do but see his vice ; 

'Tis to his virtue a just equinox, 

The one as long as the other : 'tis pity of him. 

I fear the trust Othello puts him in, 

On some odd time of his infirmity, 

Will shake this island. 

Mon. , But is he often thus ? 

lago. Tis evermore the prologue to his sleep : 

He 'It watch the horologe a double set, i 

If drink rock not his cradle. 
Mon. It were well 




135 



122. Why} omitted Q I ; think then} think Q i. 131. puts} Ff, put Qq. 
134. the} Qq, his Ff. 135. horologe} F I, Q 3 ; horolodge Q I, 2 ; horologue 
F 2, 3, 4. 136. // were} Ff, Twere Qq (T'were Q 2, 3). 



124. platform} Compare Hamlet, i. 
ii. 213 and 252. 

124, 125. set the watch} A technical 
term. It occurs in Holland's Plinie, 
xxxiii. 4 : "In which labour the pioners 
worke by turnes successively, after the 
manner of the releefe in a set watch " 
( 1601 ). To relieve or mount the guard. 
The expression was northern, and occurs 
in Barbour's Robert the Bruce (fide 
Oliphant), 1375; and in Coverdale's 
Bible, 1537. 

129. equinox} This word is not found 
elsewhere in Shakespeare. The usual 
term up to this period, and amongst his 
contemporaries, is "equinoctial," which 
occurs in Chaucer. The meaning here 



is ' ' equal, " ' ' equivalent. " The force of 
the metaphor lies in equating the night of 
Cassio's vice to the daylight of his virtue. 
135. horologe} Not used elsewhere in 
Shakespeare. The meaning is "he'll 
watch two rounds of the clock. " If we 
assume lago to be talking of the clocks 
of his own country, this would mean 
forty-eight hours. Andrew Borde says 
of Italian clocks, "At midnight they 
doo begynne & do reken unto xxiii. a 
clocke, & then it is midnight, and at 
one a clocke thei do begin again," Boke 
of Knowledge, 1542. Some commen- 
tators have made a point of this with 
reference to the ' ' dramatic time " of the 
play. An impossible idea. 



102 OTHELLO [ACT ii. 

The general were put in mind of it. 

Perhaps he sees it not, or his good nature 

Prizes the virtue that appears in Cassio 

And looks not on his evils : is not this true ? 1 40 

Enter RODERIGO. 

I ago. [Aside to him\ How now, Roderigo ! 
I pray you, after the lieutenant ; go. 

[Exit Roderigo. 
Mon. And 'tis great pity that the noble Moor 

Should hazard such a place as his own second 
'-'With one of an ingraft infirmity: 145 

It were an honest action to say 
So to the Moor. 
lago. Not I, for this fair island : 

139. Prizes'] Ff, Praises Qq ; virtue] virtues Q I. 140. looks'] looke Q I. 
145. of an] omitted F 2, 3, 4 ; ingraft] engraffed Schmidt. 146. [Aside to 
him] first marked by Capell. 

145. ingraft} ingraffed. Set or fixed writers of the time apart from technical 
deeply and firmly. Compare Ford, ones. It is an evidence of his love for 
Lover's Melancholy, iii. 2 : " The gentle horticulture, confirmed easily in other 
myrtle Is not engraft upon an olive ways. Booth remarks here, " This is 
stock." In. Julius C&sar, III. i. 184, not the language of one who had taken 
" the ingrafted love he bears to Caesar " part in the carouse " (Furness). Steevens 
is agreeable to the modern and incorrect had already remarked on the impropriety 
etymology. The word is correct in of Othello's predecessor in the govern- 
Lear, I. i. 301, "engraffed condition," ment of Cyprus tippling with tipsy 
for which "ingraft" (or "engraft") is people and encouraging the officer on 
the natural contraction. The verb is guard to drink. See above, lines 69, 90. 
(or was) to ingraff. Compare Cotgrave, There was, however, nothing in this 
" Graffe : Graffed, ingraffed " ; and repugnant to an audience of James' 
"Gra/er: To graff, or ingraff." See time. See Sir John Harington's account 
also Holland's Plinie (xvii. 15, 1601) : of the revelling at Court in 1606 (Nugce 
" hee would have the young imps . . . Antiqua). For the applied use corn- 
to be set and engraffed so as the marrow pare the first words of The Losse of 
of the one and the other may joyne and Famagusta, 1571 (Hakluyt, ed. 1810, 
meet just together." The frequency ii. 230). Englished out of Italian by 
with which Shakespeare employs terms W. Malim, 1572. "It hath been a 
about "graffing," both literally and naturall instinct (right honourable and 
metaphorically, is well worthy of note, mine especiall good lord) ingraffed in 
and not, I think, paralleled amongst noble personages hearts." 



SC.IIL] THE MOOR OF VENICE 



103 



1 do love Cassio well, and would do much 
.To cure him of this evil : But, hark ! what noise ? 

[Cry within : " Help ! help 



Re-enter CASSIO, driving in RODERIGO. 

Cas. You rogue ! you rascal ! 150 

Man. What 's the matter, lieutenant ? 
Cas. A knave teach me my duty ! But I '11 beat the ; 
knave into a twiggen bottle. ' > 



iwrw/j 
d 






150. You rogue] Zouns, you rogue Q I, Camb. 152. Buf\ Qq, omitted Ff. 
153. twiggen bottle} F 2, Twiggen Bottle F 2, 3, 4; wicker bottle Qq, Capell, 
Camb. 

152, 153. beat . . . into a twiggen 
bottle] Booth (quoted by Furness) ex- 
plains this "slash him till he resembles 
a ' chianti ' bottle covered by straw net- 
work," which a recent commentator 
adopts, saying, "To beat a person into 
a twiggen bottle means to beat him till 
he looks more like a twiggen bottle 
than a man." I have no hesitation in 
rejecting this, even though it may be 
improved by the suggestion of a pun in 
the word "twiggen" ("twigs of birch," 
Measure for Measure, I. iii. 24). 
Roderigo is running wildly, looking for 
any cranny to hide in and escape 
from his pursuer. The first little aper- 
ture that occurs to Cassio's mind is the 
last one he looked at, the opening of 
the goodly "stoup" they had been drink- 
ing from. It would be easy to prove 
that "bottles" stood for articles of 
greater capacity than those now in use ; 
a basket-covered " carboy " or a " demi- 
john " comes perhaps nearer the article 
referred to. To beat one till he runs 
into a hole, is a natural thought. It 
occurs in Antony and Cleopatra, iv. vii. : 
"we'll beat 'em into bench-holes." 
The allusion there is an unsavoury one ; 
here, the thought of a tippler getting 
into the bottle is more harmonious. The 
expression in Antony and Cleopatra was 
proverbial, and several instances could 
be given from Udall's Erasmus (1542) 



onwards. One may be quoted, "the 
drab will drive you into a bench-hole," 
Webster, Northward Ho (1607), or 
better, "I would I could flie into a 
bench-hole," Dekker, If this be not, 
etc. (Pearson, iii. 328), 1612. "Cat- 
hole " was similarly used : "Is there 
ne'er a cat-hole Where I may creep 
through ? 'Would I were in th' Indies, 
Beaumont and Fletcher, Mad Lover, 
iii. 2. See also Cotgrave. And in the 
old play, The Life and Death of Jack 
Straw (1593), Tom Miller says, sooner 
than fight, he " can creep into a quart 
pot" (Hazlitt's Dodsley, v. 386). See 
too Merie Tales of Skelton, Tale v. 

1 53. twiggen bottle] The Quartos read 
" wicker." Compare "he looks like a 
musty bottle new wickered, his head 's 
the cork, light, light ! " Ben Jonson, 
Every Man Out, I. i. 760, 1599. 
Probably these bottles were recently 
made known, and either term would 
apply. "Wicker bottle" became the 
accepted term, or " wicker flask." 
Shirley's plays may be referred to (Royal 
Master, II. i., and The Wedding, IV. iii.). 
Florence flask is a recent synonym. 
The early commentators have no note 
to this passage. Since writing above I 
found the following in Holland's Plinie, 
xxxiv. 1 6 : " the inhabitants of those 
parts do conveigh it in little twiggen 
boats, covered all over with feathers." 



104 OTHELLO 




Beat me ! 

Dost thou prate, rogue ? {Striking Roderigj). 155 

. Nay, good lieutenant; I pray you, sir, hold 

your hand. 
Cas. Let me go, sir, or I '11 knock you o'er the 

mazzard. 

Mon. Come, come, you 're drunk. 160 

Cas. Drunk! \Theyfight. 

lago. {Aside to Roderigo\ Away, I say ; go out, and cry a 

mutiny. {Exit Roderigo. 

Nay, good lieutenant ! God's will, gentlemen ! 

Help, ho ! Lieutenant, sir, Montano, sir ; 

Help, masters ! Here 's a goodly watch indeed ! 165 ./p $, 

[A bell rings. 

Who 's that that rings the bell ? Diablo, ho ! 

The town will rise : God's will, lieutenant, hold ; 

You will be shamed for ever. 

Re-enter OTHELLO and Attendants. 
Oth. What is the matter here? 

156. Nay] omitted Qq ; I pray you, sir] pray sir, Qq. 158. knock] know 
F 2, 3, 4 ; o'er] on Q -3. 163. God's -will] Qq, Alas Ff. 164. sir, Mon- 
tano, sir] Capell, Steevens, etc. , Globe ; ; sir, Montanio, sir, Qq ; Sir Mon- 
tano: Ff ; Sir! Montano! Sir! Craig. 165. masters] master Q 3. 166. 
that that] Qq, that which Ff. 167. God's will] godswill Q i ; Fie, fie Ff, Q 2, 
3 ; hold] Qq, omitted Ff. 168. You will be shamed] Qq (sham'd), You'le 
be asham'd F I , You 1 1 be sham'd F 2. 

159. mazzard] head. Compare Ham- the verb "to mazzard" for "to brain," 

let, v. i. 97. From the old word or "breake one's head," in Love Restored. 

" mazer, a broad standing-cup or drink- Nares gives several examplesof the noun, 

ing-bowl," from a fancied resemblance which is frequent in old plays. 

in shape. But the latter name refers to 166. Diablo] The devil. So Marlowe, 

the spotted wood (i.e. maple) of which "Diablo ! what passions call you these," 

these cups were made. See Skeat's Edward II. i.iv. , 1593. And Carleton's 

Etymological Dictionary in v. mazer, letterfrom Venice, i6i2(Court and Times 

" Maple-face" (spotty-face) was a com- of James I. i. 184): "As they [Venetians] 

mon expression, as in Middleton, Your term him, diabolo in casa." Not there- 

Five Gallants, 1608, etc. This points fore only Spanish, as the commentators 

to another connection. Ben Jonson uses assert. 




sc. in.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 105 

Mon. 'Zounds, I bleed still ; I am hurt to the death. 

Oth. Hold, for your lives ! 170 

I ago. Hold, ho ! Lieutenant, sir, Montano, gentle- 
men, 

Have you forgot all sense of place and duty ? 
Hold ! the general speaks to you ; hold, hold, for 
shame ! 

Oth. Why, how now, ho ! from whence ariseth this ? 

Are we turn'd Turks, and to ourselves do that 175 
Which heaven hath forbid the Ottomites ? 
For Christian shame, put by this barbarous brawl : 
He that stirs next to carve for his own rage 



169. 'Zounds] Zouns Q I ; omitted Ff, Q 2, 3 ; hurt to] hurt, but not to F 2, 3, 4, 
Rowe, Theobald ; death} Q I, F 2, 3, 4, Rowe, Malone, Dyce (ed. i), Craig ; 
death. He dies F I, death; he dies Capell, Steevens ; death [he faints] (as stage 
direction) Q 2, 3, Collier, Globe, Cambridge, Dyce. 171. Hold, ho!] Hold, 
hold Q I, 2. 172. sense of place} Hanmer et seq.; place of sense Qq, Ff (sence 
Qq). 173. hold, hold} Qq, holdff. 174. ariseth} Ff, arises Qq. 176. 

hath} Ff, has Qq. 178. for} forth Q I. 

175. turned Turks} Compare the pro- sea. A little later, in Hakluyt (p. 310, 
verbial expression in Hamlet, III. ii. ut supra), a good! example occurs in 
287, and Much Ado about Nothing, III. the Voyage of Thomas Sanders, 1583 : 
iv. 57. The proverb has no reference ' ' When that Romaine Sonnings saw 
to self-destruction. On the contrary, no remedy but that he should die, he 
the origin of it was self-preservation, protested to turne Turke, hoping there- 
Compare Captain Smith's Travels by to have saved his life. Then saide 
(Arber, p. 915), 1629: " with many an the Turke, Speake the words that 
accursed runnagado or Christian turned thereunto belong ; and he did so. 
Turke." And see note at "Aleppo," Then saide they vnto him, Now thou 
V. i. 351. The origin of the shall die in the faith of a Turke, and so 
proverb may be given here. I quote hee did, as the Turkes reported that 
from a Charter of Turkie Privileges, were at his execution." 
1580 (Hakluyt, ed. 1810, ii. 261): 176.] Heaven forbade the Turks to 
"Item. 1 8. . . . if the partie shal be destroy themselves by doing it for them 
found to be English, and shall receive in wrecking them, 
the holy religion (religionem Muzul- 176. Ottomites} See above, I. iii. 
manniam assumpserit), then let him 33. 

freely be discharged, but if he will 1 78. carve for his own rage} Steevens 

remaine a Christian, let him then be says, " supply food or gratification for 

restored to the Englishmen, and the his own anger, " comparing Hamlet, I. 

buyers shall demaund their money iii. 20, " he may not . . . carve for 

againe of them who solde the man." himself." Others suggest that " carve " 

The " item " refers to captives taken at means simply "cut" or "use the 




OTHELLO 



[ACT n. 



Holds his soul light ; he dies upon his motion. 
Silence that dreadful bell : it frights the isle 1 80 

From her propriety. What is the matter, masters ? 
Honest lago, that look'st dead with grieving, 
Speak, who began this ? on thy love, I charge thee. 

lago. I do not know : friends all but now, even now, 

^'In^uarter, and in terms like bride and groom 185 

jr (" Devesting them for bed ; and then, but now, 

* A ~' 1 " 'ML """_ ^-~_^sr*n**f . 

As if some planet had unwitted men, 

182. looKst] Hanmer ; lookes Qq, F I, 2 ; looks F 3, 4. 1 86. devesting Qq, 
Ff; digesting Q (1695) ; divesting Q (1681), Rowe (ed. 2) ; for] Ff, to Qq ; then] 
omitted Q 3. 



sword." But the word will hardly bear 
that sense. The phrase to " carve for 
oneself" had established usage, in the 
sense of _" gratify .Qae?*~aam...iriclinaj 
- tion." CJabnel Harvey has It is 
Italian courtesye to give a man leave to 
be his owne carver" (Grosart, i. 1 12, 
circa 1580); Lylyhas "In this poynte 
I meane not to be mine owne carver," 
Euphues (Arber, p. 55), 1579 ; and 
another example occurs in Lyly's 
Mother Bombie. See also Hamlet (ut 
supra) in this series. "Carving "was 
a much more important function in 
Shakespeare's time than now, and the 
word had other metaphorical uses. 

179. upon his motion] as soon as he 
moves. 

1 80. dreadful bell] this expression 
would have a telling effect upon a 
London audience at this time. The 
city was suffering from a visitation of 
the plague (1603-1604), from which 
more than 30,000 people died in the 
year (Wilson). Ben Jonson speaks of 
the " perpetuity of ringing by reason of 
the sickness" in Epicene, i. I. 

181. From her propriety] proper state 
or behaviour ; decorum. 

185. In quarter] on good terms, pro- 
perly behaved. The full expression is 
" to keep fair quarter," as in Comedy of 
Errors, n. i. 108. This was a military 



expression. An example may be given 
from Day's Blind Beggar (Bullen ed. 
p. 87), 1600: "Thus have you heard 
your several charges. Every one to his 
court of guard, and keep fair quarter. " 
The qualifying adjective is rendered 
unnecessary by the " terms like bride 
and groom," equivalent to "fair" or 
" good," only stronger, as if " in loving 
quarter. " "In quarter " cannot mean " in 
quiet," "at peace" (as Henley rightly 
stated) if it stands alone. But the 
qualification is here otherwise supplied. 

1 86. Devesting] undressing. Com- 
pare Cotgrave, "Desvesti: Devested, 
uncloathed ; disseised, dispossessed." 
See also Woman's Prize (by Fletcher) 
i. 2: "Devest you with obedient hands; 
to bed ! " Wrongly altered to divest by 
Schmidt. " Devest, uncloath one," 
Cockeram, 1642. 

187. planet] It was the custom, in the 
days of astrological belief, to attribute 
all inexplicable misfortunes, sickness, 
etc., to the influence of adverse planets. 
So in 1 Henry VI. I. i. 23 : "What, 
shall we curse the planets for mishap ? " 
And see notes to Hamlet, I. i. 162. 

187. unwitted] deprived of one's wits, 
maddened. Perhaps formed from the 
old "unwit," folly, which Chaucer uses, 
and Bailey's Dictionary gives as ob- 
solete. 



sc. in.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 



107 



190 



Swords out, and tilting one at other's breast, 
In opposition bloody. } I cannot speak 
'Any beginning to this peevish odds ; 
And would in action glorious I had lost 
Those legs that brought me to a part of it ! 

Oth. How comes it, Michael, you are thus forgot ? 

Cos. I pray you, pardon me ; I cannot speak. 

Oth. Worthy Montano, you were wont be civil ; 
The gravity and stillness of your youth 
The world hath noted, and your name is great 
In mouths of wisest censure : what 's the matter, 
That you unlace your reputation thus, 



1 88. breasf\ Qq ; breasts Ff, Rowe, Theobald. 192. Those} These Q I. 
193. comes . . . are} Ff, came . . . aw<rQq. 195. k]Qq,tofaWt 198. 
mouths] men Q I. 



-*-* * 
Q&A* 



,95 

^ 1 1 



190. peevish odds'] senseless quarrel. 
Compare 1 Henry VL III. I. 92 : 
" leave this peevish broil, And set this 
unaccustomed fight aside." In the sense 
of "meaningless," "silly," compare 
Lyly's Gallathea, v. 3, 1592: "Let 
them alone, they bee but peevish." 

193. are thus forgot} have thus for- 
gotten yourself. An example of the 
use of "to be " with an intransitive 
verb, as in "I am declined Into the 
vale of years" (in. iii. 266). See 
Abbott's Grammar, 295. Othello 
has already addressed his favourite 
Cassio, twice, by the friendly style of 
" Michael." He never does it again. 

195. wont be civil} For the omission 
of "to" before the infinitive, see 
Abbott's Grammar, 349, where this 
instance amongst others is quoted, 
as "I list not prophecy," Winter's 
Tale, IV. i. 86 ; and " Suffer him speak 
no more," Ben Jonson, Sejantis, iii. I. 

196. stillness} quietness. See Henry 
V. in. i. 4. Staidness. 

198. censure} judgment. Shake- 
speare uses this word about equally 



often in the two senses "judgment" 
and " blame." Here it seems to carry 
the sense of approbation, as in Letters 
of Elizabeth to James (Camd. Soc. p. 
113) : " Receve, therfor, deare brother, 
bothe my censure and my thankes ther- 
for," etc. 

199-201.] Booth says here, "Could it 
be possible, after this, to suppose that 
Montano was one of the ' flock of 
drunkards ' ? " But this is what we 
must suppose (see note, line 145). 

199. unlace your reputation} Johnson 
says " slacken or loosen ; put in 
danger of dropping, or perhaps strip of 
its ornament." This is not satisfactory. 
May not the word mean ' ' cut up, " or 
" break up," as in the old sense of the 
Booke of Keruynge, "unlace that cony"? 
We have already had a carving meta- 
phor applied to this brawl. I find the 
term in a contemporary play : ' ' some- 
times a mess of stewed broth will do 
well, and an unlaced rabbit is best of 
all," Return from Parnasus (Haz. Dods. 
ix. 1 80), 1602. Halliwell has it, " 
lace, to cut up." 




108 . OTHELLO [ACT it. 

And^sgend your rich opinion for the name 200 

Of a night-brawler ? Give me answer to it. 
Mon. Worthy Othello, I am hurt to danger : 

Your officer, lago, can inform you 

While I spare speech, which something now offends 
me 

Of all that I do know: nor know I aught 205 

By me that 's said or done amiss this night ; 

Unless self-charity be sometimes a vice, 

And to defend ourselves it be a sin 

When violence assails us. 
Oth. Now, by heaven, 

My blood begins my safer guides to rule, ^210 

And passion, having my best judgement collied, 

Assays to lead the way : if I once stir, 

/ I 

Or do but lift this arm, the best of you 
Shall sink in my rebuke. Give me to know 
How this foul rout began, who set it on, 215 

And he that is approved in this offence, 
Though he had twinned with me, both at B. birth, 
lose me. What ! in a town of war, 



Shall 



204. me] "omitted Q 2" (? Furness, Cambridge) in 1885 facsimile of Brit. 
Mus. copy. 211. having . . . collied} in brackets Ff; collied] Ff, coold Qq. 
212. if I once'] Ff ; Zouns, if I Q I ; If once 7Q 2, 3. 

200. spend . . . opinion] squander 217. twinned] Ben Jonson has the 

your good character. same idea, and uncommon verb, im- 

207. self-charity'] self-love. Kind- mediately earlier than Othello, in 

ness towards oneself. Sejanus, in. iii. 305* : 

211. collied] darkened, obscured. " Each mark must be alike 

The word occurs in the literal sense Were it to plot against the fame, 

(smutted) in Midsummer Nighfs the life 

Dream, I. i. 145, and in Ben Jonson's Of one with whom I twinned" 

Poetaster, iv. iii. 2423 : "thou hast (1601). 

not collied thy face enough, stinkard." 218. town of war] garrisoned town 

216. approved] found guilty, con- (Abbott). Compare Henry V. n. 

victed by proof. iv. 7. 



sc. in.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 109 

Yet wild, the people's hearts brimful of fear, 
To manage private and domestic quarrel, 220 

In night, and on the court and guard of safety ! 
'Tis monstrous. lago, who began 't ? 

Mon, If partially affined, or leagued in office, 
Thou dost deliver more or less than truth, 
Thou art no soldier. 

lago. Touch me not so near : 225 

I had rather have this tongue cut from my mouth 
Than it should do offence to Michael Cassio ; 
Yet, I persuade myself, to speak the truth 
Shall nothing wrong him. Thus it is, general. 
Montano and myself being in speech, 230 

There comes a fellow crying out for help, 
And Cassio following him with determined sword, 
"To execute upon him. Sir, this gentleman 
Steps in to Cassio and entreats his pause : 

221. and guard of] of guard and Theobald, Malone. 222. began' f\ Ff; 

began Q I, 2. 223. partially} ^impartiality Qq ; affined} affined Qq, Ff (assign d 
Q '81, Q '95) ; leagued} league Qq, Ff ; leagued Pope, Steevens, etc. 226. cut 
from my} Ff, out from my Q i, out of my Q 2, out of his Q 3. 228. the 

truth} Qq, F ; so the truth F 2, 3, 4. 229. Thus] Qq, This Ff. 

220. manage] bring about, contrive. here : " Montano should be in total 

221. court and guard of safety] Theo- ignorance of the cause of the disturb- 
bald's reading would simplify matters ance" (Furness). But Montano and 
here desirably. The'passage is presum- lago, so far as the action goes, have 
ably an amplification of the term " court the same information. Montano is 
of guard " (n. i. 220). Cowden-CIarke merely conjuring lago to tell the truth 
says, " the very spot and guarding- without fear or favour, as a soldier 
place of safety," but I do not think the should. Observe the lying account 
military technicality can be denied a lago responds with. 

footing here. 233. execute] carry out his intention. 

222. monstrotis] Trisyllabic as in Mac- Compare the sense of the substantive 
beth t III. vi. 8. The not uncommon still in use and defined in early die- 
form " monstruous " would suggest the tionaries (Browne's Expositor, 1719, 
pronunciation. e.g. ) : " Execution . . . the slaughter 

223. affined] related by any tie. Here done upon a flying enemy pursued." 
related by partiality or favour. For 234. entreats his pause"} Compare 
"partially" in this sense, see Lucrece, "Must give us pause," Hamlet, in. i. 
634. See note at I. i. 40. Booth says 68. 



110 OTHELLO [ACT ii. 

Myself the crying fellow did pursue, 235 

Lest by his clamour as it so fell out 

The town might fall in fright : he, swift of foot, 

Outran my purpose; and I return'd the rather 

For that I heard the clink and fall of swords, 

And Cassio high in oath; which till to-night 240 

I ne'er might say before. When I came back 

For this was brief I found them close together, 

At blow and thrust ; even as again they were 

When you yourself did part them. 

More of this matter cannot I report : 245 

But men are men ; the best sometimes forget : 

Though Cassio did some little wrong to him, 

As men in rage strike those x that wish them 



Yet surely Cassio, I believe, received 
From him that fled some strange indignity, 250 

Which patience could not pass. 
Oth. I know, I ago, 

Thy honesty and love doth mince this matter, 
Making it light to Cassio. Cassio, I love thee ; 
But never more be officer of mine. 

Enter DESDEMONA, attended. 

Look, if my gentle love be not raised up ! 255 

I '11 make thee an example. 

238. the] then F I. 240. oath] oaths Q I. 241. say] seeQl. 245. can- 
not /] Ff, can / not Qq. 254. Enter . . .] Ff ; Enter Desdemona, with 
others Qq ; Re-enter Desdemona, attended Dyce, Globe, Cambridge. 

239. For that] because. 30, 31, lago gives another casual stab in 

240. Cassio high in oath] This lie the back to Cassio, as a liar. 

so pleases lago's fancy that he cannot 252. mince this matter] make little 
leave it without adorning it. In iv. i. of it. Compare Ant, and Cleop. I. ii. 



sc. in.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 111 

Des. What's the matter? 

Oth, All 's well now, sweeting ; come away to bed. 
Sir, for your hurts, myself will be your surgeon : 
Lead him off. [Montana is led off. 

lago, look with care about the town, 260 

And silence those whom this vile brawl distracted. 
Come, Desdemona : 'tis the soldiers' life 
To have their balmy slumbers waked with strife. 

\Exeunt all but lago and Cassio. 

lago. What, are you hurt, lieutenant ? 

Cas. Ay, past all surgery. 

lago. Marry, heaven forbid ! > 



Reputation, reputation, reputation ! O, I have 
lost my reputation ! I have lost the immortal 
part of myself, and what remains is bestial. My 
reputation, lago, my reputation ! 270 

256. matter ?] Qq ; matter (Deere f) F I, 2. 257. well now, sweeting] well 
now sweeting Qq, well, sweeting Ff. 259. Lead him off] a stage direction, 
Malone. 263. Exeunt . . .] Exit Moore, Desdemona, and Attendants Qq (after 
line 264) ; Exit Ff. 266. Marry, heaven] Mary God Q I ; Mary Heaven 
Q 2, 3. 267. Reputation] three times in Ff, twice Qq ; 0] omitted Q I. 
269. part of] Ff, part sir o/Qq. 

109. An early use of this now common ably no one will agree with Steevens's 

expression. Compare Beaumont and surly stricture. 

Fletcher, Honest Marts Fortune, v. 259. Lead him off] Malone is " per- 

(ante 1613): " Not to mince the matter, suaded these words were originally a 

we are all cowards." stage direction." White (ed. i) and 

257. sweeting] Steevens says, " This Rolfe agree. But it is not an unnatural 
surfeiting vulgar term of fondness remark after Othello's announcing his 
originates from the name of an apple intended care. He wishes Montano to 
distinguished only by its insipid sweet- be immediately brought to his own 
ness." Shakespeare uses this term of en- quarters. "Lead"isequivalentto"help," 
dearment again in Twelfth Night, n. as in "Lead me, my lord? I do not need 
iii. 43, and in Taming of the Shrew, IV. your help," 1 Henry IV. v. iv. 9. 

iii. 36. See also 1 Henry VL III. iii. 270. reputation] Cassio mourns for 

8l. It occurs in the old play by Lodge the loss of honour and good name. 

and Greene, A Looking - Glass for lago's cynicism is levelled at the insub- 

London and England : "to fold thee in stantiality of the world's opinion. The 

so bright a sweeting's arms." Ben word bears both senses. See note at 

Jonson has it in his Tale of a Tub, ' ' opinion," I. iii. 225. 
iv. v. : " My pretty sweeting." Prob- 



112 



OTHELLO 



[ACT n. 




I ago. As I am an honest man, I thought you had 
received some bodily wound ; there is more sense 
in that than in reputation. Reputation is an idle 
and most false imposition ; oft got without merit 
and lost without deserving: you have lost no 275 
reputation at all, unless you repute yourself such 
a loser. What, man ! there are ways to recover 
the general again : you are but now cast in his 
mood, a punishment more in policy than in 
malice ; even so as one would beat his offenceless 280 
dog to affright an imperious lion : sue to him 
again, and he's yours. 



271. thought} Qq, had thought Ff. 
Qq, are more Ff. 

273-275.] Compare Guilpin's Skiale- 

theia (reprint, p. 52), 1598, on Opinion : 

"It's but the hisse of geese, the 

people's noyse, 
The tongue of humours, and phan- 

tasticke voyce 
Of haire-brain'd Apprehension : it 

respects 
With all due titles, and that due 

neglects 

Even in one instant." 
274. imposition} that which is im- 
posed, laid or placed upon. The word 
had not acquired the sense of " cheat," 
from ' ' false tax, " therefore the ad- 
jective is necessary. Compare Winter's 
Tale, I. ii. 74. 

275-277.] Several classical parallels 
are cited by Furness. One from Men- 
ander in Plutarch (quoted by Du Bois, 
Wreath, p. 72) is the best: "OW^ 
Tr^TTocflas dfivdv, av /AT) irpoffiroirj Thou 
hast suffered no wrong, unless thou 
dost fancy so." Compare John Hey- 
wood, 1546 (Sharman's ed. ) : "Tush 
man (quoth I), shame is as it is taken" ; 
and a little lower (p. 36), " Unminded, 
unmoned. " The latter is (correctly) in 
Ray, twice ; and incorrectly in Hazlitt's 



272. sense] Ff, offence Qq. 277. are] 



English Proverbs. Compare also 
Chapman, ' ' No ache hath any shame 
within itself, But in the knowledge and 
ascription," Blind Beggar of Alex- 
andria, 1598 (acted 1595-96). 

278. casf\ dismissed, as in II. iii. 79. 

280, 281. beat . . . dog . . . to affright 
. . . /ion] This old proverb has not yet 
been correctly explained by any of the 
commentators in sit& that I have met 
with. The latest editor (College Classics 
Series, 1901) says, "The idea is that, 
when the dog is beaten, it will bark 
and frighten the lion." Various altera- 
tions in the text have been suggested. 
The proverb is dealt with in Skeat's 
Chaucer (vol. v. pp. 383, 384) in a 
note to The Squiere's Tale, line 491, 
"by the whelp chasted is the lion." 
The explanation appears in Cotgrave : 
" Batre le chien devant le lion. To 
punish a mean man in the presence of, 
and for an example to the mighty " (in 
v. chien} ; and again, in v. Batre, 
where the words are " to the terror of a 
great one." The application of the 
proverb lies in the words "a punish- 
ment more in policy than in malice," 
which are senseless without its apprecia- 



sc. in.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 113 

Cas. I will rather sue to be despised than to deceive 
so good a commander with so slight, so drunken, 
and so indiscreet an officer. Drunk! and speak "28 5 
parrot ! and squabble ! swagger ! swear ! and 
discourse fustian with one's own shadow ! O 
thou invisible spirit of wine, if thou hast no name 
to be known by, let us call thee devil ! *~*^ 

*^^iii 1 '" tAJ ~l 

lago. What was he that you followed with your 290 

.sword? What had he done to you? 
Cas. I know not. 

T.f*'* ' 

lago. Is 't possible ? j&* 

Cas. I remember a mass of things, but nothing dis- 
tinctly; a quarrel, but nothing wherefore. O 295 
God, that men should put an enemy in their 
mouths to steal away their brains ! that we 
should, with joy,, pleasance,^ revel and applause, 

* --"*^ f *^*r**i.^r--f\jrr- * jr V^>^V^ M ^ > ^ M ^^y'\^ > ^*\_J^E J ^A^ 1 -^A--' 

transform ourselves into beasts ! - 

284. slight] Ff, light Qq. 285. and so] Ff, and Qq. 285-287. Drunk) 
, . . shadow !} omitted Q I. 288. if thou'} thou Q 3. 295, 296. O God} 
Q I ; O Q 2, 3 ; Oh Ff. 298. pleasance, revel} Revell, pleasure Qq. 

tion. Steevens, Furness, and Rolfe usual stronghold for such fables. See 

pass this difficulty by. The proverb below, in. i. 49. 

occurs in the Earl of Surrey's Poems 285, 286. speak parrot} talk idly. 

(Aldine ed., p. 7), 1557: "I know Compare Chapman, Widow? s Tears, 

how to deceive myself with others help ; Act Vv : "I am seated in the throne of 

And how the lion chastised is, by beat- justice, and I will doe justice : I will 

ing of the whelp." Other references not heare him . . . and moreover, put 

might be given. See Notes and Queries, you in mind in whose presence you 

May 26, i&94,&nd Athentzum, February stand ; if you parrat to me longer, goe 

10, 1900. The proverb is not in any to." 

of the English collections (including 287. fustian} nonsense. Cotgrave has 

Hazlitt's) except Herbert's Jacula " Barragouin : Pedlar's French, fustian 

Prudentium, 1640. It is explained in language; any rude gibble-gabble . . ; 

TopselPs History of Four-footed Beasts Barragoiiiner : To speak fustian : to use 

(1607), who refers to Albertus Magnus, a language that nobody understands." 

who died in 1280. The proverb has In Lyly's Mydas, iv. Hi., when Petulus 

thus a venerable antiquity, and will talks hunting language, Minutius says, 

probably be traced back to the Physio- " This is worse than fustian." 
logus of the Alexandrian School. It is 298. pleasance} festivity, merriment 

not in Pliny's Natural History, the with others. Compare Spenser, Faerie 

8 



114 



OTHELLO 



[ACT ii. 



I ago. Why, but you are now well enough : how came 300 

you thus recovered ? 

Cas./tt hath pleased the devil drunkenness to give 

Cplace to the devil wrath: oneunperfectness 

shows me another, to .make me frankly despise 

s^-^S^&> 3 5 

I ago. Come, you are too severe a moraler : as the 

time, the place, and the condition of this country 
stands, I could heartily wish this had not be- 
fallen ; but since it is as it is, mend it for your 
own good. 310 

Cas. I will ask him for my place again ; he shall 
tell me I am a drunkard ! Had I as many 
mouths as Hydra, such an answer would stop 
lem all. To be now a sensible man, by and 

md presently a beast ! O strange ! 3 1 
Every inordinate cup is unblessed, and the 
gredient is a devil. 

lago. Come, come, good wine is a good familiar 

307. and] omitted Qq. 308. not] not so Q I, 2. 315. strange.'] 
omitted Qq. 316. inordinate] unordinate Q I. 316, 317. ingredient] Ff, 
ingredience Qq. 

protest to you I am unperfect " ; and 
again, Cynthia's Revels, III. ii., "Like 
an unperfect prologue," etc. 

306. moraler} moralizer. Rolfe 
points out " moral "= moralize, in As 
You Like It, ii. vii. 29. 

313. Hydro] Shakespeare alludes to 
the many-headed dragon of Greek 
mythology again in 1 Henry IV, V. iv. 
25, and Coriolanus, III. i. 93. A very 
common metaphor. 

315. presently] immediately after, 
very soon. Compare II. i. 214. 

316. unblessed} accursed; asinv. i. 34. 
318. familiar] There may be a play 

here on the meaning of this word, 




Queene, I. ii. 30: " Faire seemely pleas- 
aunce each to other makes," and Ben 
Jonson : "Content: good sir, vouch- 
safe us your pleasance" (good company), 
Every Man out of Humour, IV. vi., 1599. 
303. unperfectness] deficiency, Not 
synonymous with imperfection, if the 
adjective be considered. It means 
rather the absence of perfectness, where 
the thing spoken of is nothing without 
it, and is therefore a much stronger 
term. Compare Sonnet xxiii. : "As an 
unperfect actor on the stage Who with 
his fear is put beside his part." And 
Ben Jonson, Every Man out of Humour, 
Induction: "Enter Prologue ... I 



' 

sc. in.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 115 

creature, if it be well used : exclaim no more 
against it. And, good lieutenant, I think you 320 
think I love you. 

Cas. I have well approved it, sir. I drunk 1 
lago. You or any man living may be drunk at some 
time, man. I '11 tell you what you shall do. 
Our general's wife is now the general. I may 325 
say so in this respect, for that he hath devoted 
and given up himself to the contemplation, mark, 
and devotement of her parts and graces : confess 
yourself freely to her ; importune her : Shell help 
to put you in your place again : she is of so free, 330 
so kind, so apt, so blessed a disposition, that she 
holds it a vice in her goodness not to do more 
than she is requested : this broken joint between 
you and her husband entreat her to splinter ; and, 

323, 324. some time] Qq, a time Ff. 324. man] omitted Q I ; /'//] Qq ; 
/Ff, Rowe. 327,328. mark, and] Globe ; mark and Qq, Cambridge ; mark: 
and Ff. 328. devotement] deuotement Q I, F I ; devotement F 2, 3, Q 3 ; denote- 
ment Q 2, Theobald, Globe, etc. 329, 330. her; she '// help to] Qq, Steevens, 
Craig ; her help to Ff, Globe, etc. 330. of] omitted Qq. 331. that she] 
Qq, Capell et seq., Craig; she Ff, Globe, Cambridge. 333. broken joint] 
braule Q I. 

"devil." Compare Love's Labour's The elder copies leave us no choice as 
Lost: "Love is a familiar; Love is a to text. Some editors find fault with 
devil" (i. ii. 177). the repetition devoted himself to the 
3251] See ii. i. 74, and note. devotement. But on other occasions 
328. devotement] There has been we are told this is "quite in Shake- 
confusion in the collation here. F i, speare's style." New Eng. Diet, has a 
Q i read "deuotement." Theeditorsof referencefor "devotement"("theaction 
the Cambridge Shakespeare (reading of devoting, or fact of being devoted, 
"denotement" in text) collate " deuote- devotion, dedication ") to Ainsworth's 
men t" Q i, F i, Q 2, whereas Q 2 reads Annots. on Pentateuch, 1622. Com- 
"denotement" (followed by Theobald), pare French Devourment : a vowing, or 
Again, Ne 10 Eng. Diet, gives F I " de- devotion. Shakespeare meant more 
votement," and both Quartos (wrongly) than Theobald's word could possibly 
"denotement," while at the latter word mean. He meant "worship" of her 
the reference is overlooked in its good parts. 

proper place. Furness, again, collates 334. splinter] to bind up with splints. 

deuotement] Q I, 2 ; the British Mu- See Richard III. li. ii. 118. 
seum Q 2 has distinctly "denotement." 



116 OTHELLO [ACT n. 

my fortunes against any lay worth naming, this 335 
^ crack of your love shall grow stronger than it 
was before. 

Cas. You advise me well. 

lago. I protest, in the sincerity of love and honest 

kindness. 340 

Cas. I think it freely ; and betimes in the morning 
I will beseech the virtuous Desdemona to under- 
take for me: I am desperate of my fortunes if 
they check me here. 

lago. You are in the right. Good night, lieutenant ; 345 
I must to the watch. 

Cas. Good night, honest lago. \Exit. 

lago. And what 's he then that says I play the villain ? 
When this advice is free I give and honest, 
Probal to thinking, and indeed the course 350 

To win the Moor again ? For 'tis most easy 

342. / will} Ff, will I Qq. 344. here} omitted Ff. 350. Probal} Prob- 
able Rowe. 

335. lay} wager, as in Cymbeline, I. timely undertaker, to the greatest jus* 

iv. 159, and 8 Henry VI. v. ii. 27. tice of this kingdom," Dedn. to 

341. betimes in the morning} early in Poetaster (Folio, 1616). See also 
the morning. Shakespeare has this Isaiah xxxviii. 14, " I am in trouble 5 
expression again in Measure for Meas- undertake for me." 

ure, IV. iii. 49, and 1 Henry IV. II. 348. what Y] who is. Compare Meas- 

iv. 600. Haifa century later it was a ure for Measure, V. 472, etc., and 

favourite with Pepys, who varies his above, line 290. 

early rising to "betimes," "pretty 350. Probal} probable, provable, 

betimes," "very betimes, "and "mighty Halliwell quotes from Sampson's Vow 

betimes." Breaker, 1636 : " Didst thou not make 

342, 343. undertake for me} take up me draw conveighances ? Did not th' 
my business for me. Used absolutely assurance of thy lands seem proball ? " 
in this sense in Ben Jonson's New Inn Collier instances contemporary contrac- 
(iv. iii. 374^) : " O yes, 'tis profitable, tions "miseral" for miserable, and 
and of use. It [Love] makes us fierce, "varial" for variable (Furness). A 
and fit to undertake." Compare the very improper contraction, since it 
substantive below (iv. i. 197), of which should alter the meaning. The play 
a good instance occurs also in Jonson : above referred to has other echoes of 
"for whose innocence, as for the Othello. 

author's, you were once a noble and 



sc.ni.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 117 

The inclining Desdemona to subdue 

In any honest suit. She's framed as fruitful 

As the free elements. And then for her 

To win the Moor, were 't to renounce his baptism, 

All seals and symbols of redeemed sin, 

His soul is so enfetter'd to her love, <^<Jto 

That she may make, unmake, do what she list, 

Even as her appetite shall play the god 

With his weak function. How am I then a villain 

To counsel Cassio to this parallel course, 361 

Directly to his good ? Divinity of hell ! 

When devils will the blackest sins put on, /(/^\ 

They do suggest at first with heavenly shows, 

s As I do now: for while this honest fool 365 

Plies Desdemona to repair his fortunes, 

And she for him pleads strongly to the Moor, 

I '11 pour this pestilence into his ear, 

355. were V] Qq, -were Ff. 363. the] their Qq, F 4, Rowe, Steevens, Malone. 
365. while} Q i, F 3, 4 ; whiles F I, 2 ; -whilst Q 2, 3. 366. fortunes} Qq, 
Fortune Ff. 

352. inclining} kindly disposed, giving reference to Macbeth, I. iii. 

gracious. "Compliant" (Malone). 140, as a parallel use. 

353- fruitful} abundant, plenteous; 361, 362. parallel . . . to his good~\ 

hence generous. Compare (for adverb) course directly parallel to, or level with, 

AWs Well, II. ii. 73, and Lear, iv. vi. his welfare. 

270. The sense of "fertile" belongs 363, 364.] For this sentiment, com- 

to the word elsewhere in Shake- pare Love's Labour s Lost, iv. iii. 257 : 

speare. ' ' Devils soonest tempt, resembling 

354. As the free elements} Schmidt spirits of light." And Measure for 

says, "as the air that blows on any- Measure, u. iv. 16 : " Let 's write good 

body"; Johnson explains "out of angel on the devil's horn : 'Tis not the 

which all things are produced." The devil's crest, " where " 'Tis " is probably 

word had very wide and vague, as well a false reading for " Is't. " 

as technical, uses ; which are enhanced 363. put on~\ encourage, thrust for- 

by the chance rendering, singular or ward. See II. i. 312, and Macbeth, iv. 

plural. See above, II. i. 45. All the iii. 239. 

operative causes of nature. 364. suggest] tempt, seduce. Com- 

357. enfetter'd'] See note II. i. 18. pare Richard II. III. iv. 75 ; and 

360. function} Schmidt says, "the "tender youth is soon suggested, " Two 

operation of the mental faculties"; Gentlemen, ill. i. 34. 



118 



OTHELLO 



[ACT H. 






That she repeals him for her_bpdy's_lust ; 
And by how much she strives to do him good, 
She shall undo her credit with the Moor. 
So will I turn her virtue into pitch ; 
""And out of her own goodness make the net 
That shall enmesh them all. 

Enter RODERIGO. 

How now, Roderigo ! 

Rod. II do follow here in the chase, not like a 375 
hound that hunts, but one that fills up the cry. 
My money is almost spent ; I have been to-night 
exceedingly well cudgelled ; and I think the 
issue will be, I shall have so much experience 
for my pains; and so, with no money at 380 
all and a little more wit, return again to 
Venice. 

I ago. How poor are they that have not patience ! 
What wound did ever heal but by degrees ? 

374. enmesh] Q I, 2 ; enmashfi. 380-382. pains . . . Venice'] Ff ; paines, 
as that comes to, and no money at all, and with that wit returne to Venice. 
Q I ; paines, and so no many at all, and with a little more wit returne to Venice. 
Q 2, 3 ; as above, omitting again Steevens, Malone, Knight. 

alone. In those days a hound with a 
fine voice was greatly appreciated. The 
identical phrase is found in Samuel 
Harsnet, Declaration of Egregious 
Popish Impostures, 1603, p. 89, "little 
beagles to fill up the cry." Compare 
this passage from Carleton's letter to 
Chamberlain, Dec. II, 1603 (Court and 
Times of James I. i. p. 30): "The 
Lord Cobham, who was now to play 
his part ... so outprayed the company 
that helped to pray with him, that a 
stander-by said, ' he had a good mouth 
in a cry, but was nothing single.' " 



369. repeals'] recalls. The literal 
sense 

372. pitch'] " Pitch will defile," 
Beaumont and Fletcher, Women 
Pleased, IV. i. From Ecclesiasticus 
xiii. I. This line takes a commanding 
place amongst lago's malignant senti- 
ments. 

374. enmesh] Our form of the word 
is " immesh." 

376. cry] a pack of hounds giving 
tongue. See Midsummer Nighfs 
Dream, iv. i. 122, 129. A hound that 
fills up the cry is not for hunting, but 
one who is in the pack for his voice 



sc. in.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 119 

Thou know'st we work by wit and not by witch- 
craft, 385 
And wit depends on dilatory time. 
Does 't not go well ? Cassio hath beaten thee, 
And thou by that small hurt hast cashier'd 

Cassio : 

Though other things grow fair against the sun, 
Yet fruits that blossom first will first be ripe: 390 
Content thyself awhile. By the mass, ^tis morn- 

^f*t* **'l*i J ,*.* ;_ *-~-* .^^^ \ 

Pleasure and action make the hours seem short. 
Retire thee ; go where thou art billeted : 
Away, I say ; thou shalt know more hereafter : 
Nay, get thee gone. [Exit Rod.~\ Two things are to 
be done: 395 

My wife must move for Cassio to her mistress ; 
I '11 set her on ; 

Myself the while to draw the Moor apart, 
And bring him jump when he may Cassio find 
Soliciting his wife : ay, that 's the way ; 400 

Dull not device by coldness and delay. {Exit. 

390. Yet] Bui Q I. 391. By the mass} Qq, In troth Ff. 394. Two] 
Ff, Some Qq. 398. the while] Theobald ; awhile Q I ; a while Ff, Q 2, 3. 
401. device} Ff, devise Qq. 

389, 390.] "The rest of our plan is The above is tantamount to that of 

progressing favourably, but it was to be Hudson. 

expected that that part which got the 399. jump} exactly in point of time, 

first opportunity should first be ripe. Compare Hamlet, I. i. 65: "jump at 

Be patient for a while, and all will go this dead hour." So in The Spanish 

well." Such seems to be the meaning. Tragedy, "all falls out for our purpose, 

Various paraphrases have been given all hits jump." 
which pursue the metaphor too closely. 



120 



OTHELLO 



[ACT in. 



ACT III 



SCENE I. Cyprus. Before the Castle, 

Enter CASSIO and some Musicians. 

Cas. Masters, play here ; I will content your pains ; 

Something that's brief; and bid "Good morrow, 
general." [Music. 

Enter Clown. 

Clo. Why, masters, have your instruments been in 
Naples, that they speak i' the nose thus ? 

3. have] Ff, ha Qq ; been in] F 4, Steevens, 1793 *' seq.; bin at Qq ; bin in 
F i, 2, 3. 4. speak] squeak Collier, 2nd ed. (MS.). 



1. Castle] "We alighted at Fama- 
gusta, . . . The walles are faire and 
new . . . these walles did the Venetians 
make. They have also on the hauen 
side of it a Castle, and the hauen is 
chained, the citie hath only two gates. 
. . . The Venetians send every two 
yeeres new rulers, which they call 
Castellani. The towne hath allowed 
it also two gallies continually armed 
and furnished," John Locke, Voyage 
to Jerusalem, 1553; Hakluyt, ii. 220 
(reprint, 1810), 1599. 

2. bid ' ' Good morrow "] A concert 
under the window was very usual in 
England to arouse the inmates in the 
morning on special occasions. See 
"Hunt's up," Romeo and Juliet, III. v. 
54, and the notes thereto for references 
to the wakening sportsmen by music. 
Early reference to the custom of waking 
the bride on the morning of her wedding 
is found in the old ballad in Collier's 
Roxburghe Ballads, " The Bride's Good 
Morrow." This is mentioned as a tune 
in Ancient Ballads and Broadsides (ed. 
1870, p. 17), circa 1570. And for the 
custom, see Barry's Ram-Alley, Act v. 
This was the orthodox " good -morrow," 
as proved by the tune's name, and not 



that of greeting a married couple the 
morning after the wedding, which some 
commentators think is referred to here. 
Cotgrave has " Resveil: A Hunts-up, 
or morning Song for a new married 
Wife, the day after the Marriage." 
Othello is, however, included in this 
greeting alone. Compare The Sun's 
Darling (Ford and Dekker) : "another 
did but peep into England, and it cost 
him more in good-morrows, blown up 
to him under his window by drums and 
trumpets, than his whole voyage," IV. i. 
It is probable that such a ceremonial 
greeting alone is referred to here. For 
later examples of the after-marriage 
custom, see Brand's Pop. Ant., ed. 
1882, ii. 176. Mildmay, Earl of West- 
moreland, has a poem (1648) entitled 
"A Reveille Mattin, or Good Morrow 
to a Friend." Lyly's Pappe with an 
Hatchet (1588-1589) opens with the 
words "Good morrow, goodman 
Martin, good morrow : will ye anie 
musique this morning ? " 

4. Naples . . . nose] A reference, 
undoubtedly, to the venereal disease, 
known also as the Neapolitan disease, 
from its having first appeared in Europe 
at the siege of Naples, in the year 1528. 



\ 



sc.i.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 121 

First Mus. How, sir, how ? 5 

Clo. Are these, I pray you, wind-instruments ? 

First Mus. Ay, marry, are they, sir. 

Clo. O, thereby hangs a tail. 

First Mus. Whereby hangs a tale, sir ? 

Clo. Marry, sir, by many a wind-instrument that I 10 

know. But, masters, here 's money for you : 

and the general so likes your music, that he 

desires you, of all loves, to make no more noise 

with it. 

First Mus. Well, sir, we will not. I 5 

Clo. If you have any music that may not be heard, 

to 't again : but, as they say, to hear music the 

general does not greatly care. 
First Mus. We have none such, sir. 
Clo. Then put up your pipes in your bag, for I '11 20 

away : go ; vanish into air ; away ! 

\Exeunt Musicians. 

6. pray y<ni\ Ff ; pray, cald Q i, 2 ; pray you, coldQ 3, Steevens. 8. tail] 
tayle Qq, tale Ff. 9. tale} Ff, tayle Qq. 13. of all loves} Q i, Johnson, 
Steevens ; for love's sake] Ff, Q 2, 3, Globe, Cambridge, etc. ; more] omitted F 2, 
Q 3, F 3, 4. 20. up] Ff, omitted Qq. 20, 21. for I'll away:} 'fore all, 
away, Anon. MS. (apud Jennens), and hye away Hanmer, fly away Ritson conj. 
21. into air] omitted Q I. 

See Cotgrave in v. Vtrole. References II. ii. 154. Nares collected numerous 

are only too frequent in writers of the examples, e.g.: "For all the loves on 

time. Compare Timon, iv. iii. 157. earth, Hodge, let me see it" (Gammer 

Johnson noted this, which cannot be Carton's Needle, v. 2), 1575 ; and 

overlooked. " Conjuring his wife, of all loves, to 

10.] The joke here is too obvious to prepare cheer fitting for such honourable 

need notice. But it is surely better to tender-men," Honest Whore [Dodsley's 

leave it alone than say it refers to Old Plays, ii. 76, and iii. 267]. 

" ribbons often attached to wind instru- 17, 18.] Two puns have been dis- 

ments," as a recent editor does. covered here: "to't" ("toot"), and 

13. of all loves'] This reading is "general" ("public"). Furness thinks 

authorised by the first Quarto, and "one is quite as likely, or as unlikely, 

more expressive than the Folio, "for as the other." 

love's sake." See Merry Wives, ii. ii. 20. put up . . . /'//] As the Clown 

119, and Midsummer Night's Dream, remains, and the Musicians go, the 



122 



OTHELLO 



[ACT in. 



Cas. Dost thou hear, mine honest friend ? 

Clo. No, I hear not your honest friend ; I hear you. 

Cas. Prithee, keep up thy quillets. There 's a poor 

piece of gold for thee : if the gentlewoman that 2 5 
attends the general's wife be stirring, tell her 
there 's one Cassio entreats her a little favour of 
speech : wilt thou do this ? 

Clo. She is stirring, sir : if she will stir hither, I shall 

seem to notify unto her. 30 



Cas. Do, good my friend. 



\Exit Clown. 



22. hear, mine] Theobald, Collier, White, Craig ; hear me, mine Ff ; heart 
my Qq ; hear, my Capell, etc., Globe, Cambridge. 26. general's wife] Qq, 
general Ff. 30. seem to] soon so Singer (ed. 2) MS., seem so to Collier (ed. 2) 
MS. 31. Cas. Do . . . friend] omitted Ff. 



reading perhaps should be "ye '11," i.e. 
' ' ye " must away. Several suggestions 
(ut supra) have been made, but this seems 
simpler. " Put up your pipes " may be 
taken proverbially : " // esf au bout de 
sa corde : He can do no more, he can 
go no further : he may put up his pipes, 
go shake his ears" (Cotgrave). The 
contraction "ye '11" occurs in Love's 
Labour's Lost, I. ii. 54. 

24. quillets] sly tricks in argument. 
"Certainly a contraction of quidlibet" 
(Skeat). See Hamlet, v. i. 108. A 
legal term. It occurs in Stanyhurst's 
Virgil, 1584 (Arber's reprint, p. 45). 
A transitional form may be found in 
Guilpin's Skialethtia, Satire ii., 1598: 
"Then what's a wench but a quirke, 
quidlet case, Which makes a painter's 
pallat of her face ? " 

29. stirring] out of bed in the morn- 
ing, as in Lucrece, 1280, and Richard 
II. ill. ii. 36. The Clown quibbles on 
this sense in "stir," "to move," 
"change place." Schmidt notices 
this. 

30. seem to~\ put on a seeming to, 
make ready to, or arrange, or begin to 
do a thing. Such was the sense this 
construction was used in. Compare 
Merchant of Venice, n. iv. 1 1, and Mid- 



summer Night's Dream, III. i. 19. 
Compare Ben Jonson, Alchemist, i. i. 
IT a: "a loadstone To draw in 
gallants that wear spurs : the rest 
they '11 seem to follow " ; and Marston, 
Eastward Ho, I. i. (Bullen, iii. 19) : 
" Give me a little box o' the ear, that 
I may seem to blush" (doubtful here) ; 
and Captain Smith, Virginia (Arber, 
p. 414), 1608 : " The people at first 
with great fury seemed to assault 
us, yet at last with songs . . . be- 
came very tractable." Several altera- 
tions and suggestions have been made 
here in notes, but none to the purpose. 
The verb "pretend" had parallel 
usages. I find this expression earlier 
in Peele's Sir Cly onion (ante 1 590 ?) : 
"as his page in these affairs would 
seem me to entreat " (i.e. arrange to 
entertain me as his page), ed. 1874, 
p. 522. And again : " Never seem for 
to persuade " (i.e. attempt or begin to 
persuade), p. 529. And "Why, whither 
runs Clamydes ? Sir Knight, seem to 
stay him" (arrange to have him 
stopped), p. 531. In these passages, 
Dyce doubts the reading, unjustifiably ; 
while Bullen, Peele's latest editor, says 
it is awkward, but not corrupt. 



sc. i.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 123 

Enter I AGO. 

In happy time, lago. 

lago. You have not been a-bed, then ? 

Cas. Why, no ; the day had broke 

Before we parted. I have made bold, lago, 

To send in to your wife : my suit to her 3 5 

Is, that she will to virtuous Desdemona 

Procure me some access. 

lago. I '11 send her to you presently ; 

And I '11 devise a mean to draw the Moor 
Out of the way, that your converse and business 
May be more free. 40 

Cas. I humbly thank you for 't. \Exit Iago?[ I never knew 
A Florentine more kind and honest. 

Enter EMILIA. 

Emil. Good morrow, good lieutenant : I am sorry 
For your displeasure : but all will soon be well. 
The general and his wife are talking of it, 4 5 

And she speaks for you stoutly : the Moor replies, 
That he you hurt is of great fame in Cyprus 
And great affinity, and that in wholesome wisdom 

44. soon] Qq, Craig ; sure Yf, Globe, Cambridge. 

37. access] The accent is on the last Florentine (i. i. 20). He means he 
syllable, as elsewhere in Shakespeare, never found one of his own countrymen 
where it is determinable, except in more kind, etc. 

Hamlet, n. i. no. 44. displeasure] disfavour, as below, 

38. mean] occurs oftener in the plural m. iii. 43. The meaning is "the dis- 
in Shakespeare. favour you are in. " 

39. converse] conversation. Accented 48.] See note at II. iii. 281. 

as here in Hamlet, n. i. 42, and Love's 48. affinity] " Affinitt: Affinity, kin- 

Laoour's Lost, v. ii. 745. dred, alliance, nearness " (Cotgrave). 

42. Florentine] lago was a Venetian Not elsewhere in Shakespeare, 
(in. iii. 201, 202). Cassio was a 



124 



OTHELLO 



[ACT in. 



He might not but refuse you ; but he protests he loves 
you, 

And needs no other suitor but his likings 50 

To take the safest occasion by the front 

To bring you in again. 
Cas. Yet, I beseech you, 

If you think fit, or that it may be done, 

Give me advantage of some brief discourse 

With Desdemon alone. 
Emit. Pray you, come in : 55 

I will bestow you where you shall have time 

To speak your bosom freely. 

Cas, I am much bound to you. 

\Exeunt. 

49.] First you omitted Q 2, 3. 51. To . . . front] omitted Ff. 55. 
Desdemon] Ff, Rowe, Dyce (ed. 3); Desdemona Qq, etc. , Globe, Craig ; you] 
omitted F 2, 3, 4. 57. Cas. / . . . you} omitted Q i. 



51. To take . . . front] A classical 
proverb of reverend antiquity, found in 
most writers of this time, but not else- 
where in Shakespeare. Take time 
(opportunity, occasion, fortune) by the 
forelock (or front) for she is bald behind. 
' ' Occasio prima sui parte comosa, 
posteriori parte calva, quam si occu- 
paris teneas ; elapsem semel, non 
ipse Jupiter possit reprehendere." It 
is found in Phsedrus' Fables, and in 
Cato's writings ; and it occurs both in 
French and Spanish. It is in Rabelais, 
Gargantua, i. 37 (circa 1530). Com- 
pare Peele, Battle of Alcazar, n. iii., 
1594: "I doubt not but will watch 
occasion, And take her foretop by the 
slenderest hair" ; Ben Jonson, Cynthids 
Revels, iv. i., 1601 : "Let's take our 
time by the forehead " ; Dekker, i. , 
Honest Whore, i. 12, 1604: "Talk 
not of happiness till your closed hand 
Have her by the forehead like the lock 
of Time " ; Bacon, Essay of Delays 
(Arber, p. 525), 1625: "Occasion (as 



it is in the common verse) turneth a 
bald noddle, after she hath presented 
her locks in front and no hold taken." 
Greene used it as early as Peele, if not 
earlier. 

55. Desdemoti] The Quartos always 
read Desdemona. The Folios avail 
themselves of the variant for the sake 
of the metre, six times [ill. i. 56; III. 
iii. 54 ; iv. ii. 41 ; V. ii. 204 ; v. ii. 281 
(twice)]. I have followed the Folios 
except in the last instance (q.v. ). 
Compare ' ' Plelen " and ' ' Helena," Mid- 
summer Nighfs Dream ; ' ' Philomel " 
and "Philomela," Titus Andronicus. 

56. bestow you] conduct you to a 
place. A common use in Shakespeare : 
' ' which way should he go ? how should 
I bestow him?" Merry Wives, IV. ii. 43. 

57. bosom] inmost thoughts. Com- 
pare Winters Tale, IV. iv. 574. See 
Beaumont and Fletcher, Wit at Several 
Weapons, n. : "The bosom of my pur- 
pose." 



sc. ii.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 125 

SCENE II. A Room in the Castle. 

Enter OTHELLO, lAGO, and Gentlemen. 

Oth. These letters give, lago, to the pilot ; 

And by him do my duties to the senate : 
That done, I will be walking on the works ; 
Repair there to me. 

lago. Well, my good lord, I '11 do 't 

Oth. This fortification, gentlemen, shall we see 't ? 5 

Gent. We '11 wait upon your lordship. \Exeunt. 

SCENE III. Before the Castle. 

Enter DESDEMONA, CASSIO, and EMILIA. 

Des. Be thou assured, good Cassio, I will do 

All my abilities in thy behalf. 

EmiL Good madam, do : I warrant it grieves my 
husband. 

As if the case were his. 
Des. O, that 's an honest fellow. Do not doubt, Cassio, 5 

But I will have my lord and you again 

As friendly as you were. 
Cas. Bounteous madam, 

Whatever shall become of Michael Cassio, 

He 's never any thing but your true servant. 
Des. I know 't : I thank you. You do love my lord : I o 

2. senate] Ff, State Qq. 3. on] to Q 2, 3. 6. We '11] F 3, 4, etc.; We 
Qq ; Well F I ; Weel F 2. 

Scene in. 

3. warrant] Ff, know Qq. 4. case] Qq, cause Ff. IO. I know' t:] Ff, 
O sir, Qq. 



126 OTHELLO [ACT m. 

You have known him long ; and be you well assured 

He shall in strangeness stand no farther off 

Than in a politic distance. 
Cas. Ay, but, lady, 

That policy may either last so long, 

Or feed upon such nice and waterish diet, I 5 

Or breed itself so out of circumstance, 

That, I being absent and my place supplied, 

My general will forget my love and service. 
Des. Do not doubt that ; before Emilia here 

I give thee warrant of thy place : assure thee, 20 

If I do vow a friendship, I '11 perform it 

To the last article : my lord shall never rest ; 

I '11 watch him tame and talk him out of patience ; 

His bed shall seem a school, his board a shrift ; 

I '11 intermingle every thing he does 2 5 

With Cassio's suit : therefore be merry, Cassio ; 

For thy solicitor shall rather die 

Than give thy cause away. 

12. in strangeness] in strangest Qq ; farther] further Steevens (1793), Dyce, 
Globe, Craig. 16. 'Circumstance] circumstances Ff. 28. thy] thee Q I. 

12. strangeness] distant behaviour. "Who will not watch his hawk will 

Compare Venus and Adonis, 310, never reclaim her, " Choice, Chance, and 

etc. Change (Gros. p. 41), 1606. Examples 

15, 16. Or feed . . . circumstance'] may be found in Beaumont and 

" Or keep itself alive with such slight Fletcher's Rule a Wife, V. ; Women 

support, or increase itself out of acci- Pleased, 11. ii., and Pilgrim, in. ii. So 

dents." also Middleton : 

19. doubt} suspect, fear. See Hamlet, " She railed upon me, when I should 

I. ii. 256. sleep, 

23. watch him tame] See Troilus And that 's you know, intolerable, 

and Cressida, III. ii. 46. Hawks were for indeed 

tamed by being kept awake, but the 'Twill tame an elephant " 

method was supposed, with reason, to (Anything for a Quiet Life, I. L). 

apply to all animals. Steevens gives 24. shrift] Confessional coupled with 

several references to the hawking meta- penance or absolution, 
phor. A few earlier may be instanced : 



sc. in.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 127 

Enter OTHELLO and lAGO, at a distance. 

Emit. Madam, here comes my lord. 

Cas. Madam, I '11 take my leave. 30 

Des. Why, stay and hear me speak. 

Cas. Madam, not now : I am very ill at ease, 

Unfit for mine own purposes. 

Des. Well, do your discretion. [Exit Cassio. 

I ago. Ha ! I like not that. 3 5 

Oth. What dost thou say ? 

lago. Nothing, my lord : or if I know not what. 
Oth. Was not that Cassio parted from my wife ? 
lago. Cassio, my lord ! No, sure, I cannot think it, 

That he would steal away so guilty-like, 40 

Seeing you coming. 

Oth. I do believe 'twas he. 

Des. How now, my lord ! 

I have been talking with a suitor here. 

A man that languishes in your displeasure. 
Oth. Who is't you mean? 45 

Des. Why, your lieutenant, Cassio. Good my lord, 

If I have any grace or power to move you, 

His present reconciliation take; 

For if he be not one that truly loves you, 

That errs in ignorance and not in cunning, 50 

I have no judgement in an honest face : 

I prithee, call him back. 

31. Why] Ff, Steevens, Globe, Craig ; Nay Q 2, 3, Cambridge. 33. 

purposes] Ff, purpose Qq. 40. steal} sneake Q I. 41. you\ Qq, F 3, 4 ; 
your F l, 2. 

48. reconciliation] "The submission 50. cunning] knowledge, forethought, 
he makes in order to be reconciled." The old sense, as in Trot/us, V. v. 
Johnson. 41. 



128 OTHELLO [ACT in. 

Otk. Went he hence now ? 

Des. Ay, sooth ; so humbled, 

That he hath left part of his grief with me, 

To suffer with him. Good love, call him back. 5 5 

Oth. Not now, sweet Desdemon ; some other time. 

Des. But shall 't be shortly ? 

Oth. The sooner, sweet, for you. 

Des. Shall 't be to-night at supper ? 

Oth. No, not to-night. 

Des. To-morrow dinner then ? 

Oth. I shall not dine at home ; 

I meet the captains at the citadel. 60 

Des. Why then to-morrow night ; or Tuesday morn ; 

On Tuesday noon, or night ; on Wednesday morn : 

I prithee, name the time ; but let it not 

Exceed three days : in faith, he 's penitent ; 

And yet his trespass, in our common reason 65 

Save that, they say, the wars must make examples 

Out of their best is not almost a fault 

To incur a private check. When shall he come ? 

Tell me, Othello : I wonder in my soul, 

What you could ask me, that I should deny, ?Q 

53. Ay, sooth] Capell, I sooth Ff, Yes faith Qq, In sooth Rowe. 55. To 

suffer} I suffer Q I. 56. Desdemon] F I, 2, 3, Q 2, Knight, Singer ; Desdemona 
Q I, 3, F4, Rowe, etc. 6l. or] Qq, on Ff. 62. noon] morneQq; night; 
on] Ff, night, or Qq. 66. examples'] Qq, example Ff. 67. their] Rowe ; 
her Qq, Ff. 70. could} Qq, Steevens, etc., Craig ; would Ff, Dyce, Globe, 
Cambridge ; should} Qq, F I ; would F 2, 3, 4, Rowe. 

53. sooth] in sooth, in truth. Fre- fence if " the wars " be taken as "war" 

quently used by Shakespeare without generally. 

"in," as in Twelfth Night, II. i. II ; 67. not almost a fault} hardly, or 

II. iv. 91, etc. scarcely a fault. Compare Comedy of 

67. their] Rowe's suggestion for Errors, v. i. 181 : "I have not 

"her" of old editions is generally breathed almost since I did see it." 
accepted. "Her" is capable of de- 68. check} rebuke, as in I. i. 149. 



sc. in.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 129 

Or stand so mammering on. What ! Michael Cassio, 

That came a-wooing with you, and so many a time 

When I have spoke of you dispraisingly 

Hath ta'en your part ; to have so much to do 

To bring him in ! Trust me, I could do much 7 5 

Oth. Prithee, no more : let him come when he will ; 
I will deny thee nothing. 

Des. Why, this is not a boon ; 

'Tis as I should entreat you wear your gloves, 
Or feed on nourishing dishes, or keep you warm, 
Or sue to you to do a peculiar profit 80 

To your own person : nay, when I have a suit 
Wherein I mean to touch your love indeed, 
It shall be full of poise and difficult weight, 
And fearful to be granted. 

Oth. I will deny thee nothing : 

Whereon, I do beseech thee, grant me this, 85 

To leave me but a little to myself. 

Des. Shall I deny you ? no : farewell, my lord. 

Oth. Farewell, my Desdemona : I '11 come to thee straight. 

71. mammering] mam? ring f, Q 2, 3 ; muttering Q r. 75. Trust me] 
Birlady Q I ; much ] much, Q 2, 3 ; much. Ff, Q i. 83. difficult -weight} 
difficulty Q i. 88. Desdemona] Desdemon Dyce (ed. 2). 

71. mammering] hesitating. Com- does not seem apparent. Everything 
pare Drant's-#i?ra(Sat. in. 2): "when Desdemona says is of some purpose, 
she daygnes to send for him, then 80. peculiar] private, belonging to 
mammeringe he doth doute" (1567), one person only. See IV. i. 70. 
cited by Steevens. All the other ex- 83. poise] weight in the scales or 
amples quoted are of the expression balance. 

"in a mammering," which was fairly 83. difficult weight] difficult to be 

common, and occurs in Palsgrave's weighed or estimated. The metaphor is 

Acolastus, 1540. continuous in the line, and implies the ad- 

72. That came, etc.] See note at justment of a very serious question. The 
I. ii. 52. adjective "difficult" occurs nowhere else 

75. / could do much ] Is this a in Shakespeare, and was uncommon, 
slight ebullition of temper? If it has being long preceded by the substantive. It 
any special reference or significance, it is,however, in Ryder's Dictionary( 1589), 

9 



130 OTHELLO [ACTIII. 

Des. Emilia, come. Be as your fancies teach you ; 

Whate'er you be, I am obedient. 90 

\Exeunt Desdemona and Emilia. 
Oth. Excellent wretch ! Perdition catch my soul, 

But I do love thee ! and when I love thee not, 

Chaos is come again. 
I ago. My noble lord, 

Oth. What dost thou say, I ago ? 

I ago. Did Michael Cassio, when you woo'd my lady, 95 

Know of your love ? 

Oth. He did, from first to last : why dost thou ask ? 
I ago. But for a satisfaction of my thought ; 

No further harm. 

Oth. Why of thy thought, lago ? 

I ago. I did not think he had been acquainted with her. I oo 
Oth. O, yes, and went between us very oft. 
lago. Indeed ! 
Oth. Indeed ! ay, indeed : discern'st thou aught in that ? 

Is he not honest ? 

lago. Honest, my lord ? 

Oth. Honest ! ay, honest. 

89. Be] Ff, be it Qq. 91. wretch] wench Theobald. 95. you] he F i. 
98. thought] thoughts Q I. 100. her] Qq ; Air F I ; it F 2, 3, 4, Rowe. 
IOI. off] often Q I. 103. ay] Rowe ; /Ff, Q 2, 3 ; omitted Q I ; in] of Rowe. 
104-107. Is he not . . . echoes me] divided as in Steevens (1793), Globe Craig ; 
in Qq each speech forms a line separately except (104) lago. Honest . . . ay, 
honest which unite to one line ; in Ff each speech forms a line as in Cambridge j 
in both Qq, Ff, Oth. Think . . , echoes me as one line. 

91. wretch] An affectionate term, faction for the poor kind wretch, who 
generally used with pity. Compare is out of his wits for my sake." 
Romeo and Juliet, I. iii. 44, and An- 93. Chaos is come again] The same 
tony and Cleopatra, V. ii. 306. Ben expression occurs in Venus and Adonis, 
Jonson uses it three times in his Al- line 2019: "For he, being dead, with 
chemist : " Dapper. I cannot speak for him is beauty slain, And, beauty dead, 
joy. Subtle. See, the kind wretch ! " black chaos comes again. " 
v. ii. 68a ; and again at IV. i. 49^, and 102. et setj.] Ford made free use of 
II. i. 243. See also Jonson's Bart, this powerful dialogue in Love's Sacri- 
Fair, v. i.: "to invent some satis- fice, Act in. (printed 1633). 



sc. in.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 131 

lago. My lord, for aught I know. 105 

Oth. What dost thou think ? 

lago. Think, my lord ! 

Oth. Think, my lord ! 

By heaven, he echoes me, 
As if there were some monster in his thought 
Too hideous to be shown. Thou dost mean something: 
I heard thee say but now, thou likedst not that, 1 1 o 
When Cassio left my wife : what didst not like ? 
And when I told thee he was of my counsel 
In my whole course of wooing, thou criedst " Indeed ! " 
And didst contract and purse thy brow together, 
As if thou then hadst shut up in thy brain 115 

Some horrible conceit : if thou dost love me, 
Show me thy thought. 

lago. My lord, you know I love you. 

Oth. I think thou dost ; 

And for I know thou 'rt full of love and honesty 
And weigh'st thy words before thou givest them 
breath, 120 

Therefore these stops of thine fright me the more : 
For such things in a false disloyal knave 
Are tricks of custom ; but in a man that 's just 

107. By . . . echoes'] By heaven he ecchoes Q I; Alas, thou eccho'st Ff ; why 
dost thou ecchoe Q 2, 3. 108. his] Q i; thy Ff, Q 2, 3. 109. dost} didst 
Q I. no. buf\ Qq, Steevens (1793), Craig; even Ff, Rowe, Dyce, Globe, 
Cambridge. 113. /] Qq, ofFL 116. conceit} counsel! Qi, 119. And} 
omitted F 2, 3, 4 ; thou'rt] Ff, thou art Qq. 120. givest}give Q i. 121. 
fright} affright Q I. 

114. purse} wrinkle, contract into the world, like a Dutch purse, with 

wrinkles. Purses, made of soft stuff the mouth downwards, his beard the 

and worn at the girdle, were more con- tassels, and he walks ... as melan- 

spicuous formerly than now. There is choly as one ... in the counter." 

a similar simile in Jonson's Every Man 1 1 6. conceit} conception, idea. 
Out (v. iv. 1333) : "his face is, for all 



A r v rjj< v 

\W>V^ 

V 



132 OTHELLO [ACT m. 

They 're close dilations, working from the heart, 

That passion cannot rule. 
I ago. For Michael Cassio, 125 

I dare be sworn I think that he is honest. 
Oth. I think so too. 
lago. Men should "be what they seem ; 

Or those that be not, would they might seem none ! 
Oth. Certain, men should be what they seem. 
lago. Why then I think Cassio 's an honest man. 130 

Oth. Nay, yet there 's more in this : 

I prithee, speak to me as to thy thinkings, 

As thou dost ruminate, and give thy worst of thoughts 

The worst of words. 
lago. Good my lord, pardon me : 

Though I am bound to every act of duty, 135 

124. They're] Ff, They are Qq ; close] cold 2, 3, 4, Rowe ; dilations'} Ff, 
Q 2, 3, Rowe, Theobald, Jennens ; denotements Q I, Capell, Malone, Steevens 
( I 793) > delations Johnson, Globe, Cambridge, Craig. 126. be sworn] pre- 
sume Q i ; sworn /] sworn / Lettsom conj. 127. whaf\ that Q i. 132. 
as] omitted Q I. 134. words] word Q i. 

124. dilations'] The reading of the passion (or emotion)." Upton, who 
Folios. Johnson suggested " dela- reads "dilations," gives it the sense 
tions," i.e. "accusations," which has "delayings," which Furness hesitatingly 
been followed by most recent editors, accepts. There is little comfort to be 
But the word in this sense is more got out of any reading. Malone says 
recent than Shakespeare's time, and "delation" is notfound in any dictionary 
the sense itself is not particularly ac- he has seen, but I find in Cockeram, 
ceptable. The claims of the suggestion 1642: "Delation, an accusation or 
are by no means of so paramount a secret complaint," which supports John- 
nature as to warrant an alteration of son. Instances could be given to show 
the original text. " Dilations " means that the spelling of "dilate " and " de- 
enlargements, widenings, diffuse late " was arbitrary and interchange- 
treatments, dilatings. The word is able. See Minshew's Dictionary : 
in Florio : " Dilatione, a dilation, Letters of Elizabeth and James (Cam- 
enlarging, or overspreading" (1598). den Soc.), p. 113, etc. 
Holland, in PlutarcKs Morals, 1603, 128. seem none] "have no seeming 
has: " The dilations of the arteries." of honesty" (Jennens). Johnson says : 
These two instances are in New Eng, "no longer seem, or bear the shape 
Diet.: "These secret expansions or of men." The former is the better 
developments (of thought), spreading sense, the latter the less violent inter- 
from the heart, that cannot govern its pretation. 



sc.m.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 133 

I am not bound to that all slaves are free to. 
CUtter my thoughts? Why, say they are vile and 

false ; 

: As where 's that palace whereinto foul things 
Sometimes intrude not ? who has a breast so pure, 
But some uncleanly apprehensions 140 

Keep leets and law-days, and in session sit 
^_With meditations lawful? 
Oth. Thou dost conspire against thy friend, lago, 

If thou but think'st him wrong'd and makest his ear 
A stranger to thy thoughts. 

lago. I do beseech you 145 

Though I perchance am vicious in my guess, 
As, I confess, it is my nature's plague 
To spy into abuses, and oft my jealousy 
Shapes faults that are not that your wisdom yet, 

137. vile] Qq, vt!dFf. 139. a breast] Qq ; that breast Ff, Rowe. 140. 
But some] Qq, Wherein Ff. 141. session] Qq ; sessions Ff, Rowe ; sit] Jit 
Q 2, 3. 145, 146. you . . . perchance] Steevens (1793) ; you, . . .perchance 
Qq, Ff ; you, Though I -perchance Johnson. 146. guess\ ghesse Qq. 148. 
oft my] Qq et seq. ; of my Ff, Rowe, G. White. 149. that your -wisdom yet] 
Q 2, 3, Globe ; 1 intreate you then Q I, Steevens (1793) ; that your wisdom Ff, 
Rowe, Staunton. 

139-142. who has . . . lawful?] of " since " or " inasmuch as " seems so 

"Whose breast is so pure, but that certain here, that I think it must be 

evil thoughts will not sometimes intrude admitted. If that be so, it will also 

and sit, as it were, on the bench along- serve us in a previous passage (i. i. "Ji), 

side of lawful meditations ? " For the where it vastly simplifies the meaning, 

legal metaphor, compare Sonnet 30. A good example is quoted at III. iii. 

The meaning is obvious enough, but 261, which I have discovered since 

there is redundancy in line 141, which writing the above. I find another in a 

is not, however, uncommon in Shake- letter of Chamberlain's (1617) in Court 

speare. " Leet is otherwise called a and Times of James I. (ii. 14), where 

Law day" (Blount's Glossographia}. the meaning " because " for " though " 

Compare Taming of the Shrew, Ind. is certain : " My Lady Bennet would 

ii. 89, for the only other use of the not vouchsafe ... to visit the Hague : 

word in Shakespeare. but she had seen enough of that good 

146. Though] requires the sense of town, though she was in a nest of 

"since." "Vicious" means "wrong," hornets, as she told her friends and 

or "faulty." Theobald suggested kindred, by reason of the boys and 

"think" for "though."' The sense wenches, who much wondered at her." 



134 



OTHELLO 



[ACT in. 



From one that so imperfectly conceits, 150 

Would take no notice, nor build yourself a trouble 

Out of his scattering and unsure observance. 

It were not for your quiet nor your good, 

Nor for my manhood, honesty, or wisdom, 

To let you know my thoughts. 

Oth. What dost thou mean ? 155 

lago. Good name in man and woman, dear my lord, 

Is the immediate jewel of their souls : 

Who steals mypurse steals trash; 'tis something,nothing; 

'Twas mine, 'tis his, and has been slave to thousands ; 

But he that filches from me my good name 1 60 

150. conceits'} coniects Q I, conjee ts Steevens (1793). 151. Would} You'dQ 
I, Jennens; Will Q 3; notice] note Anon. conj. (Cambridge). 152. his~\ Ff, 
my Qq. 154. or] Qq, etc. ; and Ff. 155. What . . . mean?] Zauns Q l. 
156. woman] -woman's Q I. 157. their] Ff, our Qq. 



150. conceits} imagines, thinks. See 
above (line 115) for the substantive. 
Some prefer the Quarto reading, "con- 
jects," and I append a few examples 
additional to those in New Eng. Diet. 
for the intransitive verb, ' ' to conjecture. " 
The examples in New Eng. Diet, are 
from Wyck (Ezekiel), Cooper's The- 
saurus (1565), and Othello (Quarto l). 
See also Trevisa, Prologue to Bartholo- 
mew's De proprietatibus , 1397 : 
"What so ever any man will conject, 
feign, imagine, suppose, or say" (ed. 
Steele, 1893). Other instances are in 
UdalPs Flowers of Terence (1581), and 
in Huloet's Alvearie (1572). A good 
instance of the verb "conceit" in the 
sense of ' ' suspect " occurs in Smith's 
Virginia (Arber, reprint, p. 597), 
1622: " Madyson conceited hee re- 
garded not the message, and intended 
as he supposed the same treason." 

152. scattering] straggling, going at 
random (Schmidt). Compare 2 Henry 
VI. in. ii. 126. 

I 56, 157. Good name . . . jewel} A 
proverbial saying: " Gode name is 
golde worthe, my leue childe." " How 



the goode wif thaught hir doughter" 
(Hazlitt, Early Pop. Poetry, i. 185), 
circa 1500. Ray has " A good name is 
better than riches," with Spanish form. 
See also Proverbs xxii. I. Observe here 
lago's introduction of " woman," to in- 
clude and direct attention to Desdemona. 
158-162. Who steals my purse, etc."} 
Malone quotes from Horace (Sat. ii. 2), 
translated thus by Drant, 1567 : "Now 
Umbrens ground, of late Ofells (a 
thing not very stable), Now myne, 
now thyne, So must we take the worlde 
as variable." This hardly seems worth 
repeating, but it prepares the way for 
more apposite illustrations. Hunter 
refers to Wilson's Rhetorique (1553), 
chapter on Amplification: "The 
places of Logique help oft for ampli- 
fication ... he might shew that a 
slanderer is worse than any thief, 
because a good name is better than 
all the goods in the world, and that 
the loss of money may be recovered, 
but the loss of a man's good name 
cannot be called back again ; and a 
thief may restore that again which he 
hath taken away, but a slanderer cannot 



sc. in.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 



135 



Robs me of that which not enriches him 

And makes me poor indeed. 
Oth. By heaven, I '11 know thy thoughts. 
lago. You cannot, if my heart were in your hand ; 

Nor shall not, whilst 'tis in my custody. 165 

Oth. Ha! 
lago. O, beware, my lord, of jealousy ; 

It is the green-eyed monster, which doth mock 

161. nof\ naught Grant White conj. 163. By heaven] Q I ; omitted Ff, 
Q 2, 3, 1 66. Oth. Ha!} omitted Q I, Ha? the rest; beware, my lord, of] 
beware Q I. 167. the] a Q 2, 3 ; mock] Qq, Ff ; make Theobald conj., Johnson. 



give a man his good name which he 
hath taken from him" (Furness). Hum- 
phrey Gifford, Paste of Gilloflowers (ed. 
Grosart, p. 8), 1580, puts it more con- 
cisely : " Such as take men's purses from 
them undesired, passe often by the sen- 
tence of a cord, and shall such as robbe 
men of their good names undeserved be 
supposed to escape scot-free ? " 

158. trash] This word had the dis- 
tinct sense of "money," and it is 
unlikely Shakespeare had not that 
meaning in his mind here. A few 
instances may prove this. T. Howell 
(Poems, ed. Grosart, i. 81), 1568, has: 
"For golde wise men that know the 
case doe count but trifling trash." In 
another passage (p. 28), Howell calls 
wealth or gold ' ' pelting trashe. " Florio 
has, p. 63, 1598 (Halliwell) : " Pelfe, 
trash, id est mony." Beaumont and 
Fletcher, Queen of Corinth, i. ii. ( Dyce, 
v. 406) : "A large return for the poor 
trash I ventured with you." Mas- 
singer, Parliament of Love, II. iii. IO : 
" There never was a sure path to the 
mistress But by her minister's help, 
which I will pay for {gives her his purse], 
But yet this is but trash." Greene is 
unmistakable: "therefore must I bid 
him provide trash, for my master is no 
friend without money," James IV. 
(1874, p. 203), 1598. 

166, 167. jealousy . . . green-eyed 
monster] Compare Merchant of Venice, 
III. ii. no: "shuddering fear and 



green-eyed jealousy." Yellow was the 
colour usually applied to denote jealousy 
from the days of Chaucer's Knight's 
Tale downwards. But yellow was also 
the colour of Hymen and of rejoicing, 
i.e. "bright yellow." The green of 
jealousy was a sickly yellowish green, 
the "goose green" of Ben Jonson, the 
Verdd'oye of Cotgiave. In "Captain 
Underwit" i.e. The Country Captain, 
by Duke of Newcastle (Bullen's Old 
Plays, ii. 344, 345), there is an elabor- 
ate classification of colours in their 
poetical meanings : ' ' Your yellow is 
joy . . . your lemon colour, a pale 
yellow is jealousy, your yellow is perfect 
joy . . . your greene hope, your sea 
greene inconstant." A bright fresh 
green is not intended. It was even a 
favourite colour to apply to eyes in 
poetry. See Romeo and Juliet, in. v. 
221. Compare also Beaumont and 
Fletcher's Two Noble Kinsmen, v. i. 
[probably by Shakespeare] : 

" Oh vouchsafe, 

With that thy rare green eye, which 
never yet 

Beheld thing maculate, look on thy 

virgin ! " 

See Skeat's note to this passage. 
Compare "green and yellow melan- 
choly," Twelfth Night, II. iv. 116. 
The expression "green with jealousy" 
is now in use. 

167. monster] If Shakespeare had 
any particular mythical monster, or real 



136 



OTHELLO 



[ACT m. 



The meat it feeds on : that cuckold lives in bliss 
Who, certain of his fate, loves not his wronger ; 
But, O, what damned minutes tells he o'er 170 

Who dotes, yet doubts, suspects, yet strongly loves I 

168. The] That Q I. 171. strongly'} Qq, soundly Ff. 



animal (Jackson suggested mouse ; Lord 
Chedworth, dragon-fly ; Jennens, croco- 
dile ; others, tiger, cat, ape, etc. ), the 
beast has not yet been determined. 
Shakespeare calls many things besides 
"Jealousy," a "monster," typified. 
Such as Ignorance, Ingratitude, Envy, 
Death, Custom. Compare below, in. 
iv. 1 60. 

167, 1 68. mock . . . feeds on] Plays 
with, and deludes and tortures her 
victim, i.e. Othello, "who dotes, yet 
doubts, suspects, yet strongly loves," 
while at the same time it [jealousy] 
grows and increases out of the imagin- 
ings of its own groundless suspicions. 
Probably the action of jealousy is no- 
where so perfectly put in a few power- 
ful words. Theobald suggested ' ' make " 
for "mock," which White (2nd ed.) says 
is ' ' the surest correction ever made in 
Shakespeare ( !) " Steevens is, in his 
own words, "counsel for the old read- 
ing," but he makes "meat," i.e. "the 
victim," refer to Desdemona herself. 
His words are: "continues to sport 
with the woman whom he suspects, 
and, on more certain evidence, deter- 
mines to punish." Malone rejects this : 
"The meat it feeds on," he says, 
"means not Desdemona herself, as has 
been maintained, but pabulum zelo- 
typice," and refers to a kindred image, 
relating to "policy," at lines 14, 15 
above. So, also, as jealousy may be 
said, poetically speaking, to feed upon 
itself; it may further be spoken of by 
a continuation of the imagery, to beget 
itself, as below, in line ill. iv. 160. 
While not countenancing any alteration 
of the text, which appears needless and 
unwarrantable, I agree with Malone's 
remarks, so far as his conclusions go, 
but his reasons for supporting "make" 



are to me unintelligible. He aptly quotes 
from Daniel's A'osamond, 1592: "O 
jealousy . . . Feeding upon suspect 
that doth renue thee, Happy were 
lovers if they never knew thee." 
Othello has become an embodied 
' ' suspect, " at the mercy of the mon- 
ster, and as lago says later (line 392), 
he is "eaten up with passion" (of 
jealousy). Jennens' note that Shake- 
speare "had here the crocodile in his 
eye " is rendered more worthy of notice 
from a passage (not quoted by him) in 
Burton's Anatomy of Melancholy (3. ill. 
i. i). Speaking of the jealousy of animals 
he says : "I have read as much of 
crocodiles ; and if Peter Martyr's au- 
thority be authentic, legat. Babylonicct, 
lib. 3 you shall have a strange tale 
to that purpose confidently related 
. . . Crocodili zelotypi et uxorum 
amanttssimi," etc. Burton gives other 
interesting references. 

168-171. lives in bliss . . . strongly 
loves'] If he does not care for his wife 
who wrongs him, although certain of 
it, he is in a state of bliss compared 
with him who loves his wife, and at 
the same time suspects her, although 
doubtfully. In Ben Jonson's Every 
Man in his Humour, Kitely, who has 
a commonplace attack of jealousy, uses 
similar words of the miserable torture 
of acknowledged suspicion : 

' ' Which as a subtle vapour spreads 
itself 

Confusedly through every sensive 
part, 

Till not a thought or notion in the 
mind 

Be free from the black poison of 
suspect. 

Ah ! but what misery is it to know 
this !" (il. ii. ), 1598. 



sc.m.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 



137 



Oth. O misery ! 

lago. Poor and content is rich, and rich enough ; 
But riches fineless is as poor as winter 
To him that ever fears he shall be poor: 175 

Good heaven, the souls of all my tribe defend 
From jealousy ! 

Oth. Why, why is this? 

Think'st thou I 'Id make a life of jealousy, 

To follow still the changes of the moon 

With fresh suspicions ? No ; to be once in doubt 1 80 

Is once to be resolved : exchange me for a goat, 

When I shall turn the business of my soul 

To such exsufflicate and blown surmises, 

174. fineless} endless Pope, Theobald. 176. heaven} God Q I. 181. Is 
once] Qq, Is Ff. 183. exsufflicate] Capell, Steevens (1793), etc. ; exufflicate 
Qq, F I, 2, 3, Rowe, Pope, Theobald ; exufflicated F 4 ; exsujfolate Hanmer ; 
blown] Qq, b lowed Ff. 



173. Poor and content] Compare 
T. Howell : "The man is blest, that 
lyves at rest, With his estate content " ; 
and again : 

" The poore degree, that lives content, 
lie sings although his goods be 

spent, 

And who can sing so merrie a note 
As he that cannot change a grote," 
Grosart ed. p. 31 (1568). The last 
two lines were proverbial in Heywood's 
time (1546). Malone quotes from 
Dorastus and Fawnia (the novel on 
which The Winter's Tale is formed), 
1592: "We are rich, in that we are 
poor with content." 

174. fineless\ endless, boundless, in- 
finite. No other example has been 
adduced. The word "fine," meaning 
"end," is frequent in Shakespeare (as 
in Hamlet, v. i. 115), but generally in 
expression "in fine." N. Bailey gives 
the adjective in his Dictionary (ed. 
1 766) : ' ' Fineless, without end. 
Shakespeare." 

174. as poor as winter'] Compare 



"Old December's bareness" (Sonnet 
97). Armin has, "as bare as January," 
Two Maids of Moreclacke, 1609 
(Grosart, p. 67). 

183. exsufflicate'] This word is not 
known elsewhere. Sir Thos. Hanmer, 
in 1744, proposed "exsuffolate," on 
which Johnson: "This odd and far- 
fetched word (following Hanmer) was 
made yet more uncouth in all the 
editions before Sir Thomas Hanmer's, 
by being printed exsufflicate. The 
allusion is to a bubble." Malone 
rejoined : "Whether our poet had any 
authority for the word exsufflicate, 
which I think is used in the sense of 
'swollen,' and appears to have been 
formed from stifflatus, I am unable to 
ascertain ; but I have not thought it 
safe to substitute for it another word 
equally unauthorised. Suffolere in 
Italian means ' to whistle. "... 
The introducer of this word explains it 
by ' whispered, buzzed in the ears.' 
How can then Dr. Johnson's inter- 
pretation of exsuffolate be supported ? " 



138 OTHELLO [ACT m. 

Matching thy inference. Tis not to make me jealous 
To say my wife is fair, feeds well, loves company, 185 
Is free of speech, sings, plays and dances well ; 
Where virtue is, these are more virtuous : 
Nor from mine own weak merits will I draw 
The smallest fear or doubt of her revolt ; 
For she had eyes, and chose me. No, lago ; 1 90 
I '11 see before I doubt ; when I doubt, prove ; 
And on the proof, there is no more but this, 
Away at once with love or jealousy ! 
lago, I am glad of it ; for now I shall have reason 

To show the love and duty that I bear you 195 

With franker spirit : therefore, as I am bound, 
Receive it from me. I speak not yet of proof. 
Look to your wife : observe her well with Cassio ; 
Wear your eye thus, not jealous nor secure : 
I would not have your free and noble nature 200 

184. thy] the F 2, 3, 4 ; jealous} lealious F I. 1 86. well] Qq, omitted Ff. 
187. are more] Qq, F I ; are most F 2, 3, 4, Rowe. 190. chose] chosen Q 2, 3. 
194. / am] I'm Pope (and at 196, 212, 214, 264, 412, 439); it] Qq, Globe; 
this Ff, Steevens. 199. Wear] Were Q3; eye] eyes Ff; jealous] lealious 

Fl,2. 

New Eng. Diet, has no other example 184. thy inference] Such as you have 

besides Othello of "exsufflicate." alleged (lines 170, 171). Not used 

Earlier examples occur of "exsuffla- elsewhere by Shakespeare. Cotgrave 

tion," which was an ecclesiastical term has: "Illation: an illation, inference, 

from Low Latin exsufflare ; see Nares' conclusion : a reason, or allegation 

Glossary. Du Cange explains "ex- that enforceth." 

sufflare, contemnere, despuere, re- 187. virtuous] beneficial. Instead 

jicere." We may assume this word to of deteriorating from her goodness, 

be derived thus, and to mean (Nares these accomplishments become the 

says) " contemptible," "abominable." more excellent in her, because of her 

The word "exsufflation" occurs in goodness. 

Reginald Scott's Discover ie of Witch- 189. doubt] suspicion, as in line 430, 

craft, in connection with exorcism, at below. "Revolt" is often used of 

page 371 (Nicholson's reprint), 1584. A inconstancy in love, as in King John, 

similar coinage may be found in Chap- III. i. 322, and Cymbeline, I. vi. 112, 

man's Byron's Conspiracy, II. i. : "A etc. See Schmidt's Lexicon, 
poor and expuate humor of the court." 



sc. in.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 



139 



Out of self-bounty be abused ; look to 't : 

I know our country disposition well ; 

In Venice they do let heaven see the pranks 

They dare not show their husbands ; their best con- 
science 

Is not to leave't undone, but keep't unknown. 205 
Oth. Dost thou say so ? 
I ago. She did deceive her father, marrying you ; 

And when she seem'd to shake and fear your looks, 

She loved them most. 

Oth. And so she did. 

lago. Why, go to then ; 

She that so young could give out such a seeming, 210 

203. heaven] God Q I. 204. not] omitted Q i. 205. leave V] Ff, Q 
2, 3, Globe; leave Q i, Steevens ; keep't] Q 2, 3 ; keepe Q i, Steevens, Dyce, 
Craig ; kept Ff. 209. to] F 3, 4, Rowe et seq, ; too Qq, F I, 2. 



201. self-bounty] inherent goodness. 
Compare T. Howell, Devises (Grosart, 
ii. 1 80), 1581: "The best Natures, 
soonest abused." It became a proverb 
in later collections. 

204. conscience] judgment of moral- 
ity, hence morality itself. 

204, 205.] Venice was at this time 
the modern Corinth of Europe, and 
earned the worst reputation for her 
women. Ben Jonson places this senti- 
ment in the mouth of Volpone, a 
magnifico of Venice : 

" 'Tis no sin love's fruits to steal ; 
But the sweet thefts to reveal : 
To be taken to be seen 
These have crimes accounted been" 
(The Fox, iii. 6), 1605. These are the 
concluding lines of his well - known 
song, " Come, my Celia, let us prove," 
etc., imitated from Catullus. But the 
concluding lines (those here quoted) 
are not in Catullus " Vivamus, mea 
Lesbia," as Gifford points out. Jonson 
has the song again in The Forest. 
These lines are referred to (or Shake- 
speare's ?) by Beaumont and Fletcher : 



" The sin [of enjoyment] 
Is in itself excusable : to be taken 
Is a crime as the poet writes" 
(Love's Progress, IV. i.). Dryden 
quotes verbatim from Jonson in The 
Kind Keeper, V. i., 1675. 

207.] Johnson, and later, Cowden- 
Clarke inculcate a moral lesson from 
the terrible results following upon poor 
Desdemona's " deceit and falshood " in 
privily marrying Othello. Modern 
views will scarcely coincide with their 
severity, but undoubtedly her "devia- 
tion from strict honesty" serves as a 
powerful weapon in the hands of the 
undermining and crafty lago. See I. 
i. 1 66, 167. 

209. go to] This expression is very 
common in Shakespeare, occurring again 
in this play at I. iii. 384, and below iv. 
i. 177. Abbott explains it (185): 
' ' To is used adverbially in ' to and 
fro,' and nautical expressions such as 
'heave to,' 'come to.' This use ex- 
plains go to." The expression implied 
motion, generally ; equivalent to our 
"come, come." 



140 



OTHELLO 



[ACT in. 



To seel her father's eyes up close as oak 

He thought 'twas witchcraft but I am much to 

blame ; 

I humbly do beseech you of your pardon 
For too much loving you. 

Oth. I am bound to thee for ever. 

lago. I see this hath a little dash'd your spirits. 215 

Oth. Not a jot, not a jot. 

lago. V faith, I fear it has. 

I hope you will consider what is spoke 
Comes from my love ; but I do see you 're moved : 

211. see!] seek F I, 2; scale Qq, F 3 ; seal F 4, Rowe, Jennens. 212. to 
blame} F 4, too blame the rest. 214. to] to to F 2. 216. /' faith] I faith Q I ; 
Trust me Ff, Q 2, 3. 218. my] your F I ; you 're] Rowe, you are Qq, y* are Ff. 



211. see!] See note I. iii. 270. 

211. close as oak] as close as the 
grain of oak. Similes for " as close as " 
almost invariably refer to secrecy, another 
sense of the adjective. "As near as" 
is common in this sense. It is a pecul- 
iarly illustrative expression. For the 
hard, compact grain of oak, compare 
"unwedgeable and gnarled oak," 
Measure for Measure, II. ii. 116; 
" rifted Jove's stout oak," Tempest, V. 
45; "rive the knotty oak," Julius 
Ccesar, I. iii. 6; "oak-cleaving thunder- 
bolt," Lear, in. ii. 5, etc. 

212. witchcraft] See I. iii. 103, etc. 
213.] A similarly constructed line 

occurs in Merchant of Venice, iv. i. 
402 : "I humbly do desire your grace 
of pardon." Abbott, Shakespeare's 
Grammar, 174, explains this and like 
passages {Midsummer Night's Dream, 
III. i. 183 ; As You Like It, v. iv. 56) 
by attaching the meaning ' ' concerning, " 
"about," to "of." In some cases (as 
Twelfth Night, I. ii. 21) this is obviously 
correct. Here it is simply a transposi- 
tion, and "of" has the ordinary sense 
of "from," coming after instead of 
before the pronoun. The involved con- 



struction hardly makes a very common- 
place line anything less so. There is 
no exact parallel to this line in Shake- 
speare ; those referred to above come 
nearest, and both are spoken by clowns 
whose language is purposely defective. 
I should like much to transpose here. 
To make "of" = "for," as Macmillan 
does, seems too great a licence. Never- 
theless "of" had apparently unwarrant- 
able usages. Compare Jonson's Sejanus, 
I. i., 1603 : " 'Tis for a gentleman Your 
lordship will like of when you see him." 
No New Eng. Diet, sense of "like" 
fits this. 

214. thee] Abbott says ' ' thou is gener- 
ally used by a master to a servant, but 
not always. Being the appropriate 
address to a servant, it is used in con- 
fidential and good-humoured utterances, 
but a master finding fault often resorts 
to the unfamiliar you " (232). On the 
other hand, lago always uses the more 
respectful "you " in addressing Othello. 
Many exceptions will, however, be 
found to this proposed rule in the 
present play, to go no further. 

215. dashed] damped, depressed. 
Compare Love's Labour's Lost, V. ii. 585. 



sc. in.] THE MOOR OF VENICE HI 

I am to pray you not to strain my speech 

To grosser issues nor to larger reach 220 

Than to suspicion. 

Oth. I will not. 

I ago. Should you do so, my lord, 

My speech should fall into such vile success 

As my thoughts aim not at. Cassio's my worthy 

friend 
My lord, I see you 're moved. 

Oth. No, not much moved: 225 

I do not think but Desdemona 's honest. 

I ago. Long live she so ! and long live you to think so ! 

Oth. And yet, how nature erring from itself 

lago. Ay, there 's the point : as to be bold with you 

Not to affect many proposed matches 230 

Of her own clime, complexion and degree, 
Whereto we see in all things nature tends 
Foh ! one may smell in such, a will most rank, 

224. As] Qq, Which Ff ; aim not af\ Qq ; ayirfd not F I, 2 ; aimd not F 3, 4 ; 
worthy'} trusty Q I. 233. FoK\ Ff, Fie Qq ; one] Ff, we Qq. 

220. grosser issues'] plainer conclu- carries with it indignation. See V. i. 

sions. For "gross " = " palpable," see 123. 

1 Henry IV. II. iv. 250. 233. such,'] I have left in the comma 

223. success] result, consequence, that of the Folios, not from any reverence for 

which succeeds or follows. their punctuation, but because I prefer 

228. erring] wandering. See I. iii. the construction it points to. "Such" 

362. I believe refers back to Desdemona's 

233. Foh /] An expression of loath- peculiarities specified, and not to the 

ing or disgust. Compare All's Well, words afterwards. It stands elliptically 

v. ii. 17; Troilus, v. ii. 22, 48. or absolutely for "such like," "such a 

The use of interjections was more position," or "such conduct." To make 

attended to and orderly in Shake- the reading "such a will most rank" 

speare's time than it is now. The alters the whole sense and confuses it. 

present one occurs in strong situa- The things we smell in Desdemona's 

tions. Compare, "all the company behaviour are "a most rank will, foul 

which sat at the table crying FOH at disproportion, and unnatural thoughts. " 

such a shameful lie," Udall's Erasmus I do not know if Shakespeare uses 

(Roberts, p. 356), 1542. "Foh" " such " in this manner elsewhere, but in 



142 



OTHELLO 



[ACT in. 



Foul disproportion, thoughts unnatural. 

But pardon me : I do not in position 235 

Distinctly speak of her, though I may fear 

Her will, recoiling to her better judgement, 

May fall to match you with her country forms, 

And happily repent. 

Oth. Farewell, farewell : 

If more thou dost perceive, let me know more ; 240 
Set on thy wife to observe : leave me, lago. 

I ago. [Going] My lord, I take my leave. 

Oth. Why did I marry ? This honest creature doubtless 
Sees and knows more, much more, than he unfolds. 

234. disproportion] Qq, disproportions Ff. 236. her, though I may fear] 
Qq, Ff, Craig; her; though I may fear Steevens, Globe, Cambridge. 238. 
/a//]ya*yWhite(ed. 2). 239. Farewell, farewell'} Fare-well Qq. 

" I smell it now : 'tis rank " [of a plot] ; 
and The Fox, iv. ii. 3840: "if their 
plot . . . Unto the dullest nostril here, 
It smell not rank." Schmidt says 
"morbid." 

235. position] "a proposition to be 
defended or reasoned out ; a thesis " 
(Webster). If this be the sense (Schmidt 
says "assertion"), it is somewhat 
strained here. A reference to II. i. 239 
gives a more obvious example. See 
Troilus and Cressida, in. iii. 112. 

237. recoiling'] reverting, going back. 
See Winter's Tale, I. ii. 254. 

237, 238. better judgement . . . her 
country forms'] lago is here deeply and 
designedly insulting, but Othello has 
fallen low enough to listen without 
apparent resentment, and even deliber- 
ately to set spies on his wife. He 
simply tells lago to leave him. 

238. fall to~] begin to, come to. Still 
in use, as " fall to your work." 

243. Why did I many?'] Kitely 
makes the same remark in the same 
circumstances : ' ' Bane to my fortunes, 
what meant I to marry ? " Every Man 
in his Humour, III. iii., 1598. 



ill. i. 19 is a nearly parallel case. It is 
an ungraceful usage in modern English, 
and an Americanism. Milton has it : 
" To whom the Angel, Son of Heaven 

and Earth, 
Attend ! That thou art happy, owe 

to God ; 
That thou continuest such, owe to 

thyself, 
That is to thy obedience " 

(Paradise Lost, v. 519). 
Steevens adopts the Folio punctuation 
(ed. 1793), an d also Craig. But I do 
not know if they attach this importance 
to it. 

233. will} desire, appetite. For the 
carnal sense, see Sonnets 134, 135, 136. 
233. rank} disgusting, foul, beastly. 
Shakespeare frequently uses "rank" of 
smells, or in connection with the sense 
of smell, as very offensive to it. Com- 
pare Coriolanus, III. i. 66 ; As You 
Like It, I. ii. 113; Twelfth Night, ii. 
v. 136; Hamlet, III. iii. 36; Merry 
Wives, III. v. 93 ; Antony and Cleo- 
patra, V. ii. 212 ; Sonnet 69. In 
Cymbeline (ii. i. 15) there is a pun. 
Compare Ben Jonson, Sejanus, IV. v. : 



sc. in.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 143 

lago. [Returning] My lord, I would I might entreat your 
honour 245 

To scan this thing no further ; leave it to time : 
Although 'tis fit that Cassio have his place, 
For sure he fills it up with great ability, 
Yet, if you please to hold him off awhile, 
You shall by that perceive him and his means : 250 
Note if your lady strain his entertainment 
With any strong or vehement importunity ; 
Much will be seen in that. In the mean time, 
Let me be thought too busy in my fears 
As worthy cause I have to fear I am 255 

And hold her free, I do beseech your honour. 

Oth. Fear not my government. 

lago. I once more take my leave. [Exit. 

Oth. This fellow 's of exceeding honesty, 

245.] This line (ending honour,) is given to Othello's last speech Q i. 246. 
further} Qq, farther Ff. 247. Although 'tis fit} Ff, Craig ; Tho it befit Q I, 
Jennens, Globe, Cambridge (reading though} ; And though tisfit Q 2, 3, Capell, 
Singer ; And though it befit Steevens, Malone. 249. hold} omitted F I ; put 
F 2, 3, 4. 251. his} Ff, her Qq. 255. As . . . am} in brackets Ff, Q 2. 

248.] This line is an example of an 257. government} control, direction, 
apparent Alexandrine. The last foot management. The commentators ex- 
contains, instead of one extra syllable, plain this "self-control," a meaning the 
two extra syllables, one of which is word has in 3 Henry VI. I. iv. 132 
slurred. See Abbott, 493. and elsewhere according to Schmidt. 

250. means} resources ; how far he is I prefer the wider sense, relating to the 
able to go, or what power he has with conduct of their scheme. Othello may 
her. Johnson says, "You shall dis- still be allowed self-respect enough not 
cover whether he thinks his best means ; to suppose his self-control questioned, 
his most powerful interest is by the 259. honesty} One would almost 
solicitation of your lady." Very John- hazard an opinion Shakespeare had 
sonian, but somewhat overwrought. some grudge against the word "honest," 

251. strain his entertainment} press he applies it so constantly to lago. 
or urge his appointment. ' ' Entertain- The word ' ' honest " occurs oftener in this 
ment " had the military sense of service, play than any other, and lago is no less 
office, appointment (which Cassio had than six times called "honest lago." 
forfeited). See AlVs Well, III. vi. 13 ; People go out of their way to call him 
IV. i. 17, etc. "honest fellow," so much so that lago 

252.] See note at 248 above. seems to resent it, when he says "as 

256. free} guiltless, honest as I am " (n. i. 104). Perhaps 



144 



OTHELLO 



[ACT in. 



And knows all qualities, with a learned spirit, 260 
Of human dealings. If I do prove her haggard, 
Though that her jesses were my dear heart-strings, 
I 'Id whistle her off and let her down the wind 

260. qualities'] Q I ; quantities Ff, Q 2, 3, Rowe. 260, 261. spirit, Of\ 
Q 3 et seq. ; spirit Of Q I, 2, Ff, Collier. 261. human] Rowe, humaine 
Q I , humane the rest ; dealings] dealing Q I ; dealings. If\ Ff, Globe ; 
dealings: ^O_q, etc., Craig. 



the design may be to accentuate the 
deviation from the original tale where 
the "wicked ensign" is at once intro- 
duced as "of the most depraved nature 
in the world." 

260. learned] experienced (Warbur- 
ton). 

261. haggard] "A wild-caught and 
unreclaimed mature hawk" (Harting). 
" The Haggard Faulcon, wild and un- 
reclaimed, takes a large liberty to herself 
for her abode either by Sea or by Land " 
(Gentleman's Recreation). In Greene's 
Never Too Late (1590), when Francesco 
gets some means, Infida "thought to 
cast forth her lure to reclame him, 
though by her unkindnesse he was proved 
haggard." 

262.] "Jesses are those short Straps 
of Leather which are fastened to the 
Hawk's Legs, and so to the Leash by 
Varvels or such like " ( Gentleman's Re- 
creation). ' ' Leash is a small long thong 
of Leather by which the Faulconer 
holdeth his Hawk fast, folding it many 
times round his Finger " (ibid.). To the 
legs were attached also little bells in- 
scribed with the owner's name. When 
the hawk was flown by detaching the 
leash, the jesses and bells were still 
" buttoned about the hawk's legs." No 
doubt the hawk would prefer to be free 
of her bells and jesses, as is implied 
in the passage quoted in Nares from 
Spenser, Faerie Queene, VI. iv. 19 : 
" he felt himselfe so slight, 

That, like an hauke, which feeling 
herselfe freed 

From bels and Jesses which did let 
her flight, 

Him seem'd his feet did fly." 



But the passage in Othello has for its 
pith and marrow, the fact that the hawk 
would fly away with the jesses, as a 
hawk always did in the sport. So that 
the Spenser passage is particularly un- 
happily referred to here by Rolfe. 

262. heart-strings'] Shakespeare uses 
this expression several times. It is 
found in the singular in the Catholicon 
Anglicum, circa 1480. An old metaphor. 
Compare T. Howell, Poems (Grosart, i. 
64): "O Drooping hart deprest with 
deadly care, Whose stretched strings be 
crackt in peeces smal." 

263. whistle her off} "Whistling" 
was the sound hawks were taught to 
understand. "Afterwards go leisurely 
against the wind, then unhood her, and 
before she bate or find any Check in her 
Eye, whistle her off from your Fist fair 
and softly" (Gentleman's Recreation); 
and again, "go out with her into the 
Fields, and whistle her off your Fist ' 
(ibid.). Compare Middleton, Roaring 
Girl, V. i. : "I whistled the poor little 
buzzard off my fist"; and Lyly, Euphues 
(Arber, p. 372) : " Hawkes that wax 
haggard by manning, are to be cast 
off. " "To lett go or whissel a hawk ; 
Sciogliere I'ztccello," etc., Howell's 
Vocabulary, 1659. Steevens gives other 
examples. 

263. down the wind] Against the 
wind, as the last note shows, was the 
proper flight for a hawk. Down the 
wind had a proverbial signification, 
equivalent to desperate, reckless fortune. 
Compare Montaigne: "Je jecte la 
plume au vent, comme on diet, et m' 
abandonne a la merci de la fortune " 
(Essais, II xvii.). And Munday and 



sc.m.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 145 

To prey at fortune. Haply, for I am black 

And have not those soft parts of conversation 265 

That chamberers have, or for I am declined 

Into the vale of years, yet that 's not much 

She 's gone ; I am abused, and my relief 

Must be to loathe her. O curse of marriage, 

That we can call these delicate creatures ours, 270 

And not their appetites ! I had rather be a 

toad, 

And live upon the vapour of a dungeon, 
Than keep a corner in the thing I love 
For others' uses. Yet, 'tis the plague of great 

ones; 

Prerogatived are they less than the base; 2^5 

'Tis destiny unshunnable, like death : 

267. the vale} the valt Q i, a vale Q 3. 272. of a] Ff, in a Qq, 273. ike 
thing] Ff, a thing Qq. 274. plague of] Qq, plague to Ff. 

Chettle's Downfall of Earl of Hunting- recognised use of "chamber-maid," 

don (Hazlitt's Dodsley, viii. 160), 1601 : Steveens' reference should be quoted in 

1 ' But he is down the wind as all such full. In this latter sense it occurs as 

are, That revel waste and spend." late as 1576 in Nicholl's Progresses. 

264. black} See "sooty, I. ii. 70. Halliwell gives early instances. 

265. parts} gifts, endowments. 267. vale of years} Othello has 

265. conversation} behaviour, deport- already referred to his being past youth 
ment. Compare Merry Wives, n. i. at I. iii. 264. And lago alludes to it 
25, etc. when he says " the Moor is defective in 

266. chamberers} " Men of intrigue " . . . sympathy in years "with Desde- 
(Steevens). "Wan ton persons, "(Nares). mona (II. i. 231). Judging from the 
The word "chambering" is similarly amount of travel and service Othello 
used in the New Testament, Romans had seen, he should obviously be some 
xiii. 13. Steevens cites " Fall'n from a thirty years of age at least. 

souldier to a chamberer," Countess of 271. toad} It must be remembered 

Pembroke's Antonius, 1590 (sic. Qu. that the toad was regarded as the very 

Arcadia ?). This reference is not, how- type of loathsomeness and poisonous- 

ever, authenticated in New Eng. Diet. ness. See below, IV. ii. 62. 

Schmidt equals the term to "carpet- 275. Prerogatived} privileged, exempt 

monger " of Much Ado, V. ii. 32, i.e. from certain things. "The great are 

"men of peace," opposed to "soldiers," less free from this curse than those of 

but there is no proof of such a sense, low degree." 
As the word "chamberer" had the 



146 OTHELLO [ACTIII. 

Even then this forked plague is fated to us 
When we do quicken. Look where she comes : 

Re-enter DESDEMONA and EMILIA. 

If she be false, O, then heaven mocks itself ! 

I '11 not believe 't. 
Des. How now> my dear Othello ! 280 

Your dinner, and the generous islanders 

By you invited, do attend your presence. 
Oth, I am to blame. 
Des, Why is your speech so faint ? Are you not 

well? 

Oth. I have a pain upon my forehead here. 285 

Des. Faith, that 's with watching ; 'twill away again : 

Let me but bind it hard, within this hour 



278. Look where she~\ Ff, Rowe, Craig ; Desdemona Qq, Globe. 279. O, 
then heaven mocks} Qq, Heaven mock'd Ff. 281. islanders} Ff, Ilander Qq. 
283, 284. / am . . . we/!?] arranged as in Qq, Capell, Steevens, Malone ; 
Ff read three lines ending blame, faintly ? well ? ; two lines ending faintly ? 
well? Globe, Cambridge, Craig. 283. to blame} Qq, F 4 ; too blame F I, 
2, 3. 284. Why is your speech so faint ?} Why do you speake so faintly? Ff, 
Globe, Cambridge ; Why is your speech so faintly ? Craig (faintly misprint ?). 
286. Faith} Q I ; Why Ff, Q 2, 3. 287. it hardly our head} Q I. 



277,278. Even . . , ^zV/fc:] When and large." Here at last we have the 

we begin to live ; from birth. " plague of flies " in I. i. 71. 

2 77- forked plague} The horns which 281. generous} noble. 'Lz.'i.generosus. 

were supposed to grow upon the fore- Compare "the generous and gravest 

head of one whose wife was unfaithful citizens," Measure for Measure, iv. vi. 

to him. Compare Winter's Tale, I. 13 ; and Hamlet, I. iii. 74. 

ii. 1 86; Troilus and Cressida, I. ii. 1 78. 282. attend} await. Compare Merry 

Sir J. Harington uses this expression Wives, I. i. 279. 

in an unmistakable connection in one 285. forehead} Othello is brooding 

of his Epigrams (1613) quoted by upon the "forked plague." Desde- 

Malone. Ben Jonson has "forked mona's guilelessness passes this by un- 

head " with a double allusion in Every noticed. Compare Nashe, Wonderfull 

Man Out, IV. iv. 1155 (1599). In Ben Prognostication, 1591: "many that 

Jonson's Every Man in his Humour, have faire wives shal be troubled with 

III. iii. (1598), Kitely emphasizes his greate swelling in the browes, a disease 

" forks " by a gesture, ' ' how they sting as incurable as the goute." 
my head, With forked stings thus wide 




sc.m.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 

It will be well. 

Oth. Your napkin is too little ; 

\She drops her handkerchief. 
Let it alone. Come, I '11 go in with you. 

Des. I am very sorry that you are not well. 290 

\Exeunt Othello and Desdemona. 

Emit. I am glad I have found this napkin : 

This was her first remembrance from the Moor : 
My wayward husband hath a hundred times 
Woo'd me to steal it ; but she so loves the token, 
For he conjured her she should ever keep it, 295 

That she reserves it evermore about her 
To kiss and talk to. I '11 have the work ta'en out, 

288. well] well againe Q r. [She drops . . . ] Rowe, etc., Craig; He puts 
her handkerchief from him, and it drops Steevens, Globe ; lets fall her napkine 
Anon., Devonshire Q I MS. (apud Cambridge, 1866). 297-299. To kiss , . , 
not I] arranged as in Qq, Ff; lines ending out, lago; I; Johnson, Steevens, 
etc., Craig. 



288. napkin] handkerchief. Fre- 
quently used in this sense in Shake- 
speare. See Lover's Compt., 15, and As 
You Like It, IV. iii. The word had also 
its present sense of serviette at this time. 

292. remembrance] keepsake. See 
Two Gentlemen of Verona, II. ii. 5. 
And again, below, III. iv. 186. 

293. -wayward"} capricious, wilfully 
obstinate. Emilia does not pause to 
guess at her husband's motives. She 
knows his disposition too well to 
attempt to thwart it. "A hundred 
times" gives here the impression of 
Desdemona's having been a "long 
time " married. See below, III. iv. 103, 
and iv. ii. 176. Compare "a thousand 
times," V. ii. 21 1. 

296. reserves"} keeps, preserves. See 
Sonnet 32. 

297. ta'en out] copied from this 
pattern. See, again, III. iv. 178, and 
IV. i. 153, below. At the passage in 
the next scene Steevens quoted two ex- 
amples of this rare expression, which are 



copied in Nares, etc. , no other instances 
being adduced hitherto. These are : 
" She intends 

To take out other works in a new 
sampler, 

And frame the fashion of an honest 

love," 

Middleton, Women beware Women, 
I. i., ante 1657. And an earlier 
one from Holland's Plinie, Preface 
(1601): "Thus Nicophanes (a famous 
painter in his time) gave his mind 
whollie to antique pictures, partly to 
exemplifie and take out their patterns 
after that in long continuance of time 
they were decaied." The latter is not 
absolutely satisfactory. The former is 
rather late. A better example occurs 
in the text of Holland's Plinie (Bk. 
xxxv. ch. ix. at the end): "Zeuxis 
. . . chose five of the fairest to take 
out as from several patterns whatsoever 
he liked best in any of them ; and of 
all the lovely parts of those five to make 
one bodie of incomparable beautie." 



148 



OTHELLO 



[ACT in. 



And give 't lago : what he will do with it 

Heaven knows, not I ; 

I nothing but to please his fantasy. 

Enter lAGO. 

lago. How now ! what do you here alone ? 
Emit. Do not you chide ; I have a thing for you. 
lago. A thing for me? it is a common thing 



300 



300. nothing but to pkase~\ nothing know, but for Q I. 
You have a thing Ff. 



303. A thing] Qq, 



And in the following chapter (p. 544) 
he refers again to Nicophanes, "a 
proper, feat, and fine workeman, whose 
manner was to take out old pictures 
and paint them new againe." So that 
Nicophanes was a renewer, not a 
copier. Again, in Pliny, xxxiii. 12, I 
find, "the patterns could not be taken 
out in any mould, without hurting or 
spoiling, so finely and delicately wrought 
they were." 

298. give '( Iago~\ Emilia's admiration 
of the work determines her to have a 
copy of it. She will then hand the 
napkin over to lago to do what he likes 
with. Blackstone says, "Her first 
thoughts are to have a copy made of it 
for her husband, and to restore the 
original to Desdemona " ; to which 
Macmillan adds, "but when lago came 
in, he snatched the handkerchief from 
her hand." There is no proof of the 
latter statement, which depends on a 
stage direction inserted by Rowe. If 
she had meant to restore it to Desde- 
mona she would probably have said so, 
although her tardy conscience smites 
her a little at line 318. She can hardly 
have thought her crafty husband would 
be satisfied with a copy. Malone says : 
"This scheme of having the work 
copied [he doesn't say for whom] was 
to render Emilia less unamiable. 
[Why?] It is remarkable that when 
she perceives Othello's fury on the loss 
of this token, though she is represented 
as affectionate to her mistress, she never 



attempts to relieve her of her distress, 
which she might easily have done. 
Shakespeare fell into this incongruity 
by departing from Cinthio's novel." 
Whether Malone's conclusion be correct 
or not, and no one will admit it without 
a struggle, it is impossible for any 
reader to evade the obvious justice of 
the remark. Another mystery about 
the handkerchief appears in III. iv. 186. 
We should have expected Cassio, who 
came so often wooing with Othello, 
would have known of this most im- 
portant and earliest "remembrance." 
Emilia, it seems to me, was subservient 
to her husband's wishes to an extent 
that fear alone could produce ; that 
terror of him being due presumably to 
her familiarity with his jealous and 
diabolical disposition. See note at 
in. iv. 157. These views (which 
occurred to me entirely from the study 
of the play) are borne out by the tale in 
Cinthio. Shakespeare probably put 
aside Cassio's knowledge, but I think 
he meant us to gather Emilia's fear of 
her husband. See below, line 320. 

300. fantasy] Schmidt allots four 
senses ( ' ' imagination, " ' 'mental image, " 
"love" (or rather, "love-thoughts"), 
and "whim" or "caprice") to "fan- 
tasy" in Shakespeare. The latter, 
occurring again in Hamlet, iv. iv. 6l, is 
the meaning here. 

303. common] Emilia is insulted at 
this expression ; lago immediately 
parries her resentment. 



sc. in.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 149 

Emit. Ha ! 

lago. To have a foolish wife. 305 

Emil. O, is that all ? What will you give me now 

For that same handkerchief? 

lago. What handkerchief? 

Emil. What handkerchief! 

Why, that the Moor first gave to Desdemona ; 

That which so often you did bid me steal. 310 

lago. Hast stol'n it from her? 
Emil. No, faith ; she let it drop by negligence, 

And, to the advantage, I being here took 't up. 

Look, here it is. 

lago. A good wench ; give it me. 

Emil. What will you do with't, that you have been so 
earnest 315 

To have me filch it ? 

lago. {Snatching if\ Why, what 's that to you ? 

Emil. If it be not for some purpose of import, 

Give 't me again : poor lady, she '11 run mad 

When she shall lack it. 

305. wife] thing Q r. 307, 308. handkerchief] handkercher Q I, hand- 
kerchiefe the rest. 312. No, faith} Qq ; No: but Ff, Rowe. 315, 316. 
What . . . it?~\ prose Ff. 316. [Snatching it] Rowe, Globe; what's]Q(\et 
seq.; what is Ff, Rowe, Steevens (1785). 317. If if] Q I, Ff, Globe, Craig; 
If't Q 2, 3, Cambridge. 318. Give't me] Gtv't me Ff; Give mee't Q I, 2 ; 
Give me V Q 3 ; Give it me Steevens, Malone. 

310. so often] Compare "a hundred 316. [Snatching it] I would prefer 

times," above (293), and "so earnest," this stage direction of Rowe's omitted, 

below (315), and "next night" (341). but it is now a part of the action of the 

Upon this "apparent inconsistency play and unassailable. Emilia's im- 

with the brief time that has elapsed mediate purpose is to give it, and she 

since the beginning of the drama," see seems to me to do so, when she says 

Introduction, " Duration of Play. " "here it is" in the previous line but 

313. to the advantage} opportunity one. Though effective on the stage, it 

(Johnson). Compare "we'll read it seems an excrescence in the study. 

at more advantage " (1 Henry IV. Moreover, lago is too calmly subtle to 

II. iv.). be betrayed into impolitic impetuosity. 



150 



OTHELLO 



[ACT m. 



lago. Be not acknown on't; I have use for it. 320 

Go, leave me. \Exit Emilia, 

I will in Cassio's lodging lose this napkin, 
And let him find it. Trifles light as air 
Are to the jealous confirmations strong 
As proofs of holy writ : this may do something. 325 
The Moor already changes with my poison : 

320. not acknown on V] F 3, 4 ; not acknowne on 't F 1 , 2 ; not you knowne on 't 
Q I, 3 ; not you acknowne on '/ Q 2. 322. lose] Qq, loose Ff. 326. The 
. . . poison :] omitted Q i ; poison] poysons F 2, 3, 4, Rowe ; potion S. Walker 
conj. 



320.] These words should be a direct 
intimation to Emilia that her husband 
was meditating some devilry. 

320. acknown] To be acknown of 
meant to confess, to avow, to acknow- 
ledge. "On" and "of" were used 
almost interchangeably (see Abbott's 
Grammar, 181, 182). The term does 
not occur again in Shakespeare, but 
was long in use. Steevens quotes 
from Golding's Ovid, vii. 632 (1565), 
and Puttenham's Arte of Poesie, Arber, 
p. 260 (1589). An early example is 
found in Furnivall's Babees Book, p. 
46, in " How the Good Wijf tauMe hir 
douStir" (circa 1430): "But take a 
smart rodde, and bete hem on a rowe 
Til ]>ei crie mercy, and be of her gilt 
aknowe." From lago's tone here, I 
think we may assume that he held his 
wife in considerable dread of him. 
This and her slack morality (see IV. 
iii. 60-70) combine to produce her 
fatal conduct. lago's plots have de- 
veloped with greater rapidity than the 
play informs us. See note at line 310. 
Although he has planned the hand- 
kerchief evidence, apparently, his soli- 
loquies have conveyed no hint. This 
is perhaps part of the "insoluble 
problem of the time which the action 
in Cyprus is intended to cover," as Boas 
calls it. In the original story he 
planned it, it is true, but he stole it 
himself. Compare " He is not ignorant 



of this report, but hears of it daily ; 
yet he shrinks not, but thinks he sits 
fast, and will not be acknown of any 
such meaning," Letter dated July 1614, 
Chamberlain to Carleton, Court and 
Times of James /., i. 333 (1848). 

323-325. Trifles . . . writ} Com- 
pare Thomas Howell, 1581 (Grosart, ii. 
176, reprint) : 

"Suspition easily yeelds to light 

beleefe 
And light beleefe to jealousie is 

thrall, 
The jealous mynde devoures itselfe 

with grief, 
Thus love at once doth frye, freese, 

ryse, and fall." 

326. changes'] A realistic expression 
referring to the actual change in 
Othello's appearance. It is to this 
lago refers at 330, 331, when he says 
' ' I did say so : Look. " ' ' Change " was 
a technical term in this sense, omitting 
"colour." Compare Henry V. II. ii. 
73: "Look ye how they change! 
Their cheeks are paper." And see 
Julius CcKsar, in. i. 24. Compare 
Holland's Plinie, xxviii. 9 : " Drusus 
. . . dranke (as it is reported) goat's 
bloud, to make himselfe looke pale and 
wan in the face, at what time as he 
ment to charge Q. Ccepio, his enemie, 
with giving him poyson" (p. 321, Bk. 
ii., 1601). lago refers to the paleness 
due to his poison. 



sc. m.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 



151 



Dangerous conceits are in their natures poisons, 

Which at the first are scarce found to distaste, 

But with a little act upon the blood 

Burn like the mines of sulphur. I did say so: 330 

Look, where he comes ! 



Enter OTHELLO. 

Not poppy, nor mandragora, 

329. act upon~\ art, upon Q I. 330. mines} mindes Q I. 331. Enter 

Othello] Ff, Q i, 2, Craig ; Re-enter Othello, Globe. 



327. conceits'] See line 116, above. 

328. distaste} displease, disgust. Not 
used elsewhere intransitively by Shake- 
speare, except doubtfully in Troilus and 
Cressida, iv. iv. 50. But it occurs 
frequently in his contemporaries. 
Compare Ben Jonson, Cynthia 's Revels, 
Induction (1600): "much distasted 
with the immodest and obscene writing 
of many in their plays " ; and in his 
Sad Shepherd, Prologue : ' ' Wherein if 
we distaste or be cried down, We think 
we therefore shall not leave the 
town." 

329. act} action, operation. See I. 
i. 62. 

330. Burn . . . sulphur] " Sulphur 
or brimstone ... is engendred within 
the Islands ^Jolia, which lie between 
Italic and Sicilie ; those I meane which 
(as I have said before) doe alwaies 
burne by reason thereof" (Holland's 
Plinie, xxxv. 15). Compare Greene, 
Or!. Furioso (ed. 1874, p. 107^), 1594: 
"Naught can serve to quench th' 
aspiring flames That burn as do the 
fires of Sicilie." 

331. poppy] Not the poppy commonly 
so called, which is not mentioned by 
Shakespeare, but the opium poppy 
(Papaver somniferum) of the druggists. 
Spenser speaks of " Dead - sleeping 
Poppy" (Fairie Queene, II. vii. 52). 
Shakespeare may have remembered Ben 
Jonson here : 



"Well, read my charmes, 

And, may they take that hold upon 
thy senses, 

As thou hadst snuft up hemlock, or 
taen down 

The juice of poppy and of man- 
drakes, [ ? and mandragora] 

Sleep, voluptuous Csesar," 

Sejanus, III. ii. 303/5 (1603). 
331. mandragora"] A powerful sopo- 
rific (Mandragora officinalis} imported 
from the south of Europe. When 
spoken of by this name (see Antony and 
Cleopatra, I. v. 4) the reference is, 
perhaps invariably, to the drug as a 
sleep producer. The commoner English 
name, mandrake, is usually applied to 
the plant with reference to the super- 
stitions attached to it. A common 
English plant, bryony, was, and is, 
known in England as "mandrake," 
and was largely sold as a counterfeit. 
It is still used by a well-known empiric 
in Yorkshire, known as the " Mandrake 
Doctor," but not as a soporific, except 
in the sense of a pain-queller. The 
root is similarly forked to that of the 
imported dried specimens, and no doubt 
it helped to foster the folk-lore. For 
references to the quality here men- 
tioned, see Nares. The early herbalists 
(Lyte, Parkinson, Gerard, etc.) deal 
with it. See also Holland's Plinie, 
xxv. 13. Compare Eastward Ho 
(Bullen's Marston, iii. 114): "I have 



152 



OTHELLO 



[ACT in. 



Nor all the drowsy syrups of the world, 

Shall ever medicine thee to that sweet sleep 

Which thou owedst yesterday. 

Otk. Ha 1 ha ! false to me ? 

lago. Why, how now, general ! no more of that. 335 

Oth. Avaunt ! be gone ! thou hast set me on the rack : 

I swear 'tis better to be much abused 

Than but to know 't a little. 

lago. How now, my lord ! 

Oth. What sense had I of her stol'n hours of lust ? 



334. to me?] Ff, to me, to me? Qq. 338. know V] know Q I, Rowe. 
sense] sent F 2, 3 ; scent F 4, Rowe ; of her] Qq, in her Ff. 



339- 



stopped mine ears with shoemaker's 
wax, and drunk Lethe and mandragora 
to forget you." And Chester's Love's 
Martyr, 1601 (New Sh. Soc., p. 86) : 
" In this delightsome country there 

doth grow, 
The Mandrake called in Greeke 

Mandragoras, 
Some of his vertues if you looke to 

know, 
The juice that freshly from the 

roote doth passe, 

Purgeth all fleame like black 
Helleborus : 

'Tis good for paine engendred 

in the eies ; 

By wine made of the roote 
doth sleepe arise." 

332. drowsy} sleep causing. Cot- 
grave has same figure of speech : 
" Alortelle somnifique, Death's herb, 
sleepy or deadly Nightshade." Tenny- 
son speaks of ' ' The drowsy hours " in 
the same sense. 

333. medicine thee to] We use "doctor" 
in this sense as a verb. Shakespeare has 
the verb meaning simply "cure" in 
Cymbeline, iv. ii. 243. Compare Cot- 
grave : " To medicine, cure, heal, salve, 
leech ; to apply a remedy ; to practise, 
or minister Physicke." I am indebted 
to Mr. Daniel for the following from 
Greene's Vision (Grosart's Huth Library, 



xii. p. 260) : "a harde sorrow that no 
releefe can medicine." 

334. owedst] "Owe," meaning "own," 
has occurred already (l. i. 66). 

336. Avaunt] Occurs often in Shake- 
speare. ' ' Shortened from the F. phrase 
en avant, forward ! on ! march ! " 
(Skeat). It occurs as early as Lydgate, 
circa 1430. See Craig's notes to Lear, 
in. vi. 68. 

337. abused] abused (without know- 
ing it). " 'Tis the pleasant life to know 
nothing : iners malorum remedium 
ignorantia, ignorance is a downright 
remedy of evils " (Burton, Anatomy of 
Melancholy, u. iii. 8). 

339. What sense] What perception. 

Steevens quotes here two passages from 

Middleton's Witch, where this thought 

is developed by a jealous husband : 

' ' Oh, 'tis a paine of hell to know 

one's shame ! 
Had it been hid and done, it- had 

been done happy, 
For he that's ignorant lives long 

and merry " 

(Bullen's Middleton, v. p. 431). 
And see next page for lines beginning 
" Hadst thou been secret, then I had 
been happy." This play, well known 
on account of its plagiarisms from 
Macbeth, was written probably later 
than 1611. 



sc.ni.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 



153 



I saw't not, thought it not, it harm'd not me: 340 

I slept the next night well, was free and merry ; 

I found not Cassio's kisses on her lips : 

He that is robb'd, not wanting what is stol'n, 

Let him not know 't and he 's not robb'd at all. 

I ago. I am sorry to hear this. 345 

Oth. I had been happy, if the general camp, 

Pioners and all, had tasted her sweet body, 
So I had nothing known. O, now for ever 
Farewell the tranquil mind ! farewell content ! 
Farewell the plumed troop and the big wars 350 

341. night well, was'] Qq ; night well, fed well, wasFf, Rowe. 347. Pioners] 
Pioneers F 3, 4. 350. troop] Qq, troops Ff. 



341. next night] For this indication 
of time, see note above, line 310. See 
Introduction. 

342. / . . . lips] Massinger borrows 
this thought: "Methinks I find 
Paulinus on her lips" (Emperor of the 
East, iv. 5). So also does Fletcher, 
Valentinian, iii. I : ' ' Kiss me, I find 
no Caesar here ; these lips taste not of 
ravisher." These parallels are cited in 
Deighton's Othello (Macmillan, 1897). 
It may be safely stated that all the 
dramatists of this time (Webster, Ford, 
and Dekker especially) have snatches 
or reminiscences of Shakespeare's 
plays. Illustrations from them are often 
interesting, but seldom useful unless of 
an earlier date than Shakespeare. 

347. Pioners] So spelt and accented in 
Hamlet, i. v. 163. Compare Ben 
Jonson, Underwoods, xiii. : 

" ramparts of defence : 
Such as the creeping common 

pioners use." 

Steevens quotes the following: "A 
soldier ought ever to retaine and keep 
his arms in saftie and forthcoming, for 
he is more to be detested than a coward 
that will lose or play away, etc. . . . 
such a one is to be dismissed with 
punishment, or to be made some abject 



pioner" (E. Davies, Art of War, 1619). 
Hence the term is used here to express 
the lowest of the camp. So far as the 
accent goes it seems easier here to 
read, as Steevens does, "pioneers." I 
find an earlier illustration of the base- 
ness of pioneers in Sir J. Harington's 
" Report to Queen Elizabeth concern- 
ing the Earle of Essex's Journey in 
Ireland, 1599" (Nugce Antiques, ed. 
1779, p. 58 : " Thos whiche escaped by 
flight or by base hydinge of themselues 
from the force of the rebelles sworde, 
were by a Martiall Court condempned 
(on the 3d) to be hanged on the 
gallowes : whiche sentence was mitti- 
gated by his Lordship's mercie, by 
whiche euerie I Oth man was sentenced 
onlie to die ; the reste appointed to 
serue in the army for pioneers." 

349. Fare-well] Malone quoted a 
similar series of " Farewells " from " a 
drama entitled Common Conditions, 
printed about 1576." This annoyed 
Steevens so much that he replied : "I 
have now before me an ancient MS. 
English Poem in which sixteen succeed- 
ing verses begin with the word fare- 
well!" See Lyly's Gallathea, v. 12 
(1592), for a good parallel. 



154 



OTHELLO 



[ACT in. 



That make ambition virtue ! O, farewell ! 
Farewell the neighing steed and the shrill trump, 
The spirit-stirring drum, the ear-piercing fife, 
The royal banner and all quality, 

Pride, pomp and circumstance of glorious war ! 355 
And, O you mortal engines, whose rude throats 
The immortal Jove's dread clamours counterfeit, 
Farewell ! Othello's occupation 's gone ! 

351. make] F 2, 3, 4; makes Qq, F I, Johnson ; farewell!] Steevens, Globe, 
Craig ; farewell ; F I ; farewell, Qq, F 2, 3, 4, Rowe, Cambridge. 356. you] 
Ff, ye Qq ; rude] Ff, wide Qq. 357. dread] Ff, great Qq ; clamours] clamor Q I. 



351. ambition,virtue] Compare "am- 
bition, the soldier's virtue, Antony 
and Cleopatra, ill. i. 22. 

352. 353- trump . . . fife] The 
trumpet, drum, and fife were the three 
usual military instruments at this time. 
They are mentioned together in Burton's 
Anatomy of Melancholy, 1621 (ll. ii. 6. 
3) : " Soldiers when they go to fight, 
whom terror of death cannot so much 
affright, as the sound of trumpet, drum, 
fife, and such like music animates." 
Compare also Peele, Sir Clyomon and 
Sir Clamydes (1874, p. 494), 1599 : 
" Sound of trumpet doth each warlike 
wight allure, And drum and fife unto 
the fight do noble hearts procure." 
And Hakluyt, Towersoris Second 
Voyage (1556): "all well appointed 
with foure Trumpets, a Drummer, and 
a Fife." 

353. ear-piercing fife] See Merchant 
of Venice, n. v. 30. Compare Peele's 
Farewell (1874, p. 549), 1589: "The 
roaring cannon and the brazen trump, 
The angry-sounding drum, the whist- 
ling fife, The shrieks of men, the 
princely courser's neigh." Singer 
referred to these lines. 

355.] Steevens quotes a plagiarism in 
Davenant [no uncommon thing] from 
this line in his Albovine, 1629. Malone 
cites a "parody" (rather another 
plagiarism) in Fletcher's Prophetess, 
1622. 

355. circumstance] ceremonious dis- 



play. Hunter refers to " Langley's 
Translation of Polydore Vergil, Fol. 
122(5," where we find that the Romans 
celebrated their dead "with great 
pomp and circumstance." If this 
quotation be from T. Langley's Abridge- 
ment of Polydore Vergil, 1546, it is 
useful ; but if it be (as it should be from 
the reference given) from J. Langley's 
Translation of Polydore Vergil, 1663, it 
is worthless. Compare Ben Jonson, 
Sejanus, I. i. 2790 : 

" men do lose their shames 
And for the empty circumstance of 

life 

Betray their cause of living." 
Shakespeare uses this word in the sin- 
gular or plural indifferently. 

356. mortal] deadly. See II. i. 72. 
357.] Compare Taming of the Shrew, 
II. i. 205 : " heaven's artillery." And 
Ben Jonson, Panegyre on the Entrance 
of James /., 1603 : 

" through the air was rolled 
The lengthened shout, as when th' 

artillery 
Of heaven is discharged along the 

sky" 

(Cunningham's Gifford'sy"0.$v7, ii. 57 1 )- 
Chapman has the expression "Jove's 
artillery" in Bussy Dambois, 1607; 
and again in his Casar and Pompey, 
1631. 

358. Othellrfs occupation 's gone /] 
These words are a death-knell. And, 
as the memory of one conscious of the 



sc.ni.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 155 

I ago. Is 't possible, my lord ? 

Oth. Villain, be sure thou prove my love a whore; 360 

Be sure of it ; give me the ocular proof ; 

Or, by the worth of mine eternal soul, 

Thou hadst been better have been born a dog 

Than answer my waked wrath ! 

I ago. Is 't come to this ? 

Oth. Make me to see't; or at the least so prove it, 365 

That the probation bear no hinge nor loop 

To hang a doubt on ; or woe upon thy life ! 
lago. My noble lord, 
Oth. If thou dost slander her and torture me, 

Never pray more; abandon all remorse; 370 

On horror's head horrors accumulate; 

Do deeds to make heaven weep, all earth amazed ; 

For nothing canst thou to damnation add 

Greater than that. 
lago. O grace ! O heaven defend me ! 

Are you a man ? have you a soul or sense ? 375 

God be wi' you ; take mine office. O wretched fool, 

359. possible, my lord ?~\ possible ? My lord, Capell, Steevens, Malone. 360. 
[Taking him by the throat] Capell. 362. mine'] Ff, Steevens, Malone, etc. , 
Craig; my Q 2, 3, Capell; man's Q I, Globe, Cambridge. 368. lord, ] 
Pope ; Lord. Qq, Ff. 374. defend] Qq, forgive Ff. 376. mine] my Q 2, 3. 

immediate approach of death, sets the intensity of action and the intricacy 

before his mental vision in rapid and of intrigue, imagery and words have 

distinct view an instantaneous picture recently given place to devices and 

of the main events of his previous life, deeds. Now a brief spell of over- 

so Othello leaps from the intolerable powering melancholy replaces the 

present into the happier retrospect of harrowing tortures in which he has 

his past career. Othello's agony here involved his genius. lago's words 

cries halt ! and ere he finally plunges recall him from his trance to the damn- 

into darkness, with his devil by his side, ing reality. 

he takes a last lingering look at the 370. remorse} See below, line 469. 

light. Desdemona and lago are alike 376. office] good will or service, 

forgotten for the moment. So, too, Common in this sense. I do not think 

Shakespeare's mind seems to tarry over it has the sense given by Macmillan, 

this glorious speech. Hurried along by "he resigns his post as ancient." But 



156 OTHELLO [ACTIII. 

That livest to make thine honesty a vice ! 

monstrous world ! Take note, take note, O world, 
To be direct and honest is not safe. 

1 thank you for this profit, and from hence 380 
I '11 love no friend sith love breeds such offence. 

Oth. Nay, stay : thou shouldst be honest. 

lago. I should be wise ; for honesty 's a fool, 
And loses that it works for. 

Oth. By the world, 

I think my wife be honest, and think she is not, 385 
I think that thou art just, and think thou art not : 
. I '11 have some proof. Her name, that was as fresh 
V\s Dian's visage, is now begrimed and black 
As mine own face. If there be cords, or knives, 
Poison, or fire, or suffocating streams, 390 

I '11 not endure it. Would I were satisfied ! 

lago. I see, sir, you are eaten up with passion : 
I do repent me that I put it to you. 
You would be satisfied ? 

Oth. Would ! nay, I will. 

377. lives^lov'sfFt. 378. -world! Take] Ff, -world, take Qq. 381. sitK] 
Ff, since Qq. 384-392. Oth. By . . . satisfied ! lago.] omitted Q I. 385. 
be] is F 3, 4. 387. proof. Her] proofe : her Q 2, 3 ; proofe. My Ff, Rowe, 
Malone. 392. sir,] Qq, omitted Ff. 394. satisfied?"] Ff, satisfied, Qq ; 
nay, I] Qq, Nay, and I Ff, Nay, and Pope. 

it may, in order rather to remind morphosed: "They should be morris- 
Othello presently that he wished for a dancers by their gingle." 
higher grade. Compare next scene, 384. By the world] This asseveration 
line III. occurs again, in affected use, in Lovers 

380. profif]ga.m, or benefit; "of this Labour's Lost, v. i. in. It comes in 
experience " understood. here unexpectedly, but there is no other 

381. sith] since. reading. It is not in the first Quarto. 

382. shouldst] ought to, hence "must" 388. Dian's] Diana, the goddess of 
in our sense. Compare "that should chastity. 

be my handkerchief," IV. i. 164 ; i.e. 389. If there be cords, etc.] Compare 
"ought to," but with a sense of un- Pericles, iv. ii. 1 60 (Malone). 
certainty. And Jonson, Gipsies Meta- 



sc. in.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 



157 



And may: but, how? how satisfied, my lord? 395 
Would you, the supervisor, grossly gape on 
^Behold her tupp'd ? 

Oth. Death and damnation ! O ! 

lago. It were a tedious difficulty, I think, 

To bring them to that prospect : damn them 

then, 

If ever mortal eyes do see them bolster 400 

More than their own ! What then ? how then ? 
What shall I say ? Where 's satisfaction ? 
It is impossible you should see this, 
-Were they as prime as goats, as hot as monkeys, 

396. you, the supervisor] Capell et seq. ; you, the superuisor Q i ; you the super' 
vision Ff ; you, the supervision Q 2, 3 ; on j Dyce, Globe ; on? Ff, Steevens, 
Cambridge ; on, Qq ; on ; Craig. 397. tupp'd] Theobald, Steevens, Craig ; 
topt Qq ; top'd F i ; topp'd F 2, 3, 4, Rowe, Globe. 399. damn them] dam 
em Qq ; them] F I, em Qq ; omitted F 2, 3, 4. 40x5. do] didQq. 401. their] 
thine Gollancy (misprint ?). 404. prime] brim Singer conj. 



396. supervisor] superintendent, over- 
seer. Halliwell cites an example from 
an old will: "And to se all thinges 
truly doone ... I ordeyn to be myn 
executour of my last will, with a super- 
visour, Aleyn Malston." Shakespeare 
has " supervise," "inspect," and "in- 
spection " elsewhere : Love's Labour's 
Lost, IV. ii. 135, and Hamlet, V. ii. 23. 

397. tupp'd] See I. i. 89. 

400. them bolster] lie on a bolster 
(together). New Eng. Diet, has no 
other example of this sense. Compare 
The 7'hree Ladies of London (Hazlitt's 
Dodsley, vi. 369), 1584: "Thou wast 
pure (Love) and art become a monster, 
Bolstering thyself upon the lascivious- 
ness of Lucre. " The verb " to bolster, " 
to back up, support (with no preposi- 
tion), occurs early in Nashe and Chettle. 
The following is a better example of the 
sense in the passage ; from Peele's 
David and Bethsdbe (ed. 1874, p. 
478), 1599: 



" the tyrant of the land, 
Bolstering his hateful head upon 

the throne 
That God unworthily hath bless'd 

him with." 

404. prime] marts appetens (Halli- 
well). Dyce refers to Cotgrave thus : 
"Prim, Prime, forward," etc., Cot' 
grave's French and English Dictionary, 
and then gives " eager " for the meaning 
in this passage. But Cotgrave only 
refers to "position," the "etc." of Dyce 
standing for " or first, principal, chief, 
or soonest," which completely vitiates 
his false quotation. Perhaps the word 
gained this sense through confusion with 
' ' brim " (verb) often used by Holland of 
swine. " More prime than goats or mon- 
kies in their prides " is a line in Samp- 
son's Vow Breaker, 1636 obviously a 
reminiscence of the passage here. See 
" Probal," above (note) II. iii. 350. 

404. goats] Compare Cotgrave in v. 
Paillard: " Paillard comme un Verrat. 



158 OTHELLO [ACTIII. 



V/ 



As salt as wolves in pride, and fools as gross 405 
As ignorance made drunk. But yet, I say, 
If imputation and strong circumstances, 
Which lead directly to the door of truth, 
Will give you satisfaction, you may have 't 

Oth. Give me a living reason she 's disloyal. 410 

I ago. I do not like the office : 

But sith I am enter'd in this cause so far, 

Prick'd to it by foolish honesty and love, 

I will go on. I lay with Cassio lately, 

And being troubled with a raging tooth, 415 

I could not sleep. 

There are a kind of men so loose of soul, 

That in their sleeps will mutter their affairs : 

One of this kind is Cassio : 

409. may] Qq, etc. , might Ff. 412. m]Ff, intoQ(\. 413. to if\ Steevens; 
too'tY i, 2 ; to 't Qq, F 3, 4, Globe, Cambridge. 

As lecherous as a goat (say we)." Illus- in the woods . . . Semblably, thus do 
trations of this (as well as " monkeys ") the Gaules by their dogges that are 
may be found in Marston's Scourge of engendred of wolves." 
Villany (i. iii.), 1598. The proverb is 410. living] lasting, enduring. Corn- 
in Ray, ed. 1670. See Chester's Love's pare Hamlet, v. i. 320. Malone says 
Martyr (New Sh. Soc., reprint, p. ill), "A reason founded on fact and ex- 
1601 : "The gote-bucke is a beast perience, not on surmise and conjee - 
lasciuious, And given much to filthie ture." Warburton says "speaking, 
venerie." manifest." 

404. monkey s\ Compare 2 Henry IV. 411. office] duty. 

ii. 338. Monkeys were favourite pets, 413. Prick'd'} goaded, spurred. Com- 

and their salacity is constantly alluded pare Two Gentlemen, in. i. 8. 

to by the dramatists. 414. lay with Cassia] Men, even in 

405. salt as wolves in pride] These the highest rank, formerly lay together, 
are the terms in venery applied to as is common still provincially among 
wolves. Compare Gentleman s Recrea- lower grades. See "bedfellow" in 
tion (p. 106, ed. 1721) : "A Bitch Wolf Nares' Dictionary, and note to that 
proud, will suffer a great many of the word in Henry V. II. ii. The custom 
Male to follow her . . . they grow Salt is constantly mentioned. In a letter 
but once a Year." And Pliny (Hoi- "from Trim in Ireland," Sir John 
land's translation), viii. 40: "The In- Harington says: "In all this journey 
dians take great pleasure to have their I was comerade to the Earl of Kildare, 
salt bitches to be lined with tygres . . . and slept both on one pillow every night 
when they grow proud they leave them for the most part " (Nuga Antiqutz}. 



SC.HI.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 159 

In sleep I heard him say " Sweet Desdemona, 420 

Let us be wary, let us hide our loves ; " 

And then, sir, would he gripe and wring my hand, 

Cry " O sweet creature ! " and then kiss me hard, 

As if he pluck'd up kisses by the roots, 

That grew upon my lips: then laid his leg 425 

Over my thigh, and sigh'd and kiss'd, and then 

Cried " Cursed fate that gave thee to the Moor ! " 

Oth. O monstrous I monstrous ! 

I ago. Nay, this was but his dream. 

Oth. But this denoted a foregone conclusion : 

'Tis a shrewd doubt, though it be but a dream. 430 

lago. And this may help to thicken other proofs 
That do demonstrate thinly. 

Oth. I '11 tear her all to pieces. 

lago. Nay, but be wise : yet we see nothing done ; 
She may be honest yet. Tell me but this ; 
Have you not sometimes seen a handkerchief 435 
Spotted with strawberries in your wife's hand ? 

Oth. I gave her such a one ; 'twas my first gift. 

lago. I know not that : but such a handkerchief - 
1 am sure it was your wife's -did I to-day 

421. -wary] merry Q i. 423. Cry " O] Cry, oh Ff, cry out, Qq ; and 
then} Qq, then Ff. 429. denoted] denoted Q I. 430, 431. 'Tis a . . . 
dream. lago. And . . .] lag. 'Tis a . . > dreame, And . . . Q I. 433. 
but] Qq, yet Ff. 439. wife's] Rowe ; wives Qq, Ff. 

422. gripe] grasp, clasp, squeeze, in spots to represent strawberries. Corn- 
Frequently used in the sense of "seize" pare Coriolanus, I. iii. 56: "What are 
(not with affection) by Shakespeare, you sewing here? A fine spot." A 
Compare Cooke's Greene's Tu Quoqite metaphor borrowed from, perhaps, or 
(Ancient British Drama, ii. 546): equivalent to the French " mar quite" \ 
" marry I would have you go to him, spotted, diversified or covered with 
take him by the hand and gripe him." sundry coloured spots ; also, inlayed ; 

429. foregone conclusion} previous wrought all over with small pieces of 
trial or experience. Not our sense. sundry colours " (Cotgrave). 

436. spoited-with strawt/erries]v>'orked 



160 OTHELLO [ACTIII. 

See Cassio wipe his beard with. 

Oth. If it be that, 440 

I ago. If it be that, or any that was hers, 

It speaks against her with the other proofs. 
Oth. O, that the slave had forty thousand lives ! 

One is too poor, too weak for my revenge. 

Now do I see 'tis true. Look here, I ago; 445 

All my fond love thus do I blow to heaven : 

J Tis gone. 
^""Arise, black vengeance, from thy hollow cell ! 

Yield up, O love, thy crown and hearted throne 

To tyrannous hate ! Swell, bosom, with thy 
fraught, 450 

440. Ifif\ Ff, Iff Qq. 441. any that w as hers] Malone, Steevens (1793) J 
any, it was hers, Qq ; any, it was hers. F I ; any, if't was hers, F 2, 3, 4, Rowe, 
Steevens (1785). 445. do 7] I doe Q 2, 3 ; true] time Q I. 448. thy hollow 
cell} Qq, Johnson, Malone, Globe, Cambridge ; the hollow hell Ff, Steevens 
(1793), Craig. 

448. hollow cell] Steevens quotes " Rouse the [thee] blacke Mischiefe 

from Jasper Heywood's translation, from thy ebben cell, 

Seneca's Thyestes, 1 560 : ' ' Where Land in the bosome of this twin in 

most prodigious ugly thinges the hoi- lust 

lo we hell doth hyde." Knight callsatten- Him whose heapt-wrong calles 

tion to the opposition between "hell" vengeance to be just." 

in this line and " heaven " immediately Armin in this play and scene has so 

preceding. Hence the Folio reading many scraps from Shakespeare that I 

appears preferable, and that Milton feel sure he quotes from him here also, 

approved of it appears from two passages and this confirms me in "cell"; he 

quoted by Malone and Holt White : mixed it with "ebon den" off Henry 

"He called so loud, that all the IV. This forms, if admitted, the 

hollow deep earliest reference to Othello. See, how- 

Of hell resounded " ever, note at II. ii. 144. Armin acted 

(Paradise Lost, I. v. 314). in Shakespeare's plays. He is full of 

"the universal host up sent such "echoes." 

A shout that tore hell's concave " 449. hearted throne} throned, seated 
(ibid., line 542). Nevertheless, in spite in the heart. See above, I. iii. 373 ; 
of the antithesis, I prefer "cell," which compare Twelfth Night, n. iv. 21. 
is more forcible applied to a personified 450. fraught} freight, load. Corn- 
vice, and a constantly employed meta- pare Tempest, V. 6 1. So Cotgrave : 
phor in such a context. I find in R. " Fret : The fraught or fraight of a 
Armin's Two Maids of More-clacke ship." 
(Grosart, reprint, p. 100), 1609: 



sc. in.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 



161 



For 'tis of aspics' tongues ! 

lago. Yet be content. 

Oth. O, blood, blood, blood ! 

lago. Patience, I say ; your mind perhaps may change. 
Oth. Never, lago. Like to the Pontic sea, 

Whose icy current and compulsive course 455 

Ne'er feels retiring ebb, but keeps due on 

To the Propontic and the Hellespont ; 

451 [he kneeles] Q i at content, at tongues Q 2, 3 ; omitted Ff ; Yef] Ff, Pray 
Qq. 452. blood, blood, blood] Ff ; blood, lago, oioodQq, Steevens. 453. per- 
haps} Qq, omitted Ff. 454-461. lago . . . heaven,} omitted Q i. 456. 
feels} Q 2, 3 ; keeps Ff. 



451. aspics'} This form of the word 
occurs again in Antony and Cleopatra, 
V. ii. 296, 354, 355. It is found also 
in Sylvester's translation Du Bartas, 
1603 (p. 156, ed. 1608), and in the 
dictionaries of Palsgrave (i53) Florio, 
and Cotgrave. Shakespeare probably 
read it in North's Plutarch (Lives, Anto- 
nius). Mr. Craig gives me this refer- 
ence thereto (not in New Eng. Diet. ) : 
" Some report that this aspick was 
brought into her in the basket with figs. " 
The word "swell" in the preceding 
line is not to be taken in conjunction 
with "asp," but as of poison generally. 
Ceesar tells us in the last scene of Antony 
and Cleopatra, that Cleopatra showed 
no external swelling from the aspic's 
sting, as would appear from "poison." 

452. blood, blood, blood} The repeti- 
tion appears to have been formerly held 
important for emphasis. Compare 
Lear, iv. vi. 181, "kill," etc. (five 
times) ; and Coriolanus, v. vi. 132, 
"kill" (five times). This latter was 
properly a cry of soldiers, where no 
quarter was given. See Craig's note 
to the passage in Lear. In Ben Jon- 
son's Fox, II. iii. 360^ occurs "Odso, 
think [seven times], sir." And in 
Case is Altered, III. i., 1598, Jaques says, 
" O, so [five times], this is for gold." 
Webster has examples in his plays. 

II 



454. Pontic sea} Black Sea. 

455. icy current} The coldness of 
these waters is noted by Pliny, iv. 12 : 
"And this is all the breadth there that 
divideth Asia from Europe : which some- 
time is passeable over most-what on foot, 
namely, when the Firth is frozen and all 
an yce" (Holland's translation, 1601). 
Of the violence of the course, there is 
also an account in the same author 
(vi. i) : "The Sea called Pontus Euxi- 
nus ... it sufficed not, I say, to have 
broken through the mountaines and so 
to rush in, ... no nor to have let 
Propontis gush through Hellespont, 
and so to encroach upon the earth." 
And again (v. xxxii. ) : " Hellespont 
. . . where into the maine sea gusheth 
with a mightie force and violence." 

455. compulsive} " having the quality 
of driving or forcing onwards," New 
Eng. Diet, (quoting Culpepper, 1655, 
in same sense). Compare Hamlet, ill. 
iv. 86. Used here in the sense of force- 
ful, not to be withstood. 

456, 457. Ne'er feels . . . Propontic} 
Steevens referred here, for Shakespeare's 
authority, to Holland's Plinie, ii. 97 : 
' ' And the sea Pontus evermore floweth 
and runneth out into Propontis, but the 
sea never retireth back againe within 
Pontus." In a later passage in the 
same work (iv. 13), a closer resem- 



162 



OTHELLO 



[ACT in. 



Even so my bloody thoughts, with violent pace, 
Shall ne'er look back, ne'er ebb to humble love, 
Till that a capable and wide revenge 460 

Swallow them up. Now, by yond marble heaven, 
In the due reverence of a sacred vow [Kneels. 

I here engage my words. 

I ago. Do not rise yet. [Kneels. 

Witness, you ever-burning lights above, 
You elements that clip us round about, 465 

462 [Kneels.] Rowe ; lago kneeles. Q 2 at about (line 465) ; omitted Ff, Q 3. 
464. you] the Q 2, 3. 



blance in some respects, occurs : "I 
cannot passe by the opinion of many 
writers, before we depart from Pontus, 
who have thought that all the inland 
seas or Mediteranen, arise from that 
head, and not from the streights of 
Gades . . . because out of Pontus the 
sea alwaies floweth and never ebbeth 
againe." Pope calls this simile (omitted 
in the first Quarto) ' ' an unnatural ex- 
cursion, "and thinks itshould be omitted. 
Swinburne says it is "one of the most 
precious jewels that ever the prodigal 
afterthought of a great poet bestowed 
upon the rapture of his readers." 

457. Propontic\ The ancient name of 
the Sea of Marmora. 

461. marble heaven] Compare 
"marble mansion," Cymbeline, v. iv. 
87, 119; " marble pavement," Timon, 
IV. Hi. 191; and "marble clouds," 
Dekker, Honest Whore ( Pearson, p. 1 19 ). 
Steevens quotes Soliman and Persida, 
1599 : " Now by the marble face of the 
welkin." Malone refers to Antonio and 
Mellida, by Marston, 1602: "And 
pleas'd the marble heavens." Hazlitt 
refers to Milton's "pure marble air," 
Paradise Lost, iii. 564 ; " which is used, " 
Upton says, "in its thoroughly classic 
sense from fjuipfuilpw, to sparke, to glow, 
or as in the aquor marmoreum of Virgil, 
the sea shining or resplendent like mar- 
ble." "This, then," says Hazlitt, "is 



the meaning in which, I think, it was 
always used by Shakespeare, of course 
without a thought, or perhaps even 
knowledge, of its classic origin. This 
is assuredly correct, and Schmidt's sug- 
gestion of "everlasting," "on account 
of their eternity," quite untenable. 
Nevertheless the term seems to me to 
convey the idea of stern severity, 
whether from the hardness, coldness, 
or inflexibility of the substance, or from 
all combined. 

465. elements'} heavens. This, I 
think, is the sense here of a word used 
with great latitude. Compare " by the 
elements," in Coriolanus, I. x. 10. 
"Heaven" or "heavens," or "sky" 
or "skies" if it be preferred. Com- 
pare Chester's Love's Martyr, 1601 : 
" O Thou great maker of the firma- 
ment, 
That ridst upon the winged 

Cherubins, 

And on the glorious shining ele- 
ment, 

Hearst the sad praiers of the 
Seraphins " 

(New Shak. Soc., p. 13). 
And again : 

' ' When early rising Birds alowd did 

sing 
And faire cleare clouds the element 

did adorne " 
(id. p. 62). While on page 12, it/em, 



SC.HI.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 163 

Witness that here lago doth give up 

The execution of his wit, hands, heart, 

To wrong'd Othello's service ! Let him command, 

And to obey shall be in me remorse, 

What bloody business ever. [They rise. 

Oth. I greet thy love, 470 

Not with vain thanks, but with acceptance bounteous, 

And will upon the instant put thee to 't : 

Within these three days let me hear thee say 

That Cassio 's not alive. 
lago. My friend fs dead; 'tis done at your request: 475 

But let her live. 
Oth. Damn her, lewd minx ! O, damn her ! 

467. execution] excellency Q I ; hands] Ff, hand Qq. 469. be in me re- 
morse] be remorce Q I. 470. business ever] worke so ever Qq ; work soever 
Theobald, Steevens. 475. at your request] Ff, as you request Qq. 476. 

Damn . . . minx] separate line Ff, one line Damn . . . her Qq ; 0, damn her !] 
O, damne her, damne her. Ff (separate line). 

" elemental " means heavenly. A good passage into a wonderful mash. It is 

instance occurs in Hakluyt (ii. 218, well to notice here the solemn manner 

rept.), 1599: " We sawe in the element, in which lago perjures his soul in this 

a cloud with a long tayle, like vnto the noble adjuration of a pious loyalty, 

tayle of a serpent." So also Peele, lago has already in a famous speech 

Edward I. (ed. 1874, p. 383), 1593: (ill. iii. 156) assumed the garb of virtue 

" Friar. What, have we a fellow dropt to his trustful chief, 

out of the element ? What 's he for a 472. put thee to V] put you to the 

man?" and Honour of Order of proof. Compare Coriolanus, i. i. 223, 

Garter, 1593: "To whom the earth, and Measure for Measure, in. ii. 201. 

the sea and elements Auspicious are" 473, 474.] This murderous order 

(1874, p. 588). causes one nowadays to revolt against 

465. clip] embrace closely, surround. Othello. Shakespeare's times were 

The original sense was to draw closely different, and it must be remembered 

together, as in the edges of a pair of the scene is in Italy, where such methods 

shears. Compare Cymbeline, ii. iii. were usual. 

139. And Trevisa, Bartholomew De 476. minx] "A pert, wanton 

Propriet. Rev. 1397: "England is the woman" (Skeat). It occurs again 

most island of Ocean, and is beclipped below, iv. i. 159; and in Twelfth 

all about by the sea." Night, ill. iv. 133. The word origin- 

467. execution] action, performance. ally seems to have been equivalent to 

469. remorse] compunction of con- " pet." The earliest note I have is to 

science (Schmidt). Hence "conscience" Udall's Erasmus (Roberts' rept., p. 

simply. See above in. iii. 369. Some 143), 1542: "A little mynxe full of 

of the commentators have laboured this play " (of a dog). It acquired a bad 



164 OTHELLO [ACTIII. 

Come, go with me apart ; I will withdraw, 
To furnish me with some swift means of death 
For the fair devil. Now art thou my lieutenant. 
I ago. I am your own for ever. \Exeunt. 480 

SCENE IV. Before the Castle. 

Enter DESDEMONA, EMILIA, and Clown. 

Des. Do you know, sirrah, where Lieutenant Cassio 

lies? 

Clo. I dare not say he lies any where. 
Des. Why, man ? 
Clo. He is a soldier; and for one to say a soldier lies, 5 

is stabbing. 

Des. Go to : where lodges he ? 
Clo. To tell you where he lodges, is to tell you where 

I lie. 

Before the Castle] The Same, Capell, Steevens ; Another Apartment in the 
Palace Theobald. I. Lieutenant} the Lieutenant Qq. 5. Clo.] omitted 
Q I ; He is] Qq, Steevens, etc., Craig ; He's Ff, Globe ; one'] Qq 5 mee F I, 2 ; 
me F 3, 4. 6. is] Qq, 'tis Ff. 8-10. To tell . . . this?] omitted Q I. 

sense. In Marlowe's Doctor Faustus, beginning of last Act], and was certainly 

"Sloth" is addressed as " Mistres intended to be an allowed or domestic 

Minx," and this prefix was frequently ' fool ' in the service of Othello and 

applied, as in Guilpin's Skialetheia, Sat. Desdemona," Illustrations of Shake- 

V., 1598. Compare Cotgrave : " Gogu- speare, ii. 272. 

enelle : A feigned title or tearm for a 6. stabbing] Compare Dekker, Seven 

wench; like our Gixie, Callat, Minx, Deadly Sinnes of London, 1606 (Arber 

etc." From Bianca's use of the word reprint, p. 22) : " He that gives a soldier 

below, it had evidently the worst sense the Lye, lookes to receave the stab." 

in Shakespeare's mind at present. And Ben Jonson, Every Man in his 

479.] lago here obtains the coveted Humour, iv. 2, 1598 : 

appointment, the refusal of which he " Tib. You lie in your throat, hus- 

makes his primary motive for revenge band. 

at the opening of the play. Cob. How, the lie ! and in my 

throat too ! do you long to be 

Scene IV. stabbed, ha? 

Clown] Douce says the Clown Tib. Why, you are no soldier, I 

"appears but twice in the play [see hope." 



sc. iv.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 165 

Des. Can any thing be made of this ? I o 

Clo. I know not where he lodges; and for me to 

devise a lodging, and say he lies here or he lies 

there, were to lie in mine own throat. 
Des. Can you inquire him out and be edified by 

report ? I 5 

Clo. I will catechize the world for him ; that is, make 

questions and by them answer. 
Des. Seek him, bid him come hither : tell him I have 

moved my lord in his behalf and hope all will 

be well. 20 

Clo. To do this is within the compass of man's wit, 

and therefore I will attempt the doing it. [Exit. 

Des. Where should I lose that handkerchief, Emilia? 
Emil. I know not, madam. 
Des. Believe me, I had rather have lost my purse 25 

Full of crusadoes : and, but my noble Moor 

12,13. lies here . . . there] lies there Qq. 13. mine own] my Q I. 19. in 

bis] Qq, Steevens, Craig ; on his Ff. 21. man's wit] a man Q I. 22. / 

will] I'le or lie Qq ; it] Ff ; of it Qq, Rowe. 23. that} Qq, the Ff. 25. 
have lost] Ff, loose Qq. 

13. lie . . . throat] A deep lie, not 23. should] See above, III. iii. 382 
one " from the teeth outward. " Shake- (note). 

speare has the expression frequently, - 24.] Hudson says here : " Emilia 

e.g. Love's Labour's Lost, IV. iii. 12. loves her mistress deeply, but she has 

Ben Jonson uses it (see last note), no moral repugnance to theft and false- 

An earlier instance is in Gabriel hood, apprehends no fatal consequences 

Harvey's Three Proper Letters (Gro- from the Moor's passion, and has no 

sart's ed. i. 73), ante 1580: "Out soul to conceive the agony her mistress 

lyar out, thou lyest abhominably in thy must suffer by the charge of infidelity ; 

throate." and it is but natural that when the 

14. edified] built, literally. The ap- result comes she should be the more 
plied sense was not common, and has spirited for the very remembrance of 
usually an affected use in Shakespeare, her own guilty part in the process " 
See Hamlet, V. ii. 162. Compare Peele, (Furness). This puts the case as well 
Edward I. (1874, p. 382) : " 'Tis pity, as it can be put for Emilia. 

friar, but thou shouldst be Lluellen's 26. crusadoes] Portuguese coins 
chaplain, thou edifiest so well." An stamped with a cross, current in 
affected biblical term. England in Shakespeare's time. They 



166 OTHELLO [ACT m. 

Is true of mind and made of no such baseness 

As jealous creatures are, it were enough 

To put him to ill thinking. 

Emit. Is he not jealous ? 

Des. Who, he? I think the sun where he was born 30 

Drew all such humours from him. 

Emil. Look, where he comes. 

Des. I will not leave him now till Cassio 

Be call'd to him. 

Enter OTHELLO. 

How is it with you, my lord ? 

Oth. Well, my good lady. \Aside\ O, hardness to dis- 
semble ! 

How do you do, Desdemona? 

Des. Well, my good lord. 3 5 

Oth. Give me your hand: this hand is moist, my 

lady. 

Des. It yet has felt no age nor known no sorrow. 
Oth. This argues fruiifulness and liberal heart : 

Hot, hot, and moist : this hand of yours requires 

32. till] Let Q I ; Enter Othello.] placed as by Dyce ; after him (line 31) Qq ; 
after comes (line 31) F I, 2 ; after sorrow (line 37) F 3 ; after lord? (line 33) F 4, 
Steevens. 33. is it] Qq, Theobald, Steevens (1785) ; is't Globe, Craig. 37. 
yet has] Qq, Cambridge, Craig; hath Ff; yet hath Dyce, Globe. 39. Hot, 
hot] Not hot Q i, Both hot Anon. MS. (in Devonshire Q I, Cambridge). 

were of gold, and their value three by the ancients (Aristotle et seq. ) in four 

shillings in English money. Andrew classifications in their views of nature 

Borde says, in his Bake of Know- and generation. These were Cold 

ledge, ch. xxix. (London rept., 1814), and Dry, Cold and Moist, Hot and 

1542: "The Portingales seketh theyr Dry, Hot and Moist. " They are called 

lyvynge fare by the see, theyr money the first qualities, because they slide 

is brasse and fyne golde .... in first from the elements into the things 

gold they have cursados worth v.s. a that be made of elements," Trevisa's 

pece." Bartholomew. In Ben Jonson's 

38. hot and moist] See II. i. 259. Every Man out of his Humour, v. 2 

The elements were formerly combined (1599), when Sogliardo greets Savio- 



sc. iv.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 



167 



A sequester from liberty, fasting and prayer, 40 

Much castigation, exercise devout ; 

For here 's a young and sweating devil here, 

That commonly rebels. 'Tis a good hand, 

A frank one. 
Des. You may, indeed, say so ; 

For 'twas that hand that gave away my heart. 45 
Oth. A liberal hand : the hearts of old gave hands ; 

40. prayer} {,praying Qq. 41. devout} devoted Q 3. 42. here's] there's 
Daniel. 44. frank one] very frank one Hanmer, frank one too Capell. 

46. hearts . . . hands] hands . . . hearts Hanmer, Warburton. 



lina, he says, " How does my sweet 
lady? hot and moist? beautiful and 
lusty?" Steevens said here "Ben 
Jonson seems to have attempted a 
ridicule on this passage, in Every Man 
out of his Humour." Gifford, naturally, 
in defence of his favourite author, 
pours out the vials of his wrath upon 
"the whole cry of commentators." 
Gifford bases his remonstrance on the 
dates. 

40. sequester] sequestration, seclu- 
sion. No other example of this sub- 
stantive has been adduced. 

42.] Cupid. So Ben Jonson: "Love 
. . . His pulse lies in her palm" 
(quoted above, II. i. 259). 

46, 47. hearts . . . hands] War- 
burton believed this to be a reference 
to the new order of baronets, instituted 
by James I. in 1611. The honour con- 
ferred (in 1612) the addition of a 
"hand" gules to the coat of arms. 
The fatal defect in this analogy (which 
would otherwise seem to me to be 
irrefutable) is the date, which is, on 
firm grounds placed at 1604. So that 
we should have to suppose this a later 
insertion. Warburton and others took 
this passage as a landmark for the date 
of the play. This natural remark, con- 
sidering the expression "new heraldry," 
called forth torrents of condemnation. 
Steevens calls it an absurdity for 



Shakespeare to " sneer " at this badge 
of honours. It is a very mild ' ' sneer, " 
and if one considers the manner in 
which James' knighthood creations are 
"sneered" at by the dramatists, it 
would be strange if this should pass un- 
noticed. Malone thinks it possible 
that Warburton is right. Dyce calls it 
"a ridiculous idea." I at first agreed, 
although insertions are extremely unwel- 
come suggestions, with White (ed. 2), 
who says, ' ' This seems to be the ' new 
heraldry ' Othello speaks of ; but in 
that case the passage was probably 
added after the first production of the 
play." The words "new heraldry" 
are too explicit to be explained away. 
Malone, supposing the words to be 
figuratively used, compares Tempest, 
III. i. 90. He also quotes the follow- 
ing from Sir William Cornwallis' 
Essays, 1601, Essay 28, "Of Compli- 
ments" : "They [our forefathers] had 
wont to give their handes and their 
hearts together ; but we thinke it a finer 
grace to looke a squint, our hand look- 
ing one way and our heart another." 
May not Othello's words at " of old" 
be a recollection of Burleigh's advice to 
Elizabeth upon taxation : " Win hearts, 
and you have their hands and purses. 1 
See Disraeli, Curiosities of Lit., iii. 
199, ed. 1858. I have failed to verify 
this, and so also has Dr. Dowden. 



168 



OTHELLO 



[ACT in. 



But our new heraldry is hands, not hearts. 
Des. I cannot speak of this. Come now, your promise. 
Oth. What promise, chuck? 

Des. I have sent to bid Cassio come speak with you. 
Oth. I have a salt and sorry rheum offends me ; 

Lend me thy handkerchief. 

Des. Here, my lord. 

Oth. That which I gave you. 
Des. I have it not about me. 



48. Come now,] Globe, Cambridge; Come, now Ff; Come now Q 2, 3, 
Steevens; Come, come Q I. 51. sorry} Ff, sullen Qq. 52-55. Lend me 
. . . That handkerchief] arranged as by Steevens (1793), Globe, Craig ; each 
speech separate line (seven lines) in old editions, etc., Cambridge. 52. hand- 
kerchief] handkercher Q I (and elsewhere). 



But Disraeli is explicit. The figurative 
use, illustrated from the Tempest by 
Malone, is probably frequent. Greene 
has it in James the Fourth, 1598 (1874, 
p. 190): 

' ' For thy false heart dissenting from 

thy hand, 
Misled by love, hath made another 

choice." 

But Peele has a heraldic reference in 
another place, which serves perhaps 
to remove any necessity for a recent 
allusion. But it needs explanation 
itself. It is in Polyhymnia, the de- 
scription of the tilting before the 
Queen in 1590. One of the tillers 
was (ed. 1874, p. 571) 

"Anthony Cooke, a man of noble 

mind, 
For arms and courtship equal to 

the best : 
Valour and Virtue sat upon his 

helm, 
Whom Love and lowering Fortune 

led along, 
And Life and Death he portray'd 

in his show ; 

A liberal Hand, badge of nobility, 
A Heart that in his mistress' 
honour vows 



To task his hand in witness of his 

heart 
Till age shake off war's rough 

habliments." 

This seems to be a direct allusion to 
the quotation attributed to Burleigh. 
And the " liberal Hand " identifies it 
with Shakespeare's thought. The 
Polyhymnia passage is also heraldic, 
each combatant being equipped with 
badge and impress.! 

49. chuck} term of endearment often 
used by Shakespeare, as well as 
Marston and Jonson. It does not 
commonly occur in such a serious 
situation as here, but compare Macbeth, 
in. ii. 45. The word is a variant of 
"chick." 

51. sorry} wretched, distressing. 
Compare Macbeth, II. ii. 21 ; 2 Henry 
VI. I. iv. 69. "Salt rheum" occurs 
again in Comedy of Errors, in. ii. 131. 
51. rheum} Lyly tells us this was a 
" courtly term." In Mydas, v. ii. 
(1592), Petullussays to Motto : "belike 
if thou shouldst spit often, thou wouldst 
call it rheume. Motto, in men of re- 
putation and credit it is the rheume ; in 
such mechanicall mushrumpes, it is a 
catarre, a pose, the water evill." 



sc. iv.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 169 

Oth. Not? 

Des. No, indeed, my lord. 

Oth. That is a fault. 

That handkerchief 5 5 

Did an Egyptian to my mother give ; 

She was a charmer, and could almost read 

The thoughts of people : she told her, while she 

kept it 

'Twould make her amiable and subdue my father 
Entirely to her love, but if she lost it 60 

Or made a gift of it, my father's eye 
Should hold her loathed and his spirits should hunt 
After new fancies : she dying gave it me, 
And bid me, when my fate would have me wive, 
To give it her. I did so: and take heed on 't ; 65 
Make it a darling like your precious eye ; 
To lose 't or give 't away were such perdition 
As nothing else could match. 

Des. Is't possible? 

54. Not ?] Ff, Not. Qq ; indeea] faith Q I ; That is} Steevens, etc. ; That 's Qq, 
Ff. 59. and} omitted F 2, 3, 4. 62. loathed] lot hely Q I, loathly Steevens. 
64. apnwjQq, wzWFf. 67. lose'f\ Theobald, etc.; loose' t Ff ; loose Q I, 2 ; 
lose Q 3, Steevens (1793). 

56. Egyptian} Gipsies were com- Upon your grannam's grave . . . 

monly called so in full, in the many each spell 

enactments passed against them in She stitched in the work, and knit it 

Shakespeare's time and earlier. Hunter well. " 

thinks the ' ' mention of ' mummy ' and If Jonson remembered here his friend 

other points in the passage, guide us to Shakespeare's lines, he interprets the 

the true Egyptians, neighbours of the word Egyptian "gipsy." 

Moors." Steevens says this passage is 59. amiable} lovable, to be loved, 

imitated in Ben Jonson's Sad Shepherd, Compare Midsummer Nighfs Dream, 

it. ii : iv. i. 2. See Cotgrave : "Aimable : as 

" where'er you spy amiable', also, loveable." Burton uses 

This browdered belt with characters, the word in this sense : "for as Pro- 

'tis I. clus holds, Omne pulchrum amabile, 

A Gypsan lady and a right beldame, every fair thing is amiable " (p. 472, ed. 

Wrought it by moonshine for me, and 1854), 1621. New Eng. Diet, cites this 

starlight passage, and refers to Coverdale, 1535. 



170 



OTHELLO 



[ACT in. 



Oth. Tis true : there 's magic in the web of it : 

A sibyl, that had number'd in the world 70 

The sun to course two hundred compasses, 

In her prophetic fury sew'd the work ; 

The worms were hallow'd that did breed the silk ; 

And it was dyed in mummy which the skilful 

Conserved of maidens' hearts. 

Des. Indeed! is 't true? 75 

71. The sun to course} Ff, Q 2, 3 ; The sun to make Q I, Malone, Steevens 
( I 793)- 74- which} -with Q I, 3. 75. Conserved] Consent 1 d Ff, Conserues 
Q I, Concerue Q 2 ; Indeed] 1 faith Q I. 



70. sibyf] prophetess. Shakespeare 
elsewhere alludes to the age of " Sibyl," 
which he uses sometimes as a proper 
name. Compare " As old as Sibyl," 
Taming of the Shrew, I. ii. 70 ; and 
"As old as Si\)y\\a.," Merchant of Venice, 
I. ii. 95. Shakespeare is in harmony 
with his contemporary Lyly, who has 
in Sapho and Phao (1584) the character 
"Sibylla, an aged Soothsayer," who 
consented to the suit of Phcebus, " if 
she might live as many years as there 
were grains in a handfull of sand" 
(II. i.). See Holland's Plinie, vii. 33. 

71.] Johnson says, " The expression is 
not very infrequent ; we say, I counted 
the clock to strike four ; so she numbered 
the sun to course, to run, two hundred," 
etc. Warburton remarks : " That is, 
number'd the sun's courses : badly ex- 
pressed " (Furness). Compare " my 
life is run his compass, "Julius Ccesar, 
v. ii. 25. 

72. prophetic Jury] Hunter says, 
" The phrase may have presented it- 
self to Shakespeare in the writings 
of Sylvester, where it is frequent" 
(Furness). It occurs in Cotgrave : 
"Fanatique: Mad, franticke . . .; 
also, ravished, or inspired, with a Pro- 
phetical fury." 

73. The worms were hallow'd] Com- 
pare A Description of China (Hakluyt 
(1810), ii. -572), 1599 : "in China . . . 
the women doe employ a great part of 
their time in preseruing of Silke-wormes, 



and in keeming and weauing of Silke. 
Hence it is that euery yeere the King 
and Queene with great solemnitie come 
foorth into a publique place, the one 
of them touching a plough, and the 
other a Mulberie tree, with the leaues 
whereof Silke-wormes are nourished : 
. . . otherwise, all the whole yeere 
throughout, no man besides the prin- 
cipall magistrates may once attaine to 
the sight of the King." 

74. mummy] "There are two kinds 
of it, the one is digged out of the 
graves, in Arabia and Syria, of those 
bodies that were embalmed, and is 
called Arabian Mummy. The second 
kind is onely an equal mixture of the 
Jews Lime and Bitumen, in Greek 
Pissiphaltum," Blount's Glossographia, 
ed. 1670. The translator of Vigo's 
Chirurgerie (1543) says, " Mumie is 
the flesh of a dead bodye that is em- 
bawmed." A medicinal preparation, 
supposed to be derived from " mummy," 
was formerly of great fame. Sir Thomas 
Browne (Urn Burial} says, " Mummie 
is become merchandize . . . and 
Pharaoh is sold for balsams." Shake- 
speare refers again to the magical 
qualities in Macbeth, IV. i. 23. Steevens 
cites from The Microcosmus of John 
Davies of Hereford (1603, p. 77, ed. 
Grosart) "That's Mummey made of 
the mere heart of Love." 

75. Conserved'] prepared as a con- 
serve, or as we say "preserve." The 



sc. iv.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 171 

Oth. Most veritable ; therefore look to 't well. 
Des. Then would to God that I had never seen it ! 
Oth. Ha ! wherefore ? 

Des. Why do you speak so startingly and rash? 
Oth. Is 't lost ? is 't gone ? speak, is it out o' the 
way ? 80 

Des. Heaven bless us ! 
Oth. Say you ? 

Des. It is not lost ; but what an if it were ? 
Oth. How! 

Des. I say, it is not lost. 

Oth. Fetch 't, let me see it. 

Des. Why, so I can, sir, but I will not now. 85 

This is a trick to put me from my suit : 

Pray you, let Cassio be received again. 
Oth. Fetch me the handkerchief: my mind misgives. 
Des. Come, come ; 

You '11 never meet a more sufficient man. 90 

Oth. The handkerchief ! 

Des. I pray, talk me of Cassio. 

Oth. The handkerchief! 
Des. A man that all his time 

Hath founded his good fortunes on your love, 

77. to God} Qq, etc.; to Heaven F ; the Heaven F 2, 3, 4. 79. startingly'] 
staringly F 3, 4 ; rash] rashly Q I. 8l. Heaven] Q I ; omitted Q 2, 3, Ff. 
82. an if"] Theobald (ed. 2), etc.; andi/Qq, Ff. 83. How .'] Globe, How? 
Ff, Ha. Qq, Ha! Steevens. 85. sir,] Qq, omitted Ff. 87. Pray you] Ff, 
Globe; I pray Qq, Steevens. 88. the] Ff, that Qq. 91, 92. Des. / 

pray . . . handkerchief ' !] omitted Ff, Q 2, 3. 

substantive is still in use. Ben Jonson further search would discover what she 

speaks of a " conserve for sea-sickness," valued so highly. Emilia, indeed, lies 

" conserve of roses," etc. abominably about it, and it is the worst 

82. lost] Desdemona does not believe thing against her that she is present 

it is lost. She would not, probably, during this scene, 
admit to herself it was lost, but that 



OTHELLO [ACT in. 

Shared dangers with you, 

Oth. The handkerchief! 

Des. In sooth, you are to blame. 95 

Oth. Awayl [Exit. 

Emit. Is not this man jealous ? 

Des, I ne'er saw this before. 

Sure there's some wonder in this handkerchief: 

I am most unhappy in the loss of it! 100 

Emit. 'Tis not a year or two shows us a man : 

They are all but stomachs and we all but food ; 
They eat us hungerly, and when they are full 
They belch us. Look you, Cassio and my husband. 

Enter CASSIO and lAGO. 

I ago. There is no other way; 'tis she must do't: 105 

And, lo, the happiness ! go and importune her. 

Des. How now, good Cassio ! what 's the news with you ? 

Cas. Madam, my former suit : I do beseech you 
That by your virtuous means I may again 
Exist, and be a member of his love 1 10 

Whom I with all the office of my heart 
Entirely honour : I would not be delayed. 
If my offence be of such mortal kind, 

94. you, ] Globe ; you: Steevens (1793) j you. Qq, Ff. 95. In sooth} 
If ait h Q i. 96. Away !] Zouns. Q I . 100. the loss of it] this losse or the losse 
Q I. in. office"} duty Q i, Steevens. 

103. hungerly] hungrily. Compare some time wedded. Compare "a 

Timon, I. i. 262. This is the only hundred times," ill. iii. 293. 

form in Sherwood's Index to Cotgrave, 106. importune] so accented in 

1672. But Cotgrave has "hungrily" Hamlet, I. iii. no, and elsewhere, 

in v. avidement, and elsewhere. Clarke 109. virtuous] powerful, efficacious, 

notices that this speech, coupled with as in Measure for Measure, II. ii. 168, 

" I ne'er saw this before," gives us the and Midsummer Nighfs Dream, in. 

impression of Desdemona's having been ii. 367. 



sc. iv.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 173 

That nor my service past nor present sorrows 
Nor purposed merit in futurity 115 

Can ransom me into his love again, 
But to know so must be my benefit ; 
So shall I clothe me in a forced content 
And shut myself up in some other course 
To fortune's alms. 

Des. Alas, thrice-gentle Cassio ! 1 20 

My advocation is not now in tune ; 
My lord is not my lord, nor should I know him 
Were he in favour as in humour alter'd. 
So help me every spirit sanctified, 
As I have spoken for you all my best 125 

And stood within the blank of his displeasure 

114. nor my] F I ; not my Q 2, F 2, Q 3, F 3, 4 ; neither Q i, Steevens, 
Malone. 119. shut . . . in] skoote myselfe up in Q I, Johnson. 126. 
stood] stoop Q 3. 

117.] It will be an act of kindness advocation for us" (1630). New Eng. 

for me but to know so, i.e. even the Diet, has no other early examples, 
knowledge of the worst would be 121. in tune] the pegs that made her 

better than being delayed. music are set down. However Desde- 

119. shut . . . course] confine my- mona may have tried us by her 
self to some other course of life. Com- unlucky iteration on Cassio's behalf, she 
pare Afacbeth, II. i. 16 : "shut up In comes back to one's heart wholly by 
measureless content " ; and see Troilus this most beautiful and pathetic speech. 
and Cressida, I. iii. 58, and Timon, IV. 125. my best] to the best of my 
iii. 279. This is Steevens's interpreta- power, in my best way. Compare 
tion. Several unwarrantable altera- Hamlet, I. ii. 120, and Lyly, Mother 
tions have been suggested. "Shape," JBcmbie, I. iii., 1594 : "Well then, this 
"set," "shift," and "suit" have all is our best, seeing we know each other's 
been through the mill. minde, to devise to governe our own 

1 20. To fortune's alms] To the children." 

mercy of fortune's alms. Malone refers 126. -within the blank] within the 

to Lear, i. i. 277, where the expression aim or range. "Blank " was the white 

" At fortune's alms" occurs in the same mark in the centre of the target ; the word 

sense. still lives in "point-blank " (i.e. direct 

120. thrice-gentle] See note at I. iii. or level aim, not "ranging" or "rov- 
232. m g")- The " blank" wasusually the head 

121. advocation] pleading. Webster of the "pin," painted white, holding up 
gives one example of this rare word the target through its centre. Perhaps 
from Bishop Taylor : "The holy Jesus no metaphor is so common as this in 
. . . sits in heaven in a perpetual Elizabethan writers, the present term 



174 OTHELLO [ACTIII. 

For my free speech ! You must awhile be patient : 
What I can do I will ; and more I will 
Than for myself I dare : let that suffice you. 

lago. Is my lord angry? 

Emit. He went hence but now, 130 

And certainly in strange unquietness. 

lago. Can he be angry? I have seen the cannon, 
When it hath blown his ranks into the air, 
And, like the devil, from his very arm 
Puff 'd his own brother ; and can he be angry ? 135 
Something of moment then : I will go meet him : 
There 's matter in 't indeed if he be angry. 

Des. I prithee, do so. [Exit lago. 

Something sure of state, 

Either from Venice or some unhatch'd practice 
Made demonstrable here in Cyprus to him, 140 

Hath puddled his clear spirit ; and in such cases 
Men's natures wrangle with inferior things, 
Though great ones are their object. 'Tis even so; 
For let our finger ache, and it indues 

135. can he be] Qq, etc., is he Ff. 143. Though} Ff; Tho Q i, 2; The 
Q 3 ; their] Ff, the Qq. 144. indues] endues Qq, Ff ; subdues Johnson conj. 

havingfor synonyms "pin," "clout" (Fr. 140. demonstrable"] Abbott ( (Jr. 492) 

clou), "prick," " mark," " white," and gives several examples from Shake- 

" centre." SeeZ#zr,i.iv. 159, and Craig's speare of "words in which the accent 

note ; and Hamlet, iv. i. 42. The word is was nearer the beginning than with us." 

rare outside Shakespeare, but out of This play received a small meed of 

many senses for Blanc in Cotgrave, it Abbott's attention. This adjective is 

stands second: "Blanc: A blank, not used elsewhere in Shakespeare, 

white, whitenesse, or white thing: the 141. puddled] Compare "muddied," 

white or mark of a pair of butts," Hamlet, iv. v. 81. Shakespeare uses 

etc. the word " puddled " literally in Comedy 

135.] Something is understood after of Errors, v. i. 173. 

brother. Malone supplies " cool and 144. finger ache] Compare the pro- 
unruffled"; Booth, "and yet he stood verb "When the head aketh all the 
unmoved." body is the worse" (Camden). The 

139. unhatch'd practice] undeveloped proverb has the merit of truth. Per- 

plot. haps ladies find this true also. 



sc.iv.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 175 

Our other healthful members even to that sense 145 

Of pain. Nay, we must think men are not gods, 

Nor of them look for such observancy 

As fits the bridal. Beshrew me much, Emilia, 

I was, unhandsome warrior as I am, 

Arraigning his unkindness with my soul; 150 

But now I find I had suborn'd the witness, 

And he's indicted falsely. 

Emit. Pray heaven it be state-matters, as you think, 
And no conception nor no jealous toy 
Concerning you. 155 

Des. Alas the day, I never gave him cause ! 

Emil. But jealous souls will not be answer'd so ; 
They are not ever jealous for the cause, 
But jealous for they are jealous : 'tis a monster 
Begot upon itself, born on itself. 160 

Des. Heaven keep that monster from Othello's mind ! 

145. even to that sense] Qq, even to a sense Ff, with a sense Pope. 147. 
observancy] observancie F I; observances Qq, Steevens (1793), etc., Globe; 
observance F 2, 3, 4. 152. indicted] Collier ; indited Qq, Ff. 161. that] 
Qq, the Ff. 

144. indues] endows. A corruption sailant (Johnson). See n. i. 182, and 

of "endue," which was an older spelling I. iii. 163 (note). Compare the senti- 

of " endow." Skeat says this word is ment here with Sonnet 49 : 

totally distinct from " indue," to invest, " And this my hand against myself 

clothe or supply with. (See Spenser's uprear, 

Faerie Queene, in. vi. 35. ) He goes on To guard the lawful reasons on 

to say "some of our best writers seem to thy part." 

have much confused them. For instance 157-160.] Emilia and lago both 

see Shakespeare's Twelfth Night, I. v. speak so feelingly of the horrors of this 

105, Othello, III. iv. 146 [the present passion, that there can be little doubt 

passage], etc. ; Spenser, Faerie Queene, lago's jealousy was a very living thing 

II. ii. 6. See Todd's Johnson." in their domestic life, whether cause- 

147. observancy] observance, duty, fully or not (and she was fully capable 

respect. Not elsewhere in Shake- of giving cause) we are not told. See 

speare. For observance, see As You note at III. iii. 298 ; and compare her 

Like It, V. ii. 102 ; Merry Wives, n. ii. speech at IV. iii. 85. 

203; and Chaucer, Annel. and Arc. ,21%. 159. monster] See above, III. iii. 

149. unhandsome -warrior] unfair as- 167. 



176 OTHELLO [ACTIH. 

Emit. Lady, amen. 

Des. I will go seek him. Cassio, walk hereabout : 
If I do find him fit, I '11 move your suit, 
And seek to effect it to my uttermost. 165 

Cas. I humbly thank your ladyship. 

[Exeunt Desdemona and Emilia. 

Enter BlANCA. 

Bian. Save you, friend Cassio ! 

Cas. What make you from home ? 

How is it with you, my most fair Bianca ? 

I' faith, sweet love, I was coming to your house. 
Bian. And I was going to your lodging, Cassio. 170 

What, keep a week away ? seven days and nights ? 

Eight score eight hours ? and lovers' absent hours, 

More tedious than the dial eight score times ? 

weary reckoning ! 

Cas. Pardon me, Bianca : 

1 have this while with leaden thoughts been press'd ; 
But I shall in a more continuate time 176 

169. r faitK\ Ifaith Q i, Indeed the rest. 172. lovers'] Theobald, etc. 
lovers Qq, F I ; loves 2, 3, 4. 174. O] NoQ I, Oh the rest. 175. leaden] 
laden Q I. 176. continuate time] Ff, Q 2; convenient time Q I ; continuate : of 
time Q 3. 

167. make'] do. See I. ii. 49. earlier than Othello. " Continuate 
171. week] This brings in the con- goodness" in Timon, I. i. n, is ex- 
fusion of " time " again. Coupling this plained "lasting," "chronic." The 
with "leaden thoughts" below, it word seems to mean here "frequently 
would need to be a week at least since recurring, assiduous," and is exactly 
Cassio was cashiered. illustrated by the following passage 
176. conlinuate] New Eng. Diet, in Burton's Anatomy of Melancholy (ii. 
quotes this passage, explaining the iii. 8) : " yet they have lucida inter- 
word " continuous in order of time, valla, sometimes well and sometimes 
uninterrupted in duration." It gives ill; orifmorefontinua/e, as the Vejenfes 
two other examples (both "continuate were to the Romans, 'tis hostis majis 
history"), one of which, from Godwin's assiduus quam gravis (Livius), a more 
Bishops of England, 1601 (p. 136), is durable enemy than dangerous." The 



sc.iv.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 177 

Strike off this score of absence. Sweet Bianca, 

[Giving' her Desdemona's handkerchief, 
Take me this work out. 

Bian. O Cassio, whence came this ? 

This is some token from a newer friend : 
To the felt absence now I feel a cause : 1 80 

Is 't come to this ? Well, well. 

Cas. Go to, woman ! 

Throw your vile guesses in the devil's teeth, 
From whence you have them. You are jealous now 
That this is from some mistress, some remembrance : 
No, by my faith, Bianca. 

Bian. Why, whose is it ? 1 8 $ 

Cas. I know not, sweet : I found it in my chamber. 
I like the work well : ere it be demanded 
As like enough it will I 'Id have it copied : 
Take it, and do 't ; and leave me for this time. 

Bian. Leave you ! wherefore ? 1 90 

Cas. I do attend here on the general ; 

And think it no addition, nor my wish, 
To have him see me woman'd. 



181. Well, well} omitted Q I. 185. by my faith] Q I, in good troth the 
rest ; whose] Q 2, 3, F 3, 4 ; who's Q i, F I, 2. 186. sweet] Qq, neither Ff 
(ending line). 188. I' Id] Pde Qq, I -would Ff. 

meaning is paraphrased by such words as "What act, though ne'er so strange 

"times more (nearly) joined together." and insolent, 

Burton has " a continuate cough " in But that addition will at least bear 

another place, meaning "chronic." out, 

178. Take . . . out] copy. See be- If t do not expiate ?" 

loW, lirie 189, and III. iii. 297, for note 193. -woman d} accompanied by a 

on expression. woman. Abbott says (Grammar, 290), 

184. remembrance] keepsake. See "it may be said that any noun or 

III. iii. 392. adjective could be converted into a verb 

186. / know not] See note at in. by the Elizabethan authors, generally 

iii. 298. in an active signification." He culls a 

192. addition] credit, outward honour, number of examples from Shakespeare, 

Compare Jonson's Sejanus, ii. I, 1601 : but omits this remarkable one. 

12 



OTHELLO [ACT iv. 

Bian, Why, I pray you ? 

Cas. Not that I love you not. 

Bian. But that you do not love me. 

I pray you, bring me on the way a little ; 195 

And say if I shall see you soon at night. 

Cas. 'Tis but a little way that I can bring you ; 
For I attend here : but I '11 see you soon. 

Bian. 'Tis very good ; I must be circumstanced. 

\Exeunt. 

ACT IV 

SCENE I. Cyprus. Before the Castle. 
Enter OTHELLO and lAGO. 

I ago. Will you think so ? 
Oth. Think so, lago ! 

I ago. What, 

To kiss in private ? 

J 93 J 94' Why . , . nof\ omitted Q I. 196. night.} Qq, night? Ff. 
Act IV. Scene I. 

Cyprus. Before the Castle] The Same Capell ; A Room of State Rowe j 
A Court before the Palace Theobald. I, 2. What . . . private?] arranged 
as by Capell, one line Ff, Qq ; continued to Othello Lettsom conj. 

195. bring] accompany. The ex- Index to Cotgrave. The phrase occurs 
pression "bring one in the way " occurs in Dekker (Satiromastix) and Jonson 
in Measure for Measure, I. i. 62 ; (Eastward Ho}. The expression also 
Winter's Tale, IV. iii. 122. occurs in the Play of Stucley (line 989), 

196. soon at night] Schmidt's ex- circa 1598. 

planation must be quoted " = this very 199. circumstanced] agreeable to 
night, so early as to-day in the even- circumstances, made a ' ' thing " of. 
ing." These words occur half a dozen Spoken no doubt, bitterly, as the pre- 
times in Shakespeare, with whom the ceding words are. Compare Cotgrave : 
expression seems to have been a " Circonstancit : Circumstanced; fur- 
favourite. See Merry Wives, I. iv. 8. nished with circumstances ; or com- 
" Soon" means presently, quickly ; "at passed, as with circumstances." See 
night " = to-night in our sense. " Soon " woman'd," line 193, above. 
at night: tan tost au soir," Sherwood's 



sc.i.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 179 

Oth. An unauthoriz'd kiss. 

lago. Or to be naked with her friend a-bed 

An hour or more, not meaning any harm ? 
Oth. Naked in bed, lago, and not mean harm ! 5 

It is hypocrisy against the devil : 

They that mean virtuously and yet do so, 

The devil their virtue tempts and they tempt heaven. 
lago. So they do nothing, 'tis a venial slip : 

But if I give my wife a handkerchief I o 

Oth. What then ? 
lago. Why, then, 'tis hers, my lord ; and being hers, 

She may, I think, bestow 't on any man. 
Oth. She is protectress of her honour too : 

May she give that ? 15 

lago. Her honour is an essence that 's not seen ; 

They have it very oft that have it not : 

But for the handkerchief 
Oth. By heaven, I would most gladly have forgot it : 

Thou said'st O, it comes o'er my memory, 20 

As doth the raven o'er the infected house, 

3. a-bed] abed Qq, Steevens, Craig ; in bed Ff, Globe. 9. So they] Qq, 
Steevens, Globe; If they Ff, Craig. 14. too] to Q I. 21. infected] QQ; 
infectious Ff, Rowe. 

2. unautkorizd] Walker insists that that do so are seduced in the end by 

the accent here is on the penult ; and the devil, and they provoke heaven. 

Abbott (491) gives a similar- sound- 17.] " People often have honour (i.e. 

ing to the word in Macbeth, in. iv. are honoured) who are devoid of 

66 : " Author | iz'd by | her gran | dam honour." But if the two senses of the 

Shame | itself." I am sceptical in both word be not allowed here, the passage 

passages, and prefer the accent as now, must mean, if it can mean " They seem 

which was at this time unfixed. In to have it, that have it not." 

Lover's Compt. 104 (quoted by Abbott) 19.] The poison, so skilfully adminis- 

it must be so situated, but I disagree with tered, has taken such a hold of Othello, 

him again in Sonnet xxxv : ' ' Authoriz- that the results have almost obliterated 

ing thy trespass with compare." the memory of how it was administered. 

6-8.] It is dissimulation to the devil 21. raven] Compare Kingjohn t IV. 

to act wickedly in outward appearances, iii. 153. The raven, besides fore- 

and yet ' ' mean virtuously " ; and those telling death to the sick, was believed 



180 OTHELLO [ACT iv. 

Boding to all he had my handkerchief. 
I ago. Ay, what of that ? 

Oth. That 's not so good now. 

I ago. What, 

If I had said I had seen him do you wrong ? 

Or heard him say as knaves be such abroad, 25 

Who having, by their own importunate suit, 

Or voluntary dotage of some mistress, 

Convinced or supplied them, cannot choose 

But they must blab. 

Oth. Hath he said anything? 

lago. He hath, my lord; but be you well assured, 30 

No more than he '11 unswear. 

Oth. What hath he said ? 

lago. Faith, that he did I know not what he did. 
Oth. What? what? 

25. heard~\heareY2 ; hearY 3, 4. 27. Or] Or by the Q I. 28. Convinced} 
F 2, 3, 4 ; Conuinced Q I (Devonsh. and Chip.) F I ; Concured O I (Capell), 

2 ; Conjured Q 3. 29. blab.~\ Qq, Ff; blab: Capell; blab Jennens, 
lobe, Cambridge. 32. Faith'] Q I, Why (the rest). 33. What? ivhat?\ 
Ff ; But what? Q I ; What? Q 2, 3. 

to carry infection on his wings. See fied their wants. For "convinced," 

Tempest, I. ii. 322. Marlowe has both compare Cymbeline, i. iv. 104 ; for 

these superstitions in one passage in the "supplied," see Measure for Measure, 

Jew of Malta, often quoted. Compare V. i. 212, and Macbeth, I. vii. 64. "Con- 

Peele, Loves of David, etc., "Like as vince" more commonly means "con- 

the fatal raven, that in his voice carries vict " in writers of this time, but the 

the dreadful summons of our deaths" present use occurs twice in the Triallof 

(p. 469, ed. 1874, 1599). And Treasure (Haz. Dods. pp. 267, 268), 

Guilpin's Skialetheia, 1598: "Like to 1567. Compare also B. Jonson, Barth. 

the fatall ominous raven, which tolls Fair, i. I, 1614: "Win! this cap does 

the sick man's dirge within his hollow convince " (overpowers by its beauty), 

beak" (To Deloney, p. 5, rept.). This 29. blab] tell what ought to be kept 

unluckiness of the raven is not borne secret, as in Venus and Adonis, 126. 

out by ancient writers. The word (verb and substantive) was 

27. dotage} excessive fondness formerly in good usage, abundantly. 
(Schmidt). Compare Much Ado, n. It is now mainly provincial. So sedate 
iii. 175, 274, and Antony and Cleopatra, a writer as Milton uses it in Comus and 
I. i. I and I. ii. 121. Samson Agonistes. 

28. Convinced or supplied} overcome 30.] For a similar bit of casual malice, 
them by means of importunacy, or satis- see II. iii. 240. 



sc. i.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 



181 



lago. Lie 

Oth. With her ? 

lago. With her, on her ; what you will. 

Oth. Lie with her ! lie on her ! We say lie on her, 3 5 
when they belie her. Lie with her ! that 's 
fulsome ! Handkerchief- confessions handker- 
chief ! To confess, and be hanged for his labour. 
First, to be hanged, and then to confess ; I 
tremble at it. Nature would not invest herself 40 
in such shadowing passion without some instruc- 
tion. It is not words that shake me thus. 
Pish ! Noses, ears and lips. Is 't possible ? 
Confess? Handkerchief? O devil! 

\Falls in a trance. 

36. her ! that 's] her, Zouns, that 's Q I , Cambridge. 37. confessions'] Ff, 
confession Qq. 38-44- To confess . . . devil!] omitted Q I. 41, 42. 

instruction] induction Warburton. 



35-44.] Abbott (Gram. 511) says, 
"The highest passion of all expresses 
itself in prose, as in the fearful frenzy 
of Othello [this passage], and Lear, IV. 
vi. 130." But the lines here are rather 
the disjointed ravings of one on the 
confines of insanity. 

38. confess, and be hanged} An old 
saying. Steevens refers to Marlowe, 
Jew of Afalta, iv. 2 : " Blame not us 
but the proverb, Confess and be 
hanged; pull hard." It occurs in 
Dekker, Honest Whore, Pt. II. ; and 
in Sharpham's Cupid's Whirligig, Act 
v. As late as 1689, in Pitman's Rela- 
tion, etc. (Arber's English Garner, vii. 
337), I find: "That common saying, 
confess and be hanged." 

41. shadowing passion] passion over- 
spreading and intensifying itself with 
gloom. In the sense of "hide" (as 
with a cloud), the verb occurs in Mac- 
beth, V. iv. 5 ; and compare Ben Jonson, 
Every Man in His Humour, I. ii. gb, 
"to conceal such real ornaments as 



these, and shadow their glory." It is 
used in the sense of intensifying a gloom 
by Armin, Foole upon Foole (Grosart, p. 
6): " lacke seeing they were sad, had 
this writ in simplicitie to shaddow it " 
(make it worse for them). Johnson 
explains the sentence : " This passion, 
which spreads its clouds over me, is 
the effect of some agency more than 
the operations of words ; it is one of 
those notices which men have, of unseen 
calamities." Hanmer here adopted 
Warburton's emendation confidently 
put forth : " The ridiculous blunder of 
writing instruction for induction (for so 
it should be read) has indeed sunk it 
into arrant nonsense " ( !) 

43. Pish /] See n. i. 268. Steevens 
refers, at " noses, ears, and lips," 
images conjured up by Othello in his 
agony, to Winter's Tale I. ii. 285. 
Othello pictures to himself the enact- 
ments of his supposed faithless wife 
with Cassio. 



182 OTHELLO [ACT iv. 

I ago. Work on, 45 

My medicine, work ! Thus credulous fools are 

caught : 

And many worthy and chaste dames even thus, 
All guiltless, meet reproach. What, ho ! my lord ! 
My lord, I say ! Othello ! 

Enter CASSIO. 

How now, Cassio ! 

Cas. What 's the matter ? 50 

lago. My lord is fallen into an epilepsy : 

This is his second fit ; he had one yesterday. 

Cas. Rub him about the temples. 

lago. No, forbear; 

The lethargy must have his quiet course : 
If not, he foams at mouth, and by and by 55 

Breaks out to savage madness. Look, he stirs : 
Do you withdraw yourself a little while, 
He will recover straight : when he is gone, 

45-49. Work on . . . Othello!'} as in Ff, prose in Qq. " 46. medicine, 
work .'] Theobald, etc. ; medicine worke : Qq ; medicine workes (or works) Ff, 
Rowe. 53. No, forbear ;] omitted Ff. 

46-48.] These lines show the un- ordained for the lethargy ... for 

reality of lago's motives with which he surely they are knowne to bee very 

formerly pretended to salve his con- proper against that drowsinesse, which 

science. He finds that he can ruin the is occasioned by the venome of the 

happiness of innocent people. He can Aspis." This part of Othello's attack 

do it causelessly, and he is triumphant, is more in harmony with the aspic than 

He rejoices not only at his skill, but with epilepsy, in which the heaviness 

because he finds such actions as his are follows the violent spasms. The 

in themselves delightful. See II. iii. Roman plays were in Shakespeare's 

372. mind at this time. See below, line 119. 

54. lethargy} Perhaps Shakespeare 57.] It was natural to suggest that 

recalls here the poison, "the fraught Cassio should withdraw, as he knows 

of Aspicks' tongues" (ill. iii. 451), of Othello is angry with him and might 

which lethargy was known to be the be made worse. lago has his own 

result, ending in death. Thus Pliny, reasons, lest there should arise ex- 

xxix. 4 : " those medicines which are planations. See V. i. 21. 



c.i.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 183 

I would on great occasion speak with you. 

{Exit Cassio. 
How is it, general ? have you not hurt your head ? 60 

Oth. Dost thou mock me? 

lago. I mock you ! no, by heaven. 

Would you would bear your fortune like a man ! 

Oth. A horned man 's a monster and a beast. 

lago. There 's many a beast then in a populous city, 

And many a civil monster. 65 

Oth. Did he confess it ? 

lago. Good sir, be a man ; 

Think every bearded fellow that 's but yoked 

May draw with you : there 's millions now alive 

That nightly lie in those unproper beds 

Which they dare swear peculiar : your case is better. 70 

O, 'tis the spite of hell, the fiend's arch-mock, 

To lip a wanton in a secure couch, 

60. head] hand 2, 3, 4. 6l. thou] omitted Q 3 ; you ! no, by] Steevens 
(1793) et seq.; you? no by Q I, 2 ; you not, by Ff. 62. fortune] Ff, fortunes 
Qq ; like] life F 2. 66. it] omitted Qq ; Good sir] God sir Q I (Capell). 
69. lie] lyes Q I. 70. case] Qq, F I ; cause F 2, 3, 4, Rowe. 

60, 61. hurt your head . . . mock] sense "indecent." The word is not 

No doubt a malicious reference to the used elsewhere by Shakespeare ; and 

horns of cuckoldom by lago, on pur- "improper" (unbecoming) only once, 

pose to torture him. Othello takes it in Lear, v. iii. 221. 
so. And lago deals with it as an 70. peculiar] private, one's own. 

accepted fact. In Jonson's Every Man See I. i. 60. 

in His Humour, n. ii. 193, Kitely 72. lip] kiss. See Antony and Cleo- 

makes the same allusion in his jealousy : patra, II. v. 30. It occurs in a song 

"Troth my head akes extremely on a in Lyly's Mother Bombie (v. 3), 1594, 

sudden." See above, in. iii. 285. and in Eastward Ho, I. i. (Bullen's 

63,64. horned man . . . city] Com- Marston, iii. p. 21) : "Be you two 

pare Jonson, Every Man in His better acquainted. Lip her, lip her, 

Humour, v. i. : "See what a drove of knave." 

horns fly in the air ... watch where 72. secure] free from care. lago 

they fall, See, see ! on heads that think here seems to be combating Othello ; s 

they have none at all." And see views at in. iii. 340-350. Possibly he 

quotation below at V. ii. 284 (note). wishes to disarm a return of the physical 

69. unproper] not peculiarly their violence he probably experienced at 

own ; with perhaps a play on the III. iii. 360. 



184 OTHELLO [ACTIV. 

And to suppose her chaste ! No, let me know ; 
And knowing what I am, I know what she shall be. 

Oth. O, thou art wise ; 'tis certain. 

lago. Stand you awhile apart ; 7 5 

Confine yourself but in a patient list. 
Whilst you were here o'erwhelmed with your grief 
A passion most unsuiting such a man 
Cassio came hither : I shifted him away, 
And laid good 'scuse upon your ecstasy ; 80 

Bade him anon return and here speak with me ; 
The which he promised. Do but encave yourself, 
And mark the fleers, the gibes and notable scorns, 
That dwell in every region of his face ; 

77- overwhelmed] ere while mad Q I, Steevens. 78. unsuiting] Theobald, 
etc.; unsuting Q * (Devonsh.) ; unfitting Q I (Capell), Q 2, 3, Dyce (ed. 3) ; 
resulting Ff, Rowe. 80. 'scuse upon] scuse, ttpon Qq ; senses upon F I ; 

scuses on F 2, 3, 4. 8l. Bade~\ Bid Q I, Bad (the rest); return] retire Qq. 
82. Do] omitted Qq ; encave'] Ff, incaue Qq. 83. fleers'} leeres Q I 

(Devonsh.); geeres Q I (Capell), Qq ; gibes'] libes Q I. 

76. in a patient list] within the verb "to fleer" occurs four times in 

bounds of patience. For "list," see Shakespeare, and the same number of 

Hamlet, iv. v. 98. times in Ben Jonson, but the sub- 

79. shifted] removed, changed. stantive only here. See Palsgrave, 

80. 'scuse] The dropping of prefixes 1530, quoted in Halliwell, for the 
was very frequently indulged in, for verb. The earliest example of the 
the sake of metre, by writers of this substantive in New Eng. Diet., after 
period. See Abbott, 460. The present the present, is from Fuller's Two 
example occurs again in Merchant of Sermons, 1654. It is alive in Scotch 
Venice, IV. i. 34. dialect. Mr. Craig, however, sends 

80. ecstasy] trance, fit, swoon. Not me from The Puritan, Act IV., 1607: 

used elsewhere by Shakespeare in this " I have took note of thy fleers a good 

sense. Compare Cotgrave : " Extase: while." 

An extasie, or trance ; a ravishment, 84. region of his face] Compare 

or transportation of the spirit, by "region of my breast," Henry VIII. 

passion," etc. n. iv. 184, and Lear, I. i. 145, "region 

82. encave] hide, as in a cave. See of my heart," where Craig quotes the 
II. i. 18, 87. This is the sole example latter words from Ford's Lady's Trial 
in New Eng. Diet. At "incave" in. iii. 27 (1639). Compare Holland's 
(the Quartos' reading here), several Pliny, beginning the 8th chapter of 
examples of a later date are quoted, Book xxx. (1601): "For them that 
all, however, referring literally to a are troubled with the stone, it is good 
"cave." to anoint the region of the bellie 

83. fleers'} looks of contempt. The with Mouse dung." Hence, perhaps, 



sc.i.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 185 

For I will make him tell the tale anew, 85 

Where, how, how oft, how long ago and when 

He hath and is again to cope your wife : 

I say, but mark his gesture. Marry, patience; 

Or I shall say you are all in all in spleen, 

And nothing of a man. 

Oth. Dost thou hear, lago? 90 

I will be found most cunning in my patience ; 
But dost thou hear ? most bloody. 

lago. That 's not amiss ; 

But yet keep time in all. Will you withdraw ? 

\Othello retires. 

Now will I question Cassio of Bianca, 
A housewife that by selling her desires 95 

Buys herself bread and clothes : it is a creature 

96. clothes} Steevens (1793) et seq>, cloathes Qq, cloath Ff. 

Shakespeare took it ; or it may be an 89. all in all] An expression of 

earlier term amongst the physicists, mere enforcement for "all " (Schmidt). 

It was applied by them to the divisions It occurs as early as Tyndale's Treatises, 

of the atmosphere. But it seems to be circa 1530; and several times in 

of French origin. Cotgrave has " La Shakespeare, as in Hamlet, I. ii. 187. 

region du cceur. The site or seat of the 89. spleen} A fit of passion (Schmidt), 

heart. " Burton (Anatomy of Melancholy, " A hare-brained Hotspur, governed by 

I. I. ii. 4, 1621) divides the body into a spleen," 1 Henry IV. v. ii. 19. 

the upper, middle, and lower regions. Gifford, in a note to Ford's Love's 

Steevens gave no instance, but makes a Sacrifice, I. ii., says: "The spleen 

reference, unusually weak for him, to a seems to have been considered as the 

play by Congreve ! Another instance source of any sudden or violent ebul- 

occurs in Pliny, xxxiv. 18 : "the loines lition, whether of mirth or of anger." 

and region of the reines." Laughter and melancholy came especi- 

87. cope] have to do with. ally within its control. Pliny tells us 

88. gesture] expression, outward that the spleen " being taken away, 
mien or manner, especially of the laughter is gone." See iv. hi. 93 
face. See again lines 103, 139, below ; (note). 

and note at "favour," I. iii. 346. See 93. keep time] keep measure, act 

Cotgrave, "Geste: Gesture, fashion, without hurry. 

behaviour . . . also, a making of signs 95. housewife} See II. i. 1 12 (note), 

or countenances," etc. Compare also lago's account of Bianca seems worse 

Holland's Plinie, xxxv. 10 : "hee first than she merits. That is the usual 

exactly kept the sundrie habits and tendency of his descriptions. See 

gestures of the countenance." below, line 156 (note). 



186 OTHELLO [ACTIV. 

That dotes on Cassio ; as 'tis the strumpet's plague 

To beguile many and be beguiled by one. 

He, when he hears of her, cannot refrain 

From the excess of laughter. Here he comes. I oo 

Re-enter CASSIO. 

As he shall smile, Othello shall go mad ; 

And his unbookish jealousy must construe 

Poor Cassio's smiles, gestures and light behaviour, 

Quite in the wrong. How do you now, lieutenant? 

Cas. The worser that you give me the addition 105 

Whose want even kills me. 

lago. Ply Desdemona well, and you are sure on 't. 
Now, if this suit lay in Bianca's power, 

99. refrain] Qq et seq.; restraine Ff, Rowe. 102. construe} conster Qq, 

conserue Ff. 103. behaviour} Qq, behaviours Ff. 104. now] Qq, omitted 

Ff. 105. give] Qq, F I ; gave F 2, 3, 4. 108. power] Qq, dowre Ff. 

98. beguile . . . beguiled] This is the to please, he sneers at Cassio for the 

latest use I have met with of a very one extreme, and now at Othello for 

early proverb. Compare Chaucer, the other. I presume a ' ' nonce- 

fteve's Tale, line 399 : " And therefore word." Fuller (Worthies, Northamp- 

this proverb is seyd fulsooth, Him that ton) has a similar term " unbook- 

nat wene wel that yvel dooth ; A gylour learned." This word has escaped all 

shal himself bigyled be." Romant of dictionaries I have referred to (Halli- 

the Rose, 5759: " Begyled is the gyler well, Nares, etc.). There are notes 

thanne." Gower, Conf. Amant. iii. 47 upon its meaning by Furness, White, 

(bk. vi.), circa 1393: "For often he and Walker in the former's edition of 

that will beguile, Is guiled with the this play, which appear to me ludicrously 

same guile, And thus the guiler is be- far-fetched. Walker regrets the lack of 

guiled." Caxton's &sop. ii. 12 (Jacob's Books of Jealousy, to which Shakespeare 

ed. i. 50), "He that begyleth other is might here refer, but there were such 

ofthyme begyled himself." See Skeat's books. Benedetto Varchi's Blazon of 

note in Chaucer, and to Piers Plow- Jealousy (translated by Tofte, 1615) 

man, ch. xxxi. 166. The sentiment is was written long before this; it appears 

common enough (Psalms vii. 16 and to have been popular in the original, 

ix. 15), but the words identify the line which, I suppose, Othello "must con- 

with the old proverb, old enough to strue " ! But I am sceptical of any such 

have escaped all the collections. allusion. 

IO2. unbookish] ignorant, block- 105. addition] title. See IV. ii. 163, 

headed. Literally "unlettered." below. See Hamlet, I. iv. 20, and 

" Bookish" has already occurred in the Dowden's note, 
normal sense (l. i. 24). lago is hard 



sc.i.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 187 

How quickly should you speed ! 

Cas. Alas, poor caitiff! 

Oth. Look, how he laughs already ! no 

lago. I never knew woman love man so. 
Cas. Alas, poor rogue ! I think, i' faith, she loves me. 
Oth. Now he denies it faintly and laughs it out. 
lago. Do you hear, Cassio? 
Oth. Now he importunes him 

To tell it o'er : go to ; well said, well said. 1 1 5 

lago. She gives it out that you shall marry her : 

Do you intend it? 
Cas. Ha, ha, ha ! 

Oth. Do you triumph, Roman ? do you triumph ? 
Cas. I marry her! what, a customer! I prithee, 120 

bear some charity to my wit ; do not think it 

so unwholesome. Ha, ha, ha ! 
Oth. So, so, so, so : they laugh that win. 

no.] Marked "Aside" by Theobald, Steevens (1793), etc. (This applies to 
all Othello's speeches to "Exit Bianca," line 161.) in. woman'] Ff, Globe, 
Craig; a woman Qq, Steevens, etc., Cambridge. 1 12. f faith\ ifaith Q I, 
indeed (the rest). 115. it o'er] it on Q I, 2 ; it out Q 3; well said, well 
said] Ff, well said Qq. 119. you . . . you] Qq, ye . . . you Ff ; Roman] 
rogue Warburton. 120. / marry her!] Steevens (1793), / marry her? Qq, / 
marry. Ff; what, a customer!] what? a customer ; Ff, Q 2 ; omitted Q I ; / 
prithee] I prethee Qq ; prythee F I, 2 ; prethee F 3 ; prithee F 4. 1 23. So, so, so, 
so.] So, so : F 3, 4, Rowe ; they] omitted Q I ; win] F 4; wins Qq, F I, 2, 3 (winnes). 

109. caitiff] wretch. Used pitifully, studying for the Roman plays about 

but not abusively. Compare Venus this time. He had been studying Pliny 

and Adonis, 914 : " she finds a hound, (Holland, 1601), who enters largely 

And asks the weary caitiff for his upon such matters, 

master." I am indebted to Mr. Craig 120. customer] See All's Well, V. iii. 

for this good parallel from Bernard's 287. There were many such synonyms. 

Terence in English (p. 435, ed. 1607). Compare S. Rowlands, Letting of 

Phormio, I. i. 1598: "What shall I Humour's Blood, etc., Epigr. 29, 1600: 

do, whom shall I find to be my friend "a punk, or else one of the dealing 

poor caitiff." trade"; an expression which occurs 

115. well said] well done. See II. again in Time's Whistle, 1615. 

i. 167; and below, V. i. 98. 122. unwholesome] Compare Hamlet, 

119. triumph, Roman] Purnell here IV. v. 52. 
remarks that Shakespeare had been 



188 OTHELLO [ACT iv. 

I ago. Faith, the cry goes that you shall marry her. 

Ca$. Prithee, say true. 125 

I ago. I am a very villain else. 

Oth. Have you scored me ? Well. 

Cas. This is the monkey's own giving out : she is 
persuaded I will marry her, out of her own love 
and flattery, not out of my promise. 130 

Oth. lago beckons me ; now he begins the 
story. 

Cas. She was here even now : she haunts me in 
every place. I was the other day talking on 
the sea-bank with certain Venetians ; and thither 1 3 5 
comes this bauble, and, by this hand, she falls 
me thus about my neck ; 

Oth. Crying " O dear Cassio ! " as it were : his 
gesture imports it. 

124. Faith] Q I, Why the rest ; that] omitted Q I ; shall] omitted F i, 2. 127. 
scored me ? Well] F I, Q 2, 3 ; stor'd me well. Q I ; scoar'd me ; -well. F 2, 3, 4. 
131. beckons] Qq, F 3, 4 ; becomes F I ; becons F 2. 136. this] Qq, Jennens, 
etc., Craig; the Ff, Globe. 136, 137. and, by this hand, she falls me thus] 
Collier, Globe ; by this hand she falls thus Q I, Steevens ; and falls me thiis Ff ; 
fals me tfws Q 2, 3. 

124. you shall marry her] See note me"? i.e. "got the better of me." 

at I. i. 21. White (ed. 2) says here : And if it can mean to mark down a set 

" Both lago and Cassio are led by the won at anything here, it means the 

occasion to make out Bianca worse, or same at All's Well, IV. iii. 253. The 

at least lower in condition, than she commentators endeavour to extract the 

was" (Furness). See my note at line sense, as Johnson says, "Have you 

95, above. made my reckoning?" But they do 

127. scored] marked, branded. Com- not notice the possibility of there being 
pare Antony and Cleopatra, "let us a reference hereto what lago tells us 
score their backs" (iv. vii. 12). Halli- was Cassio's former trade, an account- 
well gives a reference to Lydgate's ant, one who registers debits and 
Minor Poems, p. 255: "Of the yeerde credits, one who "scores." 
sometyme I stood in awe, To be 135. sea-bank] seashore, coast. See 
scooryd, that was al my dreede." Merchant of Venice, V. II. 
Branding in the forehead was a legal 136. bauble] plaything, toy. 
punishment, and this is probably the 136. by this hand] occurs in most 
allusion. Could it be made equivalent of Shakespeare's plays, 
to the modern semi-slang "scored off 



sc.i.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 



189 



Cas. So hangs and lolls and weeps upon me ; so 140 

hales and pulls me : ha, ha, ha ! 
Oth. Now he tells how she plucked him to my 

chamber. O, I see that nose of yours, but not 

that dog I shall throw it to. 

Cas. Well, I must leave her company. 145 

I ago. Before me ! look, where she comes. 
Cas. 'Tis such another fitchew ! marry, a perfumed 

one. 

140. lolls] tolls Q 2, jolh Q 3. 141. hales] Q 1, 2; shakes Ff. 146. 
Before . . . conies] continued to Cassio Q 2, 3. 147, 148. 'Tis . . . one] 
part of lago's speech Q I, 2 ; Jitchew] ficho Q I ; marry, a ... one.] marry 
a . . one? F I. 



141. hales] drags, hauls. " Hale " is 
a mere variant of " haul." 

143, 144. nose . . . throw it to] 
Mutilating the nose was an old and 
savage form of vengeance or punish- 
ment, and the reference is something 
more than a mere threat. Compare 
Taming of the Shrew, " I'll slit the vil- 
lain's nose" (v. i. 134), and Chapman's 
Humerous Day's Mirth ( Pearson, i. 98), 
1 599 : ' ' swearing to slit your nose if 
she can catch you." In Pepys' Diary 
(March 6, 1699), Sir W. Coventry says 
"that he would cause his [Tom Killi- 
grew's] nose to be slit," and a note by 
Lord Braybrooke states that "a year 
afterwards . . . Sir John Coventry was 
maimed in the very same way, his nose 
being slit to the bone by a party of 
hired assassins." See also note to 
Pepys, July 27, 1667. Cutting off a 
person's nose (from jealousy) is part 
of one of the favourite Tales of Bidpai 
(North's trans. 1570, Jacob's ed. p. 72). 
It was a judicial punishment at this 
time in several European countries. 

146. Before me] occurs again in 
Twelfth Night, II. iii. 194 ; Coriolanus, 
i. i. 124. After the "Act against 
Swearing " (see I. i. 4, note), both 
author and player introduced all sorts 
of "perfumed oaths" on the stage, 



partly because swearing was so neces- 
sary an accomplishment, and partly in 
mockery of, or pretended respect for, 
the edict. 

147. such another] Compare Troilus, 
I. ii. 282, 296 ; Merry Wives, I. iv. 
1 60, etc. Used endearingly. 

147. fitchew} polecat, so called from 
the smell. It occurs again in Shake- 
speare in Lear, iv. vi. 124, and Troilus 
and Cressida, V. i. 67. In Beaumont 
and Fletcher, Bonduca and Scornful 
Lady it is spelt " fitchock." And in 
Cotgrave in v. "pitois" and in v. 
"fissau," it is "fitch." The allusion 
here, as in Lear, is to its amorous 
qualities ; an allusion to which is to be 
found in Haughton's Woman will have, 
etc. (Haz. Dods. x. 551): "Heere'san 
old ferret, polecat." Steevens, without 
proof, said this was "one of the cant 
terms for a strumpet." 

147, 148. marry, a . . . one] The 
reading of the first Folio is : " marry a 
perfum'd one ? " This gives a wholly 
different signification which does not 
seem to have been thought worthy of 
notice. But it may have been what 
Shakespeare intended, i.e. a sarcastic 
ejaculation of Cassio's equivalent to 
"the idea of my marrying a perfum'd 
one ! " The sign (?) in the Folio, except 



190 OTHELLO [ACT iv. 



Enter BlANCA. 

What do you mean by this haunting of me ? 

Bian. Let the devil and his dam haunt you! What 150 
did you mean by that same handkerchief you 
gave me even now ! I was a fine fool to take 
it. I must take out the work? A likely piece 
of work, that you should find it in your chamber, 
and not know who left it there ! This is some 155 
minx's token, and I must take out the work? 
There ; give it your hobby-horse : wheresoever 
you had it, I '11 take out no work on 't. 

Cas. How now, my sweet Bianca ! how now ! how 

now ! 1 60 

Oth. By heaven, that should be my handkerchief! 

153. the work} the whole worke Q I, Steevens. 155. not know} Qq, know 
not Ff. 157. your] Ff, the Qq. 

on a very few exceptional occasions, schall I now doo?" (circa 1400). I 
represents also our(!). This would be find it in Roy, G. Harvey, T. Hey- 
a natural continuation of his remark wood, Greene, but nowhere so corn- 
above (line 120) "I marry her!" monly as in Shakespeare. 
" Perfumed " here may be taken liter- 153. takeout] See in. iii. 297 (note), 
ally, which "fitchew" supports, or it 156. minx] See in. iii. 476. Bianca's 
may have the affected use of the time, use of the word here is a clue to 
"fashionable," "mincing," "affected." Othello's use of it. Bianca, in this 
Gabriel Harvey has "perfumed speech, puts lago's views of her out of 
brains"; Drayton, " reperfumed court. So does her whole demeanour 
words"; Jonson, "perfumed terms"; in V. i. 

Sharpham, "perfumed phrases," etc. 157. hobby-horse] Schmidt rightly 
As the reading stands, " marry" is the says, "a term of contempt for a loose 
common asseveration. and frivolous person, either male or 
150. the devil and his dam] This female." For the latter, see Winter's 
expression belongs to Shakespeare's Tale, I. ii. 276 ; and for the former, 
earlier plays, the last in which it Love's Labour's Lost, in. i; 32. See also 
appears being Merry Wives (circa Ben Jonson, The Silent Woman, IV. ii. 
1598). It is derived from a mediaeval 4400: "What a neighing hobby- 
legend (Wright, Domestic Manners, horse is this?" The simile is by no 
p. 4), and seems to have become obso- means common. Dyce's notes ( Glos- 
lete about this time. It occurs in York sary) to this word are misleading. 
Mystery Plays fed. Toulmin Smith, p. 161. shmild be] See in. iii. 382 
300) : "What J>e deuyll and his dame (note). 



sc. i.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 191 

Bian. An you '11 come to supper to-night, you may ; 
an you will not, come when you are next pre- 
pared for. [Exit. 

I ago. After her, after her. 165 

Cas. Faith, I must ; she '11 rail in the street else. 

lago. Will you sup there? 

Cas. Faith, I intend so. 

lago. Well, I may chance to see you ; for I would 

very fain speak with you. 170 

Cas. Prithee, come ; will you ? 

lago. Go to ; say no more. [Exit Cassio. 

Oth. [Advancing} How shall I murder him, lago? 

lago. Did you perceive how he laughed at his vice ? 

Oth. O lago! 175 

lago. And did you see the handkerchief? 

Oth. Was that mine? 

lago. Yours, by this hand : and to see how he prizes 
the foolish woman your wife ! she gave it him, 
and he hath given it his whore. 1 80 

Oth. I would have him nine years a-killing. A fine 
woman ! a fair woman ! a sweet woman ! 

162, 163. An] Qq, If Ff. 166. Faith} Q I, omitted (the rest) ; in the] 
Ff, Globe, Craig ; i ' the Qq, Cambridge ; street} Qq, streets Ff. 167. Will . . . 
there?] You sup there. Q 2, 3. 168. Faith] Q I, Yes the rest. 178-181. 
lago. Yours, by . . . Oth.] omitted Qq. 

163, 164. when you are next prepared 181. nine years a-killing] Compare 
for] Never. Webster, White Devil (Routledge, ed. 

170. fain] Properly an adjective 1877, p. 150), "let her lie. Some twenty 

signifying "glad," "eager." Always months a dying." Where it was desir- 

used adverbially by Shakespeare, and able to express a considerable "number" 

with the auxiliary " would." of anything, "nine " and "twenty" were 

1 80.] It suits lago to belittle Bianca, favourite and established selections. 

to enhance the enormity of Cassio's They occur in numerous sayings, equiva- 

ofifence, and to lower Othello's self- lent to " many." 
respect, which he revels in doing. 



192 OTHELLO [ACT tv, 

lago. Nay, you must forget that. 

Oth. Ay, let her rot, and perish, and be damned to- 
night ; for she shall not live : no, my heart is 185 
turned to stone; I strike it, and it hurts my 
hand. O, the world hath not a sweeter crea- 
ture : she might lie by an emperor's side, and 
command him tasks. 

lago. Nay, that 's not your way. 1 90 

Oth. Hang her ! I do but say what she is : so deli- 
cate with her needle : an admirable musician : 
O, she will sing the savageness out of a bear : 
of so high and plenteous wit and invention ! 

lago. She 's the worse for all this. 195 

Oth. O, a thousand, a thousand times : and then, of 
so gentle a condition ! 

lago. Ay, too gentle. 

Oth. Nay, that 's certain : but yet the pity of it, lago ! 

O lago, the pity of it, lago ! 200 

lago. If you are so fond over her iniquity, give her 

183. that.] Ff ; that Q 2, 3 ; omitted Q I. 184. Ay,] 7, Ff, And Qq. 186, 
stone] a stone Q 2, 3. 191. but] not Q 2, 3. 194. and] a F 2, 3, 4 ; 
invention !] Craig ; invention, Qq, invention ? Ff ( = /) ; invention ! Rowe, 
Steevens, etc. ; invention: Dyce, Globe, Cambridge. 196. 0, ] omitted Qq ; 
thousand, a thousand] Ff, Steevens, Craig ; thousand thousand Qq, Globe. 199. 
Nay,]IQ I. 200. O lago . . . lago!] the pitty Q I ; Oh the pitty Q 2, 3, 
20 1. are] Ff, be Qq. 

185, 186. heart ... stone] Steevens here) dignified and poetical, more nearly 

quotes Antony and Cleopatra, IV. ix. replaced by our " creation." In the latter 

16; with the severe introductory words: sense, compare Tempest, i, ii. 7, etc* 

" This thought, as often as it occurs to 194. invention] imagination. See 

Shakespeare, is sure to be received, above, n. i. 125. 

and as often counteracts his pathos." 197. condition] disposition. See II. 

Steevens's inward knowledge of Shake- i. 254. 

speare is often very amusing. 20 1, 202. give . . . patent] Chalmers 

187,188. creature] Shakespeare's use (quoted by Furness) found here an 

of this word might be divided into two allusion, calculated to "electrify the 

classes, the one commonplace, of any audience," to "the patents of monopoly 

created thing or person ; the other (as which Queen Elizabeth and King James 



sc. i.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 193 

patent to offend; for, if it touch not you, it 

comes near nobody. 

Oth. I will chop her into messes. Cuckold me ! 
I ago. O, 'tis foul in her. 205 

Oth. With mine officer ! 
I ago. That's fouler. 
Oth. Get me some poison, lago ; this night. I '11 

not expostulate with her, lest her body and 

beauty unprovide my mind again: this night, 210 

lago. 
lago. Do it not with poison, strangle her in her bed, 

even the bed she hath contaminated. 
Oth. Good, good : the justice of it pleases : very 

good. 215 

lago. And for Cassio, let me be his undertaker : you 

shall hear more by midnight. 
Oth. Excellent good. [A trumpet within^\ What 

trumpet is that same ? 
lago. Something from Venice, sure. 'Tis Lodovico 220 

Come from the duke : and, see, your wife is with him. 

202. toucA]Ff, touches Qq. 208. night. I'll] night. //<; Ff ; night He 
Qq; night: I'll, Steevens, Globe, Craig. 

had so frequently granted, and so often patten to take up all the shields i 1 

retracted. He couples this with the th' country." In The Merie Tales 

"hand and hearts passage" (in. iv. of Skelton (1566), the fourth tale is 

46), in giving a late date to Othello. " Howe the Welshman dyd desyre 

Compare Ben Jonson, Every Man Skelton to ayde hym in hys sute to the 

in His Humour, in. ii., 1598 (32^): Kynge for a patent to sell drynke . . . 

"Fore God, not I, an I might have Some doth get of the Kyng by patent 

been joined patten with one of the a castell, and some a parke, and some 

seven wise masters for knowing him." a forest, and some one fee, and some 

(The passage is not noticed by Gifford, another, " etc. 

and wrongly explained by Wheatley 210. unprovide~\ weaken, " unpre- 

" joined patentee" occurs elsewhere pare." His fatal resolve shook at line 

in Jonson. ) And again in Trial of 200; to this " again " refers. 

Chevalry, Bullen's Old Plays, hi. 329, 216. undertaker} take up his business. 

1605 : " Zounds, I think he has a See note at II. iii. 341. 



194 OTHELLO [ACTIV. 

Enter LODOVICO, DESDEMONA, and Attendants, 

Lod. God save you, worthy general ! 

Oth. With all my heart, sir. 

Lod. The duke and senators of Venice greet you. 

[Gives him a packet. 
Oth. I kiss the instrument of their pleasures. 

\0pens the packet \ and reads. 

Des. And what 's the news, good cousin Lodovico ? 225 
I ago. I am very glad to see you, signior ; 

Welcome to Cyprus. 

Lod. I thank you. How does Lieutenant Cassio ? 
I ago. Lives, sir. 
Des. Cousin, there's fall'n between him and my lord 230 

An unkind breach : but you shall make all well. 
Oth. Are you sure of that ? 
Des. My lord ? 

Oth. [Reads'] " This fail you not to do, as you will " 
Lod. He did not call ; he's busy in the paper. 235 

Is there division 'twixt my lord and Cassio ? 
Des. A most unhappy one : I would do much 

To atone them, for the love I bear to Cassio. 
Oth. Fire and brimstone ! 

222. God save you,] Malone, etc., Craig ; Save you Q 2, 3, F I, 2 ; Save you, F 
3, 4, Globe ; Godsave the Q I, etc., Cambridge. 223. senators} Qq, the senators 
Ff; [Gives . . . packet] Steevens (1793), Craig; Gives . . . letter Rowe, etc., 
Globe ; omitted Qq, Ff. 224. [Opens . . .] Steevens, Craig ; Opens the letter, 
and reads Rowe, etc., Globe. 233, 239, 243. lord?'} Ff, lord. Qq. 236. 

'twixt my] betweene thy Q I. 238. To atone] T attorn Ff, To at f one Qq. 

222. With all my heart] may be taken uses these words as an execration in 

either as a reply to a salutation, or as a Twelfth Night, II. v. 56. Compare 

salutation. Compare Lear, iv. vi. 32, "sulphur," above, ill. iii. 330; and 

and Timon, in. vi. 27 (Clarke). below, v. u. 277. "Brimstone" and 

238. atone] reconcile. The verb is " sulphur " conveyed the idea of eternal 
formed by the union of the two words. torments, as in the "sulphurous pit" 

239. Fire and brimstone !] Sir Toby in Lear } iv. vi. 130. 



sc. i.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 195 

Des. My lord? 

Oth. Are you wise ? 

Des. What, is he angry? 

Lod. May be the letter moved him ; 240 

For, as I think, they do command him home, 

Deputing Cassio in his government. 
Des. By my troth, I am glad on 't. 
Oth. Indeed ! 

Des. My lord ? 

Oth. I am glad to see you mad. 

Des. Why, sweet Othello ? 

Oth. Devil! {Striking her. 245 

Des. I have not deserved this. 
Lod. My lord, this would not be believed in Venice, 

Though I should swear I saw 't : 'tis very much : 

Make her amends ; she weeps. 
Oth. O devil, devil ! 

If that the earth could teem with woman's tears, 250 

Each drop she falls would prove a crocodile. 

243. By my froth] Q I, Trust me (the rest). 244. you mad] you glad 
Anon. conj. 244. Why] Ff, How Qq ; Othello?] Qq, Ff; Othello, Dyce, 
Globe; [Striking her.] Theobald et seq.; omitted Qq, Ff. 250. woman's] 
womans Ff, womens Qq. 

244. glad] said in suppressed fury at ing, the most harrowing incident in the 
her use of "glad." Clarke's suggested whole of this terrible play. We are 
transposition of the words "glad" and duly prepared for the remaining horrors. 
' ' mad " mentioned by Furness is un- This is an appalling shock, and sends 
worthy of such an acute critic. "Mad" one's thoughts back in revolt to Bra- 
refers back to " wise, " above, bantio's worst words about Othello. 

244.] Furness says here : "That lago has turned Othello to the devil 
Theobald added the proper stage-di- he once called him. 
rection here there can be, unfortunately, 250. teem] breed, as in Lear, I. iv. 302. 
no doubt. This blow is the menace- 251. falls] lets fall. So in Lucrece, 
able blot in Othello's history, which 1551: "every tear he falls." 
leaves, upon me at least, a more pain- 250, 251. tears . . . crocodile] Com- 
ful impression than even the smother- pare 1 Henry VI. in. i. 226. This 
ing. This is simply the rage of a myth may be found in Trevisa's trans- 
coward ; that is an act of supposed lationof Bartholomew De Prof <rietatibus 
justice." It is certainly, to my think- Rerum (1397), which was written about 



196 OTHELLO [ACT iv. 

Out of my sight ! 

Des. I will not stay to offend you. [Going. 

Lod. Truly, an obedient lady : 

I do beseech your lordship, call her back. 

Oth. Mistress ! 255 

Des. My lord? 

Oth. What would you with her, sir ? 

Lod. Who, I, my lord ? 

Oth. Ay ; you did wish that I would make her turn : 
Sir, she can turn and turn, and yet go on, 
And turn again ; and she can weep, sir, weep; 260 
And she 's obedient, as you say, obedient, 
Very obedient. Proceed you in your tears. 
Concerning this, sir, O well-painted passion ! 
I am commanded home. Get you away ; 
I '11 send for you anon. Sir, I obey the mandate, 265 
And will return to Venice. Hence, avaunt ! 

[Exit Desdemona. 

Cassio shall have my place. And, sir, to-night, 
I do entreat that we may sup together : 
You are welcome, sir, to Cyprus. Goats and monkeys ! 

[Exit. 

253. an] Qq, omitted Ff. 264. home.] here Ql. 269. Cyprus.} Cypres, 
Qi. 

1250. A better account is given in (Payne's edition, 1880, p. 34). The 

Sparke's Narrative of Hawkins 1 Second fable speedily passed into the hands 

Voyage, 1565 (Hakluyt) : " His [croco- of the poets, as Lodge, Humphrey 

dile's] nature is ever when he would Gifford, Ben Jonson (Sejanus, ii. 3), 

have his prey, to cry and sob like a etc. It is generally set to Pliny's 

Christian body, to provoke them to credit, but 1 do not find it there, 

come to him, and then he snatcheth at although he has much fabulous matter 

them, and thereupon came this proverb concerning the crocodile, 

that is applied unto women when they 269. Goats and monkeys] Othello's 

weep, lachryma crocodili, the meaning maddened imagination recalls lago's 

whereof is that as the crocodile . . . words (in. iii. 404), and accepts the 

so doth a woman when she weeps" situation. 



sc. i.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 197 

Lod. Is this the noble Moor whom our full senate 270 

Call all in all sufficient? Is this the nature 
Whom passion could not shake ? whose solid virtue 
The shot of accident nor dart of chance 
Could neither graze nor pierce ? 

I ago. He is much changed. 

Lod. Are his wits safe? is he not light of brain ? 275 

lago. He 's that he is : I may not breathe my censure. 
What he might be, if, what he might, he is not, 
I would to heaven he were ! 

Lod. What, strike his wife. 

lago. Faith, that was not so well ; yet would I knew 
That stroke would prove the worst ! 

Lod. Is it his use? 280 

Or did the letters work upon his blood, 
And new-create this fault ? 

lago. Alas, alas ! 

It is not honesty in me to speak 

What I have seen and known. You shall observe him, 
And his own courses will denote him so 285 

That I may save my speech : do but go after, 

271. Is this the nature] Ff, Globe ; This the noble nature Qq, Steevens ; This 
the nature Pope, Capell, Cambridge ; is this the noble nature Craig. 275. light 
f~\ Qq> F x 5 of light F 2, 3, 4, Rowe. 276. censure.'} Ff, Steevens, Craig; 
censure, Qq ; censure Jennens, Cambridge. 277.] Punctuation as in Steevens 
(1793) 5 & e > ifi what] be, if as Q I ; be, if what Q 2, 3 ; be : if what Ff, Jennens, 
Globe ; be, if, what Craig. 282. this] Qq ; his Ff, Rowe. 284. him] omitted 
Q 2, 3. 286. after] after him Q 2, 3. 

271. all in all] See above, line 89. 276. censure] opinion. See II. iii. 

273.] This line recalls the "slings 198. 

and arrows of outrageous fortune" in 282. new-create] Shakespeare has 

Hamlet. close upon a half hundred such combin- 

274.] Malone says: "As 'pierce' ations in "new." They are mostly un- 

relates to 'the dart of chance,' so hyphened in the old editions. "New- 

' graze ' is referred to ' the shot of create " occurs again in Tempest, I. ii. 

accident."' 8l, and Henry VIII. V. v. 42. 



198 OTHEiLLO [ACTIV. 

And mark how he continues. 
Lod. I am sorry that I am deceived in him. \Exeunt. 



SCENE II. A Room in the Castle. 

Enter OTHELLO and EMILIA. 

Oth. You have seen nothing, then? 

Emit. Nor ever heard, nor ever did suspect. 

Oth. Yes, you have seen Cassio and she together. 

Emit. But then I saw no harm, and then I heard 

Each syllable that breath made up between them. 5 
Oth. What, did they never whisper ? 
Emit. Never, my lord. 

Oth. Nor send you out o' the way? 
Emit. Never. 
Oth. To fetch her fan, her gloves, her mask, nor 

nothing ? 

Emit. Never, my lord. 10 

Oth. That 's strange. 
Emit. I durst, my lord, to wager she is honest, 

3. Yes,} Ff, Yes, and Qq ; she] Qq, Ff ; her Pope, Keightley. 9. her gloves, 
her mask} Ff, her mask, her gloves Qq. 

Mai one says here : " There are great the same time, as the outside and in- 

difficulties in ascertaining the place of side of a house" (Furness). 

this Scene " ; and calls attention to the 3. she} Compare Antony and Cleo- 

words " go in, and weep not " (line 172), patra, in. xiii. 98 : " so saucy with the 

pointing to a place outside the castle ; hand of she here what 's her name ? " 

and to "shut the door" (line 28), and And see Troilus and Cressida,u. iii. 25. 

the subsequent address to Emilia, which 12. to} There was much inconsist- 

decisively leads us to suppose a room ency, at this time, as to which verbs 

inside. Malone continues : "The truth required the sign of the infinitive and 

is that our poet and his audience, in which did not. The change in the 

this instance as in many others, were language from which this arose is 

content, from want of scenery, to con- well explained by Abbott (Grammar, 

sider the very same spot, at one and 349). 



SC.H.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 199 

Lay down my soul at stake : if you think other, 
Remove your thought ; it doth abuse your bosom. 
If any wretch have put this in your head, 1 5 

Let heaven requite it with the serpent's curse ! 
For if she be not honest, chaste and true, 
There 's no man happy ; the purest of their wives 
Is foul as slander. 

Oth. Bid her come hither : go. \Exit Emilia. 

She says enough; yet she's a simple bawd 20 

That cannot say as much. This is a subtle whore, 
A closet lock and key of villanous secrets : 
And yet she '11 kneel and pray ; I have seen her do 't. 

Re-enter EMILIA with DESDEMONA. 

Des. My lord, what is your will ? 

Oth. Pray, chuck, come hither. 

Des. What is your pleasure ? 

Oth. Let me see your eyes ; 2 5 

Look in my face. 

Des. What horrible fancy 's this ? 

Oth. [To Emilia] Some of your function, mistress, 

Leave procreants alone and shut the door ; 

15. have} F I, 2 ; ha Qq ; hath F 3, 4. 16. heaven] heavens Q I ; requite} 
Q I, F 2, 3, 4 ; requit F i ; require Q 2, 3. 18. their wives'] for Sex Q I. 
24. Pray] Qq, Pray you Ff. 

13. other] otherwise. See again, line expression of the time, "hold," "keep," 

169 below ; and compare All's Well, or "shut" the door, is referred to here, 

III. vi. 27: "Suppose no other," and or at least is implied. Compare Troi- 

Macbeth, i. vii. 77, etc. lus and Cressida, V. x. 52, and Pericles, 

16. serpents curse] See Genesis iii. 14. iv. vi. 126, 175. And Breton's 
20. simple'} foolish, stupid. Pasquih Fooles Cappe: "Let her not 

24. chuck] See in. iv. 455. thinke, but such a shut the doore, Is 

25. Let me see your eyes'] Compare halfe a foole, and if she be no more." 
Much Ado, V. i. 69 : " which is the Poor Emilia does not deserve this foul 
villain ? Let me see his eyes." imputation, but she has earned no 

28. shut the door] A very common sympathy. Her punishment has begun. 



200 OTHELLO [ACT iv. 

Cough, or cry hem, if any body come : 

Your mystery, your mystery : nay, dispatch. 30 

{Exit Emilia. 
Des. Upon my knees, what doth your speech import ? 

I understand a fury in your words, 

But not the words. 
Oth. Why, what art thou ? 

Des. Your wife, my lord ; your true and loyal wife. 3 5 

Oth. Come, swear it, damn thyself; 

Lest, being like one of heaven, the devils themselves 

Should fear to seize thee ; therefore be double-damn'd ; 

Swear thou art honest. 

Des. Heaven doth truly know it. 

Oth. Heaven truly knows that thou art false as hell. 40 
Des. To whom, my lord ? with whom ? how am I 

false ? 

Oth. Ah, Desdemon ! Away ! away ! away ! 
Des. Alas the heavy day ! Why do you weep ? 

Am I the motive of these tears, my lord ? 

If haply you my father do suspect 45 

An instrument of this your calling back, 

Lay not your blame on me : if you have lost him, 

Why, I have lost him too. 

31. knees] Qq, knee Ff ; doth} Ff, does Qq. 33. But . . . words] omitted 
in Ff. 33-36. But . . . thyself} arranged as in Qq and Cambridge ; three 
lines ending words, true, thyself Steevens (1793), Globe, Craig. 38. seize} cease 
Qq ; ceaze F I, 2 ; ceise F 3. 42. Ah, Desdemon!} Ff, O Desdemona, Qq, 
Desdemona I Globe, Cambridge. 44. motive} Ff, occasion Qq ; these} Ff, 
those Qq. 48. Why} Qq, omitted Ff. 

30. mystery} profession, occupation. 43. heavy} woful, sorrowful. Com- 

" Function," three lines above, has the pare "heavy hour," below, V. ii. 97, 

same meaning. Both are paraphrased and Romeo and Juliet, iv. v. 18, etc. 

by the phrase "shut the door," or " Heavy time" is found in King John, 

" hold the door." iv. i. 47. 



sc.ii.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 



201 



Oth. Had it pleased heaven 

To try me with affliction ; had they rain'd 
All kinds of sores and shames on my bare head, 50 
Steep'd me in poverty to the very lips, 
Given to captivity me and my utmost hopes, 
I should have found in some part of my soul 
A drop of patience : but, alas, to make me 
The fixed figure for the time of scorn / 5 5 

To point his slow and moving finger at ! 

49. they] Ff, he Qq, it Hanmer; rain'd] ram'dQ I. 50. kinds] Qq, kitid 
Ff. 52. Given] Give Q 3 ; utmost} omitted Qq. 53. parf] Qq, Steevens 

(1793), Craig ; place Ff, Globe. 55. The fixed figure} Ff, Dyce (ed. 2), Craig ; 
A fixed figure, Qq, etc., Globe ; time of scorn} scorn of time Malone conj. 56. 
slow and moving finger] Ff, Theobald, etc. , Craig ; slow unmoving fingers Qq 
(finger Q 2, 3), Steevens, Globe ; slowly moving Mason conj., Collier (ed. 2) ; 
at!} Globe, at. Ff ; at Rowe, Dyce (ed. i) ; at oh, oh, Qq, Steevens, Malone 
(putting O! O ! as separate line). 



49. they} refers to "heaven " used as 
plural. Compare Hamlet, in. iv. 173, 
175, and Macbeth, n. i. 4. Instances 
of the same use have been adduced by 
Walker from other dramatists of the 
time. 

49> SO- rain'd . . . bare head] Com- 
pare with this the opening speech in Act 
iv. Scene ii. of Tancred and Gismund 
(Hazlitt's Dodsley, vii. 61, 62), 1591 : 
"Gods ! are ye guides of justice and 

revenge ? 
O thou great Thunderer ! dost thou 

behold 

With watchful eyes the subtle 
scapes of men. 

If thou spare them, rain then upon 

my head 
The fulness of thy plagues with 

deadly ire, 

To reave this youthful soul." 
54, 55-] These lines have caused 
much dispute. The meaning may per- 
haps be paraphrased thus: "Alas, to 
make me a perpetual object for all 
scornful time to point at with his slowly 
moving finger." The Quarto's reading 



"slow unmoving" was probably a 
mere error, which has increased the con- 
fusion ; the Folio corrected it. "Slow 
and moving" in the sense of "slowly 
moving " is quite Shakespearian. Com- 
pare "fatal and neglected English," 
Henry V. II. iv. 13, and see Schmidt's 
Lexicon in v. and. ' ' Time of scorn " 
may be taken as a redundant ex- 
pression for Scorn as a personified and 
lasting quality, as lasting as time itself. 
White (ed. i) says it is a phrase like 
" the day of sorrow," "the hour of joy," 
' ' the day of progress. " Were it not for 
the various lections, and for Steevens's 
note, so much criticism would not have 
exercised itself over this passage, the 
meaning of which seems perfectly clear. 
But Steevens was the cuttle-fish who 
set these floods of ink abroach. He 
said Shakespeare took his idea from 
a clock, and in endeavouring to recon- 
cile "fingers" with hands of a dial, 
and "time" with his effigy in such 
constructions, and both these with 
numerous supposed parallel passages 
(such as Sonnet civ.) relating to clocks, 
the difficulties become hopeless. 



202 



OTHELLO 



[ACT iv. 



Yet could I bear that too ; well, very well : 
But there, where I have garner'd up my heart, 
Where either I must live or bear no life, 
The fountain from the which my current runs, 60 
Or else dries up ; to be discarded thence ! 
Or keep it as a cistern for foul toads 
To knot and gender in ! Turn thy complexion there ; 
Patience, thou young and rose-lipp'd cherubin, 
I here look grim as hell ! 65 

Des, I hope my noble lord esteems me honest. 

64. thou] Ff, thy Qq. 65. I here] Qq, F 3, 4 ; / heere F I, 2; Ay, 
there, Theobald et seq. t Globe, Cambridge, Craig. 66. noble} omitted 

F 2, 3, 4. 



58. garner'd] Johnson says here, 
" the garner and the fountain are im- 
properly conjoined," to which Rolfe 
replied, ' ' a succession of metaphors is 
not a fault like the mixing of them." 
But "garner'd" established the trans- 
ference, and Johnson's remark is just, 
though hypercritical. " Garner'd " 
merely means "treasured," "stored." 

64. rose-lipped cherubiri\ The cherub 
(or " cherubin " as it was usually called) 
was depicted with a red face. Com- 
pare Chaucer : "a fyr-reed cherubinnes 
face," Prologue to Canterbury Tales 
(line 624). Cotgravehas " rouge comme 
tin cherubin : having a fierie facies 
[pun of old standing] like a cherubin. " 
Johnson explains this passage thus 
(reading "Ay, there"); "At such 
an object do thou, patience, thyself 
change colour ; at this, do thou, even 
thou, rosy cherub as thou art, look 
as grim as hell." The opposite to 
this metaphor occurs in Richard II. 
III. iii. 98 : 

" Change the complexion of her maid- 
pale peace, 

To scarlet indignation." 
Johnson's paraphrase gives a certain 
sense, but I am quite dissatisfied with 
it. Place Johnson's paragraph in the 
midst of the context, and then read 



through continuously, and it is abrupt to 
violence. I do not see that we have 
any right to accept Theobald's altera- 
tion. It seems to me impossible that 
Shakespeare could personify Patience 
as a "rose-lipped cherubin." Else- 
where he calls her "a tired mare" 
(Henry V. II. i. 26) ; and he sets her 
"on a monument, smiling at grief" 
(Twelfth Night, II. v. 83); and in 
Troilus and Cressida, I. i. 26, he says : 
" Patience herself, what goddess e'er 
she be, Doth lesser blench at sufferance 
than I do." It is an impossibility that 
Patience can be so addressed. I read 
here as the Quartos and Folios, and 
explain Othello's meaning thus: "do 
you change colour at these horrible 
reflections, young and rose - lipped 
cherub? have patience, look here at 
me. I am black and grim as the 
devil." He compares her angelic 
beauty with his loathed blackness like 
hell. Surely a dramatic touch. He 
had begun to hate his appearance, 
since lago noted to him the "foul dis- 
proportion." His words "Haply for 
I am black " are fujl of pathos. Not 
only does this sense seem to me prefer- 
able, but it is the only reading. 

66.] Compare Troilus and Cressida, 
II. iii. 170. 



sc. ii.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 203 

Oth. O, ay ; as summer flies are in the shambles, 

That quicken even with blowing. O thou weed, 
Who art so lovely fair and smell'st so sweet 
That the sense aches at thee, would thou hadst ne'er 
been born ! 70 

Des. Alas, what ignorant sin have I committed ? 

Oth. Was this fair paper, this most goodly book, 

Made to write " whore " upon ? What committed ! 

Committed ! O thou public commoner ! 

I should make very forges of my cheeks, 75 

That would to cinders burn up modesty, 

Did I but speak thy deeds. What committed ! 

Heaven stops the nose at it, and the moon winks ; 

The bawdy wind, that kisses all it meets, 

Is hush'd within the hollow mine of earth, 80 

And will not hear it. What committed ! 

Impudent strumpet ! 

Des. By heaven, you do me wrong. 

67. summer flies'] Sommer Flyes F I, summers flies Qq. 68. thou] Ff, thou 
blocks Qq. 69. Who] Ff, Why Qq ; and] Ff, Thou Qq. 70. aches] akes Qq, 
F I ; askes F 2 ; asks F 3, 4. 73. upon] on Q I. 74~77- Committed! . . . 
committed /] omitted Q I. 81. What committed!] What committed? Ff, Rowe ; 
What committed, Qq. 82. Impudent strumpet I] as in Capell, at end of 
previous line Qq, omitted in Ff. 

68. blowing] "fouling" (Schmidt), (with reference to Lear), and gave 
Literally swelled, as from the eggs of examples of the use from Dekker, and 
flies. The word lives in " fly-blown," from Sir Thomas Overbury Characters, 
etc. Compare Love's Labour's Lost, v. A Very Woman, 1614. 

ii. 409: "these summer flies Have 74. commoner] See All's Well, V. iii. 

blown me full of maggot ostentation." 174. 

For the use of a figure, by its converse, 79. bawdy wind] Compare Merchant 

see note II. i. 50. of Venice, n. vi. 16: "strumpet wind." 

73. committed] To commit, used in- "As wanton as the wind" was a com- 

transitively, had the special sense of mon simile. So Lyly, Woman in the 

"act the sin of incontinence." Othello Moone, iii. 2: "as pleasant as the 

distorts her sense into this meaning, western winde, That kisses flowers and 

See Lear, in. iv. 84, and Craig's wantons with their leaves." 
references. Malone first noticed this 



204 OTHELLO [ACT iv. 

Oth. Are not you a strumpet? 

Des. No, as I am a Christian : 

If to preserve this vessel for my lord 

From any other foul unlawful touch 85 

Be not to be a strumpet, I am none. 
Oth. What, not a whore? 

Des. No, as I shall be saved. 

Oth. Is't possible? 
Des. O, heaven forgive us ! 
Oth. I cry you mercy then : 

I took you for that cunning whore of Venice 90 

That married with Othello. You, mistress, 

That have the office opposite to Saint Peter, 

And keep the gate of hell ! 

Re-enter EMILIA. 

You, you, ay, you ! 
We have done our course ; there 's money for your 

pains : 

I pray you, turn the key, and keep our counsel. 95 

\Exit. 
Emit. Alas, what does this gentleman conceive ? 

How do you, madam ? how do you, my good 

lady? 

Des. Faith, half asleep. 
Emit. Good madam, what 's the matter with my lord ? 

85. other] hated Q l, 89. forgive us\forgivenesse Q I ; then} omitted Q I. 
91.] Globe et seq. insert as stage-direction after Othello, the words [Raising his 
voice] ; omitted Qq, Ff, Craig. 93. keep] Rowe ; keepes Qq, Ff; gate of] Ff, 
gates in Qq ; You, you, ay, you /] /, you, you, you ; Q I. 

91. married with] occurs frequently 92. to Saint Peter] "to Saint 
in Shakespeare, but "married to" is Peter's," or "to that of Saint Peter." 



commoner. 



sc.ii.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 205 

Des. With who ? i oo 

Emit. Why, with my lord, madam. 

Des. Who is thy lord ? 

Emit. He that is yours, sweet lady. 

Des. I have none : do not talk to me, Emilia ; 
I cannot weep, nor answer have I none 
But what should go by water. Prithee, to-night 105 
Lay on my bed my wedding sheets : remember ; 
And call thy husband hither. 

Emit. Here 's a change indeed ! 

[Exit. 

Des. 'Tis meet I should be used so, very meet. 

How have I been behaved, that he might stick 

The small'st opinion on my least misuse ? no 

Re-enter EMILIA, with lAGO. 

lago. What is your pleasure, madam ? How is 't with you ? 

Des. I cannot tell. Those that do teach young babes 
Do it with gentle means and easy tasks : 
He might have chid me so ; for, in good faith, 
I am a child to chiding. 

lago. What 's the matter, lady ? 115 

Emit. Alas, lago, my lord hath so bewhored her, 

100. who?] -whom F 2, 3, 4. 102. Des. Who . . . lady] omitted Q I. 
104. answer] Qq, answers Ff. 106. my wedding] our wedding Q I. 107. 
Here's] Here is Qq. 108. very meet] very well Q I. no. least misuse] 
greatest abuse Q i; great' st abuse Johnson, Steevens. 112. young] Qq, yong 
F i ; your F 2, 3, 4. 115. to] at Q i, Jennens ; What 's] F 4 et seq. ; What is 

Qq, F i, 2, 3 . 

105. water] tears. This seems now 109, no. stick . . . misuse] place 

a forced expression, but the word was the slightest censure on my smallest 

commonly used so. Compare Corio- misconduct. Johnson preferred the 

lanus, v. ii. 78 ; 1 Henry IV. in. i. 94, Quarto's reading "great'st abuse." 
etc. Steevens quoted a similar conceit 
from Dekker's Wonderful I Yeare, 1603. 



206 OTHELLO [ACTIV. 

Thrown such despite and heavy terms upon her, 

As true hearts cannot bear. 
Des. Am I that name, lago ? 

lago. What name, fair lady ? 

Des. Such as she says my lord did say I was. 120 

Emit. He call'd her whore : a beggar in his drink 

Could not have laid such terms upon his callat, 
lago. Why did he so ? 

Des. I do not know : I am sure I am none such. 
lago. Do not weep, do not weep. Alas the day ! 125 

Emit. Has she forsook so many noble matches, 

Her father and her country and her friends, 

To be call'd whore ? would it not make one weep ? 
Des. It is my wretched fortune. 
lago. Beshrew him for it ! 

How comes this trick upon him ? 

Des. Nay, heaven doth know. 130 

Emit. I will be hang'd, if some eternal villain, 

118. As} Qq, That Ff; bear.} Qq, bear it. Ff. 120. says] Qq, ; said'Ff, 
Staunton. 126. Has} Qq, Steevens (1793), e tc -> Craig; Hath Ff, Globe. 
127. and her friends] all her friends Q I. 129. for it~\ Qq, Steevens, 
Craig; for't Ff, Globe. 

119. What name} It is a part "minx" (ill. iii. 476), quoting Cot- 
of lago's brutality to endeavour to grave. 

make Desdemona repeat the word; 131 et seq.~\ "There is no intended 

as it is likewise characteristic of reference here to lago, of whom Emilia 

Emilia to play the part of eaves- has not the smallest suspicion" (Clarke), 

dropper, as she just shows she has "Witness her incredulity in the last 

done. scene when Othello tells her it was her 

122. callat} a low and lewd woman ; husband who first told him Desdemona 

a trull. It occurs, in its worst sense, was false" (Furness). This may be so, 

in Cock Lorets Bote, circa 1500. and probably must be so ; but it makes 

Compare "shameless callat," 3 Henry the presence of line 133 unnatural if 

VI. II. ii. 145. " Calliagh" is a com- it is merely a chance conjecture, 

mon Anglo-Irish word in several senses, 131. eternal} Schmidt says, "ex- 

the primary one being "hag." Hence presses extreme abhorrence," referring 

" callat " is probably of Celtic origin, also to Julius Casar, I. ii. 160, and 

See Ben Jonson's Fox, iv. I, and Hamlet, v. ii. 376. In all cases, "last- 

Gifford's note. See also note above at ing to eternity," "immeasurable," "per- 



sc. ii.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 207 

Some busy and insinuating rogue, 

Some cogging, cozening slave, to get some office, 

Have not devised this slander ; I '11 be hang'd else. 

I ago. Fie, there is no such man ; it is impossible. 135 

Des. If any such there be, heaven pardon him ! 

Emit. A halter pardon him ! and hell gnaw his bones ! 

Why should he call her whore? who keeps her 

company ? 

What place? what time? what form? what likeli- 
hood? 

The Moor 's abused by some most villanous knave, 
Some base notorious knave, some scurvy fellow. 141 
O heaven, that such companions thou 'Idst unfold, 
And put in every honest hand a whip 
To lash the rascals naked through the world 
Even from the east to the west ! 

lago. Speak within door. 145 

134. Have] Qq, F ; Has F 2, 3, 4. 136. be] are Q 2, 3. 139. form} for 
me Q I, forme the rest. 140. most villanous~\ outragiousQ I. 142. heaven] 
Qq, Heavens Ff. 144. rascals'] Rascal Is F I ; rascals Globe, Craig, 

etc. ; rascall Qq, F 2, 3, 4, Steevens (1793). 145. door] dores Qq, Jennens. 

durable" seems to me preferable and something different from what they 
sufficient. The word is commonly intend to express." This smooths 
used as here in Ireland without any away an apparent anomaly, but it is 
further sense than an intensitive, and tantamount to an accusation of "by- 
might be replaced by "unmitigated." play " or " audience-addressing," a sin 
Such a use fits Emilia's language better, that Shakespeare is freer from than his 
whose thoughts and words, like her contemporaries. I don't believe in the 
husband's, are frequently of a vulgar " confidence trick " here, 
type. Johnson gives " eternal " = " un- 142. companions] contemptible fel- 
changeable," with a reference to lows. So in Ben Jonson's Every Man 
Dryden. in His Humour, I. i. : "good my saucy 
140.] Macmillan says here : " It is companion " ; and Lyly, Mydas, v. ii. : 
a common dramatic artifice thus to " Now every base companion, being in 
make the knowledge possessed by the his muble -rubles, says he is melan- 
audience give additional meaning to choly." 

what is said by the characters in the 145. Speak within door] "donotcla- 

play, so that they express more by their mour so as to be heard beyond the 

words than they know themselves, or house " (Johnson). 



208 OTHELLO [ACT iv. 

EmiL O, fie upon them ! Some such squire he was 
That turn'd your wit the seamy side without, 
And made you to suspect me with the Moor. 

lago. You are a fool ; go to. 

Des. O good lago, 

What shall I do to win my lord again ? 150 

Good friend, go to him ; for, by this light of heaven, 

I know not how I lost him. Here I kneel : 

If e'er my will did trespass 'gainst his love 

Either in discourse of thought or actual deed, 

Or that mine eyes, mine ears, or any sense, 155 

Delighted them in any other form, 

Or that I do not yet, and ever did, 

And ever will, though he do shake me off 

To beggarly divorcement, love him dearly, 

Comfort forswear me ! Unkindness may do much ; 

And his unkindness may defeat my life, 161 

But never taint my love. I cannot say " whore " : 

It doth abhor me now I speak the word ; 

146. them] Ff, Globe ; himQ<\. 149. good] Qq, Alas Ff. 152-165. Here 
. . . make me.] omitted in Q I. 154. discourse of thought} discursive thought 
Jackson conj. ; of thought] Ff, Steevens (1793) et seq. ; or thought Q 2, 3, Jennens. 
156. them in] Q 2, 3, etc. ; them: or Ff. 158, 159. though . . . divorcement] 
in brackets old edd. 163. doth] Q 2, 3 ; do's Ff. 

147. seamy side without] Compare ness has a lengthy and inconclusive 
above, n. iii. 54 : " Whom love hath note, or collection of notes, on the 
turn'd almost the wrong side out." passage. 

154. discourse of thought] course of 161. defeat] destroy. Compare 

thought, thought. Several examples of Sonnet, Ixi. II. 

"discourse" meaning "course" are 163. It doth abhor me] it is abhorrent 

given in New Eng. Diet. As in Elyot, to me, it disgusts me. In Hamlet, v. 

1540-1541: " The naturall discourse of i. 206, the Folio reading is: "how 

the sunne " ; and Greene's Pandosto : abhorred my imagination is. " Schmidt 

" discourse of Fortune," 1588 ; Udall's cites this as a similar use. Compare 

Erasmus, "discourse of Things," 1548. the same scene in Hamlet (Q I reading) : 

This sense of the word being estab- " Here hung those lippes . . . now 

lished, it seems applicable here. Fur- they abhorre me." 



sc.ii.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 209 

To do the act that might the addition earn 

Not the world's mass of vanity could make me. 165 

I ago. I pray you, be content ; 'tis but his humour : 
The business of the state does him offence, 
And he does chide with you. 

Des. If 'twere no other, 

I ago. 'Tis but so, I warrant. {Trumpets. 

Hark, how these instruments summon to supper ! 170 
The messengers of Venice stay the meat : 
Go in, and weep not ; all things shall be well. 

[Exeunt Desdemona and Emilia. 

Enter RODERIGO. 

How now, Roderigo ! 

Rod. I do not find that thou dealest justly with me* 
I ago. What in the contrary ? 175 

168. And . . . you] Qq, omitted Ff (previous line ending offence.). 169. 
other, ] Steevens (1793) ; other. Qq, Ff ; warrant] Ff, warrant you Qq. 170. 
summon] Ff, stimmon you Qq. 171. The . . . meat] Knight et seq. ; The 
messengers of Venice states the meate, F I ; The messenger of Venice staies the 
meate F 2, 3, 4 ; And the Great Messengers of Venice stay, Q I, Johnson, Steevens ; 
The meate, great messengers of Venice stay ; Q 2, 3. 

164. addition] See IV; i* 105 (note). to Beaumont and Fletcher, Scornful 

168. chide with] quarrel with. Lady, II. i., and their Woman-Hater, 

Sonnet cxi. begins : II. i. This ostentation was allowed 

" O for my sake do you with For- only to persons of rank, and at a later 

tune chide, date (December 28, 1668), Pepys com- 

The guilty goddess of my harmful plains of the expense he was put to by 

deeds." these things. Compare The Christmas 

171. stay the meat] wait for supper. Prince (ed. 1816, p. 64), 1608: "By 

Compare Richard III. III. ii. 122 : this time supper was ready, and the 

'"Tis like enough, for I stay dinner sewer called to the dresser, whereupon 

there," an expression by no means the Butler's bell was presently rung, as 

obsolete. it uses to be at other ordinary meales, 

1 70. instruments] trumpets. A besides the trumpet was sounded at the 

dinner, supper, or carouse in state was kitchen hatch to call the wayters to- 

always announced with trumpets. So gether." Cotgrave has a proverb of 

much did this custom prevail that to hard or homely fair : " A pain & 

dine (or sup) with or without trumpets, oignon, trotnpette ne clairon." 

was quasi-proverbial for doing so well 175. in the contrary] Compare Henry 

or otherwise. Reference may be made VIII, in. ii. 182: "Every day "in 

14 



210 OTHELLO [ACTIV. 

Rod. Every day thou daffest me with some device, 
lago ; and rather, as it seems to me now, 
keepest from me all conveniency than suppliest 
me with the least advantage of hope. I will 
indeed no longer endure it; nor am I yet per- 180 
suaded to put up in peace what already I have 
foolishly suffered. 

lago. Will you hear me, Roderigo? 

Rod. Faith, I have heard too much ; for your words 

and performances are no kin together. 185 

lago. You charge me most unjustly. 

Rod. With nought but truth. I have wasted myself 
out of my means. The jewels you have had 
from me to deliver to Desdemona would half 
have corrupted a votarist : you have told me she 1 90 
has received them and returned me expectations 
and comforts of sudden respect and acquaint- 
ance; but I find none. 

176. daffest] Dyce, Globe ; doffest Q I ; doff'st Steevens, etc. ; duffs F I 
dofts F 2, 3, 4 ; device F 2, 3, 4 ; devise Fi, Qq. 177. me now,] me, thou Q I. 
178. than] Rowe; then Qq, F I, 2, 3; thou F 4. 184. Faith} Q I ; Sir 

Q 2, 3 ; omitted Ff ; for} Qq, and Ff. 185. performances} Ff, perform- 

ance Qq. 187. With . . . truth} omitted Q I. 188. my} omitted Qq. 

189. deliver to} Qq, deliver Ff. 191. has} Qq, hath Ff ; expectations} Ffj 

expectation Qq. 192, 193. acquaintance} Ff, Q 2 ; acquittance Q I, Theobald, 
Steevens (1793). 

the next line gives again the impression iSl. put up} "put up with" in 

of " long time." They have been only modern language; It occurs again in 

one day in Cyprus. So again "the Titus Andronicus, I. i. 433. So G. 

other day," iv. i. 134, above; and Harvey (Grosart, i. 113), Letter-Book, 

"yesterday," line 52, in the same scene. 1573-80 : " putte up these and twentye 

See in. iv. 103, in. iii. 293, and Introd. such odious speaches." And Ben Jon- 

176. daffest} Daff is a mere variant of son, Every Man in His Humour, V. i. : 

doff, to do off, to put]off. See 1 Henry ' ' Here, take my armour off quickly 

IV. iv. i. 96. The two spellings occur ... he is not fit to look on it, that 

about equally often in Shakespeare. will put up a blow." It occurs as late 

178. conveniency} convenience, oppor- as Dryden's Wild Gallant (IV. i.), 

tunity (of seeing Desdemona). See 1669. 

Merchant of Venice, IV. i. 82. 192. respect} notice. 



8c.ii.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 211 

lago. Well ; go to ; very well. 

Rod. Very well! go to ! I cannot go to, man; nor 195 
'tis not very well : by this hand, I say 'tis very 
scurvy, and begin to find myself Topped in it. 

lago. Very well. 

Rod. I tell you 'tis not very well. I will make 

myself known to Desdemona : if she will return 200 
me my jewels, I will give over my suit and 
repent my unlawful solicitation; if not, assure 
yourself I will seek satisfaction of you. 

lago. You have said now. 

Rod. Ay, and said nothing but what I protest intend- 205 
ment of doing. 

lago. Why, now I see there 's mettle in thee ; and 
even from this instant do build on thee a better 
opinion than ever before. Give me thy hand, 
Roderigo: thou hast taken against me a most 210 

194. very well] very good Q I. 195, 196. nor 'tis] it is Q I. 196, tyj. 
by . . . scurvy] Q I ; Nay, I think it is scurvy Ff ; I say f is very scurvy Q 2, 3. 
197. fopped] fopt Qq, Ff ; fobd Rowe ; fobbd Steevens ; fobbed Varior, Craig, 
etc. 199. / tell you 'tis] Ff, I say it is Qq. 205. and] and I have Q i 
205, 206. intendmenf] entendment Qq. 208. instant} time Q I. 

I 97 fopped] fooled. There is no the tooth paine, either to have patience, 
authority for the reading "fobbed" or to pull them out." The word (noun 
except Rowe's conjecture. For "fop" and verb) is exactly equivalent to our 
= fool, see Lear, i. ii. 14, and Craig's "swindle," in use. 
note. The verb occurs in Skelton's writ- 199,200. make myself known] re- 
ings, where it seems to mean "played ferring to his disguised appearance, 
the fool." See Dyce's ed., i. p. 213, line " with an usurped beard." 
120. " Foppery," meaning "dupery" 205. intendmenf] intention, to which 
(Schmidt), occurs in Merry Wives, V. word it was gradually giving place. It 
v. 131. I find it in Chettle's Kind- occurs only in Jonson's earlier plays, 
kartes Dreame (New Sh. Soc. p. 59), and is used very frequently by Gabriel 
1592 : "This rare secret is much used, Harvey. Compare As You Like It, I. i. 
and not smally lyked. Sundry other 140; and Ben Jonson, Every Man in 
could I set downe, practised by our His Humour, in. ii. : " I, spying his 
banner-bearers, but all is foppery ; for intendment, discharged my petronel in 
this I find to be the only remedy for his bosom " (260). 



212 OTHELLO [ACTIV. 

just exception ; but yet, I protest, I have dealt 
most directly in thy affair. 

Rod. It hath not appeared. 

I ago. I grant indeed it hath not appeared, and your 

suspicion is not without wit and judgement. 215 
But, Roderigo, if thou hast that in thee indeed, 
which I have greater reason to believe now than 
ever, I mean purpose, courage and valour, this 
night show it : if thou the next night following 
enjoy not Desdemona, take me from this world 220 
with treachery and devise engines for my life. 

Rod. Well, what is it? is it within reason and com- 
pass? 

lago. Sir, there is especial commission come from 

Venice to depute Cassio in Othello's place. 225 

Rod. Is that true? why then Othello and Desdemona 
return again to Venice. 

lago. O, no ; he goes into Mauritania, and takes away 
with him the fair Desdemona, unless his abode 
be lingered here by some accident: wherein 230 

211. exception] Ff, conception Qq. 212. affair] affaires Q 1. 216. in 
thee] Ff ; within thee Qq, Steevens. 220. enjoy] Ff ; enjoyest Qq, Jennens, 
Steevens. 222. -what is it ?] Ff, omitted Qq. 224. commission] command Q i. 
228. takes] Qq ; taketh Ff, Rowe. 

221. devise engines for my life] make 228. Mauritania] Othello's supposed 

any plans you choose against my life, native country. The term in Shake- 

lago refers here to Roderigo's threat speare's time often included Ethiopia, 

above, " I will seek satisfaction." But See note at "sooty," I. ii. 70. Theo- 

lago's meaning goes deeper ; he is him- bald remarks, "This is only a lie, of 

self, at this very instant, since Roderigo lago's own invention, to carry a point 

announced his "intendment "of making with Roderigo" (who would thereby 

himself known to Desdemona, consider- lose Desdemona finally), 

ing the best way to dispose of him. 230. lingered] prolonged, protracted, 

lago is indulging in "close dilations." See Midsummer Night's Drtam, i. i. 4. 

In his next speech, the sudden begin- Cotgrave and Sherwood both have it as 

ning, as of a mind that has solved a a synonym for "delay." 
problem, announces that his plan is 
formulated "it is engendered. 



sc. ii.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 213 

none can be so determinate as the removing of 
Cassio. 

Rod. How do you mean, removing of him ? 

lago. Why, by making him uncapable of Othello's 

place; knocking out his brains. 235 

Rod. And that you would have me to do ? 

lago. Ay, if you dare do yourself a profit and a 
right. He sups to-night with a harlotry, and 
thither will I go to him : he knows not yet of 
his honourable fortune. If you will watch his 240 
going thence, which I will fashion to fall out 
between twelve and one, you may take him at 
your pleasure : I will be near to second your 
attempt, and he shall fall between us. Come, 
stand not amazed at it, but go along with me; 245 
I will show you such a necessity in his death 

233. of] Qq, omitted Ff. 236. do ?] Pope ; do Qq, Ff. 237. if] Ff, and 
*/Qq. 238. harlotry] harlot Q I. 

233. removing] Roderigo espies lago's from Peele's Arraignment of Paris, iv. 
hidden meaning. Compare 2 Henry iii., 1584 (Routledge, 1874, p. 364^): 
VI. I. ii. 64 : "Were I a man, a duke, " Vulcan. A harlotry, I warrant her. 
and next of blood, I would remove these Bacchus. A peevish elvish shroe." 
tedious stumbling-blocks, And smooth But instances in support of lago may be 
my way upon their headless necks." given. I find in North's translation of 

234. ttncapable] occurs again, Mer- Donf s Philosophic (Jacob's ed., p. 190), 
chant of Venice, IV. i. 5. "Incapable" 1570: "out on her, whoore, quoth 
is the form elsewhere in Shakespeare, shee, kill hir yll favoured harlottry " ; 
For the French Oncapable, Cotgrave and in G. Harvey's Pierce 's Supereroga- 
gives only "uncapable: unable to tion (Grosart, ii. 228), "the state of a 
receive or conceive. " harlotrie," is unmistakable. Neither 

238. harlotry'] harlot. There can be of these latter examples are in New 

no doubt lago uses the word in its Eng. Diet., although they appear to be 

worst sense, from his already expressed requisite to support the meaning here, 

opinion of Bianca. Shakespeare has which is given in that work with Peele's 

the word again in Romeo and Juliet, passage as earliest authority, 

iv. ii. 14, and in 1 Henry IV. III. i. 245. amazed} bewildered. "To stand 

198. In both these passages, Dowden amazed" was a phrase in common use. 

says, it is "used much as 'slut' might See King John, n. i. 356; Romeo and 

be used at a later date." The same Juliet, III. i. 139. 
remark applies to the following example 



214 OTHELLO [ACT iv. 

that you shall think yourself bound to put it on 
him. It is now high supper-time, and the night 
grows to waste : about it, 

Rod. I will hear further reason for this. 250 

lago. And you shall be satisfied. [Exeunt. 



SCENE III. Another Room in the Castle. 

Enter OTHELLO, LODOVICO, DESDEMONA, EMILIA, 
and Attendants. 

Lod. I do beseech you, sir, trouble yourself no further. 

Oth. O, pardon me; 'twill do me good to walk. 

Lod. Madam, good night ; I humbly thank your ladyship. 

Des. Your honour is most welcome. 

Oth. Will you walk, sir? 

O, Desdemona, 5 

Des. My lord ? 

Oth. Get you to bed on the instant ; I will be re- 
turned forthwith : dismiss your attendant there : 
look it be done. 

Des. I will, my lord. 10 

[Exeunt Othello ', Lodovico, and Attendants. 

Emit. How goes it now ? he looks gentler than he did. 

2. 'twill] it shall Qq. 5. 0,] Capell, O Qq, Oh Ff; Desdemona,] 
Capell ; Desdemona Qq, Ff. 6. lord?] Capell; lord. Qq, Ff; lord! Hanmer. 
7. on the] on tK Ff, o' the Qq. 8. dismiss] disfatch Qq. 

248. high supper-time] "high" is Courtezan, i. i; "high dinner-time" 

still used of time, in the expression is in Edwards' Damon and Pithias, 

"high time," i.e. full, complete, urgent. 1571; Nashe has "high midnight," 

See Comedy of Errors, III. ii. 162. Pierce Pennilesse (Grosart, ii. 15). 
" High time" is a very early expression. 249. grows to waste] grows to a con- 

" High noon " occurs ante 1350 (Percy sumption; "is wasting away," as in 

Folio Ballads, ed. Furnivall, iii. 28); the expression "waste of time." 
Marston has "high night," Dutch 



sc. in.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 215 

Des. He says he will return incontinent : 

He hath commanded me to go to bed, 

And bade me to dismiss you. 
Emit. Dismiss me ! 

Des. It was his bidding ; therefore, good Emilia, i 5 

Give me my nightly wearing, and adieu : 

We must not now displease him. 
Emit. I would you had never seen him I 
Des. So would not I : my love doth so approve him, 1 9 

That even his stubbornness, his checks, his frowns, 

Prithee, unpin me, have grace and favour in them, 
Emil. I have laid those sheets you bade me on the bed. 
Des. All 's one. Good faith, how foolish are our minds ! 

If I do die before thee, prithee, shroud me 

In one of those same sheets. 

Emil. Come, come, you talk. 25 

Des. My mother had a maid call'd Barbara ; 

She was in love ; and he she loved proved mad 

13. He hath} Qq, And hath Ff. 14. bade} Q 2, 3 ; 6adQ I ; bidYL 18. 
/ would} Q i, F 2, 3, 4 ; /, would F I ; Would Q 2, 3. 20. his frowns} 
and frownes Qq. 21. in them} omitted Ff. 22. those} these Q I ; bade} 
Q I, bad (the rest). 23. one. Good faith,} Dyce et seq. ; one good faith : Q i; 
one : good Father, Ff ; one, good father ; Q 2, 3 ; one : good Father ! Rowe ; one : 
Good father ! Steevens. 24. thee} omitted F i. 25. those} Qq, these Ff. 
26. Barbara} Barbary Qq, Barbaric F i. 27. mad} bad Capell (Theobald 
conj.). 

12. incontinent} immediately. See Much Ado, v. i. 49. But "no matter," 

note at I. iii. 305. Compare Richard "never mind," in which sense Shake- 

//. V. vi. 48. speare uses it also, is perhaps more con- 

16. wearing} apparel, wear. "Swain's sonant with her misery, 

wearing " occurs in Winter's Tale, IV. 25. you talk} you talk idly, you 're 

iv. 9. talking nonsense. Compare Macbeth, 

20. stubbornness} harshness, rough- IV. ii. 64: "Poor prattler, how thou 

ness. Compare As You Like It, n. i. talk'st." The sense in the old proverb, 

19: "translate the stubbornness of " Give losers leave to talk. " 

fortune Into so quiet and so sweet a 27. proved mad} became mad. 

style." Compare "prove bankrupt," Lucrcce, 

23. All^s one} Very well. Compare 140. 



216 OTHELLO [ACTIV. 

And did forsake her : she had a song of " willow " ; 

An old thing 'twas, but it express'd her fortune, 

And she died singing it : that song to-night 30 

Will not go from my mind ; I have much to do 

But to go hang my head all at one side 

And sing it like poor Barbara. Prithee, dispatch, 

Emit. Shall I go fetch your night-gown ? 

Des. No, unpin me here, 

This Lodovico is a proper man. 35 

EmiL A very handsome man. 

Des. He speaks well. 

Emit. I know a lady in Venice would have walked 
barefoot to Palestine for a touch of his nether 
lip. 40 

Des. \Singing\ 

The poor soul sat sighing by a sycamore tree, 
Sing all a green willow ; 

28. had] has Q I ; willow] willough F I, 2 (and elsewhere in these editions). 
31-53. I have ... next.] omitted Q i. 33. Barbara] Barbarie F I ; Bar- 
bary Q 2, 3. "39. barefoot] barefooted Q 2, Q (1695) > nether] neither Q 2, F 
2, 3. 41 . Des. [Singing] Rowe et seq. ; Desdemona sings Qq ; Des. Ff, Craig ; 
sighing] Q 2, Capell, etc. ; singing Ff, Rowe. 

29. An old thing] The burden hag Egyptian sycomore of Pliny, correctly 
been traced to as early as 1 530. See so spelt, and is so applied by Cotgrave 
note below, line 42. and Blount, and even down to N. 

31, 32. much to do But] I can hardly Bailey's time (1766). The name was 

prevent myself from, etc. transferred by a mistake. Folkard 

35. proper] handsome. See I. iii. says: "In Sicily, it is known as the 

399 (note). Tree of Patience, and is regarded as 

39. nether] lower, opposed to upper, emblematic of a wife's infidelity and a 

See below, v. ii, 43, and in 1 Henry IV. husband's patience." 
II. iv. 47. 42, all a green willow] This song, 

41. sycamore] Our sycamore, or Great originally for a~ man, is found in a MS. 

Maple, was introduced to Britain per- collection of songs, with accompani- 

haps as early as the fourteenth century, ment for the lute, in the British 

The Oriental sycamore (Ficus syca- Museum (Addit. MSS., 15,117). The 

morus], mentioned in the Bible, or the transcript has been dated about 1600, 

fig mulberry, is a wholly different tree, and slightly differs from Shakespeare's, 

It was highly appreciated as a shade- with additional stanzas. A consider- 

giving tree, and was the subject of ably longer ballad, developed out of 

both legend and poetry. This is the this, is in Percy's Reliques (i. 199, 



sc. in.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 217 

Her hand on her bosom, her head on her knee, 

Sing willow, willow, willow : 
The fresh streams ran by her, and murmur'd her moans ; 45 

Sing willow, willow, willow ; 
Her salt tears fell from her, and soften'd the stones ; 

Lay by these : 

Sing willow, willow, willow ; 

Prithee, hie thee ; he '11 come anon : 50 

Sing all a green willow must be my garland. 
Let nobody blame him ; his scorn I approve, 

Nay, that 's not next. Hark ! who is 't that knocks ? 
Emit. It is the wind. 

46, 56. willow, willow, willow] Q 2, 3 ; willotigh, etc. F I, 2, 3 ; willow, etc. 
F 4. 47. and] -which Q 2, 3. 48-50. Lay . . . anon] arranged as by 
Capell, etc., Globe. 48, 49. Lay . . . willow] Sing willow, etc. (Lay by 
these) willow, willow Q 2 ; Sing willough, etc. (Lay by these} willough 
willough F i, 2, 3, 4 (the last three Folios misprinted Lady for Lay, corrected 
by Rowe). 48. Lay by these] omitted Pope, Theobald ; in parenthesis old 
editions, Rowe, Johnson ; Giving her her jewels Capell, Jennens. 50. Prithee 
. . . anon] separate line Q 2, 3, Capell et seq. ; following burthen line willough, 
willough Ff ; hie\ Qq, high Ff. 53. who is V that} Ff, who 's that Qq. 54. 
It is] Q i, Jennens, Steevens, Craig ; It's Ff, Globe ; Tis Q 2, 3. 

ed. 1887). Chappell (Popular Music, "All of greene willow, willow, willow, 

i. 206) reprints the British Museum song willow, Sit he all of greene willow 

with the music. The music is found in shall be my garland." "To wear the 

Dallas's MS. Lute-Book under the name willow " was a proverbial expression, 

of "All a greane willow," which book, hardly obsolete, applied to a bachelor 

dated 1583, is in Trinity College or disappointed lover. It is alluded to 

Library, Dublin. "Willow, willow" again by Shakespeare in Much Ado, II. 

was a favourite burden for songs in the i. 194, and by Spenser, Fae.rie Queene, 

sixteenth century. The earliest known I. i. 9. Earlier it occurs in T. Howell, 

is in a collection by John Heywood, Newe Sonets (Grosart, ii. 128), 1568 : 

about 1530, which has for burden, "All "I saw of late a wofull wight, That 

a grene wyllow, wyllow, wyllow, All a willo wandes did winde to weare." It 

grene wyllow is my garland." The is very common in Shakespearian 

words of the song itself are wholly writers. Douce thinks the willow may 

different from Shakespeare's. Another have been chosen from the Psalms 

with the same burden, adding the word (cxxxvii. 2). As Folkard says, " The 

"sing," is quoted by Steevens from A willow has been from the remotest 

Gorgious Gallery of Gallant Inventions, times considered a funereal tree and an 

1578. Another early song and ballad emblem of grief," Plant Lore, 1884. 

is in Howell's Devises (Grosart rept. Folkard supports this statement by 

ii. 183), 1581, which has for burden, references to classical authors. 



218 OTHELLO [ACT iv. 

Des. 

I call'd my love false love ; but what said he then ? 55 

Sing willow, willow, willow : 
If I court moe women, you '11 couch with moe men. 

So get thee gone ; good night. Mine eyes do itch ; 

Doth that bode weeping? 

Emit. 'Tis neither here nor there. 

Des. I have heard it said so. O, these men, these men ! 60 

Dost thou in conscience think, tell me, Emilia, 

That there be women do abuse their husbands 

In such gross kind? 

Emit. There be some such, no question. 

Des. Wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world ? 
Emit. Why, would not you ? 
Des. No, by this heavenly light ! 65 

55. (and above, lines 49, 51) the direction [singing] repeated from line 41 
Globe ; omitted throughout early editions, Craig ; at first line (41) Steevens (see 
above). S5~S7- / . men] omitted Q i. 55. false love] false Q 2, 3. 
57. moe] mo Ff, Q 2, 3 (no women F 3, 4) spelt moe Globe et seq. ; moe women] 
more women Jennens, Steevens (1785, mo 1793) > moe tnen] more men Rowe, etc. 
(in parallels with moe women). 58. So] Now Q I. 59. Doth] Ff, Does Qq. 
60-63. Des. I have . . . question] omitted Q I. 63. kind] kindes Q 2, 3. 
64. deed] thing Q 2, 3. 

57. couch] Compare Much Ado, III. tokens joyful laughter ; or the seeing 

1. 46: "as fortunate a bed As ever of one's love. The itching of the left 

Beatrice shall couch upon" ; and eye, on the other hand, was a sign of 

Merchant of Venice, V. 305. good luck according to Dryden (Love 

57. moe] more. The old form occurs Triumphant, i. i), 1694; and Swift 

frequently in the early editions, but is in his Polite Conversation records the 

usually modernised throughout the plays same omen. The superstition in the 

by the later Folios and modern editors, north of Ireland agrees with the latter 

This stanza is not in the versions re- to-day, the itchiness of the right eye 

ferred to at line 42 (note). Walker being a sign of crying. But I find in 

asks, "Why write moe" (in modern MacGregor's Folklore of North -East 

editions)? meaning why write it here, Scotland that "An itching in the eyes 

and not elsewhere ? I would reply, indicated tears and sorrow." One has 

because Desdemona's description "an to be accurate nowadays, 
old thing 'twas " harmonises with it. 65. by this heavenly light] "by this 

58-60. 'eyes . . . said so] Since the good light " occurs in Tempest, n. 

time of Theocritus folklorists have held ii. 147, and Winters Tale, II. iii. 82. 

that the itching of the right eye be- Without the adjective it is a common 



sc.ni.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 219 

Emit. Nor I neither by this heavenly light ; 
I might do 't as well i' the dark. 

Des. Wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world ? 

Emit. The world is a huge thing : 'tis a great price 
For a small vice. 

Des. In troth, I think thou wouldst not. 70 

Emit. In troth, I think I should ; and undo 't when I 
had done. Marry, I would not do such a thing 
for a joint-ring, nor for measures of lawn, nor for 
gowns, petticoats, nor caps, nor any petty exhibi- 
tion ; but, for the whole world, why, who would 75 
not make her husband a cuckold to make him a 
monarch? I should venture purgatory for't. 

Des. Beshrew me, if I would do such a wrong 

67. do 't as well f the] Ff ; doe it as -well in Q i ; as well doe it in Q 2, 3. 
68. Wouldst] Would Q i ; deed} thing Q I. 69, 70. The . . . vice] asinQq, 
first line ends thing: Ff. 69. world is] Qq Steevens, etc., Craig ; world's Ff, 
Globe ; 'tis] Steevens, etc., Craig ; it is Ff, Qq, Dyce, Globe. 70. In troth] 
Good troth Q I. 71. In troth] By my troth Q I, Malone. 72. done] done 
it Qq. 73. nor for measures] or for measures Qq, for omitted Craig 
(misprint ? corrected ed. 2). 74. petticoats'] or Petticotes Q I ; nor caps] or 
Caps Q 2, 3 ; petty] such Q I. 75. the whole] Qq, all the whole Ff; 

world, ] Capell et seq.; world? Q I ; world: Ff, Q 2, 3 ; world! Hanmer ; 
why] vds pitty Q I. IT for 't] Ff ; for it Qq, Jennens. 78,79. Beshrew 
. . . world.] prose Jennens, Steevens (1793). 78. a wrong] wrong Q 2, 3. 

oath. Compare Interlude of Four Ele- to Cotgrave, I find " A gemmew ring : 

ments: "Thou art a mad gest, be this Souvenance." And " Souvenance : 

light !" circa 1510. " Slight " which is Memory, remembrance; also, ja ring 

commoner, is of different origin. with many hoops, whereof a man lets 

69, 70. a great price For a small vice] one hang down when he would be put 

Dyce says "a quotation evidently," in mind of a thing " (Cotgrave). This 

and prints as a distich. explains a passage in Lingua, 1607, 

73. joint-ring] Thii was probably iv. 2 (Hazlitt's Dodsley, ix. 372), where 

the same as the gimmal or double ring, Memory's Page enters with "a gimmal 

constructed of two or, later, more ring with one link hanging." Steevens 

pieces let into one another by a joint, quotes from Dryden's Don Sebastian, 

Compare Herrick, Hesperides (1648): 1690, where in Act V. an account is 

" Thou sentst to me a true-love knot ; given of such a ring, used as mentioned 

but I return a ring of jimmals to imply by Herrick, and "wrought with joints." 
thy love had one knot, mine a triple 74, 75. petty exhibition] trifling allow- 

tye." Hollyband (1596) spells it ance. See I. iii. 238. 
"gemmew." In the Index (Sherwood) 



220 OTHELLO [ACT iv. 

For the whole world. 

Emit. Why, the wrong is but a wrong i' the world ; 80 
and having the world for your labour, 'tis a 
wrong in your own world, and you might 
quickly make it right 

Des. I do not think there is any such woman. 

Emil. Yes, a dozen ; and as many to the vantage as 85 
would store the world they played for. 
But I do think it is their husbands' faults 
If wives do fall : say that they slack their duties 
And pour our treasures into foreign laps, 
Or else break out in peevish jealousies, 90 

Throwing restraint upon us, or say they strike us, 
Or scant our former having in despite, 
Why, we have galls, and though we have some grace, 
Yet have we some revenge. Let husbands know 

87-104. But . . . so\ omitted Q I. 89. our] out Rolfe. 

79.] One of the jests of Scogin here only the dark foil to Desdemona's 

(Hazlitt rept. p. 120) is " How Scogin snow-white purity." This criticism 

desired of the Queene, to know whether soars over Emilia's head. 
Riches would not tempt Men and 92. scant . . . having] restrict our 

especially Women." After suggesting allowance of expense. So Johnson 

various ' ' stones and dignity " to tempt and all commentators explain it. May 

women to fall to "lechery and folly," it not mean "make little of our 

Scogin says, " What if a man did give previous estate" (prior to marriage)? 

you this house full of gold? The Until I read the notes, this sense 

Queene said : a woman would doe satisfied me, conveying the idea of a 

much for that." very prevalent sort of recrimination in 

85. to the vantage] to boot, over and such a troubled home as Emilia's 

above (Steevens). Compare Cotgrave : appears to have been. 
" Suradjouster : To give vantage, add 93. galls] The bile, source of rancour 

more, put more over." or anger in man, according to the old 

87 et seq.~\ See note at III. iv. 167. physiology. "Some men ween, that 

Furness says here: "The noble, self- the milt is cause of laughing. For by 

forgetting music in which Emilia dies, the splean we are moved to laugh, by 

goes far to drive away the shadow that the gall we are wroth, by the heart 

envelops her theft . . . But no ex- we are wise, by the brain we feel, 

cuses can be suggested for her here, by the liver we love." Translation 

Her insidious references to Lodovico, of Bartholomew's De Proprietatibus 

and her allusions to Othello's blow . . . Rerum (from Medieval Lore, ed. Steele, 

stone our hearts, and we can see in her 1893, P- 66), 1397. 



sc. in.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 221 

Their wives have sense like them : they see and smell 9 5 
And have their palates both for sweet and sour, 
As husbands have. What is it that they do 
When they change us for others ? Is it sport ? 
I think it is : and doth affection breed it ? 
I think it doth : is 't frailty that thus errs ? i oo 

It is so too : and have not We affections, 
Desires for sport, and frailty, as men have ? 
Then let them use us well : else let them know, 
The ills we do, their ills instruct us so. 104 

Des. Good night, good night : heaven me such usage send, 
Not to pick bad from bad, but by bad mend ! 

[Exeunt, 

ACT V 

SCENE I. Cyprus. A Street. 

Enter IAGO and RODERIGO. 

I ago. Here, stand behind this bulk ; straight will he come : 
Wear thy good rapier bare, and put it home : 

104. so] F I, Q 2, 3 5 to F 2, 3, 4, Jennens, Steevens (1793) 5 too Rowe (ed. i), 
105. heaven] God Q I ; usage] Q I, Johnson, Steevens, Craig; uses Ff, Q 2, 3, 
Globe ; issues Collier (ed. 2) conj. 

Act V. Scene /. 
I. bulk] Qq ; barke F I, 2 ; bark F 3, 4. 

95. sense] sensation, feelings. Act V. Scene I. 

104.] Compare Burton, Anat, of 

Melan. (3, 3, 4, i), p. 648, ed. 1854: I. bulk] The stall of a shop, jutting 

' ' It may be 'tis his own fault, and he out into the street. See Coriolanus, 

hath no reason to complain, 'tis quid II. i. 226 ; and compare Lyly, Pappe 

pro quo, she is bad, he is worse : . . . with an Hatchett, 1589 : "Ah (quoth a 

And therefore, as well adviseth Sira- Martinist sitting on a bulke in Cheap- 

cides," cap. ix. i; "teach her not an side), he is a knave I warrant you." 

evil lesson against thyself," ... for as In Beaumont and Fletcher, Wit with- 

the old saying is, "a good husband out Money, iii. I, Valentin ian asks why 

makes a good wife." the streets should be troubled with 



222 OTHELLO [ACTV. 

Quick, quick ; fear nothing ; I '11 be at thy elbow : 

It makes us, or it mars us ; think on that, 

And fix most firm thy resolution, 5 

Rod. Be near at hand ; I may miscarry in 't. 

lago. Here, at thy hand : be bold, and take thy stand. 

[Retires. 

Rod. I have no great devotion to the deed ; 

And yet he has given me satisfying reasons : 

'Tis but a man gone, Forth, my sword : he dies. I o 

lago. I have rubb'd this young quat almost to the sense, 
And he grows angry. Now, whether he kill Cassio, 
Or Cassio him, or each do kill the other, 
Every way makes my gain : live Roderigo, 
He calls me to a restitution large 1 5 

Of gold and jewels that I bobb'd from him, 
As gifts to Desdemona : 
It must not be : if Cassio do remain, 
He has a daily beauty in his life 
That makes me ugly; and besides, the Moor 20 

4. on] Ff, of Qq. 5. most] more Q 2, 3. 7. be bold] Qq, F I ; behold 
F 2, 3, 4; stand] sword Q I, Steevens, etc. 8. deed] dead Q I. 9. has] 
Qq, Steevens (1793), Craig ; hath Ff, Globe. II. quat] gnat Q I, knot Theo- 
bald, quab Hanmer, quail Upton. 12. angry. Now,] Ff, angry now: Q I. 
14. gain] F 3, 4 ; gaine F I, 2 ; game Qq, Jennens, Rolfe. 1 6. Of] Ff, For 
Qq. 19. has] Qq, hath Ff. 

Lady Heartwell's coach and four, "till by Steevens. Nares quotes a passage 

the learned lawyers with their fat bags, from Laughan's Garden of Health, 

Are thrust against the bulks. " p. 153 (1579), containing the words, 

II. quat] a pimple, literally, and " cholericke sores or quats. " 

hence like "scab," a vulgar term for 16. bobtfd] cheated, humbugged, 

a low fellow. Still in use in both Compare Troilus and Cressida, ill. i. 

senses in the Midland dialects in Eng- 75. It occurs in Beaumont and 

land. See Wise's Glossary of War- Fletcher, Loyal Subject, iii. I : " What 

wickshire Words (Furness). Compare are we bobbed thus still, colted and 

Dekker, Gut s Hornbook, ch. vii., 1609 : casted";and Spanish Curate, v. I. 

"A yong quat of the first yeares The substantive is, however, much 

revennew"; and Webster's DeviFs commoner, in the sense of a "bitter 

Law Case, ii. I. Both these are cited mock" or "gird." 



sc.i.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 223 

May unfold me to him ; there stand I in much 

peril : 
No, he must die. Be 't so, I hear him coming, 

Enter CASSIO. 

Rod. I know his gait ; 'tis he. Villain, thou diest ! 

[Makes a pass at Cassio. 
Cas. That thrust had been mine enemy indeed, 

But that my coat is better than thou know'st : 2 5 

I will make proof of thine. 

\DrawS) and wounds Roderigo. 
Rod. O, I am slain ! 

\Iago from behind wounds Cassio in the leg, and exit. 
Cas. I am maim'd for ever. Help, ho 1 murder ! murder I 

[Falls. 

Enter OTHELLO. 

Oth. The voice of Cassio : I ago keeps his word, 

Rod. O, villain that I am ! 

Oth. It is even so. 

Cas. O, help, ho ! light ! a surgeon ! 30 

Oth, 'Tis he. O brave lago, honest and just, 

That hast such noble sense of thy friend's wrong ! 

21. much} omitted Q I. 22. Be^t so.] Qq, But so, Ff, Be it so, Pope; hear] 
heard F I. 24. mine] Ff, my Qq. 25. know'st] think'st Q i. 27. 

maim'd] maindQ I ; Help] light Qq, Capell ; murder ! murder!] murder, Q 2. 
Enter Othello.] Qq, Ff, Globe ; Enter Othello, above at a window Rowe ; 
Enter Othello, at a distance Steevens, Craig. 29. It is] Ff, Harke tis] Qq. 

25. coat] I suppose a "privy coat" coat, " Webster, Devifs Law Case, ii. i; 

is intended, which was worn under the and Shirley, The Politician, iv. 5 : 

outer garments. It is written "private "were you not wounded? . . . I pre- 

coat" in Dekker's AfafcA Mee in London, pared a privy coat." Hence lago's 

Act v. Compare "I wear a privy wound in the "leg," in Theobald's 

coat," Beaumont and Fletcher, Cure stage - direction, and implied by 

for a Cuckold, Hi. I ; "without a privy "maim'd." 



224 OTHELLO ( ACTV - 

Thou teachest me. Minion, your dear lies dead, 
And your unblest fate hies : strumpet, I come ! 
Forth of my heart those charms, thine eyes, are 

blotted: 35 

Thy bed lust-stain'd shall with lust's blood be 

spotted. \Exit* 

Enter LODOVICO and GRATIANO. 

Cas. What, ho ! no watch ? no passage ? murder 1 
murder ! 

Gra. Tis some mischance ; the cry is very direful, 

Cas. O, help ! 

Lod. Hark ! 40 

Rod. O wretched villain. 

Lod. Two or three groan : it is a heavy night : 

These may be counterfeits : let 's think 't unsafe 
To come in to the cry without more help. 

Rod. Nobody come? then shall I bleed to death. 45 

Lod. Hark ! 

34. unblest fate hies :] Q 2, 3, Globe; unblest fate highes T?f;fate hies apace 
Q I, Steevens. 35. Forth of] Qq, Johnson et seq.; For of Ff (off F 2, 3, 4)* 
36. bed lust-stain' d] bed-lest- stained F 3, 4. 38. cry] Qq, Steevens, etc.; voice 
Ff, Rowe. 42. groan] fi(groane F I, 2), Globe; grones Qq (groans), Pope, 
Steevens, Craig ; it is a] Qq, ' Tis Ff. 44. in to] Capell, etc. ; into Qq, Ff, 
Rowe. 45. come ?] Theobald, come, Qq, come : Ff. 

33-36. Minion . . . spotted] Furness Abbott, 156. Compare Ben Jonson, 

quotes Ingleby's belief that Shake- Sejanus, III. i. ^ooa : 

speare did not intend Othello to speak " Natta. To this I subscribe ; 

at all in this scene, and that he did And forth a world of more parti- 

not write these lines, which he calls culars, 

"atrocious stuff." Shakespeare has else- Instance in only one." 

where the compounds " lust-breathed," 37. no passage?] nobody passing 

"lust-dieted," " lust-wearied." along? Compare Cotgrave, " PassJe : 

34. unblest] accursed. See II. iii. A passage, course, passing along." 
316. See Comedy of Errors, III. i. 99. 

35. Forth of] out of. Several in- 42. heavy] black. Compare Venus 
stances occur in Shakespeare. See and Adonis, 182. 



so. i.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 225 

Re-enter I AGO, with a light. 

Gra. Here 's one comes in his shirt, with light and weapons. 
I ago. Who 's there ? whose noise is this that cries on 

murder ? 

Lod. We do not know. 

lago. Did not you hear a cry ? 

Cas. Here, here ! for heaven's sake, help me ! 
lago. What 's the matter ? 5 o 

Gra. This is Othello's ancient, as I take it. 
Lod. The same indeed ; a very valiant fellow. 
lago. What are you here that cry so grievously ? 
Cas. lago ? O, I am spoil'd, undone by villains ! 

Give me some help. 5 5 

lago. O me, lieutenant ! what villains have done this ? 
Cas. I think that one of them is hereabout, 

And cannot make away. 
lago. O treacherous villains? 

What are you there ? come in and give some help. 

[To Lodovico and Gratiano. 

46. Re-enter . . .] Dyce (after line 47) ; Enter lago with a light. Qq (after 
line 45) Steevens. 47. light} Ff, lights Qq. 48. on~\ Qq, F I ; out F 2, 3, 
4, Rowe. 49. We] Ff ; / Qq, Jennens ; Did~\ Qq, Do Ff. 50. heaven's 
sake] heaven sake Qq, heavens sake Ff. 54. lago ?] lago, Qq. 56. me,'] my 
Q I. 57. that one} Ff, the one Qq. 59. [To . . . Gratiano] Theobald 
et seq. 

48. cries on murder] calls out mur- but it is not in the extant edition. This 

der. Compare Cotgrave, "Hue: part of Jonson's Poetaster is dealing 

Hooted or showted after ; exclaimed or with that play. The quotations serve 

cried out upon." And Hamlet, V. ii. to show the exact sense of the words 

375 : "This quarry cries on havock." In in Othello. They may have been even 

Marston's Eastward Ho, ii. I, this line in Shakespeare's thoughts, since this 

occurs, " Who cries on murther ? Lady, play was made a common laughing- 

was it you?" And in Ben Jonson's stock of. For " cry on " before a per- 

Poet 'aster, ii. I, at an earlier date (1601) son's name, see Troilus and Cressida, 

occurs, "Who cries out murther, lady v. v. 35, and Romeo and Juliet, in. 

was it you?" The line is evidently a iii. 101. 
quotation from the old play otjeronymo, 

15 



226 OTHELLO [ACTV. 

Rod. O, help me here ! 60 

Cas. That 's one of them. 

lago. O murderous slave ! O villain ! 

\Stabs Roderigo. 

Rod. O damn'd lago ! O inhuman dog ! 
lago. Kill men i' the dark ! Where be these bloody 
thieves ? 

How silent is this town ! Ho ! murder ! murder ! 

What may you be ? are you of good or evil ? 65 

Lod. As you shall prove us, praise us. 
lago. Signior Lodovico? 
Lod. He, sir. 

lago. I cry you mercy. Here 's Cassio hurt by villains. 
Gra. Cassio ! 70 

lago. How is it, brother? 
Cas. My leg is cut in two. 
lago. Marry, heaven forbid ! 

Light, gentlemen : I '11 bind it with my shirt. 

Enter BIANCA. 

Bian. What is the matter, ho ? who is 't that cried ? 

lago. Who is 't that cried ? 75 

Bian. O my dear Cassio ! my sweet Cassio ! 

O Cassio, Cassio, Cassio ! 
lago. O notable strumpet ! Cassio, may you suspect 

60. here!] Qq, etc., there Ff. 61. [Stabs Roderigo] Thrusts him in. Q 2, 
3 ; omitted Q I, Ff ; lago stabs him. Rowe ; lago stabs Roderigo Steevens (1793). 
62. dog /] Ff, dog, o, o, o. Qq ; [gives up ye gost.] Anon. MS. (apud Cam- 
bridge) ; Dies. Hanmer. 63. men] him Q i ; these] Ff, those Qq. 71. is 
it] Qq, Steevens, etc., Craig ; is't Ff, Globe. 

69. cry you mercy] beg your pardon. (1519) ; and I find it as late as Ravens- 
See below, line 94. This expression croft's Canterbury Guests^ v, v. (1697). 
occurs as early as The Four Elements 



sc.i.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 227 

Who they should be that have thus mangled you ? 
Cas. No. 80 

Gra. I am sorry to find you thus : I have been to seek 

you. 
lago. Lend me a garter. So. O, for a chair, 

To bear him easily hence ! 

Bian. Alas, he faints ! O Cassio, Cassio, Cassio ! 
lago. Gentlemen all, I do suspect this trash 85 

To be a party in this injury. 

Patience awhile, good Cassio. Come, come ; 

Lend me a light. Know we this face or no ? 

Alas, my friend and my dear countryman 

Roderigo ? no : yes, sure : O heaven ! Roderigo. 
Gra. What, of Venice ? 91 

lago. Even he, sir : did you know him ? 
Gra. Know him ! ay. 

lago. Signior Gratiano ? I cry you gentle pardon ; 

These bloody accidents must excuse my manners, 

That so neglected you. 

Gra. I am glad to see you. 95 

lago. How do you, Cassio ? O, a chair, a chair ? 

79. have thus} Ff, thus have Qq. 82, 83. lago. Lend . . . hence /] omitted 
Q I ; prose Q z, 3. 86. be a party'] bears a part Qq ; injury'] omitted Q I. 
90. O heaven .'] Q I ; Yes, 'tis F I ; yes, 'tis Q 2, 3 ; Yea, tis F z, 3, 4. 93. 
you] Qq, your Ff. 

79. should] See in. iv. 23. mercy," above, line 69. It seems to 

85. trash] worthless creature. See occur only here in Shakespeare. Simi- 

II. i. 311 (note). Observe the prompt larly Jonson has it once in Fox, IV. ii. : 

manner in which lago seizes upon Bian- " I cry your pardons, I fear I have for- 

ca's unexpected appearance, to the ad- gettingly transgrest Against the dignity 

vantage of his schemes. of the court." 

89. countryman] Steevens remarks 96. a chair] In Wright's History of 

that this proves incontestably that lago Domestic Manners (1862), p. 497, may 

was a Venetian. be seen a drawing of a " litter " from an 

93. cry you . . . pardon] beg your album preserved among the Sloane 

gentle (merciful) pardon. This form MSS. (No. 341 5) in the British Museum, 

was much less used than "cry you containing dates 1608 to 1638. It 



228 OTHELLO [ACTV. 

Gra. Roderigo ! 

lago. He, he, 'tis he. O, that 's well said ; the chair : 

[A chair brought in. 

Some good man bear him carefully from hence ; 
I'll fetch the general's surgeon. [To Bianco} For 
you, mistress, 100 

Save you your labour. He that lies slain here, Cassio, 
Was my dear friend : what malice was between you ? 
Cas. None in the world ; nor do I know the man. 
lago. \To Bianco] What, look you pale? O, bear him out 
o' the air. [Cassio and Roderigo are borne off. 

Stay you, good gentlemen. Look you pale, mistress ? 
Do you perceive the gastness of her eye? 106 

Nay, if you stare, we shall hear more anon. 
Behold her well ; I pray you, look upon her : 
. . Do you see, gentlemen ? nay, guiltiness will speak, 
Though tongues were out of use. no 

98. He, he] Ff, He, Qq ; the] Ff, a Qq. 102. between] betwixt Qq. 105. 
gentlemen] Ff ; gentlewoman Qq, Malone, Variorum. 106. gastness] ieastures 
Q I, 2 ; jestures Q 3. 107. if you stare] Ff, an you stir re Qq ; hear] 

have Qq. 

figures a lady of rank carried in her pany Cassio, to render him assistance," 

chair. Ladies, and especially persons he says, and Boswell added that "lago 

suffering from illness, were often so stops Bianca under a pretended sus- 

carried, sometimes in horse - litters, picion that she would try to escape." 

Chair, at this time, applied to more But, as Reed says, it was more proper 

cumbrous or stately furniture than now. for the two gentlemen to leave with lago 

They would need, as lago says, a good to assist him. It is not, to my mind, 

man to carry, with a person. " Man," the language that lago would have used 

indeed, would read better in the plural, to Bianca at present, and he has already 

especially as two are borne off. secured her attendance by his remarks. 
98. well said] See IV. i. 115, etc. 106. gastness] ghastliness. It occurs 

101. Save you your labour] don't in Chaucer's Boethius. The adjective 

interfere. She is attending to her "gaste"istobemetwith. Gerrard Leigh 

lover. says of the Dragon : " For as all beastes 

105. gentlemen] Malone supported most feare him : so tremble they at his 

the Qq reading "gentle woman." "Bian- gaste countenance " (Folio 134). 
ca would naturally endeavour to accom- 



sc.i.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 229 

Enter EMILIA. 

Emit. 'Las, what 's the matter ? what 's the matter, hus- 
band? 
I ago. Cassio hath here been set on in the dark 

By Roderigo, and fellows that are 'scaped : 

He 's almost slain, and Roderigo dead. 
Emit. Alas, good gentleman ! alas, good Cassio ! 115 

lago. This is the fruits of whoring. Prithee, Emilia, 

Go know of Cassio where he supp'd to-night. 

What, do you shake at that ? 

Bian. He supp'd at my house ; but I therefore shake not. 
lago. O, did he so ? I charge you, go with me. 120 

Emit. Fie, fie upon thee, strumpet ! 
Bian. I am no strumpet ; but of life as honest 

As you that thus abuse me. 

Emit. As I ! foh ! fie upon thee ! 

lago. Kind gentlemen, let 's go see poor Cassio dress'd. 

Come, mistress, you must tell 's another tale. 125 

Emilia, run you to the citadel, 

And tell my lord and lady what hath happ'd. 

III. ''Las, what's . . . vvhat's . . . husband?} Qq, Alas, what is . . . What is 
. . . husband.] Ff (in two lines). 114. dead] Qq, quite deadFf. ll'6. fruits'} 
Ff, Rowe ; fruite Qq, Steevens, etc., Globe, Cambridge; Prithee} Pray Q i. 
118, 119. that? He supp'd} that? -why, you know, He supped Steevens conj. (ed. 
1793, not you well know, as stated in Furness, Cambridge). 121. Fie, fie] Q i ; 
Fie Q 2, 3 ; Oh fie Ff. 123. foh ! fie] Capell ; faugh,, fie Q I, Jennens; now fie 
Q 2, 3 ; Fie Ff, Rowe. 127. hath] has Qq, Steevens (1793). 

117. know of] learn of. Compare sheeps eie at a fie for shame"; and 

Twelfth Night, in. iv. 278 : "I be- Richard Carew in Camderfs Remains 

seech you to know of the knight what (p. 33, ed. 1623), 1595 : " In detesta- 

my offence to him is." tion wee say Phy, as if therewithall wee 

121. Fie, fie upon thee] Emilia ser- should spit." 

vilely echoes her husband's epithets. 123. foh] Emilia is very indignant, 

The ejaculation is proper. Compare and her terms become stronger. See 

Armin's Choice, Chance, and Change III. iii. 232 (note). 
(Grosart, p. 62), 1606: "And cast a 



230 



OTHELLO 



fACT V. 



Will you go on afore? [Aside] This is the night 
That either makes me or fordoes me quite. [Exeunt. 



SCENE II. A Bedchamber in the Castle: DESDEMONA 
in bed asleep ; a light burning. 

Enter OTHELLO. 

Oth. It is the cause, it is the cause, my soul : 

Let me not name it to you, you chaste stars ! 



128. on afore?} Ff, Craig ; on ? I pray Qq, Globe. 

Scene II. 



129. makes] markes Q I. 



A Bedchamber . . . a light burning. Enter Othello.] Globe; Enter Othello 
with a light. Q I ; Enter Othello with a light, and Desdemona in her bed. Q 2, 
3 ; Enter Othello, and Desdemona in her bed. Ff ; A Bedchamber : Des- 
demona in bed asleep. A light burning. Enter Othello. Steevens. 



129. fordoes} undoes. See Hamlet, 
II. i. 103, and Lear, V. iii. 255, and 
notes at the two places. Compare 
Caxton, Reynard the Fox (Arber, p. 
38), ' ' how I myght breke and fordo 
my fadirs fals counseyl. " The word is 
commoner in the stronger sense of 
" destroy." 

Scene //. 

I. It is the cause] " The abruptness 
of this soliloquy makes it obscure. The 
meaning, I think, is this : I am here 
(says Othello in his mind) overwhelmed 
with horror. What is the reason of 
this perturbation ? Is it want of resolu- 
tion to do justice ? Is it the dread of 
shedding blood? No. It is not the 
action that shocks me, but it is the 
cause, it is the cause, my soul " (John- 
son). Steevens takes the words to 
mean that Othello seeks to justify him- 
self, by dwelling upon the cause, that 
is to say, the greatness of the provoca- 
tion he had received ; or he may merely 
mean, "It is the cause of virtue I 
maintain." I prefer Johnson's inter- 
pretation. Othello, in the depth of his 
anguish, has no room for compunction 



or any thought save the one, the " it " 
that he cannot name, the cause, the 
unforgivable and unmentionable thing 
that she has done. The more trivial 
idea of justification comes as an after- 
thought at the words, " Yet she must 
die " ; merely to be glanced at. Fur- 
ness has a long and deeply interesting 
note on the various views of actors 
upon the staging of this scene. 

2. you chaste stars] Othello's identi- 
fication of the stars with chastity shows 
the frame of mind he is in. He is 
thinking only of chastity, or its loss, 
and identifies the stars with that one 
virtue. Whatsoever frame of mind a 
man was in, or whatever calamity had 
befallen him, he attributes that mood, 
not necessarily as caused by, but as 
existing in, and harmonized with by the 
stars. The use of this word "chaste" 
bears out the sense given above to the 
word ' ' cause. " Othello feels himself 
"chaste." The stars are "chaste." 
The other thing he cannot name. 
Every human frame of mind is attributed 
to the stars, in one place or another, in 
Shakespeare, according to the condition 
uppermost at the occasion. 



sc.ii.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 



231 



It is the cause. Yet I '11 not shed her blood, 

Nor scar that whiter skin of hers than snow 

And smooth as monumental alabaster. 5 

Yet she must die, else she '11 betray more men. 

Put out the light, and then put out the light : 

If I quench thee, thou flaming minister, 

5. alabaster] F 4, alablaster the rest; [Takes off his sword] Steevens. 7.] 
Regarded as a stage-direction [Takes off his sword and then puts out the 
light.] Goldwin Smith, Cambridge) ; light, . . . light :] Qq, Ff, Steevens, Globe, 
etc. ; light, and, then, . . . the light ; Theobald ; light : and then put out thy 
light. Hanmer ; light, and then Put out the light ? Warburton, Jennens ; 
light, and then Put out the light ! Capell, Rolfe. (Several other almost im- 
perceptible variations occur.) 



4. whiter] For the transposition of 
the adjective, see many examples 
collected in Abbott, 419. A re- 
markable one occurs in 1 Henry VI. 
IV. v. 5 (not in Abbott) : 

" When sapless age and weak unable 

limbs, 

Should bring thy father to his 
drooping chair." 

5. alabaster] Compare Richard III. 
IV. iii. ii ; and Lucrece, 419, "ala- 
baster skin." The " monumental " use 
is referred to in Merchant of Venice, 
I. i. 84 : " Sit like his grandsire cut in 
alabaster " ; it gives the sense of 
"polished." Compare Burton's Ana- 
tomy of Melancholy (Bk. II. ii. 2), ed. 
1854, p. 516 : "A high brow like unto 
the bright heavens . . . white and 
smooth like the polished alabaster." 
Gabriel Harvey has the metaphor in 
Pierces Supererogation (Gros. ii. 285), 
"alabaster necke, corall bracelets 
[arms], ruby lips" (1593). 

6. betray more men] ruin others (as 
she has done me). The line comes in 
inharmoniously. It recalls the last line 
of the ballad, in an awkward fashion. 

7. put out the light] Hanmer suggested 
"thy light" at the second use; and 
others have taken various liberties with 
the text. It may seem "strange that 
the mind when fraught with a passion 
so intense " should trifle, but the line is 
only to be explained by a play upon 



words, a "cold conceit," as one of the 
commentators calls it. The obvious 
sense, ' ' put out the taper, and then 
extinguish the light of life," is enforced 
to a certainty in the following lines. 
Examples of "put out the light," 
meaning to "kill," have been adduced 
from several contemporary authors by 
Steevens and Farmer. And Malone 
refers to Lucrece (178), a poem which 
has several times served to illustrate 
this play. Compare also 3 Henry VI. 
II. vi. I, and Macbeth, v. v. 23, where 
a candle is the symbol of life. The 
words "monumental alabaster " might 
themselves have suggested the in- 
verted and extinguished torch, emblem 
of death. For the use of the phrase 
compare Beaumont and Fletcher's 
Maid's Tragedy, iv. I : " 'Tis a justice 
... To put the light out of such base 
offenders." Steevens says this phrase 
is used twice in Sidney's Arcadia for 
killing a lady, pp. 460 and 470, ed. 
1633. The expression is still in use in 
criminal life in London. (See Farmer 
and Henley, Slang and its Analogues.} 
Compare Greene's Groaf s-worth of Wit 
(at the end) : " Remember, gentlemen, 
your lives are like so many light tapers 
that are with care deliuered to you all 
to maintaine : these with wind-puft 
wrath may be extinguished, with 
drunkennesse put out, with negligence 
may fall." The metaphor is trite. 



232 OTHELLO [ACTV. 

I can again thy former light restore, 

Should I repent me : but once put out thy light, i o 

Thou cunning'st pattern of excelling nature, 

I know not where is that Promethean heat 

That can thy light relume. When I have pluck'd 

thy rose, 

I cannot give it vital growth again, 
It must needs wither : I '11 smell it on the tree. 1 5 

[Kissing her. 

O balmy breath, that dost almost persuade 
Justice to break her sword ! One more, one more : 
Be thus when thou art dead, and I will kill thee, 
And love thee after : one more, and this the last : 
So sweet was ne'er so fatal. I must weep, 20 

But they are cruel tears : this sorrow 's heavenly ; 
It strikes where it doth love. She wakes. 
Des. Who 's there ? Othello ? 



IO. thy light} f; thine Qq, Steevens (1793). II. cunning'st] cunning Q i. 
13. relume] Malone et seq. ; re-lume Ff; returne Q I ; relumine Q 2, 3 ; thy 
rose] Ff, Malone ; the rose Qq, Globe, Craig. 15. must needs} Qq, Globe ; 
needs must Ff, Steevens, etc., Craig; it] Qq, thee Ff; [Kissing her.] Kisses 
her. Q 2, 3 (at line 19 Q i); omitted Ff. 16. O balmy} Steevens, etc., 
Craig; Oh Balmy Ff; A balmy Qq ; Ah, balmy Globe, etc. ; dost almost} Ff, 
doth almost Qq. 17. Justice'] lustice her selfe Qq, Jennens ; sword! One 

. . . more:] sword. One more, one more: Ff; sword once more, Q I ; sword: 
one more; Q 2, 3 ; sword. Once more Jennens. 19. one] once Q i; and 
this] Qq, etc. ; and that's Ff, Rowe, Dyce ; [He kisses her] Q I. 22. where] 
when Q i; doth} Ff, does Qq ; She wakes.] stage - direction ; Anon, conj., 
reading It . . . Othello ? as one line (apud Cambridge). 

12. Promethean heat} Compare does not occur elsewhere in 
" Promethean fire," Love's Labour's Shakespeare (nor elsewhere earlier, 
Lost, IV. iii. 351. Peele has the image so far as I am aware). Both 
in England's Holidays (Routledge, terms are in Bailey's Dictionary. 
p. 5970) : "like Prometheus' life- Pope has: "Relumed her ancient 
infusing fire" (1595). light, not kindled new" (Web- 

13. relume] "to light anew, to re- ster). Compare French allumer 
kindle," N. Bailey, ed. 1766. This, (Cotgrave). 

like "illume" of Hamlet, I. i. 37, 



sc. ii.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 233 

Oth. Ay, Desdemona. 

Des. Will you come to bed, my lord ? 

Oth. Have you pray'd to-night, Desdemona ? 

Des. Ay, my, lord. 25 

Oth. If you bethink yourself of any crime 

Unreconciled as yet to heaven and grace, 

Solicit for it straight. 

Des. Alas, my lord, what may you mean by that ? 
Oth. Well, do it, and be brief; I will walk by: 30 

I would not kill thy unprepared spirit ; 

No ; heaven forfend ! I would not kill thy soul. 
Des. Talk you of killing ? 
Oth. Ay, I do. 

Des. Then heaven 

Have mercy on me ! 

Oth. Amen, with all my heart ! 

Des. If you say so, I hope you will not kill me. 35 

Oth. Hum! 
Des. And yet I fear you ; for you are fatal then 

When your eyes roll so : why I should fear I know not, 

Since guiltiness I know not ; but yet I feel I fear. 
Oth. Think on thy sins. 

29. Alas'] Qq, Alack Ff; may] Q I, Ff ; doe Q 2, 3. 32. heaven] Qq, 
heavens Ff. 33, 34. Talk . . . heard] arranged as by Capell, etc., Globe, 
Craig ; each speech a separate line inQq, Ff, Cambridge. 35. so] omitted F I. 

30. by] aside. would appear to have been usual in the 
32. forfend] forbid, as below, at line time of Shakespeare. A tragic scene 

182. almost requires them. Expressions 

36.] Compare Coriolanus' treatment such as "gnaw the lip," or "bite the 

of Cominius when he rejects his inter- thumbj" or "nails, till the blood 

cession : came," were so common that they must 

' ' Yet, to bite his lip, have reference to actual practices. 

And hum at good Cominius, much They are still to be found, though 

unhearts me." decreasing in quantity since the eigh- 

(v. i. 49, 50). teenth century, in works of fiction. 
These outward displays of passion 



234 OTHELLO [ACTV. 

Des. They are loves I bear to you. 40 

Oth. Ay, and for that thou diest. 

Des. That death 's unnatural that kills for loving. 

Alas, why gnaw you so your nether lip ? 

Some bloody passion shakes your very frame : 

These are portents ; but yet I hope, I hope, 45 

They do not point on me. 

Oth. Peace, and be still ! 

Des. I will so. What 's the matter ? 
Oth. That handkerchief which I so loved and gave thee, 

Thou gavest to Cassio. 
Des. No, by my life and soul ! 

Send for the man, and ask him. 
Oth. Sweet soul, take heed, 50 

Take heed of perjury ; thou art on thy death-bed. 
Des. Ay, but not yet to die. 
Oth. Yes, presently : 

Therefore confess thee freely of thy sin ; 

For to deny each article with oath 

Cannot remove nor choke the strong conception 5 5 

That I do groan withal. Thou art to die. 
Des. Then Lord have mercy on me ! 
Oth. I say, amen. 

Des. And have you mercy too ! I never did 

Offend you in my life ; never loved Cassio 

40. loves'] Qq, F I ; love F 2, 3, 4. 41. Ay] omitted Qq. 4$. I hope t I 
Aope]Ff, I hopefy\. 47. will so. What's] Johnson, Globe; will, so, what's 
Q I, 2; wi!! so: What's Ff, Capell, Steevens. 52. Yes] Qq, omitted Ff. 
55. conception'] conceit Q I, Jennens. 57. Then Lord\ Qq, etc. ; Heaven 
Ff, Rowe. 

43. nether lip] See above, IV. iii. 39. 46. point on] Compare Troilus and 
Compare Lyly *s Mydas, III. ii., 1592 : Cressida, I. iii. 31, "find Hector's 
"all my nether teeth are loose." purpose Pointing on him." 



sc. ii.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 235 

But with such general warranty of heaven 60 

As I might love : I never gave him token. 
Oth. By heaven, I saw my handkerchief in his hand. 

perjured woman ! thou dost stone my heart, 
And makest me call what I intend to do 

A murder, which I thought a sacrifice : 65 

1 saw the handkerchief. 

Des. He found it then ; 

I never gave it him : send for him hither ; 

Let him confess a truth. 

Oth. He hath confess'd. 

Des. What, my lord ? 
Oth. That he hath used thee. 

Des. How ? unlawfully ? 70 

Oth. Ay. 

Des. He will not say so. 

Oth. No, his mouth is stopp'd ; 

Honest lago hath ta'en order for't. 
Des. O, my fear interprets ! what, is he dead ? 
Oth. Had all his hairs been lives, my great revenge 

Had stomach for them all. 75 

Des. Alas, he is betray'd, and I undone ! 
Oth. Out, strumpet ! weep'st thou for him to my face ? 

62. in his] Qq, Jennens, Steevens ; zn's Ff, Globe. 63. my\ thy Q I. 
64. makest] makes F I. 68. Let] And let Q I. 70. hath used thee.'} Ff, 
hath uds death. Q I. 73. 0, . . . interprets !] Q\o\)Q, Ok, . . . interprets. 
Ff. 77. Out] O Qq. 

72. to! en order] taken measures, of thy life as many as the haires on thy 

arranged. Compare Richard II. v. i. head?" A similar expression occurs 

53, and Measure for Measure, II. i. 246. in Macbeth, V. viii. 48. Steevens 

74. hairs been lives\ Compare Lyly's quotes from two later plays, where the 

My das, I. i., 1592 : " Desirest thou to same thought occurs ; both are perhaps 

be fortunate in thy love, or in thy echoes of Othello's words in this famous 

victories famous, or to have the yeeres scene. 



236 OTHELLO [ACT v. 

Des. O, banish me, my lord, but kill me not ! 

Oth. Down, strumpet ! 

Des. Kill me to-morrow ; let me live to-night ! 80 

Oth. Nay, if you strive, 

Des. But half an hour ! 

Oth. Being done, there is no pause. 

Des. But while I say one prayer ! 

Oth. It is too late. \He smothers her. 

Emit. [ Within} My lord, my lord! what, ho! my lord, my lord! 

Oth. What noise is this ? Not dead ? not yet quite dead ? 8 5 

I that am cruel am yet merciful; 

I would not have thee linger in thy pain : 

So, so. 

Emit. [ Within] What, ho ! my lord, my lord ! 
Oth. Who 's there ? 

Emil. [ Within] O, good my lord, I would speak a word 
with you ! 

81. if} Ff, an Qq. 82, 83. Oth. Being . . . pause. Des.] omitted Q i, 
reading Des. But halfe an houre, but while I say one prayer, followed by Pope, 
Hanmer. 83. It is too] Ff, Tis too Q I ; [He smothers her] Smothers her Ff, 
He stifles her Qq (after prayer). 83, 84. late . . . Emil.] late. Des. O Lord, 
Lord, Lord. Em. Q i, Jennens. 84. Emil. [Within]] Steevens, etc., Emillia 
calls within Qq (after omitted Lord Q I, after late Q 2, 3), Emilia at the door. Ff. 
85. noise} Ff, voyce Qq. 88. [Stabbing her.] Rann ; [Within]] Ff, omitted Qq. 
89, IOO. [Within]] Malone, Steevens (1793) et seq. ; omitted Qq, Ff. 

82. Being done} " Now that it is comprehensible, and (from the drawing 
being done, there can be no pause." of blood) natural if the stab takes place. 

88. So, so] Rann ( 1 794) inserted here This, at least, was the opinion of several 

the stage-direction ' ' stabbing her " ; editors. To Furness we are indebted 

Steevens made the suggestion in his for the views of some eminent medical 

ed. 1793, though he does not insert men, the majority of whose evidence 

the words. But Furness quotes from is against the necessity of this further 

Francis Gentleman {Dramatic Censor, horror. We have no reason to suppose 

i. 148, 1770), who justifies the stage that Shakespeare thought of it, but we 

practice ; presumably that of Garrick. have Othello's words to the contrary. 

The difficulty arises from Desdemona's Nevertheless it has been adopted on 

partial recovery, and subsequent death the stage by such important actors as 

without further violence, which is an Booth and Fechter. 
unnatural result from suffocation ; while 



sc. ii.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 237 

Oth. Yes : 'tis Emilia. By and by. She 's dead. 90 

'Tis like she comes to speak of Cassio's death. 

The noise was high. Ha ! no more moving ? 

Still as the grave. Shall she come in ? were 't 
good? 

I think she stirs again. No. What 's best to do ? 

If she come in, she'll sure speak to my wife: 95 

My wife ! my wife ! what wife ? I have no wife. 

O, insupportable ! O heavy hour ! 

Methinks it should be now a huge eclipse 

Of sun and moon, and that the affrighted globe 

Should yawn at alteration. 
Emit. [ Withiri\ I do beseech you I oo 

That I may speak with you, O, good my lord ! 
Oth. I had forgot thee: O, come in, Emilia. 

92. high~\ Ff, Steevens, Dyce, Craig ; here Qq, Jennens, Globe. 94. best to 
do] the best Qq, Steevens. 96. -what wife ?] my wife ; Q I. IOO. Should] 
Qq, Did Ff. 101. That] omitted Qq, reading / . . . lord one line ; 0] 

omitted Q i. 102. forgot] forgotten Q 2, 3 ; 0] omitted Q 2, 3. 

90. by and by] presently. See II. i. tempests are asleepe and laid to rest. 

290. . . . They [earthquakes] fortune also 

92. high] Probably refers to the to be when the Sune and Moone are 

attack upon Cassio, where there was eclipsed." Here we have alterations 

undoubtedly much noise. indeed, and a vividly poetical descrip- 

97. heavy] See IV. ii. 43. tion of them, coupled with chawmes 

98-100. eclipse . . . yawn at altera- [yawns, or chasms] of the globe, as it 

tion] The chaos that Othello foretells "travelleth and waggeth to and fro," 

for himself "when I love thee not," and eclipses of sun and moon. Theo- 

should now be here. See in. iii. 93. bald accuses Shakespeare of profanity 

For the connection between eclipses in this passage, an accusation which 

and earthquakes, to us a meaningless (though obviously just to him) seems 

one, Shakespeare had his authority in quite groundless, even apart from the 

Holland's Plinie. In Book ii. ch. 80, extract from Pliny. Eclipses, like 

" Of the Gaping Chinkes of the Earth," comets, have at all times been con- 

Ifind: " In one place the walls of cities nected with mundane calamities by 

are laid along: in another they be superstition. See Lear, I. ii. in et seq. 

swallowed up in a deep and wide I see no occasion to deem that Shake- 

chawme : here are cast up mightie speare refers here to the Crucifixion 

heapes of earth : there are let out rivers (Matt, xxvii. ), as Theobald finds neces- 

of water, because in those times all sary. 



238 OTHELLO [ACT v. 

Soft ; by and by. Let me the curtains draw. 
Where art thou ? [ Unlocks the door. 

Enter EMILIA. 

What 's the matter with thee now ? 

Emit. O, my good lord, yonder 's foul murders done ! 105 
Oth. What, now ? 

Emit. But now, my lord. 

Oth. It is the very error of the moon ; 

She comes more near the earth than she was wont 

And makes men mad. 
Emit. Cassio, my lord, has kill'd a young Venetian no 

Call'd Roderigo. 
Oth. Roderigo kill'd ! 

And Cassio kill'd ! 

Emit. No, Cassio is not kill'd. 

Otk. Not Cassio kill'd ! then murder 's out of tune, 

And sweet revenge grows harsh. 
Des. O, falsely, falsely murder'd ! 

Emit. Alas, what cry is that ? 115 

Oth. That! what? 
Emil. Out, and alas ! that was my lady's voice. 

Help ! help, ho ! help ! O lady, speak again ! 

Sweet Desdemona ! O sweet mistress, speak ! 
Des. A guiltless death I die. 1 20 

104. [Unlocks the door.] Theobald et seq. 105. murders} Qq, Globe; 
murthers Ff ; murder (or murther) Steevens, etc., Craig. 106. What,] Q i, 
What ? the rest. 108. near the~\ Qq, Steevens, Craig ; nearer Ff, Globe. 
115. Alas] O Lord Qq. 117. that was~\ Ff ; it is Q I ; it was Q 2, 3. 

107. error] aberration, deviation from journey, his error by sea, the sack of 

her right path. See "erring," above, Troy, are put ... as episodes of the 

I. Hi. 362. Compare Ben Jonson, argument. 
Discoveries, (424^): "The rest of his 



sc.li.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 239 

Emit. O, who hath done this deed ? 
Des. Nobody ; I myself. Farewell : 

Commend me to my kind lord : O, farewell ! [Dies. 
Oth. Why, how should she be murder'd ? 
Emil. Alas, who knows ? 

Oth. You heard her say herself, It was not I. 125 

Emil. She said so : I must needs report the truth. 
Oth. She 's like a liar gone to burning hell : 

Twas I that kill'd her. 
Emil. O, the more angel she, 

And you the blacker devil ! 

Oth. She turn'd to folly, and she was a whore. 130 

Emil. Thou dost belie her, and thou art a devil. 
Oth. She was false as water. 
Emil. Thou art rash as fire, to say 

That she was false : O, she was heavenly true ! 
Oth. Cassio did top her ; ask thy husband else. 

O, I were damn'd beneath all depth in hell, 135 

But that I did proceed upon just grounds 

To this extremity. Thy husband knew it all. 
Emil. My husband ! 
Oth. Thy husband. 

Emil. That she was false to wedlock? 140 

Oth. Ay, with Cassio. Nay, had she been true, 

123. [Dies] She dies Qq, omitted Ff. 125. heard] Qq, hear Ff. 126. 
the truth] Ff, a truth Qq. 132. art rash] as rash Q i. 141. Nay] Qq, 

omitted Ff. 

130. folly] See n. i. 137 (note). some suspicions seem to have flashed 
138. My husband!] Emilia's repeated across her, but were not attended to in 
astonishment at lago's complicity is the her desire to please lago. Her con- 
argument in favour of her not having science was torpidity itself. When it is 
suspected him to be the " eternal aroused, she acts nobly out of sudden 
villain." See note at iv. ii. 131. On grief, and love for her mistress, 
the other hand (see line 191, below), 



240 OTHELLO [ACTV. 

If heaven would make me such another world 

Of one entire and perfect chrysolite, 

I 'Id not have sold her for it. 
EmiL My husband ! 
Oth. Ay, 'twas he that told me first : 145 

An honest man he is, and hates the slime 

That sticks on filthy deeds. 
Emit. My husband ! 

Oth. What needs this iteration ? woman, I say thy 

husband. 
EmiL O mistress, villany hath made mocks with love ! 

My husband say that she was false ! 
Oth. He, woman ; 150 

I say thy husband : dost understand the word ? 

My friend, thy husband, honest, honest I ago. 
EmiL If he say so, may his pernicious soul 

145. mefirsf\ Qq, mean her first Ff. 148. iteration ? woman, /] Qq, Jennens, 
Globe; itterance, woman? I Ff, Steevens (1793), Craig. 149-152. Emil. O 
. . . Iago\ omitted Q I. 150. that] Q 2, 3 ; omitted Ff. 

143. chrysolite] "A kind of iasper of Naxos." The perfection of the 
stone . . . Chrysolith" J. Rider, metaphor only can be appreciated from 
Biblioth. Schol., 1589. " A chrysolite ; this passage. This precious stone was 
a kind of Jasper of a golden lustre, or the costliest, the largest, and the only 
colour " (Cotgrave). We must have re- one that could be polished for noble 
course again to Pliny, xxxvii. 8 : "The persons, and made to a required shape. 
Topaze or Chrysolith, hath a singular Peele, at the beginning of David and 
greene colour by it selfe, for which it is Bethsabe {ante 1599), speaks of "rubies, 
esteemed very rich; and when it was sapphires, chrysolites," as the most 
first found, it surpassed all others in precious pebbles. The chrysolite of 
price ; they were discovered first in an the ancients is believed to be the peri- 
Isle of Arabia called Chitis. . . . Of dote of moderns. 

which Chrysolite, Ptolomseus Phila- 148. iteration} repetition. Not used 

delphus, king of Egypt, caused the elsewhere by Shakespeare in this sense, 

statue of his wife Arsinoe to be made, Compare Lyly, Woman in Moone, IV. 

foure cubits long . . . of all pretious L, 1597: " Learchus [reading] 

stones it is the largest : this propertie it ' Learchus, my love, Learchus ! ' 

hath above all other gems, That only it O the iteration of my name argues 

commeth under the file to be polished affection." 

for noble men; whereas all others be I49-] " Villany has taken advantage 

scoured with grindstones coming out to play upon the weakness of passion." 



sc. ii.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 241 

Rot half a grain a day ! he lies to the heart : 

She was too fond of her most filthy bargain, 155 

Oth. Ha! 

Emit. Do thy worst : 

This deed of thine is no more worthy heaven 
Than thou wast worthy hen 

Oth. Peace, you were best. 

Emit. Thou hast not half the power to do me harm 1 66 
As I have to be hurt. O gull ! O dolt ! 
As ignorant as dirt ! thou hast done a deed* 
I care not for thy sword ; I '11 make thee known, 
Though I lost twenty lives. Help ! help, ho ! help ! 
The Moor has kill'd my mistress! Murder! murder! 

Enter MONTANO, GRATIANO, lAGO, and others. 

Mon. What is the matter ? How now, general ! 1 66 

Emit. O, are you come, I ago ? you have done well, 
That men must lay their murders on your neck. 

160. the} Qq,Steevens, etc., Craig ; that Ff, Globe. 163. I . , . sivord~\ in 
parenthesis Ff ; known'} know Qq. 164. ho ! help /] 0, helpe ; Qq. 165. has] 
Qq, Steevens, etc., Craig; hath Ff, Globe. 

I S9- y u were best] An old idiom But in the lawe do ever wry the 

retained from Chaucer's time. See I. and wrest, 

ii. 30, above, and Abbott's Grammar, And wyll not fall to ony agree- 

230. ment, 

1 60, 1 6 1.] "I have in this cause more Tyll in theyr neckes is lay'd by 

power to endure than thou hast power jugement 

to inflict" (Johnson). Malone parallels The costes and charge's, and so are 

the sentiment from Henry VIII. III. ii. made full bare." 

387, and 2 Henry VI. IV. i. 130. "Neck" is used in several other ob- 

168. lay . . . on your neck] hold solete phrases, where we would say 

you responsible, lay it to your charge, "back." Here, perhaps the metaphor 

An expression not elsewhere in Shake- is from laying the yoke on the neck of 

speare. I find it in The Hye Way to beasts of burthen. Another example of 

the Spyttal Hous (circa 1535), Haz- the above phrase occurs in Udall's 

litt's Early Popular Poetry, iv. 53 : Erasmus (Roberts' rept. p. 327), 1542 : 

" Selfwylled people, that can not be "The mistristfulnesse of the Byzancian 

in rest, he layed on the necke of the Charetes." 

16 



242 OTHELLO [ACT v. 

Gra. What is the matter? 

Emil. Disprove this villain, if thou be'st a man : 1 70 

He says thou told'st him that his wife was false : 
I know thou didst not, thou 'rt not such a villain. 
Speak, for my heart is full. 

1 ago. I told him what I thought, and told no more 

Than what he found himself was apt and true. 175 
Emil. But did you ever tell him she was false ? 
lago. I did. 
Emil. You told a lie, an odious, damned lie ; 

Upon my soul, a lie, a wicked lie ! 

She false with Cassio ! Did you say with Cassio ? 1 80 
lago. With Cassio, mistress. Go to, charm your tongue. 
Emil. I will not charm my tongue; I am bound to 
speak : 

My mistress here lies murder'd in her bed. 
AIL O heavens for fend ! 

Emil. And your reports have set the murder on. 185 

Oth. Nay, stare not, masters : it is true indeed. 
Gra, 'Tis a strange truth. 
Mon. O monstrous act ! 
Emil. Villany, villany, villany ! 

I think upon 't : I think : I smell 't : O villany ! 

I thought so then : I '11 kill myself for grief: 190 

169. Gra.] All Q I. 172. thou'rf] Ff, thou art Qq. 183-191. My . . . 
villany !} omitted Q I. 183. bed.~\ Ff, Q 2, Steevens, etc., Craig ; bed, Dyce, 
Globe. 185. murder] murther (spelling indiscriminate, as 183, etc.). 189. 
smell 't : O villany] smell a villany Q 2, 3. 

181. charm your tongue'] be silent, as as in Jonson's Bart. Fair, ii. I: 

if by enchantment. A common expres- "Justice Overdo : he is the man must 

sion in Shakespeare and Jonson. Com- charm you." 

pare Taming of the Shrew, I. i. 214, and 190. I thought so then] See note at 

2 Henry VI. IV. i. 64; idem (3) V. v. line 138, above, and at "Be not acknown 
31. Sometimes "tongue" is omitted, on't," ill. iii. 320, which latter speech 



sc. ii.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 243 

villany, villany ! 

lago. What, are you mad ? I charge you, get you home. 
Emil. Good gentlemen, let me have leave to speak : 

Tis proper I obey him, but not now. 

Perchance, lago, I will ne'er go home. 195 

Oth. O ! O ! O ! [Falling on the bed. 

Emit. Nay, lay thee down and roar ; 

For thou hast kill'd the sweetest innocent 

That e'er did lift up eye. 
Oth. [Rising] O, she was foul ! 

1 scarce did know you, uncle : there lies your niece, 
Whose breath indeed these hands have newly 

stopp'd ! 200 

I know this act shows horrible and grim. 
Gra. Poor Desdemon ! I am glad thy father's dead : 
Thy match was mortal to him, and pure grief 
Shore his old thread in twain : did he live now, 
This sight would make him do a desperate turn, 205 
Yea, curse his better angel from his side, 
And fall to reprobation. 

195. Perchance} Q i, Ff ; Perhaps Q 2, 3. 196. [Falling . . .] Oth. fals 
on the bed Qq (falls Q 2, 3) ; omitted Ff. 198. [Rising]] Theobald et seq. ; 
omitted Qq, Ff. 202. Desdemon] F I, 2, Dyce, Staunton, Delius ; Desdernona 
Qq, F 3, 4. 204. in twain] atwane Q I. 207. reprobation] Qq, etc.; repro- 
dance Ff, Dyce, Rolfe. 

was no doubt accompanied with a need- 207. reprobation} perdition. Shake- 

ful scowl. Clarke and Rolfe believe speare does not use this word again. The 

"then" refers to Emilia's "eternal Folios have it " reprobance," as they 

villain" speech at iv. ii. 131. That have also " iterance for " iteration " at 

seems hardly a sufficient signification. line 148, above. " Iteration " is in Cot- 

202. ] Delius says Desdemona's uncle, grave ( 1 6 1 1 ), " reprobation " is not, and 
Gratiano, appears to have come to the present is perhaps its first appear- 
Cyprus to bring her news of her father's ance. " Reprobate " (adj. ) is in Love's 
death. Labour's Lost, I. ii. 64 (1590), and in 

203. mortal} deadly. See II. i. 72 Rider's Dictionary (subst. ), 1589. 
(note). 



244 OTHELLO [ACTV. 

Oth. Tis pitiful ; but yet lago knows 

That she with Cassio hath the act of shame 

A thousand times committed ; Cassio confess'd it : 210 

And she did gratify his amorous works 

With that recognizance and pledge of love 

Which I first gave her ; I saw it in his hand : 

It was a handkerchief, an antique token 

My father gave my mother. 215 

Emit. O heaven ! O heavenly powers ! 

lago. Come, hold your peace. 

Emit. 'Twill out, 'twill out, I peace ! 

No, I will speak as liberal as the north : 

209. /4oM]Qi,Ff; hadQz, 3. 212. that]theQl. 216. O . . .powers!} 
O God, O heavenly God. Q i. 217. Come] Zouns Q I, Cambridge; 'Twill 
out, 'twill out. ] Twill out, twill: Q I. 217, 218. I peace! No,] I peace? No, 
Ff, Theobald, Globe ; / hold my peace sir, no, Qq (ending line no), Steevens, 
Craig. 218. / . . . north] Ff, Globe, Cambridge ; lie be in speaking, 
liberal! as the north Q 2, 3 ; Fie be in speaking, liberall as the ayre Q i. 

210.] Jonson says here: "This is I. iii. 36: " the tyrannous breathing of 

another passage which seems to suppose the north." The first Quarto reads 

a longer space comprised in the action " air," of which see below. I believe 

of this play than the scenes include." the reference to be to the north coun- 

See note at in. iii. 293. try, and the freedom of their (northerns') 

212. recognizance] recognition, ac- speech, especially in asseverations, 

knowledgment. Properly a legal term, Emilia, in the next line, uses their 

as old as Chaucer's time, and occurring favourite invocation at this time, to 

in Hamlet, v. i. 113. Lyly introduced && devil. Greene introduces " Bohan, 

the term in Mother Bombie, iv. 3 : a Scot," in \iisjames IV., expressly, 

" Your eloquence passes my recog- apparently, to swear by the deil. 

noscence. Lucio. I never heard that Howell says in a noble protest against 

before" (1594). swearing, Letters, iv. 12, 1628: "The 

215.] Othello would appear here to Irishman swears by his five wounds, the 

have forgotten his original statement Scot bids the Devil hale his soul, yet 

in III. iv. ; but Steevens thinks this a for variety of oaths the English roarer 

proof of Shakespeare's art. The ori- puts down all " ; and Ram Alley, v. 

ginal account was purposely ostenta- 1611 : "The devil take my soul, etc., 

tious, to alarm his wife the more. . . . That oath doth show thou art a 

Here the truth suffices. northern knight " ; and Massinger, 

218. liberal] free spoken. See II. City Madam, ii. 2: "May the great 

i. 164 (note). fiend, etc., . . . as the Scotchman says." 

2 1 8. as the north] Commentators Compare, too, Andrew Borde, Boke 

have explained this to mean north of Knowledge, ch. iv., 1542, speaking 

wind, with a reference to Cymbeline, of "the natural disposition of a Scotyshe 



sc.ii.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 245 

Let heaven and men and devils, let them all, 

All, all, cry shame against me, yet I '11 speak, 220 
lago. Be wise, and get you home. 
Emil. I will not 

[lago offers to stab Emilia. 
Gra. Fie ! 

Your sword upon a woman ! 

Emil. O thou dull Moor ! that handkerchief thou speak'st 
of 

I found by fortune and did give my husband ; 

For often with a solemn earnestness, 225 

More than indeed belong'd to such a trifle, 

He begg'd of me to steal it. 

lago. Villanous whore ! 

Emil. She give it Cassio ! no, alas, I found it, 

And I did give't my husband. 
lago. Filth, thou liest ! 

223. of\ Ff, on Qq. 228. give] Ff, gave Qq. 

man," he says: "And what worde I was written at or about the time of 
do speake, be it in myrth or in borde, James' accession, who very speedily put 
The foule evyl shalbe at the end of my a stop to uncomplimentary allusions to 
worde." These extracts bear upon the the North amongst the dramatists, by 
mode of speech. But so much was the the suppression of Eastward Hoe in 
north held in dislike that it gave rise 1605, and the severe punishment, or 
to several proverbs. "Out of the contemplated punishment, of the writers. 
North all ill comes forth " is as old as Hence this suggestion has a most in- 
Hakluyt, 1599, and much older in teresting bearing upon the text, since 
Latin. North came to mean bad, the probability is that the first Folio 
coarse, clownish, broad. Compare comes nearest to Shakespeare's words, 
Beaumont and Fletcher's Mons, while the first Quarto (reading " air } 
Thomas, i. 3: "Some northern toy, was printed from an independent stage- 
a little broad " ; and in Nice Valour, copy, containing various alterations, 
i. I (Dyce's Beaumont and Fletcher, x. I advance the above suggestion with 
301), "a northern fellow" is a "coarse" fear and trembling. It appears to me to 
fellow. See also Middleton's Mich, give sense, where the north wind was 
Tern. i. I (1607). I imagine this is the little less than an absurdity, 
sense of Emilia's simile. She does not, 229. Filth} harlot. Compare Timon, 
fortunately, have time to indulge much IV. i. 6. Cotgrave has : "fi lie perdue : 
in "profane" language, but she felt a desperate filth," etc. Mr. Craig sup- 
equal to it, in quantities. This play plied me with the following from North's 



246 OTHELLO [ACTV. 

Emil. By heaven, I do not, I do not, gentlemen. 230 

O murderous coxcomb ! what should such a fool 
Do with so good a wife ? 

Of A. Are there no stones in heaven 

But what serve for the thunder ? Precious villain ! 

\He runs at lago : lago stabs Emilia, and exit. 

Gra. The woman falls ; sure, he hath kill'd his wife. 

Emil. Ay, ay : O, lay me by my mistress' side. 235 

Gra. He 's gone, but his wife 's kill'd. 

Mon. 'Tis a notorious villain. Take you this weapon, 
Which I have here recover'd from the Moor : 
Come, guard the door without ; let him not pass, 
But kill him rather. I '11 after that same villain, 240 
For 'tis a damned slave. 

[Exeunt Montana and Gratiano. 

Oth. I am not valiant neither, 

But every puny whipster gets my sword. 

232. wife] Ff, woman Qq. 233. Precious] Ff ; pretious Q I ; pernitious 
Q 2, 3 ; [He . . . exit.] Globe ("from behind" after lago), Craig; The Moore 
runs at lago, lago kills his wife Qq, after woman ? (wife ?), line 232 ; lago stabs 
Emilia, then runs out. Steevens (1793), Dyce (ed. 2); omitted Ff. 235. 
[Exit lago, Qq]. 237. you this] Ff, your Qq. 238. here'] Qq, omitted Ff. 
241. [Exeunt . . . Gratiano] Qq et seq. t Globe, Craig; Exeunt all but Othello 
and Emilia. Cambridge ; Exit. Ff. 

Plutarch, Comp. between Aristides 237. notorious'] See above, IV. ii. 141. 

and Cato, ed. 1595, p. 391 : "because "Egregious, notable" (Schmidt), 

his sonne could not abide his filth," 238. recover'd] obtained, gained, 

and five lines lower, "a young harlatry A word used by the early navigators, 

filth." as it is in Tempest, in. ii. 16, and Two 

232.] Can heaven not spare one bolt Gentlemen of Verona, v. i. 12. Com- 

for this villain? Is it all needed for pare Best's Narrative of Frobisher's 

thunder? Shakespeare has " thunder- Second Voyage (Payne, ed. 1880, p. 

stone " mjulius Cczsar, I. iii. 49, and in 75), 1577: "we passed up into the 

Cymbeline, IV. ii. 271. Nares quotes country about two English miles, and 

"Jove's fell thunder-stone " from Chap- recovered the top of a high hill." 

man's Homer's Iliad, bk. xv. (1598). 242. whipster] a contemptible fellow. 

233. Precious'] perfect, selected ; as The term was used by Gabriel Harvey 

if priceless, exquisite. Stronger than similarly, in Pierces Supererogation 

irony. (Grosart, ii. 63), 1593 ; and in The 



sc. ii.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 



247 



But why should honour outlive honesty ? 

Let it go all. 
Emil. What did thy song bode, lady ? 

Hark, canst thou hear me ? I will play the swan, 245 

And die in music. \Singing\ Willow, willow, willow. 

Moor, she was chaste ; she loved thee, cruel Moor ; 

So come my soul to bliss, as I speak true ; 

So speaking as I think, I die, I die. \She dies. 

Oth. I have another weapon in this chamber; 250 

It is a sword of Spain, the ice-brook's temper. 

244-246. What . . . willow.} omitted Q I. 246. [Singing] Dyce et seq. ; 
omitted Qq, Ff, Craig ; Willow . . . willow'} in italics Qq, Ff (willough Ff), 
Steevens, etc. 249. / die, I die] Qq ; alas, I die Ff ; [She dies] Qq ; omitted 
Ff; Dies Steevens, Globe, etc. 251. It is] Qq, It was Ff; the ice-brook's'] 
the Ice brookes F I, 2 ; the Ice brooks F 3, 4 ; the Isebrookes Qq ; the libra's 
Pope, Theobald, Capell. 



Passionate Morrice (New Sh. Soc. p. 
81, 1877) of a loose girl (1593). Dry- 
den applies it to a "padder" (thief), 
Sir Martin Marall, iv. i., 1667. Grose 
defines it later, "a sharp, subtle fellow." 
There are several old terms similarly 
employed, beginning with "whip." 
Sometimes they relate to "whipping" 
off drinks, more often to flogging, either 
of the human body, or the town-top. 

244-249.] Whatever view Shake- 
speare desires us to take of Emilia, 
and how we are to apportion the good 
and the bad in her seemingly incon- 
gruous disposition, he certainly intended 
us to forgive her everything in her 
dying scene. At line 88, above at the 
dreadful words "So, so" Johnson 
said: "I am glad that I have ended 
my revisal of this dreadful scene. It 
is not to be endured." So true are 
these words that they need no com- 
ment, save that the suffering of sym- 
pathy in the reader is practically 
exhausted by Desdemona's murder, 
and there is none left for the ensuing 
horrors. Were there a morsel left, 
Emilia earns it at last. 

245. flay the swan] Shakespeare re- 



fers to this myth several times. See 
King John, v. vii. 21, and Merchant of 
Venice, in. ii. 44. The earliest refer- 
ence I have noted is in Gascoyne's 
Life (Arber, p. 22), 1577: "The swan 
in songs doth knoll her passing bell." 
See also Arber's English Garner, vii. 
330, for an early reference. The 
legend is contradicted by Pliny : 
" Some say that the swans sing lament- 
ably a little before their death, but 
untruly I suppose : for experience in 
many hath shewed the contrarie" 
(Holland's Translation, x. 23). The 
editors of Clarendon Press edition 
of Merchant of Venice quote it from 
Ovid, Heroides, vii. i. Steevens and 
Douce refer it back to Plato. Sir 
Thomas Brown supposed the idea 
originated from the belief that Orpheus, 
after his death, became a swan 
(Popular Errors). 

251. sword of Spain] either a Toledo 
or a Bilbao, which were equally famous 
at this time. Lyly mentions ' ' the 
Spanish rapier" as early as 1579 
(Euphues, Arber, p. 152). 

251. ice-brook's temper] steel tem- 
pered in icy - cold water. Steevens 



248 OTHELLO [ACTV. 

O, here it is. Uncle, I must come forth. 
Gra. [ Within] If thou attempt it, it will cost thee dear : 

Thou hast no weapon, and perforce must suffer. 
Oth. Look in upon me then, and speak with me, ^ r j 255 

Or, naked as I am, I will assault thee. 

Re-enter GRATIANQ. 

Gra. What is the matter ? . 

Oth. Behold, I have a weapon ; 

A better never did itself sustain 
Upon a soldier's thigh : I have seen the day 
That with this little arm and this good sword 260 
I have made my way through more impediments 
Than twenty times your stop : but, O vain boast ! 
Who can control his fate? 'tis not so now. 
Be not afraid, though you do see me weapon'd ; 
Here is my journey's end, here is my butt 265 

And very sea-mark of my utmost sail. 
Do you go back dismay'd ? 'tis a lost fear : 

255. with] Ff, to Qq. 262. your] you Q I, 264-270. Be , , . wench!'} 
omitted Q I. 266. And] Ff ; The Q 2, 3. 

thought a special " brook " was referred 264. weapon' d\ armed- Mai one says 

to here, and cites classical authorities, this uncommon participle occurs in 

He does not, however, mention Pliny, Sidney's Arcadia. But see quotations 

who says (Holland, xxxiv. 14): at "officers of night," I. i. 183, from 

" Water only which in some places is Contareno's Venice. And compare 

better, in other worse, hath ennobled Hakluyt, ii. 291 (reprint), 1599: "Some 

many places for the excellent yron that of his gard had smal stanes, & most of 

commeth from them, as namely, Bil- them were weaponed with bowes and 

bilis in Spaine . . . Comus also in arrowes." 

Italic . . . Setting aside these two 266. sea-mar&] beacon, perch, etc. 

countries, I know not where there be See Coriolanvs, v. iii. 73. And East- 

anie bars or gads tempered of fine and ward Ho, iv. i : " the farthest seeing 

pure steele." sea-mark of the world." Captain Smith 

263. Who can control his fate ?] Des- ( Virginia, Arber, p. 922) has a pretty 

demona's words "It is my wretched little ode to "The Sea-Marke," 1630. 

fortune " are recalled. 267. lost] wasted, useless. 



sc. ii.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 249 

Man but a rush against Othello's breast, 
And he retires. Where should Othello go ? 
Now, how dost thou look now? O ill-starr'd 
wench ! 270 

Pale as thy smock ! when we shall meet at compt, 
This look of thine will hurl my soul from heaven, 
And fiends will snatch at it. Cold, cold, my girl ! 
Even like thy chastity. 

O cursed, cursed slave! Whip me, ye devils, 275 
From the possession of this heavenly sight ! 
Blow me about in winds ! roast me in sulphur ! 
Wash me in steep-down gulfs of liquid fire ! 
O Desdemona ! Desdemona ! dead ! 
Oh! Oh! Oh! 280 

Enter LODOVICO, MONTANO, CASSIO carried in a chair, 
and Officers with lAGO, prisoner. 

Lod. Where is this rash and most unfortunate man ? 
Oth. That 's he that was Othello : here I am. 

270. Now, how] Now: how Ff; How Q 2, 3. 271. compf] count Q I. 
275. cursed, cursed} Ff, cursed Qq ; ye] Ff, you Qq. 278. steep-down] 

hyphen omitted Qq. 279, 280. O Desdemona! . . . Ok!] Q I, 2, Collier 
(in one line), in two lines Globe, Cambridge ; Oh Desdemon ! dead Desdemon ; 
dead. Oh, Oh ! Ff (Desdemona F 2, 3) in one line ; in two lines, the first as here, 
the second reading Dead! Oh! oh! oh! Steevens, Rann, etc. 280. Enter . . . 
prisoner] Rowe and Capell (nearly), Malone, Steevens (1793) et seq. ; Enter 
Lodouico, Montano, lago, and officers, Cassio in a Chaire Qq ; lago omitted Q 2, 
3 ; Enter Lodovico, Cassio, Montano, and lago, with Officers Ff. 

268. rush] a thing of no force. 271. compf] day of judgment. 
Compare As You Like It, in. v. 22. 276, 277.] Compare this with Mea- 

269. should] denotes destiny, futurity, sure for Measure, in. i. 122: 
Compare Greene's James IV. (2o6a): " To bathe in fiery floods, . . . 
"What should I do? ah poor unhappy To be imprisoned in the viewless 
queen." Used as a cry of extreme winds, 

misery. And blown with restless violence 

270. wench] used affectionately often round about 

by Shakespeare. Seeabove, in. Hi. 314. The pendent world." 



250 OTHELLO [ACTV. 

Lod. Where is that viper ? bring the villain forth. 
Oth. I look down towards his feet : but that 's a fable. 

If that thou be'st a devil, I cannot kill thee. 285 

[ Wounds lago. 

Lod. Wrench his sword from him. 

lago. I bleed, sir, but not kill'd. 

Oth. I am not sorry neither : I 'Id have thee live ; 

For, in my sense, 'tis happiness to die. 
Lod. O thou Othello, that wert once so good, 

Fall'n in the practice of a damned slave, 290 

What shall be said to thee ? 
Oth. Why, any thing: 

An honourable murderer, if you will ; 

For nought did I in hate, but all in honour. 
Lod. This wretch hath part confess'd his villany : 

Did you and he consent in Cassio's death? 295 

Oth. Ay. 

Cas. Dear general, I never gave you cause. 
Oth. I do believe it, and I ask your pardon. 

283. that} Ff, this Q I. 285. that} omitted Q I. 286. Wrench] Wring 
Q I. 289. wert} Qq, was Ff. 290. damned] Qq, cursed Ff. 293. did 
I in] Qq J Ididinl,2,3. 297. never gave]^i; did never give Qq, Jennens. 
298. your} Ff ; you Qq, Globe, Rolfe. 

284. a fable] The devil's cloven foot The reference to "viper" in the pre- 
became a very common vulgar belief vious line is to another fable, whence 
later. Perhaps from stage representa- vipers were made the types of ingrati- 
tions. Ben Jonson and Massinger both tude ; not the least of lago's many 
refer to it. I find it in Greene's Looking- unpardonable sins. Othello means 
Glass for London (Routledge, p. 138), that since lago has not cloven feet, the 
1594 : belief is untrue. " Some are so carnal- 

" Devil. Thou hast never a shoe fit lie minded that a spirit is no sooner 

for me. spoken of, but immediately they thinke 

Adam. Why, sir, we shoe horned of a blacke man with cloven feet, a 

beasts, as well as you. [Aside} paire of homes, a taile, clawes, and eies 

O good Lord ! let me sit down as broad as a bason," Scot's Discoverie 

and laugh; hath never a cloven of Witchcraft (rept. p. 426), 1584. 

foot ; a devil, quoth he ! ... 289. so good] an important testimony 

[Beats him." to Othello's earlier repute. 



sc.ii.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 251 

Will you, I pray, demand that demi-devil 

Why he hath thus ensnared my soul and body? 300 

lago. Demand me nothing ; what you know, you know : 
From this time forth I never will speak word. 

Lod. What, not to pray? 

Gra. Torments will ope your lips. 

Oth. Well, thou dost best. 

Lod. Sir, you shall understand what hath befall'n, 305 

Which, as I think, you know not. Here is a letter 
Found in the pocket of the slain Roderigo, 
And here another : the one of them imports 
The death of Cassio to be undertook 
By Roderigo. 310 

Oth. O villain ! 

Cas. Most heathenish and most gross ! 

Lod. Now here 's another discontented paper, 

Found in his pocket too ; and this, it seems, 
Roderigo meant to have sent this damned villain ; 
But that, belike, lago in the interim 315 

Came in and satisfied him. 

299. 7] omitted Q I. 309, 310. undertook By] undertooke by Qq. 

315. interim} niche Q I. 

299. demi-devif] worse than a devil, tator, and are therefore "suspected." 

lago is human in form, but he is a But Othello has asked for information ; 

bastard, with a devil for one parent. lago will not give it ; why should he not 

A genuine devil is a higher order of be satisfied ? How otherwise is Cassio 

being. So of Caliban, at the end of to be fully restored to his rightful place 

The Tempest: "this demi-devil For in Othello's estimation before all is 

he's a bastard one" (Dowden). over? Were these remarks to close 

312 et seq.~\ Macmillan quotes the drama, they would appear trivial, 

Brandes (agreeing with him) that but as a circumstantial preliminary, to 

" these remarks of Lodovico are nerve- give one breath for the final deed, they 

less and feeble and detract from the are wholly appropriate, 

effect of the scene. This passage is 315. belike} probably. 

not Shakespeare's and ought to be 315. in the interim] Ben Jonson used 

expunged." Macmillan's objection is this phrase a little earlier, Cynthia's 

that they give information already Revels, in. i., 1600: " In the interim, 

possessed by the reader and the spec- you may." 



252 OTHELLO [ACTV. 

Oth. O the pernicious caitiff! 

How came you, Cassio, by that handkerchief 
That was my wife's ? 

Cas. I found it in my chamber : 

And he himself confess'd but even now 
That there he dropp'd it for a special purpose 320 
Which wrought to his desire. 

Oth. O fool ! fool ! fool ! 

Cas, There is besides in Roderigo's letter, 

How he upbraids lago, that he made him 

Brave me upon the watch ; whereon it came 

That I was cast : and even but now he spake 325 

After long seeming dead, lago hurt him, 

lago set him on. 

Lod. You must forsake this room, and go with us : 
Your power and your command is taken off, 
And Cassio rules in Cyprus. For this slave, 330 

If there be any cunning cruelty 
That can torment him much and hold him long, 
It shall be his. You shall close prisoner rest, 
Till that nature of your fault be known 
To the Venetian state. Come, bring away. 335 

Oth. Soft you ; a word or two before you go. 

I have done the state some service, and they know 't. 
No more of that. I pray you, in your letters, 
When you shall these unlucky deeds relate, 
Speak of me as I am ; nothing extenuate, 340 

316. OtAe]Qq, Oh thou Ff. 317. thaf] a Qq. 318. wife's] -wifes Qq, 
wives Ff. 319. but] it Q i ; it but Ff, Q 2, 3. 335. bring] Ff, Steevens 
(1793), Dyce, Cambridge ; bring him Qq, Globe, Craig. 336. before you go] 
omitted Q I. 340. me as I am] of them as they are Q I, Jennens. 

325. cast] dismissed. See I. i. 150, and I. i. 31. 



8c.ii.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 



253 



Nor set down aught in malice : then must you speak 
Of one that loved not wisely but too well ; 
Of one not easily jealous, but, being wrought, 
Perplex'd in the extreme ; of one whose hand, 
Like the base Indian, threw a pearl away 345 

Richer than all his tribe ; of one whose subdued eyes, 

341. then must you] then you must Q 2, 3. 345. Indian] Qq, F 2, 3, 4 ; 
ludean F I, Johnson, Steevens ; Judian Theobald, Globe, Cambridge, etc. 



344. Perplex'd] This word had a 
stronger meaning than it now has. In 
Skeat's Dictionary I find it "em- 
barrassed." Cotgrave explains it "at 
his wit's end." It meant as much as 
our word " distracted " or " in despair." 
Compare Cymbeline, iv. iii. 9 ; and the 
following lines from Chloris, by Wm. 
Smith (Grosart reprint, p. 11), 1596: 

" I seeing my love in perplexed 

plight, 

A sturdy bat from of an oke I rest, 
And with the ravishour continue 

fight 

Till," etc., 

where the maiden is at her last extrem- 
ity ; and compare Peele, Edward I. 
(ed. 1874, p. 406), 1593: "Ah didst 
thou know how Mary is perplex'd, 
Soon woulds thou come to Wales and 
rid me of this pain ; But, O, I die . . . 
[Dies " (in torture). 

345. Indian . . . pearl] If we are 
to judge by the space used in notes 
of commentators, this passage stands 
fourth in the list of difficult passages 
in Othello. The first Folio reading 
"Judean" increases the difficulty. The 
Folio reading is not to be rejected with- 
out serious thought. What appears to 
me most in its favour is that which 
Halliwell urged, and which Furness 
believed to be the true explanation. 
The epithet " base " appears to support 
"ludean," which, if correct, notwith- 
standing that the idea has been ridiculed 
[by Coleridge], probably refers to Judas 
Iscariot. And Furness adds, " Is there 
not, may I be permitted to add, sugges- 



tion even in the identity of the two first 
syllables, Judas, and /ttdfean?" This 
explanation requires the word "base" 
to be used in that worst sense, in which 
I cannot conceive it possible that 
Othello would use it, even indirectly, 
of himself. That is an objection. I 
find no difficulty in the " verse " accent, 
since if it be laid on Judean, as we 
should do, the first foot of the line is 
Like the base | , and scans harmoniously 
enough. Or it may be pronounced as 
" Herculean," " Epicurean," etc. But 
the fact of the word "Judean " being in 
the Folio text is the strongest argument 
in its support, and were it not for the 
superior value attached thereto, no 
hesitation would be felt in discarding it. 
My hesitation was finally removed by a 
passage in Ben Jonson's Discoveries^ 
which refers to such a fable as the 
simile requires. True, it does not con- 
tain the word Indian, but it was so 
universally the custom to connect pearls 
with Indians, that the one term would 
inevitably suggest the other. Numerous 
examples of "Indian" plus "pearl" 
are assembled in Furness's note, and as 
many more might be adduced. The 
passage only shows that there was such 
a fable, and expels the word "Judean." 
It is in Ben Jonson's Explorata, or 
Discoveries (first published in 1641), 
Periodi, etc. (4153): "Whatsoever 
loseth the grace and clearness, converts 
into a riddle : the obscurity is marked, 
but not the value. That perisheth, and 
is passed by, like the pearl in the fable." 
Passages adduced from Habington and 



254 



OTHELLO 



[ACT v. 



Albeit unused to the melting mood, 
Drop tears as fast as the Arabian trees 
Their medicinal gum. Set you down this ; 
And say besides, that in Aleppo once, 



350 



348. Drop] Drops Q I, F I. 349. medicinal] medicinall QQ, medicinable Ff. 



Howard, Carew and Glapthorne, seem 
to me not only to refer to Othello's 
words, but also to announce the fact 
that they had nothing to add, no fresh 
data to give, to the "fable." After 
all "Judean" maybe merely a misprint 
for Indian, obviously a likely one. 
"India" is actually misprinted Judah 
in the Quarto of Peele's Battle of 
Alcazar, iii. I. Nothing less than an 
apologue, a legend, or an established 
historical anecdote would satisfy the 
reading here. Of passages earlier 
than Othello, showing the ignorance 
of the base Indian in preferring 
useful to ornamental articles, two 
may be selected as the best of those 
in Furness. Collier quoted Drayton, 
Legend of Matilda, 1594 (Spenser Soc. 
ed. Poems, 1888, p. 453): "The 
wretched Indian spumes the golden 
ore." The other was given by " H. K." 
in Notes and Queries from Nashe's 
Pierce Pennilesse> 1593: "like the 
Indians that have store of gold and 
precious stones and yet are ignorant of 
their value." Macmillan's two apposite 
quotations (of late date) were previously 
cited by Boswell. For the barter of 
pearls by Indians, see Pliny ', xxxiv. ch. 
1 7. The fable must deal with a blunder 
or an accident to be fully acceptable. 
This is a strong argument against the 
above interpretation of the "Judean" 
reading, since Othello is the Indian, 
and the treachery belongs to lago. An 
example may be quoted, though un- 
fortunately of a Tartarian, not of an 
Indian : " In the storie of Pachymerius 
the Greeke ... I remember he telleth 
to the same purpose of one Nogas a 
Tartarian captaine . . . who refused a 
present of Pearle and other iewels sent 
unto him from Michael Palaeologus : 
asking withall for what use they served, 



and whether they were good to keepe 
away sicknesse, death, or other mis- 
fortune of this life, or no," Giles 
Fletcher, Russe Common Wealth, 1588 
(Hakluyt, i. p. 553, reprint 1809), 

1599- 

348. 349.] The metaphor here seems 
to be from Holland's Plinie, with some 
modifications (xii. ch. 14, 15). In 
ch. 1 5, speaking of ' ' Myrrhe and the 
trees that yield it," we are told they 
are found " in many quarters of Arabia 
. . . they sweate out of themselves a 
certaine liquor called stacte, which is 
very good Myrrhe." But the words of 
Othello come nearest to the account of 
the liquor called Opobalsamum "that 
goeth beyond all others" from Jewry. 
' ' This feat [of incision] being wrought, 
there issueth out of the wound a certaine 
juice or liquor, which they call opobal- 
samum ... it commeth forth by small 
drops : and as it thus weepeth, the teares 
ought to be received in wooll." A little 
lower we are told that ' ' it entreth into 
many medicinable confections." In 
the same chapter is an account of the 
"gums" called Storax, Galbanum, and 
Sagapenum. The .first of these is that 
called "Maujoin" in Cotgrave; "the 
Arabian gum called Benine." 

349. medicinal] Elsewhere in Shake- 
speare, except in Winter's Tale, II. iii. 
37, the word is "medicinable," as the 
Folio reads in the present instance. 
The form "medicinable" is frequent in 
Holland's Plinie. Cotgrave gives both 
forms, both in French and English, 
and distinguishes between the separate 
words as active and passive ; i.e. " heal- 
ing, curing," and "healable, curable." 
No such distinction occurs in Shake- 
speare. 

350. Aleppo] The Venetians had a 
monopoly, practically, of trade in 



sc.li.] THE MOOR OF VENICE 

Where a malignant and a turban'd Turk 

Beat a Venetian and traduced the state, 

I took by the throat the circumcised dog 

And smote him, thus. [Stabs himself. 

Lod. O bloody period ! 

Gra. All that is spoke is marr'd. 355 

Oth. I kiss'd thee ere I kill'd thee : no way but this, 

[Falling- upon Desdemona. 
Killing myself, to die upon a kiss. [Dies. 

Cas. This did I fear, but thought he had no weapon ; 
For he was great of heart. 

Lod. [To Iago\ O Spartan dog, 

More fell than anguish, hunger, or the sea! 360 

Look on the tragic loading of this bed ; 

354. [Stabs himself] He stabs himselfe Qq, omitted Ff. 355. that is] Ff, 
Malone, Staunton ; that's Qq, etc. 356. [Falling . . .] Johnson, Steevens, 
etc., Craig ; Throwing himself by his Wife Capell ; omitted Globe, Cambridge. 
357. [Dies.] Dyes Ff; He dies. Qq ; Dies Steevens, etc. ; Falls on the bed, 
and dies Globe, Cambridge. 361, loading] Ff, lodging Qq. 

Aleppo with the Turks and Armenians, where, in the notes of Clarendon Press 
to the great annoyance of London mer- edition, references are given to Sophocles, 
Chants. "There is a city in Syria Virgil, Ovid, etc. The classical refer- 
flamed Aleppo, wherein continually are ences relate to swiftness and quickness 
many Venetians dwelling, besides others of scent, Ben Jonson refers to them as 
that come yeerely," Hakluyt's Voyages, bloodhounds in Every Man Out, iv. iv. 
i. 402 (reprint 1809), 1598. And see 1150: "There's a fellow now looks 
again pp. 441, 442. In Sir Antony like one of the patricians of Sparta 
Sherley's 7"ravels (p. 32, ed, 1825), ... a good bloodhound, a close-mouthed 
X 599) he says: "they have a law in dog." Day speaks of them as blood- 
Turkey, that if a Christian do strike a thirsty in his lie of Gulls : "the fleshing 
Turk, he must either turn Turk or lose of a couple of Spartan hounds in the 
his right arm." wasting bloud of the spent deere." 

356,357.] Steevens quotes from Mar- Jonson speaks of them again in his 

lowe's Tamburlaine, Pt. II., 1590: Satyr, 1603. Some commentators find 

" Yet let me kiss my lord before I a reference here to the Spartan virtue 

dye, of fortitude and silence under suffering. 

And let me dye with kissing of my At the present juncture reference to 

lord." lago in any sort of admiration seems 

359. Spartan dog] The hounds of unlikely. It is easier to regard lago as 

Sparta held a high place in poetry from the close-mouthed bloodhound who 

classical times. They are mentioned in " fleshed himself in the wasting blood 

Midsummer Night's Dream, iv. i. 113, of the spent stag, Othello." 






256 OTHELLO [ACTV. sc. n. 

This is thy work : the object poisons sight ; 
Let it be hid. Gratiano, keep the house, 
And seize upon the fortunes of the Moor, 364 

For they succeed on you. To you, lord governor, 
Remains the censure of this hellish villain, 
The time, the place, the torture : O, enforce it ! 
Myself will straight aboard, and to the state 
This heavy act with heavy heart relate. \Exeunt> 

365. onyou\~$i; to you Qq, Rowe, Steevens, 






\ 









University of California 

SOUTHERN REGIONAL LIBRARY FACILITY 

405 Hilgard Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90024-1388 

Return this material to the library 

from which It was borrowed. 



MNIV.OFCAI.IF LIBRARY, LOS ANGELES 



UC SOUTHERN REGIONAL LIBRARY FACILITY 



AA 000014237 2 



