THE TRAGEDY OF HAMLET 



THE WORKS 

OF 

SHAKESPEARE 

THE TRAGEDY OF HAMLET 

EDITED BY 

EDWARD DOWDEN 



n 



METHUEN AND CO. 

36 ESSEX STREET: STRAND 

LONDON 

1899 




9 5 7 7 95 






CONTENTS 

PAGE 

Introduction ix 

The Tragedy of Hamlet i 

Appendix I. — The "Travelling" of the Players. . 229 

Appendix II.— Some Passages from the Quarto of 

1603 231 

Appendix III. — Addenda 235 



INTRODUCTION 

This edition of Hamlet aims in the first place at giving 
a trustworthy text. 

Secondly, it attempts to exhibit the variations from 
that text which are found in the primary sources — the 
Quarto of 1604 and the Folio of 1623 — in so far as those 
variations are of importance towards the ascertainment of 
the text. Every variation is not recorded, but I have 
chosen to err on the side of excess rather than on that of 
defect. Readings from the Quarto of 1603 are occa- 
sionally given, and also from the later Quartos and Folios, 
but to record such readings is not a part of the design of 
this edition. The letter Q means Quarto 1 604 ; F means 
Folio 1623. 

The dates of the later Quartos are as follows: — Q 3, 
1605 ; Q 4, 161 1 ; Q 5, undated ; Q 6, 1637. For my 
few references to these later Quartos I have trusted the 
Cambridge Shakespeare and Furness's edition of Hamlet. 

Thirdly, it gives explanatory notes. Here it is 
inevitable that my task should in the main be that of 
selection and condensation. But, gleaning after the 
gleaners, I have perhaps brought together a slender 
sheaf. Thus, I am not aware that I have been antici- 



X INTRODUCTION 

pated in my explanation of Hamlet's question about 
Alexander's body, in the Churchyard scene (v. i. 218); 
of his swearing by St. Patrick (i. v. 136); of the name 
Lamord (iv. vii. 93). I hope I may have done something 
towards the solution of the " dram of eale " crux (l. iv. 
26— 38), and of "stand a comma 'tween their amities" 
(v. ii. 42). I have noted a curious parallel between 
Jonson and Shakespeare (ll. ii. 210—214). With the aid 
of the New English Dictionary I have perhaps removed 
any doubt as to the meaning of " mortal coil " (ill. i. 6^^, 
and given its correct sense (though this is doubtful) to 
"anchor's cheer" (ill. ii. 231). I have perhaps explained 
why Folonius classes " fencing " with drinking and drab- 
bing (II. i. 25). I have made what I suppose to be new 
— perhaps erroneous — suggestions as to " Take this from 
this" (II. ii. 156) and "tender me a fool" (l. iii. 109). If 
ingenuities are anywhere pardonable, it is in conjecturing 
the meaning of Hamlet's riddling speeches ; it was not 
his cue ever to talk sheer nonsense ; accordingly I have 
ventured to throw out, doubtfully, suggestions — possibly 
darkening counsel with words — on " fishmonger " (ll. ii. 
174), "mad . . . handsaw" (ll. ii. 401-403), "suit of 
sables" (ill. ii. 139), "soul of Nero" (ill. ii. 413), "the 
body is with the king" (IV. ii. 30), "drink up eisel, eat 
a crocodile " (V. i. 298). I, very doubtfully, suggest a 
new reading of " select and generous " (i. iii. 74), and a 
modification of Mr. Tovey's emendation of the"Yaughan " 
crux (v. i. 6']'). Occasionally, as in the "Nunnery" scene 
with Ophelia (ill. i.), I have tried to explain Hamlet's 
thoughts rather than verbal difficulties. When what is 
worthless has been sifted away, a little that is a 



INTRODUCTION xi 

real addition to our knowledge of Shakespeare may 
remain. 

For the earliest references to the legendary Hamlet 
the reader should consult Mr. Gollancz's interesting 
volume Hamlet in Iceland (1898). The first in date, 
he tells us, is found in the second section of Snorri 
Sturlason's Prose Edda (about 1230): — "The Nine 
Maids of the Island Mill " (daughters of ^gir, the 
Ocean-god) " in ages past ground Hamlet's meal." The 
words occur in a quotation of Snorri from Snaebjorn, who 
was probably an Arctic adventurer of the tenth century. 
The name Amhlaide is found yet earlier. In the Ajinals 
of Ireland by the Four Masters, under the year 9 1 7 
( = 919), in a fragment of song (having reference to the 
battle of Ath-Cliath between the Northerners and the 
Irish) attributed to Queen Gormflaith, appear the words : 
" Niall Glundubh [was slain] by Amhlaide." Mr. Gol- 
lancz identifies this Amhlaide with Sitric, a Northerner, 
who first came to Dublin in 888, and hazards the con- 
jecture that " Gaile," a cognomen applied to Sitric, may 
mean mad, and that Amhlaide may be a synonym of 
" Gaile." He believes that in the Scandinavian kingdom 
of Ireland was developed, in the eleventh century, the 
Northern tale of Hamlet as we know it from Saxo.^ 

Probably about the opening of the thirteenth century 
the Danish writer Saxo Grammaticus told in Latin the 

■" The Ainbales Saga, which Mr. Gollancz prints, is in its present form 
"a modern production belonging to the sixteenth, or perhaps early seven- 
teenth century," preserving possibly some elements of the pre-Saxo Ilamlet 
legend. The Icelandic folk-talc of Brjam (first written down from oral 
tradition in 1705) is "nothing but a levelling down of the story of Ilamlet, 
cleverly blended with another folk-tale of the ' Clever Hans ' type " (Gollancz, 
Introduction, Ixiv and Ixviii). 



xii INTRODUCTION 

story of Amlethus in the third and fourth books of his 
History of the Dajies. The reader will find an English 
version in Mr. Elton's translation of Saxo. The Northern 
Hamlet legends, oral or written, are mingled by Saxo 
with borrowings from the old Roman story of Lucius 
Junius Brutus. Horwendil and his brother Feng rule 
Jutland under King Rorik of Denmark. Horwendil 
slays Roll, king of Norway, and marries Gerutha, the 
daughter of King Rorik ; their son is Amleth. Feng, 
jealous of his brother, slays Horwendil, and takes Gerutha 
to wife. Amleth feigns to be dull of wits and little better 
than a beast, while secretly planning vengeance. He 
baffles the courtiers by riddling words, which for them 
are nonsense, but are really significant. A girl, his 
foster-sister, is placed in his way, in the hope that his 
conduct may betray his true state of mind ; his foster- 
brother warns him of the snare, and he baffles his 
enemies. A friend of Feng, " more confident than wise," 
proposes to act as eavesdropper during an interview 
between Amleth and his mother. Amleth, crowing like 
a cock, flapping his arms like wings, and leaping hither 
and thither, discovers the eavesdropper hidden under 
straw, stabs him and brutally disposes of the body. He 
explains to his mother that his madness is feigned and 
that he plans revenge, and he gains her over to his side. 
His uncle sends Amleth to Britain, with two companions, 
who bear a letter graven on wood, requesting the king to 
slay Amleth. The letter is altered by Amleth, and his 
companions are put to death. His adventures in Britain 
do not affect Shakespeare's play. He returns, makes the 
courtiers drunk, nets them in hangings knitted by his 



INTRODUCTION xiii 

mother, sets fire to the palace, and slays his uncle with 
the sword. He harangues the people, and is hailed as 
Feng's successor. After other adventures of crafty device 
and daring deed, Amleth dies in battle. Had he lived, 
favoured by nature and fortune, he would have surpassed 
Hercules. 

Sa:>co's History was printed in 15 14. In 1570 Belle- 
forest — freely rendering Saxo's Latin — told the story of 
Amleth in French in the fifth volume of his Histoires 
tragiques. The English translation of Belleforest's story. 
The Historic of Hamblet, is dated 1608, and may have 
been called forth by the popularity of Shakespeare's 
play.^ Here the eavesdropper hides behind the hang- 
ings of Geruthe's chamber, and Hamblet cries, " A 
. rat ! a rat ! " circumstances probably borrowed from 
Shakespeare. 

As early as 1589 an English drama on the subject 
of Hamlet was in existence. It is referred to in that 
year by Thomas Nash in a printed letter accompanying 
Greene's MenapJion. VVe know from this passage, and 
other allusions, that it was a drama written under the 
influence of Seneca, and that a ghost appeared in it 
crying " Revenge ! " Henslowe's diary informs us that it 
was acted, not as a new play, at Newington Butts in 
June 1594. The suggestion that Thomas Kyd was the 
author — made long since — was supported with sub- 
stantial evidence by Mr. Fleay in his Chronicle of the 
English Drama (i 891), and, in my opinion, was decisively 
proved by Gregor Sarrazin in the section entitled " Der 

^ It may be found in Furness's Hamlet, vol. ii., or in Collier's Shake- 
speare's Libra)y, vol. i. 



xiv INTRODUCTION 

Ur-Hamlet" of his Thomas Kyd und sein Kreis (1892). 
It is not improbable that Nash, in the passage where he 
speaks of Hamlet, puns upon the name Kyd. We may 
fairly assume that it was a companion piece to Kyd's 
Spanish Tragedy — itself a play of revenge (a father's 
revenge for a murdered son, inverting the Hamlet 
theme) ; of violent passion bordering on distraction ; 
including among the dramatis personce a ghost, and pre- 
senting, like Hamlet, a play within the play. Kyd 
translated Garnier's Cornelia from the French, and could 
read the story of Hamlet in Belleforest. English actors 
had visited Elsinore, and had lately returned to London, 
bringing their tidings of Denmark. 

Mr. Corbin, in a very ingenious study. The Elizabethan 
Hamlet (1895), has conjectured that the lost play by 
Kyd exhibited a Hamlet resembling the Amleth of Saxo 
in his being rather a man of resolute action than a man 
of contemplation, and that his assumption of madness 
was the occasion of vulgar comedy ; the affliction of 
insanity was, as we know, often regarded by Elizabethan 
dramatists from the comic point of view. The con- 
jecture is well worthy of consideration. In developing 
his theory Mr. Corbin makes use, however, of one piece 
of evidence, which must be held as of doubtful value. 
A rude German drama, Der Bestrafte Bj-iidermord, found 
in a manuscript dated 17 10, is taken by Mr. Corbin and 
others as based on Kyd's Hamlet. This is possible ; 
but it seems to me far more probable that the German 
play is a debased adaptation of Shakespeare's Hamlet in 
its earliest form. Perhaps, as Tanger has suggested 
{Shakespeare Jahrbuch, xxiii.), a few recollections of the 



INTRODUCTION xv 

later form of Shakespeare's play were woven in by actors 
who arrived in Germany at a later date.^ 

Under the date July 26, 1602, was entered in the 
Stationers' Registers for the printer James Roberts, " A 
booke called The Revenge of Hamlet Prince [of] Den- 
marke, as yt was latelie Acted by the Lord Chamberleyne 
his servantes." There are no grounds for supposing that 
Shakespeare wrote the play earlier than 1602,- In the 
following year appeared in quarto, " The Tragicall 
Historie of Hamlet Prince of Denmarke By William 
Shake- speare. As it hath beene diverse times acted by 
his Highnesse servants in the Cittie of London : as also in 
the two Vniversities of Cambridge and Oxford, and else- 
where. At London printed for N. L. and John Trundell. 
1603." The Lord Chamberlain's servants of 1602 — 
Shakespeare's company — had, since the accession of 
James I., become his Highness' servants. It is conjectured 
that the play was acted at the Universities " at some enter- 
tainment in honour of the king's accession," the subject 
being connected " with the native country of his queen." 

In 1 604 appeared a second Quarto : " The Tragicall 
Historie of Hamlet, Prince of Denmarke. By William 
Shakespeare. Newly imprinted and enlarged to almost 
as much againe as it was, according to the true and 
perfect Coppie. At London, Printed by I. R. for N. L., 



^ See Cohn's Shakespeare in Germany (1865) ; Latham's Two Disserta- 
tions on the Hamlet of Saxo Grammaticus and of Shakespear (1872); and 
Furness's Hamlet, vol. ii. A Hamlet was performed by English actors at 
Dresden in 1626. Tanger's article, referred to above, is of great value. 

* The note by Gabriel Harvey in a copy of Spcght's Chancer (1598), 
mentioning Hamlet, was seen by Steevens, Bisliop I'crcy, and Malonc, but 
its date was a matter of conjecture. Harvey lived for many years after the 
publication of Shakespeare's Hamlet. 



xvi INTRODUCTION 

and are to be sold at his shoppe under Saint Dunstons 
Church in Fleetstreet. 1604," I, R, stands, we may be 
sure, for James Roberts. 

It is unquestionable that the copy for the Quarto of 
1603 was surreptitiously obtained. Errors which seem 
to be rather errors of hearing than of sight, or of a 
compositor's memory in setting up a group of words, 
indicate that, according to a practice of the time, a short- 
hand writer was employed to take notes of the speeches 
during a theatrical performance. There are also errors 
which look like errors of a copyist ; some of these may 
have occurred in writing out the shorthand notes for the 
printer, T. Bright's system of shorthand, moreover, gave 
scope for many errors in interpreting the characters of 
the stenographer.^ But the conjecture of the editors of 
the Cambridge Shakespeare that the defects of the manu- 
script derived from shorthand " were supplemented by a 
reference to the authentic copy in the library of the 
theatre," seems to deserve consideration. The earlier 
portion of the Quarto is both fuller and less inaccurate as 
compared with the true text than the later ; perhaps 
the shorthand writer scamped his work ; perhaps the 
theatrical underling, whom we may suppose as assisting 
him by reference to the copy in the theatre, was dis- 
covered, or had no opportunity of completing his 
dishonest labours. In some instances it looks as if only 
a hasty and partly incorrect note of the substance of a 
speech was made, and this was expanded into several 
feeble or incoherent lines. 

^ See on this subject a remarkable paper, "Shakespeare und die Steno- 
graphie," by Curt Dewischeit, in the Shakespsare Jahrbuch, xxxiv. (1898). 



INTRODUCTION xvii 

The Quarto of 1603, containing 2143 lines, is 
shorter by some seventeen or eighteen hundred lines 
than the play as we construct it from the second Quarto 
and the Folio ; yet it gives substantially the whole action 
of the complete play. The names of two characters 
differ from those familiar to us — Polonius is here 
Corambis, and Reynaldo is Montano. Osric is here 
" a Bragart Gentleman " ; Francisco is known only as 
first Centinel. The King and Queen of the " Mouse- 
trap " tragedy are a duke and duchess ; the duke's name 
is Albertus, not Gonzago ; the duke and duchess have 
been forty years married, not thirty. Yorick's skull has 
been twelve years in the ground, not three-and-twenty. 
Laertes has come from Paris to the late King's funeral, 
not to the coronation of King Claudius. Hamlet's in- 
dignant " 'Tis not alone my inky cloak " is addressed to 
Claudius, not to the Queen. The soliloquy " To be or 
not to be " and the " nunnery " dialogue with Ophelia 
occur in the same scene with the reading of Hamlet's 
love-letter, and before the " fishmonger " dialogue with 
Polonius ; lines spoken to Hamlet by the Ghost on the 
platform are here spoken by Hamlet to his mother in 
her closet ; Hamlet's comparison of Rosencrantz to a 
sponge appears here in another connection. It is the 
King, not Laertes, who proposes to anoint the rapier- 
point with venom. Gertrude, in the Closet scene, expressly 
declares that she was ignorant of her husband's murder, 
and she promises to assist her son in his revenge. There 
is a scene in which Horatio and the Queen confer about 
Hamlet's return to Denmark from shipboard, the Queen 
appearing as a confederate on Hamlet's side. 
b 



xviii INTRODUCTION 

Such differences as these can be accounted for only 
in one of two ways — either, as the Clarendon Press 
editors maintain, a considerable portion of the old play is 
included in the Quarto of 1603, or that Quarto imper- 
fectly and often erroneously exhibits Shakespeare's work 
in a form which he subsequently revised and altered. 
When careful and judicious investigators fail to agree, 
the matter must be admitted to be doubtful. For my 
own part, repeated perusals have satisfied me that Shake- 
speare's hand can be discerned throughout the whole of 
the truncated and travestied play of 1603. The Shake- 
spearian irony of many passages is unlike anything we 
find in plays of 15 88-1 5 89. With the exception of the 
following lines : — 

Look you now, here is your husband, 

With a face like Vulcan, 

A looke fit for a murder and a rape, 

A dull dead hanging looke, and a hell-bred eie. 

To affright children and amaze the world : 

I see nothing that looks pre-Shakespearian, and I see 
much that is entirely unlike the work of Kyd. It is 
possible, indeed, that Kyd's work may have been revised 
before 1600, but we have no evidence to that effect. 
Here and there echoes of a phrase, or a line, or a rhyme 
in Jeronimo, or The Spanish Tragedy, or Solyman and 
Perseda may be heard in the Quarto of 1603, as echoes 
of Marlowe and of Lyly may be heard elsewhere. But 
it has been aptly pointed out by Sarrazin that remin- 
iscences of Shakespeare's own Henry V. are found "in a 
passage which appears only in this first Quarto. Compare 
from the Ouarto : — 



INTRODUCTION xix 

Well Sonne Hamht we in care of you : but specially 
In tender preservation of your health, 

♦ * ♦ » * 

The winde sits faire, you shall aboorde to-night, 

with the following from Henry V., II. ii. 12 and 57— 
59:— 

Now sits the wind fair, and we will aboard. 

* ♦ ♦ ♦ # 

Though Cambridge, Scroop and Grey, in their dear care 
And tender preservation of our person. 

The general style of the Ham/ei of 1603 is much 
more like that of an ill-reported play of that date than 
like the style of a play of Kyd's and Marlowe's time ; 
but the actor's speech about Hecuba and Priam, though 
much reduced in length, stands out from the rest of the 
play in this form as it does in the second Quarto and the 
Folio, by virtue of its reproduction of a style which was 
out of date at the opening of the seventeenth century. 

The Quarto of 1604 is carelessly printed and ill 
punctuated as compared with Hamlet of the Folio, yet 
it represents more faithfully and fully what Shakespeare 
wrote. The Folio, counting only passages of more than 
one line, omits 218 lines; the Quarto, 85. The most 
considerable omissions in the Quarto are three — thirteen 
lines immediately before the entrance of Osric in V. ii. ; 
this seems to be due to accident ; secondly, the passage 
about the boy actors in II. ii. ; the omission was probably 
made, as Professor Hall Griffin suggests, because it would 
be unbecoming in the King's servants to show hostility 
to the children, who were servants of the Queen ; thirdly, 
part of the dialogue between Hamlet and Rosencrantz 
and Guildenstern in an earlier passage of the same scene ; 



XX INTRODUCTION 

the reason for the omission seems to me obvious — Den- 
mark is spoken of as a prison, or as one of the worst 
dungeons in the prison of the world, and Denmark was 
the native country of the Enghsh Queen. 

The Folio text was evidently cut for the purpose of 
stage representation, and generally it may be described 
as more theatrical, but less literary, than the text of 
1604. The greater part of iv. iv., including Hamlet's 
very important soliloquy, is deleted ; so are his medita- 
tions before the entrance of the Ghost in I. iv. ; Horatio's 
description of the prodigies in Rome before the fall of 
Caesar, I. i. ; Claudius's remarkable words to Laertes, in 
IV. vii., on the wearing effect of time on passion ; Ham- 
let's reflections on the monster Custom, III. iv. ; Hamlet's 
lines about the courtiers and his resolve to hoist the 
enginer with his own petar. III. iv. ; and much of his 
mockery of Osric, V. ii.^ Oaths and sacred words are 
altered to avoid the legal offence of profanity. Some 
actors' additions are introduced, such as the unhappy 
" O, o, o, o " of the dying Hamlet, following his words 
" The rest is silence." And there is a desire evident in 
the editors of the Folio text to modernise certain words 
which were regarded as old-fashioned. 

The duration of the action in the play presents 
difficulties. It opens at midnight with the change of 
sentinels. Next day Horatio and Marcellus, with Ber- 
nardo, inform Hamlet of the appearance of the Ghost ; it 
cannot be the forenoon, for Hamlet salutes Bernardo 
with " Good even, sir." On the night of this day Hamlet 

^ See Dr. Fumivall's Introduction to the second Quarto, prefixed to 
Griggs's facsimile. 



INTRODUCTION xxi 

watches and meets his father's ghost. The season of the 
year is perhaps March ; the nights are bitter cold. The 
second Act occupies part of one day ; Polonius despatches 
Reynaldo to Paris, Ophelia enters alarmed by Hamlet's 
visit, her father reads Hamlet's letter, the players arrive ; 
and, when Hamlet parts from them, his words are, " I '11 
leave you till to-night." But before this day arrives, 
two months have elapsed since Hamlet was enjoined to 
revenge the murder — it was two months since his father's 
death when the play opened, and now it is " twice two 
months." Next day Hamlet utters his soliloquy, " To 
be or not to be," encounters Ophelia as arranged by 
Polonius, gives his advice to the players, is present at 
the performance of the play ; and, night having come, he 
pleads with his mother, and again sees his father's spirit. 
Here the third Act closes, but the action proceeds with- 
out interruption ; the King inquires for the body of 
Polonius, and tells Hamlet that the bark is ready to bear 
him to England. We must suppose that it is morning 
when Hamlet meets the troops of Fortinbras. Two days 
previously the ambassadors from Norway had returned, 
with a request that Claudius would permit Fortinbras to 
march through Denmark against the Poles ; Fortinbras 
himself must have arrived almost as soon as the ambas- 
sadors, and obtained the Danish King's permission. In 
IV. v. Ophelia appears distracted, and Laertes has re- 
turned from Paris to be revenged for Polonius's death. 
An interval of time must have passed since Hamlet 
sailed for England — an interval sufficient to permit 
Laertes to receive tidings of the death of Polonius and 
to reach Elsinore. In the next scene letters arrive 



xxii INTRODUCTION 

announcing that Hamlet is again in Denmark ; before 
he was two days at sea, he became the pirates' prisoner. 
On the day of the arrival of letters Ophelia is drowned. 
Her flowers indicate that the time is early June. Ophelia's 
burial and Hamlet's death take place on the next day. 
Yet the time has been sufficient for Fortinbras to win 
his Polish victory and be again at Elsinore, and for 
ambassadors to return from England announcing the 
execution of Rosencrantz and Guildenstern. We might 
obligingly imagine that the pirate ship conveying Hamlet 
to Denmark was delayed by baffling winds ; but his 
letters are written after he has landed, and they describe 
his companions as holding their course for England. 
The truth is, as stated by Professor Hall Griffin (whose 
record of the notes of time has aided me here), " Shake- 
speare is at fault " ; he " did not trouble himself to 
reconcile . . . inconsistencies which practical experience 
as an actor would tell him do not trouble the spectator." 
The division of the last three Acts of the play is 
made without the authority of any early edition. Act V. 
certainly opens aright. But the division between II. and 

III. is a matter of doubt, and the received division 
between III. and iv. is unfortunate. Mr. E. Rose pro- 
posed that III, should open with Hamlet's advice to the 
players (ill. ii. of the received arrangement), and that IV. 
should open with the march of Fortinbras (our present 

IV. iv.). As regards iv., this is the division of Mr. 
Hudson in his Harvard Shakespeare; and but for the 
inconvenience of disturbing an accepted arrangement, to 
which references are made in lexicons and concordances, 
I should in this edition follow Mr. Hudson. 



INTRODUCTION xxiii 

The names of the dramatis personcs incongruously 
mingle forms derived from the Hamlet tradition of the 
North with classical, Italian, and German forms. " Ger- 
trude " is a modification of Saxo's "Gerutha." " Horatio," 
in the old play Jeronimo, is the name of Andrea's faithful 
friend, who reappears in The Spanish Tragedy. Both 
" Ofelia," the name of a shepherd, and " Montano " (the 
name of Reynaldo in the Quarto of 1603), are found in 
the Arcadia of Sannazaro. The autograph signatures — 
dated i 577 — of Jorgen Rossenkrantz and P. Guldenstern 
appear on the same page of an old German album in 
the Royal Public Library at Stuttgart, the original owner 
of which had resided for some time at Copenhagen ; ^ it 
does not follow that these individuals were in any sense 
the originals of Shakespeare's courtiers ; an ambassador 
named Rosencrantz was sent to England at the accession 
of James the First, and there were other Guildensterns. 
Shakespeare probably obtained the names from actors 
who had returned from the Continent " Fortinbras," 
wrote Mr. Elliot Browne {Athenc^um, July 26, 1876), 
" is evidently Fortebras, or Strongarm of the family of 
Ferumbras of the romances, or may have come directly 
from Niccolo Fortebraccio, the famous leader of the 
condottieri." 

It is not proposed here to notice the stage-history of 
Hamlet, the interpretations by eminent actors, nor the 
vast critical library that has grown around the play. 
Critics, I think, have sometimes erred in not keeping 
vividly before their imagination the nature of Shake- 

^ See for facsimile Shakespeare Jakrbuch, xxv. ;" and, for letters on the 
subject, xxvi. 



xxiv INTRODUCTION 

speare's task. They often speak as if the poet started 
with some central idea of which Hamlet was to be the 
exponent. " Shakespeare," wrote Goethe, "sought to 
depict a great deed laid upon a soul unequal to the 
performance of it." " In Hamlet," wrote Coleridge, 
" Shakespeare seems to have wished to exemplify the 
moral necessity of a due balance between our attention 
to the objects of our senses and our meditation on the 
working of our minds — an equilibrium between the real 
and the imaginary worlds." I prefer to think of Shake- 
speare as setting to work with the intention of rehandling 
the subject of an old play, so as to give it fresh interest 
on the stage ; as following the subject given to him, and 
as following the instinctive leadings of his genius. The 
traditional Hamlet was distinguished by intellectual 
subtlety, by riddling speech, by a power of ingeniously 
bafifling his pursuers, and, at the same time, by a love of 
truth. But the subtlety of Saxo's Amleth — and we may 
be sure the same is true of Kyd's Hamlet — was what 
Burke happily describes, in a different connection, as a 
" clumsy subtlety." If he would be taken to be mad, 
he affects unclean and brutal habits, or crows like a 
cock, or rides a horse with his head towards the tail. 
Shakespeare was attracted by the intellectual subtlety of 
Hamlet, and was inevitably led by his genius to refine 
this subtlety, and to diversify its manifestations. He 
was caught in the web of his own imaginings, and 
became so absorbed in his work that he forgot to keep 
it within the limits suitable for theatrical representation ; 
the tragedy has, perhaps, never been presented in its 
entirety on the English stage in consequence of its in- 



INTRODUCTION xxv 

ordinate length. The swift and subtle wit that had its 
play at the Mermaid Tavern was now incarnated in one 
of the creatures of Shakespeare's imagination. 

Hamlet is not the exponent of a philosophy; he has, it 
is true, a remarkable power of reflection and a tendency 
to generalise, but he is not a philosophical thinker who 
seeks to co-ordinate his ideas in a coherent system. 
Perhaps Ulysses, perhaps Prospero approaches nearer to 
the philosopher, but neither Ulysses nor Prospero is a 
wit ; and Hamlet is a wit inspired by melancholy. He 
is swift, ingenious, versatile, penetrative ; and he is also 
sad. And when Shakespeare proceeded to follow the 
story in the main as he had probably received it from 
Kyd, it turned out that such subtlety overreached itself 
— which Shakespeare recognised as wholly right, and 
true to the facts of life. Hamlet's madness is not 
deliberately assumed ; an antic disposition is, as it were, 
imposed upon him by the almost hysterical excitement 
which follows his interview with the Ghost, and he 
ingeniously justifies it to himself by discovering that it 
may hereafter serve a purpose. But in truth his subtlety 
does not produce direct and effective action. Hamlet is 
neither a boisterous Laertes, who with small resources 
almost effects a rebellion in revenge for a murdered 
father, nor a resolute Fortinbras, who, mindful of his 
dead father's honour, can march through danger to 
victory. Hamlet's intellectual subtlety sees every side 
of every question, thinks too precisely on the event, 
considers all things too curiously, studies anew every 
conviction, doubts of the past, interrogates the future ; 
it delights in ironically adopting the mental attitudes of 



xxvi INTRODUCTION 

other minds ; it refines contempt into an ingenious art ; 
it puts on and puts off a disguise ; it assumes and lays 
aside the antic disposition ; it can even use frankness 
as a veil, — for sometimes display is a concealment, as 
happened with Edgar Poe's purloined letter. Hamlet 
the subtle is pre-eminently a critic — a critic of art, a 
critic of character, a critic of society, a critic of life, a 
critic of himself. 

The intellectual dexterity and versatility of Hamlet 
are united with a moral nature essentially honest. He 
will not hire a couple of assassins to despatch his father's 
murderer. He will not himself take action until he has 
evidence of the King's guilt. Like the Amleth of Saxo, 
he is a lover of truth concealed in craft. His emotional 
nature, though deeply disturbed by his mother's lapse 
from loyalty, and liable to passionate fluctuations, is 
sound at heart. He reverences the memory of his great 
father, a man of action, whom Hamlet resembles as little 
as he resembles Hercules. He is bound to Horatio by 
ties of the deepest esteem and affection. He is kind to 
the poor actors. He expends his utmost energy in an 
effort to uplift and redeem his mother's faltering spirit. 
He is over-generous in his estimate of Laertes. He has 
loved Ophelia as a vision of beauty and innocence, and 
is proportionately embittered when he supposes that he 
has deceived himself and been deceived. But all his 
inclinations are toward those who are unlike himself 
He is complex and self-tormenting; Ophelia seems all 
simplicity and innocence ; he is oppressed by melancholy 
thought ; she is " something afar from the sphere of his 
sorrow." Horatio is a man whose blood and judgment, 



INTRODUCTION xxvii 

unlike Hamlet's own, are well commingled ; one who can 
see the evil of the world, yet not grow world-weary ; 
more of the antique Roman Stoic than a Dane. For 
Fortinbras Hamlet has the admiration which the man of 
ideas feels for the man of resolute action. In Claudius 
he might have perceived some of his own intellectual 
subtlety and reflective habit, but conjoined with grosser 
senses and an evil moral nature ; and him Hamlet loathes 
with an impatient aversion. 

Together with such an intellectual and such a moral 
nature, Hamlet has in him something dangerous — a will 
capable of being roused to sudden and desperate activity. 
It is a will which is determined to action by the flash 
and flame of an excitable temperament, or by those 
sudden impulses or inspirations, leaping forth from a 
sub-conscious self, which come almost like the revelation 
and the decree of Providence. It is thus that he suddenly 
conceives the possibility of unmasking the King's guilt, 
on the accidental arrival of the players, and proceeds 
without delay to put the matter to the test, suddenly 
overwhelms Ophelia with his reproaches of womanhood, 
suddenly stabs the eavesdropper behind the arras, 
suddenly, as if under some irresistible inspiration, sends 
his companions on shipboard to their death, suddenly 
boards the pirate, suddenly grapples with Laertes in the 
grave, suddenly does execution on the guilty King, 
plucks the poison from Horatio's hand, and gives his 
dying voice for a successor to the throne. 

Hamlet's love for Ophelia is the wonder and delight 
in a celestial vision ; she is hardly a creature of earth, 
and he has poured into her ear almost all the holy vows 



xxviii INTRODUCTION 

of heaven. The ruin of an ideal leaves him cruelly- 
unjust to the creature of flesh and blood. It is the 
strangest love-story on record. Never throughout the 
play is there one simple and sincere word uttered by 
lover to lover. The only true meeting of Hamlet and 
Ophelia is the speechless interview in which he reads her 
soul, despairs, and takes a silent and final farewell. 
Even in the letter, written prior to the terrible announce- 
ments of the Ghost, there is a conventional address and 
a baffling conclusion. After the silent parting, no true 
word, except when passion carries him away to unde- 
served reproach, is uttered by Hamlet to Ophelia. His 
love has for the first time its outbreak at her grave, 
when the pity of it for a moment restores his lost ideal. 
Never to Horatio, never to himself in soliloquy, does he 
utter the name of Ophelia. 

Whether Shakespeare's choice and treatment of the 
Hamlet story was in any way connected with the history 
of Leicester, Essex, and the mother of Essex, or with 
the history of Mary Queen of Scots and Darnley, cannot 
be considered here. I do not think that a good case 
has been made out for either hypothesis. 

The references to other plays of Shakespeare than 
Hamlet are to act, scene, and line as found in the 
Globe Shakespeare. 

I have to thank two learned students of Elizabethan 
literature, Mr. W. J. Craig, editor of The Oxford Shake- 
speare, and Mr. H. C. Hart, for aid kindly given to me in 
the preparation of this volume. 



THE TRAGEDY 



HAMLET, PRINCE OF DENMARK 



Courtiers. 



DRAMATIS PERSONS 

Claudius, King of Denmark. 

Hamlet, Son to the late, and Nepheiv to the prese7it King. 

FoRTiNBRAS, FHnce of Norway. 

Horatio, Friend to Hamlet. 

PoLONius, Lord Chamberlain. 

Laertes, his Son. 

voltimand, >^ 

Cornelius, 

rosencrantz, 

Guildenstern, 

OSRIC, 

A Gentleman, . 

A Priest. 

Marcellus, I ^^ 
T, > Officers. 

Bernardo, J -^ 

Francisco, a Soldier. 

Reynaldo, Servant to Polonius. 

A Captain. 

English Ambassadors. 

Players. 

Two Clowns, Grave-diggers. 

Gertrude, Queen of Denmark, atid Mother to Hamlet. 
Ophelia, Daughter to Polonius. 

Lords, Ladies, Officers, Soldiers, Sailors, Messengers, and Attend- 
ants. 
Ghost of Hamlefs Father. 

Scene: Elsinore. 



THE TRAGEDY 



HAMLET, PRINCE OF DENMARK 
ACT I 

SCENE I. — Ehinore. A Platform before the Castle. 

Francisco at his post. Enter to him Bernardo. 

Ber. Who 's there ? 

Fran. Nay, answer me ; stand, and unfold yourself. 
Ber. Long live the king ! 
Fran. Bernardo ? 

Ber. He. 5 

Fran. You come most carefully upon your hour. 
Ber. 'Tis now struck twelve ; get thee to bed, Fran- 
cisco. 

Act I. Scene /.] Acts and scenes are not marked in Q; in F only as 
far as 11. ii. 1-5] Many editors follow Capell in printing as verse, the 

first line ending with unfold. 7. iicnv struck] Steevens conj. iicw-stnic/:. 

2. vie] Ale emphatic, Francisco Horatio and Marcelhis answer the 
being the sentinel on guard. challenge otherwise, but Francisco is 

3. king] Perhaps the watchword, not (line 15) at his post. 

3 



4 HAMLET [acti. 

Fran. For this relief much thanks ; 'tis bitter cold, 
And I am sick at heart. 

Ber. Have you had quiet guard ? 

Fran. Not a mouse stirring. lo 

Ber. Well, good night. 

If you do meet Horatio and Marcellus, 

The rivals of my watch, bid them make haste. 

Fran. I think I hear them. Stand, ho ! Who is there ? 

Enter HORATIO and MARCELLUS. 

Hor. Friends to this ground. 

Mar. And liegemen to the Dane, i 5 

Fran. Give you good night. 

Mar. O, farewell, honest soldier : 

Who hath relieved you ? 
Fran. Bernardo has my place. 

Give you good night. \Exit. 

Mar. Holla ! Bernardo ! 

Ber. Say, — 

What, is Horatio there? 
Hor. A piece of him. 

Ber. Welcome, Horatio ; welcome, good Marcellus. 20 
Mar. What, has this thing appear'd again to-night ? 

14. hot Who is] (^, who^s Y. i6. soldier] F, soiildiers (^. 1 7. has] 

F, hath Q. 21. Mar.] Q i, F ; Hora. Q. 

13. rivals] partners, which is the Compare Romeo and Juliet, I. ii. 

reading of Q I. Compare " rivality" 59. 

in Ant. atid Chop. III. v. 8, meaning 19. A piece of him] Warburton 

"partnership," and The Tragedy of supposed that Horatio gives his hand ; 

Hoff?nafi (i6t,i) : it is night, adds Ingleby, and 

" ile seat thee by my throne of Horatio is hardly visible to Bernardo. 

state Shakespeare's intention seems to be 

And make thee rivall in those gov- to show that Horatio, the sceptical, 

ernments." can answer jestingly. 
16. (J/Vf] Ellipsis for " God give." 21. Mar.] The agreement of Q i 



SCI] PRINCE OF DENMARK 5 

Ber. I have seen nothing. 

Mar. Horatio says 'tis but our fantasy, 

And will not let belief take hold of him 

Touching this dreaded sight, twice seen of us : 25 

Therefore I have entreated him along 

With us to watch the minutes of this night, 

That if again this apparition come, 

He may approve our eyes and speak to it. 

Hor. Tush, tush, 'twill not appear, 

Ber. Sit down awhile ; 30 

And let us once again assail your ears. 
That are so fortified against our story. 
What we two nights have seen. 

Hor. Well, sit we down. 

And let us hear Bernardo speak of this, 

Ber. Last night of all, 3 5 

When yond same star that 's westward from the 

pole 
Had made his course to illume that part of heaven 
Where now it burns, Marcellus and myself. 
The bell then beating one, — 

Enter Ghost, 

Mar. Peace ! break thee off; look, where it comes 
again ! 40 

26, 27. along With us to] comma after along Q, after us F. 33. iwo 
nights have] F, have two nights Q. 39. beating'] totaling Q I. Enter 

Ghost] Q ; Enter the Ghost after off, line 40, F. 

with Ff in assigning this speech noble thing!" "This thing" may 

to Marcellus is strong against the be uttered with awe by Marcellus, or 

Quartos, which assign it to Horatio, with an air of incredulity by Horatio. 
" Thing " need not imply doubt or 29 approve] corroborate, justify, as 

disrespect. Aufidius, Coriolanus, iv. in Ant. and Cleop. I. i. 60: "he ap- 

V. 122, addresses Coriolanus as "Thou proves the common liar." 



6 HAMLET [acti. 

Ber. In the same figure, like the king that 's dead. 

Mar. Thou art a scholar; speak to it, Horatio. 

Ber. Looks it not like the king? mark it, Horatio. 

Hor. Most like ; it harrows me with fear and wonder. 

Ber. It would be spoke to. 

Mar. Question it, Horatio. 45 

Hor. What art thou that usurp'st this time of night, 

Together with that fair and warlike form 

In which the majesty of buried Denmark 

Did sometimes march ? by heaven I charge thee, 
speak ! 
Mar. It is offended. 

Ber. See, it stalks away. 50 

Hor. Stay ! speak, speak : I charge thee, speak ! 

{Exit Ghost. 
Mar. 'Tis gone, and will not answer. 
Ber. How now, Horatio ? you tremble and look pale ; 

Is not this something more than fantasy ? 

What think you on 't ? 5 5 

Hor. Before my God, I might not this believe 

Without the sensible and true avouch 

Of mine own eyes. 
Mar. Is it not like the king? 

ar\. figure, '\Y, no comma Q. 44. !iarrows\}iorrors Q i. 45. Qiies- 
fion\ F, Speake to Q. 

42. ^r//^/«;-] Latin was the language 45. Compare Boswell's Life of 

of exorcisms. Reed cites Beaumont fohnsoti (ed. Birkbeck Hill, iii. 307) : 

and Fletcher, Night IValke?; II. i : "Johnson once observed to me, 

"Let's call the butler up, for he 'Tom Tyers described me the best: 

speaks Latin, "Sir (said he) you are like a ghost : 

And that would daunt the devil." you never speak till you are spoken 

44. harro'ws'\ Compare I. v. 16; to."'" 

and Milton, Co/nus, 565, "Amazed I 49. sometimes'] someiivne, formerly, 

stood, harrow'd with grief and fear." as in Henry VIII. Ii. iv. 181. 



sc. i] PRINCE OF DENMARK 7 

Hor. As thou art to thyself: 

Such was the very armour he had on 60 

When he the ambitious Norway combated ; 
So frown'd he once, when, in an angry parle. 
He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice. 
'Tis strange. 
A'lar. Thus twice before, and jump at this dead 
hour, 65 

With martial stalk hath he gone by our watch: 
Hor. In what particular thought to work I know 
not ; 
But, in the gross and scope of my opinion. 
This bodes some strange eruption to our state. 
Mar. Good now, sit down, and tell me, he that 
knows, 70 

Why this same strict and most observant watch 
So nightly toils the subject of the land, 
And why such daily cast of brazen cannon, 
And foreign mart for implements of war ; 

61. he\ omitted in F. 63. sledded'] Y, shaded C) ; Polacks^ Mai., pollax 
Q I, Qq 2, 3, 4 ; Pollax Ff i, 2, Qq 5, 6 ; Polax F 3 ; Pole-axe F 4 ; Polack 
Pope and other editors (meaning the King of Poland). 65. juinp\ Q i, 
(2; jusf F. 66. /la^A he gone by\ he passed through Q i. 68. r/iy'] V, 
mine Q. 73. why] F, with Q. 

60. Furness asks, "Was this the pole-axe. Boswell suggested that a 

very armour that he wore thirty years person who carried the pole-axe was 

before, on the day Hamlet was born meant. "Sled" for sledge is found 

(see V. i. 155-176)? How old was in Colgrave's P'rench Dutioiiary. 

Horatio?" But the armour would be Schmidt, reading " pollax," explains 

remembered and be pointed out, when ' ' sledded " as having a sled or sledge, 

worn later. i.e. a heavy hammer. 

62. parle"] parley. King John, II. 65. /ww/] just, exactly. See V. ii. 
205: " this gentle parle." 386. 

63. sledded Polacks] Poles in sleds 70. Good now,] Please you, as in 
or sledges. See Polack in II. ii. Winter's Tale, v. i. 19 ; Q I places 
75, and IV. iv. 23. The Earl of a comma after "good," connecting 
Rochester, 1761, explained steaded "now" with "sit down." 

as loaded with lead, and Polacks as 73. subject] subjects, as in I. ii. 33. 



8 HAMLET [acti. 

Why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore 

task 7 5 

Does not divide the Sunday from the week ; 
What might be toward, that this sweaty haste 
Doth make the night joint - labourer with the 

day; 
Who is 't that can inform me ? 
Hor. That can I ; 

At least the whisper goes so. Our last king, 8o 
Whose image even but now appear'd to us. 
Was, as you know, by Fortinbras of Norway, 
Thereto prick'd on by a most emulate pride. 
Dared to the combat; in which our valiant 

Hamlet — 
For so this side of our known world esteem'd 

him — 85 

Did slay this Fortinbras ; who, by a seal'd compact 
Well ratified by law and heraldry. 
Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands 
Which he stood seized of, to the conqueror ; 
Against the which, a moiety competent 90 

Was gaged by our king ; which had return'd 
To the inheritance of Fortinbras, 

88. those\ F, these Q. 89. ofl Q, on F. 91. return d] F, returne Q. 

75. impress'] impressment, as in 87. heraldry'] Part of a herald's 

Troihis a7id Cressida, 11. i. 107. duty was to regulate the forms con- 

77' toward] imminent, as in v. ii. nected with a challenge and combat 

376. of state importance. 

83. emulate] emulous ; not else- 89. seized of] possessed of — the 

where in Shakespeare. legal term still in use. 

86. compact] Always accented by 90. moiety] a portion, not neces- 

Shakespeare on the last syllable, with sarily a half. 1 Henry I'F. in. i. 96 : 

one exception : 1 Henry VI. v. iv. 163 "my moiety . . . equals not one of 

(Clar. Press). yours." 



sc. i] PRIXCE OF DENMARK 9 

Had he been vanquisher ; as, by the same covenant 
And carriage of the article design'd, 
His fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, young Fortin- 
bras, 95 

Of unimproved mettle hot and full. 
Hath in the skirts of Norway here and there 
Shark'd up a list of lawless resolutes. 
For food and diet, to some enterprise 
That hath a stomach in 't ; which is no other — i oo 
As it doth well appear unto our state — 
But to recover of us, by strong hand 
And terms compulsative, those foresaid lands 
So by his father lost. And this, I take it, 
Is the main motive of our preparations, 105 

The source of this our watch and the chief head 
Of this post-haste and romage in the land. 

93. covenattt\ Counant F, coinart Qq 2-5, co-mart Q 6 and many editors, 
Q of 1676 reads compact. 94. article design'd] Ff 2, 3,4; article desseigne 
Qq 2, 3 ; articles deseigne Q 4 ; Articles desig7ie Q 5 ; Article designe F I. 
96. unimproved] inapproved Q I ; Singer, ed. 2 ; Keightley. 98. list] 

sight Q I ; lawless] Q, landlessc F and many editors. loi. As] Q, And F. 

103. compulsative] F, compulsatory Q and many editors. 

93. covenant] The " co-mart " of gives also an appropriate sense ; but 
the Qq, if not a misprint, is of Shake- here Q i agrees with Q 2 in giving 
speare's coinage, meaning joint bar- " lawless." 

gain. 98. resolutes] braves. 

94. carriage] process, or import. 99. food and diet,] Paid only by 
96. unimproved] Clar. I'ress ex- what they eat. Qq I, 2 have no comma 

plains as "untutored, not chastened after "diet"; may the meaning be 

by experience." " Improve" is found that the resolutes are to be the food 

in Chapman and Whitgift, meaning and diet of a devouring enterprise, 

reprove (see Nares' Glossary), and which has a stomach in it ("food for 

"unimproved" may possibly mean powder"), with a play on "stomach" 

unrebuked or unimpeachcd. in its second sense of stubborn resolu- 

98. Shark'd up] I'erhaps gathered tion ? 

as a sharker or swindler ; or snatched 107. romage] rummage, originally 

indiscriminately as a shark swallows a nautical term for the stowage of a 

food. cargo (Skeat). 

98. lawless] The F "landless" 



10 HAMLET [act I. 

Ber. I think it be no other but e'en so : 

Well may it sort that this portentous figure 
Comes armed through our watch, so like the king i i o 
That was and is the question of these wars. 

Hor. A mote it is to trouble the mind's eye. 

In the most high and palmy state of Rome, 
A little ere the mightiest Julius fell, 
The graves stood tenantless and the sheeted 
dead 1 1 5 

Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets: 
As stars with trains of fire and dews of blood, 
Disasters in the sun ; and the moist star, 
Upon whose influence Neptune's empire stands. 
Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse: 120 
And even the like precurse of fierce events. 
As harbingers preceding still the fates 

108-125. Ber. I think . . . ro!/nf>ymen]Q, omitted in F. I2I. fieyce\ 

Q 4 {fearce),feare Q,y^arV Collier's conjecture. 

109. sort\ suit, as in Midsu/nmer ii6 has been lost; it may have 

Night's Dream, V. 55, "not sorting mentioned prodigies in the heavens, 

with a nuptial ceremony." Schmidt or may have told of warriors fighting 

supposes it may mean "fall out,"' upon the clouds; in Julius Ccesar, 

"have an issue," as in other passages 11. ii. we read of such warriors who 

of Shakespeare. were "fiery," and from their en- 

112. motel The ?>toth of Q is only counters there " drizzled blood." Of 
an obsolete spelling of mote. many attempted emendations none 

113. state'] Wilson (Christopher is satisfactory. Malone conjectured 
North) pleads for "State" meaning " Astres with . . . Disastrous dimm'd 
Reigning City. the sun " ; astre or aster is found in 

1 15-120.] Plutarch describes the Florio's Jtal. Diet, under "Stella" 

prodigies preceding and following and in his translation of Montaigne. 

Caisar's death — fires in the elements. New Eng. Diet, explains " disasters" 

spirits running up and down in the here as unfavourable aspects. The 

night, a pale sun, which gave little light " moist star " is the moon — governess 

or heat. Compare_/^///;« Ccesar, l.iii. of floods; so in Winter's Tale, I. ii. I : 

Such prodigies are very impressively " Nine changes of the watery star." 
described in Marlowe's Liiean's First 122. still] constantly, as in Tew- 

Booke translated, published in 1600. pest, i. ii. 229 : " the still vex'd 

117, 118.] Perhaps a line following Bermoothes." 



SCI] PRINCE OF DENMARK 11 

And prologue to the omen coming on, 

Have heaven and earth together demonstrated 

Unto our climatures and countrymen. 125 

Re-enter Ghost. 

But, soft, behold ! lo, where it comes again ! 

I '11 cross it, though it blast me. Stay, illusion ! 

If thou hast any sound, or use of voice, 

Speak to me: 

If there be any good thing to be done, ' i 30 

That may to thee do ease and grace to me, 

Speak to me : 

If thou art privy to thy country's fate. 

Which, happily, foreknowing may avoid, 

O, speak ! 135 

Or if thou hast uphoarded in thy life 

Extorted treasure in the womb of earth, 

For which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death, 

\The cock crozvs. 
Speak of it : stay, and speak ! Stop it, Marcellus. 

138. }'oi('\ F, your Q. The cock crows] Q, omitted in F. 

123. oi>ieit'\ the ominous event, crossed him swiftly ; and when the 

Farmer cites from Ileywood's Life of l)ewitched Earl came to the place 

Merlin: "Merlin . . . liis country s where he saw this man, he first fell 

omen did long since foretell." sick. Opposite this line (^ has the 

125. climatures'] regions ; in which stage direction : "It spreads his 

sense "climate" is commonly found, armes." 

Dyce reads clit/iature. Clar. Press 134. happily] haply. See il. ii. 

suggests the inhahilants of our 408, and Measure for Measure, iv. 

regions. ii. 98 (Clar. Press). Hudson ex- 

127. ril cross it, though il blast plains it "fortunately." Furness 

nie] Blakeway cites from Lodge's writes: " The structure of this solemn 

Jllustratious of British History, iii. appeal is almost identical with that 

48, a story of I'erdinando, Karl of of a very different strain in As You 

Derby (who died 1594): on Friday Like It, 11. iv. 33-42." 
a tall man appeared, who twice 



12 HAMLET [act I. 

Mar. Shall I strike at it with my partisan? 140 

Hor. Do, if it will not stand. 

Ber. 'Tis here ! 

Hor. 'Tis here ! 

Mar. 'Tis gone ! {Exit Ghost. 

We do it wrong, being so majestical, 
To offer it the show of violence ; 
For it is, as the air, invulnerable, 145 

And our vain blows malicious mockery. 

Ber. It was about to speak when the cock crew. 

Hor. And then it started like a guilty thing 
Upon a fearful summons. I have heard, 
The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn, 150 

Doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat 
Awake the god of day ; and, at his warning, 
Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air, 
The extravagant and erring spirit hies 
To his confine : and of the truth herein i 5 5 

This present object made probation. 

Afar. It faded on the crowing of the cock. 

Some say that ever 'gainst that season comes 

Wherein our Saviour's birth is celebrated, 

The bird of dawning singeth all night long; 160 

140. at'] F, omitted in Q. 150. mo>-n] Q, morning Q i, day F. 158. 
say} Q, sayes F. 160. The] Q i, F ; T/u's Q. 

140. partisan] a kind of halbert or 151. lofty] like "shrill," qualifies 

pike. "sounding"; unless the uplifted 

1 50. trumpet] Malone quotes from throat of the crowing cock is 

England's Parnassus, 1600 (in a meant. 

passage assigned to Drayton): "the 154. extravagant] wandering out 

cocke, the morning's trumpeter." of bounds, vagrant. Othello. I. i. 

" Trumpet " for "trumpeter" occurs 137: "an extravagant and wheeling 

in several passages of Shakespeare, stranger." " Erring," straying. 

Henry F. iv. ii. 61 : "I will the 1^6. prodation] proof, eis in Measure 

banner from a trumpet take." for Measure, v. 157. 



SCI.] PRINCE OF DENMARK 13 

And then, they say, no spirit can walk 

abroad ; 
The nights are wholesome ; then no planets 

strike. 
No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to 

charm, 
So hallow'd and so gracious is the time. 
Hor. So have I heard and do in part believe it. 165 

But look, the Morn, in russet mantle clad. 
Walks o'er the dew of yon high eastern 

hill; 
Break we our watch up ; and by my advice, 
Let us impart what we have seen to-night 
Unto young Hamlet; for, upon my life, 170 

This spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him. 
Do you consent we shall acquaint him 

with it. 
As needful in our loves, fitting our duty ? 
Mar. Let 's do 't, I pray ; and I this morning 

know 
Where we shall find him most conveniently. 175 

[Exeunt. 



161. can walk'] F, dare sturre Q, dare walke Q i. 163. takes] Q, 

talkes F. 164. the] F, that Q I, Q. 167. eastern] F, eastward Q. 

175. conveniently] Q i, F ; convenient Q. 

161. walk] The Q "stir" has not siderare: to blast or strike with a 
the special ghostly significance of planet, to be taken." 

" walk," which is frequent in Shake- 163. takes] affects with malignant 

speare, e.g. Winter's Tale, v. i. 63 : influence. Merry Wives, IV. iv. 32 

" were I the ghost that walk'd." (of Heme the Hunter) : 

162. strike] blast, especially of "And there he blasts the tree and 
planetary influence. Coriolaniis, 11. takes the cattle." 

ii. 117: "struck Corioli like a planet." So "taking airs" in Lear, 11. iv. 
Fumess quotes Florio's Z'/V/. : ^* As- 166. 



14 HAMLET [act i. 

SCENE II. — A Roo7?i of State in the Castle. 

Flourish. Efiter the King, Queen, Hamlet, Polonius, 
Laertes, Voltimand, Cornelius, Lords, and 
Attendants. 

King. Though yet of Hamlet our dear brother's death 
The memory be green, and that it us befitted 
To bear our hearts in grief and our whole king- 
dom 
To be contracted in one brow of woe. 
Yet so far hath discretion fought with nature 5 

That we with wisest sorrow think on him, 
Together with remembrance of ourselves. 
Therefore our sometime sister, now our queen. 
The imperial jointress of this warlike state. 
Have we, as 'twere with a defeated joy, — 10 

With one auspicious and one dropping eye. 
With mirth in funeral and with dirge in marriage, 
In equal scale weighing delight and dole, — 
Taken to wife : nor have we herein barr'd 
Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone i 5 
With this affair along : for all, our thanks. 

Flourish] Q, omitted F ; the stage direction here is Malone's. Q after 
" Gertrad the Queene " has " Counsaile : as Polonius " ; F names Ophelia as 
present. 8. sometvne'] Q, sotne times F. 9. of^^ Y, to Q^, li. one 

, . . one] ¥, ail ... a Q. 

9. Jointress] Schmidt explains as in Othello, I. iii. 346 ; or destroyed, 
dowager. Clar. Press: joint pos- undone, as in Othello, IV. ii. 160: 
sessor. Hudson : heiress — " the Poet "his unkindness may defeat my 
herein follows the history, which life." 

represents the former King to have 11.] Steevens notes the same 
come to his throne by marriage." thought in IVinfe/'s Tale, V. ii. 80. 

10. defeated] disfigured, marred, as Grant White reads " drooping." 



sen] PRINCE OF DENMARK 15 

Now follows that you know : young Fortinbras, 

Holding a weak supposal of our worth, 

Or thinking by our late dear brother's death 

Our state to be disjoint and out of frame, 20 

Colleagued with the dream of his advantage, 

He hath not fail'd to pester us with message, 

Importing the surrender of those lands 

Lost by his father, with all bonds of law. 

To our most valiant brother. So much for him. 25 

Now for ourself and for this time of meeting:- 

Thus much the business is ; we have here writ 

To Norway, uncle of young Fortinbras, — 

Who, impotent and bed-rid, scarcely hears 

Of this his nephew's purpose, — to suppress 30 

His further gait herein ; in that the levies, 

The lists and full proportions, are all made 

Out of his subject : and we here dispatch 

You, good Cornelius, and you, Voltimand, 

For bearers of this greeting to old Norway, 35 

Giving to you no further personal power 

To business with the king more than the scope 

17. know: yoinig] Walker; no comma after kiiozv Q, V ; comma after 
follows F. 21. the'] F, this Q. 24. bonds'] F, bands Q and many 
editors. 25.] Enter Voltemand and Cornelius F. 26. meeting:] F 4, 
meeting, Q, meeting F. 35. For bearers] Q i, Q ; For bearing F. 

17, that you know,] that which 22. pester] annoy and especially by 

you know. The pointing is that crowding, as in Coriolaniis, iv. vi. 

suggested by S. Walker ; commonly 7 : " Dissentious numbers pestering 

with commas after "follows" and streets." 

" know." 23. Ifnportittg] having for import ; 

21. Colleagued] Theobald suggested not, as Abbott explains, importuning, 

"collogued," flattered, cajoled. The See Othello, 11. ii. 3. 

"supposal," line 18, is colleagued, t^z. proportions] number of troops, 

united, with the "dream." as in Henry V. \. ii. 304 : "let our 

21. his advantage] his superiority proportions for these wars be soon 

to us. collected." 



16 HAMLET [act i. 

Of these delated articles allow. 
Farewell, and let your haste commend your duty. 
Cor.^ Vol. In that and all things will we show our 
duty. 40 

King. We doubt it nothing : heartily farewell. 

\Exeunt Voltiniand and Cornelius. 
And now, Laertes, what 's the news with you ? 
You told us of some suit ; what is 't, Laertes ? 
You cannot speak of reason to the Dane, 
And lose your voice : what would'st thou beg, 
Laertes, 45 

That shall not be my offer, not thy asking ? 
The head is not more native to the heart, 
The hand more instrumental to the mouth, 
Than is the throne of Denmark to thy father. 
What would'st thou have, Laertes ? 
Laer. Dread my lord, 50 

Your leave and favour to return to France, 
From whence though willingly I came to Den- 
mark, 
To show my duty in your coronation, 
Yet now, I must confess, that duty done. 
My thoughts and wishes bend again toward 
France 5 5 

38. ddaied] Q, dilated Y, related Q i. Cor., Vol.] Q, Volt. F. 41. 
Exeunt] P\ omitted Q. 49. is . . to]Q,F ; to . . . is Warburton and other 
editors. 50. Dread mj>] F, Afy dread Q. 55. toward] Q, towards F. 

38. delated] Perhaps a different 47. native] cognate, connected by 

speUing of the F "dilated," mean- nature or birth, as in All's Well, i. 

ing expressed at large. But it may i. 238: " To join like likes, and kiss 

mean conveyed, carried, as in Bacon, like native things." 

Natural History: " the time wherein 53. £-(?;wm/z^«] In Q I Laertes asks 

sound is delated . . . the delation permission to leave "Now that the 

of light is an instant." funerall rites are all performed." 



sen] PRINCE OF DENMARK 17 

And bow them to your gracious leave and pardon. 
King. Have you your father's leave ? What says 

Polonius ? 
Pol. He hath, my lord, wrung from me my slow leave 

By laboursome petition, and at last 

Upon his will I seal'd my hard consent : 60 

I do beseech you, give him leave to go. 
King. Take thy fair hour, Laertes ; time be thine. 

And thy best graces spend it at thy will ! 

But now, my cousin Hamlet, and my son, — 
Hani. [Aside.] A little more than kin, and less than kind. 65 
King. How is it that the clouds still hang on you ? 
Ham. Not so, my lord ; I am too much i' the sun. 

57. Have . . . Polonius .'] Q, two lines F. 58. He hai/i] F, Hath Q. 
58-60. wrung . . . consent\ Q, omitted in F. 64.] Exit Q i. 64. 

son'\ Sonne Q, sonne ? ¥, son — Rowe. 65. [Aside]] added by Theobald. 
67. so^ F, so muck Q ; z' ike sun] Capell, z" t/i' Sun Y, in ike sonne Q. 

56. pardon'] permission to depart, as crate or dishonour kindred. The 

in III. ii. 332. play upon kin or kindred and kind 

64. cousin] kinsman (exclusive of or kindly is found in Gorboduc, in 

parent, child, brother, and sister); l^yWs Mother Boinbie,2LX\dmKo\\\e.y's 

used elsewhere in Shakespeare for Search for Money. "Kind" for 

uncle, niece, grandchild. "nature" occurs several times in 

65.] It can hardly be doubted Shakespeare, 
that this — Hamlet's first word — is 67. /'///£ j/^m.] Hamlet's delight in 
spoken aside. Does it refer to the ambiguous and double meanings 
King or to himself? If to himself, it makes it probable that a play is in- 
may mean a little more than a kins- tended on "sun" and "son." He 
man (for I am, incestuously, a step- is too much in the sunshine of the 
son), and less than kind, for I hate court, and too much in the relation 
the King. So Malone. Knight says of son — son to a dead father, son to 
"little of the same nature" with an incestuous mother, son to an uncle- 
Claudius. More probably it refers father. It was suggested by Johnson 
to the King, meaning : My step-father that there is an allusion to the 
(more than cousin), but in less than a proverbial expression (see Lear, n. 
natural relation. Compare il. ii. ii. 168): "Out of heaven's blessing 
619: "lecherous, kindless (i.e. un- into the warm sun," which means to 
natural) villain." To "go" or be out of house and home ; Hamlet 
"grow out of kind" is found in is deprived of the throne. Schmidt 
Baret's Alvearie and Cotgrave's lakes it to mean merely, " I am more 
French Diet., meaning to degen- idle and careless than I ought to be." 



18 HAMLET [act i. 

Queen. Good Hamlet, cast thy nighted colour off, 

And let thine eye look like a friend on Denmark. 
Do not for ever with thy vailed lids 70 

Seek for thy noble father in the dust : 
Thou know'st 'tis common ; all that lives must die, 
Passing through nature to eternity. 

Ham, Ay, madam, it is common. 

Queen. If it be, 

Why seems it so particular with thee? 75 

Ham. Seems, madam ! nay, it is ; I know not " seems." 
'Tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother. 
Nor customary suits of solemn black. 
Nor windy suspiration of forced breath. 
No, nor the fruitful river in the eye, 80 

Nor the dejected haviour of the visage. 
Together with all forms, modes, shows of grief, 
That can denote me truly ; these indeed " seem," 
For they are actions that a man might play ; 
But I have that within which passeth show ; 85 

These but the trappings and the suits of woe. 

King. 'Tis sweet and commendable in your nature, 
Hamlet, 

68. nighted] Q, nightly F. 70. vailed] Q ; veyled Ff I, 2; veiled Ff 
3, 4. 72. common ;] Theobald, com/non, ¥, common Q. lives] Q, F ; live 

Ff 2, 3, 4 and many editors. 77- good mother] F ; coold mother Qq 2, 3 ; 

could smother Qc]^ ^-6. 82. modes] Q 1695, Capell ; tnoodes Q; Moods F 
and many editors, shows] F ; chapes Qq 2, 3 ; shapes Qq 4-6. 83. denote] 
F, Q 6 ; denote Q. 85. passeth] F, passes Q. 87.] Q, two lines F. 

68. nighted] black. So in Lear, 82. modes] "Moods" may be 
IV. V. 13: " his nighted life " (of the right. 

blind Gloster). 82. shows] The "show" of line 85, 

69. Denmark]\!a& King ; so " Nor- as Furness observes, is an intentional 
way " in line 28. and emphatic repetition of the 

70. vailed] cast down. Merchant "shows" of this line. 
of Venice, i. i. 28: "Vailing her 

high-top lower than her ribs." 



sen] PRINCE OF DENMARK 19 

To give these mourning duties to your father : 
But, you must know, your father lost a father, 
That father lost, lost his ; and the survivor 
bound 90 

In filial obligation for some term 
To do obsequious sorrow ; but to persever 
In obstinate condolement is a course 
Of impious stubbornness; 'tis unmanly grief; 
It shows a will most incorrect to heaven, , 95 

A heart unfortified, a mind impatient. 
An understanding simple and unschool'd : 
For what we know must be and is as common 
As any the most vulgar thing to sense. 
Why should we in our peevish opposition 1 00 

Take it to heart ? Fie ! 'tis a fault to heaven, 
A fault against the dead, a fault to nature. 
To reason most absurd, whose common theme 
Is death of fathers, and who still hath cried, 
From the first corse till he that died to-day, 105 
" This must be so." We pray you, throw to earth 
This unprevailing woe, and think of us 
As of a father ; for let the world take note, 
You are the most immediate to our throne ; 
And with no less nobility of love i i o 

90. lost, lost] dead, lost Q i. 96. a tniiid] F, or mindc Q. 107. tin- 

prevailing] unavailing, Hanmer. 

92. obsequious] Suitable to obse- "prevail" in Koiiico and Juliet, iii. 

quies, as in Titus Aiidronicus, V. iii. 60. Drydcn, Essay on Dramatic 

iii. 152: "obsequious tears." See Poetry. " Me may often prevail him- 

also Sontuts, xxxi. 5. self of the same advantages." 

92. persever] Always accented by 109. immediate] The throne of 

Shakespeare on the second syllable Denmark was elective ; see v. ii. 

(Clar. Press). 65 ; but Hamlet was the probable 

107. unprevailing] unavailing. So successor to Claudius. 



20 HAMLET [acti. 

Than that which dearest father bears his son 

Do I impart toward you. For your intent 

In going back to school in Wittenberg, 

It is most retrograde to our desire ; 

And we beseech you, bend you to remain 1 1 5 

Here in the cheer and comfort of our eye, 

Our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son. 

Queen. Let not thy mother lose her prayers, Hamlet: 
I pray thee, stay with us ; go not to Wittenberg. 

Ham. I shall in all my best obey you, madam. i 20 

King. Why, 'tis a loving and a fair reply : 

Be as ourself in Denmark. Madam, come ; 

This gentle and unforced accord of Hamlet 

Sits smiling to my heart ; in grace whereof. 

No jocund health that Denmark drinks to-day, i 2 5 

But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell. 

And the king's rouse the heavens shall bruit again, 

112. toward^ Q, towards F. 113. iti Wittenberg] to Wittenberg, Qq 4, 5. 
119. pray thee] Q, pry thee] F. 120.] Q, two lines F. 127. heavens] 

F, heaven Q. 

112. impart] The verb has no ob- let Wittenberg was a foreign univer- 
ject ; perhaps it is a confused con- sity, to which he might go at any age, 
struction ; possibly it is a case after his earlier education had been 
of the absorption of "it" by the completed. 

"t" of "impart." To obtain an 114. retrograde] Prof. Hales notes 

object Badham suggests the reading in Chapman's May-Day (vol. ii. p. 

"nobility no less" in line no. John- 373, ed. 1873): "Be not retrograde 

son explains " impart " as impart to our desires." Originally an astro- 

myself. logical term. See Atfs Well, i. 

113. Wittenberg] The university i. 212. 

was founded in 1502 ; Luther had 127. rouse] bumper, as in I. iv. 8, 

made it famous. In The Tragedy of and Othello, \\. iii. 66; Swedish ras, 

Hoffman (1602), the foolish lerom drunkenness. Dekker, in The G til's 

says, "I am not foole, I have bin iyi5';-«-.6'(7^X't', Procemium, enumerating 

to Wittenberg, where wit growes." national drinking customs, mentions 

Shakespeare may have heard of it in "the Danish Rowsa." 

Marlowe's Doctor Faiistus, and in 127. bruit] noise abroad, as in 

Nash's Life of lacke Wilton, 1594. Macbeth, V. vii. 22. 
It must be remembered that for Ham- 



sen] PRINCE OF DENMARK 21 

Re-speaking earthly thunder. Come away. 

\^Flourish. Exeunt all but Hamlet. 
Hani. O ! that this too too soHd flesh would melt, 

Thaw and resolve itself into a dew ; 130 

Or that the Everlasting had not fix'd 

His canon 'gainst self-slaughter! O God ! O God! 

How weary, stale, flat, and unprofitable 

Seem to me all the uses of this world ! 

Fie on 't ! O fie ! 'tis an unweeded garden i 3 5 

That grows to seed ; things rank and gross in Yiature 

Possess it merely. That it should come to this ! 

But two months dead ! nay, not so much, not two : 

So excellent a king ; that was, to this, 

Hyperion to a satyr ; so loving to my mother 140 

That he might not beteem the winds of heaven 

Flourish] Q, omitled F. 129. solid\ F; sallied O I, Q; sullied Anon, 

conject. 132. O God! O God!] F, God, God Q. 134. Seem] Q, 

SeemesY. 135. Ofie!\ ah fie (^l; Oh fie, fie Y ; Oh fie Y 1 1, a,. 137. 

come to this /] F, eoine thus Q. 

129. too too] Intensive reduplica- which is frozen, regelo." Compare 

tion; hyphened b}^ some editors. Com- Timon, iv. iii. 442. 

pare 'J'wo Gentlemen of Verona, il. 132. canon 'gainst self-slaughter'] 

iv. 205. So also Cymbeline, III. iv. 77-So. 

129. W/VjT] .W/V/ and wf// are found ''Unless it be the sixth command- 
in conjunction, as here, in 2 Henry ment, the ' canon ' must be one of 
IV. III. i. 48. The sallied of Q and natural religion" (Wordsworth, 6'//fl/r- 
Q I is defended by Dr. Furnivall, spearc's Knowledge and Use of the 
who cites Cotgrave's French Diet. Bible, p. 149). 

saillie, a sallie, eruption, violent 137. merely] completely. Compare 

issue; also assaille, assaulted, as- Tempest, i. i. 59: "We are merely 

sayled. If we were to icta.in sallied, cheated of our lives." 

I should explain it as sullied, com- 140. Hyperion] Spenser, Gray, 

paring 11. i. 39, where Y reads sullyes Keats, like Shakespeare, throw the 

and Q sallies ; and, seeing that Q 1 accent on the second syllable. 

has here "this too much griev'd 141. fe/etv/'/] permit ;" beteene" in 

and sallied flesh," we have some Ff i, 2. So Golding, Ovid's Meta- 

reason to think that sullied may be morphoses (published 1587) : 

right. " Yet could he not beteeme 

130. resolve] Caldecott cites Baret's The shape of any other bird then 
Atvearie: "To thaw or resolve that eagle for to seeme." 



22 HAMLET [act i. 

Visit her face too roughly. Heaven and earth ! 

Must I remember? why, she would hang on him, 

As if increase of appetite had grown 

By what it fed on ; and yet, within a month — 145 

Let me not think on^'t. — Frailty, thy name is woman! 

A Httle month ! or ere those shoes were old 

With which she follow'd my poor father's body, 

Like Niobe, all tears ; why she, even she — 

O God ! a beast, that wants discourse of reason, i 50 

Would have mourn'd longer, — married with my uncle, 

My father's brother, but no more like my father 

Than I to Hercules. Within a month ? 

Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears 

Had left the flushing in her galled eyes, 155 

She married. O, most wicked speed, to post 

With such dexterity to incestuous sheets ! 

It is not nor it cannot come to good ; 

But break my heart, for I must hold my tongue ! 

143. woitld] F, should Q. 145. ??ionth — ] month, Q, month ? F. 

147. shoes] Q, F ; shoivs Ingleby conj. 149. evett she] F, omitted in Q. 

150. O God!] Q, Heaven F. 151. wj]Q, muie F. 153, month?] F, 
month, Q. 155. the] their Q i ; in] Q, o/Y. 

147. or ere] "Or," an old form of Hamlet. The closing words are: 

"ere"; so in line i83of this scene, "Or "Hie Amlethi exitusfuit, qui si parem 

ever." The reduplication is found in naturae atq. fortunae indulgentiam 

several other passages. expertus fuisset, cequasset fulgore su- 

150. discourse of reaso7i] discursive peros, lierculea virtutibus opera 

power of reason. Found several transcendisset." 

times in Florio's Montaigne, 1 603. 155. frisking] Hudson and Rolfe 

Johnson's ZJ/iYz'iJwa; J defines i/nruwrj^: explain this as redness. Clar. Press: 

" the act of the understanding by which " The verb ' flush ' is still used transi- 

it passes from premises to conse- tively, meaning, to fill with water." 
quences." See IV. iv. 36, and 7>w7/« 157. dexterity~\ adroitness. Clar. 

and Cressida, ii. ii. 116. Press compares 1 Henry IV. -W. iv. 

153. //(?;-t«/fj-] Perhaps a relic of the 286. 
histoiy of Amlethus in Saxo Gramina- 159. break] "A subjunctive, not an 

ticus, whose Hamlet is in some re- imperative, and ' heart ' is a subject, 

spects the opposite of Shakespeare's not a vocative " (Corson). 



sen] PRINCE OF DENMARK 23 

Enter HORATio, Marcellus, and Bernardo. ^ 

Hor. Hail to your lordship ! 

Ham. I am glad to see you well : 1 60 

Horatio, — or I do forget myself. 
Hor. The same, my lord, and your poor servant ever. 
Ham. Sir, my good friend; I '11 change that name with you : 

And what make you from Wittenberg, Horatio ? 

Marcellus? 165 

Mar. My good lord, — 

Ha7n. I am very glad to see you. — \^To Bernardo.'] 
Good even, sir. — 

But what, in faith, make you from Wittenberg? 
Hor. A truant disposition, good my lord. 
Ham. I would not hear your enemy say so, i 70 

Nor shall you do mine ear that violence. 

To make it truster of your own report 

Against yourself; I know you are no truant. 

But what is your affair in Elsinore ? 

We '11 teach you to drink deep ere you depart. i 7 5 
Hor. My lord, I came to see your father's funeral. 
Ham. I pray thee, do not mock me, fellow-student ; 

I think it was to see my mother's wedding. 

165. Marcelltisl'] Capell, Marcellus. Q, Y. i66. lord,—] Rowe ; lord. (^, 

F; lord? Cambridge. 167. sir^sirs Q I. 170. hear\ Q, have F. 171. 

ritine\ F, nty (). 172. fiiake] take PT 2-4. 175. lo drink deep] Q I, F ; 

/or to drinke Q. l"]"]. pray thee] F, pre thee Q. 17S. see\ Q I, F; 
omitted Q. 

160, 161.] Sir II. Irving, as Ilam- the name "friend." Johnson ex- 
let, delivers " I . . . well "as a con- plains: "I'll be your servant, you 
ventional greeting to unrecognised shall be my friend." 
intruders; Hamlet then looks up and 164. make you] do you, as in II. 
perceives his friend. ii. 280. 

162. chafige that name] Exchange 



24 HAMLET [act i. 

Hor. Indeed, my lord, it follow'd hard upon. 

Ham. Thrift, thrift, Horatio! the funeral baked-meats i8o 

Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables. 

Would I had met my dearest foe in heaven 

Or ever I had seen that day, Horatio ! 

My father, — methinks I see my father. 
Hor. O where, my lord ? 

Ham, In my mind's eye, Horatio. 185 

Hor. I saw him once ; he was a goodly king. 
Ham. He was a man, take him for all in all, 

I shall not look upon his like again. 
Hor. My lord, I think I saw him yesternight. 
Ham. Saw ? who ? 190 

Hor. My lord, the king your father, 

Havi. The king my father ! 

Hor. Season your admiration for a while 

With an attent ear, till I may deliver. 

Upon the witness of these gentlemen, 

This marvel to you. 
Ham. For God's love, let me hear. 195 

183. Or ever I had] Q, Ere I had ever F, Ere ever I had Q i. 184. My 
father, — ] Rowe, My father! Cambridge, O my father, my father, Q i. 
185. wherel F, Where Q. 187. in a//,] in all Q, in all: F. 190. 

Saw? who?} F ; Saw, zvho Q i, Q. 193. attent} Q, F; attentive Q I, (^q 

4-6, Ff 3, 4. 195. God's] Gods Q, Heavens F. 

180. baked-meats'] pastry. Collins : 187. a man,] Edwin Booth, in 

" It was anciently the general custom delivering this speech, paused after 

to give a cold entertainment to "man," giving it as if something 

mourners at a funeral. In distant higher than " king." 

counties this practice is continued ig2. Season your admiration] Tem- 

among the yeomanry. " per your astonishment. Compare, for 

182. dearest foe] Cla.r. Tresf^: "Dear "season,"' 11. i. 28, and for "ad- 
is used of whatever touches us nearly miration," in. ii. 342. So in "Mas- 
either in love or hate, joy or sorrow." singer's The A'ene^ado, iii. iii., 
In 1 Henry IV. iii. ii. 123, we find "Season your admiration." 
" near'st and dearest enemy." 



sen] PRINCE OF DENMARK 25 

Hor. Two nights together had these gentlemen, 
Marcellus and Bernardo, on their watch, 
In the dead vast and middle of the night. 
Been thus encounter'd : a figure Hke your father. 
Armed at point exactly, cap-a-pe, 200 

Appears before them, and with solemn march 
Goes slow and stately by them ; thrice he walk'd 
By their oppress'd and fear-surprised eyes, 
Within his truncheon's length ; whilst they, distill'd 
Almost to jelly with the act of fear, ' 205 

Stand dumb, and speak not to him. This to me 
In dreadful secrecy impart they did ; 
And I with them the third night kept the watch ; 
Where, as they had deliver'd, both in time, 
Form of the thing, each word made true and 
good, 2 10 

The apparition comes. I knew your father ; 
These hands are not more like. 

Ham. But where was this ? 

Mar. My lord, upon the platform where we watch'd. 

198. vasl'\ Q I, Qq 5, 6 ; ivast Qq 2-4, F ; waste Ff 2-4 and many editors ; 
waist Malone, Steevens, Variorum. 200. Armed at /•ohitl Q, Armed to 

poynt Q I, Arm^d at all points F. 202. stately by thetn ; thrice'] (^, 

stataly : By them thrice F. 204. his] F, this Qq 4-6. distil fcf] Q, Q I ; 

bestiFd F I ; hestiird Y 2 ; be stilPd Ff 3, 4 ; bcchilPd Collier (MS.). 205. 
the act of] th'' effect of '^■^xhwxX.'^w. 213. watch\i] F, zvatch Q. 

198. vast] vacancy, void, empti- '^Mar. Is Harry Hereford arm'd ? 

ness, as in Tempest, i. ii. 327, "vast Aum. Yea, at all points." 

of night." " Waste " of Ff has the 204. distill d]mG\\.e^. Dyce quotes 

.same sense. Malone, supporting from Sylvester's Du Bartas : "Melt 

" waist," quotes from Marston's Mai- thee, distill thee, turn to wax or snow." 

content: "the immodest waist of Jelly is probably named because of 

night." its quivering, like the quivering of 

200. at point exactly] Clar. Press fear, 

explains "at all points," and (juotes 205. act] action, operation, as in 

Richard II, 1. iii. 2: Othello, ni. iii. 328. 



26 HAMLET [act i. 

Ham. Did you not speak to it ? 

Hor. My lord, I did ; 

But answer made it none ; yet once methought 2 i 5 

It lifted up it head and did address 

Itself to motion, like as it would speak ; 

But even then the morning cock crew loud, 

And at the sound it shrunk in haste away 

And vanish'd from our sight. 
Ham. 'Tis very strange. 220 

Hor. As I do live, my honour'd lord, 'tis true ; 

And we did think it writ down in our duty 

To let you know of it. 
Ham. Indeed, indeed, sirs, but this troubles me. 

Hold you the watch to-night ? 
Mar., Ber. We do, my lord. 225 

Ham. Arm'd, say you ? 
Mar., Ber. Arm'd, my lord. 

Ha7n. From top to toe ? 

Mar., Ber. My lord, from head to foot. 
Ham. Then saw you not his face ? 
Hor. O, yes, my lord ; he wore his beaver up. 
Ham. What, look'd he frowningly ? 230 

216. it\ i^s Qq 5, 6, Ff 3, 4; /u's Q i. 221. honour'd] honourable Ff 

2-4. 224. Indeed, indeed] Q I, F ; Indeede Q. 228. face /*] Y,face. O. 

230. What, look'd he] How look't he, Q i. 

214. Did you] Actors commonly 226. Anu'cP^ Refers, of course, to 

emphasise "you"; Marcellus and the Ghost. 

Bernardo had been silent. Steevens 228. face?] The Q face, may be 

argues for emphasis on " speak." right, uttered with a tone of disap- 

216. it head] "The possessive zV pointed expectation, 

occurs fourteen times in the Folio (net 229. beai'er] " In ihe i6th century 

counting a doubtful case in Two Gen- the beaver became confounded vvith 

t/emen of Verona, V. ii. 21), it's nine the visor, and could be pushed up 

times,and /Aonly once" (Rolfe). The entirely over the top of the helmet, 

usual form of the possessive of it in and drawn down at pleasure " 

Elizabethan writers is his. (Planche). 



sen.] PRINCE OF DENMARK 27 

Hor. A countenance more in sorrow than in anger. 

Ham. Pale, or red ? 

Hor. Nay, very pale. 

Ham. And fix'd his eyes upon you ? 

Hor. Most constantly. 

Ham. I would I had been there. 

Hor. It would have much amazed you. 235 

Ham. Very like, very like. Stay'd it long ? 

Hor. While one with moderate haste might tell a 

hundred. 
Mar., Ber. Longer, longer. 
Hor. Not when I saw 't. 

Ham. His beard was grizzled ? no? 

Hor. It was, as I have seen it in his life, 240 

A sable silver'd. 
Hain. I will watch to-night ; 

Perchance 'twill walk again. 
Hor. I warrant it will. 

Ha7n. If it assume my noble father's person, 

I '11 speak to it, though hell itself should gape 

And bid me hold my peace. I pray you all, 245 

If you have hitherto conceal'd this sight, 

Let it be tenable in your silence still ; 

And whatsoever else shall hap to-night 

232. Pale, or] Q, F ; Pale or Qq 4-6. 236. Very like, very like] Q I, 

F; Very like Q. 239. grizzled i no?] grissFd, no. Q, grisly? no. F, 

grisly? ¥i 2-0,, grizzled, — tio? Dyce. 241. /will] Q, Jle V. 242. walk] Q, 
wake F; warraul] Q 1, Q ; warrant you F. 247. tenable] Q i, Q ; treble F. 

236. like] likely. defended by Caldecott, meaning a 

244. gape] Staunton suggests that threefold obligatidn of silence. G. 

perhaps "gape" signifies yell, howl, Macdonaldsays, "The actor, in utter- 

/■^ar, rather than jaTfw or ci/f«, citing ing it, must point to each of the 

Henry VIII. V. iv. 3. three" witnesses. Clar. Press, "/rt-Z'/f, 

248. tenable] The " treble " of F is a mere misprint." 



28 HAMLET [act i. 

Give it an understanding, but no tongue : 
I will requite your loves. So fare you well : 250 
Upon the platform, 'twixt eleven and twelve, 
I '11 visit you. 
All. Our duty to your honour. 

Ham. Your loves, as mine to you : farewell, 

\Exeunt Horatio, Marcellus, and Bernardo. 
My father's spirit in arms ! all is not well ; 
I doubt some foul play: would the night were 
come! 255 

Till then sit still, my soul : foul deeds will rise, 
Though all the earth o'erwhelm them, to men's eyes. 

\Exit. 

SCENE III. — A Room in Polonius's House. 
Enter LAERTES a?id OPHELIA. 

Laer. My necessaries are embark'd ; farewell : 
And, sister, as the winds give benefit 
And convoy is assistant, do not sleep, 
But let me hear from you. 

Oph. Do you doubt that ? 

Laer. For Hamlet, and the trifling of his favour, 5 

250. yott] Q, ye F. 252. duty} duties Q i. 253. loves] Q, love F 
254. arms /] F 4, armes ? Ff 1-3, {in amies) in parenthesis Q. 256. foul] F 

fonde Q. 257. them, to] Pope included 77io' . . . them in parenthesis ; 
no comma after them in Q, F. 

Scene ill. 

3. convoy is assistant'] F (semicolon after assistant), convay, in assistant Q. 
5. favour] Q, favours F and many editors. 

255. doubt] suspect, fear. Compare AlPs Well, iv. iv. 10 (Clar. 

„ Press). Perhaps it means an escort 

S^-^^'^ "t- of ships of war. 
3. convoy] means of conveyance. 



sc. Ill] PRINCE OF DENMARK 29 

Hold it a fashion, and a toy in blood, 
A violet in the youth of primy nature, 
Forward, not permanent, sweet, not lasting. 
The perfume and suppliance of a minute ; 
No more. 

OpJi. No more but so ? 

Laer. Think it no more : i o 

For nature crescent does not grow alone 
In thews and bulk ; but, as this temple waxes,_ 
The inward service of the mind and soul 
Grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves you 

now ; 
And now no soil nor cautel doth besmirch i 5 

The virtue of his will ; but you must fear. 
His greatness weigh'd, his will is not his own ; 
For he himself is subject to his birth ; 
He may not, as unvalued persons do, 
Carve for himself, for on his choice depends 20 

8. Fonnard] Q, Ff 3, 4 ; Froward Y ; sweet, not'\ tho sweet, not Rowe, 
swict, but not Capell. 9. perfume and] Q, omitted F. 10. so ?] Rowe, 

so. Q, F. 12. 6ulA] V, du/iesQ ; tA/'s] Q, /us F. 16. wii'/] Q,/eare F. 

18.] Omitted in Q. 20. Cai-ve] Crave Qq 4-6. 

6. fashion, and a toy in h/oO(i] a 13. senuLel Suggested, in tlic 
mode of youth, that he should serve sense of religious service, by 
a mistress, and a play of amorous "temple." 

temperament. 15. cautel] craft, deceit. Used by 

7. primy] of the spring-time. Shakespeare only here and in A 

8. No metrical emendation is ne- Lover^s Complaint, 303. Cotgrave's 
cessary ; the speaker dwells on /"Viewt/i Z'/dV'. gives " Cautelle, a wile, 
"sweet," as if to draw out its mean- cautell, deceit." 

ing, and pauses slightly. 20. Carve for himself] Rushton 

9. J7c////a;/a'] Mason explains " an quotes from Swinburn's Treatise on 
amusement to fill up a vacant mo- IVills, 1590: "it is not lawful for 
ment." legataries to carve for themselves, 

10. so?] Corson prefers the "so." taking their legacies at their own 
of (2, F; Ophelia does not question pleasure." 

but submits. 



30 HAMLET [act i. 

The safety and health of this whole state ; 

And therefore must his choice be circumscribed 

Unto the voice and yielding of that body 

Whereof he is the head. Then if he says he loves you, 

If fits your wisdom so far to believe it 25 

As he in his particular act and place 

May give his saying deed ; which is no further 

Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal. 

Then weigh what loss your honour may sustain, 

If with too credent ear you list his songs, 30 

Or lose your heart, or your chaste treasure open 

To his unmaster'd importunity. 

Fear it, Ophelia, fear it, my dear sister, 

And keep you in the rear of your affection. 

Out of the shot and danger of desire. 35 

The chariest maid is prodigal enough 

If she unmask her beauty to the moon ; 

Virtue itself 'scapes not calumnious strokes ; 

The canker galls the infants of the spring 

Too oft before their buttons be disclosed, 40 

And in the morn and liquid dew of youth 

21. safety\ Q, sanctity F and many editors, sanity Hanmer (Theobald 
conj.); health'] the health Warburton and many editors; this] Q, the F. 
26. particular act and place] Q, peculiar Sect and force F. 34. keep you 

in] Q, keepe witfiin F. 39. infants] Qq 2, 3, F ; infant Qq 4-6, Ff 2-4. 

40. their] Q, the F. 

21. safety] "Sanity," as conjee- binations from Q and F. White reads 

tured by Theoliald, may be right. " pecuhar sect and place," under- 

Safety is a trisyllable in Spenser's standing " sect " as class, rank. 

Fcurie Queene,V. if, ifi : " Where he 36. chariest] Hudson reads " Th' 

himself did rest in safety "; but in line unchariest," that is the least re- 

43 of this scene it has the usual served. " Chariest " means entirely 

pronunciation, and so elsewhere in modest. 

Shakespeare. 39. canker] the canker-worm. 

26. particular act and place]'Ediio\s 40. buttons] buds (Fr. bouton), as 

make new readings by various com- in 7\vo Noble Kinsmen, ill. i. 6. 



sc. Ill] PRINCE OF DENMARK 31 

Contagious blastments are most imminent. 
Be wary then ; best safety lies in fear : 
Youth to itself rebels, though none else near, 

OpJi. I shall the effect of this good lesson keep, 45 

As watchman to my heart. But, good my brother. 
Do not, as some ungracious pastors do, 
Show me the steep and thorny way to heaven, 
Whilst, like a puff'd and reckless libertine, 
Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads 50 
And recks not his own rede. 

Laer. O, fear me not. 

I stay too long ; but here my father comes. 

Enter POLONIUS. 

A double blessing is a double grace ; 
Occasion smiles upon a second leave. 
Pol. Yet here, Laertes ! Aboard, aboard, for shame ! 5 5 
The wind sits in the shoulder of your sail. 
And you are stay'd for. There; my blessing with thee! 
And these few precepts in thy memory 
Look thou character. Give thy thoughts no tongue, 

46. watchman'X Q ; watchiucn C^q 4-6, F. 49. Whilst^ F, Whiles Q, 
which omits like. 51. redc\ Singer (cd. 2), reed Q^, reade F. Enter Pol- 
oititis] Capell, after reed Q. after >to/ F. 57. /or. There ;] Theobald ; for, 
there Q I, (}; for there: F. thee'\ Q i, Q ; you F. 59. Look] Q, See F 
and many editors. 

47. ungraciou si gx3ice\e?,%. "Swear- 59. Parallels for several of these 
est thou, ungracious boy?" 1 Henry precepts have been pointed out by 
IV. n. iv. 490. ' Rushton {Shakespeare s Euphuism , p. 

^q. pufTil] bloated. Sec Merry 46) in Lyly'syS"/c//^wf, and by Hunter 
Wives, V. V. 160. in Lord Burghley's ten precepts for 

50. primrose path] Compare Mac- his son Robert. 

beth, \\. iii. 21. 59. character] Shakespeare accents 

51. recks . . . rede] cares not for the verb either, as here, on the second 
his own counsel. Clar. I'ress cites syllable, or on the first, as in Sonnets, 
Hums, Epistle to a Vounj^ Friend: c.Kxii. 2. 

" And may yc better reck the rede." 



32 HAMLET [acti. 

Nor any unproportion'd thought his act. 60 

Be thou famihar, but by no means vulgar ; 
The friends thou hast, and their adoption tried, 
Grapple them to thy soul with hoops of steel, 
But do not dull thy palm with entertainment 
Of each new-hatch'd, unfledged comrade. Be- 
ware 6 5 
Of entrance to a quarrel ; but, being in. 
Bear 't that the opposed may beware of thee. 
Give every man thine ear, but few thy voice ; 
Take each man's censure, but reserve thy judgment. 
Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy, 70 
But not express'd in fancy; rich, not gaudy; 
For the apparel oft proclaims the man ; 
And they in France of the best rank and station 
Are most select and generous, chief in that. 

62. The^^ F ; Those Q i, Q. d^. them to]Cl i, F ; /hem untoCl ; hoops'] 
hooks, Fope and several editors. 65. new-hatch'd] Q, unhatch't F ; com- 
rade] F ; courage Q I, Q. 67. opposed] Q, F ; opposcr Qq 4-6. 68. thine] 
F, thy Q. 74. Arc . . . that] Rowe, followed by many editors ; Are 
of a most select and gencrall chicfe in that .• Q i ; Or of a most select and 
generous, chiefe in that : Qq 2, 3 ; Ar of a most select and generous, chcefe in 
that : Q 4 ; Are of a most select and generous, chiefe in that : Qq 5, 6 ; Are 
a most select and generous cheff iii that, Ff. See note below. 

61. vulgar] common; be easy in 69. censure]o\t\\\iox\, z.%\w Macbeth, 

your manners but do not make your- V. iv. 14: " our just censures." 

self cheap. 74. Are . . . that] If we read 

63. hoops] Clar. Press remarks in "Are of a most select and generous 
opposition to Pope's hooks: " grap- chief in that," c/^ze/ may be taken to 
pling with hooks is the act of an mean eminotce, as in Ilorman (quoted 
enemy and not of a friend." in New Eng. Diet.), " He wanne the 

65. ccwrart'i?] Accented on the second the chieffe at every game." If we read 

syllable, as in ij%;;;j/K IV. i. 96. If as here, f/^z'^/means chiefly. TheCam- 

ihe. courage oi (^ be right, it must be bridge editors suggest that "chiefe" 

understood as bravery, frequent in our and "of" in the margin of the MS. 

old drama in the sense of a gallant, were meant as alternatives for " best " 

Examples of courage used of a person and "in," line 73, and got by mistake 

are cited in New Eng. Diet, from into line 74. They, therefore, favour 

Hoby (1561) and W. Browne (1647). White's "Are most select and gener- 



sc.iii.] PRINCE OF DENMARK 33 

Neither a borrower nor a lender be; 75 

For loan oft loses both itself and friend, 

And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry. 

This above all : to thine own self be true, 

And it must follow, as the night the day, 

Thou canst not then be false to any man. 80 

Farewell : my blessing season this in thee ! 

Laer. Most humbly do I take my leave, my lord. 

Pol. The time invites you ; go, your servants tend. 

Laer. Farewell, Ophelia, and remember well 
What I have said to you. 

Oph. 'Tis in my memory lock'd, 85 

And you yourself shall keep the key of it. 

Laer. Farewell. \Exit. 

Pol. What is 't, Ophelia, he hath said to you ? 

OpJi. So please you, something touching the Lord 
Hamlet. 

Pol. Marry, well bethought : 90 

'Tis told me, he hath very oft of late 

75. lender fe] F, Under boy Q. 77. dulls the edge\ F, dulleth edge Q, 
dulleth the edge Qq 4, 5. 83. invites'] F, inuests Q. 

ous in that." Staunton, reading " of a Q, and emend and, reading "Or of a 

most," suggests sheaf, meaning class most select, arc generous chief in 

or set, for which lie (|uotes examples that" — J'olonius adding to " best rank 

from Jonson's plays. Malonc, noting and station " those who, though not 

the heraldic meaning of <■/«!?/', the upper of the "best," are yet of a select 

third part of the shield, explains rank. 

"approve themselves to be of a most 77. husbandry'] thrift, as in Mac- 

select and generous escutcheon by bcth, 11. i. 4. 

their dress." Steevens conjectures 81. season] Singer quotes I^arct's 
"Select and generous, are most choice Alvearic: ^'' To season . . . to temper 
in that." Spence {Notes and Queries, wisely, to make more pleasant and 
1875) proposes "Are, of a most, select acceptable." Schmidt explains it 
and generous, chief in that "(<?/" a w/oj-^ " mature, ripen." Clar. Press coin- 
meaning mostly). Collier (MS.) reads: ^?iX&% Merchant of Venice, V. i. 107. 
"Are of a most select and generous 83. invites] Theobald follows Q 
choice in that." I throw out the invests, explaining it " be.sieges, 
suggestion that we may retain Or from presses upon you on every side." 



34 HAMLET [act i. 

Given private time to you, and you yourself 
Have of your audience been most free and boun- 
teous : 
If it be so — as so 'tis put on me, 
And that in way of caution — I must tell you, 95 
You do not understand yourself so clearly 
As it behoves my daughter and your honour. 
What is between you ? give me up the truth. 

Oph. He hath, my lord, of late made many tenders 

Of his affection to me. 1 00 

Pol. Affection ! pooh ! you speak like a green girl, 
Unsifted in such perilous circumstance. 
Do you believe his tenders, as you call them ? 

Oph. I do not know, my lord, what I should think. 

Pol. Marry, I '11 teach you : think yourself a baby, 105 
That you have ta'en these tenders for true pay, 
Which are not sterling. Tender yourself more 

dearly ; 
Or — not to crack the wind of the poor phrase. 
Running it thus — you '11 tender me a fool. 

Oph. My lord, he hath importuned me with love i 10 
In honourable fashion. 

105. / 7/] F, / will Q. 106. these] Q, his F. 109. Running] 

Collier conj., Dyce, Cambridge, Furness ; IVrong Q^; Roaming Y ; Wro7tging 
Pope and several editors ; Wringing^ Warburton, Theobald and others ; 
Under] render F 4. 

94. put on] communicated to, as in ing this reading proposed by Collier, 

As You Like It, I. ii. 99. observes its accordance with the figure 

102. Unsifted] untried. in the previous line. 

103. tefiders] Compare Middleton, 109. fool] Does this mean. You will 
JVomen Beware IVomen, I. ii. : " If present yourself to me as a fool? or, 
now this daughter so tendered — let present me (to the public) as a fool ? 
me come to your own phrase, sir." or, can " fool " mean an innocent, a 

107. 7'ender] regard, take care of, baby? — for Polonius is not over-deli- 
hold dear — frequent in Shakespeare. cate in his warnings. See Romeo and 
109. Rui!ning]Q\:ix. I'ress, accept- Juliet, I. iii. 31 and 48. 



sc. Ill] PRINCE OF DENMARK 35 

Pol. Ay, fashion you may call it ; go to, go to. 

Oph. And hath given countenance to his speech, my 
lord, 
With almost all the holy vows of heaven. 

Pol. Ay, springes to catch woodcocks, I do know, i i 5 
When the blood burns, how prodigal the soul 
Lends the tongue vows : these blazes, daughter. 
Giving more light than heat, extinct in both. 
Even in their promise, as it is a-making, 
You must not take for fire. From this time i 20 
Be somewhat scanter of your maiden presence ; 
Set your entreatments at a higher rate 
Than a command to parley. For Lord Hamlet, 
Believe so much in him, that he is young. 
And with a larger tether may he walk i 2 5 

Than may be given you : in i^'^, Ophelia, 
Do not believe his vows ; for they are brokers. 
Not of that dye which their investments show. 
But mere implorators of unholy suits, 

114. almoit . . . holy} ^l, all the y. 1 1 7. Lends] () I, Q; Civcs F. 
118. I'olh] birth, Badham conj. 120. From this time] Q, For this time 
Daughter F. 121. somewhat] F, something Q. 1 23. parley] F, park Q. 
128.' that dye] O, the eye F. 

115. woodeoeks] Ijirds supposed to entretien ', Clar. Press, solicitations; 
be witless, easily taken in s]3ringes or Schmidt, invitations received ; New 
snares. Clar. I'ress quotes from Eng. Diet., conversation, interview, 
Gosson's Apologie for the Sehoole of from the commoner meaning of ne- 
Abiise: " Cupid sets up a springe for gotiation, discussion, 
woodcocks.'" 127. /i;-tf/!r;T] middlemen in making 

117.] To amend the verse J'ope bargains; used specially of panders, 

read "Oh, my davighter " ; Capell, procurers. Furness quotes Cotgrave : 

"gentle daughter"; Nicholson conj. ^^ Maipiiiionner, To play the Broker, 

" Ijavin blazes"; S. T. Coleridge, also to play the bawd." 

'•Go lo, these," or "daughter, mark 128. dye . . , show] colour shown 

you." l)y their vesture or garb. F " the 

122. <'«/>rrt/;//£«/j'] Johnson explains eye" may mean tint or hue, as in 

as company, conversatiim, I'rench 'J'cinpest, II. i. 55. 



36 HAMLET [act i. 

Breathing like sanctified and pious bawds, 130 

The better to beguile. This is for all : 
I would not, in plain terms, from this time forth, 
Have you so slander any moment's leisure, 
As to give words or talk with the Lord Hamlet. 
Look to 't, I charge you ; come your ways, 135 

Oph. I shall obey, my lord. \Exetmt. 

SCENE V<f.—The Platform. 

Enter Hamlet, Horatio, and Marcellus. 

Ham. The air bites shrewdly ; it is very cold. 
Hor. It is a nipping and an eager air. 
Ham. What hour now ? 

Hor. I think it lacks of twelve. 

Mar. No, it is struck. 

Hor. Indeed ? I heard it not : it then draws near the 
season 5 

Wherein the spirit held his wont to walk. 

\A Jlourish of trumpets, and ordna?ice 
shot off, within. 
What does this mean, my lord ? 

130. bawds^ Theobald, Pope (ed. 2), Hanmer, Cambridge, Funiess, Hud- 
son ; bonds Q, F and many editors. 133. sla7ider'\ squander. Collier (MS.) ; 
moment'' s\ Pope ; moments Qq 4-6 ; moment, Qq 2, 3, F. 135. waj's] 
way Yi 2-4. 

Scene iv. 

Scene iv.] Capell, omitted F. i. it is very coId\ Q, is it very cold? F. 

5. Indeed? /] Capell ; Indeed : I Q ; Indeed / Q i, F ; it t/ten] i), then it F. 

6. A flourish, etc.] Miilone after Capell, A florish of trumpets and 2 peaces 
goes of i), omitted F. 

130. tia^vds] "Bonds" of Q, F is ing "moment," regards it as. an 

explained as vows or (Moberly) as adjective, 
law papers headed with religious Sre/ie n. 

formula. 2. eager} sharp (Fr. aigrc), as in I. 

133. moment' si Clar. Press, read- v. 69. 



sc. IV.] PRINCE OF DENMARK 37 

Ham. The king doth wake to-night and takes his rouse, 
Keeps wassail, and the swaggering up-spring reels ; 
And as he drains his draughts of Rhenish down, lo 
The kettle-drum and trumpet thus bray out 
The triumph of his pledge. 

Hor. Is it a custom ? 

Ham. Ay, marry, is 't ; 

But to my mind, though I am native here 
And to the manner born, it is a custom i 5 

More honour'd in the breach than the observance. 
This heavy-headed revel east and west 
Makes us traduced and tax'd of other nations ; 
They clepe us drunkards, and with swinish phrase 
Soil our addition ; and indeed it takes 20 

From our achievements, though perform'd at height, 
The pith and marrow of our attribute. 
So, oft it chances in particular men, 

9. wassail^ Q l» Q; "wassels, F. 12. Is it] li is F 2. 14. Buf] Q, 

AitdV. 17-38. This . . . scandal] <^ ; omillcd Q i, V. 

8. wa/;e] hold a lale revel; "so, 12. triimiph of his pledge] his 

in poets of a much earlier dale, wc glorious achievement as drinker, 

find the words ivatch and ivatchiiig Ilowell in his Letters tells of the 

employed as etjuivalent to 'debaucii Danish King Christian iv. (15S8- 

at night' " (Dyce, Glossary). 1649) beginning thirty-five healths 

8. roiise?[ see I. ii. 127. during a feast — " the King was taken 

9. iip-spri)ig\ Pope read " upstart," away at last in his chair." 
meaning the King. In Chapman's 18. taxd] censured ; frequent in 
Alphonsus up-spring is named as a Sliakespeare. 

German dance. Flze shows that it 19. depc] call, as in Macbeth, \\\. i. 

was the Hilpfaiif, " the last and con- 94. 

sequenlly wildest dance at the old 20. addition] something added by 

German merrymakings." The verb way of distinction, slyle t)f address, as 

"reels" is taken by Staunton as a in /,t(7r, i. i. 138 : " The name and all 

plural noun. the additions to a King." 

II. kettle-drum] Cleveland in 22. attribute] what is attributed: 

Fuscara, or The Bee Errant, has the hence reputation, ns in Troilus and 

line "As Danes carowse liy kettle- Cressida, 11. iii. 125: "Much attri- 

drums." bute he hath." 



38 HAMLET [acti. 

That for some vicious mole of nature in them, 

As, in their birth, — wherein they are not 

guilty, 25 

Since nature cannot choose his origin, — 
By the o'ergrowth of some complexion, 
Oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason. 
Or by some habit that too much o'er-leavens 
The form of plausive manners ; that these 

men, — 30 

Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect, 
Being nature's livery, or fortune's star, — 
Their virtues else — be they as pure as grace, 
As infinite as man may undergo — 
Shall in the general censure take corruption 35 

From that particular fault : the dram of evil 
Doth all the noble substance of a doubt 
To his own scandal. 

27. the] Pope, their Q. 32. star] Q, scar, Theobald, Pope (ed. 2). 

33. Their] Theobald, Pope (ed. 2) ; His O. 36, 37.] See note below. 

24. mole of nature] natural blemish. 34. undergo] support. Measure for 

Theobald suggested "mould." Prof. Measure, I. i. 24: "To undergo such 

Hales notes in Greene's Pandosto : ample grace and honour." 

"One mole staineth the whole face." 35. censure] opinion, judgment, as 

26. his] its. in i. iii. 69. 

27. complexion] temperament, re- 36-38. the dram . . . scandai] 
suiting from the supposed combination This difficult and perhaps corrupt 
of the four "humours" in the body passage is here printed as in Qq 2, 3, 
in various proportions ; the com- except that for e7.'il these Qq read 
plexions were sanguine, melancholic, eale. The later Qq read ease. In n. 
choleric, and phlegmatic. ii. 638: "May be a devil; and the 

30. plausive] pleasing, popular, devil hath power," Qq 2, 3 have 
All's IVell, I. ii. 53: "plausive dcale; evil is frequently a mono- 
words." syllable in Elizabethan poetry. I can 

32. star] perhaps a mark like a hardly regard evil as an emendation 
star. Cyjuheline, \. V. t,6j^: "Upon open to reasonable doubt. Thejetters 
his neck a mole, a sanguine star." vi of a JNIS. might easily be mis- 

33. Their] His of Q may be taken for an Elizabethan manuscript 
Shakespeare's word, though gram- a; the second /in "evill," " devill" 
matically incorrect. might be taken for an e, or the 



sc. IV.] PRINCE OF DENMARK 



Enter GllOST. 

Hor. Look, my lord, it comes ! 

Ham. Angels and ministers of grace defend us ! — 

Be thou a spirit of health or goblin damn'd, 40 

Bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts from hell, 
Be thy intents wicked or charitable. 
Thou comest in such a questionable shape 
That I will speak to thee : I '11 call thee Hamlet, 
King, father; Royal Dane, O, answer me! • 45 
Let me not burst in ignorance ; but tell 
Why thy canoniz'd bones, hearsed in death, 

42. iittentslQ^, events F. ^$. falher ; Royal Dane, C] Anon. conj. St. 
lames' s Chronicle, 15th Oct. 1761 ; father, royal Dane, 6 Q; Father, Koyal 
Dane : Oh, oh Y, 



MS. may have had evile, devile. 
It is possible, as Keightley suggests, 
that the sentence is interrupted before 
its completion by the Ghost's entrance. 
Most commentators regard it as com- 
plete, and attempt to emend " of a 
doubt." About eighty proposals are 
recorded in the Ca»ibridi;e Shake- 
speare. Perhaps " often dout," mean- 
ing do out, efface, is the best of these. 
" Oft devote" (consign to evil) seems 
not to have been proposed. I would 
suggest what I suppose to be a new 
line of consideration. "Scandal" is 
commonly regarded as a noun ; al- 
though ' ' doth " is separated from 
"scandal" by one of those suspen- 
sions, by qualifying clauses, character- 
istic of this speech, may not " doth 
scandal " be the verb ? We have in 
Cymbeline, HI. iv. 62: " Sinon's 
weeping did scandal many a holy 
tear." Here "the dram of evil doth 
scandal all the noble substance." The 
idea is that required ; the language is 
Shakespearean. To in Shakespeare 
often means as far as ; if we met 
*' I am scandal'd to ignominy," we 



should understand it, like "sick to 
doomsday" (i. i. 120). The dram of 
evil scandals all the noble substance 
to its own (substance) ; "his" being 
here used for the modern "its." 
"Of" is frequent in the sense of out 
of, by virtue of, e.t^. Love's Labour^ s 
Lost, II. 28: "bold of your worthi- 
ness," and we still say "of your 
charity." Out of a mere doubt or 
suspicion the dram of evil degrades 
in reputation all the noble sub- 
stance to its own. "Scandal" may 
have been meant to precede " to his 
own." 

40. spirit of health'] Clar. Press 
explains : " a healed or saved spirit." 

43. questionable] inviting question. 
In As Vou Like It, ill. ii. 393, "un- 
questionable," averse to conversation, 
occurs. 

45. father ; Royal Dane, 0,] The 
pointing leads to "father" as the 
completion of the climax. This read- 
ing is adopted by Furness. 

47. canonizd] The accent, as 
always in Shakespeare, is on the 
second svllable. 



40 HAMLET [acti 

Have burst their cerements ; why the sepulchre, 
Wherein we saw thee quietly inurn'd, 
Hath oped his ponderous and marble jaws, 50 

To cast thee up again. What may this mean. 
That thou, dead corse, again, in complete steel, 
Revisit'st thus the glimpses of the moon. 
Making night hideous ; and we fools of nature 
So horridly to shake our disposition 5 5 

With thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls ? 
Say, why is this ? wherefore ? what should we do ? 

{^Ghost beckons Hamlet. 

Hoy. It beckons you to go away with it. 
As if it some impartment did desire 
To you alone. 

Mar. Look, with what courteous action 60 

It waves you to a more removed ground : 
But do not go with it. 

Ho7\ No, by no means. 

Ham. It will not speak ; then I will follow it. 

Ho7'. Do not, my lord. 

Ham. Why, what should be the fear ? 

I do not set my life at a pin's fee ; 65 

And for my soul, what can it do to that. 
Being a thing immortal as itself? 
It waves me forth again ; I '11 follow it. 

49. imtrfi'd] F, interr''d Q i, Q. 53. Rcidsif sf] F 4, Reitisites Q, 

Reuisits F. 56. the reaches'] Q, thee ; reaches F. 61. waves] Q i, Q ; 

wafts F. 63. / will] Q, will I F. 

52. complete] Accented here on the 54. fools of nature] The presence 
first syllable. So in Massinger, The of the supernatural shows how the 
Emperor of the East, iv. iv. : "To limitations of nature cheat and befool 
march ten leagues a day in complete us, 
armour," 



sc. IV.] PRINCE OF DENMARK 41 

Hor. What if it tempt you toward the flood, my 
lord, 
Or to the dreadful summit of the cliff 70 

That beetles o'er his base into the sea, 
And there assume some other horrible form. 
Which might deprive your sovereignty of reason 
And draw you into madness ? think of it ; 
The very place puts toys of desperation, 7 5 

Without more motive, into every brain 
That looks so many fathoms to the sea 
And hears it roar beneath. 

Ham. It waves me still. — 

Go on ; I '11 follow thee. 

Mar. You shall not go, my lord. 

Ham. Hold off your hands ! 80 

Hor. Be ruled ; you shall not go. 

Ham. My fate cries out. 

And makes each petty artery in this body 
As hardy as the Nemean lion's nerve. 

l^Ghost beckons. 
Still am I call'd ? Unhand me, gentlemen ; 

{^Breaking from thefu. 

72. assume'] Q, assumes F. 74. draw\ drive Q I. 75~7S. The 
very . . . beticath'] Q, omitted F. 78. wares'] Q, wafts F. 80. hands] 
q,hand¥. 84. call'd ?]¥, cald C). 

73. deprive your sovereignly of lines were omitted from tlic F because 
reason] Warljurton, followed by their substance, enlarged and elabor- 
Hanmer, reads deprave. For deprive atcd, had been introduced into King 
see Rape of Liicrece, 1 186 and 1752. Lear. 

Caldecott explains: " Uisposesss the 75. toys'] freaks. See Romeo and 

sovereignty of your reason." In the Juliet, iv. i. 119: " inconstant to}'."' 

Ilistorie of Haniblet, IV., "depiive 83. Nemean] So accented also in 

himself" means lose the right to the Love's Labotcr's Lost, iv. i. 90. 

throne. 83. nerve] muscle or sinew ; so 

75-78.] Delius suggests that these " nervy arm," Coriolanus^ \\. i. 177. 



42 HAMLET [acti. 

By heaven, I'll make a ghost of him that lets 
me: 85 

I say, away ! — Go on ; I'll follow thee. 

[^Exeunt Ghost and Hamlet. 
Hor. He waxes desperate with imagination. 
Mar. Let 's follow ; 'tis not fit thus to obey him. 
Hor. Have after. — To what issue will this come ? 
Mar. Something is rotten in the state of Denmark. 90 
Hor. Heaven will direct it. 
Mar. Nay, let 's follow him. 

\_Exeimt, 

SCENE V. — Another Part of the Platform. 

Enter GHOST a}id Hamlet. 

Ham. Whither wilt thou lead me ? speak ; I '11 go no 

further. 
Ghost. Mark me. 
Ham. I will. 

Ghost. My hour is almost come, 

When I to sulphurous and tormenting flames 

Must render up myself. 
Ham. Alas, poor ghost ! 

Ghost. Pity me not, but lend thy serious hearing 5 

To what I shall unfold. 
Ham. Speak ; I am bound to hear. 

Scene V. 
Scene v.] Capell. i. IVhithe?'] Q i, Q ; Where F. 

85. /^/j] hinders. c\i&x'sTheWoman-Haier{zboviii6o'j), 

91. ?■/] the issue of line 89. 11. i. (vol. i. p. 37, ed. Dyce). 

6. bound\ Delius supposes that 
Scene V. Hamlet uses this word in the sense of 

6, 7. Speak . . . shalt hear'] These ready addressed, while the Ghost takes 
words are playfully quoted in Flet- it as meaning bound in duty. 



sc. v.] PKINCE OF DENMARK 43 

Ghost. So art thou to revenge, when thou shalt hear. 

Ham. What? 

Ghost. I am thy father's spirit ; 

Doom'd for a certain term to walk the night, lo 
And for the day confined to fast in fires, 
Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature 
Are burnt and purged away. But that 1 am 

forbid 
To tell the secrets of my prison-house, 
I could a tale unfold whose lightest word ' i 5 

Would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood. 
Make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their 

spheres. 
Thy knotted and combined locks to part 
And each particular hair to stand an end. 
Like quills upon the fretful porpentine : 20 

But this eternal blazon must not be 
To ears of flesh and blood. List, list, O, list ! 
If thou didst ever thy dear father love — 

Ham. O God ! 

iS. kmtted\ Q I, Q ; knoily F. 19. an end] on end Q i and many 

editors. 20. fretful] Q i, ¥ ; fearefull Q. 22. List, list,] Q, Ij^t 
Hamlet V. 23. l(n'e—\ Rowe ; love, '('l, Y. 24. God!] Q, Heaven F. 

II. to fast in] Chaucer, Persones ni. ii. 318: "Mine hair be fix'd an 

7 ale, writes: "And moreover the end" F ("on end" Qq). 

miseise of helle shal been in defame 20. porpentine^ porcupine, as in 

of mete and drinke" (Skeat's ed. iv. Comedy of Errors HI. i. 116. " Por- 

577). In Dekker his Dreaine [1620) cupine," given here by many editors, 

one of tlie souls burning in hell roars first appeared in Q 1676. 

for " cookcs to give him meate." 21. eternal blazon] promulgation 

Theobald conjectured "confined of eternity. But " eternal" was used 

fast"; Warburton read " too fast in" ; by Shakespeare as an adjective ex- 

Ileath proposed "to lasting"; Steevens pressing abhorrence — "eternal devil," 

"to waste in." Julius Ccvsar, i. ii. 160; "eternal 

19. an en(f\ So in .' Henry VI. villain," Othello, \\.\\. 130; possibly 

it has a like sense here. 



44 HAMLET [acti. 

Ghost. Revenge his foul and most unnatural murder. 25 

Ham. Murder ? 

Ghost. Murder most foul, as in the best it is, 

But this most foul, strange, and unnatural. 

Ham. Haste me to know 't, that I, with wings as swift 
As meditation or the thoughts of love, 30 

May sweep to my revenge. 

Ghost. I find thee apt ; 

And duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed 
That roots itself in ease on Lethe wharf, 
Wouldst thou not stir in this. Now, Hamlet, hear : 
'Tis given out that, sleeping in mine orchard, 35 
A serpent stung me ; so the whole ear of Denmark 
Is by a forged process of my death 
Rankly abused ; but know, thou noble youth, 
The serpent that did sting thy father's life 
Now wears his crown. 

Ham. O my prophetic soul ! 40 

My uncle ? 

Ghost. Ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast. 

With witchcraft of his wit, with traitorous gifts, — 

26. Murder?] F, Murther. Q, Murder ! Q6 and many editors. 27. best] 
least Q I. 29. Haste me] Q, Hast, hast 7ite F. 33. roots] (^ I, Q ; rots V 

and many editors. 35. '7iV]Q, Jt'sF; tnine] F, my Q. 41. My] 

Q, Mine F. uncle ?] Q, F ; Uncle .• Q 4 ; Uncle. Q 5 ; Uncle ! Q 6 and man)' 
editors. 43. wit] Pope ; wits Q, F ; with] Q, hath F, and V 4. 

30. meditation . . . love] Hamlet's Clar. Press suggests "official narra- 

comparisons are appropriate to him — live," comparing the French /roci's 

those of a thinker and a lover. verbal. 

33. roots] The F r(7A- receives some 40. O . . . soul] This occurs also 

support from Ant. and Cleop. I. iv. in Fletcher's The Double Marriage, 

47 : " rot itself." 11. iv. (vol. vi. 351, ed. Dyce) ; in 

33. wharf] seems used for bank of Massinger's The Bondman, \X. i., 

a river. See Ant. and Cleop. n. ii. and his Emperor of the East (near 

218. end of Act i.). 

37. forged process] falsified account. 



sc.v.] TRINCE OF DENMARK 45 

O wicked wit and gifts, that have the power 

So to seduce! — won to his shameful lust 45 

The will of my most seeming-virtuous queen : 

Hamlet, what a falling-off was there ! 
F'rom me, whose love was of that dignity 
That it went hand in hand even with the vow 

1 made to her in marriage; and to decline 50 
Upon a wretch, whose natural gifts were poor 

To those of mine ! 

But virtue, as it never will be moved, 

Though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven. 

So lust, though to a radiant angel link'd, 55 

Will sate itself in a celestial bed. 

And prey on garbage. 

But, soft ! methinks I scent the morning air ; 

Brief let me be. Sleeping within mine orchard, 

My custom always in the afternoon, 60 

Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole. 

With juice of cursed hebenon in a vial. 

And in the porches of mine ears did pour 

45. to his\ Q, Ff 3, 4 ; /^ to this Y ; to this F 2. 47. a\ omillcd in (\\ 
except Q 6. 56. sate\ F, sort Q, seat Ff 3, 4 (Q i fate, a misprinl). 
58. iiionting] i), nioniiiigs F. 59. minc'\ F, my Q. 60. iii\ (^ i, 1'" ; 
of(}^. 62. hebenon] F ; Hebona Q I, O. 63. mine'] F, my Q. 

61. secure] careless, unsuspeclin^^, Transactions, 18S0-82) shows thai 
accented as in Othello, iv, i. 72 : " To the yew was considered a most deadly 
lip a wanton in a secure couch." ]:)()is<jn ; that Ebenus was niediivvally 
Merry (fives, li. i. 241: "a secure applied lo different trees, including 
fool." I lie yew ; lliat Marlowe, Spenser, and 

62. hebenon] fliey conjectured l\e)nulds use lleben for the yew; 
henebon, meaning henbane. Douce, and he maintains that in the words 
having found an exanii>le oi E/>ein>, " cursed " and "at enmity with blood 
ebony, suggested that this was meant, of man" Shakespeare was adopting 
Klze conjectured hemlock; lieisly, the description of the yew found in 
cneron, one of the names for deadly Holland's Pliny, 1600. 
nightshade. Nicholson (A''. Sh. Soc. 



46 HAMLET [acti. 

The leperous distilment ; whose effect 

Holds such an enmity with blood of man 65 

That swift as quicksilver it courses through 

The natural gates and alleys of the body ; 

And with a sudden vigour it doth posset 

And curd, like eager droppings into milk, 

The thin and wholesome blood : so did it mine ; 70 

And a most instant tetter bark'd about, 

Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust. 

All my smooth body. 

Thus was I, sleeping, by a brother's hand 

Of life, of crown, of queen, at once dispatch'd ; 75 

Cut off even in the blossoms of my sin, 

Unhousel'd, disappointed, unaneled ; 

No reckoning made, but sent to my account 

With all my imperfections on my head : 

Oh, horrible ! Oh, horrible ! most horrible ! 80 

If thou hast nature in thee, bear it not ; 

67. alleys] Hanmer; allies Q i, Q, Y. 6^. posse/] F, posscsse Q. 
71. bark'd] Q I, Q; bak'dY. 75. of queen] Q, and Queene F. 

68. vigour] Staunlon proposed 77. disappointed] Pope read tin- 
rigour. anointed ; Theobald, unappointed, 

69. eager] Ff aygre. Cotgrave has comparing Aleasure for Measure, in. 
"Aigre: Eagre, sharpe, tart, biting, i. 60. Boucher conjectures unas- 
sower. " soiled, unabsolved. The meaning is, 

71. instant] instantaneous, as in II. without equipment for the last 

ii. 54S. journey. 

75. dispatcli d] deprived, wliich is 77. unaneled] unanoinled with ex- 
the reading of Q i . treme unction. See quotation from 

76. blossoms] White reads blossotn, Morte Darthur ^mve. Pope mistook 
which Dyce had suggested ; but com- it for having no knell rung. 

pare IVinter's Tale, V. ii. 135: " tlie 80.] Given to Hamlet by several 

Ijlossoms of their fortune.'' editors. Garrick, as Hamlet, pro- 

77. UnhouseV d] without receiving nounced this line ; so does -Sir H. 
the eucharist (Old English husel). Irving. Clarke observes that triple 
Tyrwhitt compares ]\Iorte Darthnr, iteration is characteristic of the Ghost's 
xxi. 12 (Lancelot dying): " So when diction. 

he was liowselyd and anelyd.' 



sc. v.] TRINCE OF DEiSMAllK 47 

Let not the royal bed of Denmark be 
A couch for luxury and damned incest. 
But, howsoever thou pursuest this act, 
Taint not thy mind, nor let thy soul contrive S5 
Against thy mother aught ; leave her to heaven, 
And to those thorns that in her bosom lodge. 
To prick and sting her. Fare thee well at once ! 
The glow-worm shows the matin to be near. 
And 'gins to pale his uneffectual fire ; 90 

Adieu, adieu, adieu ! remember me. [Exit. 

Ham. O all you host of heaven ! O earth ! what else ? 
And shall I couple hell ? Oh, fie ! Hold, hold, my 

heart ; 
And you, my sinews, grow not instant old. 
But bear me stiffly up. Remember thee? 95 

Ay, thou poor ghost, while memory holds a seat 
In this distracted globe. Remember thee ? 
Yea, from the table of my memory 
I '11 wipe away all trivial fond records, 
All saws of books, all forms, all pressures past, 100 

91. Adieu, adieu, adieu!] Q, Adue, adue, Hamlet: F and many editors. 
93. Hold, hold,] Q; hold Qq 4-6, F. 95. stiffly] F, swiftly Q. 

95, 97. thee?] Y, thee, Q. 96. while] F, whiles Q. 

83. luxury]'DycQ {Gloss.): lascivi- men of Verona, 11. vii. 3. In Mas- 

ousness, its only sense in Shake- singer, I'he Entpcror of the East, \\\ 

speare. v., we find "Writ in the table of my 

90. uneffectual] Warburton (ap- memory." 
proved by Dyce) explains: "shining <)^. fond] fnolish. 
without heat." Steevens, " lost in the 99. records] The accent in Shake- 
morning light." See Pericles, II. iii. speare is variable, on the first, or 
43. (as probably here) on the second 

93. Oh, fie] Capell, Steevens, Mil- syllable, 

ford, Dyce regard these words as 100. saws] maxims, as in As You 

probably an interpolation. Like It, 11. vii. 156. 

97. globe] Hamlet's hand is upon 100. pressures] impressions. See 
his forehead. in. ii. 29. Elsewhere Shakespeare 

98. table] tablet, as in Two Gentle- uses iiuprcssure in the same sense. 



48 HAMLET [acti. 

That youth and observation copied there ; 

And thy commandment all alone shall live 

Within the book and volume of my brain, 

Unmix'd with baser matter : yes, by heaven ! 

O most pernicious woman ! 105 

villain, villain, smiling, damned villain ! 
My tables, — meet it is I set it down, 

That one may smile, and smile, and be a villain ; 
At least I 'm sure it may be so in Denmark. — 

[ Writing-. 
So, uncle, there you are. — Now to my word ; 1 10 
It is " Adieu, adieu ! remember me." 

1 have sworn 't. 

Hor. [ Within.'] My Lord, my lord ! 

Mar. [ Within.] Lord Hamlet ! 

Hor. [ Within.] Heaven secure him ! 

Ham. So be it ! 

104. yes\ Q, yes, yes F. 107. My tables, — ] Pope, [My tables) Q i, J\fy 
fables, Q, My Tables, My Tables ; F. 109. /'w] F, I am Q. Writing.] 

Rowe ; omitted Q, F. 113. Hor. [Within.]] Hor. and Mar. within F, 
Hora. Q(see note below). Heaveii] F ; Heavens Q i, Q. 114. Ham. So 

be ill Q, given to MarceUus in F. 

107. tables'] memorandum-book, as the transference by Capell of the 

in J Henry IV. II. iv. 289, and entrance of Horatio and MarcelUis 

Sonnets, cxxii. i. Hamlet's writing to follow line 116 unnecessary; they 

in his tables is a scholar's fantastic may enter at "My lord, my lord!" 

relief for over-wrought feelings, sug- but, in the darkness, may be unseen 

gested to him by "table of my by Hamlet, 
memory." II4'] Many editors follow F in as- 

IIO. word] Steevens explains as signing "So be it!" to Marcellus. 

" watch -word " ; perhaps order, word "There is something highly solemn 

of command, as in /hIIks Cicsar, v. and proper," observes Capell, "in 

iii. 5: "Brutus gave the word too making Hamlet say the Amen to a 

early." lienediction pronounced on himself." 

113. Within] Capell first marked Furness asks, "May it not rSfer to 

thus the speech of Marcellus and that the conclusion of flamlet's writing in 

of Horatio which follows it. Wright his tables ? " 
{^Cambridge Sh. vii. p. 600) thinks 



sc.v.l PRINCE OF DENMARK 49 

Hor. \_WitJun.\ Illo, ho, ho, my lord ! 115 

Ham. Hillo, ho, ho, boy ! come, bird, come. 

Enter HORATiO and Marcellus. 

Mar. How is 't, my noble lord ? 

Hor. What news, my lord ? 

Ham. O, wonderful ! 
Hor. Good my lord, tell it. 

Ham. No ; you will reveal it. 

Hor. Not I, my lord, by heaven. 

Mar. Nor I, my lord. 120 

Ham. How say you, then ; would heart of man once 
think it? 

But you '11 be secret ? 
Hor.^ Mar. Ay, by heaven, my lord. 

Hani. There 's ne'er a villain dwelling in all Denmark 

But he 's an arrant knave. 
Hor. There needs no ghost, my lord, come from the 
grave 125 

115. Hor.] Q I, F; Mar. Q. ii6. bird] F, and Q, boy Q i. Enter 

Horatio and ]\Ia7-cclhis\ Capell ; placed after Hamlet's / have sworuH in 
Q, after My lord, my lord! in F. 1 1 7. Hor. What news, my lord''\ 

omitted Qq 4-6. 118. Ham.] Hora. Qq 4, 5. 119. yon wilf] Q, 

yotiUY. 121. it?'] Q I, F; it. Q. 122. secret?] F, secret. Q; my 

lord.] Q I, P'; omitted Q. 123. ne'er] F, never Q^. 

115. Illo] Capell considered this from Tyro's JRoarins; Hfcg-ge, 1598: 
speech "too light for Horatio," and "He go see the kyte : Come, come 
assigned it with Q to Marcellus. bird, come." 

The call, answered by Hamlet in 121. once] ever, as in Ant. ana 

falconer's fashion, is not meant as Cleop. v. ii. 50. 

such by the speaker, whether he be 123 Denmark] Seymour suggests 

Marcellus or Horatio. In The Birth that Hamlet at this word breaks off 

of Merlin, Prince Uter's "So ho, his intended disclosure, pauses, and 

boy, so, ho, illo ho!" is a mere gives it a jesting turn. Sir H. Irving 

halloo. adopts this rendering, glancing at 

116. Hillo . . . r^Jw^] The cry of a Marcellus, as if his presence rendered 
falconer to his birds. Steevens quotes the confidence unwise. 



50 HAMLET [acti. 

To tell us this. 
Ham. Why, right; you are i' the right ; 

And so, without more circumstance at all, 

I hold it fit that we shake hands and part ; 

You, as your business and desire shall point you ; 

For every man hath business and desire, 130 

Such as it is ; and, for mine own poor part. 

Look you, I '11 go pray. 
Hor. These are but wild and whirling words, my lord. 
Ham. I 'm sorry they offend you, heartily ; 

Yes, faith, heartily. 
Hor. There's no offence, my lord. 135 

Ham. Yes, by Saint Patrick, but there is, Horatio, 

And much offence too. Touching this vision 
here. 

It is an honest ghost, that let me tell you ; 

For your desire to know what is between us, 

126. us\yoit Q I ; ?' the\ Capell, in the Q, z' tli' F. 129. desife\ Q ; 
desires Q i, F. 130. hatli] Q, ha^s F. 131. 7>iine'\ F, wy Q. 132. Look 
you, I'll] F, /wi//Q. 133. w/iir/i7tg] TheohaAd, wherling(^\,whurling 
Q, hurling F. 134. / ';«] F, I am Q. 136. Horatio\ Q i, Q ; my 
Lo)-d F. 137. too. Touching] Rowe, too, touching Q i, F ; to, touching Q ; 
too : touching Q 6. 

127. circumstance\ beating about InShixley's Saiiit Patrick for Ireland, 
the bnsh, circumlocution, as in Aler- serpents come on the stage, are 
chant of Venice, i. i. 154. banned by the saint, and creep away. 

136. Saint Patrick] In connection Tschischwitz supposes that the oath 
with "the offence" there is special alludes to St. Patrick's Purgatory, and 
propriety in the oath. It was given I find mention of this place of tor- 
out that a serpent stung Hamlet's ment in Dekker's Okie Fortunatus 
father; the serpent now wears his (Pearson's Z)<,'/('/v;', vol. i. p. 155)- 
crown. St. Patrick was the proper 136. //^ra/w] Corson defends the F 
saint to take cognisance of such an "my lord," as a retort to Horatio's 
offence, having banished serpents from " my lord," line 135. 
Ireland. In Richard II. W. i. 157, 138. honest] Hudson supposes that 
Shakespeare alludes to the freedom this means a real ghost, just what it 
of Ireland from venomous creatures, appears to be, not "the Devil" in 
Campion in his History of Ireland, " a pleasing shape." 
written in 1571, mentions the legend, 



sc.v.] PRINCE OF DENMARK 51 

O'ermaster't as you may. And now, good 
friends, 140 

As you are friends, scholars and soldiers, 

Give me one poor request. 
Hor. What is 't, my lord ? we will. 

Ham. Never make known what you have seen to-night. 
Hor.y Mar. My lord, we will not. 
Ham. Nay, but swear 't. 

Hor. In faith, 145 

My lord, not I. 
Mar. Nor I, my lord, in faith. 

Ham. Upon my sword. 

Mar. We have sworn, my lord, already. 

Ham. Indeed, upon my sword, indeed. 
Gliost. {Beneath^ Swear. 

Ham. Ah, ha, boy ! say'st thou so ? art thou there, true- 
penny ? — I 5 o 

Come on ; you hear this fellow in the cellarage ; 

Consent to swear. 
Hor. Propose the oath, my lord. 

149. Beneath] Capcll ; Ghost cries under the Stage Q, F. 150. Alii F 
Ha (I. 

147. sword.'\ The hilt, having the is to be found. Marston, The Mai- 

form of a cross, is sworn on. See 1 content, 1604, iii. iii., has an echo of 

Henry IV. ii. iv. 371. Dyce quotes this scene: " Illo, ho, ho ho! arte 

from Mallet's Northern Antii/uitics there, old true-penny." Middleton, 

(i. 216, ed. 1770) to show that "the in Blurt, Master-Constable, names a 

custom of swearing on a sword pre- page Truepenny. Hamlet's recoil 

vailed even among the barbarous from horror to half-liysterical jesting 

worshippers of (^din." is justified to his own consciousness 

150. trtie-/^enny '\ Vorhy (Voc ah. of as intended to divert the ct)njectures 
East Anglia): Hearty old fellow, of his companions from the dreadful 
Collier says he has learnt, from nature of the Gliost's disclosure, which 
Sheffield authorities, that it is a min- he cannot reveal to Horatio in the 
ing term, signifying an indication in presence of Marccllus. 

the soil of the direction in which ore 



52 HAMLET [actt. 

Ham. Never to speak of this that you have seen. 

Swear by my sword. 
Ghost. [Beneat/i.] Swear. r 5 5 

Ham. Hie et ubique ? then we '11 shift our ground. — 

Come hither, gentlemen, 

And lay your hands again upon my sword : 

Never to speak of this that you have heard ; 

Swear by my sword. 160 

Ghost. [^Beneath.'] Swear. 

Ham. Well said, old mole ! canst work i' the earth so 
fast? 

A worthy pioner ! — Once more remove, good friends. 
Hor. O day and night, but this is wondrous strange ! 
Ham. And therefore as a stranger give it welcome. 165 

There are more things in heaven and earth, 
Horatio, 

Than are dreamt of in your philosophy. 

But come ; 

Here, as before, never, so help you mercy. 

How strange or odd soe'er I bear myself, 170 

As I perchance hereafter shall think meet 

To put an antic disposition on, 

153. seeu.'\ F, scene Q, scene, Qq 4-6. 156. oiu-l ^t for F. 157-160.] 

Q has a comnia after sword, line 158, and transposes lines 159, 160, witli 
no point between sivo}-d kci^l never; F. as here, but with comma after sword, 
line 158, and colon after heard, line 159; later Ff put full stop after j-rwra', 
line 158. 159. heard] scene Q i. 16 1. Swear] Q i, F; Sweare by 

hissword.Q^. 162. ea7-th'](^i,(^; ground V. 167. ^owrJQ i, Q ; ourF. 

163. pioner] pioneer, and accented, 167. your] Several editors prefer 

as in Othello, ill. iii. 346. our VL In either case, the emphasis 

165. as . . . zvelconte] Being a is probably on philosophy. Compare 

stranger, take it in. Mason needlessly for this use oi your iv. iii. 22 : ." Your 

suggests seem not to know it. Middle- worm is your only emperor for diet," 
ton, fVomen Beware Women, 11. ii. : 172. a«/zV] bizarre, fantastic ; Romeo 

"She's a stranger, madam. The and Juliet, II. iv. 29, "antic . . , 

more should be her welcome." fantasticoes," 



sc. v.] PRINCE OF DENMARK 53 

That you, at such times seeing me, never shall, 
With arms encumber'd thus, or this head-shake, 
Or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase, 175 
As " Well, well, we know," or " We could, an if we 

would," 
Or " If we list to speak," or " There be, an if they 

might," 
Or such ambiguous giving out, to note 
That you know aught of me : this not to do, , 
So grace and mercy at your most need help you, i 80 
Swear. 

Ghost. [^Beneath.'] Swear. 

Hani. Rest, rest, perturbed spirit ! 

\TJiey sivear. 
So, gentlemen, 
With all my love I do commend me to you ; 
And what so poor a man as Hamlet is 185 

May do, to express his love and friending to you, 
God willing, shall not lack. Let us go in together ; 
And still your fingers on your lips, I pray. 
The time is out of joint ; — O cursed spite, 
That ever I was born to set it right ! — 1 90 

Nay, come, let 's go together. \Exeiint. 

173. liiiies\ Q I, (I; {iiiie V. 174. ///n hcad-iliakc^ Q i, (), (williout 
\\^'^\\(tx\), thus, head shake Y. \~iG. Well, well,]Q^, well V. 176, 177. «// 
7/. .an ?/] Hanmer ; and if . . . and if Q, F. 177. ihcj] Q i, i); 
there F. 179-181. this . . . Swca7-'\ Knight's punctuation of F text, 
this doe swe.are, So . . . yon. Q. 1S4. I do'] omitted Ff 2-4. 

174. enciiviberd] commonly ex- 178. t^it'ing out] intimation, as in 
|)iained as " folded." Perhaps inter- Measure for Measure, 1. iv. 54, 
twined, Hamlet taking the arm of Othello, iv. i. 131. 

Horatio or Marcellus as he speaks. 178. to note] Theobald and other 

In I'enlon's Monophylo, li. ii. 12, I editors correct the grammatical 
lind ■' encimihred lahorinth."' irregularity hy reading denote. 



54 HAMLET [actii. 

ACT II 

SCENE I. — A Room in Polonius's House. 
Enter POLONIUS and Reynaldo. 

Pol. Give him this money and these notes, Reynaldo. 

Rey. I will, my lord. 

Pol. You shall do marvellous wisely, good Reynaldo, 
Before you visit him, to make inquire 
Of his behaviour. 

Rey. My lord, I did intend it. 5 

Pol. Marry, well said, very well said. Look you, sir. 
Inquire me first what Danskers are in Paris ; 
And how, and who, what means, and where they 

keep, 
What company, at what expense ; and finding 
By this encompassment and drift of question i o 
That they do know my son, come you more nearer 
Than your particular demands will touch it ; 
Take you, as 'twere, some distant knowledge of him, 
As thus, " I know his father and his friends, 
And in part him." Do you mark this, Rey- 
naldo? 15 

Enter Poloniiis and Reynaldo'\ Enter old Polonius with his man or two Q. 
I. this\ (), his E; these\ Q, these two (^q 4-6, those Ef 2-4. 3. iiiai-vel- 

Io»s'\ Qq 4-6, meniiles (\\ 2, 3, marvels E. 4. to fitake inquire'] (), you 

make imjuiryV. 11, 12. nearer T/ian~\ C^, E (spelling Then) ; ncere '1 han 

E 2 ; 72ear Then E 3 ; near. Then E 4. 14. As] Q, And E. 

4. inquire'] so " strange inquire "" : ciuestions and the profession of ac- 

Pericles, III. Prologue 22. quaintance : leave questioning, and 

7. Danskers] Danes. come nearer by throwing out a-bait of 

9, 10.] The opposition is not be- imperfect knowledge. Jennens and 

tween particular (which perhaps Keightley read "nearer; Then"; 

means /tf/'j'ijwa/) demands and any other but in what follows there are no 

incjuiries, but between demands or " particular demands." 



SCI.] PRINCE OF DENMARK 55 

Rey. Ay, very well, my lord. 

Pol. " And in part him ; but," you may say, " not well ; 
But if't be he I mean, he's very wild, 
Addicted " so and so ; and there put on him 
What forgeries you please ; marry, none so 
rank 20 

As may dishonour him ; take heed of that ; 
But, sir, such wanton, wild and usual slips 
As are companions noted and most known 
To youth and liberty. 

I^ej'. As gaming, my lord. 

Po/. Ay, or drinking, fencing, swearing, quarrelling, 25 
Drabbing ; you may go so far. 

Rey. My lord, that would dishonour him. 

Po/. Faith, no ; as you may season it in the charge. 
You must not put another scandal on him. 
That he is open to incontinency ; 30 

That's not my meaning; but breathe his faults so 
quaintly 

26. Drabbin,::f\ Or Grabbing C) i. 28. no] F, omitted Q. 

25. fenchig\ Perhaps named to 29. another] Theobald conjectured 

show how Polonius regards the other an titter, which was adopted by 

supposed outbreaks of his son — as to Ilanmcr and some other editors ; 

be classed with addiction to the but Theobald himself withdrew the 

fencing-school. Fencers, however, suggestion. Malone explains : "a very 

had a like legal disrepute with different and more scandalous failing : 

players. In Middleton's Spanish habitual incontinency." Hudson 

Gipsy, n. ii. Sancho comes in "from reads "open of incontinency,"' that 

playing with fencers," having lost he indulges his passions openly. Per- 

cloak, band, and rapier at dice. The haps Malone is right ; Polonius, who 

ill repute of fencers appears from loves nice distinctions, sees a difter- 

other passages in Elizabethan drama, ence between occasional "drabbing" 

In Dekker's GiiPs Horn-Booke he and lying wide open to the access of 

speaks of the danger to a rich young vice. 

man of being " set upon" by fencers 31. quaintly] delicately, ingeni- 

and cony-catchers (Dekker, ed. Ciro- ously, as in Merchant of Venice, 

sart, vol. ii. p. 213). II. iv. 6. 

28. season] (jualify ; see I. ii. 1 92. 



56 HAMLET [acth. 

That they may seem the taints of Hberty, 
The flash and outbreak of a fiery mind, 
A savageness in unreclaimed blood, 
Of general assault, 

Rey. But, my good lord, — 35 

Pol. Wherefore should you do this ? 

Rey. Ay, my lord, 

I would know that. 

Pol. Marry, sir, here 's my drift, 

And, I believe, it is a fetch of warrant ; 
You laying these slight sullies on my son. 
As 'twere a thing a little soil'd i' the work- 
ing, 40 
Mark you. 

Your party in converse, him you would sound. 
Having ever seen in the prenominate crimes 
The youth you breathe of guilty, be assured 
He closes with you in this consequence; 45 

" Good sir," or so, or " friend," or " gentle- 
man," 
According to the phrase or the addition 
Of man and country. 

Rey. Very good, my lord. 

38. warranf^ F, wit Q. 39. sullies'] F, Qq 4, 5, 6 ; sallies Qq 2, 3. 

40. i' ihe] F, with Q. 42. converse,'] Q, converse; F. 47. or](^, 

a7id F. 

34. iinrcclaij/ied] untamed. Clar. 42. converse] "Shakespeare uses 
Press quotes Cotgrave. " Adomes- the noun only three times, and with 
tiquer : To tame, reclaim, make the accent as here" (Rolfe). 
gentle." 45. He. . . consegteence] " H.^ (a.\h 

35. of general assault] which assails in with you into this conclusion '' 
youth almost universally. (Caldecott) ; "in thus following up 

38. fetch of wai-rant] a warranted your remark" (Schmidt), 
device. 47. addition] title, as in I. iv. 20. 



SCI] PRINCE OF DENMARK 57 

PoL And then, sir, does he this, — he does— what 

was I about to say? By the mass, I was 50 
about to say something ; where did I leave ? 

Rey. At " closes in the consequence," at " friend or 
so," and " gentleman." 

PoL At " closes in the consequence," ay, marry ; 

He closes with you thus : " I know the gentle- 
man ; 5 5 
I saw him yesterday, or t' other day. 
Or then, or then, with such, or such, and, as you say. 
There was he gaming, there o'ertook in 's rouse. 
There falling out at tennis ; " or perchance, 
" I saw him enter such a house of sale," 60 
Videlicet^ a brothel, or so forth. 
See you now ; 

Your bait of falsehood takes this carp of truth ; 
And thus do we of wisdom and of reach. 
With windlasses and with assays of bias, 65 

49. does he this, — he does, — ] does he this ? He does : V, doos a this, a doos Q. 
50. By the mass] Q, omitted in ¥. 51. something] tiothiitg I-'f 2-4. 

52, 53. at '■^ friend . . . gent/eman"] om'iticd Q. 55. e/oses with you tints] 
Y, closes thus (), doseth with him thus Q I. 57. or stich] Q, and such Y. 

58. he,] Y, a Q. 60. such] Q, F ; such or such Qq 4, 5 ; siich and such ( ) 6. 

63. takes] Y, take Q. 

49-51.] And then . . . leave?] 58. overtook] Clar. Press: a " eu- 

Prose first by Malone. The attempts phemism for drink" ; perhaps it means 

to justify Q and F by' constructing only surprised, caught. For rouse, 

verse miss the point that Polonius's see I. ii. 127. 

wits have failed him, and he topples 64. (j/T-rar//] Clar. Press: we who are 

from verse to incoherency in prose, far-sighted ; compare " we of taste and 

Three lines, ending say? . . . sovie- feeling," Love's Labour's Lost, iv. ii. 

thing. . . leave? Q; ending this? 30. Q i has " being men of reacli." 

. . . say? . . . leave? F. 65. TivW/axi-^rj-] winding turns. So 

52. 53-] Prose first in Globe Shake- in GoUhng's 0~'id, 15. vii. : 

speare. Reynaldo steps down from "like a wily fox he 

verse to enable I'olonius to recover runs not forth directly out, 

his train of ideas. Two lines ending Nor makes a windlasse over all the 

consei/uence" . . . "gentleman'' Y. cliampion licld-^ about "' : 



58 HAMLET [actii. 

By indirections find directions out : 

So, by my former lecture and advice, 

Shall you my son. You have me, have you not ? 

Rej. My lord, I have. 

Pol. God be wi' you ; fare you well. 

Rey. Good my lord ! yo 

Pol. Observe his inclination in yourself. 

Rey. I shall, my lord. 

Pol. And let him ply his music. 

Rey. Well, my lord. 

Pol. Farewell ! {Exit Reynaldo. 

Enter Ophelia. 

How now, Ophelia ! what 's the matter ? 
Oph. Oh, my lord, my lord, I have been so affrighted ! 75 
Pol. With what, i' the name of God ? 
Oph. My lord, as I was sewing in my closet, 

69. ye well} Q, you well F. 75. O/i, niy lord] Q, Alas F. 76. € 
the] Capell, j' th Q, ?« the F; God\ Q, Heaven F. 77. closet] Q, 

chamber F. 

and in Apollo Shroving: "See how son may gamble, drink, swear, quarrel, 

fortune came with a windlace about drab, . . . only — let him ply his 

again." music : true cavalier - breeding ! "' 

65. assays of bias] a metaphor Clarke: "Let him go on to what 
from bowls, the player sending his tune he pleases," which would agree 
bowl towards the jack in a curve, well with the explanation of line 71 
knowing that the bias — the oblique suggested by Clar. Press. 

line of motion — will bring it right. 77. closet] a private chamber, as in 

66. By . . . out] By indirect means in. ii. 346. This is the only entirely 
find out direct indications. sincere meeting of Hamlet with 

71. Observe . . . yourself] John- Ophelia in the play; and it is 

son: "Perhaps this means in your entirely silent — the hopeless farewell 

own person, not by spies." Clar. of Hamlet. Can her love discover 

Press: "Possibly it means conform him through his disguise of distrac- 

your own conduct to his inclinations." tion? He reads nothing in her face 

Hanmer and Warburton read "e'en but fright; he cannot utter a word, 

yourself." "In yourself" may pos- and feels that the estranging sea has 

sibly mean in regard to yourself. flowed between them. In no true 

73. music] \'ischer explains : "His sense do they ever meet again. 



SCI] PRINCE OF DENMAllK 51) 

Lord Hamlet, with his doublet all unbraced ; 

No hat upon his head ; his stockings foul'd, 

Ungarter'd, and down-gyved to his ancle ; 80 

Pale as his shirt ; his knees knocking each other ; 

And with a look so piteous in purport 

As if he had been loosed out of hell 

To speak of horrors, he comes before me. 

Pol. Mad for thy love ? 

Oph. My lord, I do not know, 85 

But truly I do fear it. 

Pol. What said he ? 

OpJi. He took me by the wrist and held me hard ; 
Then goes he to the length of all his arryi, 
And, with his other hand thus o'er his brow, 
He falls to such perusal of my face 90 

As he would draw it. Long stay'd he so ; 
At last, a little shaking of mine arm. 
And thrice his head thus waving up and down. 
He raised a sigh so piteous and profound 
That it did seem to shatter all his bulk 95 

And end his being ; that done, he lets me go. 
And with his head over his shoulder turn'd 
He seem'd to find his way without his eyes ; 

87. and . . . /lard] oinittcd Kf 2-4. 94. piieous\ (>, Y ; hideous l-'f 2-4. 

95. Tlial'\ !•", As Q. 97. s/ioii/der] (), shoulders V. 

78. mi/iraeed] unfaslencd, as in ceiilcd on last syllal)le. But no otlicr 

Julius Cesa/; I. iii. 48. example of tlie word occms in Sliako- 

80. Uu^arlerd'\ Sec the cunven- sptaie. 

lional lover described in As Yoit Like 90. fenisal] sUul\'. See peruse, 

Jt, III. ii. 398. IV. vii. 137. 

80. dowu-i^yved] fallen t<i llie ancle, 91. Long] Pope read L.oug time. 

like gyves or fetters. Tlieoljald read, 95. /w/i] frame. Florio (161 1) has 

w ith (^rj 4, 5, down -^qy red, explaining " JVltorata, a shock against the breasi 

it " rolled down Id the ancle." ur l)iill<." Sec A'ape of Luerece, 467: 

82. purport] Clar. I'ress says uc- '■ lier heart . . . healing her bulk. " 



60 HAMLET [acth. 

For out o' doors he went without their help, 

And to the last bended their light on me. lOO 

Pol. Come, go with me ; I will go seek the king. 
This is the very ecstasy of love ; 
Whose violent property fordoes itself 
And leads the will to desperate undertakings. 
As oft as any passion under heaven 105 

That does afflict our natures. I am sorry, — 
What, have you given him any hard words of late ? 

Oph. No, my good lord, but, as you did command, 
I did repel his letters and denied 
His access to me. 

Pol. ^ That hath made him mad. i 10 

I am sorry that with better heed and judgement 
I had not quoted him : I fear'd he did but trifle 
And meant to wreck thee ; but beshrew my jealousy ! 
By heaven, it is as proper to our age 
To cast beyond ourselves in our opinions i i 5 

As it is common for the younger sort 
To lack discretion. Come, go we to the king: 

99. d dooys\ Theobald, adoors (with various spellings) Q, F ; Jielp\ Q i, F ; 
helps i^. loi. Coine,^ Q; omitted F. 103. fordoes'] forgoes Qq 4-6. 

105. passion] F, pass/ous Q. 106. sorry, — ] Capell ; sorry, Q, F (Q 6 

sorrie ;)-, sorry. Globe. m. heed] (^, speed Y . 112. quoted]Y , coted <Cl; 
fear'd] (^,feare F. 114. By heaveti] Q i, Q ; // see vies F. 

102. ecstasy] madness, as in in. RoDieo and Juliet, i. iv. 31 : "What 

i. 168, and elsewhere in this play. curious eye doth quote deformities?" 
XQ'i,. fordoes] destroys; the _/i7r is W^. jealousy] suspicion, as fre- 

here negative, as in v. i. 2 ? : it is quently in Shakespeare. 

intensive in "fordone," Midsutnmcr 114. z> aj/ri^/fr] belongs as much, 

Night^s Drea7n, V. 381. zsm Julius Ccesar, I. ii. 41 : " Con- 

106. / av? sorry, — ] Capell's point- ceptions only proper to myself." 

ing indicates a broken sentence. 115. cast beyond] oxQxshooi. Clar. 

Polonius takes it up again in line in. Press explains cast: to contrive, de- 
ll i. heed] Theobald preferred the sign, plan, quoting Spenser, Faerie 

F j/fft/, meaning success. Qucene, i. v. 12, "he cast avenged 

112. quoted] noted, observed, as in to be." 



sen] PRINCE OF DENMARK Gl 

This must be known ; which, being kept close, 

might move 
More grief to hide than hate to utter love. 
Come. [Exetmt. 1 20 

SCENE II. — A Room in the Castle. 

Flourish. Enter KING, Queen, Rosencrantz, 
GuiLDENSTERN, and Attendajits. 

King. Welcome, dear Rosencrantz and Guildenstern ! 
Moreover that we much did long to see you, 
The need we have to use you did provoke 
Our hasty sending. Something have you heard 
Of Hamlet's transformation ; so call it, 5 

Since not the exterior nor the inward man 
Resembles that it was. What it should be. 
More than his father's death, that thus hath put him 
So much from the understanding of himself, 
I cannot dream of: I entreat you both, 10 

That, being of so young days brought up with him. 
And since so neighbour'd to his youth and humour. 
That you vouchsafe your rest here in our court 
Some little time ; so by your companies 
To draw him on to pleasures, and to gather i 5 

120. Conie.^ (), omiltcd F. 

Sce/ie If. 

5. calf] Q, / cal/ V. 6. Since tiof] F, Silh nor Q. lo. (iit:ain'\ (^, 
deeme F. 12. since\ F, sith Q ; humour] F, havior^.). 

1 1 8, 119. which . . . love] " The 
king may hie angry al my telling of Scene II. 

Hamlet's love ; but more grief winild 

come from hiding it" (Moberly). 2. Moreover that] Over and above 
Ilanmer read " to hide hate, than,"' that, 



62 HAMLET [actii. 

So much as from occasion you may glean, 
Whether aught to us unknown afflicts him thus, 
That, open'd, Has within our remedy. 

Queen. Good gentlemen, he hath much talk'd of you, 

And sure I am two men there are not living 20 

To whom he more adheres. If it will please you 

To show us so much gentry and good will 

As to expend your time with us awhile 

For the supply and profit of our hope, 

Your visitation shall receive such thanks 25 

As fits a king's remembrance. 

Ros. Both your majesties 

Might, by the sovereign power you have of us, 
Put your dread pleasures more into command 
Than to entreaty. 

Giiil. But we both obey, 

And here give up ourselves, in the full bent 30 

To lay our service freely at your feet, 
To be commanded. 

King. Thanks, Rosencrantz and gentle Guildenstern. 

Queen. Thanks, Guildenstern and gentle Rosencrantz ; 
And I beseech you instantly to visit 35 

My too much changed son. — Go, some of you, 
And bring these gentlemen where Hamlet is. 

16. occasion^ Q, occasions ¥. 17. Whether . . . thus] Q, omitted F. 
20. are] F, zs Q. 23. expend] extend Qq 4, 5. 29. But we] Q, We F. 
31. service] Q, se>-vices F. 32. To be cointnandcd] omitted Qq 4-6. 
36. yoti] Q, ye F. 37. these] Q, the F. 

17. Whether] To be pronounced or gentry, kindlinesse, naturall good- 
as a monosyllable, as often else- nesse. Generositas." 

where. 30. bent] limit of capacity ; meta- 

22. gentry] courtesy. Singer quotes phor from the extent to which a bow 
"Baret's Alvearie : " Gentlemanlinesse may be drawn. 



sen] PRINCE OF DENMARK 63 

Giiil. Heavens make our presence and our practices 

Pleasant and helpful to him ! 
Queen. Ay, amen ! 

[Exeunt Rosencrantz, Guildensteni, and 
some Attendants. 

Enter POLONIUS. 

Pol. The ambassadors from Norway, my good lord, 40 

Are joyfully return'd. 
King: Thou still hast been the father of good news. 
Pol. Have I, my lord ? Assure you, my good liege, 

I hold my duty as I hold my soul, 

Both to my God and to my gracious king; 45 

And I do think, or else this brain of mine 

Hunts not the trail of policy so sure 

As it hath used to do, that I have found 

The very cause of Hamlet's lunacy. 
King. Oh, speak of that ; that do I long to hear. 5 o 

Pol. Give first admittance to the ambassadors ; 

My news shall be the fruit to that great feast. 
King. Thyself do grace to them, and bring them in. 

{Exit Polonius. 

He tells me, my dear Gertrude, he hath found 

The head and source of all your son's distemper. 5 5 
Queen. I doubt it is no other but the main, — 

39. Ay'\Cl, omitted F. 43. Assure yoti\V , I assure (I. 45. amr\0, 

one F, Caldecott, Knight, Collier. 47. siire'\ be sure Ff 2, 3. 48. it 
hath] Q, / have V. 50. do /] Q, / do F. 52. fruit] Q, newes F. 
I'^xil Polonius] omitted Q, F. 54. tiiy dear Gertrude] Q, my szveet Queen, 
that F and many editors. 

42. 5////] constantly ; sec i. i. 122. 5 Henry VI. i. i. 20S : "look unto 
52. fruit] dessert. the main." 

56. the wain] the main cause, as in 



G4 HAMLET [actii. 

His father's death, and our o'erhasty marriage. 
King. Well, we shall sift him. — 

Re-enter POLONIUS, zvitJi VOLIMAND and CORNELIUS. 

Welcome, my good friends ! 
Say, Voltimand, what from our brother Norway ? 
Volt. Most fair return of greetings and desires. 60 

Upon our first, he sent out to suppress 
His nephew's levies, which to him appear'd 
To be a preparation 'gainst the Polack, 
But, better look'd into, he truly found 
It was against your highness; whereat grieved 65 
That so his sickness, age, and impotence 
Was falsely borne in hand, sends out arrests 
On Fortinbras ; which he, in brief, obeys. 
Receives rebuke from Norway, and, in fine. 
Makes vow before his uncle never more 70 

To give the assay of arms against your majesty. 
W^hereon old Norway, overcome with joy, 
Gives him three thousand crowns in annual fee, 
And his commission to employ those soldiers. 
So levied as before, against the Polack ; 7 5 

With an entreaty, herein further shown, 

\Giving a paper. 
That it might please you to give quiet pass 
Through your dominions for this enterprise, 

57. o^erhasty\ F, hastie Q. Re-enter] Theobald, after line 57 F ; Enter 
Embassadors Q, after line 57. 58. viy\ Q, omitted F. 73. three\ Q i, F; 
threescore Q. 78. ihis\ Q, that Q i, his F. 

61. y^rj-^] Caldecott : "Audience or Macbeth, III. i. 81 ; like French 

opening of our business"; Clar. Press, rnaintenir, 
"/'.£. greeting and desire." 71. assay\ trial. But perhaps 

67. home in hand\ deluded, as in assatdt ; see in. iii. 69. 



sen] PRINCE OF DENMARK G5 

On such regards of safety and allowance 
As therein are set down. 

King. It likes us well, 80 

And at our more consider'd time we '11 read, 
Answer, and think upon this business. 
Meantime we thank you for your well-took labour ; 
Go to your rest ; at night we '11 feast together : 
Most welcome home ! 

\Exeunt Voltimand and Cornelius. 

Pol. This business is well ended. — 85 

My liege, and madam, to expostulate 
What majesty should be, what duty is, 
Why day is day, night night, and time is time, 
Were nothing but to waste night, day, and time. 
Therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit, 90 

And tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes, 
I will be brief. Your noble son is mad : 
Mad call I it ; for, to define true madness. 
What is 't but to be nothing else but mad ? 
But let that go. 

Queen. More matter, with less art. 95 

83. weU-took'\well-look'tYl2-i,. 85. weir\(^, very well V. 90. sincc'IY, 
oniilted Q. 94. mad?] Qq 4-6, mad, Q, f?iad. F. 

79. regards . . . allowance] safe and of the Bermudas ... I will not ex- 
allowable conditions. Clar. Press : postulate." 

"terms securing the safety of the 90. wil] understanding. Staunton 

country, and regulating the passage of explains it as wisdom ; Clar. Press, 

the troops through it.' knowledge, as in Merchant of Venice, 

81. consider d time] time for con- n. i. 18. 

sideration. 93, 94. for . . . mad] to attempt 

86. expostulate] discuss, as in Two a definition of madness were to be 

Gentlemen of Verona, III. i. 251. mad oneself. Or does Polonius give 

\\\.\v\K.(tx (\\\Q\.iz'iUox\\ A Brief Relation "to be mad" as his definition of 

of the Shipwreck of Henry May, 1593: madness? 
" How these isles came by the name 

5 



66 HAMLET [acth. 

Pol. Madam, I swear I use no art at all. 

That he is mad, 'tis true ; 'tis true 'tis pity ; 

And pity 'tis 'tis true : a foolish figure ; 

But farewell it, for I will use no art. 

Mad let us grant him then; and now remains lOO 

That we find out the cause of this effect, 

Or rather say, the cause of this defect, 

For this effect defective comes by cause : 

Thus it remains, and the remainder thus. 

Perpend: 1 05 

I have a daughter, — have, while she is mine, — 

Who, in her duty and obedience, mark, 

Hath given me this; now gather and surmise. \Reads. 

To the celestial, and my soul's idol, the most 
beautified Ophelia, — i i o 

That 's an ill phrase, a vile phrase ; " beautified " is 
a vile phrase ; but you shall hear. Thus : 
[Reads.] In her excellent white bosom, these, &c. 

97. he is'] F, hee 's Q. 98. 'tis 'tis] Q, it is F. 99. farervell it\farewell , wit. 
Anon.conj. \oi,. thus.]'?, thus Ql. 106. while'\(^l,i^;whiPst¥. io8. Reads] 
Q 1676, The Letter F, omitted Q. 112,1 13. hear. Thus: In] Malone (follow- 
ing Jennens); hcare: thus in Q; heare these in F; hea7- — These to Rowe; hear 
— These in Q,'i.^&'i\. ; hear. These. ///Knight. 113. &c.] omitted P\ 

96. art] Delius suggests that Polo- dedicated Chrisfs Tears over Je)-usa- 

nius in replying to the Queen under- letn, 1594, "To the most beautified 

stands " art" as opposed to truth lady, the lady Elizabeth Carey "; and 

and nature. H. Olney dedicated R. L.'s Bulla, 

()^. fgure] a figure in rhetoric. 1596, "To the most worthily Hon- 

105. Perpend] ponder, consider, oured and vertuous beautified Ladie." 

Schmidt observes: "a word only used Greene described Shakespeare in a 

by Pistol, Polonius, and the clowns." vile phrase as an upstart crow " beau- 

iio. beautified] used by Shake- tified with our feathers." In Henry 

speare in J^wo Gentle/nen of Verona, Wotton's tale (1578), on which Soly- 

IV. i. 55. Theobald read beatified, man and Te?-seda is founded, I- find: 

which Capell approved as agreeing " Persida, seeing a stranger beautified 

with " celestial " and "idol." Dyce in his feathers." 

takes "beautified" as meaning (^f^r;^- 113. In . . . bosom] Clar. Press 

ti/ul and not accomplished. Nash compares Tzvo Gentlemeti of Verona^ 



sen]. PRINCE OF DENMARK 67 

Queoi. Came this from Hamlet to her ? 
Pol. Good madam, stay awhile ; I will be faithful. i i 5 
\^Reads^ Doubt thou the stars are fire ; 

Doubt that the sun doth move ; 
Doubt truth to be a liar; 
But tiever doubt I love. 
O dear Ophelia^ I am ill at these numbers ; i 20 
/ have Jiot art to reckon my groans ; but that I 
love thee best, O most best, believe it. Adieu. 
Thine evermore, most dear lady, zuhilst this 
machine is to him, HAMLET. 

This in obedience hath my daughter shown me; i 2 5 
And more above, hath his solicitings. 
As they fell out by time, by means, and place. 
All given to mine ear. 
King-. But how hath she 

Received his love ? 
Pol. What do you think of me ? 

116. Reads] Letter Q, omitted F. 125. shown'] Q, shew'dV. 126. above] 
F, aboiti Q ; solicitings] Q, soliciting F. 

III. i. 250: letters delivered " Even in writer. T. Bright, in ^ Treatise of 
the milk-white bosom of thy love." yl/e/aw^/^i^/j/ (1586), explains the nature 
There was a pocket in the breast of a of the body as that of a machine, con- 
lady's dress, but there may be no nected with the " soul " by the inter- 
reference to it here. mediate "spirit." He compares (p. 

I16-119. Doubt] In the first two 66) its action to that of a clock, 

lines and the fourth "doubt" means 121. reckon] Delius suggests that 

(^1? (/(j«(5//"«/ Mrt/ ; in the third it means this may mean "to number metri- 

suspect. Hamlet's letter begins in the cally." 

conventional lover's style, which per- 124. machine is to iiim] whilst this 
haps was what Ophelia would expect body is attached to liim. See Cym- 
from a courtly admirer ; then there is bclinc, V. v. 383, for use of " to." 
a real outbreak of passion and self- 126. solicitings] Solicit was some- 
pity ; finally, in the wcjrd " machine," times— but perhaps not here — used of 
Hamlet indulges, after his manner, immoral proposals. Heywood, 'I'he 
his own intellectuality, though it may Wise Woman of Hogsdcn, t. i. : "I '11 
baffle the reader ; the letter is no more visit my little rascall and soli- 
simple or homogeneous than the cite," 



68 HAMLET [acth. 

King, As of a man faithful and honourable. 130 

Pol. I would fain prove so. But what might you think, 
When I had seen this hot love on the wing, — 
As I perceived it, I must tell you that, 
Before my daughter told me, — what might you. 
Or my dear majesty, your queen here, think, 135 
If I had play'd the desk or table-book. 
Or given my heart a winking, mute and dumb, 
Or look'd upon this love with idle sight ; 
What might you think? No, I went round to work. 
And my young mistress thus I did bespeak; 140 
" Lord Hamlet is a prince, out of thy star ; 
This must not be ; " and then I prescripts gave her, 
That she should lock herself from his resort, 
Admit no messengers, receive no tokens. 
Which done, she took the fruits of my advice; 145 
And he, repulsed, a short tale to make, 
Fell into a sadness, then into a fast. 
Thence to a watch, thence into a weakness. 
Thence to a lightness, and by this declension 

132. this\ his Ff 3, 4. 137. a winking] F, a working (^. 140. thtis] 

this Qq 4, 5. 141. out of thy sta7-\ Q, F ; otit of your starre Q I ; out of thy 

sphere Ff 2-4, Q 6. 142. prescripts] Q, precepts F. 143. his] F, her Q. 

146. repulsed] F, repelTd Q. 149. a] omitted Q. 

136. desk or table-book] silent leci- 156 : "In my stars I am above thee." 
pient. Clar. Press explains : " If I Nash, in Pierce Pennilesse, speaks of 
had been the agent of their corre- the strict division of ranks in Den- 
spondence." See tables, i. v. 107. mark with reference to marriage : 

137. wittking] closed the eyes of " It is death there for anie but a hus- 
my heart. "Wink" did not neces- bandman to marry a husbandman's 
sarily mean, as now, " a brief closure daughter, or a gentleman's child to 
of the eyes." In Sonnets, xliii. i, it joyne with any but the sonne of a 
is used for sleep. gentleman." 

139. round] roundly, that is plainly. 148. watch] a sleepless state,"as in 

See round \\\ III. i. 191. Cymbeliiie, Hi. iv. 43. 

141. out of thy star] above thee in 149. lightness] lightheadedness, 
fortune. See Twelfth Night, 11. v. 



sen] PRINCE OF DENMARK 69 

Into the madness wherein now he raves 150 

And all we mourn for. 
King. Do you think 'tis this ? 

Queen. It may be, very likely. 

Pol. Hath there been such a time, I 'd fain know that, 

That I have positively said " 'tis so," 

When it proved otherwise ? 
King. Not that I know. i 5 5 

Pol. Take this from this, if this be otherwise. 

If circumstances lead me, I will find 

Where truth is hid, though it were hid indeed 

Within the centre. 
King. How may we try it further ? 

Pol. You know, sometimes he walks four hours to- 
gether 1 60 

Here in the lobby. 
Queen. So he does, indeed. 

Pol. At such a time I '11 loose my daughter to him ; 
Be you and I behind an arras then ; 

150. -vhcrciii] i), whereon V. 1 51. 7)ioiini^()> i^'<^il 1' ^T-nJ many editors. 

152. V/.f this] F, this (^; likely'] V, like Q. 153. I'd] F, / would K}. 

160. /our] Ilanmer, followed by other editions, rcada /or. 161. does] (^, 
Aas F. 163. arras then ;] arras then, Q, F ; arras ; thett Staunton. 

156. Tahe this /roil! this]T\\toh3.\{i /or is specious. But Elze [Shake- 
here added a stage direction, " Point- sfieare Jahrbtieh, B. xi.) has shown 
ing to his head and shoulders"; he the use by Klizahethan writers of four, 
has been followed i)y many editors, forty, forty thousand to express an in- 
Stage tradition may have guided defmite number. iMalune cites Web- 
Theobald. But see lines 166, 167. ster, Duchess 0/ Malft: "She will 
May not "this from this" mean the muse four hours together " ; and Clar. 
chamberlain's staff or wand and the Press, Patlenham, Arte 0/ English 
hand which bears it ? Poesie : "laughing and gibing . . . 

159. autre] that is, of the earth, foure houres by the cloclce." 
and so, according to Ptolemaic as- 1C2. loose] The word reminds the 

tronomy, of the universe. Compare King and (^Hieen that he has restrained 

Midntntiitcr Nij:;ht''s Dream, \\\.\\.^/\. Ophelia from communication with 

xdo. /our] llunmer's emendation Hamlet. 



70 HAMLET [actii. 

Mark the encounter ; if he love her not, 

And be not from his reason fall'n thereon, 165 

Let me be no assistant for a state, 

But keep a farm and carters. 
King. We will try it. 

Queen. But look where sadly the poor wretch comes 

reading. 
Pol, Away, I do beseech you, both away ; 

I'll board him presently. — 

\Exeunt King, Queen, and Attendatits. 

Enter HAjNILET \^readi7ig'\. 

Oh, give me leave; 170 
How does my good Lord Hamlet? 
Hani. Well, God-a-mercy. 
Pol. Do you know me, my lord ? 
Hani. Excellent well ; you are a fishmonger. 

167. Buf] Q, And Y. Enter Hamlet] placed after IVe will try it, line 167. 
Q, F. 174. Excellent'] Q, Excellent, excellent ¥. 

170. lioard] accost, as in Twelfth I have found no example. There are 

Night, I. iii. 60. Elizabethan references to the smell of 

170. present ly] immediately, as in fishmongers, which here could be 

Romeo and Juliet, IV. i. 95. easily indicated by an actor, as if 

170. Oh, give vie leave] addressed Polonius had brought an ill air with 

to Hamlet. The. Exeunt oi\\.mg2X\d him. Presently, however, Hamlet 

Queen is indicated in Q after line discourses on procreation, connecting 

169; in F as here. Capell, supposing Ophelia with his talk. Perhaps the 

the words to be addressed to the King following from Piatt's Jewell House, 

and Queen, placed Exeunt after 1594 (p. 97, ed. 1653), may be cited : 

"leave." "And some hold opinion that the 

iT^. fishmonger] Malone : "Fish- females ... do conceive only by 
monger was a cant term for wencher" ; licking of salt. And this maketh the 
he cites B. Rich's Irish Htihbiib : Fishmongers' wives so wanton and 
"him they call Senex fornicator and beautiful." Whiter notices that in 
old fishmonger." Farmer and Hen- loxiioxv s Masque of Christinas, ^.exms, 
ley's Slang Dictionary gives obscene as a tire woman, says, "I am a fish- 
meanings under "fish" and "fish- monger's daughter." Does Jonson 
market," which suggest that fish- only mean sea-born, or mean wanton 
monger may have meant bawd, but and beautiful? Joubert {Seconde 



SC. II. 



PRINCE OF DENMARK 



71 



Pol. Not I, my lord. 175 

HavL Then I would you were so honest a man. 

Pol. Honest, my lord ? 

Ham. Ay, sir ; to be honest, as this world goes, is 
to be one man picked out of ten thousand. 

Pol. That's very true, my lord. 180 

Ham. For if the sun breed maggots in a dead dog, 
being a good kissing carrion, — Have you a 
daughter ? 

Pol. I have, my lord. 

Ham. Let her not walk i' the sun: conception is a 185 
blessing ; but not as your daughter may con- 
ceive : — friend, look to 't. 

Pol. [Aside.] How say you by that? Still harping 



177. lord?'] F, lord. Q, lord! Dyce. 179. man'] omitted in Ff 3, 4 ; ten] Q, 
two F. 182. good kissing carrioii\ Q, F ; god kissing carrion Warburton 

and many editors ; god-kissing carrion Malone. 186. not] F, omitted 
in Q. 188. [Aside]] Capell'; placed by Steevens before Still. 



par tie des err curs popttlaires, 1 600, 
p. 169) considers the popular opinion 
"que I'usage du poisson engendre 
beaucoup de semence." See Apuleius' 
curious defence against the charge 
that he had made a magical use of 
fish in his courtship of a widow. 

176. honest] Ben Jonson's "Town 
gull." Master Mathew {Every Man 
in his Humour, i. iii.) is a citizen's 
son: Mis father's an honest man, 
aworshipful fishmonger, and so forth." 

181, 183. For . , . daughter] Re- 
taining the good of Q, F, good kissing 
(which might be hyphened) must be 
explained, with Caldecott, Corson, 
Furncss, good for kissing. But much 
might be said on behalf of Warburton's 
emendation, which Johnson accepted 
with an outbreak of admiration — god 
kissing; compare "common-kissing 
Titan," Cymbeline, \\\. iv. 166, and 
sec 1 Henry /F. II. i v. 113. In h'ing 



Edward III. (1596) we have: "The 
freshest summer's day doth soonest 
taint The loathed carrion that it seems 
to kiss." In support of god-kissing 
Malone cites Lear, n. i. 9: "ear- 
kissing ajguments." Hamlet iron- 
ically justifies the severance by 
Bolonius of Ophelia from himself : 
all the world is evil, even the sun 
has the basest propensities ; if a dead 
dog is corrupted by the sun, how 
much more your daughter by me. 
Staunton supposes that Hamlet reads, 
or pretends to read, these words. See 
a parallel from St. Augustine quoted 
by Ingleby, Shakespeare Hermencii- 
tics, p. 159. 

185. conception] Steevens supposed 
that there is a quibble, as in Lear, \. i. 
1 2, between ' ' conception, " ttnderstand- 
ing, and "conceive," to be pregnant. 

188. by] concerning, as in Merchant 
of Venice, I. ii. 58. 



72 HAMLET [acth 

on my daughter : yet he knew me not at first ; 
he said I was a fishmonger: he is far gone, far 190 
gone : and truly in my youth I suffered much 
extremity for love ; very near this. I '11 
speak to him again. — What do you read, 
my lord ? 

Ham. Words, words, words. 195 

Pol. What is the matter, my lord ? 

Ham. Between who? 

Pol. I mean the matter that you read, my lord. 

Ham. Slanders, sir : for the satirical rogue says here 

that old men have grey beards, that their faces 200 
are wrinkled, their eyes purging thick amber 
and plum-tree gum, and that they have a 
plentiful lack of wit, together with most weak 
hams ; all which, sir, though I most powerfully 
and potently believe, yet I hold it not honesty 205 
to have it thus set down ; for you yourself, sir, 
should be old as I am, if like a crab you could 
go backward. 

Pol. [Aside.] Though this be madness, yet there is 

method in 't. — Will you walk out of the air, 2 i o 
my lord ? 

Ham. Into my grave ? 

190, \<^\. far gone, far gone\Y,farre gone (^. 197. w/w] Q, F ; whomYi 

2-4. 198. that yo7i read'X Q, yoti viea72c F. 199. rogue'] Q, slave F. 

202. a7tcr\ Q, or F. 203. most] Q, omitted F. 206. you yourself] F, 
vour selfe Q. 207. shotild be old] F, shall grow old Q. 209. Aside] 
Johnson. 212. grave?] Y, grave. Q. 

197. Between who?] Clar. Press: 199. the satirical rogue] War- 

" Hamlet purposely misunderstands burton refers to Juvenal, ^a/. x. 188. 
the word to mean ' cause of dispute,' 210-214.] Several editors prefer 

2,'i\Vi. Tzvelfth Night, m.'w. \-]2." the Q grave. Compare Jonson's 



sen] PRINCE OF DENMARK 73 

Pol. Indeed, that is out o' the air. [Aside.] How 
pregnant sometimes his replies are ! a happi- 
ness that often madness hits on, which reason 2 i 5 
and sanity could not so prosperously be de- 
livered of. I will leave him, and suddenly 
contrive the means of meeting between him 
and my daughter. — My honourable lord, I will 
most humbly take my leave of you. 220 

Ham. You cannot, sir, take from me any thing that 
I will more willingly part withal ; except my 
life, except my life, except my life. 

Pol. Fare you well, my lord. 

Ham. These tedious old fools! 225 

Enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern. 

Pol. You go to seek the Lord Hamlet ; there he is. 
Ros. [To Polo7iius.'\ God save you, sir! 

[Exit Polojiius. 
Guil. My honoured lord ! 
Ros. My most dear lord ! 
Ham. My excellent good friends! How dost thou, 230 

Guildenstern ? — Ah, Rosencrantz ? Good lads, 

how do ye both ? 

213. tltat is out o ihe\ E, that's out of the Q; Aside] Capell. 
216. sanity'l E, sanctity Q. 217, 2 1 8. and suddenly . . . him\ E, 

omitted in Q. 219, 220. My . . . humbly'] E, My lord, I -will (J. 
221. sir] F, omitted in Q. 222 niill] E, will not Q ; except my life] three 
times as here, in Q ; except viy life, tny life. F. Marked aside by \Vliite, 
Hudson. 226. the Loi-d] Q, my Lord E. 227. To Polonius] Malone. 
228. My] Q, Mine E. 231. Ah,] Q, Oh, E, 232. ye] E, you Q. 

Eveiy Man in His Humour, n. i.: curious parallel is found in Jonson's 

'^^ Dame Kitely : For love's .sake, Folio 1616, and in the Quarto 1601. 

sweetheart, come in out of the Shakespeare acted in Jonson's play ; 

air. Kitely: JIow simple, and how perhaps this is an echo that lived in 

subtle are her answers ! " This his brain. 



74 HAMLET [acth. 

Ros. As the indifferent children of the earth. 
Guil. Happy in that we are not over-happy ; 

On Fortune's cap we are not the very button. 235 
Ham. Nor the soles of her shoe ? 
Ros. Neither, my lord. 
Ham. Then you live about her waist, or in the 

middle of her favours ? 
Guil. Faith, her privates we. 240 

Ham. In the secret parts of Fortune? Oh, most 

true ; she is a strumpet. What 's the news ? 
Ros. None, my lord, but that the world 's grown 

honest. 
Ham. Then is doomsday near; but your news is 245 

not true. Let me question more in particular : 

what have you, my good friends, deserved at 

the hands of Fortune, that she sends you to 

prison hither? 
Guil. Prison, my lord ? 250 

Ham. Denmark 's a prison. 
Ros. Then is the world one. 
Ham. A goodly one ; in which there are many 

confines, wards, and dungeons ; Denmark being 

one o' the worst. 255 

Ros. We think not so, my lord. 
Haul. Why, then 'tis none to you ; for there is 

234> 235- overhappy ; On Forttmes cap] F, ever happy on Fortune's lap, 
IVe Q. 2 :ig. favours:''] Q, favoztr? F. 242. What's the] ¥, What t^. 
243. that] V, omitted in Q. 246-278. Let me . . . attended] F, omitted 
inQ. 

233. indifferent] average, as in Two they are seeking fortune by dishonour - 

Gentlemen of Verona, ni. ii. 44. able means? 

241. In . . . Fortune]'Do&%\\-A.\w\Q\. 254. confines] places of confine- 
already suspect them, and hint that menl. 



sen] PRINCE OF DENMARK 75 

nothing either good or bad, but thinking makes 

it so ; to me it is a prison. 
Ros. Why, then your ambition makes it one; 'tis 260 

too narrow for your mind. 
Ham. O God, I could be bounded in a nut-shell, 

and count myself a king of infinite space, were 

it not that I have bad dreams. 
Guil. Which dreams indeed are ambition; for the 265 

very substance of the ambitious is merely the 

shadow of a dream. 
Hani. A dream itself is but a shadow. 
Ros. Truly, and I hold ambition of so airy and light 

a quality that it is but a shadow's shadow. 270 

Ham. Then are our beggars bodies, and our 

monarchs and outstretched heroes the beggars' 

shadows. Shall we to the court? for, by my 

fay, I cannot reason. 
Ros., Guil. We'll wait upon you. 275 

Ham. No such matter ; I will not sort you with the 

rest of my servants ; for, to speak to you like 

an honest man, I am most dreadfully attended. 

264. had dreams'] Malonc— perhaps — a mockery king — willi a lieggar for 

liy a prinlcr's error — read "had its substance. lie purposely loses 

dreams," a " noljlc emendation," as himself in his riddles, and, being in- 

Johnson might have called it, attained capable of reasoning, will to the 

proi)ably by accident. court, where just thinking is out of 

271. beggars bodies] The monarcli place, 

or hero is an outstretched shadow ; a 274. fay] faith, 

shadow is thrown by a body ; body is 278. dreadfully attended] Hamlet 

the op|)osile of sh.idow ; therefore the speaks like an honest man, but knows 

opposite of monarch, and heroes, his meaning will not be understood ; 

namely, beggars, are bodies. Whether he ?V dreadfully attended, by Memory 

at one or two removes— shadow, or and Horror, and wronged Love, and 

shadow's shadow — it is a beggar who tlie duty of Revenge. Let the 

produces an ambitious numarch. courtiers suppose he has a madman's 

J lamlct's private meaning may pos- suspicions of dangerous followers, 
sibly be that his uncle is a shadow 



7& HAMLET [actii. 

But, in the beaten way of friendship, what 
make you at Elsinore? 280 

Ros. To visit you, my lord ; no other occasion. 

Ham. Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks ; 
but I thank you ; and sure, dear friends, my 
thanks are too dear a halfpenny. Were you 
not sent for? Is it your own inclining? Is 285 
it a free visitation ? Come, deal justly with 
me ; come, come ; nay, speak. 

Giiil. What should we say, my lord ? 

Ham. Why, any thing, but to the purpose. You 

were sent for ; and there is a kind of confession 290 
in your looks, which your modesties have not 
craft enough to colour : I know the good king 
and queen have sent for you. 

Ros. To what end, my lord ? 

Ham. That you must teach me. But let me con- 295 
jure you, by the rights of our fellowship, by 
the consonancyof our youth, by the obligation 
of our ever-preserved love, and by what more 
dear a better proposer could charge you withal, 
be even and direct with me, whether you were 300 
sent for, or no. 

Ros. \Aside to Guildenstern.'] What say you ? 

282. evett] F , ever O. 286,287. Co/ne']V,cor>!e,cofiieQ. 2S9. Ji'hy'] 
omitted in Q ; any fhing, httt] Q 6, any thing but Q, a7zy thing. But F. 
290. c/"] Q, omitted in F. 299. couhf] F, can Q. 302. Aside to 
Guildenstern] Globe ed. ; To Guilden. Theobald ; To Hamlet Delius con- 
ject. 

2S0. make'] do, as in l. ii. 164. 299. proposer] speaker. So " pro- 

2S4. a halfpenny] at a halfpenny. pose," speak, in Mitch Ado, in. 

289. but] only. Clarke thinks it i. 3. 

also includes the effect of "except" 300. even] plain, honest. 

— a covert sarcasm. 



sen] PRINCE OF DENMARK 77 

Ham. [Aside.] Nay, then I have an eye of you. — 

If you love me, hold not off. 
Gut/. My lord, we were sent for. 305 

N'a7Ji. I will tell you why ; so shall my anticipation 
prevent your discovery, and your secrecy to 
the king and queen moult no feather. I have 
of late, — but wherefore I know not, — lost all 
my mirth, forgone all custom of exercises ; and 310 
indeed it goes so heavily with my disposition 
that this goodly frame, the earth, seems to me 
a sterile promontory ; this most excellent 
canopy, the air, look you, this brave o'er- 
hanging firmament, this majestical roof fretted 3 i 5 
with golden fire, why, it appears no other thing 
to me than a foul and pestilent congregation 
of vapours. What a piece of work is a man ! 
how noble in reason ! how infinite in faculty ! 

303. Aside] Slcevcns. 307. discovery, ami] Q, discovciy of F, with 

colon after queen, line 308. 310. exercises'] (j, exercise Y. 311, heavily] 
i), heavenly V. 314, 315- overhanging] ore-hanged Qq 4-6. 315. 

firmament] Q, omitted in F. 316. appears] P", appeareth Q, appeared 

Ff2-4. 316, 317. ;w . . . lhan]Y , nothing to )ne hut i^. ^,1%. a piece] 

Y, peece Q ; a man] man Q 6, Dyce (ed. 2), Furness. 319. facility] Y, 

faculties Q. 319-322. Q points with commas after moving, action, appre- 
hension, and colon after God. 

303. of yoii\ on )'ou. So " of " for ful dreams. lean hardly doubt that 

" on " in II. ii. 27. Shakespeare was acquainted with 

307. prevent your discovery] anti- Bright's Treatise, 

cipate your disclosure. 315. fretted] Clar. Press compares 

310. custom of exercises] In T. Cymbelitte, ii. iv. 88: 

Bright's A Treatise of Melancholy " The roof o' the chamber 

(1586), p. 126, occur the words With golden cherubins is fretted." 

" custom of exercise." It is a passage Fret is an architectural term, used 

in which Bright describes melancholy here loosely for emboss, or adorn, 

men as sometimes very witty ; as 318. a man] Dyce (ed. 2) thinks 

" exact and curi(jus in pondering the "a" in Qq. 2-5 was shuffled out of 

very moments of things " ; as de- its place before piece, and that I'f, 

liberating long " because of doubt and instead of transposing "a,"' addeil 

distrust" ; and as troubled with fear- another before piece. 



78 HAMLET [actii. 

in form and moving how express and admir- 320 
able ! in action how Hke an angel ! in appre- 
hension how like a god ! the beauty of the 
world ! the paragon of animals ! And yet, to 
me, what is this quintessence of dust? man 
delights not me ; no, nor woman neither, though 325 
by your smiling you seem to say so. 

Ros. My lord, there was no such stuff in my 
thoughts. 

Ham. Why did you laugh then, when I said " man 

delights not me " ? 330 

Ros. To think, my lord, if you delight not in man, 
what lenten entertainment the players shall 
receive from you ; we coted them on the 
way ; and hither are they coming, to offer you 
service. 335 

Ham. He that plays the king shall be welcome ; his 
majesty shall have tribute of me ; the adven- 
turous knight shall use his foil and target ; the 
lover shall not sigh gratis ; the humorous man 
shall end his part in peace ; the clown shall 340 

325. iiol omitted in Q ; ■woman'] F, -women Q. 329. yoii\ F, yee Q ; 
then] Q, omitted in F. 337. of me] F, on me Q. 340-342. the clown . . . 
sere] omitted in Q. 

320. express] exact. Clar. Press (Lat. praterit)-, used specially as a 

quote Hebrews i. 3: "express term in coursing, and so explained by 

image." Schmidt, " expressive." Turbervile. 

325,326.] to follow such a confes- 339. humorous man] "Not the 

sion with laughter, from any cause, is funny man or jester . . . but the 

a measure of the courtiers' intelligent actor who personated the fantastic 

sympathy. characters . . . for the most part 

332. lenten] meagre, as in Twelfth represented as capricious and quarrel- 
Night, I. V. 9. some" (Staunton). " Such characters 

333. coted] overtook and passed as Faulconbridge, Jaques, and Mer- 
beyond. GoMSm^s Ovid Met. V>. y^.: cutio" (Delius). The characters of the 
"With that liippomenes coted her" stock company suit the present play 



sen] PRINCE OP^ DENMARK 79 

make those laugh whose lungs are tickle o' the 

sere; and the lady shall say her mind freely, 

or the blank verse shall halt for 't. What 

players are they ? 
Ros. Even those you were wont to take such delight 345 

in, the tragedians of the city. 
Havi. How chances it they travel ? their residence, 

both in reputation and profit, was better both 

ways. 
Ros. I think their inhibition comes by the means of 350 

the late innovation. 
Ham. Do they hold the same estimation they did 

when I was in the city ? are they so followed ? 
Ros. No, indeed, they are not. 

Ham. How comes it ? do they grow rusty .? 355 

Ros. Nay, their endeavour keeps in the wonted 

pace ; but there is, sir, an eyrie of children, 

341. iicldc\ Staunton conject., Clar. Press, tickled F. 343, blaiik'\ F, 

black Q. 345. sucli\ Q, omitted in F. 354. they are] F, are they Q. 
355-383. Ho-tv . . . load too] omitted in Q. 

— King Claudius, who receives such words to utter ; if she omits them, 
tribute as he deserves from Hamlet ; the halting blank verse will betray 
Laertes, the fencer; Hamlet, the lover, her delicacy, 
who sighs gratis ; Polonius, who ends 347. residence] i.e. in the city, 
his part as "most secret and most 350, 351.] See Appendix, p. 229. 
grave"; the grave-digger; and Ophelia, 357, 358. ey7-ie of children, little 
who speaks her mind in madness eyases] eyrie or aerie, biood of nest- 
somewhat loo freely. lings; eyases, unfledged hawks. "Cry 

341 , 342. tickle d the sere] Explained out " carries on the metaphor. In 77ie 
first by Nicholson, and independently Geiitlenia>Cs Recreation, Part \\. p. 
by Clar. Press: sere, the bar or 21 (ed. 1686), we find "the name 
balance-lever of a gun-lock (from Eyess lasts as long as she is in the 
"serre," a talon), a stop-catch; if Eyrie. These are very troublesome 
"tickle," ticklish, loose, unsteady, in their feeding, do cry very iiitich.^^ 
the gun goes oft" at a tt)uch ; lungs Middleton, in Father Hubbard's 
tickle o' the sere, lungs that move to Tales, 1604, speaks of "a nest of 
laughter at a touch. l)oys" at the lilackfriars "able to 

342. lady] Hamlet is ironical ; the ravish a man" (noted by Prof, 
lady, of course, will have indecent Hales). 



80 HAMLET [act n. 

little eyases, that cry out on the top of question 
and are most tyrannically clapped for 't ; these 
are now the fashion, and so berattle the 360 
common stages — so they call them — that many 
wearing rapiers are afraid of goose-quills, and 
dare scarce come thither. 

Ham. What, are they children ? who maintains 'em ? 

how are they escoted ? Will they pursue the 365 
quality no longer than they can sing ? will 
they not say afterwards, if they should grow 
themselves to common players, — as it is most 
like if their means are no better, — their writers 
do them wrong, to make them exclaim against 370 
their own succession ? 

Ros. 'Faith, there has been much to-do on both 
sides, and the nation holds it no sin to tarre 

360. hcraftlc] Y 2, be-mtkd F. 368, 369. most like] Pope, like most F. 
369. no'] not V 2. 

358. cry . . . question] clamour prcibaMy alluding to what Bottom 
fortH the height of controversy, utter calls "a tyrant's vein," or "a part 
shrilly the extreme matter of debate, to make all split" (Rolfe). 

"Cry out" may be regarded as a 361. common stages] the public, 

verb; to "cry on" is frequent in as distinguished from the private, 

Shakespeare ; " cry out on " may be a theatres. 

combination of the two ; "question" 362. rapiers] fashionable gallants 

is -a matter in dispute; the "top of are afraid to visit the "common" 

question" is the matter in dispute theatres, so unfashionable have the 

pushed to extremity. Other explana- writers for the children made them. 

tions have been proposed. Clar. 365. escoted] paid. Dyce quotes 

Press: "Probably, to speak in a Cotgrave, " .fi'jTt'/'/ijr, Every one to pay 

high key, dominating conversation." his shot." 

For "question" in this sense, see 366. quality] profession, and speci- 

Merckant of Venice, iv. i. 70. In ally of players ; so Massinger, The 

Armin's Nest of Ninnies, p. 55 (Sh. Picture, 11. i.: 

Soc. reprint) occurs: "Cry it up in " How do you like the quality ? 

the top of question." Prof. Hales* You had a foolish itch to b^ an 

notes from Adam Bede : "Mrs. actor." 

Poyser keeps at the top o' the talk 373. tarre] set on to fight, used 

like a fife." specially of dogs, as in Troilus and 

359. tyrannically] outrageously ; Cressida, i. iii. 392, 



sen] PRINCE OF DENMARK 81 

them to controversy ; there was, for a while, 
no money bid for argument, unless the poet 375 
and the player went to cuffs in the ques- 
tion. 

Ham. Is 't possible ? 

Guil. Oh, there has been much throwing about of 

brains. 380 

Ham. Do the boys carry it away ? 

Ros. Ay, that they do, my lord ; Hercules and hi§ 
load too. 

Ham. It is not very strange ; for my uncle is King 

of Denmark, and those, that would make 385 
mows at him while my father lived, give 
twenty, forty, fifty, an hundred ducats a-piece, 
for his picture in little. 'Sblood, there is some- 
thing in this more than natural, if philosophy 
could find it out. 390 

\_FlotcnsJi of t7'umpets ivithin. 

Guil. There are the players. 

Ham, Gentlemen, you are welcome to Elsinore. 
Your hands, come ; the appurtenance of wel- 
come is fashion and ceremony: let me comply 

384. iny'\ Q, mine F. 3S6. iiioivs] F, mouths C^. 387. fifty'\ Q, 

omitted F ; aii] F, a (^. 388. 'Sblood\ Q, omitted F. 393. hands, 
come ;\ Y ; hands come then, Qcj 2, 3 ; hands, come then Qq 4, 5 ; hands : come 
/hen, () 6. 

375' ar^nmen/] plot o{ a. p\a.y, as in 386. mows'] grimzce?,, Fr. monc. 

ni. ii. 244. 388. picture in. little] miniature. 

376, 377. question] Perhaps means The children — miniature actors — now 

dialogue; perhaps controversy, de- carry away Hercules; so too have 

hate ; the poet for the ciiildren attacks fashions changed with respect to 

the common players. kings. 

381. cany it away] win the day. 393. appurtenance] adjuncts. 

382. Hercules] An allusion to the 394. comply] observe the formalities 
Glol)e Theatre, the sign of which was of courtesy, as in V. ii. 192; ^''ar/i, 
Hercules carrying the globe. fashion. 

6 



82 HAMLET [actii. 

with you in this garb, lest my extent to the 395 
players, which, I tell you, must show fairly 
outwards, should more appear like entertain- 
ment than yours. You are welcome ; but my 
uncle-father and aunt-mother are deceived. 

Guil. In what, my dear lord ? 400 

Ham. I am but mad north-north-west ; when the 
wind is southerly, I know a hawk from a 
handsaw. 

Re-enter POLONIUS. 

Pol. Well be with you, gentlemen ! 

Ham. Hark you, Guildenstern ; — and you too; — at 405 
each ear a hearer: that great baby you see 
there is not yet out of his swaddling-clouts, 

395. tins'] Q, fhe ¥ ; lest my] F, Q 6 ; /et mc Qq 2, 3 ; let iny Qq 4, 5. 
397. outwards] Q, outward Y. 406, 407. you see there is] as you see is Qq 
4-6. 407. swaddli7ig] Q, swathing F. 

395. extent] behaviour, deportment, however, generally assumed that 

as in Twelfth Night, iv. i. 57. Collier "handsaw" here is a corruption of 

proposed ostent. heronshaiv or kernsew; "no other 

401-403. / at?i . . . handsaw] I instances of the phrase (except as 
am mad only in one point of the quotations from Shakespeare) have 
compass. T. Bn^i/ixi A Treatise of hetniownd" [New Eng. Diet.). J. C. 
Melancholy (1586), mentions the Heath (quoted in Clar. Press) ex- 
south and south-east winds as the plains : the heron flying down the 
most suitable for sufferers from melan- north wind is ill seen, the spectator 
choly (chap, xxxix. ). Burton gives looking south towards the sun ; flying 
other opinions. A southerly wind north, on a south wind, it can be 
would, according to Bright, favour easily distinguished from the hawk. 
Hamlet's sanity. North and north- Does Hamlet imagine the two courtiers 
west, we may infer, would be the most as hawks loosed to pursue him ? Else- 
unfavourable. The word hawh was where he compares them to hunters 
and is used for a plasterer's tool, but no driving him unto the toils. The 
example has been found earlier than Gentlcriian's Recreation gives direc- 
1700. Hack, however, is an Eliza- tions for the pursuit of a hern by a 
bethan name for a tool for breaking pair of hawks. The south wind is 
or chopping up, and for agricultural generally represented by Shakespeare 
tools of the mattock, hoe, and pick- as a wind of evil contagion. . Does 
axe type {Aew Eng. Diet.). Hand- Hamlet mean that he can recognise 
saw might suggest hack, for we the King's birds of chase flying on an 
find in 1 Henry IV. II. iv. 187, " My ill wind? 
sword hackt like a hand-saw." It is, 



sen] PRINCE OF DENMxVRK 83 

Ros. Happily he 's the second time come to them ; 
for, they say, an old man is twice a 
child. 410 

Ham. I will prophesy he comes to tell me of the 
players ; mark it. — You say right, sir ; o' 
Monday morning ; 'twas so, indeed. 

Pol. My lord, I have news to tell you. 

Ham. My lord, I have news to tell you. When 4 1 5 
Roscius was an actor in Rome, — 

Pol. The actors are come hither, my lord. 

Ham. Buz, buz ! 

Pol. Upon my honour — 

Ham. Then came each actor on his ass, — 420 

Pol. The best actors in the world, either for tragedy, 
comedy, history, pastoral, pastoral-comical, 
historical-pastoral, tragical-historical, tragical- 
comical-historical-pastoral, scene individable, 
or poem unlimited; Seneca cannot be too 425 

408. ///.''j] F, he is Q. 411. pivplicsy ]ie\ proplitcy, lie Q(j 2, l, prophecy 

that he Qq 4-6, rrophesic. Hce F, Prophesie, He Ff 2-4. 412. <?'] Capell, 
a (^,for a F. 413. inoniing i\ nwrniug, Qq 2, 3, morning Qcj 4-6 F ; .w] 
(^ I, F ; then Q. 416. was'] omitted in F. 419. my'] (), mine F ; 

honour — ] Rowe ; hononr. Q, F. 420. came] Q, can F. 422, 423. pas- 

toral-comical, historical-pastoral, ] Pastoricall- Comicall-Historicall-Pastorall 
F, Q omits the classes of drama which follow historical-pastoral. 

408. Happily] Haply, as in i.i. 134. 424. scene indiTidalile]:s.\A^y which 

412, You say] Hamlet would mis- observes imity of place ; " poem vin- 

lead Polonius as to the subject of their limited," a play which disregards the 

conversation. unities. 

418. /)//c] Blackstone says, " It was 425, 426. Seneca. . . Plautns] 
an interjection used at Oxford when Seneca's tragedies had been trans- 
anyone began a st(jry that was gener- lated by Newton and others, and 
ally known before." Schmidt: "An influenced the English drama. See 
interjection to command silence." Cunlift'e, 'Phe InjUunce of Seneca on 

420. 7'hen . . . rtyj] Johnson: "This Elizabetlian Tragedy (1S93). Shake- 
seems to be the line of a ballad." speare'sC""^wr</)'(3/'A;r^;'.f is founded on 
Klze supposes that Hamlet makes Warner's translation of the il/fV/r<'< 7//;// 
"on his ass" ec(uivalent to I'olonius's of I'lautus. 
" ujjon my honour."' 



84 HAMLET [actii. 

heavy, nor Plautus too light. For the law of 
writ and the liberty, these are the only men. 
Ham. O Jephthah, judge of Israel, what a treasure 

hadst thou ! 
Pol. What a treasure had he, my lord? 430 

Ham. Why, 

One fair dangJiter, and no more, 
The which he loved passing well. 
Pol. [Aside.] Still on my daughter. 

Ham. Am I not i' the right, old Jephthah? 435 

Pol. If you call me Jephthah, my lord, I have a 

daughter that I love passing well. 
Ham. Nay, that follows not. 
Pol. What follows then, my lord ? 

Ham. Why, 440 

As dj lot, God zvot, 
and then, you know. 

It came to pass, as most like it ivas, — 

426, 427. light. For . . . liberty, these\ Theobald, light for . . . liberty : 
these Q, light, for . . . Libeiiy. These F. 430. What a treasitrc\ What 
treasure S. Walker, conject. Dyce(ed. 2). 434. Aside] Capell. 436-438. 
If . . . not'\ omitted in Qq 4-6. 

^26, ^2'j. hnv of writ and the liberty^ Rowe and other editors read "law 

Capell: "This means pieces written of wit." 

in rule and pieces out of rule." Cor- 428. Jephthali\ Steevens communi- 

son suggests that Seneca exemplified cated the "pious chanson" to Percy ; 

the law and Plautus the liberty of a reprint from a blackletter copy will 

writing. Probably, however, the be found in Child's English and Scot- 

reference is to written plays and ex- tisli Ballads. Hamlet quotes from 

temporised parts. In Middleton's the first stanza. Jephthah sacrificed 

Tlie Spanish Gipsy, the gipsy-actors his daughter ; before her death she 

can perform in "a way which the went into the wilderness to bewail her 

Italians and the Frenchmen use" : virginity. So with Ophelia. In 

" That is, on a word given, or some lines 444, 445 Hamlet says " the first 

slight plot, row of the pious chanson will 

The actors will extempore fashion show you more," — perhaps he refers 

out to the line ' ' Great wars there should 

Scenes neat and wittv." be." 



sen] PTIINCE OF DEXMxVRK 85 

the first row of the pious chanson will show 
you more; for look where my abridgement 445 
comes. 

Enter four or Jive Players. 

You are welcome, masters ; welcome, all, I 
am glad to see thee well : welcome, good friends. 
— O, my old friend ! Why, thy face is 
valanced since I saw thee last; comest thou 450 
to beard me in Denmark ? — What, my young 
lady and mistress ! By 'r lady, your ladyship 
is nearer to heaven than when I saw you last, 
by the altitude of a chopine. Fray God, your 
voice, like a piece of uncurrent gold, be not 455 
cracked within the ring. — Masters, you are all 

444. pious chansoii\ Qq 2-5; Potis Chanson F; Pans Chanson Ff 2-4, Q 6 ; 
S;odly Ballet Q i. 445, 446. abridgement comes~\ Q i, Q ; abridgements 
come F. 447. Yon arc\ Q, Y^are Y. 448. thee'\^l, F; ye Dycc (ed. 2). 
449, i}iy'\ F, omitted Q ; Why, thy'] (J, Thy F. 450. valanced] C), valiant 
F. 452. By ';- lady] F, Q^ i; by lady Qq 2-4 ; /;// Lady Qcj 5, 6; ladyship] 
Lordship Ff 3, 4. 453. to heaven] Q, heaven F. 

^^^. pious chanson] Tlic "godly high cork shoe. Qoiy&im Crtidities, 

Ballet" of Q i confirms the reading 161 1, describes the Venetian " chapi- 

ofQ. Attempts have l)een made by neys" as worn by ladies under the 

reference to the French " Chanson du shoes, sometimes half a yard high. 

Pont Ncuf " to justify the Folio mis- The bo\' who plays the lady has grown 

print. The ballad is "pious" as since I lamlet saw him last, 
having a scriptural subject. "Row" 456. cracked within the ring] coins 

perhaps means stanza, or perhaps cracked within the circle which sur- 

colunm of a broadside ballad. rounded the sovereign's head were 

445. abridgement] See A/idsummer unlit for currency. Usurers, Lodge 
Night' sD ream, \. i. 39, whiixc abridge- tells us in ll'^its J/iserie, 1596, bought 
;«^«^ means an entertainment, which up " crackt angels "" at nine shillings 
shortens the lime. Here it has both a piece. Is there a play on "ring" 
this meaning and that of cutting short — a voice that rings clear and true? 
the talk. In Beaumont's Keme.dy of Love (xi. 

450. valanced] fringed (wilh a 477, Dyce) we find the same expres- 

beard). sion : " If her voice be bad, crack'd in 

454. chopine] Italian ciopinno, the ring."' 
Minshcu defines Spanish chapin "u 



86 HAMLET [act n. 

welcome. We '11 e'en to 't like French falconers, 
fly at any thing we see : we '11 have a speech 
straight ; come, give us a taste of your quality; 
come, a passionate speech, 460 

First Play. What speech, my good lord ? 

Ham. I heard thee speak me a speech once, but 
it was never acted ; or, if it was, not above 
once ; for the play, I remember, pleased not 
the million; 'twas caviare to the general; but 465 
it was, — as I received it, and others, whose 
judgments in such matters cried in the top 
of mine, — an excellent play, well digested in 
the scenes, set down with as much modesty 
as cunning. I remember, one said there were 470 
no sallets in the lines to make the matter 
savoury, nor no matter in the phrase that 
might indict the author of affection ; but called 
it an honest method, as wholesome as sweet, 
and by very much more handsome than fine. 475 

457. French'] (^ i,¥ ; friendly Q. 461. good] Q i, Q; omitted in F. 
/^^J. Judgments] (^, judgement Y . 470. were](^; was(^\,Y. 473. in- 
dict] Collier ; indite Q, F ; affection'] Q, affectation F. 474, 475. as whole- 
some . . . fine] Q, omitted in F. 

457. French falconers] "It was the 467, 468. cried in the top of mine] 

fashion of our ancestors to sneer at sounded with authority above mine, 

the French as falconers. They did Perhaps a metaphor from a dog's 

not regard the rigour of the game, "over-topping" (baying more loudly 

but condescended to any quarry that than the rest of the cry), 

came in their way " (D. H. Madden, 471. sallets] salads, containing 

The Diary of Master William Silence, savoury herbs; here, spicy impro- 

p. 146). prieties. Pope read salts (ed. i) and 

459. quality] see line 366. salt (ed. 2). 

465. caviare] The spelling of Q i 473. affection] means the same as 

"caviary" and of F i "caviarie"' Y affectation. Love's Labotn-'s Lost, \ . 

indicates the pronunciation here. i. 4 : " witty without affection." 

465. the general] the multitude. 475. 7nore handsome than fine]moxe 

Malone notes that Lord Clarendon becoming and graceful than showy. 
uses the word in this sense. 



sen.] PRIXCE OF DENMARK 87 

One speech in it I chiefly loved ; 'twas Eneas' 
tale to Dido ; and thereabout of it especially, 
where he speaks of Priam's slaughter. If it 
live in your memory, begin at this line : let 
me see, let me see; — 480 

The rugged Pyrrhus, like tJC Hyrcaniati beast, — 
'tis not so ; it begins with Pyrrhus : — 
The rugged Pyrrhus, — he ivJiose sable arms, 
Black as his purpose, did the flight reseinble 
When he lay couched iu the ominous horse, — . 485 
Hatli nozv this dread and black complexion 

smear d 
IVith heraldry more dismal ; head to foot 
Noiv is he total gules ; horridly trick' d 
With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons. 
Baked and impasted zuith the parching streets, 490 
TJiat lend a tyrannous and a damned light 
To their lords' murder ; roasted in zvrath and fire, 
And thus o'er-sized zvith coagulate gore, 

476. speec}i\ Q, cheefe speech F. 477. talel Q i, F ; taike Q. 478. where'l 
Q I, F ; when Q. 482. 'tis not so ;] Qq 2, 3 (later Qq omit so) ; It is fiot 

so: F. 486. this] his Q i, Q 6. 487. dismal ; head to foot] F, dismall 
head to foote, Q. 491. and a] Q, and F. 492. their lords' murder] 
Capell, their Lords murther Q, their vilde murthers F, their lord's murder 
Steevens. 

481. The rugged Pyrrhus] This tale about 1601 into the first draught of 

of /Itneas to Dido is made to stand Hat/ilet. This is conjecture ; what is 

out from the general movement of the certain is that Shakespeare reproduces, 

play by being written in the tragic without any intention of burlesque, a 

style of Shakespeare's early contem- style which he had left far behind 

poraries. Dido, Queen of Carthage, him. 

says Fleay, was written by Marlowe 481. Ilyrcanian beast] the tiger; see 

and Nash. The narrative of Priam's Macbeth, Hi. iv. lOl. 

death he ascribed to Nash (and after- 488. gules] heraldic for red, as in 

wards to Marlowe). He supposed Titnoti of Athens, \v.\\\.'^(). "Trick'd" 

that this scene was written by Shake- may also be the heraldic term, mean 

speare in 1594, in competition with ing to dcscrilie in drawing, 
the scene in Dido, and was introduced 



88 HAMLET [acth. 

Wzt/i eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus 

Old grands ij-e Priam seeks. 495 

So, proceed you. 

Pol. 'Fore God, my lord, well spoken, with good 
accent and good discretion. 

First Play. Anon he finds him 

Striking too short at Greeks ; his antique sivord, 5 00 

Rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls, 

Repugnafit to command ; unequal match' d, 

Pyrrhus at Priam drives ; in rage strikes wide ; 

Btit with the whiff and wi)id of his fell sivord 

TJie unnerved father falls. The7i senseless Ilium, 505 

Seeming to feel this blozv, with fiaming top 

Stoops to his base, and zvith a hideous crash 

Takes prisoner Pyrrhus' ear ; for, lo ! his szuord. 

Which was declining on the milky head 

Of reverend Priam, seemed i' the air to stick ; ^\0 

So, as a painted tyrant, Pyrrhus stood, 

A nd like a neutral to his zvill afid matter. 

Did nothing. 

But, as zve often see, against some storm, 

A silence in the heavens, the rack stand still, 5 i 5 

The bold winds speechless ajtd the orb beloiu 

496. So, proceed yon'] Q, omilted F. 502. match'd] Q, match F. 

505. Then senseless Ilium] F, omitted Q. 506. this] Q, his F. 512. And 
like] F, Like Q. 

504, 505. But . . . falls] Compare 512. a neutral] one indifferent to 

Dido, Queen of Carthage : his purpose and its object. 

"Which he disdaining whiskt his 515. rack] Dyce (G/oss.) : "amass 

sword about, of vapoury clouds." " The winds in 

And with the wind thereof the the upper region, which move • the 

king fell down." clouds above (which we call the 

511. painted tyrant] Compare J/at- 7-ar/^)" {Bacon, Sy/va Sylvariit?i,\i. % 

beth, V. viii. 25-27. 115). 



sen.] PRINCE OF DENMARK 89 

As hiisli as death, anon the dreadful thunder 
Doth rend the region ; so, after Pyrrhus' pause, 
Aroused vengeatice sets him neiv a-zvork ; 
And never did the Cyclops' hammers fall 5 20 

On Mars ^s armour, forged for proof eterne, 
With less remorse than Pyrrhus' bleeding szuord 
Now falls on Priam. 

Out, out, thou strumpet. Fortune ! All you gods, 
In general synod take away her power; 525 

Break all the spokes and fellies from her ivheel. 
And bowl the round nave doivn the hill of heaven 
As low as to tJie fiends ! 

Pol. This is too long. 

Ham. It shall to the barber's, with your beard. — 530 
Prithee, say on; he's for a jig or a tale of 
bawdry, or he sleeps : say on ; come to 
Hecuba. 

First riay. But luho, O, who had seen the moblcd 

queen — 535 

Ham. " The mobled queen ? " 

Pol. That 's good ; " mobled queen " is good. 

519. Aroused] Collier ; A rowsed (^, F. 521. Mars's armour] Capell, 

Marses Armor Q, Mars his Armours Y. 524. strumpet, Fortune] hyphened 
in F. 534. who, O, who] F, who, a woe Q, who, ah woe Q 6. 534, 
536. mobled] Q, Ff 2-4 ; inobled F ; ennobl'd Capell. 536. queen .*] F, 
Qiteeiie. Q. 537. mobled . . . ^ood'\ omitted in (^. 

518. region] Clar. Press: "Origin- says, " at the end of an Enterlude, 

ally a division of the sky marked out wherein some pretie Knaverie is 

by the Roman augurs. In later times acted." 

the atmosphere was divided into three 534. moljled] muftled. Warburton 

regions — upper, middle, and lower." cjuotes from Sandys' Travels: "Their 

Used by Shakespeare for the space of [Turkish women's] heads and faces 

air, as in Roiiico and Juliet, 11. ii. 21. arc so mabled in fine linen." Farmer 

531. jig\ a ludicrous metrical com- quotes Shirley, Gentleman of Venice : 

position, sometimes given on stages " The moon does mobble ui> herself." 
i)y the clown, sometimes, as Cotgravc 



90 HAMLET [actii. 

First Play. Rti7i barefoot up and dozvn, tJireatening the 
flames 
With bisson rlieuni ; a clout upon that head 
Where late the diadem stood ; and for a robe, 540 
Abo2it her lattk and all d er-teemed loins, 
A bla7iket, i?i the alarm of fear caught up; 
Who this had seen, zvith tongue in venom steefd, 
'Gainst Fortune's state ivoidd treason have pro- 
nounced : 
But if the gods tJiemselves did see her then, 545 

When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport 
In mincing with his sword her husbands limbs. 
The instant burst of clamour that she made, — 
Unless tilings mortal move them not at all, — 
Would have made milch the burning eyes of 
heaven 550 

Aftd passion in the gods, 
Pol. Look, whether he has not turned his colour 

and has tears in 's eyes. Prithee, no more. 
Ham. 'Tis well ; I '11 have thee speak out the rest 

of this soon. — Good my lord, will you see the 555 
players well bestowed ? Do you hear, let 
them be well used, for they are the abstracts 
and brief chronicles of the time ; after your 

53S. flames] Q, flame F. 539. upon] Q, about F. 551. passion in] 

passioned Hanmer, passionate Collier ]\IS. 553. Prithee] Q, Pray you F. 
555. of this] Q, omitted F. 556. bestowed'-] Theobald, bestowed ; Q, 
bestow' d. F ; you hear] Q, ye heare P\ 557. abstracts] F, abstract Q. 

539. bisson] blinding. More com- Polyolbion, xiii. 171, "exhaling the 

monly "blind" or "purblind," as milch dew." 

in Coriglantis, ii. i. 70- 55 1] Marston, in The Insatiate 

544. state] perhaps, as often, power, Countess, I. i., refers to "a player's 

majesty ; but possibly seat or chair of passion " weeping for " old Priam " — - 

dignity, as in Macbeth, ni. iv. 5. evidently pointing to this scene. 

550. milch] moist, as in Drayton, 



sen] PinXCE OF DENMARK 91 

death you were better have a bad epitaph than 
their ill report while you live. 560 

Po!. My lord, I will use them according to their 
desert. 

J fain. God's bodykins, man, much better ! Use 
every man after his desert, and who should 
'scape whipping? Use them after your own 565 
honour and dignity ; the less they deserve, 
the more merit is in your bount)-. Take 
them in. 

Pol. Come, sirs. 

Hani. Follow him, friends: we'll hear a play to- 570 
morrow. 

\^Exit Polonius, zvith ail the Players, but 

the First. 
Dost thou hear me, old friend ; can you play 
TJie Murder of Gonzago ? 

First Play. Ay, my lord. 

Ham. We'll ha't to-morrow night. You could, 575 
for a need, study a speech of some dozen or 
sixteen lines, which I would set down and 
insert in 't, could you not ? 

First Play. Ay, my lord. 

Ham. Very well. Follow that lord; and look you 580 
mock him not. 

\Exit First Player. 

560. livc\ Q, lived F. 563. bodykins] F, bodkin Q ; much] (^,farre Q i. 
omitted Y. 564. should] F, shall Q. Exit, &c.] Dyce, Exit Polon. !•' 
after line 569 ; Exeunt Pol. and Players (^ after " Klsinore," line 5S3. 
576. for a need] Q I, F; for need Q; dozen] Q i, F; dosen lines (\). 
578. in V,] Q, in '/ .? F" ; you] Q, ye F. Exit First Player] Dyce, omitted Q, !•'. 

563. bodykins] dear body — diminii- 576, 577. dozen or sixteen lines] 
live of endearmcnl. Sec UI. ii. 200 (iiute). 



92 HAMLET [act ii. 

— My good friends, I '11 leave you till night ; 
you are welcome to Elsinore. 

Kos. Good my lord ! 

Ham. Ay, so, God be wi' ye ! 

{^Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern. 
— Now I am alone, 585 
Oh, what a rogue and peasant slave am I ! 
Is it not monstrous that this player here, 
But in a fiction, in a dream of passion, 
Could force his soul so to his own conceit 
That from her working all his visage wann'd ; 590 
Tears in his eyes, distraction in 's aspect, 
A broken voice, and his whole function suiting 
With forms to his conceit ? And all for nothing ! 
For Hecuba ? 

What's Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba, 595 

That he should weep for her? What would 

he do 
Had he the motive and the cue for passion 
That I have? He would drown the stage with tears, 
And cleave the general ear with horrid speech. 
Make mad the guilty and appal the free, 600 

5S5. God be wi' ye] God buy to yon Q, God buy 'ye F. Exeunt . . .] 
C/^^e^//.; Exeunt after line 584 Q,F. ^Sg. owii]Q^,wJioleY. 590. ///^ 
visage] Y, the visage Q; wa7m''d\ wand Q, warnCd Y. 591. in's\ F, in 
hist^. 593. nothing !] CzY>e\\,nothing, Q, 7wthiii§?Y. 594. Hecuba?] 
F, Hecuba. Q, Hecuba! Capell. 595. to Hecuba] Q 1, Y ; to her Q. 

597. the cue for] F, that for Q. 

^^d. peasant slave] Y\ixn(t%%: "It y)2. function] operation of the 

is shown by Furnivall in Notes and faculties, as in Macbeth, i. iii. 140 ; 

Queries, 12th April and 3rd May conceit, conception. 

1873, that it was possible for Shake- 600. f-ee] innocent, as in Hi. ii. 

speare to have seen in the flesh some 254. 
of the bondmen or 'peasant slaves' 
of England." 



sen.] PRINCE OF DENMARK 93 

Confound the ignorant, and amaze indeed 

The very faculties of eyes and ears. 

Yet I, 

A dull and muddy-mettled rascal, peak, 

Like John-a-dreams, unpregnant of my cause, 605 

And can say nothing ; no, not for a king. 

Upon whose property and most dear life 

A damn'd defeat was made. Am I a coward ? 

Who calls me villain ? breaks my pate across ? 

Plucks off my beard, and blows it in my face"? 6 1 o 

Tweaks me by the nose ? gives me the lie i' the 

throat, 
As deep as to the lungs ? Who does me this ? 
Ha! 

'Swounds, I should take it ; for it cannot be 
But I am pigeon-liver'd, and lack gall 6 1 5 

To make oppression bitter ; or ere this 
I should have fatted all the region kites 
With this slave's offal ; bloody, bawdy villain ! 

602. faculties} Q,facul/yV. 613. I/a!} separate line Sleevcns ; begins 
line 614 Q, F; Ha? V. 614. 'Swojinds} (), Why F. 618. offal; 

bloody,'] offal I, bloody, Q, Offall, blojidy : a F. 

6or. aiiiaze'[ confound, as in J\^iii^ tion, as in v. ii. 58. Chapman, 

John, \\. ii. 137. Revenge for Honour : 

604. peak} to dwindle, pine ; hence "That he might meantime make a 
to play a mean part, as in Merry sure defeat 

IVii'es, III. V. 71. On our good aged father's life." 

(iO<). John-a-dreams\ found also in 615. //>(W/-//r'(.v-V!'J The pigeon was 

Armin, A'^.v/<?/'A'i!';/«/t.i-, 1608. "John- supposed to secrete no gall. So 

a-droynes" is found in Nash, Have Dckker, The HoJiesl IVhore {Pcarson'a 

with yon io Saffron IValden, 1596. Dehher, ii. p. 20), "Sure hee's a 

605. unpre<^uant\ unimpregnated, pigeon, for he has no gall." Gall, 
unfjuickened hy my cause. See Mca- the physical cause of rancour, bilter- 
^tt re for Measure, iv. iv. 23. ness. 

607. property} proprietorship (of 617. region kites} kites of the air ; 
crown and wife). see line 518. 

608. defeat} undoing, act of deslruc- 



94 HAMLET [acth. 

Remorseless, treacherous, lecherous, kindless villain ! 
O, vengeance ! 620 

Why, what an ass am I ! This is most brave. 
That I, the son of a dear father murder'd, 
Prompted to my revenge by heaven and hell, 
Must, like a whore, unpack my heart with words, 
And fall a-cursing, like a very drab, 625 

A scullion ! 
Fie upon 't ! foh ! About, my brain ! I have 

heard 
That guilty creatures, sitting at a play, 
Have, by the very cunning of the scene, 
Been struck so to the soul that presently 630 

They have proclaim'd their malefactions ; 
For murder, though it have no tongue, will 

speak 
With most miraculous organ, I '11 have these 

players 
Play something like the murder of my father 
Before mine uncle, I'll observe his looks; 635 

620. vengeance!'] omitted in Q. 621. Why,'] IVhy Q, Who? F; 

This] O, / [i.e. Ay] sjcre, this F. 622. a dear father innrdet^d] Q 4, 
a deere viurthcrcd Q, the Deere 7>tnrthered F. 626. sciiUioii] F, stallyon 
Q, cullion Theobald. 627. brain] Y, braincs Q ; /] F, hum, / Q. 

619. hind/ess] unnatural. interjection, retained by Cantbridgc 

622. dear father murder d] Halli- Sh. and by I'^urness. 
well supports the reading, "a dear 628. play] Massinger had this pas- 
murdered " by comparing the phrase sage probably in his mind in writing 
*' the dear departed." The Roman Actor, \\.\. \t\ A Warn- 

627. About, my brain !] Wits, to ing for Fair lP'oi>ien, 1599, the tale is 

you work ! Steevens quotes from told of a woman led by a play to 

Heywood, The Iron Age, Part confess her husband's murder. Hey- 

II. : wood, in his Apology for Actors, tells 

" My brain about again ! for thou of this case, and of another at 

hast found Amsterdam. 

New projects now to work on." 630. presently] immediately, as in 

The IJum of Q is a meditative line 170. 



sen] PRINCE OF DEXMxVllK 95 

I '11 tent him to the quick ; if he but blench 
I know my course. The spirit that I have seen 
May be the devil ; and the devil hath power 
To assume a pleasing shape ; yea, and perhaps 
Out of my weakness and my melancholy, 640 

As he is very potent with such spirits, 
Abuses me to damn me. I '11 have grounds 
More relative than this. The play 's the thing 
Wherein I '11 catch the conscience of the king.^ 

{Exit. 

ACT III 

SCENE I. — A Room in the Castle. 
Enter King, Queen, Polonius, Ophelia, Rosen- 

CRANTZ, mid GUILDENSTERN. 

King. And can you, by no drift of circumstance, 
Get from him why he puts on this confusion, 

636. he biti\ F, a doc (^). 63S. May be the deviV] V, be a deale (^ [deak 
repeated again in this line in Q). 

Aet III. Scene I. 
I. tirciims/aiiee^ F, conference. Q. 

636. Av//] probe, as in Cymbclinc, tlie purpose, conclusive ; used onl\- 

III. iv. 118. here by Shakespeare. 

636. blench'] flinch, quail ; used 

specially of the eyes. ^^^ ^^^- ■^'''"^ '• 

638. dcvir\ Coleridge quotes from I. drift of circuvistance'\(Z\jcx.VxQ?,'> 
Browne's Keligio Medici, Part I. § 37, explain : "roundabout method," refer- 
to show that he held the belief that ring to "circumstance" in I. v. 127, 
ghosts are often devils abusing men to "drift" in II. i. 10, and both words 
damn them. See on this subject (but not in connection) in Troi/ii^ 
'i^zXdm^?, ElirMbethan Dewono/oi^y. and Cressida, ill. in. 113,114. May 

642. Abttses] deceives, deludes, as it mean tendency or significance of 
in Tempest, v. i. 112. incidental facts? 

643. relative] closely related, to 



96 HAMLET [actiii. 

Grating so harshly all his days of quiet 

With turbulent and dangerous lunacy ? 
Ros. He does confess he feels himself distracted, 5 

But from what cause he will by no means speak, 
Guil. Nor do we find him forward to be sounded, 

But, with a crafty madness, keeps aloof, 

When we would bring him on to some confession 

Of his true state. 
Queen. Did he receive you well ? i o 

Ros. Most like a gentleman. 
GuiL But with much forcing of his disposition. 
Ros. Niggard of question, but of our demands 

Most free in his reply. 
Queen. Did you assay him 

To any pastime ? i 5 

Ros. Madam, it so fell out that certain players 

We o'er-raught on the way ; of these we told 
him. 

And there did seem in him a kind of joy 

To hear of it ; they are about the court 

And, as I think, they have already order 20 

This night to play before him. 

ig. ahoitt\ F, heere about Q. 

13, 14. Niggard . . . reply'\ War- which will not discredit them, of an 

burton transposed "Niggard" and unsuccessful interview; Rosencrantz 

"Most free." Malone explains would suggest that they have not 

" Niggard of question," slow to begin wholly failed ; Guildenstern that this 

conversation. Clarke — over-ingeni- was in spite of much difficulty. They 

ously : "Sparing of speech when wish to turn off any inquiry as to 

questioned, but of demands respect- Hamlet's sharp examination of them 

ing ourselves he was very free in and his discovery that they were sent 

return." Clar. Press :" Perhaps they for. 

did not intend to give a correct account 1 7. er-raitghtA^ over-reached, over- 

of the interview." The courtiers be- took, 
tween them try to piece out an account, 



SCI.] PRINCE OF DENMARK 97 

Pol. 'Tis most true ; 

And he beseech'd me to entreat your majesties 
To hear and see the matter. 

King. With all my heart ; and it doth much con- 
tent me 
To hear him so inclined. — 25 

Good gentlemen, give him a further edge, 
And drive his purpose on to these delights. 

Ros. We shall, my lord. 

\Exeunt Rosencrantz mid Guildensteni. 

King: Sweet Gertrude, leave us too ; 

For we have closely sent for Hamlet hither, 
That he, as 'twere by accident, may here 30 

Affront Ophelia. 

Her father and myself, lawful espials, 
Will so bestow ourselves that, seeing unseen. 
We may of their encounter frankly judge, 
And gather by him, as he is behaved, 35 

If 't be the affliction of his love or no 
That thus he suffers for. 

Queen. I shall obey you. — 

And for your part, Ophelia, I do wish 
That your good beauties be the happy cause 
Of Hamlet's wildness ; so shall I hope your 
virtues 40 

27. on to] V, into Q. 28. too'] F, two Q. 30. /lere] Q, there F. 

32. /aw/a/ ^y//a/j] F, omitted in Q. 33. IFi'/f] F , Wee ' te Q. ^8. j'ot/r] 

(), F ; my Qq 4-6, Pupc and others. Exit Queen] Theobald, omitted Q, F. 

29. liosely] secretly, .is in King 32. espials] spies, as in 1 Henry 
John, IV. i. 133. VI. I. iv. 8. 

31. Affront] confront, encounter, 39, 40. beauties . . . virtues] S. 
as in Jointer's Tale, v. i. 75. Walker proposed beauty and virtue, 

which l'"urness adopts. 



98 HAMLET [actiii. 

Will bring him to his wonted way again, 

To both your honours. 
Oph. Madam, I wish it may. 

\Exit Queen. 
Pol. Ophelia, walk you here. — Gracious, so please you, 

We will bestow ourselves. \To Ophelia.'] Read on 
this book, 

That show of such an exercise may colour 45 

Your loneliness. We are oft to blame in this, — 

'Tis too much proved, — that with devotion's visage 

And pious action we do sugar o'er 

The devil himself 
King. [Aside.] Oh, 'tis too true ! 

How smart a lash that speech doth give my con- 
science ! 50 

The harlot's cheek, beautied with plastering art. 

Is not more ugly to the thing that helps it 

Than is my deed to my most painted word. 

O heavy burden ! 
Pol. I hear him coming ; let 's withdraw, my lord. 5 5 

[Exeunt King and Polo?tius. 

Enter Hamlet. 
Ham. To be, or not to be : that is the question : 

43. phase yoii\ (^, please ye F. 46. loneUness'\ F, lowliiiesCl. 48. sugar'] 
Q, surge F. 49. Aside] Capell, at line 50 Pope ; 'tis too] Q, 'tis F. 

55. let's] F, omitted Q, Enter Hamlet] F, after burden, line 54, Q. 

43. Gracious] addressed to the 56. To be, or not to be :] Explained 
King. by Johnson as a future life, or non- 
45, exer-cise] act of devotion (the existence after death ; by Malone, to 
book being one of prayers), as in live, or to commit suicide. G. M^c- 
King Richaj-d III. ill. vii. 64 : "his donald regards the words as the close 
hoi)' exercise." of a preceding train of thought, not 
52. /'(?]conipared to, as in I. ii. 140. lo be connected with what follows. 



SCI] PRINCE OF DENMARK 



99 



Whether 'tis nobler in the mind to suffer 

The sUngs and arrows of outrageous fortune, 

Or to take arms against a sea of troubles, 

And by opposing end them ? To die, — to 

sleep, — 60 

No more ; and by a sleep to say we end 
The heart-ache, and the thousand natural shocks 
That flesh is heir to, 'tis a consummation 
Devoutly to be wish'd. To die ; — to sleep ;. — 
To sleep ! perchance to dream ! ay, there 's the 

rub; 65 

For in that sleep of death what dreams may come. 
When we have shuffled off this mortal coil. 

No] Pope, die to sleepe No Q, dye, to sleepe No F. 
64, 65. die; — to sleep ; — To sleep!'] Capell, 



60, 61. To die, — . . , 
63. to,] too; Q, too? E 
die to sleepe. To sleepe, Q, F. 

Hunter, who would place the sol- 
iloquy, with Q I, in Act 11. sc. ii. 
supposes it is suggested by the book 
which Hamlet is there represented as 
reading. Perhaps, the explanation 
lying in what immediately follows, it 
means, Is my present project of active 
resistance against wrong to be, or not 
to be? Hamlet anticipates his own 
death as a probable consequence. 

57. in the mind] This is to be 
connected with "suffer," not with 
"nobler." 

58. slings and arrows] Walker, 
with an anonymous writer of 1752, 
would read "stings." "Slings and 
arrows" is found in Fletcher's Valen- 
tinian, I. iii. 

59. sea] Various emendations have 
been suggested : Theobald, "siege"; 
also, " th' assay" or "a 'say"; 
Hanmer, "assailing"; Warburton, 
"assail of" ; Bailey, " llie seat." It 
has been shown from Aristotle, Strabo, 
/Elian, and Nicolas of Damascus that 
ihi- Kelts, Gauls, and Cimbri ex- 
hibited their intrepidity by armed 



combats with the sea, which Shake- 
speare might have found in Abraham 
Fleming's translation oi yElian, 1576. 
But elsewhere Shakespeare has "sea 
of joys," "sea of glory," "sea of 
care." Here the central metaphor is 
that of a battle ("slings and arrows") ; 
the "sea of troubles," billows of the 
war, merely develops the metaphor 
of battle, as in Scott, Mannion, 
VI. xxvi. : 

" Then mark'd they, dashing 
broad and far, 
The broken billows of the war. 
And plumed crests of chieftains 

brave. 
Floating like foam upon the 
wave." 
63. consitDiinalion'] Compare Cyin- 
bcline, IV. ii. 280 : 

" (^uiet consummation have : 

And renowned be thy grave ! " 
C5. rub] impediment, as in King 
Henry V. II. ii. 18S. 

67. mortal coil] trouble or turmoil 
of mortal life. In tliis sense coil 
occurs several times in Shakespeare, 



100 HAMLET [acthi. 

Must give us pause : there 's the respect 
That makes calamity of so long life ; 
For who would bear the whips and scorns of 
time, 70 

The oppressor's wrong, the proud man's con- 
tumely, 
The pangs of disprized love, the law's delay, 
The insolence of office, and the spurns 
That patient merit of the unworthy takes, 
When he himself might his quietus make 75 

With a bare bodkin ? who would fardels bear. 
To grunt and sweat under a weary life, 
But that the dread of something after death. 
The undiscover'd country from whose bourn 
No traveller returns, puzzles the will, 80 

"jl. />roud'\ Q, poore F. 72. disprized^Y, despiz'd Q and many editors. 
76. farde/s] Q, f/iese Fardles F. 

as in 7Vw/^j/, I. ii. 207. He nowhere 76. /^arf? i(?rf/7;;] unsheathed dagger ; 

uses it in the sense of concentric rings, or bat-e may mean "mere." Sidney, 

r\or does ihc Ne'u English Dntio7iaiy Arcadia: "I . . . doe defie thee in 

give an example earlier than 1627. a mortal affray from the bodkin to the 

The notion that mortal coil means the pike upward." 

body, encircling the soul, may be set 76. fardeh'\ packs, burdens, as in 

aside. Winter'' s Tale, iv. iv. 728. 

68, 69. there 's . . . li/e] There 's 77. gnent] groan. Steevens quotes 

the consideration that makes calamity Turbervile, Ovid Epist. xiv. : "of 

so long-lived. dying men the grunts." Compare 

70. tiine'\ the times, the world, as Julius C<esar, IV. i. 22: "To 

in King John, V. ii. 12, "a sore of groan and sweat under the busi- 

time." But perhaps it may mean ness." 

time as opposed to eternity. 80. returns'\ The Ghost has not 

72. disprized^ undervalued, mis- crossed the bourn or boundary of 

prised. Tj'oiliis and Cressida (Folio death, or returned to mortal life ; 

text), IV. V. 74: " disprising the cock-crow and day-dawn startle him 

knight opposed." The Q despised away. Perhaps, however, Hamlet at 

love is preferred by many editors. the present time, doubtful as to whether 

75. tjjiieiiisl acquittance ; the law- the devil may not have been abusing 

term, "quietus est," for the settle- him (close of Act li.), will not let 

ment of an account ; as in Sonnets, the apparition enter into his calcula- 

cxxvi. 12. tions. 



SCI] PRIXCE OF DENMARK 



101 



Oph. 



And makes us rather bear those ills we have 
Than fly to others that we know not of? 
Thus conscience does make cowards of us all, 
And thus the native hue of resolution 
Is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought, 
And enterprises of great pitch and moment 
With this regard their currents turn awry 
And lose the name of action. Soft you now ! 
The fair Ophelia? Nymph, in thy orisons. 
Be all my sins remember'd. 

Good my lord, 
How does your honour for this many a day ? 



90 



S3, of lis a//] Q I, F ; omitted Q. 86. fitchi (^,pith F. 87. awry'\ Q, 
away F. 89. Ophelia F] F, Op/ieha, Q, Ophelia I Hanmer. 



85. thoiight\ often used of anxious 
or melancholy thought, as in Julius 
Cccsar, II. i. 187: " take thought and 
die for Caesar." See iv. v. 187. 

86. pitch'\ height, as in A'lng 
/Richard///, in. vii. 188; used of 
a falcon's soaring, 1 Kin}:; Henry VI. 
II. iv. II. The Folio///// is preferred 
liy many editors, and appears in late 
Quartos from 1676 onwards. 

88. action'X With the thought of 
action this soliloquy opens and closes. 
The train of ideas is as follows : — - 
Active resistance to evil or passive 
fortitude — which is more worthy of 
me ? To end troubles — perhaps by 
one's own death? Well, the sleep 
of death will be most welcome ; but 
what if there be terril)le dreams? 
The fear of the hereafter is universal, 
else men would not endure the ills of 
life ; and thus it is that, perplexed by 
calculating consequences, we drop 
away from heroic action. Parallels, 
as possible sources for parts of this 
soliloquy, have been pointed out in 
Catullus (no traveller returns), Cardan 
(death a sleep), Seneca (no traveller 
returns, and fear of futurity), Mon- 



taigne (sea of troubles, death a desir- 
able "consummation," conscience 
makes cowards), Cornelius Agrippa 
(country of the dead irremeable), 
Marlowe's Edward II. (Mortimer 
goes as a traveller to discover 
countries yet unknown). It seems 
probable, as Professor Skeat notices, 
that there are reminiscences here of 
the translation ascribed to Chaucer of 
The Roniaitnt of the Rose, lines 5637- 
5696 ; the word fardels is perhaps 
one of the echoes from this passage. 
It is worth noting that Mr. G. 
Macdonald eliminates the thought of 
suicide from the soliloquy, supposing 
that the bare bodkin is imagined as 
directed against an enemy. Suicide, 
indeed, is not the theme of the soli- 
loquy, but it incidentally enters into 
it. "Clelia" in his God in Shake- 
speare construes llie opening sentence 
thus : " Whether 'tis nobler to bear 
evil or to resist it the question is To 
be, or not to be, i.e. Is there a life 
after death ? " The note of interroga- 
tion after "end them," line 60, was 
first introduced by Pope. 



102 HAMLET [act m. 

Ham. I humbly thank you ; well, well, well. 
Oph. My lord, I have remembrances of yours, . 

That I have longed long to re-deliver ; 

I pray you now, receive them. 
Ha)n. No, not I ; 95 

I never gave you aught. 
Op/i. My honour'd lord, you know right well you did ; 

And, with them, words of so sweet breath composed 

As made the things more rich ; their perfume 
lost. 

Take these again ; for to the noble mind 1 00 

Rich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind. 

There, my lord. 
Ham. Ha, ha ! are you honest ? 
Oph. My lord ? 

Havi. Are you fair? 105 

Oph. What means your lordship ? 

92. you ; zuell, well, weH.] ¥,yoii well. Q. 95. you now,] F, yoit now 
Q, yon, now Theobald and other editors ; N'o, not 7] Q, No, no F. 
97. you /enow] Q, / /enow F and many editors. 99. l/ie things] F, these 
things Q ; rich ; their perfume lost] Q, rich, then perfume left : F, rich, than 
perfune left F 4. 

96. aught] For a moment Hamlet 99. their perfume] the perfume of 

has been touched by the sight of the gifts, derived from the sweet 

Ophelia with her book of prayers, words. 

Yet there is estrangement in the word loi. unkind] The sententious gen- 

" Nymph." She inquires for his eralisation, couched in rhyme, has an 

health (having seen him yesterday) ; air of having been prepared. And 

lie answers as to a stranger ; for- whence this false accusation of un- 

mally, as he does to Osric, v. ii. 82; kindness? Has she not rehearsed 

and with some impatience; he will her part to Polonius ? 

tell her nothing. She produces his 103. honest] a word which covers 

gifts ; he has been sent for by the both truthfulness and chastity. For 

King; Ophelia, like Rosencrantz and the meaning "chaste" Staunton 

Guildenstern, has doubtless also been Cjuotes an apt example from Shirley, 

sent for ; he falls back on his accus- The Royal Master, IV. i. Withals' 

tomed method of baffling half-truths. Dictionarie (l6o8), p. 73: "She is 

These toys were the gift of another faire, that is honest : est alma 

Hamlet to another Ophelia — not his. sancta." 



sc. I] PRINCE OF DENMAKK 103 

Hatn. That if you be honest and fair, your honesty 
should admit no discourse to your beauty. 

Oph. Could beauty, my lord, have better commerce 

than with honesty ? i i o 

Ham. Ay, truly ; for the power of beauty will sooner 
transform honesty from what it is to a bawd 
than the force of honesty can translate beauty 
into his likeness ; this was sometime a paradox, 
but now the time gives it proof. I did love i i 5 
you once, 

Oph. Indeed, my lord, you made me believe so. 

Ham. You should not have believed me ; for virtue 
cannot so inoculate our old stock but we shall 
relish of it ; I loved you not. i 20 

Oph. I was the more deceived. 

Ham. Get thee to a nunnery ; why wouldst thou be 
a breeder of sinners ? I am myself indifferent 

lOT . your honesiy'XY , yoii <^. no. luithlQl, yotirY . 119. inoculaie\ 
F, eiioaUat Q, evacuate Qq 4-6. 122. to\ F, omitted Q. 

107, 108.] Hamlet had ironically paradox true; Hamlet thinks of his 

baffled Polonius by commending his mother ; of hisown honesty represented 

wisdom in restraining and secluding as a wanton passion for beauty ; of 

Ophelia ; the same irony will serve Ophelia's virtue, which cannot be 

again. Your father and brother were trusted by Polonius to act as guardian 

right; your virtue should permit no of her beauty, but will rather corrupt 

one to hold converse with your beauty, his and her lionesty. 
Ophelia replies as if Hamlet had said 1 19. inoculate] used in the botanical 

that beauty and honesty should not sense, to graft by the insertion of a 

hold converse with each other, and bud; virtue cannot so graft love in our 

he accepts her reading of his words. old evil stock but that we shall have a 

109. commerce'] intercourse, as in flavour of this evil stock. So Bishop 

Twelfth Night, III. iv. 191. Hall: "That Palatine vine, late inocu- 

111-116.] I loved you once — in the lated with a precious bud of our royal 

days when it was a paradox — an ab- stem." 

surdity — to say that beauty could sooner 120. 1 loved you not] it was not true 

transform virtue into a procuress for love, for the taint of evil was in it ; so 

lust than virtue could translate beauty your father has told you, and you have 

to its own likeness. But now, the acted in accordance with his orders, 
world, the present time, proves the 123. ///i//^«rw/J fairly.asin v. ii.97. 



104 HAMLET [acthi. 

honest ; but yet I could accuse me of such 
things that it were better my mother had not i 2 5 
borne me. I am very proud, revengeful, am- 
bitious ; with more offences at my beck than 
I have thoughts to put them in, imagination 
to give them shape, or time to act them in. 
What should such fellows as I do crawling 130 
between heaven and earth ? We are arrant 
knaves all ; believe none of us. Go thy ways 
to a nunnery. Where 's your father ? 

Oph. At home, my lord. 

Hani. Let the doors be shut upon him, that he may i 3 5 
play the fool no where but in 's own house. 
Farewell. 

Oph. Oh, help him, you sweet heavens ! 

Hani. If thou dost marry, I '11 give thee this plague 

for thy dowry: be thou as chaste as ice, as 140 
pure as snow, thou shalt not escape calumny. 
Get thee to a nunnery, go ; farewell. Or, if 

127. heck'\ Q, F ; hacke Q i. 131. heaven and eartli] Q i, F ; earth and 

heaven Q. 132. a//] Q i, F ; omitted Q. 136. no ivhere'\ Q, noway F. 

138, 147.] marked Aside, Furness. 142. go\ F, omitted Q. 

126,12^. very proud, revengeful, am- in a nutshell, yet whose disappointed 

bilious] Hamlet brings general accusa- ambition has been a subject for the 

tions against manhood and woman- probing of Rosencrantz and Guilden- 

hood ; but these particular vices are stern. 

ironically named as those of which he 133. Whereas your fatherl Verhiips 

has been suspected or calumniously an arrow shot at a venture ; or perhaps 

accused : very proud, he who honours he has caught sight of the King and 

the poor Horatio, and hails the actor Polonius as they retire. It is to be 

as a friend, yet he is suspected of considered as a possibility that Ophelia 

treating Ophelia lightly, as an inferior may not have been aware of her 

who may be basely used ; revengeful, father's espionage, 

he who groans under the duty of 141. caliunny'] Is this promise of 

vengeance, yet who is doubtless dowry half meant for Polonius's ear ? 

suspected of revenge by the King ; His calumnies of Hamlet will come 

ambitious, he who would go back to home to roost on his own house. 
Wittenberg, and could be contented 



SCI] PRINCE OF DENMARK 105 

thou wilt needs marry, marry a fool ; for wise 
men know well enough what monsters you 
make of them. To a nunnery, go; and 145 
quickly too. Farewell. 

Oph. O heavenly powers, restore him ! 

Ham. I have heard of your paintings too, well 
enough ; God has given you one face, and 
you make yourselves another; you jig, you 150 
amble, and you lisp, and nickname God's 
creatures, and make your wantonness your 
ignorance. Go to, I '11 no more on 't ; it hath 
made me mad. I say we will have no more 
marriages ; those that are married already, all 155 
but one, shall live ; the rest shall keep as they 
are. To a nunnery, go. \Exit. 

Oph. Oh, what a noble mind is here o'erthrown ! 

The courtier's, soldier's, scholar's, eye, tongue, sword ; 
The expectancy and rose of the fair state, 1 60 

147. 0] F, omitted Q. 148. paii!fiit^i[s'\ Q l, Q ; praflings F ; pratliiig 
Ff 2-4 ; too'] F, omitted Q. 149. has] F, hath Q ; face] Q I, Q ; pace F. 
150. yourselves] Q, your selfe F; jig] Q 1676, gig Q, ^'v'^''^; F, fig Q i. 
150, 151. you amble] F, and amble Q. 151. lisp] F, list Q ; a7id nickname] 
V, you nickname Q. 152, 153. your ignorance] Q I, F; ignorance i). 
154, 155. no more marriages] O I, F; no mo marriage (^. 159. soldier's, 
scholar's] Q, F ; scholler, souldier Q I. 160. expectancy] F, expectation (\. 

144. monsters] Delias refers to 151. 7tickitamc] call things by 

Othello, IV. i. 63: " a horned man's names of immodest suggestion, and 

a monster." So Fletcher, J\ule a profess childish ignorance. Compare 

IVife and have a Wife, U.'i.: ^'' Though /•Borneo and Juliet, il. i. 35: "that 

he [a wronged husband] see himself kind of fruit as maids call medlars 

become a monster." Hamlet re- when they laugh alone." 
proaches Ophelia only through the 155,156. a/7 (^//^ 0;?^] a shaft meant 

general evil of womanhood. to strike the eves-dropping King. 

148. paintings] The F "prat- 159. soldier's, scholar's] The order 
tlings"and " pace " are possibly not "scholar's, soldier's" corresponding 
misprints ;" pace" referring to "jig" to "tongue, sword" may be more 
and "amble"; "prattlings" to rhetorically, but not therefore dram- 
" lisp " and "nickname." atically, correct. 



106 HAMLET [actih. 

The glass of fashion, and the mould of form, 

The observed of all observers, quite, quite 

down ! 
And I, of ladies most deject and wretched, 
That suck'd the honey of his music vows, 
Now see that noble and most sovereign reason, 165 
Like sweet bells jangled out of tune, and 

harsh ; 
That unmatch'd form and feature of blown 

youth 
Blasted with ecstasy; Oh, woe is me. 
To have seen what I have seen, see what I see ! 

Re-enter King and POLONIUS. 

King. Love? his affections do not that way tend; 170 
Nor what he spake, though it lack'd form a 

little. 
Was not like madness. There 's something in his 

soul 
O'er which his melancholy sits on brood ; 
And I do doubt the hatch and the disclose 

163. And /] Q, Have I F. 164. imisic\ F, musickt Q. 165. f/ia^ 
itoble\ F, what jioblei^. \(i(}. jangled out of tune,'\Y , jangled out of time, Q, 

jatiglcd, out of tune. Capell and many editors. 167. feature'] F, stattire Q. 

169. ^ife /] Q marks Exit here. So Elze. 170. Love?]Y, Loz'e,<Jl. 

162. obsei-ved of all obsen'ers] Per- Ophelia withdraws to seek her father, 

haps meaning honoured by all who returns at line 186, and is immediately 

pay the marks of honour, a common sent away. 
meaning oi obsei'ver. 170. affections'] emotions or pas- 

166. tune] The Q misprint time sions. 
occurs in F, Macbeth, I v. iii. 235. 174. disclose] Steevens quotes The 

1 6j. feature] the whole shape or Booke of Huntynge, Hawkyng, Fish- 

cast of the body, as frequently in ing: " First they ben eges, and after 

Shakespeare. they ben disclosed haukes." See v. 

168. ecstasy] see II. i. 102. i. 309. 

169. see!] Elze supposes that 



SCI] PRINCE OF DENIMARK 107 

Will be some danger; which for to prevent, 175 

I have in quick determination 

Thus set it down : he shall with speed to 

England, 
For the demand of our neglected tribute : 
Haply the seas and countries different 
With variable objects shall expel i 80 

This something-settled matter in his heart, 
Whereon his brains still beating puts him thu^ 
From fashion of himself. What think you on 't ? 

Pol. It shall do well ; but yet do I believe 

The origin and commencement of his grief 185 

Sprung from neglected love. — How now, Ophelia? 
You need not tell us what Lord Hamlet said ; 
We heard it all. — My lord, do as you please ; 
But, if you hold it fit, after the play. 
Let his queen mother all alone entreat him i 90 

To show his grief; let her be round with him ; 
And I '11 be placed, so please you, in the ear 
Of all their conference. If she find him not, 
To England send him, or confine him where 
Your wisdom best shall think. 

King. It shall be so : 195 

Madness in great ones must not unwatch'd go. 

\Exeutit. 

\']i^. for to\0, lo v. iSi. something-settled] hyphened by Warburton. 

185. his grief] Q, this greefe F. i86. Elze marks Enter OpheHa. 

1S8.] Theobald marks Exit Ophelia. 191. grief] Q, Greefes F. 192. 

placed, so please yon,] Q (so . . . you) in parentheses, //a^W so, please you V. 
196. unwatch'd] V, ttnmatcht Q. 

191. ;w^//r/] sec 11. ii. 139. 193. f'ld] detect, as in All's Well, 

V. ii. 4G. 



108 HAMLET [actih. 

SCENE U.^A Hallin the Castle. 
Enter Hamlet and tivo or three of the Players. 

Ham. Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pro- 
nounced it to you, trippingly on the tongue ; 
but if you mouth it, as many of your players 
do, I had as lief the town-crier spoke my 
lines. Nor do not saw the air too much with 5 
your hand, thus ; but use all gently ; for in 
the very torrent, tempest, and, as I may say, 
the whirlwind of passion, you must acquire 
and beget a temperance that may give it 
smoothness. Oh, it offends me to the soul 10 
to hear a robustious periwig-pated fellow tear 
a passion to tatters, to very rags, to split the 
ears of the groundlings, who, for the most 
part, are capable of nothing but inexplicable 
dumb-shows and noise ; I would have such a i 5 
fellow whipped for o'er-doing Termagant ; it 
out-herods Herod ; pray you, avoid it. 

3. yottr players'] Q i, F; oit?' players Q. 4. spoke] Q, had spoke F. 
5, 6. ffuuh with your] Q, much your F, tntuh, your Caldecott. 8. the 

whirlwimi of passion] F, whirlwind of your passion Q. 1 1, hear] Q, see F. 

15. would] Q I, Q ; could F. 

8, 9. acquire and beget] acquire, 16. Termagant] the god of the 

through training and practice ; beget, Saracens, as represented in old ro- 

through a native artistic impulse. mances and mystery plays. Florio, 

II. robustious] sturdy, as in King 1611: " 7'crmigisto, a great boaster, 

Henry V. in. vii. 159. quarreller, killer, tamer or ruler of 

II. periwig-pated] Steevens quotes the universe; the child of the earth- 

from Ejiery Woman in her Humour, quake and of the thunder, the brother 

1609: "as none wear . . . periwigs of death." 
but players and pictures." 17. Herod] the violent Herod of 

13. groundlings] spectators of the old sacred plays. In the Coventry 

play who stood in the pit, paying, as play of the Nativity a braggart speech 

we learn from Jonson, a penny for is followed by the stage direction, 

admission ; capable, receptive, appre- " Here Erode ragis in thys pagond 

hensive, and in the strete also." 



sc. II.] PRINCE OF DENMARK 109 

First Play. I warrant your honour. 

Ham. Be not too tame neither, but let your own 

discretion be your tutor ; suit the action to the 20 
word, the word to the action ; with this special 
observance, that you o'erstep not the modesty 
of nature ; for any thing so overdone is from 
the purpose of playing, whose end, both at 
the first and now, was and is, to hold, as 25 
'twere, the mirror up to nature ; to show 
virtue her own feature, scorn her own image', 
and the very age and body of the time his 
form and pressure. Now this overdone, or 
come tardy off, though it make the unskilful 30 
laugh, cannot but make the judicious grieve ; 
the censure of the which one must in your 
allowance o'erweigh a whole theatre of others. 
Oh, there be players that I have seen play, 
and heard others praise, and that highly, not 35 
to speak it profanely, that neither having 
the accent of Christians nor the gait of 

18, 43. First Player] Capell ; Player (2, F. 22. oerstep] Q, ore-stop F. 
23. ove7-done\ F, ore-doone Q. 27. her own feature'] F, her feature t^. 
30. off] F, of Q 6, Theobald, Furness ; make] F, makes Q. 32. the 

which one] F, which one Q. 33. o'erweigh] Q, Y ; ore-sway Ff 2-4. 

35. praise] F, praysd Q. 

23. frotn] away from, contrary to, Two Gentlemen of Verona, 11. i. 116 : 

2i%'\x\ Julius Cccsar, i. iii. 35. "it came hardly off"; Timon of 

28. very age^ actual generation. Athens, \. \. 2<^: " this comes off well 
Bailey proposes " visage," comparing and excellent." 

2 Henry IV. II. iii. 3: "visage of 32. censure] judgment, as in 1. 

the times." iii. 69. 

29. pressure] impress. Compare I. 36. profanely] refers to what fol- 
V. 100. lows about the creation of men, not 

30. come tardy off] as we say l)y God, but by nature's journey- 
" hanging fire"; coming to an issue men. 

slowly and ineffectively. Compare 



110 HAMLET [act III. 

Christian, pagan, nor man, have so strutted 
and bellowed that I have thought some of 
nature's journeymen had made men and not 40 
made them well, they imitated humanity so 
abominably. 

First Play. I hope we have reformed that in- 
differently with us, sir. 

Ham. Oh, reform it altogether. And let those 45 
that play your clowns speak no more than is 
set down for them ; for there be of them that 
will themselves laugh, to set on some quantity 
of barren spectators to laugh too, though in 
the mean time some necessary question of 50 
the play be then to be considered ; that 's 
villanous, and shows a most pitiful ambition 
in the fool that uses it. Go, make you ready. — 

\Exeunt Players. 

Enter POLONIUS, ROSENCRANTZ, ajld GUILDENSTEKN. 

How now, my lord ! will the king hear this 
piece of work ? 55 

Pol. And the queen too, and that presently. 

Ham. Bid the players make haste. — 

\Exit Poloniiis. 

38. nor f/ian] Q, or Norman F, fior Turke Q i. 40. men'\ Q, F ; them 
Theobald conj., Rann, Furness ; the men, Farmer conj., Hudson. 44. sir'] 
F, omitted Q. 56. Exit Polonius] F, omitted Q. 

38. nor ma??'] Farmer needlessly Collier supposed that the passage in 

conjectured "nor Mussulman"; see Q i might have been levelled at 

Q I reading. Kemp, "who about the date quitted 

44. indiffe7-ently] see III. i. 123. the company of players to which 

46. f/£?TO;/5] The " extemporall wit " Shakespeare had always belonged." 

of Wilson and of Tarlton is praised See p. 232. 

by Stowe. In Q i examples of the 56. presently] immediately, as in 

clown's jests are given by Hamlet. II. ii. 170. 



sen] PRINCE OF DENMARK 111 

Will you two help to hasten them ? 
Ros., Guil. We will, my lord. 

\Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildenstern. 
Ham. What ho ! Horatio ! 60 

Enter HORATIO. 

Hor. Here, sweet lord, at your service. 

Ham. Horatio, thou art e'en as just a man 
As e'er my conversation coped withal. 

Hor. O, my dear lord, — 

Ham. Nay, do not think I flatter ; 

For what advancement may I hope from thee, 65 
That no revenue hast but thy good spirits, 
To feed and clothe thee ? Why should the poor 

be flatter'd ? 
No, let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp. 
And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee 
Where thrift may follow fawning. Dost thou 
hear? 70 

Since my dear soul was mistress of her choice, 
And could of men distinguish, her election 
Hath seal'd thee for herself; for thou hast been 

59. Ros., fiuil.] Dyce, Both F, Ros. O ; IVc will] F, Ii = Ay\ Q. 64. lord, 
— ] Rowe, Lord. Q, Y. 68. tongue lick^ Q, tongue, like F. 70. fawn- 
ing\(^,faining? V. "Jl. he7-'\(), tnyY. 72. distinguish, her e/ection^V, 

distinguish her election (^. 73. Hath'] F, S'hath Q, She hath Malone. 

62. /i/st'] Hamlet, at this moment, second syllalile. The accent varies 
needs before all else a man of sound in Shakespeare. 

judgment, unswayed by passion. The 68. candied] sugared. 

eulogy that follows has here a dramatic 6g. />regf7anf] Schmidt: " dis- 

propriety. posed, ready, prompt." Perhaps, 

63. coped withal] as ever my inter- quick with meaning. Furness ex- 
course with men encountered. So plains, " because untold thrift is born 
copest in Winter's Tale, \\. iv. 435. from a cunning use of the knee." 

66. revenue] accented hereon the 71. dear] see i. ii. 182. 



112 HAMLET [actih. 

As one, in suffering all, that suffers nothing ; 
A man that fortune's buffets and rewards 75 

Hath ta'en with equal thanks ; and bless'd are those 
Whose blood and judgment are so well commingled 
That they are not a pipe for fortune's finger 
To sound what stop she please. Give me that man 
That is not passion's slave, and I will wear him 80 
In my heart's core, ay, in my heart of heart. 
As I do thee. Something too much of this. 
There is a play to-night before the king ; 
One scene of it comes near the circumstance 
Which I have told thee of my father's death : 8 5 
I prithee, when thou seest that act afoot, 
Even with the very comment of thy soul 
Observe mine uncle ; if his occulted guilt 
Do not itself unkennel in one speech, 
It is a damned ghost that we have seen, 90 

And my imaginations are as foul 
As Vulcan's stithy. Give him heedful note ; 
For I mine eyes will rivet to his face, 
And after we will both our judgments join 
In censure of his seeming. 
Hor. Well, my lord : 95 

76. Hath] F, Hast Q. 77. lo/niiiingled] Dyce, co-iningled F, coniedled Q. 
85. thee of] Q, thee, of F. 87. thy] Q, my F. 88. mine] F, my Q. 
92. heedful] Q, needfull F. 95. In] Q, To F. 

77. blood and judgment] passion ward and sagacious criticism. The 
and reason ; see I. iii. 6. F my would make Hamlet's judgment 

80, 81.] Douce : " From this speech the text, and Horatio's the comment. 

Anthony Scoloker, in his Z)a?///a/;;'//.s-, 89. one speech] Hamlet's dozen or 

1604, has stolen the following line: sixteen lines: II. ii. 576. 

' Oh, I would weare her in my heart- 92. stithy] possibly here a forge ; 

heart's-gore.' " often an anvil. 

87. comment of thy soul] the em- 95. censure] as in line 32. 
phasis is on soul ; with the most in- 



sen] PRINCE OF DENMARK 113 

If he steal aught the whilst this play is playing, 
And 'scape detecting, I will pay the theft. 
Ham. They are coming to the play ; I must be idle : 
Get you a place. 

Danish March. A Flourish. Enter King, Oueen, 
POLONIUS, OniELIA, ROSENCRANTZ, GUILDEN- 
STERN, and Other Lords attendant, with the Guard, 
carrying torches. 

King. How fares our cousin Hamlet ? i oo 

Ham. Excellent, i' faith ; of the chameleon's dish : 

I eat the air, promise-crammed ; you cannot 

feed capons so. 
King. I have nothing with this answer, Hamlet ; 

these words are not mine. 105 

Ham. No, nor mine now. — YTo Polonius.'] My 

lord, you played once i' the university, you 

say ? 
Pol. That did I, my lord, and was accounted a good 

actor. I 10 

Ham. And what did you enact? 

97. deicc/iitg] F, detected Q. Danish March . . . torches] substantially 
from F. Enter Trumpets and Kettle Drummes, King, Queene, Polonius, 
Ophelia Q after line 97. 106. mine noiv. My /oro',] Johnson, mine now my 
lord. Q, mine. Now my lord, F. 109. did r\(^, IdidY. ill. And 
what} V, What Q. 

98. idle] ci2i7.y. In Q i Hamlet's loi. chameleon' sdish'lSo'RoviXznds, 
mother, in the interview after the Lett. Humours Blood, 1600: "Can 
play, bids him forget these " idle men feede like camelions on the 
iits"; he replies: ayer?" In Browne's Vulgar Errors 

" Idle ! no mother, my pulse doth the matter is discussed. 

beate like yours ; 107. university] University plays. 

It is not madness that possesseth in Latin or in English, form an im- 

Hamlet." portant group of our elder drama. 

Perhaps, however, it means here no The title-page o{ Hamlet, Q i, states 

more than unoccupied with any that it was acted "in the two Uni- 

affair. versities of Cambridge and Oxford." 



114 HAMLET [actiii. 

Pol. I did enact Julius Caesar; I was killed i' the 
Capitol ; Brutus killed me. 

Ham. It was a brute part of him to kill so capital 

a calf there. — Be the players ready ? 115 

Ros. Ay, my lord ; they stay upon your patience. 

Queen. Come hither, my dear Hamlet, sit by me. 

Ham. No, good mother, here 's metal more at- 
tractive. 

Pol. [To the King?\ Oh, ho! do you mark that? 120 

Ham. Lady, shall I lie in your lap ? 

\_Lying dozvn at Ophelias feet. 

Oph. No, my lord. 

Ham. I mean, my head upon your lap ? 

Oph. Ay, my lord. 

Ham. Do you think I meant country matters? 125 

Oph. I think nothing, my lord. 

Ham. That 's a fair thought to lie between maids' legs. 

Oph. What is, my lord ? 

Ham. Nothing. 

Oph. You are merry, my lord. i 30 

Ham. Who, I ? 

Oph. Ay, my lord. 

117. dear'\ Q, good Y. 120. To the King] Capell adding Aside. 

121. Lying . . . feet] Rowe. 123, 124. Ham. / ineati . . . lord^ 

omitted Q. 125. coimtty'] Q, F ; coii/ra>y Q i. 

113, Capitor\ The error as to the some indelicate suggestion in ri5//;;/;j. 

place of Cresar's death appears in In West'wa7-d Hoe, V. i., I find: 

Chaucer, Monkes Tale, and in Shake- ' ' Though we lie all night out of the 

speare's Jiilitts Casar. So Fletcher, city, they shall not find country 

The Noble Gentleman, v. i. wenches of us," meaning we will not 

115. calf^ dolt, as in v. i. 126. wrong our husbands ; and in North- 

125. country inatteri\ rustic pro- ward Hoe, III. i. (spoken of a harlot), 

ceedings. Johnson conjectured "a good commonwealthes woman 

coiititry viajitters, as in Khtg John, she was borne. For her country, and 

I. i. 156. I suspect that there is has borne her covmtry. " 



sen] PUINCE OF DENMARK 115 

Ham. O God, your only jig-maker. What should 
a man do but be merry ? for, look you, how 
cheerfully my mother looks, and my father 1 3 5 
died within 's two hours. 

Oph. Nay, 'tis twice two months, my lord. 

Ham. So long ? Nay then, let the devil wear black, 
for I '11 have a suit of sables. O heavens ! die 
two months ago, and not forgotten yet ? 1 40 
Then there 's hope a great man's memory may 
outlive his life half a year ; but, by 'r lady, he 
must build churches then ; or else shall he 
suffer not thinking on, with the hobby-horse, 
whose epitaph is " For, O ! for, O ! the hobby- 145 
horse is forgot." 

Hautboys play. The dumb-sJiow enters. 

136. within' s\ Q, F ; within these Q I. 

133. Jig-maker] see ii. ii. 531. 144. suffer not thinking oit'\ under- 

136. witAiu's] within this. go oblivion. 

139. sa6/es] Warburton read, 144. hobby-horse^ a figure of May- 

" 'fore I'll have a suit of sable." games and morris-dances, the figure 

Johnson observed that the fur of of a horse strapped round the actor's 

sables is not black ; a suit trimmed waist, his feet being concealed by a 

with sables was magnificent, and not foot-cloth. " The hobby-horse is 

a mourning garment. Hudson adopts forgot" occurs in Love's Labour's Lost, 

a suggestion of Wightwick, and reads in. i. 30, and in several Elizabethan 

sabell, flame-colour. But Hamlet's dramas. Probably the Puritans had 

jest lies in the ambiguity of the word ; for a time succeeded in banishing 

sables, the fur and sable, the black of him from May sports. See Beaumont 

heraldry. See IV. vii. 81, whence it and Fletcher, Women Pleased, iv. i., 

appears that sables were the livery of for an amusing scene of Puritan versus 

"settled age." What an age since hobby-horse. 

my father died ! I am quite an old 146. dumb-show] The description 
gentleman ! (with an amljiguily of a])- of the diniib-show here varies only in 
parent self-contradiction in Hamlet's unessential points from that of F. 
manner, on the meaning black) ; I In Q the differences are not import- 
mean to be rich and comfortable, and ant. But Q i deserves to be quoted : 
the devil must be the only personage " Enter in a Dumbe Shew, the King 
who always wears black, his accus- and the (^)ueene, he sits down in an 
louied garb. Arbor, she leaves him : Then enters 



116 



HAMLET 



[act III. 



Enter a King and a Queen, very lovingly ; the Queen 
embracing him, and he her. She kneels, and 
makes show of protestation unto hijn. He takes 
her up, and declines his head upon her neck : 
lays him down upon a bank of floivers : she, 
seeing him asleep, leaves him. Anon comes in 
a fellow, takes off his crown, kisses it, and pours 
poison in the King's ears, and exit. The Queen 
returns ; finds the King dead, and makes 
passionate action. The Poisoner, with some tzvo 
or three Mutes, comes in again, seeming to 
lament with her. The dead body is carried 
away. The Poisoner wooes the Queen with 
gifts ; she seems loath and umvilling awhile^ 
but i}i the end accepts his love. [Exeunt. 



Lucianus with Poyson in a Viall, and 
powres it in his eares, and goes away : 
Then the Queene commeth and finds 
him dead ; and goes away with the 
other." In our elder drama dumb- 
show was employed occasionally to 
indicate action not developed by sub- 
sequent dialogue, or in a kind of 
allegory to shadow forth what was to 
follow. Shakespeare's use of it here 
is singular. Hunter cited an example 
of Danish soldiers in England, 1688, 
presenting the action of a sacred 
drama, given in Danish, in dumb- 
show before the play, and assumed 
that this was a common practice of 
the Danish theatre. Elze conjectured 
that English actors of Shakespeare's 
time on the Continent expounded the 
action of plays in this way. Ophelia 
suggests that the show may import 
the argument ; but, according to 
English practice, such a supposition 
was not warranted, except in so far 
that it might symbolically indicate 
the general tendency of the action. 



The King, on the other hand, does 
not recognise in the dumb-show the 
argument ; see line 244 ; his sus- 
picions would doubtless be aroused, 
and he would watch the play with 
keener interest, but he might suppose 
that the dumb-show presented, in 
English fashion, action which was 
not to be developed through dialogue. 
Hamlet would have thus a double 
opportunity of catching the conscience 
of the King. The following passage 
has perhaps not been quoted in con- 
nection with the use of dumb-show : 
Jamta Li)tguaruiii Qitadralingiiis; or, 
A JMessc of Tongues, 1617 [by J. 
Barbier] ; the writer explains why he 
puts his " Advertisement" at the end 
of the volume: "As in a Comedie 
the Prologue, or in a Tragedie the 
Chorus, is not for the most acute 
spectator, able (and more delighted) 
of himselfe to discerne the pretention 
of every Act presented, though intim- 
ated onely in a dumbe shew." 



sen] PRINCE OF DENMARK 117 

Oph. What means this, my lord ? 

Ham. Marry, this is miching mallecho ; it means 

mischief. 
OpJi. Behke this show imports the argument of the 150 

play? 

Enter Prologue. 

Ham. We shall know by this fellow ; the players 

cannot keep counsel ; they '11 tell all. 
Oph. Will he tell us what this show meant ? 
Ham. Ay, or any show that you '11 show him ; be 155 

not you ashamed to show, he'll not shame to 

tell you what it means. 
Oph. You are naught, you are naught : I '11 mark 

the play. 
Pro. For us, and for our tragedy, 1 60 

Here stooping to your clemency, 
We beg your hearing patiently. {Exit. 

Ham. Is this a prologue, or the posy of a 



nng 



148. this is\ F, this Q ; miching 7naUecho\ Malone, iintuching Mallico Q 
Miching Malicho F, myching Mallico Q i ; //] Q, that F. 151. play?'] F, 
play. Q. Enter Prologue] Theobald; after /e/^w, line 152 Q ; after //rtj', 
line 159 F. 152. this fellow'] Q, these felloiuesY. 153. counsel] F, 
omitted Q. 154. he] Pope, a Q, they F. 155. you'' II] F, you will Q. 

162. Exit] Globe Sh. ; omitted Q, F. 

148. miching mallecho] skulking 1 58. naught] improper, licentious, 

mischief. Minsheu gives "To miche, Bunyan in Gi-ace Abounding declares 

orsecrctlytohidehim.self outoftheway, that he never " so much as attempted 

as Truants doe from schoole " ; Florio to be naught with women." So 

has "to miche, to shrug, or sneake Dekker, The Honest WViori? (Pearson's 

in some corner." See "micher," Dehker, ii. p. 54). 

truant, in 1 Henry TV. lI. iv. 452. 163. posy] Sea Merchant oj 'Venice, 

" Mallecho," Sp;uiish wrtMci//^, mis- V. i. 147-150. Posies incised on 

chief. So Shirley, Gentleman of rings were necessarily brief. 
Venice: "Be humble. Thou man of 
mallecho, or thou diest." 



118 HAMLET [ACTin. 

Oph. 'Tis brief, my lord. 165 

Ham. As woman's love. 

Enter two Players, King and Queen. 

P. King. Full thirty times hath Phcebus^ cart gone 
round- 
Neptune^ s salt wash and Tellus' orbed ground, 
And thirty dozen moons zvitJi borrowed sheen 
About the zvorld have times tivelve thirties been, 170 
Since love our hearts and Hymen did our hands 
Unite commutual in most sacred bands. 

P. Queen. So many journeys may the sun and moon 
Make us again count o'er ere love be done ! 
But, woe is me I you are so sick of late, ly $ 

So far from cheer and from your former state. 
That I distrust you. Yet, though I distrust, 
Discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must ; 
For women's fear a?id love holds quantity, 
In neither aught, or in extremity. i 80 

Now, ivliat my love is, proof hath made you knozu. 
And as my love is sized, my fear is so ; 

166. Enter . . . Queen] Glolje, Enter King and Queene Q, Enter King 
and his Queene E, Enter the Duke and Dutchesse Q i. i68. orbed] E, 
orb'd the Q. 176. your] F, our Q. 179. Eor] F, And Q, preceded by 
the following iinrhymed line: "For women feare too much, even as they 
love" ; holds] E, hold Q. 180. In neither aught] E (with spelling ought), 
Eyther none, in neither ought Q. 181. love] F, Lord Q. 

167. cart] chariot. .Spenser, /rrfr/c; 179. holds quantity] keep propor- 
Qzieene, v. viii. 34 : " On every side tion to each other. See Midsiiminer 
of his embatteld cart." These lines Night's Dream, I. i. 232. 
resemble lines beginning "Thrice ten 180. In neither aught] Ingleby pro- 
times Phoebus," near the opening of posed " In either naught." Hunter 
Act IV. of Greene's ^////(?««/j. would punctuate "hold quantity In 

178. must] Perhaps a line, rhyming neither: — aught." Capell explains: 

with that given in Q, has been lost ; "They either feel none of these 

perhaps the Q line had been cancelled passions, or feel them both in ex- 

and was printed by mistake. tremity." 



sen.] PRINCE OF DENMARK 119 

Where love is great ^ tlie littlest doubts are fear. 
Where little fears grow great, great love groxvs there. 

P. King. ^ Faith, I must leave thee, love, and shortly too; i 8 5 
My opera7it poivers their fimctions leave to do; 
And thou shalt live in this fair zuorld behind, 
Honoured, beloved ; and haply 07ie as kind 
For husband shalt thou — 

P. Queen. Oh, confound the rest I 

Such love must needs be treason hi vty breast ; 190 
In second husbatid let me be accurst I 
None ived the second but zuho kilVd the first. 

Ham. [Aside.] Wormwood, wormwood ! 

P. Queen. The instances that second marriage move 

Are base respects of thrift, but none of love ; 195 

A second time I kill my husband dead. 
When second husband kisses me in bed. 

P. King. / do believe you think what now you speak. 
But what we do deterinine oft we break. 
Purpose is but the slave to meinory, 200 

183, 184.] Q, omitted F. i86. their functions] Q, my Functions F. 
193. Aside] Capeil ; omitted Q, F ; Worviwood, tvornnvood] F, That^s ivorni- 
woodQ^, O 2vo]-inwood, zvornnvood ! Q i. 19S. you think] Q, you. Think F. 

185. leave] cease. which actually appear should be 

194. instances] motives, induce- identified as his. Lines in the present 
ments, as in A'/«^'-/yf«;7 F. n. ii. 119. speech, it is argued, are singularly 

195. respects] considerations, as in in Hamlet's vein; they look like an 
III. i. 68. insertion ; they do not advance the 

196. kill . . . dead] kill my hus- action ; they are meant to catch the 
band, he being dead (though ex- conscience of Hamlet's mother ; the 
amples of the tautology "kill dead," plot sufficiently convicts the King, 
meaning "kill," occur in Shake- On the other hand, it is argued, that 
speare). The reading of Q i "lord the Poisoner's speech (perhaps inter- 
that 's dead " gives the sense. ruptcd before its close) is meant ; that 

200-225.] I'urncss gives a long Hamlet clearly indicates this to 

summary of a longer discussion as to Horatio, and that he warns the player 

which lines are the dozen or sixteen against mouthing a passionate speech, 

written by Hamlel, or whether it is Perhaps all this is to inquire too 

meant by .Shakespeare that any lines curiously into a dramatic device of 



120 HAMLET [actiii. 

Of violent birth but poor validity ; 
Which now, like fruit U7iripe, sticks on the tree, 
But fall unshaken when they mellow be. 
Most necessary 'tis that we forget 
To pay ourselves %vhat to ourselves is debt ; 205 

What to ourselves in passion we propose. 
The passion ending, doth the purpose lose. 
The violence of either grief or joy 
Their own enactures zvith themselves destroy ; 
Where joy most revels grief doth most lament ; 210 
Grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident. 
This world is not for aye, nor 'tis not strange 
That even our loves should with our fortunes change. 
For 'tis a question left us yet to prove, 
Whether love lead fortune or else fortune love. 215 
The great man dozvn, you mark his favourite 

files ; 
The poor advanced makes friends of enemies ; 
And Jiitherto doth love on fortune tend ; 
For zvho not needs shall never lack a friend ; 
And zvho in zvant a hollow friend doth try 220 

202. like] F, the Q. 208. either] Q, other F. 209. enactures] Q, 

enactors F. 211. Grief . . . grieves] F, Greefe ioy, icy griefes, Q. 

216. favourite] Q, fauourites F. 

Shakespeare's, designed to lessen the forced to identify Hamlet's lines, we 

improbability of the "murder of must needs point to the speech of 

Gonzago" so exactly fitting the Lucianus. Sir H. Irving, as Hamlet, 

occasion ; designed also to show mutters the Poisoner's words with 

Hamlet as a critic of theatrical art, suppressed passion while they are 

and indirectly to instruct an Eliza- being delivered by the actor, 

bethan audience in theatrical matters. 204, 205.] Our resolves are debts 

Undoubtedly this speech reflects back to ourselves ; why embarrass ourselves 

on both the Queen and Hamlet him- by inconvenient payments? 

self, but this was Shakespeare's doing, 209. enactures] fulfilments, carry- 

and clearly intentional ; if we were ing into act. 



sen] PRINCE OF DENMARK 121 

Directly seasons him his enemy. 

But, orderly to end wJiere I begun, 

Our tvills and fates do so contraiy run 

That our devices still are overthrozvn, 

Our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our oivn ; 2 2 5 

So think thou zvilt no second husband ived. 

But die thy thoughts zvhen thy first lord is dead. 

P. Queen. Nor earth to me give food nor heaven light I 
Sport and repose lock from nie day and night I 
To desperation turn my trust and hope ! 230 

An anchor's cheer in prison be my scope ! 
Each opposite, that blanks the face of joy, 
Meet zvhat I zvould have well and it destroy ! 
Both liere and hcftce pursue me lasting strife. 
If, once a zvidozv, ever I be zvife ! 235 

Ham. If she should break it now ! 

P. King. 'Tis deeply szvorn. Szveet, leave me Jiere awhile ; 
My spii'its grozv dull, and fain I zvould beguile 
The tedious day zvith sleep. [^Sleeps. 

P. Queen. Sleep rock thy brain ; 

And 7iever come mischance betzueen us twain! 240 

[Exit. 

228. to me give] Q, to give me F. 230, 231. To desperation . . . 
scope] Q, omitted P'. 231. An anchor's] Theobald, And anchors Q. 

235. once . . . wife] Q i, F; once I be a widdow, ever I be a wife Q. 

236. iiow!'] Dyce ; 7207u. Q, F; itozu — ]'ope. 239. Sleeps] F (after 
brain), omitted t^. 

221. seasons] Schmidt and Clar. plained — perhaps rightly — by Clar. 

Press: "matures, ripens," see 1. Press and others "fare," but "scope" 

iii. 81 ; but perhaps it means qualifies, supports the meaning illustrated by 

tempers. Hall. 

231. anchor's cheer] anchoret's 232. opposite, that blanks] contrary 

chair. So Bishop MaW, Satires, I v. thing that makes pale. So Sylvester's 

ii. 103 : " Sit seaven ycares pining in Dti Bar/as, 1605 : " His brow was 

an anchores cheyre." C/iecr is ex- never blankt with pallid fear." 



122 HAMLET [actih. 

Ham. Madam, how like you this play ? 

Queen. The lady doth protest too much, methinks. 

Ham. O, but she '11 keep her word. 

King. Have you heard the argument ? Is there no 

offence in 't ? 245 

Ham. No, no ; they do but jest, poison in jest ; no 
offence i' the world. 

King. What do you call the play ? 

Ham. The Mouse-trap. Marry, how ? Tropically. 

This play is the image of a murder done in 250 
Vienna : Gonzago is the duke's name ; his 
wife, Baptista : you shall see anon ; 'tis a 
knavish piece of work ; but what o' that ? 
your majesty, and we that have free souls, it 
touches us not; let the galled jade wince, our 255 
withers are unwrunsf. — 



242. doth protest] (^, protests F. 249. Tropic-all}''] Q, F; trapical/y (^ 1. 
253. ^'] F, ^Q, a Q I. ( 255. witice'] Q i ; winch Q, F. 

249. Tropiially] called The Mouse- ever, true, as Walker and Elze point 

trap (catching the conscience of the out, that "Duke" and "King" are 

king) 1))' way of a trope or figure, not always differentiated by Eliza- 

The " trapically " of Q l suggests bethan writers. As to the name 

that a pun is intended. " Baptista," Hunter says he has seen 

251. Gonzago] In 1538 the Duke of a few instances of the name as borne 

Urbano, married to a Gonzaga, was by women in England. "It had a 

murdered by Luigi Gonzaga, who feminine termination; that was enough, 

dropped poison into his ear. Shake- Shakespeare has given it to a man in 

speare, it is suggested, might have The Taming of the Shreiu." It has 

found this writ in choice Italian, been shown by A. von Reumont 

might have transferred the name (Allgemeine Zeitiing, October 21, 

Gonzaga to the murdered man, and 1870) that Baptista was used in 

formed " Lucianus " from Luigi. Italy as the Christian name of a 

"The duke" seems to be an over- woman. See Sh. Jahrbiuh, xxxi. 

sight. In Q I the murdered man and 169, for another Gonzaga-murder. 

his wife are Duke and Dutchesse 254. free] see 11. ii. 600. 

throughout, except in the dumb-show, 255. let the galled jade evince] a 

where they are King and Queen ; in proverbial saying ; found in Edwards, 

the altered form perhaps "duke" was Damon and Pythias, and Lyly, Eu- 

here erroneously retained. It is, how- t>hiies. 



sc.ii.J PRINCE OF DENMARK 123 

Enter Player, as LUCIANUS. 

This is one Lucianus, nephew to the king. 
Oph. You are as good as a chorus, my lord. 
Ham. I could interpret between you and your love, 

if I could see the puppets dallying. 260 

OpJi. You are keen, my lord, you are keen. 
Ham. It would cost you a groaning to take off my 

edge. 
Oph. Still better, and worse. 
Ham. So you mistake your husbands. — Begin, 265 

murderer ; pox, leave thy damnable faces, and 

begin. Come : the croaking raven doth bellow 

for revenge. 
Luc. Thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, atid time 
agreeing ; 

Confederate season, else no creature seeing ; 270 

258. as good as a\<^\,0; agoodY. 262. viy']¥, mine Q. 265. ww- 
(a/ce yoiir husbands'] Q, mistake husbands F, must take your husband Q. I. 
266. pox'\ F, omitted Q, a poxe Q I. 270. Confederate] Q i, F; Con- 
siderat Q. 

258. Choi-US'] which explains the service, take tlieir hvisbands "for 
action of a play, as in Winter'' s Tale, better, for worse." Hamlet means 
Komco and Juliet, Henry V. that women do not take them hut 

259, 260. interpret . . . puppets] mis-take them (as Capell prints it) in 
an interpreter on the stage expounded these words, for the words are not 
the puppet-shows ; see 7 wo Gentlemen fulfilled ; you all are faithless wives — 
0/ Verona, ii. i. loi. Steevens quotes with a thought of his mother. 
GxQQwe, Croats-worth 0/ Wit: " It was 267. croaking raven] Simpson 
I that ... for seven years' space was (Academy, December 19, 1874) shows 
absolute interpreter of the puppets." that Hamlet rolls into one two lines 
" V'our love," your lover. of The True Tragedie of Richard the 

264. better, and ivorse] Caldecott : Third — ghosts of those whom Richard 
" moie keen and less decorous." has slain in reaching for a crown come 

265. mistake] Pope read "must gaping for revenge : 

take " with Q i, and has been followed " The screeking raven sits croking for 

l)y many editors ; V)Ut this effaces revenge, 

Ilamlet's insult to womanhood. Whole herds of beasts come bcllow- 

Iirides, according to the marriage- ing for revenge."' 



124 HAMLET [actht. 

Thou 'mixture rank, of midnigJit weeds collected, 
With Hecate's ban thrice blasted, thrice infected, 
Thy natural magic and dire property, 
On wholesome life usurp immediately. 

[^Potirs the poison into the Sleeper's ears. 

Ham. He poisons him i' the garden for 's estate. 275 

His name 's Gonzago ; the story is extant, and 

writ in choice ItaHan ; you shall see anon how 

the murderer gets the love of Gonzago's wife. 

Oph. The king rises ! 

Ham. What, frighted with false fire! 280 

Queen. How fares my lord ? 
Pol. Give o'er the play. 
King. Give me some light. — Away ! 
All. Lights, lights, lights ! 

{^Exeunt all bjit Hamlet and Horatio, 
Ham. Why, let the strucken deer go weep, 285 

The hart ungalled play ; 
For some must watch, while some must sleep ; 

So runs the world away. 
Would not this, sir, and a forest of feathers, — 

272. ban] Q, F; bane Q i. 274. usurp] ¥ ; usurps Q i, Q. 275. forks'] 
F ; for /lis Qi, Q. 2yj.zunyni]F,ivr///ejiinzierj/Q. 280. M-'/ia/, . . . 
/;-£.'] Theobald, IV/iai, . . .fire. F, omitted Q, What, . . . fires? Q i. 
284. All.] F, Tol. Q. 285. Why, lef] Theobald ; Why let Q, F ; stnickefi] 
F, strooken Q, stricken Q i. 288. So\ F ; 7 hits Q I, Q. 

274. usurp] let them usurp. Com- " In all probability a quotation from 

pare Pericles, in. ii. 82 : " Death may some ballad." 

usurp on nature many hours." 2i<). forest of feat Iters'] So Chap- 

2%0. false fire'\ used of fire-works, man, IMonsietir D'' Olive, in. i. : "I 

blank-discharge of firearms, a fire or carry a whole forest of feathers with 

night - signal made to deceive an me." Feathers were much worn on 

enemy. See A New Eng. Dictionary the stage ; in Randolph's The Muses' 

under False 14 /', and under Fii'e Lookitig-GIass, i. i., Bird, the feather- 

8 a. man, has the custom of the players for 

2S5-2S8. Why . . . away] Dyce : all their feathers. 



sen] PRINCE OF DENMARK 



125 



if the rest of my fortunes turn Turk with me — 290 
with two Provincial roses on my razed shoes, 
get me a fellowship in a cry of players, sir ? 
Hor. Half a share. 
Ham. A whole one, I. 

For thou dost know, O Damon dear, 295 

This realm dismantled was 
Of Jove himself; and now reigns here 
A very, very — pajock. 
Ho7\ You might have rhymed. 

291. two\ F, omitted ; razed\ raz'd Q, rac'd F. 292. sii-] F, 

omitted Q. 298. pajock] Ff 3, 4; paiock Qq 2-5 ; Paiocke F I, Q 6; 

Pajocke F 2. 



290. turn Turk] prove renegade, 
or turn cruel. See Much Ado, iii. 

iv. 57- 

291. Provincial 7-oses\ rosettes of 
ribbon, like the roses of Provence, or 
else of Provins (forty miles from Paris), 
which was celebrated for its roses. 
" Cotgrave gives both : ' Rose de Pro- 
vence. The Province rose, the double 
Damaske Rose,' and ' Rose de 
Provins, the ordinarie double red 
Rose.' Gerarde, in his Herbal, says 
that the damask rose is called by some 
' Rosa provincialis ' " (Clar. Press). 

291. razed] slashed, or streaked in 
patterns. Stubbes, Anatoviic of 
.^/5?<5^5, writes of shoes "razed, carved, 
cut, and stitched over with silk." Clar. 
Press quotes Randle Holme, Academy 
of Armory, III. i. p. 14, " Pinked or 
raised Shoocs have the over leathers 
grain part cut into Roses, or other 
devices." 

292. cry] company; transferred from 
the meaning pack of hounds. Cotgrave, 
161 1 : "■ Meute, a kenncll, or crie, of 
hounds." Cleveland, London Lady, 
35 : "A small cry of tenants." 

293. share] Malone : " The whole 
receipts of each theatre were divided 
into shares, of which the pro ietors 



of the theatre, or house-keepers . . . 
had some ; and each actor had one or 
more shares or part of a share, accord- 
ing to his merit." See Furness for 
citation of documents from Halli- 
well. 

294. /] A whole one, say I. 
Malone conjectured "A whole one, 
ay," and several editors adopt the 
suggestion, "I" and "ay" being 
both represented in print by "I." 

298. pajock] Hamlet again probably 
quotes from some ballad, substituting 
"pajock" for the rhyming "ass." 
Q 1676 ga.ve pa icock ; Q 1695, p(cock ; 
Pope and many editors, peacock. Dyce 
says he has heard the lower classes of 
the north of Scotland call the peacock 
the pea-jock (cf. bubbly-jock, turkey). 
The peacock had an unenviable re- 
putation in popular belief and current 
natural history. He was vain, loved 
not his young, was inordinately lustful, 
swallowed his own ordure, had " the 
voice of a feend, the head of a serpent, 
and the pace of a theefe." Theobald 
proposed paddock, a toad, and puttock, 
a ravenous kite. Spenser, ./ Vietu 
of the Present State of Ireland {^. 636, 
Globe ed.), usca patchocke for a clown, 
and perhaps this is Hamlet's word. 



126 HAMLET [actiii. 

Hani. O good Horatio, I '11 take the ghost's word 300 
for a thousand pound. Didst perceive ? 

Hor. Very well, my lord. 

Ham. Upon the talk of the poisoning ? 

Hor. I did very well note him. 

Ham. Ah, ha! Come, some music! come, the 305 
recorders ! — 

For if the king like not the comedy, 
Why then, belike, — he likes it not, perdy. 
Come, some music ! 

Re-enter Rosencrantz and GuiLDENSTERN. 

Giiil. Good my lord, vouchsafe me a word with 3 1 o 
you. 

Ham. Sir, a whole history. 

Guil. The king, sir, — 

Ham. Ay, sir, what of him ? 

Guil. Is in his retirement marvellous distempered. 3 i 5 

Ham. With drink, sir ? 

Guil. No, my lord, rather with choler. 

Ham. Your wisdom should show itself more richer 
to signify this to his doctor ; for, for me to put 
him to his purgation would perhaps plunge 320 
him into far more choler. 

Guil. Good my lord, put your discourse into 

303. poisoning?'\ Y,poy suing. Q. 305. Ah, ha] Q, Oh, ha? F. 309. Re- 
enter] Q as here ; in F after 7iote him, line 304. 317. rather] F, omitted Q. 
319. his doctor] F, the doctor Q. 321. far] F, omitted Q. 

306. recorders] a kind of flageolet. 320. pirgation] medicinally purg- 

315, distempered] discomposed in ing the body, legally clearing from 

mind. Hamlet takes it up as if imputation of guilt, as in As Yoii 

meaning disordered in body ; both Like It, V. iv, 45. Hamlet plays on 

senses occur in Shakespeare, the two senses. 



sen] PRINCE OF DENMARK 127 

some frame, and start not so wildly from my 
affair. 

Hani. I am tame, sir; pronounce. 325 

Guil. The queen, your mother, in most great afflic- 
tion of spirit, hath sent me to you. 

Ham. You are welcome. 

Guil. Nay, good my lord, this courtesy is not of the 

right breed. If it shall please you to make 330 
me a wholesome answer, I will do your mother's 
commandment ; if not, your pardon and my 
return shall be the end of my business. 

Ham. Sir, I cannot. 

Guil. What, my lord ? 335 

Ham. Make you a wholesome answer ; my wit 's 
diseased ; but, sir, such answer as I can make, 
you shall command ; or, rather, as you say, 
my mother ; therefore no more, but to the 
matter; my mother, you say, — 340 

Ros. Then thus she says : your behaviour hath 
struck her into amazement and admiration. 

Ham. O wonderful son, that can so astonish a 
mother ! But is there no sequel at the heels 
of this mother's admiration ? Impart. 345 

Ros. She desires to speak with you in her closet ere 
you go to bed. 

323. start-] F, stare Q. 333. of my'\ F, of Q. 335. Guil.] F, Ros. Q. 
337. answer'] Q, answers F. 338. as you] Q, you F. 343. astonish] 
F, stonish Q. 345, mother's'] Q, Mother Y ; Impart.] Q, omitted F. 

323. frame] order, and used speci- 335. Guil.] Evidently this speech 

ally of an arrangement of words ; T. is rightly assigned to Guildenstern by 

Spencer, Logick, 162S : "This frame F. He then retires and Rosencrantz 

contains a proposition negative uni- tries his hand, 

versall, &c." 342. admiration] wonder, as in I. 

332. pardon'] see i. ii. 56. ii. 192, 



128 HAMLET [actiii. 

Ham. We shall obey, were she ten times our 
mother. Have you any further trade with us? 

Ros. My lord, you once did love me. 350 

Ham. So I do still, by these pickers and stealers. 

Ros. Good my lord, what is your cause of dis- 
temper ? you do surely bar the door upon 
your own liberty, if you deny your griefs to 
your friend. 35 5 

Ham. Sir, I lack advancement. 

Ros. How can that be when you have the voice of 
the king himself for your succession in Den- 
mark ? 

Ham. Ay, sir, but "While the grass grows," — the 360 
proverb is something musty. — 

Re-enter Players with recorders. 

Oh, the recorders ! let me see one. — To 
withdraw with you : — why do you go about 

351. So I do] F, And do Q. 353. sin-e/y . . . upon] Q, /7'eel}' . . . 

o/F. 360. «>] Q, omitted F. 361. Re-enter] Dyce, Enter one with a 

Recorder F, Enter the Players with Recorders Q, after line 359. 362. re- 

corders] Q, 7-ecorder F ; see one] Q, see F ; a comma after one Q, after see F. 

349. /rade] business, as in Twelfth "Whylst grass doth growe, oft sterves 

Night, III. i. 83. the seely steede." 

351. pickers and stealers] hands, 362, 363. To withdraw with you] 

which the Church Catechism ad- to have a word in private with you. 

monishes us to keep from picking and Steevens suggests that Guildenstern 

stealing. A mild oath, found in has indicated by a gesture his wish 

Merchant of Venice, V. i. 161. for privacy, and that Hamlet's words 

Hamlet wishes to have done with are interrogative. Mason proposed 

professions of love, and swears "by "So, withdraw you," or "So, with- 

these rogueish hands." draw will you ?" Staunton takes the 

356. advancement] Humouring words as addressed to the players, 

their conceit that he is ambitious; and suggests " So (/flyC'm^ a recorde?-) 

see II. ii. 260. withdraw with you." For the use of 

360, 361. the pi-overb] Malone the infinitive compare " to draw " in 

quotes the proverb from Whet- III. iv. 216. 
stone, Promos and Cassandra, 1578: 



sen] PRINCE OF DENMARK 129 

to recover the wind of me, as if you would 
drive me into a toil? 365 

Giiil. O, my lord, if my duty be too bold, my love 
is too unmannerly. 

Ham. I do not well understand that. Will you 
play upon this pipe? 

Guil. My lord, I cannot. 370 

Havi. I pray you. 

Guil. Believe me, I cannot. 

Ham. I do beseech you. 

Guil. I know no touch of it, my lord. 

Ham. 'Tis as easy as lying; govern these ventages 375 
with your finger and thumb, give it breath with 
your mouth, and it will discourse most eloquent 
music. Look you, these are the stops. 

Guil. But these cannot I command to any utterance 

of harmony; I have not the skill. 380 

Ham. Why, look you now, how unworthy a thing 
you make of me ! You would play upon me ; 
you would seem to know my stops ; you would 
pluck out the heart of my mystery ; you would 
sound me from my lowest note to the top of 385 
my compass ; and there is much music, excel- 
lent voice, in this little organ, yet cannot you 

375. 'Tis\ F, It is Q. 376. fiiigcr\ Y, fingers Q ; and /humb] F, C^ the 
vtnber (^. 377. eloquent'lQ, excellent ¥. 385. the top of '\ F, omitted Q. 

364. to recover the wind of »ie] 366, 367. O . . . unmannerly] a 

Madden, The Diary of Master Wil- duty perhaps too bold may have 

Ham Silence, p. 33, note: "In order forced my love to express itself ill. 

to drive a deer into the toils, it was Or perhaps — as Clar. Press suggests — 

needful to get to the windward of him, " an unmeaning compliment." 

so that, having you in the wind, he 375. ventages] vents, holes, 
might break in the opposite direction." 



130 HAMLET [actiii. 

make it speak. 'Sblood, do you think I am 
easier to be played on than a pipe ? Call me 
what instrument you will, though you can fret 390 
me, you cannot play upon me. — 

Re-enter POLONIUS. 

God bless you, sir ! 
Pol. My lord, the queen would speak with you, and 

presently. 
Ham. Do you see yonder cloud that's almost in 395 

shape of a camel ? 
Pol. By the mass, and 'tis like a camel, indeed. 
Ham. Methinks it is like a weasel. 
Pol. It is backed like a weasel. 

Ham. Or like a whale ? 400 

Pol. Very like a whale. 
Ham. Then will I come to my mother by and by. — 

[Aside.] They fool me to the top of my bent. 

— I will come by and by. 
Pol. I will say so. [Exit. 405 

Ha7n. " By and by " is easily said. — Leave me, friends. 

[Exeunt all but Hamlet. 

388. speaki Q, omitted F ; ' SbIood'\ Q, Why F ; /] Q, that I F. 390, 
391. can fret me] Q i, F ; fret me not Q. 391. yoii\ Q, F ; yet yoii Q i, 
Globe, Cambridge. ■y^i^. yonaer\Ql,thatY. 396. 0/] Q, /z7'e P\ 397- '^^'-f 
like] Q 4, 'tis, like Q, it 's Hie F. 399. dacked] Q, F ; blari Qq 4-6. 
402. 7vill /]¥, I will Q. 403-406.] Speeches distributed as in F ; Q omits 
the distribution, and the Exit of Polonius ; the Exeunt, line 406, is omitted Q, F. 

290. fret] Playing on "fret," to backed, substituted ouzle for weasel, 

irritate and " fret," the piece of gut, which Theobald approved, noting that 

metal, or wood which regulates the "there is humour in comparing the 

fingering on certain stringed instru- same cloudtoabeast,abird, and afish." 

meats. 402. by atid by] immediately, as 

398, 399. weasel] Capell transposed often in Shakespeare. 

the camel and the weasel, to provide 403. bent] see 11. ii. 30. 

a hump for the second animal. Pope, 406. Leave me, friends] follows by 

reading with the later Qq black for and by (line 404) in Q. 



sc. Ill] PRINCE OF DENMARK 131 

'Tis now the very witching time of night, 

When churchyards yawn, and hell itself breathes 

out 
Contagion to this world ; now could I drink hot 

blood, 
And do such bitter business as the day 410 

Would quake to look on. Soft ! now to my 

mother, 

heart, lose not thy nature ; let not ever , 
The soul of Nero enter this firm bosom ; 
Let me be cruel, not unnatural : 

1 will speak daggers to her, but use none; 415 
My tongue and soul in this be hypocrites ; 

How in my words soever she be shent. 

To give them seals never, my soul, consent ! 



[Exit. 



SCENE III. — A Room in the Castle. 



Enter King, Rosencrantz, and GuiLDENSTERN. 

King. I like him not, nor stands it safe with us 

To let his madness range. Therefore prepare 

you; 
I your commission will forthwith dispatch. 
And he to England shall along with you ; 
The terms of our estate may not endure 5 

408. breathes\ F, breakes Q. 410. hilte)' . . , daj'] F, btisines as the 

bitter day Q, better rfoy Warburton. 411. Soft! 7iow\ soft, now Q, Soft 
now, F. 415. daggers^ F, dagger Q^. 417. soever'] Q 6, someverCl, F. 

413. Nero] The murderer of his poisoning a husband, and of living in 

mother, Agrippina. See King John, incest with a brother. 

V. ii. 152. Perhaps the coincidences 417. shent] rebuked, as in Merry 

are accidental, that Agrippina was Wives, I. iv. 38. 
the wife of Claudius, was accused of 



132 HAMLET [actiii. 

Hazard so near us as doth hourly grow 
Out of his lunacies. 

Guil. We will ourselves provide. 

Most holy and religious fear it is 
To keep those many many bodies safe 
That live and feed upon your majesty. lo 

Ros. The single and peculiar life is bound 

With all the strength and armour of the mind 
To keep itself from noyance ; but much more 
That spirit upon whose weal depends and rests 
The lives of many. The cease of majesty i 5 

Dies not alone, but like a gulf doth draw 
What 's near it with it ; it is a massy wheel, 
Fix'd on the summit of the highest mount, 
To whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser things 
Are mortised and adjoin'd ; which, when it falls, 20 
Each small annexment, petty consequence. 
Attends the boisterous ruin. Never alone 
Did the king sigh, but with a general groan. 

King. Arm you, I pray you, to this speedy voyage ; 

6. near us\ Q 1676, Pope ; Jieer's Q ; dangerous F and many editors. 7. 
lunacies'] F, browes Q, lunes Theobald, braves Anon. 14. whose weal] Q, 
zv/iose spirit F. 15. cease] F, cesse Q. 17. it is] F, or it is Q. 
22. ruin] F, raitie Q. 23. with] F, omitted Q. 

7. lunacies] The Q brows may be Rolfe compares King John, i. i. 1S3 : 
right. The word brow is used in the "many a many foot of land," and 
sense of fronting aspect, countenance, Clar. Press, Henry V. IV. ii. 33: 
and also in that of confidence, effron- "A very little little let us do." 

tery ; see A New English Dictionary, 1 1 . single and peculiar] individual 
brow, 5 c and d. The choice of the and private, 
word may have been determined by 13. noyance] hurt, injury, 
the fixed gaze of Hamlet upon the 15. cease] cessation; cease of ma- 
King during the play-scene. It seems jesty, death of a king. Pope sub- 
strange that blows (in the sense of stituted " decease" for " the cease." 
injuries, not uncommon in Shake- 16. gulf] whirlpool, as in King 
speare) has not been suggested as an Richard III. in. vii. 128. 
emendation of i^rt'wi'. 24. Arm yoit] prepare yourselves, 
9. many many] Ff 2-4 read many, as in Mid. Night's Dream, I. i. 117. 



sc.iii] PRINCE OF DENMARK 133 

For we will fetters put upon this fear, 25 

Which now goes too free-footed. 
Ros., Guil. We will haste us. 

\Exeunt Rosencrants and Guildenstern. 

Entej' POLONIUS. 

Pol. My lord, he 's going to his mother's closet ; 
Behind the arras I '11 convey myself 
To hear the process ; I '11 warrant she '11 tax him 

home ; 
And, as you said, and wisely was it said, 30 

'Tis meet that some more audience than a mother, 
Since nature makes them partial, should o'erhear 
The speech, of vantage. Fare you well, my 

liege ; 
I '11 call upon you ere you go to bed, 
And tell you what I know. 

King: Thanks, dear my lord 35 

l^Exit Polonius. 
Oh, my offence is rank, it smells to heaven ; 
It hath the primal eldest curse upon 't, 
A brother's murder ! Pray can I not. 
Though inclination be as sharp as will : 

25. upon^V , ahouf C^. 26. Ros., Guil.] Both F, Ros. Q. 33. !;pe€ck, 
of vantai;c\ comma inserted by Theobald. 39. will :'\ F, luill, Q. 

33. of vantage] from a point or "Pray." Walker suggests " mur- 

position of vantage. Many editors derer." 

do not insert the comma before van- 39. will\ An ingenious gentleman 

tage. Hudson explains "speech of suggested "'twill" to Theobald, 

vantage," a speech having the ad- which some editors have adopted, 

vantage of such partiality as a mother Warburton read " th' ill." The King 

bears to a son or a son to a mother. means that his effort to pray was no 

38.] Ilanmer needlessly emends the reluctant resolve; his desire accom- 

metre by inserting "alas!" after panied his act of will. 



134 HAMLET [acthi. 

My stronger guilt defeats my strong intent, 40 

And, like a man to double business bound, 

I stand in pause where I shall first begin, 

And both neglect. What if this cursed hand, 

Were thicker than itself with brother's blood. 

Is not there rain enough in the sweet heavens 45 

To wash it white as snow? Whereto serves 

mercy 
But to confront the visage of offence ? 
And what 's in prayer but this two-fold force. 
To be forestalled ere we come to fall, 
Or pardon'd being down? Then I'll look up; 50 
My fault is past. But, oh, what form of prayer 
Can serve my turn ? " Forgive me my foul 

murder ? " 
That cannot be, since I am still possess'd 
Of those effects for which I did the murder, 
My crown, mine own ambition, and my queen. 55 
May one be pardon'd and retain the offence ? 
In the corrupted currents of this world 
Offence's gilded hand may shove by justice, 
And oft 'tis seen the wicked prize itself 
Buys out the law ; but 'tis not so above ; 60 

There, is no shuffling ; there, the action lies 
In his true nature, and we ourselves compell'd 
Even to the teeth and forehead of our faults 

50. pardon! d'Y F, pardon Q. 52. nnirdcr?^ Caldecott, inwiher, Q, 
viiirther: F. 58. shove by'\ F, showe by Q. 

57. currents] courses. Dyce and ii. 368. Occurrents had been su"g- 
Furness accept Walker's suggestion gested in 1752, 

'"currents" for occurrents; see v. 61. lies] Clar. Press: "used in its 

legal sense." 



sc.iii] miNCE OF DENMARK 135 

To give in evidence. What then ? what rests ? 
Try what repentance can: what can it not? 65 

Yet what can it when one can not repent? 
O wretched state ! O bosom black as death ! 
O limed soul, that struggling to be free 
Art more engaged ! Help, angels ! make assay ! 
Bow, stubborn knees ; and, heart with strings of 
steel, 70 

Be soft as sinews of the new-born babe ! 
All may be well. \Retires and kneels. 

Enter Hamlet. 

Ham. Now might I do it pat, now he is praying ; 
And now I '11 do 't ; and so he goes to heaven ; 
And so am I revenged. That would be scann'd : 7 5 
A villain kills my father ; and for that, 
I, his sole son, do this same villain send 
To heaven. 

Oh, this is hire and salary, not revenge. 
He took my father grossly, full of Dread, 80 

With all his crimes broad blown, as flush as May ; 
And how his audit stands who knows save heaven ? 

72, Retires , . .] Malonc, omitted Q, F; hee kneeles Q l. 73. it pat, 
vow he is praying] F, it, but notu a is praying- Q. 77. sole] Q,/oule, 

F, foot, Capell conject. 79. O/i] F, IV/iy Q ; /lire and salary] F, base 
and silly Q. 81. With all] F, Withall Q ; fitish] Q, fresh F. 

68. limed] caught, as with bird- be addressed not to the angels but to 
lime. the King's own soul. 

69. engaged] entangled. So Florio, 75. -would be scannd] ought to be 
Montaigne: "The Barbie fishes, if examined. 

one of them chance to be engaged." 80. bread] Malone refers to Ezekiel 

69. assay]\.x\^X; but assay is used xvi. 49: "pride, fulness of bread." _ 
by Shakespeare, King Henry V. i. 81. broad blown] sec the Ghost's 

ii. 151, for an onset, attack, and per- words, I. v. 'jG; /lush, lusty; full of 

haps that is the meaning here. It is life ; " Hush youth," Ant. and Cleop. 

suggested that "make assay" may i. iv. 52. 



136 HAMLET [actih. 

But in our circumstance and course of thought 
'Tis heavy with him ; and am I then revenged, 
To take him in the purging of his soul, 85 

When he is fit and season'd for his passage ? 
No. 

Up, sword, and know thou a more horrid hent ; 
When he is drunk asleep, or in his rage, 
Or in the incestuous pleasure of his bed, 90 

At gaming, swearing, or about some act 
That has no relish of salvation in 't ; 
Then trip him, that his heels may kick at heaven 
And that his soul may be as damn'd and black 
As hell, whereto it goes. My mother stays. — 95 
This physic but prolongs thy sickly days. [Exit. 
King. [Risingi\ My words fly up, my thoughts remain below; 
Words without thoughts never to heaven go. \Exit. 

SCENE IV. — The Queens Closet. 

Enter QUEEN and POLONIUS. 

Pol. He will come straight. Look you lay home to him ; 

89. drunk asleep] F, drnnkc, a sleepc Q. 91. gaming, swearing] ¥, 
game a sivearing Q, game swearing Q i, game, a-sweanng Cambridge. 
97. Rising] omitted Q, F ; Rises Capell. 

83. our . . . thought] our mortal and adduced instances of the use of 

condition and the course of our the hunting-sword in breaking-up the 

thought. Or "circumstance" may quarry? 

be connected with "thought," our 89-95.] Parallels for Hamlet's "in- 
thought in its indirect indications fernal sentiment " can be adduced 
and its general tendency. from other dramas. Thus in Beaumont 

88. hent] seizure, grip. The verb and Fletcher, Four Plays in One ; 

is found in Measure for Measure, iv. The Triumph of Death, sc. v. (with an 

vi. 14, and IVintet's Tale, IV. iii. evident reminiscence from Hamlet) : 

133, meaning seize, take. F 4 has " 'Tis nothing : 

hent, followed by several editors. No ; take him dead - drunk now, 

Warburton conjectured hest, com- without repentance, 

mand. Why has no "ingenious His lechery inseam'd upon him." 
gentleman " suggested hunt, pursuit, 



sc. IV.] PRINCE OF DENMARK 137 

Tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear 

with, 
And that your grace hath screen'd and stood 

between 
Much heat and him. I '11 silence me e'en here. 
Pray you, be round with him. 
Ham. [ WitJiin^ Mother, mother, mother ! 5 

Queen. I '11 warrant you ; 

Fear me not. Withdraw, I hear him coming. 

\_Polonius hides behind the arras. 

Enter HAMLET. 

Hain. Now, mother, what 's the matter ? 
Queen. Hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended. 
Ham. Mother, you have my father much offended. 10 
Queen. Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue. 
Ham. Go, go, you question with a wicked tongue. 
Queen. Why, how now, Hamlet? 

Ham. What 's the matter now ? 

Queen. Have you forgot me ? 

Ham. No, by the rood, not so : 

You are the queen, your husband's brother's 
wife ; I 5 

4. siletiii: iik: e'en'\ Y , silence me even Q, 'sconce mc e'en Waibiirton, sconce 
Die even Ilanmcr. 5. wi/h . . . Jitoiher] F, omitted Q. 6. warrant'^ 
F, wait Q. Polonius hides . . .] omitted Q, F; so with stage directions, 
line 23, line 24. 12. a wicked] Q, an idle V. 

4. silence] Several editors adopt Polonius can he " most still" only in 

Hanmer's sconce. Cf. Merry Wives, death; his resolve "to silence him- 

III. iii. 96: "I will ensconce me self" may have an ironical relation 

behind the arras." Clar. Press reads to the occasion of his death, his loud 

sconce because it is supported by Q I : " What, ho !" 

"He shrowde my scUc behinde the 5. round] see li. ii. 139. 
arras." The " foolish prating knave" 



138 HAMLET [actiii. 

And — would it were not so ! — you are my mother. 
Queen. Nay then, I '11 set those to you that can speak. 
Ham. Come, come, and sit you down ; you shall not 
budge ; 

You go not till I set you up a glass 

Where you may see the inmost part of you. 20 

Queen. What wilt thou do ? thou wilt not murder me ? 

Help, help, ho ! 
Pol. [Behind.'] What, ho ! help, help, help ! 
Ham. \_Drawmg.'\ How now ! a rat? Dead, for a ducat, 
dead ! [Makes a pass tJu-ough the arras. 

Pol. [Behind.] Oh, I am slain ! [Falls and dies. 

Queen. Oh me, what hast thou done ? 25 

Ham. Nay, I know not ; is it the king ? 
Queen. Oh, what a rash and bloody deed is this ! 
Ham. A bloody deed ! almost as bad, good mother, 

As kill a king, and marry with his brother. 
Queen. As kill a king? 

Ham. Ay, lady, 'twas my word. — 30 

[Lifts up the arras and discovers Polotiius. 

Thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell ! 

I took thee for thy better ; take thy fortune ; 

Thou find'st to be too busy is some danger. — 

Leave wringing of your hands. Peace ! sit you 
down. 

And let me wring your heart; for so I shall 35 

If it be made of penetrable stuff; 

16. And . . . _;'<??/] Q (no parenthesis, comma after jo) ; But zvould yoic were 
not so. You F. 20. ininosti F, most Q. 22. Help, help, ho /] F, Heipe 
how. Q. 23. What, ho! . . . help /] F, What how helpe Q. 24. Make's 
. . . arras] Capell, omitted Q, F. 25. Behind] omitted Q, F ; Falls and 
dies] Killes Polonius F, omitted Q. 30. king?"] F, king. Q ; stage direction 
omitted Q, F ; ''ttvas'\ F, it was Q. 32. better] Q, betters F. 



sc.iv] PRINCE OF DENMARK 139 

If damned custom have not braz'd it so 
That it is proof and buhvark against sense. 

Queen. What have I done that thou darest wag thy tongue 
In noise so rude against me? 

Ham. Such an act 40 

That blurs the grace and blush of modesty, 
Calls virtue hypocrite, takes off the rose 
From the fair forehead of an innocent love, 
And sets a blister there ; makes marriage vows 
As false as dicers' oaths ; oh, such a deed ' 45 
As from the body of contraction plucks 
The very soul, and sweet religion makes 
A rhapsody of words ; heaven's face doth glow. 
Yea, this solidity and compound mass. 
With tristful visage, as against the doom, 50 

Is thought-sick at the act. 

Queen. Ay me, what act, 

That roars so loud and thunders in the index ? 

37. hrazd\ F, bmsd Q, brass'd Globe. 38 is\ F, be Q. 44. sets] Q, 
makes F. 48. doi}i\ F, dooes Q. 48, 49. glow, Yea] F, glozve Ore Q. 
50. tristful] F, heated Q. 51, 52. ^_j/ . . . mc/(?x] given to the Queen F; 
Ay . . . act? given to Queen ; That roars, &c., to Hamlet Q. 

37. (^ras'^ hardened like brass. So Hakluyt, Voyages, 1598: "The 
Axmm, Nest of Ni>2nies, i()0?>: "I 3.n\ mutual contraction of a perpetuall 
brazed by your favours, made bold in league." Cotton Mather, Magnalia 
your ostended curtesies." Christi, 1702: "After his 'con- 

38. proof and bulwark] armour of traction ' , . . unto tlie daughter of 
proof and rampart against sense, that Mr. Wilson." 

is, feeling. For proof compare Mac- 49. this solidity] the earth. 

beth,\.'\\. 54: " Bellona's bridegroom 50. tristful] sorrowful, as in 1 

lapp'd in proof." Clar. Press takes Henry IV. u. iv. 433: doom, dooms- 

' ' proof " and ' ' bulwark " as adjectives, day. 

44. sets a blister] Clar. Press: 51. /'/w//^///-.f/V/!'] see III. i. 85. 

"brands as a harlot." Compare iv. 52 index] prelude; the index or 

V. 1 17, and Comedy of Errors, 11. ii. "table" was usually placed at the 

138. beginning of books. So Othello, 11. i. 

46. contraction] act of contracting, 263: "An index and obscure pro- 

specially of the marriage-contract, logue." 



140 HAMLET [acthi. 

Ham. Look here, upon this picture, and on this ; 
The counterfeit presentment of two brothers. 
See what a grace was seated on this brow ; 5 5 

Hyperion's curls, the front of Jove himself, 
An eye like Mars, to threaten and command ; 
A station like the herald Mercury 
New-lighted on a heaven-kissing hill ; 
A combination and a form indeed, 60 

Where every god did seem to set his seal 
To give the world assurance of a man : 
This was your husband. Look you now, what 

follows : 
Here is your husband ; like a mildew'd ear, 
Blasting his wholesome brother. Have you eyes ? 65 
Could you on this fair mountain leave to feed. 
And batten on this moor ? Ha ! have you eyes ? 
You cannot call it love, for at your age 
The hey-day in the blood is tame, it 's humble. 
And waits upon the judgment ; and what judg- 
ment 70 

55. this\ Q, his F. 57. and'] Q, or F. 65. brother] Q, breath F. 

53. Look here,] Restoration actors used two miniatures. Sir H. Irving 

made Hamlet produce two miniatures ; and Salvini have represented the por- 

but miniatures could hardly represent traits as seen only by the mind's eye. 
Hamlet's father at full-length, as he 54. counterfeit present niettt] por- 

is described. A print, prefixed to trayed representation. Compare 

Rowe's ed. of ZTaw/e/, 1709, exhibits " Fair Portia's counterfeit," yl/i?;r/^ff«/' 

half-lengths hanging on the wall. The of Venice, III. ii. 116. 
actor Holman had a picture of Claudius 58. station] attitude in standing, as 

on the wall, and a miniature of the dead m Ant. and Cleop. ill. iii. 22. 
king produced from Hamlet's bosom. 59.] Malone conjectured that this 

P'echter had two miniatures, one worn image was caught from Phaer's-<^«(?zV/, 

round Gertrude's neck, the other by IV. 246, Mercury arriving on Atlas, 
Hamlet ; he tore the miniature from 67. batten] feed gluttonously. 

Gertrude and flung it away; so Rossi, Coriolanus, IV. v. 35: "batten on 

who stamped upon it. Edwin Booth cold bits." 



sc.iv] PRINCE OF DENMARK 141 

Would step from this to this ? Sense sure you 

have, 
Else could you not have motion ; but sure, that 

sense 
Is apoplex'd ; for madness would not err. 
Nor sense to ecstasy was ne'er so thrall'd 
But it reserved some quantity of choice, 7 5 

To serve in such a difference. What devil was 't 
That thus hath cozen'd you at hoodman-blind ? 
Eyes without feeling, feeling without sight. 
Ears without hands or eyes, smelling sans all, 
Or but a sickly part of one true sense 80 

Could not so mope. 

O shame ! where is thy blush ? Rebellious hell, 
If thou canst mutine in a matron's bones, 
To flaming youth let virtue be as wax 
And melt in her own fire; proclaim no shame 85 
When the compulsive ardour gives the charge, 
Since frost itself as actively doth burn, 
And reason panders will. 
Queen. O Hamlet, speak no more ; 

Thou turn'st mine eyes into my very soul, 

71. step] Q, F; stoop Collier MS., and MS. in Ingleby's copy of Q 1637. 
71-76. .Sense . . . difference'] Q, omilled F. 78-81. Eyes . . . mope] Q, 
omitted F. 88. And] Q, As F ; pandars] F, pardons Q. 89. eyes 
. . . very] F, very eyes into my Q. 

71, 72. Sense . . . motion'] sense, 77. hoodman-blind] blind - man's 

feeling ; motion, impulse, desire, as buff. Singer quotes Baret's Alvearie : 

frequently in Shakespeare. "The Iloodwinke play, or hoodman- 

74. ecstasy] madness, as in 11. i. blind, in some places called the blind- 
102. manbuff. " 

75. quantity] portion ; used some- 81. mope] be stupid, as in Tempest, 
times by Shakespeare contemptuously V. i. 239. 

for a small portion or anything dim- 83. mutine] mutiny. Cotgrave : 
inutive, as in King John, V. iv. 23. " Mutiner, to mutine." 



142 HAMLET [act m. 

And there I see such black and grained spots 90 

As will not leave their tinct. 
Ham. Nay, but to live 

In the rank sweat of an enseamed bed, 

Stew'd in corruption, honeying and making love 

Over the nasty sty, — 
Queen. O, speak to me no more ; 

These words like daggers enter in mine ears; 95 

No more, sweet Hamlet ! 
Ham. A murderer and a villain ; 

A slave that is not twentieth part the tithe 

Of your precedent lord ; a vice of kings ; 

A cut-purse of the empire and the rule. 

That from a shelf the precious diadem stole, 1 00 

And put it in his pocket ! 
Queen. No more ! 

Ham. A king of shreds and patches — 

Enter Ghost. 

Save me, and hover o'er me with your wings. 
You heavenly guards ! — What would your gracious 
figure ? 
Queen. Alas, he's mad! 105 

90. grai7ied]Y, greened Cl. 91. not I eave'\Y, leave there Cl. 94 sty,—^ 
sty. Q, F. 95. mine'] F, my Q. 102. patches — ] Rowe, patches, Q, 

patches. F. 103. Enter Ghost.] before line 102 Q, F ; Enter the Ghost in 

his night gowne Q i. 104. yoztr'] Q, you F. 

90. grained] dyed in grain. 98. vice] the vice of the old 

92. enseamed] loaded with grease, moralities was commonly a rnvi- 

French, enseimer{no'w ensime?-). New chievous buffoon ; he wore sometimes 

English Dictionary: "The French the parti-coloured dress of a fool, 

word is now used only in sense 'to whence, Dyce supposes, "a king -of 

grease cloth,' whence perhaps the shreds and patches." 
fig. use in Shaks." See note on iii. 
iii. 89-95. 



sc.iv.] PRINCE OF DENMARK 143 

Ham. Do you not come your tardy son to chide, 
That, lapsed in time and passion, lets go by 
The important acting of your dread command ? 
Oh, say ! 

Ghost. Do not forget : this visitation 1 1 o 

Is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose. 
But look, amazement on thy mother sits ; 
Oh, step between her and her fighting soul ; 
Conceit in weakest bodies strongest works : 
Speak to her, Hamlet. 

Ham. How is it with you, lady ? i i 5 

Queen. Alas, how is 't with you, 

That you do bend your eye on vacancy 

And with the incorporal air do hold discourse? 

Forth at your eyes your spirits wildly peep ; 

And, as the sleeping soldiers in the alarm, 120 

Your bedded hair, like life in excrements. 

Starts up and stands an end. O gentle son, 

Upon the heat and flame of thy distemper 

Sprinkle cool patience. Whereon do you look ? 

Ham. On him, on him ! Look you, how pale he 
glares ! 125 

117. you do\ Q, yoti F. iiS. the iiicorpoyal] Q, ihcir corporaU F. 

1 22. Starts . . . stands'] Q 4, Start . . . stand Q, F. 

107. lapsed . . . /aj'5z"(?«] Johnson : 1 12. amazenient] bewilderment, as 
" having suffered time to slip and pas- in Measure for Measure, IV. ii. 220. 
siontocool." Rolfe :" having let time 1 14. Ci?«crfzV] imagination, as in II. 
slip by while indulging in mere pas- ii. 593. 

sion." Schmidt (guided by the use of 121. (?.xrrew<';?A] outgrowths ; used 

lapsed \n Twelfth Night, in. iii. 36) : especially of hair, nails, feathers ; used 

"surprised by you in a time and passion of the beard in Merchant of Venice. 

fit for the execution of your command." III. ii. 87. Rowe read hairs, and is 

Collier MS. has "fume" for " time." followed by several editors. 

108. m/cr/aw/] urgent, as in AlPs 122. a« <?«(/] see I. v. 19. 
Well, HI. vii. 21. 



144 HAMLET [acthi. 

His form and cause conjoin'd, preaching to stones, 
Would make them capable. — Do not look upon 

me, 
Lest with this piteous action you convert 
My stern effects ; then what I have to do 
Will want true colour ; tears perchance for 
blood. 130 

Queen. To whom do you speak this ? 

Ham. Do you see nothing there ? 

Queen. Nothing at all ; yet all that is I see. 

Ham. Nor did you nothing hear ? 

Queen. No, nothing but ourselves. 

Ham. Why, look you there ! look, how it steals away ! 
My father, in his habit as he lived ! 135 

Look, where he goes, even now, out at the portal ! 

\Exit Ghost. 

Queen. This is the very coinage of your brain ; 
This bodiless creation ecstasy 
Is very cunning in. 

Ham. Ecstasy ? 

My pulse, as yours, doth temperately keep time, 1 40 
And makes as healthful music ; it is not madness 
That I have utter'd ; bring me to the test, 
And I the matter will re-word, which madness 
Would gambol from. Mother, for love of grace, 

129. effects] Q, F; affects y Singer. 131. whomi Q, who F. 139. 

Ecstasy .^] Y, omitted Q. 

127. capable] susceptible, as in in. 135. his habit] Q i directs that the 

ii. 14. Ghost shall appear in his night-gown, 

129. effect s] z.c'ixoxi, dJixxi Ve7ius and that is, dressing-gown. 
Adonis, 605, and Lear, II. iv. 182. 138. ecstasy^ see 11. i. 102. 

Singer's proposal affects, affections of 
the mind, is perhaps right. 



sc. IV.] PRINCE OF DENMARK 145 

Lay not that flattering unction to your soul, 145 

That not your trespass but my madness speaks ; 

It will but skin and film the ulcerous place, 

Whilst rank corruption, mining all within, 

Infects unseen. Confess yourself to heaven ; 

Repent what's past, avoid what is to come; 150 

And do not spread the compost on the weeds, 

To make them ranker. Forgive me this my virtue. 

For in the fatness of these pursy times 

Virtue itself of vice must pardon beg. 

Yea, curb and woo for leave to do him good. i 5 5 

Queen. O Hamlet, thou hast cleft my heart in twain. 

Ham. O, throw away the worser part of it, 
And live the purer with the other half. 
Good night : but go not to mine uncle's bed ; 
Assume a virtue, if you have it not. 160 

That monster, custom, who all sense doth eat. 
Of habits devil, is angel yet in this. 
That to the use of actions fair and good 
He likewise gives a frock or livery. 
That aptly is put on. Refrain to-night, 165 

145. that\ Q, a F. 148. Whilst^ F, Whiles Q. 151. «?«] Q, or F, 

der Caldecott. 152. ran/cer] Q, ranke F. 153. these] Q, this F, 

155. nirb](^, courbY. 158. live] F, leatie Q. 159. mine'] F, f>iy Q. 

161-165. That . . . /M/o«]Q, omitted F. 161, 162, eat, Of habits devil,] 

Q 6, eate Of habits deuill Q. 165. on. Refrain to-night] Q 6 (with semi- 

colon after on), on to rcfraine night Q. 

152. Forgive] Staunton regards bend. Drummond of Ilawtliornden, 

these words to the close of the speech Cypress Grove: "bodies languishing 

as addressed to "my virtue," and and curbing." 

marks them "aside"; but how does 161-165.] With the pointing above, 

this agree with virtue begging pardon no emendation is required : Custom, 

of vice ? Evidently the words are who destroys all sensibility, the evil 

spoken to his mother. spirit of our habits, is yet an angel in 

155. fM;-/;] The modern spelling of this, etc. The emendation suggested 

F courb, French courber, to bow or by Thirlby to Theobald "of habits 



146 HAMLET [actiii. 

And that shall lend a kind of easiness 
To the next abstinence ; the next more easy ; 
For use almost can change the stamp of nature, 
And either master the devil, or throw him out 
With wondrous potency. Once more, good night ; 
And when you are desirous to be bless'd, i 7 i 

I '11 blessing beg of you. — For this same lord, 

{^Pointing to Polonius. 
I do repent ; but heaven hath pleased it so, 
To punish me with this, and this with me, 
That I must be their scourge and minister. 175 

I will bestow him, and will answer well 
The death I gave him. — So, again, good night. 
I must be cruel, only to be kind ; 
Thus bad begins, and worse remains behind. 
One word more, good lady. 
Queen. What shall I do ? 180 

Ham. Not this, by no means, that I bid you do : 
Let the bloat king tempt you again to bed ; 
Pinch wanton on your cheek ; call you his mouse ; 

167-170. the next more . . . poteiicyl Q, omitted I". 169. And . . . 

///e] Jennens, Steevens (1785), Dyce (ed. 2), Furness ; And eit/ier t/ie Qq 2, 
3; And Maister the Q 4. 179. Thus\ F, This Q. 180. One . . . 

lady"] Q, omitted F. 182. hloat'\ Warburton, blowt Q, bhint F. 

evil" is plausible ; but it effaces the curb." Quell, lay, shame, and other 

opposition of "angel" to "devil." verbs have been proposed. "Master" 

Staunton reads "eat, Oft habits' may be derived from the early stage, 

devil "; Grant White, " eat of habit's and has somewhat more authority 

evil"; Johnson, "eat Of habits, than any other word, 

devil." Clar. Press notes: "The 178, 179.] Delius supposes that the 

double meaning of the word ' habits ' lines are spoken aside, 

suggested the frock or livery." 1S3. moused a pet name, as in Love's 

169. And either master\ (^ omits Laboni's Lost,v .\\. \(i;'Q\yxX.ox\, A7ia- 

the verb ; Q 4 omits £?V//f rand inserts tomy of Melancholy : " pleasant names 

master. Several editors follow Q 4. may be invented, bird, mouse, lamb, 

Pope and Capell, "And master pus, pigeon, &c." 
even " (or ev'n) ; Malone, " And either 



sen] PRINCE OF DENMARK 147 

And let him, for a pair of reechy kisses, 
Or paddling in your neck with his damn'd 
fingers, i 8 5 

Make you to ravel all this matter out, 
That I essentially am not in madness. 
But mad in craft. 'Twere good you let him 

know ; 
For who that 's but a queen, fair, sober, wise. 
Would from a paddock, from a bat, a gib, 1 90 

Such dear concernings hide? who would do' so? 
No, in despite of sense and secrecy, 
Unpeg the basket on the house's top, 
Let the birds fly, and, like the famous ape, 
To try conclusions, in the basket creep, 195 

And break your own neck down. 

Queen. Be thou assured, if words be made of breath, 
And breath of life, I have no life to breathe 
What thou hast said to me. 

Ham. I must to England; you know that? 

Queen. Alack, 200 

I had forgot ; 'tis so concluded on. 

188. craft. ^Ttvere^Y, craft, 'f were (^. k^k,. cotuliisioiis,inthehasket'\Y 
3, no pointing in Q, comma only after basket F. 200. that?'\ F, that. Q. 

1 84. 7-cechy'] ^T\oi\\tr hrm o{ reeky, secrets." Perhaps the ideas of venom, 

smoky ; hence foul ; but reek is also blindness, and lust are suggested, 
used to mean emit vapour, commonly 193-196] The famous ape is now 

malodorous, and perhaps the word unknown. Warner suggests that 

may mean stinking. We have "reeky Suckling alludes to the forgotten 

shanks and yellow chapless skulls " storj' in a letter, where he speaks of 

in Ko>nco and Juliet, iv. i. 83. the jackanapes and the partridges ; 

190. paddock] toad, as in Macbeth, but Suckling's jackanapes, though he 

I. i. 9. lets out the partridges, does not break 

190. i^ih'\ tom-cat; so "gib-cat," 1 his neck, 
//tv/yj/r. I. ii. 83. Clar. Press notes : 195. try conclusions] trj' experi- 

" The toad, bat, and cat were sup- ments, as in Z«tvwt', 1160. 
posed to be familiars of witches and 200. En^and] How Hamlet had 

acquainted with their mistresses' leamt this is left untold. 



148 HAMLET [actiii. 

Ham. There 's letters seal'd ; and my two school- 
fellows, 
Whom I will trust as I will adders fang'd, 
They bear the mandate; they must sweep my 

way, 
And marshal me to knavery. Let it work ; 205 
For 'tis the sport to have the enginer 
Hoist with his own petar; and 't shall go hard 
But I will delve one yard below their mines, 
And blow them at the moon ; oh, 'tis most 

sweet 
When in one line two crafts directly meet. 210 

This man shall set me packing ; 
I '11 lug the guts into the neighbour room. 
Mother, good night. Indeed this counsellor 
Is now most still, most secret, and most grave, 
Who was in life a foolish prating knave. — 2 i 5 

Come, sir, to draw toward an end with you. — 
Good night, mother. 

\Exeunt sevei'ally ; Hamlet dragging in Polonius. 

202-210. There'' s . . . meet^ Q, omitted F. 207. aiid't'] Theobald, 

an'iQ. 212,. goodnight. Ifideed]¥, good night indeed, Q^. 21^. foolish'] 
Q I, F; most foolish Q. 217. Exeunt . . . ] Steevens ; Exit Q; Exit 
Hamlet tugging in Polonius F ; Exit Hamlet with the dead body Q i. 

206. ^;?//«(f;-] constructor of military Cotgrave : "Petart: a Petard or 
works; accent on ^«, as in (9//£f//<7, II. Petarre ; an Engine . . . wherewith 
i. 65. Compare /?'c7«cr, i. v. 163. strong gates are burst open." 

207. Hoist] Shakespeare has both 211. packing] Schmidt: departing 
the forms hoise and hoist, to either of in a hurry. Clar, Press : contriving, 
which forms of the verb this may plotting, with a play on the other 
belong. sense. " Pack" occurs in both senses 

207. petar] Clar. Press quotes in Shakespeare. 



SCI.] PRINCE OF DENMARK 149 

ACT IV 

SCENE I. — A Room i7i the Castle. 
Ejiter King, Queen, Rosencrantz, and 

GUILDENSTERN. 

King. There 's matter in these sighs ; these profound 
heaves 

You must translate ; 'tis fit we understand them. 

Where is your son ? 
Queen. Bestow this place on us a little while. 

\Exeunt Rosencrantz a^id Guildenstern. 

Ah, my good lord, what have I seen to-night ! 5 
King: What, Gertrude ? How does Hamlet ? 
Queen. Mad as the sea and wind, when both contend 

Which is the mightier : in his lawless fit. 

Behind the arras hearing something stir. 

Whips out his rapier, cries, " A rat, a rat ! " 10 

And in this brainish apprehension kills 

The unseen good old man. 
King. O heavy deed ! 

It had been so with us had we been there; 

His liberty is full of threats to all, 

To you yourself, to us, to every one. i 5 

Enter . , . Guldenstern] substantially Q, Enter King F. i. matter^ Q, 

matters F. i, 2. There^s . . . translate\ F has full stop after sighs, 

Q has comma after sighs, heaves, and translate. 4. Bestow . . . ■white'] 
Q, omitted F. Exeunt . . .] omitted Q, F. 5. my good] F, mine own Q ; 
to-night!] Hanmer ; to-night? Q, F. 7. sea] Q, seas F. 10. Whips . . . 
cries] Q, He wliips his Rapier out, and cries F. 1 1, this] Q, his F. 

II. (^ra/«?j-/^] headstrong, passion- " Braynisshc, hedy, folisshe, selfe 
ate. Palsgrave, /^ac/a/rm£/«f«/, 1 530: wylled." 



150 HAMLET [act iv. 

Alas, how shall this bloody deed be answer'd ? 

It will be laid to us, whose providence 

Should have kept short, restrain'd and out of haunt, 

This mad young man ; but so much was our love, 

We would not understand what was most fit, 20 

But, like the owner of a foul disease, 

To keep it from divulging, let it feed 

Even on the pith of life. Where is he gone ? 

Queen. To draw apart the body he hath kill'd ; 

O'er whom his very madness, like some ore 25 

Among a mineral of metals base, 

Shows itself pure ; he weeps for what is done. 

King: O Gertrude, come away ! 

The sun no sooner shall the mountains touch 

But we will ship him hence ; and this vile deed 30 

We must, with all our majesty and skill. 

Both countenance and excuse. — Ho ! Guildenstern ! 

Re-enter ROSENCRANTZ atid GUILDENSTERN. 

Friends both, go join you with some further aid ; 
Hamlet in madness hath Polonius slain. 
And from his mother's closet hath he dragg'd 
him: 35 

22. /c/] Q, lei's V. 31. must] F, fiiost Q. 

18. kepi shori\ So in Florio's ]\Ion- English-French Dictionary appended 

taigne: "When his soldiers were to Cotgrave ore is confined to gold." 

nearest unto their enemies he re- Walker proposed and Furness reads 

strained and kept them very short " "like fine ore." 

(ll. 34). 26. viineral'\ Malone : " Minsheu 

18. haimt'X resort, as in As You defines 'mineral' to be 'anything 

Like It, II. i. 15. that grows in mines and contains 

25. ore'\ Schmidt gives no meaning metals.'" It is used in Hall's .S'ai!'i'?'t'j', 

for ore in Shakespeare except " a b. vi. for mine, 
vein of gold." Clar. Press : "in the 



sen] PRINCE OF DENMARK 151 

Go seek him out ; speak fair, and bring the body 
Into the chapel. I pray you, haste in this. — 

\Exeunt Rosencrants and Guildenstern. 
Come, Gertrude, we '11 call up our wisest friends 
And let them know both what we mean to do, 
And what 's untimely done : [so, haply, slander,] 40 
Whose whisper o'er the world's diameter, 
As level as the cannon to his blank 
Transports his poison'd shot, may miss our name 
And hit the woundless air. O, come away ! 
My soul is full of discord and dismay. 45 

\_Exeunt. 

SCENE II. — Another Room in the Castle. 

Enter HAMLET. 

Ham. Safely stowed. 

Ros.^ Gull. [ Within.'] Hamlet ! Lord Hamlet ! 
Ham. But soft, what noise? who calls on Hamlet? 
O, here they come. 

Etiter RosENCRANTz a)id Guildenstern. 

Ros. What have you done, my lord, with the dead 5 
body? 

39. And let] Q, To let V. 40-44.] see note below. 

Scene II. 

Enter Hamlet] F ; luiter Hamlet, Rosencraus, and others (^. 2. Ros., 

Guil. [Within.] IJaiiiletl Lord Hamlet!'] substantially F, omitted Q. 3. But 
^oftA Q. omitted F. 4. Enter . . .] F, omitted Q. 

40. so haply 5lander]Y o\x\\\^^\h&- above, and is followed by many 
Iween done and (3, line 44 ; Q reads : editors. Malone 1790: "So viper- 

" And whats vntimely doone, ous slander." Staunton suggested 

Whose whisper." " thus calumny." 

Theobald suggested " Happily, slan- 42. blank] the white spot in the 

der," or rmnour, and read "For, centre of a target; mark. Compare 

haply, slander." Capell read as Othello^ in. iv. 128. 



152 HAMLET [act iv. 

Hatn. Compounded it with dust, whereto 'tis kin, 

Ros. Tell us where 'tis, that we may take it thence 
and bear it to the chapel. 

Ham. Do not believe it, lo 

Ros. Believe what? 

Ham. That I can keep your counsel and not mine 
own. Besides, to be demanded of a sponge, 
what replication should be made by the son 
of a king? i 5 

Ros. Take you me for a sponge, my lord ? 

Ham. Ay, sir ; that soaks up the king's countenance, 
his rewards, his authorities. But such officers 
do the king best service in the end ; he keeps 
them, like an ape, in the corner of his jaw; 20 
first mouthed, to be last swallowed ; when he 
needs what you have gleaned, it is but squeez- 
ing you, and, sponge, you shall be dry 
again, 

Ros. I understand you not, my lord. 25 

Ham. I am glad of it ; a knavish speech sleeps in 
a foolish ear, 

7. Coinpo7inded\ F, Compound Q, 13, sponge^'\ Q, F; sptinge! — 

Steevens ; spmtge ! Caldecott, 20. like ait ape] F, like an apple Q, as 

an Ape doth nuttes Q i, like an ape, an apple Farmer conject, 

7, Compounded] The Q cotiipoiind i. ii. (opening) " Counsaile ; as Polo- 
may be right, as an imperative. So nius." 
2 Henry IV. iv, v, 116, 13. sponge] The same image was 

12, keep yottr counsel] Hamlet used, in nearly the same way, by 

knows of the commission to England, Vespasian, as recorded by Suetonius. 

Or perhaps the reference is to his Caldecott quotes from R. C's Henr. 

not betraying their confession that Steph. Apology for Herodotus, 1608, 

they had been sent for by the King, and Barnabe Riche, Faultes, faults, 

See II. ii, 305. Possibly there is a 1606, in illustration of the image, 

play on the word counsel meaning Steevens quotes Marston, Satires, vii. 

councillor, as elsewhere in Shake- 17. countenance] ■^2iK.xo'CiZ.<ge.,iz.\o\xx, 

speare. See stage direction in Q i, as in 2 Henry IV, iv, ii. 13. 



sc. Ill] PRINCE OF DENMARK 153 

Ros. My lord, you must tell us where the body is, 

and go with us to the king. 
Ham. The body is with the king, but the king is 30 

not with the body. The king is a thing — 
Guil. " A thing," my lord ? 
Ham. Of nothing: bring me to him. Hide fox, 

and all after. [Exeunt. 

SCENE III. — Another Room in the Castle. 

Enter King, attended. 

King. I have sent to seek him, and to find the body. 
How dangerous is it that this man goes loose ! 
Yet must not we put the strong law on him : 
He 's loved of the distracted multitude. 
Who like not in their judgment, but their eyes ; 5 
And where 'tis so, the offender's scourge is weigh'd, 
But never the offence. To bear all smooth and even, 
This sudden sending him away must seem 

31. a thing— \ F, a thing. Q. 33, 34. Hide . . . after'] F, omitted Q. 

Scene ill. 
7. never\ Q, neerer F. 

30, 31. The body . . . thing—] express a part of his mind ; " the 
Clar. Press: "Hamlet is talking Iving— as you mean King — is for me 
nonsense designedly." He wishes to a negligable quantity, a thing of 
baffle the courtiers, and have a private nothing." In v. i. 292. Hamlet 
meaning, as often before. lie has speaks of his father as my "king." 
just called himself "the son of a ^j, ^^. Hide fox, and a// after] llan- 
king"; he has seen his father in his mer says that there is a play among 
own castle. To the courtiers his children so named. Dekker, Satiro- 
words are nonsense ; for himself they iiiastix has: "does play at bo-peep 
mean " the body lies in death with with your grace, and cries — All hid, 
the King my father, but my father as boys do." Whether the reference 
walks disembodied." He might have is to a children's game or to a fox- 
added something, but he is interrupted, hunt, the meaning seems to be : "The 
and adopting Rosencrantz's meaning old fox, Polonius, is hidden ; come, 
of "King," completes his sentence let us all follow the sport and hunt 
otherwise than intended, yet so as to him out." 



154 HAMLET [act iv. 

Deliberate pause; diseases desperate grown 

By desperate appliance are relieved, lo 

Or not at all. — 

Enter ROSENCRANTZ. 

How now ! what hath befall'n ? 
Ros. Where the dead body is bestow'd, my lord, 

We cannot get from him. 
King. But where is he ? 

Ros. Without, my lord ; guarded, to know your 

pleasure. 
King. Bring him before us. i 5 

Ros. Ho, Guildenstern ! bring in my lord. 

E7tter Hamlet and Guildenstern. 

King. Now, Hamlet, where 's Polonius ? 

Ham. At supper. 

King. At supper ? where ? 

Hani. Not where he eats, but where he is eaten ; a 20 
certain convocation of politic worms are e'en 
at him. Your worm is your only emperor for 
diet ; we fat all creatures else to fat us, and 
we fat ourselves for maggots : your fat king 
and your lean beggar is but variable service, 25 
two dishes, but to one table ; that 's the 
end. 

II. Enter Rosencrantz] F, Enter Rosencraus and all the rest Q. i6. Ho, 
Guildenstei~it\ F, How, Q; tny lord] F, the lord Q. 21. politic] Q, 

omitted F. 24. ourselves] Q, our sel/e] F. 

21. politic worms] such worms as Diet of Worms. W. Hall Griffin 
might breed in a politician's corpse, adds, "the mention of 'emperor' 
Singer suggests an allusion to the makes it very probable." 



sc. III.] PRINCE OF DENMARK 155 

King. Alas, alas ! 

Ham. A man may fish with the worm that hath 

eat of a king, and eat of the fish that hath 30 
fed of that worm. 

King. What dost thou mean by this ? 

Ham. Nothing but to show you how a king may 
go a progress through the guts of a beggar. 

King. Where is Polonius ? 35 

Ham. In heaven ; send thither to see ; if your 
messenger find him not there, seek him i' the 
other place yourself But indeed, if you find 
him not within this month, you shall nose 
him as you go up the stairs into the lobby. 40 

King. [To some Attendants.'] Go seek him there. 

Ham. He will stay till you come. 

[Exeunt Attendants. 

King. Hamlet, this deed, for thine especial safety. 
Which we do tender, as we dearly grieve 
Forthat which thouhastdone,mustsendtheehence 45 
With fiery quickness ; therefore prepare thyself; 
The bark is ready, and the wind at help, 
The associates tend, and every thing is bent 
For England. 

Ham. For England ? 

King. Ay, Hamlet. 

Ham. Good. 

2S-31. King. Alas . . . ivorm] Q, omitted F. 38. indeed, if] F, 7/ 

indeed <^. 39. withiit] Q, omitted F. 41,42. stage directions inserted 
by Capell. 42. yoic] Q, ye F. 43. deed, for thine\ Q, deed of thine, for 
thine F. 46. With fiery ijuickness\ F, omitted Q. 48. is bent] Q, 

at bent F. 49. Englmid {] F, England. Q. 

34. progress] a royal journey of slate, as in 2 Henry VI. i. iv. 76. 



156 HAMLET [act iv. 

King. So is it, if thou knew'st our purposes. 50 

Ham. I see a cherub that sees them. — But, come ; 
for England ! — Farewell, dear mother. 

King. Thy loving father, Hamlet. 

Ham. My mother : father and mother is man and 

wife ; man and wife is one flesh, and so, my 5 5 
mother. — Come, for England ! \Exit. 

King. Follow him at foot ; tempt him with speed aboard ; 
Delay it not, I '11 have him hence to-night ; 
Away ! for every thing is seal'd and done 
That else leans on the affair : pray you, make 
haste. — 60 

\Exeunt Rosencrantz and Guildeiistern. 
And, England, if my love thou hold'st at aught, — 
As my great power thereof may give thee sense, 
Since yet thy cicatrice looks raw and red 
After the Danish sword, and thy free awe 
Pays homage to us, — thou may'st not coldly set 65 
Our sovereign process ; which imports at full. 
By letters conjuring to that effect. 
The present death of Hamlet. Do it, England ; 
For like the hectic in my blood he rages, 

51. thetnl Q, him F. 55. and sd\ F, Q i ; j-o Q. 60. Exeunt . . .] 
Theobald ; omitted Q, F. 67. co7ijttring\ F, congruing Q. 

51. a chcrub\ The cherubim are 66. process] procedure, 
angels of knowledge, and so they see 67. conjitring\ This word, rather 

the King's purposes. than Qi-^«j^r2/z«^,corresponds with the 

57- a^ /^i?/'] close, at heel. "earnest conjuration" of the do- 

65. set] Pope (ed. 2) read let, i.e. cument, described by Hamlet in v. 

hinder; Hanmer set by. "Coldly ii. 38. The accent on the first 

set " is explained by Schmidt " regard syllable is found in Measure fo)- 

with indifference." "Set me light," Measure, v. i. 48. 
esteem me lightly, occurs in Sonnets, 69. hectic] Cotgrave has ' ' Ectique 

Ixxxviii., and " sets it light" in A7;?^ ... a fever called Hecticke," and 

Richard II. i. iii. 293. "sick of an Heckticke fever." 



sc. IV.] PRINCE OF DENMARK 157 

And thou must cure me. Till I know 'tis done, 70 
Howe'er my haps, my joys were ne'er begun. \^Exit. 

SCENE IV. — A Plain in Doiinark. 
Enter FoRTINBRAS, a Captain and Soldiers, marching. 

For. Go, captain, from me greet the Danish king ; 
Tell him that, by his license, Fortinbras 
Claims the conveyance of a promised march 
Over his kingdom. You know the rendezvous. 
If that his majesty would aught with us, 5 

We shall express our duty in his eye ; 
And let him know so. 

Cap. I will do 't, my lord. 

For. Go softly on. 

\Exeunt Fortinbras and Soldiers. 

Enter Hamlet, Rosencrantz, Guildenstern, and 
otJiers. 

Hani. Good sir, whose powers are these? 

Cap. They are of Norway, sir. I o 

"Ji. joys . . . begunlY, Joys will nere begin Q^. 

Scene iv. 
A Plain . . .] Capcll ; A Camp Rowe. Enter . . .] Globe ed. Enter 
Fortinbrasse with his Army over the stage Q. Enter Fortinbras with an 
Armie F. 3. Claims^ F, Craves Q. 6. eye ;] Collier ; eye, Q, F. 8. 
softly'] Q, safely F. Exeunt . . .] omitted Q, Exit F. Enter . . .] Dyce ; 
Enter Hamlet, Rosencraus, etc. Q, omitted F. 9-66. Good sir, . . . worth] 
Q, omitted F. 

71, haps] Johnson suggested and patra, il. ii. 212. Collier's semicolon 

Collier's MS. has " hopes." after eye is meant to make it clear 

_ that the words which follow are a 

^^"^^ '^' direction to the Captain. 

6. in kis eye] in his presence ; 8. softly] leisurely, slowly, as in 

Sleevens compares Antony and Cleo- Julius Cccsar, v. i. 16. 



158 HAMLET [activ. 

Ham. How purposed, sir, I pray you ? 

Cap. Against some part of Poland. 

Ham. Who commands them, sir? 

Cap. The nephew to old Norway, Fortinbras. 

Ham. Goes it against the main of Poland, sir, i 5 

Or for some frontier? 

Cap. Truly to speak, and with no addition, 
We go to gain a little patch of ground 
That hath in it no profit but the name. 
To pay five ducats, five, I would not farm it ; 20 
Nor will it yield to Norway or the Pole 
A ranker rate, should it be sold in fee. 

Ham. Why, then the Polack never will defend it. 

Cap. Yes, 'tis already garrison'd. 

Ham. Two thousand souls and twenty thousand ducats 25 
Will not debate the question of this straw ; 
This is the imposthume of much wealth and peace. 
That inward breaks, and shows no cause without 
Why the man dies. — I humbly thank you, sir. 

Cap. God be wi' you, sir. [Exit. 

Ros. Will 't please you go, my lord? 30 

Ham. I '11 be with you straight. Go a little before. 

\Exeiint all except Hamlet. 
How all occasions do inform against me, 

1 7. speak'] Q, speak it Pope, speak, sir Capell. 24. V/j] Pope, ii is Q. 

30. Exit] omitted Q. 31. Exeunt . . .] omitted Q. 

15. mai/:] Cls.r. Press: "the chief 25, 26.] It has been suggested 

power"'; Schmidt: "the whole." (Ge/iL Magazine, \x. 403) that these 

20. Jive . . . ii] Theobald sug- lines belong to the Captain, 
gested "five ducats fine," but did not 27. imposthume] Mmsheu defines 

adopt it in his edition ; farm it, " rent the word " a course of evill humours 

it," contrasted with sold in fee, line gathered to some part of the bodie " ; 

22, i.e. in absolute possession. Cotgrave : "an inward swelling full 

22. ra;/>^er] more abundant. of corrupt matter." 



sc. iv] PRINCE OF DENMARK 159 

And spur my dull revenge ! What is a man, 
If his chief good and market of his time 
Be but to sleep and feed ? a beast, no more. 3 5 

Sure he that made us with such large discourse, 
Looking before and after, gave us not 
That capability and god-like reason 
To fust in us unused. Now, whether it be 
Bestial oblivion, or some craven scruple 40 

Of thinking too precisely on the event, — 
A thought which, quarter'd, hath but one part wisdom 
And ever three parts coward, — I do not know 
Why yet I live to say " This thing 's to do," 
Sith I have cause, and will, and strength, and 
means, 45 

To do 't. Examples, gross as earth, exhort me ; 
Witness this army, of such mass and charge. 
Led by a delicate and tender prince. 
Whose spirit with divine ambition puff'd 
Makes mouths at the invisible event; 50 

Exposing what is mortal and unsure 
To all that fortune, death and danger dare, 
Even for an egg-shell. Rightly to be great 
Is not to stir without great argument, 

39. fust^ Q, riist Rowe. 

34. viar/cei'] that whicli he pur- of " mows," grimaces, found in Mid- 

chases with his time. summer Night's Dream, \\\. ii. 238; 

36. discourse] power of thought see 11. ii. 386. 

and reasoning ; see I. ii. 150. 53-56.] To stir without great 

39. fust] grow mouldy ; Cotgrave argument (matter in dispute) is not 

explains fustt', " fustie, tasting of the rightly to be great, but to find quarrel 

cask." Fr. fuste, a cask. in a straw when honour 's at the stake 

41. evenf] issue, consequences, as is an attribute of true greatness. The 

line 50. " not," as Furness argues, belongs to 

47. charge] cost. the copula, not to the predicate. 

50. mouths] a common corruption 



160 HAMLET [activ. 

But greatly to find quarrel in a straw 5 5 

When honour's at the stake. How stand I then, 

That have a father kill'd, a mother stain'd, 

Excitements of my reason and my blood, 

And let all sleep, while, to my shame, I see 

The imminent death of twenty thousand men, 60 

That, for a fantasy and trick of fame, 

Go to their graves like beds, fight for a plot 

Whereon the numbers cannot try the cause. 

Which is not tomb enough and continent 

To hide the slain? Oh, from this time forth, 65 

My thoughts be bloody, or be nothing worth ! 

\Exit. 

SCENE V. — Ehinore. A Room in the Castle. 
Enter Queen, HoRATiO, and a Gentleman, 

Queen. I will not speak with her. 

Gent. She is importunate, indeed distract ; 

Her mood will needs be pitied. 
Queen. What would she have ? 

Gent. She speaks much of her father ; says she hears 

There 's tricks i' the world ; and hems, and beats 

her heart ; 5 

Scejie V. 
Enter . . •] Pope; Enter Horatio, Gertrard, and a Gentleman Q; Enter 
Queene and Horatio F. 2, 4. Gent.] Q, Hor. F. 

61. trick of fame] toy or trifle of Scene V. 

fame ; Taming of the Slirew, IV. iii. 1-16. The only variation here from 

67: "a knack, a toy, a trick, a the distribution of speeches in Q is 

baby's cap." Perhaps "fantasy" the assigmnent of the words "Let 

also should be connected with "of her come in" (line 16) to the Queen 

fame." instead of to Horatio. Collier suggests 

64. f(?«//«5«/] receptacle, that which that the omission in F of the Gentle- 
contains, as in Midsummer Nighfs man was to avoid the employment of 
Dream, II. i. 92. another actor. 



sc. v.] PRINCE OF DENMARK 161 

Spurns enviously at straws ; speaks things in doubt, 
That carry but half sense : her speech is nothing, 
Yet the unshaped use of it doth move 
The hearers to collection ; they aim at it, 
And botch the words up fit to their own 
thoughts; lo 

Which, as her winks and nods and gestures yield 

them, 
Indeed would make one think there might be 

thought. 
Though nothing sure, yet much unhappily. 

Hor. 'Twere good she were spoken with, for she may strew 
Dangerous conjectures in ill-breeding minds. i 5 

Queen. Let her come in. {Exit Gentleman. 

[Aside.] To my sick soul, as sin's true nature is. 

Each toy seems prologue to some great amiss ; 

So full of artless jealousy is guilt, 

It spills itself in fearing to be spilt. 20 

Re-enter Gentleman, with Ophelia. 
Oph. Where is the beauteous majesty of Denmark ? 

9. aiTTilY {ayme), yawne <^. 12. tnight] Q^, would ¥ . 14-16.] given 
to Horatio Q, given to Queen F. Arranged here as conjectured by Black- 
stone ; lines 14, 15 are continued to Gentleman by Hanmer and several 
editors. 16. Exit Gentleman] Hanmer and several editors; Exit Hor. 

Johnson and others; omitted Q, E. 17. Aside] Capell ; omitted Q, F. 

21. Re-enter. . .]Cambridge; Enter Ophelia Q (after line 16); Enter Ophelia, 
distracted F. 

6. Spurns enviously] kicks spite- 19. jealousy] suspicion, as in 11. i. 

fully. Compare Antony and Cleo- 113. 

patra, ill. v. 17, where Antony 21. Oph.] The stage direction of 

" spurns the rush that lies before him." Q i is : "Enter Ofelia playing on a 

9. collection] inference, but here Lute, and her haire downe singing." 

with the idea of a preliminary gather- For the traditional music of Ophelia's 

ing together of Ophelia's distracted songs, see Furness, Hamlet, or E. 

thoughts. Compare Cymbeline, v. v. W. Naylor, Shakespeare and Music, 

432. 1896. 

II 



162 HAMLET [activ. 

Queen. How now, Ophelia ? 
Oph. [Sings.] Hoiv should I your true love know 
From another one ? 
By his cockle hat and staff 2 5 

And his sandal shoon. 
Queen. Alas, sweet lady, what imports this song ? 
Oph. Say you ? nay, pray you, mark. 

[Sings.] He is dead and gone, lady, 

He is dead and gone ; 30 

At his head a grass-green ttirf, 
At his heels a stone. 
O, ho! 
Queen. Nay, but, Ophelia, — 

Oph. Pray you, mark. 

[Sings.] White his shroud as the mountain snow, — 

Enter King. 

Queen. Alas, look here, my lord. 35 

Oph. [Sings.] Larded with siveet flowers ; 

Which beivept to the grave did not go 
With true-love shoxvers. 
King. How do you, pretty lady ? 

23. Sings'\ shee sings Q, omitted F. 2S. Say you .«'] F, Say you, Q. 

29. Sings\ Song Q, omitted F. 33. O, ho /] Q, omitted F, Oh, oh ! Cam- 
bridge. 34. Sings^ omitted Q, F. Enter King] Q ; after stone, line 32, F. 

36. Singsl Song Q, opposite line 37 ; Larded] Q i, F ; Larded all Q. 

37. grave] Q i, F; ground Q ; did not] Q, F, Q i ; did Pope and many 
editors. 39. you] Q, ye F. 

25. cockle hat] a hat with a scallop- 37. did not go] It seems rash — 

shell stuck in it, the sign of a pilgrim Q !> Q, and F agreeing — to adopt 

having been at the shrine of St. James Pope's emendation "did go," lest 

of Compostella. For the disguise of a Shakespeare may have meant a dis- 

lover as pilgrim compare Romeo and tracted allusion to the " obscure 

Juliet, I. V. burial" (line 212) of Polonius. ' 

36. Larded] garnished, as in v. 
ii. 20. 



sc.v.] PRINCE OF DENMARK 163 

Oph. Well, God 'ild you ! They say the owl was a 40 
baker's daughter. Lord, we know what we 
are, but know not what we may be. God be 
at your table ! 
King, Conceit upon her father. 

Oph. Pray you, let 's have no words of this ; but when 4 5 
they ask you what it means, say you this : 
[Sings.] To-morrozv is Saint Valentine's day. 
All in the morning betifne, 
And I a maid at your wifidow, 

To be your Valetitine. 50 

Theyi up he rose, and donned his clothes, 

A nd dupp'd the chamber door ; 
Let in the maid, that out a maid 
Never departed more. 
King. Pretty Ophelia! 55 

Oph. Indeed, la, without an oath, I '11 make an end on 't: 

40, God ^ild'\ Capell, good dild Q, God diVd F. 44] marked Aside 

Furness. 45. Pray you'] F, Pray Q, 47. Sitrgs'] SottgQ, omitted F. 

56. Indeed, la,] Johnson, Indeede Q, Indeed la ? F. 

40. ^tld] yield, reward, as in As To a brown baker's chimney ! he 

You Lite It, III. iii. 76. shall be sure there 

40. owl] Douce records a story To hear the bird sometimes after 

"among the vulgar in Gloucester- twilight." 

shire": Jesus asked for bread at a The idea of Ophelia's own trans- 
baker's shop ; the mistress put dough formation, suggested by that of the 
in the oven, was reprimanded by baker's daughter, is touched on in the 
her daughter, who reduced its size ; words " Lord, etc." 
the dough miraculously grew huge ; 44. Cottceii] imagination, as fre- 
the daughter cried out " Heugh, quently. 

heugh, heugh," like an owl, where- 50. \'alentine] Halliwell : "This 

upon Jesus transformed her to an song alludes to the custom of the first 

owl. In Fletcher, The Nice Valour, girl seen by a man on the morning of 

m. iii. we find : this day being considered his Valen- 

" Give me a nest of owls, tine, or true-love." 

and take 'em : 52. dupp'd] dup, do up, open. 

Happy is he, say I, whose window Edwards, Damon and Pitheas, 1564 : 

opens " Will they not dup the gate to- 
day ? " 



164 HAMLET [activ. 

[Sings,] By Gis atid by Saint Charity ^ 
Alack, and fie for shame ! 
Young men ivilL do V, if they come to 7 ; 

By Cock, they are to blame. 60 

Quoth she, before you tumbled me. 
You protnised me to wed : 
He answers : 

So would I ha' done, by yonder sun. 

An thou hadst not come to my bed. 65 

King. How long hath she been thus ? 
Oj)h. I hope all will be well. We must be patient ; 
but I cannot choose but weep, to think they 
should lay him i' the cold ground. My 
brother shall know of it : and so I thank you 70 
for your good counsel. — Come, my coach ! — 
Good night, ladies ; good night, sweet ladies ; 
good night, good night. [Exit. 

King. Follow her close ; give her good watch, I pray 
you. — [Exit Horatio. 

Oh, this is the poison of deep grief; it springs 75 
All from her father's death. O Gertrude, Gertrude, 
When sorrows come, they come not single spies, 
But in battalions ! First, her father slain ; 

57. .SVz/c'j] omitted Q, F. d},. He answers\{He answers) Ql,orn\\X&^Y. 
65. An] Hanmer ; And Q, F. 66. ihus'l Q, this F. 69. shotdd] F, 
would Q^. 72,73. C^^rf ... w/^i;'"/^/] F substantially ; God night. Ladies, god 
flight. Sweet Ladyes god night, god night. (^. 74. Exit Hor.] Theobald ; 

omitted Q,F. "jb. death. 0]¥, death, and now behold, SQ. ']']. sorrows 
come] Q, sorrowes comes F. 78. battalions'] Q, Battaliaes F. 

57. Gis] an abbreviation or pious Charitie," in Spenser, Shepherd's Cal- 

disguise of "Jesus"; spelt also yzj- endar. May: " the Catholiques cpmen 

2LT\d. jysse ; for examples see Nares' olhe." 

Glossary. 60. Cock] a perversion of " God." 

57. Saint Charity] the grace per- In the Canterbury Tales, Manciple's 

sonified. E. K. glosses "Saint Prologue, we have " Cockes bones." 



sc. v.] PRINCE OF DENMARK 165 

Next, your son gone ; and he most violent author 
Of his own just remove: the people muddied, 80 
Thick and unwholesome in their thoughts and 

whispers, 
For good Polonius' death ; and we have done but 

greenly, 
In hugger-mugger to inter him ; poor Ophelia 
Divided from herself and her fair judgment, 
Without the which we are pictures, or mere beas'ts ; 
Last, and as much containing as all these, 86 

Her brother is in secret come from France, 
Feeds on his wonder, keeps himself in clouds. 
And wants not buzzers to infect his ear 
With pestilent speeches of his father's death ; 90 
Wherein necessity, of matter beggar'd. 
Will nothing stick our person to arraign 
In ear and ear, O my dear Gertrude, this, 
Like to a murdering-piece, in many places 
Gives me superfluous death. [A noise within. 

Queen. Alack, what noise is this? 95 

King. Where are my Switzers ? Let them guard the 
door. — 

81. their^ F, omitted Q. 88. Feeds on his wonder] Johnson, Feeds on 
Ihis wonder Q, Kecpes on his wonder F. 92. person] Q, persons F. 
95. Alack . , . ihis] F, omitted Q. 96. fVhere are] V, Attend, 

where is Q. 

83. in hugger - mugger] secretly. Beaumont and Fletclier, The Double 

Steevens quotes North's Phttarch Marriage, I v. ii. : "Afother's curses 

(Brutus): "Antonius thinking good . . . like a murdering-piece aim not 

. . . that his bodie should be honour- at one, But all that stand within the 

ably buried, and not in hugger- dangerous level." 

mugger." 96. Szvitzers] Malone quotes Nash, 

94. murdering-piece] a cannon Christ's Tears over Jerusalem, 1594: 

loaded with case-shot (small projectiles " Law, logicke, and the Switzers may 

put up in cases). Steevens quotes be hired to fight for any body. " 



166 HAMLET [act iv. 

Enter another Gentleman. 

What is the matter? 

Gent. Save yourself, my lord ; 

The ocean, overpeering of his list. 
Eats not the flats with more impetuous haste 
Than young Laertes, in a riotous head, lOO 

O'erbears your officers. The rabble call him lord; 
And, as the world were now but to begin. 
Antiquity forgot, custom not known. 
The ratifiers and props of every word, 
They cry " Choose we ; Laertes shall be king ! " 105 
Caps, hands, and tongues applaud it to the clouds, 
" Laertes shall be king, Laertes king ! " 

Queen. How cheerfully on the false trail they cry ! 
Oh, this is counter, you false Danish dogs ! 

King. The doors are broke. \^Noise within, iio 

Enter Laertes, armed ; Danes following. 
Laer. Where is this king? — Sirs, stand you all without. 

Enter . . . ] Staunton, Enter a Messenger Q, F after death, line 95. 
99. impetuous] impitious Q, unpittious F. 1 05. They] F, The Q. 

IIO. Noise within] F (after line 109), A noise within Q (opposite line 108). 
Enter Laertes . . . ] Enter Laertes with others Q (after line 109), Enter 
Laertes F (after line 109). in. this king? Sirs] Q, the King, sirs? F. 

98. list] boundary, as in Othello, i\. props of every word (perhaps in the 

i. 76- sense of title) ; or — less probably — the 

100. head] a force raised, or body of rabble, ready to make good and to 

people gathered, especially in insur- support every word they utter, cry, etc. 

rection ; as in / Henry IV. Hi. ii. 109. r^ww/^r] Clar. Press quotes the 

167. Pepys, Diary. 8 Jan. 1661 : definition of "counter" in Holme's 

"Some talk to-day of a head of Academy of Armory, U. \x.: "When 

Fanatiques, that do appear about a hound hunteth backwards, the 

Barnett." same way that the chase is come." 

104. word] Ward, weal, and work "The huntsmen," writes Turbervile 

have been proposed instead of "word"; (Venerie), ". . . must take heede that 

no emendation is required ; antiquity their houndes take not the counter by 

and custom are the true ratifiers and cause the harte is fledde backwards." 



sc. v.] PRINCE OF DENMARK 167 

Danes. No, let 's come in. 

Laer. I pray you, give me leave. 

Danes. We will, we will. 

[ They I'etire without the door. 

Laer. I thank you : keep the door. — O thou vile king, 
Give me my father ! 

Queen. Calmly, good Laertes. i 1 5 

Laer. That drop of blood that 's calm proclaims me 
bastard, 
Cries cuckold to my father, brands the harlot 
Even here, between the chaste unsmirched brows 
Of my true mother. 

King. What is the cause, Laertes, 

That thy rebellion looks so giant-like? — 120 

Let him go, Gertrude ; do not fear our person ; 
There 's such divinity doth hedge a king. 
That treason can but peep to what it would, 
Acts little of his will. — Tell me, Laertes, 
Why thou art thus incensed. — Let him go, 
Gertrude. — i 2 5 

Speak, man. 

Laer. Where 's my father ? 

King. Dead. 

Queen. But not by him. 

King. Let him demand his fill. 

Laer. How came he dead ? I '11 not be juggled with. 

113. They retire . . . ] Capell ; omitted Q, Y. 1 16. that V cahii\ Q, that 
calmes F. Ii8. brotvs] Grant White; biow Q, F. 127. Where's] F, 

Where is Q. 

118. brows'] Grant White (followed 121. fear] fear for. 
by Cambridge and Furness), as re- 
quired by between. 



168 HAMLET [activ. 

To hell, allegiance ! vows, to the blackest devil ! 130 

Conscience and grace, to the profoundest pit ! 

I dare damnation. To this point I stand, 

That both the worlds I give to negligence, 

Let come what comes ; only I '11 be revenged 

Most throughly for my father. 
King: Who shall stay you ? 135 

Laer. My will, not all the world ; 

And for my means, I '11 husband them so well, 

They shall go far with little. 
King. Good Laertes. 

If you desire to know the certainty 

Of your dear father's death, is 't WTit in your 
revenge, 1 40 

That, swoopstake, you will draw both friend and foe, 

Winner and loser? 
Laer. None but his enemies. 

King. Will you know them then ? 

Laer. To his good friends thus wide I '11 ope my arms ; 

And, like the kind life-rendering pelican, 145 

Repast them with my blood. 
King. Why, now you speak 

Like a good child and a true gentleman. 

131. ////] pit Q, pif. F. 136. -ivorld] F, worlds Q, rvorlcTs Pope, 

140. fathoms death] F, father Q ; /> '/] Q, ;/ F. 142. loser .''] Q 6 ; looser. 
Q, F. 145. pelican] Q, politician F. 

141. swoopstake] Q, F print soop- 145. pelican] Sir Thomas Browne 

stake ; Q l has — in Vulgar Errors, v. chap. i. dis- 

" Therefore will you like a most cusses "the picture of the Pelican 

desperate gamster, opening her breast with her bill, and 

Swoop-stake-like, draw at friend, feeding her young ones with the blood 

and foe, and all?" distilled from her." Allusions occur 

Sweepstakes is a game of cards in in Richard II. n. i. 126, and lear, 

which a player may win all the stakes in. iv, 77. 

or take all the tricks. 



sc.v] PRINCE OF DENMARK 169 

That I am guiltless of your father's death, 

And am most sensibly in grief for it, 

It shall as level to your judgment pierce i 50 

As day does to your eye. 
Banes. [ Within?^ Let her come in. 

Laer. How now ! what noise is that ? — 

Re-enter OPHELIA. 
O heat, dry up my brains ! tears seven times 

salt, 
Burn out the sense and virtue of mine eye ! — 
By heaven, thy madness shall be paid by weight, i 5 5 
Till our scale turn the beam. O rose of May ! 
Dear maid, kind sister, sweet Ophelia ! — 
O heavens ! is 't possible a young maid's wits 
Should be as mortal as an old man's life ? 
Nature is fine in love, and where 'tis fine i 60 

It sends some precious instance of itself 
After the thing it loves. 
Oph. [Sings.] They bore him barefaced on the bier ; 
Hey non nonny, nonny, hey nonny ; 
A nd in his grave rabid many a tear ; — 1 6 5 
Fare you well, my dove ! 

149. seiisi/?/f] Q, satsibli- F. 150. pir.rcel Y , pcaix Q, '/C(z;- Johnson. 

151. Danes . . . ?«] Capell ; Q has stage direction A noyse within, opposite 
eye, and gives Let her come in to Laertes; F has "A noise within. Let her 
come in," as if a stage direction, after eye. 155. hy\ F, with Q. 

156. Till\ F, Tell Q; tuni\ Q, iurnes F. 159. an old] F, a poore Q. 
160-162. Nature . . . Iot'Cs] V, omitted Q. 163. Siti^] Song Q, omitted F. 
164] F, omitted Q. 165. in] Q, on F ; rain'd] Q, raines F. 166. Fare 

. . . dove] Capell ; in italics (as if last line of song) F ; using Roman for 
the whole speech, Q leaves it doubtful. 

160-162] Nature is delicate (or Ophelia's sanity after Polonius as a 
accomplished) in love, and sends precious token (or sample) of itself. 



170 



HAMLET 



[act IV. 



Laey. Hadst thou thy wits, and didst persuade revenge, 
It could not move thus. 

Oph. You must sing, Down a-down, and you call 

him a-down-a. Oh, how the wheel becomes it ! 170 
It is the false steward that stole his master's 
daughter. 

Laer. This nothing 's more than matter. 

Oph. There 's rosemary, that 's for remembrance ; 

pray you, love, remember ; and there is pansies, 1 7 5 
that 's for thoughts. 

Laer. A document in madness : thoughts and re- 
membrance fitted. 

169, 170.] see note below; Q for Down a-down has a downe a downe. 
175- pray yoiiX Q, Pray F. 



169, 170. You . . . a-down-a] Q, F 
print the whole speech in Roman 
type. Johnson used italics for You . . . 
a-down-a ; (Capell had printed Down 
with a capital). Staunton, Globe, 
Cambridge print the same words as 
verse. The above follows Steevens. 
It has been suggested that You and 
And you should be in Roman, 
as instructions to two supposed 
singers. 

170. ivheel^ Guest, English 
Rhythms, bk. IV. chap, iv., uses 
wheel for a kind of refrain, the return 
of some peculiar rhythm at the end of 
each stanza. Steevens quoted from 
memory an example of this use of the 
word from a book of which he had 
forgotten the title and date. No 
early example appears to have been 
found. Cotgrave explains French 
refrain as "the Refret, burthen, or 
downe of a ballade." Y 2 has 
" wheeles become." Perhaps Malone 
was right in thinking that the refer- 
ence is to a song sung at the spinning- 
wheel ; he refers aptly to Twelfth 
Night, 11. iv. 45, and quotes a men- 



tion of ballads "sung to the 
wheel," from Hall, Virgidemiarum, 
IV. vi. 

174. rostmaiy'\ Used as a symbol 
of remembrance, both at weddings 
and funerals. Compare Romeo and 
Juliet, IV. V, 79, and Winters Tale, 

IV. iv, 74-76. See EUacombe's 
Plant Lore of Shakespeare for this and 
the other flowers. Perhaps the rose- 
mary is given to Laertes, mistaken by 
Ophelia for her lover. Delius sup- 
poses the flowers to exist only in 
Ophelia's distracted imagination. In 
Q I her first words, after re-entrance, 
are ' ' Wei God a mercy, I a bin 
gathering of floures." 

175. pansies] for thoughts, Fr. 
pensees. Ellacombe states that still 
in Warwickshire the pansy is named 
love-in-idleness, signifying love in 
vain. Chapman in All Fools, II. i., 
refers to the pansy as " for lover's 
thoughts." 

177. document] a piece of instruc- 
tion, lesson. So Spenser, Faerie 
Queejie, I. x. 19: "And heavenly 
documents thereout did preach." 



sc. v.] PRINCE OF DENMARK 171 

Oph. There 's fennel for you, and columbines ; 

there 's rue for you ; and here 's some for me ; i 80 
we may call it herb of grace o' Sundays ; oh, 
you must wear your rue with a difference. 
There 's a daisy ; I would give you some 
violets, but they withered all when my father 
died ; they say he made a good end, — i 85 

[Sings.] For bonny sweet Robin is all my joy. 

Laer. Thought and affliction, passion, hell itself, 
She turns to favour and to prettiness. 

Oph. [Sings.] And will he not come again ? 

A nd tvill he not co7ne again ? 1 90 

181. herb of grace\<^, Herbe- Grace Y, hearb a' grace Q i. i8i, 182. oh, 

you n:ust'\ F, you may Q, you must Q i. 186. Sings'] Capell ; omitted 

Q, F. 187. Though?] Q, F ; Thoughts Q I ; affliction] F ; afflictions 

Q I, Q. 189. Sings] SongQ, omitted F. 

lyg. fennef] Malone quotes ^ that of " rue " and " ruth " (referring 

Handfull of Pleasafit Delites, 1584: to the passage in Richard /I.). 

"Fennel is for flatterers"; Florio 183. «'«?>_>'] Henley quotes Greene, 

has "Dare finocchio, to flatter, or Quip for an Upstart Courtier: "Next 

give Fennell." Given probably to them grew the dissembling daisie, to 

the King. warne such light-of-love wenches not 

179. coIumbines]?)iee.\ens S2.ys: "It to trust every faire promise that such 
should seem as if this flower was the amorous batchelors make them." But 
emblem of cuckoldom." Quotations perhaps Chaucer's flower of the loyal 
from Chapman's All Fools, 11. i. Alcestis has here no such significance ; 
(misunderstood through abbreviation), perhaps it is not given away. 

and Caltha Poetarum, 1599, verify 184. violets] Malone quotes A 

the statement. Given probably to the Handfull of Pleasant Delites : 

King. "Violet is for faithfulness." Per- 

180. r;/fi] the emblem of sorrow and haps, as Clar. Press suggests, these 
repentance. See Richard II. ill. iv. words are spoken to Horatio. 

105. The name herb-grace or herb 186. Robin] Two Noble A'ins/iien, 

of grace is found in the herbals and iv. i : "I can sing the Broom, And 

dictionaries. Given to the Queen. Bonny Robin." Chappell {Popular 

C)phelia wears her rue as the emblem Music of the Olden Times) identifies 

of sorrow and of grace. "With a the song with one given in Holborne's 

difference" had a heraldic meaning Cittharn Schoole, 1597, and else- 

(slight distinctions in coats of arms where. 

borne by members of the same family), 1 87. thought] careful or melancholy 

but that meaning is not required here, thought, as in III. i. 85. 
Skeat suggests that the difference is 



172 HAMLET [activ. 

No, no, he is dead, 
Go to thy death-bed. 
He never will come again. 

His beard was as white as snoiv. 
All flaxen was his poll ; 195 

He is gone, he is gone, 
And we cast aivay moan : 
God ha' mercy on his so7il I 
And of all Christian souls, I pray God. God be 
wi' you ! {Exit. 

Laer. Do you see this, O God ! 200 

King. Laertes, I must commune with your grief, 
Or you deny me right. Go but apart, 
Make choice of whom your wisest friends you will, 
And they shall hear and judge 'twixt you and me. 
If by direct or by collateral hand 205 

They find us touch'd, we will our kingdom give, 
Our crown, our life, and all that we call ours. 
To you in satisfaction ; but if not. 
Be you content to lend your patience to us, 
And we shall jointly labour with your soul 2 1 o 

To give it due content. 
Laer. Let this be so : 

194. was as] Q, as F, was Johnson. 195. All] F, omitted Q. 198. God 
ha' mercy] Collier, God a mercy Q, Gramercy F. 199. Christian^ Y, 

Christians Q ; I pray God] F, 'omitted Q ; yott] Q, ye F. Exit] Exeunt 
Ophelia F, omitted Q. 200. Do . . . God!] Capell, Doe you this 6 God. 
Q, Do you see this, you gods ? F. 

198, 199. God . . , sou/s] A com- sing, and daunce, and no more thinke 

mon conclusion, _ says Steevens, to on their fathers soules than on their . 

monumental inscriptions. Sir Thomas old shone, saving that sometime 

More's fi^or^es, 1557, p. 337 : " We cometh out God have mercy on all 

see there [in purgatory] our chyldren christen soules." 
too, whom we loved so well, pipe, 



sc. VI.] PRINCE OF DENMARK 173 

His means of death, his obscure burial, 
No trophy, sword, nor hatchment o'er his bones, 
No noble rite, nor formal ostentation, 
Cry to be heard, as 'twere from heaven to earth, 2 i 5 
That I must call 't in question. 
King. So you shall ; 

And where the offence is let the great axe fall. 
I pray you, go with me. \Exeunt. 

SCENE VI. — Another Room in the Castle. 

Enter HORATIO and a Servant. 

Hor, What are they that would speak with me? 

Serv. Sailors, sir ; they say they have letters for you. 

Hor. Let them come in. — \Exit Servant. 

I do not know from what part of the world 
I should be greeted, if not from Lord Hamlet. 5 

Enter Sailors. 

First Sail. God bless you, sir. 
Hor. Let him bless thee too. 

First Sail. He shall, sir, an 't please him. There 's 
a letter for you, sir, — it comes from the 

212. buriar\ F, funerall Q. 213. trophy, sword,'\ F, trophe sword, Q, 

trophy sword. Pope. 214. rite\ F, right Q. 2 1 6. call V] Q, call F. 

Scene vi. 

Enter • . . ] Capell ; Enter Horatio and others Q ; Enter Horatio, 
with an Attendant F. 2. Serv.] F, Gent. Q; Sailors'] F, Seafaring 
men Q. 5. Enter Sailors] Q; Enter Sailor F. 6, 8. First Sail.] 
Capell ; Say Q, F. 8. an V] Q 6, and Q, a7id V F. 9. comes] F, 
came Q. 

212. obshire] accented in different 216. That] so that, as in IV. vii. 
places by Shakespeare on the first or 14S. 
on the second syllable. 



174 HAMLET [act iv. 

ambassador that was bound for England, — if lo 
your name be Horatio, as I am let to know 
it is. 
Hor. [Reads.] Horatio^ when thou shall have overlooked 
this, give these fellows some means to the king; 
they have letters for him. Ere we were two days i 5 
old at sea, a pirate of very warlike appointment 
gave us chase. Finding ourselves too slow of 
sail, we put on a compelled valour, and in the 
grapple I boarded them ; on the instant they 
got clear of our ship, so I alone became their 20 
prisoner. They have dealt ivith me like thieves 
of mercy ; but they knew zvhat they did ; I am 
to do a good turn for them. Let the king have 
the letters I have sent ; and repair thou to me 
with as much haste as thou would st fly death. 25 
/ have words to speak in thine ear will make 
thee dumb ; yet are they much too light for the 
bore of the matter. These good fellows will 
bring thee where I am. Rosencrantz and 
Guildenstern hold their course for England ; of 30 
them I have much to tell thee. Farewell. 

He that thou knowest thitte, HAMLET. 
Come, I will give you way for these your letters ; 

10. ambassador] Q, Amhassadours F. i8. and in] Q, in F. 23. good] 
F, omitted Q. 25. haste] F, speede Q. 26. thine] Q, your F. 28. 
bore] F, bord Q. 32. He] F, So Q (with no point before Hamlet). 
33. g-ive\ F, omitted Q, make Q 4 and several editors. 

22. knew what they did] Miles, ing the enginer with his own petar, 

Southern Review, April and July this was in his mind. 

1870, suggests that the pursuit was 28. bore] calibre, figurative from' 

prearranged by Hamlet, and that bore of gun. 
when he spoke to his mother of hoist- 



sc.vii] PRINCE OF DENMARK 175 

And do 't the speedier, that you may direct me 
To him from whom you brought them. [Exeunt. 

SCENE VII. — Another Room in the Castle, 
Enter King and Laertes. 

King. Now must your conscience my acquittance seal, 
And you must put me in your heart for friend, 
Sith you have heard, and with a knowing ear. 
That he which hath your noble father slain 
Pursued my life. 

Laer. It well appears ; but tell me 5 

Why you proceeded not against these feats, 
So crimeful and so capital in nature, 
As by your safety, wisdom, all things else. 
You mainly were stirr'd up. 

King. Oh, for two special reasons, 

Which may to you perhaps seem much unsinew'd, i o 
And yet to me they are strong. The queen his mother 
Lives almost by his looks ; and for myself, — 
My virtue or my plague, be it either which, — 
She 's so conjunctive to my life and soul, 
That, as the star moves not but in his sphere, i 5 
I could not but by her. The other motive. 
Why to a public count I might not go. 
Is the great love the general gender bear him ; 
Who, dipping all his faults in their affection, 

6. proceeded] F, proceede Q. 7. crimefut] F, critiiinall Q. 8. sa/e/y] 
F, sa/ette, great nes Q. 11. A7id\ F, But Q; they are] F, thdr Q. 

14. She^s so conjunctive] F, She is so conclive Q. 

14. conjunctive] The idea of plane- 17. count] account, reckoning, 
tary conjunction seems to have sug- 18. ,^(;«tv-a/^<r«^/fr] common species, 
gested the line that follows. community of men. 



176 HAMLET [act iv. 

Would, like the spring that turneth wood to stone, 20 
Convert his gyves to graces ; so that my arrows, 
Too slightly timber'd for so loud a wind, 
Would have reverted to my bow again, 
And not where I had aim'd them. 

Laey. And so have I a noble father lost ; 25 

A sister driven into desperate terms. 
Whose worth, if praises may go back again. 
Stood challenger on mount of all the age 
For her perfections. But my revenge will come. 

King. Break not your sleeps for that ; you must not 
think 30 

That we are made of stuff so flat and dull 
That we can let our beard be shook with danger 
And think it pastime. You shortly shall hear more ; 
I loved your father, and we love ourself ; 
And that, I hope, will teach you to imagine, — 35 

Enter a Messenger. 

How now ! what news ? 
Mess. Letters, my lord, from Hamlet ; 

This to your majesty ; this to the queen. 

20. Would'\Y, Worke(^. 22. loud a ■wiKd'\Y, loved A rrndC^. 24. And] 
F, Bui Q ; Aad] F, /lave Q ; ainid] Q, arnCd F. 27. Whose wortli] Q, 

IVho was Y. 36. How . . . Hamlet^ F, omitted Q. 37. Tins'] Y, These Q. 

20. spring] In Harrison's Descrip- would read g>-eaves (? he prints it 
Hon of England (ed. Furnivall, p. graves). 

349) it is stated that the baths of 22. loud a ivind] Jennens would 

King's Newnham, in Shakespeare's maintain the Q misprint "loved 

county, Warwickshire, have the arm'd," explaining it "one so loved 

property of turning wood to stone, and armed with the affections ... of 

The reference was supposed by Reed the people." Elze suggests "solid 

to be to the dropping well at Knares- arms," which he connects with his 

borough. reading greaves in line 21. 

21. gyves] Daniel would read gyres, 27. praises] if I may return in praise 
wild and whirling actions. Elze to Ophelia's better days. 



sc. Ml] PRINCE OF DENMARK 177 

King. From Hamlet ? who brought them ? 

Mess. Sailors, my lord, they say ; I saw them not ; 

They were given me by Claudio ; he received 
them 40 

Of him that brought them. 
King. Laertes, you shall hear them. — 

Leave us. [^Exit Messenger. 

[Reads.] High and might}', you shall knoiv I am 

set naked on your kingdom. To-i;:onvw shall I 

beg leave to see your kingly eyes ; when I shall, 4 5 

first asking your pardon thereunto, recount the 

occasion of my sudden and more strange return. 

Hamlet. 

What should this mean ? Are all the rest come back ? 

Or is it some abuse, and no such thing? 50 

Laer. Know you the hand ? 
King. 'Tis Hamlet's character. " Naked ! " 

And in a postscript here, he says " alone." 

Can you advise me ? 
Laer. I 'm lost in it, my lord. But let him come : 5 5 

It warms the very sickness in my heart. 

That I shall live and tell him to his teeth, 

" Thus didest thou." 
King. If it be so, Laertes, — 

As how should it be so ? how otherwise ? — 

if\. Oj . . . them'] Q, omitted F. 46. asking your] F, asking you Q. 
47. occasion] Q, occasions F ; and more strange] F, omitted Q. 48. Hamlet] 
V, omitted Q. 50. abuse, and] Q, abuse ? or V. 54. advise] F, deuise Q. 

55. I'm] F, I am Q. 57. shal!] F, omitted Q. 58. didest] F, dtdst Q. 

59. As . . . otherwise] If the King speaks— how can he have returned ? 

refers to Laertes' feehngs " should it Yet how can it be otherwise with his 

not^' (or /6«/) seems required. But it letter in my hand? The doubt is 

may be Hamlet's return of which he continued in line 62. 



178 HAMLET [act iv. 

Will you be ruled by me ? 

Laer. Ay, my lord ; 60 

So you will not o'errule me to a peace. 

King. To thine own peace. If he be now return'd, 
As checking at his voyage, and that he means 
No more to undertake it, I will work him 
To an exploit now ripe in my device, 65 

Under the which he shall not choose but fall ; 
And for his death no wind of blame shall breathe ; 
But even his mother shall uncharge the practice, 
And call it accident. 

Lacr. My lord, I will be ruled ; 

The rather, if you could devise it so 70 

That I might be the organ. 

King. It falls right. 

You have been talk'd of since your travel much, 
And that in Hamlet's hearing, for a quality 
Wherein, they say, you shine ; your sum of parts 
Did not together pluck such envy from him 75 

As did that one, and that, in my regard. 
Of the unworthiest siege. 

Laer. What part is that, my lord ? 

King. A very riband in the cap of youth, 

Yet needful too ; for youth no less becomes 

The light and careless livery that it wears 80 

60. Ay, my lord] Q, omiUed F. 6l. So yoii ivill] Q, If so yon 7 V. 

63. checking a/] F, t/ie King at Q, liking nol Q 4. 69-82. J\Jy lord . . . 

graveness] Q, omitted F. 

63. checking] A hawk "checks" artifice or stratagem. For practice, 

when it forsakes its proper quarry and see v. ii. 328. 

follows some inferior game. See 77. siege] rank (literally, seat), as 

Twelfth Night, iii. i. 71. in Othello, I. ii. 22 : "men of royal 

68. uncharge the practice] acquit, siege." 
free from accusation (charge), the 



sc. VII.] PRINCE OF DENMARK 179 

Than settled age his sables and his weeds, 
Importing health and graveness. Two months since 
Here was a gentleman of Normandy ; — 
I have seen myself, and served against, the French, 
And they can well on horseback; but this gallant 85 
Had witchcraft in 't ; he grew unto his seat. 
And to such wondrous doing brought his horse 
As he had been incorpsed and demi-natured 
With the brave beast ; so far he topp'd my thought. 
That I, in forgery of shapes and tricks, " 90 

Come short of what he did. 

Laer. A Norman was 't ? 

King. A Norman. 

Lacr. Upon my life, Lamord. 

King. The very same. 

Laei\ I know him well ; he is the brooch indeed 

And gem of all the nation. 95 

King. He made confession of you, 

82. T7vo\ Q, Some Iwo F; hence'] Q, since F. 84. I've F", / have Q. 
85. can] Q, ran F. 86. unlo] Q, into F. 88. he haif] Q 6; had he Q, F. 
89. iopfd] Q, past F ; my] F, me Q. 93. Lamord] Q, Lamoiind F. 
95. the] Q, our F. 

82. health] denoting an attention of Shakespeare's names for minor 

to health. Schmidt understands characters are significant ; the word 

health as prosperity. Warburton read mords is mascuHne, but the printer of 

"wealth." Furness takes "health" Q may be responsible for La. Pope 

to refer to the livery of youth, and hasLamond; Malone conjectured La- 

"graveness" to that of settled age. mode ; Grant White has Lamont. C. 

85. can] are skilled. Compare E. Browne notes that Pietro Monte 

Pha-nix and Turtle, 14: "the priest was the instructor of Louis vil.'s 

. . . That defunctive music can." Master of the Horse. 

89. topp'd] exceeded, as in Macbeth, 94. brooch] ornament, as in Jonson's 
IV. iii. 57. Staple of News, iii. ii. : " Wiio is the 

90. forgery] invention, as in Mid- very Brooch o' the Bench, Gem o' the 
summer Night's Dream, 11. i. 81. city." 

93. Lamord] I retain the Q form of 96. confession] the unwilling ac- 
the name, having noticed in Cotgrave, knowledgment by a Frenchman of a 
" Mords, a bitt of a horse." Several Dane's superiority. 



180 HAMLET [activ. 

And gave you such a masterly report 

For art and exercise in your defence, 

And for your rapier most especially, 

That he cried out, 'twould be a sight indeed lOO 

If one could match you; the scrimers of their nation, 

He swore, had neither motion, guard, nor eye. 

If you opposed them. Sir, this report of his 

Did Hamlet so envenom with his envy 

That he could nothing do but wish and beg 105 

Your sudden coming o'er, to play with him. 

Now, out of this, — 

Laer. What out of this, my lord ? 

King. Laertes, was your father dear to you ? 
Or are you like the painting of a sorrow, 
A face without a heart ? 

Laer. Why ask you this? i 10 

King. Not that I think you did not love your father. 
But that I know love is begun by time. 
And that I see, in passages of proof, 
Time qualifies the spark and fire of it. 
There lives within the very flame of love i i 5 

A kind of wick or snuff that will abate it ; 
And nothing is at a like goodness still, 
For goodness, growing to a plurisy, 

99. tspecially'] F, especial Q. 101-103. you . . . t/iis] Q, you Sir. 

Tkis F {om'Ming ^Ae scrimers . . . opposed them.) 106. him'\¥, you (^ 

and several editors. 107. IVhat] Q, IVhyY. 1 15-124. 7 here . . . 
ulcer'] Q, omitted F. 

loi. scrimers] fencers. French, 113. passages oj proof] well-estab- 

escrimettrs. lished instances. 

102. motion] a fencing term; used 117. i^////] constantly, as in 11. ii. 42. 
by Vincentio Saviolo in his Practise 1 18, //«r/j;'] plethora ; as if derived 

(1595); see line 158 of the present irom plus, pluris. So The Two Noble 

scene. Kinsttien^ \. \ : " the plurisy of 

people." 



sc. VII.] PRINCE OF DENMARK 181 

Dies in his own too-much ; that we would do 

We should do when we would ; for this " would " 

changes, 120 

And hath abatements and delays as many 
As there are tongues, are hands, are accidents ; 
And then this " should " is like a spendthrift sigh. 
That hurts by easing. But to the quick o' the 

ulcer : 
Hamlet comes back; what would you undertake i 25 
To show yourself your father's son in deed 
More than in words ? 
Laer. To cut his throat i' the church. 

King. No place, indeed, should murder sanctuarize ; 

Revenge should have no bounds. But, good 

Laertes, 
Will you do this, keep close within your 

chamber. 1 30 

Hamlet return'd shall know you are come home ; 
We '11 put on those shall praise your excellence. 
And set a double varnish on the fame 
The Frenchman gave you ; bring you, in fine, 

together 
And wager on your heads ; he, being remiss, i 3 5 
Most generous and free from all contriving. 
Will not peruse the foils, so that with ease 
Or with a little shuffling, you may choose 

\2T,. spendthyift'\(^(i, spend-thirftsCl. 126. your . . . ! /i deecf] F (wilh 

indeed), indecde your fathers somic i)^. 130. chamber.] Stccvens ; comma 

s.{teT char/ider Q, F. 135. on]F,o^er Q. 

123. spendthrift sigh] Alluding to 128. sanctuarize^^ protect from pun- 

the notion that sighs shorten life by ishment as a sanctuary does, 
drawing blood from the heart. SceA/id- 137. peruse] see II. i. 90. 
summer Night's Dream, III. ii. 97. 



182 HAMLET [act iv. 

A sword unbated, and in a pass of practice 
Requite him for your father, 

Laer. I will do 't ; 1 40 

And for that purpose I '11 anoint my sword. 
I bought an unction of a mountebank, 
So mortal that but dip a knife in it, 
Where it draws blood no cataplasm so rare, 
Collected from all simples that have virtue 145 

Under the moon, can save the thing from death 
That is but scratch'd withal ; I '11 touch my point 
With this contagion, that, if I gall him slightly, 
It may be death. 

King. Let 's further think of this ; 

Weigh what convenience both of time and 
means 150 

May fit us to our shape. If this should fail. 
And that our drift look through our bad performance, 
'Twere better not assay'd ; therefore this project 
Should have a back or second, that might hold. 
If this should blast in proof. Soft ! — let me 
see — I 5 5 

We '11 make a solemn wager on your cunnings ; 
I ha't: 

141, thati F, omitted Q. 143. that but dip\ Q, I but dipt Y [I = Ay). 
150. conve7iience\Y , conueiance ^. 1 51. shape. If. . , _/a//,] Rowe ; Q 
has no point except comma zittr fay I e ; F has comma after shape, semicolon 
after/a;7f, 155. should] F , did Q. 156, cu/inin^s] Q, comniin^s F. 

139. unbated] not bhmted, as foils 155. b/ast in proof] suffer blight in 

are by a button. Love's Labour s Lost, the trial. 

I. i. 6 : "bate his scythe's keen 156. cutitiitigs] skill. Caldecott 

edge," and Knight explain F conwiings as 

139. pass of practice] treacherous bouts at fence. Cotgrave has Venue, 

thrust; see line 68. "Acomming; . . . also a vennie in 

142. mountebank] quack-doctor, as fencing." 
in Ot hello, I. iii. 61. 



sc.vii.] PRINCE OF DENMARK 183 

When in your motion you are hot and dry, — 
As make your bouts more violent to that end, — 
And that he calls for drink, I '11 have prepared 

him 1 60 

A chalice for the nonce ; whereon but sipping, 
If he by chance escape your venom'd stuck, 
Our purpose may hold there. But stay ! what 

noise ? — 

Enter QUEEN. 

How now, sweet queen ! 

Queen. One woe doth tread upon another's heel, 165 

So fast they follow. — Your sister 's drown'd, 
Laertes. 

Laer. Drown'd! Oh, where? 

Queen. There is a willow grows aslant a brook, 

That shows his hoar leaves in the glassy stream ; 
There with fantastic garlands did she come, 170 
Of crow-flowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples. 
That liberal shepherds give a grosser name, 

159. that'] Q, the F. i6o. prepared] Y,prefardQ^. 162. stuck] Q, F ; 

tttcke Q 6. 163. But . . . noise i"] Q, omitted F. 164. I/oiv . . . 

(jtteen] ¥ 2, how sweet Queene F, omitted Q. 166. they] Q, theyU F. 

168. aslant a] F, ascaimt the Q. 169. hoar] hore F, harry Q. 170. 

There with . . . come] F, '1 herewith . . . make Q. 

162. stuck] Dyce : "more pro- chises of the woods and meadows, 

perly stock, an abbreviation of stoc- The name of Dead Men's Fingers was 

cado" or stoccata, a thrust. So given to them from the pale palmate 

Twelith Aight, III. iv. 303. The roots of some of the species." 
/Mi-X'tf of Q 6 means rapier. 172. liberal] free-spoken, as in 

168. w;7/c;w] significant of forsaken Richard II. 11. i. 229, or licentious, 

love. as in Much Ado, IV. i. 93. Grosser 

171. crow-Jlowers] butter-cup, but names are found in old Ilerbais. 

used formerly of ragged-robin. In " One," says Malone, " Gertrude had 

Gerarde's Herbal identified wilii a particular reason to avoid — the ram- 

" Wilde Williams, Marsh Gillofluurs, pant zvidow." To find a significance 

and Cockow Gellofloures." in each plant is perhaps to consider 

171. long purples] According to too curiously ; but see notes in Fur- 

EUacombe "the common purple or- ness. 



184 HAMLET [act iv. 

But our cold maids do dead men's fingers call 

them ; 
There, on the pendent boughs her coronet weeds 
Clambering to hang, an envious sliver broke; 175 
When down her weedy trophies and herself 
Fell in the weeping brook. Her clothes spread 

wide. 
And, mermaid-like, awhile they bore her up ; 
Which time she chanted snatches of old tunes, 
As one incapable of her own distress, 1 80 

Or like a creature native and indued 
Unto that element ; but long it could not be 
Till that her garments, heavy with their drink, 
Pull'd the poor wretch from her melodious lay 
To muddy death. 

Laer. Alas, then, she is drown'd ! 185 

Queen. Drown'd, drown'd. 

Laer. Too much of water hast thou, poor Ophelia, 
And therefore I forbid my tears ; but yet 
It is our trick ; nature her custom holds, 
Let shame say what it will ; when these are 
gone 1 90 

173. cold] F, cull-cola Q. 176. her'] Q, the F. 179. times] Q I, F ; 

laudesQ. 181. i7idued]Y, ittdewedQ^. 183. their](^, herY. 184. lay] 
Q, buy F. 1S5. she is drozvn'd!] Q (note of exclamation, Pope) ; is she 

drowtCd. Qq 4, 5 ; is she drown'' d ? F, Q 6. 

175. sliver] a branch ; properly to apprehend ; see capable in III. 

a branch slivered (split) from a ii. 14. 

tree. So in Macbeth, iv. i. 28: 181. indued] brought to a state or 

"Slips of yew sliver'd in the moon's condition in harmony with that ele- 

eclipse." ment. So in Othello, in. iv. 146, an 

179. tunes] The agreement of Q i aching finger "endues" our healthful 
and F argues strongly against the members to a " sense of pain." 

Q lauds, which some editors prefer, 189. trick] way, as in ;] Henry IV. 
probably as heightening the pathos. i. ii. 240: "it was always yet the 

180. incapable] without capacity trick of our English nation.' 



SCI.] PRINCE OF DENMARK 185 

The woman will be out. — Adieu, my lord ; 
I have a speech of fire, that fain would blaze. 
But that this folly douts it. \Exit. 

King. Let 's follow, Gertrude ; 

How much I had to do to calm his rage ! 
Now fear I this will give it start again ; 195 

Therefore let 's follow. \Exeimt. 



ACT V 

SCENE I. — A Churchyard. 

Enter two Clowns, with spades and mattocks. 

First Clo. Is she to be buried in Christian burial 
that wilfully seeks her own salvation ? 

Second Clo. I tell thee she is ; and therefore make 
her grave straight ; the crowner hath sat on 
her, and finds it Christian burial. 5 

First Clo. How can that be, unless she drowned 
herself in her. own defence? 

Second Clo. Why, 'tis found so. 

First Clo. It must be se offendendo ; it cannot be else. 

192. offirc\ F, afire Q. 193. douts\ Knight ; doubts F ; Jrownes Q, F2. 

Aci V. Scene I. 

A Churchyard] Capell, A Church Rowe. 2. that~\ F, zvhen she Q. 

3. and] F, omitted Q. 9. se offendendo F, so offended Q. 

193. douts] does out, extinguish, of the church, where suicides were 
In Henry V. iv. ii. 11, where dout buried. 

seems to be the verb, F has doubt. 4. croivner] A form of " coroner" 

... found in Ilolinshed, Harrison, Pepys, 

Act y. .^cene i. ^^^ ^^^^^^_ 

4. straight] straightway, immedi- 9. offendendo] The Clown's mis- 

ately, as in II. ii. 459. Johnson take for defcndendo, as perhaps saha- 

supposed that it meant from east to tion in line 2 for its opposite, 
west ; Douce, that it meant not north 



18G HAMT.ET [act v. 

For here lies the point : if I drown myself i o 
wittingly it argues an act ; and an act hath 
three branches ; it is, to act, to do, and to 
perform : argal, she drowned herself wittingly. 

Second Clo. Nay, but hear you, goodman delver, — 

First Clo. Give me leave. Here lies the water ; 1 5 
good : here stands the man ; good : if the man 
go to this water, and drown himself, it is, will 
he nill he, he goes ; mark you that : but if 
the water come to him, and drown him, he 
drowns not himself: argal, he that is not 20 
guilty of his own death shortens not his own 
life. 

Second Clo. But is this law? 

Fv'sf Clo. Ay, marry, is 't ; crowner's quest law. 

Second Clo. Will you ha' the truth on 't ? If this 2 5 
had not been a gentlewoman, she should have 
been buried out o' Christian burial. 

First Clo. Why, there thou say'st ; and the more 
pity that great folk should have countenance 
in this world to drown or hang themselves 30 
more than their even Christian. — Come, my 

12. io act] Q, an Acte V. 13. perform: argal] Y, performe, or all ; Q. 
18. thati\ that, Q, that? F. 27. 0'] Jennens, a Q, ofY. 31. Chris- 

tian] F, Christen Q. 

12. three branches] Shakespeare tion, and the execution. Plowden's 

seems to have read or heard of Commentaries were not translated 

Plowden's report of Hales v. Petit, from the French until the eighteenth 

Sir James Hales had drowned him- century. 

self; the coroner's jury returned a 13. argal] the Clown's perversion 
verdict of y^/i? de se. Dame Plales's of ergo. 
counsel argued that the act of suicide 24. ijuest] inquest, 
cannot be completed in a man's life- 31. even Christian] fellow Chris- 
time. Walsh, .Serjeant, contra re- tian ; found in Chaucer's Parson's 
plied that " the act consists of three Tale, in Latimer, and elsewhere, 
parts"— the imagination, the resolu- 



SCI.] PRINCE OF DENMARK 187 

spade. There is no ancient gentlemen but 
gardeners, ditchers, and grave- makers ; they 
hold up Adam's profession. 

Second Cio. Was he a gentleman ? 35 

First Clo. A' was the first that ever bore arms. 

Second Clo. Why, he had none. 

First Clo. What, art a heathen ? How dost thou 
understand the Scripture? The Scripture says 
Adam digged ; could he dig without arms ? 40 
I '11 put another question to thee ; if thou 
answerest me not to the purpose, confess 
thyself — 

Second Clo. Go to. 

First Clo. What is he that builds stronger than 45 
either the mason, the shipwright, or the car- 
penter ? 

Second Clo. The gallows-maker ; for that frame 
outlives a thousand tenants. 

First Clo. I like thy wit well, in good faith; the 50 
gallows does well ; but how does it well ? it 
does well to those that do ill ; now, thou dost 
ill to say the gallows is built stronger than 
the church : argal, the gallows may do well to 
thee. To 't again ; come. 5 5 

36. A''\ Q, He F. The same difference occurs frequently in this scene, 
and elsewhere. 37-40. Why . . . arwj.^] F, omitted Q. 43. thyself— ^ 
F, ihy selfe. (.}. 48. frame F, omitted Q. 

34. /^u/i^ «/] maintain, continue, as 42, 43. coiijess lhyseIf—'\ Malone : 
in Aferry IVives, V. v. no. " 'And be hanged,' the Clown would 

35. geiitleman'\ Adam's spade, says have said ... a common proverbial 
Douce, is set down in some of the sentence." 

books of heraldry as the most ancient 
form of escutcheon. 



188 HAMLET [act v. 

Second Clo. " Who builds stronger than a mason, a 

shipwright, or a carpenter ? " 
First Clo. Ay, tell me that, and unyoke. 
Second Clo. Marry, now I can tell. 

First Clo. To 't. 60 

Second Clo. Mass, I cannot tell. 

Enter HAMLET and HORATIO, at a distance. 

First Clo. Cudgel thy brains no more about it, for 
your dull ass will not mend his pace with 
beating ; and when you are asked this ques- 
tion next, say "a grave-maker"; the houses 65 
that he makes last till doomsday. Go, get 
thee to Yaughan ; fetch me a stoup of liquor. 

\Exit Second Clown. 

61. Enter] F, after line 71 Q. 66. that] F, omitted Q ; last] Q 4 ; lasts Q, 
F. 67. to Yazighani F ( Yaughan italicised), in, and Q ; stoup] F, soope Q. 

58. unyoke] after this great effort you F, the reader for the press, taking i 

may unharness the team of your wit. for a proper name, might have sub- 

67. Yaughan] Unexplained; per- substituted "to" for "in," and so 

haps the name of a London tavern- produced the F reading. Why has 

keeper. The alehouse of "deaf lohn" no ingenious gentleman suggested a 

is mentioned in Jonson's Alchemist ; shake and jumble of the letters, with 

in Every Man out of his Humour, V. an error of a for (the boxes for these 

vi., he mentions "a Jew, one Yohan," letters being next each other in the 

but not as a tavern-keeper. Yaughan compositor's case) ? The first Clown's 

is said to be a common Welsh name. " confess thyself" was to be followed 

Of several emendations recorded in by "and be hanged," but he was in- 

the Cambridge Shakespeare, the most terrupted ; he proceeds, however, to 

plausible is that of Mr. Tovey : say that the gallows may do well for 

"Goto, y 'are gone; get thee gone, his comrade. Now Yaughan easily 

fetch." Y^are gone occurs, but in yields us You {mi?,Y>x\n\.ed Yau) ; gha?i 

another connection, in Q l, meaning is hang^'iih the last letter misplaced 

"you are out of it, you have failed to as first. Read therefore, the ingeni- 

solve the question"; get thee gone ous gentleman might say, with Q, 

occurs in the same Q after "the "Go, get thee in," and add, "hang 

gallowes dooes well to them that do you; fetch, etc." The F "to" may 

ill." Or we might read with Q " Go, be accounted for as mentioned above, 
get thee in," and add, "y'are gone," 67. stoup] Jennens supposes that Q 

as an emendation of "Yaughan." If soope is the Clown's pronunciation of 

" Yaughan " was a printer's error of sup. 



SCI.] PRINCE OF DENMARK 189 

First Cloivn digs, and sings. 

In youth, when I did love, did love, 

Methought it was very siueet, 
To contract, Oh ! the time, for, Ah ! viy 

behove, 70 

Oh ! methought there zvas nothing meet. 
Ham. Has this fellow no feeling of his business, 

that he sings at grave-making? 
Hor. Custom hath made it in him a property of- 

easiness. 75 

Ham. 'Tis e'en so ; the hand of little employment 

hath the daintier sense. 
First Clo. [Sings.] But age, with his stealing steps, 
Hath clazud me in his clutch. 
And hath sliipp'd me intil the land, 80 

As if I had never been such. 

\Throzvs up a skull. 
Ham. That skull had a tongue in it, and could 
sing once ; how the knave jowls it to the 

70. for All] for <z Q, F. 71. there was nothing] F, there a was nothing 
a Q. Tl. a/] F, in Q. 79. claw'd] Q, caught F. 80. intil] F, into 
Q. 81. Throws . . . ] Capell ; omitted Q, F. 

68-71.] This and the two following caught up from a later stanza of the 

stanzas are — with variations here — poem "And tract of time," as "And 

from a poem attributed to Lord Vaux, shipped me intil the land " certainly 

and printed in Tottel's .!/?>«//«//;' (p. is; the resulting nonsense being de- 

173, cd. Arber). The O/^ and .-W are signed by Shakespeare. I>'or the 

perhaps grunts of the digger at work ; traditional music — the tune of The 

Clar. Tress, however, take them to Children in the Wood — see Furness 

represent drawling notes, like the (from Chappell), p. 385. 

slile-a and inile-a of Autolycus in 74, 75. property 0/ easiness] a pecu- 

Winter's Tale, iv. iii., which may be liarity that now comes easily, 

right, and finds support from a similar 80. intil] into, as in Chaucer, 

example in the Tragedy of Hoffman. 83. Jowls] knocks (used specially of 

"To contract the lime" seems to be tlic head), as in .-///V Well, i. iii. 58. 



190 HAMLET [act v. 

ground, as if it were Cain's jaw-bone, that 
did the first murder! It might be the pate 85 
of a poHtician, which this ass now o'er-reaches, 
one that would circumvent God, might it 
not? 

Hor. It might, my lord. 

Ham. Or of a courtier, which could say " Good 90 
morrow, sweet lord ! How dost thou, good 
lord ? " This might be my Lord Such-a-one, 
that praised my Lord Such-a-one's horse, when 
he meant to beg it, might it not? 

Hor. Ay, my lord. 95 

Ham. Why, e'en so ; and now my Lady Worm's ; 
chapless, and knocked about the mazzard with 
a sexton's spade. Here 's fine revolution, an 
we had the trick to see 't. Did these bones 
cost no more the breeding, but to play at 1 00 
loggats with 'em ? mine ache to think on 't, 

S4, it were] F, twere Q. 85. I/] F, T/iis Q. 86. now o'eirear/ies] Q, 
o're Offices F. 87. would] Q, cotild F. 91. good] F, sweet Q. 

94. 7iieant] F, went Q. 97- mazzard] Y, niassene Q. 98. an] Capell, 
and Q^ i/Y. 101. Vw] F, them Q. 

84. Cain's jaw-bone] Prof. Skeat office." O'er-reaches is used in the 

(Notes and Queries, Aug. 21, 1880) literal sense, and for circumvent, 

showed that Cain, according to the 90.] Steevens compares Timon of 

legend, slew Abel with an ass's jaw- Athens, i. ii. 216-218. 

bone. This is mentioned in Cursor 97. mazzard] the head ; a form of 

Mundi, I. p. 71, lines 1071-74 (Early mazar, a bowl ; the later Qq alter the 

Eng. Text Soc). misprint of Q massene to mazer, 

?,6. politician] Clar. Press: "con- loi. loggat s] Th& g2.mQo{\ogg2.is\s 

spirator, schemer, plotter. The word described by Clar. Press ; the players 

is always used in a bad sense by throw the loggats (little logs), trun- 

Shakespeare." cated cones of apple-wood, as near 

86. o'e7'-reaches] The F der-officcs the Jack, a wooden wheel, as possible; 

may be right ; office, as a verb, occurs the floor is strewn with ashes: " per- 

in Coriolanus, v. ii. 68, and in All's haps Hamlet meant to compare the 

Well, III. ii. 129. O'er-offices may skull to the Jack at which the bones 

mean ' ' treats as one holding a superior were thrown. " 



SCI] PRINCE OF DENMARK 191 

First Clo, [Sings.] A pick-axe, and a spade, a spade. 
For and a shrouding sheet ; 
Oil, a pit of clay for to be made 

For such a guest is meet. i O 5 

[ Throzvs up another skull. 
II am. There 's another ; why may not that be the 
skull of a lawyer ? Where be his quiddits 
now, his quillets, his cases, his tenures, and his 
tricks ? why does he suffer this rude knave 
now to knock him about the sconce with a -iio 
dirty shovel, and will not tell him of his action 
of battery? Hum ! This fellow might be in 's 
time a great buyer of land, with his statutes, 
his recognizances, his fines, his double vouchers, 
his recoveries ; is this the fine of his fines, and i i 5 
the recovery of his recoveries, to have his fine 
pate full of fine dirt? will his vouchers vouch 
him no more of his purchases, and double ones 
too, than the length and breadth of a pair of 

105. Throws . . . ] Capcll ; omitted Q, Y. io6. viay'\ Q, might F. 

107. quiddits\ F, <juiddities Q- loS. qHillets\ F, quillites Q. 109. rudc\ 
F, maddc Q. 115, 116. is this . . . recoveries] F, omitted Q. 117. /lis 

vouchers'] F, vouchers Q. 118, 119. double ones too] F, doubles Q. 

103. For and] and moreover; so Law Dictionary. "Recognizances," 

Skelton, Against Garnescke, "Syr another form of bond. "Fines "and 

Gawen, Syr Cayus, for and Syr " recoveries," modes of converting an 

Olyvere" (ed. Dyce, i. 119); found estate tail into a fee-simple. In a 

also in Middleton and Beaumont and recovery with double voucher, two 

Fletcher. persons are vouched, or called on, to 

107. </?</rt'(?'/A] quiddities, subtleties, warrant the tenant's title. 

from the Schoolmen's quidditas, the li^. Jine of his fines] end of his 

what-ness, distinctive nature of a fines. 

thing. wj. fine dirt] Rushton {Shake- 

108. ^«///tVji] frivolous distinctions; speare, a Lawyer) thinks that this 
from quod libet. means the last dirt that will ever 

113. statutes] bonds, statutes-mer- occupy his pate, 
chant or statutes-staple, the nature of 119. 120. pair of indentures] con- 
which is explained in Thomas Blount's veyances or contracts, in duplicate, 



192 HAMLET [act v. 

indentures ? The very conveyances of his 120 

lands will hardly lie in this box ; and must 

the inheritor himself have no more, ha ? 
Hor. Not a jot more, my lord. 
Ham. Is not parchment made of sheep-skins ? 
Hor. Ay, my lord, and of calf-skins too. i 2 5 

Hani. They are sheep and calves which seek out 

assurance in that. I will speak to this fellow. 

— Whose grave 's this, sirrah ? 
First Clo. Mine, sir. — 

Oh, a pit of clay for to be made i 30 

For such a guest is meet. 
Ham. I think it be thine, indeed, for thou liest in 't. 
First Clo. You lie out on 't, sir, and therefore 'tis 

not yours ; for my part, I do not lie in 't, and 

yet it is mine. 135 

Ham. Thou dost lie in 't, to be in 't, and say it is 

thine ; 'tis for the dead, not for the quick ; 

therefore thou liest. 
First Clo. 'Tis a quick lie, sir ; 'twill away again, 

from me to you. 140 

Ham. What man dost thou dig it for? 
First Clo. For no man, sir. 
Ham. What woman, then ? 

121. hardly'] F, scarcely C^. 125. calf-skins] F, Calves skinnes Q^. 126. 
•which^Ql, thatY. 12?>. sirrah] Q,SirF. 1 29-13 1. A/ine . . . meet] 
¥, Q (as prose), A/ine sir, or a . . . made (omitting For . . . meet). 
133. 'tis] Q, it is F. 134, 135. and yet] F,yet Q. 136. it is] Q, 'tis ¥. 

the paper or parchment indented, so 122. inheritor] possessor, as in 

as to be divided into two, which two Love' s Lahoii>' s Lost, 11. i. 5. 
must fit together in proof of genuine- 127. a^jwr^wa'] used in the ordinary 
ness. and the legal sense (conveyance of 

land or tenements by deed). 



SCI] PRINCE OF DENMARK 193 

First Clo. For none, neither. 

Ham. Who is to be buried in't? 145 

First Clo. One that was a woman, sir ; but, rest her 
soul, she 's dead. 

Ham. How absolute the knave is ! we must speak 
by the card, or equivocation will undo us. By 
the Lord, Horatio, these three years I have 150 
taken note of it ; the age is grown so picked 
that the toe of the peasant comes so near the 
heel of the courtier, he galls his kibe. — How' 
long hast thou been a grave-maker? 

First Clo. Of all the days i' the year, I came to 't 155 
that day that our last King Hamlet o'ercame 
Fortinbras. 

Ham. How long is that since ? 

First Clo. Cannot you tell that ? every fool can tell 

that ; it was the very day that young Hamlet 1 60 

150. these\ F, this Q. 151. takeni F, tooke Q. 153. heel] Q, heeles F ; 
the courtier] Q, our Courtier V. 154. a] F (and later Qq), omitted Q. 
155. all] F, omitted Q. 156. dercame] F, overcame Q. 160. the very] 

F, that very Q. 

148. «/;j'(?////g] positive, decided, free of taxation for the relief of the poor 
from conditions. Sqq Cymbeline, w. was fully and finally established. The 
ii. 106. date is exactly three years before the 

149. carcT] chart ; or perhaps the words appeared in 1604. The purses, 
card on which the points of the if not the kibes, of needy courtiers 
mariner's compass were marked, as were galled l)y the assessments of the 
in Macbeth, i. iii. 17. The sense overseers. The Act is that of 43 Eliz.; 
" map " or " sea-chart " seems to be the earlier Act of 39 Eliz. preceded the 
the earlier. In any case "to speak second Q by seven years, the first Q 
by the card" means to speak with by six. 

exactness to a point. le^i. picked] spruce, smart, as in 

149. e(juivocatio)t] iimh\g\\\\.\ m {ha Love's Labou)' s Lost, \. \. 14. John- 
use of terms, not necessarily with a son and Stcevens supposed that there 
view to mislead. was an allusion to picked shoes, shoes 

150. three years] O i has "this with long projecting points, "beaks 
seaven yearcs." It is, perhaps, worth or pykes. " 

asking whether any allusion can be 153. /<•//)<?] chilblain, as in Tempest, 
intended here to the great Poor Law 11. i. 276. 
legislation of 1601, when the principle 

13 



194 HAMLET [act v. 

was born ; he that is mad, and sent into 
England. 

Ham. Ay, marry ; why was he sent into England ? 

First Clo. Why, because a' was mad : a' shall re- 
cover his wits there; or, if a' do not, 'tis no 165 
great matter there. 

Ham. Why ? 

First Clo. 'Twill not be seen in him there ; there 
the men are as mad as he. 

Ham. How came he mad ? 170 

First Clo. Very strangely, they say. 

Ha7n. How " strangely " ? 

First Clo. Faith, e'en with losing his wits. 

Ham. Upon what ground ? 

First Clo. Why, here in Denmark ; I have been 1 7 5 
sexton here, man and boy, thirty years. 

161. is\ Q, was F. 165. V?V] Q, it 's F. 168. ktui there'] Q, him F. 

176, sexton] Q 4, Sexten Q, sixeteene F, Sexesione F 2. 

169. as mad as he] Clar. Press foreign university. Prof. Hales has 

quotes Marston, Malcontent, ill. i. : quoted a passage from Nash, Pierce 

"Your lordship shall ever find , . , Penniless' s Supplication, on the late 

amongst a hundred Englishmen four- age at which the Danes commenced 

score and ten madmen." So also education: "You shall see a great 

Massinger, A Very Woman, ill, i. : boy , . . weeping under the rod 

" The fellow [an Englishman] is mad, when he is thirty years old." In 

stark mad. Believe they are all so." Q i Hamlet's age is not fixed, and 

176. thirty years] Hamlet's age — he seems younger throughout. Per- 

thirty — is here fixed in a twofold way haps in recasting the play Shake- 

— by the date of the grave-digger's speare felt that Hamlet's weight of 

service and by the number of years thought implied an age beyond that 

since Yorlck's death. Gonzago and of very early manhood, and failed 

his wife, who represent the elder to harmonise the earlier and later pre- 

Hamlet and Gertrude, have been sentations of his hero. His Troilus 

married thirty years. It is true, how- is under twenty-three ; Florizel looks 

ever, that passages in earlier scenes — about twenty-one ; Cymbeline's sons 

in particular the scene of Laertes are twenty-three and twenty-two ; 

parting from Ophelia — lead us to Hamlet is surely older than these 

conceive Hamlet as younger. He is youths. The heyday of Gertrude's 

a student of Wittenberg ; but it is a blood is tame ; she may be forty-five 



SCI] PRINCE OF DENMARK 195 

Ham. How long will a man He i' the earth ere he 
rot? 

First Clo. V faith, if a' be not rotten before a' die, 

— as we have many pocky corpses now-a-days, i 80 
that will scarce hold the laying in, — a' will 
last you some eight year or nine year ; a 
tanner will last you nine year. 

Ham. Why he more than another ? 

First Clo. Why, sir, his hide is so tanned with his i 8 5 
trade that a' will keep out water a great 
while ; and your water is a sore decayer of 
your whoreson dead body. Here 's a skull 
now ; this skull has lain in the earth three and 
twenty years. 190 

Ham. Whose was it ? 

First Clo. A whoreson mad fellow's it was ; whose 
do you think it was ? 

Ham. Nay, I know not. 

First Clo. A pestilence on him for a mad rogue! 195 
a' poured a flagon of Rhenish on my head 
once. This same skull, sir, was Yorick's skull, 
the king's jester. 

Ham. This ? 

179. J'faiih] F, Fayth Q. i8o. ftow-a-days] F, omitted Q. i88, 189. 

Here^s . . . iti the\Y,heer''s a skull now hath lycn you -C th '<l. 189,190. 

three and twenty'] F, 23 Q, this dozen yeare Q i (but in a different connec- 
tion, and perhaps not Yoricic's skull). 197. This same skull, sir] Q, words 
repeated F ; Yorick's'l F, sir Yoricks Q. 

or forty-six : yet, like Gonzago's wife, perhaps the Danish Jorg (George) ; 
who is of that age, she may have Magni'isson (in Clar. Press) : per- 
the power to charm. However we haps a corruption of Rorick, Saxo's 
account for the inconsistency, we Roricus, Hamlet's maternal grand- 
must accept dates so carefully de- father. Furness notes that Jerick is 
termined. the name of a "Dutch Bowr " in 
197. Yorick^s'\ Ainger : Yorick is Chapman's Alphonsus. 



196 HAMLET [act v. 

First Clo. E'en that. 200 

Ha7n. Let me see. — {Takes the skull. 

Alas, poor Yorick ! — I knew him, Horatio ; a 
fellow of infinite jest, of most excellent fancy ; 
he hath borne me on his back a thousand 
times ; and now, how abhorred in my imagina- 205 
tion it is ! my gorge rises at it. Here hung 
those lips that I have kissed I know not how 
oft. — Where be your gibes now? your gambols? 
your songs ? your flashes of merriment, that 
were wont to set the table on a roar ? Not 2 1 o 
one now, to mock your own grinning? quite 
chop-fallen ? Now get you to my lady's 
chamber, and tell her, let her paint an inch 
thick, to this favour she must come ; make her 
laugh at that. — Prithee, Horatio, tell me one 2 i 5 
thing. 
Hor. What 's that, my lord ? 
Ham. Dost thou think Alexander looked o' this 

fashion i' the earth ? 
Ho)'. E'en so. 220 

Ham. And smelt so ? puh ! {Puts doivn the skull. 

201. Let me see\ F, omitted Q. Takes the skull] Capell (after This? line 
199); omitted Q, F. 20a,. bor}ie\Y, boreal. 205. w^7£;]Q, omitted F. 205, 
206. in my . . . it is\ Q, my imagination is. F. 210, 21 1. JVot one] Q, Al? 
one F. 211. grinning] Q, leering F. 213. c/iamier] Q i, F; taSte Q. 

221. j-^ ? puh] F, so pah Q, so ? pah Q 6. Puts down . . .] Collier ; omitted Q, F. 

214. favotir] commonly used for mingled also with red . . . his skin 

appearance, aspect ; also for beauty, had a marvellous good favour . . . 

comeliness ; also for the countenance, his bodie had so sweet a smell " that 

the face. his apparel "took thereof a passing 

218. Alexatider] Perhaps Shake- delightful savour." His corpse re- 

speare thought of Alexander's beauty mained "many days naked wirhout 

and sweet smell as well as of his con- buriall, in a hote drie countrie," yet 

quests. North's Plutarch : "Alex- was "still a cleane and faire corps as 

ander had a very faire white colour could be" {Life of Alexander). 



SCI] PRINCE or DENMARK 197 

Hor. E'en so, my lord. 

Ham. To what base uses we may return, Horatio ! 
Why may not imagination trace the noble 
dust of Alexander, till he find it stopping 225 
a bung-hole? 
Hor. 'Twere to consider too curiously, to consider so. 
Ham. No, faith, not a jot; but to follow him 
thither with modesty enough, and likelihood 
to lead it ; as thus : Alexander died, Alexander 230 
was buried, Alexander returneth into dust"; 
the dust is earth ; of earth we make loam ; 
and why of that loam, whereto he was con- 
verted, might they not stop a beer-barrel ? 

Imperious Caesar, dead and turn'd to clay, 235 
Might stop a hole to keep the wind away ; 
Oh, that that earth, which kept the world in awe. 
Should patch a wall t' expel the winter's flaw ! 
But soft ! but soft ! aside : here comes the king. 

Enter Priests^ etc. in procession ; the Corpse of OPHELIA, 
Laertes and Mourners foUozving ; KING, QuEEN, 
their Trains, etc. 

The queen, the courtiers; who is this they follow? 240 
And with such maimed rites ? This doth betoken 
The corse they follow did with desperate hand 

230. rt.f///?/.r]Q I, F; omitted Q. 231. into\Y, /oQ. 235. Imperious\ 
Q, Iniperiall F. 23S. winters] F, waters Q. 239. Enter . . .] ^falone. 

Enter K. Q. Laertes and the corse Q. Enter King, Queene, Laertes, and 
a coffin, witli Lords attendant F. 240. t/iis] Q, t/iaf F. 

229. w/<7(/<;j-/|'] moderation, freedom 238. y7rt7y] gust. Dyce quotes Cot- 
from exaggeration, as in III. ii. 22. grave: "A flaw or gust of wind 

235. Imperious'] Imperial, as in Tourbillon dc vent." 
Troilus and Cressida, IV. v. 172 : 
"most imperious Agamemnon." 



198 



HAMLET 



[act v. 



Fordo it own life ; 'twas of some estate. 
Couch we awhile, and mark. 

{^Retiring with Horatio. 

Laer. What ceremony else ? 245 

Ham. That is Laertes, a very noble youth : mark. 

Laer. What ceremony else ? 

Priest. Her obsequies have been as far enlarged 

As we have warrantise ; her death was doubtful ; 
And, but that great command o'ersways the order, 
She should in ground unsanctified have lodged 25 i 
Till the last trumpet ; for charitable prayers, 
Shards, flints, and pebbles should be thrown on her ; 
Yet here she is allow'd her virgin crants, 
Her maiden strewments, and the bringing home 255 
Of bell and burial. 



243. it\ Q, F ; ?V5 Q 6 ; it's Ff 3, 4 ; of] Q, omitted F. 244. Retiring . . .] 
Capell ; omitted Q, F. 248. Priest] F, Doct Q, First Priest Capell. 

249. warrantise] Dyce, warrantis F, warrantie Q, warranties Caldecott 
(ed. 2). 251. have] F, been Q. 252. prayers] Q, prayer F. 253. 

Shards] F, omitted Q. 254. crants] Q ; Rites F, Q 6 and many editors. 



243. Fordo] see il. i. 103 ; and for 
it, see I. ii. 216. 

244. Couch] conceal, lurk. Bar- 
rough, Meth. Physick, 1610: "If 
the quantity of humour be great, it 
sometime coucheth itself in some 
principall member." 

249. warrantise] The word occurs 
m Sonnets, cl., and in 1 Henry VI. 
I. iii. 13. Clar. Press: " The rubric 
before the Burial Office forbids it to 
be used for persons who have laid 
violent hands on themselves." 

253. Shards] Potsherds. 

254. crants] wreaths, garlands, or 
perhaps singular, garland (German, 
Krantz). New Eng. Diet, quotes 
Greene in Harl. Misc. il. 246 : 
" The filthy queane weares a craunce," 
and Nichol, Progr. Q. Eliz., 1596. 



Hardiman, Our Prayer-Book, 138, 
says : ' ' The crants were garlands 
which it was usual to make of white 
paper, and to hang up in the church 
on the occasion of a young girl's 
funeral. Some of these were hanging 
up in Flamborough Church, York- 
shire, as late as 1850." Many editors 
give F rites. See Brand's Popular 
Antiquities, II. 302. 

255. strewntents] Several passages 
of Shakespeare refer to strewing the 
corpse or the grave with flowers ; in 
Cymbeline, IV. ii. 285, we have 
" strewings fitt'st for graves." 

255. bringing home] Clar. Press 
compares Romeo and Juliet, iv. v, 
85-90, adding: "the marriage-rites 
in the case of maidens are sadly 
parodied in the funeral rites." 



SCI] PRINCE OF DENMARK 199 

Laer. Must there no more be done ? 

Priest. No more be done ; 

We should profane the service of the dead 
To sing a requiem and such rest to her 
As to peace-parted souls. 

Laer. Lay her i' the earth ; — 260 

And from her fair and unpolluted flesh 
May violets spring ! — -I tell thee, churlish priest, 
A ministering angel shall my sister be, 
When thou liest howling. 

Ham. What, the fair Ophelia ? 

Queen. Sweets to the sweet ; farewell ! 265 

[ Scattering floivers. 
I hoped thou shouldst have been my Hamlet's 

wife ; 
I thought thy bride-bed to have deck'd, sweet maid, 
And not have strew'd thy grave. 

Laer. Oh, treble woe 

Fall ten times treble on that cursed head 
Whose wicked deed thy most ingenious sense 270 
Deprived thee of. — Hold off the earth awhile. 
Till I have caught her once more in mine arms, 

\Leaps into the grave. 

259. sing a ieijuie>ii'\0, sing sage 'Rci\mem¥. 265. Sweets . . . fareivcll'\ 
Sweets to the siveet, fai-ewell, Q, Sweets, to the sweet farewell. Ff I, 2, 
Sweets, to thee sweet farewell. Ff 3, 4. Scattering flowers] Johnson ; omitted 
Q, F. 268. have'\ (1, /' have F ; treble woe] Q, terrible woer F, terrible 
wooer Yi 2-4, treble woes. P\irness (S. Walker conject.). 269. treble] F, 

double Q. 272. Leaps . . . ] F (with iti for into), omitted Q. 

259. a reqtiiem] The "sage re- in hell: "The damned use that 

quiem " of F has been emended " sad word [banished] in hell, llowlings 

requiem,'' Collier MS. "such re- attend it." 
quiem," Dyce conject., Grant White. 270. ingenious] quick in appre- 

264. howling] Used also in Romeo hension. Compare Lear, iv. vi. 287, 

and Juliet, III. iii. 48, of the outcries 288. Q 6 reads " ingenuous." 



200 HAMLET [act v. 

Now pile your dust upon the quick and dead, 
Till of this flat a mountain you have made 
To o'er-top old Pelion or the skyish head 275 

Of blue Olympus. 

Ham. [Advancing:] What is he whose grief 

Bears such an emphasis ? whose phrase of sorrow 
Conjures the wandering stars, and makes them 

stand 
Like wonder-wounded hearers? This is I, 
Hamlet the Dane. [Leaps into the grave. 

Laer. The devil take thy soul ! 280 

[Grappling ivith him. 

Ham. Thou pray'st not well. 

I prithee, take thy fingers from my throat ; 

For, though I am not splenitive and rash, 

Yet have I something in me dangerous, 

Which let thy wisdom fear. Hold off thy hand ! 285 

King. Pluck them asunder. 

Queen. Hamlet, Hamlet ! 

All. Gentlemen, — 

Hor. Good my lord, be quiet. 

\TJie Attendants part them, and they come out 

of the grave. 

276. Advancing] Capell ; omitted Q, F ; grief] Q, gn'efcs F. 278. 

Conjures'] Q, Conjure F. 280. Leaps . . .] omitted Q, F; Hamlet 
leaps in after Laertes Q i ; Grappling] Rowe ; omitted Q, F. 283. Foi-] 
Q, Sir F ; atid] F, omitted Q. 284. something in me] F, in vie sojuethifig 
Q. 285. wisdom'] Q I, Q ; wisenesse F; Hold off] Q, Away F. 287. 

All. Gentlemen, — ] Malone, All. Gentlemeti. Q, omitted F. Hor.] Q, Gen. 
F. The Attendants . . .] Malone ; omitted Q, F. 

278. -ivandering stars] Clar. Press 283. splenitive] The spleen was the 

quotes Cotgrave (under Pianette): seat of anger. Compare i A'£«;j /F. 

"they be also called Wandering V. ii. 19. 
starres." 



SC. I. 



PRINCE OF DENMARK 



201 



Ham. Why, I will fight with him upon this theme 

Until my eyelids will no longer wag. 
Queen. O my son, what theme? 290 

Ham. I loved Ophelia ; forty thousand brothers 

Could not, with all their quantity of love, 

Make up my sum. — What wilt thou do for her ? 
King. Oh, he is mad, Laertes. 

Queen. For love of God, forbear him. 295 

Ham. 'Swounds, show me what thou 'It do ; 

Woo't weep? woo't fight? woo't fast? woo't tear 
thyself? 

Woo't drink up eisel ? eat a crocodile ? 

296. 'Swounds] Q, Covte F ; thou 7/] F, ih 'owt Q. 297. wooU fast'] Q, 
omitted F. 298. eisef] Theobald, Esill Q, Esile (italicised) F. 

(according to Sharon Turner, the 
Down of the Yssel). On the other 
hand, it has been shown that "drink 
up " does not necessarily mean ex- 
haust ; it may mean drink eagerly, 
quaff. In Sonnets, cxi., Shakespeare 
names "potions of eisel " as a bitter 
and disagreeable remedy for ' ' strong 
infection." The word was used (see 
Ne'w Eng. Did.) for the vinegar re- 
jected by Christ upon the cross. The 
chief objection to eisel, vinegar, seems 
to be, as Theobald puts it, that " the 
proposition was not very grand." 
This objection would be met if we 
could find any special propriety in the 
proposition. Now vinegar, even in 
small quantities, as we learn from 
William Vaughan's Directions for 
Health (ed. 7, 1633, p. 47, first pub- 
lished about 1607), while it allays 
heat and choler, " hurtelh them that 
be sorrowfull." L. Joubert, Physician 
to the French King, in his Seconde 
Partie dcs Errcitrs Populaires (Rouen, 
1600, p. 135), notes the vulgar error: 
" Que le vinaigre est la mort de la 
colere et la vie de la melancholic." 
There may be irony in Hamlet's choice 



289. wag] move ; free from its pre- 
sent trivial or ludicrous associations. 
So " the empress never wags," Titus 
Andronicus, V. ii. 87 ; and Spenser, 
Faerie Qtteene, iv. iv. 167. 

292. (]ua7ttity] see III. iv. 75 ; used 
in depredator}' sense. 

297. Woo't] Perhaps used to express 
Hamlet's hurried utterance ; but it 
occurs. Ant. and Cleop. iv. ii. 7, 
and IV. XV. 59, with no such signi- 
ficance. Q I has Wilt. Yox Thou 'It, 
line 296, Q has th 'owt, possibly with 
the same intention. 

298. eiser\ Criticism has not ad- 
vanced much beyond Theobald's sug- 
gestions of 1733, that the Q Esill and 
F Esile mean eitlier eisel, vinegar, 
or some river ; and of the names of 
rivers none is more plausible than 
Theobald's " Yssel, in the German 
Flanders." Parallels for the hyper- 
bole of drinking a river can be pointed 
out in several Flizabethan writers, in 
CJreene's Orlando Furioso, in East- 
ward Hoe, and elsewhere. The pro- 
posal Nilus has only the crocodile to 
favour it. An English Esill has not 
been found, though there is an Iseldun 



202 HAMLET [act v. 

I '11 do 't. Dost thou come here to whine ? 

To outface me with leaping in her grave? 300 

Be buried quick with her, and so will I : 

And, if thou prate of mountains, let them 

throw 
Millions of acres on us, till our ground. 
Singeing his pate against the burning zone, 
Make Ossa like a wart ! Nay, an thou 'It mouth, 305 
I '11 rant as well as thou. 

Queen. This is mere madness ; 

And thus awhile the fit will work on him ; 
Anon, as patient as the female dove, 
When that her golden couplets are disclosed, 
His silence will sit drooping. 

Ham. Hear you, sir ; 310 

What is the reason that you use me thus ? 
I loved you ever. — But it is no matter ; 
Let Hercules himself do what he may, 
The cat will mew, and dog will have his day. {Exit. 

299. thou^ F, omitted Q. 305. a«] Pope; and (^, F. 306. Queen] Q, 
Kin. ¥. 307. thus'] F, this Q. 309. couplets] Q, cuplct F. 

of extravagant performances suggested 243, spoken at Gertrude's sugges- 

by Laertes' extravagance of grief: tion. 

Would you artificially heighten your 309. golden couplets] The pigeon 

sorrow by a bitter potion of eisel ? lays two eggs, and the young, when 

"Would you allay your anger ? disclosed ox hatched (see ill. i. 174), 

298. eat a crocodile] Hamlet's dial- are covered with yellow down, 

lenge to revolting feats — half-passion- 314. dog . . . day] "Bay" has 

ate, half-ironical — receives more point been proposed for day, but the saying 

if we remember that in current natural was proverbial; examples are found 

history the crocodile was a monster both earlier and later than Hamlet. 

of the serpent tribe. See Topsell's The meaning is, " Laertes must have 

Historie of Serpents. T. Bright re- his whine and his bark." Hamlet had 

gards the crocodile's bite as poisonous, previously (i. ii. 153) contrasted him- 

like an asp's. self with Hercules : if Hercules cannot 

306. madness] Compare this with silence dogs, much less I, who am 

Hamlet's apology to Laertes, v. ii. little like that hero. 



sen.] PRINCE OF DENMARK 203 

King. I pray you, good Horatio, wait upon him. — 3 1 5 

\Exit Horatio. 
[To Laertes?[ Strengthen your patience in our last 

night's speech ; 
We '11 put the matter to the present push. — 
Good Gertrude, set some watch over your son. — 
This grave shall have a living monument : 
An hour of quiet shortly shall we see; 320 

Till then, in patience our proceeding be. [Exeunt. 

SCENE II. — A Hall in the Castle. 

Enter HAMLET and HORATIO. 

Ham. So much for this, sir ; now let me see the other ; 
You do remember all the circumstance ? 

Hor. Remember it, my lord ? 

Ham. Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting 

That would not let me sleep ; methought I lay 5 
Worse than the mutines in the bilboes. Rashly, — 
And praised be rashness for it, let us know, 

315. you\ F, thee Q. 320. shortly'] F, thirtie Q, thereby Qq 3-6. 

Scene li. 
I. let me] Y, shall you (^. 2.. circumstanced] Theobald; circuinsiance. 

Q, F. 3. lord?] F, Lord. Q. 6. bilboes] F, bilbo Q. 6, 7. Rashly,^ 
. . . know,] Furness, rashly. And pray sd . . . it: let us know, Q, rashly, 
{And . . . it) let us know, Y. 

3i7./>'c;j'(;«//?<j/^]instantforwarding. (as in King John, li. i. 378) in the 

319. living] enduring. Moberly : fetters. Bilbo (of uncertain deriva- 

" a statue like life itself. " Clar. Press tion, perhaps named from Bilboa in 

suggests a double meaning, enduring Spain) was a long iron bar, with 

(meant for Gertrude), the life of Ham- sliding shackles, to confine the ankles, 

let (for Laertes). a loclc fixing one end to the floor. 

The earliest example of the word in 

^'^"'- "■ New Eng. Did. is of 1557 from 

4.yff/i/z«^] So Ardenof Feversham, Hakluyt's Voyages. 

ni. vi. : " This fighting at my harte." 6,7. Rashly] Pope read A'j.t//«^5J-. 

6. mutines in the bilboes] mutineers Tyrwhitt, retaining Rashly, and read- 



204 HAMLET [act v. 

Our indiscretion sometimes serves us well 
When our deep plots do pall; and that should teach us 
There's a divinity that shapes our ends, lo 

Rough-hew them how we will. 

Hor. That is most certain. 

Ham. Up from my cabin, 

My sea-gown scarf'd about me, in the dark 

Groped I to find out them; had my desire, 

Finger'd their packet, and in fine withdrew i 5 

To mine own room again ; making so bold, 

My fears forgetting manners, to unseal 

Their grand commission; where I found, Horatio, — 

O royal knavery ! — an exact command. 

Larded with many several sorts of reasons 20 

Importing Denmark's health, and England's too. 

With, ho ! such bugs and goblins in my life, 

8. sonietimes\ F, sometime Q. 9. dee/>'\ Q, dcare F ; pair\ Q, 'P,fall Qq 
3-6; /each'] F, /earn Q. 13. me, in the dark] <2 6, no point in Q, comma 
only after ^ar/!'^ F. i"]. 7msear\¥,7info!d(^. 19. fJF, ^Q. 20. 
1-easotts'] Q, reason F. 

\ngfor it lets^yiowXd-p^^ce Andpraised ill-favouredly." We do not need the 

to certain, line ii, in a parenthesis, assistance of the dealer in skewers 

thusconnectingi'v'aj///)' with "up from who told Farmer that his nephew 

my cabin." could rough-hew them, but that he 

9. pall] Pope read fail, and is fol- had himself to shape their ends, 
lowed by Capell, Dyce (ed. 2), Fur- 13. sea-gown] Singer quotes Cot- 
ness, Hudson. Ingleby, citing several grave: " ^j-f/az'/wi? . . . a sea-gowne, 
examples, maintains that fall was or a coarse, high-collered, and short- 
used by Elizabethan writers where we sleeved gowne, reaching down to the 
should use y^//, and ya// is the reading mid-leg, and used most by sea-men 
here of Qq 3-6. Fall, however, to and saylors." 

grow vapid and so worthless, occurs 20. Larded] see iv. v. 36. 
m Ant. and Cleop. U. vii. 88, " pall'd 21. Importing] concerning. Com- 

fortunes," and has here the authority pare Lovers Labour's Lost, iv. i. 57. 
of both Q and F. 22. bugs] bugbears, as in Taming 

10. II. ends, Rough-hew] To ivugh- of the Shrezv, I. ii. 211. In Chapman's 
hew, perhaps originally a carpenter's Gentleman Usher, enter "Sylvan, 
word, extended its meaning. Thus with a Nymph, a man Bugge and a 
Florio : ^'' Abbozzare, \.o xo\x^-\\zv] ox woman." 

cast any first draught, to bungle up 



sc. II.] PRINCE OF DENMARK 205 

That, on the supervise, no leisure bated, 
No, not to stay the grinding of the axe, 
My head should be struck off, 

Hor. Is 't possible ? 25 

Ham. Here's the commission: read it at more leisure. 
But wilt thou hear me how I did proceed ? 

Hor. I beseech you. 

Ha7n. Being thus be-netted round with villanies, — 

Ere I could make a prologue to my brains, 30 

They had begun the play, — I sat me down, , 

Devised a new commission, wrote it fair ; 

I once did hold it, as our statists do, 

A baseness to write fair, and labour'd much 

How to forget that learning; but, sir, now 35 

It did me yeoman's service. Wilt thou know 

The effect of what I wrote ? 

Hor, Ay, good my lord. 

27. me\ F, now Q. 28. /] Ay Capell and several editors. 29-31. 

villanies . , . /] Dvce, villairies. Or , . . play, I Q, villaines, Ere . . , 
Play. I Y. 37. 'effect'] Q, effects F. 

23. bated] deducted ; no leisure time "(Ere I could make a prologue, to my 

is to be taken out of the interval Bane 

between the supervisal of the commis- They had begun the Play :). " 

sionand Hamlet's execution. Promp- 33. statists] statesmen, as in Cyni- 

torii^mParvuloru/n, '^Baten or a.ha.ten beline, li. iv. 16. Ritson quotes 

of weyle or mesuxe, suStra/io." Florio's Montaigne, 1603, p. 125: 

29. villayiies] For instances of "I have in my time seene some who 
the confusion of villaine and villanie by writing did earnestly get both their 
in Y, see Sidney Walker, Criticism on titles and living, to disavow their ap- 
Shakespeare, ii. 44. prentise age, marre their pen, and 

30, 31.] Hamlet's brains operate affect the ignorance of so vulgar a 
without any scheme assigned \.o them qualilie." 

by his conscious self. They proceed "X^^. yeoman^ sservice'\'$sX.t\QX\'^: "The 

as players without an argument to the ancient yeomen were famous for their 

play. See the prologue to Romeo and military valour. ' These were the 

Juliet, where the action of the play is good archers in times past,' say Sir 

set forth. Theobald, taking They as Thomas Smith, ' and the stable 

referring to Hamlet's enemies, read troop of footmen that affraidc all 

(in parenthesis): France.'" 



206 HAMLET [act v. 

Ham. An earnest conjuration from the king, 
As England was his faithful tributary, 
As love between them like the palm should flourish, 40 
As peace should still her wheaten garland wear, 
And stand a comma 'tween their amities, 
And many such-like As&s of great charge, 
That, on the view and knowing of these contents, 
Without debatement further, more or less, 45 

He should the bearers put to sudden death. 
Not shriving-time allow'd. 

Hor. How was this seal'd ? 

Ha7n. Why, even in that was heaven ordinant. 
I had my father's signet in my purse. 
Which was the model of that Danish seal ; 50 

Folded the writ up in the form of the other, 
Subscribed it, gave 't the impression, placed it safely, 

40. like\ Q, as F ; should'] F, might Q. 43. As^j-] Furness, as sir Q, 
Assis F. 44. kfiowingof] Q, ktiow ofY. 46. the\ F, those (^. 48. ordi- 
nant'] Q, ordinate F. 51. the form] Q, for/n F. 52. Subscribed] F, 
Subscribe Q. 

42. comma] Theobald substitutes stop, and in this view a mark of con- 

commere •jlis.nvatr, cement ; other sug- nection, not division"; but there is 

gestions are co-mate, column, couti- no suggestion of a full stop here, and 

ter. No emendation is required ; the a comma in this sense always marks 

obscurity has arisen through forgetting a division ; nor is the idea that peace 

an earlier meaning of comma, a connects amities, but that it derives its 

phrase or group of words forming a force through dependence on mutual 

short member of a sentence or period, love. 

The New Eng. Diet., which gives 43. As>t%] A quibble, as Johnson 

several examples, so explains comma notices, between " as " (pronounced 

in the only other instance in which it ass in Warwickshire) and ass the 

is used by Shakespeare — Timon of beast of burden or charge ; charge 

Athens, I. i. 48 : "No levelled malice being used in the double sense of 

Infects one comma in the course I material burden and moral weight, 

hold." Here amity begins and amity See Ttvelfth Night, II. iii. 184, 185. 

ends the period, and peace stands The quibble of as, ass is amusingly 

between like a dependent clause, introduced in Chapman's Ge?itlema7t 

Clar. Press, following Johnson, ex- f/s7^«r, near close of Act III. 

plains otherwise: "comma is used ^o. model] counterpart. Malone 

here as opposed to 'period' or full refers io /Cichard //. ill. ii. 153. 



sen] PRINCE OF DENMARK 207 

The changeling never known. Now, the next day 
Was our sea-fight, and what to this was sequent 
Thou know'st already. 5 5 

Hor. So Guildenstern and Rosencrantz go to 't, 

Hivn. Why, man, they did make love to this employ- 
ment ; 
They are not near my conscience ; their defeat 
Does by their own insinuation grow. 
'Tis dangerous when the baser nature comes 60 

Between the pass and fell incensed points 
Of mighty opposites. 

Hor. Why, what a king is this ! 

Ham. Does it not, thinks 't thee, stand me now upon — 
He that hath kill'd my king and whored my 

mother, 
Popp'd in between the election and my hopes, 65 
Thrown out his angle for my proper life. 
And with such cozenage — is 't not perfect conscience 
To quit him with this arm ? and is 't not to be 

damn'd 
To let this canker of our nature come 
In further evil ? 70 

54. sequent\ Q, scment F. 56. i'o . . . /i; V ] Q ; in F comma before 
,^(0. 57. Why . . . employmeni] ¥, omitted Q. 58. defeat\ Q, debate F. 
59. Does] Q, DoihY. 62. this !\ Q, this? F. 63. ihitiks't] S. Walker 
conject., Y)yce, thinke Q, thinkst Y ; upon — ] Boswell, uppon? Q, vpon F. 
68-80. To quit . . . here z'] F, omitted Q. 

59. insinuation] Malone : " By 63. thinks V thee] Walker's cor- 

their having insinuated or thrust rection of F ; seems it to thee, 

themselves into the employment." 63. stand me 7iow upon] is it not 

61. pass] thrust, as in line 170. incumbent on me, as in Richard /I. 
Dyce and other editors hyphen fell- 11. iii. 138. 

incensed. 70. In] Into, as in V. i. 300. 

62. opposites] opponents, as in 
Twelfth Night, ni. iv. 253. 



208 HAMLET [act v. 

Hor. It must be shortly known to him from England 
What is the issue of the business there. 

Hain. It will be short ; the interim is mine ; 

And a man's life 's no more than to say " One." 

But I am very sorry, good Horatio, 75 

That to Laertes I forgot myself; 

For, by the image of my cause, I see 

The portraiture of his ; I '11 court his favours ; 

But, sure, the bravery of his grief did put me 

Into a towering passion. 

Hor. Peace ! who comes here ? 80 

Enter OSRIC. 

Osr. Your lordship is right welcome back to Denmark. 

Ham. I humbly thank you, sir. — \_Aside to Hor^ Dost 
know this water-fly? 

Hor. [Aside to Ham.'] No, my good lord. 

Ham. [Aside to Hor^ Thy state is the more 85 
gracious, for 'tis a vice to know him. He hath 
much land, and fertile ; let a beast be lord of 
beasts, and his crib shall stand at the king's 
mess : 'tis a chough, but, as I say, spacious in 
the possession of dirt. 90 

73. is] Hanmer, 's F. 74. life's] F, life Reed and many editors. 

78. cottri ] Theobald, couni F. 80. Enter Osric] F, 2 ; Enter a Courtier 
Q ; Enter young Osricke F. 81. (and later) Osr.] F, Cour. Q. 89. 
say] Q, saw F. 

79. bravery] bravado, or ostenta- by the natives chow") or red-legged 

tion. Examples of each meaning crow, be meant, the following, from 

are common. Carew's Siii~vey of Cornwall, 1602 

83. zvater-fly] Because the water- (p. no, ed. 1811), maybe quoted: 

fly is a little, skipping, burnished ' ' His state, when he is kept tame, 

creature, seeming busily idle. See ungracious, in filching and hiding of 

Troilus and Cressida, V. i. 38. money, and such short ends, and 

89. chough] If the Cornish chough somewhat dangerous in carrying 

(which Ritson says is "pronounced sticks of fire." Camden also notices 



sen] PRINCE OF DENMARK 209 

Osr. Sweet lord, if your lordship were at leisure, I 
should impart a thing to you from his majesty. 

Ham. I will receive it, sir, with all diligence of spirit. 
Putyour bonnet to his right use ; 'tis for the head. 

Osr. I thank your lordship, 'tis very hot. 95 

Hani. No,believe me,'tis verycold ; the wind is northerly. 

Osr. It is indifferent cold, my lord, indeed. 

Ham. But yet methinks it is very sultry and hot 
for my complexion. 

Osr. Exceedingly, my lord ; it is very sultry, — as 1 00 
'twere, — I cannot tell how. But, my lord, his 
majesty bade me signify to you that he has 
laid a great wager on your head. Sir, this is 
the matter — 

Ham. I beseech you, remember — 105 

{^Hamlet moves him to put on his hat. 

Osr. Nay, good my lord ; for mine ease, in good 

91. lordship'] Q^, friendship ¥. 93. j/r] Q, omitted F. 94. 7'^^/] F, 

omitted Q. 95. 'iis]¥, ii is Q. 98. AV^/jtV] Q, omitted F ; j-«//';j] F, 
sully Q. 99. for my complexion] P\ or my completion Q, or my 

complexion — Warburton and many editors. lOi. But] F, omitted Q. 

104. matter — ] Rowe ; matter. Q, F. 105. Hamlet moves . . .] Johnson ; 

omitted Q, F. 106. good my lord] Q, in good faith F ; mine] F, my Q. 

his money-loving and his incendiary Lost, v. i. 103 : " I do beseech thee, 

practices. Chough's "chat" and remember thy courtesy; I beseech 

"gabble" are spoken of in Tempest, thee, apparel thy head." The mean- 

II. i. 266, and AlFs Well, iv. i. 22. ing of the phrase (found also in Jon- 

But Caldecott may be right in think- son and elsewhere) is Remember that 

ing that here chujf may be meant, you have already complied with the 

Furness quotes Cotgrave : '■''Franc- requirement of courtesy; so cover 

goutier, A substanciall yonker, your head. 

weal thie chuffe," and " Maschefouyn, 106. for )iiinecase]\hQ coxwewiionaX 
a chuffe, boore . . . one that is fitter form of reply, when remaining un- 
to feed with catlell than to conuersc covered. Examples are cited from 
with men." Marston's Malcontent (Induction), 

95-103. JTheobaldnoted the parallel and Florio's Second Frulcs : that 

in Juvenal, Sat. iii. : "igniculum from IVIarston (given to Shakespeare's 

brumie si tempore poscas, Accipit fellow-player William Sly) is one of 

endromidem ; si dixeris, xstuo, sudat." several reminiscences of Hamlet. 

105. remember] So Love's Labour'' s Malone inferred that Sly had played 

14 



210 



HAMLET 



[act v. 



faith. Sir, here is newly come to court 
Laertes ; believe me, an absolute gentleman, 
full of most excellent differences, of very soft 
society and great showing ; indeed, to speak i i o 
feelingly of him, he is the card or calendar 
of gentry, for you shall find in him the con- 
tinent of what part a gentleman would see. 
Ham. Sir, his definement suffers no perdition in 

you ; though, I know, to divide him inven- i 1 5 
torially would dizzy the arithmetic of 
memory, and yet but yaw neither, in respect 

107-147. Sir, hen . . . iinfellowed] Q, omitted F, which abbreviates by 
reading Sir, yon are ftof ignorant of what excellence Laertes is at his weapon. 
116. dizzy'\ Q 4, dosie Q. 



Osric ; but Sly also asks Sinklo to 
"sit between my legs" (a reminis- 
cence of Hamlet and Ophelia), to 
which Sinklo replies, " the audience 
will then take me for a viol-de-gambo, 
and think that you play upon me " 
(a reminiscence of liamlet and the 
two courtiers). 

108. at>so/nte] consummate, perfect, 
as in Merry Wives, ill. iii. 66: "an 
absolute courtier." 

109. differences^ characteristics 
(which difference one person from 
others). In heraldry [a difference 
(alteration of or addition to a coat 
of arms) distinguishes a junior member 
or branch of a family from the chief 
line. 

III. feeling!y'\ with just perception. 
Compare Twelfth Night, 11. iii. 172. 
Q misprints sellingly. 

Ill, 112. card . . . gentry] card, 
chart or map (as in V. i. 149) "by 
which a gentleman should direct his 
course ; the calendar by which he is 
to choose his time " (Johnson). 
Gentr}', courtesy, as in li. ii. 22. 
Perhaps card here means the card of 
the mariner's compass ; calendar [use- 
ful in navigation with its astronomical 



data) was used figuratively as ex- 
ample, model. 

112, 113. C£i;///;/^;//] summary, sum 
and substance of the qualities a gentle- 
man would desire to contemplate, 
with a play on the geographical 
meanings of continent and part, 
suggested by card. Nicholson pro- 
poses /rtr/j-, as in IV. vii. 74. 

1 14. definewent] definition. Ham- 
let uses an affected preciosity ; no 
other example of the word in this 
sense earlier than 1867 is recorded in 
JVew Eng. Diet. ; no other example 
in any sense before 1643. 

116. arithmetic] "The two meta- 
phors (arithmetic and quick sail)," 
says Clar. Press, "are a little difficult 
to separate." Perhaps they should 
rather be united. The card and con- 
tinent suggest a voyage to discover 
Laertes' parts. The arithmetic of 
memory may be the computations 
made in a navigator's head ; in 1625 
T. Addison published his Arith- 
metical Navigation. Q dosie is only 
an obsolete form of dizzy (see New 
Eng. Diet., dozy). 

117. yaw] Qq 3-6 have raw, 
which Johnson explains : " the best 



sen.] PRINCE OF DENMARK 



211 



of his quick sail. But, in the verity of extol- 
ment, I take him to be a soul of great article, 
and his infusion of such dearth and rareness, i 20 
as, to make true diction of him, his semblable 
is his mirror, and who else would trace him, 
his umbrage, nothing more. 

Osr. Your lordship speaks most infallibly of him. 

Ham. The concernancy, sir? why do we wrap the 125 
gentleman in our more rawer breath ? 

Osj: Sir? 

Hor. Is 't not possible to understand in another 
tongue ? You will do 't, sir, really. 



125. sir? w/^j'] Capell, sir, 7v/iy Q. 
tougue ?] Theobald, tongue. Q ; You , 
sir really Q. 

account of him would be imperfect" ; 
Heath explains — Laertes was but 
young {raw) in proportion to his pro- 
gress in accomplishments. To yaw, 
used of a ship, means to move im- 
steadily, to diverge from her course ; 
"hue illuc vacillare," says Coles's 
Dictionary. But neither means ' ' for 
all that " (examples in Schmidt's .SV^ 
Lexicon, under neither). In respect 
ofhz.s two meanings in Shakespeare : 
(i) with regard to, (2) in comparison 
with, "///j quick sail " may possibly, 
as Deighton holds, mean its. Tiiese 
are the data for an explanation of 
Hamlet's jargon ; to which it should 
be added that for yet Dyce and 
others read it ; yt, it, being easily 
mistaken for yet ; and that Staunton 
conjectures wiV [or yet. The explana- 
tion of the text as it stands may be : 
To enumerate in detail the perfections 
of Laertes would bewilder the com- 
putations of memory, yet for all that 
— in spite of the calculations — the 
enumeration would stagger to and 
fro (and so fall behind) in comparison 
with Laertes' cjuick sailing (or, pos- 



127. Sir?} Capell, Sir. Q. 129. 
. really'] Qq 3-6 ; Yoti will too U 



sibly, considering its quick sail, which 
ought to steady the ship). 

119. article^ business, concern; 
"of great article," of great moment 
or importance. See New Eng: Diet., 
article, 10. 

120. infusion . . . rareness"] the 
qualities infused into him ; something 
higher than acquisition. Sir T. 
Browne {A'elig'io Aledici, II. § viii.) 
would sometimes shut his books, 
thinking the pursuit of knowledge a 
vanity, when, wait a little and we 
shall enjoy knowledge by "instinct 
and infusion." Dearth, dcarness. 
Bishop Barlow, Three Sermons 
(1596): "Dearth is that, when all 
things . . . are rated at a high price." 

122. trace] follow, as in 1 Henry 
IV. III. i. 47. 

125. concernancy] concernment ; 
another affected word ; no other ex- 
ample given in New Eng. Diet. 

125. why . , . ] Theobald took 
these words as spoken of Osric to 
Horatio; no doubt, erroneously. 

128, 129. A'/ . . . tongue]]o\iw?,ow 
conjectured a " mother tongue." 



212 HAMLET [act v. 

Ham. What imports the nomination of this gentle- 130 

man ? 
Osr. Of Laertes ? 
Hor. [Aside to Ham.l His purse is empty already ; 

all 's golden words are spent. 
Ham. Of him, sir. 135 

Osr. I know you are not ignorant — 
Ham. I would you did, sir ; yet, in faith, if 

you did, it would not much approve me. 

Well, sir? 
Osr. You are not ignorant of what excellence Laertes 1 40 

is — 
Ham. I dare not confess that, lest I should compare 

with him in excellence ; but, to know a man 

well, were to know himself 
Osr. I mean, sir, for his weapon; but in the im- 145 

putation laid on him by them, in his meed he 's 

unfellowed. 
Ham. What 's his weapon ? 
Osr. Rapier and dagger. 

132. Laertes? (^6, Laertes Q^. 136. ignorant — ] Theobald, ignorant Q. 
138, 139. me. Well, sir?] Globe Sh., we, well sir Q, tne. Well, sir. 
Theobald. 141. is — ] Malone, is. Q. 145. for his] Q 6, for this Q. 

146. them, in his meed] Steevens, them in his meed, Q. 

Jennens : "understand? In another rarely." The words are an ironical 

tongue you " (addressed to Osric). encouragement to Osric to talk like a 

Malone conjectured: "Is't possible rational human being — Believe me 

not to understand in a mother tongue?" you will succeed. 

(addressed to Hamlet). The words 138. approve] commend. 

are surely addressed to Osric, and 143. but to know] to know another 

mean " Might you not understand implies self-knowledge, the height of 

if you used a less affected dialect?" human wisdom. 

Moberly explains : " Can't you under- 145, 146. imputation] re'pwX.Q, 2iS in 

stand your own absurd language on Troilus and Cressida, i. iii. 339.- 

another tongue." 146. vieed] merit, as \xvS Henry VL. 

129. You . . . really] Theobald IV. viii. 38. 
x^zA rarely. Heath: " Vou do 't, sir, 



sen] PRINCE OF DENMARK 213 

Ham. That 's two of his weapons ; but, well. 150 

Osr. The king, sir, hath wagered with him six Bar- 
bary horses ; against the which he has imponed, 
as I take it, six French rapiers and poniards, 
with their assigns, as girdle, hangers, and so : 
three of the carriages, in faith, are very dear to 155 
fancy, very responsive to the hilts, most delicate 
carriages, and of very liberal conceit. 

Ham. What call you the carriages ? 

Hor. [Aside to Ham!\ I knew you must be edified 

by the margent ere you had done. 160 

Osr. The carriages, sir, are the hangers. 

Ham. The phrase would be more germane to the 
matter if we could carry cannon by our sides ; 
I would it might be hangers till then. But, 
on: six Barbary horses against six French 165 
swords, their assigns, and three liberal-conceited 
carriages ; that 's the French bet against the 
Danish. Why is this " imponed," as you call it ? 

151. hath wagered^ Q, hds wag'd F. 152. he has imponed] Theo- 
bald, hee has impaund Q, he impond F. 154. hangers] F, hanger Q 
and so] Q, or so F. 159, 160. Hor. . . . £/i?«if] Q, omitted F. 161. car 
riages] V, carriage Q. 162. germane] F 3, lerman Q, Cermaitie F 
163. catmon] F, a cannon Q. 164. might be] ¥, be Q. 165. on:] Pope 
on, Q, on F. 167. bet] Q, but F. 168. this " imponed''' as] F, this all Q 

152. imponed] staked. Perhaps both for fashion and workmanship . 
Osric's affected pronunciation of im- most peremptory beautiful." 
pawned. Johnson suggested deponed. 156. very ?-esponsive] closely cor 
Minsheu gives deponerc as Latin for responding. 

stake. 157. liberal conceit] elaborate de 

154. assigns] appurtenances. No sign, 
other example of this sense in yWw 160. margent] Explanatory notes 

£ng. Diet. often in old books printed in the 

154. hatigers] straps by which the margin, 
rapier hung from the girdle — often 163. cannon] Knolles, History of 

richly ornamented, as that described the Tiirks, 1603 : " He commanded 

by Jonson's Matthew {Every Man the great ordnance to be laid upon 

»«/^/j//;<M<;i<r, I. iv.), "a hanger . . . carriages." 



214 HAMLET [act v. 

Osr. The king, sir, hath laid, sir, that in a dozen 

passes between yourself and him, he shall not i 70 
exceed you three hits ; he hath laid on twelve 
for nine ; and it would come to immediate trial 
if your lordship would vouchsafe the answer. 

Ham. How if I answer No ? 

Osr. I mean, my lord, the opposition of your person 175 
in trial. 

Ham. Sir, I will walk here in the hall ; if it please 
his majesty, 'tis the breathing time of day with 
me ; let the foils be brought, the gentleman 
willing, and the king hold his purpose, I will 1 80 
win for him if I can ; if not, I will gain no- 
thing but my shame and the odd hits, 

Ors. Shall I re-deliver you e'en so ? 

Ham. To this effect, sir ; after what flourish your 

nature will. i 8 5 

169. sir, ihat'](^, thatY. 170. yourself^ <^, you Y. 171, 172. laid 

. . . nine]Ql, one twelve formineY. iy2. il]Q,ikatY. 177, 178, ^a//; 
. . . piajes/y, 'lis] Y, hall, . . . majestie, it is Q. 180. purpose,] Theo- 

bald ; purpose; Q, F. 181. :/ /] F, arid / Q; / will] Q, He Y. 

183. re-deliver . . . so] F, deliver you so Q. 

171, 172. twelve fornine] The word Venue or venny was sometimes used 

passes seems to mean passes which for a hit ; more commonly, a bout 

coiutt, the same as hits ; the encounter or a thrust. 

is to continue until one party has 173. anszver] Osric uses the word 

made a dozen hits. The King wagers for encounter. So in the Paston 

that Laertes — famous as a fencer, and Letters, " My Lord the Bastard took 

therefore able to afford his rival odds upon him to answer xxiv knyts and 

— will not have made his twelve gentylmen . . . at jostys of pese." 
hits until Hamlet's hits are nine; if 178. breathing time] Clar. Press: 

Hamlet falls short of nine, Laertes " the time of relaxation and rest." 

wins. Other explanations will be Breathing time was so used ; but this 

found in Furness. In Q i Hamlet time of relaxation was also the time for 

asks " And howe 's the wager ? " The recreative exercise. "To breathe" 

" Bragart Gentleman " replies : came to mean to exercise briskly 

"Mary sir, that yong Leartes in (from the quickening of the respiratory 

twelve venies oigans) ; so breathing time means a 

At Rapier and Dagger do not get time of intermission from compelled 

three oddes of you." toil and a time of voluntary exercise. 



sen] PRINCE OF DENMATIK 



215 



Os7: I commend my duty to your lordship. 

Ham. Your, yours. — \^Exit Osric. 

He does well to commend it himself; there 
are no tongues else for 's turn. 

Hor. This lapwing runs away with the shell on his 190 
head. 

Ham. He did comply with his dug before he sucked 
it. Thus has he, and many more of the same 
bevy that I know the drossy age dotes on, 
only got the tune of the time and outward 195 
habit of encounter ; a kind of yesty collection 
which carries them through and through the 
most fond and winnowed opinions ; and do 
but blow them to their trial, the bubbles are 
out. 200 



1 87, 1 88. Yours . . . (/oes]F, Yours dad's Q. 1S9. /urn] Q, ^o^t^^ueF. 

192. I/e . . . tvit}i\ F, A did sir with Q, A did so sir tvith Qq 3-6. 

193. has'\ Q, had F ; wa;?j] Q, rnine Y, nine F 2. 194. bcvy'\ F {beany), 
breede (^. 195. and outivard]Y, and out of an (^. ig6. yesty] F, histy 
(^, misty Qq 4-6. 198. fotid and winnowed] F, p7Vphane and tren- 
noivedCl. 199. trial] (^), try alls F. 



190. lapwing] So Meres, IVifs 
Treasury: "As the lapwing runneth 
away with the shell on her head as soon 
as sihe is hatched '' ; hence a forward, 
conceited youngster. Clar. Press 
adds insincere, the lapwing cr)'ing far 
from its nest to mislead intruders. 
See Measure for Measure, I. iv. 32. 

192. comply with] see II. ii. 394. 

^95) 196- outward . . . encounter] 
exterior manner of address. 

196. yesty collection] frothy aggre- 
gation (of empty knowledge, like a 
mass of bubbles). 

198. fond and %vi)inowed opinions] 
VVarburton's emendation /rtww'rt'is apt, 
and has found many supporters. 
Tschischwitz proposes profound for Q 
prophane. Q trennowed becomes //-tvi- 



7iowned in later Quartos, and renowned 
in Q 1676. Fleay proposes fond un- 
winnozved. Moberly explains : ' 'frothy 
expressions suited to express the 
absurdest and most over-refined no- 
tions"; Clar. Press: "The metaphor 
is a mixed one . . . Osric, and others 
like him, are compared to the chaff 
which mounts higher than the sifted 
wheat, and to the bubbles which rise to 
the surface through the deeper water." 
The metaphor in "winnowed" seems 
to me incidental and latent ; the 
meaning is " Their frothy acquisitions 
carry them successfully through the 
slight judgments of the most exquisite 
arbiters elegant iai uin." If wo read 
fanned, the same remains llie 
meaning. 



216 HAMLET [act v. 



Enter a Lord. 

Lord. My lord, his majesty commended him to 
you by young Osric, who brings back to him 
that you attend him in the hall ; he sends to 
know if your pleasure hold to play with Laertes, 
or that you will take longer time. 205 

Ham. I am constant to my purposes ; they follow 
the king's pleasure ; if his fitness speaks, mine 
is ready ; now or whensoever, provided I be 
so able as now. 

Lord. The king, and queen, and all are coming 210 
down. 

Ham. In happy time. 

Lord. The queen desires you to use some gentle 
entertainment to Laertes before you fall to 
play. 215 

Ham. She well instructs me. {Exit Lord. 

Hor. You will lose this wager, my lord. 

Ham. I do not think so ; since he went into France, 
I have been in continual practice ; I shall win 
at the odds. But thou wouldst not think how 220 
ill all 's here about my heart ; but it is no 
matter. 

Llor. Nay, good my lord, — 

201-216. Enter . . . itisU-ncts me] Q, omitted F. 214. /a//] Q, goe Qq 
4-6. 220. But]F, omitted Q. 220,221. how ill aWs] Q, how all ¥. 
223. lord, — ] Capell ; lord. Q, F. 

206. /«/};^^5fj-] Walker : "note the 212. Tn happy (inie]VikQ a la boti?ie 

double meaning." Tschischwitz : heure ; as in Othello, ni. i. 32. 

" Hamlet's /////^.cfi is unchanged to 220. odds\ Malone : "With the 

kill the King . . . when the King is advantage that I am allowed." 
fit for it in the hour of his unholy 
pleasure.'" 



sen] PRINCE OF DENMARK 217 

Ham. It is but foolery ; but it is such a kind of 

gain-giving as would perhaps trouble a woman. 225 

Hor. If your mind dislike any thing, obey it; I will 
forestall their repair hither, and say you are 
not fit. 

Hani. Not a whit ; we defy augury ; there 's a special 

providence in the fall of a sparrow. If it be 230 
now, 'tis not to come ; if it be not to come, it 
will be now ; if it be not now, yet it will come ; 
the readiness is all ; since no man has aught 
of what he leaves, what is 't to leave betimes ? 
Let be. 235 

Etiter King, Queen, Laertes, Lords, Osric, and 
Attendants zvith foils and gaimtlets : a table and 
flagons of ivine on it. 

King. Come, Hamlet, come, and take this hand from me. 
[ The King puts the hand of Laertes into that 

of Hamlet. 

225. gain-giving\ F, gamgiving Q, game-giving Qq 4-6. 226. //] 

Q, omitted F. 229. there'' s a\ F, there is Q. 231. noiv\Yy omitted Q. 

233-235. the 7-eadiness . . . Let he^ Caldecott ; The readines is all, since ?to 
man of ought he leaves, knowes what ist to leave betimes, let be. Q ; The 
readinesse is all, since no matt ha^s ought of zvhat he leaves. Mhat is't to 
leave betimes? F. 235. Enter King . . .] F (substantially); A table 

prepared, Trumpets, Drums, and Officers with Cushions, King, Queene, and 
all the state, T'oiles, daggers, and Laertes. Q. 236. The King . . .] 

Johnson (substantially) ; omitted Q, F. 

225. gain-gi7'ing] misgiving ; man can solve its mysteries. But the 

formed like gainsay. idea of F is vulgarised by reducing it 

233, 234. since . . . betimes'] to " If a man cannot carry away with 

Many editors follow Warburton, who him life's goods" ; it is rather : If we 

punctuates Q thus: "since no man, possess nothing except our personality, 

of ought he leaves, knows, what." what matters it to leave the adventi- 

Johnson read "knows aught of." tious things of life soon or late. 

The Q certainly gives a fine and Hanmer read "since no man owes 

characteristic meaning : since no man aught of what he leaves." 
knows what life may bring, since no 



218 HAMLET [act v. 

Ham. Give me your pardon, sir ; I 've done you wrong ; 
But pardon 't, as you are a gentleman. 
This presence knows, 

And you must needs have heard, how I am 
punish'd 240 

With sore distraction. What I have done, 
That might your nature, honour and exception 
Roughly awake, I here proclaim was madness. 
Was 't Hamlet wrong'd Laertes ? Never Hamlet ; 
If Hamlet from himself be ta'en away, 245 

And when he 's not himself does wrong Laertes, 
Then Hamlet does it not ; Hamlet denies it. 
Who does it then? His madness; if't be so, 
Hamlet is of the faction that is wrong'd ; 
His madness is poor Hamlet's enemy. 250 

Sir, in this audience, 
Let my disclaiming from a purposed evil 
Free me so far in your most generous thoughts. 
That I have shot mine arrow o'er the house. 
And hurt my brother. 

237. /'j'ifJF, I have C). 241. sore"] ¥, a sore Q. 248. madness^ 

madnesse. Q, Madnessel F. 251. Sir . . . midience] V, omitted Q. 

254. Mhte'\ F, T?iy Q. 255. brother] Q I, Q ; Mo/her F. 

239. pi-esence] royal and courtly istic irony of adopting another's point 

assembly ; frequent in Shakespeare. of view ; that Hamlet twice before 

242. exception] disapproval. Com- has pointed his indifference to the 

pare AlPs Well i. ii. 40. King by expressed deference to his 

255. brother] The F mother is mother ; and that he might ironically 

almost certainly a mere printer's error ; apologise for his apology (which |ohn- 

yet it is worth considering that Hamlet son thought unworthy of him as lacking 

has been requested by his mother to sincerity) by hinting at the close why 

" use some gentle entertainment to it was made and made in the desired 

Laertes"; that the speech, in com- form — "And hurt — my mother" (with 

plying with her request, merely de- a slight salutation towards Gertrude J. 

velops her words in the last scene, Can it be that this reading of F was 

"This is mere madness, etc."; that an afterthought of Shakespeare ? 
it is spoken not without the character- 



sen] PRINCE OF DENMARK 219 

Laer. I am satisfied in nature, 255 

Whose motive, in this case, should stir me most 
To my revenge ; but in my terms of honour 
I stand aloof, and will no reconcilement. 
Till by some elder masters of known honour 
I have a voice and precedent of peace, 260 

To keep my name ungored. But till that time 
I do receive your offer'd love like love. 
And will not wrong it. 

Ham. I embrace it freely. 

And will this brother's wager frankly play. — 
Give us the foils. — Come on. 

Laer. Come, one for me. 265 

Ha7n. I '11 be your foil, Laertes ; in mine ignorance 
Your skill shall, like a star i' the darkest night, 
Stick fiery off indeed. 

Laer. You mock me, sir. 

Ham. No, by this hand. 269 

King. Give them the foils, young Osric. — Cousin Hamlet, 
You know the wager ? 

Ham. Very well, my lord ; 

Your grace hath laid the odds o' the weaker side. 

261. keepi !•", omiltc-d Q ; ungored^ Q, inigorifdV ; ////] F, all Q. 263. /] 
Q, I do Y. 265. Come on] F, omitted Q. 267. darirsl] Q, F ; bni^ltlest 
Ff2-4. 271. ivager';] Capell ; ivagcr. Q, F. 272. hath] F, has (l. 

255. nature] Hamlet has referred 268. Stick fiery off] stand out 

to " nature" and "honour" ; Laertes brilUantly. For "darkest," changed 

replies as to each point. in F 2 to " brightest," st*: Ant. and 

260. voice aiid precedent] aulhori- Cleop. I. iv. 13. 

talive pronouncement, justified by 272. odds] three points given to 

precedent, on the question whether Hamlet, who is assumed to be the 

an insult by one distracted should be less skilled. Supposed, erroneously, 

formally resented. Laertes' words — by some to refer to the greater value 

spoken by an assassin — are wholly of the King's stake, 
insincere. 



220 HAMLET [act v. 

King. I do not fear it ; I have seen you both ; 

But since he is better'd, we have therefore odds. 
Laer. This is too heavy; let me see another. 275 

Ham. This hkes me well. — These foils have all a 
length ? [ They prepare to play. 

Osr. Ay, my good lord. 

King. Set me the stoups of wine upon that table. — 
If Hamlet give the first or second hit, 
Or quit in answer of the third exchange, 280 

Let all the battlements their ordnance fire ; 
The king shall drink to Hamlet's better breath ; 
And in the cup an union shall he throw, 
Richer than that which four successive kings 
In Denmark's crown have worn. Give me the 
cups; 285 

And let the kettle to the trumpet speak. 
The trumpet to the cannoneer without, 
The cannons to the heavens, the heaven to 

earth, 
"Now the king drinks to Hamlet!" — Come, 

begin ; — 
And you, the judges, bear a wary eye. 290 

Ham. Come on, sir. 
Laer. Come, my lord. \T hey play. 

274. better'd] F, better Q. 276. Ie7tgth .?] Rowe ; length. Q, F. 

283. unio}i~\ F, V)iice Q, Onixe Q 3-6. 2S6. trumpet] Q, trufnpets F. 

289.] Trumpets the while (stage direction) Q, omitted F. 291. Come, my 
lord] Q, Co?ne on sir F. 

274. better'd] not naturally superior, Steevens quotes Holland's Pliny : 

trained by Parisian fencers. " Vnions, as a man would say, 

280. i/tiit] pay off scores. Singular, and by themselves alonfe." 

283. union] Malone quotes Florio : Pliny tells of Cleopatra's dissolving a 

" Vnione . . . Also a faire, great, pearl in vinegar, and drinkin\; it. 

orient pearle, called an vnion." 286. Settle] see i. iv. 11. 



sen] PRINCE OF DENMARK 221 

Hatn. One. 

Laer. No. 

Ham. Judgment. 

Osr. A hit, a very palpable hit. 
Lae7'. Well ; again. 

King. Stay; give me drink. — Hamlet, this pearl is 
thine ; 

Here 's to thy health. — 

[ Trumpets sound, and cannons shot off ivithin. 
Give him the cup. - 
Ham. I '11 play this bout first; set it by awhile. — 295 

Come. [ They play. 

Another hit ; what say you ? 
Laer. A touch, a touch, I do confess. 
King. Our son shall win. 
Queen. He 's fat, and scant of breath. — 

Here, Hamlet, take my napkin, rub thy brows ; 

The queen carouses to thy fortune, Hamlet. 300 
Ham. Good madam ! 

King. Gertrude, do not drink ! 

Queen. I will, my lord ; I pray you, pardon me. 
King. [Aside.'] It is the poison'd cup ! it is too late ! 
Ham. I dare not drink yet, madam ; by and by. 

294. Trumpets . . .] Malone. Drum, trumpets and shot. Florish, a 
pcece goes off. Q (after kit, line 292), Trumpets sound, and shot goes off. F 
(after cup). 295. set /V] Q, set V. 296. Coine.'] Come: ¥, Come, Q. 
297. A touch, a touch,] F, omitted Q ; confess'] V, coitfest Q. 299. Here 

. . . napkin] Q, Heere''s a napkin V. 301. madam!] Dyce ; Madam. Q, 
F ; Madam — Rowe. 303, 307. Aside] Rowe. 

293. /i<r(7;-/] In fact the poison. See acted the character of Hamlet." H. 

line 337. Wyeth proposes faint ; Plehwe, re- 

298. /rz/] Clar. Pres. : "There is ferring to iv. vii. 158, conjectures A^?/. 
a tradition that this line was appro- 299. napkin] handkerchief, as in 

priate to Richard Burbage, who first Othello, in. iii. 290. 



222 HAMLET [act v. 

Queen. Come, let me wipe thy face. 305 

Laer. My lord, I '11 hit him now. 
Kifig. I do not think 't. 

Laer. [Aside.] And yet 'tis almost 'gainst my conscience. 
Ham. Come, for the third, Laertes : you but dally ; 
I pray you, pass with your best violence ; 
I am afeard you make a wanton of me. 3 i o 

Laer. Say you so? come on. \They play. 

Osr. Nothing, neither way. 
Laer. Have at you now ! 

[Laertes wounds Hamlet ; then, in scuffling, 
they change rapiers, and Hamlet wounds 

Laertes. 
King. Part them ! they are incensed. 

Ham. Nay, come, again. [ The Queen falls. 

Osr. Look to the queen there, ho ! 

Hor. They bleed on both sides. — How is it, my 
lord ? 315 

307. 'lis . . . 'gainst] F, it is . . . against Q. 308. third . . . you] 

Stesvens, /Aird Laertes, }'oii doe Q, third. Laertes, you ¥. 310. afeard]F, 
sure Q. 313. Laertes wounds . , .] Rowe, omitted Q. In scuffling 

they change Rapiers F ; They catch one anothers Rapiers, and both are 
wounded, Leartes falles downe, the Queene falles downe and dies Q i. 
314. come, again] F ; come againe Q, Yi 2-4. The Queen falls] Capell ; 
omitted Q, F. 315. is it] Q, is't] F. 

310. wanton] treat me like an blow descending along the blade of 

indulged^ boy. _ 3-our opponent) . . . advance the left 

313. Stage direction] Of several foot close to the outer side of the right 

methods of exchanging rapiers adopted foot of your opponent, seize with the 

by actors, or described by commen- left hand the guard of your opponent's 

lators, that suggested by H. von rapier. . . . The opponent meets the 

F"riesen (Sh. Jahrbiich, 1869) seems attack with the same manceuvre, and 

to accord best with the stage direc- gets his assailant's weapon in his 

tion of Q I. The writer derives it hand in the same way." The com- 

from his recollections of the fencing- batants change places, and continue 

school. " As soon as your opponent to fight. (Furness's translation ^b- 

has made a pass, and is about to breviated.) 

return to his guard, you strike the 314. ho!] Supposed by Staunton 

most powerful battute possible {i.e. a to be a signal to stop the combat. 



sen] PRINCE OF DENMARK 223 

Osr. How is 't, Laertes ? 

Laer. Why, as a woodcock to mine own springe, 
Osric ; 
I am justly kill'd with mine own treachery. 

Ham. How does the queen ? 

King. She swounds to see them bleed. 

Queen. No, no, the drink, the drink, — O my dear 

Hamlet, — 320 

The drink, the drink ! — I am poison'd. [^Dies. 

Ham. O villany ! — Ho ! let the door be lock'd : ' 

Treachery ! seek it out ! \^Laertes falls. 

Laer. It is here, Hamlet. Hamlet, thou art slain ; 

No medicine in the world can do thee good ; 325 
In thee there is not half an hour of life ; 
The treacherous instrument is in thy hand, 
Unbated and envenom'd ; the foul practice 
Hath turn'd itself on me ; lo, here I lie, 
Never to rise again ; thy mother's poison'd ; 330 
I can no more. — The king, the king 's to 
blame. 

Ham. The point envenom'd too ! — 

Then, venom, to thy work ! \Stabs the King: 

All. Treason ! treason ! 

King. Oh, yet defend me, friends ; I am but hurt. 335 

317. wvie ozun] Q, inincY. 321. Dies] Rowc ; omitted Q, F. 322. 
Ho !^ Theobald, hoiv (^, hoe (^ 4, How? F. 323. Laertes falls] Capell ; 
omitted (), F. 324. here, Hamlet. Hamlet] F, heere Hamlet, Q. 

326. hour of] V, houres Q. 327. thy] F, 7ny Q. 333, Stabs the King] 
Rowe, Hurts the King F, omitted Q. 

317. woodcock] %iiQ. I. iii. 115. Hamlet first to note that the button 

328. Utibated^^iiQ \\\ vii. 139. is gone, and reads, "The point — 

328. practice] artifice, stratagem, envenom'd too ! " 

See IV. vii. 68. 333. to thy work] Theobald (ed. 2) 

332. The point] Staunton supposes read " do thy work." 



224 HAMLET [act v. 

Ham. Here, thou incestuous, murderous, damned Dane, 
Drink off this potion ! Is thy union here ? 
Follow my mother ! \^King dies. 

Laer. He is justly served ; 

It is a poison temper'd by himself. — 
Exchange forgiveness with me, noble Hamlet ; 340 
Mine and my father's death come not upon thee, 
Nor thine on me ! \pies. 

Ham. Heaven make thee free of it ! I follow thee. — 
I am dead, Horatio. — Wretched queen, adieu ! — 
You that look pale and tremble at this chance, 345 
That are but mutes or audience to this act, 
Had I but time (as this fell sergeant, death, 
Is strict in his arrest) oh, I could tell you — 
But let it be. — Horatio, I am dead ; 
Thou livest; report me and my cause aright 350 
To the unsatisfied. 

Hor. Never believe it ; 

I am more an antique Roman than a Dane ; 
Here 's yet some liquor left. 

Ham. As thou 'rt a man, 

Give me the cup : let go ; by heaven, I '11 have 't. — 

336. Hert\ F, Hmre Q (= here?) ; murderous] F, omitted Q. 337. 0^] 
F, 0/ Q (== off?); union'] Q i, ¥ ; the Onixe Q. 338. King dies] F, 
omitted Q. 342. Dies] F, omitted Q. 348. you — ] Pope, you, Q, you. 
F. 350. cause aright] Q, causes right F. 351. Never believe] Q, F ; 
Never ; believe Hanmer. 

337. union] see line 283. Calde- 347. sergeant] Malone compares 
cott suggests a play on the word ; the Silvester's Du Bartas : "And Death, 
potion effects the union of the King drad Serjant of th' eternall ludge," 
and Queen. and Shakespeare's Sonnets, Ixxiv. : 

346. viutes] performers in a play "When that fell arrest Without all 
who have no words. The word occurs bail shall carrj' me away." "Ser- 
in the stage direction for the dumb- geants" is of frequent occurrence in 
show preceding the play, Act III. ii. Elizabethan literature as the name for 
147. officers who arrest debtors. 



sen.] PRINCE OF DENMARK 225 

good Horatio, what a wounded name, 355 
Things standing thus unknown, shall live behind 

me! 
If thou didst ever hold me in thy heart, 
Absent thee from felicity awhile. 
And in this harsh world draw thy breath in 

pain, 
To tell my story. — 

\^March afar off, and shot within. 
What war-like noise is this? 360 
Osr. Young Fortinbras, with conquest come from 
Poland, 
To the ambassadors of England gives 
This war-like volley. 
Ham. Oh, I die, Horatio ; 

The potent poison quite o'er-crows my spirit ; 

1 cannot live to hear the news from England; 365 
But I do prophesy the election lights 

On Fortinbras ; he has my dying voice ; 

So tell him, with the occurrents, more and less, 

Which have solicited — the rest is silence. [Dies. 

355. good Hoyatio\Y, god Horatio i^, God Horatio Q(\/^-6, God! — Horatio 
Capell. 356. live\ F, I leave (^ ; nie !'\ Jennens, 7ne? Q, ine. F. 360. March 
. . .] Steevens, A march a farre offQ, March afarre off, and shout within F. 
369. solicited — ] Jennens, solicited, Q, solicited. F ; siknce.'\ Q, silence. 
O, 0, o,o.¥ ; Dies] F, omitted (^. 

356. j-z^fl// //w] Staunton in support him." Qq 4-6, Pope, and other 
of F cites Much Ado, ill. i. 1 10: Q6.\\.or?, rez.6. ore-grozves. 

" No glory lives behind the back of 368. occurre/tts] occurrences, inci- 

such." dents. Beaumont and Fletcher, 

364. oV;--rr<?w.f] triumphs over (as a Beggar's Bush, i. i. : "kept me 

victorious cock). To several examples stranger. . . to all the occurrents of 

cited by Steevens and Malone, add my country." 

The .Spanish Mandevile, 1618, p. 369. solicited] invited, prompted, 

135 : " Being somewhat haughtie, as in Richard II. I. ii. 2. 
and suffering no man to overcrow 

15 



226 HAMLET [act v. 

Hor. Now cracks a noble heart. — Good night, sweet 
prince, 370 

And flights of angels sing thee to thy rest ! — 
Why does the drum come hither? \March within. 

Enter Fortinbras, tJie EnglisJi Ambassadors, luith drum, 
colours, and attendattts. 

For. Where is this sight ? 

Hor. What is it ye would see ? 

If aught of woe or wonder, cease your search. 
For. This quarry cries on havoc. — O proud Death! 375 

What feast is toward in thine eternal cell, 

That thou so many princes at a shot 

So bloodily hast struck ? 
First Avib. The sight is dismal; 

And our affairs from England come too late ; 

The ears are senseless that should give us hearing, 3 80 

To tell him his commandment is fulfill'd, 

That Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are dead. 

Where should we have our thanks ? 
Hor. Not from his mouth, 

Had it the ability of life to thank you ; 

He never gave commandment for their death. 385 

370. cracks'] Q, c7-acke F. 372. March within] Capell ; omitted Q, F. 

Enter Fortinbras . . . ] F (substantially). Enter Fortenbrassee, with the 
Embassadors. Q. 373- J'^l F> Jw/Q- 375- ^'^"■■^] Q> ^" F. 378. First] 
Capell ; omitted Q, F. 

370. cracks] So Co7'iolamis, v. iii. Othello, v. i. 48, Richai-d III. v. iii. 
9: " with a crack'd heart." 231. Clar. Press: "This pile of 

371. sing] Warburton reads wz«^. corpses urges to merciless slaughter." 
375. This quarry . . . havoc] His 376. towarcT] see i. i. 77. 

of F may refer to Death. White's 376. eternal] Perhaps used in the 

explanation seems right : "This heap sense which expresses abhorrehce ; 

of dead proclaims an indiscriminate see note on i. v. 21. 
slaughter." For "cry on" compare 383. /iw ;«<??<M] The King's mouth. 



sen.] PRINCE OF DENMARK 227 

But since, so jump upon this bloody question, 
You from the Polack wars, and you from England, 
Are here arrived, give order that these bodies 
High on a stage be placed to the view ; 
And let me speak to the yet unknowing world 390 
How these things came about; so shall you hear 
Of carnal, bloody, and unnatural acts, 
Of accidental judgments, casual slaughters, 
Of deaths put on by cunning and forced cause, 
And, in this upshot, purposes mistook 395 

Fall'n on the inventors' heads : all this can I 
Truly deliver. 
For. Let us haste to hear it, 

And call the noblest to the audience. 
For me, with sorrow I embrace my fortune ; 
I have some rights of memory in this kingdom, 400 
Which now to claim my vantage doth invite me, 
Hor. Of that I shall have also cause to speak, 

And from his mouth whose voice will draw on 

more ; 
But let this same be presently perform'd. 
Even while men's minds are wild ; lest more 

mischance, 405 

390. to the yet']Y , to yet Q. 394. forced cause'] F, for no cause Q. 

4(X). fi'g/its] (), Rites F. 401. now to] Q, are to F. 402. shall have 

also] Q, shall have alwayes F. 403. on more] F, no more Q. 405. 

while] Q, whiles F. 

386. jump] see i. i. 65. deaths of Rosencrantz and Guilden- 

392. carnal] changed to cittcll in stern. 

Qq 4, 5. This line refers to the 394. put on] instigated. Compare 

King's incestuous marriage and the Coriola7ius, 11. i. 272 ; for other 

murder of his brother ; the next, to examples see Schmidt, 

the death of Ophelia (accidental 400. 0/ memory] traditional and 

judgments) and of Polonius (casual remembered, 
slaughter) ; that which follows, to the 



228 HAMLET [act v. sen. 

On plots and errors, happen. 
For. Let four captains 

Bear Hamlet, like a soldier, to the stage ; 
For he was likely, had he been put on, 
To have proved most royally : and for his passage, 
The soldiers' music and the rites of war 410 

Speak loudly for him. — 
Take up the bodies. — Such a sight as this 
Becomes the field, but here shows much amiss. — 
Go, bid the soldiers shoot. 

\^A dead vmrck. Exeunt, bearing' off the bodies ; 
after which a peal of ordnance is shot off. 

409. 7-oyaUy\ F, royall Q. 410. )-ites\ F, right Q. 412. bodies'] Q, 

body F. 414. Stage direction] Capell (substantially) ; Exeunt Q ; Exeunt 

Marching : after the which, a Peale of Ordenance are shot off. F. 

406. 0)t] Perhaps "as the conse- 408. put on] set to work (as King), 
quence of " ; perhaps "on the top brought to trial, 
of." 409. passage) departure, as in ni. 

iii. 86. 



APPENDIX I 

The "Travelling" of the Players (n. ii. 347). 

Q I (1603) reads as follows: 

Ham. How comes it that they travell ? Do they grow 
restie ? 

Gil. No my Lord, their reputation holds as it was wont. 

Ham. How then ? 

Gil. Yfaith my Lord, noveltie carries it away, 
For the principall publike audience that 
Came to them, are turned to private playes, 
And to the humour of children. 

Q(i6o4): 

Ham. How chances it they trauaile ? their residence both 
in reputation, and profit was better both wayes. 

Ros. I thinke their inhibition, comes by the meanes of the 
late innouasion. 

Ham. Doe they hold the same estimation they did when 
I was in the Citty ; are they so followed, 

Ros. No indeed are they not. 

F (1623) repeats Q (1604) so far, and adds all that 
follows as given in the text (pp. 99-101) to and including 
the words " Hercules and his load too." 

The discussion of this matter by Prof W. Hall Griffin 
in The Athenaum, April 25, 1896, seems to me highly 
satisfactory. At Michaelmas 1600 Henry Evans took 
possession of the Blackfriars Theatre, — a private theatre, — 
which he leased from Richard Burbage, and there he set 
up " a companie of boyes," who became exceedingly 
popular. This is referred to in Q. r, 

220 



230 APPENDIX I 

Q (1604) refers to an inhibition and an innovation. 
Probably this is a veiled allusion to the popularity of the 
children, an innovation, which had almost the effect of 
an inhibition. If we must find an express inhibition, 
that due to the visitation of the Plague, 1603, may answer 
the purpose. In January 1604 the children became "the 
Children of her Majesty's Revels " ; in 1603 Shakespeare's 
company became the King's servants. It was inexpedient 
that the King's servants should censure the Queen's chil- 
dren. Hence the omission of any reference to boy 
actors in Q 1604. 

The passage in F refers not only to boy actors, but 
probably also to the " war of the theatres," in which 
Jonson, Marston, Dekker took prominent parts. The 
children performed Cynthia's Revels, 1600, and The Poet- 
aster, 1601. Jonson admits that he had " tax'd " the 
players, but only some of them, and that " sparingly " 
(see Apologeticall Dialogue appended to The Poetaster). 
A far less probable suggestion as to the " inhibition " is, 
that it refers to the disgrace of Shakespeare's company at 
court in 1601, owing to the share they had taken, by a 
performance of Richard II., in the conspiracy of Essex. 
See S. Lee's Life of Shakespeare, pp. 213-217. 



APPENDIX II 



Some Passages from the Quarto of 1603 

It may be of interest to give a few passages from the 
Quarto of 1603, which differ considerably from the received 
text, or are wholly absent from it. For II. i. 77-100 the 
Q 1603 gives: 

Of. O yong Prince Hamlet, the only floure of Demnark, 
Hee is bereft of all the wealth he had, 
The lewell that ador'nd his feature most 
Is filcht and stolne away, his wit 's bereft him, 
Hee found mee walking in the gallery all alone, 
There comes hee to mee with a distracted looke, 
His garters lagging downe, his shooes untide. 
And fixt his eyes so stedfast on my face, 
As if they had vow'd, this is their latest obiect. 
Small while he stoode, but gripes me by the wrist, 
And there he holdes my pulse till with a sigh 
He doth unclaspe his holde, and parts away 
Silent, as is the mid time of the night : 
And as he went, his eie was still on mee, 
For thus his head over his shoulder looked. 
He seemed to finde the way without his eies : 
For out of doores he went without their helpe. 
And so did leave me. 

III. ii. 53. The Quarto 1603 adds to Hamlet's criticism 
of the Stage Clown the following : 

And then you have some agen, that keepes one sute 
Of ieasts, as a man is knowne by one sute of 
Apparell, and Gentlemen quotes his ieasts downe 
In their tables, before they come to the play, as thus : 

231 



232 APPENDIX II 

Cannot you stay till I eate my porrige? and, you 

owe me 
A quarters wages : and, my coate wants a culHson : 
And your beere is sowre: and, blabbering with his 

lips, 
And thus keeping in his cinkapase of ieasts, 
When, God knows, the warme Clowne cannot make a 

iest, 
Vnlesse by chance, as the blinde man catcheth a 

hare: 
Maisters tell him of it. 

Dr. B. Nicholson has argued that Kemp is the clown 
specially hit at ; he had left Shakespeare's company. 
When he returned, these specialised jests were omitted. 
Dr. Nicholson further argues that the praise of Yorick is 
the praise of Tarlton, who died in 1588, and that on 
Kemp's return to the company the praise of Tarlton was 
made less pointed by altering the period during which 
Yorick's skull had lain in the earth from twelve to twenty- 
three years. 

III. iii. 36-72. Q. 1603 reads: 

King. O that this wet that falles upon my face 

Would wash the crime cleere from my conscience ! 
When I looke up to heaven, I see my trespasse, 
The earth doth still crie out upon my fact, 
Pay me the murder of a brother and a king, 
And the adulterous fault I have committed: 

these are sinnes that are unpardonable : 
Why say thy sinnes were blacker then is ieat, 
Yet may contrition make them as white as snowe : 

1 but still to persever in a sinne, 

It is an act gainst the universall power, 

Most wretched man, stoope, bend thee to thy prayer, 

Aske grace of heaven to keepe thee from despaire. 

III. iv. 136. From Exit Ghost to the close of the scene 
Q 1603 gives the following: 

Queene. Alas, it is the weaknesse of thy braine, 

Which makes thy tongue to blazon thy hearts griefes : 



APPENDIX II 233 

But as I have a soulc, I sweare by heaven, 
I never knew of this most horride murder : 
But Hamlet, this is onely fantasie, 
And for my love forget these idle fits. 
Ham. Idle, no mother, my pulse doth beate like yours. 
It is not madnesse that possesseth Hamlet. 

mother, if ever you did my deare father love, 
Forbeare the adulterous bed to night, 

And win your selfe by little as you may, 
In time it may be you wil lothe him quite : 
And mother, but assist mee in revenge, 
And in his death your infamy shall die. 
Queene. Hamlet, I vow by that majesty, 

That knowes our thoughts, and lookes into our hearts, 

1 will conceale, consent, and doe my best. 
What stratagem soe're thou shalt devise. 

Ham. It is enough, mother, good night: 
Come sir, I 'le provide you a grave, 
Who was in life, a foolish prating knave. 

The following is absent from the later texts, but the 
information here given by Horatio to the Queen is given 
by Hamlet to Horatio in the received text in V. ii. This 
scene follows iv. v. : 

Enter HORATio and the QUEENE. 

Hor. Madame, your sonne is safe arriv'de in Denmarke, 
This letter I even now receiv'd of him, 
Whereas he writes how he escap't the danger. 
And subtle treason that the king had plotted. 
Being crossed by the contention of the windes. 
He found the Packet sent to the king of Jinglatid, 
Wherein he saw himselfe betray 'd to death. 
As at his next conversion with your grace, 
He will relate the circumstance at full, 

Queene. Then I perceive there 's treason in his lookes 
That seem'd to sugar o're his villanic : 
But I will soothe and please him for a time, 
For murderous mindes are alwayes jealous. 
But know not you Horatio where he is ? 



234 APPENDIX II 

Hor. Yes Madame, and he hath appoynted me 
To meete him on the east side of the Cittie 
To morrow morning, 

Queene. O faile not, good Horatio, and withall, com- 
mend me 
A mothers care to him, bid him a while 
Be wary of his presence, lest that he 
Faile in that he goes about. 

Hor. Madam, never make doubt of that : 

I thinke by this the news be come to court : 
He is arriv'de, observe the king, and you shall 
Ouickely finde Hamlet being here. 
Things fell not to his minde. 

Queene. But what became of Gildersione and Rossencraft ? 

Hor. He being set ashore, they went for England, 
And in the Packet there writ down that doome 
To be perform'd on them that poynted for him : 
And by great chance he had his fathers seale, 
So all was done without discoverie. 

Queene. Thankes be to heaven for blessing of the prince, 
Horatio once againe I take my leave, 
With thowsand mothers blessings to my sonne. 

Hor. Madam adue. 



APPENDIX III 
Addenda 

Mr. W. J. Craig, who in knowledge of the language of 
Shakespeare is, I believe, unsurpassed by any living 
student, has read the proof-sheets of this edition (not 
always agreeing with my interpretations), has noted 
omissions, and has sent me a mass of valuable illustra- 
tions and additions, from which I make a scanty selection. 

I. i. io6 : head, source, as in AWs Well, I. iii. 178, "your 
salt tears' head." Hence origin, cause. Compare II. ii. 55. 

I. i. 166: russet, probably gray turning to gold or to 
red. Latham's JoJinsotis Dictionary notices that Sir I. 
Newton uses russet for gray. 

I. ii. 4 : one brow of woe. Brow, aspect, look. See 
Schmidt's Lexicon. 

I. ii. 100: peevish, foolish, silly, as in Comedy of Errors, 
IV. i. 93. 

I. iii. 56: shoulder of your sail. Shoulder, the back. 
See Schmidt's Lexicon. 

I. v. 48 : dignity, worth, excellence. See Lovers Labour's 
Lost, IV. iii. 236. 

I. v. 97 : globe. Schmidt thinks this may mean the 
world ; Mr. Craig suggests this little world of man. Com- 
pare Lear, III. i. 10. 

I. V. 116. Compare Marston, The Dutch Courtezan, 
I. ii. " Wha, ho, ho ! come, bird, come." 

236 



236 APPENDIX III 

I. V. 133: tvhirling words. Schmidt defines whirling 
"giddy." Mr. Craig prefers F hurling. But compare 
1 Henry VI. I. v. 19, "My thoughts are whirl'd Hke a 
potter's wheel." 

I. V. 1 50 : old true-penny. Mr. Craig notes these words 
as occurring in The Retiirne from Per?iasstis, II. iv., and 
Beaumont and Fletcher, The Loyal Subject, i. iii. ; he adds 
that Truepenny is the name of a character in Ralph 
Roister Doister, and is defined in Bailey's Dictionary 
(1721), "a name given by way of taunt to some sorry 
fellow." 

II. ii. 63 : preparation, used specially for a force ready 
for combat, as in Coriolanus, I. ii. 15. 

II. ii. 339: the humorous f)ian. Mr. Sidney Lee notes a 
mention in Henslowe's Diary, p. 183, of "The honorable 
lyfe of the humorous Earle of Gloster with his conquest of 
Portugalle." 

II. ii. 381 : carry it aivay. Mr. Craig compares Romeo 
and Juliet, III. i. 77, and notices an example earlier than 
any in Neiv English Dictionary, Nash, The Unfortunate 
Traveller (1594), Grosart's Nash, v. 42. 

II. ii. 402,403. Mr. Craig quotes from Apollo Shroving 
(1627), " It lifts a man up till he grow lesse and lesse like 
a hawk after a hernshaw." 

II. ii. 605 : John-a-dreams. Mr. Craig notices " John- 
dreaming" as an epithet in Hall's translation of Homer, 
1581, b. ii. 

III. iv. 135. Compare Jonson, The Fortunate IsleSy 
" Enter Skogan and Skelton, in Hke habits as they lived." 

IV. ii. 33 : Hide fox, defined as "hide and seek, a child's 
play," by Pegge, Alphabet of Kenticisms, 1735. 

IV. vii. 1 39 : unbated. Compare " unrebated swords " 
in North's Plutarch, "Coriolanus," p. 241, ed. 1603. 



APPENDIX III 237 

V. i. loi : loggats. Steevens notes " It is one of the 
unlawful [new and crafty] games enumerated in the statute 
of 33 Henry viii." 

V. ii. 6: bilboes. Mr. Craig notes an earlier example 
than any in Neiv English Dictionary : Elyot, Latin 
Dictionary (1538), ^^ area, the pillory, stocks, or bilboes," 

V. ii. 298 : fat and scant of breath. Mr. Craig under- 
stands /^z/ to mean not reduced to athletic condition by a 
fencer's training. 



PRINTED BY MORRISON AND GIB8 LIMITED, EDINBURGH 




Shakespecre, William 
The tragedy r " 



