THE ARDEN SHAKESPEARE 
GENERAL EDITOR : W. J. CRAIG 



TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 



ll 




J^ 



i*a 



THE WORKS 

OF 

SHAKESPEARE 

TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 



EDITED BY 



K. DEIGHTON 



? 




METHUEN AND CO. 

36 ESSEX STREET: STRAND 



L O N DON 



O^ Su l>u i"^ £11 



^Tin r 



'^"Sbr' 






' i". . » -» ,4 n if^ ;,^ 4^. 



D/-"": 



J 



First Published in igo6 



PR 



^ '•< v>  \ 



) 



CONTENTS 



PAGE 

Introduction .  • • " 

Troilus and Cressida . . • 

. 203 

Appendix I. • • • * " , 

Appendix II. • 



\ 



k 






INTRODUCTION 

Unless Shakespeare owed suggestions to a play called 
Troilus and Cressida upon which Dekker and Chettle 
were engaged in 1599, but which has not come down to 
us, the plot of our drama may be taken as derived in the 
main from Chaucer's Troilus and Criseyde, Caxton's 
Reaiyell of the Historyes of Troye, and Lydgate's Historye, 
Sege, and dystruccyon of Troye. To these may be added 
Chapman's translation of the Iliad (of which books i. ii. 
and vii.-xi, were published in 1598) as furnishing hints 
of character ; especially in the case of Thersites, whose 
portrait, physical and moral, is only more elaborately 
worked out by the dramatist. Of Shakespeare's obligations 
to Caxton and Lydgate there can be no doubt. On the 
question whether in the Cressida myth he was primarily 
and chiefly indebted to Chaucer, something will be said 
further on. 

Troilus and Cressida was first published in 1609. It 
then appeared as a quarto, of which there were two im- 
pressions differing only in the title-page and in the fact that 
one of them is prefaced by an address to the reader. This 
address opens with the words "Eternal reader, you have 
heere a new play neuer stal'd with the stage, neuer clapper- 
clawd with the palmes of the vulgar, and yet passing full 

vii 



\ 



viii INTRODUCTION 

of the palme comicall " ; and hence it was inferred that the 
impression in question was the earh'er of the two quartos. 
As, however, the title-pages were evidently printed from the 
same form, and as the running title. The History of Troilus 
and Cressida, corresponds in each, the Cambridge Editors 
believe that the copies of the impression without the address 
were first issued for the theatre and afterwards those with 
it for general readers. " In this case," they remark, " the 
expression 'neuer stal'd with the stage, neuer clapper- 
clawd with the palmes of the vulgar,' must refer to the first 
appearance of the play in type, unless we suppose that the 
publisher was more careful to say what would recommend 
his book than to state what was literally true." 

No further publication of the play is known until it 
appeared in the folio of 1623. There it stands between the 
Histories and the Tragedies, and its position has given rise 
to much dispute. It was supposed by Steevens to have 
been unknown to the editors Heminge and Coudell till 
after the volume was almost printed off; and Farmer 
added, " It was at first either unknown or forgotten. It 
does not, however, appear in the list of the plays, and is 
thrust in between the Histories and the Tragedies, without 
any enumeration of the pages ; except, I think, on one leaf 
only." To these hypotheses Knight replies, " If these 
critics had carried their inquiries one step farther, they 
would have found that Troilus and Cressida was neither 
unknown nor forgotten by the editors of the first folio. It 
is more probable that they were only doubtful how to 
classify it. In the first quarto edition it is called a famous 
History in the title-page ; but in the preface it is repeatedly 



INTRODUCTION ix 

mentioned as a Comedy. In the folio edition it bears the 
title of The Tragedie of Troilus and Cressida. In that 
edition the Tragedies begin with Coriolamis ; and the 
paging goes on regularly from i to y6, that last page 
bringing us within a hundred lines of the close of Romeo 
and Juliet. We then skip pages Jj and 78, Romeo and 
Juliet concluding with 79. Now the leaf of Troilus and 
Cressida on which Farmer observed an enumeration of 
pages includes the second and third pages of the play, and 
those are marked 79, 80. If the last page of Romeo and 
Juliet had been marked yj, as it ought to have been, and 
the first page of Troilus 78, we should have seen at once 
that this Tragedy was intended by the editors to follow 
Romeo and Juliet. But they found, or they were informed* 
that this extraordinary drama was neither a Comedy, nor 
a History, nor a Tragedy ; and they therefore placed it 
between the Histories and the Tragedies, leaving it to the 
reader to make his own classification." 

With regard to the discrepancies between the quarto and 
the folio, the Cambridge Editors write : " Some of the most 
important have been mentioned specially in the notes at 
the end of the play, and all others are recorded in the 
footnotes. We find in the Folio several passages essential 
to the sense of the context which do not exist in the 
Quarto, and which therefore must have been omitted by 
the negligence of a copyist or printer. On the other 
hand, we find some passages in the Quarto, not absolutely 
essential to the sense, though a decided improvement to 
it and quite in the author's manner, which either do not 
appear in the Folio at all, or appear in a mutilated form. 



X INTRODUCTION 

Sometimes the lines whicli are wrongly divided in the 
Quarto are divided properly in the Folio, and vice versa : 
in this point, however, the former is generally more correct 
than the latter. The two texts differ in many single words : 
sometimes the difference is clearly owing to a clerical or 
typographical error, but in other cases it appears to result 
from deliberate correction, first by the author himself, and 
secondly by some less skilful hand. . . . On the whole we 
are of opinion that the Quarto was printed from a transcript 
of the author's original MS. ; that this MS. was afterwards 
revised and slightly altered by the author himself, and that 
before the first Folio was printed from it, it had been 
tampered with by another hand. Perhaps the corrections 
are due to the writer who did not shrink from prefixing to 

\ Shakespeare's play a prologue of his own." 

The question of the date of composition is a difficult 
one, and various theories have endeavoured to solve it. Of 
these the most elaborate is that put forward by Fleay in 
1876. Three plot^, that critic held, are "interwoven, each 
of which is distinct in manner of treatment, and was com- 
posed at a different time from the other two. There is, 
first, the story o{\Troj//us and Cressida which v/as earliest 
written, on the basis of Chaucer's poem ; next comes the 
§tory of the challenge of Hector, their combat, and the 

'(•^sjaying of Hector by Achilles, on the basis of Caxton's 
' Three Destructions of Troy : and * finally, the story of 
Ulysses' stratagem to induce Achilles to return to the 
battlefield by setting up Ajax as his rival, which was 
written after the publication of Chapman's Homer, from 
whom Thersites, a chief character in this part, was taken." 



INTRODUCTION xi 

The dates at which the several parts were written Fleay 
conjectured to be about 1594, 1595 and 1607; and the 
conclusion thus drawn was based upon the difference of 
thought and expression between the earlier and the latest 
stories, and secondly, upon metrical evidence according 
with this difference. In his Introduction to Shakespearian 
Study, published a year later, he merely says, " This play 
was originally acted by the Chamberlain's men c. 1601, and 
was so entered for publication 7th February, 1603. . . . The 
play was rewritten (except the love story which remains 
nearly unchanged) before 1606, . . . and was printed in 
1609, piratically, as a play, ' not staled with the stage '. 
It was first acted in its present form in 1609." • • • Other 
critics, with less minuteness of detail, believe that the 
original production, which they date somewhere between 
1599 and 1602, was revised and enlarged between 1606 and 
1609, Thus Verplanck,^ to some extent anticipating Fleay, 
writes in 1847, " In Romeo and Juliet, The Merry Wives of 
Windsor, and more especially in Hamlet, we have the 
direct evidence of the manner in which Shakespeare, after 
having sketched out a play on the fashion of his youthful 
taste and skill, returned in after years to enlarge and re- 
model it, and enrich it with matured fruits of years of 
observation and reflection. ... In such a recasting and 
improvement of a juvenile work, unless it was wholly 
rewritten — which seems never to have been Shakespeare's 
method — the work would bear the characteristics of the 
several periods of its composition, and with the vernal flush 
of his youthful fancy it would have its crudity of taste, but 

1 1 quote from Rolfe's edition of the play, n.d. 



X 



xii INTRODUCTION 

contrasted with the matured fulness of thought and the 
labouring intensity of compressed expression of his middle 
i career. . . . Moreover, the style, and the verbal and metri- 
cal peculiarities, suggest other questions. There is much 
in the play recalling the rhymes and the dialogue of the 
Poet's earlier comedies, while the higher and more con- 
templative passages resemble the diction and measure of 
his middle period, . . . the author of Romeo and Juliet 
before 1595, might well have preceded it with the lighter 
loves of Cressida." ^ Others, again, date the whole of the 
play at 1608 or 1609. The advocates of the earliest date 
of a portion at all events of the story rely strongly on a 
passage in the old play of Histriouiastix published not later 
than 1602 and apparently ridiculing Shakespeare's Troiliis 
and Cressida in the following lines : — 

Troyltis. Come, Cressida, my cresset light. 

Thy face doth shine both day and night, 
Behold, behold thy garter blue, 
Thy knight his valiant elbow wears. 
That when he shakes his furious speare. 
The foe in shivering fearful sort. 
May lay him down in death to snort. 

Cressida. O knight with valour in thy face. 

Here take my skreene, wear it for grace; 
Within thy helmet put the same 
Therewith to make thy enemies lame : '^ 

the allusion being to V. ii. of the play. 

* These passages do not come consecutively in Verplanck's Introduction, 
but are pieced together in order to show to what extent they are in keeping 
with Fleay's theory. 

- Mr. Gollancz, in his edition of Troilus and Cressida, points out that 
after 1. 3 of this extract a line, ending with a rhyme to "blue," has dropped 
out, and that "wears" (1. 4) should be "wear" to rhyme with "spear". 
He adds, " This passage lends colour to the hypothesis that Troilus and 



INTRODUCTION xiii 

The arguments in favour of a revision and reconstruction 
which Verplanck and Fleay deduce from thought and dic- 
tion on the one hand and from metrical evidence on the 
other are in themselves forcible, the former more especially. 
To these are to be added the undramatic character of the 
play, apparent in its structure, its personages, and its pur- 
pose ; its want of unity ; and the desultory succession of 
incident and dialogue, noticed by various critics, which led 
Sir Walter Scott to say that it resembled " a legend, or 
a chronicle, rather than a dramatic composition," and which 
possibly account for its being styled a " History " in the 
quarto. There is, indeed, one consideration which makes 
it difficult to accept the revision theory, viz., the cynical, 
belittling, sour spirit that besm irches the whole play and 
seems to tes tijy^to a p assing mood of morbid disgust. 
Still, it may be argued that the portion which Fleay dates 
about 1607, that of the stratagem by which Ulysses tries to 
bring Achilles back to the battle-field, is the portion in which 
this spirit is least dominant. For though the Greek chiefs 
who take part in the plot are not the chiefs of Homer's 
ninth Book, though it is burlesqued, and we see none of 
the divine wrath of Pelides, Ulysses is not much degraded 
below the level of the Iliad, certainly is not a meaner man 
than him of the Philoctetes. Nor, again, is Thersites, here 
so prominent, painted with a deeper brush than that used 
by Homer. His portraiture is more of a full-length, but 

Cressida originally had some real or supposed bearing on the theatrical 
quarrels of the day, Ajax representing Jonson and Thersites standing for 
Dekker ; rank Thersites with his mastic jaws has been brought into connexion 
with Dekker's Satironiastix (1601) and Jonson's description of him in the 
Poetaster, ' one of the most overflowing rank wits of Rome ' ". 



xiv INTRODUCTION 

the features are the same. If there was to be a revision 
and if this story was to be inserted, it is obvious that the 
characters must be made to harmonise as far as possible 
with the spirit of the play as at first conceived. 

That the love-story was Shakespeare's starting-point 
is, I suppose, generally admitted. That in its delineation 
he followed Chaucer is generally assumed. Yet the whole 
tone of the story as dramatised is in most marked anti- 
thesis to that told by the older poet. In proof of this it 
is worth while, I think, to make a somewhat minute com- 
\ <.^ parison between the poem and the play. Chaucer, in 
jJ" this following Boccaccio, makes Cressida a widow, and 
( ' \-^' not only a widow but one of a cautious, self-contained 

nature, most desirous of avoiding scandal, of preserving 
her good name, and of living in what is now called re- 
spectability. Her father's desertion to the Greeks has 
exposed her to the danger of public resentment ; but 
Hector supports her, and the excellence of her conduct, 
set off by the charms of personal beauty, gains her general 
admiration. No inherent levity of nature discovers itself, 
nor is it without great pressure that she is induced to 
betray any liking for Troilus. Pandarus, her uncle, with 
persistent eagerness dwells upon the miserable condition 
to which the Prince has been reduced by his absorbing 
passion for her, depicts him as a man of every virtue that 
should command respect and of every charm that could 
attract love. His military fame and his gallant bearing 
as she sees him on horseback appeal to her imagination 
with a force that is quickened by the knowledge of his 
devotion. Her scruples and timidity Pandarus strives to 



INTRODUCTION xv 

overcome by protests that neither he nor Troilus has a 
thought of proposing anything that would injure her 
reputation or shock her modesty. Still, the affair proceeds 
slowly, and hope deferred again prostrates the Prince. 
On the suggestion of Pandarus, he addresses her in a 
letter describing his wretched state. With reluctance she 
sends him an answer, but one professing a sisterly interest 
only. At this stage, with the assistance of Deiphobus and 
Helen, arrangements are made for a banquet to which 
Cressida is invited, and an interview between her and 
Troilus is planned in the hope that he may find such favour 
in her eyes as shall in some measure restore him to his 
former self Two out of Chaucer's five Books are occupied 
in narrating with much amplitude what is here so meagrely 
condensed. With the third Book we come to the banquet. 
At its close Cressida is persuaded to go up to a chamber 
in which, unknown to her, Troilus is lying sick ; and there 
with passionate emotion he implores only that he may be 
allowed to serve her as her true knight. With many ad- 
jurations that he should "in honour of trouthe and gentil- 
nesse " " mene wel to her," she accepts his love, assuring him, 

For every wo ye shall recovere a blisse. 

After this they meet from time to time, but purity and 
self-restraint are never infringed. There is much avowal 
of high motives, and Pandarus strongly urges upon Troilus 
his niece's claim to respect and consideration. How far 
Shakespeare's " broker-lackey " had hitherto been wearing 
a mask, how far he was shortly afterwards impelled by 
mischievous glee and love of intrigue, it matters little to 
consider. Whatever the motives actuating him, he again 



V 



\ 



xvi INTRODUCTION 

bids Cressida, with her relative Antigone and her attending 
women, to a supper at his house. At nightfall the guests 
are about to depart, but a fierce storm bursts over the place 
and they are persuaded to remain till morning. When 
Cressida has retired to her chamber and all is still, Pan- 
darus comes to her with a piteous tale how that Troilus, 
maddened with jealousy at hearing that she was destined 
to love another, had made his way through the storm and 
craved a sight of her. After much argument, he persuades 
her to see the Prince. A long-drawn colloquy ensues 
between the lovers, Troilus descanting upon his misery, 
and in the end so exciting her pity and her passion that 
she yields to his sensual desires. The third Book leaves 
the pair in the height of happiness. They meet, they 
consider themselves husband and wife, Troilus is stimulated 
by his joy to martial deeds, and all goes well, the public, 
meanwhile, being none the wiser. The fourth Book, which 
narrates the capture of Antenor and the arrangement 
whereby he is to be exchanged for Cressida, has little 
that bears upon her character, except that up to this time 
she had continued wholly faithful to Troilus. Whatever 
may be thought of her lax morality, there are no omens 
of inconstancy. In the fifth Book Cressida is escorted 
to the Grecian camp by the handsome Diomed, whose 
prowess as a soldier is as marked as his good looks. She 
hopes to be able to escape from her confinement and 
endeavours to reassure Troilus by promising to revisit 
Troy on the tenth day from their separation. Diomed, 
smitten by her beauty, begins to make love to her even 
on their short journey to the camp and vigorously presses 



\ 




INTRODUCTION 

his suit as soon as she has been made over to her father. 
For a time she resists his importunity, but before the ten 
days are over succumbs to the fascination of his wily tongue 
and personal gifts. Chaucer relates the fact, but does not 
describe the process. He seems tired and disappointed, 
feels perhaps that he has failed in delineating the character 
of his heroine, and only makes a lame attempt to reinstate 
her in our favour, or at least to modify our reproach, by 
declaring that her inconstancy was mainly due to pity 
for Diomed's devotion and that her defection has brought 
bitter sorrow to herself. 

Shakespeare's Cressida is of a wholly different mould. 
From first to last she is consistent in levity of character, 
and her crowning act of faithlessness is but a true develop- 
ment of the traits outlined in the opening scene with 
Pandarus. There we find her free, nay, absolutely indeli- 
cate of speech, well seen in such japes as rise readily to 
the lewd lips of her filthy-minded uncle, and clearly no 
novice to vicious suggestion and innuendo. Her very con- 
fession of love for Troilus, made when left alone, breathes 
of the senses not of the heart, and the casual remark of 
Paris, " my disposer Cressida," shows in what light she 
was regarded at the Trojan court. Pretty as is the coquetry 
— foreshadowed in her self-communing — with which she 
tantalises the enamoured Prince, it is yet the coquetry 
of a wanton who listens without a blush when Pandarus 
chides her coyness with the suggestion "an 'twere dark, 
you'ld close sooner " ; without a blush, when, upon Troilus's 
remark " You have bereft me of all words, lady," his com- 
ment is, " Words pay no debts, give her deeds ; but she '11 
b 



xviii INTRODUCTION 

r bereave you o' the deeds too, if she call your activity in 
question " ; or, again, dropping all veil of decency, says, 
'\ "if my lord get a boy of you, you'll give him me"; the 
coquetry of a wanton who, as the scene closes, accepts 
without demur his coarsely worded proposal that she 
\ should lose no time in gratifying her lust. The deed done, 
j she receives with scarcely a pretence of shame the flouts 
! with which that worthy greets her on the following morning. 
\ When the news comes that she is to be exchanged fo- 
^ Antenor, her grief is no doubt violent ; and in the scenes 
immediately succeeding we have the only semblance of 
; a love that is anything but mere animal passion. At the 
\ moment of parting from Troilus her professions of fidelity 
,'are abundant, and for that moment perhaps sincere. Yet 
I it is something more than a lover's fears that prompts 
j Troilus to exact so many vows of constancy and to suggest 
with reiteration the dangers to which she will be exposed 
from the fascination of the Grecian youth. He might well 
suspect that a love so lightly won would be as lightly lost. 
At any rate her passionate grief is of the shortest duration. 
Without rebuke she allows Diomed to protest his admiration 
even before she starts on her journey and while in the act 
1 of bidding farewell to Troilus. On arrival at the Grecian 
camp all traces of her better emotions have vanished. With 
i easy insouciance she bandies risque jests, with easy com- 
pliance she bandies kisses, among the assembled chiefs. 
\ Well may Ulysses say : — 

Fie, fie upon her ! 
There's language in her eye, her cheek, her lip, 
Nay, her foot speaks; her wanton spirits look out 
At every joint and motive of her body. 



INTRODUCTION xix 

O, these encounterers, so glib of tongue, 
That give accosting welcome ere it comes, 
And wide unclasp the tables of their thoughts 
To every ticklish reader 1 set them down 
For sluttish spoils of opportunity 
And daughters of the game. 

I^Her latest appearance shows her as having in a short ten 
\^days been " tempted " to " folly," as, indeed, already notori- 
ous for a "drab," as using her reminiscences of Troilus to 
fire the passion of Diomed, as confessing to herself that — 

Minds sway'd by eyes are full of turpitude, i 

In short, while Chaucer's Cressida is a woman at the outset 
modest and reserved, who, exposed to strong terhptation 
and beset by wily lures, yields to the promptings of passion, 
and, probably as a consequence of her first lapse, adds to 
that offence the stain of inconstancy, Shakespeare paints 
a character who at her best betrays the manners and morals 
of a sfrisette, at her worst can boast little more refinement 
and purity than Doll Tearsheet herself. If Shakespeare 
was in a pessimistic frame of mind, his pourtrayal of 
Cressida is easily accounted for. But we may further con- 
jecture that his insight showed him how ill-suited for 
dramatic treatment was the view conceived or accepted 
by Chaucer; how impossible the reconcilement between 
the Cressida of the clear dawn and the Cressida of the 
murky sunset. I say this on the assumption that Shake- 
speare did take Chaucer and Chaucer alone as the source of 
the Cressida myth. Is this proven ? The absence of any 
other known source — play, poem, or romance — dealing with 
the story in a cynical spirit does not seem conclusive. 
Nor is it improbable that a theme handled in so many 



XX INTRODUCTION 

languages by so many diverse artists should have varied 
in its conception and treatment, or impossible that Shake- 
speare should have had access to translations of which we 
know nothing. 

For the romance literature dealing with the Tale of 
Troy is a large one. Earliest among the narratives that 
supplied material for that literature are the Historia de 
Excidio Trojae of Dares the Phrygian and the Ephemeris 
Belli Trojani of Dictys the Cretan, both of which writers 
pretended to belong to the Homeric age, but probably 
lived between the fifth and seventh centuries, and wrote in 
Latin. Next to these works perhaps come two Latin 
elegiac poems of the twelfth century, one anonymous, the 
other by Simon Chevre d'Or, a canon in Paris. These, 
however, may be passed over as containing no mention of 
the Cressida myth. It is in the great Roman de Troit 
by Benoit de Sainte More, dated i i6o, and running to 
close upon 30,000 lines, that we first meet with the loves 
of the faithless Briseida, daughter of Calchas. From this 
poem Boccaccio took the theme of his Filostrato^ the 
heroine in the Italian becoming Griseida in place of Briseida. 
The Roman was evidently very popular, for it was trans- 
lated into German, somewhere about the end of the twelfth 
century, and in the thirteenth into Latin prose by Guido 
delle Colonne, who, however, did not mention that his work 
was a translation, but left it to be taken as an original 

' Mr. Boas, whose Shakespeare and his Predecessors I had not the 
opportunity of seeing till this part of my Introduction was completed, says 
Boccaccio worked upon Guide's translation. Mr. Boas takes almost 
exactly the same view with myself on the Cressida question, and I may 
cheerfully add, writes with a charm which my narrative does not possess. 



INTRODUCTION xxi 

production. It was from this prose version that Lydgate 
derived the materials for his Troy Book. By a curious 
fate, Guido's work was in part retranslated from the Latin 
into French by Raoul le Fevre. This translation had a 
great vogue, as we may judge by the fact that the first 
book printed in English was a translation of Raoul le Fevre 
which Caxton entitled Recuyell of the Histories of Troye. 

Chaucer's story was continued by the Scottish poet 
Henryson, who thought that punishment ought to be meted 
out to Cressida, 'Here is his portrait of her, stanza xii. of 
The Testament of Cresseid : — 

O, fair Cresseid ! the floure and A per se 

Of Troy and Grece, how was thou fortunait ! 

To change in filth all thy feminitie, 

And be with fleschelie lust sa maculait, 

And go amang the Greikis air and lait, 

Sa giglotlike, takand thy foull plesance ; 

I have pietie thou suld fall in sic mischance. 

He goes on to relate the sentence passed on her by Saturn 
and Cynthia, whereby she is afflicted with leprosy, con- 
demned to the " spittail hous," and made to wander about 
as a beggar with "cop and clapper". Did Shakespeare 
take his first idea of Cressida from Henryson ? So far back 
as Henry the Fifth, II. ii. 78-81, Pistol says : — 

O hound of Crete, think'st thou my spouse to get ? 

No ; to the spital go, 

And from the powdering-tub of infamy 

Fetch forth the lazar kite of Cressid's kind, 

Doll Tearsheet she by name, and her espouse : 

again, in Twelfth Night, III. i. 58-62, we have : — 

Clown. I would play Lord Pandarus of Phrygia, sir, to bring a 
Cressida to this Troilus. 



xxii INTRODUCTION 

Viol. I understand you, sir ; 'tis well begged. 
Clown. The matter, I hope, is not great, sir, begging but a 
beggar : Cressida was a beggar. 

Heywood who, in his Iron Age, parts i. and ii., treats 
the same story, abounds with reminiscences of Shakespeare 
and paints Cressida in even darker colours. Her defection 
from Troilus is represented as due to a conversation of 
some half-a-dozen lines with her father in which she prefers 
safety with Diomed to danger with Troilus ; later on she 
excuses herself not as having yielded to a passion for the 
Greek, but merely as having obeyed her father's command ; 
on the appearance of Sinon, who unblushingly avows to 
her his treacherous nature, she is persuaded after a five 
minutes' conversation to grant him her love ; is on Diomed's 
reappearance contemptuously cast off by Sinon as " a fair 
Troian weather-hen " ; and on the taking of Troy has 
already been " branded with leprosy ". 

If, however, in our play Cressida fares worse than any 
of the characters presented in this part of the story, the 
same acrid and depreciatory touch is upon nearly all of 
them. Pandarus, at all events in the earlier parts of 
Chaucer's poem, is represented as really fond of his niece 
and careful of her interests ; while towards Troilus his 
attitude is rather that of an over-zealous friend who is 
ready to use every effort to rescue him from the unhappy 
plight into which love has brought him. Later on, it is 
true, his unscrupulous nature and love of intrigue reveal 
themselves, and when his mischief is accomplished he only 
chuckles over the villainous plot that has been the undoing 
of Cressida. But at his worst he never approaches in 
baseness the filthy, prurient, self-appointed tool who revels 



INTRODUCTION xxiii 

in garbage of words and garbage of deeds, and whom 
Shakespeare has damned for all time to come. Whence, 
then, if not from his own inner consciousness, did the 
dramatist derive suggestions for his portrait? Not from 
Chapman's Iliad (even if that part of the translation could 
have been seen in MS.), for the worst said of him there 
(bk. iv. 98-103) is as follows: — 

And [Pallas] sought for Lycian Pandarus, a man that being bred 

Out of a faithless family, she thought was fit to shed 

The blood of any innocent, and break the covenant sworn ; 

He was Lycaon's son, whom Jove into a wolf did turn 

For sacrificing of a child, and yet in arms renowned 

As one that was inculpable. 

Nor from Lydgate, for Pandarus, I believe, is only once 
mentioned in the Troy Book; nor from Boccaccio, whose 
Pandaro is young and chivalrous. As regards Ajax, Malone 
suggests that Shakespeare, finding in Lydgate a sketch of 
both Ajax Oileus and Ajax Telamonius, ascribes to the 
latter the ignoble traits given by His authority to the 
former ; or that he confounded " Ajax Thelamon " of The 
Destruction of Troy with Ajax Oileus, there called simply 
"Ajax" and described as "of a huge stature, great and 
large in the shoulders" . . . and "of no great enterprise". 
Again, Steevens points out that Lydgate, "who in the 
grossest manner has violated all the characters drawn by 
Homer," takes upon him to reprehend the Greek poet for 
having magnified the chivalry of Achilles in making him 
cope and slay Hector single-handed. To this extent, then, 
Shakespeare may have had an excuse, that he followed the 
old romances. But it is abundantly clear that he knew 
better, and that he had some set purpose in debasing 



xxiv INTRODUCTION 

these two characters from the heroes of all classical lore 
to creatures not much loftier than the braggart Pistol. 
Agamemnon, Nestor and Hector, it is true, are not be- 
draggled beyond all recognition ; yet no one can say that 
they are heroic after the pattern of Homer.^ 

The inner meaning of the play as a whole has found 
many diverse interpretations. Coleridge was " half-inclined 
to believe that Shakespeare's main object, or shall I rather 
say, his ruling impulse, was to translate the poetic heroes 
of paganism into the not less rude, but more intellectually 
vigorous, and raorefeaturely, warriors of Christian chivalry, 
and to substantiate the distinct and graceful profiles of the 
Homeric into the flesh and blood of the romantic drama — 
in short, to give a grand history-piece in the robust style of 
Albert Durer". Knight, in this following Ulrici, thinks 
that the whole tendency of the play, its incidents, its 
characterisation, is to lower what the Germans call hero- 
dom, and that to satirise such herodom Shakespeare wrote 
Troilus and Cressida. To this Verplanck cogently replies, 
" I suppose that there are very few readers in this practical 
and utilitarian world of England and America, who will 
give the very practical Shakespeare credit for so remote 
an object as a satire in which so few of his readers or 
audience could possibly sympathise, and which, in after 

^ Mr. Furnivall and Mr. Boas both suggest that in so belittling these 
heroes Shakespeare was prompted by ill-will towards Chapman, as being in 
all likelihood the rival who ousted him from his patron's favour. To me it 
seems altogether impossible that he should have prostituted his art to so 
poor and so obscure a purpose, or should have been guilty of so petty a 
revenge. Those who are curious on this point may be referred to Mr. 
Acheson's volume entitled Shakespeare and the. Rival Poet, a book that 
carries no conviction to me. 



INTRODUCTION xxv 

ages, could escape the observation of Dryden, Johnson, 
Walter Scott, and even of the sagacious and over-refining 
Warburton ". To me nothing could be more unlike Shake- 
speare than such an intention. Shakespeare is incidentally 
a satirist, but he does not propose to himself to write a 
satire. Such a proceeding is alien from his nature, alien 
from his conception of the dramatic scope, alien from his 
practice. Nor is he a moralist ; that is, he does not mount 
the pulpit to preach a moral doctrine. A moral is of 
course to be found in his plays, as it is to be found in 
all stories of human action. But it is there because the 
poet taking certain characters and certain incidents, whether 
from history, fiction, or his own imagination, shows us 
dramatically how those characters would act among those 
incidents ; not because he has chosen those characters and in- 
cidents to illustrate a particular theory of ethics or of politics. 
Grant White is of opinion that " Ulysses is the real hero 
of the play ; the chief, or, at least, the great purpose of 
which is the utterance of the Ulyssean view of life ; and 
in this play Shakespeare is Ulysses, or Ulysses Shake- 
speare ". Here, again, I am compelled to dissent. Ulysses 
is by force of circumstances on the scene, and history fits 
him to be the mouthpiece of sound practical wisdom 
tinctured with a cynical purview of human motive. So 
far his mood was probably Shakespeare's mood for the 
nonce, and much that this character says may have been 
the utterance of Shakespeare's thoughts upon life. But 
that the dramatist should have had for his main purpose 
to use the hero as a stalking-horse behind which to launch 
his shafts, I cannot for a moment believe. Shakespeare's 



w 



xxvi INTRODUCTION 

impersonality is so cardinal a doctrine in the interpretation 
of his mind and art that much stronger reasons would be 
necessary to persuade one that he here removed the mask 
and showed his features to the world. Dowden calls the 
play a "comedy of disillusion," and notices "a striking 
resemblance in its spirit and structure to Tinion of Athens" . 
So, too, Furnivall, who pertinently contrasts the tone of the 
play with that of The Rape of Lucrece, 11. 1 366-1 568, when 
dealing with characters common to both. Boas, whose 
study of the play is the most complete and most satisfac- 
tory that I know, says, among many other things, " In the 
Lucrece Shakspere had introduced an elaborate description 
of the siege of Troy, and had there referred to Helen as 
* the strumpet that began this stir '. The phrase gives 
us an important clue to Shakspere's motive for combining 
in one play the story of Troilus and Cressida and the 
broader theme of the conflict between Greece and Troy. 
Helen and Cressida are made to figure in exactly the same 
light. Both are heartless and disloyal, yet they awake 
a devotion of which they are utterly unworthy. The 
infatuation of Troilus is paralleled by that of Menelaus and 
Paris whom Diomed cynically classes together as equally 
deserving of Helen : — 

He merits well to have her, that doth seek her, 
Not making any scruple of her soilure, 
With such a hell of pain and world of charge, 
And you as well to keep her, that defend her. 
Not palating the taste of her dishonour, 
With such a costly loss of wealth and friends. 

But Helen not only throws a spell over her individual 
lovers ; she brings two nations into conflict for the sake of 
her beaux yeux. As Diomed asserts : — 



INTRODUCTION xxvii 

For every false drop in her bawdy veins 
A Grecian's life hath sunk : for every scruple 
Of her contaminated carrion weight 
A Trojan hath been slain. 

Hector makes a similar statement in the Trojan council 

when he urges the surrender of Helen as the price of peace. 

In his eyes 'she is not worth what she doth cost the 

holding ' : — 

'Tis mad idolatry 
To make the service greater than the god, 
And the will dotes, that is inclinable 
To what infectiously itself affects 
Without some image of the affected merit. 

These lines strike the very keynote of the play, and knit 

together the two plots. The ' mad idolatry that makes the 

service greater than the god ' is exemplified in the one on 

a personal, in the latter on a national scale. Troilus is 

infected by the mania as virulently as in his private 

character. His rhapsodies over Cressida are not more 

glowing than over Helen, the 

Grecian queen, whose youth and freshness 
Wrinkles Apollo and makes stale the morning. 

r For her sake he, and, as is natural, Paris, are eager to risk 
, the welfare of the entire Trojan state, and Hector, though 
' he holds that ' the moral laws of nature and of nation ' 
demand her restoration, yields to the impetuous counsels 
of his younger brothers and confesses that he has already 
sent ' a roisting challenge ' among the Greeks. The de- 
bate moves throughout in the circle, not of antique, but 
of mediaeval ideas. It illustrates and implicitly condemns 
the quixotic sacrifice of great national interests to a fantastic 
J code of exaggerated gallantry." . . , Much more of this 



xxviii INTRODUCTION 

writer's admirable examination of the play I should like 
to quote, but can only advise those interested in the pro- 
blem to study the whole of the chapter in which it is dis- 
cussed by him. On the whole I think my own view, 
put shortly, is that being in a moody spirit and having, 
upon whatever^ j)rompting, { taken the most cynical view 
of Cressida's character, Shakespeare "set down the keys 
that made the music " of the Homeric heroes whom he 
brought into the story, and giving prominence to the 
fact that the war was waged for " a cuckold and a whore," 
held cheap those who would fight upon such an argument. 
But the more I ponder the play, the more do I feel that, 
though Fleay may have laid down lines too hard and fast, 
there must have been some considerable revision, and that 
the " third story " of his division could not have belonged 
to the drama in its original form. 

While the critics differ as to the meaning of the play, 
they are also at variance in regard to the greater or less 
skill with which the several characters are delineated. Thus 
Godwin writes, " But the great beauty of this play, as it 
is of all the genuine writings of Shakespeare ... is that 
his men are men ; his sentiments are living, and his char- 
acters marked with those delicate, evanescent, undefinable 
touches which identify them with the great delineation 
of nature ". Again, Verplanck says, " Nor is there any 
drama more rich in variety and truth of character. The 
Grecian camp is filled with real and living men of all sorts 
of temper and talent." . . . Grant White, on the other 
hand, notices "a singular lack of that peculiar characteristic 
of Shakespeare's dramatic style, the marked distinction 



INTRODUCTION xxix 

and nice discrimination of the individual traits, mental 
and moral, of the various personages. . . . The thoughtful 
reader will observe that Ulysses pervades the serious parts 
of the play, which is all Ulyssean in its thoughts and lan- 
guage. . . . For example, no two men could be more 
unlike in character than Achilles and Ulysses, and yet the 
former having asked the latter what he is reading, he, 
uttering his own thoughts, says as follows with the sub- 
sequent reply : — 

Ulysses. A strange fellow here 

Writes me : That man, how dearly ever parted, 
How much in having, or without, or in, 
Cannot make boast to have that which he hath. 
Nor feels not what he owes but by reflection ; 
As when his virtues shining upon others 
Heat them, and they retort that heat again 
To the first giver. 

Achilles. This is not strange, Ulysses. 

The beauty that is borne here in the face 
The bearer knows not, but commends itself 
To others' eyes : nor doth the eye itself. 
That most pure spirit of sense, behold itself, 
Not going from itself; but eye to eye oppos'd 
Salutes each other with each other's form ; 
For speculation turns not to itself 
Till it hath travell'd, and is mirror'd there 
Where it may see itself This is not strange at all. 

I Now these speeches are made of the same metal and coined 
I in the same mint ; and they both of them have the image 
and superscription of William Shakespeare. No words 
or thoughts could be more unsuited to that bold, bloody 
egoist, ' the broad Achilles,' than the reply he makes to 
Ulysses ; but here Shakespeare was merely using the Greek 
champion as a lay figure to utter his own thoughts, which 



XXX INTRODUCTION 

are perfectly in character with the son of Autolycus. 
Ulysses thus flows over the whole serious part of the 
play. Agamemnon, Nestor, ^neas and the rest all talk 
alike, and all like Ulysses." This similarity of tone and 
temperament cannot, it seems to me, be denied. Yet 
to admit it is to admit that Shakespeare has for once failed 
in what was the most distinctive mark of his superiority 
over all his compeers, and that too in a play in which 
intellect is at its highest ; which displays the profoundest 
practical wisdom, the keenest insight into the motives and 
impulses of human nature. Surely we have here another 
incongruity added to the enigmas which baffle us in the 
general scheme. 

The duration of the action of this play is thus stated by 
Mr. P. A. Daniel :— 

Day I. Act i, sc. i. and ii. 

Interval: the long-continued truce [l. iii. 261, 
262]. 
„ 2. Act I. sc. iii., Act II., and Act III. 
,, 3. Act IV., Act V. sc. i. and first part of sc. ii, 
„ 4. Act V. the latter part of sc. ii. and sc. iii.-x. 
But Mr. Daniel further points out certain discrepancies, 
among which the following may be specially noticed : — 

"Act II. sc. iii. In the Grecian camp, before the tent 
of Achilles. The commanders ' rub the vein ' of Ajax. 
Achilles declines to see them, but through Ulysses informs 
them that he 'will not to the field to-morrow' (1. 171). 
At the end of the scene Ulysses remarks : — 

To-morrow 
We must with all our main of power stand fast (11. 268-9). 



INTRODUCTION xxxi 

These two passages are somewhat ambiguous, for in fact 
only the single combat between Hector and Ajax is re- 
solved on for the morrow. 

" Act III. sc. i. We are back again in Troy. Pandarus 
requests Paris to excuse Troiius to Priam, should 'the 
king call for him at supper ' (1. 8o). In this scene com- 
mences an extraordinary entanglement of the plot of the 
play. It is quite clear that from its position it must 
represent a portion of the day on which Hector sends his 
challenge to the Greeks : a day on which there could be 
no encounter between the hostile forces, and which in fact 
is but one day of a long-continued truce ; yet in this scene 
Pandarus asks Paris, ' Sweet lord, who 's a-field to-day ? ' 
Paris replies, ' Hector, Deiphobus, Helenus, Antenor, and 
all the gallantry of Troy '. Paris himself, it seems, nor 
Troiius went not. Towards the end of the scene a re- 
treat is sounded, and Paris says : — 

They're come from the field ; let us to Priam's hall 
To greet the warriors ; 

and he begs Helen to come 'help unarm our Hector'. 

"Act III. sc. iii. In the Grecian camp. The allusions 
to the combat which is to com6 off to-morrow between 
Hector and Ajax are numerous in this scene, so that we are 
clearly still in the day on which Hector sent his challenge. 
But the entanglement of the plot which we noticed in Act 
III. sc. i. becomes here still more involved. Calchas 
says : — 

You have a Trojan prisoner, called Antenor, 
Yesteyday took ; 



XXXll 



INTRODUCTION 



and he requests that Antenor may be changed for his 
daughter Cressida. The commanders assent, and Diomedes 
is commissioned to effect the exchange. From this it ap- 
pears that Antenor, who goes out to fight on this very day 
(see Act III. sc. i.) — when there is no fighting — was never- 
theless taken prisoner the day before, during the long- 
continued truce." 

For many illustrations of words and for genial co-opera- 
tion in every way, I have to thank our General Editor, 
Mr, W. J. Craig ; I wish also to thank my old friend, Mr. 
J. W. Sherer, C.S.I., for interesting information as to the 
bibliography of the Cressida myth : while to the labours 
of the Cambridge Editors in the matter of collation my 
debt, as will be seen in every page, is very large. 



To the quotation on III, iii, 95 I should have added that 
in the Preface to his Studies in Shakespeare Mr, Churton 
Collins mentions that while the work was passing through 
the press he discovered that he had been anticipated by 
Grant White as to the parallel with the First Alcibiades. 



TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 



/^ 



-his Sons. 



DRAMATIS PERSONS 

Priam, King of Troy. 

Hector, 

Troilus, 

Paris, 

Deiphobus, 

Helenus, 

Margarelon, a bastard Son of Priam. ks 

^NEAS, ) 

, > Trojan Commanders. 

Antenor, j 

■Calchas, a Trojan Priest, taking part tvith the 6 

Pandarus, Uncle to Cressida. 

Agamemnon, the Grecian General. 

Menelaus, his Brother. ^ilJj 

Achilles, 

/Tf^^'^i' -'AjAX, 

Ulysses, 
Nestor, 

DiOMEDES, 

Patroclus,^ 
Thersites, a deformed a?id scurrilous Grecian. 
Alexander, Servant to Cressida. 
Servant to Troilus ; Serva?it to Paris ; Servant 
Helen, Wife to Menelaus. 
Andromache, Wife to Hector. \ 

Cassandra, Daughter to Priam, a Prophetess. {f 

Cressida, Daughter to Calchas. 
^ Trojan and Greek Soldiers, and At/ 

Scene : Troy, and the Grecian Ca^ 

2 



Grecian Commanders. 

Diomedes. 



TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 



PROLOGUE 



n Troy there lies the scene. From isles of Greece 
J he princes orgulous,' their high blood chafd, 
Have to the port of Athens sent their ships, 
Fraught with the ministers and instruments 
Of cruel war : sixty and nine, that wore 
T'leir crownets regal, from the Athenian bay 
?ut forth toward Phrygia; and their vow is made 
To ransack Troy, within whose strong immures 



:. orgulousl orgillous Ff. 



8. immures] emures F i. 



ti 



The Prologue, wanting in the 

arto, is generally attributed to 

ae other hand than Shakespeare's. 

ant White, judging from the style, 

:nks that it was probably written 

' George Chapman, the dramatist, 

contemporary and personal friend 

• our author. 

2. orgulous] F. orgueilleux, " proud, 

rly, swe'ling, scornful," etc., Cot- 

ave. The word is found several 

Ties in M.dMory'^ King Arthur. Com- 

; are Ca::ton's translation of Reynard 

the Fox (Arher, The Scholar's Library, 

; , 36), " he was so prowde and orgil- 

' nis that he had alle other beestis in 

■'espyte which tofore had been his 

telaws ". Caxton's Destruction of 

Troy, p. 7 : " Then began men . . , 



to haunt the thorny desarts to fight 
and destroy the orgillous serpents". 

6. crownets] properly a diminutive 
of " crown " ; but, like its fuller form, 
" coronet," often used by Shake- 
speare as an equivalent to that word. 
In Henry V. Chorus, ii. 10, we have 
" crowns imperial, crowns and coro- 
nets," i.e. crowns such as are worn 
by emperors, by inferior sovereigns 
and by peers. Marlowe, Edward I. 
I. i. 62, seems to use the word in the 
sense of bracelets : — 

" Crownets of pearl about his naked 
arms". 

8. immures] walls, fortifications. 
Though the verb is frequent in 
Shakespeare he has no instance of 
the substantive. In the New Eng. 



4 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [prol. 

The ravish'd Helen, Menelaus' queen, 

With wanton Paris sleeps ; and that's the quarrel. ic^ 

To Tenedos they come, 

And the deep-drawing barks do there disgorge 

Their war-like fraughtage: now on Dardan plains 

The fresh and yet unbruised Greeks do pitch 

Their brave pavilions: Priam's six-gated city, 15 

Dardan, and Timbria, Helias, Chetas, Troien, 

And Antenorides, with massy staples 

And corresponsive and fulfilling^^bolts, ^^*-^r 

Sperr up the sons of Troy. 

Now expectation, tickling skittish spirits 20 

On one and other side, Trojan and Greek, 

Sets all on hazard : and hither am I come 

17. Antenorides] Theobald; Antenoridus Ff. 



Diet, it is marked as rare and the 
only quotation is the present pas- 
sage. Heywood has " mures " and 
" countermures ". 

13. fraughtage'] freight, sc. of 

armed men. The word occurs again 

in The Comedy of Errors, iv. i. 87. 

Compare Pericles, 1. iv. 92-94 : — 

"And these our ships, you happily 

may think 

Are like the Trojan horse was 

stuffd within 
With bloody veins expecting 
overthrow ". 

15. brave] fine, shawy, well- 
adorned. 

16. Dardan . . . r>'o;Vw] Theobald 
alters to Thymbria, Ilia, Sccea, 
Troian, in order to make the names 
agree with those given by Dares 
Phrygius ; but, as Dyce remarks, if 
Shakespeare wrote the Prologue he 
was not likely to have consulted that 
author. The same editor points out 
that in Caxton's Recuyell the gates 



are given as dardanc, tymbria, kelyas, 
chetas, troyenne, antenorides; and 
Steevens that Lydgate enumerates 
them as Dardanydes, Tymbria, 
Heleas, Cetheas, Trojana and An- 
thony des. 

18. corresponsive] the parts of 
which corresponded with each other ; 

fulJiUing, closely fitting into their 
sockets. The two epithets are ex- 
pressive of the security obtained. 

19. Sperr] Theobald's emendation 
of Stirre, Stirr, Stir, is the same 
word as spar = shut up, enclose. 
Compare Chaucer, TroilusMnd Cris- 
cyde, V. Ixxvii. 6: — 

" For whan he saugh hir dorres 
sperred alle". 
It is found in Piers the Plojvman, 
B text, xix. 162 ; Toilet's Miscellany 
(Arber, p. 255) ; Tin- Paston Letters, 
i. 83 (Arber) ; Spenser, Faerie Qneene, 
V, x. 37 ; and, in the form spar, in 
Jonson's Staple of News, 11, i, "spar 
up all your doors ". 



ROL] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 



A prologue arm'd, but not in confidence 
*f author's pen or actor's voice, but suited 

i I like conditions as our argument, 25 

To tell you, fair beholders, that our play 

Leap's o'er the vaunt and firstlings of those broils, 
eginning in the middle; starting thence away 

10 what may be digested in a play. 

Like or find fault ; do as your pleasures are : 30 

Now good or bad 'tis but the chance of war. 



23-25. A prologue . . . argument] 
clad in armour as suitable to the sub- 
ject of our play, not from any over- 
v/eening confidence in the merits of 
our author or our actors. Jonson's 
Poetaster has an armed Prologue who 
thus discourses : — 

" If any muse why I salute the 
stage 
An armed Prologue; know 'tis 
a dangerous age ; 

f Wherein who writes, hath need 
present his scenes 
Fortyfold proof against the con- 
juring means 
Of base detractors, and illiterate 
apes. 
That fill up rooms in fair and 
formal shapes. 
'Gainst these have we put on this 
forced defence," etc. 
The Epilogue to Part I. of Marston's 
Antonio and Mel' -■^ahegins: "Gentle- 
men, thoi'gb. i rt,Aitjin an armed Epi- 
lotji'C, 1 stand not as a peremptciy 
challenger of desert, either for him 
thut composed the Comedy, or for 
us that acted it ; but a most submis- 
sive suppliant for both ". As a rule 
the speaker of the Prologue wore a 
black cloak ; compare Prologue to 
Heywood's Four Prentices, etc., " Do 



you not know that I am the prologue ? 
Do you not see this long black cloak 
upon my back ? " 

27. ■y(i7(«<] van, first beginning ; F. 
avant : firstlings, Steevens compares 
Genesis iv. 4 : " And Abel, he also 
brought of the _^rs</i;;^s of his flock". 
For the figurative sense, compare 
Macbeth, iv. i. 147, 148 : — 

" The very firstlings of my heart 
shall be 
The firstlings of my hand ". 

27. broils] now used of petty 
quarrels, bickerings, riots, had for- 
merly the larger sense of war, battle, 
combat. Compare Macbeth, i. ii. 6: — 

" Say to the king the knowledge of 
the broil 
As thou didst leave it " ; 
Othello, I. iii. 87, "feats of broil and 
battle " ; very common in Chapman's 
Iliad in this sense. 

29. 2"o le^hat . . . play] to what 
may be set forth in due qrder in the 
olay. Compare HamUt, il, ii. 460, 
'' an e^c^Uent. play, well digested in 
the scenes " ; Lat., digerere, to carry 
through. V • ••• '- 

31. No IV good .  • war] whatever 
your verdict, we tak' it as the chance 
of war ; take what comes without 
murmuring at the cJ.ance. 



ACT I 



SCENE l.— Troj^. Before Priam's Palace. 

• Enter Troilus armed, and Pandarus. 

Tro. Call here my varlet, I '11 unarm again : 

Why should I war without the walls of Troy, 

That find such cruel battle here within ? 

Each Trojan that is master of his heart, 

Let him to field ; Troilus, alas ! hath none. 5 

Pan. Will this gear ne'er be mended ? 

Tro. The Greeks are strong, and skilful to their strength, 
Fierce to their skill, and to their fierceness valiant;' 
But I am weaker than a woman's tear, 
Tamer than sleep, fonder than ignorance, 10 

Less valiant than the virgin in the night, 
And skilless as unpractis'd infancy. 

Pan. Well, I have told you enough of this: for my 

I. varlet] servant to a knight or vens (jyotes- i<rorfi' tlrie i'::ilerlude 
warrior ; in ancient chivalry a syrD- King Darius, 1565 : — 




nym of " page," w'lth^ any of the 
contemptuous sense whjlch the word 
acquired later on; O.F. varlet, "a 
groom, also a >younker, stripling, 
youth" (Cotgry/e). An older spell- 
ing was vast-' for vassaht (which 
does not exist'-;, :he regular diminutive 
of O.F. vassal, and so a young vassal. 
See Skeat, Ety. Diet. s.v. 

6. gear] business ; a word of wide 
significatiori in Shakespeare. Stee- 



" Wyll not yet this geere be ameiidtd 
Nor your sinful acts corrected ? " 

7. to their strength] usually taken 
as = in addition to, etc., as often in 
Shakespeare. Abbott, Shakespearian 
Grammar, § 1S7, prefers the sense of 
"up to," "in proportion to," "ac- 
cording to ". 

10. fonder] more foolish, the on 
ginal sense of the word ; participl 
of M.E. fonnen. 



i 



sc. 



I] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 



part, I'll not meddle nor make no further. 
He that will have a cake out of the wheat 15 
must needs tarry the grinding. 
'o. Have I not tarried ? 
Pan. Ay, the grinding; but you must tarry the 

bolting. 
Tro. Have I not tarried ? 20 

Pan. Ay, the bolting; but you must tarry the 

leavening. 
Tro. Still have I tarried. 
Pan. Ay, to the leavening; but here's yet in the 

word "hereafter" the kneading, the making 25 
of the cake, the heating of the oven, and the 
baking; nay, you must stay the cooling too, 
or you may chance to burn your lips. y 

Tro. Patience herself, what goddess e'er she be, 

Doth lesser blench at sufferance than I do. 30 

At Priam's royal table do I sit; 
And when fair Cressid comes into my thoughts, — 
So, traitor ! — " When she comes ! " — When is she 
thence ? 

16. needs\ Omitted in Q. 32, 33. thoughts. So traitor then she comes 

when she is thence] Q ; thoughts So (Traitor) then she comes, when she is 
thence Ff. i, 2. 

ig. bolting] sifting. Compare The 30. blench . . . sufferance] shrink 

Winter's Tale, iv. iv. 375 : — from suffering ; blench, a word of very 

" The fanned snow obscure history, originally meant to 

That's bolted by the northern cheat, chide, from O.E. blcncan, to 

blasts". deceive, cheat ; later used transitively 

The word is used figuratively also, for to turn away the eye, and in- 

as in the Nonne Prestes Tale, 420 : — transitively for to flinch. Compare 

" But 1 cannot bulte it to the bren," Measure for Measure, iv. v. 5 ; 

which Dryden modernised in his Fletcher, The False One, iv. iv. : 

Palamon and Arcite :— "Art thou so poor to blench at what 

" I cannot bolt the matter to the thou hast done ? " 

bran". ^^. So, traitor I ... thence]'Ro-we's 

29. what] of whatever nature. correction; see cr. w. 



8 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [m 

Pan. Well, she looked yesternight fairer than ever I 

saw her look, or any woman else. 
Tro. I was about to tell thee: — when my heart, 

As wedged with a sigh, would rive in twain, ^ 
Lest Hector or my father should perceive me, 
I have, as when the sun doth light a storm, 
Buried this sigh in wrinkle of a smile ; 40 

But sorrow, that is couch'd in seeming gladness. 
Is like that mirth fate turns to sudden sadness. 
Pan. An her hair were not somewhat darker than 
Helen's, — well, go to, — there were no more com- 
parison between the women : but for my part, 45 
she is my kinswoman ; I would not, as they 
term^ it, praise her ; but I would somebody 
had heard her talk yesterday, as I did : I will 
not dispraise your sister Cassandra's wit, but — 
Tro. O Pandarus ! I tell thee, Pandarus, — 50 

When I do tell thee, there my hopes lie drown'd, 
Reply not in how many fathoms deep 
They lie indrench'd. I tell thee I am mad 
In Cressid's love: thou answer'st, "she is fair"; 
Pour'st in the open ulcer of my heart 55 

39. a storm^ Rowe ; a scorne Q ; a-scorne (or a-scorn) Ff. 

37. As wedged . . . hvahi] was An exclamation of impatience, re- 

about to burst, as though split in proof, exhortation, according to the 

half by a sigh. context. These were . . . women, 

40. Buried . . . smile] forced because Cressida would be so mani- 
myself to hide my grief by fashion- festly the fairer of the two. 

ing my looks into a smile. Malone 55. Pour'st . . . heart] Barry con- 
compares Twelfth Night, iii. ii. jectures that this line should be 
85: "he does smile his face into trans^posed to follow line 63, and 
more lines than is in the new so Lettsom, with the alteration to 
map with the augmentation of the Pour' d,\vou\diea.d. The latter would 
Indies". also follow a suggestion made by 
44. go to] never mind, let that be. Grant White, but not edited by him. 



SCI] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 9 



Her eyes, her hair, her cheek, her gait, her voice ; 
. Handiest in thy discourse, O, that her hand, 
In whose comparison all whites are ink, 
Writing their own reproach ; to whose soft seizure 
The cygnet's down is harsh, and spirit of sense 60 
Hard as the palm of ploughman : this thou tell'st 

me. 
As true thou tell'st me, when I say I love her ; 

57. discourse : O that her hand] Q ; discourse. O that her Hand Ff. 



that in line 60 we should read, " And 
spirit of sense the cygnet's down is 
harsh," with the further change in 
the next line to " As the hard palm," 
etc. 

57. The punctuation here is that 
of Malone. Staunton conjectured, 
" Handiest . . . hand, — O that, In 
whose," etc., or " Handiest in thy 
discourse her hand — O, that her 
hand," etc., and in any case would 
take Troilus to be repeating, or pre- 
tending to repeat, what Pandarus had 
said in praise of Cressida's hand — 
which does not seem by any means 
an improvement. 

60,61. andspirit . , . ploughman] 
Grant White's suggestion has al- 
ready been mentioned. Hanmergave 
"harsh to th' spirit," etc. ; 'Warbur- 
ton, " harsh (and spite of sense)," 
etc. ; Capell, " harsh, in spirit," etc. 
The words " spirit of sense " have 
been explained " the most exquisite 
power of sensibility " (Johnson) ; 
" most delicate and ethereal touch " 
(Lettsom) ; "sense or sensibility it- 
self" (Schmidt); and in support of 
such meaning it is usual to quote iii. 
iii. 107, " That most pure spirit of 
sense" {sc. the eye). But it by no 
means follows that because the eye 
is called " That most pure spirit of 
sense " the words " spirit of sense " 
taken alone could bear any such ex- 
planation. I am inclined to think 



that we should read, " The cygnet's 
down is harsh in spirit, of sense Hard 
as," etc., i.e. in comparison with her 
hand the cygnet's down is in itself, 
in its nature, harsh, and in contact 
as hard, etc. The words "harsh" 
and " hard " would thus have a more 
appropriate sense. Chaucer's hyper- 
bole as to Cressida's beauty, Troilus 
and Criseyde, i. xxv. 3, 4, is less 
poetical : — 

" Right as our firste lettre is now 
an A, 
In beautee first so stood she 
makeless ". 
62. As] This is what Ingleby, 
Shakespeare, The Man and the Book, 
vol. i. p. 147, calls " the conjunction of 
reminder, being employed by Shake- 
speare to introduce a subsidiary state- 
ment, qualifying, or even contradict- 
ing, what goes before, which the 
person addressed is required to take 
for granted " ; as in As You Like It, 
III. V. 38 : — 

" What though you have 
no beauty, — 
As, by my faith, I see no more in 

you 
Than without candle may go dark 
to bed " ; 
Measure for Measure, 11. iv. 8g : — 
" Admit no other way to save his 
life. 
As I subscribe not that nor any 
other " : 



10 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act i. 

But, saying thus, instead of oil and balm, 
Thou lay'st in every gash that love hath given me 
The knife that made it. 65 

Pan. I speak no more than truth. 

Tro. Thou dost not speak so much. 

Pan. Faith, I '11 not meddle in 't. Let her be as 
she is : if she be fair, 'tis the better for her ; 
an she be not, she has the mends in her own 70 
hands. 

Tro. Good Pandarus, how now, Pandarus ! 

Pan. I have had my labour for my travail ; ill- 
thought on of her, and ill-thought on of you : 
gone between, and between, but small thanks 75 
for my labour. 

Tro. What ! art thou angry, Pandarus ? what ! with 
me ? 

Pan. Because she's kin to me, therefore she's not so 

fair as Helen : an she were not kin to me, 80 



80. nof] Omitted in Q. 

Antony and Cleopatra, i. iv. 22 : — 

" Say this becomes him, 
As his composure must be rare 

indeed 
Whom these things cannot 
blemish ". 
70, 71. She has . . . haiids] prob- 
ably means it rests with her to remedy 
the defect, perhaps, as Johnson sug- 
gests, with cosmetics. A proverbial 
expression. Compare The Captives 
(Bullen's Old Plays), iv. 122: "Ra- 
phael. Which if he have Clowne. 

Why then he hath and the mends is 
in your oivne hands " ; Beaumont and 
Fletcher, The Wild Goose Chase, 11. 
I : " The mends are in mine own 
hands, or the surgeon's". Steevens, 
who explains, " She may make the 



best of a bad bargain," quotes 
Woman's a Weathercock, 1612: "I 
shall stay here and have my head 
broke, and then I have the mends in 
my own hands''; Burton's Anatomy 
of Melancholy, ed. 1632, p. 605 : 
" And if men will be jealous in such 
cases, the mends is in their owne 
hands, they must thank themselves " ; 
and the above passage from Beau- 
mont and Fletcher. 

73. / have had . . . travail] the 
only reward of my exertion is the 
pains I have taken ; travail is, of 
course, only another spelling oi travel 
(the reading of the later folios) in 
order to distinguish between the 
literal and the figurative sense of 
the word. 



Z' 



SCI.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 11 

she would be as fair on Friday as Helen is 
on Sunday. But what care I ? I care not 
an she were a black-a-moor ; 'tis all one to 
me. 

Tro. Say I she is not fair ? 85 

Pan. I do not care whether you do or no. She's a 
fool to stay behind her father : let her to 
the Greeks ; and so I '11 tell her the next 
time I see her. For my part, I '11 meddle 
nor make no more i' the matter. 90 

Tro. Pandarus, — 

Pan. Not I. 

Tro. Sweet Pandarus, — 

Pan. Pray you, speak no more to me ! I will leave 

all as I found it, and there an end. 95 

\Exit Pandams. An alarum. 

Tro. Peace, you ungracious clamours ! peace, rude sounds ! 
Fools on__both sides J . Helen must needs be fair, 
When with your blood you daily paint her thus. 
I cannot fight upon this argument ; 

81, 82. as fair . . . Sunday] " as the oracle of Delphi concerning the 

fair in ordinary apparel as Helen in event of the war that was threatened 

holiday finery " (Staunton). Clarke by Agamemnon. As soon as he had 

thinks there is a particular reference made "his oblations and demands 

to Friday as a day of abstinence and for men of Troy, Apollo (says the 

to Sunday as a day of festivity among book) answered unto him, saying: 

Catholics. ' Calchas, Calchas, beware that thou 

83. 6/ac^-a-moor] Originally " Black returne not back again to Troj^ ; but 

Moor," an Ethiopian, any very dark- goe thou with Achylles, unto the 

skinned person. Compare Jonson, Greekes, and depart never from them, 

The Fox, I. i. : " Gypsies, and jews, for the Greekes shall have victorie 

and blackmoors " ; often formerly of the Troyans by agreement of the 

without any depreciatory sense. Gods ' ". Chapman also calls him 

86, 87. She's a fool . . . father] a " bishop ". 
Calchas, according to Shakespeare's 96. clamours] the abstract for the 

authority, The Destruction of Troy, concrete. 

was " a great learned bishop of Troy," gg. I . . . argument] an allusion 

who was sent by Priam to consult to fighting on an empty stomach. 



12 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act i. 

It is too starv'd a subject for my sword. loo 

But Pandarus — O gods ! how do ye plague me. 
I cannot come to Cressid but by Pandar; 
And he 's as tetchy to be woo'd to woo 
. As she is stubborn-chaste against all suit. 
fT Tell me, Apollo, for thy Daphne's love, 105 

' What Cressid is, what Pandar, and what we? 
Her bed is India ; there she lies, a pearl : 
Between our Ilium and where she resides. 
Let it be call'd the wild and wandering flood ; 
Ourself the merchant, and this sailing Pandar no 
Our doubtful hope, our convoy and our bark. 

Alarum. Enter ^NEAS.-' u- - . . ,.  
^ne. How now. Prince Troilus ! wherefore not a-field ? 
Tro. Because not there : This woman's answer sorts, 

For womanish it is to be from thence. 

What news, i^neas, from the field to-day? 115 
ALne. That Paris is returned home, and hurt. 
Tro. By whom, ^Eneas? 

Aine. Troilus, by Menelaus. 

Tro. Let Paris bleed : 'tis but a scar to scorn ; 

Paris is gor'd with Menelaus' horn. {Alarum. 

103. tetchy\teachy <^,VL 104. s<«66on«-cAas?^] Theobald ; stubborne, 

chast Q, Ff. 

103. ^^^cAj] fretful, peevish ; M.E. dialogue which precedes the soliloquy 

tecche or tachc, a habit, especially a Pandarus professed himself angry 

bad habit ; O.F. tache, a spot, stain, with Troilus. See also line 103 : 

blemish. See Skeat, Ety. Diet. ' And he's as tetchy to be woo'd to 

iQ^. for . . . love] I entreat you woo,' " etc. 

by the lo\4e you bear to Daphne. 113. sorts] is fitting. Compare 

108. Iliion] here the palace of e.g. Henry V. iv. i. 63 : " It sorts 

Troy. Ilium was properly the name well with your fierceness ". 

of the city ; Troy, that of the country. iiS. 'tis but . . . scorn] Does this 

110. sailing] Daniel proposes vail- mean "it is but a mere trifle which 

ing. " Note," he says, " that in the Paris can aflord to treat with con- 



sc. II.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 13 

^ne. Hark! what good sport is out of town to-day. 120 
Tro. Better at home, if " would I might " were " may ". 
But to the sport abroad: are you bound thither? 
^m. In all swift haste. 

Jro. Come go we then together. 

\Exeunt. 

SCENE W.— The Same. A Street. 

Enter Cressida and ALEXANDER. 

Cres. Who were those went by ? 

Alex. Queen Hecuba and Helen. 

Cres. And whither go they? 

Alex. Up to the eastern tower, 

Whose height commands as subject all the vale, 
To see the battle. Hector, whose patience 
Is, as a virtue fix'd, to-day was mov'd : 5 

He chid Andromache, and struck his armourer ; 
And, like as there were husbandry in war, 

tempt," or " it is but a scar in return 5. /s, as . . . fix'd] is of the nature 
for the scorn with which Paris regards of a fixed, unshakeable virtue. War- 
Menelaus ? " Brae conjectured, and burton proposed, and Theobald ac- 
Hudson adopts, 5cor5^, i.e. exchange, cepted, "the Virtue," an alteration 
barter ; but the rhyme seems needed which seems far from an improve- 
in a didactic saying of the kind. In ment. 

horn there is the usual allusion to 7. And, like . . . war] and, as 

cuckoldom. The combat between though in war as in peaceful life it 

Menelaus and Paris, and Hector's was true economy to make the most 

scornful tirade at the latter's coward- of time. Compare Henry V. iv. i. 

ice, are told in Chapman's Iliad, iii. 6, 7 : — 

26-60. " For our bad neighbour makes us 

• early stirrers, 

'^'^^"^ "■ Which is both healthful and 

This scene is based upon Chaucer's good husbandry " ; 

description, Troilus and Criseyde, ii. and for " husbandry," Macbeth, n. i, 

xxvi. 176 ff. 4 ■• — 

3. as sicbject] as being under its " There's husbandry in heaven ; 

dominion. Their candles are all out ". 



14 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act i. 

Before the sun rose he was harness'd h'ght, 
And to the field goes he; where every flower 
/Did, as a prophet, weep what it foresaw lo 

tin Hector's wrath. 

Cres. What was his cause of anger? 

Alex. The noise goes, this : there is among the Greeks 
A lord of Trojan blood, nephew to Hector ; 
They call him Ajax. 

Cres. Good ; and what of him ? 

Alex. They say he is a very man per se, 15 

And stands alone. 

Cres. So do all men ; unless they are drunk, sick, or 
have no legs. 

Alex. This man, lady, hath robbed many beasts of 

their particular additions : he is as valiant as 20 
the lion, churlish as the bear, slow as the ele- 
phant ; a man into whom nature hath so 

8. harness'd light] harnest lyte Q, F i ; harncst light Ff 2, 3, 4. 12. 

The noise . . . Greeks] As in Q. Two lines in Ff. 

8. harness'd light] It has been ment of Crcsseid, stanza xii., calls 

disputed whether "light" means Cressida " the ^ouvq and A per se of 

"lightly" or "promptly". War- Troie and Grece ". 

burton is very scornful at Theobald's 20. additions] defined by Cowel 

doubting the former sense. (La7i) Diet.) as "a title given to a 

12. The noise goes] the rumour is. man besides his Christian and sur- 

Compare Antony and Cleopatra, i. name, showing his estate, degree, 

ii. 145: "Cleopatra, catching but mystery, trade, place of dwelling, 

the least Ko/sr of this, dies instantly ". etc.". Both verse and prose of the 

So V. ix. 3 below, " The bruit is, period abound with the word in this 

Hector's slain ". sense. Thus Plutarch, speaking of 

15. a very . . . sc] unique. Com- the praenomen, nomen and agnomen 

pare Massinger, The Fatal Dowry, of the Romans, says : " The third 

iii. 2; "Oh lord per se, lord! quint- was some addition given, either for 

essence of honour ! " A phrase very some act or notable service, or for 

frequent in old writers, who also some mark on their face, or of some 

have " A per se A," " E per se E," shape ot their body, or else for some 

"I per se I," etc., sometimes with special virtue they had " (Con'o/a?iz<5, 

"of all," to express pre-eminent ex- ed. Skeat, c. 7). 
cellence. Thus Henryson, The Testa- 



sen] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 15 

crowded humours that his valour is crushed 
into folly, his folly sauced with discretion : 
there is no man hath a virtue that he hath 25 
not a glimpse of, nor any man an attaint but 
he carries some stain of it : he is melan- \ 
choly without cause, and merry against the \ 
hair: he hath the joints of everything, but 
everything so out of joint that he is a gouty 30 
Briareus, many hands and no use ; or pur- 
blind Argus, all eyes and no sight. 

Cres. But how should this man, that makes me 
smile, make Hector angry ? 

Alex. They say he yesterday coped Hector in the 35 
battle and struck him down ; the disdain and 



31. purblind] purblinde Q ; purblitided Ff. 
Q, F I ; strooke F 2 ; strook F 3. 



36. struck] F 4 ; strokes 



23. humours] In old physiology the 
four principal temperaments, viz. the 
sanguine, the phlegmatic, the choleric 
apd the melancholic, were supposed 
to arise from four humours or fluids 
in the body, the fluids themselves 
being more remotely referred to the 
four elements ; and what we should 
now term peculiarities of manner 
were then known as humours. The 
abuse of the word is ridiculed by 
Shakespeare in The Merry Wives of 
Windsor, and by Jonson in Every 
Man in His Humour. See Nares, 
Glossary, s.v. 

23, 24. that his valour . . . discre- 
tion] so that his valour is made a 
conglomerate with folly, and his folly 
is spiced and seasoned with discre- 
tion. For " sauced," Theobald con- 
jectured "farced," i.e. stuffed. 

26. glimpse of] tinge of, spark of. 
The Netv Eng. Diet, quotes Sir 
Thomas Browne's Religio Medici, 



i. 33 : " there is not any creature 
that hath so neere a glimpse of their 
(spirits) nature, as light in the Sunne 
and elements". 

27. stain] tincture, admixture. 
Compare AlVs Well that Ends Well, 
I. i. 122 : " You have some stain of 
soldier in you ". 

28, 29. against the hair] against 
the grain. Compa.Te The Merry Wives 
of Windsor, 11. iii. 41 ; Romeo and 
Juliet, II. iv. 100. In 1 Henry IV. 
IV. i. 61 : " The quality and hair of 
our attempt " ; /«azV = peculiar nature. 

33. should] can possibly. See 
Abbott, Shakespearian Grammar, § 

325- 

35. coped] met and fought with ; 

F. coiiper, to strike, thence to come 
to blows, join battle. Compare Hey- 
wood, A Challenge for Beauty, vol. v. 
p. 67 (Pearson's Reprint) : — 

"Whose sword has coped brave 
champions for their fame ", 



16 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act i. 

shame whereof hath ever since kept Hector 

fasting and waking. 
Cres. Who comes here? 
Alex. Madam, your uncle Pandarus. 40 

Enter Pandarus. 

Cres. Hector's a gallant man. 

Alex. As may be in the world, lady. 

Pan. What's that? what's that? 

Cres. Good morrow, uncle Pandarus. 

Pan. Good morrow, cousin Cressid. What do you 45 
talk of ? Good morrow, Alexander. , How do 
you, cousin ? When were you at Ilium ? 

Cres. This morning, uncle. 

Pan. What were you talking of when I came ? 

Was Hector armed and gone ere ye came to 50 
Ilium ? Helen was not up, was she ? 

Cres. Hector was gone, but Helen was not up. 

Pan. Even so : Hector was stirring early. 

Cres. That were we talking of, and of his anger. 

Pan. Was he angry ? 55 

Cres. So he says here. 

Pan. True, he was so ; I know the cause too : he '11 
lay about him to-day, I can tell them that : 
and there's Troilus will not come far behind 
him ; let them take heed of Troilus, I can 60 
tell them that too. 

43. WhaVs that ?] What do you 72, 73. in some degrees] by many 

mean by so praising Hector? degrees. Compare Chapman, //irtrf, 

47. cousin] niece; a word very xvi. igi, "thou strongest Greek by 

loosely used of old, as the derivation all degrees," said of Achilles, 

makes permissible. 75. / 7voidd he ivcre] sc. himself, 

56. he . . . here] sc. Alexander, not distraught by love. 

Pandarus's servant. 78. Condition . . . India] even if 



sen] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 17 

Cres. What ! is he angry too ? 

Pan. Who, Troilus? Troilus is the better man of 

the two. 
Cres. O Jupiter ! there 's no comparison. 65 

Pan.  What ! not between Troilus and Hector ? Do 

you know a man if you see him ? 
Cres. Ay, if I ever saw him before and knew him. 
Pan. Well, I say Troilus is Troilus. 
Cres. Then you say as I say ; for I am sure he is 70 

not Hector. 
Pan. No, nor Hector is not Troilus in some 

degrees. 
Cres. 'Tis just to each of them ; he is himself. 
Pan. Himself ! Alas ! poor Troilus, I would he 75 

were. 
Cres. So he is. 

Pan. Condition, I had gone bare-foot to India. 
Cres. He is not Hector. 
Pan. Himself! no, he's not himself: would a' were 80 

himself! Well, the gods are above; time must 

friend or end. Well, Troilus, well, I would 

my heart were in her body ! No, Hector is 

not a better man than Troilus. 
Cres. Excuse me. 85 

Pan. He is elder. 
Cres. Pardon me, pardon me. 

to bring that about I had to go, IV. pt. i. vol. i. p. 51 (Pearson's Re- 
etc, a continuation of Pandarus's print) : " I would I had not, condition 
last speech. Compare Middleton, she had all " ; Chapman, The Revenge 
The Old Laiv, 11. i. 202 : " I would I of Btissy D^Ambois, iv. i. ; " Condi- 
had e'en Another father, condition </o« I would set this message by ". 
he did the like" ; Heywood, Edward 83. my heart] my feelings. 

2 



^ 



18 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act i. 

Pan. Th' other 's not come to 't ; you shall tell me 
another tale when th' other's come to't. 
Hector shall not have his wit this year. 90 

Cres. He shall not need it if he have his own. 

Pan. Nor his qualities. 

Cres. No matter. 

Pan. Nor his beauty. 

Cres. 'Twould not become him; his own's better. 95 

Pan. You have no judgment, niece : Helen herself 
swore th' other day, that Troilus, for a brown 
favour, — for so 'tis I must confess, not brown 
neither, — 

Cres. No, but brown. 100 

Pan. Faith, to say truth, brown and not brown. 

Cres. To say the truth, true and not true. 

Pan. She prais'd his complexion above Paris. 

Cres. Why, Paris hath colour enough. 

Pan. So he has. 105 

Cres. Then Troilus should have too much : if she 

88-90. TW other's not . . .year} Genesis xli. 4 : ' The ill-favoured and 
Troilus wants some years of Hector's lean-fleshed kine did eat up the well- 
age ; you will sing another song when favoured and fat kine '. Favour seems 
he is as old as Hector is now. Hector to be used for face from the same 
will not be as wise as he is for many confusion or natural transference of 
a long day. For " this year " used meaning between the expressions for 
indefinitely, compare As You Like It, the feeling in the mind and the out- 
11. iii. 74 : — ward indication of it in the look that 

"But at fourscore it is too late a has led to the word co)(«<£'Ha«ce, which 

week ". commonly denotes the latter, being 

98. favour] complexion, feature, sometimes employed, by a process 

look. "'In beauty,'" says Bacon the reverse of which we have in the 

in his forty-third essay, " ' that of case of favour, in the sense of at 

favour is more than that of colour ; least one modification of the former, 

and that of decent and gracious as when we speak of any one giv- 

motion more than that of favour '. ing his countenance or countenancing 

The word is now lost to us in that it" (Craik, Eng. of Shakespeare, § 

sense ; but we still use favoured with 54). 

well, ill, and perhaps other qualifying 106. s/wmW /iawf] would necessarily 

terms for featured or looking ; as in have. 



sen.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 19 

praised him above, his complexion is higher 
than his: he having colour enough, and the 
other higher, is too flaming a praise for a 
good complexion. I had as lief Helen's no 
golden tongue had commended Troilus for a 
copper nose. 

Pan. I swear to you, I think Helen loves him 
better than Paris. 

Cres\T)\Q.rv she's a merry Greek indeed, 115 

Pan. Nay, I am sure she does. She came to him 
th' other day into the compassed window, — 
and, you know, he has not past three or four 
hairs on his chin, — 

Cres. Indeed, a tapster's arithmetic may soon bring 120 
his particulars therein to a total. 

Pan. Why, he is very young; and yet will he, with- 



iio. / had as lief] The older 
construction of this idiom was " For 
me (it) were lever " ; and so in 
Chaucer. 

Ill, 112. a copper nose] a red nose, 
with a notion of base metal, as in 
Marston, ii Atitonio and Mellida, i, 
ii. 85: "and if your nose will not 
abide the touch, your nose is a copper 
nose, and must be nailed up for a 
slip " ; and as the result of drinking, 
Greene, Friar Bacon and Friar Bun- 
gay, p. 155/2 (ed. Dyce) : " Mother 
Water's strong ale will fit his turn 
to make him have a copper nose ". 
The Eng. Dial. Diet, notes that the 
chaffinch is called the " copper finch " 
in Devon and Cornwall, and that 
" copper-topt " is red-haired in Nor- 
thuuiL-rland, etc. 

115. a merry Greek] a proverbial 
expression for one of a light heart, 
with something of a depreciatory 



sense. Staunton points out that the 
droll in Ralph Roister Doister, our 
earliest English comedy, is called 
" Mathewe Merygreeke," and Stee- 
vens that ^rti^carj, among the Romans, 
signified to "pray tTie reveller ". 

117. compassed] (also compass as an 
adjective) =; round, curved ; applied 
to windows and roofs. The New 
Eng. Diet, quotes Leland, Itin., 
" Mervelus fair cojnpacid windoes ". 
Compare The Taming of the Shrew, 
IV. iii. 140, " a small compassed cape ". 
In Venus and Adonis, 272, " his mane 
upon his compass'd crest," the word 
appears to mean " arched ". 

120. a tapster's arithmetic] i.e. a 
very small knowledge of arithmetic. 
In Love's Labour's Lost, i. ii. 43, to 
Moth's question " How many is one 
thrice told ? " Armado replies, " I am 
ill at reckoning ; it fitteth the spirit 
of a tapster". 



w 



20 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act i. 

in three pound, lift as much as his brother 

Hector. 
Cres. Is he so young a man, and so old a lifter? 125 
Pan. But to prove to you that Helen loves him : 

she came and puts me her white hand to 

his cloven chin — 
Cres. Juno have mercy ! how came it cloven ? 
Pan. Why, you know, 'tis dimpled. I think his 130 

smiling becomes him better than any man in 

all Phrygia. 
Cres, O ! he smiles valiantly. 
Pan. Does he not ? 

Cres. O! yes, an 'twere a cloud in autumn. 135 

Pan. Why, go to then. But to prove to you that 

Helen loves Troilus, — 
Cres. Troilus will stand to the proof, if you '11 prove 

it so. 
Pan. Troilus ! why, he esteems her no more than I 140 

esteem an addle egg. 
Cres. If you love an addle &^^ as well as you love 

an idle head, you would eat chickens i' the 

shell. 
Pan. I cannot choose but laugh, to think how she 145 

125. a lifter] with a quibble on the see Abbott, Shakespearian Gratnmar, 

word in the sense of a thief. Com- § 220. 

pare Greene, James the Fourth, iii. 133. ant were . . . ajitumH] like a 

I : " Slip. I am dead at a pocket, cloud portending a storm ; not " a 

sir ; why, I am a lifter, master, by summer's cloud " {Macbeth, iii. iv. 

my occupation. Sir Bar. A lifter.' iii) coming quickly and passing 

wiiat is that ? Slip. Why, sir, I can lightly away. 

lift a pot as well as any man, and 138, 139. Troilus ... so] Troili's 

pick a purse as soon as any thief in will not shrink from the proot,' if that 

the country." Also the modern proof be that Helen loves him. 

"shop-lifter". 141. addle] a.dd\ed; " auf abortif: 

127. puts me] On this datival use, an addle egg " (Cotgrave). 



sc. II.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 21 

tickled his chin : indeed, she has a marvel- 
lous white hand, I must needs confess, — 

Cres. Without the rack. 

Pan. And she takes upon her to spy a white hair 

on his chin. 150 

Cres. Alas ! poor chin ; many a wart is richer. 

Pan. But there was such laughing : Queen Hecuba 
laughed that her eyes ran o'er. 

Cres. With millstones. 

Pan. And Cassandra laughed. 155 

Cres. But there was more temperate fire under the 
pot of her eyes : did her eyes run o'er too ? 

Pan. And Hector laughed. 

Cres. At what was all this laughing ? 

Pan. Marry, at the white hair that Helen spied on 160 
Troilus' chin. 

Cres. An't had been a green hair, I should have 
laughed too. 

Pan. They laughed not so much at the hair as at 

his pretty answer. 165 

Cres. What was his answer? 

Pan. Quoth she, " Here 's but two-and-fifty hairs on 
your chin, and one of them is white ". 
146. marvellous] Pope ; marvels Q, F i ; marvcVs Ff 2, 3 ; marvelVs F 4. 

148. without the rack] Compare ///. i. iii. 134 ; i. iv. 246 ; but here 

Portia's banter of Bassanio, The of laughter. Compare Massinger, 

Merchant of Venice, iii. ii. 26-29 '■ — The City Madam, iv. 3 : — 

" Bass. Let me choose ; " For. Thou dost belie him, varlet ! 

For as I am, I live upon the rack. he, good gentleman, 

Port. Upon the rack, Bassanio ! Will weep when he hears how we 

then confess are used. 

What treason there is mingled i Serj. Yes, millstones.'" 

with your love." 165. pretty] apt, witty. 

154. with millstones] A proverbial 167, 170, 171. otie and fifty] The.o- 

expression applied to persons not bald's correction of the old copies, 

addicted to weeping; as in Richard ''two and fifty". Dyce supposes 



22 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act i. 

Cres. This is her question. 

Pan. That's true; make no question of that. "Two- 170 
and-fifty hairs," quoth he, " and one white : 
that white hair is my father, and all the rest 
are his sons." " Jupiter ! " quoth she, " which 
of these hairs is Paris my husband?" "The 
forked one," quoth he; " pluck 't out, and 175 
give it him." But there was such laughing, 
and Helen so blushed, and Paris so chafed, 
and all the rest so laughed, that it passed. 

Cres. So let it now, for it has been a great while 

going by. 180 

Pan. Well, cousin, I told you a thing yesterday ; 
think on 't. 

Cres. So I do. 

Pan. I '11 be sworn 'tis true : he will weep you, an 

'twere a man born in April. 185 

Cres. And I '11 spring up in his tears, an 'twere a 

nettle against May. \^A retreat sounded. 

that the error arose from the MS. 178. i/zai i^ /"ass^rf] that it outwent 

having the numbers in figures. "It all description. Q,om^-ax^ The Merry 

is not to be doubted," he says, " that Wives of Windsor, i. i. 310: "the 

Shakespeare knew the exact number women have so cried and shrieked 

of sons which from the earliest times at it, that it passed ". In her answer, 

had been assigned to Priam . . . and Cressida pretends to take the word in 

it is utterly improbable that he would its more usual sense, 

here needlessly deviate from the 184., 185. aii't were . . . April] In 

Homeric tradition." To Knight's such phrases Abbott supposes an 

remark that " The Margarelon of the ellipsis. See S. G. § 104. For the 

romance-writers ... is one of the thought, Steevens compares Antony 

additions to the old classical family," and Cleopatra, iii. ii. 43, 44 : — 

Dyce rejoins that "the romance- "The April's in her eyes: it is 

writers merely bestowed that name love's spring, 

on one of the fifty sons whom an- And these the showers to bring 

tiquity had left unnamed". it on ". 

174, 175. the forked one] another 187. against May] in anticipation 

allusion to the horns of a cuckold, of the coming of May. Compare A 

Compare Othello, in. iii. 276, " this Midsummer-Night's Dream, in. ii. 

forked plague ". gg : — 



sen] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 23 

Pan. Hark! they are coming from the field. Shall 
we stand up here, and see them as they pass 
toward Ilium? good niece, do; sweet niece 190 
Cressida. 

Cres. At your pleasure. 

Pan. Here, here ; here 's an excellent place : here we 
may see most bravely. I '11 tell you them all 
by their names as they pass by, but mark 195 
Troilus above the rest. 

Cres. Speak not so loud. 

^NEAS passes over the stage. 

Pan. That 's yEneas : is not that a brave man ? 
he's one of the flowers of Troy, I can tell 
you: but mark Troilus; you shall see anon. 200 

Cres. Who's that? 

Antenor passes over. 

Pan. That's Antenor: he has a shrewd wit, I can 
tell you; and he's a man good enough: he's 
one o' the soundest judgments in Troy, who- 
soever, and a proper man of person. When 205 
comes Troilus ? I '11 show you Troilus anon : 
if he see me, you shall see him nod at me. 

Cres. Will he give you the nod ? 

" I'll charm his eyes against she sharp, whether in a good or a bad 

do appear " ; sense. 

Hamlet, i. i. 158 : — 204. whosoeverl sc. the other may 

" Some say that ever Against that be. 

season comes," etc. 205. a proper . . . persoti] a man 
202. he has . . . ivit] Steevens of comely personal appearance. Corn- 
quotes Lydgate's description of An- pare 1 Henry IV. u. li. 72: " a proper 
tenor's natural seriousness coupled person of my hands " ; The Tempest, 
with dryness of humour ; shrewd, 11. ii. 63 : " as proper a man as ever 
originally the past participle of went on four legs ". Capell con- 
shrewen, to curse, thence keen, jectured " of 5 person". 



24 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act i. 

Pan. You shall see, 

Cres. If he do, the rich shall have more. 210 

Hector passes over. 

Pan. That's Hector, that, that, look you, that; 
there's a fellow ! Go thy way, Hector ! 
-There's a brave man, niece. O brave Hec- 
tor! Look how he looks! there's a counten- 
ance! Is't not a brave man? 215 

Cres. O ! a brave man. 

Pan. Is a' not ? It does a man's heart good. 
Look you what hacks are on his helmet ! 
look you yonder, do you see? look you 
there : there 's no jesting ; there 's laying on ; 220 
take 't off who will, as they say : there be 
hacks ! 

Cres. Be those with swords? 

Pan. Swords ! any thing, he cares not ; an the 

devil come to him, it's all one: by God's lid, 225 

210. If he do . . . more] After the rich shall have more" were probably 

word nod in line 208 I believe we proverbial sayings, 

should insert Ay, as the commence- 220, 221. There's laying . . . say"] 

ment of Pandarus's answer. The pun there's proof of the fierceness of the 

on" noddy" will then be complete, fight. CompureHeywood,! Edward 

as in The Two Gentlemen of Verona, IV. vol. i. p. 17 (Pearson's Reprint) : 

I. i. 119-122: "Proteus. But what "Will soundly lay it on, take 't off 

said he ? Speed [First nodding], who will " ; and, for a similarly in- 

Ay. Protetis. Nod — Ay — why, that's consequent consequence, Beaumont 

noddy. Speed. You mistook, sir ; I and Fletcher, A King and No King, 

say, she did nod : and you ask me v. i. 98 : — 

if she did nod : And I say, ' Ay '. " Do that you do not used to do, 

Proteus. And that set together is tell truth, 

noddy." Cressida's answer (line 210) Or, by my hand, Fll beat your 

then becomes unmistakably plain ; captain's brains out, 

and no change such as Hanmer's Wash 'em and put 'em in again 

rest . . . none or Staunton's wretch that will". 

. . . more is necessary for rich . . . 225. God's lid] (or abbreviated 

more. To "give the nod" and "the 'slid) God's eyelid, a petty form of 



sc. II.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 25 

it does one's heart good. Yonder comes 
Paris, yonder comes Paris. 

Paris passes over. 

Look ye 3onder, niece ; is 't not a gallant 
man too, is 't not ? Why, this is brave now. 
Who said he came hurt home to-day ? he 's 230 
not hurt : why, this will do Helen's heart 
good now, ha ! Would I could see Troilus 
now i You shall see Troilus anon. 

Helen US passes over. 

Cres. Who's that? 

Pan. That's Helenus. I marvel where Troilus is. 235 

That's Helenus. I think he went not forth 

to-day. That's Helenus. 
Cres. Can Helenus fight, uncle ? 
Pan. Helenus ? no. Yes, he '11 fight indifferent well. 

I marvel where Troilus is. Hark ! do you 240 

not hear the people cry " Troilus " ? Helenus 

is a priest. 
Cres. What sneaking fellow comes yonder? 

Troilus passes over. 

Pan. Where ? yonder ? that 's Deiphobus, 'Tis 

oath, similar to 'shlood, 'sbody, reverence sake to one singular thing : 

'sdeath, etc. Gower, lib. i. : ' O good/a^A^j-deare, 

228. Look ye] On the distinction Why make ye this heavy cheere ? ' " 

between you and ye in the original 238. Can Helenus . . . uncle ?] 

form of the language Abbott (S.G. Helenus being a priest. 

§ 236) remarks that by Elizabethan 243. What . . . yonder ?] Recog- 

authors "-ye seems to be generally nising Troilus, Cressida says this to 

used in questions, entreaties and rhe- provoke Pandarus to eulogy, and per- 

torical appeals," and quotes Jonson's haps to disguise the admiration which 

Grammar [Of Syntax, chap, ii.] : later on she confesses she had always 

" The second person plural is for felt for the Prince. 



26 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act i. 

Troilus ! there's a man, niece ! Hem ! Brave 245 
Troilus ! the prince of chivalry ! 

Cres. Peace ! for shame, peace ! 

Pan. Mark him ; note him. O brave Troilus ! 
Look well upon him, niece : look you how 
his sword is bloodied, and his helm more 250 
hacked than Hector's ; and how he looks, 
and how he goes. O admirable youth ! he 
ne'er saw three-and-twenty. Go thy way, 
Troilus, go thy way ! Had I a sister were a 
grace, or a daughter a goddess, he should 255 
take his choice. O admirable man ! Paris ? 
Paris is dirf: to him ; and, I warrant, Helen, 
to change, would give an eye to boot. 

Cres. Here come more. 

Soldiers pass over. 

Pan. Asses, fools, dolts ! chaff and bran, chafif and 260 
bran ! porridge after meat ! I could live and 
die i' the eyes of Troilus. Ne'er look, ne'er 
look ; the eagles are gone : crows and daws, 
crows and daws ! I had rather be such a 
man as Troilus than Agamemnon and all 265 
Greece. 

258. an eye] Q ; money Ff. 

250, 251. his helm . . . Hector's] I a sister were a grace, or a daughter 

Compare Chaucer, Troilus and Cris- a goddess, he should have her ". 

eyde, i. ii. 225 : — 260, 261. chaff and bran] recalls 

" His helm to - hewen was in Falstaiifs "food ibr powder, food for 

twenty places ". powder," 1 Henry IV. iv. ii. 72 : por- 

254-256. Had I . . . choice] Aeon- j-iWg-e] originally leek broth, 

fusion between " Had I a sister were 262. V the eyes of Troilus] looking 

a grace, and a daughter a goddess, at Troilus, or, perhaps, when he is 

he should take his choice," and " Had there looking upon me. 



sc. II.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 27 



Cres. There is among the Greeks Achilles, a better 
man than Troilus. 

Pan. Achilles ! a drayman, a porter, a very camel. 

Cres. Well, well. 270 

Pan. " Well, well ! " Why, have you any discretion ? 
have you any eyes? Do you know what a 
man is ? Is not birth, beauty, good shape, 
discourse, manhood, learning, gentleness, virtue, 
youth, liberality, and such like, the spice and 275 
salt that season a man ? 

Cres. Ay, a minced man : and then to be baked 
with no date in the pie, for then the man's 
date's out. 

Pan. You are such a woman ! one knows not at 280 
j what ward you lie. 

Cres. Upon my back, to defend my belly ; upon / 



275. such like] Q ; so forth Ff. 

273-276. Is not birth . . . man ?'] 
Compare Troilus and Criseyde, ii. iii. 
157 ff. :- 

" And eek his freshe brother 
Troilus 
The wyse worthy Ector the 

secounde, 
To whom that every vertu list 

abounde, 
As alle trouthe and alle gentilesse, 
Wysdom, honour, fredom, and 
worthinesse ". 
277-279. and then . . . out] a whim- 
sical allusion to the custom of using 
dates in pastry as a seasoning. Com- 
pare Romeo and Juliet, iv. iv. 2 ; AlVs 
Well that Ends Well, i. i. 172, 173. 
It were to consider too curiously to 
subject Cressida's meaning to a strict 
scrutiny. Aristophanes would be the 
best scholiast here. 

280. You . . . woman /] What a 
woman you are ! i.e. how full of japes 



and jests ! The folios give " such 
another woman," which is perhaps 
the better reading. Compare The 
Merry Wives of Windsor, i. iv, 160 : 
"it is such another Nan". The ex- 
pression in this contemptuous sense 
was indeed very common, e.g. Chap- 
man, The Gentleman Usher, in. i. : 
" Come, you have such another plaguy 
tongue " ; May Day, 11. iii. : " Come, 
you are such another " ; Middleton, 
The Widow, i. ii. 69 : " you're suck 
another". 

280, 281. at what . . . lie] how to 
take you, what your posture of de- 
fence is. Compare 1 Henry IV. 11. 
iv. 215, 216 : " Thou knowest my 
old ward ; here I lay and thus I bore 
my point"; figuratively, The Merry 
Wives of Windsor, n. ii. 258 : " I could 
drive her then from the ward of her 
purity ". Both ward and lie were 
technical terms in fencing parlance. 







28 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act i. 

my wit, to defend my wiles ; upon my secrecy, 
to defend mine honesty ; my mask, to de- 
fend my beauty; and you, to defend all 285 
these : and at all these wards I lie, at a 
thousand watches. 

Pan. Say one of your watches. 

Cres. Nay, I '11 watch you for that ; and that 's one 

of the chiefest of them too : if I cannot 290 
ward what I would not have hit, I can 
watch you for telling how I took the blow ; 
unless it swell past hiding, and then it's past 
watching. 

Pan. You are such another ! 295 

Enter Troilus's Boy. 

Boy. Sir, my lord would instantly speak with you. 

Pan. Where ? 

Boy. At your own house ; there he unarms him. 

Pan. Good boy, tell him I come, {Exit Boy. 

I doubt he be hurt. Fare ye well, good 300 

niece. 
Cres. Adieu, uncle. 

Pan. I '11 be with you, niece, by and by. 
Ores. To bring, uncle ? 

304. hrin<r, uncle] Cambridge Edd. ; bring uncle Q ; bring Vnkle Ff i, 2, 3 ; 
bring Uncle, F 4. 

288. Say . . . watches] Cressida 304. To bring] A cant expression 

having used watches in the sense of frequent in the old dramatists. The 

vigilance, Pandarus.withaninnuendo, exact sense is doubtful, though it 

takes up the word in that of keeping seems always sinister, and commonly 

awake at night. indicates retaliation. Among other 

291, 292. / can . . . blow] I can passages, Dyce quotes Peele, Sir 

take precautions to prevent you from Clyonion and Sir Clamydes, sc. vi. 

telling, etc. 76: — 



sc. II.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 



29 



Pan. Ay, a token from Troilus. 305 

Cres, By the same token, you are a bawd. 

\^Exit Pandarus. 
Words, vows, gifts, tears, and love's full sacrifice, 
He offers in another's enterjprise ; 
But more in Troilus thousand-fold I see 
Than in the glass of Bandar's praise may be. 310 
Yet hold I off. Women are angels, wooing : 
Things won are done ; joy's soul lies in the 

doing : 
That she belov'd knows nought that knows not 

this : 
Men prize the thing ungain'd more than it is : 
That she was never yet that ever knew 315 

Love got so sweet as when desire did sue. 
Therefore this maxim out of love I teach : 
Achievement is command ; ungain'd, beseech : 



"And I '11 close with Bryan till I 

have gotten the thing 

That he hath promised me, and 

then 77/ he with him to bri7ig" ; 

Middleton, The Family of Love, in. 

ii. 2: ^^ Lipsalve. Now, mistress 

Maria, ward yourself : if my strong 

hope fail not, / shall be with you to 

bring Shrimp. To bring what, 

sir ? Some more of your kind ? " ; 
Shirley, The Ball, vol. iii. p. 36 (ed. 
Gifford and Dyce) : — 

" Why did I not strike her ? but I 
will do something, 
And be with you to bring before 
you think on't". 
The phrr^^e is of frequent occurrence 
in Heywood. 

308. in another's enterprise'] in 
scheming for another. 

311. Women . . . wooing] women 
are accounted angels by men when 
making love to them. 



312. joy's . . . doing] the very 
spirit, essence, of delight, lies in the 
act of doing, and perishes when the 
act is complete. Compare Marlowe, 
Hero and Leander, Third Sestiad, 
lines 33, 34:— 

" that unblessed blessing 
Which for lust's plague doth 
perish in possessing ". 
The later folios read " the soules joy 
lyes in doing". For "lies" Mason 
conjectured " dies " ; Seymour, 
" lives ". 

314. more thajt it is] beyond its 
real value. 

316. got] sc. by men. 

317. out of love] taught by love. 

318. Achievement . . . beseech] 
when men have achieved their de- 
sire, they have us at their command ; 
so long as we hold out, their language 
is that of entreaty. Harness con- 
jectures : " Achiev'd, men ns com- 



30 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act i. 

Then though my heart's content firm love doth 

bear, 
Nothing of that shall from mine eyes appear. 320 

[Exeunt. 

y 

SCENE III. — The Grecian Camp. Before 
Agamemnon's Tent. 

Sennet. Enter Agamemnon, Nestor, Ulysses, 
Menelaus, and Others. 

Agam. Princes, 

What grief hath set the jaundice on your cheeks ? 
The ample proposition that hope makes 
In all designs begun on earth below 
Fails in the promis'd largeness : checks and 
disasters 5 

Grow in the veins of actions highest rear'd ; 
As knots, by the conflux of meeting sap, 
Infect the sound pine and divert his grain 
Tortive and errant from his course of growth. 
Nor, princes, is it matter new to us 10 

319. heart's content] hearts content Q ; hearts Contents Ff i, 2, 3 ; heart's 
content's F 4. 

mand " ; and, less happily, Collier's Scene in. 

MS. Corrector : " Achiev'ci, men still 

command". » Stage direction. S^whc^] a particular 

319. >ny heart's content'\ seems to set of notes on a trumpet or cornet, 
mean "my heart in the fulness of 3. proposition] promise held out. 
its contentment". Warburton ex- 9. Tortive and errant] :pxo\&Y>^\c, so 
plained " content " as " capacity " ; that it becomes tortive, etc! Rolfe 
Malone doubtfully gives " my heart's notes that this is the only instance in 
satisfaction or joy, my well-pleased Shakespeare of either of these ad- 
heart "; Steevens, " the acquiescence jectives. In Othello, i. iii. 362, 
of my heart"; Mason conjectures "erring "is used in the literal sense 
"consent". of " wandering ". 



sc. III.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 31 

That we come short of our suppose so far 

That after seven years' siege yet Troy walls 

stand ; 
Sith every action that hath gone before, 
Whereof we have record, trial did draw 
Bias and thwart, not answering the aim, ; 15 
And that unbodied figure of the thought 
That gave't surmised shape. Why then, you 

princes. 
Do you with cheeks abash'd behold our works, 
And call them shames? which are indeed nought 

else 
But the protractive trials of great Jove 20 

To find persistive constancy in men : 
The fineness of which metal is not found 
In fortune's love ; for then the bold and coward. 
The wise and fool, the artist and unread, 

19. call them shames] (^ ; think them shame ¥L 19-21. shames? . . . 

meii] Cambridge Edd. ; shames which . , . men Q; shame, which . . . 
men? Ff. 



11. suppose] supposition, expecta- 
tion. Compare The Taming of the 
Shrew, \. i. 120; Titus Andronicus, 
I. i. 440. 

12. Troy walls] Compare " Philippi 
fields," yulius Casar, v. v. 19 ; 
"Cyprus wars," Othello, 1. i. 151, 
for substantives with an adjectival 
force in the case of localities, as 
frequently in the language of the 
day. 

13. Sith] as a conjunction of in- 
ference is frequent in Shakespeare, 
but as an adverb of time occurs only 
in Hamlet, 11. ii. 12. 

15. Bias . . . thwart] Rolfe takes 
both words as adverbs ; Hudson as 
nouns ; Schmidt " bias " as an ad- 
verb, "thwart" as a verb; Delius 



notes that " trial " is the subject, 
"every action" the object. 

16, 17. And that , . , shape] and 
that impalpable shape which it as- 
sumed in thought. The sentence is 
somewhat redundant. 

18. works] acts, deeds. Walker 
pronounces the word to be " palpably 
wrong," and Dyce edits the conjecture 
of Collier's MS. Corrector, " wrecks ". 

20, 21. the protractive . , . men] 
the long-drawn-out trials by which 
Jove tests the possession of endur- 
ance by men. 

23. In fortune's love] when fortune 
smiles. 

24. artist] scholar. Compare All's 
Well that Ends Well, 11. iii. 10 ; 
Pericles, 11. iii. 15. 



32 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act i. 



The hard and soft, seem all affined and kin : 25 
But, in the wind and tempest of her frown, 
Distinction, with a broad and powerful fan, 
Puffing at all, winnow-SL the light away ; 
And what hath mass or matter, by itself 
Lies rich in virtue and unmingled. 30 

Nest. With due observance of thy god-like seat, 
Great Agamemnon, Nestor shall apply 
Thy latest words. In the reproof of chance 
Lies the true proof of men : the sea being 

smooth. 
How many shallow bauble boats dare sail 35 

Upon her patient breast, making their way 
With those of nobler bulk ! 
But let the ruffian Boreas once enrage 
The gentle Thetis, and anon behold 
The strong-ribb'd bark through liquid mountains 

cut, 40 

Bounding between the two moist elements. 
Like Perseus' horse : where 's then the saucy boat 



27. broad] Q ; lowd or loud Ff. 
like Q ; thy godly Ff. 36. patien 

25. affined] joined by affinity ; in 
Othello, I. i. 39, II. iii. 218, bound 
by any tie. 

30. dies rich . , . unmingled] is 
seen in all the richness of unalloyed 
purity ; unmingled, here a quadri- 
syllable. 

31. god-like seat] a Greek ex- 
pression. Compare 'iSpa irayicpaT'fis, 
Aeschylus, P. V, 389. 

32. apply] drawn an inference from, 
moralise. 

33. reproof] confutation, rebuff ex- 
pressed by endurance. 

39. Thetis] " a sea goddess ; mother 



31. thy godlike] Theoha.\d; the god- 
t] Ff ; ancient Q. 

of Achilles. . . . Confounded with 
Tethys, the wife of Oceanus, and 
used for the sea, the ocean " (Schmidt). 
So, in Pericles, iv. iv. 39 : " Thetis, 
being proud, swallow'd some part o' 
the earth " ; though that scene is 
clearly not by Shakespeare. The 
confusion is not uncommon in the 
old dramatists, e.g. Marlowe, ii Tam- 
burlainc, i. iii. : " The sun . . . Shall 
hide his head in Thetis' watery lap " ; 
while in Latin both Tethys and Thetis 
are used by metonymy for the sea. 

42. Perseus' horse] Malone notes 
that the only winged horse, Pegasus, 



sc. Ill] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 33 



Whose weak untimber'd sides but even now 
Co-rivall'd greatness ? either to harbour fled, 
Or made a toast for Neptune. Even so 45 

Doth valour's show and valour's worth divide 
In storms of fortune ; for in her ray and brightness 
The herd hath more annoyance by the breese 
Than by the tiger ; but when the splitting wind 
Makes flexible the knees of knotted oaks, 50 

And flies fled under shade, why then, the thing 

of courage, 
As rous'd with rage, with rage doth sympathise, 
And with an accent tun'd in self-same key, 
Retorts to chiding fortune. 

47. One line in Q, two in Ff. 48. brecsc] Bryze Q ; Brieze or Brize 

Ff. 54. Retorts'] Dyce ; Retires or Retyres Ff. 

mentioned in mythology belonged to 
Bellerophon, not to Perseus, but that 
Shakespeare here followed Lydgate 
who represents the Pegasus engen- 
dered from the blood of the slain 
Medusa as being " the most swift 
ship that was in all the world," and 
assures us that this ship, which he 
always calls Perseus' flying horse, 
"flew on the sea like a bird". To 
which Steevens replies that " un- 
allegorised Perseus might fairly be 
styled Perseus' horse, because the 
heroism of Perseus had given him 
existence ". In his translation of 
0%'id's Elegies, xii. 24, Marlowe 
writes: "Victorious Perseus a wing'd 
steed's back takes," and there is no 
doubt that by Victor Abantiades Ovid 
meant that hero, just as in Meta- 
morphoses, vi. 137, he calls him Ultor 
Abantiades. Heywood, The Silver 
Age, vol. iii. p. 91 (Pearson's Reprint), 
has the same mistake : " Are you the 
noble Perseus . . . Fam'd for your 
winged steed . . . ? " So, too, in 
the anonymous play of Timou, iv. 



V. : " Perseus, hee had a winged 
horse". 

45. a toast] "a rich morsel to be 
swallowed" (Schmidt); an allusion 
to the toasts put in liquor. Compare 
The Merry Wives of Windsor, iii. 

iii. 5- 

46. divide] separate, stand aloof. 
48. breese] gadfly. Compare An- 

tony and Cleopatra, ill. x. 14 : [Cleo- 
patra] " The breese upon her like a 
cow in June, Hoists sail and flies". 
Jonson, The Poetaster, in. i : " This 
brize has prick'd my patience ". Hey- 
wood, Jupiter and lo, vol. vi. p. 266 
(Pearson's Reprint), distinguishes be- 
tween the breese and the horsefly : — 
" Keep her in shadow in the parch- 
ing sun 
Till she is stung with horseflies 
and the bres ". 
51. Jled] are fled, if the text is 
sound ; " get " and " flee " have been 
conjectured, and "are fled to" for 
"fled under". 

54. Retorts] Dyce's conjecture. 
Lettsom proposes " Re-chides," which 



34 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act 



Ulyss. 



commander. 



Agamemnon, 
nerve and bone 



of 

55 



Thou great 

Greece, 

Heart of our numbers, soul and only spirit, 
In whom the tempers and the minds of all 
Should be shut up, hear what Ulysses speaks. 
Besides the applause and approbation 
The which, ^Fo AGAMEMNON] most mighty for thy 

place and sway, 60 

\To Nestor] And thou most reverend for thy 

stretch'd-out life, 
I give to both your speeches, which were such 
As, Agamemnon, all the hands of Greece 

63. Agamemnon, all the hands] Orger; 



55. nerve] Ff; nerves Q. 
Agamemnon and the hand Q, Ff. 

Staunton and Rolfe adopt ; but with 
"chiding" immediately following 
this was less likely to be corrupted. 
Pope gave " Returns " ; Hanmer, 
"Replies". For " chiding," in allu- 
sion to the brawling of the waves 
about a coast, compare 1 Hetiry IV. 
III. i. 45 :— 

" the sea 
Thatc//if/es the banks of England, 
Scotland, Wales"; 
Othello, II. i. 12, " The chidden 
billow " ; and in the sense of angrily 
resounding to, Henry V. ii. i. 125 : — 
" that caves 
Shall chide your trespass and 

return your mock 
In second accents of his ord- 
nance ". 
55. Jierve] Shakespeare seems al- 
ways to have used " nerve " for 
"sinew," "tendon" (in accordance 
with its derivation from Greek vivpov, 
a sinew), not for a fibre conveying 
sensation. On the other hand, as 
Bucknill points out (Shakespeare's 
Medical Knowledge, p. 236), " sinew," 



V. iii. 3, below, " Let grow thy sinews 
till their knots be strong," is used for 
" muscle," a word not found in Shake- 
speare in its anatomical sense. Again, 
from Hamlet, i. iv. 82, 83 : — 

" And makes each petty artery in 
this body 
As hardy as the Nemean lion's 
nerve," 
the poet seems to have supposed that 
nerve and artery were of the same 
texture, their outward appearance 
being similar. 

58. Should . . . up] should be 
contented to find themselves ab- 
sorbed, as, for instance, petty streams 
in an ocean. 

63-69. As, Agamemnon, . . . speak] 
Many conjectures have been pro- 
posed in order to meet the difficulties 
of construction here. I have followed 
• Orger. Ulysses is addressing Aga- 
memnon and Nestor in turns. It is 
therefore impossible that, in apostro- 
,phising the former, he should say: 
" As Agamemnon and the hand . . . 
brass," and almost nonsense to talk 



sc. Ill] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 35 



Agam. 



Should hold up high in brass; and such again 
As, venerable Nestor, hatch'd in silver, 65 

Should with a bond of air, strong as the axletree 
On which heaven rides, knit all the Greekish ears 
To thy experienced tongue, yet let it please both, 
Thou great, and wise, to hear Ulysses speak. 
Speak, Prince of Ithaca ; and be 't of less ex- 
pect ' CC^ wvSf ; 70 

70. expect] Pope ; expect ; F i ; expect ; 



; 68. thy] Orger ; his Q, Ff, 
Ff 2, 3 ; exspect ; F 4. 

of that chief himself holding up his 
own speech in brass ; impossible that, 
in apostrophising Nestor, he should 
say : " As venerable Nestor . . . knit 
. . . To his experienced tongue," etc. 
By treating " Agamemnon " and 
" Nestor " as vocatives, reading " all 
the hands," in line 63, and " thy " 
for " his," in line 68, all will be clear 
as to construction and sense, Han- 
mer's alteration of "Though" for 
" Thou," which Dyce and other 
editors have adopted, is clearly 
wrong ; for " Thou, great, and wise " 
evidently means " Thou, great Aga- 
memnon, and Thou, wise Nestor ". 
A minor difficulty has been found in 
" hatch'd in silver " ; but the quota- 
tions adduced by Steevens make it 
quite plain that the hair of Nestor, 
thickly streaked with white, is likened 
to'^llver closely engraved with fine 
lines. Among those quotations are 
the following : Love in a Maze, 1632 : 
" Thy hair is fine as gold, thy chin is 
hatch'd with silver " ; The Two 
Merry Milkmaids, 1620: "Double 
and treble gilt . . . Hatch'd and 
inlaid, not to be worn with time " ; 
Chapman's Iliad, xxiii. 701 ; " Shall 

.win this sword, silvered and hatch'd ". 

^The whole passage may be para- 
phrased thus : ." which were such as, 
Agamemnon, universal Greece should 

' record in tablets of brass for all to 

j read, and such again as, venerable 



Nestor, thou whose hairs are thickly 
streaked with silver, should knit all 
the ears of Greece to thy experienced 
tongue with a bond of breath that 
nothing could dissipate; yet, do thou, 
great Agamemnon, and thou, wise 
Nestor, be pleased to hear the words 
which I shall speak ". 

70-74. and be't . , . oracle] and let 
no one any more expect that needless 
matter will come from your lips than 
we should be confident of hearing 
wisdom and music when Thersites 
speaks. The sentence begins with 
an injunction, but goes on with a 
statement of fact. If the reading is 
sound, " expect " must be taken as = 
expectation. Dyce has no doubt 
that the line is corrupt. Pope gave 
"we Itss expect"; Capell, " and we 
less expect " ; Lettsom conjectured 
"we rto less expect," supposing the 
comparison to be inverted or ironical, 
with the sense "we are as sure of a 
bad speech from you as of a good 
one from Thersites," an inversion 
with which he compares the words 
of Ulysses, lines 167, 168, below : 
" as near as the extremities of paral- 
lels ; as like as Vulcan and his wife ". 
In "mastic" there is a difficulty. 
Many editors follow Rowe in reading 
"mastiff"; and "mastic" would be 
an easy misprint for " mastie," i.e. 
" masty," a form frequently found 
for " mastiff," e.g. Middleton, A Trick 



36 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act i. 

That matter needless, of importless burden, 
Divide thy lips, than we are confident, 
When rank Thersites opes his mastic jaws, 
We shall hear music, wit, and oracle. 
Ulyss. Troy, yet upon his basis, had been down, 75 

And the great Hector's sword had lack'd a 

master. 
But for these instances. 

The specialty of rule hath been neglected : 
And, look, how many Grecian tents do stand 
Hollow upon this plain, so many hollow fac- 
tions. 80 
When that the general is not like the hive 



to Catch the Old One, i. iv. 15 : " the 
stealing of a masty dog from a farmer's 
house"; and again, 1. 23: "staked 
his masty against a noble ". Grant 
White suggests that the word may 
be mastix, scourging, or that "mas- 
tic " was substituted for " mastix " to 
avoid the cacophony of "his masti^r 
jawi ". In his description of Thersites 
and his " rankness," Shakespeare 
seems to have followed Chapman, 
Iliad, ii. 181-183 : — 

" Thersites only would speak all. 
A most disordered store 
Of words he foolishly poured out, 

of which his mind had more 
Than it could manage ; anything 

with which he could procure 
Laughter, he never could con- 
tain "; 
and lines 189-191 : — 

" He most of all envied 
Ulysses and Aeacides, whom still 

his spleen would chide. 
Nor could the sacred King him- 
self avoid his saucy vein ". 
75-137. Of this speech Mr. Churton 
Collins, Studies in Shakespeare, p. 
81, remarks: "In passing to Shake- 



speare's parallels in metaphysical 
speculation and generalised reflection 
on life, to use the term in its most 
comprehensive sense, we may first 
notice the possible influence exercised 
upon him by Jocasta's magnificent 
priffLs in the Phoenissac, 528-585. We 
trace it in Ulysses' great speech in 
the third scene of the first act of 
Troiliis and Cressida, which borrows 
its sentiments and even its imagery, 
and catching its very cadence and 
rhythm, might have been modelled 
on it." . . . 

77. instances'] causes, which he goes 
on to detail. The word is used by 
Shakespeare with a large latitude of 
meaning for " motive, inducement, 
cause, ground ; symptom, prog- 
nostic ; information, assurance ; proof, 
example, indication" (Dyce, Gloss- 
ary). 

78. specialty of rule] the preroga- 
tive of which attaches to command. 

80. Hanmer omits " Hollow " at 
the beginning of the line; Steevens, 
before " factions ". 

8i-87j. When that . . . expected?] 
when the common soldiery does not 



sc. Ill] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 37 

To whom the foragers shall all repair, 

What honey is expected ? Degree being viz- 

arded, 
The unworthiest shows as fairly in the mask. 
The heavens themselves, the planets, and this 

centre, 85 

Observe degree, priority, and place, 
Insisture, course, proportion, season, form. 
Office, and custom, in all line of order : 
And therefore is the glorious planet Sol 
In noble eminence enthron'd and spher'd 90 

Amidst the other ; whose med'cinable eye 
Corrects the ill aspects of planets evil. 



92. ill aspects 



evils] Ff ; influence of eiiill Planets Q. 



refer itself in everything, its objects, 
acts, etc., to the general, as the honey- 
bees do to their headquarters, there 
can be no hope of profitable enter- 
prise. Delius, though preferring to 
take " the general " as the com- 
mander-in-chief, doubtfully suggests 
that the phrase may be used as in 
Hamlet, ii. ii. 457, " 'twas caviare to 
the general ". The context, I think, 
shows this to be improbable. 

83, 84. Degree . . . mask] if those 
in high authority are content to hide 
their superiority behind a veil, the 
meanest in the throng is on a level 
with them ; " mask " is not here the 
covering of the face, but the mas- 
querade in which the several actors 
have a part. In his edition of 
Sophocles Professor Jebb points out 
the parallelism between these lines 
and those in the Ajax, 669 et scqq., 
beginning koI yap ra Seiva Kal rk 
KapTtpairara Tt/xais inre'iKei. 

85. This centre] the earth. In the 
Ptolemaic system of astronomy the 
universe consisted of nine hollow 



crystalline spheres of which the earth 
was the centre. Warburton thinks 
that this passage was suggested by 
one in Hooker's Ecclesiastical Polity : 
" If celestial spheres should forget 
their wonted motion ; if the prince 
of the lights of heaven should begin 
to stand ; if the moon should wander 
from her beaten way ; and the seasons 
of the year should blend themselves ; 
what would become of man ? " 

87. Insisture] persistent regularity ; 
apparently a a5ra| KeyS/xevov. 

89. glorious] brilliant, lustrous. 

Compare Paradise Lost, iii. 612 : — 

" so many precious things 

Of colour glorious " ; 

and Gower, Confcssio Amantis, iii. 114 

(quoted in the New Eng. Diet.) : — 

" Mars the planet bataillous 
Next to the sonne glorious ". 

91. other] a plural; the sun being 
one of the planets affixed to a crystal- 
line sphere. 

92. the ill . . . ew//] " aspect " was 
the technical term for the appearance 
of a planet which varied with its posi- 



38 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act i. 

' And posts, like the commandment of a king, 
Sans check to good and bad : but when the 

planets 
In evil mixture to disorder wander, 95 

What plagues, and what portents, what mutiny. 
What raging of the sea, shaking of earth, 
Commotion in the winds, frights, changes, horrors, 
Divert and crack, rend and deracinate 
The unity and married calm of states 100 

Quite from their fixure ! O, when degree is 

shak'd, 
Which is the ladder to all high designs. 
The enterprise is sick ! How could communities, 
Degrees in schools, and brotherhoods in cities, 
Peaceful commerce from dividable shores, 105 

The primogenity and due of birth, 
Prerogative of age, crowns, sceptres, laurels. 
But by degree, stand in authentic place? 

loi. Jixjirc] Q, Ff I, 2 ; fixture Ff 3, 4. 106. primogenity] primo- 

genitie Q, primogenitive Ff. 

tion among the stars and was either of a statue, rather than the " direc- 

benign or malign. So, in line 95, tion" as Schmidt explains; shaked, 

their " conjunction " is spoken of. the commoner form of the participle 

96. mutiny] strife, contention, as in Shakespeare, 

frequently in Shakespeare. Compare 102. Which . . . designs] by which 

King Lear, 1. ii. 116 ff., where " the alone men climb to lofty results, 

sequent effects " of eclipses are de- 105. coniincrce] accented on the 

scribed. second syllable : dividable, having 

99. derncinate] tear up hy the roots, the function of dividing; for adjec- 

Compare Henry V. v. ii. 47. tives having both an active and a 

loi. y/Arz/rt-] fixed position, stability, passive sense, see Abbott, Shake- 
In a similar sense. Bacon, Advance- pcarian Grammar, § 3, and compare 
ment of Learning, i. vi. 10, speaks of mcdicinahle, iii. iii. 44, below. 
" the fixing ol the stars, ever standing 106. primogenity] It seems probable 
at equal distance ". In The Winter's that Shakespeare would have avoided 
Tale," V. iii. 67, "The fixure of her the termination -ive in two words so 
eye has motion in 't " seems to mean close together, and I have, therefore, 
her eyeballs though fixed as are those followed the quarto. 



sc. III.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 



39 



Take but degree away, untune that string, 

And, hark ! what discord follows ; each thing 

"^eets ^^^jj^-^j^ no 

In mere op'pugnancy : the bounded waters 
Should lift their bosoms higher than the shores, 
And make a sop of all this solid globe : 
Strength should be lord of imbecility, 
And the rude son should strike his father 

dead : 115 



TU-M n-i^ 



no. meets'] Ff; melts Q. 

III. mere'] absolute. On "merely 
upon myself" {Julius Ccesar, i. ii. 
39) Craik (The English Shakespeare, 
§ 45) has the following useful note. 
" Merely . . . means purely, only. 
It separates that which it designates 
or qualifies from everything else. But 
in doing so the chief or most emphatic 
reference may be made either to that 
which is included or to that which is 
excluded. In modern English it is 
always to the latter ; by ' merely 
upon myself we should now mean 
upon nothing else except myself; the 
nothing else is that which makes the 
merely prominent. In Shakespeare's 
day the other reference was the more 
common, that, namely, to what was 
included; and ' merely upon myself 
meant upon myself altogether or 
without regard to anything else. 
Myself was that which the merely 
made prominent. So, when Hamlet 
[^Hamlet, i. ii. 137], speaking of the 
world says, ' Things rank and gross 
in nature Possess it merely,' he by 
the merely brings the possession be- 
fore the mind and characterises it as 
complete and absolute; but by the 
term now the prominence would be 
given to something else from which 
the possession might be conceived 
to be separable ; ' possess it merely ' 
would mean have nothing beyond 
simply the possession of it (have, it 



might be, no right to it or no enjoy- 
ment of it). . . ." 

112. Should lift] would be certain 
to lift. 

113. And make a sop] and reduce 
to a mere pulp ; sop, anything steeped 
and softened in liquor. Compare 
Richard III. i. iv. 162 : "First Murd, 
We will chop him in the malmsey 
butt in the next room. Sec. Mnrd. O 
excellent device ! make a sop of him." 

114. 115. Strength . . . dead] If 
the text is sound here, the only sense 
I can extract from it is that mere 
strength would necessarily be lord 
over weakness and that as a conse- 
quence the strong, rough, son would 
strike his feeble father dead. This 
seems very poor. The gist of the 
whole passage is that where " degree 
is shaked," everything is turned 
topsy-turvy, there is a general boule- 
versement in all processes. Now, 
in the ordinary course of things, 
" strength " is " lord of imbecility," 
and so nothing is upset by " degree " 
being " shaked ". I believe, there- 
fore, that for lord we should read 
da/d, i.e. defied, and that the latter 
of the two lines has no dependence 
upon the former, but means that filial 
reverence would be a thing of the 
past. Apparently feeling this, Mr. 
P. A. Daniel conjectures slave or 
law'd for "lord". 






yUX 



40 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act i. 



be right ; or rather, 



right and 



Force should 

wrong, 
Between whose endless jar justice resides, 
Should lose their names, and so should justice 

too. 
Then every thing includes itself in power, 
Power into will, will into appetite; 120 

And appetite, an universal wolf, 
So doubly seconded with will and power, 
Must make perforce an universal prey, 
And last eat up himself. Great Agamemnon, 
This chaos, when degree is suffocate, 125 

Follows the choking. 
And this neglection of degree it is 
That by a pace goes backward, with a purpose 
It hath to climb. The general's disdain'd 
By him one step below, he by the next, 130 

That next by him beneath ; so every step, 
Exampled by the first pace that is sick 
Of his superior, grows to an envious fever 
Of pale and bloodless emulation : 



128. with] Q ; in Ff. 

117. jar] collision. For " resides " 
Warburton conjectures presides. 

119,120. Then everything^ . . . ap- 
petite] then everything resolves itself 
in the end into power, power in its 
turn resolves itself into will, and, etc. 

125. suffocate] For the suffix -ed, 
omitted after d and t, see Abbott, 
Shakespearian Grammar, § 342. 

127-129. And this . . . climb] It 
is not, of course, the " neglection of 
degree " that " goes backward " step 
by step, but those who, in their en- 
deavour to climb, are guilty of this 



neglection. So, " the first pace " 
(line 132) is the person who so paces. 
We have "neglection" in Pericles, 
III. ii. 20 (the folios and the later 
quartos giving neglect), and in 1 
Henry VI. iv. iii. 49. 

134. Of pale . . . emulation] John- 
son explams " not vigorous and 
active, but malignant and sluggish ". 
But it is the want of vigour which 
prevents noble deeds from being done 
that is especially emphasised, the 
malignant fever being the cause of 
that want. 



\ 



sc. III.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 41 



And 'tis this fever that keeps Troy on foot, 135 
Not her own sinews. To end a tale of length, 
Troy in our weakness stands, not in her strength. 

Nest. Most wisely hath Ulysses here discover'd 
The fever whereof all our power is sick. 

Again. The nature of the sickness found, Ulysses, 140 
What is the remedy? 

Ulyss. The great Achilles, whom opinion crowns 
The sinew and the forehand of our host, 
Having his ear full of his airy fame, 
Grows dainty of his worth, and in his tent 145 
Lies mocking our designs : with him Patroclus 
Upon a lazy bed the livelong day 
Breaks scurril jests; 

And with ridiculous and awkward action, 
Which, slanderer, he imitation calls, 150 

He pageants us. Sometime, great Agamemnon, 

137. standsl Q; lines Ff. 149. awkward] Ff; sillie Q. 



138. discovered] laid bare to our 
view. 

143. forehand] originally an ad- 
jective used in archery of an arrow 
for shooting straight before one (in 
contrast with those fixed at an angle, 
as " rovers ") ; hence that which 
holds the front position ; later, of 
anything foremost, leading, and so 
as a substantive, the vanguard, etc. 
See the New Eng. Diet. 

144. airy fame] Malone compares 
"mouth honour," Macbeth, v. iii. 
27, but there the want of sincerity 
is the point, here the insubstanti- 
ality. 

145. Grows . . . worth] sets ex- 
ceeding great store by his prowess, 
so that he will not exert it in our 
behalf on ordinary occasions ; not, I 
think, " is over-solicitous of, takes 



too much care of" (Schmidt). Com- 
pare Romeo and ftdiet, i. v. 26 : — 

" which of you all 
Will now deny to dance ? She 

that makes dainty, 
She, I'll swear, hath corns." 

147. Upon a lazy bed] lazily upon 
his bed. So, "in her naked bed," 
Venus and Adonis, 397, means the 
bed upon which she lay naked. 

151. pageants us] presents us as on 
a stage. A pageant originally meant 
a movable scaftbld, such as was used 
in the representation of the old 
mystery plays and in the theatrical 
spectacles so common in Shake- 
speare's day, in which events, ex- 
ploits, etc., were symbolised by 
animals and scenery constructed of 
wood. For the thought compare 
Antony and Cleopatra, v. ii. 216-221. 



42 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act i. 



^fu4.V',^jiH-'iS 



Thy topless deputation he puts on, 

And, like a strutting player, whose conceit 

Lies in his hamstring, and doth think it rich 

To hear the wooden dialogue and sound 155 

'Twixt his stretch'd footing and the scafifoldage, — 

Such to-be-pitied and o'er-wrested seeming 

He acts thy greatness in : and when he speaks, 

'Tis like a chime a-mending ; with terms un- 

squared, 
Which, from the tongue of roaring Typhon 

dropp'd 160 

Would seem hyperboles. At this fusty stuff 



157. o'ey-wrested] Pope ; ore-rested Q, Ff i, 2, 3 ; o're-rested F 4. 
unsquafd] unsquare Q. 



159- 



152. Thy topless deputation] "the 
supreme power deputed to thee (by 
the other Greek chiefs) " (Rolfe) seems 
preferable to " thy dignity as Jove's 
substitute " (Schmidt). Marlowe, 
Faustus, V. iii. lyx, uses "topless" 
of the towers of Ilium in the sense of 
not exceeded by any ; for the figura- 
tive sense, compare Marston, ii An- 
tonio and Mellida, i. i. 85, " my 
topless villany," and Heywood, The 
Golden Age, vol. iii. p. 40 (Pearson's 
Reprint), "their topless fury". 

153-156. whose conceit . . . scaf- 
foldage] whose only faculty for acting 
lies in the sinews of his legs, and who 
glories in the wooden echo given by 
the boards to the wooden, stilted gait 
with which he treads them : ham- 
string, one of the tendons which form 
the sides of the ham or space at the 
back of the knee. Malone thinks that 
scaffoldage refers to the galleries, the 
tiers of which were sometimes termed 
" scaffolds," but it seems simpler to 
take it of the framework of the 
stage. 

157. o'cr-wr6's^<^(/] strained ; a meta- 



phor from the tuning of stringed in- 
struments by a wrest. See note on 
III. iii. 23, below, and compare Othello, 
II. i. 202: — 

" O, you are well tuned now, 
But I '11 set down the pegs that 
make this music". 

159. a chime a-mending'] Steevens 
understands this literally of repairing. 
Does it mean more than being tuned 
into unison ? iinsqnared, unsuitable ; 
resembling stones not dressed to fit 
into their proper places. Compare 
Marston, What You Will, Introduc- 
tion, 71 : " Lest aught I offered were 
nnsquared or warp'd ". 

160. Typhon] A giant with a hun- 
dred serpentine heads growing from 
his shoulders, in Epic Typhoeus, son 
of Tartaros and Gaia, who sought to 
dethrone Jupiter, and was by him im 
prisoned under Mt. Etna. 

161. fusty] seems to be here used 
in the sense of "fustian," "high- 
sounding," rather than that of 
"mouldy," the ordinary meaning of 
the word, though the mouldiness 
may, of course, be figurative. 



sc. Ill] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 43 

The large Achilles, on his press'd bed lolling, 
From his deep chest laughs out a loud applause ; 
Cries " Excellent ! 'tis Agamemnon just. 
Now play me Nestor ; hem, and stroke thy 
beard, 165 

As he being dress'd to some oration." 
That 's done ; as near as the extremest ends 
Of parallels, as like as Vulcan and his wife : 
Yet god Achilles still cries " Excellent ! 
'Tis Nestor right. Now play him me, Patroclus, 170 
Arming to answer in a night alarm." 
And then, forsooth, the faint defects of age 
Must be the scene of mirth ; to cough and spit, 
And with a palsy-fumbling on his gorget, 
Shake in and out the rivet : and at this sport 175 
Sir Valour dies ; cries " O, enough, Patroclus, 
Or give me ribs of steel ! I shall split all 
In pleasure of my spleen." And in this fashion 
All our abilities, gifts, natures, shapes, 
Severals and generals of grace exact, 180 

Achievements, plots, orders, preventions, 

165. hem] clear the throat and hesi- ordered gifts, individual and general " 
tate. (Delius) ; " the minutest, peculiar 

166. dress'd] prepared ; ultimately, and general excellencies " (Schmidt), 
like "address," from Lat. dirigcre, Hudson more probably, I think, takes 
to direct, set right. "of grace exact" as "exact in re- 

167. i68. as near . . . zvife] i.e. spect of grace". Staunton's conjec- 
not at all near. ture, " of grace a?id act" is plausible, 

171. aHSTeicr] meet his foes in com- but with him I doubt the necessity 

bat. of any change. Singer's " arc of 

174. Many editors adopt Tyrwhitt's grace exact" is forbidden by the 

" palsy-fumbling ". construction as leaving " Achieve- 

178. spleen] often used of old for ments," etc., without any connecting 

any sudden impulse, a fit of laughter, link, 
as here. i8i. preventions] precautionary 

180. Severals . . . exacty o\ivv^e\\- measures. 



44 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act i. 

Excitements to the field, or speech for truce, 
Success or loss, what is or is not, serves 
As stuff for these two to make paradoxes. 

Nest. And in the imitation of these twain, 185 

Who, as Ulysses says, opinion crowns 
With an imperial voice, many are infect. 
Ajax is grown self-will'd, and bears his head 
In such a rein, in full as proud a place 
As broad Achilles; keeps his tent like him; 190 
Makes factious feasts ; rails on our state of war, 
Bold as an oracle, and sets Thersites, 
A slave whose gall coins slanders like a mint, 
To match us in comparisons with dirt ; 
To weaken and discredit our exposure, 195 

How rank soever rounded in with danger. 

Ulyss. They tax our policy, and call it cowardice; 
Count wisdom as no member of the war ; 
Forestall prescience, and esteem no act 
But that of hand : the still and mental parts, 200 



184. paradoxes] absurdities. Com- 
pare Othello, 11. i. 139: "These are 
old fond paradoxes to make men laugh 
i' the alehouse ". 

187. With . . . ?;o/c^] with the title 
of being chief among us ; though it 
was Achilles only who was described 
as " The sinew . . . our host ". 

188. In such a rein] just as 
loftily. Compare Kiyi^r Lear, iii. i. 
27:— 

" Or the hard rein which both of 
them have borne 
Against the old kind king " ; 
Chapman, Iliad, xxiii. 4, uses the 
phrase literally : — 

" Disjoin not we chariots and horse, 
but bearing hard our rd>i, 



With state of both, march soft 
and close ". 
Whether the " bearing-rein " of 
modern days was in vogue in 
Shakespeare's day I do not know. 

190. broad] arrogant. 

193. like a mint] " as fast as a mint 
coins money" (Malone). 

195, ig6. To weaken . . . danger] 
to minimise the valour shown by us 
in fearlessly facing the dangers around 
us, abundant as they are : rank, ad- 
verbially. 

19S. Count . . . 7x»irr] consider that 
wisdom has no place in war. 

199. Forestall prescience] discount, 
depreciate foresight; prescience, ac- 
cented on the second syllable. 



sc. III.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 45 

That do contrive how many hands shall strike, 
When fitness calls them on, and know by measure 
Of their observant toil the enemies' weight, — 
Why, this hath not a finger's dignity. 
They call this bed-work, mappery, closet-war ; 205 
So that the ram that batters down the wall. 
For the great swing and rudeness of his poise, 
They place before his hand that made the engine, 
Or those that with the fineness of their souls 
By reason guide his execution. 210 

Nest. Let this be granted, and Achilles' horse 

Makes many Thetis' sons. \^A tucket. 

Agam. What trumpet? look, Menelaus. 

Men. From Troy. 

Enter ^NEAS. 

Agam. What would you 'fore our tent? 

jf^ne. Is this great Agamemnon's tent, I pray you ? 2 1 5 

Agam. Even this. 

j^ne. May one, that is a herald and a prince. 
Do a fair message to his kingly ears ? 

Agam. With surety stronger than Achilles' arm 

'Fore all the Greekish heads, which with one 
voice 220 

Call Agamemnon head and general, 

Aine. Fair leave and large security. How may 

205. hcd-wor'k'\ work that can easily that Agamemnon, after what has just 

be done lying in bed : mappery, gone before, should here emphasise 

"bookish theory" (Schm.idt). the valour of Achilles. As, however, 

210. /ji's] sc. the ram. that hero's fame was so great in 

212, Makcs'\ is worth. Troy, the text may be sound. 

Stage direction. Tucket] a flourish 222-224. Hoiv may . . . mortals ?] 

on a trumpet. On these words and those in iv. v. 

219. ^c/»7/cs'] Johnson conjectures 195, 196, " But this my countenance 

" Alcides," and it is perhaps unlikely . . . till now," Steevens remarks that 



46 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act i. 

A stranger to those most imperial looks 
Know them from eyes of other mortals? 

Again. How ! 

^ne. Ay ; 225 

I ask, that 1 might waken reverence, 
And bid the cheek be ready with a blush 
Modest as morning when she coldly eyes 
The youthful Phoebus. 

Which is that god in office, guiding men? 230 
Which is the high and mighty Agamemnon ? 

Again. This Trojan scorns us ; or the men of Troy 
Are ceremonious courtiers. 

yEne. Courtiers as free, as debonair, unarm'd. 

As bending angels; that's their fame in peace: 235 
But when they would seem soldiers, they have 

galls. 
Good arms, strong joints, true swords ; and, Jove's 
accord, 

237, 238. swords ; and, Jove's accord, Nothing] Theobald ; swords, & 
loues accord, Nothing Ff ; sword, & great loues accord Nothing Q. 

Shakespeare " probably supposed that 236. o-a/Zs] fierce passions, 
the ancients (like the heroes of chi- 237, 238. and, Jove's . . . hcarf] 
valry) fought with beavers to their The punctuation in the text is Theo- 
helmets," and thinks that he may bald's, "Jove's accord" being taken 
" have adopted this error from the as a case absolute with the sense 
wooden cuts in ancient books or " and, Jove being in accord with 
from the illuminations of manu- them, nothing is so full of heart as 
scripts" . . . while Malone suggests they". Somewhat similar is Chap- 
that in The Destruction, etc., the man's expression, Iliad, xix. ig6 : — 
chieftains in each army are thus " But now, to all our shames be- 
pourtrayed, sides, our friends by Hector 

226. waken reverence] call up in slain 

myself a reverent demeanour. (Andyovctofriend)\i&-ankic\).&A 

234. debonair] a word of which off". 

Chaucer is fond; e.g. Troiliis and If not wholly satisfactory, this in- 

Criseyde, i. xxvi. 181, " dcbonaire of terpretation seems to be better than 

chere ". any other offered, and we might 

235. bending angels] angels with easily insert 's before 50. Mitford 
heads inclined to listen prayer. proposes " swords, great Jove's ac- 



sc. Ill] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 47 

Nothing so full of heart. But peace, ^neas ! 

Peace, Trojan ! lay thy finger on thy lips. 

The worthiness of praise distains his worth, 240 

If that the praised himself bring the praise forth ; 

But what the repining enemy commends. 

That breath fame blows ; that praise, sole pure, 
transcends. 
Agam. Sir, you of Troy, call you yourself yEneas? 
Aine. Ay, Greek, that is my name. 245 

Again. What's your affair, I pray you ? 
u^ne. Sir, pardon ; 'tis for Agamemnon's ears. 
Agam. He hears nought privately that comes from Troy. 
^ne. Nor I from Troy come not to whisper him : 

I bring a trumpet to awake his ear, 250 

To set his sense on the attentive bent, 

And then to speak. 
Again. Speak frankly as the wind : 

It is not Agamemnon's sleeping hour ; 

That thou shalt know, Trojan, he is awake, 

He tells thee so himself. 
yEne. Trumpet, blow loud, 255 

243. praise, sole pure] Capell ; praise sole pure Q, Ff. 251. sense on 

the] Ff ; seat on that Q. 

cord," the reading of the quarto with unworthy motives. Staunton was 

the omission of "and". Malone's hardly at his best in conjecturing 

"Jove's a god," Steevens's " Love's "pure Sol". 

a lord," and Mason's "Jove's own 249. On the double negative, see 

bird," are unworthy of those critics. Abbott, Shakespearian Gram., § 406. 

Grant White interprets, " and Jove's 251. To set . . . 6ewi] to rouse him 

spontaneous geniality is not so to attention ; the phrase is similar in 

hearty — as they are whether as friends form to the modern " to set the teeth 

or foes ". on edge". 

242. But what . . . commend sihwt 252. frankly as the ivitid] Compaie 
the praise that an enemy is grudg- As You Like It, 11. vii. 48, 49 : — 
ingly compelled to allow, etc. " as large a charter as the wind, 

243. sole pure] alone unalloyed by To blow on whom I please ". 



48 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act i. 

Send thy brass voice through all these lazy tents ; 
And every Greek of mettle, let him know, 
What Troy means fairly shall be spoke aloud. 

\Trunipet sounds. 
We have, great Agamemnon, here in Troy 
A prince call'd. Hector, Priam is his father, 260 
Who in this dull and long-continued truce 
Is rusty grown : he bade me take a trumpet, 
And to this purpose speak : Kings, princes, lords ! 
If there be one among the fair'st of Greece 
That holds his honour higher than his ease, 265 
That seeks his praise more than he fears his 

peril. 
That knows his valour, and knows not his fear, 
That loves his mistress more than in confession. 
With truant vows to her own lips he loves, 
And dare avow her beauty and her worth 270 
In other arms than hers, — to him this challenge. 
Hector, in view of Trojans and of Greeks, 

262. ru%ty'\ Ff ; re%tic Q. 266. That seeks] Ff ; And feeds Q. 

256. lazy] because of the truce to " profession ". This seems to me 

mentioned below. doubly a mistake. First, because 

261. this dull . . . truce] In i. ii. confession has here all the sense of 
35) 36, we have " he [Ajax] coped " profession " ; secondly, because I 
Hector in the battle," and Johnson believe that a true confession is here 
points out the inconsistency of those meant and that " truant " in the next 
words with this line. Malone ob- line is a misprint for " truest ". The 
serves that Shakespeare sometimes whole point is the sincerity of his 
follows and sometimes deserts his love, a sincerity which emboldens 
original authorities, and that he found him to champion her in battle, and 
mention of this truce in Lydgate. the repetition of "lover " seems em- 

262. trumpet] Here, perhaps, as in phatic. Had his love been only 
IV. V. 6, and elsewhere in Shakespeare, something more than he professed in 
= trumpeter, but not, I think, in line truant vows, it would not have been 
255. such as to make him risk his life. 

264. fair'st] noblest in the fight. Line 269 is between brackets in Q, 
Watkiss Lloyd conjectures " first ". Ff, and should, I think, be so printed. 
268. confession] altered by Hanmer 271. arms] with an equivoque. 



sc. III.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 49 



Shall make it good, or do his best to do it, 
He hath a lady, wiser, fairer, truer. 
Than ever Greek did compass in his arms ; 275 
And will to-morrow with his trumpet call, 
Midway between your tents and walls of Troy, 
To rouse a Grecian that is true in love : 
If any come. Hector shall honour him ; 
If none, he'll say in Troy when he retires, 280 
The Grecian dames are sunburnt, and not worth 
The splinter of a lance. Even so much. 
Again. This shall be told our lovers, Lord yEneas ; 
If none of them have soul in such a kind, 

( We left them all at home : but we are 
soldiers ; 285 

And may that soldier a mere recreant prove, 
That means not, hath not, or is not in love ! 
If then one is, or hath, or means to be, 

' That one meets Hector ; if none else, I am he. 
Nest. Tell him of Nestor, one that was a man 290 

When Hector's grandsire suck'd : he is old now ; 
But if there be not in our Grecian host 
One noble man that hath one spark of fire 
To answer for his love, tell him from me 

275. compasslVi \ couple Q. 292. host] hoste Q ; mouldFi. 293. one 
spark] no sparke Q. 

279. honour him] sc, hy taking up blended the rich hues of the romance- 

his challenge. writers with the Doric simplicity of 

281. sunburnt] a euphemism for outline in the classic poets " ; and 

"not worth looking at". Compare Knight writes to much the same pur- 

Much Ado About Nothing, 11. i. 331. pose. For the challenge, see Chap- 



282. The splinter of a lance] Clarke 
remarks : " The wording of this chal- 
lenge is in the true chivalric tone ; 
and it affords one of the instances of 
the skill with which the dramatist has 



man's Iliad, vii. 53-76. 

284. soul . . . kind] a spirit ready 
to take up the challenge. 

285. We left . . . home] you may 
say that we left, etc. 



J 



50 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act i. 

I '11 hide my silver beard in a gold beaver, 295 
And in my vantbrace put this wither'd brawn ; 
And, meeting him, will tell him that my lady 
Was fairer than his grandam, and as chaste 
As may be in the world : his youth in flood, 
I '11 prove this truth with my three drops of 
blood. 300 

j^ne. Now heavens forbid such scarcity of youth ! 

Ulyss. Amen. 

Again. Fair Lord ^neas, let me touch your hand ; 
To our pavilion shall I lead you first. 
Achilles shall have word of this intent ; 305 

So shall each lord of Greece, from tent to tent : 
Yourself shall feast with us before you go, 
And find the welcome of a noble foe. 

\Exeunt all but Ulysses and Nestor. 

Ulyss. Nestor ! 

Nest. What says Ulysses? 310 

Ulyss. I have a young conception in my brain ; 

Be you my time to bring it to some shape. 

Nest. What is 't ? 

Ulyss. This 'tis : 

300. prove this truth] Malone ; prone this troth Q ; pawne this truth Ff. 
301. forbid] forf end Q ; youth] men Q. 

296. Vantbrace] " avant-bras, a here " ; Massinger, The Bondman, 

vambrace ; armour for the arm," iii. 3 : — 

Cotgrave. Compare Cymbeline, iv. " Hunger shall force thee to cut 

ii. 311 : " The brawns of Hercules " ; of the brmvns 

Marlowe, i Tamburlaine, iv. iv. 50: From thy arms and thighs ". 

"I'll make thee slice the brawns of 299. his youth in flood] though he 

thy arms into carbonadoes and eat be in the full flood of youth, at high 

them " ; Chapman, The Gentleman tide in vigour. 

Usher, iii. i: "A good calf, ... I 312. B^jox .. .s/m/^] be to my con- 
warrant you a braivn of a thumb ception what time is to the embryo. 



sc. III.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 51 

Blunt wedges rive hard knots : the seeded pride 315 

That hath to this maturity blown up 

In rank Achilles must or now be cropp'd, 

Or, shedding, breed a nursery of like evil, 

To overbulk us all. 

Nest. Well, and how ? 

Ulyss. This challenge that the gallant Hector sends, 320 
However it is spread in general name. 
Relates in purpose only to Achilles, 

Nest. The purpose is perspicuous even as substance, 
Whose grossness little characters sum up : 
And, in the publication, make no strain, 325 

But that Achilles, were his brain as barren 
As banks of Libya, — though, Apollo knows, 



315. Blunt . . . inofs] rough meas- 
ures must be used in stubborn cases. 
315-319. the seeded pride . . , all] 
The figure is that of a plant of which, 
it having passed beyond flowering, 
the seed cup now threatens to burst 
and sow itself broadcast in profusion 
of a second crop. Compare The 
Rape of Lucrece, 603, 604 : — 

" How will thy shame be seeded in 
thine age, 
When thus thy vices bud before 
they spring ! " 
Marston, i Antonio and Mellida, iv. 

i- 35 :— 

" thou but pursu'st the world 
That cuts off virtue 'fore it comes 

to growth, 
Lest it should seed, and so o'er- 
run her son " ; 
also Henry V. iii. v. 6-g ; bloion tip 
seems to express the distention of the 
pod, and so is better than Capell's 
"grown up": mirsery, in the sense 
in which we speak of a " nursery 
garden " : overbulk, tower over us 
in its might. 



323. perspicuous . . . sjcbsfance] 
apparent, palpable, as substantial 
wealth. 

324. Whose grossness . . . up] as 
a gross amount is summed up in a 
few small figures. Steevens quotes 
Henry V. prol. 15 : — 

" since a crooked figure may 
Attest in little place a million " ; 
and The Winter's Tale, i. ii. 6-g. 

325. fw the publication] when the 
terms of Hector's challenge are pro- 
claimed, notified to the army : make 
no strain, do not hesitate to feel sure. 
Compare below, iii. iii. 113, "I do 
not strain at this position " ; 1 Henry 
IV. IV. i. 75. 

327. banks of Libya] the sand- 
banks of the Libyan desert, the 
Libycae harenac of Ovid. 

327, 328. though . . . enough] an 
ellipsis for " though even that is 
hardly too much to say of him, for, 
as Apollo knows, his brain is as dry 
as it well can be". For dry brain 
compare Hamlet, iv. v. 154, " O heat, 
dry up my brains ", 



52 TROILUS AND CKESSIDA [act i. 



'Tis dry enough, — will, with great speed of judg- 
ment, 
Ay, with celerity, find Hector's purpose 
Pointing on him, 330 

Ulyss. And wake him to the answer, think you ? 

Nest. Yes, 'tis most meet : whom may you else oppose, 
That can from Hector bring his honour off. 
If not Achilles? Though 't be a sportful combat, 
Yet in the trial much opinion dwells ; 335 

For here the Trojans taste our dear'st repute 
With their fin'st palate: and trust to me, Ulysses, 
Our imputation shall be oddly pois'd 
In this wild action ; for the success, '''^ 

Although particular, shall give a scantling 340 
Of good or bad unto the general ; 
And in such indexes, although small pricks 



333. his honotir] Fi; those honours 

331. wake . . . ans7ver]iousehim- 
self out of his lethargy to meet Hector. 

332. most meet] most fitting that 
we should take this course : oppose, 
put forward as our champion. 

333. bring . . . off] come out of 
the combat without loss of honour. 

334. a sportful combat] one not to 
the utterance. Compare below, iv. 
V. 67-70. 

335. mnch opinion dwells] our re 
putation is largely at stake. 

336. 337- i(isi'' • • • palate] get a 
taste of our very best champion's 
prowess, for thy appreciating it. 
Compare line 372 below. 

33^1 339- Our impittation . . . 
action] in so venturously putting for- 
ward our best champion we are ex- 
posing our reputation to no ordinary 
risk; for imputation, compare Ham- 
let, V. ii. 1.49 : oddly poised, unequally 
balanced. 



Q- 

^39-34^1. for the success . . .general] 
for the issue of the combat, though 
primarily affecting the champion we 
may choose, will to a certain extent 
redound to the credit or to the shame 
of all the host: scantling, pattern, 
sample ; " the word has doubtless 
been confused with sca>it and scanty. 
... As used by Shakespeare and 
Cotgrave it is certainly a derivative 
from O.F. cschaiitelcr and answers to 
O.F. cschantillo)i, '■zsmsW cantle or 
corner-piece, also a scantling, sample, 
pattern, proof of any sort of mer- 
chandise,' Cotgrave " (Skeat, Ety. 
Diet.). Compare Dekker, The Whore 
of Babylon, vol. ii. p. 189 (Pearson's 
Reprint) : " of such a scantling are my 
words set down that neither the one 
party speaks too much, nor the other 
too little ". 

342. indexcs]\vQre'\n Shakespeare's 
day often prefixed to books, but the 



sc. Ill] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 



53 



To their subsequent volumes, there is seen 

The baby figure of the giant mass 

Of things to come at large. It is suppos'd 345 

He that meets Hector issues from our choice ; 

And choice, being mutual act of all our souls, 

Makes merit her election, and doth boil, 

As 'twere from forth us all, a man distill'd 

Out of our virtues ; who miscarrying, 350 

What heart from hence receives the conquering 

part. 
To steel a strong opinion to themselves ! 
Which entertain'd, limbs are his instruments, 

351. from hence receives the] Ff ; receives from hence a Q. 352. them- 

selves I] Theobald; themselves. Q ; themselves, Ff i, 4; themselves Ff 2, 3. 
353-355- Which . . . limbs'] Omitted in Q. 

word had the further sense of some- 
thing directing the attention, as an 
index-finger in the margin of books, 
here compared to " small pricks ". On 
Othello, II. i. 262, Mr. Hart notes : 
" The ' index ' was originally a finger 
(' pilcrow ') placed in the margin of 
books to direct attention to striking 
passages. Thence it came to mean 
a list or table of these placed in the 
front of the book. This is well illus- 
trated by two passages in Massinger's 
Fatal Doivry, iii. i., and iv. i. : — 
' Would I had seen thee graved 
with thy great sin, 

Ere lived to have men's marginal 
fingers point 

At Charalois, as a lamented 
story ' ; 
and ' Even as the index tells us the 
contents of stories, and directs to the 
particular chapters, even so does the 
outward habit . . . demonstratively 
point out (as it were a manual note 
from the margin) all the internal 
quality and habiliment of the soul '." 
343. subsequent] accented on the 
penultimate. 



348. makes . , . election] looks to 
nothing but merit in making up its 
mind. 

350-352. who miscarrying , . . 
themselves !] This passage is usually 
printed with a note of interrogation 
after themselves (Capell's punctua- 
tion). It thus becomes a question of 
appeal involving a negative answer, 
as thus : " and, if he miscarries, the 
victorious side (the Trojans) receive 
no encouragement to feel assurance 
of their strength " — which is non- 
sense. Theobald puts a note of ex- 
clamation after themselves and I have 
followed him. The sense will then 
be : " and, if he miscarries, the vic- 
torious side (the Trojans) will be 
greatly encouraged to believe that, 
as their champion has been victorious 
in the single combat (from hence), 
they will be victorious in the general 
struggle ". 

353-355. Which entirtain'd . , . 
limbs] and if this belief is entertained 
it will energise the limbs of those who 
hold it, just as those limbs energise 
the swords and bows they wield. 



54 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act i. 

In no less working than are swords and bows 
Directive by the limbs. 355 

Ulyss. Give pardon to my speech : 

Therefore 'tis meet Achilles meet not Hector. 

Let us, like merchants, show our foulest wares, 

And think, perchance, they '11 sell ; if not, 

The lustre of the better yet to show 360 

Shall show the better. Do not consent 

That ever Hector and Achilles meet ; 

For both our honour and our shame in this 

Are dogg'd with two strange followers. 

Nest. I see them not with my old eyes : what are 
they ? 365 

Ulyss. What glory our Achilles shares from Hector, 

Were he not proud, we all should wear with him : 

But he already is too insolent ; 

And we were better parch in Afric sun 

Than in the pride and salt scorn of his eyes, 370 

Should he 'scape Hector fair : if he were foil'd. 

Why then we did our main opinion crush 

In taint of our best man. No ; make a lottery ; 

And by device let blockish Ajax draw 374 

The sort to fight with Hector : among ourselves 

360. yet to show'\ Ff ; %hall exceed Q. 361. Shall shorn the better'] 

Ff ; By showing the ivorst first Q. 

360. the better . . . s/iow] the better there is no mention of the "device," 

which yet remains to be shown. though the prayer of the soldiers is : — 

370. 5a//] bitter, pungent. " O Jove, so lead the 

372, 373. wc did . . . mari\ the re- herald's hand 

suit would be that our general good That Ajax, our great Tydeus' son, 

name would be ruined bj' the stain may our wished champion 

thus falling upon our chiefest hero. stand, 

375. stir/] lot. The account of the Or else the king himself that rules 

casting of the lots will be found in the rich Mycenian land". 

Chapman's Iliad, vii. 153-179, but In Sophocles, Ajax, 1265-1287, there 



sc. Ill] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 55 

Give him allowance as the worthier man, 
For that will physic the great Myrmidon 
Who broils in loud applause ; and make him fall 
His crest that prouder than blue Iris bends. 
If the dull brainless Ajax come safe off, 380 

We'll dress him up in voices : if he fail, 
Yet go we under our opinion still 
That we have better men. But, hit or miss, 
Our project's life this shape of sense assumes : 
Ajax employ 'd plucks down Achilles' plumes. 385 
NesL Ulysses, 

Now I begin to relish thy advice ; 
And I will give a taste of it forthwith 
To Agamemnon : go we to him straight. 
Two curs shall tame each other: pride alone 390 
Must tarre the mastiffs on, as 'twere their bone. 

[Exeunt. 

is allusion to the "device" by which so, Much Ado About Nothing, iv. i. 
Cresphontes obtained Messenia, a de- 146: '' attir'd in wonder"; Twelfth 
vice v/hich Tencer indignantly says Night, iv. iii. 3 : — 
that Ajax did not adopt when the " And though 'tis wonder that en- 
lots for the combat were cast. w ray's me thus". 

376. allowance'] praise, fitting ac- 382, 383. Yet go . . . tnen]we shall 

knowledgment ; O.F. aloucr; Lat. still be able to say that we have, 

allaudare. etc. 

378. broils . . . applause] boast- 391. tarre] s,e<i onto fight; an old 

fully suns himself in the praises with verb from A.S. tergan, tyrgan, to 

which he is so loudly greeted. irritate. Compare Hamlet, 11. ii. 370 ; 

381. dress . . . voices] deck him King John, iv. i. 117. Holland's 

in praise. Compare Measure for Glossary of Words for the County of 

Measure, i. i. 20 : — Chester, Eng. Dial. Society, ed. 1886, 

" Lent him our terror, dress'd him gives the word as still in use there for 

in our love" ; to "excite to anger or violence". 



ACT II 

SCENE I. — A Part of the Grecian Camp. 

Enter AjAX and Thersites. 

Ajax. Thersites ! 

TJier. Agamemnon, how if he had boils ? full, all 

over, generally? 
Ajax. Thersites ! 
Ther. And those boils did run ? say so : did not the 5 

general run then ? were not that a botchy 

core ? 
Ajax. Dog! 
Ther. Then would come some matter from him : I 

see none now. 10 

Ajax. Thou bitch-wolf 's_ son, canst thou not hear? 

Feel then. {^Strikes him. 

5,6. ahotchy corc\Yi2iViv^&\\{Dict) In core here and in v. i. 2 Schmidt 

says that botch is used in Northumber- sees a quibble with cor, heart, 

land for "an inflamed humour," and Collier's MS. Corrector gives "sore" ; 

the £«^. £)m/. £)jV^. that in Yorkshire Grant White, " corps," while Staun- 

it has the sense of " a sore breaking ton conjectures "cur," the Q variant 

out in the skin," as in Deuteronomy in v. i. 2. Middleton, Michaelmas 

xxviii. 27, "the botch of Egypt"; a Term, in. iv. 266, has: "To beguile 

6o<c/ijy coff, therefore, probably means goodness is the core of sins," where 

much the same as an angry boil, core there seems to be a quibble be- 

being the more or less hard mass of tween "ulcer" and "heart". The 

tissue in the centre of a boil. Com- Cambridge Editors are mistaken in 

i[>2LxeM2iXir,ior\, I Antonio and Mcllida, saying that Dj'ce reads "sore" 

III. ii. 14 : " draw the core forth of in his second edition ; he retains 

imposthum'd sin". Others connect core. 

botchy with "botch," a patch, in the 9. matter] of course with a pun, as 

sense, I suppose, of a ragged ulcer, above in "run ". 

56 



sc. i] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 



57 



Ther. The plague of Greece upon thee, thou mon- 
grel beef-witted lord ! 

Ajax. Speak then, thou vinewedst leaven, speak : 15 
I will beat thee into handsomeness. 

Ther. I shall sooner rail thee into wit and holi- 
ness : but I think thy horse will sooner con 
an oration than thou learn a prayer without 
book. Thou canst strike, canst thou? a red 20 

/f^ murrain o' thy jade's tricks ! 

Ajax. Toadstool, learn me the proclamation. 

Ther. Dost thou think I have no sense, thou strikest 
me thus? 

Ajax, The proclamation ! 25 

Ther. Thou art proclaimed a fool, I think. 

Ajax. Do not, porpentine, do not : my fingers itch. 

Ther. I would thou didst itch from head to foot, 
and I had the scratching of thee ; I would 

15. vinewedst] whinid^st Ff ; unsalted Q. 



13. The plague of Greece] " allud- 
ing, perhaps, to the plague sent by 
Apollo on the Grecian army" (John- 
son) ; perhaps : mongrel, " on account 
of his father being a Grecian and his 
mother a Trojan" (Malone) : beef- 
witted, bovine, as we say. Compare 
Twelfth Night, i. iii. 90, 91 : " but 
I am a great eater of beef and 
I believe that does harm to my 
wit ". 

15. vincwedst]mos,tmou\dy. Nares 
gives both " vinew'd " and " finew'd " 
as = miicidus, situ sentus, adducing 
the following instances of the word's 
use : " Many of Chaucer's words are 
become as it were vinew'd and hoarie 
with over-long lying," T. Beaumont 
to Speght, in Ins Chaucer; "A soul- 
dier's hands must oft be died with 
goare, Lest stark with rest, they 



finew'd waxe and hoare," Mirror for 
Magistrates. Baret's Alvearie and 
Huloet's Diet., 1552, have the same 
explanation : leaven, compare Cym- 
beline, iii. iv. 64, where Dowden ex- 
plains the image as that of " a 
spreading ferment of evil ", 

18. zvithout book] off by heart ; 
frequent in Shakespeare. 

20, 21. a red tmirrain] apparently 
the same as the " red plague " of The 
Tempest, i. i. 364, and the " red 
pestilence " of Coriolamis, iv. i. 13, 
but variously diagnosed as erysipelas, 
leprosy, etc. 

22. learn me] ascertain for me the 
particulars of, as in line 98 below ; not 
"communicate," "tell," as Schmidt 
explains. 

27. porpentine] the form always 
used by Shakespeare. 



58 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act n. 

make thee the loathsomest scab in Greece. 30 
When thou art forth in the incursions, thou 
strikest as slow as another. 

Ajax. I say, the proclamation ! 

Ther. Thou grumblest and railest every hour on 

Achilles, and thou art as full of envy at his 35 
greatness as Cerberus is at Proserpina's beauty, 
ay, that thou barkest at him. 

Ajax. Mistress Thersites ! 

Ther. Thou should 'st strike him, 

Ajax. Cobloaf! 40 

Ther. He would pun thee into shivers with his fist, 
as a sailor breaks a biscuit, 

Ajax. You whoreson cur ! [^Beating him. 

Ther. Do, do. 

Ajax. Thou stool for a witch ! 45 

Ther. Ay, do, do ; thou sodden -witted lord ! thou 

hast no more brain than I have in mine 

elbows ; an assinico may tutor thee, thou 

31,32. When . . , another] Om\t¥i. 40, A]zx. Cobloaf !] Ajax Cob- 

lofeQ (in italics as part of Thersites' speech). 48. Assinico] Asinico Q, Ff. 

31. iwcMrsioHs] encounters with the 41. pun] pound. Compare Hey- 

Trojans, wood, 1 Echvard IV. vol. i. p, 19 

37. Mistress] a taunt at his coward- (Pearson's Reprint) : " Cavallero Spic- 

ice. So, in the Agamemnon of ing, the maddest slave that ever />;<«(/ 

Aeschylus, 1625, the Chorus addresses spice in a mortar " ; P. Holland's 

Aegisthus as " Woman ! " In Chap- Plinie, book xix. p. 4, ed. 1634 : " they 

man's Iliad, ii. 204, Thersites rates are to be beaten and /MWKtt/ in a great 

the chiefs as " Greekish girls, not stone mortar ". 

Greeks", 43. 7i<horeson] spelt in Q and Ff 

40. Col>loafl]TheEng. Dial. Diet, i, 2, horson, which is the truer spell- 
gives "cobloaf" as (i) a crusty, un- ing, the w being an excrescence, 
even loaf; (2) the outside loaf of a 48. assinico] The old copies give 
batch. Minsheu's Diet., quoted by asinico, modern editors, assinego. I 
Malone, defines the word as " a have taken Dyce's suggestion in 
bunne. It is a little loaf made printing assinico as being a form 
with a round head, such as cob-irons nearer to the Spanish word, asnico, a 
which support the tire." little ass. Jonson, The Staple of 



sc. i] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 59 

scurvy-valiant ass ! thou art here but to thrash 
Trojans ; and thou art bought and sold among 50 
those of any wit, like a barbarian slave. If 
thou use to beat me, I will begin at thy heel, 
and tell what thou art by inches, thou thing 
of no bowels, thou ! 

Ajax. You dog! 55 

Ther. You scurvy lord ! 

Ajax. You cur ! {^Beating him. 

Ther. Mars his idiot ! do, rudeness ; do, camel ; do, 
do. ^ «^ 

Enter ACHILLES and PatrocluS. 

Achil. Why, how now, Ajax! wherefore do you thus? 60 
How now, Thersites ! what 's the matter, man ? 

Ther. You see him there, do you? 

Achil. Ay; what's the matter? 

Ther. Nay, look upon him. 

Achil. So I do: what's the matter? 65 

Ther. Nay, but regard him well. 

Achil. "Well!" why, so I do. 

Ther. But yet you look not well upon him ; for, 
whosoever you take him to be, he is Ajax. 

49. scurvy -valianfl Dyce (S. Walker's conjecture) ; scurvy valiant Q, Ff. 

News, V. 2, though prefixing " Don " of tenderness and sensibiHty. Corn- 
keeps Assincgo : — pare Henry V. ii. iv. 102, and 11. ii. 
"Slum. With a good jeer or two. 11, below. Also frequently in the 
P. Sen. And from your jaw- Bible, e.g. Genesis xliii. 30 : " His 
bone, Don Assinego ? " bozvels did yearn upon his brother " ; 

50. 6oMg-/(^ a?j<f so W] made sport of, Canticles v. 4: "My bowels were 
treated as a mere chattel. Compare moved for him " ; Philippians i. 8 : 
Richard III. v. iii. 305 : " For Dickon " I long after you all in the bowels of 
thy master is bought and sold ". Jesus Christ". 

52. 7<sf] make a habit of, continue to. 58. Mars his idiot} thou dolt, fit 

53. by inches'] inch by inch. only to be used as an implement of 

54. of no bowels'] merciless ; the war ! his, see Abbott, Shakespearian 
bowels being considered as the seat Grammar, § 217. 



60 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act n. 



AchiL I know that, fool. 70 

Ther. Ay, but that fool knows not himself. 

Ajax. Therefore I beat thee. 

Ther. Lo, lo, lo, lo, what modicums of wit he utters ! 
his evasions have ears thus long. I have 
bobbed his brain more than he has beat my 75 
bones: I will buy nine sparrows for a penny, .^ ^ 
and his pia mater is not worth the ninth part 
of a sparrow. This lord, Achilles, Ajax, who 
wears his wit in his belly and his guts in his 
head, I '11 tell you what I say of him. 80 

AchiL What? 

Ther. I say, this Ajax — 



[Ajax oj^ers to strike him. 



AchiL Nay, good Ajax. 

70. that, fool'] Rowe; that fool Q, Ff. 

71. Ay, . . . himself] Thersites 



pretends to understand Achilles as 
having said, "I know that fool". 

72. Therefore . . . iAc^] The "modi- 
cum of wit " here, and it is indeed a 
modicum, seems to lie in making Ajax 
say that he forgets himself in beating 
one so unworthy to be touched by 
him. 

74. his evasions . . . long] his shifts, 
quibbles, are those of an ass. 

75. bobbed] thumped, huHeted; "a 
word of uncertain origin, perhaps 
onomatopceic, expressing the effect 
of a smart but not very weighty blow 
— to pummel, buffet. Wynkyn de 
Worde (1493), Fcstivall : ' Our most 
benynge savyour . . . was bobbed, 
buffeted and spytte upon '. Armin, 
Foolc upon Foole (1G05), ' The fellowe 

. . got the fooles head under his 
arme and bob'd his nose ' " (New 
Enff. Diet.). In iii. i. 75, "You 
shall not bob us out of our melody," 
the word is from " the M.E. bobben ; 



O.F. bober, to befool, mock, deceive; 
PasquiVs Nightcap (1612): 'I '11 not 
be bob\l with such a slight excuse ' ; 
Brome, City Wit, iii. iv. : ' If you 
could bob me of with such pay- 
ment'" (id.). 

77. pia mater] the membrane that 
covers the brain, here the brain itself, 
as in T2velfth Night, i. v. 123. Phin- 
eas Fletcher, Purple Island, v. 11, 12, 
describing the skull, says : — 

" Four several walls, beside the 
common guard. 
For more defence the city round 

embrace. 
The first, thick, soft : the second, 

dry and hard . . . 
The other two of matter thin and 

light. 
And yet the first much harder 
than the other," 
adding in his footnote, "These two 
are called the hard and tender 
mother," meaning the dura mater 
and the pia mater. 



sc. I.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 61 

Ther. Has not so much wit — 

Achil. Nay, I must hold you. 85 

Ther. As will stop the eye of Helen's needle, for 

whom he comes to fight. 
Achil. Peace, fool ! 
Ther. I would have peace and quietness, but the 

fool will not : he there ; that he ; look you 90 

there ! 
Ajax. O thou damned cur ! I shall — 
Achil. Will you set your wit to a fool's? 
Ther. No, I warrant you ; for a fool's will shame 

it. 95 

Pair. Good words, Thersites. 
Achil. What 's the quarrel ? 
Ajax. I bade the vile owl go learn me the tenour 

of the proclamation, and he rails upon me. 
Ther. I serve thee not. 100 

Ajax. Well, go to, go to. 
Ther. I serve here voluntary. 
Achil. Your last service was sufferance, 'twas not 

voluntary ; no man is beaten voluntary : Ajax 

was here the voluntary, and you as under an 105 

impress.  

93. Will you . . . fools ?] Will you money advanced, earnest money, the 

enter into a contest with a fool ? Com- recruit's shilling of to-day, and to give 

pare A Midsiunniey-Nighfs Dream, such money was to ifH/res^ him. The 

in. i. 137 : " Who would set his wit corruption, impress, arose from the 

to so foolish a bird ? " sc. as the practice of taking men for the public 

cuckoo. service on compulsion, and the original 

104. voluntary'] adverbially. sense of the word was thus lost sight 

106. impress] with a pun upon the of. See Wedgwood, Diet. Compare 

impression made by Ajax's fist and Dekker, The Gentle Craft, vol. i. p. 

impressment into military service, ii (Pearson's Reprint): " They have 

In the word in the latter sense the their imprest coats and furniture " ; 

element press is a corruption of O.F. Jonson, The Magnetic Lady, iv. i. : 

prest, ready, prest-money being ready " He lent you imprest money ". 



62 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act n. 



Ther. E'en so; a great deal of your wit too lies in 
your sinews, or else there be liars. Hector 
shall have a great catch if he knock out 
either of your brains : a' were as good crack i lo 
a fusty nut with no kernel. 

Achil. What! with me too, Thersites? 

Ther. There's Ulysses, and old Nestor, whose wit 
was mouldy ere your grandsires had nails on 
their toes, yoke you like draught-oxen and 115 
make you plough up the wars, 

Achil. What? what? 

Ther. Yes, good sooth : to, Achilles ! to, Ajax ! to ! 

Ajax. I shall cut out your tongue. 

Ther. 'Tis no matter; I shall speak as much as 120 
thou afterwards. 

Pair. No more words, Thersites ; peace ! 

Ther. I will hold my peace when Achilles' brach 
bids me, shall I ? 

Achil. There's for you, Patroclus. 125 

Ther. I will see you hanged, like clotpoles, ere I 

109. if he knock out] Ff ; and knocke at Q. 114. your] Theobald; 

their Q, Ff. 123. brach] Rowe ; brooch Q, Ff. 

no, a' were . . . crack] he would iv. ii, : " There is , , , a sow-pig hath 

get as much by cracking, etc. suck'd a brach, and now hunts the 

118. to, Achilles I . . . to] "To, deer ... as well as any hound in 

to," says Staunton, "are words of Cyprus", Figuratively of courtesans, 

encouragement which ploughmen of Massinger, The Unnatural Combat, 

old employed to their draught horses iv. ii. : " Why, braches, will you worry 

and oxen." Compare Chapman, May me ? " Mason compares v. i. 19, be- 

Day, IV. iv. : "I shall imagine still I low: "his masculine whore". Others, 

am driving an ox and an ass before retaining the old reading, brooch, ex- 

me, and cry phtrohho, ptrough ". So, plain, after Johnson : " an appendant 

" at him 1 " in setting on a dog. ornament, and so a hanger on ". 

123. brach] properly a kind of 126. clotpoles] " clotpoU," a thick 

hound that hunts by the scent. Often or " wooden " head ; also " clod-poll," 

of a bitch-hound. Compare Beaumont from "clod," a lump, mass, and 

and Fletcher, The Lover's Melancholy, " poll " = " head ". 



sc. II.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 63 

come any more to your tents: I will keep 
where there is wit stirring and leave the 
faction of fools. [ExzL 

Pair. A good riddance. 130 

Achil. Marry, this, sir, is proclaim'd through all our 
host : J^ iA? 

That Hector, by the fifth hour of the sun, 
Will with a trumpet 'twixt our tents and 

Troy 
To-morrow morning call some knight to arms 
That hath a stomach ; and such a one that 
dare 135 

Maintain — I know not what : 'tis trash. Fare- 
well. 
Ajax. Farewell. Who shall answer him? 
Achil. I know not : 'tis put to lottery ; otherwise 

He knew his man. 
Ajax. O ! meaning you. I will go learn more of it. 140 

\Exeunt. 



SCENE n. — Troy. A Room in Priam's Palace. 

Enter Priam, Hector, Troilus, Paris, and 

Helenus. 

Pri. After so many hours, lives, speeches spent. 

Thus once again says Nestor from the Greeks : 
"Deliver Helen, and all damage else, 

132. fifth hour] i.e. eleven o'clock 139. He knew his man] he would 

in the forenoon. have had no doubt as to who would 

135. stomach] appetite for fighting, be his opponent, 
courage. 



..y^'-r' 



64 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act n. 

As honour, loss of time, travail, expense. 
Wounds, friends, and what else dear that is con- 
sum'd 5 

In hot digestion of this cormorant war, 
Shall be struck off." Hector, what say you to't? 
Hect. Though no man lesser fears the Greeks than I, 
As far as toucheth my particular, 
Yet, dread Priam, , ^, lO 

There is no lady of more softer bowels. 
More spongy to suck in the sense of fear, 
More ready to cry out " Who knows what fol- 
lows ? " 
Than Hector is. The wound of peace is surety, 
ty'" \ Surety secure; but modest doubt is call'd 15 

The beacon of the wise, the tent that searches 
To the bottom of the worst. Let Helen go: 
Since the first sword was drawn about this 

question, 
Every tithe soul, 'mongst many thousand dismes, 

4, 5. As honour . . . friends'] means " tenths," it would, I think, 

i.e. as injury to honour, loss of be a mistake to understand these 

friends. words in their literal sense. The 

9. toucheth my particular] concerns meaning seems to be not that every 

me personally ; for particular as a tenth soul only, but every soul that 

substantive in this sense, compare has been taken as a tithe by war is as 

Coriolanus, iv. vii. 13 ; King Lear, dear as Helen, and of such tithes 

II. iv. 295. there have been many thousands. 

II. bowels] see note on 11. i. 54 Hudson's"every ten souls" is against 

above. all usage ; and Hector immediately 

14. the tiionnd . . . surety] that goes on to say that Helen, even if 

which more than anything else im- she were truly a Trojan, would not 

perils peace is our overweening sense be " worth to us the value of one 

of security. Compare King Lear, 11. ten ". Nor can I believe with Rolfe 

iv. 295. that " the* meaning is that not only 

16. tent] a roll of lint for probing is every tenth soul taken, but there 

wounds. are many thousands of these souls," 

19. Every tithe . . . dismes] though for Hector does not say that every 

tithe means " tenth " and dismes tenth soul has been taken. 



sen] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 65 

Hath been as dear as Helen ; I mean, of ours : 20 
If we have lost so many tenths of ours, 
To guard a thing not ours nor worth to us, 
Had it our name, the value of one ten, 
What merit's in that reason which denies 
The yielding of her up? 

Tro. Fie, fie ! my brother, 25 

I Weigh you the worth and honour of a king 
So great as our dread father in a scale 
Of common ounces? will you with counters sum 
The past proportion of his infinite? 
And buckle in a waist most fathomless 30 

,' With spans and inches so diminutive 
As fears and reasons ? fie, for godly shame ! 

Hel. No marvel, though you bite so sharp at reasons, 
You are so empty of them. Should not our father 
Bear the great sway of his affairs with reasons, 35 
Because your speech hath none that tells him so? 

Tro. You are for dreams and slumbers, brother priest; 
You fur your gloves with reason. Here are your 
reasons : 

29. past proportion] Q, Ff ; past-proportion Johnson. 30. waisti waste 

Q, Ff I, 2; zcrts^Ff 3,4. 

20. / mean, of onrsl I mean every 38. You fur . . . reason] you line 

tithe soul of our host. your speech with reasons as gloves 

29. The past proportion . . . in- are lined with fur. Or perhaps fur 

finite] that infinite greatness of his may be taken for "ornament," as in 

which is beyond all measure of com- Measure for Measure, in. ii. 8-11 : "a 

parison. furred gown . . . and furred with 

33. reasons] A poor pun on "rais- fox and lambskins too, to signify that 

ins" has been suspected here, as in craft, being richer than innocency, 

Much Ado About Nothing, v. i. 211. stands for the facing ". In the former 

It seems unlikely in a passage so sense, compare King John, iv. iii. 

serious, but Shakespeare does quibble 24 : — 

even at solemn moments. " We will not line his thin be- 

36. that] referring to " your stained cloak 

speecu ". ii'iVith our pure honours". 

5 



66 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act n. 









\ 



You know an enemy intends you harm ; 

You know a sword employ'd is perilous, 40 

And reason flies the object of all harm : 

Who marvels then, when Helenus beholds 

A Grecian and his sword, if he do set 

The very wings of reason to his heels, 

And fly like chidden Mercury from Jove, 45 

Or like a star disorb'd ? Nay, if we talk of 

reason, 
Let 's shut our gates and sleep : manhood and 

honour 
Should have harehearts, would they but fat their 

thoughts 
With this cramm'd reason : reason and respect 
Make livers pale and lustihood deject. 50 

Hecf. Brother, she is not worth what she doth cost 

The holding. . ] 

Tro. What is aught but as 'tis valued ? 

HecL \ But value dwells not in particular will ; 
/ It holds his estimate and dignity 
/ As well wherein 'tis precious of itself 55 



56. mad] madde Q; made Ff, 

46. disorb'd] thrown out of its 
sphere. See note on i. iii. 85 above. 

48. 49. Should have . . . reason] 
would have hearts as timid as that of 
a hare if they battened upon such 
food as reason, food that fattens 
without strengthening. 

49. respect] anxious consideration 
of consequences. 

50. livers pale] The "hver" as the 
seat of passion, courage, etc., is fre- 
quent in the language of the time, 
and we have " li\y-livered" " Ik- 



livcred^' for cowards. In 2 Henry 
IV. IV. iii. no ff., Falstaff says : 
" The second property of your ex- 
cellent sherris is the warming of the 
blood ; which, before cold and set- 
tled, left the liver ivhite and pale, 
which is the badge of pusillanimity 
and cowardice ". 

53. particular will] The value 
which a particular person puts upon it. 

54. dignity] worth, noblensss ; 
compare Hamlet, i. v. 48 : " For me 
whose love was of such dignity ". 



sen.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 67 

' ', As in the prizer. 'Tis mad idolatry ' - , //- 

fV^^^* • To make the service greater than the god; . ^'■ 

And the will dotes that is inclinable 
To what infectiously itself afifects, ' 

Without some image of the affected merit. 60 

Tro. I take to-day a wife, and my election 
Is led on in the conduct of my will^ 
My will enkindled by^mine eyes and ears, ^" 
Two traded pilots 'twixt the dangerous shores 
Of will and judgment. How may I avoid, 65 
Although my will distaste what it elected, 
rrhe wife I chose? there can be no evasion 
To blench from this and to stand firm by 

honour. 
We turn not back the silks upon the merchant 
When we have soil'd them, nor the remainder 

viands 70 

We do not throw in unrespective sieve 

71. sieve] Johnson ; sive Q ; same F i ; place Ff 2, 3, 4. 

^6. prizer] appraiser; to "prize" 66. djsto^^] here = disrelish. Corn- 
is probably more frequent in Shake- pare Massinger, The Refiegado, i. 
speare in this sense than in that of ii. : — 

to " value highly ". So, to " appreci- " We that are born great, 

ate" properly means to " put a price Seldom distaste our servants, 

upon," to " appraise," though in though they give us 

modern parlance loosely used in the More than we can pretend to ". 

sense of to "value highly". See note on line 123, below. 

58, 59. that is . . . affects] that 67, 68. there can . . . honour] there 

attributes excellences to whatever it can be no standing firm by honour if 

is strongly and sympathetically drawn evasion is used to shrink from the 

to. Schmidt gives "morbidly" for choice made: evasion, subterfuge, 

infectiously, which seems to me too shuffling excuse, getting out of the 

sinister a meaning. way to avoid anything : blench, see 

60. image] idea, conception. note on i. i. 30. 

64. traded] constantly engaged in 71. unrespective sieve] sieve or 

such a voyage, professional ; " trade " " voider " into which scraps from the 

originally meant " path," that on table, etc., are thrown and which 

which we tread ; hence habitual oc- heeds not what it thus receives, 

cupation, manner of life. Farmer says that in several counties 



68 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act n. 

Because we now are full. It was thought meet 
Paris should do some vengeance on the Greeks : 
Your breath of full consent bellied his sails; 
The seas and winds, old wranglers, took a 

truce 75 

And did him service : he touch'd the ports de- 

sir'd, 
And for an old aunt whom the Greeks held 

captive, 
He brought a Grecian queen, whose youth and 

freshness 
Wrinkles Apollo's, and makes stale the morning. 
Why keep we her ? the Grecians keep our 

aunt : 80 

Is she worth keeping? why, she is a pearl. 
Whose price hath launch'd above a thousand 

ships. 
And turn'd crown'd kings to merchants. 
If you'll avouch 'twas wisdom Paris went, 

79. stale] Ff ; pale Q. 

of England the baskets used for carry- 76. touch'd] landed at. Compare 

ing out dirt, etc., were in his day still The Winter's Tale, v. i. 139: — 

called " sieves ". " By his command 

74. Your breath . . . consent] the Have I here touched SiciVia.", 

counsel which you all agreed on; The modern " touch at " implies only 

with a play on " breath " in its a short stay. 

ordinary sense : bellied, compare A 77. an old aunt] Hesione, Priam's 

Midsummer - Night's Dream, 11. i. sister and mother of Ajax; in "old 

129: — aunt" there seems something of the 

"And grow big-bellied with the contemptuous sense in which the 

wanton wind ". phrase was formerly used of an old 

There is the same conceit in Chap- gossip, and even more opprobriously. 

man's continuation of Hero and 80. Why . . , her ?] do you ask 

Leander, Third Sestiad, line 327 : — why we persist in keeping her ? 

" And all her fleet of spirits came 82. Compare Marlowe, Faustus : — 

swelling in •' Was this the face that launched 

With child of sail ". a thousand ships ? " 



4 



sen.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 69 

As you must needs, for you all cried " Go, 
go"; 85 

If you '11 confess he brought home noble prize. 
As you must needs, for you all clapp'd your 

hands 
And cried " Inestimable ! " why do you now 
The issue of your proper wisdoms rate, 
And do a deed that Fortune never did, 90 

Beggar the estimation which you prized 
Richer than sea and land ? O ! theft most base. 
That we have stol'n what we do fear to keep ; 
But thieves unworthy of a thing so stol'n, 
That in their country did them that disgrace 95 
We fear to warrant in our native place. 

Cas. [ Within?^ Cry, Trojans, cry ! 

Pri. What noise? what shriek is this? 

Tro. 'Tis our mad sister, I do know her voice. 

Cas. [ Withini\ Cry, Trojans ! 

Hect. It is Cassandra. 100 

Enter CASSANDRA, raving, 
Cas. Cry, Trojans, cry ! lend me ten thousand eyes, 

And I will fill them with prophetic tears. 
Hect. Peace, sister, peace ! 

86. noble] Ff ; worthy Q. 

89. The issue . . . wisdoms] the for the concrete ; but it has been sug- 

result of what you yourselves wisely gested to me that the sense may be : 

approved: raf^, condemn. "make worthless that valuation by 

90-92. And do . . , land P] and which you rated her as being above 

with an inconstancy such as even all price ". 

Fortune never showed, depreciate as 93. That] in that, because. Han- 
worthless that which you formerly mer reads What . . . that; Grant 
held to be above all price. Schmidt White, That . . . that. 
rightly, I think, takes estimation, as 95. That] sc. the rape of Helen, 
in Cymbeline, i. iv. 99, as the abstract 96. warrant] justify, defend. 






70 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act n. 

Cas. Virgins and boys, mid-age and wrinkled eld, 

Soft infancy, that nothing canst but cry, 105 

Add to my clamours ! let us pay betimes 

A moiety of that mass of moan to come. 

Cry, Trojans, cry ! practise your eyes with tears ! 

Troy must not be, nor goodly Ilion stand ; 

Our firebrand brother, Paris, burns us all. no 

Cry, Trojans, cry ! a Helen and a woe ! 

Cry, cry ! Troy burns, or else let Helen go. 

SJExit. 

Hect. Now, youthful Troilus, do not these high 
strains 
Of divination in our sister work 
Some touches of remorse? or is your blood 115 
So madly hot that no discourse of reason. 
No fear of bad success in a bad cause, % 
Can qualify the same? 

Tro. Why, brother Hector, 

We may not think the justness of each act 

104. eld] Ritson's correction. The face prasgnans Cisseis regina Parin 

Q gives elders ; the foHos, old, which creat ". 

latter Delius retains. Ritson com- ii6. discourse of reasoii']Xh&Tea.son- 

pares The Merry Wives of Windsor, ing faculty. Compare Havilet, i. ii. 

IV. iv. 36, and Measure for Measure, 150, and also in the same sense "dis- 

III. i. 36. So, Chapman, Iliad, xxiii. course " alone, Hamlet, iv. iv. 36. 

689: "the green-haired eld "; Jon- The phrase is in ^a.con. Advancement 

son, The Sad Shepherd, ii. : " Who of Learning, 1. iv. 2, and elsewhere 

scorns at eld, peels off his own young frequently in Elizabethan literature, 

hairs". On Twelfth Night, iv. iii. 12, Singer 

107. moiety] Lat. medietas, is used quotes Glanville : " The act of the 

by Shakespeare in its proper sig- mind which connects propositions and 

nification, but frequently also, as deduces conclusions from them, the 

here, for any portion, greater schools call discourse, and we shall 

or less. Steevens quotes Aeneid, not miscall it if we name it reason ". 

ii. 56 : " Trojaque nunc staret, 117. success] Shakespeare uses the 

Priamique arx, alta maneres " ; and word as = issue, result, both in a 

for Hecuba's dream, when pregnant neutral sense and qualified by vari- 

with Paris, Aeneid, x. 705 : " et ous adjectives. 



sc. II.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 71 

Such and no other than event doth form it, 120 
Nor once deject the courage of our minds, 
Because Cassandra's mad : her brain-sick raptures 
Cannot distaste the goodness of a quarrel 
Which hath our several honours all engag'd 
To make it gracious. For my private part, 125 
I am no more touch'd than all Priam's sons ; 
And Jove forbid there should be done amongst us 
Such things as might offend the weekest spleen 
To fight for and maintain. 
Par. Else might the world convince of levity 130 

As well my undertakings as your counsels ; 
But I attest the gods, your full consent 
Gave wings to my propension and cut off 
All fears attending on so dire a project: 
For what, alas, can these my single arms? 135 
What propugnation is in one man's valour, 

122. raptures] proph^ic ecstasies. doubtful whether the word means 

123. distaste] here give a bad taste " show their disHke to," or "expose 
to, make distasteful; so, again, in to dislike". 

IV. iv. 48: "Distasted with the salt 124. engag'd] enlisted; an ad- 

of broken tears". Cotgrave has the jective, not a perfect tense, 

word both transitively and intransi- 125. to make it gracious] to show it 

tively : " Desapetisser : to distast, to advantage, 

marre the stomach ; take away the 130. convince] prove guilty of. 

appetite; to breed a dislike or loath- 131. This inversion, whereby pro- 

ing of meats ; and Desgouster : to minence is given to that which is 

distast, loathe, dislike, abhorre ; to subordinate in the mind of the 

be out of humor with, have no mind, speaker, is more Greek than English, 

no maw unto ". Compare Othello, 132. attest] call to witness. 

III. iii. 327 : — 133. propension] inclination; here 

" Which at the first are scare found only in Shakespeare. Compare 

to distaste," Glapthorne, The Lady Mother, ii. 

where the verb is intransitive. In 141 : — 

Dekker, The Untrussing of the Hum- " I feel a strong propension in my- 
orous Poet, vol. i. p. 195 (Pearson's self 
Reprint) : " I can bring . . . a . . . To yield to you ". 
troop of gallants who . . . shall dis- 136. propugnation] defence ; again 
taste every unsalted line in their a word not elsewhere in Shake- 
fly-blown comedies," it is perhaps speare. 



72 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act n. 

To stand the push and enmity of those 

This quarrel would excite ? Yet, I protest, 

Were I alone to pass the difficulties. 

And had as ample power as I have will, 140 

Paris should ne'er retract what he hath done, 

Nor faint in the pursuit. 

Pri. Paris, you speak 

Like one besotted on your sweet delights : 
You have the honey still, but these the gall ; 
So to be valiant is no praise at all. 145 

Par. Sir, I propose not merely to myself 

The pleasure such a beauty brings with it ; 

But I would have the soil of her fair rape 

Wiped off in honourable keeping her. 

What treason were it to the ransack'd queen, 150 

Disgrace to your great worths, and shame to me, 

Now to deliver her possession up 

On terms of base compulsion ! Can it be 

137. To stand the push] to resist single man could cope ; yet if singly 
the attack, face the onset. Compare I had to face such difficulties, sup- 
1 Henry IV. iii. ii. 66 : — posing my powers were equal to my 

"To laugh at gibing boys and will, I should not leave undone what 

stand the push I have done, nor be slack in the pro- 

Of every beardless vain com- secution of my design ". 
parative ". 145. So'] in such a way. 

138. would excite] was sure to 148. rape] in the original sense of 
arouse. snatching away, carrying off. 

139. to pass] if sound, means to 150. ransack'd] ravished. The 
"undergo," as in Othello, 1. iii. 131, word primarily means to search a 
Hudson edits the conjecture of Col- house ; from rann, a house, and sak, 
lier's MS. Corrector, "poise," and base of sc^^a, to search (Skeat, £/j. 
Dyce inclines to it. Possibly " t' op- Diet.). In Chapman's Iliad, xx. 311, 
pose". Achilles, after the escape of Aeneas, 

141. retrnct] draw hack ivom; not, says: — 

I think, "disavow," "wish undone," "All this host I'll ransack, 

as Schmidt explains. Paris's argu- and have hope 

ment is this: "Your agreement Of all; not one again will 'scape, 

fortified me against all fears as to whoever gives such scope 

the dangers that would surely result To his adventure, and so near 

from my act, dangers with which no dares tempt my angry lance ". 



sc. II.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 73 

That so degenerate a strain as this 

Should once set footing in your generous 

bosoms? 155 

There's not the meanest spirit on our party 
Without a heart to dare or sword to draw 
When Helen is defended, nor none so noble 
Whose life were ill bestow'd or death unfamed 
Where Helen is the subject : then, I say, 160 

Well may we fight for her whom, we know well, 
The world's large spaces cannot parallel. 
Hect. Vdixis and Troilus, you have both said well; 
And on the cause and question now in hand 
Have gloz'd, but superficially ; not much 165 

Unlike young men, whom Aristotle thought 
Unfit to hear moral philosophy. 
The reasons you allege do more conduce 

155. footing hi] Q, F I ; foot in Ff 2, 3, 4. 

155. oncel for a single moment: serves: "Both Bacon and Shake- 

generous, nobly born and, so, nobly speare agree in misrepresenting 

natured ; Lat. gencrosus. Compare Aristotle's remark about young men 

Measure for Measure, iv. vi. 13 : — not being fit to be instructed in 

"Theg"f»£>'0M5 and gravest citizens Political Philosophy, both of them 

Have hent the gates". substituting Moral Philosophy. Now 

165. gloz'd] commented, put your Bacon's citation occurs in the Ad- 
interpretation upon matters as they vancement of Learning which was 
now stand ; O.F. glose, Lat. glossa, published in 1605, Shakespeare's in 
Gk. yXwcra-a, a word needing explana- Troilus and Cressida which was 
tion, hence the explanation itself, published in 1609. It is abundantly 
often with a specious, plausible or clear that Shakespeare was a studious 
flattering sense ; gloss, an explanation reader of contemporary literature, 
is a variant. Compare Henry V. 1. and why, we ask, should he not 
ii. 40 : — have derived the reference and the 

" Which Salique land the French error from Bacon's treatise ? " In a 

unjustly o'/oze footnote he adds: "If error it be, 

To be the realm of France ". for, as Mr. Sidney Lee justly ob- 

Theobald punctuates " glozed but serves, by 'political' philosophy 

superficially"; and perhaps rightly. Aristotle is referring to the ethics of 

166. Aristotle] On this passage, of civil society, which are hardly dis- 
which the " Baconians " have made tinguishable from what is called 
so much, Mr. Churton Collins, S<?<JtVs 'moralls'. He shows by reference 
in Shakespeare, pp. 360, 361, ob- to a French translation of the pas- 



74 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act n. 

To the hot passion of distemper'd blood 
Than to make up a free determination 170 

'Twixt right and wrong ; for pleasure and revenge 
Have ears more deaf than adders to the voice 
Of any true decision. Nature craves 
All dues be render'd to their owners : now, 
What nearer debt in all humanity 175 

7**'*' Than wife is to the husband? If this law 

Of nature be corrupted through affection, 
And that great minds, of partial indulgence 
To their benumbed wills, resist the same, 
There is a law in each well-order'd nation 180 
To curb those raging appetites that are 
Most disobedient and refractory. , 
If Helen then be wife to Sparta's king, 

sage, published in Paris in 1553, Iviii. 3 : " they are like the deaf adder 

where it is turned ' science civile,' to that stoppeth her ear". Cp. also 

a note in a copy of Aristotle in the Wyclif, Sermon Ixiv, s.f., "But Crist 

British Museum where it is translated biddith hise disciplis be prudent as 

' morall philosophy,' and to a passage eddris. An eddre hath this witt ; 

in an Italian essayist in 1622, where whanne charmeris come to take him, 

it is translated ' moralli,' that this the toon of his erris he clappith to 

was the sense in which the term the erthe, and with the ende of his 

was generally understood in the six- tail he stoppith the tother." 

teenth and seventeenth centuries" 177. flj^i?c</o«] inclination, appetite, 

{Life of Shakespeare, p. 370, note), propensity, are all senses in which 

Though, as Mr. Collins says, Troilns Shakespeare uses the word, and it is 

and Cressida was published in i6og, perhaps doubtful which exactly it has 

Mr. Lee supposes the passage in here. 

question to have been ivritten " about 178. of partial indulgeiice'] out of 

1603". too easy compliance : bejium bed, dead 

168. do more conduce'] tend more to to all higher principle ; not, I think, 

inflame, etc., than to, etc. " inflexible, immoveable, no longer 

172. adders] The word is properly obedient to superior direction," as 

ncedre, nadre, naddcr, but in M.E. Johnson says. 

the initial n was lost and a nadre be- 179. the same] sc. law of nature, 

came an adder. Similarly an auger 180. a law] " what the law does 

IS Y>xo}pex\y a nmiger ; and conversely in every nation between individuals, 

a newt should be an ewt, a nickname, justice ought to do between nations " 

an ekenaiiie. For the belief in the (Johnson). 
deafness of the adder, compare Psalms 



sen.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 75 



Tro. 



As it is known she is, these_nigral_Iaw.s 
OjLnature and of nation speak aloud 185 

To have her back return'd : thus to persist 
In doing wrong extenuates not wrong, 
But makes it much more heavy. Hector's opinion 
Is this, in way of truth ; yet ne'ertheless, 
My spritely brethren, I propend to you 190 

In resolution to keep Helen still ; 
For 'tis a cause that hath no mean dependance 
Upon our joint and several dignities. 
Why, there you touch'd the life of our design : 
Were it not glory that we more affected 195 

Than the performance of our heaving spleens, 
I would not wish a drop of Trojan blood 
Spent more in her defence. But, worthy Hector, 
I She is a theme of honour and renown, 
I A spur to valiant and magnanimous deeds, 200 
Whose present courage may beat down our foes. 
And fame in time to come canonise us ; 



203. lose\ loose Q, F i, 

187. extemiates] here " mitigates," 
rather than " palliates ". Compare 
A Midsummer-Night's Dream, i. i. 
120. Shakespeare uses the word in 
both senses and also as = under- 
value. In Bacon, Advancement of 
Learning, i. ii. 3, and Letter of 
Advice to Essex, the sense is to 
" depreciate," and in his Colours of 
Good and Evil, 7, to " weaken ". 
Chapman, Iliad, xvi. 675, has the 
word in the sense of " break the force 
of," "serve as a defence against" : — 
" full on with his huge 

stone he ran, 
Discharged, and drave it 'twixt 

the brows of bold Cebriones. 



Nor could the thick bone there 
prepared extenuate so th' ac- 
cess, 
But out it drave his broken eyes." 
i8g. in way of truth] looking at the 
matter as an abstract question of right. 
190, igi. I propend . . . resolution] 
my inclination accords with yours in 
resolving, etc. 

196. heaving spleens] fiercely re- 
vengeful feelings. 

201. Whose present courage] the 
valour shown by which deeds may 
in the present, etc. 

202. canonise] put us in the canon 
or roll of heroes ; accented on the pen- 
ultimate, as always in Shakespeare. 



76 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act n. 

For, I presume, brave Hector would not lose 
So rich advantage of a promis'd glory- 
As smiles upon the forehead of this action 205 
For the wide world's revenue. 
Hect. I am yours, 

You valiant offspring of great Priamus. 
I have a roisting challenge sent amongst 
The dull and factious nobles of the Greeks 
Will strike amazement to their drowsy spirits. 210 
I was advertis'd, their great general slept 
Whilst emulation in the army crept : 
This, I presume, will wake him. 

\Exeunt. 

SCENE III. — The Grecian Camp. Before 
Achilles' Tent. 



Enter Thersites. 

Thcr. How now, Thersites ! what ! lost in the laby- 
rinth of thy fury. Shall the elephant Ajax 
carry it thus ? he beats me, and I rail at 

/ him : O worthy satisfaction ! would it were 



204. So rich . . . glory^ the rich 
promise of fame to be won. 

208. roistino;] roistering, vaunting. 
Skeat {Ety. Diet.) quotes Cotgrave : 
" riistre, a ruffin, royster, hackster, 
swaggering sawcy fellow," and says 
the verb to roist is in P. Levin's 
Manipulus Vocabulortim, 1570. It 
occurs also in Gabriel Harvey's 
Supererogation, 1593, "his raving 
Poetry, his roisting Khetorique, and 
his chopping logique". 

211. advcrtis'd^mioxm'A; accented 
on the second syllable. 

212. emulation] factious rivalry, 



jealousy. Compare the Advancement 
of Learning, i. vi. 14 : " The emula- 
tion and jealousy of Gregory the first 
of that name". 

Scene iij. 

3. carry it] carry off the honours, 
bear the palm ; an expression frequent 
in Shakespeare, e.g. Tlic Merry Wives 
of Windsor, iii. ii. 70 : " he will carry 
it, he will carry it ; 'tis in his buttons ; 
he will carry it " ; Romeo and Juliet, 
III. i. 77 : " Alia stoccata carries it 
away ". 



sc. Ill] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 77 

otherwise ; that I could beat him, whilst he 5 
railed at me. 'Sfoot, I '11 learn to conjure 
and raise devils, but I '11 see some issue of 
my spiteful execrations. Then there's Achil- 
les, a rare enginer. If Troy be not taken 
till these two undermine it, the walls will 10 
stand till they fall of themselves. O ! thou 
great thunder-darter of Olympus; forget that 
thou art Jove the king of gods, and, Mercury, 
lose all the serpentine craft of thy caduceus, 
if ye take not that little, little less than little 15 
wit from them that they have ; which short- 
armed ignorance itself knows is so abundant 
scarce, it will not in circumvention deliver a 
fly from a spider, without drawing their massy 
irons and cutting the web. After this, the 20 
vengeance on the whole camp ! or rather, the 
Neapolitan bone-ache? for that, methinks, is 
the curse dependant on those that war for 
a placket. I have said my prayers, and, 

22. Neapolitan] Q, omitted in Ff. 

7. but I 'II see] rather than not 
see it. 

9. enginer] or ingener, the form al- 
ways found in Shakespeare, except 
in some of the later folios. 

12. forget, lose] may you forget, 
lose. 

16. short-armed] not reaching far. 
Dyce conjectures " short-aimed," and 
compares Coriolanus, i. ii. 22 : — 

" By the discovery pare King Lear, iii. iv. 100. The 

We shall be shortened in our word was sometimes written " plac- 

aim ". kerd," as in Friar Bacon and Friar 

22. Neapolitan] the disease being Bungay, p. 154/2 (ed. Dyce) : " on 
supposed to have originated in Naples, a sudden she'll swap thee into her 
So, Glapthorne, The Hollander, 11, i. : plackerd ". 



" if I should obtain the Neapolitan 
boucache ". 

24. placket] " has been very vari- 
ously explained — a petticoat, an 
under-petticoat, a pocket attached 
to a petticoat, the slit or opening 
in a petticoat, and a stomacher ; and 
it certainly was occasionally used to 
signify a female, as a petticoat is 
now . . ." (Dyce, Glossary). Com- 



\ 



78 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act n. 

devil Envy, say Amen. What ho ! my Lord 25 

Achilles ! 1 v 

 cUA 

Enter Patroclus. 

Pair, Who 's there ? Thersites ! Good Thersites, 
come in and rail. 

Ther. If I could have remembered a gilt counterfeit, 

thou would'st not have slipped out of my 30 
contemplation : but it is no matter ; thyself 
upon thyself ! The common curse of man- 
kind, folly and ignorance, be thine in great 
revenue ! heaven bless thee from a tutor, and "ft) 

discipline come not near thee ! Let thy blood 35 
be thy direction till thy death ! then if she 
that lays thee out says thou art a fair corse 
I '11 be sworn and sworn upon 't she never 
shrouded any but lazars. Amen. Where's 
Achilles ? 40 

Pair. What ! art thou devout ? wast thou in prayer ? 

Ther. Ay ; the heavens hear me ! 

Enter ACHILLES. 

Achil. Who's there? 

Patr. Thersites, my lord. 

Achil. Where, where? Art thou come? Why, my 45 

37. corse\ Capell ; course Q ; coarse Ff. 

29-31. // / could . . . contempla- 34. bless thee front] providenti- 

<ioM] " Slips " were pieces of counter- ally save you from. Compare X/wg' 

feit money, brass covered over with Lear, in. iv. 60 : " Bless thee from 

silver. Com\):iXQ Romeo and Juliet, u. whirlwinds, star-blasting, and tak- 

iv. 49-51 : "/^o>«. What co/(?j/fr/>i7 did ing ! " 

1 give you ? Aft'K. The i///", sir, the s/J/!>." 35. ftZood] violent passions. Com- 

31, 32. thyself upon thyself!] i.e. pare King Lear, iv. ii. 64: "to let 

I can invoke no worse curse than this, these hands obey my blood". 



? 



sc. Ill] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 79 

cheese, my digestion, why hast thou not served 
thyself in to my table so many meals ? Come, 
what's Agamemnon? 

Ther. Thy commander, Achilles. Then tell me, 

Patroclus, what's Achilles? 5° 

Pair. Thy, lord, Thersites. Then tell me, I pray 
thee, what 's thyself? 

Ther. Thy knower, Patroclus. Then tell me, Pat- 
roclus, what art thou?' 

Patr. Thou may'st tell that knowest. 55 

Achil. O ! tell, tell. 

Ther. I '11 decline the whole question. Agamemnon 
commands Achilles ; Achilles is my lord ; I 
am Patroclus' knower ; and Patroclus is a 
fool. 6o 

Patr. You rascal ! 

Ther. Peace, fool ! I have not done. 

Achil. He is a privileged man. Proceed, Thersites. 

Ther. Agamemnon is a fool ; Achilles is a fool ; 

Thersites is a fool ; and, as aforesaid, Pat- 65 
roclus is a fool. 

Achil. Derive this, come. 

Ther. Agamemnon is a fool to offer to command 
Achilles ; Achilles is a fool to be commanded 
of Agamemnon ; Thersites is a fool to serve 70 
such a fool; and Patroclus is a fool positive. 

61-66. You rascal . . . fool] Ff ; omitted in Q. 

46. my digestion'] cheese being sup- Jonson, Epigrams, ci. 27 : " Digestive 

posed to help that process. Compare cheese, and fruit there sure will be". 
Middleton, Your Five Gallants, 11. 57. decline] go through ; a gram- 

iii. 323 : " it comes like cheese after matical term, as, just below, derive 

a great feast to digest the rest"; and positive. 



\ 



80 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act n. 



Pair, 
Ther 



80 



Why am I a fool? 

Make that demand to the Creator. It suffices 

me thou art. Look you, who comes here? 

Achil. Patroclus, I '11 speak with nobody. Come in 75 
with me, Thersites. {Exit. 

Ther. Here is such patchery, such juggling, and 
such knavery ! all the argument is a whore 
and a cuckold ; a good quarrel to draw emu- 
lous factions and bleed to death upon. Now, 
the dry serpigo on the subject ! and war and 
lechery confound all ! \Exit. 

Enter Agamemnon, Ulysses, Nestor, Diomedes, 

and AjAX. 

Agam. Where is Achilles? 

Patr. Within his tent ; but ill dispos'd, my lord. 

Again. Let it be known to him that we are here, 

78, 79. a cuckold and a whore] Ff ; a whore, and a cuckold Q. 



85 



73. to the Creator'] the reading of 
the folios. The Q gives " of the 
prover," which can only mean him 
who is able to prove that you are a 
fool by making trial of you. Delius 
says the latter was an alteration made 
in consequence of the prohibition of 
profane expressions on the stage, and 
one which hardly comes from Shake- 
speare. 

77. patchery] " botching intended 
to hide faults; gross and bungling 
hypocrisy " (Schmidt) ; or perhaps 
" knavish contrivance ". Compare 
Timon of Athens, v. i. gg : "Know 
his gross patchery ". 

81. serpigo] In Gerharde's Herball, 
1597, P- 6g, the serpigo or impetigo 
is defined as " certain chaps, chinkes, 
or riftes in the palmes of the handes 
or feete (a disease of great affinitie 
with the pockes) ". IBucknill, The 



Medical Knowledge of Shakespeare, 
p. 230, says : " Serpigo seems to 
have been widely used by old medi- 
cal authors as a creeping skin disease. 
. . . The disease to which it was most 
frequently applied was the vesicular 
disease now called Herpes circinatus, 
which certainly could not be called 
dry; it was also applied to creeping 
forms of impetigo and psoriasis ; and 
to the latter of these especially, a 
dry scaly eruption, the term in the 
text would be perfectly appropriate." 
Compare Marston, The Fawn, iv. i. 
434 : " From Don Zuccone, that dry 
scdlincss, — that sarpego, — that barren 
drouth, and shame of all humanity " ; 
Heywood, Lovers Mistress, vol. vi. 
p. 50 (Pearson's Reprint) : 

" he all his body stung 
With the French fly, with the 
sarpego dried". 



sc. Ill] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 81 

He shent our messengers ; and We lay by 

Our appertainments, visiting of him : 

Let him be told so ; lest perchance he think 

We dare not move the question of our place, 

Or know not what we are. ' / 

Pai(r. I shall say so to him. [Exz'i. 90 

Ulyss, We saw him at the opening of his tent: 
He is not sick, 

Ajax. Yes, lion-sick, sick of proud heart : you may 
call it melancholy if you will favour the man ; 
but, by my head, 'tis pride : but why, why ? 95 
let him show us a cause. A word, my lord. 

\Takes Agamemnon aside. 

Nest. What moves Ajax thus to bay at him? 

Ulyss. Achilles hath inveigled his fool from him. 

Nest. Who, Ther sites ? 

Ulyss. He. 100 

Nest. Then will Ajax lack matter, if he have lost 
his argument. 

Ulyss, No, you see, he is his argument that has his 
argument, Achilles. 

Nest. All the better ; their fraction is more our 105 

86. shenti scolded, reviled ; Theo- 8g. dare not . . . place] dare not 

bald's correction of the folio reading, assert the authority that belongs to 

sent. The quarto gives safe, which us, or, perhaps, dare not raise the ques- 

Dyce supposes to be a misprint for tion of our authority by asserting it. 
rate, i.e. rated. Compare Coriolamis, 93. lion-sick] i.e. " sick of proud 

V. ii. 104; Twelfth Night, IV. ii. 112. heart". Compare Massinger, The 

In these and other passages Shake- Bondman, in. iii., " lioit drunk ". 
speare uses the word as a participle, 94. if you will favour] if you are 

not as a past tense. disposed to make the best of his 

86, 87. we lay by , . . him] we behaviour, 
waive what is our due by coming to 102. his argument] that which 

see him instead of summoning him forms the subject of his anger, 
before us. 105. fraction] rupture. 

6 

<; - • 



82 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act n. 

wish than their faction : but it was a strong 

composure a fool could disunite. 
Ulyss. The amity that wisdom knits not folly may • 

easily untie. Here comes Patroclus, 
Nest. No Achilles with him? no 

Re-enter PATROCLUS. 

Ulyss. The elephant hath joints, but none for cour- 
tesy : his legs are legs for necessity, not for 
flexure. 

Pair. Achilles bids me say, he is much sorry, 

If anything more than your sport and pleasure 115 
Did move your greatness and this noble state 
To call upon him ; he hopes it is no other 
But for your health and your digestion sake, 
An after-dinner's breath. 

Again. Hear you, Patroclus ; 

We are too well acquainted with these answers:' 120 
But his evasion, wing'd thus swift with scorn, 

107. composure'] Q; counsell that Ff. 113. flexure] Q; flight Ff. 

106, 107. but . . . disunite] ironi- Middleton, The Old Law, v. i. 651, 

cal : composure, union, alliance. " The elephants have found their 

111-113. The elephant . . .flexure] joints" ; Chapman, All Fools, v. i, 
Sir Thomas Browne's first chapter " I hope you are no elephant, you 
of the third book of his Pseudodoxia have joints" ; but the belief was, in 
is on the thesis " That an elephant fact, of frequent mention. Chap- 
hath no joints," a belief which his man, Iliad, xxiii. 109, uses flexure 
commentators call an "old and grey- for "turning" in a race : — 
headed error," it being, in fact, de- " Eumelus made most pace 
rived from Ctesias, the first Greek With his fleet mares, and he be- 
who saw and described an elephant, gan theyft'^«r^ as we thought", 
and long ago controverted by Aris- 116. this noble state] sc. the xtX.m\x& 
totle. Steevens compares The Dia- of the accompanying chiefs. 
logues of Creatures Moralyscd, etc., iig. breath] breathing, exercise. 
h\.\.,"'\.\\e^ olefawnte i\i2.t bou'eth 7iot Compare Hamlet, v. ii. iSi, "it is 
the kneys" ; Rowley's AlVs Lost by the breathing time of day with me". 
Lust, 1633, " Stubborn as an ele- 121. evasion] attempt to put us off 
phant's leg, no bending in her". So, with jests. 



sc. Ill] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 83 

Cannot outfly our apprehensions. 

Much attribute he hath, and much the reason 

Why we ascribe it to him ; yet all his virtues, 

Not virtuously on his own part beheld, 125 

Do in our eyes begin to lose their gloss, 

Yea, like fair fruit in any unwholesome dish. 

Are like to rot untasted. Go and tell him. 

We come to speak with him ; and you shall not 

sin 
If you do say we think him over-proud 130 

And under-honest, in self-assumption greater 
Than in the note of judgment ; and worthier than 

himself 
Here tend the savage strangeness he puts on. 
Disguise the holy strength of their command, 
And underwrite in an observing kind 135 

His humorous predominance ; yea, watch 
His pettish lunes, his ebbs, his flows, as if 
The passage and whole carriage of this action 

137. pettish Junes] Hanmer ; pettish lines Ff; course and time Q. 138. 

carriage 0/ this action] Ff; strcame of his commencement Q. 

122. apprehensions] understand- ance] veil that authority which in all 

ings. righteousness they might well assert, 

125. Not virtuously , . . beheld] and deferentially acquiesce in, sub- 
not regarded by himself as the virtues scribe their assent to, the superiority 
themselves would prescribe, but arro- which he so capriciously arrogates to 
gantly borne. Mason conjectures himself, 
"upheld" for beheld. 137. lunes] Hanmer's correction, 

127. unwholesome] foul. mad freaks. Compare The Winter's 

131. under - honest] lacking in Tale, 11. ii. 30 : " These dangerous 
straightforward courtesy. unsafe lunes i' the king". Knight 

132. note] distinctive mark, retains the reading of the folios, /jh^s; 
Schmidt, however, renders " than but the words " his ebbs, his flows," 
true judges know him to be" ; and and "his tide," seem to point to the 
to the same effect Delius. belief that lunacy is due to the moon. 

133. tend . . . strangeness] wait 138. whole . . . action] The quarto 
upon the ill-bred aloofness. reading, " the stream of his com- 

134-136. Disguise . . . predomin- mencement," was probably revised 



84 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act n. 

Rode on his tide. Go tell him this, and add, 

That if he overhold his price so much, 140 

We '11 none of him ; but let him, like an engine 

Not portable, lie under this report : 

" Bring action hither, this cannot go to war ; " 

A stirring dwarf we do allowance give 

Before a sleeping giant : tell him so. 145 

Pair. I shall ; and bring his answer presently. \Exit. 

Agam. In second voice we'll not be satisfied; 

We come to speak with him. Ulysses, enter 
you. \Exit Ulysses. 

Ajax. What is he more than another? 

Agam. No more than what he thinks he is. 150 

Ajax. Is he so much ? Do you not think he thinks 
himself a better man than I am ? 

Agam. No question. 

Ajax. Will you subscribe his thought, and say he 

is? 155 

Agam. No, noble Ajax ; you are as strong, as 
valiant, as wise, no less noble, much more 
gentle, and altogether more tractable. 

Ajax. Why should a man be proud ? How doth 

pride grow? I know not what pride is. 160 

Agam. Your mind is the clearer, Ajax, and your 
virtues the fairer. He that is proud eats up 
himself: pride is his own glass, his own 

in order to get rid of such a figure as \\b. presently^ at once, on the 

a stream riding upon a tide, and per- present moment, 
haps also because of " the stream of 147. In second voice] by an inter- 

his dispose," line 173. mediary. 

144. nl!o7e<nncc] approving acknow- 154. subscribe] endorse, 
ledgment, approbation, as in i. iii. 376. 160. grow] is born and nurtured. 



sc. Ill] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 85 

trumpet, his own chronicle ; and whatever 

praises itself but in the deed, devours the 165 

deed in the praise. 
Ajax. I do hate a proud man, as I hate the engen- ) 

dering of toads. / 

Nest. [Aside.] Yet he loves_^llimseli^ is 't not  

strange? 170 

Re-enter ULYSSES. 

Ulyss. Achilles will not to the field to-morrow. 

Again. What's his excuse? 

Ulyss. He doth rely on none, 

But carries on the stream of his dispose 
Without observance or respect of any, 
In will peculiar and in self-admission. 175 

Again. Why will he not upon our fair request 

Untent his person and share the air with Cfe? 

Ulyss. Things small as nothing, for request's sake only, 
He makes important : possess'd he is with greatness, 
And speaks not to himself but with a pride 180 
That quarrels at self-breath : imagin'd worth 
Holds in his blood such swoln and hot discourse, 
That 'twixt his mental and his active parts 
Kingdom'd Achilles in commotion rages 
And batters down himself: what should I say? 185 

185. down himself] Q ; 'gainst itself e Ff. 

175. self-admission'] conviction that " The genius and the mortal in- 

what he does must be right. struments 

181. That . . . self-breath] that is Are then in council ; and the 

at variance with itself for giving vent state of man, 

to the very words he utters. Like to a little kingdom, suffers 

184, 185. Kingdom'd . . . himself] then 

Malone compares Julius Ccesar, ii. i. The nature of an insurrection ". 
66 ff. :— 



86 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act ii. 

He is so plaguy proud that the death-tokens of it 
Cry " No recovery ". 

Again. Let Ajax go to him. 

Dear lord, go you and greet him in his tent: 

'Tis said he holds you well, and will be led 

At your request a little from himself. 190 

Ulj/ss. O Agamemnon ! let it not be so. 

'~" We'll consecrate the steps that Ajax makes 

When they go from Achilles : shall the proud lord 

That bastes his arrogance with his own seam. 

And never suffers matter of the world 195 

Enter his thoughts, save such as do revolve 

And ruminate himself, shall he be worshipp'd 

Of that we hold an idol more than he ? 

No, this thrice-worthy and right valiant lord 

Must not so stale his palm, nobly acquir'd ; 200 

Nor, by my will, assubjugate his merit, , yi 

As amply titled as Achilles is, 

By going to Achilles : J 

That were to enlard his fat-already pride. 

And add more coals to Cancer when he burns 205 

With entertaining great Hyperion. 

This lord go to him ! Jupiter forbid, 

And say in thunder "Achilles, go to him". 

200. stale] Rowe ; staule Q, Ff i, 2; staul Ff 3, 4. 202. titled] Ff; 

liked Q. 

186. death-tokens'] an allusion to 200. stoZe A/s /a^w] sully the glory 

the " tokens " of the plague. Com- he has nobly won. Compare Othello, 

pare Love's Labour's Lost, v. ii. 423 ; i. iii. 227 : " slubber the gloss of your 

Antony and Cleopatra, iii. x. g. new fortunes". 

194. scam] fat, lard ; " O.F. sain, 205, 206. add . . . Hyperioti] " add 

grease; mid. ha.t. saginum, stuffing" heat to the summer; Cancer being 

(Skeat, Ety. Diet.). Compare " en- the zodiacal sign the sun enters at 

seamed," Hamlet, iii. iv. 92. the summer solstice" (Rolfe). 



sc. Ill] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 87 

Nest. [Aside.] O ! this is well ; he rubs the vein of 

him. 
Dw. [Aside.] And how his silence drinks up this ap- 
plause! 210 
Ajax. If I go to him, with my armed fist 

I '11 pash him o'er the face. 
Again. O, no ! you shall not go. 
Ajax. An a' be proud with me, I '11 pheeze his pride. 

Let me go to him. 215 

Ulyss. Not for the worth that hangs upon our quarrel. 
Ajax. A paltry, insolent fellow ! 
Nest. [Aside.] How he describes himself! 
Ajax. Can he not be sociable ? 

Ulyss. [Aside.] The raven chides blackness. 220 

Ajax. I '11 let his humours blood. 
Again. [Aside.] He will be the physician that should 

be the patient. 
Ajax. An all men were o' my mind, — 
Ulyss. [Aside.] Wit would be out of fashion. 225 

Ajax. A' should not bear it so, a' should eat swords 

first: shall pride carry it? 

222. lef] Ff; tell Q: humours] Ff; humorous Q. 

213. pash] batter. Compare Jon- caedere. It is a favourite word with 

son, Sejanus, v. x : — the dramatists who use it in a variety 

"when you do fall, of contemptuous senses. 

You pash yourselves to pieces, 217. Not . . . quarrel] not for the 

ne'er to rise " ; value of all we are fighting about. 

yi.a%&ingQr,The Virgin Martyr, n.W.: 21S. paltry] "stands for palter-y, 

" To />fls/j your gods in pieces ". But formed from an old pi. palter, Ta.gs, 

the word was common enough. raggish, hence vile, worthless" (Skeat, 

215. pheeze] also " fese," probably Ety. Diet.). 

means " plague," whether by beating 226. eat swords] Grey ingeniously 

or otherwise. Cole, in his Latin Die- conjectures " eat 's words," i.e. his 

tionary (1679), quoted by Malone, words. For ^tarif so, compare above, 

renders the word by Jlagellare , virgis line 3, " carry it thus ". 



88 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act n. 

Nest. [Aside.] An 'twould, you'd carry half. 

U/j/ss. [Aszde.] A' would have ten shares, 

Ajax. I will knead him ; I '11 make him supple. 230 

Nest. [Aside.] He's not yet through warm : force him 

with praises : pour in, pour in ; his ambition 

is dry. 
Ulyss. [To Agamemnon.] My lord, you feed too much on 

this, dislike^ 
Nest. Our noble general, do not do so. 235 

Dio. You must prepare to fight without Achilles. 
Ulyss. Why, 'tis this naming of him does him harm. 

Here is a man — but 'tis before his face ; 

I will be silent. 
Nest. Wherefore should you so? 

He is not emulous, as Achilles is. 240 

Ulyss. Know the whole world, he is as valiant. 
Ajax. A whoreson dog, that shall palter thus with us! 

Would he were a Trojan ! -^tv^'-'-Y y -^ 

Nest. What a vice were it in Ajax now, — 
Ulyss. If he were proud, — 

Dio. Or covetous of praise, — 245 

Ulyss. Ay, or surly borne, — 

Dio. Or strange, or self-affected ! 

Ulyss. Thank the heavens, lord, thou art of sweet com- 
posure ; 

Praise him that got thee, she that gave thee suck: 

231. through warm] thoroughly said to be connected with " paltry ". 

warm : force, i.e. " farce," stuff. See note on line 218, above. 

Compare v. i. 64. 246. Or strctnge, or self-affected] 

240. «m«/oMs] liere "envious," but, or haughtily held himself aloof, or 

like " emulation," used by Shake- cared for nobody but himself, 

speare in a good sense also. 248. she] for " her ". Compare 

242. palter] shuffle, shift, dodge ; Othello, iv. ii. 3 : " you have seen 



sc. III.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 89 

Fam'd be thy tutor, and thy parts of nature 

Thrice-fam'd, beyond all erudition : 250 

But he that disciplin'd thine arms to fight, 

Let Mars divide eternity in twain. 

And give him half: and, for thy vigour, 

Bull-bearing Milo his addition yield 

To sinewy Ajax. I will not praise thy 

wisdom, 255 

Which, like a bourn, a pale, a shore, confines 
Thy spacious and dilated parts : here 's Nestor, 
Instructed by the antiquary times, -ccA^ 

He must, he is, he cannot but be wise; 
But pardon, father Nestor, were your days 260 
As green as Ajax' and your brain so temper'd, 
You should not have the eminence of him, 
But be as Ajax. 

Ajax. Shall I call you father? 

Nest. Ay, my good son. 

Dio. Be rul'd by him, Lord Ajax. 

Ulyss. There is no tarrying here ; the hart Achilles 265 
Keeps thicket. Please it our great general 
To call together all his state of war ; 

250. beyond, beyond all] Ff ; beyond all thy Q. 

Cassio and she together". "She," 250. beyond . . . erudition] I ha.ve 

says Abbott, Shakespearian Gram- followed Steevens and Dyce in 

mar, § 211, "was more often used omitting the second beyond of the 

for ' woman ' than he for ' man '. folios. 

Hence, perhaps, she seemed more 256. bourn] here " limit " ; also 

like an uninflected noun than he, " brook," as being a limit, ATz'wg' L^ar, 

and we may thus extenuate the re- iii. vi. 27 : pale, paling, that which 

markable anomaly ' Praise hint that keeps in. 

got thee, she that gave thee suck ' 258. antiquary times] times rich in 

(Troilus and Cressida, 11. iii. 252)". stored-up lore. 

249. thy parts of nature]ihym.t\xx3.\ 267. all his state of war] the -whole 

endowments. council of chiefs. 



90 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act n. 

Fresh kings are come to Troy : to-morrow 

We must with all our main of power stand 

fast : 
And here's a lord, — come knights from east to 

west, 270 

And cull their flower, Ajax shall cope the best. 
Again. Go we to council. Let Achilles sleep : 

Light boats sail swift, though greater hulks draw 

deep. \^Exeunt. 

269. rnahi] full might. 



ACT III 

SCENE l.— Troy. Priam's Palace. 

Enter Pandarus and a Servant. 

Pan. Friend ! you ! pray you, a word : do not you 

follow the young Lord Paris? 
Serv. Ay, sir, when he goes before me. 
Pan. You depend upon him ? I mean. 
Serv. Sir, I do depend upon the Lord. 5 

Pan. You depend upon a noble gentleman ; 

I must needs praise him. 
Serv. The Lord be praised ! 
Pan. You know me, do you not? 

Serv. Faith, sir, superficially. lO 

Pan. Friend, know me better. I am the Lord 

Pandarus. 
Serv. I hope I shall know your honour better. -ik' 
Pan. I do desire it. 

Serv. You are in the state of grace. 15 

Pan. Grace ! not so, friend ; honour and lordship are 

my titles. \^Music within. 

What music is this ? 

6. nohle\ Ff ; notable Q. 

12. I hope . . . hetter\ "The ser- Pandarus as if he had said he wished 
vant means to quibble. He hopes to grow better, and hence the servant 
that Pandarus will become a better affirms that he is in a state of grace 
man than he is at present. In his . . ." (Malone). Pandarus deprecates 
next speech he chooses to understand the word grace as a title above him. 

91 



92 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act m. 

Serv. I do but partly know, sir : it is music in parts. 

Pan. Know you the musicians? 20 

Serv. Wholly, sir. 

Pan. Who play they to? 

Serv. To the hearers, sir. 

Pan. At whose pleasure, friend ? 

Serv. At mine, sir, and theirs that love music. 25 

Pan. Command, I mean, friend. 

Serv. Who shall I command, sir? 

Pan. Friend, we understand not one another. I am 

1 too courtly, and thou art too cunning. At 

1 whose request do these men play? 30 

Serv. That 's to 't, indeed, sir. Marry, sir, at the 

I request of Paris my lord, who's there in 

person ; with him the mortal Venus, the 
heart-blood of beauty, love's invisible soul. 

^ Pan. Who, my cousin Cressida ? 35 

Serv. No, sir, Helen : could you not find out that 
by her attributes ? 

Pan. It should seem, fellow, that thou hast not 
seen the Lady Cressida. I come to speak 
with Paris from the Prince Troilus : I will 40 
make a complimental assault upon him, for 
my business seethes. 

Serv. Sodden business: there's a stewed phrase, in- 
deed. 

34. lovers invisible soul] may mean jectures invisible lovers or love's 

" the soul of love invisible every- indivisible. 

where else" (Johnson), or "the 43. s<r7<'<rf />/u-a5f] probably with a 

ethereal spirit of love as impersonated quibble on the word stews, a brothel, 

by her " (Clarke). Hanmer and and in sodden an allusion to the " tub- 

Capell give "visible"; Daniel con- fast," Timou of Athens, iv. iii. 8-j, the 



sc. I.J TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 93 

Enter PARIS and HELEN, attended. 

Pan. Fair be to you, my lord, and to all this fair 45 
company! fair desires, in all fair measure, 
fairly guide them ! especially to you, fair 
queen ! fair thoughts be your fair pillow ! 

Helen. Dear lord, you are full of fair words. 

Pan. You speak your fair pleasure, sweet queen. 50 
Fair prince, here is good broken music. 

Par. You have broke it, cousin ; and, by my life, 
you shall make it whole again : you shall 
piece it out with a piece of your perform- 
ance. Nell, he is full of harmony. 55 

Pan. Truly, lady, no. 

Helen. O, sir ! 

Pan. Rude, in sooth; in good sooth, very rude. 

Par. Well said, my lord! Well, you say so in fits. 

Pan. I have business to my lord, dear queen. My 60 
lord, will you vouchsafe me a word ? 

Helen. Nay, this shall not hedge us out: we'll hear 
you sing, certainly. 

Pan. Well, sweet queen, you are pleasant with me. 

usual treatment of the lues venerea, the pun on the phrase xn As You 

See also Measure for Measure, iii. ii. Like It, i. ii. 150. 

60; Henry F. 11. i. 79. 59. in fits] Steevens supposes a 

51. broken music] " means what we quibble upon "by fits," i.e. now and 

now term 'a string band'. . . . 'The then, and "fits," parts or divisions 

term originated probably from harps, of a song. This seems very unsatis- 

lutes, and such other stringed instru- factory. Nares conjectures " it fits", 

ments as were played without a bow, Possibly " i' fecks " ; we have in this 

not having the capability to sustain scene many such exclamations, " i' 

a long note to its full duration of faith," " la," " in good troth ". Com- 

time,' Chappell's Popular Music of pare The Winter's Tale, i. ii. 120. 

the Olden Time, etc., vol. i. p. 246, 62. hedge us out] shut us out, debar 

sec. ed." (Dyce, Glossary). Compare us. 



94 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act m. 

But, marry, thus, my lord: my dear lord 65 

and most esteemed friend, your brother 

Troilus, — 
Helen. My Lord Pandarus ; honey-sweet lord, — 
Pan, Go to, sweet queen, go to : commends himself 

most affectionately to you. 70 

Helen. You shall not bob us out of our melody : if 

you do, our melancholy upon your head ! 
Pan. Sweet queen, sweet queen ! that 's a sweet 

queen, i' faith. 
Helen. And to make a sweet lady sad is a sour 75 

offence. 
Pan. Nay, that shall not serve your turn ; that shall 

it not, in truth, la! Nay, I care not for such 

words ; no, no. And, my lord, he desires 

you, that if the king call for him at supper, 80 

you will make his excuse. 
Helen. My Lord Pandarus, — 
Pan. What says my sweet queen, my very very 

sweet queen? 
Par. What exploit 's in hand ? where sups he to- 85 

night ? 
Helen. Nay, but, my lord, — 
Pan. What says my sweet queen ? My cousin will 

68. honey - sweet lord] Compare turns to her with : " What says my 

Henry V. ii. iii. i. sweet queen ? " He then goes on to 

71. 606] See note on II. i. 75, above, warn Paris that if Priam should ask 

88, 89. My cousin . . . you] What for Troilus at supper he (Paris) is not 

have these words to do here ? Paris's supposed to know anything of his 

last question was : " Where sups he brother's doings. Nothing has as 

[sc. Troilus] tonight ? " Before Pan- yet bctii said of Cressida, and the 

darus can answer, Helen breaks in words " My cousin will fall out with 

with : " Nay, but, my lord " upon you " are altogether irrelevant. For 

which Pandarus somewhat impatiently this reason, as I suppose, Capell 



sc. I] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 95 

fall out with you. You must not know where 

he sups. ' 90 

Par. I '11 lay my life, with my disposer Cressida. 
Pan. No, no, no such matter ; you are wide. Come, 

your disposer is sick. 
Par. Well, I '11 make excuse. 
Pan. Ay, good my lord. Why should you say 95 

Cressida? no, your poor disposer's sick. 
Par. I spy. 
Pan. You spy ! what do you spy ? Come, give me 

an instrument. Now, sweet queen. 
Helen. Why, this is kindly done. 100 

Pan. My niece is horribly in love with a thing you 

have, sweet queen. 
Helen. She shall have it, my lord, if it be not my 

Lord Paris. 
Pan. He ! no, she '11 none of him ; they two are 105 

twain. 
Helen. Falling in, after falling out, may make them 

three. 

91. / 'II lay my life] Q ; omitted in Ff. 

transferred them to follow "twain" and "■' my dispraiser,'" Dyce may well 

(line 106). There, if printed with a say that it is doubtful which is the 

break after " with you," i.e. as the most foolish. 

beginning of a caution addressed to 105,106. are izwa/w] are at variance. 
Paris and interrupted by Helen, they 107, 108. Falling . . . three] Tak- 
will not only have relevance, but will ing up Pandarus's equivoque, Helen 
lead tip to Helen's joke about " Falling says if falling out has made them two, 
in " and "falling out ". then falling in may make them three. 
91. my disposer] " i.e. she who dis- Compare Marston, The Dutch Courte- 
poses or inclines me to mirth by her zan, iv. i. 93 (Tysefew kissing) : — 
pleasant (and rather free) talk " " Then thus and thus, so Hymen 
(Dyce), who refers to many instances should begin ; 
of the verb so used quoted in his note Sometimes a falling out proves 
on Love's Labour's Lost, 11. i. 249. filling in". 
Of the alterations here made or pro- Toilet's coarse interpretation is im- 
posed, " my dispouser," " my deposer" possible. 



96 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act m. 

Pan. Come, come, I '11 hear no more of this. 

I '11 sing you a song now. i lo 

Helen. Ay, ay, prithee now. By my troth, sweet 

lord, thou hast a fine forehead. 
Pan. Ay, you may, you may. 
Helen. Let thy song be love: this love will undo us 

all. O Cupid, Cupid, Cupid! 115 

Pan. Love ! ay, that it shall, i' faith. 
Par. Ay, good now, love, love, nothing but love. 
Pan. In good troth, it begins so. {^Sings. 

Love, love, nothing but love, still more ! 

For, O ! love's bow 120 

Shoots buck and doe : 

The shaft confounds. 

Not that it wounds, 
But tickles still the sore. 

These lovers cry Ol 01 they diet 125 

Yet thai which seems the wound to kill, 

Doth turn O ! O ! to ha ! ha ! he ! 
So dying love lives still: 

O ! O ! a while, but ha ! ha ! ha ! 

O ! O ! groans out for ha ! ha ! ha I 1 30 

Heigh-ho ! 
Helen. In loye, i' faith, to the very tip of the nose. 
Par. He eats nothing but doves, love ; and that ) 

112. a fine forehead] Was the Loi;e's La6or<r's Los^ iv. ii. 59, there 
brow supposed to indicate musical is a play on the word as meaning a 
talents ? buck of the fourth year. 

113. Ay . . . yoH may'] go on, go 127. Doth turn . . . he^i.e.gxozns 
on, you are privileged to have your to laughter. 

joke. 133-136. He eats . . . love] Com- 

124. sore] Probably here, as in pare Dekker, The Honest Whore, vol. 



sc. I.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 97 

f^breeds hot blood, and hot blood begets hot 
; thoughts, and hot thoughts beget hot deeds, 135 
and hot deeds is love. 

Pan. Is this the generation of love? hot blood, hot 
thoughts, and hot deeds ? Why, they are 
vipers: is love a generation _of vipers ? Sweet 
lord, who's a-field to-day? 140 

Par. Hector, Deiphobus, Helenus, Antenor, and all 
the gallantry of Troy: I would fain have 
armed to-day, but my Nell would not have 
it so. How chance my brother Troilus went 
not? 145 

Helen. He hangs the lip at something: you know 
all, Lord Pandarus. 

Pan. Not I, honey-sweet queen. I long to hear 
how they sped to-day. You '11 remember your 
brother's excuse? 150 

Par. To a hair. 

Pan. Farewell, sweet queen. 

Helen. Commend me to your niece. 

Pan. I will, sweet queen. {Exit. 

{A retreat sounded. 

Par. They 're come from field : let us to Priam's 
hall 155 

To greet the warriors. Sweet Helen, I must woo 
you 

141. Deiphobus] Deiphcebns F i; Antcnoy] Pope (ed. 2); Anthenor Q, Ff. 

ii. p. 182 (Pearson's Reprint) : " Have and " what chance was it . . . ? " 

ye eaten pigeons that y'are so kind- Compare "What need . . . ? " Much 

hearted to your mate ? " Ado About Nothing, i. i. 318. 

144. How chance . . . ?] Probably 149, 150. your brother's excuse] the 

a blending of " how chances it . . . ? " excuse to be made about your brother. 

7 



98 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act m. 

To help unarm our Hector : his stubborn buckles, 
With these your white enchanting fingers touch'd, 
Shall more obey than to the edge of steel 
Or force of Greekish sinews ; you shall do 
more i6o 

Than all the island kings, — disarm great Hector. 

Helen. 'Twill make us proud to be his servant, Paris ; 
Yea, what he shall receive of us in duty 
Gives us more palm in beauty than we have, 
Yea, overshines ourself. 165 

Par. Sweet, above thought I love thee. 

\Exeunt, 

SCENE n. — The Same. Pandarus's Orchard. 

Enter Pandarus and Troilus'S Boy, meeting. 

Pan. How now ! where 's thy master ? at my cousin 

Cressida's ? 
Boy. No, sir ; he stays for you to conduct him 

thither. 

Enter Troilus. 

Pan. O ! here he comes. How now, how now ! 5 

Tro. Sirrah, walk off. \Exit Boy. 

Pan. Have you seen my cousin ? 

Tro. No, Pandarus : I stalk about her door, 

157. help unarm] The only instance 34 : " Lo, now the heavens obey to 

in which Shakespeare omits "to" me". 

before the infinitive with help. 161. island kings] See Prologue 2. 

159. obey . . . to] Compare The 164. wore/'a/w] a greater pre-emin- 

Phoenix and Turtle, 4 : — ence. Compare Jonson, The Poet- 

" Herald sad and trumpet be, aster, v. i : " this carries palm with 

To whose sound chaste wings it " ; Massinger, The Duke of Milan, 

obey ". iii. 2 : " constancy . . . bears such 

Rolfe adds the Faerie Queene, in. xi. palm ". 



sc. II.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 99 

Like a strange soul upon the Stygian banks 
Staying for waftage. O ! be thou my Charon, lo 
And give me swift transportance to those fields 
Where I may wallow in the lily-beds 
Propos'd for the deserver. O gentle Pandarus ! 
From Cupid's shoulder pluck his painted wings, 
And fly with me to Cressid. 15 

Pan. Walk here i' the orchard. I '11 bring her straight. 

\Exit. 

Tro. I am giddy, expectation whirls me round. 

The imaginary relish is so sweet 

That it enchants my sense. What will it be 

When that the watery palate tastes indeed 20 

Love's thrice repured nectar ? death, I fear me, 

Destruction, or some joy too fine, 

Too subtle-potent, tun'd too sharp in sweetness 

23. Too siibtle-potent] Theobald ; To subtill, potent Q ; Too subtile, potent 
Ff. ; tun'd too] tund to Q ; and too Ff. 

12. Where I . . . lily-beds] Here Delius compares Romeo and Juliet, 
Mr. Craig kindly sends me an ex- v. i. lo, ii : — 

cellent illustration from Golding's " Ah me ! how sweet is love itself 

translation of Ovid's Metamorphoses, possess'd, 

xii. 445-452 : — When but love's shadows are so 

"Of all the half-brutes in the rich in joy I" 

woodes there did not any 20. watery] watering, longing. The 

dwell old copies give " palates taste," which 

More comly than Hylonome. . . . the Cambridge Edd. retain. The cor- 

With combing smoothe she made rection in the text is Hanmer's. 

her haire ; she wallow' d her 21. repured] the reading of the 

full oft quarto. Delius seems to be alone 

In Roses or in Rosemarye, or among modern editors in following 

Violets sweet and soft, the Ff, "reputed". 

Sumtymes she carryed Lillyes 22. Sounding; destruction] utter loss 

wyght," etc. of senses in fits of fainting. The 

13. Propos'd] promised as a re- following forms are found in Shake- 
ward, speare : sound, swound, swoiin, swowft, 

16. orchard] garden; as always in swoon. Orger conjectures " distrac- 

Shakespeare. Properly a yard for tion," which may be indicated by the 

vegetables, orts, worts. reading of the quarto and F i, " dis- 

18, ig. The imaginary . . . sense] truction". 



100 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act m. 

For the capacity of my ruder powers : 

I fear it much ; and I do fear besides 2$ 

That I shall lose distinction in my joys ; 

As doth a battle, when they charge on heaps 

The enemy flying. 

Re-enter Pandarus. 

Pan. She 's making her ready ; she '11 come straight : 

you must be witty now. She does so blush, 30 
and fetches her wind so short, as if she were 
frayed with a sprite : I '11 fetch her. It is 
the prettiest villain : she fetches her breath 
so short as a new-ta'en sparrow. \Exit. 

Tro. Even such a passion doth embrace my bosom : 35 

My heart beats thicker than a feverish pulse ; 

And all my powers do their bestowing lose, 

Like vassalage at unawares encountering 

The eye of majesty. 

Re-enter Pandarus with Cressida. 

Pan. Come, come, what need you blush ? shame 's 40 
a baby. Here she is now : swear the oaths 
now to her that you have sworn to me. 

24. ruder] not sufficiently refined. "th' Infernal King that all 

26-28. lose . . . Jlyingi be unable things /ra^ys, v^z^ frayed ". 
to distinguish (and so rightly to 33. villain] used as a term of en- 
value) the variety of my joys, as dearment, as in Twelfth Night, 11. v. 
on the battle-field a pell-mell charge 16. Compare " And my poor fool is 
upon a flying foe makes it impossible hang'd," said by Lear of Cordelia, 
to distinguish the rival combat- King Lear, v. iii. 305. 
ants. 36. thicker]i2iSX.eT. Compare Cjw 65- 

30. be witty] " have your wits about line, in. ii. 58 : "say, and speak thick ". 

you " (Clarke). 37. bestowing] proper use, be- 

32. frayed] frightened, an aphetic haviour. 

form of " affray ". Compare Chap- 40. what need . . . ?] See note on 

man, Iliad, xx. 62 : — m. i. 144, above. 



sc. 



II.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 101 



What ! are you gone again ? you must be 
watched ere you be made tame, must you ? 
Come your ways, come your ways ; an you 45 
draw backward, we'll put you i' the fills. 
Why do you not speak to her ? Come, 
draw this curtain, and let's see your picture. 
Alas the day ! how loath you are to offend 
daylight ; an 'twere dark, you'd close sooner. 50 
So, so ; rub on, and kiss the mistress. How 
now ! a kiss in fee-farm ! build there, 
carpenter ; the air is sweet. Nay, you shall 
fight your hearts out ere I part you. The 
falcon as the tercel, for all the ducks i' the 55 
river : go to, go to. 



44. watched] an allusion to the 
taming of hawks, though in that pro- 
cess the word means " kept awake ". 
Compare The Taming of the Shrew, 
IV. i. 208. 

45. ways] the old genitive used 
adverbially, like " needs," " twice " 
(twies). 

46. fills] or " thills," shafts. Com- 
pare "^//-horse," Merchant of Venice, 
II. ii. 100; "fill-shaft" is still in use 
provincially. 

48. draw this curtain] remove your 
veil. Compare Twelfth Night, i. v. 
251. It was a common practice to 
put curtains before pictures. 

51. rub . , . mistress] At howls the 
jack or object-ball was called the 
" master " and sometimes the " mis- 
tress," and to " rub " was used of 
meeting obstacles in the way. Com- 
pare Webster, The White Devil, i. 
2: — 

" his cheek 
Hath a most excellent bias ; it 

would fain 
Jump with my mistress " ; 



Middleton, The Black Book, vol. viii. 
p. 41 (ed. Bullen) : "the landing of 
your bowl, and the safe arriving at 
the haven of the mistress, if it chance 
to pass all the dangerous rocks and 
rubs of the alley ". 

52. in fee-farm] in perpetuity; "a 
fee-farm being a grant of lands in fee, 
that is, for ever, with a certain rent 
reserved " (Malone). Compare Ham- 
let, IV. ii. 22. 

52-53. build . . . sweet] Compare 
Macbeth, i. vi. i ff. 

54-56. The falcon , . . river] I will 
back the falcon against the tercel for 
bringing down any amount of game. 
According to Cotgrave and Randle 
Holme, quoted in Dyce's Glossary, 
the tercel was the male goshawk, 
said to be so named from being one- 
third in weight of the falcon, the 
female bird. Dekker, Match me in 
London, vol. iv. p. 183 (Pearson's 
Reprint), has "Your tassel - gentle 
[the form used in Romeo and jfuliet, 11. 
ii. i6o]s/j£;'sluredoffandgone". Here, 
of course, of Cressida and Troilus. 



102 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act m. 

Tro. You have bereft me of all words, lady. 

Pan. Words pay no debts, give her deeds ; but 
she'll bereave you o' the deeds too if she 
call your activity in question. What ! billing 60 
again ? Here 's " In witness whereof the 
parties interchangeably " — Come in, come in : 
I '11 go get a fire. \^Exit. 

Cres. Will you walk in, my lord? 

Tro. O Cressida ! how often have I wished me thus. 65 

Cres. Wished, my lord ! The gods grant, — O my 
lord! 

Tro. What should they grant ? what makes this 
pretty abruption ? What too curious dreg 
espies my sweet lady in the fountain of our 70 
love? 

Cres. More dregs than water, if my fears have eyes. 

Tro. Fears make devils of cherubins ; they never see 
truly. 

Cres. Blind fear, that seeing reason leads, finds safer 75 
footing than blind reason stumbling without 
fear: to fear the worst oft cures the worse. 

Tro. O ! let my lady apprehend no fear : in all 
Cupid's pageant there is presented no monster. 

Cres. Nor nothing monstrous neither ? 80 

Tro. Nothing but our undertakings ; when we vow 

72. fears] F 3 ; teares Q, Ff i, 2 ; tears F 4. 

61, 62. In witness . . . interchange- this passage ... a Fear appears to 

ably] A legal formula completed by have been a personage in other 

the words " have set their hands and pageants ; or perhaps in our ancient 

seals". moralities. To this circumstance As- 

6g. curious] embarrassing, causing patia alludes in The Maid's Tragedy : 

anxiety. ' and then a Fear : Do that Fear 

78,79. in all . . . ntonster]" From bravely, wench'" (Steevens). 



sc. II.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 103 

to weep stas, live in fire, eat rocks, tame 
tigers ; thinking it harder for our mistress to 
devise imposition enough than for us to under- 
go any difficulty unposed. This is_ the mon- 85 
struosity in love, lady, that the will is Jn- 
finite, and the execution confined ; that the 
desire is boundless, and the act a slave to 
limit. 

Cres. They say all lovers swear more performance 90 
than they are able, and yet reserve an ability 
that they never perform ; vowing more than 
the perfection of ten and discharging less than 
the tenth part of one. They that have the 
voice of lions and the act of hares, are they 95 
not monsters ? 

Tro. Are there such ? such are not we. Praise us 
as we are tasted, allow us as we prove ; our 
head shall go bare till merit crown it. No 
perfection in reversion shall have a praise in 100 
present: we will not name desert before his 
birth, and, being born, his addition shall be 
humble. Few words to fair faith : Troilus 
shall be such to Cressid, as what envy can 
say worst shall be a mock for his truth ; and 105 
what truth can speak truest not truer than 
Troilus. 

Cres. Will you walk in, my lord ? 

85. tnonstrnosity] F 3 gives mon- 102. addition] See note on i. ii. 20, 

strositie, F 4 monstrosity ; but the above. 

form in the text is one undoubtedly 104, 105. as what . . . truth] 

used of old. that the worst gibe that malice 

98. allow] See note on i. iii. 376, can offer will be a sneer at his con- 
above, stancy. 



104 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act m. 

Re-enter Pandarus. 

Pan. What ! blushing still ? have you not done talk- 
ing yet? 1 10 
Cres. Well, uncle, what folly I commit I dedicate to 

you. 
Pan. I thank you for that: if my lord get a boy of 
you, you '11 give him me. Be true to my lord : 
if he flinch, chide me for it. 115 

■Tro. You know now your hostages ; your uncle's 

word, and my firm faith. 
Pan. Nay, I '11 give my word for her too. Our 
kindred, though they be long ere they are 
wooed, they are constant being won : they are 1 20 
, burrs, I can tell you; they'll stick where they 
are thrown. 
Cres. Boldness comes to me now, and brings me 
heart. 
Prince Troilus, I have loved you night and day 
For many weary months. 125 

Tro. Why was my Cressid then so hard to win ? 
Cres. Hard to seem won ; but I was won, my lord, 
With the first glance that ever — pardon me — 
If I confess much you will play the tyrant. 
I love you now; but not, till now, so much 130 

123-125. Boldness . . . mouths] As verse first by Rowe. 

119, 120. long . . . wooed] We upon the nap of his fortune". In 

should rather have expected "long Heyvvood, The Iron Age, pt. i. 

in the wooing". vol. iii. p. 285 (Pearson's Reprint), 

120-122. they are burs . . . thrown] Hector says of Andromache and 

Compare Marston, What You Will, Astyanax : — 

III. iii. 79 : " never regardeth thee •' Help to take off these burrs ; 

but as an idle burr that stickest they trouble me". 



sc. 11] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 105 

But I might master it : in faith, I lie ; 
My thoughts were Hke unbridled children, grown 
Too headstrong for their mother. See, we fools ! 
Why have I blabb'd ? who shall be true to us 
When we are so unsecret to ourselves? 135 

But, though I lov'd you well, I woo'd you not ; 
And yet, good faith, I wish'd myself a man. 
Or that we women had men's privilege 
Of speaking first. Sweet, bid me hold my tongue ; 
For in this rapture I shall surely speak 140 

The thing I shall repent. See, see ! your silence, 
Cunning in dumbness, from my weakness draws 
My very soul of counsel. Stop my mouth. 

Tro. And shall, albeit sweet music issues thence. 

Pan. Pretty, i' faith. 145 

Cres. My lord, I do beseech you, pardon me ; 
'Twas not my purpose thus to beg a kiss : 
I am asham'd : O heavens ! what have I done ? 
For this time will I take my leave, my lord. 

Tro. Your leave, sweet Cressid ! 1 50 

Pan. Leave ! an you take leave till to-morrow morn- 
ing.— 

Cres. Pray you, content you. 

Tro. What offends you lady ? 

Cres. Sir, mine own company. 155 

Tro. You cannot shun yourself. 

142. Cunning] Pope ; Camming Q, Ff i, 2, 3 ; Coming F 4. 143. My 

very soul of counsel] Q ; My soul of coiinsell from me Ff. 

142, 143. from my . . . counsel I] A Midsummer-Night's Dream, 1. i. 

take advantage of my weakness 216 : — 

to extract the inmost secrets of " Emptying our bosoms of our 
my bosomed thoughts. Compare counsels sweet". 



106 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act m. 

Cres. Let me go and try. 

I have a kind of self resides with you ; 

But an unkind self, that itself will leave, 

To be another's fool. Where is my wit? i6o 

I would be gone. I speak I know not what. 

Tro. Well know they what they speak that speak 
so wisely. 

Cres. Perchance, my lord, I show more craft than 

love, 165 

And fell so roundly to a large confession. 
To angle for your thoughts ; but you are wise, 
Or else you love not, for to be wise and love 
Exceeds man's might ; that dwells with gods above. 

Tro. O ! that I thought it could be in a woman, 170 
As if it can I will presume 't in you. 
To feed for aye her lamp and flames of love ; 
To keep her constancy in plight and youth, 

172. aye\ age Q. 

166. roundly] straightforwardly. For the sentiment, that commentator 

On the words " clear and round deal- quotes Marston, The Dtitch Courte- 

ing" (Bacon, Essay, i. 63) Abbott zan, 11. ii. 104: "The gods them- 

remarks : " Round was naturally used selves cannot be wise and love " ; 

of that which was symmetrical and but, as has been pointed out by 

complete (as a circle is) ; then of any- various critics, this is but an adapta- 

thing thorough. Hence (paradoxi- tion of the well-known line of Publius 

cally enough) ' I went round to work,' Syrus, " Amare et sapere vix Deo con- 

Hamlet, 11. ii. 139, means 'I went ceditur," frequently quoted or imitated 

straight to the point'." by Elizabethan writers. 

167-169. but you are . . . might] 170-175. See note on iii. iii. 95, 

The meaning of this passage has below. 

been much disputed, and many altera- 171./ will presume 't] At Mr. 

tions have been proposed. Logically Craig's suggestion I have inserted '<. 

stated, the alternative would be "you 173. To keep . . .youth] to pre- 

are wise or else you love ". If the serve in all its freshness the constancy 

text is sound, Or else can only be she has plighted. Here, again, there 

taken as = " Or in other words," un- is a slight confusion of ideas, the 

less, as Malone thinks, Shakespeare preposition in being used by a kind 

has here, as elsewhere, entangled of zeugma in two different senses ; 

himself in an inextricable difficulty, her constancy in that which she has 



sc. II.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 107 

Outliving beauty's outward, with a mind 
That doth renew swifter than blood decays: 175 
Or that persuasion could but this convince me, 
That my integrity and truth to you 
Might be affronted with the match and weight 
Of such a winnow'd purity in love ; 
How were I then uplifted! but, alas! 180 

I am as true as truth's simplicity, 
And simpler than the infancy of truth. 
Cves. In that I '11 war with you. 
Tro. O virtuous fight ! 

When right with right wars who shall be most 

right. 
True swains in love shall in the world to 

come 185 

Approve their truths by Troilus : when their 

rimes, 
Full of protest, of oath, and big compare, 
Want smiles, truth tir'd with iteration, 
As true as steel, as plantage to the moon, 
As sun to day, as turtle to her mate, 190 

plighted (the matter) in all its fresh- And at that instant like a babe 

ness (the condition). So in Othello, sprung up". 

I. i. 76, 77: " As when by night and i86. their truths] each his truth; 

negligence, the fire Is spied in popu- not that different kinds of truth are 

lous cities," i.e. As when the fire meant. 

which has broken out by night owing 189. plantage] herbs and shrubs in 

to negligence, etc. general. Pliny, Natural History 

174. outward] substantive; so "in- (Holland's translation), i. 99, notices 

ward," Sonnet cxxviii. 6; Cymbeline, the supposed influence of the moon 

III. iv. 6. upon vegetation : " the leaves of 

178. affronted] confronted, met. trees and the grasse for fodder . . . 

182. the infancy of truth] For this do feel the influence of her, which 

quasi-personification compare Titnon evermore the same pierceth and 

of Athens, 1. ii. lis, i^T-Q '■ — enters effectually into all thing". 

"Joy had the like conception in Johnson thinks our "plantain," Lat, 

our eyes, plantago, is meant. 



108 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act m. 

As iron to adamant, as earth to the centre, 
Yet, after all comparisons of truth, 
As truth's authentic author to be cited, 
As true as Troilus shall crown up the verse 
And sanctify their numbers. 
Cres. Prophet may you be ! 195 

If I be false, or swerve a hair from truth, 
When time is old and hath forgot itself. 
When waterdrops hath worn the stones of Troy, 
And blind oblivion swallow'd cities up, 
And mighty states characterless are grated 200 

To dusty nothing, yet let memory. 
From false to false, among false maids in love, 
Upbraid my falsehood ! when they've said " as 

false 
As air, as water, wind, or sandy earth. 
As fox to lamb, as wolf to heifer's calf, 205 

Pard to the hind, or stepdame to her son," 
Yea, let them say, to stick the heart of false- 
hood, 
"As false as Cressid ". 
Pan. Go to, a bargain made ; seal it, seal it : I '11 

be the witness. Here I hold your hand, 210 
here my cousin's. If ever you prove false 

210. witness. Here] Rowe ; witnes here Q ; witnesse here F i ; witnesse, 
here Ff 2, 3, 4. 

191. arfawanf] the loadstone. Com- no mark to tell of their former great- 
pare A Midsummer-Night's Dream, ness, are reduced to ashes and ob- 
iii. i. 195- livion. 

193. As truth's . . . cited] as though 202. From false . . . love] from 

to cite the acknowledged and indis- one false one to another false one 

putable exemplar of truth. among maids in love who are false. 

200, 201. And mighty . . . noth- 207. i/»V^]stab. Compare T/u' Tw^o 

ing-] and mighty states, leaving behind Gentlemen of Verona, i, i. 108. 



sc. Ill] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 109 

one to another, since I have taken such 
pains to bring you together, let all pitiful 
goers-between be called to the world's end 
after my name; call them all Pandars ; let 215 
all inconstant men be Troiluses, all false 
women Cressids, and all brokers-between 
Pandars ! say, amen. 
Tro. Amen. 

Cres. Amen. 220 

Pan. Amen. Whereupon I will show you a 
chamber with a bed ; which bed, because it 
shall not speak of your pretty encounters, 
press it to death : away ! 

And Cupid grant all tongue-tied maidens here 225 
Bed, chamber, Pandar to provide this gear ! 

\Exeunt. 

SCENE III. — The Grecian Camp. 

Enter AGAMEMNON, Ulysses, Diomedes, Nestor, 
AjAX, Menelaus, and Calchas. 

Cat. Now, princes, for the service I have done you. 
The advantage of the time prompts me aloud 

222. chamber with a bed ; which bed] Hanmer ; chamber which bed Q, Ff. 

216. inconstant] I follow Dyce in 222, 223. because . . . speak] to 

accepting Hanmer's correction of the prevent it from speaking, 

old copies, "constant". The words 223. encounters] Compare " en- 

" if ever you prove false one to an- counterers," iv. v. 58, below. 

other," is surely proof that Pandarus 224. Press it to death] an allusion 

contemplated the possibility of both to the punishment of pressing to 

proving false; and the fact that death. Compare Much Ado About 

Troilus remained constant, and was Nothing, in. i. 76. 
thereafter famed for his constancy, 

in no wise affects the conception that Scene iii. 
he might prove otherwise and might 

become notorious for his inconstancy. 2. aloud] openly and forcibly. 



110 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act m. 

To call for recompense. Appear it to your mind 

That through the sight I bear in things of lore, 

I have abandon'd Troy, left my possession, 5 

Incurr'd a traitor's name ; expos'd myself. 

From certain and possess'd conveniences, 

To doubtful fortunes ; sequestering from me all 

That time, acquaintance, custom, and condition 

Made tame and most familiar to my nature ; 10 

And here, to do you service, am become 

As new into the world, strange, unacquainted : 

I do beseech you, as in way of taste, 

To give me now a little benefit, 

Out of those many register'd in promise, 15 

Which, you say, live to come in my behalf. 

Again. What would' st thou of us, Trojan ? make de- 
mand. 

Cal. You have a Trojan prisoner, call'd Antenor, 
Yesterday took : Troy holds him very dear. 
Oft have you, often have you thanks therefore, 20 
Desir'd my Cressid in right great exchange, 
Whom Troy hath still denied ; but this Antenor 
I know is such a wrest in their affairs 

4. of lore] Ed ; to love Q, Ff i, 2, 3 ; to come F 4. 

4. of lore] See Appendix ii. 23. wrest] See note on i. iii. 157, 

8. sequestering from me] putting above; a tuning key ; "figuratively, 

apart from me. that upon vi'hich the harmonious or- 

10. tame] wonted ; much the same dering of their affairs depends" 

as " familiar ". (Clarke). Compare Skelton, Treatise 

16. live . . . behalf] are no mere between Truth and Information: "A 

dead things, but full of life and ready harper with his wrest may tune his 

to greet me. harpe wrong " ; Wyclif s Eng. Works 

21. in . . . exchange] offering in (ed. Mathew), pp. 339, 340, Of Con- 
hex redemption captives whom Troy fession, " an harpe hath three partis 
held in high account. of hym ; the ouermost in which ben 



sc. III.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 111 

That their negotiations all must slack, 

Wanting his manage ; and they will almost 25 

Give us a prince of blood, a son of Priam, 

In change of him : let him be sent, great princes. 

And he shall buy my daughter; and her presence 

Shall quite strike off all service I have done, 

In most accepted pain. 

Agam. Let Diomedes bear him, 30 

And bring us Cressid hither : Calchas shall have 
What he requests of us. Good Diomed, 
Furnish you fairly for this interchange : 
Withal bring word if Hector will to-morrow 
Be answer'd in this challenge : Ajax is ready. 35 

Dio. This shall I undertake ; and 'tis a burden 
Which I am proud to bear. 

[Exeunt Diomedes and Calchas. 

Enter ACHILLES and Patroclus, before their Tent. 

Ulyss. Achilles stands i ' the entrance of his tent : 

Please it our general to pass strangely by him, 
As if he were forgot ; and, princes all, 40 

Lay negligent and loose regard upon him : 
I will come last. 'Tis like he'll question me 

stringis wrastid, the secounde is the reading after Hanmer, " pay," says : 

holow part of the harpe ; the thridde " the original compositor probably 

knytteth thise two to gidre ". mistook paie for ' paine,' and ' pay ' 

30. Inmost . . . /rt/w] in hardships is supported by the preceding 

to which I have most cheerfully sub- words of the sentence ' buy my 

mitted. That this is the meaning, I daughter'". 

think, is clearly shown by the extract 33. Furnish . . . interchange] equip 

from Troilus and Criseyde, iv. xviii. yourself with those things which are 

84-gi, given in my Appendix, parti- necessary for an embassage such as 

cularly by the line " But al that los this. 
ne doth me no disease ". Dyce, 34. will] is willing, ready, to, etc. 



112 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act m. 

Why such unplausive eyes are bent on him: ^,,\ 
If so, I have derision medicinable 
I To use between your strangeness and his pride, 45 
Which his own will shall have desire to drink. 
It may do good : pride hath no other glass 
To show itself but pride, for supple knees 
Feed arrogance and are the proud man's fees. 

Agam. We'll execute your purpose, and put on 50 

A form of strangeness as we pass along : 
So do each lord, and either greet him not, 
Or else disdainfully, which shall shake him more 
Than if not look'd on, I will lead the way, 

Achil. What! comes the general to speak with me? 55 
You know my mind ; I '11 fight no more 'gainst 
Troy. 

Agam. What says Achilles ? would he ought with us ? 

Nest. Would you, my lord, aught with the general ? 

Achil. No. 

Nest. Nothing, my lord. 60 

Agam. The better. 

\Exeunt Agamemnon and Nestor. 

Achil. Good day, good day. 

Men. How do you ? how do you ? \Exit. 

43. hent on him] Theobald ; bent ? why turn'd on him Q ; bent ? why 
turn'd on him ? Ff. 44. derision} Q, Ff i, 2 ; decision Ff 3, 4. 

44. derision'] here probably means Iliad, ix, 304, the rendering of Homer 
pretended seriousness of remon- is " Thy serious speech ". For 
strance, for nothing is less like medicinable, see note on i. iii. gr, 
derision in its ordinary sense than above. 

the line which Ulysses takes in his 45. To use . . . pride] which shall 

talk with Achilles. The language prove something intermediate to your 

there employed is seriously argu- neglect and that pride of his certain 

mentative and skilfully persuasive, to be sorely ruffled thereby, 

without a trace of irony, sarcasm or 48. To show itself] to mirror its 

veiled mockery ; and in Chapman's real semblance. 



sc. III.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 113 

Achil. What ! does the cuckold scorn me ? 

Ajax. How now, Patroclus ! 65 

Achil, Good morrow, Ajax. 

Ajax. Ha ? 

Achil, Good morrow. 

Ajax. Ay, and good next day too. {Exit, 

Achil. What mean these fellows ? Know they not 
Achilles ? 70 

Pair, They pass by strangely: they were us'd to bend, 
To send their smiles before them to Achilles ; 
To come as humbly as they us'd to creep 
To holy altars. 

Achil, What ! am I poor of late ? 

'Tis certain, greatness, once fall'n out with for- 
tune, 75 
Must fall out with men too: what the declin'd is 
He shall as soon read in the eyes of others 
As feel in his own fall ; for men, like butterflies, 
Show not their mealy wings but to the summer, 
-And not a man, for being simply man, 80 
Hath any honour, but honour for those honours 
That are without him, as place, riches, and favour. 
Prizes of accident as oft as merit : 
Which when they fall, as being slippery standers 
The love that lean'd on them as slippery too, 85 

81. hut honour for] Q ; but honoured for F i ; but honored by Ff 2, 3, 4. 

72. To send . . . them] as though consume it I " In dialect the moth is 
harbingers preparing their way. called the "miller " and the " dusty 

73. as they us'd] as though they miller". For the thought, compare 
were creeping after their wont to, etc. Timon of Athens, 11. ii. 172, 173 : — 

79. mealy] powdered as with meal. " one cloud of winter 

Compare Middleton, Michaelmas showers, 

Term, 11. iii. 203 : "The mealy moth These flies are couch'd". 

8 



114 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act m. 

Doth one pluck down another, and together 
Die in the fall. But 'tis not so with me : 
Fortune and I are friends : I do enjoy 
At ample point all that I did possess, 
Save these men's looks ; who do, methinks, find 
out 90 

Something not worth in me such rich beholding 
As they have often given. Here is Ulysses : 
I '11 interrupt his reading. 
How now, Ulysses ! 

Ulyss. Now, great Thetis' son ! 

Achil. What are you reading? 

Ulyss. A strange fellow here 95 



86. Doth . . . rtwo</«fr] do each one 
pluck down the other. 

8g. At ample point], in fullest 
measure. 

95. A strange fellozv~\ On this pas- 
sage Mr. Collins {Studies in Shake- 
speare, pp. 33, 34) observes: "Now 
of all the myriad commentators on 
Shakespeare, no one, so far as I know, 
has pointed out that the ' strange 
fellow ' is Plato, and that the refer- 
ence is to a passage in the First 
Alcibiades. I give a literal version 
of the most material portions of the 
passage : ' Socrates. You have ob- 
served, then, that the face of him 
who looks into the eye of another 
appears visible to himself in the eye- 
sight of the person opposite to him. 
. . . An eye, therefore, beholding an 
eye and looking into that in the eye 
which is most perfect, and which is 
the instrument of vision, would thus 
see itself. . . . Then, if the eye is 
to see itself, it must look at the eye 
and at that part of the eye in which 
the virtue of the eye resides, and 
which is like herself. . . . Nor should 
we know that we were the persons 



to whom anything belonged, if we 
did not know ourselves.' So, too, 
the lines which follow : ' No man 
. . . others ' are derived from an 
earlier paragraph in the dialogue, 
' When a person is able to impart 
his knowledge to another, that surely 
proves his own understanding of any 
matter '. And, curiously enough, 
there seems to be another reminis- 
cence of his dialogue in the play 
(Act II!. sc. ii. [170-175]) : ' O that 
. . . decays'. C/. ^Socrates. He who 
loves your soul is the true lover. 
Alcibiades. That is the necessary in- 
ference. Socrates. The lover of the 
lady goes away when the flower of 
youth fades. . . . But he who loves 
the soul goes not away' (p. 131)." 
Mr. Collins then points out that 
Plato was accessible in Shakespeare's 
time through Latin versions only. 
Mr. Craig sends me the following 
parallelism from the Epistle dedica- 
torie to Nash's Unfortunate Traveller, 
The Life of Jack Wilton, 1594, " By 
divers of my good friends have I 
been dealt with to employ my dull 
pen in this kinde, it being a cleane 



sc. III.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 115 

Writes me: That man, how dearly ever parted, 

How much in having, or without, or in, 

Cannot make boast to have that which he hath, 

Nor feels not what he owes but by reflection ; 

As when his virtues shining upon others lOO 

Heat them, and they retort that heat again 

To the first giver. 

Achil. This is not strange, Ulysses. 

The beauty that is borne here in the face 

The bearer knows not, but commends itself 

To others' eyes : nor doth the eye itself, 105 

That most pure spirit of sense, behold itself, 

Not going from itself; but eye to eye oppos'd 

Salutes each other with each other's form ; 

For speculation turns not to itself 

Till it hath travell'd, and is married there 1 10 

Where it may see itself. This is not strange at all. 

105, 106. To , . . itself] Q ; omitted in Ff. 

different vaine from other my former 104, but commends] For the ellipsis 

courses of writing, How wel or ill I of if, see Abbott, Shakespearian 

have done it I am ignorant (the eye Grammar, § 204. 

that sees round about itself sees not 106. That . . . sense] that most 

into itself e) ". Mr. Craig adds that spiritual organ of sense. 

the term "a strange fellow" well 109. speculation] the power, of 

applies to Nash. The same idea is vision. Compare Macbeth, iii. iv. 

found in jfulius Ccesar, i. ii. 67-70. 95. 

96. how . . , parted] howsoever no. married] Most editors read 
richly endowed. Steevens quotes Jon- " mirror'd," a conjecture made by 
son, Every Man Out of His Humour, Singer's and Collier s MS. Correctors. 
III. iii. : " Though ne'er so richly Delius and Knight retain the reading 
parted, you shall have," etc. of the Q, Ff, and Ingleby {Complete 

97. having] possession, acquisition ; View of the Shakespeare Controversy, 
more often of something material. etc., p. 232, quoted by Dyce) remarks : 

99. owes] owns: but by reflection, "' Mirror'd' for tnarried is just one of 

compare Julius Ccesar, i. ii. 52, 53 : — those emendations which beguile the 

"For the eye sees not judgment, lull criticism, and enlist our 

itself love of the surprising and ingenious. 

But by reflection, by some other But it is not sound " — a conclusion 

things ". which Dyce himself questions. I do 



116 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act m. 

Ulyss. I do not strain at the position, 

It is familiar, but at the author's drift ; 
Who in his circumstance expressly proves 

. jThat no man is the lord of any thing, 115 

G 'Though in and of him there be much consisting, 
Till he communicate his parts to others: 
Nor doth he of himself know them for aught 
Till he behold them form'd in the applause 
Where they're extended ; who, like an arch, rever- 
berates 120 
The voice again, or, like a gate of steel 
Fronting the sun, receives and renders back 
His figure and his heat. I was much wrapt in 

this; 
And apprehended here immediately 
The unknown Ajax. 125 

Heavens, what a man is there ! a very horse ; 
That has he knows not what. Nature, what things 

there are, 
Most abject in regard, and dear in use ! 
What things, again most dear in the esteem, 

not feel convinced of the necessity of 123. wrapf] See my note on Timon 

change, or think that if "mirror'd" of Athens, i. i. 19. 
had been found it would have been 125. The miknown Ajax] Clarke 

altered to married. explains " unknown to himself, want- 

114. in his circumstance] in his ingin true self-knowledge," which the 

detailed examination of the ques- context " That has . . . what" may 

tion. perhaps support. Johnson : "who has 

116. Though . . . consisting] though abilities which were never brought into 
much may be comprised in him and view or use" — a rather compliment- 
may result from him. Schmidt ex- ary remark ; Schmidt : " hinted at 
plains: "though much may depend unintentionally and unconsciously," 
on his co-operation and power ". which seems best, since here in the line 

119. form'd] given shape to. above means " in this description ". 

120. Where ... extended]hywhich 128. abject . . . use I] "Poor in 
they are published to the world ; who estimation, but precious in utility ; 
= which. little valued but very useful " (Rolfe). 



sc. Ill] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 117 

And poor in worth ! Now shall we see to- 
morrow, — 130 
An act that very chance doth throw upon him, — 
Ajax renown'd. O heavens ! what some men do, 
While some men leave to do. 
How some men creep in skittish fortune's 

hall, 
Whiles others play the idiots in her eyes! 135 
How one man eats into another's pride, 
While pride is fasting in his wantonness ! 
To see these Grecian lords ! why, even already 
They clap the lubber Ajax on the shoulder 
As if his foot were on brave Hector's breast, 140 
And great Troy shrieking. 

Achil. I do believe it ; for they pass'd by me 

As misers do by beggars, neither gave to me 
Good word nor look : what ! are my deeds for- 
got? 

Ulyss. Time hath, my lord, a wallet at his back, 145 

Wherein he puts alms for oblivion, 
A great-siz'd monster of ingratitudes : 

iS7. fasting] Q ; feasting Ff. 141. shrieking] shriking Q ; shrinking Ff. 

134, 135. How sotne . . . eyes I] pride, out of its wanton self-satisfac- 

how some men slink about in the tion, goes hungry away, 

corners of freakish Fortune's hall, 145. Tiw^ ... ^)acy^] Boaden thinks 

while others with their idiotic gam- that Shakespeare took the figure from 

bols obtrude themselves upon her the Faerie Queene, vi. viii. 24 : — 

notice; creep has been explained as " And eeke this wallet at your back 

"keep out of sight" (Johnson) ; "re- arreare . . . 

main tamely inactive " (Malone) ; and And in this bag, which I behind 

creep in as " get secretly into " me don, 

(Schmidt) ; a sense which would, I I put repentance for things past 

think, involve either "into" or "in and gone". 

3.t". 147. monster] Singer conjectures 

137. While . . , wantonness] while "muster". 



118 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act m. 



Those scraps are good deeds past ; which are 

devour'd 
As fast as they are made, forgot as soon 
As done : perseverance, dear my Jord, 1 50 

Keeps honour bright : to have done is to hang 
Quite out of fashion, Hke a rusty mail 
"^In monumental mockery. Take the instant way ; 
For honour travels in a strait so narrow 
Where one but goes abreast : keep then the 

path; 155 

For emulation hath a thousand sons 
That one by one pursue : if you give way, 
Or hedge aside from the direct forthright, 
Like to an enter'd tide they all rush by 
And leave you hindmost ; 160 

Or, like a gallant horse fall'n in first rank, 
Lie there for pavement to the abject rear, 
O'errun and trampled on : then what they do in 

present, 

152. mail]Fope; male Q,Fi. 158. hedge'lFi; turneQ. 160-163. 

hindmost : Or . . . trampled on : then] him most, then Q (omitting Or . . . 
on). 162. abject rear] Hanmer ; abject, neere Ff i, 2; abject, near Ff 

3.4- 



150. perseverance] accented on the 
second syllable. So " persever " al- 
ways in Shakespeare. 

152. ma//] suit of armour. 

153. Take . . . way] march straight 
on without pause. Compare the next 
three lines. Not, I think, "serve the 
present time " (Schmidt). 

154. 155. in a strait . . . abreast] 
We should now say either " in a 
narrow strait where but," etc., or " in 
a strait so narrow that but," etc. 

158. fvrthrif;ht] straight path. 
Compare Thr Tempest, iii. iii. 3 ; 
used adverbially also by Chapman, 



Iliad, xix. 408 ; Heywood, Deorum 
Judicium, vol. vi. p. 246: "Look 
here forthright, just where my finger 
points". So "fore-right," Dekker, 
Northtvard Ho I vol. iii. p. 17 : " Yet 
thought I had gone fore-right ". The 
latter word was frequent as an ad- 
jective, e.g. Massinger, The Bond- 
man, iii. 3: "A fore-right gale of 
liberty " ; The Rincgado, v. 8. 

162. Lie . . . rear] you lie there 
to be trodden upon by the miserable 
creatures behind you ; for the ellipsis, 
see Abbott, Shakespearian Grammar, 
§401. 



sc. III.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 119 

Though less than yours in past, must o'ertop 

yours ; 
For time is like a fashionable host, 165 

That slightly shakes his parting guest by the hand. 
And with his arms outstretch'd, as he would fly. 
Grasps in the comer : welcome ever smiles, 
And farewell goes out sighing. O ! let not virtue 

seek 
Remuneration for the thing it was; 170 

For beauty, wit, 

High birth, vigour of bone, desert in service. 
Love, friendship, charity, are subjects all 
^-^ To envious and calumniating time. 

One touch of nature makes the whole world kin, 175 
That all with one consent praise new-born gawds, 
Though they are made and moulded of things 

past, 
And give to dust that is a little gilt 
More laud than gilt o'er-dusted. 
The present eye praises the present object : 1 80 
Then marvel not, thou great and complete man, 

179. than gilt] then guilt Q, Ff i, 2 ; in gilt Ff 3, 4. 

168. Grasps . . . comer] Hanmer is the readiness to praise " new-born 

gives "Grasps the in-conier'^ ; but gawds," etc. 

the text is stronger in its emphasis 178, 179. And give . . . o'er-dusted] 

of welcome. Thirlby's emendation, give for " goe," 

168, 169. welcome . . . sighing] first adopted by Theobald, is now uni- 
smiles of welcome greet the fresh face, versally accepted. His further pro- 
sighs alone attend farewell: virtue, posal, "gold" iox gilt'in the second 
nobility of character and of action. of the lines is approved by Walker 

175. One touch . . . kin] Grant and edited by Hudson. 

White [The Galaxy, February, 1877), 181. complete] Schmidt, Lexicon, 

quoted by Rolfe, forcibly points out Grammatical Observations, writes : 

the sentimental misapplication of " The form complete always precedes 

this line in ordinary parlance, and a noun accented on the first syllable, 

shows clearly that the " one touch " complete is always in the predicate ". 



120 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act m. 

That all the Greeks begin to worship Ajax; 
Since things in motion sooner catch the eye 
j Than what not stirs. The cry went once on 
thee, 
And still it might, and yet it may again, 185 

If thou would'st not entomb thyself alive, 
And case thy reputation in thy tent ; 
Whose glorious deeds, but in these fields of late, 
Made emulous missions 'mongst the gods them- 
selves, 
And drave great Mars to faction. 

Achil. Of this my privacy 190 

I have strong reasons. 

Ulyss. But 'gainst your privacy 

The reasons are more potent and heroical. 
'Tis known, Achilles, that you are in love 
With one of Priam's daughters. 

Achil. Ha! known! 195 

Ulyss. Is that a wonder! 

The providence that 's in a watchful state 
Knows almost every grain of Plutus' gold. 
Finds bottom in the uncomprehensive deeps, 

184. once otil Q ; out on Ff. 

189. Made . , . themselves] A re- he was afterwards killed by Paris" 
ference to the share taken by the (Steevens). 

rival deities in the combats before 197. The providence . . . state] 

Troy. foresight when aroused, active. 

190. afid drave . . . faction] and 199. incompreheiisive] unfathom- 
drove the god of war to abandon able. Compare " inexpressive," As 
his impartial attitude towards com- Yoti Like It, in. ii. 10; "plausive," 
batants and to take sides in the All's Well that Ends Well, 1. ii. 53 ; 
struggle. "directive," above, i. iii. 355; and 

194. one . . . daughters] " sc. Poly- see Abbott, Shakespearian Grammar, 
xena, in the act of marrying whom § 445. 



sc. III.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 121 

Keeps place with thought, and almost, like the 
gods, 200 

Does thoughts unveil in their dumb cradles. 
There is a mystery, with whom relation 
Durst never meddle, in the soul of state, 
Which hath an operation more divine 
Than breath or pen can give expressure to. 205 
All the commerce that you have had with Troy 
As perfectly is ours as yours, my lord ; 
And better would it fit Achilles much 
To throw down Hector than Polyxena ; 
But it must grieve young Pyrrhus now at 
home, 210 

When fame shall in our islands sound her trump, 
And all the Greekish girls shall tripping sing, 
"Great Hector's sister did Achilles win, 
But our great Ajax bravely beat down him ". 
Farewell, my lord : I as your lover speak ; 215 
The fool slides o'er the ice that you should break. 

"*^ [Exit. 

211. our islands] our island Q ; her Hand Ff i, 2, 3 ; her Island F 4. 

201. Does thoughts . . . cradles'] had become as perfectly aware of 
A large variety of conjectures in Achilles's commerce with Troy as 
amendment of this halting line is re- Achilles himself was. 

corded by the Cambridge Edd. Clarke 215. lover] one devoted to you; 

not only " can see no necessity for as frequently in the language of the 

change," but " extremely admires the day. 

original expression " ! 216. The fool . . . break] The inner 

202, 203. There is . . . state] ap- meaning of this aphorism is not 
pears to mean that in the inmost touched upon by any commentator 
principle of statecraft there is a mys- known to me. Delius, indeed , says : 
tery of which men do not venture to " Under Achilles, a man of great 
speak. I suppose the application of weight, the ice would break, over 
these and the two following lines is which the light-footed fool slides", 
that by the operation of this mystery But this does not help one. Is the 
Agamemnon and the other chiefs sense: "The fool can afford to do 



122 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act m. 

Pair. To this effect, Achilles, have I mov'd you. 
A woman impudent and mannish grown 
Is not more loath'd than an effeminate man 
In time of action. I stand condemn'd for this : 220 
They think my little stomach to the war 
And your great love to me restrains you thus. 
Sweet, rouse yourself ; and the weak wanton 

Cupid 
Shall from your neck unloose his amorous 

fold. 
And, like a dew-drop from the lion's mane, 225 
Be shook to air. 

Achil. Shall Ajax fight with Hector ? 

Pair. Ay ; and perhaps receive much honour by him. 

Achil. I see my reputation is at stake ; 
My fame is shrewdly gor'd. 

Pair. O ! then beware ; 

Those wounds heal ill that men do give them- 
selves : 230 
Omission to do what is necessary 
Seals a commission to a blank of danger ; 

226. o/r] ayre Q ; ayrie ayre Ff i, 2 ; airie (or airy) air Ff 3, 4. 

things which would be unworthy of 232. Seals . . . danger] gives dan- 

you ? " or is it: "The fool easily ger a free hand in attacking him. 

escapes dangers that to a man of " Blanks " were warrants given to 

your dignity would be fatal ? " agents of the crown to fill up as 

229. shreivdly gor^d] dangerously they pleased in exacting imposts ; 

wounded ; keeping up the figure in compare Richard II. ir. i. 250. Also 

the previous line. Compare Hamlet, warrants or blank papers generally. 

V. ii. 261 : " To keep my name nn- Compare Jonson, The Silent Woman, 

gored". The origin of "gore" = v. i. : " I will seal to it, that, or to a 

pierce, stab, wound, is doubtful, but blank"; The Widojn, i. i. 54: "see 

the word has no connection with you these blanks ? I '11 send him but 

" gore," thickened blood. Chapman, one of these bridles, and bring him in 

//jarf, has " ingored " (xvi. 741), " un- at Michaelmas with a vengeance." 

dergore" (xiv. 408). We retain the usage in the phrase a 



sc. Ill] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 123 

And danger, like an ague, subtly taints 
Even then when we sit idly in the sun. 
Achil. Go call Thersites hither, sweet Patroclus : 235 

I '11 send the fool to Ajax and desire him 
To invite the Trojan lords after the combat 
To see us here unarm'd. I have a woman's longing, 
An appetite that I am sick withal, 
To see great Hector in his weeds of peace ; 240 
To talk with him and to behold his visage, 
Even to my full view. A labour sav'd ! 

Enter THERSITES. 
Ther. A wonder ! 

Achil. What? 

Ther. Ajax goes up and down the field, asking for 
himself 245 

Achil. How so? 

Ther. He must fight singly to-morrow with Hector, 
and is so prophetically proud of an heroical 
cudgelling that he raves in saying nothing. 

Achil. How can that be? 250 

Ther. Why, he stalks up and down like a peacock, 
a stride and a stand ; ruminates like an hos- 
tess that hath no arithmetic but her brain to 
set down her reckoning ; bites his lip with a 
politic regard, as who should say "There were 255 

"blank cheque". The words Seal " I had such a woman'' s first and 

a commission prove that Schmidt is second longing 

mistaken in giving blank as " the To hear how she would bear her 

white mark in the centre of a butt ". mock'd abuse ". 

238. a woman's longing] such as 240. weeds] dress; A.S. wad, a 

women feel in pregnancy. Compare garment, covering. 

The Two Gentlemen of Verona, 1. i'l. 242. Even . . . wi^ze)] to the fullest 

137 : " a month's mind " ; Middleton, satisfaction of my eyes. 

The Mayor of Queenborough, in. iii. 255, 256. a politic regard] a look 

243 : — of profound wisdom. 



124 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act m. 



wit in this head, an 'twould out " ; and so 
there is, but it lies as coldly in him as fire 
in a flint, which will not show without knock- 
ing. The man's undone for ever ; for if 
Hector break not his neck i' the combat, 260 
he'll break 't himself in vain-glory. He 
knows not me : I said " Good morrow, 
Ajax " ; and he replies " Thanks, Agamem- 
non ". What think you of this man that ' 
takes me for the general ? He 's grown a 265 
very land-fish, languageless, a monster. A 
plague of opinion ! a man may wear it on 
both sides, like a leather jerkin. 

Achil. Thou must be my ambassador to him, Ther- 

sites. 270 

Ther. Who, I ? why, he '11 answer nobody ; he pro- 
fesses not answering ; speaking is for beg- 
gars ; he wears his tongue in 's arms. I will 
put on his presence : let Patroclus make de- 
mands to me, you shall see the pageant of 275 
Ajax. 

256. thh head] Q ; Ms head Ff. 274. demands] Q ; his demands Ff. 

257, 258. it lies . . . knocking] estimate of one's self which at one 
Compare jfulius Ccrsar, iv. iii. no- time shows a man's character in its 
113 : — most seemly garb and anon presents 

"you are yoked with a its sorrier fashion. Compare O^A^Z/o, 



lamb 
That carries anger as the flint 

bears fire, 
Who much enforced, shows a 

hasty spark, 
And straight is cold again ". 



IV. ii. 146 :- 

" Some such squire he was 

That turn'd your wit the seamy 

side without ". 

271, 272. he . . . answering] he 

publicly proclaims that he will not 



265, 266. a very land-Jlsh] as com- answer when spoken to; not answer- 

pletely at his wits' end as a fish on j«g-, as if hyphened, refusal to answer, 

shore. 273. he wears . . . mars] Compare 

266-268. A plague . . . Jerkin] Macbeth, v. viii. 7: " My voice is in 

Here opinion seems to mean that my sword". 



sc. III.] TROiLUS AND CRESSIDA 125 

Achil. To him, Patroclus : tell him I humbly desire 
the valiant Ajax to invite the most valorous 
Hector to come unarmed to my tent ; and to 280 
procure safe-conduct for his person of the 
magnanimous, and most illustrious, six-or- 
seven-times-honoured captain-general of the 
Grecian army, Agamemnon, et ccetera. Do 
this. 

Patr. Jove bless great Ajax ! 285 

Ther. Hum ! 

Patr. I come from the worthy Achilles, — 

Ther. Ha! 

Patr. Who most humbly desires you to invite Hec- 
tor to his tent, — 290 

Ther. Hum ! 

Patr. And to procure safe-conduct from Agamem- 
non. 

Ther. Agamemnon ! 

Patr. Ay, my lord. 295 

Ther. Ha ! 

Patr. What say you to't? 

Ther. God be wi' you, with all my heart. 

Patr. Your answer, sir. 

Ther. If to-morrow be a fair day, by eleven 300 
o'clock it will go one way or other; howso- 
ever, he shall pay for me ere he has me. 

Patr. Your answer, sir. 

Ther. Fare you well, with all my heart. 

Achil. Why, but he is not in this tune, is he? 305 

298. he wV you'\ Rowe ; buy you Q, Ff i, 2, 3 ; If yon F 4. 300. eleven 

of the] a leuen of the Q ; eleuen a Ff. 



126 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act m. 

Ther. No, but he's out o' tune thus. What music 
will be in him when Hector has knocked out 
his brains, I know not ; but, I am sure, 
none, unless the fiddler Apollo get his sinews 
to make catlings on. 310 

Achil. Come, thou shalt bear a letter to him 
straight. 

Ther. Let me bear another to his horse, for that's 
the more capable creature. 

Achil, My mind is troubled, like a fountain stirr'd ; 315 
And I myself see not the bottom of it. 

\Exeunt Achilles and Patroclus. 

Ther. Would the fountain of your mind were clear 
again, that I might water an ass at it ! I 
had rather be a tick in a sheep than such a 
valiant ignorance. {Exit. 320 

311. hear\ Q; carry Ff. 

308,309, hut, . . . none]hut I need 314. capable] intelligent, gifted. 

not have any doubt on this point for Compare Richard III. in. i. 155. 
I am, etc. 318. that I might . . . it!] that I 

310. catlings] catgut (really the in- might bring an ass, the only animal 

testines of a sheep). Compare Mars- that would care to do so, to drink of 

ton. What You Will, iii. ii. 92 : — it, for even he would not taste it as it 

" Tickling the dried g-w^s of a mew- now is. 
ing cat". 



ACT IV 

SCENE I.— Troy. A Street. 

Enter ^ at one side, ^NEAS, and Servant with a torch ; 
at the other, PARIS, Deiphobus, Antenor, Dio- 
MEDES, and Others, with torches. 

Par. See, ho ! who is that there ? 

Dei. It is the Lord ^neas. 

yEneas. Is the prince there in person ? 

Had I so good occasion to h"e long 

As you, Prince Paris, nothing but heavenly 

business 
Should rob my bed-mate of my company. 5 

Dio. That 's my mind too. Good-morrow, Lord ^neas. 

Par. A valiant Greek, vEneas ; take his hand, — 
Witness the process of your speech, wherein 
You told how Diomed, a whole week by days. 
Did haunt you in the field. 

^ne. Health to you, valiant sir, 10 

During all question of the gentle truce ; 
But when I meet you arm'd, as black defiance 
As heart can think or courage execute. 

7. A valiant . . . hand, — ] Better 9. by days] day by day. 
thus punctuated than by a colon or 11. During . . . truce] during all 
semicolon at hatid, since " Witness the converse that the gentle truce 
. . . speech " means " as let the pro- allows between us. 
cess of your speech witness". 

127 



128 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act iv. 

Dio. The one and other Diomed embraces. 

Our bloods are now in calm, and, so long, 
health ! 15 

But when contention and occasion meet, 
By Jove, I '11 play the hunter for thy life 
With all my force, pursuit, and policy. 

^ne. And thou shalt hunt a lion, that will fly 

With his face backward. In humane gentle- 
ness, 20 
Welcome to Troy ! now, by Anchises' life. 
Welcome, indeed ! By Venus' hand I swear, 
No man alive can love in such a sort 
The thing he means to kill more excellently. 

Dio. We sympathise. Jove, let ^neas live, 25 

If to my sword his fate be not the glory, 
A thousand complete courses of the sun ! 
But, in mine emulous honour, let him die. 
With every joint a wound, and that to-morrow ! 

^ne. We know each other well. 30 

16. But when . . . weef] but when to show the temporary courtesy with 

the time is opportune to conflict. enduring animosity which co-exist 

19, 20. that will fly . . . backward] and co-express themselves in the 

Compare Cymbeline, i. ii. 15-17: speech of JEneas ". But surely this 
" Clo. The villain would not stand ' is impossible. Rather, as Blakeway 

me.' Sec. Lord [^Aside.] No; he fled says, "he swears first by the life of 

forward still, toward your face " ; his father and then by the hand of 

hmnane and " human " are, of course, his mother ". 

merely different spellings of the same 24. more excellently] to be taken 
word in order to distinguish the par- with " in such a sort ". 
ticular senses. In Shakespeare the 25. sympathise] have a fellow-feel- 
word is always "humane" or " hu- ing in this matter, 
maine," whichever the sense. 26. If . . . glory] if my sword is 

22. By Venus' hatid] " This oath," not to have the glory of slaying 

says Warburton, " was used to indi- him. 

cate his resentment for Diomedes' 27. courses . . . sun] Com- 

wounding his mother in the hand " ; pare Othello, in. iv. 71 ; Psalms 

and Clarke adds that " Shakespeare xix. 4. 

well introduces this allusion as aiding 28. in mine . . . honour] as satis- 



I] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 129 

We do ; and long to know each other worse. 

This is the most despiteful gentle greeting, 

The noblest hateful love, that e'er I heard of. 

What business, lord, so early ? 
ALne, I was sent for to the king ; but why, I know 
not. 35 

Par. His purpose meets you : 'Twas to bring this / ^ 

Greek V^^'^^C^f 

To Calchas' house, and there to render him. 
For the enfreed Antenor, the fair Cressid. 
Let 's have your company ; or, if you please. 
Haste there before us. I constantly do think, 40 
Or rather, call my thought a certain knowledge, 
My brother Troilus lodges there to-night: 
Rouse him and give him note of our approach. 
With the whole quality wherefore : I fear 
We shall be much unwelcome. 

^ne. That I assure you : 45 

Troilus had rather Troy were borne to Greece 
Than Cressid borne from Troy. 

Par. There is no help ; 

The bitter disposition of the time  

Will have it so. On, lord; we'll follow you. 

JEne. Good morrow, all. \Exit. 50 

Par. And tell me, noble Diomed ; faith, tell me true, 
Even in the soul of sound good-fellowship, 

40. do think] Ff; beleeue Q. 44. quality wherefore] Q; qualify where- 

of Ff I, 2; quality, whereof Ff 3, 4. 

faction to my honour eager for his Have, cannot help thinking. Corn- 
death, pare King Lear, v. i. 4. 

36. His purpose meets you] I come 44. with . . . wherefore] with full 

to tell you of his purpose. explanation of the character of our 

40. constantly do think] firmly be- visit. 

9 



130 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act iv. 

Who, in your thoughts, merits fair Helen most. 
Myself or Menelaus ? 

Dio. Both alike : 

He merits well to have her that doth seek her, 55 
Not making any scruple of her soilure, 
With such a hell of pain and world of charge, 
And you as well to keep her that defend her. 
Not palating the taste of her dishonour, 
With such a costly loss of wealth and friends : 60 
He, like a puling cuckold, would drink up 
The lees and dregs of a flat tamed piece ; 
You, like a lecher, out of whorish loins 
Are pleas'd to breed out your inheritors : 
Both merits pois'd, each weighs nor less nor 
more ; 65 

But he as he, the heavier for a whore. 

Par. You are too bitter to your countrywoman. 

Dio. She 's bitter to her country. Hear me, Paris : 
For every false drop in her bawdy veins 
A Grecian's life hath sunk ; for every scruple 70 
Of her contaminated carrion weight 

66. he as he . . . whore] Q ; he as he, which . . . whore Ff. 

57. hell of pain] Compare Sonnet tamed," i.e. " tamed to flatness or 

cxx. 5, 6. staleness". Of course "piece" is 

59. Not palating] without being frequently used of persons, sometimes 

sensible of. In Coriolanus, iii. i. 104, in contempt, as in Titus Andronicus, 

" most palates theirs " = smacks most i. i. 309. 

strongly of. 64. breed out] breed a line of; 

62. a flat . . . piece] " a cask that Shakespeare elsewhere uses " breed 

has been broached, and the contents out" as = exhaust by breeding, e.g. 

of which have thus become flat to Henry F. iii. v. 29; Timon of Athens, 

the taste. For piece, compare Beau- i. i. 259. 

mont and Fletcher, Monsieur Thomas, 66. the heavier] all the heavier : the, 

V. 10 : ' Strike a ixQsh piece of wine ' " by so much. 
(Rolfe). Schmidt suggests " flat- 



sc. II.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 131 

A Trojan hath been slain. Since she could 

speak, 
She hath not given so many good words breath 
As for her Greeks and Trojans sufifer'd death. 
Par. Fair Diomed, you do as chapmen do, 75 

Dispraise the thing that you desire to buy ; 
But we in silence hold this virtue well, 
We'll but commend what we intend to sell. 
Here lies our way. {Exeunt. 

SCENE II. — The Same. Court of Pandarus's House. 

Enter Troilus and Cressida. 

Tro. Dear, trouble not yourself: the morn is cold. 
Cres, Then, sweet my lord, I '11 call mine uncle down ; 

He shall unbolt the gates. LkiA 
Tro. ;,^ Trouble him not ; 

To bed, to bed : sleep kill those pretty eyes, 

And give as soft attachment to thy senses 5 

As infants' empty of all thought ! 
Cres. Good morrow then. 

6. infayits''\ Capell ; infants Q, Ff. 

74. suffer' d] supply " have " from dispraising what they were anxious 
" hath " in the line above. to buy. Other conjectures are, for 

75. chapmen] ha^gXers. what we, "till we," '■'without we," 
78. but commend] Jackson's emen- " that ne'er," "that not" ; for we in- 

dation for " not commend," i.e. here tend to sell, " w' intend not sell," "we 

there is no thought with us of selling, intend not sell ". 
Those who retain 7iot, follow Johnson 

in explaining that as the Trojans, if Scene n. 
they have to part with Helen, will 4. kill] seems to be nothing more 
make the Greeks pay dearly for her, than a pretty daintiness for " subdue," 
they will not practise the seller's art "overpower"; but "seal," "still," 
of commending, though the Greeks "fill," "kill," "kiss," have been pro- 
had practised that of the buyer in posed. 



132 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act iv. 

Tro. I prithee now, to bed. 

Cres. Are you aweary of me? 

Tro. O Cressida! but that the busy day, 

Wak'd by the lark, hath rous'd the ribald crows, 
And dreaming night will hide our joys no 
longer, lo 

I would not from thee. 
Cres. Night hath been too brief. 

Tro. Beshrew the witch ! with venomous wights she 
stays 
As tediously as hell, but flies the grasps of love 
With wings more momentary-swift than thought. 
You will catch cold, and curse me. 
Cres. Prithee, tarry: 15 

You men will never tarry. 

O foolish Cressid ! I might have still held off, 
And then you would have tarried. Hark ! 
there's one up. 
Pan. [ Within?^ What ! 's all the doors open here ? 
Tro. It is your uncle. 20 

Cres. A pestilence on him ! now will he be mocking : 
1 shall have such a life ! 

Enter Pandarus. 

Pan. How now, how now ! how go maidenheads ? 
Here, you maid ! where 's my cousin Cressid ? 

13. tediously] Q ; liidioiisly Ff. 

g. ribald] as though their raucous turnal sorcery. Perhaps rather all 

chattering were scurrilously com- doers of malignant deeds of darkness 

menting upon the loves of Troilus are meant, 
and Cressida. 24. Here, . . . Cressid] affectmg 

12. venomous wights] Steevens re- to believe that she cannot be Cres- 

fers to venijici, or practisers of noc- sida. 



sc. II.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 133 



Cres. 



Pan. 



Cres. 



Pan. 



Cres. 



Tro. 
Cres. 



Go hang yourself, you naughty mocking uncle ! 25 
You bring me to do — and then you flout me 

too. 
To do what ? to do what ? let her say what : 
what have I brought you to do? 
Come, come ; beshrew your heart ! you '11 ne'er be 

good. 
Nor suffer others. 30 

Ha, ha ! Alas, poor wretch ! a poor capoc- 
chio ! hast not slept to-night ? would he not, 
a naughty man, let it sleep? a bugbear take 
him ! [Knocking within. 

Did not I tell you? Would he were knock'd o' 

the head! 35 

Who 's that at door ? good uncle, go and see. 
My lord, come you again into my chamber: 
You smile and mock me, as if I meant naughtily. 
Ha, ha! 
Come, you are deceiv'd, I think of no such 



thing. 



31, capocchio] Delius quotes 
Florio's Diet. {1598), " capocchio, a 
dolt, a loggerhead," etc., but retains 
capocchia (Theobald's conjecture for 
" chipochia" of Q, Ff). Dyce writes: 
"Several editors print 'capocchia'; 
but wrongly, if the term is to be con- 
sidered as Italian, and as meaning 
simpleton ; though an edition of 
Baretti's Ital. Diet, is now before 
me, in which ' eapoeehio ' is given as 
an adjective. The word ' capocchia ' 
signifies the knob of a stick, and — 
something else." 

33. bugbear'] " a sort of hobgoblin, 
presumably in the shape of a bear, 



40 

\_Knocking zvithin. 

supposed to devour naughty children " 
{New Eng, Diet.). Compare Hey- 
wood, The Iron Age, pt. i., vol. 
iii. p. 312 (Thersites to Achilles), 
" Thou the champion of Greece ; a 
mere biigbear, a scare-crow " ; " bug " 
was used in the same sense, e.g. The 
Taming of the Shrew, i. ii. 211, 
" fear boys with bttgs " ; Marlowe, ii 
Tambxirlaine, in. v. : — 

" here are bugs 
Will make the hair stand upright 
on your heads " ; 
and adjectively, Massinger, A New 
Way, etc., in. ii. : "No bug words, 
sir ". 



134 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act iv. 

How earnestly they knock ! Pray you, come in : 
I would not for half Troy have you seen here. 

\^Exeunt Troilus and Cressida. 
Pan. Who's there? what's the matter? will you 
beat down the door ? How now ? what 's the 
matter? 45 

Enter y^NEAS. 

yEne. Good morrow, lord, good morrow. 

Pan. Who 's there ? my Lord ^neas ! By my 

troth, I knew you not : what news with you 

so early? 
^ne. Is not Prince Troilus here? SO 

Pan. Here ! what should he do here ? 
jEne. Come, he is here, my lord ; do not deny him : 

It doth import him much to speak with me. 
Pan. Is he here, say you ? 'tis more than I know, 

I'll be sworn: for my own part, I came in 55 

late. What should he do here? 
^ne. Who ! nay, then : come, come, you '11 do him 

wrong ere you are 'ware. You '11 be so true 

to him, to be false to him. Do not you 

know of him, but yet go fetch him hither ; go. 60 

Re-enter TROILUS. 
Tro. How now ! what 's the matter ? 
^ne. My lord, I scarce have leisure to salute you, 

58. you are ware] Q ; y' are ware Ff. 

48, 49. what news . . . early?] 57. IF/io /] Theobald gives " Pho ! " 

Compare Troilus and Criseyde, v. Hudson, " What ! " 

iii. i: — 59,60. do not you . . . hither] you 

" F\i\ ready \va.s at pry me Diomede can affect, if you Hke, not to know 

Criseyde unto the Grekes ost to anything about him, but, all the same, 

lede ". go, etc. 



sc. II.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 135 

My matter is so rash : there is at hand 

Paris your brother, and Deiphobus, 

The Grecian Diomed, and our Antenor 65 

Deliver'd to us ; and for him forthwith, 

Ere the first sacrifice, within this hour, 

We must give up to Diomedes' hand 

The Lady Cressida. 

Tro. Is it concluded so? 

jEne. By Priam and the general state of Troy : 70 

They are at hand and ready to effect it. 

Tro. How my achievements mock me ! 

I will go meet them : and, my Lord ^Eneas, 
We met by chance ; you did not find me here. 

^ne. Good, good, my lord ; the secrets of nature 75 
Have not more gift in taciturnity. 

\Exeunt Troiliis and y^neas. 

Pan. Is't possible? no sooner got but lost? The 
devil take Antenor ! the young prince will go 
mad. A plague upon Antenor ! I would 
they had broke 's neck ! 80 

Re-enter Cressida. 

Cres. How now ! what 's the matter ? Who was here ? 
Pan. Ah! ah! 

63. rash'X full of haste, urgent, im- " For which delivered was by parle- 

portunate. Compare Coriolanns, iv. ment, 

vii 22 : — For Antenor to yelden up Cris- 

" their people eyde ". 

Will be as rash in the repeal, as 74. we met by chance] you must 

hasty say that we, etc. Compare above : 

To expel him thence ". " I did not send you ". 

70. By Priam . , . Tyoy] Com- 75. secrets] probably a trisyllable 

pare Troilus and Criseyde, iv. xxxi. here, as frequently in the dramatists. 

The Cambridge Edd. record a long 




I, 2:— 



list of conjectures. 



136 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act iv. 

Cres. Why sigh you so profoundly? where 's my 
lord ? gone ! Tell me, sweet uncle, what 's 
the matter? 85 

Pan. Would I were as deep under the earth as I 

am above ! 
Cres. O the gods ! what 's the matter ? 
Pan. Prithee, get thee in. Would thou hadst ne'er 

been born ! I knew thou would'st be his 90 
death. O poor gentleman ! A plague upon 
Antenor ! 
Cres. Good uncle, I beseech you, on my knees I 

beseech you, what 's the matter ? 
Pan. Thou must be gone, wench, thou must be 95 
gone ; thou art changed for Antenor. Thou 
must to thy father, and be gone from Troilus : 
'twill be his death ; 'twill be his bane ; he 
cannot bear it. 
Cres. O you immortal gods ! I will not go. 100 

Pan. Thou must. 

Cres. I will not, uncle : I have forgot my father ; 
I know no touch of consanguinity ; 
No kin, no love, no blood, no soul so near me 
As the sweet Troilus. O you gods divine ! 105 
Make Cressid's name the very crown of false- 
hood 
If ever she leave Troilus ! Time, force, and 
death, 

96. f/mH^^«f] exchanged. Compare 103. touch of consanguinity]" sense 

Troilus and Criseyde, iv. Ixxix. 7 : — or feeling of relationship " (Ma- 

" Sin she is changed for the townes lone). 

good". 106. crown of falsehood] Compare 

98. 6aK^] ruin, destruction, as often Cymbeline, i. vi. 4: "my supreme 

in Shakespeare. crown of grief". 



sc. III.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 137 

Do to this body what extremes you can ; 
But the strong base and building of my love 
Is as the very centre of the earth, i lO 

Drawing all things to it. I '11 go in and weep, — 

Pan. Do, do. 

Cres. Tear my bright hair, and scratch my praised cheeks. 
Crack my clear voice with sobs, and break my heart 
With sounding Troilus. I will not go from Troy. 

\Exeunt. 

SCENE \\\.— The Same. Before Pandarus'S Hotise. 

Enter PARIS, Troilus, tEneas, Deiphobus, Antenor, 

and DiOMEDES. 

Par. It is great morning, and the hour prefix'd 
Of her delivery to this valiant Greek 
Comes fast upon. Good my brother Troilus, 
Tell you the lady what she is to do, 
And haste her to the purpose. 

Tro. Walk into her house ; 5 

I '11 bring her to the Grecian presently : 
And to his hand when I deliver her. 
Think it an altar, and thy brother Troilus 
A priest there offering to it his own heart. {Exit. 

Par. I know what 'tis to love ; 10 

And would, as I shall pity, I could help ! 
Please you walk in, my lords. {Exeunt. 

I. great morning] " grand jour, a radical sense ; as generally in Shake- 
Gallicism " (Steevens) ; our " broad speare. 
day ". II- And would . . . help 1] and wish 

3. Comes fast upon] Pope gives I could help you as truly as I shall 

"upon us"; perhaps "upon's". pity you. 

6. presently] at once, the more 



138 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act iv. 

SCENE IV. — The Same. A Room in Pandarus's 

House. 

Efiter Pandarus and CRESSIDA, 

Pan. Be moderate, be moderate. 

Cres. Why tell you me of moderation ? 

The grief is fine, full, perfect, that I taste, 
And violenteth in a sense as strong 
As that which causeth it : how can I moderate 
it? 5 

If I could temporise with my affection, 
Or brew it to a weak and colder palate, 
The like allayment could I give my grief: 
My love admits no qualifying dross ; 
No more my grief, in such a precious loss. lo 

Enter Troilus. 
Pan. Here, here, here he comes. Ah ! sweet ducks. 
Cres. O Troilus ! Troilus ! [Embracing him. 

Pan. What a pair of spectacles is here ! Let me em- 
brace too. heart, as the goodly saying is, — 

— O heart, heavy heart, 15 

Why sigh'st thou without breaking "i 
where he answers again. 

Because thou cqnst not ease thy smart 
By friendship nor by speaking. 

4, 5. violenteth in . . . As that which] Q; no lesse in . . . As that which 
Ff 1,2; no lesse in . . . as that, Which F{ 3, 4. g. dross] drosse Q ; 

crosse Ff. 18, 19. As verse first by Pope ; prose in Q, Ff. 

4. violenteth] rages. Steevens 7. palate] taste, 

quotes " violenceth " from Jonson ; 13. pair of spectacles] with a pun 

Toilet, " violented " from Fuller ; and on spectacles. 

Farmer, "violentes" from Latimer. 19. friendship] i.e. mere friendship. 



sc. IV.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 139 

There was never a truer rime. Let us cast 20 
away nothing, for we may live to have need 
of such a verse : we see it, we see it. How 
now, lambs ! 

Tro. Cressid, I love thee in so strain'd a purity. 

That the bless'd gods, as angry with my fancy, 25 
More bright in zeal than the devotion which 
Cold lips blow to their deities, take thee from 
me. 

Cres. Have the gods envy? 

Pan. Ay, ay, ay, ay ; 'tis too plain a case. 

Cres. And is it true, that I must go from Troy ? 30 

Tro. A hateful truth. 

Cres. What ! and from Troilus too ? 

Tro. From Troy and Troilus. 

Cres. Is it possible? 

Tro. And suddenly; where injury of chance 

Puts back leave-taking, justles roughly by 

All time of pause, rudely beguiles our lips 35 

Of all rejoindure, forcibly prevents 

Our lock'd embrasures, strangles our dear vows 

Even in the birth of our own labouring breath. 

We too, that with so many thousand sighs 

Did buy each other, must poorly sell ourselves 40 

With the rude brevity and discharge of one. 

Injurious time now with a robber's haste 

24. strain'd] Q ; strange Ff. 

25. fancy] love ; as so frequently. 37. embrasures] embracements ; ap- 
28. envy] jealousy. parently a coinage of Shakespeare's 
33. where . . . chance] a case in in this sense. 

which injurious accident, etc. 41. With . . . one] with the scant 

36. Of all rejoindure] of all pes- ceremony of one brief sigh, 
sibility of meeting again. 42-46. Injurious . . . adieu] just 



140 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act 



IV. 



Crams his rich thievery up, he knows not how : 
As many farewells as be stars in heaven, 
With distinct breath and consign'd kisses to 

them, 45 

He fumbles up into a loose adieu, 
And scants us with a single famish'd kiss, 
Distasted with the salt of broken tears. 

y^ne. [ Within?^ My lord, is the lady ready ? 

Tro. Hark ! you are call'd : some say the Genius so 50 
Cries " Come ! " to him that instantly must die. 
Bid them have patience ; she shall come anon. 

Pan. Where are my tears? rain, to lay this wind, or 

my heart will be blown up by the root ! {Exit. 

Cres. I must then to the Grecians? 

Tro. No remedy. 55 

Cres. A woeful Cressid 'mongst the merry Greeks ! 
When shall we see again ? 

Tro. Hear me, my love. Be thou but true of heart, — 

Cres. I true ! how now ! what wicked deem is this ? 

48. Distaited'\ Q ; Distasting Ff. 

as a robber, in his haste to get clear all sweetness by the salt tears of 

away, crams up his booty in any way broken sobs. 

he can, so time cruelly compels us 50. Getiius'] the spirit which was 

to cram into a moment the precious supposed to attend a man through 

delight of leave-taking. life. Compare A/rtc6^i/j, iii. i. 55, 56. 

45. with distinct . . . them] with 53. rain . . . wr;;rf] Compare A/ac- 

the several utterances that should beth, i. vii. 25 : " That tears shall 

accompany those farewells, and with drown the wind", 

kisses that should ratify them. With 57. When . . . again ?] So Cym- 

consign'd kisses Malone compares beliiie, i. i. 124. 

Measure for Measure, iv. i. 5, 6, and 59. deem] supposition ; here only 

Venus and Adonis, 511. Schmidt in Shakespeare. Compare Troilus 

explains "kisses allotted to them"; and Criseyde, iv. ccxxx. 3, 4: — 

but surely coMS«^/j'J indicates the legal " I see wel now that ye mistrusten 

deliverance of a bond, to them mean- me ; 

ing " in addition to them ". For by your wordes it is wel 

48. Distasted . . . tears] robbed of y-sene ". 



sc. IV.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 141 

Tro. Nay, we must use expostulation kindly, 6o 

For it is parting from us : 
I speak not "be thou true," as fearing thee, 
For I will throw my glove to Death himself, ^ 
That there 's no maculation in thy heart ; ' 'X.AiL 
But "be thou true," say I, to fashion in 65 

My sequent protestation; be thou true, 
And I will see thee. 

Cres. O! you shall be expos'd, my lord, to dangers 
As infinite as imminent ; but I '11 be true. 

Tro. And I'll grow friend with danger. Wear this 
sleeve. 7° 

Cres. And you this glove. When shall I see you? 

Tro. I will corrupt the Grecian sentinels, 
To give thee nightly visitation. 
But yet, be true. 

Cres. O heavens ! " be true " again ! 

Tro, Hear why I speak it, love : 75 

The Grecian youths are full of quality ; 

61. For . . . Ms] for it is farewell and another bare on his helme the 

we now are saying. glove of his deareling " ; and Drayton, 

63. throw . . . AtmseZ/] challenge Brtrows' V7rtrs ; "A lady's sleeve high- 
even Death in championship of your spirited Hastings wore ". Compare 
truth. Troilus and Criseyde, v. cxlix. 7 : — 

44. maculation'] taint of disloyalty. " She made him were a pencel of 

65, 66. to fashion . . . protestation] hir sieve ". 

as foreshaping the assurance I am 76. full of quality] richly gifted, 

about to make. Compare above, iii. iii. 96: "how 

80. And I 'II . . . danger] The dearly ever parted ". The variations 

more ordinary expression would be of the old copies are here great, while 

" I '11 grow friends," even though a the texts of the different editors are 

single person only is spoken of. Hey- still more discrepant. " The quarto 

wood, The English Traveller, ii., reads: — 

thrice has the curious construction : ' Here why I speak it, loves, 

"The ghost and I am friends". The Grecian youths are full of 

70. Wear this sleeve] Steevens quality, 

quotes Hall's Chronicle : " One ware And swelling ore with arts and 

on his headpiece his lady's sleeve, exercise'. 



142 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act iv. 

They're loving, well compos'd with gifts of nature, 
And flowing o'er with arts and exercise : 
How novelties may move, and parts with person, 
Alas ! a kind of godly jealousy, 80 

Which, I beseech you, call a virtuous sin. 
Makes me afeard. 
Cres. O heavens ! you love me not. 

Tro. Die I a villain then ! 

In this I do not call your faith in question 

So mainly as my merit : I cannot sing, 85 

Nor heel the high lavolt, nor sweeten talk. 

Nor play at subtle games; fair virtues all. 

To which the Grecians are most prompt and 

pregnant : 
But I can tell that in each grace of these 
There lurks a still and dumb-discoursive devil 90 
That tempts most cunningly. But be not tempted. 
Cres. Do you think I will ? 

The first folio has : — and personal fascination. Com- 

' Heare why I speak it ; Loue : pare Troilus and Criseyde, iv. ccxiii. 

The Grecian youths are full of i-6. 

qualitie, 86. lavolt] or " lavolta," or " le- 

Their loving well compos'd, with valto," originally two words, la volta, 

guifts of nature, was a lively dance for two persons 

Flawing and swelling ore with with " lofty jumping " and "leaping 

Arts and exercise '. round" (Davies, Orchestra, etc., st. 

The second folio has the same ex- 70). Compare Marston, ii Antonio 

cept that it substitutes ' Flowing' for and Mellida, v. ii. 22: "Skip light 

' Flawing '. The third and fourth lavoltas " ; The Fawn, 11. i, 400 : 

have substantially the same reading as "who '11 run a caranto, or leap a le- 

the second. . . . The reading which valto ? " and, figuratively, Middleton, 

we have adopted in the text is that More Dissemblers Besides Women, v. 

of Mr. Staunton. The word ' Flow- i. 88 : " The lavoltas of a merry heart 

ing ' was in all probability a marginal be with you, sir ". 

correction for 'swelling,' which the %S. pre<;nant} naturally addicted; 

printer of the folio by mistake added for the construction with " to," com- 

to the line" (the Cambridge Editors, pare Kins^ Lear, iv. vi. 227. 

whom I have followed). 90. dumb-discoiirsive]Q,om'i>2i.x&The 

79. parts with person] mental gifts Tempest, in. iii. 39. 



sc. IV.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 143 



Tro. No. 

But something may be done that we will not : 
And sometimes we are devils to ourselves 95 

When we will tempt the frailty of our powers, 
Presuming on their changeful potency. 

^ne. {Within^ Nay, good my lord, — 

Tro. Come, kiss ; and let us part. 

Par. [ VVitJnn.'\ Brother Troilus ! 

Tro. Good brother, come you hither ; 

And bring ^Eneas and the Grecian with you. 100 

Cres, My lord, will you be true ? 

Tro. Who, I ? alas ! it is my vice, 
Whiles others fish with craft 
I with great truth catch mere simplicity; 
Whilst some with cunning gild their copper 
crowns, 105 

Who, I ?] Capell ; Who IPFi; Who I, Q. 

plains: "While others, by their art, 



my fault : 

for great opinion, 



102. 



94. will] intend, desire. 

96. will tempt] are determined to 
make trial of. 

97. Presuming . . . potency] not 
sufficiently taking into account the 
tendency to change which is so 
powerful in them. Clarke explains : 
" presuming too far on the strength 
of that which is variable, unstable, 
and fallible ". Dyce suggests : " their 
potency which is subject to variation, 
and therefore imperfect, and not to 
be rashly relied upon ". Neither ex- 
planation seems to emphasise suffi- 
ciently that the potency is towards 
change. The " powers " are " frail," 
their only " potency " being one to- 
wards the worser course. 

103, 104. Whiles . . . simplicity] 
while others with subtle lure angle 
for the reputation of wisdom, my use 
of bare truth wins for me the character 
of a plain, simple man ; mere meaning 
"pure," "complete". Johnson ex- 



gain high estimation, I, by honesty, 
obtain a plain, simple approbation ". 
Not to lay stress on the fact that here 
no distinction is made between fish- 
ing for and catching — though the 
difference between studied effort and 
natural disposition is not unimport- 
ant — this interpretation seems to miss 
the main point. It is not the degree 
but the nature of the outcome in 
each case that Troilus dwells upon. 
He neither fishes for nor gains appro- 
bation, " simple " or otherwise. For 
the figure and sentiment, compare The 
Mcrcliant of Venice, i. i. loi, 102 : — 
" But fish not, with this melan- 
choly bait, 
For this fool gudgeon, this 
opinion " : 
Whiles, the old genitive used adverbi- 
ally, like " needs," etc. 

105. Whilst . . . crowns] The 
two lines emphasise the difference 



144 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act 



IV. 



With truth and plainness I do wear mine bare. 

Fear not my truth ; the moral of my wit 

Is "plain and true"; there's all the reach of it. 

Enter vEneas, Paris, Antenor, Deipiiobus, . 
and DiOMEDES., 
Welcome, Sir Diomed ! Here is the lady 
Which for Antenor we deliver you : no 

At the port, lord, I 'II give her to thy hand, 

_ And by the way possess thee what she is. 
Entreat her fair; and, by my soul, fair Greek, 
If e'er thou stand at mercy of my sword, 
Name Cressid, and thy life shall be as safe 115 
As Priam is in Ilion. 

Fair Lady Cressid, 
So please you, save the thanks this prince ex- 
pects : 
The lustre in your eye, heaven in your cheek. 
Pleads your fair usage; and to Diomed 119 

You shall be mistress, and command him wholly. 

106. wear-] were Q. ng. usage\ Q, Ff 3, 4; visage Ff i, 2. 

of attitude just implied. Compare Iron Age, pt. i. i, has "the water- 

 port". 

112. possess] inform; as frequently 
in Shakespeare and the dramatists 
generally. 

113. Entreat] treat. Compare 
Richard II. in. i. 37. 

117. save . . . expects] Here save 
is taken as a verb, with a colon after 
expects. I am not sure that it is not 
an adverb, with the sense " independ- 
ently of the gratitude which this 
prince expects of me for his assurance 



DlO. 



Chapman, Ccesar and Pompcy, i 
I : — 

" and golden speech 
Did Nature never give man but 

to gild 
A copper soul in him ". 
In Whilst the t is excrescent. 

107, 108. the moral . . . true] my 
wisdom may be summed up in the 
maxim " plain and true ". For 
moral in this sense, compare A 

Midsummer-Nigh fs Dream, v. i. 120 : , 

"A good moral, my lord: it is not of mercy! the lustre," etc. If so,"a 



enough to speak, but to speak 
true " 



comma will be the stop after expects. 
The opening lines of Troilus's answer 



III. port] gate; so Heywood, The seem to support this view 



sc. IV.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 145 

Tro. Grecian, thou dost not use me courteously, 
To shame the zeal of my petition to thee 
In praising her : I tell thee, lord of Greece, 
She is as far high-soaring o'er thy praises 
As thou unworthy to be call'd her servant. 125 
I charge thee use her well, even for my charge ; 
For, by the dreadful Pluto, if thou dost not, 
Though the great bulk Achilles be thy guard, 
I '11 cut thy throat. 

Dio. O ! be not mov'd, Prince Troilus, 

Let me be privileg'd by my place and mes- 
sage 130 
To be a speaker free ; when I am hence, 
I '11 answer to my lust ; and know you, lord, 
I '11 nothing do on charge : to her own worth 
She shall be priz'd ; but that you say " be 't so," 
I'll speak it in my spirit and honour, "no". 135 

Tro. Come, to the port. I '11 tell thee, Diomed, 

This brave shall oft make thee to hide thy 
head. 

122. zeaV\ Theobald (Warburton conj.) ; seale Q, Ff i, 2; seal Ff 3, 4. 
123. In praising] Q ; / praising Ff. 

121-123. thou dost . . . her] in " my Zwr^," " my host," "my trust," 

praising her and treating with dis- " thy lust," " my best," " thy best ". 

dain my urgent appeal on her behalf, It is possible, I think, that // has 

you are not treating me with courtesy, been caught from the line below, and 

126. even . . . charge] merely be- that we should read "/answer," i.e. 

cause I so bid you. I speak out plainly when I am at 

132. / 'II answer . . . lust] If the home, and I ask for the same privilege 

text is sound here, Rolfe's explanation here as an envoy. " Lust " = pleasure 

appears the only possible one, viz. is common enough in old English. 
" I'll do as I please," not, as some 134, 135. but that . . . "no "] the 

explain, " I'll answer you as I please ". mere fact of your saying " Be 't so " 

For 7ny lust, the following are the is enough to stir my spirit and honour 

conjectures recorded by the Cam- to saying " No I " 
bridge Editors : " my list" " thy last," 137. brave] boast. 

10 



146 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act iv. 

Lady, give me your hand, and, as we walk, 
To our own selves bend we our needful talk. 

'[Exeunt Troilus, Cressida, and 
Diomedes. Trumpet sounded. 

Par. Hark ! Hector's trumpet. 

^ne. How have we spent this morning ! 140 

The prince must think me tardy and remiss. 
That swore to ride before him to the field. 

Par. 'Tis Troilus' fault. Come, come, to field with him. 

Dei. Let us make ready straight. 

^ne. Yea, with a bridegroom's fresh alacrity, 145 

Let us address to tend on Hector's heels : 
The glory of our Troy doth this day lie 
On his fair worth and single chivalry. {^Exeunt. 

SCENE V. — The Grecian Camp. Lists set out. 

Enter AjAX, armed ; Agamemnon, Achilles, Patro- 
CLUS, Menelaus, Ulysses, Nestor, and others. 

Agam. Here art thou in appointment fresh and fair, 
Anticipating time. With starting courage 
Give with thy trumpet a loud note to Troy, 

144-148. Dei. Let . . . chivalry] Omitted in Q. 

146. address] See note on i. iii. and placing it at the end of the line. 

166, above, and compare Chapman, Knight and Schmidt (Lixicon) retain 

Iliad, i. 590 : " each Godhead to his the punctuation of all the old copies, 

house Addressed for sleep ". and with this I interpret starting 

courage as " bold defiance " ; the ap- 

bcene v. palled air seems to bear out this 

1. appointment] ec[\ni[>m&r\t. Com- sense, and the repetition of with, on 
pare Hamlet, iv. vi. i6; "a pirate of which Clarke lays stress, is hardly a 
very warlike appointment ". valid objection. Shakespeare more 

2. Anticipating, ..courage] Mod- than once uses "start" transitively 
ern editors, almost without exception, for "startle". With Theobald's 
here follow Theobald's punctuation punctuation I can see no satisfactory 
in removing the full stop after time expla.na.Uon oi starting courage. 



sc. v.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 147 



Thou dreadful Ajax ; that the appalled air 
May pierce the head of the great combatant 5 
And hale him hither. 

Ajax. Thou, trumpet, there 's my purse. 

Now crack thy lungs, and split thy brazen pipe : 
Blow, villain, till thy sphered bias cheek 
Outswell the colic of pufif'd Aquilon. 
Come, stretch thy chest, and let thy eyes spout 
blood ; 10 

Thou blow'st for Hector. [ Trumpet sounds. 

Ulyss. No trumpet answers. 

Achil. 'Tis but early days. 

Agam. Is not yond Diomed with Calchas' daughter? 

Ulyss. 'Tis he, I ken the manner of his gait ; 

He rises on the toe: that spirit of his 15 

In aspiration lifts him from the earth. 

Enter Diomedes, with Cressida. 

Agam. Is this the lady Cressid ? 

Dio. Even she. 

Agam. Most dearly welcome to the Greeks, sweet lady. 

Nest. Our general doth salute you with a kiss. 



6. hale\ haul, draw. Collier con- 
jectures " hail " : trumpet, trum- 
peteer. 

8. bias cheek] Steevens says that 
the idea is taken from the puffy 
cheeks of the winds as represented 
in ancient prints, maps, etc. ; bias 
was used literally of the weight in- 
serted on one side of a bowl to 
give a particular tendency, as in 
The Taming of the Shrew, iv. v. 
25:— 

"thus the bowl should run, 
And not unluckily against the 
bias^' ; 



figuratively of the tendency, Twelfth 
Night, V. i. 267 : — 

" But nature to her bias drew in 

that", 
g. Outswell . . . Aquilon] swell 
larger than Aquilon when distended 
by colic : Aquilon, the Greek Boreas, 
said to be so called because its flight 
was as swift as that of an eagle. 

11. for Hector] to summon Hector. 

12. 'Tis . . . days] it is but early 
in the day ; again the old genitive 
adverbially. 

13. yotid] here a demonstrative 
pronoun, but properly an adverb. 



148 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act iv. 

Ulyss. Yet is the kindness but particular; 20 

'Twere better she were kiss'd in general. 
Nest. And very courtly counsel : I '11 begin. 

So much for Nestor. 
Achil. I'll take that winter from your lips, fair lady: 

Achilles bids you welcome. 25 

Men. I had good argument for kissing once. 
Pair. But that 's no argument for kissing now ; 

For thus popp'd Paris in his hardiment, 

And parted thus you and your argument. 
Ulyss. O deadly gall, and theme of all our scorns ! 30 

For which we lose our heads to gild his 
horns. .''^'" ~ 

Patr. The first was Menelaus' kiss ; this, mine : 

Patroclus kisses you. 
Men. O ! this is trim. 

Patr. Paris and I kiss evermore for him. 
Men. I '11 have my kiss, sir. Lady, by your leave. 35 
Cres. In kissing, do you render or receive ? 
Patr. Both take and give. 
Cres. I '11 make my match to live, 

29. Ayid . . . argument] Q ; omitted in Ff. 

20. Yet is . . . particular] general adverb with popp'd, as a preposi- 

though he be, his kiss is but parti- tion with hardiment : thus, sc. with 

cular ; with a pun on the two senses kisses. 

of " general ". 30- theme . . . scorns] text for the 

24. / 'II take . . . lips] probably scorn which we invite by lighting for 

with allusion to the belief that disease her. 

was thus transferred to the kisser. 36. In kissing . . . receive ?] Stee- 

Compare Timon of Athens, iv. iii. vens compares The Merchant of 

63,64: — Venice, 111. ii. 141: — 

" I will not kiss thee ; then the " I arm by note to give and to re- 

rot returns ceive," 

To thine own lips again ". said as Bassanio kisses Portia. 
28. For thus . . . hardiment] Here 37. I 'II . . . live] probably, as 

in seems to do double duty, as an Tyrwhitt says, " I '11 lay my life ". 



sc. v.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 149 

The kiss you take is better than you give ; 

Therefore no kiss. 
Men. I '11 give you boot ; I '11 give you three for one. 40 
Cres. You 're an odd man ; give even, or give none. 
Men. An odd man, lady! every man is odd. 
Cres. No, Paris is not; for you know 'tis true, 

That you are odd, and he is even with you. 
Men. You fillip me o' the head. 

Cres. No, I '11 be sworn, 45 

ULyss. It were no match, your nail against his horn. 

May I, sweet lady, beg a kiss of you ? 
Cres. You may. 
Ulyss. I do desire it. 

Cres. Why, beg then. 

Ulyss. Why then, for Venus' sake, give me a kiss. 

When Helen is a maid again, and his. 50 

Cres. I am your debtor; claim it when 'tis due. 
Ulyss. Never 's my day, and then a kiss of you. 
Dio. Lady, a word : I '11 bring you to your father. 

\Diomedes leads out Cressida. 
Nest. A woman of quick sense. 
Ulyss. Fie, fie upon her! 

There's language in her eye, her cheek, her lip, 55 

Nay, her foot speaks ; her wanton spirits look out 

48, theyil Q ; then ? Ff. 

40. boot} something in addition, well say so, for his horn is far too 
interest; A.S. bot, advantage, profit, tough for your nail to make any im- 

41. You're . . . man] a play upon pression upon it. 

odd = singular, and odd = single, i.e. 48. beg then] to mend the metre 

no longer having a wife to make up Dyce here adds do. 

a pair. 56. her foot speaks] Compare Dek- 

45. You fillip . . . head] you give ker, The Untrussing of the Humourous 
me a shrewd tap in this taunt. Poet, vol. i. p. 224 (Pearson's Re- 

46. It were . . . horn] you may print) : — 



150 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act iv. 



V 



All. 
Again. 



At every joint and motive of her body. 

O ! these encounterers, so glib of tongue, 

That give accosting welcome ere it comes, 

And wide unclasp the tables of their thoughts 60 

To every ticklish reader, set them down 

For sluttish spoils of opportunity I 

And daughters of the game. [ Trumpet within. 

The Trojans' trumpet. 

Yonder comes the troop. 



Enter HECTOR, armed ; ^NEAS, Troilus, and other 
Trojans^ with Attendants. 

jEne. Hail, all ye state of Greece ! what shall be done 65 
To him that victory commands ? or do you purpose 

59. accosting] Theobald ; a coasting Q, Ff. 61. ticklish] Q ; tickling 

Ff. 65. the state] Q ; you state Ff. 



" For a true furnished courtier hath 
such force, 
Though his tongue faint, his very 
legs discourse". 

57. motive] that which gives 
motion. Compare Richard II. i. i. 

193 ■•— 

" my tongue . . . 

The slavish motive of recanting 

fear ". 

58. encotmtcrers] The New Eng. 
Diet, explains the word as " one who 
meets another half way, a froward 
person, coquette"; but I know not 
on what authority. 

59. accosting] Theobald's emenda- 
tion of a coasting. Those who retain 
that reading usually explain " a side- 
long glance of invitation," in which 
case an antecedent has to be found 
in encounterers. Mr. Churton Collins, 
Studies in Shakespeare, pp. 301, 302, 
quoting Turbervile's Noble Art of 
Veneric and Venus and Adotiis, 870, 
to show that to "coast" is to move 
alongside, says that to " give a coast- 



ing welcome, ere it comes" means 
" to move alongside of a welcome, or 
meet it before it comes". Had the 
words been " to give welcome a coast- 
ing," I could have understood this 
explanation, but, as they stand, it 
seems impossible. 

60. tables] tablets. Compare Ro- 
meo and jfulict, 1. iii. 92. 

6r. ticklish] wanton, prurient. 
Compare v. ii. 52, below. 

62. sluttish . . . opportunity] " cor- 
rupt wenches, of whose chastity every 
opportunity may make a prey " (John- 
son). 

65. all the taste] all the assembled 
chiefs. Dyce conjectures " all you 
(or ye) states ". 

65. commands] If the reading is 
sound, victory must be the object. 
Walker conjectures, and Hudson 
edits, "crowns," in which case vic- 
tory is the subject. 

66, 67. or do you . . . knoivn ?] or 
is it your intention that there shall 
be any declaration at all of victory ? 



sc. v.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 151 

A victor shall be known? will you the knights 

Shall to the edge of all extremity 

Pursue each other, or shall be divided 

By any voice or order of the field ? 70 

Hector bade ask. 

Agam. Which way would Hector have it ? 

JEne. He cares not ; he '11 obey conditions. 

Achil. 'Tis done like Hector ; but securely done, 
A little proudly, and great deal misprizing 
The knight oppos'd. 

^ne. If not Achilles, sir, 75 

What is your name ? 

Achil. If not Achilles, nothing. 

ySne. Therefore Achilles ; but whate'er, know this : 
In the extremity of great and little, 
Valour and pride excel themselves in Hector ; 
The one almost as infinite as all, 80 

The other blank as nothing. Weigh him well, 
And that which looks like pride is courtesy. 
This Ajax is half made of Hector's blood : 
In love whereof half Hector stays at home ; 
Half heart, half hand, half Hector comes to seek 85 
This blended knight, half Trojan, and half Greek. 

Achil. A maiden battle then ? O ! I perceive you. 

74. misprizing] misprising Q ; disprizing Ff. 

73. securely] over - confidently, as in the extreme littleness of his pride, 
Compare ii. ii. 15, above, "Surety Hector is pre-eminent. 

secure". 83. This Ajax . . . 6/oorf] See note 

74. misprizing] Compare As You on 11. i. 14, above. 

Like It, I. i. 172; All's Well that 87. A maiden battle] "a blood- 

Ends Well, in. ii. 33. less contest, like that of novices ; 

78,79. Lithe extremity . . .Hector] not 'a gory emulation,' line 123" 

in the extreme greatness of his valour, (Rolfe). 



152 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act iv. 

Re-enter DiOMEDES. -^-^-wv-r 

Agam. Here is Sir Diomed. Go, gentle knight, 

Stand by our Ajax : as you and Lord ^Eneas 
Consent upon the order of their fight, 90 

So be it ; either to the uttermost. 
Or else a breath : the combatants being kin 
Half stints their strife before their strokes begin. 
\Ajax and Hector enter the lists. 
Ulyss. They are oppos'd already. 

Agam. What Trojan is that same that looks so heavy ? 95 
Ulyss. 1 The youngest son of Priam, a true knight ; 

; Not yet mature, yet matchless ; firm of word, 
; Speaking in deeds and deedless in his tongue ; 
Not soon provok'd nor being provok'd soon 

calm'd : 
His heart and hand both open and both free ; 100 
For what he has he gives, what thinks he shows ; 
1 Yet gives he not till judgment guide his bounty, 

' Nor dignifies an impare thought with breath. 



103. impare] Q ; impaire Ff i, 2 ; impair Ff 3, 4. 

92, a breath] a breathing, a spell or " impair," which some editors pre- 

of exercise, as in 11. iii. 118, above, fer. Others adopt Johnson's "im- 

and All's Well that Ends Well, I. ii. pure". Though no instance has 

17, " sick for breathing and exploit ". been found of impare, or of " impair," 

92, 93. the combatants . . . stints] as an adjective, the former may, I 

the fact of their being kin, etc. Com- think, be taken as an equivalent of 

pare Cymbcline, v. v. 343 : " beaten the Lat. impar. For it is not the 

for loyalty Excited me to treasons," modesty of Troilus that is here in 

i.e. the fact of my being beaten. question, as the advocates of " im- 

98. deedless . . . tongue] making pure" assume, nor his "ripeness of 

no boast of his prowess. Mr. Col- judgment," as the Cambridge editors 

lins compares Sophocles, Philoctetcs, say, but his sincerity, his evening of 

97, yXwffffav /iilv apyov, x^'P" 5' elxov his words to his thoughts. The line 

ipydriv. " Yet gives he not till judgment guide 

103. impare] Th'ia is the reading of his bounty" qualifies and expands 

the Q. The folios give " impaire," the words " For what he has he 



i 



sc. v.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 153 

Manly as Hector, but more dangerous ; 
For Hector, in his blaze of wrath, subscribes 105 
I To tender objects ; but he in heat of action 
.' Is more vindicative than jealous love. 
/ They call him Troilus, and on him erect 
A second hope, as fairly built as Hector. 
Thus says ^neas ; one that knows the youth 1 10 
Even to his inches, and with private soul 
Did in great I lion thus translate him to me. 

{^Alarum. Hector and Ajax fight. 

Agam. They are in action. 

Nest. Now, Ajax, hold thine own ! 

Tro. Hector, thou sleep'st ; 

Awake thee ! 

Agam. His blows are well dispos'd : there, Ajax! 115 

Dio. You must no more. {Trumpets cease. 

^ne. Princes, enough, so please you. 

Ajax. I am not warm yet ; let us fight again. 

Dio. As Hector pleases. 

Hect. Why, then will I no more. 

Thou art, great lord, my father's sister's son, 120 
A cousin-german to great Priam's seed ; 

114, 115. Hector . . . thee\ Arranged as by Steevens (1793) ; one line in 
Q, Ff. 115. disposed : there} dispo'd there Q; dispos'd there Ff. 

gives," and the line " Nor dignifies log. as fairly . . . Hector] as fair 

an impare thought with breath " as that built on Hector. Compare 

qualifies and expands the words Troilus and Criseyde, 11. xcii. 7 : 

"what he thinks he shows". "And next his brother, holdere up 

105, 106. in his blaze . . . objects^ of Troye ". 

even when his rage is at its hottest iii. Even . . . inches] from top to 

grants terms of mercy to defenceless toe. The phrase was also used in the 

objects. Compare Troilus and Cris- sense of "as far as one's capacities 

eyde, i. xvii. i : " Now was this Ector go," as in Jonson, The Magnetic Lady, 

pitoHs of nature". i. i. ; "all men are Philosophers, to 

107. vindicative] here only. their inches ", 



^ 



154 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act iv. 

The obligation of our blood forbids 
A gory emulation 'twixt us twain. 
Were thy commixtion Greek and Trojan so 124 
That thou could'st say, "This hand is Grecian all, 
And this is Trojan ; the sinews of this leg 
All Greek, and this all Troy ; my mother's blood 
Runs on the dexter cheek, and this sinister 
Bounds in my father's " ; by Jove multipotent, 
Thou should'st not bear from me a Greekish 
member 1 30 

Wherein my sword had not impressure made 
Of our rank feud : but the just gods gainsay 
That any drop thou borrow'dst from thy mother, 
My sacred aunt, should by my mortal sword 
Be drain'd ! Let me embrace thee, Ajax : 135 
By him that thunders, thou hast lusty arms ; 
Hector would have them fall upon him thus : 
Cousin, all honour to thee ! 

Ajax. I thank thee. Hector: 

Thou art too gentle and too free a man : 
I came to kill thee, cousin, and bear hence 140 
A great addition earned in thy death. 

Hect. Not Neoptolemus so mirable, 

124. commixtion] Q, F 4 ; commixion Ff i, 2, 3. 132. Of our rank 

feud] Ff ; omitted in Q. 133. drop] day Q. 

132. gainsay] forbid ; A.S. gegn, gentilitinm, and thought the father 

against, and say. was Achilles Neoptolemus ". In Jon- 

^39- /''''^] gt^'ierous of soul. son's Poetaster, iv. i., Tucca says: 

142. Neoptolemus] Johnson is prob- " Give me thy hand, Agamemnon ; 

ably right in supposing that "by Neop- we hear abroad thou art the Hector 

tolemus the author meant Achilles of citizens. What sayest thou ? are 

himself; and remembering that the we welcome, noble Neoptolemus?" 

son was Pyrrhus Neoptolemus, con- Does he here make the same mis- 

sidered Neoptolemus as the nomen take ? 



sc. v.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 155 

On whose bright crest Fame with her loudest Oyes 

Cries " This is he ! " could promise to himself 

A thought of added honour torn from Hector. 145 

^ne. There is expectance here from both the sides 
What further you will do. 

Hect. We '11 answer it ; 

The issue is embracement : Ajax, farewell. 

Ajax. If I might in entreaties find success, 

As seld I have the chance, I would desire 150 
My famous cousin to our Grecian tents. 

Dio. 'Tis Agamemnon's wish, and great Achilles 

Doth long to see unarm'd the valiant Hector. 

Hect. vEneas, call my brother Troilus to me. 

And signify this loving interview 15S 

To the expecters of our Trojan part ; 

Desire them home. Give me thy hand, my 

cousin ; 
I will go eat with thee and see your knights. 

Ajax. Great Agamemnon comes to meet us here. 

Hect. The worthiest of them tell me name by name ; 160 
But for Achilles, mine own searching eyes 
Shall find him by his large and portly size. 

143. Oyes.^{Oyes)<^,Yi. 

143. Oyes\ F oyez, hear ye ; the of Bussy D'Ambois, v. i. : " These 

usual introduction to a proclamation spirits seld or never haunting men ". 

or advertisement by the public crier. 156. To the . . . part] to those of 

150. As seld . . . chance — Janellip- our party who are awaiting to know 

tical expression = which I might hope the issue of this meeting. 

for now, for I so rarely, etc. : seld, 162. portly] of stately bearing or 

in Shakespeare here only and in The carriage. The word nowadays has 

Passionate Pilgrim, 175, though in narrowed itself down to little more 

Coriolanus, 11. i. 229, we have "seld- than an euphemism for "corpulent," 

shown," as in Marlowe, The jfew of but was formerly used in a more 

MaZia, I. i., "scW-seen," and in quasi- gracious sense. Thus Marlowe, i 

composition. Chapman, The Revenge Tamburlaine, i. ii., uses it of " the 



156 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act iv. 



Agam. 



Meet 
Agam. 

Men. 



Hect. 
j^ne. 
Hect. 



Worthy of arms ! as welcome as to one 

That would be rid of such an enemy ; 

But that's no welcome: understand more clear 165 

What 's past and what 's to come is strew'd with 

husks 
And formless ruin of oblivion ; 
But in this extant moment, faith and troth, 
Strain'd purely from all hollow bias-drawing 
Bids thee, with most divine integrity, 170 

From heart of very heart, great Hector, welcome. 
I thank thee, most imperious Agamemnon. 
\To Troilus.'] My well-famed lord of Troy, no 

less to you. 
Let me confirm my princely brother's greet- 
ing : 
You brace of war-like brothers, welcome hither. 175 
Who must we answer? 

The noble Menelaus. 
O ! you, my lord ? by Mars his gauntlet, thanks ! 



163. of] Ff; all Q. 165-170. Btit . . . integrity] Ff ; omitted in Q. 

169. bias-drawing] Theobald; bias drawing Ff. 176. Who] Q, F i ; 

Whom Ff 2, 3, 4. 



fair Xenocrate " ; and Massinger, The 
Unnatural Combat, iii. i. 4, even of 
"viands". 

163, 164. as welcome . . . enemy] 
as welcome as is possible to one who 
would gladly hear of your death. 

i6g. Strain'd . . . bias - dra70ing] 
purged of all such tortuous inclination 
as the bias gives to the bowl. Com- 
pare King John, 11. i. 577 : " this vile- 
drawing bias, This sway of motion ". 

170. divine] godlike. 

171. From heart . . . heart] Steevens 
compares //a/w/f/, iii. ii. 78 : " In my 
heart's core, ay, in my heart of heart ". 



172. imperious] Dyce, Glossary, 
says : " though Shakespeare and 
sundry of his contemporaries make 
no distinction between imperious and 
imperial, yet . . . Bullokar carefully 
distinguishes between them : ' im- 
perial, royal or chief, emperor-like : 
imperious, that commandeth with au- 
thority, lord-like, stately ' ". It would, 
perhaps, be safer to say that though 
Shakespeare frequently uses imperi- 
ous where we should imperial, he 
rarely, if ever, uses imperial for im- 
perious in its modern sense of des^ 
potic. 



sc. v.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 157 

Mock not that I affect the untraded oath ; 

Your quondam wife swears still by Venus' 

glove : 
She 's well but bade me not commend her to 
you. 1 80 

Men. Name her not now, sir ; she 's a deadly theme. 

Hect. O ! pardon ; I offend. 

Nest. I have, thou gallant Trojan, seen thee oft. 
Labouring for destiny, make cruel way 
Through ranks of Greekish youth : and I have 
seen thee, 185 

As hot as Perseus, spur thy Phrygian steed, 
Despising many forfeits and subduements, -''" '^" 

When thou hast hung thy advanced sword i' th' 

air, 
Not letting it decline on the declin'd. 
That I have said to some my standers by, 190 
" Lo ! Jupiter is yonder, dealing life ". 
And I have seen thee pause and take thy breath, 
When that a ring of Greeks have hemm'd thee in, 

178. that I . . , oath] Ff ; thy affect the vntraded earth Q. 187. De- 

spising many] Q; And seene thee scorning Ff. 188. thy advanced] Ff; 

th' advanced Q. 

178. untraded] unhackneyed. In 187. Despising . . . subduements] 

Henry V. in. vi. 80, we have " new- not deigning to trouble yourself with 

tuned oaths," and in The Two Gentle- those who were already vanquished 

tnen of Verona, iv. iv. 135, " new- and forfeited to death ; the abstract 

found oaths". Jonson, Every Man for the concrete. 

in His Humour, in. i., ridicules this 188. arfyawc(?rf] raised high to strike, 

kind of affectation in his character Compare Henry V. v. ii. 382. 

of Captain Bobadil who excites the 189. decline . . . declin'd] descend 

enviousadmirationof Master Stephen, upon those fallen. Compare Ham/^^, 

the country gull, by such oaths as " By in. ii. 500, and for declined, used 

Pharaoh's foot," "Body o'Cffisar," etc. figuratively, Antony and Cleopatra, 

184. Labouring for destiny] acting in. xiii. 27. 

as though a reaper in the service of 191. dealing life] sc. by not tak- 

Fate. ing it. 



C-7''^- 



158 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act iv. 

Like an Olympian wrestling : this have I seen ; 
But this thy countenance, still lock'd in steel, 195 
I never saw till now. I knew thy grandsire, 
And once fought with him : he was a soldier 

good; 
But, by great Mars, the captain of us all, 
Never like thee. Let an old man embrace 

thee ; 
And, worthy warrior, welcome to our tents. 200 
jfEne. 'Tis the old Nestor. 
Hect. Let me embrace thee, good old chronicle. 

That hast so long walk'd hand in hand with 

time : 
Most reverend Nestor, I am glad to clasp 
thee. 
Nest. I would my arms could match thee in conten- 
tion, 205 
As they contend with thee in courtesy. 
Hect. I would they could. 
Nest. Ha ! 

By this white beard, I 'd fight with thee to- 
morrow. 
Well, welcome, welcome ! I have seen the time — 210 
Ulyss. I wonder now how yonder city stands, 

When we have here her base and pillar by us. 
Hect. I know your favour, Lord Ulysses, well. 

Ah ! sir, there 's many a Greek and Trojan dead, 

195. still] ever. tors, with Q, Ff i, 2, put a full stop 

196. gyandsire] Laomedon. after time; most editors, with Ff 3, 
210. / have . . . time — ] Appar- 4, mark a break. 

ently Nestor here breaks off in his 213. favour] See note on i. ii. 98, 
reminiscences. The Cambridge edi- above. 



sc. v.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 159 

Since first I saw yourself and Diomed 215 

In IHon, on your Greekish embassy. 

Ulyss. Sir, I foretold you then what would ensue : 
My prophecy is but half his journey yet ; 
For yonder walls, that pertly front your town, 
Yond towers, whose wanton tops do buss the 
clouds, 220 

Must kiss their own feet. 

Hect. I must not believe you : 

There they stand yet, and modestly I think, ..-^\ 

The fall of every Phrygian stone will cost ^ 

A drop of Grecian blood : the end crowns all, 
And that old common arbitrator, Time, 225 ' 

Will one day end it. 

Ulyss. So to him we leave it. 

Most gentle and most valiant Hector, welcome. 
After the general, I beseech you next 
To feast with me and see me at my tent. 

Achil. I shall forestall thee. Lord Ulysses, thou ! 230 

Now, Hector, I have fed mine eyes on thee ; 

219. pertly] Q, F i ; partly Ff 2, 3, 4. 220. Yond] Ff; Yon Q. 

219. pertly] boldly, with a notion ism forbids my believing anything of 
of light-heartedness. Compare Ed- the sort. 

■ward I. xii. 15 : "I have not a 230. thou I] Tyrwhitt conjectures 

penny, which makes me so pertly " though " ; Singer, " then—" ; Wal- 

pass through these thickets". ker, "there". Clarke remarks that 

220. buss] Though in Shakespeare's " the repetition of a pronoun thus in 
day the word was not vulgarised a sentence, for the sake either of 
it seems generally to have had a emphatic, playful or scornful effect, 
somewhat amorous sense. Ma- was usual " ; and the arrogant thoti 
lone quotes The Rape of Lticrece, would be in keeping with the speaker's 
line 1370 : " Threatening cloud- character. Compare Twelfth Night, 
kissing Ilion v/ith annoy," which iii. ii. 48 : " li thou thoust him some 
Heywood imitates with ''sky-kissing thrice, it shall not be amiss," the ad- 
llium ". vice given to Aguecheek when about 

221. / 7nust . . . you] my patriot- to write a challenge. 



160 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act iv. 

I have with exact view perus'd thee, Hector, 
And quoted joint by joint. 

Hect. Is this Achilles? 

Achil. I am Achilles. 

Hect. Stand fair, I pray thee: let me look on thee. 235 

Achil. Behold thy fill. 

Hect. Nay, I have done already. 

Achil. Thou art too brief: I will the second time. 

As I would buy thee, view thee limb by limb. 

Hect. O ! like a book of sport thou 'It read me o'er ; 

But there 's more in me than thou understand'st. 240 
Why dost thou so oppress me with thine eye ? 

Achil. Tell me, you heavens, in which part of his body 
Shall I destroy him ? whether there, or there, or 

there ? 
That I may give the local wound a name, 
And make distinct the very breach whereout 245 
Hector's great spirit flew. Answer me, heavens ! 

Hect. It would discredit the bless'd gods, proud man, 
To answer such a question. Stand again : 
Think'st thou to catch my life so pleasantly 

232. perus'd] thoroughly surveyed ; stroke of art in Shakspere to borrow 
a word strange in its composition the Homeric incident of Achilles sur- 
from Latin and French, and in its veying Hector before he slew him, 
sense, which should be to " use thor- not using it in the actual scene of 
oughly ". the conflict [as in Homer], but more 

233. quoted] noted, marked. characteristically in the place which 
235. Stand . . . thee] let me have he has given it". 

a full view of you in all your goodly 249-251. Think'st . . . dead?] do 

proportions. you fancy that when we meet in 

241. Why dost . . . eye?] Is this deadly combat you can surprise my 

intended to mark a presentiment of life with such easy carelessness as 

his fate ? now to name beforehand the exact 

242-246. Tell me . . . heavens I] part of my body in which you will 

Knight remarks : " It was a fine deliver the fatal stroke ? 



sc. v.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 161 

As to prenominate in nice conjecture 250 

Where thou wilt hit me dead ? 
Achil. I tell thee, yea. 

Hect. Wert thou the oracle to tell me so, 

I 'd not believe thee. Henceforth guard thee 
well, 

For I '11 not kill thee there, nor there, nor 
there ; 

But, by the forge that stithied Mars his helm, 255 

I '11 kill thee every where, yea, o'er and o'er. 

You wisest Grecians, pardon me this brag ; 

His insolence draws folly from my lips ; 

But I '11 endeavour deeds to match these words, 

Or may I never — 
Ajax. Do not chafe thee, cousin : 260 

And you, Achilles, let these threats alone, 

Till accident and purpose bring you to 't : 

You may have every day enough of Hector, 

255. stithied] forged ; " stithy," or 260. chafe thee] allow yourself to 

" stith " as Chaucer has it, seems be irritated. 

always to be used of an anvil, not of 262. to 't] meaning " to an en- 

a workshop ; and on Hamlet, iii. ii. counter," though it is used indefi- 

8g : — nitely without reference to any ante- 

" And my imaginations are as foul cedent expressed. 

As Vulcan's stithy,^' 263-265. You may . . . him] if 

Dowden says that the two senses you have a private inclination, ap- 

are confounded : Mars his, ior ^' his," petite, for it, you can any day find 

" sometimes used, by mistake, for 's, ample opportunity for fighting with 

the sign of the possessive case, par- Hector, though I don't suppose 

ticularly after a proper name, and that consideration of public wel- 

with especial frequency when the fare would persuade you to come to 

name ends in s," see Abbott, Shake- blows with him ; in stomach there 

spearian Grammar, § 217. is probably the further sense of 

259. endeavour dcecls]Compa.Te The "courage," so common in Shake- 
Advancemcnt of Learning, i. i. 3 : speare, with a sneering insinuation. 
" but rather let men endeavour an Schmidt takes state as persons re- 
endless progress or proficience in presenting a body politic, as in line 
both". 65, above. 

II 



162 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act iv. 

If you have stomach. The general state, I 
fear, 

Can scarce entreat you to be odd with him. 265 
Hect. I pray you, let us see you in the field ; 

We have had pelting wars since you refus'd 

The Grecians' cause. 
Achil. Dost thou entreat me, Hector? 

To-morrow do I meet thee, fell as death; 

To-night all friends. 
Hect. Thy hand upon that match. 270 

Agam. First, all you peers of Greece, go to my tent ; 

There in the full convive we : afterwards. 

As Hector's leisure and your bounties shall 

Concur together, severally entreat him. 

Beat loud the tabourines, let the trumpets blow, 275 

That this great soldier may his welcome know. 
\Exeunt all but Troiliis and Ulysses. 
Tro. My Lord Ulysses, tell me, I beseech you, 

In what place of the field doth Calchas keep? 
Ulyss. At Menelaus' tent, most princely Troilus : 

There Diomed doth feast with him to-night ; 280 

Who neither looks upon the heaven nor earth, 

But gives all gaze and bent of amorous view 

On the fair Cressid. 

274, 275. him. Beat . . . tabourines] Ff ; hivi to taste your bounties Q. 
281. upon the heaven nor earth] Q ; on heaven, nor on earth Ff. 

267. pelting] paltry ; probably con- 274. severally] separately, individu- 

nected with "peltry" and "paltry," ally. 

formed of rags, hence vile, worthless. 275. tabourines] drums. Compare 

Compare Richard II. 11. i. 60, and Antony and Cleopatra, iv. viii. 37. 

King Lear, 11. iii. 18. 278. keep] dwell, reside ; a term 

272. in the full . . , 7s)e] let us still in use of rooms in colleges at 

feast in full assemblage. ' Oxford and Cambridge, 



sc. v.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 163 

Tro. Shall I, sweet lord, be bound to you so much, 

After we part from Agamemnon's tent, 285 

To bring me thither ? 

Ulyss. You shall command me, sir. 

As gentle tell me, of what honour was 
This Cressida in Troy ? Had she no lover there 
That wails her absence ? 

Tro. O, sir ! to such as boasting show their scars 290 
A mock is due. Will you walk on, my lord? 
She was belov'd, she lov'd ; she is, and doth : 
But still sweet love is food for fortune's tooth. 

[Exeunt. 

287. As gentWl Ff; But gentle Q. 292. she loved] Ff ; my Lord Q. 

287. As gentle'] with like courtesy. 293. But still . . . tooth] but 

290, 291. to such . . . due] i.e. I love is ever a delicacy on which 

should deserve to be scorned if I were fortune is fond of whetting her ap- 

to say that she loved as she was loved petite. 

by me. 



ACT V 

SCENE I. — The Grecian Camp. Before ACHILLES' 

Tent. 

Enter ACHILLES and Patroclus. 

Achil. I '11 heat his blood with Greekish wine to-night, 
Which with my scimitar I '11 cool to-morrow. 
Patroclus, let us feast him to the height. 

Patr. Here comes Thersites. 

Enter Thersites. 

Achil. How now, thou core of envy ! 

Thou crusty batch of nature, what 's the news ? 5 
Ther. Why, thou picture of what thou seemest, and 

idol of idiot-worshippers, here's a letter for 

thee. 
Achil. From whence, fragment ? 

Ther. Why, thou full dish of fool, from Troy. 10 

Patr. Who keeps the tent now ? ; J 

4. core\ Ff ; currc Q. 

1. Greekish] Clarke thinks the (Steevens). Compare Every Man in 
strength and excellence of Greek His Humour, i. ii. : " One is a rimer, 
wines is referred to. sir, of your own batch, your own 

2. cool] by letting it out into the leaven ". 

air. 6. picture . . . seemest] fool in looks, 

4. core] probably ulcerous sore, as fool in reality. 

in V. viii. I, but with a play on " core," ii. Who . . . now?] A question 

heart. of appeal, equivalent to " You see 

5. hatch] " all that is baked at one that Achilles can no longer be taunted 
time without heating the oven afresh " with keeping his tent ". 

164 



> 



sc. I] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 165 



Ther. The surgeon's box, or the patient's wound. 

Pair. Well said, adversity ! and what need these 
tricks ? 

Ther. Prithee, be silent, boy ; I profit not by thy 1 5 
talk : thou art thought to be Achilles' male 
varlet. 

Pair. Male varlet, you rogue ! what 's that ? 

Ther. Why, his masculine whore. Now the rotten 

diseases of the south, the guts-griping, rup- 20 
tures, catarrhs, loads o' gravel i' the back, 
lethargies, cold palsies, raw eyes, dirt-rotten 
livers, wheezing lungs, bladders full of impos- 



16. varlet] F 4; varlot Q, Ff i, 2, 3. 
and the like Ff. 



22-26. raw 



tetter] Q ; 



12. The surgeon's . . . wound] 
Pretending to think that an answer 
is required, Thersites replies with the 
same pun on tents as in 11. ii. 16 above. 
So Webster, The Duchess of Malfi, i. 
i. : " he was a pitiful fellow, to lie like 
the children of Israel, all in tents " ; 
and Middleton, More Dissemblers Be- 
sides Women, 11. iii. 103. 

13. adversity !] Steevens under- 
stands this as = contrariety, and com- 
pares "avaunt Perplexity!" said in 
Love's Labour's Lost, v. ii. 298, by 
the Princess to Boyet who had been 
doing his best to perplex the dialogue. 
Collier conjectures " perversity," 
which Hudson edits. 

16, 17. male varlet] Theobald, on 
Thirlby's suggestion, gives "male 
harlot," one objection to which is, as 
Johnson points out, that it is too plain 
to need the explanation which Pat- 
roclus asks. Farmer quotes " male 
varlet" from Dekker's Jfo«<?sf Whore, 
but it is very doubtful whether the 
expression there has the same sinister 
sense. 

ig, 20. rotten . . . south] Shake- 
speare often speaks of the south as 



being unhealthy, as e.g. Coriolanus, 
I. iv. 30 : " All the contagion of the 
south light on you ". But it seems 
probable that the allusion here is to 
Naples (compare " the NeapoUtjtfi 
boneache," 11. iii. 22, above), supposed 
to be the original locale of the disease 
to which all those here catalogued 
are taken by Thersites to be the 
sequelae. This view is taken also by 
Dr. Bucknill (Shakespeare's Medical 
Knowledge, p. 234), from whom I 
quote an explanation of several of 
the terms here used : " Loads of 
gravel in the back of course refers to 
gravel in the kidneys, which would 
be attended by pain in the loins ; . . . 
lethargy is frequently confounded by 
medical men of the time, and by 
Shakespeare himself, with apoplexy, 
and cold palsies is the old medical 
term for chronic paralysis. Dirt- 
rotten livers indicate a pathological 
state, as distinguished from a named 
disease. . . . The same may be said 
of bladders full of imposthume or 
chronic inflammation of the bladder, 
with muco purulent discharge." 
23. wheezing lungs] The dramatists 




166 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act v. 



thume, sciaticas, lime-kilns i' the palm, incur- 
able bone-ache, and the rivelled fee-simple of 25 
the tetter, take and take again such prepos- 
terous discoveries ! 

Patr. Why, thou damnable box of envy, thou, what 
meanest thou to curse thus ? 

Ther. Do I curse thee ? 30 

Patr. Why, no, you ruinous butt, you whoreson in- 
distinguishable cur, no. 

Ther. No ! why art thou then exasperate, thou idle 
immaterial skein of sleave silk, thou green 
sarcenet flap for a sore eye, thou tassel of a 35 
prodigal's purse, thou ? Ah ! how the poor 
world is pestered with such water-flies, di- ', 
minutives of nature. I 

Patr. Out, gall ! 



34. sleave\ sleive Q ; Sleyd Ff. 

frequently speak of " the cough o' 
the lungs," apparently as something 
worse than an ordinary cough and 
as being due to the venereal dis- 
ease. 

24. lime-kilns . . . palm] burning 
sensations in the palms of the hands ; 
which it is suggested to me to refer to 
palmar psoriasis — a more probable 
conjecture than that which Dr. Buck- 
nill puts forward " for want of a 
better," sc. "chronic gout in the joints 
of the hands in which what are called 
chalk stones are found ". 

25. rivelled] wrinkled. Here only 
in Shakespeare, though frequent in 
the dramatists ; e.i^. Marlowe, Dido, 
III. i., '-rivelld gold"; Marston, ii 
Antonio and Mellida, i. ii. 20 : " the 
front of grief . . . much rivell'd with 
abortive care " ; Middleton, Blurt, 
Master Constable, iii. i. 71, "his 



rivelVd brow ". This, according to 
Dr. Bucknill, " points to the intract- 
able ring-worm ". 

27. discoveries] Whether this is the 
abstract for the concrete or not, the 
meaning is too plain for doubt. 

3T. Why . . . butt] Patroclus dis- 
claims all applicability of the curse to 
himself: you . . . butt, you who re- 
semble nothing so much as a dilapi- 
dated hogshead. 

31, 32. indistinguishable cur] mere 
lump of flesh and bones, and those 
the flesh and bones of a cur. 

33. idle] useless. 

34. immaterial] of no substance, 
worthless : sleave silk, floss silk, which 
till woven is useless. 

37. water-flies] Compare Hamlet, 
V. ii. 84 : " Dost thou know this 
water fly ? " said of the empty-headed 
Osric. 



sc. I.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 167 

Titer. Finch-egg ! A^v.-^^M'-Ai^' 40 

Achil. My sweet Patroclus, I am thwarted quite 

From my great purpose in to-morrow's battle. 

Here is a letter from Queen Hecuba, 

A token from her daughter, my fair love, 

Both taxing me and gaging me to keep 45 

An oath that I have sworn. I will not break it : 

Fall, Greeks ; fail, fame ; honour or go or stay ; 

My major vow lies here, this I '11 obey. 

Come, come, Thersites, help to trim my tent ; 

This night in banqueting must all be spent. 50 

Away, Patroclus ! 

\Exeunt Achilles and Patroclus. 
Ther. With too much blood, and too little brain, 
these two may run mad ; but if with too 
much brain and too little blood they do, I '11 
be a curer of madmen. Here's Agamemnon, 55 
an honest fellow enough, and one that loves 
\. quails, but he has not so much brain as 
ear-wax : and the goodly transformation of 
Jupiter there, his brother, the bull, the 

59. his brother, the] Ff ; his he the Q. 

40, Finch-egg I] Again retorting fice, in. i. : " By this light, I have 
upon Patroclus's charge of lumpish- toiled more with this tough carrion 
ness by that of insignificance. In hen than with ten quails scarce 
Natural Histories of the time the grown into their first feathers" — an 
finch is sometimes described as the apostrophe to Morona ; Jonson, Bar- 
smallest of birds. Compare Love's tholomew Fair, iv. iii. : " Here will 
Labour's Lost, v. i. 78 : " Thou be Zekiel Edgworth, and three or 
pigeon-egg of discretion I " four gallants with him at night, and 

45. taxing me] may mean either I have neither plover nor quail for 

"reproaching me for intending to them". 

break my oath," or "reproachfully 58, 59. the goodly . . . Jupiter] 

reminding me of my oath, and bind- the god having changed himself mto 

ing me to keep it ". a bull when pursuing Europa in her 

57. quails] a cant term for loose form of a cow. 

women. Compare Ford, Loire's Sacri- 59-61. the primitive . . . cuckolds] 



168 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act v. 

primitive statue, and . oblique memorial of 60 
cuckolds; a j thrifty shoeing-horn in a chain, 
hanging at his brother's leg, — to what form 
but that he is, should wit larded with malice 
and malice forced with wit turn him to ? 
To an ass, were nothing : he is both ass 65 
and ox ; to an ox, were nothing : he is both 
ox and ass. To be a dog, a mule, a cat, a 
fitchew, a toad, a lizard, an owl, a puttock, 
or a herring without a roe, I would not 
care ; but to be Menelaus ! I would conspire 70 
against destiny. Ask me not what I would 
be, if I were not Thersites, for I care not to 
be the louse of a lazar, so I were not 
Menelaus. Hey-day ! spirits and fires ! 

Enter HECTOR, TRoiLus, Ajax, Agamemnon, Ulysses, 

Nestor, Menelaus, and Diomedes, with lights. 
Agam. We go wrong ; we go wrong. 
A/^^' No, yonder 'tis. 75 

There, where we see the lights. 

62. hanging at his brother's] Ff; at his bare Q. 67, 68. a dog . . . 

fitchew] Ff ; a day, a Moyle, a Cat, a Fichooke Q. 

the prototype (in his horns) and 68. fitchew] polecat ; an animal 

figurative emblem of cuckolds. supposed to be very amorous and 

61, 62. a thrifty . . . leg] a nig- known to be very ofi'ensive in smell : 

gardly and not - to - be - shaken off puttock, kite, i.e. not a noble kind 

hanger-on of his brother, like a shoe- of hawk, but one that feeds on 

ing-horn hanging to a man's leg by carrion. 

a chain. Compare Dekker, Mrt^c/; ;;/f 69. a herring . . . roe] Compare 

in London, vol. iv. p. 192 (Pearson's Romeo and JnUet, 11. iv. 39: " With- 

Reprint):"Youareheldbutas5//of/HjO-- out his roe, like a dried herring," the 

hortis to wait on great lords' heels", roe being the most delicate part; or 

62-64. to what . . . to] On doubled perhaps a " shotten herring," i.e. one 

prepositions, see Abbott, Shake- that has spent the roe, as in 1 Henry 

spearian Grammar, g 407. IV, v. iii. 30. 

64. forced] i.e. farced, stuffed. 72, 73. care not to be] should not 

Compare 11. iii. 231, above. mind being. 



sc. I.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 169 

Hect. I trouble you. 

Ajax. No, not a whit. 

Ulyss. Here comes himself to guide you. 

Re-enter ACHILLES. 

Achil. Welcome, brave Hector; welcome, princes all. 
Again. So now, fair prince of Troy, I bid good night. 

Ajax commands the guard to tend on you. 80 
Hect. Thanks and good night to the Greeks' general. 
Men. Good night, my lord. 

Hect. - Good night, sweet lord Menelaus. 

Ther. Sweet draught : " sweet " quoth a' ! sweet 

sink, sweet sewer. 
Achil. Good night and welcome both at once, to 
those 85 

That go or tarry. 
Agani. Good night. 

[Exeunt Agamemnon and Menelaus. 
Achil. Old Nestor tarries ; and you too, Diomed, 

Keep Hector company an hour or two. 
Dio. I cannot, lord ; I have important business, 90 

The tide whereof is now. Good night, great 
Hector. 
Hect. Give me your hand. 

Ulyss. [Aside to Troilusi\ Follow his torch ; he goes to 
Calchas' tent. 

I '11 keep you company. 

84. sewey] Rowe ; S2irc Q, Ff. 

77. AiOTSi?^/] properly a dative = by 83. draught] a jakes. 
the same him. See Abbott, Shake- 91. tide] A.S. tid, time. 
spearian Grammar, § 20. 



170 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [^ct v. 

Tro. Sweet sir, you honour me. 

Hect. And so, good night. 95 

{Exit Diomedes ; Ulysses and Troilus following. 

Achil. Come, come ; enter my tent. 

[Exeunt Achilles, Hector, Ajax, and Nestor. 

Ther. That same Diomed's a false-hearted rogue, a 
most unjust knave ; I will no more trust 
him when he leers than I will a serpent when 
he hisses. He will spend his mouth, and 100 
promise, like Brabbler the hound ; but when 
he performs, astronomers foretell it : it is pro- 
digious, there will come some change : the 
sun borrows of the moon when Diomed keeps 
his word. I will rather leave to see Hector, 105 
than not to dog him : they say he keeps a 
Trojan drab, and uses the traitor Calchas' 
tent. I '11 after. Nothing but lechery ! all 
^ incontinent varlets ! [Exit. 

SCENE U.— Tke Same. Before Calchas' Tent. 
Enter DiOMEDES. 

Dio. What, are you up here, ho? speak. 

Col. [Within.'] Who calls? 

Dio. Diomed. Calchas, I think. Where's your 

daughter ? 
Cal. [ Within.] She comes to you. 

100, loi. spend . . . Iinund] give thing so marvellous as to enter into 

tongue without viewing the fox. Such the predictions of astronomers. Com- 

a hound was, and still is, called a pare Cymbelinc, in. ii. 27 : prodigious, 

"brabbler". Compare Henry V. u. portentous. 

iv. 70. 105. leave to see] forgo seeing. 

102. astronomers . . . it] it is some- 107. uses\ dwells in. 



sen] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 171 

Enter Troilus and Ulysses, at a distance; after them, 

Thersites. 

Ulyss. Stand where the torch may not discover us. 5 

Enter CRESSIDA, 

Tro. Cressid comes forth to him. 

Dio. How now, my charge ! 

Cres. Now, my sweet guardian ! Hark ! a word with 
you. [ Whispers. 

Tro. Yea, so familiar ! 
Ulyss. She will sing any man at first sight. 
Ther. And any man may sing her, if he can take 10 

her cliff; she's noted. 
Dio. Will you remember? 
Cres. Remember ! yes. 
Dio. Nay, but do then ; 

And let your mind be coupled with your words. 15 
Tro. What should she remember? 
Ulyss. List ! 

Cres. Sweet honey Greek, tempt me no more to folly. 
Ther. Roguery ! 

10, II. suig her . . . cliff] Q ; Jltid her . . . life Ff. 

9. She will . . . sight] The more what is written, the lines and spaces 

usual phrase nowadays is to sing a referring to different notes, according 

song or play a piece of music "at to the cliff prefixed at the beginning, 

sight " {i.e. without having to practise The principal cliffs are the bass, 

it),but "at /rsi sight" seems to have treble, and tenor; these are ascer- 

been more common of old, as Middle- tained by the gamut. . . . It is often 

ton, The Roaring Girl, iv. ii. 199 : equivocally used by our old comic 

" Sir Alex. You can play any lesson ? writers " (Nares). Sir John Hawkins 

Moll. At first sight, sir." Cressida, defines the word as " a mark in musick 

from her familiarity with Diomed at atthebeginningof thelines of asong; 

so short a notice, is thus said to be and is the indication of the pitch, and 

able to sing any man at first sight, bespeaks to what kind of voice — as 

11. cliff] "in music, from clef, base, tenor, or treble, it is proper", 
signifying a key ; as it is a key to Of course in noted there is a pun. 



172 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act v. 

Dio. Nay, then, — ' 20 

Cres. I '11 tell you what, — 

Dio. Foh, foh ! come, tell a pin : you are forsworn. 
Cres. In faith, I cannot. What would you have me 

do? 
Titer. A juggling trick, — to be secretly open. 
Dio. What did you swear you would bestow on me? 25 
Cres. I prithee, do not hold me to mine oath ; 

Bid me do any thing but that, sweet Greek. 
Dio. Good night. 
Tro. Hold, patience! 

Ulyss. How now, Trojan ! 

Cres. Diomed. — 

Dio. No, no ; good night': I '11 be your fool no more. 
Tro. Thy better must, 

Cres. Hark ! one word in your ear. 30 

Tro. O plague and madness. 
Ulyss. You are mov'd, prince ; let us depart, I pray you, 

Lest your displeasure should enlarge itself 

To wrathful terms. This place is dangerous ; 

The time right deadly: I beseech you, go. 35 
Tro. Behold, I pray you ! 
Ulyss. Nay, good my lord, go off: 

You flow to great distraction ; come, my lord. 
Tro. I pray thee, stay. 

Ulyss. You have not patience ; come. 

Tro. I pray you, stay. By hell and all hell's torments, 

I will not speak a word ! 

22. come . . . pin] i.e. don't waste 28. Hold patience /] adjuring hlm- 
your words by saying "I'll tell you self to be patient. 
what ". 37. Jlow to] are rapidly haste'ning to. 



sen.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 173 

Dio. And so, good-night. 40 

Cres. Nay, but you part in anger. 

Tro. Doth that grieve thee? 

wither'd truth! 

Ulyss. Why, how now, lord ! 

Tro. By Jove, 

1 will be patient. 

Cres. Guardian ! — why, Greek ! 

Dio. Foh, foh ! adieu; you palter. 

Cres. In faith, I do not : come hither once again. 45 
Ulyss. You shake, my lord, at something : will you go ? 

You will break out. 
Tro. She strokes his cheek ! 

Ulyss. Come, come. 

Tro. Nay, stay ; by Jove, I will not speak a word : 

There is between my will and all offences 

A guard of patience : stay a little while. 50 

Ther. How the devil Luxury, with his fat rump 

and potato-finger, tickles these together! Fry, 

lechery, fry ! 
Dio. But will you then? 

Cres. In faith, I will, la; never trust me else. 55 

Dio. Give me some token for the surety of it. 
Cres. I '11 fetch you one. \^Exit. 

Ulyss. You have sworn patience. 
Tro. Fear me not, sweet lord ; 

I will not be myself, nor have cognition 

Of what I feel : I am all patience. 60 

55. / will, lcC\ Theobald ; / will lo Q, F i; I will goe or go Ff 2, 3,4. 

51. luxury] lechery; as always toes being accounted stimulants to 
in Shakespeare ; potato -finger, pota- luxury. 



174 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act v. 

Re-enter Cressida. 

Ther, Now the pledge ! now, now, now ! 

Cres. Here, Diomed, keep this sleeve. 

Tro. O beauty ! where is thy faith ? 

Ulyss. My lord,— 

Tro. I will be patient ; outwardly I will. 

Cres. You look upon that sleeve ; behold it well. 65 

He lov'd me — O false wench ! — Give 't me again. 
Dio. Whose was 't ? 
Cres. It is no matter, now I have 't again : 

I will not meet with you to-morrow night. 

I prithee, Diomed, visit me no more. 70 

Ther. Now she sharpens : well said, whetstone ! 
Dio. I shall have it. 
Cres. What, this ? 

Dio. Ay, that. 

Cres. O ! all you gods. O ! pretty, pretty pledge. 

Thy master now lies thinking in his bed 

Of thee and me ; and sighs, and takes my 
glove, 75 

And gives memorial dainty kisses to it. 

As I kiss thee. Nay, do not snatch it from 
me; 

He that takes that doth take my heart withal. 
Dio. I had your heart before ; this follows it. 

64. I will . . . will] Omitted in Q. 78. doth take] Q ; rakes F i ; 

takes Ff 2, 3, 4. 

71. Now she sharpens] now she is 76. memorial . . . kisses] tender 
whetting his desire. kisses of remembrance. 

72. shall] am determined to. 



sc. II.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 175 

Tro, I did swear patience. 80 

Cres. You shall not have it, Diomed ; faith, you shall 
not; 

I '11 give you something else. 
Dio. I will have this. Whose was it? 
Cres. 'Tis no matter. 

Dio. Come, tell me whose it was. 
Cres. 'Twas one's that lov'd me better than you will. 85 

But now you have it, take it, 
Dio. Whose was it? 

Cres. By all Diana's waiting-women yond, 

And by herself, I will not tell you whose. 
Dio. To-morrow will I wear it on my helm, 

And grieve his spirit that dares not challenge 
it. 90 

Tro. Wert thou the devil, and wor'st it on thy horn. 

It should be challeng'd. 
Cres. Well, well, 'tis done, 'tis past: and yet it is not; 

I will not keep my word. 
Dio. Why then, farewell; 

Thou never shalt mock Diomed again. 95 

Cres. You shall not go: one cannot speak a word 

But it straight starts you. 
Dio. I do not like this fooling. 

Ther. Nor I, by Pluto: but that that likes not me 

Pleases me best. 
Dio. What ! shall I come ? the hour ? 

87. By all . . . yond] " the stars whoever it may be to whom it be- 

which she points to " (Warbur- longed, 

ton). 97. But it . . . you] without it at 

go. his spirit] the spirit of him once sending you off in a huff. 



176 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act v. 

Cres. Ay, come : — O Jove ! — lOO 

Do come : — I shall be plagu'd. 

Dio. Farewell till then. 

Cres. Good night : I prithee, come. [Exit Dioinedes. 

Troilus, farewell ! one eye yets looks on thee, 
But with my heart the other eye doth see. 
Ah ! poor our sex ; this fault in us I find, 105 
The error of our eye directs our mind. 
What error leads must err. O ! then conclude 
Minds sway'd by eyes are full of turpitude. \Exit. 

Ther. A proof of strength she could not publish more, 
Unless she said " My mind is now turn'd 
whore". no 

Ulyss. All 's done, my lord. 

Tro. It is. 

Ulyss. Why stay we then ? 

Tro. To make a recordation to my soul 

Of every syllable that here was spoke. 

But if I tell how these two did co-act, 

Shall I not lie in publishing a truth ? 115 

Sith yet there is a credence in my heart. 

An esperance so obstinately strong, 

That doth invert the attest of eyes and ears, 

As if those organs had deceptions functions, 

iig. had deceptions] Ff ; were deceptions Q. 

loi. plagu'd] punished. Compare stronger proof". Rather, I think, 

Richard II. i. iii. i8i : — " a strong proof that she could not 

" And God, not we, hath plagued publish more ". 

thy bloody deed ". 112. To make . . . soul] to set 

105. poor our sex] an inversion down in the tablets of my soul, 

similar to "dear my lord," etc. 119. deceptions] Compare Hey- 

109. A proof . . . more] Johnson wood, The Iron Age, vol. iii. p. 317; 

explains " she could not publish a "I trust no deceptions visions ", 



sc. II.] mOILUS AND CRESSIDA 177 

Created only to calumniate. 120 

Was Cressid here ? 

Ulyss. I cannot conjure, Trojan. 

Tro. She was not, sure. 

Ulyss. Most sure she was. 

Tro. Why, my negation hath no taste of madness. 

Ulyss. Nor mine, my lord : Cressid was here but now. 

Tro. Let it not be believ'd for womanhood ! 125 

Think we had mothers ; do not give advantage 
To stubborn critics, apt, without a theme. 
For depravation, to square the general sex 
By Cressid's rule: rather think this not Cressid. 

Ulyss. What hath she done, prince, that can soil our 
mothers ? 1 30 

Tro. Nothing at all, unless that this were she. 

Ther. Will he swagger himself out on 's own eyes ? 

Tro. This she ? no ; this is Diomed's Cressida. 
If beauty have a soul, this is not she ; 
If souls guide vows, if vows be sanctimonies, 135 
If sanctimony be the gods' delight, 
If there be rule in unity itself. 
This is not she. O madness of discourse. 
That cause sets up with and against thyself; 

130. soz7] soyle Ff ; spoile Q. 135. he satictimonies] Q ; are sancti- 

monie Ff. 

127. critics] censorious observers. measure the sex in general by Cres- 

127, 128. apt . . . depravation] sida's standard : rule, the carpenter's 
ready, though without having any tool of that name. 

Acting subject for it, to indulge in de- 135. sanctimonies] ratifiers of truth, 

f imation. For depravation, compare 137. // there . . . itself] if unity 

The Advancement of Learning, i. 28 : be bound by rule, so that one cannot 

" a mere depravation and calumny, be more than one. 

without all shadow of truth ". 1^8. discourse]TesLsoning. See note 

128, 129. To square . . . rule] to on 11. ii. 116, above. 

12 



178 TROiLUS AND CRESSIDA [act v. 



Bi-fold authority ! where reason can revolt 140 
Without perdition, and loss assume all reason 
Without revolt : this is, and is not, Cressid. 
Within my soul there doth conduce a fight 
^ Of this strange nature that a thing inseparate 
Divides more wider than the sky and earth ; 145 
And yet the spacious breadth of this division 
Admits no orifice for a point as subtle 
As Ariachne's broken woof to enter. 

140. Bi-fold] By-foxdd Q ; By foule or foul Ff. 148. Ariachne's] 

Ariachnes Ff; Ariachna's Q; Ariathna's Q (Steevens's copy in Brit. Mus.). 



140-142. where reason . . . revolt] 
where reason can revolt against 
itself without involving its own ruin, 
and though maimed can claim the 
possession of all its powers as not 
guilty of revolt against itself; where 
reason can be a traitor to itself, and 
yet by such treachery not forfeit its 
essential virtue. 

143. there doth conduce] if sound, 
as I think it is, probably means, 
" there is brought about," " there 
follows as a consequence ". Rowe 
conjectures "commence," and many 
editors suspect conduce. 

144. a thing inseparate] Malone 
takes this thing to be " the plighted 
tr oth of lovers. Troilus considers" it 
inseparable, or at least that it ought 
never to be broken, though he has 
unfortunately found that it sometimes 
is." Clarke explains : " A thing so 
inseparable as personal iridividuality 
— Cressida's iderility"with~ herself — 
becomes in my mind more widely 
divided than are the sky and the 
earth. . . . Troilus is trying to per- 
suade himself that the false woman 
he has just seen is not his Cressida, 
and yet he is conscious that she is 
no other than her own heartless 
self." This latter seems to me to be 
undoubtedly what Shakespeare meant. 

148. Ariachnc] In an interesting 



note Ingleby, Shakespeare Her- 
meneidics, pp. 64-67, writes : " That 
[sc. Ariachne] is the word of the 
folio 1623. The quarto of 1609 has 
Ariachna, and the undated quarto 
has Ariathna. This variation is 
thought to favour the view that the 
poet confounded the two names, 
Arachne and Ariadne, and possibly 
also the web of the former with the 
clew of the latter. Arachne was the 
spinner and weaver, and so subtle, 
i.e. fine spun (sicbtilis) was her woof 
that when it was woven into the web 
Minerva could not see how the web 
was made, and in a fit of jealousy 
and revenge tore it to pieces. If 
Shakespeare did confound the two 
fables, it is no more than his contem- 
poraries did. . . . The point is of no 
moment. What is of moment for us 
to see is that by Arachne Shakespeare 
meant the spider into which Arachne 
was transformed, and which in Greek 
bears the same name ; and that the 
woof he meant was finer than was 
ever produced by human hand, viz. 
the woof of the spider's web — those 
delicate transverse filaments which 
cross the main radial threads on 
7i'arps, and which are perhaps the 
nearest material approach to mathe- 
matical lines! Thus has Shakespeare 
in one beautiful allusion wrapt up in 



sen.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 179 

Instance, O instance ! strong as Pluto's gates ; 
Cressid is mine, tied with the bonds of heaven : 150 
Instance, O instance! strong as heaven itself; 
The bonds of heaven are slipp'd, dissolv'd, and 

loos'd ; 
And with another knot, five-finger-tied, 
The fractions of her faith, orts of her love, 154 
The fragments, scraps, the bits and greasy reliques 
Of her o'er-eaten faith, are bound to Diomed. 

Ulyss. May worthy Troilus be but half attach'd ' 

With that which here his passion doth express? 

Tro. Ay, Greek ; and that shall be divulged well 

In characters as red as Mars his heart 160 



156. bound] Ff ; given Q. 

two or three little words the whole 
story of Arachne's transformation, 
the physical fact of the fineness of 
the woof-filaments of a spider's web, 
and an antithesis, effective in the 
highest degree, to the vastness of the 
yawning space between earth and 
heaven. For what orifice could be 
imagined more exquisitely minute 
than the needle's eye which would 
not admit the spider's woof to thread 
it . . .?" 

149. Instance] evidence, argument. 

153. knot, five-finger-tied] Malone 
compares Massinger, The Fatal 
Dowry, ii. : — 

"Your fiftgers tie my heart-strings 
with this touch 
In true love's knots which naught 
but death shall loose ". 

154. orts] " ' Fragmenta, Menses 
reliqiiicE,' Coles's Lat. and Eng. Diet. : 
' Orts, the refuse of hay left in the 
stall by cattle,' Craven Dialect " 
(Dyce, Glossary). Compare Lucrece, 
line 985 ; Timon of Athens, iv. iii. 400. 

156. her . . . faith] " Vows which 



she has already swallowed once over. 
We still say of a faithless man, that 
he has eaten his words" (Johnson); 
" her troth plighted to Troilus, of 
which she was surfeited, and like 
one who has over-eaten himself, had 
thrown off. All the preceding words, 
the fragments, scraps, etc., show that 
this was Shakespeare's meaning " 
(Malone) ; " eaten and begnawn 
on all sides " (Schmidt). Possibly 
" which she has mouthed over and 
over again in her fulsome protesta- 
tions of loyalty to Troilus ". For 
faith, Walker conjectures " truth " 
or "troth". 

157. May . . . attached . . . ?] Is 
it possible that you are affected to 
even half the extent ? For attach'd, 
compare The Tempest, in. iii. 5 : 
" Who am mys&M attach'd with weari- 
ness ". As Troilus is never a tri- 
syllable with Shakespeare, 1 follow 
Dyce in adopting Walker's insertion 
of " but " before half 

160. Mars his heart] See note on 
IV. V. 177, above. 



k. 



180 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act v. 

Inflam'd with Venus: never did young man fancy 
With so eternal and so fix'd a soul. 
Hark, Greek : as much as I do Cressid love, 
So much by weight hate I her Diomed ; 164 

That sleeve is mine that he'll bear in his helm; > 
Were it a casque compos'd by Vulcan's skill, 
My sword should bite it. Not the dreadful 

spout 
Which shipmen do the hurricane call, 
Constring'd in mass by the almighty sun. 
Shall dizzy with more clamour Neptune's ear 170 
In his descent than shall my prompted sword 
Falling on Diomed. 

Tker. He'll tickle it for his concupy, 

Tro. O Cressid ! O false Cressid ! false, false, false ! 

Let all untruths stand by thy stained name, 175 
And they '11 seem glorious, 

U/j/ss. O ! contain yourself ; 

Your passion draws ears hither. 

Enter ^Eneas. 

^ne. I have been seeking you this hour, my lord. 
Hector, by this, is arming him in Troy : 
Ajax, your guard, stays to conduct you home. 180 

169. sun] sunne Q ; Fenne or Fen Ff. 

168. hurricano] waterspout ; a name 169. Constring'd] drawn together. 

given primarily to the violent storms 173. He'll . . . concupy] Prohahly 

of the West Indies ; Spanish, /n<»'aca«. it is here used contemptuously for 

For the sense here, compare King him, as Rolfe suggests, pointing out 

Lear, in. ii. 2: — that /i/'s is the genitive of ?7. Schmidt 

"You cataracts and hurricanoes, (s.z;. j^) takes the phrase indefinitely, 

spout, as" lord j<," " foot i^ " ; Delius would 

Till you have drench'd our read "him": concupy, a coinage by 

steeples ". Thersites for " concupiscence ". 



sc. Ill] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 181 

Tro. Have with you, prince. My courteous lord, adieu. 
Farewell, revolted fair ! and, Diomed, 
Stand fast, and wear a castle on thy head ! 

Ulyss. I '11 bring you to the gates. 

Tro. Accept distracted thanks. 185 

[^Exeunt Troilus, ^neas, and Ulysses. 

They. Would I could meet that rogue Diomed ! I 
would croak like a raven ; I would bode, I 
would bode. Patroclus will give me any- 
thing for the intelligence of this whore : the 
parrot will not do more for an almond than 190 
he for a commodious drab. Lechery,., lechery ;. 
still, wars_ and lechery : nothing else holds 
fashion. _A burning devil take them ! \Exit. 

SCENE III.— Troy. Before Priam's Palace, 

Enter HECTOR and Andromache. "'*-'*^ iT 

And. When was my lord so much ungently temper'd, 
To stop his ears against admonishment? 
Unarm, unarm, and do not fight to-day. 

183. casi/c] used figuratively for the Scene in. 

strongest possible protection. Com- 
pare "sconce," (i) head, (2) helmet, Of this scene Mr. Collins {Studies 

(3) bulwark, fortification. in Shakespeare, p. 73) says: "The 

187. bode] prognosticate, like a scene in Troilus and Cressida (v. iii.), 

bird of ill omen. where Andromache, Cassandra, and 

189, 190. the parrot . . . almond] Priam are'trying to dissuade Hector 

The fondness of parrots for almonds from taking the field against Achilles, ^ 

gives the title to an old play. An bears so close a resemblance, especi- 

Almond-for a Parrot, and the phrase ally in the stress laid on dreams and 

is frequent in the dramatists, e.g. prophecies, to the scene in the Seven 

Dekker, Old Fortunatus, vol. i. p. against Thebes where the Chorus are 

89 (Pearson's Reprint): "my tongue imploring Eteocles not to go out 

speaks no language but an almond against Polynices, that it is difficult 

for parrot^'. to suppose the, resemblance is due toj 

rnere coincidence ", 



182 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act v. 

Hect. You train me to offend you ; get you in : 

By all the everlasting gods, I '11 go ! 5 

And. My dreams will, sure, prove ominous to the day. 
Hect. No more, I say. 

Enter Cassandra. 

Cas. Where is my brother Hector? 

And. Here, sister; arm'd, and bloody in intent. 

Consort with me in loud and dear petition ; 
Pursue we him on knees ; for I have dream'd 10 
Of bloody turbulence, and this whole night 
Hath nothing been but shapes and forms of 
slaughter. 

Cas. O ! 'tis true. 

Hect. Ho ! bid my trumpet sound. 

Cas. No notes of sally, for the heavens, sweet brother. 

Hect. Be gone, I say : the gods have heard me swear. 1 5 

Cas. The gods are deaf to hot and peevish vows : 
They are polluted offerings, more abhorr'd 
Than spotted livers in the sacrifice. 

And. O ! be persuaded : do not count it holy 

To hurt by being just : it is as lawful, 20 

For we would give much, to use violent thefts, 
And rob in the behalf of charity. 

20, 21. as lawful . . . use\ Tyrwhitt conj. ; as lawful . . . For we would 
count give much to as Ff. 20-22. To hurt . . . charity^ Omitted in Q. 

4. You train . . . you] you tempt violent thefts. The reading in the 

me to be rough with you. text is Tyrwhitt's conjecture, and a 

6. ominous . . . day] prophetic of large abundance of other conjectures 
what the day will bring forth, i^owe will be found in the Cambridge Shake- 
in his second edition gave " to-day ". speare. For use thefts, Dyce compares 

i5. peevish] foolish. Middleton, Women Beware Wo/nen, 

21. For we . . . thefts] because we iv. iii. 36: "Is it enough to use 
would give much in charity, to practise adulterous thefts . . .?" 



sc. III.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 183 

Cas. It is the purpose that makes strong the vow; 
But vows to every purpose must not hold. 
Unarm, sweet Hector. 

Hect. Hold you still, I say ; 25 

Mine honour keeps the weather of my fate : 
Life every man holds dear; but the dear man 
Holds h onou r far more precious-dear than life. 

Enter Troilus. 
How now, young man ! mean'st thou to fight to- 
day ? 
And. Cassandra, call my father to persuade. 30 

[^Exit Cassandra. 
Hect. No, faith, young Troilus ; doff thy harness, youth ; 
I am to-day i' the vein of chivalry ; 
Let grow thy sinews till their knots be strong, 
And tempt not yet the brushes of the war. 
Unarm thee, go, and doubt thou not, brave 
boy, 35 

I '11 stand to-day for thee and me and Troy. 
Tro. Brother, you have a vice of mercy in you. 
Which better fits a lion than a man. 

26. keeps . . . /fl^g] keeps to wind- " clear " = of spotless honour. Corn- 
ward of, as so gains an advantage pare Macbeth, i. vii. i8 : " Duncan 
over, as in naval engagements and hath been so clear in his great office " ; 
races. Compare Much Ado About The Merchant of Venice, ii. ix. 42 : 
Nothing, II. i. 327 ; Twelfth Night, " that clear honour Were purchased 
III. iv. i8it by the merit of the wearer" ; King 

27. dear^ Those who retain this, Lear, iv. vi. 73 : " the clearest gods ". 
the reading of the quarto and the 34. brushes] encounters, frays ; 
folios, explain it variously as "man generally of a less serious kind. 

of worth " (Delius), "man intense of 37-42. Brother, . . . live]CompaTe 

purpose," " the earnest man ". Others above, iv. v. 105, 106 and 185-189. 

accept Pope's conjecture, " brave," 38. Which better . . . man] Stee- 

supposing dear to have been caught vens compares Philemon Holland's 

from the line below. It is not im- translation of Pliny's Natural Hist- 

possible, I think, that we should read ory, chap. 16 : " The lion alone of all 



184 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act v. 



Hect. 
Tro. 



Hect. 
Tro. 
Hect. 
Tro. 



Hect. 
Tro. 
Hect. 
Tro. 



What vice is that, good Troilus ? chide me for it. 
When many times the captive Grecian falls, 40 
Even in the fan and wind of your fair sword, 
You bid them rise, and live. 
O ! 'tis fair play. 

Fool's play, by heaven, Hector. 
How now ! how now ! 

For the love of all the gods, 
Let 's leave the hermit pity with our mothers, 45 
And when we have our armours buckled on, 
The venom'd vengeance ride upon our swords, 
Spur them to ruthful work, rein them from ruth. 
Fie, savage, fie ! 

Hector, then 'tis wars. 
Troilus, I would not have you fight to-day. 50 
Who should withhold me? 
Not fate, obedience, nor the hand of Mars 
Beckoning with fiery truncheon my retire ; 
Not Priamus and Hecuba on knees, 



45. mothers,\ Ff; mother Q. 
2, 3. 4- 



48. ruthful] nithfull Q, F i ; ruefull Ff 



beasts is gentle to those who humble 
themselves before him, and will not 
touch any such upon their submission, 
but spareth what creature soever lieth 
prostrate before him ". 

41. Even . . . sii)ord] Compare 
Hamlet, ii. ii. 495 : "with the whiff 
and wind of his fell sword The un- 
nerved father falls ". For fair, which 
can hardly be sound, the conjectures 
are " fear'd," " fierce," " fell ". 

48. ruthful] It would be a pity to 
alter this to " deathful," Walker's 
conjecture, or "ruthless," Hudson's. 
It is quite in Shakespeare's way to 
use in one and the same line a word 



that has two cognate senses, as here 
of a feeling that is caused in others 
and one that is felt by the actor. 

49. then 'tis wars] then war is 
really acted, there is no playing at 
fighting. 

53. Beckoning . . . retire] In com- 
bats between two champions, the 
arbiter of the proceedings directed 
their course by a truncheon, or " war- 
der," which was thrown down when 
the combat was to cease. Compare 
Richard II. i. iii. 118: "Stay, the 
king hath thrown his zvarder down," 
in the tourney between Bolingbroke 
and Norfolk. 



sc. Ill] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 185 

Their eyes o'ergalled with recourse of tears; 55 
Nor you, my brother, with your true sword 

drawn, 
Oppos'd to hinder me, should stop my way, 
But by my ruin. 

Re-enter CASSANDRA, with Priam. 

Cas, Lay hold upon him, Priam, hold him fast : 

He is thy crutch ; now if thou lose thy stay, 60 
Thou on him leaning, and all Troy on thee, 
Fall all together. 

Pri. Come, Hector, come ; go back : 

Thy wife hath dream'd ; thy mother hath had 

visions ; 
Cassandra doth foresee ; and I myself 
Am like a prophet suddenly enrapt, 65 

To tell thee that this day is ominous : 
Therefore, come back. 

Hect. ^neas is a-field ; 

And I do stand engag'd to many Greeks, 
Even in the faith of valour, to appear 
This morning to them. 

Pri. Ay, but thou shalt not go. 70 

Hect. I must not break my faith. 

You know me dutiful ; therefore, dear sir. 
Let me not shame respect, but give me leave 

58. But . . . ruin] Ff ; omitted in Q. 

55. recourse 0/ tears] tears in quick 122; Macbeth, 1. iii. 57, and above, 

succession coursing down the cheek : in. iii. 123. 

o'ergalled, inflamed, made sore. Com- 6g. even . . . valour] by the honour 

pare Hamlet, i. ii. 155. of a brave man. 

65. ewra^i] seized with a prophetic 73. shame . . . res/ec^] do violence 

frenzy. Compare Coriolanus, iv. v. to the filial respect I owe you. 



186 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act v. 

To take that course by your consent and voice, 
Which you do here forbid me, royal Priam. 75 

Cas. O Priam ! yield not to him. 

And. Do not, dear father. 

Hect. Andromache, I am offended with you : 
Upon the love you bear me, get you in. 

\Exit Andromache. 

Tro. This foolish, dreaming, superstitious girl 
Makes all these bodements. 

Cas. O farewell ! dear Hector. 80 

Look ! how thou diest ; look ! how thy eye turns 

pale; 
Look ! how thy wounds do bleed at many vents : 
Hark ! how Troy roars : how Hecuba cries out ! 
How poor Andromache shrills her dolour forth ! 
Behold, distraction, frenzy, and amazement, 85 

Like witless anticks, one another meet. 
And all cry, Hector ! Hector 's dead ! O Hector ! 

Tro. Away ! away ! 

Cas. Farewell. Yet, soft ! Hector, I take my leave : 

Thou dost thyself and all our Troy deceive. 90 

[Exit. 

Hect. You are amaz'd, my liege, at her exclaim. 

Go in and cheer the town : we '11 forth and fight. 
Do deeds worth praise and tell you them at 
night. 

85. distraction] Ff ; distruction Q. 

jS. upon . . . me] I adjure you by 86. wj^/^ss aw^iV^s] grimacing luna- 

your wifely love. tics. Not, I think, " puppets " or 

84. shrills] Steevens quotes in- " buffoons," who would not neces- 

stances of this verb from Spenser sarily be "witless", 
and Heywood. 



sc. III.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 187 

Pri. Farewell : the gods with safety stand about thee ! 
\Exeunt severally Priam and Hector. Alarums. 
Tro. They are at it ; hark ! Proud Diomed, believe, 95 
I come to lose my arm, or win my sleeve. 

Enter Pandarus. 

Pan. Do you hear, my lord ? do you hear ? 

Tro. What now? 

Pan. Here's a letter come from yond poor girl. 

Tro. Let me read. 100 

Pan. h. whoreson tisick, a whoreson rascally tisick 
so troubles me, and the foolish fortune of this 
girl ; and what one thing, what another, that 
I shall leave you one o' these days : and I 
have a rheum in mine eyes too, and such an 105 
ache in my bones that, unless a man were 
cursed, I cannot tell what to think on 't. 
What says she there? 

Tro. Words, words, mere words, no matter from the 
heart ; 
The effect doth operate another way. 1 10 

\Tearing the letter. 
Go, wind to wind, there turn and change together. 
My love with words and errors still she feeds. 
But edifies another with her deeds. 

\Exeunt severally. 

loi. h'«c^] i.e. phthisis, though here no. The effect . . . wayl A 

perhaps only symptoms of that dis- blending of " the effect is of another 

ease, wheezing lungs, dry cough, etc. kind," and " they operate another 

107. cursed] "under the influence way". 

of a malediction, such as mischievous 113. The Cambridge Editors note : 

beings have been supposed to pro- " The folio here inserts the following 

nounce upon those who had offended lines : — 

them " (Steevens). ' Pand. Why, but heare you. 



188 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act v. 



SCENE IV. — Plains between Troy and the Grecia^t 

Camp. 

Alarums. Excursions. Enter Thersites. 
Ther. Now they are clapper-clawing one another; 
I '11 go look on. That dissembling abomin- 
able varlet, Diomed, has got that same scurvy- 
doting foolish young knave's sleeve of Troy 
there in his helm : I would fain see them 5 
meet ; that that same young Trojan ass, that 
loves the whore there, might send that 
Greekish whore-masterly villain, with the 
sleeve, back to the dissembling luxurious 
drab, of a sleeveless errand. O' the t' other 10 



,> 



10. errand] Hanmer; arrant Q ; errant Ff : 
O' th' tother Ff. 



O' the t'other] A th' tother Q ; 



Troy. Hence brother lackie ; ig- 
nomie and shame 

Pursue thy Hfe, and Hue aye with 
thy name.' 
As they occur, with a sHght variation 
in the first line, in the last scene, we 
have followed the quarto in omitting 
them. This is an indication that the 
play has been tampered with by an- 
other hand." And to the same effect 
Collier. Walker on the other hand 
observes (Critical Examination, etc., 
vol. iii., p. 203) : " This is the proper 
place for these two speeches, for with- 
out them the scene ends abruptly ; 
and on the other hand, the conclud- 
ing lines of Troilus's speech, v. x., 
' Strike a free march to Troy ! — with 
comfort go : Hope of revenge shall 
hide our inward woe,' — are evidently 
the concluding lines of the play it- 
self: the mind of the reader is fully 
satisfied, and anything additional 
sounds like an impertinence and ob- 
trusion — an extra note after the har- 
mony is completed. Besides, after 



what had passed, is it conceivable 
that Pandarus's disgrace should have 
been put off to the end of the play ? 
Pandarus's epilogue must, therefore, 
be an interpolation. (Since I wrote 
this I have discovered that Steevens 
also thought that the play ended 
here.) Perhaps the words from ' A 
goodly fnedicine' to ^painted cloths' 
ought to be added to the end of v. iii. 
Troilus strikes Pandarus, or pushes 
him violently from him." 

Scene iv. 

I. clapper-clawing] sticking their 
claws into each other. ..Compare 
The Merry Wives of Windsor, ii. iii. 
67. The Eng. Dial. Diet, shows 
that the word is still well alive in the 
sense of scratch, maul, fight in an 
unskilful way (generally of women), 

3. that same] like "this same," al- 
most always used in a sarcastic sense. 

9. luxurious] lustful. 

10. of a . . . errand] on a useless 
errand, i.e. to be scorned by Cressida. 



sc. IV.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 189 

side, the policy of those crafty-swearing 
rascals, that stale old mouse-eaten dry cheese, 
Nestor, and that same dog-fox, Ulysses, is 
not proved worth a blackberry : they set me 
up, in policy, that mongrel cur, Ajax, against 15 
that dog of as bad a kind, Achilles ; and now 
is the cur Ajax prouder than the cur 
Achilles, and will not arm to-day ; whereupon 
the Grecians begin to proclaim barbarism, and 
policy grows into an ill opinion. Soft ! here 20 
comes sleeve, and t'other. 

Enter Diomedes, Troilus following. 

Tro. Fly not; for should'st thou take the river Styx, 

I would swim after. 
Dio. Thou dost miscall retire : 

I do not fly, but advantageous care 

Withdrew me from the odds of multitude. 25 

Have at thee ! 
Ther. Hold thy whore, Grecian ! now for thy whore, 

Trojan ! Now the sleeve ! now the sleeve ! 

\Exeunt Troilus and Diomedes, fighting, 

21. and V other] and tother Q ; and th' other Ff. 

Compare Nicholson, Acolastus (1600) : 15. in policy] to suit their purposes. 
" My suit was sleeveless, my regard 19. to proclaim barbarism] " to set 
too cold"; Udall, Fiotrophes (158S) up the authority of ignorance, to de- 
(Arber, p. 16) : "he made me a. sleeve- clare that they will be governed by 
Z«S5 answer and sent me away " ; also policy no longer" (Johnson). 
Beaumont and Fletcher, The Fair 24, 25. advantageous . . . multi- 
Maid of the Inn, iv. i., and The Little tude] perhaps, reasonable care for my 
French Lawyer, 11. 2. life made me shun the risk of being 
II, 12. crafty - swearing rascals] crushed by numbers ; Schmidt says: 
rascals who to gain their ends will " perhaps, a care to spy advantages ". 
swear to anything. I have inserted Compare All's Well that Ends Well, 
the hyphen. Theobald conjectures i. i. 215. 
" sneering " ; Collier, " fleering ". 27, 28. Hold . . . sleeve I] Tarring 



190 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act v. 

Enter HECTOR. 

Hect. What art thou, Greek? art thou for Hector's 
match ? 
Art thou of blood and honour? 30 

Ther. No, no ; I am a rascal ; a scurvy railing 
knave ; a very filthy rogue. 

Hect. I do believe thee: live. {Exit. 

Ther. God-a-mercy, that thou wilt believe me; but 

a plague break thy neck for frighting me ! 35 
What's become of the wenching rogues? I 
think they have swallowed one another : I 
would laugh at that miracle ; yet, in a sort, 
lechery eats itself. I'll seek them. \Exit. 

SCENE Y.— Another part of the Plain. 

Enter DiOMEDES, and a Servant. 

Dio. Go, go, my servant, take thou Troilus' horse ; 
Present the fair steed to my Lady Cressid : 
Fellow, commend my service to her beauty: 

them on, the one to fight in order to mercy on you for believing me ! or 

keep, and the other to regain posses- God-a-mercy may be merely " Thank 

sion of Cressida and the sleeve given you ! " 

by her to Diomed. See above, iv. iv. 

70. Collier, in his second edition, Scene V. 

gave " nov^' the sleeve, now the 

sleeveless!" i.e. the wearer of the i. Go . . . horse] Steevens points 

sleeve and the one without it. out that this is from Lydgate, and 

29. Art thou . . . honour?'] Reed Menon's death (line 7) from Caxton, 

refers to Segar, On Honor, etc. (1602), both of whom he quotes. In Hey- 

to show that a person of superior wood's Iron Age, pt. i. vol. iii. 

birth might not be challenged by an p. 305 (Pearson's Reprint), Paris 

inferior, or, if challenged, might re- taunts Diomed with having caught 

fuse the combat. Compare King Troilus's horse when " unback'd," 

Lear, v. iii. 141-145, 153, 154. while Diomed claims to have un- 

34. God-a-mercy . . . me] God have horsed Troilus. 



sc. v.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 191 

Tell her I have chastis'd the amorous Trojan, 
And am her knight by proof. 
Serv. I go, my lord. [Exit. 5 

Enter AGAMEMNON. 

Agam. Renew, renew ! The fierce Polydamas 

Hath beat down Menon ; bastard Margarelon 
Hath Doreus prisoner, 

And stands colossus-wise, waving his beam, 
Upon the pashed corses of the kings 10 

Epistrophus and Cedius ; Polyxenes is slain ; 
Amphimachus, and Thoas, deadly hurt ; 
Patroclus ta'en, or slain ; and Palamedes 
Sore hurt and bruis'd ; the dreadful Sagittary 
Appals our numbers: haste we, Diomed, 15 

To reinforcement, or we perish all. 

Enter Nestor. 

Nest. Go, bear Patroclus' body to Achilles ; 

And bid the snail-pac'd Ajax arm for shame. 
There is a thousand Hectors in the fieldT V''^*^ 
Now here he fights on Galathe his horse, 20 

And there lacks work; anon he's there afoot, 

7. Margarelon] mentioned by both was called sagittayre, that behinde 

Caxton and Lydgate, whom Steevens the myddes was an horse, and to 

quotes. Heywood, The Iro7i Age, fore a man : this beste was heery like 

Act II., stage direction, calls him an horse, and had his eyen rede as a 

"one of Priam's youngest sons". cole, and shotte well with a bowe : 

9. beam] " i.e. his lance like a this beste made the Grekes sore 

weaver's beam, as Goliath's spear is aferde, and slew many of them with 

described. So, in Spenser's Fairy his bowe ". Steevens adds a more 

Queen, iii. vii. 40 : — circumstantial account from Lyd- 

' All were the beame in bignes like gate. 

a mast ' " (Steevens). 20. Galathe] Also from Lydgate. 

14. Sagittary] Theobald quotes 21. lacks work] because all flee 

Caxton, " a mervayllous beste that before him. 



192 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act v. 

And there they fly or die, like scaled sculls 
Before the belching whale ; then is he yonder, 
And there the strawy Greeks, ripe for his edge, 
Fall down before him, like the mower's swath : 25 
Here, there, and every where, he leaves and 

takes, 
Dexterity so obeying appetite 
That what he will he does ; and does so much 
That proof is call'd impossibility. 

Enter UlysSES. 

Ulyss. O ! courage, courage, princes ; great Achilles 30 
Is arming, weeping, cursing, vowing vengeance : 
Patroclus' wounds have rous'd his drowsy blood, 
Together with his mangled Myrmidons, 
That noseless, handless, hack'd and chipp'd, come 

to him. 
Crying on Hector. Ajax hath lost a friend, 35 
And foams at mouth, and he is arm'd and at it, 
Roaring for Troilus, who hath done to-day 
Mad and fantastic execution. 
Engaging and redeeming of himself 

22. scaled] Ff; scaling Q: sculls] Q; sculs Ff. 24. strawy] Q; 

straying Ff. 

22, 23. like . . . whale] like " My silver-scaled skids about my 

shoals of fish flying before a whale ; streams do creep " : 

scaled is variously explained as belching, spouting, 

"scaly," and as "dispersed," the 25. sivath] a line of grass cut by 

latter being a sense which according the mower. 

to Halliwell {Diet.) the word formerly 26. he leaves and takes] slays or 

had in the North: sculls, "schools" spares according to his pleasure, 

and " shoals " are one and the same 29. proof] fact, 

word in different spellings. Com- 35. Crying on Hector]cuTS\ngHec- 

pare, Drayton, Polyolbiim, Song tor for their wounds. 
xxvi. : — 



sc VI.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 193 

With such a careless force and forceless care 40 
As if that luck, in very spite of cunning, 
Bade him win all. 

Enter AjAX. 

Ajax. Troilus ! thou coward Troilus ! {Exit. 

Dio. Ay, there, there. 

Nest. So, so, we draw together. 

Enter ACHILLES. 

Achil. Where is this Hector? 

Come, come, thou boy-queller, show thy face ; 45 
Know what it is to meet Achilles angry : 
Hector ! where 's Hector ? I will none but Hector. 

\Exeunt. 

SCENE VI. — Another part of the Plain. 

Enter AjAX. 
Ajax. Troilus, thou coward Troilus, show thy head ! 

Enter DiOMEDES. 
Dio. Troilus, I say! where 's Troilus? 
Ajax. What would'st thou? 

Dio. I would correct him. 

Ajax. Were I the general, thou should'st have my office 

Ere that correction. Troilus, I say ! what, 

Troilus ! 5. 

41. Uickl Ff ; luit Q. 

40. forceless care] easy dexterity in Scene vi. 

escaping from the enemy's toils. 

45. boy-queller] boy killer ; A.S. 5. Ere that correction'] before I 
quellan, to kill. Compare 2 Henry would allow you to do what is my 
IV. ii. i. 58: "a ma.n-qneller and a chosen task. 
woman-queller ". 

13 



194 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act v. 

Enter Troilus. 

Tro. O traitor Diomed ! turn thy false face, thou traitor, 

And pay thy life thou ow'st me for my horse ! 
Dio. Ha! art thou there? 

Ajax. I '11 fight with him alone : stand, Diomed. 
Dio. He is my prize; I will not look upon. lo 

Tro. Come, both, you coggling Greeks ; have at you 
both ! [Exeunt, fighting. 

Enter H ECTOR. 

Hect. Yea, Troilus ? O ! well fought, my youngest 
brother. 

Enter ACHILLES. 

AcJiil. Now do I see thee. Ha ! Have at thee, Hector ! 

Hect. Pause, if thou wilt. 

Achil. I do disdain thy courtesy, proud Trojan. 15 

Be happy that my arms are out of use : 
My rest and negligence befriend thee now, 
But thou anon shalt hear of me again ; 
Till when, go seek thy fortune. \^Exit. 

Hect. Fare thee well. 

I would have been much more a fresher man, 20 
Had I expected thee. How now, my brother ! 

Re-enter Troilus. 

Tro. Ajax hath ta'en ^Eneas : shall it be ? 

~'*- No, by the flame of yonder glorious heaven, 

10. / will . . . upon] I will not be 20. viuch . . . man] For the 

a mere spectator. transposition of the article, see 

17. befriends] rest and negligence Abbott, Shakespearian Grammar, 

being taken as a single idea — sluggish § 422. 
neglect of warlike exercise. 



sc. vii] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 195 

He shall not carry him : I '11 be ta'en too, 
Or bring him off. Fate, hear me what I say! 25 
! I reck not though I end my life to-day. 

[Exif. 

Enter one in sumptuous armour. 
Hect. Stand, stand, thou Greek ; thou art a goodly mark. 
No ? wilt thou not ? I like thy armour well ; 
I '11 frush it, and unlock the rivets all, 
But I '11 be master of it. Wilt thou not, beast, 
abide ? 30 

Why then, fly on, I '11 hunt thee for thy hide. 

\Exeunt. 

SCENE V\\.~Another part of the Plain. 

Enter ACHILLES, with Myrmidons. 

Achil. Come here about me, you my Myrmidons ; 

Mark what I say. Attend me where I wheel : 
Strike not a stroke, but keep yourselves in breath : 
And when I have the bloody Hector found, 
Empale him with your weapons round about ; 5 
In fellest manner execute your aims. 

26. reckl Pope ; wreake Q, Ff i, 2 ; wreak Ff 3, 4. / end] Q ; thou end Ff. 

24. carry] bear off as prisoner. not Hector, whom Achilles surrounds 

29. frush] batter, bruise. From by numbers and kills. Heyvvood, The 

" O.F. frtiissier, froissier (mod. F. Iron Age, pt. i., gives the same de- 

froisser) — popular Lat. frustrare, to tails as Shakespeare, and in pt. ii. 

shiver in pieces, f. Lat. frustum, Penthesilea taunts Pyrrhus as being 

fragment " (New Eng. Diet.). Stee- the son of a coward, and says, 

vens, among other passages, quotes " Hector was by Achilles basely 

Fairfax's Tasso, " Rinaldo's armour slain ". 

frush'd and hack'd they had". 5. Empale] hedge in; "pale," an 

enclosure. 

iicene vii. g_ execute your aims] ply your 

I. Come . . . Myrmidons] Clarke business; aims is Capell's conjecture 

points out that in Caxton it is Troilus, for "arms"; "execute your arms," 



196 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act v. 

Follow me, sirs, and my proceedings eye: 
It is decreed Hector the great must die. 

^s^Exeunt. 

Enter Menelaus and PARIS, fighting : then 
THERSITES. 

Ther. The cuckold and the cuckold-maker are at it. 

Now, bull! now, dog! 'Loo, Paris, 'loo! now, lo 
my double-henned sparrow ! 'loo, Paris, 'loo ! 
The bull has the game : ware horns, ho ! 

\Exeunt Paris and Menelaus. 

Enter Margarelon. 

Mar. Turn, slave, and fight. 

Ther. What art thou ? 

Mar. A bastard son of Priam's. 15 

Ther. I am a bastard too ; I love bastards : I am a 
bastard begot, bastard instructed, bastard in 
mind, bastard in valour, in every thing illegi- 
timate. One bear will not bite another, and 
wherefore should one bastard ? Take heed, 20 
the quarrel 's most ominous to us : if the son 
of a whore fight for a whore, he tempts judg- 
ment. Farewell, bastard. 

Mar. The devil take thee, coward ! {^Exeunt. 

II. sparrow] Ff ; spartan Q. 

in the sense of " make use of them," (Schmidt) ; but the expression is 

seems impossible, whoever was the very anomalous and should mean 

writer of this scene. "having two wives" : loo, "a cry to 

II. double-henned sparrow] "per- excite dogs" (Craig on King Lear, 

haps = sparrow with a double-hen, iii. iv. 79, where see the quotation 

i.e. with a female married to two from Life of Butler) : has the game, 

cocks, and hence false to both " wins. 



sc. VIII.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 197 

SCENE W\\\.— Another part of the Plain. 

Enter HECTOR. 

Hect. Most putrefied core, so fair without, 

Thy goodly armour thus hath cost thy life. 

Now is my day's work done ; I '11 take good 

breath : 
Rest, sword ; thou hast thy fill of blood and 
death. 

\^Puts off his helmet and lays his sword aside. 

Enter Achilles and Myrmidons, 

Achil. Look, Hector, how the sun begins to set; 5 

How ugly night comes breathing at his heels : 
Even with the vail and darking of the sun. 
To close the day up, Hector's life is done. 

Hect. I am unarm 'd ; forgo this vantage, Greek. 

Achil. Strike, fellows, strike! this is the man I seek. 10 

{^Hector falls. 
So, Ilion, fall thou next ! now, Troy, sink down ! 
Here lies thy heart, thy sinews, and thy bone. 
On ! Myrmidons, and cry you all amain, 
Achilles hath the mighty Hector slain. 

\_A retreat sounded. 
Hark! a retreat upon our Grecian part. 15 

Myr. The Trojan trumpets sound the like, my lord. 

7. darking] Ff; darkiiing Q. ii. thou next I now] Pope; thou 

next, come Q ; thou, now Ff. 

4. Rest, sword; . . . death] " Shak- 7. vail] setting, sinking. The verb 

spere," says Knight, "borrowed the cir- in similar senses is frequent in Shake- 

cumstance which preceded the death of speare. 
Hector from the Gothic romances". 



198 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act v. 

Achil. The dragon wing of night o'erspreads the earth, 
And, stickler-hke, the armies separates. 
My half-supp'd sword, that frankly would have 

fed, 
Pleas'd with this dainty bait, thus goes to bed, 20 

[Sheathes his sword. 
Come, tie his body to my horse's tail ; 
Along the field I will the Trojan trail. [Exeunt. 

SCENE IX. — Another part of the Plain. 

Enter AGAMEMNON, AjAX, MeNELAUS, NeSTOR, 
DiOMEDES, and Others^ marching. 

[Shouts within. 
Agam. Hark ! hark ! what shout is that ? 
Nest. Peace, drums ! 

[ Within.] Achilles ! Achilles ! Hector 's slain ! Achilles ! 
Dio. The bruit is. Hector's slain, and by Achilles. 
Ajax. If it be so, yet bragless let it be ; 

Great Hector was a man as good as he. 5 

20. baiti baite Q ; bed F i ; bitt or bit Ff 2, 3, 4. 

17. Dragon . . . night} Compare " O were it but my life 
A Midsummer-Night^ s Dream, in. ii. I 'Id throw it down for your de- 
379 ; Cymbeline, 11. ii. 48 ; II Pen- liverance, 

serosa, 591, "Cynthia checks her As frankly as a pin" ; 

dragon yoke ". Dragons were fabled and Surflet, Countric Farm, 1600, i. 

to be sleepless. 130 : " Oxen are not to be fed so 

18. stickler-like] "A stickler was frankely and tree in winter " (quoted 
one who stood by to part the com- in the New Eng. Diet.). 

batants when victory could be deter- 20. bait] food for travellers on a 

mined without bloodshed. . . . They journey, food for horses, and in dialect 

were called sticklers from carrying used of a workman's mid-day meal. 

sticks or staves in their hands, with „ 

ocene /.v. 



which they interposed between the 
duellists" . . . (Steevens). 

19. frankly] Compare Measure for 
Measure, in. i. 106: — v, vii. 22; Hamlet, i. ii, 127 



duellists" . . , (Steevens). 3. bruit] rumour, report. Shake- 

ig. frankly] Compare Measure for speare uses the verb also, Macbeth, 



sex] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 199 

Agam. March patiently along. Let one be sent 
To pray Achilles see us at our tent. 
If in his death the gods have us befriended, 
Great Troy is ours, and our sharp wars are 
ended. \^Exeunt marching. 

SCENE X. — Another part of the Plain. 

Enter /ENEAS and Trojan Forces. 

yEne. Stand, ho ! yet are we masters of the field. 

Never go home ; here starve we out the night. 

Enter Troilus. 

Tro. Hector is slain. 

All. Hector ! The gods forbid ! 

Tro. He 's dead ; and at the murderer's horse's tail, 

In beastly sort, dragg'd through the shameful 
field. 5 

Frown on, you heavens, effect your rage with speed ! 

Sit, gods, upon your thrones, and smite all Troy! 

I say, at once let your brief plagues be mercy. 

And linger not our sure destructions on ! 
^ne. My lord, you do discomfort all the host. lo 

Tro. You understand me not that tell me so : 

I do not speak of flight, of fear, of death. 

But dare all imminence that sfods and men 



t>^ 



Address their dangers in. Hector is gone : 

7, 8. smite . . . once] With Hudson speedy destruction. Hanmer gave 

I adopt Lettsom's conjecture for the "smite at Troy, I say, at once ". 

reading of the old copies, "smile at 13, 14. But dare . . . in] but 

Troy. / say at once." It seems dare whatever imminent dangers 

impossible, even if "smile at Troy" either gods or men may be prepar- 

were used derisively, that it should ing for me : Address, prepare, make 

be followed by two lines invoking ready. 



r 



200 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act v. 

Who shall tell Priam so, or Hecuba? 15 

Let him that will a screech-owl aye be call'd 
Go in to Troy, and say there Hector 's dead : 
There is a word will Priam turn to stone, 
Make wells and Niobes of the maids and wives, 
Cold statues of the youth ; and, in a word, 20 
Scare Troy out of itself. But march away : 
Hector is dead ; there is no more tosay. 
Stay yet. You vile abominable tents, 
Thus proudly pight upon our Phrygian plains, 
Let Titan rise as early as he dare, 25 

I '11 through and through you ! And, thou great- 

siz'd coward, 
No space of earth shall sunder our two hates : 
I'll haunt thee like a wicked conscience still, 
That mouldeth goblins swift as frenzy's thoughts. 
Strike a free march to Troy ! with comfort go : 30 
Hope of revenge shall hide ou£ inward woe. 

[Exeunt ^neas and Trojan Forces. 

As Troilus is going out, enter, from the other side, 

PANDARUS. 

Pan, But hear you, hear you ! 

Tro. Hence, broker-lackey ! ignomy and shame 

Pursue thy life, and live aye with thy name ! 

\Exit. 

23. vilc\ Ff ; proud Q. 29. frenzy' s] Dyce ; frienzes Q ; frensies Ff. 

33. broker-lackey] Dyce ; broker, lacky Q ; broker, lackie F i ; brother, lackey 
F 2 ; brothel, lacky Ff 3, 4. 

16. screech-owl] Compare A Mid- 24. pight] pitched. Compare Cym- 

summer-Night's Dream, v. i. 383-385, beline, v. v. 164. 

and, for the thought, 2 Henry IV. i. 33. broker-lackey] Dyce's reading; 

i. 100-104. thou compound of pimp and tool : 



sc. X.] TROILUS AND CRESSIDA 201 

Pan, A goodly medicine for mine aching bones ! O 35 
world ! world ! world ! thus is the poor agent 
despised. O traders and bawds, how earn- 
estly you are set a-work, and how ill re- 
quited ! why should our endeavour be so 
loved, and the performance so loathed ? what 40 
verse for it ? what instance for it ? Let me 
see : 

Full merrily the humble-bee doth sing, 
Till he hath lost his honey and his sting ; 
And being once subdued in armed tail, 45 

Sweet honey and sweet notes together fail. 

Good traders in the flesh, set this in your painted 
cloths. 

As many as be here of pandar's hall, 
Your eyes, half out, weep out at Pandai-s fall ; 50 
Or, if you cannot weep, yet give some groans. 
Though not for me, yet for your aching bones. 
Brethren, and sisters, of the hold-door trade, 
Some tzvo months hence my will shall here be 
\ made : 

37. traders] Craig conj. ; old copies traitors. 

ignomy, this contracted form occurs line 47 below, " Good traders in the 

again in 1 Henry IV. v. iv. 100 ; flesh ". 

Measure for Measure, 11. iv. 111. So, 47, 48. painted cloths] "cloth or 

Peele, Sir Clyomon and Sir Clamydes, canvas painted in oil and used for 

sc. iii. 31, "Let Ignomy to my re- hangings in rooms" (Schmidt). Com- 

proach, instead of Fame, Sound," pare As Yon Like It, iii. ii. 290; 1 

etc., and sc. x. 40, " To me the blast Henry IV. iv. ii. 28. 

oi Ignomy ; to thee Dame Honour's 53. Brethren . . . frarf^] pimps and 

crown ". bawds. Compare Henry V. iv. v. 16 ; 

37. ^raj^ors] Mr. Craig's conjecture, Othello, iv. ii. 91, 92. 
" traders," seems certain. Compare 



202 TROILUS AND CRESSIDA [act v. 

It should be now, but that my fear is this, 55 

Some galled goose of Winchester would hiss. 
Till then, Pll sweat, and seek about for eases ; 
And at thai time bequeath you my diseases. 

[Exit. 

57. sweati sweate Q, F i ; siveare F 2; swear Ff 3, 4. 

56. some . . . Winchester] " some under the jurisdiction of the Bishop 

one suffering from the venereal dis- of Winchester" . . . (Dyce, Glos- 

ease, who would be galled by my sary). Compare i HeHn' F/. i. iii. 35. 

words. . . . Winchester goose, a 57. sweat] an allusion to certain 

cant term for a certain venereal sore, treatment of the disease. See note on 

because the stews in Southwark were Timon of Athens, iv. iii. 87. 



APPENDIX I 

On Shakespeare's obligations to Chapman's Iliad, I extract 
part of an excellent note by Mr. J. Foster Palmer in Notes 
and Qtierzes for 20th October, 1900 : — 

" The whole of this play, as I have elsewhere pointed 
out,^ shows some acquaintance with Chapman's translations. 
In the first place, it must be remembered that Chapman's 
first version did not comprise the whole of the Iliad, but 
only the first, second, seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth, and 
eleventh books, and was called Seaven Bookes of the Iliades 
of Homere. These are precisely the books which contain 
the subject-matter of the play (excluding of course the 
Troilus and Cressida myth . . . ). In the play Shake- 
speare, having introduced us to the quarrel between Aga- 
memnon and Achilles, and to the characters of Agamemnon, 
Achilles, Ulysses, Nestor, and Thersites — all contained in 
the first and second books — passes at once, in the first act, 
to the subject-matter of the seventh book, the challenge 
of Hector to the Greeks and its acceptance by Ajax 
Telamon, whose character is there indicated. This is con- 
tinued through three acts. There are also allusions to 
events in the seventh, ninth, and eleventh books, including 
the embassy to Achilles; while the acts of Diomede, the 
prophecy of Hector, the wound of Menelaus, and other 

1 Transactions of the Royal Society of Literature, vol. xv. pt. i. 

203 



204 APPENDIX I 

things contained in the third, fourth, fifth, and sixth books, 
are conspicuous by their absence. 

" The well-known speech of Ulysses on military disci- 
pline, too, is evidently inspired by these lines of Chap- 
man's : — 

We must not all be kings. The rule is most irregular 
Where many rule. One lord, one king, propose to thee ; and he 
To whom wise Saturn's son hath given both law and empery 
To rule the public is that king. 

— Book ii. 172-75. 

In the same scene is a still more striking instance, in which 
Ulysses complains of the disrespect shown by Achilles to 
Nestor's age : — 

And then, forsooth, the faint defects of age 
Must be the scene of mirth ; to cough, to spit. 
And, with a palsy-fumbling on his gorget. 
Shake in and out the rivet. 

If this is not suggested by the following lines of Chapman 
in the eighth book, the coincidence is a remarkable one : — 

That Hector's self may try 
If my lance dote with the defects that fail best minds in age, 
Or find the palsy in my hands, that doth thy life engage. 

— Book viii. 93-5. 

In the eleventh book of Chapman's Iliad Ajax is com- 
pared to a mill-ass {ovos). This description is adopted by 
Shakespeare with variations, and is kept up throughout the 
play : ' Thou scurvy-valiant ass ' ; ' An assinego may tutor 
thee ' ; 'His evasions have ears thus long,' etc. The char- 
acter throughout is true to Chapman's description. The 
character of Menelaus is still more striking. I think no 
one who has read the description of Menelaus given by 
Chapman in his preface would dispute Shakespeare's ac- 
quaintance with it. The resemblance in this case can hardly 



APPENDIX I 205 

be accidental : ' Simple, well-meaning, standing still affect- 
edly on telling truth, small and shrill voice (not sweet, nor 
eloquent, as some most against the hair would have him), 
short-spoken, after his country, the laconical manner, yet 
speaking thick and fast, industrious in the field, and willing 
to be employed, and (being mollis bellator himself) set still 
to call to every hard service the hardiest'. 

" The laconic brevity of speech is very characteristic of 
Shakespeare's Menelaus." 



APPENDIX II 

III. iii. 4 : things of lore. In the critical note below will be 
found the various readings and conjectures recorded by the 
Cambridge Editors. With the conjecture I hav-e ventured 
to edit, "things of lore" will mean matters of soothsaying. 
The word " seen " was of old frequently used as = " versed," 
" skilled," and here I believe that " sight " has the cognate 
sense of "acquaintance," "experience," "insight". Thus 
Johnson, Hyinenm, The Barriers, line i6i, writes : — 

She wears a robe enchased with eagles' ej'es. 
To signify her sight in mysteries : 

and, again. Epigrams, xiv. 8: — 

What name, what skill, what faith hast thou in things ! 
What sight in searching the most antique springs .' 

Now, in the former of these two passages, the word " mys- 
teries" is almost the exact equivalent of "lore," "lore" in 
the case of Calchas being his learning derived from divina- 
tion, learning which had warned him to forsake Troy, even 
though by so doing he earned the name of traitor ; while in 
the latter passage the general sense is pretty nearly identical. 
Further, we have seen in many instances how closely Shake- 
speare follows Chaucer, and in Troiliis and Criseyde, i. 64-77, 
we have two stanzas which must have been in Shakespeare's 

memory when writing this scene. They run : — 

206 



APPENDIX II 207 

Now fil it so, that in the toun ther was 
Dwellinge a lord of greet auctoritee, 
A gret devyn that cleped was Calkas, 
That in science so expert was, that he 
Knew wel that Troye sholde destroyed be, 
By answere of his god, that highte thus, 
Daun Phebus or Apollo Delphicus. 

So whan this Calkas knew by calculinge. 

And eke by answere of this Appollo, 

That Grekes sholden swiche a peple bringe, 

Through which that Troye moste been for-do. 

He caste anoon out of the toun to go ; 

For wel wiste he, by sort, that Troye sholde 

Destroyed been, ye, wolde who-so nolde. 

Here the words " That in science so expert was," and " So 
whan this . . . Appollo," correspond precisely with " through 
the sight I bear in things of lore," and scientia was of old 
the usual equivalent of " lore ". Again, in book iv. lines 
84-91, we have Calchas's account of what he had forfeited 
in terms that Shakespeare reproduces in lines 3- 12 of this 
scene. Thus, Chaucer : — 

Havinge un-to my tresour ne my rente 
Right no resport, to respect of your ese. 
Thus al my good I lost and to yow wente, 
Wening in this you, lordes, for to plese. 
But al that los ne doth me no disease. 
I vouche-sauf, as wisely have I joye. 
For you to lese al that I have in Troye. 

Shakespeare : —  

Appear it to your mind 
That through the sight I have in things of lore, 
I have abandoned Troy, left my possession, 
Incurr'd a traitor's name ; exposed myself. 
From certain and possess'd conveniencies, 
To doubtful fortunes, sequestering from me all 



208 APPENDIX II 

That time, acquaintance, custom and condition 
Made tame and most familiar to my nature, 
And here, to do you service, am become 
As new into the world, strange, unacquainted. 

Further, the succeeding stanzas of the 'jame book represent 
Calchas's next speech in this scene. 

III. iii. 4 : things of lore] Ed ; things to love Q, Ff 1,2,3; things to come 
F 4.; things to Jove Johnson ; things, to love Steevens conj. ; things above 
Collier, ed. 2 (Mitford conj.); things to Jove Dyce; things from Jove 
Staunton (Becket conj.). 



THE ABERDEEN UNIVERSITY PRESS LIMITED 



BINDING SECT. JUN 3 1964 



/ 



PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE 
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET 



UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY 



PR Shakespeare, William 

2836 Troilus and Gressida 

A2D4 



