This book is D* T F ^ the last date stamped below 




£feS 




XTbe Uufcor Sbaftespeare 

EDITED BY 

WILLIAM ALLAN NEILSON 

AND 

ASHLEY HORACE THORNDIKE 



I 







THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 

NEW YORK • BOSTON • CHICAGO 
DALLAS • SAN FRANCISCO 

MACMILLAN & CO., Limited 

LONDON • BOMBAY ■ CALCUTTA 
MELBOURNE 

THE MACMILLAN CO. OF CANADA, Ltd. 

TORONTO 



XTbC ZTUfcOr SbafKSpearC w published ra thirty-nine 

volumes, including all of 
the plays and poems, each under the special editorship of an American 
scholar. The general editors are William Allan Neilson, Ph.D., 
of Harvard University, aud Ashley Horace Thorndike, Ph.D., 
L.H.D., of Columbia University. 

Romeo and Juliet — The General Editors. 

A Midsummer-Night's Dream — John W. Cunliffe, D.Lit., Profes- 
sor of English, Columbia University. 

Macbeth — Arthur C. L. Brown, Ph.D., Professor of English, North- 
western University. 

Henry IV, Part I — Frank W. Chandler, Ph.D., Professor of Eng- 
lish and Comparative Literature, University of Cincinnati. 

Troilus and Cressida — John S. P. Tatlock, Ph.D., Professor of Eng- 
lish, University of Michigan. 

Henry V — Lewis F. Mott, Ph.D., Professor of English, College of the 
City of New York. 

The Merchant of "Venice — Harry M. Ayf.es, Ph.D., Assistant Pro- 
fessor of English, Columbia University. 

As You Like It — Martha H. Shackford, Ph.D., Associate Professor 
of English Literature, Wellesley College. 

Coriolanus — Stuart P. Sherman, Ph.D., Professor of English, Uni- 
versity of Illinois. 

Henry VI, Part I — Louise Pound, Ph.D., Assistant Professor of Eng- 
lish, University of Nebraska. 

Henry VIII — Charles G. Dunlap, Litt.D., Professor of English Lit- 
erature, University of Kansas. 

Comedy of Errors — Frederick Morgan Padelford, Ph.D., Pro- 
fessor of English, University of Washington. 

King John — Henry M. Belpen, Ph.D., Professor of English, Uni- 
versity of Missouri. 

King Lear — Virginia C. Gildersleeve, Ph.D., Dean of Barnard 
College. 

Much Ado About Nothing —William W. Lawrence, Ph.D., Associate 
Professor of English, Columbia University. 

Love's Labour's Lost — Jamer F. E oyster, Ph.D., Professor of Eng- 
lish, University of North Carolina. 

Henry IV, Part II — Elizabeth Deering Hanscom, Ph.D., Pro- 
fessor of English, Smith College. 

Richard III — George B. Churchill, Ph.D., Professor of English, 
Amherst College. 



The Winter's Tale — Laura J. Wylie, Ph.D., Professor of English, 
V lax College. 

Othello — Thomas M. Parrott, Ph.D., Professor of English, Prince- 
ton University. 

The Two Gentlemen of Verona — Martin W. Sampson, A.M., Gold- 
win Smith Professor of English Literature, Cornell University. 

All's Well that Ends Well — John L. Lowes, Ph.D., Professor of Eng- 
lish, Washington University, St. Louis. 

Richard II — Hardin Craig, Ph.D., Professor of English, University 
of Minnesota. 

Measure for Measure — Edgar C. Morris, A.M., Professor of Eng- 
lish, Syracuse University. 

Twelfth Night — Walter Morris Hart, Ph.D., Associate Professor 
of English, University of California. 

The Taming of the Shrew — Frederick Tupper, Jr., Ph.D., Pro- 
fessor of English, University of Vermont. 

Julius Caesar — Robert M. Lovett, A.B., Professor of English, 
University of Chicago. 

Timon of Athens — Robert Huntington Fletcher, Ph.D., Pro- 
fessor of English Literature, Grinnell College, Iowa. 

Venus and Adonis, and Lucrece — Carleto>: Brown, Ph.D., Pro- 
fessor of English, Bryn Mawr College. 

Henry VI, Part III — Robert Adger Law, Ph.D., Adjunct Professor 
of English, the University of Texas. 

Cymbeline — Will D. Howe, Ph.D., Professor of English, Indiana 
University. 

Merry Wives of Windsor — Fred P. Emery, A.M., Professor of Eng- 
lish. Dartmouth College. 

Titus Andronicus — Elmer E. Btoll, Ph.D., 

Pericles — C. Alphonso Smith, Ph.D., Edgar Allan Poe Professor of 
English, University of Virginia. 

The Sonnets — Raymond M. Alden, Ph.D., Professor of English, 
University of Illinois. 

Hamlet — George Pierce Baker, A. B., Professor of Dramatic Lit- 
erature, Harvard University. 

Henry VI, Part II — Charles H. Barnwell, Ph.D., Professor of 
English, University of Alabama. 

The Tempest — Herbert E. Greene, Ph.D., Professor of English, 
Johns Hopkins University. 

Antony and Cleopatra — George Wyllys Benedict, Ph.D.. Associate 
Professor of English, Brown University. 



Z\)t Qttxt ugefc is tty Nrilson VUxt ropgrigijtrti m 1906 
bg $2SiIitam &llan Neiison 




£opgrtgJjt, 1913 
33s 3H) £ fHacmtllan (£ompang 

/frst rtitton of tfjts issue of " Cfif Erageoo of £ttua Sntromcus, 
pcfefeD «pril, 1013 



154 

jJntroDuctton 

rr\ Text. — Under date of January 23, 1594, Henslowe 

r* makes note in his diary of a new play, "titus & ondroni- 

v 'cus," performed by the servants of the Earl of Sussex. 

On February 6 of the same year there is entered to John 

Danter in the Stationers' Register a book entitled A Noble 

t. Roman Historye of Tytus Andronicus. An edition pub- 

^ lished in 1594 was mentioned by Gerard Langbaine in his 

H. Account of English Dramatic Poets , in 1691, and a copy 

of it was at last discovered at Malmo, Sweden, in 1905. 

It bears the title : " The most Lamentable Romaine 

Tragedie of Titus Andronicus: as it was Plaide by the 

Right Honorable the Earle of Darbie, Earle of Pembrooke 

and Earle of Sussex their Servants, London. Printed 

j by John Danter, etc., 1594." 

The Second Quarto (1600) gives a like account of itself 
on the title-page except for the name of another company 
Ji still, the Lord Chamberlain's, and the name of another 
printer. Though the changes in this text are on the whole 
few and slight, there are two omissions, one of six lines in 
the first scene of the play and another of five lines in the 
last. From the Second Quarto a third was printed in 
161 1, and from this, but for the addition of a scene in the 
third act, was printed the First Folio. The text of the 
present edition is based on the Second Quarto, amended 
at some points by the substitution of readings from the 
First. 

vii 



viii 3|ntrotiuction 

Date and Versions. — There is every reason to believe 
that the play as we have it is not only that entered in the 
Stationers' Register in February but also that mentioned 
as new (" ne ") by Henslowe in January. Before the 
discovery of the First Quarto, Henslowe's memorandum 
was thought by some to refer to the English original — 
from another hand than Shakespeare's — of a Dutch play 
by Jan Vos, entitled Aran en Titus, printed in 1641, and of 
a lost German play, acted at Linz in 1699, of which only 
a program remains. Another play, " tittus and vespacia," 
also marked " ne," mentioned by Henslowe as performed 
on April 11, 1591, was thought to be a still earlier version 
of the story, the original of another German play, entitled 
Tito Andronico, published in 1620, in which Lucius appears 
under the name Vespasianus. " Ne " often means no 
more than newly revised, and a previous version (if not 
two such) of the play there probably was. Very likely this, 
and not the present text, was carried over into Holland 
and Germany by English actors, known to have played 
there in the last year or so of the sixteenth century. For 
the Dutch and German pieces betray likenesses to each 
other and differences from the English text that point to a 
common source beyond it, as well as traits of an Eliza- 
bethan dramatic art of a more old-fashioned type. 1 

But we cannot hope to discover a previous version in 
Henslowe's entry in 1594. Later than the first days of 
1594 the man who probably had already penned The Two 

1 For a comparison of the Dutch and German with the Eng- 
lish version see an article by H. de W. Fuller in Publications of 
the Modern Language Association of America, vol. xvi, 1901. 



JlntroDuctton 



Gentlemen of Verona and Richard III could hardly have 
written our play without writing it better, and if it was 
new in January of that year, it would not have required re- 
touching for several years to come. Much earlier than the 
middle of the year before he could not have written it, be- 
cause he has echoed phrases and passages from Peele's 
Honour of the Garter, which was written to celebrate an 
event that took place on June 26, 1593. The only trace 
of an early version is " tittus and vespacia." Although 
these symbols may have to do rather with the Flavian 
emperors, they seem to furnish evidence, otherwise miss- 
ing in Henslowe, of the known popularity of the play. Of 
the later version there are recorded in his diary only five 
performances, and of the older ten. 

Authorship and Style. — Few now maintain that Shake- 
speare wrote the play at first hand, and most English 
critics in the last two centuries stoutly aver that he did no 
more than Edward Ravenscroft in 1687 said that he did : 
" I have been told by some anciently conversant with the 
stage that it was not originally his but brought by a private 
author to be acted, and he only gave some master touches 
to one or two of the principal parts or characters." But 
the wisest of these, setting little store by Ravenscroft, 
whose sincerity of purpose, by the way, Langbaine dis- 
credits, take their stand upon an un-Shakespearean quality 
in the style, the unmitigated horror of the fable, and the 
absence of Shakespeare's name on the title-pages of the 
quartos. This last circumstance seems outweighed, how- 
ever, by the explicit mention of the play in the catalogue of 
Shakespeare's tragedies by Francis Meres in 1598, the 



x ^Introduction 

inclusion of it in the First Folio by Shakespeare's friends 
and fellow-actors, Heminge and Condell, and the fact that 
the poet's name is missing on several of the other early 
quartos, as doubtless not yet commercially valuable. 

In enforcing their impression of the un-Shakespearean 
quality of the style the critics have had recourse to argu- 
ments derived from vocabulary, phrasing, and metre. 
With the last no case has been made. But there are words 
in Titus Andronicus which appear nowhere else in Shake- 
speare, though found in Peele, Greene, Kyd, and Lodge. 
There are phrases which resemble those of these poets, 
and a very few which may have been directly borrowed 
from Peele and possibly from the others. Hence has been 
inferred the authorship of Peele, or, according to some 
critics, of all the four. By this process of reasoning, as 
has been said, every man's hand may be found in every 
other man's play. 1 In Elizabethan times collaboration was 
no rare thing, but at the same time it must be borne in 
mind that poets then were all of one flock and fold, moved 
as by one impulse, drew from one common stock of senti- 
ment, phrase, and figure, and wrote like other poets, not 
like Browning to suit themselves. Their whole vocation 
was endless imitation. Hence recurrence of word or 
phrase, as of character and situation, is to be thought due, 
if not to a closer communion of spirits than poets now enjoy, 
to the imitation of another poet rather than to that poet's 
actually putting in an appearance for himself. 

1 For an extreme, though scholarly, example of this method 
Bee Did Shakespeare Write "Titus Andronicus' 1 ''? by John M. 
Robertson, London, 1905. 



31ntroDuctton xi 

Peele's, moreover, was not the hand to delineate the 
M splendid lunacy" of Titus, with his "miserable, mad, 
mistaking eyes," or the burly villainy of Aaron. Peele's 
Moor, Muly Mahamet, is but a shadow of Marlowe's 
Tamburlaine, and Tamburlaine and the Jew Barabas 
themselves are phantoms when put in the scale with 
Aaron. Like Barabas a mythical Machiavel, that is, a 
gloating, swaggering murderer, egoist, atheist, and limb 
of Satan, supposed, in accordance with the inflamed Eliza- 
bethan fancy of the way things were going in the world, 
to be living by the rule of the Florentine Machiavelli, not 
of Christ, he is nevertheless no fawning, sentimental son 
of Belial like the Jew of Malta, or mere mouthpiece for 
bragging hyperbole and frenzied mythological rant. He 
keeps cool like Richard Crookback and Iago, and is some- 
what more — or, rather, less — than ogre or hobgoblin. 
His humour is, if the apparent pun be allowed, good- 
humoured, not confined, like the grinning malice and gleeful 
hypocrisy of Barabas, to the base considerations of profit 
and loss ; and he gives it play, not unlike a man of this 
world, in easy-going, colloquial terms : 

Come on, you thick-lipp'd slave, I'll bear you hence : 
For it is you that puts us to our shifts. 

. . . their mother, 
As sure a card as ever won the set. 

As he speaks of the mother, so of the child. Shakespeare 
is the first Elizabethan, perhaps the first of dramatists, to 
conceive and cope with that interesting situation, the 
villain with the new-born child of his body in his arms. 



xii 3Intro0uctton 

Barabas speaks of Abigail and to her in lofty tones and ten- 
der cadences : 

whom I hold as dear 

As Agamemnon did his Iphigen, 

And all I have is hers ; 

later to curse her with all the fury of a demon. When 
he loves her he is not Barabas ; but Aaron takes up his 
thick-lipped brat with a chuckle of paternal complacence 
quite in his vein: 

Here's a young lad fram'd of another leer : 
Look how the black slave smiles upon his father, 
As who should say 4 Old lad, I am thine own.' l 

No Agamemnonian hero this, but a dog — a brute — of a 
man, fondling his whelp. Unlike Barabas, unlike Tamora 
in the play, and nearly all of the other fierce men and 
women in the early Elizabethan drama when they stoop to 
the language of love and affection, he does not drop into 
sentiment too delicate and mincing for his lips. 

Aaron and Titus apart, however, not much can be said 
for the originality of the characters, or for their likeness 
to others of Shakespeare's. Titus himself is not much 
like Lear, nor Tamora like Lady Macbeth. But surely 
there is something in the suggestion that the Clown is one 
of the characters who are Shakespeare's own, not because 
of his quibbling and reckless confounding of words, but 

1 The situation, crudely treated, is to be found indeed in the 
German Tito Andronico, whether derived from Shakespeare 
we cannot say. 



3]ntroDuetion xm 

because of his saying to Titus when he takes him for an 
angel: "From heaven! alas, Sir, I never came there. 
God forbid I should be so bold to press to heaven in my 
young days," or, in more familiar phrase, " I would be 
loath to pay him before his day." The man who wrote 
either was not Peele, Greene, or Marlowe, if we know 
them, but the man who wrote : " Now I to comfort him 
bid him he should not think of God ; I hoped there was no 
need to trouble himself with any such thoughts yet : " — a 
man who above all others took delight in a rude and 
cheerful soul who is loath to enter into the kingdom. 

Another character not in Peele's vein but decidedly in 
Shakespeare's is Young Lucius. The youth in The Battle 
of Alcazar has no character at all, but Lucius is like Prince 
Edward in Marlowe's Edward II y and in his affection- 
ateness and intrepidity, his eagerness to fight or to revenge 
his family's wrongs, and his somewhat plaintive and self- 
conscious pathos he is still more like Prince Arthur in 
King John and the young princes in Richard III. 

As for the blood and thunder and the parade of Latin 
and classical allusion at which the critics stumble, are 
they more than is to be expected, being part of the current 
tradition in the Senecan type of tragedy then in vogue? 
Titus Andronicus is no more unlike Shakespeare's other 
earliest histories and tragedies than Love's Labour's Lost or 
The Comedy of Errors is unlike his other comedies. Here 
he but outdid Marlowe and Kyd as there he outdid Lyly 
and Plautus. A god come down among men, he eclipses 
them all, in their vices as in their virtues. With no such 
excuse for it as in a Roman play, all of Shakespeare's 



xiv JlntroUuction 

early work is sprinkled with Latin and abounds in classical 
allusion; purely classical in subject are his two long 
poems, and one of them has two lines of Latin for a motto. 
Likewise his early histories and tragedies, Henry VI and 
Richard III, as for that matter Hamlet and King Lear 
(witness Gloster's eyes!), abound in blood. In the Epi- 
logue to Selimus, a play which belongs to the same year 
as Titus, the hero holds out the promise of " greater mur- 
thers " in the Second Part. In 1581 Robert Wilson was 
thought to be the man to write a play then desired, " full of 
all sorts of murders, immorality, and robberies." Such a 
desire was in that day no base and degenerate one either, 
for not otherwise Scaliger, one of the authoritative critics 
of the Renaissance, had denned the scope of tragedy. 

Source. — The source of Shakespeare was, as we have 
seen, an old play or plays. The author of one of these may 
have been Peele, and if it was, some tricks of style could 
be explained, as well as some Senecan traits of narration 
(instead of Shakespeare's direct presentment) which 
appear in the Dutch and German versions. However that 
may be, the main features of Shakespeare's story, not to 
be found in the Dutch or German versions, are : the rivalry 
between Saturninus and Bassianus for the throne; the 
funeral of Titus's sons killed in war ; the sacrifice of Alar- 
bus: the kidnapping of Lavinia by Bassianus, with the 
death of Mutius ; the sending of young Lucius with pres- 
ents to the sons of Tamora ; and the whole of the second 
scene of the third act, which appears only in the First 
Folio and is perhaps a later addition. Perhaps there is 
more significance in what Shakespeare suppresses — 



31ntroDuction xv 

the gross obscenity of the Moor's confessions concerning 
his past life, and the burning of him alive on the stage, in 
the Dutch version. These may indeed be the additions 
of the travelling actors or of the Dutch and Germans them- 
selves, but it would be like Shakespeare to suppress ob- 
scenity when there is no joke at stake, or tortures like 
these penal fires, which remind us, by the way, of the boil- 
ing cauldron of Barabas, and are one of the most striking 
evidences of the existence of an earlier play. 1 

Other Versions of the Story. — At the same time as our 
play there was entered in the Stationers' Register "alsoe the 
ballad thereof," and if it be the same as that entitled Titus 
Andronicus's Complaint, in Percy's Reliques, the play is 
the source of it. Another ballad, in the Roxburghe col- 
lection, entitled A lamentable Ballad of the Tragical end 
of a Gallant Lord and a Vertuous Lady, with the untimely 
end of their two Children, wickedly performed by a Hea- 
thenish Blackamoor their Servant: the like never heard of, 
tells practically the same story as the twenty-first novel 
in the third book of Bandello, a translation of which was 
entered in the Stationers' Register on July 22, 1569-1570. 
The story is of a black slave who, beaten by his master, 
revenges himself by ravishing his mistress, killing one of 
the children, inducing his master to cut off his nose on the 
promise of saving the lives of the others, and killing them, 
with a laugh, nevertheless. In a manuscript of the thir- 
teenth or fourteenth century in the Erlangen Library there 

1 In Ravenscroft's version (see below, p. xvii) Aaron is again 
burned on the stago. This may have been due to Ravenscroft's 
knowledge of the older play. 



xvi 3|ntroDurtion 

is a collection of exempla which contains a similar story, 
that of a slave who gets his master's son in his power and, 
on the strength of a hypocritical promise to save his life, 
induces his master to pluck out his own eyes. 

Other indebtedness has been traced to various classical 
sources. The name Andronicus was borne by an emperor 
of Constantinople, surnamed Comnenus, who, like Titus, 
shot arrows with missives attached, not up to the gods but 
over the walls of Prusa. Tamora, Queen of the Goths, is 
probably a reminiscence of that Tomyris, Queen of the 
Getae (Goths they were to Touchstone) who revenged the 
death of her son on Cyrus. And the story of Lavinia is 
much the same as that of Philomela and Progne, con- 
stantly referred to in the text, which Ovid's verse spread 
far and wide in the Middle Ages and ^he Renaissance. 

Relations to Contemporary Drama* — Two influences 
presided at the making of the play — that of Kyd and that 
of Marlowe. The latter's influence is almost confined to 
the character of Aaron, analyzed above, and to the style 
and versification. Throughout the play Marlowe's thun- 
dering line and high-astounding terms prevail over the 
crabbed and pedantic bombast of Kyd. But to Kyd is 
due the type of the play as a whole, the Senecan species 
which he domesticated and popularized in The Spanish 
Tragedy and probably in the earlier Hamlet. In this 
the motive is revenge, not revenge for personal satisfac- 
tion, but as a sacred duty and in obedience to the powers 
above. Ghosts, indeed, there are none, yet in orthodox 
fashion the hero appeals for justice to the divinities 
supernal and infernal and to earth and heaven. There are 



31ntroDuction xvii 

Senecan omens and premonitions, murder and mutilation, 
and a Thyestean cannibal banquet. And as in Kyd, a 
father is engaged in avenging his murdered children, goes 
mad from passion and mad in craft, and himself falls 
under the avalanche of ruin which he precipitates at the 
end. 

Stage History. — Of all Elizabethan tragedies the most 
popular, it would seem, were the bloody four — Kyd's 
Spanish Tragedy, the Hamlet of Kyd and of Shakespeare, 
Marlowe's Jew of Malta, and Titus Andronicus. Fifteen 
times the play is entered in Henslowe's book (if all the 
Titus and Andronicus plays be taken together), and accord- 
ing to Henslowe and the title-pages five 1 different compa- 
nies played it. Contemporary allusions to it were numerous 
and the popularity of the play is shown even by the later 
scornful allusions, as that of Jonson, in Bartholomew 
Fair (1614), to those playgoers " who swear leronimo and 
Andronicus are the best plays yet." 

In 1687 Ravenscroft published his revision, acted in 
1678, which bears the sub-title " the Rape of Lavinia." 
Although he boasts of having " refined the language, 
heightened the characters, and increased the plot," he 
seems to have added vastly to the horror of it, in so far 
as to have Tamora kill her child herself, and Aaron, who 
thereupon offers to eat it, racked and burned on the stage. 
It is this version only that found favour henceforth in 

1 Actually they were three in number, for four of the names 
were borne by two companies at differont periods of their career. 
But the point is that they kept on playing Titus. 



XV111 



3f|ntroDuctton 



the theatre. Revived at Drury Lane in 1717, it was said 
in the advertisement to have been acted " but twice these 
fifteen years." James Quin was Aaron, and he played 
him again in 1720 and 1721. In 1852-1856 the piece was 
acted in London and Dublin by Ira Aldridge, the " African 
Roscius," and as it was then announced to be the first 
performance in two hundred years the text was probably 
that of Shakespeare, though, according to the testimony 
of spectators, much curtailed. Aldridge had difficulty in 
persuading his company to play it, and he thought good to 
follow it with a farce called " Mummy " and a song called 
" Possum up a gum tree." And that was the end of Titus 
and Aaron on the stage. 




mm 



C^e Cragta? of Cttujs anDromcuss 



[DRAMATIS PERSON/E 

Batuuninub, son to the late Emperor of Rome, and afterwards declared 

Emperor. 

Bassiaxus, brother to Saturninus; in love with Lavinia. 

Titus Andronicus, a noble Roman, general against the Goths. 

Marcus Andronicus, tribune of the people, and brother to Titus. 

Lucius, ] 

Qutntus, I . _.. , , 

. . f sons to Titus Andronicus. 

Martius, 

Mutius, J 

Young Lucius, a boy, son to Lucius. 

.Emilius, a noble Roman. 

Publius, son to Marcus the Tribune. 

Sempronius, "J 

Caius, >- kinsmen to Titus. 

Valentine, J 

ALARBU8, 1 

Demetrius, V sons to Tamora. 
Chiron, J 

"Aaron, a Moor, beloved by Tamora. 
A Clown. 

A Captain, Tribune, and Messenger. 
Goths and Romans. 

Tamora, Queen of the Goths. 
Lavinia, daughter to Titus Andronicus. 
A Nurse, and a black child. 

Senators, Tribunes, Officers, Soldiers, and Attendants.. 

Scene: Rome, and the country near it.] 



€^c CrageD? of CttitjS au&romcuss 



ACT FIRST 

Scene I 

[Rome. Before the Senate-house. The Tomb of the 
Andronici appearing.] 

Enter the Tribunes and Senators aloft, and then enter 
Saturninus and his Followers at one door, and 
Bassianus and his Followers at the other; with 
drums and trumpets. 

Sat. Noble patricians, patrons of my right, 

Defend the justice of my cause with arms, 

And, countrymen, my loving followers, 

Plead my successive title with your swords. 

I am his first-born son, that was the last 5 

That wore the imperial diadem of Rome ; 

Then let my father's honours live in me, 

Nor wrong mine age with this indignity. 

Bas. Romans, friends, followers, favourers of my right, 
If ever Bassianus, Caesar's son, 10 

3 



4 ©itus 3nDronicu$ Act I 

Were gracious in the eyes of royal Rome, 

Keep then this passage to the Capitol, 

And suffer not dishonour to approach 

The imperial seat, to virtue consecrate, 

To justice, continence, and nobility ; 15 

But let desert in pure election shine, 

And, Romans, fight for freedom in your choice. 

Enter Marcus Andronicus, aloft, with the crown. 

Marc. Princes, that strive by factions and by friends 
Ambitiously for rule and empery, 
Know that the people of Rome, for whom we stand 
A special party, have, by common voice, 21 

In election for the Roman empery, 
Chosen Andronicus, surnamed Pius 
For many good and great deserts to Rome. 
A nobler man, a braver warrior, 25 

Lives not this day within the city walls. 
He by the senate is accited home 
From weary wars against the barbarous Goths ; 
That, with his sons, a terror to our foes, 
Hath yok'd a nation strong, train'd up in arms. 30 
Ten years are spent since first he undertook 
This cause of Rome and chastised with arms 
Our enemies' pride ; five times he hath return'd 
Bleeding to Rome, bearing his valiant sons 
In coffins from the field ; 35 

And now at last, laden with honour's spoils, 



Sc. I {Eitua #nDronicu0 5 

Returns the good Andronicus to Rome, 

Renowned Titus, flourishing in arms. 

Let us entreat, by honour of his name, 

Whom worthily you would have now succeed, 40 

And in the Capitol and senate's right, 

Whom you pretend to honour and adore, 

That you withdraw you and abate your strength, 

Dismiss your followers, and, as suitors should, 

Plead your deserts in peace and humbleness. 45 

Sat. How fair the tribune speaks to calm my thoughts ! 

Bas. Marcus Andronicus, so I do affy 
In thy uprightness and integrity, 
And so I love and honour thee and thine, 
Thy noble brother Titus and his sons, 50 

And her to whom my thoughts are humbled all, 
Gracious Lavinia, Rome's rich ornament, 
That I will here dismiss my loving friends, 
And to my fortunes and the people's favour 
Commit my cause in balance to be weigh'd. 55 
Exeunt soldiers [of Bassianus). 

Sat. Friends, that have been thus forward in my right, 
I thank you all and here dismiss you all, 
And to the love and favour of my country 
Commit myself, my person, and the cause. 

[Exeunt soldiers of Saturninus.] 
Rome, be as just and gracious unto me 60 

As I am confident and kind to thee. 
Open the gates, and let me in. 



6 tEitutf 3ntiromcu$ Act i 

Bos. Tribunes, and me, a poor competitor. 

Flourish. They go up into the Senate-house. 

Enter a Captain. 

Cap. Romans, make way ! The good Andronicus, 
Patron of virtue, Rome's best champion, 65 

Successful in the battles that he fights, 
With honour and with fortune is return'd 
From where he circumscribed with his sword, 
And brought to yoke, the enemies of Rome. 

Drums and trumpets sounded, and then enter two of 
Titus's sons [Martius and Mutius]; and then 
two Men bearing a coffin covered with black ; then 
two other sons [Lucius and Quintus]. Then Titus 
Andronicus; and then Tamora, the Queen of 
Goths with her [three] sons [Alarbus,] Demetrius, and 
Chiron ; Aaron the Moor, and others as many as can 
be. They set down the coffin, and Titus speaks. 

Tit. Hail, Rome, victorious in thy mourning weeds ! 
Lo, as the bark that hath discharg'd her fraught 71 
Returns with precious lading to the bay 
From whence at first she weigh'd her anchorage, 
Cometh Andronicus, bound with laurel boughs, 
To re-salute his country with his tears, 75 

Tears of true joy for his return to Rome. 
Thou great defender of this Capitol, 



Sc. i tEitutf &n&romcu$ 7 

Stand gracious to the rites that we intend ! 
Romans, of five and twenty valiant sons, 
Half of the number that King Priam had, 80 

Behold the poor remains, alive and dead ! 
These that survive let Rome reward with love, 
These that I bring unto their latest home 
With burial amongst their ancestors. 
Here Goths have given me leave to sheathe my 
sword. 85 

Titus, unkind and careless of thine own, 
Why suffer'st thou thy sons, unburied yet, 
To hover on the dreadful shore of Styx ? 
Make way to lay them by their brethren. 

They open the tomb. 
There greet in silence, as the dead are wont, 90 
And sleep in peace, slain in your country's wars ! 
O sacred receptacle of my joys, 
Sweet cell of virtue and nobility, 
How many sons hast thou of mine in store, 
That thou wilt never render to me more ! 95 

Luc. Give us the proudest prisoner of the Goths, 
That we may hew his limbs and on a pile 
Ad manes fratrum sacrifice his flesh 
Before this earthy prison of their bones ; 
That so the shadows be not imappeas'd, 100 

Nor we disturb'd with prodigies on earth. 

Tit. I give him you, the noblest that survives, 
The eldest son of this distressed queen. 



8 ®ttu0 anDromeu* Acti 

Tarn. Stay, Roman brethren ! Gracious conqueror, 
Victorious Titus, rue the tears I shed, 105 

A mother's tears in passion for her son ; 
And if thy sons were ever dear to thee, 
O, think my son to be as dear to me ! 
Sufficeth not that we are brought to Rome, 
To beautify thy triumphs and return, 110 

Captive to thee and to thy Roman yoke, 
But must my sons be slaught'red in the streets 
For valiant doings in their country's cause ? 
O, if to fight for king and commonweal 
Were piety in thine, it is in these. 115 

Andronicus, stain not thy tomb with blood ! 
Wilt thou draw near the nature of the gods ? 
Draw near them, then, in being merciful ; 
Sweet mercy is nobility's true badge. 
Thrice noble Titus, spare my first-born son ! 120 

Tit. Patient yourself, madam, and pardon me. 

These are their brethren, whom your Goths beheld 
Alive and dead ; and for their brethren slain 
Religiously they ask a sacrifice. 
To this your son is mark'd, and die he must, 125 
To appease their groaning shadows that are gone. 

Luc. Away with him ! and make a fire straight ; 
And with our swords, upon a pile of wood, 
Let's hew his limbs till they be clean consum'd. 
Exeunt Lucius, Quintus, Martius, and Mutius, 
with Alarbus. 



Sc. I 2Tttu0 £nDromcu$ 9 

Tarn. O cruel, irreligious piety ! 130 

Chi. Was never Scythia half so barbarous. 
Dem. Oppose not Scythia to ambitious Rome. 
Alarbus goes to rest ; and we survive 
To tremble under Titus' threat'ning look. 
Then, madam, stand resolv'd, but hope withal 135 
The self-same gods that arm'd the Queen of Troy 
With opportunity of sharp revenge 
Upon the Thracian tyrant in his tent, 
May favour Tamora, the Queen of Goths — 
When Goths were Goths and Tamora was 
queen — 140 

To quit the bloody wrongs upon her foes. 

Re-enter Lucius, Quintus, Martins, and Mutius [with 
their swords bloody]. 

Luc. See, lord and father, how we have perform'd 
Our Roman rites. Alarbus' limbs are lopp'd, 
And entrails feed the sacrificing fire, 
Whose smoke, like incense, doth perfume the 
sky. 145 

Remaineth nought but to inter our brethren, 
And with loud 'larums welcome them to Rome. 
Tit. Let it be so ; and let Andronicus 

Make this his latest farewell to their souls. 

Trumpets sounded, and the coffin laid in the 
tomb. 
In peace and honour rest you here, my sons ; 150 



io ®itu0 anoronicusf Acti 

Rome's readiest champions, repose you here in rest, 
Secure from worldly chances and mishaps ! 
Here lurks no treason, here no envy swells, 
Here grow no damned drugs ; here are no storms, 
No noise, but silence and eternal sleep. 155 

In peace and honour rest you here, my sons ! 

Enter Lavinia. 

Lav. In peace and honour live Lord Titus long, 
My noble lord and father, live in fame ! 
Lo, at this tomb my tributary tears 
I render, for my brethren's obsequies ; 1G0 

And at thy feet I kneel, with tears of joy 
Shed on this earth for thy return to Rome. 
O, bless me here with thy victorious hand, 
Whose fortunes Rome's best citizens applaud ! 

Tit. Kind Rome, that hast thus lovingly reserv'd 165 
The cordial of mine age to glad my heart ! 
Lavinia, live ; outlive thy father's days 
And fame's eternal date, for virtue's praise ! 

Marc. Long live Lord Titus, my beloved brother, 

Gracious triumpher in the eyes of Rome ! 170 

Tit. Thanks, gentle tribune, noble brother Marcus. 

Marc. And welcome, nephews, from successful wars, 
You that survive, and you that sleep in fame ! 
Fair lords, your fortunes are alike in all, 
That in your country's service drew your 
swords ; 175 



Sc. I tEitua anuromcu* n 

But safer triumph is this funeral pomp, 

That hath aspir'd to Solon's happiness 

And triumphs over chance in honour's bed. 

Titus Andronicus, the people of Rome, 

Whose friend in justice thou hast ever been, 180 

Send thee by me, their tribune and their trust, 

This palliament of white and spotless hue ; 

And name thee in election for the empire, 

With these our late-deceased emperor's sons. 

Be candidatus then, and put it on, 185 

And help to set a head on headless Rome. 

Tit. A better head her glorious body fits 

Than his that shakes for age and feebleness. 
What should I don this robe, and trouble you ? 
Be chosen with proclamations to-day, 190 

To-morrow yield up rule, resign my life, 
^ And set abroad new business for you all ? 
Rome, I have been thy soldier forty years, 
y >\ And led my country's strength successfully, 

N%j And buried one and twenty valiant sons, 195 

j^L Knighted in field, slain manfully in arms, 
In right and service of their noble country. 
Give me a staff of honour for mine age, 
But not a sceptre to control the world ; 
Upright he held it, lords, that held it last. 200 

Marc. Titus, thou shalt obtain and ask the empery. 

Sat. Proud and ambitious tribune, canst thou tell ? 

Tit. Patience, Prince Saturninus. 



12 Witu$ amiromcus Act i 

Sat. Romans, do me right. 

Patricians, draw your swords, and sheathe them not 
Till Saturninus be Rome's emperor. 205 

Andronicus, would thou were shipp'd to hell, 
Rather than rob me of the people's hearts ! 

Luc. Proud Saturnine, interrupter of the good 
That noble-minded Titus means to thee ! 

Tit. Content thee, Prince ; I will restore to thee 210 
The people's hearts, and wean them from them- 
selves. 

Bas. Andronicus, I do not flatter thee, 
But honour thee, and will do till I die. 
My faction if thou strengthen with thy friends, 
I will most thankful be ; and thanks to men 215 
Of noble minds is honourable meed. 

Tit. People of Rome, and people's tribunes here, 
I ask your voices and your suffrages. 
Will you bestow them friendly on Andronicus ? 

Tribunes. To gratify the good Andronicus, 220 

And gratulate his safe return to Rome, 
The people will accept whom he admits. 

Tit. Tribunes, I thank you ; and this suit I make, 
That you create our emperor's eldest son, 
Lord Saturnine ; whose virtues will, I hope, 225 
Reflect on Rome as Titan's rays on earth, 
And ripen justice in this commonweal. 
Then, if you will elect by my advice, 
Crown him, and say, "Long live our emperor !" 



Sc. I ®itu0 #n&romcu* 13 

Marc. With voices and applause of every sort, 230 
Patricians and plebeians, we create 
Lord Saturninus Rome's great emperor, 
And say, "Long live our Emperor Saturnine !" 

A long flourish till they come down. 

Sat. Titus Andronicus, for thy favours done 

To us in our election this day, 235 

I give thee thanks in part of thy deserts, 
And will with deeds requite thy gentleness ; 
And, for an onset, Titus, to advance 
Thy name and honourable family, 
Lavinia will I make my empress, 240 

Rome's royal mistress, mistress of my heart, 
And in the sacred Pantheon her espouse. 
Tell me, Andronicus, doth this motion please 
thee ? 

Tit. It doth, my worthy lord ; and in this match 

I hold me highly honoured of your Grace : 245 
And here in sight of Rome to Saturnine, 
King and commander of our commonweal, 
The wide world's emperor, do I consecrate 
My sword, my chariot, and my prisoners ; 
Presents well worthy Rome's imperious lord. 250 
Receive them, then, the tribute that I owe, 
Mine honour's ensigns humbled at thy feet. 

Sat. Thanks, noble Titus, father of my life ! 
How proud I am of thee and of thy gifts 
Rome shall record, and when I do forget 255 



14 ®ttu0 3nDronini0 Act I 

The least of these unspeakable deserts, 
Romans, forget your fealty to me. 
Tit. [To Tamora.] Now, madam, are you prisoner to 
an emperor ; 
To him that, for your honour and your state, 
Will use you nobly and your followers. 260 

Sat. A goodly lady, trust me, of the hue 

That I would choose, were I to choose anew. — 
Clear up, fair queen, that cloudy countenance ; 
Though chance of war hath wrought tins change 

of cheer, 
Thou com'st not to be made a scorn in Rome ; 265 
Princely shall be thy usage every way. 
Rest on my word, and let not discontent 
Daunt all your hopes. Madam, he comforts you 
Can make you greater than the Queen of Goths. 
Lavinia, you are not displeas'd with this ? 270 
Lav. Not I, my lord ; sith true nobility 

Warrants these words in princely courtesy. 
Sat. Thanks, sweet Lavinia. Romans, let us go ; 
Ransomless here we set our prisoners free. 
Proclaim our honours, lords, with trump and 
drum. 275 

[Flourish. Saturninus courts Tamora in dumb 
show.] 
Bas. Lord Titus, by your leave, this maid is mine. 

[Seizing Lavinia.] 
Tit. How, sir ! Are you in earnest then, my lord ? 



Sc. I tEitutf #nDronicu0 15 

Bas. Ay, noble Titus ; and resolv'd withal 

To do myself this reason and this right. 
Marc. "Suum cuique" is our Roman justice ; 280 

This prince in justice seizeth but his own. 
Luc. And that he will, and shall, if Lucius live. 
Tit. Traitors, avaunt ! Where is the Emperor's guard ? 

Treason, my lord ! Lavinia is surpris'd ! 
Sat. Surpris'd ! By whom ? 

Bas. By him that justly may 

Bear his betroth'd from all the world away. 286 
[Exeunt Bassianus and Marcus with Lavinia.] 
Mut. Brothers, help to convey her hence away, 
And with my sword I'll keep this door safe. 

[Exeunt Lucius, Quintus, and Martius.] 
Tit. Follow, my lord, and I'll soon bring her back. 289 
Mut. My lord, you pass not here. 
Tit. What, villain boy ! /.^ 

Barr'st me my way in Rome ? 1 

Mut. Help, Lucius, helpT 'fc l 

\wj\L i$ Wilt Titus kills him 
[During the fray, exeunt Saturninus, Tamora, 
Demetrius, Chiron, and Aaron.] 

[Re-enter Lucius.] 

Luc. My lord, you are unjust, and, more than so, 
In wrongful quarrel y ou have s lain your son. 
Tit. Nor thou, nor he, are any sons of mine ; 



,-p,'. 



H 



16 tEitus 3nDromeus? Act I 

My sons would never so dishonour me. 295 

Traitor, restore Lavinia to the Emperor. 
Luc. Dead, if you will ; but not to be his wife 

That is another's lawful promis'd love. [Exit.] 

Re-enter aloft Saturninus with Tamora and her two sons, 
and Aaron. 

Sat. No, Titus, no ; the Emperor needs her not, 

Nor her, nor thee, nor any of thy stock. 300 

I'll trust, by leisure, him that mocks me once ; 
Thee never, nor thy traitorous haughty sons, 
Confederates all thus to dishonour me. 
Was there none else in Rome to make a stale 
But Saturnine ? Full well, Andronicus, 305 

Agree these deeds with that proud brag of thine, 
That said'st I begg'd the empire at thy hands. 

Tit. O monstrous ! what reproachful words are these ? 

Sat. But go thy ways ; go, give that changing piece 
To him that flourish'd for her with his sword. 310 
A valiant son-in-law thou shalt enjoy, 
One fit to bandy with thy lawless sons, 
To ruffle in the commonwealth of Rome. 

Tit. These words are razors to my wounded heart. 314 

Sat. And therefore, lovely Tamora, Queen of Goths, 
That like the stately Phcebe 'mongst her nymphs 
Dost overshine the gallant'st dames of Rome, 
If thou be pleas'd with this my sudden choice, 
Behold, I choose thee, Tamora, for my bride, 



Sc. I ©itu0 anDronicufif 17 

And will create thee Empress of Rome. 320 

Speak, Queen of Goths, dost thou applaud my 

choice ? 
And here I swear by all the Roman gods, 
Sitli priest and holy water are so near 
And tapers burn so bright and everything 
In readiness for Hymenaeus stand, 325 

I will not re-salute the streets of Rome, 
Or climb my palace, till from forth this place 
I lead espous'd my bride along with me. 

Tarn. And here, in sight of heaven, to Rome I swear, 
If Saturnine advance the Queen of Goths, 330 

She will a handmaid be to his desires, 
A loving nurse, a mother to his youth. 

Sat. Ascend, fair queen, Pantheon ; lords, accompany 
Your noble emperor and his lovely bride, 
Sent by the heavens for Prince Saturnine, 335 

Whose wisdom hath her fortune conquered ; 
There shall we consummate our spousal rites. 

Exeunt all [but Titus]. 

Tit. I am not bid to wait upon this bride. 

Titus, when wert thou wont to walk alone, 
Dishonoured thus, and challenged of wrongs ? 340 

Re-enter Marcus, Lucius, Quintus, and Martins. 

Marc. O Titus, see, 0, see what thou hast done ! 

In a bad quarrel slain a virtuous son. 
Tit. No, foolish tribune, no ; no son of mine, 
c 



18 tEitus #ntiromcu0 Act I 

Nor thou, nor these, confederates in the deed 
That hath dishonoured all our family ; 345 

Unworthy brother, and unworthy sons ! 

Luc. But let us give him burial, as becomes ; 
Give Mutius burial with our brethren. 

Tit. Traitors, away ! he rests not in this tomb. 

This monument five hundred years hath stood, 
Which I have sumptuously re-edified. 351 

Here none but soldiers and Rome's servitors 
Repose in fame ; none basely slain in brawls. 
Bury him where you can ; he comes not here. 

Marc. My lord, this is impiety in you. 355 

My nephew Mutius' deeds do plead for him ; 

He must be buried with his brethren. 

Quin. \ , , „ , . .„ 

J-. [ And shall, or him we will accompany. 

Tit. "And shall!" What villain was it spake that 

word ? 
Quin. He that would vouch it in any place but here. 
Tit. What, would you bury him in my despite ? 361 
Marc. No, noble Titus, but entreat of thee 

To pardon Mutius and to bury him. 
Tit. Marcus, even thou hast struck upon my crest, 

And, with these boys, mine honour thou hast 
wounded. 365 

My foes I do repute you everyonej_ 

So, trouble me no more, but get you gone. 
Luc. He is not with himself ; let us withdraw. 



Sc. I {Ktutf #nDromcus 19 

Mart. Not I, till Mutius' bones be buried. 

Marcus and the sons of Titus kneel. 

Marc. Brother, for in that name doth nature 
plead, — 370 

Mart. Father, and in that name doth nature speak, — 

Tit. Speak thou no more, if all the rest will speed. 

Marc. Renowned Titus, more than half my soul, — 

Luc. Dear father, soul and substance of us all, — 

Marc. Suffer thy brother Marcus to inter 375 

His noble nephew here in virtue's nest, 
That died in honour and Lavinia's cause. 
Thou art a Roman, be not barbarous. 
The Greeks upon advice did bury Ajax 
That slew himself ; and wise Laertes' son 380 

Did graciously plead for his funerals. 
Let not young Mutius, then, that was thy joy, 
Be barr'd his entrance here. 

Tit. Rise, Marcus, rise. 

The dismall'st day is this that e'er I saw, 
To be dishonoured by my sons in Rome ! 385 

Well, bury him, and bury me the next. 

Mutius is put into the tomb. 

Luc. There lie thy bones, sweet Mutius, with thy 
friends, 
Till we with trophies do adorn thy tomb. 

All. (Kneeling.) No man shed tears for noble Mutius ; 

He lives in fame that died in virtue's cause. 390 

Exeunt all but Marcus and Titus. 



2o tCitusf 3nDromcu$ Act I 

Marc. My lord, to step out of these dreary dumps, 
How comes it that the subtle Queen of Goths 
Is of a sudden thus advanc'd in Rome ? 

Tit. I know not, Marcus, but I know it is ; 

Whether by device or no, the heavens can tell. 
Is she not then beholding to the man 396 

That brought her for this high good turn so far ? 
[Yes, and will nobly him remunerate.] 

Flourish. Re-enter Saturninus, Tamora, Demetrius, 
Chiron, and Aaron at one door ; enter, at the other 
door, Bassianus, Lavinia, with others. 

Sat. So, Bassianus, you have play'd your prize. 

God give you joy, sir, of your gallant bride ! 400 
Bas. And you of yours, my lord ! I say no more, 

Nor wish no less ; and so, I take my leave. 
Sat. Traitor, if Rome have law or we have power, 

Thou and thy faction shall repent this rape. 
Bas. Rape, call you it, my lord, to seize my own, 

My true betrothed love and now my wife ? 406 

But let the laws of Rome determine all ; 

Meanwhile I am possess'd of that is mine. 
Sat. 'Tis good, sir ; you are very short with us ; 

But, if we live, we'll be as sharp with you. 410 

Bas. My lord, what I have done, as best I may 

Answer I must, and shall do with my life. 

Only thus much I give your Grace to know : 



Sc. I {Eitutf #rtDronicu0 ai 

By all the duties that I owe to Rome, 

This noble gentleman, Lord Titus here, 415 

Is in opinion and in honour wrong'd ; 

That in the rescue of Lavinia 

With his own hand did slay his youngest son, 

In zeal to you and highly mov'd to wrath 

To be controll'd in that he frankly gave. 420 

Receive him, then, to favour, Saturnine, 

That hath express'd himself in all his deeds 

A father and a friend to thee and Rome. 

Tit. Prince Bassianus, leave to plead my deeds ; 424 
'Tis thou and those that have dishonoured me. 
Rome and the righteous heavens be my judge, 
How I have lov'd and honoured Saturnine ! 

Tarn. My worthy lord, if ever Tamora 

Were gracious in those princely eyes of thine, 
Then hear me speak indifferently for all ; 430 

And at my suit, sweet, pardon what i s^east^. 

Sat. What, madam ! be dishonoured openly 
And basely put it up without revenge ? 

Tarn. Not so, my lord ; the gods of Rome forfend 

I should be author to dishonour you ! 435 

But on mine honour dare I undertake 

For good Lord Titus' innocence in all, 

Whose fury not dissembled speaks his griefs. 

Then, at my suit, look graciously on him ; 

Lose not so noble a friend on vain suppose, 440 

Nor with sour looks afflict his gentle heart. 



2a ®ttu0 3n&romcu0 Acti 

[Aside to Sat.] My lord, be rul'd by me, be won 

at last ; 
Dissemble~afl your griefs and discontents. 
You are but newly planted in your throne ; 
Lest, then, the people, and patricians too, 445 
Upon a just survey, take Titus' part, 
And so supplant you for ingratitude, 
Which Rome reputes to be a heinous sin, 
Yield at entreats ; and then let me alone : 
rilf jnd a day to massacre them all 450 

jV v And raze their faction and their family, 
vj The cruel father and his traitorous sons, 
Ik To whom I sued for my dear son's life, 

And make them know what 'tis to let a queen 
Kneel in the streets and beg for grace in vain. 

[Again speaking openly to Sat.] 
Come, come, sweet emperor ; — come, Andron- 
icus ; — 456 

Take up this good old man, and cheer the heart 
That dies in tempest of thy angry frown. 
Sat. Rise, Titus, rise ; my empress hath prevail'd. 
Tit. I thank your Majesty, and her, my lord. 460 

These words, these looks, infuse new life in me. 
Tarn. Titus, I am incorporate in Rome, 
A Roman now adopted happily, 
And must advise the Emperor for his good, 
j This day all quarrels die, Andronicus,; 465 

[And let it be mine honour, good my lord, 



Sc. I tEitug an&ronicutf 23 

That I have reconcil'd your friends and you. 

For you, Prince Bassianus, I have pass'd 

My word and promise to the Emperor 

That you will be more mild and tractable. 470 

And fear not, lords, and you, Lavinia ; 

By my advice, all humbled on your knees, 

You shall ask pardon of his Majesty. 

[Marcus, Lavinia, and the others kneel.] 

[Luc] We do, and vow to heaven and to his High- 
ness, 
That what we did was mildly as we might, 475 
Tend'ring our sister's honour and our own. 

Marc. That, on mine honour, here do I protest. 

Sat. Away, and talk not ; trouble us no more. 

Tarn. Nay, nay, sweet emperor, we must all be 
friends ; 
The tribune and his nephews kneel for grace. 480 
I will not be denied ; sweetheart, look back. 

Sat. Marcus, for thy sake and thy brother's here, 
And at my lovely Tamora's entreats, 
I do remit these young men's heinous faults. 
Stand up ! [Marcus and the others rise.] 485 

Lavinia, though you left me like a churl, 
I found a friend, and sure as death I swore 
I would not part a bachelor from the priest. 
Come, if the Emperor's court can feast two brides, 
You are my guest, Lavinia, and your friends. 490 
This day shall be a love-day, Tamora. 



24 



tEitus an&ronicus 



Act I 



Tit. To-morrow, an it please your Majesty 
To hunt the panther and the hart with me, 
With horn and hound we'll give your Grace bon- 
jour. 
Sat. Be it so, Titus, and gramercy too. 495 

Flourish. Exeunt. 




ACT SECOND 
Scene I 

[Rome. Before the palace.] 

Enter Aaron. 

Aar. Now climbeth Tamora Otympus' top, 
Safe out of fortune's shot ; and sits aloft, 
Secure of thunder's crack or lightning flash ; 
Advanc'd above pale envy's threat'ning reach. 
As when the golden sun salutes the morn, 5 

And, having gilt the ocean with his beams, 
Gallops the zodiac in his glistering coach 
And overlooks the highest-peering hills ; 
So Tamora : 

Upon her wit doth earthly honour wait, 10 

And virtue stoops and trembles at her frown. 
Then, Aaron, arm thy heart and fit thy thoughts 
To mount aloft with thy imperial mistress, 
And mount her pitch, whom thou in triumph 

long 
Hast prisoner held, fett'red in amorous chains 15 
And faster bound to Aaron's charming eyes 
Than is Prometheus tied to Caucasus. 
Away with slavish weeds and servile thoughts 
I will be bright and shine in pearl and gold 
25 



26 tEitus #nDronicu0 Act n 

To wait upon this new-made empress. 20 

To wait, said I ? To wanton with this queen, 
This goddess, this Semiramis, this nymph, 
This siren, that will charm Rome's Saturnine, 
And see his shipwreck and his commonweal's. 
Holloa ! what storm is this ? 25 

Enter Demetrius and Chiron, braving. 

Dem. Chiron, thy years wants wit, thy wit wants edge 
And manners, to intrude where I am grac'd ; 
And may, for aught thou know'st, affected be. 

Chi. Demetrius, thou dost over-ween in all ; 

And so in this, to bear me down with braves. 30 

'Tis not the difference of a year or two 

Makes me less gracious or thee more fortunate. 

I am as able and as fit as thou 

To serve, and to deserve my mistress' grace ; 

And that my sword upon thee shall approve, 35 

And plead my passions for Lavinia's love. 

Aar. [Aside.] Clubs, clubs ! these lovers will not keep 
the peace. 

Dem. Why, boy, although our mother, unadvis'd, 
Gave you a dancing-rapier by your side, 
Are you so desperate grown, to threat your 
friends ? 40 

Go to ; have your lath glued within your sheath 
Till vou know better how to handle it. 



Sc. I ®itu0 3nt>ronicu0 27 

Chi. Meanwhile^ sir, with the little skill I have, 

Full well shalt thou perceive how much I dare. 
Dem. Ay, boy, grow ye so brave? They draw. 

Aar. [Coming forward.] Why, how now, lords ! 45 

So near the Emperor's palace dare you draw, 

And maintain such a quarrel openly ? 

Full well I wot the ground of all this grudge. 

I would not for a million of gold 

The cause were known to them it most con- 
cerns ; 

Nor would your noble mother for much more 51 

Be so dishonoured in the court of Rome. 

For shame, put up. 
Dem. Not I, till I have sheath'd 

My rapier in his bosom, and withal 

Thrust those reproachful speeches down his 
throat 55 

That he hath breath'd in my dishonour here. 
Chi. For that I am prepar'd and full resolv'd. 

Foul-spoken coward, that thund'rest with thy 
tongue, 

And with thy weapon nothing dar'st perform ! 
Aar. Away, I say ! 60 

Now, by the gods that warlike Goths adore, 

This petty brabble will undo us all. 

Why, lords, and think you not how dangerous 

It is to jet upon a prince's right ? 

What, is Lavinia then become so loose, 05 



38 ®itu0 #n&romcus Act n 

Or Bassianus so degenerate, 

That for her love such quarrels may be broach'd 

Without controlment, justice, or revenge ? 

Young lords, beware ! an should the Empress 
know 

This discord's ground, the music would not 
please. 70 

Chi. I care not, I, knew she and all the world ; 

I love Lavinia more than all the world. 
Dem. Youngling, learn thou to make some meaner 
choice ; 

Lavinia is thine elder brother's hope. 
Aar. Why, are ye mad ? or know ye not, in Rome 75 

How furious and impatient they be, 

And cannot brook competitors in love ? 

I tell you, lords, you do but plot your deaths 

By this device. 
Chi. Aaron, a thousand deaths 

Would I propose to achieve her whom I 
love. 80 

Aar. To achieve her ! how ? 
Dem. Why makes thou it so strange ? 

She is a woman, therefore may be woo'd ; 

She is a woman, therefore may be won ; 

She is Lavinia, therefore must be lov'd. 

What, man ! more water glideth by the mill 85 

Than wots the miller of ; and easy it is 

Of a cut loaf to steal a shive, we know. 



Sc. i tEitua #nDronicu0 29 

Though Bassianus be the Emperor's brother, 

Better than he have worn Vulcan's badge. 
Aar. [Aside.] Ay, and as good as Saturninus may. 90 
Dem. Then why should he despair that knows to 
court it 

With words, fair looks, and liberality ? 

What, hast not thou full often struck a doe, 

And borne her cleanly by the keeper's nose ? 94 
Aar. Why, then, it seems, some certain snatch or so 

Would serve your turns. 
Chi. Ay, so the turn were served. 

Dem. Aaron, thou hast hit it. 
Aar. Would you had hit it too ! 

Then should not we be tir'd with this ado. 

Why, hark ye, hark ye ! and are you such fools 99 

To square for this ? Would it offend you, then, 

That both should speed ? 
Chi. Faith, not me. 

Dem. Nor me, so I were one. 

Aar. For shame, be friends, and join for that you 
jar. 

'Tis policy and stratagem must do 

That you affect ; and so must you resolve 105 

That what you cannot as you would achieve 

You must perforce accomplish as you may. 

Take this of me : Lucrece was not more chaste 

Than this Lavinia, Bassianus' love. 

A speedier course than lingering languishment 



30 tEttua #n&romcu$ Act n 

Must we pursue, and I have found the path. Ill 
My lords, a solemn hunting is in hand : 
There will the lovely Roman ladies troop ; 
The forest walks are wide and spacious ; 
And many unfrequented plots there are 115 

Fitted by kind for rape and villainy. 
Single you thither then this dainty doe, 
And strike her home by force, if not by words. 
This way, or not at aUTsFand you in hope. 
Come, come, our empress, with her sacred wit 
To villainy and vengeance consecrate, 121 

Will weacquaint with all that we intend ; 
And she shall file our engines with advice, 
That will not suffer you to square yourselves, 
But to your wishes' height advance you both. 125 
The Emperor's court is like the house of Fame, 
The palace full of tongues, of eyes, and ears ; 
The woods are ruthless, dreadful, deaf, and 

dull; 
There speak, and strike, brave boys, and take your 

turns ; 
There s erve your lus t, shadowed from heaven's 

eye, 130 

And reveHnLayinia's treasury. 
Chi. Thy counsel, lad, smells of no cowardice. 
Dem. Sit fas aut nefas, till I find the stream 

To cool this heat, a charm to calm these fits, 134 
Per Styga, per manes vehor. Exeunt. 



Sc. ii 3Mtu0 3nuronicu0 31 

Scene ii 

[A forest near Rome.] 

Enter Titus Andronicus, and his three sons [Lucius, 
Quintus, and Martius], making a noise with hounds 
and horns, and Marcus. 

Tit. The hunt is up, the morn is bright and grey, 
The fields are fragrant and the woods are green. 
Uncouple here and let us make a bay, 
And wake the Emperor and his lovely bride, 
And rouse the Prince, and ring a hunter's peal 5 
That all the court may echo with the noise. 
Sons, let it be your charge, as it is ours, 
To attend the Emperor's person carefully. 
I have been troubled in my sleep this night, 
But dawning day new comfort hath inspir'd. 10 

A cry of hounds, and horns winded in a peal. Enter 
Saturninus, Tamora, Bassianus, Lavinia, Chiron, 
Demetrius, and Attendants. 

Many good morrows to your Majesty ; 

Madam, to you as many and as good. 

I promised your Grace a hunter's peal. 
Sat. And you have rung it lustily, my lords ; 

Somewhat too early for new-married ladies. 15 
Bas. Lavinia, how say you ? 



33 {Ktus? 3nDromcus? Act n 

Lav. I say, no ; 

I have been broad awake two hours and more. 
Sat. Come on, then ; horse and chariots let us have, 

And to our sport. [To Tamora.] Madam, now 
shall ye see 

Our Roman hunting. 
Marc. I have dogs, my lord, 20 

Will rouse the proudest panther in the chase, 

And climb the highest promontory top. 
Tit. And I have horse will follow where the game 

Makes way, and run like swallows o'er the plain. 
Dem. Chiron, we hunt not, we, with horse nor hound, 

But hope to pluck a dainty doe to ground. 26 

Exeunt. 
Scene III 

[A lonely part of the forest.] 

Enter Aaron [with a bag of gold]. 

Aar. He that had wit would think that I had none 
To bury so much gold under a tree 
And never after to inherit it. 
Let him that thinks of me so abjectly 
Know that this gold must coin a stratagem, 5 
Which, cunningly effected, will beget 
A very excellent piece of villainy. 
And so repose, sweet gold, for their unrest 

[Hides the gold.] 
That have their alms out of the Empress' chest. 



Sc. in (Ettu0 anDronicu0 33 

Enter Tamora. 

Tarn. My lovely Aaron, wherefore look'st thou sad 10 
When everything doth make a gleeful boast ? 
The birds chant melody on every bush, 
The snake lies rolled in the cheerful sun, 
The green leaves quiver with the cooling wind 
And make a chequer'd shadow on the ground. 15 
Under their sweet shade, Aaron, let us sit, 
And, whilst the babbling echo mocks the hounds, 
Replying shrilly to the well-tun'd horns, 
As if a double hunt were heard at once, 
Let us sit down and mark their yelping noise ; 20 
And, after conflict such as was suppos'd 
The wand'ring prince and Dido once enjoy'd, 
When with a happy storm they were surpris'd 
And curtain'd with a counsel-keeping cave, 
We may, each wreathed in the other's arms, 25 
Our pastimes done, possess a golden slumber ; 
Whiles hounds and horns and sweet melodious 

birds 
Be unto us as is a nurse's song 
Of lullaby to bring her babe asleep. 

Aar. Madam, though Venus govern your desires, 30 
Saturn is dominator over mine. 
What signifies my deadly-standing eye, 
My silence and my cloudy melancholy, 
My fleece of woolly hair that now uncurls 

D 



34 tEitus 3nDromcu$ Act II 



y 



Even as an adder when she doth unroll 35 

To do some fatal execution ? 
No, madam, these are no venereal signs. 
Vengeance is in my heart, death in my hand, 
Blood and revenge are hammering in my head. 
Hark, Tamora, the empress of my soul, 40 

Which never hopes more heaven than rests in 

thee, 
This is the day of doom for Bassianus. 
His Philomel must lose her tongue to-day, 
Thy sons make pillage of her chastity 
And wash their hands in Bassianus' blood. 45 

Seest thou this letter ? Take it up, I pray thee, 
And give the King this fatal-plotted scroll. 
Now question me no more ; we are espied. 
Here comes a parcel of our hopeful booty, 
Which dreads not yet their lives' destruction 50 

Enter Bassianus and Lavinia. 

Tarn. Ah, my sweet Moor, sweeter to me than life ! 

Aar. No more, great empress ; Bassianus comes. 
Be cross with him ; and I'll go fetch thy sons 
To back thy quarrels, whatsoe'er they be. [Exit.] 

Bas. Who have we here ? Rome's royal empress, 

Unfurnish'd of her well-beseeming troop ? 56 

Or is it Dian, habited like her, 

Who hath abandoned her holy groves 

To see the general hunting in this forest ? 



Sc. in {Ettutf 3n&romcu0 35 

Tarn. Saucy controller of my private steps ! 60 

Had I the power that some say Dian had, 
Thy temples should be planted presently 
With horns, as was Actaeon's ; and the hounds 
Should drive upon thy new-transformed limbs, 
Unmannerly intruder as thou art ! 65 

Lav. Under your patience, gentle empress, 

v 'Tis thought you have a goodly gift in hor ning ; 
^j^And to be doubted that your Moor and you 
V-« ^F Are singled forth to try experiments. 

V Jove shield your husband from his hounds to-day ! 
^ 'Tis pity they should take him for a stag. 71 

Bas. Believe me, Queen, your swarth Cimmerian 
Doth make your honour of his body's hue, 
Spotted, detested, and abominable. 
Why are you sequest'red from all your train, 75 
Dismounted from your snow-white goodly steed, 
And wand'red hither to an obscure plot, 
Accompanied but with a barbarous Moor, 
If foul desire had not conducted you ? 

Lav. And, being intercepted in your sport, 80 

Great reason that my noble lord be rated 
For sauciness. I pray you, let us hence, 
And let her joy her raven-coloured love ; 
This valley fits the purpose passing well. 8-i 

Bas. The King, my brother, shall have note of this. 

Lav. Ay, for these slips have made him noted long, 
Good king, to be so mightily abused. 



36 tEitutf #n&romcu$ Act 11 

Tarn. Why have I patience to endure all this ? 
Enter Chiron and Demetrius. 

Dem. How now, dear sovereign, and our gracious 
mother ! 
Why doth your Highness look so pale and wan ? 

Tarn. Have I not reason, think you, to look pale ? 91 
These two have 'tic'd me hither to this place ; 
A barren detested vale, you see it is ; 
The trees, though summer, yet forlorn and lean, 
O'ercome with moss and baleful mistletoe. 95 

Here never shines the sun ; here nothing breeds, 
Unless the nightly owl or fatal raven ; 
And when they show'd me this abhorred pit, 
They told me, here, at dead time of the night, 
A thousand fiends, a thousand hissing snakes, 100 
Ten thousand swelling toads, as many urchins, 
Would make such fearful and confused cries 
As any mortal body hearing it 
Should straight fall mad, or else die suddenly. 
No sooner had they told this hellish tale, 105 

But straight they told me they would bind me here 
Unto the body of a dismal yew, 
And leave me to this miserable death. 
And then they calFd me foul adulteress, 
Lascivious Goth, and all the bitterest terms 110 
That ever ear did hear to such effect ; 
And, had you not by wondrous fortune come, 



Sc. in GTttuflf #n&romcu0 37 

This vengeance on me had they executed. 
Revenge it, as you love your mother's life, 
Or be ye not henceforth call'd my children. 115 

Dem. This is a witness that I am thy son. 

Stabs Bassianvs. 

Chi. And this for me, struck home to show my 
strength. 

[Also stabs Bassianus, who dies.] 

Lav. Ay, come, Semiramis, nay, barbarous Tamora, 
For no name fits thy nature but thy own ! 119 

Tarn. Give me thy poniard ; you shall know, my boys, 
Your mother's hand shall right your mother's wrong. 

Dem. Istay, madam ; here iy morcTbelongs to her. 
First thrash the corn, then after burn the straw. 
This minion stood upon her chastity, 
Upon her nuptial vow, her loyalty, 125 

And with that painted hope braves your mighti- 
ness ; 
And shall she carry this unto her grave ? 

Chi. An if she do, I would I were an eunuch. 

Drag hence her husband to some secret hole, 
And make his dead trunk pillow to our lust. 130 

Chi. I warrant you, madam, we will make that sure. 
Come, mistress, now perforce we will enjoy 
That nice-preserved honesty of yours. 135 

Lav. O Tamora ! thou bear'st a woman's face, — 



\ 



Tarn. But when ye have the honey ye desire, y • ,r\ 
Let not this wasp outlive us both to sting. 



38 tEitutf anoronicu* Act n 

Tam. I will not hear her speak ; away with her ! 

Lav. Sweet lords, entreat her hear me but a word. 

Dem. Listen, fair madam : let it be your glory 

To see her tears ; but be your heart to them 140 
As unrelenting flint to drops of rain. 

Lav. When did the tiger's young ones teach the dam ? 
O, do not learn her wrath ; she taught it thee ; 
The milk thou suck'dst from her did turn to mar- 
ble ; 
Even at thy teat thou hadst thy tyranny. 145 

Yet every mother breeds not sons alike, 
[To Chiron.] Do thou entreat her show a woman's 
pity. 

Chi. What, wouldst thou have me prove myself a bas- 
tard ? 

Lav. 'Tis true ; the raven doth not hatch a lark. 

Yet have I heard, — 0, could I find it now ! — 150 
The lion mov'd with pity did endure 
To have his princely paws par'd all away ; 
Some say that ravens foster forlorn children 
The whilst their own birds famish in their nests ; 
O, be to me, though thy hard heart say no, 155 
Nothing so kind, but something pitiful ! 

Tam. I know not what it means ; away with her ! 

Lav. O, let me teach thee ! For my father's sake, 

That gave thee life when well he might have slain 

thee, 
Be not obdurate, open thy deaf ears. 160 



Sc. in ■ tEitu* 3nDromcu0 39 

Tarn. Hadst thou in person ne'er offended me, 

Even for his sake am I pitiless. 

Remember, boys, 1 pour'd forth tears in vain 

To save your brother from the sacrifice ; 

But fierce Andronicus would not relent. 165 

Therefore, away with her, and use her as you 
will, 

The worse to her, the better lov'd of me. 
Lav. O Tamora, be call'd a gentle queen, 

And with thine own hands kill me in this place ! 

For 'tis not life that I have begg'd so long ; 170 

Poor I was slain when Bassianus died. 
Tarn. What begg'st thou, then ? Fond woman, let 

me go. 
Lav. 'Tis present death I beg, and one thing more 

That womanhood denies my tongue to tell. 

O, keep me from their worse than killing lust, 175 

And tumble me into some loathsome pit 

Where never man's eye may behold my body. 

Do this, and be a charitable murderer. 
Tarn. So should I rob my sweet sons of their fee. 

No, l et them sat isfy th eir lust on th ee, "p 1 Ti I \ 
Dem. Away! for thou hast stay'd us here too 

long. 
Lav. No grace ? no womanhood ? Ah, beastly crea- 
ture ! 

The blot and enemy to our general name ! 

Confusion fall — 



40 ®itus 2nt)rontnts Act n 

Chi. Nay, then I'll stop your mouth. Bring thou her 
husband ; 185 

This is the hole where Aaron bid us hide him. 
[Demetrius throws the body of Bassianus into 
the pit; then exeunt Demetrius and Chiron, 
dragging off Lavinia.] 
Tarn. Farewell, my sons : see that you make her sure. 
Ne'er let my heart know merry cheer indeed, 
Till all the Andronici be made away. 
Now will I hence to seek my lovely Moor, 190 

And let my spleenful sons this trull deflower. 

Exit. 
Re-enter Aaron, with Quintus and Martius. 

Aar. Come on, my lords, the better foot before. 
Straight will I bring you to the loathsome pit 
Where I espied the panther fast asleep. 

Quin. My sight is very dull, whate'er it bodes. 195 

Mart. And mine, I promise you ; were't not for shame, 
Well could I leave our sport to sleep a while. 

[Falls into the pit.] 

Quin. What, art thou fallen ? What subtle hole is this, 
Whose mouth is covered with rude-growing briers, 
Upon whose leaves are drops of new-shed blood 
As fresh as morning dew distill'd on flowers ? 201 
A very fatal place it seems to me. 
Speak, brother, hast thou hurt thee with the 
fall? 



Sc. in Cttu0 anDronicusf 41 

Mart. O brother, with the dismall'st object hurt 

That ever eye with sight made heart lament ! 205 

Aar. [Aside.] Now will I fetch the King to find them 
here, 
That he thereby may have a likely guess 
How these were they that made away his brother. 

Exit. 

Mart. Why dost not comfort me, and help me out 

From this unhallow'd and blood-stained hole ? 210 

Quin. I am surprised with an uncouth fear ; 

A chilling sweat o'er-runs my trembling joints ; 
My heart suspects more than mine eye can see. 

Mart. To prove thou hast a true-divining heart, 

Aaron and thou look down into this den, 215 

And see a fearful sight of blood and death. 

Quin. Aaron is gone ; and my compassionate heart 
Will not permit mine eyes once to behold 
The thing whereat it trembles by surmise. 
O, tell me who it is ; for ne'er till now 220 

Was I a child to fear I know not what. 

Mart. Lord Bassianus lies embrued here, 

All on a heap, like to a slaught'red lamb, 
In this detested, dark, blood-drinking pit. 

Quin. If it be dark, how dost thou know 'tis he ? 225 

Mart. Upon his bloody finger he doth wear 
A precious ring, that lightens all this hole, 
Which, like a taper in some monument, 
Doth shine upon the dead man's earthy cheeks 



42 GKtuS anDromcus Actn 

And shows the ragged entrails of this pit. 230 

So pale did shine the moon on Pyramus 
When he by night lay bath'd in maiden blood. 

brother, help me with thy fainting hand — 
If fear hath made thee faint, as me it hath — 
Out of this fell devouring receptacle, 235 
As hateful as Cocytus' misty mouth. 

Quin. Reach me thy hand, that I may help thee out ; 
Or, wanting strength to do thee so much good, 

1 may be pluck'd into the swallowing womb 

Of this deep pit, poor Bassianus' grave. 240 

I have no strength to pluck thee to the brink. 
Mart. Nor I no strength to climb without thy help. 
Quin. Thy hand once more ; I will not loose again 
Till thou art here aloft or I below. 
Thou canst not come to me ; I come to thee. 245 

Falls in. 
Enter Saturninus with Aaron. 

Sat. Along with me ; I'll see what hole is here, 
And what he is that now is leap'd into it. 
Say, who art thou that lately didst descend 
Into this gaping hollow of the earth ? 

Mart. The unhappy son of old Andronicus, 250 

Brought hither in a most unlucky hour 
To find thy brother Bassianus dead. 

Sat. My brother dead ! I know thou dost but jest. 
He and his lady both are at the lodge 



Sc. in tEitus 3n&ronicu$ 43 

Upon the north side of this pleasant chase ; 255 
"Pis not an hour since I left them there. 
Mart. We know not where you left them all alive ; 
But, out, alas ! here have we found him dead. 

Re-enter Tamora [with Attendants], Titus Andronicus, 
and Lucius. 

Tarn. Where is my lord the King ? 

Sat. Here, Tamora, though griev'd with killing grief. 

Tarn. Where is thy brother Bassianus ? 261 

Sat. Now to the bottom dost thou search my wound ; 
Poor Bassianus here lies murdered. 

Tarn. Then all too late I bring this fatal writ, 

The complot of this timeless tragedy ; 2C5 

And wonder greatly that man's face can fold 
In pleasing smiles such murderous tyranny. 

She giveth Saturnine a letter. 

Sat. (Reads.) " An if we miss to meet him hand- 
somely — 
Sweet huntsman, Bassianus 'tis w T e mean — 
Do thou so much as dig the grave for him. 270 

Thou know'st our meaning. Look for thy reward 
Among the nettles at the elder-tree 
Which overshades the mouth of that same pit 
Where we decreed to bury Bassianus. 
Do this, and purchase us thy lasting friends." 275 
O Tamora ! was ever heard the like ? 
This is the pit, and this the elder-tree. 



44 Wit\x$ amiromcus? Actn 

Look, sirs, if you can find the huntsman out 
That should have murdered Bassianus here. 

Aar. My gracious lord, here is the bag of gold. 280 

Sat. [To Titus.] Two of thy whelps, fell curs of bloody 
kind, 
Have here bereft my brother of his life. 
Sirs, drag them from the pit unto the prison. 
There let them bide until we have devis'd 
Some never-heard-of torturing pain for them. 285 

Tarn. What, are they in this pit ? O wondrous thing ! 
How easily murder is discovered ! 

Tit. High emperor, upon my feeble knee 

I beg this boon, with tears not lightly shed, 
That this fell fault of my accursed sons, 290 

Accursed, if the fault be prov'd in them, — 

Sat. If it be prov 'd ! You see it is apparent. 

Who found this letter ? Tamora, was it you ? 

Tarn. Andronicus himself did take it up. 

Tit. I did, my lord ; yet let me be their bail, 295 

For, by my father's reverend tomb, I vow 
They shall be ready at your Highness' will 
To answer their suspicion with their lives. 

Sat. Thou shalt not bail them ; see thou follow me. 
Some bring the murdered body, some the mur- 
derers. 300 
Let them not speak a word ; the guilt is plain ; 
For, by my soul, were there worse end than death, 
That end upon them should be executed. 



Sc. iv tEttutf &nDromcu$ 45 

Tarn. Andronicus, I will entreat the King. 

Fear not thy sons ; they shall do well enough. 305 
Tit. Come, Lucius, come ; stay not to talk with them. 

Exeunt. 

SCENE IV 

[Another part of the forest.] 

Enter Demetrius and Chiron, with Lavinia, ravished; 
her hands cut off, and her tongue cut out. 

Dem. So, now go tell, an if thy tongue can speak, 

Who 'twas that cut thy tongue and ravish'd thee. 

Chi. Write down thy mind, bewray thy meaning so, 
An if thy stumps will let thee play the scribe. 

Dem. See, how with signs and tokens she can scrowl. 5 

Chi. Go home, call for sweet water, wash thy hands. 

Dem. She hath no tongue to call, nor hands to wash ; 
And so let's leave her to her silent walks. 

Chi. An 'twere my case, I should go hang myself. 9 

Dem. If thou hadst hands to help thee knit the cord. 
Exeunt Demetrius and Chiron. 

Horns winded. Enter Marcus from hunting. 

Mar. Who is this — my niece ? — that flies away so 

fast ? 
Cousin, a word ; where is your husband ? 
If I do dream, would all my wealth would wake 

me ! 



46 ®itug #n&romcu0 Act II 

If I do wake, some planet strike me down, 
That I may slumber in eternal sleep ! 15 

Speak, gentle niece, what stern ungentle hands 
Hath lopp'd and hew'd and made thy body bare 
Of her two branches, those sweet ornaments 
Whose circling shadows kings have sought to sleep 

in, 
And might not gain so great a happiness 20 

As have thy love ? Why dost not speak to me ? 
Alas, a crimson river of warm blood, 
Like to a bubbling fountain stirr'd with wind, 
Doth rise and fall between thy rosed lips, 
Coming and going with thy honey breath. 25 

But, sure, some Tereus hath deflowered thee, 
And, lest thou shouldst detect him, cut thy tongue. 
Ah, now thou turn'st away thy face for shame ! 
And, notwithstanding all this loss of blood 
As from a conduit with three issuing spouts, 30 
Yet do thy cheeks look red as Titan's face 
Blushing to be encount'red with a cloud. 
Shall I speak for thee ? Shall I say 'tis so ? 
O, that I knew thy heart ; and knew the beast, 
That I might rail at him to ease my mind ! 35 
Sorrow concealed, like an oven stopp'd, 
Doth burn the heart to cinders where it is. 
Fair Philomela, why, she but lost her tongue, 
And in a tedious sampler sew'd her mind ; 
But, lovely niece, that mean is cut from thee ; 40 



Sc. iv ®ttu0 #n&rontcu0 47 

A craftier Tereus, cousin, hast thou met, 
And he hath cut those pretty fingers off, 
That could have better sew'd than Philomel. 
O, had the monster seen those lily hands 
Tremble, like aspen-leaves, upon a lute, 45 

And make the silken strings delight to kiss them, 
He would not then have touch'd them for his life ! 
Or, had he heard the heavenly harmony 
Which that sweet tongue hath made, 
He would have dropp'd his knife, and fell asleep 
As Cerberus at the Thracian poet's feet. 51 

Come, l et us go, and make thy father blind ; 
For s uch a siflht will blind a father's ey e. 
One hour's storm will drown the fragrant meads ; 
What will whole months of tears thy father's 
eyes ? 55 

Do not draw back, for we will mourn with thee. 
O, could our mourning ease thy misery ! 

Exeunt. 




ACT THIRD 
Scene I 

[Rome. A street.] 

Enter Judges, Senators [and Tribunes], with Martius 
and Quintus, bound, passing on the stage to the 
place of execution ; Titus going before, pleading. 

Tit. Hear me, grave fathers ! noble tribunes, stay ! 
For pity of mine age, whose youth was spent 
In dangerous wars, whilst you securely slept ; 
For all my blood in Rome's great quarrel shed ; 
For all the frosty nights that I have watch'd ; 5 
And for these bitter tears, which now you see 
Filling the aged wrinkles in my cheeks ; 
Be pitiful to my condemned sons, 
Whose souls are not corrupted as 'tis thought. 
For two and twenty sons I never wept, 10 

Because they died in honour's lofty bed. 

Lieth down; the Judges, etc., pass by him 
[and exeunt]. 
For these, tribunes, in the dust I write 
My heart's deep languor and my soul's sad tears. 
Let my tears stanch the earth's dry appetite ; 
My sons ' sweet blood will make it shame and blush. 
O earth, I will befriend thee more with rain, 16 
48 



Sc. I Gl4tu$ #noromcu$ 49 

That shall distil from these two ancient urns, 
Than youthful April shall with all his showers. 
In summer's drought I'll drop upon thee still ; 
In winter with warm tears I'll melt the snow 20 
And keep eternal spring-time on thy face, 
So thou refuse to drink my dear sons' blood. 

Enter Lucius, with his weapon drawn. 

O reverend tribunes ! O gentle, aged men ! 
Unbind my sons, reverse the doom of death ; 
And let me say, that never wept before, 25 

My tears are now prevailing orators. 

Luc. O noble father, you lament in vain. 

The tribunes hear you not ; no man is by ; 
And yo u rec ount your sorrows_to_a^tone. 

Tit. Ah, LuciusTfoTthy brothers let me plead. 
Grave tribunes, once more I entreat of you, — 

Luc. My gracious lord, no tribune hears you speak. 

Tit. ^Why, 'tis no matter, man ; if they did hear, 
I They would not mark me, or if they did mark, 
VThey would not pity me ; yet plead I must, 
And bootless unto them. 
Therefore I tell my sorrows to the_stones 
Who, though they cannot answer my distress, 
Yet in some sort they are better than the tribunes, 
For that they will not intercept my tale. 40 

When I do weep, they humbly at my feet 
Receive my tears and seem to weep with me ; 



50 ®ttusf 3nDronicu$ Act in 

And, were they but attired in grave weeds, 
Rome could afford no tribune like to these. 
j^A stone is soft as wax, tribunes more hard than 
\ stones ; 45 

\ A stone is silent, and offendeth not, 
I And tribunes with their tongues doom men to 

\ death. [Rises.] 

But wherefore stand'st thou with thy weapon 
drawn ? 
Luc. To rescue my two brothers from their death ; 

For which attempt the judges have pronounc'd 50 
My everlasting doom of banishment. 
Tit. O happy man ! they have befriended thee. 
Why, foolish Lucius, dost thou not perceive 
That Rome is but a wilderness of tigers ? 
Tigers must prey, and Rome affords no prey 55 
But me and mine. How happy art thou, then, 
From these devourers to be banished ! 
But who comes with our brother Marcus here ? 

Enter Marcus and Lavinia. 

Marc. Titus, prepare thy aged eyes to weep ; 

Or, if not so, thy noble heart to break. 60 

I bring consuming sorrow to thine age. 

Tit. Will it consume me ? Let me see it, then. 

Marc. This was thy daughter. 

Tit. Why, Marcus, so she is. 

Luc. Ay me, this object kills me ! 



Sc. I Citufli anDronictifif 51 

Tit. Faint-hearted boy, arise, and look upon her. 65 
Speak, Lavinia, what accursed hand 
Hath made thee handless in thy father's sight ? 
What fool hath added water to the sea. 
Or brought a faggot to bright-burning Troy ? 
My grief was at the height before thou eam'st, 70 
And now, like Nilus, it disdaineth bounds. 
Give me a sword, I'l l chop off my hands too ; 
For they have f oifgrit for Ro me, and all in vain ; 
And they have nurs'd this woe, in feeding life ; 
In bootless prayer have they been held up, 75 

And they have serv'd me to effectless use. 
Now all the service I require of them 
Is that the one will help to cut the other. 
'Tis well, Lavinia, that thou hast no hands ; 
Forjnands to do Rome service is but vain. 80 

Luc. Speak, gentle sister, who hath martyr'd thee ? 

Marc. O, that delightful engine of her thoughts, 

That blabb'd them with such pleasing eloquence, 
Is torn from forth that pretty hollow cage, 
Where, like a sweet melodious bird, it sung 85 
Sweet varied notes, enchanting every ear ! 

Luc. O, say thou for her, who hath done this deed ? 

Marc. O, thus I found her, straying in the park, 
Seeking to hide herself, as doth the deer 
That hath receiv'd some unrecuring wound. 90 

Tit. It was my deer ; and he that wounded her 
Hath hurt me more than had he kill'd me dead. 



52 tEitus 3n&ronicus Act in 

For now I stand as one upon a rock 

Environ'd with a wilderness of sea, 

Who marks the waxing tide grow wave by wave, 

Expecting ever when some envious surge 96 

Will in his brinish bowels swallow him. 

This way to death my wretched sons are gone, 

Here stands my other son, a banish'd man, 

And here my brother, weeping at my woes ; 100 

But that which gives my soul the greatest spurn, 

Is dear Lavinia, dearer than my soul. 

Had I but seen thy picture in this plight, 

It would have madded me ; what shall I do 

Now I behold thy lively body so ? 105 

Thou hast no hands, to wipe away thy tears ; 

Nor tongue, to tell me who hath martyr'd thee. 

Thy husband he is dead ; and for his death 

Thy brothers are condemn'd, and dead by this. 

Look, Marcus ! ah, son Lucius, look on her ! 110 

WTien I did name her brothers, then fresh tears 

Stood on her cheeks, as doth the honey-dew 

Upon a gath'red lily almost withered. 

Marc. Perchance she weeps because they kill'd her 
husband ; 
Perchance because she knows them innocent. 115 

Tit. If they did kill thy husband, then be joyful, 
Because the law hath ta'en revenge on them. 
No, no, they would not do so foul a deed ; 
Witness the sorrow that their sister makes. 



Sc. I ^itu0 3nDromcu0 53 

Gentle Lavinia, let me kiss thy lips, 120 

Or make some sign how I may do thee ease. 

Shall thy good uncle, and thy brother Lucius, 

And thou, and I, sit round about some fountain, 

Looking all downwards, to behold our cheeks 

How they are stain'd, like meadows yet not dry 125 

With miry slime left on them by a flood ? 

And in the fountain shall we gaze so long 

Till the fresh taste be taken from that clearness, 

And made a brine-pit with our bitter tears ? 

Or shall we cut away our hands, like thine ? 130 

Or shall we bite our tongues, and in dumb shows 

Pass the remainder of our hateful days ? 

What shall we do ? Let us that have our tongues 

Plot some device of further misery, 

To make us wond'red at in time to come. 135 

Luc. Sweet father, cease your tears ; for, at your grief, 
See how my wretched sister sobs and weeps. 

Marc. Patience, dear niece. Good Titus, dry thine eyes. 

Tit. Ah, Marcus, Marcus ! brother, well I wot 

Thy napkin cannot drink a tear of mine, 140 

For thou, poor man, hast drown'd it with thine 
own. 

Luc. Ah, my Lavinia, I will wipe thy checks. 

Tit. Mark, Marcus, mark ! I understand her signs. 
Had she a tongue to speak, now would she say 
That to her brother which I said to thee : 145 

His napkin, with his true tears all bewet, 



54 tEitua &nm:omctt0 Act in 

Can do no service on her sorrowful cheeks. 

O, what a sympathy of woe is this, 

As far from help as Limbo is from bliss ! 

Enter Aaron the Moor. 

Aar. Titus Andronicus, my lord the Emperor 150 

Sends thee this word, — that, if thou love thy sons, 
Let Marcus, Lucius, or thyself, old Titus, 
Or any one of you, chop off your hand 
And send it to the King ; he for the same 
Will send thee hither both thy sons alive ; 155 

And that shall be the ransom for their fault. 

Tit. O gracious emperor ! O gentle Aaron ! 
Did ever raven sing so like a lark 
That gives sweet tidings of the sun's uprise ? 
With all my heart, I'll send the Emperor 160 

My hand. 
Good Aaron, wilt thou help to chop it off ? 

Luc. Stay, father ! for that noble hand of thine, 

That hath thrown down so many enemies, 164 

Shall not be sent. My hand will serve the turn. 
My youth can better spare my blood than you ; 
And therefore mine shall save my brothers' lives. 

Marc. Which of your hands hath not defended Rome, 
And rear'd aloft the bloody battle-axe, 
Writing destruction on the enemy's castle ? 170 
O, none of both but are of high desert. 
My hand hath been but idle ; let it serve i 



Sc. I {Eitua anuronicu0 55 

To ransom my two nephews from their death ; 

Then have I kept it to a worthy end. 
Aar. Nay, come, agree whose hand shall go along, 175 

For fear they die before their pardon come. 
Marc. My hand shall go. 

Luc. By heaven, it shall not go ! 

Tit. Sirs, strive no more : such with'red herbs as these 

Are meet for plucking up, and therefore mine. 
Luc. Sweet father, if I shall be thought thy son, 180 

Let me redeem my brothers both from death. 
Marc. And, for our father's sake and mother's care, 

Now let me show a brother's love to thee. 
Tit. Agr ee between you jlwill s pare my hand . 
Luc. Then I'll go fetch an axe. 185 

Marc. But I will use the axe. 

Exeunt [Lucius and Marcus]. 
Tit. Come hither, Aaron ; I'll deceive them both. 

Lend me thy hand, and I will give thee mine. 
Aar. [Aside.] If that be call'd deceit, I will he honest, 

And never, whilst I live, deceive men so ; 190 

But I'lljieceive. you in another sort. 

And that you'll say, ere half an hour pass. 

Cuts off Titus's hand. 

Re-enter Lucius and Marcus. 

Tit. Now stay your strife ; wltat shall be IS dispatcliM. 
Good Aaron, give his Majesty my hand. 
Tell him it was a hand that warded him 1 ( J5 



s<* {Rtua #miromcu$ Act hi 

From thousand dangers ; bid him bury it : 

More hath it merited ; that let it have. 

As for my sons, say I account of them 

As jewels purchas'd at an easy price ; 

And yet dear too, because I bought mine own. 
Aar. I go, Andronicus ; and for thy hand 201 

Look by and by to have thy sons with thee. 

[Aside.] Their heads, I mean. O, how this villainy 

Doth fat me with the very thoughts of it ! 

Let fools do good, and fair men call for grace, 205 

Aaron will have his soul black like his face. Exit. 
Tit. O, here I lift this one hand up to heaven, 

And bow this feeble ruin to the earth ; 

If any power pities wretched tears, 

To that I call ! [To Lav.] What, wouldst thou 
kneel with me ? 210 

Do, then, dear heart ; for Heaven shall hear our 
prayers ; 

Or with our sighs we'll breathe the welkin dim, 

And stain the sun with fog, as sometime clouds 

When they do hug him in their melting bosoms. 
Marc. brother, speak with possibility, 215 

And do not break into these deep extremes. 
Tit. Is not my sorrow deep, having no bottom ? 

Then be my passions bottomless with them. 
Marc. But yet let reason govern thy lament. 
Tit. If there were reason for these miseries, 220 

Then into limits could I bind my woes, 



Sc. I Cituflf 3lnDronicu£( 57 

When heaven doth weep, doth not the earth o'er- 

flow? 
If the winds rage, doth not the sea wax mad, 
Threat'ning the welkin with his big-swoln face ? 
And wilt thou have a reason for this coil ? 225 

I am the sea ; hark, how her sighs do blow ! 
She is the weeping welkin, I the earth ; 
Then must my sea be moved with her sighs ; 
Then must my earth with her continual tears 
Become a deluge, overflow'd and drown'd ; 230 
For why my bowels cannot hide her woes, 
But like a drunkard must I vomit them. 
Then give me leave, for losers will have leave 
To ease their stomachs with their bitter tongues. 

Enter a Messenger, with two heads and a hand. 

Mess. Worthy Andronicus, ill art thou repaid 235 

For that good hand thou sent'st the Emperor. 
Here are the heads of thy two noble sons ; 
And here's thy hand, in scorn to thee sent back, 
Thy griefs their sports, thy resolution mock'd, 
That woe is me to think upon thy woes 240 

More than remembrance of my father's death. 

Exit, 

Marc. Now let hot /Etna cool in Sicily, 
And be my heart an ever-burning hell ! 
These miseries are more than may be borne. 



58 tEttus 3n&roniru$ Actm 

To weep with them that weep doth ease some deal, 
But sorrow flouted at is double death. 246 

Luc. Ah, that this sight should make so deep a wound, 
And yet detested life not shrink thereat ! 
That ever death should let life bear his name, 
Where life hath no more interest but to breathe ! 

[Lavinia kisses Titus.] 

Marc. Alas, poor heart, that kiss is comfortless 251 
As frozen water to a starved snake. 

Tit. When will this fearful slumber have an end ? 

Marc. Now, farewell, flattery ; die, Andronicus. 

Thou dost not slumber ; see, thy two sons' 
heads, 255 

Thy warlike hand, thy mangled daughter here, 
Thy other banish'd son, with this dear sight 
Struck pale and bloodless ; and thy brother, I, 
Even like a stony image, cold and numb. 
Ah, now no more will I control thy griefs. 260 

Rend off thy silver hair, thy other hand 
Gnawing with thy teeth ; and be this dismal sight 
The closing up of our most wretched eyes. 
Now is a time to storm ; why art thou still ? 

Tit. Ha, ha, ha ! 265 

Marc. Why dost thou laugh ? It fits not with this 
hour. 

Tit. Why, I have not another tear to shed. 
Besides, this sorrow is an enemy, 
And would usurp upon my watery eyes 



Sc. I Cttu0 &nDromcu0 59 

And make them blind with tributary tears ; 270 
Then which way shall I find Revenge's cave? 

For these two heads do seem to speak to me, 

And threat me I shall never come to bliss 

Till all these mischiefs be return'd again 

Even in their throats that have committed them. 

Come, let me see what task I have to do. 276 

You heavy people, circle me about, 

That I may turn me to each one of you 

And swear unto my soul to right your wrongs. 

The vow is made. Come, brother, take a head ; 

And in this hand the other will I bear. 281 

Lavinia, thou shalt be employed in these things ! 

Bear thou my hand, sweet wench, between thy 

teeth. 
As for thee, boy, go, get thee from my sight ; 
Thou art an exile, and thou must not stay. 285 
Hie to the Goths, and raise an army there ; 
And, if you love me, as I think you do, 
Let's kiss and part, for we have much to do. 

Exeunt [Titus, Marcus, and Lavinia]. 
Luc. Farewell, Andronicus, my noble father. 

The woefull'st man that ever liv'd in Rome. 290 
Farewell, proud Rome ; till Lucius come again, 
He leaves his pledges dearer than his life. 
Farewell, Lavinia, my noble sister ; 
O, would thou wert as thou tpfore hast been ! 
But now nor Lucius nor Lavinia lives 295 



60 tEitu* #n&ronieu* Actm 

But in oblivion and hateful griefs. 
If Lucius live, he will requite your wrongs ; 
And make proud Saturnine and his empress 
Beg at the gates, like Tarquin and his queen. 
Now will I to the Goths, and raise a power, 300 
To be reveng'd on Rome and Saturnine. 

Exit. 
SCENE II 

[A room in Titus's house. A banquet set out.] Enter 
Titus, Marcus, Lavinia, and young Lucius. 

Tit. So, so ; now sit ; and look you eat no more 
Than will preserve just so much strength in us 
As will revenge these bitter woes of ours. 
Marcus, unknit that sorrow-wreathen knot ; 
Thy niece and I, poor creatures, want our hands, 
And cannot passionate our tenfold grief 6 

With folded arms. This poor right hand of mine 
Is left to tyrannize upon my breast ; 
Who, when my heart, all mad with misery, 
Beats in this hollow prison of my flesh, 10 

Then thus I thump it down. 
[To Lavinia.] Thou map of woe, that thus dost talk 

in signs ! 
When thy poor heart beats with outrageous beat- 
ing, 
Thou canst not strike it thus to make it still. 
Wound it with sighing, girl, kill it with groans ; 15 



Sc. ii tEitutf an&ronicus 61 

Or get some little knife between thy teeth, 
And just against thy heart make thou a hole, 
That all the tears that thy poor eyes let fall 
May run into that sink, and soaking in 
Drown the lamenting fool in sea-salt tears. 20 

Marc. Fie, brother, fie ! teach her not thus to lay 
Such violent hands upon her tender life. 

Tit. How now ! has sorrow made thee dote already ? 
Why, Marcus, no man should be mad but I. 
"What violent hands can she lay on her life ? 25 

Ah, wherefore dost thou urge the name of hands, 
To bid iEneas tell the tale twice o'er, 
How Troy was burnt and he made miserable ? 
O, handle not the theme, to talk of hands 
Lest we remember still that we have none. 30 

Fie, fie, how franticly I square my talk, 
As if we should forget we had no hands 
If Marcus did not name the word of hands ! 
Come, let's fall to ; and, gentle girl, eat this. 
Here is no drink ! Hark, Marcus, what she says ; 
I can interpret all her martyr'd signs : 36 

She says she drinks no other drink but tears 
Brew'd with her sorrow, mash'd upon her cheeks. 
Speechless complainer, I will learn thy thought ; 
In thy dumb action will I be as perfect 40 

As begging hermits in their holy prayers. 
Thou shalt not sigh, nor hold thy stumps to 
heaven, 



62 ®itus antjronicusf Act in 

Nor wink, nor nod, nor kneel, nor make a sign, 

But I of these will wrest an alphabet 

And by still practice learn to know thy meaning. 45 
Young Luc. Good grandsire, leave these bitter deep 
laments. 

Make my aunt merry with some pleasing tale. 
Marc. Alas, the tender boy, in passion mov'd, 

Doth weep to see his grandsire's heaviness. 
Tit. Peace, tender sapling ; thou art made of tears, 50 

And tears will quickly melt thy life away. 

Marcus strikes the dish with a knife. 

What dost thou strike at, Marcus, with thy knife ? 
Marc. At that that! have kilT d^my lo rd ; a fl y. 
Tit. Out on thee, murderer ! thou kill'st my heart ; 

Mine eyes are cloy'd with view of tyranny. 55 

A deed of death done on the innocent 

Becomes not Titus' brother. Get thee gone ; 

I see thou art not for my company. 
Marc. Alas, my lord, I have but kill'd a fly. 59 

Tit. "But ! " How, if that fly had a father and mother ? 

How would he hang his slender gilded wings, 

And buzz lamenting doings in the air ! 

Poor harmless fly, 

That, with his pretty buzzing melody, 

Came here to make us merry ! and thou hast kill'd 
him. 65 

Marc. Pardon me, sir, it was a black ill-favour'd fly, 

Like to the Empress' Moor ; therefore I kill'd him. 



\ 



Sc. II {Eitus? 3nDromcusf 63 

Tit. 0,0,0, 

Then pardon me for reprehending thee, 

For thou hast done a charitable deed. 70 

Give me thy knife, I will insult on him ; 

Flattering myself, as if it were the Moor 

Come hither purposely to poison me. — 

There's for thyself, and that's for Tamora. 

t, Ah, sirrah ! 75 

Yet, I think, we are not brought so low, 
But that between us we can kill a fly 
That comes in likeness of a coal-black Moor. 

Marc. Alas, poor man ! grief has so wrought on him, 
He takes false shadows for true substances. 80 

Tit. Come, take away. Lavinia, go with me. 
I'll to thy closet, and go read with thee 
Sad stories chanced in the times of old. 
Come, boy, and go with me ; thy sight is young, 
And thou shalt read when mine begin to dazzle. 

Exeunt. 




ACT FOURTH 
Scene I 

[Rome. Titus's garden.] 

Enter young Lucius, and Lavinia running after him, and 
the boy flies from her, with his books under his 
arm. Then enter Titus and Marcus. 

Young Luc. Help, grandsire, help ! my aunt Lavinia 

Follows me everywhere, I know not why. 

Good uncle Marcus, see how swift she comes. 

Alas, sweet aunt, I know not what you mean. 
Marc. Stand by me, Lucius ; do not fear thine aunt. 
Tit. She loves thee, boy, too well to do thee harm. 6 
Young Luc. Ay, when my father was in Rome she did. 
Marc. What means my niece Lavinia by these signs ? 
Tit. Fear her not, Lucius ; somewhat doth she mean. 
[Marc] See, Lucius, see how much she makes of thee ; 

Somewhither would she have thee go with her. 11 

Ah, boy, Cornelia never with more care 

Read to her sons than she hath read to thee 

Sweet poetry and Tully's Orator. 

Canst thou not guess wherefore she plies thee thus ? 
Young Luc. My lord, I know not, I, nor can I guess, 16 

Unless some fit or frenzy do possess her ; 

For I have heard mv grandsire say full oft 
64 



Sc. I tEitus £nt>romeu$ 65 

Extremity of griefs would make men mad, 

And I have read that Hecuba of Troy 20 

Ran mad for sorrow. That made me to fear ; 

Although, my lord, I know my noble aunt 

Loves me as dear as e'er my mother did, 

And would not, but in fury, fright my youth ; 

Which made me down to throw my books, and 
fly,— 25 

Causeless, perhaps. But pardon me, sweet aunt ; 

And, madam, if my uncle Marcus go, 

I will most willingly attend your ladyship. 
Marc. Lucius, I will. 

[Lavinia turns over with her stumps the books 
which Lucius has let fall.] 
Tit. How now, Lavinia ! Marcus, what means this ? 30 

Some book there is that she desires to see. 

Which is it, girl, of these ? Open them, boy. 

But thou art deeper read, and better sknTd : ^^'fff 

Come, and take choice of all my library, 

And so beguile thy sorrow, till the heavens 35 

Reveal the damn'd contriver of this deed. 

Why lifts she up her arms in sequence thus ? 
Marc. I think she means that there were more than one 

Confederate in the fact. Ay, more there was ; 

Or else to heaven she heaves them for revenge. 40 
Tit. Lucius, what book is that she tosseth so ? 
Young Luc. Grandsire, 'tis Ovid's Metamorphoses ; 

My mother gave it me. 



66 ^itua #n&ronicu$ Activ 

Marc. For love of her that's gone, 

Perhaps she cull'd it from among the rest. 

Tit. Soft ! so busily she turns the leaves ! Help her. 45 
What would she find ? Lavinia, shall I read ? 
This is the tragic tale of Philomel, 
And treats of Tereus' treason and his rape ; 
And rape, I fear, was root of thine annoy. 

Marc. See, brother, see ; note how she quotes the 
leaves. 50 

Tit. Lavinia, wert thou thus surpris'd, sweet girl, 
Ravish'd and wrong'd, as Philomela was, 
Forc'd in the ruthless, vast, and gloomy woods ? 
See, see ! 

Ay, such a place there is, where we did hunt — 55 
O, had we never, never hunted there ! — 
Pattern'd by that the poet here describes, 
By nature made for murders and for rapes. 

Marc. O, why should nature build so foul a den, 

Unless the gods delight in tragedies ? GO 

Tit. Give signs, sweet girl, for here are none but 
friends, 
What Roman lord it was durst do the deed ; 
Or slunk not Saturnine, as Tarquin erst, 
That left the camp to sin in Lucrece' bed ? 

Marc. Sit down, sweet niece ; brother, sit down by 
me. 65 

Apollo, Pallas, Jove, or Mercury, 
Inspire me, that I may this treason find ! 



Sc. i ®itu0 3nDronicus 67 

My lord, look here ; look here, Lavinia. 

He writes his name with his staff, and guides 
it iritli feet and mouth. 

This sandy plot is plain ; guide, if thou canst, 

This after me. I have writ my name 70 

Without the help of any hand at all. 

Curs'd be that heart that fore'd us to this shift ! 

"Write thou, good niece ; and here display at last 

What God will have discovered for revenge. 

Heaven guide thy pen to print thy sorrows plain. 

That we may know the traitors and the truth ! 78 
She takes the staff in her mouth, and guides it 
with her stumps, and writes. 
Tit. O, do ye read, my lord, what she hath writ ? 

"Stuprum — Chiron — Demetrius." 
Marc. What, what ! the lustful sons of Tamora 

Performers of this heinous, bloody deed ? 80 

Tit. Magni Dominator poll, 

Tarn lentus audis scelera? tarn lent us rides? 
Marc. O, calm thee, gentle lord ; although I know 

There is enough written upon this earth 

To stir a mutiny in the mildest thoughts, 85 

And arm the minds of infants to exclaims. 

My lord, kneel down with me ; Lavinia, kneel ; 

And kneel, sweet boy, the Roman Hector's hope ; 

And swear with me, as, with the woeful fere 

And father of that chaste dishonoured dame 90 

Lord Junius Brutus swarc for Lucrece' rape, 



68 tEituS an&rotticus Act IV 

That we will prosecute by good advice 
Mortal revenge upon these traitorous Goths, 
And see their blood, or die with this reproach. 

Tit. 'Tis sure enough, an you knew how. 95 

But if you hunt these bear- whelps, then beware ! 
The dam will wake ; and, if she wind you once, 
She's with the lion deeply still in league, 
And lulls him whilst she playeth on her back, 
And when he sleeps will she do what she list. 100 
You are a young huntsman, Marcus ; let alone ; 
And, come, I will go get a leaf of brass, 
And with a gad of steel will write these words, 
And lay it by. The angry northern wind 
Will blow these sands, like Sibyl's leaves, abroad, 
And where's our lesson, then ? Boy, what say 
you ? 106 

Young Luc. I say, my lord, that if I were a man, 
Their mother's bed-chamber should not be safe 
For these base bondmen to the yoke of Rome. 

Marc. Ay, that's my boy ! Thy father hath full oft 
For his ungrateful country done the like. Ill 

Young Luc. And, uncle, so will I, an if I live. 

Tit. Come, go with me into mine armoury ; 
Lucius, I'll fit thee ; and withal, my boy 
Shall carry from me to the Empress' sons 115 

Presents that I intend to send them both. 
Come, come ; thou'lt do my message, wilt thou 
not? 



Sc. II Citua anoronicus; 69 

Young Luc. Ay, with my dagger in their bosoms, grand- 
sire. 

Tit. No, boy, not so ; I'll teach thee another course. 
Lavinia, come. Marcus, look to my house ; 120 
Lucius and I'll go brave it at the court. 
Ay, marry, will we, sir ; and we'll be waited on. 

Exeunt [Titus, Lavinia, and young Lucius]. 

Marc. heavens, can you hear a good man groan 
And not relent or not compassion him ? 
Marcus, attend him in his ecstasy, 125 

That hath more scars of sorrow in his heart 
Than foemen's marks upon his batt'red shield ; 
But yet so just that he will not revenge. 
Revenge the heavens for old Andronicus ! Exit. 

Scene II 

[The same. A room in the palace.] 

Enter Aaron, Demetrius, and Chiron, at one door; and 
at another door, young Lucius, and another, uitJi a 
bundle of weapons, and verses icrit upon them. 

Chi. Demetrius, here's the son of Lucius ; 
He hath some message to deliver us. 

Aar. Ay, some mad message from his mad grandfather. 

Young Luc. My lords, with all the humbleness I may, 
I greet your honours from Andronicus. 5 

[Aside .] And pray the Roman gods confound you 
both! 



70 ®ttu0 3n&ronicu0 Act iv 

Dem. Gramercy, lovely Lucius. What's the news ? 
Young Luc. [Aside.] That you are both decipher'd, 
that's the news, 
For villains mark'd with rape. — May it please you, 
My grandsire, well advis'd, hath sent by me 10 
The goodliest weapons of his armoury 
To gratify your honourable youth, 
The hope of Rome ; for so he bid me say ; 
And so I do, and with his gifts present 
Your lordships, that, whenever you have need, 15 
You may be armed and appointed well : 
And so I leave you both — [Aside] like bloody 
villains. 

Exeunt [young Lucius and Attendant]. 
Dem. What's here ? A scroll ; and written round 
about. 
Let's see : 

[Reads.] "Integer vita, scelerisque purus, 20 

Non eget Mauri jaculis, nee arcu.** 
Chi. O, 'tis a verse in Horace ; I know it well. 

I read it in the grammar long ago. 
Aar. Ay, just ; a verse in Horace ; right, you have it. 
[Aside.] Now, what a thing it is to be an ass ! 25 
Here's no sound jest ! The old man hath found 

their guilt ; 
And sends them weapons wrapp'd about with lines 
That wound, beyond their feeling, to the quick. 
But were our witty empress well afoot, 



Sc. [I ^ttu0 3nDromcu0 71 

She would applaud Andronicus' conceit ; 30 

But let her rest in her unrest a while. — 

And now, young lords, was't not a happy star 

Led us to Rome, strangers, and more than so, 

Captives, to he advanced to this height ? 

It did me good, before the palace gate C5 

To brave the tribune in his brother's hearing. 

Dem. But me more good to see so great a lord 
Basely insinuate and send us gifts. 

Aar. Had he not reason, Lord Demetrius ? 

Did you not use his daughter very friendly ? 40 

Dem. I would we had a thousand Roman dames 
At such a bay, by turn to serve our lust. 

Chi. A charitable wish and full of love. 

Aar. Here lacks but your mother for to say amen. 

Chi. And that would she for twenty thousand more. 45 

Dem. Come, let us go and pray to all the gods 
For our beloved mother in her pains. 

Aar. [Aside.] Pray to the devils ; the gods have given 
us over. Trumpets sound within. 

Dem. Why do the Emperor's trumpets flourish thus ? 

Chi. Belike, for joy the Emperor hath a son. 60 

Dem. Soft ! who comes here ? 

Enter a Nurse, with a blackamoor Child. 

Nur. Good morrow, lords. 

O, tell me, did you sec Aaron the Moor ? 



72 tKtua Sinuromcutf Act iv 

Aar. Well, more or less, or ne'er a whit at all, 

Here Aaron is ; and what with Aaron now ? 
Nur. O gentle Aaron, we are all undone ! 55 

Now help, or woe betide thee evermore ! 
Aar. Why, what a caterwauling dost thou keep ! 

What dost thou wrap and fumble in thine arms ? 
Nur. O, that which I would hide from heaven's eye, 

Our empress' shame, and stately Rome's disgrace ! 

She is delivered, lords ; she is delivered. 61 

Aar. To whom ? 

Nur. I mean, she is brought a-bed. 

Aar. Well, God give her good rest ! What hath he 

sent her ? 
Nur. A devil. 

Aar. Why, then she is the devil's dam ; a joyful is- 
sue. 65 
Nur. A joyless, dismal, black, and sorrowful issue ! 

Here is the babe, as loathsome as a toad 

Amongst the fairest breeders of our clime. 

The Empress sends it thee, thy stamp, thy seal, 

And bids thee christen it with thy dagger's point. 
Aar. 'Zounds, ye whore ! is black so base a hue ? 71 

Sweet blowse, you are a beauteous blossom, sure. 
Dem. Villain, what hast thou done ? 
Aar. That which thou canst not undo. 
Chi. Thou hast undone our mother. 75 

Aar. Villain, I have done thy mother. 
Dem. And therein, hellish dog, thou hast undone her. 



Sc. ii Cituflf 3ttDromcu$ 73 

Woe to her chance, and damn'd her loathed choice ! 
Accurs'd the offspring of so foul a fiend ! 

Chi. It shall not live. 80 

Aar. It shall not die. 

Nur. Aaron, it must ; the mother wills it so. 

Aar. What, must it, nurse ? then let no man but I 
Do execution on my flesh and blood. 

Dem. I'll broach the tadpole on my rapier's point. 85 
Nurse, give it me ; my sword shall soon dispatch it . 

Aar. Sooner this sword shall plough thy bowels up. 

[Takes the Child from the Nurse, and drairs.} 
Stay, murderous villains ! will you kill your 

brother ? 
Now, by the burning tapers of the sky, 
That shone so brightly when this boy was got, 90 
He dies upon my scimitar's sharp point 
That touches this my first-born son and heir ! 
I tell you, younglings, not Enceladus 
With all his threat'ning band of Typhon's brood. 
Nor great Alcides, nor the god of war, 95 

Shall seize this prey out of his father's hands. 
What, what, ye sanguine, shallow-heart ed boys ! 
Ye white-lim'd walls ! ye alehouse painted signs ! 
Coal-black is better than another hue. 
In that it scorns to bear another hue ; 100 

For all the water in the ocean 
Can never turn the swan's black legs to white. 
Although she lave themTiourly in the flood. 



1 



74 ®itu0 #n&romcu0 Activ 

Tell the Empress from me, I am of age 

To keep mine own, excuse it how she can. 105 

Dem. Wilt thou betray thy noble mistress thus ? 

Aar. My mistress is my mistress ; this myself, 
The vigour and the picture of my youth. 
This before all the world do I prefer ; 
This maugre all the world will I keep safe, 110 

Or some of you shall smoke for it in Rome. 

Dem. By this our mother is for ever sham'd. 

Chi. Rome will despise her for this foul escape. 

Nur. The Emperor, in his rage, will doom her death. 

Chi. I blush to think upon this ignomy. 115 

Aar. Why, there's the privilege your beauty bears. 
Fie, treacherous hue, that will betray with blushing 
The close enacts and counsels of thy heart ! 

v\. Here's a young lad fram'd of another leer ; 

Look, how the black slave smiles upon the father, 
As who should say, "Old lad, I am thine own." 121 
He is your brother, lords, sensibly fed 
Of that self-blood that first gave life to you, 
And from that womb where you imprisoned were 
He is enfranchised and come to light. 125 

Nay, he is your brother by the surer side, 
Although my seal be stamped in his face. 

Nur. Aaron, what shall I say unto the Empress ? 

Dem. Advise thee, Aaron, what is to be done, 

And we will all subscribe to thy advice. 130 

Save thou the child, so we may all be safe. 



Sc. H tUatus antiromcutf 75 

Aar. Then sit we down, and let us all consult. 

My son and I will have the wind of you ; 

Keep there. Now talk at pleasure of your safety. 

[They sit.) 
Dem. How many women saw this child of his ? 135 
Aar. Why, so, brave lords ! when we join in league, 

I am a lamb ; but if you brave the Moor, 

The chafed boar, the mountain lioness, 

The ocean swells not so as Aaron storms. 

But say, again, how many saw the child ? 140 

Nur. Cornelia the midwife and myself ; 

And no one else but the delivered empress. 
Aar. The Empress, the midwife, and yourself. 

Two may keep counsel when the third's away. 

Go to the Empress, tell her this I said. 145 

He kills her. 

Weke, weke ! so cries a pig prepared to the spit. 
Dem. What mean'st thou, Aaron ? wherefore didst thou 

this ? 
Aar. O Lord, sir, 'tis a deed of policy. 

Shall she live to betray this guilt of ours, 

A long-tongu'd babbling gossip ? No, lords, no ; 

And now be it known to you my full intent. 151 

Not far, one Muli lives, my countryman ; 

His wife but yesternight was brought to bed ; 

His child is like to her, fair as you are. 

Go pack with him, and give the mother gold, 155 

And tell them both the circumstance of all ; 



76 t^itu0 #nDromeu* Act iv 

And how by this their child shall be advanc'd, 

And be received for the Emperor's heir, 

And substituted in the place of mine 

To calm this tempest whirling in the court ; 160 

And let the Emperor dandle him for his own. 

Hark ye, lords ; you see I have given her physic, 

[Pointing to the Nurse.] 
And you must needs bestow her funeral ; 
The fields are near, and you are gallant grooms. 
This done, see that you take no longer days, 165 
But send the midwife presently to me. 
The midwife and the nurse well made away, 
Then let the ladies tattle what they please. 

Chi. Aaron, I see thou wilt not trust the air 
With secrets. 

Dem. For this care of Tamora, 170 

Herself and hers are highly bound to thee. 

Exeunt [Dem. and Chi., bearing off the Nurse's 
body]. 

Aar. Now to the Goths, as swift as swallow flies ; 
There to dispose this treasure in mine arms, 
And secretly to greet the Empress' friends. 
Come on, you thick-lipp'd slave, I'll bear you 
hence ; 175 

For it is you that puts us to our shifts. 
I'll make you feed on berries and on roots, 
And feed on curds and whey, and suck the 
goat, 



Sc. Hi GTitufl? anDronicuS 77 

And cabin in a cave, and bring you up 179 

To be a warrior, and command a camp. Exit. 



Scene III 

[The same. A public place.] 

Enter Titus, bearing arrows icith letters at the ends of 
them: with him, Marcus, young Lucius, [Publius, 
Sempronius, Caius] and other Gentlemen, with 
bows. 

Tit. Come, Marcus, come ; kinsmen, this is the way. 
Sir boy, let me see your archery. 
Look ye draw home enough, and 'tis there straight. 
Terras Astrcea reliquit ; 

Be you rememb'red, Marcus, she's gone, she's fled. 
Sirs, take you to your tools. You, cousins, shall 6 
Go sound the ocean, and cast your nets ; 
Happily you may catch her in the sea ; 
Yet there's as little justice as at land. 
No ; Publius and Sempronius, you must do it ; 10 
'Tis you must dig with mattock and with spade, 
And pierce the inmost centre of the earth ; 
Then, when you come to Pluto's region, 
I pray you, deliver him this petition. 
Tell him, it is for Justice and for aid, 15 

And that it comes from old Andronicus, 
Shaken with sorrows in ungrateful Rome. 



78 tEitus #nDrontcu$ Activ 

Ah, Rome ! Well, well ; I made thee miserable 
What time I threw the people's suffrages 
On him that thus doth tyrannize o'er me. 20 

Go, get you gone ; and pray be careful all, 
And leave you not a man-of-war unsearch'd. 
This wicked emperor may have shipp'd her hence ; 
And, kinsmen, then we may go pipe for Justice. 

Marc. O Publius, is not this a heavy case, 25 

To see thy noble uncle thus distract ? 

Pub. Therefore, my lords, it highly us concerns 
By day and night to attend him carefully, 
And feed his humour kindly as we may, 
Till time beget some careful remedy. 30 

Marc. Kinsmen, his sorrows are past remedy. 

Join with the Goths ; and with revengeful war 
Take wreak on Rome for this ingratitude, 
And vengeance on the traitor Saturnine. 

Tit. Publius, how now ! how now, my masters ! 35 
What, have you met with her ? 

Pub. No, my good lord ; but Pluto sends you word, 
If you will have Revenge from hell, you shall. 
Marry, for Justice, she is so employ'd, 
He thinks, with Jove in heaven, or somewhere else, 
So that perforce you must needs stay a time. 41 

Tit. He doth me wrong to feed me with delays. 
I'll dive into the burning lake below, 
And pull her out of Acheron by the heels. 
Marcus, we are but shrubs, no cedars we, 45 



Sc. in tEatusf an&romcua 79 

No big-bon'd men fram'd of the Cyclops' size ; 

But metal, Marcus, steel to the very back, 

Yet wrung with wrongs more than our backs can 

bear. 
And, sith there's no justice in earth nor hell, 
We will solicit heaven and move the gods 50 

To send down Justice for to wreak our wrongs. 
Come, to this gear. You are a good archer, 

Marcus ; He gives them the arrows. 

"Ad Jovem" that's for you; here, "Ad Apolli- 

nem;" 
"Ad Mortem," that's for myself ; 
Here, boy, to Pallas ; here, to Mercury ; 55 

To Saturn, Caius, not to Saturnine, 
You were as good to shoot against the wind. 
To it, boy ! Marcus, loose when I bid. 
Of my word, I have written to effect ; 
There's not a god left unsolicited. 60 

Marc. Kinsmen, shoot all your shafts into the court ; 

We will afflict the Emperor in his pride. 
Tit. Now, masters, draw. [They shoot.] 0, well said, 

Lucius ! 
Good boy, in Virgo's lap ; give it Pallas. 
Marc. My lord, I aim a mile beyond the moon ; 65 

Your letter is with Jupiter by this. 
Tit. Ha, ha ! 

Publius, Publius, what hast thou done ? 

See, see, thou hast shot off one of Taurus' horns. 



80 Gfttutf antjronicuflf Act IV 

Marc. This was the sport, my lord. When Publius 
shot, 70 

The Bull, being gall'd, gave Aries such a knock 

That down fell both the Ram's horns in the court ; 

And who should find them but the Empress' 
villain ? 

She laugh'd, and told the Moor he should not 
choose 

But give them to his master for a present. 75 

Tit. Why, there it goes ; God give his lordship joy ! 

Enter a Clown, with a basket, and two pigeons in it. 

News, news from heaven ! Marcus, the post is 
come. 

Sirrah, what tidings ? Have you any letters ? 

Shall I have justice ? What says Jupiter ? 
Clo. O, the gibbet-maker ! he says that he hath 80 

taken them down again, for the man must not 

be hang'd till the next week. 
Tit. But what says Jupiter, I ask thee ? 
Clo. Alas, sir, I know not Jupiter ; I never drank 

with him in all my life. 85 

Tit. Why, villain, art not thou the carrier ? 
Clo. Ay, of my pigeons, sir ; nothing else. 
Tit. 'Why, didst thou not come from heaven ? 
Clo. From heaven ! alas, sir, I never came there. 

God forbid I should be so bold to press to 90 



Sc. in tEitu* an&ronicu* 81 

heaven in my young days. Why, T am going 

with my pigeons to the tribunal plebs, to take 

up a matter of brawl betwixt my uncle and 

one of the emperial's men. 
Marc. Why, sir, that is as fit as can be to serve 95 

for your oration ; and let him deliver the 

pigeons to the Emperor from you. 
Tit. Tell me, can you deliver an oration to the 

Emperor with a grace ? 
Clo. Nay, truly, sir, I could never say grace in all 100 

my life. 
Tit. Sirrah, come hither ; make no more ado, 

But give your pigeons to the Emperor. 

By me thou shalt have justice at his hands. 

Hold, hold ; meanwhile here's money for thy 
charges. 105 

Give me pen and ink. Sirrah, can you with a 

grace deliver a supplication ? 
Clo. Ay, sir. 
Tit. Then here is a supplication for you. And when 

you come to him, at the first approach you 110 

must kneel, then kiss his foot, then deliver 

up your pigeons, and then look for your reward. 

I'll be at hand, sir ; see you do it bravely. 
Clo. I warrant you, sir, let me alone. 
Tit. Sirrah, hast thou a knife? Come, let me see it. 115 

Here, Marcus, fold it in the oration ; 

For thou hast made it like an humble suppliant, 
a 



82 tEttus? #n&romcu$ Act iv 

And when thou hast given it the Emperor, 
Knock at my door, and tell me what he says. 
Clo. God be with you, sir ; I will. Exit. 120 

Tit. Come, Marcus, let us go. Publius, follow me. 

Exeunt. 

Scene IV 

[The same. Before the palace.] 

Enter Saturninus, Tamora, Demetrius, Chiron [Lords, and 
others] ; Saturninus brings the arrows in his hand 
that Titus shot at him. 

Sat. Why, lords, what wrongs are these ! Was ever 
seen 
An emperor in Rome thus overborne, 
Troubled, confronted thus ; and, for the extent 
Of egal justice, us'd in such contempt ? 
My lords, you know, [as know] the mightful gods, 5 
However these disturbers of our peace 
Buzz in the people's ears, there nought hath pass'd, 
But even with law, against the wilful sons 
Of old Andronicus. And what an if 
His sorrows have so overwhelm'd his wits, 10 

Shall we be thus afflicted in his wreaks, 
His fits, his frenzy, and his bitterness ? 
And now he writes to heaven for his redress. 
See, here's to Jove, and this to Mercury ; 
This to Apollo ; this to the god of war ; 15 



Sc. iv Qntus annronicu* 83 

Sweet scrolls to fly about the Btreets of Rome ! 
What's this hut libelling againsl the senate, 
And blazoning our unjustice everywhere? 

A goodly humour, is it not, my lords ? 
As who would say, in Rome no justice were. 20 
But if I live, his feigned ecstasies 
Shall be no shelter to these outrages; 
But he and his shall know that justice lives 
In Saturninus' health, whom, if he sleep, 
He'll so awake as he in fury shall 25 

Cut off the proud'st conspirator that lives. 
Tarn. My gracious lord, my lovely Saturnine, 
Lord of my life, commander of my thoughts, 
Calm thee, and bear the faults of Titus' age, 
The effects of sorrow for his valiant sons, 30 

Whose loss hath piere'd him deep and scarr'd his 

heart ; 
And rather comfort his distressed plight 
Than prosecute the meanest or the best 
For these contempts. (Aside.) Why, thus it 

shall become 
High-witted Tamora to gloze with all ; 35 

But, Titus, I have touch'd thee to the quick. 
Thy life-blood out, if Aaron now be wise, 
Then is all safe, the anchor in the port. 

Enter Claim. 

How now, good fellow! wouldst thou speak with us ? 



84 tEatus an&romcusf Activ 

Clo. Yea, forsooth, an your mistership be emperial. 40 
Tarn. Empress I am, but yonder sits the Emperor. 
Clo. 'Tis he. God and Saint Stephen give you 

god-den. I have brought you a letter and a 

couple of pigeons here. 

Saturninus reads the letter. 
Sat. Go, take him away, and hang him presently. 45 
Clo. How much money must I have ? 
Tarn. Come, sirrah, you must be hang'd. 
Clo. Hang'd ! by'r lady, then I have brought up 

a neck to a fair end. Exit [guarded]. 

Sat. Despiteful and intolerable wrongs ! 50 

Shall I endure this monstrous villainy ? 

I know from whence this same device proceeds. 

May this be borne ? As if his traitorous sons, 

That died by law for murder of our brother, 

Have by my means been butcher'd wrongfully ! 

Go, drag the villain hither by the hair ; 56 

Nor age nor honour shall shape privilege. 

For this proud mock I'll be thy slaughter-man ; 

Sly frantic wretch, that holp'st to make me great, 

In hope thyself should govern Rome and me. 60 

Enter Nuntius Mmilius. 

What news with thee, iEmilius ? 
Mmil. Arm, my lords ! Rome never had more cause. 
The Goths have gather'd head ; and with a power 
Of high-resolved men, bent to the spoil, 



Sc. iv tEttua an&romcus 85 

They hither march amain, under conduct 65 

Of Lucius, son to old Andronicus ; 

Who threats, in course of this revenge, to do 

As much as ever Coriolanus did. 
Sat. Is warlike Lucius general of the Goths ? 

These tidings nip me, and I hang the head 70 

As flowers with frost or grass beat down with 
storms. 

Ay, now begins our sorrows to approach. 

'Tis he the common people love so much ; 

Myself hath often heard them say. 

When I have walked like a private man, 75 

That Lucius' banishment was wrongfully. 

And they have wish'd that Lucius were their 
emperor. 
Tarn. Why should you fear ? Is not your city strong ? 
Sat. Ay, but the citizens favour Lucius, 

And will revolt from me to succour him. 80 

Tarn. King, be thy thoughts imperious, like thy name. 

Is the sun dimm'd, that gnats do fly in it ? 

The eagle suffers little birds to sing 

And is not careful what they mean thereby, 

Knowing that with the shadow of his wings 85 

He can at pleasure stint their melody ; 

Even so mayst thou the giddy men of Rome. 

Then cheer thy spirit ; for know, thou emperor, 

I will enchant the old Andronicus 

With words more sweet, and vet more dangerous, 



86 {Wtttf anuronituflf Act iv 

Than baits to fish, or honey-stalks to sheep, 91 
Whenas the one is wounded with the bait, 
The other rotted with delicious feed. 

Sat. But he will not entreat his son for us. 

Tarn. If Tamora entreat him, then he will ; 95 

For I can smooth and fill his aged ears 
With golden promises ; that, were his heart 
Almost impregnable, his old ears deaf, 
Yet should both ear and heart obey my tongue. 
[To ^Emilius.] Go thou before, be our ambassador. 
Say that the Emperor requests a parley 101 

Of warlike Lucius, and appoint the meeting 
Even at his father's house, the old Andronicus. 

Sat. zEmilius, do this message honourably ; 

And if he stand on hostage for his safety, 105 

Bid him demand what pledge will please him best. 

Mmil. Your bidding shall I do effectually. Exit. 

Tarn. Now will I to that old Andronicus, 
And temper him with all the art I have 
To pluck proud Lucius from the warlike Goths. 
And now, sweet emperor, be blithe again, 111 

And bury all thy fear in my devices. 

Sat. Then go successantly, and plead to him. 

Exeunt. 



ACT FIFTH 
Scene I 

[Plains near Rome.] 

Enter Lucius with an army of Goths, with drums and 
[colours]. 

Luc. Approved warriors, and my faithful friend B, 
I have received letters from great Rome, 
Which signifies what hate they bear their emperor, 
And how desirous of our sight they are. 
Therefore, great lords, be, as your titles witness, 5 
Imperious and impatient of your wrongs, 
And wherein Rome hath done you any scathe. 
Let him make treble satisfaction. 

[1.] Goth. Brave slip, sprung from the great Amlron- 
icus, 
Whose name was once our terror, now our comfort, 
Whose high exploits and honourable deeds 11 

Ingrateful Rome requites with foul contempt, 
Be bold in us ; we'll follow where thou lead'st, 
Like stinging bees in hottest summer's day 
Led by their master to the flow'red Held-. 15 

And be aveng'd on cursed Tamora. 

[.4// the Got 1 ] And as he saith. so say we all with 
him. 

8? 



88 tEitutf #ttDromeu0 Actv 

Luc. I humbly thank him, and I thank you all. 
But who comes here, led by a lusty Goth ? 

Enter a Goth, leading of Aaron with his Child in his arms, 

[2.] Goth. Renowned Lucius, from our troops I 
stray'd 20 

To gaze upon a ruinous monastery ; 
And, as I earnestly did fix mine eye 
Upon the wasted building, suddenly 
I heard a child cry underneath a wall. 
I made unto the noise ; when soon I heard 25 

The crying babe controll'd with this discourse : 
"Peace, tawny slave, half me and half thy dame ! 
Did not thy hue bewray whose brat thou art, 
Had nature lent thee but thy mother's look, 
Villain, thou mightst have been an emperor. 30 
But where the bull and cow are both milk-white, 
They never do beget a coal-black calf. 
Peace, villain, peace!" — even thus he rates the 

babe, — 
" For I must bear thee to a trusty Goth ; 
Who, when he knows thou art the Empress' babe, 
Will hold thee dearly for thy mother's sake." 36 
With this, my weapon drawn, I rush'd upon him, 
Surpris'd him suddenly, and brought him hither, 
To use as you think needful of the man. 
Luc. worthy Goth, this is the incarnate devil 40 
That robb'd Andronicus of his good hand ; 



Sc. I {Ettua #nDronicu0 89 

This is the pearl that ple&s'd your empress' eve. 

And here's the base fruit of her burning lu>t. 

Say, wall-eyed slave, whither wouldst thou con- 
vey 

This growing image of thy fiend-like face ? 45 

Why dost not speak ? What, deaf ? Not a word ? 

A halter, soldiers ! Hang him on this tree, 

And by his side his fruit of bastardy. 
Aar. Touch not the boy ; he is of royal blood. 
Luc. Too like the sire for ever being good. 50 

First hang the child, that he may Bee it sprawl ; 

A sight to vex the father's soul withal. 

Get me a ladder. 

[A ladder brought, which Aaron is made to as- 
cend.] 
Aar. Lucius, save the child. 

And bear it from me to the Empress. 

If thou do this, I'll show thee wondrous tilings, 55 

That highly may advantage thee to hear. 

If thou wilt not, befall what may befall, 

I'll speak no more but "Vengeance rol you all !" 
Luc. Say on ; an if it please me which thou speak'st, 

Thy child shall live, and I will sec it Qourish'd. 00 
Aar. An if it please thee ! Why, assure thee, Lucius, 

'Twill vex thy soul to hear what I shall speak ; 

For I must talk of murders, rapes, and massacres, 

Acts of black night, abominable deeds, 

Complots of mischief, treason, villainies, C5 



9© tEatutf 3n&romcu$ Act V 

Ruthful to hear, yet piteously perform'd. 
And this shall all be buried in my death 
Unless thou swear to me my child shall live. 

Luc. Tell on thy mind ; I say thy child shall live. 

Aar. Swear that he shall, and then I will begin. 70 

Luc. Who should I swear by ? Thou believ'st no god : 
That granted, how canst thou believe an oath ? 

Aar. What if I do not ? as, indeed, I do not ; 
Yet, for I know thou art religious 
And hast a thing within thee called conscience, 
With twenty popish tricks and ceremonies 76 

Which I have seen thee careful to observe, 
Therefore I urge thy oath ; for that I know 
An idiot holds his bauble for a god 
And keeps the oath which by that god he swears, 80 
To that I'll urge him. Therefore thou shalt vow 
By that same god, what god soe'er it be, 
That thou adorest and hast in reverence, 
To save my boy, to nourish and bring him up ; 
Or else I will discover nought to thee. 85 

Luc. Even by my God I sw T ear to thee I will. . 

Aar. First know thou, I begot him on the Empress. 

Luc. O most insatiate and luxurious woman ! 

Aar. Tut, Lucius, this was but a deed of charity 

To that which thou shalt hear of me anon. 90 

'Twas her two sons that murdered Bassianus ; 
They cut thy sister's tongue, and ravish'd her, 
And cut her hands, and trimm'd her as thou saw'st. 



Sc. i Cttutf anaronicu0 91 

Luc. detestable villain ! call'st thou that trimming ? 

Aar. Why, she was wash'd and cut and trimm'd, and 
'twas 95 

Trim sport for them which had the doing of it. 

Luc. barbarous, beastly villains, like thyself ! 

Aar. Indeed, I was their tutor to instruct them. 

That codding spirit had they from their mother, 

As sure a card as ever won the set ; 100 

That bloody mind, I think, they learn'd of me, 

As true a dog as ever fought at head. 

Well, let my deeds be witness of my worth. 

I train'd thy brethren to that guileful hole 

Where the dead corpse of Bassianus lay ; 105 

I wrote the letter that thy father found, 

And hid the gold within that letter mention'd, 

Confederate with the Queen and her two sons ; 

And what not done, that thou hast cause to rue, 

Wherein I had no stroke of mischief in it ? 110 

I play'd the cheater for thy father's hand, 

And, when I had it, drew myself apart 

And almost broke my heart with extreme laughter. 

I pried me through the crevice of a wall 

W T hen, for his hand, he had his two sons' heads ; 115 

Beheld his tears, and laugh'd so heartily, 

That both mine eyes were rainy like to his ; 

And when I told the Empress of this sport. 

She swounded almost at my pleasing tale. 

And for my tidings gave me twenty Iris* 180 



92 tEitu* 3n&romcu$ Actv 

[1.] Goth. What, canst thou say all this, and never 
blush ? 

Aar. Ay, like a black dog, as the saying is. 

Luc. Art thou not sorry for these heinous deeds ? 

Aar. Ay, that I had not done a thousand more. 

Even now I curse the day — and yet, I think, 125 

Few come within the compass of my curse — 

Wherein I did not some notorious ill, 

As kill a man, or else devise his death, 

Ravish a maid, or plot the way to do it, 

Accuse some innocent and forswear myself, 130 

Set deadly enmity between two friends, 

Make poor men's cattle break their necks, 

Set fire on barns and hay-stacks in the night, 

And bid the owners quench them with their 

tears. 
Oft have I digg'd up dead men from their 

graves, 
And set them upright at their dear friends' 

door, 
Even when their sorrows almost was forgot ; 137 
And on their skins, as on the bark of trees, 
Have with my knife carved in Roman letters, 
"Let not your sorrow die, though I am dead." 140 
Tut, I have done a thousand dreadful things 
As willingly as one would kill a fly, 
And nothing grieves me heartily indeed 
But that I cannot do ten thousand more. 



Sc. I Citus anDromcu* 93 

Luc. Bring down the devil, for he must riot die 145 

So sweet a death as hanging presently. 

Aar. If there be devils, would I were a devil, 
To live and burn in everlasting fire, 
So I might have your company in hell, 
But to torment you with my hitter tongue I 150 

Luc. Sirs, stop his mouth, and let him speak no more. 

[Enter a Goth.] 

[3.] Goth. My lord, there is a messenger from Rome 

Desires to be admitted to your presence. 
Luc. Let him come near. 

Enter JEmilius. 

Welcome, ^Emilius ! What's the news from 
Rome? 155 

JEmil. Lord Lucius, and you princes of the Goths, 
The Roman Emperor greets you all by me ; 
And, for he understands you are in arms, 
He craves a parley at your father's house, 
Willing you to demand your hostages, 160 

And they shall be immediately delivered. 

[/.] Goth. What says our general . v 

Luc. /Eniilius, let the Emperor give his pledges 
Unto my father and my uncle Marens, 
And we will come. March away. IW 

Flourish. Extunt. 



94 QPitu* #n&ronicu$ Act v 

SCENE II 

[Rome. Before Titus's house.] 

Enter Tamora, Demetrius, and Chiron, disguised. 

Tarn. Thus, in this strange and sad habiliment, 
I will encounter with Andronicus 
And say I am Revenge, sent from below 
To join with him and right his heinous wrongs. 
Knock at his study, where, they say, he keeps 5 
To ruminate strange plots of dire revenge ; 
Tell him Revenge is come to join with him, 
And work confusion on his enemies. They knock, 

Titus [above] opens his study door. 

Tit. Who doth molest my contemplation ? 

Is it your trick to make me ope the door 10 

That so my sad decrees may fly away 

And all my study be to no effect ? 

You are deceiv'd ; for what I mean to do 

See here in bloody lines I have set down ; 

And what is written shall be executed. 15 

Tarn. Titus, I am come to talk with thee. 
Tit. No, not a word ; how can I grace my talk, 

Wanting a hand to give it action ? 

Thou hast the odds of me ; therefore no more. 
Tarn. If thou didst know me, thou would'st talk with 
me. 20 



Sc. ii Citua anDronicua 95 

Tit. I am not mad, I know thee well enough ; 

Witness this wretched stump, witness these (rim- 
son lines ; 

Witness these trenches made by grief and < are ; 

Witness the tiring day and heavy eight ; 

Witness all sorrow, that I know thee \\« II *5 

For our proud empress, mighty Tamora. 

Is not thy coming for my other hand ? 
Tarn. Know, thou sad man, I am not Tamora ; 

She is thy enemy, and I thy friend. 

I am Revenge, sent from the infernal kingdom 30 

To ease the gnawing vulture of thy mind 

By working wreakful vengeance on thy foes. 

Come down, and welcome me to this world's 
light ; 

Confer with me of murder and of death. 

There's not a hollow cave or lurking-place, 35 

No vast obscurity or misty vale. 

Where bloody murder or detested rape 

Can couch for fear, but I will find them out ; 

And in their ears tell them my dreadful name, 

Revenge, which makes the foul offender quake. 
Tit. Art thou Revenge? and art thou sent to me, 41 

To be a torment to mine enemies ? 
Tarn. I am ; therefore come down, and welcome me. 
Tit. Do me some service, ere I come t«> thee. 

Lo, by thy side where Rape and Murder >tand> . 

Now give some surance that thou art Revenge, M 



96 GMtu* 3n&romcu$ Act V 

Stab them, or tear them on thy chariot-wheels ; 
And then I'll come and be thy waggoner, 
And whirl along with thee about the globes. 
Provide thee two proper palfreys, black as jet, 50 
To hale thy vengeful waggon swift away, 
And find out murderers in their guilty caves ; 
And when thy car is loaden with their heads, 
I will dismount, and by the waggon-wheel 
Trot, like a servile footman, all day long, 55 

Even from Hyperion's rising in the east 
Until his very downfall in the sea ; 
And day by day I'll do this heavy task, 
So thou destroy Rapine and Murder there. 

Tain. These are my ministers, and come with me. 60 

Tit. Are these thy ministers ? What are they call'd ? 

Tarn. Rape and Murder ; therefore called so, 

'Cause they take vengeance of such kind of men. 

Tit. Good Lord, how like the Empress' sons they are ! 
And you, the Empress ! but we worldly men 65 
Have miserable, mad, mistaking eyes. 

sweet Revenge, now do I come to thee ; 

And, if one arm's embracement will content thee, 

1 will embrace thee in it by and by. [Exit above.] 
Tarn. This closing with him fits his lunacy. 70 

Whate'er I forge to feed his brain-sick humours, 
Do you uphold and maintain in your speeches, 
For now he firmly takes me for Revenge ; 
And, being credulous in this mad thought, 



Sc II Citutf anDronicutf 07 

I'll make him send for Lucius his son ; 75 

And, whilst I at a banquet hold him sure, 

I'll find some cunning practice out of hand, 

To scatter and disperse the giddy Goths, 

Or, at the least, make them his enemies. 

See, here he comes, and I must ply my theme. 80 

[Enter Titus below.] 

Tit. Long have I been forlorn, and all for thee. 
Welcome, dread Fury, to my woeful house ; 
Rapine and Murder, you are welcome too. 
How like the Empress and her sons you are ! 
Well are you fitted, had you but a Moor ; 85 

Could not all hell afford you such a devil ? 
For well I wot the Empress never wags 
But in her company there is a Moor ; 
And, would you represent our queen aright, 
It were convenient you had such a devil. 90 

But welcome, as you are. What shall we do ? 

Tarn. What wouldst thou have us do, Andronicus ? 

Dem. Show me a murderer, I'll deal with him. 

Chi. Show me a villain that hath done a rape, 

And I am sent to be reveng'd on him. 95 

Tarn. Show me a thousand that have done thee wrong, 
And I will be revenged on them all. 

Tit. Look round about the wicked streets <>f Rome ; 
And when thou find'st a man that'.- like thyself, 
Good Murder, stab him ; he's a inunhrer. 100 



98 tEitus? #ntironicu0 Act v 

Go thou with him ; and when it is thy hap 
To find another that is like to thee, 
Good Rapine, stab him ; he's a ravisher. 
Go thou with them ; and in the Emperor's court 
There is a queen, attended by a Moor ; 105 

Well shalt thou know her by thine own propor- 
tion, 
For up and down she doth resemble thee. 
I pray thee, do on them some violent death ; 
They have been violent to me and mine. 

Tarn. Well hast thou lesson'd us ; this shall we do. 110 
But would it please thee, good Andronicus, 
To send for Lucius, thy thrice-valiant son, 
Who leads towards Rome a band of warlike Goths, 
And bid him come and banquet at thy house ; 
When he is here, even at thy solemn feast, 115 
I will bring in the Empress and her sons, 
The Emperor himself and all thy foes ; 
And at thy mercy shall they stoop and kneel, 
And on them shalt thou ease thy angry heart. 
What says Andronicus to this device ? 120 

Tit. Marcus, my brother ! 'tis sad Titus calls. 

Enter Marcus. 

Go, gentle Marcus, to thy nephew Lucius ; 
Thou shalt inquire him out among the Goths : 
Bid him repair to me, and bring with him 



Sc. H 3>ttu0 &nDromcti0 09 

Some of the chiefesi princes of the Goths. 125 

Bid him encamp his soldiers where they arc 

Tell him the Emperor and the Empress too 
Feast at my house, and he shall feast with them. 
This do thou for my love ; and so let him, 
As he regards his aged father's lit'.-. 130 

Marc. This will I do, and soon return again. [Exit.] 

Tarn. Now will I henee about thy business, 
And take my ministers along with me. 

Tit. Nay, nay, let Rape and Murder stay with me ; 

Or else I'll call my brother back again, 135 

And cleave to no revenge but Lucius. 

Tarn. [Aside to her sons.] What say you, boys ? Will 
you abide with him 
Whiles I go tell my lord the Emperor 
How I have govern'd our determin'd jest ? 
Yield to his humour, smooth and speak him fair, 
And tarry with him till I turn again. 141 

Tit. [Aside.] I knew them all though they supposed 
me mad, 
And will o'erreach them in their own devices. 
A pair of cursed hell-hounds and their dam ! 

Dem. Madam, depart at pleasure ; leave us here. 145 

Tarn. Farewell, Andronicus ! Revenge now ( 
To lay a complot to betray thy foes. 

Tit. I know thou dost; and, sweet Revenge, farewell. 

[Exit Tarn or a.] 

Chi. Tell us, old man, how shall we be employ'd ? 



ioo ®itus? #nDromcu0 Act v 

Tit. Tut, I have work enough for you to do. 150 

Publius, come hither, Caius, and Valentine ! 

[Enter Publius and others.] 

Pub. What is your will ? 

Tit. Know you these two ? 

Pub. The Empress' sons, I take them, Chiron, 

Demetrius. 155 

Tit. Fie, Publius, fie ! thou art too much deceiv'd. 

The one is Murder, Rape is the other's name ; 

And therefore bind them, gentle Publius. 

Caius and Valentine, lay hands on them. 

Oft have you heard me wish for such an hour, 160 

And now I find it ; therefore bind them sure, 

And stop their mouths if they begin to cry. 

[Exit Titus. Publius, etc., lay hold on 
Chiron and Demetrim.] 
Chi. Villains, forbear ! we are the Empress' sons. 
Pub. And therefore do we what we are commanded. 

Stop close their mouths, let them not speak a 
word. 165 

Is he sure bound ? Look that you bind them fast. 

Re-enter Titus with a knife, and Lavinia with a basin. 

Tit. Come, come, Lavinia ; look, thy foes are bound. 
Sirs, stop their mouths, let them not speak to me, 
But let them hear what fearful words I utter. 
O villains, Chiron and Demetrius ! 170 



Sc. II {EattlS fttlDtOItfat* 101 

Here stands the spring whom you have stain'd with 

mud, 
This goodly summer with your winter mixM. 
You kill'd her husband, and for that vile fault 
Two of her brothers were condemn'd to death, 
My hand cut off and made a merry jesl : 176 

Both her sweet hands, her tongue, and that more 

dear 
Than hands or tongue, her spotless chastity. 
Inhuman traitors, you constraint and forc'd. 
What would you say if I should let you speak ? 
Villains, for shame you could not beg for grace. 180 
Hark, wretches ! how I mean to martyr you. 
This one hand yet is left to cut your throats. 
Whilst that Lavinia 'tween her stumps doth hold 
The basin that receives your guilty blood. 
You know your mother means to feast with me, 185 
And calls herself Revenge, and thinks me mad. 
Hark, villains ! I will grind your bones to dust 
And with your blood and it I'll make a paste. 
And of the paste a coffin I will rear 
And make two pasties of your shameful heads, 190 
And bid that strumpet, your unhallowed dam. 
Like to the earth swallow her own increase. 
This is the feast that I have bid her to. 
And this the banquet she shall surfeit on ; 
For worse than Philomel you us'd my daughter, 
And worse than Progne I will be reveng'd, 106 



102 tEitutf 3ntjronicu$ Act v 

And now prepare your throats. Lavinia, come, 
Receive the blood ; and when that they are dead, 
Let me go grind their bones to powder small 
And with this hateful liquor temper it ; 200 

And in that paste let their vile heads be bak'd. 
Come, come, be every one officious 
To make this banquet ; which I wish may prove 
More stern and bloody than the Centaurs' feast. 

He cuts their throats. 
So, now bring them in, for I'll play the cook, 205 
And see them ready against their mother comes. 
Exeunt [bearing the dead bodies]. 

SCENE III 

[Court of Titus's houxe.] 
Enter Lucius, Marcus, and Goths [with Aaron prisoner]. 

Luc. Uncle Marcus, since 'tis my father's mind 
That I repair to Rome, I am content. 

[1.] Goth. And ours with thine, befall what fortune will. 

Luc. Good uncle, take you in this barbarous Moor, 
This ravenous tiger, this accursed devil ; 5 

Let him receive no sustenance, fetter him, 
Till he be brought unto the Empress' face, 
For testimony of her foul proceedings. 
And see the ambush of our friends be strong ; 
I fear the Emperor me ens no good to us. 10 



Sc. in tEitu* an&romcu* 103 

Aar. Some devil whisper curses in mine car. 

And prompt me, that my tongue may utter forth 
The venomous malice of my swelling heart ! 

Luc. Away, inhuman dog ! unhallowed slave I 

Sirs, help our uncle to convey him in. 16 

[Exeunt Goths, with Aaron.] Flourish [within]. 
The trumpets show the Emperor is at hand. 

Sound trumpets. Enter Saturninus and Tarnora, with 
[Mmilius,] Tribunes, [Senators,] and others. 

Saf. What, hath the firmament moe suns than one ? 
Luc. What boots it thee to call thyself a sun ? 
Marc. Rome's emperor, and nephew, break the parle ; 
These quarrels must be quietly debated. 20 

The feast is ready, which the careful Titus 
Hath ordain'd to an honourable end, 
For peace, for love, for league, and good to Rome. 
Please you, therefore, draw nigh, and take your 
places. 
Sat. Marcus, we will. 25 

Hautboys. A table brought in. [The com- 
pany sit down.} 

Sound trumpets. Enter Titus like a mid:, placing the no at 
on the table; Lavinia with a nil over her faa ; 

[young Lucius and others]. 

Tit. Welcome, my gracious lord ; welcome, dread 
queen ; 



104 tEttus an&rontcus Actv 

Welcome, ye warlike Goths ; welcome, Lucius ; 
And welcome, all ! Although the cheer be poor, 
'Twill fill your stomachs ; please you eat of it. 

Sat. Why art thou thus attir'd, Andronicus ? 30 

Tit. Because I would be sure to have all well, 

To entertain your Highness and your empress. 

Tarn. We are beholding to you, good Andronicus. 

Tit. An if your Highness knew my heart, you were. 
My lord the Emperor, resolve me this : 35 

Was it well done of rash Virginius 
To slay his daughter with his own right hand, 
Because she was enforc'd, stain'd, and deflower'd ? 

Sat. It was, Andronicus. 

Tit. Your reason, mighty lord ? 40 

Sat. Because the girl should not survive her shame, 
And by her presence still renew his sorrows. 

Tit. A reason might y, strong, and effectual ; 
A pattern, precedent, and lively warrant 
For me, most wretched, to perform the like. 45 
Die, die, Lavinia, and thy shame with thee ; 
And, with thy shame, thy father's sorrow die ! 

Kills Lavinia. 

Sat. What hast thou done, unnatural and unkind ? 

Tit. Kill'd her, for whom my tears have made me blind. 
I am as woeful as Virginius was, 50 

And have a thousand times more cause than he 
To do this outrage ; and it now is done. 

Sat. What, was she ravish'd ? Tell who did the deed. 



Sc. Ill CituS ftnDronicus 105 

Tit. Will't please you cat ? W511M please your High- 
ness feed ? 
Tarn. Why hast thou slain thine only daughter thufl ? 

Tit. Not I; 'twas Chiron and Demetrius. 50 

They ravish'd her, and cut away her tongue; 
And they, 'twas they, that did her all this wrong. 

Sat. Go fetch them hither to us presently. 

Tit. "Why, there they are both, baked in that pie ; 60 
Whereof their mother daintily hath fed. 
Eating the flesh that she herself hath bred. 
'Tis true, 'tis true ; witness my knife's sharp point. 

Stubs T amor a. 

Sat. Die, frantic wretch, for this accursed deed ! 

[Kills Titus.] 

Luc. Can the son's eye behold his father bleed ? fi5 

There's meed for meed, death for a deadly deed ! 
[Kills Satuminus. A great tumult. Lucius, 
Marcus, and others go up into On }>alcony.) 

Marc. You sad-fae'd men, people and sons of Rome, 
By uproars sever'd, as a flight of fowl 
Scatter'd by winds and high tempestuous gusl 
O, let me teach you how to knit again ~0 

This scatt'red corn into one mutual sheaf. 
These broken limbs again into one body ; 
Lest Rome herself be bane unto herself. 
And she whom mighty kingdoms curtsy to, 
Like a forlorn and desperate <a>ta\\ay, 75 

Do shameful execution on herself. 



io6 tEitutf #n&ronicus Actv 

But if my frosty signs and chaps of age, 
Grave witnesses of true experience, 
Cannot induce you to attend my words, 
[To Lucius.] Speak, Rome's dear friend, as erst 
our ancestor, 80 

When with his solemn tongue he did discourse 
To love-sick Dido's sad attending ear 
The story of that baleful burning night 
When subtle Greeks surpris'd King Priam's Troy ; 
Tell us what Sinon hath bewitch'd our ears, 85 
Or who hath brought the fatal engine in 
That gives our Troy, our Rome, the civil wound. 
My heart is not compact of flint nor steel ; 
Nor can I utter all our bitter grief, 
But floods of tears will drown my oratory 90 

And break my utterance, even in the time 
W T hen it should move you to attend me most, 
And force you to commiseration. 
Here's Rome's young captain, let him tell the tale ; 
While I stand by and weep to hear him speak. 
Luc. Then, gracious auditory, be it known to you 96 
That Chiron and the damn'd Demetrius 
Were they that murdered our emperor's brother, 
And they it were that ravished our sister. 
For their fell faults our brothers were beheaded ; 
Our father's tears despis'd, and basely cozen'd 101 
Of that true hand that fought Rome's quarrel out 
And sent her enemies unto the grave. 



Sc. in Citutf anuromcu* 107 

Lastly, myself unkindly banished, 

The gates shut on me, and turn'd weeping out 100 

To beg relief among Rome's enemies, 

Who drownM their enmity in my true tears, 
And op'd their arms to embrace me as s friend. 

I am the turned forth, be it known to you, 
That have preserv'd her welfare in my blood ; 110 
And from her bosom took the enemy's point, 
Sheathing the steel in my advent'rous body. 
Alas, you know I am no vaunter, I ; 
My scars can witness, dumb although they ar<\ 
That nrv report is just and full of truth. 1 15 

But, soft ! methinks I do digress too much. 
Citing my worthless praise. O, pardon me ; 
For when no friends are by, men praise themselves. 
Marc. Now is my turn to speak. Behold the child : 

[Pointing to the Child in the arms of an Atti nd- 
ant.] 
Of this was Tamora delivered, 120 

The issue of an irreligious Moor, 
Chief architect and plotter of these woes. 
The villain is alive in Titus' house, 
And as he is, to witness this is true. 
Now judge what cause had XitUS to revenue K."> 
These wrongs unspeakable, past patience, 
Or more than any living man could bear. 
Now you have heard the truth, what say you, 

Romans ? 



108 tEitus &ntironttu$ Actv 

Have we done aught amiss ? Show us wherein, 
And, from the place where you behold us now, 130 
The poor remainder of Andronici 
Will, hand in hand, all headlong hurl ourselves, 
And on the ragged stones beat forth our brains, 
And make a mutual closure of our house. 
Speak, Romans, speak ; and if you say we shall, 135 
Lo, hand in hand, Lucius and I will fall. 

/Emil. Come, come, thou reverend man of Rome, 
And bring our emperor gently in thy hand, 
Lucius our emperor ; for well I know 
The common voice do cry it shall be so. 140 

[.4//.] Lucius, all hail, Rome's royal Emperor ! 

Marc. Go, go into old Titus' sorrowful house, 

[To Attendants.] 
And hither hale that misbelieving Moor, 
To be adjudg'd some direful slaught'ring death, 
As punishment for his most wicked life. 145 

[Exewit Attendants.] 

Lucius, Marcus, and the others descend. 

[AIL] Lucius, all hail, Rome's gracious governor ! 

Luc. Thanks, gentle Romans ; may I govern so, 
To heal Rome's harms, and wipe away her woe ! 
But, gentle people, give me aim a while, 
For nature puts me to a heavy task. 150 

Stand all aloof, but, uncle, draw you near, 
To shed obsequious tears upon this trunk. 



Sc. in l&ituti &nDromcu$ 109 

O, take tins warm kiss on thy pale cold lips, 

[Kissing Titus.] 

These sorrowful drops upon thy blood-stain'd face. 

The last true duties of thy noble son ! 155 

Marc. Tear for tear, and loving kiss for kiss, 

Thy brother Marcus tenders on thy lips. 

O, were the sum of these that I should pay 

Countless and infinite, yet would I pay them ! 159 
Luc. Come hither, boy ; come, come, and learn of us 

To melt in showers; thy grandsire lov'd thee well. 

Many a time he danc'd thee on his knee, 

Sung thee asleep, his loving breast thy pillow ; 

Many a story hath he told to thee, 

And bid thee bear his pretty tales in mind, 165 

And talk of them when he was dead and gone. 
Marc. How many thousand times hath these poor lips, 

When they were living, warmed themselves on thine! 

O now, sweet boy, give them their latest kiss ; 

Bid him farewell ; commit him to the grave ; 170 

Do him that kindness, and take leave of him. 
Young Luc. O grandsire, grandsire ! even with all my 
heart 

Would I were dead, so you did live again ! 

O Lord, I cannot speak to him for weeping ; 

My tears will choke me, if I ope my mouth. 17". 

[Re-enter Attendants with Aaron.] 
A Roman. You sad Andronici, have done with woes. 



no tEitutf amironicusf Actv 

Give sentence on this execrable wretch 
That hath been breeder of these dire events. 

Luc. Set him breast-deep in earth, and famish him ; 
There let him stand and rave and cry for food. 180 
If any one relieves or pities him, 
For the offence he dies. This is our doom. 
Some stay to see him fast'ned in the earth. 

Aar. Ah, why should wrath be mute, and fury dumb ? 
I am no baby, I, that with base prayers 185 

I should repent the evils I have done. 
Ten thousand worse than ever yet I did 
Would I perform, if I might have my will. 
If one good deed in all my life I did, 
I do repent it from my very soul. 190 

Luc. Some loving friends convey the Emperor hence, 
And give him burial in his father's grave. 
My father and Lavinia shall forthwith 
Be closed in our household's monument. 
As for that ravenous tiger, Tamora, 195 

No funeral rite, nor man in mourning weed ; 
No mournful bell shall ring her burial ; 
But throw her forth to beasts and birds to prey. 
Her life was beastly, and devoid of pity ; 
And, being dead, let birds on her take pity. 200 
See justice done on Aaron, that damn'd Moor, 
By whom our heavy haps had their beginning. 
Then, afterwards, to order well the state, 
That like events may ne'er it ruinate. Exeunt. 



0om 



The Qq have no division into Acts or Scenes. The Ff 
begin with Actus Primus, Sccena Prima, but thereafter 
give only division into Acts. The division into Scenes, 
and the list of Dramatis Persona? were first made by Rowe. 

I. i. 35. At this point in Qi is a passage of five lines 
missing in later texts. See Textual Variants. 

I. i. 40. succeed. Succeeded. 

I. i. 42. pretend. Claim. 

I. i. 43. strength. Military strength. Cf. power, III. 
i. 300. 

I. i. G9. The stage-directions here and throughout the 
play indicate the pleasure of poet and people in martial 
sounds and pageantry. 

I. i. 77. defender of the Capitol. Jupiter Capitolinus. 

I. i. 92. receptacle. Accented on first and third .-yl- 
lables. 

I. i. 98. ad manes fratrum. To the shades of our 
brethren. Such sacrifices were unknown in Rome, but 
the author may have derived the motive from cl assical 
drama. 

I. i. 127. fire. A dissyllable. 

I. i. 131. Scythia. Cf. King Lear, I. i. 10. 

I. i. 130. the Queen of Troy. Hecuba. 

I. i. 138. the Thracian tyrant. Polymnestor, who killed 
the son of Hecuba. 

ill 



ii2 jpote* 

I. i. 177. By several examples Solon showed Croesus, 
king of Lydia, that the highest happiness was honour, even 
in death. Solon is also credited with the saying, " Call 
no man happy till he is dead." 

I. i. 185. candidatus. The author confuses the election 
of an emperor with that of a consul. The latter, as he 
sought the votes of the people, wore a white robe, and 
hence was called candidatus. 

I. i. 201. obtain and ask. Ask and obtain. 

I. i. 240. empress. A dissyllable. Cf . I. i.^320 ; door, 
I. i. 288 ; brethren, I. i. 348, etc. 

I. i. 291. Titus's giving his daughter to whom he 
pleased and his killing his son who defied him were not 
crimes in Roman law. 

I. i. 323. Priest and holy water suggests a Catholic 
or English marriage. Another anachronism is the " ruin- 
ous monastery," V. i. 21. 

I. i. 368. not with himself. Beside himself. 

I. i. 379. Cf. the Ajax of Sophocles. In ancient times 
one guilty of a crime was not buried, or not honourably 
buried. 

I. i. 394. I know it is. I.e., I know it is so. 

II. i. 14. mount her pitch. A falconer's term which here 
means "rise as high as she." 

II. i. 37. Clubs, clubs ! The cry to call forth the Lon- 
don apprentices, who had clubs for weapons. 

II. i. 70. discord's ground. A pun upon ground and 
discord in the ordinary sense and the musical. Ground was 
the melody. 

II. i. 82-83. These lines are echoed in 1 Henry VI, 
V. iii. 78-79, and Richard III, I. ii. 228-229. The senti- 



J^oteg 113 

ment appears repeatedly in the «-arIy work of Greene, hut 
the phrasing is new, ami on the strength of this and other 
similarities we are not justified in inferring thai Greene 
wrote this part of the play. 

II. i. 80-8G. A proverbial saying. 

II. i. 89. worn. A dissyllable. — Vulcan's badge. The 
dishonour of an unfaithful wife, referring to the intrigue 
of Mars and Venus. 

II. i. 103. Join for that you jar. Make up your dif- 
ferences. 

II. i. 12G. house of Fame. The allusion is to Virgil's 
conception in Mneid, IV. 183, 184, as copied by Chaucer 
in The Eoua of Fame, 1379-1390. 

II. i. 133, 135. Sit fas, etc. Be it right or wrong. 
Per Styga, etc. Through Styx I am borne and through 
the realm of the dead. Both are from Seneca, Phaedra, 
1180, 1181. 

II. ii. 1-2. Compare Peele, Old Wires Tale, 850, 551 : 

The hunt is up, the morn is bright and grew 
The lark is merry, and records her notes. 

II. ii. 1. grey. Bright. Applied to the sunless light 
of early morning. The word cannot mean dull or cloudy. 

II. ii. 9-10. Premonitions of a purely physical char- 
acter, unlike Hamlet's presentiment before the fencing 
match, are characteristic of early Elizabethan Senei an 
tragedy. Cf. II. iii. 195, 210-213. 

II. ii. 21. The panther is no more native to the Roman 
forest than the lion is to Arden, in As )'<»// Like It. 

II. iii. 8-9. lie has taken the gold from Tamora's 
chest. 



n4 jpotes 

II. iii. 13, 15-16. Cf. Seneca, Phadra, 508 f. 

II. iii. 39. In earlier plays, those of both Lodge and 
Greene, for instance, are to be found parallel expressions. 

II. iii. 55. Who. Whom. Not uncommon in Eliza- 
bethan drama. 

II. iii. 63. horns. The usual Elizabethan allusion to 
the horns of the cuckold. 

II. iii. 86-87. Tamora's unfaithfulness has long made 
the Emperor a laughing-stock. 

II. iii. 92-104. In this scene there is either a change of 
place, implying that the characters have been walking as 
they talk, or else, in the desire to make the landscape fit 
the occasion (cf. IV. i. 53-58), the poet forgets Tamora's 
very different description of it in 11. 11-15. Instances of 
change of place within a scene are not rare in early plays, 
and were, of course, less noticeable in the absence of scen- 
ery. Cf. Jew of Malta, II. iii. 

II. iii. 110. Goth. There is a pun on the word goat. 
Cf. As You Like It, III. iii. 7-9. 

II. iii. 126. painted. Unreal. The line is faulty met- 
rically, and has been much amended. F2-4 insert she 
before braves, thus making an Alexandrine. 

II. iii. 151. The lion moved with pity. Usually ex- 
plained as referring to the story of Androclus, who was 
spared in the arena by a lion from whose paw he had once 
removed a thorn. But no version of the story is known 
which speaks of his paring the paws, or " claws " as some 
modern editors emend the line. 

II. iii. 153-154. It is an ancient notion that ravens 
leave their young until they grow feathers, to be fed by the 
hand of God with the dew of heaven. The fostering of 



jpotca 115 

children by ravens seems to be folk-lore, as it is again 
alluded to in Winter's Talc, II. iii. 186. 

II. iii. 195. Cf. note on II. ii. 9-10, above. 

II. iii. 227. The jewel is possibly the mythical car- 
buncle which shed light instead of reflecting it. But often in 
the literature of the time, as in The Faerie Queene, jewels and 
even armour are represented as radiating light in darkness. 

II. iv. 6. sweet water. Perfumed water. 

II. iv. 14. The baleful influence of planets is meant. 
Cf. Hamlet, I. i. 162. 

II. iv. 2G. See Introduction for the poet's indebted- 
ness to Ovid's story of Tereus and Philomela. 

II. iv. 51. The allusion is to the effect of Orpheus's 
music as he descended into Hades for Eurydice. 

III. i. 11. Lying or sitting down on the earth is a bit 
of " business " common in these early plays as a sign «»f 
utter grief. Cf. Richard II, III. ii. 155; Richard III, 
IV. iv. 29 ff. 

III. i. 82. engine. See Glossary. Cf. Venus and 
Adonis, 1. 367. 

" Once more the engine of her thoughts began." 

III. i. 91. deer. The usual pun on the word is intended. 

III. i. 170. castle. Theobald emended this to casque 
and Walker to crest. The expression in the text is cer- 
tainly peculiar. 

III. i. 189. Aaron means that he will never incline to 
deceits so generous. 

III. i. 231. For why. Because. 

III. i. 280 ff. They clear these ghastly properties away 
to prepare for the next scene. 



Ii6 $LQtZS> 

III. i. 282. The corruption of the passage is attested 
by the rhythm. See Textual Variants. 

III. ii. This entire scene was added in the First Folio. 

III. ii. 15. Each sigh was supposed to draw a drop of 
blood from the heart. Hence " blood-drinking," " blood- 
sucking sighs," 3 Henry VI, IV. iv. 22. 

III. ii. 25-30. The passage is quite similar in spirit 
aDd taste to the following from The Spanish Tragedy, 

III. xiii : 

And thou and I and she will sing a song, 
Three parts in one, but all of discords framed : — 
Talke not of cords, but let us now be gone, 
For with a cord Horatio was slaine. 

IV. i. 20. Hecuba ran mad after avenging her son upon 
Polymnestor. 

IV. i. 81-82. Magni Dominator, etc. "Lord of the 
mighty heavens, dost thou so mildly hear, so mildly see such 
crimes ? " Latin, preferably a quotation from Seneca, was, 
for supreme moments of anguish, a common dramatic de- 
vice in the school of Kyd. This, somewhat modified, is 
from the Phadra, 671. 

IV. i. 105. Sibyl's leaves. Cf. Mneid, VI. 75. 

IV. i. 109. base. Qo reads bad, which may be the 
right reading. 

IV. i. 129. the heavens. Emended by Johnson and 
others to ye heavens. But Herford observed that the ex- 
pression is idiomatic English as it stands. 

IV. ii. 20. " He who is pure of life and unstained with 
crime needs not bow or Moorish dart." Horace, 
I. 22. 

IV. ii. 26. no sound jest. This is more than a jest. 



fiOtt* 117 

IV.ii.31. Cf. The Sjxini.sk Tragedy, I. iii. 5 : " Then r<^t 
we hecre a while in our unrest." Also ibid., III. xiii. 10 
30, and Richard II L IV. iv. 29. 

IV. ii. 144. A proverb. Cf. Romeo and Juliet, II. iv. 
209. 

IV. ii. 164. gallant grooms. " Stout fellows.'' 

IV. ii. 175. thick-lipp'd. Everywhere in the play Aaron 
and his ehild, though Moors, are represented as Degrees. 
Cf. II. iii. 34-35. So Peele conceives his Muly Edahamet 
and Shakespeare his Othello. 

IV. iii. 4. "Astrsea, or Justice, has left the earth." 
Ovid, Metamorphoses, I. 150. 

IV. iii. 11 ff. This notion of digging in the earth to 
reach Pluto and demand justice of him is presented di- 
rectly on the stage in The Spanish Tragedy, III. xii. 71. 
where Hieronimo digs the earth with his dagger to reach 
the underworld and bring back his son. 

IV. iii. 24. go pipe. To-day we say "go whistle." 

IV. iii. 53, 54. Ad Jovem, Ad Apollinem, Ad Martem. 
To Jupiter, to Apollo, to Mars. 

IV. iii. 59. of my word. On my word. 

IV. iii. 63. well said. Well done 

IV. iii. 71-72. The Bull (Taurus) and the Ram (Aries) 
are signs of the zodiac. 

V. i. 15. master. Queen bee. Cf. Henry V. I. ii. 1!><>. 
V. i. 27. tawny. This means not " yellowish-brown " 

but dark or black. It does not contradict the previous 
statement that the child was ;i blackamoor, IV. ii. 51. 

V. i. 42. pearl. There was a proverb which ran : " A 
black man [a man of dark complexion] is a pearl in a fair 
woman's eye." 



n8 



jpotes? 



V. i. 53. Get me a ladder. This is brought to hang 
Aaron. In the Quartos and Folios the speech is attributed 
to Aaron himself. 

V. i. 61 ff. This speech and that at lines 124-144, in 
which Aaron vaingloriously tells the beadroll of his sins, 
are parallel to two in The Jew of Malta, II. iii. 180-220. 

V. i. 122. Cf. " Hee blusheth like a blacke dogge, he 
hath a brazen face." Withals's Adagia, ed. 1634, p. 557. 

V. ii. 204. Centaurs' feast. The battle between the 
Centaurs and the Lapithse at the wedding of Pirithous. 

V. iii. 3. ours with thine. Our will as well as thine. 

V. iii. 38. In the allusion the story of Virginia is con- 
fused, perhaps with that of Lucrece. 

V. iii. 48. unkind. The word means the same as un- 
natural. 

V. iii. 80. our ancestor. ^Eneas. 

V. iii. 124. as he is. The meaning seems to be that 
were it not for the need of him as witness he would not 
now be left alive. 

V. iii. 164-170. See Textual Variants. 







Cejrtual aaartantjS 

The text in the present edition i^ based upon the 
Quarto, with a number of readings from the recently recovered 
first Quarto ; and the following list records the more important 
variations from Q 2 . Act III, sc. ii is from Pi. 

I. i. 6. wore] Ff ; ware Q2. 

35, 30. In coffins . . . And now] Q 2 ; Q : read* 

In coffins from the field, and at this day 

To the Monument of that Andronicy 

Done sacrifice of expiation 

And slaine the Noblest prisoner of the Gothefl 

And now, etc. 
71. her] F 4 ; his Qq F^. 
122. your] Q t ; you Q_>. 

131. never ... barbarous] Qi ; ever ... barbarous ? Q 2 . 
162. this] Q, ; the Q 2 . 
214. friends] Qi; friend Q,. 
219. you] Q 2 ; yec Qi. 
224. our] Qi; your Q„. 
304. there none else] F_> ; none Qq Fi. 
316. Phoebe] F s ; Thebe Qq Iv 
398. Ff; Qq omit. 
477. do I] Q, ; I do Q_>. 
495. Flourish . . . A<t Sboond . . . Enter Aaron] 

Exeunt, wound trumpets, Manet Moor, 1} \ 

Exeunt Actus Secunda. Flourish. Enter 

Aaron alone 1\. 

119 



120 X&mml Variants 

II. i. 110. than]Rowe; this Q 2 Ff. 

ii. 1. mom] Ff ; Moone Q 2 . 

in. 20. yelping] Ff ; yellowing Q 2 . 

72. swarth] Ff ; swartie Q 2 . 

85. note] Pope; notice Q 2 Ff. 

88. haveI]F 2 ; I have Q 2 F x . 

147. woman's ] Qi ; woman Q 2 Ff . 

222. embrued here] Q 2 ; bereaud in blood Qi. 

iv. 9. case] Pope ; cause Q 2 Ff . 

21. have] Theobald; half Q 2 Ff. 

27. him] Rowe ; them Q 2 Ff . 

30. three] Hanmer ; theyr Q 2 . 

III. i. 17. urns] Hanmer ; mines Q 2 Ff . 

125. likeJQi; inQ 2 ; as Collier. 

116. with his] F 4 ; with her Q 2 . 
210. wouldst] Qi ; would Q 2 . 

226. do blow] F 2 ; doth flow Qi ; do flow Q 2 Fi. 

282. things] Ff; Armes Q 2 . 

292. leaves] Rowe; loves Q 2 Ff. 

ii. Qq omit this scene. Text is based on Fi. 

ii. 38. mash'd] S. Walker conj. ; mesh'd Ff . 

IV. i. 10. [Marc] S. Walker conj.; QqFtomit. 

106. our] Qi ; you Q 2 ; your F x . 

109. baseJQx; bad Q 2 Ff. 

117. my] Q i; thy Q 2 . 

ii. 152. Muli lives] Steevens conj. ; Muliteus Q 2 Ff . 

iv. 5. [as know] Clark and Wright; Q 2 Ff omit. 

93. feed] Q 3 ; seede Q 2 ; Foode F x . 

V. i. 1, s. d. [colours] CapeW; Souldiers Q 2 Ff. 

27. dame] Q 1 ; dam Q 2 . 

53. Get] Pope ; Awn. Get Q 2 Ff . 



Ccrtual ©ariant0 121 

96. which] Qi ; that Q : . 
107. that letter] Qi; the letter Qj. 
18. it action] Ff ; that accord Qs, 
42. mine] Qi ; thine Qi If. 
52. murderers] Capell; murder Qs Ff. 
71. humours] Qi ; fits Q 2 . 
10G. shalt] Qi ; mayst Q 2 . 
137. abide] Q t ; bide Q 2 . 

142. knew . . . suppos'd] Qi ; know . . . suppose Q* 
1.37. Rape] Qs; and Rape (&. 
73. Lest] Capell; Roman Lord. Let Q 2 ; Goth. Let 

Ff. 
93-97. Q i; Q 2 Ft read: 

Lending your kind commiseration. 
Here is a captain, let him tell the tale; 
Your hearts will throb and weep to hear him 
speak. 
Luc. Then, noble auditory, be it known to you 

That cursed Chiron and Demetrius. 
125. cause] F 4 ; course Q 2 Fi_ 3 . 
130. now]Q 2 Ff; pleading Qi. 
132. hurl ourselves] Qr, cast us down Qi Ff. 
141. [All.] Rom. Capell; Marcus Qs Ff. 
14G. [All.] Rom. Capell ; Q, Ff omit. 
164. story] Q! ; matter Qs Pf. 
165-169. Qr. Qs Ff read: 

Meet and agreeing with thine infancy. 

In that respect, then, like a loving child, 

Shed yet some small drops from thy tender spring, 

Because kind nature doth require il - 

Friends should associate friend- in grief and woe. 



122 



jjeirtual ©arianta 



171. him . . . him] Ff ; them . . . Q 2 . 

195. ravenous] Qi, Collier Ms. ; hainous Q 2 Ff . 

196. weed] Qi ; weeds Q 2 Ff . 

200. Qi ; And, being so, shall have like want of pity Q 2 . 




(Bloftarf 



abused, deceived; II. ill. 87. 

accited, summoned; I. i. 27. 

Acheron, a river of the infernal regions; IV. iii. 44. 

Actaeon, the Theban prince transformed by Diana into 

a stag; II. iii. G3. 
advice, reflection, consideration; I. i. 379; IV. i. 02. 
advised, in his right senses; IV. ii. 10. 
advise thee, consider, deliberate; IV. ii. 129. 
affect, desire, love; II. i. 28; II. i. 105. 
affy, confide; I. i. 47. 
aim, " give me a.," " give room and scope to my thoughts ; " 

V. iii. 149. 
Alcides, Hercules; IV. ii. 95. 
an, if; II. i. 69. 

annoy, grief, suffering; IV. i. 19. 
approve, prove; II. i. 35; V. i. 1. 
author, cause; I. i. 435. 

bay, " at a b.," in our power ; IV. ii. 42. 

bestow her funeral, afford her burial; IV. ii. 163. 

bewray, reveal; II. iv. 3; V. i. 28. 

blowse, " a ruddy fat-faced wench; " IV. ii. 72. 

brabble, quarrel; II. i. 62. 

bravely, finely, properly; IV. iii. 113. 

braves, defiance, threatenings ; II. i. 30. 

broach, spit; IV. ii. 85. 

buzz, whisper; IV. iv. 7. 

Cimmerian, a member of the race fabled by the ancients 
to live in perpetual darkness; II. iii. 72. 
123 



124 45lo$0ar£ 

challenge, accuse ; I. i. 340. 

chaps, wrinkles; V. iii. 77. 

chase, hunting ground; II. ii. 21; II. iii. 255. 

cheer, countenance; I. i. 264. 

close, secret; IV. ii. 118. 

closing with, humouring ; V. ii. 70. 

closure, end; V. iii. 134. 

Cocytus, a river in hell ; II. iii. 236. 

codding, lustful ; V. i. 99. 

coffin, the crust of a pie; V. ii. 189. 

coil, confusion, ado; III. i. 225. 

common, general; I. i. 21. 

conceit, device; IV. ii. 30. 

confederate, in league, allied; V. i. 108. 

confident, confiding; I. i. 61. 

continence, moderation, or, perhaps, chastity, with a glance 

at his brother's weakness ; I. i. 15. 
Cornelia, the mother of the Gracchi; IV. i. 12. 
couch, lie hidden ; V. ii. 38. 
cousin, niece (used of any degree of kinship outside of the 

immediate family) ; II. iv. 12; IV. iii. 6. 
cozen, cheat; V. iii. 101. 
create, elect; I. i. 224. 
Cyclops, the giant servants of Vulcan ; IV. iii. 46. 

dancing-rapier, a sword worn only for ornament as when 

dancing; II. i. 39. 
days, " no longer d.," no more time; IV. ii. 165. 
deadly-standing, menacing death, fixed in a deadly stare; 

II. iii. 32. 
dear, grievous; III. i. 257. 
decree, decide, determine ; II, iii. 274 : resolution, V. ii. 

11. 
detect, expose ; II. iv. 27. 



dispose, dispose of; IV. ii. 173. 

doubt, suspect; II. iii. 68. 

drive upon, rush upon, attack; II. iii. <i I. 

ecstasy, excitement; IV. i. 125: madness; IV. iv. 21. 

egal, equal ; IV. iv. 4. 

embrue, bathe in blood; II. iii. 222. 

emperial, a blunder for emperor; IV. iii. 91; IV. iv. 10. 

empery, empire, dominion; I. i. 10, 22, 201. 

enacts, working; IV. ii. 118. 

Enceladus, a giant of ancient fable; IV. ii. 93. 

engine, device; II. i. 123: (the tongue); III. i. 82: (the 

wooden horse); V. iii. 8G. 
escape, escapade, transgression; IV. ii. 113. 
exclaim, outcry, lamentation; IV. i. 86. 
extent, maintenance, application; IV. iv. 3. 

fact, deed ; IV. i. 39. 

fear, fear for; II. iii. 305. 

fere, spouse (Collatine) ; IV. i. 89. 

file, perfect; II. i. 123. 

fond, foolish; II. iii. 172. 

forfend, forbid ; I. i. 434. 

funeral, obsequies; I. i. 381 : burial; IV. ii. 1G3. 

gad, sharp point; IV. i. 103. 

gear, business; IV. iii. 52. 

gentleness, kindness; I. i. 237. 

globes, the seven spheres of the Ptolemaic astronomy or, 

possibly, the stars or planets; V. ii. 49. 
gloze, dissemble; IV. iv. 35. 
God-den, good evening; IV. iv. V.'<. 
gramercy, many thanks; I. i. 495; IV. ii. 7. 
grey, bright; see note, II. ii. 1. 



126 ^lossari? 

happily, perchance, perhaps; IV. iii. 8. 

happy, opportune; II. iii. 23. 

head, armed force ; IV. iv. 63 : " fought at h.," " an allusion 

to bulldogs whose generosity and courage are always 

shown by meeting the bull in front and seizing his nose " 

(Johnson) ; V. i. 102. 
Hecuba, the wife of Priam, King of Troy ; IV. i. 20. 
high-witted, sly, cunning ; IV. iv. 35. 
his, its; III. i. 97. 
honesty, chastity; II. iii. 135. 
honey-stalks, clover, which, eaten by cattle to excess, kills 

them; IV. iv. 91. 
Hyperion, the sun-god; V. ii. 5G. 

ignomy, ignominy, shame; IV. ii. 115. 
imperious, imperial ; I. i. 250; IV. iv. 81. 
indifferently, impartially ; I. i. 430. 
inherit, possess ; II. iii. 3. 
insult on, exult, triumph; III. ii. 71. 

jet upon, treat with insolence; II. i. 64. 

just, just so, exactly; IV. ii. 24: correct; V. iii. 115. 

kind, nature; II. i. 116; II. iii. 281. 

Laertes' son, Ulysses ; I. i. 380. 

lamenting doings, lamentations; III. ii. 62. 

leer, complexion; IV. ii. 119. 

leisure, " by 1.," in no hurry; I. i. 301. 

Limbo, a region on the borders of hell ; III. i. 149. 

lively, living; III. i. 105. 

loose, loosen your bow, let fly ; IV. iii. 58. 

love-day, a day appointed for the settlement of quarrels; 

I. i. 491. 
luxurious, lustful ; V. i. 88. 



0lossar£ 127 

mash, mix malt with water, brew; III. ii. 38. 
maugre, in spite of; IV. ii. 110. 
minion, spoiled darling; II. iii. 124. 
mistership, a blunder for mistressxhip; IV. iv. 40. 
moe, more ; V. iii. 17. 

napkin, handkerehief ; III. i. 140; III. i. 146. 
note, notice; II. iii. 85; IV. i. 50. 

obsequious, funereal; V. iii. 152. 

o'ercome, covered ; II. iii. 95. 

of, by; II. iii. 107: from; III. ii. 44 : on ; IV. iii. 59. 

officious, ready, helpful ; V. ii. 202. 

onset, beginning; I. i. 238. 

pack, plot; IV. ii. 155. 

palliament, robe; I. i. 182. 

parcel, part ; II. iii. 49. 

part, depart; I. i. 488. 

passionate, express sorrowfully; III. ii. 6. 

Philomel, the daughter of Pandion, ravished by Tereus, 
who afterwards cut out her tongue to prevent her ex- 
posing him ; II. iii. 43 ; II.iv.43; IV.i.47; V. ii. 195. 

power, armed force; III. i. 300; IV. iv. 63. 

present, immediate, instant; II. iii. 173. 

presently, immediately; II. iii. 62; IV. ii. 166; IV. iv. 
45; V. iii. 59. 

prize, " play'd your p.," won your game, " a technical 
term in the ancient fencing-school ;" I. i. 'A'.)'.). 

Progne, wife of Tereus, to whom, in revenge for her sister 
Philomela, she served up his son Itys to eat; V. ii. l!'<;. 

propose, be ready to meet : II. i. 80. 

purchase, gain as; II. iii. dlo. 

put it up, put up with it; I. i. 433. 



128 #los#an? 

put up, sheathe your swords ; II. i. 53. 
Pyramus, the lover of Thisbe, who kills himself through 
an error; II. iii. 231. 

quotes, observes, examines; IV. 1. 50. 

rememb'red, " be you r.," remember; IV. iii. 5. 
reserved, preserved, kept safe; I. i. 165. 
ruffle, be turbulent and disorderly; I. i. 313. 

sacred, imperial (used ironically with perhaps a quibble 
on the Latin use, "accursed"); II. i. 120. 

sanguine, blood-coloured; IV. ii. 97. 

Saturn, " the planet of hate and gloom; " II. iii. 31. 

scrowl, write in the air (?) ; II. iv. 5. 

Seniiramis, a queen of Assyria, proverbial for her volup- 
tuousness and cruelty; II. iii. 118. 

sensibly, palpably, obviously; IV. ii. 122. 

sequence, " in s.," one after the other; IV. i. 37. 

shape, create ; IV. iv. 57. 

shive, slice; II. i. 87. 

Sinon, the Greek who persuaded the Trojans to carry the 
wooden horse into Troy; V. iii. 85. 

singled forth, stolen forth ; II. iii. 69. 

sith, since; I. i. 271; I. i. 323; IV. iii. 49. 

smoke, suffer; IV. ii. 111. 

smooth, flatter; IV. iv. 96; V. ii. 140. 

solemn, ceremonious; II. i. 112; V. ii. 115. 

speed, succeed; I. i. 372. 

spleenful, eager; II. iii. 191. 

spurn, pang; III. i. 101. 

square, quarrel; II. i. 100; II. i. 124: shape; III. ii. 
31. 

stale, laughing stock; I. i. 304. 



#lo0$ar|> 129 

stand on, insist on; IV. iv. 105: "s. upon," set a high 

value upon, take pride in; II. iii. 124. 
starve, benumb with cold; III. i. 252. 
stint, stop, silence; IV. iv. 86. 
still, always, continually; III. i. 19; III. ii. 30: constant; 

III, iii. 45. 

stuprum, violation; IV. i. 78. 

successantly, one after another ( ?) ; IV. iv. 113. 

successive, " my s. title," " my title to the succession;" 

I. i. 4. 
suppose, supposition; I. i. 110. 
surance, assurance; V. ii. 40. 
suum cuique, to every man his due ; I. i. 280. 
swounded, swooned, fainted; V. i. 119. 

take away, clear away dishes and table ; III. ii. 81. 

tawny, dark, black; see note, V. i. 27. 

tedious, laborious; II. iv. 39. 

temper, shape, mould; IV. iv. 109: mix; V. ii. 200. 

Tereus, the ravisher of Philomela; II. iv. 26. 

tendering, caring for; I. i. 47G. 

'ticed, enticed; II. iii. 92. 

timeless, untimely; II. iii. -2G5. 

Titan, the sun-god; I. i. 226. 

tofore, before; III. i. 294. 

train, entice; V. i. 104. 

tribunal plebs, the clown's blunder for tribunus plebi*. 

the tribune of the people; IV. iii. 92. 
Tully's Orator, i.e., Cicero's De oratore; IV. i. 14. 
turn, return; V. ii. 141. 
Typhon, i.e., Typhoeus, one of the giants of ancient fable; 

IV. ii. 94. 

uncouple, loose the hounds; II. ii. 3. 

K 



130 



6ios#ar£ 



undertake, answer for, guarantee ; I. i. 436. 
unrecuring, past cure, incurable; III. i. 90. 
urchin, hedge-hog; II. iii. 101. 

Virgo, the name given to Astraea after she became a 

constellation ; IV. iii. 64. 
voice, vote; I. i. 21 ; I. i. 218. 
vouch, make good; I. i. 360. 

wag, move; V. ii. 87. 

wall-eyed, white-eyed, glaring; V. i. 44. 

what, why; I. i. 189. 

white-lim'd, white- washed ; IV. ii. 98. 

wind, scent; IV. i. 97: "have the w. of you," keep an 

eye upon you ; IV. ii. 133. 
wit, mental power; II. i. 10, 26, 120; II. iii. 1. 
witty, clever; IV. ii. 29. 
wreak, vengeance; IV. iii. 33; IV. iv. 11. 
wreaks, resentments; IV. iv. 11. 




A 



university or L>aniornia JLibrary 
Los Angeles 

This book is DUE on the last date stamped below. 



1 4IKFEB2 7 1 
EFEB 1 ;> '95 REC'D CX 






4WKMAR2 81995 



.^EIWIVERS/a ^lOSANGEtfx* ^.OFCAIIFO% .^OF- 

s 



%3H3NVSm^ %MAWIH\V^ 




^AHVH8IH>^ y Oti 



tfUBRARY0/ 



« 



^tUBRARYQ^ 
& 1 <<-' £ 



^EUNIVER^ ^IC 



^OJIlVDiO^ 




^!/0illV3JO^ 






^OFCAIIFO^ 




^OFCAllFOfc^ 



^AavaaiH^ 




^AHvaan-i^ 







<Tiuowso^ %a 



^WEUNIVERS/4 




^lOS-ANGEl^ 







^OJITVJJO^ 



^WEUNIVERS/a. 




- I 



^lOSANCEl^ 




^wmwfF 



^OKALIFO/?^ ^OF- 




^oxmmsfr 



i\_^r V-v w£\ 






















B 000 018 258 4 



A-OFCAIIFC 







.8811 






























I 



V£ 






