<ttflOLD B. LEF UBKAKY 
PROVO. UTAH 



. 














THENEWHUDSON 
SHAKESPEARE 






TWELFTH NIGHT 
SWHATYOUWiLL 

INTRODUCTTONi^DNO'reS BY 

HENRYNORMAN 
HUDSON, LED- 'teP 

EDITED AND REVISED BY 
EBENEZER CHARITON 
BLACK. LLD- (GLASGOW) 



2~£^ 




GINN AND COMPANY 

BOSTON NEWYORK CHICAGO LONDON 
ATLANTA DALLAS COLUMBUS SAN FRANCIS® 



Entered at Stationers' Hall 



Copyright, 1880 
By HENRY N. HUDSON 



Copyright, 1908 
By KATE W. HUDSON 



Copyright, 1911 
By GINN AND COMPANY 



all rights reserved 



920.6 



GINN AND COMPANY • PRO- 
PRIETORS • BOSTON • U.S.A. 



lGHAM Vor itv! 



PREFACE 

The text of this edition of Twelfth Night is based upon a 
collation of the seventeenth century Folios, the Globe edition, 
the Cambridge (W. A. Wright) edition of 1891, and that of 
Delius (1882). As compared with the text of the earlier 
editions of Hudson's Shakespeare, it is conservative. Exclu- 
sive of changes in spelling, punctuation, and stage directions, 
very few emendations by eighteenth century and nineteenth 
century editors have been adopted ; and these, with every 
variation from the First Folio, are indicated in the textual 
notes. These notes are printed immediately below the text, 
so that a reader or student may see at a glance the evidence 
in the case of a disputed reading, and have some definite 
understanding of the reasons for those differences in the text 
of Shakespeare which frequently surprise and very often 
annoy. Such an arrangement should be of special help in 
the case of a play universally read and very often acted, as 
actors and interpreters seldom agree in adhering to one text. 
A consideration of the more poetical, or the more dramatically 
effective, of two variant readings will often lead to rich results 
in akening a spirit of discriminating interpretation and in 
_ ^eloping true creative criticism. In no sense is this a textual 
variorum edition. The variants given are only those of im- 
portance and high authority. 

The spelling and the punctuation of the text are modern, 
except in the case of verb terminations in -ed, which, when 
the e is silent, are printed with the apostrophe in its place. 

iii 



iv THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE 

This is the general usage in the First Folio. The important 
contractions in the First Folio which may indicate Elizabethan 
pronunciation (' i' th' ' for ' in the/ for example) are also fol- 
lowed. Modern spelling has to a certain extent been adopted 
in the text variants ; but the original spelling has been re- 
tained wherever its peculiarities have been the basis for im- 
portant textual criticism and emendation. 

With the exception of the position of the textual variants, 
the plan of this edition is similar to that of the old Hudson 
Shakespeare. It is impossible to specify the various instances 
of revision and rearrangement in the matter of the Introduc- 
tion and the interpretative notes, but the endeavor has been 
to retain all that gave the old edition its unique place and to 
add the results of what seems vital and permanent in later 
inquiry and research. In this edition, as in the volumes of 
the series already published, the chapters entitled Sources, 
Date of Composition, Early Editions, Diction and Versifica- 
tion, Scene of Action, Duration of Action, Title of the Play, 
Dramatic Construction and Development with Analysis by 
Act and Scene, and Stage History, are wholly new. In this 
edition, too, is introduced a chronological chart, covering the 
important events of Shakespeare's life as man and as author 
and indicating in parallel columns his relation to contemporary 
writers and events. A^ a guide to reading clubs and literary 
societies, there has been appended to the Introduction a table 
of the distribution of characters in the play, giving the acts 
and scenes in which each character appears and the number 
of lines spoken by each. The index of words and phrases 
has been so arranged as to serve both as a glossary and as 
a guide to the more important grammatical differences be- 
tween Elizabethan and modern English. 



PREFACE V 

While it is important that the principle of suum cuique be 
attended to so far as is possible in matters of research and 
scholarship, it is becoming more and more difficult to give 
every man his own in Shakespearian annotation. The amount 
of material accumulated is so great that the identity-origin of 
much important comment and suggestion is either wholly lost 
or so crushed out of shape as to be beyond recognition. 
Instructive significance perhaps attaches to this in editing the 
works of one who quietly made so much of materials gath- 
ered by others. But the list of authorities given on page lxiii 
will indicate the chief source of much that has gone to enrich 
the value of this edition. Especial acknowledgment is here 
made of the obligations to Dr. William Aldis Wright and 
Dr. Horace Howard Furness, whose work in the collation of 
Quartos, Folios, and the more important English and Amer- 
ican editions of Shakespeare has been of so great value to all 
subsequent editors and investigators. 

With regard to the general plan of this revision of Hud- 
son's Shakespeare, Professor W. P. Trent, of Columbia Uni- 
versity, has offered valuable suggestions and given important 
advice. 



CONTENTS 



INTRODUCTION 

Page 

I. Sources xi 

The Main Plot xii 

^Italian Plays and Foreign Translations . xii 

Secchi's Gl? Inganni xii 

Gonzaga's Gl? Inganni xii 

Gl' Ingannati xiii 

Estienne's Les Abuse's xiv 

Laelia xiv 

Italian Tales and Foreign Translations . xiv 

Bandello's Novelle xiv 

Rueda's Los Enganos xiv 

Belleforest's Histoires Tragiques ... xv 

ClNTHIO'S HECATOMMITHI XV 

Riche's Apolonius and Silla XV 

Montemayor's Diana xvii 

Sidney's Arcadia xvii 

A Lost Play xviii 

The Subplot xviii 

Riche's Of Two Brethren and their Wives . xviii 

A Story about Sir William Knollys ... xix 

Names of Persons and Places xix 

II. Date of Composition ' xix 

External Evidence xx 

Negative xx 

Positive xx 

*-*- Manningham's Diary xx 

Reference by Ben Jonson xx 

vii 



viii THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE 

Page 

Internal Evidence xxi 

"The new map," III, ii, 70-71 xxi 

Reference to "the Sophy," II, v, 165 . . xxi 

" Words are very rascals," etc., Ill, i, 18-19 xxii 

Feste's Song, II, iii, 38 xxiii 

Sir Toby's Song Snatch, II, iii, 97 ... . xxiii 

Qualities of Style xxiii 

Diction and Verse Mechanism xxiii 

III. Early Editions xxiv 

Folios xxiv 

Rowe's Editions xxvi 

IV. Diction and Versification xxvii 

Prose xxvii 

Blank Verse xxviii 

Alexandrines xxx 

Rhyme xxx 

Couplets xxx 

Songs xxxi 

" O mistress mine, where are you 

roaming?" II, iii, 38 xxxi 

" Come away, come away, death," II, 

iv, 50 . . . xxxi 

" When that I was and a little tiny 

boy," V, i, 376 xxxi 

Humorous-Satirical Snatches xxxii 

V. Scene of Action xxxii 

VI. Duration of Action xxxii 

P. A. Daniel's Time Analysis xxxiii 

1 

VII. Title of the Play xxxiii 

VIII. Dramatic Construction and Development . . xxxvi 

_ : < fF ^ Analysis by Act and Scene xxxvii 

IX. Spedding's Arrangement of Acts and Scenes . xl 



CONTENTS ix 

Page 

X. The Characters xlii 

Characters of the Subplot xlii 

Sir Toby xlii 

Sir Andrew xliii 

Malvolio xliv 

Maria xlvi 

Fabian and Feste xlvii 

Characters of the Main Plot xlviii 

Olivia xlix 

Orsino li 

Viola liii 

Sebastian . lvi 

XI. Stage History lvii 

The Seventeenth Century lviii 

The Eighteenth Century lix 

The Nineteenth Century Ix 

Authorities (with Abbreviations) lxiii 

Chronological Chart lxiv 

Distribution of Characters' lxviii 

THE TEXT 

Act I 3 

Act II 32 

Act III 62 

Act IV 94 

Act V 106 

Index of Words and Phrases 125 

FACSIMILE 
Last Page of Twelfth Night, First Folio . . . Frontispiece 



INTRODUCTION 



Note. In citations from Shakespeare's plays and nondramatic 
poems the numbering has reference to the Globe edition, except in 
the case of this play, where the reference is to this edition. 



I. SOURCES 

Popular speech recognizes the element of the ludicrous in 
the likeness of twins or of any two members of a family; 
and the complications and misunderstandings that arise from 
such resemblances, and from mistaken identity generally, are 
themes of interest as old as the literature of humor. The 
comic possibilities involved made strong appeal to both 
Greek and Latin dramatists, 1 and to the shapers of Euro- 
pean story-telling from mediaeval times to the seventeenth 
century. Especially popular among romancers and drama- 
tists towards the close of the sixteenth century were cases of 
mistaken identity arising from the resemblance of a brother, 
and a sister who dresses as a man ; stories of a heroine dis- 
guised as a page, who falls in love with her master ; and plots 

1 The Mencechmi of Plautus, upon which The Comedy of Errors 
is based, is derived "from a Greek original, — not Epicharmus, it 
appears to be held, but Posidippus. Greek comedies, of which the 
action turned on the personal likeness of twins, seem to have been 
generically called Aldvnoi> plays under this title being mentioned 
from the hands of six several authors. Variations of the main idea 
are to be found in the Amphitruo and in Philocomasium's story in 
the Miles Gloriosus." — A. W. Ward, History of English Dramatic 
Literature^ II, 75. 

xi 



xii THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE 

involving such complicated cross-wooings as are inevitable 
when a heroine of this kind also attracts the love of the lady 
the master loves. From this material, common to many 
languages, Shakespeare took in a somewhat crude man- 
ner the foundation stories of his early comedies, The Com- 
edy of Errors and The Two Gentlemen of Verona; from 
it he selected the incidents which in his prime he refined 
and compacted into the exquisite humor and romance of 
Twelfth Night. 

The Main Plot 

i. Italian Plays and Foreign Translations. In the Diary l 
of John Manningham, barrister at law of the Middle Temple, 
under the date, February 2, 1601, 2 is the following entry: 

At our feast wee had a play called Twelue night or what you will, 
much like the commedy of errores or Menechmi in Plautus, but most 
like and neere to that in Italian called Inganni a good practise 3 
in it to make the steward beleeue his Lady widdowe was in Loue 
with him by counterfeyting a letter, as from his Lady, in generall 
termes, telling him what shee liked best in him, and prescribing his 
gesture in smiling his apparaile, &c. And then when he came to 
practise making him beleeue they tooke him to be mad. 

Two Italian plays named GV Inganni ( i The Cheats/ ' The 
Deceits') certainly antedate Twelfth Night; one by Nicolo i 
Secchi (Secco) was performed at Milan in 1547 and printed | 
at Florence in 1562 ; the other by Curzio (Curtio) Gonzagaj 
was printed at Venice in 1592. In both plays a brother and' 

1 Preserved in the British Museum, and edited by John Bruce for 
the Camden Society. 

2 1602, according to the modern reckoning. 

3 plot, trick, scheme. Cf. V, i, 340. 



INTRODUCTION xiii 

a sister, twins, occupy an important place in the action; the 
sister, disguised as a manservant, is sent with love messages 

Ito a woman, and in Gonzaga's play she assumes the name 
Cesare, — whence Shakespeare may have derived ' Cesario,' 
— but neither play contains the pivotal incident of the woman ' 
to whom the messages are sent falling in love with the mes- / 
senger. This central situation is found in a comedy called 
GP Ingaruiati ('The Deceived,' 'The Mistaken'), composed 
and acted by a literary society, called the Intronati, 1 at Sienna 
in Carnival week, 1531, printed at Venice in 1537, and ex- 
tremely popular, as the many reprintings show. In this pjayl 
a brother and a sister, named Fabrizio and Lelia, are sepa- 
rated at the sack of Rome in 1527. Lelia is carried to 
Modena, where resides a gentleman named Flaminio, who 
had once upon a time made professions of love to her, and to 
whom she was sincerely attached. She dons boy's attire and 
enters his service as a page. Flaminio has forgotten Lelia 
and is making suit to Isabella, a lady of Modena. The dis- 
guised Lelia is employed by him in his love suit to Isabella, 
who remains deaf to his passion but falls desperately in love 
with the messenger. In the third act the brother Fabrizio 
arrives at Modena, and his close resemblance to Lelia in her 
page's dress gives rise to interesting complications. A serv- 
ant of Isabella meets him in the street and, supposing him 
to be the messenger, takes him to her house, just as in Twelfth 
Night Sebastian is taken for Viola and led to the house of 
Olivia. In due time the needful recognitions and reconcilia- 
tions take place, with the result that Isabella transfers her 
affection to Fabrizio and Flaminio marries the loving and 

1 Or Academici Intronati, founded in 1525, " orare, studere, gau- 
de7-e, etc." 



xiv THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE 

faithful Lelia. In the poetical Induction, 77 Sacrificio, which 
precedes the play, occurs the significant name 'Maleuolti,' 
and it is noteworthy that when the heroine adopts her dis- 
guise she assumes the name 'Fabio.' Hunter, 1 who first 
drew attention to Manningham's Diary and to GV Ingannati 
as a more probable source for Twelfth Night than the In- 
ganni plays, suggested in addition to the points of similarity 
noted above that Shakespeare may have taken his title from 
the phrase la Notte di Beffana, i. e. 'Twelfth Night/ which 
occurs in the Prologue. 

Under the title Les Abuses a French translation of GV In- 
' gannati, by Charles Estienne, was printed at Lyon in 1543, 
and this it is claimed may have been consulted by Shake- 
speare. A closer connection between GV Ingannati and 
England is a Latin version called, from the name of the 
heroine, Laelia, which was acted at Queens' College, Cam- 
bridge, in 1590, and again in 1598. It seems never to have 
been printed, 2 but unquestionably it would be well known in 
London literary and dramatic circles. 

2. Italian Tales and Foreign Translations. Though the 
names of the characters are changed, the plot of GV In- 
gannati is essentially the same as that of a prose tale by 
Bandello, published as one of his Novelle in 1554. Ban- 
dello's version of the story became extremely popular, Lope 
de Rueda translating it into Spanish in his los Enganos 
(Engahados) in 1556, first printed in 1567, and Belief orest 
(Francois de Belle-Forest Comingeois) publishing a famous 
French adaptation of it in 1570 in the fourth book of the 

1 New Illustrations of Shakespeare, London, 1845. 

2 The MS. is preserved in Lambeth Palace. See Shakespeare 
lahrbuch, XXXIV, 286. 



INTRODUCTION XV 

Histoires Tragiques. As Shakespeare took material for Romeo 
and Juliet, Much Ado About Nothing, and Hamlet from the 
Histoires Tragiques, efforts have been made to find here an 
important source for the plot of Twelfth Night. 

A version of the story with significant alteration of detail 
is found in the eighth novel of the fifth decade of the Heca- 
tommithi (Ecatomiti) of Giovanni Battista Giraldi, usually 
known by his surname Cinthio (Cintio, Cynthius). In this 
work, published in 1565, and translated into French by 
Chappuys in 1583, the incident of a shipwreck is elaborated 
and there are interesting suggestions of the Illyria setting of 
Twelfth Night. If Cinthio's statement that he wrote all his 
tales in his youth may be trusted, his version of the story 
derives not from Bandello but probably from one of the 
earlier plays. In this connection it may be noted that directly 
or indirectly the Hecatommithi furnished the plot of Othello. 

3. Riche'' s Apolonius and Silla. For the bare framework 
of the plot of Twelfth Night Shakespeare had a source to his 
hand in an English version of the Bandello- Belief orest-Cinthio 
story, The Historie of Apolonius and Silla, the second of 
eight tales in a volume by an Elizabethan ex-soldier and 
pamphleteer, of which the full title is : Riche his Farewell \ 
to Militarie Profession : con | teining verie pleasaunt dis- 
courses I fit for a peaceable tyme. | Gathered together for the 
onely delight of \ the courteous Gentlewomen bothe | of Eng- 
land and Irelande, | For whose onely pleasure thei were collected 
together | And unto whom thei are directed and dedicated | by 
Barnabe Riche, Gentleman. | Imprinted at London by Robert 
Walley, 1581. 

In Riche's tale Silla (Viola), daughter of Duke Pontus 
of Cyprus, falls in love with Duke Apolonius (Orsino) of 



xvi THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE 

Constantinople while he is visiting her father. Apolonius is 
so engrossed with his business affairs that her affection is not 
even observed by him, and after he leaves for home she 
resolves to follow him. After strange experiences at sea she 
is shipwrecked. She makes her way to Constantinople, and 
having assumed the name of her brother Silvio, whom she 
closely resembles, she disguises as a page and enters the 
service of Apolonius. Apolonius employs his page to carry 
love tokens to the Lady Julina (Olivia), who, of course, falls 
in love with the messenger. Silvio, seeking his sister in Con- 
stantinople, is met by Julina, and after having been enter- 
tained by her he leaves the city. Apolonius hears of what 
Julina has done, and suspecting his page of treachery he has 
Silla thrust into a dungeon. Julina pleads for her, and after 
a series of exciting events the identity of the page is revealed 
and her betrothal to Apolonius follows. When Silvio hears 
of this he returns to Constantinople in time to clear the 
character of Julina and marry her. " And thus, Silvio hav- 
yng attained a noble wife, and Silla, his sister, her desired 
housband, thei passed the residue of their daies with suche 
delight as those that have accomplished the perfection of 
their felicities." 

Editors have noted interesting verbal resemblances be- 
tween Riche's story and Shakespeare's play. Grant White 
compares, for example, Sir Andrew's complaint to Sir Toby, 
III, ii, 4-6, and the passage in Apolonius and Silla, where 
the servants, " debating betweene them, of the likelihood of 
the marriage, betweene the duke & the ladie, one of them 
said : that he neuer saw his lady & mistresse, vse so good 
countenance to the duke himself, as she had done to Siluo his 
man." Riche's expression " that haue so charely presented 



INTRODUCTION xvii 

jnyne honour" may also be compared with "And laid mine 
honour too unchary out," Twelfth Night, III, iv, 187. 

If Apolonius and Silla is Shakespeare's chief source for I 
the incidents of Twelfth Night, his transformation of the i 
material, in this instance as in others, lies in simplification, \ 
compression for dramatic effect, and idealization. What is 
tedious in the original story, and unessential to the plot de-l 
velopment, is cut out in the interests of dramatic economy ; 
needless grossnesses are eliminated ; characterization, humor, 
pathos, and poetry are added. In his treatment of source-j 
material Shakespeare always used what he took merely asl^' 
the canvas whereon to pencil out and express the breathing" 
creatures of his mind. The whole workmanship is as original, 
in the only right'sense of that term, as if the story and inci- 
dents had been altogether his own invention ; and he but fol- 
lowed his usual custom of so ordering his work as to secure 
whatever benefit might accrue from a sort of preestablished 
harmony between his subject and the popular mind. 

4. Montemayor } s Diana. The Diana Enamorada of Jorge 
de Montemayor, one of the important sources of The Two 
Gentlemen of Verona, contains matter which strongly resem- 
bles certain situations in Twelfth Night, — for example, the 
locality of Illyria and the passion of Celia for the disguised 
Felismena. The Diana was published first in 1542, so ante- 
dating both Bandello's Novelle and Cinthio's Hecatommithi, 
but Bartholomew Yonge's English version, published in 
1598, had circulated in manuscript from 1582. 

5. Sidney's Arcadia. In the exquisite union of pathos and 
poetry in the disguised Viola's speeches at the close of II, iv, 
there are haunting reminiscences of the story of Zelmane told 
by Pyrocles in the second book of Sir Philip Sidney's Arcadia. 



xviii THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE 

6. A Lost Play. In 1608 a company of English actors 
produced at Graz a comedy called Tugend- und Liebesstreit, 
on the same general subject as Apolonius and Silla and 
apparently closely connected with it. It is conjectured that 
this may have been a German version of a lost English play 
founded on Riche's story, — a play that would, of course, 
antedate Twelfth Night. 

The Subplot 

Shakespeare's subplots and comic scenes are usually origi- 
nal, and for the glorious humors of Olivia's household no 
source exists. All the characters involved — Sir Toby and 
Sir Andrew, Feste and Fabian, Malvolio and Maria — are 
wholly of Shakespeare's invention. It has been suggested 1 
that a hint for the treatment of Malvolio as a madman may 
have been found by Shakespeare in Riche's fifth story, Of 
Two Brethren and Their Wives, where a husband, to punish 
his ill-tempered wife, dresses her in rags, and ties her in a 
dark house with a great chain about her leg. 

To quote from the story itself : 

Callyng his neibours about her, he would seeme with greate 
sorrowe to lament his wives distresse, telling them that she was 
sodainly become lunatique ; whereas by his geasture, he tooke so 
greate greefe, as though he would likewise have runne madde for 
companie. But his wife (as he had attired her) seemed in deede 
not to be well in her wittes. . . . She used no other wourdes but 
cursynges and banninges. . . . The companie that were about her, 
thei would exhorte her, Good neighbour, forget these idle speeches, 
which doeth so muche distemper you, and call upon God, and he 
will surely helpe you. — Call upon God for help ? (quoth the other) 
wherein should he helpe me. 

1 In an article by Professor W. A. Neilson, The Atlantic Monthly, 
May, 1902. 



INTRODUCTION XIX 

Mr. E. K. Chambers has suggested that a hint for Malvolio 
may have been received from stories about S ir William Knollys, 
the pompous old Controller of the Royal Household, of whom 
a seventeenth century anecdotist relates the following : 

The Lord Knollys in Queen Elizabeth's time had his lodging at 
Court, where some of the Ladyes and Maydes of Honour used to 
friske and hey about in the next room, to his extreame disquiet a 
nights though he often warned them of it ; at last, he gets one to 
bolt their own backe doore when they were all in one night at their 
reuells . . . and so with a payre of spectacles on his nose and Aretine 
in his hand, comes marching in at a posterne doore of his owne 
chamber, reading very gravely, full upon the faces of them. 

Names of Persons and Places 

The probable source of the more important names of per- 
sons and places in Twelfth Night is given and discussed 
when each occurs for the first time in the text. Special men- 
tion may be made here of Emanuel Forde's Parismus, the 
Renowned Prince of Bohemia, published in 1598, where 
' Olivia^ is the name of a queen of Thessal y, and ' Violetta ' 
t he na me of a lady who followed her lover in the disguise of 
a page and in t he cours e of her wanderings was shipwrecked. 
1 Antonio ' and l Sebastian/ names repeated in The "Tempest, 
are found in Eden's History of Travayle, 1577, from which 
Shakespeare borrowed names of persons and places for 
other plays. 

II. DATE OF COMPOSITION 

The date of composition of Twelfth Night falls within 
1602, the later time limit {terminus ante quern), and 1598, 
the earlier time limit {terminus post quern). The weight of 
evidence is in favor of 1 600-1 601. 



XX THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE 

Until the discovery of Manningham's Diary (see above, 
Sources), announced by Collier in 183 1, 1 Twelfth Night was 
usually regarded as one of Shakespeare's latest plays. 2 This 
opinion was based upon misinterpreted references within 
the play. 

External Evidence 

1. Negative. Twelfth Night is not referred to by Francis 
Meres in the Palladis Tamia, Wits Treasury ; being the Second 
Part of Wits Commonwealth , published in the autumn of 1598. 
Here Meres gives a list of twelve noteworthy Shakespeare 
plays, and the probability is that a play so popular in sub- 
ject and treatment as Twelfth Night, and so appealing to an 
Elizabethan public, would have been mentioned, had it been 
in existence at that time. 

2. Positive. (1) Manningham 's Diary \ Manningham's allu- 
sion to the play, in the quotation from his Diary given above, 
page xii, fixes the later time limit very definitely. (2) Reference 
by Ben fonson. Steevens held that Ben Jonson referred to 
Twelfth Night in the following passage in the dialogue be- 
tween Cordatus and Mitis at the close of the first scene of 
the third act of Every Man Out of His Humour, a play 
produced in 1599 : 

That the argument of his comedy might have been of some other 
nature as of a duke to be in love with a countess, and that countess 
to be in love with the duke's son, and the son to love the lady's 
waiting-maid ; some such cross-wooing, with a clown to their serving- 
man, better than to be thus near, and familiarly allied to the time. 

1 History of English Dramatic Poetry, I, 327. 

2 Theobald (1734) assigned it to 1604; Tyrwhitt (1766), Steevens 
(1773), Malone (1790), and Harness (1825) gave 1614 as the prob- 
able date of composition. 



INTRODUCTION xxi 

As the description of " the argument of his comedy " is 
equally applicable to Shakespeare's earlier plays of cross- 
wooing and other Elizabethan comedies of a similar character, 
it is useless to base upon this passage evidence for the date 
of composition of Twelfth Night, 

Internal Evidence 

The following bits of internal evidence, of varying value 
in themselves, furnish together a suggestive body of cumula- 
tive proof. The first three may be looked upon as local or 
contemporary hits, in perfect keeping with the comic action 
of the passages where they occur. As such, they would lose 
force or distinction the further they are in point of time from 
the exciting cause. 1 

i. " The new map" In III, ii, 70-71, when Malvolio is 
at the height of his ludicrous beatitude, Maria says of him, 
" He does smile his face into more lines than is in the new 
map, with the augmentation of the Indies." The allusion 
here, if not convincingly definite, is perfectly pat to the map 
referred to in the note, III, ii, 71. 

2. Reference to "the Sophy" The humor and the edge in 
Fabian's words, " a pension of thousands to be paid from the 
Sophy," are intensified when the remark is interpreted in the 
light of the excitement in London in 1599 over Sir Robert 
Shirley's return from his embassy to Persia, and the publica- 
tion in the following year of his narrative of adventures. 
See note, II, v, 165. 

1 " Mistress Mall's picture," I, iii, 115, and "the lady of the 
Strachy," II, v, 35-36, are probably topical allusions to which we 
have lost the key. 



XXU THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE 

3. " Words are very rascals" etc., Iff, i, 18-ig. Feste's 
remark to Viola, " Words are very rascals, since bonds dis- 
graced them," III, i, 18-19, though enigmatical to a modern 
reader, is probably, like the references to contemporary play- 
house conditions and regulations in Hamlet, II, ii, a satirical 
1 topical 5 allusion which would come with peculiar propriety 
and telling effect both from dramatist and from actor. It 
may be fairly understood as referring to an order issued 
by the Privy Council in June, 1600 (see note, III, i, 19), lay- 
ing very severe restrictions upon stage performances. 

In this connection it may be noted that the Puritans were 
specially forward and zealous in urging the complaints which 
made the Privy Council issue this stringent process ; and it 
will hardly be questioned that the character of Malvolio was 
partly meant as a humorous satire on Puritanism. 1 That 
Shakespeare should be somewhat provoked at the action 
of the Puritans in bringing about such restraints upon the 
freedom of his art, 2 was certainly natural enough. Nor is it 
a small addition to their many claims on our gratitude, that 
their aptness to think that, because they were virtuous, there 
should be no more cakes and ale, had the effect of calling 
forth so rich and withal so good-natured a piece of retaliation. 

1 Hunter {New Illustrations of Shakespeare, 1845, Ji 3^°) held tnat 
the passage in which Malvolio was treated as possessed was inspired 
by Harsnet's Discovery of the fraudulent practices offohn Barrel, etc., 
published in 1599. In this tract the Puritan practice of exorcism is 
exposed in connection with a family called Starkey or Starchy, and 
Hunter suggests that here is the key to the allusion to " the lady 
of the Strachy," II, v, 35-36. Harsnet tells that when a Bible was 
brought in, one of the Starchy children cried " Bible-bable, Bible- 
bable ! " and Hunter connects this with Feste's " bibble babble," 
IV, ii, 93. 

2 Cf. Sonnets, lxvi, 9 : " And art made tongue-tied by authority." 



INTRODUCTION xxiii 

4. Feste's Song, II, Hi, j8. Feste's song, " O mistress mine, 
where are you roaming ? " was published in Morley's Consort 
Lesso?is in 1599. " It is also found .in Queen Elizabeth's Vir- 
ginal Book [1603], arranged by Byrd." — Chappell. 

5. Sir Tobfs Song Snatch, II, Hi, gy. The song from 
which Sir Toby sings snatches in his musical dialogue with 
Feste was published apparently for the first time in 1601, 
in the Booke of Ayres by Robert Jones. The evidence as to 
the date of composition of Tzuelfth Night furnished by this, 
and by Feste's song referred to in the preceding paragraph, 
is obviously weakened by the fact that Elizabethan songs 
were often well known long before they were published. 

6. Qualities of Style. By the internal notes of style, temper, 
and poetic grain, Twelfth Night falls into the middle period 
of Shakespeare's productive years. It has no such marks of 
vast but immature powers as are often met with in his earlier 
plays ; nor, on the other hand, does it show " that intense 
idiosyncrasy of thought and expression, — that unparalleled 
fusion of the intellectual with the passionate," — which dis- 
tinguishes the later. Everything is calm and quiet ; the atmos- 
phere is one of unruffled serenity and composure. 

As a play, Twelfth Night shows in the mastery of plot and 
subplot the dramatic and formative power of the practised 
artist. The characterization is superb ; it is alive with dra- 
matic interest from the first scene to the last. 

7. Diction and Verse Mechanism. The diction of Twelfth 
Night, the quality of the blank verse, the proportion of prose 
to verse, the use of rhyme, and the rhetorical quality of the 
play as a whole, with the absence of strained conceits, antith- 
eses, and artificial turns of expression, support the external 
and the other internal evidence that the date of composition 



xxiv THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE 

falls within 1599 and 1602. 1 It was written probably in 
immediate succession to As You Like It and Much Ado 
About Nothing, making with them a notable trilogy of joy- 
ous comedy. It is full of reminiscences of the earlier come- 
dies, the mistaken identity and cross-wooing of The Comedy 
of Errors and The Two Gentlemen of Verona, the poetry 
of A Midsummer Night's Dream, and the music-sentiment 
of The Merchant of Venice ; it has in it significant anticipa- 
tions of the great reconciliation dramas of Shakespeare's 
latest period, The Winter's Tale and The Tempest. 

III. EARLY EDITIONS 

Folios 

Twelfth Night was first printed in 1623 in the First Folio, 
designated in the textual notes of this edition F r The First 
Folio is the now famous volume in which all Shakespeare's 
collected plays (with the exception of Pericles, first printed in 
the Third Folio), were first given to the world. That there 
was no previous printing of Twelfth Night is virtually estab- 
lished by the expression "not formerly entred," in the word- 
ing of the following license, or description entry, concerning 
the First Folio, in The Stationers' Registers : 2 

1 In his Shakespeare Manual, F. G. Fleay assigns the Viola mat- 
ter, " full of the young, fresh, clear poetry " of Shakespeare's earlier 
period, and all of it in verse, to 1 594-1 595 ; the completed play, with 
the subplot in prose, to 1 600-1 601. "All this latter part [the good- 
humored but satirical subplot] is . . . from the same mint as Falstaff 
and his companions, the same as Pistol and Parolles. For the 
play of All 's Well that Ends Well in like manner divides into two 
parts In both these plays, too, the early part has been revised." 

2 Professor E. Arber's Transcripts of The Stationers' 1 Registers 
(1554-1640), 4 vols., 1875-1877. 



INTRODUCTION XXV 

8° jQotoembria 1623 

Master Blounte Entred for their Copie vnder the hands of Master 

Isaak Jaggard Doctor Worrall and Master Cole warden Master 

William Shakspeers Comedyes Histories, and Trag- 

edyes soe manie of the said Copies as are not 

formerly entred to other men. viz 1 . vij. B 

The Tempest 

The two gentlemen of Verona 
Measure for Measure 
The Comedy of Errors 
As you like it 
All 's well that ends well 
Twelfe night 
The winters tale 



Comedyes 



The thirde parte of Henry ye Sixt 
Histories TT * , 

Henry the Eight 



Tragedies 



Coriolanus 

Timon of Athens 

Julius Caesar 

Mackbeth 

Anthonie and Cleopatra 

Cymbeline 



Twelfth Night is one of the most correctly printed plays in 
the First Folio ; and, as the editors of the Cambridge Shake- 
speare suggest with regard to Julius Ccesar, it " may perhaps 
have been (as the preface falsely implied all were) printed 
from the original manuscript of the author." l 

lu . . . Absolute in their numbers, as he concerned them. . . . 
His mind and hand went together : And what he thought, he vttered 
with that easinesse, that wee haue scarse receiued from him a blot 
in his papers" (Heminge and CondelPs Address " To the great 
Variety of Readers," First Folio). 



xxvi THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE 

Twelfth Night occupies pages 255-275 in the division of 
the Folio devoted to Comedies, and it stands there between 
All's Well that E?ids Well and The Winter's Tale. The run- 
ning title is Twelfe Night, or, What You Will. It is one of 
the seventeen plays in the First Folio in which is indicated 
the division into acts and scenes. 

The Second Folio, F 2 (1632), corrects a few manifest 
misprints of the First Folio ; and this corrected text is re- 
peated with few changes, except in the way of slightly mod- 
ernized spelling, in the Third Folio, F 3 (1663, 1664), and 
in the Fourth Folio, F 4 (1685). 

Rowe's Editions 

The first critical editor of Shakespeare's plays was Nicholas 
Rowe, poet laureate to George I. His first edition was 
issued in 1709 in six octavo volumes; a second edition, in 
eight volumes, was published in 1714. 1 His text followed 
very closely that of the Fourth Folio, but with modernization 
of spelling, punctuation, and occasionally grammar. 

Rowe, an experienced playwright, marked the entrances 
and exits of the characters in a thorough and systematic way, 
and introduced many stage directions. He also gave com- 
plete lists of dramatis personam which have been the basis 
for all later lists. Rowe was the first man to write a life of 
Shakespeare. This life, in which are preserved many valu- 
able traditions, was published along with his edition of the 
plays, and entitles Rowe to the eternal gratitude of the 
world. 

1 The Poems were not included in either edition, but were pub- 
lished in 171 5 from the edition of 1640. 



INTRODUCTION xxvii 

IV. DICTION AND VERSIFICATION 

Prose 

Of the 2692 lines in Twelfth Night (Globe edition num- 
bering), 1732 are in prose, a preponderance of prose over 
verse exceeded only in The Merry Wives of Windsor and 
Much Ado About Nothing. 

In the development of the English drama the use of prose 
as a vehicle of expression entitled to equal rights with verse 
was due to Lyly. He was the first to use prose with power 
and distinction in original plays, and did memorable service 
in preparing the way for Shakespeare's achievement. Inter- 
esting attempts have been made to explain Shakespeare's 
distinctive use of verse and prose ; and of recent years there 
has been much discussion of the question " whether we are 
justified in supposing that Shakespeare was guided by any 
fixed principle in his employment of verse and prose, or 
whether he merely employed them, as fancy suggested, for 
the sake of variety and relief." 1 It is a significant fact that 
in many of his earlier plays there is little or no prose, and 
that the proportion of prose to blank verse increases with 
the decrease of rhyme. Six kinds of prose may be distin- 
guished in the plays: (1) The prose of formal documents, 
as in letters and proclamations. Examples of this are Mal- 
volio's letters, II, v, 131 ; V,i, 292 ; and Sir Andrew's challenge, 
III, iv, 138. (2) The prose of 'low life' and the speech of 
comic characters, as in all the scenes in which the characters 

1 Churton Collins, Shakespeare as a Prose Writer. See Delius, Die 
Prosa in Shakespeares Dramen {Shakespeare Jahrbuch, V, 227-273); 
Janssen, Die Prosa in Shakespeares Dramen ; Hiram Corson, An 
Introduction to the Study of Shakespeare, pp. 83-98. 



xxviii THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE 

of the subplot appear as the chief actors. This is a devel- 
opment of the humorous prose found, for example, in 
Greene's comedies that deal with humble life. (3) The collo- 
quial prose of dialogue and of matter-of-fact narrative, as in 
II, i. Shakespeare was " the creator of colloquial prose, of 
the prose most appropriate for drama." — Churton Collins. 
(4) The prose of high comedy, vivacious, sparkling, and flash- 
ing with repartee, as in I, v, 159-222. (5) The prose of abnor- 
mal mentality. (6) Impassioned or highly wrought poetical 
and rhetorical prose. Of these kinds of prose the fifth and 
the sixth, so conspicuous in Hamlet, Macbeth, and King Lear, 
have naturally no place in Twelfth Night. 

Here and there in Twelfth Night may be read the princi- 
ples which underlie Shakespeare's transition from prose to 
verse and from verse to prose. In II, ii, the ordinary dia- 
logue giving information is naturally in prose, but Viola's 
emotional excitement finds expression in verse. The same 
transition may be noted in III, i. 

Blank Verse 

About a third of Twelfth Night is in blank verse — the 
unrhymed, iambic five-stress (decasyllabic) verse, or iambic 
pentameter, introduced into England from Italy by Henry 
Howard, Earl of Surrey, about 1540, and used by him in a 
translation of the second and fourth books of Vergil's JEneid. 
Nicholas Grimald (TotteVs Miscellany, 1557) employed the 
measure for the first time in English original poetry, and its 
roots began to strike deep into British soil and absorb sub- 
stance. It is peculiarly significant that Sackville and Norton 
should have used it as the measure of Gorboduc, the first 
English tragedy (performed by " the Gentlemen of the Inner 



INTRODUCTION xxix 

Temple" on January 18, 1561, and first printed in 1565). 
About the time when Shakespeare arrived in London the 
infinite possibilities of blank verse as a vehicle for dramatic 
poetry and passion were being shown by Kyd, and above all 
by Marlowe. Blank verse as used by Shakespeare is really 
an epitome of the development of the measure in connection 
with the English drama. In his earlier plays the blank verse 
is often similar to that of Gorboduc. The tendency is to ad- 
here to the syllable-counting principle, to make the line the 
unit, the sentence and phrase coinciding with the line (end- 
stopped verse), and to use five perfect iambic feet to the line. 
In plays of the middle period, such as The Merchant of 
Venice, As You Like It, and Twelfth Night, written between 
1596 and 1602, the blank verse is more like that of Kyd and 
Marlowe, with less monotonous regularity in the structure 
and an increasing tendency to carry on the sense from one 
line to another without a syntactical or rhetorical pause at 
the end of the line (run-on verse, enjambenienf). Redundant 
syllables now abound, and the melody is richer and fuller. 
In Shakespeare's later plays the blank verse breaks away 
from bondage to formal line limits, and sweeps all along with 
it in freedom, power, and organic unity. In the blank verse 
of Twelfth Night we have the transition from the earlier style 
to the later. Trochees, spondees, anapaests, dactyls, run-on 
lines, incomplete lines, and mid-line speech endings give to 
the verse flexibility and power ; and end-stopped lines abound, 
many of them (for instance, the first line of the play, the 
fourth, the sixth, the ninth, the fifteenth, etc.) examples of 
normal five-stress iambic pentameter. 

In the 763 lines of blank verse in Twelfth Night are 
found 152 feminine (or double, redundant, hypermetrical) 



xxx THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE 

endings, but only three weak endings and one light ending. 1 
Sebastian's speech, IV, iii, 1-2 1, has seven feminine endings. 

Alexandrines 

While French prosodists apply the term Alexandrine only 
to a twelve-syllable line with the pause after the sixth syllable, 
it is generally used in English to designate iambic six-stress 
verse, as iambic hexameter, of which we have an example in 
V, i, 204. This was a favorite Elizabethan measure, and it 
was common in moral plays and the earlier heroic drama. 
English literature has no finer examples of this verse than 
the last line of each stanza of The Faerie Queene. In Twelfth 
Night are only six Alexandrines. 

Rhyme 

1. Couplets. In the history of the English drama, rhyme 
as a vehicle of expression precedes blank verse and prose. 
Miracle plays, moral plays, and interludes are all in rhyming 
measures. In Shakespeare may be seen the same develop- 
ment. A progress from more to less rhyme is a sure in- 
dex to his growth as a dramatist and a master of expression. 
In the early Love's Labour's Lost are more than 500 rhym- 
ing five-stress iambic couplets ; in the very late The Winter's 
Tale there is not one. 2 In Twelfth Night are 60 rhyming 

1 Light endings, as defined by Ingram, are such words as am, can, 
do, has, I, thou, etc., on which " the voice can to a certain small ex- 
tent dwelP'; weak endings are words like and, for, from, if, in, of 
or, which " are so essentially proclitic . . . that we are forced to run 
them, in pronunciation no less than in sense, into the closest con- 
nection with the opening words of the succeeding line." 

2 The Chorus speech introducing Act IV is excepted as not part 
of the regular dialogue. 



INTRODUCTION xxxi 

five-stress iambic couplets, used chiefly for the following pur- 
poses : (i) to give emotional pitch and intensity, as in Viola's 
speech, III, i, 155-160, and in Sebastian's, IV, i, 59-62 ; 
(2) to give epigrammatic effect to a sententious generali- 
zation, III, iv, 343-346 ; and (3), as so frequently in Eliza- 
bethan plays, to mark an exit or round off a speech, I, i, 
40-41, I, ii, 60-61, I, iv, 40-41, etc. 

2. Songs. (1) " O mistress mine, where are you roaming '? " 
//, Hi, 38. The prevailing movement is trochaic and the 
verse four-stress, with feminine endings except in the tail- 
rhyme lines. A rich iambic effect is given to the two open- 
ing lines by the unaccented extra syllable prefixed (anacrusis). 
" The exquisite richness of sound in the two splendid open- 
ing lines is due partly to the alliteration, largely concealed, 
of ' r ' and ' m ' (seven r's and four m's), partly to the fact 
that each line rings the changes on all the five vowels. 
Such triumphs of sound are more characteristic of Shake- 
speare than of any other Elizabethan. 1 " — J. H. Fowler. 
(2) " Come away, come away, death," II, iv, 50. The prevail- 
ing movement is anapaestic, with iambic and trochaic sub- 
stitutions. (3) " When that I was and a little tiny boy" V, i, 
376, is in irregular ballad stanzas. The ballad effect is in- 
tensified by the haunting refrain. The regular measure of 
the old ballads seems to have been originally four-stress 
throughout, as in the " M, O, A, I," stanza which enmeshes 
Malvolio, II, v, 96, with a tendency to drop the last stress 
in the alternating lines. The development of this tendency 
gives the measure of the Robin Hood ballads, etc., and the 
common metre of modern hymns. 

1 This in itself would be a sufficient argument for the Shake- 
spearian authorship. See note, II, iii, 38. 



xxxii THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE 

3. Humorous- Satirical Snatches. In the snatch of one-stress 
and two-stress iambic verse, II, v, 89-92, Shakespeare not 
improbably travesties certain fads and follies in Elizabethan 
lyric forms, as in the travesty verses assigned to Bottom in 
A Midsummer Night's Dream, I, ii, 33-40. The arrange- 
ment of one-stress and two-stress anapaestic lines in Feste's 
" I am gone, sir" IV, ii, 1 16-127, has an archaic-humorous 
effect in keeping with the situation. 

V. SCENE OF ACTION 

The First Folio contains no stage directions to guide in 
determining the scene of action of Twelfth Night, and the 
locality-setting in modern editions of the play is based upon 
such references within the dialogue as that in I, ii, 2. Edi- 
tors have sought to identify the Illyria mentioned here with 
the modern Dalmatia, but in a matter of this kind it is use- 
less to go for help or interpretation to the maps or charts of 
the formal geographer. The play has an indefiniteness as 
to locality in perfect harmony with the romance atmosphere 
throughout, and the subtitle, What You Will, should save us 
from considering too curiously the local habitation of those 
to whom the whirligig of time brought in the sweet revenges 
of perfect comedy. 

VI. DURATION OF ACTION 

Though the action of Twelfth Night is supposed to fall 
within three days, with an interval of three days between the 
first and the second, according to the time analysis subjoined, 
an interval of three months is twice mentioned in Act V. 



INTRODUCTION xxxiii 

Ingenious attempts have been made to explain the seeming 

inconsistency, but the difference between a poet's point of 

view and a scientist's must never be lost sight of in analyzing 

a work of creative imagination, especially an ideal comedy 

that is 

silly sooth, 

And dallies with the innocence of love, 

Like the old age. [II, iv, 45-47.] 

Shakespeare's time and space allusions, like Sir Walter Scott's, 
are independent of chronometers and almanacs. Orlando 
settled the matter of such discrepancies for all time when he 
said to Rosalind, " There 's no clock in the forest ! " 
The following is P. A. Daniel's time analysis * : 

Day 1. — I, i-iii. 

Interval of three days. 
Day 2. — I, iv, v ; II, i-iii. 
Day 3. — II, iv, v; III; IV; V. 

VII. TITLE OF THE PLAY 

The main title of the play, Twelfth Night, which has no 
reference to the plot, doubtless indicates the occasion for 
which it was written, or when it was first performed. 2 
Twelfth Night is the eve of Twelfth Day, or Twelfth-tide, 
January 6, the twelfth day after Christmas, the day whereon 
the Church has always kept the feast of " The Epiphany, 

1 New Shakspere Society Transactions, 1877— 1879, P?£ e J 73- 

2 Halliwell-Phillipps conjectured that Twelfth Night was one of 
four plays acted by Shakespeare's company, the " Lord Chamber- 
lain's servants," before Queen Elizabeth during the Christmas festiv- 
ities of 1 601-1602. 



xxxiv THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE 

or the Manifestation of Christ to the Gentiles." From time 
immemorial Twelfth Night has been associated with popular 
festivities to honor the Three Kings, and of these the Twelfth- 
cake and the beanfeast survive to modern times. In Eliza- 
bethan England a common feature of the celebration was 
the performance of plays ; and, in preparing a Twelfth Night 
entertainment, the idea of fitness might aptly suggest that 
national lines and distinctions should be lost in the paramount 
ties of a common religion, and that people the most diverse 
in kindred and tongue should draw together in the senti- 
ment of " one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism," — their social 
mirth relishing of universal brotherhood. 

The general scope and plan of Twelfth Night, as a work 
of art, is hinted in its second title, What You Will? all the 
comic elements being, as it were, thrown out simultaneously 
and held in a sort of equipoise, so that readers may fix the 
preponderance where it best suits their several bent or state 
of mind, and each, within certain limits and conditions, may 
take the work in what sense he will. For, where no special 
prominence is given to any one thing, there is the wider 
scope for individual aptitude or preference, and the greater 
freedom for each to select for virtual prominence such parts 
as will best knit in with what is uppermost in his thoughts. 
As in the case of As You Like It, the spirit of the play as a 
whole is expressed in the title. 

The significance of the title is further traceable in a pecul- 
iar spontaneousness running through the play. Replete as 
it is with humors and oddities, they all seem to spring up 
of their own accord, the comic characters being free alike 

1 The expression occurs in the body of the play, I, v, 103. Cf. I, 
v, 29; I, v, 146-147 ; II, iii, 79-80. 



INTRODUCTION xxxv 

from disguises and from pretensions, caring nothing at all 
whether everybody or nobody sees them, so they may have 
their whim out, and giving utterance to folly and nonsense 
simply because they cannot help it. Thus their very weak- 
nesses and deformities have a certain grace, since they are 
genuine and of nature's planting : absurdity and whimsicality 
are indigenous to the soil, and shoot up in free, happy lux- 
uriance, from the life that is in them. By thus setting the 
characters out in their happiest aspects, Shakespeare con- 
trives to make them simply ludicrous and diverting, instead 
of putting upon them the constructions of wit or spleen, and 
thereby making them ridiculous or contemptible. Hence it 
is that we so readily enter into a sort of fellowship with 
them ; their foibles and follies being shown up in such a 
spirit of good humor, that the subjects themselves would 
rather join with us in laughing than be angered or hurt at 
the exhibition. High and low are here seen moving in free 
and familiar intercourse, without any apparent consciousness 
of their respective ranks ; the humors and comicalities of 
the play keep running and frisking in among the serious 
parts, to their mutual advantage, the connection between 
them being of a kind to be felt, not described. 

Thus the play overflows with the genial, free-and-easy 
spirit of a merry Twelfth Night. Chance, caprice, and in- 
trigue, it is true, are brought together in about equal por- 
tions, and their meeting and crossing and mutual tripping 
cause a deal of perplexity and confusion, defeating the hopes 
of some, suspending those of others ; but here — as is often 
the case in actual life — from this conflict of opposites, order 
and happiness spring up as the final result. If what we call 
accident thwart one cherished purpose, it draws on something 



xxxvi THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE 

better, blighting a full-blown expectation now to help the 
blossoming of a nobler one hereafter ; and it so happens 
in the end that all the persons but two either have what they 
will, or else grow willing to have what comes to their hands. 1 

VIII. DRAMATIC CONSTRUCTION AND 
DEVELOPMENT 

As a drama, Twelfth Night is one of Shakespeare's superb 
achievements in high comedy. The action of the play has 
mistaken identity as its motive, and three love stories make 
up the common entanglement of the main plot. Three vari- 
eties of humorous folly are inwoven in the subplot, and in 
the interaction of main plot and subplot is evolved a master- 
piece of comic appeal, compact, symmetrical, and dramati- 
cally as effective as it is satisfying to the imagination. 

Like tragedy, comedy deals with a conflict between an in- 
dividual force (which may be centered either in one charac- 
ter, or in a group of characters acting as one) and environing 
circumstances. In tragedy the individual (one person or a 
group) is overwhelmed ; in comedy the individual triumphs. 
In comedy, as in tragedy, there are five stages in the plot 
development: (i) the exposition, or introduction; (2) the 
complication, rising action, or growth ; (3) the climax, crisis, 
or turning point ; (4) the resolution, falling action, or conse- 
quence ; and (5) the de'nouement, castastrophe, 2 or conclusion. 

1 Some interpreters have suggested that the name expresses 
Shakespeare's carelessness as to his own production ; others that it 
signified his farewell to Comedy ; others again that it was a proof of 
his indifference in regard to the naming of his plays. 

2 u Catastrophe — the change or revolution which produces the 
conclusion or final event of a dramatic piece." — Johnson. 



INTRODUCTION xxxvii 

Let it not be thought for a moment that each of these stages 
is clearly differentiated. As a rule they pass insensibly into 
each other, as they do in life. Especially is this true in a play 
like Twelfth Night, where the weaving of the plot-action is 
so close and compact. 

Analysis by Act and Scene 1 
I. The Exposition, or Introduction (Tying of the Knot) 

Act /, Scene i. The play opens in an atmosphere of brooding 
sentiment, and the keynote is struck in Orsino's first words. The 
scene discloses his love for Olivia, (who is mourning for her brother) 
and her rejection of his suit, which are the basis of the main plot. 

Act /, Scene ii. The heroine, Viola, is introduced. Safe from 
shipwreck, but in an agony of suspense over the fate of her twin 
brother, she learns that the ruler of the country where she finds her- 
self is Orsino, and additional explanatory details of his relation to 
Olivia are related. As a means of self-protection, Viola plans to dis- 
guise herself as a page and enter Orsino's service. Two elements 
of plot interest have now been introduced, and Viola's words about 
her brother prepare for the appearance of Sebastian later in the play. 

Act I, Scene Hi. Three active agents in the underplot — Sir Toby, 
Sir Andrew, and Maria — are introduced in a fitting scene of royster- 
ing and drunken merriment in Olivia's house. The scene suggests 
infinite possibilities of humorous situation to follow. 

Act I, Scene iv. Viola, disguised as the page Cesario in Orsino's 
service, is sent on a love embassy to Olivia. As it becomes clear 
that Viola herself has fallen in love with Orsino, another important 
element in the plot interest is introduced. 

1 " It must be understood that a play can be analyzed into very 
different schemes of plot. It must not be thought that one of these 
schemes is right and the rest wrong ; but the schemes will be better 
or worse in proportion as — while of course representing correctly 
the facts of the play — they bring out more or less of what ministers 
to our sense of design." — Moulton. 



xxxviii THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE 

Act I, Scene v, f-fjS. With the introduction of Olivia, Malvolio, 
and Feste, the exposition of the play is complete, and the complica- 
tion begins when, in the thick of a wrangle between Malvolio and 
Feste, in which Olivia sides with Feste, Viola enters. 

II. The Complication, Rising Action, or Growth (Tying of 

the Knot) 

Act I, Scene v, 15Q-2Q5. So passionately does Viola plead for her 
master that Olivia yields her heart, not to Orsino, but to the fair go- 
between. When Viola leaves, Olivia sends Malvolio after her with a 
ring, and the request that " the youth will come this way tomorrow. ,, 
Olivia's love for Cesario is a most important element in the compli- 
cation. 

Act II, Scene i. The dialogue between Sebastian and Antonio 
emphasizes the confusion of identity element in the main plot. 
Sebastian tells how strong was the resemblance between himself 
and his twin sister, whom he believes to be dead. Antonio deter- 
mines to follow Sebastian to the court of Orsino, though he has 
many enemies there. 

Act II, Scene ii. When Malvolio has given Viola the ring, and 
with it Olivia's message, she reads the secret of Olivia's heart. The 
motive interest is increased. 

Act II, Scene Hi. The comic subplot is advanced. Malvolio breaks 
in upon the revel-rout of Sir Toby, Sir Andrew, and Feste, and when 
he leaves, they agree to play him a trick contrived by Maria. He is 
to be deluded into the belief that Olivia is in love with him. This is 
the first important element in the subplot. 

mm *~Act II, Scene iv. The emotional interest is intensified. In the 
famous lines beginning, " She never told her love," Viola tells her 
own passion for Orsino, while she continues her service as the con- 
fidant of his love for Olivia. This scene is a masterpiece of dramatic 
or constructive irony. 1 

Act II, Scene v. Maria's ruse is successful. Malvolio's self-love 
and sense of self-importance make him an easy dupe, and the sub- 
plot interest deepens. 

1 For a definition of * dramatic irony,' see note, I, iv, 28. 



INTRODUCTION xxxix 

Act III, Scene i. Viola again visits Olivia, and Olivia's love for 
Orsino's proxy-wooer becomes more intense. She makes an open 
declaration of her passion. 

Act III, Scene ii. A trick played on Sir Andrew and Viola comes 
as a second important element in the subplot. On the instigation of 
Sir Toby, Sir Andrew, jealous of the favors shown to the page by 
Olivia, challenges Viola to a duel. The subplot is now firmly linked 
to the main plot. 

Act III, Scene Hi. Sebastian, followed by Antonio, arrives in the 
city, and with his arrival is set in motion the machinery which will 
result in the resolution of all the elements of the complication. The 
mistaken identity implicit in the resemblance between Sebastian 
and Viola dominates the action of the play from now on to the 
denouement. 

Act III, Scene iv, 1-288. The success of the trick played upon 
the solemn " yellow-legg'd stork " culminates in Malvolio's being 
shut up as a madman. This climax of one action in the subplot 
is in the closest relation to the climax of the other — the duel 
between Sir Andrew and Viola. 

III. The Climax, Crisis, or Turning Point (the Knot tied) 

Act III, Scene iv, 289-3 J2. The entrance of Antonio crosses 
every strand of interest in the weaving of the plot. To use Aristotle's 
famous figure, it tightens all the elements of main plot and subplot 
into a compact knot of general entanglement. 

IV. The Resolution, Falling Action, or Consequence (the 
Untying of the Knot) 

Act IV, Scene i. Sir Andrew's attack upon Sebastian, whom of 
course he mistakes for Viola, is the first important element in the 
resolution. It foreshadows the coming together of brother and sis- 
ter, and suggests a happy solution for Olivia's passion for the page. 

Act IV, Scene ii. Feste's visit to " Malvolio the lunatic " in the 
dark room and his conversation with him in the assumed character 
of " Sir Topas the curate," result in a promise to take a letter from 
Malvolio to Olivia. The resolution of one important element in the 
subplot is now clearly indicated. 



xl THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE 

Act IV, Scene iii. As the denouement approaches, the action 
gains in swiftness. This short scene, culminating in Sebastian's 
betrothal to Olivia, who thinks that he is Cesario, goes far in the 
resolution of the main plot. 

Act V, Scene i, 1-200. After badinage between Feste and Fabian 
over what turns out to be Malvolio's letter to Olivia, Antonio in 
talk with Orsino gives the necessary details of his connection with 
Sebastian. The several charges against Viola — Olivia's that she had 
married her, Sir Toby's and Sir Andrew's that she had beaten them, 
and Orsino's that she had deceived him — are cleared by Sebastian 
when he enters. 

V. Denouement, Catastrophe, or Conclusion (the Knot untied) 

Act V, Scene i, 201-jgj. When Viola and Sebastian meet in the 
presence of the leading characters of the play, and the resemblance 
between them is obvious to all, the resolution is complete. As 
Orsino cannot have Olivia, he transfers his affections to Viola ; 
Malvolio's letter is delivered to Olivia, who now sends for him and 
has the subplot ' practice ' explained to her ; and Fabian tells that, 
as a reward for her cleverness, Sir Toby has married Maria. " He, 
who has been so busy in gulling others, ends by exposing himself to 
the permanent derision which accompanies a misalliance.'''' — Boas. 
Feste's epilogue-song, to the accompaniment of the jester's bells, is 
a fitting last word in this high comedy of romantic sentiment and 
exquisite satire. 

IX. SPEDDING'S ARRANGEMENT OF ACTS 
AND SCENES 

The sequence of acts and scenes in Twelfth Night as 
given in the First Folio and followed in most modern texts, 
except those of acting versions of the play, has often been 
regarded as unsatisfactory. The modern stage with its elab- 
orate scenery settings and interact pauses tends to make 
harshly obvious what, if played from beginning to end 



INTRODUCTION xli 

without any pause as in the Elizabethan time, would never 
give the slightest sense of awkwardness. The following are 
Spedding's * suggestions for rearrangement : 

At the end of the first Act, Malvolio is ordered to run after 
Cesario with Olivia's ring; in the second Scene of the second Act, 
he has but just overtaken him. " Were you not even now " (he says) 
" with the Countess Olivia ? " " Even now, sir " (she answers), " on 
a moderate pace I have since arrived but hither." Here, therefore, 
the pause is worse than useless. It impedes the action, and turns 
a light and swift movement into a slow and heavy one. 

Again, at the end of the third Act, Sir Andrew Aguecheek runs 
after Cesario (who had just left the stage) to beat him, Sir Toby and 
Fabian following to see the event. At the beginning of the fourth, 
they are all where they were. Sir Andrew's valour is still warm ; he 
meets Sebastian, mistakes him for Cesario, and strikes him. Here 
again the pause is not merely unnecessary ; it interrupts what was 
evidently meant for a continuous and rapid action, and so spoils the 
fun. I have little doubt that the first Act was meant to end with the 
fourth Scene, — the Scene between the Duke and Viola, — 

Whoe'er I woo, myself would be his wife [I, iv, 41] ; 

the second, with Viola's soliloquy upon receiving Olivia's ring, — 

O time, thou must untangle this, not I ; 

It is too hard a knot for me to untie ! [II, ii, 39-40.] 

The third might end where, according to the received arrangement, 
the second does ; only that the underplot would in that case become 
rather too prominent, and the main action stand still too long. To 
avoid this, I would not have the curtain fall till after the second 
interview between Olivia and Viola, in which Olivia declares her 
passion : 

Yet come again ; for thou perhaps mayst move 

That heart, which .now abhors, to like his love. [Ill, i, 161-162.] 

The fourth Act may end where it now does, with the contract be- 
tween Olivia and Sebastian ; and the fifth will remain as it is. 

1 New Shakspere Society Transactions, 187 7- 1879, P a g e 2 4- 



xlii THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE 

X. THE CHARACTERS 

Characters of the Subplot 

sir TOBY 

If the characters of Iwelfth Night are generally less inter- 
esting in themselves than some we meet with elsewhere in 
Shakespeare's works, the defect is pretty well made up by 
the felicitous grouping of them. Their very diversities of 
temper and purpose are made to act as so many mutual 
affinities ; and this too in a manner so spontaneous that we 
see not how they could possibly act otherwise. For broad 
comic effect, the cluster of which Sir Toby is the centre — 
all of them drawn in clear yet delicate colors — is inferior 
only to the unparalleled assemblage that makes rich the air 
of Eastcheap. Of Sir Tob y,iiimselL^z that^most whimsical, 
madcap, frolicsome^ol d toper, so^ fuJU^^^L arctics ^Qd^fond^of 
sprees, with a plentiful stock of wit T w hich is kept injriotion 
by an equally pl entiful lack of money — it is enough to say, 
with Verplanck, that " he certainly comes out of the same 
associations where the Poet saw Falstaff hold his revels"; 
and that, though " not Sir John, nor a fainter sketch of him, 
yet he has an odd sort of a family likeness to him." Sir 
Toby has a decided penchant for practical jokes, rather be- 
cause he takes a sort of disinterested pleasure in them than 
because he loves to see himself in the process of engineering 
them through, for he has not a particle of ill nature in him. 
Though by no means a coward himself, he enjoys the ex- 
posure of cowardice in others. This again is not so much 
because such exposure feeds his self-esteem as because he 



INTRODUCTION xliii 

delights in the game for its own sake, and for the nimble 
pastime it yields to his faculties. It is much the same with 
his addiction to vinous revelry and to the moister kind of 
minstrelsy ; an addiction that proceeds in part from his keen 
gust of fun, and the happiness he finds in making sport for 
others as well as for himself. He will drink till the world 
turns round, but not unless others are at hand to enjoy the 
turning along with him. 

SIR ANDREW 

Sir Andrew Aguecheek, the aspiring, lackadaisical, self- 
satisfied echo and sequel of Sir Toby, fitly serves the double 
purpose of a butt and a foil to him, at once drawing him out 
and setting him off. Ludicrously proud of the most petty, 
childish irregularities, which his natural fatuity keeps him 
from acting and barely suffers him to affect, he reminds us 
of that impressive imbecility, Abraham Slender ; yet not in 
such sort as to encroach at all on Slender's province. There 
can scarcely be found a richer piece of diversion than Sir 
Toby's ' practice ' in dandling Sir Andrew out of his money, 
and paying him off with the odd hope of gaining Olivia's 
hand. And the humor of it is, that while Sir Toby under- 
stands him thoroughly, he has not himself the slightest sus- 
picion or inkling of what he is ; he is as confident of his own 
wit as others are of his want of it. Nor are we here touched 
with any revulsions of moral feeling, such as might disturb 
our enjoyment of their fellowship ; on the contrary, we 
sympathize with Sir Toby's sport, without any reluctances of 
^virtue or conscience. To our sense of the matter, he neither 
has nor ought to have any scruples or compunctions about 
tpe game he is hunting. His dealing with Sir Andrew is all in 



xliv THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE 

the way of fair exchange. He gives as much pleasure as he 
gets. If he is cheating Sir Andrew out of his money, he is 
also cheating him into the proper felicity of his nature, and 
thus paying him with the equivalent best suited to his capac- 
ity. It suffices that, in being stuffed with the preposterous 
delusion about Olivia, Sir Andrew is rendered supremely 
happy at the time, while he manifestly has not force enough 
to remember it with any twinges of shame or self-reproach. 
And we feel that, while clawing his fatuous crotchets and 
playing out his absurdities, Sir Toby is really doing Sir 
Andrew no wrong, since the poor fool, the true fool of the 
play, if not the " allow'd fool/' is then most himself, is in his 
happiest mood, and in the most natural freedom of his in- 
digenous gifts and graces. All which quite precludes any 
division of our sympathies, and makes our comic enjoyment 
of their intercourse simply perfect. 

MALVOLIO 

Malvolio, the self-lovesick steward, has hardly had jus- 
tice done him, his bad qualities being indeed of just the kind 
to defeat the recognition of his good ones. He represents 
a perpetual class of people whose leading characteristic is 
moral demonstrativeness, who are never satisfied with a law 
that leaves them free to do right, unless it also give them the 
power to keep others from doing wrong. To quote again 
from Verplanck, Malvolio embodies " a conception as true as 
it is original and droll ; and its truth may still be frequently 
attested by comparison with real Malvolios, to be found 
everywhere, from humble domestic life up to the high places 
of learning, of the State, and even of the Church." From 
the central idea of the character it follows in course that the 



INTRODUCTION xlv 

man has too much conscience to mind his own business, 
and is too pure to tolerate mirth in others, because too 
much swollen and stiffened with self-love to be merry himself. 
His highest exhilaration is when he contemplates the image 
of his self-imputed virtues ; he lives so entranced with the 
beauty of his own inward parts that he would fain hold him- 
self the wrong side out, to the end that all the world may 
duly appreciate and admire him. Naturally, too, the more 
he hangs over his own moral beauty, the more pharisaical 
and sanctimonious he becomes in his opinion and treatment 
of others. For the glass which magnifies to his view what- 
ever of good there may be in himself, also serves him as an 
inverted telescope to minify the good of those about him ; 
and, which is more, the same spirit that prompts him to 
invert the instrument upon other men's virtues, naturally 
moves him to turn the big end upon their faults and the 
small end upon his own. Of course he is never without food 
for censure and reproof save when he is alone with himself, 
where, to be sure, his intense consciousness of virtue breathes 
around him " the air of Paradise." Thus his continual froth- 
ing over with righteous indignation all proceeds from the 
yeast of pride and self-importance working mightily within 
him. Maria, whose keen eye and sure tongue seldom fail to 
hit the white of the mark, describes him as not being " any 
thing constantly, but a time-pleaser." And it is remarkable 
that the emphasized moral rigidity of such men is commonly 
but the outside of a -mind secretly intent on the service of 
the time, and caring little for anything but to trim its sails to 
the winds of self-interest and self-advancement. Yet Malvolio 
is really a man of no little talent and accomplishment, as he 
is also one of marked skill, fidelity, and rectitude in his calling; 



xlvi THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE 

so that he would be a right-worthy person all round, but 
for his inordinate craving 

to be dress'd in an opinion 
Of wisdom, gravity, profound conceit ; 
As who should say, ' I am Sir Oracle, 
And when I ope my lips, let no dog bark ! ' 

[The Me7-chant of Venice, I, i, 91-94.] 



This overweening moral coxcombry is not indeed to be reck- 
oned among the worst of crimes, but perhaps there is no 
other one fault so generally or so justly offensive, and there- 
fore none so apt to provoke the merciless retaliations of 
mockery and practical wit. 

MARIA 

Maria, the little structure packed so close with mental 
spicery, has read Malvolio through and through ; she knows 
him without and within ; and she never speaks of him but her 
speech touches the very pith of the theme, — as, for example, 
when she describes him to be one " that cons state without 
book, and utters it by great swarths ; the best persuaded of 
himself, so cramm'd, as he thinks, with excellencies, that it is. 
his grounds of faith that all that look on him love him '' (II, 
iii, 139-143). Her quaint stratagem of the letter has, and 
is meant to have, the effect of disclosing to others what her 
keener insight has long since discovered ; and its working lifts 
her into a model of arch, roguish mischievousness, with wit 
to plan and art to execute whatsoever falls within the scope 
of such a character. Her native sagacity has taught her how 
to touch him in just the right spots to bring out the reserved 
or latent notes of his character. Her diagnosis of his inward 
state is indeed perfect; and when she makes the letter 






INTRODUCTION xlvii 

instruct him, — " Be opposite with a kinsman, surly with serv- 
ants ; let thy tongue tang arguments of state ; put thyself 
into the trick of singularity" (II, v, 136-138) — her arrows 
are so aimed as to cleave the pin of his most characteristic 
predispositions. 

The scenes where the waggish troop, headed by this 
" noble gull-catcher " and " most excellent devil of wit," be- 
witch Malvolio into " a contemplative idiot," practising upon 
his vanity and conceit till he seems ready to burst with an 
ecstasy of self -consequence, and they " laugh themselves in- 
to stitches " over him, are almost painfully diverting. It is 
indeed sport to see him " how he jets under his advanced 
plumes," and during this part of the operation our hearts 
freely keep time with theirs who are tickling out his buds 
into full-blown thoughts ; at length, when he is under treat- 
ment as a madman, our delight in his exposure passes over 
into commiseration of his distress, and we feel a degree of 
resentment towards his ingenious persecutors. The drama- 
tist, no doubt, meant to push the joke upon him so far as 
to throw our sympathies over on his side, and make us take 
his part. For his character is such that perhaps nothing but 
excessive reprisals on his vanity and conceit could make us 
do justice to his real worth. 

FABIAN AND FESTE 

The shrewd, mirth-loving Fabian is an apt and willing 
agent in putting the stratagem through. If he does nothing 
towards inventing or cooking up the repast, he is at least 
a happy and genial partaker of the banquet that others 
have prepared. — Feste, the jester, completes this illustrious 
group of laughing and laughter-moving personages. Though 



xlviii THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE 

not, perhaps, quite so wise a fellow as Touchstone, of As 
You Like It memory, nor endowed with so fluent and racy 
a fund of humor, he has enough of both to meet all the 
demands of his situation. If, on the one hand, he never 
launches the ball of fun, neither, on the other, does he ever 
fail to do his part towards keeping it rolling. On the whole, 
he has a sufficiently facile and apposite gift at jesting out phi- 
losophy, and moralizing the scenes where he moves, and what- 
ever he has in that line is perfectly original with him. It is 
a rather noteworthy circumstance that both the comedy and 
the romance of the play meet together in him, as in their 
natural home. He is indeed a right jolly fellow; for every 
note of mirth that springs up he has answering susceptibili- 
ties, but he also has at the same time a delicate vein of ten- 
der pathos in him. This makes him the singer of two of the 
sweetest songs in Shakespeare's plays. In the noteworthy 
group of Shakespeare's jesters, Feste is preeminently the 
musical Fool. 

Characters of the Main Plot 

Such are the scenes, such the characters that enliven 
Olivia's mansion during the play ; Olivia herself, calm, cheer- 
ful, of " smooth, discreet, and stable bearing," hovering about 
them ; sometimes unbending, never losing her dignity among 
them ; often checking, oftener enjoying their merrymakings, 
and occasionally emerging from her seclusion to be plagued 
by the Duke's message and bewitched by his messenger; 
and Viola, always perfect in her part, yet always shrinking 
from it, appearing among them from time to time on her 
embassies of love, sometimes a partaker, sometimes a pro- 
voker, sometimes the victim of their mischievous sport. 



INTRODUCTION xlix 

All this array of comicalities, exhilarating as it is in itself, 
is rendered doubly so by the frequent changes and playings- 
in of poetry breathed from the sweetest spots of romance, 
giving "a very echo to the seat where Love is throned"; 
ideas and images of beauty creeping and stealing over the 
mind with footsteps so soft and delicate that we scarce know 
what touches us — the motions of one that had learned 
to tread 

As if the wind, not he, did walk, 

Nor press'd a flower, nor bow'd a stalk. 

Upon this portion of the play Hazlitt has some spirited re- 
marks : " We have a friendship for Sir Toby ; we patron- 
ize Sir Andrew ; we have an understanding with the Clown, 
a sneaking kindness for Maria and her rogueries ; we feel 
a regard for Malvolio, and sympathize with his gravity, his 
smiles, his cross-garters, his yellow stockings, and imprison- 
ment : but there is something that excites in us a stronger 
feeling than all this." 

OLIVIA 

The characterization of Olivia reveals how much a fair 
and candid setting-forth may do to render an ordinary person 
attractive, and shows that for the home-bred comforts and 
fireside tenor of life such persons after all are apt to be the 
best. Nor, though something commonplace in her make- 
up, such as the average of cultivated womanhood is always 
found to be, is she without bright and penetrative thoughts, 
whenever the occasion calls for them. Her reply to Malvolio, 
when, by way of scorching Feste, he " marvels that her lady- 
ship takes delight in such a barren rascal," gives the true 



1 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE 

texture of her mind and moral frame : " O, you are sick 
of self-love, Malvolio, and taste with a distemper'd appetite. 
To be generous, guiltless, and of free disposition, is to take 
those things for bird-bolts that you deem cannon-bullets. 
There is no slander in an allow'd fool, though he do nothing 
but rail ; nor no railing in a known discreet man, though 
he do nothing but reprove " (I, v, 85-90). Practical wisdom 
enough to make the course of any household run smooth ! 
The instincts of a happy, placid temper have taught Olivia 
that there is as little of Christian virtue as of natural benig- 
nity in stinging away the spirit of kindness with a tongue of 
acid and acrimonious pietism. Her firm and healthy pulse 
beats in sympathy with the sportiveness in which the proper 
decorum of her station may not permit her to bear an active 
part. And she is too considerate, withal, not to look with 
indulgence on the pleasantries that are partly meant to di- 
vert her thoughts, and air off a too vivid remembrance of 
her recent sorrows. Besides, she has gathered, even under 
the discipline of her own afflictions, that as, on the one hand, 
« what nature makes us mourn she bids us heal," so, on the 
other, the free hilarities of wit and humor, even though there 
be something of nonsense mixed up with them, are a part of 
that « bland philosophy of life " which helps to knit us up in 
the unions of charity and peace ; that they promote cheer- 
fulness of temper, smooth down the lines of care, sweeten 
away the asperities of the mind, make the eye sparkling and 
lustrous, and, in short, do much of the very best stitching in 
the embroidered web of friendship and fair society. So that 
she finds abundant motive in reason, with no impediment in 
religion, to refrain from spoiling the merry passages of her 
friends and servants by looking black or sour upon them. 



INTRODUCTION li 

Olivia is manifestly somewhat inclined to have her own 
way. But then it must also be acknowledged that her way 
is pretty apt to be right. This wilfulness, or something that 
borders upon it, is shown alike in her impracticability to the 
Duke's solicitations, and in her pertinacity in soliciting his 
messenger. And it were well worth the while to know, if we 
could, how one so perverse in certain spots can manage not- 
withstanding to be so agreeable as a whole. Then, too, if it 
seems rather naughty in her that she does not give the Duke 
a better chance to try his power upon her, she gets pretty 
well paid in falling a victim to the eloquence which her 
obstinacy stirs up. Nor is it altogether certain whether 
her conduct springs from a pride that will not listen where 
her fancy is not taken, or from an unambitious modesty that 
prefers not to " match above her degree." Her " beauty 
truly blent, whose red and white nature's own sweet and 
cunning hand laid on," saves the credit of the fancy-smitten 
Duke in such an urgency of suit as might else breed some 
question of his manliness ; while her winning infirmity, as ex- 
pressed in the tender violence with which she hastens on " a 
contract and eternal bond of love " with the astonished and 
bewildered Sebastian, " that her most jealous and too doubt- 
ful soul may live at peace," shows how well the sternness of 
the brain may be tempered into amiability by the meekness 
of womanhood. 

ORSINO 

Orsino, without any very splendid or striking qualities, is 
a highly agreeable and interesting person. His character is 
that of an accomplished gentleman, enraptured at the touch 
of music, and the sport of thick-thronging fancies. It is plain 



Hi THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE 

that Olivia has only enchanted his imagination, not won his 
heart, though he is not himself aware that such is the case. 
This fancy-sickness — for it appears to be nothing else — 
naturally renders him somewhat capricious and fantastical, 
"unstaid and skittish in his motions"; and, but for the ex- 
quisite poetry which it inspires him to utter, would rather 
excite our mirth than enlist our sympathy. To use an illus- 
tration from another play, Olivia is not so much his Juliet as 
his Rosaline, and perhaps a secret persuasion to that effect 
is the real cause of her rejecting his suit. Accordingly, when 
he sees her placed beyond his hope, he has no more trouble 
about her, but turns, and builds a true affection where, dur- 
ing the preoccupancy of his imagination, so many sweet and 
tender appeals have been made to his heart. 

In Shakespeare's delineations, as in nature, we may com- 
monly note that love, in proportion as it is deep and genu- 
ine, is also inward and reserved. To be voluble, to be fond of 
spreading itself in discourse, or of airing itself in the fineries 
of speech, seems indeed quite against the instinct of that 
passion ; and its best eloquence is when it ties up the tongue 
and steals out in other modes of expression, the flushing of 
the cheeks and the mute devotion of the eyes. In its purest 
forms it is apt to be a secret even unto itself, the subjects of 
it knowing indeed that something ails them, but not know- 
ing exactly what. The most effective love-making is invol- 
untary and unconscious. If the true lover's passion be not 
returned before it is spoken, it stands little chance of being 
returned at all. 

In Orsino's case, the passion, or whatever else it may be, 
is too much without to be thoroughly sound within. Like 
Malvolio's virtue, it is too glass-gazing, too much enamored 



INTRODUCTION liii 

of its own image, and renders 'him too apprehensive that it 
will be the death of him, if disappointed of its object. Accord- 
ingly he talks too much about it, and his talking about it is 
too ingenious withal ; it makes his tongue run glib and fine 
with the most charming divisions of poetic imagery and sen- 
timent ; all which shrewdly infers that he lacks the genuine 
thing, and has mistaken something else for it. Yet, when 
we hear him dropping such riches as this, — 

O, when mine eyes did see Olivia first, 

Methought she purg'd the air of pestilence ! [I, i, 19-20] — 

and this, — 

She that hath a heart of that fine frame 
To pay this debt of love but to a brother, 
How will she love, when the rich golden shaft 
Hath kill'd the flock of all affections else 
That live in her ! [I, i, 33-37] — 

we can hardly help wishing that such were indeed the true 
vernacular of that passion. But it is not so, and on the whole 
it is much better than so ; for love, that which is rightly so 
called, uses a diviner language even than that, and this it 
does when, taking the form of religion, it sweetly and silently 
embodies itself in deeds. 

VIOLA 

In Viola, divers things that were else not a little scattered 
are thoroughly composed ; her character is the unifying 
power that draws all the parts into true dramatic consistency. 
Love-taught herself, it was for her to teach both Orsino 
and Olivia how to love. She plays into all the other parts, 
causing them to embrace and cohere within the compass of 



liv THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE 

her circulation. And yet, like some subtile agency, working 
most where we perceive it least, she does all this v/ithout 
rendering herself a special prominence in the play. 

It is observable that Shakespeare has left it uncertain 
whether Viola was in love with the Duke before assuming 
her disguise, or whether her heart was won afterwards by 
reading " the book even 'of his secret soul " while wooing 
another. Nor does it much matter whether her passion were 
the motive or the consequence of her disguise, since in either 
case such a man as Olivia describes him to be might well 
find his way to tougher hearts than Viola's. But her love 
has none of the skittishness and unrest which mark the 
Duke's passion for Olivia. Complicated out of all the ele- 
ments of her being, it is strong without violence ; never mars 
the innate modesty of her character ; is deep as life, tender 
as infancy, pure, peaceful, and unchangeable as truth. 

Mrs. Jameson 1 — who, with the best right to know what 
belongs to woman, unites a rare talent for taking others along 
with her and letting them see the choice things which her 
apprehensive eye discerns, and who, in respect of Shake- 
speare's heroines, has left little for others to do but quote 
her words — remarks that " in Viola a sweet consciousness 
of her feminine nature is for ever breaking through her 
masquerade : she plays her part well, but never forgets, nor 
allows us to forget, that she is playing a part." Everything 
about her save her dress "is semblative a woman's part"; 
she has none of the assumption of a pert, saucy, waggish 
manhood, which so delights us in Rosalind in As You Like It, 
but she has that which, if not better in itself, is more becom- 
ing in her, — " the inward and spiritual grace of modesty " 

1 Characteristics of Women, by Anna Jameson, London, 1833. 



INTRODUCTION lv 

pervading all she does and says. Even in her railleries with 
the comic characters there is all the while an instinctive 
drawing-back of female delicacy, touching our sympathies, 
and causing us to feel most deeply what she is, when those 
with whom she is playing least suspect her to be other than 
she seems. And the same is true concerning her passion, of 
which she never so speaks as to compromise in the least the 
most exquisite delicacy, but she lets, fall many things from 
which the Duke easily gathers the drift and quality of her 
feelings directly he learns what she is. But the great charm 
of her character lies in a moral rectitude so perfect and so 
pure as to be a secret unto itself ; a clear, serene composure 
of truth, mingling so freely and smoothly with the issues of 
life that while, and perhaps even because, she is herself 
unconscious of it, she is never once tempted to abuse or 
to shirk her trust, though it be to play the attorney in a 
cause that makes so much against herself. In this respect 
she presents an instructive contrast to Malvolio, who has 
much virtue indeed, yet not so much but that the counter- 
pullings have rendered him intensely conscious of it, and 
so drawn him into the vice, at once hateful and ridiculous, 
of moral pride. *>c 

Sundry critics have censured, some of them pretty sharply, 
the improbability involved in the circumstance of Viola and 
Sebastian resembling each other so closely as to be mistaken 
the one for the other. Even so just and liberal a critic as 
Hallam has stumbled at this circumstance, so much so as 
quite to disconcert his judgment of the play. The improba- 
bility is indeed palpable enough, yet why should it trouble 
any one more than certain things not less improbable in As 
You Like It. Such criticism as Hallam's proceeds from that 



lvi THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE 

old heresy which supposes the proper effect of a work of art 
to depend on the imagined reality of the matter presented. 
" The great creative writer shows us the realization and the 
apotheosis of the day-dreams of common men. His stories 
may be nourished with the realities of life, but their true 
mark is to satisfy the nameless longings of the reader, and 
to obey the ideal laws of the day-dream/' — R. L. Stevenson. 

SEBASTIAN 

Of Sebastian himself the less need be said, forasmuch as 
the leading traits of his character have been substantially 
evolved in what has been said of his sister. For the two are 
really as much alike in the inward texture of their souls as 
in their visible persons ; at least their mutual resemblance in 
the former respect is as close as were compatible with proper 
manliness in the one, and proper womanliness in the other. 
Personal bravery, for example, is as characteristic of him as 
modesty is of her. In simplicity, in gentleness, in rectitude, 
in delicacy of mind, and in all the particulars of what may 
be termed complexional harmony and healthiness of nature, 
— in these they are as much twins as in birth and feature. 
Therewithal they are both alike free from any notes of a 
pampered self-consciousness. Yet in all these points a nice 
discrimination of the masculine and feminine proprieties is 
everywhere maintained. In a word, there is no confusion of 
sex in the delineation of them ; as like as they are, without 
and within, the man and the woman are nevertheless per- 
fectly differentiated in all the essential attributes of each. 

The conditions of the plot did not require nor even permit 
Sebastian to be often or much in sight. We have indeed 
but little from him, but that little is intensely charged with 



INTRODUCTION lvii 

significance; nowhere in Shakespeare is so much of character- 
ization accomplished in so few words. The scene where he is 
first met with consists merely of a brief dialogue between him 
and Antonio, the man who a little before has recovered him 
from the perils of shipwreck. He there has neither time nor 
heart for anything but gratitude to his deliverer, and sorrow at 
the supposed death of his sister, yet his expression of these 
is so ordered as to infer all the parts of a thorough gentle- 
man ; the efficacies of a generous nature, of good breeding, 
of liberal culture, and of high principle, all concurring in one 
result, and thus filling up the right idea of politeness as 
" benevolence guided by intelligence." 



XI. STAGE HISTORY 

As an acting play, Twelfth Night seems from the first to 
have been popular. The variety of the incidents, which is best 
realized in the theatre, the vigor of the characterization, and 
the witty dialogue shot through with exquisite poetry, make 
up a fascinating play, alive with dramatic opportunity. The 
sentimental-romantic element, which makes Twelfth Night 
less suitable for the modern stage than either Much Ado 
About Nothing or As You Like It, would be enjoyed to the 
full by an Elizabethan audience. The arrangement and the 
general business of the denouement, which to a modern audi- 
ence often seem unsatisfactory, would be much more con- 
vincing and effective with boys playing the part of women 
as on the Elizabethan stage. 1 

1 W. Oechelhauser, Einfuhrungen in Shakespeares Buhnen-Dra- 
men, Minden, 1885. 



lviii THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE 

The Seventeenth Century 

Implicit in Manninghan's reference to Twelfth Night (see 
above, Sources) is evidence of the early popularity of the 
play. This popularity is clearly attested by Leonard Digges 
in his Commendatory verses prefixed to the Poems Written by 
Wil. Shakes-peare. Gent. 1640. In enumerating Shakespeare's 
most popular characters, Digges says : 

Let but Beatrice 
And Benedicke be seene, loe in a trice 
The Cockpit Galleries, Boxes, all are full 
To hear Maluoglio that crosse garter'd Gull. 

Halliwell-Phillipps points out that the play was performed 
before James I " long after there had ceased to be any at- 
traction from its novelty," as appears from the following 
entry in a MS. preserved at the Audit Office: "To John 
Hemminges, etc., upon a warrant dated 20 April, 16 18, for 
presenting two severall playes before his Majesty, on Easter 
Monday, Twelfte Night, the play soe called, and on Easter 
Tuesday, the Winters Tale." 

Four years later in Herbert's Diary, 1622-1623, is the 
following entry: "At Candlemas, Malvolio 1 was acted at 
Court by the King's Servants." 

After the Restoration, Pepys saw Twelfth Night on three 
different occasions, representing three distinct revivals of the 
play. The following are his Diary entries on the subject, 
containing characteristic condemnation: 

September 11, 1661. — Walking through Lincoln's Inn Fields 
observed at the Opera a new Play, Twelfth Night, was acted there, 

1 In the copy of the Second Folio which belonged to Charles I, 
the title Twelfe Night is struck out and that of Malvolio substituted. 



INTRODUCTION lix 

and the King there ; so I, against my own mind and resolution, 
could not forbear to go in, which did make the play seem a burthen 
to me, and I took no pleasure at all in it. 

January 6, 1662-3. — After dinner at the Duke's House, and there 
saw Twelfth Night acted well, though it be but a silly play, and not 
related at all to the name or day. 1 

January 20, 1668-9. — To tne Duke of York's house and saw 
Twelfth Night, as it is now revived ; but I think, one of the weakest 
plays that ever I saw on the stage. 

From the cast of characters given by Downes in his notice 
of the 1663 revival of the play, Twelfth Night seems to have 
suffered less from Restoration editing than other Shakespeare 
plays, but one of the later Restoration dramatists, Charles 
Burnaby, tried to bring the story up to date and imbue it 
with the new spirit of the time in Love Betray' d or the Agree- 
able Disappointment, As Burnaby, according to his own con- 
fession in the preface to his play, published in 1703, took only 
about fifty lines bodily from Shakespeare, his comedy should 
be looked upon as an original work rather than as an adap- 
tation after the fashion of the D'Avenant-Dryden version 
of The Tempest or the 1661 arrangement of A Midsummer 
Night's Dream, It was left for a nineteenth century editor 
to try to change Twelfth Night into a comic opera. 2 

The Eighteenth Century 

During the eighteenth century there were more than 
twenty notable revivals of Twelfth Night, the play becoming 

1 With reference to this revival, in which Thomas Betterton, the 
great Shakespeare actor of the Restoration, took the part of Sir 
Toby, Downes in his Roscius Anglicanus, says that " it was got up 
on purpose to be acted on Twelfth Night." 

2 Reynolds's operatic version was produced in 1820 and ran for 
seventeen nights. 



lx THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE 

more and more popular as the century advanced. Among 
these revivals mention may be made of that at Drury Lane 
in 1 741, with Macklin as Malvolio, Woodward as Sir Andrew, 
and Mrs. Pritchard as Viola. At the Haymarket Theatre in 
,782 Bensley played Malvolio for the first time, and three 
years later at Drury Lane he took the part again, Dodd on 
this occasion playing Sir Andrew, ' Dickey ' Suett the Clown, 
Palmer Sir Toby, and Mrs. Jordan Viola. These five imper- 
sonations at this performance have been made immortal 
by Charles Lamb in his essay On Some of the Old Actors. 
Mrs. Jordan's Viola has also been described by Sir Joshua 
Reynolds and Leigh Hunt. 

In 1789 John Kemble played Malvolio, and in 1797 took 
place the last notable performance of the play in the eight- 
eenth century, Suett now Sir Andrew, Mrs. Jordan still Viola, 
and ' Jack ' Bannister playing Malvolio for the first time. 

The Nineteenth Century 

The first famous performance of Twelfth Night in the 
nineteenth century was under Kemble's management at 
Covent Garden in 1 8 1 1 . The cast was, — Liston as Malvolio, 
Blanchard as Sir Andrew, Emery as Sir Toby, Fawcett as 
Feste, Mrs. S. Booth as Viola, and Mrs. Kemble as Olivia. 
From that time to the noteworthy revival at the Lyceum 
Theatre in 1884, when Henry Irving took the part of Malvolio 
and Miss Ellen Terry that of Viola, the play has held the stage 
as a successful acting play. It may never have had long 
runs, but the four leading male roles have been favorites 
with almost all the greater actors of the modern Eng- 
lish-speaking world, and Viola has been impersonated by 
every actress of distinction. In the attempt to get rid of 



INTRODUCTION lxi 

the difficulty caused by the resemblance between Viola and 
Sebastian, more than once a sister and a brother of striking 
family likeness have taken the parts, 1 and in 1865, when the 
play was produced at the Olympic Theatre, Miss Kate Terry, 
a famous Viola, boldly took the parts of both Sebastian 
and Viola. 

1 For example, Mrs. Jordan and Bland in 1790, and Mrs. Siddons 
and Murray in 181 5. 



/ 



/ 



AUTHORITIES 

(With the more important abbreviations used in the notes) 

Fi = First Folio, 1623. 
F 2 = Second Folio, 1632. 
F3 = Third Folio, 1663, 1664. 
F 4 = Fourth Folio, 1685. 
Ff = all the seventeenth century Folios. 
Rowe = Rowe's editions, 1709, 17 14. 
Pope = Pope's editions, 1723, 1728. 
Theobald = Theobald's editions, 1733, 1740. 
Hanmer = Hanmer's edition, 1744. 
Johnson = Johnson's edition, 1765. 
Capell = Capell's edition, 1768. 
Malone = Malone's edition, 1790. 
Steevens = Steevens's edition, 1793. 

Globe = Globe edition (Clark and Wright), 1864. 
Dyce = Dyce's (third) edition, 1875. 
Clar = Clarendon Press edition (W. A.Wright), 1877. 
Delius = Delius's (fifth) edition, 1882. 
Camb = Cambridge (third) edition (W.A.Wright), 1891. 
Furness = H. H. Furness's New Variorum edition, 1902. 
Innes = Arthur D. Innes's Warwick edition, 1895. 
Verity = A. W. Verity's Pitt Press edition, 1895. 
Gollancz = Israel Gollancz's The Temple Shakespeare. 
Morton Luce = Morton Luce's Arden edition, Methuen. 
Herford = C. H. Herford's The Eversley Shakespeare. 
Abbott = E. A. Abbott's A Shakespearian Grammar. 
Fleay = F. G. Fleay's Shakespeare Manual. 
Boas = F. S. Boas's Shakespeare and his Predecessors, 1896. 
Cotgrave = Cotgrave's Dictiona7'ie of the French and English 

Tongues, 161 1. 
Schmidt = Schmidt's Shakespeare Lexicon. 
Skeat = Skeat's An Etymological Dictionary. 
Murray = A New English Dictionary {The Oxford Dictionary), 
Century = The Century Dictionary. 

lxiii 



•a * 

2£ c 

T3 ti O 

°^ o 



1) V 

8.1 

g;b 

^_ o 

°« 

3 .8 "5 



SI** 

2 -a <u c 

fr w, gSJi 





,V. 


M 


w . 





h 


« £ 


>4 


U 


w 0) 


o 


■•-» 


IS s 


B 




° 6 


v c 


-s* 


cR 




.Si 03 
T3 . 


^ c 


oS2 

4> 


*C/2 


c u o 









2 

a 



to 

.of 








T3 

« >> 



O 



<u — • 



« n 
j3 in 



H c 



'^52 




1 


»° d 








3 
o 


£* 




d 


<§.s 




2.8 


C rt 


T3 




^ 3 


CJ 




cCJ 


T) 


"3 ° 


ondo 
The 
achs 




r-.Z 


C^ 


a c 



5 

«2 

OS 

o 



I 

Pi 

o 
•d 

o 
E 

► 

S 3 



CO 

o 

5 

co 
■M 
co 

Vi 4> 

3 B 






W 



00 



° « « 

% «*3.a 



d 
o.2 

C J 






•l-< 

I 



WO 

°* o 

O ■- 
•"" "— 

i-. — 



H' 



CO w 

0° a 

M .6 

o 
<u > 

c^fcQ 



3 C 



SI 
•ss 

«C to 
co w co 

'■3 »JS 



§ 3 3 « 

cj *d 

O b0 fcJO "" 



u 5° c rt 



•M © w *i «« 1 « 

"" « ^ ttd-3 P 0O 



^ S.'Sj^sS- 









u <u 



" 2 .•S^^d 



s^ a u o 

B 

o 



5-s .*-d ^a 

a2 a'a«C :t tt2-5a4 



C o 

<< ? 

B O 



to 



pq 



B 




rt 




s 


£ 


O 





T3 


^J 


V 

B 


Xi 


rt 


rB 



v 


O 


,0 


14 


V- 


1) 


V 


J3 


43 


•«-» 




O 


rt 


Im 


fe 


pq 






VO 

m 



•3 £ B^ 



00 



S3 



10 



lxiv 



v3 

w s 

4) O 



>3 fc 

o a<_, 

■1 s § 

5 HS 



CO to 

Jo 

O.J2 



a 

3 C 



- a> 
"I 



a 



.3 

C D 
3 C 



:/: 



£ pi 

*■* ■»-> 'O 

— . * c 



3H 



CO 



3*2 

u o 

« u 



<V S 



bo >> 

C 10 

£?« 

> -B 

3 <u 

£ o3 



> 

o 



«M JL 05 « ta 

•^^£3 4) CI 

c *> . -.a 






°S«^5 



O 



1(0 

— ■ 

CO 

to 

w 

-a 

4; O 

c *i 

'3 ■ 



35 



^ S3 

• s 

H 





• fi 


CO 


p«*> 




«j a 


* a 


a 


»<** 


•-> 

CO 


as 


CO 


*4 


14 


* «c3 


g 


►ma* 


7««h 


rt 


^P-i o 


O 


J 



a 



O 



-* buB 0< 









<jo 



^co|«i 






* - ° r. 






% 9 



CO 



CO 



KM 

M « 



to"^ 

O CO 

► O 

3^ 






s 

U3 



•§^ 



uJ3 



to 



c 
c 





1 


B 



U3 




V 

3 

i 


1 

3 









Xi 




w 


g 













c 




V 


3 

3 




55 










3 

g 




3 
3 


K3 
(0 

3 




3 3 


3 








H3 

w 






CO 




>- O 

2-° 










u 




01 






-CX 


J3 
J2 3 








V 

A 






•a 




*-> 













rt !t 


3 




'S 3 


O O 








PQ 




2* 


P 




— 









00 

CO 



CO 
CO 

iO 



00 



00 
m 



00 
10 



CO 
CO 

10 



CO 

m 



a 



lxv 



o 
w 

o 
u 



< 

u 

►J 

u 

o 
o 
ij 
o 

55 
O 
P4 

W 
u 



< 

K 



S 

Q 
Z 

< 
> 
% 


H 

to 

X 


Greene died. Montaigne 
died. London theatres 
closed through plague 


K 
o s 

ij 


Palestrina (" Princeps 
Musicae ") died 

Tasso died. Sir Waltei 
Raleigh's expeditior 
to Guiana. Sir J. Haw 
kins died 

Burbage built Black 
friar's Theatre. Des 
cartes born. Sir F 
Drake died 


B 
.2 

.a 

<u 
u 

u 

fi 


kl 

>-. 

H 
<u 

H 





W 

0) ^ 

Ph 


Spenser died. Glob< 
Theatre built. Olive 
Cromwell born 

Calderon born. Brun« 
died 














1 1 1) 


CD « CD 




w 

D 

< w 

at 
2 J 




. c* 


M 

•2* 

-** 

c* cd 

£ fl 
•d o 

w 

C/l~[/i 

— • u 

<upq 


3 
i 

is 


co-^J 

► w 

© cuo 


■si 

>,co O 


10 -i-i e«J C -rt 

03 ^5 


N .(4 


O 
O 

F— 1 

CD 

w 

CO 

a 
W 




^^ 


2^ 




































ctf H 


rd « 


















og 


<jS 


















CD+, 


CO w 


















fl-S 


21 
















> 

c 
It 
* 


aw 


» — ' 






CO 




1 

M 








g 

■j 

frl 7 

3 : 

en 
W 
U 

< 

X 

(A 

t 


~co 

3 








" « 




b 

a 

W 






IS 




•1 

as 

2« 8 

"AS 


^ CO fl £ 

-•sis 




H-t 1 CD 

co*j P 


§? 


4-> 

CD 

M 

•r-l 

O 
CO 


•♦-» 

JB 
cxO 

+-» 

l-H 

CD 


. -2a 

2 SS 


CO 1 

•f-» f* 

© * 

«.2 

*£] 


c 
.2 

'•3 

<u 

ft) 

> 

S3 

1 Is 


bi 

5 o 

c ** 

8 w» 

V 
>— ■ B mi 

"» S « 

•-3 <u a 

W h W 

> 


S 1 ^ 

O 

•0 Si 
S^ 

W ^B 

c >>£ 

CO 


u 

fS 

Ph 

^ 

■Sfi 

3C/3 
P-t 


B PI 

Sbg 

"Is 

^ B» 

(4 Orj 

t/3 


1 1) 10 1 

1 c fc 

Ml* 

1 w S CL 

rtH W)c^ 

P-t 


"3 

(0 

i 

• i 


< 

H 


M 


en 
o\ 
m 

H 


m 


m 

M 


M 


c* 
»n 

M 


1 

H 


8 

m 

M 


1 

M 



lxvi 



The Essex plot. Rivalry 
between London adult 
and boy actors 


h 

CO 
hi 

.a 
3 
a 
.2 -a 

o o 


t3 
U 

•-3 c 
o 

n « 

rtOi 

d* 

e 

CJr-; 

a 


9 

a 
o 
U 
C 

3 
O 

U 

o 

S « 

3 8 


CO o 
X> 

o £ 
ao 

O 


V 

a 

u 

o 

tj 

*d" 

<u 

5 J 


(A 

a> 

B 

d 

a 
£ 

CO 


O 

CJ 

a 
p 
1-8 


(A 

£ 

s 

re 4j 

CO 


u 

hi 

u 

re 
> 
re 

(U 

> rt 
^ 'S 

>-i re 
G co 


to 

3 
X! 
CU 

O 3J 

<t 

wCO 

go 
cO M 

S.S 

?^ 
a 


'd 
D 

§ 

3 
XI 



u 
■«j 
re 
u 

H 

D 

XI 

O 

3 


Cervantes died. Beau- 
mont died. Baffin ex- 
plores Baffin's Bay. 
Harvey lectured on the 
circulation of the blood 


1-4 

CD 
4-> 
CO 
CTJ 
■♦-» 
CD 
O 
£ 

"is 

o 

a 
o 


1 

o 

M 

+-» 
«J 
CO 

l/i 
4) M 

s| 


to 

3 
PI 
id 

•i— » 

a) 
CO 

m 
"c 
o 

(0 

a 

o 
►-1 


to 

3 
+■» 
to 

3 

v-c in 

co « 


■»-* 

a 
>«• 

CD 
-M 
O 

M 

'3 
o 

o 


3 

<o 
to 

a 

o 

rt > 

aO 

6 Q 


S to 


o © 
.£2^2 

u 


■ 

w 

H 

o 

3 
O 

c 

-d £ 
H 


ei 

C« 
CD 

M 
U 

J- 1 fl 

^« 

o d 
re v 

CO 


. CD 

< CO 

~— ' CO 

w» 

CO C 

2«S 


ei 
o 

;§ 
O 

o 

o 
>> 


to q ja jn "^ 

.^CX4 M W^ 

om oh w 

^fl - c< 
5 ^ ."2 <u CO 


u 

n 

CO 

o 

CO 

3 
3 


CO 

4-> 

CD 

a 




o 

F-H 

a) 
.d 
■<-» 
O 


X3 

CO 

o 

erj 


1 

H 

ctj 

exc- 
el 

Q 


CO 

a 

o 
el 
o 

g 

s 


-d 
el 

el «j 

5 5 


CO 

e» 
el 

$ 
o 
'y 
o 
o 
































> 
M 

a 

CD 

W 








1 
to 

I 

,2 c* 

•S3 


M 
O 
«M 

o 

h« 4) 

5* 3 
to <o 

*8 

°§ 
ST 








NO 

CO 

CD 
»-< 

t> 
Pi 




CD 


Ctj to 

>- CD 
el CD 






I 

8 

s 

.8-d 

-a a 

>- r$ 


1 

CO 

oii 
£5 

*T3 CJ 

re <u 

s- )- 


1 

CU 

•d 

re D 

**§ 
t© 

II 
.9 6 


• 

1 

CO 

cO 
to 

Ih 

<o 
ho 
o 

OJ u 
3.2 
CO 


s 

o 


s 

a> 

> 

'Sb 

H 

2~ 

W) = 

a ° 

5 U 


1 

>-. 

S 

el 

a 
5 


T3 cd J2 
re -^^ 

bJO-M (U 

° re O 

P5 


CO 

M 
CD 
> 
O 

^^ 

. PI 

53 

CD CX 

S s 

CI O 
CO 


"cO 

CU 
hi 

o 
£ 

T3 
<U 
CO 

2s 

u re 
>-. -u 
-t ^ 


hi 

1) 

■♦-» 

u 

o 

>4H 

•d 

pQ >> 

•r co 
»J 

WJ-fl 
^) M 

3^ 
CO 


o ^ «J 

T3 ^^3 

o "-d 

^o^ 
e *3j 

*J co^ 
w 3*3 
<U o 
> O u 

1— 1 


h. w to 

<U CO N 

. 4) «J £ 

w C k! j? 

"^ ■»-' c >-> 

cu^.3 co 
•d'2 3^ 


M 


C*) 

& 


co 

s 


l 


VO 

1 


1 


1 


CO 

1 


1 


o 

VO 


M 
H 


CO 
H 
VO 


vo 

M 
VO 



ixvii 



DISTRIBUTION OF CHARACTERS 

In this analysis are shown the acts and scenes in which the char- 
acters (see Dramatis Personae, page 2) appear, with the number of 
speeches and lines given to each. 

Note. Parts of lines are counted as whole lines. 







NO. of 


NO. OF 






NO. OF 


NO. OF 






SPEECHES 


LINES 






SPEECHES 


LINES 


Duke 


I, i 


4 


31 


Sir Andrew 


I, iii 


23 


44 


(Orsino) 


II, iv 


20 


69 




II, iii 


25 


47 




V, i 


28 


_90 




II, V 


12 


12 






52 


190 




III, i 
III, ii 


4 

7 


6 
10 


Sebastian 


II, i 


5 


3i 




III, iv 

IV, i 


9 


15 




III, iii 


8 


20 




2 


6 




IV, i 


8 


17 




V, i 


6 


21 




IV, iii 


2 


23 






~88 


1 S7 




V,i 


8 
3i 


_3_2 

123 










Antonio 


II, i 


6 


12 


Malvolio 


I, v 


10 


32 




III, iii 


7 


28 




II, ii 


3 


12 




III, iv 


9 


33 




II, iii 


5 


17 




V, i 


4 


28 




II, v 


23 


97 






26 


101 




III, iv 

IV, ii 


21 
22 


48 
42 


Captain 


I, ii 


10 


32 




V, i 


3 

87 


18 
266 


Valentine 


I, i 
I, iv 


1 
2 


9 
_4 














3 


13 


Fabian 


II, V 


18 


27 


Curio 


I,i 


2 


2 




III, ii 


8 


22 




II, iv 


2 


4 




III, iv 


19 


3i 






4 


6 




V,i 


_5 


26 












5o 


106 


Sir Toby 


I, iii 
I,v 

II, iii 


27 

4 

29 


53 

7 
55 


* 










II, V 


28 


35 


Clown 


I,v 


22 


56 




III, i 


4 


5 


(Feste) 


II, iii 


14 


30 




III, ii 


11 


30 




II, iv 


5 


26 




III, iv 


35 


113 




III, i 


13 


35 




IV, i 


5 


9 




IV, i 


5 


17 




IV, ii 


6 






IV, ii 


26 


69 




V,i 


3 


6 




V, i 


_£9 


_^5 






152 


324 






104 


298 



lxviii 



DISTRIBUTION OF CHARACTERS 



lxix 







NO. OF 


NO. OF 






NO. OF 


no. or 






SPEECHES 


LINES 






SPXKCHSS 


LINKS 


Olivia 


I, v 


49 


II 4 


Maria 


I, iii 


16 


29 




III, i 


13 


54 




I, v 


ia 


22 




III, iv 


20 


44 




II, iii 


11 


34 




IV, i 


4 


16 




II, v 


3 


15 




IV, iii 


2 


12 




III, ii 


1 


J 3 




V,i 


2q 


66 




III, iv 


12 


23 






117 


306 




IV, ii 


a 
5* 


«4« 


Viola 


I,ii 
I,iv 


11 

7 


34 
13 


Priest 


V,i 


1 


8 




I,v 


21 


67 


1 Officer 


III, iv 


4 


7 




II, ii 


3 


28 




V,i 


1 


_6 




II, iv 


12 


32 






5 


13 




III, i 


32 


65 








III, iv 
V,i 


18 
16 


49 
_44 


2 Officer 


III, iv 


3 


4 






120 


332 


Servant 


III, iv 


1 


3 






TWELFTH NIGHT 
OR, WHAT YOU WILL 



DRAMATIS PERSONS i 

Orsino, 2 Duke of Illyria 

Sebastian, brother to Viola 

Antonio, a sea captain, friend to Sebastian 

A Sea Captain, friend to Viola 

Valentine 1 . „ , ' _ , 

y gentlemen attending on the Duke 

Sir Toby Belch, 3 uncle 4 to Olivia 
Sir Andrew Aguecheek 5 
Malvolio, steward to Olivia 6 
Fabian 
Feste, 7 a clown 



I servants to Olivia 



Olivia, a rich countess 

Viola 8 

Maria, Olivia's woman 9 

Lords, Priests, Sailors, Officers, Musicians, and other Attendants 

Scene : A city in Illyria, and the sea-coast near it 

1 First given by Rowe, " with all the cant of the modern stage," as Johnson 
said of the character descriptions which Rowe added to the names. 

2 See note, I, ii, 25, 27. 

8 Some of these names are as significantly typical of the characters as 
those in Ben Jonson's comedies. 

4 See notes, I, iii, 1, 4. 

6 "A foolish Knight, pretending to Olivia." — Rowe. 

6 "A fantastical Steward." — Rowe. 

7 Dissyllabic. Many editors omit the name, which occurs only in II, iv, 1 1. 
" From the Italian festeggiatite, which Florio explains : ' Feasting, merrie, 
banqueting, pleasant, of good entertainment.'" — Cowden Clarke. 

* Accented on the first syllable. " The name Viola is given to her because 
of her exquisite grace, and because ot her concealment, under cover whereof 
she could cherish, like a secret treasure, the longings of her loving heart." — 
Gen6e (quoted by Furness). 

9 " Confident to Olivia." — Rowe. 



ACT I 

Scene I. An apartment in the Duke's palace 

Enter Duke, Curio, and other Lords ; Musicians attending 

Tjjjk-tt.. J fHrmsir. be the food of love, play on ; 

rive me excess of it, that, surfeiting, '^ 

The appetite may sicken, and so die. 
That strain again ! it had a dying fall ; 

», it came o'er my ear like the sweet sound 5 

That breathes upon a bank of violets , 
Stealing and giving odour ! Enough ; no more : 
'T is not so sweet now as it was before. 
O spirit of love, how quick and fresh art thou, 

An apartment . . .palace | Ff omit. ria, Curio and other Lords Ff. 
— Enter Duke . . . Musicians at- 5. sound Ff Globe Camb Delius I 

tending | Enter Orsino, Duke of Illy- south Pope Dyce. 

ACT I. Scene I. Twelfe Night Or zvhat you will, as the play is 
called in the First Folio, is one of the seventeen plays divided there 
into acts and scenes, which are given with Latin nomenclature. 

1. The key-note of the play. Cf. Antony and Cleopatra, II, v, 1-2. 

3. 'Appetite ' refers to ' music,' not to ' love.' 

4. fall: cadence. Cf. Richard II, II, i, 12-13: "music at the 
close, Like the last taste of sweets, is sweetest last ; Henry V, I, ii, 
182-183 : " a full and natural close Like music." 

5. sound: murmuring breeze. Cf. Milton, Comus, 555-557; Bacon, 
Of Gardens : " The breath of flowers is far sweeter in the air (where 
it comes and goes like the warbling of music)." In previous editions 
of Hudson's Shakespeare, Pope's reading ' south,' i.e. ' south wind,' 
was adopted. See Furness for an interesting discussion of this. 

3 



4 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act i 

That, notwithstanding thy capacity 10 

Receiveth as the sea^ nought enters there, 

Of what validity and pitch soe'er, 

But falls into abatement and low price, 

Even in a minute ! so full of shapes is fancy 

That it alone is high fantastical. 15 

Curio. Will you go hunt, my lord ? 

Duke. What, Curio ? 

Curio. The hart. 

Duke. Why, so I do, the noblest that I have. 
O, when mine eyes did see Olivia first, o\ 
Methought she purg'd the air of pestilence $ v * 20 

That instant was I turn'd into a hart ; 
And my desires, like fell and cruel hounds, 
E'er since pursue me. 

Enter Valentine 

How now ! what news from her ? 
Valentine, So please my lord, I might not be admitted, 
But from her handmaid do return this answer: 25 

The element itself, till seven years' heat, 

14. ivS Ff I in Theobald Johnson. yeares heate F1F2 I years heat F4 
26. years' heat Globe Camb | Delius | years hence Rovve. 

12. validity: value, worth. — pitch: height (of excellence). The 
figure is from falconry. Cf. / Henry VI, II, iv, 11, etc. 

14. fancy: love. Cf. The Merchant of Venice, III, ii, 63; Love's 
Labour' \r Lost, V, ii, 772-773 ; A Midsummer Night's Dream, , V ', i, j-&. 

15. fantastical : imaginative. ' High ' is an intensive. 

17. This pun occurs also in Julius Ccesar, III, i, 207-208. 
21-22. Actseon, having seen Diana bathing, was changed by her 
into a stag and torn to pieces by his own hounds. 

26. element : sky. — till seven years' heat : for seven summers. 



>• 



scene ii TWELFTH NIGHT 5 

Shall not behold her face at ample view ; 

But, like a cloistress, she will veiled walk 

And water once a day her chamber round 

With eye-offending brine ; all this to season 30 

A brother's dead love, which she would keep fresh 

And lasting in her sad remembrance. 

Duke. O, she that hath a heart of that fine frame 
To pay this debt of love but to a brother, 
How will she love, when the rich golden shaft 35 

Hath kill'd the flock of all affections else 
That live in her ; when liver, brain, and heart, 
These sovereign thrones, are all supplied, and fill'd — 
Her sweet perfections — with one self king ! 
Away before me to sweet beds of flowers ; 40 

Love-thoughts lie rich when canopied with bowers. [Exeunt^ 

Scene II. The sea-coast 
Enter Viola, a Captain, and Sailors 



../Viola. What country, friends, is this ? 
^Captain. This is Illyria, lady. 

39. self I selfe Fi I selfe same F2. The sea-coast Capell | Ff omit. 

30. season: preserve. Ci. All's Well that Ends Well, I, i, 55. 

35. Cupid's golden arrow inspired love ; his leaden one abated it. 

37. In the mediaeval physiology the liver, the brain, and the heart 
were the seats of the passions (especially love and courage), the 
reason, and the sentiments, respectively. 

38-39. and fill'd . . . self king : and her sweet perfections are filled 
with (dominated by) one and the same king (love). Some editors 
omit the comma after ' supplied,' and bracket ' Her sweet perfec- 
tions ' as being appositional to ' thrones.' — self. See Abbott, § 20. 



6 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act' i 

Viola. And what should I do in Illyria ? 
' My brother he is in Elysium. 
Perchance he is not drown'd. What think you, sailors ? 5 

Captain. It is perchance that you yourself were sav'd. 

Viola. O my poor brother ! and so perchance may he be. ; 

Captain. True, madam : and, to comfort you with chance, 
Assure yourself, after our ship did split, 
When you, and those poor number sav'd with you, 10 

Hung on our driving boat, I saw your brother, 
Most provident in peril, bind himself, 
Courage and hope both teaching him the practice, 
To a strong mast that liv'd upon the sea ; 
Where, like Arion on the dolphin's back, 15 

I saw him hold acquaintance with the waves 
So long as I could see. 

10. those Ff I that Rowe | this Ca- 11. our Ff I your Rowe. 

pell. — sav'd | saved Ff. 15. Arion Pope | Orion Ff. 

5-6. Viola uses ' perchance ' in the sense of 'perhaps '; the Cap- 
tain, punningly, in that of ' by chance.' 

10. those. ' Number ' is treated as a plural. Cf. I, v, 83. 

11. driving : drifting. Cf. Pericles, III, Chorus, 50 : " So up and 
down the poor ship drives." 

15. Arion was a poet-musician of Lesbos. The legend alluded to 
here is described by Wordsworth, On the Power of Sound, ix : 

Thy skill, Arion ! 
Could humanize the creatures of the sea, 
Where men were monsters. A last grace he craves, 
Leave for one chant; — the dulcet sound 
Steals from the deck o'er willing waves, 
And listening dolphins gather round. 
Self-cast, as with a desperate course, 
Mid that strange audience, he bestrides 
A proud One docile as a managed horse ; 
And singing, while the accordant hand 
Sweeps his harp, the Master rides. 



scene ii TWELFTH NIGHT 7 

Viola. For saying so, there 's gold : 
Mine own escape unfoldeth to my hope, 
Whereto thy speech serves for authority, 20 

The like of him. TCnow'st thou this country ? 

Captain. Ay, madam, well ; for I was bred and born 
Not three hours' travel from this very place. 

Viola. Who governs here ? 

Captain. A noble duke, in nature as in name. 25 

Viola. What is his name ? 

Captain. Orsino. 

Viola. Orsino ! I have heard my father name him ; 
He was a bachelor then. 

Captain. And so is now, or was so very late ; 30 

For but a month ago I went from hence, 
And then 't was fresh in murmur — as, you know, \ 
What great ones do the less will prattle of — 
That he did seek the love of fair Olivia. 

Viola. What's she? 35 

Captain. A virtuous maid, the daughter of a count 
That died some twelvemonth since, then leaving her 
In the protection of his son, her brother, 

25, 27. A reference undoubtedly to the wealthy and noble Orsini 
family of Italy. A Duke Orsino visited England as ambassador in 
1 600-1 601, and while this may have been after the composition of 
this play, it is noteworthy that Elizabeth gave a feast in his honor on 
Twelfth Night. Throughout the play, except in this scene, Scene IV, 
and in stage directions, Orsino is always called * Count,' but 'Duke' 
is prefixed to all his speeches. Grant White suggested that in a 
revisal of the play Shakespeare may have concluded to change 
Orsino's title, and then, for some cause, left the change incomplete. 

32. fresh in murmur : beginning to be talked about. 

33. the less. Cf. " Both more and less," Macbeth,^, iv, 12. 



8 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act i 

Who shortly also died ; for whose dear love, 

They say, she hath abjur'd the company 40 

And sight of men. 

Viola. O that I serv'd that lady, 

And might not be delivered to the world, 
Till I had made mine own occasion mellow, 
What my estate is ! 

Captain. That were hard to compass ; 

Because she will admit no kind of suit, 45 

No, not the duke's. 

Viola. There is a fair behaviour in thee, captain ; 
And though that nature with a beauteous wall 
Doth oft close in pollution, yet of thee 

I will believe thou hast a mind that suits 50 

With this thy fair and outward character. / 

I prithee, and I '11 pay thee bounteously, /\ 

Conceal me what I am, and be my aid 
For such disguise as haply shall become 
The form of my intent. I '11 serve this duke : 55 

Thou shalt present me as an eunuch to him ; 

39. love Ff I loss Dyce. company And sight Hanmer | sight 

40-41. hath Fi I had F2F3F4. — And company Ff. 

42-44. Viola is herself a nobleman's daughter, and she here 
wishes that her birth and quality — her ' estate ' — may be kept 
secret from the world till she has a ripe (' mellow ') occasion for 
making known who she is. Certain later passages in the play seem 
to infer that she has already fallen in love with Duke Orsino from 
the descriptions she has had of him. — deliver'd : made known. In 
the Folios there is no comma after l mellow,' and editors adopting 
this punctuation, interpret ' mellow ' as ' ripen.' 

56. This plan of Viola's was not pursued, as it would have been 
inconsistent with the plot of the play. She was presented as a page. 



scene in TWELFTH NIGHT 9 

It may be worth thy pains ; for I can sing, 

And speak to him in many sorts of music 

That will allow me very worth his service. 

What else may hap, to time I will commit ; 60 

Only shape thou thy silence to my wit. 

Captain. Be you his eunuch, and your mute I '11 be ; 
When my tongue blabs, then let mine eyes not see. 

Viola. I thank thee ; lead me on. [JSxeunt] 

Scene III. Olivia's house 

Enter Sir Toby Belch and Maria 

Sir Toby. What a plague means my niece, to take the death 
of her brother thus ? I am s ure care 's an enemy to life. 

Maria. By my troth, Sir Toby, you must come in earlier 
o' nights ; your cousin, my lady, takes great exceptions to 
your ill hours?" — "** 5 

Olivia's house Rowe | Ff omit. Enter Sir Toby . . . Ff. 
— Enter Sir Toby Belch . . . I 4. o' nights Capell | a nights Ff. 

59. allow: cause to be acknowledged. From 'the sense 'approve.' 

62. mute. Cf. Henry V, I, ii, 232 : " Like Turkish mute, shall have 
a tongueless mouth." 

1. a plague. In such expressions (cf. " a [Globe reads ' o"] God's 
name," Richard II, II, i, 251; / Henry IV, I, ii, 51; IV, ii, 56) 'a' 
represents 'in,' 'on,' or ' of.' See Abbott, § 24. — niece. On this word 
rests Rowe's generally accepted statement (see Dramatis Personas) 
that Sir Toby was Olivia's uncle. Nowhere does Olivia speak of 
him as such, and in IV, i, she not only calls him plain ' Toby,' but 
uses towards him terms, as Furness puts it, " barely consonant with 
the respect due from a niece to her uncle." 

4. cousin. This term was formerly used for any " collateral rela- 
tive more distant than a brother or sister." — Murray. 



IO THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act i 

Sir Toby. Why, let her except before excepted. 

Maria. Ay, but you must confine yourself within the 
modest limits of order. 

Sir Toby. Confine ! I '11 confine myself no finer than I 
am. These clothes are good enough to drink in, and so be 
these boots too ; and they be not, let them hang themselves 
in their own straps. 

Maria. That quaffing and drinking will undo you. I 
heard my lady talk of it yesterday, and of a foolish knight 
that you brought in one night here to be her wooer. 15 

Sir Toby. Who ] Sir Andrew Aguecheek ? 

Maria. Ay, he. 

Sir Toby. He 's as t all a man as any 's in Illy ria. 

Maria. What 's that to th' purpose ? 

Sir Toby. Why, he has three thousand ducats a year . 20 

Maria. Ay, but he '11 have but a year in all these ducats ; 

Sir Toby. Fie, that you '11 say so ! he plays o' th' viol-de- 
gamboys, and speaks three or four languages word for word 
without book, and hath all the good gifts of nature. 25 

11. and Ff | an Theobald. 

6. Sir Toby hiccoughs out a technical legal phrase often found 
in old leases, exceptis excipiendis, 'those things being excepted which 
were before excepted,' i.e. 'with the exceptions before named.' 

11. and : if. Usually printed ' an ' in modern editions. 

18. tall : valiant. Cf. 1 Henry IV, I, iii, 62. Often used with a touch 
of sarcasm, as in The Merry Wives of Windsor, II, ii, 11 ; Romeo and 
Juliet, II, iv, 31. 

23-24. ' Viol-de-gamboys ' is a Tobyism for viol a da gamba, an in- 
strument similar to the violoncello, or bass-viol. "Viola di Gamba, 
or Violl de Gamba, because men hold it betweene or vpon their 
legges." — Florio, Italian Dictionarie. 



SCENE III 



TWELFTH NIGHT n 



Maria. He hath, indeed, almost natural ; for besides that 
he 's a fool, he 's a great quarreller ; and but that he hath 
the gift of a coward to allay the gust he hath in quarrelling, 
't is thought among the prudent he would quickly have the 
gift of a grave. . 30 

Sir Toby.^ By this hand, they are scoundrels and substract- 
ors that say so of him. Who are they ? 

Maria. They that add, moreover, he 's drunk nightly in 
your company. 34 

Sir Toby. With drinking healths to my niece. I '11 drink 
to her as long as there is a passage in my throat and drink 
in Illyria : he'sa coward and a coystrill that will not drink to 
my niece till his brains turn o' th' toe like a parish-top. What, 
wench ! Castiliano vulgo ! for here comes Sir Andrew Ague- 
face. 40 

26. almost Ff I all, most Collier. burton conj.) | volgo Johnson. 

37. coystrill | kestrel Hanmer. 39-40. Agueface Fil Ague face F2 I 

39. vulgo Ff Ivolto Hanmer (War- Ague-cheek Theobald. 

26. almost natural : almost like an idiot. * Natural ' in this sense 
occurs in As You Like It, I, ii, 52, 55 ; The Tempest, III, ii, 37 ; Romeo 
and Juliet, II, iv, 96. The word is still used in this sense in Scotland. 
— Collier's reading (Upton's conjecture), ' all, most,' was adopted in 
previous editions of Hudson's Shakespeare. 

28. gust: taste, relish. Cf. Sonnets, cxiv, 11. 

31-32. substractors. Warburton changed this Tobyism for ' de- 
tractors ' to * subtractors.' Notice the ' add ' in Maria's reply. 

37. coystrill : knave. Holinshed uses the word in the senses of 
(1) 'groom' and (2) 'camp follower.' 

38. parish-top. A large top was formerly kept in each village for 
the peasantry to amuse themselves with in frosty weather. " He 
sleeps like a town-top " is an old proverb. 

39. Castiliano vulgo. Probably a Tobyism without any definite 
meaning. Warburton conjectured 'volto,' and interpreted, 'put on a 
Castilian face,' i.e. 'look grave." This is in keeping with 'Agueface.' 



12 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act I 

Enter Sir Andrew Aguecheek 

Sir Andrew. Sir Toby_Belch ; how now, Sir Toby Belch ! 

Sir Toby. Sweet Sir Andrew ! 

Sir Andrew. Bless you, fair shrew. 

Maria. And you too, sir. 

Sir Toby. Accost, Sir Andrew, accost. 45 

Sir Andrew. What 's that ? 

Sir Toby. My niece's chambermaid. 

Sir Andrew. Good Mistress Accost, I desire better ac- 
quaintance. 

Maria. My name is Mary, sir. 50 

Sir Andrew. Good Mistress Mary Accost, — 

Sir Toby. You mistake, knight ; ' accost ' is front her, 
board her, woo her, assail her. 

Sir Andrew. By my troth, I would not undertake her in 
company. Is that th e meaning of ' acc ost ' ? 55 

Maria. Fare you well, gentlemen. 

Sir Toby. And thou let part so, Sir Andrew, would thou 
mightst never draw sword again. 

Sir Andrew. And you part so, mistress, I would I m ight 
never draw sword again. Fair lady, do you think you have 
fools in hand ? 61 



41. Scene IV Pope. — Enter ... 56. Fare F2F3F4 I Far Fi. 

I Enter Sir Andrew Ff. 57. And Ff I An Capell I If Pope. 

48. Sir Andrew I Ma.(Maria) Fi. — let part F1F2 I let her part F3F4. 
53. board Rowe I boord Ff. ' 59. And Ff| An Theobald | If Pope. 

45. Sir Toby speaks more learnedly than intelligibly here, using 
1 accost ' in its original sense. The word is from the French accoster 
(Lat. ad, costa), 'to come side by side,' 'to approach.' 'Accost' is 
seldom used thus, which accounts for Sir Andrew's mistake. 

53. board: address. Cf. Love's Labour's Lost, II, i, 218. 

57. part : depart. ' Depart ' was also used for ' part.' 



^this 



scene in TWELFTH NIGHT 1 3 

Maria. Sir, I have not you by th' hand. 

Sir Andrew. Marry, but you shall have ; and here 's my 
hand. 

Maria. Now, sir, ' thought is free/ I pray you, bring 
your hand to th' buttery-bar and let it drink. 66 

Sir Andrew. Wherefore, sweet-heart ? what 's your met- 
aphor ? 

Maria. It 's dry, sir. 

Sir Andrew. Why, I think so ; I am not such an ass but 
I can keep my hand dry. But what 's your jest ? 71 

Maria. A dry jest, sir. 

Sir Andrew. Are you full of them ? 

Maria. Ay, sir, I have them at my fingers' ends ; marry, 
now I let go your hand, I am barren. \_Exit\ 

Sir Toby. O knight, thou lack'st a cup of canary ; when 
did I see thee so put down ? 

Sir Andrew. Never in your life, I think ; unless you see 
canary put me down. Methi nks sometimes I have no more 
wit t han a Christ ian or an ordinary man has ; but I am a great 
eater of beef , and Tbel ieve tha t does harm to my wit. 81 

Sir TobyTNo question. 

65. Maria quotes the proverb in reply to Sir Andrew's question, 
lines 60-61. Cf. Lyly, Enphues : ". . . quoth she . . . none can iudge 
of wit but they that haue it. Why, then, quoth he, doest thou thinke 
me a foole ? Thought is free, my Lord, quoth she, I wil not take 
you at your word." 

66. buttery-bar : " a board or ledge on the top of the buttery- 
hatch, on which to rest tankards." — Murray. The old sense of 
' buttery ' (late Lat. botaria) was ' storeroom for liquor.' 

69. A moist hand was regarded as a lover's hand. 

76. canary: "a marvellous searching wine." — 2 Henry IV, II, iv, 30. 

81. Cf. " mongrel, beef-witted lord," Troilus and Cressida, II, i, 14. 



14 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act i 

Sir Andrew. And I thought that, I 'd forswear it. I '11 
ride home to-morrow, Sir Toby. 

Sir Toby. Pouro^ioi, my dear knight ? 85 

Sir Andrew. What is ' pourquoi ' ? do or not do ? I would 
I had bestow 'd that time in the tongues that I have in fencing, 
dancing, and bear-baiting ! O, had I but followed the arts ! 

Sir Toby. Then hadst thou had an excellent head of hair. 

Sir Andrew. Why, would that have mended my hair ? 90 

Sir Toby. Past question ; for thou see'st it will not curl 
by nature. 

Sir Andrew. But it becomes me well enough, does 't not ? 

Sir Toby. Excellent ; it hangs like flax on a distaff. 94 

Sir Andrew. Faith, I '11 home to-morrow, Sir Toby. Your 
niece will not be seen ; or, if she be, it 's four to one she '11 
none of me : the count himself here hard by wooes her. 

Sir Toby. She '11 none o' th' count. She '11 not match 
above her degree, neither in estate, years, nor wit ; I have 
heard her swear 't. Tut, there 's life in % man. 100 

Sir Andrew. I '11 stay a month longer. I am a fellow 
o' th' strangest mind i' th' world ; J. delight in masque s and 
r pk sometimes altogether. 

Sir Toby. Art thou good at these kickshawses, knight ? 

83. And Ff I An Theobald. 93. me I we Fi. — does 't Rowe I 

85. Pourquoi | Pur-quoy Ff. dost Ff. 

91-92. curl by Theobald | coole 104. kickshawses F3 I kicke- 

my Ff. chawses F1F2 I kick-shaws F4. 

89. Sir Toby is quibbling between 'tongues' and 'tongs,' the 
latter meaning, of course, the well-known instrument for curling 
the hair. The two words were often written, and probably sounded, 
alike, or nearly so. 

100. there 's life in *t : no need to despair yet. 

104. kickshawses : trifles, knickknacks. ' Kickshaws ' is properly 
the singular, being a corruption of Fr. quelque chose. See Murray. 



scene in TWELFTH NIGHT 1 5 

Sir Andrew. As any man in Illyria, whatsoever he be, 
under the degree of my betters ; and yet I will not compare 
with an old man. 

Sir Toby. What is thy excellence in a galliard, knight ? 

Sir Andrew. Faith, I can cut a caper. 

Sir Toby. And 1 can cut the mutton to 't. no 

Sir Andrew. And I think I have the back-trick simply 
as strong as any man in Illyria. 

Sir Toby. Wherefore are these things hid ? wherefore 
have these gifts a curtain before 'em ? are they like to take 
dust, like Mistress Mall's picture ? why dost thou not go to 
church in a galliard, and come home in a coranto ? My very 
walk should be a jig. What dost thou mean ? is it a world to 
hide virtues in ? I did think, by the excellent constitution of 
thy leg, it was form'd under the star of a galliard. 119 

,116. coranto Rowe 1 Carranto Ff. 

107. an old man. Probably Sir Andrew's stupid expression for 
4 one who has had experience.' In previous editions of Hudson's 
Shakespeare, Theobald's suggestion, ' a nobleman,' was adopted as 
the reading. 

108. The ' galliard ' and the ' coranto,' line 116, were lively, rapid 
dances. Cf. Henry V, III, v, 33. 

in. back-trick : " a caper backwards in dancing." — Schmidt. 

114. Hanging curtains before pictures was common. Cf. I, v, 219. 

115. Mistress Mall. " ' Mistress Mall ' is a mere impersonation, 
like 'my lady's son' in Muck Ado." — Singer. Dates make it im- 
possible that there is an allusion here to Mary Frith, known as 
Moll Cutpurse. 

119. star of a galliard. There are many astrological allusions in 
this play. The star that is in the ascendant at a man's birth was 
supposed to determine what he has a genius for. Cf. Much Ado 
About Nothing, II, i, 349 : " there was a star danc'd, and under that 
was I born." 






l6 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act i 

Sir Andrew. Ay, 'tis strong, and it does indifferent well 
in a flame-colour'd stock. Shall we set about some revels ? 

Sir Toby. What shall we do else ? were we not born 
under Taurus ? 

Sir Andrew. Taurus ! That 's sides and heart. 124 

Sir Toby. No, sir ; it is legs and thighs. Let me see thee 
caper. Ha ! higher ! ha, ha ! excellent ! \Exeunt\ 

Scene IV. The Duke's palace 

Enter Valentine, and Viola in man's attire 

Valentine. If the duke continue these favours towards 
you, Cesario, you are like to be much advanc'd. He hath 
known you but three days, and already you are no stranger. 

Viola. You either fear his humour or my negligence, that 
you call in question the continuance of his love. Is he incon- 
stant, sir, in his favours ? 6 

i2i. flame-colour'd Rowe Globe sit Ff. 
Camb I dam'd colour'd Ff | damask- 124. That 's F3F4 I That F1F2. 

coloured Knight Delius. — stock I Scene IV I Scene V Pope. — The 

stocke Fi I stocken F3. — set Rowe | ... palace | Ff omit. 

121. flame-colour'd. Perhaps Sir Andrew meant to apply to his 
stockings the epithet in the Folios. The justification for ' flame- 
colour'd ' is in 1 Henry IV, I, ii, II. 

124-125. Taurus . . . thighs. An allusion to the medical astrology 
of the almanacs. Both the knights are wrong, the zodiacal sign 
Taurus having reference to the neck and throat. The point seems 
to be that Sir Toby is poking fun at Sir Andrew's conceit of agility. 

4. humour : capriciousness. Cf. ' humorous,' As You Like It, I, 
ii, 278. This meaning comes from the theory of the old physiolo- 
gists that four cardinal humors — blood, choler or yellow bile, 
phlegm, and melancholy or black bile — determine, by their con- 
ditions and proportions, a person's physical and mental qualities. 



scene iv TWELFTH NIGHT 17 

Valentine. No, believe me. 

Viola. I thank you. Here comes the count. 

Enter Duke, Curio, and Attendants 

Duke. Who saw Cesario, ho ? 

Viola. On your attendance, my lord ; here. 10 

Duke. Stand you awhile aloof. Cesario, 
Thou know'st no less but all ; I have unclasp'd 
To thee the book even of my secret soul. 
Therefore, good youth, address thy gait unto her ; 
Be not denied access, stand at her doors, 1 5 

And tell them, there thy fixed foot shall grow 
Till thou have audience. 

Viola. Sure, my noble lord, 

If she be so abandon'd to her sorrow 
As it is spoke, she never will admit me. ^^ 

Duke. Be clamorous and leap all civil bounds 20 

Rather than make unprofited return. 

Viola. Say I do speak with her, my lord, what then ? 

Duke. O, then unfold the passion of my love, 
Surprise her with discourse of my dear faith ! 
It shall become thee well to act my woes ; 25 

She will attend it better in thy youth 
Than in a nuncio's of more grave aspect. 

Viola. I think not so, my lord. 

Duke. Dear lad, believe it ; I i 

12. but: than. "'But' in the sense of 'except' frequently follows 

negative comparatives, where we should use ' than.' " — Abbot, § 127. 

27. nuncio's : messenger's. The Folios spell ' Nuntio's.' 

28-35. An example of ' dramatic irony,' as most scenes involving 

sex disguise are, the audience knowing the facts, while the speaker 

is unconscious of the real significance of what he says. 



F 



1 8 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act i 

For they shall yet belie thy happy years, 

That say thou art a man : Diana's lip 30 

Is not more smooth and rubious ; thy small pipe 

Is as the maiden's organ, shrill and sound, 

And all is semblative a woman's part. 

I know thy constellation is right apt 

For this affair. Some four or five attend him ; 35 

All, if you will ; for I myself am best 

When least in company. Prosper well in this, 

And thou shalt live as freely as thy lord, 

T o call rns tortunes thine. 

Viola! " I '11 do my best 

To woo your lady, — [Aside] yet, a barful strife ! ^ 40 

Whoe'er I woo, myself would be his wife. [Exeunt] 



Scene V. Olivia's house 

Enter Maria and Clown 

Maria. Nay, either tell me where thou hast been, or I 
will not open my lips so wide as a bristle may enter in way 
of thy excuse. My lady will hang thee for thy absence. \j 

Scene V | Scene VI Pope. — Olivia's house Rowe I Ff omit. 

31. rubious : red, rosy, ruby-colored. Probably a Shakespearian 
coinage. ' Rubied ' occurs in Pericles, V, Prologue, 8. — pipe : voice. 

32. sound: not yet cracked. For 'and sound' Grant White, Dyce, 
and others read ' in sound.' 

33. semblative:' resembling. This is probably another Shake- 
spearian coinage, what Murray calls a ' nonce word.' 

34. Another astrological allusion. See note, I, iii, 119. 
40. barful : full of hindrances and impediments. 



scene v TWELFTH NIGHT 19 

Clown. Let her hang me. JJ f tV^t jsj^U4»emg ? d in this 
wo rld nee ds to fonrfio colours, <*,cl{&4- 5 

Maria. Make that good. 

Clown. He shall see none to fear. 

Maria. A good lenten answer. I can tell thee w ]]f r^ *^f 
■^yinpr w^g horn of ' I fear no colours.' 

Clown. Where, good Mistress Mary ? 10 

Maria. In the wars ; and that may you be bold to say in 
your foolery. "" 

Clown. Well, God give them wisdom that have it ; an d 
those that are fools, let them use their t alents. 14 

Maria. Yet you will be hang'd for being so long absent ; 
or, to be turn'd away, is not that as good as a hanging to 

yOU? C M 

Clown, \\ftlan y a good hanging prevents a bad marriage ; ) I 
and, fo r turning away, let summer bear it out. ' 

Maria. You are resolute, then ? 20 

Clown. Not so, neither ; but I am resolv'd on two points. 

Maria. That, if one break, the other will hold ; or, if both 
break, your gaskins fall. 

Clown. Apt, in good faith ; very apt. Well, go thy way ; 
if Sir Toby would leave drinking, thou wert as witty a piece 
of Eve's flesh as any in Illyria. 26 

5. Feste is punning on ' colours ' (' the flag of an enemy ') and 
' collars ' (' hempen noose of the hangman '). 

8. lenten: short and poor. Cf. Hamlet, II, ii, 329: "what lenten 
entertainment the players shall receive from you." 

19. bear it out : make it endurable. " In summer when I can find em- 
ployment in every field and lodging under every hedge." — Steevens. 

22-23. Maria quibbles on ' points.' ' Points ' were the laces with 
metal tips that held the clothes together. ' Gaskins ' were either 
4 hose ' or * breeches.' 



20 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act i 

Maria. Peace, you rogue, no more o' that. Here comes 
my lady ; make your excuse wisely, you were best. \Exti\ 
Clow t n. Wit, and 't be thy will, put me into good fooling ! 
j Those wits that think they have thee do very oft prove fools ; 
J and I, that am sure I lack thee, may pass for a wise man : / 
| for what says Quinapalus ? ' Better a witty fool than a fool^C 
ish wit.' *■"" —————— 



isr 



*— ~ Enter Lady Olivia with Malvolio 

God bless thee, lady ! 

Olivia. Take the fool away. 35 

Clown. Do you not hear, fellows ? Take away the lady. 

Olivia. Go to, you 're a dry fool ; I '11 no more of you : 
besides, you grow dishonest. 

Clown. Two faults, madonna, that drink and good coun- 
sel will amend ; for, give the dry fool drink, then is the fool 
not dry: bid the dishonesty man mend himself; if he mend, 
he is no longer dishonest ; if he cannot, let the botcher mend 
him. A ny thing that ? s m ended Js hut patc h'd ; virtue th at 
tf^ojjjpcjcjocj jc| fr^f pn+ninM tttiW, nin . on^ si n that a m ends j s 

but patch'd with virtue. If that this simple syllogism wjll 
serve, so ; li it will not, what remedy ? As there is no true 
cuckold but calamity, so beauty 's a flower. The lady bad e 
take away the fool ; therefore, I say again, take her away. 



Olivia. Sir, I bade them take away you. 49 

28. [Exit] Pope ! Ff omit. 34. Enter Lady Olivia with Mal- 

29. Scene VII Pope.— and 't Ff | volio Ff (after line 28). 
an 't Hanmer. 37. you 're | y' are Ff. 

28. you were best : it were best for you. See Abbott, § 230. 

32. ' Quinapalus ' is an imaginary author. To invent or to coin 
Rabelaisian names and authorities for the nonce, seems to be a part 
of Feste's humor. Cf. II, iii, 21-23. 



' 



scene v TWELFTH NIGHT 21 

Clown. Misprision in the highest degree ! Lady, cucullus 
non facit monachum ; that 's as much to say as I wear not 
motley in my brain. Good madonna, give me leave to prov e 
y ou a fool . 

Olivia. Can you do it ? 

Clown. Dexteriously, good madonna. 55 

Olivia. Make your proof. 

Clown. I must catechize you for it, madonna ; good my 
mouse of virtue, answer me. 

Olivia. Well, sir, for want of other idleness, I '11 bide 
your proof. 60 

Clown. Good madonna, why mourn'st thou ? 

Olivia. Good fool, for my brother's death. 

Clown. I think his soul is in hell, madonna. 

Olivia. Lknow his soul is in heaven, fool . 64 

Clown. The more fool, madonna, to mourn for you r 
bro ther's soul being in heaven. _ Take away the fool, g en- 
tlemen. 

Olivia. What think you of this fool, Malvolio ? doth he 
not mend ? 69 

Malvolio. Yes, and shall do till the pangs of death 
shake him. Infirmity, that decays the wise, doth ever make 
the better fool. 

Clown. God send you, sir, a speedy infirmity, for the 
better increasing your folly ! Sir Toby will be sworn that I 
am no fox ; but he will not pass his word for twopence that 
you are no fool. 76 

50-51. Misprision : misapprehension. — cucullus . . . monachum : 

the cowl does not make the monk. Cf. Measicre for Measure,Y, i, 263. 
55. Dexteriously. This form and ' dexterious ' are occasionally 
found in seventeenth century literature. 



'< 



22 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act i 

Olivia. How say you to that, Malvolio? 

Malvolio. I marvel your ladyship takes delight in such 
a barren rascal ; I saw him put down the other day with an 
ordinary fool that has no more brain than a stone. Look you 
now, he 's out of his guard already ; u nless you laugh and 
minister_p ccasion to him, he is gagg'cL I protest, I take these 
wise men, that crow so at these set kind of fools, no better 
than the fools' zanies. ' 84 

* Olivia. O, you are sick of self-love , Malvolio, and taste 
with a distempered appetite. To be generous, guiltless, and 
of free disposition, is to take those things for bird-bolts that 

\you deem cannon-bullets. There is no slander in an allow'd 
fool, though he do nothing but rail ; nor no railing in a known 
discreet man, though he do nothing but reprove. 90 

Clown. Now Mercury endue thee with leasing, for thou 
speak'st well of fools ! 

Re-enter Maria 

Maria. Madam, there is at the gate a young gentleman 
much desires to speak with you. a _--- 

83. wise men F3F4 I Wisemen F1F2. 86. guiltless F3F4 I guitless F1F2. 

83. these set kind of. See note, I, ii, 10. 

84. The business of the ' zany ' (cf. modern slang ' a Johnny,' 
It. zanni, a form of Giovanni) is thus described by Ben Jonson, 
Every Man Out of His Humour, IV, i, 89-90: 

He 's like the zany to a tumbler, 

That tries tricks after him, to make men laugh. 

87. bird-bolts : short, thick, pointless arrows. 

88-89. allow'd fool : licensed fool. This was the jester by profes- 
sion, who dressed in motley, with whom folly was an art, and whose 
functions are set forth by Jaques in As You Like It, II, vii. 

91. leasing : lying. Mercury was the god of thieves and liars. 



scene v TWELFTH NIGHT 23 

Olivia. From the Count Orsino, is it ? 95 

Maria. I know not, madam ; 't is a fair young man, and 

well attended. 

Olivia. Who of my people hold him in delay ? 

Maria. Sir Toby, madam, your kinsman. 99 

Olivia. Fetch him off, I pray you ; he speaks nothing 

but madman : fie on him ! [Exit Maria] Go you, Malvolio : 

if it be a suit from the count, I am sick, or not at home ; 

what you will, to dismiss it. [Exit Malvolio] Now you see, 

sir, how your fooling grows old, and people dislike it. 104 
Clown. Thou hast spoke for us, madonna, as if thy 

eldest son should be a fool ; whose skull Jove cram with 

brains ! for — here he comes — 

Enter Sir Toby 

one of thy kin has a most weak pia mater. 

Olivia. By mine honour, half drunk. What is he at the 
gate, cousin? no 

Sir Toby. A gentleman. 

Olivia. A gentleman ! what gentleman ? 

Sir Toby. 'T is a gentleman here — a plague o' these 
pickle-herring ! How now, sot ! 

Clown. Good Sir Toby! 115 

101. [Exit Maria] Capell I Ff omit. 108. Scene VIII Pope. 

100-101. speaks nothing but madman. Cf. Henry V, V, ii, 1 56 : "I 

speak to thee plain soldier." 

108. The 'pia mater' is here used humorously for the 'brain.' 

113. here. " This word appears to be a corruption of some inter- 
jectory particle that directed a drunken hiccuping" — Capell. 

114. pickle-herring. Gabriel Harvey says of Greene, the dramatist, 
that he died of a "surfett of pickle herringe and Rennishe wine." — 
sot : fool, dolt. The common Elizabethan meaning. 



24 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act I 

Olivia. Cousin, cousin, how have you come so early by 
this lethargy ? 

Sir Toby. Lechery ! I defy lechery. There 's one at the 
gate. 

Olivia. Ay, marry, what is he? 120 

Sir Toby. Let him be the devil, and he will, I care not ; 
give me faith, say I. Well, it 's all one. \_Exit\ 

Olivia. What ?s a dr unken manlj] 

Clown. Like a drown J d man, a fool, and a madman : one 

1 draught above heat makes him a fool ; the second mads him ; 

and a third drowns him. 126 

Olivia. Go thou and seek the crowner, and let him sit 
o' my coz ; for he 's in the third degree of drink, he 's 
drown'd: go, look after him. 129 

Clown. He is but mad yet, madonna ; and the fool shall 
look to the madman. \Exit\ 

Re-enter Malvolio 

Malvolio. Madam, yond young fellow swears he will 
speak with you. I told him you were sick ; he takes on him 
to understand so much, and therefore comes to speak with 
you. I told him you were asleep ; he seems to have a fore- 
knowledge of that too, and therefore comes to speak with 
you. What is to be said to him, lady ? he 's fortified against 
any denial. 

Olivia. Tell him he shall not speak with me. 139 

• 

121. and Ff | an Hanmer. 131. [Exit] Ff omit. 

125. heat : the point at which wine warms the blood. Cf. The 
Tempest, IV, i, 171 : "red-hot with drinking." 

127. crowner : coroner. Still heard in dialect. Cf. Hamlet, V, i, 4. 






scene v TWELFTH NIGHT 25 

Malvolio. Has been told so ; and he says, he '11 stand 
at your door like k sheriff's post, and be the supporter to a 
bench, but h£ '11 speak with you. 

Olivia. What kind o' man is he ? 

Malvolio. Why, o f mankind. 

Olivia. What manner of man ? 145 

Malvolio. Of very ill manner ; he '11 speak with you, will 
you or no. 

Olivia. Of what personage and years is he ? 

Malvolio. Not yet old enough for a man, nor young 
enough for a boy ; as a squash is before 't is a peascod, or 
a codling when 't is almost an apple : 't is with him in stand- 
ing water, between boy and man. He is very well-favour'd, 
and he speaks very shrewishly ; one would think his mother's 
milk were scarce out of him. 

Olivia. Let him approach. Call in my gentlewoman. 155 

Malvolio. Gentlewoman, my lady calls. \Exit\ 

Re-enter Maria 

Olivia. Give me my veil ; come, throw it o'er my face. 
We '11 once more hear Orsino's embassy. 

157. Scene IX Pope. 

141. Sheriffs and mayors had carved and painted posts before 
their doors, more probably as tokens of authority than as convenient 
places for proclamations and announcements. 

150. squash: unripe peascod. Cf. A Midsummer Night's Dream, 
III, i, 191 ; The Winter's Tale, I, ii, 160. 

151. codling : unripe apple. Originally, and up to the close of the 
sixteenth century, applied to a small hard variety of apple. 

151-152. in standing water : at the turn of the tide. Cf. The 
Tempest, II, i, 221 : " I am standing water." 

153. shrewishly : sharply, like a shrew. See Skeat. 



20 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act i 

Enter Viola, and Attendants 

Viola. The honourable lady of the house, which is she ? 

Olivia. Speak to me ; I shall answer for her. Your will ? 

Viola. Most radiant, exquisite, and unmatchable beauty, 
— I pray you, tell me if this be the lady of the house, for I 
never saw her : I would be loth to cast away my speech ; for, 
besides that it is excellently well penn'd, I have taken great 
pains to con it. Good beauties, let me sustain no scorn ; I 
am very comptible even to the least sinister usage. 166 

Olivia. Whence came you, sir ? 

Viola. I can say little more than I have studied, and that 
question 's out of my part. Good gentle one, give me mod- 
est assurance if you be the lady of the house, that I may 
proceed in my speech. 171 

Olivia. Are you a comedian ? 

Viola. No, my profound heart ; and yet, by the very fangs 
of malice I swear, I am not that I play. Are you the lady of 
the house? 175 

Olivia. If I do not usurp myself, I am. 

Viola. Most certain, if you are she, you do usurp your- 
self ; for wha t is yours to bestow is not yours to reserve. 
But this is from my commission. I will on with my speech 
in your praise, and then show you the heart of my message. 

Olivia. Come to what is important in 't ; I forgive you 
the praise. 

Viola. Alas, I took great pains to study it, and 'tis 
poetical. 184 

159. Enter . . . | Enter Uiolenta Fi. 

^"165. con : learn by heart. Cf. Julius Ccesar, IV, iii, 98. 
166. comptible: sensitive. — sinister usage : discourteous treatment. n S 
169-170. modest assurance : some slight evidence. x * I 

^ 



scene v TWELFTH NIGHT 27 

Olivia. It is the more like to be feign'd ; I pray you, 
keep it in. I heard you were saucy at my gates, and allow'd 
your approach rather to wonder at you than to hear you. If 
you be not mad, be gone ; if you have reason, be brief : 't is 
not that time of moon with me to make one in so skipping 
a dialogue. 190 

--Maria. Will you hoist sail, sir ? here lies your way. 

• -^Vtola. No, good swabber ; I am to hull here a little 
longer. Some mollification for your giant, sweet lady. Tell 
me your mind ; I am a messenger. 194 
^—Oetvia. Sure, you have some hideous matter to deliver, 
when the courtesy of it is so fearful. Speak your office. 

* Vio la. It alone concerns your ear. I bring no overture 
of war, no taxation of homage : I hold the olive in my hand ; 
my words are as full of peace as matter. 199 

-OmviA. Yet you began rudely. What are you ? what 
would you ? 

Vi - ol a. The rudeness that hath appeared in me have I 
learn'd from my entertainment. What I am, and what I 

189. Lunatics were supposed to grow worse at full moon. 

192. swabber : deck scrubber. — hull : float without hoisting sail. 

193-194. Ladies in romance are guarded by giants. Viola, seeing 
the waiting maid so eager to oppose her message, entreats Olivia 
to pacify her giant, alluding, ironically, to the small stature of Maria. 
Cf. Sir Toby's words, III, ii, 60. — Tell me your mind. Many editors, 
following Warburton, give these words to Olivia, but the Folios give 
them to Viola, as in the text. Hunter's interpretation of the passage 
is : "Viola evidently appeals to Olivia whether she will suffer Maria 
to turn her out of the house so unceremoniously, and claims the 
privilege of an ambassador to be courteously treated, and allowed 
to deliver his message." 

197. It alone concerns your ear : it concerns your ear alone. 

198. taxation of homage : formal demand for homage. 



28 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act i 

would, are as secret as maidenhead ; to your ears, divinity ; 
to any other's, profanation. 205 

Olivia. Give us the place aldne ; we will hear this divinity. 
[Exeunt Maria and Attendants] Now, sir, what is your text ? 

Viola. Most sweet lady, — 

Olivia. A comfortable doctrine, and much may be said 
of it. Where lies your text ? 210 

Viola. In Orsino's bosom. 

Olivia. In his bosom ! In what chapter of his bosom ? 

Viola. To answer by the method, in the first of his heart. 

Olivia. O, I have read it; it is heresy. Have you no 
more to say? 215 

Viola. Good madam, let me see your face. 

Olivia. Have you any commission from your lord to nego- 
tiate with my face ? You are now out of your text ; but w r e 
will draw the curtain, and show you the picture. Look you, 
sir, such a one I was this present ; is ? t not well done ? 220 

[ Unveiling\ 

Viola. Excellently done, if God did all. 

Olivia. ? T is in grain, sir ; 't will endure wind and weather. 

Viola. 'T is beauty truly blent whose red and white 
Nature's own sweet and cunning hand laid on. 
La dy, you are the cruell'st she a live, 225 

207. [Exeunt . . . Capell. 220. [ Unveiling] Rowe. 

204. maidenhead: maidenhood. Theobald changed to 'maidhood.' 

209. comfortable : comforting. Cf. Richard If, II, ii, j6. 

219-220. Look you . . . this present. See Furness or Camb for the 
various attempts to emend this passage. It is to be borne in mind 
that the idea of a picture is continued, the meaning being, Behold 
the picture of me, such as I am at the present moment. 

222. 'T is in grain : it is dyed in a fast color. 



scene v TWELFTH NIGHT 29 

If you will lead these grace s to the g ^rave. 
A nd leave the world n o copy. 

Olivia. 0,sir, I will not be so hard-hearted; I will give 
out divers schedules of my beauty. It shall be inventoried, 
and every particle and utensil labelPd to my will : as, item, 
two lips, indifferent red ; item, two gray eyes, with lids to 
them ; item, one neck, one chin, and so forth. Were you 
sent hither to praise me ? 

Viola. I see you what you are, you are too proud ; 
But, if you were the devil, you are fair. 235 

My lord and master loves you ; O, such love 
Could be but recompensed, though you were crown'd 
The nonpareil of beauty ! 

Olivia. How does he love me ? 

Viola. With adorations, fertile tears, 
With groans that thunder love, with sighs of fire. 240 

Olivia. Your lord does know my mind ; I cannot love him : 
Yet I suppose him virtuous, know him noble, 
Of great estate, of fresh and stainless youth ; 
In voices well divulg'd, free, learn'd, and valiant ; 
£ And, in dimension and the shape of nature, 245 

A gracious person : but yet I cannot love him ; 
He might have took his answer long ago. . 

Viola. If I did love you in my master's flame, 7s 
W T ith such a suffering, such a deadly life, 
In your denial I would find no sense ; 250 

I would not understand it. 

Olivia. Why, what would you ? 

233. praise : appraise, value. Cf. Troilus and Cresszda, III, ii, 97. 
239. fertile : copious. Pope inserted ' with ' before ' fertile.' 
244. voices well divulg'd: well spoken of. — free: generous. 



30 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act I 

Viola. Make me a willow cabin at your gate, 
And call upon my soul within the house ; 
Write loyal cantons of contemned love, 

And sing them loud even in the dead of night ; 255 

Halloo your name to the reverberate hills, 
And make the babbling gossip of the air 
Cry out, ' Olivia ! ' O, you should not rest 
Between the elements of air and earth, 
But you should pity me ! 260 

Olivia. You might do much. What is your parentage ? 

Viola. Above my fortunes, yet my state is well ; 
I am a gentleman. 

Olivia. Get you to your lord ; 

I cannot love him : let him send no more ; 
Unless, perchance, you come to me again, 265 

To tell me how he takes it. Fare you well ; 
I thank you for your pains. Spend this for me. 

Viola. I am no fee'd post, lady ; keep your purse : 
My master, not myself, lacks recompense. 
Love make his heart of flint that you shall love ; 270 

And let your fervour, like my master's, be 
Plac'd in contempt ! Farewell, fair cruelty. \Exit] 

Olivia. ' What is your parentage ? ' 
* Above my fortunes, yet my state is well ; 
I am a gentleman.' I '11 be sworn thou art ; 275 

Thy tongue, thy face, thy limbs, actions, and spirit, 

256. Halloo I Hallow Fi | Hollaw F2 I Hollow F3F4. 

252. The willow was the symbol of rejected love. 

254. cantons : songs. A form between ' canto' and ' canzone.' 

256. reverberate : reverberant, echoing. Passive for active. 



scene v TWELFTH NIGHT 3 1 

Do give thee fivefold blazon. Not too fast ! Soft, soft ! 

Unless the master were the man. How now ! 

Even so quickly may one catch the plague ? 

Methinks I feel this youth's perfections 280 

With an invisible and subtle stealth 

To creep in at mine eyes. Well, let it be. 

What ho, Malvolio ! 

Re-enter Malvolio 

Malvolio. Here, madam, at your service. 

Olivia. Run after that same peevish messenger, 
The county's man : he left this ring behind him, 285 

Would I or not ; tell him I '11 none of it. 
Desire him not to flatter with his lord, 
Nor hold him up with hopes ; I am not for him. 
If that the youth will come this way to-morrow, 
I '11 give him reasons for 't. Hie thee, Malvolio. 290 

Malvolio. Madam, I will. [Exit'] 

Olivia. I do I know not what ; and fear to find 
Mine eye too great a flatterer for my mind. 
Fate, show thy force : ourselves we do not owe ; 294 

What is decreed must be, and be this so ! [Exit] 

285. county's Capell | Countes 295. [Exit] Rowe | Finis, Actus 

Fi I Counts F2F3F4. Primus Fi. 

277. blazon : description of armorial bearings. 
277-278. Not too . . . the man : I must curb my passion ! If only 
the master, who loves me, were his messenger, whom I love. 

284. peevish. Olivia is concealing her own feelings towards Cesario. 

285. county's: count. Cf. Romeo and Juliet, III, v, 219. 
292-293. She fears that her eyes have formed so flattering an idea 

of Cesario that she will not be able to resist the impression. 
294. owe : own. We are not our own masters. 



ACT II 

Scene I. The sea-coast 

Enter Antonio and Sebastian 

Antonio. Will you stay no longer ? nor will you not that 
I go with you ? 

Sebastian. By your patience, no. My stars shine darkly 
over me : the malignancy of my fate might perhaps distem- 
per yours ; therefore I shall crave of you your leave that I 
may bear my evils alone : it were a bad recompense for your 
love, to lay any of them on you. 

Antonio. Let me yet know of you whither you are bound. 

Sebastian. No, sooth, sir ; my determinate voyage is 
mere extravagancy. But I perceive in you so excellent a 
touch of modesty that you will not extort from me what I 
am willing to keep in ; therefore it charges me in manners 
the rather to express myself. You must know of me then, 

The sea-coast Capell | Ff omit. 

ACT II. Scene I. This scene is out of place, the action being 
later than that of the following scene. In acting versions it is usu- 
ally arranged as the second scene of the third act. 

9-10. my determinate . . . extravagancy : what seems my journey 
to a fixed destination is only an aimless wandering. With * extrav- 
agancy ' cf. Hamlet, I, i, 154. 

13. express myself : declare, unfold myself. Sebastian holds him- 
self the more bound to give the information, inasmuch as Antonio's 
delicacy keeps him from asking, or from being inquisitive. 

3 2 



scene I TWELFTH NIGHT 33 

Antonio, my name is Sebastian, which I called Roderigo. 
My father was that Sebastian of Messaline whom I know 
you have heard of. He left behind him myself and a sister, 
both born in an hour. If the heavens had been pleas'd, would 
we had so ended ! but you, sir, alter'd that ; for some hour 
before you took me from the breach of the sea was my sister 
drown 'd. 20 

Antonio. Alas the day ! 

Sebastian. A lady, sir, though it was said she much 
resembl'd me, was yet of many accounted beautiful; but, 
though I could not, with such estimable wonder, over-far 
believe that, yet thus far I will boldly publish her : she bore 
a mind that envy could not but call fair. She is drown'd 
already, sir, with salt water, though I seem to drown her 
remembrance again with more. 

Antonio. Pardon me, sir, your bad entertainment. 

Sebastian. O good Antonio, forgive me your trouble ! 30 

Antonio. If you will not murder me for my love, let me 
be your servant. 

Sebastian. If you will not undo what you have done, that 
is, kill him whom you have recovered, desire it not. Fare ye 
well at once ; my bosom is full of kindness, and I am yet so 
near the manners of my mother that upon the least occasion 

14. Roderigo Collier | Rodorigo Ff. 18. hour | houre F1F2 I houres F3. 

18. some hour. For ' some ' with nouns of time, see Abbott, § 21. 

24. such estimable wonder : admiration that estimates so highly. 

31. If you . . . my love. This has been interpreted as an allusion 
to an old superstition that the man you save from drowning will do 
you an injury (cf. Scott, The Pirate, Chapter VII, note), but it is 
clearly Antonio's impassioned expression of regard. 

36-37. Cf. Hamlet^ IV, vii, 190; Henry V, IV, vi, 31-32. 



34 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act ii 

more mine eyes will tell tales of me. I am bound to the 
Count Orsino's court ; farewell. [Exit] 

Antonio. The gentleness of all the gods go with thee ! 
I have many enemies in Orsino's court, 40 

Else would I very shortly see thee there. 
But, come what may, I do adore thee so 
That danger shall seem sport, and I will go. [Exit'] 

Scene II. A street 

Enter Viola, Malv olio following 

Malvolio. Were not you ev'n now with the Countess 
Olivia ? 

Viola. Even now, sir ; on a moderate pace I have since 
arriv'd but hither. 4 

Malvolio. She returns this ring to you, sir ; you might 
have sav'd me my pains, to have taken it away yourself. She 
adds, moreover, that you should put your lord into a desper- 
ate assurance she will none of him ; and one thing more, 
that you be never so hardy to come again in his affairs, 
unless it be to report your lord's taking of this. Receive 
it so. 11 

Viola. She took the ring of me ; I '11 none of it. 

A street Capell | Ff omit. — Enter seuerall doores Ff. 
. . . following I Enter V. and M. at 7. into F1F2 I in F3F4. 

6. to have taken : by taking. Infinitive used gerundively. 

io-ii. Receive it so : take it on those terms. 

12. Malone read ' no ring of me '; but "Viola dissembles because 
she instinctively guesses Olivia's secret (cf. lines 16-40), and wishes 
to conceal it from Malvolio. If she said 'no ring,' his suspicions 
might be roused." — Verity. 



scene ii TWELFTH NIGHT 35 

Malvolio. Come, sir, you peevishly threw it to her ; and 
her will is it should be so return'd. If it be worth stooping 
for, there it lies in your eye ; if not, be it his that finds it. 1 5 

[jExit] 
Viola. I left no ring with her ; what means this lady ? 
Fortune forbid my outside have not charm 'd her ! 
j She made good view of me ; indeed, so much 
* That, methought, her eyes had lost her tongue, 
, For she did speak in starts distractedly. 20 

y J She loves me, sure ; the cunning of her passion 
-y Invites me in this churlish messenger. 
y^ None of myJo rcTs ring ! why, he sent her none. / 
,^xlam the man^J^ it be so, as 't is, 
*^ Foor lady, she were better love a dream. , 25 

Ejjsg uise, I see thou art a w ickedness, 
>L Wherein the pregnant enemy does much. 
How easy is it for the prop er-false 

In women's waxen hearts to set their form s ! ^^^ 

Alas, _our frailty is the c ause, not we ! F^a * \} 030 

as we are made of, such we be. ^^ , 




19. That Fi Camb Delius I That 30. our F2F3F4 I O Fi. 

sure F2F3F4 Globe. 31. made of, Rann | made, if Ff. 

19. Her eyes were so charmed that she lost the right use of 
her tongue. With regard to the supposed metrical defect of this 
line, Furness says " a good actress could so speak the line that the 
ear could detect no fault in the metre. " 

27. pregnant: quick-witted, ready, clever. Cf. Ill, i, 86. — enemy. 
Often interpreted as Satan (cf. Ill, iv, 109), "the enemy of- man- 
kind," but it may mean any designing foe. 

28. proper-false : handsome deceivers. Mason inserted the hyphen. 
* Proper,' in the sense of ' well-formed,' ' handsome,' occurs often 
in Shakespeare. Cf. The Merchant of Venice, I, ii, 77, etc. 




36 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act ii 

How will this f adge ? my master loves her dearly ; 

And I, poor monster, fond as much on him, 

And she, mistaken, seems to dote on me. 

What will become of this ? As I am man, 35 

My state is desperate for my master's love ; 

As I am woman — now, alas the day ! — 

What thriftless sighs shall poor Olivia breathe I 

time, thou must untangle this, not I ; 39 

is too hard a knot for me to untie ! Exit'] 



Scene III. Olivia's house 

Enter Sir Toby and Sir Andrew 

Sir Toby. Approach, Sir Andrew : not to be a-bed after 
midnight is to be up betimes ; and ' diluculo surgere,' thou 
know'st, — 

Sir Andrew. Nay, by my troth, I know not ; but I know, 
to be up late is to be up late. 5 

Sir Toby. A false conclusion ; I hate it as an unfilPd can. 
To be up after midnight, and to go to bed then, is early ; so 

35. man F1F2 I a man F3F4. Olivia's house Rowe. 

40. to untie | t'vnty Fl. 2. diluculo | Deliculo Fi. 

32. fadge. Either (1) 'suit the circumstances,' or (2) 'turn out.' 
The first seems the older meaning of this word of uncertain etymol- 
ogy, which came into use late in the sixteenth century. 

33. monster. Viola, disguised as Cesario, is both woman and man. 
— fond. Murray interprets this as a verb meaning ' dote.' 

2. The adage, diluculo surgere saluberrimum est, l To get up at 
dawn is most healthy,' would be very familiar to many in an Eliza- 
bethan audience, as it is one of the drill expressions in Lilly's Latin 
Grammar, a famous text-book of the sixteenth century. 



scene in TWELFTH NIGHT 37 

that to go to bed after midnight is to go to bed betimes. 
Does not our Jife c onsi st of th e four elements ? 9 

Sir Andrew. Faith, so they say ; but I think it rather 
consis ts of eating and drinking. 

SirToiW. 'Ihou 'rt a scholar ; let us therefore eat and 
drink. Marian, I say ! a stoup of wine ! 

Enter Clown 

Sir Andrew. Here comes the fool, i' faith. 14 

Clown. How now, my hearts ! did you never see the 
picture of ' We Three ' ? 

Sir Toby. Welcome, ass. Now let 's have a catch. 

Sir Andrew. By my troth, the fool has an excellent 
breast. I had rather than forty shillings I had such a leg, 
and so sweet a breath to sing, as the fool has. In sooth, 
thou wast in very gracious fooling last night, when thou 
spokest of Pigrogromitus, of the Vapians passing the equi- 
noctial of Queubus ; 't was very good, i' faith. I sent thee 
sixpence for thy leman ; hadst it ? 24 

9. life I Hues Ff. 13. Marian Ff | Maria Pope. 

9. The ' four elements ' referred to are earth, water, air, and fire, a 
right proportion of which was supposed by mediaeval philosophers 
(see note, II, iv, 25) to be the principle of all excellence in nature. 
Cf. Henry V, III, vii, 22; Antony and Cleopatra, V, ii, 292-293. 

16. picture of * We Three/ A popular tavern sign representing 
two fools or asses, with the inscription * We three are fools ' (or 
1 asses '), the reader or spectator being, of course, the third. 

17. catch : part-song. " The < catch ' was for each succeeding 
singer to take up or catch his part in time." — Grove. 

19. breast: voice. " Sweet-breasted as the nightingale. " — Fletcher, 
Lovers Cure. Cf. Roister Doister, I, ii, 32 ; III, iii, 108. 
22-23. Pigrogromitus . . . Queubus. See note, I, v, 32. 
24. leman : sweetheart. The Folios print it as < Lemon/ 



38 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act ii 

Clown. I did impeticos thy gratillity ; for Malvolio's nose 
is no whipstock ; my lady has a white hand, and the Myrmi- 
dons are no bottle-ale houses. 

Sir Andrew. Excellent ! why, this is the best fooling, 
when all is done. Now, a song. 29 

Sir Toby. Come on ; there is sixpence for you : let 's 
have a song. 

Sir Andrew. There 's a testril of me too. If one knight 
give a — 

Clown. Would you have a love-song, or a song of good 
life? 35 

Sir Toby. A love-song, a love-song. 

Sir Andrew. Ay, ay ; I care not for good life. 

Clown. [Sings] 

O mistress mine, where are you roaming? 
O, stay and hear; your true-love 's coming, 

That can sing both high and low : 40 

25. While ' impeticos thy gratillity ' might be translated into 
* impetticoat (impocket) thy gratuity/ there is little doubt that Sir 
Andrew in his next speech gets the real truth of the matter. 

32. testril : sixpence. A variant form of ' tester ' (2 Henry IV, 
III, ii, 296). From Fr. test on (teste, tete). 

38. Many editors hold that this exquisite song is probably not 
by Shakespeare. This because, (1) it is found in Morley's Consort 
Lessons, printed in 1599, and (2) it was a common practice of 
Elizabethan playwrights to introduce old songs into new plays (see 
notes, lines 74-77, 97-107). Furness, in defence of the Shake- 
spearian authorship, says : 

Its phraseology, its histrionic quality (it is a drama in miniature), its sen- 
tentiousness (* Journeys end in lovers meeting,' ' Youth 's a stuff will not 
endure/ — the very word 'stuff' is Shakespearian), its interrogation 
< What is love ? ' (like ' Tell me where is fancy bred ? ') , its defining love by 
what it is not rather than by what it is, — all these proclaim its author to be 
either Shakespeare — aut Diabolus* 



scene in TWELFTH NIGHT 39 

Trip no further, pretty sweeting ; 
Journeys end in lovers meeting, 

Every wise man's son doth know. 

Sir Andrew. Excellent good, i' faith. 

Sir Toby. Good, good. 45 

Clown. [Sings] 

What is love ? 'T is not hereafter ; 
Present mirth hath present laughter ; 

What 's to come is still unsure. 
In delay there lies no plenty ; 
Then come kiss me, sweet and twenty, 50 

Youth 's a stuff will not endure. 

Sir Andrew. A mellifluous voice, as I am true knight. 

Sir Toby. A contagious breath. 

Sir Andrew. Very sweet and contagious, i' faith. 54 

Sir Toby. To hear by the nose, it is dulcet in contagion. 
But shall we make the welkin dance indeed ? shall we rouse 
the night-owl in a catch that will draw three souls out of one 
weaver ? shall we do that ? 

50. sweet and twenty. This is undoubtedly a term of endearment, 
but some editors interpret it as ' sweet kisses and twenty of them.' 
Theobald put a comma after * sweet,' making 'sweet' a vocative and 
1 twenty ' the number of the kisses. 

56. make . . . dance : " drink till the sky seems to turn round." — 
Johnson. Steevens compares Antony and Cleopatra, II, vii, 124. 

57-58. Cf. Much Ado About Nothing, II, iii, 61-62. Warburton 
read in the ' three souls ' a reference to the peripatetic philosophy, 
but Sir Toby simply means that the catch should be so harmonious 
that it would hale the soul out thrice over. But why * weaver ' ? In 
1 Henry IV, II, iv, 146, is a reference to psalm-singing weavers, not 
improbably the Puritan refugee weavers from the Netherlands, and 
to connect one of these with a tavern catch may be Sir Toby's jest 
This would be in keeping with his references to Malvolio. 



40 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act n 

Sir Andrew. And you love me, let 's do 't ; I am dog at 
a catch. 60 

Clown. By 'r lady, sir, and some dogs will catch well. 

Sir Andrew. Most certain. Let our catch be, 'Thou 
knave.' 

Clown. ' Hold thy peace, thou knave/ knight ? I shall 
be constraint in 't to call thee knave, knight. 65 

Sir Andrew. 'T is not the first time I have constrained 
one to call me knave. Begin, fool ; it begins, * Hold thy 
peace.' 

Clown. I shall never begin, if I hold my peace. 69 

Sir Andrew. Good, i' faith. Come, begin. [Catch sung\ 

Enter Maria 

Maria. What a caterwauling do you keep here ! If my 
lady have not call'd up her steward Malvolio, and bid him 
turn you out of doors, never trust me. 

Sir Toby. My lady 's a Cataian, we are politicians, Mai- 
volio 's a Peg-a-Ramsey, and ' Three merry men be we.' Am 

59. And Ff I An Pope. 71. Scene IV Pope. 

59. dog at : good at. The full expression is ' old dog at,' i.e. 
' experienced in,' ' adept at.' 

62-63. * Thou knave ' seems to have been a catch so arranged 
that each of the singers calls the other ' knave ' in turn. 

74-77. Cataian : sharper, rogue. Probably ' a native of Cataia 
(Cathay, China). ' Cf. the expression 'heathen Chinee.' — Peg-a- 
Ramsey. A name taken at random from an old song-snatch. — 
Tilly-vally; lady! We should interpret, perhaps, as 'pooh-pooh; 
lady indeed ! ' With Sir Toby, as wine goes in music comes out, 
and fresh songs keep bubbling up in his memory as he waxes mel- 
lower. A similar thing occurs in 2 Henry IV, where Master Silence 
grows merry and musical amidst his cups in " the sweet of the 
night." Of the songs referred to by Sir Toby, ' Three merry men 



scene in TWELFTH NIGHT 41 

not I consanguineous ? am I not of her blood ? Tilly-vally ; 
lady ! [Sings] ' There dwelt a man in Babylon, lady, lady ! ? 

Clown. Beshrew me, the knight 's in admirable fooling. 

Sir Andrew. Ay, he does well enough if he be dispos'd, 
and so do I too ; he does it with a better grace, but I do it 
more natural. 81 

Sir Toby. [Sings] ' O, the twelfth day of December/ — 

Maria. For the love o' God, peace ! 

Enter Malvolio 

Malvolio. My masters, are you mad ? or what are you ? 
Have you no wit, manners, nor honesty, but to gabble like 
tinkers at this time of night ? Do ye make an alehouse of 
my lady's house, that ye squeak out your coziers' catches 
without any mitigation or remorse of voice ? Is there no 
respect of place, persons, nor time, in you ? 89 

Sir Toby. We did keep time, sir, in our catches. Sneck up ! 

Malvolio. Sir Toby, I must be-round with you. My lady 
bade me tell you that, though she harbours you as her kins- 
man, she 's nothing allied to your disorders. If you can sep- 
arate yourself and your misdemeanours, you are welcome to 

77, 82. [Sings] Ff omit. 90. Sneck F3F4 I Snecke F1F2 I 

82. twelfth I twelfe F1F2. Strike Rowe | Snick Collier. 

be we' occurs in Peele's The Old Wives Tale, and 'There dwelt a man 
in Babylon ' is from The Godly and Constante Wyfe Susanna. 'O, the 
twelfth day of December' (line 82) has not been identified. 

87. coziers' : cobblers'. "A cosier or cobbler, remendon" — Minsheu. 

90. Sneck up : shut up and be hanged to you. ' Sneck,' meaning 
'latch,' is still a dialect word. 'Snick up' is used contemptuously 
with regard to the gallows in Elizabethan literature. Some interpret 
the expression here as a hiccough. 

91. round: direct, outspoken. Cf. Henry V, IV, i, 216. 



1 



42 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act ii 

the house ; if not, and it would please you to take leave of 
her, she is very willing to bid you farewell. 96 

Sir Toby. ' Farewell, dear heart, since I must needs be 
gone.' 

Maria. Nay, good Sir Toby. 

Clown. ' His eyes do show his days are almost done.' 

Malvolio. Is 't even so ? 100 

Sir Toby. ' But I will never die. 7 

Clown. Sir Toby, there you lie. 

Malvolio. This is much credit to you. 

Sir Toby. < Shall I bid him go ? ' 

Clown. * What and if you do ? ' 105 

Sir Toby. ' Shall I bid him go, and spare not ? ' 

Clown. ' O, no, no, no, no, you dare not.' 

Sir Toby. Out o' tune sir ? ye lie. Art any more than a 
steward ? Dost thou think, becaus e thou art virtuous^ there 
shall be no more cakes and^ale ? no 

Clown.. Yes, by Saint Anne, and ginger shall be hot i' th' 
mouth too. 

Sir Toby. Thou 'rt i' th' right. Go, sir, rub your chain 
with crumbs. A stoup of wine, Maria! 114 

95. and Ff I an Rowe. 105. and Ff I an Theobald. 

97-107. This musical dialogue between Sir Toby and the Clown 
is adapted from a song entitled ' Corydon's Farewell to Phyllis/ 
which appeared in Robert Jones's Booke of Ay?'es i 1601. 

no. The expression ' cakes and ale ' seems to have been pro- 
verbial for * revelling.' Cf. Henry VIII, V, iv, 11. The Puritans 
strongly objected to the excessive eating and drinking on saints' 
days and holy days. 

113-114. rub . . . crumbs : mind your own business. Stewards 
anciently wore a chain of silver or gold as a mark of superiority, as 
did other principal servants. Wolsey's chief cook is described by 



scene in TWELFTH NIGHT 43 

Malvolio. Mistress Mary, if you priz'd my lady's favour 
at any thing more than contempt, you would not give means 
for this uncivil rule. She shall know of it, by this hand. 

[Exit] 

Maria.^Go shake yourearg^ 118 

Sir Andrew. 'T were as good a deed as to drink when 
a man 's a-hungry, to challenge him the field, and then to 
break promise with him and make a fool of him. 

Sir Toby. Do 't, knight : I '11 write thee a challenge ; or 
I '11 deliver thy indignation to him by word of mouth. 123 

Maria. Sweet Sir Toby, be patient for to-night ; since the 
youth of the count's was to-day with my lady, she is much 
out of quiet. For Monsieur Malvolio, let me alone with him ; 
if I do not gull him into a nayword, and make him a com- 
mon recreation, do not think I have wit enough to lie straight 
in my bed : I know I can do it. 129 

Sir Toby. Possess us, possess us ; tell us something of 
him. 

Maria. Marry, sir, sometimes he is a kind of puritan. 

Sir Andrew. O, if I thought that, I 'd beat him like a dog ! 

127. a nayword Rowe I an ayword Ff. 

Cavendish as wearing " velvet or satin with a chain of gold." One 
of the methods used to clean gilt plate was rubbing it with crumbs. 
So in Webster, Duchess of Malfi, III, ii, 229-230 : " Yes, and the 
chippings of the buttrey fly after him, to scoure his gold chaine." 

118. " Like to the empty ass, to shake his ears, And graze in 
commons." — Julius Ccesar, IV, i, 26. 

127. nayword : byword, proverb. This is plainly the meaning here, 
but in The Merry Wives of Windsor, II, ii, 131, it means 'password,' 
'watchword.' See Murray for interesting quotations. 

130-131. In previous editions of Hudson's Shakespeare this 
speech was given to Sir Andrew. — possess us : inform us. 



44 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act ii 

Sir Toby. What, for being a puritan ? thy exquisite rea- 
son, dear knight? 135 

Sir Andrew. I have no exquisite reason for 't, but I have 
reason good enough. 

Maria. The devil a puritan that he is, or any thing con- 
stantly, but a time-pleaser ; an affection'd ass, that cons state 
without book, and utters it by great swarths ; the best per- 
suaded of himself, so cramm'd, as he thinks, with excellen- 
cies, that it is his grounds of faith that all that look on 
him love him ; and on that vice in him will my revenge find 
notable cause to work. 

Sir Toby. What wilt thou do ? 145 

Maria. I will drop in his way some obscure epistles of 
love ; wherein, by the colour of his beard, the shape of his 
leg, the manner of his gait, the expressure of his eye, fore- 
head, and complexion, he shall find himself most feelingly 
personated. I can write very like my lady, your niece ; on 
a forgotten matter we can hardly make distinction of our 

hands. 

« 

Sir Toby. Excellent ! I smell a device. 

Sir Andrew. I have 't in my nose too. 154 

Sir Toby. He shall think, by the letters that thou wilt 

drop, that they come from my niece, and that she 's in love 

with him. 

140. swarths Ff | swaths Collier. ground F2F3F4 Delius. 

142. grounds Fi Globe Camb | 149. complexion F3 I complection Fi. 

139-140. time-pleaser : time server. — affection'd : affected. — cons 
state . . . great swarths. Learns pompous courtly phrases by heart 
and then delivers himself of them wholesale. This interpretation is 
borne out by II, v, 49 (see note), and 137, 147. ' Con ' and 'without 
book ' are phrases from the theatre. ■ Swarth ' is a corrupted form 
of ' swath ' and indicates the Elizabethan pronunciation. 



scene in TWELFTH NIGHT 45 

Maria. My purpose is, indeed, a horse of that colour. 

Sir Andrew. And your horse now would make him an 
ass. 160 

Maria. Ass, I doubt not. \£t f *< t/l < (<< 

Sir Andrew. O, 't will be admirable ! ' 

Maria. Sport royal, I warrant you ; I know my physic 
will work with him. I will plant you two, and let the fool 
make a third, where he shall find the letter ; observe his 
construction of it. For this night, to bed, and dream on the 
event. Farewell. \_Exit~\ 

Sir Toby. Good night, Penthesilea. 

Sir Andrew. Before me, she 's a good wench. 169 

Sir Toby. She 's a beagle, true-bred, and one that adores 
me. What o' that ? 

Sir Andrew. I was ador'd once too. 

Sir Toby. Let 's to bed, knight. Thou hadst need send 
for more money. 174 

Sir Andrew. If I cannot recover your niece, I am a foul 
way out. 

Sir Toby. Send for money, knight ; if thou hast her not 
i* th' end, call me cut. 178 

Sir Andrew. If I do not, never trust me, take it how 
you will. 

159. Sir Andrew | Sir To. Harness (Tyrwhitt conj.). 

168. Penthesilea was queen of the Amazons. This is another 
good-natured joke at Maria's small size. See note, I, v, 193-194. 

170. A ' beagle ' is a small hound and a keen hunter. 

173. hadst need send. See Abbott, § 349. 

178. cut. A term of abuse, probably derived from the word as 
applied to a common work horse. Cf. Falstaff's words, 1 Henry IV, 
II, iv, 214-215 : "if I tell thee a lie, spit in my face, call me horse." 



46 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act ii 

Sir Toby. Come, come, I '11 go burn some sack ; 't is too 
late to go to bed now. Come, knight ; come, knight. [Exeunt] 

Scene IV. The Duke's palace 

Enter Duke, Viola, Curio, and others 

Duke. Give me some music. Now, good morrow, friends. 
.Now, good Cesario, but that piece of song, 
That old and antique song we heard last night ; 
/ Methought it did relieve my passion much, 
/] More than light airs and recollected terms 5 

J j Of these most brisk and giddy-paced times. 
VX!ome, but one verse. 

Curio. He is not here, so please your lordship, that should 
sing it. 

Duke. Who was it ? 10 

Curio. Feste, the jester, my lord ; a fool that the lady 
Olivia's father took much delight in. He is about the house. 
Duke. Go seek him out, and play the tune the while. 

[Exit Curio. Music plays] 
Come hither, boy. If ever thou shalt love, 
In the sweet pangs of it remember me ; 1 5 

Scene IV I Scene V Pope.— The 3. antique Pope | Anticke F1F2 I 

Duke's palace | The Palace Rowe | Antick F8F4. 
Ff omit. 13. {Exit Curio] Pope I Ff omit. 

181. burn : heat, mull. — sack. This seems to have been a general 
name for the white wines imported from southern Spain and the 
Canaries, as distinguished from Rhenish and the red wines. 

3. antique : quaint. Accented on the first syllable. 

5. recollected terms : phrases carefully thought out and elaborated. 

11. Feste. For pronunciation and probable derivation, see note, 
Dramatis Personae. 



scene iv TWELFTH NIGHT 47 

For such as I am all true lovers are, 

Unstaid and skittish in all motions else, 

Save in the constant image of the creature J^ 

That is belov'd. How dost thou like this tune ? 

Viola. It gives a very echo to the seat 20 

Where love is thron'd. 

Duke. Thou dost speak masterly : 

My life upon 't, young though thou art, thine eye 
Hath stay'd upon some favour that it loves ; 
Hath it not, boy ? 

Viola. A little, by your favour. 24. 

Duke. What kind of woman is 't ? 

Viola. Of your complexion. 

Duke. She is not worth thee, then. What years, i' faith ? 

Viola. About your years, my lord. 

Duke. Too old, by heaven ! let still the woman take 
An elder than herself ; so wears she to him, 
So sways she level in her husband's heart : 30 

For, boy, however we do praise ourselves, u 

Our fancies are more giddy and unfirm, 
More longing, wavering, sooner lost and worn, 
Than women's are. 

33. worn F4 I worne F1F2F3 I won Hanmer. 

23. favour : countenance. Viola in reply plays on the word. 

25. complexion. While Shakespeare sometimes uses 'complexion ' 
in the modern sense of ' natural colour, texture, and appearance of 
the skin' (cf. The Merchant of Venice, II, i, 1), he more often haClt 
with the old connotation of * general appearance, as showing the 
temperament or bodily constitution.' The original meaning is con- 
nected with the mediaeval physiology, and, like ' temperament,' had 
reference to the combination (l^st. com, plectere) of the four 'humors' 
of the body in certain proportion. 



48 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act n 

Viola. I think it well, my lord. 

Duke. Then let thy love be younger than thyself, 35 
Or thy affection cannot hold the bent ; 
For women are as roses, whose fair flower, 
Being once display'd, doth fall that very hour. 

Viola. And so they are : alas, that they are so ; 
To die, even when they to perfection grow ! 40 

Re-enter Curio and Clown 

Duke. O, fellow, come, the song we had last night. 
Mark it, Cesario, it is old and plain ; 
The spinsters and the knitters in the sun, 
And the free maids that weave their thread with bones, 
Do use to chant it : it is silly sooth, 45 

And dallies with the innocence of love, 
Like the old age. 

Clown. Are you ready, sir ? 

Duke. Ay; prithee, sing. [Music] 

49. Ay; prithee | Ay; pr'ythee Capell I I prethee Ff. 

36. The metaphor is from a strung bow. Cf. Romeo and Juliet, 
II, i, 143 : " If that thy bent of love be honourable." 

43. spinsters : women spinners. The original sense of the word. 
Cf. Othello, I, i, 24 ; Henry VIII, I, ii, 33. 

44. free. As used here the word undoubtedly means both * guile- 
less ' and 'free from care'; they "fleet the time carelessly." — As 
You Like It, I, i, 124. Halliwell interprets as 'unmarried.' 

45. silly sooth: "simple truth miscalled simplicity." — Sonnets, 
lxvi, 11. Both 'silly' and ' sooth' (as in 'soothsayer') are words 
that have degenerated in meaning. 'Silly' (Anglo-Saxon sizlig, 
Middle Eng. sely, cf. German selig) once meant 'blessed' or 'good.' 

47. Like the old age: "as they did in the golden world." — As 
You Like It, I, i, 125. Cf. Sonnets, cxxvn, 1 : "In the old age black 
was not counted fair." 



SCENE IV 



TWELFTH NIGHT 



49 



Song 

Clown. Come away, come away, death, 

And in sad cypress let me be laid ; 
Fly away, fly away, breath ; 

I am slain by a fair cruel maid. 
My shroud of white, stuck all with yew, 

O, prepare it ! 
My part of death, no one so true 
Did share it. 



50 



55 



Not a flower, not a flower sweet, 

On my black coffin let there be strown ; 
Not a friend, not a friend greet 60 

My poor corpse, where my bones shall be thrown. 
A thousand thousand sighs to save, 

Lay me, O, where 
Sad true lover never find my grave, 

To weep there ! 65 

Duke. There 's for thy pains. 

Clown. No pains, sir ; I take pleasure in singing, sir. 
Duke. I '11 pay thy pleasure, then. 

Clown. Truly, sir, and pleasure will be paid one time or 
another. 70 



52. Fly ... fly Rowe I Fye ... 64. Sad Ff I Pope omits. — true 

fie F1F2 I Fie ... fie F3F4. lover Ff | true-love Capell. 

51. cypress. Either (1) l a. coffin of cypress wood/ or (2) 'a bier 
strewn with branches of cypress.' The former seems the natural 
interpretation. The fifth line of the song makes it unlikely that the 
reference is to ' a shroud of cypress,' or crape. 

56-57. Death is a part in the drama of life, which all have to 
undergo or to act ; and of all the actors who have shared in this 
common lot, no one has been so true a lover as I. 



■u 



50 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act ii 

Duke. Give me now leave to leave thee. 

Clown. Now the melancholy god protect thee ; and the 
tailor make thy doublet of changeable taffeta, for thy mind 
is a very opal. I would have men of such constancy put to 
sea, that their business might be every thing and their intent 
every where ; for that 's it that always makes a good voyage 
of nothing. Farewell. \Exit~\ 

Duke. Let all the rest give place. 

[Curio and Attendants retire\ 
Once more, Cesario, 
Get thee to yond same sovereign cruelty. 
Tell her my .love, more noble than the world, 80 

Prizes not quantity of dirty lands ; 
The parts that fortune hath bestow'd upon her, 
Tell her, I hold as giddily as fortune ; 
But 't is that miracle and queen of gems 
That nature pranks her in attracts my soul. 85 

Viola. But if she cannot love you, sir ? 

Duke. I cannot be so answer'd. 

Viola. Sooth, but you must. 

Say that some lady, as perhaps there is, 
Hath for your love as great a pang of heart 
A-s yon have for "Olivia"':" "you can not lovfc her ; 90 

You tell her so ; must she not, then, be answer d ? 



72. Clown | Duk. F2. retire] Camb | Ff omit. 

78. Scene VI Pope.— [Curio ... 87. I Hanmer | It Ff. 

71. Probably the Duke's polite way of requesting the Clown to 
withdraw. Cf. / Henry IV, I, iii, 20. 

72. the melancholy god : Saturn. Hence * saturnine/ 

73. changeable taffeta: shot silk. Its colors vary with the light, 
and so resemble those of the * opal/ line 74. 



scene iv TWELFTH NIGHT 5 1 

Duke. There is no woman's sides 
Can bide the beating of so strong a passion 
As love doth give my heart ; no woman's heart 
So big to hold so much ; they lack retention. 95 

Alas, their love may be call'd appetite — 
No motion of the liver, but the palate — 
That suffer surfeit, cloyment, and revolt ; 
But mine is all as hungry as the sea, 

And can digest as much. Make no compare 100 

Between that love a woman can bear me 
And that I owe Olivia. 

Viola. Ay, but I know — 

Duke. What dost thou know ? 

Viola. Too well what love women to men may owe ; 
In faith, they are as true of heart as we. 105 

My father had a daughter lov'd a man, *T>^i u<$ 
As it might be, perhaps, were I a woman, 4 K 
I should your lordship. 

Duke. And what 's her history ? 

Sf Viola. A blank, my lord. She never told her love, 
But let concealment, like a worm i' th' bud, no 

Feed on her damask cheek ; she pin'd in thought, 

98. suffer Ff | suffers Rowe. 

95. to : as to. — retention : capacity to hold so much love in their 
hearts. Cf. Sonnets, cxxn, 9. 

97. motion: emotion. — liver. See note, I, i, 37. 

98. That. The antecedent is contained in * their/ line 96. 
in-112. There is no better interpretation than these lines from 

the famous soliloquy, Hamlet, III, i, 84-85 : 

And thus the native hue of resolution 

Is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought. 

The * damask cheek' is the 'native hue'; 'sicklied o'er with the 



52 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act ii 

I And with a green and yellow melancholy, 
She sat, like patience on a monument, 
£ Smiling at grief. Was not this love indeed ? 

We men may say more, swear more ; but indeed 115 

Our shows are more than will ; for still we prove 
Much in our vows, but little in our love. 

Duke. But died thy sister of her love, my boy ? 
Viola. I am all the daughters of my father's house, 
And all the brothers too ; and yet I know not. 120 

Sir, shall I to this lady ? 

Duke. Ay, that 's the theme. 

To her in haste ; give her this jewel ; say, 
My love can give no place, bide no denay. \Exeunt\ 



4- 



Scene V. Olivia's garden 



Enter Sir Toby, Sir Andrew, and Fabian 



Sir Toby. Come thy ways, Signior Fabian. 

Fabian. Nay, I '11 come : if I lose a scruple of this sport, 
let me be boil'd to death with melancholy. 

Sir Toby. Wouldst thou not be glad to have the niggardly 
rascally sheep-biter come by some notable shame ? 5 

Scene V I Scene VII Pope. — Olivia's garden Pope I Ff omit. 

pale cast of thought ' is the ' green and yellow melancholy.' With 
'thought' in the sense of 'brooding grief,' cf. also Julius Casar, II, 
i, 187 ; "take thought and die." 

113-114. ' Smiling ' qualifies ' She,' not ' patience.' For a similar 
comparison and personification, cf. Pericles, V, i, 139. 

123. denay : denial. Used here for the rhyme. 

5. sheep-biter : worthless cur. A term of utter contempt. — come 
by : receive. Cf. The Merchant of Venice, I, i, 3 ; ii, 9. 



scene v TWELFTH NIGHT 53 

Fabian. I would exult, man ; you know he brought me 
out o' favour with my lady about a bear-baiting here. 

Sir Toby. To anger him, we '11 have the bear again ; and 
we will fool him black and blue : shall we not, Sir Andrew ? 

Sir Andrew. And we do not, it is pity of our lives. 10 

Enter Maria 

Sir Toby. Here comes the little villain.. 
How now, my metal of India ! 

Maria. Get ye all three into the box-tree ; Malvolio 's 
coming down this walk. He has been yonder i' the sun prac- 
tising behaviour to his own shadow this half hour. Observe 
him, for the love of mockery; for I know this letter will 
make a contemplative idiot of him. Close, in the name of 
jesting ! Lie thou there [throws down a letter], for here comes 
the trout that must be caught with tickling. [Exit] 

Enter Malvolio ^J 

Malvolio. 'T is but fortune ; all is fortune. Maria once 
told me she did affect me"pttncHE have heard herself come 
thus near, that, should she fancy, it should be one of my 
complexion. Besides, she uses me with a more exalted 
respect than any one else that follows her. What should I 
think on 't ? 25 

10. And Ff I An Pope Globe. 18. {throws . . . letter] Theobald | 

12. metal Malone | Mettle Fi | Ff omit. 
Nettle F2F3F4. 20. Scene VIII Pope. 

7. Bear-baiting was particularly obnoxious to the Puritans. 

12. metal of India: heart of gold, precious girl. Shakespeare refers 
more than once to India as synonymous with gold. Cf. 1 Henry IV, 
III, i, 169; Henry VIII, I, i, 21. 

17. Close: hide. In Julius Ccesar, I, iii, 131, is "stand close." 

22-23. fancy: fall in love. — complexion. See note, II, iv, 25. 



54 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act n 

Sir Toby. Here 's an overweening rogue ! 

Fabian. O, peace ! Contemplation makes a rare turkey- 
cock of him ; how he jets under his advanc'd plumes ! 

Sir Andrew. 'Slight, I could so beat the rogue ! 

Sir Toby. Peace, I say. 30 

Malvolio. To be Count Malvolio ! 

Sir Toby. Ah, rogue ! 

Sir Andrew. Pistol him, pistol him. 

Sir Toby. Peace, peace ! 34 

Malvolio. There is example for f t ; the lady of the 
Strachy married the yeoman of the wardrobe. 

Sir Andrew. Fie on him, Jezebel ! 

Fabian. O, peace ! now he 's deeply in ; look how imagi- 
nation blows him. 39 

Malvolio. Having been three months married to her, 
sitting in my state, — 

Sir Toby. O, for a stone-bow, to hit him in the eye ! 

Malvolio. Calling my officers about me, in my branch'd 
velvet gown ; having come from a day-bed, where I have left 
Olivia sleeping, — 45 

Sir Toby. Fire and brimstone ! 

Fabian. O, peace, peace ! 

28. jets : struts proudly. — advanced plumes : uplifted feathers. 

29. 'Slight. One of the many Elizabethan petty oaths. It is a 
contraction of ' by God's light.' Cf. ' 'Od's lifelings,' V, i, 176. 

35-36. Probably an allusion to an unidentified story, in real life or 
in fiction, of a lady of high rank who had married a servant. Furness 
fills four pages with the theories and suggestions of editors on the 
subject. 

39. blows : puffs up. Cf. Wycliffe version of 1 Corinthians, viii, I : 
" Kunnynge blowith, charite edifieth." 

42. stone-bow : a crossbow for throwing stones or bullets. 



scene v TWELFTH NIGHT 55 

Malvolio. And then to have the humour of state ; and, 
after a demure travel of regard, telling them I know my 
place, as I would they should do theirs, to ask for my kins- 
man Toby, — 5 1 

Sir Toby. Bolts and shackles ! 

Fabian. O, peace, peace, peace ! now, now. 

Malvolio. Seven of my people, with an obedient start, 
make out for him : I frown the while ; and perchance wind 
up my watch, or play with my — some rich jewel. Toby 
approaches ; curtsies there to me, — 

Sir Toby. Shall this fellow live ? 

Fabian. Though our silence be drawn from us with cars, 
yet peace. 60 

Malvolio. I extend my hand to him thus, quenching my 
familiar smile with an austere regard of control, — 

Sir Toby. And does not Toby take you a blow o' the 
lips, then ? . 64 

Malvolio. Saying, * Cousin Toby, my fortunes having cast 
me on your niece, give me this prerogative of speech/ — 

56. my — some Collier | my some 59. with cars Fi I with cares F2 

F1F2 I some F3F4. F3F4 I by th' ears Hanmer. 

49. a demure travel of regard : letting my glances move slowly 
from one to another. This and Malvolio's other pornpous expres- 
sions should help to explain Maria's words, II, iii, 139-140. 

56. my — some. Collier's happy punctuation of the First Folio read- 
ing yields this excellent interpretation by Dr. Brinsley Nicholson: 

There is here a true touch of nature and a most humorous one. While 
Sir Toby is being fetched to the presence, the Lord Malvolio would frown- 
ingly wind up his watch or play with — and here from force of habit he 
fingers [his badge of office], and is about to add 'play with my chain,' but 
suddenly remembering that he would be no longer a steward, or other gold- 
chained attendant, he stops short, and then confusedly alters his phrase to — 
1 some rich jewel.' 



56 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act ii 

Sir Toby. What, what ? 

Malvolio. * You must amend your drunkenness.' — 

Sir Toby. Out, scab ! 69 

Fabian. Nay, patience, or we break the sinews of our plot. 

Malvolio. l Besides, you waste the treasure of your time 
with a foolish knight/ — 

Sir Andrew.. That's me, I warrant you. 

Malvolio. ' One Sir Andrew.' 74 

Sir Andrew. I knew 't was I ; for many do call me fool. 

Malvolio. What employment have we here ? 

[Taking up the letter] 

Fabian. Now is the woodcock near the gin. 

Sir Toby. O, peace ! and the spirit of humours intimate 
reading aloud to him ! 79 

Malvolio. By my life, this is my lady's hand : these be 
her very C's, her U's, and her T's ; and thus makes she her 
great P's. It is, in contempt of question, her hand. 

Sir Andrew. Her C's, her U's, and her T's ; why that ? 

Malvolio. [Reads] 

To the unknown beloved, this, and my good wishes : 
— her very phrases ! By your leave, wax. Soft ! and the 
impressure her Lucrece, with which she uses to seal; 'tis 
my lady. To whom should this be ? 

Fabian. This wins him, liver and all. 

76. employment I implement Han- 84, 89, 96. [Reads] Capell I Ff 

mer. — [Taking . . . letter] Ff omit. omit. 

76. What employment have we here : what is going on here ? 

77. The woodcock, like the gull, was proverbial for stupidity. 
78-79. May the self-love-sick humor that possesses him prompt 

him to read the letter aloud ! 

81-82. Ritson suggested that the C and the P belong to the old 
form of address, ' with Care Present.' 



scene v TWELFTH NIGHT 57 

Malvolio. [Reads] Jove knows I love ; 

But who? 90 

Lips, do not move ; 
No man must know. 

1 No man must know.' What follows ? the numbers alter'd ! 
' No man must know/ If this should be thee, Malvolio ! 
Sir Toby. Marry, hang thee, brock ! 95 

Malvolio. [Reads] I may command where I adore ; 

But silence, like a Lucrece knife, \(~> 

With bloodless stroke my heart doth gore : 
M, O, A, I, doth sway my life. 

Fabian. A fustian riddle ! "Too 

Sir Toby. Excellent wench, say I. 

Malvolio. ' M, O, A, I, doth sway my life.' Nay, but 
first, let me see, let me see, let me see. 

Fabian. What dish o' poison has she dress'd him ! 104 

Sir Toby. And with what wing the staniel checks at it ! 

Malvolio. ' I may command where I adore.' Why, she 
may command me ; I serve her ; she is my lady. Why, this 
is evident to any formal capacity ; there is no obstruction in 
this : and the end, — what should that alphabetical position 
portend ? if I could make that resemble something in mel — 
Softly! M, O, A, I,— in 

89-92. As prose in Ff. 104. o* Dyce | a F1F2 I of FsF4. 

97. Lucrece knife Rowe I Lucresse 105. staniel | stanyel Hanmer | 

knife F1F2 I Lucress wife F3F4. stallion Ff | falcon Collier MS. 

89. Jove. See note, III, iv, 71-72. 

93. the numbers alter'd : the metre, the versification, is different 

95. brock : badger. A common term of contempt. 

104. An exclamatory speech. 'What' meaning 'What a.' 

105. staniel checks : hawk forsakes its proper prey. 
108. formal : in a normal, well-regulated condition. 



58 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act ii 

Sir Toby. O, ay, make up that ; he is now at a cold scent. 

Fabian. Sowter will cry upon 't, for all this, though it be 
as rank as a fox. 

Malvolio. M, — Malvolio; M, — why, that begins my 
name. 116 

Fabian. Did not I say he would work it out ? the cur is 
excellent at faults. 

Malvolio. M, — but then there is no consonancy in the 
sequel ; that suffers under probation : A should follow, but 

does. 121 
Fabian. And O shall end, I hope. 

Sir Toby. Ay, or I '11 cudgel him, and make him cry O ! 

Malvolio. And then I comes behind. 124 

Fabian. Ay, and you had any eye behind you, you might 
see more detraction at your heels than fortunes before you. 

Malvolio. M, O, A, I ; this simulation is not as the for- 
mer ; and yet, to crush this a little, it would bow to me, for 
every one of these letters are in my name. Soft ! here follows 
prose. 130 

— [Reads] If this fall into thy hand, revolve. In my stars I am 
above thee ; but be not afraid of greatness : some are born great, 

125. and Ff | an Hanmer | and if 131. [Reads'] Capell I Ff omit. 

Capell conj. 132-133. born Rowe I become Ff. 

128. bow to F1F2 I bow F3F4. — achieve | atcheeues Fi. 

113-114. * Sowter' is used here as the name of a hound. Properly 
it means ' cobbler,' and, by implication, * bungler.' Furness suggests 

1 Shouter.' ',' The stupid dog will be picking up the scent again, and 
giving tongue most clamorously . . . , and yet all the while the scent 
was as strong as that of a fox." — Morton Luce. 

118. A * fault ' is a * break in the line of scent' 
120. suffers under probation : fails when put to the proof. 
127. simulation : disguise of meaning. Malvolio cannot so easily 
find himself pointed out here as in what has gone before. 



scene v TWELFTH NIGHT 59 

some achieve greatness, and some have greatness thrust upon 'em. 
Thy Fates open their hands ; let thy blood and spirit embrace 
them ; and, to inure thyself to what thou art like to be, cast thy 
humble slough and appear fresh. Be opposite with a kinsman, 
surly with servants ; let thy tongue tang arguments of state ; put 
thyself into the trick of singularity : she thus advises thee that 
sighs for thee. Remember who commended thy yellow stockings, 
and wish'd to see thee ever cross-garter' d. I say, remember. Go 
to, thou art made, if thou desir'st to be so ; if not, let me see thee 
a steward still, the fellow of servants, and not worthy to touch 
Fortune's fingers. Farewell. She that would alter services with 

The Fortunate-Unhappy. 

Daylight and champain discovers not more ; this is open. I 
will be proud, I will read politic authors, I will baffle Sir 
Toby, I will wash off gross acquaintance, I will be point-de- 
vise the very man. I do not now fool myself, to let imagina- 
tion jade me ; for every reason excites to this, that my lady 
loves me. She did commend my yellow stockings of late, 
she did praise my leg being cross-garter'd ; and in this she 
manifests herself to my love, and with a kind of injunction 
drives me to these habits of her liking. I thank my stars, I 
am happy. I will be strange, stout, in yellow stockings, and 

145-146. Fortunate -Unhappy. champion F3F4 I champaign Collier. 

Daylight Capell I fortunate vnhappy — discovers not Ff I discovers no 

daylight Ff | fortunate and happy Pope | discover no Hammer | dis- 

daylight Rowe. — champain Dyce cover not Dyce. 
Globe Camb|champian F1F2 Deliusl 

146. champain: open country. — discovers. See Abbott, §333. 

148-149. I will . . . very man : I will be punctiliously exacting and 
precise in all the dues and becomings of my rank. 

150. jade : trick, deceive. Cf. Henry VIII, III, ii, 280. 

155. strange : reserved, standing aloof. — stout : haughty, over- 
bearing. Schmidt quotes 2 Henty VI, I, i, 187. 



60 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act ii 

cross-garter'd, even with the swiftness of putting on. Jove 
and my stars be praised ! Here is yet a postscript. 

[Reads] Thou canst not choose but know who I am. If thou 
entertain'st my love, let it appear in thy smiling ; thy smiles be- 
come thee well ; therefore in my presence still smile, dear my 
sweet, I prithee. 161 

Jove, I thank thee. I will smile ; I will do every thing 
that thou wilt have me. [Exit] 

Fabian. I will not give my part of this sport for a pension 
of thousands to be paid from the Sophy. 165 

Sir Toby. I could marry this wench for this device. 

Sir Andrew. So could I too. 

Sir Toby. And ask no other dowry with her but such 
another jest. 

Sir Andrew. Nor I neither. 170 

Fabian. Here comes my noble gull-catcher. 

Re-enter Maria 

Sir Toby. Wilt thou set thy foot o' my neck ? 

Sir Andrew. Or o' mine either ? 

Sir Toby. Shall I play my freedom at tray-trip, and 
become thy bond-slave? 175 

Sir Andrew. I' faith, or I either ? 

Sir Toby. Why, thou hast put him in such a dream, that 
when the image of it leaves him he must run mad. 

156, 162. Jove I God Halliwell. 171. Scene IX Pope. 

158. [Reads] Collier | Ff omit. 172. Re-enter. . . | Enter . . . Ff (after jest) . 

165. Sophy: Shah of Persia. In 1600 was printed an account of 
the adventures of the Elizabethan traveller, Sir Robert Shirley, and 
his brothers, Sir Anthony and Sir Thomas, at the Persian court. 

174. play : stake. — tray-trip : a game played with dice. 



scene v TWELFTH NIGHT 6 1 

Maria. Nay, but say true ; does it work upon him ? 

Sir Toby. Like aqua-vitae with a midwife. 180 

Maria. If you will then see the fruits of the sport, mark 
his first approach before my lady. He will come to her in 
yellow stockings, and 't is a colour she abhors ; and cross- 
garter'd, a fashion she detests ; and he will smile upon her, 
which will now be so unsuitable to her disposition, being 
addicted to a melancholy as she is, that it cannot but turn 
him into a notable contempt. If you will see it, follow me. 

Sir Toby. To the gates of Tartar, thou most excellent 
devil of wit ! 189 

Sir Andrew. I '11 make one too. [Exeunt'] 

♦ 

180. aqua-vitae F2F3F4 I Aqua 190. [Exeimt] Exeunt. Finis Ac- 

vite Fi. tus secnndus [secundus] Fi | Exeunt. 

188. gates of Tartar F1F2F3 1 gates Finis Actus secundi F2F3F4. 
Tartar F4 I gates, Tartar Rowe. 

186. addicted. " This is now generally used in connexion with 
some bad habit, but this is a modern sense, for it is said with praise 
of the house of Stephanas (1 Corinthians, xvi, 15) that they had 
'addicted themselves to the ministry of the saints.' " — Clar. 

188. Tartar : Tartarus, the classical underworld of the dead. Cf. 
Henry V, II, ii, 1 21-12 5 : 

If that same demon that hath gull'd thee thus 
Should with his lion gait walk the whole world, 
He might return to vasty Tartar back, 
And tell the legions, ' I can never win 
A soul so easy as that Englishman's,' 



V 






iO 



ACT III 

Scene I. Olivia's garden 

Enter Viola, and Clown with a tabor 

Viola. Save thee, friend, and thy music ! dost thou live 
by thy tabor ? 

Clown. No, sir, I live by the church. 

Viola. Art thou a churchman ? 4 

Clown. No such matter, sir : I do live by the church ; for 
I do live at my house, and my house doth stand by the church. 

Viola. So thou mayst say, the king lies by a beggar, if a 
beggar dwell near him ; or, the church stands by thy tabor, 
if thy tabor stand by the church. 9 

Clown. You have said, sir. To see this age ! A sentence 
is but a cheveril glove to a good wit ; how quickly the wrong 
side may be turn'd outward ! 

Viola. Nay, that 's certain ; they that dally nicely with 
words may quickly make them wanton. 14 

Olivia's garden Pope | Ff omit. 2. thy Fi I the F2F3F4. 

— Enter . . . tabor | Enter Uiola and 7. king | Kings Fi. — lies I lives 

Clowne Ff. Steevens (Capell conj.). 

2. tabor : a small drum. It seems the " allow'd fool " had a pre- 
scriptive right to this as his musical instrument. 

4. churchman : ecclesiastic. Shakespeare often uses the word thus. 

10. You have said. A form of assent, usually with a touch of irony. 

11. cheveril : kid. Cf. " wit of cheveril," Romeo and Juliet, II, iv, 87. 

62 



scene i TWELFTH NIGHT 63 

Clown. I would, therefore, my sister had had no name, sir. 

Viola. Why, man ? 

Clown. Why, sir, her name 's a word ; and to dally with 
that word might make my sister wanton. But, indeed, words 
^are very rascals since bonds disgrac'd them. 

Viola. Thy reason, man ? 20 

Clown. Troth, sir, I can yield you none without words ; 
and words are grown so false, I am loth to prove reason 
with them. 

Viola. I warrant thou art a merry fellow, and car'st for 
nothing. 25 

Clown. Not so, sir ; I do care for something ; but in my 
conscience, sir, I do not care for you : if that be to care for 
nothing, sir, I would it would make you invisible. 

Viola. Art not thou the Lady Olivia's fool ? 29 

Clown. No, indeed, sir ; the Lady Olivia has no folly : 
she will keep no fool, sir, till she be married ; and fools are 
as like husbands as pilchards are to herrings, the husband 's 

19. This may refer to an order of the Privy Council, in June, 1600, 
laying very severe restrictions on players and playhouses. The 
order, besides allowing only two houses to be used for stage plays 
in the city and suburbs, interdicted those two from playing at all 
during Lent, or in any time of great sickness, and also limited them 
to twice a week at all other times. If rigidly enforced it would have 
amounted almost to a total suppression of playhouses. As the 
penalty was imprisonment, it might well be said that words were 
disgraced by bonds. Or the explanation may have reference to the 
old saying, "An honest man's word is as good as his bond." Now- 
adays, implies the Clown, a man's word is worth nothing unless it is 
strengthened by his bond. 

32. Lord Teignmouth said that pilchards differ from herrings 
only in that they can be fried in their own fat, whereas herrings 
have not fat enough for the purpose. 



64 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act in 

the bigger. I am, indeed, not her fool, but her corrupter of 
words. 

Viola. I saw thee late at the Count Orsino's. 35 

Clown. Foolery, sir, does walk about the orb like the 
sun, it shines everywhere. I would be sorry, sir, but the 
fool should be as oft with your master as with my mistress. 
I think I saw your wisdom there. 

Viola. Nay, and thou pass upon me, I '11 no more with 
thee. Hold, there 's expenses for thee. 41 

Clown. Now Jove, in his next commodity of hair, send 
thee a beard ! 

Viola. By my troth, I '11 tell thee, I am almost sick for 
one ; [Aside] though I would not have it grow on my chin. 
Is thy lady within ? 46 

Clown. Would not a pair of these have bred, sir ? 

Viola. Yes, being kept together and put to use. 

Clown. I would play Lord Pandarus of Phrygia, sir, to 
bring a Cressida to this Troilus. 50 

Viola. I understand you, sir ; 't is well begg'd. 

Clown. The matter, I hope, is not great, sir, begging but 
a beggar. Cressida was a beggar. My lady is within, sir. I 

40. and I an Pope. 45. [Aside] Globe Camb | Ff omit. 

37. ■ But' has the force of ' if not. 5 See Abbott, § 126. 

40. pass upon me : make sallies of wit at my expense. 

47. He looks roguishly at the coin Viola has given him. 

49. Pandarus, Cressida's uncle, served her and Troilus as a 
go-between. Cf. Troilus and Cressida, I, i, 98 : "I cannot come 
to Cressid but by Pandar." 

53. Cressida was a beggar. In the later developments of the Troy 
legend, as in Henryson's Testament of Cresseid, the heroine is smitten 
with leprosy for her faithlessness to Troilus, and becomes a beggar. 
Cf. Henry V, II, i, 80 : " the lazar kite of Cressid's kind." 



scene i TWELFTH NIGHT 65 

will construe to them whence you come ; who you are and 
what you would are out of my welkin, — I might say ' ele- 
ment/ but the word is over-worn. [Exit] 

Viola. This fellow is wise enough to play the fool ; 
And to do that well craves a kind of wit : 
He must observe their mood on whom he jests, 
The quality of persons, and the time ; 60 

And, like the haggard, check at every feather 
That comes before his eye. This is a practice 
As full of labour as a wise man's art : 
For folly that he wisely shows is fit ; 
But wise men, folly-falPn, quite taint their wit. 65 

Enter Sir Toby and Sir Andrew 

Sir Toby. Save you, gentleman 1 

Viola. And you, sir. 

Sir Andrew. Dieu vous garde, monsieur. 

Viola. Et vous aussi ; votre serviteur. 

Sir Andrew. I hope, sir, you are ; and I am yours. 70 

61. And Ff I Not Johnson conj. | | wisemens folly falne Fi. 
Nor Harness. 66. Scene II Pope. 

63. wise man's | Wise-mans Ff. 68. vous garde | vou guard Ff. 

65. wise men, folly-fair n Capell 69. vous aussi | vouz ousie Fi. 

55-56. 'Element' was used for both 'sphere' and ' sky'; 'welkin,' 
for * sky ' only. Feste humorously interchanges the words as if they 
were synonymous. In Satiromastix is further evidence of the over- 
working of the word ' element ' in certain Elizabethan literary and 
artistic circles. Cf. the use of the expression ' atmosphere ' in much 
modern criticism. 

61. And. Johnson's change to ' not ' is unnecessary. The trained 
fool, like the 'haggard' ('wild, untrained hawk'), is free to go after 
all game. For ' check,' see note, II, v, 105. 

65. taint their wit : ruin their reputation for wisdom. 



66 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act hi 

Sir Toby. Will you encounter the house ? my niece is 
desirous you should enter, if your trade be to her. 

Viola. I am bound to your niece, sir ; I mean, she is the 
list of my voyage. 

Sir Toby. Taste your legs, sir; put them to motion. 75 

Viola. My legs do better understand me, sir, than I 
understand what you mean by bidding me taste my legs. 

Sir Toby. I mean, to go, sir, to enter. 

Viola. I will answer you with gait and entrance. But we 
are prevented. 80 

Enter Olivia and Maria 

Most excellent accomplished lady, the heavens rain odours 
on you ! 

Sir Andrew. That youth 's a rare courtier. 'Rain odours'; 
well. 

Viola. My matter hath no voice, lady, but to your own 
most pregnant and vouchsafed ear. 86 

Sir Andrew. ' Odours/ ' pregnant/ and ' vouchsafed ' : 
I '11 get 'em all three all ready. 

f Olivia. Let the garden door be shut, and leave me to my 
hearing. [Exeunt Sir Toby, Sir Andrew, and Maria] Give 
me your hand, sir. 91 

Viola. My duty, madam, and most humble service. 
Olivia. What is your name ? 

81. Enter . . . Maria | Enter ... 90. [Exeunt . . . Maria] Rowe I 

Gentlewoman Ff. Ff omit. 

88. all ready Malone I already Ff. 91. Scene III Pope. 

74. list : goal. Literally ' boundary.' Cf. ' lists ' of a tournament. 

75. Taste : make trial of, test. Cf. Ill, iv, 227. 

80. prevented: anticipated. The original sense (L&t. prae-venire). 
86. pregnant : apprehensive, quick, intelligent. Cf. II, ii, 27. 



scene I TWELFTH NIGHT 67 

Viola. ' Cesario is your servant's name, fair princess. 
AOlivia. M^ s eniant^ j ir ! 'T was never merry world 95 
Since lowly feigning was call'd compliment ; 
You 're servait to the Count Orsino, youth. 

Viola. Ar.d he is yours, and his must needs be yours ; 
Your servant's servant is your servant, madam. 
*t)LiviA. For him, I think not on him ; for his thoughts, 
Would they were blanks, ff.ther. than fill'd with me ! 101 

Viola. Madam, I come to whet your gentle thoughts 
On his behalf. 

^Olivia. Q^°Y y our leave, I pray you, 

I bade you never speak again of him ; 

But, would you undertake another suit, 105 

I had rather hear you to solicit that 
Than music from the spheres. 

Viola^, Dear lady,.— _ 

Olivia. Give me leave, beseech you. I did send, 
After the last enchantment you did here, 
A ring in chase of you ; so did I abuse no 

Myself, my servant, and, I fear me, you. 
Under your hard construction must I sit, 
To force that on you, in a shameful cunning, 
Which you knew none of yours ; what might you think ? 

108. beseech F1F2 I I beseech F3F4. 109. here Warburton | heare F1F2 

107. According to the Pythagorean doctrine, ' sphere music ' was 
that made by the revolution of the crystal spheres in which the stars 
were set. Cf. 7'he Merchant of Venice, V, i, 60-63. 

108. beseech you. ' I ' is omitted as in ' prithee.' 
no. abuse : deceive. Cf. As Yon Like It, III, v, 80. 

112. hard construction : unfavorable interpretation of my conduct 

113. To force : by forcing. See Abbott, § 356. 







M 



68 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPJARAE act in 

•Have you not set mine honour at the stake, 115 

I And baited it with all th' unmuzzled thoughts 
I That tyrannous heart can think ? To one of your receiving 

Enough is shown. A cypress, not a bosom, 

Hides my heart. So, let me hear you speak. / 
Viola. I pity you. 

^Olivia. That 's a degree to love. 120 

Viola. No, not a grize ; for 't is a vulgar proof, 

That very oft we pity enemies. 

^Olivia. Why, then methinks 'tis time to smile again. 

O world, how apt the poor are to be proud ! 
Ji one should be a prey, how much the better 125 

+3k) fall before the lion than the wolf ! [ Clock strikes] 

/^The ,clogk upbraids me with the waste of time. 

Be not afraid, good youth, I will not have you ; 
, And yet, when wit and youth is come to harvest, 
I Your wife is like to reap a proper man. 130 

j Thue lies your way, due west. 

118. cypress I Cipresse F1F2F3. poore F2F3F4 Rowe. 

119. Hides Ff Camb Delius I Hideth 121. grize Fi Globe Camb | grice 
Globe (Delius conj.). — my Fi | my F2F8F4 I grise Delius. 

115. The metaphor is from bear baiting. Cf. Macbeth , V, vii, 1. 

118. cypress : covering of transparent lawn. This material, a kind 
of crape, probably received its name from the island of Cyprus. See 
Murray. Cf. TheWinter'sTale, IV, iv, 220-221 ; Milton, /I Penseroso, 35. 

— bosom. " Used in this passage in the sense of * the bosom of the 
dress ' . . . Olivia says, ' you can see my heart ; a thin gauze, as it 
were, hides it, not a stomacher.' " — Gollancz. 

121. grize : step. Etymologically the same as '-gree' in ' de-gree,' 
line 120. Cf. Othello, I, iii, 200. So in Timon of Athens, IV, iii, 16-17 : 

Every grize of fortune 
Is smooth'd by that below. 

— vulgar proof : common experience. Cf. Julius Ccesar, II, i, 2\. 



scene i TWELFTH NIGHT ++ 

Viola. Then westward-ho ! Grace and good disposition 
Attend your ladyship I 

You '11 nothing, madam, to my lord by me ? 
K)livia. Stayj 135 

I prithee, tell me what thou think'st of me. 

Viola. That you do think you are not what you are. 
^Olivia. J£ I think so, I think the same of you. 

Viola. Then think you right ; I am not what I am. 
^Olivia. I would you were as I would have you be ! 140 

Viola. Would it be better, madam, than I am ? 
I wish it might, for now I am your fool. 
-^Olivia. Q what a deal of scorn looks beautiful 
In the contempt and anger of his lip ! 
Ajaiuidlrous guilt shows not itself more soon 145 

Than love that would seem hid ; love's night is nooi 
Cesario, by the roses of the spring, 
J3y maidhood, honour, truth, and every thing, 
I love thee so^ that, maugre all thy pride/? 
No^^^norj^sc^ca^^ hide.J I /S° 

, Do not extort thy reasons from this clause, v 

) For that I woo,)thou therefore hast no cause ; 
n3ut rather reason thus with reason fetter, 
' Love sought is goqdj/but given unsought is better) 

132-133. As in Globe. InFfCamb ho, ladyship. * 

Melius two lines ending westward- 135-136. One line in Ff. 

132. < Westward-ho ! ' and ' Eastward-ho ! ' were familiar cries 
used by watermen on the Thames. They were taken as titles for 
well-known Elizabethan comedies. 

149. maugre : in spite of. Cf. King Lear, V, iii, 131. 

151-152. Do not, from what I have just said, force or gather rea- 
sons for rejecting my offer. Perhaps Olivia thinks her superiority 
of rank may excuse her in thus making the first open advances. 



7© THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act hi 

Viola. By innocence I swear, and by my youth, 155 

I have one heart, one bosom, and one truth, 
And that no woman has ; nor never none 
Shall mistress be of it, save I alone. 
And so adieu, good madam ; never more 
Will I my master's tears to you deplore. 160 

^Olivia. Yet come again ; for thou perhaps mayst move 
That heart, which now abhors, to like his love. [Exeunt] 

Scene II. Olivia's house 

Enter Sir Toby, Sir Andrew, and Fabian 

Sir Andrew. No, faith, I '11 not stay a jot longer. 

Sir Toby. Thy reason, dear venom, give thy reason. 

Fabian. You must needs yield your reason, Sir Andrew. 

Sir Andrew. Marry, I saw your niece do more favours 
to the count's serving-man than ever she bestow'd upon me ; 
I saw 't i' th' orchard. 6 

Sir Toby. Did she see thee the while, old boy ? tell 
me that. 

Sir Andrew. As plain as I see you now. 

Fabian. This was a great argument of love in her toward 
you. IJ 

Sir Andrew. 'Slight, will you make an ass o' me ? 

Fabian. I will prove it legitimate, sir, upon the oaths of 
judgment and reason. 

Scene II I Scene IV Pope. — 7. thee the F3F4 I the F1F2. 

Olivia's house Rowe | Ff omit. 13. I will Fi | I F2F3F4. 

6. orchard : garden. The original meaning (Anglo-Saxon ort-geard). 
12. flight. See note, II, v, 29. 



scene ii TWELFTH NIGHT 71 

Sir Toby. And they have been grand-jurymen since be- 
fore Noah was a sailor. 16 

Fabian. She did show favour to the youth in your sight 
only to exasperate you, to awake your dormouse valour, to 
put fire in your heart, and brimstone in your liver. You should • , 
then have accosted her ; and with some excellent jests, fire-^ 
new from the mint, you should have bang'd the youth into 
dumbness. This was look'd for at your hand, and this was 
balk'd : the double gilt of this opportunity you let time wash 
off, and you are now sail'd into the north of my lady's 
opinion ; where you will hang like an icicle on a Dutchman's 
beard, unless you do redeem it by some laudable attempt 
either of valour or policy. 27 

Sir Andrew. And 't be any way, it must be with valour ; 
for policy I hate : I had as lief be a Brownist as a politician. 

Sir Toby. Why, then, build me thy fortunes upon the basis 
of valour. Challenge me the count's youth to fight with him ; 
hurt him in eleven places : my niece shall take note of it ; 
and assure thyself, there is no love-broker in the world can 
more prevail in man's commendation with woman than re- 
port of valour. 35 

Fabian. There is no way but this, Sir Andrew. 

28. And 't Ff I an 't Hanmer. 

25-26. icicle . . . beard. This taken with " saiPd into the north," 
line 24, has been regarded as an allusion to the discovery of Nova 
Zembla by Barenz (Barends), a Dutchman, in 1 596-1 597. 

29. The Brownists were one of the radical dissenting sects that 
arose during the reign of Elizabeth. They took their name from 
Robert Brown (Browne, Broun), their founder. They were bitterly 
opposed to the discipline and forms of government of the Estab- 
lished Church. 

30. me. The ethical dative. So in the next line. See Abbott, § 220. 



72 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act m 

Sir Andrew. Will either of you bear me a challenge to him ? 

Sir Toby. Go, write it in a martial hand ; be curst and 
brief ; it is no matter how witty, so it be eloquent and full 
of invention ; taunt him with the license of ink ; if thou 
thou'st him some thrice, it shall not be amiss ; and as many 
lies as will lie in thy sheet of paper, although the sheet were 
big enough for the bed of Ware in England, set 'em down : 
go, about it. Let there be gall enough in thy ink ; though 
thou write with a goose-pen, no matter : about it. 45 

Sir Andrew. Where shall I find you ? 

Sir Toby. We '11 call thee at the cubiculo. Go. 

\Exit Sir Andrew] 

Fabian. This is a dear manakin to you, Sir Toby. 

48. Scene V Pope. 

38. curst : ill-tempered, sharp in your language. 

40-41. thou thou'st him : you address him as ' thou.' This has 
been taken to be an allusion to Coke's abusive * thouing ' of Sir 
Walter Raleigh at his trial, but the play was acted a year and a half 
before that trial took place. Coke addressing Raleigh is reported 
to have said, " All that he did was at thy instigation, thou viper ; 
for I thou thee, thou traitor." Cf. what George Fox, the Quaker, 
wrote in 1661 : 

For this thou and thee was a sore cut to proud flesh, and them that sought 
self-honour; who, though they would say it to God and Christ, would not 
endure to have it said to themselves. So that we were often beaten and 
abused, and sometimes in danger of our lives, for using those words to some 
proud men, who would say, " What, you ill-bred clown, do you thou me ! " 

43. bed of Ware. This famous bedstead is still in existence, pre- 
served at the Rye House. It is eleven feet square and can hold 
twelve persons. The date 1460 is carved on it. 

44. Ox-gall was a constituent in Elizabethan ink. 

47. cubiculo : lodging, chamber. A Sir Tobyism. 

48. dear manakin. This diminutive of ' man ' is used contemptu- 
ously. For the transposition of ■ dear,' see Abbott, § 419 a. 



scene ii TWELFTH NIGHT 73 

Sir Toby. I have been dear to him, lad, some two thou- 
sand strong, or so. 5° 

Fabian. We shall have a rare letter from him ; but you '11 
not deliver 't ? 

Sir Toby. Never trust me, then ; and by all means stir on 
the youth to an answer. I think oxen and wain-ropes cannot 
hale them together. For Andrew, if he were open'd, and you 
find so much blood in his liver as will clog the foot of a flea, 
I '11 eat the rest of th' anatomy. 57 

Fabian. And his opposite, the youth, bears in his visage 
no great presage of cruelty. 

Sir Toby. Look, where the youngest wren of nine comes. 

Enter Maria. 

Maria. If you desire the spleen, and will laugh yourselves 
into stitches, follow me. Yond gull Malvolio is turn'd hea- 
then, a very renegado ; for there is no Christian, that means 
to be sav'd by believing rightly, can ever believe such impos- 
sible passages of grossness. He 's in yellow stockings. 65 

60. nine Theobald | mine Ff. 63. renegado Rowe | Renegatho Ff. 

49-50. Sir Toby has borrowed so much money from him. 

56. A red liver, or a liver full of blood, was the common badge 
of courage, as a white or bloodless liver was of cowardice. See 
note, I, i, 37. Cf. Macbeth, V ', iii, 15. 

58. opposite: opponent, adversary. So in III, iv, 215, 248. 

60. nine. This emendation of Theobald's is generally accepted. 
Sir Toby is making another reference to the small stature of Maria. 
The wren usually lays about nine eggs, and the last hatched may 
well be supposed to be the smallest. 

61. In the mediaeval- physiology the spleen was regarded as the 
seat of laughter. 

64-65. impossible passages of grossness : incredible acts of stupidity; 
or ' passages ' may be interpreted as * tricks,' ' impositions.' 



74 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act hi 

Sir Toby. And cross-garter'd ? 

Maria. Most villanously ; like a pedant that keeps a 
school i' th' church. I have dogg'd him, like his murderer. 
He does obey every point of the letter that I dropp'd to 
betray him ; he does smile his face into more lines than is in 
the new map, with the augmentation of the Indies : you have 
not seen such a thing as 'tis. I can hardly forbear hurling 
things at him. I know my lady will strike him ; if she do, 
he '11 smile, and ^ take 't for a great favour. 74 

Sir Toby. Come, bring us, bring us where he is. \_Exeunf\ 

Scene III. A street 

Enter Sebastian and Antonio 

Sebastian. I would not by my will have troubled you ; 
But, since you make your pleasure of your pains, 
I will no further chide you. 

Antonio. I could not stay behind you : my desire, 
More sharp than filed steel, did spur me forth ; 5 

And not all love to see you, though so much 
As might have drawn one to a longer voyage, 
But jealousy what might befall your travel, 

Scene III | Scene VI Pope. — A street Capell. 

67-68. Shakespeare always uses ' pedant ' in the sense of * peda- 
gogue.' It seems to have been not unusual for a school to be kept 
in a church. Evelyn tells of receiving his early instruction " at the 
church porch of Wotton." 

71. new map . . . Indies. Probably an allusion to a map which 
appeared in the second edition of Hakluyt's Voyages, 1599. It was 
unusually multilineal, and had a fuller representation of India, Ceylon, 
and the East than any preceding map. 



scene in TWELFTH NIGHT 75 

Being skilless in these parts ; which to a stranger, 
Unguided and unfriended, often prove 10 

Rough and unhospitable. My willing love, 
The rather by these arguments of fear, 
Set forth in your pursuit. 

Sebastian. My kind Antonio, 

I can no other answer make but thanks, 
And thanks, and ever thanks ; too oft good turns 1 5 

Are shufiTd off with such uncurrent pay : 
But, were my worth as is my conscience firm, 
You should find better dealing. What 's to do ? 
Shall we go see the reliques of this town ? 

Antonio. To-morrow, sir ; best first go see your lodging. 

Sebastian. I am not weary, and 't is long to night ; 
I pray you, let us satisfy our eyes 
With the memorials and the things of fame 
That do renown this city. 

Antonio. Would you 'd pardon me ; 

I do not without danger walk these streets. 25 

Once, in a sea-fight, 'gainst the count his galleys 
I did some service ; of such note indeed, 
That, were I ta'en here, it would scarce be answer'd. 

15, 16. Omitted in F2F3F4. — thanks; and ever . . . Globe Camb [ 
thanks, and ever thanks ; too Sey- thanks, and ever thanks ; and Theo- 
mour conj. | thankes : and euer Fi | bald Delius. 

15. The line as it stands in the First Folio is obviously corrupt. 
Upwards of twenty-one emendations have been suggested. See 
Camb or Furness. 

16. shuffl'd off. Cf. Hamlet, III, i, 6j. — uncurrent: worthless. 

17. my worth : what I am worth, my fortune. 

19. reliques : " the memorials and the things of fame," line 23. 
26. his. For this as the sign of the possessive, see Abbott, § 217, 



y6 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act i:i 

Sebastian. Belike you slew great number of his people. 

Antonio. Th' offence is not of such a bloody nature ; 3° 
Albeit the quality of the time and quarrel 
Might well have given us bloody argument. 
It might have since been answer'd in repaying 
What we took from them ; which, for traffic's sake, 
Most of our city did : only myself stood out ; 35 

For which, if I be lapsed in this place, 
I shall pay dear. 

Sebastian. Do not then walk too open. 

Antonio. It doth not fit me. Hold, sir, here 's my purse. 
In the south suburbs, at the Elephant, 

Is best to lodge. I will bespeak our diet, 40 

Whiles you beguile the time and feed your knowledge 
With viewing of the town ; there shall you have me. 

Sebastian. Why I your purse ? 

Antonio. Haply your eye shall light upon some toy 
You have desire to purchase ; and your store, 45 

I think, is not for idle markets, sir. 

Sebastian. I '11 be your purse-bearer and leave you 
For an hour. 

Antonio. To th' Elephant. 

Sebastian. I do remember. \_Exeunt\ 

32. argument : cause, reason. Cf. Hamlet, IV, iv, 54. 

36. lapsed : caught, surprised. The word occurs nowhere else in 
this sense, and not improbably there is some text corruption. Murray 
suggests that ' lapse ' here may be from the substantive ' laps ' (some- 
times written ' lapse ') as used in the expression ' fall into the laps 
of,' i.e. ' come within the power of.' Cf. the German expression 
durch die Lappen gehen, 'to get clear off,' where Lappeti means 
literally a contrivance for catching deer. 

39. London still has an old inn called ' The Elephant and Castle.' 



scene iv TWELFTH NIGHT jy 



Scene IV. Olivia's garden 

Enter Olivia and Maria 

Olivia. I have sent after him ; he says he '11 come. 
How shall I feast him ? what bestow of him ? 
For youth is bought more oft than begg'd or borrow'd. 
I speak too loud. 

Where 's Malvolio ? He is sad and civil, 5 

And suits well for a servant with my fortunes. 
Where is Malvolio ? 

Maria. He 's coming, madam, but in very strange manner. 
He is, sure, possessed, madam. 

Olivia. Why, what 's the matter ? does he rave ? 10 

Maria. No, madam, he does nothing but smile. Your 
ladyship were best to have some guard about you, if he 
come ; for, sure, the man is tainted in 's wits. 

Olivia. Go call him hither. [Exit Maria] I am as mad 
as he, 
If sad and merry madness equal be. ^>^ l $ 

Scene IV I Scene VII Pope. — Madam, Madam, rave. 
Olivia's garden Capell | Ff omit. 14. [Exit Maria] Ff omit. — En- 

4, 5. One line in Ff. — Where 's ter Malvolio Ff (after hither). 

Ff I Where is Pope. 15. merry Fi (Furness reads met- 

8-10. Three lines in Ff ending ry) F3F4 I mercy F2. 

1. he says. But the messenger has not yet returned (see lines 
55-56). In previous editions of Hudson's Shakespeare 'says he' 
was read with the concessive sense, ' if he says.' Probably ' he 
says' is hypothetical, — 'suppose he says.' 

2. of : on. For examples of this usage, see Abbott, § 175. 

5. sad and civil : grave and ceremonious. With this use of * sad,' 
cf. Henry V, IV, i, 318: "the sad and solemn priests"; Paradise 
Lost, VI, 541 : " sad resolution." 



78 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act in 

Re-enter Maria, with Malvolio 

How now Malvolio ! 16 

Malvolio. Sweet lady, ho, ho. 

Olivia. SmiPst thou ? 
I sent for thee upon a sad occasion. 

Malvolio. Sad, lady ! I could be sad ; this does make 
some obstruction in the blood, this cross-gartering ; but what 
of that ? if it please the eye of one, it is with me as the very 
true sonnet is, ' Please one, and please all.' 

Olivia. Why, how dost thou, man ? what is the matter 
with thee? 25 

Malvolio. Not black in my mind, though yellow in my 
legs. It did come to his hands, and commands shall be exe- 
cuted ; I think we do know the sweet Roman hand. 

Olivia. Wilt thou go to bed, Malvolio ? 

Malvolio. To bed ! ay, sweet-heart, and I '11 come to thee. 

Olivia. God comfort thee ! Why dost thou smile so and 
kiss thy hand so oft ? 3 2 

Maria. How do you, Malvolio ? 

Malvolio. At your request! yes; nightingales answer daws. 

Maria. Why appear you with this ridiculous boldness be- 
fore my lady ? 

16. Re-enter.. .Malvolio I Dyce. 24. Olivia | Mai. Fi. 

18, 19. One line in Ff. 28. the | that Rowe. 

20-25. Irregular verse in Ff. 34. Two lines in Ff. 

22-23. A copy of the "very true sonnet" is still in existence. It is 
adorned with a rude portrait of Queen Elizabeth, with her feathered 
fan, starched ruff, and ample farthingale, and is said to have been 
composed by her Majesty's right merry and facetious droll, Dick 
Tarleton. It has the heading, " A prettie new Ballad, intytuled : The 
Crowe sits vpon the Wall, Please one and please all." The last line 
forms the burden, and is repeated in each stanza. 



scene iv TWELFTH NIGHT 79 

Malvolio. ' Be not afraid of greatness '; 't was well writ. 

Olivia. What mean'st thou by that, Malvolio ? 

Malvolio. ' Some are born great/ — 

Olivia. Ha! .4° 

Malvolio. ' Some achieve greatness/ — 

Olivia. What say'st thou ? 

Malvolio. ' And some have greatness thrust upon them.' 

Olivia. Heaven restore thee ! 

Malvolio. ' Remember who commended thy yellow 
stockings/ — 46 

Olivia. Thy yellow stockings ! 

Malvolio. * And wish'd to see thee cross-garter'd.' 

Olivia. Cross-garter'd ! 

Malvolio. ' Go to, thou art made, if thou desir'st to 
be so;' — 5 1 

Olivia. Am I made ? 

Malvolio. ' If not, let me see thee a servant still.' 

Olivia. Why, this is very midsummer madness. 

Enter Servant 

Servant. Madam, the young gentleman of the Count 
Orsino's is return'd : I could hardly entreat him back : he 
attends your ladyship's pleasure. 57 

Olivia. I '11 come to him. [Exit Servant] Good Maria, 
let this fellow be look'd to. Where 's my cousin Toby ? Let 

58. [Exit Servant] Capell. 

52. Am I made : is my fortune made ? Lettsom and others con- 
jecture that Shakespeare originally wrote, "Am I maid?" 

54. " ' 'Tis midsummer moon with you ' is a proverb in Ray's Col- 
lection; signifying, 'you are mad.'" — Steevens. Hot weather was 
of old thought to affect the brain. 



80 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act hi 

some of my people have a special care of him ; I would not 
have him miscarry for the half of my dowry. 

\Exeunt Olivia and Maria] 
Malvolio. O, ho ! do you come near me now ? no worse 
man than Sir Toby to look to me! This concurs directly 
with the letter : she sends him on purpose, that I may appear 
stubborn to him ; for she incites me to that in the letter. 
' Cast thy humble slough/ says she ; ' be opposite with a 
kinsman, surly with servants ; let thy tongue tang with argu- 
ments of state ; put thyself into the trick of singularity'; and, 
consequently, sets down the manner how; as, a sad face, a 
reverent carriage, a slow tongue, in the habit of some sir of 
note, and so forth. I have lim'd her ; but it is Jove's doing, 
and Jove make me thankful ! And, when she went away now, 
* Let this fellow be look'd to ' ; fellow ! not Malvolio, nor after 
my degree, but fellow. Why, every thing adheres together, 
that no dram of a scruple, no scruple of a scruple, no ob- 
stacle, no incredulous or unsafe circumstance, — what can 
be said ? Nothing that can be can come between me and the 
full prospect of my hopes. Well, Jove, not I, is the doer of 
this, and he is to be thank'd. 79 

61. [Exeunt . . . Maria] Exit Ff. 67. tang with F2F3F4 I langer 

62. Scene VI 1 1 Pope. with Fi | tang Capell. 

61. miscarry : come to harm. Cf. The Merchant of Venice, II, viii, 29. 

71-72. lim'd : caught as with bird-lime. Cf. Macbeth, IV, ii, 34. — 
Jove's . . . Jove. " In this, and in most of the other passages where 
Jove is mentioned in this comedy, the probability is that God was the 
original word, which was altered on account of the statute of James I. 
. . . Malvolio, with puritanical sentiments, would freely use the name 
of the Almighty. The change was one frequently made." — Halliwell. 

73. Malvolio takes ' fellow ' in the sense of ' companion,' ' equal/ 

76. incredulous : causing incredulity, incredible. 



scene iv TWELFTH NIGHT 8 1 

Re-enter Maria with Sir Toby and Fabian 

Sir Toby. Which way is he, in the name of sanctity ? If 
all the devils of hell be drawn in little, and Legion himself 
possessed him, yet I '11 speak to him. 

Fabian. Here he is, here he is. How is 't with you, sir ? 
how is 't with you, man ? 84 

Malvolio. Go off ; I discard you : let me enjoy my pri- 
vate ; go off. 

Maria. Lo, how hollow the fiend speaks within him ! did 
not I tell you ? Sir Toby, my lady prays you to have a care 
of him. 

Malvolio. Ah, ha ! does she so ? 9° 

Sir Toby. Go to, go to ; peace, peace ; we must deal 
gently with him : let me alone. How do you, Malvolio ? how 
is 't with you ? What, man ! defy the devil ; consider, he 's 
an enemy to mankind. 

Malvolio. Do you know what you say ? 95 

Maria. La you, and you speak ill of the devil, how he 
takes it at heart ! Pray God, he be not bewitch'd ! My lady 
would not lose him for more than I '11 say. 

Malvolio. How now, mistress ! 

Maria. O Lord ! 100 

Sir Toby. Prithee, hold thy peace ; this is not the way : 
do you not see you move him ? let me alone with him. 

Fabian. No way but gentleness ; gently, gently : the fiend 
is rough, and will not be roughly us'd. 

Sir Toby. Why, how now, my bav/cock ! how dost thou, 
chuck ? 106 

80. Scene IX Pope. 96. and Ff | an Capell. 

91. to ... to I too . . . too Ff. 105. bawcock F1F2 I havoc F3F4. 

105. bawcock : fine fellow. Fr. beau coq. Cf. Henry V, III, ii, 26. 



82 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act hi 

Malvolio. Sir ! 

Sir Toby. Ay, Biddy, come with me. What, man ! 't is 
not for gravity to play at cherry-pit with Satan. Hang him, 
foul collier! no 

Maria. Get him to say his prayers ; good Sir Toby, get 
him to pray. 

Malvolio. My prayers, minx ! 

Maria. No, I warrant you, he will not hear of godliness. 

Malvolio. Go, hang yourselves all ! you are idle shallow 
things. I am not of your element ; you shall know more 
hereafter. [Exit] 

Sir Toby. Is 't possible ? 118 

Fabian. If this were play'd upon a stage now, I could 
condemn it as an improbable fiction. 

Sir Toby. His very genius hath taken the infection of 
the device, man. 

Maria. Nay, pursue him now, lest the device take air 
and taint. 

Fabian. Why, we shall make him mad indeed. 125 

Maria. The house will be the quieter. 

Sir Toby. Come, we '11 have him in a dark room and 

120. improbable | unprofitable F3F4. 123. lest F4 I least F1F2F3. 

108. Biddy . . . me. Probably a snatch of an old song. 

109. cherry-pit. A game of pitching cherry stones into a hole. 
no. 'Collier' was a well-known term of abuse. "The devil is 

called ' Collier ' for his blackness. ' Like will to like,' quoth the 
Devil to the Collier." — Johnson. Greene, in his Notable Discovery 
of Coos(e)nage (i.e. 'fraud,' 'thieving'), has much to say on the 
" coosenage of Colliars." 

127-128. A common way of treating lunatics until the close of 
the eighteenth century. Cf. The Comedy of Errors, IV, iv, 95-97 ; 
As You Like It, III, ii, 421. 






scene iv TWELFTH NIGHT 83 

bound. My niece is already in the belief that he 's mad : we 
may carry it thus, for our pleasure and his penance, till our 
very pastime, tired out of breath, prompt us to have mercy 
on him ; at which time we will bring the device to the bar, and 
crown thee for a finder of madmen. But see, but see. 132 

Enter Sir Andrew 

Fabian. More matter for a May morning. 
Sir Andrew. Here 's the challenge, read it ; I warrant 
there 's vinegar and pepper in 't. 135 

Fabian. Is 't so saucy ? 
Sir Andrew. Ay, is 't, I warrant him ; do but read. 

Sir Toby. Give me. [Reads] Youth, whatsoever thou art, 
thou art but a scurvy fellow. 

Fabian. Good, and valiant. 140 

Sir Toby. [Reads] Wonder not, nor admire not in thy mind, 
why I do call thee so, for I will show thee no reason for 't. 

Fabian. A good note ; that keeps you from the blow of 
the law. 

Sir Toby. [Reads] Thou com'st to the lady Olivia, and in 
my sight she uses thee kindly : but thou liest in thy throat ; that 
is not the matter I challenge thee for. 147 

133. Scene X Pope. 138, 141, etc. [Reads] Rowe I Ff omit. 

132. finder. A quibble on the legal phrase, 'find guilty.' "An 
allusion to the witchfinders who were very busy." — Johnson. 

133. The May-day sports were scenes of such revelry that the 
Puritans did what they could to put them down. " Diuers warlike 
shewes, with good Archers, Morice-dauncers, and other deuices for 
pastime all the day long, and towards the Evening, they had stage 
playes and Bonefiers in the streets." — Stowe, Survey of London. 

141. admire : be astonished. — nor . . . not. See Abbott, § 406. 



84 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act hi 

Fabian. Very brief, and to exceeding good sense — less. 
Sir Toby. \_Reads\ I will waylay thee going home ; where 
if it be thy chance to kill me, — 1 50 

FABIAJN_Good. 

Sir Toby. \Reads\ Thou kill 'st me like a rogue and a 
villain. 

Fabian. Still you keep o' th' windy side of the law ; good. 

Sir Toby. \Reads\ Fare thee well ; and God have mercy 
upon one of our souls ! He may have mercy upon mine ; but my 
hope is better, and so look to thyself. Thy friend, as thou usest 
him, and thy sworn enemy, Andrew Aguecheek. 158 

If this letter move him not, his legs cannot ; I '11 give 't him. 

Maria. You may have very fit occasion for 't ; he is now 
in some commerce with my lady, and will by and by depart. 

Sir Toby. Go, Sir Andrew ; scout me for him at the 
corner of the orchard, like a bum-baily. So soon as ever 
thou see'st him, draw ; and, as thou drawest, swear hor- 
rible ; for it comes to pass oft, that a terrible oath, with a 
swaggering accent sharply twang'd off, gives manhood more 

148. sense— less I sence-lesse F1F2. 164-165. horrible Fi | horribly F2. 

148. The ' — less ' is added, of course, as an ' aside.' 

154. Of course 'windy' here means 'safe.' The figure is probably 

from hunting, but some take it from seamanship. Cf. Much Ado 

About Nothing, II, i, 327. 

155-157. " The man on whose soul he hopes that God will have 

mercy is the one that he supposes will fall in the combat ; but Sir 

Andrew hopes to escape unhurt, and to have no present occasion 

for that blessing." — Mason. 

161. commerce : conversation. Cf. Tennyson, In Memoriam, lxxxv: 

So hold I commerce with the dead ; 
Or so methinks the dead would say. 

162. me. The ethical dative. See note, III, ii, 30. 

163. bum-baily. "A contemptuous synonym of ' bailiff.' " — Murray. 



scene iv TWELFTH NIGHT 85 

approbation than ever proof itself would have earn'd him. 
Away ! 168 

Sir Andrew. Nay, let me alone for swearing. [Exit] 
Sir Toby. Now will not I deliver his letter; for the 
behaviour of the young gentleman gives him out to be of 
good capacity and breeding ; his employment between his 
lord and my niece confirms no less : therefore this letter, 
being so excellently ignorant, will breed no terror in the 
youth ; he will find it comes from a clodpole. But, sir, I will 
deliver his challenge by word of mouth ; set upon Aguecheek 
a notable report of valour ; and drive the gentleman, as I 
know his youth will aptly receive it, into a most hideous 
opinion of his rage, skill, fury, and impetuosity. This will 
so fright them both, that they will kill one another by the 
look, like cockatrices. 181 

Re-enter Olivia with Viola 

Fabian. Here he comes with your niece ; give them way 
till he take leave, and presently after him. 

Sir Toby. I will meditate the while upon some horrid 
message for a challenge. 

[Exeunt Sir Toby, Fabian, and Maria] 

Olivia. I have said too much unto a heart of stone, 186 
And laid mine honour too unchary out. 
There 's something in me that reproves my fault ; 

175. it Fi I that it F2F3F4. 185. [Exeunt... Maria] Fi omits. 

182. Scene XI Pope. 187. out Theobald | on 't Ff. 

181. The ' cockatrice ' is an imaginary serpent, " identified with 
the basilisk, fabulously said to kill by its mere glance, and to be 
hatched from a cock's egg.^ — Murray. Cf. Romeo and Juliet, III, 
ii, 47 : " the death-darting eye of cockatrice." See Murray for the 
very curious ' sense-history * of the word. 



86 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act in 

But such a headstrong potent fault it is, 

That it but mocks reproof. 19° 

Viola. With the same haviour that your passion bears, 
Goes on my master's grief. 

Olivia. Here, wear this jewel for me, 't is my picture : 
Refuse it not ; it hath no tongue to vex you : 
And I beseech you come again to-morrow. 195 

What shall you ask of me that I '11 deny, 
That honour sav'd may upon asking give ? 

Viola. Nothing but this, — your true love for my master. 

Olivia. How with mine honour may I give him that 
Which I have given to you ? 

Viola. I will acquit you. 200 

Olivia. Well, come again to-morrow ; fare thee well. 
A fiend like thee might bear my soul to hell. [Exit] 

Re-enter Sir Toby and Fabian 

Sir Toby. Gentleman, God save thee ! 

Viola. And you, sir. 204 

Sir Toby. That defence thou hast, betake thee to 't. Of 
what nature the wrongs are thou hast done him, I know not ; 
but thy intercepter, full of despite, bloody as the hunter, at- 
tends thee at the orchard-end. Dismount thy tuck, be yare in 
thy preparation ; for thy assailant is quick, skilful, and deadly. 

Viola. You mistake, sir ; I am sure no man hath any 

192. grief Rowe | greefes F1F2 I 203. Scene XII Pope, 

griefs FsF4. 205. thee to *t I the too 't Fi. 

191. haviour. Originally a different word from 'behaviour.' 
207-208. intercepter : opponent. — attends : is waiting for. 
208. Dismount thy tuck : unsheathe thy sword. Sir Toby purposely 
is using pompous and affected phrases. — yare : ready. 



scene iv TWELFTH NIGHT 87 

jquarreHo me : my remembrance is very free and clear from, 
any image of offence donlTtx^mj^an. 212 

Sir Toby. You TTfind it otherwise, I assure you. There- 
fore, if you hold your life at any price, betake you to your 
guard ; for your opposite hath in him what youth, strength, 
skill, and wrath can furnish man withal. 216 

Viola. I pray you, sir, what is he ? 

Sir Toby. He is knight, dubb'd with unhatch'd rapier and 
on carpet consideration ; but he is a devil in private brawl : 
souls and bodies hath he divorc'd three ; and his incense- 
ment at this moment is so implacable that satisfaction can 
be none but by pangs of death and sepulchre. Hob, nob, is 
his word; give 't or take 't. 223 

Viola. I will return again into the house and desire 
some conduct of the lady. I am no fighter. I have heard 
of some kind of men that put quarrels purposely on others, 
to taste their valour ; belike this is a man of that quirk. 227 

Sir Toby. Sir, no ; his indignation derives itself out of a 
very competent injury. Therefore get you on and give him 
his desire. Back you shall not to the house, unless you un- 
dertake that with me which with as much safety you might 

218. unhatch'd | unhacked Pope. 

218-219. unhatch'd : unhacked. Cf. the engraver's term ' cross- 
hatching.' The general meaning here may be gathered from Randle 
Holme. Speaking of a certain class of knights, he says : 

They are termed simply knights of the ' carpet,' or knights of the green 
cloth, to distinguish them from knights that are dubbed as soldiers in the 
field ; though in these days they are created or dubbed with the like cere- 
mony as the others are, by the stroke of a naked sword upon the shoulder. 

222. Hob, nob : have or have not, give or take. 

225. conduct: escort. Cf. The Merchant of Venice, IV, i, 148. 

227. taste: make trial of. Cf. Ill, i, 75. — quirk: humor. 



88 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act hi 

answer him. Therefore on, or strip your sword stark naked ; 
for meddle you must, that 's certain, or forswear to wear iron 
about you. 234 

Viola. This is as uncivil as strange. I beseech you, do 
me this courteous office, as to know of the knight what my 
offence to him is ; it is something of my negligence, nothing 
of my purpose. 

Sir Toby. I will do so. Signior Fabian, stay you by this 
gentleman till my return. \Exit~\ 

Viola. Pray you, sir, do you know of this matter ? 241 

Fabian. I know the knight is incens'd against you, even to 
a mortal arbitrement ; but nothing of the circumstance more. 

Viola. I beseech you, what manner of man is he ? 244 

Fabian. Nothing of that wonderful promise, to read him 
by his form, as you are like to find him in the proof of his 
valour. He is, indeed, sir, the most skilful, bloody, and fatal 
opposite that you could possibly have found in any part of 
Illyria. Will you walk towards him ? I will make your peace 
with him, if I can. 250 

Viola. I shall be much bound to you for 't. I am one 
that had rather go with sir priest than sir knight ; I care not 
who knows so much of my mettle. \Exeunt\ 

252. ' Sir ' was in common use as a clerical title in Shakespeare's 
time, and long before. Cf . Sir Oliver Martext in As Yon Like It, and Sir 
Hugh, the Welsh parson, in The Merry Wives of Windsor. Cf. Scott, 
The Fair Maid of Perth, Chapter XX: "... A priest and parson of 
St. John's, . . . like all the priests of the period (who were called 
from that circumstance the Pope's Knights), received the honour- 
able title of Dominns, contracted into Do'm, or Don, or translated 
into Sir, the title of reverence due to the secular chivalry." Viola's 
fright does not quench her humor, or her sense of the ludicrous in 
her position. She would rather be one of the parties in a marriage 
than in a duel. 



scene iv TWELFTH NIGHT 89 

Re-enter Sir Toby, with Sir Andrew 

Sir Toby. Why, man, he 's a very devil ; I have not seen 
such a firago. I had a pass with him, rapier, scabbard, and 
all, and he gives me the stuck in with such a mortal motion 
that it is inevitable ; and, on the answer, he pays you as 
surely as your feet hits the ground they step on. They say 
he has been fencer to the Sophy. 

Sir Andrew. Pox on 't, I '11 not meddle with him. 260 

Sir Toby. Ay, but he will not now be pacified ; Fabian 
can scarce hold him yonder. 

Sir Andrew. Plague on 't, and I thought he had been 
valiant and so cunning in fence, I 'd have seen him damn'd 
ere I 'd have challeng'd him. Let him let the matter slip, 
and I '11 give him my horse, gray Capilet. 266 

Sir Toby. I '11 make the motion. Stand here, make a good 
show on 't ; this shall end without the perdition of souls. / 
[Aside] Marry, I '11 ride your horse as well as I ride you. 

-"""' Re-enfer Fabian and Viola 

[To Fabian] I have his horse to take up the quarrel ; I have 
persuaded him the youth 's a devil. 271 

254. Scene XIII Pope | Scene V Camb Delius. 
Dyce Staunton. — Re-enter . . . An- 263. and I Ff | an I Theobald. 

drew Capell I Enter Toby and An- 266. Capilet | Capulet Dyce. 



drew Ff. 269. 

258. hits Ff I hit Rowe Globe 270, 



Aside] Theobald. 
To Fabian] Rowe. 



254. In previous editions of Hudson's Shakespeare, as in the 
editions of Dyce and Staunton, a new scene began here, with the 
setting, " The street adjoining Olivia's garden." 

255. firago. This Tobyism for i virago ' has added terror as applied 
to a man. Cf. Sir Andrew's application of 'Jezebel' to Malvolio. 

256. stuck: thrust. A corruption of stoccado (stoccata). 
259. Sophy : the Shah of Persia. See note, II, v, 165. 
270. take up : make up. Cf. As You Like It, V, iv, 104. 



90 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act in 

Fabian. He is as horribly conceited of him ; and pants 
and looks pale, as if a bear were at his heels. 

Sir Toby. [To Viola] There 's no remedy, sir ; he will 
fight with you for's oath sake. Marry, he hath better be- 
thought him of his quarrel, and he finds that now scarce to 
be worth talking of : therefore draw, for the supportance of 
his vow ; he protests he will not hurt you. 

Viola. [Aside] Pray God defend me ! A little thing would 
make me tell them how much I lack of a man. 280 

Fabian. Give ground, if you see him furious. 

Sir Toby. Come, Sir Andrew, there 's no remedy ; the 
gentleman will, for his honour's sake, have one bout with 
you ; he cannot by the duello avoid it ; but he has promis'd 
me, as he is a gentleman and a soldier, he will not hurt you. 
Come on ; to 't. 286 

Sir Andrew. Pray God, he keep his oath ! 

Viola. I do assure you 't is against my will. [They draw] 

Enter Antonio 

Antonio. Put up your sword. If this young gentleman 
Have done offence, I take the fault on me ; 2 9° 

If you offend him, I for him defy you. 

Sir Toby. You, sir ! why, what are you ? 

Antonio. One, sir, that for .his love dares yet do more 
Than you have heard him brag to you he will. 294 

Sir Toby. Nay, if you be an undertaker, I am for you. 

[They draw] 



274. 
279. 
288. 



To Viola] Capell. 289. Scene XIV Pope. — P 'tcr 

Aside] Capell. Antonio Ff (after line 287). 

They draw] Rowe. 295. {They draw] Globe Camb. 



272. is as horribly conceited : has as horrible a conception. 
295. undertaker : one who undertakes another's business. 



scene iv TWELFTH NIGHT 9 1 

Enter Officers 

Fabian. O good Sir Toby, hold ! here come the officers. 

Sir Toby. I '11 be with you anon. 

Viola. Pray, sir, put your sword up, if you please. 

Sir Andrew. Marry, will I, sir ; and, for that I promised 
you, I '11 be as good as my word ; he will bear you easily, 
and reins well. 3 01 

1 Officer. This is the man ; do thy office. 

2 Officer. Antonio, I arrest thee at the suit 
Of Count Orsino. 

Antonio. You do mistake me, sir. 

1 Officer. No, sir, no jot ; I know your favour well, 
Though now you have no sea-cap on your head. 3°6 
Take him away ; he knows I know him well. 

Antonio. I must obey. [To Viola] This comes with 
seeking you : 
But there 's no remedy ; I shall answer it. 
What will you do, now my necessity 3 10 

Makes me to ask you for my purse ? It grieves me 
Much more for what I cannot do for you 
Than what befalls myself. You stand amaz'd ; 
But be of comfort. 

2 Officer. Come, sir, away. 3 : 5 
Antonio. I must entreat of you some of that money. 
Viola. What money, sir ? 

For the fair kindness you have show'd me here, 

And, part, being prompted by your present trouble, 

Out of my lean and low ability 3 20 

I '11 lend you something. My having is not much ; 






301. reins Rowe | raines F1F2F3. 308. [To Viola] Collier. 



92 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act hi 

I '11 make division of my present with you : 
Hold, there 's half my coffer. , 

Antonio. Will you deny me now ? 

Is 't possible that my deserts to you 

Can lack persuasion ? Do not tempt my misery, 3 2 5 

Lest that it make me so unsound a man 
As to upbraid you with those kindnesses 
That I have done for you. 

Viola. I know of none ; 

Nor know I you by voice or any featun^/ 
I hate ingratitude more in a man jf 33° 

Than lying, vainness, babbling, drunkenness, 
Or any taint of vice whose strong corruption 
Inhabits our frail blood. 

Antonio. O heavens themselves ! 

2 Officer. Come, sir, I pray you, go. 

Antonio. Let me speak a little. This youth that you see 
here 335 

I snatch'd one half out of the jaws of death, 
Reliev'd him with such sanctity of love, 
And to his image, which methought did promise 
Most venerable worth, did I devotion. 

i Officer. What ? s that to us ? The time goes by ; away ! 

Antonio. But O how vile an idol proves this god ! 34 * 
Thou hast, Sebastian, done good feature shame. 
In nature there 's no blemish but the mind ; 
None can be call'd j deforni'JLbut the unkind. y* 

Virtue is beauty ; but the beauteous evil 345 



331. lying, vainness Ff I lying vain- Ff I babbling drunkenness Globe 
ness Globe Camb Delius. — babbling, Camb Delius. 
drunkenness I babling drunkenness 339. venerable | veritable Collier. 



scene iv TWELFTH NIGHT 93 

Are empty trunks, o'erflourish'd by the devil. 

1 Officer. The man grows mad ; away with him ! 
Come, come, sir. 

Antonio. Lead me on. [Exit with Officers] 

Viola. Methinks his words do from such passion fly 35° 
That he believes himself ; so do not I. 
Prove true, imagination, O, prove true, 
That I, dear brother, be now ta'en for you ! 

Sir Toby. Come hither, knight ; come hither, Fabian ; 
we '11 whisper o'er a couplet or two of most sage saws. 355 

Viola. He nam'd Sebastian. I my brother know 
Yet living in my glass ; even such and so 
In favour was my brother ; and he went 
Still in this fashion, colour, ornament, 

For him I imitate. O, if it prove, 360 

Tempests are kind, and salt waves fresh in love ! [Exit] 

Sir. To by. A very dishonest paltry boy, and more a 
coward than a hare : his dishonesty appears in leaving his 
friend here in necessity and denying him ; and for his 
cowardship, ask Fabian. 365 

Fabian. A coward, a most devout coward, religious in it. 

Sir Andrew. 'Slid, I '11 after him again and beat him. 

Sir Toby. Do ; cuff him soundly, but never draw thy 
sword. 369 

Sir Andrew. And I do not, — [Exit] 

Fabian. Come, let 's see the event. 

Sir Toby. I dare lay any money 't will be nothing yet. 

[Exeunt] 

370. And Ff I An Theobald. 






346. trunks, o'erflourish'd : chests elaborately carved. 

367. 'Slid. Another petty oath, corrupted from ' God's eyelid. 5 



ACT IV 

Scene I. Before Olivia's house 

Enter Sebastian and Clown 

Clown. Will you make me believe that I am not sent 
for you ? 

Sebastian. Go to, go to, thou art a foolish fellow ; 
Let me be clear of thee. 4 

Clown. Well held out, i' faith ! No, I do not know you ; 
nor I am not sent to you by my lady, to bid you come speak 
with her ; nor your name is not Master Cesario ; nor this is 
not my nose neither. Nothing that is so is so. 

Sebastian. I prithee, vent thy folly somewhere else ; 
Thou know'st not me. 10 

Clown. Vent my folly ! He has heard that word of some 
great man, and now applies it to a fool. Vent my folly ! I 
am afraid this great lubber, the world, will prove a cockney. 
I prithee now, ungird thy strangeness, and tell me what I 

Before Olivia's house Globe | The 3. to ... to I too . . . too Ff. 

street Rowe | Ff omit. 9-10, 17-19. Prose in Ff. 

1. Will you : do you wish to. Cf. Fr. veux-tu. 

13. lubber . . . cockney : big, stupid world will soon become a 
pampered weakling. Some interpret, The world will show this lubber 
(Sebastian) to be a cockney. For 'cockney' in the sense of 'pam- 
pered weakling,' see Murray. 

14. ungird thy strangeness : put off your haughty bearing. 

94 



scene I TWELFTH NIGHT 95 

shall vent to my lady; shall I vent to her that thou art 
coming? 16 

Sebastian. I prithee, foolish Greek, depart from me. 
There 's money for thee ; if you tarry longer, 
I shall give worse payment. l 9 

Clown. By my troth, thou hast an open hand. These 
wise men that give fools money get themselves a good report 
after fourteen years' purchase. 

Enter Sir Andrew, Sir Toby, and Fabian 

Sir Andrew. Now, sir, have I met you again ? there 's 
for you. 2 4 

Sebastian. Why, there 's for thee, and there, and there. 
Are all the people mad ? 

Sir Toby. Hold, sir, or I '11 throw your dagger o'er the 
house. 

Clown. This will I tell my lady straight. I would not be 
in some of your coats for twopence. [Exit] 

Sir Toby. Come on, sir; hold. 3 1 

Sir Andrew. Nay, let him alone : I '11 go another way to 
work with him ; I '11 have an action of battery against him, 
if there be any law in Illyria : though I struck him first, yet 
it 's no matter for that. 35 

Sebastian. Let go thy hand. 

17. Greek F3F4 I greeke F1F2. 30. [Exit] Rowe. 

ax. wise men | Wise-men Ff. 34. struck F4 I stroke F1F2. 

17. * Greek ' was proverbial for ' merry fellow,' 'roysterer.' 'Grig' 
in ' merry as a grig' is connected with this sense of 'Greek.' 

22. Twelve years' purchase was the average price of land in 
Shakespeare's day, so that the price mentioned for a good report 
from a fool is extravagantly high. 



96 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act iv 

Sir Toby. Come, sir, I will not let you go. Come, my 
young soldier, put up your iron : you are well flesh'd ; 
come on. 

Sebastian. I will be free from thee. What wouldst thou 
now ? 40 

If thou dar'st tempt me further, draw thy sword. 

Sir Toby. What, what ? Nay, then I must have an ounce 
or two of this malapert blood from you. 

Enter Olivia 

Olivia. Hold, Toby ; on thy life, I charge thee, hold ! 
Sir Toby. Madam ! 45 

Olivia. Will it be ever thus ? Ungracious wretch, 

Fit for the mountains and the barbarous caves, 

Where manners ne'er were preach'd ! Out of my sight ! 

Be not offended, dear Cesario. 

Rudesby, be gone ! 

\Exeunt Sir Toby, Sir Andrew, and Fabian] 
I prithee, gentle friend, 5° 

Let thy fair wisdom, not thy passion, sway 

In this uncivil and unjust extent 

44. Scene II Pope. 50. [Exeunt . . . Fabian] Capell. 

38. are well flesh'd : have tasted blood enough. < To flesh ' was, in 
hunting phrase, ' to render an animal eager for prey by the taste of 
blood.' So * to flesh ' one's sword was ' to use it for the first time in 
battle.' Cf. 1 Henry IV, V, iv, 133-134. Sir Toby means to intimate 
that Sebastian, whom he supposes to be Viola, is too young to have 
handled that manly weapon before. 

50. Rudesby: ruffian. Cf. The Taming of the Shrew, III, ii, 10. 

52. extent : attack. " In law, a writ of execution, whereby goods 
are seized for the king. It is therefore taken here for violence in 
general." — Johnson. 



scene ii TWELFTH NIGHT 97 

Against thy peace. Go with me to my house ; 

And hear thou there how many fruitless pranks 

This ruffian hath botch'd up, that thou thereby 55 

Mayst smile at this : thou shalt not choose but go ; 

Do not deny. Beshrew his soul for me, 

He started one poor heart of mine in thee. 

Sebastian. What relish is in this ? how runs the stream ? 
Or I am mad, or else this is a dream. 60 

Let fancy still my sense in Lethe steep ; 
If it be thus to dream, still let me sleep 1 

Olivia. Nay, come, I prithee. Would thou'dst be ruFd 
by me ! 

Sebastian. Madam, I will. 

Olivia. O, say so, and so be ! 

\Exeunt\ 

Scene II. Olivia's house 

Enter Maria and Clown 

Maria. Nay, I prithee, put on this gown and this beard ; 
make him believe thou art Sir Topas the curate : do it quickly ; 
I '11 call Sir Toby the whilst. [Exit] 

Clown. Well, I '11 put it on, and I will dissemble myself 
in 't ; and I would I were the first that ever dissembl'd in 
such a gown. I am not tall enough to become the function 
well, nor lean enough to be thought a good student ; but to 

63. prithee | pray Pope. Olivia's house Rowe | Ff omit. 

Scene II | Scene III Pope.— 3. [Ext/] Ff omit. 

58. The old quibble between * heart ' and « hart.' Cf. I, i, 17. 
6. tall : large, robust. Able ' to set off ' the gown. 



V 



98 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act iv 

be said an honest man and a good housekeeper goes as fairly 

as to say a careful man and a great scholar. The competitors 

enter. 10 

Enter Sir Toby and Maria 

Sir Toby. Jove bless thee, master parson ! 

Clown. Bonos dies,. Sir Toby : for, as the old hermit of 
Prague, that never saw pen and ink, very wittily said to a 
niece of King Gorboduc, ' That that is is ' ; so I, being master 
parson, am master parson ; for, what is ' that ' but ' that/ and 
'is 'but 'is'? 16 

Sir Toby. To him, Sir Topas. 

Clown. What, ho, I say, peace in this prison ! 

Sir Toby. The knave counterfeits well ; a good knave. 

Malvolio. [ Within] Who- calls there ? 20 

Clown. Sir Topas the curate, who comes to visit Malvo- 
lio the lunatic. 

Malvolio. Sir Topas, Sir Topas, good Sir Topas, go to 
my lady. 2 4 

Clown. Out, hyperbolical fiend ! how vexest thou this 
man ! talkest thou nothing but of ladies ? 

11. Enter . . . Maria Theobald | 14. Gorboduc | Gorbodacke F1F2. 

Enter Toby Ff . 20. Malvolio within Ff (as a stage 

11, 14, etc. master | M. Ff. direction). 

8. housekeeper: host. Cf. 'housekeeping,' 2 Henry VI, I, i, 191. 

9. competitors : accomplices. Cf. Richard III, IV, iv, 506. 

14. Gorboduc. The legendary British king, the woes of whose 
sons, Ferrex and Porrex, are the theme of the first regular English 
tragedy. The niece of the old king and the hermit of Prague belong 
doubtless to the realm of the Vapians, Pigrogromitus (II, iii, 22), and 
Quinapalus (I, v, 32). 

14-16. A burlesque on the language of the Schoolmen. 

25. hyperbolical. Feste's humorous derangement of ' diabolical.' 



flU ft*/""' ' 

scene ii TWELFTH NIGHT 99 

Sir Toby. Well said, master parson. 

Malvolio. Sir Topas, never was man thus wrong'd ; 
good Sir Topas, do not think I am mad : they have laid me 
here in hideous darkness. 3° 

Clown. Fie, thou dishonest Satan ! I call thee by the 
most modest terms ; for I am one of those gentle ones that 
will use the devil himself with courtesy. Say'st thou that 
house is dark ? 

Malvolio. As hell, Sir Topas. 35 

Clown. Why, it hath bay-windows transparent as barri- 
cadoes, and the clerestories toward the south north are as 
lustrous as ebony ; and yet complainest thou of obstruction ? 

Malvolio. I am not mad, Sir Topas ; I say to you, this 
house is dark. 40 

Clown. Madman, thou errest : I say, there is no dark- 
ness but ignorance ; in which thou art more puzzl'd than the 
Egyptians in their fog. 

Malvolio. I say, this house is as dark as ignorance, 
though ignorance were as dark as hell ; and I say, there was 
never man thus abus'd. I am no more mad than you are ; 
make the trial of it in any constant question. 

31. Satan Dyce I Sathan Ff. cleare stones F2 I clearstores Globe | 

37. clerestories | cleere stores Fi | clearstories Camb Delius. 

37. The ' clerestory ' (' clearstory') is the upper story of the nave 
of a church, perforated by windows admitting light to the central 
part of the building. Here * clerestories ' is used for the windows. 

43. Egyptians in their fog. Cf. Exodus, x, 21. 

47. constant question : logical discussion. Or it may refer to re- 
peating the question asked in the sense of Hamlet, III, iv, 141-144: 

it is not madness 
That I have utter'd : bring me to the test, 
And I the matter will re-word. 



IOO THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act iv 

Clown. What is the opinion of Pythagoras concerning 
wild fowl ? 49 

Malvolio. That the soul of our grandam might haply 
inhabit a bird. 

Clown. What think'st thou of his opinion ? 

Malvolio. I think nobly of the soul, and no way approve 
his opinion. 54 

Clown. Fare thee well. Remain thou still in darkness ; 
thou shalt hold th' opinion of Pythagoras ere I will allow of 
thy wits, and fear to kill a woodcock lest thou dispossess the 
soul of thy grandam. Fare thee well. 

Malvolio. Sir Topas, Sir Topas ! 

Sir Toby. My most exquisite Sir Topas ! 60 

Clown. Nay, I am for all waters. 

Maria. Thou mightst have done this without thy beard 
and gown ; he sees thee not. 

Sir Toby. To him in thine own voice, and bring me 
word how thou find'st him ; I would we were well rid of 
this knavery. If he may be conveniently delivered, I would 
he were, for I am now so far in offence with my niece that I 

49. wildfowl|Wilde-fowleFiF2F3l 5^ th' opinion Ff | the opinion 
Wild-f oule F4 1 the soul Theobald conj. Globe Camb. 

50. haply Capell Globe Camb De- 58. soul I soule Fi I house F2F3F4. 
lius I happily Ff Rowe Pope Johnson. 65. well Fi I all F2F3F4. 

48. ' The opinion of Pythagoras ' refers to the doctrine of the 
transmigration of souls. Cf. The Merchant of Venice, IV, i, 131 ; As 
You Like It, III, ii, 187. 

57. a woodcock. See note, II, v, yy. 

61. am for all waters : can turn my hand to anything, assume any 
character. Malone quotes Florio's Montaigne : " He hath an oar in 
every water, and meddleth with all things"; but he adds, "The 
metaphor is probably that of a fish 'which can swim equally well in 
all waters.' " 



scene ii TWELFTH NIGHT IOI 

cannot pursue with any safety this sport to the upshot. Come 
by and by to my chamber. [Exeunt Sir Toby and Maria] 

Clown. [Singing\ Hey, Robin, jolly Robin, 7° 

Tell me how thy lady does. 

Malvolio. Fool, — 

Clown. My lady is unkind, perdy. 

Malvolio. Fool, — 

Clown. Alas, why is she so? 75 

Malvolio. Fool, I say, — 

Clown. She loves another — Who calls, ha ? 

Malvolio.. Good fool, as ever thou wilt deserve well at 
my hand, help me to a candle, and pen, ink, and paper ; as I 
am a gentleman, I will live to be thankful to thee for 't. 80 

Clown. Master Malvolio ? 

Malvolio. Ay, good fool. 

Clown. Alas, sir, how fell you besides your five wits ? 

Malvolio. Fool, there was never man so notoriously 
abus'd ; I am as well in my wits, fool, as thou art. 85 

Clown. But as well ? then you are mad indeed, if you be 
no better in your wits than a fool. 

Malvolio. They have here propertied me ; keep me in 

68. to the Rowe | the Ff. 81. Master Steevens | Mr. Rowe 

69. [Exeunt . . . | Exit Ff. Pope Capell I M. Ff. 

70. Scene IV Pope. 86. you are | thou art Rowe. 

68. upshot : the decisive shot, the conclusion. An archery term, 
used of old in a dignified way. Cf. Hamlet, V, ii, 395. 

70. This song is given in Percy's Reliques. 

84-85. notoriously abus'd : outrageously ill used. Cf. V, i, 317. 

88. propertied me. Used probably in the double sense of (1) 'taken 
possession of me as a man unable to look after himself,' and (2) 
1 thrown me, like a useless stage property, into a dark lumber room.' 



102 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act iv 

darkness, send ministers to me, asses, and do all they can to 
face me out of my wits. 90 

Clown. Advise you what you say ; the minister is here. 
Malvolio, Malvolio, thy wits the heavens restore ! endeavour 
thyself to sleep, and leave thy vain bibble babble. 

Malvolio. Sir Topas ! 94 

Clown. Maintain no words with him, good fellow. Who, 
I, sir ? not I, sir. God be wi' you, good Sir Topas ! Marry, 
amen. I will, sir, I will. 

Malvolio. Fool, fool, fool, I say ! 

Clown. Alas, sir, be patient. What say you, sir ? I am 
shent for speaking to you. 100 

Malvolio. Good fool, help me to some light and some 
paper. I tell thee, I am as well in my wits as any man in 
Illyria. 

Clown. Well-a-day that you were, sir ! 104 

Malvolio. By this hand, I am. Good fool, some ink, 
paper, and light ; and convey what I will set down to my 
lady. It shall advantage thee more than ever the bearing of 
letter did. 

96. be wi' you | buy you Ff. 97. sir, I will Fi I sir, I will, sir F2. 

91. Advise you : be careful. The Clown, in the dark, acts two 
persons, and counterfeits, by variation of voice, a dialogue between 
himself and Sir Topas ; the preceding part of this speech being 
spoken as Clown, the following as Priest. 

92-93. endeavour thyself. Cf. Book of Common Prayer, Collect, 
Second Sunday after Easter : " and also daily endeavour ourselves." 

93. bibble babble : idle chatter, tittle-tattle. Cf. Fluellen's ' pibble 
pabble,' Henry V, IV, i, 71. 

96. God be wi* you. The ' God buy ' of the Folios represents the 
transition to the modern * Good by.' 

100. shent : scolded. Cf. Hamlet, III, ii, 416. 



scene ii TWELFTH NIGHT 103 

Clown. I will help you to 't. But tell me true, are you 
not mad indeed, or do you but counterfeit ? no 

Malvolio. Believe me, I am not ; I tell thee true. 

Clown. Nay, I '11 ne'er believe a madman till I see his 
brains. I will fetch you light and paper and ink. 

Malvolio. Fool, I '11 requite it in the highest degree ; I 
prithee, be gone. 1 1 5 

Clown. [Singing] I am gone, sir, 

And anon, sir, 
I '11 be with you again, 

In a trice, 

Like to the old Vice, 120 

Your need to sustain ; 

Who, with dagger of lath, 
In his rage and his wrath, 

Cries, ah, ha ! to the devil : 
Like a mad lad, 125 

Pare thy nails, dad ; 

Adieu, goodman devil. [Exit] 

116. [Singing] Ff omit. devil Globe Camb | Devil F3F4 1 diuell 

116-127. Eight lines in Ff. Fi I Direll F2 I Drivel Rowe | drivel 

127. goodman | good man Ff. — Delius | Mean-evil Johnson conj. 

120-126. The Vice and the Devil were prominent personages in 
che old miracle plays and moral plays. 'Ho, ho ! ' and 'Ah, ha ! » 
vere among their stereotyped exclamations or ' roarings.' The Vice 
jsed to belabor the Devil with various indignities, and, among them, 
chreaten to pare his nails with the * dagger of lath/ the Devil choos- 
ing to keep his claws long and sharp. Cf. 2 Henry IV, III, ii, 343 ; 
Henry V, IV, iv, 74-77. From the character of the Vice was de- 
veloped the Fool, or Clown, of the Elizabethan drama. 

127. The application of the epithet ' goodman ' to the devil may 
have had its origin in the old euphemistic tendency to call powerful 
spirits by propitiatory names. So the Greeks called the Furies 
Eumenides, ' the benevolent ones.' 



104 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act iv 

Scene III. Olivia's garden 

Enter Sebastian 

Sebastian. This is the air ; that is the glorious sun ; 
This pearl she gave me, I do feel 't and see 't ; 
And though 't is wonder that enwraps me thus, 
Yet 'tis not madness.; Where's Antonio, then? 
I could not find him at the Elephant : 5 

Yet there he was ; and there I found this credit 
That he did range the town to seek me out. 
His counsel now might do me golden service ; 
For though my soul disputes well with my sense, 
That this may be some error, but no madness, 10 

Yet doth this accident and flood of fortune 
So far exceed all instance, all discourse, 
That I am ready to distrust mine eyes 
And wrangle with my reason, that persuades me 
To any other trust but that I am mad, 15 

Or else the lady 's mad ; yet, if 't were so, 
She could not sway her house, command her followers, 
Take and give back affairs and their dispatch 
With such a smooth, discreet, and stable bearing 
As I perceive she does. There 's something in 't 20 

That is deceivable. But here the lady comes. 

Scene III I Scene V Pope. — 6. credit F3F4 I credite F1F2. 

Olivia's garden Capell | Ff omit. 16. lady >s Rowe | Ladies Ff. 

3. 'tis wonder that enwraps. Cf. Much Ado About A r othing, IV, 
i, 146: " I am so attir'd in wonder." 

6. ' Credit ' seems used here in the sense of * report.' 

21. deceivable : deceptive. The passive form with active sense. 






scene in TWELFTH NIGHT 105 

Enter Olivia and Priest 

Olivia. Blame not this haste of mine. If you mean well, 
Now go with me and with this holy man 
Into the chantry by. There, before him, 
And underneath that consecrated roof, 2 5 

Plight me the full assurance of your faith ; 
That my most jealous and too doubtful soul 
May live at peace. He shall conceal it 
Whiles you are willing it shall come to note, 
What time we will our celebration keep 3° 

According to my birth. What do you say ? 

Sebastian. I '11 follow this good man, and go with you ; 
And, having sworn truth, ever will be true. 

Olivia. Then lead the way, good father ; and heavens so 

shine 34 

That they may fairly note this act of mine ! [Exeunt] 

27. jealous I iealious Fi. 35. [Exeunt] Exeunt. Finis Actus 

34. heavens F1F2 I heaven FsF4. Quartus Fi | Finis Actus Quarti F2. 

24. chantry: private chapel. Cf. Henry V, IV, i, 318. 

29. Whiles : until. — come to note : become known. The ceremony 
to which Olivia here so sweetly urges Sebastian is the ancient solemn 
troth-plight, as it was called, which, as it had the binding force of an 
actual marriage, might well give peace to an anxious maiden. 

34. A bright, glad sunshine falling upon a bride was formerly 
thought auspicious ; it inspired a feeling that the Powers above were 
indeed smiling their benediction, and so was fitting cause for prayer 
beforehand and of thanksgiving afterwards. 






ACT V 

Scene I. Before Olivia's house 

Enter Clown and Fabian 

Fabian. Now, as thou lov'st me, let me see his letter. 
Clown. Good Master Fabian, grant me another request. 
Fabian. Any thing. 

Clown. Do not desire to see this letter. 
Fabian. This is, to give a dog, and in recompense desire 
my dog again. 6 

Enter Duke, Viola, Curio, and Lords 

Duke. Belong you to the Lady Olivia, friends ? 

Clown. Ay, sir ; we are some of her trappings. 

Duke. I know thee well ; how dost thou, my good fellow ? 

Clown. Truly, sir, the better for my foes and the worse 
for my friends. n 

Duke. Just the contrary ; the better for thy friends. 

Clown. No, sir, the worse. 

Duke. How can that be ? 1 4 

Clown. Marry, sir, they praise me and make an ass of 

me. Now my foes tell me plainly I am an ass: so that by 

-my joes, sir, I profit in the knowledge of myself, and by my 

Before Olivia's house Capell I The 2. Master Steevens I Mr. Rowe 

street Pope | Ff omit. Pope Capell I M. Ff. 

1. his letter. Malvolio's letter to Olivia. Cf. IV, ii, 105-108. 

106 



scene i TWELFTH NIGHT 107 

friends I am abus'd : so that, conclusions to be as kisses, if 
your four negatives make your two affirmatives, why, then 
the worse for my friends and the better for my foes. 20 

Duke. Why, this is excellent. 

Clown. By my troth, sir, no ; though it please you to be 
one of my friends. 

Duke. Thou shalt not be the worse for me ; there 's gold. 

Clown. But that it would be double-dealing, sir, I would 
you could make it another. 26 

Duke. O, you give me ill counsel. 

Clown. Put your grace in your pocket, sir, for this once, 
and let your flesh and blood obey it. 

Duke. Well, I will be so much a sinner to be a double- 
dealer; there 's another. 3 1 

Clown. Primo, secundo, tertio, is a good play ; and the 
old saying is, the third pays for all : the triplex, sir, is a good 

18-19. " The meaning seems to be nothing more recondite than 
this : as in the syllogism it takes two premisses to make one con- 
clusion, so it takes two people to make one kiss." — Camb. Upon. 
Warburton's suggestion that " conclusions to be as kisses " be 
changed to " conclusion to be asked is," Coleridge's comment is : 

Surely Warburton could never have wooed by kisses and won, or he would 
not have flounder-flatted so just and humorous, nor less pleasing than hu- 
morous, an image into so profound a nihility. In the name of love and won- 
; der, do not four kisses make a double affirmative ? The humor lies in the 
whispered ' No ! ' and the inviting ' Don't ! ' with which the maiden's kisses 
are accompanied, and thence compared to negatives, which by repetition 
constitute an affirmative. 

28. The Clown puns on 'grace 'as (1) a title, (2) a gracious im- 
pulse, and (3) 'grace ' in the theological sense. 

32. Primo, secundo, tertio. ' Throw,' line 37, indicates that this 
was an expression used in some dice game. 

33. triplex : triple time in music. 



108 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act v 

tripping measure ; or the bells of Saint Bennet, sir, may put 
you in mind ; one, two, three. 35 

Duke. You can fool no more money out of me at this 
throw ; if you will let your lady know I am here to speak 
with her, and bring her along with you, it may awake my 
bounty further. 39 

Clown. Marry, sir, lullaby to your bounty till I come 
again. I go, sir ; but I would not have you to think that 
my desire of having is the sin of covetousness : but, as you 
say, sir, let your bounty take a nap, I will awake it anon. 

[Exit] 

Viola. Here comes the man, sir, that did rescue me. 

Enter Antonio and Officers 

Duke. That face of his I do remember well ; 45 

Yet, when I saw it last, it was besmear'd 
As black as Vulcan in the smoke of war. 
A bawbling vessel was he captain of, 
For shallow draught and bulk unprizable ; 
With which such scathful grapple did he make 5° 

With the most noble bottom of our fleet 

34. or Ff I as Hanmer. — Saint 45. Enter . . . | in Ff after line 43. 

Capell I St. Rowe I S. Ff. —Scene II Pope. 

34. A church called St. Bennet (Benedict) Hithe stood on Paul's 
Wharf opposite the Globe theatre, but " the bells of Saint Bennet " 
may be a snatch of a popular song. 

48. bawbling: like a bauble, paltry. Cf. Cymbeline, III, i, 27. 

49. As used by Shakespeare 'unprizable' means either (1) * inesti- 
mable,' as in Cymbeline, I,iv,99, or (2) 'worthless,' 'valueless,' as here. 

50. scathful : destructive. Shakespeare uses ' scathe ' four times 
as noun and once as verb. 

51. bottom : ship. Cf. The Merchant of Venice, I, i, 42. 



scene i TWELFTH NIGHT 109 

That very envy and the tongue of loss 

Cried fame and honour on him. What 's the matter ? 

1 Officer. Orsino, this is that Antonio 
That took the Phoenix and her fraught from Candy ; 55 

And this is he that did the Tiger board, 
When your young nephew Titus lost his leg. 
Here in the streets, desperate of shame and state, 
In private brabble did we apprehend him. 

Viola. He did me kindness, sir ; drew on my side ; 60 
But in conclusion put strange speech upon me ; 
I know not what 't was, but distraction. 

Duke. Notable pirate ! thou salt-water thief ! 
What foolish boldness brought thee to their mercies, 
Whom thou, in terms so bloody and so dear, 65 

Hast made thine enemies ? 

Antonio. Orsino, noble sir, 

Be pleas 'd that I shake off these names you give me ; 
Antonio never yet was thief or pirate, 
Though, I confess, on base and ground enough, 
Orsino's enemy. A witchcraft drew me hither : 70 

That most ingrateful boy there by your side, 
From the rude sea's enrag'd and foamy mouth 
Did I redeem ; a wreck past hope he was. 

73. wreck | wracke F1F2. 

52. tongue of loss : talk of those on whom he had inflicted loss. 

56. Cf. * Tiger ' as the name of a ship, Macbeth, I, iii, 7. 

58. desperate of shame and state : reckless of character and posi- 
tion, like a desperate man. 

62. distraction : madness. Scan as a quadrisyllable. 

65. ' Dear' is used by Shakespeare to express that which produces 
strong emotion either of pleasure or of pain. 






IIO THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act v 

His life I gave him, and did thereto add 

My love, without ret ention o r restraint, 75 

All His in dedication ; for his sake 

Did I expose myself, pure for his love, 

Into the danger of this adverse town; 

Drew to defend him when he was beset : 

Where being apprehended, his false cunning, 80 

Not meaning to partake with me in danger, 

Taught him to face me out of his acquaintance, 

And grew a twenty years removed thing 

While one would wink ; denied me mine own purse, 

Which I had recommended to his use 85 

Not half an hour before. 

Viola. How can this be ? 

Duke. When came he to this town ? 

Antonio. To-day, my lord ; and for three months before, 
, No interim, not a minute's vacancy, 
Both day and night did we keep company. 9° 

Enter Olivia and Attendants 

Duke. Here comes the countess ; now heaven walks on 
earth. 
But for thee, fellow, — fellow, thy words are madness ; 
Three months this youth hath tended upon me ; 
But more of that anon. Take him aside. 94 

76. All his Fi I All this F2F3F4. 89. interim | intrim Fi. 
— in F1F2 I is F3F4. 91. Scene III Pope. 

77. pure : purely. For adjectives used as adverbs, see Abbott, § 1. 
85. recommended : committed, entrusted. Cf. * commended.' 

93. Three months. The action of the play falls within three days. 
See Introduction, Duration of Action. 



scene I TWELFTH NIGHT III 

Olivia. What would my lord, but that he may not have, 
Wherein Olivia may seem serviceable ? 
Cesario, you do not keep promise with me. 

Viola. Madam ! 

Duke. Gracious Olivia, — 99 

Olivia. What do you say, Cesario ? Good my lord, — 

Viola. My lord would speak ; my duty hushes me. 

Olivia. If it be aught to the old tune, my lord, 
It is as fat and fulsome to mine ear 
As howling after music. 

Duke. Still so cruel ? 

Olivia. Still so constant, lord. 105 

Duke. What, to perverseness ? you uncivil lady, 
To whose ingrate and unauspicious altars 
My soul the faithfull'st offerings have breath'd out 
That e'er devotion tender'd ! What shall I do ? 

Olivia. Even what it please my lord that shall become him. 

Duke. Why should I not, had I the heart to do it, in 
Like to th' Egyptian thief at point of death, 

102. aught Theobald | ought Ff. 108. have | haue Ff | has Pope | 

103. fat I flat Hanmer. hath Globe Camb Delius. 

103. fat and fulsome. An alliterative expression for ' nauseating.' 
108. have. The subject is 'soul,' but the verb is attracted to 
'offerings.' A good example of the Shakespearian idiom ("an un- 
pardonable mistake in modern authors "), which Abbott, § 412, calls 
the " confusion of proximity." Cf. Julius Ccesar, V, i, 33 : " The pos- 
ture of your blows are yet unknown." 

112. The allusion is to the story of Theagenes and Chariclea, 
told in the Ethiopica of Heliodorus, an English translation of which 
was popular at the close of the sixteenth century. The lovers were 
captured by Thyamis of Memphis, chief of a band of robbers, who 
fell in love with Chariclea. Surprised by a stronger band of robbers 
and in danger of death, Thyamis attempted to kill her first. 



112 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act v 

Kill what I love ? — a savage jealousy 

That sometime savours nobly. But hear me this : 

Since you to non-regardance cast my faith, 115 

And that I partly know the instrument 

That screws me from my true place in your favour, 

Live you the marble-breasted tyrant still ; 

But this your minion, whom I know you love, 

And whom, by heaven I swear, I tender dearly, 120 

Him will I tear out of that cruel eye, 

Where he sits crowned in his master's spite. 

Come, boy, with me ; my thoughts are ripe in mischief ; 

I '11 sacrifice the lamb that I do love, 

To spite a raven's heart within a dove. 125 

Viola. And I, most jocund, apt, and willingly, 
To do you rest, a thousand deaths would die. 

Olivia. Where goes Cesario ? 

Viola. After him I love 

More than I love these eyes, more than my life, 
More, by all mores, than ere I shall love wife. 13° 

If I do feign, you witnesses above, 
Punish my life for tainting of my love ! 

Olivia. Ay me, detested ! how am I beguil'd ! 

Viola. Who does beguile you ? who does do you wrong ? 

Olivia. Hast thou forgot thyself? is it so long? 135 

Call forth the holy father. 

Duke. Come, away ! 

Olivia. Whither, my lord ? Cesario, husband, stay. 

Duke. Husband ! 

Olivia. Ay, husband ! can he that deny ? 

Duke. Her husband, sirrah ! 

Viola. No, my lord, not I. 



scene I TWELFTH NIGHT 113 

Olivia. Alas, it is the baseness of thy fear 140 

That makes thee strangle thy propriety. 
Fear not, Cesario ; take thy fortunes up ; 
Be that thou know'st thou art, and then thou art 
As great as that thou fear'st. 

Enter Priest 

O, welcome, father ! 
Father, I charge thee, by thy reverence, H5 

Here to unfold, though lately we intended 
To keep in darkness what occasion now 
Reveals before 't is ripe, what thou dost know 
Hath newly pass'd between this youth and me. 

Priest. A contract of eternal bond of love, 15° 

Confirm'd by mutual joinder of your hands, 
Attested by the holy close of lips, 
Strengthen^ by interchangement of your rings ; 
And all the ceremony of this compact 

Seal'd in my function, by my testimony ; J 55 

Since when, my watch hath told me, toward my grave 
I have travelPd but two hours. 

Duke. O thou dissembling cub ! what wilt thou be 
When time hath sow'd a grizzle on thy case ? 

141. strangle thy propriety : disavow thy proper self. 

153. In the ceremony of betrothal, which is described here, the 
man received as well as gave a ring. 

154. ceremony. Pronounce as a trisyllable. In Julius Ccesar, I, 
ii, 11, it is quadrisyllable. — compact. Accented on the last syllable. 

159. grizzle on thy case : gray hairs on thy skin. ' Case ' in this 
sense is neatly punned on in The Winter 's Tale, IV, iv, 843-844 : 
" Though my case be a pitiful one, I hope I shall not be played out 
of it" 



114 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act v 

Or will not else thy craft so quickly grow 160 

That thine own trip shall be thine overthrow ? 
Farewell, and take her ; but direct thy feet 
Where thou and I henceforth may never meet. 

Viola. My lord, I do protest, — 

Olivia. O, do not swear ! 

Hold little faith, though thou hast too much fear. 165 

Enter Sir Andrew 

Sir Andrew. For the love of God, a surgeon ! send one 
presently to Sir Toby. 

Olivia. What 's the matter ? 

Sir Andrew. Has broke my head across and has given 
Sir Toby a bloody coxcomb too ; for the love of God, your 
help ! I had rather than forty pound I were at home. 17 I 

Olivia. Who has done this, Sir Andrew ? 

Sir Andrew. The count's gentleman, one Cesario ; we 
took him for a coward, but he 's the very devil incardinate. 

Duke. My gentleman Cesario ? 175 

Sir Andrew. 'Od's lifelings, here he is ! You broke my 
head for nothing ; and that that I did, I was set on to do 't 
by Sir Toby. 

Viola. Why do you speak to me ? I never hurt you. 

165. Hold Fi I How F2F3F4. 169. Has I H'as Ff | He has Globe 

166. Scene IV Pope. Camb Delius. 

174. devil incardinate. Cf. Launcelot Gobbo's 'devil incarnar 
(First Quarto), The Merchant of Venice, II, ii, 28-29. For another 
form of the word-play, see Henry V, II, iii, 34-35. 

176. 'Od's lifelings. A petty oath corrupted from ' By God's life.' 
In As You Like It, III, v, 43, is ' 'Od's my little life.' For the diminu- 
tive ' lifeling,' cf. ' pittikins ' from ' pity,' Cymbeline, IV, ii, 293. 



scene i TWELFTH NIGHT 1 15 

You drew your sword upon me without cause ; 180 

But I bespake you fair, and hurt you not. 

Sir Andrew. If a bloody coxcomb be a hurt, you have 
hurt me ; I think you set nothing by a bloody coxcomb. 

Enter Sir Toby and Clown 

Here comes Sir Toby halting ; you shall hear more : but if 
he had not been in drink, he would have tickl'd you other- 
gates than he did. 186 

Duke. How now, gentleman ! how is 't with you ? 

Sir Toby. That 's all one. Has hurt me, and there 's 
th' end on 't. Sot, didst see Dick surgeon, sot ? 

Clown. O, he 's drunk, Sir Toby, an hour agone ; his 
eyes were set at eight i' th' morning. 19 1 

Sir Toby. Then he 's a rogue, and a passy measures pavin. 
I hate a drunken rogue. 

Olivia. Away with him ! Who hath made this havoc with 
them ? 195 

Sir Andrew. I '11 help you, Sir Toby, because we '11 be 
dress'd together. 

184. Enter Sir Toby . . . | Enter 192. and a Fi | after a F2F3F4. — 

Toby . . . Ff (after line 181). pavin Steevens Camb Delius | Pavin 

185-186. othergates Capell Globe I F2F3F4 I panyn Fi Globe | paynim 

other-gates Rowe | other gates Ff. Capell. 

181. bespake you fair : s :>oke courteously to you. 

192. passy measures pavin. Undoubtedly Sir Toby is drunk, but 
possibly he has reference to some grave, solemn dance, the idea of 
which, as Furness suggests was started in his fancy by the Clown's 
"set at eight." 'Pavin' m.y be for * pavan,' a stately dance intro- 
duced into England in the sixteenth century. ' Passy measures ' is 
perhaps an attempt at passa mezzo (passo e mezzo). In previous 
editions of Hudson's Shakespeare the reading * paynim' was adopted 
with the general interpretatk n, 'past measure a heathen rogue.' 



Il6 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act v 

Sir Toby. Will you help ? an ass-head and a coxcomb 
and a knave I a thin-fac'd knave, a gull ! 

Olivia. Get him to bed, and let his hurt be look'd to. 200 
\_Exeunt Clown, Fabian, Sir Toby, and Sir Andrew] 

Enter Sebastian 

Sebastian. I am sorry, madam, I have hurt your kinsman ; 
But, had it been the brother of my blood, 
I must have done no less with wit and safety. 
You throw a strange regard upon me, and by that 
I do perceive it hath offended you ; 205 

Pardon me, sweet one, even for the vows 
We made each other but so late ago. 
X Duke. One face, one voice, one habit, and two persons, 
A natural perspective, that is and is not ! 

Sebastian. Antonio, O my dear Antonio! 210 

How have the hours rack'd and tortur'd me, 
Since I have lost thee ! 

Antonio. Sebastian are you ? 

Sebastian. Fear'st thou that, Antonio ? 

Antonio. How have you made division of yourself ? 
An apple cleft in two is not more twin 2I 5 

Than these two creatures. Which is Sebastian ? 

200. [Exeunt Clown . . . Sir An- 291. Scene V Pope. — kinsman 

drew] Dyce | Ff omit. Ff | fUncle Rowe Pope. 

204. strange regard : a look of estrangement. Cf. IV, i, 13. 

209. ' Perspective ' is used loosely in Elizabethan literature to 
describe any optical device. In Scot's Discoverie of Witchcraft, 1584, 
is an enumeration and description of several " conceipts made and 
conteined in glasse," one of which is possibly that referred to here : 
"There be glasses also wherin one nun may see another mans image 
and not his owne." 



scene i TWELFTH NIGHT 117 

Olivia. Most wonderful ! 

Sebastian. Do I stand there ? I never had a brother ; 
Nor can there be that deity in my nature, 
Of here and everywhere. I had a sister, 220 

Whom the blind waves and surges have devoured. 
Of charity, what kin are you to me ? 
What countryman ? what name ? what parentage ? 

Viola. Of Messaline : Sebastian was my father ; 
Such a Sebastian was my brother too, 225 

So went he suited to his watery tomb. 
If spirits can assume both form and suit, 
You come to fright us. 

Sebastian. A spirit I am indeed ; 

But am in that dimension grossly clad 

Which from the womb I did participate. 230 

Were you a woman, as the rest goes even, 
I should my tears let fall upon your cheek, 
And say, ' Thrice-welcome, drowned Viola ! ' 

Viola. My father had a mole upon his brow. 

Sebastian. And so had mine. 235 

Viola. And died that day when Viola from her birth 
Had number'd thirteen years. 

Sebastian. O, that record is lively in my soul ! 
He finished, indeed, his mortal act 
That day that made my sister thirteen years. 240 

Viola. If nothing lets to make us happy both 
But this my masculine usurp'd attire, 
Do not embrace me till each circumstance 

229. Cf. The Merchant of Venice, V, i, 64-65. Shakespeare uses 
* dimension \ in the sense of 'body* only here and in I, v, 245. 
241. lets: hinders. Cf. 'let' meaning 'hindrance,' Henry J^V,ii, 65. 



Il8 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act v 

Of place, time, fortune, do cohere and jump 

That I am Viola : which to confirm, 245 

I '11 bring you to a captain in this town, 

Where lie my maiden weeds ; by whose gentle help 

I was preserv'd to serve this noble count. 

All the occurrence of my fortune since 

Hath been between this lady and this lord. 250 

Sebastian. [To Olivia] So comes it, lady, you have been 
mistook ; 
But nature to her bias drew in that. 
You would have been contracted to a maid ; 
Nor are you therein, by my life, deceived, 
J You are betroth'd both to a maid and man. 255 

Duke. Be not amaz'd ; right noble is his blood. 
If this be so, as yet the glass seems true, 
I shall have share in this most happy wreck. 
[To Viola] Boy, thou hast said to me a thousand times 
Thou never shouldst love woman like to me. 260 

Viola. And all those sayings will I over-swear ; 
And all those swearings keep as true in soul 

248. preserv'd Ff I pref err'd Theo- 258. wreck | wracke F1F2. 

bald Hanmer Dyce. 259. [To Viola] Rowe. 

251. [To Olivia] Rowe. 261. over-swear | ouer sweare Fi. 

244. jump: agree. Cf. The Taming of the Shrew, I, i, 195. 

247. weeds : garments. Cf. line 267. ' Weed ' (Anglo-Saxon wczd) 
occurs in A Midsummer Night's Dream, II, i, 256. 

251-252. The mistake Olivia has made is in being betrothed to 
Sebastian instead of Viola, but this was owing to the bias or pre- 
disposition of Nature, who would not have a woman betrothed to a 
woman. In the game of bowls, a favorite Elizabethan pastime, the 
1 bias ' is the weighted side of the bowl which causes it when de- 
livered to curve in to that side or ' draw to its bias.' Cf. Richard II, 
III, iv, 5 : " my fortune runs against the bias," 



scene i TWELFTH NIGHT 119 

As doth that orbed continent the fire 
That severs day from night. 

Duke. Give me thy hand ; 

And let me see thee in thy woman's weeds. 265 

Viola. The captain that did bring me first on shore 
Hath my maid's garments ; he, upon some action, 
Is now in durance, at Malvolio's suit, 
A gentleman and follower of my lady's. 

Olivia. He shall enlarge him. Fetch Malvolio hither ; 
And yet, alas, now I remember me, 271 

They say, poor gentleman, he 's much distract. 

Re-enter Clown with a letter, and Fabian 

A most extracting frenzy of mine own 
From my remembrance clearly banish'd his. 
How does he, sirrah ? 275 

Clown. Truly, madam, he holds Belzebub at the stave's 
end as well as a man in his case may do. Has here writ a 
letter to you ; I should have given 't you to-day morning ; 
but, as a madman's epistles are no gospels, so it skills not 
much when they are IcJgfivei^L ^ _ 280 

269. lady's Rowe I Ladies Ff. ing Fi | exacting F2F3F4 Rowe | dis- 

273. Scene VI Pope. — extract- tracting Hanmer. 

263. continent. As Shakespeare uses ' continent ' elsewhere in 
the etymological sense of ' that which contains,' the word has been 
interpreted here as " the firmament which contains the orbs includ- 
ing 'the fire That severs day from night.'" More probably 'conti- 
nent' should be understood in the general sense of 'bulk,' 'mass.' 

273. extracting : "drawing other thoughts from my mind." — 
Schmidt. Lettsom conjectured 'enchanting'; Cartwright, 'exciting.' 

276. Belzebub. This spelling represents popular pronunciation. 

279. epistles . . . gospels. A reference to the Church Service. — 
skills: matters, Cf. 2 Henry VI r III, i, 281, 



120 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act v 

Olivia. Open 't, and read it. 

Clown. Look then to be well edified when the fool de- 
livers the madman. 

[Reads] By the Lord, madam, — 

Olivia. How now I art thou mad ? 285 

Clown. No, madam, I do but read madness : and your 
ladyship will have it as it ought to be, you must allow Vox. 

Olivia. Prithee, read i' thy right wits. 

Clown. So I do, madonna ; but to read his right wits is 
to read thus : therefore perpend, my princess, and give ear. 

Olivia. [To Fabian] Read it you, sirrah. 291 

Fabian. [Reads] By the Lord, madam, you wrong me, and 
the world shall know it ; though you have put me into darkness 
and given your drunken cousin rule over me, yet have I the bene- 
fit of my senses as well as your ladyship. I have your own letter 
that induc'd me to the semblance I put on ; with the which I 
doubt not but to do myself much right, or you much shame. 
Think of me as you please. I leave my duty a little unthought 
of, and speak out of my injury. The madly-us'd Malvolio. 

Olivia. Did he write this ? 3°° 

Clown. Ay, madam. 

Duke. This savours not much of distraction. 

Olivia. See him deliver'd, Fabian ; bring him hither. 

[Exit Fabian] 
My lord, so please you, these things further thought on, 
To think me as well a sister as a wife, 3°5 

284. [Reads] Rowe. 291. [To Fabian] Rowe. 

286. and Ff I an Pope. 303. [Exit Fabian] Capell. 

287. Vox : the appropriate tone for such a document. 

290. perpend : consider, attend. This bombastic and affected ex- 
pression is used by Polonius, Touchstone, and Pistol. 



scene i TWELFTH NIGHT 121 

One day shall crown th' alliance on 't, so please you, 
Here at my house, and at my proper cost. 

Duke. Madam, I am most apt t' embrace your offer. 
[To Viola] Your master quits you ; and, for your service 

done him, 
So much against the mettle of your sex, 310 

So far beneath your soft and tender breeding, 
And since you calPd me master for so long, 
Here is my hand ; you shall from this time be 
Your master's mistress. 

Olivia. A sister ! you are she. 

Re-enter Fabian, with Malvolio 

Duke. Is this the madman ? 

Olivia. Ay, my lord, this same. 3 J 5 

How now, Malvolio ! 

Malvolio. Madam, you have done me wrong, 

Notorious wrong. 

Olivia. Have I, Malvolio ? no. 

Malvolio. Lady, you have. Pray you, peruse that letter. 
You must not now deny it is your hand ; 
Write from it, if you can, in hand or phrase ; 320 

Or say 't is not your seal, not your invention : 
You can say none of this. Well, grant it then ; 
And tell me, in the modesty of honour, 
Why you have given me such clear lights of favour, 
Bade me come smiling and cross-garter'd to you, 325 

309. [To Viola] Rowe. volio Capell | Enter Maluolio Ff. 

315. Re-enter Fabian . . . Mal- — Scene VII Pope. 

309. quits you : releases you, sets you free from service. 

320. from it: differently. Cf. 'from my commission, ' I, v, 179. 



122 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act v 

To put on yellow stockings, and to frown 

Upon Sir Toby and the lighter people ; 

And, acting this in an obedient hope, 

Why have you suffer'd me to be imprison'd, 

Kept in a dark house, visited by the priest, 33° 

Arid made the most notoriotrs-geck and gull 

That e'er invention play'd on ? tell me why. 

Olivia. Alas, Malvolio, this is not my writing, 
Though, I confess, much like the character ; 
But out of question 'tis, Mar ia's ha nd. 335 

And now I do bethink me, it was she 
First told me thou wast mad ; then cam'st in smiling, 
And in such forms which here were presuppos'd 
Upon thee in the letter. Prithee, be content : 
This practice hath most shrewdly pass'd upon thee ; 34° 
But when we know the grounds and authors of it, 
Thou shalt be both the plaintiff and the judge 
Of thine own cause. 

Fabian. Good madam, hear me speak ; 

And let no quarrel nor no brawl to come 
Taint the condition of this present hour, 345 

Which I have wonder'd at. In hope it shall not, 
Most freely I confess, myself and Toby 
Set this device against Malvolio here, 
Upon some stubborn and uncourteous parts 
We had conceived against him. Maria writ 35° 

The letter at Sir Toby's great importance ; 
In recompense whereof he hath married her. 
How with a sportful malice it was follow'd, 

331. geek: "one who is befooled or derided, a dupe." — Murray. 
351. importance : importunity. Cf. King John , II, i, 7. 



scene i TWELFTH NIGHT 123 

May rather pluck on laughter than revenge ; 

If that the injuries be justly weigh'd 355 

That have on both sides pass'd. 

Olivia. Alas, poor fool, how have they baffled thee ! 

Clown. Why, ' sorn^aj£^(^ g£ eat " 1\ 

-»ess, and some h ave greatne ss thrown upurrthem. ' I was 
one, sir, in this interlude ; one Sir Topas, sir ; but that 's all 
one. ' By the Lord, fool, I am not mad ' ; but do you remem- 
ber ? * Madam, why laugh you at such a barren rascal ? and .. 
you smile not, he 's gagg'd ' : and thus the whirligig of time I 
bri ngs in jri s revenges. 3 6 cJl 

•Afc¥o£io\ I ? 11 be revenged on the whole pack of you. ^ 

\Exit~\ 

Olivia. He hath been most notoriously abus'd. 

Duke. Pursue him, and entreat him to a peace. 
He hath not told us of the captain yet ; 
When that is known, and golden time convents, 
A solemn combination shall be made 37° 

Of our dear souls. Meantime, sweet sister, 
We will not part from hence. Cesario, come ; 
For so you shall be, while you are a man ; 
But, when in other habits you are seen, 
Orsino's mistress and his fancy's queen. 375 

[Exeunt all but the Clown] 

357. fool F4 I Foole F1F2F3 I soul 365. [Exit] Rowe I Ff omit. 

Collier | tool (anon. conj.). 375. [Exeunt all but the Clown] 

362. and Ff \ an Pope. Dyce I Exeunt Ff. 

357. baffled : treated ignominiously. ' To baffle ' meant originally 
'to subject to public disgrace or infamy.' A special sense was 'to 
disgrace a perjured knight with infamy.' 

369. convents : is convenient. In Henry VIII, V, i, 52, it means 
' summons.' 



124 THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE act v 

Clown. [Sings] 

When that I was and a little tiny boy, 
With hey, ho, the wind and the rain, 

A foolish thing was but a toy, 
For the rain it raineth every day. 

But when I came to man's estate, 38,0 

With hey, ho, &c. 
'Gainst knaves and thieves men shut their gate, 

For the rain, &c. 

But when I came, alas ! to wive, 

With hey, ho, &c. 385 

tfoUt> By swag gering could I never thrive, 

i&eJ£ For the rain, &c. 

But when I came unto my beds, (A ^M^ 

With hey, ho, &c. 
With toss-pots still had drunken heads, / ^ vfe 390 

For the rain, &c. ^^ 

A great while ago the world begun, 

With hey, ho, &c. 
But that 's all one, our play is done, 394 

And we '11 strive to please you every day. [Exit] 

376. tiny Rowe | tine Ff. 390. heads Ff I head Hanmer. 

382. knaves and thieves | knave 392. begun Rowe | begon F1F2. 

*nd thief Steevens. 393. With hey F2 I hey Fi. 

388. beds Ff I bed Hanmer. 395. [Exit] Rowe | Ff omit. 

376. Steevens called this song a "nonsensical ditty"; Knight 
holds it to be " the most philosophical clown's song upon record." 
Its authorship has been questioned, but it has the charm of the 
genuine Shakespeare lyric, and in it is that mingling of realism and 
romanticism, pathos and buffoonery, which is of the essence of 
Shakespearian humor. The haunting refrain occurs in a snatch 
sung by the Fool in the great storm scene in King Lear. 



INDEX 

This Index includes the most important words, phrases, etc., explained in 
the notes. The figures in heavy-faced type refer to the pages ; those in plain 
type, to the lines containing what is explained. 



a (in, on, of ) : 9 1 
abuse : 67 110, 101 84- 

85 
accost : 12 45 
Act I, Scene 1 : 3 1 
Act II, Scene I: 32 l 
Actaeon : 4 21-22 
addicted: 61 186 
admire: 83 141 
advanc'd plumes : 54 

28 
advise you : 102 91 
affection'd: 44 139 
allow : 9 59 
allowed fool: 22 88 
alone: 27 197 
am for all waters : 100 

61 
am I made ? : 79 52 
and (an): 10 11 
antique : 46 3 
appetite : 3 3 
argument : 76 32 
Arion: 6 15 
attends : 86 207-208 
back-trick: 15 111 
baffled: 123 357 
barful: 18 40 
bawbling : 108 48 
bawcock: 81 105 
beagle: 45 170 
bear it out : 19 19 
bear-baiting: 53 7 
bed of Ware: 72 43 



beef: 13 81 

bells of Saint Bennet : 

108 34 
Belzebub (spelling) : 

119 276 
bent : 48 36 
beseech you : 67 108 
bespake you fair: 115 

181 
bias: 118 252 
bibble babble : 102 93 
Biddy, come with me: 

82 108 
bird-bolts : 22 87 
blazon : 31 277 
blood in his liver : 73 56 
blows : 54 39 
board: 12 53 
bonds: 63 18-19 
bosom: 68 118 
bottom : 108 51 
breast: 37 19 
brock: 57 95 
Brownist: 71 29 
bum-baily : 84 163 
burn: 46 181 
but (if not) : 64 37 
but (if than) : 17 12 
buttery-bar: 13 66 
C's . . . P's: 56 81-82 
cakes and ale: 42 110k 
canary: 13 76 
cantons : 30 254 
case: 113 159 

I2 5 



Castiliano vulgo: 11 39 
Cataian: 40 74 
ceremony (trisyllabic): 

113 154 
champain: 59 146 
changeable taffeta : 50 

73 
chantry: 105 24 
Chariclea: 111 112 
checks : 57 105, 65 61 
cherry-pit: 82 109 
cheveril: 62 11 
churchman : 62 4 
civil: 77 5 
clerestories : 99 37 
close: 53 17 
cockatrices: 85 181 
cockney: 94 13 
codling: 25 151 
collier: 82 no 
come by : 52 5 
come to note : 105 29 
comfortable : 28 209 
commerce: 84 161 
compact: 113 154 
competitors: 98 9 
complexion : 47 25, 53 

23 
comptible: 26 166 
con: 26 165 
conceited : 90 272 
conclusions to be as 

kisses : 107 18-19 
conduct : 87 225 



126 



THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE 



* confusion of proxim- 
ity': 111 108 

cons state . . . great 
swarths: 44 139-140 

constant question: 99 
47 

constellation: 18 34 

continent: 119 263 

convents: 123 369 

coranto: 15 108 

county's : 31 285 

cousin : 9 4 

coystrill : 11 37 

coziers' : 41 87 

credit: 104 6 

Cressida : 64 53 

crowner: 24 127 

cubiculo : 72 47 

cucullus. . .monachum: 
21 50-51 

curst : 72 38 

curtain: 15 114 

cut: 45 178 

cypress: 49 51, 68 118 

damask cheek, etc. : 
51 111-112 

dark room: 82 127 

dear : 73 49, 109 65 

deceivable : 104 21 

deliver' d: 8 42 

demure travel of re- 
gard : 55 49 

denay: 52 123 

desperate of shame and 
state : 109 58 

determinate : 32 9 

devil incardinate: 114 
174 

dexteriously : 21 55 

diluculo surgere : 36 2 

dimension: 117 229 

discovers : 59 146 

dismount thy tuck: 86 
208 

distraction : 109 62 

divulg'd; 29 244 



dog at : 40 59 
dramatic irony : 17 28- 

35 
Dramatis Personam: 2, 

note i 
driving: 6 11 
dry (hand) : 13 69 
eater of beef : 13 81 
Egyptian thief: 111 

112 
Egyptians in their fog : 

99 43 
element : 4 26, 65 55-56 
employment: 56 76 
endeavour thyself : 102 

92-93 
enemy: 35 27 
epistles . . . gospels: 

119 279 
estate : 8 44 
estimable wonder: 33 

24 
ethical dative: 71 30, 

84 162 
except before excepted: 

10 6 
express myself: 32 13 
extent: 96 52 
extort thy reasons, etc.: 

69 151-152 
extracting: 119 273 
extravagancy: 32 10 
eyes had lost her 

tongue: 35 19 
fadge : 36 32 
fall: 3 4 

fancy : 4 14, 53 22 
fantastical: 4 15 
fat and fulsome: 111 

103 
faults: 58 118 
favour : 47 23 
fear no colours :19 s 
fellow: 80 73 
fertile : 29 239 
Feste: 2, note;, 46 11 



fill'd . . . self king: 5 

38-39 
finder: 83 132 
flrago : 89 255 
flame-colour 'd : 16 121 
flesh'd: 96 38 
fond : 36 33 
formal: 57 108 
four elements : 37 9 
fourteen years' pur- 
chase : 95 22 
free : 29 244, 48 44 
fresh in murmur : 7 32 
from it: 121 320 
gall: 72 44 
galliard: 15 108 
gaskins : 19 23 
geek : 122 33J 
give . . . leave to leave : 

50 71 
go, shake your ears : 

43 118 
God be wi' you : 102 96 
golden shaft : 5 35 
goodman devil: 103 127 
Gorboduc: 98 14 
grace : 107 28 
Greek: 95 17 
grize: 68 121 
grizzle on thy case : 

113 159 
gust: 11 28 
hadst need send : 45 173 
haggard: 65 61 
hard construction: 67 

112 
hart: 4 17 
haviour: 86 191 
he says : 77 1 
heart : 97 58 
heat: 24 125 
heavens so shine : 105 

34 
here: 23 113 
high : 4 15 
his : 75 26 






INDEX 



127 



his letter: 106 l 
hob, nob : 87 222 
hold the bent : 48 36 
horribly conceited : 90 

272 
housekeeper: 98 8 
hull: 27 192 
humour : 16 4 
hyperbolical : 98 25 
icicle . . . beard: 71 

25-26 
impeticos thy gratilli- 

ty : 38 25 
importance: 122 351 
impossible passages of 

grossness : 73 64-65 
in grain : 28 222 
in standing water: 25 

151-152 
incardinate: 114 174 
incredulous : 80 76 
infinitive used gerun- 

dively: 34 6, 67 113 
intercepter : 86 207 
interchangement of 

your rings: 113 153 
jade: 59 150 
jets : 54 28 
jewel : 55 56 
Jove : 57 89, 80 71 
jump: 118 244 
kickshawses: 14 104 
kisses: 107 18-19 
lady of the Strachy: 

54 35-36 
lapsed : 76 36 
leasing : 22 91 
leman: 37 24 
lenten : 19 8 
less : 7 33 
lets: 117 241 
life in 't : 14 100 
like fell and cruel 

hounds : 4 22 
like the old age : 48 47 
lim'd: 80 71 



list : 66 74 

liver, brain, and heart : 

5 37, 51 97 
lubber: 94 13 
maidenhead : 28 204 
make the welkin dance: 

39 56 
Malvolio : 2, note 6 
manakin : 72 48 
Maria: 2, note 9 
maugre: 69 149 
May morning : 83 133 
melancholy god : 50 72 
metal of India : 53 12 
midsummer madness : 

79 54 
miscarry : 80 61 
misprision: 21 50 
Mistress Mall: 15 115 
modest assurance: 26 

169-170 
mollification for your 

giant: 27 193 
monster : 36 33 
motion: 51 97 
murder me for my love : 

33 31 
music from the spheres: 

67 107 
music . . . love : 3 1 
mute : 9 62 
natural: 11 26 
natural perspective : 

116 209 
nature to her bias : 118 

251-252 
nay word: 43 127 
new map . . . Indies : 

74 71 
niece: 9 1 
nine : 73 60 
nor . . . not: 83 141 
notoriously abus'd: 101 

84-85 
numbers alter'd : 57 93 
nuncio's: 17 27 



O mistress mine, etc. : 

38 38 
'O, the twelfth . . . 

December* :41 82(74- 

77) 
'od's lifelings : 114 176 
o'erflourish'd: 93 346 
of (on) : 77 2 
old age : 48 47 
old man: 15 107 
opinion of Pythagoras : 

100 48 

opposite : 73 58 

orchard : 70 6 

Orsino : 7 27 

owe: 31 294 

pair of these : 64 47 

Pandarus : 64 49 

parish-top: 11 38 

part : 12 57 

part of death . . . share 

it : 49 56-57 
pass upon me : 64 40 
passages : 73 65 
passy measures pavin : 

115 192 
pedant : 74 67 
peevish: 31 284 
Peg-a-Ramsey : 40 75 
Penthesilea: 45 168 
perchance : 6 5-6 
perpend : 120 290 
perspective: 116 209 
pia mater : 23 108 
pickle-herring: 23 114 
picture of ' We Three ' : 

37 16 
Pigrogromitus : 37 22 
pilchards : 63 32 
pipe: 18 31 
pitch: 4 12 
play: 60 174 
point-devise: 59148-149 
points : 19 22-23 
possess: 43 130 
praise : 29 233 



128 



THE NEW HUDSON SHAKESPEARE 



pregnant : 35 27, 66 86 
prevented : 66 80 
primo, secundo, tertio : 

107 32 
proper-false : 35 28 
propertied me : 101 88 
propriety: 113 141 
psalm-singing weav- 
ers : 39 57-58 
pure: 110 77 
Pythagoras : 100 48 
question : 99 47 
Queubus: 37 23 
Quinapalus : 20 32 
quirk : 87 227 
quits you : 121 309 
receive it so: 34 10-11 
recollected terms : 46 5 
recommended: 110 85 
regard: 116 204 
reliques: 75 19 
retention: 51 95 
reverberate : 30 256 
round: 41 91 
rub . . . crumbs: 42 

113-114 
rubious : 18 31 
rudesby: 96 50 
sack: 46 181 
sad : 77 5 
scathf ul : 108 50 
Schoolmen language : 

98 14-16 
season: 5 30 
self: 5 39 
semblative : 18 33 
set . . . honour . . . 

stake: 68 115 
seven years' heat: 4 

26 
Shakespearian humor: 

124 376 
shame and state: 109 

58 
sheep-biter : 52 5 
shent: 102 100 



sheriff's post: 25 141 
shrewishly: 25 153 
shuffl'd off: 75 16 
silly sooth : 48 45 
simulation: 58 127 
sinister usage: 26 166 
sir: 88 252 
Sir Andrew Aguecheek : 

2, note 5 
Sir Toby Belch: 2, 

note 3 
'slid: 93 367 
'slight: 54 29, 70 12 
smiling at grief: 52 

114 
sneck up : 41 90 
sooth : 48 45 
Sophy : 60 165, 89 259 
sot: 23 114 
sound (adj.) : 18 32 
sound (noun) : 3 5 
sowter: 58 1 13 
speaks . . . madman: 

23 100-101 
sphere music: 67 107 
spinsters : 48 43 
spirit of humours, etc. : 

56 78-79 
spleen: 73 61 
squash: 25 150 
staniel: 57 105 
star of a galliard: 15 

119 
stone-bow : 54 42 
stout: 59 155 
Strachy : 54 36 
strange: 59 155 
strange regard: 116 

204 
strangeness : 94 14 
strangle thy propriety : 

113 141 
stuck : 89 256 
substractors : 11 31-32 
such a one . . . present : 

28 220 



suffers under proba- 
tion: 58 120 
supplied . . . self king : 

5 38-39 
swabber: 27 192 
swarths: 44 140 
sweet and twenty : 39 

50 
tabor: 62 2 
taffeta : 50 73 
taint their wit : 65 65 
take up : 89 270 
tall: 10 18, 97 6 
Tartar: 61 188 
taste : 66 75, 87 227 
Taurus . . . thighs ; 

16 124-125 
taxation of homage : 

27 198 
terms : 46 5 
testril : 38 32 
Theagenes: 111 112 
■ There dwelt . . . 

Babylon ' : 41 77 
these set kind : 22 83 
those poor number : 6 10 
1 Thou knave ' : 40 62- 

63 
thou thou'st him: 72 

40-41 
1 thought is free' : 13 

65 
* Three merry men be 

we ' : 40 75 
three months: 110 93 
three souls : 39 57 
Tiger: 109 56 
Tilly-vally: 41 76 
time of moon : 27 189 
time-pleaser : 44 139 
to (as to) : 51 95 
tongue of loss : 109 52 
tongues (tongs) : 14 89 
tray-trip: 60 174 
treatment of lunatics : 

82 127 



INDEX 



129 



triplex : 107 33 

trunks, o'erflourish'd : 
93 346 

uncurrent: 75 16 

undertaker : 90 295 

ungird thy strange- 
ness: 94 14 

unhatch'd : 87 218 

unless the master,etc. : 
31 278 

unprizable : 108 49 

upshot: 101 68 

validity : 4 12 

Vapians : 37 22 

very true sonnet: 78 
22-23 

Vice : 103 120 



viol-de-gamboys : 10 

23-24 
Viola : 2, note 8 
voices well divulg'd 

29 244 
Vox : 120 287 
vulgar proof : 68 121 
* We Three': 37 16 
weaver : 39 58 
weeds: 118 247 
welkin : 39 56, 65 55 
well flesh'd : 96 38 
west war d-ho: 69 132 
what: 57 104 
When that I was, etc. 

124 376 
whiles: 105 29 



will you : 94 l 
willow : 30 252 
windy: 84 154 
wonder that enwraps : 

104 3 
woodcock: 56 77, 100 

57 
words . . . rascals . . . 

bonds: 63 18-19 
Wordsworth quoted : 

6 15 
worth: 75 17 
yare : 86 208 
you have said : 62 10 
you were best : 20 28 
zanies : 22 84 



Date Due 

All library items are subject to recall at any time. 



M MAR 7 Ml 



- II JN 1 6 7008 



- qpp 9. 5 2008 



_ OCT 7 2008 



WW 



OCT 2 5 2010 



— 
— 

— 



ociomm 



'■ ■ v.:. ' ' ' ' •■ 



4. 



Brigham Young University 



DEN/. 



OfiiSoM sPR^^ 2, & TUBS ucu * ° IiJUC 




3 "l"i 97 00103 9459 



