
Etjt-IUND H OARRETT 1910 OPUS 65 



vviijjAM sii.\Kh:si'i<:.\ii['rs 



C () II I L A N I S 



EDITED BY 



F. A. LEO 

PH.D., MEMBER OF THE SOCIETY FOK THE STUDY OF MODEKN LANGUAGES 

AT BERLIN 



WITH A QUARTO-FACSIMILE OF THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS 
FROM THE FOLIO OF 1623 

PHOTOLrrHO(JRAPHET) BY A. RURCHARD 

AND WITH EXTRA("rS FROM NORTH'S PLUTARCH 



THl-: PKoCEKDS OF THE SALli Wli.L BE APPROPRIATED BY THE EDITOR TOWARDa 
THE SHAKESPEARE MONUMEM 



LONDON 
JOHN RUSSELL SMITH 

1864. 



V 



ALLEN A BROWN 
DEC. 17. 1909 



PREFACE. 



Three centuries of unremitting and conscientious labour in the 
field of Shakespearian Criticism have not yet been able to fill up 
that chasm between the learned and the popular, which opened 
amono; the ranks of those who hurried from all the Zones of the 
civilized world to present their offering of admiration to that im- 
mortal Genius. 

Even down to the present day, Shakespeare's works have always 
appeared in two different kinds of editions, namely, those which 
professed to be popular, which endeavoured therefore to satisfy 
the requirements of the cultivated many, and hoped to attain this 
end by dispensing with numerous explanatory notes, and follow- 
ing whatever text enjoyed for the moment the greatest reputa- 
tion ; and those editions on the other hand, which, bearing on the 
face of them the stamp of the coldest erudition, clipped the 
wdngs of genius , and then commenced microscopical researches 
on the individual feathers. 

If we first consider the latter class of editions, we must be care- 
ful not to confound them with the works of those men, with w^hom 
their editors would like to be compared : with those first pioneers 
who possessed the courage and the enthusiasm to clear away for 
us Epigoni that forest of ambiguities and errors which has grown 
up around the bright flower of Shakespearian poesy. To these 
men indeed all honour and reverence is due, for they are the men 
above all others, to whom the nineteenth century is indebted for 



IV PREFACE. 

its enjoyment of Shakespeare, and who can therefore justly claim 
to be immortalized on the same monument with the poet himself. 

But that which in the works of these earlier editors was a matter 
of necessity, became a mere learned passion with their "classically 
educated" disciples, who forgot that Shakespeare's creations were 
not intended for the learned alone, but rather for the whole great 
wide world. They forgot that by excluding the unlearned multitude 
from the direct enjoyment of their investigations, they were also 
estranging themselves from the spirit of the poet. For if the charac- 
teristic feature of the present age be described, whether for praise 
or for blame, as a striving after popularity, it is, when rightly un- 
derstood, the greatest acknowledgement which could be paid to the 
spirit of the times. If every creation of man , which does not at 
last awake among the people something living, and productive of 
new life; which does not finally become popular, is dead from 
the very first, — Shakespeare may also in this sense, as in every 
other, be represented as the emblem, as the culminating point of 
the highest and freest development. He created for the people, 
and only for the people, and if this conviction is the most 
important guide for the Shakespearian inquirer, to en- 
able him to find the true road for his critical labours, 
it is also the condemnation of all who have imagined that an ant- 
Hke diligence in amassing learned lumber was the proper way to 
erect a monument worthy of receiving the image of the poet.*) 

It is true, a great variety of knowledge is requisite to enable a 
man to attain the elevation necessary for Shakespearian criticism ; 



*) Hamlet's words in act iii , sc. 2 , when speaking to the actors respecting 
their profession, may be regarded as a clue to Shakespeare's conception of the 
province of the poet in the portrayal of character and situation: 

"■Suit the action to the word, and the ivord to the action, with this special ob- 
servance , that you o'erstep not the modesty of nature ; for anything so overdone is 
from the purpose of playing, whose end, both at the first, and now, was and is, to 
hold, as't were, the mirror up to nature; to sheiv virtue her own feature, scorn 
her own image, and the very age and body of the time, his form and pressure." 



PREFACE. V 

but a work of art, like every other product of the intellect, is 
only perfect, when its merits are not w^eakened or obscured by 
the sioht of the effort which its creation occ'asioned its author, a 
sight which is often the result of a vainglorious intention. 

But the men of dry learning, — however indisputable the good- 
ness of their intentions, — lacked that amount of creative power, 
those poetic gifts, which are indispensable for the critical treat- 
ment of every poet. It is not sufficient to weigh syllables and 
words, longs and shorts, to hunt out the occurrence of this or 
that turn of expression in older writers, — all this, necessary as it 
may be, can only take the second place in the scale of importance. 
But the first duty of the critic is, to penetrate into the innermost 
hfe and activity of the poet's mind, and, led by his hand, to ex- 
perience and create anew that which he created and experienced, 
and thus from the critic's own creative power to realise what the 
poet felt and thought, — what, in short, he intended. 

He who attempts the critical treatment of a poet without feel- 
ing something of the poet in his own nature , may be able to ac- 
complish much that is valuable, and accumulate copious materials 
in the way of facts, which others may employ for the building 
they would raise, but he will never succeed in presenting a mirror 
in which the true image of the poet shall meet our view. 

And this is the service for which the due meed of acknowledo-e- 
ment must be paid those industrious labourers. They have col- 
lected a vast mass of materials, which, though requiring a win- 
nowing process hardly less troublesome than that of its first dis- 
covery, renders the most welcome, indeed the most important 
assistance to the critic by natural vocation, to the critic w^ho has 
himself become a poet. 

If we now direct a hasty glance to those editions , which we 
have above denominated 'the popular', it is impossible to deny, 
that in one point at least their authors have endeavoured to ac- 
complish the task, which every Shakespearian critic must propose 
to himself: they gave the pubhc the result of their labours, with- 



VI PREFACE. 

out encumbering it with any traces of the labours themselves. 
They offered readable editions, without any exaggerated mass of 
notes to diminish the enjoyment of the lay-reader, and which only 
in rare instances facilitate his comprehension. If we had been 
able to add, that acute criticism and an unquestionable under- 
standing of the works had been employed in these editions in the 
winnowing of the text and the notes, we should, in our opinion, 
have been obliged to consider all further labour in the field of 
Shakespeare as unnecessary. For the ideal of an edition of Shake- 
speare for us at the present day, is one, which, while it makes 
the least open display of effort, and is unencumbered with foot- 
notes on every page, betrays to the initiated Shakespeare student 
the traces of the most unwearying labour, and a thorough know- 
ledge of all the materials, which bear upon the subject. 

This praise is more than we could award to the popular editions; 
but in the majority of instances the ambition of the editors has 
not gone beyond that of supplying the market with readable, and 
therefore saleable editions of the poet. 

The production of such an ideal edition of Shakespeare is a 
task presenting immense difficulties, but after the lapse of three 
centuries the time to attempt it at least has arrived, and its suc- 
cessful execution would be the noblest celebration of the tercen- 
tenary festival, the most glorious monument that could be raised 
to Shakespeare's memory. — We believe it could only be success- 
fully accomplished in the following manner: 

Every passage that has succeeded in estabhshing its title to re- 
spect, either by the agreement of the old editions or of later emen- 
dators, should be adopted in the text, without the slightest mention 
of all the arguments for and against, which have hitherto been ban- 
died about respecting it. The mention of them is not of the least ad- 
vantage to the public, and does not at all advance the purification 
of the text. There are emendations, which have stood the ordeal 
of time, and the errors they are intended to remove, the errors of 
copyists, printers, and early editors, — errors, which the rust of 



PREFACE. Vn 

centuries has consecrated in the eyes of fanatics, might at length 
be consigned to a lasting repose. — A similar mode of proceeding 
should be adopted with respect to everything respecting questions 
of interpunctuation and orthography in cases of subordinate in- 
terest, such as do not affect the sense and clearness of the matter. 
Notes, which only say just what is most necessary in the most 
precise form, without any useless introduction of learned matter, 
should be placed at the end of each piece, and only considered 
admissible at all under the three following categories: 

1. On corrupt passages, containing difficulties of which the 

Editor himself is not able to give any final solution. 

2. On proposed new readings, the adoption of w^hich in the 

text ought to be left to future editors. 

3. Explanations of the meaning of difficult passages. 
Those who make the study of Shakespeare a profession, or the 

occupation of a learned leisure, find such rich materials for their 
researches, in the editions with copious notes, works of reference, 
reprints, and monographs, as also in articles in Reviews and Maga- 
zines, that it can no longer be the task of every new^ editor to 
repeat even the essence of all that has so often appeared in print. 
When, for instance, the subject is Juliet's celebrated 'runaway', 
where is the necessity for fishing up all that has been said about 
it, whether valuable or the reverse? The judicious editor will 
either retain the original reading, and refer the reader in a short 
note to the works containing more ample matter, or else he will 
adopt in his text, on his own responsibility, one of the many good 
emendations, that have been proposed, and thus take his chance 
with the critics. Whether he be right or wrong, the professed 
student will recognize the traces of his knowledge and his la- 
bour in every line of his edition, and the popular reader will 
feel truly grateful for the uninterrupted enjoyment of the poet's 
creations. 

At the present day the above conception of an editor's duties 
is no longer an isolated one; for while I have been engaged in 



VIII PREFACE. 

preparing the present edition of Coriolanus, the first volumes of 
two editions of Shakespeare have appeared , in which precisely 
similar principles have been adopted : the Cambridge Shakespeare, 
and the second edition of the Rev. A. Dyce. If I add to these the 
labours of the American, Grant White*), I believe that these three 
works, supported by the mysterious emendator of the second folio, 
(who, though much abused, and often justly blamed, has never- 
theless taken an important step in advance,) contain all the most 
valuable matter that Shakespearian criticism can boast of, at least 
in addition to the labours of the iirst pioneers in the same field. 

Perhaps in the present edition I have gone one step further 
than the above-mentioned writers, and have silently adopted in the 
text many things, which appeared to them to require a note, and 
in many still doubtful readings have not expressed a doubt, which 
I no longer entertained myself. I can however assert, that in all 
such cases I have been guided alone by the results of a conscien- 
tious investigation. It is hardly necessary moreover to observe, 
that I have only alluded to myself in conjunction with those emi- 
nent names, because I thought I could perceive a certain agree- 
ment in our objects, and therefore hoped to find some support in 
the connection with such Coryphaei. Neither is it an "edition of 
Shakespeare", which I have now attempted, but only the modest 
essay of a beginner, whose dehut must be all the more timid in 
proportion, as his boldness — as a German — is great in venturing 
to appear at all on a field, which so many distinguished English- 
men have chosen as an arena worthy of their labours. 

The appendices to the following volume, namely, the photo- 
lithographical impression of the Tragedy from the copy of the 
first folio in the Royal Library of Berlin , and the extracts from 
North's Plutarch, appeared to me valuable for the comparison of 
the text. 



*) I have had no opportunity of looking at his edition, and know only his 
"Shakespeare's Scholar". 



PREFACE. IX 

A star in the text, as thus — *) — signifies, that there is a note 
on the passage at the end of the piece. The numbers in the margin 
(omitted in the reprint of the first foho, in order not to injure the 
representation as a fac-simile) are intended to facihtate the finding 
of single passages, and are to be understood as follows: 38"^ signi- 
fies 38, third reply; in the present case therefore: 

^'■Lart. Now the fair goddess (fee." 

The numbers to the extracts from Plutarch correspond with 
the passages in the text to which they refer. 

In conclusion, 1 beg to offer my best thanks to Mr. Pertz, Privy 
Counsellor and Head Librarian of the Royal Library of Berlin, 
for his kindness in allowing me to use the first folio for the photo- 
lithographic fac-simile. I also wish to express my obligations to 
Mr. A. Burchard , chief of the photo-lithographical Institution of 
Berlin, for the great pains, which he took in the production of the 
very successful fac-simile of the first folio, and also of the title to 
the Plutarch. 

Berlin. April 23, 1864. 

F. A. LEO. 



CORIOLANUS. 



C R I L A N U S 



DRAMATIS PERSONS. 



CAIUS MARCIUS CORIOLANUS , a noble Roman. 

TITUS LARTIUS, ] ^ , . , ,, , . 

/-i/^^rr-^TTxx,, f Generals against the Volscians. 

COMINIUS, j ^ 

MENENIUS AGRIPPA, Friend to Coriolanus. 

SICINIUS VELUTUS , 



JUNIUS BRUTUS, ' ^"^"""^ "^ '^'' ^'''^'^'^ 
YOUNG MARCIUS, Son to Coriolanus. 
A Roman Herald. 

TULLUS AUFIDIUS , General of the Volscians. 
Lieutenant to Aufidius. 
Conspirators with Aufidius. 
A Citizen of Antium. 
Two Volscian Guards. 

VOLUMNIA, Mother to Coriolanus. 
VIRGILIA, Wife to Coriolanus. 
VALERIA , Friend to Virgilia. 
Gentlewoman, attending on Virgilia. 

Roman and Volscian Senators, Patricians, ^diles, Lictors, Soldiers, Citizens, 
Messengers, Servants to Aufidius, and other Attendants. 

SCENE , partly in Rome , and partly in the Territories of the 
Volscians and Antiates. 



ACT I. SCENE I. 

Rome. A Street. 

Enter a Company of mutinons Citizens, with Staves, Cluhs, and 

other Weapons. 

First Cit. Before we proceed any further, hear me speak. 

All. Speak, speak. 

First Cit. You are all resolv'd rather to die, than to famish? 

All. Resolv'd, resolv'd. 

First Cit. First you know, Caius Marcius is chief enemy to the 
people. 

All. We know 't, we know 't. 

First Cit. Let us kill him, and we'll have corn at our own price. 
Is 't a verdict? 

All. No more talking on 't; let it be done; aw^ay, away. 

Second Cit. One w^ord, good citizens. 

First Cit. We are accounted poor citizens; the patricians good. 
What authority surfeits on, would relieve us. If they would yield 
us but the superfluity, while it were wholesome, we might guess 
they relieved us humanely; but they think, we are too dear: the 
leanness that afflicts us, the object of our misery,*) is as an inven- 
tory to particularize their abundance; our sufferance is a gain to 
them. — Let us revenge this with our pikes, ere we become rakes: 
for the gods know, I speak this in hunger for bread, not in thirst 
for revenge. 

Second Cit. Would you proceed especially against Caius Marcius ? 

All. Against him first: he 's a very dog to the commonalty. 

Second Cit. Consider you what services he has done for his 
country ? 

1* 



4 THE TRAGEDY OP CORIOLANUS. 

First Cit. Very well; and could be content to give him good 
report for 't, but that he pays himself with being proud. 

Second Cit. Nay, but speak not maliciously. 

First Cit. I say unto you, what he hath done famously, he did 
it to that end: though soft-conscienc'd men can be content to say 
it was for his country, he did it to please his mother, and to be 
partly*) proud; which he is, even to the altitude of his virtue. 

Second Cit. What he cannot help in his nature, you account a 
vice in him. You must in no way say he is covetous. 

First Cit. If I must not, I need not be barren of accusations: 
he hath faults, with surplus, to tire in repetition. [Shouts within.'] 
What shouts are these ? The other side o' the city is risen : why 
stay we prating here? to the Capitol! 

All. Gome, come. 

First Cit. Soft! who comes here? 

- Enter Menenius Agrippa. 

Second Cit. Worthy Menenius Agrippa; one that hath always 
lov'd the people. 

First Cit. He 's one honest enough: would, all the rest were so. 

Men. What work's, my countrymen, in hand? Where go you 
With bats and clubs? The matter? Speak, I pray you. 

First Cit. Our business is not unknown to the senate; they have 
had inkling this fortnight what we intend to do, which now we '11 
show 'em in deeds. They say, poor suitors have strong breaths: 
they shall know, we have strong arms too. 

Men. Why, masters, my good friends, mine honest neighbours, 
Will you undo yourselves? 

First Cit. We cannot, sir; we are undone already. 

Men. I tell you, friends, most charitable care 
Have the patricians of you. For your wants, 
Your suffering in this dearth, you may as well 
Strike at the heaven with your staves, as lift them 
Against the Roman state, whose course will on 
The way it takes, cracking ten thousand curbs 
Of more strong link asunder, than can ever 



THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 5 

Appear in your impediment. For the dearth, 

The gods, not the patricians, make it; and 

Your knees to them, not arms, must help. Alack! 

You are transported by calamity 

Thither where more attends you; and you slander 

The helms o' the state, who care for you like fathers, 

Wlien you curse them as enemies. 

First Cit. Care for us? True, indeed! They ne'er cared for us 
yet. Suifer us to famish, and their store-houses crammed with grain ; 
make edicts for usury, to support usurers; repeal daily any whole- 
some act established against the rich, and provide more piercing 
statutes daily to chain up and restrain the poor. If the wars eat 
us not up, they will; and there 's all the love they bear us. 

Men. Either you must 
Confess yourselves wondrous malicious, 
Or be accus'd of folly. I shall tell you 
A pretty tale: it may be you have heard it; 
But, since it serves my purpose, I will venture 
To stale 't*) a little more. 

First Cit. Well, I '11 hear it, sir: yet you must not think to fob 
off our disgrace with a tale; but, an 't please you, deliver. 

Men. There was a time, when all the body's members 
Rebell'd against the belly; thus accus'd it: — 
That only like a gulf it did remain 
r the midst o' the body, idle and unactive, 
Still cupboarding the viand, never bearing 
Like labour with the rest; where th' other instruments 
Did see and hear, devise, instruct, walk, feel, 
And, mutually participate, did minister 
Unto the appetite and affection common 
Of the whole body. The belly answer'd, — 

First Cit. Well, sir, what answer made the belly? 

Men. Sir, I shall tell you. — With a kind of smile. 
Which ne'er came from the lungs, but even thus, 
(For, look you, I may make the belly smile. 
As well as speak) it tauntingly replied 



6 THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 

To the discontented members, the mutinous parts 
That envied his receipt; even so most fitly 
As you malign our senators, for that 
They are not such as you. 

First Cit. Your belly's answer? What! 

The kingly crowned head, the vigilant eye, 
The counsellor heart, the arm our soldier. 
Our steed the leg, the tongue our trumpeter, 
With other muniments and petty helps 
In this our fabric, if that they — 

Men. What then? — 

'Fore me, this fellow speaks! — what then? what then? 

First Cit. Should by the cormorant belly be restrained. 
Who is the sink o' the body, — 

Men. Well, what then? 

First Cit. The former agents, if they did complain. 
What could the belly answer? 

Men. I will tell you, 

If you '11 bestow a small (of what you have little) 
Patience a while, you '11 hear the belly's answer. 

First Cit. Y' are long about it. 

Men. Note me this, good friend; 

Your most grave belly was deliberate, 
Not rash like his accusers, and thus answer'd: 
"True is it, my incorporate friends," quoth he, 
"That I receive the general food at first, 
Which you do live upon; and fit it is. 
Because I am the store-house, and the shop 
Of the whole body: but, if you do remember, 
I send it through the rivers of your blood. 
Even to the court, the heart, to the seat o' the brain; 
And through the cranks and offices of man, 
The strongest nerves and small inferior veins 
From me receive that natural competency 
Whereby they live. And though that all at once. 
You, my good friends," — this says the belly, mark me, — 



THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 7 

First Git. Ay, sir; well, well. 

Men. "Though all at once cannot 10 

See what I do deliver out to each, 
Yet I can make my audit up, that all 
From me do back receive the flower of all, 
And leave me but the bran." What say you to 't? 

First Git. It was an answer : how apply you this ? 

Men. The senators of Rome are this good belly. 
And you the mutinous members: for examine 
Their counsels and their cares; digest things rightly 
Touching the weal o' the common, you shall find. 
No public benefit which you receive, 
But it proceeds or comes from them to you. 
And no way from yourselves. — What do you think? 
You, the great toe of this assembly? 

First Git. I the great toe? why the great toe? 

Men. For that being one o' the lowest, basest, poorest 
Of this most wise rebellion, thou go'st foremost: 
Thou rascal, that art worst in blood to run,*) 
Lead'st first, to win some vantage. 
But make you ready your stiff bats and clubs, 
Rome and her rats are at the point of battle; 
The one side must have bale. 

Enter Caius Marcius. ii 

Hail, noble Marcius! 

Mar. Thanks. — What's the matter, you dissentious rogues, 
That, rubbing the poor itch of your opinion, 
Make yourselves scabs? 

First Git. We have ever your good word. 

Mar. He that will give good words to ye, will flatter 
Beneath abhorring. What would you have, you curs. 
That like nor peace, nor war? the one affi'ights you. 
The other makes you proud. He that trusts to you. 
Where he should find you lions, finds you hares; 
Where foxes, geese: you are no surer, no, 



3 THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 

Than is the coal of fire upon the ice, 

Or hailstone in the sun. Your virtue is, 

To make him worthy, whose offence subdues him, 

12 And curse that justice did it. Who deserves greatness, 
Deserves your hate; and your affections are 

A sick man's appetite, who desires most that 

Which would increase his evil. He that depends 

Upon your favours, swims with fins of lead. 

And hews down oaks with rushes. Hang ye! Trust ye? 

With every minute you do change a mind. 

And call him noble, that was now your hate. 

Him vile, that was your garland. What's the matter, 

That in these several places of the city 

You cry against the noble senate, who, 

Under the gods, keep you in awe, which else 

Would feed on one another? — What's their seeking? 

Men. For corn at their own rates; whereof, they say. 
The city is well stor'd. 

13 Mar. Hang 'em! They say? 
They ^11 sit by the fire, and presume to know 
What's done i' the Capitol; who 's like to rise, 

Who thrives, and who declines; side factions, and give out 

Conjectural marriages; making parties strong, 

And feebling such as stand not in their liking, 

Below their cobbled shoes. They say, there 's grain enough? 

Would the nobility lay aside their ruth. 

And let me use my sword, I 'd make a quarry 

With thousands of these quarter'd slaves, as high 

As I could pick my lance. 

Men. Nay, these are almost thoroughly persuaded; 
For though abundantly they lack discretion, 
Yet are they passing cowardly. But, I beseech you, 
What says the other troop? 

14 Mar. They are dissolved: hang 'em! 
They said, they were an-hungry; sigh'd forth proverbs, — 
That hunger broke stone walls, that dogs must eat, 



THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. » 

That meat was made for mouths, that the gods sent not 
Corn for the rich men only: — with these shreds 
They vented their complainings; which being answer'd, 
And a petition granted them, a strange one, 
(To break the heart of generosity. 
And make bold power look pale) they threw their caps 
As they would hang them on the horns o' the moon, 
Shouting their emulation.*) 

Men. What is granted them? 

Mar. Five tribunes, to defend their vulgar wisdoms, 15 

Of their own choice: one 's Junius Brutus, 
Sicinius Velutus, and I know not — 'Sdeath! 
The rabble should have first unroof'd the city, 
Ere so prevail'd with me: it will in time 
Win upon power, and throw forth greater themes 
For insurrection's aro-uin"". 

Men. This is strange. 

Mar. Go; get you home, you fragments! 

Enter a Messenger, hastily. 

Mess. Where's Caius Marcius? 

Mar. Here: what's the matter? 

Mess. The news is, sir, the Volsces are in arms. 
Mar. I am glad on 't: then we shall have means to vent 
Our musty superfluity. — See, our best elders. 

Enter CoMim\:s^ Titus Lartius, and other Setiators ; Jumius 16 
Brutus, and Sicinius Velutus. 

First Sen. Marcius, 't is true that you have lately told us; 
The Volsces are in arms. 

Mar. They have a leader, 

Tullus Aufldius, that will put you to 't. 
I sin in envying his nobility; 
And were I any thing but what I am , 
I would wish me only he. 

Com. You have fought together. 



17 



10 THK TI{AGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 

Mar. Were half to half the world by th' ears, and he 
Upon my })arty, I 'd revolt, to make 
Only my wars with him: he is a lion 
That I am proud to liunt. 

Fh'st Sen. Then, worthy Marcius, 

Attend upon Cominius to these M''ars. 

Co'm. It is your former promise. 

Mar. Sir, it is; 

And I am constant. — Titus Lartius, thou 
Shalt see me once more strike at Tullus' face. 
What! art thou stiff? stand' st out? 

Tit. No, Caius Marcius: 

I '11 lean upon one crutch, and fight with th' other. 
Ere stay behind this business. 

3Ien. 0, true-bred! 

First Sen. Your company to the Capitol; where, I know, 
Our greatest friends attend us. 

Tit. Lead you on: 

Follow, Cominius; we must follow you; 
Right worthy your priority. 

Co7n. Noble Marcius! 

First Sen. Hence! To your homes! be gone. [To the Citizens. 

Mar. Nay, let them follow, 

The Volsces have much corn: take these rats thither. 
To gnaw their garners. — Worshipful mutineers. 
Your valour puts well forth: pray, follow. 

[Exeunt Senators, Cominius, Marcius, Titus, and 
Menenius. Citizens steal away. 

18 Sic. Was ever man so proud as is this Marcius? 
Bru. He has no equal. 

Sic. When we were chosen tribunes for the people, — 
Bru. Mark'd you his lip and eyes? 
Sic. Nay, but his taunts. 

Bru. Being mov'd, he will not spare to gird the gods. 
Sic. Bemock the modest moon. 



THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 1 1 

Bru. The present wars devour liiiu! He is grown 
Too proud to be so valiant.*) 

Sic. Such a nature, 

Tickled with good success, disdains the shadow 
Which he treads on at noon ; but I do wonder. 
His insolence can brook to be commanded 
Under Cominius. 

Bru. Fame, at the wdiich he aims, 19 

In whom already he is well grac'd, cannot 
Better be held, nor more attain'd, than by 
A place below the first; for what miscarries 
Shall be the general's fault, though he perform 
To the utmost of a man; and giddy censure 
Will then cry out of Marcius, "0, if he 
Had borne the business!" 

Sic. Besides, if things go well, 

Opinion, that so sticks on Marcius, shall 
Of his demerits*) rob Cominius. 

Bru. Come : 

Half all Cominius' honours are to Marcius, 
Though Marcius earn'd them not; and all his faults 
To Marcius shall be honours, though, indeed. 
In aught he merit not. 

Sic. Let's hence, and hear 

How the dispatch is made; and in what fashion 
More than his singularity,*) he goes 
Upon this present action. 

Bru. Let 's along. [Exeunt. 

SCENE 11. 

Corioli. The Senate-House. 

Enter Tullus Aufidius, and Senators. 20 

First Sen. So, your opinion is, Aufidius, 
That they of Rome are enter'd in our counsels, 
And know how we proceed. 



12 THE TRAGKDY OF CORIOLANUS. 

Aiif. Is it not yours? 

What ever have been thought on in this state, 
That could be brought to bodily act ere Rome 
Had circumvention? 'T is not four days gone, 
Since I heard thence; these are the words: I think 
I have the letter here; yes, here it is: [Reads. 

21 "They have press'd a power, but it is not known 
Whether for east, or west. The dearth is great; 
The people mutinous: and it is rumour'd, 
Cominius, Marcius your old enemy 

(Who is of Rome worse hated than of you). 
And Titus Lartius, a most valiant Roman, 
These three lead on this preparation 
Whither 't is bent: most likely, 't is for you. 
Consider of it.'' 

First Sen. Our army 's in the field: 
We never yet made doubt but Rome was ready 
To answer us. 

22 Auf. Nor did you think it folly. 

To keep your great pretences veil'd, till when 

They needs must show themselves: which in the hatching, 

It seem'd, appear'd to Rome. By the discovery. 

We shall be shorten'd in our aim; which was. 

To take in many towns, ere, almost, Rome 

Should know we were afoot. 

Second Sen. Noble Auiidius, 

Take your commission; hie you to your bands: 
Let us alone to guard Corioli: 
If they set down before 's, for the remove 
Bring up your army; but, I think, you '11 find 
They 've not prepar'd for us. 

23 Auf. 0, doubt not that: 
I speak from certainties. Nay, more; 

Some parcels of their power are forth already, 
And only hitherward. I leave your honours. 
If we and Caius Marcius chance to meet, 



THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 13 

'T is sworn between us, we shall ever strike 
Till one can do no more. 

All. The gods assist you! 

Auf. And keep your honours safe! 

First Sen. Farewell. 

Second Sen. Farewell. 

All. Farewell. [Exetmt. 

SCENE III. 24 

Rome. A room in Marcius' house. 

Enter Volumnia, and Virgilia. They sit down on two loiv 
stools, and sew. 

Vol. I pray you, daughter, sing; or express yourself in a more 
comfortable sort. If my son were my husband, I should freelier 
rejoice in that absence wherein he won honour, than in the em- 
bracements of his bed, where he would show most love. When 
yet he was but tender-bodied, and the only son of my womb; 
when youth with comeliness plucked all gaze his way; when, for 
a day of king's entreaties, a mother should not sell him an hour 
from her beholding; I, — considering how honour would become 
such a person ; that it was no better than picture-like to hang by 
the wall, if renown made it not stir, — was pleased to let him seek 
danger where he was like to find fame. To a cruel war I sent 
him; from whence he returned, his brows bound with oak. I tell 
thee, daughter, I sprang not more in joy at first hearing he was 
a man-child, than now in first seeing he had proved himself a man. 

Vtr. But had he died in the business, madam, — how then? 25 

Vol. Then, his good report should have been my son: I there- 
in would have found issue. Hear me profess sincerely: — had I a 
dozen sons, — each in my love alike, and none less dear than thine 
and my good Marcius, — I had rather had eleven die nobly for 
their country, than one voluptuously surfeit out of action. 

Enter a Gentlewoynan. 
Gent. Madam, the lady Valeria is come to visit you. 



14 THE TRAGEDY OF CORTOLANUS. 

Vir. Beseech you, give me leave to retire myself. 
2<> Vol. Indeed, you shall not. 

Methinks, I hear hither your husband's driun. 
See him pluck Aufidius down by the hair; 
As children from a bear, the Volsces shunning him: 
Methinks, I see him stamp thus, and call thus, — 
"Come on, you cowards! you were got in fear. 
Though you were born in Rome." His bloody brow 
With his mail'd hand then wiping, forth he goes; 
Like to a harvest-man, that's task'd to mow 
Or all, or lose his hire. 

Vir. His bloody brow? 0, Jupiter, no blood! 

Vol. Away, you fool! it more becomes a man. 
Than gilt his trophy: the breasts of Hecuba, 
When she did suckle Hector, look'd not lovelier 
Than Hector's forehead, when it spit forth blood 
At Grecian sword contemning.*) — Tell Valeria, 
We are lit to bid her welcome. [Exit Gent. 

27 Vir. Heavens bless my lord from fell Aufidius! 
Vol. He '11 beat Aufidius' head below his knee. 

And tread upon his neck. 

Re-enter Gentlewoman^ with Valeria and her Usher. 

Val. My ladies both, good day to you. 

Vol. Sweet Madam, — 

Vtr. I am glad to see your ladyship. 

Val. How do you both? you are manifest housekeepers. What 
are you sewing here? A fine spot, in good faith.*) — How does 
your little son? 

Vir. I thank your ladyship; well, good madam. 

Vol. He had rather see the swords, and hear a drum, than 
look upon his school-master. 

28 Val. 0' my word, the father's son; I '11 swear, 't is a very 
pretty boy. 0' my troth, I looked upon him o' Wednesday half 
an hour together: he has such a confirmed countenance. I saw 
him run after a gilded butterfly; and when he caught it, he let it 



THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 15 

go again; and after it again; and over and over he comes, and up 
again; catched it again: or whetlier his fall enraged him, or how 
't was, he did so set his teeth, and tear it; 0,1 warrant, how he 
mammocked it! 

Vol. One of his father's moods. 

Veil. Indeed, la, 't is a noble child. 

Vir. A crack, madam. 

Val. Come, lay aside your stitchery; I must have you play the 
idle huswife with me this afternoon. 

Vir. No, good madam; I will not out of doors. 

Val. Not out of doors! 

Vol. She shall, she shall. 

Vir. Indeed, no, by your patience: I will not over the thresh- 
old, till my lord return from the wars. 

Vol. Fie! you confine yourself most unreasonably: come; you '^y 
must go visit the good lady that lies in. 

Vir. I will wish her speedy strength, and visit her with my 
prayers; but I cannot go thither. 

Vol. Why, I pray you? 

Vir. 'T is not to save labour, nor that 1 want love. 

Val. You would be another Penelope; yet, they say, all the 
yarn she spun in Ulysses' absence did but fill Ithaca full of moths. 
Come: I would, your cambric were sensible as your finger, that 
you might leave pricking it for pity. Come, you shall go with us. 

Vir. No, good madam, pardon me; indeed, I will not forth. 

Val. In truth, la, go with me; and I '11 tell you excellent news 
of your husband. 

Vir. 0, good madam, there can be none yet. 

Val. Verilf, I do not jest with you: there came news from him 
last night. 

Vir. Indeed, madam? 

Val. In earnest, it 's true; I heard a senator speak it. Thus 
it is: — The Volsces have an army forth, against whom Cominius 
the general is gone, with one part of our Roman power: your lord 
and Titus Lartius are set down before their city Corioli; they 



30 



16 THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANVS. 

nothing doubt prevailing, and to make it brief wars. This is true 
on mine honour; and so, I pray, go with us. 

Vir. Give me excuse, good madam; I will obey you in every 
thing hereafter. 

Vol. Let her alone, lady: as she is now, she will but disease 
our better mirth. 

Val. In troth, I think, she would. — Fare you well, then. — 
Come, good sweet lady. — Pr'ythee, Virgilia, turn thy solemness 
out o' door, and go along with us. 

Vi7\ No, at a word, madam; indeed, I must not. I wish you 
much mirth. 

Val. Well then, farewell. [Exeunt. 

31 SCENE IV. 

Before Corioli. 

E7iter, with Drum and Colours^ Marcius, Titus Lartius, Officers, 
and Soldiers. To them a Messenger. 

Mar. Yonder comes news: — a wager, they have met. 

Lart. My horse to yours, no. 

Mar. 'T is done. 

Lart. Agreed. 

Mar. Say, has our general met the enemy? [To the Messenger. 

Mess. They lie in view, but have not spoke as yet. 

Lart. So, the good horse is m ine. 

Mar. I '11 buy him of you. 

Lart. No, I '11 nor sell, nor give him: lend you him I will 
For half a hundred years. — Summon the town. 

32 Mar. How far off lie these armies ? 

Mess. Within this mil^and half. 

Mar. Then shall we hear their 'larum, and they ours. 
Now, Mars, I pr'ythee, make us quick in work. 
That we with smoking swords may march from hence. 
To help our fielded friends! — Come, blow thy blast. 

They sound a parley. Enter, on the walls, two Senators, 

and others. 
Tullus Aufidius,is he within your walls? 



THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 17 

First Sen. No, nor a man that fears you less than he, 
That 's lesser than a little. Hark, our drums [Drums afar off. 
Are bringmg forth our youth: we '11 break our walls. 
Rather than they shall pound us up. Our gates. 
Which yet seem shut, we have but pinn'd with rushes ; 
They '11 open of themselves. Hark you, far off! [Alarum afar off. 33 
There is Aufidius: list, what work he makes 
Amongst your cloven army. 

Mar. 0, they are at it! 

Larf. Their noise be our instruction. — Ladders, ho! 

The Volsces enter, and pass over the stage. 

Mar. They fear us not, but issue forth their city. 
Now put your shields before your hearts, and fight 
With hearts more proof than shields. — Advance, brave Titus: 
They do disdain us much beyond our thoughts. 
Which makes me sweat with wrath. — Come on, my fellows: 
He that retires, I '11 take him for a Volsce, 
And he shall feel mine edge. 

Alarum., and exeunt Roynans and Volsces, fighting. The Romans 34 
are beaten hack to their trenches. Re-enter Maucius. 

Mar. All the contagion of the south light on you, 
You shames of Rome you! Herds of boiles and plagues*) 
Plaster you o'er, that you may be abhorr'd 
Farther than seen, and one infect another 
Against the wind a mile! You souls of geese. 
That bear the shapes of men, how have you run 
From slaves that apes would beat! Pluto and hell! 
All hurt behind; backs red, and faces pale 
With flight and agued fear! Mend, and charge home. 
Or, by the fires of heaven, I '11 leave the foe. 
And make my wars on you: look to 't: come on; 
If you '11 stand fast, we '11 beat them to their wives, 
As they us to our trenches followed. 

2 



18 THE TRAGEDY OF CO^ilOLANUS. 

35 Another alarum. The Volsces and Romans re-enter, and the 

fight is renewed. The Volsces retire into Corioli, and Marcius 
follows them to the gates. 

So, now the gates are ope: — now prove good seconds. 
'T is for the followers fortune widens them, 
Not for the fliers: mark me, and do the like. 

[Marcius enters the gates. 

First Sol. Fool-hardiness ! not I. 

Sec. Sol. Nor I. [Marcius is shut in. 

Third Sol. See, they have shut him in. [Alarum continues. 

All. To the pot, I warrant him. 

36 Enter Titus Lartius. 

Lart. What is become of Marcius? 

All. Slain, sir, doubtless. 

First Sol. Following the fliers at the very heels, 
With them he enters; who, upon the sudden, 
Olapp'd-to their gates: he is himself alone. 
To answer all the city. 

Lart. noble fellow! 

Who sensibly outdares his senseless sword, 
And, when it bows, stands up. Thou art left, Marcius: 
A carbuncle entire, as big as thou art. 
Were not so rich a jewel. Thou w^ast a soldier 
Even to Cato's wish, not fierce and terrible 
Only in strokes; but, with thy grim looks and 
The thunder-like percussion of thy sounds. 
Thou mad'st thine enemies shake, as if the world 
Were feverous and did tremble. 

Re-e7iter Marcius, bleeding, assaulted by the eneyny. 

First Sol. Look, sir! 
Lart. 0, 'tis Martins! 
Let 's fetch him off, or make remain alike. 

[They fight, and all enter the city. 



THE TRAGP^DY OF CORIOLANUS. 19 

SCENE V. 37 

Within Corioli. A street. 

Enter certain Romans, with spoils. 

First Rom. This will I cany to Rome. 

Sec. Rom. And I this. 

Third Rom. A murrain on 't! I took this for silver. 

[^Alarum continues still afar off. 

Enter Marcius, and Trrus Larhls, with a trumpet. 

Mar. See here these movers, that do prize their hours 
At a crack'd drachm! Cushions, leaden spoons, 
Irons of a doit, doublets that hangmen would 
Bury with those that wore them, these base slaves. 
Ere yet the fight be done, pack up. — Down with them! — 
And hark, what noise the general makes. — To him! 
There is the man of my soul's hate, Aufidius, 
Piercing our Romans: then, valiant Titus, take 
Convenient numbers to make good the city, 
Wliilst I, with those that have the spirit, will haste 
To help Cominius. 

Lart. Worthy sir, thou bleed'st; 38 

Thy exercise hath been too violent 
For a second course of fight. 

Mar. Sir, praise me not; 

My work hath yet not warm'd me: fare you well. 
The blood 1 drop is rather physical 
Than dangerous to me: to Aufidius thus 
I will appear, and fight. 

Lart. Now the fair goddess. Fortune, 

Fall deep in love with thee; and her great charms 
Misguide thy opposers' swords! Bold gentleman. 
Prosperity be thy page! 

Mar. Thy friend no less 

Than those she placeth highest! So, farewell. 

2* 



20 THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 

Lm^t. Thou worthiest Marcius! — [Exit Marcius. 

Go, sound thy trumpet in the market-place; 
Call thither all the oflicers o' the town, 
Where they shall know our mind. Away! [Exeunt. 

39 SCENE YI. 

Near the Camp of Cominius. 
Enter Cominius and forces, retreating. 

Com. Breathe you, my friends: well fought; we are come off 
Like Romans, neither foolish in our stands. 
Nor cowardly in retire: believe me, sirs. 
We shall be charg'd again. Whiles we have struck. 
By interims and coveying gusts, we have heard 
The charges of our friends : — Ye Roman gods 
Lead their successes as we wish our own. 
That both our powers, with smiling fronts encount'ring. 
May give you thankful sacrifice! — 

40 Enter a Messenger. 

Thy news? 

Mess. The citizens of Corioli have issu'd. 
And given to Lartius and to Marcius battle: 
I saw our party to their trenches driven, 
And then I came away. 

Com. Though thou speak'st truth, 

Methinks, thou speak'st not well. How long is 't since? 

Mess. Above an hour, my lord. 

Com. 'T is not a mile; briefly we heard their drums: 
How could'st thou in a mile confound an hour, 
And bring thy news so late? 

Mess. Spies of the Volsces 

Held me in chase, that I was forc'd to wheel 
Three or four miles about; else had I, sir, 
Half an hour since brought my report. 

Corn. Who 's yonder, 



THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 21 

That does appear as he were flay'd? gods! 

He has the stamp of Marcins, and 1 have 

Before-time seen him thus. 

Mar. [withiii] Oome I too late? *^ 

Com. The shepherd knows not thunder from a tabor, 

More than I know the sound of Marcius' tongue 

From every meaner man. 

Enter Marcius. 

Mar. Come I too late? 

Com. Ay, if you come not in the blood of others, 
But mantled in your own. 

Mar. 0, let me clip you 

In arms as sound, as when I woo'd; in heart 
As merry, as when our nuptial day was done, 
And tapers burn'd to bedward. 

Com. Flower of warriors, 

How is 't with Titiis Lartius? 

Mar. As with a man busied about decrees: ^^ 

Condemning some to death, and some to exile: 
Ransoming him or pitying, threatening the other; 
Holding Corioli in the name of Rome, 
Even like a fawning greyhound in the leash, 
To let him slip at will. 

Com. Wliere is that slave, 

Which told me they had beat you to your trenches? 
Where is he? Call him hither. 

Mar. Let him alone. 

He did inform the truth: but for our gentlemen. 
The common file, (a plague! — tribunes for them!) 
The mouse ne'er shunn'd the cat, as they did budge 
From rascals worse than they. 

Com. But how prevail'd you? 

Mar. Will the time serve to tell ? I do not think — 
Where is the enemy? Are you lords o' the field? 
If not, why cease you till you are so ? 



22 THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 

Com. Marcius, we have at disadvantage fought, 
And did retire to win our purpose. 

43 Mar. How lies their battle? know you on which side 
They have plae'd their men of trust? 

Com. As I guess, Marcius, 

Their bands i' the vaward are the Antiates, 
Of their best trust: o'er them Aufidius, 
Their very heart of hope. 

Mar. I do beseech you. 

By all the battles wherein we have fought, 
By the blood we have shed together, by the vows 
We have made to endure friends, that you directly 
Set me against Aufidius and his Antiates; 
And that you not delay the present, but, 
Filling the air with swords advancM and darts. 
We prove this very hour. 

44 Com. Though I could wish 
You were conducted to a gentle bath, 

And balms applied to you, yet dare I never 
Deny your asking: take your choice of those 
That best can aid your action. 

Mar. Those are they 

That most are willing. — If any such be here, 
(As it were sin to doubt) that love this painting 
Wherein you see me smear'd; if any fear 
Lesser his person than an ill report; 
If any think, brave death outweighs bad lii'e, 
And that his country's dearer than himself: 
Let him, alone, or so many so minded, 
Wave thus, to express his disposition, 
And follow Marcius. 

[They all shout, and wave their swords; take him 
up in their arms, and cast up their caps. 

45 0, me alone! ■') Make you a sword of meV 

If these shows be not outward, which of you 
But is four Volsces? None of you, but is 



THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 23 

Able to bear against the great AuficUus 
A shield as hard as his. A certain number, 
Though thanks to all, must I select*): the rest 
Shall bear the business in some other fight, 
As cause will be obey'd. Please you to march: 
And four shall quickly draw out my command,*) 
Wliich men are best inclin'd. 

Co7n. March on, my fellows: 

Make good this ostentation, and you shall 
Divide in all with us. [Exeunt. 

SCENE VIL 46 

The Gates of Corioli. 

Titus Lartius, having set a guard upon Corioli, going with drum 
and trumpet toward Cominius and Caius Marcius, enters with 
a Lieutenant, a Party of Soldiers, and a Scout. 

Lart. So; let the ports be guarded: keep your duties, 
As I have set them down. If I do send, despatch 
Those centuries to our aid; the rest will serve 
For a short holding: if we lose the field, 
We cannot keep the town. 

Lieu. Fear not our care, sir. • 

Lart. Hence, and shut your gates upon 's. — 
Our guider, come; to the Roman camp conduct us. [Exeunt. 

SCENE VIII. 47 

A field of battle between the Roman and the Volscian camps. 
Alarum. Enter, from opposite sides, Marcius a7id Aufidius. 

Mar. I '11 fight with none but thee: for I do hate thee 
Worse than a promise-breaker. 

Auf. We hate alike: 

Not Afric owns a serpent, I abhor 
More, than thy fame I envy. Fix thy foot. 

Mar. Let the first budger die the other's slave, 
And the gods doom him after! 



24 THK TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 

Auf, If I fly, Marcius, 

Halloo me like a hare. 

Mai\ Within these three hours, Tulltis, 

Alone I fought in your Corioli walls. 
And made what work I pleasVl. 'T is not my blood, 
Wherein thou seest me mask'd: for thy revenge 
Wrench np thy power to the highest, 

Auf. Wert thou the Hector, 

That was the whip of your bragg'd progeny, 
Thou should'st not scape me here. — 

[They fight, and certain Volsces come to the aid 

of AUFIDIUS. 

Officious, and not valiant— you have sham'd me 
In your condemned seconds. 

[Eoceunt fighting, driven in by Marcius. 

48 SCENE IX. 

The Roman Camp. 

Alarum,. A retreat is sounded. Flourish. Enter at one side, Co- 
MiNius, and Romans; at the other side, Marcius, with his arm 
in a scarf, and other Romans. 

Conu If I should tell thee o'er this thy day's work. 
Thou It not believe thy deeds: but I '11 report it. 
Where senators shall mingle tears with smiles; 
Where great patricians shall attend, and shrug, 
r the end admire; where ladies shall be frighted, 
And, gladly quak'd, hear more; where the dull tribimes, 
That with the fusty plebeians*) hate thine honours. 
Shall say, against their hearts, — "We thank the gods, 
Our Rome hath such a soldier!" — 
Yet cam'st thou to a morsel of this feast. 
Having fully din'd before. 

49 Enter Tn us Lartius, with his power, from, the purswit. 
Lart. genera], 

Here is the steed, we the caparison: 
Hadst thou beheld — 



THE TRAGEDY OF COHIOLANIS. 25 

Mar. Pray now, no more: my mother, 

Wlio has a charter to extol her blood, 
When she does praise me, grieves me. 1 have done 
As you have done, — that 's what I can: inducM 
As you have been, — that "s for my country: 
He that has but effected his good will 
Hath overta'en mine act. 

Com. You shall not be 50 

The grave of your deserving; Rome must know 
The value of her own : 't were a concealment 
Worse than a theft, no less than a traducement. 
To hide your doings, and to silence that 
Which, to the spire and top of praises vouched. 
Would seem but modest: therefore, I beseech you, 
(In sign of what you are, not to reward 
What you have done) before our army hear me. 

Mar. I have some wounds upon me, and they smart 
To hear themselves remeniberM. 

Com. Should they not. 

Well might they fester "gainst ingratitude. 
And tent themselves with death. Of all the horses 
(Whereof we have ta'en good, and good store), of all 
The treasure, in this field achiev'd and city. 
We render you the tenth; to be ta'en forth, 
Before the common distribution, at 
Your only choice. 

Mar. 1 thank you, general; 

But cannot make my heart consent to take 
A bribe to pay my sword: I do refuse it; 
And stand upon my common part with those 
That have beheld the doing. 

\_A long flourish. They all cry., Marcius! Marcius! 
cast up their caps and lances: CoiMINIUs and 
Lar'jius stand hare. 

Mar. May these same instruments, which you profane, 51 

Never sound more, when drums and trumpets shall 



26 THE TRAGEDY OV COUIOLANUS. 

I' the field prove flatterers: let courts and cities be 

Made all of false-fac'd soothing ; 

When steel grows soft as the parasite's silk, 

Let him*) be made a coverture for the wars! 

No more, I say! For that I have not wash'd 

My nose that bled, or foil'd some debile wretch, 

Which, without note, here 's many else have done, 

You shout me forth in acclamations hyperbolical. 

As if I lov'd my little shoidd be dieted 

In praises sauc'd with lies. 
52 Com. Too modest are you: 

More cruel to your good report, than grateful 

To us that give you truly: by your patience. 

If 'gainst yourself you be incens'd, we '11 put you 

(Like one that means his proper harm) in manacles, 

Then reason safely with you. — Therefore, be it known. 

As to us, to all the world, that Caius Marcius 

Wears this war's garland: in token of the which 

My noble steed, known to the camp, I give him, 

With all his trim belonging; and, from this time. 

For what he did before Corioli, call him, 

With all th' applause and clamour of the host, 

Caius Marcius Curiolanus. — Bear 

The addition nobly ever! 

[Flourish. Trumpets sound, and drums. 
^3 All. Caius Marcius Coriolanus! 
Cor. I will go wash; 

And when my face is fair, you shall perceive 

Whether I blush, or no: howbeit, I thank you. — 

I mean to stride your steed; and, at all times, 

To undercrest*) your good addition 

To the fairness of my power. 

Com. So, to our tent: 

Where, ere we do repose us, we will write 

To Rome of our success. — You, Titus Lartius, 

Must to Corioli back: send us to Rome 



. THE TKAGEDY OF CURIULANUS. ^7 

The best, with whom we may articulate, 
For their own good and ours. 

Lart. I shall, my lord. 54 

Cor. The gods begin to mock me. I, that now 
Refus'd most princely gifts, am bound to beg 
Of my lord general. 

Cotn. Take 't: 't is yours. — Wat is 't? 

Cor. I sometime lay, here in Corioli, 
At a poor man's house; he us'd me kindly: 
He cried to me; I saw him prisoner; 
But then Aufidius was within my view, 
And wrath o'erwhelm'd my pity. I request you 
To give my poor host freedom. 

Com. 0, well begg'd! ^^ 

Were he the butcher of my son, he should 
Be free as is the wind. — Deliver him, Titus. 

Lart. Marcius, his name? 

Cor. By Jupiter, forgot: — 

I am weary; yea, my memory is tir'd. — 
Have M^e no w'ine here? 

Com. Go we to our tent. 

The blood upon your visage dries: 't is time 
It should be look'd to: come. [Exeunt. 

SCENE X. 56 

The Camp of the Volsces. 

A Jiourish. Cornets. E7iter Tvuxs Avfwivs , bloody, icith two 

or three soldiers. 

Auf. The tow'n is ta'en! 

First Sol. 'T will be deliver'd back an good condition. 

Auf. Condition! — 
I would I were a Roman; for I cannot, 
Being a Volsce, be that I am. — Condition! 
What good condition can a treaty find 
r the part that is at mercy? — Five times, Marcius, 



28 THE TRAGEDY OF COKIOI.ANUS.. 

I have fought with thee; so often hast thou beat me; 
And woulcl'st do so, I think, should we encounter 
As often as we eat. — By the elements, 
If e'er again I meet him beard to beard, 
He 's mine, or I am his. Mine emulation 
Hath not that honour in 't, it had; for where 
I thought to crush him in an equal force, 
True sword to sword, I '11 potch at him some way, 
Or wrath, or craft may get him. 
5'^ First Sol. He 's the devil. 

Auf. Bolder, though not so subtle. My valour's poison'd, 
With only suffering stain by him; for him 
Shall fly out of itself: nor sleep, nor sanctuary, 
Being naked, sick; nor fane, nor Capitol, 
The prayers of priests, nor times of sacrifice, 
Embarquements*) all of fury, shall lift up 
Their rotten privilege and custom 'gainst 
My hate to Marcius. Where I find him, were it 
At home, upon my brother's guard, even there. 
Against the hospitable canon, would I 
Wash my fierce hand in's heart. Go you to the city: 
Learn, how 't is held; and what they are, that must 
Be hostages for Rome. 

First Sol. Will not you go? 

All/. I am attended at the cypress grove: I pray you 
('T is south the city mills), bring me word thither 
How the world goes, that to the pace of it 
I may spur on my journey. 

First Sol. I shall, sir. [Exeunt. 



THE TKAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 29 



ACT 11. SCENE 1. 58 

Rome. A public place. 

Enter Menenius, Sicinius, a^i^ Brutus. 

Men. The augurer tells me, we shall have news to-night. 

Bmt. Good or bad? 

Men. Not according to the prayer of the people, for they love 
not Marcius. 

Sic. Nature teaches beasts to know their friends. 

Men. Pray you, whom does the wolf love? 

Sic. The lamb. 

Men. Ay, to devour him: as the hungry plebeians would the 
noble Marcius. 

Brut. He 's a lamb indeed, that baes like a bear. 

Men. He 's a bear indeed, that lives like a lamb. You two are 59 
old men: tell me one thing that I shall ask you. 

Both Trib. Well, sir? 

Men. In what enormity is Marcius poor in, that you two have 
not in abundance? 

Brut. He 's poor in no one fault, but stored with all. 

Sic. Especially in pride. 

Brut. And topping all others in boasting. 

Men. This is strange now. Do you two know how you are 
censured here in the city, I mean of us o' the right-hand file? do 
you? 

Both Trib. Why, how are we censured? 

Men. Because you talk of pride now, — will you not be angry ? 

Both Trib. Well, well, sir; well. 

Men. Why, 't is no great matter; for a very little thief of oc- go 
casion will rob you of a great deal of patience: give your dispo- 
sitions the reins, and be angry at your pleasures; at the least, if 
you take it as a pleasure to you in being so. You blame Marcius 
for being proud? 

Brut. We do it not alone, sir. 



30- THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 

Men. 1 know, you can do very little alone; for your helps are 
many, or else your actions would grow wondrous single: your 
abilities are too infant-like, for doing much alone. You talk of 
pride: 0, that you could turn your eyes toward the napes*) of 
your necks, and make Imt an interior survey of your good selves ! 
0, that you could! 

61 Brut. What then, sir? 

Men. Why, then you should discover a brace of unmeriting, 
proud, violent, testy magistrates, (alias fools) as any in Rome. 

Sic. Menenius, you are known well enough, too. 

Me7i. I am known to be a humorous patrician, and one that 
loves a cup of hot wine, with not a drop of allaying Tyber in 't; 
said to be something imperfect in favouring the first complaint;*) 
hasty and tinder-like upon too trivial motion; one that converses 
more with the buttock of the night, than with the forehead of the 
morning. What I think, I utter, and spend my mahce in my 

62 breath. Meeting two such weals-men as you are (I cannot call 
you Lycurguses), if the drink you give me touch my palate ad- 
versely, I make a crooked face at it. I cannot say, your worships 
have deliver d the matter well , when I find the ass in compound 
with the major part of your syllables; and though I must be con- 
tent to bear with those that say you are reverend grave men, yet 
they lie deadly, that tell, you have good faces. If you see this in 
the map of my microcosm, follows it, that I am known well enough, 
too? What harm can your bisson conspectuities glean out of this 
character, if I be known well enough, too? 

G3 Brut. Come, sir, come; we know you well enough. 

Men. You know neither me, yourselves, nor any thing. You 
are ambitious for poor knaves' caps and legs: you wear out a 
good wholesome forenoon in hearing a cause between an orange- 
wife and a fosset-seller, and then rejourn the controversy of three- 
pence to a second day of audience. — When you are hearing a 
matter between party and party, if you chance to be pinched with 
the colic, you make faces like mummers, set up the bloody flag 
against all patience, and, in roaring for a chamber-pot, dismiss the 
controversy pleading,*) the more entangled by your hearing: all the 



THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 31 

peace you make in their cause Is, calling both the parties knaves. 
You are a pair of strange ones. 

Brut. Come, come, you are well understood to be a perfecter 64 
giber for the table, than a necessary bencher in the Capitol. 

Men. Our very priests must become mockers, if they shall en- 
counter such ridiculous subjects as you are. When you speak best 
unto the purpose, it is not worth the wagging of your beards; and 
your beards deserve not so honourable a grave as to stuff a bot- 
cher's cushion, or to be entombed in an ass's pack-saddle. Yet 
you must be saying, Marcius is proud; who, in a cheap estimation, 
is worth all your predecessors since Deucalion, though, perad- 
venture, some of the best of 'em were hereditary hangmen. Good 
den to your worships: more of your conversation M^ould infect 
my brain, being the herdsmen of the beastly plebeians. I will be 
bold to take my leave of you. • 

[Brutus and Sicinius retire to the hack of the scene. 

Enter Voli mnia, Virgilia, and Valeria, &c. 65 

How now, my as fair as noble ladies, (and the moon, were she 
earthly, no nobler), whither do you follow your eyes so fast? 

Vol. Honourable Menenius, my boy Marcius approaches; for 
the love of Juno, let 's go. 

Men. Ha! Marcius coming home? 

Vol. Ay, worthy Menenius; and with most prosperous appro- 
bation. 

Men. Take my cap, Jupiter, and I thank thee. — Ho! Marcius 
coming home? 

Two Ladies. Nay, 't is true. 

Vol. Look, here 's a letter from him: the state hath another, 
his wife another; and, I think, there 's one at home for you. 

Men. I will make my very house reel to-night. — A letter for 
me? 

Vir. Yes, certain, there 's a letter for you : I saw it. 

Men. A letter for me? It gives me an estate of seven years' 66 
health: in which time I will make a lip at the physician: the inpsl'i; 



32 THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 

sovereign prescription in Galen is but empiricutic, *) and, to this 
preservative, of no better report than a horse-drench. — Is he not 
wounded? he was wont to come home wounded. 

Vi?\ 0, no, no, no! 

Vol. 0, he is wounded — 1 thank the gods for 't! 

Men. So do I too, if it be not too mucli. — Brings 'a victory in 
his pocket? — The wounds become him. 

Vol. On's brows: Menenius, he comes the third time home with 
the oaken garland. 

67 Me7i. Has he disciplined Aufidius soundly? 

Vol. Titus Lartius writes, they fought together, but Aufidius 
got oif. 

Men. And 't was time for him too, I '11 warrant him that: an 
he had stay'd by him, I would not have been so fidiused for all 
the chests in Corioli, and the gold that 's in them. Is the senate 
possessed of this? 

Vol. Good ladies, let 's go. — Yes, yes, yes; the senate has let- 
ters from the general, wherein he gives my son the whole name 
of the war. He hath in this action outdone his former deeds 
doubly. 

Val. In troth, there 's wondrous things spoke of him. 

Men. Wondrous: ay, I warrant you, and not without his true 
purchasing. 

"F^r. The gods grant them true! 

Vol. True? pow, wow! 

68 Men. True? I '11 be sworn they are true. — Where is he 
wounded? — God save your good worships! [To the Tribunes, 
who come f 07' ward.] Marcius is coming home: he has more cause 
to be proud. — Where is he wounded? 

Vol. V the shoulder, and i' the left arm: there will be large 
cicatrices to show the people, when he shall stand for his place. 
He received in the repulse of Tarquin seven hurts i' the body. 

Men. One i' the neck, and two i' the thigh, — there's nine that 
I know. 

Vol. He had, before this last expedition, twenty-five wounds 
upon him. 



THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 33 

Me7i. Now it's twenty-seven: every gash was an enemy's grave. 
[A shout and flour ish.'\ Hark! the trumpets. 

Vol. These are the ushers of Marcius: before hmi he carries 
noise, and behind him he leaves tears: 
Death, that dark spirit, in's nervy arm doth He; 
Which, being advanc'd, decHnes, and then men die. 

A sennet. Trumpets sound. Enter Cominius and Titus LARTros; G9 
between them, Coriolanus, croivned with an oaken garland; 
with captains, soldiers, and a Herald. 

Her. Know, Rome, that all alone Marcius did fight 
Within Corioli's gates: where he hath won. 
With fame, a name to Caius Marcius; these 
In honour follows Coriolanus: — 
Welcome to Rome, renowned Coriolanus! [Flourish. 

All. Welcome to Rome, renowned Coriolanus! 

Cor. No more of this; it does offend my heart: 
Pray now, no more. 

Com. Look, sir, your mother, — 

Cor. O! 

You have, I know, petition'd all the gods 
For my prosperity. [Kneels. 

Vol. Nay, my good soldier, up; 70 

My gentle Marcius, worthy Caius, and 
By deed-achieving honour newly nam'd, 
What is it? Coriolanus must I call thee? 
But 0! thy wife— 

Cor. My gracious silence, hail! 

Would'st thou have laugh'd, had I come coffin'd home. 
That weep'st to see me triumph? Ah, my dear, 
Such eyes the widows in Corioli wear. 
And mothers that lack sons. 

Men. Now, the gods crown thee! 

Cor. And live you yet? — my sweet lady, pardon. 

[To Valeria. 

3 



34 THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 

Vol. I know not where to turn: — 0, welcome home; 
And welcome, general; — and you are welcome all! 
71 Men. A hundred thousand welcomes: I could weep, 
And I could langh; I am light, and heavy. Welcome! 
A curse begin at very root on's heart, 
That is not glad to see thee! — You are three, 
That Rome should dote on; yet, by the faith of men, 
We have some old crab-trees here at home, that will not 
Be grafted to your relish. Yet welcome, warriors! 
We call a nettle but a nettle; and 
The faults of fools but folly. 

Com. Ever right. 

Cor. Menenius, ever, ever. 

Her. Give way there, and go on! 

Cor. Your hand, — and yours: 

[To his ivife arid mother. 
'72 Ere in our own house I do shade my head. 
The good patricians must be visited; 
From whom I have receiv'd, not only greetings, 
But with them change of honours. *) -^ 

Vol. I have lived 

To see inherited my very wishes *) 
And the buildings of my fancy: only there 
Is one thing wanting, which I doubt not, but 
Our Rome will cast upon thee. 

Cor. Know, good mother, 

I had rather be their servant in my way, 
Than sway with them in theirs. 

Com. On, to the Capitol! 

■ [Flourish. Cornets. Exeunt in state., as before. 
'?3 The Tribunes remairi. 

Brut, All tongues speak of him, and the bleared sights 
Are spectacled to see him: your prattling nurse 
Into a rapture lets her baby cry 
While she chats him: the kitchen malkin pins 



THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 35 

Her richest lockram 'bout her reechy neck, 

Clambering the walls to eye him: stalls, bulks, windows 

Are smother'd up, leads fill'd, and ridges hors'd 

With variable complexions; all agreeing 

In earnestness to see him: seld-shown flamens 

Do press among the popular throngs, and puff 

To win a vulgar station: our veil'd dames 

Commit the war of white and damask in 

Their nicely-gawded cheeks to the wanton spoil 

Of Phoebus' burning kisses: such a pother, 

As if that whatsoever god who leads him. 

Were slily crept into his human powers, 

And gave him graceful posture. 

Sic. On the sudden 74 

I warrant him consul. 

Brut. Then our office may. 

During his power, go sleep. 

Sic. He cannot temperately transport his honours 
From where he should begin and end; but will 
Lose those he hath won. 

Brut. In that there 's comfort. 

Sic. Doubt not. 

The commoners, for whom we stand, but they 
Upon their ancient malice, will forget. 
With the least cause, these his new honours; which 
That he '11 give them, make I as little question 
As he is proud to do 't. 

Brut. I heard him swear, 75 

Were he to stand for consul, never would he 
Appear i' the market-place, nor on him put 
The napless vesture of humility; 
Nor, showing (as the manner is) his wounds 
To the people, beg their stinking breaths. 

Sic. 'T is right. 

Brut. It was his word. 0! he would miss it, rather 



36 THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 

Than carry it but by the suit of the gentry to him, 
And the desire of the nobles. 

Sic. I wish no better 

Than have him hold that purpose, and to put it 
In execution. 

Brut. 'T is most like, he will. 

Sic. It shall be to him, then, as our good wills, 
A sure destruction. 

76 Brut. So it must fall out 
To him, or our authorities. For an end. 
We must suggest the people, in what hatred 

He still hath held them; that, to 's power,*) he would 

Have made them mules, silenc'd their pleaders, and 

Dispropertied their freedoms; holding them. 

In human action and capacity. 

Of no more soul nor fitness for the world 

Than camels in the war; who have their provand 

Only for bearing burdens, and sore blows 

For sinking under them. 

Sic. This, as you say, suggested 

At some time when his soaring insolence 
Shall touch*) the people, (which time shall not want. 
If he be put upon 't; and that 's as easy, 
As to set dogs on sheep) will be his fire 
To kindle their dry stubble; and their blaze 
Shall darken him for ever. 

77 Enter a Messenger. 

Brut. What's the matter? 

Mess. You are sent for to the Capitol. 'T is thought, 
That Marcius shall be consul. 
I have seen the dumb men throng to see him, and 
The blind to hear him speak: matrons flung gloves, 
Ladies and maids their scarfs and handkerchers 
Upon him as he pass'd; the nobles bended. 
As to Jove's statue, and the commons made 



THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 37 

A shower and thunder with their caps and shouts. 
I never saw the Kke. 

Bimt, Let 's to the Capitol; 

And carry with us ears and eyes for the time, 
But hearts for the event. 

Sic, Have with you. [Exeunt. 

SCENE 11. 78 

The same. The Capitol. 
Enter Two Officers, to lay cushions. 

First Off. Come, come; they are almost here. How many stand 
for consulships? 

- Sec. Off. Three, they say; but 't is thought of every one Corio- 
lanus will carry it. 

First Off. That 's a brave fellow; but he 's vengeance proud, 
and loves not the common people. 

Sec. Off. 'Faith, there have been many great men that have 
flattered the people, wo ne'er loved them; and there be many that 
they have loved, they know not wherefore: so that, if they love 
they know not why, they hate upon no better a ground : therefore, 
for Coriolanus neither to care whether they love or hate him, 
manifests the true knowledge he has in their disposition ; and out 
of his noble carelessness, lets them plainly see 't. 

First Off. If he did not care whether he had their love or no, 79 
he waved indifferently 'twixt doing them neither good nor harm; 
but he seeks their hate with greater devotion than they can render 
it him, and leaves nothing undone that may fully discover him 
their opposite. Now, to seem to affect the malice and displeasure 
of the people is as bad as that which he dislikes, — to flatter them 
for their love. 

Sec. Off. He hath deserved worthily of his country: and his 
ascent is not by such easy degrees as those, who, having been 
supple and courteous to the people, bonneted, without any farther 
deed to have them at all into their estimation and report: but he 
hath so planted his honours in their eyes, and his actions in their 



38 THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 

hearts, that fur theh* tongues to be silent, and not confess so much, 
were a kind of in grateful injury; to report otherwise were a malice, 
that, giving itself the lie, would pluck reproof and rebuke from 
every ear that heard it. 

First Off. No more of him: he is a worthy man. Make way, 
they are coming. 

80 A sennet. Enter, with Lictors before them, Cominris, Menenius, 

CoRioLANus, Senators^ Sicmius and Brutus. The Senators 
take their i^laces; the Tribunes take theirs also by themselves. 

Men. Having determin'd of the Volsces, and 
To send for Titus Lartius, it remains, 
As the main point of this our after-meeting, 
To gratify his noble service, that 
Hath thus stood for his country: therefore, please you, 
Most reverend and grave elders, to desire 
The present consul, and last general 
In om' well-found successes, to report 
A little of that worthy work perform'd 
By Gains Marcius Coriolanus; whom 
We meet here, both to thank, and to remember 
With honours like himself. 

81 First Sen. Speak, good Cominius: 
Leave nothing our for length, and make us think 
Rather our state's defective for requital. 

Than we to stretch it out. Masters o' the people, 
We do request your kindest ears ; and, after, 
Your loving motion toward the common body. 
To yield what passes here. 

Sic. We are convented 

Upon a pleasing treaty; and have hearts 
Inclinable to honour and advance 
The theme of our assembly. 

B7'ut. Which the rather 

We shall be bless'd to do, if he remember 



THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 39 

A kinder value of the people, than 
He hath hereto priz'd them at. 

Men. That 's off, that 's off; 82 

I would you rather had been silent. Please you 
To hear Cominius speak? 

Brut. Most willingly: 

But yet my caution was more pertinent 
Than the rebuke you give it. 

Men. He loves your people; 

But tie him not to be their bedfellow. — 
Worthy Cominius, speak. — ■ 

[CoRiOLANUs rises, and offers to go away. 
Nay, keep your place. 

First Sen. Sit, Coriolanus; never shame to hear 
What you have nobly done. 

Cor. Your honours' pardon: 83 

I had rather have my wounds to heal again, 
Than hear say how I got them. 

Brut. Sir, I hope, 

My words disbench'd you not. 

Cor. No, sir: yet oft, 

When blows have made me stay, I fled from words. 
You sooth'd not, therefore hurt not: but, your people, 
I love them as they weigh. 

Men. Pray now, sit down. 

Cor. I had rather have one scratch my head i' the sun. 
When the alarum were struck, than idly sit 
To hear my nothings monster'd. [Exit. 

Men. Masters of the people, 84 

Your multiplying spawn how can he flatter 
(That 's thousand to one good one), when you now see 
He had rather venture all his limbs for honour. 
Than one on's ears to hear it? — Proceed, Cominius. 

Com. I shall lack voice: the deeds of Coriolanus 
Should not be utter'd feebly. — It is held, 
That valour is the chief est virtue, and 



40 THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 

Most dignifies the haver: if it be, 
The man I speak of cannot in the world 
^^ Be singly counterpois'd. At sixteen years, 

When Tarquin made a head for Rome, he fought 
Beyond the mark of others: our then dictator, 
Whom with all praise I point at, saw him fight, 
When with his Amazonian chin he drove 
The bristled lips before him: he bestrid 
An o'er-press'd Roman, and i' the consul's view 
Slew three opposers : Tarquin self he met, 
And struck him on his knee: in that day's feats. 
When he might act the woman in the scene. 
He prov'd best man i' the field, and for his meed 

86 Was brow-bound with the oak. His pupil age 
Man-enter' d thus, he waxed like a sea; 

And in the brunt of seventeen battles since. 

He lurch' d all swords of the garland. For this last, 

Before and in Corioli, let me say, 

I cannot speak him home: he stopp'd the fliers; 

And by his rare example made the coward 

Turn terror into sport: as weeds before 

A vessel under sail, so men obey'd. 

And fell below his stem: his sword, death's stamp. 

Where it did mark, it took: from face to foot 

He was a thing of blood, whose every motion 

87 Was tim'd with dying cries: alone he enter'd 
The mortal gate of the city, which he painted 
With shunless destiny; aidless came off. 
And with a sudden re-enforcement struck 
Corioli like a planet: now all 's his; 

When, by and by, the din of war 'gan pierce 
His ready sense: then, straight his doubled spirit 
Re-quicken'd what in flesh was fatigate, 
And to the battle came he; where he did 
Run reeking o'er the lives of men, as if 
'T were a perpetual spoil; and till we call'd 



THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 41 

Both field and city ours, he never stood 
To ease his breast with panting. 

3Ie)i. Worthy man! ^^ 

First Sen. He cannot but with measure fit the honours 
Which we devise him. 

Com. Our spoils he kick'd at; 

And look'd upon things precious, as they were 
The common muck o' the world: he covets less 
Than misery itself would give, rewards 
His deeds with doing them, and is content 
To spend the time to end it.*) 

Men. He 's right noble: 

Let him be call'd for. 

First Sen. Call for Coriolanus. 

Off. He doth appear. 

Re-enter Coriolanus. 89 

Men. The senate, Coriolanus, are well pleas'd 
To make thee consul. 

Cor. I do owe them still 

My life, and services. 

Men. It then remains, 

That you do speak to the people. 

Cor. I do beseech you, 

Let me o'erleap that custom; for 1 cannot 
Put on the gown, stand naked, and entreat them, 
For my wounds' sake, to give their suffrage: please you, 
That I may pass this doing. 

Sic. Sir, the people 

Must have their voices ; neither will they bate 
One jot of ceremony. 

Men. Put them not to 't: 

Pray you, go fit you to the custom, and 
Take to you, as your predecessors have, 
Your honour with your form. ^ 



90 



42 THE TRAGEDY OK CORIOLANUS. 

Cor. It is a part 

That I shall blush in acting, and might well 
Be taken from the people. 

Brut. Mark you that? 

Cor. To brag unto them, — thus I did, and thus; — 
Show them th' unaching scars which I should hide, 
As if I had receiv'd them for the hire 
Of their breath only. — 

Men. Do not stand upon 't. — 

We recommend to you, tribunes of the people, 
Our purpose to them; — and to our noble consul 
Wish we all joy and honour. 

Sen. To Coriolanus come all joy and honour! 

[Flourish. Exeunt all except SiciNius and Brutus. 

Brut. You see how he intends to use the people. 

Sic. May they perceive 's intent! He will require them, 
As if he did contemn, what he requested 
Should be in them to give. 

Brut. Come, we '11 inform them 

Of our proceedings here : on the market-place, 
I know, they do attend us. [Exeunt. 

91 SCENE III. 

The same. The Forum. 
Enter several Citizens. 

First Cit. Once, if he do require our voices, we ought not to 
deny him. 

Sec. Cit. We may, sir, if we will. 

Third Cit. We have power in ourselves to do it, but it is a 
power that we have no power to do: for if he shows us his wounds, 
and tells us his deeds, we are to put our tongues into those wounds, 
and speak for them; so, if he tells us his noble deeds, we must 
also tell him our noble acceptance of them. Ingratitude is mon- 
strous: and for the multitude to be ingrateful were to make a 



THE TliAGEDY OF CURIOLANUS. 43 

monster of the multitude; of the which we being members, should 
bring ourselves to be monstrous members. 

First Cit. And to make us no better thought of, a little help 
will serve: for once we stood up about the corn, he himself stuck 
not to call us the many-headed multitude. 

Third Cit. We have been called so of many; not that our 92 
heads are some brown, some black, some auburn, some bald, but 
that our wits are so diversely coloured: and truly, I think, if all 
our wits were to issue out of one skull, they would fly east, west, 
north, south; and their consent of one direct way should be at 
once to all the points o' the compass. 

Sec. Cit. Think you so? Which way, do you judge, my wit 
would fly? 

Third Cit. Nay, your wit will not so soon out as another man's 
will: 't is strongly wedged up in a block-head; but if it were at 
liberty, 't would, sure, southward. 

Sec. Cit. Why that way? 

Third Cit. To lose itself in a fog; where being three parts melted 
away with rotten dews, the fourth would return, for conscience 
sake, to help to get thee a wife. 

Sec. Cit. You are never without your tricks: — you may, you 93 
may. 

Third Cit. Are you all resolved to give your voices? But 
that 's no matter; the greater part carries it. I say, if he would 
incline to the people, there was never a worthier man. 

CoRiOLANUs and Menenius (approaching). 

Here he comes, and in the gown of humility: mark his behaviour. 
We are not to stay all together, but to come by him where he 
stands, by ones, by twos, and by threes. He 's to make his re- 
quests by particulars; wherein every one of us has a single honour, 
in giving him our own voices with our own tongues: therefore, 
follow me, and I '11 direct you how you shall go by him. 

All. Content, content. [Exeunt. 

[Menenius advancing with Cokiolanus. 94 

Men. sir, you are not right: have you not known 



44 THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 

The worthiest men have done't? 

Cor. What must I say? — 

I pray, sh', — Plague upon't! I cannot bring 
My tongue to such a pace. — Look, sir; — my wounds; — 
I got them in my country's service, when 
Some certain of your brethren roar'd, and ran 
From the noise of our own drums. 

Men. me, the gods! 

You must not speak of that: you must desire them 
To think upon you. 

Co7'. Think upon me? Hang 'em! 

I would they would forget me, like the virtues 
Which our divines lose by 'em. 

95 Men. You '11 mar all : 

I '11 leave you. Pray you, speak to them, I pray you. 

In wholesome manner. [Exit. 

Enter' tivo Citizens. 

Cor. Bid them wash their faces. 

And keep their teeth clean. — So, here comes a brace. 
You know the cause, sir, of my standing here. 

First Cit. We do, sir; tell us what hath brought you to 't. 

Cor. Mine own desert. , 

Sec. Cit. Your own desert? 

Cor. Ay, not mine own desire. 

First Cit. How! not your own desire? 

Cor. No, sir: 't was never my desire yet, to trouble the poor 
with begging. 

96 First Cit. Yon must think, if we give you any thing, we hope 
to gain by you. 

Cor. Well then, I pray, your price o' the consulship? 

First Cit. The price is, to ask it kindly. 

Cor. Kindly! — Sir, I pray, let me ha't: I have wounds to show 
you, which shall be yours in private. — Your good voice, sir; what 
say you? 

Sec. Cit. You shall ha't, worthy sir. 



THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 45 

Cor. A match, sir; there's in all two worthy voices begg'd: 
I have your alms: adieu. 

First Cit. But this is something odd. 

Sec. Cit. An 't were to give again, — but 't is no matter. 

[Exeunt the two Citizens. 

Enter two other Citizens. 9'? 

Cor. Pray you now, if it may stand with the tune of your 
voices that I may be consul, I have here the customary gown. 

Third Cit. You have deserved nobly of your country, and 
you have not deserved nobly. 

Cor. Your enigma? 

Third Cit. You have been a scourge to her enemies, you have 
been a rod to her friends; you have not, indeed, loved the com- 
mon people. 

Cor. You should account me the more virtuous, that I have 
not been common in my love. I will, sir, flatter my sworn brother, 
the people, to earn a dearer estimation of them; 't is a condition 
they account gentle: and since the wisdom of their choice is rather 
to have my hat than my heart, I will practise the insinuating nod, 
and be off to them most counterfeitly ; that is, sir, I will counter- 
feit the bewitchment of some popular man, and give it bountifully 
to the desirers. Therefore, beseech you, I may be consul. 

Fou7'th Cit. We hope to find you our fi'iend, and therefore 98 
give you our voices heartily. 

Third Cit. You have received many wounds for your country. 

Cor. I will not seal your knowledge with showing them. I 
will make much of your voices, and so trouble you no farther. 

Both Cit. The gods give you joy, sir, heartily! [Exeunt. 

Cor. Most sweet voices! — • 
Better it is to die, better to starve, 
Than crave the hire which first we do deserve. 

Why in this foolish*) toge should I stand here, 99 

To beg of Hob and Dick, that do appear, 
Their needless vouches? Custom calls me to 't: — 
What custom wills, in all things should we do 't, 



100 



46 . THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 

The dust on antique time would lie unswept, 
And mountainous error be too highly heap'd 
For truth to o'er-peer. — Rather than fool it so, 
Let the high office and the honour go 
To one that would do thus. — I am half through: 
The one part suffer'd, the other will I do. 

Enter three other Citizens. 

Here come more voices. — 

Your voices: for your voices I have fought; 

Watch'd for your voices; for your voices bear 

Of wounds two dozen odd; battles thrice six 

I have seen, and heard of: for your voices have 

Done many things, some less, some more: your voices: 

Indeed, I would be consul. 

Fifth Cit. He has done nobly, and cannot go without any 
honest man's voice. 

Sixth Cit. Therefore, let him be consul. The gods give him 
joy, and make him good friend to the people! 

All. Amen, amen. — 
God save thee, noble consul! [Exeunt Citizens. 

Cor. Worthy voices! 

101 Re-enter Menenius, tcith Brutus, and Sicmius. 

Men. You have stood your limitation; and the tribunes 
Endue you with the people's voice: remains 
That, in th' official marks invested, you 
Anon do meet the senate. 

Cor. Is this done? 

Sic. The custom of request you have discharg'd. 
The people do admit you, and are summon'd 
To meet anon upon your approbation. 

Cor. Where? at the senate-house? 

Sic. There, Coriolanus. 

Cor. May I change these garments? 

Sic. You may, sir. 



THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 47 

Cor. That I '11 straight do; and, knowhig myself agahi, 
Repau" to the senate-house. 

Men. I '11 keep you company. — Will you along? 

Brut. We stay here for the people. 

Sic. Fare you well. 

[Exeunt Coriolanus and Menentus. 

He has it now; and by his looks, methinks, ^^^ 

'T is M^arm at 's heart. 

Brut. With a proud heart he wore 

His humble weeds. Will you dismiss the people? 

Re-enter Citizens. 

Sic. How now, my masters! have you chose this man? 

First Cit. He has our voices, sir. 

Brut. We pray the gods he may deserve your loves. 

Sec. Cit. Amen, sir: to my poor unworthy notice. 
He mock'd us when he begg'd our voices. 

Third Cit. Certainly, 

He flouted us down-right. 

First Cit. No, 't is his kind of speech ; he did not mock us. 

Sec. Cit. Not one amongst us, save yourself, but says, 103 

He us'd us scornfully : he should have show'd us 
His marks of merit, wounds receiv'd for's country. 

Sic. Why, so he did, I am sure. 

All. No, no; no man saw 'em. 

Third Cit. He said, he had wounds, which he could show in 

private; 
And with his hat thus waving it in scorn, 
"I would be consul", says he: "aged custom, 
But by your voices, will not so permit me ; 
Your voices therefore." When we granted that, 
Here was, — "I thank you for your voices, — thank you, — 
Your most sweet voices: — now you have left your voices, 
I have no further with you." — Was not this mockery? 

Sic. Why, either were you ignorant to see 't, 104 



4b THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 

Or, seeing it, of such childish friendliness 
To yield your voices? 

Brut. Could you not have told him, 

As you were lesson'd — when he had no power. 
But was a petty servant to the state, 
He was your enemy; ever spake against 
Your liberties, and the charters that you bear 
r the body of the weal : and now, arriving 
A place of potency and sway o' the state, 
If he should still malignantly remain 
Fast foe to the plebeii, your voices might 
Be curses to yourselves. You should have said, 
That, as his worthy deeds did claim no less 
Than what he stood for, so his gracious nature 
Would think upon you for your voices, and 
Translate his malice towards you into love, 
Standing your friendly lord. 

105 Sic. Thus to have said. 
As you were fore-advis'd, had touch'd his spirit. 
And tried his inclination; from him pluck'd 
Either his gracious promise, which you might, 
As cause had called you up, have held him to; 
Or else it would have gall'd his surly nature, 
Which easily endures not article 

Tying him to aught ; so, putting him to rage, 
You should have ta'en th' advantage of his choler. 
And pass'd him unelected. 

B7mt. Did you perceive, 

He did solicit you in free contempt, 
When he did need your loves; and do you think, 
That his contempt shall not be bruising to you. 
When he hath power to crush? Why, had your bodies 
No heart among you? or had you tongues, to cry 
Against the rectorship of judgment? 

106 Sic. Have you. 
Ere now, denied the asker; and, now again, 



THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 49 

On him, that did not ask, but mock, bestow 
Your sued-for tongues? 

Third Cit. He 's not confirm'd; we may deny him yet. 
Sec. Cit. And will deny him: 
I '11 have five hundred voices of that sound. 

First Cit. I twice five hundred, and their friends to piece 'em. 
Brut. Get you hence instantly; and tell those friends, 
They have chose a consul that will from them take 
Their liberties; make them of no more voice 
Than dogs, that are as often beat for barking, 
As therefore kept to do so. 

Sic. Let them assemble; 107 

And, on a safer judgment, all revoke 
Your ignorant election: enforce his pride, 
And his old hate unt o you: besides, forget not 
With what contempt he wore the humble weed; 
How in his suit he scorn'd you: but your loves, 
Thinking upon his services, took from you 
The apprehension of his present portance, 
Which most gibingly, ungravely, he did fashion 
After the inveterate hate he bears you. 

Brut. Lay 

A fault on us, your tribunes; that we labour'd 
(No impediment between) but that you must 
Cast your election on him. 

Sic. Say, you chose him 108 

More after our commandment, than as guided 
By your own true affections; and that your minds, 
Pre-occupied with what you rather must do, 
Than what you should, made you against the grain 
To voice him consul. Lay the fault on us. 

Brut. Ay, spare us not. Say, we read lectures to you, 
How youngly he began to serve his country. 
How long continued, and what stock he springs of, — 
The noble house o' the Marcians; from whence came 
That Ancus Marcius, Numa's daughter's son, 

4 



50 THE TRAGEDY OF CORTOLANUS. 

Who, after great Hostilius, here was king. 
Of the same house Publius and Quintus were, 
That our best water brought by conduits hither; 
[And Censorinus, nam'd so by the people,*)] 
And nobly named so, twice being censor, 
Was his great ancestor. 

109 Sic. One thus descended, 
That hath beside well in his person wrought 
To be set high in place, we did commend 

To your remembrances; but you have found, 
Scaling his present bearing with his past, 
That he 's your fixed enemy, and revoke 
Your sudden approbation. 

Brut Say, you ne'er had done 't 

(Harp on that still), but by our putting on; 
And presently, when you have drawn your number. 
Repair to the Capitol. 

AIL We will so: almost all 

Repent in their election. [Exeunt Citizens. 

110 Brut. Let them go on: 
This mutiny were better put in hazard, 
Than stay, past doubt, for greater. 

If, as his nature is, he fall in rage 

With their refusal, both observe and answer 

The vantage of his anger. 

Sic. To the Capitol, come : 

We will be there before the stream o' the people ; 
And this shall seem, as partly 't is, their own, 
Which we have goaded onward. [Exeunt. 



THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 51 



ACT HI. SCENE I. m 

Rome. A Street. 

Cornets. Enter Coriolanus, Menenius, Comtnius, Titus Lartius, 
Senators, and Patricians. 

Cor, Tullus Aufidiiis, then, had made new head? 

Lart. He had, my lord; and that it was, which caus'd 
Our swifter composition. 

Cor. So then, the Volsces stand but as at first; 
Ready, when time shall prompt them, to make road 
Upon 's again. 

Com. They are worn, lord consul, so, 

That we shall hardly in our ages see 
Their banners wave again. 

Cor. Saw you Aufidius? 112 

Lart. On safe-guard he came to me; and did curse 
Against the Volsces, for they had so vilely 
Yielded the town : he is retir'd to Antium. 

Cor. Spoke he of me? 

Lart. He did, my lord. 

Cor. How? what? 

Lart. How often he had met you, sword to sword; 
That of all things upon the earth he hated 
Your person most; that he would pawn his fortunes 
To hopeless restitution, so he might 
Be calFd your vanquisher. 

Cor. At Antium lives he? 

Lart. At Antium. 

Cor. I wish, I had a cause to seek him there. 
To oppose his hatred fully. — Welcome home. [To Lartius. 

Enter Sicinius and Brutus. ii3 

Behold! these are the tribunes of the people, 

The tongues o' the common mouth: I do despise them. 



52 THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 

For they do prank them in authority, 
Against all noble sufferance. 

Sic. Pass no further. 

Cor. Ha! what is that? 

B7mt. It will be dangerous to go on : no further. 

Cor. Wliat makes this change? 

Men. The matter? 

Com. Hath he not pass'd the nobles, and the commons? 

Brut. Cominius, no. 

Cor. Have I had children's voices? 

114 First Sen. Tribunes, give way: he shall to the market-place. 
Brut. The people are incens'd against him. 

Sic. Stop, 

Or all will fall in broil. 

Cor. Are these your herd? — 

Must these have voices, that can yield them now. 
And straight disclaim their tongues? — What are your offices? 
You being their mouths, why rule you not their teeth? 
Have you not set them on? 

Men. Be calm, be calm. 

Cor. It is a purpos'd thing, and grows by plot, 
To curb the will of the nobility: 
Suffer 't, and live with such as cannot rule, 
Nor ever will be rul'd. 

115 Brut. Call 't not a plot: 
The people cry you mock'd them; and, of late. 
When corn was given them gratis, you repin'd; 
Scandal'd the suppliants for the people, call'd them 
Time-pleasers, flatterers, foes to nobleness. 

Cor. Why, this was known before. 
Brut. Not to them all. 

Cor. Have you inform'd them sithence? 

Brut. How! I' inform them! 

Cor. You are like to do such business. 
Brut. Not unlike, 

Each way, to better yours.*) 



THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 53 

Cor. Why, then, should I be consul? By yond' clouds, 
Let me deserve so ill as you, and make me 
Your fellow tribune. 

Sic. You show too much of that, Hfi 

For which the people stir. If you will pass 
To where you are bound, you must inquire your way, 
Which you are out of, with a gentler spirit; 
Or never be so noble as a consul, 
Nor yoke with him for tribune. 

Me7i. Let 's be calm. 

Com. The people are abus'd; set on! This paltering 
Becomes not Rome; nor has Coriolanus 
Deserved this so dishonour'd rub, laid falsely 
r the plain way of his merit. 

Cor. Tell me of corn ! 

This was my speech, and I will speak 't again — 

Men. Not now, not now. 

First Sen. Not in this heat, sir, now. 

Cor. Now, as I live, I will. — My nobler friends, 117 

I crave their pardons: — 
For the mutable, rank-scented many, let them 
Regard me as I do not flatter, and 
Therein behold themselves. I say again, 
In soothing them we nourish 'gainst our senate 
The cockle of rebellion, insolence, sedition. 
Which we ourselves have plough'd for, sow'd, and scatter' d, 
By mingling them with us, the honour'd number; 
Who lack not virtue, no, nor power, but that 
Which they have given to beggars. 

Men. Well, no more. 

Sen. No more words, we beseech you. 

Cor. How! no more? 118 

As for my country I have shed my blood, 
Not fearing outward force, so shall my lungs 
Coin words till their decay against those measels. 



54 THE URAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 

Which we disdain should tetter us, yet sought 
The very way to catch them. 

Brut. You speak o' the people, 

As if you were a god to punish, not 
A man of their infirmity. 

Sic. 'T were well, 

We let the people know 't. 

Men. What, what? his choler? 

Cor. Choler! 
Were I as patient as the midnight sleep, 
By Jove, 't would be my mind. 

Sic. It is a mind, 

That shall remain a poison where it is. 
Not poison any further. 

Cor. Shall remain! — 

Hear you this Triton of the minnows? mark you 
His absolute "shall?" 

Com. 'T was from the canon. 

119 Cor. "Shall!" 

0, good but most unwise patricians ! why. 
You grave but reckless senators, have you thus 
Given Hydra here*) to choose an officer. 
That with his peremtory "shall," being but 
The horn and noise o' the monster, wants not spirit 
To say, he '11 turn your current in a ditch. 
And make your channel his? If he have power. 
Then vail your ignorance: if none, awake*) 
Your dangerous lenity. If you are learned. 
Be not as common fools: if you are not. 
Let them have cushions by you. You are plebeians,*) 
If they be senators; and they are no less. 
When both your voices blended, the great' st taste 
Most palates theirs. They choose their magistrate: 
And such a one as he, who puts his "shall". 
His popular " shall ", against a graver bench 
Than ever frown'd in Greece. By Jove himself, 



THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 55 

It makes the consuls base; and my soul aches, 
To know, when two authorities are up, 
Neither supreme, how soon confusion 
May enter 'twixt the gap of both, and take 
The one by the other. 

Com. Well — on to the market-place. 120 

Cor. Whoever gave that counsel, to give forth 
The corn o' the store-house gratis, as 't was us'd 
Sometime in Greece, — 

Men. Well, well; no more of that. 

Cor. Though there the people had more absolute power, 
I say, they nourish'd disobedience, fed 
The ruin of the state. 

Brut. Why, shall the people give 

One that speaks thus their voice? 

Cor. I '11 give my reasons, 121 

More worthier than their voices. They know^, the corn 
Was not our recompense, resting well assur'd 
They ne'er did service for't; being press'd to the war, 
Even when the navel of the state was touch'd, 
They would not thread the gates: this kind of service 
Did not deserve corn gratis: being i' the war, 
Their mutinies and revolts, wherein they show'd 
Most valour, spoke not for them. Th' accusation 
Which they have often made against the senate, 
All cause unborn, could never be the motive 
Of our so frank donation. Well, what then ? 
How shall this bisson multitude digest 
The senate's courtesy? Let deeds express 
What 's like to be their w^ords: — "We did request it; 
We are the greater poll, and in true fear 
They gave us our demands." — Thus we debase 
The nature of our seats, and make the rabble 
Call our cares,*) fears; which will in time 
Break ope the locks o' the senate, and bring in 
The crows to peck the eagles. 



^6 THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 

122 Men. Come, enough. 
Brut. Enough, with over-measure. 

Cor. No, take more: 

What may be sworn by, both divine and human. 
Seal what I end withal! — This double worship, — 
Where one part does disdain with cause, the other 
Insult without all reason; where gentry, title, wisdom. 
Cannot conclude, but by the yea and no 
Of general ignorance, — it must omit 
Real necessities, and give way the while 
To unstable slightness. Purpose so barr'd, it follows. 
Nothing is done to purpose: therefore, beseech you. 
You that will be less fearful than discreet. 
That love the fundamental part of state 
More than you doubt the change on 't, that prefer 
A noble life before a long, and wish 
To jump*) a body with a dangerous physic 
That 's sure of death without it, at once pluck out 
The multitudinous tongue; let them not lick 
The sweet which is their poison. Your dishonour*) 
Mangles true judgment, and bereaves the state 
Of that integrity which should become it. 
Not having the power to do the good it would. 
For th' ill which doth control 't. 

123 Brut. Has said enough. 
Sic. Has spoken like a traitor, and shall answer 

As traitors do. 

Cor. Thou wretch! despite o'erwhelm thee! — 
What should the people do with these bald tribunes? 
On whom depending, their obedience fails 
To the greater bench. In a rebellion, 
When what 's not meet, but what must be, was law. 
Then were they chosen: in a better hour. 
Let, what is meet, be said it must be meet. 
And throw their power i' the dust. 

Brut. Manifest treason. 



THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 57 

<Szc. This a consul? no. 

Brut, The ^ediles, ho! — Let him be apprehended. 124 

Enter an jEdile. 

Sic. Go, call the people ; [Exit jEdile.^ in whose name myself 
Attach thee as a traitorous innovator, 
A foe to the public weal: obey, I charge thee, 
And follow to thine answer. 

Cor. Hence, old goat! 

All. We '11 surety him. 

Com. Aged sir, hands off. 

Cor. Hence, rotten thing, or I shall shake thy bones 
Out of thy garments. 

Sic, Help, ye citizens! 

Re-enter the jEdile, with a rabble of Citizens. 125 

Meji. On both sides more respect. 

Sic. Here's he, that would take from you all your power. 

Brut. Seize him, sediles. 

Cit. Down with him! down with him! 

Sec. Sen. Weapons! weapons! weapons! 

[They all bustle about Coriolanus. 
Tribunes, patricians, citizens! — what ho! — 
Sicinius, Brutus, Coriolanus, citizens! 

Cit. Peace, peace, peace! stay, hold, peace! 

Men. What is about to be? — I am out of breath; 
Confusion 's near: I cannot speak. — You, tribunes 
To the people, — Coriolanus, patience: — 
Speak, good Sicinius. 

Sic. Hear me, people, peace ! 126 

Cit. Let 's hear our tribune: — peace! Speak, speak, speak. 

Sic. You are at point to lose your liberties: 
Marcius would have all from you; Marcius, 
Whom late you have nam'd for consul. 

Men. Fie, fie, fie! 

This is the way to kindle, not to quench. 



58 THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 

Se7i. To unbuild the city, and to lay all flat. 

Sic. What is the city, but the people? 

Cit. True, 

The people are the city. 

Brut. By the consent of all, we were establish'd 
The people's magistrates. 

Cit. You so remain. 

Men. And so are like to do.*) 

127 Com. That is the way to lay the city flat; 
To bring the roof to the foundation, 

And bury all, which yet distinctly ranges, 
In heaps and piles of ruin. 

Sic. This deserves death. 

Bimt. Or let us stand to our authority. 
Or let us lose it. — We do here pronounce, 
Upon the part o' the people, in whose power 
We were elected theirs, Marcius is worthy 
Of present death. 

Sic. Therefore lay hold of him. 

Bear him to the rock Tarpeian, and from thence 
Into destruction cast him. 

Brut. JEdiles, seize him! 

128 Cit. Yield, Marcius, yield. 

Men. Hear me one word; 

Beseech you, tribunes, hear me but a word. 

JEdi. Peace, peace! 

Men. Be that you seem, truly your country's friends 
And temperately proceed to what you would 
Thus violently redress. 

Brut. Sir, those cold ways, 

That seem like prudent helps, are very poisonous 
Where the disease is violent. — Lay hands upon him. 
And bear him to the rock. 

129 Cor. No; I '11 die here. 

[Drawing his sword. 



THE TKAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 59 

There 's some among you have beheld me fighting: 
Come, try upon yourselves what you have seen me. 

Men. Down with that sword!— Tribunes, withdraw a while. 

Brut. Lay hands upon him. 

Men. Help Marcius, help, 

You that be noble; help him, young and old! 

Cit. Down with him! down with him! 

[In this mutiny, the Tribunes, the ^diles, and the 
people, are beat in. 

Men. Go, get you to your house: be gone, away! 130 

All will be naught else. 

Sec. Se7i. Get you gone. 

Cor. Stand fast; 

We have as many friends as enemies. 

Men. Shall it be put to that? 

First Sen. The gods forbid! 

I pr'ythee, noble friend, home to thy house; 
Leave us to cure this cause. 

Men. For 't is a sore upon us. 

You cannot tent yourself: be gone, 'beseech you. 

Com. Come, sir, along with us. 

Cor. I would they were barbarians, as they are. 
Though in Rome litter'd, not Romans, as they are not, 
Though calv'd i' the porch o' the Capitol! 

Men. Be gone; 

Put not your worthy rage into your tongue; 
One time will owe another. 

Cor. On fair ground 131 

I could beat forty of them. 

Men. I could myself 

Take up a brace o' the best of them; yea, the two tribunes. 

Com. But now 't is odds beyond arithmetic; 
And manhood is call'd foolery, when it stands 
Against a falling fabric. — Will you hence. 
Before the tag return ? whose rage doth rend 



60 THE TRAGKDY OF CORIOLANUS. 

Like interrupted waters, and o'erbear 
What they are us'd to bear. 

Men. Pray you, be gone. 

I '11 try whether my old wit be in request 
With those that have but little; this must be patch'd 
With cloth of any colour. 

Com, Nay, come away. 

[Exeunt Coriolanus, CoxMINius, and others. 

132 First Pat. This man has marr'd his fortune. 
Men. His nature is too noble for the world: 

He would not flatter Neptune for his trident, 

Or Jove for 's power to thunder. His heart 's his mouth: 

What his breast forges, that his tongue must vent; 

And, being angry, does forget that ever 

He heard the name of death. — \_A noise within. 

Here 's goodly work! 

Sec. Pat. I would they were a-bed! 

Men. I would they were in Tiber! — What, the vengeance. 
Could he not speak them fair? 

133 Re-enter Brutus and Sicinius, with the rabble. 

Sic. Where is this viper, 

That would depopulate the city, and 
Be every man himself? 

Men. You worthy tribunes, — 

Sic. He shall be thrown down the Tarpeian rock 
With rigorous hands: he hath resisted law, 
And therefore law shall scorn him further trial 
Than the severity of the public power, 
Which he so sets at naught. 

First Cit. He shall well know. 

The noble tribunes are the people's mouths. 
And we their hands. 

Cit. He shall, sure on't. 

Men. Sir, sir, — 

Sic. Peace! 



THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 



61 



Men. Do not cry havock, where you should but hunt 134 

With modest warrant. 

Sic. Sir, how comes 't, that you 

Have holp to make this rescue? 

Men. Hear me speak: 

As I do know the consul's worthiness, 
So can I name his faults, — 

Sic. Consul ! — what consul ? 

Men. The consul Coriolanus. 

Brut. He a consul! 

Cit. No, no, no, no, no! 

Men. If, by the tribunes' leave, and yours, good people, 135 

I may be heard, I would crave a word or two; 
The which shall turn you to no further harm. 
Than so much loss of time. 

Sic. Speak briefly then; 

For we are peremptory to dispatch 
This viperous traitor: to eject him hence, 
Were but one danger, and to keep him here, 
Our certain death: therefore, it is decreed 
He dies to-night. 

Men. Now the good gods forbid. 

That our renowned Rome, whose gratitude 
Towards her deserved children is enroll'd 
In Jove's own book, like an unnatural dam 
Should now eat up her own! 

Sic. He 's a disease that must be cut away. 

Men. 0! he 's a limb that has but a disease; 
Mortal, to cut it off; to cure it, easy. 
What has he done to Rome that 's worthy death? 
KilUng our enemies? The blood he hath lost 
(Which, I dare vouch, is more than that he hath, 
By many an ounce), he dropp'd it for his country ; 
And what is left, to lose it by his country. 
Were to us all, that do 't and suffer it, 
A brand to th' end o' the world. 



136 



62 THE TRAGEDY OF CORTOLANUS. 

■I Sic. This is clean kam. 

Brut. Merely awry: when he did love his country, 
It honour'd him. 

Me7i. The service of the foot, 

Being once gangren'd, is not then respected 
For what before it was. 

B7'ut. We '11 hear no more. — 

Pursue him to his house, and pluck him thence, 
Lest his infection, being of catching nature, 
Spread further. 

137 Men. One word more, one word. 
This tiger-footed rage, when it shall find 

The harm of unscann'd swiftness, will, too late. 
Tie leaden pounds to 's heels. Proceed by process; 
Lest parties (as he is belovM) break out, 
And sack great Rome with Romans. 

Brut. If it were so, — 

Sic. What do ye talk? 
Have we not had a taste of his obedience? 
Our sediles smote? ourselves resisted? — come! — 

Me7i. Consider this: — he has been bred i' the wars 
Since he could draw a sword, and is ill school'd 
In boulted language; meal and bran together 
He throws without distinction. Give me leave, 
I '11 go to him, and undertake to bring him 
Where he shall answer, by a lawful form. 
In peace, to his utmost peril. 

138 First Sen. Noble tribunes, 
It is the humane way: the other course 

Will prove too bloody, and the end of it 
Unknown to the beginning. 

Sic. Noble Menenius, 

Be you, then, as the people's officer. — 
Masters, lay down your weapons. 

Brut. Go not home. 

Sic. Meet on the market-place. — We '11 attend you there: 



THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 63 

"Where, if you bring not Marcius, we '11 proceed 
In our first way. 

Meii. I '11 bring him to you. — 

Let me desire your company. [To the Senators.] He must come, 
Or what is worst will follow. 

First Sen. Pray you, let 's to him. [Exeunt. 

SCENE 11. ^39 

A Room in Coriolanus's House. 
Enter Coriolanus, and Patricians. 
Cor. Let them pull all about mine ears : present me 
Death on the wheel, or at wild horses' heels; 
Or pile ten hills on the Tarpeian rock, 
That the precipitation might down stretch 
Below the beam of sight, yet will I still 
Be thus to them. 

[VoLUMNiA approaching.] 

First Pat. You do the nobler. 

Cor. I muse my mother 
Does not approve me further, who was wont 
To call them woollen vassals ; things created 
To buy and sell with groats; to show bare heads 
In congregations, to yawn, be still, and wonder, 
When one but of my ordinance stood up 
To speak of peace, or war. 

Enter Volumisia (advancing). 140 

I talk of you. 
Why did you wish me milder? would you have me 
False to my nature? Rather say, I play 
The man I am. 

Vol. 0, sir, sir, sir! 

I would have had you put your power well on. 
Before you had worn it out. 



64 THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANIS. 

Cor. Let go. 

Vol. You might have been enough the man you are, 
With striving less to be so: lesser had been 
The thwartings of your dispositions, if 
You had not show'd them how you were dispos'd, 
Ere they lack'd power to cross you. 

Cor. Let them hang. 

Vol. Ay, and burn too. 

I'ii Enter Menenius, and Senators. 

Men. Come, come; you have been too rough, something too 

rough: 
You must return, and mend it. 

First Se7i. There 's no remedy; 

Unless, by not so doing, our good city 
Cleave in the midst, and perish. 

Vol. Pray be counsell'd: 

I have a heart as little apt*) as yours, 
But yet a brain, that leads my use of anger 
To better vantage. 

142 Men. Well said, noble woman! 
Before he should thus stoop to the herd, but that 
The violent fit o' the time craves it as physic 
For the whole state, I would put mine armour on. 
Which I can scarcely bear. 

Cor. What must I do ? 

Men. Return to the tribunes. 

Cor. Well, what then? what then? 

Men. Repent what you have spoke. 
Cor. For them? — I cannot do it to the gods. 
Must I then do 't to them? 

143 Vol. You are too absolute; 
Though therein you can never be too noble. 

But when extremities speak. I have heard you say. 

Honour and policy, like unsever'd friends, 

r the war do grow together: grant that, and tell me. 



THE TRAGEDY OF COIJIOLANUS.. 65 

In peace what each of them by th' other lose, 
That they combine not there? 

Cor. Tush, tush! 

Men. A good demand. 

Vol. If it be honour in your wars to seem 
The same you are not (which for your best ends 
You adopt your poUcy), how is it less, or worse, 
That it shall hold companionship in peace 
With honour, as in war, since that to both 
It stands in like request? 

Cor, Why force you this? 

Vol. Because that now it lies you on to speak 144 

To the people; not by your own instruction, 
Nor by the matter which your heart prompts you, 
But with such words that are but rooted in 
Your tongue, though but bastards, and syllables 
Of no allowance to your bosom's truth. 
Now, this no more dishonours you at all. 
Than to take in a town with gentle words. 
Which else would put you to your fortune, and 
The hazard of much blood. — 
I would dissemble with my nature, where 
My fortunes and my friends at stake, requir'd 
I should do so in honour: I am in this. 
Your wife, your son, these senators, the nobles ; 
And you will rather show our general low^.s 
How you can frown, than spend a fawn upon 'em. 
For the inheritance of their loves, and safeguard 
Of what that want might ruin. 

Men. Noble lady! — 145 

Come, go with us; speak fair: you may salve so, 
Not what is dangerous present, but the loss 
Of what is past. 

Vol. 1 pr ythee now, my son. 

Go to them, with this bonnet in thy hand ; 
And thus far having stretch'd it (here be with them). 



66 THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 

Thy knee bussing the stones (for in such business 
Action is eloquence, and the eyes of the ignorant 
More learned than the ears), waving thy head, 
Which often, thus, correcting thy stout heart, 
Now humble as the ripest mulberry 
That will not hold the handling : say to them, *) 
Thou art their soldier, and, being bred in broils, 
Hast not the soft way, which, thou dost confess. 
Were fit for thee to use as they to claim. 
In asking their good loves; but thou wilt frame 
Thyself, forsooth, hereafter theirs, so far 
As thou hast power and person. 

146 Men. This but done. 
Even as she speaks, why, their hearts were yours; 
For they have pardons, being ask'd, as free 

As words to little purpose. 

Vol. Pr'ythee now, 

Go, and be rul'd; although, I know, thou hadst rather 
Follow thine enemy in a fiery gulf. 
Than flatter him in a bower. — Here is Cominius. 

147 Enter Gominius. 

Com. I have been i' the market-place; and, sir, 't is fit 
You make strong party, or defend yourself 
By calmness, or by absence: all 's in anger. 

Men. Only fair speech. 

Com. I think, 't will serve ; if he 

Can thereto frame his spu'it. 

Vol. He must, and will. — 

Pr'ythee now, say you will, and go about it. 

Cor. Must I go show them my unbarb'd sconce? must I 
With my base tongue give to my noble heart 
A lie, that it must bear? Well, I will do 't: 
Yet were there but this single plot to lose. 
This mould of Marcius, they to dust should grind it. 
And throw 't against the wind. — To the market-place! 



THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 67 

You have put me now to such a part, which never 
1 shall discharge to the life. 

Com. Come, come, we '11 prompt you. 

Vol. I pr'ythee now, sweet son: as thou hast said, l^S 

My praises made thee first a soldier, so, 
To have my praise for this, perform a part 
Thou hast not done before. 

Cor. Well, I must do 't. 

Away, my disposition, and possess me 
Some harlot's spirit! My throat of war be turn'd, 
Which quired with my drum, into a pipe 
Small as an eunuch, or the virgin voice 
That babies lulls asleep ! The smiles of knaves 
Tent in my cheeks; and school-boys' tears take up 
The glasses of my sight! A beggar's tongue 
Make motion through my lips; and my arm'd knees, 
Who bow'd but in my stirrup, bend like his 
That hath receiv'd an alms! — I will not do 't, 
Lest I surcease to honour mine own truth, 
And by my body's action teach my mind 
A most inherent baseness. 

Vol. At thy choice, then : 149 

To beg of thee, it is my more dishonour 
Than thou of them. Come all to ruin: let 
Thy mother rather feel thy pride, than fear 
Thy dangerous stoutness;*) for I mock at death 
With as big heart as thou. Do as thou list. 
Thy valiantness was mine, thou suck'dst it from me, 
But owe thy pride thyself. 

Cor. Pi'ay, be content: 

Mother, 1 am going to the market-place; 
Chide me no more. I '11 mountebank their loves. 
Cog their hearts from them, and come home belov'd 
Of all the trades in Rome. Look, 1 am going. 
Commend me to my wife. I '11 return consul, 



68 THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 

Or never trust to what my tongue can do 
r the way of flattery further. 

Vol. Do your will. [Exit. 

150 Com. Away! the tribunes do attend you: arm yourself 
To answer mildly; for they are prepar'd 

With accusations, as I hear, more strong 
Than are upon you yet. 

Cor. The word is, mildly: — pray you, let us go: 
Let them accuse me by invention, I 
Will answer in mine honour. 

Men. Ay, but mildly. 

Cor. Well, mildly be it then; mildly. [Exeunt. 

151 SCENE III. 

The same. The Forum. 
Eiiter SiciNius and Brutus. 

Brut. In this point charge him home; that he affects 
Tyrannical power : if he evade us there. 
Enforce him with his envy to the people; 
And that the spoil got on the Antiates 
Was ne'er distributed. — 

Enter an jEdile. 

What, will he come? 

^d. He 's coming. 

Brut. How accompanied? 

jEd. With old Menenius, and those senators 
That always favour'd him. 

Sic. Have you a catalogue 

Of all the voices that we have procur'd, 
Set down by the poll? 

JEd. I have; 't is ready. 

Sic. Have you collected them by tribes? 

^d. 1 have. 

152 Sic. Assemble presently the people hither: 



THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. ^9 

And when they hear me say, "It shall be so 

r the right and strength o' the commons," be it either 

For death, for fine, or banishment, then let them, 

If I say fine, cry "fine;" if death, cry "death;" 

Insisting on the old prerogative 

And power i' the truth o' the cause. 

JEd. I shall inform them. 

Brut. And when such time they have begun to cry, 
Let them not cease, but with a din confus'd 
Enforce the present execution 
Of what we chance to sentence. 

^d. Very well. 

Sic. Make them be strong, and ready for this hint, 
When we shall hap to give 't them. 

Brut. Go about it.— 153 

Put him to choler straight: he hath been us'd \^Exit jEdile. 

Ever to conquer, and to have his worth *) 
Of contradiction : being once chaf d, he cannot 
Be rein'd again to temperance; then he speaks 
What 's in his heart; and that is there which looks 
With us to break his neck. 

Enter Coriolanus, Menenius, Cominius, Senators^ and 

Patricians. 

Sic. Well, here he comes. 

Men. Calmly, I do beseech you. 154 

Cor. Ay, as an ostler, that for the poorest piece 
Will bear the knave by the volume. — The honourd gods 
Keep Rome in safety, and the chairs of justice 
Supplied with worthy men! plant love among us! 
Throng our large temples with the shows of peace, 
And not our streets with war! 

First Sen. Amen, amen! 

Me7i. A noble wish. 



'7b THK TRAGEDY OF COWOLANUS. 

155 Re-enter JEdile, ivith Citize7is. 
Sic. Draw near, ye people. 

j!Ed. List to your tribunes. Audience: peace, I say! 

Cor. First, hear me speak. 

Both Tribunes. Well, say. — Peace, ho! 

Cor. Shall I be charg'd no further than this present? 
Must all determine here? 

Sic. I do demand. 

If you submit you to the people's voices, 
Allow their officers, and are content 
To suffer lawful censure for such faults 
As shall be prov'd upon you? 

Cor. I am content. 

156 Men. Lo, citizens, he says, he is content. 
The warlike service he has done, consider; 

Think upon*) the wounds his body bears, which show 
Like graves i' the holy churchyard. 

Cor. Scratches with briars; 

Scars to move laughter only. 

Men. Consider further, 

That w^hen he speaks not like a citizen. 
You find him like a soldier. Do not take 
His rougher accents for malicious sounds, 
But, as I say, such as become a soldier. 
Rather than envy you. 

Com. Well, well; no more. 

Cor. What is the matter. 
That being pass'd for consul with full voice, 
I am so dishonour'd that the very hour 
You take it ofi" again ? 

Sic. Answer to us. 

Cor. Say then: 't is true, I ought so. 

157 Sic. We charge you, that you have contriv'd to take 
From Rome all season'd office, and to wind 
Yourself into a })ower tyrannical; 

For which you are a traitor to the people. 



THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 71 

Cor. How! traitor? 

Men. Nay, temperately; your promise. 

Cor. The fires i' the lowest hell fold in the people! 
Call me their traitor? — Thou injurious tribune, 
Within thine eyes sat twenty thousand deaths, 
In thy hands clutch'd as many millions, in 
Thy lying tongue both numbers, I would say, 
Thou liest, unto thee, with a voice as free 
As I do pray the gods. 

Sic. Mark you this, people? 

Cit. To the rock! to the rock with him! 158 

Sic. Peace ! 

We need not put new matter to his charge: 
What you have seen him do, and heard him speak. 
Beating your officers, cursing yourselves, 
Opposing laws with strokes, and here defying 
Those whose great power must try hmi; even this, 
So criminal, and in such capital kind, 
Deserves th' extremest death. 

Brut. But since he hath 

Serv'd well for Rome, — 

Cor. What do you prate of service? 

Brut. I talk of that, that know it. 

Cor. You ? 

Men. Is this the promise that you made your mother? 

Com. Know, I pray you, — J59 

Cor. I '11 know no further. 

Let them pronounce the steep Tarpeian death, 
Vagabond exile, flaying, pent to linger 
But with a grain a day, I would not buy 
Their mercy at the price of one fair word, 
Nor check my courage for what they can give. 
To have 't with saying, good morrow. 

Sic. For that he has 160 

(As much as in him lies) from time to time 
Envied against the people, seeking means 



72 THi: TKAGEDV OF CORlULANUS. 

To pluck away their power; as now at last 

Given hostile strokes, and that not in the presence 

Of dreaded justice, but on the ministers 

That do distribute it; in the name o' the people, 

And in the power of us, the tribunes, we, 

Even from this instant, banish him our city, 

In peril of precipitation 

From off the rock Tarpeian, never more 

To enter our Rome gates. I' the people's name, 

I say, it shall be so. 

161 Cit. It shall be so, it shall be so; let him away : 
He 's banish'd, and it shall be so. 

Com. Hear me, my masters, and my conmion friends, 

Sic. He 's sentenc'd: no more hearing. 

Com. Let me speak. 

I have been consul, and can show for Rome 
Her enemies' marks upon me. I do love 
My country's good, w^ith a respect more tender. 
More holy and profound, than mine own life, 
My dear wife's estimate, her womb's increase, 
And treasure of my loins; then, if I would 
Speak that — 

Sic. We know your drift: speak what? 

162 Brut. There 's no more to be said, but he is banish'd. 
As enemy to the people, and his country. 

It shall be so. 

Cit. It shall be so: it shall be so. 

Cor. You common cry of curs! whose breath I hate 
As reek o' the rotten fens; whose loves I prize 
As the dead carcasses of unburied men 
That do corrupt my air, I banish you! 
And here remain with your uncertainty. 
Let every feeble rumour shake your hearts! 
Your enemies, with nodding of their plumes, 
Fan you into despair! Have the power still 
To banish youi* defenders; till, at length, 



THE il!AC;KDV UK (JUlUOLANUS. 73 

Your ignorance (which finds not till it feels). 
Making not reservation of yourselves 
(Still your own foes), deliver you as most 
Abated captives, to some nation 
That won you without blows! Despising, 
For you, the city, thus I turn my back. 
There is a world elsewhere. 

[Exeunt Cokiolanis, Cuminii s, Menenius, Senators, 
and Patricians. 

uEd. The people's enemy is gone, is gone! 163 

Cit. Our enemy is banish'd! he is gone! Hoo! hoo! 

[The people shofit, and throw up their caps. 

Sic. Go, see him out at gates, and follow him. 
As he hath follow'd you, with all despite; 
Give him deserved vexation. Let a guard 
Attend us through the city. 

Cit. Come, come; let "s see him out at gates: come. — 
The gods preserve our noble tribunes! — Come. [Exeimt. 



74 THli TUAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS, 



164 ACT IV. scenp: l 

Rome. Before a gate of the City. 

E)iter CoiuoLAiNus, Volvmnia, Virgilia, Menenius, Cominius, 
aiid several young Patricians. 

Cor. Come, leave your tears; a brief farewell: the beast 
With many heads butts me away. — Nay, mother, 
Where is your ancient courage? you were us'd 
To say, extremity was the trier of spirits; 
That common chances common men could bear; 
That, when the sea was calm, all boats alike 
Show'd mastership in floating; fortune's blows. 
When most struck home, being gentle wounded, craves 
A noble cunning.') You were us'd to load me 
With precepts, that would make invincible 
The heart that conn'd them. 

V'ir. heavens! o heavens! 

Cor. Nay, 1 pr'ythee, woman, — 

Vol. Now the i-ed pestilence strike all trades in Rome, 
And occupations perish! 
165 Cor. What, what, what! 

I shall be lov'd when I am lack'd. Nay, mother, 
Resume that spirit, when you were wont to say, 
If you had been the wife of Hercules, 
Six of his labours you 'd have done, and sav'd 
Your husband so much sweat. — Cominius, 
Droop not: adieu. — Farewell, my wife, my mother! 
1 '11 do well yet. — Thou old and true Menenius, 
Thy tears are salter than a younger man's. 
And venomous to thine eyes. — My sometime general, 
I have seen thee stern, and thou hast oft beheld 
Heart-hardening spectacles; tell these sad women, 
'T is fond to wail inevitable strokes, 
As 't is to laugh at 'em. — My mother, you wot well, 



THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 7b 

My liazards still have been your solace; and 

Believe 't not lightly (though I go alone, 

Like to*) a lonely dragon, that his fen 

Makes fear'd and talk'd of more than seen), your son 

Will or exceed the common, or be caught 

AN'ith cautelous baits and practice. 

Vol. My first son. 

Whither wilt thou go? Take good Cominius 
With thee a while: determine on some course, 
More than a wild exposture to each chance, 
That starts i' the way before thee. 

Co7\ the gods! 

Com. I 11 follow thee a month, devise with thee 
Where thou shalt rest, that thou may'st hear of us. 
And we of thee: so, if the time thrust forth 
A cause for thy repeal, we shall not send 
O'er the vast world to seek a single man, 
And lose advantage, which doth ever cool 
r the absence of the needer. 

Cor. Fare ye well: 

Thou hast years upon thee; and thou art too full 
Of the wars' surfeits, to go rove with one 
That 's yet unbruis'd: bring me but out at gate. — 
Come, my sweet wife, my dearest mother, and 
My friends of noble touch; when I am forth, 
Bid me farewell, and smile. I pray you, come. 
While I remain above the ground, you shall 
Hear from me still ; and never of me aught 
But what is like me formerly. 

Men. That 's worthily 

As any ear can hear. — Gome, let 's not weep. — 
If I could shake off but one seven years 
From these old arms and legs, by the good gods, 
I 'd with thee every foot. 

Cor. Grive me thy hand. — 

Come. [Exeunt. 



16fi 



167 



76 THE TRAGEDY UF CORIULANUS. 

168 scenp: II. 

The sairie. A street iiejir the gate. 
Enter SiciN'irs, Bhitus, and an ^Edile. 
Sic. Rid them all home: he 's gone, and we 'II no further. — 
The nobility are vexM, whom we see, have sided 
In his behalf. 

Bvftt. Now we have shown our power, 

Let us seem humbler after it is done. 
Than when it was a-doing. 

Sic. Bid them home: 

Say, their great enemy is gone, and they 
Stand in their ancient strength. 

Brut, Dismiss them home. 

[Exit ^Edile. 

Enter Voi.umnia, Virgii-ia, and Menenils. 

Here comes his mother. 

Sic. Let 's not meet her. 

Brut. Why? 

Sic. They say, she 's mad. 

Brut. They have ta'en note of us: keep on your way. 

Vol. 0! ye 're well met. The hoarded plague o' the gods 
Requite your love! 

Men. Peace, peace! be not so loud. 

Vol. If that 1 could for weeping, you should hear, — 
Nay, and you shall hear some. — Will you be gone? 

[To Brutus. 

Vir. You shall stay too. [To Siclnius.] I would, I had the 

power 
To say so to my husband. 

Sic. Are yon mankind?*) 

Vol. Ay, fool; is that a shame? — Note but this fool. — 
Was not a man my father? Hadst thou foxship 
To banish him that struck more blows for Rome, 
Than thou hast spoken words? 



169 



THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 77 

Sic. blessed heavens! 

Vol. More noble blows, than ever thou wise words; 170 

And for Rome's good. — 1 '11 tell thee what — yet go: — 
Nay, but thou shalt stay too, — I would my son 
Were m Arabia, and thy tribe before him. 
His good sword in his hand. 

Sic. What then V 

Vir. What then! 

He 'd make an end of thy posterity. 

Vol. Bastards, and all. — 
Good man, the wounds that he does bear for Rome ! 

Alen. Come, come: peace! 

Sic. I would he had continu'd to his country. 
As he began, and not unknit himself 
The noble knot he made. 

Brut. I would he had. 171 

Vol. I would he had. 'T was you incens'd the rabble: 
Cats, that can judge as fitly of his worth, 
As I can of those mysteries which heaven 
Will not have earth to know. 

Brut. Pray, let us go. 

Vol. Now, pray, sir, get you gone: 
You have done a brave deed. Ere you go, hear this: — 
As far as doth the Capitol exceed 
The meanest house in Rome, so far my son, 
(This lady's husband here, this, do you see), 
Whom you have banish'd, does exceed you all. 

Brut. Well, well; we '11 leave you. 172 

Sic. Why stay we to be baited 

With one that wants her wits? [Exeunt Tribunes. 

Vol. Take my prayers with you. — 

I would the gods had nothing else to do. 
But to confirm my curses! Could I meet 'em 
But once a day, it would unclog my heart 
Of what lies heavy to 't. 



78 THE TRAGKDY OK CORIOLANUS. 

Men, Yon have told them home, 

And, by my troth, you have cause. You 'II sup Avitli uie V 

Vol, Auger 's my meat: I sup upon myseH', 
And so shall starve with feeding. — Come, let 's go. 
Leave this faint puling, and lament as I do, 
In anger, Juno-like. Come, come, come. 

Men, Fie, fie, fie! [Exeunt, 

173 SCENE III. 

A highway between Rome and Antium. 
Enter a Roman and a Volsce, meeting. 

Bom. I know you well, sir, and you know me: your name, 
I think, is Adrian. 

Vol. It is so, sir: truly. I have forgot you. 

Bom. I am a Roman; and my services are, as you are, against 
'em. Know you me yet? 

Vol. Nicanor? No. 

Born. The same, sir. 

Vol, You had more beard, when I last saw you; but your fa- 
vour is well approved*) by your tongue. What 's the news in 
Rome? I have a note from the Volscian state, to find you out 
there : you have well saved me a day's journey. 
174 Bom, There hath been in Rome strange insurrection: the 
people against the senators, patricians, and nobles. 

Vol. Hath been! Is it ended then? Our state thinks not so: 
they are in a most warlike preparation, and hope to come upon 
them in the heat of their division. 

Bo7n. The main blaze of it is past, but a small thing woul^ 
make it flame again: for the nobles receive so to heart the 
banishment of that worthy Coriolanus, that they are in a ripe 
aptness to take all power from the people, and to pluck from them 
their tribunes for ever. This lies glowing, I can tell you, and is 
almost mature for the violent breaking out. 

Vol, Coriolanus banished? 

Bom. Banished, sir. 



THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 79 

Vol. You will 1)6 welcome with this intelligence, Nicanor. 

Rom. The day serves well for them now. I have heard it i'?'^ 
said, the fittest time to corrupt a man's wife is when she 's fallen 
out with her husband. Your noble Tullus Aufidius will appear 
well in these wars, his great opposer, Coriolanus, being now in 
no request of his country. 

Vol. He cannot choose. I am most fortunate, thus accidentally 
to encounter you: you have ended my business, and I will merrily 
accompany you home. 

Rom. I shall between this and supper tell you most strange 
things from Rome, all tending to the good of their adversaries. 
Have you an army ready, say you? 

Vol. A most royal one: the centurions and their charges dis- 
tinctly billeted, already in the entertainment, and to be on foot 
at an hour's warning. 

Rom. I am jo} ful to hear of their readiness, and am the man, 
I think, that shall set them in present action. So sir, heartily 
well met, and most glad of your company. 

Vol. You take my part from me, sir: I have the most cause 
to be glad of yours. 

Ro7n. Well, let us go together. [Exewit. 

SCENE IV. 176 

Antium. Before Aufidius's House. 
Enter Coriolanus, in mean apparel, disguised and muffled. 

Cor. A goodly city is this Antium. — City, 
'T is I that made thy M^dows: many an heir 
Of these fair edifices 'fore my wars. 
Have I heard groan, and drop : then, know me not, 
Lest that thy wives with spits, and boys with stones, 
In puny battle slay me. 

Enter a Citizen. 

Save you, sir. 
Cit. And you. 



80 THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 

Cor. Direct me, if it be your will, 

Where great Aufirlins lies. Is he in Antiiim? 

Cit. He is, and feasts the nobles of the state 
At his house this night. 

Cor. Which is his house, 'beseech you? 

Cif. This, here before you. 
^'^'^ Cor. Thank you, sir; farewell. 

[Exit Citizen. 
0, world, thy slippery turns! Friends now fast sworn, 
Whose double bosoms seem to wear one heart, 
Whose house, whose bed, whose meal, and exercise 
Are still together, wdio twin, as 't were in love 
Unseparable, shall within this hour, 
On a dissention of a doit, break out 
To bitterest enmity: so, fellest foes, 
Whose passions and whose plots have broke their sleep 
To take the one the other, by some chance. 
Some trick not worth an egg, shall grow dear friends. 
And interjoin their issues. So with me: — 
My birth-place hate I, and my love's upon 
This enemy town. — I '11 enter: if he slay me, 
He does fair justice; if he give me way, 
I '11 do his country service. [Exit. 



178 SCENE V. 

The same. A hall in Aufidius's House. 
Music loithin. Enter a Servant. 

First Serv. Wine, wine, wine! What service is here! I think 
our fellows are asleep. [Exit. 

Enter a second Servant. 

Sec. Serv. Where 's Cotus? my master calls for him. — Cotus! 

[Exit. 



THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 



Enter Goriolanus. 



Cor. A goodly house: the feast smells well; but I 
Appear not like a guest. 

Re-enter the first Servant. 

First Serv. What would you have, fi-iend? Whence are you? 
here 's no place for you: pray, go to the door. 

Cor. I have deserv'd no better entertainment, 179 

In being Goriolanus. 

Re-enter secorid Servant. 

Sec. Serv. Whence are you, sir? Has the porter his eyes in 
his head, that he gives entrance to such companions? Pray, get 
you out. 

Cor. Away! 

Sec. Serv. Away? Get you away. 

Cor. Now, thou 'rt troublesome. 

Sec. Serv. Are you so brave? I '11 have you talked with anon. 

Enter a third Servant. The first meets him. 180 

Third Serv. Wliat fellow's this? 

First Serv. A strange one as ever I looked on: I cannot get 
him out o' the house. Pr'ythee, call my master to him. 

Third Serv. What have you to do here, fellow? Pray you, 
avoid the house. 

Cor. Let me but stand ; I will not hurt your hearth. 

Third Serv. What are you? 

Cor. A gentleman. 

Third Serv. A marvellous poor one. 

Cor. True, so I am. 

Third Serv. Pray you, poor gentleman, take up some other 
station; here 's no place for you. Pray you, avoid: come. 

Cor. Follow your function; go, 
And batten on cold bits. [Pushes him away. 

Third Serv. What, will you not? Pr'ythee, tell my master i8i 
what a strange guest he has here. 



82 THE TRAGEDY OF COR lOL ANUS. 

Sec. Serv. And I shall. [Exit. 

Third Serv. Where dwell'st thou ? 

Cor. Under the canopy. 

Third Serv. Under the canopy? 

Cor. Ay. 

Third Serv. Where 's that? 

Cor. Y the city of kites and crows. 

Third Sei^v. V the city of kites and crows?— What an ass it is!— 
Then, thou dwellest with daws too ? 

Cor. No; I serve not thy master. 

Third Serv. How, sir! Do you meddle with my master? 

Cor. Ay; 't is an honester service than to meddle with thy 
mistress. 
Thou prat'st, and prat'st: serve with thy trencher. Hence! 

[Beats hiin away. 

182 Enter Aufidius and the second Servant. 

Auf. Where is this fellow? 

Sec. Serv. Here, sir. I 'd have beaten him like a dog, but for 
disturbing the lords within. 

Auf. Whence com'st thou? what would' st thou? thy name? 
Wliy speak'st not? speak, man: what 's thy name? 

Cor. If, TuUus, [unmuffiing. 

Not yet thou know'st me, and, seeing me, dost not 
Think me for the man I am, necessity 
Commands me name myself. 

Auf. What is thy name? 

[Servants retire. 

Cor. A name unmusical to the Volscians' ears, 
And harsh in sound to thine. 

Auf. Say, what 's thy name? 

Thou hast a grim appearance, and thy face 
Bears a command in 't; though thy tackle's torn, 
Thou show'st a noble vessel. What 's thy name? 

Cor. Prepare thy brow to frown: know'st thou me yet? 

Auf. I know thee not: — thy name? 



THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 83 

Cor. My name is Cains Marcius, who hath done 183 

To thee particularly, and to all the Volsces 
Great hurt and mischief: thereto witness may 
My surname, Coriolanus. The painful service, 
The extreme dangers, and the drops of blood 
Shed for my thankless country, are requited 
But with that surname; a good memory 
And witness of the malice and displeasure 
Which thou should'st bear me. Only that name remains : 
The cruelty and envy of the people, 
Permitted by our dastard nobles, who 
Have all forsook me, hath devour'd the rest; 
And suffer'd me by the voice of slaves to be 
Whoop'd out of Rome. Now, this extremity 
Hath brought me to thy hearth: not out of hope. 
Mistake me not, to save my life; for if 
I had fear'd death, of all the men i' the world 
I would have Voided thee; but in mere spite, 
To be full quit of those my banishers. 

Stand I before thee here. Then, if thou hast 184 

A heart of wreak in thee, that will revenge 
Thine own particular wrongs, and stop those maims 
Of shame seen through thy country, speed thee straight, 
And make my misery serve thy turn: so use it, 
That my revengeful services may prove 
As benefits to thee; for I will fight 
Against my canker'd country with the spleen 
Of all the under fiends. But if so be 
Thou dar'st not this, and that to prove more fortunes 
Thou 'rt tir'd; then, in a word, I also am 
Longer to live most weary, and present 
My throat to thee and to thy ancient malice: 
Which not to cut would show thee but a fool, 
Since I have ever follow'd thee with hate. 
Drawn tuns of blood out of thy country's breast. 



^^ THE TRAGEDY OF CORTOLANUS. 

And cannot live but to thy shame, unless 
It be to do thee service. 

185 Auf. Marcius, Marcius ! 

Each word thou hast spoke hath weeded from my heart 

A root of ancient envy. If Jupiter 

Should from yond' cloud speak divine things, 

And say, '"t is true"; I 'd not believe them more 

Than thee, all noble Marcius. — Let me twine 

Mine arms about that body, where against 

My grained ash an hundred times hath broke. 

And scarr'd the moon with splinters! here I clip 

The anvil of my sword; and do contest 

As hotly and as nobly with thy love, 

As ever in ambitious strength I did 

Contend against thy valour. Know thou first, 

I lov'd the maid I married : never man 

Sigh'd truer breath; but that I see thee here. 

Thou noble thing, more dances my rapt heart. 

Than when I first my wedded mistress saw 

186 Bestride my threshold. Why, thou Mars, I tell thee, 
We have a power on foot; and I had purpose 
Once more to hew thy target from thy brawn. 

Or lose mine arm for 't: thou hast beat me out 

Twelve several times, and I have nightly since 

Dreamt of encounters 'twixt thyself and me: 

We have been down together in my sleep. 

Unbuckling helms, fisting each other's throat. 

And wak'd half dead with nothing. Worthy Marcius, 

Had we no quarrel else to Rome, but that 

Thou art thence banish'd, we would muster all 

From twelve to seventy; and, pouring war 

Into the bowels of ungrateful Rome, 

Like a bold flood o'er-bear. 0, come; go in. 

And take our friendly senators by the hands. 

Who now are here, taking their leaves of me, 



THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 85 

Who am prepar d against your territories, 
Though not for Rome itself. 

Cor. You bless me, gods! ^^'^ 

All/. Therefore, most absolute sir, if thou wilt have 
The leading of thine own revenges, take 
Th' one half of my commission; and set down, — 
As best thou art experienc'd, since thou know'st 
Thy country's strength and weakness, — thine own ways; 
Whether to knock against the gates of Rome, 
Or rudely visit them in parts remote. 
To fright them, ere destroy. But come in : 
Let me commend thee first to those, that shall 
Say, "yea", to thy desires. A thousand welcomes! 
And more a friend than e'er an enemy; 
Yet, Marcius, that was much. Your hand: most welcome! 

[Exeunt Coriolanus and Aufidiu«. 

First Serv. [advancing'] Here 's a strange alteration! 188 

Sec. Serv. By my hand, I had thoaght to have strucken him 
with a cudgel; and yet my mind gave me, his clothes made a false 
report of him. 

First Serv. AVhat an arm he has! He turned me about with 
his finger and his thumb, as one would set up a top. 

Sec. Serv. Nay, I knew by his face that there was something 
in him: he had, sir, a kind of face, methought, — I cannot tell how 
to term it. 

First Serv. He had so; looking, as it were, — would I were 
hanged , but I thought there was more in him than I could think. 

Sec. Serv. So did I, I '11 be sworn : he is simply the rarest man 
i' the world. 

First Serv. I think, he is; but a greater soldier than he, you 
wot one. 

Sec. Serv. Who? my master? 

First Serv. Nay, it 's no matter for that. 

Sec. Serv. Worth six on him. 

First Serv. Nay, not so neither; but I take him to be the 
greater soldier. 



86 THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 

Sec. Serv. 'Faith, look you, one cannot tell how to say that: 
for the defence of a town, our general is excellent. 
First Serv, Ay, and for an assault too. 

189 Re-enter third Servant. 

Third Serv. 0, slaves! I can tell you news; news, you rascals. 

First, Sec. Serv. What, what, what? let's partake. 

Third Serv. I would not be a Roman, of all nations; I had as 
lieve be a condemned man. 

First, Sec. Serv. Wherefore? wherefore? 

Third Serv. Why, here 's he, that was wont to thwack our 
general, — Caius Marcius. 

First Serv. Why do you say thwack our general? 

Third Serv. I do not say, thwack our general; but he was 
always good enough for him. 

Sec. Serv. Come, we are fellows and friends: he was ever too 
19^ hard for him; I have heard him say so himself. 

First Serv. He was too hard for him directly, to say the truth 
on 't: before Corioli, he scotched hhn and notched him like a 
carbonado. 

Sec. Serv. An he had been cannibally given, he might have 
broiled and eaten him too. 

First Serv. But, more of thy news? 

Third Serv. Why, he is so made on here within, as if he were 
son and heir to Mars; set at upper end o' the table; no question 
asked him by any of the senators, but they stand bald before him: 
our general himself makes a mistress of him; sanctifies himself 
with 's hand, and turns up the white o' the eye to his discourse. 
But the bottom of the news is, our general is cut i' the middle, 
and but one half of what he was yesterday, for the other has half, 
by the entreaty and grant of the whole table. He '11 go, he says, 
and sowle the porter of Rome gates by the ears : he will mow all 
191 down before him, and leave his passage polled. 

Sec. Serv. And he 's as like to do 't, as any man I can imagine. 

Third Serv. Do 't! he will do 't; for, (look you, sir,) he has as 
many friends as enemies; which friends, sir, (as it were,) durst 



THK TBAGIiPy OF CORIOLANUS. 87 

not (look you, sir,) show themselves (as we term it) his friends, 
whilst he 's in directitude. *) 

First Serv, Directitude; what 's that? 

Thi7^d Serv. But when they shall see, sir, his crest up again, 
and the man in blood, they will out of their burrows, like conies 
after rain, and revel all with him. 

First Serv. But when goes this forward? 

Third Serv. To-morrow; to-day; presently. You shall have 
the drum struck up this afternoon: 't is, as it were, a parcel of 
their feast, and to be executed ere they wipe their lips. 

Sec. Serv. Why, then we shall have a stirring world again. 192 
This peace is nothing, but to rust iron, increase tailors, and breed 
ballad-makers. 

First Serv. Let me have war, say I: it exceeds peace as far as 
day does night; it 's spritely, waking, audible, and full of vent. 
Peace is a very apoplexy, lethargy; mulled,*) deaf, sleepy, insen- 
sible ; a getter of more bastard children, than wars a destroyer of 
men. 

Sec. Serv. 'T is so: and as wars, in some sort, may be said to 
be a ravisher, so it cannot be denied, but peace is a great maker 
of cuckolds. 

First Serv. Ay, and it makes men hate one another. 

Third Serv. Reason: because they then less need one another. 
The wars for my money. I hope to see Romans as cheap as Vol- 
scians. — They are rising, they are rising. 

All. In, in, in, in. [^Exeunt. 

SCENE VI. 193 

Rome. A public Place. 

Enter Sicinius and Brutus. 

Sic. We hear not of him, neither need we fear him; 
His remedies are tame i' the present peace 
And quietness o' the people, which before 
Were in wild hurry. Here do we make his friends 
Blush that the world goes well; who rather had, 



194 



88 THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 

Though they themselves did suffer by 't, behold 
Dissentious numbers pestering streets, than see 
Our tradesmen singing in their shops, and going 
About their functions friendly. 

[Menenius approaching ^^ 

Brut. We stood to 't in good time. Is this Menenius? 
Sic. 'T is he, 't is he, 0! he is grown most kind 
Of late. 

Enter Menenius (advancing). 

Hail, sir! 

Men. Hail to you both! 

Sic. Your Coriolanus is not much miss'd. 
But with his friends: the common-wealth doth stand. 
And so would do, were he more angry at it. 

Men. All 's well; and might have been much better, if 
He could have temporiz'd. 

Sic. Where is he, hear youV 

Men. Nay, I hear nothing: his mother and his wife 
Hear nothing from him. 

195 Enter three or four Citizens. 

Cit. The gods preserve you both! 

Sic. Good-den, our neighbours. 

Brut. Good-den to you all, good-den to you all. 

First Cit. Ourselves, our wives and children, on our knees 
Are bound to pray for you both. 

Sic. Live, and thrive! 

Brut. Farewell, kind neighbours: w^e wish'd Coriolanus 
Had lov'd you as we did. 

Cit. Now the gods keep you! 

Both Tri. Farewell, farewell. [Exeunt Citizens. 

196 Sic. This is a happier and more comely time, 
Than when these fellow^ ran about the streets, 
Crying confusion. 



THE TRAGEDY OF COKIOLANL'S. 89 

Brut. Caius Marcius was 

A worthy officer i' the war; but insolent, 
Overcome with pride, ambitious past all thinking, 
Self-loving, — 

Sic. And affecting one sole throne. 

Without assistance. 

Men. I think not so. 

Sic. We should by this, to all our lamentation, 
If he had gone forth consul, found it so. 

Brut. The gods have well prevented it, and Rome 
Sits safe and still without him. 

Enter an jEdile. 197 

J^d. Worthy tribunes, 

There is a slave, whom we have put in prison. 
Reports, the Volsces with tw^o several powers 
Are enter'd in the Roman territories; 
And with the deepest malice of the war 
Destroy what lies before them. 

Men. 'T is Aufidius, 

Who, hearing of our Marcius' banishment. 
Thrusts forth his horns again into the world ; 
Which were inshell'd when Marcius stood for Rome, 
And durst not once peep out. 

Sic. Come, what talk you 

Of Marcius? 

Brut. Go see this rumourer whipp'd. — It cannot be; 198 

The Volsces dare break with us. 

Men. Cannot be! 

We have record that very well it can; 
And three examples of the like have been 
Within my age. But reason with the fellow, 
Before you punish him, where he heard this; 
Lest you shall chance to whip your information, 
And beat the messenger who bids beware 
Of what is to be dreaded. 



W THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 

Sic. Tell not me: 

I know, this cannot be. 

Bi'ut. Not possible. 

199 Enter a Messenger. 

Mess. The nobles in great earnestness are going- 
All to the senate-house: some news is come, 
That turns their countenances. 

Sic. 'T is this slave; — 

Go whip him 'fore the people's eyes: — his raising! 
Nothing but his report! 

Mess. Yes, worthy sir. 

The slave's report is seconded; and more. 
More fearful, is deliver'd. 

Sic. What more fearful? 

Mess. It is spoke freely out of many mouths 
(How probable I do not know), that Marcius, 
Join'd with Aufidius, leads a power 'gainst Rome, 
And vows revenge as spacious, as between 
The young' st and oldest thing. 

Sic. This is most likely ! 

Brut. Rais'd only, that the weaker sort may wish 
God Marcius home again. 

Sic. The very trick on 't. 

200 Men. This is unlikely : 

He and Aufidius can no more atone. 
Than violentest contrariety. 

Enter another Messenger. 

Mess. You are sent for to the senate: 
A fearful army, led by Caius Marcius, 
Associated with Aufidius, rages 
Upon our territories; and have already 
O'erborne their way, consum'd with fire, and took 
What lay before them. 



THE TRAGEDY UF CORIOLANUS, 91 



Enter Cominius. 201 

Com. 0! you have made good work. 

Men. What news? what news? 

Com. You have holp to ravish your own daughters, and 
To melt the city leads upon your pates; 
To see your wives dishonour'd to your noses; — 

Men. What 's the news? what 's the news? 

Com. Your temples burned in their cement; and 
Your franchises, whereon you stood, confin'd 
Into an auger 's bore. 

Men. Pray now, your news? — 202 

You have made fair work, I fear me. — Pray, your news? 
If Marcius should be join'd with Volscians, — • 

Com. ' If! 

He is their god: he leads them like a thing 
Made by some other deity than nature, 
That shapes man better; and they follow him 
Against us brats, with no less confidence 
Than boys pursuing summer butterflies, 
Or butchers killing flies.*) 

Men. You have made good work, 

You, and your apron-men; you that stood so much 
Upon the voice of occupation and 
The breath of garlic-eaters ! 

Com.. He will shake 203 

Your Rome about your ears. 

Men. As Hercules 

Did shake down mellow fruit. You have made fair work. 

Brut. But is this true, sir? 

Com. iVy; and you '11 look pale 

Before you find it other. All the regions 
Do smilingly revolt, and who resist 
Are mock'd for valiant ignorance, 
And perish constant fools. Who is 't can blame him? 
Your enemies and his find something in him. 



205 



9'2 THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 

Men. We are all undone, unless 
The noble man have mercy. 
204 Com. Who shall ask it? 

The tribunes cannot do 't for shame; the people 
Deserve such pity of him as the wolf 
Does of the shepherds : for his best friends, if they 
Should say, "Be good to Rome," they charg'd him even 
As those should do that had deserv'd his hate, 
And therein show'd like enemies. 

Men. 'T is true. 

If he were putting to my house the brand 
That should consume it, I have not the face 
To say, "Beseech you, cease." — You have made fair hands, 
You, and your crafts; you have crafted fair. 

Co7n. You have brought 

A trembling upon Rome, such as was never 
So incapable of help. 

T7n. Say not, we brought it. 

Men. How! Was it we? we lov'd him; but, like beasts 
And cowardly nobles, gave way unto your clusters. 
Who did hoot him out o' the city. 

Com. But 1 fear 

They '11 roar him in again. Tullus Aufidius, 
The second name of men, obeys his points 
As if he were his officer: desperation 
Is all the policy, strength, and defence. 
That Rome can make against them. 

206 Enter a troop of Citizens. 

Men. Here come the clusters. — 

And is Aufidius with him? — You are they 
That made the air unwholesome, when you cast 
Your stinking greasy caps, in hooting at 
Coriolanus' exile. Now he 's coming; 
And not a hair upon a soldier's head 
Which will not prove a whip: as many coxcombs 



THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 9S 

As you threw caps up will he tumble down, 
And pay you for your voices. 'T is no matter: 
If he could burn us all into one coal, 
We have deserv'd it. 

Cit. 'Faith, we hear fearful news. 

First Cit. For mine own part, 

When I said, banish him, I said, 't was pity. 

Sec. Cit. An so did I. 

Third Cit. And so did I; and, to say the truth, so did very 
many of us: that we did, we did for the best; and though we 
willingly consented to his banishment, yet it was against our will. 

Com. Y' are goodly things, you voices! 

Men. You have made 

Good work, you and your cry! — Shall's to the Capitol? 

Com. 0! ay, what else? [Exeunt Oominius and Menenius. 

Sic. Go, masters, get you home;, be not dismay'd: 207 

These are a side, that would be glad to have 
This true, which they so seem to fear. Go home. 
And show no sign of fear. 

First Cit. The gods be good to us! Come, masters, let 's home. 
I ever said, we were i' the wrong, when we banished him. 

Sec. Cit. So did we all. But come, let 's home. 

[Exeunt Citizens. 
Brut. I do not like this news. 
Sic. Nor I. 

Brut. Let 's to the Capitol: — 'would, half my wealth 
Would*) buy this for a lie! 

Sic, Pray, let us go. [Exeunt. 

SCENE Vll. 208 

A Camp; at a small distance from Rome. 
Enter Aufidius, and his Lieutenant. 
Auf. Do they still fly to the Roman? 
Lieu. I do not know what witchcraft 's in him, but 
Your soldiers use him as the the grace 'fore meat, 



94' THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 

Their talk at table, and their thanks at end; 
And you are darken'd in this action, sir, 
Even by your own. 

Auf. I cannot help it noM'^, 

Unless, by using means, I lame the foot 
Of our design. He bears himself more proudlier, 
Even to my person, than I thought he would 
When first I did embrace him; yet his nature 
In that 's no changeling, and I must excuse 
What cannot be amended. 

209 Lieu. Yet I wish, sir 
(I mean, for your particular), you had not 
Join'd in commission with hhn; but either 
Had borne the action of yourself, or else 
To him had left it solely. 

Auf. I understand thee well; and be thou sure. 
When he shall come to his account, he knows not 
What I can urge against him. Although it seems, 
And so he thinks, and is no less apparent 
To the vulgar eye, that he bears all things fairly. 
And shows good husbandry for the Volscian state. 
Fights dragon-like, and does achieve as soon 
As draw his sword; yet he hath left undone*) 
That, which shall break his neck, or hazard mine. 
Whene'er we come to our account. 

Lieu. Sir, I beseech you, think you he '11 carry Rome? 

210 j^uf. All places yield to him ere he sits down; 
And the nobility of Rome are his : 

The senators and patricians love him too: 
The tribunes are no soldiers; and their people 
Will be as rash in the repeal, as hasty 
To expel him thence. I think he '11 be to Rome, 
As is the osprey to the fish, who takes it 
By sovereignty of nature. First he was 
A noble servant to them, but he could not 
Carry his honours even: whether 't was pride, 



THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 



9# 



Which out of daily fortune ever taints 

The happy man; whether defect of judgment, 

To fail in the disposing of those chances 

Which he was lord of; or whether nature, 

Not to be other than one thing, not moving 

From the casque to the cushion, but commanding peace 

Even with the same austerity and garb 

As he controll'd the war; but one of these 

(As he hath spices of them all, not all, 

For I dare so far free him), made him fear'd. 

So hated, and so banish'd: but he has a merit. 

To choke it in the utterance. So our virtues 

Lie in the interpretation of the time. 

And power, unto itself most commendable. 

Hath not a tomb so evident as a chair*) 

To extol what it hath done. 

One lire drives out one fire; one nail, one nail; 

Rights by rights falter, *) strengths by strenghts do fail. 

Come, let 's away. When, Caius, Rome is thine. 

Thou art poor'st of all; then, shortly art thou mine. [Exeunt. 



THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 



211 ACT V. SCENE 1. 

Rome. A public Place. 

Entei' Menenils, Cominius, Sicinius, Brutus, and others. 

Me7i. No, I '11 not go: you hear what he hath said, 
Which was sometime his general; who lovM him 
In a most dear particular. He call'd me father, 
But what o' that? Go, you that banish'd him, 
A mile before his tent fall down, and knee 
The way into his mercy. Nay, if he coy'd 
To hear Cominius speak, I '11 keep at home. 

CoTYi. He would not seem to know me. 

Men. Do you hear? 

212 Com. Yet one time he did call me by my name: 
I urg'd our old acquaintance, and the drops 

That we have bled together. Coriolanus 
He would not answer to; forbad all names: 
He was a kind of nothing, titleless, 
Till he had forg'd himself a name o' the fire 
Of burning Rome. 

Men. Why, so, — you have made good work! 

A pair of tribunes, that have rack'd*) for Rome, 
To make coals cheap, — a noble memory! 

Com. I minded him, how royal 't was to pardon 
When it was less expected: he replied 
It was a bare *) petition of a state 
To one whom they had punish'd. 

Men. Very well: 

Could he say less ? 

213 Com. I offer'd to awaken his regard 

For 's private friends: his answer to me was, 

He could not stay to pick them in a pile 

Of noisome musty chaff: he said, 't was folly, 



THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 



9f 



For one poor grain or two, to leave unburnt 
And still to nose th' offence. 

Men. For one poor grain or two! 

I am one of those: his mother, wife, his child, 
And this brave fellow too; we are the grains: 
You are the musty chaff, and you are smelt 
Above the moon : we must be burnt for you. 

Sic. Nay, pray, be patient: if you refuse your aid 
In this so never-needed help, yet do not 
Upbraid's with our distress. But, sure, if you 
Would be your country's pleader, your good tongue. 
More than the instant army we can make. 
Might stop our countryman. 

Men. No; I '11 not meddle. 214 

Sic. I pray you, go to him. 

Men. What should I do? 

Brut. Only make trial what your love can do 
For Rome towards Marcius. 

Men. Well; and say that Marcius 

Return me, as Cominius is return'd. 
Unheard; what then? — 
But as a discontented friend, grief-shot 
With his unkindness ? say 't be so ? 

Sic. Yet your good will 

Must have that thanks from Rome, after the measure 
As you intended well. 

Men. I '11 undertake it: 215 

I think, he '11 hear me. Yet, to bite his lip. 
And hum at good Gominius, much unhearts me. 
He was not taken well; he had not din'd: 
The veins unfill'd, our blood is cold, and then 
We pout upon the morning, are unapt 
To give or to forgive; but when we have stuffd 
These pipes and these conveyances of our blood 
With wine and feeding, we have suppler souls 
Than in our priest-like fasts: therefore, I '11 watch him 

7 



98 THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 

Till he be dieted to my request, 
And then I '11 set upon him. 

Brut. You know the very road into his kindness, 
And cannot lose your way. 

Men. Good faith, I '11 prove him, 

Speed how it will. I shall ere long have knowledge 
Of my success. [Exit. 

216 Com. He '11 never hear him. 

Sic. Not? 

Com. I tell you, he does sit in gold, his eye 
Red as 't would burn Rome, and his injury 
The gaoler to his pity. I kneel'd before him; 
'T was very faintly he said, ''Rise;" dismiss'd me 
Thus, with his speechless hand; what he would do. 
He sent in writing after me; what he would not, 
Bound with an oath to yield to his conditions:*) 
So that all hope is vain. 
Unless his noble mother, and his wife 
(Who, as I hear)*) mean to solicit him 
For mercy to his country. Therefore, let 's hence. 
And with our fair entreaties haste them on. [Exeunt. 



217 SCENE 11. 

The Volscian camp before Rome. The guards at their stations. 
Enter to them^ Menenius. 

First G. Stay! Whence are you? 

Sec. G. Stand, and go back. 

Men. You guard like men: 't is well; but, by your leave, 
I am an officer of state, and come 
To speak with Coriolanus. 

First G. From whence? 

Men. From Rome. 

First G. You may not pass; you must return: our general 
Will no more hear from thence. 



v;^ 



THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 99 

Sec. G. You '11 see your Rome embrac'd with fire before 
You '11 speak with Coriolanus. 

Men. Good my friends, 

If you have heard your general talk of Rome, 
And of his friends there, it is lots to blanks, 
My name hath touch'd your ears: it is Menenius. 

First G. Be it so; go back: the virtue of your name 218 

Is not here passable. 

Men. 1 tell thee, fellow, 

Thy general is my lover: I have been 
The book of his good acts, whence men have read 
His fame unparallel'd, haply amplified; 
For I have ever verified*) my friends 
(Of whom he ""s chief), with all the size that verity 
Would without lapsing suffer: nay, sometimes, 
Like to a bowl upon a subtle ground, 
I have tumbled past the throw, and in his praise 
Have almost stamped the leasing. Therefore, fellow, 
I must have leave to pass. 

First G. 'Faith, sir, if you had told as many lies in his behalf, 219 
as you have uttered words in your own, you should not pass here: 
no, though it were as virtuous to lie, as to live chastely. There- 
fore, go back. 

Men. Pr'ythee, fellow, remember my name is Menenius, always 
factionaiy on the party of your general. 

Sec. G. Howsoever you have been his liar (as you say you 
have), I am one that, telHng true under him, must say, you cannot 
pass. Therefore, go back. 

3Ien. Has he dined, canst thou tell? for I would not speak 
with him till after dinner. 

First G. You are a Roman, are you? 

Men. I am, as thy general is. 

First G. Then you should hate Rome, as he does. Can you, 220 
when you have pushed out your gates the very defender of them, 
and, in a violent popular ignorance, given your enemy your shield, 
think to front his revenges with the easy groans of old women, 

7* 



100 THE TRAGEDY OF CORTOLANUS. 

the virginal palms of your daughters, or with the palsied inter- 
cession of such a decayed dotant as you seem to be? Can you 
think to blow out the intended fire, your city is ready to flame in, 
with such weak breath as this? No, you are deceived; therefore, 
back to Rome, and prepare for your execution: you are con- 
demned, our general has sworn you out of reprieve and pardon. 
M Men. Sirrah, if thy captain knew I were here, he would use 

me with estimation. 

Sec. G. Come, my captain knows you not. 

Me7i. I mean, thy general. 

First G. My general cares not for you. Back, I say: go, lest 
I let forth your half pint of blood, — back, — that 's the utmost of 
your having: — back. 

Men. Nay, but fellow, fellow, — 

221 Enter Coriolanus and Aufidius. 

Cor. What 's the matter? 

Men. Now, you companion, I '11 say an errand for you: you 
shall know now that I am in estimation; you shall perceive that a 
Jack guardant cannot office me from my son Coriolanus: guess, 
but by my entertainment with him, if thou stand'st not i' the state 
of hanging, or of some death more long in spectatorship, and 
crueller in suffering: behold now presently, and swoon for what 's 
to come upon thee. — The glorious gods sit in hourly synod about 
thy particular prosperity, and love thee no worse than thy old 
father Menenius does! 0, my son! my son! thou art preparing 
fire for us; look thee, here 's water to quench it. I was hardly 
moved to come to thee; but being assured, none but myself could 
move thee, I have been blown out of our*) gates with sighs, and 
conjure thee to pardon Rome, and thy petitionary countrymen. 
The good gods assuage thy wrath, and turn the dregs of it upon 
this varlet here, — this, who, like a block, had denied my access 
to thee. 

222 Cor. Away! 
Men. How! away? 

Cor. Wife, mother, child, I know not. My affairs 



THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 101 

Are servanted to others: though I owe 
My revenge properly, my remission lies 
In Volscian breasts. That we have been familiar, 
Ingrate forgetfulness shall poison*) rather 
Than pity note how much. — Therefore, be gone: 
Mine ears against your suits are stronger than 
Your gates against my force. Yet, for I lov'd thee, 
Take this along; I writ it for thy sake, [Gives a paper. ^ 

And would have sent it. Another word, Menenius, 
I will not hear thee speak. This man, Aufidius, 
Was my belov'd in Rome; yet thou behold'st — 
Auf. You keep a constant temper. 

[Exeunt Coriolan.us and Aufidius. 
First G. Now, sir, is your name Menenius? 223 

Sec. G. 'T is a spell, you see, of much power. You know the 
way home again. 

First G. Do you hear how we are shent for keeping your 
greatness back? 

Sec. G. What cause, do you think, I have to swoon? 
Me7i. I neither care for the world nor your general: for such 
things as you, I can scarce think there 's any, ye 're so slight. He 
that hath a will to die by himself, fears it not from another. Let 
your general do his worst. For you, be that you are, long; and 
your misery increase with your age. I say to you, as I was said 
to: Away! [Exit. 

First G. A noble fellow, I warrant him. 

Sec. G. The worthy fellow is our general: he 's the rock, the 
oak not to be wind-shaken. [Exeunt. 

SCENE III. 224 

The Tent of Coeiolanus. 
Enter Coriolanus, Aufidius, and others. 

Cor. We will before the walls of Rome to-morrow 
Set down our host. — My partner in this action, 



102 THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 

You must report to the Volscian lords, how plainly 

I have borne this business. 

Auf. Only their ends 

You have respected; stopp'd your ears against 

The general suit of Rome; never admitted 

A private whisper, no, not with such friends 

That thought them sure of you. 
226 Cot. This last old man, 

Whom with a crack' d heart I have sent to Rome, 

Loved me above the measure of a father; 

Nay, godded me, indeed. Their latest refuge 

Was to send him; for whose old love I have 

(Though I show'd sourly to him) once more ofFer'd 
^^■- The first conditions, which they did refuse. 

And cannot now accept — to grace him only 

That thought he could do more; a very little 

I have yielded to: fresh embassies and suits, 

Nor from the state nor private friends, hereafter 

Will I lend ear to. — Ha! what shout is this? \^}iout within. 

Shall I be tempted to infringe my vow 

In the same time 't is made? I will not. — 

226 Enter, in mourning habits, Virgilia, Volumnia, leading young 
Marcius, Valeria, and Attendants. 

My wife comes foremost; then, the honour'd mould 

Wherein this trunk was fram'd, and in her hand 

The grand-child to her blood. But, out, affection! 

All bond and privilege of nature, break! 

Let it be virtuous, to be obstinate. — 

What is that curt'sy worth? or those doves' eyes. 

Which can make gods forsworn? — I melt, and am not 

Of stronger earth than others. — My mother bows, 

As if Olympus to a molehill should 

In supplication nod; and my young boy 

Hath an aspect of intercession, which 

Great nature cries, "Deny not." — Let the Volsces 



THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 103 

Plough Rome, and harrow Italy: I '11 never 
Be such a gosling to obey instmct, but stand, 
As if a man were author of himself, 
And knew no other kin. 

Vir. My lord and husband! 227 

Cor. These eyes are not the same I wore in Rome. 

Vir. The sorrow, that delivers us thus chang'd, 
Makes you think so. 

Cor. Like a dull actor now, 

I have forgot my part, and I am out. 
Even to a full disgrace. Best of my flesh. 
Forgive my tyranny; but do not say 
For that, "Forgive our Romans." — 0! a kiss 

Long as my exile, sweet as my revenge! '■'-' 

Now, by the jealous queen of heaven, that kiss 
I carried from thee, dear; and my true lip 
Hath virgin'd it e'er since. — You gods! I prate, 
And the most noble mother of the world 

Leave unsaluted. Sink, my knee, i' the earth; [Kneels. 

Of thy deep duty more impression show 
Than that of common sons. 

Vol. 0, stand up bless'd! 228 

Whilst, with no softer cushion than the flint, 
I kneel before thee, and unproperly 
Show duty, as mistaken all this while 
Between the child and parent. [Kneels. 

Cor. What is this? 

Your knees to me? to your corrected son? 
Then let the pebbles on the hungry beach 
Fillip the stars; then let the mutinous winds 
Strike the proud cedars 'gainst the fiery sun, 
Murd'ring mipossibility, to make 
What cannot be, slight work. 

Vol. Thou art my warrior; 229 

I holp to frame thee. — Do you know this lady? 



104 THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 

Cor. The noble sister of Publicola, 



*5 



The moon of Rome; chaste as the icicle, 
That 's curdied by the frost from purest snow, 
And hangs on Dian's temple: dear Valeria! 

Vol. This is a poor epitome of yours. 
Which, by the interpretation of full time, 
May show like all yourself. 

Cor. The god of soldiers, 

With the consent of supreme Jove, inform 
Thy thoughts with nobleness; that thou may'st prove 
To shame unvulnerable, and stick i' the wars 
Like a great sea-mark, standing every flaw, 
And saving those that eye thee! 

230 Vol. Your knee, sirrah. 
Cor. That 's my brave boy! 

Vol. Even he, your wife, this lady, and myself. 
Are suitors to you. 

Cor. I beseech you, peace; 

Or, if you 'd ask, remember this before : 
The thing I have forsworn to grant, may never 
Be held by you denials. Do not bid me 
Dismiss my soldiers, or capitulate 
Again with Rome's mechanics: tell me not 
Wherein I seem unnatural: desire not 
To allay my rages and revenges with 
Yom* colder reasons. 

231 Vol. 0, no more, no more! 
You have said, you will not grant us any thing; 
For we have nothing else to ask, but that 
Which you deny already: yet we will ask; 
That, if we fail in our request, the blame 

May hang upon your hardness: therefore, hear us. 

Cor. Aufidius, and you Volsces, mark; for we '11 
Hear nought from Rome in private. — Your request? 

232 Vol. Should we be silent and not speak, our raiment 
And state of bodies would bewray what life 



THE IRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 105 

We have led since thy exile. Think with thyself 

How more unfortunate than all living women 

Are we come hither: since that thy sight, which should 

Make our eyes flow with joy, hearts dance with comforts, 

Constrauis them weep, and shake with fear and sorrow; 

Making the mother, wife, and child, to see 

The son, the husband, and the father, tearing 

His country's bowels out. And to poor we*) 

Thine enmity 's most capital: thou barr'st us 

Our prayers to the gods, which is a comfort 

That all but we enjoy; for how can we, 

Alas! how can we for our country pray, 

Whereto we are bound, together with thy victory, 

Whereto we are bound? Alack! or we must lose 

The country, our dear nurse; or else thy person, 

Our comfort in the country. We must find 233 

An evident calamity, though we had 

Our wish, which side should win; for either thou 

Must, as a foreign recreant, be led 

With manacles through our streets, or else 

Triumphantly tread on thy country's ruin, 

And bear the palm for having bravely shed 

Thy wife and children's blood. For myself, son, 

I purpose not to wait on fortune, till 

These wars determine: if I cannot persuade thee 

Rather to show a noble grace to both parts 

Than seek the end of one, thou shalt no sooner 

March to assault thy country, than to tread 

(Trust to 't, thou shalt not) on thy mother's womb, 

That brought thee to this world. 

Fw'. Ay, and mine, 

That brought you forth this boy, to keep your name 
Living to time. 

Boy. 'A shall not tread on me: 

I '11 run away till I am bigger, but then I '11 fight. 

8 



106 THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 

Cor. Not of a woman's tenderness to be, 
Requires nor child nor woman's face to see. 
I have sat too long. [Rising. 

234 Vol. Nay, go not from us thus. 
If it were so that our request did tend 

To save the Romans, thereby to destroy 

The Volsces whom you serve, you might condemn us, 

As poisonous of your honour: no; our suit 

Is, that you reconcile them: while the Volsces 

May say, "This mercy we have show'd"; the Romans, 

"This we receiv'd"; and each in either side 

Give the all-hail to thee, and cry, "Be bless'd 

For making up this peace!" Thou know'st, great son. 

The end of war 's uncertain; but this certain, f^ 

That if thou conquer Rome, the benefit 

Which thou shalt thereby reap is such a name, 

Whose repetition will be dogg'd with curses. 

Whose chronicle thus writ, — "The man was noble, 

But with his last attempt he wip'd it out, 

Destroy'd his country, and his name remains 

235 To the ensuing age abhorr'd." Speak to me, son! 
Thou hast affected the fine strains of honour. 

To imitate the graces of the gods; 

To tear with thunder the wide cheeks o' the air. 

And yet to charge thy sulphur with a bolt 

That should but rive an oak.*) Why dost not speak? 

Think'st thou it honourable for a noble man 

Still to remember wrongs? — Daughter, speak you; 

He cares not for your weeping. — Speak thou, boy: 

Perhaps thy childishness will move him more 

Than can our reasons. — There 's no man in the world 

More bound to 's mother; yet here he lets me prate 

Like one i' the stocks. — Thou hast never in thy life 

Show'd thy dear mother any courtesy; 

When she (poor hen!), fond of no second brood, 

Has cluck'd thee to the wars, and safely home, 



THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 107 

Loaden with honour. Say my request 's unjust, 236 

And spurn me back; but, if it be not so. 

Thou art not honest, and the gods will plague thee, 

That thou restrain'st from me the duty, which 

To a mother's part belongs. — He turns away: 

Down, ladies; let us shame him with our knees. 

To his surname, Coriolanus, 'longs more pride, 

Than pity to our prayers. Down: an end; 

This is the last; — so we will home to Rome, 

And die among our neighbours. — Nay, behold us. 

This boy, that cannot tell what he would have. 

But kneels and holds up hands for fellowship. 

Does reason our petition with more strength 

Than thou hast to deny 't. — Come, let us go. 

This fellow had a Volscian to his mother; 

His wife is in Corioli, and this*) child 

Like him by chance. — Yet give us our dispatch: 

I am hush'd until our city be a fire. 

And then I '11 speak a little.*) 

Cor. [Holds VoLUMNTA by the hand, silent. 237 

mother, mother! 

What have you done? Behold! the heavens do ope, 

The gods look down, and this unnatural scene 

They laugh at. my mother! mother! 0! 

You have won a happy victory to Rome ; 

But, for your son, — believe it, ! believe it, — 

Most dangerously you have with him prevail'd, 

If not most mortal to him. But let it come. — 

Aufidius, though I cannot make true wars, 

I '11 frame convenient peace. Now, good Aufidius, 

Were you in my stead, would you have heard 

A mother less, or granted less, Aufidius ? 

Auf. I was mov'd withal. 238 

Cor. I dare be sworn, you were: 

And, sir, it is no little thing to make 

Mine eyes to sweat compassion. But, good sir. 



108 THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 

What peace you 11 make, advise me; for my part, 
I '11 not to Rome, I '11 back with you; and pray you, 
Stand to me in this cause. — mother! wife! 

Auf. \_ Aside.'] I am glad, thou hast set thy mercy and thy 

honour 
At difference in thee : out of that I '11 work 
Myself a former fortune. 

[The Ladies make signs to Coriolanus. 
Cor. Ay, by and by; 

[To V(3LUMNIA, ViRGILIA, &C. 

But we will drink together; and you shall bear 

A better witness back than words, which we 

On like conditions will have counter-seal'd. 

Come, enter with us. Ladies, you deserve 

To have a temple built you : all the swords 

In Italy, and her confederate arms. 

Could not have made this peace. [Exeunt. 

239 SCENE IV. 

Rome. A public place. 
Eriter Menenius and Sicinius. 

Men. See you yond' coign o' the Capitol; yond' cornerstone? 

Sic. Why, what of that? 

Men. If it be possible for you to displace it with your little 
finger, there is some hope the ladies of Rome, especially his mo- 
ther, may prevail with him; but I say, there is no hope in 't: our 
throats are sentenced, and stay upon execution. 

Sic. Is 't possible, that so short a time can alter the condition 
of a man ? 

Men. There is differency between a grub and a butterfly; yet 
your butterfly was a grub. This Marcius is grown from man to 
dragon: he has wings; he 's more than a creeping thing. 

240 Sic. He loved his mother dearly. 

Men. So did he me: and he no more remembers his mother 
now, than an eight year old horse. The tartness of his face sours 



THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 109 

ripe grapes: when he walks, he moves like an engine, and the 
ground shrinks before his treading: he is able to pierce a corslet 
with his eye; talks like a knell, and his hum is a battery. He sits 
in his state, as a thing made for Alexander.*) What he bids be 
done, is finished with his bidding: he wants nothing of a god but 
eternity, and a heaven to throne in. 

Sic. Yes, mercy, if you report him truly. 

Me7i. I paint him in the character. Mark what mercy his mo- 
ther shall bring from him: there is no more mercy in him, than 
there is milk in a male tiger; that shall our poor city find: and all 
this is 'long of you. 

Sic. The gods be good unto us! 

Men. No, in such a case the gods will not be good unto us. 
When we banished him, we respected not them; and, he returning 
to break our necks, they respect not us. 

Enter a Messenye7\ 241 

Mess. Sir, if you'd save your life, fly to your house: 
The plebeians have got your fellow-tribune. 
And hale him up and down; all swearing, if 
The Roman ladies bring not comfort home. 
They '11 give him death by inches. 

Enter ariother Messenger. 
Sic. What 's the news? 

Mess. Good news, good news! — The ladies have prevail'd, 
The Volscians are dislodg'd, and Marcius gone. 
A merrier day did never yet greet Rome, 
No, not the expulsion of the Tarquins. 

Sic. Friend, 

Art thou certain this is true? is it most certain? 

Mess. As certain, as I know the sun is fire: 
WTiere have you lurk'd, that you make doubt of it? 
Ne'er through an arch so hurried the blown tide. 
As the recomforted through the gates. Why, hark you! 

[Trumpets and hautboys sounded, and drums beaten, 
all together. Shoutmg also within. 



110 THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 

The trumpets, sackbuts, psalteries, and fifes. 
Tabors, and cymbals, and the shouting Romans, 
Make the sun dance. Hark you! [Shouting again. 

242 Men. This is good news. 

I will go meet the ladies. This Volumnia 
Is worth of consuls, senators, patricians, 
A city full; of tribunes, such as you, 
A sea and land-full. You have pray'd well to-day: 
This morning forning for ten thousand of your throats 
I 'd not have given a doit. Hark, how they joy! 

[Shouting and music. 

Sic. First, the gods bless you for your tidings : next, 
Accept my thankfulness. 

Mess. Sir, we have all 

Great cause to give great thanks. 

Sic. They are near the city? 

Mess. Almost at point to enter. 

Sic. We wiU meet them. 

And help the joy. [Exeunt, 



SCENE V. 

The same. A street near the gate. 

243 Enter Volumnia, Virgilia, Valeria, accompanied by Senators, 
Patricians^ and Citizens. They pass over the stage. 

First Sen. Behold our patroness, the life of Rome! 
Call all your tribes together, praise the gods. 
And make triumphant fires ; strew flowers before them. 
Unshout the noise that banish'd Marcius; 
Repeal him with the welcome of his mother: 
Cry, — Welcome, ladies, welcome! — 

All. Welcome, ladies! 

Welcome! [A flourish with drums and trumpets. 

[Exeunt. 



THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. Ill 



SCENE VI. 244 

Antiuni.*) A public place. 
Enter Tullus Aufidius, with Attendants. 

Auf. Go tell the lords o' the city, I am here: 
Deliver them this paper: having read it, 
Bid them repair to the market-place; where I, 
Even in theirs' and in the commons' ears, 
Will vouch the truth of it. Him I accuse, 
The city ports by this hath enter'd, and 
Intends t' appear before the people, hoping 
To purge himself with words: dispatch. 

[Exeunt Attendants, 

Enter three or four Conspirators of Aufidius' faction. 245 

Most welcome! 

First Con. How is it with our general? 

Auf. Even so. 

As with a man by his own alms empoison'd. 
And with his charity slain. 

Sec. Con. Most noble sir, 

If you do hold the same intent wherein 
You wish'd us parties, we *11 deliver you 
Of your great danger. 

Auf. Sir, I cannot tell: 

We must proceed as we do find the people. 

Third Con. The people will remain uncertain, whilst 
'Twixt you there 's difference; but the fall of either 
Makes the survivor heir of all. 

Auf. I know it; 246 

And my pretext to strike at him admits 
A good construction. I rais'd him, and I pawn'd 
Mine honour for his truth: who being so heighten'd. 
He water'd his new plants with dews of flattery. 
Seducing so my friends; and to this end. 



112 THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 

He bow'd his nature, never known before 
But to be rough, unswayable, and free. 

TJiird Con. Sir, his stoutness, 
When he did stand for consul, which he lost 
By lack of stooping, — 

Auf. That I would have spoke of: 

Being banish'd for 't, he came unto my hearth; 
Presented to my knife his throat: I took him; 
Made him joint-servant with me; gave him way 
In all his own desires; nay, let him choose 
Out of my files, his projects to accomplish. 
My best and freshest men; serv'd his designments 
In mine own person; holp to reap the fame 
Which he did end all his; and took some pride 
To do myself this wrong: till, at the last, 
I seem'd his follower, not partner ; and 
He wag'd me with his countenance, as if 
I had been mercenary. 

247 First Con. So he did, my lord; 
The army marvelFd at it; and, in the last. 
When he had carried Rome, and that we look'd 
For no less spoil, than glory, — 

Auf. There was it. 

For which my sinews shall be stretch'd upon him. 
At a few drops of women's rheum, which are 
As cheap as lies, he sold the blood and labour 
Of our great action : therefore shall he die, 
And I '11 renew me in his fall. But, hark! 

[Drums and trumpets sound, with great shouts of 
the people. 

248 First Con. Your native town you enter'd like a post, 
And had no welcomes home; but he returns, 
Splitting the air with noise. 

Sec. Con. And patient fools, 

Whose children he hath slain, their base throats tear 
With giving him glory. 



THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 113 

Third Con. Therefore, at your vantage, 

Ere he express himself, or move the people 
With what he would say, let him feel your sword, 
Which we will second. When he lies along, 
After your way his tale pronounc'd shall bury 
His reasons with his body. 

Auf. Say no more: 

Here come the lords. 

Enter the Lords of the city. 2*9 

Lords. You are most welcome home. 

Auf. I have not deserv'd it. 

But, worthy lords, have you with heed perus'd 
What I have written to you? 

Lords. We have. 

First Lord. And grieve to hear it. 

What faults he made before the last, I think. 
Might have found easy fines; but there to end. 
Where he was to begin, and give away 
The benefit of our levies, answering us 
With our own charge, making a treaty where 
There was a yielding; this admits no excuse. 

Auf. He approaches: you shall hear him. 

Enter Coriolanus, with drums and colours; a crowd of Citizens 250 

with him. 

Cor. Hail, lords! I am return'd your soldier; 
No more infected with my country's love 
Than when I parted hence, but still subsisting 
Under your great command. You are to know. 
That prosperously I have attempted, and 
With bloody passage led your wars, even to 
The gates of Rome. Our spoils we have brought home. 
Do more than counterpoise a full third part 
The charges of the action. We have made peace. 
With no less honour to the Antiates 

9 



114 THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 

Than shame to the Romans; and we here deUver, 
Subscribed by the consuls and patricians, 
Together with the seal o' the senate, what 
We have compounded on. 

Auf. Read it not, noble lords; 

But tell the traitor in the highest degree 
He hath abus'd your powers. 

251 Cor. Traitor! — How now! — 

Auf. Ay, traitor, Marcius. 

Cor. Marcius! 

Auf. Ay, Marcius, Caius Marcius: dost thou think 
I '11 grace thee with that robbery, thy stol'n name 
Coriolanus in Corioli? — 

You lords and heads of the state, perfidiously 
He has betray'd your business, and given up 
For certain drops of salt your city Rome, 
I say your city, to his wife and mother; 
Breaking his oath and resolution, like 
A twist of rotten silk; never admitting 
Counsel o' the war, but at his nurse's tears 
He whin'd and roar'd away your victory. 
That pages blush'd at him, and men of heart 
Look'd wondering each at other. 

Cor. Hear'st thou, Mars? 

Auf. Name not the god, thou boy of tears. 

Cor. Ha! 

Auf. No more.*) 

252 Cor. Measureless liar, thou hast made my heart 
Too great for what contains it. Boy! slave! — 
Pardon me, lords, 't is the first time that ever 

I was forc'd to scold. Your judgments, my grave lords, 
Must give this cur the lie: and his own notion 
(Who wears my stripes impress'd upon him, that 
Must bear my beating to his grave) shall join 
To thrust the lie unto him. 

First Lord. Peace both, and hear me speak. 



THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 115 

Cor. Cut me to pieces, Volsces; men and lads, 
Stain all your edges on me. — Boy! False hound! 
If you have writ your annals true, 't is there, 
That, like an eagle in a dove-cote, I 
Flutter'd your Volscians in Corioli: 
Alone I did it. — Boy! 

Auf. Why, noble lords, 253 

Will you be put in mind of his blind fortune, 
Which was your shame, by this unholy braggart, 
'Fore your own eyes and ears? 

All Con. Let him die for 't. 

Citizens. Tear him to pieces; do it presently: — he killed my 
son; — my daughter: — he killed my cousin Marcius: — he killed my 
father. — * 

Sec. Lord. Peace, ho! — no outrage: — peace! 
The man is noble, and his fame folds-in 
This orb o' the earth. His last offences to us 
Shall have judicious hearing. — Stand, Aufidius, 
And trouble not the peace. 

Cor. 0, that I had him. 

With six Aufidiuses, or more, his tribe. 
To use my lawful sword! 

Auf. Insolent villain! 

All Con. KiU, kill, kill, kill, kill him! 

[Aufidius and the Conspirators draw, and kill Coriolanus, 
who falls: Aufidius stands on him. 

Lords. Hold, hold, hold, hold! 254 

Auf. My noble masters, hear me speak. 

First Lord. Tullus!— 

Sec. Lord. Thou hast done a deed whereat valour will weep. 

Third Lord. Tread not upon him. — Masters all, be quiet. — 
Put up your swords. 

Auf. My lords, when you shall know (as in this rage, 
Provok'd by him, you cannot) the great danger 
Which this man's life did owe you, you '11 rejoice 
That he is thus cut off. Please it your honours 

9* 



255 



116 THE TRAGEDY OF CORIOLANUS. 

To call me to your senate, I '11 deliver 
Myself your loyal servant, or endure 
Your heaviest censure. 

First Lord. Bear from hence his body, 

And mourn you for him : — let him be regarded 
As the most noble corse that ever herald 
Did follow to his urn. 

Sec. Lord. His own impatience 

Takes from Aufidius a great part of blame. 
Let 's make the best of it. 

Auf. My rage is gone. 

And I am struck with sorrow. — Take him up : — 
Help, three o' the chiefest soldiers; I '11 be one. — 
Beat thou the drum, that it speak mournfully; 
Trail your steel pikes. — Though in this city he 
Hath widow'd and unchilded many a one, 
Which to this hour bewail the injury. 
Ye the shall have a noble memory. — 

Assist. [Exeunt, bearing the body of Coriolanus. 

A dead march sounded. 



NOTES. 



NOTES. 



2'. the leanness that afflicts us, the object of our misery ... 
If we put ivhich is before the object, no misunderstanding is possible. 

3 '. partly proud. 
Should we not rather read portly proud? see Spenser's Amoretti, or Sonn. 5 : 
"Rudely thou wrongest my deare hearts desire, 
In finding fault with her too portly pride:" 
Delius proposes to read: "partly to please ... and partly to be proud". 

5 I To stale 't. 
The fol. gives it to scale 't. Various commentators adhere to the old reading, 
understanding it in the sense of "to disperse", Knight even in the sense of "to 
yeigh". To use the word here in the sense of "to weigh" would seem ex- 
ceedingly forced, and no one of the unlearned hearers of Menenius would 
understand it. — As for "disperse", the old patrician may mean to do it a little 
more, since he supposes the tale to have been heard already by his audience, 
but it is more natural to understand to stale the already heard story, to make 
it as flat, as every twice told story is. — See Dyce^s remarks «&c., p. 158, and 
Walker's criticisms, vol. ii, p. 274. 

10 ^. Thou rascal, that art worst in blood to run . . 
A sporting dog of worst breed. 

14 '. Shouting their emulation. 
The sense of the last word is not very clear in this place (if it does not mean : 
"They shout at the success of their emulation") ; perhaps we ought to read in- 
stead of their emulation 

the innovation. Then it means: "They shout at the innovation, with 
which they have succeeded." 

18 *. The present wars devour him ! He is grown 

Too proud to be so valiant. 
May he perish in the present wars ! The consciousness of his being so valiant, 
has made him too proud. 

19 ^. Demerits . . 

Ought we not perhaps to read due merits? 

19 * and in what fashion 

More than his singularity 

The modern editors put a comma after "fashion", which is not to be found in 



120 NOTES. 

the first fol., and are at a loss to understand "his singularity". I propose to 
change his to this, and to omit the newly added comma; then there is a very 
clear sense : the Tribunes had been just speaking about the singular fashion of 
arrangement between Cominius and Marcius ; they now go to the Capitol, to 
see, "in what fashion more" — in what further fashion, beside the just mentioned 
singularity — "he goes upon this present action". 

26 ^ when it spit forth blood 

At Grecian sword contemning. 
The fol. has : At Grecian /word. Contenning, tell Valeria . . All editors read : 
At Grecian /word's contending. Collier's Corr. and Co^foer himself in his Sh: ed: 
proposed swords contemning, declaring it as "Hectors forehead contemning at 
the Grecian sword", and Dyce is right in asking whether "contemning at" is 
legitimate phraseology. But Volumnia does not speak about "contemning at"; 
she says: spit at, and the construction of the phrase must be: "when contemning 
(full of contempt) it spit forth blood at Grecian sword", 

27". What are you sewing here'? A fine spot, in good /aith. 
The first fol. has: What are you /owing heere't A fine /potte in good /aith. 
Spot and sport were the different readings of the editors, but, in my opinion, 
neither of them is the right one. It seems to me highly probable that the first 
fol. has a misprint in the word /potte, for I am disposed , to regard this letter 
as an erroneous repetition of the compositor, who looked at the / in the word 
fine (/ and / being easily confounded ) ; the words to be composed , were not, 
as I conjecture, a fine /potte in good /aith, 

but a fine patte rn, good /aith. 

34 '. Yoti shames o/ Rome you ! 

The reading oi Malone; the fol. has: You Shames o/ Rome: you Heard o/ Byles 
and Plagues . . . 

45 ^ 0, me alone! 
This is intelligible, though not very clear; probably the meaning is: "You lift 
me up, and even me alone, just as you do with your swords". But I should 
prefer to change alone into alo/t. 

45 '. Though thanks to all, must I select . . . 
Hanmer has omitted the words /rom all after select, which are found in the 
first fol., and I agree with him. 

45 '. And /our shall quickly draw out my command . . 
Numerous notes and different emendations by the editors of each century show, 
that the reading of the first fol. did not satisfy the claims on intelligibility, 
and generally it was the word /our, that puzzled the critics. And indeed, when 
Steevens says: "he will submit the election to four indifferent persons," it is 
a poor and rather indifferent sense, and not at all Shakespeare-like. But there 
is one word more, which must be regarded otherwise than it has been hitherto, 
if we want to understand it : the word command. It is impossible for Corio- 
lanus, to '■'■command, which men are best inclin'd", for inclination does not de- 
pend upon command ; it acts without external influence. But if we understand 
command as subject, and change and /our into be/ore, the sense of the phrase 



NOTES. 121 

seems very clear: "Before you march, my command shall quickly draw out 
those men, which are best inclined." 

48. That with the fusty plebeians . . . 
Plebeians is here to be pronounced plebians. See the first fol. Plebeans. (Syd- 
ney Walkei- and Dyce.) 

51. Let him be made a coverture for the wars! 
It would be more intelligible , if we could read this ( silk ) instead of him , as 
Tyr%ohitt proposed. 

53 ^. To undercrest your good addition . . . 
If undercrest is the word of the poet, this must be the sense: In his modesty, 
Marcius is not of opinion, to have already merited the good addition, the 
name of honour, Coriolanus; he promises to merit it by other deeds; for him 
it is nothing more but a hollow name, until he has "undercrested" it, adorned 
it by new heroical actions, and "to the fairness of his power". 

57 '''. Embarquements. 
A quite obsolete, and, as I suppose, not the poet's word', as expressing 
"impeachments", "impediments". 

60 '. the napes of your necks . . 
"Nape of the neck" is an expression, which does not want any explanation, 
so that I wonder, that the critics have written so much about it; it means the 
hinder part of the neck , and Menenius wishes , that the eyes of the tribunes 
could be directed to the nape of the neck , and see their own foolish brains. 

61 *. said to be something imperfect in favouring the first complaint ; 
The following remark may be allowed to find a place here, though I do not 
pretend to attach any very great importance to it; it is perhaps too "hasty 
and tinder-like upon too trivial motion " : 

If "first complaint" does not stand in connexion with the mysterious charms 
of the worship of Venus, I would suggest the following explanation : 

Menenius gives his own portrait as that of an Epicurean. He confesses to 
liking drinking and revelling, so that I wonder, he does not say anything about 
eating. But perhaps he does: he does not at all favour "the first complaint", 
for else he would favour the complaint of the plebeians , and since he already 
in the first words has confessed to like drinking, the "thirst" has no reason to 
complain. That Menenius is known to be a gourmand, appears from the 
remark of Brutus (64): "you are well understood to be a perfecter giber for 
the table...", and if we therefore take the / m favouring as a misprint for a 
long /, and remember, that Menenius says in the same play (215) : 

" but when we have stuft"'d 

These pipes and these conveyances of our blood 
With wine and feeding, we have suppler souls 

Than in our priest-like fasts " 

we are induced , to search in the first complaint for a misprint for something 
belonging to the culinary art; and the words "priest-like fasts" remind us of 
the time, when fasting was ordered — the lenten time. ("Time of lent" in- 
stead of "lenten time", see f. i. Notes and Queries, 3rd S., i, p. 88: "....this 

10 



122 NOTES. 

p'sent tyme of Lent..."") Is it not possible, th&i first complaint is a misprint 
for feast of lent, and that instead of 

in favouring the first complaint 
we ought to read in favouring the feast of lent. 
(1 will not too strongly advocate a change in the w^ovd feast, and reading /sA 
for it. — See Pericles, act ii, scene i: "we '11 have flesh for holidays, fish for 
fastingdays . . . ") At all events the sense , given by the emendation , is quite 
in keeping with the whole portrait: Menenius likes neither wine allayed with 
Tyber, nor lenten food, nor retiring to bed early — in short, he confesses to 
being a jolly fellow. 

63 ^. pleading. 
The fol. has bleeding, but I have no doubt, that Collier''^ Corr, is right, in 
emending this word to pleading; the pleading controversy is entangled .... 

66 '. the most sovereign prescription in Galen is but empiricutic . . . 
The fol. hsiS Emperickqutique. If that is not intended to be a carricatured form for 
empirical, Colliefs Corr. and Grant White may be right in reading: empiric physic. 

72 ^ change of honours. 
Variety of honours. — Warburton. 

72 ^ / have lived 

To see inherited my very wishes, 
I have obtained the realization of my wishes. 

76 '. that to 's power . . 
as far as his power goes, to the utmost of it. — Steevens. 

76 '. touch the people. 
The fol. has teach. Knight, Dyce, Collier's Corr., Grant White, and Walker 
accept the reading touch. If the Tribunes must "suggest to the people ...", 
they cannot hope, that "teaching" would do for the purpose; only "touching" 
will teach the people, whose mental power is not very great. 

88 ^ and is content 

To spend the time to end it. 
To end — what? The time — of his life. He is content to have no other occu- 
pation but to sacrifice himself for his country. 

99. foolish. 
M. Mason and Grant White have the merit of having introduced this reading, 
instead of the misprint of the first fol. Wooluish. Coriolanus calls foolish "the 
napless gown of humility". 

108*. And Censorinus , nam'd so by the peojole. 
This line is wanting in the first fol., and Pope supplied it; he wrote: "And 
Censorinus, darling of the people"; Dyce calls the line "far from a happy 
one", but says , "it seems to have now acquired a sort of prescriptive right to 
a place in the text". I do not think so; I prefer the reading, which I propose. 
In North's Plutarch we read : " Cenforinus alfo came of that familie, that was 
fo furnamed, becaufe the people had chofen him Cenfor twife." The lines 
And Censorinus, nam'd so by the people, 
And nobly named so, twice being censor, 



NOTES. 123 

are much nearer to the text and sense in Plutarch, than "the darling of the 
people". Delius proposed: "And Censorinus. that was so surnam'd"; in the 
form he comes yet nearer to Plutarch; but I think the same verb must stand 
in the first line as in the next. 

115^. Each icay, to better yours. 
Your business is, to subdue the people, and I will better it, I will hinder you 
from doing so. 

119. Given Hydra here.. 
The fol. has heere, and most of the editors read here. Collier's Corr. has leave, 
and Dyce says: "rightly perhaps, for in this passage there is a harshness in 
understanding Given as equivalent to j^ermitted.'''' In II. Part of K. Henry VI., 

act iv, sc. 4, we find: 

"Sir Humphrey Stafford and his brother's death 
Hath given them heart and courage to proceed." 
I propose therefore the reading: Given Hydra heart .. 

119. awake your dangerous lenity. 
In All 's well that ends well, act v, sc. 3, the words : 

"Oft our displeasures, to ourselves unjust, 
Destroy our friends, and after weep their dust" 
are to be understood as follows: " 7n our displeasures we often destroy our 
friends, and after we weep their dust." In the same manner the words awake 
your dangerous lenity are to be understood: '■'■you mu^t awake out of your dan- 
gerous lenity." — Perhaps the best reading would be away instead oi awake, 
though with after avmy is wanting. 

119. You are fleheians. 
The last word is to be pronounced as if consisting of two syllables. 

121. Call our cares, fears; which will in time .. 
This line is complete in the metre, if cares is read as consisting of two syllables. 

122 ^. To jump a body. 
I retain the word jump , because I like it better than Pope's emendation vamp 
(adopted by Dyce) , and Singer's imp. Neither "vamp" nor "imp" express, 
what Coriolanus means; he will "treat" the body with a dangerous physic, and 
hopes to "cure", not to "vamp" it, and since the treatment is dangerous, he 
jumps, i. e. he risks the body. 

122 ^ Your dishonour 

Mangles true judgment 

Coriolanus finds the dishonour of the Patricians in "this double worship, where 
one part does disdain with cause, the other insult without all reason". 

126 '°. And so are like to do. 
Menenius speaks that to himself. Since there is the question, who will pre- 
vail, Coriolanus or the Tribunes, Menenius fears the latter: "I fear, you will 
remain in your place, and Coriolanus will lose his new-won consulship." 

141 ^. I have a heart as little apt as yours. 
But yet a brain .... 
Singer proposes "soft" for "apt", and Collier's Corr. substitutes a new line; 
I prefer another reading, and propose therefore: "I have a heart as lightly 

10" 



124 NOTES. 

rapt as yours." Many instances of this use of the word lightly are to be 
found in Johnson, Richardson "(R. of Brnnne, Chaucer, Gower, Holland: 
Plinie)", and Coleridge's Glossarial Index "(R. of Gloucester) " , and even in 
this play we find it (165, the last line but 5) ; as to ra2)t, see Johnson, Richard- 
son '•'■{rajit: borne, carried away, transported; and hence [met.] rapt, ra2)ture, 
transport, trance, ecstasy, violent motion or emotion, of the mind, senses, 
passions)", and Coriolanus 185, last line but 2, where the heart is rapt in joy; 
but it might as easily be rapt in anger. 

145 ^ That will not hold the handling: say to them ... 
Before say I have omitted the or of the fol. , and believe I have thus restored 
this much discussed passage to clear sense: "Go to them, with this bonnet in 
thy hand, and — having stretch'd it, thy knee bussing the stones, waving thy 
head — say to them ..." 

149 ' let 

Thy mother rather feel thy pride, than fear 
Thy dangerous stoutness . . . 
I will rather silently feel thy pride, than by new entreaties do as if I feared .... 

153 \ to have his worth of contradiction . . . 
Rowe made a very clever emendation, in changing worth to word. I should like 
to adopt his reading. 

156 '. Think upon is here to be read as think 'pon. 

164 '. A noble cunning. 
Perhaps calling ? 

165. Like to a lonely dragon. 
He does not compare himself with a lonely dragon (for just now there is no 
reason to suppose, that he will be feared), but the banishment; he says: 

"though I go alone, as if I were going to " It is to be remembered that 

banishment was the hardest destiny for a Roman. A banished Roman was 
lost for ever, but Coriolanus assures his mother, that he will — even banished 
— perform deeds, that will "exceed the common" : "There is a world elsewhere". 

169 '^ Are you mankind'^ 
There is a malicious and low sense in these words: Volumnia says to Brutus: 
"will you be gone?", Virgilia to Sicinius: "you shall stay too", and con- 
tinues: "I would, I had the power to say so to my husband." The tribune 
imderstands quite well the stinging pain of these words, but he prefers to com- 
ment them in a spiteful sense, as expressing the lady's kindness to me7i, since 
she wants to retain him and Brutus, and to have her husband too. And 
therefore he asks: "Are you mankindV Volumnia has too much of feminine 
purity, to understand the coarse quibble, and answers in the clear sense of the 
word, calling him and his father a fox. 

173 ^. your favour is well approved by your tongue. 
Approved, Steevens' emendation, instead of appeared of the first fol., is sup- 
ported by Collier's Corr., JValker, and Grant White. 

191 ^. directitude. 
Singer says: "There can be no doubt, that the servant is intended to blunder 



NOTES. 125 

in the use of directitude.'''' The servant will say, that Coriolanus is now in a 

dejected position, "but when his crest is up again " The servant himself 

does not understand the word he uses, for else he would show his erudition 
by answering the question "Directitude, what 's that?" At all events he means 
" dejectitude", the emendation of Collier's Corr. 

192 \ mulled. 
It is the only instance in Shakespeare, where this word is used, and I agree 
therefore with Walker's emendation: mute. 

202 ^. Than boys pursuing summer butterflies , 
Or butchers killing flies. 
In the fol. flies in the first instance is written as here, but in the second line 
Flyes. I would prefer another word after "killing", since the comparison is 
very forced, and I suppose the repetition to be an error of the compositor. 
Pigs f. i. (though there are many other words, which may be chosen as well) 
would be better than Flyes. 

207 ^ 'would , half my wealth 

Would buy this for a lie! 
The repetition of would is somewhat heavy; Could in the second line would 
perhaps be a better reading. 

209 ^ yet he has left undone. 
Aufidius hints at the conquest and demolition of Rome and the massacre of 
the inhabitants, and his words signify: "He has not yet done it, and I doubt, 
whether he will do it." Afterwards he says: "When, Caius , Rome is thine, 
thou art poor'st of all; then shortly art thou mine." 

210. Hath not a tomb so evident as a chair ... 
For "chair" dinger reads "hair", Collier'sCovY. and Grant White "cheer"; the best 
remark yet made is that of Dyce: he calls the line "a dark passage" ; let us try, to 
make it clear: In order to penetrate the poet's meaning and intention, we must 
not examine a phrase, taken out of the connexion with the scene, but we must 
feel with the acting persons, and out of this feeling we must know, how they 
think and how they speak. And therefore let us now become Aufidius for a 
moment, and see, whether it might be possible for us, to think on the "chair", 
the sella curulis in Rome, and reflect on things, which do not stand in any re- 
lation to the passionate feelings of envy and revenge, which dominate us. — 
Aufidius feels quite well, that he has lost his position, as the first general of 
the Volsces, and that his glory is darkened by Coriolanus; he hates him and 
has the clear intention, to ruin him; so clear, that he knows already his way 
and means to do it. Though Coriolanus is hated by him and by some other 
Volscian Generals, he is not hated by the people, and to make him so, must 
be the first step. Aufidius knows, that, though small merits are willingly ac- 
knowledged, people do not like to be reminded of great and important merits, 
which lay them under the obligation of gratitude, and that he, who is idolized, is 
nearest to be hated as soon as he himself mentions his deeds. 

"he has a merit [great enough] to choke it in the utterance," 
and therefore he provokes Coriolanus in act v, sc. 5 (251-253), and hopes 



126 NOTES. 

that in his fury he will boast of what he has done for the Volscian people, 
and that the ''fire" of his merits shall be driven out by the "fire" of the 
people's pride. But that does not lie in the nature of Coriolanus, and by 
going just the contrary way, and hurting the self-love and vanity of the Volsces 
in reminding them of the origin of his name of Coriolaims , he facilitates for 
Aufidius the attainment of his purpose. But that is a fact, though it is of a 
stirring dramatic effect, (Coriolanus perishing in Antium by the same contempt 
of the people as in Rome) which has nothing to do with the former combina- 
tions of Aufidius. He intends to provoke Coriolanus to become his own pane- 
gyrist, and so he says: 

"Power, unto itself most commendable, 
Has not a tomb so evident as a claim 
To extol what it has done." 
i. e. "If he, who has merits, claims the extolment of his deeds, his power is 
lost." And therefore I propose, not to read chair 
' but claim. 

210. Rights by rights falter . . . 
Falter, the ingenious emendation of Dyce. The fol. hns fouler. 

212 ^ that have racked for Rome ... 
Rack'd in the fol. wrack'd. Perhaps we should read worked; for that is the 
sense: The tribunes have won a noble memory (ironically) by caring for the 
public interest (as they ought to do as tribunes), and making coals cheap, just 
so as Publius and Quintus (108^) had the merit, to have brought the best water 
by conduits to Rome. 

212 ^ It teas a bare j^etition of a state .. 
Monk Mason proposed "base" instead of "bare"; but bare may mean here: 
"without reasonable expectation of success". 

216^ , ivhat he looidd do, 

He sent in writing after me; ivhat he would not. 
Bound with an oath to yield to his conditions: 
In his writing he said, what he would do, and what not; and that an oath, 
given to the Volscians, bound him in this way. — The first guard says (220'): 
"you are condemned, our general has sworn you out of reprieve and pardon", 
and Coriolanus himself says (222^): "my remission lies in Volscian breasts", 
and (230*): "the thing I have forsworn to grant.." — Just before going to 
press, Professor Solly suggested to me as a new reading hold for yield. 

216 3. (Who, as I hear) ... 
I have added the parenthesis, and the sense is: "Unless his noble mother and 
his wife mean — as I hear they intend — to solicit " 

218 ^ verified ... with all the size that verity would ... suffer. 
This seems almost to be nonsense. Dyce calls "verified" a most suspicious 
reading. Hanmer and Collier's Corr. have "magnified"; what I propose is not 
much better than "magnified", except perhaps that the expression is somewhat 
more distinct, and that the word contains one letter more corresponding with 



NOTES. 127 

the letters in verified; I propose 

to read : glorified. 

221, line 14, o^ir ... 
Your, the reading of the first fol., is a misprint for our. Menenius cannot call 
the gates "your", since Coriolanus afterwards (222, line 10) says "your". — 
Perhaps we ought to read yond. 

222 ^. Ingrate forgetfulness shall poison . . . 
"Ingrate forgetfulness" is here subject: rather than pity shall note the fact, 
how familiar they have been, the ingrate forgetfulness of the Roman people shall 
poison this thought. 

232. And to poor xce thine enmity 's most caiyital: 
i. e. "to us poor ..." 

235 Speak to me, son! 

Thou hast affected the fine strains of honour, 
To imitate the graces of the gods ; 
To tear ivith thunder the wide cheeks o' the air. 
And yet to charge thy sidphur with a holt 
That should but rive an oak. 
Volumnia means: "Speak to me! confess that thou hast injured thine honour, 
(in being the enemy of thy native country) only for the purpose, to be as 
merciful as the gods." 

236. and this child . . . 
This, the emendation of Walker. The fol. has his. 

236, last line. And then I 'II speak a little. 
The last word she will speak before her death, shall be a curse on her son! 

240 ^ He sits in his state, as a thing made for Alexander. 
In my opinion, these are not Shakespeare's words. Perhaps he has written: 

as a king, great as ..., or something similar; but the words, which stand 

in the text, seem to me almost nonsense, because I cannot agree with Malone, 
who understands "state" as "chair of state", and consequently must refer "thing" 
to "state", so that in this case the sense would be: "He sits in his state, as 
in a thing ..." 

244'. Antium. 
Query: Is it not rather Corioli? Aufidius' words (251*): "Dost thou think, 
I '11 grace thee with that robbery, thy stol'n name Coriolanus in Corioli?" may 

be read in two different ways: "... I '11 grace thee with thy in Corioli stol'n 

name ...", and then Antium may be right; but if we read: "Dost thou think, 
I '11 grace thee in Corioli . . . ", then Antium must give way for Corioli, though 
Plutarch calls Antium the native town of Aufidius, and (248^) the Conspirator 
says: "your native town . ." 

251 ^ ^^Auf. No more." 
I am of Tyrwhitfs and Walker's opinion, who give this speech to the First 
Lord. 



Berliu, printed by Unger Brothers, Priuters to the King. 



M^* WILLIAM 

SHAKESPEARES 

Tragedy of Coriolanus. 

Publiflied according to the True Originall CopieSo 




LONDON 
Printed by Ifaac laggard, and Ed. Blount. 1 62 5« 



Pliololitliographie der Gebr. Burdiard^ Berlin. 




The Tragedy of CorioJanus: 



(lABus l^rimus. Scoena T^rmia. 




SnteraCowparty cfi^Mtinom Citizens, [withSt4MeSj 
Clubs, ivtd other weapons. 

T. (^ttiz.en. 
Efore wc proceed any further, heate nne fpcake. 
u4ll. Speakcfpcikc. 

\.Cit Youareallrefolu'd rather t©dyth;n 
to farnifh ? 
Rcfolu'd.rtfolu'd, 
I Xit. Firft you know, ^aius TAartiHS is chicle eiiens/ 
tothepcdple 

All, Wcknow'tjWeknow't. 

l.C't' Lee vs kill him,aniJ wee'I hauc Come at our own 
pri«. I»'ta Vcrdifl? 

t^ll.No more talking on't; Let it be done,av»ay,away 

2,Cit. Ouc word, good Citizens, 

i.Cit. \\c are accountcdpoore Citizens, the Patri- 
riantgood: what Authority furfetsonc, would rclceue 
vs. Ifthey would yeeldevs but the fupcrfluitic while it 
u ere wholfotnc, wccmightgucfle they rclccued vi hu- 
tDanely. But they thinkcweare toodecrc, thclcanncfTc 
that affli(fls vs, the obieiSl of our milcry, is as an inuento- 
rv to particularize their abundance, our fuffcranceis a 
gainc lo them. Letvs reucngetliis wich our Pikes, ere 
we become Rakes. For the Gods know, I fpcake chisin 
hunger for Bread, not in thirft for Reuenge, 

i.Ctf. Would you procccdc efpccially againft Caittr 
(JHttrtMs. 

All. Againft him firll , He's a very dog to the Com. 
monahy. 

2.^<f . Confider you what Seruiccs he has done for bis 
Country^ 

l.Cit. Very w^ell, and could bee content to glue him 
j;ood report for' t, but that hee paves himfclfe withbcc- 
liig proud, 

All. Nay,b<it fpeak notmajicioufly. 

t,Cit. Ilay vntoyou, what he hath donepamounic, 
he did it to that end :»houghfoft confcicnc'd men can be 
ccMUent to fay it was for his Countrey.ihe did it to plcal€ 
his Mother,and to be partly proud, wnichhcis, cucuto 
ctiealtitudcof hisvertue. 

a. Of. What he cannot helpe in his Nature, you ac- 
count a Vice in him : You muft in no way fay he is co- 
uctous. 

i-Cit- Iflmuftnot, Incedcnotbcbarrcnof Accufa-- 
t;ons he hath faults (with furp!us)to tyre in repetition- 

Shewts tvithiii. 
What Oiowtt are thefe ? The other fide a'th City a tifcn: 
why ftay wc prating hccre.' To th'Capitoi 1, 

All. Come,coaic. 



1 Cit. Soft,who comes heerc ? 

Enter Me^enins A^rtphu, 
2 Cit. Worthy Menennts t^grippa', one that hath aU 
waycs loii'd the people. 

I Ctt. He's one honelt en(7tigh,wo!d al the xci\ v/er fo. 
Me». Whsi work's my Comurimen in hand? 
Where go you with Bats and Clubs? The matter 
Spcakel pray you. 

tCrh Ourbulitiesisnotwnknownetoth'Senat, they 
hauc had inkling this fortnight what we intend to do , w 
now wcc'l Qiew cm in deeds : they fiy poorc Sutcrs haue 
firong breaths, they (Vial know we haue fhx>ng amis too. 

T^eueu. Why Maftcrsjmy good Friends, nunc honefi 
NcighbourSjWill you vndo your Icluesf' 

aCif. WecannotSir,wcarevndoncalready. 

Men. I tell you Friends, moft charitable caic 
Haue the Patricians of you for your wants. 
Your fuffering in this dearth, you may as well 
Strike at the Hcaucn with vour flauct, as lift them 
Againft the Roman S"ta£e,whofc courfe will on 
The way it takes: cracking ten thoufandCurbca 
Ofmore ftrong linkc aflundcr, then can cucr 
Appeateinyourimpaduncnt. For the Dearth, 
The Gods, not the Patricians make it, and 
Your knees tothcm ^not armes) rouft hclpt. Ahckt% 
You arctranfpoued by Calamif/ 
7 hcther, where more attentis you,and you flandcf 
TheHclmes o'th State; who care for you like Fathcrfp 
When you curfe thcm.as Enemies. 

2 Cit. Care for vs? True indeed, they ncrecar'd forvs 
yet. Suffer v$ to fanjiOi,and their Store-houfes cramm'd 
witii Gi-amc : Make Edi<ft$ for Vfurie , to fupport Vfu- 
j-ers; repealedailyany whoifome Ad eftablifhed againft 
th-rich, and prouidemoii piercing Statutes daily, to 
chainc vp and reftraineihe poorc. IftheWarres caters 
not vppe, they will? and there's alhhelouc ihcybcarc 
vs. 

Alemn, Either you muft 
• Confcflc your iehtcs wondrous MalicioU'/, 
Orbeaccus'dofFolly. I fhall .cllyou 
/^ pretty Tale, irmay be you haue heard it. 
But fiiice it ferues my purpofe, 1 will venture 
To iLale't a little more. 

2 Citizen. Well, 
He heare it Sir ; yet yoo mnft not thinke 
To fobbe cfFour difgrace with a talc : 
But and't plcafc you deliuer. 

Men.l'hcfc was a time, when all the bodies members 
Rebelld againft the Belly; rhus accus'd it : 
ThatonelyhkeaGulfcIt didremaioe 

a 3 I'lh 



^'th niidd'ft 1 th'boJy, i.-llc and vnafttuc, 

StiU cubbording the Viand, neucr bearing 

Like labour wiih the reft, wliere ch'ochcr Inftrumcat* 

Did fee, and heare,-dcuiic, inftrutt.walkCjfedc, 

Ahd mutually participate, did miniRcr 

Vnto the appetite; and affciSlion comcooii 

Of the whole body, the Bdly anlwcr 'd. 

z.Cir. Well fir.what anTwcr made the Belly. 

Mey>. Sir, 1 (liall teli yoit with a kinde of Smile, 
Which nc'rc came from the Lungs, but eucn thus : 
For looke vou I may make the belly Sir.ilc , 
A» well as fpcakc, it taintingly rcplyed 
To'th dilcontcnted Members, the inutinouspatts 
That enuicd his reccite : eucnfo moft fitly, 
As you maligne our Senators, for that 
They arc not fuch as you. 

z.Cit. Your Bellies anfwcr: What 
The Kingly crown'd head, the vigilant eye, 
TheCouiiiailor Hearr, the Arme our SooLiier 
Our Steed the Leggc, the Tongue our Trumpeter, 
With other Munimcots and petty helpcs, 
In this our Fabiicke, if chat ihey,»— — — 

<Jiien. What then? ForcnJC,this Fellow fpcakes. 
What then? What then ? 

2 Cit. Should by the Cortnorant belly be rcftrain'd, 
Wh^is the (inkt; a tli'body. 

A^nn, We]l,whatthcn? 

C.C«*. The former AgcrHj,if they did complainc. 
What could the Belly anfwcs? 

Milt. I wii! tcllyon, 
If you'i befiow a fmaJI (of what you haue little) 
Paticnccawhiic; you'ft hcarc the 3eUJes anfvvcr. 

z.Cit. Y'are long about it. 

(JHitn, Note me thi» good Friend ; 
Yout iTiotl: grauc Belly was delibsrate, 
Not raCh like his Ac cufcrs.and thus arslwered. 
True \i it my Incorporate Fflends^qiyithhe) 
That I recciue the general! Food atnrii 
Which you do iiue *pon : and fit it is, 
Becaufel3n:5ihc Store-houre,and the^op 
Of the wnole.Body. But,ifyoa do remember, 
Mend it through the R-.oers of your blood 
Euen to the Court, the Heart, to thfcate o th'Brajne, 
Ar.dthrough the Ci anket ip.d Offices of man, 
The rtrongeft Ncrues, and fmail inferiour Vcines 
From me rccejiie that natural! competencie 
Whetcbvf they liuc. And f,hougl. that all at once 
(You my ^ood FricndSjihis fayci the Beily) markc me. 

l.Cit, i fir well-,\vcll. 

A£ea. Though all at once, cannot 
See what I do d«hacr out to each. 
Yet I can make my A w<ljit vp> thu all 
From me do bacice recciue the Flowre ofall,' 
And leaue me but the Bran. Whatfay you too't ? 

2 Cit. It Wis an ailfvvcr,how apply you this? 

THeu. The Senators of Rome, are this good Belly, 
And you the mutinous Mcrobers 7 For examiw 
Their Counfail€s,^ndfheiF C»rcs;difgeft tbinj»srightlyk 
Touching the Wcalea'th Coronson, youlhalliinde 
No pubhque benefit which you receiue 
But it proceeds, oc coidc* from them to you. 
And no way from yoiarfciucs. What do you tbinke?. 
You, the great Toe of this A&mbJy i 

zSih I.rtie great Toe ^Wjiy the gtaat Toe ? 

Men. For tha»:beingoneo'ihloweft,bafcft,pooteft 
Of this mort wife R«beikoo,^bQu gocft forrooP 



^he T'ragedie of QorioUnus, 



Thou Rafcall, that art worfi io blood to run, 

Lcad'flfirfltowin loroe vantage. 

r.ut raajce you ready your rtiffe bats and ciubs, ! 

Rome,aud bcrlUts^tc at thepoint^of battyU, 

The one fide mu6 bauc baile, ' 

£»rfr Caitu MArtim. 
Hayle, Noble (JMhthiu . 

ySar.JhavJis. What's the roattcryou diflentiousfogHCS 
That rubbing the poorc Itch of your Opinion, 
Make your fclues Scabs. 

z.Ctt, We haue euer yoor good wo, J. 

M4r.Hc that will giuc good words to ihee, wil flatter 
Beneath abhorring, W hat would you haue.you Currcs 
That like nor Peace.nor Warrc ? The one affrights you, ' 
The other makes you proud. He thati.ufls toyou^ 
Where heihouldfindcyou Lyons.findes you Hares: 
WhereFoxcs, Gccfe you arc : No furetjno. 
Then is the coale of fire vpon the fee, 
OrHailftoncinthcSun. Vour Vntueis, 
To make hiro worthy.whofe offence fubdues him. 
And curfe that luflite did it. Who deferues Greaines, 
Dcferues your Hate : and youi Affc^ions are 
A fickmans Appetite ; who defires moft that 
Which would cncrcafe his eudl. He that depends 
Vponyourfauours, fwrron»cj withfinnes ot Leadc, 
And hcwes dnwne Oakcs.with i uflics.Hang ye:truiiye ? 
With euery Minute you dorhangc a Minde, 
And call him Noble, that was now your Hate : 
Him Tilde, that was yout Garland, What's the matter, 
That in thcfefeucrall place* of the Ci tie, 
You cry againfi the Noble Senate, who 
(Vnder the Gods) keepcyou in awe, which elfe 
Would fcedc on one another? What's their feeking ? 

Men. For Corne at their owne rates.wherof they fay 
j ThcCitieiswenflor'd. 

i-Mar. Hang 'cm : They fay ? 
Tbey'l fit by th'fire, and prefume to know 
What'rdonci'th Capitoll • Who's Hke to rife, 
Whothriues,& whodecjirci: Side f^aioDSj&giue out 
Conicfturall Marriages, making parties ftf ong. 
And feebiingfuch as fi and not in their liking. 
Below their coblcdSbooes.Theyfayther's grain erioogh? 
Would the Nobility lay afidetheirrurh, 
And let Die vfe my Sword, I'dc maTte z Quarrie 
With thoufandsof thefc quancr'd flaues,a$high 
As I could pickc my Lance. 

Mnett. Nay thefe are almoft thoroughly pctfwaded: 
For though abundantly theylacke liifcretion 
Yet are they pafiing CowardJy, But J befcech yoil. 
What fayes the other Troope ? 

Mar. They are diflblu'd^ Hang em} 
They faid they were an hungry, figh'd forth Prouerbei 
That Hunger-broke ftone wajs: that dogges wuft eate 
That meate was made for months. That the gads fent not 
ComcfortheRichmcnonely : With thefe Ihreds 
They vented their Complainings, which being anfwef*d 
Andapeticionnranted thefli,a ftrangeone. 
To brcaketht hpart of gcncrofity. 
And make bold power looke pale, they threw their caps 
A J they would bang them on tfae homes a'th Moooe, 
Shooting their Emulation. 

Menen. What is graunted them? 

Mar. Fiue Tribunes to defend their vulgar wifdoini 
Of their ownc choicr. One's ^uniut'Brfttm^ 
SieiMtHsVcluws^mdlhiovtnoi. Sdcadi, 



The Tragedie of (^oridams. 



TI>eraW>i< fhould h«<Je 6tft vnroo ft theCify 
Etc (o prcttayl'(ivi'nh mc ; ir will lotlffte 
Win vpor power,^n<J throwforch gpcaicr Theamts 
For Inftirrcil^ions jT'j^ng. 

^4r. Go get you home you Fragments. 

£«/^ a Me\fengrr mfitly. 
Meff- Where's Cmw Martttu > 
Zlar. Hccve: what'i the rftatter ? 
7t4pf. Theiicwe* i* lir.ihc Volcics are in Armcs. 
Afar. J'»«ngl3<lon't, chen wcfhall hamcancf :o vent 
Ou' mufiie fupcrfiuicy. Sec our beft Elders. 

EnttnSkiniMS Vcltittu , Annim Bruttu ConSinifi*-,Tttia 
Lartim^ with other Setiatcurs. 

i.Stn. tMirtdts 'tis truc,that you haue lately told vs, 
Tnc Voices are in Armcs. 

Mar. They haiie a Leader, 
T«/?*» Aufftdtiu that will'f ut you too't: 
I finne in enuying his Nobility : 
And were I any thing but wbat I am, 
I would wtlli me oncly he, 

C»f». You haue fought together ? 

TUttr, Were halfe to halfc the world by sh'eares, & he 
vpon my partie, I'dc ceuolt to make 
Onely my warrcswith hitn. He is a Lion 
That I am proud to hunt. 

J.Sen. Tiicn worthy 7W4r//«i<, 
Attend vpon Com/nias tothcfe Warrcs. 

Com. It ii youriormer promifc. 

Tiiar. Sir it J3, 
And I am coaftant : Tittts Lncm, tliou 
Shalt fccme-oncc more ftrikcat TuSms face. 
What art thou rtiffc? Stand'ft out? 

Tit. No Catus Tyiartius, 
lie Icanc wpon one Cri»tch,3nd fight with lothcr, 
Ereftay behindethis Bufincffe. 

Men, Oh irac-bred. 

Sent. Your Company to'ih'CapitoU, where I know 
Our greateftFrieods attend vs. 

Tit. Lead you on : Follow C«wi«w,wcniuft followe 
you, right worthy y©u Priority. 

Com. Noble Ai^ttut, 

Sen, Hence to your homcjjbe goue. 

"Mar. Nay let them follow, 
The Voices liaucmuchCoroe : take thefc Rats thither. 
To gnaw their Garners. Worihipfall Mutiners, 
Your valotuputs well forth : Pray follow. Exeunt. 

Citiz^ensfiealeatfay, THauet Sicin,(jr Brutus . 

Sicitt. Was euer roan Co proud as is this Afartttts ? 

'Brn. Hehasnocquall. 

5»r«w,Wfaen wewerjc chofen Tribunes for the(people. 

"Bru. Mark'd you his lip and eyes. 

Siciri. Nay.buc his taunts. 

'Brit. Being mou'd,he will not fpare to gird the Gods. 

Sicin. Bemocke thr roodcft Moonc; 

Bru. Tiicprefent-Wafrcs deuourcbim,heis grownc 
Too proud robe io valiant. 

Stein. Such a Nature, ticlded with good fucceffe, dif- 
dainesthefhadow which he treads on at r>ooDc,bnt I do 
wonder.hisinfolence^canbtookctobc comraanded vn- 
der Cominius} 

Bru. Fame, at the which he aymcs. 
In whom already he's well grac'd, cannot 
Better be held, nor mdrc atiain'd then by 



A place below the firtt ; tor wliat niilcatrics 
Shall be the GcncralLS fault, though he pcrfonnc 
To th'vtmoftofainan>anJ giddy ccnfurc 
Will then cry out oifJHartius : Oh, uhc 
Had borne the bofioeffc. 

Sicin, Bcfide»,ifching5gowell, 
Opinion that fo ftickrs on Martiut^ Hiall 
Ofhis demerits-rob Cominius. 

Uru, Come: halfc all CoTnwius Honors arc to Afitrtiits 
Thorn f^h Mar tiHt carn'd them not : and all his faults 
To Jl^grtius fhall be Honors, though indeed 
In ought he merit not. 

SiciK. Let's hence,and iieare 
How the difpatch is made,and in what fafhioc 
Mote then his fingularity, he goes 
Vpon this pTcfent Actico. 

"Brti. Let's along. F,xcmst 

Enter TttHxs Auffidius with Senators ofCoriclHs. 

z.SeH. So, your opinion is Aujftdsus, 
That they of Rome Ste enttcd in our Counfailcs, 
And know how we procccde, 

Auf. Is it not yours > 
What euer hauc bin thought one in this State 
That could be brought tc* bodily z€t, eve Rome 
Had circumuention : 'tis not fourc dciyes gone 
Since I heard thei'ce, thefc are the words, I thinke 
] hauc the Letter hecre : yc*,hccre it is; 
They haue preft a Power, but it is not knownc 
Whe ihcr for Eaft or Weft : the Dearth is jjrcat. 
The people Mutinous: And it isrumour'd, 
Comtnius ,Afartius your old Enemy- 
. (Who is of Rome worfe hsted then ofyou) 
And Titus Lartius, a rooft valiant Roman, 
Thcfe three leadeoD this Preparation 
Whether 'tis bent ; nioft iikcly,'cis for you : 
Confider ofit. 

i.S<:yi. Our Ajfnie's in the Field: 
We ncuer yet made doubt but Rome was ready 
To anfwev vs. 

j4iif. Nor did you thinke it Tolly, 
To keepe your great pretences vayi'd, tiil when 
They needs mull fhew themfciues, which in the batching 
It feem'd appear'd to Rome. By the difcoucry. 
We flialbe fhortncd in our ayme, vvhith was 
To take in manv Townes, ere (alciiofl)Rorne 
Sliould know, we were a-fow. 

i.Stn. Nob\e yjuftdiusj 
Take your Commifiion, hye you to your Bands, 
Let vs alone to gi'ard (^erioles 
If they fet downe bcfore's : for the remoue 
Bring vp your Army : but (\ chinke) you'I finde 
Th'hauc notprcpat'd for vs. 

Auf. O doubt not that, 
1 fpeake from Certnir.ties. Nay more, 
Some parcels of their Power are forth already, 
And -onely hithcrward. 1 leaue your Honors, 
If we, and Cams Martins chance tomeete, 
'Tis fworoe betwecne vs, wc Oiajl euer firike 
Till one can do no more, 

All. TheGo<Vaf'ift you. 

Auf. And keepe your Honors life. 

\.Sen. Farew^IL 

t.Stn. FareweU. 

All. FatcwcU. Sxeuntamnes 



Ef.'-erl^ 



The Tragedie of Qorkhnus, 



Biter VohtmmiA (UuL ViijilU, mother tud mfe f » Martini : 
Thejfet them dimnt ou tw» lowtftoolts mutfitft. 

Voltim.\ pray you daughter fing.or crprelTcyoai Wfe 
in a more comfortable fort : If my Soantwcrciny Huf- 
baiid, Ifliouldftcelicr rcioyccinthat abfcnce wherein 
he wonne Honor, then iiubc embraccmcntsof hisBed , 
whcrehc would (hew mortlouc. Wiienyet hcewas but 
tender-bodied, and the onely Sonne of my womb; when 
youth with comclinefle pluck'd aJl gaze his way; when 
for a day of Kings cntieaties.a Mother (hould not fcl him 
anhourc from her beholding; I confideringhow Honour 
would bec6me fuch a pcrfon, that it was no bettcrthcn 
Pi(fture-hkctohangbyth'wall, if rcnownc made-it not 
Uir'C, was plcas'd to let him fecke danger, v. here he was 
like tafinde fame : Toacrucll Warrcl lenthitn, from 
whence he return'd.his browes bound with Oakc. I icil 
thccDaughtcr, Ifprang not more in ioy at firfi hearing 
he was a Man-child, thennowinfirft feeing hebadpro- 
ued himfcUc a man. 

Vtrg^ But had he died in the Sufineffc Madame, how 
then ? 

Volum. Then his good report fhouldhaucbeene my 
Sonne, I therein would hauc found itfuc. Heare me pro- 
feffe (incercjy, had I a dozen fons ^acb in my loue alike, 
and none Icfle deere then thine, and my good Mmttus, I 
had rather had eleuen dye Nobly for their Countrcy,then 
one voloptuoufly furfetout of Action. 
Enter tkCentleTfomMn, 

Cent, Madam the Lady yxlertA is come to vifit you. 

Virg. BefiechyoU gt uemclcauc to retire my felfe. 

Volum. Indeed you (lull not: 
Me thinkss, I heare hither your Husbands Druroroe . 
See him placket^»jf«//«/ doWneby ih'hairc : 
(As children from a Beare) \Vtyolces fhunning him : 
Mc tbinkes 1 fee him flampc thus, and call thus, 
Come on you Cowards, you were got in fearc 
Though you were borne in Rome ; his bloody broVr 
With his-inail'd hand, then wiping, forth he goe» 
Liketo a HarueJi man, that task'd to mowe 
Orall,ot loofehii hyre. 

Virg. Hii bloody Brow ? Oh Iupiter,ivo Wood. 

Uolnm. Away you Foole ; it more becomes a man 
Theu gilthis Ttophe. The brefts oiHetubA 
Wheri flie did fncklc HeB:or, look'd not louelicr 
Then HeUars fathead, when it fpit forth blood 
At Gtc ci an fword . drntfuning , tell VAieri* 
We arc fit tabid her welcome, £*«* Cent. 

Vir. Heauens bbffe my Lord from fcH jif^im. 

Vol, Heel beat AnffiMus head bctow his knee. 
And trcadc vpo(n his uctke. 

Enter VaUriti with <tn Vjhery avU A GtntUwom^sf, 

VaI. My 1 adifs both good day to you. 

f^Dt, SwcciM.idam. 

ZJir, 1 am ^hd tofetyusr ladyTitp. 

Viti. How do y oil b<Hh ? You are manifetl h->afc-kce- 
pets- What are you fowmg hccrc ? A fine fpottein Eood 
fatth. How does your little Soruie? 

r»r. 1 thanke your Lady-fhip : Well good Madam. 

r^. He had rather fee the fword j, and heare s Drum, 
then lookc vpon his Schoolmaftcr. 

y-il. A my word the Father* Sonne : lie fweaie 'tis a 
very pretty boy. A ray troih.I look'd vponhlcn&WcnU 
day halfc an home together ; ha's fucb « confinn'd coun- 



tenance. I law him ran aftet a gjildod Buciciflj^, 0e wbcn 
ke caught it,he let ir gp itgaine, aad after ita^aioc, and 0* 
uer apd oucr be comes.and vp agaiac : catchtk again : ot 
whether his fall enrag'd hipi, or how 'tw«, hec did fo t^i 
his teeth, and teare iu Oh, I wacnot how he oMmtTMck t 
it. 

f^«l. One on's Fathers moodis. 

f^iU. Indeed la, tit a Noble chiUe. 

f^trg. ACrackcMadam. 

fal. Come, lay afide your Aitchery, Imuftbaueyou 
play the idle Hufwife with me this aftcrnoonc. 

ftrg. No (good Madam) 
1 will not otn of doores. 

P^mI. Not out ofdoorts ? 

Valum. She{hall,UbcilialL 

f^irg. Indeed no, by your patience; llenotouer the 
thicftiold, till my Lord returoe fitom the Warrcs. 

yal. Fyc, you coniincyeut ff4l"c moft voieafonab.'y 
Come.you muA go vifu the good Lady tnat Ilea in. 

F'trg. I will wifti her fpeedy fircngth, irtd^ilitehe- 
with my prayers : but I cannot go thither. 

yolum. Why 1 pray yoj. 

Vlftg, Tis not to fauc labour.nor that T want louc. 

Vni. Y ou would be another ?*«f/(ppf: yet they (ay, a'l 
the^«atne Oie fpun in Vliffet abfencc, did but fill Athicn 
full of Moihcs. Come,! would your Cambtick wcrcfcn- 
iibleasyour Bngcr. that you might leauepncking icfci 
pitie. Come you (hall go v^iih vs. 

Vir. No good MadaiD, pardon mc, indeed I will not 
foorth. 

ZJdl. In truth la go wich me, andUetcllyouciKeUcr.r 
newcs of your HusSand. 

yirg. Oh good.Madam,therecanbeQaoeyet, 

Vd. Vetiiy I do noticft with you: cliei.e c«mc aewci 
from him la(l night. 

Vir. Indeed Madam. 

Vol, In cameR h's true ; I heard a Senatoui fpcake k. 
Thus it is : the Volciei bauean Army forth, againft who 
CommiMstht Generall is gone, wi^h oat part of ourRo- 
marie power. Your Lord, and Titm Lgriins, are fee down 
before their Ciiie CarieUt, ihcy nothing doubt preuai- 
liug,3nd camake it brecfe Watres. Thii is uuc oamme 
Honor,3nd fo I pray go with vs. 

f^irg, Giue me excufe good Madame, I wiU obey you 
in euery thing heereafter. 

yo!. Let her alone Ladte,ai ftieJa now : 
She will but dHeafc our better martb. 

ialftriA. In troth I thiidtc (he would : 
Fare you well then. Cnme good fweet Ladie. 
Ptythee ^^i^MUimethy roletnneffeoutAdaoie, 
\ Andgoalongwithvs. 

Virgil. No 
At a word Madam : Indeed I mi^ uoc, 
I wiflj you much m'ir:h. 

V^. Well, then farewell. Exewst L/ubej 

Enttr tJHitrttMt, Tittu Ltrtiut, mtk Drmmt mti Ca^ 

ithrs, rviih Citptttwitt gnd Sottldiert, tt 

ifftre the Cir^ CcritUm > tathem 

»<Mefef)gtr. 

Adxrtius. YondercomesNcwcs : 
A Wager they baoemet. 
Lmr. My hotfetc youf$,iK>, 
//«r Tisdonca 
Liort, Agreed. 



ne Tragedie of (jm olams. 



cMar. Say.ha' J our Gcnetall met ihc Eii^my? 

cJMSr/"- They lye in vieW) but hauc not fpokc ai yet. 

Ltrt. So, cKc good Horfoi* mine. 

Jilart. 3 le boy him of you. 

£(«ri.No, lie nor feI,iiot giuc him: Lenrf you him i will 
?ot halfc 3 hundred ycsrr s: Summon the Townc. 

>l/<r. How farrc off iicihffe Armies? 

Jfef. Within this mile »nd halfc. 

Mar. Then ftall we beare their Larum, dc they Ours 
Now Mars, I prytbce nnake vs qtticke in workc. 
That we with Ctr.oaking Iwordi may march {com hence 
To helpe out fielded Ftiendi. Come, blow thy blaft. 

They Sotted a Parley : £nter twoSenatsrs with others on 
thefyaUes ofCerialiu. 
TuUm Auffidious M he within your W.illes ? 

i.Stnat. No,noraiTianthatfcjrcs you leffcthen he. 
That'* leffer then a littlq .- Drum afarre off. 

i^Icarke, out Drummes 

Are bringing forth our youth : Wce'I breake our Wallcs 
Rather then they (hall pound v$ vp our Gates, 
Which yet leetnefhut, wehauebut pin'd wuhRiiflies, 
Thcy'lc open of themfelucs. Harke you, farre off 

ty^urum fivrre off. 
There is Anfidiout, Lift what worke he makes 
Among'vl your cloucn Army. 

M^ktt. Oh they are at it. 

L*rt. Their noifc be oj^r infiruftjon. Ladders hoa. 

Enter the Artnj of the ZJolces. 
{Jiiar. They feare vsnot, but ifluc forth their Qiiie. 
Now put your Shields before your hcarts,and fight 
With hearts moieptoofe then Shields. 
Aduance braue 7»f«A 

They do difdaine vs much beyond our Thoughts , 
which makes nie fwcat with wrath. Come on my fellows 
He that retires, lie take him for a Voice, 
And he fhall fcele mine edge. 

Alaiumthi RimnHS axe he At backjo their Trenches 
Enter AJarttut Ci*^J>"g. 
Msr. All the contagion of the South.light on you. 
You Shames of Rome :you Heard of Byies and Plagues 
Plaifter you o're.tbat youmay be abhorr'd 
Farther then feene^and oneinfe(5tanother 
Againft the Windeainile : youfoulcsofGccfe, 
That beare the£hapes of mcn^howhaue you run 
From Slaues, that Apes would beate ; Fluto and Hell, 
All hurt behinde, backcs fed, and faces pale 
With flight and agucd feare, mend and charge home, 
Or by the fires of heauen, lie leaue the Foe, 
And make my Warrcs on you : Looke toot: Come on, 
I f youl ftand faft, wec'l beate ihem to tkeir Wiucs, 
As they vs to oUrTrenchesfoUowes. 

Awther Alitrttm,Md Martins foSoi^es them to 
gates, and us (hut in. 
So, now the gates «re ope; now prouc good Seconds, 
fis-for the foliowcrs Fortune, widens them. 
Not for the flyers : Marke me.and do the like. 
Inter the Cati. 
t.Sel. F<X)!e-hardinefre,not I. 
iSol. Nor I. 

I.Sol. Sec theyhauefiiuthimin. tyflarnnt continues 
All. To th'pot I warrant hi m. Enter Titus Lorttus 
Tit. What is become of iJ^rfr/iw- ? 
^<f.Siainc fSir)doubtIefrc. 
I.Sol, following the Flycrt atthcveryheeles. 



With them he enters : who vpon the fodainc 
Clapt to their Gates, he is himlelfe alone. 
To anfwer all the City. 

LaK OhNobleFcUow! 
Who fenfibly out-dares his fenccleflc Sword, 
And whch it bowes,ftand'ft vp : Thou arc left (^arttfis, 
A Carbuncle intire : as big as thou art 
Wcare not fo rich a leweli. Thou was't a Souldiet 
Euen to Cilues wifh.noi fierce and terrible 
Oncly in ftroltes, but with thy grim looke$,and 
TheThunder-likcpcrcOffionof thy founds 
Thou mad'ft thine enemies (hake,as if the World 
Were Feauorousj and did tremble. 

Enter MArtitis bUeding,ajfuttlted l>y the Enemy. 
Sol. Looke Sir. 
Lur. O'ui Martins. 
Let's fetch him ofF,or make remaine alike. 

They fight, and al/evter the Citj 
Enter certaine B^manes withjpotks. 

i.Rom. This will J carry to /?owf. 

i.Rom. And I this. 

S^ow.AMurrainon't, fiooke this for Siluer. exeunt. 
Alarum cynt tune s JliU a-farreof. 
Enter Tilariiiis and Ti t us rrit ha Trumpet. 

Mar.^ee heere thefe mouers,ci)nt do prize their hours 
At a crack'dDrachmc : Cuftiionj,! caden Spooncs, 
Irons of a Doit, Dubletsthat Hangmen would 
Bury with thofe that wore them. Thefe bafeflaucs. 
Etc yet the fight be done,packc vp,downc with them. 
And harke, what r.oyfe the Generall makes: To him 
There is the man of my foules hate, Aufidiems, 
Piercing our Romanes : Then Valiant TttHs take 
Conuenient-Numberstonaake good the City, 
Whil'ft I with thofe that haue the rpint,wil hafle 
To helpe Cominius. 

Lur. Worthy Sir, thou blecd'ft. 
Thy exercilc hath bin too violent, 
For a fecond coutfecf Fight. 

Mar, Sir,praifcmenot : 
My workc hathi yet not warm'd me. Fare you well : 
The blood I drop, is rather Phyficall 
Then dangerous to me: To AttffidieHs thus^I will appear 

Lar. Now the faireGoddeffc Fortune, (and fight. 
Fall deepe in Jouc with thee,and her great charmes 
Mifguide thy Oppofcrs fwords. Bold Gentleman : 
Profpetity be thy gage. 

Jlfar. Thy Friend no ieffe. 
Then thofe (lie placcth bigheft : So farewell. 

Lar. Thou worthieft THarttus, 
Go found thy Trumpet m the Marketplace , 
Call thi thcr all the Officers a'th'Towne, 
Where they fhall know our minde. Away. E.-eeunt 

Enter Comini»s at it were in retire jffith feldiers. 

Com. Breath you my friends, wcl fought,we are come 
LikcRomanSjiieitherfooiifli inour ftands, (off, 

NorCowardly in retyrc : BelecucmeSirs, 
We fhall be charg'd agairte. Whiles we haue flrookc 
By Interims and conueying gufts.wc haue heard 
The Charges of ourFiitnds. TheRomanGods, 
Leade their fucceffes,a$ we wifh our owne. 
That both our powers,with fmiling Fronts encouritting^ 
May giuc you thankful! Sacrifice. Thy Ncwcs ? 
Enter a Meffenger, 

Meff. The Cittizens of C<7r«#/« h.iueyfloed. 
And giuen to Lartius and to Martius Batiaile : 
aa ; I fawj 



The Tragedie of QorioUrms. 



I faw our party to their Trenches driucH, 
And then 1 came away. 

Com. Though thou fpcskcft truth. 
Me thinkcs ihoa fpr ak'ft no: well. How long is't fince ? 

Mtf* AbotJC an hourc,my Lord. 

Ow.'Tts nor a mile: brieicly we hcarej tlieir drummer. 
How could'K thou in a mile confound an houtc. 
And brJng.thy Ncwcs fo iatc f 

TUff. Spies ofthc Valees 
Hcldmcinch3cc,that I was forc'd towbeele 
Three or fouremilcs about, clfc had I fir 
Halfc an hour* fince brought my report. 

Enter KjAUrtifu, 

Com, Whofo yonder. 
That doc s appc^rc as he were Flcad ?0 Gods, 
He has the ftaitjpc oiMartitfs^ind. I haiic 
Before time feene him thus. 

Mir. Corac I too late ? 

Cow.Tht Siiephctd knowes nor Thunder fro a Tabcr, 
More then i know the found oilrlartius Tongtic 
From eucry ' leancr man, 

MartiM, Come I too latt ? 

Corn. I, ifyoUrCome upt in she blood of others. 
But mantled in youjowne. 

Murt. On' let mc clip ye 
In Armes as found, as when I woo'd in heart; 
Asmcrry,as when our N4rptiall day was done. 
And Tapers burnt to Bedward. 

Co/w.Flower of Warriors, how is't with Tittu Lartitui 

Ttltsr. As with a man buficdabout Decrees ; 
Condemning i'omc to death, &nd fome to exile, 
Ranfoming,hun,or pittying,threatning th'othcr ; 
Holding Coriolu in,the name of Rome, 
EuenlikcafawningGrey-houndintheLeafl), 
To let him flip at will. 

Com. Where is that Slaue 
Which told me they had beateyou to your Trenches ? 
Where is he? Call him hither. 

Mxr. Let him alone, 
He dijdinfoimc the truth : but for our Gentlemen, 
The common fiic:(a plague-Tribunes for them) 
ThcMoufeac'refhunn'dthcCat,as they did budge 
FrotnRafcals worfe then they. 

Com. Bjrhowprtuail'dyou? 

Mat. Will the t,.ne fetue to tcH, I do not thinkc : 
Where is the enemy? Are you Lords a'th Field ? 
If nor.why ceafe you till you.ai/J fo ? 

Com. tM«rti»s. we ha>K at difaduaotagfl fought. 
And did rctyrc to win our purpofe. 

M^. How lies their Battell? Know you on ^ fide 
They luiic plac'd their men of truft ? 

Com. Ail f.wt'^c Mart i(4t^ 
Their Bands i'th Vaward are the Antients 
Of their bcft trtift : Ore them jiaffidiow, 
Tittir very heart of Hope. 

T^ar. IdobefeechyoH, 
By ill the BanaJlcs wherein we haue fought. 
By th'BIood Wcihauc llied together. 
By tb' Vowes we haue njade 
To endure Frieodsi th?t you dito^ly fetme 
Agnnft jifidtttit, and his AntUts., 
And that yoanct deJay thcpiefent (boi 
Filling the aire vnth5»wordj 4,du»RC'd)ind Darts, 
"We proue tUis very houtc. 

Com. Though icouldwfifli. 



You were conduifted to a gentle Bath 
And Balmes applyed to yon, yet dare I neoer 
Deny your asking, takeyour choice ofihofc 
That bcft can aydcyour aSion. 

T^lar. Thofe arc ihcy 
That moft are willing; if any fuch behcere, 
(As it were finne to doubi^that loue this painting 
Wherein you fee mc fmcar'd, if any fearc 
Leffcn his perfon, then an ill report : 
If any thinke, braue death out-weighes bad life. 
And that his Countries deercr then himfelfe. 
Let him alone : Or fo Tiaoy fo minded, 
Waue thus to expreffe bis difpofition, 
And follow Mtirtifts. 

Thtj alip^out and watu their frerds ,takg htm vp in their 
Armes, ar.d cafi vf their Capf, 
Ob me alone, make you a Iword of me : 
If thefc fhewcsbe not outward, which ofyou 
But is fonxeVolces} None of you,butif 
Able to beare againft the great u^ufftdiatu 
A Shield, as liard as his. A certaincflumbty: 
(Though thankes to all) muft I feled from all ; 
The reft fhall beare the bufineffe in fome other fight 
(As caufe will be obey 'd:) pleafe you to March, 
Afld foure fhall quickly draw out myCooimand, 
Which men are beft inclin'd. 

(^om. March on my Fellowes : 
Make good this oftentation, and you Ihall 
Diuide in all,with vs. Exeunt 

Tittis LartiHS,h4uittgfetagHttrdvfm Carioles, going with 
T)rum ondTriimpet toward Cominim,And Cains Mar- 
tius, Enters with a Lientenant , other SouM'OHrf, and a 
Scout. 

Lor. So,let the Ports be guarded ; keepe your Duties 
As I haue fct them downe. If 1 do fend, difpatch 
Th^fe Centuries to our aydjthe reft will fetuc 
For a Q)ort holding, if we loofe the Field, 
We cannot keepe the Townc 

Um. Feare not our care Sir. 

Ltrt- Hencejand (hat your gates vpon's : 
Our Guidet come, loih'Roman Carope conduit vs. £«/ 
Alxntm, as in BMttule. 

Snter "Martitn «nd Auffidixs atfeiural deores. 

THixr. \\c fighe with none but thee,for I do hate thee 
Worfe then a Ptomiic-brcaker. 

Auftd. We hate alike: 
Not Affricke owncs * Serpent J abhorre 
More then thy Fame and Enuy : Fix thy foot. 

Mm-. Let \ke firft Budgerdyeihe others Slaue, 
And the Gods doomehimafter. 

Am/. If I fly e c>^/i«m#l,ho^low jnc like a Hare. 

Mar. Within thefe three h©uresT*ft</ 
Alone I fought in your CerioUs wallcs. 
Anil made what woike I pleas'd: Tis not my blood. 
Wherein tboU feeftmc nwski,for thy Reuengc 
Wrench yp thy power to th bigbeft. 

Auf, Wer'c thou the HtSer^ 
That was the whip of your bragg'd Progeny, 
TboB (hould'P not fcspe mc beere. 

Hcert thtj fight, W eettitintFohttcomt Ih thearde 
ffAuft. MArtnts pghtt ttlthn ht drittem iit bre*tbUs. 
OflficiouJ and not valiant,you hauefliara'd aio 
In your condemned Seconds. 

TlotfrHh. 



t/oftrifh. yilarMtn. t^ Retreat if founded. Enteral 

»KtT)oore Copttinitt'f-, rrith (he Ramanes : yit 

arather Doort O^iartiw, with his 

yirm* t» a Searfi. 

Cent. If I Ihould cell thee o're this thy Jay c* Woilce, 
Tlion't not bclcciic thy deeHs : but He report it. 
Where Senators fhall fning!etcarcs witli fmiics. 
Where great Patricians fh;tii attend, and Hirug, 
I'tli end admire : where Ladies iTudl be Iriglued, 
And gladly quak'd, heart more: where the dull Tribunes, 
Thic with the futile Plebeans,hare thine Honors, 
Shall fay againft their heart?, Wcthanke theCjods 
Our Rome hath fuch a Souldier. 
Yet cam'it thou to a Morfell of this Feaft, 
Hailing fully din'd before. 

Enter Titui with his Power, from the Fttrjitit. 

Titiis L<trtinj. Oh General! : 
Here is the S teed, wee the Caparifon : 
Hadft thou beheld— 

MATtiftf. Pray no w.no more : 
My Mother ,who ha's a Charter to cxtoU herBIoud, 
VVhcQ (he do's prayfe me, gricues me ; 
I hauc done as you haue done^thai's what I can, 
Induc'd as you hauc beene,that*s for my Councrcy : 
He that ha's but efifcvSed his good will. 
Hath ouerta'nc mine Acl. 

Cent, Youfliall not be thcGraueof yourdcfcruing, 
Rome muft know the value of her ownc : 
Twcrea Concealement wotfe then a Theft, 
No lefl'c then aTraducemcnt, 
To hide your doing5,and to filcnce that. 
Which to the fpirc.and Cop of prayfes vouch'd. 
Would feemc but modeft : therefore I befecch you. 
In figne of what you arc, not to reward 
What you haue donc.beforc our Armie hcare me. 

Afartifu.l haue feme Wou'nds vpon me,and they fmart 
To heare themfclues remembred. 

Com, Should they not : 
Well might they fcflcr 'gainft Ingratitude, 
And tent themfclues with death : of all the Horfes, 
Whereof we hauc ta'ne good, and good ftoreof all. 
The Treafure in this field atchieucd,3nd Citie, 
We render you the Tentb,to be ta'ne forth. 
Before the common diflribution, 
Atyouronclychoyfc. 

CMartiMt, I thankeyou Gcoerall : 
But cannot makcmy heart confent to take 
A BribCjto pay my Sword : I doe refufc it. 
And ftand vpon my coramon part with thofe. 
That haue beheld the doing. 

ji long flotirip:). They aS cry, Martifts, Mccithu, 

cxjipp their Caps and Luaecei : CominiMS 

and L/artiiu ft and hare, 

Mar.Mtiy thcfe fame Inftrumcntj, which you'prophanc, 
Ncuer lound more: when Drums »nd Trumpets (hall 
I'th'tield proue (\attercrs,ict Courts and Citigs be 
Madeallof fal(ie.fac'dfoo'.h;ng : 
When Steele growes foft.as the Paralites Silkc, 
Let him be m:ide an Oucrt urc for th ' Warrcs : 
No mote I fay, for that I hauc not wa(k'4 



The TrageJie of (^oriolanus. 



7 



My Nofe that bIcd,or foyi'd fomc JebUe Wretch, 
Which without notCjhcre's many clfc haue done. 
You flioot me forth in acclamations hypcrbolicallj 
As if 1 lon'd my little fhould be dieted 
In prayfo, fawc'll with Lyes. 

Com. Too modeft arc you ; 
More ctuell to your good report, ihengratcfull 
T-> vs.that giucyou rnily: by your patience, 
If'gainllyourfelfeyou be mccns a,wccleput you 
(Like one that meaoc his proper liatmc) in Manacles, 
Then rcafon fafely with you r Therefore be it knownc, 
As to vSjtoall the WorldjThat Canu Mitrttttt 
Wearcs this Warrcs (Jatland : in token of the which. 
My Noble Steed.knownc to the Campc,! giuehim. 
With .ill his trim belonging ; and from this time. 
For what he did before Corioles,cM him. 
With all th'applaufc and Clamor of the Hoaft, 
(^yUarctis Caiia (^'«rtoliinns. Bcare th'addition Nobly cucr? 
FUun/h. Trufnpets fiuudtand Drttms. 

O runes. THarcia Cains Certolaattt. 

AlartiM-s. I will goc wafh : 
And when my Face is faire, you fhal! pcrceiue 
Whether I blufli.or no : howbeit,] thankc youj 
I meane to ilride your Stced,and at al! times 
To vndet.crcfl your good Addition, 
To th'faireric(rcofmypower. 

Com. Sojto ourTcnt : 
Where ere we doc rcpofe vs,we will write 
To Rome of out fucccfTc ; you Tttw Lartiut 
Muftto Corioles backc, fend vs to Rome 
The beft,with whom we may articulate. 
For i\\c\i ownc goodjapd ours. 

Lartiiu. I fhall,njy Lord. 

Martins. The Gods begin to raocke Oie : 
I that now rcfus'd mo(i Princely gifts, 
Ambound tobeggeof my Lord General!. 

Com. Tak't,'tis yours : what Is't? 

Martitis. I fometime lay here in Cori*Ut, 
At a poore mans hoi.fe; he vs'd roe kindlyj, 
Hecry'dtome: il'awhimPtifoner: 
But then ^KJfdms Wis within my view. 
And Wrath o'rc-whelm"d my pittie : I rcqucft you 
To giuc my poore Holt freedoroe. 

Com. Oh well begg'd : 
Were he the Butcher of my Sonne,lie fhould 
Be free,aj is the Winde : dcliucrhiro,7V/«/. 

lartiM. AIartiia,h\s Name. 

AiarttHs. By I/tpiter forgot : 
I am wearie, yea my memoric is tyt'd : 
Hauc we no Wine here ? 

Com. Goc we to our Tent: 
The bloud vpon yoiu: Vifage drycs,'ti$ time 
Itihouldbclookttoo: come. Extwtt. 

uiflomiP). Cornets. Enter TftStu jitrffiditu 
hioudie,with tworr three Souldmrs, 

jiu^.. The Towne is ta'ne. 

Souli. 'Twill be dcliuer'd ba^ke on good Condition. 

jitt^d. Condition ? 
I would 1 were a Roman, for I cannot, 
Bcing3'u^e/f(r,be thatjam. Condition? 
What good Condition can a Treatic finde 
Tth'part that is at mercy ? fiue i\mv%jMartitU, 
I haue fought with thee ; fooftcnhaft thou beat me: 
And would'ftdoe fo,I ih)nke,fhould we cncoifncer 



As/ 



8 



^be Tragedte of QorioUnm, 



As often a« wccate* By th'Elemcnts^ 

If ccc againel meet him beard to beard. 

He's mine, or I am his : Mine Emulatioti 

Hath not that Honor in't it had ; For vrhete 

1 thought to crufh hina in an equall Force, 

True Sword to Sword ,• Ilcpotche at him fonieway. 

Or -Wrach.or Craft may get him. 

Sol. He's the diuell. 

^*/.Boidcr,though not ''o fubtlerwy valors poifon'd. 
With oncly fuff ring ftainc by him : ior him 
Shall flyc out of it klfe, nor flccpe, nor fain5tuary. 
Being naked, fierce; nor Phajic.nor Capitoll, 
The Prayers of PrieftS, nor times of Sacrifice: 
Embarqucments all of ruty.fliall lift vp 
Their rotten Priuilcdge, and Cuftome 'gainft 
My hate to Mtertiiu. Where I findc him, were it 
At home, vpon my Brothers Guard, euen there 
Againft the hofpitable Canons would I 
Wafii my fierce hand in's hcarr. Go you to th'Ci tic, 
Learne how 'tis lield, and whu they aj-etbat mu& 
Be Hoftages for Rome. 

Setd. Will not you go? 

Atff. I am attended at the Cyprus groue. I pray you 
( Tis Sorth the City Mils) bring roe word thither 
How the world goes : that to the pace of it 
I may fpurre on my iourncy. 

Sotd, I {hall fir. 



Ad-us Secundus, 



Enter Mefttnim with the two Tribunes, of the 
feaplcSicttuHS cr Trutus. 

Men. The Agurettcli me, wee (hall hauc Ncwei to 
night. 

"Bru. Good or bad? 

Men, Not according to the prayer of the people, for 
they louc not M«rtim, 

Stem. Nature teaches Beafts to know their Ftiends, 

Men. Pray you, who docs the Wolfe loae ? 

Stein. The Lambe. 

Men. I, to deuour him,as the hungry Plebeians would 
the Noble THartini . 

"Bru. He's a Lambe indeed, that bacs like a Beare. 

Men. Hee's aBeare indeede, thatliueslikea Lambe. 
You two arc old men, tell me one thing that Ifhall aske 
you. 

Both. Well fir. 

Men. In what enormity is Martim poorein.that you 
two haue not in abundance ? 

"Bru. He's poorc in no one faulty but flor'd withall, 

Sicin. Efpccially in Pride, 

Brti. And topping all others in boafling. 

C^fen. This u ftrange now : Do you two know.how 
you arc cenlurcd hecrc in the City,I mean of vi a'thVight 
hand File, do you? 

"Both, Why? ho ware we cenfur'd? 

Men. Becaufeyoutalkcofpridcoow, willyouoot 
be angry. 

7<oth, We!I,wcll(ir,we!l. 

7r}:-^. Why 'tis no great matter : for a very little theefe 
•f Occafion, will rob you of a great dcalc of Patience : 



/ 



Giue your difpofitioos the reines, and bee angry at your 
pleafurcs(at ifaeJeaftjif you take it as a pteafurc tayoo in 
being fo : you bJame Tu^tixt for being proud. * 

'Brm. We do It not alone.fir. 

Men. I know you cao doc very little alone, for yo'ir 
helpes are many, or elfe your aSions would growc won- 
drous fingle : your abilities are to Jnfant-Iikc. fordoointj 
much alone. You lalke of Pride: Oh.that you coald turn 
your eyes toward the Napei of your neckcs , and maie 
but an Interiour furuey otyoiu good I'clues. Oh that you 
could, ^ 

Both. What then fir? 

Men. Whythcnyou (hoiild Hifconera braceofvn- 
mcriting,proad,violent, teftie Magiftrates (alias Foolcs) 
as any in Rome. 

Sicw. MenentHs, you are knownc well enough too. 

/Wfw. I am knownc to be a humorous Patriti^ , and 
one that loues a cup of hot Winc,wich not a drop of alay- 
ing Tiber in't : Said.to be fonaetliing imperfird in fauou- 
ring the firll complaint, hafty and Tinder-hke vppon, to 
triuiallmotion : One,tbatcoonerf«more with the But- 
tockeof the night.then with theforhead^ofche motnine. 
What I think, 1 vttcr,and fpend my malice in my breath. 
Meeting two fuchWeales men as you are (I carmoc call 
you Licuxgujjes,) if the drinke you giuc me. touch my Pa- 
lataduerfly.Imakcacrookedfaceatit, I can fay, you: 
Worflnippes haue deliuer'd the matter well, when'lfinde 
the Affein compound, with the Maioc parr of your fylla- 
bles. And though I roufi be content to beare with thofe, 
that fay you arereorrcnd graue men, yet they lye deadly', 
that teil you haue good faces, if you fee this in the Map 
of my Microcofme, foUowes it that 1 aro knowne well e- 
nough too ? What barmc can your bccfomc Confpeaui- 
tifes gleanc out of this Charraaer. if 1 be knowac well c- 
nough too. 

BrH, Come fir conw, we know yi>u well enough. 

MeneH. You know neither mee, your fdues, nor my 
thing : you are ambitious, forpoore knaues cappcs and 
icgges : you wcare out a good wholcfomc Forcnoone.in 
hearing a caufe bet wcene anOrendgc wife, and a Forfct- 
fcller, and then reiounie the Controucrfie of three^cnee 
toa fcconl day of Audience. When you are hearing a 
matter betwccne party and party, ifyon chaonce to- bee 
pinch'd with the Collicke. you make faces like Mum- 
mer«, fct yp the bloodic Flagge-againft ail Patience, and 
in roaring for aChamber-pot, difmiffe the Controucrfie 
bleeding, the more iniangle<j by your hearing : AH the 
peace you make in their Caufc. is calling both the parties 
Knaues. You are a payre of ftrange ones. 

Brm. Come, come, youarcweJi vnderftood to bee » 
perfeder gybcr for the Tabk.thenancccflaiy Bencher in 
tbeCapirolI. 

Men. OiirvcryPric(*»muft become Mockers, ifrhey 
Hiall encounter fuch ridiculou* Subicfts as you arc, when 
youfpeake befivniorhepurpofe, Itisnot woorth the 
wagging of your Beard*, and your Ccards dereruenoi fo 
honourable a graue.as tofluffea Botchers Cufiiion.or to 
beintomb'dinan AflcsPackc-fadciIe; yet you muftbee 
faying, /I/«rri*/i J proud : who inathespc cfiimation,is 
worth all your prcdeceflors, iincc Deneatten, though per. 
aduenture fome of the beflof 'em wxre hcreditaric hang- 
men. Godden to your Wotfhips, more of your conuci- 
fation would infcd my Braine, bring the Heardfroen of 
the BeattJy Plebetns. 1 will be bold to take my leauc of 
you. 

TBrit. md Sti<, i^ifid*. 

Smter 



11)6 Tragedie of (^oriolanus. 



Eater P^climiit4,p'ir^t/ia,aiul f^AhrU. 

How now (my 3$ fai»e a$ Noble) Ladyei. and the Moonc 
were ("hcc Earthly, no Nobler; vvhitlicrdoc you follow 
your Eyes io Tift ? 

falum. H onorable Afenetti>u,my Boy MarttM appro- 
chcs : for ihc louc crt- lano let's goc. 

Aienen. Ha? Adintttu comminq home ? 

V»lt»»- I,worthy Menenim and withmoft profpcrous 
approbation. 

Menen. Take my Cappc Iinpiter,9nd I thanke thcc : 
hoo, A'f'trtiw comming home ? 

i.Ladtcs. Nay,'cis true. 

yoinm. Looke.hcre'sa Letter from him,ibe State hath 
another, hu Wife another, and (I thinke^ there's one st 
home tor you. 

Menen. I will make my very houfc recic to nigh«: : 
A Letter for me ? 

Virgil Yes certaine.there's a Letter for you.l faw't. 

Menen. A Letter for mc ? it giues me an Eftate of fe- 
uen yeeres health ; in which time, I will make a Lippe at 
the PhylicianrThemoft loucrsignePrefcriptionin Galsn, 
is but Emperickqutique; 3ndtothisPr«ferii3tiu<,of no 
better report then a Horfe-drench. Is he not wounded ? 
he was wont to come home wounded ? 

f^tr<^il. Oh nOjHOjno. 

Vtittm, Oh.he is wounded,! thanke the Gods fort. 

Menen. So doe I too, if it be not too much : bring* a 
ViftorJe in his Pockct?thc wounds become him. 

Velum. On's Browcs : Menemm^cc comes the third* 
time home with the Oaken Garland. 

Menen. Ha's he difciplirt'd ^iiffdiw foundly ? 

Volum. Titiu Lartim writes,thcy fought together, but 
AuffidiMt got off. 

Menen. And^twai time for him too, Tie warrant him 
that : and he had flay'd by him.I would not haue been fo 
fiddious'd, for all the Chefts in Carioles , and the Gold 
that's in them. Is the Senate poffeft of this i 

ZJtlmm. Good Ladies let's goc. Yes, yes, yes : The 
Senate ha's Latcrs from the Gencrall,whcrein hec giucs 
my Sonoe the whole Name of the Warre : he hath in this 
a{ftion out-done his former dee'ds doubly. 

Valtr. In troth,thcrc's wondrous things fpoke of him. 

Menen. Wondrous : 1,1 warrant you^and not with- 
out hii true purchafing. 

Vtrgil. The Gods graunt them true. 

Valtfm. True ? pow waw. 

Aime. TrucMlcbe fwornc they are true: where is 
bee wounded ,God fauc your good Worfhips i (Jl^aniiu 
is comming borne : hec ba's more caufc to be prowd ; 
where is he wounded ? 

Vabtm, Ith'Shoulder,and iih'left Arme: there will be 
large Cicatrices to fiiew the People, when hce /hall ftand 
for his place : he rccciued iathenrpulfc of Tartjuia fcuen 
iturts ith' Body, 

.Met.e. One ith' Neckband two ith'Tbigh,fbcre"s nine 
that I know. 

VoiMm. Heebad, before this laftExpedition, twentic 
fiueWoundsvponiiim. 

Afeae. Nowit's twentic feuen ; eucrygaOiwas an 
EncmiesGrauc. UearkCjtheTrunipers. 

^ (hewt, and fxmrifh, 

Vfilttm. Tbefe are the Vflicrs of CMMfihu : 
Before him,hcc cartycs Noyfe ; 
Aod bebindc huBjhee Icaues Testes : 

\ ,-. 



\ Death,that darke Spirit, in's neruie Armc doth lye, 
Which being aduanc'd,deciioe!r,artd then men dye. 

t^ Senmet. Trumpets fmtnJ. 

Enter Cominitu theCeneraU^and Titm Ltitrttsr bc- 
tfveene them Corielanw . crown' d jvtth xnO.tl'en 
Gikrlnnd, i»ith Captatmf and Seul- 
dters^gnda Heraidd. 
HtrAHld. Know Rome,that ?.Ii alone 'MaritHs^-.d IT^ht 
Within Corjoirs Gates : where he Iiath wocne, 
With Faroe.a Name to (J'^art-tw Caiiu ■ 
Thcfe in honor followes (JWartim C^itw CeriolofUM. 
Welcome to Rooiie, renowned CertoUnm. 

Sound. Fianr'fu. 

AU. Welcome to Romc,renowred Coy^ioif-mts, 

Cortol. No more of thisjit docs ofl'cod my iieart;pray 
now no more. 

Com. Lcoke,Sir,your Mother. 

Coriol. Oh i you haue,! know,petition'dJI the Cods 
formyprofpcritic. Kneeles, 

Z>olttm. Nay.my good Souldier,vp : 
My gentle tJ^ art tut, vionhy (,'etiHs, 
And by deed-acchieuing Honor newly nam'd. 
What is it {Coriolanw) mult I call chec ? 
But oh,thy Wife. 

(^orio. My gracious filen<:c,haylc : 
Would'ft thou hauc laugh'd.had ( come Coffin'd horr.e 
That weep'ft to fee me tnu^nph? Ah my dcare. 
Such eyes the Widowcs in Canolcs were. 
And Mothers that lacke Sonnes. 

Ment. Now the Gods Crownc thee. 

Com. And Hue you yet? Oh my fwcct Lady,pardon, 

Vulitm. I know not where to turne. 
Oh welcome bome:ind weicomcGcnetalL 
And y'arc welcome all. 

Mene. A hundred thoufand Wclcomei : 
! could weepe.and I could laugh. 
Jam light,and hcauic* welconte: 
A Curfe begin at very root on'* heart. 
That is not glad to fee thee. 
Yon arc threc,ihat Rome Ihould dote on -. 
Yet by the faith of men, we hauc 
Some old Crab-trees here at home. 
That will not be gr»ftcd to your Rsllift}, 
Yet welcome Warriors : 
We<fcallaNcttle>buc a Nettle; 
And the faults of fooles,bui folly. 

C»m. Euer right. 

C»r. MenentHs^ cucr,euer. 

Heri*nl4. Giuc way there, and goe on., 

^or. Your Hand, and yours ? 
Ere in our ownc houfc I do^lhade my Head, 
The good Patricians muftbcvifitcd. 
From whom I haue receiu'd not oncly greciingf, 
But with them,change of Honors. 

Volum. I hiue liued. 
To fee inherited my very WiOies, 
And the Buildings of my FaiKie : 
Onely there's one thing wanting. 
Which (I doubt not) but out Roro* 
Will cafl vpon thee. 

{"or. Know.good Mother, 
J had rather be their feruant in oiy way. 
Then fwaywith them iniheirs. 

Copt, On,toiheCapitill. FloMri(k. Ctnmts. 

Exettttt in State, m Btfvrt, . 
S>iterl^ 



lO 



The Tragedie of Qorioldnm. 



Snter Srmtu W Scicimiu. 

Brit. Al! tongues fpcakc of him.and the bleared fights 
Are fpcdlacted to fee him. Your pratling Nurfe 
Into a rapture lets her Baby eric, 
Wliilc flie chats him : the Kitchin Mdlt^H pinncs 
Her richeft Lockram'bout her rccchie necke, 
Climbring the Walls to eye him: 
Stalls.Bulkes, VVindowej,are fmothct'd vp, 
Lcsdcs fill'd, and Ridgcj bors'd 
With variablcComplcAions; all agreeing 
Tncarncrtiiclle to fee him: feld-fViownc Flamins 
Doe preffc among the popular Throngs.and puffc 
Towinneaviiigarftation : our vcyl'd Dames 
Committhe Warreof White and Damaskc 
In their nicely gawded Checkes,coth' wapton fpoylc 
Of ?habni burning Kifles : fuch a poother. 
As if that u'hatfoeuerGod,wholcades him^ 
Were flyiy crept into his humane powers, 
Andgaucbim gracefull poftute. 

Scicin. On the fuddaitjc,! warrant him ConfoU. 

BrutM, Then our Office may, during his power, goe 
flcepc. 

Sctciyf, He cannot tcmp'rately tranfport hisHouors, 
From where he fhould begiojand cnd,but will 
Lofe thofc he haA wonnc. 

'Bruttti. In that there's comforc 

Scici. Doubt not. 
The CommouerSjf or whom we ftand,but they 
Vpon their ancient maUice,will torget 
With the lca[lcoufr,thefc his new Honor j. 
Which that he will gins them,makc 1 as little queftion. 
As he is prowd to doo't. 

"Bruttu. 1 heard him IWeare, 
Were he to fiand for Con[uU,ncucr would he 
App?are i'th'Market place,noroa him put 
The Naples Vcfture of Humilitis, 
Nor fhewing(as the manner is)his W'ounds 
Toth' People.bcgge their ftioking Breath*. 

Sciciu. Tis rjghc. 

"Brittttf. It was his word : 
Oh he would mifi'e it, rather then carry it. 
But by the foite of the Gentry to hkn. 
And the defire of the Nobles. 

Scicin. I wifh no bettei;,thcn haue him hold that pur- 
pofe,and to put it in execution. 

'Brutiu. 'Tismoft like he will. 

Scicitt, It (hall be to him then, as our good wills; a 
furcdeftru(ftion, 

'Bruttu. So it muft fall on: 
To him.or our Actlwc itics,tor an end. 
We muft fiiggcft the Pcogle,jn what hatred 
He ftill hath t eld them; that to's power ht would 
Haue maiiC them Mnics,iiicno*d their Pleaders, 
And difpropertied their Frcedomcs; holding them. 
In humane Adion,3nd Capacitic, 
Of no more SoiiIe,nor fitneffc for the World, 
Then Cammcls in their VVatrc,who haue their Prouand 
Onely for bearing Burthens -and fotcblowcs 
For finking vndcr tbern. 

Scicin, This fas you fayXfuggeRed, 
At fome time^when his foaring Inioleocc 
Shall teach the People.wbichtiiDC HjaliAo; want. 
If he-bftpttc vpon c,a«d that's as eafie. 
As to fee Poggcs on ^heept will be bis fire 

/ 



To kindle their dry Stubble : and their Blaze 
Shall darken him far eitc^ 

EnicTMMe^enger, 

Brutm: What's the matter? 

Dflejf. YoDarcfcntfortothcCapitoll: 
'Tis thoughf.thatcJW/ir/iwftiallbcConrull : 
I haue feene the dumbe men throng to fee him. 
And theblind to heare himfpeak:Matrons flongGloucs 
Ladies and Maids theix Scarffes.and Handkcrcbers, 
Vpon him as he pafs'd ; the Nobles bended 
As'to loues Statue,and the Commons made 
A Shower,and Thundcr,with thcit Caps.aod Sbowts: 
Ineuerfawthelikc. 

'Brtttui. Let's to the Capitol}, 
And carry with vs Earcs and Eyes forth' time, 
But Heartsfor the cuent. 

Scicin. Haue with you, Exemit. 

Ettter tifo Officers, te Uj Cu^imi^Mtt were, 
lit the Ciipiteil. 

1. Of. Come,come,they are almofihere : how many 
ftand forConfulfliips ? 

,2- Ojf. Three,theyfay: but 'tis thought of euory one, 
Cortolantu will carry it« 

uOf. That's 3 braue fellow: but hce's vengeance 
prowd,aBd loues no? the common people. 

"i-Of. 'Faithjtherebaih beenc many great men that J 
haue flatter'dthepeopie.whonc'reloued thcm;ai>d there i 
be many that they haue loued,they know not wherefore : i 
fothat if they louc they know not why, they hitp vpon | 
no better a ground. Thercforc,for CertoUuM neytiier to > 
care whether they loue, or hate him , manifcfts n.c true 1 
knowledge he ha s in their difpofition,and outof his No- \ 
blc carclclheflc lets them plainely fcc't. 

\-Of. If he did not care whether he had their Ioue,or 
no, hcc waned indifferently, 'twixt doing them iwythcr 
good,nor harrae : buthcefcckestheirhatcwitb greater 
deuotion,then they can render it h jm; and ieaues nothing 
(rndonCjthat may fully difcouer him their oppofitc. Now 
to feeme to affc^ the malliceand difplcafureof thePeo- 
ple,is as bad,as that vvhich he diflikes, to flatter them for 
their loue. 

a. Ojf. Heehathdefcrucd worthily of hisCounttey, 
andhisaCfent isnot by fuch eafie degrees as thofc, who 
hauiog beenc fupple and courteous to the People , Bon- 
ncttcd.without any further deed, to haue thtm ac aU into 
their efiimation,and report: but hcc hath fo planted his 
Honors in their Eycs.andhis aftions inthcirHearts,.that 
for their Tongues to be filent,aitd not cciifeflc i'omifch, 
were a kinde of ingtatefiill Iniurie : to report otbetwifp, 
were a Mallice, that giuing it felfc the Lye.would plucke 
reproofer-and rebuke 6om euety Eare that beard it 

i.Ojf. No more of" him, hee's a worthy man; make 
way,th^arc comming. 

' ASemiet, EtiterthePntriciattStOni'the Trilmtiei »f 
the PecpUjLttiers befori them : CmWiOttu, Trlette- 
nirnXof'ti'iiw the CoufklcSdctnuu mtdBrMtm 
take their places kf themfilttes ; Ceria» 
Lttsm fidttds. 
Menea. Hauing-dcienwin'd of rhe Voices, 
And to fend for Tittu Lartim .-■ it remaines. 
As themainePointtrfthisonraftet-mcetkngg 



7^€ Tragedieof Qr'wlanus, 



II 



To gratifie his Noble feroicCythat hath 

Thus flood tor his Countrey .Therefore plcafc you, 

Moftrcuercnd and graucElders.todefire 

Thir prefcnc Confuii , and laft Genera il,' 

In our vcU-found Succefles,to report 

A little of that worthy Wotk«,perfoin>'d 

By f^^ittrtnu C:ittis Coriolanud : whom 

VVe met here,both io th3nkc,and to remember. 

With Honors lilcc himfclfc 

t.Se». Spcake.sood CotHiniw : 
Lcaue nothing out for length, and mskc vs thinlte 
Rather our ftates drt'ectiisc for rcciouall, 
Then we to Hretch it our. Matters ? tii" People, 
We doe tcqueli your kindeft ejtcs: and^lter 
Yourlouing mof.on toward tftc common B^dy, 
To yccld what paffcs here. 

Scicin. We arc conucnted vpon a pfeaGog Treatie,and 
haue hearts inclinable to honor and aduaace cheTheame 
of our AlTembly- 

Brtitiii. Which the rather wee fhall be bleft to doe, if 
he remember a kinder value of the People, then he bath 
hereto priz'd them at, 

Menen. That's off,that*s off: I would you rather had 
been filent : Pleafc you to hearef«fw/>«»>«fpeake? 

'SrutHi. Mof^ willingly : but yet my Caution was 
more pertinent then the rebuke you giue it. 

Menen. Heioues yourPcople, but tyehim not tobe 
theirBed-fellow • Worthie ComimM fpeake. 

Cariol»nHt-Ttfes ,*nd sffers to g9c away. 
Nay, keepe your place. 

Str.At. Sit CorioUnw : TicMct fhamc to beare 
What you haue Nobly done- 

Corid. Your Honors pardon : 
1 1 had tlther haue my Wounds to heale againe. 
Then heart fay ho w I got them. 
} 'Srmw. Sir,I hope my words dis-bench'd you not ? 

C'^riol. No Sir: yet oft. 
When blowcs haue made me rtay,I fled from words. 
You footh'd not/cherefore hurt not : but your People, 
I loue them as they weigh — 

Menen, Pray now fn downe. 

CorioA had rarher haue one fcratch my Head I'th' Sun, 
When the Alarum were ftrucke,;hcn idly fit 
To hcarc my Nothings nsonlJerd. Exit C«rioUr,w 

Metien. Maftets of cbe People, 
Your multiplying Spawne,how can he flatter ? 
That's thoafand to one good onC;When you now fee 
He had rather venture ail his Limbes for Honor, 
Then on ones Earcs to hcatc st. Proceed CemiHttu, 

Corn. 1 flial! lacketoyce : the deeds ox CormaKu^ 
Should not be vttet'd feebly : if is held. 
That Valour is the chiefoft Vettue, 
And moft dignifies the iiauer : if it be, 
The man I fpeake ofjcannot in the World 
Beiingly counter-poys'ii. At hxtecne yceres. 
When Tar^HtK made a Head for Rome,hc fought 
Beyond the raarke of others : out then Diclacor, 
Whom with all prayfc I point st. faw him fight, 
When with his Amaionian Shinne he drouc 
The brizled Lippcs before him : he beftrid 
An o're-prcfl Roman, ai>d ith Confuls view 
Slew three Oppoferi : Tartjtws felfc he m«; 
And ftruoke him on his Knee : in that dayes fcatcSj 
When bc-jnight adtthe Woman,ir» the Scene, 
Heptou'dbeftman i'th'field,and forhisme«d 
Was Brow-bpund with theOake. His Popill age 
\ 



' MaD'Cnciedthus^hcwMed like a Sea, 
And in the brunt of feuenteeoc Battailes fince. 
He lurchtall Sword* of the Garland: for this laftj 
Before,and in Corioles, let me fay 
I cannot fpeake him hoi&e ; he ftopt the flyers. 
And by his rare example made the CoWard 
Turne terror into fport : as Weeds before 
A VelTcU vndrr fayle.lo men obey'd. 
And fell below hi» Stem-: hit Sword.Dcaths ftampe. 
Where it did m»rke,it tooke from face to foot ; 
He was a thing of Blood., vyhofe euery motioix 
Was tim'd with dying Cryesralone he cntred 
The rnortall Gate of th'Ci tie, which he painted 
With fnunlefle dcftinie : aydeielTe came off. 
And with a fudden re-iiiforcement ftrucke 
Carioles like a Planet : now afl's his. 
When by and by the dinnc of Warrc gan pierce 
His readie fence f then ftraight his doubled Ipitit 
Rcquickned what in flcfh was fatigatc. 
And to the Battaile came hc,where he did 
Runne reeking o're the Hues of men.as if 'twere 
A perpctuall fpoyle : and till we call'd 
Both Field and Citie ours,he neuer ftood 
To eafe his Breft with panting, 

Menen. Worthy man. 

Seuat. He cannot but with meafure fit the Honoit 
which we deuifc him. 

Com. Our fpoyles he kickt at, 
And look'dvpon things prccious,as they were 
The common Muck of the World : he couets leffe 
Then Miferie it fclfe would giue,rcwards his deeds 
With doing'them, and is content 
To fpend the time.to end it. 

Menen. Kce's right Noble,kt him be call'd for, 

Senat, Gsil (^oriolamu. 

Of. He doth appearc, 

i Enter Corielantu. 

Meneti. The Ser.ate,C»n»/4w«,arc well plcas'd to make 
thee Con full. 

Carto, 1 doe owe them ftil! my Life,8n(i Seruices. 

Menen, It then remauies, that you doe fpeake to the 
People. 

Corto. I doe befecch you. 
Let me o'te-teapc that cu()ome: for I cannot 
Put on the Gowne.ftand naked,and entreat them 
For my Wounds fake, to giue their fufferage : 
Plcafe you that I may pafic this doing. 

Scicin. Sir,chc People muft haue their Voyces, 
Ncy thei will they bate one iot of Ccremonje. 

"Menen. Put them not too't : 
Pray you go c fit you to the Cuftome, 
Attdtake to you,ai your Prcdeceflors haue, 
Your Honor with your forme. 

Corto. It is a part that I fhali bludi in afling, 
Afidmight well betaken from the People. 

Brmtu. Msrkeyouthat. 

Corio> To brag rnto them.thus 1 did,and thus 
Shew them th'vriakingSkarres.which I fliould hide, 
Aiif Ihadrecciu'd themfor thehyre 
Of their breacbonely. 

Menen, Doe not ftand vpon't : 
We recommend to, you Tribunes of the People 
Our purpofeto.thcm,and to our Noble Confull 
Wifh we ail Ioy,atid Honor. 

Sevat. 



14 



IZ 



Tie ITragedle of QorioUnuu 



Sffir. To CcritUHM come all ioy and Honor. ] 

Flcurijh CcrHtti. 
Then "Exeunt. U^4itet SicimuA atidBrmus. 
"BrM. Youfechowheinccndsio v(e the people. 
ScicinMi.y they pcrceiue's intent: he wil require them 
As if" he did contcronc what hcrequefted. 
Should be in them to piuc. 

'Pru, Come,wccliiiforinctheni 
Of our proceedings hecrc on th'Matkct place, 
I know they do attend vs. 

Enter fcMCn or eight Cttix,ens. 
i,Cii. Once if he do require our voyccs, wee ought 
not to deny him. 

z.Cit, VVcmay Sirifvvcwil!. 
5.tVr. We hauc power in our fclues to do it, but it is 
3 power that we haue no power to do : For.if hec (hew v$ 
his wounds, end tell vs his deeds,' we are to put our ton- 
gues into thofe wounds, and fpeake for them : So if he tel 
vs his Noble deeds, we muftalfo tell him our Noble ac- 
ceptance of them. Ingratitude is mot^flrous, and for the 
mutcitude to be ingrarefull, were to make a Monfterof 
thciTjukitude; of the which, v/ebeing'members, (hould 
bring our fclue* to be monftrous nncmbcrs. 

i.Cit. And to make v.s no better thought of a little 
Vielpe will fcruc : for once we flood vp about the Come, 
he himfelfe fluckc not to call vsthe many-headed Multi- 
tude, 

S-0'- Wc hauc bccnc call'dfo of many, not that our 
heads are fomcbrowoe.fomeblacke, fomc Abram.fomc 
bald ; but that our wits are fo diuerfly Cou'ord ; and true- 
ly T thinke, ifallour wittcs werctoirtiteoucot one Scull, 
theywouIdflyeEaR.Weft.North South, and their con- 
fcr.t of one dircil way, ihould beat oiiccto allthc paints 
a'thCoinp.a<^e- 

s.^jf. Thinke you fo? Which way do y«U judge my 
wit would fiyc. 

^.C(t. Nay your wit will not fo fccne out 2$ another 
mans will/tis flrongly wadg'd vp m a blocKc-hcad : but 
ifit were at libeity, 'twould liuc Sout'nviard. 
tCtt. Why chat way? 

; Cit. To loofe i: felfe in a Fogge, where being three 

parts rocked away with rotten Dewesjthc fourth would 

rcturnc for Confcicncc fake, to helpe to get thee a Wife. 

z Cti . You"~arc ncuer without your trickes.y ou may, 

you may. 

7 Cit, Arcyouallrefolu'dtc giueyour voyces? But 
that's no matter, the greater part carries it, I fay. Jf hte 
would incline to the people, there was neuer a worthier 
man. 

Enter Cortol.ifint in a gexvnttf Humility, with 
Meneniiu. 
Hcerehe comes, and in the Gownc of humility, marke 
ins behaiiiour : ws arc not to iVay aItogether,but to come 
by him where he llands^ by ones, by t woes, &: by threes. 
Ke'i tomaki; his: requefts by particulars, wherein cueric 
one ofvsha'sa hnglc Honor, in giuing him our own voi- 
ce? with our owiK totigucsjthcrcfore follow me, and He 
dircfl you how you fiiall go by him. 
AU. ContentjContent. 

Mm, OhSir,you arenotrigln:baueyou notknowne 
The worthitfi mea haue donc't? 

CoTio. What mufti fay, I pray Sit .* 
Pliguc vpon t, I cannot bting 
My toiigsc CO rachfcpacc. Looke Sir, my wounds, 
I jj;ot ;hcm in my Counitf ics Scruicc, when 
Some ccrtainc of your Brethren roar'd, and raiine 
I 



From th'noifc of our ownc Drummes, 

Mtnen. Oh me the Godi.you muft not fpeik of that 
You muft deflre them to thinke vpon you. 

CoritL Thinke vpon me? Hang 'em, 
I would they would forget me, like the Vcrtue* 
Which our Diuincs lofc by em. 

Men. You'l marre all. 
He leaue you : Pray you fpeake to em,T pray you 
In wholfome manner* £;^/, 

Snter three ef the Citiz.evs, 

Corio, Bid them wafh their Faces, 
And kecpe their reeth cleane : So,heeie comes abrace^ 
Yeu know the caufc (Sir) of my ftanding hecrc. 

3 C'^' We do Sir.tell vs what hath brogght you too't. 

Corio, Mine ownc defert. 

2 Or. Yourownedclert. 
Coria. ],buimine owne defire. 

3 Ctt. How not your owne defire? 

Cono. No Sir,'t»»as neuer my defire yet to trouble the 
poorewith begging. 

jC/f. You muft thinke ifwegiueyou any tbitig, wc 
hope to gain* by y ou. 

Corie. Well then I pray.your price a'th'ConfuIfliip. 

1 Cit. The price is, to askc it kindly. 

Cgrie. Kindly fir, I pray let me hat : I haue wounds to 
(hew you, which fhall bee yours in priuate : your goou 
voice Sir, what fay you? 

^ Ctt. You fhatl ha't worthy Sir. 

Corto. A match Sir, there's in all two wotthie voyces 
bcgg'd : I haue your Almes, Adieu. 

J Cit, But tlasii fomethingodde. 

2 Of. And 'twere to g'uic againc : but 'tis no matter. 

Bxtunt. Enter twa otktr Citi^cens. 

Corial. Pray you now, ifit may ftand with tht nir.c 
of your voices, that I na.y bee Confull, 1 haue heerc the 
Cullomarie Gownc. 

I. You hauc defcrued Nobly of y out Counrrcy, and 
you haue not dcferued Nobly. 

Coriol. Your Enigma. 

1. You hauebinafcoargeto her enemies, you hauc 
bin a Rod to her Friends, you hauc not indecdc loacd the 
Common people. 

Corial . You fnould account mee the more Vcrtuous. 
thatlhauenot bin common inmyLtwe, I willfir flatter 
my fwornc Brother the people to earne a decrer eftima- 
tionofthemj'tis a conditionthey account gentle: & fincc 
the wifedome of their choice, is rather to hauc my Hat, 
then my Heart, I will practice the infinuanngnod,and be 
off to them moft counterfetly, that is fir, 1 will counter- 
fet the bewitchment of fomc popular man, and giue it 
bountifuU to the defircts ; Therefore befccth you, I may 
be ConfuH; 

2. Wee hope to findc you our friend: and therefore 
giue you our voices heartiH'. 

I. You haue rectyucd.roany wounds for your Coun- 
trcy. 

Cor$ol. I wil not Scale your knowledge with fhewing 
them. I will make much of your voyces, and i'o trouble 
you no farther. 

Bath. TheGods giue you icy Sir heartily. 

Coriol, Moft fwcet Voyces : 
Better it is to dye, better to fteruc. 
Then craue the higher, which firft we do dcferoc. 
Why in this Wooluifh tongue flioiiW I ftand hecrr, 
Tobegge of Hob and Dicke, that 6oi% apptcre 



l^he Tragedie of Coriolanui, 



n 



Their needlcrtc Vouches : Curtotne calls me too'c. 
Whst Cuftome wills in all th)ngs,QiouId wcdoo'i? 
The Duft oh antique Time would lye vnfwept, 
And mountainous Error be too highly heapc, 
For Troth to o'rc-peerc. Rather then foolc it fo. 
Let the high Office and the Honor go 
To one tlut would doe thus. 1 am halfc through, 
The one pan fuffeted,the other will I doe. 

Enter three Ctttt^ns mora. 
Here come moe Voyccs. 
Your Vdyces? for your Voyces I haue fought, 
Watcht for your Voyics: for your Voyccs, beare 
Of WoundSjtwo dozen odde: Battailes thrice (ix 
I haue feene,and heard of: for your Voyces, 
Haue done many things,fome lefTe/ome more : 
Your Voyces ? Indeca I would beConlull. 

x.Cit. Hec ha's done Nobly, and cannot goc without 
any honefl mans Voycc. 

2.C«r. Therefore let him be Caofull : theGodsgiuc 
him ioy,and make hhn good friend to the People. 

Ai. AmenjAmen.Ggd fauc ihce,NobIe CoHfull. 

C«Tio, Worthy Voycei, 

Enter A^eneuiM, tvith "Brutm and Scicinitts, 

Menc. You haue ftood your Limitation ; 
And the Tribunes endue you with the Peoples Voy ce, 
RcmaineSjthatin th'Officiall Maikes inucftcd, 
You anon doc meet the Senate. 
Corio. Is this done? 

5'dc/w.TheCuftomeofRcqueft you haue difcharg'd: 
The People doe admit you and arefummon'd 
To meet a'ion,vpon your appjobaiion. 
Corio. Where ? at the Scnarc-houfe ? 
Soicin, There, (^oriolaifts. 
Corio. May 1 change thefc Garments? 
Scicin. You may, Sir. 

Cc-j.That lie ftraight do: and knowing my felfc again, 
Rcpayre toth'Senatc-houfc. 

Altne, lie kcepe you company. Will you along ? 
Trut. We ftay here for the People. 
Scicin, Fare you well. ExeinttCoriel.ahdMene. 

HCiha's it now : and by his Lookcs,mcthinkes, 
Tis warme at's heart. 

'Brut. With a prowd heart he wore his humble Weeds : 
Will you difmiffc the People? 

Eriter the Plehtinns. 
iJcKi.How now,my Maflcf s,haue you chofc this man? 
I ,Ctt, He ha's our Voyces.Sir. 
Brut. We pray the Gods, he may deferue your loues. 
a.C»r. Ameo,Sir:to my poore vnwotthy notice. 
He mock'd v$,when he begg'd our Voyces. 
5.Cir.Certainely,he flowted vs downe-right. 
\.CU. No,V»si»i$kind of fpeech,hcdid not mock vs. 
2.Ctf. Not one amongft Vs.faue your felfe,but fayes 
He vs'd vs fcorivcfully : he fhould haue iTie w'd vs 
HisMarks of Merit, Wouods recciu'd for'i Countrey. 
Scicin. Why fohedid,Iamfure. 
AH. No,no;nomanfaw 'em. 
Ij.Crf. Hec faid hee had Wounds, 
Which he could fhew inptiuate : 
And with his Hatjthus wauing it in fcorne, 
I would be Confull, fayes he : aged Cuflomc, 
But by your Voyccs, will not fo permit me. 
Your Voyces therefore: when we graunted that, 
Here was,I thanke you for your Voyces,thankc you 



Your moftfv»eetVoyce»:now you haue lefty 00 rVovces. 
I haue no further with you. Was not this mockcnr?' 
Scicin. Why eycher were you ignorant to ice": ? 
Or feeing it,of fuch Chlldifn friendiineffc 
To yeeld your Voyces ? 

'Brut. Couldyounot haue told him, 
Aj you wj:re lefion'd : When he had no Power, 
But was a pettie feruant to the State, 
He was your Encmic, eiier I'pake agamft 
Your Liberties,3nd the Charters that you beare 
I'th'Bodyof the Wcale: and now arriuing 
A place of Potencic,and fwayo'th' State, 
If he fhouldftill malignantly remaine 
Faft Foe iQilV Pletieif, yonv Voyccs might 
Be Curfes to your Iclues. You fbould h.iue faid, 
That as his worthy deeds did claynic no lefl'e 
Then what he ftood for: fo his gracious nature 
Would thinke vpon you, for your Voyces, 
And tranflate his Mallicc towards yoti mta Loue 
Standing yout'friendly Lord, 

Scicin. Thus to haue faid. 
As you were fote-aduis*d,had tducht his Spirjr, 
And try'd his Inclination: from hjm pluckt 
Eyther his gracious Pron)ife,which you miglit 
As caufc had call'd you vp,hauc held him to , 
Orclfc ic would haucgall'd/his furlyrVature, 
Which eafily endures not Article, 
Tyinj: him to otfght, fo put;irg him to Rage, 
You nirtiilc! hnuc ta'ne th'aduancage of his Choller, 
And pals'd him vndcded. 

Brnt. Did you peicciuc. 
He did foUicitc you in free Contempt, 
When he did need your Loues: and doe you thinke. 
That his Coatempc Oiall not be brofing to you. 
When he hath power tocruOi;V\'hv,hjd /our Bodves 
No Heart arjfoog you? Or had you Tongues, to cry 
AgainftthcReaorflnipof ludgemcnt? 

Scicin, Haue you.cre now,deny'd the asker : 
And now againc.of him that did not aske^but mock, 
Bertow your fu'd-for Tongues? 

;5.C«'r.Hcc's not confirm'd,we may deny him yet. 

2-Cit. And will deny him : 
Jle haue fitic hundred Voyces of that found. 

I. Or. ] twice f!ue hundred, & their fricnds,to piece 'cm. 

"Brui.Gez you hence mdantly, and tell thofcfrierds, 
They haue chofeaConluil.that will from them take 
Their Liberties, m3kc iheni of no more Voycc 
Then DoggeSjthat are as often beat for batking. 
As therefore kept to doe fo. 

Scici.Lct. them anemble:and on a fafer ludgcoient, 
AH reuoke your ignorant cleiiion: Enforce bis Pride, 
And his old Hate vnto you: bcfides, forget not 
With what Contempt he wore th: humble Weed, 
How in his Suit he fcorn'd you: but your LoucS) 
Thinking vpon his Seruices,tooke from you 
Th'^pprchcnfionot his prefcnt portance. 
Which moft gibingly,vngrtuely,he did fadiion 
After the inuc:eratc Hate he bearca you. 

Bri4t. Lay a fault on v$,your Tribune*, 
That we labout d (no impediment bctwcenc) 
But that you muft caft your Eledion oo him. 

Scici. Say you chofc him,more after our commandment. 
Then as guided by your owne true affe6tions,and that 
Yout Minds prc-occupy'd with what you rather moft do, 
Then what you fhould.made you againft the graiiie 
To Voycc him Confull. Lay the fault on va, . 
bb "Brm. xj 



14. 



l^heTragedk of Cmolanus, 



Brnt. I.fparc v$ not ; Sjy.we tea A Ledutcs co you, 
How youngly he began to fcrue his Countrey, 
How long continued,and what (lock he fprings oK 
The Noble Houfc o'lh'C^rtutnt : from wlicnce came 
That yinctti "MarUHi fNttTHMS Daughter* Sonne: 
Who after great HoftiUiu hcrt was King, 
Of the lame Houfc Vnblim and Quinttu were. 
That ourbeft Watsr.brought by Conduiu hither. 
And Nobly nam'd, fo tw ice being Cenfor, 
Was hit great Anceftor. 

Sci!vi. One thus dcf raided, 
That harhbrfidf well in his perfon wrought. 
To be let high in place, we did commend 
To your rcmeiBbrance»: but you hauc found, 
Skalinghis prefect bearing with hi:, paft. 
That hec*s your fixed enemie; andreuoke 
Your fuddaine approbation. 

Bmt. Say you ne'rc had don't, 
(Harpe on that ftill) but by our putting on: 
And prcfently.whcii you hauc drawnc your number, 
RepairR toth* Capitoll. 

AS. Wcwill io: alinoftali repent in their eIe<5lion, 
SxcHHt TUbeians, 

"Brat . Let th em goe on : 
This Mutinie were betterput in hazard. 
Then ftay pa(t doubt.for greater : 
If,a$ his nature is,he fall in rage 
With their refufall, both obfcrue and aofwer 
The vantftgc of his anger. 

Scicin. Toth* Capitoll, come : 
We will be there before the ttreamc o'th' People: 
And this (hall fecme,as partly 'tij,their ownc, 
Which we bane goaded oa-ward. Excnnt. 



JBuf Tertius. 



Caritets, Enter Coriolatut, Mtaeuitu, aU tht C*ntry^ 
C»mi»iiu,Tttu/ Latiiu,a»d ether Sen aters, 

Ctrij. TmIIhs Aitffidiu^ then had made new head. 

Latttis. He had,my Lotd,aod that it was which caus'd 
Our fwifcerCompofitian. 

Corio. So then the Voices ftand but as at firft, 
Rcadic when time fliall prompt thcm.tu make roade 
Vpon's againe. 

Ctm They arc worne (Lord ConfuU) fo. 
That we fhall hardly in our ages fee 
Their Banners waue againe. 

Corio. Siwyoiiyitifjidius'f 

LtUMs. On fafegatd he came to me,8ud did corfc 
Againft the Volccs,for they had fo vildly 
Yeelded thcTowne : he is retyred to Antium. 

Cario. Spoke he of me ? 

Latins. He did, my Lord. 

Cario. How ? what ? 

Lotifts. How often he had metyoo Sword to Sword : 
That of all things vpon the E3tth,be hated 
Your perfon moft : That he would pawne his fortunes 
Tohopeiefrcrffftuuiion.fohcmigbt 
Be caird your Vanquifher. 

Cofia. At AniiUinhucshe? 

LiitiHs. At Antium, 

Corio. I w ifh I had a caufc to fecke him there. 
To oppofe hi* hatred fully. Welcome home. 

6nter SeicMius nad BrtUHt. 
Eehold,thcfe are thcTtibuncs of rhe People, 
The Tongues o'th' Common Mouth- 1 do dcfpifcthem : 



For they doc pranke khem in Autiiositie, 
Againftall Noble fuffcrancc, 

Sctcin. Paffc no further. 

Cor. Hah ? what is that ? 

Brut. It will bcdiingeroiis to goe on— No further. 

Corio. What makes this change ? 

Mene. The matter? 

Cow. Hath he not pafs'd tiie Nobje,and the Common: 

Brut. CommtMt^o. 

Corio. Hauc I had Children! '', oyr es ? 

.Tfwjr.Tribunes giuc w ay,he fliail J oth' Maiker place. 

Brut. ThePcoplcare incens'd againft him. 

Sctcin. Stop.ora!! will fall m broylc. 

Ceru. Arc thcfc your Heard ? 
Muft thcfc hauc Voyccs,tl«t can yecld them now. 
And flraight difclalm their toungs?what are your Offices^ 
You being their V'.->Mthes,why ruic y or nee their T«cth : 
Hauc you not fet them on ? 

Ment, Becalme,bec3lme. 

Coria. It is a purpos d thing,and gtowes by PJot, 
To curbe the will of iheNobilitie: 
Sufter't,and liuc with Inch at cannot tule, 
Norcuer will be ruled. 

Brut, Cali't not.u Plot : 
The People cry you mockt them : and of late, 
When Come was giuen \\\z\n^Atif, you rcpin'd,, 
Scandal'd the Suppliants : for the People, caJi'd them 
Time-pleafers.flatterets, fo?s to Nobiencfle. 

Cario» Why this was knowne before. 

Brut, Not to them all. 

Corio. Hauc you iiiform'd them fithtnce ^ 

"Brut. How?I infoimethefn ? 

Com. You arc like to doe fuch bufineffe. 

^rut. Not vnhke each way to better yours. 

Corio. Why then (hould I be Confull? by yond Clouds 
Let mc deferue fo ill as you,a.id make mc 
Your fellow Tribune, 

Sctcin. You (licw too much of that, 
For which the People i^irre; if vouvviL' paiTe 
To where you ate bound, you rouft enquirf your wav^ 
Which you arc out of,with a gci>tlcr fpirit, 
Oc neucr be fo Nobi.;at ii Confull, 
Nor y oake with him loi Tribune. 

Aien*. Let's be calme. 

Com, The People ate abus'd : iet on.this psUring 
Becomes not Rom^" : nor ha's (^orwUrtMi 
Deferu'd this (o diOionor'd Rabjltyd fslfcly 
I'th' piaine Way of his Merit. 

Corio. Tell mc of Cornc: this was my ipeech. 
And I will fpeak't againe. 

Mene. Not now, not novv. 

Senat. Not in this hcat,Sif,now. 

Cone- NowasIIiuCjIwill. 
My Nobiei friends, I craue their par donis 
For the mutable ranke-fented Meynie, 
Lfi them regard mc,at I doe not flatter. 
And therein behold themfeiues : I lay againe. 
In foothing thcm,wc noutiHi gainft our Senate 
The Cockle of Rcbellion,Infoience,Sedition, 
Which we i.ur felucs hauc plowed for.fow'd,^ fcsttcx V 
By n^ngling them with ¥S,the hoaor'd Numbf S; 
W'lo h. k not Vertuc, no,nor Power, but tha* 
Which rhey hauc giuen to Bcggers. 

Mene. WeU,D*more. 

StitM, No moBC words, we bcfccch yoa>.. 

Cm*, How i BO more i 



l^hf Tragedit of Corioktws. 



?5 



At for my Countrv, I haue fted my blood, 
Nov fearinc ootwarci force : So fhall my Lungs 
Come words till tlieir deca^jSgainft thole Mcaxcis 
Wlitch wcdil'damc Aiould Tetter V», vcc focghc 
The vety i^ny to catch chsrn. 

/;>•;<. Yn» fpcokc 3'th'pco»rc,.J? if you •were a God, 
Topunifii;No' *ni3n,of chffu Infirmity. 

Sicif. ' TvtreK well we let the peon !e know'c. 

Mi«r. Wh3t,what?Hi$,Chofier> 

Cor.Cholier?Vv'ere I as patient as the mVdnightflccn, 
Bv lotie,'t«ft't^'>'o be my in.ndc. 

Siciit. Jcisaminde that Tliall icmataapoilbn 
Where it is : irot poyfon any further. 

Cerio. Shall rerrwine? 
Heart you this Triton of the .'i^innofies ? Markc you 
His abfolutc Shall? 

Com, Twas from the Csnnon. 

Cor. Shall? O Go i ! bi-.t rnoft vnwifcPatricitnstwhy 
You graue, but wrcakieffe Senators, haueyou thus 
Giucn Hidra heere to choofe an Oftucr, 
That V(ich his peremptory Shall, being but 
The home, and iioifc o'th'MotiRers, wants not ipiric 
To fay, hee'ltumcyour Current in a ditch, 
And tr.ake your Channel! his? Ifhehaue power. 
Then Vile your Ignorance : Ifnone.awakc 
yourdan£;croMS Lenirv' -. U yoa ajc LearoM, 
Be not as common Fooles ; if you arc not, 
Let them hauc Cufh!or>s by you, You are Plebeian? _, 
If they be Senators : and they are no lefle. 
When b-oth your voices blended, the great'ft taflc 
Moft pallatcs theirs. Thcycboofetheir Magifiratc, 
And fdih a otK as he, who puts his Shall, 
His popular Shall, againft a grauer Bench 
Then cuer frown'd in Greece. By louc himfelfe, 
It makes the Confuls bafe : and my Souleakes 
Toknow,\A;hcntwo Authorities are vp, 
Neither Suprcame ;How foc^ne Confufion 
May enter 'twixt the gap of Botli,andtako 
The one by th'othCT. 

Csm- Well, on to'th'Marketplacc. 

Cario. Who euer gaae tnat CounfcU.to giue forth 
The Come a'th'Store-houfcgratiSjas'iwasvs'd 
Sometime in Greece. 

Mine, WclljWclljno more of that. 

C»r.Thogh there the people had more abfolute powre 
I fay they norifhtdifobediencc:fed,thcrUin of the State. 

"Bru. Why ("hall the people giuc 
Oae that fpeakes thus, their spjcz ? 

Corro. IlegiuemyReafons, 
More worthier then their VoyfesTliey knowtheCorne 
Was not our recorr.pcnce.rcfting well affut'd 
They ne're did fcruice for't ; being preft to'th'Warre, 
Eucn when iheNauell of the State was touch'd. 
They would not thred theGaces:ThiskJndc ofSerUice 
Did not defetuc Corne gratis. Being i'th Warre, 
There Mutinies atKl Reuolts, wherein they fticw'd 
MoR Valour fpoke not for them. Th'Accufation 
Which they banc often made againft the Senate, 
All caufc \'hbome, couJd neuer be the Natiue 
Ofour fo fraake Donation • Well, what then? 
Ho'v fhall this Bofome-multiplied, digeft 
The Senates CouKcfte ? Let deeds expreflfo 
What's like iok>t their words, We did rcqu«ft it. 
We ate the greater pole, an<l rn true feare 
They gauevs our dttnoands. Tlwis we-debafe 
The Nature ofour Scats, and make the Rabble 



Call our Cares, Fcares ; wlfle^ "ill in time 
Brcake ope the Lockcs a*ch'yei,«.rc, ami bring in 
T'lc Crowes to pccke the Eagles, 

Mene. Coine enough, 

'Brti. Enoiigh.wtci: otierineafurc. 

Corio, No, takeit^ore-. 
What tnaybcfworneby, 4.'0.h Ditjinennd Humane, 
Scale what I end wjthall. This double worfhip, 
Whcteon part do** difdaiue with caufc, the other 
IhTult without all I ..afon : when? Gentry ,Title,\vifedom 
Cannot conclude, but by tirt; yea and no 
Of general! Tgnorance, it mini omit 
Reall Ncceditie?, and giue wsy the whiJ-.? 
Tovnflable Slightneflc. Purpofc fo ban'dv'tfoHowcs, 
Nothing is:donc to puFpofc. Therefore befc?cch vou. 
You that vAM be kfle fearffull, then difcrct??. 
That loue the i-undamentall psr^cfScacc 
More then you doubt the chatige on'c ; Tha£*5rcfetrft 
A Noble life, before a Long,£r,d \V jfli, 
To iumpc a Body with a dangeroiis Phv-.lcke, 
Th.it's fuTC of death, without it : at once j<!uci<e©tTt 
The Multitudinous Tongue, let them not lickc 
The fwect which \i '.heir poyfon. Your difbonor 
Mangles true judgement, and beresues the State 
Of that Integrity which fhould hfcom't : 
Not hauing the power to do the goo<3 it woilM 
For th'lll which doth cbntroiJ't. 

Bru. Has faid enough. 

Sicin. Ha's fpokenhkcaTraicor .andfl^alTanf'^ver 
As Traitors do, 

Coric. Thou wreich,dcfpight ore-wbclaic tbce : 
What fhould the people do with thefc bald Tsibuncs ? 
On whom depending, their obedience failtfs 
To'th'greater Bench, in a Rebellion: 
When what's not mect,but what muft be, was law. 
Then were they chofcn : in a better hourc. 
Let what is meet, be fsicle it muftbc meet. 
And throw their power i'th'dul*. 

Bru, ManifeO Trc^fcn. 

Stem. This a Confiill ? No. 

EHter at> ty£dile. 

"Brn. The Ediles hoe : Let him be appreh«>t';d : 

Sicin. Go call the people, in whofe liamc my Selfc 
Attach thee as a Traitorous Innouator : 
A Foe to'th'publike Weale. Obey I charge thee, 
And follow to thine anfwer. 

Cario. Hence oldGoat. 

All. Wee'l Surety him. 

Com. A g'd nr, hards off. 

Corio . Hence rotteii tliing,or I fhall fhake tby bones 
Out of thy Garments. 

StciK, Helpc ye Citizens. 

Er.Xir a rahhle ofPUbentns tvith the t/£iilet. 

A-feyie. On bo^h fides more reft>eft. 

Shin. Hcerc's hcc, that would take frotnyou all your 
power. 

Brtt. Seize him e/£(i«/«. 

ylll. Downe with him:downe with hits, 

iSen, Weapons, weapons,weapons: 
They aU bujlle n^oHt Coriolnfttts, 
Tribunes, Patricfans.Cititens: what ho: 
Sicinita, Brut/Uy CorielanMSyCW\zeni. 

j^ll. Peace,pcace,pcacc,fia,y,hold,pC3ce. 

Mene. W'hat is about to be? I am out of Breath, 
Confufions necre.I cannot fpeake, You,Tribuncs 
To'th'pcoplc : C#r»Aa»«»,paiience : Speak g«od5/€-m»f.. 
Bb 1 Stem. I 



i6 



Tie Tragedie of Coriolanus, 



Sciei. Hcare me. People peace. 

jIH. Let's here our Tribune ; peace, fpcake, fpeake, 
rpeake. 

Scici. You are ar point to lofe your Liberties : 
M/trtim would haue all fiooi you; M^irtim, 
Whom late you hauc natn'd forConfoll. 

Meve. Fie, fie, fie , this is the way to kirtdic, not to 
quench. 

Sen*. To vnbuild the Citie,and to lay all flat. 

Scici. What i j the Citic,but the People ? 

uiR- TruCjthc People arc the Citic. 

"Brut, By theconfcnt of all, we were cAablifh'd the 
Peoples Magistrates. 

jiS. You fo rcmaine. 

MtMe. And To arc like to doe. 

Cam, That is the way to l«y the Citie flat, 
To bring the Roofc to the Foundation , 
And buricall)Whtchycc4iAin£lly raunges 
In heapet;,and piles of Ruine. 

Scici. This deferues Death. 

"Bw*. Or let vs ftand to our Auihorltle, 
Or let Vf lofc it : we doc, here pronounce, 
Vpon the part o'lh' Pcopltffin whofe power 
Wc were elo<9;cd tbcirs,?Wiir/«/« is worthy 
Of prefcntDcath. 

Scici. Therefore lay hold of him: 
Beare him toth* Rock Tarpeian, and from thence 
Into deftruftion caft him. 

'KrMi /Edilcs feize him. 

yill Pit. Yeeld Afartitu, yeeld. 

Menc. Hcare me one word, 'bcfecch you Tribune*, 
heare me but a word. 

ty£diles. Peace,peacc. 

Mene. Be that you fccmCitruIy your Countries friend. 
And temp'ratcly proceed to what you would 
Thus violently rcdrcffe. 

Srttt. Sir,thofc cold waye*, 
Thatfecme like prudent hclpes.ireverypoyfonous. 
Where the Difeafc is violent. Lay hands vpon him. 
And beare him to the Rock. Cvrio. drimtt hu Sword. 

Cario, No.llc die here : 
There's fomc among you haue beheld me fighting, 
Covne trie vpon your felues,vv hat you haue feene me. 

Meat. Downe with that Sword, Tribune* withdraw 
awWilev 

"Bmt. Lay hands vpon him. 

Mene. Hclpe J/4rf/«#,helpe : you that be noble,bcIpe 
him young and old. 

AU. Downe with him,downe with htm. Extuttt. 

In tbii THutiiiie, the TrihuneSi thet/£dUejf and I be 
PefpU art heat in. 

Mene. GoCjgct you to our Houfe: be gone.away. 
All willbennught elfe. 

r.Sc-.iA. Get you gone, 

■Cam. Stand faft,wc haue as many friends as cnemiis, 

Mene. Shall it be put to that ? 

Sena. The Gods forbid : 
I prychec noble friQnd,hcme to thy Houfe, 
Leaue vs to cure ihisCaufe. 

Mene. For 'lis » Sore vpon vs, 
You cannot Tent your felfc: be gone.'btiaech you. 

Corio. Come Su,»long with vs. 

Mtne. I would they wneBarb^tiaos.as they are, 
Though jaRomc littet'd* not Ron»ans,as they are not, 
Thoilgh cabwd i'th'Porcho'th' Capitol! : 
Be goncfpwtnot yov>r worthy Rage into your Tongue, 



One tin»e will owe viothtur, 

Ctrrio. On fairc ground,! could beat fortie of theffi. 

Mene. I could my felfc take vp a Brace o'th* beft of 
them, yea,the two Tribunes. 

Com. But DOW 'tis oddcs beyond Arlthaaetick, 
And Manhood is call'd Foolerie,whci) it fianrfs 
Againft a falling Fabrjck, Will you licncc. 
Before the Taggc reiurnc ? whofe Rage doth rjr.d 
Like interrupted Waters,ando'rc-bcarc 
What they arc vs'd to beare. 

Mene. Pray you be gone: 
lie trie whether my old Wit be in requeft 
With thofe that hauc but little: this muft be patcht 
Wi:h Cloth of any Colour. 

Com. Nay,corae away. Exermt Corh/anm and 

Comsnim, 

PAtri. This man ha's marr'd hirfortune. 

Mene, His nature is too noble for the World : 
He would not flatter iVflJWw for his Trident, 
Or loueSoTi power to T hundcr: his Heart's his Mouth: 
What his Brcft forges,that his Tongue muft vent, 
And being angry, does forget that euer 
He heard the Name of Death. ^ Noife vithitt. 

Here's goodly worke. 

Patri. ] would they were a bed. 

Mene. I would they were in Tyber. 
What the vengeance, could he not fpeake 'cm faire / 
Enter 'BrMunutdSicinius with the raible dgAint. 

Sictn, Where is this Viper, 
That v/ould deprypulate the city,& be euery oian hins&lf 

Mene. You worthy Tribunes. 

Sicin. He ftiall be ihrownc downe theTarpe'tan rock 
With rigorous hands : he hath refifled Law, 
And therefore Law ftiall fcorne him further "Triall 
Then the feuerity of the publike Power, 
Which he fo fets at naught . 

I Or. He (hall wellknow the Noble Tribunes arc 
The peoples tnouths,and wc theithands. 

All. He (hall fure ont. 

Mene. Sir,fir^ Sicin, Peace. 

(.Me. Donot cty hauocke, where you fholdbutbunt 
Withmodeft warrant. 

Sicin. Sir,how coni'ft that you haue hoipe 
To make this refcue ? 

Mene, H«etc me fpeake? As Idoknow 
The Confu]sworthineflc,fo can I name his Faults, 

Stcin. ConfoU? what Confull ? 

JHene, The Confull CoriolAtrnt, 

ifr«. He Confull. 

Ai. No,no,no,no,no. 

Mene. IfbytheTribunes leaue. 
And yours good people, 
1 may be heard, 1 would craue a word ortwo, 
The which (ball lume you to no further harioef 
Then fo much lofTc of time. 

Sic. Speake breefely then. 
For we are peremptory (o difpatcb 
This Viporous Traitor ; to eieft hjro heiKc 
Wcrtbut one danger,3nd to keepc him heete 
Our certaine death: therefore it is decreed. 
He dyes tonight. 

Mtuen. Now the good Gods forbid. 
That our renowned Rome whofe gratitude 
Towards her deferued Children.is enroll'd 
In loues owne Booke,like an vnnatunU Dam 
Should now eate vp b«r owbc. 

Sitin, 



The Tragedievf (Joriolanus. 



17 



Sicifi. He'« a Dit'cafcthat moft be cut away. 
O^et'to Oh hc'i a Limbe, that has buc a Difeafe 
Morta':!, cocntitofF: to cure !r,cafic. 
Wliat ha's he done to Roroc, thats worthy Jeath ? 
Killing our Et»cmics, the blood he hath loft 
(Which I dare vouch,is rnbrethen that he hath 
By many an Ounce^ he diopp'd it for his Country : 
And what iis lefr, to loolc it by his Countrcy, 
We^e to »s all that doo'c, and Ibffcr u 
A brand to th'cnd a'ch World. 
Sicia- This is clcane kamtne. 
BrHt. Meercly awry : 
When he did loue bis Country, it honourd him. 

jMtn:n, The fcruice ofthe foote 
Being once gangrcn'd, is noc then refptdled 
For V. hat before it wai. 

BrH, VVee'l licarc no nriore : 
Purfuc him to his houfe,anfi plticke him thence, 
Leaft his inf«£lion being of catching nature, 
Spred further. 

Menett. One word more, one word : 
This Tiger- footed-ragc, when it (hall find 
The harmc of vnskan d i wiftncfie, will (too late) 
Tye Leaden pounds too's heclcs. Proceed by ProcefiTe, 
Leaft parties (as he is bcIou'd)breakc outj 
.^nd facke great Ro«ie with Romanes.. 
Brut. If It were fo? 
Stein. What do ye talke ? 
Hauc we not had a laflc of his Obedience ? 
Our Ediles frnot : our felues refifted : come. 

Men*, Coniider this ; Ke ha's bin bred i'th'Warrcs 
Since a could draw a Sword, and is ilUfchool'd 
111 boulted Language : M,<:alc andBran together 
He throwes without diliinftion. Giuc melcaue, 
J lie go to him, atid vndercake to bring h>m in peace, 
Wiicf c he (hail anlwcr by a lawfull Forme 
(in peace) to his vtmoR perill, 

uScH. Noble Tribunes, 
It is '.he humane way : die other courfe 
W)ll proue :o bloody : and the end of it, 
Vnknownc to the Bej^mning. 

5yf. Noble /!/<?»;«;«,», be you then as the peoples officer; 
Mafters,lay downe youi Weapons. 
"Bth. Go not home. 

Sic, Kfeet on the Marketplace: wee'l attend you there: 
Where ifyoti btiog not MArtim,vtcc'\ proceedc 
Incur fitft way. 

Mtnen, llebrii^ him toyoo. 
Let noc dcHre your cotnpany : he muft come. 
Or what is worft will follow. 

Setta. Pray you let's t o hi m . Extunt Ornnes . 

Enter {'erit 'anfts with Ne(>lis, 
Corio.Let thempuU all about triine cares, prcfent mc 
Death on the Whecle, or at wildc Horles hccles. 
Or pile ten hiUes on theTarpeian Rocke, 
That the precipitation mi ghtc!-»wneftretch 
Below the bcame of fight; yet will I ftiU 
Bc(hui.tothem. 

Enter Voliimniti, 
Nahle. You do the Nobler, 
C<^io. I mufc my KJotber 
Do 5 not approuc mc fiirther, who was wont 
To call them Wollert VaflailcSj thingscrcated 
To buy and fell withGroats, to fbew barcbeads 
In Congregations, tcjyawne, be ftiU, and wonder. 
When one buc of ray ordmancc flood ^^p 



To fpeakeof Pcacc.or Warre. 1 talke of you. 
Why did you wifli hk milder? Would you haue me 
Falfe to my Nature ? Rather fay, 1 play 
The man I am. 

XJolum. Ohlir,fir,fir, 
I would haue had you put your po wtr well on 
Before you had wornc it cut. 
Cortc. Let go. 

Vol. You might haue bccne enough the man you arc, 
With firiuing icfTe to be To : Leifet had bm 
The things of your difpofitions, lif 
You had not (hew'd them how yc w;rc difpos'd 
Ere they lackd power toctofi'eyou. 
Ceno. Let them hang.j 
Volttm. Land burne too. 

Enter .McneKtm with the Senator!, 
Men, Come, cotr.e, you haue bin too roughjfomthing 
too rough ! you mult returnc,and mend it. 

Sen. There s no remedy, 
VnlelTe by not fo domg, our good Citie 
Cleaucin the midd'it.aiid pendi. 

Volum. Pray be counlaii'd ; 
I haue a heart as little apt as yours. 
But yet a brainc, that Icades w^ vfc of Anger 
To better vantage. 

Mene. Well faid,Noble wonaao : 
Before he iTiould thus ftoopc.to'th'hcart, but that 
The*violent fit a'th'time ciaues it as Phyficke 
For the whole State; I would put mine Aroioucon, 
Which I can fcarfcly bcaro. 
Corto, What muft 1 do •• 
Ateac. Returnc to th'Tribuncs. 
Cerh. Well,whatthen?whatthen? 
Mene. Repent,what youhauefpoke. 
Corio. For them, I cannot do it to the Gods, 
Muft I then doo't to them ? 

Volttm. Youarctooabfolute, 
Though therein you can neuer betoo Noble, 
Eut 'A' hen extremities fpeakc. I liauc heard you fay. 
Honor and Policy, like vnicucr'd Friends, 
J 't h' W arrc do grow together : Grant that,and tell mc 
'. Jn PcacCjWha: each of them by th'other loofe. 
That they combine not ihcrc? 
Cario. Tufh,tufii. 
( U\feiie. A good demand. 

Velum. If it be Honor in your Warres,to feeme 
The fame you are not, which for your beft cnd« 
You adopt yonrpolicy: How isitlefTcorwoifc 
Thai it fhall hold Companionfiiip in Peace 
With Honour,a$in Warre; fincc that to both 
It flaiids in likerequeft. 

Corio. Why force you this.' 
'Uolitm. Becaufe,ihat 
Now it Jyes you on to fpeakc to th'people: 
Not by your owne inftrutSion, nor by'th'matter 
Which your heart prompts youjbut withiuch words 
That arc but roated in your Tongue; 
Though but Baiiards,andSyHables 
Of no allowance, to yout bofomcs truth. 
Now, thss no more diflionors you at all, 
Then to take in a Towne with gentle words. 
Which e!fe would put y*u to your fortune, and 
The hazard of much blood. 
I iwould dilTerfJble with my Nature, where 
Mv Fortunes and my Friends at ftake,requii'd 
1 Owiild do fo in Honor, I am in this 

bb? Yonr/ 



i8 



Yout Wirc,yourSoniie:Thel"e Scnators,thc Nobles, 
And you,will raclicj: flicw our gencrall Lowts, 
Ho'.v you cai frownct'.rcn i'pcnd a fawne vpon'coij 
Forthciiihentioceof their louei,and fafegard 
Of what tliat wane mjgiit riiinc. 

(.^{(Hcn. Noble Lady, 
Conic goc with vs.fpeakc faire: you may faluc Co, 
Not what is dangerous ])releiic,but the iofic 
Of what is pal) 

Z/olum. I invtl»cenow,niySonne, 
Goe to them,>vith this Bonnci in thy hand. 
And thus farre hauiog Rrctcht it(hcrc be with tlicm) 
Thy Knee burti'ig the (tones: for in fuch bulincfTc 
Aitiou is eloqucncc^atid the eyes of th'ignorant 
Mote learned then the catesjWauing thy hcnd. 
Which often thus correJbng thy (tout heai t. 
Now humble as the ripcft Mulberry, 
That wil! not hold the handling : or fay to them, 
Thou art their SouIdicr,an<l being bred in bro) les. 
Haft not the fofc way.which thou do'fl confetfc 
Were fit for ihee to vfc.as they to clayme. 
In asking their good Jouci^ but thou wilt frirac 
Thy felfc (forlooih) hereafter theirs fo farrc. 
As thou haft power and perfon. 

Mciien This but done, 
Euen as fhe fpcakcs.why their hearts were yours : 
For they hsuc P3rdon$,being ask'd,as free. 
As vvor'/S to little purpofe. 

Vclim. Frythoenow, 
Goe.and be ruVd : although I know thoubsdft rather 
Follow thine Encmie in a ficric Gulfe, 
Then flatter him in a Bo wcf. €»ter Cemmm. 

Here is Cominim> 

Com. 1 haue beene i'lh' Marker place: «nd Sir 'tis fit 
You make ftroag parcic.or defend your fclfe 
By calmenefrc,o"r by abfence: all'i in anger. 
Menen. Oncly fairc fpeech. 

Com. I tbinke'cwilirerue,if he can thereto frame his 
fpiric, 

Volam. He muft.and will ; 
Prythcc now fay you will, and goe about it. 

Corto. Mufti goe (Tiew them my vnbatb'd Sconce > 
Muft I with my bafe Tongue ginc to my Noble Heart 
A Lyc.thatitmuft bcarc well ? Iwilldoo't : 
Yet were there buc this fingle Ploc,ro loofe 
This Mould of yl/.<rf/*«,thcy to duft fhould grinde It, 
And ciKow*t againft the Winde. Toth' Market place : 
You haue put me now t o fuch a part,which ncuer 
I fl-vall d'fcharge toth' Life. 

Com. Come, come.wce'le prompt you. 
VoIhm. I p' ychee now iWect Son.as thou haft faid 
My praifes made thee firft a Souldier ; fo 
Tohauc my priviie fr>r tins, performe aparc 
Thou hift not done before. 

Corio. WfllJ murtdoo't: 
Awayrnv difpoficion, andpoflcflcme 
Some Harlots fpiric ; My throat of Warre be turu'd, 
Wiichquicr'd with my Drumnoeinto a Pipe, 
Small as an Eunuch, or the Vugin voyce 
That Babies !;i! 1 a-llcepc : The fmiles of Knaue» 
Ten: m my cht ekes, and Schoole-boyes Tcares take vp 
ThcGlaOesofmyfight: A Deggars Tongue 
Make motion through my Lips,and my Arm'd kneef 
Vv'iio bow d but in oiy Stirrop, bend like his 
Tbathatiueceiu'd anAlmes. Iwillnotdoo't, 
Leaft I lutceafe to hoOot mineowne truth. 



ne Trdgedie of fpmldnm. 



And by my /bodies a(Siion, tcacii my Mindc 
A mop inherent I'.aienejfe. 

Folutn, At thy choice then : 
To beggeof lacc, it is my moredif-honor, 
Then thou of thtm. Come all to ruinc, !« 
Thy Mother i athcr feeic thy Pride, then fearc 
Thy dangerous Stomneflc : for I mockc at death 
With as t>igge heart as ihou. Do a thou lift, 
Thy Valiantneffe was mine, thou luck 'ft it from me : 
But owe thy Pride thy feife, 

Cers9, Pray be content ; 
Mother, 1 am going to the Market place : 
Chide me no more, lie Mountcbanke their Louci, 
Cogge their Heaits from them,and come home bclou'd 
OfaSl the Trade* in Rome. Looke.I am going: 
Commend me to my Wife, !!«; returne ConfuKj, 
Or neuei truft to what my Tongu--: can do 
I'th way of Flattery furcbcr. 

Volnm. Do your will. ExstV^olumnia 

Cew, Away,thc Tribunes do attend you:airo your felf 
Toanfwermildely : for they are prcpar'd 
With Accufations, as I hearc more ftrong 
Then are vpon you yet. 

Coria. The word is, Mildely. Pray you let vs go, 
Lctthem accufemcby inaention .-I 
Will anfwer in mine Honor. 

Menen. 1, but mildely. 

Corio. Wcllraildclybcit then, Mildely. fxe»nt 

Snter Sicwim and Brutus, 
ISrii. In thi.; point chai'ge him home,that be afre£ts 
Tyrannicail power : If he euade vs there, 
Inforce him with his enuy to thepeople. 
And that rhe Spoilc got on the A«tiali 
Was nc'tc dilttibuted. What,will he come ? 

Enter aa Edilt, 

£diU. Hee'scomming. 

Bru. How attompanied i* 

tdile. With old Afe>iemHi,znA thofe Senators 
That alwayes fauoui'd liim. 

Siciu. Haue you a Catalogue 
of all the Voice*, that we haucprocur'd.fctdowneby'th 

Edile, 1 haue : 'tis ready. (Pole f 

Sicin, Haue you ccllecled them by Tribes? 

EdiU. I haue. 

Sicin. Affemblc prefenily the people hither s 
And when tiiey heare me fay, itfliall be fo, 
TthVightand ftrength a'th'Coinmons : be it either- 
For death, for fine, or Baniftiment, then let theca 
If I fay Finc.cry Fine ; if Death, cry Death, 
Infifting on the oldc prcro^atiue 
And power i'th Truth a'th Caufe. 

iMle, I fliallinformethem. 

"BrM. And when fuch time they haue begun to cry, 
Let them Bot reafe, but<with a dinnc confus'd 
Inforce the prefeiit Execution 
Of wb:^t we chance to Sentence, 
SdK Very well. 

Skat. Make them be flrong.and ready for this hint 
When we ftiall hap to giu'tthcm. 

"Bru. Go about it. 
Put him to Qwller ftraite, he hath bene vs'd 
Euer to conquer, and to haue his worth 
Of contradidton. Being once chafe, he cannot 
Be r?in'd againe toTeif pctanc«,thcii ^<- Ipeakes 

Whst's 



^helr^gedieof (^oriolanus. 



Whai s in his hcaTt,ailclthat is tlic« which l^i^Wcs 
With v$ to brcike his nccke. 

Enter C^ri»ia>tia,7yifneniHi,Md Cm$i-' 
n:tu,with others. 

Stein. Wcll,liecre he comes. 

5Wff»f, Calmely, I do befccch you. 

Com. I, a» an Hoftlf r, t!iat tourth pooreft pcccc 
Will bcaic the Nr.aac by'th Volume : 
Th'honor'd Goddcii 

Kecpe Romc^n fafcrv. and the Chaires of luftice 
Supplied with worthy n-.en, j-lint lone amongs 
Through oat Urge Temples with y fhcwcsofpeace 
And net oor ftrects with Warrc. 

J Sen, Ainen.Afncn. 

(J^effe. ANoblcwifli. 

E«ier the Edilewnh the PUhetMif. 

Skin. Dravvneere yc people. 

Sdtle. Lift to your Tribunes. Audience: 
Peace 1 fav. 

Cor 10, Firft heare me fpeake. 

"BathTri, Wcli.fay : Peace hoe. 

^oria. Shall 1 be charg'd no further then this prefent t 
MulV all determine hcere ? 

Stem. I do demand, 
f f you lubmityou to the peoples voices. 
Allow t heir Officers, and are concent 
To i'uffer lawfull Cenfurc for fuch faults 
As Giall be pron'd vpon you . 

Cario. I am Content. 

Afe»e. Lo Citizens,he fayes he is Content. 
The warlike Scruice he ha'i tione, confider : Thinke 
Vpon the wounds his body bcares, which fhcw 
LikeGraues i'thholy Church-yard. 

Cor-o, Scratchcii with Briars, fcarres to moue 
Laughter cncly, 

.ifene. Confider further : 
That when he fpeakts not like a Citizen, 
You finde him hke a Soldier : do not take 
His rougher Af^ions for malicious I'oundi: 
But as I Tay, fuch as become a Soldier, 
Rather then cnuy you. 

Com. Well, wd!, no more. 

Ceno. What is the matter. 
That beinp pafl for Confull with full voyce : 
lam fodifhonour'd, that the very hourc 
You take it offagainc. 

Sicit:, Aufwertovs. 

Cerio. Say then : 'tis true, I ought fo 

Sfcin.We charge you,that you haiie contriu'd to take 
From Rome all feafon'd Office, andiowindc 
Y our felfe into a power ty rannicall. 
For which you arc aTraitor to the people. 

Corio. HowPTilycor? 

Mefie . Nay temperately : yo'ir proroife, 

Corio. The fires I'th'loweft hell, Fould in the people : 
Call me their rraitor,thouiniurious Tribune. 
Within thine eyes fate twenty thoufand deaths 
In thy hands dutcht : as many Millions in 
Thy lying tongue, both mimbcrs. 1 would Cay 
Thou lyeft vnto thee, with a voice as free. 
As I do pray the Gods. 

Sicia. Markc you this people? 

y^U. To'th'Rocke, to'th'Rocke with him. 

Sicia. Peace: 
Wc neede not put new matter to his cinrge : 
What you hauc fccnchim do, and heard him fpeake : 



19 



Beating yoor Officer?, ctirfing your feloes, 
Oppofiog Lawcy with ftroakcs,andheerc defying 
Thofc whofc great power muR try him. 
Euea this fo criminall, and in fuch capitall kinde 
Dcfcruci th'cxtreamcfl death. 

2?n«, But fince he hath feru'd well for Rome. 

Corio. What do you prate of Seruice. 

"Brut. I talkc of that, that know it. 

Car 10. You ? 

lUene.lidns ihcproraifc that vou made vour mother. 

Com. Know, I pray you. 

Cors9. lie know lio further : 
Let them pror-ouncc the llecpe Tarpeian death. 
Vagabond exile, Flcaing, pent to lin j;cr 
But with a graine a day, I would not buy 
Their mcrcie,at the price of one faire word, 
Nor checkemy Courage for what they can !^:ue. 
To haue'i with faying, Good morrow. 

Sicia, For that he ha's 
(As much as in him lies } from time to time 
Enui'd againfl the people ; (ceking meanes 
To plucke away their power: as now at laft, 
Giuen Hollilc Hrokes, and thar not in theprefencc 
Of dreaded luftice, but on the Miniflcrs 
That doth diftributc it. In the name a'th'peoplc. 
And in the power ofvs the Tribunes, wee 
(£u'n from this inttant) banifli him our Citie 
Inpetill ofprecipitation 
From off the Rocke Tarpeian, neucr more 
To enter our Romegatej. I'tlrPcopIesname, 
1 fay icfballbeefo. 

JS. It Avail be fo, it fhall be fo : let bim awsy ; 
Hee's banilh'd, and it fhall be fo. 

Com. Heare me my M3ftcrs,and my common friends. 

Skirt. He's fentenc'd ; No more hearing. 

Com. Let me fpeake: 
I haue bene ConfuD^and can fhew from Rome 
Her Enemies markcs vpon roc. I do louc 
My Countries good, with a refpeft more tender. 
More holy, and profound, then mine owne life. 
My deete Wiucs eftimatc, her wombes encreafe, 
Andtrcafureofmy Loyne$:thenifIwould 
Speakcthat. 

Siciti. Wc know your drlfu Speake v/bat ? 

"Sru. There's no mote to be iaid, but he is banifli'd 
As Enemy to the people, and his Countrcy. 
Itlhallbeefo. 

y^i'. It riiall be fo, it fhall be fo. 

Corio. You common cry ofCurs.whofe breath I hate. 
As recke a'ch'rotten Fcnnes ; whole Loueslprize, 
As the dead Carkaffes of vnburied men, 
Tnat do corrupt my Aye : I banifh you. 
And heere remaine with your vncertair.tic. 
Let eucry feeble Rumor fhake yoor hes'ts : 
Your Enemies, with nodding of their Plumes 
Fan you into difpairc : Haue the power ftill 
To banifii your Defenders, till at length 
Your igiorance (which findcs not till it feeles. 
Making' but rcieruation of youpfclues. 
Still your owneFocs)deIiuer you 
As moll abated Captiues, to fome Nation 
That wonne you without blowes, detpifng 
Fen- you the City. Thus I turnc my backc; 
There is a world cifcwhere. 

Exeunt Cortolttfuu, CcmtntiUy<»tth Cmm-tfi'! 
Thej *S{houty andthram vp then C.'S/. 
Etit/ef 



20 



cdiic The peoples Enemy is gone,is gone. 

^■^11. Our eaemy isbanifh'd.he i$ gone; Hoo,oo, 

Sictn. Go fee him out at Gates.aDd foUow him 
As he hacli t'ollow'd you, vvjih all defpighc 
Giiishim tlcleru'd vexation. Let a guard 
AttL-r.dytthtough the City- 

jiil. Comc,fpme,lets lee him out o,t gate? ,come: 
The Gods prclcrucourNdbicTibuneSjCome. Exemt, 



The TrdgedteafQoriQlmus, 



A^us Quartus, 



Etter Cgnoldnw yo'umniiti firgt[t4,Afctie>iiM, Comimm, 
•yvith thtjofig Nobility of Rome. 

Corio.Comc Icaiieyour teares:a brief fvwehthcbcaft 
With many heads butts me away. Nay Mother, 
Whcr< is your ancient Courage ?You wete vs'd 
To (ayiExtrcamities was the trier of fpirits, 
That common chauccs. Common nwn could bearc, 
That when the Sea \va$ calme, all Boats ahkc 
Shew**! Mafterfnip in floating. Fortunes blowes, 
When moft ftrookc home, being gcncie woundcd,craues 
ANoblc cunning. You were vs.'d to load mc 
WithPf ecepts that would make inuincibic 
The heart that coiin'd them. 

y,rg Oh hcaucvisIOhcauens.' 

Corie. Nay, I pryihce woman. 

rb/.Now the Red Peftilcnce fti ike al Trades in Rome, 
And Occupations pcrifli. 

^or«». What.what, what : 
I {hall be lou'd when I am lacked, ^?ay Mother, 
Refunie that Spirit, when you were wont to fay. 
If you hadbecnc the; Wiicoi HercHks, 
Six of his Labours youl'd hauc done, and fau'd 
Your Husband fo much fwet. CeminiMf 
Droopcnot, Adieu; Farewell my Wifc,my Mother, 
lie do well yet. Thou old and true Memr.iM, 
Thy tearcs arc falter then a yonf.cr mans. 
And venomous to thine eyes. My (fomctimc)Genetall, 
I haue fcene thcSteinie, and thou haft o^t beheld 
Heart-hafclning fpeciacles. Tell thefc fad women, 
Tis fond to waile incuitable ftrokes. 
As 'tis to laugh at 'cm. My Mother,you wot well 
My hazards ftill haiie Ipeenc your folace,and 
Beleeu't not lightly, though I go alone 
Eike to a lonely Dragon, that his fenne 
vlakes fear'd,and talk'd of more then fecnc : your Sonne 
Will or exceed the Common,ot be caughc 
With cautelous baits and practice. 

Volnm. My firft fonnc, 
Whether will thou go ? Take good Commiut 
With thee awhile : Determine on fomc courfc 
Mote then a wildc txpofture, to each chance 
That ftart's i'th' way before tl»c«. 

Ctrio. O the Gods ! 

Cww.lk follow thee a Moneth, deuif* with ihcc 
Where thou (halt reft, that thou may'ft hcatc of vs. 
And we of thee. So if the time thruft forth 
AcaulefotthyRepcale.weftiallnot fcod 
O'tc the vaft world, to fcckc afinglc wan. 
And loofe aduatitagc, which doth cuer coole 
hh'abfence of the nceder. 

Cm9. Farcyt -«c^! : 
Thou hail y caics ypoo tbc«, And thoo arc toe-fuH 



* Ofthc vvarrcs fui fees, to go roue with one 
That's yet vnbruis'd :bririgruebutout at^ate. 
Come my fwect wife, my dcercft Mother,and 
My Friends of Noble touch : whexi I am forth. 
Bid mc farewell, and fmile. I pray you cotne ; 
While 1 remainc a^ouc the ground, ytju ftiall 
Hearc froni meftill, and neuct ofinc oiight 
But what is like me foimerly. 

LMemn. That's worthily '' 

A.s any earc can hcare. Comejlct's not weepe. 
If I could Ihake offbut one feuen ycerex 
From thcfe old arroes ai^d legges, by thegoiod Gods 
rid with thee,euery foot. 

C^^fo- Giiie mc thy hand, co.«e. 6'xeunt 

Enter the two Tribunes, Sieini»f,dfid'Sr>t{tu, 
v^ththe Edtlf. 

i'/r/'w.Bid them all heme, he's gone: & wce'l no further, 
The Nobility are vcxcd,vvi>om vvc fee hauc fidcd 
Inhisbchalfe. 

*5r»t. Now we haue fttcwnc our power,. 
Let vs feeme humbler after \i is done> 
Then when ii w^as a dooing. 

Sicin. Bid them home; fay their great cneoiy is gotje. 
And theyjftand in rhcir ancient firength. 

"Brut. Difmiflc them home. Here comes his Mother. 
\ SrJterF'alHmni4iF'tr£ilia,*wd(^entiiiM. 

Sicin. Let's not meet her. 
rSrat Why? 
Stcin. They fay {he's mad. 

'Brnt. They hauc tanc note of vs:kecpe on your way* 
Volttm. Oh y'are well ract : 
Thhoorded plague a'ch'Godt rcquit your loue. 
Menen. Peacejpeacc,benot foloud. 
Folum. if thai 1 could for weeping, you (hould hearc, 
Nay,and you fliall hearc fomc. Will you be gone i 

(^frg. You {hall (lay too ; I would 1 had thcpowcr 
To fay fo to my Husband.t 
Sicin, Are you mankinde ? 

Foium, I foole,is that a {bame. Note but this Foolc, 
Was not a roan my Father? Had'ft thouFos{hip 
TobanifhhimthatftrookemofC blowcsfoi Rome 
Then thou hailfpokcn words. 
Stem. Oh blc{red Hcauens ! 
Volum. Moc Noble blowcs, then cuer ^ wife words. 
And for Homes good, lie tell thee what : yet goc : 
Nay but thou Ihalt Hay too : I would my Sonne 
Were in Arabia,and thy Tribe before him. 
His good Sword in his haiid. 
Sicin, What then? 

^«>^.What then? HceHd make an end of thy poftcrity 
Volum. Baftards,and all. 
Good man, the Woundnkat h»docs bcate for Rome ! 
Menen. Come,come,pe9ce. 
Sicin. I would be had continued \o hit Couotry 
As he began,nnd not vnknit hirofclfc 
The Noble knot be made. 
Br*: I would he had. 

Volum. 1 would he had ? 'Twas you inc«jft the rable, 
Cats, that can iodge asfitly of his worth, 
A« I can of thofe My(»eries which hcaucn 
Will not haue earth to know. 
Bmt. Pray let's go. 
Volmm. Now pray (ir get you gooc 
You haue done a brauc decde : Ere vou go, heart this : 
i As farre as doth the CapitoJlexceede 

This 



The-oBcancft houfc in Rome,' fo firre my Sonne 



Tie Tragt^ of ComUnus. 



%i 



This L»die$ Husband hoeie; this /'do yiMi fee) 
Whom you haucbmifhVij does exceed you all. 

'Bnt. V^elljWeU.weclleiueyou. 

SietH. \\ by ftay we to be baited 
With one that wants her Wfi?. Exit Tribmu. 

V»lum* Take roy Pisycr* with you. 
1 would the Gods had rxothJngclfe lodo. 
But to confirms my Curfies. Coiitd I meeic 'cm 
But once a day, it would-vflcloggc roy hc^rr 
of •«»bat lycAb«auy too't. 

cMene. You hauc told there home. 
And by tnw tioth you bane caufc : you'l Sup with me. 

Fflnm. A«igcrs my Meatc : I fuppe vpon any felftf. 
And io Ihall fteruc with Feeding ; Com€,lei'j go, 
Lcauc this faint-puling, and lament as i do, 
la Anger, /«B*.ltke : Comc^come^connet Sxeuitt 

MfM. Fie,fic,fie. Extt. 

Enter a 'E.smait, and n Folce, 

Rem. 1 know you well fir, and you know mec : your 
name I ihinke \%jid>ia*>. 

V«ici. It is ii>fir, truly i haue forgot you. 

Rom. lam a Roman, andmy Sciuicctareas youare, 
agajnft cm. Know you me yet. 

jf^elce. NicAtitr : fio, 

Rom. The fame fir. 

K^lct, You had more Beard when T lafifawyon, but 
your Fauou* is well appeav'd by your Tongue. What's 
the Ne WC5 in Rome : I haue a Note from the Volcean 
Rate to findc you out there. You haue well i'auedrocea 
dayesiourney. 

7^. There hath becne in Rome ftraunge Infurrc£>i- 
ons : The people, againft the Scnatours, l^atricians, and 
Nobles. 

Vol. Hath bin; is itcnded then? Our State thinks not 
fo, they arc in a moil warlike preparatton,& hope to com 
Tpon theoijin the beate of their diuifion 

Rom. Themaincblaze oficispaft, butafmallthing 
would make it flame againe. For the Nobles receyuefo 
to heart, the Banifhmcnt of that worthy CorioUnus, that 
they are in a lipe aptnciTe, to take al power from the peo- 
ple, and to plucke from them their Tribunes for euer . 
This lyes glowing I can tell you.and is alonoll mature for 
ehcYioIcnt breaking out. 

Vol, CartoLtHus^zniCht} 

Ti^m. Banilh'dfir. 

Vol. You will be welcome with this intelligence /W- 
e»tor, 

Rom. The day ferue$.well for them now. I haue beard 
ttfaide, the fiiteil time to corrupt a mans Wife, is when 
dice's faloe out with her husband. Your Noble TMitt 
y^»(^«i»*f well appcare well in thefc Warres, his gteat 
Oppofer CoriolMMt being now in no requcft of his cofin- 
trey. 

Voice. Hecaanotchoofe: I am moft fortuDate> thus 
accidentally to encounter you. You haue ended my Ba- 
fioeifejand I will merrily accompany you home. 

Rom, I ffiail betwcene this and Supper, tell you mofl 
ftrange things from Rome : all tending to the good of 
their Aduerfatic*. Hiueyou an Army ready fay-you.? 

Ve/. ArooRRoyaiIon<: ThcCcnwwions, andiihcir 
charges diftin£lly biileitcd already in tb'entertainmcnt, 
and to be on foot at an houres warning, 

Rom. I am ioyfuU to heare of their re^joeffcjnrf am 
the man I cbinke, that fhall fet them in preCent Aif^o(k.So 
fir,beKtiJy well roet.and moft glad of yoar Coq^ay. 

Vo/cf. Yoa take my part from qje fir, Ibaoetbc raoft 



caufe to be glad of youK, 

Rom. Well, let .»s go together. Exeunt. 

Enter CorioUnt*' inmeane yfpparrell, Dif- 
gHijii^d mujjied, 

Cono. A goodly City is tbjs Antium. Citty, 
'Tis-I that niJadc thy Widdowcs : Many an hcyrc 
Of thefc faire Edifices fore my VVarrcs 
Haue I heard groane,and drop : Then kpcv/ me HOC, 
Leaft that thy Wiues with Spits, andBoy« with fioees 
InpunyBattellfliyme. Sane you fir. 
Enter a Citizen. 

Cit. And you* 

Corio^ Dire<ft me,if i« be your wilUvhcrc great sAftf- 
fidius lies : Is he in Arttmm ? 

Cit. He is, and Feaftsihe Nobles of the State, at bis 
houfc this night. 

Corio. Which is his houfe,bcfeech vou .' 

Ctt. This beetc beforeyou, 

Corio. Tbankc you fir, farcwci !. Exit Citi^ep 

Oh World, thy flippery turnc-: ! Fricodsnow fad fworn, 
Whofc doubie bolon-es fccmes to wcare one heart, 
Whofe Houres, whofc Beo.whofe Meale and Exctcifir 
Are ftill together : who T. via (as 't\vere}in Loue, 
Vnfeparable, fhall within this iioure, 
Ort a diflentioQ of a Doit, breakc out 
To bittereft Enmity ; So tcllelf Foes, 
Whofe Pa/5op$, and wbofe Plots haue broke thckfleep 
To take the one the other, by fome chance. 
Some trickc not worth an Egge, (ihall grow deere fiends 
And ioter-ioype their yffucs. So with roe. 
My Birth-place haue I. and ncy loues vpon 
This Eiiemie Townc ; He enter, if he flay me 
He docs faireluftice : if he giuc me way, 
lie do hie Country Scruicc. Eidt, 

Mujicke flaj/es, 8'ntei a Sermngmav. 

I Ser. Wine, Wice, Wine . What feiuice is hccrc ? I 
thinkc our Fcllowes art afleepe. 

Snter another SersiwgmiiH, 

a Ser. Where's ^«««;my M.cals for hiiu.- Coiiu»Ex7t 
Enter CmioUntU. 

Corio. A gootlty Houfe ; 
The Fc^ftfrnelj w<cll :but [ appearcnoilikcaGueft. 
Enter thefirfi Seruingman. 

1 ^rr.What would you hauc FriendPwhencc areycii? 
Here's no place for yoo; Pra^y gotothcdoore? Exit 

Cortp. I hauc defcru'd no better entcrtainment,in be- 
ing Cpr/o/4»«tf, Enter fecondStrMMt, 

1 Ser, Whenceareyoufir? Ha's the Porter his eyCi in 
his head, that he giucs entrance to fuchCompaDipnt ? 
Pray get you out. 

Corio. Away. 

^ Ser. Avay ? Get you away. 

Corif, Now th'art troublcforoe. 

iSer. Areyoufobraues lie haueyduulkt^ith anon 
Enter j SemingmoH, tire i mettt him. 

3 What Fcllowes this? 

I Aftrangconeascucrllook'donl: 1 cannot get hisn 
out o'th'houfe : Pryth«e call my Mafttt to him. 

? What haue youto do heiefcUow? Pray you auoid 
thehontc- 

Corio.. L«t me but ftand,! will nobbtut yourHartb. 

; What arc you i* 

Corio. A Gentleman. 

3 Aaiant'Jlotupooreone. 

Corio. TruCjfo Lam. 

Z Pcay yonpoore Gcntleiiian,taJ<;e vp fone other Oa- 



22 



Exitfecsnd Seritingm^.n. 



tii-n : llecrc's no place for you,pray yon aiiokh Come. 

Cort9. Follow your Funftion.gOjand batccii on coklc 
bits. PuihM bim avjiiyfr«m hirn, 

5 What you will not? Prvchwrci! my M.-tiilcr whac 
3 ftcangcGneft heiia'slicerc. 

; Anain-ial!. 

J WhcvcUvvcVi^chcu? 

Ci)rw. V'.idci the Canopy, 

3 Vnder ihc Canopy ? 

Carit, !. 

3 Wheve's that? 

Corio. I'ch Ciiv of Kites and Crowes. 

J I'ch City of Kites and Crowes ? What an Affe it is, 
then thou dwcl'll with Dawes too ? 

Couo, No, I rcrucnot thy Maftei. 

^ How fir? Do yoa meddle wich my Maflcr ? 

Corto. 1,115 an honefter feruice, then to meddle with 
thv Mifiris : Thou rrat'ft,and prat'h, fcrtre with thy tren- 
cher : Hence. ' HtMi him tmaj 
Enter Aajfidita with thf Sernwg/fifl.h. 

yl.vf'. Whaeis this Fellow? 

K Hac nr. I'de iiaue beaten himhke adoggc, but for 
diitorbing the Lords wichiri, 

^»<f.w;-.cncc com'fi thou? What woldft y?Thy nan^c? 
Why fpeaV'ft not? Speake man : What's thy n?,me ? 

Cirio- Jf7«//i';anci yet thou know'ftmc, and feeing 
tne, doi\ not thinkc m.c for the man I am, notclTKie com- 
mundi tnc name my fclie. 

jlitf. What is thy name? 

Certo. A r.aoic vamuficaii to the Volcians carcij 
And haffii in found co thine. 

^i<fl Say,what'3 thy name ? 
Thou haft a Grim apparance, and thy Face 
Bcarcs a Command in t : Though thy Tackles torne, 
Tliou Tnew'ft a C^oble VefTeil : What's chy name ? 

Curio. Prepare thy brow tofrowne-.knowft ymcyet? 

u4uf, I know thee not ?Tl'iy Name? 

Ceria. Itiy nimc is Cmh* Ulfartius, who hath donR 
To^hee particularly , and to all rhe Voices 
Greai: hurt and Mifchiefe : thereto witnefle may 
My Surname c:ari*/.:»«*. The painfull Seruice, 
The excrcnac Dangers , and the droppcs of B!ood 
1 Shed forcny £hankkffeCountry,srcrcquittcd : 
i But with that Surname, a good memoric 
) And witneffe of the Malice and Difpleafute 
i Which thou {linuld'Bbcr.remc,onJy that name remains. 
1 The Cruekf and Hnuy of the pccplc, 
' 1 crraittrd by our daftard Noblcs.who 

IHaue all forfooke me, hatli dcuour"d the reft : 
And fuffer'd rne by th'voyce of Slaues to be 
Heop'doutof Rome. Now this extremity, 
j Hath brought me to thy Haith, not out of Hope 
I ^Miftake ;rie not; ro fauc my life : for if 
i had fearV, dcciU, of afl the Men I'th' World 
I would hMie voided thee. But in tnccrc i'pight 
To be full quit of thoft my Binifhe. s, 
j Stand 1 beiote ihec hecve ; Then ii thou hai"! 
' A hcjrt of wrcakf in tiice, that wilt reucngc 
Ti»tne owpc particular wrongSj and (lop ihofe :na!mcs 
of llume fcsnc throut^h thy Country, fpeed thee ftraight 
And ma^kc rny mii'cf y ferue thy turnc : So vfe it. 
That «iy reucnc^efull Scruices may ptouc 
AsBenehtstorhec. Forlwillfigbc 
Aoainu uiy Cankvcd Couatrey,wiih the Spleene 
1 Of alUbe vnder biends. But if fo be, 
I TUo-J dar'li not ihii.^nd that to pwucmore Forrunes 



T^he ^rageSe of Coriolanus, 



Thai J tyi'd, then in a word, I alfo am 
Longer to liuo moft wcarie : arwJprcTent 
My throat to thee, and to ihy Ancient ^J^!icc ; 
Which not to cut,\vould rtiew thee but a Foofc, 
Sirvcc I hniie cuer foilowcd thee with hate, 
DrawncTunnes of Blood out of thy Count ricibreJt, 
And cannot liue but to thyn"iame,Tnlcnc 
It be to do thee feruice. 

Atif. Oh Mttrtiut, .Mttrtim; 
Each word thou haft Ipokc.hath weeded from my heart 
A roptc of Ancient Enuy, Iflupiter 
Should fromyond clowd fpcake diuine things. 
And fay 'tis true; I'dcnotbeleeue them more 
Then thee all-Noble Mmrtim. Let me twine 
Mine armcs about that body, where againft 
My grained Afh an hundred times hath broke. 
And fcarr'd the Moone with fplintcrs ; head deep 
The Anuile of my Sword, and do contefl 
As hotly,and as Nobly with thy Loue, 
As cuer m Ambitious ftrcngth, I did 
Contend againft thy Valour. Know thou firfl, 
I lou'd the Mavd I married : neuer man 
Sigh'd truer breath. But that 1 fee thee hcere 
Thou Noble thing, more dances my rapt heart. 
Then v/hcn 1 firft my wedded Miflris law 
Beftridemy Thre/hold, Why, thoa Mars Itellthecj' 
We hauc a Power on foote : and 1 had porpofc 
Once more to hew thy Target from thy Brawne, 
Or loole mine Armc for't : Thou haft beatc mee out 
Tvjelue feuerall times,and I haue nightly fince 
Dreamt of encounters 't wixt thy feife and me : 
We haue bccnc downc together in my fleepc, 
Vnbuckling Helmes,fifting each others Throat, 
And wak'd haifedead with nothing. Worthy Mdrtiw, 
Had we no other quarrel! clfc to Rome, bm thai 
Thou art thence Banifti'd, wewould mufter ;'l 
From twelucjto feuentie •• and powring Wsrre 
Into the bovveli ofvngratefull Rome, 
Like a bold Flood oVe-bcate. Oh come,go in, 
And take our Friendly Senators by'th'hands 
Who now are hcere, taking their leaucs of mce, 
Who am prepared againft your Territories, 
Though not for Rome it felfc. 

Ceria. YoubleflemeGods, 

•/«/■. Therefore moftabfolutc SJr.ifthou wilt haue 
The leading of ihincowne Reucngcs, take 
Th'one halfc of my CommiiTionjand fet downc 
As bcft thou art expericnc'd,fincethoukrx>w'ft 
Thy Countries ftrcngth and weakncflt, thine own waies 
Whether to koockc againft the Gates of Rome, \ 

Orrudelyvifit them in parts remote. 
To fright them, ere deftroy, Batcomcirr, | 

Let me commend thee firft, to thofe that ftiall | 

Sayyeatothydcfircs. A thoufand welcome*, j 

And more a Friend,then ere an Enemie, j 

Yet THartim thai was much. Your hands nooft weleome. j 

Exemt 
£nterti»o«frhe Serutn^mtn.. 

I Hecre'saftrangcaJferaiion? 

z Bymyhand.Ihadtinoghttobauc ftroken him with 
a Cudgell,and yer my minde gaue bm;, his doaohes made 
a falfc report of him. 

1 What an Artnc he has, he turn'd me abo»it with his 
finger and his thumbc.as one would let vp a Top, 

a Nay,l knew by hisface that there w» fome-ihing 
in him. Hehadfitvakindcoffiice-meabought, I cannot \ 

tell 



T^f l^ragedie of Coriolanus, 



tell howtotearme it. 

t He had fo booking as it were, would I were hang'd 
but I thought thcfc was roore in him.then I could think. 

5 So dici I, lie DC iwornc. He,« firoply therareft man 
i'lh'world. 

1 \ thinkc be is : but a greater foldier thcr he, 
YouNvotonc 

2 Who my Mafier .-' 

I Nay^ it's no .'ivutcr for tr.at. 
s Wortii C\% on hsm. 

1 Nay not io neither: bu:I jskchirntobethegrcatcr 
Souldiour. 

2 Faith iookc you, one cannot tdi now to fay that:for 
the Defence of a To v«nc,oiii: General] is cxcciient, 

1 I, and fo' ar aflfault too. 

Enter tkfthirii-SerPii'igTnitni 

■^ Oh Slaues,lcan tell you Nevves,NcwsyouRafcals 

^oth. What whac,wbatr Let's partake. 

; i wouldnot beaKomanofallNacions; 1 had as 
line be a/coodcmii'd man. 

'Beth. Wherefore? Whc! -fore? 

J Why here's he that was wont to thwackc ourGe- 
ncraH, Crf/M* UMnrtiw, 

1 Why doyoufayjthwacke ourGencrall ? 

3 I do not lay thwacke our General!, but he was al- 
vvaycs good enough tor him 

a Come we are fcllowes and friends : lie was eucr too 
hard for hitn, I haue heard him fay fo himfelfc. 

1 Hcwastoohardforhimdiircilyjtofay the Troth 
on't bsfote Corioles, hcrcotcUt huij.and notchthiin like a 
Carbinado, 

2 And heehadbinCannibaUygiucn, bee might haue 
boy Id and eaten him too. 

I But moreofthy Ncwes. 

5 Why hcis io made on. he?re within, asifheewere 
Son and Hcirc to Mars,fet at vpper end o'ch'Tabie : Nc 
queliion askt hira by^ny of the Senators, but chev (bnd 
bald before him. Out General] hinifeife makcsa MlLis 
of bim,San(f}ifies himfelfe wiih's hand, and tun-.c*. vp the 
white o'th'eye to his Difcouri'e. Bul ine bottome of the 
Newcs iSjOUi Generall is cut i tb'middle,&; but one halfe 
of whathe was yefterdav. Forthe other ha's haUe, by 
the intrcaty and graunt of the whole Table. Hce'lgohe 
f3yes,3nd folc the Porter of Rome Gates by ch cares. He 
wilnTiow.ea!Idowncbcforchim, andlcauehis paffagc 
pOLJ'a. 

2 And he's as like to do't.as any n)an I can imjginc. 

i Doo't? he will doo't : for look you fir,ne has as ina^ 
ny Friends as Enemies: which Friends r.r as It were,durft 
not flookcyou fir) fhcwthem'e!(ici(as we termeit) his 
f iiend'^whileRhe'finDirefliiiide, 

i Direfticude? What's that i" 

5 But v.'hen they fliall fee ijr.hisCreflvpagaine.snd 
the man in b! cod , tliey will oat of their Burroughcs (like 
Conies after Rainc) and rcoeli all with him. 

I But '.'ihen goes this forward.' 

3 Tomorrow, today, prefently, you fhall haue the 
Drum firooke vp this afternoonc : 'Tis as it were a parcel 
ofihcir Feafl,and to be executed ere they wipe their lips. 

•2 Why then wee lhallhauca(Hrring World againe: 
This peace is nothing, but to ruft Iron,«encreafc Taylors, 
and breed Ballad-makers. 

I LecmchaucWarrcfay I, it exceeds peaccas farrc 
as day do's night : It's fprightly walking.audible.and full 
ofVent. Peace, is a very Apoplexy, Lethargie.muU'd, 
<icafe,fleepe,infeiifiblc, a getter of more baftard Chil- 



dren, then warres a deftroyer of men, 

2 ' Fis fo, and at wanes in fome fort may be '"aide to 
be 3 Rauidier, (o it cannot be denied^ but peace is i prcac 
maker of Cuckolds. 

I I, and it makes men hate one another. 

5 Reafon.becaufe they then leffe ncede one another . 
The Warres for my money. I hope to lee Romanes as 
cbeapcas Voicians. They arc rifing,they are rifing. 

"Both. In, in, in, in. Exeunt 

Enter the two Tribunes £tctniui,anA 'Brutus. 

Sic'tK, We hears not of him, neither need wc fear him. 
His remedies are tame, the prcfent peace. 
And quietnelTc of the people, which before 
Were in wiide hurry. Hecrcdo wcmakehJs Friends 
Blufli, that the world goes well : who rather had. 
Though they themfeluesdiJ fuffer by 't, behold 
Diffentious numbers peering ftreets, then fee 
Our Trade fmen )in.:;ing in their fliops^and going 
About ihcir Pundions friendly. 

Enter ^Meveniut, 

Bru. Wc iiood too t in good time. Is this Menenitu} 

i-'icin. 'Tis hc,*Cis he : O he is grown moft kind ofiacc: 
HaileSir. Menc. Haiictcyouboth, 

Siciti. Your OcjV/iM^f is not much mift, butwuhhis 
Friends: the Commonwealth doth ftand, and fo would 
dojwcre he more angry at it. 

Mene. All's well, and might Iwuc bene much better, j 
if he could haue temporiz'd. 

Stein. Wheie IS he.hcarc you ? 

Mene. Nay I hesre nothing : 
His Mother and his wife, hearc nothing from him. 
Enter three orfaure Citit.e»s. 

yill. The Gods prefcrue you both. 

Siciif. Gooden our Neighbours. 

'Bru. Gooden to you all, gooden to you all. 

I Our i,eiues,our wiucs.and children, on our knees. 
Are bound to pray for you both. 

Stem. Liuc,aridihriuc, 

Bru. Farewell kinde Neighbours': 
Wc vfifht CorieUriu hau lou'd you as we did. 

^U. Now the Gods keepe you, 

BothTrs. Farewell, farewell. Exetsut Crtii.em 

Sictii. This is n happier and iHore comejy time. 
Then when thcfe Fcllowcs ran about the firects, 
Cryir.g Connifion. 

"Bru. Cditt4 Martim was 
A worthy Ofticer I'ch'Warre, but Infolent, 
Orccomc with Pride. AmbitlouSjpafl ail thinking 
Selfe-Iouing. 

5;f/>7.And affe^^ing one foIeThrcne.withcut alTfflace 

(JiieKe. I thioke not Co. 

SiciK. We fhould by t!)is,to all our LamentJon, 
If hehad gone foithConfuil.found it fo. 

Urn. The Gods haue well preiitntcd ic,and Rome 
Sits fafe and ftili,v;ichout him. 

Enter an i/£dtle» 

ty£d:le. Worthy Tribunes, 
There is a Slaue whom we haue put in prifon. 
Reports the Voices with two fcuerall Powers 
Are cntrcdinthe Roman Territories, 
And with the deepeft malice of the Warre, 
Deflroy, what lies before 'cm, 

Mene. 'Tis Auffldttu, 
Who hearing of our THartim Banifhmenc, 
Thruft* forth his homes againc into the world 
Which were In-fhcU'd,when Martim flood for Rome, 
And/ 



H 



TheTragedie 0/ Coriolanus. 



And durft not once peepc out. 

Sicin, CoTne,wh3c talkc yoii ofUiUrtitM. 

"Sru. Go fee this Rumorcr whipc, ic cannot be> 
The Voices dare breake wichvs. 

Aiene. Cannot be ? 
We hauc Record, that very well it can , 
And three examples of the like, hath bccne 
Within my Age. But reafoawith thefellow 
Before you punilh hini,where he heard this, 
Leaft yoti ftiaH chance to whip your Information, 
And beatc the Meflcnger,who bids beware 
Of what is to be dreaded. 

Sicin. Tell not me : ) know this cannot be. 

Brst. Notpoffibic. 

Enttr a Mt^enger, 

Mef. The Nobles in great earneftneflc are going 
All to the Senate^boufc : fome newes is comming 
That tusnes their Countenances. 

Sicin. Tis this Slaue : 
Go whip him fore the peoples eyes : His raiiing^ 
Nothing but his report. 

Mef. Yes worthy Sir, 
The Slaues report is fccondcd,and more 
More fearful! is dcHuer'd. 

Sicin. What more fearcfull ? 

Mef. It is fpoke freely out of many mouths. 
How probable I do not know, that MartiM 
loyn'd with Au^tiitu, leads a power 'gainft Rome, 
And vbwcs Rcucnge as fpacious, as betweene 
The yong'ft and oldeft thing, 

Sicin^ This ismoft likely .« 

'Brii. Rais'doncl/.that the weaker fort may wifh 
Good aiitr^whomcagainc. 

Sicin. The very ttickc on'c. 

Mene, Thisisvnhkely, 
He,and j4uftditu can no more attonc 
Then violent'ft Contrariety. 

Sttter Mejftnger. 

Tiicf. You arc fent for to the Senate: 
A featcfuU Army, led by CutM Adttrtim, 
Aflbctated with AujfidtM, Rages 
Vpon our Tctritories,and haue already 
O're-borne their way, confum'd with fire,and tooke 
What lay before them. 

Enter Cominiut. 

Cent. Oh you hauc m.ade good worke. 

Mene. What newcs? What newes? 

Cow .You baue holpto rauifli your owne daughter»,&: 
To melt thcCitty Leadcs vpon yourpates. 
To fee your Wiucs diftiortour'd to your Nofes, 

Me«c. What's the newes? What's the newes ? 

Com. Your Temples burned in their Ciment, and 
Your Franchlfes, whereon you flood, confin'd 
IntoanAugorsboart. 

Iriene, Pray now,your Newes : 
You haue made fail e wotke I fcare me : pray your newes, 
liMArtiw fhould be ioyn'd with VoLceans. 

Com. ]f 5 He is their God , he leads them like a thing 
Made by fome other Deky thet> Nature, 
Tliat fhapes man Better ; and they follow him 
A gainft v$ Brats, with no kffe Confidence, 
Then Boyes purfurn;? Summer Butter-ilies, 
Or Butchers killing Flycs, 

T^ltne. You baue made good worke. 
You and your Apron men : y©u,that ftood fo mUclt 
Vpon the voycc of occupation, and 



The breath of Garlicke-eaters. ~ ' 

Com. Hee'l Qiake your Rome about your cares. 

Mene. As HtrtuUi. did fhake downe Mellow Fruit* \ 
You hauc made fairc worke. 

Bntt. But is this true fir? 

Com, I,andyou*llookepale 
Before you finde it other. All the Regions 
Do fmilingly Reuolt, and who refifts 
Are roock'd for valiant Ignorance, 
And perifh conAant Fooles: who is't can bJacne him ? 
Your Enemies and his, findc-fomething in him, 

Mene. Weareall vndone,vnleflc 
The Noble man haue mercy. 

Com. Who fliall aske it? 
The Tribunes cannot doo't forfharae ; the people 
Deferue fuch pitty of him, as the Wolfe 
Doe's o/the Sbepheards : For his befi Friends, iftl»ejr 
Should fay be good to Rome, they chatg'dhiuj,ciicn 
As ihofe ihould do that had dcferu'dhis hate, 
And therein fliew'd like Enemies. 
t^/.Tis trucjil: he were putting to my houfe^the brand 
That fiiould confuroe it,l haue not the face 
To f.iy, bf fccch you ceafe. You haue made faire hands. 
You and your Craft»,,youhauecraftedf3ire, 

Com. You haue brought 
A Trembling vpon Rome, fuch as was ncucr 
S'incap<rable of helpe. 

7"'/. Say not, we brought it. 

Mene. How? Was't we ? We lou'd him, 
But like Bealls, and Cowardly Nobles, 
Gaue way vnto your Clufters, who did hoote 
Him out o'th'Citty. 

Com. But I fears 
They'lroarchiminagaine. Tdltu JiuftJ^tn^ 
The fecofid name of men, obeyei his point* 
As if be were his Oflicer : Defperation, 
Is all the Policy^ Strength,and Defence 
That Rome can make againft them. 

Enter H Troepe ef Citiz.ent. 

Mene. Heere come the Cloficrs. 
And is Amfftdim with him? You are they 
That made the Ay re vnwholfome,wheu youcafl 
Your ftinking, greafle Caps,ia hooting 
At CerieUum Exile. Now he's comming,] 
And not ahaire vpon a SouLdiers head 
Which will not proue a whip : As many Coxcombet 
As you threw Caps vp,will he tumble downe. 
And pay you for your voyces. 'Tis no matter. 
If he could burne vs all into oue coale, 
Webauedeferu'dit. 

Omnet, Faith,we hcare fearful! Newei* 
1 Cit, For mine owne part. 
When I faid banilhhim, 1 faid 'twas pitty. 

z Andfodidf. 

3 And fo did I : and to fay the truth, fo did very ma- 
ny of vs. that we did we did for the beft,and though wee 
willingly confented to bis Banifhment,yet it was againft 
our will. 

Com. Y'are goodly things.you Voyces. 

THene. You haue made good worke 
You and your cry. Shal's to the Capitoll ? 

Cam. Oh I.what elfe # Exeunt ink. 

Sicin. Go Maiters getyoDhome.benotdifmaW, 
Thefe arc a Side, that would be glad to haue 
This truCjwhich they fo feeme to fcare. Go home. 
And fhew no figae of Fcare 

I Cit. 



ITbe Tragedieof (jnolams. 



i^it. The Gods bee good to *$ : Come Maflen let's 
bomc> J)cucr{atd we^wat « tb wrong, when we banJQic 
htm. 

3^ Sodidwexll. fiuc come, let'i home. ExitCit. 

Bn . 7 donoc >ikethifcNew€{. 

Sic*M. Not I 

Mm, Let's to the Capitoll: would halfe myweahh 
WooU buy this foia lye. 

Stein, pray let's go, EvfuntTriBittes. 

Ettttr ylufiAim v>ilhhu Lieutenant, 

Auf. Do they ftill five to'th'Romaii ? 

UcH. \ do not krtow what Witchctafr's in him : but 
Your Soldiers vfe him as the Grace Tore mcate. 
Their talkc at Table, and their Thankcs at end. 
And you are darkncd in this a&ionSir, 
Euenby yourowne. 

Auf. Icannothelpeitnow, 
VnlelTc by vfing meancs 1 lame the foot* 
Ofourdefignc. He bcarcs himfcifemorcproudlicr, 
Eatntomy perfon, then I thought he would 
When fitft I did embrace him. Yet his Nature 
In that's no Changeling, and I touft cxcufe 
What cannot be amended. 

Lieu. YitlwifhSir, 
(I mcane for your particular) you had not 
loyn'd in Commi<Tion with him : but either haue borne 
The adiotvcf your felfe, or elfc to him,had left it foly. 

^uf. I vndcrfland thee wcll.and be thou furc 
When he fliall come to his account,he knowes not 
What I can vrge again(t him, although it fcemes 
And fo he thmkes, and is no icfle apparant 
To th'vulgareye, thathebearesall things fairely : 
And iTiewes good Husbandry for the Volcian State, 
7ights Dragon-likc, and doet atcheeuc as foonc 
As draw his Sword : yet he hath left vndone 
That which Ihall breakc his necke, or hazard mine, 
When ere we come to our account. 

£,<>«. Sir, I befeech you, think you he'l carry Rome ? 

Anf. All pUcesyccids to him ere he fits downe. 
And theiNobilitv of Rome are his : 
The Senators and Patricians loue him too : 
The Tribunes are no Soldiers ; and their people 
VVillbeasrafli intbercpealc, ashafty 
To expell him thence. I ihiiikc hcc'l be to Rome 
As is the Afpray to tlie Fith,who takes it 
By Soueraignty ofNaturc. Firft, he was 
A Noble feruant to them, but he could not 
Carry his Honors eeuen : whether 'was Pride 
Which o'r of dayly Portune euer tiints 
The happy man ; wi. ether dcte£l of Judgement. 
To faileinthedifpofing of thofe chances 
Which he was Lord of: or whether Nature, 
Nor to be other then one thing, not moouing 
From th'Caskcto th'Cufhion : but commanding peace 
Euen with tlie fame aufterity and garbe, 
Asticcontroll'd the warre. But one of :hefc 
(As he hath fpices-of them aU) not all. 
For I dare fo farrc free him, made him fear'd, 
So hated, and fobaniHi'd; but he ha'* a Merit 
Tochoakeitin thevtc-V.nce : So our Venue, 
Lie in th'interpretatioo of the time. 
And power vnto ic lelfe m^ift commendable, 
Hath'not a Toinbe fo euidcnt as a Chaire 
T'cxtoll what itfaath done. 

One fire drines olic one fire ;oi>oNaile,oneNaJle; 
Rights by rights fbiiier,tTrengths by ftrengths dotaile. 



_i5 

Come let's awa^: when C^uwRotDciscbne, 

Thou artpoor'ftof all; tbcufliortly art thou vamt^xiuat 



AUus "Qtdntus. 



Enter Mentnitu.Cemisisa^ Sici»iMjSrfft»fj 
the tt9» Tribunes, v^ib ethers^ 

"Menen. No, Jle not go: you heare what be hath faid 
Which was foroetime hisGencrall: wholouedhun 
Inamoft deere particular. He call'd me Father: 
But what o'that ?Go you that bani£hd him 
A l^ile before hii Tent, fall downe,and IcDce 
The way int<^ his mercy : Nay.if hecoy'd 
To heare Cominiat ipeakc, Il« keepe at home. 

Com. Hcwouid notfcemetoknowmc. 

Menen. Do you heare? 

Com. Yet one time he did call me by my name 5 
1 vrg'd our old acquaintancc,and the drops 
That we haue bled together. Coriolanm 
He would not anfwer too : Forbad all Names^ 
He was a kinde of t-iothing, Titleleffc, 
Till hchad forg'd himfclfe aoame a'tb'fire 
Of burning Rome. 

MtntH. Why fo; you haue made good worke: 
A pairc of Tribunes, that haue wrack'd for Rome, 
To make Coales cheapc : A Noble metnory. 

Cowt. I minded him, how Royall 'twas to pardon 
WhenitwaslcfTeexpeded. Hcrcplyed 
It was a bare petition ofa State 
To one whom they had punifli'd. 

Menen, Very well, iould he fay lefle. 

Com. I offered to awaken his regard 
For'spriuate Friends. Hisanfwer to me was 
He couldnot fiay to pickc tiiem,in apile 
Of noyfomc muHy Chaffe. He faid, 'twas folly 
For one poorc graine or two, to Icaue rnburnt 
And ftill to nofc th'offencc. 

Menen, For one poorc graine or two? 
I am one of thofe : his Mother, WifCjhis ChilcJc, 
And this braue Fellow too : we arc theGraines, 
You are the mufty Chaftc,and you are fmck 
AboucthcMoone, We muft be burnt for you. 

Sicin. Nay,pray be patient: If yourefufe your ayde 
In this fontuer.neededbe!pe,yetdonot 
Vpbraid's with our diftrcfle, Bucfureifyou 
Would be your Countries Pleader, your good tongiie 
More then cheinttant Armie we caa make 
J Might flop our Countryman, 

^Jiiene. No: He not meddle. 

Sicit^. Prayyou gotohim. 

Tviene. What Ihould I do t 

Bru, Onely make triall what year Loue can do. 
For RomCjtowards Martiw. 

(J^lene. Wcll,and fay that Martiuf rctumemec. 
As (^tmtniHi is return'd, rnhcard: what then ? 
But a« adifcontented Fricnd,«rcefe-fliot 
With his vnkindnefl'e. Say'tbefo? 

Sicin. Yet your good will 
Mu(^ haue that thankes from Rone,arter the meafore 
As you intended well. 

Mtne. llevnd;rtak*t « 
Ithinkehec'l heareme. Yet to bite his lip. 
And hununeatgood C#Mr«ww,miKbvnbeartsn]ce. f 
cc Hec/ 



16 



The*Tragedie of Qoriolanus, 



He V, as not taken well, he had not djn*d. 
The Vemes ynfiU'd.oui blood is coId,»ndthcn 
We powc vpon the Morning, arc vnapt 
To c'luc or to forgiuc; but when wc hauc fliifft 
'rbelc Pipes, and f hcfc Conueyances of our blood 
With Wine anJ Feeding, we hauefupplerSculcs 
Then in our I'ricfl-likc F afis: therefore lie watch him 
Till he be dieted to my requeft, 
Anotheii ile fct vpon him, 

Tiru. You know the very rode into hiskindncffc. 
And cannot lofe your way. 

Men:. Good faith Ile prouebim, 
Spccc* how it will. I fliall ere long,haue kno fledge 
0!"my fucccffc. Exit. 

Cam. Heel ncucr hcaie him. 

Skin. Not. 

Com. I tell youjhc doc's fit in Gold, his eye 
Red as 'twould burne Rome: and his Iniury 
The Gaoler to hiipitty. i kncel'd before him, 
Twas fcry faintly ha faiu Riicrdifmift mc 
Thus with his fpeechlcffc hand. What he would do 
He fent in writing after me : what he would not. 
Bound with an Oath to yeeld to his conditioni: 
So that all hope is vaine.vnleflc his Noble Mother, 
And his Wife, who (as I heare) meanc to fohcitc ium 
For mercy tohisCountrcy : therefore let's hence. 
And with our fane imteaties hall them on. Exeunt 

Enter TiUneuiKs to the fVatch or Guard. 

I KVf. Stay: whence arc you. 

z.u^'at. Stand, an<l go backe* 

Me.Yovi guard like men, tis wclLButby yourleaue, 
I atn an Officer of State,& come to fpcak with CorioUnw 

I From whence? Me»0. From Rome. 

■X You m jy not paflc,you muft re(:urne : out Generall 
will no m'»ic heare from thence. 

i You'lfceyoufR^mccTibrac'd with fire, before 
You'i fpcake with CsriolMiu. 

^Unt. Good my Friends, 
Ifvouhaue heard your Generall talkc ofRomc, 
And ot*his Friends there, it is Lots to Blankes, 
My name hath touch'c youi cares : it is Mtmnim, 

\ Beit io,gob3ck:thevcrtuc of your name. 
Is not hccrc payable. 

tjMer.e, I tell thee Fellow, 
Thy Generall is my Louer : I haue beenc 
Thcbooke of his good Aclt, whence men hauc read 
His Famt vnpatoleird, happely amplified : 
For I haue cuet verified my Friends 
(Of whom hcc's cheese) With all the fizc that verity 
Would with.>ut lapfiiig Uiffer ; Nay,fomciimc$, 
Liicc to a Bowk vpon a fubtle ground 
I hiue tumbled pall the throw : and in his praife 
Haue (almofi)ftampt the Leafing, Therefore Fellow, 
1 mutt hauc leaue to pafie. 

1 FaichSirjifyou had told as many lies in his behaile. 
a» yoB hauc vttercd words inyoui^ ownc,you (houldnot 
paffehcerc; no, though it wcrcasvettuoustolye, as to 
liuechaftly. Therefore go back e. 

TMifw. Pry thee fellow, remember my name is TUtneniut, 
alwaycs laclionary on the party of your Generall, 

2 Howfoeuer you rnv.e bin his Lier, as you fay you 
haiic, i am one that t-ihnjj true vnder him,n>uft fay you 
cannot paffe. Tiierefore g'^backc. 

Mfit, Ha's he din'd can'ft thou tell? For I would not 
fpeakc with him, till after dinrter. 
I YouaicaRoiuan,areyou? 

) -___ 



Men$. I am as thy Generall is. 

I Then you fhouid hatcRome.aj he do's. Canyou, 
when you haue pufht out your gates, the very Defender 
ofthem, and in a violent popular ignorance, giucn your 
enemy your Qiieid, thinkc to front hix reuenges with the 
cafie groanes of old women, the Virginall Palms of your 
daughters, ror with the palfied intercelfion of fuch ade- 
cay'd Dotant as you feemc to be? Can you think to blow 
out the intended fire,your Ci ty is ready to flamein, with 
fuch wcakc breath as this? No,you are deceiu'd, therfore 
backe to Romc,and prepare for your execution ; you arc 
condemn'd,out Generall ha^ tworneyou out of rcpreeue 
and pardon. 

'Mene. Sirra, if thy Captaine knew I were heere. 
He would vfe mc with cHimation. 

I Come, my Captaine knowesyoa not. 

Ment. I meanc thy Generall. 

I MyGencrall cares not for you. FiackIfay,go;leaft 
I let forth your halfe pinte of blood. Iiackc,that's the vt- 
moft of your hauing, backe. 

M«nt. Nay but Fellow,Fcllow. 

Enter Cmelxntu with t/inffsditu. 

Carta. What's the matter ? 

/l/wf.Now you Companion:IIe fayan ariantforyout 
you fhall know now that I am in eftimaticn : you fhall 
perceiue, that a lackc gardant cannot office me from my 
Son C«w/<(»i«,gueflc but my entertainment with him; if 
thou ftand'ft not I'th ftate of hanging, or of fome death 
more long in Spcdatoi (hip.and crueller in fuffeting, be- 
hold now prefently.and fwoondfor what's to come vpon 
I thee. The glorious Gods fit in hourdy Synod about thy 
particular profpcrity,and loue thee no worfethen thy old 
Father JHeneuitu do's. O my Son, my Son ' thou art pre- 
paring fire for vs : lookc thee, hcerc's water to quench it. 
I was hardly moucd to come to thee ; but bccing aflured 
none but my fclfc could mouc thee ,1 hauc bene blowne 
out of your Gates with fighes : andconiure thee to par- 
don Rome, and thy petitionary Countrimcn. The good 
Gods a(fwagc thy wrath, and turne the drees of it, vpon 
this Varletheere: This, who likca blocjte haibdenyed 
my acicrtc to thee. 

Ceri9, Away. 
Mene. How? Away? 

Corh. Wife, Mother, Chif d, I know doc My affairM 
Are Seruanted to others : Though I owe 
My Reucnge properly, my remiffion lies 
In Volceanbrefts. That we hauc bccne familiar, 
Ingrate forgetfulnefle (ball poifon rather 
Then pitty : Note how much,' therefore be gone. 
Mine cares againft your fuites, are ftronger then 
Your gates againft my force. Yet fori loucd thee. 
Take this along, i writ icfor thy fake. 
And would hauc fent it. Another word Mentnitu, 
I will not heare thee fpeakc. This mai; Aufftdim 
Was my belou'd in Rome : yet thou bchold'fi. 

Auffid. You kcepe a conftant temper. Bxchki 

Manet the Guard and Mtneaim, 

1 Now fir, ii your name Meptenitu ? 

2 Tis afpell you fee ofmuchpowei . 
You know the way homcagainc 

I Do you heare Yiow wree are flwnt for keeping your 
greatneflc backe ? 

a What caufe do you thinke I hauc to fwoond? 

T^lenen; I neither care for ih'wotld, nor your General: 
for fuch things as you, I can fcarfc thinkc thcr's any ,y 'ate 
fo flight. He that bath a will to die by himfclfc. ^tcj it 



The Tragedie of Qoridanus. 



^7 



not trom another : Let yourGcnerall do his worft. For 
you, bee that you »re/«lDng ; and your mifery cncrcafc 
vvuhyo'.ira£;c;. I fsy coyou.as I was faidto, Away.Ex//; 
I ANotlcFellowI warrant him, 
z The wottliy Fellow is our General.Hc's the Rock, 
The Oakc not to be winde-fhaken. ExitWfAch. 

Enter CortolanM *ni Au^tdiui, 
Corio. We will before the walls of Kofnc tomorrow 
Set downe ourHoift. My partner in this Afiion, 
You mnft report to tli'Voician Lords, how plainly 
I haue borne this BufincfTe. 

Auf. Oncly their ends you haucrcfpcfted, 
Stopl your cares againftthegcnerall fuitr of Rome t 
Neucr admitted a priuit wbifper,no not with kich ficnti* 
That thought them futc of yoii. 

Carto. This hft olJ man, 
VVhon with a crack'd hcst: i hjiic fen: ro Rome, 
I.ou'u !!ie, aboiic the rr;eAfure of a Father. 
Nay godded me indeed. Their latcll rcfupc 
Was ro fend him : for whofeold Louc I hmc 
(Though I fhcw'd fowrely to him^ once more offci'd 
The firlt Conditions whicii they did refufc. 
And cannot now accept, to grace him oncly, 
Thatthoughc he could do more ; Avery little 
I haueyeclded too, Frcrn£nrb?.lTes,and Suites, 
Nor from iheStitCjnorpnuatcfriendshccreauer 
Will I lend eare to. KaPwhat fliout is this? Shout yftth'at 
Shall ! be tempted to infringe my vow 
In the fame time 'cis nisde? I wil/ nor. 

Enter yirgdiA yolurKnia X^nUria^-jong Tylartim, 
with AttfndiiKts. 
My wife comes formoQ, then the honour'd mould 
Wherein this Trunkewas fram'd, and inhrr hand 
T he Grandchilde to hec blood. But out affeftion. 
All bond and priuile^ge of Nature brcakc ; 
t Let it be Vertuous ro be Obftinate. 
1 What IS that Cntt'liewotihPOrthofeDoues eyes, 
Which can inake Gods forfwornc ? f mcir, and am not 
Orftronger esrth then others: my Mother bowes, 
Ai if Olympus to a Molc-hillfhould 
Jn fupplication Nod : and n)y yong Boy 
Hath an A.^pcd of m- erccf^ion, which 
Great Nature crici. Deny not. Let the Voices 
Plough Rome, and harrow Italy. lleneuer 
Be fuch a Goff.ng roobcy !nRini>; but ftantl 
As ifa man wcfc Author ofhimfclf,& knew no other kin 
firgil. My Lord and Husband. 
Cerw, Thefe eyes are not the fame I wore in Rome. 
ytrg. The forrow that deliuers vs thus chang'd. 
Makes you thinke (o. 

Ceriv. L'.kc adull After now,! haue forgot my part, 
And I am out, euen to a full Dilgnue. Beft of my FIcfli, 
Forgiue my Tyranny ; but da not lay, 
For thatforoiiieourRemanes. C>ak;fre 
Lon<; as my Exile, fwcct ?i my Fvcucngc ! 
Now by the ic^'Ious (^ecne of iieauen, that kiffe 
I carried from tiieedearc; 2nd mv true Lippc 
HathVir^in'dit crelince. Yon Gods, I pray. 
And the moft noble Mother of the world 
I Leaue vnfaluted : Sinke my knee I'th'earth, Kneeles 

Of thy deepe doty , more imprefjion flicw 
Then that cf common Sonnes. 
Voiitm. Ohftand vpblcftf 
Whil'il withnofoftcrCufliion then the Flint 
I knecle before thee, and vnpropcrly 
t Shew duty as milhkcn, ail thi 5 while, 

s • ■ I .1 



BctwccnctheChilde,and Parent. 

Corio, What's this.* yoor knees to me ? 
To your Cotrcfted Sonne ? 
Then let the Pibbles on the hungry beach 
Fillop theStarres : Then, let the mutinous windci 
Sttike theproud Cedars 'gaintt the fiery Sun ; 
Murdring Impofltbility, to make 
What cannot be, flight worke. 

Velum. Thou ar: my Warriour, I hope to firainc thee 
Do vou know this Lady > 

Cerio. The Noble Sifier of /'»^//W<; 
The Moonc ofRome: Chaftc as the Ificle 
That's curdicdby the Froft, fron) pureft Snow^ 
And hangs on Dians Temple; Deere Z-'ahrit 

yolum. This is a poore Epitcwne of yoi:rs. 
Which by th'mtcrpretation of ful! time, 
Miy fliew like all yourfch'e. 

Corio, The God of Souldicrj ■ 
W ith the confcnt of fuprcatre loue, informe 
Thy thoughts with Noblenefie, that thou mayftproue 
To fhamc vnvulnerable, and fticke i'th Warrcs 
Like a gre3t Sea-markc ftanding euery flaw. 
And fauing thofe that eye thee. 

IJolttm. Your knee. Sirrah. 

Corio, That's my braue Boy. 

Volura. Euen he,your wife,this Ladic,and try fclfe, 
AreSatorstoyou. 

Corio. I befeech you peace: 
Or if you'ld aske, remember this before; 
The thing I haue forfworne to graunt, may neucc 
Beheld by you denials, Donotbidmc 
Difmiffe my Soldiers, or capindate 
Againe.with RomcsMcchanickcs. Tellmcnot 
Wherein I fecmevnnaturall ;Dcfireno:t*allay 
My Rages an J Rcuenges,wlth yO-Jir colder rcafons. 

yolum. Oh no more,no more : 
You haue faid you will not grant vs any thing '. 
For we haue nothing clfeto askc, but that 
vVhichyou deny already: yetwe willaske, 
That if you f^'le m our requeft, the blame 
M.-iy hang vpcn your hardneffc, ihcrcforc heare vs. 

Corio, Anjfidiufy and you Voices markc, for wect 
Hcare nought froniRotnc in priuate. Your requcft? 

ralnfff. Should we he t'llcnt & not fpcak.our Raiaient 
And ftace of Bod:es would bewray what Jife 
We haue led (inic thy Exile, Th.nke with thy felfc, 
How more vnfortunate then all liuing women 
Are we come hither; f.ncethac thy fight, which fhould 
Makeoureics flow with ioy hares dance with comforts, 
Condraines them weepe.ai-.d fbake with feare & forow. 
Making the Mother, wifcj.md Childeto fee, 
The Sonne, the Hu»band.,-r.d the F.ithcr icating 
His Countries Bo v^)els out; and to poore we 
7 l<;ne enmities mort capitall : Thoubarr'flvs 
Our ptav;rs 10 the Gods which 13 a comfort 
That all but wcenioy. For how can wc,? 
Alas! how aa we, for our Country pray ? 
Whereto we are bound, together with thy victory : 
Whereto we atebound : Alacke.or we murt loofc 
The Countrieour deereNurfc, or elfethy perlon 
Our comfort in the Country. Wemufttinde . 
An euidcnt Calamity, though wc had 
Our wi(h, which (idefhould win. For cither thou 
Muft as a Forraine Recreant be led 
With Man.tdes through our ftrccts, or clfe 
Triumphantly treadc on thy Countries ruinc, 

cc 2 A 



nd/ 



28 



And bcsrf tlie Palme, for hauing brauely ftied 
T!iy Wife ^nd Childrcns blood ; For my Iclfc, Sonne, 
I purpoff i-.oi. to wait* on Hortiine, till 
Thefc \v3!rC5 determine-: If [ cannot perfwade thee, 
Katber to fliew a Noble grace to both parts. 
Then icckc the end of one ; ihou flialt no {ooner 
Marcli to afiault thy Country, tlicn to trca«ic 
(Truft too't, ihou Hialt not) on thy Mothers woinbc 
Thac brought chec to this world. 

rirg. I,andfiiii]e,thac brought you fotih this boy, 
To kcepc y -Mir nar.ie iiuing to cimc. 

'B«r. A (hall no: rrtad on me : lie run awoy 
Till 1 a-ii bigger, but then lie fight. 

Coriff, Not ofa womar!Stcn<Jcrnc(retobc, 
Requires nor Childe,nor vvomans (icc to fee : 
Ihaijcfatcto.long, 

Volfim. Nay, go not from vs thus : 
If ii were fOjthac our rcqueft did tend 
To fj'ieihcR.omaties, thereby to deHroy 
The Voices v.honj yotilerue, yctimight condemnevs 
Aspoyfonous ofyout Honour. No, our fuitc 
Js \ hat you reconcile them : While the Voices 
M,i.y fa/, thjs mercy w)e hauc Hiew'd : the Romanes, 
"J hi; wc ft cciu'd, and each m either fide 
Giuc ihc All-hailc to tiiee, and cry be Bleft 
For making »p this peace. Thoiiknovv'ft (great Sonne) 
The end of Wanes vncectaine : but this ccrtaine. 
That if tViou conquer Rome, the benefit 
Which thou Hialt thereby reapc, is fuch a name 
Whofc repetition will be dogg'd with Curfes : 
Whofe Chronicle thus writ, The man was Noble, 
But; with his laft Attempt,he wipd it out : 
Dcftroy'd his Country,and his name rcmaincs 
To th'infuing Age.abhorr'd. Spcake to mcSon: 
Thou haft affe£lcd the fiue fttaines of Honor, 
To imi'.ate the gracej of the God?, 
To icare with Thunder the wide Chcekes a'th'Ayre, 
And yet to change thy Sulphurc with a Boulc 
That fViouldbut riueanOake, Why do'ft not fpeake? 
Think'ft thou it Honourable for aNobleman 
Stiil to remember wrongs <" Daughter, fpeake you : 
He cares not for your weeping. Speake thou Boy, 
Pcrrjapj thy childiHiincfle will mouc him more 
Then can our Rcafons. There s no man in the world 
More bound co's Mother, yet hecte he lei's me prate 
Like one i th'Stockes, Thou haft neucr in thy life, 
Shevv'd thy dcete Mother any curtefie. 
When fke(poore HcnJ fond of no fecond brood. 
Ha 'S clock'd thee to the Waues : andfafclie home 
Loden with Honor. Say my Requeft's vniuft. 
And Ipurnc me backe : But, if it be not fo 
Thou artnot honeft,and thcGods will plague thee 
That thou refirain'ftfrom me the Duty, which 
To a Mothers part belongs. He turncs away : 
Down L.rdiesuet v; iham' him with him with«ourknec« 
To his fur-riU.ne ConsUvus iongs more pride 
Then pitty to Gur Prayers. Downe : an end. 
This is the iaft. So, wc will home to Rome, 
And dye ainong onr Neighbours ; Nay,behoId*s, 
This Bey that cannot tell what he would hauc. 
But kneeles, and holds vp hands for fellowfbip. 
Doe's reafon our Petition with more ftreogth 
Then thou haft to deny't. Comc,let vs go : 
This Fellow had a Vokcan to his Mother : 
His V*/ife is in Corioles, and his Childc 
Like him by chance : yrt giuc vs our difpatch : 



T^he Tragedxe of QorioUnus. 



I am hufh^vntill our City be afire ,& then lie fpcak aiitle 
Holds herjy the handfileni. 
Ctrio, O Mother, Mother ' 
What hauc you done? Behold, the Hcauens do ope. 
The Gods lookc dowQc, and t hi s vnnatorall Scene 
They laugh at. Oh my Mother, Mother . Oh ! 
You hauc wonnc a happy Vidory toRome. 
But for your Sonne, belccue it : Oh belecuc it, 
Moft dangeroufly you hauc with him preuajl'd, 
If not moft moitall to him. Bui let it come : 
Aujftdim, though I cannot make true Warrcs, 
He frame conuenient peace. Now good ^uffidiw, 
Were you in my ftced, would you hauc beard 
A Mother Icfte? or gtahted \t^z u^n^idiJu ? 
Atif. I wasmou'dwithall. 
Coria^ I dare be fworne you were : 
And fir, it is no little thing to make 
Mine eyes to fweat compafTion, But (good fir) 
What peace you'l iBake,adu!fe fflc :Fof my pajt, 
lie not to Rome, lie backe with you,and pray you I 

Stand to me in this caufc. Oh Mother! Wife ! ! 

uiuf. I am glad thou haft fet thy mercy, & thy Honcr J 
A t dififercnce in thee ; Out orthat lie workc \ 

My (z^'e a former Fortune. ' 

Corto, I by and by ; But we will drinke together : \ 
And you (hall beare \ 

A better witnefTc backe then words, which wc | 

On like conditions,v»ilI hauc Coiinier-feard. '. 

Come enter with v«: Ladies you defcruc i 

To hauc a Temple built yoH : All the Swords 
In Italy, and her Confederate Armes 
Could not hauc made this peace. Exeunt. 

Et/trr Afenemut ttnd SicifiiHi . ( ft o n c ? 

?^'e>^e, Sceyouyon'tl Coin a'th Capitol, yon'j corner 
I Sicin. Why what of that ? 

\ THeyie. If it bcpolfibleforyou to difplaceit with your j 
\ little finger, there is fome hope the Ladies of Rome,efpc- 
cially his Mother, may preuaile with him-Butl fay.there 
IS no hope in't,our throats arc fentenc'd, and ftay vppon 
cxeciitton. 

Stem. Is't pofsible, that fo fi^jrt a time can alter the 
condition of a man'. 

Mene. There is differency between a Grub & a But- 
terfly, yet yoor Batteifly was a Grub : this cJi^Mrtint, is 
growncfrom Man to Dragon ; He has wings, hcc's more 
then a creeping tiling . 

SiCtH. He lou'd his Mother dcerely, 
Mene. Sodidhemec: and he no more remembers hi; 
Mother now jthei) an eight ycarc old horfe. The lannefiV 
of his face/owres ripe Grapes. When he walkj,hemoues 
likeanEngine,and the ground fiirinkes before his Trea- 
ditig. Hcis able to pierce a Cotdet with his eye: Talkes j 
like a knell, and his hum is a Battery. He fits in bis State, j 
as a thing made for Alexander, What he bids bee done,is I 
finifht with his bidding. He wants nothing of a God but 
Eternity,and a Hcauen to Throne in. 

Stein. Yes, mercy ,ifyou report him truly. 
Mtut. IpainthimintbeCharafler. Markwiatroer- 
cy his Mother flball bring from him ! There is no more 
mercy in him,thtnf here is irtilke in a male*Tyger, that 
(Kail our foore City Rndc : and all this it long of you. 
Stein, ThcGods be gotjdvBto vs. 
Mene. No.in fuch a cafe the Gods will not bee good 
vntoTs, Wlc:» we baniih'd hini,we refpeScd not them : 
sad be retutniog tobreakcouEncck3,they refpcairot vs, | 
£atMr * MtSenfer. 

Mef. 



The Tragedieo/QohoUnus. 



2P 



TiUf, Sir, if you'ld lauc your life, flyc to your Houfe, 
The Plebeians hauc got your rellow Tribune, 
And hale him vp and downe ; all fwcaring, if 
The Romane Ladies bring no: comfort home^ 
They'l giuehinxdeathby Inches. 

Enter Another Meffeitgtr. 

Sicii. What's the Ncwcs? (preuayl'd, 

THeff. Good Ncwcs, pood ncwcs, the Ladies haue 
The Volcians are dillodg'J, and /Martins gone : 
Aitien rrdaydid neucrycc greet R-oroe, 
No^iiot th'cxpuliion otthe Turquins. 

SiciK. Friend, art thou ccrtaine this is true * 
Is't nioft ccrtatnc. 

lilef. A* ccrtaine as I know the Sun is fire : 
Where hauc you luik'J that you mnke doubt of it ; 
Nc'rc through an Arch fo huriied the blownc Tide, 
As the lecomfortcd through th'gates. Why harke vou : 
Trumpets .Haboyes p^runss btntr, altogethiT. 
The Trumpets, Sack-buts,PiaJteries, and Fifes, 
Tabors.and Symboles,and the fhowting R onnansj 
Make the Sunnc dance. Hcarkc you . j^jhoHt within 

Mene. This is good Ncwcs : 
I will go mcete the Ladies, Th\s f'o/itfunia. 
Is worth of Confuls, Senators, Patricians, 
A City full '.Of Tribunes fuch as you, 
A Sea and Land fnll: vou hauc prsy'd well to day: 
This Morning, for tenthoufand of your throstes, 
rdc not haue giucn a doit. Harkc,how they ioy, 

SottKdfiiUi»tth theS'hgHts. 

Stein. Firfljthe Gods b!c(Te you for your tydings : 
Nexc,accept my thankefulncffe. 

Tiislf. Sir,we haue all great caufc to giue great thanks. 

Sicia. They are neerc the City, 

Afef Alreort at point to cmer. 

Sicin- Wce'l meet them, and heipe the ioy. Exemt. 

Sntertvdo SeKMters^ith Ladtef, pafsin^oHtr 
the Stage, wuh other Ltrds. 

Sena, Behold ourPstronnefic, the life of Rome: 
Call all your Tribes together, praife the Gods, 
And make triumphant fires, ftce w RovA'ers before them : 
Vnrtioot the noife that Banifh'd Mttrtius; 
Rcpeale him, with the welcome of his Mother : 
Cry welcome Ladies, welcome. 

^11. Welcome Ladies, welcome. 

^ r/ouri/h with Drammes cr Trumfets. 

Enter Tnlhs tyfuffidiuj^with Attendants. 

Auf. Go tell the Lords a'th'City, I am heere : 
Deliucr them this Paper : hauing read it, 
Bid them tepayrc to tk'Market place, where I 
Euen intheirs,andin theComoMMiseares 
Will vouch the truth of it. Him I accufc : 
The City Ports by this hath cntet'd, and 
Intends t'appeare before the People, hoping 
Topurge hiinfelfc with words. Difparch. 

Enter 'yor^ (^on^irstorr (^ Attffidtus FitBitm. 
Moft Welcome. 

r.Con, How isitwiihourGenerall ? 

Auf. Euen fo.as v;ith a man by his owne Alir.es iffl- 
poyfon'd.and witb his Charity flame. 

2.Cen. Moft Noble Sir, If you do hold the fame intent 
Wherein you wiflit vs parties : Wcc'l deliucr you 
Ofyour great danger. 

Anf. Sir,] cannot tell, 



I 



We muft proceed as we do findc the People. 

i.Cen. The People will rcmaine rncertainc.whirft 
'Tw ixc you there's difference : but the fall of ciihwr 
Makes the Suruiuor hcyrc of all. 

Anf. 1 know it : 
And my pretext to ttrike at him, admits 
A goad conftrudion. I rais'd him, and I p«wn'd 
Mine Honor for his truth : vho being fo hcightcn'd, 
He watered his new Plants ;/ithdcwcs of Flattcrv, 
Seducing fo my Friends : and to this end, 
j He bow'd his Nature, ncuer knownc before. 
But to be rough, »nfwayable,and free, 

l.CoMJf. Sir,hisftoutneffc 
When he did ftand for Confnll, which he loft 
Bylackeof ftooping. 

Anf. That I would haue rpokeiof: 
Ecingbauilh'dfor tjhecamcYntomy Harth, 
Prcicnted to my knife his Throat : I tookchim. 
Made him ioynt-(cri ant with mt : Gauc him way 
In all bis ownc defitcs : Nay, let him choofc 
Out of my Files, his proiciAs,to accomphrh 
My bcft and frcrtieft men, fcru'd his defignements 
In mine ownc perfon : holpc to rcapc the Fame 
Whith he did end all hi';; and tooke !omc pride 
To domyfclff this wrong :TiUatthclaft 
1 fccnrdiiis Follower, not Partner; and 
He wadg'd me with liis Couotcnancc,a$if 
I had b;n Mercenary. 

f.Ctn. Sohedidiiiy Lord : 
The Army maruey I'd at it, and :n the laft, 
Whcnhchad carried Rome. and that wc fook'd 
For no icflc Spoile, ihcii Gioiy. 

Auf There was it r 
For which my fincwcc fliall be ftretcht vpon him, 
At a few drops of Womcm rhewnie, whi. hare 
As cheapc as Lies; he loU! ihc Blo< d and Labour 
Of our great Aftion; therefore fVi:.ll he dye, 
Andllcrencwme in hit fall Buthciirke. 

Lrummes a^U 'Trumpets fotindtjirithgreat 
Ihowts ofthepecpie. 

l.Con. YourNitiucTownr youenr.e'<l likeaPoflc, 
An<l had no welcocnes home, bu: he returnes 
Splitting the Ayrc with noyfe, 

t.Cen. And patient Fooles, 
Whofc children he hath flaine, their bafe throats tcarc 
With j;iuinghim glory. 

J. Can. Therefore at your vantage, 
Ere hs exprcflc himfelfe; or moue the people 
With what he would lay, let him fccle youi Swofd: 
Which wc will tceond, when he lies olrng 
After your way. His Tale pronounc'd, ftiall bury 
His Reafons, with his Body. 

Auf, Siy no more. Hcere come the Lords, 
Enter (he Lords of the City. 

AU Lords. You are moft welcome home. 

Anff", 1 hnuen^-: dcieru'dit. 
Rut worthy Lords, haue yon with hccdepcrufed 
What I hauc written to you ? 

Ail, Wchaue. 

I. Lord. And greeuctoheare't: 
Whit faults l-.c made before the laft, I thinkc 
Might haue found eafic Fines : But there to end 
Whctche was to begin,and g;ue away 
The benefit of our Lcuics,anlweriiig vs 
With our owne charge : making a I reatic, where 
There was a yeelding; this admits no cxcufc I 

cc? Atifl 



V 



The Tragedie of QorioUnus. 



Anf. Ke approaches, you Hiall hcare biro. 
Etrtcr Corioltmw m^rchtug with Dri*tnme,and Colowrs, T^t 
Commoners beintr with him. 

Corio. Hailc Lords, I am retum'd youiSouldier : 
No more infeifled with my Countrie* loue 
Then when I parted hence ; but (iill fubfifting 
Viider your great Command . You are to know, 
ThatprofpcrouHy I hanc attempted, and 
With bloody paffagc led your Warrcs, cuen co 
The gates of Ron::c: Our I'poilcs we haue brought home 
Doth more-then couii;erpoiz.c a full tliird part 
The charges of the A(flion. We hauc madepesc« 
With no Icffe Honor to the yintiates 
Then fhame to tn'Romaines. And we heere dcliuer 
Sublcrib'd by'th'ConfuIs.and Patricians, 
TogetWerwith theSeale a'tb Senat,wh^t 
Wchaue compounded on. 

Auf. Read it not Noble Lords, 
But tell the Traitor in the higheft degree 
He hath ibus'd rourP-iwers. 

Corio. Tiaitor? How now? 

Auf. I Traitor, A^ttrtiM. 

Cario, MtirtiHt} 

Anf. I MarciM, Cmm MarctH/ :Do'l{t\\ou thinke 
lie grace thee with that Robbery, thy ftolne name 
CarioUHM in C orioles } 

You Lords and Heads a'th'State.pcrfidioufly 
Heha'sbctray'dyoHrbu{ineffe,aad giuen vp 
For ccrtainc drop s of Salt.your City Rome : 
I fay your City to his Wiffr^nd Mother, 
Breaking bis CJath and Refolution, hke 
A t wift of rotten Siike, neuer admitting 
Counfaile a'cb'warre : But at his Nnrfes teares 
He whin'd and rnar'd away your Vii^ory, 
That Pages blufh'd at him, and men of heart 
Look'd wond'rir.g each at othcis. 

Corio. Hcai'ft chouMars? 

tAuft Name not :he God, thou boy of Teares, 

Corio. Ha> 

Aufi. No more. 

Corio. Mcafureleffe Lyar, thou haft made my heart 
Too great for what containcs it. Boy? Oh Slaue, 
Pardon me Lords, 'tis the firft time that euer 
I vvas forc'd to fcouI'd-Your iudgments my graue Lords 
Muft giucfhis Curre the Lye : and his owne Notion, 
Who weares my flripes impreft vpon him, that 
Muft beare my beating to his Grauc, fliall ioync 
To thruft the Lye vnto him. 

I J^ord. Peace both.and hcare me fpcake. 

Corio. Cut me to pceccs Voices men and Lads, 
Stsine all your edges on me. Boy, falfc Hound : 
If you haue writ your Annales true, 'tis there^ 
That likeanEaglcinaDoue-coaCyl 



Flattet'd your Volcians in Cerioles. 
Alone I did it. Boy. 

tAnf. Why Noble Lords, 
Will you be put in minde of his blinde Fortune, 
Which was your rhame, by this vnholy Braggart? 
'Fore your owne eyes,and cares ? 

tAB. Confp. Let him dye for't. 

AHPeofle. Teare him to peeces,doit prefently r 
He kill'd my Sonne, my daughter,he kill'd my Cofine 
MarcHs^ he kill'd my Father. 

i Lord. Peace hoe : no outragc,peact : 
The man is NobIc,and his Fame folds in 
This Orbc o'th'earth : His laft offences to vs 
Shall haue ludicious hearing. SundAt^idsM, 
A lid trouble not the peace. 

Corio. O that I had him,with fix Aitffidifijfej, or more ; 
His Tribe, to vfe my lawful! Sword, 

Atef. Irifolent Villaine. 

Ail Conjp. Kill.kill,kill,kill,kill him. 

Draw (>eth the Conjpimtors, andkjlt iJHArtiM, who 
f»Ues, Attfidttufinnds on him. 

Lords. Hold,hold,hold,hold. 

Auf. My Noble M3ftcrs,hearc me fpcake. 
iXord. OTulim. 

z.Lord. Thou haft done a dced,whereat 
Valour will wcepc. 

3. Lord. Tread not vpon him Maft«rs,all be quiet, 
Putvp yourSwordj. 

Auf. My Lords, 
When you fhall know (as in this Rage 
Proiiok'd by him.you cannot^ the great danger 
Which this mans life did owe you,you'l reioyce 
1 hat he is thus cut off. Pleafc it your Honours 
To call me to your Senate, lie deliuer 
My leift vour loyall Sfruant, or endure 
Your heauieft Ccnfure. 

I. Lord. Beare from hence his body. 
And niournc you for him. Let him be regarded 
As tiie moft ?<ot>lc Coarfe, that euer Herald 
Did follow to his Vrne. 

z.Lerd. His owne impatience, 
T Aes from Anftdius a great part of blame : 
Let's make the Belt of it. 

A-if. My Rage is gone, 
Ahd I am firucke with forrow. Takebim vj : 
Heipe three a'th'cheefcft Souldiers.Ile be one. 
Beate thou the Orumme chat it fpeake moumiully : 
Traile your fteelc Pikes. Though in this City hec 
Hath widdowed and vnchilded many acne. 
Which to this houre bewaile thelniuty. 
Yet he (hall haue 8 Noble Memory. A(}i(i. 

Extnnt bttrrng the Ttd/ efMiirtitu. A dttti March 
Siiudtd. 



FINIS. 



THE LIVES 

OF THE NOBLE GRE- 

CIANS AND ROMANES, COMPARED 

TOGETHER BY THAT GRAVE LEARNED 
PHILOSOPHER AND HISTORIOGRAPHER, 

TranllatcdoutofGrcckciuto French by Iames Am iot, Abbot ofBclIo- 
7.anc,Bi(hopofAuxcrrc, one ofthe Kings priuic counfcll, and great 
AmncrofFrancc,and out of French into Engiiih, by 
Thomas 3^orth. 




Imprinted at London by Richard Field for 
Bonham Norton. 



EXTRACTS FROM NORTH'S 
PLUTARCH. 



THE LIFE OF CAIUS MARTIUS CORIOLANUS. 



The houfe of the Martians at Rome was of the number of the Patricians, 108 
out of the which hath fprong many noble peifonages, whereof Ancus Martins 
was one, king Nuinaes daughters Tonne, who was king of Rome aiter Tullus 
Hostilius. Of the fame houfe were Fublius, & Quintus , who brought to Rome 
their best water they had by conduites. Cenforinus alfo came of that familie, 
that was fo furnamed, becaufe the people had chofen him Cenfor twife. 



The firft time he went to the warres, being but a ftripling, was when 85 
Tarquine furnamed the prowde (that had bene king of Rome, and was driuen 
out for his pride, after many attemptes made by fundry battelles to come in 
againe, wherein he was euer uuercome) did come to Rome. 



In this battell, wherein were many hotte and fharpe encounters of either 85 
partie, Martins valliantly fought in the fight ot the Dictator: & a Romaine 
fouldier being thrown to the groud euen harde by him, Martins ftraight be- 
ftrid him, and flew the enemie with his owne handes that had before ouer- 
thrown the Romaine. Hereupon, after the battell was wonne, the Dictator 
did not forget fo noble an acte, and therefore firft of all he crowned Martins 
with a garland of oken boughs. 



And as for other, the only refpect that made them valiant, was they hoped 
to haue honour: but touching Martins, the onely thing that made him to loue 
honour, was the ioy he fawe his mother did take of him. For he thought 
nothing made him fo happie and honorable, as that his mother might heare 
euerie body praife and commend him, that fliee might alwayes fee him returne 
with a crowne vpon his head, and that fhe might ftill imbrace him with teares 
running downe her cheekes for ioye. 



Other held hard againft that opinion, and that was Martins for one. For 119 
he alleaged, that the creditours lofing their money they had lent, was not the 
worft thing that was thereby: but that the lenitie that was fauored , was a be- 
ginning of difobedience , and that the proude attempt of the communaltie , was 
to abolifh law, and to bring all to confufion. Therefore he fayed, if the 

1 



EXTRACTS FROM NORTh's PLUTARCH. 



Senate were wife, they flioukl betimes preuent ami quencli this ill fauored & 
worfe ment beginning. 

The Senate being afeartl of their departure, did fend vnto them certaine of 
the pleafantest olde men, and the moft acceptable to the people among them. 
Of thofe Menenius Agrippa was he, who was fent for chiefe man of the meffage 
from the Senate. He, after many good perfualions and gentle requeftes made 
to the people, on the behalfe of the Senate: knit vp his oration in the end, 

6 with a notable tale, in this manner. That on a time all the members of mans 
body did rebell against the bellie, complaining of it, that it onely remained in 
the middeft of the bodie, without doing anything, neither did beare any labour 
to the maintenaunce of the reft: whereas all other partes and members did 
labour paynefully, & were very carefuU to satifiie the appetites and defires 

9 of the bodie. And fo the bellie, all this notwithftanding laughed at their follie, 
and fayed. It is true, I firft receiue all meates that norifh mans bodie: but 
afterwardes I fend it againe to the norifhment of other partes of the fame. 
10 Euen fo (quoth he) 6 you, my maifters, and cittizens of Rome: the reafon is 
alike betweene the Senate & you. For matters being wel digefted, & their 
counfells throughly examined , touching the benefite of the common wealth : 
the Senatours are caufe of the common comoditie that cometh vnto euery one 
of you. 

In the countrie of the Volsces againft whom the Romaines made war at 
that time, there was a principall cittie & of most fame, that was called 
CoRiOLES, before the which the Conful Cominius did laye fiege. Wherefore 
al the other Volsces fearing leaft that cittie fhould be taken by affault, they 
came from all partes of the countrie to faue it, entending to giue the Romaines 
battell before the cittie, and to giue an onfet on them in two feuerall places. 
The Conful Cominius vnderftanding this, deuided his armie alfo into two partes, 
and taking the one part with himfelf, he marched towards them that were 
drawing to the cittie, out of the countrie: and the other part of his armie he 
left in the campe with Titus Latius ( one of the valianteft men the Romaines 
had at that time) to refift thofe that would make any faly out of the cittie 
vpon them. To the Coriolans making fmall acconipt of them that laye in 
campe before the cittie, made a falye out vpon them, in the which at the firft 
the Coriolans had the better, and draue the Romaines backe againe into the 

34 trenches of their campe. But Martius being there at that time, running out of 
the campe with a fewe men with him, he flew the firft enemies he met withal, 
and made the reft of them ftay vpon the fodain, crying out to the Romaines 
that had turned their backes, and calling them againe to fight with a loud voyce. 

36 For he was euen fuch another, as Cato would haue a fouldier and a captaine 
to be, not only terrible, and fierce to lay about him, but to make the enemie 
afearde with the founde of his voyce, and grimnes of his countenance. Then 
there flocked about him immediately, a great number of Romaines : whereat 
the enemies were fo afeard, that they gaue backe prefently. But Martius not 



EXTRACTS FROM NORTH's PLUTARCH. .3 

ftayiiig fo, did chafe and followe them to their owne gates, that fled for life. 
And there perceiuing that the Romainks retired backe, for the great number 
of dartes and arrowes which flew about their cares fro the walles of tlie cittie, 
& that there was not one man amongeft them that durft venter himfelfe to 
follow the flying enemies into the cittie , for that it was full of men of warre, 
very well armed, and appointed: he did encorage his fellowes with wordes 
and deedes, crying out to them, that fortune had opened the gates of the cittie, 3rb 
more for the followers the the flyers. But all this notwithftanding, few had 
the hartes to follow him. Howbeit Martius being in the throng among the 
enemies, thruft himfelfe into the gates of the cittie, and entred the fame among 
them that fled, without that any one of them durft at the firft turne their face 
vpon him, or elfe off'er to ftay him. 



The cittie being taken in this forte, the moft part of the fouldiers beganne 37 
incontinently to fpoile, to carry away, and to looke vp the bootie they had 
wonne. But Martius was maruellous angry with them, and cryed out of them, 
that it was no time now to looke after fpoyle, and to runne ftragling heere 
and there to enrich themfelues, whileft the other Conful and their fellowe 
cittizens peraduenture were fighting with their enemies: and how that leaning 
the fpoyle, they fhould feeke to wind themfelues out of daunger and perill. 



When they fawe him at his firft comming, all blouddy, and in a fwet, and 40 
but with a fewe men following him: fome thereupon beganne to be afeard. 
But foone after, when they fawe him runne with a liuely cheere to the Conful, 
and to take him by the hande, declaring howe he had taken the cittie of Co- 41 
RiOLES, and that they fawe the Conful Coviinius alfo kiffe and imbrace him: 
then there was not a man but tooke harte againe to him , and beganne to be 
of a good courage, fome hearing him report from poynt to poynt, the happie 
fucceffe of this exployte, and other alfo coniecturing it by feeing their geftures 
a farre off. Then they all beganne to call vpon the Conful to martch forward, 
and to delaye no longer but to giue charge vpon the enemie. Martius asked 43 
him howe the order of their enemies battell was, and on which fide they had 
placed their beft fighting men. The Conful made him aunfwer, that he thought 
the bandes which were in the vowarde of their battell , were thofe of the 
Antiates, whom they efteemed to be the warlikeft men, and which for valiaunt 
corage would giue no place, to any of the hofte of their enemies. Then prayed 
Martius, to be fet directly againft them. The Conful granted him, greatly 44 
prayfing his courage. 

Then they prayed Martius that he would retire to the campe , becaufe they 38 
fawe he was able to doe no more, he was alreadie fo wearied with the great 
paine he had taken, and fo fainte with the great woundes he had vpon him. 
But Martius aunfwered them, that it was not for conquerours to yeelde, nor 
to be fainte harted: and thereupon beganne a frefhe to chafe thofe that fledde, 
vntill fuch time as the armie of the enemies was vtterly ouerthrowne, and 

1* 



4 EXTRACTS FROM NORTH S PLUTARCH. 

numbers of them flaine and taken prilbiiers. The next morning betimes, 

48 Martins went to the Conful, and the other Romaines with him. There the 
Conful Cominhis going vp to his chayr of ftate , in the prefence of the whole 
armie, gaue thankes to the goddes for fo great, glorious, and profperous a 
victorie : then he fpake to Martins, whofe valiantnelTe he commended beyond 
the moonc, both for that he himfelfe fawe him do with his eyes, as alfo for 

60 that Martins had reported vnto him. So in the ende he willed Martins, that 
he fhould choofe out of all the horfes they had taken of their enemies, and of 
all their goodes they had wonne (whereof there was great ftore) tenne of euerie 
forte which he liked beft, before any diftribution fhould be made to other. Be- 
fides this great honourable offer he had made him, he gaue him in teftimonie 

52 that he had wonne that daye the price of proweffe aboue all other , a goodly 
horfe with a capparifon, and all furniture to him: which the whole armie be- 
holding, did maruelloufly praife and commend. But Martins ftepping forth, told 
the Confull, he moft thankefully accepted the gift of his horfe, and was a glad 
man befides, that his feruice had deferued his generalles commendation: and 

50 as for his other offer, which was rather a mercenarie rewarde, then an honor- 
able recompence , he would haue none of it, but v.- as contented to haue his 

54 equall part with other fouldiers. Onely, this grace (fayed he) I craue and be- 
feech you to graunt me. Among the Volsces there is an olde friend and hoaft 
of mine, an honest wealthie man, and nowe a prifoner , who liuing before in 
great wealth in his owne countrie, liueth nowe a poore prifoner, in the hands 
of his enemies: and yet notwithftanding all this miferie and misfortune, it would 
do me great pleafure if I could fane him from his one danger: to keepe him 
from being folde as a fiaue. 



52 After this fhoute and noyfe of the affembly was fomewhat appeafed, the 

Conful Cominius beganne to fpeake in this forte. We cannot compell Martins 
to take thefe giftes wee offer him if he will not receiue them : but we will giue 
him fuch a reward for the noble feruice he hath done, as he cannot refufe. 
Therefore we do order and decree, that henceforth he be called CorioJanus, 
vnleffe his valiant actes haue wonne him that name before our nomination. 
And fo euer fince, he ftill bare the third name of CorioJanus. 



Shortly after this, Martins ftood for the Confulfhip: and the common people 
91 fauoured his fute, thinking it would be a fliame to them to denie, and refufe 
the chiefeft noble man of bloud, and moft worthie perCon of Rome, and fpecially 
him that had done fo great feruice and good to the commonwealth. For the 
89 cuftome of Rome was at that time, that fuch as did fue for any office, fhould 
for certaine dayes before be in the market place , onely with a poore gowne 
on their backes, and without any coate vnderneath, 'to pray the cittizens to re- 
member them at the day of election: which was thus deuifed, either to moue 
the people the more, by requefting them in fuch meane apparell, or elfe becaufe 
they might fhew them their wounds they had gotten in the warres in the feruice 
of the commonwealth, as manifeft markes and teftimonie of their valiantneffe. 



EXTRACTS FROM NORTH S PLUTARCH. 

Now Martins following this cuftome, fhewed many woundes and cuts vpon 93 
his bodie, which he had i-eceiued in leuenteene yeares feruice at the warres, 
and in many fundrie battels, being euer the foremoft man that did fet oat feete 
to fight. So that there was not a man among the people, but was afhamed of 
liimfelfe, to lefufe fo valiant a man: and one of them laid to another, we muft 
needes choofe him Confull, there is no remedie. But when the day of election 
was come, and that Martins came to the market place with great pompe, ac- 
companied witli all the Senate, and the whole Nobilitie of the citie about him, 
who fought to make him Confull , with the greateft inftance and intreatie they 
could, or euer attempted for any man or- matter: then the loue and good will 
of the common people, turned ftraight to an hate and enuie toward him, fear- 
ing to put this office of foueraigne authoritie into his hands, being a man fome- 
what partiall toward the nobilitie , and of great credit and authoritie amongft 
the Patricians, and as one they might doubt would take away altogether the 106 
libertie from the people. Whereupon for thefe confiderations . they refufed 
Martins in the end. and made two other that were futers, Confuls. The Senate 
being maruelloufly offended with the people, did accompt the fliame of this 
refufall, rather to redound to themfelues, then to Martins: but Martins tooke 
it in farre worfe parte then the Senate, and was out of all pacience. For he 
was a man too full of paffion and choUer, and too much giuen to ouer felfe 
will and opinion. ' 

In the meane feafon, there came great plentie of come to Rome, that had 
bene bought, part in Italie, and part was lent out of Si('ii>E, as giuen by GeJon 
the tyrant of Syracvsa: fo that many ftood in great hope, that the dearth of 
victuals being holpe, the ciuill dilTention would alio ceafe. The Senate fate in 
counfell vpon it immediatly, the common people ftood alfo about the pallace 
where the counfell was kept, gaping what refolution would fall out: perfwading 
themfelues, that the corne they had bought fhoidd be folde good cheape, and 
that which was giuen fhould be deuided by the polle , without paying any 
pennie , and the rather, becaufe certaine of the Senatours amongft them did fo 
wifhe and perfwade the fame. But Martins ftanding vpon his feete, did fonie- 
what fharpely take vp thofe, who went about to gratifie the people therein: 
and called them people pleafers, and traitours to the nobilitie. Moreouer, 
"he faied, they nouriflied againft themfelues, the naughtie feede and cockle of 117 
"infolencie and fedition, which had bene fowed and fcattered abroade amongft 
"the people whom they fliould haue cut off, if they had bene wife, and haue 119 
"preuented their greatneffe : and not to their owne deftruction to haue fuffered 
"the people, to ftablifh a magiftrate for themfelues, of fo great power and au- 
"thoritie , as that man had , to whome they had granted it. Who was alfo to 
"be feared, becaufe he obtained what he would, and did nothing but what he 
"lifted, neither paffed for any obedience to the Confuls, but lined in all libertie, 
"acknowledging no fuperiour to commaund him , fauing the onely heads and 
"authours of their faction, whom he called his magiftrates. Therefore faied 120 
"he, they that gaue counfell, and perfwaded that the corne fhould be giuen out 



6 EXTRACTS FROM NORTH S PLUTARCH. 

"to the common people gratis, us they vfed to do in the cities of Gkegk, where 
"the people had more abfolute power: did but onely nourifh their difobedience, 
"which would breake out in the ende, to the vtter ruine and ouerthrowe of 

121 "the whole ftate. For they will not thinke it is done in recorapenfe of their 
"feruice paft, fithence they know well enough they haue fo oft refufed to go 
"to the warres, when they were commanded: neither for their mutinies when 
"they went with vs, whereby they haue rebelled and forfaken their countrie: 
"neither for their accufations which their flatterers haue preferred vnto them, 
"and they haue receiued, and made good againft the Senate: but they will 
"rather iudge, we giue and grant them this, as abafing ourfelues, and ftanding 
"in feare of them, and glad to flatter them euery way. By this meanes, their 
"difobedience will ftill growe worfe and worfe: and they will neuer leaue to 

123 "practife new fedition, and vprores. Therefore it were a great follie for vs, 
"me thinkes to do it: yea, fhalM fay more? we fhould if we were wife, take 
"from them their Tribunefhip, which moft manifeftly is the embafing of the 
"Confulfhip, and the caufe of the diuifion of the citie. The ftate whereof as 
"it ftandeth, is not now as it was wonte to be, but becommeth difmembred in 
"two factions, which maintains alwaies ciuill diffention and difcorde betweene 
"vs, and will neuer fuflfer vs againe to be vnited into one body. 



For the Tribunes of the people, being prefent at this confultation of the 
Senate, when they fawe that the opinion of Martius was confirmed with the 

124 more voices, they left the Senate, and went downe to the people, crying out 
for helpe, and that they would affemble to faue their Tribunes. Hereupon the 

125 people ran on head in tumult together, before whom the words that Martius 
fpake in the Senate were openly reported : which the people fo ftomaked, that 
euen in that furie they were ready to flie vpon the whole Senate. But the 
Tribunes laide all the fault and burthen wholly vpon Martius, and fent their 
fergeants forthwith to arreft him, prefently to appeare in perfon before the 
people, to anfwer the words he had fpoken in the Senate. Martius ftoutly 
withftood thefe ofticers that came to arreft him. Then the Tribunes in their 
owne perfons, accompanied with the ^diles, went to fetche him by force, and 

129 fo laide violent hands vpon him. Howbeit the noble Patricians gathering to- 
gether about him, made the Tribunes giue back, and laid it fore vpon the 
^diles. 

Martius feeing the Senate in great doubt howe to refolue, partly for the 
loue and good will the nobilitie did beare him, and partly for the feare they 
ftoode in of the people : asked aloud of the Tribunes, what matter they would 

155 burden him with? The Tribunes aunfwered him, that they Avould fhewe howe 
he did afpire to be king, and would proue that all his actions tended to vfurpe 

157 tyrannicall power ouer Rome. Martius with that, rifing vp on his feete, faide: 
that thereupon he did willingly offer himfelfe to the people, to be tried vpon 
that accufation. And that if it were proued by him, he had fo much as once 
thought of any fuch matter, that bee would then refufe no kinde of punifhment 



EXTRACTS FROM NORTH S PLUTARCH. 7 

they would offer him: conditionally (quoth he) that you charge me with nothing 155 
(die befides, and that ye doe not alio abufe the Senate. They promifed they 
would not. Vnder thele conditions the iudgement was agreed vpon, and the 
people affembled. And firl't of all the Tribunes would in any cale (whatfoeuer 
became of it) that the people would proceede to giue their voices by Tribes, 151 
and not by hundreds: for by this meanes the naultitude of the poore needy 
people (and all fuch rable as had nothing to loofe, and had leffe regard of 
honeftie before their eies) came to be of greater force (becaufe their voices 
were numbred by the polle) then the noble lioneft citizens, whole peiions and 
purl'e did dutifully ferue the common wealth in their warres. And then when 
the Tribunes law they could not proue he went about to make him felfe King: 
they beganne to broach a frefh the former wordes that Martius had fpoken in 
the Senate, in hindering the diftribution of the corne at meane price vnto the 115 
common people, and perfwading alfo to take the office of Tribunefhip from 160 
them. And for the third, they charged him a new, that he had not made the 
common diftribution of the fpoyle he had gotten in the inuading the territories 151 
of the Antiates: but had of his owne authoritie deuided it among them, who 
were with him in that iourney. But this matter was moft ftraunge of all to 
Martius, looking leaft to haue bene burdened with that, as with any matter of 
offence. Whereupon being burdened on the fodaine, and hauing no readie ex- 
cufe to make euen at that infiant: he beganne to fall a praifing of the fouldiers 
that had ferued with him in that iourney. But thofe that were not with him, 
being the greater number, cried out fo loud, and made fuch a noife that he 
could not be heard. To conclude, when they came to tell the voices of the 
Tribes, there were three voices odde, which condemned him to be baniflied for 161 
life. After declaration of the fentence, the people made fuch ioy, as they neuer 
reioyced more for any battell they had wonne vpon their enemies, they were 
fo braue and liuely, and went home fo iocondly from the affembly, for triumph 163 
of this fentence. 

Now in the citie of Antivm , there was one called Tullus Aufidius , who for 
his riches, as alfo for his nobilitie and valiantneffe was honoured among the 
VoLSCES as a King. Martius knewe very well that Tullus did more malice and 
enuie him, then he did all the Romaines befides: becaufe that many times in 
battels where they met, they were euer at the encounter one againft another, 
like luftie couragious youthes, ftriuing in all emulation of honour, and had en- 
countered many times together. Infomuch as befides the common quarrell be- 
tweene them, there was bred a maruellous priuate hate one againft another. 
Yet notwithftanding, confidering that Tullus Aufidius was a man of a great 
mind, and that he aboue all other of the VoLSCES moft defired reuenge of the 
Romaines, for the iniuries they had done vnto them : hee did an acte that con- 
firmed the true wordes of an auncient Poet, who faide: 
It is a thing full hard, mans anger to withftand, 

if it be ftiffely bent to take an enterprife in hand. 
For then moft men will haue, the thing that they defire, 

although it coft their Hues therefore, fuch force hath wicked ire. 



8 EXTRACTS FKOM ^'ORTH's PLUTAKCH. 

And fo did he. For he dil'guifed himfelfe in fuch array and attire, as he thought 
no man could euer haue knowen him for the perfon he was , feeing him in that 
apparell he had vpon his backer and as Homer faid of Vlyffes, 
So did he enter into the enemies towne. 
176 It was euen twy-light when he entred the citie of Antivm, and many people 
met him in the ftreetes, but no man knew him. So he went directly to Tullus 
Aiifidius houfe, and when he came thither, he got him vp ftraight to the chimney 
harth, and fate him downe, and fpake not a word to any man, his face all 
muffled ouer. They of the houfe fpying him, wondered what he fhould be, and 
yet they durft not bid him rife. For ill fauouredly muffled and difguifed as he 
was, yet there appeared a certaine maieftie in his countenance, and in his 
filence: whereupon they went to Tullus who was at fupper, to tell him of the 
ftrange difguifing of this man. Tullus rofe prefently from the board, and com- 
ming towards him, asked him what he was, and wherefore he came. Then 
Martins vnmuffled himfelfe, and after he had paufed a while, making no anfwere, 
he faid vnto him. If thou knoweft me not yet, Tullus, and feeing me, doft 
'•not perhappes beleeue me to be the man I am in deede, I muft of neceffitie 

183 "bewray myfelfe to be that I am. I am Cuius Alartius, who hath done to thy- 
"felfe particularly, and to all the Volces generally, gi-eat hurt and mifchief, 
"which I cannot denie for my furname of Coriolanus that I beare. For I neuer 
"had other benefite nor recompeuce, of all the true and painefull feruice I haue 
"done, and the extreme daungers I haue bene in, but this only furname: a 
"good memorie and witneffe of the malice and difpleafure thou fhouldeft beare 
"me. In deede the name onely remaineth with me : for the reft, the enuie and 
"crueltie of the people of Rome haue taken from me, by the fuft'erance of the 
"daftardly nobilitie and magiftrates, who haue forfaken me, and let me be 
"banifhed by the people. This extremitie hath now driuen me to come as a 
"poore futer, to take thy chimney harth, not of any hope I haue to faue my 
"life thereby. For if I had feared death, I would not haue come hither to 
"haue put my life in hazard: but prickt forward with fpite and defire I haue 
"to be reuenged of them that thus haue banifhed me, whom now I beginne to 
"be auenged on putting my perfon betweene thy enemies. Wherefore, if thou 

184 "haft any heart to be wrecked of the iniures thy enemies haue done thee, 
"fpeede thee now, and let my miferie ferue thy turne, and fo vfe it, as my 
"feruice may be a benefite to the Volsces: promifing thee, that I will fight 
"with better good will for all you, then I did when I was againft you, knowing 
"that they fight more valiantly, who knowe the force of the enemie, then fuch 
"as haue neuer proued it. And if it be fo that thou dare not , and that thou 
"art wearie to proue fortune any more: then am I alfo wearie to Hue any 
"longer. And it were no wifdome in thee, to faue the life of him, who hath 
"bene heretofore thy mortall enemie, and wbofe feruice now can nothing helpe 
"nor pleafure thee. Tullus hearing what he faid, was a maruellous glad man, 
and taking him by the hande, he faide vnto him. Stand vp, 6 Martius, and be 

185 of good cheere, for in proferiug thy felfe vnto vs, thou doft vs great honour: 
and by this meanes thou maieft hope alfo of greater thinges, at all the Volsces 



232 



EXTRACTS FROM NORTH S PLVTARCH. \J 

handes. So he feafted him for that time, and entertained him in the honour- 
ablelt manner he could, talking with him in no other matters at that prefent: 
but within few daies after, they fell to confultation together in what fort they 
fhould beginne their warres. 

After he had thus louingly receiued them, and perceiuing that his mother 
Volumnia would begin to fpeake to him, he called the chiefeft of the counfell 
of the VoLSCES to heare what fhe would fay. Then flie fpakc in this fort. 
''If we helde our peace (my fonne) and determined not to fpeake, the ftate of 
"our poore bodies, and prefent fight of our raiment, would eafily bewray to 
"thee what life we haue led at home, fince thy exile and abode abroad. But 
"thinke now with thy felfe, how much more vnfortunately, then all the women 
"liuing we are come hither, confidering that the fight which fhould be moft 
"pleafant to all other to behold, fpightfuU fortune hath made moft fearefull to 
"vs: making my felfe to fee my fonne, and my daughter here, her husband, 
"befieging the walles of his natiue countrie. So as that which is the onely 
"comfort to all other in their aduerfitie and miferie, to pray vnto the gods, 
"and to call to them for aide: is the onely thing which plungeth vs into moft 
"deepe perplexitie. For we cannot (alas) together pray, both for victorie, for 
"our countrie , and for fafetie of thy life alfo : but a world of grieuous curfes, 
"yea more then any mortall enemie can heape vpon vs, are forcibly wrapt vp 
"in our praiers. For the bitter fop of moft harde choice is offered thy wife 
"and children, to forgo the one of the two: either to lofe the perfon of thy 233 
"felfe, or the nurfe of their natiue countrie. For my felfe (my fonne) I am 
"determined not to tarie , till fortune in my life time do make an end of this 
"warre. For if I cannot perfwade thee, rather to do good vnto both parties, 
"then to ouerthrow and deftroy the one, preferring loue and nature, before the 
"malice and calamitie of warres: thou flialt fee, my fonne, and truft vnto it, 
"thou flialt no fooner marche forward to affault thy countrie, but thy foote 
"fhall treade vpon thy mothers wombe, that brought thee firft into this world. 
"And I may not deferre to fee the day, either that my fonne be led prifoner 
"in triumph by his naturall countrymen, or that he himfelfe do triumphe of 
"them, and of his naturall countrie. For if it were fo, that my requeft tended 234 
"to faue thy country, in deftroying the Volsces : I muft confeffe, thou wouldft 
"hardly and doubtfully refolue on that. For as to deftroy thy naturall countrie, 
"it is altogether vnmeete and vnlawfuU: fo were it not iuft, and leffe honorable, 
"to betray thofe that put their truft in thee: But my onely demaund confifteth, 
"to make a gaile deliuerie of all euils, which deliuereth equall benefit and 
"fafetie, both to the one and the other, but moft honorable for the Volsces. 
"For it fhall appeare, that hauing victorie in their hands, they haue of fpeciall 
"fauour granted vs fingular graces: peace, and amitie, albeit themfelues haue 
"no leffe part of both, then we. Of which good, if fo it came to paffe, thy 
"felfe is the onely author, and fo haft thou the only honour. But if it faile, 
"and fall out contrarie: thy felfe alone deferuedly fhall carie the fhamefuU re- 
"proach and burthen of either partie. So, though the end of warre be vn- 



10 EXTRACTS FROM NORTh's PLUTARCH. 

"oertaine, yet this notwithftanding is moft certaine: that if it be thy chance to 
"■conquer, this benefit fhalt thou reape of thy goodly eonqueft, to be chronicled 
"the plague and deftroier of thy countrie. And if fortune alfo ouerthrow thee, 
"•then the world will fay, that through defire to reuenge thy priuate iniuries, 
''thou haft for euer vndone thy good friends , who did moft louingly and 
"courteouflie receiue thee. Marti/us gaue good eare vnto his mothers words, 
without interrupting her fpeach at all: and after fhe had faid what fhe would, 
he held his peace a prety while, and anfwered not a word. Hereupon fhe be- 
S35 "gan againe to fpeake vnto him, and faid. My fonne, why doeft thou not anfwer 
"me? doeft thou thinke it good altogether to giue place vnto thy choller and 
"defire of reuenge, and thinkeft thou it not honeftie for thee to graunt thy 
"mothers requeft, in fo weighty a caufe ? doeft thou take it honorable for a 
"noble man, to remember the wrongs and iniuries done him : and doeft not in 
"like cafe thinke it an honeft noble mans parte, to be thankful! for the good- 
"neffe that parents do fhew to their children, acknowledging the dutie and 
"reuerence they ought to beare vnto them? No man lining is more bound to 
"fhew himfelfe thankefuU in all parts and refpects, then thy feLfe : who fo vn- 
"naturally fheweth all ingratitude. Moreouer (my fonne) thou haft forely taken 
"of th}' country, exacting grieuous paiments vpon them , in reuenge of the in- 
"iuries offered thee: befides, thou haft not hithei'to fhewed thy poore mother 
"any courtefie. And therefore, it is not only honeft, but due vnto me, that 

236 "without compulfion I fhould obtaine my fo iuft and reafonable requeft of thee. 
"But fince by reafon I cannot perfwade thee to it, to what purpofe do I defer 
"my laft hope? And with thefe words, her felfe, his wife and children, fell 
downe vpon their knees before him. Martins feeing that, could refraine no 

237 longer, but went ftraight and lift her vp, crying out: Oh mother, what haue 
you done to me? And holding her hard by the right hand, oh mother, faid 
he, you haue wonne a happy victorie for your countrie, but mortall and vn- 
happy for youi fonne: for I fee my felfe vanquifhed by you alone. Thefe 
words being fpoken openly, he fpake a litle apart with his mother and wife, 
and then let them returne againe to Rome, for fo they did requeft him: and fo 
remaining in campe that night, the next morning he diflodged, and marched 
homewards into the Volsces countrie againe, who were not all of one minde, 
nor all alike contented. 



253 For thefe caufes TuUus thought he might no longer delay his pretence and 

enterprife, neither to tarie for the mutining and rifing of the common people 
againft him: wherefore, thofe that were of the confpiracie, beganue to crie out 
that he was not to be heard, nor that they would not fuffer a traytour to vfurpe 
tyrannicall power ouer the Tribe of the Volsces, who would not yeeld vp his 
eftate and authoritie. And in faying thefe words, they all fell vpon him, and 
killed him in the market place, none of the people once offering to refcue him. 



Berlin, printed by Unger Brothers, Printers to the King. 



