THE YALE 
SHAKESPEARE 



THE 

WINTER'S 

TAL% 



Edited bv 

Frederick S. Pierce 



Yale Umvlrsity 
Press 




Class P^.ZHd"] 
Book.- > n Z id 



Copight)]?. 



CfiEXRIGHT DEPOSm 



THE YALE SHAKESPEARE 



Edited by 
Wilbur L. Cross Tucker Brooke 

WiLLARD HiGLEY DuRHAM 



Published under the Direction 

OF the 

Department of English, Yale University, 

ON THE Fund 

Given to the Yale University Press in 1917 

BY THE Members of the 

KiNGSLEY Trust Association 

To Commemorate the Seventy-Fifth Anniversary 

of the Founding of the Society 



The Yale Shakespeare 



The Winters Tale 



EDITED BY 

FREDERICK E. PIERCE 




NEW HAVEN • YALE UNIVERSITY PRESS 

LONDON • HUMPHREY MILFORD 
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS • MCMXVIII 



^ ^>^\^ 
^-^^y.^ 



Copyright, 1918 
By Yale University Press 



First published, January, 1918 



■■■" $6,*J. 

FEB -5 1918 

©CLA481621 



/u^ . [ 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 



The Text 
Notes 

Appendix A. 
Appendix B. 
Appendix C. 

Appendix D. 



Sources of the Play 
The History of the Play 
The Text of the Present Edi- 
tion .... 
Suggestions for Collateral 
Reading 



Index of Words Glossed . 



Page 

1 

121 

128 

131 

134 

135 

136 



The facsimile opposite reproduces the first page of 
*The Winter's Tale' from the earliest printed edition, 
the Shakespeare Folio of 1623. This play is there the 
fourteenth in order among the thirty-six in the volume 
and stands at the end of the division of ^Comedies.' 
The facsimile has been made from the Elizabethan Club 
copy of the Folio and is about one-third the size of the 
original. 



Z77 




The Winters Tale. 



oASius Ti^rimm, Scosna Trima, 



Enter CttmiBo and jirchidamw. 



jirch. 



P you (liall chance(C(*w/J<i)to vifit "BohemiatOn 
the like occafion whereon my fevuiccs are now 
on-foot, you (haU fee(as I haue raid)grcat dif- 
ference betwixt our Bokemia,ind your Sicilia. 

Cum. Ichinke,this comming Summer, the King of 
StcittA meanes to pay "BohtmiA the Vifitation, which hec 
iuftly owes him. 

Arch. Wherein our Entertainment flia]lftiamcvs:wc 
will be iuftified in our Loues : for indeed— 

C*m. 'Befccchvou — 

^rfA.Verely I fpeake it in the freedotne of my know- 
ledge : we cannot with foch magnificence— in fo rare— 
I know Dot what to fay— Wee will giue you (leepie 
Drinkes,that your Sences (vn-incclligent of our infuffi- 
ciencc) mt", though they cannot pray fe vs, as little ac- 
cufc vs. 

Cmi, You pay a great dealc to deare;^for what's giuen 
freely. 

jirch. 'Belceuc me, Ifpeake as my Tndei (landing in- 
ftrufls mc,and as mine honeftieputs it to vttcrance. 

Cam. Bicditt cannot (hew himfelfc ouer-kind to "Bohe- 
tmt : They were trayn'd together in thejr Child-hoods ; 
and there rooted betwixt therej then fuch an affedion, 
which cannot chufebutbraunchnow. Since their more 
3i3tuic Dignities,and RoyuU NeccfTiticsjmadefeperati- 
30 of their Societie, their Encounccrs(though not Pcrfo- 
lall) hath been Royally actornyed with enccr-change of 
jifts.Letters^ouingEmbaflies.that they haue fecm d to 
3e together, though abfent:fliookc hands,as ouer a Vart; 
indcmbrac'd at it were trom theendsofoppofcd Winds. 
The Hcanens continue their Loues. 
^rch, I thinke there is not in the World,either Malice 
)r Matter, to alter it. You haue an vnfpeakible comfort 
•fyour young Prince v^<«w<&*«.- it is^Gernleman of the 
;reateft P^omife,that euer came into my Note. 

Cam, 1 very well agree with y ou.in the hopes of him : 
J : is a gallant Child ; one.that (indecd)Phyricks the Sub- 
j :d, makes old hearts frcfln : thay that went on Crutches 
; re he was borne,defire yet their life.to fee him a Man, 
'.- -^rch. VVould they clfc be content to d»« ? 
. C«jw.Yes;if there were no other excufe, why they Giould 
(jfirecoliue, 

i; Aroy. i fthe King had no Sonne, they waulddcfire to 
■. ;)eo;i Cnirrhes till he ?\6 f"e. F.xeiitH. 

Scosna Sccmida. 



Enter LeoKtes^HermioneyTHamiBim,T'elixenes,CamiU9. 
"el. Nine Changes of the Wacry-Starre hath been 



The Shepheards Notcfince wchaue left out Throne 

Without a Burthen : Time as long againe 

Would be fiirdvp(m7Brothcr)with out Thanks, 

And yet we(houid,forperpetuitic, 

Goe hence in debt : And therefore,like a Cypher 

(Yet ftanding in rich place) I multiply 

With one we thanke you.many thoufands moe. 

That goe before it. 

Lee. Stay your Thanks a while. 
And pay them when you part. 

Pol. Sir,that's to morrow ; 
J am qucftion'd by my feares,of what may chance. 
Or breed vpon our abfence,thac may blow 
No fneaping Winds at home,to make vj fay. 
This is put forth too truly: befjdes, I haue ftay'd 
To tyre your Royal tie. 

Leo. We are tougher (Brother) 
Then you can put vs xo'u 

fol. No longer (lay, 

Leo, One Seue'night longer. 

Vol. Very footh, to morrow, 

Leo. Weele part the time bet weenes then:and in that 
llenogaine-faying. 

Pol. Pre(remcnot('befeefhyou}ro: 
There is no Tongue that mouc$jiione,none i'th' World 
So foone as yours, could win me: fo it fiiould now, 
Were there r.ece(ritie in your requeft.although 
Twere ncedfull I deny'd it. My Affaires 
Doc euen drag me home-ward : which to hinder, 
Were (in your Loue) a W hip to me ; my flay, 
To you a Ch3rge,ai!d Trouble : to fane both, 
Farewell (our Brother.) 

Lee. Tongu£-ty'd our Queene ? fpeakc you. 

Her. I had thought (Sir)to haue held my pcace.vntill 
You had drawne Oathcs from him,not to ftay : you(Sir) 
Charge him too coldly. Tell him.you are furc 
All m'Bohemias well ; this fatisfadion. 
The by-gonc-day prochym'd, fay this (O him^ 
He's beat from his bett ward. 

Lee. \V c\\{i\d, Herm/one. 

Her. To tell.he longs to fee hisSonne,wete ftrongj 
But let him fay fo thcn.and let him goe ; 
Sut let him fweare fo.and he ITiall not ftay, 
Wee'l thwack him hence with Diftaffes. 
Yetof yourRoyallprelence.Ileaduenture 
The boitow o^a Weekc. When at 'Bohemia 
You take my Lord, He gioc him my CommitTion, 
Tolet^himthercaMoneth.behindihcGeft 
Prefix'd for's parting: yet (good-deed) Leontes, 
I loue thee not a Tar re o'th* Clock.behind 

A a What 



Four Lords of Sicilia 



[DRAMATIS PERSONiE] 

Leontes, King of Sicilia 

Mamillius, young Prince of Sicilia 

Camillo, 

Antigonus, 

Cleomenes, 

Dion, 

Hermione, Queen to Leontes 

Perdita, Daughter to Leontes and Hermione 

Paulina, Wife to Antigonus 

Emilia, a Lady 

PoLixENES, King of Bohemia 

Florizel, Prince of Bohemia 

Old Shepherd, reputed Father of Perdita 

Clown, his Son 

AuTOLYCus, a Rogue 

Archidamus, a Lord of Bohemia 

[:„ * [Shepherdesses^ 

Other Lords and Gentlemen and Servants 

Shepherds and Shepherdesses 

[A Mariner 

A Gaoler 

Ladies attending the Queen 

Satyrs for a dance 

Time, as Chorus 

Scene: Sometimes in Sicilia^ sometimes in 
Bohemia.'^ 

Dramatis Personae; cf. n. 



The Winter's Tale 

ACT FIRST 

Scene One 

[Sicilia. An Antechamber in Leontes' Palace^ 

Enter Camillo and Archidamus. 

Arch. If you shall chance^ Camillo, to visit 
Bohemia, on the like occasion whereon my ser- 
vices are now on foot, you shall see, as I have 
said, great difference betwixt our Bohemia and 
your Sicilia. 5 

Cam. I think, this coming summer, the King 
of Sicilia means to pay Bohemia the visitation 
which he justly owes him. 8 

Arch. Wherein our entertainment shall shame 
us we will be justified in our loves: for, indeed, — 

Cam. Beseech you, — ii 

Arch. Verily, I speak it in the freedom of my 
knowledge: we cannot with such magnificence — 
in so rare — I know not what to say. We will give 
you sleepy drinks, that your senses, unintelligent 
of our insufficience, may, though they cannot 
praise us, as little accuse us. 17 

Cam. You pay a great deal too dear for 
what 's given freely. 

Arch. Believe me, I speak as my understand- 
ing instructs me, and as mine honesty puts it to 
utterance. 22 

3 on foot: actively employed 

7 Bohemia: the king of Bohemia visitation: visit 

9,10 entertainment , . . loves; cf. n. 11 Beseech: I beseech 

12 ireedom: privilege 15 unintelligent oi: not perceiving 



The Winter's Tale, I. i 



Cam. Sicilia cannot show himself over-kind 
to Bohemia. They were trained together in 
their childhoods; and there rooted betwixt 
them then such an affection which cannot 
choose but branch now. Since their more ma- 27 
ture dignities and royal necessities made sepa- 
ration of their society, their encounters, though 
not personal, have been royally attorneyed with 
interchange of gifts, letters, loving embassies; 
that they have seemed to be together, though 
absent, shook hands, as over a vast, and em- 
braced, as it were, from the ends of opposed 
winds. The heavens continue their loves ! 35 

Arch. I think there is not in the world either 
malice or matter to alter it. You have an un- 
speakable comfort of your young Prince Mamil- 
lius: it is a gentleman of the greatest promise 
that ever came into my note. 40 

Cam. I very well agree with you in the hopes 
of him. It is a gallant child; one that indeed 
physics the subject, makes old hearts fresh; 
they that went on crutches ere he was born 
desire yet their life to see him a man. 45 

Arch. Would they else be content to die? 

Cam. Yes; if there were no other excuse why 
they should desire to live. 48 

Arch. If the king had no son, they would 
desire to live on crutches till he had one. 

Exeunt. 

23 ^icWia: the king of Sicily 26 which: aj 

27 branch: put forth branches 29 encounters: meetings 

30 personal: performed in person attorneyed: performed by proxy 

32 that: so that 33 vast: boundless and waste expanse 

34, 35 from . . . winds; cf. n. 40 note: notice 

43 physics the subject: is medicine to the king's subjects 



The Winter's Tale, I. 



Scene Two 

[A Room of State in the Palace^ 

Enter Leontes, Hermione, Mamillius, Polixenes, 
Camillo, [and Attendants^. 

Pol. Nine changes of the watery star have been 
The shepherd's note since we have left our throne 
Without a burden: time as long again 
Would be fiU'd up, my brother, with our thanks ; 
And yet we should for perpetuity 5 

Go hence in debt: and therefore, like a cipher, 
Yet standing in rich place, I multiply 
With one *We thank you' many thousands moe 
That go before it. 

Leo7i. Stay your thanks awhile, 9 

And pay them when you part. 

Pol. Sir, that 's to-morrow. 

I am question'd by my fears, of what may chance 
Or breed upon our absence; that may blow 12 

No sneaping winds at home, to make us say, 
'This is put forth too truly!' Besides, I have stay'd 
To tire your royalty. 

Leon. We are tougher, brother, 

Than you can put us to 't. 

Pol. No longer stay. 16 

Leon. One seven-night longer. 

Pol. Very sooth, to-morrow. 

Leon. We'll part the time between 's then; and 
in that 
I'll no gainsaying. 

1 watery star: moon; cf. n. 

2 The shepherd's note: observed by the shepherd 

6, 7 like . . . place; cf. n. 8 moe: more 9 Stay: postpone 

10 part: depart 12 that may blow; cf. n. 

14 is put forth: has blossomed {resulted) 

16 put us to't: prove by extreme test 

17 Very sooth: in absolute truth 18 between's: between us 



The Winter's Tale, I, ii 



Pol. Press me not, beseech you, so. 

There is no tongue that moves, none, none i' the 
world, 20 

So soon as yours could win me : so it should now, 
Were there necessity in your request, although 
'Twere needful I denied it. My affairs 
Do even drag me homeward; which to hinder 24 

Were in your love a whip to me ; my stay 
To you a charge and trouble : to save both. 
Farewell, our brother. 

Leon. Tongue-tied, our queen? speak you. 

Her. I had thought, sir, to have held my peace 
until 28 

You had drawn oaths from him not to stay. You, sir. 
Charge him too coldly : tell him, you are sure 
All in Bohemia 's well: this satisfaction 
The by-gone day proclaim'd: say this to him, 32 

He 's beat from his best ward. 

Leon. Well said, Hermione. 

Her. To tell he longs to see his son were strong: 
But let him say so then, and let him go; 
But let him swear so, and he shall not stay, 36 

We'll thwack him hence with distaffs. 
[To Polixenes.] Yet of your royal presence I'll ad- 
venture 
The borrow of a week. When at Bohemia 
You take my lord, I'll give him my commission 
To let him there a month behind the gest 41 

Prefix'd for 's parting: yet, good deed, Leontes, 

25 in your love a whip to me : an injury to me, though meant in love 

26 cha^rgQ^'. expense 33 ward: fencer's guard 37 thwack: &^of 
38 adventure : venture _ 39 borrow : borrowing 

40 commission: permission 

41 let: allow to remain gest: date of departure; cf. n. 

42 good deed : indeed 



The Winter's Tale, I, ii 



I love thee not a jar o' the clock behind 
What lady she her lord. You'll stay? 

Pol. No, madam. 44 

Her. Nay, but you will ? 

Pol. I may not, verily. 

Her. Verily! 
You put me off with limber vows ; but I, 
Though you would seek to unsphere the stars with 
oaths, 48 

Should yet say, 'Sir, no going,' Verily, 
You shall not go: a lady's Verily' 's 
As potent as a lord's. Will you go yet? 
Force me to keep you as a prisoner, 52 

Not like a guest ; so you shall pay your fees 
When you depart, and save your thanks. How say 

you? 
My prisoner, or my guest? by your dread 'verily,' 
One of them you shall be. 

Pol. Your guest, then, madam: 56 

To be your prisoner should import offending ; 
Which is for me less easy to commit 
Than you to punish. 

Her. Not your gaoler then. 

But your kind hostess. Come, I'll question you 
Of my lord's tricks and yours when you were boys : 61 
You were pretty lordings then. 

Pol. We were, fair queen, 

Two lads that thought there was no more behind 
But such a day to-morrow as to-day, 64 

And to be boy eternal. 

Her. Was not my lord 

The verier wag o' the two ? 

43 jar: tick 44 What lady she : any lady whatever 

47 limber: easily evaded 48 unsphere, etc.; cf. n. 

53 pay your fees; cf. n. 



6 The Winter's Tale, I. ii 

Pol. We were as twinn'd lambs that did frisk i' 
the sun. 
And bleat the one at the other : what we chang'd 68 
Was innocence for innocence; we knew not 
The doctrine of ill-doing, nor dream'd 
That any did. Had we pursu'd that life, 
And our weak spirits ne'er been higher rear'd 72 

With stronger blood, we should have answer'd heaven 
Boldly, 'not guilty;' the imposition clear'd 
Hereditary ours. 

Her. By this we gather 

You have tripp'd since. 

Pol. O ! my most sacred lady, 76 

Temptations have since then been born to 's ; for 
In those unfledg'd days was my wife a girl; 
Your precious self had then not cross'd the eyes 
Of my young playfellow. 

Her. Grace to boot! 80 

Of this make no conclusion, lest you say 
Your queen and I are devils; yet, go on: 
The offences we have made you do we'll answer; 
If you first sinn'd with us, and that with us 84 

You did continue fault, and that you slipp'd not 
With any but with us. 

Leon. Is he won yet? 

Her. He'll stay, my lord. 

Leon. At my request he would not. 

Hermione, my dearest, thou never spok'st 88 

To better purpose. 

Her. Never ? 

Leon. Never, but once. 

68 chang'd: exchanged 74 the imposition, etc.; cf. n. 

80 Grace to boot: Heavenly Grace help us 



The Winter's Tale, I. ii 



Her. What ! have I twice said well ? when was 't 
before ? 
I prithee tell me ; cram 's with praise, and make 's 
As fat as tame things: one good deed, dying tongue- 
less, 92 
Slaughters a thousand waiting upon that. 
Our praises are our wages : you may ride 's 
With one soft kiss a thousand furlongs ere 
With spur we heat an acre. But to the goal: 96 
My last good deed was to entreat his stay: 
What was my first ? it has an elder sister. 
Or I mistake you : O ! would her name were Grace. 
But once before I spoke to the purpose: when? 
Nay, let me have 't ; I long. 

Leon. Why, that was when 

Three crabbed months had sour'd themselves to death, 
Ere I could make thee open thy white hand 
And clap thyself my love: then didst thou utter, 104 
*I am yours for ever.' 

Her. 'Tis grace indeed. 

Why, lo you now, I have spoke to the purpose twice: 
The one for ever earn'd a royal husband. 
The other for some while a friend. 108 

[Giving her hand to Polixenes.'\ 

Leon. [Aside.] Too hot, too hot! 
To mingle friendship far is mingling bloods. 
I have tremor cordis on me: my heart dances; 
But not for joy; not joy. This entertainment 112 
May a free face put on, derive a liberty 

92 tame things: well-fed pets one good deed, etc.; cf. n. 

96 heat: race over to the goal: to come to the point 

99 would her name were Grace: would that that were called a 

gracious deed ! 
104 clap: declare by clapping thy hand into mine 
111 tremor cordis: trembling of the heart 113 free: innocent 



The Winter's Tale, Z. ii 



From heartiness^, from bounty, fertile bosom, 
And well become the agent: 't may, I grant: 
But to be paddling palms and pinching fingers, 
As now they are, and making practised smiles, 117 
As in a looking-glass ; and then to sigh, as 'twere 
The mort o' the deer; O! that is entertainment 
My bosom likes not, nor my brows. Mamillius, 
Art thou my boy? 

Mam. Ay, my good lord. 

Leon. V fecks? 121 

Why, that 's my bawcock. What ! hast smutch'd thy 

nose? 
They say it is a copy out of mine. Come, captain. 
We must be neat ; not neat, but cleanly, captain : 
And yet the steer, the heifer, and the calf, 125 

Are all call'd neat. Still virginalling 
Upon his palm! How now, you wanton calf! 
Art thou my calf ? 

Mam. Yes, if you will, my lord. 128 

Leon. Thou want'st a rough pash and the shoots 
that I have. 
To be full like me: yet they say we are 
Almost as like as eggs; women say so. 
That will say anything: but were they false 132 

As o'er-dy'd blacks, as wind, as waters, false 
As dice are to be wish'd by one that fixes 
No bourn 'twixt his and mine, yet were it true 
To say this boy were like me. Come, sir page, 

114 ierti\&: generous 

119 mort o' the deer: note on hunter's horn announcing death of 
the deer 

120 brows; cf. n. 121 I' fecks: in faith 
122 bawcock: fine lad smutch'd: soiled 

126 neat: cattle virginalling: playing with fingers; cf. n. 

129 pash: head shoots: horns 

133 o'er-dy'd hlacks: mourning garments rotten from over-dyeing or 

worn by hypocritical mourners 
135 bourn: boundary 



The Winter's Tale, I. it 9 

Look on me with your welkin eye : sweet villain ! 
Most dear'st ! my collop ! Can thy dam ? — may 't 

be?— 
Affection! thy intention stabs the centre: 
Thou dost make possible things not so held^ 140 

Communicat'st with dreams; — how can this be? — 
With what 's unreal thou co-active art, 
And fellow'st nothing: then, 'tis very credent 
Thou mayst co-join with something; and thou 
dost, 144 

And that beyond commission, and I find it. 
And that to the infection of my brains 
And hardening of my brows. 

Pol. What means Sicilia ? 

Hei\ He something seems unsettled. 

Pol. How, my lord! 148 

Leon. What cheer ? how is 't with you, best 

« brother? 

Her. You look 

As if you held a brow of much distraction: 
Are you mov'd, my lord? 

Leon. No, in good earnest. 

How sometimes nature will betray its folly, 152 

Its tenderness, and make itself a pastime 
To harder bosoms ! Looking on the lines 
Of my boy's face, methoughts I did recoil 
Twenty-three years, and saw myself unbreech'd. 
In my green velvet coat, my dagger muzzled. 
Lest it should bite its master, and so prove. 
As ornaments oft do, too dangerous: 
How like, methought, I then was to this kernel, 

\Z7 vf&lkin: sky-hlue viWain: little rogue 

138 my collop: a piece of my flesh dam: mother 

139-144 Affection . . . dost; of. n. 148 something: somewhat 



10 The Winter's Tale, I. ii 

This squash, this gentleman. Mine honest friend, 161 
Will you take eggs for money? 

Mam. No, my lord, I'll fight. 

Leon. You will } why, happy man be his dole ! My 
brother. 
Are you so fond of your young prince as we 164 

Do seem to be of ours ? 

Fol. If at home, sir. 

He 's all my exercise, my mirth, my matter. 
Now my sworn friend and then mine enemy; 
My parasite, my soldier, statesman, all: 168 

He makes a July's day short as December, 
And with his varying childness cures in me 
Thoughts that would thick my blood. 

Leon. So stands this squire 

Offic'd with me. We two will walk, my lord, 172 

And leave you to your graver steps. Hermione, 
How thou lov'st us, show in our brother's welcome: 
Let what is dear in Sicily be cheap: 
Next to thyself and my young rover, he 's 176 

Apparent to my heart. 

Her. If you would seek us. 

We are yours i' the garden : shall 's attend you there ? 

Leon. To your own bents dispose you: you'll be 
found. 
Be you beneath the sky. — [Aside. "] I am angling 
now, 180 

Though you perceive me not how I give line. 
Go to, go to ! 
How she holds up the neb, the bill to him ! 

161 squash: an unripe pea-pod 

162 take eggs for money: allow yourself to he imposed on 

163 dole: lot in life 170 childness: childish humors 

171 thick my blood: thicken my blood, cause melancholy 

172 Offic'd with: in relation to 177 Apparent: heir apparent 
178 shdM's: shall we 179 hents: inclinations 183 nth: mouth 



The Winter's Tale, I, a n 

And arms her with the boldness of a wife 184 

To her allowing husband ! 

[Exeunt Polixenes, Hermione, and 
Attendants,^ 
Gone already! 
Inch-thick^ knee-deep, o'er head and ears a fork'd 

one! 
Go play, boy, play; thy mother plays, and I 
Play too, but so disgrac'd a part, whose issue 188 

Will hiss me to my grave: contempt and clamour 
Will be my knell. Go play, boy, play. There have 

been. 
Or I am much deceiv'd, cuckolds ere now; 
And many a man there is even at this present. 
Now, while I speak this, holds his wife by the arm, 
That little thinks she has been sluic'd in 's absence. 
And his pond fish'd by his next neighbour, by 
Sir Smile, his neighbour : nay, there 's comfort 

in 't, 196 

Whiles other men have gates, and those gates open'd. 
As mine, against their will. Should all despair 
That have revolted wives, the tenth of mankind 
Would hang themselves. Physic for 't there is 

none ; 200 

It is a bawdy planet, that will strike 
Where 'tis predominant; and 'tis powerful, think it. 
From east, west, north, and south: be it concluded. 
No barricado for a belly : know 't ; 204 

It will let in and out the enemy 
With bag and baggage. Many a thousand on 's 
Have the disease, and feel 't not. How now, boy ! 
Mam. I am like you, they say. 

185 allovfing: approving 186 a fork'd one: with forked horns 

188 issue: outcome 201 strike: blast 

202 predominant: strongest in influence; cf. n. 



12 The Winter's Tale, Z. it 

Leon. Why, that 's some comfort. 208 

What! Camillo there? 

Cam. Kj, my good lord. 

Leon. Go play, Mamillius ; thou 'rt an honest man. 

{Exit Mamillius. '\ 
Camillo, this great sir will yet stay longer. 212 

Cam. You had much ado to make his anchor hold: 
When you cast out, it still came home. 

Leon. Didst note it? 

Cam. He would not stay at your petitions ; made 
His business more material. 

Leon. Didst perceive it? 216 

[Aside.'] They're here with me already, whispering, 

rounding, 
'Sicilia is a so-forth.' 'Tis far gone. 
When I shall gust it last. How came 't, Camillo, 
That he did stay? 

Cam. At the good queeri's entreaty. 220 

Leon. At the queen's, be't: 'good' should be per- 
tinent ; 
But so it is, it is not. Was this taken 
By any understanding pate but thine? 
For thy conceit is soaking; will draw in 224 

More than the common blocks : not noted, is 't. 
But of the finer natures ? by some severals 
Of head-piece extraordinary? lower messes 
Perchance are to this business purblind? say. 

Cam. Business, my lord! I think most understand 
Bohemia stays here longer. 

214 came home: came hack without catching 216 material: important 
217 here with me: making mocking gestures when mentioning me 

rounding : whispering 
219 s^st: perceive 222 taken: understood 

224 conceit: intelligence soaking: capable of absorbing 

225 blocks: /j^adj 226 severals: individuals 
227 lower messes: men of inferior rank who ate, or messed, at a 

lower table 



The Winter's Tale, I. ii 13 

Leon. Ha ! 

Cam. Stays here longer. 

Leon. A.J, but why? 

Cam. To satisfy your highness and the en- 
treaties 232 
Of our most gracious mistress. 

Leon. Satisfy ! 

The entreaties of your mistress ! satisfy ! 
Let that suffice. I have trusted thee, Camillo, 
With all the nearest things to my heart, as well 
My chamber-councils, wherein, priest-like, thou 
Hast cleans'd my bosom: I from thee departed 
Thy penitent reform'd; but we have been 
Deceiv'd in thy integrity, deceiv'd 240 

In that which seems so. 

Cam. Be it forbid, my lord ! 

Leon. To bide upon 't, thou art not honest; or. 
If thou inclin'st that way, thou art a coward. 
Which boxes honesty behind, restraining 244 

From course requir'd; or else thou must be counted 
A servant grafted in my serious trust. 
And therein negligent; or else a fool 
That seest a game play'd home, the rich stake 
drawn, 248 

And tak'st it all for jest. 

Cam. My gracious lord, 

I may be negligent, foolish, and fearful ; 
In every one of these no man is free. 
But that his negligence, his folly, fear, 252 

Among the infinite doings of the world. 
Sometime puts forth. In your affairs, my lord, 

237 chdi.mh&r-connci\s: private affairs 242 hide', dwell, lay emphasis 

244 boxes: hamstrings 

246 grafted in my serious trust: whom I have trusted implicitly 

254 puts forth: reveals itself 



14 The Winter's Tale, I. ii 

If ever I were wilful-negligent, 

It was my folly; if industriously 256 

I play'd the fool, it was my negligence. 

Not weighing well the end ; if ever fearful 

To do a thing, where I the issue doubted. 

Whereof the execution did cry out 260 

Against the non-performance, 'twas a fear 

Which oft infects the wisest: these, my lord. 

Are such allow'd infirmities that honesty 

Is never free of. But, beseech your Grace, 264 

Be plainer with me; let me know my trespass 

By its own visage ; if I then deny it, 

'Tis none of mine. 

Leon. Ha' not you seen, Camillo, — 

But that 's past doubt ; you have, or your eye- 
glass 268 
Is thicker than a cuckold's horn, — or heard, — 
For to a vision so apparent, rumour 
Cannot be mute, — or thought, — for cogitation 
Resides not in that man that does not think, — 
My wife is slippery? If thou wilt confess, — 273 
Or else be impudently negative. 
To have nor eyes, nor ears, nor thought, — then say 
My wife 's a hobby-horse ; deserves a name 276 
As rank as any flax-wench that puts to 
Before her troth-plight: say 't and justify 't. 

Cam. I would not be a stander-by, to hear 
My sovereign mistress clouded so, without 280 

My present vengeance taken: 'shrew my heart, 

260 execution: successful performance later 

268 eye-glass: crystalline lens of the eye 

270 vision so apparent: spectacle so obvious 

273 s\iv^&ry: inconstant 272-27 S If . . . thought; c/. n. 

276 hohhy-hoTse: immoral woman 

277 flax-wench: female flax-dresser puts to: sins 

280 clouded: shamefully accused; cf. n. 

281 present: immediate 'shrew: beshreWj curse 



The Winter's Tale, I. ii is 

You never spoke what did become you less 
Than this ; which to reiterate were sin 
As deep as that, though true. 

Leon. Is whispering nothing? 284 

Is leaning cheek to cheek? is meeting noses? 
Kissing with inside lip ? stopping the career 
Of laughter with a sigh ? — a note infallible 
Of breaking honesty, — horsing foot on foot? 288 

Skulking in corners ? wishing clocks more swift ? 
Hours, minutes ? noon, midnight ? and all eyes 
Blind with the pin and web but theirs, theirs only, 
That would unseen be wicked? is this nothing? 
Why, then the world and all that 's in 't is noth- 
ing ; 293 
The covering sky is nothing; Bohemia nothing; 
My wife is nothing; nor nothing have these nothings, 
If this be nothing. 

Cam. Good my lord, be cur'd 296 

Of this diseas'd opinion, and betimes ; 
For 'tis most dangerous. 

Leon. Say it be, 'tis true. 

Cam. No, no, my lord. 

Leon. It is; you lie, you lie: 

I say thou liest, Camillo, and I hate thee; 300 

Pronounce thee a gross lout, a mindless slave. 
Or else a hovering temporizer, that 
Canst with thine eyes at once see good and evil, 
Inclining to them both: were my wife's liver 304 

Infected as her life, she would not live 
The running of one glass. 

Cam. Who does infect her? 

288 honesty: chastity , 291 pin and web: ca^aroc? 

306 glass : hour-glass 



16 The Winter's Tale, I. ii 

Leon. Why, he that wears her like her medal, 
hanging 
About his neck, Bohemia: who, if I 308 

Had servants true about me, that bare eyes 
To see alike mine honour as their profits. 
Their own particular thrifts, they would do that 
Which should undo more doing: ay, and thou. 
His cup-bearer,— whom I from meaner form 313 

Have bench'd and rear'd to worship, who mayst see 
Plainly, as heaven sees earth, and earth sees heaven. 
How I am galled, — mightst bespice a cup, 316 

To give mine enemy a lasting wink; 
Which draught to me were cordial. 

Cam. Sir, my lord, 

I could do this, and that with no rash potion, 
But with a lingering dram that should not work 
Maliciously like poison: but I cannot 321 

Believe this crack to be in my dread mistress. 
So sovereignly being honourable. 
I have lov'd thee, — 

Leon. Make that thy question, and go rot ! 

Dost think I am so muddy, so unsettled, 325 

To appoint myself in this vexation; sully 
The purity and whiteness of my sheets. 
Which to preserve is sleep; which being spotted 
Is goads, thorns, nettles, tails of wasps? 329 

Give scandal to the blood o' the prince my son. 
Who I do think is mine, and love as mine, 
Without ripe moving to 't ? Would I do this ? 

307 medal; cf, n. 311 thrifts: advantages 

313 ra&dine^r iorva: lower seat 

314 bench'd: given a seat of authority worship: dignity, honor 
316 bespice: /JotVow 317 yfirik: sleep 319 rash.: speedy 
321 Maliciously: T/io/enf/y 322 crack: flaw 
323 so\creign.\y: above all others 324 cyaestion: subject for thought 
326 appoint: dress 332 ripe moving to 't: ample cause for it 



The Winter's Tale, Z. ii 17 

Could man so blench? 

Cam. I must believe you^ sir: 333 

I do; and will fetch off Bohemia for 't; 
Provided that when he 's remov'd, your highness 
Will take again your queen as yours at first, 33a 

Even for your son's sake; and thereby for sealing 
The injury of tongues in courts and kingdoms 
Known and allied to yours, 

Leon. Thou dost advise me 

Even so as I mine own course have set down: 
I'll give no blemish to her honour, none. 341 

Cam. My lord, 
Go then ; and with a countenance as clear 
As friendship wears at feasts, keep with Bohemia, 
And with your queen. I am his cupbearer; 345 

If from me he have wholesome beverage. 
Account me not your servant. 

Leon. This is all: 

Do 't, and thou hast the one half of my heart; 
Do 't not, thou split'st thine own. 

Cam. I'll do 't, my lord. 349 

Leon. I will seem friendly, as thou hast advis'd me. 

Exit. 

Cam. O miserable lady! But, for me. 
What case stand I in ? I must be the poisoner 
Of good Polixenes ; and my ground to do 't 353 

Is the obedience to a master; one 
Who, in rebellion with himself, will have 
All that are his so too. To do this deed 356 

Promotion follows. If I could find example 
Of thousands that had struck anointed kings, 

333 blench: start aside from his course 

334 fetch oflF: make away with 337 sealing: sealing up, ending 
338 injury of tongues: injury caused by gossip 



1 8 The Winter's Tale, I. ii 

And flourished after, I'd not do 't ; but since 

Nor brass nor stone nor parchment bears not one, 360 

Let villainy itself forswear 't. I must 

Forsake the court : to do 't, or no, is certain 

To me a break-neck. Happy star reign now ! 

Here comes Bohemia, 

Enter PoUxenes. 

Pol. This is strange: methinks 364 

My favour here begins to warp. Not speak .f* — 
Good day, Camillo. 

Cam. Hail, most royal sir! 

Pol. What is the news i' the court? 

Cam. None rare, my lord. 

Pol. The king hath on him such a countenance 368 
As he had lost some province and a region 
Lov'd as he loves himself : even now I met him 
With customary compliment, when he. 
Wafting his eyes to the contrary, and falling 372 
A lip of much contempt, speeds from me and 
So leaves me to consider what is breeding 
That changes thus his manners. 

Cam. I dare not know, my lord. 376 

Pol. How ! dare not ! do not ! Do you know, and 
dare not 
Be intelligent to me? 'Tis thereabouts; 
For, to yourself, what you do know, you must, 
And cannot say you dare not. Good Camillo, 
Your chang'd complexions are to me a mirror 
Which shows me mine chang'd too; for I must be 
A party in this alteration, finding 
Myself thus alter'd with 't. 

363 break-neck: ruinous course 

372 contrary: opposite direction iaWing: letting fall 

378 mteWigent: communiofltive thereabouts: about that 



The Winter's Tale, I, ii 19 

Cam. There is a sickness 384 

Which puts some of us in distemper ; but 
I cannot name the disease, and it is caught 
Of you that yet are well. 

Pol. How! caught of me? 

Make me not sighted like the basilisk: 388 

I have look'd on thousands, who have sped the better 
By my regard, but kill'd none so. Camillo, — 
As you are certainly a gentleman, thereto 
Clerk-like experienc'd, which no less adorns 392 

Our gentry than our parents' noble names. 
In whose success we are gentle, — I beseech you. 
If you know aught which does behove my knowledge 
Thereof to be inform'd, imprison it not 396 

In ignorant concealment. 

Cam. I may not answer. 

Pol. A sickness caught of me, and yet I well ! 
I must be answer'd. Dost thou hear, Camillo; 
I conjure thee, by all the parts of man 400 

Which honour does acknowledge, — whereof the least 
Is not this suit of mine, — that thou declare 
What incidency thou dost guess of harm 
Is creeping toward me; how far off, how near; 
Which way to be prevented if to be; 405 

If not, how best to bear it. 

Cam. Sir, I will tell you; 

Since I am charg'd in honour and by him 
That I think honourable. Therefore mark my 
counsel, 408 

388 Make me not sighted: do not represent me as having eyes 
basilisk: fabulous monster whose glance was fatal 

389 sped: fared 390 regard: look 391 thereto: in addition 
392 Clerk-like: /t^^ c^c/w/ar 393 gentry: noble birth 
394 In whose success: in succession or descent from whom gentle: of 

high rank 
397 ignorant: causing ignorance 
400 parts: traits and qualities 403 incidency: /za/'/'^ntn^ 



20 The Winter's Tale, I. ii 

Which must be even as swiftly foUow'd as 
I mean to utter it, or both yourself and me 
Cry lost,' and so good night ! 

Pol. On, good Camillo. 

Cam. I am appointed him to murder you. 412 

Pol. By whom, Camillo? 

Cam. By the king. 

Pol. For what ? 

Cam. He thinks, nay, with all confidence he swears, 
As he had seen 't or been an instrument 
To vice you to 't, that you have touch' d his queen 
Forbiddenly. 

Pol. O, then my best blood turn 417 

To an infected jelly, and my name 
Be yok'd with his that did betray the Best ! 
Turn then my freshest reputation to 420 

A savour, that may strike the dullest nostril 
Where I arrive; and my approach be shunn'd, 
Nay, hated too, worse than the great'st infection 
That e'er was heard or read! 

Cam. Swear his thought over 

By each particular star in heaven and 425 

By all their influences, you may as well 
Forbid the sea for to obey the moon 
As or by oath remove or counsel shake 428 

The fabric of his folly, whose foundation 
Is pil'd upon his faith, and will continue 
The standing of his body. 

Pol. How should this grow? 

Cam. I know not: but I am sure 'tis safer to 
Avoid what 's grown than question how 'tis born. 
If therefore you dare trust my honesty, 

412 him: the one . 416 vice: force 

424 Swear his thought over: try to overcome his suspicion by oaths 
428 or ... or: either . . . or 430 continue: last as long as 



The Winter's Tale, I. ii 21 

That lies enclosed in this trunk, which you 

Shall bear along impawn' d, away to-night! 436 

Your followers I will whisper to the business. 

And will by twos and threes at several posterns 

Clear them o' the city. For myself, I'll put 

My fortunes to your service, which are here 440 

By this discovery lost. Be not uncertain; 

For, by the honour of my parents, I 

Have utter'd truth, which, if you seek to prove, 

I dare not stand by ; nor shall you be safer 444 

Than one condemn'd by the king's own mouth, 

thereon 
His execution sworn. 

Pol. I do believe thee: 

I saw his heart in 's face. Give me thy hand: 
Be pilot to me and thy places shall 448 

Still neighbour mine. My ships are ready and 
My people did expect my hence departure 
Two days ago. This jealousy 

Is for a precious creature: as she's rare 452 

Must it be great, and, as his person 's mighty 
Must it be violent, and, as he does conceive 
He is dishonour'd by a man which ever 
Profess'd to him, why, his revenges must 456 

In that be made more bitter. Fear o'ershades me: 
Good expedition be mj friend, and comfort 
The gracious queen, part of his theme, but nothing 
Of his ill-ta'en suspicion! Come, Camillo; 460 

I will respect thee as a father if 
Thou bear'st my life off hence: let us avoid. 

435 tTxmkxhody 436 impdiVin' 6.: as a pledge 

438 posterns: small gates in city walls 

439 Clear them o' : get them away from 

441 6.\scov&ry: revelation nncertain: undecided 

448 places: official positions 456 Vroiess'd: professed friendship 

458-460 C/. n. 462 avoid: depart 



22 The Winter's Tale, II, i 

Cam. It is in mine authority to command 
The keys of all the posterns: please your high- 
ness 464 
To take the urgent hour. Come^ sir, away ! 

Exeunt. 

ACT SECOND 

Scene One 

[A Room in the Palace] 

Enter Hermione, Mamillius, and Ladies. 

Her. Take the boy to you: he so troubles me, 
'Tis past enduring. 

First Lady. Come, my gracious lord, 

Shall I be your playfellow? 

Mam. No, I'll none of you. 

First Lady. Why, my sweet lord ? 4 

Mam. You'll kiss me hard and speak to me as if 
I were a baby still. I love you better. 

Sec. Lady. Aiid why so, my lord ? 

Mam. Not for because 

Your brows are blacker ; yet black brows, they say, 8 
Become some women best, so that there be not 
Too much hair there, but in a semicircle. 
Or a half-moon made with a pen. 

Sec. Lady. Who taught you this ? 

Mam. I learn'd it out of women's faces. Pray 
now, 12 

What colour are your eyebrows? 

First Lady. Blue, my lord. 

Mam. Nay, that 's a mock : I have seen a lady's 
nose 

Scene One S. d. ; cf. n. 9 so that: provided that 



The Winter's Tale, 11. i 23 

That has been blue, but not her eyebrows. 

Sec. Lady. Hark ye ; 

The queen your mother rounds apace: we shall 
Present our services to a fine new prince 17 

One of these days ; and then you 'd wanton with us. 
If we would have you. 

First Lady. She is spread of late 

Into a goodly bulk : good time encounter her ! 20 

Her. What wisdom stirs amongst you? Come, sir, 
now 
I am for you again : pray you, sit by us. 
And tell 's a tale. 

Mam. Merry or sad shaU 't be ? 

Her. As merry as you will. 

Mam. A sad tale 's best for winter. 24 

I have one of sprites and goblins. 

Her. Let 's have that, good sir. 

Come on, sit down: come on, and do your best 
To fright me with your sprites ; you're powerful at it. 

Mam. There was a man, — 

Her. Nay, come, sit down; then on. 28 

Mam. Dwelt by a churchyard. I will tell it softly ; 
Yond crickets shall not hear it. 

Her. Come on then. 

And give 't me in mine ear. 

[Enter Leontes, Antigonus, Lords, and Others.1 

Leon. Was he met there? his train? Camillo with 
him ? 32 

First Lord. Behind the tuft of pines I met them: 
never 
Saw I men scour so on their way: I ey'd them 
Even to their ships. 

18 wznton: play 22 ior you: at your service 34 scour: hasten 



24 The Winter's Tale, II. i 

Leon. How blest am I 

In my just censure, in my true opinion! 36 

Alack, for lesser knowledge! How accurs'd 
In being so blest ! There may be in the cup 
A spider steep'd, and one may drink, depart, 
And yet partake no venom, for his knowledge 40 

Is not infected; but if one present 
The abhor r'd ingredient to his eye, make known 
How he hath drunk, he cracks his gorge, his sides. 
With violent hefts. I have drunk, and seen the 
spider. 44 

Camillo was his help in this, his pandar: 
There is a plot against my life, my crown; 
All 's true that is mistrusted: that false villain 
Whom I employ'd was pre-employ'd by him: 48 

He has discover'd my design, and I 
Remain a pinch'd thing; yea, a very trick 
For them to play at will. How came the posterns 
So easily open.? 

First Lord. By his great authority ; 52 

Which often hath no less prevail'd than so 
On your command. 

Leon. I know 't too well. 

[ToHermione.'\ Give me the boy: I am glad you did 

not nurse him: 
Though he does bear some signs of me, yet you 
Have too much blood in him. 

Her. What is this.^* sport? 

Leon. Bear the boy hence; he shall not come about 
her; 

36 censure : judgment 

37 Alack, for lesser knowledge: would I had known less! 

40 partake no venom; c/. M. 43 z^rge: throat 44 htits: retchings 

49 discover'd: revealed 50 pinch'd: ridiculous trick: trifle, toy 



The Winter's Tale, II, i 25 

Away with him! — [Exit MamilliuSt attended.] 

and let her sport herself 
With that she 's big with ; for 'tis Polixenes 60 

Has made thee swell thus. 

Her. But I'd say he had not. 

And I'll be sworn you would believe my saying, 
Howe'er you lean to the nayward. 

Leon. You, my lords, 

Look on her, mark her well ; be but about 64 

To say, 'she is a goodly lady,' and 
The justice of your hearts will thereto add, 
* 'Tis pity she's not honest, honourable:' 
Praise her but for this her without-door form, — 
Which, on my faith deserves high speech, — and 
straight 69 

The shrug, the hum or ha, these petty brands 
That calumny doth use, — O, I am out! — 
That mercy does, for calumny will sear 72 

Virtue itself : these shrugs, these hums and ha's, 
When you have said 'she 's goodly,' come between. 
Ere you can say 'she 's honest.' But be 't known. 
From him that has most cause to grieve it should 
be, 76 

She 's an adulteress. 

Her. Should a villain say so, 

The most replenish'd villain in the world. 
He were as much more villain: you, my lord. 
Do but mistake. 

Leon. You have mistook, my lady, 80 

Polixenes for Leontes. O thou thing! 
Which I'll not call a creature of thy place, 

63 nayward: contrary 67 honest: chaste 

68 without-door form: external appearance 

71 out: wrong, like an actor who has forgotten his part 

78 replenish'd : complete 82 place : high rank 



26 The Winter's Tale, 11, i 

Lest barbarism, making me the precedent. 

Should a like language use to all degrees, 84 

And mannerly distinguishment leave out 

Betwixt the prince and beggar: I have said 

She's an adulteress; I have said with whom: 

More, she 's a traitor, and Camillo is 88 

A f ederary with her, and one that knows 

What she should shame to know herself 

But with her most vile principal, that she 's 

A bed-swerver, even as bad as those 92 

That vulgars give bold'st titles ; ay, and privy 

To this their late escape. 

Her. No, by my life. 

Privy to none of this. How will this grieve you 
When you shall come to clearer knowledge that 
You thus have publish'd me ! Gentle my lord, 97 
You scarce can right me throughly then to say 
You did mistake. 

Leon. No; if I mistake 

In those foundations which I build upon, 100 

The centre is not big enough to bear 
A schoolboy's top. Away with her to prison ! 
He who shall speak for her is afar off guilty 
But that he speaks. 

Her. There 's some ill planet reigns : 104 

I must be patient till the heavens look 
With an aspect more favourable. Good my lords, 
I am not prone to weeping, as our sex 
Commonly are; the want of which vain dew 108 

Perchance shall dry your pities ; but I have 

89 iedera.ry: confederate, accomplice 91 principal: leader in sin 

92 bed-swerver: adulteress 93 vulgars: the vulgar 

97 publish.' d: denounced publicly 98 throughly: thoroughly 

101 centre: earth 103 aiar oS: indirectly 

106 aspect: position and influence of a planet 



The Winter's Tale, II. i 27 

That honourable grief lodg'd here which burns 
Worse than tears drown. Beseech you all, my lords. 
With thoughts so qualified as your charities 112 

Shall best instruct you, measure me; and so 
The king's will be perform'd! 

Leon. [To the Guards.] Shall I be heard? 

Her. Who is 't that goes with me? Beseech your 
highness. 
My women may be with me; for you see 116 

My plight requires it. Do not weep, good fools ; 
There is no cause : when you shall know your mistress 
Has deserv'd prison, then abound in tears 
As I come out: this action I now go on 120 

Is for my better grace. Adieu, my lord: 
I never wish'd to see you sorry; now 
I trust I shall. My women, come; you have leave. 

Leon. Go, do our bidding: hence! 124 

[Exeunt Queen guarded, and Ladies.] 

First Lord. Beseech your highness call the queen 
again. 

Ant. Be certain what you do, sir, lest your justice 
Prove violence: in the which three great ones suffer. 
Yourself, your queen, your son. 

First Lord. For her, my lord, 128 

I dare my life lay down, and will do 't, sir. 
Please you to accept it, — that the queen is spotless 
I' the eyes of heaven and to you : I mean. 
In this which you accuse her. 

Ant. If it prove 132 

She 's otherwise, I'll keep my stables where 
I lodge my wife; I'll go in couples with her; 

112 qualified: moderated 113 measure: judge 

117 fools: a term of endearment, not contempt 

120 action: legal accusation 

130 Vlease you: if you please 133,134 I'll . . . wife; c/. «, 



28 The Winter's Tale, II. i 

Than when I feel and see her no further trust her ; 
For every inch of woman in the world, 136 

Ay, every dram of woman's flesh is false, 
If she be. 

Leon. Hold your peaces ! 

First Lord. Good my lord, — 

Ant. It is for you we speak, not for ourselves. 
You are abus'd, and by some putter-on 140 

That will be damn'd for 't ; would I knew the villain, 
I would land-damn him. Be she honour-flaw'd, — 
I have three daughters ; the eldest is eleven. 
The second and the third, nine and some five ; 144 
If this prove true, they'll pay for 't: by mine honour, 
I'll geld them all ; fourteen they shall not see, 
To bring false generations : they are co-heirs ; 
And I had rather glib myself than they 148 

Should not produce fair issue. 

Leon. Cease! no more. 

You smell this business with a sense as cold 
As is a dead man's nose ; but I do see 't and feel 't. 
As you feel doing thus, and see withal 152 

The instruments that feel. 

Ant. If it be so. 

We need no grave to bury honesty : 
There 's not a grain of it the face to sweeten 
Of the whole dungy earth. 

Leon. What! lack I credit? 156 

First Lord. I had rather you did lack than I, my 
lord. 
Upon this ground; and more it would content me 
To have her honour true than your suspicion, 

140 ahus'd: deceived putter-on: instigator, plotter 

142 land-damn; cf. n. 147 co-heirs: equal heirs in default of sons 

148 glih: geld 152 Cf.n. 



The Winter's Tale, II, i 29 

Be blam'd for 't how you might. 

Leon. Why, what need we I60 

Commune with you of this, but rather follow 
Our forceful instigation? Our prerogative 
Calls not your counsels, but our natural goodness 
Imparts this ; which if you, — or stupefied 164 

Or seeming so in skill, — cannot or will not 
Relish a truth like us, inform yourselves 
We need no more of your advice: the matter. 
The loss, the gain, the ordering on 't, is all 168 

Properly ours. 

Ant. And I wish, my liege, 

You had only in your silent judgment tried it. 
Without more overture. 

Leon. How could that be? 

Either thou art most ignorant by age, 172 

Or thou wert born a fool. Camillo's flight, 
Added to their familiarity. 

Which was as gross as ever touch'd conjecture, 
That lack'd sight only, nought for approbation 
But only seeing, all other circumstances 177 

Made up to the deed, doth push on this proceeding: 
Yet, for a greater confirmation, — 
For in an act of this importance 'twere 180 

Most piteous to be wild, — I have dispatch'd in post 
To sacred Delphos, to Apollo's temple, 
Cleomenes and Dion, whom you know 
Of stuff'd sufficiency. Now, from the oracle 184 

They will bring all; whose spiritual counsel had, 
Shall stop or spur me. Have I done well? 

First Lord. Well done, my lord. 

162 forceful instigation: strong impulse or incitement 
166 Relish: appreciate 171 overture: disclosure 

175-178 Which . . . deed; cf. n. 181 wild: hasty post: haste 

182 Delphos; cf. n. 184 stuff'd sufficiency: ample ability 



30 The Winter's Tale, II. ii 

Leon. Though I am satisfied and need no more 188 
Than what I know, yet shall the oracle 
Give rest to the minds of others, such as he 
Whose ignorant credulity will not 
Come up to the truth. So have we thought it 
good 192 

From our free person she should be confin'd. 
Lest that the treachery of the two fled hence 
Be left her to perform. Come, follow us : 
We are to speak in public; for this business 196 

Will raise us all. 

Ant. [Aside.'} To laughter, as I take it. 
If the good truth were known. Exeunt. 

Scene Two 

[At the Gate of a Prison] 

Enter Paulina [and Attendants]. 

Paul. The keeper of the prison, call to him ; 
Let him have knowledge who I am. — [Ej;it an At- 
tendant.] Good lady, 
No court in Europe is too good for thee; 
What dost thou then in prison? 

[Enter Attendant with the Gaoler.] 

Now, good sir, 4 
You know me, do you not ? 

Gaol. For a worthy lady 

And one whom much I honour. 

Paul. ^ Pray you then. 

Conduct me to the queen. 

Gaol. I may not, madam: to the contrary 8 

I have express commandment. 

193 free: accessible to everybody 



The Winter's Tale, II. ii 3i 

Paul. Here 's ado, 

To lock up honesty and honour from 
The access of gentle visitors ! Is 't lawful, pray you. 
To see her women ? any of them ? Emilia ? 12 

Gaol. So please you, madam. 
To put apart these your attendants, I 
Shall bring Emilia forth. 

Paul. I pray now, call her. 

Withdraw yourselves. [Eojeunt Attendants.'\ 

Gaol. And, madam, 16 

I must be present at your conference. 

Paul. Well, be 't so, prithee. [Exit Gaoler.'] 

Here 's such ado to make no stain a stain 
As passes colouring. 

[Enter Gaoler, with Emilia.'] 

Dear gentlewoman, 20 

How fares our gracious lady? 

Emil. As well as one so great and so forlorn 
May hold together. On her frights and griefs, — 
Which never tender lady hath borne greater, — - 
She is something before her time deliver'd. 25 

Paul. A boy? 

Emil. A daughter; and a goodly babe. 

Lusty and like to live : the queen receives 
Much comfort in 't ; says, 'My poor prisoner, 28 

I am innocent as you.' 

Paul. I dare be sworn: 

These dangerous unsafe lunes i' the king, beshrew 

them! 
He must be told on 't, and he shall : the office 
Becomes a woman best; I'll take 't upon me. 32 

20 colouring: glossing over 27 like: likely 

30 \unQs: lunatic freaks beshrew: CMrjg 



32 The Winter's Tale, II. ii 

If I prove honey-mouth' d, let my tongue blister, 

And never to my red-look' d anger be 

The trumpet any more. Pray you, Emilia, 

Commend my best obedience to the queen: 36 

If she dares trust me with her little babe, 

I'll show it to the king and undertake to be 

Her advocate to the loud'st. We do not know 

How he may soften at the sight of the child: 40 

The silence often of pure innocence 

Persuades when speaking fails. 

Emil. Most worthy madam, 

Your honour and your goodness is so evident 
That your free undertaking cannot miss 44 

A thriving issue: there is no lady living 
So meet for this great errand. Please your ladyship 
To visit the next room, I'll presently 
Acquaint the queen of your most noble offer, 48 

Who but to-day hammer'd of this design. 
But durst not tempt a minister of honour, 
Lest she should be denied. 

Paul. Tell her, Emilia, 

I'll use that tongue I have : if wit flow from 't 52 

As boldness from my bosom, let it not be doubted 
I shall do good. 

Emil. Now be you blest for it! 

I'll to the queen. Please you, come something nearer. 

Gaol. Madam, if 't please the queen to send the 
babe, 56 

I know not what I shall incur to pass it, 
Having no warrant. 

Paul. You need not fear it, sir: 

44 iree: magnanimous 45 thriving issue: successful result 

46 meet: well fitted 47 presently: instantly 

49 ha.mmer'd of: thought over SO minister: agent 52 wit: wisdom 



The Winter's Tale, II. in 33 

The child was prisoner to the womb, and is 

By law and process of great nature thence 60 

Freed and enfranchis'd; not a party to 

The anger of the king, nor guilty of. 

If any be, the trespass of the queen. 

Gaol. I do believe it. 64 

Paul. Do not you fear: upon mine honour, I 

Will stand betwixt you and danger. Exeunt. 

Scene Three 

\^A Room in the Palace^, 

Enter Leontes, Servants, Antigonus, and Lords. 

Leon. Nor night, nor day, no rest; it is but weak- 
ness 
To bear the matter thus ; mere weakness. If 
The cause were not in being, — part o' the cause. 
She the adultress ; for the harlot king 4 

Is quite beyond mine arm, out of the blank 
And level of my brain, plot-proof ; but she 
I can hook to me: say, that she were gone. 
Given to the fire, a moiety of my rest 8 

Might come to me again. Who 's there ? 

First Att en. [Advancing.] My lord? 

Leon. How does the boy? 

First Atten. He took good rest to-night; 
*Tis hop'd his sickness is discharg'd. 

Leon. To see his nobleness ! 12 

Conceiving the dishonour of his mother. 
He straight declin'd, droop'd, took it deeply, 
Fasten'd and fix'd the shame on 't in himself. 
Threw off his spirit, his appetite, his sleep, 16 

5 blank: white spot in the middle of target 6 level: aim 

8 moiety: part, usually half 15 on: of 



34 The Winter's Tale, II, Hi 

And downright languish'd. Leave me solely: go, 
See how he fares. [Eaiit Attendant.'] 

Fie, fie! no thought of him; 
The very thought of my revenges that way 
Recoil upon me: in himself too mighty, 20 

And in his parties, his alliance; let him be 
Until a time may serve : for present vengeance. 
Take it on her. Camillo and Polixenes 
Laugh at me; make their pastime at my sorrow: 24 
They should not laugh, if I could reach them, nor 
Shall she within my power. 

Enter Paulina [mith a Child]. 

First Lord. You must not enter. 

Paul. Nay, rather, good my lords, be second to me : 
Fear you his tyrannous passion more, alas, 28 

Than the queen's life.^ a gracious innocent soul. 
More free than he is jealous. 

Ant. That 's enough. 

Sec. Atten. Madam, he hath not slept to-night; 
commanded 
None should come at him. 

Paul. Not so hot, good sir; 32 

I come to bring him sleep. 'Tis such as you. 
That creep like shadows by him and do sigh 
At each his needless heavings, such as you 
Nourish the cause of his awaking: I 36 

Do come with words as med'cinal as true. 
Honest as either, to purge him of that humour 
That presses him from sleep. 

Leon. What noise there, ho? 

17 solely, alone 27 second: lending support 

35 each: each of heavings: sighings 38 humour; cf. n. 



The Winter's Tale, II. Hi 35 

Paul. No noise, my lord; but needful confer- 
ence 40 
About some gossips for your highness. 

Leon. How ! 

Away with that audacious lady ! Antigonus, 
I charg'd thee that she should not come about me: 
I knew she would. 

Ant. I told her so, my lord, 44 

On your displeasure's peril, and on mine, 
She should not visit you. 

Leon. What ! canst not rule her ? 

Paul. From all dishonesty he can: in this. 
Unless he take the course that you have done, 
Commit me for committing honour, trust it, 49 

He shall not rule me. 

Ant. La you now! you hear; 

When she will take the rein I let her run ; 
But she'll not stumble. 

Paul. Good my liege, I come, 52 

And I beseech you, hear me, who professes 
Myself your loyal servant, your physician. 
Your most obedient counsellor, yet that dares 
Less appear so in comforting your evils 56 

Than such as most seem yours: I say, I come 
From your good queen. 

Leon. Good queen ! 

Paul. Good queen, my lord, good queen; I say, 
good queen; 
And would by combat make her good, so were I 
A man, the worst about you. 

Leon. Force her hence. 61 

41 gossips: godparents for the child 

49 Commit . . . committing: imprison . . . putting in practice 

56 comforting your evils: encouraging your evil acts 



36 The Winter's Tale, II, Hi 

Paul. Let him that makes but trifles of his eyes 
First hand me: on mine own accord I'll off; 
But first I'll do my errand. The good queen, 64 

For she is good, hath brought you forth a daughter : 
Here 'tis ; commends it to your blessing. 

{^Laying down the Child-I 

Leon. Out ! 

A mankind witch ! Hence with her, out o' door : 
A most intelligencing bawd ! 

Paul. Not so; 68 

I am as ignorant in that as you 
In so entitling me, and no less honest 
Than you are mad; which is enough, I'll warrant. 
As this world goes, to pass for honest. 

Leon. Traitors ! 72 

Will you not push her out? Give her the bastard. 
[To Antigonus.'\ Thou dotard! thou art woman-tir'd, 

unroosted 
By thy dame Partlet here. Take up the bastard; 
Take 't up, I say ; give 't to thy crone. 

Paul. For ever 76 

Unvenerable be thy hands, if thou 
Tak'st up the princess by that forced baseness 
Which he has put upon 't! 

Leon. He dreads his wife. 

Paul. So I would you did; then, 'twere past all 
doubt, 80 

You'd call your children yours. 

Leon. A nest of traitors ! 

Ant. I am none, by this good light. 

Paul. Nor I; nor any 

63 hand: lay hands on 67 mdivikind: mannish 

68 intelligencing: acting as go-hetween 74 woma.n-tiv'd: hen-pecked 

75 dame Partlet: lecturing wife; cf. n. 

78 forced baseness : arbitrarily imposed title of bastard 



The Winter's Tale, II. in 37 

But one that 's here, and that 's himself; for he 
The sacred honour of himself, his queen's, 84 

His hopeful son's, his babe's, betrays to slander. 
Whose sting is sharper than the sword's; and will 

not, — 
For, as the case now stands, it is a curse 
He camiot be compell'd to 't, — once remove 88 

The root of his opinion, which is rotten 
As ever oak or stone was sound. 

Leon. A callat 

Of boundless tongue, who late hath beat her husband 
And now baits me! This brat is none of mine; 
It is the issue of Polixenes: 93 

Hence with it; and, together with the dam 
Commit them to the fire ! 

Paul. It is yours; 

And, might we lay the old proverb to your charge, 96 
*So like you, 'tis the worse.' Behold, my lords. 
Although the print be little, the whole matter 
And copy of the father; eye, nose, lip. 
The trick of 's frown, his forehead, nay, the 
valley, lOO 

The pretty dimples of his chin and cheek, his smiles. 
The very mould and frame of hand, nail, finger: 
And thou, good goddess Nature, which hast made it 
So like to him that got it, if thou hast 104 

The ordering of the mind too, 'mongst all colours 
No yellow in 't ; lest she suspect, as he does. 
Her children not her husband's. 

Leon. A gross hag! 

And, lozel, thou art worthy to be hang'd, 108 

That wilt not stay her tongue. 

90 callat: disreputable woman 104 got: hegot 

106 ye.\\o\}: the color symbolizing jealousy 108 lozel: worthless rascal 



38 The Winter's Tale, II, Hi 

Ant. Hang all the husbands 

That cannot do that feat, you'll leave yourself 
Hardly one subject. 

Leon. Once more, take her hence. 

Paul. A most unworthy and unnatural lord 
Can do no more. 

Leon. I'll ha' thee burn'd. 

Paul. I care not: 

It is a heretic that makes the fire. 
Not she which burns in 't. I'll not call you tyrant; 
But this most cruel usage of your queen, — 116 

Not able to produce more accusation 
Than your own weak-hing'd fancy, — something 

savours 
Of tyranny, and will ignoble make you. 
Yea, scandalous to the world. 

Leon. On your allegiance, 120 

Out of the chamber with her ! Were I a tyrant. 
Where were her life ? she durst not call me so 
If she did know me one. Away with her ! 

Paul. I pray you do not push me; I'll be gone. 124 
Look to your babe, my lord ; 'tis yours : Jove send her 
A better guiding spirit ! What need these hands ? 
You, that are thus so tender o'er his follies. 
Will never do him good, not one of you. 128 

So, so: farewell; we are gone. Exit. 

Leon. Thou, traitor, hast set on thy wife to this. 
My child ! away with 't ! — even thou, that hast 
A heart so tender o'er it, take it hence 132 

And see it instantly consum'd with fire: 
Even thou and none but thou. Take it up straight : 
Within this hour bring me word 'tis done, — 
And by good testimony, — or I'll seize thy life, 
With what thou else call'st thine. If thou refuse 



The Winter's Tale, II. Hi 



And wilt encounter with my wrath, say so; 
The bastard brains with these my proper hands 
Shall I dash out. Go, take it to the fire; 140 

For thou sett'st on thy wife. 

Ant. I did not, sir: 

These lords, my noble fellows, if they please, 
Can clear me in 't. 

First Lord. We can, my royal liege, 

He is not guilty of her coming hither. 144 

Leon. You are liars all. 

First Lord. Beseech your highness, give us better 
credit : 
We have always truly serv'd you, and beseech you 
So to esteem of us ; and on our knees we beg, 148 

As recompense of our dear services 
Past and to come, that you do change this purpose, 
Which being so horrible, so bloody, must 
Lead on to some foul issue. We all kneel. 152 

Leon. I am a feather for each wind that blows. 
Shall I live on to see this bastard kneel 
And call me father.^ Better burn it now 
Than curse it then. But, be it ; let it live : 156 

It shall not neither. — [To Antigonus.] You, sir, come 

you hither ; 
You that have been so tenderly officious 
With Lady Margery, your midwife there. 
To save this bastard's life, — for 'tis a bastard, 160 
So sure as this beard 's grey, — what will you 

adventure 
To save this brat's life? 

Ant. Anything, my lord. 

That my ability may undergo, 

139 proper: own 142 fellows: comrades 149 dear: loving 

159 Lady Maitgery: a contemptuous term 161 this: Antigonus' 



40 The Winter's Tale, II. Hi 

And nobleness impose: at least, thus much: 164 

I'll pawn the little blood which I have left. 
To save the innocent: anything possible. 

Leon. It shall be possible. Swear by this sword 
Thou wilt perform my bidding. 

Ant. I will, my lord. 168 

Leon. Mark and perform it, — seest thou ! — for the 
fail 
Of any point in 't shall not only be 
Death to thyself, but to thy lewd-tongu'd wife. 
Whom for this time we pardon. We enjoin thee. 
As thou art liegeman to us, that thou carry 173 

This female bastard hence; and that thou bear it 
To some remote and desert place quite out 
Of our dominions ; and that there thou leave it, 
Without more mercy, to it own protection, 177 

And favour of the climate. As by strange fortune 
It came to us, I do in justice charge thee, 
On thy soul's peril and thy body's torture, 180 

That thou commend it strangely to some place. 
Where chance may nurse or end it. Take it up. 

Ant. I swear to do this, though a present death 
Had been more merciful. Come on, poor babe: 
Some powerful spirit instruct the kites and ravens 185 
To be thy nurses ! Wolves and bears, they say. 
Casting their savageness aside have done 
Like offices of pity. Sir, be prosperous 188 

In more than this deed does require ! And blessing 
Against this cruelty fight on thy side. 
Poor thing, condemn'd to loss ! 

Exit [with the Child'], 

169 iail: failure 177 it: its. 

181 commend: entrust strangely: as a stranger 

189 require: deserve 191 loss: being abandoned 



The Winter's Tale, III. i 4i 

Leon. No; I'll not rear 

Another's issue. 

Enter a Servant, 

Serv. Please your highness^ posts 192 

From those you sent to the oracle are come 
An hour since: Cleomenes and Dion, 
Being well arriv'd from Delphos, are both landed. 
Hasting to the court. 

First Lord. So please you, sir, their speed 

Hath been beyond account. 

Leon. Twenty-three days 197 

They have been absent: 'tis good speed; foretells 
The great Apollo suddenly will have 
The truth of this appear. Prepare you, lords ; 
Summon a session, that we may arraign 201 

Our most disloyal lady ; for, as she hath 
Been publicly accus'd, so shall she have 
A just and open trial. While she lives 204 

My heart will be a burden to me. Leave me. 
And think upon my bidding. Exeunt. 



ACT THIRD 

Scene One 

[A Town in Sicilia'] 

Enter Cleomenes and Dion. 

Cleo. The climate 's delicate, the air most sweet, 
Fertile the isle, the temple much surpassing 
The common praise it bears. 

Dion. I shall report, 

197 heyond account: unaccountable 199 suddenly: promptly 



42 The Winter's Tale, III, ii 

For most it caught me, the celestial habits, — 4 

Methinks I so should term, them,- — and the reverence 
0£ the grave wearers. O, the sacrifice ! 
How ceremonious, solemn, and unearthly- 
It was i' the offering ! 

Cleo. But of all, the burst 8 

And the ear-deafening voice o' the oracle. 
Kin to Jove's thunder, so surpris'd my sense. 
That I was nothing. 

Dion. If the event o' the journey- 

Prove as successful to the queen, — O, be 't so ! — 
As it hath been to us rare, pleasant, speedy, 13 

The time is worth the use on 't. 

Cleo. Great Apollo 

Turn all to the best ! These proclamations, 
So forcing faults upon Hermione, 16 

I little like. 

Dion. The violent carriage of it 

Will clear or end the business : when the oracle. 
Thus by Apollo's great divine seal'd up. 
Shall the contents discover, something rare 20 

Even then will rush to knowledge. — [To an Attend- 
ant.^ Go: — fresh horses ! 
And gracious be the issue! Exeunt. 

Scene Two 

[A Court of Justice] 

Enter Leontes, Lords, Officers. 

Leon. This sessions, to our great grief we pro- 
nounce, 
Pven pushes 'gainst our heart: the party tried 

4 hahits: garments 11 event: outcome 

17 carriage: management 22 gracious: favorable 



The Winter's Tale, III, ii 43 

The daughter of a king, our wife/ and one 

Of us too much belov'd. Let us be clear'd 4 

Of being tyrannous, since we so openly 

Proceed in justice, which shall have due course, 

Even to the guilt or the purgation. 

Produce the prisoner. 8 

Offi. It is his highness' pleasure that the queen 
Appear in person here in court. Silence ! 

[Enter Hermione guarded; Paulina and Ladies 
attending. 1 

Leon. Read the indictment. 11 

Offi. [Reads.l 'I^ermione, queen to the worthy 
Leontes, King of Sicilia, thou art here accused 
and arraigned of high treason, in committing 
adultery with Polixenes, King of Bohemia, and 
conspiring with Camillo to take away the life of 
our sovereign lord the king, thy royal husband: 
the pretence whereof being by circumstances 18 
partly laid open, thou, Hermione, contrary to 
the faith and allegiance of a true subject, didst 
counsel and aid them, for their better safety, to 
fly away by night.' 

Her. Since what I am to say must be but that 
Which contradicts my accusation, and 24 

The testimony on my part no other 
But what comes from myself, it shall scarce boot me 
To say 'Not guilty:' mine integrity 
Being counted falsehood, shall, as I express it. 
Be so receiv'd. But thus: if powers divine 29 

Behold our human actions, as they do, 
I doubt not then but innocence shall make 
False accusation blush, and tyranny 32 

7 purgation: acquittal 18 pretence: purpose, design 26 hoot: profit 



44 The Winter's Tale, III, ii 

Tremble at patience. You, my lord, best know, — 
Who least will seem to do so, — my past life 
Hath been as continent, as chaste, as true, 
As I am now unhappy; which is more 36 

Than history can pattern, though devis'd 
And play'd to take spectators. For behold me, 
A fellow of the royal bed, which owe 
A moiety of the throne, a great king's daughter, 
The mother to a hopeful prince, here standing 
To prate and talk for life and honour 'fore 
Who please to come and hear. For life, I prize it 
As I weigh grief, which I would spare: for 
honour, 44 

'Tis a derivative from me to mine. 
And only that I stand for. I appeal 
To your own conscience, sir, before Polixenes 
Came to your court, how I was in your grace, 48 

How merited to be so ; since he came. 
With what encounter so uncurrent I 
Have strain'd, to appear thus: if one jot beyond 
The bound of honour, or in act or will 52 

That way inclining, harden'd be the hearts 
Of all that hear me, and my near'st of kin 
Cry fie upon my grave ! 

Leon. I ne'er heard yet 

That any of these bolder vices wanted 56 

Less impudence to gainsay what they did 
Than to perform it first. 

Her. That 's true enough ; 

Though 'tis a saying, sir, not due to me. 

Leon. You will not own it. 

37 pattern: give examples of 38 take: bewitch, fascinate 

39 owe: oTOn 41 hopeiul: inspiring hope 

50 encounter: behavior uncurrent: extraordinary 

51 strain'd: transgressed beyond due limits 57 gainsay: deny 



The Winter's Tale, III, ii 45 

Her. More than mistress of 60 

Which comes to me in name of fault, I must not 
At all acknowledge. For Polixenes, — 
With whom I am.accus'd, — I do confess 
I lov'd him as in honour he requir'd, 64 

With such a kind of love as might become 
A lady like me; with a love even such. 
So and no other, as yourself commanded: 
Which not to have done I think had been in me 
Both disobedience and ingratitude 69 

To you and toward your friend, whose love had spoke. 
Even since it could speak, from an infant, freely 
That it was yours. Now, for conspiracy, 72 

I know not how it tastes, though it be dish'd 
For me to try how: all I know of it 
Is that Camillo was an honest man; 
And why he left your court, the gods themselves, 
Wotting no more than I, are ignorant. 77 

Leon, You knew of his departure, as you know 
What you have underta'en to do in 's absence. 

Her. Sir, 80 

You speak a language that I understand not: 
My life stands in the level of your dreams. 
Which I'll lay down. 

Leon. Your actions are my dreams: 

You had a bastard by Polixenes, 84 

And I but dream'd it. As you were past all shame, — 
Those of your fact are so, — so past all truth: 
Which to deny concerns more than avails; for as 
Thy brat hath been cast out, like to itself, 88 

No father owning it, — which is, indeed, 
More criminal in thee than it, — so thou 

60-62 More . . . acknowledge; cf. n. 

77 Wotting: knowing 82 Cf. n. 86 fact: deed 

87 concerns more than avails: is more significant than helpful to you 



46 The Winter's Tale, III, ii 

Shalt feel our justice, in whose easiest passage 
Look for no less than death. 

Her. Sir, spare your threats: 92 

The bug which you would fright me with I seek. 
To me can life be no commodity : 
The crown and comfort of my life, your favour, 
I do give lost ; for I do feel it gone, 96 

But know not how it went. My second joy, 
And first-fruits of my body, from his presence 
I am barr'd, like one infectious. My third comfort, 
Starr'd most unluckily, is from my breast, 100 

The innocent milk in its most innocent mouth, 
Hal'd out to murder: myself on every post 
Proclaim'd a strumpet: with immodest hatred 
The child-bed privilege denied, which longs 104 

To women of all fashion: lastly, hurried 
Here to this place, i' the open air, before 
I have got strength of limit. Now, my liege. 
Tell me what blessings I have here alive, 108 

That I should fear to die ? Therefore proceed. 
But yet hear this ; mistake me not ; no life, 
I prize it not a straw: — but for mine honour. 
Which I would free, if I shall be condemn'd 112 

Upon surmises, all proofs sleeping else 
But what your jealousies awake, I tell you 
'Tis rigour and not law. Your honours all, 
I do refer me to the oracle: 116 

Apollo be my judge ! 

First Lord. This your request 

Is altogether just: therefore, bring forth. 
And in Apollo's name, his oracle. 

91 passage: procedure 93 hug: bugbear 94 commodity: advantage 
100 Starr'd most unluckily: born under stars of most evil influence 
103 imrnodest: immoderate 105 iashion: kinds 

107 of limit: from a limited, or normal, period of recuperation 



The Winter's Tale, III, ii 47 

\Exeunt certain Officers.'] 
Her. The Emperor of Russia was my father: 
O ! that he were alive, and here beholding 121 

His daughter's trial ; that he did but see 
The flatness of my misery; yet with eyes 
Of pity, not revenge! 124 

[Enter Officers, with Cleomenes and Dion.] 

Offi. You here shall swear upon this sword of 
justice. 
That you, Cleomenes and Dion, have 
Been both at Delphos, and from thence have brought 
This seal'd-up oracle, by the hand deliver'd 128 

Of great Apollo's priest, and that since then 
You have not dar'd to break the holy seal, 
Nor read the secrets in 't. 

^^^^' I All 4.1, • 

7^. f All this we swear. 

Dion. ) 

Leon. Break up the seals, and read. 132 

Offi,. [Reads.] 'Hermione is chaste; Polixenes 

blameless; Camillo a true subject; Leontes a 

jealous tyrant; his innocent babe truly begotten; 

and the king shall live without an heir if that 

which is lost be not found.' 137 

Lords. Now blessed be the great Apollo! 

Her. Praised ! 

Leon. Hast thou read truth .f* 

Offi. Ay, my lord; even so 

As it is here set down. 

Leon. There is no truth at all i' the oracle: 141 
The sessions shall proceed: this is mere falsehood. 

[Enter a Servant.] 

123 ^a.in&ss: absoluteness 142 raere: pure 



48 The Winter's Tale, III. ii 

Ser. My lord the king, the king! 

Leon. What is the business? 

Ser. O sir! I shall be hated to report it: 144 

The prince your son, with mere conceit and fear 
Of the queen's speed, is gone. 

Leon. How ! gone ! 

Ser. Is dead. 

Leon. Apollo's angry; and the heavens themselves 
Do strike at my injustice. [Hermione swoons.] 

How now, there! 148 

Paul. This news is mortal to the queen: — ^look 
down. 
And see what death is doing. 

Leon. Take her hence: 

Her heart is but o'ercharg'd; she will recover: 
I have too much believ'd mine own suspicion: 
Beseech you, tenderly apply to her 153 

Some remedies for life. — 

[Exeunt Paulina and Ladies, with Hermione.] 
Apollo, pardon 
My great prof aneness 'gainst thine oracle ! 
I'll reconcile me to Polixenes, 156 

New woo my queen, recall the good Camillo, 
Whom I proclaim a man of truth, of mercy; 
For, being transported by my jealousies 
To bloody thoughts and to revenge, I chose 160 

Camillo for the minister to poison 
My friend Polixenes : which had been done, 
But that the good mind of Camillo tardied 
My swift command; though I with death and 
with 164 

Reward did threaten and encourage him, 
Not doing it, and being done: he, most humane 

145 conceit: imagination 146 speed: fortune 163 tardied: delayed 



The Winter's Tale, III. ii 49 

And fill'd with honour, to my kingly guest 
Unclasp'd my practice, quit his fortunes here, 168 

Which you knew great, and to the certain hazard 
Of all incertainties himself commended. 
No richer than his honour: how he glisters 
Thorough my rust ! and how his piety 172 

Does my deeds make the blacker! 

[Enter Paulina.^ 

Paul. Woe the while! 

O, cut my lace, lest my heart, cracking it. 
Break too ! 

First Lord, What fit is this, good lady ? 

Paul. What studied torments, tyrant, hast for 
me ? 176 

What wheels? racks? fires? What flaying? boiling 
In leads, or oils ? what old or newer torture 
Must I receive, whose every word deserves 
To taste of thy most worst? Thy tyranny, 180 

Together working with thy jealousies. 
Fancies too weak for boys, too green and idle 
For girls of nine, O ! think what they have done. 
And then run mad indeed, stark mad; for all 184 

Thy by-gone fooleries were but spices of it. 
That thou betray' dst Polixenes, 'twas nothing; 
That did but show thee of a fool, inconstant 
And damnable ingratef ul ; nor was 't much 188 

Thou wouldst have poison'd good Camillo's honour 
To have him kill a king; poor trespasses. 
More monstrous standing by: whereof I reckon 
The casting forth to crows thy baby daughter 192 

168 Unclasp'd: revealed; cf. n. practice: plotting 

170 incertainties: uncertain events 171 glisters: glitters 

172 Thorough: through 174 lace: cord for lacing the bodice 

180 most worst : wor^f 185 s^ic&s: foretastes 187 oi: as 



50 The Winter's Tale, III. ii 

To be or none or little; though a devil 

Would have shed water out of fire ere done 't : 

Nor is 't directly laid to thee, the death 

Of the young prince, whose honourable thoughts, — 

Thoughts high for one so tender, — cleft the heart 

That could conceive a gross and foolish sire 

Blemish'd his gracious dam: this is not, no. 

Laid to thy answer : but the last, — O lords ! 200 

When I have said, cry, 'woe!' — the queen, the queen. 

The sweetest, dearest creature 's dead, and vengeance 

for't 
Not dropp'd down yet. 

First Lord. The higher powers forbid ! 

Paul. I say she's dead; I'll swear 't: if word nor 
oath 204 

Prevail not, go and see: if you can bring 
Tincture or lustre in her lip, her eye. 
Heat outwardly, or breath within, I'll serve you 
As I would do the gods. But, O thou tyrant ! 208 
Do not repent these things, for they are heavier 
Than all thy woes can stir; therefore betake thee 
To nothing but despair. A thousand knees 
Ten thousand years together, naked, fasting, 212 

Upon a barren mountain, and still winter 
In storm perpetual, could not move the gods 
To look that way thou wert. 

Leon. Go on, go on; 

Thou canst not speak too much: I have deserv'd 
All tongues to talk their bitterest. 

First Lord. Say no more: 217 

Howe'er the business goes, you have made fault 
I' the boldness of your speech. 

206 Tincture: color 

210 stir: i.e., remove -from thy guilty record 213 still: always 



The Winter's Tale, III, ii 5i 

Paul. I am sorry for *t : 

All faults I make^ when I shall come to know 
them, 220 

I do repent. Alas ! I have show'd too much 
The rashness of a woman : he is touch'd 
To the noble heart. What 's gone and what 's past 

help 
Should be past grief : do not receive affliction 224 

At my petition; I beseech you, rather 
Let me be punish'd, that have minded you 
Of what you should forget. Now, good my liege, 
Sir, royal sir, forgive a foolish woman: 228 

The love I bore your queen, — lo, fool again ! — 
I'll speak of her no more, nor of your children; 
I'll not remember you of my own lord. 
Who is lost too: take your patience to you, 232 

And I'll say nothing. 

Leon. Thou didst speak but well. 

When most the truth, which I receive much better 
Than to be pitied of thee. Prithee, bring me 
To the dead bodies of my queen and son: 236 

One grave shall be for both : upon them shall 
The causes of their death appear, unto 
Our shame perpetual. Once a day I'll visit 
The chapel where they lie, and tears shed there 
Shall be my recreation: so long as nature 241 

Will bear up with this exercise, so long 
I daily vow to use it. Come and lead me 
To these sorrows. Exeunt, 

226 minded: reminded 231 Tememher: remind 



52 The Winter's Tale, III. Hi 

Scene Three 

\Bohemia. A desert country near the sea] 

Enter Antigonus, [with the] Babe; and a Mariner. 

Ant. Thou art perfect, then, our ship hath touch'd 
upon 
The deserts of Bohemia? 

Mar. Ay, my lord ; and fear 

We have landed in ill time: the skies look grimly 
And threaten present blusters. In my conscience, 4 
The heavens with that we have in hand are angry. 
And frown upon 's. 

Ant. Their sacred wills be done! Go, get aboard; 
Look to thy bark: I'll not be long before 8 

I call upon thee. 

Mar. Make your best haste, and go not 

Too far i' the land: 'tis like to be loud weather; 
Besides, this place is famous for the creatures 
Of prey that keep upon 't. 

Ant. Go thou away: 12 

I'll follow instantly. 

Mar. I am glad at heart 

To be so rid of the business. Ea;it. 

Ant. Come, poor babe: 

I have heard, but not believ'd, the spirits o' the dead 
May walk again : if such thing be, thy mother 16 

Appear'd to me last night, for ne'er was dream 
So like a waking. To me comes a creature, 
Sometimes her head on one side, some another; 
I never saw a vessel of like sorrow, 20 

So fiU'd, and so becoming: in pure white robes. 
Like very sanctity, she did approach 

1 perfect: certain 4 blusters: storms 12 keep: live 



The Winter's Tale, HI, Hi 53 

My cabin where I lay ; thrice bow'd before me. 

And, gasping to begin some speech, her eyes 24 

Became two spouts: the fury spent, anon 

Did this break from her: 'Good Antigonus, 

Since fate, against thy better disposition. 

Hath made thy person for the thrower-out 28 

Of my poor babe, according to thine oath. 

Places remote enough are in Bohemia, 

There weep and leave it crying; and, for the babe 

Is counted lost for ever, Perdita, 32 

I prithee, call't: for this ungentle business. 

Put on thee by my lord, thou ne'er shalt see 

Thy wife Paulina more' : and so, with shrieks. 

She melted into air. Affrighted much, 36 

I did in time collect myself, and thought 

This was so and no slumber. Dreams are toys; 

Yet for this once, yea, superstitiously, 

I will be squar'd by this. I do believe 40 

Hermione hath suffer'd death ; and that 

Apollo would, this being indeed the issue 

Of King Polixenes, it should here be laid. 

Either for life or death, upon the earth 44 

Of its right father. Blossom, speed thee well! 

[Laying down Babe.'\ 
There lie; and there thy character: there these; 

[Laying down a bundle. 1 
Which may, if fortune please, both breed thee, pretty, 
And still rest thine. The storm begins: poor 
wretch ! 48 

That for thy mother's fault art thus expos'd 
To loss and what may follow. Weep I cannot, 

31 for: because 38 toys: trifles 

39 superstitiously: with religious reverence 40 squar'd: ruled 

46 character: written means of identification 
47, 48 Which . . . thine; cf. n. 



54 The Winter's Tale, III. in 

But my heart bleeds, and most accurs'd am I 
To be by oath en join'd to this. Farewell! 52 

The day frowns more and more: thou art like to have 
A lullaby too rough. I never saw 
The heavens so dim by day. A savage clamour ! 
Well may I get aboard ! This is the chase : 56 

I am gone for ever. Exit, pursued by a hear. 

[Enter a Shepherd.] 
Shep. I would there were no age between 
ten and three-and-twenty, or that youth 
would sleep out the rest; for there is nothing in 
the between but getting wenches with child, 
wronging the ancientry, stealing, fighting. Hark 
you now! Would any but these boiled brains 63 
of nineteen and two-and-twenty hunt this wea- 
ther ? They have scared away two of my best 
sheep; which I fear the wolf will sooner find 
than the master: if anywhere I have them, 'tis 
by the sea-side, browsing of ivy. Good luck, 
an't be thy will! what have we here? Mercy 
on 's, a barne ; a very pretty barne ! A boy 70 
or a child, I wonder? A pretty one, a very 
pretty one; sure some scape: though I am 
not bookish, yet I can read waiting-gentle- 
woman in the scape. This has been some 
stair-work, some trunk-work, some behind-door- 
work; they were warmer that got this than the 
poor thing is here. I'll take it up for pity; yet 
I'll tarry till my son come; he hollaed but even 
now. Whoa, ho, hoa! 79 

Enter Clown. 

56 the chase: a hunted wild beast 59 ten; cf. n. 

62 ancientry: old people 63 boiled brains: hot heads 

70 barne: child 71 child: girl 72 scape: transgression 
79 S. d. Clown: country bumpkin 



The Winter's Tale, III, Hi 55 

Clo. Hilloa, loa ! 

Shep. What! art so near? I£ thou 'It see a 
thing to talk on when thou art dead and rotten, 
come hither. What ailest thou, man? 83 

Clo. I have seen two such sights by sea and 
by land ! but I am not to say it is a sea, for it is 
now the sky: betwixt the firmament and it you 
cannot thrust a bodkin's point. 

Shep. Why, boy, how is it? 88 

Clo. I would you did but see how it chafes, 
how it rages, how it takes up the shore! but 
that 's not to the point. O ! the most piteous 
cry of the poor souls; sometimes to see 'em, 
and not to see 'em; now the ship boring the 
moon with her mainmast, and anon swallowed 
with yest and froth, as you 'd thrust a cork into 
a hogshead. And then for the land-service: to 96 
see how the bear tore out his shoulderbone ; 
how he cried to me for help and said his name 
was Antigonus, a nobleman. But to make an 
end of the ship : to see how the sea flap-dragoned 
it: but, first, how the poor souls roared, and the 
sea mocked them; and how the poor gentleman 
roared, and the bear mocked him, both roaring 
louder than the sea or weather. 104 

Shep. Name of mercy! when was this, boy? 

Clo. Now, now; I have not winked since I 
saw these sights : the men are not yet cold under 
water, nor the bear half dined on the gentle- 
man : he 's at it now. 109 

87 hodkin: small pointed instrument 95 yest: foam 

96 land-service: military, as compared with naval, service; used 

humorously 
100 flap-dragoned; cf. n. 



56 The Winter's Tale, III, in 

She p. Would I had been by, to have helped 
the old man! 

Clo. I would you had been by the ship's side, 
to have helped her: there your charity would 
have lacked footing. 114 

Shep. Heavy matters ! heavy matters ! but 
look thee here, boy. Now bless thyself: thou 
mettest with things dying, I with things new 
born. Here 's a sight for thee ; look thee, a 
bearing-cloth for a squire's child! Look thee 
here : take up, take up, boy ; open 't. So, let 's 
see: it was told me, I should be rich by the 
fairies : this is some changeling. — Open 't. 
What 's within, boy? 123 

Clo. You're a made old man: if the sins of 
your youth are forgiven you, you're well to 
live. Gold! all gold! 

Shep. This is fairy gold, boy, and 'twill prove 
so: up with't, keep it close: home, home, the 
next way. We are lucky, boy ; and to be so 129 
still, requires nothing but secrecy. Let my 
sheep go. Come, good boy, the next way home. 

Clo. Go you the next way with your findings. 
I'll go see if the bear be gone from the gentle- 
man, and how much he hath eaten: they are 
never curst but when they are hungry. If there 
be any of him left, I'll bury it. 136 

Shep. That 's a good deed. If thou mayst 
discern by that which is left of him what he is, 
fetch me to the sight of him. 

119 bearing-cloth: infant's christening robe squire's: gentleman's 

122 changeling: elfin child left by fairies in place of stolen human one 
125 well to live: well to do 129 neyit: nearest 135 curst: savage 



The Winter's Tale, IV. i 57 

Clo. Marry, will I; and you shall help to put 
him i' the ground. 141 

Shep. 'Tis a lucky day, boy, and we'll do 
good deeds on 't. Exeunt. 



ACT FOURTH 

Scene One 
Enter Time, the Chorus. 

Time. I, that please some, try all, both joy and 

terror 
Of good and bad, that make and unfold error. 
Now take upon me, in the name of Time, 
To use my wings. Impute it not a crime 4 

To me or my swift passage, that I slide 
O'er sixteen years, and leave the growth untried 
Of that wide gap; since it is in my power 
To o'erthrow law, and in one self-born hour 8 

To plant and o'erwhelm custom. Let me pass 
The same I am, ere ancient'st order was 
Or what is now receiv'd: I witness to 
The times that brought them in; so shall I do 
To the freshest things now reigning, and make 

stale 13 

The glistering of this present, as my tale 
Now seems to it. Your patience this allowing, 

I turn my glass and give my scene such growing 16 
As you had slept between. Leontes leaving, — 
The effects of his fond jealousies so grieving. 
That he shuts up himself, — imagine me, 

140 Marry: an exclamation, from the name of the Virgin Mary 
8 one self -born : one and the self -same 

II rQC&i-v^d'. accepted 18 grieving: grieving over 



58 The Winter's Tale, IV, ii 

Gentle spectators, that I now may be 20 

In fair Bohemia; and remember well, 

I mention'd a son o' the king's, which Florizel 

I now name to you; and with speed so pace 

To speak of Perdita, now grown in grace 24 

Equal with wondering: what of her ensues 

I list not prophesy; but let Time's news 

Be known when 'tis brought forth. A shepherd's 

daughter. 
And what to her adheres, which follows after. 
Is th' argument of Time. Of this allow, 29 

If ever you have spent time worse ere now: 
If never, yet that Time himself doth say 
He wishes earnestly you never may. Exit, 

Scene Two 

l^Bohemia. A Room in the Palace of Polixenes^ 

Enter Polixenes and Camillo. 

Pol. I pray thee, good Camillo, be no more 
importunate: 'tis a sickness denying thee any- 
thing; a death to grant this. 3 

Cam. It is fifteen years since I saw my 
country: though I have for the most part been 
aired abroad, I desire to lay my bones there. 
Besides, the penitent king, my master, hath sent 
for me; to whose feeling sorrows I might be 
some allay, or I o'erween to think so, which is 
another spur to my departure. 10 

Pol. As thou lovest me, Camillo, wipe not 
out the rest of thy services by leaving me now. 

25 Equal with wondering: as much as in admiration 26 list: wish to 
28 a.dh&r&s: is related 29 SiV gnment: subject-matter 

5 been aired: lived 8 feeling: deeply felt 

9 o'erween: rate myself too highly 



The Winter's Tale, IV. ii 59 

The need I have of thee thine own goodness hath 
made: better not to have had thee than thus to 
want thee. Thou^ having made me businesses 
which none without thee can sufficiently manage, 
must either stay to execute them thyself or take 
away with thee the very services thou hast done ; 
which if I have not enough considered, — as too 
much I cannot, — to be more thankful to thee 20 
shall be my study, and my profit therein, the 
heaping friendships. Of that fatal country, 
Sicilia, prithee speak no more, whose very nam- 
ing punishes me with the remembrance of that 
penitent, as thou callest him, and reconciled 
king, my brother ; whose loss of his most precious 
queen and children are even now to be afresh la- 
mented. Say to me, when sawest thou the Prince 
Florizel, my son? Kings are no less unhappy, 
their issue not being gracious, than they are in los- 30 
ing them when they have approved their virtues. 

Cam. Sir, it is three days since I saw the 
prince. What his happier affairs may be, are to 
me unknown; but I have missingly noted he is 
of late much retired from court, and is less 
frequent to his princely exercises than formerly 
he hath appeared. 37 

Pol. I have considered so much, Camillo, and 
with some care; so far, that I have eyes under 
my service which look upon his removedness; 
from whom I have this intelligence, that he is 
seldom from the house of a most homely shep- 
herd; a man, they say, that from very nothing, 

22 heaping friendships: increase of friendly acts 

30 gracious: upright, righteous 31 approved: tested 

34 missingly: grieving at his absence 

40 removedness: absence 41 intelligence: news 



60 The Winter's Tale, IV. in 



and beyond the imagination of his neighbours, 
is grown into an unspeakable estate. 45 

Cam. I have heard, sir, of such a man, who 
hath a daughter of most rare note : the report of 
her is extended more than can be thought to 
begin from such a cottage. 49 

Pol. That 's likewise part of my intelligence ; 
but, I fear, the angle that plucks our son thither. 
Thou shalt accompany us to the place; where 
we will, not appearing what we are, have some 
question with the shepherd; from whose simpli- 
city I think it not uneasy to get the cause of my 
son's resort thither. Prithee, be my present 
partner in this business, and lay aside the 
thoughts of Sicilia. 58 

Cam. I willingly obey your command. 

Pol. My best Camillo! — We must disguise 
ourselves. Exeunt. 

Scene Three 

[A Road near the Shepherd's Cottage'\ 

Enter Autolycus, singing. 

'When daffodils begin to peer. 

With heigh ! the doxy, over the dale. 
Why, then comes in the sweet o' the year; 

For the red blood reigns in the winter's pale. 4 

'The white sheet bleaching on the hedge. 

With heigh ! the sweet birds, O, how they sing ! 

Doth set my pugging tooth on edge ; 

For a quart of ale is a dish for a king. 8 

47 note: celebrity 51 angle: fish-hook 54 question: conversation 
1 peer: show slightly 2 doxy: beggar's mistress 

4 winter's pale; cf. n. 7 pugging: thieving 



The Winter's Tale, IF. Hi 6i 

'The lark, that tirra-lirra chants, 

With, heigh! with, heigh! the thrush and the jay. 
Are summer songs for me and my aunts. 

While we lie tumbling in the hay.' 12 

I have served Prince Florizel, and in my time 
wore three-pile; but now I am out of service: 

'But shall I go mourn for that, my dear? 

The pale moon shines by night; 16 

And when I wander here and there, 

I then do most go right. 

*If tinkers may have leave to live, 

And bear the sow-skin bowget, 20 

Then my account I well may give. 

And in the stocks avouch it.' 

My traffic is sheets ; when the kite builds, look to 
lesser linen. My father named me Autolycus; 
who being, as I am, littered under Mercury, was 
likewise a snapper-up of unconsidered trifles. 
With die and drab I purchased this caparison, 27 
and my revenue is the silly cheat. Gallows and 
knock are too powerful on the highway: beating 
and hanging are terrors to me: for the life to 
come, I sleep out the thought of it. A prize! a 
prize ! 32 

Enter Clown. 
Clo. Let me see: Every 'leven wether tods; 

1 1 aunts : mistresses (thieves' slang) 

14 three-pile: most costly kind of velvet 

20 bowget: budget, big wallet 23 Cf. n. 

25 littered under Mercury; c/. «. 

27 By means of dice and lewd women I acquired this clothing 

28 silly cheat: petty thieving gallows and knock: fear of hanging 
and of the officer's blow 

33 tods: yields a tod, twenty-eight pounds of wool 



62 The Winter's Tale, IF. Hi 

every tod yields pound and odd shilling: fifteen 
hundred shorn, what comes the wool to? 

Aut. [Aside.'] If the springe hold, the cock *s 
mine. 37 

Clo. I cannot do 't without compters. Let me 
see; what am I to buy for our sheep-shearing 
feast? 'Three pound of sugar; five pound of 
currants; rice/ what will this sister of mine do 
with rice? But my father hath made her mis- 
tress of the feast, and she lays it on. She hath 
made me four-and-twenty nosegays for the 
shearers, three-man song-men all, and very 
good ones; but they are most of them means 
and basses : but one puritan amongst them, and 47 
he sings psalms to hornpipes. I must have saf- 
fron, to colour the warden pies; mace, dates, — 
none; that 's out of my note: — nutmegs seven; a 
race or two of ginger, — but that I may beg; — 
four pound of prunes, and as many of raisins o' 
the sun. 53 

Aut. O ! that ever I was born ! 

[Grovelling on the ground."] 

Clo. I' the name of me! — 

Aut. O! help me, help me! pluck but off 
these rags, and then death, death! 57 

Clo. Alack, poor soul! thou hast need of 
more rags to lay on thee, rather than have 
these off. 60 

36 springe: bird-hunter's noose cock: woodcock, a slang term for a 

fool 
38 compters: pieces of metal used in making calculations 
43 lays it on : manages lavishly 

45 three-man song-men: singers of songs in three parts 

46 means: altos _ 47 puritan; cf. n. 

48 saffron: orange-red substance used for coloring cookery 

49 warden : made of the warden pear 50 note : list 
51 race: root 52 raisins o' the sun: sun-dried grapes 



The Winter's Tale, IV. Hi 



Aut. O, sir! the loathsomeness of them 
offends me more than the stripes I have re- 
ceived^ which are mighty ones and millions. 

Clo. Alas, poor man ! a million of beating 
may come to a great matter. 65 

Aut. I am robbed, sir, and beaten; my money 
and apparel ta'en from me, and these detestable 
things put upon me. 68 

Clo. What, by a horseman or a footman.'* 

Aut. A footman, sweet sir, a footman. 

Clo. Indeed, he should be a footman, by the 
garments he hath left with thee: if this be a 
horseman's coat, it hath seen very hot service. 
Lend me thy hand, I'll help thee: come, lend 
me thy hand. [Helping him up.] 

Aut. O ! good sir, tenderly, O ! 76 

Clo. Alas, poor soul! 

Aut. O! good sir; softly, good sir! I fear, 
sir, my shoulder-blade is out. 

Clo. How now! canst stand? 80 

Aut. Softly, dear sir; [Picks his pocket.'] good 
sir, softly. You ha' done me a charitable office. 

Clo. Dost lack any money .^ I have a little 
money for thee. 84 

Aut. No, good sweet sir: no, I beseech you, 
sir. I have a kinsman not past three-quarters of 
a mile hence, unto whom I was going: I shall 
there have money, or anything I want: offer me 
no money, I pray you ! that kills my heart. 89 

Clo. What manner of fellow was he that 
robbed you? 

Aut. A fellow, sir, that I have known to go 
about with trol-my-dames : I knew him once a 

93 trol-my-dames: a game in which halls were 'trolled' through arches 
set on a board 



64 The Winter's Tale, IV. Hi 

servant of the prince. I cannot tell, good sir, 
for which of his virtues it was, but he was cer- 
tainly whipped out of the court. 96 

Clo. His vices, you would say : there 's no 
virtue whipped out of the court: they cherish it, 
to make it stay there, and yet it will no more 
but abide. 100 

Aut. Vices, I would say, sir. I know this man 
well: he hath been since an ape-bearer; then a 
process-server, a bailiff; then he compassed a 
motion of the Prodigal Son, and married a 
tinker's wife within a mile where my land and 
living lies; and having flown over many knavish 
professions, he settled only in rogue: some call 
him Autolycus. 108 

Clo. Out upon him! Prig, for my life, prig: 
he haunts wakes, fairs, and bear-baitings. 

Aut. Very true, sir; he, sir, he: that's the 
rogue that put me into this apparel. 112 

Clo. Not a more cowardly rogue in all 
Bohemia: if you had but looked big and spit 
at him, he'd have run. 

Aut. I must confess to you, sir, I am no 
fighter: I am false of heart that way, and that 
he knew, I warrant him. 118 

Clo. How do you now? 

Aut. Sweet sir, much better than I was: I 
can stand and walk. I will even take my leave 
of you, and pace softly towards my kinsman's.- 

Clo. Shall I bring thee on the way? 

Aut. No, good- faced sir; no, sweet sir. 124 

99 no more but abide : barely make a brief stay 

102 ape-bearer: showman who carries a trained monkey 

103 compassed: acquired 104 motion: puppet show 109 Prig: thief 



The Winter's Tale, IV, iv 65 

Clo, Then fare thee well: I must go buy- 
spices for our sheep-shearing. Exit. 

Aut. Prosper you, sv/eet sir! Your purse 
is not hot enough to purchase your spice. 
I'll be with you at your sheep-shearing too. 
If I make not this cheat bring out another, 
and the shearers prove sheep, let me be unrolled, 
and my name put in the book of virtue. 132 

Song. 'Jog on, jog on, the footpath way. 
And merrily hent the stile-a: 
A merry heart goes all the day. 

Your sad tires in a mile-a.' Exit, 



Scene Four 

\^A Lawn before the Shepherd's Cottage] 

Enter Florizel and Perdita. 

Flo. These your unusual weeds to each part of you 
Do give a life : no shepherdess, but Flora 
Peering in April's front. This your sheep-shearing 
Is as a meeting of the petty gods, 4 

And you the queen on 't. 

Per. Sir, my gracious lord. 

To chide at your extremes it not becomes me: 
O ! pardon, that I name them. Your high self. 
The gracious mark o' the land, you have obscur'd 8 
With a swain's wearing, and me, poor lowly maid. 
Most goddess-like prank'd up. But that our feasts 
In every mess have folly, and the feeders 

131 unrolled: stricken from the roll of thieves 134 hent: get over 

1 weeds: garments 3 Peering: appearing front: van or beginning 
6 extremes: extravagances of conduct 

8 mark o' the land: landmark or model of the nation 

9 wearing: clothing . 10 prank'd up: decked out 



66 The Winter's Tale, IV, iv 

Digest it with a custom, I should blush 12 

To see you so attired, — swoon, I think. 
To show myself a glass. 

Flo. I bless the time 

When my good falcon made her flight across 
Thy father's ground. 

Per. Now, Jove afford you cause ! 16 

To me the difference forges dread: your greatness 
Hath not been us'd to fear. Even now I tremble 
To think, your father, by some accident. 
Should pass this way as you did. O, the Fates ! 
How would he look, to see his work, so noble, 21 

Vilely bound up ? What would he say ? Or how 
Should I, in these my borrow'd flaunts, behold 
The sternness of his presence } 

Flo. Apprehend 24 

Nothing but jollity. The gods themselves, 
Humbling their deities to love, have taken 
The shapes of beasts upon them: Jupiter 
Became a bull, and bellow'd; the green Neptune 
A ram, and bleated ; and the fire-rob'd god, 29 

Golden Apollo, a poor humble swain. 
As I seem now. Their transformations 
Were never for a piece of beauty rarer, 32 

Nor in a way so chaste, since my desires 
Run not before mine honour, nor my lusts 
Burn hotter than my faith. 

Per. O! but, sir. 

Your resolution cannot hold, when 'tis 36 

Oppos'd, as it must be, by the power of the king. 
One of these two must be necessities, 

12 with a custom: from force of habit 13 swoon; cf. n. 

1 7 difference : difference in rank 

2Z Mnnis: finery 27-30 Cf. n. 35 iaith: fidelity 



The Winter's Tale, IV. iv 67 

Which then will speak^ that you must change this 

purpose, 
Or I my life. 

Flo. Thou dearest Perdita, 40 

With these forc'd thoughts, I prithee, darken not 
The mirth o' the feast: or I'll be thine, my fair, 
Or not my father's; for I cannot be 
Mine own, nor anything to any, if 44 

I be not thine: to this I am most constant, 
Though destiny say no. Be merry, gentle; 
Strangle such thoughts as these with anything 
That you behold the while. Your guests are 
coming: 48 

Lift up your countenance, as it were the day 
Of celebration of that nuptial which 
We two have sworn shall come. 

Per. O lady Fortune, 

Stand you auspicious ! 

Flo, See, your guests approach: 52 

Address yourself to entertain them sprightly. 
And let 's be red with mirth. 

[Enter Shepherd, with Polixenes and Camillo dis- 
guised; Clown, Mopsa, Dorcas, and Others.^ 

Shep. Fie, daughter ! when my old wife liv'd, upon 
This day she was both pantler, butler, cook; 56 

Both dame and servant; welcom'd all, serv'd all. 
Would sing her song and dance her turn ; now here. 
At upper end o' the table, now i' the middle; 
On his shoulder, and his; her face o' fire 60 

With labour and the thing she took to quench it. 
She would to each one sip. You are retir'd, 

41 ioTc'd: unnatural 

S3 Address yourself: make ready sprightly: in sprightly manner 

56 pantler: servant in charge of pantry 



68 The Winter's Tale, IV, iv 

As if you were a feasted one and not 
The hostess of the meeting: pray you, bid 64 

These unknown friends to 's welcome ; for it is 
A way to make us better friends^ more known. 
Come, quench your blushes and present yourself 
That which you are, mistress o' the feast: come 
on, 68 

And bid us welcome to your sheep-shearing. 
As your good flock shall prosper. 

Per. [To Polixenes.'\ Sir, welcome: 

It is my father's will I should take on me 
The hostess-ship o' the day. [To Camillo.] You're 
welcome, sir. 72 

Give me those flowers there, Dorcas. Reverend sirs. 
For you there 's rosemary and rue ; these keep 
Seeming and savour all the winter long: 
Grace and remembrance be to you both, 76 

And welcome to our shearing! 

Pol. Shepherdess, — 

A fair one are you, — well you fit our ages 
With flowers of winter. 

Per. Sir, the year growing ancient, 

Not yet on summer's death, nor on the birth 80 

Of trembling winter, the fairest flowers o' the season 
Are our carnations, and streak' d gillyvors. 
Which some call nature's bastards: of that kind 
Our rustic garden 's barren, and I care not 84 

To get slips of them. 

Pol. Wherefore, gentle maiden. 

Do you neglect them.^ 

Per. For I have heard it said 

75 Seeming: beauty of shape sa.vour: fragrance 

76 Grace and remembrance; cf. n. 
82 ^Wyvors: gillyflowers, pinks (?) 



The Winter's Tale, IV, iv 69 

There is an art which in their piedness shares 
With great creating nature. 

Pol. Say there be; 88 

Yet nature is made better by no mean 
But nature makes that mean : so, over that art, 
Which you say adds to nature, is an art 
That nature makes. You see, sweet maid, we 
marry 92 

A gentler scion to the wildest stock. 
And make conceive a bark of baser kind 
By bud of nobler race: this is an art 
Which does mend nature, change it rather, but 
The art itself is nature. 

Per. So it is. 97 

Pol. Then make your garden rich in gillyvors, 
And do not call them bastards. 

Per. I'll not put 

The dibble in earth to set one slip of them; 100 

No more than, were I painted, I would wish 
This youth should say, 'twere well, and only therefore 
Desire to breed by me. Here's flowers for you ; 
Hot lavender, mints, savory, marjoram; 104 

The marigold, that goes to bed wi' the sun. 
And with him rises weeping: these are flowers 
Of middle summer, and I think they are given 
To men of middle age. You're very welcome. 108 

Cam. I should leave grazing, were I of your flock, 
And only live by gazing. 

Per. Out, alas ! 

You'd be so lean, that blasts of January 
Would blow you through and through. Now, my 
fair'st friend, 112 

87,88 There . . . nature; c/. «. 89 mean: instrtiment 

100 dibble: gardener's tool to make holes for planting 104 Cf. n. 



70 The Winter's Tale, IV. iv 

I would I had some flowers o' the spring that might 

Become your time of day; and yours, and yours, 

That wear upon your virgin branches yet 

Your maidenheads growing: O Proserpina! lie 

For the flowers now that frighted thou let'st fall 

From Dis's waggon! daffodils, 

That come before the swallow dares, and take 

The winds of March with beauty; violets dim, 

But sweeter than the lids of Juno's eyes 121 

Or Cytherea's breath; pale primroses. 

That die unmarried, ere they can behold 

Bright Phoebus in his strength, a malady 124 

Most incident to maids ; bold oxlips and 

The crown imperial ; lilies of all kinds. 

The flower-de-luce being one. O ! these I lack 

To make you garlands of, and my sweet friend, 

To strew him o'er and o'er ! 

Flo. What! like a corse? 129 

Per. No, like a bank for love to lie and play on; 
Not like a corse ; or if, — not to be buried. 
But quick and in mine arms. Come, take your 
flowers : 132 

Methinks I play as I have seen them do 
In Whitsun pastorals: sure this robe of mine 
Does change my disposition. 

Flo. What you do 

Still betters what is done. When you speak, 
sweet, 136 

I'd have you do it ever: when you sing, 
I'd have you buy and sell so; so give alms; 

116 Proserpina; cf. n. 123 Cytherea's: Venus' s 

126 crown imperial: an imported flower from Asia Minor, the fritil- 
laria imperialis 

127 flower-de-luce : mj 132 quick: alive 
134 Whitsun pastorals; cf. n. 



The Winter's Tale, IF. iv 7i 

Pray so ; and^ for the ordering your affairs. 

To sing them too: when you do dance, I wish you 140 

A wave o' the sea, that you might ever do 

Nothing but that; move still, still so, 

And own no other function : each your doing. 

So singular in each particular, 144 

Crowns what you are doing in the present deed. 

That all your acts are queens. 

Per, O Doricles ! 

Your praises are too large : but that your youth. 
And the true blood which fairly peeps through it, 
Do plainly give you out an unstain'd shepherd. 
With wisdom I might fear, my Doricles, 
You woo'd me the false way. 

Flo. I think you have 

As little skill to fear as I have purpose 152 

To put you to 't. But, come ; our dance, I pray. 
Your hand, my Perdita: so turtles pair 
That never mean to part. 

Per. I'll swear for 'em. 

Pol. This is the prettiest low-born lass that 
ever 156 

Ran on the green-sord: nothing she does or seems 
But smacks of something greater than herself; 
Too noble for this place. 

Cam. He tells her something 

That makes her blood look out. Good sooth, she 
is 160 

The queen of curds and cream. 

Clo. Come on, strike up. 

143 each your doing: each act of yours 

144 singular: characteristic of you, unique particular: detail 

147 large: extravagant 149 give you out: declare you 

152 skill: r^ajon 154 turtles: turtle-doves 

157 sord: sward 160 sooth: truth 



72 The Winter's Tale, IF. iv 

Dor. Mopsa must be your mistress: marry, garlic. 
To mend her kissing with. 

Mop. Now, in good time ! 

Clo. Not a word, a word: we stand upon our 

manners. 164 

Come, strike up. [Music] 

Here a dance of Shepherds and Shepherdesses. 

Pol. Pray, good shepherd, what fair swain is this 
Which dances with your daughter.'' 

Shep. They call him Doricles, and boasts him- 
self 168 
To have a worthy feeding ; but I have it 
Upon his own report and I believe it: 
He looks like sooth. He says he loves my daughter: 
I think so too ; for never gaz'd the moon 172 
Upon the water as he'll stand and read 
As 'twere my daughter's eyes ; and, to be plain, 
I think there is not half a kiss to choose 
Who loves another best. 

Pol. She dances featly. 176 

Shep. So she does anything, though I report it 
That should be silent. If young Doricles 
Do light upon her, she shall bring him that 
Which he not dreams of. 180 

Enter a Servant. 

Serv. O master ! if you did but hear the pe dlar -^ 
at the door, you would never dance again after a 
tabor and pipe; n<o, the bagpipe could not-jaaove 
yjou. He sings several tunes faster than you'll 
tell money; he utters them as he had eaten 
ballads and all men's ears grew to his tunes. 186 

169 feeding: tract of pasture 

176 another: the other iea.t\y : nimbly 

183 ta.hor : small drum 185 tell: count as: as if 



/■ 



The Winter's Tale, IV. iv 78 

Clo. He could never come better: he shall 
come in: I love a ballad but even too well, if it 
be doleful matter merrily set down, or a very 
pleasant thing indeed and sung lamentably. 190 

Serv^ He hath songs for man or woman, of all,, 
sizes; no milliner can so fit his customers witli 
gloves : he has the prettiest love-songs for maids ; 
-'so without bawdry, which is strange; with such 
"delicate burdens of dildos and fadings, 'jump 195 
her and thump her'; and where some stretch- 
mouthed rascal would, as it were, mean mischief 
and break a foul gap into the matter, he makes 
the maid to answer, 'Whoop, do me no harm, 
good man;' puts him off, slights him with 
'Whoop, do me no harm, good man.' 201 

Pol. This is a brave fellow. 

Clo. Believe me, thou talkest of an admirable 
conceited fellow. Has he any unbraided wares? 

Serv. He hath ribands of all the colours i' 
the rainbow ; ^Jpomts more than all the lawyers 
in Bohemia can learnedly handle, though they 
come to him by the gross ; inkles, caddisses, 208 
cambrics, lawns: why, he sings 'em over, as they 
were gods or goddesses. You would think a 
smock were a she-angel, he so chants to the 
sleeve-hand and the work about the square on 't. 

Clo. Prithee, bring him in, and let him ap- 
proach singing. 214 

195 burdens: refrains 195, 196 Cf. n. 

196 s\.vetQ.\i-month.&d.: foul-mouthed 202 hrave: fine 

203 admirable conceited: wonderfully witty 

204 xmhraAdtd'. unfaded 205 ribands: W&&on.y 
206 points: tags with lacings for fastening hose to doublet or jacket 

208 inkles: broad linen tape caddisses: garters of worsted tape 

209 \aiwns: fine silks 211 smock: woman's undergarment 
212 sleeve-hand: cuff work about the square: embroidery about the 

bosom 



74 The Winter's Tale, IV, iv 

Per. Forewarn him that he use no scurrilous 
words in 's tunes. [Ea;it Servant,] 

Clo. You have of these pedlars, that have 
more in them than you'd think, sister. 

Per. Aj, good brother, or go about to think. 

Enter Autolycus, singing. 

'Lawn as white as driven snow; 220 

Cyprus black as e'er was crow; 
Gloves as sweet as damask roses ; 
Masks for faces and for noses ; 
Bugle-bracelet, necklace-amber, 224 

Perfume for a lady's chamber; 
Golden quoifs and stomachers. 
For my lads to give their dears ; 
Pins and poking-sticks of steel; 228 

What maids lack from head to heel : 
Come buy of me, come ; come buy, come buy ; 
Buy, lads, or else your lasses cry: 
Come buy.' 232 

Clo. If I were not in love with Mopsa, thou 
shouldst take no money of me; but being en- 
thralled as I am, it will also be the bondage of 
certain ribands and gloves. 236 

Mop. I was promised them against the feast; 
but they come not too late now. 

Dor. He hath promised you more than that, 
or there be liars. 240 

Mop. He hath paid you all he promised you: 

217 You have of these: there are some 219 go about: make an effort 
221 Cyprus: crape 222 sweet: perfumed 

224 Bugle-bracelet: bracelet of tube-shaped glass beads 
226 quoifs: women's headdresses stomachers: ornamental coverings 

for bosom 
228 poking-sticks : metal rods to adjust plaits of ruffs 
237 against: in time for 



The Winter's Tale, IV, iv 76 

may be he has paid you more^ which will shame 
you to give him again. 243 

Clo. Is there no manners left among maids? 
will they wear their plackets where they should 
bear their faces? Is there not milking-time, 
when you are going to bed, or kiln-hole, to whistle 
off these secrets, but you must be tittle-tattling 
before all our guests ? 'Tis well they are whisper- 
ing: clamour your tongues, and not a word more. 

Mop. I have done. Come, you promised me 
a tawdry lace and a pair of sweet gloves. 252 

Clo. Have I not told thee how I was cozened 
by the way, and lost all my money? 

Aut. And indeed, sir, there are cozeners 
abroad; therefore it behoves men to be wary. 256 

Clo. Fear not thou, man, thou shalt lose 
nothing here. 

Aut. I hope so, sir; for I have about me 
many parcels of charge, 260 

Clo. What hast here? ballads? 

Mop. Pray now, buy some: I love a ballad in 
print, a-life, for then we are sure they are true. 

Aut. Here's one to a very doleful tune, how 
a usurer's wife was brought to bed of twenty 
money-bags at a burden; and how she longed to 
eat adders' heads and toads carbonadoed. 

Mop. Is it true, think you? 268 

Aut. Very true, and but a month old. 

Dor. Bless me from marrying a usurer ! 

Aut. Here 's the midwife's name to 't, one Mis- 

245 plackets: openings in petticoats 

247 kiln-hole: big fire-place where women made malt (?) 

250 clamour: silence 252 tawdry lace: necklace; cf. n. 

253 coz&n&A: cheated 260 charge: z/o/m^ 

263 a-life: on my life, dearly 267 carbonadoed: sliced for broiling 



76 The Winter's Tale, IV, iv 

tress Taleporter^ and five or six honest wives' that 
were present. Why should I carry lies abroad? 

Mop. Pray you now, buy it. 274 

Clo. Come on, lay it by : and let 's first see 
moe ballads; we'll buy the other things anon. 

Aut. Here 's another ballad of a fish that 
appeared upon the coast on Wednesday the 
fourscore of April, forty thousand fathom above 
water, and sung this ballad against the hard 
hearts of maids : it was thought she was a woman 
and was turned into a cold fish for she would not 
exchange flesh with one that loved her. The 
ballad is very pitiful and as true. 284 

Dor. Is it true too, think you? 

Aut. Five justices' hands at it, and witnesses 
more than my pack will hold. 

Clo. Lay it by too: another. 288 

Aut. This is a merry ballad, but a very 
pretty one. 

Mop. Let 's have some merry ones. 

Aut. Why, this is a passing merry one, and 
goes to the tune of 'Two maids wooing a man': 
there's scarce a maid westward but she sings it: 
'tis in request, I can tell you. 295 

Mop. We can both sing it: if thou 'It bear a 
part thou shalt hear ; 'tis in three parts. 

Dor. We had the tune on 't a month ago. 

Aut. I can bear my part; you must know 'tis 
my occupation: have at it with you. 300 

Aut. 'Get you hence, for I must go. 
Where it fits not you to know.' 
Dor. 'Whither?' 
Mop. 'O! whither?' 304 

276 anon: immediately 292 passing: surpassingly 



The Winter's Tale, IV. iv 77 

Dor, 'Whither?' 

Mop. 'It becomes thy oath full well, 

Thou to me thy secrets tell.' 
Dor. 'Me too: let me go thither.' 308 

Mop. 'Or thou go'st to the grange or mill.' 
Dor. 'If to either, thou dost ill.' 
Aut. 'Neither.' 

Dor. 'What, neither.'*' 312 

Aut. 'Neither.' 

Dor. 'Thou hast sworn my love to be.' 
Mop. 'Thou hast sworn it more to me: 

Then whither go'st ? say whither ?' 316 

Clo. We'll have this song out anon by our- 
selves: my father and the gentlemen are in sad 
talk, and we'll not trouble them: come, bring 
away thy pack after me. Wenches, I'll buy for 
you both. Pedlar, let's have the first choice. Fol- 
low me, girls. [Exit with Dorcas and Mopsa."] 

Aut. And you shall pay well for 'em. 

Song. 'Will you buj'' any tape, 324 

Or lace for your cape, 
My dainty duck, my dear-a? 
Any silk, any thread. 

Any toys for your head, 328 

Of the new'st and fin'st, fin'st wear-a.^' 
Come to the pedlar; 
Money 's a meddler. 
That doth utter all men's ware-a.' 332 

Exit. 
[Enter a Servant."] 

Serv. Master, there is three carters, three 

309 grange: farmhouse 318 sad: serious 320 Wenches: girls 

331 meddler: a go-between 332 utter: put in circulation, market 



78 The Winter's Tale, IF. iv 

shepherds, three neat-herds, three swine-herds, 
that have made themselves all men of hair ; 335 
they call themselves Saltiers; and they have a 
dance which the wenches say is a gallimaufry of 
gambols, because they are not in 't ; but they 
themselves are o' the mind, — if it be not too 
rough for some that know little but bowling, — 
it will please plentifully. 841 

Shep. Away ! we'll none on 't : here has been 
too much homely foolery already. I know, sir, 
we weary you. 344 

Pol. You weary those that refresh us: pray, 
let 's see these four threes of herdsmen. 

Serv. One three of them, by their own report, 
sir, hath danced before the king; and not the 
worst of the three but jumps twelve foot and a 
half by the squier. 350 

Shep. Leave your prating: since these good 
men are pleased, let them come in: but quickly 
now. 

Serv. Why, they stay at door, sir. 

Here a dance of twelve Satyrs. 

Pol. [To Shep.^ O, father! you'll know more of 

that hereafter. 
[To Camillo.'i Is it not too far gone.f* 'Tis time to 

part them. 356 

He 's simple and tells much. [To Florizel.] How now, 

fair shepherd! 
Your heart is full of something that does take 
Your mind from feasting. Sooth, when I was young, 
And handed love as you do, I was wont 360 

334 neat-herds: cowherds 

335 men of hair: men dressed as hairy satyrs 

336 Saltiers: blunder for satyrs 337 gallimaufry: hotch-potch 
350 squier: measure 360 handed: held the hand of 



The Winter's Tale, IV, iv 79 

To load my she with knacks : I would have ransack'd 
The pedlar's silken treasury and have pour'd it 
To her acceptance; you have let him go 
And nothing marted with him. If your lass 364 

Interpretation should abuse and call this 
Your lack of love or bounty, you were straited 
For a reply, at least if you make a care 
Of happy holding her. 

Flo. Old sir, I know 368 

She prizes not such trifles as these are. 
The gifts she looks from me are pack'd and lock'd 
Up in my heart, which I have given already. 
But not deliver'd. O ! hear me breathe my life 
Before this ancient sir, who, it should seem, 373 

Hath sometime lov'd: I take thy hand; this hand. 
As soft as dove's down, and as white as it. 
Or Ethiopian's tooth, or the fann'd snow 376 

That 's bolted by the northern blasts twice o'er. 

Pol What follows this ? 
How prettily the young swain seems to wash 
The hand was fair before ! I have put you out : 
But to your protestation: let me hear 381 

What you profess. 

Flo. Do, and be witness to 't. 

Pol. And this my neighbour too.^* 

Flo. And he, and more 

Than he, and men, the earth, the heavens, and all ; 384 
That, were I crown'd the most imperial monarch. 
Thereof most worthy, were I the fairest youth 
That ever made eye swerve, had force and knowledge 
More than was ever man's, I would not prize 
them 388 

361 she: lady knacks: knick-knacks 364 marted: traded 

365 Interpretation should abuse: should misinterpret 

366 straited: put in straits 370 looks: looks for 377 halted: sifted 



80 The Winter's Tale, IF. iv 

Without her love: for her employ them all; 
Commend them and condemn them to her service 
Or to their own perdition. 

Pol. Fairly offer' d. 

Cam. This shows a sound affection. 

Shep. But^ my daughter, 392 

Say you the like to him? 

Per. I cannot speak 

So well, nothing so well; no, nor meap better: 
By the pattern of mine own thoughts I cut out 
The purity of his. 

Shep. Take hands; a bargain; |^__ 396 

And, friends unknown, you shall bear witness to 't : 
I give my daughter to him, and will make 
Her portion equal his. 

Flo. O ! that must be 399 

I' the virtue of your daughter: one being dead, 
I shall have more than you can dream of yet; 
Enough then for your wonder. But, come on ; 
Contract us 'fore these witnesses. 

Shep. Come, your hand; 

And, daughter, yours. 

Pol. Soft, swain, awhile, beseech you. 

Have you a father? 

Flo. I have; but what of him? 

Pol. Knows he of this? 

Flo. He neither does nor shall, 

Pol. Methinks a father 
Is, at the nuptial of his son, a guest 408 

That best becomes the table. Pray you, once more. 
Is not your father grown incapable 
Of reasonable affairs? is he not stupid 

391 perdition: destruction 



The Winter's Tale, IV, iv 8 1 

With age and altering rheums?- can he speak? 
hear? 412 

Know man from man? dispute his own estate? 
Lies he not bed-rid? and again does nothing 
But what he did being childish? 

Flo. No, good sir: 

He has his health and ampler strength indeed 
Than most have of his age. 

Pol. By my white beard, 417 

You offer him, if this be so, a wrong 
Something unfilial. Reason my son 
Should choose himself a wife, but as good reason 420 
The father, — all whose j oy is nothing else 
But fair posterity, — should hold some counsel 
In such a business. 

Flo. I yield all this; 

But for some other reasons, my grave sir, 424 

Which 'tis not fit you know, I not acquaint 
My father of this business. 

Pol. Let him know 't. 

Flo. He shall not. 

Pol. Prithee, let him. 

Flo. No, he must not. 

Shep. Let him, my son: he shall not need to 
grieve 428 

At knowing of thy choice. 

Flo. Come, come, he must not. 

Mark our contract. 

Pol. Mark your divorce, young sir, 

[Discovering himself.^ 
Whom son I dare not call: thou art too base 
To be acknowledg'd : thou a sceptre's heir, 432 

412 rheums; cf. n. 

413 dispute: c?wc«j5 estate: affairs 419 Reason: it is reasonable 



82 The Winter's Tale, IV, iv 

That thus affect'st a sheep-hook! Thou old traitor, 
I am sorry that by hanging thee I can 
But shorten thy life one week. And thou, fresh piece 
Of excellent witchcraft, who of force must know 
The royal fool thou cop'st with, — 

Shep. O, my heart! 437 

Pol. I'll have thy beauty scratch'd with briers, and 
made 
More homely than thy state. For thee, fond boy. 
If I may ever know thou dost but sigh 440 

That thou no more shalt see this knack, — as never 
I mean thou shalt, — we'll bar thee from succession ; 
Not hold thee of our blood, no, not our kin. 
Far than Deucalion off: mark thou my words: 
Follow us to the court. Thou, churl, for this 
time, 445 

Though full of our displeasure, yet we free thee 
From the dead blow of it. And you, enchantment, — 
Worthy enough a herdsman; yea, him too, 448 

That makes himself, but for our honour therein. 
Unworthy thee, — if ever henceforth thou 
These rural latches to his entrance open, 
Or hoop his body more with thy embraces, 452 

I will devise a death as cruel for thee 
As thou art tender to 't. Exit. 

Per. Even here undone! 

I was not much af card ; for once or twice 
I was about to speak and tell him plainly, 456 

The self-same sun that shines upon his court 
Hides not his visage from our cottage, but 

433 a&ect'st: aspirest to 435 iresh: young 

436 oiiovce: of necessity 437 cop'st: dealest 

439 state: social position iond: foolish 

444 Far : farther Deucalion : the Greek Noah 

445 churl: peasant 447 dead: deadly 



The Winter's Tale, IV. iv 83 

Looks on alike. Will 't please you, sir, be gone ? 
I told you what would come of this : beseech you, 460 
Of your own state take care : this dream of mine — 
Being now awake, I'll queen it no inch further, 
But milk my ewes and weep. 

Cam. Why, how now, father! 

Speak, ere thou diest. 

Shep. I cannot speak, nor think, 464 

Nor dare to know that which I know. O sir! 
You have undone a man of fourscore three. 
That thought to fill his grave in quiet, yea. 
To die upon the bed my father died, 468 

To lie close by his honest bones : but now 
Some hangman must put on my shroud and lay me 
Where no priest shovels in dust. O cursed wretch ! 
That knew'st this was the prince, and wouldst 
adventure 472 

To mingle faith with him. Undone ! undone ! 
If I might die within this hour, I have liv'd 
To die when I desire. Exit. 

Flo. Why look you so upon me? 

I am but sorry, not afeard; delay'd, 476 

But nothing alter'd. What I was, I am: 
More straining on for plucking back; not following 
My leash unwillingly. 

Cam. Gracious my lord. 

You know your father's temper: at this time 480 

He will allow no speech, which I do guess 
You do not purpose to him ; and as hardly 
Will he endure your sight as yet, I fear : 
Then, till the fury of his highness settle, 484 

Come not before him. 

473 mingle iaith: exchange troth-plights 478 plucking: being pulled 



84^ The Winter's Tale, IV. iv 

Flo. I not purpose it. 

I think^ Camillo? 

Cam. Even he, my lord. 

Per. How often have I told you 'twould be thus ! 
How often said my dignity would last 488 

But till 'twere known! 

Flo. It cannot fail but by 

The violation of my faith; and then 
Let nature crush the sides o' the earth together 
And mar the seeds within ! Lift up thy looks : 
From my succession wipe me, father; I 493 

Am heir to my affection. 

Cam. Be advis'd. 

Flo. I am ; and by my fancy : if my reason 
Will thereto be obedient, I have reason; 496 

If not, my senses, better pleas'd with madness, 
Do bid it welcome. 

Cam. This is desperate, sir. 

Flo. So call it ; but it does fulfil my vow ; 
I needs must think it honesty. Camillo, 500 

Not for Bohemia, nor the pomp that may 
Be thereat glean'd, for all the sun sees or 
The close earth wombs or the profound sea hides 
In unknown fathoms, will I break my oath 504 

To this my fair belov'd. Therefore, I pray you, 
As you have ever been my father's honour'd friend, 
When he shall miss me, — as, in faith, I mean not 
To see him any more, — cast your good counsels 
Upon his passion: let myself and fortune 509 

Tug for the time to come. This you may know 
And so deliver, I am put to sea 
With her whom here I cannot hold on shore ; 

494 Am heir to my affection: have an inheritance in my love 

495 iancy: love 503 wombs: bears within it 
510 Tug: struggle (as in a tug-of-war) 



The Winter's Tale, IV. iv 85 

And most opportune to our need, I have 513 

A vessel rides fast by, but not prepar'd 
For this design. What course I mean to hold 
Shall nothing benefit your knowledge, nor 516 

Concern me the reporting. 

Cam. O my lord! 

I would your spirit were easier for advice, 
Or stronger for your need. 

Flo. Hark, Perdita. [Tahes her aside. 1 

[To Camillo.] I'll hear you by and by. 

Cam. He 's irremovable, 520 

Resolv'd for flight. Now were I happy if 
His going I could frame to serve my turn. 
Save him from danger, do him love and honour, 
Purchase the sight again of dear Sicilia 524 

And that unhappy king, my master, whom 
I so much thirst to see. 

Flo. Now, good Camillo, 

I am so fraught with curious business that 
I leave out ceremony. 

Cam. Sir, I think 528 

You have heard of my poor services, i' the love 
That I have borne your father? 

Flo. Very nobly 

Have you deserv'd: it is my father's music 
To speak your deeds, not little of his care 532 

To have them recompens'd as thought on. 

Cam. Well, my lord, 

If you may please to think I love the king 
And through him what 's nearest to him, which is 
Your gracious self, embrace but my direction. 
If your more ponderous and settled project 537 

516 nor . . . reporting: nor is it my business to tell you 

520 by and by: in jiist a ininute 

527 fraught: loaded down curious: causing anxiety 



86 The Winter's Tale, IV, iv 

May suffer alteration, on mine honour 

111 point you where you shall have such receiving 

As shall become your highness; where you may 

Enjoy your mistress, — from the whom, I see, 541 

There 's no disjunction to be made, but by. 

As, heavens forfend! your ruin, — marry her; 

And with my best endeavours in your absence 

Your discontenting father strive to qualify, 545 

And bring him up to liking. 

Flo. How, Camillo, 

May this, almost a miracle, be done? 
That I may call thee something more than man. 
And after that trust to thee. 

Cam. Have you thought on 549 

A place whereto you'll go ? 

Flo. Not any yet; 

But as the unthought-on accident is guilty 
To what we wildly do, so we profess 552 

Ourselves to be the slaves of chance and flies 
Of every wind that blows. 

Cam. Then list to me: 

This follows ; if you will not change your purpose 
But undergo this flight, make for Sicilia, 556 

And there present yourself and your fair princess, — 
For so, I see, she must be, — 'fore Leontes; 
She shall be habited as it becomes 
The partner of your bed. Methinks I see 560 

Leontes opening his free arms and weeping 
His welcomes forth; asks thee, the son, forgiveness 
As 'twere i' the father's person; kisses the hands 
Of your fresh princess ; o'er and o'er divides him 564 

543 iorfend: forbid 

545 discontenting: dissatisfied qnaliiy: pacify 

546 bring him up to liking: make him approve your choice 

551 guilty to: to blame for 559 habited: dressed 564 him: himself 



The Winter's Tale, IF, iv 87 

'Twixt his unkindness and his kindness : the one 
He chides to hell, and bids the other grow 
Faster than thought or time. 

Flo. Worthy Camillo, 

What colour for my visitation shall I 568 

Hold up before him? 

Cam. Sent by the king your father 

To greet him and to give him comforts. Sir, 
The manner of your bearing towards him, with 
What you as from your father shall deliver, 572 

Things known betwixt us three, I'll write you down: 
The which shall point you forth at every sitting 
What you must say ; that he shall not perceive 
But that you have your father's bosom there 576 

And speak his very heart. 

Flo. I am bound to you. 

There is some sap in this. 

Cam. A course more promising 

Than a wild dedication of yourselves 
To unpath'd waters, undream'd shores, most cer- 
tain 580 
To miseries enough: no hope to help you. 
But as you shake off one to take another; 
Nothing so certain as your anchors, who 
Do their best office, if they can but stay you 584 
Where you'll be loath to be. Besides, you know 
Prosperity 's the very bond of love. 
Whose fresh complexion and whose heart together 
Affliction alters. 

Per. One of these is true: 588 

I think affliction may subdue the cheek. 
But not take in the mind. 

568 coIovlt: pretext 

574 point you forth : cftr^cf 3'OM sitting: interview 

576 hosom: inmost secrets 578 sap: juice, life 590 take in: conquer 



88 The Winter's Tale, IF, iv 

Cam. Yea, say you so? 

There shall not at your father's house these seven 

years 
Be born another such. 

Flo. My good Camillo, 592 

She is as forward of her breeding as 
She is i' the rear o' our birth. 

Cam. I cannot say 'tis pity 

She lacks instructions, for she seems a mistress 
To most that teach. 

Per. Your pardon, sir; for this 596 

I'll blush you thanks. 

Floi My prettiest Perdita! 

But O ! the thorns we stand upon. Camillo, 
Preserver of my father, now of me. 
The med'cine of our house, how shall we do? 600 

We are not furnish'd like Bohemia's son. 
Nor shall appear in Sicilia. 

Cam. My lord, 

Fear none of this: I think you know my fortunes 
Do all lie there: it shall be so my care 604 

To have you royally appointed as if 
The scene you play were mine. For instance, sir, 
That you may know you shall not want, one word. 

[They talk aside. 1 

Enter Autolycus. 

Aut. Ha, ha ! what a fool Honesty is ! and 
Trust, his sworn brother, a very simple gentle- 
man ! I have sold all my trumpery : not a coun- 
terfeit stone, not a riband, glass, pomander, 

593 forward of her breeding: superior to her upbringing 

601 inrmsWd: equipped 602 appear: appear so 

605 appointed: fitted out 611 pomander; c/. «. 



The Winter's Tale, IV, iv 89 

brooch, table-book, ballad, knife, tape, glove, 
shoe-tie, bracelet, horn-ring, to keep my pack 
from fasting: they throng who should buy first, 
as if my trinkets had been hallowed and brought 
a benediction to the buyer : by which means 616 
I saw whose purse was best in picture; and 
what I saw, to my good use I remembered. My 
clown, — who wants but something to be a reason- 
able man, — grew so in love with the wenches' 
song that he would not stir his pettitoes till he 
had both tune and words; which so drew the 
rest of the herd to me that all their other senses 
stuck in ears : you might have pinched a placket, 
it was senseless ; 'twas nothing to geld a codpiece 625 
of a purse ; I would have filed keys off that hung 
in chains: no hearing, no feeling, but my sir's 
song, and admiring the nothing of it; so that, in 
this time of lethargy I picked and cut most of 
their festival purses; and had not the old man 
come in with a whoo-bub against his daughter 
and the king's son, and scared my choughs from 
the chaff, I had not left a purse alive in the 
whole army. 634 

[Camillo, Florizel, and Perdita come forward.] 
Cam. Nay, but my letters, by this means being 

there 
So soon as you arrive, shall clear that doubt. 636 

Flo. And those that you'll procure from King 

Leontes — 
Cam. Shall satisfy your father. 
Per. Happy be you ! 

612 table-book: notebook 617 picture: appearance 

621 pettitoes: /'ig'^/^^^ 

625 senseless: insensible geld a codpiece: rob a breeches pocket 

631 v^hoo-huh: outcry 632 choughs: jackdaws, simpletons 



90 The Winter's Tale, IV. iv 

All that you speak shows fair. 

Cam. [Seeing Autolycus.] Whom have we here? 
We'll make an instrument of this : omit 640 

Nothing may give us aid. 

Aut. [Aside.] If they have overheard me now, 
why, hanging. 

Cam. How now, good fellow! Why shakest 
thou so ? Fear not, man ; here 's no harm in- 
tended to thee. 

Aut. I am a poor fellow, sir. 647 

Cam. Why, be so still ; here 's nobody will 
steal that from thee; yet, for the outside of thy 
poverty we must make an exchange; therefore, 
disease thee instantly, — thou must think, there's 
a necessity in 't, — and change garments with this 
gentleman: though the pennyworth on his side 
be the worst, yet hold thee, there's some boot. 
Aut. I am a poor fellow, sir. — [A side. '\ I 
know ye well enough. 656 

Cam. Nay, prithee, dispatch: the gentleman 
is half flayed already. 

Aut. Are you in earnest, sir.^ [Aside.] I 
smell the trick on 't. 660 

Flo. Dispatch, I prithee. 

Aut. Indeed, I have had earnest; but I can- 
not with conscience take it. 

Cam. Unbuckle, unbuckle. — 664 

[Florizel and Autolycus exchange garments."] 
Fortunate mistress, — ^let my prophecy 
Come home to ye ! — you must retire yourself 
Into some covert: take your sweetheart's hat 
And pluck it o'er your brows ; muffle your face ; 

651 disease: undress 653 pennyworth: bargain 

662 earnest: part payment in advance 



The Winter's Tale, IV, iv 9i 

Dismantle jou, and^ as you can, disliken 669 

The truth of your own seeming; that you may, — 
For I do fear eyes over you, — to shipboard 
Get undescried. 

Per. I see the play so lies 672 

That I must bear a part. 

Cam. No remedy. 

Have you done there? 

Flo. Should I now meet my father 

He would not call me son. 

Cam. Nay, you shall have no hat. 

[Giving it to Perdita.^ 
Come, lady, come. Farewell, my friend. 

Aut. Adieu, sir. 676 

Flo. O Perdita, what have we twain forgot ! 
Pray you, a word. [They converse apart. 1 

Cam. [Aside.'] What I do next shall be to tell the 
king 
Of this escape, and whither they are bound; 680 

Wherein my hope is I shall so prevail 
To force him after: in whose company 
I shall review Sicilia, for whose sight 
I have a woman's longing. 

Flo. Fortune speed us ! 684 

Thus we set on, Camillo, to the sea-side. 

Cam. The swifter speed the better. 

Exit [with Florizel and Perdita]. 
Aut. I understand the business; I hear it. 

To have an open ear, a quick eye, and a nimble 

hand, is necessary for a cut-purse: a good nose 

is requisite also, to smell out work for the other 

senses. I see this is the time that the unjust 

669 Dismantle: change your cloak disliken: disguise 

682 To : as to 683 review : see again 



92 The Winter's Tale, IV, iv 

man doth thrive. What an exchange had this 
been without boot! what a boot is here with this 
exchange ! Sure^ the gods do this year connive 694 
at us^ and we may do anything extempore. The 
prince himself is about a piece of iniquity; 
stealing away from his father with his clog at 
his heels. If I thought it were a piece of 
honesty to acquaint the king withal^ I would not 
do 't : I hold it the more knavery to conceal it, 
and therein am I constant to my profession. 
Aside, aside: here is more matter for a hot 
brain. Every lane's end, every shop, church, 
session, hanging, yields a careful man work. 704 

Enter Clown and Shepherd. 

Clo. See, see, what a man you are now ! There 
is no other way but to tell the king she 's a 
changeling and none of your flesh and blood. 

She p. Nay, but hear me. 708 

Clo. Nay, but hear me. 

She p. Go to, then. 

Clo. She being none of your flesh and blood, 
your flesh and blood has not offended the king; 
and so your flesh and blood is not to be punish- 
ed by him. Show those things you found about 
her; those secret things, all but what she has 
with her : this being done, let the law go whistle : 
I warrant you. 717 

Shep. I will tell the king all, every word, yea, 
and his son's pranks too; who, I may say, is no 
honest man neither to his father nor to me, 
to go about to make me the king's brother- 
in-law. 722 

699 yfithal: therewith 710 Go to: go ahead 



The Winter's Tale, IF. iv 93 

Clo. Indeed^ brother-in-law was the furthest 
off you could have been to him, and then your 
blood had been the dearer by I know not how 
much an ounce. 

Aut. [Aside.] Very wisely, puppies! 727 

She p. Well, let us to the king: there is that 
in this fardel will make him scratch his beard. 

Aut. [Aside.] I know not what impediment 
this complaint may be to the flight of my 
master. 732 

Clo. Pray heartily he be at palace. 

Aut. [Aside.] Though I am not naturally 
honest, I am so sometimes by chance: let me 
pocket up my pedlar's excrement. [ Takes off 
his false beard.] How now, rustics! whither are 
you bound .^ 738 

Shep. To the palace, an it like your wor- 
ship. 740 

Aut. Your affairs there, what, with whom, the 
condition of that fardel, the place of your dwell- 
ing, your names, your ages, of what having, 
breeding, and anything that is fitting to be 
known, discover. 745 

Clo. We are but plain fellows, sir. 

Aut. A lie; you are rough and hairy. Let 
me have no lying; it becomes none but trades- 
men, and they often give us soldiers the lie; but 
we pay them for it with stamped coin, not 
stabbing steel; therefore they do not give us the 
lie. 752 

Clo. Your worship had like to have given us 

729 fardel: bundle 736 excrement: excrescence, hair 

739 an: if like: please 743 having: wealth 



The Winter's Tale, IV. iv 



one, if you had not taken yourself with the 
manner. 755 

Shep. Are you a courtier, an 't like you, sir? 

Aut. Whether it like me or no, I am a 
courtier. Seest thou not the air of the court in 
these enfoldings.^ hath not my gait in it the 
measure of the court? receives not thy nose 
court-odour from me? reflect I not on thy base- 
ness court-contempt ? Think'st thou, for that I 762 
insinuate, or toaze from thee thy business, I am 
therefore no courtier? I am courtier, cap-a-pe, 
and one that will either push on or pluck back 
thy business there: whereupon I command thee 
to open thy affair. 

Shep. My business, sir, is to the king. 768 

Aut. What advocate hast thou to him? 

Shep. I know not, an 't like you. 

Clo. Advocate 's the court-word for a phea- 
sant: say you have none. 772 
Shep. None, sir ; I have no pheasant, cock nor hen. 
Aut. How bless'd are we that are not simple men! 
Yet nature might have made me as these are. 
Therefore I'll not disdain. 776 

Clo. This cannot be but a great courtier. 

Shep. His garments are rich, but he wears 
them not handsomely. 

Clo. He seems to be the more noble in being 
fantastical: a great man, I'll warrant; I know 
by the picking on 's teeth. 

Aut. The fardel there? what's i' the fardel? 
Wherefore that box? 784 

754 with the manner : m i/te ac* 759 enioldings: garments 

760 measure : stately tread 

763 insinuate: w/i^^d/g toaze: draw out 

764 cap-a-pe: from head to foot 782 picking on's: way he picks his 



The Winter's Tale, IV. iv 95 

Shep. Sir, there lies such secrets in this fardel 
and box which none must know but the king; 
and which he shall know within this hour if I 
may come to the speech of him. 788 

Aut. Age, thou hast lost thy labour. 

Shep. Why, sir? 

Aut. The king is not at the palace; he is 
gone aboard a new ship to purge melancholy 
and air himself: for, if thou be'st capable of 
things serious, thou must know the king is full 
of grief. 

Shep. So 'tis said, sir, about his son, that 
should have married a shepherd's daughter. 797 

Aut. If that shepherd be not now in hand- 
fast, let him fly : the curses he shall have, the 
torture he shall feel, will break the back of man, 
the heart of monster. 801 

Clo. Think you so, sir? 

Aut. Not he alone shall suffer what wit can 
make heavy and vengeance bitter; but those 
that are germane to him, though removed fifty 
times, shall all come under the hangman: which 
though it be great pity, yet it is necessary. An 807 
old sheep-whistling rogue, a ram-tender, to offer 
to have his daughter come into grace! Some 
say he shall be stoned; but that death is too 
soft for him, say I: draw our throne into a 
sheep cote! all deaths are too few, the sharpest 
too easy. 813 

Clo. Has the old man e'er a son, sir, do you 
hear, an 't like you, sir ? 

Aut. He has a son, who shall be flayed alive; 
then 'nointed over with honey, set on the head 

798 hand-iast: custody 805 germane: related 808 oHer: presume 



90 The Winter's Tale, IV. iv 

o£ a wasp's nest; then stand till he be three 
quarters and a dram dead; then recovered again 
with aqua-vitae or some other hot infusion; then, 
raw as he is, and in the hottest day prognostica- 
tion proclaims, shall he be set against a brick- 
wall, the sun looking with a southward eye upon 
him, where he is to behold him with flies blown 824 
to death. But what talk we of these traitorly 
rascals, whose miseries are to be smiled at, their 
offences being so capital ? Tell me, — for you seem 
to be honest plain men, — what you have to the 
king: being something gently considered, I'll 
bring you where he is aboard, tender your per- 
sons to his presence, whisper him in your be- 
half s; and if it be in man besides the king to 
effect your suits, here is a man shall do it. 833 

Clo. He seems to be of great authority: close 
with him, give him gold; and though authority 
be a stubborn bear, yet he is oft led by the nose 
with gold. Show the inside of your purse to the 
outside of his hand, and no more ado. Re- 
member, 'stoned,' and 'flayed alive' ! 839 

Shep. An 't please you, sir, to undertake the 
business for us, here is that gold I have: I'll 
make it as much more and leave this young 
man in pawn till I bring it you. 

Aut. After I have done what I pro- 
mised ? 845 

Shep. Ay, sir. 

Aut. Well, give me the moiety. Are you a 
party in this business? 848 

819 a dram: a trifle more 820 aqua-vitae: brandy 

821 prognostication: the almanac's forecast of the weather 

825 what: why 

829 considered : given a consideration, bribed 830 tender : present 



The Winter's Tale, IV. iv 97 

Clo. In some sort^ sir: but though my case be 
a pitiful one, I hope I shall not be flayed out 
of it. 

Aut. O! that 's the case of the shepherd's son: 
hang him, he'll be made an example. 853 

Clo. Comfort, good comfort ! we must to the 
king and show our strange sights: he must 
know 'tis none of your daughter nor my sister; 
we are gone else. Sir, I will give you as much as 
this old man does when the business is per- 
formed; and remain, as he says, your pawn till 
it be brought you. 860 

Aut. I will trust you. Walk before toward 
the sea-side; go on the right hand; I will but 
look upon the hedge and follow you. 

Clo. We are blessed in this man, as I may 
say, even blessed. 865 

Shep. Let 's before as he bids us. He was 
provided to do us good. 

[Ea:eunt Shepherd and Clown.'] 

Aut. If I had a mind to be honest I see 
Fortune would not suffer me: she drops booties 
in my mouth. I am courted now with a double 
occasion, gold, and a means to do the prince 
my master good; which who knows how that 
may turn back to my advancement? I will -873 
bring these two moles, these blind ones, aboard 
him: if he think it fit to shore them again, and 
that the complaint they have to the king con- 
cerns him nothing, let him call me rogue for 
being so far officious; for I am proof against 
that title and what shame else belongs to 't. To 

849 case: a pun on the tzvo meanings, situation and skin 

874 aboard him: aboard his ship 875 shore: put on shore 



98 The Winter's Tale, V, i 

him will I present them: there may be matter 
in it. Exit. 

ACT FIFTH 

Scene One 

[^Sicilia. A Room in the Palace of Leontes"] 

Enter Leontes, Cleomenes, Dion, Paulina, Servants, 

Cleo. Sir, you have done enough, and have per- 
form'd 
A saint-like sorrow: no fault could you make 
Which you have not redeem'd; indeed, paid down 
More penitence than done trespass. At the last, 4 
Do as the heavens have done, forget your evil; 
With them forgive yourself. 

Leon. Whilst I remember 

Her and her virtues, I cannot forget 
My blemishes in them, and so still think of 8 

The wrong I did myself; which was so much. 
That heirless it hath made my kingdom, and 
Destroy'd the sweet'st companion that e'er man 
Bred his hopes out of. 

Paul. True, too true, my lord; 12 

If one by one you wedded all the world. 
Or from the all that are took something good. 
To make a perfect woman, she you kill'd 
Would be unparallel'd. ' 

Leon. I think so. Kill'd! 16 

She I kill'd! I did so; but thou strik'st me 
Sorely to say I did: it is as bitter 
Upon thy tongue as in my thought. Now, good now. 
Say so but seldom. 

19 good now: pray you 



The Winter's Tale, V. i 99 

Cleo. Not at all, good lady: 20 

You might have spoken a thousand things that would 
Have done the time more benefit, and grae'd 
Your kindness better. 

Paul. You are one of those 

Would have him wed again. 

Dion. If you would not so, 24 

You pity not the state, nor the remembrance 
Of his most sovereign name; consider little 
What dangers, by his highness' fail of issue, 
May drop upon his kingdom and devour 28 

Incertain lookers-on. What were more holy 
Than to rejoice the former queen is well? 
What holier than for royalty's repair. 
For present comfort, and for future good, 32 

To bless the bed of majesty again 
With a sweet fellow to 't } 

Paul. There is none worthy. 

Respecting her that 's gone. Besides, the gods 
Will have fulfil'd their secret purposes; 36 

For has not the divine Apollo said. 
Is 't not the tenour of his oracle, 
That King Leontes shall not have an heir 
Till his lost child be found? which that it shall. 
Is all as monstrous to our human reason 41 

As my Antigonus to break his grave 
And come again to me; who, on my life. 
Did perish with the infant. 'Tis your counsel 44 

My lord should to the heavens be contrary. 
Oppose against their wills. — [To Leontes.'] Care not 

for issue; 
The crown will find an heir: great Alexander 

22 done . . . benefit : suited the occasion better 27 fail : lack 

29 Incertain : irresolute 

31 repair : restoration 35 Respecting: compared with 



100 The Winter's Tale, V, i 

Left his to the worthiest, so his successor 48 

Was like to be the best. 

Leon. Good Paulina, 

Who hast the memory of Hermione, 
I know, in honour ; O ! that ever I 
Had squar'd me to thy counsel ! then, even now, 52 
I might have look'd upon my queen's full eyes. 
Have taken treasure from her lips, — 

Paul. And left them 

More rich, for what they yielded. 

Leon. Thou speak' st truth. 

No more such wives; therefore, no wife: one 
worse, 56 

And better us'd, would make her sainted spirit 
Again possess her corpse and on this stage, — 
Where we're offenders now, — appear soul-vex'd. 
And begin, 'Why to me?' 

Paul. * Had she such power, 60 

She had just cause. 

Leon. She had; and would incense me 

To murder her I married. 

Paul. I should so: 

Were I the ghost that walk'd, I'd bid you mark 
Her eye, and tell me for what dull part in 't 64 

You chose her; then I'd shriek, that even your ears 
Should rift to hear me; and the words that foUow'd 
Should be 'Remember mine.' 

Leon. Stars, stars ! 

And all eyes else dead coals. Fear thou no wife; 
I'll have no wife, Paulina. 

Paul. Will you swear 69 

Never to marry but by my free leave? 

52 squar'd me : shaped my conduct 

61 incense: incite 66 viit: rive, burst 



The Winter's Tale, V, i loi 

Leon. Never^ Paulina : so be bless'd my spirit ! 

Paul. Then, good my lords, bear witness to his 
oath. 72 

Cleo. You tempt him over much. 

Paul. Unless another. 

As like Hermione as is her picture, 
Affront his eye. 

Cleo. Good madam, — 

Paul. I have done. 

Yet, if my lord will marry, — if you will, sir, 76 

No remedy, but you will, — give me the office 
To choose you a queen, she shall not be so young 
As was your former; but she shall be such 
As, walk'd your first queen's ghost, it should take 
joy 80 

To see her in your arms. 

Leon. My true Paulina, 

We shall not marry till thou bidd'st us. 

Paul. That 

Shall be when your first queen 's again in breath ; 
Never till then. 84 

Enter a Servant. 

Ser. One that gives out himself Prince Florizel, 
Son of Polixenes, with his princess, — she 
The fairest I have yet beheld, — desires access 
To your high presence. 

Leon. What with him? he comes not 88 

Like to his father's greatness ; his approach. 
So out of circumstance and sudden, tells us 
'Tis not a visitation fram'd, but forc'd 
By need and accident. What train ? 

75 AflFront: confront _ 84 S. d. Servant: gentleman-in-waiting 

90 out of circumstance: lacking in ceremony 

91 fram'd: planned in advance 



102 The Winter's Tale, V. i 

Ser. But few, 92 

And those but mean. 

Leon. His princess, say you, with him? 

Ser, Ay, the most peerless piece of earth, I think. 
That e'er the sun shone bright on. 

Paul. O Hermione ! 

As every present time doth boast itself 96 

Above a better gone, so must thy grave 
Give way to what 's seen now. Sir, you yourself 
Have said and writ so, — but your writing now 
Is colder than that theme, — 'She had not been. 
Nor was not to be equall'd' ; thus your verse 101 

Flow'd with her beauty once : 'tis shrewdly ebb'd 
To say you have seen a better. 

Ser. Pardon, madam: 

The one I have almost forgot — your pardon — 
The other, when she has obtain'd your eye, 105 

Will have your tongue too. This is a creature. 
Would she begin a sect, might quench the zeal 
Of all professors else, make proselytes 108 

Of who she but bid follow. 

Paul. How! not women? 

Ser. Women will love her, that she is a woman 
More worth than any man; men, that she is 
The rarest of all women. 

Leon. Go, Cleomenes; 112 

Yourself, assisted with your honour'd friends. 
Bring them to our embracement. Still 'tis strange. 

Exit [^Cleomenes with others']. 
He thus should steal upon us. 

Paul. Had our prince — 

Jewel of children — seen this hour, he had pair'd 

102 shrewdly: exceedingly 

108 proiessoTS else: those who profess other faiths 113 with: &y 



The Winter's Tale, V, i 103 

Well with this lord: there was not full a month 
Between their births. 

Leon. Prithee, no more: cease! thou know'st 
He dies to me again when talk'd of: sure, 120 

When I shall see this gentleman, thy speeches 
Will bring me to consider that which may 
Unfurnish me of reason. They are come. 

Enter Florisel, Perdita, Cleomenes, and others. 

Your mother was most true to wedlock, prince; 

For she did print your royal father oif, 125 

Conceiving you. Were I but twenty-one, 

Your father's image is so hit in you. 

His very air, that I should call you brother, 128 

As I did him; and speak of something wildly 

By us perform'd before. Most dearly welcome! 

And you, fair princess, — goddess ! O, alas ! 

I lost a couple, that 'twixt heaven and earth 132 

Might thus have stood begetting wonder as 

You, gracious couple, do: and then I lost — 

All mine own folly — the society, 

Amity too, of your brave father, whom, 136 

Though bearing misery, I desire my life 

Once more to look on him. 

Flo. By his command 

Have I here touch'd Sicilia; and from him 
Give you all greetings that a king, at friend, 140 

Can send his brother: and, but infirmity, — 
Which waits upon worn times, — hath something seiz'd 
His wish'd ability, he had himself 
The land and waters 'twixt your throne and his 
Measur'd to look upon you, whom he loves — 145 

123 Unfurnish: deprive 

140 at iritnd: on friendly terms 141-143 but . . . ability; c/. n. 



104 The Winter's Tale, V. i 

He bade me say so — more than all the sceptres 
And those that bear them living. 

Leon. O, my brother! — 

Good gentleman^ — the wrongs I have done thee 
stir 148 

Afresh within me, and these thy offices 
So rarely kind, are as interpreters 
Of my behind-hand slackness ! Welcome hither, 
As is the spring to the earth. And hath he too 
Expos'd this paragon to the fearful usage — 153 

At least ungentle — of the dreadful Neptune, 
To greet a man not worth her pains, much less 
The adventure of her person ? 

Flo. Good my lord, 156 

She came from Libya. 

Leon. Where the warlike Smalus, 

That noble honour'd lord, is fear'd and lov'd? 

Flo. Most royal sir, from thence; from him, whose 
daughter 
His tears proclaim'd his, parting with her: 
thence — 160 

A prosperous south- wind friendly — we have cross'd, 
To execute the charge my father gave me 
For visiting your highness : my best train 
I have from your Sicilian shores dismiss'd; 164 

Who for Bohemia bend, to signify 
Not only my success in Libya, sir. 
But my arrival and my wife's, in safety 
Here where we are. 

Leon. The blessed gods 168 

Purge all infection from our air whilst you 
Do climate here ! You have a holy father, 

149 offices: dutiful acts 156 adventure: mfe 

165 hend: steer 170 climate: reside 



The Winter's Tale, V. i 105 

A graceful gentleman ; against whose person, 

So sacred as it is, I have done sin: 172 

For which the heavens, taking angry note. 

Have left me issueless ; and your father 's bless'd — 

As he from heaven merits it — with you, 

Worthy his goodness. What might I have been. 

Might I a son and daughter now have look'd on. 

Such goodly things as you! 

Enter a Lord. 

Lord. Most noble sir. 

That which I shall report will bear no credit. 
Were not the proof so nigh. Please you, great 
sir, 180 

Bohemia greets you from himself by me; 
Desires you to attach his son, who has — 
His dignity and duty both cast off — 
Fled froin his father, from his hopes, and with 
A shepherd's daughter. 

Leon. Where's Bohemia? speak. 185 

Lord. Here in your city; I now came from him: 
I speak amazedly, and it becomes 

My marvel and my message. To your court 188 

Whiles he was hastening, — in the chase it seems 
Of this fair couple, — meets he on the way 
The father of this seeming lady and 
Her brother, having both their country quitted 
With this young prince. 

Flo. Camillo has betray'd me; 193 

Whose honour and whose honesty till now 
Endur'd all weathers. 

171 graceiul: full of graciotts qualities 182 attach: arrest 

187 amazedly: in a maze becomes: he fits 

188 marvel: astonishment 



106 The Winter's Tale, V. i 

Lord. Lay 't so to his charge : 

He 's with the king your father. 

Leon. Who? Camillo? 196 

Lord. Camillo, sir : I spake with him, who now 
Has these poor men in question. Never saw I 
Wretches so quake: they kneel, they kiss the earth, 
Forswear themselves as often as they speak: 200 

Bohemia stops his ears, and threatens them 
With divers deaths in death. 

Per. O my poor father! 

The heaven sets spies upon us, will not have 
Our contract celebrated. 

Leon. You are married.^ 204 

Flo. We are not, sir, nor are we like to be ; 
The stars, I see, will kiss the valleys first: 
The odds for high and low 's alike. 

Leon. My lord. 

Is this the daughter of a king.f* 

Flo. She is, 208 

When once she is my wife. 

Leon. That 'once,' I see, by your good father's 
speed, 
Will come on very slowly. I am sorry. 
Most sorry, you have broken from his liking 212 

Where you were tied in duty; and as sorry 
Your choice is not so rich in worth as beauty/ 
That you might well enjoy her. 

Flo. Dear, look up: 

Though Fortune, visible an enemy, 216 

Should chase us with my father, power no jot 
Hath she to change our loves. Beseech you, sir, 
Remember since you ow'd no more to time 
Than I do now ; with thought of such affections, 

207 Cf.n. 214 worth: wealth and rank 219 since: when 



The Winter's Tale, V, ii 107 

Step forth mine advocate; at your request 221 

My father will grant precious things as trifles. 

Leon. Would he do so, I'd beg your precious 
mistress, 
Which he counts but a trifle. 

Paul. Sir, my liege, 224 

Your eye hath too much youth in 't : not a month 
'Fore your queen died, she was more worth such gazes 
Than what you look on now. 

Leon. I thought of her. 

Even in these looks I made. [To Florisel.] But your 
petition 228 

Is yet unanswer'd. I will to your father: 
Your honour not o'erthrown by your desires, 
I am friend to them and you; upon which errand 
I now go toward him. Therefore follow me, 232 

And mark what way I make: come, good my lord. 

Exeunt. 

Scene Two 

[Before the Palace"] 

Enter Autolycus and a Gentleman. 

Aut. Beseech you, sir, were you present at 
this relation? 

Gent. I was by at the opening of the fardel, 
heard the old shepherd deliver the manner how 
he found it: whereupon, after a little amazed- 
ness, we were all commanded out of the cham- 
ber; only this methought I heard the shepherd 
say, he found the child. 8 

Aut. I would most gladly know the issue of it. 

Gent. I make a broken delivery of the busi- 

230 YonrhotiouT noV. provided your honor he not 233 way: progress 



108 The Winter's Tale, V, it 

ness; but the changes I perceived in the king 
and Camillo were very notes of admiration: they 
seemed almost, with staring on one another, to 13 
tear the cases of their eyes; there was speech in 
their dumbness, language in their very gesture; 
they looked as they had heard of a world ran- 
somed, or one destroyed: a notable passion of 
wonder appeared in them; but the wisest be- 
holder, that knew no more but seeing, could not 
say if the importance were j oy or sorrow ; but in 
the extremity of the one it must needs be. 21 

Enter another Gentleman. 

Here comes a gentleman that haply knows more. 
The news, Rogero? 

Sec. Gent. Nothing but bonfires: the oracle 
is fulfilled; the king's daughter is found: such a 
deal of wonder is broken out within this hour 
that ballad-makers cannot be able to express it. 

Enter another Gentleman. 

Here comes the lady Paulina's steward: he can 
deliver you more. How goes it now, sir.^ this 
news which is called true is so like an old tale, 
that the verit}'' of it is in strong suspicion: has 
the king found his heir? 32 

Third Gent. Most true, if ever truth were 
pregnant by circumstance: that which you hear 
you'll swear you see, there is such unity in the 
proofs. The mantle of Queen Hermione, her 
jewel about the neck of it, the letters of Anti- 

12 notes: distinctive marks admiration: wonder 14 cases: sockets 
20 importance : import in . , . one : one in the highest degree 
34 pregnant by circumstance: made full and convincing by circum- 
stantial detail 
37 jewel: jeweled necklace or similar ornament 



The Winter's Tale, V. ii i09 

gonus found with it, which they know to be his 
character; the majesty of the creature in re- 
semblance of the mother, the affection of noble- 
ness which nature shows above her breeding, 
and many other evidences proclaim her with all 
certainty to be the king's daughter. Did you see 
the meeting of the two kings ? 44 

Sec. Gent. No. 

Thir<ji Gent. Then have you lost a sight, which 
was to be seen, cannot be spoken of. There 
might you have beheld one joy crown another, 
so, and in such manner that, it seemed, sorrow 
wept to take leave of them, for their joy waded 
in tears. There was casting up of eyes, holding 
up of hands, with countenances of such dis- 
traction that they were to be known by garment, 
not by favour. Our king, being ready to leap out 54 
of himself for joy of his found daughter, as if 
that joy were now become a loss, cries, 'O, thy 
mother, thy mother !' then asks Bohemia for- 
giveness ; then embraces his son-in-law ; then 
again worries he his daughter with clipping her; 
now he thanks the old shepherd, which stands 
by like a weather-bitten conduit of many kings' 
reigns. I never heard of such another encoun- 
ter, which lames report to follow it and undoes 
description to do it. 64 

Sec. Gent. What, pray you, became of Anti- 
gonus that carried hence the child? 

Third Gent. Like an old tale still, which will 
have matter to rehearse, though credit be asleep 
and not an ear open. He was torn to pieces with 

39 ch.a.raiCt&r : handwriting 40 afiection oi: inclination toward 

54 iavour: face 59 clipping: embracing 

61 weather-bitten: zveather-worn; of. n. 64 do: describe 



1 10 The Winter's Tale, V, it 

a bear: this avouches the shepherd's son, who 
has not only his innocence — which seems much 
— to justify him, but a handkerchief and rings 
of his that Paulina knows. 73 

First Gent. What became of his bark and his 
followers ? 

Third Gent. Wrecked, the same instant of 
their master's death, and in the view of the shep- 
herd: so that all the instruments which aided to 
expose the child were even then lost when it was 
found. But, O ! the noble combat that 'twixt 
joy and sorrow was fought in Paulina. She had 
one eye declined for the loss of her husband, 
another elevated that the oracle was fulfilled: 
she lifted the princess from the earth, and so 
locks her in embracing, as if she would pin her 
to her heart that she might no more be in 
danger of losing. 87 

First Gent. The dignity of this act was worth 
the audience of kings and princes, for by such 
was it acted. 

Third Gent. One of the prettiest touches of 
all, and that which angled for mine eyes, — 
caught the water though not the fish, — was when 
at the relation of the queen's death, with the 
manner how she came to it, — bravely confessed 
and lamented by the king, — how attentiveness 
wounded his daughter; till, from one sign of 
dolour to another, she did, with an *alas!' I 
would fain say, bleed tears, for I am sure my 99 
heart wept blood. Who was most marble there 
changed colour; some swounded, all sorrowed: 

71 innocence: stupidity 72 justiiy: confirm 

100 marble: i.e., stony-hearted 101 svfounded: swooned 



The Winter's Tale, V. ii 1 1 1 

if all the world could have seen 't, the woe had 
been universal. 103 

First Gent. Are they returned to the court? 

Third Gent. No ; the princess hearing of her 
mother's statue^ which is in the keeping of 
Paulina — a piece many years in doing, and now 
newly performed by that rare Italian master, 
Julio Romano ; who, had he himself eternity 109 
and could put breath into his work, would 
beguile Nature of her custom, so perfectly he is 
her ape: he so near to Hermione hath done 
Hermione that they say one would speak to her 
and stand in hope of answer: thither with all 
greediness of affection are they gone, and there 
they intend to sup. 116 

Sec. Gent. I thought she had some great 
matter there in hand, for she hath privately, 
twice or thrice a day, ever since the death of 
Hermione, visited that removed house. Shall 
we thither and with our company piece the re- 
joicing? 122 

First Gent. Who would be thence that has 
the benefit of access? every wink of an eye some 
new grace will be born: our absence makes us 
unthrifty to our knowledge. Let 's along. 126 

Exeunt [Gentlemen']. 

Aut. Now, had I not the dash of my former 
life in me, would preferment drop on my head. 
I brought the old man and his son aboard the 
prince; told him I heard them talk of a fardel 

109 Julio Romano ; c/. «. eternity: immortality 

111 custom: customers, trade 112 dipe: imitator 

120 removed: distant 121 piece: add to 

124 access: privilege of admittance 

126 unthrifty to: careless about the increase of 



112 The Winter's Tale, V, ii 

and I know not what; but he at that time, over- 
fond of the shepherd's daughter, — so he then 
took her to be, — who began to be much sea-sick, 
and himself little better, extremity of weather 
continuing, this mystery remained undiscovered. 
But 'tis all one to me; for had I been the finder 
out of this secret, it would not have relished 
among my other discredits. Here come those 
I have done good to against my will, and al- 
ready appearing in the blossoms of their for- 
tune. 141 
Enter Shepherd and Clown. 

Shep. Come, boy; I am past moe children, 
but thy sons and daughters will be all gentle- 
men born. 144 

Clo. You are well met, sir. You denied to 
fight with me this other day, because I was no 
gentleman born: see you these clothes.'* say you 
see them not and think me still no gentleman 
born: you were best say these robes are not 
gentleman born. Give me the lie, do, and try 
whether I am not now a gentleman born. 

Aut. I know you are now, sir, a gentleman 
born. 153 

Clo. Ay, and have been so any time these 
four hours. 

Shep. And so have I, boy. 156 

Clo. So you have: but I was a gentleman 
born before my father; for the king's son took 
me by the hand and called me brother; and 
then the two kings called my father brother; 
and then the prince my brother and the princess 

137 relished: tasted well, been pleasing 145 denied: refused 



The Winter's Tale, V, ii na 

my sister called my father father; and so we 
wept: and there was the first gentleman-like 
tears that ever we shed. 164 

Shep. We may live, son, to shed many more. 

Clo. Ay; or else 'twere hard luck, being in so 
preposterous estate as we are. 

Aut. I humbly beseech you, sir, to pardon 
me all the faults I have committed to your wor- 
ship, and to give me your good report to the 
prince my master. 

Shep. Prithee, son, do; for we must be gentle, 
now we are gentlemen. 173 

Clo. Thou wilt amend thy life.^ 

Aut. Ay, an it like your good worship. 

Clo. Give me thy hand: I will swear to the 
prince thou art as honest a true fellow as any is 
in Bohemia. 178 

Shep. You may say it, but not swear it. 

Clo. Not swear it, now I am a gentleman ? 
Let boors and franklins say it, I'll swear it. 

Shep. How if it be false, son.f* 182 

Clo. If it be ne'er so false, a true gentleman 
may swear it in the behalf of his friend: and 
I'll swear to the prince thou art a tall fellow 
of thy hands and that thou wilt not be drunk; 
but I know thou art no tall fellow of thy hands 
and that thou wilt be drunk: but I'll swear it, 
and I would thou wouldst be a tall fellow of thy 
hands. 

Aut. I will prove so, sir, to my power. 191 

Clo. Ay, by any means prove a tall fellow: 
if I do not wonder how thou darest venture to 

167 preposterous: blunder for prosperous 

181 iranklins : smalllandholders 185 tall: bold 



114 The Winter's Tale, V. in 

be drunk, not being a tall fellow, trust me not. 
Hark! the kings and the princes, our kindred, 
are going to see the queen's picture. Come, 
follow us : we'll be thy good masters. 197 

Exeunt. 

Scene Three 

[J Chapel in Paulina's House'] 

Enter Leontes, Polixenes, Florisel, Perdita, Camillo, 
Paulina, Lords, and Attendants, 

Leon. O grave and good Paulina, the great comfort 
That I have had of thee ! 

Paul. What, sovereign sir, 

I did not well, I meant well. All my services 

You have paid home; but that you have vouch- 
saf'd, 4 

With your crown'd brother and these your contracted 
Heirs of your kingdoms, my poor house to visit. 
It is a surplus of your grace, which never 
My life may last to answer. 

Leon. O Paulina! 8 

We honour you with trouble: but we came 
To see the statue of our queen: your gallery 
Have we pass'd through, not without much content 
In many singularities, but we saw not 12 

That which my daughter came to look upon. 
The statue of her mother. 

Paul. As she liv'd peerless. 

So her dead likeness, I do well believe. 
Excels whatever yet you look'd upon 16 

196 ^ictvire: painted statue 197 good masters: ^cfronj 

9 We honour you with trouble: our so-called honor hut makes you 
trouble 

II content', pleasure 12 singularities: cwrto^YtV^ 



The Winter's Tale, V. Hi i is 

Or hand of man hath done; therefore I keep it 
Lonely, apart. But here it is: prepare 
To see the life as lively mock'd as ever 
Still sleep mock'd death: behold! and say 'tis 
well. 20 

[Paulina draws hack a curtain, and reveals 
Hermione as a siaiueJ\ 

I like your silence: it the more shows off 

Your wonder; but yet speak: first you, my liege. 

Comes it not something near? 

Leon. Her natural posture ! 

Chide me, dear stone, that I may say, indeed 24 

Thou art Hermione; or rather, thou art she 
In thy not chiding, for she was as tender 
As infancy and grace. But yet, Paulina, 
Hermione was not so much wrinkled; nothing 
So aged as this seems. 

Pol. O! not by much. 29 

Paul. So much the more our carver's excellence; 
Which lets go by some sixteen years and makes her 
As she liv'd now. 

Leon. As now she might have done, 32 

So much to my good comfort, as it is 
Now piercing to my soul. O ! thus she stood. 
Even with such life of majesty, — warm life. 
As now it coldly stands, — when first I woo'd her. 
I am asham'd: does not the stone rebuke me 37 

For being more stone than it } O, royal piece ! 
There 's magic in thy majesty, which has 
My evils conjur'd to remembrance, and 40 

From thy admiring daughter took the spirits, 
Standing like stone with thee. 

19 \i-ve\y: to the life 2% nothing: not nearly 38 piece: a;oma« 



1 16 The Winter's Tale, V. Hi 

Per. And give me leave, 

And do not say 'tis superstition, that 
I kneel and then implore her blessing. Lady, 44 

Dear queen, that ended when I but began, 
Give me that hand of yours to kiss. 

Paul. O, patience! 

The statue is but newly fix'd, the colour 's 
Not dry. 48 

Cam. My lord, your sorrow was too sore laid on. 
Which sixteen winters cannot blow away, 
So many summers dry: scarce any joy 
Did ever so long live; no sorrow 52 

But kilFd itself much sooner. 

Pol. Dear my brother, 

Let him that was the cause of this have power 
To take off so much grief from you as he 
Will piece up in himself. 

Paul. Indeed, my lord, 56 

If I had thought the sight of my poor image 
Would thus have wrought you, — for the stone is 

mine, — 
I'd not have show'd it. 

Leon. Do not draw the curtain. 

Paul. No longer shall you gaze on 't, lest your 
fancy 60 

May think anon it moves. 

Leon. Let be, let be! 

Would I were dead, but that, methinks, already — 
What was he that did make it.^* See, my lord, 
Would you not deem it breath'd, and that those 
veins 64 

Did verily bear blood .^ 

56 piece up in himself: make up by increasing his own grief 
58 wrought: excited 



The Winter's Tale, V. in 117 

Pol. Masterly done: 

The very life seems warm upon her lip. 

Leon. The fixure of her eye has motion in 't, 
As we are mock'd with art. 

Paul. I'll draw the curtain; 68 

My lord 's almost so far transported that 
He'll think anon it lives. 

Leon. O sweet Paulina! 

Make me to think so twenty years together : 
No settled senses of the world can match 72 

The pleasure of that madness. Let 't alone. 

Paul. I am sorry^ sir^ I have thus far stirr'd you: 
but 
I could afflict you further. 

Leon. T>o, Paulina; 

For this affliction has a taste as sweet 76 

As any cordial comfort. Still, methinks, 
There is an air comes from her: what fine chisel 
Could ever yet cut breath.^ Let no man mock me, 
For I will kiss her. 

Paul. Good my lord, forbear. 80 

The ruddiness upon her lip is wet: 
You'll mar it if you kiss it ; stain your own 
With oily painting. Shall I draw the curtain? 

Leon. No, not these twenty years. 

Per. So long could I 84 

Stand by, a looker-on. 

Paul. Either forbear. 

Quit presently the chapel, or resolve you 
For more amazement. If you can behold it, 
I'll make the statue move indeed, descend, 88 

And take you by the hand ; but then you'll think, — 

67 Cf.n. 77 cor^idil: restorative 

86 resolve you: prepare yourselves 



1 1 8 The Winter's Tale, V. Hi 

Which I protest against, — I am assisted 
By wicked powers. 

Leon. What you can make her do, 

I am content to look on: what to speak, 92 

I am content to hear; for 'tis as easy 
To make her speak as move. 

Paul. It is requir'd 

You do awake your faith. Then, all stdnd still; 
Or those that think it is unlawful business 96 

I am about, let them depart. 

Leon. Proceed: 

No foot shall stir. 

Paul. Music, awake her: strike! [Music] 

*Tis time; descend; be stone no more: approach; 
Strike all that look upon with marvel. Come; 
I'll fill your grave up: stir; nay, come away; lOl 

Bequeath to death your numbness, for from him 
Dear life redeems you. You perceive she stirs: 

[Hermione comes down.] 
Start not; her actions shall be holy as 104 

You hear my spell is lawful: do not shun her 
Until you see her die again, for then 
You kill her double. Nay, present your hand: 
When she was young you wOo'd her ; now in age 108 
Is she become the suitor ! 

Leon. [Embracing her.] O ! she 's warm. 
If this be magic, let it be an art 
Lawful as eating. 

Pol. She embraces him. 

Cam. She hangs about his neck: 112 

If she pertain to life let her speak too. 

Pol. Ay ; and make 't manifest where she has liv'd, 
Or how stol'n from the dead. 

100 upon: on 107 double: doubly, twice 



The Winter's Tale, V. in 1 19 

Paul. That she is living, 

Were it but told you, should be hooted at lie 

Like an old tale; but it appears she lives, 
Though yet she speak not. Mark a little while. 
Please you to interpose, fair madam: kneel 
And pray your mother's blessing. Turn, good 
lady ; 120 

Our Perdita is found. 

[Presenting Perdita, who kneels to Hermione.'] 

Her. You gods, look down. 

And from your sacred vials pour your graces 
Upon my daughter's head ! Tell me, mine own. 
Where hast thou been preserv'd? where liv'd? how 
found 124 

Thy father's court? for thou shalt hear that I, 
Knowing by Paulina that the oracle 
Gave hope thou wast in being, have preserv'd 
Myself to see the issue. 

Paul. There 's time enough for that ; 128 

Lest they desire upon this push to trouble 
Your joys with like relation. Go together. 
You precious winners all: your exultation 
Partake to every one. I, an old turtle, 132 

Will wing me to some wither'd bough, and there 
My mate, that 's never to be found again. 
Lament till I am lost. 

Leon. O! peace, Paulina. 

Thou shouldst a husband take by my consent, 136 
As I by thine a wife: this is a match. 
And made between 's by vows. Thou hast found 

mine; 
But how, is to be question'd; for I saw her, 

129 ^-ash.: impulse 130 TQ\z.\.ion'. relating of their adventures 

132 Partake to: j/iare zwV/t 137 maXch: bargain 



120 The Winter's Tale, V. Hi 

As I thought dead, and have in vain said many 140 
A prayer upon her grave. I'll not seek far, — 
For him, I partly know his mind, — to find thee 
An honourable husband. Come, Camillo, 
And take her by the hand; whose worth and 
honesty 144 

Is richly noted, and here justified 
By us, a pair of kings. Let 's from this place. 
What! look upon my brother: both your pardons. 
That e'er I put between your holy looks 148 

My ill suspicion. This' your son-in-law. 
And son unto the king, — whom heavens directing, 
Is troth-plight to your daughter. Good Paulina, 
Lead us from hence, where we may leisurely 152 

Each one demand and answer to his part 
Perform'd in this wide gap of time since first 
We were dissever'd: hastily lead away. Exeunt. 

145 richly noted: thoroughly known justified: vouched for 
149 This': this is 

FINIS. 



NOTES • 

Dramatis Personce. This play is one of seven for 
which, under the caption 'The Names of the Actors/ 
the First Folio lists the Dramatis Personse. The 
words put in brackets are there omitted. 

I. i. 9, 10. entertainment . . . loves. 'Our loving 
welcome shall atone for our inadequate entertainment.' 

I. i. 34, 35. from . . . winds. 'From the opposite 
corners of the heavens/ where the winds of the north, 
east, south, and west were supposed to have their 
homes. 

I. ii. 1. the watery star. The moon, as cause of 
the tides, was considered the queen of the waters. 

I. ii. 6, 7. like . . . place. 'As a cipher, though 
worthless in itself, may, in a significant position 
change thousands into tens of thousands, so my grate- 
ful farewell, though wholly inadequate, increases all 
previous expressions of gratitude.' 

I. ii. 12. that may blow. This is usually inter- 
preted as a wish. 'May there blow no nipping 
winds.' 

I. ii. 41. gest. The gests of a royal journey (from 
the old French giste, a bed or lodging) were the 
houses at which the monarch stopped overnight on 
his way. 

I. ii. 48. unsphere the stars with oaths. 'Shake 
the stars from their positions in the heavens by the 
violence of your oaths.' According to the ancient 
Ptolemaic theory of astronomy the earth was the 
center of the universe, and the stars were located in 
concentric hollow spheres revolving around it. 

I. ii. 53. pay your fees. It was formerly a custom 
in prisons for a jailer to exact fees from his prisoners. 

I. ii. 74. the imposition, etc. 'Setting aside our 
hereditary taint of original sin.' 

I. ii. 92. one good deed, etc. 'The failure to praise 
one good deed prevents the existence of a thousand 
that would have been inspired by it.' 



122 The Winter's Tale 

I. ii. 120. brows. It was a common saying in 
Shakespeare's time that an unfaithful wife put horns 
on her husband's head, or brows. The unsavory joke 
appears repeatedly. 

I, ii. 126. virginalling. Playing as on the keys of 
the virginal, an old-time instrument resembling a 
piano. The word is here, as often, used punningly. 

I. ii. 139-144. Affection . . . dost. A possible 
interpretation of this much disputed passage is: 
'Love, thy intense passion masters the inmost hearts 
of women. Thou dost make possible on their part 
sins not believed to be possible. Thou dost make 
absent lovers communicate with each other through 
dreams (how can this be?). Thou dost cause the 
dreaming woman to make love to the unreal dream- 
image of her absent paramour, and to embrace 
nothingness. Then it is very believable that thou 
mayst bring her to the arms of a lover bodily present ; 
and thou dost.' For another interpretation cf. C. D. 
Stewart, Some Textual Difficulties in Shakespeare 
(Yale University Press), pp. 96-109. 

I. ii. 202. predominant. Leontes accepts the theory 
of astrology that certain stars under the right con- 
ditions exercise a powerful influence over human 
conduct. 

I. ii. 273-275. If . . . thought. 'If thou wilt 
confess the truth — and to do otherwise thou must be 
one who impudently denies his possession of eyes or 
ears or thought — then say that my wife is a loose 
woman.' 

I. ii. 280. clouded. Shakespeare's language is so 
figurative that a sharp line cannot always be drawn 
between metaphors and obsolete meanings. In the 
present case, which is typical of hundreds, he prob- 
ably thought of the accusation dimming Hermione's 
fair reputation as a cloud dims the moon. 

I. ii. 307. medal. Medallions with the portrait of 



The Winter's Tale 123 

a friend or sweetheart were frequently worn around 
the neck in Shakespeare's day. Leontes' jealous 
delirium pictures Hermione with her arms around 
Poli^enes' neck and her living face on his bosom 
where the medallion with her portrait might hang. 

I. ii. 458-460. 'May good speed in escaping help 
me, and bring comfort to the gracious queen, who is 
part of the subject of his thoughts but in no way the 
intentional cause of his ill-founded suspicion.' The 
passage is blind, and may have been garbled in 
printing. 

II. i. S. d. The Folio stage direction reads : 'Enter 
Hermione, Mamillius, Ladies: Leontes, Antigonus, 
Lords.' Editors have agreed in placing the entrance 
of Leontes after line 31. In the Folio text of The 
Winter's Tale stage directions repeatedly mention 
actors who were probably to be ready when thus 
mentioned, but who evidently did not appear before 
the audience until later. In the present edition such 
stage directions are adapted according to the judg- 
ment of later editors. 

II. i. 40. partake no venom. The belief was for- 
merly common that a spider in one's drink made the 
beverage poisonous if the insect was seen, but not if 
the insect was unobserved. 'In the cup of my family 
life,' says Leontes, 'there has been the spider of 
adultery; but it did not poison my mind with jealous 
suffering as long as I did not perceive it.' 

II. i. 133, 134. ril . . . wife. 'I'll consider 
human beings on a level with horses in morality.' 

II. i. 142. land-damn. Nothing but guesses can 
be given for the meaning of land-damn. It may 
mean to bury alive under the ground (land), to exile 
from the land, or it may be equivalent to landan, the 
word for a rural punishment in Gloucestershire for 
slanderers and adulterers, 'by rustics traversing from 
house to house along the country side, blowing trum- 
pets and beating drums or pans and kettles.' 



124 The Winter's Tale 

II. i. 152. While saying this Leontes probably 
pulls Antigonus' beard or offers him some other minor 
physical violence. 

II. i. 175-178. Which . . . deed. 'Which was as 
gross as was ever found by a suspicion (conjecture) 
that lacked sight [of their crime] only, lacked nought 
for proof (approbation), except actually seeing them 
in sin — with all other circumstances pointing (made 
up) to the deed — all these, etc' 

II. i. 182. Delphos. The famous oracle of Apollo 
was at Delphi (or Delphos). Its location was on 
the mainland, but it is spoken of at the beginning of 
Act Third as being on an 'isle,' probably because it 
has been confused with the island of Delos. The 
play bristles with inaccuracies in history and geogra- 
phy, which the author did not consider out of keeping 
with its romantic atmosphere, and most of which he 
merely took over from the novel that served him as 
his source. In the main the story seems located in 
the Middle Ages, whereas the oracle belongs to a 
much earlier pagan period. 

II. iii. 38. humour. It was formerly the general 
belief that there were four liquids (humours) in the 
body and that diseases were due to a disproportionate 
amount of some one of them. 

II. iii. 75. dame Partlet. Dame Pertelote (Part- 
let) was a curtain-lecturing hen in Chaucer's Nun's 
Priest's Tale. 

III. ii. 60-62. More . . . acknowledge. 'I must 
not at all acknowledge that I am guilty (mistress) of 
anything more than [that] which is counted against 
me as a fault [namely, my innocent hospitality toward 
Polixenes].' 

III. ii. 82. 'My life is exposed to the deadly aim 
(level) of your jealous imaginings.' 

III. ii. 168. Unclasp'd. The meaning 'revealed,' 
like so many Shakespearean meanings, was probably 
more metaphorical than literal even in the author's 



The Winter's Tale 125 

day. In King Henry IV, Part / (I. iii. 188) Worces- 
ter begins his revelation to Hotspur: 

'And now I will unclasp a secret book.' 

III. iii. 47, 48. Which . . . thine. 'Which may, if 
fortune is willing, by their great value inspire people 
to educate (breed) thee, and still remain thy 
property.' 

III. iii. 59. ten. Most modern editors put sixteen 
or nineteen in the place of ten, on the ground that so 
early an age does not harmonize with all the offences 
mentioned. But the author was representing an 
ignorant and excited man who did not choose his 
words with the calm precision of a Shakespearean 
commentator. 

III. iii. 100. flap-dragoned. A flap-dragon was a 
raisin or some other substance floating in a glass of 
brandy, from which some gallant, wishing to show 
his dexterity, would snatch it with his mouth. The 
sea gulped down the ship with the easy dexterity 
with which a toper would gulp down the flap-dragon. 

IV. iii. 4. winter's pale. 'Pale' with Shakespeare 
had two frequent and widely different meanings, 
(1) paleness, and (2) an enclosed space, either one 
of which here would make sense. Consequently we 
could interpret the line: 'The red blood of youth and 
spring reigns in the pale face of winter'; or, 'The 
red blood reigns in those fields which recently were 
the enclosed park of winter.' 

IV. iii. 23. It was a common belief that kites stole 
small linen articles to use in building their nests. 
My trade, says Autolycus, is in stealing sheets. Look 
out for lesser linen when the kites are building, but 
for sheets when I come by. 

IV. iii. 25. littered under Mercury. Born under 
the influence of the planet Mercury, he naturally imi- 
tated the god Mercury, who was the ancient deity of 
thieves. 

IV. iii. 47. puritan. The puritans were hostile to 



126 The Winter's Tale 

the stage and consequently attacked repeatedly by 
Shakespeare and his fellow dramatists. Their habit 
of singing psalms was only one of their many traits 
ridiculed. 

IV. iv. 13. swoon. The original text reads sworn, 
and the emendation swoon, though now generally 
adopted, is not very well in harmony with Perdita's 
healthful life and courageous character. If Shakes- 
peare wrote sworn, Perdita probably meant that 
Florizel had come with the vowed purpose of showing 
in his plain clothes the opposite of her rich ones, as 
printed letters in a looking-glass are shown reading 
backwards. 

IV. iv. 27-30. Jupiter became a bull to win the 
love of Europa; Neptune, a ram when in love with 
Theophane; and Apollo as a humble shepherd kept 
the flocks of King Admetus. 

IV. iv. 76. Grace and remembrance. These were 
symbolized by rue and rosemary respectively. The 
significance of flowers as emblems of human moods 
was often mentioned by the Elizabethans, and plays 
an important part in the mad speeches of Ophelia 
{Hamlet, IV. v.). 

IV. iv. 87, 88. There . . . nature. Their varie- 
gated colors are partly the result of the gardener's 
art in cross-breeding, and not wholly produced by 
nature. 

IV. iv. 104. Lavender, savory, and certain varie- 
ties of marjoram were flowers recently imported into 
England from southern Europe. It is probably as 
natives of a warmer climate that Perdita calls them 
'hot' and a few lines later speaks of them as 'flowers 
of middle summer.' 

IV. iv. 116. Proserpina. While Proserpina was 
gathering flowers in the meadows of Sicily, Dis, or 
Pluto, the god of the underworld, rose through the 
earth in his chariot, seized her, and carried her away 
to be his queen. 



The Winter's Tale 127 

IV. iv. 134. Whitsun pastorals. A pastoral is a 
play of country life; and a Whitsun play would be 
one given at Whitsuntide, the seventh Sunday after 
Easter, although we have no evidence elsewhere that 
plays given then were pastorals. 

IV. iv. 195, 196. Dildos, fadings, 'jump her and 
thump her' were all catch words from the anything 
but 'delicate' refrains of certain popular songs and 
ballads. 

IV. iv. 252. tawdry lace. This necklace or neck- 
tie of silk derived its name from Saint Audrey 
(Ethelreda), who believed a tumor which came in her 
throat to be a divine judgment on her for her vanity 
earlier in wearing beautiful necklaces. 

IV. iv. 412. altering rheums. Morbid disarrange- 
ment of the four humours (see note on II. iii. 38), a 
condition producing rheumatism, catarrh, and the dis- 
eases characteristic of old age. 

IV. iv. 611. pomander. A little ball of perfumes 
worn in the pocket or about the neck as a preventive 
against the plague. 

V. i. 141-143. 'But that the infirmity which comes 
with age has somewhat stolen from him (seized) the 
traveling ability which he wishes for.' 

V. i. 207. Probably, 'the odds are as great against 
me in my princely role of Florizel as they were in my 
humble role of Doricles.' 

V. ii. 61. Conduits were often in the shape of 
human figures. 

V. ii. 109. Julio Romano. This Italian painter 
was born in 1492, the year of America's discovery; 
and the worship of Apollo's oracle ceased among 
Mediterranean kings about a thousand years before 
that. Both Shakespeare and his audience had a 
sublime indifference to such anachronisms in a well- 
told story. 

V. iii. 67. 'Though her eye be fixed, yet it seems 
to have motion in it.' (Edwards.) 



APPENDIX A 
Sources of the Play 

The Winter's Tale is an excellent example of a 
novel turned into a play. That practice was common 
in Elizabethan times as in recent years; but with 
this difference, that the drama in Shakespeare's time 
was usually an improvement on the novel and in our 
own day is usually a popularized degradation of the 
original. The novel — or novelette, for it can be read 
in an hour — from which Shakespeare drew most of 
the plot of his Winter's Tale was Pandosto: the 
Triumph of Time (or The Historie of Dorastus and 
Fawnia), which first appeared in 1588 and was a 
'best-seller' for years before Shakespeare dramatized 
it. At least fourteen editions of it are known to have 
been issued. Its author was Robert Greene, a bril- 
liant and unfortunate author, who died near the 
beginning of Shakespeare's career, and died bitterly 
jealous of that transforming genius which was al- 
ready giving hints of the masterpieces it could make 
from other men's crude materials. 

In Greene's novel Pandosto, king of Bohemia, with 
his wife Bellaria entertains as his guest his old friend 
Egistus, king of Sicilia. Pandosto, like Leontes, 
becomes jealous, but more slowly and with more 
reason, for Bellaria, though pure, is imprudent. 
Franion, his cup-bearer, promises murder and es- 
capes, as does Camillo. Bellaria, like Hermione, is 
accused, cleared by the oracle, and actually — not 
apparently — dies on learning the death of her son 
Garinter. Her little daughter Fawnia is abandoned 
on the coast of Sicilia, brought up by a shepherd, and 
loved by Prince Dorastus of that country. Capnio, 
a faithful old servant of Dorastus, aids the young 



The Winter's Tale 129 

lovers in their flight, as does Camillo, and brings the 
shepherd and 'fardel' aboard Dorastus' ship as does 
Shakespeare's Autolycus. The reception of the lovers 
at the court of Pandosto and the discovery of Fawnia's 
identity run closely parallel to the same events in the 
play, save that Pandosto, before learning Fawnia's 
parentage, conceives an incestuous love for his own 
daughter. After Fawnia's marriage Pandosto, grown 
melancholy with brooding over his sins against those 
whom he loved best, kills himself. 

Shakespeare in recasting Greene's material omitted 
as too tragic and brutal the incestuous passion and 
violent death of Pandosto, and threw out as imperti- 
nent several paragraphs dealing with the life of the 
old shepherd. He created the characters of Anti- 
gonus, Paulina, and Autolycus, and combined the 
parts of Franion and Capnio in that of Camillo. He 
created the statue scene which ends the play, and the 
scene between Perdita and Polixenes (IV. iv.), for 
which there were no hints in the prose tale. By 
interchanging throughout the parts of Bohemia and 
Sicily he probably meant to veil the extent of his 
debt to a book that was still popular, although he 
may have believed that the suddenness of Leontes' 
jealousy would seem truer to life in a hot-blooded 
Sicilian than in a native of Central Europe. As is 
almost inevitable when changing a novel into a play, 
the action is made more rapid. For example, in the 
second scene of Act First events which in Greene's 
novel covered several weeks are made to happen in 
a single hour. The greatest change, however, and 
the greatest improvement, is in the conception of 
character, which throughout is more noble and 
subtle in Shakespeare than in his forerunner. 

The closeness of Shakespeare at times to his origi- 
nal can be shown by comparing Hermione's defence 
(III. ii. 23-117) with the corresponding speech of 
Bellaria : 



130 The Winter's Tale 

'If the deuine powers bee priuy to humane actions 
(as no doubt they are) I hope my patience shall make 
fortune blushe, and my vnspotted life shall staine 
spightfuUy discredit. For although lying Report 
hath sought to appeach mine honor, and Suspition 
hath intended to soyle my credit with infamie: yet 
where Vertue keepeth the Forte, Report and suspition 
may assayle, but neuer sack: how I haue led my life 
before Egistus comming, I appeale Pandosto to the 
Gods & to thy conscience. What hath passed betwixt 
him and me, the Gods onely know, and I hope will 
presently reueale: that I loued Egistus I can not 
denie: that I honored him I shame not to confesse: to 
the one I was forced by his vertues, to the other for 
his dignities. But as touching lasciuious lust, I say 
Egistus is honest, and hope my selfe to be found 
without spot: for Franion, I can neither accuse him 
nor excuse him, for I was not priuie to his departure, 
and that this is true which I haue heere rehearsed, I 
refer re my selfe to the deuine Oracle.' [ed. Grosart, 
4. 260.] 

Vague likenesses between The Winter's Tale and 
certain other books have been pointed out ; but none 
are close enough to prove borrowing on Shakespeare's 
part. 



APPENDIX B 
The History op the Play 

The Winter's Tale was first 'allowed of,' or offi- 
cially approved for performance, by Sir George Buck, 
who assumed office as Master of the Revels in 1610; 
consequently, although Buck did license plays before 
taking office, we may reasonably assume that it was 
not written previous to that year. Yet it was already 
on the stage by May 15, 1611, for a Dr. Simon 
Forman saw it acted on that date and has left a 
written record of the fact with an analysis of the plot. 
The dance of twelve satyrs in IV. iv. was probably 
suggested by a similar dance of satyrs in Ben Jonson's 
Masque of Oheron, first acted on the opening day of 
January, 1611. It seems practically certain, there- 
fore, that the play was finished and first staged in the 
spring of 1611. It was for several years following a 
favorite at court, and in 1613 was acted with several 
other Shakespearean dramas before the Prince Pala- 
tine and his bride. No Quarto editions of it exist; 
apparently it first appeared in print in the Folio of 
1623. 

After Shakespeare's death the play, despite its 
beauty, was unpopular and almost unnoticed for over 
a century, more so than many of the author's other 
works. Certain fantastic qualities in it — the sea- 
coast of Bohemia, a country which for centuries had 
no seacoast, and the sixteen-year interval between 
the third and fourth acts — jarred on the new age, an 
age which was more fastidious in such matters than 
the imaginative Elizabethans had been. 

In 1741, however. The Winter's Tale — 'not acted 
100 years,' according to the historian Genest — was 
revived at Goodman's Fields, and the following year 
at the more famous theatre of Covent Garden. Soon 
afterward several adaptations of parts of it were 



132 The Winter's Tale 

made, the most notable being that of the great actor 
David Garrick (1717-1779), which was played at 
Drury Lane theatre in 1756. The play in Garrick's 
adaptation begins with what was Shakespeare's fourth 
act. The events of sixteen years earlier are rehearsed 
for the benefit of the audience in a conversation 
between Camillo and a gentleman. Then the repent- 
ant Leontes comes to Bohemia, takes part with 
Polixenes and Perdita in the conversation at the 
shepherd's feast, and assumes the part which Shake- 
speare gave Camillo of comforting the lovers. 
Florizel and Perdita do not take ship ; and the closing 
statue scene is in Bohemia. Garrick's version was 
popular for more than a generation. The prosaic 
ingenuity with which he dovetailed together parts of 
Shakespeare's great work is well illustrated in the 
following passage: 

Perd. One of these is true, 
I think aflEliction may subdue the cheek. 
But not take in the mind. 

Leon. Yea, say you so.^* 
There shall not at your father's house, these sev'n years. 
Be born another such. 

Flor. O reverend. Sir! 
As you would wish a child of your own youth 
To meet his happiness in love, speak for me; 
Remember since you ow'd no more to time 
Than I do now ; and with thought of like affections. 
Step forth my advocate. 

Leon. You touch me deep. 
Deep, to the quick, sweet prince ; alas ! alas ! 
I lost a daughter, that 'twixt heaven and earth 
Might thus have stood begetting wonder, as 
Yon lovely maiden does — of that no more; — 
I'll to the king your father, — this our compact. 
Your honour not o'erthrown by your desires, 
I am friend to them and you. 

[Ea;it Leontes and Cleomenes. 



The Winter's Tale 133 

The history of the play during the nineteenth cen- 
tury begins with its revival by John Philip Kemble 
(1757-1823). In 1802 he presented it with splendid 
decorations and stage properties, the famous Mrs. 
Siddons, who was Kerable's sister, taking the part of 
Hermione. The comedy was revived again in 1856 
by Charles Kean (1811-1868) at the Princess's 
theatre, where Ellen Terry, then a little girl, made 
her first appearance on the stage as Mamillius. 
Helen Faucit (1817-1898) about the middle of the 

century, and Mary Anderson (1859 ) toward its 

close, gave brilliant interpretations of the leading 
female roles. In 1910 in New York The Winter's Tale 
was admirably produced under the direction of Mr. 
Louis Calvert 'with such a stage and accessories as, 
according to the latest researches, Shakespeare had 
at his own command.' The most important presenta- 
tion since then has been the one given by Mr. Gran- 
ville Barker. 



APPENDIX C 

The Text of the Present Edition 

The text of the present volume is, by permission of 
the Oxford University Press, that of the Oxford 
Shakespeare, edited by the late W. J. Craig, except 
for the following deviations: 

1. The stage directions and the list of dramatis 
personce are those of the First Folio, any alterations 
and additions being enclosed in square brackets. The 
Folio numbering of scenes in the fourth act has been 
followed. 

2. A few minor changes in punctuation (such as 
good now, for good now in V. i. 19) and in spelling 
(such as primroses for prime-roses in IV. iv. 122) 
have been made. 

3. The following alterations, all reversions to the 
readings of the First Folio, have been made in the 
text, the reading of the Folio and the present text 
preceding the colon, and that of Craig following it: 

I. ii. 70 nor dreamed: no nor dreamed 

1. 11.149 Leon. What cheer?: Pol. What cheer? 

I. ii. 264 free of. But: free of: but 

II. ill. 161 this: thy 

II. ill. 177 it: its 

II. ill. 189 does: doth 

III. 11. 177 What flaying? boiling: What flaying? or 

what boiling 

III. 11. 244 To: Unto 
III. ill. 59 ten: sixteen 

IV. iv. 594 our: her 



APPENDIX D 

Suggestions for Collateral Reading 

William Hazlitt in Characters of Shakespeare's 
Plays (1817). (Everyman's Library edition, pp. 
213-219.) 

Mrs. Anna Jameson in Characteristics of Women, 
Moral, Poetical and Historical (1833). 

Mary Cowden Clarke: 'Hermione; The Russian 
Princess' in The Girlhood of Shakespeare's Heroines 
(1850-1852). (Everyman's Library edition, vol. iii.) 

A. C. Swinburne in A Study of Shakespeare (1880). 

Helena Faucit, Lady Martin: On Some of Shake- 
speare's Female Characters, Letter no. ix. 'Hermione' 
(1890). 

Andrew Lang: The Comedies of Shakespeare. 
With illustrations by E. A. Abbey, and comment by 
Andrew Lang. XII. The Winter's Tale. Harper's 
Magazine, April, 1894, vol. Ixxxviii, pp. 710-720. 

Barrett Wendell in William Shakespeare (1894). 

H. H. Furness : A New Variorum Edition of Shake- 
speare. Vol. xi. The Winter's Tale (1898). 

L. A. Sherman in What is Shakespeare? (1902). 

Brander Matthews in Shakespeare as a Playwright 
(1913). 



INDEX OF WORDS GLOSSED 



(Figures in full-faced type refer to page-numbers) 



aboard him: 97 (IV. iv. 874) 
abus'd: 28 (II. i. 140) 
access: 111 (V. ii. 124) 
action: 27 (II. i. 120) 
address yourself: 67 (IV. iv. 

53) 
adheres: 58 (IV. i. 28) 
admirable conceited: 73 (IV. 



admiration: 108 (V. ii. 12) 
adventure (n.): 104 (V. i. 

156); (vb.) 4 (I. ii. 38) 
afar off: 26 (II. i. 103) 
affection: 122 (I. ii. 139) 
affection of: 109 (V. ii. 40) 
affect'st: 82 (IV. iv. 433) 
affront: 101 (V. i. 75) 
against: 74 (IV. iv. 237) 
aired, been: 58 (IV. ii. 5) 
a-life: 75 (IV. iv. 263) 
allowing: 11 (I. ii. 185) 
amazedly: 105 (V. i. 187) 
an: 93 (IV. iv. 739) 
ancientry: 54 (III. iii. 62) 
angle: 60 (IV. ii. 51) 
anon: 76 (IV. iv. 276) 
another: 72 (IV. iv. 176) 
ape: 111 (V. ii. 112) 
ape-bearer: 64 (IV. iii. 102) 
apparent: 10 (I. ii. 177); 

14 (I. ii. 270) 
appear: 88 (IV. iv. 602) 
appoint: 16 (I. ii. 326) 
appointed: 88 (IV. iv. 605) 
approbation: 124 (II. i. 

176) 
approved: 59 (IV. ii. 31) 
aqua-vitae: 96 (IV. iv. 
argument: 58 (IV. i. l 



as: 72 (IV. iv. 185) 
aspect: 26 (II. i. 106) 
at friend: 103 (V. i. 140) 
attach: 105 (V. i. 182) 
attorneyed: 2 (I. i. 30) 
aunts: 61 (IV. iii. 11) 
avoid: 21 (I. ii. 462) 

barne: 54 (III. iii. 70) 
basilisk: 19 (I. ii. 388) 
bawcock: 8 (I. ii. 122) 
bearing-cloth: 56 (III. iii. 

119) 
becomes: 105 (V. i. 187) 
bed-swerver: 26 (II. i. 92) 
bench'd: 16 (I. ii. 314) 
bend: 104 (V. i. 165) 
bents: 10 (I. ii. 179) 
beseech: 1 (I. i. 11) 
beshrew: 31 (II. ii. 30) 
bespice: 16 (I. ii. 316) 
between's: 3 (I. ii. 18) 
beyond account: 41 (II. iii. 

197) 
bide: 13 (I. ii. 242) 
blank: 33 (II. iii. 5) 
blench: 17 (I. ii. 333) 
blocks: 12 (I. ii. 225) 
blusters: 52 (III. iii. 4) 
bodkin: 55 (III. iii. 87) 
Bohemia: 1 (I. i. 7) 
boiled brains: 54 (III. iii. 

63) 
bolted: 79 (IV. iv. 377) 
boot: 43 (III. ii. 26) 
borrow: 4 (I. ii. 39) 
bosom: 87 (IV. iv. 576) 
bourn: 8 (I. ii. 135) 
bowget: 61 (IV. iii. 20) 



The Winter's Tale 



137 



branch: 2 (I. i. 27) 
brave: 73 (IV. iv. 202) 
break-neck: 18 (I. ii. 363) 
breed: 125 (III. iii. 47) 
bring him up to liking: 86 

(IV. iv. 546) 
bug: 46 (III. ii. 93) 
bugle-bracelet: 74 (IV. iv. 



burdens: 73 (IV. iv. 195) 
by and by: 85 (IV. iv. 519) 

caddisses: 73 (IV. iv. 208) 
callat: 37 (II. iii. 90) 
came home: 12 (I. ii. 214) 
cap-a-pe: 94 (IV. iv. 764) 
caparison: 61 (IV. iii. 27) 
carbonadoed: 75 (IV. iv. 

267) 
carriage: 42 (III. i. 17) 
case: 97 (IV. iv. 849) 
cases: 108 (V. ii. 14) 
censure: 24 (II. i. 36) 
centre: 26 (II. i. 101) 
chamber-councils: 13 (I. ii. 

237) 
chang'd: 6 (I. ii. 68) 
changeling: 56 (III. iii. 122) 
character: 53 (III. iii. 46); 

109 (V. ii. 39) 
charge: 4 (I. ii. 26); 75 

(IV. iv. 260) 
chase: 54 (III. iii. 5Q) 
child: 54 (III. iii. 71) 
childness: 10 (I. ii. 170) 
choughs: 89 (IV. iv. 632) 
churl: 82 (IV. iv. 445) 
clamour: 75 (IV. iv. 250) 
clap: 7 (I. ii. 104) 
clear them o': 21 (I. ii. 439) 
clerk-like: 19 (I. ii. 392) 
climate: 104 (V. i. 170) 
clipping: 109 (V. ii. 59) 
clouded: 14 (I. ii. 280) 
clown: 54 (III. iii. 79) 
cock: 62 (IV. iii. 36) 
codpiece: 89 (IV. iv. 625) 



co-heirs: 28 (II. i. 147) 
collop: 9 (I. ii. 138) 
colour: 87 (IV. iv. 568) 
colouring: 31 (II. ii. 20) 
comforting your evils: 35 

(II. iii. 5Q) 
commend: 40 (II. iii. 181) 
commission: 4 (I. ii. 40) 
commit: 35 (II. iii. 49) 
conunodity: 46 (III. ii. 94) 
compassed: 64 (IV. iii. 103) 
compters: 62 (IV. iii. 38) 
conceit: 12 (I. ii. 224) ; 48 

(III. ii. 145) 
concerns more than avails: 

45 (III. ii. 87) 
conjecture: 124 (II. i. 175) 
considered: 96 (IV. iv. 829) 
content: 114 (V. iii. 11) 
continue: 20 (I. ii. 430) 
contrary: 18 (I. ii. 372) 
cop'st: 82 (IV. iv. 437) 
cordial: 117 (V. iii. 77) 
cozened: 75 (IV. iv. 253) 
crack: 16 (I. ii. 322) 
crown imperial: 70 (IV. iv. 

126) 
curious: 85 (IV. iv. 527) 
curst: 56 (III. iii. 135) 
custom: 111 (V. ii. Ill) 
Cyprus: 74 (IV. iv. 221) 
Cytherea's: 70 (IV. iv. 122) 

dam: 9 (I. ii. 138) 
dame Partlet: 36 (II. iii. 75) 
dead: 82 (IV. iv. 447) 
dear: 39 (II. iii. 149) 
Delphos: 124 (II. i. 182) 
denied: 112 (V. ii. 145) 
Deucalion: 82 (IV. iv. 444) 
dibble: 69 (IV. iv. 100) 
die: 61 (IV. iii. 27) 
difference: 66 (IV. iv. 17) 
dildos: 127 (IV. iv. 195) 
Dis: 126 (IV. iv. 118) 
disease: 90 (IV. iv. 651) 



138 



The Winter's Tale 



discontenting: 86 (IV. iv. 

disco ver'd: 24 (II. i. 49) 
discovery: 21 (I. ii. 441) 
disliken: 91 (IV. iv. 669) 
dismantle: 91 (IV. iv. 669) 
dispute: 81 (IV. iv. 413) 
dole: 10 (I. ii. 163) 
double: 118 (V. iii. 107) 
doxy: 60 (IV. iii. i2) 
drab: 61 (IV. iii. 27) 

each: 34 (II. iii. 35) 

each your doing: 71 (IV. iv. 

143) 
earnest: 90 (IV. iv. 662) 
encounter: 44 (III. ii. 50) 
encounters: 2 (I. i. 29) 
enfoldings: 94 (IV. iv. 759) 
equal with wondering: 58 

(IV. i. 25) 
estate: 81 (IV. iv. 413) 
eternity: 111 (V. ii. 109) 
event: 42 (III. i. 11) 
excrement: 93 (IV. iv. 736) 
execution: 14 (I. ii. 260) 
expedition: 123 (I. ii. 458) 
extremes: 65 (IV. iv. 6) 
eye-glass: 14 (I. ii. 268) 

fact: 45 (III. ii. 86) 
fadings: 127 (IV. iv. 195) 
fail: 40 (II. iii. 169); 99 

(V. i. 27) 
faith: 66 (IV. iv. 35) 
falling: 18 (I. ii. 372) 
fancy: 84 (IV. iv. 495) 
far: 82 (IV. iv. 444) 
fardel: 93 (IV. iv. 729) 
fashion: 46 (III. ii. 105) 
favour: 109 (V. ii. 54) 
featly: 72 (IV. iv. 176) 
federary: 26 (II. i. 89) 
feeding: 72 (IV. iv. 169) 
feeling: 58 (IV. ii. 8) 
fellows: 39 (II. iii. 142) 
fertile: 8 (I. ii. 114) 



fetch ofP: 17 (I. ii. 334) 
fixure: 127 (V. iii. 67) 
flap-dragoned: 125 (III. iii. 

100) 
flatness: 47 (III. ii. 123) 
flaunts: 66 (IV. iv. 23) 
flax-wench: 14 (I. ii. 277) 
flower-de-luce: 70 (IV. iv. 

127) 
fond: 82 (IV. iv. 439) 
fools: 27 (II. i. 117) 
for: 53 (III. iii. 31) 
for you: 23 (II. i. 22) 
forc'd: 67 (IV. iv. 41) 
forced baseness: 36 (II. iii. 

78) 
forceful instigation: 29 (II. 

i. 162) 
forfend: 86 (IV. iv. 543) 
fork'd one: 11 (I. ii. 186) 
forward of her breeding: 88 

(IV. iv. 593) 
fram'd: 101 (V. i. 91) 
franklins: 113 (V. ii. 181) 
fraught: 85 (IV. iv. 537) 
free: 7 (I. ii. 113) ; 30 (II. 

i. 193) ; 32 (II. ii. 44) 
freedom: 1 (I. i. 12) 
fresh: 82 (IV. iv. 435) 
front: 65 (IV. iv. 3) 
furnish'd: 88 (IV. iv. 601) 

gainsay: 44 (III. ii. 57) 
gallimaufry: 78 (IV. iv. 

337) 
geld: 89 (IV. iv. 625) 
gentle: 19 (I. ii. 394) 
gentry: 19 (I. ii. 393) 
germane: 95 (IV. iv. 805) 
gest: 4 (I. ii. 41) 
gillyvors: 68 (IV. iv. 82) 
give you out: 71 (IV. iv. 

149) 
glass: 15 (I. ii. 306) 
glib: 28 (II. i. 148) 
glisters: 49 (III. ii. 171) 
go about: 74 (IV. iv. 219) 



The Winter's Tale 



139 



go to: 92 (IV. iv. 710) 
good deed: 4 (I. ii. 42) 
good masters: 114 (V. ii. 

19T) 
good now: 98 (V. i. 19) 
gorge: 24 (II. i. 43) 
gossips: 35 (II. iii. 41) 
got: 37 (II. iii. 104) 
grace to boot: 6 (I. ii. 80) 
graceful: 105 (V. i. 171) 
gracious: 42 (III. i. 22); 59 

(IV. ii. 30) 
grafted: 13 (I. ii. 246) 
grange: 77 (IV, iv. 309) 
grieving: 57 (IV. i. 18) 
guilty to: 86 (IV. iv. 551) 
gust: 12 (I. ii. 219) 

habited: 86 (IV. iv. 559) 
habits: 42 (III. i. 4) 
hammer'd of: 32 (II. ii. 49) 
hand: 36 (II. iii. 63) 
handed: 78 (IV. iv. 360) 
hand-fast: 95 (IV. iv. 798) 
having: 93 (IV. iv. 743) 
heaping friendships: 59 (IV. 

ii. 22) 
heat: 7 (I. ii. 96) 
heavina:s: 34 (II. iii. 35) 
hefts: 24 (II. i. 44) 
hent: 65 (IV. iii. 134) 
here with me: 12 (I. ii. 217) 
hobby-horse: 14 (I. ii. 276) 
honest: 25 (II. i. 67) 
honesty: 15 (I. ii. 288) 
hopeful: 44 (III. ii. 41) 
boxes: 13 (I. ii. 244) 
humour: 124 (II. iii. 38) 

1' fecks: 8 (I. ii. 121) 
ignorant: 19 (I. ii. 397) 
immodest: 46 (III. ii. 103) 
impawn'd: 21 (I. ii. 436) 
importance: 108 (V. ii. 20) 
imposition: 121 (I. ii, 74) 
incense: 100 (V. i. 61) 
incertain: 99 (V. i. 29) 



incertainties : 49 (III. ii. 

170) 
incidency: 19 (I. ii. 403) 
injury of tongues: 17 (I. ii. 

338^ 
inkles: 73 (IV. iv. 208) 
innocence: 110 (V. ii. 71) 
insinuate: 94 (IV. iv. 763) 
intelligence: 59 (IV. ii. 41) 
intelligencing: 36 (II. iii. 

68) 
inteUigent: 18 (I. ii. 378) 
intention: 122 (I. ii, 139) 
interpretation should abuse: 

79 (IV. iv. 365) 
is put forth: 3 (I. ii. 14) 
issue: 11 (I. ii. 188) 
it: 40 (II. iii. 177) 

jar: 5 (I. ii. 43) 
jewel: 108 (V. ii. 37) 
Julio Romano: 127 (V. ii. 

109) 
justified: 120 (V. iii. 145) 
justify: 110 (V. ii. 72) 

keep: 52 (III. iii. 12) 
kiln-hole: 75 (IV. iv, 247) 
knacks: 79 (IV. iv, 361) 
knock: 61 (IV. iii. 28) 

lace: 49 (III. ii. 174) 
Lady Margery: 39 (II. iii. 

159) 
land-damn: 123 (II. i. 142) 
land-service: 55 (III. iii. 

96) 
large: 71 (IV. iv. 147) 
lawns: 73 (IV. iv. 209) 
lays it on: 62 (IV. iii. 43) 
let: 4 (I. ii. 41) 
level: 33 (II, iii. 6) 
like (adj.): 31 (II. ii. 27) 
like (vb.) : 93 (IV. iv. 739) 
limber: 5 (I. ii, 47) 
list: 58 (IV. i, 26) 
lively: 115 (V. iii. 19) 



140 



The Winter's Tale 



looks: 79 (IV. iv. 370) 
loss: 40 (II. iii. 191) 
lozel: 37 (II. iii. 108) 
lunes: 31 (II. ii. 30) 

make me not sighted: 19 

(I. ii. 388) 
maliciously: 16 (I. ii. 321) 
mankind: 36 (II. iii. 67) 
marble: 110 (V. ii. 100) 
mark o' the land: 65 (IV. 

iv. 8) 
marry: 57 (III. iii. 140) 
marted: 79 (IV. iv, 364) 
marvel: 105 (V. i. 188) 
match: 119 (V. iii. 137) 
material: 12 (I. ii. 216) 
mean: 69 (IV. iv. 89) 
meaner form: 16 (I. ii. 313) 
means: 62 (IV. iii. 46) 
measure (n.): 94 (IV. iv. 

760) 
measure (vb.): 27 (II. i. 

113) 
meddler: 77 (IV. iv. 331) 
meet: 32 (II. ii. 46) 
men of hair: 78 (IV. iv. 

335) 
Mercury: 125 (IV. iii. 35) 
mere: 47 (III. ii. 143) 
messes: 12 (I. ii. 237) 
minded: 51 (III. ii. 326) 
mingle faith: 83 (IV. iv. 

473) 
minister: 32 (II. ii. 50) 
missingly: 59 (IV. ii. 34) 
moe: 3 (I. ii. 8) 
moiety: 33 (II. iii. 8) 
mort o' the deer: 8 (I. ii. 

119) 
most worst: 49 (III. ii. 180) 
motion: 64 (IV. iii. 104) 

nayward: 25 (II. i. 63) 
neat: 8 (I. ii. 126) 
neat-herds: 78 (IV. iv. 334) 
neb: 10 (I. ii. 183) 



negative: 122 (I. ii. 274) 

next: 56 (III. iii. 129) 

no more but abide: 64 (IV. 

iii. 99) 
note: 2 (I. i. 40); 3 (I. ii. 

2); 60 (IV. ii. 47); 62 

(IV. iii. 50) 
notes: 108 (V. ii. 12) 
nothing: 115 (V. iii. 28) 

o'er-dy'd blacks: 8 (I. ii. 

133) 
o'erween: 58 (IV. ii. 9) 
of: 49 (III. ii. 187) 
of force: 82 (IV. iv. 436) 
of limit: 46 (III. ii. 107) 
offer: 95 (IV. iv. 808) 
offic'd with: 10 (I. ii. 172) 
offices: 104 (V. i. 149) 
on: 33 (II. iii. 15) 
on foot: 1 (I. i. 3) 
one self -born: 57 (IV. i. 8) 
or ... or: 20 (I. ii. 428) 
out: 25 (II. i. 71) 
out of circumstance: 101 

(V. i. 90) 
overture: 29 (II. I. 171) 
owe: 44 (III. ii. 39) 

pantler: 67 (IV. iv. 5Q) 
part: 3 (I. ii. 10) 
partake to: 119 (V. iii. 132) 
particular: 71 (IV. iv. 144) 
parts: 19 (I. ii. 400) 
pash: 8 (I. ii. 129) 
passage: 46 (III. ii. 91) 
passing: 76 (IV. iv. 292) 
pattern: 44 (III. ii. 37) 
peer: 60 (IV. iii. 1) 
peering: 65 (IV. iv. 3) 
pennyworth: 90 (IV. iv. 

653) 
perdition: 80 (IV. iv. 391) 
perfect: 52 (III. iii. 1) 
personal: 2 (I. i. 30) 
pettitoes: 89 (IV. iv. 621) 



The Winter's Tale 



141 



physics the subject: 2 (I. i. 

43) 
picture: 89 (IV. iv. 617); 

114 (V. ii. 196) 
piece (n.): 115 (V. iii. 38) 
piece (vb.): HI (V. ii. 121) 
piece up in himself: 116 (V. 

iii. 56) 
pin and web: 15 (I. ii. 391) 
pinch'd: 24 (II. i. 50) 
place: 25 (II. i. 82) 
places: 21 (I. ii. 448) 
plackets: 75 (IV. iv. 245) 
please you: 27 (II. i. 130) 
plucking: 83 (IV. iv. 478) 
point you forth: 87 (IV. iv. 

574) 
points: 73 (IV. iv. 206) 
poking-sticks : 74 (IV. iv. 

228) 
pomander: 127 (IV. iv. 611) 
post: 29 (II. i. 181) 
posterns: 21 (I. ii. 438) 
practice: 49 (III. ii. 168) 
prank'd up: 65 (IV. iv. 10) 
predominant: 11 (I. ii. 202). 
pregnant by circumstance : 

108 (V. ii. 34) 
preposterous: 113 (V. ii. 

167) 
present: 14 (I. ii. 281) 
presently: 32 (II. ii. 47) 
pretence: 43 (III. ii. 18) 
prig: 64 (IV. iii. 109) 
principal: 26 (II. i. 91) 
profess'd: 21 (I. ii. 456) 
professors else: 102 (V. i. 

108) 
prognostication: 96 (IV. iv. 

821) 
proper: 39 (II. iii. 139) 
publish'd: 26 (II. i. 97) 
pugging: 60 (IV. iii. 7) 
purchased: 61 (IV. iii. 27) 
purgation: 43 (III. ii. 7) 
push: 119 (V. iii. 129) 
put us to 't: 3 (I. ii. 16) 



puts forth: 13 (I. ii. 254) 
puts to: 14 (I. ii. 277) 
putter-on: 28 (II. i. 140) 

qualified: 27 (II. i. 112) 
qualify: 86 (IV. iv. 545) 
question: 16 (I. ii. 324); 60 

(IV. ii. 54) 
quick: 70 (IV. iv. 132) 
quoifs: 74 (IV. iv. 226) 

race: 62 (IV. iii. 51) 
raisins o' the sun: 62 (IV. 

iii. 52) 
rash: 16 (I. ii. 319) 
reason: 81 (IV. iv. 419) 
receiv'd: 57 (IV. i. 11) 
regard: 19 (I. ii. 390) 
relation: 119 (V. iii. 130) 
relish: 29 (II. i. 166) 
relished: 112 (V. ii. 137) 
remember: 51 (III. ii. 231) 
removed: 111 (V. ii. 120) 
removedness: 59 (IV. ii. 40) 
repair: 99 (V. i. 31) 
replenish'd: 25 (II. i. 78) 
require: 40 (II. iii. 189) 
resolve you: 117 (V. iii. 86) 
respecting: 99 (V. i. 35) 
review: 91 (IV. iv. 683) 
rheums: 127 (IV. iv. 412) 
ribands: 73 (IV. iv. 205) 
richly noted: 120 (V. iii. 

145) 
rift: 100 (V. i. QQ) 
ripe moving to 't: 16 (I. ii. 

332) 
rounding: 12 (I. ii. 217) 

sad: 77 (IV. iv. 318) 
saffron: 62 (IV. iii. 48) 
saltiers: 78 (IV. iv. 336) 
sap: 87 (IV. iv. 578) 
savour: 68 (IV. iv. 75) 
scape: 54 (III. iii. 72) 
scour: 23 (II. i. 34) 
sealing: 17 (I. ii. 337) 



142 



The Winter's Tale 



second: 34 (II. iii. 27) 
seeming: 68 (IV. iv. 75) 
senseless: 89 (IV. iv. 625) 
servant: 101 (V. i. 84) 
severals: 12 (I. ii. 226) 
shall 's: 10 (I. ii. 178) 
she: 79 (IV. iv. 361) 
shoots: 8 (I. ii. 129) 
shore: 97 (IV. iv. 875) 
'shrew: 14 (I. ii. 281) 
shrewdly: 102 (V. i. 102) 
Sicilia: 2 (I. i. 23) 
silly cheat: 61 (IV. iii. 28) 
since: 106 (V. i. 219) 
singular: 71 (IV. iv. 144) 
singularities: 114 (V. iii. 

13) 
sitting: 87 (IV. iv. 574) 
skill: 71 (IV. iv. 152) 
sleeve-hand: 73 (IV. iv. 

212) 
slippery: 14 (I. ii. 273) 
smock: 73 (IV. iv. 211) 
smutch'd: 8 (I. ii. 122) 
sneaping: 121 (I. ii. 13) 
soaking: 12 (I. ii. 224) 
solely: 34 (II. iii. 17) 
something: 9 (I. ii. 148) 
sooth: 71 (IV. iv. 160) 
sord: 71 (IV. iv. 157) 
so that: 22 (II. i. 9) 
sovereignly: 16 (I. ii. 323) 
sped: 19 (I. ii. 389) 
speed: 48 (III. ii. 146) 
spices: 49 (III. ii. 185) 
sprightly: 67 (IV. iv. 53) 
springe: 62 (IV. iii. 36) 
squar'd: 53 (III. iii. 40) 
squar'd me: 100 (V. i. 52) 
squash: 10 (I. ii. 161) 
squier: 78 (IV. iv. 350) 
squire's: 56 (III. iii. 119) 
starr'd most unluckily: 46 

(III. ii. 100) 
state: 82 (IV. iv. 439) 
stay: 3 (I. ii. 9) 
still: 50 (III. ii. 213) 



stir: 50 (III. ii. 210) 
stomachers: 74 (IV. iv. 

226) 
strain'd: 44 (III. ii. 51) 
straited: 79 (IV. iv. 366) 
strangely: 40 (II. iii. 181) 
stretch-mouthed: 73 (IV. iv. 

196) 
strike: 11 (I. ii. 201) 
stufle'd sufficiency: 29 (II. 

i. 184) 
success: 19 (I. ii. 394) 
suddenly: 41 (II. iii. 199) 
superstitiously: 53 (III. iii. 

39) 
swear his thought over: 20 

(I. ii. 424) 
sweet: 74 (IV. iv. 222) 
swounded: 110 (V. ii. 101) 

table-book: 89 (IV. iv. 612) 
tabor: 72 (IV. iv. 183) 
take: 44 (III. ii. 38) 
take eggs for money: 10 

(I. ii. 162) 
take in: 87 (IV. iv. 590) 
taken: 12 (I. ii. 222) 
tall: 113 (V. ii. 185) 
tame things: 7 (I. ii. 92) 
tardied: 48 (III. ii. 163) 
tawdry lace: 75 (IV. iv. 

252) 
tell: 72 (IV. iv. 185) 
tender: 96 (IV. iv. 830) 
that: 2 (I. i. 32) 
thereabouts: 18 (I. ii. 378) 
thereto: 19 (I. ii. 391) 
thick my blood: 10 (I. ii. 

171) 
this': 120 (V. iii. 149) 
thorough: 49 (III. ii. 172) 
three-man song-men: 62 

(IV. iii. 45) 
three-pile: 61 (IV. iii. 14) 
thrifts: 16 (I. ii. 311) 
thriving: 32 (II. ii. 45) 
throughly: 26 (II. i. 98) 



The Winter's Tale 



143 



thwack: 4 (I. ii. 37) 
tincture: 50 (III. ii. 206) 
to: 91 (IV. iv. 682) 
toaze: 94 (IV. iv. 763) 
tods: 61 (IV. iii. 33) 
toys: 53 (III. iii. 38) 
tremor cordis: 7 (I. ii. Ill) 
trick: 24 (II. i. 50) 
trol-mv-dames : 63 (IV. iii. 

93) " 
trunk: 21 (I. ii. 435) 
tug: 84 (IV. iv. 510) 
turtles: 71 (IV. iv. 154) 

unbraided: 73 (IV. iv. 204) 
uncertain: 21 (I. ii. 441) 
unclasp'd: 49 (III. ii. 168) 
uncurrent: 44 (III. ii. 50) 
unfurnish: 103 (V. i. 123) 
unintelligent of: 1 (I. i. 15) 
unrolled: 65 (IV. iii. 131) 
unsphere: 121 (I. ii. 48) 
unthrifty to: 111 (V. ii. 

126) 
upon: 118 (V. iii. 100) 
utter: 77 (IV. iv. 



vast: 2 (I. i. 33) 
very sooth: 3 (I. ii. 17) 
vice: 20 (I. ii. 416) 
viUain: 9 (I. ii. 137) 
virginalling: 8 (I. ii. 126) 
vision: 14 (I. ii. 270) 
visitation: 1 (I. i. 7) 
vulgars: 26 (II. i. 93) 

wanton: 23 (II. i. 18) 
ward: 4 (I. ii. 33) 
warden: 62 (IV. iii. 49) 



watery star: 3 (I. ii. 1) 
way: 107 (V. i. 233) 
wearing: 65 (IV. iv. 9) 
weather-bitten: 109 (V. ii. 

61) 
weeds: 65 (IV. iv. 1) 
welkin: 9 (I. ii. 137) 
well to live: 56 (III. iii. 

125) 
wenches: 77 (IV. iv. 320) 
what: 96 (IV. iv. 825) 
what lady she: 5 (I. ii. 44) 
which: 2 (I. i. 26) 
Whitsun pastorals: 127 (IV. 

iv. 134) 
whoo-bub: 89 (IV. iv. 631) 
wild: 29 (II. i. 181) 
wink: 16 (I. ii. 317) 
winter's pale: 125 (IV. iii. 4) 
wit: 32 (II. ii. 52) 
with: 102 (V. i. 113) 
with a custom: 66 (IV. iv. 

12) 
with the manner: 94 (IV. 

iv. 754) 
withal: 92 (IV. iv. 699) 
without-door form: 25 (II. 

i. 68) 
woman-tir'd: 36 (II. iii. 74) 
wombs: 84 (IV. iv. 503) 
work about the square: 73 

(IV. iv. 212) 
worship: 16 (I. ii. 314) 
worth: 106 (V. i. 214) 
wotting: 45 (III. ii. 77) 
wrought: 116 (V. iii. 58) 

yellow: 37 (II. iii. 106) 
yest: 55 (III. iii. 95) 



