Digitized by the Internet Archive 

in 2008 with funding from 

IVIicrosoft Corporation 



http://www.archive.org/details/3edtragedyofking00shakuoft 



OFC 1 5 iqo? 



THE ARDEN SHAKESPEARE 
GENERAL EDITOR: W. J. CRAIG 
1899-1906: R. H. CASE, 1909 



THE TRAGEDY 

OF 

KING RICHARD THE THIRD 



*^ ^*^ 



THE WORKS 

OF 

SHAKESPEARE 

THE TRAGEDY OF 

KING RICHARD THE THIRD 

EDITED BY 
A. HAMILTON THOMPSON 



. ? 



^^ 






METHUEN AND CO. LTD. 

86 ESSEX STREET: STRAND 
LONDON 

Thircf Edition 



First Published . . August 22nd igoy 

Second Edition . . . August ^9^7 

Third Edition . igi8 






CONTENTS 



PAGB 



Introduction vii 

The Tragedy of King Richard the Third ... 7 

Appendix I. 211 

Appendix II 213 

Appendix III. ......... 215 

Appendix IV 220 



INTRODUCTION 

Six quarto editions of The Life and Death of Richard III. were 
published before the appearance of the folio of 1623. The 
title of the first quarto is : THE TRAGEDY OF | King Richard 
the third. | Containing, | His treacherous Plots against his 
brother Clarence: | the pittiefull murther of his innocent 
nephewes : | his tyrannicall vsurpation : with the whole course | 
of his detested life, and most deserued death. | As it hath beene 
lately Acted by the | Right honourable the Lord Chamber- | 
laine his seruants. | At LONDON | [Prijnted by Valentine Sims, 
for Andrew Wise, | dwelling in Paules Chuch-yard \sic\ at 
the I Signe of the Angell. | 1597. 

In the title of the second quarto (i 598), printed for Wise by 
Thomas Creede, the words " By William Shake-speare " occupy 
a new line after " seruants." The fourth, fifth, and sixth quartos 
also spell the author's name with a hyphen. The third quarto 
(1602), also printed by Creede, gives it as "Shakespeare," 
and adds, in a line above, the words " Newly augmented " 
followed by a comma, which appear in the titles of the re- 
maining quartos. The fourth (1605) and the fifth (1612) 
were printed by Creede for " Mathew Lawe, dwelling in Paules 
Church-yard, at the Signe of the Foxe, neare S. Austin's Gate." 
The title of the fifth alters the title of the actors to " the Kings 
Maiesties seruants." As the licence by virtue of which the 
Lord Chamberlain's players became the King's bears date 
19 May, 1603, this alteration probably should have appeared in 
the previous quarto. It occurs in the rest. The sixth quarto 
(1622) was printed for Law by Thomas Purfoot ; the seventh 
(1629) and eighth (1634) by John Norton. 

The title of the play in the first folio (1623) is: The 



viii INTRODUCTION 

Tragedy of Richard the Third : | with the Landing of Earle 
Richmond, and the | Battell at Bosworth Field. The pages 
are headed : The Life and Death of Richard the Third. The 
. play IS divided into acts and scenes. The fourth scene of 
Act III. includes scenes iv.-vii. as at present arranged. In Act IV. 
there are four scenes instead of five, scenes ii. and iii. beinsr 
treated as one. The second scene of Act v. embraces scenes ii.-v. 
of the modern editions. 

While the quarto editions present many internal variations, 
they form one text of the play which was derived originally 
from Q I, and in the remaining editions underwent steady de- 
generation. Q I is the basis of the text of Q 2 ; Q 2 supplies 
a basis for Q 3, and transmits to it, as a general rule, its own 
characteristic errors and variations. The rest of the quartos, 
with one possible exception, follow the same plan of reprinting 
the most recent edition, so that, in each, the accumulation of 
printer's errors and alterations grows. The Cambridge editors 
hold that Q 5 was printed, not from Q 4, but from Q 3. For 
the present edition a minute examination has been made of 
Qq 1-4 and O 6; but for Q 5 the editor has relied upon the 
Cambridge collation. But his impression is that of Mr. P. A. 
Daniel, who thinks that the Cambridge collation "suggests 
that Q 5 was printed from a copy made up of Q 3 and Q 4," 
It is sufficient to refer to the first scene of the play, where, at 
lines 8, 14, 39, 48, 71, the debt ot Q 5 to the errors of O 4 is 
perfectly manifest. Very probably, as the play advanced, the 
printer realised that he had been guilty of heinous mistakes 
in Q 4, and, to avoid them, consulted the copy which in 1602 he 
had printed for another bookseller. He may have referred, as 
at I. i. 65, to Q 2, which he also had printed, to correct an error 
shared by Q 3 and Q 4. But the assumption that O 5 was not, 
in the first place, printed from Q 4, involves a number of un- 
designed coincidences in error between the two editions, which 
are quite improbable. 

A point of greater textual importance is the statement, in 
Q 3 and its successors, that the play had been " newly augmented.' 
The possible bearing of these words on its authorship will be 
discussed later. As a matter of fact, the text received no 



INTRODUCTION ix 

augmentation in the later quartos. Q 3 is indeed responsible 
for numerous variations from its predecessors : many of these, 
where they happen to agree with readings in the folios, have 
taken their place in both the established versions of the text ; 
and it has been a very general opinion that Q 3 was used as one 
of the authorities for the first folio. But, even if we allow the 
highest importance to these readings, they cannot be described 
as "augmentations." It seems unjust to conclude that the 
printer wished to attract fresh customers by false pretences. 
Nor have we any evidence that the author, having guaranteed 
some additions, failed to make good his promise, and that the 
title-page, printed in anticipation of the fulfilment of that 
promise, could not be cancelled. The most probable sense 
which the words can be made to bear is, that the O text in all 
its forms is an augmentation of some earlier play, and that 
these words should have appeared on the title-pages of Q i 
and Q 2, as well as of the later quartos. 

The F text, which is common to all the folios, leaves the 
general form of the play unaltered ; but the variations from the 
Q text which it contains are so many and important, that the 
question of its derivation and independent value becomes a most 
intricate problem. The discrepancies between F and Q (as it 
is convenient, for the sdke of brevity, to call the two versions 
of which F I and Q i are the original forms) may be summed 
up under the following general heads : — 

(i) Lines or passages peculiar to F ; 

(2) Lines or passages peculiar to Q ; 

(3) Variations in lines, phrases, or single words, pointing 
to a possible revision of one version by the other ; 

(4) Variations in stage-directions. 

The problem which these points raise is concerned with the 
priority of the texts. Is F a revised and lengthened form ot 
Q ; or is Q a revised and shortened form of F ? Or, supposing 
them to be independent revisions of a common original, which 
should we prefer as the basis for a modem text of the play ? 

(i) There are in F about 196 lines of ordinary length, 15 
short lines, and 17 half-lines or parts of lines, which are additions 
to the text as represented by O. In some cases the omission 



X INTRODUCTION 

of these passages from O can be accounted for quite simply, e.g. 
at I. iv. 36, 37, where the first printer of Q evidently has united 
the beginning of one line to the end of the next, by a careless, 
but quite intelligible mistake, which the printer of F has not 
made. But there are many passages which, if they existed in 
the original text, cannot have been overlooked accidentally by 
the original editor or printer of Q. At I. ii. 155-66, II. ii. 89- 
100, III. vii. 144-53, IV. i. 97-103, IV. iv. 222-35, the F additions 
are of some length and importance; while at IV. iv. 291-345 the 
new matter amounts to 55 lines. It is obvious that, at the first 
appearance of Q in 1597, these passages either did not exist, or 
were omitted deliberately by the editor. In the first case, they 
must be later additions, forming part of a revision the result of 
which was F ; in the second case, they must have formed part 
of the original text, and, as such, establish a claim for F to 
represent the play as written by the author. 

(2) On the other hand, Q contains twenty-three ordinary 
and nineteen short lines which are not to be found in F. Of 
these, fourteen ordinary and four short lines occur in a single 
passage, viz. IV. ii, 98-115. When this is deducted from the 
rest, the matter peculiar to Q is seen to be inconsiderable. 
Either the editor of F omitted these lines, in some cases wil- 
fully, in others perhaps accidentally; or he had access to a 
text of the play which supplied the authority for their omission. 
That text, it is clear, either was revised by Q, or was itself a 
revision of Q. On the first supposition, these additions are 
easily explained : on the second, it is hard to see on what 
principle the reviser, while adding so much, cut out so little, 
and that little so unimportant ; while it is impossible to account 
for his omission of the one important passage in IV. ii. 

(3) The numerous minor differences between Q and F are 
recorded in the collation which accompanies this text. No 
attempt at their classification can be wholly satisfactory. In 
general, they are variations on words and phrases, and in- 
dicate that a very minute revision has been exercised, either 
on Q by the editor of F, or by the editor of Q on the text of 
which F is representative. Certain systematic differences may 
be noticed. For " which " in Q„we usually find "that" in F. 



INTRODUCTION xi 

Where Q has "betwixt," F has "between." In F we find 
greater metrical consistency throughout : h'nes which, in Q, are 
irregular or hypermetric, become smooth and regular. The 
passage at I. iv. 84-159, which is printed by Q in a kind of 
spurious verse, is arranged in F as prose. F also avoids 
repetitions, which occur in Q, of the same word in a few lines, 
or transposes words from their arrangement in Q. The 
student who compares the two texts for himself can hardly 
fail to recognise that, in point of regularity and order, the 
balance is in favour of F. 

(4) The stage-directions in F are fuller and more perfect 
than those in Q. Certain minor parts appear in F, which Q 
either neglects or partly suppresses. The result is a gain in 
clearness to F, although, in one case, the duplication of the 
part of Brakenbury in I. iv. by that of the Keeper, the alteration 
seems unnecessary. It is of course possible that the addition of 
entrances, exits, and other more minute directions may be en- 
tirely due to the editor of F ; and the utmost that they can 
be made to prove is his zeal for accuracy and definiteness. 

From the dates of publication, it is obvious that F, as a 
Printed text, is later than Q. Probably it was never edited for 
the press until a little before its appearance in 1623. Appear- 
ing at that time, it is probably a revision, to a certain extent, 
of Q, the hitherto accepted text of the play. There are three 
main possibilities with regard to the genesis of this revision. 
It may have been the arbitrary work of the editor. It may 
have been derived from an original source which was either 
inaccessible to the editor of Q, or was used by him with 
arbitrary alterations. Or, thirdly, it may represent a personal 
revision of the text by the author, after the appearance of the 
play on the stage and the publication of Q i . 

This third view is substantially the view taken by Pope and 
Johnson. It involves the existence in 1623 of a MS. of the 
play, or, at least, an annotated copy of one of the quartos, 
containing the author's final alterations of his original text, with 
additions and a few excisions. It seems certain, if this corrected 
text existed, that the editor of F compared it with Q. The 
result would be a text which, depending for the most part on 



xii INTRODUCTION 

this conjectural document, would accept here and there a 
reading of Q whose origin is probably to be found in the later 
quartos. Oversights on the part of the editor, and mistakes 
on the part of the printer, must be allowed for in this as in 
all other theories. 

Many editors, in more recent times, have taken the clearly 
defined view that Q is a revision, for dramatic purposes, of an 
original text represented by F. Howard Staunton regarded the 
long passages peculiar to F as deliberately omitted "to ac- 
celerate action," and to " afford space for the more lively and 
dramatic substitutions which are met with in the quartos alone." 
For the first of these statements there is much to be said : the 
omission of such passages as those in IV. iv. for this purpose, 
is more credible than their subsequent addition for no apparent 
purpose at all. But the presence of those substitutions which 
Staunton praised is very questionable. As we have seen, the 
additions in Q are, with one exception, insignificant and im- 
material. 

The authority of Q was asserted on other grounds by the 
Cambridge editors. In their view both Q and F are of Shake- 
spearean origin. Of the author's original MS., which they called 
A I, a transcript (B i) was made for the theatre library; and 
from this transcript, with its accidental faults and omissions, 
Q I was printed. However, at some unspecified time, the author 
undertook a complete revision of the play, correcting the origi- 
nal MS. with marginal notes and interlineations, and adding new 
matter here and there on inserted leaves. At some time, pro- 
bably after the author's death, this corrected MS. (A 2) was 
taken in hand by a transcriber, whose copy of it (B 2) was in- 
tended probably to take the place of B i , now worn and tattered, 
in the theatre library. To judge from the internal evidence of 
F I, which was printed from this new transcript, the transcriber 
"worked in the spirit, though not with the audacity, of Colley 
Cibber," altering words, even where it was unnecessary, to 
avoid their recurrence, or to correct a supposed metrical defect ; 
or now and then modifying a word that, in the course of time, 
was become obsolete. The editor of F i, therefore, in addition 
to some unique Shakespearean matter, accepted much that is 



INTRODUCTION xiii 

non-Shakespearean. It follows that the Cambridge editors, 
while admitting all the additions (two lines excepted) which 
are peculiar to F, took Q i as the basis of their text. 

The cardinal point of the Cambridge theory is the existence 
of the lawless transcriber. In 1872, Delius, writing in the Jahr- 
buch of the German Shakespeare Society, brought forward 
his theory that Q i was nothing more than a pirated edition of 
the play, in which an unknown editor mangled the original 
text at his own discretion, Delius' contempt for this " poetaster " 
surpassed in measure the Cambridge editors' allusions to their 
"nameless transcriber." For his theory there is one strong 
argument, to be derived from the preface to F i. His hypo- 
thesis makes good the editors' statement that they were restor- 
ing the plays " cur'd, and perfect of their limbes ; and . . . 
absolute in their numbers," to a public that hitherto had been 
"abus'd with diuerse stolne, and surreptitious copies." 

Spedding's exhaustive paper, read before the New Shak- 
spere Society in 1875, maintained the case for F against the 
Cambridge editors. The most interesting part of his argument 
is his enumeration of alterations in F which, in his judgment, 
could not have been made by the author, but were due, for the 
most part, to editorial and press misunderstandings of marginal 
corrections, etc., in the MS. from which F i was prepared. In 
a detailed criticism of Spedding's paper, Mr. E. H. Pickersgill 
supported the main contentions of the Cambridge editors. He 
definitely regarded the author's final version of his MS. as an- 
terior to the publication of Q i, which was founded on the actors' 
copy of the play, omitting the long passages, afterwards in- 
serted in F, for the sake of shortening the dramatic representa- 
tion. He admitted the presence of a number of blunders in 
Q, which were afterwards corrected or avoided in F. But the 
" nameless transcriber " was still made responsible for much 
tampering with the text. The theory advanced by Koppel, 
in his Textkritische Studien iiber Shakespeare' s Richard III. 
(1877), is similar in detail to Pickersgill's, but does not adopt 
the conclusion as to the " nameless transcriber." 

The exceptional scholarship and judgment of the Cambridge 
editors gives much weight to their elaborate theory. But very 



xiv INTRODUCTION 

few students of the two texts, even while admitting the traces of 
acoiTector's hand in F, will agree with their low estimate of his 
skill. His text is more smooth and regular ; but very seldom 
is it noticeably less vigorous on that account. Where single 
words differ, there is generally nothing to choose between the 
texts. No one has put down the additions in F to the credit 
of a corrector other than the author himself. As to the omis- 
sions in F, when we have deducted the long passage in IV. ii., 
the rest are of so little importance that it is impossible to dis- 
cover the grounds on which Staunton characterised them as 
"terse and vigorous bits of dialogue." And, after a careful and 
prolonged study of the texts, the present editor, while giving 
full weight to the editor or editors' and printer's responsibility 
for errors in F, is unable to distinguish its debt to a "nameless 
transcriber" from that which it may owe to the author's original 
version of the play. In short, he sees nothing in F which pre- 
cludes it from consideration as a return, in the main faithful 
and accurate, to the author's own text, containing passages that 
had been omitted in Q, and superseding Q as a trustworthy 
and definite version of the play. On the other hand, the 
source of Q seems to him to be the stage version of the play, 
shortened at certain points from the original text, and garnished 
here and there with a line which breaks up the dialogue or 
illustrates the action of the play more fully. It is possible, 
too, that the editor of Q revised his text by comparing it with 
a performance of the play on the stage, or with his reminis- 
cences of such a performance ; for several of his readings are 
best explained as slips of memory or free interpolations on the 
part of an actor. When the editors of F r charged themselves 
with curing and perfecting the received text, they doubtless 
compared one or more editions of Q with a MS. — either the 
original or a careful transcript — of the play as originally 
written. 

Mr. P. A. Daniel, in his preface to Mr. Griggs' facsimile of 
Q I, has given an explanation of this process which sets the 
whole matter in a very clear light. He believes F to represent 
the author's text of the play : Q to be a shortened and revised 
copy of that text The editor of F carefully revised the text 



INTRODUCTION xv 

of one of the quartos by the original MS., and sent the corrected 
volume, with his deletions, interlineations, and marginal 
additions, to the printer. Comparing F i with the quartos, 
Mr. Daniel finds that, for two doubtful readings shared by it 
with Q I, and for one shared with each of the editions Q 3, 
Q 4, and Q 5, nine, at least, are shared with Q 6. These 
nine may be increased to twelve, by adding three probable 
cases. It is thus probable that Q 6 was the copy corrected by 
the editor of F, who overlooked a few words or wrong letters. 
The printer took over this copy, and brought F into being, 
with a certain number of errors and misunderstandings due to 
the crowded state of the revised page. 

To almost every case of difficulty which meets the textual 
student, Mr. Daniel's hypothesis may be applied with a more 
than plausible result ; and, in the text which the present editor 
has followed, he has endeavoured to act on the principles 
laid down by Mr. Daniel as a corollary to his proposition. 
At the same time, in examining the several variations between 
the texts, the editor has tested them by the other theories that 
have been put forward for their solution. While founding his 
text on F, he has accepted such readings from Q as seem to him 
to be deliberate improvements ; and at II, i. 66-8 and II. iv. i, 2, 
both highly debateable passages, he has ventured to retain the 
Q readings which have been rejected, on grounds which appear 
to him not sufficiently strong, by many editors. 

Special instances will be found fully treated in the notes 
which supplement the text. One point, however, calls for 
further mention. The collation shows that, for the first 150 
lines or so of III. i., and from about V. iii. 80 to the end of the 
play, the editor of F i found little to alter in his copy of Q. 
Where he made alterations, it is highly probable that he made 
them on his own responsibility. Reference to Q i or Q 2 at 
these passages shows us several times that, where the latter 
quartos are wrong, the earlier contain a satisfactory reading, 
which, we cannot doubt, he would have adopted had he 
possessed authority to guide him. The inference is that his 
MS. was wanting at these points, and that he had to depend 
on a later quarto and his own instinct. Again, in I. i., where 



xvi INTRODUCTION 

the vaiiations between the texts are very few, the readings of 
the earlier quartos in several c^fes. have a weight that cannot 
be attributed to F. A case in point is I. i. 65, where F reads 
"That tempts him to this harsh Extremity." This is an 
obvious correction of a reading common to Qq 2, 5, and 6, 
" That tempts him to this extreamitie." We might assume, 
as we can assume in most cases, that the editor of F i found 
the omitted word " harsh " in the original MS., and inserted it 
accordingly. But, in Q i, we find a better and more satis- 
factory reading, " That tempers him to this extremity," which 
needs no alteration. It seems likely that, in the MS. from 
which Q I was derived, " tempers " was written in its abbreviated 
form " temps," and that Q 2, not noticing the abbreviation, took 
the word from the same MS. as " tempts." Q 3 likewise used 
the MS., and printed it "temps," without regard to sense. In 
Q 5, this meaningless word was altered to the more obvious 
"tempts," and so F i found it printed in Q 6. Nothing is 
more likely than that the opening pages of the authentic MS. 
were torn or illegible from use and the lapse of time. Find- 
ing no help here, the editor emended the metre of the line by 
inserting the word " harsh." To judge from the reading, the 
early leaves of the MS. were wanting or illegible in part ; while 
the closing leaves, and a leaf or two in the middle, were totally 
illegible or had perished. There has been a very general 
opinion that, in passages where original authority was wanting, 
the editor of F 1 resorted to a copy of Q 3. This may have 
been the case; but there is no circumstance which tends to 
show that, to his copy of O 6, he added in these instances any- 
thing more than a talent for cautious emendation. 

Richard I J I., dramatically as well as historically, is a sequel 
to the three parts of Henry VI., in which Shakespeare's share 
is generally admitted to have been that of a reviser. The 
question naturally arises whether Shakespeare was the author 
of Richard III., or merely the editor and revi.ser of a sequel to 
those plays on which he had been engaged previously. Mr. 
Daniel holds that the play was really the work of the author 
or authors of the Henry VI. plays, and was revised by Shake- 
.speare. Mr. Fleay looks upon it as a Shakespearean recension 



INTRODUCTION xvii 

and completion of an unfinished .play by Marlowe, so thorough 
that any distinction between tlfe original text and the revision 
is impossible. The only considerations on which an answer 
can be founded depend upon the style and date of the drama, 
(i) The evidence of style places Richard III., beyond all 
doubt, among Shakespeare's earliest plays. Apart from the 
ordinary metrical tests, which, applied whether to Q or F, do 
not differ materially in the result, the verse has everywhere 
/; that rhetorical accent with which Marlowe had stamped the 
language of the stage. The spirit of the verse is in keeping with 
its accent. No passage can be singled out as an example 
of that vein of reflective sentirnent which, at a not much later 
date, Shakespeare expressed with so great a command of 
imagery. The most striking passages, Clarence's account of 
his dream in I. iv., and Tyrrel's narrative of the murder of the 
princes in IV. iii., are little more than evenly written pieces of 
description, with a certain amount of smooth eloquence and 
picturesque colour. Richard's soliloquies in I. i. and I. ii. are 
clearly the work of the hand which was responsible for his 
soliloquies in 5 Henry VI. III. ii. and V. vi. He declares his 
aims in the vigorous rhythm which Marlowe makes his heroes 
use, explicit in sense and full of sound. These speeches, in- 
deed, might have been written by Marlowe in a restrained 
mood, in which his habitual rhetoric was sobered by a con- 
sciousness of his dramatic purpose. If the programme which 
they reveal is outrageous, their actual words are free from the 
grotesqueness with which Marlowe's Barabas relates his ini- 
quities, and from the extravagance of the wildly poetic ** lunes " 
of Tamburlaine. On the other hand, they have not that depth 
of living passion which Marlowe sounds in Tamburlaine's rhap- 
sody on Divine Zenocrate, or in the last soliloquy of Faustus. 
And, as a matter of fact, where Marlowe worked, as in Edzvard 
II., with greater self-restraint, his style has not much in common 
with that of Richard III. The classical allusions, which fill 
Edward II., and are very noticeable in the Henry VI. plays, 
are nearly absent from Richard III. The formal tragic style 
of such a passage as the lamentation of the women in Richard 

^11. IV. iv., has a stateliness which we miss in Edivard II. • 
b 



xviii INTRODUCTION 

but it has not that lyric fervour which give certain passages of 
Edward II. a. pathos that redeems their crudeness. It is con 
ceivable, in short, that Marlowe may have written much of 
Richard III. ; but we have nothing from his hand which goes 
to prove that he must have had a part in it. It may be said 
that the style of the play is a distinct advance on the style of 
Titus Andronicus, which is closely akin to the style of Mar- 
lowe's most literal imitators. The individual quality of its 
rhetoric has been trained by previous work on the Henry VI. 
plays ; while probably the congeniality of a tragic figure like 
Richard to a taste founded on Marlowe's models has given an 
opportunity for the independent expression of that quality. 
Any tendency to exaggeration is softened by an increasing 
sense of the relation between the dramatist's art and life 
itself. If we allow Shakespeare to have had any part in the 
play, then Richard ///., whatever may be its debt to older 
material, shows witness of his hand, at a time when he has 
reached the stage of untrammelled expression of his meaning, 
but is still partly dependent on his models for the form that 
his work takes, and has yet to handle the highest gifts of 
poetry. The declamatory vigour of Richard III. gathers 
fresh life in the complaints of Constance and the ecstasies of 
Romeo and Juliet. Its echo is still audible in the balanced 
melody of the plays of Shakespeare's middle life. And, tame 
as it is in comparison, it is the first sign of tlie possibility of 
that eloquence, compact of fire and air, and pregnant with 
"immortal longings," which is the case for the huge spirits of 
his great tragedies. 

(2) In date, then, Richard III probably follows immediately 
upon the t hird part oi Henry VI. No allusion exists to settle 
the year in which the play was first produced. John Weever's 
epigram to " honie-tong'd Shakespeare," which selects the 
poems of 1593-4 and the characters of Romeo and Richard for 
praise, was not published till 1599. ^^ may have been written, 
as has been conjectured, as earlyas iJgS ; but this cannot be 
proved. All that can be said is that Weever probably chose 
the names of Romeo and Richard for mention, on account of 
their popularity on the stage, A book of Epigrammes and 



INTRODUCTION xix 

Elegies by J. D. and C. M., first published about 1 596, con- 
tains lines which were probably imitated from Richard's open- 
ing soliloquy on his want of polite accomplishments : — 

I am not fashion'd for these amorous times, 
To court thy beauty with lascivious rhymes ; 
I cannot dally, caper, dance, and sing, 
Oblige my saint with supple sonnetting. 

Collier found, in The Rising to the Crown of Richard the Thirds 
appended to Giles Fletcher's Licia (1593), evidence that Richard 
had not yet appeared as a hero on the stage, when the poem 
was written. Fletcher makes Richard complain of " the Poets 
of this Age, 

Like silly boats in Shallow rivers tost, 

Losing their pains, and lacking still their wage, 

To write of Women, and of Women's falls." 

But the dramatists of 1 593 could not be charged with exclusive 
attention to female misfortune. And if the third part of 
Henry VI. had appeared before September, 1 592, as is probable 
from the famous allusion in Greene's Groat s-worth of Wit, 
Richard III., in which the strong outlines of the character of 
Gloucester are developed directly from the earlier play, must 
have followed soon after, probably, in the course of 1593. It 
is the most natural thing to conclude that Shakespeare, 
having revised the plays which dealt with the tragedy of the 
house of Lancaster, and having set his own mark on the revision, 
with increasing certainty of touch as the work proceeded, should 
continue the series, whether as author or reviser, to the culminat- 
ing tragedy in which the house of York pays the penalty of its 
vengeance, and the destroyer of his own family is himself 
exterminated. And naturally, again, when Richard III. had 
proved a success on the stage, the dramatist would see what 
could be done with the original events that were the prime 
cause of all these sorrows, and so undertook the tragedy of 
Richard II. The relative chronology of Richard III. and 
Richard II. is an unsettled question, it is true ; but it is diffi- 
cult to disprove the patent fact that Richard II. shows just 
that degree of advance on Richard III. in poetic, if not in 



XX INTRODUCTION 

metrical and dramatic skill, which we might expect. There is 
nothing in Richard III. which can compare, on grounds of 
poetry, with the dialogue between John of Gaunt and Boling- 
broke in Richard II. I. iii. 275-303, Gaunt's dying speech (ll. i. 
31-68), the King's reflections (ill. ii, 144-77, ill. iii. 143-75), or 
York's description of Richard's captive entry into London (v. 
ii. 7-40). In these passages the rhetoric of Richard III. has 
lost self-consciousness and has acquired fresh grace. If tlie 
date of Richard II. is not later than 1 594, as is generally ac- 
knowledged, it may be assumed that Ric hard III, w as Shake- 
ispeare's chief work of 1 593. 

' Mayirbe taken, then, as Shakespeare's own unaided work ? 
His authorship of the play cannot be denied positively. We 
have no traces of any play on which he could have exercised 
his revision — not even of any play from which the text that he 
! revised, like that of Henry VI., could have been derived. The 
comparative evenness of the style shows that the revision, if re- 
vision it was, was performed with great skill. There is a con- 
centration and liveliness in the action, which are less noticeable 
\\n such hurried chronicles of events as the three parts of 
Henry VI. The occasional humour of the Henry VI. plays is 
certainly almost wanting in Richard III. ; but they are far 
surpassed by Richard III. in point of dramatic irony. Certain 
weaknesses which may be detected here and there — for example, 
Richard's soliloquy on waking from his dreams, in V. iii. — may be 
explained by the probability that Shakespeare was attempting 
more than a young dramatist might be expected to achieve on 
his own account. Such points of style as the abandonment of 
classical similes favour the supposition that the reviser of the 
earlier plays was now working as an independent author. The 
theory that the origin of Richard III. was similar to that of the 
three parts of //^«;j F/. is attractive and not improbable. But, 
on the other hand, if we recognise that there is such a thing in 
Shakespeare's work as a current of development and improve- 
ment, we cannot surrender whatever seems feeble or common- 
place in it to other authors, unless probability is supported by 
something stronger than itself, Richard III, inferior though 
it is to Shakespeare's more mature writings, is nevertheless far 



INTRODUCTION xxi 

from being feeble or commonplace. On the contrary, it is 
conspicuous, among the plays of Marlowe's followers, for its 
dramatic skill and interest. 

There doubtless was an existing play on the same subject, 
when Richard III. appeared on the stage for the first time. 
The TrueTragedie of R ichard III.. pnhli>;he H in 1394, "as it 
was played by the Queenes Maiesties Players," covers much 
the same ground as the Shakespearean play ; but there is 
no textual connexion between the two. Possibly the True 
Tragedie was an earlier play, whose publication as the " only 
original " Richard III. was intended to steal a march upon its 
successful younger rival. But, if Shakespeare simply revised 
an older drama, the text and original sources of that drama 
have disappeared altogether. The chief argument in favour 
of the revised play may be found, perhaps, in the words " newly 
augmented," which were prefixed to Shakespeare's name for 
the first time in Q 3. It has been shown already that these 
words are not true, if applied merely to the editions in which 
they occur. But it is possible that they supply an omission 
which had been made in the title-pages of the earlier quartos. 
Q I had been printed without the author's name. In O 2 
Shakespeare had been introduced as the author. Four years 
later, when Q 3 appeared, his true relation to the play may 
have been discovered ; and it is not unlikely that the words 
"newly augmented" were inserted to rectify the impression, 
created by Q 2, that he was the original author. Nothing is 
more probable than that the publisher of an unauthorised 
edition of the play should be insuflficiently informed as to its 
true authorship. The word " newly," which was continued on 
the title-pages of the later quartos, might easily be applied to 
work which had been done some years before the publication 
of Q 3. In short, Q, from this point of view, may be regarded 
as the text of an earlier play augmented by Shakespeare. We 
might even go further, and surmise that many of the rough- 
nesses of Q were left unsmoothed from the original drama, and 
that the process of augmentation came before that of revision, 
which eventually was accomplished in the text represented by 
F. This view would not diminish, but corroborate the im- 



xxii INTRODUCTION 

portancc of F as the true basis of a text of the play. It is, 
however, a mere conjecture ; and the only conclusions at which 
we can arrive safely are, that the text as we have it is substanti- 
ally Shakespeare's, and that either, as in the Henry VI. plays, 
he embroidered skilfully upon an older text, or wrote an en- 
tirely new play in a style to which, by practice, his own was 
become assimilated. 

Beside the True Tragedie of Richard the Thirds there was a 
Latin play on the same theme by Thomas Legge, Master of 
Caius, which had been acted at Cambridge in 1579. But the 
real source of the material used for Richard III. was Holin- 
shed's Chronicles of England., in which Halle's earlier chronicle 
and the History of Richard III. by Sir Thomas More were 
embodied almost literally. A reading at V. iii. 325, which is 
shared by all the printed editions of the play, shows that the 
second edition of Holinshed (1586-7) must have been used in 
the preparation oi Richard III. : the passage at IV. ii. 98-115, 
peculiar to Q, depends on an insertion added to the same 
edition. It goes without saying that the treatment of the 
historical sources in Richard III. is free in general, but faithful 
in minor details. To form a connected action, the events of 
several years are brought together into a space of time which 
Mr. Daniel has estimated at eleven days with certain intervals. 
Thus the imprisonment and death of Clarence (l. i. and iv.) took 
place in 1478. The events of I. ii., if they were historically 
possible, would belong to 1471. From II. i. to IV. iv., the 
events of 1483 follow one another in rapid succession. At the 
end of IV. iv., the interval between Richmond's separate ex- 
peditions of 1483 and 1485 is annihilated, and the drama moves 
on to its climax at Bosworth. The dramatic convenience of 
these alterations is obvious : accuracy of date is incompatible, 
in the space of five acts, with striking presentation of character. 
The main object of the play is to give bold dramatic relief to 
the figure of Richard III., whose traits were ready to hand in 
Holinshed. This is the object of the liberty which is taken 
with history in the famous scene between Richard and Lady 
Anne — a scene which has no foundation in fact, but is a most 
powerful demonstration of the personal influence of the hero on 



INTRODUCTION xxiii 

those round him. The interview with the Queen-dowager in 
IV. iv., where Richard again exercises his faculty of persuasion, 
is a free deduction from history for the same purpose. Richard's 
connivance at the death of Clarence, which the historical 
authorities merely insinuate, becomes in the play a positive 
fact. The impression of subtlety and wickedness, which is left 
by the chroniclers, is repeated by Shakespeare in the higher key 
and more emphatic tone which are required by drama. Now 
and then, the Shakespearean estimate of a particular character 
departs slightly from the estimate suggested by Holinshed. 
The Hastings of the play, vindictive, but gay and imprudent, is a 
more foolish person than the Hastings of history, who is more 
closely related to the Shakespearean Buckingham. Even Buck- 
ingham is represented as less cautious than he actually was. 
His bragging, melodramatic words in III. v. 5-11 amount to 
a confession of imbecility. Hastings and Buckingham, how- 
ever, are merely dramatic foils to the figure of Richard ; and, 
as such, the depreciation of their characters is unavoidable. 
Finally, some of the doubtful minor details of history become, 
where it is necessary in the play, actual facts. This is the 
case with the confidences of Richard to Buckingham, for which 
there is only historical probability ; while the manner of 
Clarence's murder is related in accordance with likelihood 
rather than with ascertained truth. 

The treatment of history in Richard III. is guided every- 
where by loyalty to the traditional principles of tragedy. The 
irresistible power of Nemesis over-rules the actions of every 
one of the characters. In the great tragedies of Shakespeare's 
later life, the misfortunes of the heroes compel our sympathy 
and regret, while we acknowledge that they are inevitable. 
But in Richard III. the inevitable nature of the tragedy pre- 
cludes us from sympathy. We are passionless spectators, 
standing outside the drama. It is true that the dramatis per- 
soncB interest us more nearly than any persons in the Henry VI. 
plays. Richard himself is a powerful study in sustained vil- 
lainy: Hastings, his credulous dupe, and Buckingham, his 
short-sighted fellow-conspirator, although they are mereh- foils 
to him, are skilfully drawn as such. There is a pathetic humour 



xxiv INTRODUCTION 

in the precocious taunts of young York : the lamentations of the 
women and children whom Richard has bereaved have real 
pathos beneath their outward formality. But the abiding power 
of the tragedy lies in its clear presentation of the moral signifi- 
cance of the events which it relates. Raro antecedentem scele- 
stum deseruit pede Poena claudo are words which would sug- 
gest themselves as a fit motto for the play, were it not that 
here vengeance follows at the very heels of crime. Richard 
has not had time to enjoy his triumph, when the first blow 
of vengeance strikes him. Hastings, in the moment of exulta- 
tion at the death of his enemies, finds himself a partaker in 
their fate. Buckingham hastens his own downfall by hesitat- 
ing at the last crime by which he can ensure temporary success. 
The ruin of Rivers and his friends, the helpless misery of the 
women, are hurried on by their selfish ambition and intrigue. 

It would be inaccurate to say that the author of Richard 
III. was profoundly moved by the spectacle of sin and its 
punishment in history. The doctrine was the conventional 
foundation of the tragic art which he practised. Expressed 
with pious conviction or reluctant acquiescence by the great 
Athenian dramatists, it had been accepted as an artificial prin- 
ciple by the author of the Senecan tragedies. In the dawn 
of the Renaissance, the " harm of hem that stode in heigh de- 
gree " was a favourite theme of prose and poetry, of which, in 
England, The Myrroure for Magistrates was the crowning 
example. The frigid atmosphere of that grave poem was the 
atmosphere of tragedy on the early Elizabethan stage, where 
Seneca was the formal model of drama. The tragic pro- 
priety of Gorbodiic stirs no emotion of sympathy or horror, 
beyond the natural repugnance which we feel towards its fatal 
catastrophes. The crimes and punishment of Queen Eleanor 
in Peele's Edwaj-d I. are merely grotesque. In Lodge and 
Greene's Looking-G lass for London, a certain sincerity of feeh'ng 
underlies the artless machinery of the story. But, in plays like 
The Wounds of Civil War, Greene's fames IV., or the three 
parts of Henry VI., the tragic groundwork is a matter of course ; 
and our estimate of such works depends on the degree of skill 
with which their leading principle is developed. The same 



INTRODUCTION xxv 

thing, allowing for the exceptional horrors of the action, may 
be said of Titus Andronicus. Richard III. is almost the first 
tragedy of the school of Marlowe, in which the conventional 
element, used and developed with great clearness, is invested 
with a real human interest. The characters are something 
more than mere stage dolls, moved to and fro as the action of 
the play prescribes. Yet their sin and fate, if they compel 
our interest, leave our deeper emotions untouched. They are 
still matters of course. The dramatist has not won as yet that 
insight into the springs of human sin and folly which gives 
Othello or King Lear their eternal pathos. His characters are 
drawn in simple outline and with uniform colouring. They 
are good or bad without compensation. They sin without re- 
flection : their punishment is purely mechanical. Richmond, 
the ultimate avenger, is the most lifeless figure of the play : he 
is merely the instrument of justice. To the author, in fact, the 
whole course of such a tragedy was perfectly obvious. It 
would have been impossible for him, at this date, to make 
Hastings say, in the hour of his misfortune : — 

As flies to wanton boys, are we to the gods ; 
They kill us for their sport. 

Margaret or Elizabeth could not yet acknowledge that : — 

The gods are just, and of our pleasant vices 
Make instruments to plague us. 

Richmond could not yet confess, over the body of his slain 
adversary : — 

This shows you are above, 
You justicers, that these our nether crimes 
• So speedily can venge. 

In Richard III., as in King Lear, the wheel comes full circle ; 
but the dramatist watches its revolution with imperfect experi- 
ence, and, as a consequence, with little emotion. 

His artistic sympathy is concentrated on the figure of his 
hero. Every actor in the story receives his degree of life from 
association with Richard and contact with his malign influence. 
But, when we speak of the character of the hero and its elTect on 
the play, we recognise in its design the same simplicity which 



xxvi INTRODUCTION 

distinguishes the author's perception of the tragic princir)le. 
Richard is an ideal conception after the pattern of Mario- .e's 
heroes. Already his audacity, his determination to stick at 
nothing, have given him heroic prominence in the third part of 
Hemy VI. — a prominence which leaves Warwick, the real hero 
of the piece, in the background. This preliminary revelation 
of his remorseless nature, devoid of pity, love, and fear, glorying 
in its powers of dissimulation and treachery, must have whetted 
the appetite of an Elizabethan audience for a further develop- 
ment of the theme. The key is maintained in Richard III. 
Like Tamburlaine or Barabas, Richard is absolutely consistent 
to his character and aims. There is no room for any real 
development of character. No chastening of experience can 
modify the superhuman passion for self-aggrandisement at any 
price, the ready-made standard to which Richard's every action 
must conform. His opening soliloquy lays down his motives 
and plan of campaign. He follows out all his designs with 
swiftness and eminent success. Relying on his force of will, 
he removes his enemies one by one, uses his adherents as his 
tools, and accomplishes feats like the wooing of Anne and the 
persuasion of the Queen-dowager to further his plans. It is 
only when he has done everything that he possibly can do, 
that Nemesis falls upon him. Even so, he is loyal to his part, 
and goes to ruin with the callous assurance that has been the 
keynote of all his actions. No compunction visits him. Once, 
when he hears of the first serious opposition to his career, the 
defection of Buckingham and Richmond's invasion, he falters, 
chides the messengers furiously, and issues contradictory orders 
to his lieutenants. But, a moment later, he recovers his courage. 
Once again, after his last night of visions, he wakes with the 
agonised cry, " Have mercy, Jesu ! " and turns to a self-question- 
ing, which, however, compared with his earlier soliloquies, is 
lifeless and perfunctory. On the field of battle, there is no 
place for his usual weapons of hypocrisy and treachery. 
Courage and physical force alone are possible ; and in these he 
is still superhuman, fighting to the end with entire consistency 
to those early glimpses of his character in the third part of 
Henry VI., when, after St. Albans, he flung down Somerset's 



INTRODUCTION xxvii 

head on the ground with a savage gibe, or when, at Towton, 
he and his brother Edward, " like a brace of greyhounds, having 
the fearful flying hare in sight," chased the Lancastrians from 
the field. 

Selfish ambition, physical courage, absolute want of moral 
scruple and human kindliness, are the fundamental qualities on 
which the character of Richard is built up. The figure is im- 
posing, because the villainy embodied in its conception is on so 
large a scale, and is worked out so thoroughly. At the same 
time, the conception itself is mechanical. The character is 
made to order, to fulfil an ideal plan. As a study in selfish 
wickedness, it is far behind such a study as that of lago. Ex- 
ceptional though he is, lago compels our belief by virtue of 
the complexity of his motives, and of the mind that dwells in 
him and admits us to its secrets. Richard's motive is simple ; 
he has no individual mind ; he is merely an artistic conception 
of a gigantic villain with no redeeming quality, worked out with 
great power, and impressive chiefly because of the bulk of the 
design. Not very long before, Marlowe had made a similar 
attempt in the Jew of Malta, in whom malevolence and avarice 
exclude all other qualities. If Barabas supplied some hints for 
Shylock at a later date, he can hardly have been overlooked in 
the work of creating or transforming the character of Richard 
III. Richard is the most striking stage-villain of the type of 
which Barabas is the most grotesque example. He possesses 
in an eminent degree those Machiavelian tricks of which 
Barabas furnishes a shameless demonstration. To "count 
religion but a childish toy" is one of the fundamental tenets of 
this statesman who had boasted, in an earlier play, that he was 
able to " set the murderous Machiavel to school." He steals 
" odd old ends " from Holy Writ to deceive the ears of those 
who suspect him. It is by an unblushing parade of piety that 
he gains his object, in the critical scene where-he accepts the 
crown from the citizens. He is an adept in the art of moralis- 
ing " two meanings in one word." Examples of the Machia- 
velian tradition in English drama recur to ^^e mind of every 
student. Richard, with his ambition, his feai^ssness, his un- 
scrupulousness, his calculating hypocrisy, his never-failing irony, 



xxviii INTRODUCTION 

his natural defects redeemed by his gifts of insinuation and 
persuasion, is the beau ideal of the Machi ivelian, to whom virtiiy 
prompt and unscrupulous energy, is indispensable, with whom 
the semblance of religion must take the place of the reality, in 
whom the highest perfection of bestial qualities, the cunning of 
the fox and the courage of the lion, must be combined. 

To discuss the relation of this dramatic ideal to its real 
origin in Machiavelli, or, more properly, in the ideas of the 
" Englishman Italianate " about Machiavelli, is not to the present 
purpose. Nor is it necessary to enter into the relationship be- 
tween the Richard of the drama and the real Richard of history. 
Something has been said of the minor characters, of the would- 
be Machiavelian Buckingham, and of the frivolous, sensual 
Hastings. In the case of Hastings, the dramatic irony of the 
tragedy, its most distinguishing excellence, is at its best. 
Richard, and even Buckingham, are too thoroughly alive to 
their own villainy, and too obviously self-devoted to destruction, 
to be altogether blind to a possible reversal of their fortunes, 
ur to lend their words that terrible significance with which the 
thoughtless sinner bears witness on the stage to his real in- 
security or prophesies his own downfall. The cynicism with 
which Richard says of Clarence's murder, " God will revenge 
it," disarms the situation of half its irony. When Buckingham 
sets aside Margaret's warning, it is not because he feels himself 
secure from the necessity to " take heed of yonder dog," but 
because he thinks himself competent to take care of himself 
and foresee all means of self-preservation. Hastings, on the 
other hand, has full confidence in the good faith of the protector. 
He laughs at Stanley's dreams and caution ; he exults in the 
news of the execution of his enemies ; the meeting with the 
pursuivant, though it recalls an unhappy day in his life, gives 
him no foreboding qualm. His meeting with the priest fills him 
with no sense of ill to come : he can laugh over it with Bucking- 
ham, and answer his sinister jests with a jeer at the unhappy 
lords at Pomfret. At the council in the Tower he boasts of his 
intimate friendship with Gloucester, and praises his friend's sim- 
plicity of heart and face, of whith he is doubtless ready to take 
the first advantage. But, in a moment, the fatuous self- 



INTRODUCTION xxix 

complacence that has held us in suspense for two scenes, 
crumbles to pieces, when the protector, frowning and biting his 
lip, bursts into the council-chamber, and Hastings, at close 
quarters with death, realises what the conceit was that had 
given so cheerful a seeming to his grace's good-morrow, and 
how ill his face had accorded with the thoughts of his heart. 

More pathet'c is the irony with which Anne, in her repul- 
sion from the murderer of Henry VI. and of his son, curses the 
woman who may become Richard's wife, and then, almost in 
the same breath, yields to his mastery, and consents to be that 
woman. The scene is a tour de force ; and the illusion which 
it produces is rather too violent to be entirely successful. But 
we are reminded of it at that later date, when Anne, the " woe- 
ful welcomer of glory," discloses to the other hapless women 
who have felt the influence of the " unavoided eye " of the royal 
basilisk, the fulfilment of her imprecation on herself. Of those 
women, whose part is almost that of a chorus to the play — a 
chorus whose personal concerns are most deeply implicated by 
its events — Anne is the most blameless and the most attractive. 
The widowed Duchess of York, broken by grief, is surrendered 
to passionate despair. For Queen Elizabeth in her helpless- 
ness we have less sympathy. She has played an ambitious 
and domineering part in the past : she has been a sharer in 
that hollow reconciliation by her husband's death-bed, the 
manifest insincerity of which prejudices us against all concerned 
in it : her self-interest persuades her to sacrifice her daughter 
to Richard, at a time when his villainies are no longer any 
secret. Much praise has been given to the character of Mar- 
garet, whose kinship to the models of antique tragedy is be- 
come a commonplace of criticism. The sudden appearances of 
the wrinkled beldame to gloat over the misfortunes of her foes, 
and the dialogue in which Richard, by his sudden interjection 
of her own name, diverts the current of her curses, are highly 
effective from a theatrical point of view. She is little more, 
however, than a shadowy phantom, the survivor of Richard's 
early experiments in crime ; and her real use, like that of the 
funeral of her husband in I. ii., is to connect the events of the 
new play more closely vvitl-^ those of its predecessor, and to 



XXX TNTRODITCTION 

add the weight of Richard's past exploits to the load of guilt 
which he has piled up more recently. When we look forward 
to Lear, or Coriolanus, or Lady Macbeth, it seems needless to 
single out Margaret for comparison with the tragic figures of 
the Athenian stage. 

Early records of the stage history of Richard HI. are con- 
nected chiefly with the performance by Burbage of a part which, 
without involving great intellectual effort in the actor, calls forth 
his most striking powers of action and declamation. Manning- 
ham notes in his diary for 13th March, i6or, a story of a trick 
played on Burbage by Shakespeare, " vpon a tyme when Bur- 
bidge played Richard III." In the same year, the authors 
of the third part of The Returne from Parnassus introduce 
Burbage catechising Philomusus thus : " I like your face and 
the proportion of your body for Richard the 3. I pray M. Phil. 
let me see you act a little of it." Whereupon Philomusus 
quotes the opening lines of the play. A third allusion is con- 
tained in Bishop Corbet's Iter Boreale^ written before 1635, in 
which he describes his visit with a loquacious host to Bosworth 
Field. The host showed him the position of the armies and 
the very spot of Richard's death : — 

Besides what of his knowledge he could say, 

He had authenticke notice from the Play; 

Which I might guesse, by 's mustring up the ghosts, 

And policyes, not incident to hosts, 

But cheifly by that one perspicuous thing, 

Where he mistook a player for a king, 

For when he would have sayd, King Richard dyed, 

And call'd — A horse ! a horse ! he Burbidge cry'de. 

It was Burbage, no doubt, who gave the famous line "A 
horse ! a horse ! my kingdom for a horse ! " its vogue, attested 
by many allusions in the plays and poems of the earlier part of 
the seventeenth century. But, although there is ample evidence 
of the early popularity of Richard III., no allusion to a definite 
performance is found before 1633, when Sir Henry Herbert 
notes in the OflRce-book which he kept as Master of the Revels, 
that the play was acted at St. James's before Charles I. and 
Henrietta Maria, .soon after the birth of the future James II. 



INTRODUCTION xxxi 

Its popularity seems to have waned after the Restoration. 
Betterton does not seem to have included Richard in his re- 
pertoire of Shakespearean characters. Pepys makes no mention 
of the play ; and no dramatist adapted it for the stage until Colley 
Gibber brought out his famous version early in the eighteenth 
century. For more than a century and a half this mutilated 
edition became the playgoer's text of the drama. It was as 
Gibber's Richard that Garrick made his first appearance at 
Goodman's Fields, 19th October, 1741 : it remained one of his 
favourite parts until his retirement in June, 1776. In May of 
that year, Mrs. Siddons, then a member of Garrick's company 
at Drury Lane, made one of her earliest appearances in London 
as Lady Anne. Her brothers, John Philip and Charles Kemble, 
produced a revision of Gibber's version, in which they took the 
parts of Richard and Richmond, at Govent Garden in 181 1. 
Edmund Kean played Richard with great success at Drury 
Lane in the seasons of 181 3-4 and 18 14-5. Macready, who 
made his fame in the same part about 18 19, was the principal 
actor in the restoration of the Shakespearean text which took 
place at Govent Garden, 12th and 19th March, 1821. The public, 
long accustomed to Gibber's adaptation, received this change for 
the better without enthusiasm. Later actors, like Gharles 
Kean, returned to the mutilated text ; and it was not till 29th 
January, 1877, when Henry Irving produced the play, " arranged 
for the Stage exclusively from the author's text," at the Lyceum, 
that Gibber's book was ousted from the boards. Among the 
famous actors whose debits are connected with the drama, may 
be mentioned Richard William Elliston, who appeared as a 
youth at the Bath Theatre in 1791, taking the very minor part 
of Tressel in the second scene of this play. 

From the notes to the present volume it will be seen how 
much the editor owes to the freely-given help and friendship 
of the late Mr. Graig. He is also indebted to Mr. P. A. 
Daniel for advice and suggestions communicated through Mr. 
Craig. All references to other plays of Shakespeare follow the 
numbering of lines in the Globe edition of the plays. 



^ 



THE TRAGEDY 

OF 

KING RICHARD THE THIRD 



brothers to the King. 



DRAMATIS PERSONS 

King Edward the Fourth. C '^'' 

Edward, Prince of Wales, afterwards King "j 

Edward V., I sons to the King. 

Richard, Duke of York, I 

George, Duke of Clarence, ^ 

Richard, Duke of Gloucester, afterwards 

King Richard III., 
A young son of Clarence. 

HE>fRY, Earl of Richmond, afterwards King Henry VII. 
Cardinal Bourchiek, Archbishop of Canterbury. 
Thomas Rotherham, Archbishop of York. 
John Morton, Bishop of Ely. 
Duke of Buckingham. 
Duke of Norfolk. 
Earl of Surrey, his son. 
Earl Rivers, brother to Elizabeth. 

Marquess of Dorset and Lord Grey, sons to Elizabeth. 
Earl of Oxford. 
Lord Hastings. 

Lord Stanley, called also Earl of Derby. 
Lord Lovel. 
Sir Thomas Vaughan. 
Sir Richard Ratcliff. 
Sir William Catesby. 
Sir James Tyrrel. 
Sir James Blount. 
Sir Walter Hkrhert. 

Sir Rokert Brakenburv, Lieutenant of the Tower. 
Christopher Urswick, a priest. 
Another Priest. 
Tressel and Berkeley, } ntlemen attending on the Lady Anne. 



DRAMATIS PERSONS 3 

Lord Mayor of London. 

Sheriff of Wiltshire. 

Elizabeth, queen to King Edward IV. 

Margaret, widow of King Henry VI. 

Duchess of York, mother to King Edward IV. 

Lady A'ii^^_widow of Edward, Prince of Wales, son to King 

Henry VI. ; afterwards married to Richard. 
A young daughter of Clarence. 

Ghosts of those murdered by Richard ; Lords and other Attendants ; 
a Pursuivant ; a Scrivener ; Citizens, Murderers, Messengers, 
Soldiers, etc. 

ScuNB : Englatid. 



I 



NOTES ON DRAMATIS PERSONS 

A young son of Clarence] Edward, Earl of Warwick, born 1475 : kept in 
custody at Sheriff Hutton during the reign of Richard III., but knighted during 
the King's visit to York, 1483. Removed by order of Henry VII. to the Tower 
of London, 1485, where he was shut up, " out of all companie of men & sight 
of beasts ; insomuch that he could not discerne a goose from a capon " (Holin- 
shed, iii. 7S7, where five years are added to his age). In iv. ii. 55 below, this 
simplicity is slightly anticipated. Executed 28th November, 1499, on the charge 
of conspiracy with Perkin Warbeck and connivance at his escape from the 
Tower. 

Cardinal Bourchier] Thomas, son of William Bourchier, Earl of Eu, by 
Anne, elder daughter of Thomas, Duke of Gloucester, sixth son of Edward III. 
His brother Henry, created Earl of Essex, 1461, was an uncle by marriage of 
Edward IV. and Richard III. By their mother's first marriage, the Bourchiers 
were half-brothers to the first Duke of Buckingham, grandfather of the Bucking- 
ham of the play. The Cardinal was born 1404 : he was Chancellor of Oxford and 
Bishop of Worcester, 1434-5; Bishop of Ely, 1443-4; Archbishop of Canterbury, 
J454; Lord Chancellor, 1455-6; Cardinal with title of San Ciriaco in Terme, 
1467-8. At first a Lancastrian, he declared for the house of York, 1460. He 
crowned Edward IV., Queen Elizabeth Woodville, Richard III., and Henry VII., 
and married Henry VII. to Elizabeth of York. He died at Knole, 30th March, 
I486. 

Thomas Rotherham] or Scott, born at Rotherham, 1423. Nominated Bishop 
of Rochester and Keeper of the Privy Seal, 1467 ; Chancellor of Cambridge, 
1469-71, 1473-8; Bishop of Lincoln, 1472; Archbishop of York, 1480; Lord 
Chancellor, 1474-83 ; Master of Pembroke Hall, Cambridge, c. 1480-6. For his 
part in the play see Appendix II. He was arrested and imprisoned after the 
council of 13th June, 1483, at which Hastings was entrapped; but seems to have 
made his peace with Richard, and to have held office as Lord Treasurer for a 
short time under Henry VII. He died at Cawood in May, 1500. He founded 
the College of Jesus at Rotherham, and is regarded as the second founder ol 
Lincoln College, Oxford. 

John Morton] Born c. 1420; lawyer and diplomatist; Bishop of Ely, 1479; 
for his imprisonment and escape see notes on iv. iv. 470-1 and 512-6 ; rewarded 
for his services to Richmond with the archbishopric of Canterbury, i486; Lord 
Chancellor, 1487 ; created Cardinal, 1493; Chancellor of Oxford, 1495 ; died 1500. 
It is probably from him, through Sir Thomas More, that we derive the traditional 
account of the character and reign of Richard III. 

Duke ok Buckingham] Henrj- Stafford, born c. 1454; succeeded his grand- 
father as second Duke, 1460; executed at Salisbury, 1483. For his descent see 
note on in. i. 195. His son, Edward, third Duke, is the Buckingham of Henry 
VIII. 

Duke of Norfolk] John Howard, born before 1430 ; created Duke of Norfolk 
and Earl Marshal by Richard III., 1483 ; killed at Bosworth, 1485. 

Earl of Surrey] Thomas Howard, born 1443 ; fought at Bosworth ; im- 
prisoned by Henry VII., but gained distinction afterwards in the sersice of the 
Tudors; won battle of P'lodden, 1513; created Duke of Norfo'k, 1514; died 1524. 
He is the Norfolk of Henry VIII. 

4 



NOTES ON DRAMATIS PERSON jE 5 



Earl Rivers] Anthony Woodville, born c. 1442 ; K.G., 1466 ; executed 1483. 
His translation, The Dictes and Sayings of the Philosophers, was the first book 
•printed by Caxton, 1477. See also Appendix II. 

Marquess of Dorset] Thomas Grey, born 1451 ; succeeded his father as 
ninth Baron Feirars of Groby, 1461 ; Earl of Huntingdon, 1471 ; Marquess of 
Dorset, 1475; K.G., 1476; escaped to Brittany, 1483; confirmed in his titles 
by Henry VII. ; died 1501. 

Lord Grey] more correctly Lord Richard Grey ; executed 1483. 

Earl of Oxford] John de Vere, born 1443 ; succeeded his father as thirteenth 
Earl, 1462 ; a consistent Lancastrian. His abortive attempt to hold St. Michael's 
Mount in 1473 led to his attainder and imprisonment at Hammes, 1474-84. He 
returned with Richmond to England, and died 1513. 

Lord Hastings] William Hastings, created Baron Hastings of Ashby-de-la- 
Zouch and Lord Chamberlain, 1461. He was a prominent antagonist of the 
Woodville faction ; but his imprisonment in the Tower, referred to in i. i. and 
iiL ii. is merely an inference drawn by the author of the play from Holinshed, 
iii. 723, where it is said (following More) that Hastings was " accused vnto King 
Edward by the Lord Riuers ... in such wise, as he was for the while (but it 
lasted not long) farre fallen into the kings indignation, & stood in gieat feare of 
himselfe." Executed 1483. 

Lord Stanley] Thomas Stanley, born c. 1435 ; succeeded his father as second 
Baron Stanley, 1459 ; became third husband of Lady Margaret Beaufort, mother 
of Henry VII. ; created Earl of Derby, 1485 ; died 1504. Strictly speaking, the 
use of the title " Derby," where it occurs in this play, is wrong, as Stanley was 
not yet created Earl of Derby at the time of the action. Theobald used " Stanley " 
throughout, on the ground that the author was not responsible for the inaccuracy. 
The Cambridge editors retain Derby where both Qq and Ff agree in the reading ; 
and their custom has been followed in the present edition. 

Lord Lovel] more usually Lovell. Francis Lovell, ninth Baron Lovell of 
Tichmarsh, Northants; created Viscount Lovell and K.G., 1483 ; Lord Chamber- 
lain to Richard III. ; died after fighting for Lambert Simnel at Stoke, 1487. 

Sir Thomas Vaughan] Chamberlain to Edward, Prince of Wales (Edward V.), 
1471 ; executed 1483. 

Sir Richard Ratcliff] or RadclifFe: knighted at Tewkesbury, 1471; K.G., 
1484 ; killed at Bosvvorth, 1485 ; the " Rat " of Colyngborne's couplet. 

Sir William Catesby] A lawyer, and protege of Hastings, whose service 
he forsook for that of Gloucester. Under Richard III. he became Chancellor of 
the Exchequer, and in 1484 was knight of the shire for Northants and Speaker 
of the House of Commons. He was taken at Bosworth, and beheaded at 
Leicester. The "Cat" of Colyngborne's satire. The knighthood given him 
here is purely a courtesy title. ' * 

Sir James Tyrrel] more correctly Tyrrell or Tyrell ; knighted after Tewkes- 
bury, 1471 ; Master of the Horse to Richard III. ; pardoned and made Lieuten- 
ant of Guisnes Castle by Henry VII. ; beheaded 1502. See note on iv. ii. 36. 

Sir James Blount] son of Sir Walter Blount, Baron Montjoy of Mountjoy ; 
Lieutenant of Hammes Castle, 1476, where he was custodian of the Earl of Ox- 
ford; knighted 1485; died 1493. 

Sir Walter Herbert] See note on iv. v. 10-18. 

Sir Robert Brakenbury] Appointed Constable of the Tower, 1483, so that 
his connexion with the murder of Clarence (1478) has no warrant in history; 
killed at Bosworth, 

Christopher Urswick] A member of a northern family ; confessor to the 
Countess of Richmond, Henry VII. 's mother; Archdeacon of Richmond; em- 
ployed in diplomatic missions by Henry VII. ; Dean of York, 1488 ; Dean of 
Windsor, 1495 ; died 1522. 

Tressel and Berkeley] Names probably chosen by Shakespeare at random. 

Lord Mayor of London] Sir Edmund Shaw. See note on iii. v. 103. 

Elizabeth] Born c. 1437, daughter of Sir Richard Woodville (Baron Rivers, 
1448 ; Earl Rivers, 1466) by Jacquetta of Luxemburg, widow of John, Duke of 
Bedford; married (i) Sir John Grey, eighth Baron Ferrers of Groby, (2) Edward 



6 NOTES ON DRAMATIS PERSONjE 

IV., 1464-65 ; died 1492. Her complicity in the designs of Richard III. (see iv. 
iv.) brought her out ol favour with her son-in-law, Henry VII. 

Margaret] See note on iv. iv. 6. 

Duchess of York] Born 1415 ; daughter of Sir Ralph Nevill, first Earl of West- 
morland, the "cousin Westmoreland" oi Henry V. iv. iii. 19; married Richard, 
Duke of York, 1438 ; died 1495. See notes on iii. vii. 179-82 ; iv. i. 95. 

Lady Anne] Born 1456, younger daughter of Richaid Nevill, the great Earl of 
Warwick; betrothed, but never married, to Edward, son of Henry VI., 1470; 
married Richard, Duke of Gloucester, 1474; died March, 1485. In 3 Henry VI. 
HI. iii. 242 she is wrongly called Warwick's "eldest daughter" (see also ibid. 
IV. i. 118). Her elder sister and co-heiress, Isabella, married George, Duke of 
Clarence; and a dispute over her inheritance was one of the causes of ill-feeling 
between Clarence and his brothers. 

A young daughter of Clarence] Margaret Plantagenet, born 1473; married to 
Sir Richard Pole ; restored to the title and possessions of the earldom of Salis- 
bury by Henry VIII., 1513 ; attainted for her suspected complicity in the intrigues 
of her .son, Reginald Pole, and others, 1539; executed 27th May, 1541. At iv. 
iii. 37 she is probably confused with her first cousin. Princess Cicely, whom 
Richard III. married "to a man found in a cloud, and of an vnknowne linage 
and f.imilie" (Holinshed, iii. 752), probably a member of the Lincolnshire family 
of Kyme. 

A Pursuivant} See note on ui. ii. 94. 



THE TRAGEDY OF 
KING RICHARD THE THIRD 

ACT I 

SCENE \.— London. A street. 



Enter RICHARD, Duke of Gloucester, solus. 

Glou. Now is the winter of our discontent 

Made glorious summer by this sun of York ; 
And all the clouds that lour'd upon our house 
In the deep bosom of the ocean buried. 
Now are our brows bound with victorious wreaths ; 
Our bruised arms hung up for monuments ; 



A street.'] Capell ; omitted Qq, Ff. 
2. sun] Rowe ; sonne Qq ; son Ff. 



London. 
Qq 3-8. 

2. this sun of York] Compare 3 
Henry VI. v. iii. 4, 5. Edward IV. 
assumed a sun for his badge, in conse- 
quence of the vision which appeared to 
him 2nd February, 1461, the day before 
the battle of Mortimer's Cross. See 
3 Henry VI. n. i. 25-40 ; HoHnshed, 
Chronicles, 2nd ed. 1587, iii. 660. The 
legend is referred to by Drayton, 
Miseries of Queen Mar°;aret, st. 134, 
and Poly-Olbion, 1622, xxii. 762-84. 
Aldis Wright quotes from Stow the 
incident at Barnet, where Warwick's 
forces, in the mist, took the "staire 
with streames " on the coats of Lord 
Oxford's men, their friends, for the sun 
worn by the supporters of Edward. 
The readings of Qq and Ff bring out a 
common play on the words " sun " and 
" son " : compare below, i. iii. 266, 267, 
and Tourneur, Revenger's Tragedy, 
1607: — 



I. our] Qq i, 2, Ff; omitted 



" The mother's curse is heavy ; where 
that lights. 
Sons set in storm, and daughters 
lose their lights." 
In Shr.T;e.speare's account of the vision 
mentioned above, Edward divines the 
three orr.inous suns joined in one as an 
emblem of the three "sons of brave 
Plantagenet." 

6. motiuments] Compare Massinger, 
Great Duke of Florence, 1635, ii. i : — 
•' his arms 
And his victorious sword and shield 

hung up 
For monuments." 
A. M. (ap. Hakluyt, Principal Navi- 
gations, 1599, ii. 135) : " They kept 
there the sword wherewith John Fox 
had killed the Keeper . . . and hanged 
it up for a monument." The phrase is 
sometimes taken as referring to the 
armour hung up over tombs, like those 



KING RICHARD 111 



[act I. 



Our stern alarums chang'd to merry meetings ; 
Our dreadful marches, to delightful measures. 
Grim-visag'd War hath smooth'd his wrinkled front ; 
And now, instead of mounting barbed steeds, 
To fright the souls of fearful adversaries, 
He capers nimbly in a lady's chamber, 



lO 



7. alarums] alarnies Q i, 8. measures] Qq 1-3, Ff ; pleasures Qq 4-8. 



of the Black Prince or Henry V. Such 
armour, however, was usually made for 
the funeral ceremonies, and could not 
corns under the category of " bruised 
arms " ; nor were the members of the 
house of York at present in need of 
funeral armour, The allusion, if any is 
needed, is simply to the custom of 
ornamenting a hall with the disused 
armour of the family, like the armour 
"Hugh's at Agincourt and . . . old 
Sir Ralph's at Ascalon " in Tennyson's 
Princess, 1847, prol. lines 25, 26, or 
Mr. Chainmail's " rusty pikes, shields, 
helmets, swords, and tattered banners" 
in Peacock's Crotchet Castle, 1831, 
chap. 5. 

8. measures] slow and solemn dances. 
Sir John Davies, Orchestra, 1596, st. 
65, says of Love, who had taught the 
multitude lighter dances : — 

" But after these, as men more civil 

grew. 
He did more grave and solemn 

Measures frame ; 
With such fair order and proportion 

true. 
And correspondence every way the 

same, 
That no fault-finding eye did ever 

blame"; 
and St. 66 : — 

"Yet all the feet whereon these 

measures go 
Are only Spondees, solemn, 

grave, and slow." 
Decker, Bel-Man of London, 1608, 
has " I neither wonder at the stately 
measures of the clouds, the nimble 
galliards of the water, nor the wanton 
trippings of the wind " (ed. Smeaton, 
1904, p. 71). There is a close parallel 
between the present passage and Lyly, 
Alexander and Cnmpaspe, 1584, ii. 2 
and iv. 3. Shakespeare seems to have 
had both these passages in mind. In 



iv. 3 we find " But let us draw in, to 
see how well it becomes them to tread 
the measures in a dance, that were 
wont to set the order for a march." 
Shakespeare's alliteration of " dreadful 
marches" and "delightful measures" 
is a trick learned in the school of 
Lyly. 

9. Grim-visag'd War] Mr. Craig calls 
my attention to the recurrence of the 
same phrase in Drajton, Poly-Olbion, 
i6i3,viii. 181: ^'Yet \\ith\grim-visag'd 
war when he her shores did greet," and 
to the reminiscence in Gray, Ode on a 
Distant Prospect of Eton College, 1797, 
St. vii. : " Grim-visaged comfortless 
despair." 

10. barbed] armed for war. So Lyly, 
Alexander and Campaspe, ii. 2 ; "Is the 
war-like sound of drum and trump 
turned to the soft noise of lyre and lute ? 
the neighing of fcarif*/ steeds . . . con- 
verted to delicate tunes and amorous 
glances ? " The word is a corruption 
of the proper term " barded " ; barde is 
a general term for horse-armour in 
French. Cotgrave, Dictionarie, 1611, 
gives " Bard6 : barbed or trapped, as a 
great horse. Bardes : f. Barbes, or 
trappings for horses of service, or of 
shew." " Barbed steeds" occurs again 
in Richard II. in. iii. 117. " Unbarbed," 
in Coriolanus. in. ii. 99, is usually taken 
to mean " unarmoured." The substan- 
tive "barb" is used for horse-armour 
by Spenser, Faerie Queenc, 1590, 11. ii. 
II : " goodly gorgeous barbes." For 
"barded" see Berners' Froissart, 1523, 
i. 41 : " It was a great beauty to behold 
the . . . horses barded." " Barded " 
is sometimes used, e.g. by Stow, of men 
as well as horses. The application of 
the term "barbed" to the walls of a 
hall hung with armour (Mlla, line 219) 
was one of the signs that betrayed 
Chatterton's forgeries. 



SC. I. 



KING RICHARD III 



9 



To the lascivious pleasing of a lute. 

But I, that am not shap'd for sportive tricks, 

Nor made to court an amorous looking-glass; 15 

I, that am rudely stamp'd, and want love's majesty, 

To strut before a wanton ambling nymph ; 

I, that am curtail'd of this fair proportion. 

Cheated of feature by dissembling Nature, 

Deform'd, unfinish'd, sent before my time 20 

Into this breathing world, scarce half made up, 

And that so lamely and unfashionable, 

That dogs bark at me as I halt by them ; 

Why, I, in this weak piping time of peace, 

Have no delight to pass away the time, 25 



13. lute] Ff ; lone Qq. 
4, 5 ; sharpe of Qq 6-8. 



14. shap'd fori F^I shapte for Qq 1-3; sharpe for Qq 
21. scarce] Qq i, 2; scarse Ff; omitted Qq 3-S. 



13. pleasing] evidently used here for 
"pleasure." No parallel example is 
forthcoming. 

17. ambling] used of leisurely or easy 
motion, as Romeo and jftdiet, i. iv, 10; 
Hamlet, iii. i. 151. New Eng. Diet. 
quotes an apposite passage from Addi- 
son, The Drummer, 1716, i. i : " She 
has . . . play'd at an assembly, and 
ambled in a ball or two." Mr. Craig 
suggests that " wanton-ambling " is 
possibly one of the double epithets so 
cx)mmon in this play. 

18. proportion] regularity of figure. 
Compare Greene, Friar Bacon and 
Friar Bungay , 1594 (ed. Dyce,p. 158) : — 

" Proportioned as was Paris, when, 
in grey. 
He courted CEnon in the vale by 
Troy " ; 
Decker, Guls Horn-Booke, 1609 (ed. 
Smeaton, 1904, p. 30) : " a head al hid 
in haire gives even to a most wicked 
face a sweet proportion.'^ 

19. feature] outward appearance 
(Lat. factura, Fr. faitiire), as Kyd, 
iSpanish Tragedy, c. 1588, act ii. : " My 
feature is not to content her sight " ; 
Spenser, Faerie Queene, i. viii. 49 ; 
Two Gentlemen of Verona, 11. iv. 73, 
" Feature " and " proportion " occur 
together again in Fletcher, False One, 
1647, i. 2 : — 

" Caesar is amorous, 
And taken more with the title of a 
queen, . . . 



Thzn feature or proportion." 
Shakespeare does not here imply beauty 
of appearance : it is the shape of his 
body of which Richard has been 
cheated. Its " feature " is imperfect : 
as he explains lower down, he is 
" scarce half made up." 

dissembling Nature] The idea of 
cheating is probably emphasised in 
"dissembling." Warburton explained 
the phrase as meaning " Nature that 
puts together things of a dissimilar 
kind, as a brave soul and a deformed 
body," i.e. dis-assembling Nature. 
But this idea seems rather far- 
fetched. 

21. this breathing world] Compare 
Sonnet Ixxxi. 12. See also 2 Henry 
VI. 1. ii. 21 (Craig). 

22. lamely and unfashionable] For 
this double adverb with a single ter- 
mination compare Ben Jonson, 
Poetaster, 1601, i. i: "What, hast 
thou buskins on, Luscus, that thou 
swearest so tragically and high." 
Sometimes the adverbial termination 
is given to the second of the two words, 
as Fletcher, False One, iv. 2 : — 

" we make louder prayers to die 
nobly. 
Than to live high and wantonly." 
24. piping] The pipe was an instru- 
ment proper to times of peace, as the 
fife to times of war. Compare Much 
Ado About Nothing, 11. iii. 13-15. 



10 



KING RICHARD III 



[act 1. 



Unless to spy my shadow in the sun, 
And descant on mine own deformity. 
And therefore, since I cannot prove a lover, 
To entertain these fair well-spoken days, 
I am determined to prove a villain, 
■ And hate the idle pleasures of these days. 
Plots have I laid, inductions dangerous. 
By drunken prophecies, libels, and dreams, 
To set my brother Clarence and the king 
In deadly hate the one against the other : 
And if King Edward be as true and just, 
As I am subtle, false, and treacherous, o^r 
This day should Clarence closely be mew d up. 
About a prophecy, which says that G 

26. spy'\ spie Qq ; see Ff. 39. a prophecy] adrohesit Qq 4, 5. 



30 



35 



27. descant] The usual meaning of 
"descant" in music was the art of 
constructing variations on a simple 
melody called the " ground " or " plain- 
song." Richard's deformity is the 
plain-song of his descant. New Eng. 
Diet, quotes Cotgrave, s.v. Contre, " To 
sing . . , the Plainesong whereon 
another descants." Compare below, 
III. vii. 49 ; Edwards, Damon and 
Pithias, 1571, refers to the jests passed 
on ladies by Aristippus : " They are 
your playne song to singe descant 
upon " ; Lyly, Euphues, 1579 (ed. 
Arber, p. 137) : " He that alwaycs 
singeth one note without deskant 
breedeth no delight." In Eastward 
Ho, 1605, Wolf the prison-keeper 
answers to Touchstone's puns, " Sir, 
your worship may descant as you 
please o" my name." 

29. entertain . . . days] Compare 
Measure for Measure, in. i. 75 ; Sonnet 
xxxix. II. Shakespeare uses the word 
in this act with three different senses, 
(i) as here; (2) as in i. ii. 257, with 
which compare King Lear, in. vi. 83 ; 
(3) as in I. iii. 4, where it corresponds 
to our phrase " to entertain a hope." 

30. Gloucester has expressed this 
intention previously, 3 Henry VI. v. 
vi. 78-9. The soliloquy of the Duke of 
Epire in Machin and Markham, Dumb 
Knight, 1608, act i., is a recollection of 
this passage : — 



" I am resolv'd, since virtue hath 
disdain'd 
To clothe me in her riches, hence- 
forth to prove 
A villain fatal, black and omin- 
ous." 
32. inductions] beginnings, prepara- 
tions ; as below, iv. iv. 5. Compare 1 
Henry IV. in. i. 2 ; Cook, Green s Tu 
Quoquf, c. 1599 : " False dice say 
amen : for that's my induction.' In 
drama, the " induction " is the scene 
or scenes preparatory to a play, like the 
inductions to Taming of the Shrew, or 
Jonson's Cynthia's Revels, or Webster's 
induction to Marston's Malcontent. 

38, mew'd up] confined, properly oj 
a hawk while mewing (muer) or moult- 
ing its feathers. It is used again below, 
line 132 and i. iii. 139. Compare 
Spenser, Faerie Queene, n. iii. 34 ; 
Midsummer-Night's Dream, i. i. 71; 
Beaumont and Fletcher, Woman- 
Hater, 1607, iii. i : "Is this your 
mewing-up, your strict retirement?" 
The cage was called a " mew " : see 
Chaucer, Canterbury Tales, A. 349; 
Troilus and Criseyde, iii. 602. In Lon- 
don, the fact that the royal stables 
originally were built on the site of the 
king's mews for hawks, gave rise to 
the name commonly applied to stables 
of town houses. 

39. a prophecy ] Compare Halle (ap. 
Holinshed, iii.703),"afoolishprophe6ie, 



sc. I] KING RICHARD III 11 

Of Edward's heirs the murderer shall be. 40 

Dive, thoughts, down to my soul ! here Clarence comes. 

Enter Cl^AKEjaCE, guarded, and Brakenbury. 

Brother, good day : what means this armed guard 

That waits upon your grace ? 
Clar. His majesty, 

Tendering my person's safety, hath appointed 

This conduct, to convey me to the Tower. 45 

Glou. Upon what cause ? 

Clar. Because my name is George. 

Glou. Alack, my lord, that fault is none of yours ; 

He should for that commit your godfathers. 

O, belike his majesty hath some intent 

That you shall be new-christ'ned in the Tower. 50 

But what 's the matter, Clarence ? may I know ? 
Clar. Yea, Richard, when I know ; for I protest 

As yet I do not : but, as I can learn, 

He hearkens after prophecies and dreams. 

And from the cross-row plucks the letter G, 55 

40. murderer] murtherer Qq 3-8, Ff ; murtherers Qq i, 2, 41. Dive . , . 

conies] one line as Ff ; two lines Qq, divided after soule. Enter . . . Braken- 
bury.] Howe; Enter Clarence zvith a guard of men. Qq ; Enter Clarence and 
Brakenbury , guarded. Ti. 42. day]'Pi\ dayes 01 dates Qq. 43-45- That 

waits . . . the Toit/tr.] arranged as Pope; That waits . . . Grace? His . . . 
appointed This . . . the Tower (3 lines) Qq ; That waits . . . Grace ? His . . . 
safety, Hath . . . th' Toxver. Ff. 48. godfathers] Qq 1-3, Fi; good fathers 
Qq 4-6 ; grandfathers Ff 2-4. 50. shall be] Qq 2-8 ; shalbe Q i ; should be Ff. 
51. what's]Vi; ivhats Qq i, 2 ; what is Qq 3-8. 52. know] doe know Q Q. 
/br]Qq; 6m^ Ff. 

which was, that, after K. Edward, one for London and England, 1594 (Dyce, 

should reigne, whose first letter of his 124) : " the duty of lawyers in tender- 

name should be a G." Q 5 follows Q ing the right cause of their clients." 

4 in the extraordinary misprint " ad- 54. hearkens after] Compare Much 

rohesie." Ado About Nothing, v. i. 216. New 

44. <«KrfmHg'] having regard to. The £«^. Dtc^. quotes Berners' Froijsarf, i. 

word is used about twenty times by 303: " There abode styll the Englyssh- 

Shakespeare, e.g. 11. iv. 72 below; Tnen to hearken after other nev/es." 

Richard II. 1. i. 32 ; Hamlet, i. iii. prophecies] Malone notes the state- 

107 ; Tempest, 11. i. 270 : compare 1 ments of Philippe de Commines " that 

Henry IV. v. iv. 49. See also Lyly, the English at that time were never 

Euphues (Arber, 147): "When as I unfurnished with some prophecy or 

see many fathers more cruell to their other, by which they accounted for 

children then carefull of them, which every event." 

thinke it not necessarye to haue those 55. cross-row] the alphabet or Christ- 

about them, that most tender them"; cross-row, so called from the cross 

Lodge and Greene, Looking -Glass which was placed before the alphabet 



12 



KING RICHARD III 



[act I. 



And says, a wizard told him that by G 

His issue disinherited should be : 

And, for my name of George begins with G, 

It follows in his thought that I am he. . ., 

These, as I learn, and such like toys asrthese, 60 

Have mov'd his highness to commit me now. 

Glou. Why, this it is, when men are rul'd by women : 
'Tis not the king that sends you to the Tower; 
My Lady Grey his. wife, Clarence, 'tis she 
That (empers liim'to this extremity. 65 

Was it not she, and that good man of worship, 
Anthony Woodville, her brother there. 
That made him send Lord Hastings to the Tower, 
From whence this present day he is delivered ? 
We are not safe, Clarence, we are not safe. 70 

Clar. By heaven, I think there is no man secure 

But the queen's kindred and night-walking heralds 

61. Have'\ Qq, F 4 ; Hath Ff 1-3. 65. tempers] Q i ; tcmf>ts Qq 2, 5-8, Ff ; 
temfs Qq 3, 4. thii] Qq ; this harsh Ff. 71. secure] Ff ; is securdc Qq 1-3 ; 
securde Q 4 ; sceurde Q 5 ; secttr'd Q 6. 



in horn-books. Cotgrave gives " La 
croix de par Dieu : The Christ's cross 
row, hornebooke wherein a child learns 
it." The sixteenth century screen in 
the tower-arch of Probus Church, Corn- 
wall, is ornamented with a series of 
small shields in its lower panels, the 
first of which bears a cross, and the 
rest the opening letters of the alphabet 
cut in relief. New Eng. Diet, quotes 
a formula repeated before the alphabet 
from Morley, Plaine and Easie Intro- 
duction to Practicall Mnsicke, 1597 : 
" Christ's crosse be my speede, in all 
vertue to proceede. A, b, c," etc. 
Halliwell, s.v. Christ-Crcs, notes a 
variant beginning " Christe cross me 
spede in all my worke.'' Skelton refers 
to one or other of these formulas. 
Against Venemous Tongues, ant. 1529 
(Chalmers, English Poets, ii. 235) : 
" In your crosse rowe, nor Christ crosse 
you spcde." 

60. toys] trifles, idle fancies; very 
common in all writers of this age. 
Compare Lyly, Euphues (Arber, 20S) : 
" They that inuented this toie were un- 
wise, and they that reported it vnkinde." 



65. tempers] Reasons for adopting 
this reading, peculiar to Q i, have been 
given in the Introduction. The queen 
tempers Edward's will as one tempers 
or moulds wax : compare for the meta- 
phor 2 Henry IV. iv. iii. 140 : " I 
have him already tempering between 
my finger and thumb, and shortly will 
I seal with him." For "temper" in 
the sense of "govern, comrol." see 
Greene, Friar Bacon (Dyce, 178) :— 
" mine art, 
Which once I temper d in my 
secret cell." 

67. Woodville] pronounced as a 
trisyllable. The name originally was 
spelt Wydeville, and -a full syllabic 
value given to the middle e. Steevens 
mentions that, in his day, one of the 
bearers of the name Woodville pro- 
nounced it in this way. "England" 
and " Henry," among other words, are 
often found in places where it is neces- 
sary to pronounce them as trisyllables, 
as in Qq readings of iv. iv. 264, iv. ii. 
94 below. Compare Chaucer, Canter- 
bury Tales, A. 16 " ngelond,'" A. 3S9 
" Dertemouthe." 



sc. i] KING RICHARD III 13 

That trudge betwixt the king and Mistress Shore. 

Heard you not what an humble suppliant 

Lord Hastings was to her for his delivery? 75 

Glou. Humbly complaining to her deity 

Got my lord chamberlain his liberty. 

I '11 tell you what ; I think it is our way, 

If we will keep in favour with the king, 

To be her men and wear her livery. 80 

The jealous o'er-worn widow and herself, 

Since that our brother dubb'd them gentlewomen. 

Are mighty gossips m this monarchy. 
Brak I beseech your graces both to pardon me ; 

His majesty hath straitly given in charge, 85 

That no man shall have private conference. 

Of what degree soever, with his brother. 
Glon. Even so ; an 't please your worship, Brakenbury, 

You may partake of any thing we say. 

74. yo%i\ Ff, Qq 7, 8; ye Qq i-6, 75, wa% to her for his] Qq; was, for her 
F I ; was, for his Ff 2, 3 ; was for his F 4. 83. this] Qq ; our Ff. 87. his] 
Qq ; your Ff. 88, an't] Pope ; and Qq i, 2, Ff ; <&- Qq 3-6. Brakenbury] 
Ff ; Brokenbury Qq. 

73. Mistress Shore] Jane Shore was brackets her name with that of Mistress 

daughter of a Cheapside mercer and Shore in a spirit of malicious insinua- 

wife of a goldsmith in Lombard Street, tion. That erroneous accounts of her 

More saj's that she used her influence origin were current appears from a 

with the king "to manie a mans phrase in the translation of Polydore 

comfort and releefe. Where the king Vergil (ed. Ellis, 1844, p. 117), where 

tooke displeasure, shee would mitigate the king is said to have kept his marriage 

and appease his mind : where men secret " because the woman was of 

were out of fauour, she would bring meane caulyng." 

them in his grace." In 1483 Glouces- 83. gossips] familiar acquaintances, 

ter, as Protector (see below, in. iv.) ac- So Gammer Gurton's Needle, 1575, 

cused her of sorcery against 'his "mother Chat, my gossip" ; Midstim- 

person. No proof being found against mer-NighVs Dream, 11. i. 47 ; Merchant 

her, she was condemned to do penance of Venice, iii. i. 9 ; Jonson, Bartliolo- 

in St. Paul's for incontinency. She mew Fair, 1614, i. i : " All the poets 

died in poverty c. 1527. and poet-suckers in town . . . are the 

75. fo Aer/oy A Ji] Qq, although add- players' gossips." Nares quotes Ver- 
ing an extra foot to the line, have the stegen for the origin of the word, 
better reading. " For A £»• delivery " in "Such as undertooke for the child at 
Ffcan mean only " for delivery at A^r baptisme, called each other by the 
hands," which is strained and awkward, name of Godsib, that is, of kin together 

Si. o'erworn] Compare Chapman (?), through God." The sense of vulgar 

Alphonsns Emperor of Germany, 1654, familiarity implied by Richard is found 

i. 2 : "Joachim Carolus, Marquess of in Piers the Ploivman,B-text, v. ;iio {A- 

Brandenburg, o'erworn with age." text, 152), and Chaucer, Canterbury 

S2. gentlewomen] There was no ques- Tales, D. 548. Compatie Ft. compere. 

tion of Elizabeth's gentry. Richard commcre. 



14 KING RICHARD III [act i. 

We speak no treason, man ; we say the king 90 

Is wise and virtuous, and his noble queen 

Well struck in years, fair, and not jealous ; 

We say that Shore's wife hath a pretty foot, 

A cherry lip, a bonny eye, a passing pleasing tongue ; 

And that the queen's kindred are made gentle-folks: 95 

How say you, sir? can you deny all this ? 
Brak. With this, my lord, myself have nought to do. 
Glou. Naught to do with Mistress Shore ? I tell thee, fellow, 

He that doth naught with her, excepting one. 

Were best to do it secretly alone, 100 

Brak. What one, my lord ? 

Glou. Her husband, knave : wouldst thou betray me ? 
Brak. I beseech your grace to pardon me, and withal 

Forbear your conference with the noble duke. 

g2. jealous] Qq; iealious Ff. 97. nought] Qq i, 6, Ff; naught Qq 2-5. 

98-100. Naught . . . alone] arranged as Qq 1-7; Ff, Q 8 divide thus, Naught 
. . . Shore ? I tell . . . with her (Excepting one) . . . alone. 100. to do] 

Ff, Q 8 ; he do Qq 1-7. loi, 102. What one . . . betray me ?] omitted Q i. 
103. beseech] Qq ; do beseech Ff. 103, 104. / beseech . . . noble duke] 

arranged as Capell ; Qq divide thus, / beseech . . . forleare Your . . . Duke; 
Ff thus, / do beseech your Grcue To pardon . . . forbear e Your . . . Duke 
(3 lines). 

92. struck in years] Aldis Wright nature all aie jealous," where the same 

points out that this phrase means pronunciation is necessary, 
"well gone" or "far run" in years. 94. Steevens emended the metre bj' 

" Struck " is from A.S. strican = to giving a whole line to " A cherry lip." 

go, run : compare Ger. streichen. Pope omitted " a bonny eye." Is it 

"Strike" is used with this meaning in not possible that the line is a snatch 

a lyric poem on Springtime, c. 1300 from some old song in "fourteen" 

(Morris and Skeat, Specimens, new ed. metre ? 

1879, ii. 48): " Asse slreme ])at strike]? 94. 6o«m^] Compare 2 /f^«r)' KJ. v, ii, 

stiile." Halliwell, sub Strike (2) and 12 ; Much Ado About Nothing, \i.m.6g; 

Streke, gives thirteenth and fourteenth Greene, Friar Bacon (Dyce, 174) : — 
century examples. See George a " May it please your highness give 
Greene, 1599 : " Three men come strik- me leave to post 

ing through the corn, my love," and ToFresingfield, I '11 fetchthe6cl>mv 

/irts<a'ard Ho, i. I : — girl-" 

" prouder hopes, which daringly 100. Were best to do it] The ordinary 

a'erstrike phrase would be "he . . . were ,best 

Their place and means.' do it." Compare Taming of the Shrew, 

Elizabeth could not be said to be \.'\.\^;'Ly\y, Alexander andCavipaspe, 

" struck in years " or " o'erworn " (line iv. 1 : "You were as good eat my 

81). She was about thirty-seven when master." The earliest example cited 

Edward IV. died. All Richard's re- in New Eng. Diet, belongs to 14S3. 

marks are coloured by insinuation. Before that time the pronoun wa- in the 

jealous] a trisyllable. Ff print dative, " him were best." The read- 

" iealious." Compare Drayton, Eng. ing in Qq is confused and ungramnia- 

Her. Epp. 1597, Mary of France to tical, and 1 have found no parallel for 

Charles Brandon, 72 : " That we by it. 



sc. I.J KING RICHARD III 15 

Clar. We know thy charge, Brakenbury, and will obey. 105 
Glou. We are the queen's abjects, and must obey. 

Brother, farewell : I will unto the king, 

And, whatsoe'er you will employ me in, 

Were it to call King Edward's widow sister, 

I will perform it to enfranchise you. 1 10 

Meantime, this deep disgrace in brotherhood 

Touches me deeper than you can imagine. 
Clar. I know it pleaseth neither of us well. , 

Glou, Well, your imprisonment shall not be long; ^fSJrv-^ '""^ pWi^J^ 

I will deliver you, or else lie for you : - ,• i * '"^^ 1 15 

Meantime, have patience. 
Clar. I must perforce : farewell, 

\Exeiint Clarence, Brakenbury, and guard. 
Glou. Go, tread the path that thou shalt ne'er return, 

Simple, plain Clarence ! — I do love thee so, 

That I will shortly send thy soul to heaven. 

If heaven will take the present at our hands. I20 

But who comes here ? the new-delivered Hastings ? 

Enter LORD HASTINGS. 

Hast. Good time of day unto my gracious lord ! 
Glou. As much unto my good lord chamberlain ! 

Well are you welcome to this open air : 

How hath your lordship brook'd imprisonment? 125 

Hast. With patience, noble lord, as prisoners must ; 

But I shall live, my lord, to give them thanks 

That were the cause of my imprisonment. 

108. whatsoe'er] whatsoe'rc Ff; whatsoeuer Qq. 115. or else^Vl; or Qq. 
Exeunt . . . guard.] Capell ; Exit Clar. (or Cla) Qq, Ff. 124. this] Qq 3-8, 
Ff ; the Qq i, 2. 

106. abjects] used in an exaggerated 115. lie for you] On their face, the 

sense for " subjects." Monck Mason words mean, " lie in prison instead of 

and others explain, " the most servile you." But Gloucester, no doubt, uses 

of her subjects." So Lyly, Alexander "lie" in a double sense. He really 

and Carkpaspe, i. i : "You shall not be means " I v/ill deliver you, or else will 

as abjects of war, but as subjects to tell falsehoods about j'ou." See below, 

Alexander." There is a similar play lines 147, 148. 

between "abject" and "object" in lit. patience . . . ^er/brcc] Steevens 

Henry VIII. i. i. 127. sees an allusion to the proverb "Pa- 

log. King Edward's widow] i.e. the tience perforce is a medicine for a mad 

widow whom King Edward has made dog." 
his wife. 



^ 



16 KING RICHARD 111 [act i. 

Glou. No doubt, no doubt ; and so shall Clarence too ; 

For they that were your enemies are his, 130 

And have prevail'd as much on him as you. 
Hast. More pity that the eagle should be mew'd, 

While kites and buzzards prey at liberly. 
Glou. What news abroad ? 
Hast. No news so bad abroad as this at home : 135 

The king is sickly, weak, and melancholy ; 

And his physicians fear him mightily. 
Glou. Now, by Saint Paul, that news is bad indeed ! 

O, he hath kept an evil diet long. 

And overmuch consum'd his royal person : 140 

'Tis very grievous to be thought upon. 

What, is he in his bed ? 
Hast. He is. 
Glou. Go you before, and I will follow you. \Exit Hastings. 

He cannot live, I hope, and must not die 145 

Till George be pack'd with post-horse up to heaven. 

I '11 in, to urge his hatred more to Clarence, 

With lies well steel'd with weighty arguments ; 

And if I fail not in my deep intent, 

Clarence hath not another day to live ; 1 50 

Which done, God take King Edward to his mercy, 

And leave the world for me to bustle in ! 

132. eagle\ Qq ; Eagles Ff. 133. While] Qq ; Whiles Ff. py<:y~[ Qq ; play 
Ff. 138. Sa;«/ Pa»</] Qq ; S. JoAn Ff. that] ¥i\ this Q,({. 142. What, 
is he] Qq ; Where is he, Ff. 

136. sickly] See below, 11. iii. 30, 139. evil diet] So More (ap. Holin- 

" this sickly land," and compare Lyly, shed, iii. 712) : " The king his brother 

Euphues (Arber, 227) : " Cassander . . . (whose life he looked that euill diet 

being both aged and sickly, found such should shorten)." 

weaknesse in himselfe, that he thought 148. steel'd] pointed with steel, like 

nature would yeeld to death." a lance ; and so, armed, fortified. 

137. /^-ar] fear for. New Eng. Diet. Compare 2 Henry VI. in. i. 331: 

suggests that the pronoun may origin- " Now, York, or never, steel thy fearful 

ally have been in the dative, like Lat. thoughts," where, however, " steel " 

timere nlictii, and quotes Berners, Hys- approximates more nearly to the sense 

torye of the moost noble and valiaunt of "harden," as "the steeled gaoler" 

Knyght Arthur of lytell Brytayne, c. in Measure for Measure, iv. ii. 90. 

1530 (ed. 1814, p. 213) : " Arthur fered 152. bustle] busy mj'self energeti- 

his horse, lest that the lyon sholdehaue cally. Compare Lyly, Alexander and 

elayne him." See also Merchant of Campaspe, iv. 1 : " See, they begin to 

Venice, lu. v. 3, 33 i i Henry IV. iv. flock, and behold my master bustles 

i. 24. himself to fly " ; Merry Devil of Ed- 



sc. II.] KING RICHARD III 17 

For then I '11 marry Warwick's youngest daughter. 

What though I killed her husband and her father ? 

The readiest way to make the wench amends 155 

Is to become her husband and her father : 

The which will I, not all so much for love 

As for another secret close intent, 

By marrying her which I must reach unto. 

But yet I run before my horse to market : 160 

Clarence still breathes ; Edward still lives and reigns ; 

When they are gone, then must I count my gains. [Exit. 

SCENE II. — The same. Another street. 

Enter the corpse <?/"KlNG Henry VI., Gentlemen with halberds 
to guard it ; Lady Anne being the mourner. 

Anne. Set down, set down your honourable load — 
If honour may be shrouded in a hearse — 
Whilst I awhile obsequiously lament 
The untimely fall of virtuous Lancaster. 
Poor key-cold figure of a holy king ! 5 

Scene it. The same. Another street.] Capell. Enter . . . mourner] Enter 
the Coarse of Henrie the sixt with Halberds to guard it . . . Mourner. Ff.; 
Enter Lady Anne, with the hearse of Harry the 6. Qq. i. load] Ff ; I [rest 
imperfect] Q i ; lord Qq 2-8, 

monton, 1617 : " Let us alone to bustle 158. secret close] The second ad- 

for the set." In the same play, the jective intensifies the first : compare 

keeper Brian uses the word thus : — " secretly alone " above, line 100 For 

"Let me alone to bustle with your " close " compare below, iv. ii. 35. 

fathers ; 

I warrant you that I will keep them Scene II. 

play 

Till you have quit the Chase." 3. obsequiously] as befits a funeral, 

154. her husband and her father] mournfully. Compare 5 Henry VI. 11. 

For the traditiiial part taken by v. 118. For the more usual and modern 

Richard in the slaying of Prince Ed- sense, see Merry Wives of Windsor, 

ward after Tewkesbury, see below, i. ii. iv. ii. 2, and Othello, i. i. 46. 
242, and 3 Henry VI. v. v. 39 : " Her 5. key-cold] as cold as a key, i.e. 

father " cannot mean Warwick. Glou- very cold. Aldis Wright quotes Gower, 

cester commanded the vanguard at Confessio Amantis, vi. 244-7 : — 
Barnet, where Warwick fell ; but only " For certes there was never keie 

in this general sense could he be called Ne frosen is vpon the walle 

Warwick's murderer. On the other More inly cold, than I am alle." 

hand, he was credited with the murder Compare Lucrece, 1774; Decker, Seuen 

of Henry VL, Anne's father-in law. Deadly Sinucs of London, 1606 (Arber, 

The later Qq use "father " for " father- p. 19) : " Such fellowes [the porters at 

in-law" below, I. ii. 231 ; and compare the city-gates] are key-cold in their 

Romeo and Juliet, iv. i. 2, etc. comming downe to Strangers, except 



18 



KING RICHARD III 



Tact i. 



Pale ashes of the house of Lancaster ! 

Thou bloodless remnant of that royal blood! 

Be it lawful that I invocate thy ghost, 

To hear the lamentations of poor Anne, 

Wife to thy Edward, to thy slaught'red son, lo 

Stabb'd by the selfsame hand that made these wounds ! 

Lo, in these windows that let forth thy life 

I pour the helpless balm of my poor eyes. 

O cursed be the hand that made these holes ! 

Cursed the heart that had the heart to do it ! 15 

Cursed the blood that let this blood from hence ! 

More direful hap betide that hated wretch, 

That makes us wretched by the death of thee, 

Than I can wish to adders, spiders, toads. 

Or any creeping venom'd thing that lives ! 20 

II. hand] Ff ; hands Qq. 
14. O cursed] Ff ; Curst Qq 



3-8. 15. Cursed] Ff ; Curst be Qq. 
Qq. ig. adders] Qq ; Wolues, to Ff. 

they be brybed." The earliest ex- 
ample in New Eng. Diet, is of 1529. 
Mr. Craig furnishes several examples, 
e.g. John Heywood, Proverbes, 1546 
(ed. Sharman, 1876, p. 121) : " Hot as a 
toste, it grew cold as a kay" ; Fletcher, 
Wild-Goose Chase, 1652, iv. 3 : "till 
they be key-cold dead, there 's no 
trusting of 'em." 

8. invocate] invoke, as 1 Henry 
VI. I. i. 52. New Eng. Diet, quotes 
Institution of a Christian Man, 1537 : 
" Whensoever I do invocate and call 
upon him in right faith and hope." 
Compare Milton, Samson Agonistes, 
1671, 1146 : — 

" Go to his Temple, invocate his aid 
With solemnest devotion." 

II. hand] In line 92 below, Ff ap- 
parently (all into the error of printing 
"hands" for "hand." which in this 
line they correct. 

19. adders] In favour of Ff it may be 
conceded that " any creeping venom'd 
thing " in the next line does not neces- 
sarily refer to the creatures mentioned 
in this. At the same time, " wolves ' 
is incongruous with " spiders, toads." 
The alteration in Ff could hardly be a 
mere editorial conjecture, fcr which no 
reason could be alleged but the rtcur- 



wounds] Ff ; holes Qq. 12. these] Ff ; those Qq. 

these] Ff; these fatall Qq 1,2; the/ataliqq 



16. Cursed 



hence l] Ff; omitted 



rence of the same syllable in " adders " 
and "spiders." If, as is likely, the 
editor of F 1 was conservative in his 
emendations, the probability is that 
some intended alteration, begun, but 
not extended to the whole line, had 
found its way into the margin of the 
corrected Q which he used, and was 
embodied by him in his new text with- 
out question. Spcdding's view was 
that Shakespeare had begun such an 
alteration, intending to change " creep- 
ing venom'd things," significant 01 
treacherous and underhand dealing, 
into words compatible with acts of open 
violence. This theory is somewhat 
discounted by the fact that "open 
violence " is hardly characteristic of a 
wolfs behaviour. Pickersgill thought 
that Ff represented Shakespeare's ori- 
ginal text, and thus expressed the 
" blood-thirsty ferocity " of Gloucester 
by " wolves," and by the rest the loath- 
ing which Anne felt for him. For 
Richard's biting, wolfish nature is in- 
sisted upon in these plays. But Qq 
give us a more consistent reading, 
whether it be due to Shakespeare or 
not, which is a'so more in keeping with 
the general sense of the passage. 



V 



sc II.] KING RICHARD III 19 

If ever he have child, abortive be it, 

Prodigious, and untimely brought to light, 

Whose ugly and unnatural aspect 

May fright the hopeful mother at the view, 

And that be heir to his unhappiness ! 25 

If ever he have wife, let her be made 

More miserable by the death of him 

Than I am made by my young lord and thee ' 

Come now towards Chertsey with your holy load. 

Taken from Paul's to be interred there ; 30 

And still, as you are weary of this weight, 

Rest you, whiles I lament King Henry's corse. 

Enter GLOUCESTER. 

Glon. Stay, you that bear the corse, and set it down ! 
Anne. What black magician conjures up this fiend, 

To stop devoted charitable deeds ? 35 

Glou. Villains, set down the corse ! or, by Saint Paul, 

I '11 make a corse of him that disobeys ! 
Gent. My lord, stand back, and let the coffin pass. 

25. And that . . . unhappiness t'\ Ff; omitted Qq. 26. made] mad: Q 6. 
27. More] Ff; As Qq. 28. Than] Then Ff; As Qq. young] Ff ; poore Qq. 
31. weary] Qq i, 2, Ff; a wearie Qq 3-6. this] Ff ; the Qq. 36. Villains] 
Villaines F i ; Villaine Qq. 38. My Lord] omitted Q 6. 

22. prodigious] monstrous, unnatural, with billes and glaues pompouslie (if 

Compare King John, ni. i. 46. you will call that a funerall pompe) " 

25. unhappiness] capacity for work- from the Tower to St. Paul's on As- 

ing mischief. "Unhappy" is mis- cension Eve, 22nd May, 1471. It re- 

chievous: see All's Well that E rids mained in St. Paul's during Ascension 

Well, IV. V. 66; and compare Skelton, Day " on a beire or coffen bare faced," 

Against Venemous Tongues : " Such where it was reported to have bled in 

tongues unhappy hath made great the presence of spectators. It was 

division." Compare Lyly, Alexander then taken to the Blackfriars, "and 

and Catnpaspe, v. 4 : " I am no bled there likewise." Next day, it was 

thought catcher, but I guess un- taken by boat to Chertsey "without 

happily " ; Fletcher and Massinger, priest or clerke, torch or taper, singing 

Eldir Brother, 1637, iii. 5: "He speaks or saieng," and was buried in the 

unhappily " ; Wilkins, Miseries of In- abbey. Richard III., in August, 1484, 

jorst Marriage, 1607, act v. : "I am removed the body to St. George's 

sure they are greater sinners that made Chapel at Windsor. Henry VII. strove 

this match, and were unhappy men "; to obtain leave from Pope Julius II. for 

Psalm xiv. 7 (Prayer-Book version) : the removal of the body from Windsor 

" Destruction and unhappiness is in to Westminster, 
their ways." 36. by Saint Paul] Richard's favour- 

29. 30. See Holinshed, iii. 690, 6gi. ite oath, as above, i. i. 138 ; below, lino 

The body of Henry VI, was " conueied 41 ; iii. iv. 78, etc. 



20 



KING RICHARD III 



[act r. 



Glou. Unmanner'd dog, stand thou when I command ! 

Advance thy halberd higher than my breast, 40 

Or, by Saint Paul, I '11 strike thee to my foot, 
And spurn upon thee, beggar, for thy boldness ! 

Anne. What, do you tremble? are you all afraid ? 
Alas, I blame you not ; for you are mortal, 
And mortal eyes cannot endure the devil. 45 

Avaunt, thou dreadful minister of hell ! 
Thou hadst but power over his mortal body, 
His soul thou canst not have ; therefore be gone. 

Glou. Sweet saint, for charity, be not so curst. 

Anne. Foul devil, for God's sake, hence, and trouble us not ! 50 
For thou hast made the happy earth thy hell, 
Fill'd it with cursing cries and deep exclaims. 
If thou delight to view thy heinous deeds, 
Behold this pattern of thy butcheries. 
O gentlemen, see, see ! dead Henry's wounds 5 5 

39. Unmanner'd . . . command] one line as Qq ; two lines Ff, divided after 
dog. stand] Qq 1-7, Ff 2-4 ; stand'st F i, Q 8. 50. Foul devil . . . us not] 
one line as Qq ; two lines Ff, divided after devil. 



39. Unmanner'd] unmannerly. So 
Beaumont and Fletcher, Faithful 
Shepherdess, c. i6og, ii. 4 : " I fear I am 
too much unmanner'd, far too rude." 
Forms of this kind are common in 
Shakespeare. Compare above, line 20, 
" venom'd " for " venomous " ; Measure 
for Measure, in. i. 121, "delighted" 
for "delightful"; ibid. iii. ii. 62, " un- 
shunned " for " unavoidable " ; ibid. iv. 
ii. 13, " unpitied " for " pitiless." 

49. curst] spiteful, cantankerous. 
New Eng. Diet, quotes Coverdale, 
Spirit. Perle, 1550, who calls Xanthippe 
Socrates' " curst and shrewd wife," a 
phrase repeated by Shakespeare, Tam- 
tn^ of the Shrew, i. ii. 70. Compare 
Lodge, Wounds of Civil War, 1594, 
act ii. : — 

" No, Sylla, my discourse is re- 
solute, 
Not coin'd to please thy fond and 
cursed thoughts " ; 
Marlowe, Edward II., 15Q4, v. 2 : 
" Speak curstly to him." The proverb 
" God sends a cunt cow short horns " 
is quoted in Much Ado Ah^nt Nothing, 
u. i. 23. Mr. Craig furnishes several 



instances of references to this prover- 
bial use, e.g. North's Plutarch, 1579, 
Life of Crassus (ed. Rouse, 1899, vi. 
13) : " The manner was then at Rome, 
if any man had a curst bullock that 
would strike with his horn, to wind hay 
about his head." 

50. exclaims] Compare Richard II. 

I. ii. 2 ; Troilus and Cressida, v. iii. 

91 ; Kyd, Spanish Tragedy, act iii. : — 

" Mine exclaims, that have sur- 

charg'd the air 

With ceaseless plaints." 

54. pattern] Compare Othello, v. ii. 
11; Haughton, Grim the Collier of 
Croydon, c. 1599, act i. : "Stand forth, 
thou ghastly /o^/frn of despair." The 
use may be illustrated by Machin and 
Markham, Dumb Knight, act iii. : 
" Ascend, poor model [of] calamity." 

55. The current legend was (see note 
on lines 29, 30) that Henry VI. 's corpse 
bled in the presence of eye-witnesses. 
Shakespeare, for dramatic purposes, 
combines this legend with the common 
superstition that dead bodies bled in 
the presence of their murderers. In- 
stances are given by Brand, Pop. 



\ 



V 



sc. H.] KING RICHARD III 21 

Open their congeal'd mouths and bleed afresh. 

Blush, blush, thou lump of foul deformity ! 

For 'tis thy presence that exhales this blood 

From cold and empty veins where no blood dwells. 

Thy deed, inhuman and unnatural, 60 

Provokes this deluge most unnatural. 

O God, which this blood mad'st, revenge his death ! 

O earth, which this blood drink'st, revenge his death ! 

Either heav'n with lightning strike the murderer dead, 

Or earth, gape open wide and eat him quick, 65 

As thou dost swallow up this good king's blood, 

Which his hell-govern'd arm hath butchered ! 
Glou. Lady, you know no rules of charity, 

Which renders good for bad, blessings for curses. 
A nne. Villain, thou know'st no law of God nor man : 70 

No beast so fierce but knows some touch of pity. 
Glou. But I know none, and therefore am no beast. 
Anne. O wonderful, when devils tell the truth! "'^'^^^i. 
Glou. More wonderful, when angels are so angry. 

Vouchsafe, divine perfection of a woman, 75 

60. deed:\ Qq ; deeds Ff. 70. no\ Qq ; nor Ff. 73. truth'\ troth Q i. 

Antiquities, ed. Eilis, new ed. igoi, iii. Greene, Looking-Glass for London 

229-32. Steevens quotes Arden of (Dyce, 123) : — 

Fever sham, 1592 : — " These are but common exhalations, 

"The more I sound his name, the Drawn from the earth"; 

more he bleeds : Decker, Bel-Man of London, pref. 

This blood condemns me, and in (Smeaton, 68): "But of such rare temper 

gushing forth are your eies, that (as if they had sunne- 

Speaks as it falls, and asks me beames in them) they are able to ex- 

why I did it." hale up all these contagious breathes 

Aldis Wright notices Scott's use ot the which poison a kingdome." 

tia.diUon m Fair Maid of Perth, 182S, 75-So. Qq seem preferable to Ff. 

ch. xxiii. See Scott's note on his em- The parallelism of lines 75-77 and 78-So 

ployment of the legend. requires "evils" in line 76, and "a 

58. exhales] draws out. Compare man" in line 78, to give the passage its 

line 165 below. For the simplest sense full weight and balance. On the other 

of the word see Jonson, Poetaster, iii. i : hand, Ff, by substituting " Of" instead 

"Nay, I beseech you, gentlemen, do of "For" in line 79, preserve the 

not exhale me thus " ; and Pistol, more balance at the expense of grammar, 

sno, in Henry V. 11. i. 66. The true Either the editor of F i was misled by 

sense of the Latin derivation, "to his MS., or attempted in lines 76,78 

breathe oat," is overlooked by Shake- metrical emendations on his own ac- 

speare and his contemporaries : Shake- count. " Evils," in the first case, has 

speare usually applies the word to a a monosyllabic value : in the secoi'd, 

meteor or " bright exhalation " drawn there was no necessity for givinsj^ " in- 

out of matter by the sun, not breathed fection " its full value of four syflabltj* 

out in vapour. Compare Lodge and by cutting the indefinite article oiit ot 



22 KING RICHARD III [act r 

Of these supposed evils, to give me leave, 

By circumstance but to acquit myself. 
Anne. Vouchsafe, defus'd.infection.Q.f.a.oian, 

For these known evils, but to give me leave, 

By circumstance to curse thy cursed self. 80 

Glou. Fairer than tongue can name thee, let me have 

Some patient leisure to excuse myself. 
Anne. Fouler than heart can think thee, thou canst make 

No excuse current, but to hang thyself. 
Glou. By such despair, I should accuse myself. 85 

Anne. And, by despairing, shouldst thou stand excus'd 

For doing worthy vengeance on thyself. 

That didst unworthy slaughter upon others. 
Glou. Say that I slew them not ? 
Anne. Why, then they are not dead : 

But dead they are, and, devilish slave, by thee. 90 

Glou. I did not kill your husband. 

Anne. Wl^, then he is^alive. 

Glou. Nay, he is dead, and slain by Edward's hand. 

76. eviW] Qq ; crimes Ff. 78. a waw] Qq ; man Ff. 79. For\ Qq ; Of Ff. 
83, 84. Fouler . . . hang thyself] two lines as Qq ; three lines Ff, divided after 
thee, current. 86. shouldst] Qq; shalt Ff. 8S. ThatjFi; Which Qq. 89. 
Why, then they are not dead] Qq; Then say they were notslaine Ff. 92. hand] 
Qq ; hands Ff. 

the line. In line 79 the MS. is pro- dition." Neu> Eng. Diet, quotes Bur- 
bably entirely to blame; but the ton, Anatomy of Melancholy, 1621, i. 
editor, if this is the case, ought to § i. 3. i (ed. Shilleto, 1896, i. 193) [Mel- 
have detected its error. Spedding ancholy is, according to Galen] " a 
suggested that " curse " in line 80 privation or infection of the middle 
was to have been altered into " ac- cell of the head." , 
cuse," thus explaining the variation in 82. patient] tranquil. Compare the 
line 79; but this conjecture applies verbal use of "patient" in Titus An- 
mtrely to his own general theory. dronicus, i. i. 121. 

77. By circumstance] by detailed 89. dead] Qq add to the force of 
argument, circumstantially. Compare "dead they are" in the next line, and 
Two Gentlemen of Verona, I. i. 36, 37; so to that of the whole passage. 
Troilus and Cressida, iii. iii. 114; 92. Holinshed's account (taken from 
Cymbelitie, n. iv. 61. Halle) of Prince Edward's murder (iii. 

'78. defus'd] diffused : i.e. spread 688) is that Ed%vard IV. " thrust him 

abroad (compare Milton, Samson Agon- from him, or (as some sale) stroke him 

istes, 118), and so, shapeless. See Mr. with his gantlet ; whom, incontinentlie, 

Craig's note on King Lear, i. iv. 2, and George duke of Clarence. Richard dui:e 

Mr. Hart on Merry Wives of Windsor, of Glocester, Thomas Gieie marquevse 

IV. iv. 55 [54]. Dorcet. and William lord Hastinp;s, 

78. »«/Vf/»o«] a retort to " perfection " that stood by, suddenlie murthered." 
in line 75. The original sense of the See below, lines 241, 242 ; i. iii. 210-12 ; 
\\t)rd is a " corrupted or diseased con- i. iv. 52-57. Also compare tiie scene of 



/f 



V 



sc. n.] KING RICHARD III 28 

Anne. In thy foul throat thou liest: (^ueen Margaret saw 

Thy murderous falchion smoking in his blood ; 

The which thou once didst bend against her breast, 95 

But that thy brothers beat aside the point. 
Glou. I was provoked by her slanderous tongue, 

That laid their guilt upon my guiltless shoulders. 
Anne. Thou wast provoked by thy bloody mind, 

That never dreamt on ought but butcheries: lOO 

Didst thou not kill this king ? 
Glou. I grant ye. 

Anne. Dost grant me, hedge-hog ? Then God grant me too 

Thou may'st be damned for that wicked deed ! 

O, he was gentle, mild, and virtuous ! 
Glou. The better for the King of heaven, that hath him, 105 
Anne. He is in heaven, where thou shalt never come. 
Glou. Let him thank me, that holp to send him thither; 

For he was fitter for that place than earth. 
Anne. And thou unfit for any place but hell. 
Glou. Yes, one place else, if you will hear me name it. no 
Anne. Some dungeon. 
Glou. Your bed-chamber. 

93. In thy . . , saw] one line as Qq ; two lines Ff, divided after ly'st. 94. 
niurdirouslinurd'rous Ff ; bloudy Qq i, 2 ; bloodly Qq 3-6. 98, 100. Thaf] Ff ; 
Which Qq. 100. dreamt] Qq ; drecim'st Ff. loi. ye] Ff; yee Qq 3-8; yea 
Qq I, 2. 102. Dost . . . grant me too] one line as c^q ; two lines Ff, divided 
after hedge-hog. 103. may'st be damned] Ff ; maiest be damnd Qq i, 2 ; maiest 
be damned Qq 3-6. 105. better] Ff ; fitter Qq. 110. you] Qq i, 2, 6-8, Ff; 

y^ Qq 3-5- 

the murder, 5 Henry VI. v. v. 38-40. compare King jfohn, 1. i. 240; King 

In The True Tragedie of Richard Duke Lear, in. vii. 62. Pope altered it here 

0/ Yorke, sc. xxi., Edward is the mur- to " help'd ". Kyd, Spanish Tragedy, 

derer. From the same source, and act iii., uses " holp " as j^ast participle, 

from no historical authority, comes the " He runs to kill, whom I have help to 

story, repeated in 3 Henry VI., and catch." Tennyson is fond of this form 

below, line 95, that Gloucester threat- of the preterite, e.g. Princess, i. 198, 

ened Queen Margaret's life on the same "and himself . . . holp to lace us up." 
occasion. iii. The broken metre emphasises 

loi. Gloucester's admission is in the brevity of Anne's taunt and Glou- 

entire keeping with the audacity of his cester's retort. There is room for a 

character as Shakespeare designed it. pause between the two, to allow him 

It need hardly be said that it rests on to recover from the stinging severity 

no historical basis. The only authority of her answer. The proposed emenda- 

for Richard's guilt in the case of Henry tions — e.g. Steevens, " Some dungeon 

VI. was " constant fame" (Holinshed, perhaps. G/o«. Your bed-chamber," in 

iii. 690). which "dungeon" is a trisyllable — 

107. holp] For the strong preterite, seem to be unnecessary. 



24 KING RICHARD III [act i. 

Anne. Ill rest betide the chamber where thou liest! 

Glou. So will it, madam, till I lie with you. 

Anne. I hope so. 

Glou. I know so. But, gentle Lady Anne, 

To leave this keen encounter of our wits 1 1 5 

And fall something into a slower method, 

Is not the causer of the timeless deaths 

Of these Plantagenets, Henry and Edward, 

As blameful as the executioner ? 
Anne. Thou wast the cause and most accurs'd effect. 120 

Glou. Your beauty was the cause of that effect ; 
r Your beauty, that did haunt me in my sleep 
|, To undertake the death of all the world, 
L\. So I might live one hour in your sweet bosom. 
Anne. If I thought that, I tell thee, homicide, 125 

These nails should rend that beauty from my cheeks. 
Glou. These eyes could not endure that beauty's wrack ; 

You should not blemish it, if I stood by : 

As all the world is cheered by the sun. 

So I by that; it is my day, my life. 130 

115. kceti] Q I, Ff ; kind Qq 2-8. 116. something] Ff; somewhat Qq. 
120. wast] Ff; art Qq. 122. that] Ff; which Qq. 124. live] Ff ; rest Qq. 
126. retid] Qq ; rent Ff. 127. not] Ff; neuer Qq. that] Ff; sweet Oq. 
128. it] Ff ; them Qq. 

116. slower method] Steevens ex- by Marlowe, Doctor Faustus, c. 1588, 
plains as "more serious," i.e. slow as sc. x. : "none . . . can compare with 
opposed to " quick " in the sense of thee for the rare effects of magic " ; and 
"lively." Perhaps " more deliberate " New Eng. Diet, gives a more recent 
is a better interpretation. instance from Sir David Brewster's 

ii-j. timeless] untimely. Aldis Natural Magic, 1833: "It will act 

Wright notices Shakespeare's use of like a concave when the cooling effect 

the word in his earliest plays and has reached the axis." In the present 

poems: e.g. Richard II. iv. i. 5; line both "cause" and "eftect" are used 

Romeo and Juliet, v. iii. 162; Lucrece, in a concrete sense, to be retorted in the 

44. Compare Marlowe, 2 Tambur- next with their ordinary abstract mean- 

laine, 1590, v. 3 : " Let Earth and ing. Warburton explained " effect " as 

Heaven his timeless death deplore." " executioner," which amounts to the 

R. C. Browne, on Milton, Di'fl^/i 0/ Fair same as Malone's reading; Steevens 

In/ant, line 2 (Clar. Press ed. i. 250), re- and Johnson took the woid in its usual 

krs toSpenser, Faerie Queene, vj. 2. 14, sense. Han Tier proposed : " Thou wast 

where " knightlesse" = unknightly. the cause and most accurs'd th' effect." 

120. effect] efficient power, agent. 128. blemish it] i.e. your beauty, 

Richard is at once the causer and the referring to line 126. Qq "them "refers, 

executioner of the deaths of Henry and of course, to " cheeks " in line 126 ; but 

Edward. Malone understood the Gloucester's mention of his eyes in the 

passage thus. " Effect," meaning previous line makes such a reference 

" agency, operative influence," is used ambiguous. 



V 



sc. II.] KING RICHARD III 25 

Anne. Black night o'ershade thy day, and death thy life! 
Glou. Curse not thyself, fair creature ; thou art both. 
Anne. I would I were, to be reveng'd on thee. 
Glou. It is a quarrel most unnatural, 

To be reveng'd on him that loveth thee. 135 

Anne. It is a quarrel just and reasonable, 

To be reveng'd on him that kill'd my husband. 
Glou. He that bereft thee, lady, of thy husband, 

Did it to help thee to a better husband. 
Anne. His better doth not breathe upon the earth. 140 

Glou. He lives that loves thee better than he could. 
Anne. Name him. 
Glou. Plantagenet, 

Anne. Why, that was he. 

Glou. The self-same name, but one of better nature. 
A nne. Where is he ? 
Glou. Here. \She spitteth at him. 

Why dost thou spit at me ? 
Anne. Would it were mortal poison, for thy sake ! 145 

Glou. Never came poison from so sweet a place. 
Anne. Never hung poison on a fouler toad. 

Out of my sight ! thou dost infect mine eyes. 
Glou. Thine eyes, sweet lady, have infected mine, 
Anne. Would they were basilisks, to strike thee dead ! 150 

131. o'ershade] ore-shade Ff; ouershade or ouershad Qq. 132, Curse not 
. . . both] one line as Qq ; two lines Ff, divided alter creature. 135. thee] 
Ff ; you Qq. 137. kill'd] Ff ; slew Qq. 141. He] Ff ; Go to, he Qq. thee 
Ft; you Qq. 142. that] Qqi, 2, Fi; whatQqyS. 148. niine]¥{; my Qq, 

141. He lives] Qq " go to " at the See Sir T. Biowne, Pseud. Epid., 1646. 
beginning of the line may have been iii. 7, where also the real basilisk is de- 
an ejaculation added on the stage, scribed, a small serpent distinguished 
which found its way into theatrical by its habit of " ad\ ancing his head," 
MSS. and so into the text. In Qq, the and by " some white marks or coronary 
murderers' conversation in i. iv. is full spots on the crown," which gave it its 
of such expletives and interjections, nameofiaii/fscws (Vulgate, Ps. xci. 13) 
See also line 187 below. or regulus (Prov. xxiii. 32). Gloucester 

150. basilisks] In popular supersti- (3 Henry VI. in. ii. 187) says he will 

tion, the basilisk was a creature "with " slay more gazers than the basilisk." 

legs, wings, a serpentine and winding^ See also 2 Henry VI. 111. ii. 52, 324; 

tail, and a crest or comb somewhat Cymbeline, 11. iv. 107; Winter's Tale, 

like a cock." It was the offspring of a i. ii. 388. Compare Jonson, pref. 

cock's egg, hatched under a toad or speech to Poetaster : — 
serpent, and had the power of killing ?.t "Are there no players here? no 

a distance with the poison of its eye, poet-apes, 



26 KING RICHARD III [act .. 

Glou. I would they were, that I might die at once ; 
For now they kill me with a living death. 
Those eyes of thine from mine have drawn salt tears, 
Sham'd their aspects with store of childish drops — 
These eyes, which never shed remorseful tear, 1 5 5 

No, when my father York and Edward wept 
To hear the piteous moan that Rutland made 
When black-fac'd Clifford shook his sword at him ; 
Nor when thy warlike father like a child 
Told the sad story of my father's death, 160 

And twenty times made pause to sob and weep, 
That all the standcrs-by had wet their checks. 
Like trees bedash'd with rain — in that sad time 
My manly eyes did scorn an humble tear ; 
And what these sorrows could not thence exhale 165 

Thy beauty hath, and made them blind with weeping. 
I never sued to friend nor enemy ; 
My tongue could never learn sweet smoothing word : 
But, now thy beauty is propos'd my fee, 
My proud heart sues, and prompts my tongue to 

speak. l^She looks scornfully at him. 170 

Teach not thy lip such scorn, for it was made 
For kissing, lady, not for such contempt. 

154. aspects'] Ff; aspect Qq. 155-166. These eyes . . . tveeping] Ff ; omitted 
Qq. . 168. smoothing] Ff, Qq 7, 8 ; soothing Qq 1-6. word] Ff ; words Qq. 
170. She looks . . . ] Ff; omitted Qq. 171. Up] Ff ; lips Qq. it was] 

Ff ; they were Qq. 

That come with basilisk's eyes, by John, Lord Clifford, after the battle 
whose forked tongues of Wakefield, see 3 Henry VI. i. iii. 
Are steep'd in venom, as their York's tears at the news (line 156) are 
hearts in gall"; recorded ibid. i. iv. 147. The tidings 
Fletcher, False One, iv. 2 : — were brought to Edward and Gloucester 
" I will . . . put a look on, arm'd on the field of Mortimer's Cross {ibid. 
with all my cunning, n. i.). Warwick (line 159) does not 
Shall meet him like a basilisk, and bring them in Shakespeare, but enters 
strike him." after they have been told. Gloucester's 
Lodge, Wounds of Civil War, act ii., indignation at the news forbade him to 
speaking of the kind of cannon called, weep. Once, however, in 5 Henry VI. 
for obvious reasons, a basilisk, carries (11. iii. 46) he is allowed to "shed re- 
out the metaphor in detail : — morseful tear," when the prospect at 
"... these Roman basilisks, Towton is unpromising for the Yorkist 
That seek to quell us with their party. 

currish looks." 168. smoothing] flattering. See be- 

157. i?M</a«rf] second son of Richard, low, i. iii. 48, and 2 Henry VI. 1. i. 

Duke of York. For his supposed murder 156. 



sc. Ill KING RICHARD III 27 

if thy revengeful heart cannot forgive, 

Lo, here I lend thee this sharp-pointed sword, 

Which if thou please to hide in this true breast, 175 

And let the soul forth that adoreth thee, 

I lay it naked to the deadly stroke, 

And humbly beg the death upon my knee. 

[He lays his breast open : she offers at it 
with his sword. 

Nay, do not pause : for I did kill King Henry ; 

But 'twas thy beauty that provoked me. 180 

Nay, now dispatch : 'twas I that stabb'd young Edward ; 

But 'twas thy heavenly face that set me on. 

[Here she lets fall the sword. 

Take up the sword again, or take up me. 
Anne. Arise, dissembler : though I wish thy death, 

I will not be thy executioner. 185 

Glou. Then bid me kill myself, and I will do it. 
Anne. I have already. 
Glou. That was in thy rage. 

Speak it again ; and, even with the word, 
', This hand, which, for thy love, did kill thy love, 
■ Shall, for thy love, kill a far truer love : I90 

To both their deaths shalt thou be accessary. 
Anne. I would I knew thy heart. 
Glou. 'Tis figur'd in my tongue. 
Anne. I fear me, both are false. 

175. hreasf] Ff ; hosom Qq, 177, the'\ thy Qq 6-8, F3. aft. 178. He lays 
. . . at it . . . sword.] F (at F i) ; omitted Qq. 179. for I . . . Henry] Ff; 
twas I that kild your husband Qq. 181. stabb'd young Edward] Ff ; kild 

King Henry Qq. aft. 182, lets fall] Qq ; fals Ff. 185. thy] Ff ; the Qq. 

187. ThatjFi; Tush, that Qq. thy]thcQqyj. 189. This]Fi; That Qq. 
191. shalt thou] Q i, Ff ; thou shalt Qq 2-8. 

178. the death] death after judicial 68) : " Take up thy pen, or I '11 take up 

sentence, as St. Mark vii. 10: "He thee." 

that curseth father or mother, let him 192-201. Steevens arranged these 

die the death." See Henry V. iv. i. lines in more or less regular blank 

181; Measure for Measure, 11. iv. 165; verse; his lines end "figur'd in . . . 

Chapman (?), Alphonsiis, v. 2 : " Thoa man . . . sword . . . know . . . men , . . 

shalt obtain thj' boon and die the ring " (Camb.). His divisions are out of 

death." keeping with those characteristic of this 

183. The line recalls the first part of period of Shakespeare's work; and their 

yeronimo, c. 1587 (Dodsiey, 1825, iii. metrical accuracy is open to criticism. 



28 KING RICHARD III [act i 

Glou. Then never man was true. 195 

Anne. Well, well, put up your sword. 

Glou. Say then my peace is made. 

Anne. That shalt thou know hereafter. 

Glou. But shall I live in hope ? 

Anne. All men, I hope, live so, 200 

Glou. Vouchsafe to wear this ring. 

Anne. To take is not to give. 

Glou. Look, how my ring encompasseth thy finger : 

Even so thy breast encloseth my poor heart ; 

Wear both of them, for both of them are thine. 205 

And if thy poor devoted servant may 

But beg one favour at thy gracious hand, 

Thou dost confirm his happiness for ever. 
Anne. What is it ? 
Glou. That it may please you leave these sad designs 21c 

To him that hath most cause to be a mourner, 

And presently repair to Crosby Place ; 

Where, after I have solemnly interr'd 

At Chertsey monast'ry this noble king, 

195. man uai\ Qq3-8, Ff; was man Qq i, 2. 198. shalt thou] Ff; shall you 
Qq. 199. shall /] Q i, Ff ; / shall Qq 2-8. 201. Glou.] Qq ; omitted Ff. 

202. Anne. To . . . give] La. To . . . give Qq ; omitted Ff. 203. my] F i ; 
this Qq ; thy Ff 2-4. thy finger] Qq, F i ; my finger Ff 2-4. 206. devoted] 
Q I, Fl ; omitted Qq 2-8. servant] Ff ; suppliant Qq. 210. may] Ff ; would 
Qq. you] Ff; thee Qq. 211. most] Ff; more Qq. 212. P/a<:^] Qq ; 

House Ff. 

201. Ff continue this line from Philippians ii. 23 : " Him therefore I 

Anne's speech in the line before, and hope to send presently." 

omit line 202 altogether. This omis- 212. Crosby Place]Ste Stov/, Survey, 

sion may be attributed to a quite ed. Strype, 1720, i. pt. ii. p. 106. The 

compiehensible printer's error. The site of Crosby Place or House (now 

passage, as printed, would have read called Crosby Hall) was leased in 

thus : — 1466 to Sir John Crosby by the prioress 

An. All men, 1 hope, live so. and convent of St. Helen's. The 

Rich. Vouchsafe to wear this ring, house, fronting on Bishopsgate Sueet 

Rich. Look, how my ring, etc. Within, was built by Sir John, "of 

In the final revision of F i, it seems stone and timber, very large and 

probable that the error was altered beautiful, and the highest at that time 

summarily : the first Rich, was struck in London." Sir John was alive at 

out, and the line was set back so that the time of the burial of Henry VL 

the V of " Vouchsafe " ranged immcdi- Later, " Richard, Duke of Gloucester, 

ately below the Aof ".<4«." The sense and lord protector, was lodged in this 

was confused by this hasty emendation, house," which, in Shake!^peare, is the 

212. presently] immediately, as ni. i. centre from which he works his ploto. 

34 below; Julius Casnr, m. i. 28; See below, i. iii. 345, etc. 



9c. n] KING RICHARD III 29 

And wet his grave with my repentant tears, 21$ 

I will with all expedient duty see you. 

For divers unknown reasons, I beseech you, 

Grant me this boon. 
Anne. With all my heart; and much it joys me too 

To see you are become so penitent. 230 

Tressel and Berkeley, go along with me. 
Glou. Bid me farewell. 
Anne. 'Tis more than you deserve ; 

But, since you teach me how to flatter you, 

Imagine I have said farewell already. 

[Exeunt Lady Anne, Tressel^ and Berkeley 
Glou. Sirs, take up the corse. 225 

Gent. Towards Chertsey, noble lord ? 
Glou. No, to White-Friars ; there attend my coming. 

[Exeunt all but Gloucester 

Was ever woman in this humour woo'd ? 

Was ever woman in this humour won ? 

I '11 have her, but I will not keep her long. 230 

What ! I, that kill'd her husband and his father. 

To take her in her heart's extremest hate, 

With curses in her mouth, tears in her eyes. 

The bleeding witness of her hatred by, 

aft. 224. Exeunt . . . ] Exit two with Anne. Ff; Exit. Qq. S25. Glou. 
Sirs . . . corif] Qq; omitted Ff. aft. 227. Exeunt . . . ^Exit Coarse. Ff; 

Exeunt. Manet Glo. Qq (aft. 228). 231. What i /] What? I Ff; What I 

Qq I, 2,5,6; What I ? Qq 3, 4. Ats] Qq i, 2, Ff ; her Qq 3-8. 232. hate\ 
Q I, Ff ; heate Qq 2-8. 234. her] Qq ; my Ff. 

22^. farewell already] After these from the earlier of these passages, or 

words, Gibber, regarding the whole from some previous play. See also 

scene as in need of some safeguard the quotation from Greene in Mr. 

against criticism, added a remark by Baildon's edition of Titus Andronicus, 

Tressel:— 1904. P- 32. 

" When future chronicles shall speak 234. her hatred] Qq reading is pre- 

of this, ferable. Henry's bleeding wounds bore 

This will be thought romance, not witness to the justice of Anne's hatred. 

history." Spedding defends Ff by saying that 

227. White-Friars] The chroniclers Henry's corpse was the " motive or 
give B/oc*friars as the intermediate ground of Anne's hatred of Richard, 
stage of Henry's obsequies. whereas it was really the witness of 

228, 229. Kindred passages are found Richard's hatred of her father-in-law." 
in Titus Andronicus, 11. i. 82, 83, and 1 The difference between the readings 
Henry VI. v. iii. 77, 78. The origin lies in the sense which "witness" is 
of this effective dramatic tag may spring made to bear. 



80 KING RICHARD III [act i. 

Having God, her conscience, and these bars against 

me, 235 

And I no friends to back my suit withal 
But the plain devil and dissembling looks — 
And yet, to win her, all the world to nothing ! 
Ha! 

Hath she forgot already that brave prince, 240 

Edward her lord, whom I, some three months since, 
Stabb'd in my angry mood at Tewkesbury ? 
A sweeter and a lovelier gentleman, 
Fram'd in the prodigality of nature, 

Young, valiant, wise, and, no doubt, right royal, 245 

The spacious world cannot again afford : 
And will she yet abase her eyes on me, 
That cropp'd the golden prime of this sweet prince, 
And made her widow to a woful bed — 
On me, whose all not equals Edward's moiety — 250 

On me, that hnlt and am unshapen thus ? 
My dukedom to a beggarly denier, 
I do mistake my person all this while ! 
Upon my life, she finds, although I cannot, 
Myself to be a marvellous pj;oper man, 255 

2^6. no /rie»ids]Fi; nothing Qq. withal]Qq y8,Fi; at all Qqi, 2. 24 
abasc'i Ff; debase Qq. 251. halt] Qq ; halts Ff. 252. to] to be Qq 5-8. 

241. three months since] In reality, at Edward's legitimacy is possible, but 

Tewkesbury was lougnt on 4th May; is not needed to make sense; while 

Henry was buried on 23rd May, 1471. Johnson's emendation " loyal " {i.e. to 

244. the prodigality of 7iature] his wiie) does not improve matters, 
nature's most prodigal mood, Holin- 252. denier] A small copper coin, 
shed (iii. 688) speaks of Prince Edward equivalent to the twelfth part of a sou 
as " a faire and well proportioned yoong or the "tenth part of an English 
gentleman." pennie" (Cot^rave) ; Lat. denarius. 

245. valiant] must be read as a full Compare Taming of the Shrew, Ind. i. 
trisyllable for the sake of metre. For 9; Fletcher, Monsieur Thomas, 1639, 
alterations like Pope's " wise and i. 2 : — 

valiant " there is no need. " No money, no more money, 

245. royal] " It is hard to believe that Monsieur Launcelot, 

this is what Shakespeare v^T^ote " (Aldis Not a drnt.'t, sweet signior." 

Wrighti. But why ? Gloucester means The first quoiation in Netv Eng. Diet. 

that Edward no doubt was royal by is c. 1425. " Denier " is also equivalent 

nature, and not merely by birth — hand- to a pennywei^'hi in Troy weight, 

some, young, brave, wise, in every re- 255. proper] handsome, well-liking: 

spcct fit to be a king. Sieevens' sug- compare Taming of the Shrew, i. ii. 

gestion that the word contains a sneer 144; As You Like It, i. ii. 129. 



\. 



sc. Ill ] KING RICHARD III 81 

I '11 be at charges for a looking-glass, 

And entertain a score or two of tailors 

To study fashions to adorn my body : 

Since I am crept in favour with myself, 

I will maintain it with some little cost. 260 

But first I '11 turn yon fellow in his grave, 

And then return lamenting to my love. 

Shine out, fair sun, till I have bought a glass, 

That I may see my shadow as I pass. [Exit. 

SCENE. Ul.—ThePa/ace. 

Enter QuEEN ELIZABETH, Lord Rivers, and Lord Grey. 

Riv. Have patience, madam : there 's no doubt his majesty 

Will soon recover his accustom'd health. 
Grey. In that you brook it ill, it makes him worse : 

Therefore, for God's sake, entertain good comfort, 

And cheer his grace with quick and merry words. 5 

Q. Eliz. If he were dead, what would betide on me? 
Riv. No other harm but loss of such a lord. 
Q. Eliz. The loss of such a lord includes all harms. 
Grey. The heavens have bless'd you with a goodly son. 

To be your comforter when he is gone, lo 

Q. Eliz. Ah L he is young; and his minority 

257. a] Ff ; some Qq. 258. adorn] adore Qq 3-6. 260. some] a Qq 3-8. 

Scefie III. 

Scene in. The Palace. ]T\\to\>2\A.. Queen Elizabeth] Queene (^q; Queene 
Mother Ff. 5. words] Qq ; eyes Ff. 6. on] Ff; 0/ Qq. 8. harms 

Ff ; harme Qq. II. Ah]¥i; Oh Qq. 

256. at chars^es] at the expense, to me"; i Maccabees iii. 30: "He 

Compare Chapman, An Humorous feared that he should not be able to 

D'ly's Mirth, 1599 (ed. Shepherd, 1874, bear the charges any longer." 
p. 42) : " Here 's the poor man hath been 
at threat charges for the preparation of 

a lottery." For the use of " charge, Scene III. 

charge;-," in the sense of "expense, 

cost,' see Jonson, Cynthia's Revels, 5. quick] lively : compare Love's 

1600. t. i: " Amo. . . . your travel i.'^ Labour's Lost, v. ii. 283; Antony and 

your only thing that rectifies . . . Aso. Cleopatra, v. ii. 216; ]ons.or), Cynthia's 

i think it be great charge though, Revels, iv. i: "This tire, methinks, 

sir"; Marston. Malcontent, 1604, act makes me look very ingeniously, ^«»c*, 

Hi.: " Madam, I am going embassador and spirited." See also line igu 

for Florence ; 'twill be great charges below. 



32 



KING RICHARD III 



[act r. 



,1.5 put unto the trust of Richard Gloucester, 
A man that loves not me, nor none of you. 

Riv. Is it concluded he shall be protector? 

Q. Eliz. It is determin'd, not concluded yet ; 
But so it must be, if the king miscarry. 

Enter Buckingham and Derby. 



15 



Grey. Here come the lords of Buckingham and Derby. 

Buck. Good time of day unto your royal grace ! 

Der. God make your majesty joyful as you have been ! 

Q. Eliz. The Countess Richmond, good my lord of Derby, 20 

To your good prayer will scarcely say amen. 

Yet, Derby, notwithstanding she 's your wife 

And loves not me, be you, good lord, assur'd 

I hate not you for her proud arrogance. 
Der. I do beseech you, either not believe 25 

The envious slanders of her false accusers ; 

14. li »<] It is Q 6. aft. i6. Derby] Stanley Theobald (passim). 17. 

come the lords] Qq i. 2; comes the Lords Qq 3-8; comes the Lord Ff. 21. 

prayer] Ff; prayers Qq. 24. arrogance] Qq i, 2, Ff; arrogancie Qq 3-8. 

25. do] Qq I, 2, Ff ; omitted Qq 3-8. 26. false] Qq i, 2, Ff; omitted Qq 3-8. 



15. determined, not concluded] The 
matter is settled, but the official formal- 
ities are not completed. Aldis Wright 
notes that at Trinity College, Cam- 
bridge, the official entries of decisions 
arrived at by the Master and Seniors 
are entered in a book called the Con- 
clusion Book. A treaty is determined 
before it is officially concluded. So 
Merry Devil of Edmonton : — 

"... After we '11 conclude 
The cause of this our coming," 
i.e. the betrothal. 

16. miscarry] Compare Measure for 
Meastire, III. i. 218; Chapman, /I// Foo/s, 
1605, i. I : — 

" How would his father grieve, 
should he be maim'd, 
Or quite miscarry in the ruthless 
war." 

17. come the lords] The Ff reading is 
cither due to the printer, or, which is 
hardly credible, reintroduces an error of 
the MS. which the editor employed. It 
teems likely that the original reading 
had the old plural " comes the lords," 
like the quartos from Q 3 onwards; 
that the editor of F i found this both 



in his Q and the MS. by which he 
checked it ; and that the printer eventu- 
ally altered " lords " into " lord." per- 
haps assuming that Buckingham and 
Derby were two titles of the same 
person, and certainly anxious to get rid 
of the plural meaning of " comes." 

20. Countess Richmond] Margaret 
Beaufort (1443-1509), daughter and 
heiress of John Beaufort, first Duke of 
Somerset, and great-grand-daughter of 
John of Gaunt. She married in 1455 
Edmund Tudor (d. 1456), Earl of 
Richmond, son of Owen Tudor and 
Katharine, widow of Henry V. By 
him she had Henry Tudor, afterwards 
Henry VII. She married secondly. 
Lord Henry Stafford, a son of the first 
Duke of Buckingham, and uncle of the 
Buckingham of this play. Her third 
husband was Thomas. Lord Stanley. 

25. not believe] Compare " not 
equals " above, i. ii. 250. 

«6. a/owrm.n^] reconciliation, setting 
at oic (at-one-mcnt). Compare 2 
Henry IV. iv. i. 22r ; More (ap. Holin- 
shed. iii. 714) : " hauing more regard to 
their old variance, than their new 



sc. in] KING RICHARD III 33 

Or, if she be accus'd on true report, 

Bear with her weakness, which, I think, proceeds 

From wayward sickness, and no grounded malice. 

Riv. Saw you the king to-day, my lord of Derby ? 30 

Der. But now the Duke of Buckingham and I 
Are come from visiting his majesty. 

Q. Eliz. What likelihood of his amendment, lords ? 

Buck. Madam, good hope ; his grace speaks cheerfully. 

Q. Eliz. God grant him health ! Did you confer with him ? 35 

Buck. Ay, madam : he desires to make atonement 

Between the Duke of Gloucester and your brothers, 
And between them and my lord chamberlain. 
And sent to warn them to his royal presence. 

Q. Eliz. Would all were well ! — but that will never be. 40 

Ijfear-ouii happiness.4s- at the height. 

Enter GLOUCESTER, HASTINGS, and DORSET. 

Glou. They do me wrong, and I will not endure it. 
Who are they that complain unto the king, 
That I, forsooth, am stern and love them not ? 
By holy Paul, they love his grace but lightly, 45 

That fill his ears with such dissentious rumours ! 
Because I cannot flatter and look fair, 
Smile in men's faces, smooth, deceive, and cog, 

27. on]Ff; JwQq. 32. Are come]F{; Came Qq. 33. What] QqyS, Ff; 
With Qq I, 2, 36. Ay, Madam] I Madam Ff; Madam we did Qq. 37. 

Between] Ff; Betwixt Qq. 38. betwceti] Ff; betwixt Qq. 39. to his] of 
his Q 6. 41. height] Ff; highest Qq. 43. are they] Qq ; is it Ff. com- 
plain] Q 8; complaines Qq 1-7, Ff. 47. look] Ff; speak Qq. 

attonement." See also Atitony and turn to an original MS. reading; but 

Cleopatra, 11. ii. 102 ; Fletcher and the tell-tale " them," which has been 

Massinger, Spanish Curate, 1622, iii. overlooked in the next line, is against 

4 : "I have been atoning two most this theory. 

wrangling neighbours." For an in- 48. Smooth] See note on i. ii. 168 

transitive use see Coriolanus, iv. vi. above. Theobald suggested "sooth." 

72 : — cog] used originally of cheating at 

" He and Aufidius can no more dice. A common word. Nav Eng. 

atone Diet, quotes Dice Play, 1532 : " There 

Than violentest contrariety." be divers kinds of cogging, but of all 

39. warn] summon, as King John, other the Spanish cogg b>.ars the bell, 

II. i. 201. and seldom raises an}- smoke." Com- 

43. "Complaines" in Qq 1-7 is not pare Love's Labour's Lost, v. ii. 235: 

a singular, but the old plural form. Ff "Since you can cog, I'll play no more 

seem to attempt to modernise the with you." Mr. Craig notes that, in 

grammar. This might be taken as a re- Ireland, " to cog " is used by schoolboys 

3 



34 



KING RICHARD III 



[act I, 









Duck with French nods and apish courtesy, 

I must be held a rancorous enemy. 50 

Cannot a plain man live and think no harm, 

But thus his simple truth must be abus'd 

With silken, sly, insinuating Jacks ? 

Grey. To whom in all this presence speaks your grace ? 

G/ou. To thee, that hast nor honesty nor grace: 55 

When have I injur'd thee ? when done thee wrong ? 
Or thee ? or thee ? or any of your faction ? 

-^ A plague upon you all ! His royal person — 

Whom God preserve better than you would wish ! — 
Cannot be quiet scarce a breathing^while, 60 

But you must trouble him with lewd complaints. 
E/ts. Brother of Gloucester, you mistake the matter. 
The king, on his own royal disposition, 



54. Gro']Ff(GrajFf3, 4); 
all] omitted Qq 6-8. 58, 



52. his] m Qq 5-8. 53. With] Ff ; By Qq. 
Ri. or Ry. Qq, whom] who F i ; home Q 6, 
person] Qq ; grace Ff. 63. on] Ff ; 0/ Qq. 

low-bred fellows. Compare J Henry 
IV. II. iv. 12 ; Romeo and jfuliet, 11. 
iv. 160; Wilkins, Miseries of Inforst 
Marriage, act i. : " Now death ot me, 
shall I be crossed by such a jack ? 



in the sense of " to copy work from 
another " at an examination, and that 
a "cog" is used of a translation from 
a classical author, like the English 
" crib." 

49. French nods and apish courtesy] 
In Decker, Seuen Deadly Sinnes 0/ Lon- 
don (Arber, 35), the fifth sin is " Apish- 
nesse," the sin of " counterfetting or 
imitation." " Much about the year 
when Monsieur came in, was hee be- 
gotten, betweene a French Tayler, and 
an English Court-Seamster." Fran(;ois, 
Dukeof Alen9on, and, after 1574, Duke 
of Anjou and, by courtesy, Monsieur 
de France, the youngest son of Henry 
II. and Caterina de' Medici, visited 
England in 1579 and 1581 as a suitor 
to Elizabeth, and was regarded for a 
time as her prospective husband. The 
popular attitude to the foreign marriage 
is gauged by such allusions as these, 
which, written several years after the 
event, retain the deep impression which 
it created. Compare Eastward Ho : 
" dost thou think our Englishmen are 
so Frenchified, that a man knows not 
whether he be in France or in England, 
when he sees 'hem ? " ; Fletcher, Mon- 
sieur Thomas, i. 2 : " Sirrah, no more 
of your French shrugs, I advise you." 

J3' yo'^i] L'sed contemptuously : 



act v. : " Peace, saucy jfack.'" See also 
the conversation in Martin Marprelate, 
Epistle, 15S8 (.\rber, 20), between John 
Aylmer, Bishop of London, and one 
Madox : " That is my meaning, ka 
dumb lohn, and I tell thee Madox that 
thou art but a lacke to use me so ; 
Master Madox replying sayd that in 
deed his name was lohn, and if euery 
lohn were a lacke, he was content to 
bee a lacke (there he hit my L[ord] 
ouer the thumbs)." 

63-69. The king . . . remove it] The 
meaning of the sentence is obvious ; 
but the grammar is hopelessly con- 
fused. The words " royal disposition " 
have deposed "the king" from its 
place as the true nominative. The 
words " Aiming . . . hatred " are in- 
tended to qualify "royal disposition " ; 
the "interior hatred" of Gloucester 
being the antithesis to the royal nature 
of the king. Elizabeth goes on to 
explain how this hatred shows itself. 
But she loses the thread of her 
sentence; and, when she comes to 
her verb, the " royal disposition " is 



sc. Ill] KING RICHARD III 35 

And not provok'd by any suitor else — 

Aiming, belike, at your interior hatred^ 65 

That in your outward action shows itself _ 

Against my children, brothers, and myself. 

Makes him to send, that thereby he may gather 

The ground of your ill-will, and so remove it. 
Glou. I cannot tell : the world is grown so bad, 70 

That wrens make prey where eagles dare not perch. 

Since every Jack became a gentleman. 

There 's many a gentle person made a Jack. 
Q. Eliz. Come, come, we know your meaning, brother 
Gloucester ; 

You envy my advancement and my friends', 75 

God grant we never may have need of you ! 
Glou. Meantime, God grants that we have need of you ! 

Our brother is imprison'd by your means, 

Myself disgrac'd, and the nobility 

Held in contempt, while great promotions 80 

Are daily given to ennoble those 

That scarce, some two days since, were worth a noble. 

66. T/ia<] Ff; li^AJcA Qq. action\ Ff; actions Qq. 67. children'] Ff; 

kindred Qq. brothers^Ff; brother Qq. 68,69. that thereby . . . The ground 
. . . so remove it] Steevens ; that thereby . . . The ground . . . to remove it Qq 
1-5 ; that thereby . . . The grounds . . . to remove it Q 6; that he may learne 
the ground Ff; whereby . . . The ground . . . to remove it Qq 7, 8. 71. 

make] Qq i, 2, Ff ; may Qq 3-6. 75. my] Q i, Ff ; mine Qq 2-8. 77. grants] 
Qqi, 2, Fi; grant QqyS. we]Qq\IF{. 80. while]Fi; whilst Qq. great] 
Ff ; many faire Qq. 

uppermost in her mind, and becomes due to hasty writing, it is exactly the 

the subject of the sentence. Abbott, agitated and incoherent defence which 

Shakespearian Grammar, § 413, quotes a woman would make, face to face with 

Cymbeline, v. v. 344, 345 : — a dangerous enemy, and powerless 

" Beaten for loyalty against his insinuations. 

Excited me to treason " ; 72. every Jack] " Jack " (see riote on 

but the case does not seem exactly line 53 above) is here used in the 

parallel. In behalf of Qq, Aldis Wright original sense of peasant: compare 

quotes the Prayer -Book version of John Heywood, Proverbes (Sharman, 

Ps. Ixxxviii. 81: "That they might 61): "yatA« would be a^ gentleman, 

put their trust in God, and not to for- if he could speake French " (Craig), 

get," etc. Ffseem to adopt a summary 77. need of you] Gloucester plays on 

method of emendation by removing the double meaning of " need." Eliza- 

the main difficulty. If, on Mr. Daniel's beth has prayed that she and her 

theory, the editor of F i used a copy of family may never be under the neces- 

Q 6, the plural "grounds" in line 69 sity of asking his help. He rejoins 

would have complicated the problem that he and his friends are in necessity 

which he thus solved. Even if the owing to her intrigues. 
in\'olved construction of the speech is 



86 KING RICHARD III [act i. 

Q. Eliz. By Him that rais'd me to this careful height 

From that contented hap which I enjoy'd, 

I never did incense his majesty 85 

Agaiiist the Duke of Clarence, but have been 

An earnest advocate to plead for him ! 

My lord, you do me shameful injury, 

Falsely to draw me in these vile suspects. 
Glou. You may deny that you were not the mean 90 

Of my Lord Hastings' late imprisonment. 
Riv. She may, my lord, for— — 
Glou. She may, Lord Rivers ! wh)^ who knows not so ? 

She may do more, sir, than denying that : 

She may help you to many fair preferments, 9^ 

And then deny her aiding hand therein, 

And lay those honours on your high desert. 

What may she not ? she may, ay, marry, may she, — 
Riv. What, marry, may she ? 
Glou. What, marry, may she ! marry with a king, 100 

A bachelor and a handsome stripling too : 

I wis your grandam had a worser match. 
Q. Eliz. My Lord of Gloucester, I have too long borne 

Your blunt upbraidings and your bitter scoffs: 

By heaven, I will acquaint his majesty 105 

Of those gross taunts that oft I have endur'd ! 

I had rather be a country servant-maid 

90. mean] Ff ; cause Qq. 92. lord, for — ] Ff ; Lord Qq. 97. desert] Ff; 
deserts Qq. 98. ay] I Ff ; yea Qq. loi. and] Ff ; omitted Qq. 106. Of] 
Ff ; With Qq. that oft /] Ff ; / often Qq. 

83. careful] full of trouble. Compare 90. deny that you were not] For the 

Lyly, EK/AMfi (Arber, 65) : " Thou hast intensified negative, Nciv En^. Diet. 

hetherto founde me a cheerefull com- quotes Captain Smith, Virginia, 1624, 

panion in thy myrth, and nowe shalt iv. 157 : " Taxing the poore king of 

thou finde me as carefull with thee in treason, who denied to the death not 

thy moane "; Lodge, Wounds of Civil to know of any such matter." 
War, 3iC\. v.: "the coverts of my care- 102. I wis] certainly. See Mr. 

full eyes." Pooler's note on Merchant of Venice, 

8g. draw me in] Compare Wilkins, ii. ix., 68. The O.E. form "iwis"( = 

Miseries of Inforst Marriage, act ii. : A.S. gcwis : compare German gewiss) 

" Draw all her soul in th' compass of is found as early as the twelfth centurj' ; 

an oath." see Morris, Specimens of E. Eng. i. 2nd 

suspects] suspicions, as 2 Henry VI. ed. 1898, p. 32 : " Mi fleis is wis mete, 

in. ii. 139; Marlowe, Edward II, and mi blod I'li'/j drinke." 
1594, act iv. : " Free from suspect, and 102. worser] So Hamlet, iii. iv. 157, 

fell invasion," etc. 



sc. Ill] KING RICHARD III 37 

Than a great queen, with this condition, 

To be so baited, scorn'd, and stormed at : 

Small joy have I in being England's queen. i lo 

Enter QuEEN Margaret, behind. 

Q. Mar. And lessen'd be that small, God I beseech Him ! 

Thy honour, state, and seat is due to me. 
Glou. What, threat you me with telling of the king ? 

Tell him, and spare not : look, what I have said, 

I will avouch 't in presence of the king : 115 

I dare adventure to be sent to the Tower. 

'Tis time to speak ; my pains are quite forgot. 
Q. Mar. Out, devil ! I do remember them too well : 

.Thou kill'dst my husband Henry in the Tower, 

And Edward, my poor son, at Tewkesbury. 120 

Glou. Ere you were queen, ay, or your husband king, 

I was a pack-horse in his great affairs, 

A weeder-out of his proud adversaries, 

A liberal re warder of his friends : 

To royalise his blood, I spent mine own. 125 

109. so baited'^ Ff; thus taunted C^q, stormed'] Ff; baited Qq. aft. no. 
Enter . . . behind.} Enter old Queene Margaret. Ff; Enter Queen Margaret. Qq 
(aft, 109). III. Him] Ff; thee Qq. 113. of] or Q 2; omitted Qq 6-8. 

114. Tell him . . . said] Qq ; omitted Ff. have] Qq 1,2; omitted Qq 3-8. 

115. avouch't]F{; avouchQq. 116. I dare . . . Tower]F{; omitted Qq. 117. 
my] when Q 6, 118. Out . . . well] one line as Qq ; two lines Ff, divided 
after Diuell. do] Ff ; omitted Qq. 119. kill'dst] Ff ; slewest Qq. 121. 
Ereyou . . . king] one line as Qq ; two lines Ff, divided after Qneefie. ay] I 
Ff ; yea Qq. 125. spent] Ff ; spilt Qq. 

114-116.] The omission of line 114 in omission of line 116 in Qq may have 

Ff may be due to a printer's error. Its been either an error or an unnecessary 

loss injures the emphasis, if not the piece of revision. 

sense : the editor can hardly have 125. royalise] A word frequently used 

missed it willingly. If he used Q 6 by Marlowe and his disciples ; e.g. 

for his text, he would have found the Marlowe, 1 Tambitrlaine, c. 1587, ii. 

line imperfect; but he could have cor- 3 : — 

rected it from his MS. copy or by mere " For fates and oracles of Heaven 

conjecture. Of course, the MS. may have sworn 

have omitted it by mistake, just as it To royalise the deeds of Tambur- 

probably supplied line 116. But Ff laine." 

" avouch 't " in line 115 does not neces- Greene, Friar Bacon (Dyce, 169) : — 

sarily imply such an omission ; and it " Rich Alexandria drugs . . . 

has been kept here as a mere repetition Shall royalize the table of my 

of the object after the verb, which F i king." 

probably borrowed from MS. The Peele, Edward I. 1593 (ibid. 377) :— 



38 KING RICHARD III [act i. 

Q. Mar. Ay, and much better blood than his or thine. 
Glou. In all which time you and your husband Grey 

Were factious for the house of Lancaster ; 

And, Rivers, so were you. Was not your husband 

In Margaret's battle at Saint Albans slain? 130 

Let me put in your minds, if you forget 

What you have been ere this, and what you are, 

Withal, what I have been, and what I am. 
Q. Mar. A murd'rous villain, and so still thou art. 
Glou. Poor Clarence did forsake his father, Warwick; 135 

Ay, and forswore himself, which Jesu pardon ! — 
Q. Mar. Which God revenge ! 
Glou. To fight on Edward's party for the crown ; 

And for his meed, poor lord, he is mew'd rp. 

I would to God my heart were flint, like Edward's, 140 

Or Edward's soft and pitiful, like mine : 

I am too childish-foolish for this world, 
Q Mar. Hie thee to hell for shame, and leave this world, 

Thou cacodemon ! there thy kingdom is. 

126. Ay'\l Ff; Yea Qq. Ay . . . thine] one line as Qq; two lines Ff, 

divided after blood. 131. minds] mindc Q 5 ; mind Qq 6-8. you] Ff ; yours 
Qq. 132. this] Ff; now Qq. 136. Ay] I Ff; Yea Qq. 142. childish- 
foolish] Theobald ; childish, foolish Qq i, 2 ; childish foolish Qq 3-8, Ff. 143. 
this] Ff ; the Qq. 

" Illustrious England, ancient seat demons, knowing into what arrearages 

of kings, these Rank-riders were runne for hoise- 

Whose chivalry hath royaliz'd thy flesh to his maister, . . . sent out his 

fame." writs to attach them." Neiv Eng. Diet. 

130. Margaret's battle at St. Albans] quotes Nashe, Terrors of the Night, 

"Margaret's battle" may mean either 1594: " Anie terror, the least illusion in 

(i) the battle in which Margaret was the earth is a Cacodamon unto him." 

victorious at St. Albans, i.e. the battle C. I. Elton, IVilliam Shakespeare, 1904, 

of Bernard's Heath, 17th February, pp. 315, 316, notes Howell, £//>. Ho.- 

1461; or (2) Margaret's army, as 1 El., 1655, ii. 76: "I fear, that while 

Henry IV. iv. i. 129 ; and see note on France sets all wheels a-going, and 

V. iii. II below. Either is tenable; stirs all the Cacorff/moMs of Hell to pull 

but, if Shakespeare is consistent to his down the House of Austria, she may 

error in 3 Henry VI. in. ii. 6, the first chance at last to pull it upon her own 

is the more likely. head "; also Diary of the Rev. John 

144. cacodemon] simply equivalent to Ward, ed. Severn, 1839, p. 163 : " It is 

" evil demon." KaKoSaifiwv means said of the gunpowder plott, that itt 

"possessed by an evil spirit"; but seemd apiece rather hammerd in hell 

Aristophanes once uses it {Eq. 112) in by a conventicle of cacodemons, than 

the sense of " an evil genius." Decker, tracd by humane invention." In 

Lanthorne and Candle-light, 1608 (ed. Fletcher, Bloody Brother, c. 1624, iv. 2 

Smeaton, 235), has: "The Under (a scene sometimes ascribed to Jonson), 

Sheriffe for the county of the Ccuo- the twelfth or lowest house in an astro- 



sc. 



Ill] KING RICHARD III 39 



Riv. My Lord of Gloucester, in those busy days, 145 

Which here you urge to prove us enemies, 
We follow'd then our lord, our sovereign king: 
So should we you, if you should be our king. 

Glou. If I should be ! I had rather be a pedlar : 

Far be it from my heart, the thought thereof! 150 

Q. Eliz. As little joy, my lord, as you suppose 
_ You should enjoy, were you this country's king, 
As little joy you may suppose in me 
That I enjoy, being the queen thereof. 

Q. Mar. A little joy enjoys the queen thereof ; 155 

For I am she, and altogether joyless. 
I can no longer hold me patient. \ Advancing. 

Hear me, you wrangling pirates, that fall out 
In sharing that which you have pill'd from me ! 
Which of you trembles not that looks on me — 160 

If not that, I being queen, you bow like subjects. 
Yet that, by you depos'd, you quake like rebels ? 
Ah, gentle villain, do not turn away ! 

Glou. Foul wrinkled witch, what mak'st thou in my sight? 

Q. Mar. But repetition of what thou hast marr'd ; 165 

That will I make before I let thee go. 

Glou. Wert thou not banished on pain of death ? 

Q. Mar. I was ; but I do find more pain in banishment 

147. sovereign] soueraigne Ff ; law/nil Qq. 148. we yoit] we now Q 6. 

150. thereof] Ff ; of it Qq. 151. Q. Eliz.] Qu. Qq i, 2, Ff; Q. M. Qq 3, 4; 
Q. Nar. Q 5 ; Qu. Mar. Q 6. 153. you may] Ff ; may you Qq. aft. 157. 

Advancing] Capell. 159. sharing] Q i, Ff; sharing out Qq 2-6. 161. 

being] Qq ; am Ff. 163. Ah] Ff ; O Qq. 167-69. Glou. Wert thou . . , 
my abode] Ff ; omitted Qq. 

logical scheme of the heavens is called Historye of Reynart the Foxe, 1481 

the " cacodemon," as being significant (Arber, 114) : " thyse false beestis . . . 

of misfortune to the native. whan they be myghty and doubted then 

153. t«wtf] as regards me, in my case, ben they extorcionners and scatte and 

158. you wrangling pirates] Mr. /"j/Ze the peple." 

Craig notes a parallel from 2 Henry 160-62. The construction is somewhat 

VI. I. i. 222. mvolved and confusing. " You all 

159. pilVd'] robbed, pillaged. Com- tremble as you look on me, if not be- 
pare Richard II. 11. i. 246. Halliwell cause, as subjects, you bow in awe of 
and Aldis Wright quote examples of me, your queen, at any rate because, 
"to rob and pill "from Halle's chronicle, as rebels, you quake before me, the 
" To pill " is the same word as " to sovereign whom you have deposed." 
peel," i.e. to strip dean. Mr. Craig The sense is easy to see, and hard to 
supplies an instance from Caxton, express. 



40 KING RICHARD III [act i. 

-Thar death can yield me here by my abode. 
A husband and a son thou ow'st to me; 170 

And thou a kingdom ; all of you allegiance : 
This sorrow that I have by right is yours, 
And all the pleasures you usurp are mine. 

Glou. The curse my noble father laid on thee, 

When thou didst crown his warlike brows with paper, 175 

And with thy scorns drew'st rivers from his eyes, 

And then, to dry them, gav'st the duke a clout 

Steep'd in the faultless blood of pretty Rutland — 

His curses, then from bitterness of soul 

Denounc'd against thee, are all fall'n upon thee ; 180 

And God, not we, hath plagu'd thy bloody deed. 

Q. Eliz. So just is God to right the innocent. 

Hast. O, 'twas the foulest deed to slay that babe. 
And the most merciless that e'er was heard of. 

Riv. Tyrants themselves wept when it was reported. 185 

Dor. No man but prophesied revenge for it. 

Buck. Northumberland, then present, wept to see it. 

Q. Mar. What ! were you snarling all before I came, 
Ready to catch each ethef-by^the-throat^- 
And turn you all your hatred now on me ? 190 

Did York's dread curse prevail so much with heaven, 
That Henry's death, my lovely Edward's death, 
Their kingdom's loss, my woful banishment, 
Should all but answer for that peevish brat ? 
Can curses pierce the clouds and enter heaven ? 195 

Why then, give way, dull clouds, to my quick curses ! 

170. ow'st t6\ Ff; owest to Qq 1-5 ; owestunto(^f\ 6-S. 172, TA«s] Ff; The 
Qq. 173. ar^] Qq i, 2, Ff; is Qq 3-8. 176. iconis] Ff ; scorns Qq. 178. 
/aM/</«5] omitted Qq 3-8. 180. a//] omitted Qq 3-8. 184. e'er] ere Vi\ etier 
Qq, 190. all . . . now] Qq i, 2, Ff ; now . . , all Qq 2-6. 194. Should} 
Ff ; Could Qq. 

174. For York's curse see 3 Henry VI. v. vi. 18; Lodge, Wounds 0/ Civil 

VI. I. iv. 164-66. War, act ii. : "peevish eld discoursing 

187. Northumberland] See 3 Henry by a fire." Below, iii, i. 31, is an 

VI. I. iv. 150-51, 169-74. Sir Henry example more nearly approximating 

Percy, third Earl of Northumberland, to our own use, as meaning " wa) ward 

grandson of Hotspur. He was killed and querulous." " Peevish " is con- 

at Towton, 29th March, 1461. stantly applied lo a boy, as a con- 

19.^. /f^ris/t] childish, fretful. Com- ventional epithet, 
pare below, iv, iv. 42a, See 3 Henry 



sc. ui] KING RICHARD III 41 

Though not by war, by surfeit die your king' 
As ours by murder, to make him a king ! 
vEdward thy son, that now is Prince oi" Wales, 
For Edward my son, that was Prince of Wales, 200 

Die in his youth by like untimely violence ! 
Thyself a queen, for me that was a queen, 
Outlive thy glory, like my wretched self! 
Long may'st thou live to wail thy children's loss, 
And see another, as I see thee now, 205 

Deck'd in thy rights, as thou art stall'd in mine 1 
Long die thy happy days before thy death ; 
And, after many lengthen'd hours of grief, 
Die neither mother, wife, nor England's queen ! 
Rivers and Dorset, you were standers-by, 210 

And so wast thou, Lord Hastings, when my son 
Was stabb'd with bloody daggers — God I pray Him, 
That none of you may live his natural age, 
But by some unlook'd accident cut off! 
Glou. Have done thy charm, thou hateful wither'd hag! 215 
Q. Mar. And leave out thee ? stay, dog, for thou shalt hear me ! 
If heaven hath any grievous plague in store, 
Exceeding those that I can wish upon thee, 
O, let them keep it till thy sins be ripe, 
And then hurl down their indignation 220 

197. Thotigh^Yi; i/Qq. 198. owrs] om)' Qq 3, 5, 6; o«< Q 4. 199. that] 
Ff; which Qq. 200. my] Qq; otirFf. that]F{; which Q^q. 204. /osiJQq; 
death Ff. 206. rights] Q i, Ff ; glorie Qq 2-8. 211. wast] Qq i, 2, Ff, Q 8 ; 
was Qq 2-7. 213. his] Ff ; your Qq. 

206. s^aWd] installed. Aldis Wright where, and in what manner of comple- 

quotes Greene, Friar Bacon (Dyce, ment it was done." 

155): " A friar newly sfaWrf in Brazen- 214. The sense is obvious, but the 

nose." Qom^&xe id., Orlando Furioso, syntax is elliptic. The construction of 

1594 (Dyce, 95) : — "cutoff" is either (i) co-ordinate with 

" Nor can there sit within the sacred the wish in the previous line, "But 

shrine [that you may be] cut off," or (2) pro- 

Of Venus more than one installed leptic, "But [that you may live until 

heart." you are] cut off." This latter is the 

In Decker, Bel-Man of London, 1608 more probable. 

(Smeaton, 83), a candidate for initia- 219. </i£w] Notice the plural pronoun 

tion in the ragged regiment of beggars after "heaven," as though Margaret 

is asked " if hee were stalled to the had said " the gods." 

Rogue or no ? the poore Hungarian 220. elvish-mark' d] Compare King 

answered, yes, He was : then was he jfohn, 111. i. 47, and the lines im- 

asked by Whom he was Stalled, and mediately preceding. For this malig- 



42 



KING RICHARD III 



[act I. 



On thee, the troubler of the poor world's peace ! 

The worm of conscience still begnaw thy soul ! 

Thy friends suspect for traitors while thou livest, 

And take deep traitors for thy dearest friends! 

No sleep close up that deadly eye of thine, 225 

Unless it be while some tormenting dream 

Affrights thee with a hell of ugly devils ! 

Thou elvish-mark'd, abortive, rooting hog ! 

Thou that wast seal'd in thy nativity 

The slave of nature and the son of hell! 230 

Thou slander of thy heavy mother's womb I 

Thou loathed issue of thy father's loins ! 

Thou rag o' honour! thou detested 

G/ou. Margar*... ! 

Q. Mar. Richard ! 

Glou. Ha ! 

223. while] whilst Q 6. 226. while] Ff ; whilest or whilst Qq. 231. heavy 
mother's]F{; mothers heany Qq. 233. detested — ] Ff i, 3, 4; detested F2; 
detested, &•€. Qq. 



nant sense of " elvish " compare I 
ycronimo, c. 1587 : — 

" Oh fate thou elf I 
To kill Andrea, which here kill'd 
himself." 
See also Chaucer, Canterbury Tales, 
G. 751 [of alchemy]: "our elvish 
craft." 

228. rooting hog] Richard's badge 
was a white boar, as below, iii. ii. 11. 
etc. Steevens cites the " Complaint of 
Collingbourne " in Myroure for Magis- 
trates, " For where I meant the king 
by name of hog, I only alluded to his 
badge the bore." In 1484, William 
Colyngborne, a Wiltshire gentleman, 
was executed for publishing the dog- 
grel lines, " The Cat, the Rat, and 
Louell our dog, Rule all England vnder 
an hog " — " meaning," adds Halle (ap. 
Holinshed, iii. 746), " by the hog, the 
dreadfull wild boare, which was the 
kings cognisance." Fuller. Worthies 
of England, 1662, p. 214, refers to a 
boar, one of the supporters of a rose in 
the gateway to the Schools qu.idrangle 
at Cambridge, built while Archbishop 
Rotherham was chancellor of the uni- 
versity : "The truth is that Rotheram 
having felt the Sharp Tuskcs of that 



Boar . . . advanced his Armes thereon, 
meerly to engratiate himself." 

230. slave of nature] Conjectural 
emendations, such as " shame of 
nature," quoted by Theobald, seem 
unnecessary. Aldis Wright explains 
it as a term of contempt. In Fletcher, 
False One, iv. 2, Cleopatra refers con- 
temptuously to "hated lucre," on 
which Caesar has cast his eyes covet- 
ously, as " the slave of nature." War- 
burton and Malone both took the phrase 
here as referring " to the ancient custom 
of masters branding their profligate 
slaves " ; and Malone notes the coup- 
ling of a " slavish wipe" and "birth- 
hour's blot " in Lucrece, 537. We may 
compare the application of" stigmatic " 
to Richard in 2 Henry VI. v. i. 215, 
and 3 Henry VI. 11. ii. 136. Nature, 
in this sense, has sealed him her slave 
in his nativity by branding him with 
deformity. 

233- rag] Compare Taming of the 
Shrev', iv. iii. 112, and Mr. Bond's note 
on the passage. See also below, v. iii. 
329; Jonson, Cynthia's Revels, v. 2: 
"Heart! who let in that rag there 
amongst us ? " Warburton proposed 
to read "wrack." 



sc. Ill] KING RICHARD III 43 

Q. Mar. I call thee not. 

Glou. I cry thee mercy then, for I did think 235 

That thou hadst call'd me all these bitter names. 
Q. Mar. Why, so I did, but look'd for no reply. 

O, let me make the period to my curse ! 
Glou. 'Tis done by me, and ends in " Margaret." 
Q. Eliz. Thus have you breath'd your curse against your- 
self. 240 
Q. Mar. Poor painted queen, vain flourish of my fortune ! 

Why strew'st thou sugar on that bottled spider, 

Whose deadly web ensnareth thee about ? 

Fool, fool ! thou whet'st a knife to kill thyself ^ a , . 

The day will come that thou shalt wish for me " 245 

To help thee curse that poisonous bunch-back'd toad. .. 
Hast. False-boding woman, end thy frantic curse, 

Lest to thy harm thou move our patience. 

235. / cry . . . then] Ff ; Then I crie thee mercy Qq. did thipk'] Ff; had 
thought Qq. 236. That thou] Q i, Ff; Thou Qq 2-6. 237. look'd] looke 

Q 6, 239. in] by Q 6. 245 day] Ff ; time Qq. that] Q i, Ff ; when Qq 
2-8. 246. poisonous] Q i, Ff; poisoned Qq 2-8. 

238. period] the conclusion, which See also Wilkins, Miseries of Inforst 

rounds off" my curse. See below, 11. i. Marriage, act iii. : " How ill it will 

44; Antony and Cleopatra, iv. xiv. stand with the_/?0Mm/t of your reputa- 

107 ; and compare Fletcher and Mas- tions," and act v. : " Who bear a 

singer, Spanish Curate, i. 3 : " The flourish in the outward show " ; 

period of human happiness " ; Elder Fletcher, False One, i. i : — 

Brother, i. 2 : — "To be honest, 

" I might well conclude Religious and thankful, in them- 

My name were at a period." selves 

241. painted] counterfeit. So Ham- Are forcible motives, and can need 

let, in. 1. 53, refers to fair-seeming no flourish 

speeches which are really hollow and Or gloss in the persuader." 

empty. Com}^cLxe Eastivard He, act ii. : There is a good parallel to the present 

" marriage is but a form in the school of line in Love's Labour's Lost, iv. iii. 

policy, to which scholars sit fastened 23S-39. For the verbal use of " flourish " 

only with painted chains." see Measure for Measure, iv. i. 75. 

241. vain flourish] empty decoration 242. bottled] bottle-shaped, swollen : 
of a fortune which is mine by right. We applied again to Richard, iv. iv. 81 be- 
still speak of "flourishes" in connec- low. Steevens quotes the absurd 
tlon with ornamental handwriting or a opinion of Robert Heron, that "a 
highly decorated speech. Compare bottled spider is evidently a spider 
Hamlet, v. ii. 187. Steevens quotes kept in a bottle long fasting, and of 
Massinger, Great Duke of Florence, iii. consequence the more spiteful and 
i: — venomous." Mr. Craig ("Little 
" I allow these Quarto," Richard III. 1904, p. 58) 
As flourishes of fortune, with notes that the bluebottle fly in North 
which princes Lincolnshire is called the "bottle 
Are often sooth'd." fly." 



44 KING RICHARD III [act i. 

Q. Mar. Foul shame upon you ! you have all mov'd mine. 
Riv. Were you well serv'd, you would be taught your 

duty. 250 

Q, Mar. To serve me well, you all should do me duty, 

Teach me to be your queen, and you my subjects : 

O, serve me well, and teach yourselves that duty ! 
Dor. Dispute not with her ; she is lunatic. 
Q. Mar. Peace, master marquess, you are malapert : 255 

Your fire-new stamp of honour is scarce current 

O, that your young nobility could judge 

What 'twere to lose it, and be miserable ! 

They that stand high have many blasts to shake them. 

And, if they fall, they dash themselves to pieces. 260 

Glou. Good counsel, marry : learn it, learn it, marquess. 
Dor. It touches you, my lord, as much as me. 
Glou. Ay, and much more ; but I was born so high, 

Our aery buildeth in the cedar's top. 

And dallies with the wind and scorns the sua 265 

Q. Mar. And turns the sun to shade, alas, alas 1 

Witness my son, now in the shade of death, 

Whose bright out-shining beams thy cloudy wrath 

Hath in eternal darkness folded up. 

Your aery buildeth in our aery's nest. 270 

O God, that seest it, do not suffer it ! 

As it was won with blood, lost be it so ! 
Buck. Peace, peace, for shame, if not for charity! 

259. blasts'[ blast Q i. 262. touches] Ff ; toucheth Qq. 263. Ay] I Ff ; 
Y'ca Qq. 267. son] sunne Qq 5-8. 272. was] Qq; is Ff. 273. Peace, 
peace] Ff ; Haue done Qq. 

255. malapert] impudent. An em- [132]. New Eng. Diet, quotes Syl- 
phatic form of " apert," i.e. free-spoken, vester. Hymn of Almes, 1611, line 197 : 
our modern " pert." Compare Chaucer, "Or Fire neic Fashion in a sleeve or 
Troilus and Criseyde, iii. 87 : " Al nere slop" (Works, 1641, p. 516). 

he malapert, or made it tough " ; 264. aery] the brood of an eagle. 

Chapman (?), Alphonsus. act i. : " What, Compare King John, v. ii. I49, where 

boy, so malapert ? " ; Twdfth Night, New Eng. Diet, is surely wrong in tak- 

IV. i. 47. ing " aery " to mean simply the nest. 

256. fire-new] newly-coined, fresh For this latter sense compare Mas- 
from assay. Dorset's title had been singer, Mati o/'/fowoMr, 1632, i. 2 : — 
granted i8th April, 1475. Compare "One aery with proportion ne'ex 
Twelfth Night, iii. ii. 23, 24, and see discloses 

Mr. Craig on King Lear, v. iii. 133 The eagle and the wren." 



sc. Ill] KING RICHARD III 45 

Q. Mar. Urge neither charity nor shame to me : 

Unchjiritably with me have you dealt, 275 

Aiid shamefully my hopes by you are butcher'd. 

My.cJiarity is outrage, life my^shame, 

Andi«~that shame still live my sorrow's rage! 
Buck, Have done, have done ! 
Q. Mar. O princely Buckingham, I '11 kiss thy hand, 280 

In^ign of league and amity with thee : 

Now fair befall thee and thy noble house ! 

Thy garments are not spotted with our blood, 

Nor thou within the compass of my curse. 
Buck. Nor no one here ; for curses never pass 285 

The lips of those that breathe them in the air. 
Q. Mar. I will not think but they ascend the sky, 

And there awake God's gentle-sleeping peace. 

O Buckingham, take heed of yonder dog! 

Look, when he fawns, he bites ; and, when he bites, 290 

His venom tooth will rankle to the death. 

Have not to do with him, beware of him ! 

Sin, death, and hell have set their marks on him. 

And all their ministers attend on him. 
Glou. What doth she say, my Lord of Buckingham ? 295 

Buck. Nothing that I respect, my gracious lord, 
Q. Mar. What, dost thou scorn me for my gentle counsel, 

And soothe the devil that I warn thee from ? 

O, but remember this another day 

When he shall split thy very heart with sorrow, 300 

And say poor Margaret was a prophetess,,, ^ts/^ 

276. my hopes by you] Ff; by you my hopes Qq. 278. that shaniel Ff; my"'"'^^, 
shame Qq. still'] shall Qq 6-8. 279. Have done, have done] Ff; Haue '^ 
done Qq. 280. Til] He ¥{; I will Q,q. 282. nohle]Fi; princely Qq. 287. 
/ will not think] Ff; He not beleeuc Qq. 2S9. take heed] Ff ; beivare Qq. 
291. rankle] ruckle Q i. to the] Ff ; thee to Qq. 297, What . . . coinisel] 
one line as Qq ; two lines Ff, divided after scorne me. 

291, venom tooth) "Venom" for 298. soothe] Ratiei, as Coriolanus, lu 

"venomed" occurs also 3 Henry VI. ii. 77. "Soothing" for "flattery" 

II. ii. 138 ; Lucrece, 850. Compare the occurs ibid. i. ix. 44. See also Jonson, 

use of " honey " in Lodge, Wounds of Poetaster, iv. 3 : — 
Civil War, act v.: "honey words " thy violent wrong 

make foolish minds," and at iv. i, 79 In soothing the declin'd affections 

below. Of our base daughter," 



46 KING RICHARD III [act i. 

Live each of you the subjects to his hate, 

And he to yours, and all of you to God's ! [Exii. 

Hast. My hair doth stand an end to hear her curses. 
Riv. And so doth mine : I muse why she 's at liberty. 305 

Glou. I cannot blame her : by God's holy mother. 

She hath had too much wrong ; and I repent 

My part thereof that I have done to her. 
Q. Eliz. I never did her any, to my knowledge. 
Glou. Yet you have all the vantage of her wrong. 310 

»I was too hot to do somebody good. 

That is too cold in thinking of it now. 

Marry, as for Clarence, he is well repaid ; 

He is frank'd up to fatting for his pains — 

God pardon them that are the cause thereof! 315 

Riv. A virtuous and a Christian-like conclusion, 

To pray for them that have done scathe to us. 
G/ou. So do I ever — [Aside] being well advis'd ; 

For, had I curs'd now, I had curs'd myself 

302. subjects to] Ff; subiects o/Qq i-6. 303. yours]'Fi; yourQq i, 2; you 
Qq 3-8. 304. Hos<.]Qq; Buc.Yi. a»i] Ff; o« Qq. 305. muse why'\Vi; 
wonder Qq. 308. to her] Ff ; omitted Qq. ^09. Q. Eliz.] Camb. ; Qu. Qq 
1-5; Hast. Qq 6-8; Mar. Ff i, 2 ; Der. Ff3, 4; Dors. Rowe. 310. Yet] Ff; 
Z?«f Qq. A^r] Ff ; </»t5 Qq. 315. thereo/]¥i; o/it Qc[. 318. Aside] 

Camb.; omitted Qq ; Speakcs to himselfe Ff (after advis'd); Rowe marks both 
lines Aside. 319. curs'd now, /] curst now, / Q 4, Ff ; curst, now I Qq 

1-3, 5-8. 

305. / muse] I wonder. Compare maintainers of their weale and libertie." 

George a Greene (Dodsley, 1825, iii. Malone quotes Harrison, Description 

23) : — of Britaine, 1577 : " The husbandmen 

" I muse, if thou be Henry Momford, and farmers never fraunkc them above 

Kendall's earl, three or four months, in which time he 

That thou wilt do poor George a is dyeted with otes and peason, and 

Greene this wrong." lodged on the bare planches of an 

Milton, Of Reformation in England, uneasy cote." 

1641, book ii. : " How then this third 317. scathe] injury. The 13th cen- 

and last sort that hinder reformation tury version of Genesis, printed in 

v/ill justify that it stands not with rea- Morris, Specimens of Early English, 

bon of state, / much muse." part i. (2nd ed. p. 164), has (line 2298) 

314. frank'd up] See also below, iv. " losep ne iSoht Oor-of no sca&'e," i.e. 

V. 3. Nares, after Cotgrave, gives no harm. See also Chaucer, Canter- 

" Frank. A place to fatten a boar in ; biiry Tales, A. 446: "But she was 

a sty," as 2 Henry IV. 11. ii. 160. Fom-del deef, and that was scathe," 

New Eng. Diet, quotes Hollard's i.e. a misfortune. See Romeo and 

Livy, i6oo : " The Commons doe feed Juliet, i, v. 86, for " scatlie " used as 

and franke vp, even for the shambles a verb, 
and butchers knife the fautors and 



sc. hi] king RICHARD III 47 

Enter Catesby. 

Gates. Madam, his majesty doth call for you, 320 

And for your grace, and you, my noble lords. 

Q. Eliz. Catesby, we come. Lords, will you go with us ? 

Riv. We wait upon your grace. \Exeunt all but Gloucester. 

Glou. I do the wrong, and first begin to brawl : 

The secret mischiefs that I set abroach 325 

I lay unto the grievous charge of others. 

Clarence, whom I indeed have cast in darkness, 

I do beweep to many simple gulls, 

Namely to Derby, Hastings, Buckingham, 

And tell them 'tis the queen and her allies 330 

That stir the king against the duke my brother. 

Now they believe it, and withal whet me 

To be reveng'd on Rivers, Vaughan, Grey : 

But then I sigh, and, with a piece of Scripture, 

Tell them that God bids us do good for evil ; 335 

And thus I clothe my naked villainy 

With odd old ends stolen forth of Holy Writ, 

And seem a saint, when most I play the devil. 

Enter Ccite^hy.^ Ft; omitted Qq. 321. your grace\ Qq i, 2, Ff ; your noble 
grace, Qq 3-8. you . . . lords.} Capell ; yott my noble Lo : Qq 1, 2 ; you my 
noble Lord Qq 3-6 ; yours my gracious Lord Ff. 322. we . . . us] Qq ; / 

. . . mee Ff. 323. We] Ff; Madam we Qq. wait upon]F{; will attend 

Qq. 324. begin] Ff ; began Qq. 325. mischiefs] mischiefe Qq 3-8. 327. 
whom]w}io'P 1. cast] Ff; /at^ Qq. 329. Derby, Hastings] ¥i; Hastings, 
Darby Qq. 330. tell them His] PT; say it is Qq 1-7. 332. it] Ff ; me Qq. 
333. Vaughan] Ql(\; Dorset Ff. 334. /] omitted Qq 3,5-8. 337. odd old] 
odde old Ff; old odde (or od) Qq. forth] Ff ; out Qq. 

325. set abroach] a common meta- band," " Old ends " occurs Much 



phor. See Romeo and Jtilict, i. i. m 

Lodge, Wounds of Civil War, act i. 

this discord, newly set abroach " 



Ado About Nothing, 1. i. 290, and 
Jonson, Volpone, 1607, pro. 23 : " Nor 
hales he in a gull old ends reciting 



Chapman, All Fools, act ii. : — Milton has " odd ends," Apology for 

" shall I be made Smectymnuus, 1642 (Prose Works, ed. 

A foolish novice, my purse set a- St. John, iii. no): "His odd ends, 

broach which from some penurious book of 

By every cheating come-you- characters he had been culling out and 

seven." would fain apply." ''Ends" are tags, 

337. odd old ends] For " odd old," commonplace quotations, as in East- 

compare Marston, Malcontent, act v. : ward Ho, ii. i, where Touchstone 

"fables feign'd, orfrf old fools' chat"; rebukes his dissolute apprentice, " Well 

Beaumont and Fletcher, irowaK-Z/n^^*", said, change your gold-ends for play- 

ii. I : " Any odd old gentlewoman, ends." 

that mourns for the death of her hu«\* 



48 KING RICHARD III [act i. 

Enter two Murderers. 

But soft ! here come my executioners. 

How now, my hardy, stout, resolved mates ! 340 

Are you now going to despatch this thing ? 
First Murd. We are, my lord ; and come to have the warrant, 

That we may be admitted where he is. 
Glou. Well thought upon ! I have it here about me. 

\^Gives the warrant. 

When you have done, repair to Crosby Place. 345 

But, sirs, be sudden in the execution. 

Withal obdurate : do not hear him plead ; 

For Clarence is well-spoken, and perhaps 

May move your hearts to pity, if you mark him. 
First Murd. Tut, tut, my lord, we will not stand to prate. 350 

Talkers are no good doers : be assur'd 

We go to use our hands, and not our tongues, 
Glou. Your eyes drop mill-stones, when fools' eyes fall tears; 

I like you, lads : about your business straight ! 

Go, go, dispatch ! 
First Murd. We will, my noble lord. [Exeunt. 355 

Enter two Murderers] Ff {murtherers) ; Enter Executioners. Qq (aft. 339). 
339. come] Q i, Ff ; comes Qq 2-8. 341. you noiv] Qq i, 2, Ff; ye now Qq 
3-5 ; ye not Q 5 ; you not Qq 7, 8. ihing] Ff ; deed Qq. 342, 350. First 

Murd.] I. M. Capell; Exccu. Qq [var.]; Vil. Ff (and 355). 344. Well] Ff; 
It was well Qq. Gives the warrant.] Capell. 350. Tut, tut] Ff; Tush 
feare not Qq ; Fear not Pope. 352. go] Ff ; come Qq. 353. fall] Ff ; drop 
Qq. 354. straight] Ff; omitted Qq. 355. Go, go . . . lord.] Ff ; omitted 

Qq. Exeunt] Qq [aft. 354] ; omitted Ff. 

346. sudden] hasty, immediate. " Talking pays no toll " in Grose's 

Chapman (?), Alphonsus, act v., has collection of proverbs. 

" Be therefore sudden lest we die our- 353. mill-stones] The expression was 

selves " ; and, almost a repetition of the proverbial : see Troilus and Cressida, 

present line, " I will be sudden in the i. ii. 158. Steevens quotes Ccesar and 

execution." Compare below, iv. ii. 19. Pompcy, 1607 : " Men's eyes must mill- 

348. well-spoken] Compare Chap- stones drop, when fools shed tears " ; 

man, All Fools, act i. : — and (on i. iv. 239 below) Massinger, 

" I know he is rvell-spoken, and may City Madam, 1632, iv. 3 : — 

much prevail " He, good gentleman, 

In satisfying my father." Will weep when he hears how we 

In Beaumont and Fletcher, Woman- are used. 

Hater, v. i, one of the intelligencers i Scrj. Yes, millstones." 

says of Lucio : " He 's excellently fall tears] let tears fall. Compare 

spoken." stage-direction in Ff, i. ii. 182 above : 

351. Talkers are no good doers] Pro- " She /n/s the Sword"; Measure for 

bably proverbial. Mr. Craig found Measure, 11. i. 6. 



SC. IV.] 



KING RICHARD III 



49 



SCENE \Y.— London. The Tower. 



Enter CLARENCE and Brakenbury. 

Brak. Why looks your grace so heavily to-day ? 
Clar. O, I have pass'd a miserable night, 

So full of fearful dreams, of ugly sights, 

That, as I am a Christian faithful man, 

I would not spend another such a night, 5 

Though 'twere to buy a world of happy days. 

So full of dismal terror was the time ! 
Brak. What was your dream, my lord ? I pray you tell me. 
Clar. Methoughts that I had broken from the Tower, 

And was embark'd to cross to Burgundy, lO 

And, in my company, my brother Gloucester, 

Scene iv.'\ Scene v. Pope. Brakenbury] Brokcnbury. Qq; Keeper. Ff. 
I. Brak.] Brok. Qq; Keep. Ff. (and 34, 42, 64, 75). 3. fearful . . . sights] 
Ff; vgly sights, of gastly dreames Qq. 8. my lord . . , tell me] Ff; / long 
to keare yoti tell it Qq. g. Methoughts] Me thought Qq 4-8. 9, 10. that I 
. . . Burgundy] Ff; / was imbarkt for Burgundy Qq. 



Brakenbury] In Ff Brakenbury does 
not enter till after line 75, and his part 
in the dialogue is assigned to a keeper. 
Possibly, in the original draft of the 
play, Brakenbury and the keeper were 
distinct persons, but were united for 
acting purposes, and so appeared in Qq 
as one. The editor of F i perhaps 
restored the double part from his MS. 
Spedding explained the absence of 
"Exit Keeper" at line 75 in Ff as an 
" error of press or pen, the context 
showing conclusively that the ' keeper ' 
is supposed to retire on the entrance of 
his chief." The part of the keeper, 
however, is not necessary. Clarence 
is more likely to have told his story to 
Brakenbury than to a casual warder ; 
and he might apply the term " keeper," 
as altered by Ff in lines 66, 73, to the 
Lieutenant of the Tower, in whose 
custody he v/a;. 

g. Methoughts] A corrupt form, evi- 
dently "on the false analogy of 
'methinks'" (Aldis Wright). In line 
iS below, all the printed copies read 
"me thought." In line 58, Q i alone 
reads "me thoughts," which the present 
editor has adopted in harmony with 
this passage. The form occurs in 



Winter's Tale, 1. ii. 154, and Merchant 
of Venice, 1. iii. 70 (Q 2 and Ff, not 

Qi). 

10. Burgundy] t.e. the Netherlands, 
part of the domains of the Valois 
Dukes of Burgundy. The princes oi 
the house of York found a natural 
shelter in these provinces. After 
Wakefield, Clarence, then a child, re- 
sided under Burgundian protection in 
the episcopal city of Utrecht. In 
1468, his sister Margaret became the 
second wife of Charles the Bold, last 
duke of his line. Edward IV., in 1470, 
took refuge in Holland from the coali- 
tion of Warwick and Clarence with 
Queen Margaret. Clarence had been 
a suitor for the hand of Mary, daughter 
of Charles the Bold by his first wife, 
and heiress of his duchy. Edward IV. 
put his veto on Clarence's suit ; this 
being one of the causes of discontent 
that led to the imprisonment oi 
Clarence. The year before Clarence 
was murdered, Burgundy proper was 
seized by Louis XI. of France, after 
the death of Charles the Bold ; and the 
dominions of the Duchess were re- 
stricted to the Netherlands and the 
County of Burgundy (Franche Comte). 



50 KING RICHARD III [act i 

Who from my cabin tempted me to walk 

Upon the hatches : thence we look'd toward England, 

And cited up a thousand heavy times, 

During the wars of York and Lancaster 1 5 

That had befairn us. As we pac'd along 

Upon the giddy footing of the hatches, 

Methought that Gloucester stumbled, and, in falling, 

Struck me, that thought to stay him, overboard, 

Into the tumbling billows of the main. 20 

Lord, Lord ! methought what pain it was to drown ! 

What dreadful noise of waters in mine ears ! 

What ugly sights of death within mine eyes ! 

Methoughts I saw a thousand fearful wracks, 

A thousand men that fishes gnaw'd upon, 25 

Wedges of gold, great anchors, heaps of pearl, 

Inestimable stones, unvalu'd jewels. 

All scatter'd in the bottom of the sea. 

Some lay in dead men's skulls ; and, in the holes 

Where eyes did once inhabit, there were crept, 30 

As 'twere in scorn of e\'es, reflecting gems. 

That woo'd the slimy bottom of the deep, 

And mock'd the dead bones that lay scatter'd by. 

Brak. Had you such leisure in the time of death 

To gaze upon these secrets of the deep ? 35 

Clar. Methought I had : and often did I strive 

13. <A^Kc«] Qq 1-5; <Afr^ Qq 6-8, Ff. 14. heavy] Ff ; fearefull Qq. 16. 
pac'd] Ff ; pact Q i ; past Qq 2-8. 18. falling] Ff ; stumbling- Qq. 21. 

Lord, Lord] Qq ; O Lord Ff. 22. waters] Qq 1-5 ; tvater Qq 6-8, Ff. 22, 23. 
mine . . . mine] my . . . my Q I. 23. ugly sights of ] Qq; sights of ugly Vi. 
24. Methoughts] F{ ; Methought Qq. 25. A thousand] Vf; Ten thousand Qq. 
28. All . . . sea] Ff ; omitted Qq. 29. the holes] Ff ; those holes Qq. 32. 
That]F{; Which Qq. 35. these]F{; the Qq. 36,37. and often . . . ghost] 
Ff ; omitted Qq. 

13. thctu:e] Ff have " there " in com- the phrase in accordance with the act 

mon with Q 6. See also line 22 below, of 3 James I. c. 21, " To restraine the 

where both have "water " for "waters." abuses of Players." 

Such errors may be mere coincidences 26. anchors] Aldis Wright mentions 

due to printers; but they may point a conjectural emendation to " ingots." 

equally to the use of Q 6 as the 27. jrnja/ji'rf] invaluable, as Marlowe, 

printed foundation of the text of Ff. 1 Tambtirlame, c, 1587, i. 2, " this suc- 

21. Lord, Lord] Qq may give the re- cess and loss unvalued." " Unpara- 

sult of a stage alteration ; but they have gon'd " is used for " incomparable " in 

the advantage of emphasis over Ff, Cymbelinc, i. iv. 87 ; 11. ii. 17. See 

which may show an attempt to soften note on i. ii. 39 above. 



sc iv.J KING RICHARD III 51 

To yield the ghost ; but still the envious flood 

Stopt in my soul, and would not let it forth 

To find the empty, vast, and wandering air, 

But smother'd it within my panting bulk, 40 

Which almost burst to belch it in the sea. 

Brak. Awak'd you not in this sore agony ? 

Clar. No, no, my dream was lengthen'd after life : 
O, then began the tempest to my soul. 
Who pass'd, methought, the melancholy flood, 45 

With that sour ferryman which poets write of, 
Unto the kingdom of perpetual night. 
The first that there did greet my stranger-soul 
Was my great father-in-law, renowned Warwick, 
Who spake aloud, " What scourge for perjury 50 

Can this dark monarchy afford false Clarence ? " 
And so he vanish'd : then came wandering by 
A shadow like an angel, with bright hair 
Dabbled in blood ; and he squeak'd out aloud, 

37. huf] Ff ; for Qq. 38. Stopf\ Stofd Ff ; Kept Qq. 39. find] Ff ; seeke 
Qq I, 2 ; keepe Qq 3-8. empty, vast, and'\ Qq 2, 6-8, Ff ; emptie vast and Qq i, 
3-5; evipty vast, and Malone. 41, Which] Qq; Who Ff. 42. tw] Ff ; with 
Qq. 43. No,no]F{; O wo Qq. 45. Who'iQq; / Ff. 46. sourJFi; grim 
Qq. 49. renowned] renowmed Qq 1-5. 50. spake]Fl; cried Qq. 53. 

with] Ff ; in Qq. 54. squeak'd] squeakt Qq 2-8 ; squakt Q i ; shriek' d Ff, 

37. envious] malicious. Compare 3 " A soul shall draw from out the raj^ 

Henry VI. iii. ii. 157, where the envy And strike his being into bounds." 

or malice of Natuie is transferred to the 40. bulk] the frame of the body, as 

defect which it causes. Hamlet, 11. i. 95. Compare first part of 

39. empty, vast] Malone suggested y^roHJwo (Dodsley, 1825, iii. 60) : — 

that "empty vast" means "immense "I have a mischief 

vacuity," like Tennyson's " illimitable Within my breast, more than my 

inane " in Lucretius, line 40. Shake- bulk can hold." 

speare uses " vast " as a substantive in Chapman (?), Alphonsus, act iv. : " Still 

the plays of his later and middle life, looking when his poison'd bulk would 

see Hamlet, i. ii. 198; Winter's Tale, i. break." 

i. 33 ; Tempest, i. ii. 327. In his earlier 45. Who pass'd] Ff break up the 
plays it is an adjective, as King John, sentence too much ; and Qq have the 
IV. iii. 152. However, Lodge, Wounds better reading. In line 41 above there 
of Civil War, printed 1594, but prob- is nothing to choose between the read- 
ably written some years earlier, has ings. 

(acti.): " Whose vows have pierc'd and 45, 46. Compare the speech of An- 

search'd the deepest vast," and (act drea's ghost at the beginning of Kyd, 

ii.) : — Spanish Tragedy, act i. : — 

" Those fatal fears "When I was slain, my soul de- 

That dwell below amidst the dread- scended straight 

ful vast." To pass the flowing stream of 

Compare Tennyson, In Memoriam, Acheron," etc. 

1850, epilogue, st. 31 : — 54. squeak'd] " Squeak," applied to 



52 KING RICHARD III [act i. 

"Clarence is come, false, fleetinj^, perjur'd Clarence, 55 

That stabb'd me in the field by Tewkesbury : 

Seize on him, Furies, take him unto torment ! " 

With that, methoughts, a legion of foul fiends 

Environ'd me, and howled in mine ears 

Such hideous cries, that with the very noise 60 

I trembling wak'd, and for a season after 

Could not believe but that I was in hell. 

Such terrible impression made my dream. 
Brak. No marvel, my lord, though it affrighted you ; 

I am afraid, methinks, to hear you tell it. 65 

Clar. Ah, keeper, keeper ! I have done those things, 

That now give evidence against my soul. 

For Edward's sake ; and see how he requites me ! 

O God ! if my deep prayers cannot appease Thee, 

But Thou wilt be aveng'd on my misdeeds, 70 

Yet execute Thy wrath in me alone ; 

O, spare my guiltless wife and my poor children ! — 

57. unto torment] Ff ; to your torments Qq. 58. methoughts] me thoughts 
Q I ; me thought Qq 2-8, Ff 1-3. 59. me, and] Ff ; me about, and Qq. 63. 
my] Ff ; the Qq. 64. my lord] Qq ; Lord Ff. 65. I am afraid, methinks] Ff ; 
I promise you, I am afraid Qq. 66. Ah keeper, keeper, ] I' {; O Brokenbury Qq. 
those] Qq ; these Ff. 67. That] Ff ; Which Qq. give] Ff ; beare Qq. 69-72. 
O God . . . children] Ff ; omitted Qq. 71. in me] on me Rowe. 

a voice "thin as voices from the grave," c. 1225: "Mid te fleotinde word, to 

is found in Hamlet, i. i. 116 [not in Ff]. fleoteS ]>e heorte." 
Compare " squeal " in Julius Casar, 64. marvel] pronounced as a mono- 

II. ii. 24, and Mr. Macmillan's note in syllable, and often so spelt. Compare 

Arden ed. In Antony and Cleo^iilra, J. Cook, Green's Tit Quoque (Dodsley, 

V. ii. 220, " squeaking " is used of a boy- 1825, vii. 94) : " I marl'd indeed that all 

actor's voice. Perhaps, in 1623, the things were so quiet." The alteration 

word was losing its application to in Ff points to a growth of dissyllabic 

supernatural sounds ; and the editor of pronunciation. For " no marvel . . . 

F I altered it on his own account. though " compare Gammer Gurton's 

55. fleeting] fickle, deceitful. Stee- Needle, 1575, act v. : " Was it any 

vens refcTs to Antony and Cleopatra, v. marvaile, though the poor woman 

ii. 240, " the fleeting moon," which is arose." 

the same thing as " the inconstant 71. in me] either " on me," or " in 
moon " of Romeo and Juliet, 11. ii. log. respect of me " (as i. iii. 153 above). 
There are two examples in Lyly, Eu- Compare Ezekiel v. 10 : "I will exe- 
phues (Arber, 48) : " Whom thou maist cute judgments in thee," where, how- 
make . . . partaker of all thy misfortune ever, the meaning may be " in the 
without mistrust oi fleeting" ; and (p. midst of thee" (LXX, iv aoi). 
106) : " If Lucilla reade this trifle, shee 72. my guiltless wife] Clarence's 
will . . . condemne me of mischiefe in wife, Isabella Neville, died before his 
arming young men against fleeting imprisonment took place. By that 
minions." The earliest example in time he had attempted to win Mary of 
New Eng. Diet, is from Ancren Rlule, Burgundy for his second wife. 



sc. iv] KING RICHARD III 53 

Keeper, I prithee sit by me awhile ; 
My soul is heavy, and I fain would sleep. 
Brak. I will, my lord: God give your grace good rest! 75 

[Clarence sleeps. 
Sorrow breaks seasons and reposing hours. 
Makes the night morning, and the noon-tide night. 
Princes have but their titles for their glories, 
An outward honour for an inward toil ; 
And, for unfelt imaginations, 80 

They often feel a world of restless cares : 
So that, between their titles and low name. 
There 's nothing differs but the outward fame. 

Enter the two Murderers. 

First Murd. Ho ! who 's here ? 

Brak. What wouldst thou, fellow, and how cam'st thou 
hither? 85 

First Murd. I would speak with Clarence, and I came 

hither on my legs. 
Brak. What, so brief? 

73. Keeper . . . awhile] Ff; I pray thee gentle keeper stay by me Qq ; I pray 
thee, Brakenbury, stay by me Pope. Capell adds Retiring to a chair, aft.; 75. 
Clarence sleeps.] Johnson ; Enter Brakenbury the Lieutenant. Ff. 76. 

Bra.YL So. imaginations] Fi; imagination Qq. 82. bet7veen]F{; betwixt 
Qq. iheir]your Qq ^-8. name]Fi; names Qq. 84,85. First Murd. Hot 
. . . Brak.] Ff; omitted Qq. 85. What wotildst . . . hither?] Ff; In God's 
name what are you and how came you hither ? Qq; In God's name, what art thou ? 
how cam'st thou hither? Pope. 86. First Murd.] Exectt. Qq; 2. Mur. Ff. 
88. What, so brief] Ff; Yea, are you so brief e Qq i, 2, 8 ; Yea, are ye so brief e 
Qq 3-7- 

78. glories] Johnson thought that line 89 (Ff), belong to Brakenbury. 
" troubles " " would more impress the Qq arrange the whole passage roughly 
purpose of the speaker, and correspond in lines, without any attempt at scan- 
better with the following lines." sion. Ff print mainly as prose, with 

80. for unfelt imaginations] instead one or two exceptions. The chief differ- 

of imaginations which cannot be ence between the two versions is that 

gratified. " Unfelt " is on a par with the style of Ff is more set and literary ; 

" unvalu'd," line 27 above. while Qq abound in ejaculations and 

85. From this point to line 158, the colloquial forms which may have 

discrepancies between Qq and Ff are entered the text from the stage. On 

more than usually numerous. The the other hand, Ff have forn <; like 

bulk of the dialogue originally must "there's," " hee'l," " 'tis," whe.e Qq 

have been written as prose. The only print ''there is," "he will," "it is," 

lines that scan, with the exception of See collation, 



54 KING RICHARD III [act i. 

Sec. Murd. 'Tis better, sir, than to be tedious. 

Let him see our commission, and talk no more. 90 

[Brakenbury reads it. 
Brak. I am in this commanded to deliver 

The noble Duke of Clarence to your hands. 

I will not reason what is meant hereby, 

Because I will be guiltless from the meaning. 

There lies the duke asleep, and there the keys. 95 

I '11 to the king, and signify to him 

That thus I have resign'd to you my charge. 
First Murd. You may, sir, 'tis a point of wisdom : fare 

you well. \Exit Brakenbury. 

Sec. Murd. What, shall we stab him as he sleeps? 100 

First Murd. No ; he '11 say 'twas done cowardly, when 

he wakes. 
Sec. Murd. Why, he shall never wake until the great 

judgment-day. 
First Mtird. Why, then he'll say we stabb'd him sleeping. 105 
Sec, Murd. The urging of that word "judgment" hath 

bred a kind of remorse in me. 

8g. Sec. Murd.] 2. Exe. Qq; i. Ff. 'Tis . . . tedious] Ff; O sir, it is 
better to be briefe then tedious Qq i, 2, 7, 8 ; O sir, it is better be briefe then 
tedious Qq 3-6. 90. Let him see] Ff ; Shew him Qq. 93. hereby] thereby 

Qq 3-8. 94. from] Ff; of Qq. 95. There . . . keys] Ff; Here are the 

keies there sits the Duke asleepe Qq. 96./'// . . . him]F{; lie to his Maiesty. 
and certijie his Grace Qq. 97. to you my charge] Ff; my charge to you Qq 

I, 2 ; my place to you Qq 3-8. 99. You may, sir, 'tis] Ff ; Doe so, it is Qq. 

fare you well] Ff; omitted Qq. 100. we] I Qq i, 2. loi. he'll] hee 'I Ff; 
then he will Qq. 103. Why] Ff; When he wakes, Why fool e Qq. 103. 

until the great] Ff; till the Qq. 105. he 'II] hee 7 Ff ; he will Qq. 

89. " It is better to be brief than improvement to read it here. But for 
tedious " is possibly proverbial. Mr. an editor to do so would be to commit 
Craig calls attention to All's Well himself to a principle of arbitrary selec- 
that Ends Well, n. iii. 33, 34: "that tion between Qq and Ff. The whole 
is the brief and the tedious of it." line in Ff, as it stands, is better than 

96. It may be noted, in connection the line in Qq. 
with Qq reading here, that Shakespeare, loi. cotvardly] For adverbs of a 
if he was responsible for it, used the similar kind, compare Marston, Mai- 
terms "majesty" and "grace" with content, act v.: "she most courtly 
little discrimination. The title of " ma- finds fault with them one after 
jesty " was first used by diaries V. as another " ; Fletcher, False One, iii. i. : 
King of Spain, after his election as " Let us consider timely what we must 
Emperor, 1519; and was borrowed in do"; Suckling, Upon , . . the Lord 
imitation by Henry VIII. and other Leppington, c. 1627 '■ — 
princes. What Brakenbury really " Describes each thing so lively 

would have said in 1478 would have that we are 

been : " I '11 to the king, and certify his Concern'd ourselves before wc are 

trace"; and therefore it would be an aware." 



sc. IV.] KING RICHARD 111 55 

First Murd. What, art thou afraid ? 

Sec. Murd. Not to kill him, having a warrant ; but to be 

damn'd for killing him, from the which no warrant i lO 

can defend me. 
First Murd. I thought thou hadst been resolute. 
Sec. Murd. So I am, to let him live. 
First Murd. I '11 back to the Duke of Gloucester, and tell 

him so. 115 

Sec. Murd. Nay, I prithee stay a little : I hope this 

passionate humour of mine will change ; it was wont 

to hold me but while one tells twenty. 
First Murd. How dost thou feel thyself now ? 
Sec. Murd. Some certain dregs of conscience are yet 120 

within me. 
First Murd. Remember our reward, when the deed 's 

done. 
Sec. Murd. 'Zounds ! he dies ! I had forgot the reward. 
First Murd. Where's thy conscience now? 125 

Sec. Murd. O, in the Duke of Gloucester's purse. 
First Murd. When he opens his purse to give us our 

reward, thy conscience flies out. 

log. warranf] Ff; warrant for it Qq. no. the ivhich] Ff ; which Qq. 

in. me] Ff; vs Qq. 112, 113. First Murd. I . . . live] Ff; omitted Qq, 

114. ril back] He backe Ff; Backe Qq. and tell] Ff; tell Qq. 116. Nay, 
I prithee] Ff; I pray thee Qq. a little] Ff; a while Qq. 116, 117. this 

passionate . . . mine] Ff; my holy humor Qq; this compassionate humour of 
mine Ca.pe\\. 117. it was] Ff; twas Qq. 118. tells] Ff; zvonld tel Qq. 

120. Some] Ff; Faith, some Qq. 122. deed 's] Ff; deede is Qq. 124. 

Zounds] Qq; Come Fi. 125. Where's]Fi; Where is Qq. 126. O, in]¥(; 
In Qq. 127. When] Ff ; So when Qq. 

117. /as«owoi«]Malone thought that from Sir Henry Herbert's Office-Book, 
the editor of F i altered Qq on account relating to D'Avenant's Wits, 1636. 
of the statute of 1605-6, which was Charles I., on the author's petition, 
passed " for the preventing and avoid- restored several exclamations, which 
ing the great abuse of the holy name the Master of the Revels had crossed 
of God in stage-plays, interludes, may- out from the play. Sir Henry noted : 
games, shewes and such like." See "The King is pleased to take faith, 
note on line 21 above. The alteration death, slight, for asseverations and no 
at line 85 above may be due to this oaths, to which I do humbly submit as 
reason, to which may be ascribed the my master's judgment ; but under 
omission of "Zounds "at lines 124, 143, favour conceive them to be oaths, and 
and the radical change in lines 188, 189 enter thi m here to declare my opinion 
below. Theomissionof "Faith" in line and submission." In the present case, 
120 is another probable instance. No an alteration could hardly have been 
change was made in Qq after the pass- deemed necessary within the terms of 
ing of the act. Collier, Annals of the the statute, even by the most puritani- 
Stage, 1831, ii. 56, 57, quotes a note cal critic. 



56 KING RICHARD III [act i. 

Sec. Murd. 'Tis no matter, let it go : there 's few or none 

will entertain it. 130 

First Murd. What if it come to thee again ? 

Sec. Murd. I '11 not meddle with it : it makes a man a 
coward : a man cannot steal, but it accuseth him ; 
a man cannot swear, but it checks him ; a man 
cannot lie with his neighbour's wife, but it detects 135 
him. 'Tis a blushing shamefast spirit, that mutinies in 
a man's bosom ; it fills a man full of obstacles : it 
made me once restore a purse of gold that by chance 
I found ; it beggars any man that keeps it ; it is 
turn'd out of towns and cities for a dangerous thing; 140 
and every man tUat means to live well endeavours to 
trust to himself and to live without it. 

Ftjst Mtird. 'Zounds, 'tis even now at my elbow, per- 
suading me not to kill the duke ! 

Sec. Murd. Take the devil in thy mind, and believe him 145 
not : he would insinuate with thee but to make thee 
sigh. 

First Murd. I am strong- fram'd : he cannot prevail with 
me. 

129. 'Ti$nomaUer'\Vi\ omitted Qq. 131. What^Yl; How Qq. 132. it: 
it makes] Ff ; it, it is a dangerous thing, It makes Qq. 134. a man . . . a 

man] Ff; he . . . He Qq. swear] steale Qq 3-8. 136. 'Tis] Ff ; It is Qq. 

136. shamefast] Qq i, 3, 6; shamfast Q 2; sham/act Qq 4, 5; shamefaced Ff. 

137. aman]Fi; one Qq. 13S. purse] piece Qq 2-8- by chance] Ff; omitted 
Qq. 140. towns] Ff; all Townes Qq. 141. to live] Qq 1-6; Hue Ff. 143. 
Zounds] Qq ; omitted Ff. 'tis] Ff ; it is Qq. 146. but] Ff ; omitted Qq. 
148. / am strong-fram'd] Ff ; Tut, I am strong in fraud Qq. 149. me.] me, I 
warrant thee. Qq. 

136. shamefast] the correct form of the devil will be more than a match. 
the word. Compare " steadfast." The This is substantially W'arburton's ex- 
variations of spelling in successive edi- planation. It involves the use of 
tions show a transformation in ortho- "in" = "into." Compare above, i. iii. 
graphy. " Shame-faced " suggests a 89. " Him " also must in this case 
wrong etymology. Aldis Wright notes refer to " conscience," hitherto alluded 
a like discrepancy between Qq and Ff to as "it." (2) Take hold of, i.e. 
in 3 Henry VI. iv. viii. 52 ; Lyly, grapple with conscience, whch is the 
Euphues, 1579 (Arber, 69), has " shame- devil in thy mind, and believe him not. 
fastnes." This is adopted by Aldis Wright, and 

145. There are two possible meanings is more simple. Capell avoided the 

to this line: (i) Take the devil into thy difficulty by reading " Shake the devil 

mind, and believe not conscience — the out of thy mind." 
blushing shamefast spirit, for which 



sc. 



IV.] 



KING RICHARD III 



57 



Sec. Murd. Spoke like a tall man that respects thy repu- 150 

tation. Come, shall we fall to work ? 
First Murd. Take him on the costard with the hilts of thy 

sword, and then throw him into the malmsey-butt in 

the next room. 
Sec. Murd. O excellent device ! and make a sop of him. 155 

150. spoke] Soode Q 4; Stood Qq 5-8. man'] Ff; fellow Qq. thy] Ff; 
his Qq. 151. fall to work] Ff ; to this geere Qq. 152. on] Ff ; oner Qq. 
152, 153. thy sword] my sword Qq 3-8. 153. throw him into] Ff ; we wil chop 
htm in Qq. 155. and] Ff ; omitted Qq. sop] scoope Q 3. 



150. a tall man] "Tall" is fine, 
brave ; usually in the sense of " swag- 
gering," as we speak of " tall talk." 
Mercutio in Romeo and Juliet, 11. iv. 
31, ridicules the fashionable employ- 
ment of the word. Chapman, Blind 
Beggar of Alexatidria, 1598 (Shepherd, 
7), has " I do hold thee for the most 
tall, resolute, and accomplished gentle- 
man on the face of the earth." Qq 
" tall fellow " is common, e.g. Decker, 
Seuen Deadly Sinnes of London (Arber, 
21) : " Though a Lye haue but short 
legs (like a Dwarfes) yet it goes farre 
in a little time, Et crescit eundo, and at 
last prooues a tall fellow " ; Wilkins, 
Miseries of Inforst Marriage, 1607, act 
iv. : " had you kept half a dozen tall 
fellows." " Tall man " occurs in Lodge 
and Greene, Looking-Glass for London 
(Dyce, 138) : " Then may I count 
myself, I think, a tall man, that am 
able to kill a devil." 

thy] The mixture of persons involved 
in this sentence is natural in the mouth 
of a rough and ill-educated man. There 
is no necessity to keep Qq "his." 

152. Take him] strike him. Mr. 
Craig gives illustrations in the note to 
his " Little Quarto " edition of the 
play, p. 80, and refers further to Tam- 
ing of the Shrew, in. ii. 165. 

costard] A costard is a kind of large 
apple ; hence the word was applied 
vulgarly to the head. Compare King 
Lear, iv. vi. 247, and Moth's jest on 
Costard in Love's Labour 's Lost, in. i. 
71. See Gammer Gtirton's Needle, act 
v. : " Well, knave, and I had the alone, 
I wold surely rap thy costard." The 
word is common. 

hilts] Compare 1 Henry IV. 11. iv. 
229 ; Cook, Green's Tu Quoque, " All 
the while his money is losing, he swears 
by the cross of this silver ; and, when 



it is gone, he changeth it to the hilts 
of his sword." Qq 7, 8 " hilt " may 
point to a transition from the plural to 
the singular use. 

153. throw] This is weaker than the 
colloquial " chop " of Qq. So also the 
reading " fall to work" in line 151 is 
weaker than Qq " to this gear." See 
note on line 85 above. In The True 
Tragedie of Richard the Third, quoted 
by Aldis Wright, we find " He spares 
none whom he but mistrusteth to be 
a hinderer to his proceedings, he is 
straight chopped up in prison." Quota- 
tions for this use of " chop " in New 
Eng. Diet, range from 1560 to 1708. 

malmsey] Boswell Stone, Shakspere's 
Holinshcd, 1896, p. 348, notes that the 
execution of Clarence in the butt of 
malmsey is the only detail of this 
scene which Shakespeare did not in- 
vent. Malmsey or Malvoisie was a 
Greek wina from Napoli di Malvasia 
(Monemvasia) on the south-east coast 
of Laconia. According to Howell, 
Epp. Ho. -EL, ii. 54, "some few 
MuscadelLs or Malmsies . . . brought 
over in small Casks" were the only 
wines suitable for transportation from 
Greece. Compare 'Buxion, Anatomy of 
Melancholy (Shilleto, i. 255) : " All black 
wines overhot, compound, strong 
thick drinks, as Muscadine, Malmsey, 
Alicant, Rumney, Brown Bastard, 
Metheglin, and the like." In Jonson, 
Bartholomew Fair, i. i, Littlewit says 
of Busy, " Some time the spirit is so 
strong with him, it gets quite out of 
him, and then my mother, or Win, are 
fain to fetch it again with malmsey or 
aqua caslestis." See Mr. Hart's note 
on Measure for Measure, m. ii. 3, 4. 

155. make a sop] Mr. Craig illustrates 
from King Lear, 11. ii. 35, and Troilus 
and Cressida, i. iii. 113. 



58 KING RICHARD III [act i. 

First Murd. Soft, he wakes ! 

Sec. Murd. Strike ! 

First Murd. No, we'll reason with him. 

Clar. [awaking]. Where art thou, keeper? give me a 

cup of wine. i6o 

First Murd. You shall have wine enough, my lord, anon. 
Clar. In God's name, what art thou ? 
First Murd. A man, as you are. 
Clar. But not, as I am, royal. 

First Murd. Nor you, as we are, loyal. 165 

Clar. Thy voice is thunder, but thy looks are humble. 
First Murd. My voice is now the king's, my looks mine own. 
Clar. How darkly and how deadly dost thou speak ! 

Your eyes do menace me : why look you pale? 

Who sent you hither? wherefore do you come? 170 

Both. To, to, to 

Clar. To murder me ? 

Both. Ay, ay. 

Clar. You scarcely have the hearts to tell me so, 

And'':Uierefore cannot have the hearts to do it.i 175 

Wherein, my friends, have I offended you ? 
First Murd. Offended us you have not, but the king. 
Clar. I shall be reconciled to him again. 
Sec. Murd, Never, my lord : therefore prepare to die, 
Clar. Are you drawn forth, among a world of men, r8o 

To slay the innocent ? What is my.offcnce ? 

156. Soft, heivakes\Yi\ Harkc he stirs, shalll strike Q<^. 157. Sec. Murd 
Strike] Ff; omitted Qq. 158. First Murd.] i Ff; 2 Qq (and 163, 167) 

we'll] wee 'I F{; frst lets Qq. 159. awaking] Cla.awakeih Qq 3-8. 165 

First Murd.] i Qq 5-S, Ff ; 2 Qq 1-4. 169. Your . . . pale] Ff ; omitted Qq 

170. Who . . . come] Ff ; Tell me who are yon, wherefore come you hither Qq 

171. Both] Am. Qq; 2 Ff. 173. Both. Ay, ay] Both. I, I Ff; Am. I Qq. 
174. hearts] heart Qq 6-8. 180. drawn forth, among] drawne forth among 
Ff; cald foorth from out Qq. 

158. r^a5o«]talk, as below, 11. iii. 39, To minister this soveraigne anti- 

and constantly in the Authorised Ver- dote ? " 

sion of the Bible. Johnson read " culled "—an unneces- 

iSo. drawn] In support of Qq, sary emendation. " Among a world 

Steevens quotes Nobody and Somebody, of men " is put here within commas, in 

1598 : — order to emphasise the stress evidently 

" Art thou call'd forth amongst a laid by Clarence on " you." 
thousand men 



sc. iv] KING RICHARD III 59 

Where is the evidence that doth accuse me ? 

What lawful quest have given their verdict up 

Unto the frowning judge ? or who pronounc'd 

The bitter sentence of poor Clarence death ? 185 

Before I be convict by course of law, 

To threaten me with death is most unlawful, 

I charge you, as you hope to have redemption 

By Christ's dear blood shed for our grievous sins. 

That you depart and lay no hands on me ! 190 

The deed you undertake is damnable. 

First Mtird. What we will do we do upon command. 

Sec. Murd. And he that hath commanded is our king. 

Clar. Erroneous vassals ! the great King of kings 

Hath in the table of His law commanded 195 

That thou shalt do no murder. Will you then 

Spurn at His edict, and fulfil a man's? 

Take heed ; for He holds vengeance in His hand, 

To hurl upon their heads that break His law. 

Sec. Murd. And that same vengeance doth He hurl on 

thee, 200 

For false forswearing, and for murder too. 
Thou didst receive the holy Sacrament, 
To fight in quarrel of the house of Lancaster. 

182. is] Ff ; or^ Qq. that doth] Ff; that doc Qq i, 2; <o Qq 3-8. 187. 
threaten] thteaten Q 3; thercaten Qq 4-6. 188, 1S9. to have . . . sins] Qq ; 
for any goodnesse F{. 193. owr] Ff ; the Qq. 194. vassals] Ff; vassaileQq. 

195. the table] Ff ; the tables Qq i, 2 ; his tables Qq 3-6. 196. Will you] Ff ; 
and wilt thou Qq. 198. hand] Ff ; hands Qq. 200. hurl] Ff; throw Qq. 
202, 203. holy . . . To . . . Lancaster] Qq ; Sacrament to Jight In . . . Lancaster Ff. 

183. Clarence's imprisonment and out the Alexandrine in line 202, or 
execution, if hasty, were carried out to omit "holy" before "Sacrament." 
after trial and condemnation. Gairdner, This use of " holy " would be far more 
Richard the Third, new ed. p. 32, likely to fall under the statute already re- 
comments on the one-sided character ferred to than the use in line 117 (Qq). 
of the trial. There is no reason why " holy," if not 

188, i8g. to have . . . sins] See note in the original MS., should have been 

on line 117 above; Qq would be subject added in Qq ; and, consequently, why 

to the fine of ^10 inflicted by the it should be omitted in Ff. 
statute there mentioned. 203. in quarrel] Compare Fletcher, 

194. Erroneous] Compare Fletcher, False One, i. i : — 
Monsieur Thomas, i. 2 : " Your worship " He pities them whose fortunes are 

is erroneous." embark'd 

202, 203. F T appears to have altered In his unlucky quarrel," 

the passage either in order to smooth 



60 KING RICHARD III [act i. 

First Murd. And, like a traitor to the name of God, 

Didst break that vow, and with thy treacherous blade 205 

Unrip'dst the bowels of thy sovereign's son. 
Sec. Murd. Whom thou wast sworn to cherish and defend. 
First Murd. How canst thou urge God's dreadful law to us. 

When thou hast broke it in such dear degree } 
Clar. Alas! for whose sake did I that ill deed ? 210 

For Edward, for my brother, for his sake: 

He sends you not to murder me for this, 

For in that sin he is as deep as I. 

If God will be avenged for the deed, 

O, know you yet, He doth it publicly. 215 

Take not the quarrel from His powerful arm ; 

He needs no indirect or lawless course 

To cut off those that have offended Him. 
First Murd. Who made thee then a bloody minister, 

When gallant-springing brave Plantagenet, 220 

That princely novice, was struck dead by thee ? 
Clar. My brother's love, the devil, and my rage. 

207. wast^wasHYi; wert<^<\. 209. 5Mc/r]Ff; io Qq. 212. //?]Ff; Why 
sits, he Qq. you]F{; ye Qq. 213. that]F{; this Qq. 214. avengedjFf; 
reuenged Qq. the deed] Fi; thisdfedQa. 215. O . . . j>ublicly]F{; omitted 
Qq. you yet] you, that Steevens (Farmer conj.). 217. or] Ff; nor Qq. 
lawleis]Q i, Ff; lawfull Qq 2-8. 220. gallant-springing] Q i, Ff (hyphened 
Pope); gallant spring Qq 2-8; gallant springall Capell (conj.). 221. That] 
The Qq 6-8. 

209. dfor] " A word of mere enforce- The double adjective, of which the 

ment " (Steevens). Compare King first part qualifies the second and takes 

Lear, iv. iii. 53 ; Troilus and Crrssida, the place of an adverb, is common in 

V. iii. g. There is an ironical use in this play, and in Elizabethan literature 

Jonson, Cynthia's Revels, i. i, where generally. Compare Greene, Orlando 

Crites says to Asotus : "Leave it to Furioso (Dyct, gi) : " fortune, or some 

me, I'll forget none of your rf^or graces, deep-inspiring fate"; Fletcher and 

I warrant you." Massinger, Spanish Curate, iii. 3 : 

212. The "Why, sirs" preceding " an easy-yielding wanton." There are 

this line in Qq, is printed by Cambridge three good examples in Tourneur, 

editors as a line by itself. It is pro- Revenger's Tragedy, act i. : " And 

bably an ejaculation introduced from thou his son, as impious-steep'd as 

the colloquial stage-alterations of this he" ; " Be not so cruel-wise " ; and 

dialogue. " All which and more 

220. gallant-springing]FoT "spring- She, foolifh chaste, sent back." 

ing " compare Spenser, Shepherd's Compare " childish-foolish " above, i. 

Calendar, 1579, February, 52 : — iii. 142; "wrong-incensed" below, 11. 

" I scorn thy skill, i. 51 ; " high-swoll'n," 11. ii. 117. 
That wouldeet me my springing 
youngth to spill." 



sc. IV.] KING RICHARD III 61 

First Murd. Thy brother's love, our duty, and thy faults, 

Provoke us hither now to slaughter thee. 
Clar. If you do love my brother, hate not me: 225 

I am his brother, and I love him well. 

If you are hir'd for meed, go back again, 

And I will send you to my brother Gloucester, 

Who shall reward you better for my life 

Than Edward will for tidings of my death, 230 

Sec. Murd. You are deceiv'd, your brother Gloucester hates 

you. 
Clar. O, no, he loves me, and he holds me dear : 

Go you to him from me. 
Both. Ay, so we will. 

Clar. Tell him, when that our princely father York 

Bless'd his three sons with his victorious arm, 235 

And charg'd us from his soul to love each other. 

He little thought of this divided friendship : 

Bid Gloucester think of this, and he will weep. 
First Murd. Ay, millstones ; as he lesson'd us to weep. 
Clar. O, do not slander him, for he is kind. 240 

First Murd. Right, 

As snow in harvest. Come, you deceive yourself: 

'Tis he that sends us to destroy you here. 
Clar. It cannot be ; for he bevvept my fortune, 

And hugg'd me in his arms, and swore with sobs 245 

That he would labour my delivery. 

223. owr rf;<!!>'] Ff; the diuell Qq. faults'] F{; fault Qq. 224. Provoke]F{; 
Haue brought (iq. slaughter] Ff; murder Qq. 225. If you rfo] Ff ; Oh if 
you Qq. my brother] brother Qq 4-6. 227. are] Ff; be Qq. meed] Q i, 
Ff; needeQq2-8. 229. shall] Ff; will Qq. 231. You. . . hates you] onQ 
line Qq ; You are deceiu'd. Your . . . hates you (two lines) Ff. 233. Both] 

Am. Qq; i Ff. 236. And . . . each other] Qq ; omitted Ff. 23S. of this] 

on this Qq 6-8, Ff. 239. First Murd.] i Ff ; Am. Qq. 241, 242. Right, As] 
Camb. ; Right as Qq i, 2 ; Right, as Qq 3-8, Ff; As Pope. 242. Come . . . 
yourself] Ff; thou deceiu'st thy self e Qq. 243. that sends . . . here]F(; hath 
sent us hither now to slaughter theeQ i ; that sent us hither now to murder thee 
Qq2-8. 244, 245. A« . . . fortune, And]Fi; when I parted with him, He Qq. 

239. lesson'd] The murderer refers to 240. kind] naturally affectionate, as 

I. iii. 353 above. Compare Coriolanus, Hamlet, i. ii. 65. The murderer, in 

II. iii. 185 ; Spenser, Faerie Quetne, answer, plays on the more ordinary 

III. vi. 51. meaning, " natural." 

246. labour my delivery] busy him- 



62 KING RICHARD III [act i. 

First Murd. Why, so he doth, when he dehvers you 
From this earth's thraldom to the joys of heaven. 

Sec. Murd. Make peace with God ; for you must die, my lord. 

Clar. Have you that holy feeling in your souls, 250 

To counsel me to make my peace with God, 
And are you 3''et to your own souls so blind 
That you will war with God by murdering me? 
O sirs, consider, they that set you on 
To do this deed, will hate you for the deed. 255 

Sec. Murd. What shall we do ? 

Clar. Relent, and save your souls. 

First Murd. Relent ! no, 'tis cowardly and womanish. 

Clar. Not to relent is beastly, savage, devilish. 
Which of you, if you were a prince's son, 
Being pent from liberty, as I am now, 260 

If two such murderers as yourselves came to you, 
Would not entreat for life ? 
My friend, I spy some pity in thy looks ; 
O, if thine eye be not a flatterer, 

Come thou on my side, and entreat for me, 265 

As you would beg, were you in my distress ! 
A begging prince what beggar pities not ? 

247. Fir%t Murd.] i Ff; 2 Qq. when] Ff ; now Qq. you] Ft ; thee Qq. 
248. earth's] Ff ; worlds Qq. 250. Have you . . . your souls] Ff ; Hast thou 
. . . thy soule Qq. 252. are you . . . your own souls] Ff; art thou , . . thy 
own soule Qq. 253. you will] Ff ; thou wilt Qq. *)']/o^ Qq 3-8. 254. O] 
Ff; Ah Qq. they] Ff ; he Qq. 255. for the deed] Ff ; for this deede Qq. 

257-68. First Murd. Relent I no . . . my lord I] arranged as Steevens (Tyrwhitt 
conj.), Camb. ; Ff. arrange thus, 259, 260, 261, 262, 266, 257, 258, 263, 264, 265, 
267, 268 ; Qq. thus, 257, 258, 263, 264, 265, 267 [omitting 259-62, 266, 268]; Pope 
as Qq. but omitting 267. 257. mo] Ff ; omitted Qq. 258. devilish] Q i, Ff ; 
and diuelish Qq 2-8. 262. Would . . . life] Would . . . life, as you would 

^^T^^i Were you in my distresse F; Would . . . life? Ah t you would beg. 
Were . . . distress Theobald. 263. thy] your Qq 6, 8. 264. thine] Ff; thy 
Qq. 266. As . . . distress] see line 262 above. 

self to procure my delivery. So Kyd, Compare Eastward Ho, act v. : " I do 

Spanish Tragedy, act iii. : — wonder . . . that you, being the keeper 

" My lord, I write as my extremes of a prison, should labour the release 

require, of your prisoners." 
That you would labour my de- 257-68. See Appendix I. 

livery " ; 267. There is perhaps a reminiscence 

and Marlowe, yew of Malta, c. 1589-90, of this line in Chapman (.'), Alphonsus, 

act iii. : — V. 2 (Shepherd, 413), where the Em- 

" It is not yet long since peror says to his murderer, " Think 

That I did labour thy delivery." what I am that beg my life of thee.'" 



sc. IV.] KING RICHARD III 63 

Sec. Murd. Look behind you, my lord ! 

First Murd. Take that, and that ! \Stabs him] if all this will 
not do, 
I '11 drown you in the malmsey-butt within. 270 

[Exit, with the body. 
Sec. Murd. A bloody deed, and desperately dispatch'd ! 
How fain, like Pilate, would I wash my hands 
Of this most grievous murder — 

Re-enter First Murderer. 

First Murd. How now I what mean'st thou that thou help'st 
me not? 

By heaven, the duke shall know how slack you have 
been ! 275 

Sec. Murd. I would he knew that I had sav'd his brother ! 

Take thou the fee, and tell him what I say; 

For I repent me that the duke is slain. \Exit. 

First Murd. So do not I : go, coward as thou art I 

Well, I '11 go hide the body in some hole, 280 

Till that the duke give order for his burial : 

And, when I have my meed, I will away ; 

For this will out, and then I must not stay. \Exit. 

^69. Take that, and that] Ff; I thus, and thus Qq. if all ... do] Ff; if 
this will not serue Qq; and, if this will not serve Qsi^eW. 270. drown you] 
Ff ; chop thee Qq. within] Ff ; f« the next roome Qq. Exit, with the body] 
Steevens; Exit.Yi; omitted Qq. 271. dispatch'd] Fi ; perform'd Qq. 272. 
hands] Ff ; hand Qq 1-7. 273. grievous murder] Ff ; grievous guilty murder 
done Qq. Reenter . . . ] Camb. ; Enter . . . Ff; omitted Qq. 274. How 

now , . . not] Ff (as prose) ; Why doest thou not helpe me Qq. 275. heaven] 
Qq 6-8, Ff; heavens Qq 1-5. you have been] Ff (as prose); thou art Qq. 
280. Well, I'll go] Ff; Now must I Qq. the body] Ff ; his body Qq. 281. 
Till that] Ff ; Vntill Qq. give] Ff; take Qq. 282. will] Ff ; must Qq. 

283. then] Ff ; here Qq. Exit.] Ff ; Exeunt. Qq. 

272. Compare Richard II. iv. i. 239. 



ACT II 

SCENE I. — London. The Palace. 

Flourish. Enter KING EDWARD sick, QUEEN ELIZABETH, 
Dorset, Rivers, Hastings, Buckingham, Grey, and 
others. 

K. Edw. Why, so : now have I done a good day's work. 

You peers, continue this united league : 

I every day expect an embassage 

From my Redeemer, to redeem me hence ; 

And now in peace my soul shall part to heaven, 5 

Since I have made my friends at peace on earth. 

Rivers and Hastings, take each other's hand ; 

Dissemble not your hatred, swear your love. 
Riv. By heaven, my soul is purg'd from grudging hate ; 

And with my hand 1 seal my true heart's love! 10 

Hast. So thrive I, as I truly swear the like ! 
K. Edw. Take heed you dally not before your king ; 

Act 11. Scene i. Flourish.] Fi; omitted Qq. Enter King Edward . . . 
others.] Enter the Kins; sicke, the Queenc, Lord Marquesse Dorset, Riuers, 
Hastings, Cateshy, Buckingham, Wooduill, Ff ; Enter King, Queene. Hastings, 
Ryners, Dorcet, &-c. Qq (Qq 3-8 omit Dorcct). i. Why, sd\ Why so Ff ; So Qq. 
have I] Ff ; / have Qq. 5. now in peace] Qq ; more to peace Ff. part to] Qq 
3-8, Ff; part from Qq i, 2. 6. made]Fi; set Qq. 7. Rivers and Hastings] 
Qq ; Dorset and Riuers Ff. 9. 50M/]Ff; heart Qq. 11. /rw/>'] omitted Qq 3-8. 

5. now in peace] Ff have evidently a line 25 below, did not see that the 

printer's error for " more in peace," present alteration was inappropriate, 

which is Steevens' reading. 8. Dissemble not your hatred] The 

7. Rivers and Hastings] Ff here are meaning is obvious ; but the phrase 

clearly ^v^ong. The editor was prob- is capable of another interpretation, 

ably misled by some marginal correction Malone's explanation is needlessly ela- 

in his MS. Rivers and Hastings had borate. The line may be paraphrased 

been on bad terms. Rivers and Dorset, thus : Do not hide your hatred beneath 

on the contrary, were uncle and nephew, a mere show of friendship ; but swear 

and the leaders of the Woodville party, truly to be friends. 
It is curious that the editor, who added 

6i 



sc. i] KING RICHARD III 65 

Lest He that is the supreme King of kings 

Confound your hidden falsehood, and award 

Either of you to be the other's end. IS 

Hast. So prosper I, as I swear perfect love ! 

Riv. And I, as I love Hastings with my heart ! 

K. Edw. Madam, yourself is not exempt from this, 
Nor you, son Dorset ; Buckingham, nor you : 
You have been factious one against the other. 20 

Wife, love Lord Hastings, let him kiss your hand ; 
And what you do, do it unfeignedly. 

Q. Eliz. There, Hastings ; I will never more remember 
Our former hatred, so thrive I and mine! 

K. Edw. Dorset, embrace him ; Hastings, love lord mar- 
quess. 25 

Dor. This interchange of love, I here protest 
Upon my part, shall be inviolable. 

Hast. And so swear L \They embrace, 

K. Edw. Now, princely Buckingham, seal thou this league 

With thy embracements to my wife's allies, 30 

And make me happy in your unity. 

Buck. [To the Queen.] Whenever Buckingham doth turn his 
hate 
Upon your gi-ace, but with all duteous love 
Doth cherish you and yours, God punish me 
With hate in those where I expect most love! 35 

18. is] Ff; are Qq. from this] Ff ; in this Qq. 19. you,] Ff; your Qq, 
23. There]Fi; Here Qq. 25. K. Edw. Dorset . . . marquess] King. Dorset 

. . . him : Hastings . . . Marqtiesse (two lines) Ff ; omitted Qq. 26. This] 
Q I, Ff; Thus Qq 2-8. 27. inviolable] Yi; unuiolable Qq. 28. swear I.] 

Ff; sweare I my Lord. Qq. They embrace] Capell. 32. To the Queen.] 
Rowe. 33. Upon your grace] Fi; On you or yours Qq. but with all] and 
not with Pope. 

20. factious] Johnson explains as that their boughs made a goodlie greene 

"active" or "urgent." Mr. Craig roofe." 

suggests that the meaning here is " in 32-34. Pope's emendation of 34, men- 
active opposition." Probably the de- tioned above, avoids the difficulty of 
rived meaning "guilty of faction" is the passage, which seems to arise from 
really implied. the attempt to combine two strong as- 

30. embracements] Used again, severations, whose meaning is opposed, 

Comedy of Errors, I. i. 44; Troilus and in one connected sentence. Thedoubt- 

Cressida,iv. v. 148 ; Henry VIII. i. i. ful passage in Winter's Tale, 1. ii. 

10. Decker, Bel-Man of London, 459, 460, may be explained by a simi- 

speaks of branches of trees that " in lar attempt to combine two opposite 

their embracements held so iasttogethet, thoughts together. 



66 KING RICHARD III [act u. 

When I have most need to employ a friend, 

And most assured that he is a friend, 

Deep, hollow, treacherous, and full of guile, 

Be he unto me ! This do I beg of God, 

When I am cold in love to you or yours. 40 

\They embrace. 
K. Edw. A pleasing cordial, princely Buckingham, 

Is this thy vow unto my sickly heart. 

There wanteth now our brother Gloucester here, 

To make the blessed period of this peace. 
Buck. And, in good time, here comes the noble duke. 45 

Enter GLOUCESTER. 

Glou. Good morrow to my sovereign king and queen ; 

And, princely peers, a happy time of day ! 
K. Edw. Happy indeed, as we have spent the day. 

Gloucester, we have done deeds of charity. 

Made peace of enmity, fair love of hate, 50 

Between these swelling wrong-incensed peers. 
Glou. A blessed labour, my most sovereign lord. 

Among this princely heap, if any here. 

By false intelligence, or wrong surmise, 

39. God^ Qq; heaucn Ff. 40. love] Ff; zeale <^(\. 44. blessed] Ff: 

perfect Qq. 45. And . . . duke] Qq; And in g^ood time, Heere comes Sir Richard 
RatcUffe, and the Duke (two lines) Ff. Enter Gloucester.] Qq (before 45); 

Enter RatcUffe, and Gloster. Ff. 49. Gloucester] Gloster Ff ; Brother Qq. 

52. w^] omitted Qq 3-8. lord]F{; liege Qq. 53. Among] Ff; Amongst Qq. 

37. most assured] i.e. I am most performance, when there were not too 

assured. The construction is ellip- many actors to spare ; and so the passage 

tical. passed into Qq, metrically emended, 

45. The alteration in Ff of this line and in a more satisfactory form, 

and the stage-direction following seems 51. swelliug] Compare Othello, 11. iii. 

unnecessary. Ratcliff says and does 57. But the metaphor in the present 

nothing in what follows; nor is it likely case is "swelling with wrath" rather 

that his name would be mentioned be- than " swelling with ambition." Sep 

fore Gloucester's, unless the metre made below, 11. ii. 1 17. 

it unavoidable. But, since a whole line 53. heap] assembly (O.E. heap, a 

which was metrically perfect had to be multitude). Compare Julius Casar, 

altered into a line and a half, in order i. iii. 23 ; Chaucer. Canterbury Tales, 

to introduce Ratcliff's name, the editor .\. 575 : " The wisdom of an heep of 

of F I must have had some ground to go lerned men." Nev Eng. Diet, quotes 

upon. Probably his MS. contained the Earl Rivers, Dictes and notable Wise 

name of Ratcliff. But Ratcliff's silent Sayings of the Philosophers, 1477. p. 

part may have been omitted in the stage 105: " A great A^f^ of sheep." 



sc. i] KING RICHARD III 67 

Hold me a foe ; 55 

If I unwittingly, or in my rage, 
Have ought committed that is hardly borne 
By any in this presence, I desire 
To reconcile me to his friendly peace : 
'Tis death to me to be at enmity ; 6o 

I hate it, and desire all good men's love. 
First, madam, I entreat true peace of you, 
^._^Which I will purchase with my duteous service ; 
Of you, my noble cousin Buckingham, 
If ever any grudge were lodg'd between us ; 65 

Of you, Lord Rivers, and Lord Grey, of you, 
That all without desert have frown'd on me, 
Dukes, earls, lords, gentlemen, indeed of all : 
I do not know that Englishman alive, 
With whom my soul is any jot at odds, 70 

More than the infant that is born to-night : 
I thank my God for my humility. 
Q. Eliz. A holy day shall this be kept hereafter : 

55. 56. Hold . . . rage] arranged as Malone (sugg. Capell) ; one line Qq, Ff. 
56. unwittingly] Qq ; vnwillingly Ff. or in my rage] omitted Pope. 58. 
By]Q<\; To Ff. 62. true] omitted Qqs-S. 66. Of you, Lord . . . o/you] 
Qqi-4; O/you my Lord . . . of you Qq^-S; O/you and you, Lord Riuers and of 
Dorset Ff. aft. 67. Ff adds Of you Lord Wooduill, and Lord Scales of you, 

56. in my rage] in unthinking pas- 67. without desert] i.e. without desert 
sion. Compare Greene, Orlando Fur- on my part. 

ioso (Dyce, 99) : — 69-72. Milton, Eikonoklastes, 1649, 
"Theseus in his rage chap, i., in support of the thesis that 
Did never more revenge his wrong'd "the deepest policy of a tyrant hath 
Hippolytus been ever to counterfeit religious," says 
Than I will on the false Angel- that the poets " have been in this point 
ica" ; so mindful of decorum, as to put never 
ibid. (108) : — more pious words in the moudi of any 
" as cruel death person, than of a tyrant. I shall not 
As fell to Nero's mother in his instance an abstruse author, wherein 
rage." the king [Charles I.] might be less con- 
See King Lear, iv. vii. 78 ; Coriolanus, versant, but one whom we well know 
V. vi. 148; and line 106 below. was the closest companion of these his 

57. hardly borne] "To bear hard" solitudes, William Shakespeare; who 
is to bear a grudge. Compare the Latin introduces the person of Richard the 
cEgre ferre. See jfuliusCasar, ii.i. 215. Third, speaking in as high a strain of 
Two further instances occur ibid. i. ii. piety and mortification as is uttered in 
317 ; m. i. 157. New Eng. Diet, quotes any passage of this book [Eikon Basi- 
Ltfe of Thomas Cromwell, 1602, iv. ii. like], and sometimes to the same sense 
112: "You bear me hard about the and purpose with some words in this 
abbey lands." place : ' I intended,' saith he, ' not only 

66^8. See Appendix II. to oblige my friends, but my enemies.'" 



68 KING RICHARD III [act n. 

I would to God all strifes were well compounded 

My sovereign lord, I do beseech your highness 75 

To take our brother Clarence to your grace. 

Glou. Why, madam, have I offer'd love for this, 
To be so flouted in this royal presence ? 
Who knows not that the gentle duke is dead ? 

[ They all start. 
You do him injury to scorn his corse. 80 

K, Edw. Who knows not he is dead ! who knows he is ? 

Q. Eliz. All-seeing heaven, what a world is this ! 

Buck. Look I so pale, Lord Dorset, as the rest ? 

Dor. Ay, my good lord ; and no man in the presence, 

But his red colour hath forsook his cheeks. 85 

K. Edw. Is Clarence dead ? the order was revers'd. 

Glou. But he, poor soul, by your first order died, 
And that a winged Mercury did bear ; 
Some tardy cripple bare the countermand, 
That came too lag to see him buried. 90 

God grant that some, less noble and less loyal, . ,, 
Nearer in bloody thoughts, and not in blood, ^\ 
Deserve not worse than wretched Clarence did. 
And yet go current from suspicion ! 

75. lord] Ff; liege Qq. highness] Ff; maiestie Qq. 78. so flouted] Ff; 
thus scorned Qq [scornde Q 6). 79. gentle] Ff ; noble Qq. They all start.] 
Ff; omitted Qq. 81. K. Edw.] King. Ff; Riu. Qq. Who . . . //(? ti] one 
line as Qq ; two lines (VFAo . . . dead? Who . . . is ?)Vi. 84. ho wa«] Ff; 
no one Qq- the presence] Ff; this presence Qq. 87. soul] Qq ; man Ff. 

89. bare] Ff; bore Qq. 92. and not] Ff ; but not Qq. 

83. See below, line 136. Bucking- "111 news hath wings, and with the 
ham's remark on the sudden pallor of winde doth goe; 

Dorset himself and his relations is mali- Comfort's a cripple, and comes ever 

cious. They are Buckingham's enemies; slow." 

and he wishes to fasten the stigma of 90. lag] late. Compare King Lear, 

guilt upon them. i. ii. 6, and see Mr. Craig's note. 

84. in the presence] "Presence" is 92. Steevens cites Macbeth, 11. iii. 
used in the sense of " noble company," 146, 147. 

Midsummer-Night's Dream, i. i. 61. In 94. go current] Compare Decker, 

Richard II. i. iii. 289 it means "pre- GM/i//orn-Boo*c, chap. iii. : "Cerfaine I 

sehce-chamber." am, that when none but the golden age 

89. Some tardy cripple] Steevens went currant upon earth, it was higher 

mentions a proverbial expression found treason to clip haire, then to clip 

in Drayton, Barons' Wars, 1603, ii. St. money." See also Machin and Mark- 

28: — ham. Dumb Knight, act iii. : " My plol 

is current and it cannot miss." 



sc. i] KING RICHARD III 69 

Enter DERBY. 

Der. A boon, my sovereign, for my service done! 95 

K. Edw. I prithee, peace : my soul is full of sorrow. 

Der. I will not rise, unless your highness hear me. 

K. Edw. Then say at once, what is it thou demand'st. 

Der. The forfeit, sovereign, of my servant's life. 

Who slew to-day a riotous gentleman, 100 

Lately attendant on the Duke of Norfolk. 

K. Edw. Have I a tongue to doom my brother's death. 
And shall that tongue give pardon to a slave ? 
My brother kill'd no man : his fault was thought ; 
And yet his punishment was bitter death. 105 

Who sued to me for him ? who, in my rage, 
Kneel'd at my feet, and bade me be advis'd ? 
Who spoke of brotherhood ? who spoke of love ? 
Who told me how the poor soul did forsake 
The mighty Warwick, and did fight for me ? no 

Who told me, in the field by Tewkesbury, 
When Oxford had me down, he rescued me. 
And said " Dear brother, live, and be a king " ? 
Who told me, when we both lay in the field. 
Frozen almost to death, how he did lap me 115 

Even in his garments, and did give himself, 
* All thin and naked, to the numb cold night ? 
All this from my remembrance brutish wrath 

96. prithee] F 4 ; prethee Ff 1-3 ; pray thee Qq. 97. hear me] Ff ; grant Qq. 
98. sflj] Ff ; speake Qq. demand' st] Qq {demaundest Q 6); requests FL 103. 
that tongue] Ff ; the same Qq. 104. kill'd] Ff ; slew Qq. 105. bitter] Ff ; 
cruell Qq. 106. rage] Qq; wrath Ff. 107. at my feet] Qq ; and my feet Ff. 
108. Who spoke] Ff; Who spake Qq. spoke of love] F i ; spoke in love Ff 2-4; 
of love Qq. iii. by] Qq ; at Ff. 116. his garments] Ff ; his owne garments Qq 
1-5; his owne armes Qq 6-8. did give] Ff; gaue Qq. 

99. The forfeit] Johnson explains, where he fought on the side of War- 

" the remission of the forfeit." wick. 

107. be advis'd] be cautious, as 2 115. lap] cover, enfold, as Macbeth, 

Henry VI. ii. iv. 36; Merchant of I. ii. 54; Cymbeline, v. v. 360. See 

Venice, 11. i. 42. See also Measure for also song in Gammer Gur ton's Needle, 

Measure, v. i. 469. act ii. : — 

112. Oxford] John de Vera, thir- " I am so wrapt, and throwly lapt, 
teenth Earl of Oxford (1443-1513), could Of jolly good ale and old " ; 

not have been present at Tewkes- Decker, Seuen Deadly Sinnes of London 

bury, for he escaped to France im- (Arber, 27) : " his legges, that are lapt 

mediately after the battle of Barnet, rounde about with peeces of Rugge." 



70 KING RICHARD III [act n. 

Sinfully pluck'd, and not a man of you 
Had bO much grace to put it in my mind. I20 

But when your carters or your waiting-vassals 
Have done a drunken slaughter, and defac'd 
The precious image of our dear Redeemer, 
You straight are on your knees for pardon, pardon ; 
And I, unjustly too, must grant it you : 125 

But for my brother not a man would speak. 
Nor I, ungracious, speak unto myself 
For him, poor soul ! The proudest of you all 
Have been beholding to him in his life ; 
Yet none of you would once beg for his life. 130 

O God, I fear Thy justice will take hold 
On me, and you, and mine, and yours for this ! 
Come, Hastings, help me to my closet. Ah, poor Clarence ! 
\^Exeuni some with King and Queen. 

Glou. This is the fruit of rashness. Mark'd you not 

How that the guilty kindred of the queen 135 

Look'd pale when they did hear of Clarence' death .' 

O ! they did urge it still unto the king : 

God will revenge it. Come, lords, will you go 

To comfort Edward with our company ? 

Buck. We wait upon your grace. {Exeunt. 140 

122. defac'd^ defaste Qq 1-3. 126. not a man] not a mast Qq 3-5. 127. 
speak] spake Rowe. 129. beholding] beholden Qq 5, 6. 130. beg]¥i; pleade 
Qq. 133. Come . . . C/arrncr] one line as Qq; two lines (Come . . . Closset, 
Ah . . . Clarence) Ff; Come [to Hastings], help me . . . Clarence Capell. Ah] 
Ff ; Oh Qq. Exeunt . . . Queen.] Ff ; Exit Qq. 134. fruit] Qq ; fruits Ff. 
rashness]rawnes QqyS'i rawtiesse Qq 6-8. 138. Come . . . go]Fi; But come 
lets in Qq. 140. Buck. We . . . grace] Ff ; omitted Qq. 

126. Holinshed, iii. 703, following & openlie speake : ' Oh infortunate 

Halle, describes Edward's grief for brother, for whose life not one would 

Clarence's " sudden execution." make sute ! ' " 

"When anie person sued to him for 137. sf«7/] continually ; a very general 

the pardon of malefactors condemned usage. Mr. Craig notes that it is 

to death, be would accustomablie saie, common in Ulster. 



sc. ii] KING RICHARD III 71 



SCENE U.— T/ie Palace. 

Enter the DuCHESS OF York, with the two children of 
Clarence, 

Boy. Good grandam, tell us, is our father dead ? 

Duch. No, boy. 

Girl. Why do you weep so oft, and beat your breast, 

And cry " O Clarence, my unhappy son " ? 
Boy. Why do you look on us, and shake your head, 5 

And call us orphans, wretches, castaways. 

If that our noble father were alive ? 
Duch. My pretty cousins, you mistake me both. 

I do lament the sickness of the king. 

As loath to lose him, not your father's death : 10 

It were lost sorrow to wail one that 's lost. 
Boy. Then you conclude, my grandam, he is dead. 

The king mine uncle is to blame for it : 

God will revenge it, whom I will importune 

With earnest prayers, all to that effect. 1 5 

Girl. And so will I. 
Duch. Peace, children, peace ! the king doth love you well. 

Incapable and shallow innocents. 

You cannot guess who caus'd your father's death. 
Boy. Grandani, we can ; for my good uncle Gloucester 20 

Enter the Duchess . . . Clarence.] Enter the old Dutchesse . . . Clar- 
ence. Ff; Enter Dutches of Yorke with Clarence Children. Qq. i. Boy.] 
(^(\; Edw.'FL Good grandam, tell us] Ff; Tell tne good GranamQq. 3. Girl] 
Daugh. Ff; Boy. Qq, do you] do Ff. weep so o/t] Ff; wring your hands Qq. 
5. Boy.] Ff ; Gerl. Qq. 6. orphans, wretches] Ff; wretches, orphans Qq. 8. 
both] Ff; much Qq. 10. not your father's death] now your fathers dead Qq6-%. 
II. sorrow to wail] Ff; labour to weepe for Qq. 12. you . . . grandam] Ff; 
Granam you conclude that Qq. i^. for it]Ff; for this Qq. 15. earnest]Ff; 
daily Qq. 16. Girl. And . . . /] Daugh. And . . . I Ff; omitted Qq. 

8. cousins] relations. The usage is " With daily earnest prayers, 
not altogether obsolete in our own day. Girl. And so will I." 
Compare Much Ado About Nothing, i. 18. Incapable] destitute of capacity, 
ii. 2. In Wilkins, Miseries of Inforst without power of understanding. So 
Marriage, act i., an uncle says to his Hamlet, iv. vii. 179, and see Prof. 
nephew: "Thanks, my good coz." Dowden's note in Arden ed. Corn- 
Richard speaks below of Edward V. pare Greene, Friar Bacon (Dyce, 164) : 
and the Duke of York as his cousins. "Doctors, whose doting night-caps 

15, 16. Pope combined the two lines are not capable of my ingenious dig- 
thus : — nity." 



72 KING RICHARD III [act n. 

TQldLjue^.the_kiag,.prov:ok'd to it by the^^jueen, 

Devis'd impeachments to imprison him ; 

And when my uncle told me so, he wept, 

And pitied me, and kindly kiss'd my cheek ; 

Bade me rely on him, as on my father, 25 

And he would love me dearly as a child. 
Duch. Ah ! that deceit should steal such gentle shape, 

And with a virtuous vizard hide deep vice ! 

He is my son, ay, and therein my shame ; 

Yet from njy dugs he drew not this deceit 30 

Boy. Think you my uncle did dissemble, grandam ? 
Duch. Ay, boy. 
Boy. I cannot think it. Hark ! what noise is this ? 

Enter QUEEN Elizabeth, with her hair about her ears ; 
Rlv^.RS and DORSET after her. 

Q. Eliz. Ah ! who shall hinder me to wail and weep, 

To chide my fortune, and torment myself? 35 

I'll join with black despair against my soul, 
And to myself become an enemy. 

Duch. What means this scene of rude impatience ? 

Q. Eliz. To make an act of tragic violence. 

Edward, my lord, thy son, our king, is dead. 40 

Why- grow the branches when the root is gOD^ ? /^T^^/-^ 
Wh_>- wither not the leaves that want theiiLS3p_2- •^^^r- 
If you will live, lament : if die, be brief, 

21. provok'd to it] Ff ; pronoked Qq. 23. my uncle] Ff ; hee Qq. 24. 

pitied me] Ff; hugd me in his arme Qq. cheek] chcekes Qq 6-8. 25. 

Bade] Bad Ff ; And bad Qq. on my] in my Q i. 26. a child] Ff; his 

chtldQq. 27. Ah]Fi; Oh Qq. shape]F{; shapes Qq. 2S. deep vice] Ff; 
fonle guile Qq. 29. ay] I Ff ; yea Qq 1-3, 5-s ; omitted Q 4. aft. 33. Enter 
Queen Elizabeth . . . after her.] Enter the Qiieene . . . after her. Ff ; Enter 
the Queene. Qq. 34. Ah] Ff ; Oh Qq r, 2, 4; IVA Q 3 ; omitted Qq 5-8. 36. 
soul] selfe Qq 5-8. 40. thy] Ff; your Qq. 41. when . . . is gone] Ff; 

now . . . is witherd Qq. 42. that want their sap] Ff; the sap being gone Qq. 

23,24. Qq are here stronger and more 34. hinder hie to wail] For "hinder 

lively than Ff. But the words "And ... to" compare Acts viii. 36. For 

hugg'd me in his arm," which spoil a parallel construction, see Chapman, 

the metre of line 24, might very well be An Humorous Day's Mirth (Shepherd, 

the result of a happy impromptu on the 30) : "The sight thereof doth half dis- 

stage, preserved in an acting copy of may me to make proof." 

the play. Cambridge editors suggest 39. make] make up, complete. Com- 

the omission of " kindly " in line 24. pare Cytnbeline, 1. iv. 9. 



sc. II.] KING RICHARD III 73 

That our swift-winged souls may catch the king's, 
Or, like obedient subjects, follow him 45 

To his new kingdom of ne'er-changing night. 
Duch. Ah ! so much interest have I in thy sorrow, 
As I had title in thy noble husband. 
I have bewept a worthy husband's death, 
And liv'd with looking on his images : 50 

But now two mirrors of his princely semblance 
Are crack'd in pieces by malignant death ; 
And I for comfort have but one false glass. 
That grieves me when I see my shame in him. 
Thou art a widow; yet thou art a mother, 55 

And hast the comfort of thy children left ; 
But death hath snatch'd my husband from mine arms, 
And pluck'd two crutches from my feeble hands, 
Clarence and Edward. O ! what cause have I, 
Thine being but an moiety of my moan, 6o 

To overgo thy woes and drown thy cries ! 

46. ne'er -changing night'\ Ff; perpetuall rest Qlq. 47. have /] Qq ; haue 
Ff. 50. with-\ Ff ; by Qq. 54. That] Ff ; Which Qq. 56. leff] Ff 

left thee Qq. 57. husband] Ff; children Qq. 58. hands]Fi; limmes Qq 
59. Clarence and Edward] Ff; Edward and Clarence Qq. 60. Thine . . 
an moiety] Thine ... a moity Ff; Then, . . . moity Qq i, 2; Then, . . 
moitie Qq 3-5 ; Then, . . . motitie Q 6. moan] Ff ; grief e Qq 1-5 ; selfe Qq 6-8 
61. woes] Ff ; plaints Qq (plants Q 2). thy cries] the cries Qq 5, 6. 

46. ne'er-changing night] This is Olympia's soul as wandering, brighter 

without doubt the better, and probably than the sun, "about the black cir- 

the original, reading. This gloomy cumference " of hell. Compare also 

and spacious idea of the life after death the prologue to Spanish Tragedy, c. 

is in keeping with the spirit of the 1588, where the ghost of Andrea, on 

tragic writers of Shakespeare's youth, his way to Pluto's court, passes "thro' 

Pickersgill argued for Qq, on the dreadful shades of ever glooming night." 

ground that Elizabeth is not oppressed Qq probably perpetuate a stage-corrup- 

by the terrors of death, but that life tion, the result of an attempt to remedy 

has lost its value to her; and that " per- a possible confusion with i. iv. 47. 

petual rest " is the form in which the 50-54. These metaphors are used by 

idea of death would most naturally old Lucretius in Lucrece, 175S-64. 

occur to one in her frame of mind. 60. moiety] In Shakespeare, " moi- 

Ff seemed to him to contain " a sort of ety " does not necessarily bear its strict 

stock phrase," lofty, but not appropri- meaning of "half." Compare All's 

ate. That it is, in a certain sense, a Well that Ends Well, in. ii. 69, where 

stock phrase, is corroborated by i. iv. it means, as here, a portion. On the 

47 above. That it represents a very otherhand, see Fletcher and Massinger, 

general and appropriate notion in con- Spanish Curate, 1622, v. 3 : — 

temporary tragedy, is seen by such " Your brother hath deserved well. 

passages as Marlowe, 1 Tambnrlaine, Hen, And shall share 

iv. 4, where Theridamas speaks of The wioifity of my state." 



74 KING RICHARD III [act n. 

Boy. Ah, aunt ! you wept not for our father's death : 
How can we aid you with our kindred tears ? 

Girl. Our fatherless distress was left unmoan'd ; 

Your widow-dolour likewise be unwept ! 65 

Q. Eliz. Give me no help in lamentation ; 

I am not barren to bring forth complaints : 

All springs reduce their currents to mine eyes, 

That I, being govem'd by the watery moon. 

May send forth plenteous tears to drown the world, 70 

Ah ! for my husband, for my dear lord Edward ! 

Chil. Ah ! for our father, for our dear lord Clarence ! 

Duck. Alas ! for both, both mine, Edward and Clarence ! 

Q. Eliz. What stay had I but Edward ? and he 's gone. 

Ckil. What stay had we but Clarence? and he's gone. 75 

Duch. What stays had I but they ? and they are gone. 

Q. Eliz. Was never widow had so dear a loss ! 

Chil. Were never orphans had so dear a loss ! 

Duch. Was never mother had so dear a loss ! 

Alas ! I am the mother of these griefs : 80 

Their woes are parcell'd, mine is general. 
She for an Edward weeps, and so do I ; 
I for a Clarence weep, so doth not she : 

62. y4/f] Ff; Good Qq. t^,. hindred\'e I; kindreds C^a,. 64. Girl.] Ctrl. 

Qq ; Daugh.Fi. 65. widow-dolour] Ff; widdowcs dolours Qq; tcidoio dolours 
Pope. 67. complaints] Ff ; laments Qq. 68-70. Put in margin by Pope. 

69. moon] Ff, Qq 7, 8; moane Qq 1-6. 71. Ah] Ff; Oh Qq. (and below, 72). 
dear] Ff; eire Q i ; eyre Q 2; heire Qq 3-S. 72. Chil.] Ff; Ambo. Qq. (and 
below, 78). 74. he 's] Ff ; he is Qq 1-5 ; is he (^t (and below, 75). 76. 

stays] stay Qq 6-8. 78. Were] Ff; Was Qq. never] Q i, Ff ; ever Qq 2-8 
(and below, 79). so dear a] Ff, Qq 7, 8; a dearer Qq 1-6. 79. so dear a] 

Ff; a dearer (^q. 80. griefs]¥{; wo«« Qq. 81. mine is]Fi\ mineareO^q. 
82. an Edward] Ff; Edward Qq, 83. weep] weepes F i. 

65. widow-dolour] The hyphen is 69, 70. Elizabeth compares her eyes 

inserted in Ff, and should be kept as in to the sea, receiving back from the 

" widow-comfort " {King John, iii. iv. rivers the moisture which it gives forth, 

105). An instance of arbitrary hyphen- and governed by the influence of the 

ing in Ff is found below, line 112, moon. When we have accepted the 

" Youclowdy-Princes, &hart-scrowing- first part of the comparison, it is diffi- 

Peeres." cult to agree with Johnson that "the 

68. reduce] in the literal sense of introduction of the moon is not very 

" bring back," as below, v.v. 36. Com- natural." 

pare D'Avenant's prologue to The 81. parcell'd] Compare Antony and 

Woman Haicr, 1649 : " 'Twas he re- Cleopatra, v. ii. 163. 
duced Evadne from her scorn." 



sc. 



II.] KING RICHARD III 75 



These babes for Clarence weep, and so do I ; 

I for an Edward weep, so do not they. 85 

Alas ! you three on me, threefold distress'd. 

Pour all your tears. I am your sorrow's nurse, 

And I will pamper it with lamentation. 

Dor. Comfort, dear mother : God is much displeas'd 

That you take with unthankfulness His doing. 90 

In common worldly things, 'tis call'd ungrateful. 

With dull unwillingness to repay a debt 

Which with a bounteous hand was kindly lent ; 

Much more to be thus opposite with heaven, 

For it requires the royal debt it lent you. 95 

Riv. Madam, bethink you, like a careful mother. 

Of the young prince your son : send straight for him ; 
Let him be crown'd ; in him your comfort lives. 
Drown desperate sorrow in dead Edward's grave. 
And plant your joys in living Edward's throne. 100 

Enter GLOUCESTER, BUCKINGHAM, DERBY, HASTINGS, 
and Ratcliff. 

Glou. Sister, have comfort : all of us have cause 
To wail the dimming of our shining star; 
But none can help our harms by wailing them. 
Madam, my mother, I do cry you mercy ; 

84, 85. These babes . . . so do not they'\^ i; These babes . . . and so do they 
Qq 2-8 ; These babes for Clarence weepe, so do not they (one line) Ff. 87. Pour] 
Proue Q 2. 88. lamentation]Ff; lamentations Qq. 89-100. Dor. Comfort 

. . . throne]Fi; omitted Qq. aft. 100. Scene iii. Pope. Enter Gloucester 
. . . Ratcliff] Enter Richard . . . Ratcliffe. Ff; Enter Glocest. with others 
Qq. loi. Sister] Ff; Madame Qq. 103. help our] Ff ; cure their Qq. 

84, 85. Q I, being the only form in Queen Elizabeth. The transition is 

which these lines make sense, may be abrupt, and should be noted in the 

taken as the original form of the text. 

passage. In later editions of Qq, line 85 92. repay] Pope emended the metre 
was altered, with more regard to sound by reading " pay." The first syllable 
than sense. F i probably restored the of " repay " is not strong enough to 
true reading from the MS. source ; but make the verse noticeably discordant, 
the printer, working with the interlined 94. opposite ivith heaven] Compare 
Q, could easily have overlooked the Twelfth Night, 11. v. 162; hyly, Alex- 
end of line 84 and the beginning of ander and Campaspe, act i. : " Thou 
line 85, and so produced a nonsense thinkest it a grace to be opposite with 
line. Alexander." See also Timon of Athens, 

89. dear mothrr] Dorset addresses i. i. 384. 



76 KING RICHARD IIJ [act n. 

I did not see your grace : humbly on my knee 105 

I crave your blessing. 

Duck. God bless thee, and put meekness in thy breast, 
Love, charity, obedience, and true duty ! 

Glou. Amen : \^Aside\ and make me die a good old man ! 

That is the butt-end of a mother's blessing; 1 10 

I marvel that her grace did leave it out. 

Buck. You cloudy princes and heart-sorrowing peers, 
That bear this heavy mutual load of moan, 
Now cheer each other in each other's love : 
Though we have spent our harvest of this king, 115 

We are to reap the harvest of his son. 
The broken rancour of your high-swoll'n hates, 
But lately splinter'd, knit and join'd together. 
Must gently be preserv'd, cherish'd, and kept : 
Me seemeth good, that, with some little train, 120 

Forthwith from Ludlow the young prince be fet 
Hither to London, to be crown'd our king. 

Riv. Why with some little train, my Lord of Buckingham ? 

Buck. Marry, my lord, lest, by a multitude, 

xo'-,. your grace\you'?Q^t.. log. /45Z(f«.] Hanmer (before .^mtn). and 

make me] make me Q6] make me to Qq 7, 8. no. That is] Ff; That, Qq. 

amother's]Q 1, Ff; my mothers Qq 2-8. in. that] Ff; why Qq. 113. 

heavy muit4al] Ff; mutuall heauy Qq. 115. of this] Q i, Vi; for this Qq 

2-8. 117. Aato] Ff; A«ar/i Qq. iiS. splinter'd] splinted Q_c[ 2.-?,. 119. 

gently] Q i, Ff ; greatly Qq 2-8. 121. fei] Ff; fetcht Qq. 123-40. Riv. 

Why . . . say I.] Ff ; omitted Qq. 

112. clondy] melanchol}', as Lucrece, dition, which is the result of that heal- 
ioS<i; Macbeth, 111. \i.^i; The Tempest, ing, must be preserved. The quota- 
11. i. 142. tion from Cjwjii^/tn^.v. V. 344, 345, given 

113. load of moan] Compare Troilus by Abbott to illustrate i. iii. 63-69 above 
and Cressida, 11. ii. 107. (see note), is more applicable here. 

1 17-19. broken rancour . . . kept] n8. splinter'd] i.e. splinted, bound 

Some doubt has been cast upon the text up with splints. Compare Othello, 11. 

ofthis difficult passage ; and it has been iii. 329. 

suggested that "rancour" should be 121. Ludlow] See More (ap. Holin- 

altered to some other word, such as shed, iii. 714). At the time of his 

" concord." But there can be very father's death, Edward V. " kept his 

little doubt that the subject of the verbs household at Ludlow in Wales [sic], 

in line iig is, not any special word in which countrie being farre off from the 

the preceding lines, but the general idea law and recourse to justice, . . . the 

contained in them. Paraphrased, the prince was in the life of his father sent 

sense is as follows : Now that your thither, to the end that the authoritie 

dissensions, which, having swollen of his presence should refraine euill 

high, had broken out in rancour, have disposed persons from the boldnesse of 

been healed, and the wound has been their former outrages." 

splinted and sewn up, the healthy con- 124. More («.s.) gives the reasons, 



sc. ii.j KING RICHARD III 77 

\ The new-heal'd wound of malice should break out; 125 
Which would be so much the more dangerous, 
By how much the estate is green and yet ungovern'd. 
Where every horse bears his commanding rein, 
And may direct his course as please himself, 
As well the fear of harm, as harm apparent, 130 

In my opinion, ought to be prevented. 

Glou. I hope the king made peace with all of us ; 
And the compact is firm and true in me. 

Rzv. And so in me ; and so, I think, in all : 

Yet, since it is but green, it should be put 135 

To no apparent likelihood of breach, 

Which haply by much company might be urg'd : 

Therefore I say with noble Buckingham, 

That it is meet so few should fetch the prince. 

Hast. And so say I. 140 

Glou. Then be it so ; and go we to determine 

Who they shall be that straight shall post to Ludlow. 

134-40. Riv. And . . . prince. Hast. And .../,] Hast. And . . . prince. 
Stan. And . . . I. Capell. 139. so few'\ but few Hanmer 142. Ludloiv'\ 

Qq ; London Ff (and 154 below). 

which Shakespeare attributes to Buck- partisans, intimidated by their fear of 

ingham, as Richard's personal conclu- Gloucester, yet willing, against hope, 

sions, derived from consultation with to show their adhesion to the new-made 

Buckingham and Hastings. " Should peace, on whose maintenance he and 

all the realme fall on a rore," the liis friends were laying such stress, 
guilt of breach of truce would fall upon 139. sofew'l a certain limited number, 
the queen and her kindred. 142. L,udlow~\ Ff reading is inde- 

127. estate\ The risk is the more fensible. Spedding attributed the error 

imminent, in proportion to the novelty to the printer; but it occurs twice in 

of the change in the state, and the thirteen lines. The editor of F i seems 

absence of any supreme controlling to have had little knowledge of history 

hand. Buckingham emphasises the (compare 11. i. 66-68 above; 11. iv. i, 

need of control, and so points obliquely 2 below). Probably in the MS. he 

to Gloucester as the man who is fit to found " London " written here by 

exercise it. In line 135 below. Rivers mistake for "Ludlow" — a very com- 

calls the newly-made compact prehensible error. He would have 

" green." altered his Q in consequence, and 

134. Malone followed Capell in as- " Ludlow " again in line 154 to match, 

signing this speech to Hastings, and Richard was at York about this time, 

line 140 to Stanley. This would only and actually met the king on his way 

make Gloucester's party acquiesce in from York to London. The editor of 

an arrangement favourable to them- F i is hardly likely to have known this, 

selves; and for this Hastings' brief If he did, he was guilty of a misplaced 

assent in line 140 is sufiicient. Shake- accuracy, for which there was no 

speare's object surely was to bring out warrant in the text, 
the ready agreement of the queen's 



78 KING RICHARD III [act n. 

Madam, and you, my mother, will you go 

To give your censures in this business ? 

Q. Eliz. \ .... , ,, 

Z, , y With all our hearts. 145 

Duch. ) 

[Exeunt all hut Buckingham and Gloucester. 

Buck. My lord, whoever journeys to the prince, 

For God's sake, let not us two stay at home : 

For, by the way, I '11 sort occasion, 

As index to the story we late talk'd of, 

To part the queen's proud kindred from the prince. 1 50 
Glou. My other self, my counsel's consistory, 

My oracle, my prophet ! — My dear cousin, 

I, as a child, will go by thy direction. 

Toward Ludlow then, for we '11 not stay behind. 

\Exeunt. 

143. mother] Qq; Sister Ff. 144. business] Ff; waighty busines Qq. 

145. Q. Eliz. Duch. With . . , hearts.] Ans. With . . . hearts Qq; omitted Ff. 
Exeunt . . . Gloucester.] Exeunt manet Glo. Buck. Qq ; Manet Buckingham 
and Richard. Ff. 147. stay]Qi. ¥{; beQq?-8. at home] Ff; behindeQq. 
149. late] Qi; Ffi-3; lately Qq 2-S, F 4.. 150. prince] Ff; King Qq. 152. 
prophet I — My] Theobald (sugg. Warburton) ; prophet, my Qq, Ff. 153. as] 
Ff; like Qq. 154. Toward] Ff; Towards Qq. we'll] Ff; we will Qq. 

Exeunt.] Ff; Exit. Qq 3-8; omitted Qq i, 2. 

143. wo^/kt] Gloucester would natur- an opportunity. For "sort" compare 
ally address the queen-dowager before 1 Henry VI. 11. iii. 27 ; 3 Henry VI. v. 
his mother, of whom she took preced- v. 87; 1 Henry IV. 11. iii. 13: "The 
ence. Qq therefore have the better purpose you undertake is dangerous 
reading. . . . the time itself j/MJor<^<f." 

144. censures] judgments. So 1 149. index] prelude, preface. " In- 
Henry VI. 11. iii. 10; Winter's Tale, dex " was the name given to the finger 
II. i. 37 ; Fletcher, False One, i. i : — printed in the margin of a book, and 

" my opinion pointing to its main arguments or 

Is, «till committing it to graver other important contents, as they 

censure, might occur. An abstract or list of 

You pay the debt you owe him." these, prefixed to the book, became 

Compare Chapman (?), Alphnnsus, i. i : known in course of time as the index. 

"as for Mentz, I need not censure See Mr. Hart on Othello, n. i. 263. 

him," i.e. give my opinion of him. Compare Troilus and Cressida, 1. iii. 

148. sort occasion] choose, contrive 343 ; and iv. iv. 85 below. 



8c. m.] KING RICHARD III 79 



SCENE Ul.-^London. A street. 

Enter two Citizens, meeting. 

First Cit. Good morrow, neighbour : whither away so fast ? 
Sec. Cit. I promise you, I scarcely know myself: 

Hear you the news abroad ? 
First Cit. Yes, that the king is dead. 

Sec. Cit. Ill news, by'r lady, seldom comes the better: 

I fear, I fear, 'twill prove a giddy world. 5 

Enter another Citizen, 

Third Cit. Neighbours, God speed ! 

First Cit. Give you good morrow, sir. 

Third Cit. Doth the news hold of good king Edward's death ? 
Sec. Cit. Ay, sir, it is too true, God help the while ! 
Third Cit. Then, masters, look to see a troublous world. 
First Cit. No, no ; by God's good grace, his son shall reign. lo 
Third Cit. Woe to that land that 's govern'd by a child ! 
Sec. Cit. In him there is a hope of government, 

Scene iii.'\ Scene iv. Pope. Enter . . . meeting.] Capell ; Enter two 
Cittizens. Qq ; Enter one Citizen at one doore, and another at the other. Ff. 
I. Good morrow, neighbour] Ff; Neighbour well met Qq. 3. Hear] Ff; 

1. Heare Qq. 3. First Cit. Yes] i. Yes Ff ; 2. / Qq. that] omitted Ff 2-4. 
4. Sec. Cit. Ill] 2. /// Ff ; i. Bad Qq. 5. giddy] Ff ; troublous Q i ; trouble- 
some Qq2-S. 6. Third Cit. Neighbours . . . morrow, sir.] Ff; 3. Cit. Good 
morrow neighbours Qq. 7. the news] Ff ; this newes Qq. 8. Sec. Cit. Ay 
. . . while] Ff ; i. It doth Qq. 10. good] Q i, Ff ; omitted Qq 2-8. 

4. seldom comes the better] Reed connexion by one verb of two ideas, 

quotes The English Courtier and one present, the other future. A some- 

Cotmtry Gentleman, 1586, sig. B: "As what similar difficulty of construction 

the proverb sayth, seldome come the has been noted above, 11. i. 32-34. The 

better.^' Pope's alteration, " a better," pessimist of the party has quoted 

is discountenanced, as Malone remarks, Scripture to vouch for the dangers of a 

by Reed's parallel. minority. His more hopeful friend re- 

7. hold] continue unchanged, hold bukes his forebodings : "We may hope 

good, as King Lear, v. i. i ; Beaumont for good government in the case of this 

and Fletcher, Faithful Shepherdess, i. king, who, while he is still under age, 

3 : " Speak, shall our meeting hold ?" shall govern well through his council, 

II. Ecclesiastes x. 16. The same and shall govern us well in his own 
text is used by Langland with reference person, when he is come to his ma- 
te the minority of Richard II. : see jority." The meaning is more easy 
Piers the Plowman, prologue 192 : to see than to paraphrase ; and the 
" |?ere J)e catte is a kitoun, ])e courte is expression of the thought is more than 
full elyng; Jjat witnesseth holiwrite a little redundant. Qq "that" may 
•whoso wil it rede, Ve terrc ubi puer rex be a conjunction, introducing a sen- 
est, &'C." tence explanatory of " hope." This 

13-15. These lines suffer from th? makes as good sense as Ff. 



80 KING RICHARD III [act ii. 

Which, in his nonage, council under him, 

And, in his full and ripened years, himself, 

No doubt, shall, then and till then, govern well 15 

First Cit. So stood the state, when Henry the sixth 
Was crown'd in Paris but at nine months old. 

Third Cit. Stood the state so? No, no, good friends, God 
wot ! 
For then this land was famously enrich'd 
With politick grave counsel ; then the king 20 

Had virtuous uncles to protect his grace. 

First Cit. Why, so hath this, both by his father and mother. 

Third Cit. Better it were they all came by his father, 
Or by his father there were none at all ; 
For emulation, who shall now be nearest, 25 

Will touch us all too near, if God prevent not. 
O ! full of danger is the Duke of Gloucester, 
And the queen's sons and brothers haught and proud ; 

13. Which-] Ff; That Qq. i6. Henry^ Ff, Q 8 ; Harry Qq 1-7. 17. in 
Paris\ Ff ; at Paris Qq. 18. No, no . . . God wot] Ff ; no good my friend 

not so Qq. 22. First Cit. Why, so] Ff ; 2. So Qq. 22. his father] Ff; the 
father Qq (and below, 23, 24). 25. who shall now be] Ff; now, who shall be 

Qq. 26. Will] Q I, Ff; Which Qq 2-8. 28. sons and brothers haught] Ff; 
kindred hauty Qq ; kindred haughty are Capell. haught and proud] haughty 
proud Pope. ' 

16. Henry] probably a trisyllable, brooke, long yer morning, came in 
Compare J Hf«r>' VI. iii. i. 76, and see great haste to the house of one Pottier 
note on i. i. 67 above. dwelling in Redcrosse-strete without 

17. crown'd] Henry VI. was pro- Creplegate : and when he was with 
claimed kmg of France in Paris, after hastie rapping quickelie letten in, he 
the death of his grandfather, Charles shewed unto Pottier, that king Edward 
VI., October, 1422. He was then about was departed. 'By my truth man,' 
a year old. He was not crowned in quoth Potiier, ' then will my maister 
Paris till December, 1430, when he was the Duke of Glocester be king.' " 
nine jfori, not nine »io«</ji, old. 28. Aaw^A;] Compare 3 Henry VI. 

19. famously] excellently. Compare 11. i. 169 : " the haught Northumber- 

Corwlanus.i.i.iy. Miss Austen, TAf land"; Greene, Orlando Furioso 

Watsons, p. 326, makes a young man (Dyce, 106): "the pride of haught 

of fashion say: "I shall retreat in as Latona's son." One of the 1608 Qq 

much secrecy as possible to the most of Richard II. reads " haught " in iv. 

remote corner of the house, where I i. 254. In 2 Henry VI. 1. Hi. 71, where 

shall order a barrel of oysters, and be F i reads "haughtie," Ff 2-4 read 

famously snug." "haught." Dyce reads for 

27. The popular apprehension of "haughtie" in Lodge and Greene, 

Gloucester is illustrated by an anecdote, Looking-Glass (p. 117): " If doughty 

told on good authority by More (ap. deeds more haught than any done." 

Holinshed. iii. 712), which Shakespeare In the present case, Qq perhaps repre- 

must have remarked. " The selfe night, sent the corruption of the line on the 

Jn which king Edward died, one Mistle- stage. 



sc. 



iii.j KING RICHARD III 81 



And, were they to be rul'd, and not to rule, 

This sickly land might solace as before. 30 

First Cit. Come, come, we fear the worst ; all will be well. 
Third Cit. When clouds are seen, wise men put on their 
cloaks ; 

When great leaves fall, then winter is at hand ; 

When the sun sets, who doth not look for night ? 

Untimely storms make men expect a dearth. 35 

All may be well ; but, if God sort it so, 

'Tis more than we deserve, or I expect. 
Sec. Cit. Truly, the hearts of men are full of fear : 

You cannot reason almost with a man. 

That looks not heavily and full of dread. 40 

Third Cit. Before the days of change, still is it so : 

By a divine instinct, men's minds mistrust 

Pursuing danger ; as, by proof, we see 

The water swell before a boist'rous storm. 

But leave it all to God. Whither away ? 45 

Sec. Cit. Marry, we were sent for to the justices. 
Third Cit. And so was I : I '11 bear you company. {Exeunt. 

2g. to rule] rule Qq 6-S. 31. First Cit.] Fi; 2. Qq. will] Fi; shall Qq. 
32. are seen] Ff; appeare Qq. 33. then] Ff; the Qq. 35. make] Qq; 

makes Ff. 38. Sec. Cit.] Ff ; i. Qq. hearts] Ff; soules Qq. fear] Ff ; 
bread Qq 1, 2; dread QqyS. 39. Fom] Ff ; Y^^ Qq. reason almost] reason 
{almost) Ff ; almost reason Qq. 40. dread] Ff ; feare Qq. 41. days] Ff ; 

times Qq. 43. Pursuing danger] Ff ; Ensuing dangers Qq. 44. water] 

Ff; waters Qq. 46. Marry, we were] Ff; We are Qq. justices] Ff ; 

Justice Qq ; justice's Anon conj. ap. Camb. 

30. solace] Compare Cymbeline, i.vi. 4i-44. The sentiment is More's (ap. 

86. Holinshed, iii. 721) : " Before such great 

32. Compare Sonnet xxxiv. 1-4. things, mens hearts of a secret instinct 

36. sort] appoint, dispose, as Mer- of nature misgiue them ; as the sea 

chant of Venice, v. i. 132. Compare without wind swelleth of himselfesome- 

" sort occasion," above, 11. ii. 148. time before a tempest." 



82 KING RICHARD III [act n. 



SCENE Wf.— London. The Palace. 

Enter the ARCHBISHOP OF YORK, the young DUKE OF YORK, 
Queen Elizabeth, and the Duchess of York. 

Arch. Last night, I hear, they lay at Northampton; 

At Stony-Stratford will they be to-night : 

To-morrow, or next day, they will be here. 
Duch. I long with all my heart to see the prince : 

I hope he is much grown since last I saw him. 5 

Q. Eliz. But I hear no ; they say my son of York 

Has almost overta'en him in his growth. 
York. Ay, mother ; but I would not have it so. 
Duch. Why, my young cousin, it is good to grow. 
York. Grandam, one night, as we did sit at supper, lo 

My uncle Rivers talk'd how I did grow 

More than my brother: "Ay," quoth my uncle Glou- 
cester, 

" Small herbs have grace, great weeds do grow apace : " 

And since, methinks, I would not grow so fast, 

Because sweet flowers are slow, and weeds make haste, i 5 
Duch. Good faith, good faith, the saying did not hold 

In him that did object the same to thee. 

He was the wretched'st thing when he was young, 

Enter the Archbishop . . . ] Ejiter Arch-bishop, yong Yorke, the Queene, 
and the Dutchesse. Ff; Enter Cardinall, Dutches of Yorke, Quee. [or Qu.], 
young Yorke. Qq. i. Arch.] Ff; Car. Qq (and so in line 36, etc.). 

hear] Qq ; heard Ff. Northampton] Qq ; Stony Stratford Ff. 2. At Stony- 
Stratford will they be]Qq; And at Northampton they do rest, Ff. 6. no] 
not Pope. 7. Has] Ff ; Hath Qq. almost] omitted Qq 6-8. 9. young] 
Qq; good Ff. 13. do grow] Ff. ; grow Qq. 

Archbishop of York] For this sUge- that I dare put no person earthlie in 

direction and the reading in lines i, 2, trust with his keeping, but my selfe 

see Appendix III. onelie." 

6. my son of York] According to 13. great weeds do grow apace] Aldis 

Holinshed, iii. 719, York was at this Wright quotes Heywood's Prof^r/;f5 ; — 

time anything but the healthy, acti%-e " 111 weede growth fast, that is show- 

bov whom Shakespeare pictures. Eliza- yng 

be'th pleads with the Cardinal that, In the show of thy fast growyng." 

"beside his infancie, that also ncedeth Compare Chapman, An Humorous 

good looking to," he "hath a while Day's Mirth (Shepherd, 36): " VVhat- 

beene so sore diseased, vexed with soever I say to Monsieur Rowl, he 

sicknesse, and is so newlie rather a shall say, *Oh, sir, you may see an ill 

little amended, than well recouercd, weed gro\vs apace.'" 



\ 



sc. iv] KING RICHARD III 88 

So lon^' a-growing, and so leisurely, 

That, i.i his rule were true, he should be gracious. 20 

Arc/t. And so no doubt he is, my gracious madam. 
Duck I hope he is ; but yet let mothers doubt. 
York. Now, by my troth, if I had been rememb'red, 

I could have given my uncle's grace a flout, 

To touch his growth nearer than he touch'd mine. 25 

Duck. How, my young York ? I prithee, let me hear it. 
York. Marry, they say my uncle grew so fast, 

That he could gnaw a crust at two hours old : 

'Twas full two years ere I could get a tooth. 

Grandam, this would have been a biting jest. 30 

Duch. I prithee, pretty York, who told thee this ? 
York. Grandam, his nurse. 

Duch. His nurse ! why, she was dead ere thou wast born. 
York. If 'twere not she, I cannot tell who told me. 
Q. Eliz. A parlous boy! go to, you are too shrewd. 35 

Arch. Good madam, be not angry with the child. 
Q. Eliz. Pitchers have ears. 

20. his rule were true] Ff ; this were a true rule Qq i, 2 ; this were a rule Qq 
3-8; this rule were true C&mb. 21. /Irc/i.] Car. Qq; For. Ff. And so . . . 
Madam] Ff ; Why Madame, so no doubt he is Qq. 22. he is] Ff ; so too Qq. 

25. To touch . . . mine] Ff ; That should haue neerer toucht his growth then he 
did mine Qq. 26. How . . . hear it] one line as Qq ; How . . . Yorke. I 

. . . heare it (two lines) Ff, young] Ff ; prety Qq. 27. say my uncle] Q 

I, Ff; say, that my Vnckle Qq 2-8. 30. biting] Q i, Ff; pretie Qq 2-8. 

31. prithee] Ff ; pray thee Qq. this] Ff ; so Qq. 33. His nurse I] Q i, Ff ; 
omitted Qq 2-8. wast]Vi; wert (^<\. 35. parlous] Ff; perilous Qq. 

20 'gracious] Compare Julius Ccesar, of a precocious boy or girl as a '* terrible 

m. ii. 198 ; Hamlet, i. i. 164. child"; but a sarcastic intention in the 

23. had been rememb'red] Compare child's precocity is also implied. Com- 

Measure for Measure, 11. i. 109, no. pare Measure for Measure, 11. iv. 172. 

27, 28. The legend is mentioned by Milton, Animadversions upon Reman- 
More (ap. Holinshed, iii. 712). Shake- strant's Defence, 1641, has : " sure some 
speare alludes to it and its significance, pedagogue stood at your elbow, and 
3 Henry VI. v. vi. 53, 54, 74-77, and made it itch with their parlous criti- 
IV. iv. 49 below. Compare Margaret's cism." Decker andMiddleton, i?oar/'«g- 
warning above, I. iii. 289-291. Girl, i6ii, ii. i, refer to '^ Parlous 

35. parlous] a popular corruption of pond," which Reed conjectured to be 

" perilous." Shakespeare uses it as an Peerless {i.e. Perilous) Pool in Clerken- 

emphatic epithet, Midsummer-Night's well (see Hone, Every-Day Book, i. 

Dream, iii. i. 14; As You Like It, iii. 485-9), so called from the number of 

ji. 45. Compare Tourneur, Rev. Trag. people who lost their lives there, 

act iv. : "A/ar/oMi melancholy"; Beau- shrewd] malicious, as Much Ado 

montzndFletcheT, Elder Brother, 11. ii.: About Nothing, u. i. 20-22, where 

"You are so parlously in love with "curst" (see i. ii. 49 above) is used as 

learning." Here and below, m. i. 154, a synonym in the same passage, 

the sense is much that in which we speak 37. Pitchers have ears] Stt Taming 



84 KING RICHARD HI [act ». 

Enter a Messenger. 

Arch. Here comes a messenger. What news ? 

Mess. Such news, my lord, as grieves me to report. 

Q. Eliz. How doth the prince ? 

Mess. Well, madam, and in health. 40 

Duck. What is thy news ? 

Mess. Lord Rivers and Lord Grey are sent to Pomfret, 

With them Sir Thomas Vaughan, prisoners. 
Duch. Who hath committed them ? 
Mess. , The mighty dukes, 

Gloucester and Buckingham. 
Arch. For what offence ? 45 

Mess. The sum of all I can, I have disclos'd : 

Why or for what the nobles were committed 

Is all unknown to me, my gracious lord. 
Q. Eliz. Ay me ! I see the ruin of my house ! 

The tiger now hath seiz'd the gentle hind ; 50 

Insulting tyranny begins to jet 

aft. 37. Enter a Messenger,'] Ff ; Enter Dorset. Qq. 38. Here comes . . . neivs] 
Ff; Here comes your Sonne, Lo : M. Dorset. What newes Lord Marques (two 
lines) Qq. 39. Mess.] Ff; Dor. Qq (and so line 42, etc.). report] Ff; vnfold 
Qq. 40. doth] Ff ; fares Qq. 41. thy] Q i, Ff; the Qq 2-8. news] Ff; 
newes then Qq. 42, 43, Lord Rivers . . . prisoners] arranged as Qq ; Lo : 

Riuers . . . Grey Are sent . . . and with them Sir Thomas . . . prisoners (3 
lines) Ff; Lord Rivers and Lord Grey Are sent to Pomfret prisoners ; and with 
them Sir Thomas Vaughan Capell. 44, 45. Who hath . . . offence] arranged 
as Pope, Camb. ; 3 lines, one to each speech, Qq, Ff. 45. Arch.] Ff ; Car. 

Qq ; Queen. Johnson; Q. Eliz. Camb. 47. the nobles] Vi; these nobles (^q. 

48. lord] Ff; lady Qq. 49. Ay] Ah Rowe. ruiti]¥i; downfall Q^q. my 
house] Ff; our house Qq. 51. jet] Qq; lutte Ff. 

0/ <A< SAr^w, IV. iv. 52, and Mr. Bond's beheaded." Rivers was at Sheriff 

note. Malone quotes William Biilleyn, Hutton in the interval ; Lord Richard ' 

A Dialogue both pleasaunt and pietifull. Grey was at Gloucester's other York- 

1564, " Small pitchers have great ears." shire castle of Middleham. 

Enter a Messenger] The speeches 50. The image is used also in Lwrrfc^, 

which follow seem to suit an ordinary 543. It is reversed in Midsummer- 

messenger better than Dorset, who ap- Night's Dream, 11. i. 232, 233. 

pears here in Qq. In More's account, 51, 52. jet Upon] encroach upon, 

it is by a messenger from Hastings that Compare Titus Andronicus, 11. i. 64, 

Rotherham learns the fatal news. where Ff and later editors adopt the 

42. More (ap. Holinshed, iii. 715) form "jut." " To jet," used absolutely, 

says that " the lord Riuers, and the lord means " to strut, swagger," as Twelfth 

Richard, with Sir Thomas Vaughan " Night, 11. v. 36 ; Decker, Seuen Deadly 

were sent from Northampton "into Sinnes (Arber, 15): "he iets vp and 

the north countrie, into diverse places downe in silks wouen out of other mens 

to prison ; and afterward all to Pom- stocks." Mr. Craig (" Little Quarto " 

fret, where they were in conclusion Shakespeare) remarks upon the un- 



sc. IV.] KING RICHARD III 85 

, Upon the innocent and aweless throne : 
Welcome, destruction, blood, and massacre ! 
I see, as in a map, the end of all. 

Duch. Accursed and unquiet wrangling days, 55 

How many of you have mine eyes beheld ! 
My husband lost his life to get the crown ; 
And often up and down mj^ sons were toss'd, 
For me to joy and weep their gain and loss : 
And being seated, and domestic broils 60 

Clean over-blown, themselves, the conquerors, 
Make war upon themselves, brother to brother, 
Blood to blood, self against self: O, preposterous 
And frantic outrage, end thy damned spleen ; 
Or let me die, to look on death no more ! 65 

Q. Eliz. Come, come, my boy ; we will to sanctuary. 
Madam, farewell. 

Duch. Stay, I will go with you. 

Q. Eliz. You have no cause. 

Arch. My gracious lady, go ; 

52. aweless] Ff ; lawlesse Qq. 53. blood] Ff ; death Qq. 60. seated, and 
domestic broils] seated and domestike broiles, Q i. 61. over-blotvn. themselves] 
ouerblowne themselues, Q i. 62, 63. brother to brother, Blood to blood] Ff; 

blood against blood Qq. 65. death] Qq; earth Ff. 67. Madam, farewell] 
Ff; omitted Qq. Stay, I will go with you] Ff; He goe along with you Qq. 
68. Arch. [To the Queen.] Malone. 

commonness of the present usage, of Qq make a distinct emendation. Or, 

which New Eug. Diet, contains only again, it may have been a MS. error 

two instances. He suggests in an peculiar to the copy which F i appears 

unpublished note that iv. iii. 42 be- to have followed with such fidelity. 

low may throw some light on its 66. sanctuary] More (ap. Holinshed, 

meaning. iii. 715) says that Elizabeth, on hearing 

52. aweless] which does not inspire ofGIoucester'scoM/ rf'eia<, "gathir selfe 

awe. New Eng. Diet, quotes T. in all the hast possible with hiryoonger 

Adams, Practical Works, 1614, " It is sonne and hir daughters out of the 

a lawless school where there is an palace of Westminster (in which she 

awless monitor." Qq "lawlesse" then laie) into the iawc/wanV ; lodging 

makes doubtful sense, unless it can hir selfe and hir companie there in the 

bear the meaning of "without the abbats place." Halle adds, "and she 

power of administering law." But this and all her chyldren and compaignie 

is a strained interpretation. were regestred for sanctuarye persons." 

63. Spedding thought that F i in- The abbot of Westminster at this period 

tended to read " Blood to blood, self was John Esteney. In 1470, Elizabeth 

'gainst self: preposterous." Pope had taken refuge with his predecessor, 

emended Qq "most preposterous." William Millyng. The " abbats place " 

65. death] Spedding attributed Ff stood south of the abbey church : its 

reading to a printer's error. It possibly remains form part of the present 

was in the original text, in which case Deanery and College Hall. 



86 KING RICHARD III [act n. 

And thither bear your treasure and your goods. 

For my part, I '11 resign unto your grace 70 

The seal I keep : and so betide to me 

As well I tender you and all of yours ! 

Come, I '11 conduct you to the sanctuary. 

[Exeunt. 

71. to me] it me Ff 2-4. 73. Come] Ff ; Go Qq. 

70. Rotherham's words are thus re- his brother, whome you haue here with 

ported by More (u.s.) : " Madame . . . you. And here is the great scale, 

be yee of good cheere, for I assure you, which in likewise as that noble prince 

if they crowne anie other king than your husband deliuered it vnto me ; so 

your Sonne, whome they now haue with here I deliuer it vnto you, to the vse 

them, we shall on the morow crowne and behoofe of your sonne." 



ACT III 

SCENE I. — London. A street. 

The trumpets sound. Enter the young PRINCE, the Dukes of 
Gloucester a«^ Buckingham, Cardinal Bourchier, 
Catesby, and others. 

Buck. Welcome, sweet prince, to London, to your chamber ! 

Glou. Welcome, dearicousin,' my thoughts' sovereign! Ln-«^|-»*'Ji>-^ 

J The weary way hath made you melancholy. 
Prince. No, uncle ; but our crosses on the way 

Have made it tedious, wearisome, and heavy: 5 

I want more uncles here to welcome me. 
Glou, Sweet prince, the untainted virtue of your years 

Hath not yet div'd into the world's deceit: 

No more can you distinguish of a man 

Than of his outward show ; which, God He knows, lo 

London.^ Pope. A street. ^ Capell. Cardinal Bourckier"] Cardinall Qq; 
Lord Cardinall Ff. Catesby.'] Capell; omitted Qq, Ff. i. Welcome . . . 
chamber] one line as Qt, ; Welcome . . . London, To your Chamber (two lines) 
Ff. 8. Hath] Haue Qq 6-8. 9. No] Ff, Q 8 ; Nor Qq 1-7. 

Cardinal Bourchier] See Appendix of his kingdome." In the pageant de- 

III. and notes on dramatis personcB, vised by Jonson for the coronation 

I. chamber] Camden, Britannia, tr. procession of King James, an erection 

Holland, 1610, p. 427 B, says that, in Fenchurch Street, symbolical of 

after the Norman Conquest, London, London, bore the title " Londinium," 

"through the speciall fauour and in- and below, in smaller characters, 

dulgence of Princes . . . beganne to bee " Camera Regis" (Jonson, ed. Giftord, 

czUed The King's Chamber." Compare i vol. ed. p. 527). Giovanni Villani, 

ibid. p. 421 D : " London, the Epitome Cronicn, i. 41, says of Florence : " La 

or Breviary of all Britain, the seat of citta di Firenze in quello tempo era 

the British Empire, and the Kings camera d' imperio." 

of Englands Chamber." So Heywood, 9, 10. No more . . . show] You can 

If you know not Me, you know Nobody, distinguish nothing more in a man 

1633, part 2 (quoted by Steevens) : than that which you can distinguish in 

" This city, our great chamber." New his outward behaviour. The second 

Eng. Diet, quotes Weever, Ancient "of" confuses the meaning a little, 

Funerall Monuments, 1631 : " This but is not superfluous. 
his Citie of Maldon, then the chamber 

87 



88 KING RICHARD III [act m. 

Seldom or never jumpeth with the heart. 

Those uncles which you want were dangerous: 

Your grace attended to their sug'red words, 

But look'd not on the poison of their hearts : 

God keep you from them, and from such false friends ! 1 5 

Prince. God keep me from false friends ! but they were none. 

Glou. My lord, the mayor of London comes to greet you. 

Enter the Lord Mayor, and his train. 

May. God bless your grace with health and happy days ! 

Prince. I thank you, good my lord, and thank you all. 

I thought my mother and my brother York 20 

Would long ere this have met us on the way : 
Fie ! what a slug is Hastings, that he comes not 
To tell us whether they will come or no ! 

Enter LORD HASTINGS. 

Buck. And, in good time, here comes the sweating lord. 

Pritice, Welcome, my lord ! what, will our mother come ? 25 

Hast. On what occasion God He knows, not I, 

The queen your mother and your brother York 

Have taken sanctuary : the tender prince 

Would fain have come with me to meet your grace, 

But by his mother was perforce withheld. 30 

Buck. Fie ! what an indirect and peevish course 

Is this of hers ! Lord cardinal, will your grace 
Persuade the queen to send the Duke of York 
Unto his princely brother presently ? 

16. aft. Prince. [Aside.'\ Camb. conj. God . . . none] one line as Qq; 

God . . . Friends, But . . . none (two lines) Ff. aft. 17. and his train.] Capell ; 

omitted Qq, Ff. 29. have come] come Qq 3, 5-8. 33. to send] the send Q 3 ; 
they send Q 5. 

II. jumpeth with] agrees with, as "Crates. Thou thinkest it a gfrace 

Merchant 0/ Venice, 11. ix. 32; 1 Henry to be opposite with Alexander. 

IV. I. ii. 78. New Eng. Diet, quotes Diogenes. And thou to be j<fMn 

R. D., Hypnerotomachia, 1592: "The with Alexander." 

corners of which triangle did iumpe 31. peevish] See note on i. iii. 194 

with the sides and lymbus of the sub- above, and compare Hamlet, i. ii. 100' 

jacent plynth." Compare Lyly, Othello, iv. iii. 90. 
Alexander and Campaspe, i. 3 : — 



SC. 1.] 



KING RICHARD III 



89 



If she deny, Lord Hastings, go with him, 35 

And from her jealous arms pluck him perforce. 

Card. My Lord of Buckingham, if my weak oratory 
Can from his mother win the Duke of York, 
Anon expect him here ; but, if she be obdurate 
To mild entreaties, God in heaven forbid 40 

We should infringe the holy privilege 
Of blessed sanctuary I not for all this land 
Would I be guilty of so deep a sin. 

Buck. You are too senseless-obstinate, my lord, 

Too ceremonious and traditional. 45 

Weigh it but with the grossness of this age, 
You break not sanctuary in seizing him. 

35. him\ them Qq 5-8. 39. Anon\ omitted, Steevens conj. 39, 40. Anon 
. . .forbid] Anon . . . she be Obdurate to entreaties, God forbid Pope. 40. 

in heaven] omitted Qq 3-8, Ff. 42. 6/(;ss^(i] omitted Pope. 43. deep] great 
Qq 3-8, Ff. 44. senseless-obstinate] hyphened Theobald. 46. grossness of 
this] greatnesse of this Q 6 ; greatnesse of his Qq 7, 8 ; greenness of his Hanmer 
(from Warburton). 



.t.o-43. More (ap. Holinshed, iii. 717) 
quotes the Cardinal's words as Arch- 
bishop Rotherham's. " And therefore 
(quoth the archbishop of Yorke) God 
forbid that anie man should, for anie- 
thing earthlie, enterprise to breake the 
immunitie & libertie of the sacred 
sanctuarie, that hath beene the safe- 
gard of so manie a good mans life. 
And I trust (quoth he) with God's 
grace, we shall not need it. But for 
anie maner need, I would not we 
should doo it." In view of the con- 
fusion, due to More, between Bourchier 
and Rotherham, it should be noted 
that, both in More and Shakespeare, 
the Cardinal already has consented to 
attempt persuasion, but objects to force. 
It is very unli!<ery that Rotherham 
would have undertaken persuasion so 
readily, and very improbable that the 
opportunity should have been offered 
to him. See Appendix III. and the 
appendix to Canon Leigh-Bennett's 
Archbishop Rotherham, iqoi, p. 178. 

44. senseless-obstinate] Of the alter- 
native conjectures which the vehemence 
of the expression has provoked, Staun- 
ton's " needless - obstinate " comes 
nearest within the bounds of reason. 

46. grossness] Literally "coarseness, 
want of refinement " (New Eng. Diet. ; 



Schmidt). The implied meaning seems 
to be : Judge the matter by the vulgar, 
practical standard of the present age. 
" Qrpss " is applied by Shakespeare to 
denote things plain and obvious : com- 
pare Othello, I. ii. 72 ; and so it is used 
of unconcealed coarseness of language, 
as in Measure for Measure, 11. iv. 82. 
Buckingham speaks as a man of the 
world, to assuage the scruples of the 
cardinal. Warburton argues for 

" greenness of his age" on the ground 
that "grossness" means superstition; 
in which case, Buckingham's appeal, 
if obeyed, would have a precisely 
opposite effect to its intention. John- 
son takes "grossness" as equivalent 
to " licentious practices." See note 
on IV. i. 79 below. 

47. More gives Buckingham a long 
speech of which this sentiment is the 
hypothesis. While there are many 
who deserve the right of sanctuary, 
there are thriftless debtors, thieves, 
bankrupts, etc., who take advantage of 
it. The evil might be amended with- 
out prejudice to innocent refugees in 
la'ivful peril of their body. But the 
Duice of York is not one of these. Fie 
is innocent before all the world ; " and 
so sanctuary, neither none he needeth, 
nor also none can have." Again, a 



90 KING RICHARD III [act m. 

The benefit thereof is always granted 

To those whose dealings have deserv'd the place, 

And those who have the wit to claim the place : 50 

The prince hath neither claimed it nor deserv'd it, 

And therefore, in mine opinion, cannot have it ; 

Then, taking him from thence that is not there, 

You break no privilege nor charter there. 

Oft have I heard of sanctuary men, 55 

But sanctuary children ne'er till now. 

Card. My lord, you shall o'er-rule my mind for once. 
Come on. Lord Hastings, will you go with me ? 

Hast. I go, my lord. 

Prince. Good lords, make all the speedy haste you may. 60 

\Exewit Cardinal and Hastings. 
Say, uncle Gloucester, if our brother come. 
Where shall we sojourn till our coronation ? 

Glou. Where it seems best unto your royal self. 
If I may counsel you, some day or two 
Your highness shall repose you at the Tower ; 65 

Then where you please, and shall be thought most fit 
For your best health and recreation. 

Prince. I do not like the Tower, of any place. 
Did Julius Caesar build that place, my lord ? 

52. ^ni] omitted Ff 2-4. 53. ta)iing\ /aife^ Qq 6-8. 56. ne'er'\ Ff; n$ucr 
Qq. 57. o^cr-rv,le\ Ff; ouerrule Qq. 60. E.\eunt . . .] Camb. ; Exit . . . 
Qq 3-8, Ff (after 59) ; omitted Qq i, 2. 63. S£ems'\ think' st Qq 3-8, Ff. 

sanctuary man must not claim the right illustrations of the above arguments, 

by proxy. The Duke is kept in see Raine's Sanctuarium Dunelmense 

sanctuary by his mother, perhaps et Sanctuarium Beverlacense (Surtees 

against his will. What scruple of con- Society publications, vol. 5), and Rites 

science, what breach of privilege, can 0/ Durham, ed. J. T. Fowler, 1903, pp. 

be urged here? If any be allowed, it 41, 42, 226, etc. {ibid. vol. 107). 

follows that no one may be taken out 58. Lord Hastings] According to 

of sanctuary who says he will stay More, the Cardinal went to the sanctu- 

there. A child will be able to claim ary " with diuers other lords with him." 

the right for fear of his schoolmaster. Halle names "the lord Haward" as 

In this case there is not even the ex- using words to persuade the queen 

cuse of fear. "And verelie," adds against any idea of danger. This was 

Buckingham in parenthesis, " I have John, Lord Howard, afterwards Duke 

often heard of sanctuarie men, but I of Norfolk. Hastings is not mentioned, 

neuer heard earst of sanctuarie chil- 69. Julius Casar] " It hath been 

dren " (see lines 55, 56). A terse the common opinion, and some have 

summing-up of his argument concludes written — but of none assured ground — 

a speech with successful effect. For that Julius Cassar . . . was the original 

the history of sanctuary privileges and author and founder as well " 01 the 



sc. 



'•] 



KING RICHARD III 



91 



Btick. He did, my gracious lord, begin that place ; 70 

Which, since, succeeding ages have re-edified. 
Prince. Is it upon record, or else reported 

Successively from age to age, he built it ? 
Buck. Upon record, my gracious lord. 
Prince. But say, my lord, it were not regist'red, 75 

Methinks the truth should live from age to age, 

As 'twere retail'd to all posterity, 

Even to the general all-ending day. 
Glou. [Aside.] So wise, so young, they say, do never live long. 
Prince. What say you, uncle ? 80 

Glou. I say, without characters, fame lives long. 

[Aside.] Thus, like the formal vice. Iniquity, 

70. Bucli.'\ Glo. Steevens. 70, 71. He did . . . re-edified] He did, my lord 
. . . since Succeeding . . . re-edified Steevens conj. 71. re-edtfied] rebuilt 

Hanmer. 74. Upon'] It is upon Capell. 78. general all-ending] Q i ; 

generall ending] Qq 2-8, Ff. 79. [/4sirff.] Johnson (and so 94). never] ne'er 
Pope. 82. [Aside.] Ff 2-4. Thus] That Qq 6-8. 



Tower of London, " as also of many 
other towers, castles, and great build- 
ings within tiiis realm " (Stow, Survey, 
ed. Morley, p. 73). 

73. Successively] Mr. Craig sends a 
parallel from Holland, Pliny, vii. 11 
(1634, pt. i. p. 160) : " In the race and 
family of the Lepidi it is said there 
were three of them (not successively 
one after another, but out of order 
after some intermission) who had , . . 
at their birth a little pannicle of thin 
skin growing over their eyes." Com- 
pare III. vii. 135 below. 

77. retail'd] reported. Compare iv. 
iv. 338 below, where the meaning is 
probably the same. Malone quotes 
Minsheu, Ductor in Linguas, 1617 : 
" to retail or retell, G. renombrer, a 
Lat. renumerare." Warburton ex- 
plains that the story, being thus re- 
tailed, " like most oihev retailed things, 
became adulterated." He proposed 
"intail'd" instead, "which is finely 
and sensibly expressed, as though 
truth were the natural inheritance of 
our children ; which it is impiety to 
deprive them of." Johnson supposed 
that "retail'd" might mean " diffus'd, 
dispersed." 

78. general all-ending] The reading 
of all the printed copies save Q i may 
be due to the printer of Q 2, who con- 



founded " all," on this supposition, 
with the last syllable of " general." 
The occurrence of the error in Ff may 
point, however, to its source in some 
early MS. of the play. For " all- 
ending " compare "all-shaking" in 
King Lear, iii. ii. 6. 

79. Steevens quotes " Is cadit ante 
senem, qui sapit ante diem." Reed 
gives an English form from Timothy 
Bright, A Treatise of Melancholic, 
1586 : " They be of short life who are of 
wit so pregnant." Aldis Wright refers 
to Holland's translation of P/JMj, 1601, 
vii. 51, where the proverb is attributed 
to Cato the Censor. 

81. characters] written records. 
Compare Winter's Tale, iii. iii. 47. 
The word is usually accented on the 
first syllable ; but, in Hamlet, i. iii. 59, 
the verb " character " has the penulti- 
mate accent. Compare " charactery " 
in Merry Wives of Windsor, v. v. 77 ; 
Julius Casar, 11. i. 308. 

82. the formal vice. Iniquity] The 
nearest parallel in Shakespeare to this 
much-disputed passage is 1 Henry IV. 
II. iv. 499, 500. References to the Vice 
of the Morality-plays are also found, 
e.g.. Twelfth Night, iv. ii. 134; I 
Henry IV. 11. iv. 151 ; Henry V. iv. 
iv. 75-77. In Jonson, The Devil is an 
Ass, 1616, i. I, Pug asks Satan to let 



92 



KING RICHARD III 



[act III. 



I moralise two meanings in one word. 
Prince. That Julius Caesar was a famous man; 

With what his valour did enrich his wit, 85 

His wit set down to make his valour live: 
Death makes no conquest of this conqueror, 

83. morcdhe\ moralixe : Warburton ; moralise,— Capell. 87. this]Q i; 

his Qq 2-8, Ff. 



him wander about the world for a 
fortnight, and take a Vice with him. 
When asked what kind of Vice he 
wishes, he answers " Why any : Fraud, 
Or Covetousness, or Lady Vanity, or 
old Iniquity." Iniquity then intro- 
duces himself. This shows (i) that 
the Vice often represented one special 
sin, but {2) that he frequently appeared 
under the general name of Iniquity. 
This is further indicated by Jonson, 
Staple of News, 1625, interact ii. : 
" the old way, when Iniquity came in 
like Hokos Pokos, in a juggler's jerkin, 
with false skirts, like the knave of 
clubs." " Formal " unquestionably 
means " according to form, usual, 
regular," as in Antony and Cleopatra, 
II. V. 41 ; compare Merry Devil of 
Edvionton, sc. i. : " The /orwa/ deed 
'twixt me and thee." Thus it seems 
that Iniquity was the customary name 
under which the Vice appeared. War- 
burton wished to read " formal-wise 
antiquity," arguing (i) that the Vice 
was anything but formal (i.e. sober) in 
demeanour ; (2) that Shakespeare would 
not allow an exact speaker, discoursing 
on antiquity, to wander oft to a simile 
which had so little to do with his theme. 
He concludes complacently : " Formal- 
wise is a compound epithet, an extreme 
fine one, and admirably fitted to the 
character of the speaker, who thought 
all 7t'isdom but formality. It must 
therefore be read for the future with a 
hyphen." Of course, Warburton takes 
" formality " in its derived sense : Pol- 
onius would be an excellent example of 
a " formal-wise " statesman. So Lucio, 
in Beaumont and Fletcher, Woman- 
Hater, is described as " a weak, formal 
statesman," i.e. devoted to the for- 
malities of his office. Malone thought 
that " formal " might mean " shrewd, 
sensible " ; but in his parallels (Comedy 
of Errors, v. i. 105; Twelfth Nifrht, 



II. V. 128) the word simply means 
" normal." 

83. The sense is " I imply a double 
meaning in one phrase." (i) We 
may assume that double entendre was 
part of the Vice's business during his 
career on the stage. It is the most 
effective weapon of Mathew Mery- 
greeke, his direct descendant, in Ralph 
Kcister-Doister. (2) For "moralise" 
in this sense see As You Like It, 11. 
i. 44 ; Lucrece, 103 ; and compare 
"moral" in the sense of "hidden 
meaning," Much Ado About Nothing, 
HI. iv. 78-80. (3) The " one word " 
which Richard moralises, as Monck 
Mason and others explain, is the phrase 
"lives long," repeating the "live 
long " of line 79. The Prince has 
caught the last words of his uncle's 
aside; and Richard repeats them for 
his benefit, altering the beginning and 
meaning of his sentence. For " word " 
in the sense of a collection of words, 
like Fr. mot. It. motto, compare Richard 
II. I. iii. 152. {4) Warburton explains 
his colon after "moralise" thus: "I 
moralise as the ancients [see previous 
note] did. And how was that ? the 
having two meanings to one word." 
Capell understands " two meanings 
in one word " as a gloss which Richard 
adds to " moralise." The sentence as 
it stands, without alteration, would 
have been perfectly clear to an audience 
of Shakespeare's day. 

85. With what] i.e. that with which 
his valour, etc. 

87. of this] Later Qq and Ff readings 
may be defended on the groimd that 
Ca;sar, by perpetuating his fame in 
written history, has conquered the obli- 
vion which Death brings. He is thus 
Death's conqueror, not Death his. On 
the other hand, it is equally probable 
that the printer of Q 2 dropped the 
"t" of "this," and that his error, 



sc. i] ' KING RICHARD III 98 

For now he lives in fame, though not in life. 

I '11 tell you what, my cousin Buckingham, — 
Buck. What, my gracious lord ? 90 

Prince. An if I live until I be a man, 

I '11 win our ancient right in France again, 

Or die a soldier, as I liv'd a king. 
Glou. [Aside.] Short summers lightly have a forward spring. 

Enter young YORK, HASTINGS, and the CARDINAL. 

Buck. Now, in good time, here comes the Duke of York. 95 
Prince. Richard of York ! how fares our loving brother ? 

York. Well, my dread lord — so must I call you now. 
Prince. Ay, brother, to our grief, as it is yours : 

Too late he died that might have kept that title, 

Which by his death hath lost much majesty. 100 

Glou. How fares our cousin, noble Lord of York ? 

York. I thank you, gentle uncle. O, my lord, 
You said that idle weeds are fast in growth : 
The prince my brother hath out-grown me far. 

Glou. He hath, my lord. 

York. And therefore is he idle ? 105 

Glou. O, my fair cousin, I must not say so. 

York. Then he is more beholding to you than I. 

Glou. He may command me as my sovereign ; 
But you have power in me as in a kinsman. 

York. I pray you, uncle, give me this dagger. 11 o 

Glou. My dagger, little cousin ? with all my heart. 

Prince. A beggar, brother ? 

gi. An\ Theobald; ^nd Qq, Ff. (and so 148). 94. summers . . . have] 

summers . . . has Pope (ed. i); summer . . . has Pope (ed. 2); summer . . . 
hath Capell (conj,). 96. loving] noble Qq 3-8, Ff. 97. dread] deare Qq 

3-8. Ff. 107. beholding] beholden Pope. no. uncle] uncle then Hanmer. 

this] this your Warburton. 

having some warrant in sense, was ever rode lightly together." Perhaps 

adopted by subsequent editions. this whole line is proverbial. 

94. %/»</>'] usually. Steevens quotes 99. late] lately. Hanmer altered 

the proverb : " There 's lightning to " soon," apparently failing to 

lightly before thunder," and Jonson, grasp this not uncommon use of the 

Cynthia's Revels, ii. i : " He is not word. 

lightly within to his mercer." So T09. in me] with me, as regards me. 

Berners' Froissart, i. 38 : " Sir John Collier's MS. contained the suggestion 

of Hainault and the lord of Fauqucmont " o'er me." 



94 KING RICHARD III [act m. 

York. Of my kind uncle, that I know will give ; 

And being but a toy, which is no grief to give. 
G/ou. A greater gift than that I '11 give my cousin. 115 

Voj'/c. A greater gift ? O, that 's the sword to it. 
G/ou. Ay, gentle cousin, were it light enough. 
York. O, then, I see, you will part but with light gifts ; 

In weightier things you '11 say a beggar nay. 
G/ou. It is too heavy for your grace to wear. 1 20 

Yor/c. I weigh it lightly, were it heavier. 
G/ou. What, would you have my weapon, little lord ? 
YorM. I would that I might thank you as you call me. 
G/ou. How ? 

yWk. Little, 125 

Prince. My Lord of York will still be cross in talk : 

Uncle, your grace knows how to bear with him. 
Yorfi. You mean to bear me, not to bear with me : 

Uncle, my brother mocks both you and me ; 

Because that I am little, like an ape, 130 

He thinks that you should bear me on your shoulders. 
Buck. With what a sharp-provided wit he reasons ! 

To mitigate the scorn he gives his uncle, 

114. 6m<] omitted Ff 2-4. which is"] it is Ff 2-4; omitted, Steevens conj. 

S^iff] g^f^ Q.^^-^- 120. heavy"] Q i; waightie Qq 2-8, Ff. 121. /] I'd 

Hanmer. 123. 05] as as Q 3 ; as, as, F i. 132. sharp-provided] 
hyphened Theobald. 133. gives] giue Qq 3-7. 

114. beirg but a toy] since what I probable double entendre in " bear," 

ask is but a trifle, it is no grief to give understands the allusion as referring 

it. The construction is elliptic. F 2 to the custom by which the lool in 

emends both construction and metre, large households carried an ape perched 

but apparently without authority, on his back, and quotes Ulpian 

York's meaning is perfectly clear. Fulwel, Ars Adulandi, etc. 1596 : 

130, 131. The point of the jest lies. "Thou hast an excellent back to carry 
of course, in the relation between the my lord's ape," and Jonson, Masque 
words " bear " and " ape." (i) John- of the Gipsies Metamorphosed, 1621 : 
son refers to the custom, at country " The fellow with the ape. Or the ape 
shows, of taking a monkey and bear on his shoulder." New Eng. Diet. 
about together, and setting the monkey quotes Overbury, Characters, 1614 
on the bear's back. Compare Beatrice's [A Rhymer]: "There is nothing in 
jest in Much Ado About Nothing, 11. i. the earth so pitiful — no, not an ape- 
43. York likens himself to an ape, carrier." Shakespeare alludes to the 
and his uncle to a bear ; while the custom. Winter's Tale, iv. iii. loi. 
gTOtesqueness of the jest is heightened 132. s/jar/'-/'ro»»rf^rf] Compare "sense- 
by the "envious mountain" which less-obstinate" above, line 44. 
Nature has heaped on Gloucester's 133. the scorn] the taunt. Compare 
back. (2) Steevens, disregarding the 1 Henry IV. in. ii. 64; Othello, iv. i. 83. 



sc. i] KING RICHARD III 95 

He prettily and aptly taunts himself: 

So cunning and so young is wonderful. 135 

Glou. My lord, will 't please you pass along ? 

Myself and my good cousin Buckingham 

Will to your mother, to entreat of her 

To meet you at the Tower and welcome you. 
York. What, will you go unto the Tower, my lord ? 140 

Prince. My lord protector needs will have it so. 
York. I shall not sleep in quiet at the Tower. 
Glou. Why, what should you fear ? 
York. Marry, my uncle Clarence' angry ghost : 

My gran dam told me he was murder'd there. 145 

Prince. I fear no uncles dead. 
Glou. Nor none that live, I hope. 
Prince. An if they live, I hope I need not feac. 

But come, my lord ; and with a heavy heart, 

Thinking on them, go I unto the Tower. 150 

[^ Sennet. Exeunt all but Gloucester^ Buckingham 
and Catesby. 
Buck. Think you, my lord, this little prating York 

Was not incensed by his subtle mother 

To taunt and scorn you thus opprobriously ? 
Glou. No doubt, no doubt : O, 'tis a perilous boy, 

Bold, quick, ingenious, forward, capable : I55 

He is all the mother's, from the top to toe. 

136. lor d'X gracious lor dYiznm&x. yoti]your highness CupeU. 141. needs] 
Q I ; omitted Qq 2-8, Ff. 149. afid] Ff ; omitted Qq. 150. A Sennet.) 

F I. Exeunt . . . Catesby.] Exeunt Prin. Yor. Hast. Dors, manet Rich. 

[Bich. Q 5 ; Bisk. Qq 6-8] Buc. Qq ; Exeunt Prince, Yorke. Hastings, and Dorset. 
Manet [Manent F 2] Richard, Buckingham, and Catesby. Ff. aft. 150. SCEAfB 11. 
Pope. 154. perilous] perlous Qq 7, 8 ; parlous Camb. 

141. needs] Q i supplies the syllable 152. incensed] instigated, as Mu^h 
missing from the rest of the printed Ado About Nothing, v. i. 242. ^^ In 
copies. Hanmer conjectured the Henry VIII. v. i. 43 "incens'd" is 
omitted monosyllable to be "here"; not merely equivalent, as Netv Eng. 
Collier MS. suggested "e'en." Diet, takes it, to " insens'd," i.e. in- 

148. /Var] The prince has used "fear" formed, but implies that, by his infor- 
in its ordinary sense (line 146). Now mation, Gardiner has instigated the sus- 
his thoughts revert to the uncles whom picion of the council against Cranmer. 
he has left in such jeopardy, and he 154. perilous] The full form of the 
uses it as above, i. i. 137. word is found in all copies of Qq and 

150. A Sennet] A set flourish of Ff except the latest Qq. 
trumpets, used to mark such occasions 155. ca/>a6/«] intelligent. Seen. ii. 18 
as the royal progress in this scene. See above, and note. Compare HamU't, in. 
Mr. Craig on King Lear, i. i. 34. iv. 127; Troilus and Cressida, m. iii. 310. 



96 KING RICHARD III [act m. 

Buck. Well, let them rest. Come hither, Catesby. 

Thou art sworn as deeply to effect what we intend. 

As closely to conceal what we impart : 

Thou know'st our reasons urg'd upon the way ; i6o 

What think'st thou ? is it not an easy matter 

To make William Lord Hastings of our mind, 

For the instalment of this noble duke 

In the seat royal of this famous isle ? 
Gates. He for his father's sake so loves the prince 165 

That he will not be won to ought against him. 
Buck. What think'st thou then of Stanley ? will not he ? 
Gates. He will do all in all as Hastings doth. 
Buck. Well, then, no more but this : go, gentle Catesby, 

And, as it were far off, sound thou Lord Hastings, 170 

How he doth stand affected to our purpose ; 

And summon him to-morrow to the Tower, 

To sit about the coronation. 

If thou dost find him tractable to us, 

157-59- Come hither . . . impart] Come, Catesby, thou art sworn As deeply 
. . . impart Pope ; Come hither, gentle Catesby, thou art sworn As deeply . . . 
impart Capell (Well . . . rest separate line); Camb. edd. conj. Thou art sworn 
as separate line. i6o. kftow'st]Fi; knowest Qq. i6i. think'st]F{; thitikest 
Qq. 162. William Lord^lord William ^o^ie^. 167. willnot]Yi; what will 
Qq. 169-71. Well . . . purpose] arranged as Pope; Well . . . this: Goe 

. . . farre off, Sound . . . Hastings, How . . . purpose Ff ; Well . . . this : 
Go . . . a farre off, Sound . . . hoiv he stands affi\ted Vnto our purpose Qq. 
170. sound thou] Sound Qq 3-8. 172, 173. And summon . . . coronation] 

Ff; omitted Qq. 174. // thou . . . ms] Ff ; if he be willing Qq. 

160. upon the jvay] Two councils at Although " sore inamoured upon " Jane 

least had been held upon the journey, Shore during the lifetime of Edward, 

the night-council at Northampton before "yet he forbore hir ; ether for reuerence, 

the arrest of Rivers, and another the or for a certeine firiendliefaithfulnesse" 

next day, after the return from Stony {ibid. 724). Gloucester seems to have 

Stratford. Shakespeare, condensing liked him : his only reason for sacrific- 

history, makes the Protector's designs ing him without hesitation was " feare 

known to his private friends at a mo- least his life should haue quailed their 

ment when, according to the historians, purpose " (ibid. 722.) 

they were matured only in his own mind. 169-75. Possibly Qq here, as in other 

165. Holinshed and More bear fre- cases, represent the passage as it was 

quent testimony to the friendship be- corrupted, when spoken hastily on the 

tween Hastings and Edward IV. When stage. 

Edward fled to Lynn in 1470. Hastings 170. far off~] " For v/hich cause he 

and Gloucester were his companions, mooned Catesbie to prooue with some 

Queen Elizabeth disliked Hastings " for words cast out a farre off, whether he 

the great faiiour the king bare him ; could thinke it possible to win the lord 

and also for that she thought him Hastings unto their part " (More, ap. 

secretlie familiar with the king in Holinshed, iii. 722). Compare below", 

wanton companie" (Holinshed, iii. 713). iii. v. 93 and note. 



sc I] KING RICHARD III 97 

Encourage him, and tell him all our reasons : 175 

If he be leaden, icy-cold, unwilling, 

Be thou so too, and so break off the talk, 

And give us notice of his inclination ; 

For we to-morrow hold divided councils. 

Wherein thyself shalt highly be employ'd. 180 

Glou. Commend me to Lord William : tell him, Catesby, 

His ancient knot of dangerous adversaries 

To-morrow are let blood at Pomfret castle ; JJ~ 

And bid my lord, for joy of this good news, ,/ jC'-^'^i^* i. ' ;. 

Give Mistress Shore one gentle kiss the more.'' r J J- {^^ 
Buck. Good Catesby, go, effect this business soundly. 
Gates. My good lords both, with all the heed I can. 
Glou. Shall we hear from you, Catesby, ere we sleep ? 
Gates. You shall, my lord. 

Glou. At Crosby Place, there shall you find us both. 190 

\Exit Catesby. 
Buck. Now, my lord, what shall we do, if we perceive 

175. telV^ Ff ; s}iow Qq. 176. icy-cold] Camb. (from Ingleby's conj.) ; icie, 
cold Qq ; ycie, cold Ff. 177. the talk] Ff ; your talke Qq. 184. lord] Ff ; 

frie7id Qq 1-5 ; friends Qq 6-8. 185. Mistress] gentle Mistresse Qq 3-8. 

186. go, effect] Ff; effect Qq. 187. can] Ff; may Qq, 190. Place] Qq; 

House Ff. Exit Catesby.] Ff; after i8g Qq 3-8 ; omitted Qq i, 2. 

igi. Now . . . perceive] one line as Qq; Now, my Lord, What . . . perceitie 
(two lines) Ff. Now] omitted Pope. 

179. divided councils] "But the Pepys, Diary, i6th Dec. 1662: "... 
protector and the duke, after that they the world says of me ; that all do con- 
had sent the lord cardinall, the arch- elude Mr. Coventry, and Pett, and me, 
bishop of Yorke, . . . the bishop of to be of a ktiot ; and that we do now 
Elie, the lord Stanleie, and the lord carry all things before us." 
Hastings . . . with manie other noble 185. Mistress Shore] She had be- 
men, to common & deuise about the come Hastings' mistress after the death 
coronation in one place, as fast were of Edward IV. When Hastings was 
they in an other place, contriuing the executed, she was deprived of her goods 
contrarie, and to make the protector and sent to prison. Gloucester failed 
king" (More, ap. Holinshed, iii. 721). to convict her of conspiracy with Hast- 
Gairdner (pp. 62, 63) shows that Glou- ings, and fell back on the charge of her 
cester allowed every facility to the known incontinence. " And for this 
council which sat at the Tower, to cause (as a goodlie continent prince, 
mature their plans, with the king's cleane and faultlesse of himself, sent 
privity, undisturbed. out of heauen into this vicious world for 

182. knot] company, confederacy, as the amendment of mens maners) he 

Merry Wives of Windsor, m. ii. 52, caused the bishop of London to put hir 

IV. ii. 123 ; yulius CcEsar, in. i. 117. to open penance, going before the 

Among the plays presented by the crosse in procession vpon a sundaie 

King's Players at the wedding festivi- with a taper in hir hand " (More, ap, 

ties of Princess Elizabeth, 1613, was Holinshed, iii, 724). 
one called A Knot of Fools. So 



98 



KING RICHARD III 



[act hi. 



Lord Hastings will not yield to our complots ? 

Glou. Chop off his head : something we will determine : 
And look, when I am king, claim thou of me 
The earldom of Hereford, and all the moveables 
Whereof the king my brother was possess'd. 

Buck. I '11 claim that promise at your grace's hand. 

Glou. And look to have it yielded with all kindness. 
Come, let us sup betimes, that afterwards 



195 



S We may digest our complots in some form. 



200 
\Exeunt. 



192. Lord'\ Ff; William Lord Qq. 193. Chop . . . determine] Chop . . . 
Head: Something . . , determine (two lines) Ff. head] Ff; head, man Qq. 

something] Ff ; somewhat Qq. determine] Ff ; do Qq. 195. Hereford] 

Herford Qq y^; Hertford Q 6. a//] Ff ; omitted Qq. 196. was]Fi; stood 
Qq. 197. hand] Ff; hands Qq. 198. all kindness] Ff ; all willingnesse 

Q I ; willingnesse Qq 2-8. 



192. complots] Below, line 200, the 
same word is used with the accent 
changed to the penultimate, which is 
the customary usage. Compare Titus 
Andronicns, 11. iii. 265, v. i. 65, v. ii. 
147 ; 2 Henry VI. in. i. 147. So the 
verb is accented in Richard II. i. iii. 
189. 

195. Humphrey de Bohun, Earl of 
Hereford, Essex, and Northampton, 
left two daughters. (i) The elder, 
Eleanor, married the youngest son of 
Edward III., Thomas, Duke of Glou- 
cester and Earl of Buckingham, who 
was styled Earl of Essex in right of his 
wife. They had a daughter Anne, who 
married Edmund, Earl of Stafford : her 
son Humphrey was created Duke of 
Buckingham by Henry VI. ; and his 
grandson, the second Duke of Buck- 
ingham, is the Buckingham of this 
play. (2) The lands of Hereford were 



conveyed by the younger co-heiress, 
Mary, to her husband Henry, Earl ol 
Derby, son of John of Gaunt, after- 
wards Henry IV. In 1397, three 
years after his wife's death, he was 
created Duke of Hereford. The fiei 
continued in his line, and passed, with 
the other possessions of the crown, to 
the House of York : at this time it was 
in the hands of the King. Bucking- 
ham's claim to the Earldom of Here- 
ford was thus a claim to the moiety 
of the Bohun possessions which, by the 
marriage of a younger co-lieiress, had 
passed to an elder branch of the royal 
family. The third Duke of Bucking- 
ham, who occurs in Henry VIII., 
was actually styled Earl of Here- 
ford. 

200. digest] arrange, give shape to, 
as Tourneur, Revenger's Tragedy, act 
iii. : " most dreadfully digested I " 



sc. II.] KING RICHARD III 99 

SCENE II.— Before Lord Hastings' house. 
Enter a Messenger. 

Mess. My lord, my lord ! 
Hast. [ Within^ Who knocks ? 
Mess. One from the Lord Stanley. 

Enter LORD HASTINGS. 

Hast. What is 't o'clock ? 

Mess. Upon the stroke of four, 5 

Hast. Cannot thy master sleep these tedious nights? 

Mess. So it appears by that I have to say. 

First, he commends him to your noble self. 
Hast. What then ? 
Mess. Then certifies your lordship that this i ight . 10 

He dreamt the boar had razed off his helm;'^'^'^*'^' 

Besides, he says there are two councils kept ; 

And that may be determin'd at the one 

SCBXB II.] Scene hi. Pope. Before . . . house] Theobald. Enfei' a Messenger.] 
Enter a messenger to Lord Hastings. Qq ; Enter a Messenger to the doore of 
Hastings. Ff. " i. My lord, my lord] Ff; What ho my Lord Qq. 2. Who 
knocks] Ff; Who knoc'kcs at the dore Qq. 3. One] Ff; A messenger Qq. 

Enter Lord Hastijtgs.] Qq ; after 5 Ff. 4. What is 't o'clock] Ff ; Whats a 

clocke Qq. 6. thy master] Qq; my Lord Stanley Ff. these] Q i, Ff; 

the Qq 2-6. 7. appears] Ff; should seeme Qq. 8. self] Ff; Lordship Qq. 
9, 10. What . . . night] Ff; And then. Mes. And then he sends you word 
(one line) Qq. 11. He dreamt] Ff ; He dreamt to night Qq. boar] Qq 

6-S, Ff; beare Qq 1-5. razed off] Ff ; raste Qq 1-4 ; caste Q 5 ; cast Qq 6-8. 

12. kept] Ff ; held Qq. 

5. Upon the stroke of four] More always given to describe the violence 
(ap. Holinshed, iii. 723) says that inflicted by a boar." Compare Sir 
Stanley sent his messenger at midnight. Lancelot du Lake {ap. Percy, Rdiques, 

6. thy masi.i] Ff, contrary ,;o the i. bk. 2. no. lo) : — 

usual custom, derange the metre. " Tl 7 buckled the") together so. 
The probability, as Spedding suggests, Like unto wild boares rashing " ; 

is that the editor of F i meant to alter Qq reading of King Lear, ni. vii. 58; 

" thy master " to " Lord Stanley," but Spenser, Faerie Qiieene, v. iii. 8, uses it 

forgot to strike out "thy"; that the with the simile of a lion : '• Hashing off 

printer noticed the weakness of the helms, and riving plates asonder." For 

phrase "thy Lord Stanley," and the word applied in a general sense, see 

changed "thy" to "my." Berners' Froissart, i. 147 : "Then the 

II. razed off] More \u.s.) uses the new town and bastide . . . was pulled 

word : " him thought that a boare down, and the castle that stood on the 

with his tuskes so rased them both by haven rashed down," i.e. razed. In 

the heads, that the bloud ran about Hawt/ei, in. ii. 288, " m^fcf shoes " are 

both their shoulders." Steevens says shoes slashed or cut in patterns, 
that the term " rased or rashed is 



100 KING RICHARD III [act m 

Which may make you and him to rue at the other. 

Therefore he sends to know your lordship's pleasure, 1 5 

If you will presently take horse with him, 

And with all speed post with him toward the north. 

To shun the danger that his soul divines. 
Hast. Go, fellow, go, return unto thy lord : 

Bid him not fear the separated councils; 20 

His honour and myself are at the one. 

And at the other is my good friend Catesby, 

Where nothing can proceed that toucheth us 

Whereof I shall not have intelligence. 

Tell him his fears are shallow, wanting instance ; 25 

And, for his dreams, I wonder he 's so simple 

To trust the mockery of unquiet slumbers. 

To fly the boar before the boar pursues. 

Were to incense the boar to follow us 

And make pursuit, where he did mean no chase. 30 

Go, bid thy master rise and come to me ; 

And we will both together to the Tower, 

Where, he shall see, the boar will use us kindly. 
Mess. I '11 go, my lord, and tell him what you say. \^Exit. 

16. you will presently] Ff ; presently you will Qq. 17. with him toward] 
Ff; into Qq; hence into Capell. 19. Go, fellow] Good fellow Qq 3-8. 

20. councils] Qq; Councell Ff. 22. good friend] Ff; seruant Qq. 25. 

wanttng]Qc\; without Ff. instance]^ i, Ff; instancie Qq 2-8. 26. he's 

so simple] Ff ; he is so fond Qq 1-3, 5-8 ; he is fond Q 4. 28. pursues] Ff ; 

pursues us Qq i, 2; pursue us Qq 3-6. 30. no chase] to chase Q 4. 34. 

I'll go . . . and] Ff; My gratious Lord He Qq. £^;<.] omitted Qq i, 2. 

21. His honour] Stanley. Malone 25. instance] cause, rtiotive, as 

says that this was the usual title by Henry V. 11. ii. 119; Merry Wives of 

which noblemen were addressed in Windsor, 11. ii. 256 ; Hamlet, in. ii. 

Shakespeare's day. It was used indis- 192. 

criminately with " his lordship." See 26, 27. so simple To] For the omis- 
Richard Field's dedication of Putten- sion of " as," compare Tourneur, Re- 
ham's (?) Arte of English Poesie, 1589, venger's Tragedy, act i. : — 
to Lord Burghley, or Bishop Hall's " But I had so much wit to keep my 
dedications of Contemplations, books i thoughts 
and 14, to the Earls of Exeter and Up in their built houses." 
Montgomery. The use of "his 33. kindly] Hastings means that 
honour" was not confined to noble- Richard will use them kindly, i.e. 
men : for instance, book 13 of Con- gently, courteously. But the audi- 
templations is dedicated to Sii Thomas ence know that he will use them 
Edmonds, a knight and member of the kindly in another sense, i.e. after his 
Privy Council, whom Hall addresses as bearish nature or kind. 
" your Honour." 



sc. II.] KING RICHARD III 101 



Enter Catesby. 

Gates. Many good morrows to my noble lord ! 35 

Hast. Good morrow, Catesby ; you are early stirring : 

What news, what news, in this our tottering state? 
Gates. It is a reeling world indeed, my lord ; 

And I believe 'twill never stand upright 

Till Richard wear the garland of the realm. 40 

Hast. How ! wear the garland ! dost thou mean the crown ? 
Gates. Ay, my good lord. 
Hast. I '11 have this crown of mine cut from my shoulders, 

Before I '11 see the crown so foul misplac'd ! 

But canst thou guess that he doth aim at it ? 45 

Gates. Ay, on my life, and hopes to find you forward 

Upon his party for the gain thereof; 

And thereupon he sends you this good news, 

That this same very day your enemies, 

The kindred of the queen, must die at Pomfret. 50 

Hast. Indeed, I am no mourner for that news. 

Because they have been still my adversaries ; 

But, thtit I '11 give my voice on Richard's side. 

To bar my master's heirs in true descent, 

God knows I will not do it, to the death. 55 

Gates. God keep your lordship in that gracious mind ! 
Hast. But I shall laugh at this a twelve-month hence. 

That they which brought me in my master's hate, 

I live to look upon their tragedy. 

aft. 34. Enter Cateshy.'\ Enter Catesby to L. Hastings, Qq 3-8. 39. 'twill 

Qq 3-8; it will Qq I, 2; will Ff. 41. How . . , crown] one line as Qq; 

How . . . Garland? Doest . . . Crowne ? (two lines) Ff. 44. Before I'll] 

Ff; Ere I will Qq. 51. that nervs] this newes Qq 4, 6-8. 52. my adver- 

saries'] Ff; mine enemies Qq. ^S. which] Ff; who Qq. 

40. garland] Compare 2 Henry IV. 43. crown] Compare 1 Henry IV. 11. 

IV. V. 202. New Eng. Diet, quotes iv. 420. 

Grafton's continuation of Harding's 49. Shakespeare derived this state- 

Chronicles, i^^i: " What about ye get- ment from More. Hastings' arrest and 

ting of the garland, keping it, lesing execution took place on 13th June; the 

and winning again, it hath coste more lords were not beheaded apparently 

English blood then hath the twise till 25th June. 

winning of France." 55. to the death] i.e. even if my 

refusal cost me my life. 



102 KING RICHARD III [act m. 

Well, Catesby, ere a fortnight make me older, 6o 

I '11 send some packing that yet think not on 't. 

Gates. 'Tis a vile thing to die, my gracious lord, 
When men are unprepar'd and look not for it. 

Hast. O monstrous, monstrous ! and so falls it out 

With Rivers, Vaughan, Grey; and so 'twill do 65 

With some men else, that think themselves as safe 
As thou and I, who, as thou know'st, are dear 
To princely Richard and to Buckingham. 

Gates. The princes both make high account of you : 

[Aside.] For they account his head upon the bridge. 70 

Hast. I know they do ; and I have well deserv'd it. 

Enter LORD STANLEY. 

Come on, come on ; where is your boar-spear, man ? 

Fear you the boar, and go so unprovided ? 
Stan. My lord, good morrow ; good morrow, Catesby : 

You may jest on ; but, by the holy rood, 75 

I do not like these several councils, I. 
Hast. My lord, 

I hold my life as dear as you do yours ; 

60. Well . . . older] Ff; I fell thee Catesby. Cat. What my Lord? Hast. 
Ere aforttiight niak'- me elder Qq. 6i. or? V] Ff : on it Qq. 66. thai]Fi; 

uiho Qq. 70. Aside] Rovy'e. 72. Come on. come on] F{; What my Lord Qq. 
74. morrow ; good] morrow, and good Pope. 77, 78. My lord, I . . . yours] 

two lines as Johnson ; one line Qq; My Lord. I hold my life as deare as yours Ff. 

61. /"acAJM^] Compare above, 1. i. 146; haste is not implied, as in English, 

Tourneur, Revenger's Tragedy, act He also notes " Let the canting liar 

lii. : — pack " in Tennyson, Vision of Sin, iv. 

• "He being pack'd we'll have some st. 12. 

trick and wile, 70. In their account, his head is as 

To wind our younger brother out good as exposed already on London 

of prison." Bridge, with those of other traitors. 

•• To send packing," i.e. to send away, Compare Wilkins, Miseries of hiforst 

dismiss summarily (New Eng. Diet.), Marriage : " A knave's head, shook 

is still used colloquially, though per- seven years in the weather upon Lon- 

haps more rarely now than formerly, don Bridge." 

The intransitive " to pack," i.e. to go 76. I do not . . . J] For the empha- 

away, bag and baggage, is used by tic repetition of " I," compare Two 

Shakespeare, e.g. The Taming of the Gentlemen of Verona, v. iv. 132, and 

Shrew, n. i. 178. Compare Lodge and Marlowe, ye7t' of Malta, prol. line 28: 

Greene, Lookivg-Glasse (Dyce, 131): " I come not, L to read a lecture here in 

"Old dotard, pack, move not my Britain." 

patience." Mr. Craig calls attention 78. as you do yours] Qq, in spite of 

to the Scottish use of " pack." in which, Steevens' expressed contempt, introduce 

according to Jamieson's Dictionary, a great improvement on F"f. Ff reading 



sc. n j KING RICHARD III 103 

And never in my days, I do protest, 

Was it so precious to me as 'tis now : 80 

Think you, but that I know our state secure, 

I would be so triumphant as I am ? / 

Stan. The lords at Pomfret, when they rode from London, 
Were jocund and suppos'd their states were sure, 
And they indeed had no cause to mistrust ; 85 

But yet, you see, how soon the day o'ercast. 
This sudden stab of rancour I misdoubt : 
Pray God, I say, I prove a needless coward ! 
What, shall we toward the Tower ? the day is spent. 

Hast. Come, come, have with you ! Wot you what, my lord ? 90 
To-day the lords you talk of are beheaded. 

Stan. They, for their truth, might better wear their heads, 
Than some that have accus'd them wear their hats. 
But come, my lord, let us away. 

79. rfays] Ff; Zt/i? Qq. 80. so . . . 05] Ff; more . . . f/iew Qq. 'fw]Ff; 
it is Qq. 81. otir state] the state Ff 3, 4. 84. states were] Ff; states was 

Qq ; state was Camb. 85. they] omitted Qq 3-8. 86. o'ercast] oiiercast Qq 
I, 2. 87. stab] Ff; scab Qq. 89. What . . . spent] Ff; But come my Lo : 
shall we to the tower Qq. 90. Come, come . . . my lord] Come. . . yon : Wot 
. . . Lord (two lines) Ff; I go : but stay, heare you tiot the new es Qq. 91. 

the lords you talk of] Ff; those men you talkt o/Qq i, 2; those men you talke oj 
Qq 3-8. 93. hats] hat Qq 2-5. 94. But come, my lord, let us away] Qq ; 

But come, my Lord, lets away Ff; But come, my lord, away Pope; Come, let us 
away Capell. 

may be an example of Shakespeare's over Qq. It is a little difficult, how- 

" elliptical mode of expressing him- ever, to reconcile these words with the 

self" ; but, if so, it is an example which time of the scene as already indicated 

involves a misunderstanding. Its only in line 5 above, or to explain them as 

obvious meaning is that Hastings sets meaning " the day is wearing itself 

an equal value on his own life and away." Shakespeare already had 

Stanley's ; and this would be a remark pushed on an hour which the historians 

without point. Qq give us what we gave as midnight to four in the morh- 

naturally should expect him to say. ing, and was condensing the several 

/ 83. London] The reading of all the interviews recorded in the chronicles 

/ printed editions. Shakespeare must into one scene, the prelude to the 

' have meant to write " Ludlow." The forenoon council at the Tower and the 

\ lords in question were at Ludlow with discomfiture of Hastings. The phrase 

\ the prince, when Edward IV. died; and is either unusual or due to a lapse of 

\it was on the ride from Ludlow to memory. 

'London that the sudden overcasting of go. have with you] This and kindred 

their happiness took place. Compare phrases, e.g. have at, after, or among 

Ff at II. ii. 142, 154, where the error is you, are frequently found as announc- 

more conspicuous. ing the arrival or departure of characters 

87. misdoubt] Compare Love's on the stage. For " have with you," 

Labour's Lost, iv. iii. 194. compare the title of Nash's pamphlet. 

89. the day is spent] Ff, here and in Hane 'with you to Saffron Walden. 

line 90, have a great metrical advantage 1596. 



104 KING RICHARD HI o; [act hi. 

Enter a Pursuivant.''' '"f M" 

Hast. Go on before ; I '11 talk with this good fellow. 95 

{^Exeunt Lord Stanley and Cntesby. 

How now, sirrah ! how goes the world with thee ? 
Purs. The better that your lordship please to ask. 
Hast. I tell thee, man, 'tis better with me now 

Than when thou met'st me last where now we meet : 

Then was I going prisoner to the Tovveiv ICX) 

By the suggestion of the queen's allies j^ 

But now, I tell thee — keep it to thyself — 

This day those enemies are put to death, 

And I in better state than e'er I was. 
Purs. God hold it, to your honour's good content ! 105 

Hast. Gramercy, fellow : there, drink that for me. 

\Throws him his purse. 
Purs. I thank your honour ! {Exit. 

aft. 94. Enter a Pursuivant.] Ff; Enter Hast, a Pursiuant Qq i, 2; Enter 
Hastings a Pursiuant Qq 3-8 (after 95). 95. Go on . . . fellow] Ff ; Go you 

before, He follow presently Qq. Exeunt . . .] Exit . . . Ff; Exit . . . Qq 3-8 
(after 94) ; omitted Qq i, 2. 96. How now. sirrah] Ff ; Well met Hastings 

Qq ; Sirrah, how now Pope. 97. your lordship please] Ff ; it please your 

La: Qq i, 2; it please your good Lordship Qq 3-8. 98. man] Ff; fellow 

Qq. 99. thou met'st me] Ff; I met thee Qq. 104. e'er] Ff ; euer Qq. 

106. fellow . . . me] Ff; Hastings, hold spend thou that Qq. Throws] Ff ; 

He gives Qq. 107. / thank your honotir] Ff ; God saue your lordship Qq. 
Exit.] Exit Pur. Qq 3-8, Ff; omitted Qq i, 2. 

aft. 94. Enter a Pursuivant] The 100, loi. Hastings' imprisonment 

stage-directions of Qq are in accordance has been mentioned above, i. i. 68, etc. 

with the historians, as are also the read- Rivers, according to More, was the 

ings at lines 96, 106. The name of chief mover of his disgrace with the 

the pursuivant was Hastings. Compare king. Shakespeare, i. i. 67, follows 

More (ap. Holinshed, iii. 723) : " Upon this statement. 

the verie Tower wharfe, so neare the loi. By the suggestion] by the 

place where his head was off [so] soone crafty instigation. Compare i Henry 

after there met he with one Hastings, a IV. iv. iii. 51 ; Henry VIII. iv. ii. 

purseuant of his own name." This 35. 

detail, in drama, becomes confusing; 105. God hold it] God continue it. 

and Ff reading has rightly been adopted Compare Much Ado About Nothing, i. 

by all editors. A pursuivant is, strictly i. 91. 

speaking, an attendant upon a herald. 106. Gramercy] We sometimes find 
Chaucer, Hous of Fame, line 1321, the form " gramercics," i-.^. Tnwnwg' 0/ 
speaks of " purseuauntes and heraudes, the Shrew, i. i. 41. A somewhat parallel 
That cryen riche folkes laudes." The case is the alternative use of "me- 
rest of the present passage in Shake- thought" and " methoughts " : see 
speare is in substantial agreement with note on i. iv. 9 above. 
More. 



SC. II.] 



KING RICHARD III 



105 



Enter a Priest. 

Priest. Well met, my lord ; I am glad to see your honour. 

Hast. I thank thee, good sir John, with all my heart. 

I am in your debt for your last exercise ; no 

Come the next Sabbath, and I will content you. 

\He whispers in his ear. 

Priest. I '11 wait upon your lordship. 

Enter BUCKINGHAM. 

Buck. What, talking with a priest, lord chamberlain ? 
Your friends at Pomfret, they do need the priest ; 
Your honour hath no shriving work-in hand. 1 1 5 

108, 109. Priest. Well met . . . my heart.'] Ff ; What sir John you are well 
m^< Qq. no. lam . . . exercise] ¥i\ lam beholding to yon for your last 

dales exercise Qq, in. Sabbath] sabaoth Qq i, 2; Sabboth Qq 3-7, Ff i, 2. 

He whispers . . .] Qq ; omitted Ff. 112. Priest. I'll . . . lordship] Ff; 

omitted Qq. 113. What . . , chamberlain]Fi; How now Lo : Chamberlaine, 
what talking with a priest Qq. 



109. Sir John] The title "sir" was 
habitually applied to a priest in Eng- 
land, even after the Reformation. The 
parson in the Merry Devil of Edmonton 
is Sir John ; there is Sir Hugh Evans 
in Merry Wives of Windsor ; and, in 
this play, iv, v.. Sir Christopher Urs- 
wick was a priest, not a knight. " Sir 
John " was a common nickname for a 
priest : compare Chaucer, Canterbury 
Tales, B. 4010: "This svvete preest, 
this goodly man, sir John." 

no. exercise] sermon, exposition of 
Scripture. New Eng. Diet, quotes 
Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastical, 
1604: "Sermons, commonly tearmed 
by some Prophesies or Exercises in 
market-towns, or other places." Com- 
pare J. Udall, Diotrephes, 1588 (ed. Ar- 
ber, p. 29): "Take heedaboueal things, 
that the exercises ... of prophesie 
come not vp again . . . and you must 
beware of the exercises that ministers 
haue at their meetings " ; Bishop Hall, 
Letter sent from the Tower, 1641 
(Works, ed. Pratt, 1808, vol. i. p. xlix.) : 
" Can they say . . . that I barred the 
free course of religious exercises, by 
the suppression of painful and peaceable 
preachers." Malone tqok "exercise" 
in the present case to mean " confes- 
sion." Buckingham speaks of " shriv- 
ing work" below; and, in iii. vii. 64, 



Richard's exercise with the bishops 
appears to be meditation, prayer, and 
confession combined. In Othello, in. 
iv. 41, private meditation and prayer are 
implied. 

III. Sabbath] Qq i, 2 are paral- 
leled by Merchant of Venice, iv. i. 36 
(Q 2), on which see Mr. C. K. Pooler's 
note. 

aft. 112. Enter Buckingham] In the 
historians, a knight, sent by Richard, 
fetches Hastings to the Tower, " as it 
were of courtesie." According to Halle, 
he was Sir Thomas Howard, a son of 
John, Lord Howard (see note on iii. i. 
58 above). They met the priest in 
Tower Street. The knight " brake his 
[Hastings'] tale, and said merilie to 
him : ' What, my lord, I pray you 
come on, whereto talke you so long with 
that priest ? you haue no need of a 
priest yet ' : and therwith he laughed 
vpon him, as though he would say, 
' Ye shall haue soone.' But so little 
wist the tother what he ment, and so 
little mistrusted, that he was neuer 
merier, nor neuer so full of good hope 
in his life; which selfe thing is oft 
seene a signe of change " (More, ap. 
Holinshed, iii. 723). 

115. shriving work] confession and 
absolution. Compare " shriving time," 
Hamlet, v, ii. 47. 



106 KING RICHARD III [act m. 

Hast. Good faith, and, when I met this holy man, 

The men you talk of came into my mind. 

What, go you toward the Tower ? 
Buck. I do, my lord ; but long I cannot stay there : 

I shall return before your lordship thence. 120 

Hast. Nay, like enough, for I stay dinner there. 
Buck. [Ast'dc] And supper too, although thou know'st it not. 

Come, will you go ? 
Hast. I '11 wait upon your lordship. 

[Exeunt. 

SCENE lU.— Pom/re/ Castle. 

Enter SiR RiCHARD Ratcliff, with halberds ^ carrying 
Rivers, Grey, and Vaughan to death. 

Rat. Come, bring forth the prisoners. 

Riv. Sir Richard Ratcliff, let me tell thee this : 

To-day shalt thou behold a subject die 

For truth, for duty, and for loyalty. 
Grey. God bless the prince from all the pack of you ! 5 

A knot you are of damned blood-suckers. 
Vaug. You live that shall cry woe for this hereafter. 
Rat. Dispatch ; the limit of your lives is out. 

117. The men\Y{\ Those men Qq. iiS. toward the Tower] Ff; to the tower 
my Lord (^q. 119. my lord] omitted Qq. cannot stay there] Ff ; shall not 

stay Qq. 121. Nay]¥{; 'Tis Qq. 122. Aside.] Rowe. 123. Come . . . 
lordship] Ff ; Come shall we go along Qq. 

Scene ill. 

Scene 111.] Scene iv. Pope. Pomfret Cas/Z^.] Theobald. Enter . . . ] 
Camb. ; Enter . . . carrying the Nobles to death at Pomfret. Ff; Enter Sir 
Richard Ratliffc, with the Lo : Riiiers. Gray and Vaughan. prisoners. Qq. 
I. Rat. Come . . .prisoners] Qq ; omitted Ff. 5. bless] Ff; keep Qq. 7, 8. 
Vaug. You live . . . is out] Ff ; omitted Qq. 

5, 6. pack . . . knot] See note on A Fair Quarrel, 1617. i. i : " If it be 
III. i. 182 above, and the passage so, you 're a blood-sucking churl." 
quoted there from Merry Wives of 7. Without this Hne, Vaughan would 
Windsor. be merely a walking figure in the play. 

6. blond-suckers] So Warwick, 2 It is not clear why it and line 8 should 
Henry VI. in. ii. 226, calls Suffolk : have been left out in Qq, which, in 
" Pernicious blood-sucker of sleeping the stage-directions, expressly mention 
men." New Eng. Diet, explains Vaughan. That the alteration must 
" blood-sucker " as " a blood-thirsty or have been deliberate is shown by the 
blood-guilty person." Mr. Craig illus- virtual transference, in Qq, of line 8 to 
trates from Middleton and Rowley, line 24. 



3c. Ill ] KING RICHARD III 107 

Riv. O Pomfret, Pomfret ! O thou bloody place, 

Fatal and ominous to noble peers ! lo 

Within the guilty closure of thy walls 
Richard the second here was hack'd to death ; 
And, for more slander to thy dismal seat, 
We give to thee our guiltless blood to drink. 

Grey. Now Margaret's curse is fall'n upon our heads, 15 

When she exclaim'd on Hastings, you, and I, 
For standing by when Richard stabb'd her son. ■ 

Riv. Then curs'd she Hastings, then curs'd she Buckingham, 
Then curs'd she Richard. O, remember, God, 
To hear her prayer for them, as now for us ! 20 

And for my sister and her princely sons. 
Be satisfied, dear God, with our true blood. 
Which, as thou know'st, unjustly must be spilt. 

Rat. Make haste ; the hour of death is expiate. 

Riv, Come, Grey, come, Vaughan, let us here embrace. 25 
Farewell, until we meet again in heaven. \Exeunt. 

10. ominous\ dominions Qq 2, 3; ominious Qq 4, 5. 13. seat] Ff; soule Qq; 
soile Capell conj. 14. to thee] Ff ; thee vp Qq. blood] blouds Qq 1-6. 16. 
When . . . aMi/]Ff; omitted Qq, Camb. 18, 19. Then . . . Hastings, then 
. . . Buckingham, Then . . . Richard] Qq ; Then . . . Richard, Then . . . 
Buckingham, Then . . . Hastings (3 lines) Ff. 18. then] omitted Pope. 

20. prayer] Ff; prayers Qq. 21. sons] Ff ; sonne Qq. 24. Make . . . 

expiate] Ft; Come come dispatch, the limit of your Hues is out Qq. expiate] 
F I ; expir'd Ff 2-4 ; expirate Singer (from Steevens) ; expedite Collier conj. 
26. Farewell . . . again] Ff ; And take our leauc vntill we meete Qq. 

10. Pontefract Castle had been the 18, 19. The more effective arrange- 

scene (19th June, '1322) of the execution ment in Qq leads up to the name of the 

of Thomas, Earl of Lancaster, for chief criminal. On the other hand, Ff 

rebellion against his cousin Edward 11. call our attention to the fact that Hast- 

Richard II. died there, probably by mur- ings is fulfilling the curse at the verymo- 

der, 14th Feb., 1400. In 1405, Arch- ment at which these words are spoken, 

bishop Scrope was imprisoned there 24. exfiafe] terminated. Tl^ hour 

before his execution; and in 1461, of death is come to an end. "Expiate" 

after Wakefield, Richard Nevill, Earl here is, of course, a past participle. 

of Salisbury, father of the " King- Malone refers to Sonnet xxii. 4. Nevi 

maker," was murdered there by order Eng. Diet, quotes Marlowe and Nash, 

of Margaret of Anjou. Di2o, 1594, act v. : — 

13. seat] Capell's conjecture " soil " " Cursed larbas, die to expiate 

probably explains Qq. For "seat"= The grief that tires upon thine 

site, compare Macbeth, i. vi. i. inward soul " ; 

16. The grammar of this line, in and Tofte, Honours Academic. 1610: 

which "I" is used for "me," is the "Nothing could appease ard expiat 

only valid reason for rejecting it. But, his cankered rage." Monck Mason 

in Othello, iv. ii. 3, Shakespeare has supports F 2. Steevens' "expirate" 

"Yes, you have seen Cassio and she means, of course, " breathed out " ; but 

together." the word is seldom used. 



108 KING RICHARD III [act m. 

SCENE IV.— The Tower 0/ London. 

Enter BUCKINGHAM, Derby, Hastings, the Bishop of Ely, 
RatclIFF, Lovel, with others, and take their seats at a 
table. 

Hast. Now, noble peers, the cause why we are met 

Is to determine of the coronation. 

In God's name, speak ! when is the royal day ? 
Buck. Is all things ready for the royal time ? 
Der. It is, and wants but nomination. 5 

Ely. To-morrow, then, I judge a happy day. 
Buck, Who knows the lord protector's mind herein ? 

Who is most inward with the noble duke ? 
Ely. Your grace, we think, should soonest know his mind. 
Buck. Who? I, my lord! lo 

We know each other's faces : for our hearts, 

He knows no more of mine than I of yours. 

Or I of his, my lord, than you of mine. 

Lord Hastings, you and he are near in love. 

Scene iv.] Scene v. Pope. Enter . . . ] Camb. ; Enter Buckingham, 

Darby, Hastings, Bishop of Ely, Norfolke, Ratcliffc, Loiiell, with others, at a 
Table. Ff; Enter the Lords to Councell Qq. i. Now, noble peers] Fi (Peere 

F 2); My Lords at once Qq. 3. speak] Ff; say Qq. the royal] Ff; this 

royall Qq (rayall Q 6). 4. Is] Ff ; Are Qq. ready] Ff; ftting Qq. the 
royal] Ff; that royall Qq. 5. It is] They are Rowe, Capell. wants but] 

Qq I, 2, Ff, Capell ; let but Qq 3, 5-7 ; lack but Q 4 ; yet in Q 8 ; want but Rowe. 
6. Ely] Ff; Ryu. Qq i, 2 ; Bish. Qq 3-8. Judge] Ff; guesse Qq. day] Ff; 
time Qq. 9. Your grace . . . should] Fi; Why you my Lo : me thinks you 

should Qq. 10. Who . . . lord]Qq; omitted Ff. 11, /or] Ff; but for Qq. 
13. Or . . . lord]Fi; nor I no more of his Qq. 

5. It is] This reading may have English literature. Compare Romaunt 

arisen from the use of " is " as a plural of Rose, Frag. A, 53 ; and the metrical 

verb in the preceding lire, which Ff prayer ascribed to Henry VIII.: "O 

retain. It is curious that it should God, the maker of all thing." It is 

have been kept by Qq when line 4 was found in Macbeth, iii. i. 13, where the 

altered. Perhaps what Shakespeare later Ff have "all things"; there, 

wrote in line 4 was : " Is all thing ready however, Aldis Wright takes it to be 

for the royal time ? " which Qq altered an adverb. 

to "Are all things fitting." Thus, S. mjiarrf] intimate. Compare Tour- 
when the editor of F i altered his copy neur. Revenger's Tragedy, act ii. : — 
of Q, he restored "Is" and "ready," "one 
but by an oversight left " things " un- That is most inward with the 
changed. The meaning of line 5 thus duke's son's lust " ; 
would be "All thing {i.e. everything) Measure for Measure, in. ii. 138. See 
is ready, and all that is wanting is the also Much Ado About Nothing, iv. i, 
nomination'of the date." "All thing" 247. 
occurs often for " everything " in early 



sc. iv] KING RICHARD III 109 

Hast. I thank his grace, I know he loves me well ; 1 5 

But, for his purpose in the coronation, 
I have not sounded him, nor he deliver'd 
His gracious pleasure any way therein. 
But you, my noble lords, may name the time ; 
And in the duke's behalf I '11 give my voice, 20 

Which, I presume, he '11 take in gentle part. 

Enter GLOUCESTER. 

Ely. In happy time here comes the duke himself. 
Glou. My noble lords and cousins all, good morrow. 

I have been long a sleeper ; but, I trust, 
•'My absence doth neglect no great design, 25 

Which by my presence might have been concluded. 
Buck. Had you not come upon your cue, my lord, 

, William Lord Hastings had pronounc'd your part, — 

I mean, your voice, — for crowning of the king. 
Glou. Than my Lord Hastings no man might be bolder ; 30 

His lordship knows me well, and loves me well. 
Hast. I thank your grace. 
Glou. My Lord of Ely, when I was last in Holborn, 

18. gracious\ Ff ; Graces Qq. 19. my noble lords'] Singer, Camb. ; my noble 
Lo : Qq I, 2 ; my L. Qq 3-7 ; my Honorable Lords Ff i, 4 ; my Honorable Lord 
Ff 2, 3; tny Lord Q 8; my noble lord Pope. 21. he HI] Ff; he will Qq. 

gentle] good Q 6. aft. 21. Enter Gloucester] Ff ; after 22 Qq. 22. In happy 
time] Ff; Now in good time Qq. 24. a sleeper] a sleepe Q 6. but] Q i, Ff; 
fcui now Qq 2-8. trust]'p{; hope Qq. 25. design] Fi; designes Qq. 27. 
you not] Ff; not you Qq. cue] kew Qq; Q Ff. 28. had] Ff ; had now Qq. 
28, 29. part, — . . . voice, — ] Capell, Camb. ; part : . . . voice Qq ; part ; 
. . . Voice, Ff. 32. Hast. I . . . grace] Qq ; omitted Ff. 33. Glou. My 
. . . Holborn] Fi; Glo. My Lo : 0/ Elie, Bisk. My Lo. Glo. When .'.. . 
Holborne Qq. 

17. deliver'd] expressed, made public, merilie that he had beene a sleeper 

Compare Twelfth Night, i. ii. 42; that daie " (More, ap. Holinshed, iii. 

Fletcher and Massinger, Elder Brother, 722). 

i. 2 : 27. upon your cue] Compare Henry 

" For what concerns tillage V. in. vi. 130. The theatrical phrase 

Who better can deliver it than " was derived, doubtless, from the 

Virgil French, queue ; being literally the tail 

In his Georgicks ? " of a speech." (Nares,s.f. Cue.) Buck- 

24. "The lords so sitting togither ingham continues this actor's metaphor 

communing of this matter, the protector in the next line. 

came in amongst them, first about nine 29. voice] vote So Coriolanus, II. 

of the clocke, saluting them courteous- ii. 144, in. i. 34, etc. 

lie, and excusing himselfe that he had 33. The Qq addition here is one of 

beene from them so long ; saieng those that may have arisen in the 



no KING RICHARD III [act hi 

I saw good strawberries in your garden there : 

I do beseech you send for some of them. 35 

Ely. Marry, and will, my lord, with all my heart. \Exit. 

Glou. Cousin of Buckingham, a word with you. 

\Draiving him aside. 

Catesby hath sounded Hastings in our business, 

And finds the testy gentleman so hot, 

That he will lose his head, ere give consent 40 

His master's child, as worshipfully he terms it, 

Shall lose the royalty of England's throne. 
Buck. Withdraw yourself awhile ; I '11 go with you. 

{Exit Gloucester, Buckingham following. 
Der. We have not yet set down this day of triumph. 

To-morrow, in my judgment, is too sudden ; 45 

For I myself am not so well provided 

As else I would be, were the day prolong'd. 

35. / d6\ I now Q 4. 36. Marry . . . heart] Ff; / go my Lord Qq. 

Exit.] Exit Bishop Ff ; omitted Qq. 37. of] Ff; omitted Qq, Drawing 

him aside] Capell, Camb. 40. That] Ff; As Qq. 41. child] Ff ; sonne Qq. 
worshipfully] Ff ; worshipful Qq. 43. yourself , . . go with] Ff ; you hence, 

my Lo. lie follow Qq. Exit . . . ] Camb.; Ex. Gl. Qq; Exeunt. Ff, 45. 
my judgment] Ff; mine opinion Qq. sudden] soone Qq 2-8. 

custom of the stage, and so have been was produced, the fee-simple had been 

transferred to print. More has " After alienated, under pressure from the 

a little talking with them, he said vnto Crown, to Sir Christopher Hatton, the 

the Bishop of Elie : My lord, you haue memory of whose tenure survives in 

very good strawberies at your garden the name of Hatton Garden. Stow 

in Holborn, I require you let vs haue a mentions that Ely House, in his time, 

messe of them. Gladlie, my lord " for the large and commodious rooms 

(quoth he), would God I had some thereof," was used for " divers great 

better thin':,' as readie to your pleasure and solemn feasts . . . especially by 

as that ! And therewithal! in all the the sergeants at-the-law." The chapel 

hast he sent his seniant for a messe of was founded by Bishop William "of 

strawberies." Gloucester's irrelevant Louth (d. 1298), and is a beautiful 

request to the Bishop was obviously example of the latest tjpe of thirteenth 

intended to throw dust in the eyes of century architecture. In Sir Christo- 

the lords who might suspect him. pher Hatton's time, half the undercroft 

33. Holborn] The chapel of Ely was used as a wine-shop ; the chapel. 

House, with its undercroft, remains in in the next rei<,'n, was appropriated to 

Ely Place, on the north side of Holborn. the services of the Spanish embassy. 

The site of the house was given fo his Ely House was pulled down in 1772 : 

successors by Bishop John of Kirkby for many years the chapel was used 

(d. 1290). Further additions to the gift for Welsh services, but is now occu- 

wcre made by Bishop Hotham (d. pied by a community of Romanist 

1336). At the end of the lourteentli clergy. 

centur)', Bishop .\rundell repaired the 47. prolong'd] postponed, as Much 

house. Some years before this play Ado About Nothing, iv. i. .ij6. 



sc. IV.] KING RICHARD III 111 

Re-enter the BiSHOP OF Ely. 

Ely. Where is my lord the Duke of Gloucester ? 

I have sent for these strawberries. 
Hast. His grace looks cheerfully and smooth this morning ; 50 

There 's some conceit or other likes him well, 

When that he bids good-morrow with such spirit. 

I think there 's never a man in Christendom 

Can lesser hide his love or hate than he ; 

For by his face straight shall you know his heart. 55 

t)er. What of his heart perceive you in his face 

By any livelihood he show'd to-day ? 
Hast. Marry, that with no man here he is offended ; 

For, were he, he had shown it in his looks. 
Der. I pray God he be not, I say ! 60 

Re-enter GLOUCESTER and BUCKINGHAM. 

Glou. I pray you all, tell me, what they deserve 
That do conspire my death with devilish plots 
Of damned witchcraft, and that have prevail'd 
Upon my body with their hellish charms ? 

Hast. The tender love I bear your grace, my lord, 65 

Makes me most forward in this princely presence 

aft. 47. Re-enter^ Enter Qq, Ff. 48, 49. Where . . . strawberries] arranged 

as Ff ; one line Qq ; as prose Camb. 48, the Duke of Gloucester] Ff ; protector 

Qq. 49. sent] sent straitway Hanmer. these] these same Capell. 50. 

this morning] Ff ; to day Qq. 52. that he bids] Ff; he doth bid Qq. such] 
Ff; such a Qq. 53. there's never] Ff ; there is neuer Qq; there's ne'er Pope. 

54. Can lesser] Ff; That can lesser Qq 1-7; That can less Q 8, Camb. 57. 

livelihood] Ff ; likelihood Qq. 58. he is] he 's Pope. 59. were he . . . 

showji] Ff; if he were, he would haue shewen Qq. locks] Q i, Ff; face Qq 2-8. 
60. Der. I . . . say] Qq ; omitted Ff. aft. 60. Re-enter . . . ] Enter Richard. 
and Buckingham. Ff ; Enter Glo. Qq. 61. tell me, what they] Ff; what do 

they Qq. 66. princely] Ff ; noble Qq. 

51. coMceti] ingenious notion. Com- refers to All's Well thai Ends Well, 
pare Taming of the Shrew, iv. iii. 162, i. iii. 128. 

163. " Conceit," used absolutely by 61-81. The whole of this passage is 
Shakespeare, means "fancy," as closely condensed from More. More's 
Rotneo and Juliet, 11. vi. 30. account of the arrest, the entry of the 

likes him well] So Hamlet, 11. ii. men-at arms, and the turmoil in which 
80, and numerous other passages in Stanley was wounded, are omitted by 
Shakespeare. Shakespeare, doubtless to concentrate 

57. livelihood] Ail's Well that Ends our attention on the real victim of the 
Well, I. i. 58, supplies a parallel for Ff. scene. In lines 78, 79 he reproduces 
Qq, however, have "likelihood" {i.e. More almost literally: "by St. Paul 
apparent sign), for which there is (quoth he) I will not to dinner till I see 
something to be said. Aldis Wright thy head oft'. ' 



112 KING RICHARD III [act m. 

To doom the offenders, whosoe'er they be : 

I say, my lord, they have deserved death. 
Glou. Then be your eyes the witness of their evil ! 

Look, how I am bewitch'd ! behold ! mine arm 70 

Is like a blasted sapling wither'd up : 
- And this is Edward's wife, that monstrous witch, 

Consorted with that harlot, strumpet Shore, 

That by their witchcraft thus have marked me. 
Hast. If they have done this deed, my noble lord, — 75 

Glou. \{\ thou protector of this damned strumpet, 

Talk'st thou to me of " ifs " ? Thou art a traitor. 

Off with his head ! now by Saint Paul I swear, 

I will not dine until I see the same ! 

Lovel and Ratcliff, look that it be done : 80 

The rest that love me, rise and follow me. 

\Exeunt all but Hastings, Ratcliff, and Lovel. 
Hast. Woe, woe for England ! not a whit for me ; 

For I, too fond, might have prevented this. 

Stanley did dream the boar did raze his helm ; 

And I did scorn it, and disdain to fly : 85 

Three times to-day my foot-cloth horse did stumble, 

67. whosoe'er] Ff ; whatsoeuer Qq. 69. their evil] Ff ; this ill Qq. 70. 
Look] Ff ; See Qq. 72. And this is] Ff ; This is that Qq. 74. witchcraft] 
Q I, Ff ; witchcrafts Qq 2-6. 75. deed] Ff ; thing Qq. noble] Ff ; grations Qq. 
lord, — ]Ro\ve, Camb. 77. Talk'st thou to me] Telst thou me Qq ; Tellest thou 
me Camb. 78-80. Off . . . done] Ff; Off with his head. Now by Saiftt 

Paule. I will not dine to day I sweare, Vntill I see the same, some see it done Qq. 
81. rise] Ff; come Qq. Exeunt . . . ] Camb. ; Exeunt. Manet Loucll and 

Ratcliffe, with the Lord Hastings. Ff (Manent Ff 2, 4) ; Exeunt, manet Cat. 
with Ha. Qq ; Exeunt. Manent Lovel and Catcsby, with the Lord Hastings. 
Theobald. 84. raze his helm] race his hclme Qq; rowsc our Hclmes Ff; rase 
our helms Rowe. 85. And I . , . disdain] Ff ; But I disdained it, and did 
scorne Qq. 

71. blasted sapling] Compare 3 the horse'ssides and covering the rider's 

Henry VI. in. ii. 156. feet. In 2 Henry VL iv. vii. 51, Cade 

84. raze his helm] See note on iii. ii. asks Lord Say : " Thou dost ride in a 

II above. Ff "our Helmes " is in /ooZ-r/o/A, dost thou not ?" and rebukes 

keeping with Stanley's dream as re- him for letting his " horse wear a cloak, 

corded by the chroniclers. Buf'rowse" when honester men ... go in their 

must be a printer's error. hose and doublets." In the same play. 

86. foot-cloth horse] More says that, iv. 1. 54, Suffolk reminds his murderer 
as Hastings went to the Tower, his that in times past he has " bare- 
" horsse twise or thrise stumbled with headed plodded by my foot -cloth mule." 
him. almost to the falling." A " foot- The social importance of the " foot- 
cloth horse" is a horse equipped with cloth riders." classed among the " vali- 
foot-cloths, i.e. trappings hanging over ant stomachs of the court," by Fletcher, 



sc IV.] KING RICHARD III 113 

And started, when he look'd upon the Tower, 

As loath to bear me to the slaughter-hou^e. 

O, now I need the priest that spake to me : 

I now repent I told the pursuivant, 90 

As too triumphing, how mine enemies 

To-day at Pomfret bloodily were butcher'd, 

And I myself secure in grace and favour. 

O Margaret, Margaret ! now thy heavy curse 

Is lighted on poor Hastings' wretched head. 95 

Rat. Come, come, dispatch ; the duke would be at dinner : 

Make a short shrift ; he longs to see your head. 
Hast. O momentary grace of mortal men, 

Which we more hunt for than the grace of God ! 

Who builds his hope in air of your good looks, 100 

Lives like a drunken sailor on a mast, 

Ready with every nod to tumble down 

Into the fatal bowels of the deep. 
Lov. Come, come, dispatch ; 'tis bootless to exclaim. 
Hast. O, bloody Richard ! miserable England ! 105 

87. started]F{; Qqy-S; startled Qqi-6. 89. need]F{; want Qq 1-6. 91. 
too triumphing, how'] Ff ; twere triumphing at Qq. 92. To-day] Ff; How 

they Qq. 95. lighted] lightened Qq 6, 7. 96. Rat.] Ra. Ff; Cat. Qq. 

Come, come, dispatch] Ff; Dispatch, my lord Qq. 98. grace of mortal] Qq; 

ttate of worldly Ff. 99. than] then for Qq 3-8. God] Ff; heauen Qq. 

100. hope] Ff ; hopes Qq. good] Ff; faire Qq. loi. a drtinken sailor] 

drunken Saylers Q 4. 104-107. Lov. Come . . . upon] Ff ; omitted Qq. 

Woman-Hafer, i. 2, is alluded to by 97. short shrift] More says of Hast- 

Machin and Ma.rkha.m, Dumb Knight, ings: " heauilie he tooke a priest at 

act iii., in reference to a pleader who aduenture, and made a short shrift." 

has made his fortune : — loi. The figure of the sailor on the 

" his father was mast is used again in 2 Henry IV. in. 

An honest proiner of our country i. 18-25. 

vines ; rotten armour] rusty armour. Halli- 

Yet he 's shot to his foot-cloth." well, s.v. Rotten, cites Richard of Ham- 

Steevens made the mistake of suppos- pole: "When I am rotyn, rub of the 

ing "foot-cloth" in such passages to rust." More says that Gloucester 

be a mere synonym for the horse. Mr. "with the Duke of Buckingham stood 

Craig supplies a reference from Shirley, harnessed in old ill faring briganders." 

The Brothers, c. 1626, i. i : — The brigander or brigandine was a 

" I am a gentleman jacket, composed of small plates of 

With as much sense of honour as metal between leather or quilted canvas 

the proudest, coverings, over which on the outside 

One that doth ride on's foot-cloth." velvet, silk, or satin was laid, the rivets 

87. started] Aldis Wright quotes As being visible on the outer covering. 

You Like If, IV. iii. 13, in support of See Fairholt, Costume in England (4th 

Qq. ed. 1896), ii. 91, 92. 

8 



114 KING RICHAKD HI [act m 

I prophesy the fearfull'st time to thee 
That ever wretched age hath look'd upon. 
Come, lead me to the block ; bear him my head : 
They smile at me who shortly shall be dead. 

[Exeunf. 



SCENE V. — T/ie Toiver-tvaUs. 

Enter GLOUCESTER and BUCKINGHAM in rotten armour^ 
marvellous ill-favoured. 

Glou. Come, cousin, canst thou quake and change thy colour, 

Murder thy breath in middle of a word. 

And then again begin, and stop again, 

As if thou were distraught and mad with terror ? 
Buck. Tut ! I can counterfeit the deep tragedian, 5 

Speak and look back, and pry on every side, 

Tremble and start at wagging of a straw, 

Intending deep suspicion : ghastly looks 

Are at my service, like enforced smiles ; 

And both are ready in their offices, 10 

109. who'\ Ff ; that Qq. 

Scene V. 

Scene k,] Scene vi. Pope ; omitted Ff. The Tower-icaUs.'] Theobald. 

Enter Gloucester . . . ] Eider Richard . . . Ff ; Enter Duke of Glocester and 
Buckingham in armour. Qq. rotten^ rusty Rowe. i. Come . . . colour'^ 

one line as Qq ; Come Cousin. Canst . . . colour (two lines) Ff. 3. again 

begin'] Ff; heginne againe Qq. 4. were] Ff; wert Qq. 5. Tut, I . , . 

tragcdian]Fi; Tut/eare not me, I . . . Tragedian (two Unts)Qq. j. Tremble 
. , . straw,] Tremble . . . Straw : Ff ; omitted Qq. 8. deep] deerc Q 4. 

4. distraught] Compare Romeo and put them in feare where no feare is." 
yultet, IV. iii. 49. " Distract " is used Mr. Craig also sends a parallel from 
for "distraught" in Comedy of Errors, North's Plutarch, Life of Fabius (ed. 
IV. iii. 42 ; King Lear. it. vi. 288. Rouse, i8g8, ii. 195) : " To be afeard of 

5. the deep tragedian] Mr. Craig the wagging of every straw, or to re- 
suggests that this may be an allusion gard every common prating, it is not 
to Burbage, the "deep tragedian" of the part of a worthy man of charge." 
Shakespeare's company, or to some 8. Intending] pretending, as Timon 
other well-known actor. of Athens, 11. ii. 219. See also iii. vii. 

7. at wagging of a straw] The pro- 4"; below. New Eng. Diet, qootes 

verbial use of this phrase seems to be Marriage of Witte and Science, c. 1570, 

illustrated by a passage which Mr. act iv. : " Friend Wit, are >1du the man 

Craig points out from Nash, Lenten indeed which you iw^^'xrf.^ " 
Stuffe, 1599 (McKerrow, iii. 219) : " but 12-21. See Appendix II. 
open the least wagging of a straw to 



sc. v.] KING RICHARD III 115 

At any time to grace my stratagems. 
But what, is Gates by gone ? 
Glou. He is ; and see, he brings the mayor along. 

Enter the LORD MAYOR and Catesby. 

Buck. Lord mayor, — 

Glou. Look to the drawbridge there ! 1 5 

Buck. Hark ! a drum. 

Glou. Catesby, o'erlook the walls. 

Btick. Lord mayor, the reason we have sent — 

Glou. Look back, defend thee, here are enemies. 

Buck. God and our innocency defend and guard us ! 20 

Glou. Be patient, they are friends, Ratcliff and Lovel. 

Enter LovEL and Ratcliff, with HASTINGS' head. 

Lov. Here is the head of that ignoble traitor, 

The dangerous and unsuspected Hastings. 
Glou. So dear I lov'd the man, that I must weep. 

I took him for the plainest harmless creature 2$ 

That breath'd upon the earth a Christian ; 

Made him my book, wherein my soul recorded 

The history of all her secret thoughts. 

So smooth he daub'd his vice with show of virtue, 

That, his apparent open guilt omitted — 30 

n. At any time]F{; omitted Qq. 12-14. But what . . . mayor, — ] Ff ; Enter 
Maior. Glo. Here comes the Maior. Btic. Let me alone to entertaine him. 
Lo: Maior. Qq. 16-18. Buck. Hark! . . . settt — ] Ff; Buc. The reason we 
hatie sent for you. Glo. Catesby ouerlooke the wals. Buck. Harke, I hcare a 
drumme. Qq. 16. Hark] Hark, hark Capell. 17. Catesby] Some one 

Hanmer. 18. sent — ] sent for you Capell. 20. and guard] Ff; omitted 

Qq. ■21. Be . . . Lovcl] Ff; O, O, he quiet, it is Catesby Qq. Enter 

Lovel and Ratcliff e . . .] after 20 Ff; Enter Catesby . . . Qq. 22. Lov.] 
Louell. Ff; Cat. Qq. 25. harmless] harmlessH Steevens. creature] Ff; 

maji Qq. 26. the earth] Q 4, Ff ; this earth Qq 1-3, 5-8. 27. Made] I 

made, Qq 5-8. aft. 26. Qq inserts Look ye my Lo : Maior, which Capell 

inserts at end of 34. 

25. plainest harmless] Steevens "covert'st shelter'd'st." One superla- 

altered to " plainest harmless't," citing tive is quite sufficient in each case. For 

the latter word as a common contrac- " plain," compare i. ii. 237 above, 
tion in Leicestershire and Warwick- 29. daub'd . . . virtue] New Eng. 

shire, and referring to "covert'st" in Z)tc^ explains " to daub " as " to cover 

line 33 immediately below. But with a specious exterior, to whitewash, 

"covert'st shelter'd" is exactly parallel cloak, gloss." 

to " plainest harmless," and, to be con- 30. open] evident, as Twelfth Night, 

sistent, he should have read the phrase 11. v. 175. 



116 KING RICHARD III [act hi 

I mean, his conversation with Shore's wife — 

He h'v'd from all attainder of suspects. 
Buck. Well, well, he was the covert'st shelter'd traitor 

That ever liv'd. 

Would you imagine, or almost believe, 35 

Were 't not that, by great preservation, 

We live to tell it, that the subtle traitor 

This day had plotted, in the council-house 

To murder me and my good Lord of Gloucester ? 
May. Had he done so ? 40 

Glou. What, think you we are Turks or infidels ? 

Or that we would, against the form of law, 

Proceed thus rashly in the villain's death, 

But that the extreme peril of the case. 

The peace of England, and our persons' safety, 45 

Enforc'd us to this execution ? 
May. Now, fair befall you ! he deserv'd his death ; 

And your good graces both have well proceeded, 

To warn false traitors from the like attempts. 

32. /»T;'<i] Ff ; /aid Qq, smpectf^Vi; suspect Qq. 3436. That ever . . 
Preservation] F{ ; That euer liu'd, would you haue imagined. Or almost belceue 
wert not by great preseruation Qq. 37. tell tt, that] Ff ; tell it you ? the Qq 
tell it you, the Camb. 38. This day had] Ft; Had this day Qq. 40, 

Had ... jo] Ff; What, had he so Qq; Ay, had he so Capell (conj.). 41 
you] ye Qq 3-8. 42. form] course Qq 3-8. 43. ««] Ff; to Qq. 44 

extreme] very extreame Q 4. 48. your good grcues] Ff ; you my good Lords Qq 

32. from] free from, without. Com- the lords who were present at the 

pare Othello, i. i. 132. In the passage council were either Gloucester's crea- 

from More, cited above in the note on tures, or were imprisoned as suspect of 

III. iv. 24, "he had heent from them" complicity with Hastings. 

= he had been away from them, 41. Turks or infidels] Compare 

attainder of suspects]QomY>3.rt Love's Merchant of Venice, iv. i. 32, where 

Labour's Lost, i. i. 158. the " infidel " Shylock is reminded that 

34. Capell, followed by Steevens, Antonio's misfortunes are enough to 

gave an imperfect finish to this im- " pluck commiseration of his 

perfect line by transferring the words state . . . 

" Look you, my lord mayor" from after From stubborn Turks and Tartars 

line 26 in Qq, where they obviously never train'd 

are out of place. It is difticult to see To offices of tender courtesy." 

where they were intended to stand ; Compare also the famous phrase in the 

and Ff dismiss them altogether. third Collect for Good Friday : " Have 

36. by great preservation] " And so mercy upon all Jews, Turks, Infidels 

had God holpen them, that the mis and Hereticks." 

chiefe turned vpon them that would 47. fair befall you] Compare i. iii 

haue doone it" (More). 282 above; Taming of the Shrew, v. ii 

38, 39. It would have been impos- in. 
SJble to disprove this accusation, since 



sc. v.] KING RICHARD 111 117 

Buck, I never look'd for better at his hands, 50 

After he once fell in with Mistress Shore. 
Yet had we not determin'd he should die, 
Until your lordship came to see his end ; 
Which now the loving haste of these our friends, 
Something against our meanings, have prevented : 5 5 

Because, my lord, I would have had you heard 
The traitor speak, and timorously confess 
The manner and the purpose of his treasons, 
That you might well have signified the same 
Unto the citizens, who haply may 60 

^ Misconster us in him and wail his death. 

May. But, my good lord, your grace's words shall serve, 
As well as I had seen and heard him speak : 
And do not doubt, right noble princes both, 
But I '11 acquaint our duteous citizens 65 

With all your just proceedings in this case. 

Glou. And to that end we wish'd your lordship here, 

50, Buch.'\ Ff; omitted Qq. 52-61, Qq 4, 6-8 give to Glo.; Dut. Qq 

I, 2; Clo. Qq 3, 5. 52. we not] Ff; not we Qq. 53. end] Ff; death 

Qq. 54. loving] Ff ; longing Qq. 55. Something] Ff, Pope ; Some- 

what Qq. tneanings]Fi; meaning Qq, Pope. have] hath Pope. 56. 

7] Ff ; we Qq. heard]heayKeightleY(con}.). 58. trea5on5]F{; treason Qq. 
60. haply] Ff; happily Qq. 61. Misconster] Qq 1-5, Ff 1-3; Misconstrue 

Q 6, F 4. 62. But] omitted Qq 3-8; Tut Hanmer. words] Ff; word Qq. 

63. and heard] Ff; or heard Qq. 64. do not doubt] Ff; doubt yon not Qq. 

65. our] Ff; your Qq. 66. case] Ff, Qq 7, 8; cause Qq 1-5; ease Q 6. 

67. wish'd] wish Qq 6-8. 

50, 51. Qq assign these lines to the Gloucester adds his further improve- 

Mayor, by whom they might have ment in lines 67, 68. Probably •' Dut." 

been spoken. The whole case of Jane before line 52 in Qq i, 2 is a misprint 

Shore was a disgrace in citizenship for " Buc." 

which would have touched the Lon- 55. have] The verb apparently has 

doner deeply. However, the words " I been attracted into the plural after 

never look'd for better at his hands" " friends " in the previous line, 

seem to point either to Gloucester or 61. Misconster us i7i him] misconstiue 

Buckingham as the speaker; for the our behaviour towards him. " Miscon- 

Mayor had nothing to look for at the ster " is the form common to the early 

hands of Hastings. That the words Qq and three of the folios. On Mr. 

are Buckingham's is most probable ; Daniel's hypothesis as to the text, the 

Gloucester already, in line 31, had editor of F i restored it in place of the 

brought in the mention of Shore's wife new reading " Misconstrue " in Q 6. 

to raise the Mayor's prejudice against F i has " misconsters" in As You 

Hastings. It was now Buckingham's Like It, 1. n. 277 ; " conster," Twelfth 

turn to underline the insinuation. Night, iii. i. 63 ; but " construe," 

52-61. These words are clearly a con- Merry Wives of Windsor, i. iii. 50 : 

tinuation of Buckingham's speech, yulius Casar, i. iii. 34. 11. i. 307. 



118 KING RICHARD III [act m. 

To avoid the censures of the carping world. 

Buck. But, since you come too late of your intent, 

Yet witness what you hear we did intend : 70 

And so, my good lord mayor, we bid farewell. 

\Exit Mayor. 

Glou. Go after, after, cousin Buckingham ! 

The mayor towards Guildhall hies him in all post : 

There, at your meetest vantage of the time, 

Infer the bastardy of Edward's children : 75 

Tell them how Edward put to death a citizen. 

Only for saying he would make his son 

Heir to the crown — meaning indeed his house, 

Which, by the sign thereof, was termed so. 

Moreover, urge his hateful luxury 80 

And bestial appetite in change of lust, 

Which stretcht unto their servants, daughters, wives. 

Even where his raging eye or savage heart. 

Without control, listed to make a prey. 

68. censures of the carping'] Ff; carping censures of the Qq. 69. But] 

Qq; Which Ff. come'] came Qq 3-8. too late of] too late for Capell. 

intent] Ff; intents Qq. 70, 71. Yet . . . farewell] Ff ; Yet witnesse what 

we did intend, and so my Lord adue (one line) Qq. 72. Go] Ff ; omitted 

Qq. 74. meetest] Qq 6-8, Ff ; meetst Qq 1-5. vantage] Ff; aduantage 

Qq. 82. stretcht tmto] Ff; stretched to Qq. 83. raging] Ff; litsfful Qq; 
ranging Pope. aprey]F{; his prey Qq. 

68. censures] Here, if Ff be adopted, sense in the present case is " bring in 

in the usual sense of " adverse judg- as evidence." 

ments," as in 0<A^//o, V. ii. 368; Henry 76-79. The story of one Burdet, "a 

VIII, I. i. 33, III. i. 64. Qq, transfer- marchaunt dwellyng in Chepesyd at 

ring to it the epithet "carping," give ye signe ofyecroune . . . oueragaynst 

it the simple sense of "judgments," as soper lane," was foisted into More's 

II. ii. 144 above. narrative by Halle, to explain an allu- 

6g. too late of] For the preposition sion to Burdet's execution in the text, 

compare King Lear. 1. ii. 6. Halle seems to have confused two 

73. j« a// /os^] For this phrase com- separate incidents; for Bjrdet, punished 
pare i. i. 146 above. See also Rich- in 1476, was a squire of Arrow in 
ard II. II. i. 296 ; and compare " haste- Worcestershire, and " the word spo'.en 
post-haste," Othello, i. ii. 37. Mr. m hast " for which he suffered had 
Craig notes three instances from 3 nothing to do with the crown. The 
Henry VI. viz. i. ii. 48, ill. iii. 222, citizen's name is given otherwise as 
V. V. 84. Walker. See Botwell-Stone, Shak- 

74. vantage of the time] Compare sperc's Holinshcd. p. 275, ^ote 2. 
Troiliis and Cressida, in. iii. 2. 80. luxury] lechery, as Hamlet, i. v. 

75. Infer] See iii. vii. 12 below, in 8^; Measurefor Measure, v. i. ^06; King 
Buckinfjham's account of the speech Lear,i\'.v\. iiq. Compare "luxurious," 
which Gloucester here advises him to Macbeth, iv. iii. 58. Tourneur, Reveii- 
make. Compare Timon of Athins, iii. gcr's Tragedy, twice uses the substan- 
V. 73, and Mr. Deighton s note. The tive " luxur " as a term of opprobrium. 



I 



sc. v.] KING RICHARD III 119 

Nay, for a need, thus far come near my person : 85 

Tell them, when that my mother went with child 

Of that insatiate Edward, noble York, 

My princely father, then had wars in France, 

And, by true computation of the time. 

Found that the issue was not his begot ; 90 

Which well appeared in his lineaments, 

Being nothing like the noble duke my father. 
' Yet touch this sparingly, as 'twere far off; 

Because, my lord, you know my mother lives. 
Buck. Doubt not, my lord, I '11 play the orator, 95 

As if the golden fee for which I plead 

Were for myself; and so, my lord, adieu. 
Glou. If you thrive well, bring them to Baynard's Castle ; 

Where you shall find me well accompanied 

With reverend fathers and well-learned bishops. 100 

Buck. I go ; and towards three or four o'clock 

Look for the news that the Guildhall affords. \Exit. 

85. come] comes Q 4. 87. insatiate] Ff ; vnsatiate Qq. 88. wars] wares 
Q 6. 89. true] Ff; iust Qq. 93. Yet] Ff ; But Qq. 'twere] Ff; it were 
Qq. /«''] afarrc^ 4. 94. my lord,yo7i hiow] Ff; you kttow, my Lord Qq. 
my mother] my brother Qq 5, 7, 8 ; me brother Q 6. 95. Doubt] Ff; Fear 

Qq. 97. and so . . . adieu] Ff; omitted Qq. loi, 102. I go . . . affords.] 
Ff ; About three or four e a clocke look to heare What news Guildhall affordeth, 
and so my Lord farewel. Exit.] Exx. Buck, and Catesby severally. Pope. 

85. for a need] if necessary. So 93. touch . . . far off] touch hint- 
Chapman, All Fools, act iv. : — ingly- Compare Merry Wives of 
"If tears, which so abundantly Windsor, i. i. 216; in. i. 170 above, 
distil 98. Baynard's Castle] This castJe, 
Out of my inward eyes, and for a which gives its name to a ward of the 
need city of London, was on the Thames, 
Can drown these outward." between Blackfriars and London 
87. insatiate] Qq have "unsatiate," Bridge. It was founded after the Con- 
as they have " unviolable " in 11. i. 27 quest by one Baynard, and eventually 
above. Compare Fletcher, Woman- passed to the Crown through the hands 
Hater, Hi. i : " woman, unsatiate of the Clares, Fitzwalters, and Hum- 
woman." The distinction between phrey, Duke of Gloucester. From 
the prefixes "un-" and "in-" was HenryVI.it passed to Richard, Duke 
not thoroughly recognised in Shake- of York, and remained in the possession 
speare's day, although, during his later of his family till the death of Richard 
years, it becomes more marked. Mar- III. In 1483 it was the residence of 
ston's Insatiate Coiaitess was printed the Dowager Duchess of York. In 
in 1613. In Richard H. 11. ii. 126, Ff Shakespeare's time it belonged to 
have " impossible " for Qq " unpos- William Herbert, the F.arl of Pembroke 
sible"; but they have " uncapable " in whose name is familiar to all Shake- 
Mcrchant of Venice, iv. i. 5 ; Othello, spearean students. 
IV. ii. 235. See note on iii. vii. 7 99,100. accompanied With]^o Cori- 
below. olanus, m. lii. 6, 7. 



120 KING RICHARD III [act m. 

Glou. Go, Lovel, with all speed to Doctor Shaw ; 

\To Cates.] Go thou to Friar Penker; bid them both 
Meet me within this hour at Baynard's Castle. 105 

[Exeunt all but Gloucester. 
Now will I go to take some privy order 
To draw the brats of Clarence out of sight, 
And to give order, that no manner person 
Have any time recourse unto the princes. [Exit. 

SCENE VI. — The same. A street. 

Enter a Scrivener with a paper in his hand. 

Scriv. Here is the indictment of the good Lord Hastings ; 
Which in a set hand fairly is engross'd, 
That it may be to-day read o'er in Paul's. 
And mark how well the sequel hangs togetlier : 

103-105. Go . . . Castle] Ff ; omitted Qq. 104. To Gates.] Capell. 105. 
Exeunt . . .] Exit Ff ; Exeunt Lov. and Gates, severally. Theobald. 106. 

go] Ff ; in Qq. 108. order] Ff ; notice Qq. manner] Qq 3, 4, Ff; maner of 
Qq I, 2, 5-8. 109. Have any time] Ff; At any time haue Qq. Exit.] 

Exeunt. Ff i, 2. 

Scene VT. 

Scene vi.] omitted Ff ; scene continued Pope. The same. A street.] Capell. 
with . . . hand.] Qq ; omitted Ff. i. Here] Ff; This Qq. 3. to-day] 

Ff; this day Qq. o'er] Ff ; ouer Qq. 

103. Doctor Shaw] "John Shaw, reading peculiar to Qq 3, 4. Compare 
clearke, brother to the maior " (More, ap. Spenser, Faerie Queene, iv. x. 7 : " all 
Holinshed, iii. 725). manner wights." 

104. Friar Penker] Among the 

learned men of Richard's reign enumer- eocene vi. 

ated by Bale, Holinshed (iii. 761) men- The material for this scene is 

tions " John Penketh an Augustine gathered from a passage in More (ap. 

frier of Warington in Lancashire, a Holinshed, iii. 724). "Now was this 

right subtill fellow in disputation." proclamation made within two houres 

More calls him " prouinciall of the after that he was beheaded, and it was 

Augustine friers." The name Penketh so curiouslie indicted, & so faire 

or Penkei is derived, no doubt, from the written in parchment, in so well a set 

village of Penketh on the Mersey, hand (line 2), and therewith of it selfe 

about four and a half miles south-west so long a proctsse, that euerie child 

of Warrington. Of Shaw and Penker might well perceiue that it was prepared 

More says that they were " both doctors before. For all the time, betweene his 

of diuinitie, both great preachers, both death and the proclaming, could scant 

of more learning than virtue, of more haue sufficed vnto the bare writing 

fame than learning." alone, all had it bene but in paper, and 

106. take . . . order] make some scribled foorth in hast at aduenture." 

arrangement. Qq read "take order" In the prose narrative the reflections 

at I. iv. 281 above. are given to "one that was schole- 

105. no manner person] It is interest- maister of Powles," and to a merchant 
ing to find Ff coinciding here with a that talked with him. 



sc. vii] KING RICHARD 111 121 

Eleven hours I have spent to write it over, 5 

For yesternight by Catesby was it sent me ; 

The precedent was full as long a-doing : 

And yet within these five hours Hastings liv'd, 

Untainted, unexamin'd, free, at liberty. 

Here 's a good world the while ! Who is so gross, lo 

That cannot see this palpable device ? 

Yet who so bold, but says he sees it not ? 

Bad is the world ; and all will come to nought, 

When such ill dealing must be seen in thought. [Exil. 

SCENE VU.—Baj'nard's Castle. 

Enter GLOUCESTER and Buckingham, at several doors. 

Glou. How now, how now, what say the citizens ? 
Buck. Now, by the holy mother of our Lord, 

The citizens are mum, say not a word ! 
Glou. Touch'd you the bastardy of Edward's children ? 

5. / have spent] Ff; / spent Qq; I've spent Pope. 6. sent] Ff ; brought Qq, 
7. precedent] Ff ; president Qq. 8. Hastings liv'd] Ff ; lined Lord Hastings 

Qq. 10, II. Here's . . . device] Here's . . . while. Who is . . . detiice 

Ff; Heeres . . . while. Why whoes so grosse That sees not . , . deuice Qq; 
Here's . . . while I Why, who's so gross. That secth not . . . device Camb. 
12. who] Qq 3-7, Ff; whoes Q i; whose Q 2; who's Q 8. bold] Ff; blinde 

Qq. 13. nought] naught Qq i, 2. 14. ill] Ff ; bad Qq. dealing] 

dealings Q 4. 

Scene vii. 

Scene vii. Baynard's Castle.] Theobald. Enter Gloucester . . .] Ente^ 
Richard . . . Ff; Enter Glocester at one doore, Buckingham at another Qq- 
I. How now, hownow]F{; How now my Lord Qq. 3. say]F{; andspeak Qq- 

7. precedent] the rough copy of the 10. gross] dull of perception. Com 

document, as King John, v. ii. 3. Ff pare Othello, iii. iii. 404. 
spell the word as we spell it now, in 

the present instance ; but in the pass- Scene vii. 
age just referred to, and in Merchant 

of Venice, iv. i. 220, Richard IL 11. i. 3. mum] silent. Shakespeare ordin- 

130, Henry VIIL i. ii. 91, the form in arily uses the word as an interjection, 

Ff is " president," as in Qq here. e.g. 2 Henry VI. i. ii. 89 ; Measure for 

"President" occurs again in all the Measure, v. i. 288. Compare Lodge 

early editions of Suckling's Sessions of and Greene, Looking-Glass for Lon- 

the Poets, st. 12, in Fragmenta Aurea don (Dyce, 133) : — 

(ist ed. 1646). " Strike up the drum, 

9. utitainted] without suspicion of And say no words but mum " ; 

guilt. Compare III. V. 32 above. See yNUkins, Miseries of Itiforst Marriage, 

Griffith's description of Wolsey's fall, act ii. : " But mum : they have felt 

Henry VIII. iv. ii. 14, " a man sorely thy cheek, Clare, let them hear thy 

tainted," tongue." 



122 KING RICHARD III [act m 

Buck. I did ; with his contract with Lady Lucy, 5 

And his contract by deputy in France ; 
The unsatiate greediness of his desire, 
And his enforcement of the city wives ; 
His tyranny for trifles ; his own bastardy, 
As being got, your father then in France ; lO 

And his resemblance, being not like the duke : 
Withal I did infer your lineaments, 
Being the right idea of your father, 
Both in your form and nobleness of mind ; 
Laid open all your victories in Scotland, 1 5 

Your discipline in war, wisdom in peace, 
Your bounty, virtue, fair humility ; 
Indeed, left nothing fitting for your purpose 
Untouch'd or slightly handled in discourse : 
And, when my oratory drew toward end, 20 

5-7. hh contract . . . France] Ff ; omitted Qq (/ did . . . desires one line). 
7. unsatiate] Ff ; insatiate Qq. desire] Ff ; desires Qq. 8. Aiid his . . . 

wives] Ff; omitted Qq. ii. And his . . . duke] Ff ; omitted Qq. his 

resemblance] disresemblance Collier. 14. your] one Qq 3-6. 15. open] 

vpon Qq 6-S. 18. your] Ff ; the Qq. 20. my] mine Qq 1-2. drew 

toward] Ff ; grew to Qq. end] an end Qq i, 2. 

5. Lady Lucy] See note on lines of iii. v. 92 above. Buckingham repeats 

179-82 below. Gloucester's words in that passage 

7. insatiate] Qom^zxe. iii. v. 87 and with a slight alteration. More says that 

note above. In the present case Qq Buckingham asserted that Gloucester 

and Ff reverse their previous readings, "as well in all princelie behauiour, 

9. His tyranny for trifles] Edward as in the lineaments and fauour of his 
IV. " neuer asked little, but euerie thing visage, represented the verie face of 
was hawsed aboue the measure, amerce- the noble duke his father." 
ments turned into fines, fines into right idea] exact image. For 
ransoms, small trespasses into rnis- " idea" = image, form, compare Mil- 
prison [sic], misprison into treason " ion. Apology for . . . Smectymnuus : 
(More). "whether a vehement vein throwing 

II. The construction may be ex- out indignation and scorn upon an 
panded thus: "[I touched] the fact object that merits it, were among the 
that his resemblance, if it were a aptest ideas of speech to be allowed." 
resemblance to anybody, was not to 15. Gloucester had been entrusted 
the duke." The sentence is one with the command of the Scottish 
substantival clause ; and the comma expedition of 1482, in which the 
might be deleted with advantage. English took the part of Alexander, 
More savs that, to those who knew Duke of Albany, against his brother 
the family best, there was some un- James III. The English army ad- 
certainty as to the parentage of Edward vanced as far as Edinburgh: the 
and Clarence : "as those that by their substantial ad\antage of the invasion 
fauours more resembled other knowna was the capture of Berwick, which 
men than him." war. ceded finally to England by the 

13. Being] The construction is that concluding treaty. 



sc. vn] KING RICHARD III 123 

I bid them that did love their country's good 
Cry " God save Richard, England's royal king ! " 

Glou. And did they so ? 

Buck. No, so God help me ! they spake not a word ; 

But, like dumb statues or breathing stones, 25 

Star'd each on other, and look'd deadly pale. 

Which when I saw, I reprehended them, 

And ask'd the mayor, what meant this wilful silence ? 

His answer was, the people were not used 

To be spoke to, but by the recorder. 30 

Then he was urg'd to tell my tale again : 

" Thus saith the duke, thus hath the duke inferr'd ; " 

But nothing spoke in warrant from himself. 

When he had done, some followers of mine own. 

At lower end of the hall, hurl'd up their caps, 35 

And some ten voices cried " God save King Richard!" 

And thus I took the vantage of those few ; 

" Thanks, gentle citizens and friends ! " quoth I, 

" This general applause and cheerful shout 

Argues your wisdom and your love to Richard : " 40 

And even here brake off, and came away. 

21. hid'\ bad Qq 5-8. did love] loues Qq 3-8. 23. And] Ff ; A and Qq. 

24. they . . . word] Ff ; omitted Qq. 25. statues] illegible misprint Q i ; 

statuas Steevens, Reed, Camb. 26. Star'd] Ff ; Gazde Qq. 28. meant] 

meanes Qq 6-8. 29. used] Ff ; wont Qq. 30. but] except Pope. by the] 
by their own Capell. 33. spoke] Ff ; spake Qq 1-5, 7, 8 ; speake Q 6. 35. 

At . . . of the] Ff; At the . . . of the Qq; At . . . 0' th' Pope ; At lower end 
the Capell. 37. And thus . . .few] Ff; omitted Qq. 38. gentle] Ff; 

louing Qq 1-6 ; noble Qq 7, 8. 39. cheerful] Ff ; louing Qq. 40. wisdom] 

wiscdomes Qq i. 2. love] loues Qq 3-6. 41. even here] Ff ; so Qq. 

25. statues] a trisyllable, as yulins and "thrown" must be read as a 

Casar, II. ii. 76 (see Mr. Macmillan's dissyllable (throwen). 

note), III. ii. 192. In all these cases, 30. recorder] The accent is on the 

later editors, following the advice of first syllable," as in "record." Such 

Reed, have printed the hj-brid forms emendations as those of Pope and 

" statua, statuas." The plural " sta- Capell are therefore unnecessary. The 

tuaes " is used by Bacon. In Greene, recorder's name was Fitzwilliam, "a 

Orlando Furioso (Dyce, 8g), " statues " sad man, and an honest" (More). 

(Q I "statutes") is a dissyllable. 37. the vantage of those few] the 

Similarly in Lodge and Greene, opportunity offered by those few. Com- 

Lookitig-Glass for London (Dyce, 137). pare in. v. 74 above. Halle gives the 

" statues " is a dissyllable in the line name of the ringleader of those who 

"The statues of our gods are thrown shouted for Gloucester as Nash- 

down," where Qq 1-3 pr'nt " statutes," field. 



124 KING RICHARD III [act m. 

Glou. What tongueless blocks were they! would they not 
speak ? 

Buck. No, by my troth, my lord. 

Gloti. Will not the mayor then and his brethren come ? 

Buck. The mayor is here at hand : intend some fear ; 45 

Be not you spoke with, but by mighty suit : 
And look you get a prayer-book in your hand. 
And stand between two churchmen, good my lord ; 
For on that ground I '11 make a holy descant : 
And be not easily won to our requests ; 50 

Play the maid's part, still answer nay, and take it. 

Glou. I go; and if you plead as well for them 
As I can say nay to thee for myself, 
No doubt we '11 bring it to a happy issue. 

Buck. Go, go up to the leads ! the lord mayor knocks. 55 

\^Exit Gloucester 

Enter the LORD MAYOR and Citizens. 

Welcome, my lord ! I dance attendance here ; 
I think the duke will not be spoke withal. 

42. What . . . speak] one line as Qq ; What . . . were they, Would . . . 
speakc (two lines) Ff. 43. Buck. No . . . lord] Qq; omitted Ff. 45. at 

hand] omitted Qq 3-8. intend] Fi ; and intend Qq. 46. you spoke with] Ff; 
spoken withall Qq. ^8. between]F{; betwixt Qq. 49. make]¥i; buiid Qq. 
50. And] FT; omitted Qq. easily] Q i, Ff; easie Qq 2-8. requests] Ff, 

request Qq. 51. sttll answer nay, and] Ff; say no, but Qq. 52. / go ; and 

if you] Ff; Feare not me, if thou canst Qq. 53. c'an say . . . thee] must say 

. . . them Johnson conj. 54. we 'II] Qq ; we Ff. 55. Go, go . . . knocks] ¥1; 
You shall see what I can do, get you vp to the leads. Qq. 55. Exit Gloucester.] 

Camb. ; Exit. Qq ; omitted Ff. aft. 55. Enter the Lord Mayor . . .] Enter 
the Maior . . . ¥i\ omitted Qq. 56. Welcome, my lord] Ff ; Now my L. 

Mator Qq. 57. spoke] spoken Qq 3-S. 

46. by mighty suit] by earnest en- from Steevens the original proverb, 

treaty. " Maids say nay, and take it." Mr. 

51. still . . . take it] The expression Craig finds in Middleton, A Trick to 

is proverbial. Compare Lodge and Catch the Old One, 160S, 111. i. : " You 

Greene, Looking-G lass for London do so ravish me with kindness, that I 

(Dyce, 123) : — am constrained to play the maid, and 

" Tut, my Remilia, be not thou so take it." 

coy; 53. to thee] It is to Buckingham, as 

Say nay, and take it." introducer and spokesman of the citi- 

See Two Gentlemen of Verona, 1. ii. 55. zens, that Rich.ird will have to play 

Mr. Bond, in his note on the above " the maid's part." 
passage (Arden ed. igo6, p. 13), quotes 



sc vii ] KING RICHARD 111 125 

Enter Catesby. 

Now, Catesby, what says yQUX lorjl-io niy request ? 
Gates. He doth entreat your grace, my noble lord, 

To visit him to-morrow or next day : 6o 

He is within with two right reverend fathers, 

Divinely bent to meditation ; 

And in no worldly suits would he be mov'd. 

To draw him from his holy exercise. 
Buck. Return, good Catesby, to the gracious duke ; 65 

Tell him, myself, the mayor and aldermen, 

In deep designs, in matter of great moment. 

No less importing than our general good, 

Are come to have some conference with his grace. 
Gates. I '11 signify so much unto him straight. {^Exit. 70 

Buck. Ah, ha, my lord ! this prince is not an Edward : 

He is not lolling on a lewd love-bed, 

But on his knees at meditation ; 

Not dallying with a brace of courtesans, 

But meditating with two deep divines ; 75 

Not sleeping, to engross his idle body, 

58. Now Catesby . . . request] Ff ; Here corns his seruant : how now Catesby 
what sates he Qq; Catesby . . . reqtiest Pope; Here comes his servant: how 
now, Catesby, What says he (two lines) Camb. 59. He doth . . . lord] Ff ; 

My Lord, he doth intr eat your grace Qq. 61. right] omitted Qq 3-8. 63. 

suits] Ff ; suite Qq. 65. the gracious duke] Ff; thy lord again Qq. 66. 

aldermen] Ff; Cittizens Qq. 67. in matter] Ff; and matters Qq. 68. 

than] them then Qq 6-8. 70. I'll . . . straight] Ff ; lie tell him what you say 

my Lord. Qq. 72. lolling] Pope ; lulling Qq, Ff. love-bed] Ff ; day-bed Qq. 

72. lolling] For "lulling," the form are "day-beds in all chambers," in 

common to Qq and Ff, compare the preparation for company, 

description of Covetyse in Piers the 76. engross]{3Ltten. New Eng. Diet. 

Plowman, A-text (Vernon MS.), v. no : cites W. Hzriison, Description of Eng- 

"And like a le))erne pors. lullede his land, 1577: "They (i.e. the Scotch) 

chekes." so ingrosse their bodies." Compare 

love-bed] Qq have "day-bed," i.e. Bishop HM, Contemplations, book ix. 

a couch or sofa, as in Twelfth Night, {Works, ed. Pratt, i. 186) : " It is amar- 

11. V. 54,55. New Eng. Diet, quotes vel, that neither any noise in his dying, 

Overbury's Characters, 1613 (An Ordin- nor the fall of so gross a body, called 

ary Fencer) : " Three large bavins set in some of his attendants." Spenser, 

up his trade, with a bench, which, in Fcurie Queene, 11. vi. 46, uses "en- 

the vacation of the afternoons, he uses groste " in a kindred sense : — 

as his day-bed." Compare ^Fletcher, "The waves thereof so slow and 

Rule a Wife and have a Wife, 1640, sluggish were, 

iii. I (quoted by Nares), where Margarita Engroste with mud which did 

asks her servant Altea whether there them fowle agrise." 



126 KING RICHARD Til [act 



•HI 



But praying, to enrich his watchful soul : 

Happy were England, would this virtuous prince 

Take on his grace the sovereignty thereof! 

But, sure, I fear, we shall not win him to it. 8o 

May. Marry, God defend his grace should say us nay ! 

Buck. I fear he will. Here Catesby comes again : 

Re-enter Catesby. 
Now, Catesby, what says his grace ? 

Gates. He wonders to what end you have assembled 

Such troops of citizens to come to him, 85 

His grace not being warn'd thereof before : 
He fears, my lord, you mean no good to him. 

Buck. Sorry I am, my noble cousin should 
Suspect me, that I mean no good to him : 
By heaven, we come to him in perfect love ! 90 

And so once more return and tell his grace. 

[Exit Catesby. 
When holy and devout religious men 
Are at their beads, 'tis much to draw them thence, 
So sweet is zealous contemplation. 

Enter GLOUCESTER aloft, between two Bishops. 
Catesby returns. 
May. See, where his grace stands 'tween two clergymen ! 95 

78. virtuous'\ Ff ; gracious Qq. 79. his grace'] Ff ; himselfe Qq. thereof] 
Ff; thereon Qq. 80. not]Fi; nener Qq; ne'er Capell, Camb. 81. defetid] 
Ff; for bid Qq; shield Pope. S2. here . . . ag-ajn] Ff; omitted Qq. Re-enter] 
Enter Qq, Ff. 03. N071) . . . grace] Ff ; how now Catesby, What saits your 
Lord Qq. 84. He] Ff ; My Lo. he Qq ; My lord, He Camb. 85. covie to] Ff ; 
speake with Qq. 87. He fears, my lord] Ff; My Lord, hefeares Qq. 90. we 
come . . . love] Ff ; / come in perfect lone to him Qq. perfect] perfit Ff. 

91. Exit Catesby.] Qq 1-6; Exit. Ff. 93. much] Ff; hard Qq. thence] 

hence Qq 5-8. 94. Enter Gloucester . . .] Enter Richard . , . Ff; Enter 

Rich, with two Bishops a loste. Q i; Enter Rich. 7vith . . . aloft. Q 2; Enter 
Rich, and . . . aloft. Qq 3-8. Catesby returns] Theobald; Catesby again, 

below. Capell. aft. 94. ScBNB vni. Pope. 95. his grcue] Ff ; he Qq. 

'tween] tweene Ff ; between Qq. 

80. win] persuade, as Richard II. 11. on himself the responsibility of the 

iii. 163. message, which, in the prose 

83-95. This passage is a close follow- chroniclers, is sent back to the Pro- 

ing of the chroniclers. Shakespeare tector by the mayor and aldermen, 

introduces Catesby as the messenger aft. 94. Enter Gloucester aloft, etc.] 

employed by Richard, and makes More's words, " with a byshop on 

Buckingham, for brevity's sake, take eucry hand of him," are omitted by 



sc. vii] KING RICHARD III 127 

Buck, Two props of virtue for a Christian prince, 

To stay him from the fall of vanity : 

And see, a book of prayer in his hand ! — 

True ornaments to know a holy man. , 

Famous Plantagenet, most gracious prince, loo 

Lend favourable ear to our requests ; 

And pardon us the interruption 

Of thy devotion and right Christian zeal. 
Glou. My lord, there needs no such apology : 

I do beseech your grace to pardon me, 105 

Who, earnest in the service of my God, 

Deferr'd the visitation of my friends. 

But, leaving this, what is your grace's pleasure ? 
Buck. Even that, I hope, which pleaseth God above, 

And all good men of this ungovern'd isle. 1 10 

Glou, I do suspect I have done some offence 

That seems disgracious in the city's eye. 

And that you come to reprehend my ignorance. 
Buck. You have, my lord : would it might please your grace, 

On our entreaties, to amend your fault. 1 1 5 

Glou. Else wherefore breathe I in a Christian land ? 
Buck. Know, then, it is your fault that you resign 

The supreme seat, the throne majestical, 

The sceptred office of your ancestors, 

Your state of fortune and your due of birth, 120 

98, 99. And see . . . man] Ff ; omitted Qq. ornaments] ornament Dyce. 
loi. ear] Ff; eares Qq. our] Q i, Ff ; my Qq 2-8. requests Ff; request 
Qq. 105. do beseech your grace to] Ff ; I rather do beseech you Qq. 106. 
my God] God F 2; th' high God Ff 3, 4. 107. Deferr'd] Ff; Neglect Qq. 
H2. eye] Ff; eyes Qq. 114. You . . . grace] one line as Qq; You . . . 
Lord: Would . . . Gmc^ (two lines) Ff. might] Ff; omitted Qq. 115. 
Oti] Ff; At Qq. your] Ff; that Qq. 117. Know then] Ff ; Then know 
Qq. 120. Your . . . birth] Ff ; omitted Qq. due] Deaw Ff i, 2. 

Holinshed, but adopted by Halle. " As for these causes he was in highest 

From this point to the end of the grace with the king, so hee was the 

scene, Shakespeare expands his au- more disgracious or hated of the 

thorities freely. people." For " disgrace " used in this 

99. ornametits] refers to the bishops sense, compare Puttenham (?), Arte of 
as well as the prayer-book. This line English Poesie, iii. 12 (Arber, 181) : 
is the mayor's criticism of the whole " This insertion ... is no disgrace 
scene in the gallery above. but rather a bewtie and to very good 

112. disgracious] used again below, purpose." 
IV. iv. 178. New Eng. Did. quotes 118. majestical] Compare Hcnfy V, 
Speed, Hist. Great Britaiiie, 1611 : iv. i. 284. 



128 KING RICHARD III [act m. 

The lineal glory of your royal house, 

To the corruption of a blemish'd stock ; 

Whiles, in the mildness of your sleepy thoughts, 

Which here we waken to our country's good, 

This noble isle doth want his proper limbs ; 125 

His face defac'd with scars of infamy, 

His royal stock graffd with ignoble plants, 

And almost should'r^d in the swallowing gulf 

Of dark forgetfulness and deep oblivion. 

Which to recure, we heartily solicit 130 

Your gracious self to take on you the charge 

And kingly government of this your land — 

Not as protector, steward, substitute. 

Or lowly factor for another's gain ; 

But as successively, from blood to blood, 135 

123. Whiles] Ff ; Whilst Q i ; Whitest Qc[ 2-8 ; While Pope. 124. our] 

vour Q 6. 125. This] Qq ; The Ff. hts] her Qq i, 2. 126. His] Ff; 

Her Qq. scars] stars Qq 2-4. 127. His . . . plants] Ff ; omitted Qq. 

His] Her Pope. 128. in the] in this Qq 3-8; into th' Hanmer. 129. dark] 
Ff; blind Qq. deep]F{; darke Qq. i^o. recure] recouerQqd-S. 131,132. 
Your . . . land] Ff ; Your grafious selfe to take on voii the soueraingtie thereof 
Qq. 134. Or] Nor Qq 3-8. 

125-127. his . . . his . . . His] We shoulders in," quoting Spenser's /?k»«£5 
naturally should expect " her," which 0/ Rome, st. 16, where the sea "in a 
we find in Qq, lines 125, 126. But great mountaine heap't " is " eftsoones 
the repetition of " his" and its occur- of thousand billowes shouldred narre." 
rence in a line peculiar to Ff (127) This passage, alleged with much doubt 
suggest that it is deliberate and not by Malone, is rightly quoted by Aldis 
merely an error. VVright in support of the meaning 

127. Malone implies that this line is " thrust violently out of place," as im- 
intended to recall the text of Dr. Shaw's plied above. Johnson proposed 
sermon at Paul's Cross, viz. Wisdom " smoulder'd." f .c. "almost smother'd, 
IV. 3, " Spuria vitilamina non agent covered and lost." 

radices altas." 130. recure] Compare Beaumont 

128. shouldered in] The metaphor, and Fletcher. Faithful Shepherdess, v. 
as Hanmer and Steevens understood, 5 : — 

is that of violent jostling in a crowd. " That may raise thee, and re-cure 

Compare Milton, Apology for . . . All thy life that was impure." 

Smectymnuus : " That just government 134. factor] agent, used again below, 

which pride and ambition . . . hath iv. iv. 72. Compare 1 Henry IV. ni. 

shouldered out of the church." Stee- ii. 147. The word is still used in Scot- 

vens quotes Drayton, Barons' Wars, i. land of a land-agent. 
St. 45 : — 135. successively] by right of succes- 

" Strongly inveigled with delightful sion. So in Chapman {?), Alphonsus, 

hope, act i., the King of Bohemia speaks in 

Stoutly t' affront and shoulder the name of 

with debate." " The seven prmces of the German 

Buckingham says that England, in her empire, 

adverse circumstances, is almost thrust To whom successively it doth 

into the gulf of oblivion. Malone be- belong 

lieved that the meaning was " up to the To make election of our emperors." 



sc. VII.] KING RICHARD III 129 

'•^ Your right of birth, your empery, your own. 
For this, consorted with the citizens, 
Your very worshipful and loving friends, 
And by their vehement instigation, 

In this just cause come I to move your grace. 140 

Glou. I cannot tell, if to depart in silence, 
Or bitterly to speak in your reproof. 
Best fitteth my degree or your condition : 
If not to answer, you might haply think 
Tongue-tied ambition, not replying, yielded 1 45 

To bear the golden yoke of sovereignty, 
Which fondly you would here impose on me : 
If to reprove you for this suit of yours, 
So season'd with your faithful love to me. 
Then, on the other side, I check'd my friends. 1 50 

Therefore, to speak, and to avoid the first, 
And then, in speaking, not to incur the last. 
Definitively thus I answer you. 
Your love deserves my thanks ; but my desert 
Unmeritable shuns your high request. 155 

First, if all obstacles were cut away, 
And that my path were even to the crown, 
As the ripe revenue and due of birth ; 

138. very . . . loving'\ worshipfull and very louing Qq 3-8. 140. cause'] 

Ff; sute (^(\. 141. cannot tell, if] Ff; know not whether Qq 1-4; know not 
whither Qq 5-8. 144-53. If not . . . answer you] Fi; omitted Qq. 144. 

If not] For not Ff 2-4. 152. not to] not Pope. 158. As the] Ff ; As my Qq. 
ripe] Q i, Ff ; right Qq 2-8. of birth] Ff ; by birth Qq. 

See also note on iii. i. 73 above. Mr. territorial sovereignty. In Titus An- 

Craig quotes Peele, Anglorum Ferie dronicus, i. i. 22, we find " the Roman 

(Bullen, ii. 347) : — empery " ; but, three lines before, the 

" In her hereditarie royal right word has the more general sense of 

Successively to sit enthronized." sovereign power. Marlowe, in the 

136. empery] empire. Compare two parts of Tamburlaine, gives it the 

Cymbeline, i. vi. 120 : — specific sense of " empire " three times, 

" A lady and the more general sense once. 

So fair, and fasten'd to an em- 143. degree . . . condition] Compare 

pery " 2 Henry IV. iv. iii. 1-6. 

(see Prof. Dowden's note) ; Chap- 150. / checked] i.e. I should check. 

man {}), Alphonsus, act ii,: — 155. Unmeritable] used again in 

" How far is Richard now unlike Jttlirts Ccvsar, iv. i. 12. 

the man 158. revenue] The accent, until a 

That cross'd the seas to win an comparatively recent date, was usually 

empery." on the second syllable. Compare 

In these passages the word implies Troilus and Cressida, 11. ii. 206. But 



130 KING RICHARD III [act m. 

Yet so much is my poverty of spirit, 

So mighty and so many my defects, i6o 

That I would rather hide me from my greatness, 
Being a bark to brook no mighty sea, 
Than in my greatness covet to be hid, 
And in the vapour of my glory smother'd. 
But, God be thank'd ! there is no need of me ; 165 

And much I need to help you, were there need : 
The royal tree hath left us royal fruit, 
Which, mellow'd by the stealing hours of time, 
Will well become the seat of majesty. 
And make, no doubt, us happy by his reign. 170 

On him I lay that you would lay on me, 
The right and fortune of his happy stars. 
Which God defend that I should wring from him ! 
Buck. My lord, this argues conscience in your grace ; 

But the respects thereof are nice and trivial, 175 

All circumstances well considered. 

You say that Edward is your brother's son : 

So say we too, but not by Edward's wife ; 

For first was he contract to Lady Lucy — 

161. That I would] Ff ; As I had Qq. 165. thank'd I there »J]Ff; thanked 
there's Qq. of nie']for me Qq 3-8. 166. were there need'] Ff ; if need were 

Qq. 170. 710 doubt, us] us (tie doubt) Ff2-4; us doubtless Pope. 171. 

that you] hi; what you Qq. 179. was he]Fi; he was Qq. contract] 

contracted Q 6. 

Shakespeare also accentuates the first I^leanor Butler, a daughter of the Earl 

syllable, as here and in Richard II. 11. of Shrewsbury, was Edward's troth- 

i. 226. plight wife at the time of his marriage 

173. writig] Compare 3 Henry VI. with Elizabeth. The statement rested 

II. i. 154. on the evidence of only one witness ; 

175. the respects thereof] the con- and, at Henry VII. 's accession, every 

siderations on which your arguments copy of the scandalous petition was 

are founded. Compare Much Ado destroyed, and an alternative legend 

About Nothing, n. '\\\.i']6; King Lear, grew up. Holinshed's story is that, 

I. i. 251; and " unrespective boys " at just before Edward had fallen in love 

IV. ii. 29 below. with Lady Grey, there had been talk of 

nice] scrupulous, fastidious, as 5 his marriage with Bona of Savoy, sister 

Henry VI. iv. vii. 58 ; Taming of the to the Queen of France ; and Warwick 

Shrew, in. i. 80. had been sent to Louis XL at Tours, 

179-82. Shakespeare followed More to arrange such a treaty. The Comte 

in the details of Edward IV.'s supposed de Dammartin was about to come to 

marriage or contract. In the petition England and there conclude prelimin- 

ratified by the Parliament of January, aries, when Edward pledged his honour 

1484, when the crown was settled upon to Lady Grey. His mother was so 

Richard, it was stated that Lady annoyed that, " vnder pretext of hir 



sc. vii] KING RICHARD 111 131 

Your mother lives a witness to his vow — l8o 

And afterward by substitute betroth'd 

To Bona, sister to the king of France. 

These both put off, a poor petitioner, 

A care-craz'd mother to a many sons, 

A beauty-waning and distressed widow, 185 

Even in the afternoon of her best days, 

Made prize and purchase of his wanton eye, 

Seduc'd the pitch and height of his degree 

To base declension and loath'd bigamy : 

By her, in his unlawful bed, he got 190 

This Edward, whom our manners call the prince. 

More bitterly could I expostulate. 

Save that, for reverence to some alive, 

I give a sparing limit to my tongue. 

Then, good ray lord, take to your royal self 195 

This profFer'd benefit of dignity ; 

If not to bless us and the land withal, 

Yet to draw forth your noble ancestry 

From the corruption of abusing times, 

Unto a lineal true-derived course. 200 

180. his] Ff ; that Qq. 183. J>ut off] Ff ; put by Qq. 184. mother to] Ff ; 
mother of Qq. a many] Q i, Ff ; many Qq 2-8. sons] Ff ; children Qq. 

187. wanton] Ff; lustful Qq. 188. his degree] Ff; all his thoughts Qq. 

191. call]Fi; term Qq. igS. forth . . . ancestry] Ff ; out your roy all stocke 
Qq. 199. abusing times] Ff; abusing time Qq 1-5; a busing time Q 6; a 

busie time Qq 7, 8. 200. true-derived] Theobald ; true, derived Pope. 

dutie to Godward," she determined to " Down with your dust, our morning's 

break the engagement by any means, purchase." 

and asserted that Edward already was 188. /"t^cA] a metaphor from falconry. 

ensured to Elizabeth Lucy. When Compare Richard II. 1. i. log ; Julius 

called upon for evidence, the lady con- Ccesar, i. i. 78. 

fessed that Edward had seduced her 189. declension] Compare Hamlet, 

under a vague promise of marriage, 11. ii. 149, where the word is used of a 

but that no formal contract had passed gradual change to the worse. Here it 

between them. implies a sudden apostasy from the 

184. care-craz'd] shattered by care, duties of station. 

Compare iv. iv. 17 below ; Midsummer- loath'd bigamy] The use of "bigamy " 

Night's Dream, i. i. 92, in which cases in connection with a marriage with 

"crazed" means "cracked, broken." a widow, as More uses it, is curious. 

Mr. Craig refers to the phrase " a crazy " Loath'd " = loathsome : see note on 

boat " for a damaged, broken boat. In " unmanner'd," i. ii. 39 above, and 

Lincolnshire " crazy " is still applied to compare " effeminate " for " feminine " 

cracked china, etc., e.g. ''acrazy plate", at line 211 below. 

187. purchase] booty, as 1 Henry 192. expostulate] expound, discuss 

IV. II. i. loi. Compare Wilkins, the matter. Compare Hamlet, 11. ii. 86. 

Miseries of Inforst Marriage, act iv. : 199. the corruption of abusing times] 



132 KING RICHARD III [act m. 

May. Do, good my lord ! your citizens entreat you. 

Buck. Refuse not, mighty lord, this proffer'd love. 

Cates. O ! make them joyful, grant their lawful suit. 

Glou. Alas ! v^\iy would you heap this care on me ? 

I am unfit for state and majesty. 205 

I do beseech you, take it not amiss ; 
I cannot nor I will not yield to you. 

Buck. If you refuse it, as, in love and zeal, 

Loath to depose the child, your brother's son — 

As well we know your tenderness of heart, 210 

And gentle, kind, effeminate remorse, 

Which we have noted in you to your kindred, 

And egally, indeed, to all estates — 

Yet know, whether you accept our suit or no, 

Your brother's son shall never reign our king ; 215 

But we will plant some other in the throne, 

To the disgrace and downfall of your house ; 

And in this resolution here we leave you. 

Come, citizens : 'zounds ! I '11 entreat no more. 

Glou. O ! do not swear, my Lord of Buckingham. 220 

\Exit Buckingham with the Citizens. 

Cates. Call him again, sweet prince ; accept their suit : 
If you deny them, all the land will rue it. 

Glou. Will you enforce me to a world of cares? 

202. Buck. Refuse . . . love] Ff ; omitted Qq. 204. this care] Ff; these 

cares Q i ; thosr cares Qq 2-8. 205. majesty] Ff ; dignitie Qq. 212. 

kindred]'Pi; kin Qq. 214. know]Fi; omitted Qq. whether] Qq; where 

Ff; w/j«V Theobald. accept] except Q 6. 219. 'zounds I I'll]Qq; we will 
Ff. 220. Glou. O . . , Buckingham] Qq; omitted Ff. Exit. . .Citizens.] 
Capell. 221. him] Ff ; them Qq. Pope. sweet prince] Ff, Pope ; my lord 

Qq. accept] Ff, Pope ; and accept Qq. 222. If you . . . rue it] Ff ; Ana. 
Doe, good my lord, least all the land do rew it Qq. 223. Will] Ff ; Would 

Qq. cares] Ff ; care Qq. 

the corruption which it has suffered by 213. egally] Nares notes that in 
periods of abuse. "Abusing time" of Puttenham (?), Arte of English Poesie, 
the earlier Qq would imply that the i. 20, the forms " egall " and " equall " 
abuse came in the natural course of occur within a few lines of each other, 
time : the " abusing times " of Ff are In the same passage " egally " and 
the years following Edward's marriage " unegall " are also employed. Shake- 
to Elizabeth. speare uses "egal." Titus Andronicus, 

207. nor I will tioi] Compare the iv. iv. 4. Mr. Craig, among other 

double negative below, iv. iv. 496. references, gives one from Surrey in 

211. remorse] in the common Shake- TottcVs Miscellany, 1557 (ed. Arber, p. 

spearean sense of " pity," as Macbeth, 27) : " The egall frend, no grudge, no 

h V. 45. strife." 



sc. vii] KING RICHARD III 133 

Call them again : 1 am not made of stones, 

But penetrable to your kind entreaties, 225 

Albeit against my conscience and my soul. 



Re-enter BUCKINGHAM and the rest. 

Cousin of Buckingham, and sage, grave men, 
^ Since you will buckle fortune on my back, 

To bear her burthen, whether I will or no, 

I must have patience to endure the load : 230 

But, if black scandal or foul-fac'd reproach 

Attend the sequel of your imposition, 

Your mere enforcement shall acquittance me 

From all the impure blots and stains thereof; 

For God doth know, and you may partly see, 235 

How far I am from the desire of this. 
May. God bless your grace ! we see it, and will say it. 
Glou. In saying so, you shall but say the truth. 
Buck. Then I salute you with this royal title — 

Long live King Richard, England's worthy king! 240 

AIL Amen. -~..-^- 

Buck. To-morrow may it please you to be crown'd ? 
Glou. Even when you please, for you will have it so. 

224. Call] Ff ; Well, call Qq, after agaiiil Exit Catisby. Theobald. 
stones] stone Pope, Camb, 225. entreaties] Ff ; intreatcs Qq 1-3, 5-7. aft. 226. 
Re-enter . . .] Enter . . . Ff ; omitted Qq. 227. sai^e] Ff ; you sage Qq. 
229. her] the Qq 3-8. whether] where F i ; whe'r Steevens (conj.). 231. 
foul-fac'd] soule-fac't Q 2 ; sofoule-fac't Qq 3-8 ; four-fac'd F 3. 235. doth 
know] Ff ; he knows Qq. 236. of this] Ff; thereof Qq. 239. roval] 
Ff; kingly Qq. 240. King] omitted Qq i, 2, worthy] Ff; rojaW Qq. 
241. AIL] Ff; Mai. Qq; May. and Cit. Camb. 242. may] Ff; will Qq, 
243. please, for] Ff; will, since Qq. 

225. e»<r«a<j«] For other substantives 2^2. To-morrow] The interview 
of this kind, compare "suspects," for with the Mayor and citizens took place 
"suspicions," i. iii. 89 above; "ex- on 25th June, 1483^^ the day follow- 
claims " for "exclamations," iv. iv. 135 ing BucT;Tngh'an?s1iil-omened speech at 
below; "relent" for " relentment " in the Guildhall. Richard was crowned 
Lodge, Wounds of Civil War, act ii. ; eleven days later, on_6th July. His ac- 
" repent " for " repentance " in Greene, cession was dated from 26th June, when 
Orlando Furioso (Dyce, 106). he went publicly to Westminster Hall 

232. your imposition] the charge and there took on him the government 
which you lay upon me. Compare of the realm. 
All's Well that Ends Well, iv. iv. 29. 



134 KING RICHARD III [act m. 

Buck. To-morrow, then, we will attend your grace ; 

And so most joyfully we take our leave. 245 

Glou. Come, let us to our holy work again. 

Farewell, my cousin ; farewell, gentle friends, 

\Exe7int. 

245. And so . . . have] Ff; omitted Qq. 246. Glou.] Johnson adds To 

the Clergymen. work] Ff; taske Qq. 247, my cousin] Pope; my Cousins 
Ff ; good coosine Qq. 



ACT IV 

SCENE I. — Before the Tower. 

Enter, on one side, QuEEN ELIZABETH, the DuCHESS OF 
York, and the Marquess of Dorset ; on the other, 
Anne, Duchess of Gloucester, leading Lady 
Margaret Plantagenet, Clarences young daughter. 

Duch. Who meets us here ? my niece Plantagenet, 
Led in the hand of her kind aunt of Gloucester ? 
Now, for my life ! she 's wandering to the Tower, 
On pure heart's love to greet the tender princes. 
Daughter, well met ! 

Anne. God give your graces both 5 

A happy and a joyful time of day ! 

Q. Eliz. As much to you, good sister ! Whither away ? 

Anne. No farther than the Tower, and, as I guess, 

Act IV. Scene /.] Act ni. Scene viii. Rann (Johnson conj.). Before the 
Tower.] Theobald. Eater . . . datighttr.} Malone, Camb. (after Theobald) ; 
Enter Quee. mother, Dnchesse of Yorke, Marques Dorset, at one doore. Diichesse 
of Glocest. at another doore. Qq ; Enter the Queene, Anne Dnchesse of Gloucester, 
the Duchesse of Yorke, and Marquesse Dorset. Ff. i. Who . . . Plantagenet] 

one hne as Qq ; Who . . . hecrc ? My Neece Plantagenet (two lines) Fi. 2-6. 
I.,ed . . . time of day.] Fi; omitted Qq. 4. /"n'uf^s] Theobald ; Prince Ff. 

5, 6. God give . . . time of day] arranged as Pope, Camb. ; God give . . . a 
happie And . . . time of day Ff. 7. As much . . . away] Ff; Sister well 

met, whether awaie so fast Qq. 8. Anne.] Ff; Duch. Q i ; Du. Q 2 ; Dut. 

Glo. Qq 3-8. 

1. niece] Compare " cousins," 11, ii. 4. On pure heart's love] Compare 
8 above ; and " niece " in King John, Measure for Measure, iv. i. 37, " on 
II. i. 469. your knowledge"; Atitony and Cleo- 

2. in the hand] Compare Coriolanus, patra. iii. vi, 57, " on my free 
V. iii. 23 ; Titus Andronicus, v. iii. 138. will." 

135 



136 KING RICHARD III [act iv. 

Upon the like devotion as yourselves, 
To gratulate the gentle princes there. lo 

Q. Eliz. Kind sister, thanks: we'll enter all together. 

Enter Brakenbury. 

And, in good time, here the lieutenant comes. 

Master lieutenant, pray you, by your leave. 

How doth the prince, and my young son of York ? 

Brak. Right well, dear madam — by your patience, 1 5 

I may not suffer you to visit them : 
The king hath strictly charg'd the contrary. 

Q. Eliz. The king ? who 's that ? 

Brak. I mean the lord protector. 

Q. Eliz. The Lord protect him from that kingly title ! 

Hath he set bounds between their love and me ? 20 

1 am their mother : who shall bar me from them ? 

Duck. I am their father's mother : I will see them. 

An?ie. Their aunt I am in law, in love their mother: 
Then bring me to their sights ; I '11 bear thy blame, 
And take thy office from thee, on my peril. 25 

Brak. No, madam, no, I may not leave it so : 

I am bound by oath ; and therefore pardon me. [Exit. 

10. gentle] Ff; tender Qq. aft. ir. Enter Brakenbury.] Capell, Camb. ; Enter 
Lieutenant. Qq i, 2; Enter the Lieutenant of the Tower. Qq 3-8. 14. How 

doth . . . York] Ff ; How fares the Prince Qq 1-5 ; Ho7v feares the Prince 
Q 6. 15. Brak.] Lieu. Qq, Ff (and lines 18, 26). Right ivell . . . 

patience] Ff ; Wei Madam, and in health, but by your leaue Qq. 16. them] Ff ; 
him Qq. 17. strictly] Ff; straightlie Qq. 18. who 's that] Ff ; whie, 

whose that Qq i, 2 ; why, who 's that Qq 3-7 ; why who is that Q 8. / mean] 
Ff; / eric you mercie, I mcane Qq. 20. between] Ff; bettvixt Qq. 21. 

shall bar] Ff ; should kccpc Qq. 22. Duch.] Du. yor. Q i ; Duch. Yorke. 

Ff; omitted Qq 2-8. / am their father's mother : I] Ff; / am their Fathers, 

Mother, / Q i ; / am their father, Mother, and Qq 2-S (theirs Q 4). 24. Then 
, . . sights] Ff; Then fearc not thou Qq. 26, 27. No, madam . . . pardon 

me] Ff ; / doe beseech your graces all to pardon me : I am bound by oath, I may 
not doe it. Qq. Exit] Exit Lieutenant. Ff ; omitted Qq. 

g. Upon the like devotion] This may 10. gratulate] So Titus Andronicus, 

mean "from the same impulse of de- i. i. 221; Lodge and Greene, Looking- 

votion," in which case the use of Glass for London (Dyce, 117): "See 

" upon " is parallel to that of " on," where she comes to gratulate my 

already noticed in line 4. It may also fame." 

mean " upon the same devout errand " ; 24. their sights] Compare Timon of 

" with the same devout object." Athens, i. i. 255. 



sc. i] KING RICHARD III 137 

Enter LORD STANLEY. 

Stan. Let me but meet you, ladies, one hour hence, 
And I '11 salute your grace of York as mother 
And reverend looker-on of two fair queens. 30 

\To Anne.] Come, madam, you must straight to West- 
minster, 
There to be crowned Richard's royal queen 

Q. Eliz. Ah ! cut my lace asunder. 

That my pent heart may have some scope to beat, 

Or else I swoon with this dead-killing news ! 35 

Anne. Despiteful tidings ! O unpleasing news ! 

Dor. Be of good cheer : mother, how fares your grace ? 

Q. Eliz. O Dorset, speak not to me, get thee gone ! 
Death and destruction dog thee at thy heels ; 
Thy mother's name is ominous to children. 40 

If thou wilt outstrip death, go, cross the seas, 
And live with Richmond, from the reach of hell : 
^ Go, hie thee, hie thee from this slaughter-house, 
Lest thou increase the number of the dead. 
And make me die the thrall of Margaret's curse, 45 

Nor mother, wife, nor England's counted queen ! 

Stan. Full of wise care is this your counsel, madam. 
Take all the swift advantage of the hours : 

28. one hour] Ff ; an houre Qq 1-4 ; at an houre Qq 5-8. 30. reverendl Ff, 

CI?,; reuerenteC^i; reuerent Qq 2-7. 31. To /4«Mf] Capell, Camb. straight] 
Ff; go with me Qq. 33-35- Ah . . . news] arranged as Ff ; O . . . heart. 

May . . . else I sound With . . . newes Qq. 33. Ah] Ff ; O Qq. asunder] 
Ff; in sunder Qq. 35. swoon]Yi; soundQq. dead ■ killing] Fi; dead kill- 

ing Qq 1-4; dead liking Qq 5-8 ; dead-striking Capell conj, 36. Despiteful 

. . . news]F{; omitted Qq. 37c Be . . . mother]F{; Madame, haue comfort 
Qq. 38. gone] Ff ; hence Qq. 39. dog] Qq, Ff 3, 4 ; dogges Ff i, 2. 

thy heels] Fi; the heeles Qq. 41. outstrip] ouerstrip Qq 6-8. 42. reach] 

race Qq 6-8. 48. hours] Ff ; time Qq. 

33. cut my lace] See Prof. Case's below, is formed rather exceptionally, 

nolQon Antony and Cleopatra, I. m. 71, for this play. Mr. Craig notes the oc- 

and compare Winter's Tale, iii. ii. 174. currence of the Irishism " kill her dead " 

35. dead-killing] The first part of the in Midsummer-Night's Dream, in. ii. 
compound is merely intensitive. In 269, and " kill'd me dead" in Titus 
this play, the ordinary type of com- Andronicus, in. i. 92. 
pound epithet is that of which the first 48-50. Stanley, of course, is speak- 
part qualifies the second, and may be ing to Dorset. "My son" is Rich- 
expressed as an adverb, ^.g'., "childish- mond, whose mother, Lady Margaret 
foolish," I. iii. 142, "deep-revolving," Beaufort, Stanley had married About 
IV. ii. 42. " Ill-dispersing," in line 52 1482. 



138 KING RICHARD III [act iv 

You shall have letters from me to my son, 

In your behalf, to meet you on the way : 50 

Be not ta'en tardy by unwise delay. 

Duch. O ill-dispersing wind of misery ! 

O my accursed womb, the bed of death ! 

A cockatrice hast thou hatch'd to the world, 

Whose unavoided eye is murderous. 55 

Stan. Come, madam, come ; I in all haste was sent, 

Anne. And I in all unwillingness will go. 

O ! would to God that the inclusive verge 

Of golden metal, that must round my brow, 

Were red-hot steel, to sear me to the brains ! 60 

Anointed let me be with deadly venom, 

And die ere men can say, God save the queen ! 

Q. Eliz. Go, go, poor soul, I envy not thy glory ; 
To feed my humour, wish thyself no harm. 

Anne. No ! why? When he that is my husband now 65 

Came to me, as I follow'd Henry's corse, 
When scarce the blood was well wash'd from his hands, 
Which issued from my other angel husband. 
And that dear saint which then I weeping follow'd — 
O ! when, I say, I look'd on Richard's face, 70 

This was my wish : " Be thou," quoth I, " accurs'd, 

50. In your . . . way] Ff; To meete you on the way, and welcome you Qq. 
51. ta'en] ta'ne Ff; tane Q i ; taken Qq 2-8. 52. ill-dispersing] hyphened 

Theobald. 56. Come, madam, come] Ff ; Come Madam Qq. sent] Qq i, 2, 
Fi; sent for Qq 3-8; sent for you Capell (conj.). 57. Anne]V{; Duch. Qq. 

in all] Qq; with all Ff. 58. O] Ff; / Qq. 60. brains] Ff; braine Qq. 

61. venom] Ff; pay son Qq. 63. Go, go] Ff; Alas Qq. 65. Anne] Ff; 

Duch. Glo. Qq. Not why] Ff; No Qq. 66. corse] Ff; course Qq. 

69. dear] Ff ; dead Qq. which] whom Capell (conj.). 

54. cockatrice] See note on " basi- 55. unavoided] unavoidable. Chap- 

lisks," I. ii. 150 above. The cockatrice man, All Fools, act ii. has 
and the basilisk were synonymous in " youth and love 

vulgar tradition. Compare Chapman, Were th' unresisted {i.e. irresist- 

All Fools, act iii. : " Is this the cocka- ible) organs to seduce you "; 

trice that kills with sight"; Romeo Eastward //o, act iv. : "this your un- 

and Juliet, iii. ii. 47 ; Twelfth Night, believed (».^. incredible) absence." See 

III. iv. 215. Sir Thomas Browne also note on i. ii. 39 above, 
quotes Scaliger on the confusion be- 58. verge] Used again of the rim 

tween the basilisk (a real serpent) and of the crown, Richard II. 11. i. 102; 

the purely imaginary cockatrice : " Basi- of a magic circle, 2 Henry VI. i. iv. 

lisci formam mentiti sunt vulgo gallin- 25. 
aceo similem, et pedibus binis," etc. 



sc. I.J KING RICHARD III 189 

For making me, so young, so old a widow ! 

And, when thou wed'st, let sorrow haunt thy bed ; 

And be thy wife, if any be so mad. 

More miserable by the life of thee 75 

Than thou hast made me by my dear lord's death ! " 

Lo, ere I can repeat this curse again, 

Within so small a time, my woman's heart 

Grossly grew captive to his honey words, 

And prov'd the subject of mine own soul's curse, So 

Which hitherto hath held mine eyes from rest ; 

For never yet one hour in his bed 

Did I enjoy the golden dew of sleep. 

But with his timorous dreams was still awak'd. 

74. mad] Qq i, 2, Ff ; badde Qq 3-8. 75. More] Ff ; As Qq. life] Ff; 

death Qq. 76. Thati] Ff; As Qq. 77. ere] Ff; eare Q i; euen Qq 2-8. 

78. Within . . . time] Ff ; Euen in so short a space Qq. 79. Grossly] Q i, 

Ff ; Crosselie Q 2 ; Crosly Qq 3-8. 80. subject] Qq i, 8, Ff ; subiectes Qq 

2-7 {subsects Q 3). mine] Ff, Qq 7, 8 ; my Qq i-6. 81. hitherto] Ff ; euer 

since Qq. held] Ff ; kept Qq. mine] Qq 6-8, Ff; my Qq 1-5. rest] Ff ; 

sleepe Qq. 83. Did I enjoy] Ff ; Haiie I enioyed Qq. dew] deaw Qq 3-5, 

Ff I, 2. 84. with his . , . awak'd] Ff; haue bene waked by his timorous 

dreames Qq. 

74-76. Anne's curse in its original here and in the parallel instance (coni- 
form, I. ii. 26-28 above, is delivered pare " grossness," iii. i. 46 above) ; (2) 
before Gloucester comes on the scene, the objective sense, implying anything 
She there wishes that his wife may be which it needs no fineness of perception 
made more miserable by his death than to recognise, i.e. anything plain and 
she is made by the deaths of those he obvious. For the latter use, see King 
has murdered. Qq in both passages Lear, i. i. 295. There is also the third 
have " as . . . as "instead of "more and concrete sense, implying size or 
, , . than " — a variation which, on its extent, as King Lear, iv. vi. 14 : com- 
own merits, is merely a matter of taste, pare "engross," iii. vii. 76 above. 
Qq also have "death" in both cases, honey] See note on i. iii. 291 
which Ff alter here into "life" (line above. 

75). Ff are clearly right, as the rest of 83. golden dew of sleep] Mr. Craig 

the passage, emphasising the fialfilment cites " golden sleep," Romeo and Juliet, 

of the curse, shows; and probably the 11. iii. 38; "the honey-heavj' dew of 

editors retained " death " in i. ii. 27 by slumber," Julius Casar, 11. i. 230, and 

an oversight. The clause "if any be several passages from other authors, 

so mad " (line 74) does not occur in i. The occurrence of the phrase " golden 

ii. ; while it is rather curious that two sleep" in Bacon has been cited on 

of the later Qq, which here accept the behalf of the Baconian authorship of 

mistaken reading " badde " for " mad," the plays. Equally improbable traces 

read " mad" for "made" in i. ii. 26. of Baconian authorship are to be found 

79. Grojsi;'] stupidly, without percep- in Holinshed (ed. 1809, 11. iv. 32) : "So 

tion. See note on iii. vi. 10 above, that he needed now no more for that 

" Gross," " grossly," and kindred cause either to wake or to break his 

words, are used by Shakespeare in two golden sleep " ; Fletcher, Women 

derived senses : (i) the subjective sense. Pleased, 1647 ■ " Sweet rest about thee, 

" without fineness of perception," as sweet and golden sleep." etc. 



140 KING RICHARD III [act iv. 

Besides, he hates me for my father Warwick, 85 

And will, no doubt, shortly be rid of me. 
Q. Eliz. Poor heart, adieu ! I pity thy complaining. 
Anne. No more than with my soul I mourn for yours. 
Dor. Farewell, thou woful welcomer of glory ! 
Anne. Adieu, poor soul, that tak'st thy leave of it ! 90 

Duch. [To Dorset.] Go thou to Richmond, and good fortune 
guide thee ! 

[ To Anne.] Go thou to Richard, and good angels tend thee ! 

[To Q. Eliz.] Go thou to sanctuary, and good thoughts 
possess thee ! 

I to my grave, where peace and rest lie with me ! 

Eighty odd years of sorrow have I seen, 95 

And each hour's joy wrack'd with a week of teen. 
Q. Eliz. Stay ! yet look back with me unto the Tower. 

Pity, you ancient stones, those tender babes. 

Whom envy hath immur'd within your walls ! 

Rough cradle for such little pretty ones, 100 

Rude ragged nurse, old sullen playfellow 

86. no dotibt] Q i, Ff ; omitted Qq 2-8, 87. Poor heart, adieu] Ff; Alas 

poore soule Qq. complaining'] Ft; complaints Qq. 88. 7intli]F{; from Qq. 
89. Dor.] Q I, Ff; Qu. Qq 2-8; Q. Eliz. Camb. 90. thut] Ff; thou Qq. 

gi. (To Dorset.) Go . . . guide thcc]F ^; Go to Richmond, to Dorset, to Anne, 
to the Queene, and good fortune guide thee Ff 2, 3. 92. To Anne] F 4. tend] 
Ff; guard Qq. 93. To Q. Eltz.] F 4, (Camb.). and good] Ff ; good Qq. 

96. wrack'd] F 4; wrackt Qq, Ff 1-3; wreck'd Camb. 97103. Stay . . . 

farewell] Ff ; omitted Qq. « 

85. Richard had fled to the Nether- Ovid," and has noted at least six in- 
lands with Edward IV. when Warwick stances there. 

invaded England in the Lancastrian loi. Johnson, with little sjTiipathy 

interest. At Barnet, where Warwick for bold metaphor, thought that 

fell, Richnrd was one of the generals on " nurse " and " playfellow " were harsh 

the winning side. epithets for the Tower, and conjectured 

95. Eighty odd] The Duchess of that the Queen addressed Brakenbury 
York was born in 1415, and, therefore, under these titles. Mcnck Mason 
was only sixty-eight in 1483. But the attributed them to the Tower, but 
tragic pity of the situation is more im- explained that the words "fo?''sh 
portant than historical accuracy. sorrow " in line 103 were intei ed 

96. teeti] sorrow. Shakespeare uses as an excuse for them. Malone justly 
this old English word again. Love's said that Shakespeare " never could 
Labour's Lost, iv. iii. 164 ; Romeo and intend to apologize for a practice, 
yuliet, I. iii. 13 ; The Tempest, i. ii. 64, of which numerous examples are 
etc. It is used several times by found in his plays, and in which, 
Spenser and by poets of his school, e.g. assuredly, he perceived no impropriety." 
William Browne. Mr. Craig says The epithet "ragged," applied to a 
that the word " is frequent in a book medieval castle like the Tower, is 
which Shakespeare loved, Golding's peculiarly appropriate : the raggedness 



sc. II.] KING RICHARD III 141 



For tender princes, use my babies well ! 
So foolish sorrow bids your stones farewell. 



SCENE II. — London. The Palace. 



[Exeunt, 



Sennet. Enter Richard, in pomp, crowned ; BuCKINGHAMj 
CatesBY, a Page, and others. 

K. Rich. Stand all apart ! Cousin of Buckingham ! 

Buck. My gracious sovereign ! 

K. Rich. Give me thy hand. [Here he ascendeth the throne. 

Thus high, by thy advice 
And thy assistance, is king Richard seated : 
But shall we wear these glories for a day ? 5 

Or shall they last, and we rejoice in them ? 

Buck. Still live they, and for ever let them last ! 

K. Rich. Ah, Buckingham, now do I play the touch, 
To try if thou be current gold indeed. 
Young Edward lives: think now what I would speak. 10 

Buck. Say on, my loving lord. 

K. Rich. Why, Buckingham, I say I would be king. 

103. sorrow bids\ Rowe, Camb. ; Sorrowes bids Ff 1-3 ; sorrows bid F 4. 

Scene 11. 

London. The Palace.] Camb. ; The same. A Room of State in the 

Palace. CzipeM; The Court. Pope. Sennet.'} Camb. ; Sound a Sennet. F i; Sound 
a Sonnet. Vi 2-^; Tile Trumpets sound. (^(\. Enter . . . others.'\Ca.mh.; Enter 
Richard crownd, Buckingham, Catesby with other Nobles. Qq; Enter Richard in 
pompe, Buckingham, Catesby, Ratcliffe, Louel. Ff. i. K. Rich.} Camb. ; 

Rich. Qq, Ff. 2. Buck. . . . sovereign] Ff; omitted Qq. 3,4. K. Rich. 

Give . . . seated] arranged as Qq (which print Give . . . advice as two short 
lines) ; Giue . . . hand. Thus . . . assistance. Is . . . seated, (three lines) Ff. 
3. Here . . . throne.] Qq ; Sound. Ff. 5. glories] Ff; honours Qq. 7. let 
them] Ff ; may they Qq. 8. Ah] Ff ; Qq. do I] Qq i, 2, Ff ; / do Qq 

3-8. pl°-y]ph Warburton. 10. speak] Ff ; say Qq. ii. loving lord] Ff; 
gracious soueraigne Qq. 

of '/he angles of a Norman keep, seen "touch-stone" when employed as 
in^' profile, strikes every observer, building material. Nares quotes Jonson, 
Compare 2 Henry IV. ind. 35, and the The Forest, 1616, 11. ii. : — 
metaphor in King Lear, in. iv. 31. "Thou art not, Penshurst, built to 

envious show 
Scene 11. Of touch or marble." 

Lyly, Euphues (Arber, 79). has "the 

8. play the touch] play the part of a tree is known by his fruit, the gold 

touch-stone. Timon, Timon of Athens, by his touch, the sonne by the fire," 

IV. iii. 390, calls gold the " touch of and (p. 74) " as the true gold is tryed 

hearts." "Touch" was used for by the touch," etc. 



142 KING RICHARD III [act iv. 

Buck. Why, so you are, my thrice- renowned lord. 

K. Rich. Ha ! am I king ? 'tis so : but Edward lives. 

Buck. True, noble prince. 

K. Rich. O bitter consequence, 1 5 

That Edward still should live ! " True, noble prince ! " 

Cousin, thou wast not wont to be so dull : 

Shall I be plain ? I wish the bastards dead, 

And I would have it suddenly perform'd. 

What say'st thou now ? speak suddenly ; be brief. 20 

Buck. Your grace may do your pleasure. 
K. Rich. Tut, tut ! thou art all ice, thy kindness freezes : 

Say, have I thy consent that they shall die ? 
Buck. Give me some little breath, some pause, dear lord, 

Before I positively speak in this : 25 

I will resolve you herein presently. \Exit. 

Gates. [Aside to a stander-by^ The king is angry : see, he 

gnaws his lip. 
K. Rich. I will converse with iron-witted fools 

And unrespective boys ; none are for me 

13. lord\ Ff; liege (^o^. 14. king] a king Pope. 16. live I '^ True,] 

Camb. ; Hue true Qq, Ff; live, True Rowe ; live — <ruf Theobald. 17. wast^ 

Ff ; wert Qq. 20. say'st thou now] Ff ; saist thou Qq 1-5 ; saiest thou Qq 6-8. 
22, freezes] ¥i;freezeth Qq. 24. little breath, some pause] Ff; breath, some 

little pause Qq 1-6 ; breath Qq 7, 8. dear lord] ¥i; my lord Qq. 25. in 

this] Ff; herein Qq. 26. you herein presently] Ff; your grace immediatlie 

Qq. Exit.] Q i ; Exit Buck. Ff ; omitted Qq 2-8. 27. Aside . . . ] 

Capell, Camb.; Aside. Hanmer. gnaws his] Ff; bites the Qq 1-6; bites 

his Qq 7, 8. 28. K. Rich.] Malone adds Descends from his throne. 

15. consequence] Compare Romeo 28. irOn-witted] Compare Romeo 

and Juliet, I. w. loj. and Juliet, iv. v. 126; Nash, Un- 

26. resolve you] give you a definite fortunate Traveller, 1594 (Gosse, 103): 
answer, assure you, as 3 Henry VI. " onely iron wits are not wonne 
III. ii. 19. without a long siege of intreatie." 

27. gnaws his lip] This personal 29. unrespective] thoughtless, incon- 
trait was derived by Holinshed (iii. 760) siderate (compare "considerate" in 
from Polydore Vergil through Halle: next line). See "respects," in. vii. 
" When he stood musing, he would 175 above. In Troilus and Cressida, 
bite and chaw busilie his nether lip; 11. ii. 71, this epithet is applied by 
as who said, that his fierce nature in metaphor to a sieve. For the antithesis 
his cruell bodie alwaies stirred, chafed, " respective," see Romeo and Juliet, 
and was euer unquiet." More (ap. \n.\.i-z'6;Yloo\!iGr, Ecclesiastical Polity, 
Holinshed, iii. 722) says that, when v. i: "wary and respective men"; 
Richard returned to the council before Chapman, All Fools, act ii. : — 
Hastings' arrest, he was " all changed, " The bold and careless servant still 
with a woonderfull soure angrie coun- obtains ; 

tenance, knitting the brows, frowning, The modest and respective noth- 

and fretting and gnawing his lips." ing gains." 



sc. II.] KING RICHARD III 143 

That look into me with considerate eyes : 30 

High-reaching Buckingham grows circumspect 

Boy! 

Page. My lord ? 

K. Rich. Know'st thou not any whom corrupting gold 

Will tempt unto a close exploit of death ? 35 

Page. I know a discontented gentleman, 

Whose humble means match not his haughty spirit : 
Gold were as good as twenty orators, 
And will, no doubt, tempt him to anything. 

K. Rich. What is his name ? 

Page. His name, my lord, is Tyrrel. 40 

K. Rich. I partly know the man : go, call him hither. 

[Exit Page. 
The deep-revolving witty Buckingham 
No more shall be the neighbour to my counsels : 

31-33. High-reaching . . . lord] Ff; Boy, high reaching . . . circumspect. 
Boy. My Lord Qq 1-7 ; Boy. High reaching . . . circutnspect. Boy. My 
Lord Q 8. 35. It^tH] Ff; IVomW Qq. ^6. I] Ff; My lord, I Qq. 37. 

spirit] Ff; mind Qq. 41. hither [Exit Page] Camb. ; hither [Exit Boy] 

Pope; hither, Boy. Exit Ff; hither presentlie Qq. 42. deep-revolving] 

hyphened Pope. 43. counsels] Ff ; counsell Qq. 

31. High-reachitig] For the idea high heart, & sore longed vpward, not 

involved compare Two Gentlemen of rising yet so fast as he had hoped, 

Verona, in. i. 156. Mr. Craig refers to being hindered & kept vnder by the 

2 Henry VI. in. i. 158, and Pericles, meanes of Sir Richard Ratcliffe, and 

II, ii. 20. Sir William Catesbie, which . . . kept 

36. The conversation with the page, him by secret drifts out of all secret 

in More's account, took place at War- trust." The page, being Tyrrel's 

wick, during Richard's journey to special friend, took this opportunity to 

Gloucester after his coronation. He advance him. The king obeyed the 

had sent his servant John Greene to hi«t, broke the business immediately 

Brakenbury; and Brakenbury had to Tyrrel, and "found him nothing 

refused to kill the children. In his strange" in the matter. One weak 

impatience, Richard complained to " a point in this story is its implications 

secret page of his " that he could trust as to Richard's unfamiliarity with 

nobody. " ' Sir ' (quoth his page) Tyrrel. Gairdner shows (pp. 23, 24, 

' there lieth one on your pallet without, 121) that Tyrrel had been used in 

that I dare well saie, to doo your grace offices of trust by Richard at a much 

pleasure, the thing were right hard earlier date. 

that he would refuse.' Meaning this 42. deep-revolving] deeply pond- 
by Sir James Tirrell, which was a man ering. For "revolving" compare 
of right goodlie personage, and for Cymbeline, in. iii. 14. 
natures gifts worthie to haue serued witty] cunning, as Much Ado 
a much better prince; if he had well About Nothing, iv. ii. 27; Tourneur, 
serued God, and by grace obteined as Revenger's Tragedy, act v, : " 'Twas 
much truth and good will as he had somewhat witty carried, tho' we say 
strength and wit. The man had an it." 



144 KING RICHARD III [act n. 

Hath he so long held out with me untir'd, 

And stops he now for breath? Well, be it so! 45 

Enter STANLEY. 

How now, Lord Stanley, what 's the news ? 

Stan. Know, my loving lord, 

The Marquess Dorset, as I hear, is fled 
To Richmond, in the parts where he abides. 

\ Stands apart. 

K. Rich. Come hither, Catesby ! rumour it abroad 50 

That Anne my wife is very grievous sick : 
I will take order for her keeping close. 
Inquire me out some mean poor gentleman, 
Whom I will marry straight to Clarence daughter : 
The boy is foolish, and I fear not him. 5 5 

Look, how thou dream'st ! I say again, give out 
That Anne, my queen, is sick and like to die. 
About it ! for it stands me much upon 

45. Well, be it so] Ff; omitted Qq. aft. 45. Enter Stanley.] Ff ; Enter 

Darby. Qq. 46. How now . . . news] Ff ; How now, what newes with you 
Qq. 47-49. Know . . . abides] arranged as Craig ; Know . . . Dorset As 
. . . Richmond, In . . . abides Ff ; My Lord, I heare the Marques Dorset Is 
fled to Richmond, in those partes beyond the seas where he abides Qq ; My lord, 
I hear . . . fled To Richmond . . . sea Where he abides Camb. 50. Come 

. . . abroad] Ff ; Catesby. Cat. My lord. King. Rumor it abroad Qq. 51. 
very grievous sick] Ff ; sicke and like to die Qq. 53. foor] Ff ; borne Qq. 

57. queen] Ff ; wife Qq. 

47-50. Spedding suggested the ex- sudden sicknesse or greeuous maladie : 

istence of interlinear alterations in the and to prooue, if afterwards she should 

MS., which may have misled the fortune by that or anie other waies to 

printer of F i. If Ff represent a re- lease her life, whether the people would 

turn to an original version of the play, impute hir death to the thought or 

Qq reading may be the result of an sicknesse, or thereof would laie the 

effort to improve the defective metre blame to him." When this report 

of that original. This latter reading, came to Anne's ears, she sought an 

however, was evidently disarranged interview with Richard, and was 

in printing: the Cambridge reading, answered with fair words. But " how- 

perhaps, represents the real intention soeuer that it fortuned, either by in- 

of the reviser. The call for Catesby ward thought and pensiuenesse of hart, 

and the answer which follows, corres- or by infection of poison (which is 

ponding in Qq to line 50, are probably affirmed to be most likelie), within few 

stage amplifications of the original daies after the queene departed out of 

text. this transitorie life." Anne's death 

51. Halle and Holinshed (iii. 751) really happened on i6th March. 1485. 
say that Richard ordered the queen's 58. it stands me much upon] it con- 
death to be reported, " to the intent cerns me, depends upon me, greatly, 
thai she, taking some conceit of this Compare Antony and Cleopatra, 11. i. 
strange fame, should fall into some 50,51; Milton, 0/ Pnlat. Episcopacy, 



sc. II.] KING RICHARD III 145 

To stop all hopes whose growth may damage me. 

[Exit Cateshy. 
I must be married to my brother's daughter, 60 

Or else my kingdom stands on brittle glass. 
Murder her brothers, and then marry her ! 
Uncertain way of gain ! But I am in 
So far in blood that sin will pluck on sin : 
Tear-falling pity dwells not in this eye. 65 

Re-enter Page with Tyrrel. 

Is thy name Tyrrel ? 

Tyr. James Tyrrel, and your most obedient subject. 

K. Rich. Art thou indeed ? 

Tyr. Prove me, my gracious lord. 

K. Rich. Dar'st thou resolve to kill a friend of mine ? 

Tyr. Please you, but I had rather kill two enemies. 70 

K. Rich. Why, there thou hast it ; two deep enemies, 
Foes to my rest and my sweet sleep's disturbers 
Are they that I would have thee deal upon : 
Tyrrel, I mean those bastards in the Tower. 

Tyr. Let me have open means to come to them, 75 

And soon I '11 rid you from the fear of them. 

K. Rich. Thou sing'st sweet music. Hark ! come hither, Tyrrel ! 

59. Exit Cate%hy'\ Capell. 64. will pluck} Q i, Ff ; plucke Qq 2-5 ; plucks 
Qq 6-8. 65. Tear-falling] Ff; Teare falling Qq 1-5 ; Teares falling Qq 6-8. 

aft. 65. Re-enter . . . ] Capell ; Enter Tirrel Qq ; Enter Tyrrel Ff. 68. in- 
deed ?] Pope adds He takes him aside. lord] Ff ; soueraigne Qq. 70. 
Please you] Ff; / my lord Qq. two] Q i, Ff ; two decpe Qq 2-8. 71. there] 
Qq ; then Ff. 72. disturbers] Ff; disturbs Qq. 77. Thoti sing'st . . . 
Tyrrel] one line as Qq ; Thou sing'st sweet Musique : Hearke . . . Tyrrel (two 
lines) Ff. Hark] Ff ; omitted Qq. 

1641 : "£^ stood them muchuponlong Richard's description of his tempera- 
ere this to uphold their now well tasted ment, see note on i. ii. 157 above, 
hierarchy." See also Lyly, Euphues, 70. two enemies] The reading of Q 2 
1579 (Arber, 94) : " if thy reuenge stand and its successors is an obvious printer's 
onely upon thy wish, thou shalt neuer error. The epithet "deepe" has been 
Hue to see my woe"; and Mr. Craig taken up from the next line and re- 
refers to Golding's Ctrsar, 1565 : "Cassar peated to the detriment of sense and 
thought that it stood him upon to be- metre, 
ware." 72. disturbers] Qq "disturbs" is a 

64. pluck on] draw on, as Measure substantive of the formation noticed at 
for Measure, 11. iv. 147, etc. ■ in. vii. 225 above. New Eng. Diet. 

65. Tear-falling] that lets fall tears, quotes Daniel, Civil Wars, 1601-2. vi. 
For the transitive use of " fall," com- st. 47 : " From all disturbs to be so 
pare Ff stage direction at i. ii. 182 long kept free." 

above, " She fals the sword." As to 77, Thou sing'st sweet music] Aldis 



146 KING RICHARD Til [act iv. 

Go, by this token : rise, and lend thine ear : [ Whispers. 
There is no more but so : say it is done, 

And I will love thee, and prefer thee for it, 80 

Tyr. I will despatch it straight. [Exit. 

Re-enter BUCKINGHAM. 

Buck. My lord, I have considered in my mind 
The late request that you did sound me in. 

K. Rich. Well, let that rest. Dorset is fled to Richmond. 

Buck. I hear the news, my lord. 85 

K. Rich. Stanley, he is your wife's son ; well, look to it 

Buck. My lord, I claim the gift, my due by promise, 
For which your honour and your faith is pawn'd — 
The earldom of Hereford and the moveables, 
Which you have promised I shall possess. 90 

K. Rich. Stanley, look to your wife ! if she convey 
Letters to Richmond, you shall answer it. 

Buck. What says your highness to my just request ? 

K. Rich. I do remember me, Henry the sixth 

Did prophesy that Richmond should be king, 95 

When Richmond was a little peevish boy : 

A king ! perhaps, perhaps, — , 

78. this.'\ Ff; that Qq. Whispers\ Ff; He whispers in his eare. Qq* 
79. There is] Ff ; Tis Qq. it is] Qq 3-5, Ff; is it Qq i, 2, 6-8. 81. 
/ . . . straight^Fi; Tis done my gracious lord. King. Shall we heare from thee 
Tirrel ere we sleep ? Enter Buc. Tir. Ye shall my lord. Qq (Yea, my good lord 
Qq 6-8). Exit.]F{; omitted Qq. aft. 81. Re-enter Buckingham.] C&mh.; 
Enter Buckingham Ff ; Enter Buc. Qq (see preceding note). 83. request] 
Ff; demand Qq. 84. rest] Ff ; pass Qq. 85. the news] Ff; that newes 
Qq. 86. son] sonnes Qq 1-3 to it] Qq ; unto it Ff. 87. the gift] Ff; your 
gift Qq. 89. Hereford] Herford Qq 1-3, 5-8 ; Herfort Q 4 : Hertford Ff. 90. 
Which you have promised] Ff; The which you promised Qq. shall] Ff; 
should Qq. 93. request] Ff ; demand Qq. 94. / do remember me] Ff ; 
As I remember Qq, 97. perhaps, perhaps — ] Camb. ; perhaps perhaps. Qq 
1-3. 5. 6, 8 ; perhaps, Q 4 ; perhaps, perhaps, Q 7 ; perhaps. Ff. 

Wright, in a note on i. i. 27, alludes to Alphonsus, act ii. : " nay, tell her more 

Richard's well-known love of music, than so." 

Various allusions scattered through the 89, 90. See iii. i. 195 above, and note, 

play, as in this passage, may have a The " moveables " are the appurten- 

reference to this love ; but there is no ances of the earldom not attached to the 

authority for it in the chief sources from soil : see Richard II. 11. i. 161 ; Taming 

which Shakespeare derived his know- of the Shrew, 11. i. 198; Fletcher and 

ledge. Massinger, Spanish Curate, iv. 5 : " My 

79. no more but so] So Chapman (?), sheep and oxen, and my moveables." 



SC. II.] 



KING RICHARD III 



147 



Buck. My lord ! 

K. Rich. How chance the prophet could not at that time 
Have told me, I being by, that I should kill him ? 

Buck. My lord, your promise for the earldom, — 

K. Rich. Richmond ! When last I was at Exeter, 
The mayor in courtesy show'd me the castle, 
And call'd it Rougemont ; at which name I started, 



lOO 



98-115, My lord . . . fo-day] Qq; omitted Ff. 
104. Kongemoni] Rvge-tnount Qq. 



98. My lord] Lord Qq 3, 4. 



98-115. The reason for the omission 
of these lines from Ff is obscure. That 
it was deliberate appears probable 
from the alteration in the Ff version 
of line 116, which has been retained 
here. On the other hand, Ff reading 
may be equally well the original form 
of line 116, afterwards altered to suit 
the purpose of Qq. Spedding, while 
classing this among the alterations in 
F I not intended by Shakespeare, 
leans noticeably to the conclusion that 
it may have been due to Shakespeare's 
feeling that the action was delayed by 
the intermediate matter. No such 
feeling, however, seems to have crossed 
Shakespeare's or his editors' mind, 
when the long rhetorical speeches in 
IV. iv., serious impediments to the 
action, were retained in F i. Mr. 
Daniel can account for the omission 
only on the supposition that the pas- 
sage was a theatrical insertion, not 
in the original draught of the play, 
introduced for the benefit of the chief 
actor, and so struck out by the editor 
in the Q from which F i was pre- 
pared. He further accounts for the 
omission by Ff of the second "per- 
haps" in line 97, by suggesting that 
the word was struck out by accident, 
when the editor of F i drew his line 
through the succeeding passage. 
Pickersgill suggests that the metre of 
lines 107-112 may have proved a bar to 
the smoothing hand of the editor of F 
I. It is also possible that the editor 
of F I, for some reason which we can 
only conjecture, decided to omit the 
passage, even though it was original : 
perhaps he felt it to be irrelevant, or 
thought the double play on words 
which it contains far-fetched. Even if 
the passage is a later insertion, at any 



rate the resort which its author made to 
Shakespeare's own historical sources, 
and his selection of this striking anec- 
dote, make it highly probable that*the 
author who inserted it was Shakespeare 
himself. 

io2-io6. This anecdote, " interlaced" 
into Holinshed's text by his posthum- 
ous editors, came from John Hooker or 
Vowell, the chamberlain and historian 
of Exeter. Richard paid a visit to 
Exeter in November, 1483, after the 
failure of Buckingham's rebellion and 
Richmond's first expedition, and was 
received by the mayor. " He came to 
the castell ; and, when he understood 
that it was called Rougemont, sudden- 
lie he fell into a dumpe, and (as one 
astonied) said : ' Well, I see my daies 
be not long,' " etc. (Holinshed, iii. 746). 

104. Rougemont] ^Tbe castle of Exeter, 
the building of which was ordered by 
William I. after the taking of the city 
in 1067, and committed by him to 
Baldwin of Brionne. The name comes 
from the natural formation of the site, 
"rubeus mons extra portam aquilo- 
narem civitatis Exonie." Richmond 
was the name given to the castle built 
by Alan of Brittany at the mouth of 
Swaledale after 1072, and either was 
derived from a castle of Richemont in 
Brittany, or was a gallicised form of 
the English Rices-munt (hill of sove- 
reignty). The vast Earldom of Rich- 
mond was vested in Henry VII. ; his 
title, derived from his Yorkshire estates, 
merel}' lent its name to the Surrey 
Richmond when Shene Palace became 
his favourite residence. The popular 
pronunciation of "Rougemont" and 
" Richmond " may have been so nearly 
alike as to make the play on the words 
tolerable. 



148 KING RICHARD III [act iv. 

Because a bard of Ireland told me once, 105 

I should not live long after I saw Richmond. 
Buck. My lord ! 
K. Rich. Ay, what''s o'clock ? 
Buck. I am thus bold to put your grace in mind 

Of what you promis'd me. 
K. Rich. Well, but what 's o'clock ? 1 10 

Buck. Upon the stroke of ten. 
K. Rich. Well, let it strike. 

Buck. Why let it strike ? 
K. Rich. Because that, like a Jack, thou keep'st the stroke 

Betwixt thy begging and my meditation. 

I am not in the giving vein to-day. 1 1 5 

Buck. May it please you to resolve me in my suit ? 
K. Rich. Thou troublest me ; I am not in the vein. 

\Exeunt all but Buckingham. 
Buck. And is it thus ? repays he my deep service 

With such contempt ? made I him king for this ? 

O, let me think on Hastings, and be gone 120 

To Brecknock, while my fearful head is on ! 

lExit. 

no. Wf/Z] omitted Pope. 116. May . . . 5Mt/] Ff; Whie then resolue me 
whether you wil or no. Qq. 117. Thou] Ff; Tut, tut, thou Qq. Exeunt 

. . .] Camb. ; Exit. Qq, Ff. Exeunt Richard and train. Ca.pc\\. 118. And 
. . . repays] Ff ; Is it euen so, rewards {rewardst Q i) Qq. deep] Ff ; true 
Qq. 119. such] Ff ; such deepe Qq. 

105. a bard of Ireland] There is no the north transept of York Minster. A 

authority for this description in Holin- sitting Jack, locally known as Jack 

shed. Blandiver, strikes the quarters with his 

113. jfack] The Jack of the clock heels on the bell of the clock, once in 

was the figure which struck the hours Glastonbury Abbey, now in the north 

on the bell of an old clock. Compare transept of Wells CStthedral. Other 

Richard II. v. v. 60. Steevens quotes examples are at Southwold and Blyth- 

Decker, Lanthorne and Caudle-Light : burgh in Suffolk : at Rye in Sussex 

"The yacke of a Clocke-house goes two gilded cherubs perform the office 

uppon Screws, and his office is to do of Jacks. The expression probably is 

nothing but strike," and Guls Horn- connected with the rather slighting use 

Booke, where the Jacks of the clock in of the name, alluded to at i. iii. 53 

old St. Paul's are mentioned, l^ew above. Richard likens Buckingham's 

Eng. Diet, quotes from the accounts of hesitation to a Jack suspending his 

St. Lawrence's Church, Reading, in stroke on the clock-bell, and bids him 

1498-9 : " It. payed for the settyng of strike at once. 

Jak with the hangyng of his beJl and 121. Brecknock] The lordship of 

mendyng his bond, iiijd." Two Brecon, and the castle founded by 

wooden Jacks in armour strike the Bernard of Neufmarch^ about 1092, 

quarters on the clock which is now in came through the Braoses to the 



^ 



sc. Ill] KING RICHARD HI 149 

SCENE III. — The same. 

Enter Tyrrel. 

Tyr. The tyrannous and bloody act is done, 
The most arch deed of piteous massacre 
That ever yet this land was guilty of. 

' ' Dighton and Forrest, whom I did suborn 

• To do this piece of ruthless butchery, 5 

Albeit they were flesh'd villains, bloody dogs, 
Melted with tenderness and mild compassion, 
Wept like to children in their deaths' sad story. 
" O ! thus," quoth Dighton, " lay the gentle babes : " 
" Thus, thus," quoth Forrest, " girdling one another 10 
Within their alabaster innocent arms : 

Scene in.] Pope ; omitted Ff. The same] Capelf, Camb. Enter Tyrrel.] 
Ff; Enter Sir Francis Tirrell Qq. i. act] Ff; deedQq. 2. arch deed] Ff; 
arch-act Qq 1-6; arch-acts Q 7; arch act Q 8. 4. whom] who F i. 5. 

piece of ruthless] Pope ; ruthles peece of Qq 1, 2 ; ruthfull peece of Qq 3-8 ; 
peeceofrtithfullFL 6. Albeit] Ff; Although Qq. 7. Melted]F{; Melting 
Qq. mild] Ff ; kind Qq 1-5 ; omitted Qq 6-8. 8. like to] Ff ; like two Qq. 
deaths'] Theobald; deaths Qq, Ff. story] Ff; stories Qq. 9. 01 thus] Ff; 
Lo thus Qq. the gentle] Ff ; those tender Qq 1-5 ; these tender Qq 6-8. 10. 
one] on Qq i, 2. 11. alabaster innocent] F 4; Alablaster innocent Ff 1-3; 

innocent alablaster Qq 1-7 ; innocent alabaster Q 8. 

Bohuns, Earls of Hereford ; from whom rate in the eighteenth century, without 

it passed by marriage to Thomas of distinction, to the custom of giving the 

Woodstock, son of Edward III., and so hounds a portion of the killed game, as 

to the house of Stafford. See note on 'n Smollett, Peregrine Pickle, 1751, 

,111. j^ ic(5above. chapter viii. Metaphorically, it is used 

"-iC arai'lteid^'Com'pzxe Othello, iv. i. ot one who has tasted slaughter and is 

71, where Ff have the hyphen, appar- become accustomed to it. Compare 

ently rejected in the present case. So Henry V. iii. iii. 11. Fletcher and 

" arch-enemy (5 Henry VI. 11. ii. 2) Massinger, Spanish Curate, iv, 2, use 

and " arch-villain " {Measure for the word in the transferred sense of a 

Measure, v. i. 57) are hyphened in Ff. hardened knave : — 

4. More tells us that Dighton, "a ''Tush, he's flesh'd, 

big, broad, square, and strong knave," And knows what vein to strike for 

was Tyrrel's " horssekeeper." Forrest, his own credit." 

" a fellow fleshed (see below) in murder 11. alabaster] The form in most of 

before his time," was one of the the early editions, " alablaster," is a very 

warders of the Princes in the Tower. common corruption. For the various 

6. flesh'd] Hounds were said to be spellings current in the fifteenth and 

fleshed when they ate of the first sixteenth centuries, see the extracts 

game which they killed. So Fletcher from the Nottingham Records, etc., in 

and Massinger, Elder Brother, iv. 3, of W. H. St. John Hope, On the Early 

one using a sword for the first time: Working of Alabaster in England 

"This is my grief, I shall he flesh'd on (Archceol. Journal, Ixi., 1904, 221-40). 

cowards." Compare King John, v. i. In Leland's Itinerary and Holland's 

71. The word is also applied, at any version of Camden's Britannia, " ala- 



150 KING RICHARD III [act iv. 

Their lips were four red roses on a stalk, 

And in their summer beauty kiss'd each other. 

A book of prayers on their pillow lay ; 

Which once," quoth Forrest, "almost chang'd my mind ; 15 

But O ! the devil ! " — there the villain stopp'd, » 

Whilst Dighton thus told on : " We smothered 

The most replenished sweet work of nature 

That from the prime creation e'er she fram'd." 

Hence both are gone with conscience and remorse : 20 

They could not speak ; and so I left them both. 

To bear this tidings to the bloody king. 

And here he comes. 

Enter King Richard. 

All health, my sovereign lord ! 
K. Rick. Kind Tyrrel, am I happy in thy news ? 
Tyr. If to have done the thing you gave in charge 25 

Beget your happiness, be happy then ; 

For it is done. 
K. Rich. But didst thou see them dead ? 

Tyr. I did, my lord. 

K. Rich. And buried, gentle Tyrrel? 

Tyr. The chaplain of the Tower hath buried them ; 

But where, to say the truth, I do not know. 30 

12. were four'\<^x,'^i; foure (^ 2; like foure (^(\ y%. 13. And in^Yi 1, 2; 
And Ff 3, 4; Which in Qq 1-5; When in Qq 6-8. 15. once] Qq ; one Ff. 

16. devil I" — there] devil" — there Rowe ; diuell their Q i; diuel : their Q 2; 
diuel : there Qq 3,4; divel I there Qq 5-8 ; Diuell, there Ff. 17. Whilst] 

Qq ; When Ff. ig. e'er she] Ff; eucr he Qq. 20. Hence . . . remorse] 

Ff ; Thus . . . remorse Qq i, 2 ; omitted Qq 3-8. 22. hear] Ff; briit/^ Qq. 

23. Enter . . .] Camb. : after 22 Qq, Ff. health] Ff; hail Qq. /or rf] Ff; 

liege Qq. 25. gave] give Qq i, 2. 27. done] Ff; done my Lord Qq. 30. 
where . . . truth] Ff ; how or »;« what place Qq. 

baster" is the form used. Leiand, i. might be hyphened together. " Re- 

fol. 42 (ed. Hearne, 1710-12, i. 40), men- pleniah'd," in the sense of " complete, 

tions a popular corruption current in fully furnished," occurs in Winter's 

the Isle of Axholme : " The ujper part Tale, 11. i. 79. 

of the Isle hath plentiful Quarres of 30. where, to say the truth] Shake- 
Alabaster, communely there caullid speare departs from his authority, which 
Plaster." The same form is apparent expressly says that Tyrrel ordered the 
in the term " plaster of Paris." murderers " to burie them at the staire 
18. replenished sweet] The first epi- foot, meetlie deepe in the ground, vnder 
thet qualifies the second, and the two a great heape of stones." 



sc. Ill] KING RICHARD III 151 

K. Rich. Come to me, Tyrrel, soon, at after-supper, 

When thou shalt tell the process of their death. 

Meantime, but think how I may do thee good, 

And be inheritor of thy desire. 

Farewell till then. 
Tyr. I humbly take my leave. 35 

\Exit Tyrrel. 
K. Rich. The son of Clarence have I pent up close ; 

His daughter meanly have I match'd in marriage ; 

The sons of Edward sleep in Abraham's bosom ; 

And Anne my wife hath bid this world good night. 

Now, for I know the Breton Richmond aims 40 

At young Elizabeth, my brother's daughter. 

And, by that knot, looks proudly on the crown. 

To her go I, a jolly thriving wooer. 

31. K. Rich.] King Qq 3-8; Rich. Ff; Tir. Qq i, 2. soon, at] soone at Qq 
1-6; soone, and Ff; sootie Qq 7, 8; soon, soon Rowe. after-snpper]hLyY>hen&d 
Staunton, Craig. 32. When] Ff ; And Qq, thou shalt] thou there shalt 

Ff 2-4. 35. then] Ff ; soone Qq. Tyr. I . . . leave.] F i ; Tyr. I humbly 

take leave Ff 2-4 ; omitted Qq. Exit Tyrrel] Qq ; omitted Ff. 36. K. 

Rich.] Rich. Ff ; omitted Qq. 39. this world] Ff ; the world Qq. good 

night] godnight Qq I, 2. 40. Breton] CapeW; Brittaine Qq; Britai7ie Fii, 2; 
Brittain F 3; Britain F 4; Briton Rowe. 42. on] Ff; ore Qq. 43. go I] 
Ff ; / go Qq. 

31. soon, at after-supper] Probably 34. inheritor] possessor. Compare 
Ffreading, which makes no great sense, "inherit," Richard II. i. i. 85; The 
is founded on a misunderstanding of the T^w/^s^ iv. i. 154, etc. 
phrase. The comma after " soon," 40. Breton] Richmond was in exile 
which Mr. Craig inserts in his " Little in Brittany, and was welcome, Richard 
Quarto" edition, makes the meaning implies, to his place of retreat, 
clear. For "after-supper," the "rere- 42. by that knot] i.e. by virtue of 
supper " or dessert taken after supper that proposed alliance. The marriage 
and served in another room, see Mr. of Richmond and Elizabeth had been 
Cuningham's note on Midsummer- arranged at Brecon by Buckingham 
Night's Dream, v. i. 34. In that case, and the Bishop of Ely, during Ely's 
where the meaning is unmistakable, semi-captivity there. It was communi- 
the Cambridge editors allow the cated to the Countess of Richmond by 
hyphen : here they read " soon at after means of her confidential secretary 
supper " within commas. " Soon at Reginald Bray, and by her, through 
night" commonly means "this very her physician Lewis, to the Queen- 
night," as Othello, in. iv. 198. "Soon Dowager. Richmond accepted the 
at "supper-time" occurs in Comedy of proposition, and swore at Rennes on 
Errors, in. ii. 179; and "soon at Christmas Day, 1483, to observe this 
supper " in Merchant of Venice, u. iii. necessary condition of his enterprise. 
5. This reading presumes either (i) It was not till 1485 that the rumour of 
that " at after " is a preposition mean- Richard III.'s intention to marry 
ing " after," as in Chaucer, Canterbury Elizabeth was spread abroad (Bos- 
Talcs,B. 1455, etc., or (2) that "soon well Stone, Shakspere's Holinshed, p 
at " = " soon," which seems improb- 388). 
able. 



152 KING RICHARD III [act iv. 

Enter Catesby. 
Gates. My lord ! 

K. Rich. Good or bad news, that thou com'st in so bluntly? 45 
Gates. Bad news, my lord : Morton is fled to Richmond'; 

And Buckingham, back'd with the hardy Welshmen, 

Is in the field, and still his power increaseth. 
K. Rich. Ely with Richmond troubles me more near 

Than Buckingham and his rash-levied strength. 50 

Come, I have learn'd that fearful commenting 

Is leaden servitor to dull delay ; 

Delay leads impotent and snail-pac'd beggary : 

Then fiery expedition be my wing, 

Jove's Mercury, and herald for a king! 55 

Go, muster men ! my counsel is my shield ; 

We must be brief, when traitors brave the field. [Exeunt. 

SCENE IV.— Before the Palace. 

Enter QuEEN MARGARET. 

Q. Mar. So ! now prosperity begins to mellow 
And drop into the rotten mouth of death. 
Here in these confines slily have I lurk'd, 

aft. 43. Enter Catesby.'] Qq ; Enter Rat cliff e Ff. 44. Cates."] Gate. Qq; 

Rat. Ff (and 46). 45. or bad 7iews] Ff; newcs or bad Qq. 46. Morton\ 

Mourton Ff; Ely Qq. 50. rash-levied] hyphened Pope. strength] Ff; 

army Qq. 51. learn'd] Ff; heard Qq. 55. Jove's] loues Qq i, 2, Ff; 

loue, Qq 3, 5-8; Lone, Q 4. 56. Go] Ff; Come Qq. 

Scene ly. 
Scene iv.] Scena Tertia. Ff. Before the Palace] Capell. Enter Queen 
Margaret.] Enter Queene Margaret sola. Qq ; Enter old Qtieene Margaret. Ff. 

46. The Bishop of Ely escaped 57. brave the field] boastfully dis- 

secretly from Brecon, " and came to his pute the field. Compare King John, 

see of Elie ; where he found monie and iv. ii. 243; ibid. v. i. 70. Schmidt 

friends ; and so sailed into Flanders." hesitates between this sense and that 

For Buckingham's expedition and its of " make fine, splendid," which is the 

fate, see the end of the next scene. sense at v. iii. 280 below. 

50. ras/j-ZerJtfrf] hastily raised. Com- 
pare King John, n. i. 67. ^<^"'^ '»'• 

55. Jove's Mercury] " Fiery expedi- i, 2. Steevens quotes what is prob- 

tion " is to herald Richard's entry into ably a reminiscence of ithis passage 

the field, and be the Mercury to his from Marston, Antonio and Mcllida, 

Jove. The second half of the line ex- 1602 : — 

plains the allusion. Theobald wished " now is his fate grown mellow, 

to read "Jove's Mercury's an herald Instant to fall into the rotten jaws 

for a king." Of chap-fall'n death." 



sc. IV.] KING RICHARD III 153 

To watch the waning of mine enemies. 

A dire induction am I witness to, 5 

And will to France, hoping the consequence 

Will prove as bitter, black, and tragical. 

Withdraw thee, wretched Margaret ! who comes here ? 

Enter QuEEN ELIZABETH and the DuCHESS OF YORK. 

Q. Eliz. Ah ! my poor princes ! ah ! my tender babes ! 

My unblown flowers, new-appearing sweets I 10 

If yet your gentle souls fly in the air, 

And be not fix'd in doom perpetual. 

Hover about me v\ath your airy wings, 

And hear your mother's lamentation ! 
Q. Mar. Hover about her ! say, that right for right 15 

Hath dimm'd your infant morn to aged night ! 
Duch. So many miseries have craz'd my voice. 

That my woe-wearied tongue is still and mute. 

Edward Plantagenet, why art thou dead ? 
Q. Mar. Plantagenet doth quit Plantagenet ; 20 

Edward for Edward pays a dying debt. 
Q. Eliz. Wilt thou, O God, fly from such gentle lambs. 

And throw them in the entrails of the wolf? 

When didst thou sleep, when such a deed was done ? 
Q. Mar. When holy Harry died, and my sweet son. 25 

4. enemies] Ff ; aduersaries Qq. 9. poor] Ff ; young Qq. 10. unhlown] 

unblowed F i. flowers.] flower Qq 6-8. new-appearing] hyphened Pope. 

13. about] aboue Qq 6-8. 15. right for right] wrong for wrong Warburton. 

17-19. Duch. So . . . dead] as Ff ; inserted after 34 in Qq. 18. still and 

mute] Ff; mute and dumbe Qq. 20, 21. Q. Mar. Plantagenet . . . debt] 

Ff; omitted Qq. 24. When] Why Ff 2-4. 25. Harry] Qq i, 2, F i; 

Henry Ff 2-4 ; Mary Qq 3-8. 

6. As a matter of fact, Margaret's 17. craz'd:] broken, cracked, as 

departure to France took place in 1476, Chaucer, Canterbury Tales, G. 934 : 

after which time she never returned to " I am right siker that the pot was 

England. crazed " ; Milton, Paradise Lost, 2nd 

15. right for right] Johnson explains, ed. 1674, >:ii. 210: — 
"justice answering to justice." Heaven "God looking forth will trouble all 

has given the house of York its just his host 

revenge for the atrocities which the And craze their chariot wheels." 

house of Lancaster has committed on Mr. Craig quotes a parallel from Comedy 

it ; and now the sins of the house of of Errors, v. i. 307-10. See note on 

York are to be visited upon its own " care-craz'd," iii. vii. 184 above, 
head. 



154 KING RICHARD III [act iv. 

Duck. Dead life, blind sight, poor mortal living ghost, 

Woe's scene, world's shame, grave's due by life usurp'd, 

Brief abstract and record of tedious days, 

Rest thy unrest on England's lawful earth, [^Sitting down. 

Unlawfully made drunk with innocent blood ! 30 

Q. Eliz. Ah, that thou wouldst as soon afford a grave, 

As thou canst yield a melancholy seat ! 

Then would I hide my bones, not rest them here. 

Ah ! who hath any cause to mourn but we ? 

\_Sitting down by her. 
Q. Mar. If ancient sorrow be most reverend, 35 

Give mine the benefit of seniory. 

And let my griefs frown on the upper hand. 

If sorrow can admit society, [Szi/ing doivn with them. 

Tell o'er your woes again by viewing mine. 

I had an Edward, till a Richard kill'd him ; 40 

I had a Henry, till a Richard kill'd him : 

26. Dead life, blind sight] Ff ; Blind sight, dead life Qq. 28. Brief . . . 
days]F{; omitted Qq. 29. thy]they Q^; their Qq6-8. Sitting douin] 

Camb. ; Sitting down on it. Capell. 30. Unlawfully'] Unlawfull Qq 6, 7. 

innocent] Ff; innocents Qq. 31. Ah] Ff; O Qq. as soon] Ff; as well Qq. 
34. Ah]F{; O Qq. we] Ff; / Qq. Sitting down by her.] Camh. ; Throw- 
ing herself down upon the earth. Hanmer (at 31). 35. If ancient] If any ancient 
Pope. reverend] reuerent Qq, Ff. 36. seniory] signorie Qq 1-5 ; signiorie 
Qq 6, 7 ; signeurie F i ; sigyiiory Q 8 ; signeury Ff 2-4 ; seigneurie Rowe ; 
seniority Pope, 37. griefs] Ff ; woes Qq. hand.] Warburton ; hand, Qq ; 
hand Ff. 38. Sitting down with them.] Camh.; joining, and taking seat 

between them. Capell. 39. Tell . . . mine] Qq ; omitted Ff. o'er] 

Warburton; ouer Qq. 41. I had a Hmry] Rann (Capell conj.), Craig; / 

had a Harry Camb. ; / had a Richard Qq ; / had a Husband Ft 

26-30. Pope put this speech of strained rivals. Richard has murdered, not 

paradoxes into his margin. No doubt, only Pri^.ce Edward and Henry VI., 

in writing Constance's lamentations but also his own nephews, Edward V. 

in King John, iii. i., Shakespeare re- and Richard of York. The Duchess 

membered this earlier and more stilted retorts by reminding Margaret of her 

attempt. responsibility for the deaths of York and 

28. Brief abstract] Qom^axe Hamlet, Rutland at Wakefield. Margaret an- 
il, ii. 548, 549. swers her by adding the death of Clar- 

31. thou] Elizabeth addresses the ence to the list of Richard's crimes, and 

earth. The transition is rather abrupt, upbraids her with being the mother of 

36. seniory] This is the spelling the arch-criminal, 
adopted by mort modern editions. The 41. Henry] Qq are obviously wrong: 
word, in the present passage, implies it is diflicult to imagine that the read- 
both superior age (line 35) and superior ing in Ff was derived from an original 
cause for sorrow (line 37). source, as it breaks a sequence of proper 

40-46. Margaret makes her sorrows names to which the lines owe their 

common with those of her Yorkist point. 



sc. iv] KING RICHARD III 155 

Thou hadst an Edwar<3, till a Richard kill'd him ; 

Thou hadst a Richafd^ till a Richard kill'd him. 
Duch. I had a Richard too, and thou didst kill him ; 

I had a Rutland too, thou holp'st to kill him. 45 

Q. Mar. Thou hadst a Clarence too, and Richard kill'd him. 

From forth the kennel of thy womb hath crept 

A hell-hound that doth hunt us all to death : 

That dog that had his teeth before his eyes, 

To worry lambs and lap their gentle blood, 50 

That foul defacer of God's handiwork. 

That excellent grand tyrant of the earth, 

That reigns in galled eyes of weeping souls, 

Thy womb let loose to chase us to our graves. 

O upright, just, and true-disposing God, 55 

How do I thank thee, that this carnal cur 

Preys on the issue of his mother's body. 

And makes her pue-fellow with other's moan ! 
Duch. O Harry's wife, triumph not in my woes ! 

God witness with me ! I have wept for thine. 60 

Q. Mar. Bear with me ; I am hungry for revenge, 

And now I cloy me with beholding it. 

Thy Edvvard he is dead, that kill'd my Edward ; 

Thy other Edward dead, to quit my Edward ; 

45. holp'st] Ff 2-4 ; hop^st F i ; hopst Qq. 46. Thou . . . him] one line as 
Qq; Thou . . . too, And . . . hifn (two lines) Ff. and] Q i, Ff; till Qq 2-8. 
50. 6/oocf] Ff, Q 8 ; blonds Qqi-y. 52,53. That excellent . . . som/s] arranged 
as Capell ; transposed Ff; omitted Qq. 55. true-disposing] hyphened Ff. 

58. And . . . moaw] omitted Pope. puefellow]Qq y7,Fi; puefellow Qq 1,2. 

59. wife]wifes Q i. 60. thiHe]Q 1, Ff; theeQq2-S. 63. kiU'djFi; stabd 
Qq. 64. Thy] Qq ; The Ff, 

52, 53. The reversal of these lines in above. Richard has tasted flesh, and 

Ff is, no doubt, the result of a crowded now hunts after it persistently, 

interlineation or marginal insertion — 58. pue-fellow] companion. Nares 

probably both combined — in the margin quotes, without a reference : " When I 

of a printed copy of Q. was a treuantly scholar in the noble 

52. excellent] merely in a superlative university of Cambridge, though I hope 
sense, like Sir Andrew's " Excellent I had as good a conscience as other of 
good, i' faith " in rwc//"//t iVt^A^, II. iii. my pew -fellows." See also Decker, 
46. Bel-Man of London (Smeaton, 146) : 

53. galled eyes] Compare Hamlet, 1. " The Foist and the Nip are pcw-fel- 
i\. 155. lowes together and of one religion." 

56. car«a/] used with much the same Shakespeare uses the word " pue," 
significance as " flesh'd," iv. iii. 6 King Lear, in. iv. 55. 



156 



KING RICHARD III 



[act IV. 



Young York he is but boot, because both they 65 

Match'd not the high perfection of my loss. 
Thy Clarence he is dead, that stabb'd my Edward ; 
And the beholders of this frantic play, 
The adulterate Hastings, Rivers, Vaughan, Grey, 
Untimely smother'd in their dusky graves. 70 

Richard yet lives, hell's black intelligencer. 
Only reserv'd their factor, to buy souls 
And send them thither : but at hand, at hand, 
Ensues his piteous and unpitied end : 
Earth gapes, hell burns, fiends roar, saints pray, 75 

To have him suddenly convey'd from hence. 
Cancel his bond of life, dear God, I pray, 
That I may live and say, The dog is dead ! 
Q. Eliz. O ! thou didst prophesy the time would come 

66. 3/a/cA'(f] Ff3, 4; Matcht Fi 1,2; Match Qq. 67. stabb'd] Ff; kildQq. 
6S. frantic play] Fi; tragic ke plaie Qq; tragick scene Capell (conj.). 69. 

adulterate] adulterer Warburton. 72. their] the Hanmer. 73. at hand, 

at hand] at hand at handes Q i ; a< hand Qq 7, 8. 75. Earth gapes] Earth 
gapes, heaven lowers Seymour (conj.). hell burns] hell burns, heaven weeps S. 
Walker. roar] roar for him Q:i^e\\. pray] pray for vengeance Vo^e.. 76. 
To have . . . hence] omitted Pope. from hence] Ff ; away Qq. 78. and 

say] Ff ; to say Qq. 



65. boot] the additional item thrown 
in to equalise a bargain, as Winter's 
Tale, IV'. iv. 650. See also Measure 
for Measure, 11. iv. 11; Troilus and 
Cressida, iv. v. 40. Margaret reckons 
that the death of young York is thrown 
in to equalise the sorrows of herself and 
her enemies. 

6g. adulterate] Shakespeare uses 
this form in Comedy of Errors, 11. ii. 
142; Hamlet, 1, v. 42, and three times 
in the poems. See also Machin and 
Markham, Dumb Knight, act v. 
Steevens understands the epithet in a 
double sense. Hastings was not only 
an adulterer ; he was also adulterate, 
base metal, to Margaret, who had made 
experience of his treachery. 

71. intelligencer] agent, go-between, 
as 2 Henry IV. iv. ii. 20. Compare 
Winter's Tale, 11. iii. 68. Mr. Craig 
notes two instances from Nash: one 
from The Unfortunate Traveller, 
" never anie discredited the trade of 
intelligencers but Judas ' ; the other 
from Pierce Penilesse (Grosart, ii. 19), 



"throwing himself abruptly into my 
company like an intelligencer." See also 
Webster, Duchess of Malfi, 1623, i. i : 
" flatterers, panders, intelligencers, 
atheists, and a thousand such political 
monsters." 

72. their factor] the agent of the 
powers of hell. Aldis Wright remarks 
that the "plural of respect" is used 
by Shakespeare after the mention of 
heaven and hell alike, and refers to 
Othello, IV. ii. 48, on which see Mr. 
Hart's note. The term " factor " re- 
peats and emphasises " intelligencer " in 
the foregoing line. Compare Fletcher 
and Massinger, Spanish Curate, iii. 2: — 
"a young /at/or 
They call Leandro, that has robb'd 
his master." 

75. In a line of heavily stressed 
monosyllables, containing four short 
sentences, nothing is more likely than 
that a foot should have been missed 
out by the author. The necessary 
pauses in the line make the omission 
almost unnoticeable. 



sc. 



IV.] KING RICHARD III 157 



That I should wish for thee to help me curse 80 

That bottled spider, that foul bunch-back'd toad ! 
Q, Mar. I call'd thee then vain flourish of my fortune : 
I call'd thee then poor shadow, painted queen ; 
The presentation of but what I was ; 
The flattering index of a direful pageant; 85 

One heav'd a-high, to be hurl'd down below ; 
A mother only mock'd with two fair babes ; 
A dream of what thou wast ; a garish flag, 
To be the aim of every dangerous shot ; 
A sign of dignity, a breath, a bubble ; 90 

A queen in jest, only to fill the scene. 
Where is thy husband now ? where be thy brothers ? 
Where be thy two sons ? wherein dost thou joy ? 
Who sues and kneels and says " God save the queen " ? 
Where be the bending peers that flatter'd thee ? 95 

Where be the thronging troops that follow'd thee ? 
Decline all this, and see what now thou art : 
For happy wife, a most distressed widow ; 
For joyful mother, one that wails the name ; 
For one being sued to, one that humbly sues; 100 

For queen, a very caitiff crown'd with care ; 

81. bunch-back'd] Q i, Ff ; hunch-backt Qq 2-8. 85. pageant] page War- 

burton. 86. a-high] hyphened Camb. ; on high Pope. 87. only mock'd] 

Ff, Q 8; onelie, mockt Qq 1-7. fair] Ff; sweete Qq. 88. what thou wast] 
Ff; which thou wert Qq. 88-90. a garish flag . . . bubble] Ff; a breath, a 

bubble, A signe of dignitie, a garish flag. To be . . . shot Qq. 93. be] are 

Qq I, 2. two sons] Ff ; children Qq. 94. and kneels and says] Ff ; to thee 
{me Q 7), and cries Qq. 100, loi. For one . . . care] Ff ; transposed Qq. 

86. a-high] on high. So Berners' phrases in Qq may have been derived 

Froissart,{ed. Macaulay), i. 164: "he from a stage misquotation of the ori- 

[Chandos] said to the prince : ' Sir, it ginal text. 

were good that you rested here and set 88. garish] Mr. Craig quotes several 

your banner a-high in this bush, that instances. Familiar examples are from 

your people may draw hither' "; ibid. i. Milton, II Penseroso, line 141 : " Hide 

160: "the king was on a white courser me from Day's garish eie," and "I 

and said a-high to his men." "An lov'd the garish day" from Newman's 

bye " occurs in Chaucer, Hous of Fame, hymn, " Lead, kindly Light." 

215. Compare " on lofte," where we 97. Decline all this] So Troilus and 

say "aloft" in Parliament of Foules, Cressida, 11. iii. 55. 

683. Compare " an end " above, i. iii. loi. caitiff] literally, a " captive." 

304 ; and " a-height " in King Lear, iv. Hence the word comes to mean a " poor 

vi. 58. wretch," and is used with a compas- 

88-90. The arrangement of these sionate sense by Shakespeare in this 



158 KING RICHARD III [act iv. 

For she that scorn'd at me, now sconi'd of me ; 

For she being fear'd of all, now fearing one ; 

For she commanding all, obey'd of none : 

Thus hath the course of justice whirl'd about, 105 

And left thee but a very prey to time, 

Having no more but thought of what thou wast, 

To torture thee the more, being what thou art. 

Thou didst usurp my place, and dost thou not 

Usurp the just proportion of my sorrow ? no 

Now thy proud neck bears half my burthen'd yoke ; 

From which even here I slip my wearied head, 

And leave the burthen of it all on thee. 

Farewell, York's wife, and queen of sad mischance ! 

These English woes shall make me smile in France. 1 15 
Q. Eliz. O thou well-skill'd in curses, staj' awhile, 

And teach me how to curse mine enemies ! 
Q. Mar. Forbear to sleep the night, and fast the day ; 

Compare dead happiness with living woe ; 

Think that thy babes were sweeter than they were, 1 2© 

And he that slew them fouler than he is. 

Bettering thy loss makes the bad causer worse : 

Revolving this will teach thee how to curse. 
Q. Eliz. My words are dull ; O ! quicken them with thine! 
Q. Mar. Thy woes will make them sharp and pierce like 

mine. {Exit. 125 

102. For she . . . qf me] Ff; For one ... of me Qq (aft. 104). 103. For 

she . . . one] Ff; For one . . . one Pope; omitted Qq. 104. For she . . . 

none] Ff ; For one . . . none Qq, 105. whirl'd] Ff ; rvheeld Qq. 107. 

wast] Ff; wert Qq i, 2; art Qq 3-8, 112. wearied head] Ff; wearie necke 

Qq 1-5; wearied necke Qq 6-8. 115. woes] wars Q 4. shall] Ff; will Qq. 
118. ni^ht . . . day] Qq 3-8, Ff; nights . . . daies Qq i, 2. 120. sweeter] 
Ff; fairer Qq. 122. bad causer worse] bad causes worse Q 4: bad cause 

it'prs^r Q 8 ; bad-causer worse Steevens. 125. Thy . . . mine] one \me us 

Qq; Thv . . . sharpe. And . . . mine (two lines) Ff. Exit] Exit Margaret. 
Ff ; Exit Mar. (aft. 126) Qq. 

and other passages. Compare Romeo used in its ordir. iry sense, and be 

and yuliet. V. i. 52; Othello, iv. i. log; mcitly transferrer from "neck" to 

and see Mr. Hart's note on the latter "yoke"; or, ag;' t, that it may agree 

passage. with the possess ^e case of the personal 

105. Compare Love's Labour's Lost, pronoun imiliea in " my." 

IV. iii. 384. 122. bad causer] " Causer " has been 

HI. burthen'd] burdensome, as used above, i. ii. 117. Steevens' read- 

" unmanner'd," I. ii. 39 above. It may ing, "bad-causer," destroys the true 

be, however, that the epithet may be force of the enithet. 



sc. IV.] KING RICHARD III 159 

Duck. Why should calamity be full of words ? 
Q. Elis. Windy attornies to their client woes, 

Airy succeeders of intestate joys, 

Poor breathing orators of miseries ! 

Let them have scope : though what they will impart 130 

Help nothing else, yet do they ease the heart. 
Duch. If so, then be not tongue-tied : go with me. 

And in the breath of bitter words let 's smother 

My damned son, that thy two sweet sons smother'd. 

The trumpet sounds : be copious in exclaims, 135 

Enter KiNG RICHARD, marching, with drums and trumpets. 

K. Rich. Who intercepts me in my expedition ? 

Duch. O ! she that might have intercepted thee, 
By strangling thee in her accursed womb. 
From all the slaughters, wretch, that thou hast done ! 

Q. Eliz. Hid'st thou that forehead with a golden crown, 140 
Where should be branded, if that right were right, 
The slaughter of the prince that ow'd that crown, 
And the dire death of my poor sons and brothers ? 
Tell me, thou villain slave, where are my children ? 

Duch. Thou toad, thou toad, where is thy brother Clarence ? 145 
And little Ned Plantagenet, his son ? 

Q. Eliz. Where is the gentle Rivers, Vaughan, Grey ? 

127. their client] Hanmer, Camb. ; their Clients Ff; your Client Qq 1-3, 5-8; 
yottr clients Q ii; your client's Fope. 128. inl estate] Qq ; ititestine Ft 130. 

will] Ff; do Qq. 131. nothing else] Ff; not at all Qq 1-6; not all Qq 7, S. 

134. that] Ff ; which Qq, 135. The trumpet sounds] Ff ; I heare his drum 

Qq. aft. 135. Scene v. Pope. Enter . . , trumpets.] Qq ; Enter Kino; 

Richard, and his Traine. Ff. 136. me in] Ff ; omitted Qq. 137. O I she] 
Ff; A she Qq. 141. Where] Qq ; WhereH Ff, should] jvould Q 4. 

branded] Ff; graven Qq. right,] Qq; right? Ff. 143. poor] Ff; two Qq. 
144. villain slave] Qq ; hyphened Ff. 145. Thou . . . Clarence] one line as 

Qq ; Thou Toad, thou Toade, Where . . . Clarence (two lines) Ff. 147. the 

gentle] Ff ; kind Hastings, Qq. 

127. client] This is evidently the " woes," and not in the genitive, 

right reading. Woes are the clients qualifying it. 

to whom words are but windy attornies. 142. ow'd] owned. Compare, among 

The misreading in the next line seems many other instances, Macbeth, i. iv. 

to point to the F i editor's misunder- 10. 

standing of the text at this point, and 147, T48. Aldis Wright, while retain- 
to an attempt at altering it on his own ing Qq reading, points out its inherent 
account. If " clients " is the right improbability. Elizabeth would not be 
reading, it must be in apposition to likely to speak of her enemy as " kind 



160 KING RICHARD III [act iv. 

Dtich. Where is kind Hastings ? 

K. Rich. A flourish, trumpets ! strike alarum, drums ! 

Let not the heavens hear these tell-tale women 150 

Rail on the Lord's anointed ! strike, I say! 

^Flourish. Alaru7ns. 

Either be patient, and intreat me fair. 

Or with the clamorous report of war 

Thus will I drown your exclamations. 
Dudi. Art thou my son ? 155 

K. Rich. Ay, I thank God, my father, and yourself. 
Duch. Then patiently hear my impatience. 
K. Rich. Madam, I have a touch of your condition, 

That cannot brook the accent of reproof. 
Duch. O ! let me speak. 

K. Rich. Do, then ; but I '11 not hear. 160 

Duch. I will be mild and gentle in my words, 
K. Rich. And brief, good mother ; for I am in haste. 
Duch. Art thou so hasty ? I have stay'd for thee, 

God knows, in torment and in agony, 
K. Rich. And came I not at last to comfort you ? 165 

Duch. No, by the holy rood ! thou know'st it well, 

Thou cam'st on earth to make the earth my hell. ^ 'j 

A grievous burthen was thy birth to me ; -v ** *t 

% ^^ 

148. Duch. . . . Hastings] Ff; omitted Qq. 151. Flourish. Alarums.] 

Ff ; The trumpets Q i ; The trumpets sound. Qq 2, 8 ; The trumpets sounds. Qq 
3-7. 159. That\ Ff ; Which Qq. 160. Duch. O . . . hear] Ff ; omitted 

Qq. 161. uiords]Fi; speech Qq. 164. torment and in] Ff; anguish, paine 
and Qq. 

Hastings," The tragedy of her own elected by the Lord " (Richard II. iii. 
family would also be too present in her ii. 57). Richard III., on the other 
mind to admit the memory of any hand, to whom such a belief is super- 
kindred crime; and, even if it occurred stition, uses it to awe his adversaries 
to her, she hardly would give it the first into silence. 

place in her reproaches. It is natural 152. intreat me fair] Compare 

that the Duchess, on the other hand, Richard II. iii. i, 37. 

recalling the loyalty of Hastings to 158. condition] temperament, dis- 

her eldest son and his family, should position, as Henry V. v. ii. 314; 

add his name to these of the members Othello, 11. i. 255. 

of the Woodville family and faction. 168. See note on 11. iv. 27, 28 above. 

151. the Lord's anointed] The For Richard's character at the various 

strength, such as it is, of Shakespeare's periods of his life, Shakespeare merely 

Richard II., proceeds from his high draws inferences from the general 

sense of his dignity as " the deputy description given by More. 



sc. iv] " .C>^KING RICHARD III 

Tetchy and wayward was thy infancy ; 
Thy school-days frightful, desperate, wild, and furious; 
Thy prime of manhood daring, bold, and venturous; 
Thy age confirm'd, proud, subtle, sly, and bloody. 
More mild, but yet more harmful, kind in hatred : 
What comfortable hour canst thou name, 
That ever grac'd me with thy company ? 
K. Rich. Faith ! none but Humphrey Hour, that call'd 
grace 



161 



170 



175 

your 



171. Thy . . . iieH<Mra»/s] omitted Qq 3-8, iy2. sly, and bluody]F{; blondie, 
trecherotis Qq. 173. Mofe . . . hatred] Ff ; omitted Qq. 175. 7cith] Ff; 

in Qq. 176. Faith . , . grace] one line as Qq ; Faith . . , Hower, That 

. , . Grace (two lines) Ff. 



169. Tetchy] Compare Romeo and 
yuliet, I. iii. 32 ; Troilus and Cressida, 
I. i. 99. The word has been explained 
as equivalent to " touchy," e.g. by 
Halliwell, Nares, etc. Skeat, how- 
ever, defines it as " full of tetches 
or teches, i.e. full of bad habits, freaks, 
whims, vices." In Romeo and Juliet 
(h.s.) it is used perhaps instead of 
" tettish " : compare Fletcher's Wit 
without Money, 1639, v. 2 : " He 's the 
most tettish knave ! " 

172. age confirmed] Aldis Wright 
explains, " in the full vigour ot man- 
hood." More, perhaps, than this is 
implied in " confirm'd," which means 
" fixed, resolved," as in Coriolanus, 
I. iii. 65, etc. " Age confirm'd" would 
thus denote the time of life at which 
early tendencies and character become 
fixed and settled. 

173. harmful, kind] Ff have " harm- 
full ; Kinde," and S. Walker suggested 
" harmful kind," which, if accepted, 
should be hyphened. However, the 
meaning of the paradox " kind in 
hatred " is clear enough. It exactly 
describes Richard's attitude towards 
Clarence at the beginning of the 
play. 

176. Humphrey Hour] The only 
satisfactory explanation of this play 
upon words is that suggested by Stee- 
vens, and adopted by M alone. " Shake- 
speare might indeed by this strange 
phrase have designed to mark the hour 
at which the good Duchess was as 
hungry as the followers ot Duke Hum- 
phrey." Q 8 reads " Humphreys 
houre," which may be intended to 



make the phrase clearer. Loiterers 
who could not buy or beg a dinner, and 
spent the dinner-interval in lounging 
about the nave of St. Paul's, were said 
to " dine with Duke Humphrey." 
Humphrey, Duke of Gloucester, son of 
Henry IV., died in 1447, and was buried 
at St. Albans Abbey ; but " a proper 
chapel and fair monument " on the 
south side of St. Paul's nave, marking 
the burial-place of Sir John Beauchamp 
(d. 1358), were supposed vulgarly to 
mark that of Duke Humphrey. Decker, 
Guls Horn-Booke, ch. iv., speaks of 
this part of the nave of St. Paul's as 
'♦ Duke Humfi-yes Walke." Gabriel 
Harvey, Foure Letters and certain 
Sonnets, 1592, has " to seekehis dinner 
in Poules with Duke Humphrey : to 
licke dishes, to be a beggar." For other 
references, see Steevens' note ; Nares 
s.v. Duke Humphrey ; Brand, Popular 
Antiquities, iii. 384-7. Shakespeare 
thus may have intended to make 
Richard answer his mother's question 
literally with a far-fetched pun : the 
only hour he can name is Duke Hum- 
phrey's hour, and that called her away 
from his company to eat her breakfast. 
The mention of breakfast instead of 
dinner is immaterial. Besides this ex- 
planation, the on!) other that seems 
reasonable is that the " comfortable 
hour " was a certain Humphrey Hour, 
for whom there is no historical authority. 
Shakespeare may have invented the 
name for a ser\'ing-man, merely for the 
sake of the pun. The idea that Hum- 
phrey Hour was a gallant of the 
Duchess is not warrantable. 



162 KING RICHARD III [act iv. 

To breakfast once forth of my company. 

If I be so disgracious in your eye, 

Let me march on, and not offend you, madam, 

Strike up the drum ! 
Duck. I prithee, hear me speak. i8o 

K. Rich. You speak too bitterly. 
Duch. Hear me a word ; 

For I shall never speak to thee again. 
K. Rich. So. 
Duch. Either thou wilt die, by God's just ordinance, 

Ere from this war thou turn a conqueror ; 185 

Or I with grief and extreme age shall perish, 

And never more behold thy face again. 

Therefore take with thee my most grievous curse. 

Which, in the day of battle, tire thee more 

Than all the complete armour that thou wear'st ! 190 

My prayers on the adverse party fight ; 

And there the little souls of Edward's children 

Whisper the spirits of thine enemies, 

And promise them success and victory. 

Bloody thou art, bloody will be thy end ; 195 

Shame serves thy life, and doth thy death attend. \Exii. 
Q. Eliz. Though far more cause, yet much less spirit to curse 

Abides in me, I say amen to her. 
K. Rich. Stay, madam ; I must talk a word with you. 
Q. Eliz. I have no more sons of the royal blood 200 

For thee to slaughter : for my daughters, Richard, 

They shall be praying nuns, not weeping queens ; 

And therefore level not to hit their lives. 

178. / he\ Q I, Ff; it he Qq 2-8. disgraciotis'] gratious Qq 3-7; grieious Q 
8. eye] Ff ; sight Qq. 179. you, madam] Ff; your grace Qq. 180-83. 
Strike up . , . So] Ff; Dut. O heare me speake for I shall neuer see thee more. 
King. Come, come, you are too bitter. Qq. 184. thou wilt] thou 'It Pope. 

187. more behold] Ff ; lookc vpon Qq. 188. grievous] Ff; heauy Qq. 195. 
art] art, and Qq 6-8. 198. her] Ff; all Qq. aft. 198. Theobald 

added Gotwg'. 199. talk]'Fi; speake Qq. 200. more]moe Q i. 201. 

slaughter] Ff ; murther Qq. 

196. serves] accompanies, is servant Greene, Orlando Furioso (Dj ce, 92) : 

to; parallel to "attend" at the close " .\y, so they guess, but level far 

of the line. awry." 

203. level not] do not aim. Compare 



sc. IV.] KING RICHARD III 163 

K. Rich. You have a daughter call'd Elizabeth, 

Virtuous and fair, royal and gracious ? 205 

Q. Eliz. And must she die for this ? O ! let her live, 

And I '11 corrupt her manners, stain her beauty. 

Slander myself as false to Edw^ard's bed, 

Throw over her the veil of infamy : 

So she may live unscarr'd of bleeding slaughter, 210 

I will confess she was not Edward's daughter. 
K. Rich. Wrong not her birth ; she is a royal princess. 
Q. Eliz. To save her life, I '11 say she is not so. 
K. Rich. Her life is safest only in her birth. 
Q. Eliz. And only in that safety died her brothers. 215 

K. Rich. Lo, at their birth good stars were opposite. 
Q. Eliz. No, to their lives ill friends were contrary. 
K. Rich. All unavoided is the doom of destiny. 
Q. Eliz. True ; when avoided grace makes destiny : 

My babes were destin'd to a fairer death, 220 

If grace had bless'd thee with a fairer life. 
K. Rich. You speak as if that I had slain my cousins. 
Q. Eliz. Cousins indeed, and by their uncle cozen'd 

Of comfort, kingdom, kindred, freedom, life ! 

Whose hand soever lanch'd their tender hearts, 225 

Thy head, all indirectly, gave direction : 

No doubt the murderous knife was dull and blunt 

Till it was whetted on thy stone-hard heart, 

To revel in the entrails of my lambs. 

But that still use of grief makes wild grief tame, 230 

■zo^. veil'\ vaile Qq 6-8, Ff; vale Qq 1-5. 210. «M5carrW 0/] Ff ; vnskard 

(or unscarde, etc.) from Qq. 212. a royal princess] Ff; of roiall bloud Qq. 

214. safest only] Ff ; onlie safest Qq. 216. Lo] No Pope. birth] Ff ; 

births Qq. 217. ill] Ff; bad Qq. 222-35. J^- R^c^- You . . . bosom] Ff ; 
omitted Qq. 224,225. Of comfort , , . A^ar<5] omitted Pope. 225. lanch'd] 
lanced Camb. 

218. unavoided] unavoidable : see 226. Steevens refers to Hamlet, 11. i. 

notes on i. ii. 39, i. iv. 27 above. 66. He criticises the jingle as one " in 

223. The same pun occurs in which Shakespeare found more delight 

Fletcher, Monsieur Thomas, i. 3 : than his readers." It is thoroughly in 

" cousin. Cozen thyself no more." keeping with the elaborate word-split- 

225. lanch'd] Compare Beaumont and ting of the whole dialogue. 
Fletcher, Faithful Shepherdess, iv. ^l — 230. still use] constant use. Com- 

" while he, pare " still practice " m Titus Androni- 

Directed by his fury, bloodily cms, hi. ii. 45, where " still," however 

Lanch'd up her breast." may mean " silent." 



164 KING RICHARD III [act iv. 

My tongue should to thy ears not name my boys, 

Till that my nails were anchor'd in thine eyes ; 

And I, in such a desperate bay of death, 

Like a poor bark, of sails and tackling reft, 

Rush all to pieces on thy rocky bosom. 23S 

K. Rich. Madam, so thrive I in my enterprise 

And dangerous success of bloody wars, 

As I intend more good to you and yours 

Than ever you and yours by me were harm'd ! 
Q. Eliz. What good is cover'd with the face of heaven, 240 

To be discover'd, that can do me good ? 
K. Rich. The advancement of your children, gentle lady. 
Q. Eliz. Up to some scaffold, there to lose their heads ? 
K. Rich. Unto the dignity and height of fortune, 

The high imperial type of this earth's glory. 245 

Q. Eliz. Flatter my sorrow with report of it ! 

Tell me, what state, what dignity, what honour, 
— Canst thou demise to any child of mine ? 
K. Rich. Even all I have ; ay, and myself and all. 

Will I withal endow a child of thine ; 250 

So in the Lethe of thy angry soul 

236, 237. Madam . . . wars} two lines as Ff; Madam, so i/inuc I in my 
dangerous attempt 0/ hostile armes (one line) Qq. 239. and yours] Qq 6-8, 
Ff ; or yours Qq 1-5. by me were harm'd] Ff; were by me wrong'd Qq. 
242. gentle] Fi; mightie Qq. 244. Unto]F{; No to Qq. /ortune]F{; 
honor Qq. 245. high] Q i, Ff ; height Qq 2-8. 246. sorrow] Ff; sorrowes 
Qq. 248. demise] deuise Ft 2-^. 249. a^] Ff ; jm Qq. 

237. success] sequel, result, as Unto her former strength and 
Othello, III. iii. 222. glorious type 

245. type] emblem, badge. The Our half-declining Roman mon- 

phrase is explained by another in archy." 

Halle's Chronicle, p. 414, cited by 248. demise] Aldis Wright notes this 
Aldis Wright, where Richard, in his law-term as an oto^ KtySufvoy in 
speech to his soldiers before Bosworth, Shakespeare, like " pleasing " in i. i. 
says: "I haue obteyned the crowne 13 above. A "demise" is a convey- 
iype of this famous realm & noble ance or transfer of an estate or other 
region." See Henry VIII. 1. iii. 31, real property. Thus, Blackstone defines 
where " types of travel " = emblems of " the demise of the crown " as meaning 
travel. In 3 Henry VI. i. iv. 121, " that, in consequence of the disunion of 
" the type of King of Naples " prob- the Kmg's natural body from his body 
ably means the style or semblance of politic, the kingdom is transferred or de- 
king, though Schmidt takes it to mean mised to his successor ; and so the royal 
the crown. A more unrestricted use, dignityremain.'>perpetual." Perhapsthe 
again, is found in Chapman {?), Al- word was suggested here by the men- 
phonsus, 1654,1.2: — tion, immediately preceding, of "the 
" to unite anew high imperial type of this earth's glory. 



sc. IV.] KING RICHARD III 165 

Thou drown the sad remembrance of those wrongs, 
Which thou supposest I have done to thee. 

Q. Eliz. Be brief, lest that the process of thy kindness 

Last longer telling than thy kindness' date, 255 

K. Rich. Then know, that from my soul I love thy 
daughter. 

Q. Eliz. My daughter's mother thinks it with her soul. 

K. Rich. What do you think ? 

Q. Eliz. That thou dost love my daughter from thy soul : 

So from thy soul's love didst thou love her brothers ; 260 
And from my heart's love I do thank thee for it. 

K. Rich. Be not so hasty to confound my meaning : 
I mean, that with my soul I love thy daughter, 
And do intend to make her queen of England. 

Q. Eliz. Well then, who dost thou mean shall be her king ? 265 

K. Rich. Even he that makes her queen : who else should be ? 

Q. Eliz. What, thou ? 

K. Rich. Even so : how think you of it ? 

Q. Eliz. How canst thou woo her ? 

K. Rich. That I would learn of you, 270 

As one being best acquainted with her humour. 

Q. Eliz. And wi It thou learn of me ? 

K. Rich. Madam, with all my heart. 

Q. Eliz. Send to her, by the man that slew her brothers, 

A pair of bleeding hearts ; thereon engrave 275 

Edward and York ; then haply will she weep : 
Therefore present to her — as sometime Margaret 

255. kindness' date] Ff; kindnes doe Qq. 256. Then . . . daiighfey] one 

line as Qq; Then know, That . . . Daughter (two lines) Ff. 260. sottl's 

love didst thou love] Q i, Ff ; soitles hue didst thou Qq 2-5 ; soule didst thou 
lotie Qq 6-8. 264. do intend] Ff ; nieane Qq. 265. Well then] Ff ; Sale 

ihen Qq. 266. Even . . . be] one line as Qq ; Even . . . Queene : Who 

. . . bee (two lines) Ff. else should be] Ff ; should be else Q 1 ; should else Qq 
2-8. 268. Even so] Ff; / eueji I Qq; Even I Capell ; Ay, even I Malone. 

how] Ff; what Qq. ofit]Fi; of it, madam Qq. 270. TAa/] omitted Pope. 
/ would] would I Qq i, 2. 271. being] Ff; that are Qq i, 2 ; that were 

Qq 38. 273. Madam] omitted Pope. 275. engrave] engraven Collier 

MS. 276. ivill she] Ff; she will Qq. 277. sometime] sometimes Qq 

I, 2, 7, 8. 

271. humour] disposition, as Love's word is used in its common sense of 
Labour's Lost, v. i. 10; 2 Henry "mood": here it implies natural char- 
VL V. i. 132. Above, iv. i. 64, the acter. 



166 KING RICHARD III [act iv. 

Did to thy father, steep'd in Rutland's blood — 
A handkerchief ; which, say to her, did drain 
The purple sap from her sweet brother's body, 280 

And bid her wipe her weeping eyes withal. 
If this inducement move her not to love, 
Send her a letter of thy noble deeds ; 
Tell her thou mad'st away her uncle Clarence, 
Her uncle Rivers ; ay, and, for her sake, 285 

Mad'st quick conveyance with her good Aunt Anne. 
; K, Rich. You mock me, madam ; this is not the way 
I To win your daughter. 

Q. Eliz. There is no other way ; 

Unless thou could'st put on some other shape, ^ /^ 
And not be Richard that hath done all this. p^p ^^^po' 

K. Rich. Say that I did all this for love of her. '^<^^'xx^ 

Q. Eliz. Nay, then indeed she cannot choose but hate thee, 
Having bought love with such a bloody spoil. 

K. Rich. Look, what is done, cannot be now amended : 

Men shall deal unadvisedly sometimes, 295 

Which after-hours gives leisure to repent. 
If I did take the kingdom from your sons ; 
To make amends, I '11 give it to your daughter : 

278, 279. Did . . . handkerchief] Ff; Did to th}' father, a handkercher (hand- 
kercheffe Qq2-8) steef>t in Rutlands bloud {one Vine) Qq. 279,280. which . . . 
body] Ff; omitted Qq. 280. sap] tide Pope. brother's body]brothers bodies 
Rowe; brothers' bodies WzThuiton. 281. wipe] Ff; drie Qq. withal] Ff; 
therewith Qq. 282. move] Ff; force Qq. 283. letter] Ff; storie Qq. 

deeds] Ff; acts Qq. 285. ay] Ff ; yea Qq. 287. You mock me, madam] 

Ff ; Come, come, you mocke me Qq i, 2 ; Come, come, ye mockc me Qq 3-8. 
this is] this F i. 288. There is] There's Pope. 291-345. K. Rich. Say 

. . .years.] Ff; omitted Qq. 291. her.] her ? Capell. 292. hate] have 

Steevens (Mason conj.) ; love Grant White (Tyrwhitt conj.). 293. bought] 

brought Pope. 296. repent] repent of Rowe. 

286. conveyance] For the sense of that " part of the dialogue is ridiculous, 
dishonest dealmg implied here in this and the whole improbable." An op- 
word, compare 1 Henry VI. i. iii. 2, posite, but paradoxically expressed 
3 Henry VI. iii. iii. 160. opinion is that of Dr. Brandes (William 

291. Richard makes use of the argu- Shakespeare, English translation, 1898, 

ment with which he had tempted Anne, ii. 159) : " The scene has the air of a 

I. ii. 115-24 above. Dr. A. W. Ward repetition. ... Shakespeare has lavished 

(History of English Dramatic Litera- his whole art on the passage." The 

ture. new ed. 1899, ii. 99) calls this last sentence is surely extravagant, 
part of the scene "a weak sort of repe- 293. spoil] waste, havoc (Johnson), 

tition of the powerful scene between Compare J Henry IV. in. iii. n ; 

Richard and Anne." Johnson remarked Henry V. v. ii. 249. 



sc. IV.] KING RICHARD III 167 

If I have kill'd the issue of your womb; 

To quicken your increase, I will beget 300 

Mine issue of your blood upon your daughter: 

A grandam's name is little less in love 

Than is the doting title of a mother ; 

They are as children but one step below, 

Even of your mettle, of your very blood ; 305 

Of all one pain, save for a night of groans 

Endur'd of her, for whom you bid like sorrow. 

Your children were vexation to your youth ; 

But mine shall be a comfort to your age. 

The loss you have is but a son being king; 310 

And by that loss your daughter is made queen. 

I cannot make you what amends I would ; 

Therefore accept such kindness as I can. 

Dorset your son, that with a fearful soul 

Leads discontented steps in foreign soil, 315 

This fair alliance quickly shall call home 

To high promotions and great dignity : 

The king that calls your beauteous daughter wife. 

Familiarly shall call thy Dorset brother : 

315. Leads] Treads Collier (Capell conj.). 

305. mettle] temper, disposition. 314-17. Dorset your son] On Shake- 
The same word as "metal." See Mr. speare's confusion of historical time in 
Macmillan on jfulius Ccssar, i. i. 66, this scene, see note on line 447 below, 
and Mr. Hart on Measure for Measure, Dorset, on leaving sanctuary (see iv. i. 
II. iv. 48. Here the spelling in Ff is 38 above), had " gathered together a 
" mettall," as in Troilus and Cressida, great band of men in Yorkshire " to help 
I. iii. 22 ; J Henry IV. 11. iv. 383, iv. Buckingham. It was after the failure 
iii. 22, and v. iv. 24 ; and in line 385 of Buckingham's expedition that he 
below. " Metal " occurs in Measure went abroad and joined Richmond. 
for Measure, i. i. 49, where a play is See also iv. ii. 48, 49. According to 
intended on the double meaning of the More (ap. Holinshed, iii. 750), one of 
word. The spelling in Henry V. iii. v. the chief inducements by which Richard 
15 is " mettell." " Mettle," however, won over the Queen Dowager was his 
is the form used in the large majority offer of promotion to Dorset. She 
of Shakespearean instances, whether actually was so " blinded by auaricious 
the meaning be that of "metal," " dis- affection, & seduced by flattering words" 
position," or, as is very common, be that she sent letters to her son, " will- 
applied in the double sense. ing him in anie wise to leaue the earle, 
307. bid] endured ; a past tense and without delaie to repaire into Eng- 
formed from " bide." Chaucer, Canter- land." The whole passage in More is 
bury Tales, E. 1888, uses a past parti- epitomised in this speech, 
ciple " biden " from " bide," with the 315. Leads] used in the sense of 
intransitive sense of "waited." But "drags; draws along his steps." 
the past tense used here is uncommon, 
if not unique. Capell read " 'bid." 



108 KING RICHAKD III [act iv 

Again shall you be mother to a king- ; 320 

And all the ruins of distressful times 
Repair'd with double riches of content. 
What ! we have many goodly days to see : 
The liquid drops of tears that you have shed 
Shall come again, transform'd to orient pearl, 325 

Advantaging their loan with interest 
Of ten times double gain of happiness. 
Go then, my mother, to thy daughter go ; 
Make bold her bashful years with your experience ; 
Prepare her ears to hear a wooer's tale ; 330 

Put in her tender heart the aspiring flame 
Of golden sovereignty ; acquaint the princess 
With the sweet silent hours of marriage joys : 
And when this arm of mine hath chastised 
The petty rebel, dull-brain'd Buckingham, 335 

Bound with triumphant garlands will I come. 
And lead thy daughter to a conqueror's bed ; 
To whom I will retail my conquest won, 
And she shall be sole victress, Caesar's Caesar. 
Q. Eliz. What were I best to say? her father's brother 340 
Would be her lord ? or shall I say, her uncle ? 

326. /oa«] Theobald ; Loue Ff. 336. garlands] laurels Capell. 339. 

victress] F 4 ; Victoresse Ff 1-3. 

325. orient pearl] See Prof. Case's upside down. He explains the pas- 
note on Antony and Cleopatra, i. v. 41, sage thus: " The tears that you have 
for the two possible derivations of '• ori- lent to your afflictions, shall be turned 
ent," viz. (i) oriental, eastern ; (2) from into gems, and requite you by way of 
the resemblance of the colour of a pearl interest." 

to the clearness of the air before sun- 335. dull - brain'd Buckingham] 

rising. A passage in Decker, Bel-Man Richard, almost secure in the hope of 

of London (Smeaton, 112), speaks for his new marriage, speaks slightingly of 

the second of these: "So are these Buckmgham. However, the " deep- 

Villanies . . . paynted over with fresh revolving witty Buckingham " (iv. ii. 

orient cullers, because their looks may 42), while aiding him, had never been 

be more pleasing." For another ex- his dupe. In iv. ii. 28-31, Richard 

ample of "orient" see the passage from reckons "high-reaching" Buckingham 

Drayton quoted at v. iii. 251 below. as one of those who look into him 

326. Advantaging] "Advantage" is "with considerate eyes," and con- 
the name given to the favourable terms trasts him with " iron-witted fools " 
on which a lender receives back more like Tyrrel, and " unrespective boys" 
than the amount of his loan : see Mer- like Tyrrel's friend, the page. 

chant of Venice, I. iii. 71 ; 1 Henry IV. 338. retail] " Richard means to say 

II. iv. 599. that he will transmit the benefit of his 

loan] Theobald conjectured, with victories to Elizabeth " (Steevens). 

every probability, that Ff " Loue " Probably the real meaniiig is simply 

was really " Lone," with the n turned " tell." as at 111. i. 77 above. 



sc. iv] KING RICHARD III 169 

Or, he that slew her brothers and her uncles ? 

Under what title shall I woo for thee, 

That God, the law, my honour, and her love. 

Can make seem pleasing to her tender years? 345 

K. Rich. Infer fair England's peace by this alliance. 

Q. Eliz. Which she shall purchase with still lasting war. 

K. Rich. Tell her the king, that may command, entreats. 

Q. Eliz. That at her hands which the king's King forbids. 

K. Rich. Say, she shall be a high and mighty queen. 350 

Q. Eliz. To wail the title, as her mother doth. 

K. Rich. Say, I will love her everlastingly. 

Q. Eliz. But how long shall that title, ever, last ? 

K. Rich. Sweetly in force unto her fair life's end. 

Q. Eliz. But how long fairly shall her sweet life last? 355 

K. Rich. As long as heaven and nature lengthens it. 

Q. Eliz. As long as hell and Richard likes of it. 

K. Rich. Say, I, her sovereign, am her subject low. 

Q. Eliz. But she, your subject, loathes such sovereignty. 

K. Rich. Be eloquent in my behalf to her. 360 

Q. Eliz. An honest tale speeds best, being plainly told. 

K. Rich. Then plainly to her tell my loving tale. 

Q. Eliz. Plain and not honest is too harsh a style. 

K. Rich. Your reasons are too shallow and too quick. 

Q. Eliz. O no ! my reasons are too deep and dead ; 365 

Too deep and dead, poor infants, in their graves. 

K. Rich. Harp not on that string, madam ; that is past. 

348. Tell her] Ff ; Say that Qq. that] Ff ; which Qq. 349. forbids] 

Q I, Ff; forbid Qq 2-8. 351. wail] Qq; vaile Ff. 353. ever] omitted Q 5. 
355. her sweet life] that title Qq 3-8. 356. As] Ff; So Qq. lengthens] 

lengthen Pope. 357. ^s] Ff; So Qq. likes] like Pope. 358. /ow]Ff; 

lone Qq ; now Pope. 362. plainly to her tell] Ff ; in plaine termes tell her Qq, 
364. Yotir] Ff; Madame your Qq. 365-67. Q. Eliz. O no . . . past] Pope 

putin margin. 365. »jy] joj<r Rann. t,66. graves]'Fi; graueO^q. 367,368, 
K. Rich. Harp not . . . break] Q i ; Qq 2-8 omit 367 ; Harpe on tt still shall I, 
till heart-strings break. Rich. Harpe not on that string Madam, that is past 
(transposing 367, 368) Ff. 

346. Infer] in the literal sense, deep " carries the play on words un- 

" bring on." See also in. v. 75 ; m. necessarily far. 

vii. 12 above. 367. The editor of F i, reinserting this 

364. quick] Richard means " hasty." line in the margin of one of the later 

Elizabeth, in her answer, plays upon Qq, must have misled the printer into 

the other meaning, " full of life," to transposing it with line 368. 

point her taunt. Harp not on that string] Compare 

366. Too de^] Pope's reading " Two Measure for Measure, v. i, 64 (and 



170 KING RICHARD III [act iv 

Q. Eliz. Harp on it still shall I till heart-strings break. 
K. Rich. Now, by my George, my garter, and my crown. — 
Q. Eliz. Profan'd, dishonour'd, and the third usurp'd. 370 

K. Rich. I swear — 

Q, Eliz. By nothing ; for this is no oath : 

, ^'-.^/"^hy George, profan'd, hath lost his lordly honour ; 
L* . *.v,- Thy garter, blemish'd, pawn'd his knightly virtue ; 

Thy crown, usurp'd, disgrac'd his kingly glory. 
^ If something thou would'st swear to be believ'd, 375 

^ Swear then by something that thou hast not wrong'd. 

K. Rich. Then, by myself — 

Q. Eliz. Thyself is self-misus'd. 

K. Rich. Now, by the world — 

Q. Eliz. 'Tis full of thy foul wrongs. 

K. Rich. My father's death — 

Q. Eliz. Thy life hath it dishonour'd. 

K. Rich. Why then, by God— 
Q. Eliz. God's wrong is most of all. 380 

If thou didst fear to break an oath with Him, 

The unity the king my husband made 

369. K. Rich.] omitted Ff. 372. Thy] Ff ; The Qq (and so 373, 374). lordly] 
Ff ; holie Qq. 373. knightly] kingly Ff 2-4. 374. glory] Ff; dignitie Qq. 

375. something thou would'st] Ff; something thou wilt Qq 1-6; nothing thou 
wilt Qq 7, 8. 377. Then . . . self-misus'd] Qq place between lines 379, 380. 

is self-misus'd] Ff; thy selfe misusest Qq 1-7; thy sclfe misused Q 8. 379. it] 
Ff; that Qq. 380. God . . . God's] Qq ; Heauen . . . Heauens Ff. 381. 
didst fear] Ff ; hadst feard Qq. with Him] Ff ; by him Qq ; with heav'n Pope. 
382. my husband] Ff; thy brother Qq 1-6; my brother Qq 7, 8. 

see Mr. Hart's note) ; Coriolanus, 11. iii. strynges do minister the pulse." So 

260, etc. A similar metaphor is used Heywood, Faire Maide of the West, 

by Fletcher, Monsieur Thomas, i. i: i63i,iii. 4: — 

"Touch no more that string, 'tis too " if she still love him, 

harsh and jarring"; S/rtn.CMra/f.i. 2: — I'll break her heart-strings with 

" Touch not that string, some false report 

'Twill but increase your sorrow." Of his unkindness." 

Among instances supplied by Mr. Craig 369. George] The figure of St. George 

.Tiay be noted one from Speed's Chron- and the dragon, which is the pendent 

icle, p. 909: "The Cardinal! made a of the collar of the Garter. The George, 

countenance to the other lord that he as Aldis Wright notes, was not added 

should harpe no more on that string." till the reign of Henry VH. 

368. heart-strings] Mr. Craig notes 377. The re-arrangement of lines in 

that Cotgrave has " Precordiaux : the Ff makes no great difference, but the 

heart-strings or filme of the heart," and order in which Richard's oaths come is 

that in the old anatomy the heart- perhaps more natural, 

strings are nerves supposed to brace 380. God] For Ff reading, compare i. 

and sustain the heart: compare W. iv. 21, 117. 188, 189, etc.. and notes on 

Horman, Vulgaria. 1517 : "The hert those passages. 



sc. IV.] KING RICHARD III 171 

Thou hadst not broken, nor my brothers died : 
If thou hadst fear'd to break an oath by Him, 
The imperial metal, circling now thy head, 385 

Had grac'd the tender temples of my child, 
And both the princes had been breathing here, 
Which now, two tender bedfellows for dust, 
Thy broken faith hath made the prey for worms. 
What canst thou swear by now ? 
K. Rich. The time to come. 390 

Q. Eliz. That thou hast wronged in the time o'erpast ; 
For I myself have many tears to wash 
Hereafter time, for time past wrong'd by thee. 
The children live, whose fathers thou hast slaughter'd, 
Ungovern'd youth, to wail it with their age ; 395 

The parents live, whose children thou hast butcher'd, 
Old barren plants, to wail it with their age. 
Swear not by time to come ; for that thou hast 
Misus'd ere us'd, by times ill-us'd o'erpast. 
K. Rich. As I intend to prosper and repent, 400 

So thrive I in my dangerous affairs 
Of hostile arms ! myself myself confound ! 
Heaven and fortune bar me happy hours ! 
Day, yield me not thy light ; nor, night, thy rest ! 
Be opposite, all planets of good luck, 405 

To my proceeding, if with dear heart's love, 
Immaculate devotion, holy thoughts, 
I tender not thy beauteous princely daughter ! 

383. Thou hadst not] Ff ; Had not bene Qq. brothers died] Ff; brother 

slaine Qq. 385. head] Ff; brow Qq. 386. grac'd] Ff; grast Qq 1-5; 

grac't Qq 6-8. 388. two] too Capell. bedfellows] Ff; plaie fellow es Qq. 

389. the prey for] Ff; a prate for Qq ; a prey to Pope. 390. What . . . 

now] Ff; omitted Qq, Pope. The time] Ff; By the time Qq; By time Pope. 

391. wronged in the time] Ff ; wrongd in time Qq. 393. past wrong'd by 

thee]'Pi\ by the past wrongd (^a^. ^g^. fathers] Ff; parents Qq. 395. with 
their] Q 5, Ff; in their Qq 1-4; with her Qq 6-8. 397. barren] Ff; withered 

Qq. with] in Pope. 398, 399. Swear . . . o'erpast] Pope put in margin. 

399. ere] eare Qq 1-3, 5; nere Q 4. times ill-us'd] Ff; time misused Qq. 

o'erpast]orepast Qq; repast Ff. 401. affairs]F{; attempt Qq. ^^o^. Heaven 
. . . hours] Ff; omitted Qq ; So Heaven . . . hours Keightley (conj.). 406. 
proceeding] Ff ; proceedings Qq. dear] Ff; pure Qq. 407. Immaculate] 

Q I, Ff; Immaculatd Q 2 ; Immaculated Qq 3-8. 408. tender] render Qq 3-7. 

393. Hereafter time] after this. The 408. tender] The word is used exactly 
two words should perhaps be hyphene J. in the present sense by Horace Walpole, 



172 KING RICHARD III [act iv. 

In her consists my happiness and thine ; 

Without her, follows to myself and thee, 410 

Herself, the land, and many a Christian soul, 

Death, desolation, ruin, and decay : 

It cannot be avoided but by this ; 

It will not be avoided but by this. 

Therefore, dear mother, — I must call you so — 415 

Be the attorney of my love to her : 

Plead what I will be, not what I have been ; 

Not my deserts, but what I will deserve : 

Urge the necessity and state of times. 

And be not peevish found in great designs. 420 

Q. Eliz. Shall I be tempted of the devil thus? 
K. Rich. Ay, if the devil tempt you to do good. 
Q. Eliz. Shall I forget myself to be myself? 
K. Rich. Ay, if yourself 's remembrance wrong yourself. 
Q. Eliz. Yet thou didst kill my children. 425 

K. Rich. But in your daughter's womb I bury them ; 

Where, in that nest of spicery, they will breed 

Selves of themselves, to your recomforture. 
Q. Eliz. Shall I go win my daughter to your will ? 
K. Rich. And be a happy mother by the deed. 430 

410. myself and thee]Fl; this land and me Qq. 411. Herself, the land] Ff; 
To thee her selfe Qq. 412. Death, desolation] Ff; Sad desolation Qq 1-6; 

Sad desolate Qq 7, 8. 414. by this] this Q i. 415. dear] Ff ; good Qq. 

418. my] Ff ; by Qq. deserts] desires F 4. 419. and state of] of state and 
Collier MS. 420. peevish found] Ff; pieuish, fond Q i ; peeuish, fond Q 2; 

peeuish fond Qq 3-8; peevish-fond Staunton (Malone conj.), Camb. 422. 

you] Ff; thee Qq. 425. Yet] Ff; But Qq. 426. I bury] Q 3, Ff; I buried 
Qq I, 2; lie btirte Qq 4-8. 427. they] there Qq 3-8. will] Ff; shall Qq, 

428. recomforture] Ff; recomjiture Qq. 

writing to Sir Horace Mann, 15th De- Steevens defended Ff, quoting Henry 

cember, 1748: " Somerset tendered his VIII. 11. ii. 79. 

pride even beyond his hate." 423, 424. Elizabeth asks " Shall 1 

416. Be the attorney] The metaphor forget myself, the wronged mother, to 

is common in Shakespeare. See line be myself, the royal queen-mother ? " 

127 above, v. iii. 83 below. Richard's answer, as usual, is double- 

420. peevish found] For " peevish " edged, and is delivered with an appear- 
see I. iii. 194, in. i. 31 above. The ance of sincerity, as though Elizabeth's 
plausible reading " peevish-fond " is words had only their surface-meaning, 
probably the result of the omission of a 427, 428. Richard, as Steevens notes, 
letter in Qq. " Peevish-fond " is equiva- refers to the fable of the phcenix. 
lent to "childish-foolish"; not in the 428. to your recomforture] to the re- 
sense of childish simplicity, as in i. iii. covery of your comfort. For the form 
I42 above, but of childi.sh waywardness, "recomforture" compare "recure" in 

III. vii. 130 above. 



sc. IV.] KING RICHARD III 178 

Q, Eliz. I go. Write to me very shortly, 

And you shall understand from me her mind. 

K. Rich. Bear her my true love's kiss ; and so, farewell. 

\Exit Queen Elizabeth. 
Relenting fool, and shallow-changing woman ! 

Enter RatCLIFF ; Catesby following. 

How now, what news ? 435 

Rat. Most mighty sovereign, on the western coast 
Rideth a puissant navy ; to our shores 
Throng many doubtful hollow-hearted friends, 
Unarm'd and unresolv'd to beat them back : 
'Tis thought that Richmond is their admiral ; 440 

And there they hull, expecting but the aid 
Of Buckingham to welcome them ashore. 
K. Rich. Some light-foot friend post to the Duke of Norfolk : 
Ratcliff, thyself, or Catesby ; where is he ? 

431. to me] to me. Richard Collier MS. very] omitted Pope. 432. 

And . . . mind] Ff ; omitted Qq. 433. and so] Ff ; omitted Qq. ; Johnson 

2i.AA% Kissing her. Exit Queen Elizabeth.] Exit. Qq 1,2; Exit Qu. Q^(\i-?>\ 

ExitQ. Ff (aft. 432). 434. shallow-changing woman] Ff; shallow chang- 

ing woman Qq ; shallow, changing — woman Capell. aft. 434. Enter . . . 

following] Capell, Camb. ; Enter Rat. Qq ; Enter Ratcliffe. Ff (aft. 435.) 
435. How . . . news] Ff ; omitted Qq. aft. 435. Scene vi. Pope. 436. 
Most mighty] Ff; My gracious Qq. 437. our shores'] Ff; the shore Qq. 

443. Norfolk] Norff. Qq 1-5. 

431. Steevens reads "shortly" as a For examples, see Nares s.z)., and Mr. 

trisyllable, which removes the metrical Luce's note on Twelfth Night, 1. v. 217. 

irregularity. Possibly, however, there New Eng. Diet. quotesSmith, Seaman's 

is an intentional break in the line after Grammar, ''hull, which is to beare no 

" I go." saile. . . . They call it hulling also in 

434. More's account of Elizabeth's a calme swelling sea, which is com- 

behaviour is most unfavourable to her monly before a storme, when they 

strength of character. Her conduct in strike their sailes lest she should beat 

the present scene is the result of Shake- them against the mast by rolling." 

speare's imagination ; but it is highly Mr. Craig notes from Frobisher, Voy- 

probable that she succumbed to per- age, 1578, p. 121 : " being then be- 

sonal overtures by Richard, after her calmed, and lying a-hull openly upon 

departure from sanctuary. the great bay." 

shallow - changing woman] What- 443. light-foot] light-footed, as 

ever knowledge Shakespeare had of " venom " for " venomed," i. iii. 291 

the Latin classics, he hardly can have above. New Eng. Diet, quotes 

forgotten Virgil, Mneid, iv. 569, 570. Spenser, Shepheards Calendar. June, 

441. hull] drift ; float at the mercy line 26 : — 

of the wind, which drives the hull of " And light-foote Nymphes, can 

the boat along without the aid of sails. chace the lingring night." 



174 KING RICHARD III [act iv. 

Gates. Here, my good lord. 

K. Rich. Catesby, fly to the duke ! 445 

Gates. I will, my lord, with all convenient haste. 

K. Rich. Ratcliff, come hither ! post to Salisbury : 

When thou com'st thither, — \To Gatesby] Dull, unmindful 
villain ! 

Why stay'st thou here, and go'st not to the duke ? 
Gates. First, mighty liege, tell me your highness' pleasure, 450 

What from your grace I shall deliver to him. 
K. Rich. O, true, good Catesby : bid him levy straight 

The greatest strength and power that he can make, 

And meet me suddenly at Salisbury. 
Gates. I go. [Exit. 455 

Rat. What, may it please you, shall I do at Salisbury ? 
K. Rich. Why, what wouldst thou do there before I go ? 
Rat. Your highness told me I should post before. 
K. Rich. My mind is chang'd. 



445- good]Vi; omitted Qq. Ca/fifc^-. ^j]Ff; F/jV (new line) Qq. 446,447. 
Gates. I will . . . hither] Ff; omitted Qq. 447. Ratcliff] Catesby Ft. 

post] Ff ; post thou Qq (continuing 445) ; [To Ratcliff] Post thou Camb. 448. 
thither] Ff; there Qq. [To Catesby.] Rowe, Camb. 449. stay'st] Ff ; 

standst Qq 1-3, 5, 6, 8 ; stands Qq 4, 7. here] Ff ; still Qq. 450. liege 

, . . pleasure] Ff ; Soueraigne, let me know your minde Qq. 451. to him] 

Ff; them Qq i, 2 ; Aim Qq 3-8. 453. that]F{; omitted Qq. 454. suddenly] 
Ff; presentlie Qq. 455. Cates. I go. Exit.] Ff; omitted Qq. 456. What 

. . . shall I] Ff ; What is it your highncs pleasure, I shall Qq 1-4 ; What it is 
your , . . shall Q 5 ; What is your . . . shall Qq 6-8. at Salisbury] new 

line Camb. (adopting Qq in 456). 459. My . . . chang'd] Ff ; My mind is 

changd, sir, my minde ts changd Qq ; My mind is changed, sir, my mind is 
changed Camb. 

445-49. The omissions in Qq, al- faithful following of an oversight in the 

though, without stage-directions in- original MS. 

volving the presence of Ratcliff, they 447. Sa/w6Mry] Richmond was off the 

make imperfect sense, may have been south-western coast, close to Dorset, 

due to the possible fact that, in this Richard hastened to Salisbury to pre- 

scene, at any rate, the parts of Ratcliff vent his junction with Buckingham's 

and Catesby were doubled by one player, forces from the Welsh borders. Shake- 

Qq direction at line 435 seems to point speare makes nothing of the interval 

to this. When Catesby went out at line which elapsed between the failure of 

455, the same player might enter again Buckingham and the ultimate success 

as Ratcliff, or even go on with Rat- of Richmond. Buckingham's rebellion 

cliff's part without retiring. F"f make and Richmond's first attempt failed in 

Richard call for Catesby in line 447: October, 1483 : it was not until August, 

this is probably an oversight, or a too 1485, that Richmond set out on his 

.successful voyage. 



sc. iv] KING RICHARD III 175 

Enter LORD STANLEY. 

Stanley, what news with you ? 
Stan. None good, my liege, to please you with the hearing ; 460 

Nor none so bad, but well may be reported, 
K. Rich. Hoyday ! a riddle ! neither good nor bad ! 

What need' St thou run so many miles about, 

When thou may'st tell thy tale the nearest way ? 

Once more, what news? 
Stan. Richmond is on the seas. 465 

K. Rich. There let him sink, and be the seas on him ! 

White-liver'd runagate, what doth he there ? 
Stan. I know not, mighty sovereign, but by guess. 
K. Rich. Well, as you guess ? 
Stan. Stirr'd up by Dorset, Buckingham, and Morton, 470 

He makes for England, here to claim the crown. 

Enter Lord Stanley] Ff ; Enter Barbie (aft. 459) Qq. Stanley] Ff ; How 

now Qq. 460. None . . . liege] Theobald ; None, good my liege Ff ; None 

good my Lord Qq; None good, my lord Camb. 461. well . . . reported] Ff; 

may well be told Qq. 462. Hoyday] Heyday Pope. 463. What need'st] 
Ff ; Why doest Qq. miles] Ff, Qq 7, 8 ; mile Qq 1-6. 464. the nearest] Ff ; 
a neerer Qq. 469. Well, as you guess] Ff; Well sir, as you guesse, as you 

guesse Qq 1-6 ; Well, sir, as you guesse Qq 7, 8. 470. Morton] Ff ; Elie Qq. 

471. here] Ff; there Qq. 

460. None good, my liege] Theobald's 470, 471. The Bishop of Ely, after the 

punctuation is probably right. An fatal Council at the Tower (in. iv.), was 

antithesis is needed to " bad " in the sent to Buckingham's castle at Brecon 

next line. (see note on iv. ii. 121). There Buck- 

462. Hoyday] Aldis Wright refers ingham found him, on his return from 

to Troilus and Cressida, v. i. 73. See court. Buckingham was already dis- 

also Timon of Athens, i. ii. 137. Mr. posed to rebellion by Richard's cavalier 

Craig furnishes an example from R. treatment of his deserts. The historians 

Brome, Covent Garden Weeded, 1639 tell us the story of his journey. At 

(ed. Pearson, 1873, p. 33): ''Hoyday, Tewkesbury he came to the conclusion 

here 's a din." that he was " indubitate heire of the 

467. White-liver'd] cowardly. Com- house of Lancaster." But, between 

pare Merchant of Venice, in. ii. 86, and Worcester and Bridgenorth, he met the 

see Mr. Pooler's note. Countess of Richmond herself, on her 

runagate] A corruption of " rene- way to the shrine of Our Lady at 

gade," from renegatus : not a vari- Worcester. He then remembered, that 

ant on " runaway." See Cymbeline, she and his mother were first cousins, 

I. vi. 137. Aldis Wright explains it and that the Countess was a daughter 

here as " vagabond " ; and it looks very of the elder branch of the house of 

much as if Shakespeare had used it here Beaufort. Thus his "earnest title" 

in the sense which does not belong to was " turned to a tittell not so good as 

it etymologically. But Richmond Est Amen " ; and he was prepared, 

would be also, in Richard's mind, a under the influence of his prisoner at 

renegade to his true sovereign. Brecon, to support the claim of Rich- 

469. as you guess] The impatient mond to the throne. Morton heard 

repetition in Qq probably originated on his complaints with sympathy, and 

the stage. threw out plausible suggestions on his 



176 KING RICHARD III [act iv. 

K. Rich. Is the chair empty ? is the sword unsway'd ? 

Is the king dead ? the empire unpossess'd ? 

What heir of York is there alive but we ? 

And who is England's king but great York's heir? 475 

Then tell me, what makes he upon the seas ? 
Stan. Unless for that, my liege, I cannot guess. 
K. Rich. Unless for that he comes to be your liege, 

You cannot guess wherefore the Welshman comes. 

Thou wilt revolt and fly to him, I fear. 480 

Stan. No, my good lord ; therefore mistrust me not. 
K. Rich. Where is thy power, then, to beat him back ? 

Where be thy tenants and thy followers ? 

Are they not now upon the western shore, 

Safe-conducting the rebels from their ships? 485 

Stan. No, my good lord, my friends are in the north. 
K. Rich. Cold friends to me ! what do they in the north, 

When they should serve their sovereign in the west ? 
Stan. They have not been commanded, mighty king : 

Pleaseth your majesty to give me leave, 490 

I '11 muster up my friends and meet your grace, 

Where and what time your majesty shall please. 
K. Rich. Ay, ay, thou would'st be gone to join with Richmond ; 

But I '11 not trust thee, 
Stan. Most mighty sovereign, 

476. makes he] Ff; doeth he Qq; makes him Hanmer. seas] Ff, Q 8 ; sea 

Qq 1-7. 479. Welshman] Welchmen Qq 4, 7, 8. 481. my good lord] Ff; 
mightie liege Qq. 483. be] Ff ; are Qq. 485. Safe-conducting] hyphened 

Ff; Conducting safe Fope. 487. me]F{; Richard Qq. 489. king]F{; 

soueraigne Qq. 490. Pleaseth] Ff; Phase it Qq. 493. Ay, ay, thou 

would'st] Qq ; /, thou would'st Ff; Ay, thou would'st fain Pope. 494. But 

. . . thee] Ff ; I will not trust you Sir Qq. Most] omitted Pope. 

own side, so that " he rather seemed to Stanleie would haue departed into his 

follow him, than to lead him." The countrie to visit his familie, and to 

end of their conference was an agree- recreate and refresh his spirits (as he 

ment to further the marriage of Rich- openlie said, but the truth was, to the 

mond with Elizabeth of York. mtent to be in a perfect readinesse to 

479. Welshman] On his father's side, receiue the earle of Richmond at his 

Edmund of Hadham, Earl of Richmond, first arriuall in England), the king in no 

was the eldest son of Owen Tudor and wise would suffer him to depart, before 

Katharine, widow of Henry V. he had left as an hostage in the coiut 

494-96. In spite of Stanley's as- George Stanleie, lord Strange, his first 

severations, Ricliard's suspicions were begotten sonne and hcire." 
fully justified. " When the said lord 



SC. IV.] 



KING RICHARD III 



177 



You have no cause to hold my friendship doubtful : 495 

I never was, nor never will be false. 
K. Rich. Go then, and muster men ; but leave behind 

Your son George Stanley : look your heart be firm. 

Or else his head's assurance is but frail. 
Stan. So deal with him, as I prove true to you ! [Exit. 500 



Enter a Messenger. 

Mess. My gracious sovereign, now in Devonshire, 
As I by friends am well advertised. 
Sir Edward Courtney, and the haughty prelate, 
Bishop of Exeter, his elder brother, 
With many moe confederates, are in arms. 



505 



496. nor never] nor ever Pope. 497. Go then, afid] Ff ; Well, go Qq ; Camb. 
puts Well in separate line. but]F{; but heare yon Qq, 498. heart] Ff; 

faith] Qq. 500. Exit] Qq 6-8; omitted Qq i, 2; Exit Dar. Qq 3-5; Exit 

Stanley Ff. 503. Edward] Ff ; William Qq ; Edmond Pope. 504. elder 

brother] Ff ; brother there Qq. 505. moe] more Qq 7, 8, Ff 2-4. 



498. George Stanley] Ferdinand©, 
Lord Strange, was patron of the 
company by whom this play was 
produced, from 1588 to his death in 
1594, two years after he had succeeded, 
as fifth earl, to the earldom of Derby. 
The repeated mention of his ancestor 
(see IV. V. 3 ; v. iii. 62, 96, 345-47 ; 
V. V. 9, 10 below), by whose preservation 
after Bosworth the unbroken succes- 
sion of the house of Stanley was 
secured, was probably intended as a 
compliment to Lord Derby. "Young 
George Stanley " married the heiress 
of Lord Strange of Knocking, and thus 
brought the title of Strange into the 
family. He predeceased his father ; 
and his son, the second Earl of Derby, 
was great-grandfather of the fifth earl, 
who left no male issue, and was suc- 
ceeded by his brother William in 1594. 
After the death of the fifth earl, his 
company of players attached them- 
selves to the service of the Lord 
Chamberlain, Henry Carey, Lord 
Hunsdon. 

503, 504. Sir Edward Courtenay oj 
Haccombe, descended from a younger 
son of the second Earl of Devon, was 
the head of the house of Courtenay. 
The direct line had failed in the three 
brothers, Thomas, sixth Earl of De\on, 

12 



Hugh, and John, who all fell victims 
to the house of York. Thomas was 
beheaded at York after Towton (1461) ; 
Hugh was beheaded at Salisbury 
(1466) ; and John fell at Tewkesbury 
{1471). Their kinsman Edward was 
created Earl of Devon on Henry VIL's 
accession ; and his son William 
married Katharine, daughter of Edward 
IV. Shakespeare followed More in 
the error of calling Peter Courtenay, 
Bishop of Exeter 1478-87, brother of 
Sir Edward : that he was not his elder 
brother is obvious, as the Bishop did 
not die till 1492, when Edward was 
already earl. Peter Courtenay was 
son of Sir Philip Courtenay of Powder- 
ham, whose grandfather was sixth son 
of the second Earl. He was attainted 
by Richard HL and fled to Brittany. 
Henry VH. created him Lord Keeper ; 
and, from 1487 to his death, he was 
Bishop of Winchester. 

505. moe} Compare Q i, line 200 
above. " Moe " is usually taken as a 
comparative of number, " more " as a 
comparative of size. Here and in 
other passages, e.g. Richard II. 11. i. 239, 
Merchant of Venice, i. i. 108, etc., it 
implies number. But Nares remarks 
that, in the sixteenth century, " mo, 
and more, were both used, and it does 



178 



KING RICHARD III 



[aci 



Enter another Messenger. 

Sec. Mess. In Kent, my Hege, the Guildfords are in arms; 
And every hour more competitors f' cmi v »-• * ►tVi-j \ 
Flock to the rebels, and their power grows strong. 



Enter another Messenger. 

Third Mess. My lord, the army of great Buckingham — 
K. Rich. Out on ye, owls ! nothing but songs of death ? 510 

[//> strike th him. 

There, take thou that, till thou bring better news ! 
Third Mess. The news I have to tell your majesty 

Is, that by sudden floods and fall of waters, 

506. In Kent, my liege] Ff ; My Liege, in Kent Qq. 507. more] still more 

Pope. 508. the rebels . . . strong] Ff; their aide, and still their power 

increaseth Qq. 509. great] Ff; the Duke 0/ Qq. 510. ye] Qq 6-8, Ff; 

you Qq 1-5. He striketh him] Ff; aft. 509 Qq. 511. There . . . till thou] 
Ff; Take that untill thou Qq 1-5; Take that untill yon Qq 6-S. bring]F{; 
bring me Qq. 512,513. The news . . . majesty Is] Ff; Your grace mistakes, 
the news I bring is good. My newes is (two lines) Qq. 
Qq. waters] Ff ; water Qq. 



1 - »"•• ft-—" — - --I 

513. floods] Ff; floud 



not appear why one or other was pre- 
ferred in any particular passage, unless 
when it favoured a rhyme." Ff reading 
in line 200 countenances this state- 
ment ; and compare line 507 below. 
See Mr. Deighton's note on Timon of 
Athens, i. i. 41 [44]. 

506. the Guildfords] Sir Richard 
Guildford of Hempstead, near Cran- 
brook, was son of Sir John Guildford, 
Comptroller of the Household to 
Edward IV. Henry VH. made him 
Comptroller of his Household. His 
grand-daughter became Duchess of 
Northumberland, and mother of Lord 
Guildford Dudley, the husband of Lady 
Jane Grey. 

507. competitors] associates, con- 
federates. Mr. Luce quotes this pas- 
sage in illustration of Twelfth Night, 
IV. ii, 12. The meaning is double in 
Two Gentlemen of Verona, 11. vi. 35. 
See also Antony and Cleopatra, i. 
iv. 3 ; II. vii. 76. 

512-16. Buckingham's expedition was 
without fortunate omens. His fellow- 
conspirator, Morton, took advantage 
of his semi-liberty to escape to Flanders, 
before the Duke had got his company 
together. The enrolment of the " great 



power of wild Welshmen " was effected 
by compulsion, "which thing was the 
verie occasion why they left him deso- 
late, & cowardlie forsooke him." In 
spite of the great storm which flooded 
the West of England the day before 
he set up his standard at Brecon, he 
made his way to Weobley, and thence 
marched through the Forest of Dean 
towards Gloucester, where he intended 
to cross the Severn and join the Courte- 
nays in the West. But the river was 
in flood, and his passage cut off. The 
flood, remembered long afterwards as 
"the duke of Buckingham's great 
water," lasted ten days; and, on a 
march attended by delay, the Welsh- 
men deserted their leader. Buckingham 
fled up the west bank of the Severn 
to Shrewsbury, near which he took 
refuge with his trusted servant, 
Humphrey or Ralph Banaster. His 
allies gave way to panic; and their 
leaders escaped into Brittany. Rich- 
ard's proclamation for the apprehen- 
sion of Buckingham was dated from 
Leicester ; and Banaster betrayed his 
master, for the reward of a thousand 
pounds, a few days after, to the sheriff 
of Shropshire. 



sc. IV.] KING RICHARD III 179 

Buckingham's army is dispers'd and^ scatter'd ; 

And he himself vvander'd away alone, ~' S'f 5 

No man knows _whith£.r^ 
K. Rich. I cry thee mercy : 

There is my purse to cure that blow of thine. 

Hath any well-advised friend proclaim'd 

Reward to him that brings the traitor in ? 
Third Mess. Such proclamation hath been made, my lord. 520 

Enter another Messenger. 

Fourth Mess. Sir Thomas Lovel and Lord Marquess Dorset, 
'Tis said, my liege, in Yorkshire are in arms. 
But this good comfort bring I to your highness : 
The Breton navy is dispers'd by tempest ; 
Richmond in Dorsetshire sent out a boat 525 

Unto the shore, to ask those on the banks 
If they were his assistants, yea or no ; 
Who answer'd him, they came from Buckingham 

514. Buckingham's] Ff ; The Duke of Buckitighams Qq 515, 516. wander'd 
away alone, No] Fi; Jled, no Qq. 516. / . . . mercy]F{; O I crie you mercie, 
I did mistake Qq. 517, There . . . thine]Fi; Ratcliffe reward him, for the 

blow I gaue him Qq. 518. proclaim'd] Ff; giuen out Qq. 519. Rrivard 

to him] F; Ricwardes for him Qq. the traitor in] Ff; in Buckingham Qq. 

520. lord] Ff ; liege Qq. 522. in Yorkshire are in arms] Ff ; are vp in armes 
Qq. 523. But] Ff; Yet Qq. highness] Ff ; grace Qq. 524. Breton] 

Capell ; Bnttaine Qq, Ff i, 2; Britain Ff 3, 4; Bretagne Theobald. 524-26. 
dispers'd by tempest . . . banks] Ff ; disperst, Richmond in Dorshire Sent ojit a 
boate to aske them on the shore (two lines) Qq. 

518. well-advised] This may mean asunder " : some were driven back to 

(i) prudent : compare " be advis'd," 11. Brittany, some to Normandy. Rich- 

i. 107 ; or (2) with satisfactory informa- mond's ship, " associat onelie with one 

tion, as Henry V. ii. prol. 12. other barke," found itself next morning 

521. See note on lines 314-17 above off Poole Harbour. The whole shore 

as to the historic order of Dorset's was garrisoned by soldiers, who told 

movements. His life "by the onelie Richmond's messengers that they were 

helpe of sir Thomas Louell was pre- an advance-guard deputed by Bucking- 

serued from all danger & perill in this ham, the Duke himself being, with the 

troublous world." He probably led bulk of his army, not far off. Richmond 

his Yorkshiremen to the rendezvous was not deceived ; and, seeing none of 

appointed by Buckingham and the his fleet in the neighbourhood, returned, 

Courtenays. with a favourable breeze, to France. He 

524-30. Richmond's navy of forty landed in Normandy, stayed there for 

ships, bearing "an armie of five three days ; and then, under safe-conduct 

thousand manlie Britons," set sail on from Charles VH I., made his way over- 

I2th October, 1483. Towards night, a land into Brittany, 

tempest — the storm so fatal to Bucking- 526. ian^s] shore. So Merchant of 

ham on shore — arose. "The ships Venice, v. i. 11; and see for a parallel 

were disparkled, seuered & separated Mr. Pooler's note. 



180 KING RICHARD III [act iv. 

Upon his party : he, mistrusting them, 
Hois'd sail, and made his course again for Bretagne. 530 
K. Rich. March on, march on, since we are up in arms ! 
If not to fight with foreign enemies. 
Yet to beat down these rebels here at home. 

Re-enter Catesby. 

Gates. My liege, the Duke of Buckingham is taken ; 

That is the best news : that the Earl of Richmond 535 
Is with a mighty power landed at Milford, 
Is colder news ; but yet they must be told. 

K. Rich. Away towards Salisbury ! while we reason here, 
A royal battle might be won and lost : 
Some one take order Buckingham be brought 540 

To Salisbury ; the rest march on with me. 

[Flourish. Exeunt. 

530. his course . . . Bretagne} his course . . . Brittaine Ff; away for Brit 
taine Qq; away for Britanny Camh. 535. Thatis]¥f; T hats Qq. 537. 

news] Qq 6-8, Ff; tidings Qq 1-5. but yet] Ff; yet Qq. they must] it 

must Rowe. 541. Flourish.] F i; omitted Qq, Ff 2-4. Exeunt.] Q 1, 

Ff ; omitted Qq 2-8. 

530. //otj'rf] "Halsed" isthewordem- That he may live a lawlesse 
ployed by the chroniclers. " To hoise " conqueror." 
= to lift, hoist, heave away. Compare 534-37. ^ee notes on lines 447, 471 
The Tempest, 1. ii. 148 ; Greene, Menu- above. Buckingham was taken at 
/)Ao«, 1589 (Arber, 58) : " Eurilochus . . . Shrewsbury in October, 1483. Rich- 
awaited no farther parley, but willed mond set sail from Harfleur early in 
his men perforce to hoyse him a ship- August, 1485, and landed at Milford 
boord"; Hall, Virgidemiarum. 159S, Haven about a week later. His 
IV. iv. 58 : — " mighty power " this time consisted of 

" Or hoyseth sail up to a forraine only two thousand men. 

shore, 536. Milford]?>teCymbeline.m.'\\.&i. 



sc. v.] ^ KING RICHARD III li^ 

'<*■■ 
SCENE v.— Lord Derdys house. \ 

Enter DERBY and SiR CHRISTOPHER UrSWICK. 

Der. Sir Christopher, tell Richmond this from me ; 

That in the sty of the most deadly boar 

My son George Stanley is frank'd up in hold : 

If I revolt, off goes young George's head ; 

The fear of that holds off my present aid. 5 

So, get thee gone : commend me to thy lord. 

Withal say that the queen hath heartily consented 

He should espouse Elizabeth her daughter. 

But tell me, where is princely Richmond now ? 
Chris. At Pembroke, or at Ha'rford-west, in Wales. lo 

Scene r.] Capell ; Scena Quarta. Ff ; Scene vii. Pope. Lord Derby's house.'] 
Lord Stanley's House. Hanmer. Enter Derby] Enter Lord Stanley. Pope, 

Theobald. Urswick.] Theobald. 2. the most deadly] Ff ; this most bloudie 
Qq ; themost bloody Co\\\&x. 5. holds off] Vi; with holdes Qq. 6-8. So, 

get . . . daughter] Ff ; substantially in Qq aft. 18. 6. So, get . . . lord] Ff ; 
Retourne vnto thy Lord, commend me to him Qq ; Well, hie thee to thy lord, 
commend me to him Capell. 7. Withal say that] Ff ; Tell him Qq ; Say, too, 

Pope. 8. should] Ff; shall Qq. 10. Pembroke] Penbroke Ff i, 2; 

Penbrook F 3. Ha'rford-west] Capell ; Harford-west Q i ; Herford-west 

Qq 2, 5; Hertford-west Qq 3, 4; Hertford west Qq 6, 7 ; Hertford West Ff; 
Hertford, west Q 8. 

1. Sir Christopher] For -'Sir" marched to Haverfordwest, where he 
applied to a priest, compare ni. ii. 109 was received with joy. Here he heard 
above. Urswick was sent into Brittany that the men of Pembroke were ready 
by the Countess of Richmond in 1483. to follow his uncle, Jasper of Hatfield, 
He seems to have been recalled at the " their naturall and immediate lord " ; 
last moment ; and Hugh Conway sent but also that his expected ally, Rhys 
instead, as a " personage of more esti- ap Thomas, was going to join Richard's 
mation than her chapleine." Richard party. With increased forces, he went 
Guildford sent an envoy from Kent on to Cardigan, not without fear of Sir 
with the same instructions, in case Walter Herbert, who was said to be 
Conway were taken captive at Ply- at Carmarthen " with a great crue of 
mouth. Here Shakespeare continues to men," and with doubtful intentions, 
weld together the events of 1483 and As he advanced through Wales to the 
1485. George Stanley's detention passage of the Severn at Shrewsbury, 
belongs also to 1483. these fears proved groundless. Welsh 

2, 3. For the metaphor, see notes on gentlemen joined him ; and Rhys ap 
" rooting hog," i. iii. 228, and " frank'd Thomas, who probably had dallied 
up," I. iii. 314. between the two parties, swore fealty 

6-8. These lines are misplaced in to him, if he had not sworn it before, 
Qq, probably owing to the care of an in return for a promise of the governor- 
editor, who thought that the words of ship of Wales. At Newport in Shrop- 
farewell came prematurely, before the shire, he was joined by Sir Gilbert 
bulk of the conversation. Talbot ; at Stafford, by Sir William 

10-18. Richmond landed at Dale, at Stanley, his step-father's brother ; and 

the north-west corner of Milford so, " his power increasing," he marched 

Haven ; and, at sunrise the next day, forward to Lichfield. Stanley, with 



182 KING RICHARD III [act iv. 

Der, What men of name resort to him ? 

Chris. Sir Walter Herbert, a renowned soldier ; 
Sir Gilbert Talbot, Sir William Stanley ; 
Oxford, redoubted Pembroke, Sir James Blunt, 
And Rice ap Thomas, with a valiant crew, 15 

And many other of great name and worth ; 
And towards London do they bend their power, 
If by the way they be not fought withal. 

Der. Well, hie thee to thy lord; I kiss his hand : 

My letter will resolve him of my mind. 20 

Farewell. [Exeunt, 

15. And Rice ap Thomas] Ff ; Rice vp Thomas Qq 1-5 ; Rice ap Thomas Q 6. 
i6. And] Ff ; With Qq. other] Ff ; moe Qq i-6 ; more Qq 7, 8 ; others Warburton. 
great name]'Fi; noble fame Qq. 17. do they] F{; they do Qq. power]F{; 
course Qq. ig. Well . . . hand] Ff ; Qq substantially as 6-8 above (see notes 
thereon). 20. My letter] F{; These letters Qq; Those letters Capell. 

nearly five thousand men, had been at Fortescue, and Blunt found them- 

Lichfield ; but, on Richmond's arrival, selves all on the same side. Stanley's 

" to avoid all suspicion on king conduct, though not ingenuous, was 

Richard's part," moved further up the naturally guided by his fear for his son 

London road to Atherstone. Oxford George's life ; and it was not till the 

and Sir James Blunt had come from day of Bosworth that he openly 

France with Richmond : Sir James declared himself, although, at a private 

had been Oxford's gaoler at the castle interview with Richmond " in a litle 

of Hammes, since, in Edward IV. 's close " at Atherstone, he consulted 

reign, the Earl had rebelled, and had with him as to the means of giving 

been taken at St. Michael's Mount by battle to Richard. 
Sir John Fortescue. Now Oxford, 



ACT V 

SCENE I, — Salisbury. An open place. 

Enter the SHERIFF, and BUCKINGHAM, with halberds, led 
to execution. 

Buck. Will not King Richard let me speak with him ? 

Sher. No, my good lord ; therefore be patient. 

Buck. Hastings, and Edward's children. Grey, and Rivers, 
Holy king Henry, and thy fair son Edward, 
Vaughan, and all that have miscarried 5 

By under-hand corrupted foul injustice. 
If that your moody discontented souls 
Do through the clouds behold this present hour. 
Even for revenge mock my destruction ! 
This is All-Souls' day, fellow, is it not? lO 

Sher. It is. 

Buck. Why then, All-Souls' day is my body's doomsday : 
This is the day which, in King Edward's time, 
I wish'd might fall on me, when I was found 

Sa/ts6M>7] Pope. An open place] Capell. Enter tlie Sheriff and Buck- 

ingham] Rowe ; Enter Buckingham Qq, Ff. with halberds] ¥i; omitted Qq. 
2. Sher.]Fi; Rat. Qq (and so ii). good] Ff; omitted Qq. 3. Grey, 

and Rivers] Ff; Rivers, Gray Qq. 6. corrupted foul] Ff; corrupted, foule Qq. 
10. fellow] Ff ; felloives Qq. 11. It is] Ff; It is my Lord Qq. 12. Why 

, , . doomsday] omitted Pope. 13. which] Ff ; that Qq. 

1. Buckingham was brought to a dagger as men then mdged) he 

SaHsbury after his capture at Shrews- sore desired and required." His 

bury. There he confessed the whole request was in vain ; and " vpon 

conspiracy, " trusting, bicause he had AH sou'es daie, without arreigment 

truelie and plainelie reuealed and con- or iudgement, he was at Salisburie, in 

fessed all things that were of him the open market place, on a new 

required, that he should haue licence to scaffold, beheaded and put to death." 

speake to the king : which (whether Of Buckingham's possible intention 

it were to sue for pardon and grace, of killing Richard, Shakespeare speaks 

or whether he being brought to his in Henry VIII. 1. ii. 193-99. 
presence, would haue sticked him with 

183 



184 KING RICHARD III [act v. 

False to his children and his wife's allies : IS 

This is the day wherein I wish'd to fall 

By the false faith of him whom most I trusted. 

This, this All-Souls' day to my fearful soul 

Is the determin'd respite of my wrongs : 

That high All-seer, which I dallied with, 20 

Hath turn'd my feigned prayer on my head, 

And giv'n in earnest what I begg'd in jest. 

Thus doth he force the swords of wicked men 

To turn their own points in their masters' bosoms. 

Thus Margaret's curse falls heavy on my neck : 25 

" When he," quoth she, " shall split thy heart with sorrow, 

Remember Margaret was a prophetess." 

Come, lead me, officers, to the block of shame ; 

Ai^ong hath but wrong, and blame the, due of bUcne. 

[Exeunt. 

SCENE II. — The camp near Tamworth. 

Enter RICHMOND, OXFORD, Blunt, Herbert, and others, 
with drum and colours. 

Richm. Fellows in arms, and my most loving friends, 
Bruis'd underneath the yoke of tyranny, 

15. a);(i] Ff, Q 8; or Qq 1-7. 17, whom . . . trusted] Ff; / trusted most 

Qq. 18. This . . . soul] omitted Pope. 19. respite] despite Qq 7, 8 ; 

respect 'Wa.Thmton. 20. which]Fi; that Qq; whom CiipeU. 23. s7vords] 

sword] Qq 3-8. 24. own] omitted Qq 3-8. in] Ff ; on Qq. bosoms] Ff; 

bosome Qq. 25. Thus] Ff; Now Qq. falls . . . neck] Ff; is fallen vpon 
my head Qq; falls . . . head Pope. 28. lead me, officers] Fi; sirs, conuey 

me Qq. 29. Exeunt] Exeunt Buckingham with Officers. Ff ; omitted Qq. 

Scene //. 
The camp near Tamworth] Hanmer, Camb. Enter . . . colours.] Ff; 

Enter Richmond U'ith drums and trumpets. Qq. 

19. the determin'd respite of my act would have thus " a more full and 

wrongs] the time to which the punish- striking conclusion ; and the fifth act 

ment of my evil practices was respited will comprise the business of the impor- 

(Johnson, following Hanmer). For tant day, which put an end to the com- 

" wrongs" in this sense, compare petition of York and Lancaster." 
Midsummer-Night's Dream. 11. i. 240. 

24. in] into. Compare in. vii. 128 .Scene it. 

above. 

29. Johnson wished to add this scene i. The camp near Tamworth] Rich- 

to the foregoing act, abandoning a mond's army moved up a line parallel 

division due " to the judgment or cap- to Watling Street from Lichfield to 

rice of the first editors." The fourth Tamworth, while Stanley, pretending 



SC. II.] 



KING RICHARD III 



185 



Thus far into the bowels of the land 

Have we march'd on without impediment ; 

And here receive we from our father Stanley 5 

Lines of fair comfort and encouragement. 

The wretched, bloody, and usurping boar. 

That spoil'd your summer fields and fruitful vines, 

Swills your warm blood like wash, and makes his trough 

In your embowell'd bosoms — this foul swine lo 

Is now even in the centre of this isle, 

Near to the town of Leicester, as we learn : 

8. summer fields] Ff ; somer-fieldes Q i ; summer-fields Q 2 ; sommer-field Qq 
3-8. 10. embowell'd] Ff; inboweld or imboweld Qq. ii. Is] Ff; Lies Qq. 
centre] Gentry F i. 12. Near] Ne're F i. 

bered the figure of the vine in Psahn 
Ixxx. : " The wild boar out of the field 
doth root it up : and the wild beasts of 
the field devour it." 

9. Swills] Malone and Aldis Wright 
remark on the change of tense from 
past to present, "not uncommon in 
animated description." But the sense 
of the passage requires the change. 
What Richmond says is : the boar, 
who in time past destroyed your 
summer fields and fruitful vines {i.e. 
the young princes and the whole royal 
stock), is now turning against you 
yourselves, and is swilling your own 
blood in the very bowels of the land. 
Lines lo, ii further explain the meta- 
phor. The past tense of " spoil'd " 
in line 8 requires that " summer fields 
and fruitful vines " should refer to that 
royal "harvest" (ii. ii. ii6) which 
Richard had laid waste, and not to the 
material crops which his march from 
Nottingham was endangering. See 
another metaphor drawn from the har- 
vest in line 15 below. 

ivash] Mr. Craig notes from Cot- 
grave, " Lavailles : swillings, hog's 
wash, washings for swine." 

10. embowell'd] The same as " dis- 
embowell'd," or, in legal language, 
" drawn." Compare i Henry IV. v. iv. 
109. 

12. Leicester] Richard arrived in 
Leicester from Nottingham, where he 
had resided much during 14S4 and 1485. 
On 2oth August "he (inuironed with 
his gard), with a frowning countenance 
and cruell visage, mounted on a great 
white courser, and followed with his 



flight, lay in front of them at Ather- 
stone. Richard was at this time in 
Nottingham or at the royal park of 
Bestwood, close by. Between Lich- 
field and Tamworth, Richmond was 
joined by Sir Walter Hungerford and 
Sir Thomas Bourchier, who had de- 
serted firom Brakenbury's forces at 
Stony Stratford. The army arrived at 
Tamworth without Richmond, who had 
lingered behind them, distressed by 
moody doubts; and, losing his way 
as evening fell, had spent the night in 
nervous anxiety at a small village. He 
rejoined his troops next morning, char- 
acteristically explaining his absence as 
designed " to receiue some glad mes- 
sage from certeine of his priuie friends 
and secret allies." The next day he 
made another lonely journey to Ather- 
stone, where he met his step-father (see 
note on iv. v. 10-18 above). 

3. bowels] centre. Mr. Craig notes 
Gilbert, Voyage, 1583 (Payn, English 
Voyagers, p. 175) : " Many voyages 
have been pretended, yet hitherto 
never any throughout accomplished by 
our nation of exact discovery into the 
bowels of those ample and vast nations." 

5, 6. Probably an allusion to the 
" glad message," which (see note on 
line i) Richmond had made the ex- 
cuse for his separation from his army 
near Tamworth. The chroniclers 
make no mention of a definite com- 
munication from Stanley ; but Sir 
William Stanley, on joining Richmond 
at Stafford, must have made his 
brother's plans clear. 

6, 7. Shakespeare may have remem- 



186 KING RICHARD III [act v. 

From Tamworth thither is but one day's march. 
In God's name, cheerly on, courageous friends, 
I To reap the harvest of perpetual peace 1 5 

I By this one bloody trial of sharp war ! 
Ox/. Every man's conscience is a thousand men, 

To fight against this guilty homicide. 
Herd. I doubt not but his friends will turn to us. 
Blunt. He hath no friends but what are friends for fear, 20 

Which in his dearest need will fly from him. 
Richm. All for our vantage. Then, in God's name, march ! 
True hope is swift, and flies with swallow's wings ; 
Kings it makes Gods, and meaner creatures kings. 

\Exeunt. 

SCENE \\\.—Bosworth Field. 

Enter KING Richard in arms, with NORFOLK, the EarL OF 
Surrey, and others. 

K. Rich. Here pitch our tent, even here in Bosworth field. 
My Lord of Surrey, why look you so sad ? 

14. cheerly\ Q i, Ff; cheere Qq 2-8. 17. Oxf.^ Ff ; i Lo. Qq. wen] Ff; 
swordes Qq. 18. this guilty] Ff; that bloudie Qq. 19. Herb.] Her. Ff; 

2 Lo. Qq. turn] Ff ; ^ie Qq. 20. Blunt.] Ff; 3 Lo. Qq. what] Ff, 

Q 8; who Qq 1-7. 21. dearest] Ff; greatest Qq. /ly] Ff; shrinke Qq. 

24. makes] Qq 6-8, Ff ; make Qq 1-5. Exeunt.] Exeunt Omnes. Ff ; Exit, 

Q I ; omitted Qq 2-8. 

Scene lu. 

ScBNB ifr.]Popc. Bosworth Field.] Pope. Enter . . . others] Csimh.; 

Enter King Richard, Norffolke, Ratcliffe, Catesbie, with others. Qq ; Enter 
King Richard in Armes, with Norfolke, Ratcliffe, and the Earle of Surrey. Ff. 
I. tent] tentes Qq. 2. My . . . Surrey] Ff ; Whie, hoiv now Catesbie Qq. 

look you] Ff ; lookst thou Qq. sad] bad Q i. 

footmen, the wings of horssemen coast- camp seems actually to have been 

ing and ranging on euerie side ; and pitched about three miles south of 

keeping this arraie, he with great Market Bosworth. Ambien Hill lay 

pompe entered the towne of Leicester between him and Richmond, who, 

after the sunne set." marching eastwards from Atherstone, 

had encamped at White Moors, about 

Scene in. ^^ same distance S.W. of Bosworth. 

Lord Stanley lay south of the ground 

Bosworth Field] Richard marched between the armies, while Sir William 

westward from Leicester "to a place Stanley was opposite him, on the north, 

meet for two battels to incounter, by a " Thus there were four hosts placed as 

village called Bosworth, and there he regards one another not unlike whist 

pitched his field on a hill called Anne players " (Gairdner, p. 235). 

Beame [Ambien]. refreshed hsi soul- 2. My Lord 0/ Surrey] The explanA- 

diers, and tooke his rest." Richard's tion of Qq reading lies probably in the 



sc. III.] KING RICHARD 111 187 

Sur. My heart is ten times lighter than my looks. 

K. Rich. My Lord of Norfolk ! 

Nor. Here, most gracious liege. 

K. Rich. Norfolk, we must have knocks : ha ! must we not ? 5 

Nor. We must both give and take, my loving lord. 

K. Rich. Up with my tent ! here will I lie to-night. 

But where to-morrow ? Well all 's one for that. 

Who hath descried the number of the traitors ? 
Nor. Six or seven thousand is their utmost power. 10 

K. Rich. Why, our battalia trebles that account : 

Besides, the king's name is a tower of strength, 

Which they upon the adverse faction want. 

Up with the tent ! Come, noble gentlemen. 

Let us survey the vantage of the ground. 15 

Call for some men of sound direction : 

Let 's lack no discipline, make no delay ; 

For, lords, to-morrow is a busy day. [Exeunt. 



3. Sur.] Ff ; Cat. Qq. 4, K. Rich. My Lord . . . liege.] Ff; King. Nor- 

ffolke, come hither Qq. 5. K. Rich.] Ff; omitted Qq. Norfolk . . . not] one 
line as Qq ; Norfolke . . . knockes : Ha . . . not ? (two lines) Ff. 6. loving] 
Ff; gracious Qq. 7. here] Ff, Qq 7, 8 ; there, here Qq 1-6. 8. all's] 

Ff; all is Qq. 9. traitors] Vf; foe (^<\. 10. utmost power] Ff; greatest 

number Qq. 11. battalia] Ff ; battalion or battalion Qq. 13. faction] Ff; 
par tie Qq. want] went F i. 14. the tent i Come, noble] Ff; my tent there, 

valiant Qq. 15. ground] Ff ; field Qq. 17. lack] Ff ; want Qq. 

scarcity of actors, and the conse- battaglia to the subdivision of the 

quent suppression of this immaterial legion, the cohort : " lo voglio che noi 

part in the stage version of the dividiamo il nostro battaglione in dieci 

play. battaglie." Compare Berners' Frois- 

5. knocks] Compare Henry V. iii. ii. sart, i. 18 : " There was ordained three 

3, 8. great battles afoot, and to every battle 

8. This line probably ought to be two wings of five hundred men of 

marked " aside." arms," etc. 

II. battalia] There is no reason for 16. men of sound direction] men, as 

altering this word to "battalion." It Mr. Craig (" Little Quarto" ed., p. 265) 

is the same word as " battle," of which explains it, of sound capacity in direc- 

we have noted a possible example in tion. Compare Henry V. iii. ii. 68, 76, 

I. iii. 130 above; and see below, line etc.; Othello, i. iii. 300, 11. iii. 128, for 

24, with which compare the passage "direction" in the sense of military 

quoted in the note on " Bosworth command. New Eng. Diet, quotes 

Field" at the beginning of this scene. Massinger, Bashful Lover, 1655, ii. 

" Battalion " is, strictly speaking, the 4 ; — 

more correct term for an army in order " The enemy must say we were not 

of battle. Machiavelli, Arte delta wanting 

Guerra, lib. ii., uses battaglione as In courage or direction." 

equivalent to the Roman legion, and Compare 1 Henry IV. iv. iii. 17. 



188 KING RICHARD III [act v. 

Enter, on the other side of the field, RICHMOND, SiR WILLIAM 
Brandon, Oxford, and others. /Some of the soldiers 
pitch Richmond's tent./ 

Richm. The weary sun hath made a golden set, 

And by the bright tract 6f his fiery car 20 

Gives token of a goodly day to-morrow. 

Sir William Brandon, you shall bear my standard. 

Give me some ink and paper in my tent : 

I '11 draw the form and model of our battle, 

Limit each leader to his several charge, 25 

And part in just proportion our small power. 

My Lord of Oxford, you, Sir William Brandon, 

And you, Sir Walter Herbert, stay with me. 

The Earl of Pembroke keeps his regiment : 

Good Captain Blunt, bear my good-night to him, 30 

aft. 18. Scene changes to another part of Bosworth field. Theobald. Enter 

. . . tent.] Camb. (fr. Capell) ; Enter Richmond with the Lordes &•€. Qq; Enter 
Richmond, Sir William Brandon, Oxford, and Dorset. Ff. 19. set] Ff ; sete 

Q I ; seate Qq 2-5 ; seat Qq 6-8. 20. tract] Ff ; tracke Qq. 21. token] 

Ff ; signall Qq. 22. Sir . . . you] Ff; Where is Sir . . ., he Qq. 23-26. 
Give . . . power] as Ff ; see aft. 44 for Qq. 26. power] Ff ; strength Qq. 

27, 28. My Lord . . . me] Ff ; omitted Qq. 28. you] your F 1. 29. 

keeps] Ff ; keepe Qq. 

20. tract] trace. Compare Timon second son of Owen Tudor and Queen 

of Athens, i. i. 50, on which fir. Katherine. He was created Earl of 

Deighton remarks that there is no Pembroke ini453, and, on Henry VII. 's 

etymological connection between accession, Duke of Bedford. Always 

"tract" and "track." The verb "to faithful to the house of Lancaster, he 

tract " is not uncommon. See Greene, had presented his nephew Richmond, 

Orlando Furioso (Dyce, 90) : — when a boy often, to Henry VI., and, 

"when bright Phoebus mounteth up after Tewkesbury, had taken him to 

his coach, Britanny. He aided his nephew in his 

And tracts Aurora in her silver earlier attempt on England ; and it was 

steps"; in his country that Henry made his 

Spenser, Faerie Queene, 11. vi. 39 : — successful landing at Milford. There 

" As Shepheards curre, that in darke seems to be no account of his con- 

eveninges shade duct at Bosworth in any of the 

Hath tracted forth some salvage primary- authorities for the story of the 

beastes trade." battle. 

Spenscf also uses the substantive, ibid. keeps] Compare Beaumont and 

VI. xii. 22. Fletcher, Woman-Hater, iv. 2 : "I 

fiery car] Shakespeare's references will retire henceforth, and keep my 

to the car of Phoebus were doubtless chamber, live privately, and die for- 

derived from the description in Gold- gotten " ; Fletcher, Wit without 

ing's Ovid, book 2. See Cymbeline, Money, i. i : " And tho' I have no 

V. V. 190 ; Antony and Cleopatra, iv. state, I keep the streets still." Shake- 

viii. 29. spearc several times uses the verb in- 

29. The Earl of Pembroke] Rich- transitively, e.g. Troilus and Cressida, 

mond's uncle, Jasper of Hatfield, iv. v. 278. 



sc. Ill] KING RICHARD III 189 

And by the second hour in the morning 

Desire the earl to see me in my tent : 

Yet one thing more, good captain, do for me — 

Where is Lord Stanley quarter'd, do you know ? 
Blunt. Unless I have mista'en his colours much, 35 

Which well I am assur'd I have not done. 

His regiment lies half a mile at least 

South from the mighty power of the king. 
Richm. If without peril it be possible, 

(' Sweet Blunt, make some good means to speak with him, 40 
And give him from me this most needful note. 
ULunt. Upon my life, my lord, I '11 undertake it ; 

And so God give you quiet rest to-night ! 
Richm. Good night, good Captain Blunt. Come, gentlemen, 
Let us consult upon to-morrow's business : 45 

Into my tent ! the dew is raw and cold. 

\They withdraw into the tent. 

Enter to his tent, KING RICHARD, NORFOLK, Ratcliff, 
CateSBY, and others. 

K. Rich. What is 't o'clock ? 

Cat. It 's supper-time, my lord ; it 's nine o'clock. 

33, captain . . . me] Ff ; Blunt before thou goest Qq. 34. do you] Ff; 

doest thou Qq. 35. colotirs] quarters Wa-Aurton. 37. lies] liet Qq 3, 5; 

lieth Qq 4, 6-8. 40. Sweet . . . him] Ff ; Good captaine Blunt beare my 

good night to him Qq. 41. note] Ff ; scrowle Qq. 42. life] selfe Ff 2-4. 

43. And . . . to-night I] Ff; omitted Qq. 44. Good . . . gentlemen] Good 
. . . Blunt: Come Gentlemen (two lines) Ff; Farewell good Blunt. Qq. aft. 

44. Qq insert 23-26, omitted above. 45. Let us] Ff ; Come, let vs Qq. 46. my] 
Ff; 02tr Qq. They withdraw . . . ] Ff; omitted Qq. aft. 46. Scene 
chatiges back to King Richard's tent. Theobald. to his tent.] Capell, Camb. 
and others] &'c. Qq i, 2 ; omitted Qq 3-8. Ff. 47. is 't o'clock] is 't a Clocke Ff ; 
is a clocke Qq. 48. It's . . . o'clock] Ff; It is sixe of\ofthe Qq 3-8] clocke, 
full supper time Qq ; It's . , . lord ; It's . . . o'clock Pope (continuing 47). 

40. make some good means] contrive after sunset on 21st August, and adopts 

some good opportunity. So All's Well Ff reading. Nares quotes Harrison, 

that Ends Well, v. i. 35 ; and see Two Description of England, 1577 : " With 

Gentlemen of Verona, 11. vii. 5 ; Merry us, the nobilitie, gentrie, and students 

Wives of Windsor, 11. ii. 189. doo ordinarilie go to dinner at eleven 

48. nine o'clock] Steevens preferred before noone, and to supper at five, 

Qq reading with the just criticism that or between five and sixe at afternoone." 

" a supper at so late an hour as nine It is, perhaps, unnecessary to add that, 

o'clock, in the year 1485, would have after a day's march and the subsequent 

been a prodigy." Aldis Wright encampment, supper would probably 

recognises, however, that the time is be deferred considerably. 



190 KING RICHARD III [act v. 

K. Rich. I will not sup to-night. 

Give me some ink and paper. 5^ 

What, is my beaver easier than it was ? 

And all my armour laid into my tent? 
Cat. It is, my liege ; and all things are in readiness. 
K. Rich. Good Norfolk, hie thee to thy charge ; 

Use careful watch, choose trusty sentinels. 55 

Nor. I go, my lord. 

K. Rich. Stir with the lark to-morrow, gentle Norfolk. 
Nor. I warrant you, my lord, {Exit. 

K. Rich. Catesby ! 
Gates. My lord ? 
K, Rich. Send out a pursuivant at arms 6o 

To Stanley's regiment : bid him bring his power 

Before sun-rising, lest his son George fall 
>y Into the blind cave of eternal night. {Exit Catesby. 

Fill me a bowl of wine. Give me a watch. 

49, 50. / . . . to-night. Give . . . paper] two lines as Ff; one line in Qq. 
54. charge] charge, away Capell. 55. sentinels] Centinels Ff ; centinell Qq. 

58. Exit.]Vi\ omitted Qq. 59- Ca^fjfcj] Qq ; RatcUffe Ff. 60. Gates.] 

Pope; Rat.C^q, Ff. 63. Exit Catesby.] Camb. ; omitted Qq, Ff. 64. To 
RatcUffe. Pope; To Catesby. Capell. watch] watch-light Keightley conj. 

51. beaver] properly the face-guard Chaos caecum, atque opacam Ditis urn- 

of the helmet, as Hamlet, i. ii. 230 ; 2 brosi domum [precor] ; ibid. 9 : Noctis 

Henry IV. iv. i. 120. Knight, and, aeternae chaos Adversa superis regna; 

after him, Fairholt, Costume in Bug- Here. Fur. 610: noctis aeterna chaos. 

land, (ed Dillon, ii. 45), figure an 64. watch] a watch-light or candle, 

armet, or helmet with removable Steevens says, in answer to a doubt 

beaver, of the time of Philip and Mary, of Johnson's as to whether line 77 does 

" In ordinary helmets, the beaver, not contain a repetition of this order : 

when up, displays the face ; but to do " A watch, i.e. guard, would certainly 

that, it falls down to the chin " (Fair- be placed about the royal tent, without 

holt). The earliest example in England any request of the king concerning it. 

is said to be the beaver in the effigy I believe, therefore, that particular 

of Thomas, Duke of Clarence (d. 1421). kind of candle is here meant, which 

in St. Michael's Chapel of Canterbury was anciently called a watch, because. 

Cathedral. In this passage the beaver being marked out into sections, each 

is probably used for the whole helmet, of which was a certain portion of time in 

Compare 1 Henry IV. iv. i. 104. burning, it supplied the place of the 

63. Compare the phrase used by more modern instrument by which we 

Queen Elizabeth, 11. ii. 46 above, measure the hours." Mr. Craig gives 

The occurrence of this Marlowe-like a reference (" Little Quarto " ed. p. 268) 

and grandiloquent image in the midst to an example from Decker, Bel-Man 

of so much action and plainness of of London (Smeaton, 90) : "I that all 

speech is rather noticeable. Both this while had stood in a corner (like 

passages recall similar phrases in the a watching candle) to see all their 

Senecan plays — e.g. Medea. 740: Et villanies." 



SC. III.] 



KING RICHARD III 



191 



Saddle white Surrey for the field to-morrow. 65 

Look that my staves be sound, and not too heavy. 
Ratdiff! ,_^^ _ _ ^ ^ , 

Rat. My \ord? - .- -^>'. yA / ^ 

K. Rich. Saw'st thou the melancholy Lord Northumberland ? 



Rat. Thomas the Earl of Surrey, and himself, 

Much about cock-shut time, from troop to troop 
Went through the army, cheering up the soldiers. 

K. Rick. So, I am satisfied. Give me a bowl of wine : 
i have not that alacrity of spirit 



70 



v' 



66,67. heavy. Ratdiff 1] Rowe, Camb. ; heauy Ratliffe Qq; heauy. Ratdiff 
all one line) Ff. 69. Saw'st thou] Qq ; Saw'st Ff. 71. about] like Qq 6-8. 
73. / am] I 'm Capell, Pope. 



65. white Surrey] The name is 
Shakespeare's invention. He took the 
hint, no doubt, from the " great white 
courser " on which, according to the 
chroniclers, Richard had entered 
Leicester. 

65. staves] i.e. the staves, or wooden 
shafts of the lances. See below, line 
342; and compare the metaphor in 
Much Ado About Noihitig, v. i. 138. 

69. melancholy] Malone explains 
this epithet by the inactivity of 
Northumberland, "which . . . stood 
still with a great companie, and inter- 
mitted not in the battell." Henry 
Percy, fourth Earl of Northumberland, 
had been an adherent of Richard. It 
fs probable, however, that he came 
to an understanding with Richmond 
not long before Bosworth : his wife was 
a sister of Richmond's supporter. Sir 
Walter Herbert. At any rate, he sub- 
mitted himself to the conqueror after 
the battle, and " was incontinentlie 
receiued into fauour and made of the 
councell." There are indications that, 
after his death near Thirsk in 1489, 
Northumberland's conduct at Bosworth 
was regarded in the North with scant 
respect. Richard, noticing his fol- 
lower's moodiness and thoughtfulness 
before the critical moment of treachery^ 
might well apply lo him the epithet 
" melancholy." 

71. cock-shut time] twilight. The 
old explanation was that a cock-shut 
was a large net, used to snare woodcocks. 
Nares says that it was " stretched 



across a glade, and so suspended upon 
poles as to be easily drawn together " 
by a cord, called by Dame Juliana 
Berners, Treatyse on Fysshynge, 1496, 
a " cockeshote corde." It was gener- 
ally spread in the evening twilight, when 
woodcocks came out to feed ; and thus 
"cock-shut time" became a synonym 
for twilight. New Eng. Diet., however, 
rejects this derivation, and explains the 
word as " perhaps the time when 
poultry go to rest and are shut up." 
Schmidt also suggests this sense. 
New Eng. Diet, quotes Florio, 1598 : 
" Cane e liipo Cock-shut, or twilight, as 
when a man cannot discerne a dog 
from a wolfe." Steevens quotes several 
examples, e.g'., Jonson, The Satyr; — 
" Mistress, this is only spite: 
For you would not yesternight 
Kiss him in the cock-shut light " ; 
Middleton, The Widow, iii. i : " Come, 
come away then : a fine cock shoot 
evening." Toilet, while recognising 
that there was a net known as a "cock- 
shut," regarded "cock-shoot" as im- 
plying the flight of the woodcock, and 
" cock-shoot time " as the time of even- 
ing at which that flight took place. 
New Eng. Diet, defines " cock shoot" 
as " a broad way or glade in a wood, 
through which woodcocks, etc., might 
dart or shoot so as to be caught by 
nets stretched across the opening,'" 
and admits this as an alternative deriva- 
tion of the phrase. Probably the older 
dictionary makers applied the term for 
the glade to the net stretched across it 



192 KING RICHARD III [act v 

Nor cheer of mind that I was wont to have. 75 

Set it down. Is ink and paper ready ? 
Rat. It is, my lord. 
K. Rich. Bid my guard watch. Leave me. 

Ratcliff, about the mid of night come to my tent 

And help to arm me. Leave me, I say. 

{Exeunt Ratcliff and the other attendants. 

^ Enter DERBY to RICHMOND in his tent. Lords and others 
} attending. 

Der. Fortune and victory sit on thy helm ! 80 

Richm. All comfort that the dark night can afford 

Be to thy person, noble father-in-law ! 

Tell me, how fares our loving mother ? 
Der. I, by attorney, bless thee from thy mother, 

Who prays continually for Richmond's good : 85 

So much for that. The silent hours steal on. 

And flaky darkness breaks within the east. 

In brief, for so the season bids us be, 

Prepare thy battle early in the morning. 

And put thy fortune to the arbitrament 90 

Of bloody strokes and mortal-staring war. 

76. Sef] So, set Capell ; There, set Pope. 77, 78. Leave me. Ratcliff] and 

leave me Pope. 78. mid] midst Qq 6-8. 79. arme me] arm me, Ratcliffe 

Capell. me] omitted Ff 3, 4. Leave me] Leave me now Pope. Exeunt 
. . .] Camb. ; King Richard retires into his tent. Exeunt Ratcliffe and Catesby. 
Malone; Exit Ratliffe. Qq; Exit Ratclif. Ft. alt. 79. Scene n: Pope (ed. 

2). Lords . . . attending.] Cdimh. 80. sit]set(^i. 83. Tell me] Tell me, I 
pray Collier. fares] fares it with Hanmer. loving] Qq i, 2; noble Qq 3-8, 
Ff. mother] mother now Keightley conj. 86. that. The] Ff; that the 

Qq I, 2. 91. mortal-staring] hyphened Steevens ; mortal-fearing Capell ; 

mortal-scaring Malone conj. ; mortal-stabbing Staunton conj. 

80. Pope's subdivision of this scene ously take their position between the 
into separate little scenes is noted two tents, which are thrown open in 
above, here and at the other dividing- front to display the sleeping generals, 
points. In his first edition his scenes and they address their remarks to each 
are numbered wrong. Scene iii. occurs in turn. 

twice, at v. iii. i and here ; and the 87. flaky darkness breaks] i.e. dark- 
subsequent scenes are numbered ac- ness breaks into flakes of cloud, as the 
cordingly (Scene iv. line 119; Scene v. dawn rises. New Eng. Diet, quotes 
line 224 ; Scene vi. line 272 ; Scene vii. Sidney, Psalm cxxxv. 3: "In flaky 
V. iv. I and v. 5). The scene, however, mists, the reaking vapors rise." 
in spite of its double character, is in- Mr. Craig thinks that Shakespeare 
divisible. The tents of the rivals are may have derived the epithet from 
on either side of the stage; and the Golding's Ovid,'iu. fol. 34 (b): 'The 
interest shifts from one to the other, flakie clouds all grieslie black." 
When the ghosts appear, they obvi- 91. mortal -staring war] Steevens 



SC. III.] 



KING RICHARD III 



193 



I, as I may — that which I would I cannot — 
With best advantage will deceive the time, 
And aid thee in this doubtful shock of arms: 
But on thy side I may not be too forward, 95 

Lest, being seen, thy brother, tender George, 
Be executed in his father's sight. 
Farewell : the leisure and the fearful time 
Cuts off the ceremonious vows of love 
And ample interchange of sweet discourse, lOO 

Which so long sund'red friends should dwell upon : 
God give us leisure for these rites of love ! 
Once more, adieu : be valiant, and speed well ! 
Riclini. Good lords, conduct him to his regiment : 

I '11 strive with troubled noise to take a nap, 105 

Lest leaden slumber peise me down to-morrow, fl 

96. brother, tender] tender brother Q 6. 97. his] thy Q 4. 98. leisure] 

lack 0/ leisure Anon ap, Camb. loi. sund'red] sundried Qq i, 2; sundired 

Qq 3, 4; sundered Qq 5, 6. 102. rites] Ff; rights Qq. 105. with troubled 
7wise] Ff; with troubled thoughts Qq; troubled with noise Grant White. 



explains "war that looks big, or stares 
fatally on its victim." Compare 
" grim-visag'd war," i. i. 9. The 
present epithet is rather harsh ; but 
none of the many alternative readings 
is as simple and effective. Schmidt 
takes "mortal living" at iv. iv. 26 
above as a similar epithet, and hyphens 
the two words. Mr. Craig (" Little 
Quarto " ed. p. 271) says " the idea is of 
War personified with a fierce, savage 
look in his eye," and gives several in- 
stances of the Elizabethan use of 
" stare." He parallels from Shake- 
speare " wall-ey'd wrath " (King John, 
IV. iii. 49) and Othello, v. ii. 37, 38. 

93. More (ap. Holinshed, iii. 753) 
calls Stanley " this wilie fox." The 
reason which he here gives to Rich- 
mond is recognised by the chroniclers 
as the true motive of his actions. 

96. tender George] Aldis Wright 
notes that George Stanley was a grown 
man. The epithet "tender " seems to 
be derived from the chroniclers' ac- 
count of the end of the battle. Richard 
had given over Lor^.Sttange in custody 
tQ'ITie'lceepers of his tents, ""Which, 
when the field was doone, and their 
maister slaine, and proclamation made 

13 



to know where the child was, they sub- 
mitted themselves as prisoners to the 
lord Strange, and he gentlie received 
them, and brought them to the new pro- 
claimed king." But the passage seems 
to indicate that " child " here is equi- 
valent to " young nobleman," as in 
Spenser and the ballad quoted in King 
Lear, iii. iv. 187, and that Shakespeare 
did not catch this meaning. 

98. leisure] Compare line 239 below. 
The word means, here and in many 
other passages of Shakespeare, not 
"time to spare," but "the time at a 
man's disposal." Johnson's explana- 
tion, "want of leisure," is hardly 
necessary. For "leisure" in the 
special sense, see line 102 below. 

105. with troubled noise] This seems 
to be the right reading. " Thoughts " 
may have arisen through an error in a 
stage MS. or on the stage itself. 
" Troubled " is for " troublesome." 
Compare i. ii. 39, iii. vii. 189. 

106. leaden slumber] M alone quotes 
Lucrece, 124. Compare Julitis Ccesar, 
IV. iii. 268. , 

peise] weigh. The same word as 
"poise." Compare French pescr, and 
see King John, 11. i. 575. Compare 



194 KING RICHARD III [act v. 

When I should mount with wings of victory. 
Once niore, good night, kind lords and gentlemen. 

[Exeunt all but Richmond. 
O Thou, whose captain I account myself, 
Look on my forces with a gracious eye : no 

Put in their hands thy bruising irons of wrath, 
That they may crush down with a heavy fall 
The usurping helmets of our adversaries : 
Make us thy ministers of chastisement. 
That we may praise thee in thy victory ! 115 

To thee I do commend my watchful soul, 
Ere I let fall the windows of mine eyes : 
Sleeping and waking, O, defend me still ! [Sleeps. 

Enter the Ghost of PRmCE ED\yARD, son to Henry 
the Sixth. 

Ghost. [To K. Rich.'] Let me sit heavy on thy soul to-morrow! 
Think how thou stab'dst me in my prime of youth 120 
At Tewkesbury : despair therefore, and die ! 
[To Richm.] Be cheerful, Richmond ; for the wronged souls 
Of butcher'd princes fight in thy behalf: 
King Henry's issue, Richmond, comforts thee. 

108. Exeunt . . .] Exeunt. Manet Richmond Ff; Exiint or Exeunt. Qq. 
113. helmets] helmet Qq 6-8. 115. thy] Qq 3-5, Ff; the Qq 1, 2, 6-8. 118. 
S/£f/>s.]Ff; omitted Qq. aft. 118. Sce.vb K Between the Tents of Richard and 
Richmond: They sleeping. Pope. Prince] Ff; young Prince Qq. Henry] 
Harry Q i. Sixth] sixt, to Ri. Qq i, 2. 120, stab'dst] Camb. ; stabst Qq ; 
stab'st Ff I, 2 ; stabb'st Ff 3, 4 ; stabb'dst Rowe. 121. despair therefore] 

therefore despair Pope. 122. Be . . . 50»</5] one line as Qq; Be . . . Rich- 
mond, For . . . Soules (two lines) Ff. 

Merchant of Venice, iii. ii. 22, and in. bruising irons^i.e. maces, which 

Mr. Pooler s note. Steevens quotes were usually made of iron, 

parallels from late sixteenth century 115. thy victory] the victory which 

authors ; among them Christopher is in truth thine. This seems the 

M'lddleton, Legend of Humphrey, Duke preferable reading. 

of Gloucester, 1600: "Nor was her 118. The forms which Richard's 

schooles peis'd down with golden visions took are not specified by the 

waights." The substantive "peise" chroniclers. According to them, "it 

is used to mean a weight. Compare seemed to him being asleepe, that he 

Pecock, Repressor, 1455, i. 19: " certis did see diuerse images like terrible 

neuere saue in late daies was eny clok diuels, which pulled and haled him, 

telling l^e houns of ]ie dai & ny^t bi peise not suffering him to take anie quiet or 

& hi stroke " ; and see Nares, s.v. rest." 



sc. Ill] KING RICHARD III 195 

Enter the Ghost <?/ Henry THE SIXTH. 
Ghost.\To K. Rich.'] When I was mortal, my anointed body 125 
•/ By thee was punched full of deadly holes : 
Think on the Tower, and me : despair, and die ! 
Harry the Sixth bids thee despair and die ! 
[To Richm.'] Virtuous and holy, be thou conqueror ! 
Harry, that prophesied thou shouldst be king, 1 30 

Doth comfort thee in thy sleep : live and flourish ! 

Enter the Ghost ^/CLARENCE. 
Ghost. [To K. Rich.] Let me sit heavy in thy soul to-morrow ! 
I, that was wash'd to death with fulsome wine, 
Poor Clarence, by thy guile betray 'd to death — 
To-morrow in the battle think on me, 135 

And fall thy edgeless sword : despair, and die ! 
[To Richm.] Thou offspring of the house of Lancaster, 
The wronged heirs of York do pray for thee : 
Good angels guard thy battle ! live, and flourish ! 

Enter the Ghosts <?/ Rivers, Grey, «««? Vaughan. 

Ghost of Riv. [To K. Rich.] Let me sit heavy in thy soul to- 
morrow — 140 
Rivers, that died at Pomfret ! despair, and die ! 
Ghost of G7'ey. [To K. Rich.] Think upon Grey, and let thy 

soul despair ! 
Ghost of Vaughan. [ To K. Rich.] Think upon Vaughan, and, 
with guilty fear. 
Let fall thy lance : despair, and die ! 

126. deadly] Q i ; omitted Qq 2-8, Ff. 128. Harry] Henry Ff 2-4. 131. 
in thy sleep : live] in sleep : live thou Rowe. 132, sit] set Q i. in] Qq 1-4, 
Ff; onQqs, 6, 8; omc Q 7 (and so 140). 133, wi </»] i« Qq 3, 4. 140. Ghost 
of Riv. [To K. Rich.] Riu. Qq 3-8, Ff; Kijig. Qq i, 2. 144. lance] huriless 

lance Capell ; pointless lance Collier MS. despair] Richard, despair Pope. 

132. in thy soul] Compare Richard thrown into the wine, so that he could 
II. I. ii. 50. hardly be said to find the wine " ful- 

133. fulsome] cloying, especially some," or to be "washed to death." 
applicable to the thick, sweet wine in 136. fall] let fall, drop. See note 
which Clarence's body was thrown, on i. iii. 353 above. The line is repeated 
New Eng. Diet, cites Harrison, De- at line 164. 

scription of England, ii. 6: "Our ale 144. /awc^-] Perhaps some epithet has 

is more thicke,/J<^5om£, and of no con- dropped out, like those suggested by 

tinuance." Steevens objected that Capell and Collier. 
Clarence was dead before he was 



196 KING RICHARD III [act v. 

All. [To Rtc/imond] Awake, and think our wrongs in Richard's 
bosom 145 

Will conquer him ! Awake, and win the day ! 

Enter the Ghost of Hastings. 

Ghost. [To K. Rtch.] Bloody and guilty, guiltily awake, 
And in a bloody battle end thy days ! 
Think on Lord Hastings : despair, and die ! 
[To Richin.'] Quiet untroubled soul, awake, awake ! 150 
Arm, fight, and conquer, for fair England's sake ! 

Enter the Ghosts 0/ the ttvo young PRINCES, 

Ghosts. [ To K. Rich.'] Dream on thy cousins smothered in the 

Tower : 
Let us be lead within thy bosom, Richard, 
And weigh thee down to ruin, shame, and death ! 
Thy nephews' souls bid thee despair and die ! 155 

[To Richm.'] Sleep, Richmond, sleep in peace, and wake 

in joy : 
Good angels guard thee from the boar's annoy ! 
Live, and beget a happy race of kings ! 
Edward's unhappy sons do bid thee flourish. 

Enter the Ghost f/LADY Anne. 

Ghost. [To K. Rich.] Richard, thy wife, that wretched Anne 

thy wife, 160 

That never slept a quiet hour with thee, 
Now fills thy sleep with perturbations : 
To-morrow in the battle think on me. 
And fall thy edgeless sword : despair, and die ! 

145. Awake . . . bosom'\ one line as Qq ; Awake, And . . . Bosome (two lines) Ff. 
aft. 146-151. Enter . . . sake I] arranged as Qq 3-8, Ff; Qq i, 2 transpose with 
I52-59- 149. despair] and despair Fope; so despair CoWier MS, 150. Quiet 
. . . awakeloneVme a.sQq; Quiet . . . soule, Atvake. awake Fi. 1^2. Dream 
. . . Tower] one line as Qq ; Dreame . . . Cousins Smothered . . . Tower (two 
lines) Ff. 153. lead] Q i ; laid or layd Qq 2-8, Ff. 155. souls bid] Qq, 

F4; soule bids Tf 1-2. 156. Sleep . . . yov] one line as Qq ; SUepe Richmond 
Sleepe . . . Icy (two lines) Ff. aft 159. Lady Anne] Camb. ; Ladie Anne his wife 
Qq I, 2 ; Queene Anne his wife. Qq 38 ; Anne his 7cife. Ff. 160. Richard . . . 
Anne thy u»//V] one line as Qq ; Richard, thy Wife, That . . . Anne thy Wife 
(two lines) Ff. 162. perturbations] preturbations Q i. 



sc. Ill] KING RICHARD HI 197 

[To Rickm.] Thou quiet soul, sleep thou a quiet sleep : 165 
Dream of success and happy victory ! 
Thy adversary's wife doth pray for thee. 

Enter the Ghost ^/Buckingham. 
Ghost, [To K. Rick] The first was I that help'd thee to tiie 
crown ; 
The last was I that felt thy tyranny : 
O! in the battle think on Buckingham, 170 

And die in terror of thy guiltiness ! 
Dream on, dream on, of bloody deeds and death : 
Fainting, despair : despairing, yield thy breath ! 
[ To Richm.] I died for hope ere I could lend thee aid : 
But cheer thy heart, and be not thou dismay'd ! 175 

God and good angels fight on Richmond's side ; 
And Richard fall in height of all his pride ! 

The Ghosts vanish. King Richard starts out of his dream. 
K. Rich. Give me another horse ! bind up my wounds ! 
Have mercy, Jesu ! — Soft ! I did but dream. 
O coward conscience, how dost thou afiflict me! 180 

165. Thou . . . sleep] one line as Qq ; Thou . . . soule, Sleepe . . . sleepe {two 
lines) Ff. i68. The first . . . crown] one line as Qq; The first was I That 

. . . Crowne (two lines) Ff. 174. / died . . . aid] one line as Qq ; / dyed 

. . . hope Ere . . . Ayde (two lines) Ff. for hope] for holpe Theobald conj. ; 
forsoke Hanmer ; forholpe Steevens conj. ; fore-done Tyrvvhitt conj. 177. fall] 
Ff; fals Qq. aft. 177. The Ghosts vanish.] Rowe, Camb. 

174. for hope] The meaning may be, is perhaps the weakest passage in the 
"I died /o*- /lo/in^ to give you aid, be- play. It seems to mark a stage in 
fore I could actually give it." This Shakespeare's development at which 
is the interpretation suggested by he was unequal to the psychological 
Steevens. Aldis Wright's explanation, skill which such a speech required ; and 
"I died as regards hope," is equally it may stand out as a conspicuous 
good, if not better. In that case the failure, because it demanded more from 
passage means, " Before I could give him than any other speech in the play, 
thee aid, I was dead so far as hope was The attempt to portray the king's 
concerned; but be not thou without mingled emotions is thoroughly in 
hope." There is also much to be said keeping with the statement of the 
for Steevens' conjecture "forholpe," chronicles, that the "strange vision 
and for the whole idea that "for — " is not so suddenlie strake his heart with 
here a privative prefix. The passage a sudden feare, but it stuffed his head 
cited by Dyce from Greene, James IV. and troubled his mind with manie 
1598, V. 6. (Dyce, 217): " Some then busie and dreadfull imaginations." 
will yield when I am dead /or hope," is. The phrase " coward conscience " (line 
however, in favour of the received text 180) recalls Hamlet, iii. i. 83, part 
and of Wright's explanation. of a speech which is a triumph in 

178. The speech, full of self- the very field in which this is a first 
questioning argument, which follows, effort. 



198 KING RICHARD 111 [act v. 

The lights burn blue. It is now dead midnight. 

Cold fearful drops stand on my trembling flesh. 

What do I fear? myself? there's none else by: 

Richard loves Richard ; that is, I am I. 

Is there a murderer here? No. Yes, I am. 185 

Then fly. What, from myself ? Great reason : why ? 

Lest I revenge. What, myself upon myself? 

Alack, I love myself. Wherefore ? for any good 

That I myself have done unto myself? 

O, no ! alas, I rather hate myself 190 

For hateful deeds committed by myself. 

I am a villain : yet I lie, I am not. 

Fool, of thyself speak well : fool, do not flatter. 

My conscience hath a thousand several tongues, 

And every tongue brings in a several tale, 195 

And every tale condemns me for a villain. 

Perjury, perjury, in the high'st degree ; 

Murder, stern murder, in the dir'st degree ; 

All several sins, all us'd in each degree, 

181. It is now] Q I ; It is not Qq 2-8, Ff ; Is it not Rowe. 183-204. What 
. , . to myself?] Ritson proposed to put in margin. 1S3. What do I fear? 
myself?] What doe I feare my selfe ? Qq 2-8 ; What ? do I feare my selfe ? Ff. 
184. Richard . . . / am 7] omitted Pope. am] and Q i. 1^6. fly.] fly e ? 
Ff 2-4. reason: why ?] Ff; reason whie ? Q i; reason why? Q 2; reason 

why, Qq 3-8. 186-93. Then fly . . . flatter] Pope put in margin. 187. 

What] omitted Capell. 188. Alack] omitted Pope. 189. 7] omitted 

Qq 6-8. 197. Perjury, perjury] Qq i, 2; Periurie Qq 3-8, Ff; Perjury, 

foul perjury Collier MS. the] omitted Pope. 

iSi._,ThLj-igl^i bujm..iliu] Brand, point in the play, to have been without 

Popular Antiquities, iii. 69, quotes MS. guidance, and to have relied on 

Grose: "If, during the time of an ap- the later Qq alone. Another example 

parition, there is a lighted candle in follows at line 183. In these cases 

the room, it will burn extremely blue : Q i supplies us with the right reading, 
this is so universally acknowledged, 184. Pope was perhaps justified in 

that many eminent philosophers have rejecting this feeble line to the margin, 

busied themselves in accounting for it, But the words " I am I " bring out, in 

without once doubting the truth of the Richard's extremity, his unfailing belief 

fact." Steevens quotes Lyly, Ga/rt/A^-a, in the doctrine "I am myself alone," 

1592: " I thought there was some spirit already enunciated at 3 Henry VI. v. 

in it because it burnt so blue ; for my vi. 83. 

mother would often tell me when the 186. Great reason : why ?] Ff, whose 

candle burnt blue, there was some ill emendation at line 183 was less suc- 

spirit in the house." Compare Julius cessful, seem here to have hit upon 

Caesar, iv. iii. 275. the right readmg. For another emen- 

noiv] This is one of several cases dationofFf, in default of MS. authority, 

where the editor of F x seems, at this see line 200 below. 



sc. Ill] KING RICHARD III 199 

Throng to the bar, crying all, " Guilty ! guilty ! " 200 

I shall despair. There is no creature loves me ; 

And, if I die, no soul will pity me : 

Nay, wherefore should they, since that I myself 

Find in myself no pity to myself? ' 

Methought the souls of all that I had murder'd 205 

Came to my tent, and every one did threat 

To-morrow's vengeance on the head of Richard. 

Enter Ratcliff. 

Ra My lord I 

K, 'ich. 'Zounds ! who is there ? 

Ra. My lord, 'tis I. The early village-cock 210 

-lath twice done salutation to the morn ; 
J'our friends are up, and buckle on their armour. 

K. i\ 'ch. O Ratcliff, I have dream'd a fearful dream. 

What thinkest thou? will our friends prove all true? 

Rat. No doubt, my lord. 

K.Rich. O Ratcliff, I fear, I fear ! 215 

Rat. Nay, good my lord, be not afraid of shadows. 

K. Rich. By the apostle Paul, shadows to-night 
Have struck more t' or to the soul of Richard 
Than can the substai often thousand soldiers 
Armed iu proof, and le^i by .:haii<''v Richm.ond ! 220 

200. Throng] Qq i, 2 ; Throng all Qq 3-8, Ff. to the] to th' Ff. crying 
all] all crying Pope. 201. shall] will Pope. 202. will] Qq i, 2 ; shall 

Qq 3-8, Ff. 203, 204. Nay . . . to myself?] Pope put in margin. 205. 

had] Q I, Ff; omitted Qq 2-6; have Qq 7, 8. 206. Came] Came all Qq 3-6. 

209. 'Zounds! who is] Qq ; Who's Ff. 210. My lord] Qq 7, 8 ; Ratcliffe, 

my Lord Qq i-6, Ff. 213-15. O Ratcliff . . . my lord] Qq ; omitted Ff. 

214. thinkest] Ca.'ptW, Camb. ; thinkst Qq. 215. 0] omitted Pope. O . . . 
fear.] Collier replaces by 213. 

209. 'Zounds] For Ff reading com- enemies (see lines 217-220), the king 
pare note on i. iv. 117 above. "recited and declared to his familiar 

210. My lord] I have ventured to freends in the morning his wonderfull 
leave out the unnecessary "Ratcliff" vision and fearefull dream." The 
at the beginning of the line, which was omission of lines 213, 214 in Ff is 
most likely a printer's error, originating obviously due to the printer, who mis- 
in Q I and emended in no following took the " O Ratcliff" in the latter half 
edition until Q 7. Had any MS. been of line 215 for that at the beginning of 
to hand at this point, the editor of F i line 213, and proceeded accordingly, 
would probably have made this correc- As the passage stands in Ff, Ratcliff 
tion. has not sufficient information to justify 

213. The chroniclers say that, to his words in line 216. 
avoid any appearance of fear of his 



200 KING RICHARD III [aci v. 

'Tis not yet near day. Come, go with me ; 

Under our tents I '11 play the eaves-dropper, 

To hear if any mean to shrink from me. [Exeu?it. 

Enter the Lords to RICHMOND, sitting in his tent. 

Lords. Good morrow, Richmond ! 

Richm. Cry mercy, lords and watchful gentlemen, 225 

That you have ta'en a tardy sluggard here. 
Lords. How have you slept, my lord ? 
Richm. The sweetest sleep and fairest-boding dreams 

That ever enter'd in a drowsy head, 

Have I since your departure had, my lords. 230 

Methought their souls, whose bodies Richard murder'd, 

Came to my tent and cried on victory : 

I promise you, my heart is very jocund 

In the remembrance of so fair a dream. 

How far into the morning is it, lords ? 23 5 

Lords. Upon the stroke of four. 
Richm. Why, then 'tis time to arm and give direction. 

His Oration to his Soldiers. 

More than I have said, loving countr)'-men, 

The le-surc and enfor.cnicni of the li;r!^ 

221. TJs] Qq, Ff; It is Pope. 222. eaves-dropper] F 4; ease dropper Q i- 
ewse dropper Q 2 ; ewse-dropper Q 3 ; eawse-dropper Q 4 ; ewese-dropper Qq 
5-8 ; Ease-dropper Ff 1-3. 223. hear] Qq 3-8, Ff ; see Qq i, 2. mean to shrink] 
means to shrtnke Q 4; man shrinks Ff 3, 4. aft. 223. Scene vi. Warburton 
Pope (ed. I) misprinted Scene v. ; (ed. 2) misprinted Scene iv. sitting 
tent] Ff ; omitted Qq. 224. Lords.] Qq ; Richm. Ff. 225. Cry mercy] Cry 
you mercy Ff2-4; I cry you mercy Pope. 228. The . . . rfr^ams] one line 

asQq; The . . . sleepe. And . . . Dreames (two lines) Ff. fairest-boding] 

hyphened Theobald. 232. cried on victory] cried out, Victory Pope; cried On I 
Victory Warburton. 233. heart] Ff; soule Qq. 237. Arms and comes 

forth. Capell. aft. 237. His . . . Soldiers.] To his Troobs ; who now rather 

about the Tent. Capell. ^ 

226. Cry mercy] The fiill form is " I was so neere imbatelled, he rode about 

cry you mercy": see i. iii. 235 above, his armie from ranke to ranke, & from 

The pronoun is omitted, as when we wing to wing, giuing comfortable 

say "Thank you." words to all men, and that finished 

231, 232. Richmond's dreams are a (being armed at all peeces, sauing his 

dramatic interpolation which find no helmet) mounted on a little hill, so 

warrant in the chroniclers' accounts. that all his people might see and' be- 

238. " When the earle of Richmond hold him perfectlie, to their great re- 
knew by his foreriders that the king ioicing" (Holinshed, iii. 757). 



sc. in] KING RICHARD III 201 

Forbids to dwell upon : yet remember this. 240 

God and our good cause fight upon our side ; 

The prayers of holy saints and wronged souls, 

Like high-rear'd bulwarks, stand before our faces. 

Richard except, those whom we fight against 

Had rather have us win than him they follow : 245 

For what is he they follow ? truly, gentlemen, 

A bloody tyrant and a homicide ; 

One rais'd in blood, and one in blood establish'd ; 

One that made means to come by what he hath. 

And slaughter'd those that were the means to help him ; 2 ^o 

A base foul stone, made precious by the foil 

Of England's chair, where he is falsely set ; 

One that hath ever been God's enemy. 

Then, if you fight against God's enemy, 

God will in justice ward you as his soldiers ; 255 

If you do sweat to put a tyrant down. 

You sleep in peace, the tyrant being slain ; 

If you do fight against your country's foes, 

Your country's fat shall pay your pains the hire ; 

If you do fight in safeguard of your wives, 260 

Your wives shall welcome home the conquerors ; 

If you do free your children froiM the sword, 

240. upon] on Pope. 244. Richard except,] Qq 3-8, Ff ; Richard, except 

Qq I, 2. 250. slaughter'd] slandered Q 4. 251. foil]Qq i, 2; soile Qq 

3-5 ; soyle Qq 6-8, Ff 1-3 ; soyl F 4. 256. sveat] Qq i, 2 ; sweare Qq 3-8, Ff. 

247. homicide] The word is taken i. iii. 265-67 ; Beaumont and Fletcher, 

from Holinshed : "an homicide and Faithful Shepherdess, i. ^i — 

murtherer of his owne bloud or pro- "Yet, if I may believe what others 

genie." say, 

249. made means] Compare line 40 My face has foile enough " ; 
above. Here a sinister meaning is Chapman, etc., Eastward Ho, act iv. : 
given to the phrase. " I will charge 'hem and recharge 'hem, 
251. foil] A thin leaf of metal placed rather than authority should want /o:7 
under a precious stone to relieve its to set it off." The history of the read- 
brilliancy. See Drayton, Eng. Her. ing here is obvious. See note on 
Epp., Mary to Brandon: — " now," line 181 above. 

" Which [a precious stone] then 255. ward] protect. Q 8 mistakenly 
appears more orient and more printed "reward." 
bright, 256. sweat] Holinshed has " There- 
Having a foil whereon to show its fore labour for your gaine, & sweat for 
light." your right," which is fairly conclusive 
Metaphors from the jewel and its foil as to the right reading, 
are common. Compare Richard II. 



202 KING RICHARD III [act v 

Your children's children quits it in your age. 

Then, in the name of God and all these rights, 

Advance your standards, draw your willing swords ! 265 

For me, the ransom of my bold attempt 

Shall be this cold corpse on the earth's cold face ; 

But, if I thrive, the gain of my attempt 

The least of you shall share his part thereof. 

Sound drums and trumpets boldly and cheerfully ; 270 

God and Saint George ! Richmond and victory ! 

[Exeun/(. 

Re-enter King RICHARD, Ratcliff, Attendants and 
Forces. 

K. Rich. What said Northumberland as touching Richmond ? 
Rat. That he was never trained up in arms. 
K. Rich. He said the truth. And what said Surrey then ? 
Rat. He smil'd and said " The better for our purpose." 275 
K. Rich. He was in the right ; and so indeed it is. 

\The clock striketh. 

Tell the clock there. Give me a calendar. 

Who saw the sun to-day ? 
Rat. Not I, my lord. 

K. Rich. Then he disdains to shine ; for, by the book, 

He M, -VI have brav'd the east an hour - " 280 



263. quits^ Qq, Ff; quit Pope. 270. boldly] bold Staunton. and] 

omitted Pope. 271. Exeunt. ]Shonts &•€., and Exeunt. Capell ; omitted Qq, Ft. 
aft. 271. Scene vii. Pope. Re-enter . . . ] Camb. ; Enter King Richard, Rat. 
&>€. Qq ; Enter King Richard, Ratcliffe, and Catesby. Ff. 276. in the] i' th' 
Pope. The clock striketh.] after there in 277 Qq, Ff. 277, 278. Tell . . . 

my lord] arranged as Pope, Camb.; Tell . , . there. Give . . . to day? Rat. 
Not I my lord. {3 lines) Qq, Ff. 

263. quits] There is no reason for 267. Richmond's words in Holinshed 

altering the old plural, which occurs in are : " You shall find me this dale 

all the printed copies. rather a dead carrion vpon the cold 

265. Advance] raise. Compare i. ii. ground, than a free prisoner on a 

40 above. Holinshed has, " And there- carpet in a ladies chamber." 

fore, in the name of God and St. 277. T^// /A^c/oc*] Count the strokes 

George, let euerie man couragiouslie of the clock. Compare " as one tells 

aduance foorth his standard!" Com- twenty," i. iv. 118 above, and see 

pare Milton, Paradise Lost, v. 588 : The Tempest, 11. i. 289. 

" Ten thousand thousand Ensignes 279. the book] the calendar which he 

high advanced." has just consulted. 



sc. Ill] KING RICHARD III 203 

A black day will it be to somebody. ^ '^n . oo c^ - 
Ratcliff! roo/'o 

Rat. My lord ? 

K. Rich. The sun will not be seen to-day ; 

The sky doth frown and lour upon our army. 
I would these dewy tears were from the ground. 285 

Not shine to-day ? Why, what is that to me 
More than to Richmond ? for the self-same heaven 
That frowns on me looks sadly upon him. 

Enter NORFOLK. 

Nor. Arm, arm, my lord ! the foe vaunts in the field. 

K. Rich. Come, bustle, bustle ! Caparison my horse. 290 

Call up Lord Stanley, bid him bring his power. 

I will lead forth my soldiers to the plain. 

And thus my battle shall be ordered : 

My foreward shall be drawn out all in length, 

Consisting equally of horse and foot ; 295 

Our archers shall be placed in the midst : 

John Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Earl of Surrey, 

Shall have the leadinj^ of th's foot and horse. 

They thus directed, wc will follow 

281, 282. A black . . . somebody. Ratcliff] arranged as Johnson, etc. ; A 
blacke . . . some bodie Rat. (one line) Qq i-6 ; A blacke . . . somebody. Rat- 
cliff e. (one line) Ff; A black . . . somebody — Ratcliff, — (one line) Capell. 
288. looks]looke(i6. aft. 288. Enter Norfolk.]Re-entey Norfolk. Camh. 294. 
shall be drawn out all] Q i ; shall be drawne Qq 2-8, Ff ; battel shall be drawn 
Hanmer. 298. i/u5]Qqi, 2; <A« Qq 3-8, Ff. 299. we] zf « o?/rstf// Pope. 

follow] follow them Collier MS. 

281. A black day . . . somebody]Mx. 292-301. Shakespeare follows Holin- 

Craig points out that this seems to be shed closely, Richard, " bringing all 

a proverbial expression, and compares his men out of their campe into the 

2 Henry IV. v. iv. 14. See also 3 plaine, ordered his fore-ward in a mar- 

Henry VI. v. vi. 85 : "I will sort a uellous length, in which he appointed 

pitchy day for thee." both horsmen and footmen . . . and 

285. from] away from, off. Com- in the fore-front he placed the archers 

pare Antony and Cleopatra, 11. vi. 30, like a strong fortified trench or bul- 

and see note on in. v. 32 above. worke. Guer this battell was capteine, 

290. Caparison] The caparison of a lohn, duke of Norffolke, with whome 
horse was, strictly speaking, the rich was Thomas earle of Surrie, his sonne. 
covering or housing which was worn After this long vant-gard, followed king 
by the spare horse at a battle or tourna- Richard himselfe with a strong com- 
ment (Demmin, Arms and Armour, panie of chosen and approued men of 
English translation, 1894, p. 349). The warre, hauing horssemen for wings on 
armed horse was often covered with a both sides of his battell." 
caparison of cloth. 



204 KING RICHARD Til [act v. 

In the main battle, whose puissance on either side 300 

Shall be well winged with our chiefest horse. 

This, and Saint George to boot ! What think'st thou, 
Norfolk ? 
Nor. A good direction, warlike sovereign. 

This found I on my tent this morning. 

\He showeth him a paper. 
K. Rich. {^Reads?^ '•'Jockey of Norfolk, be not so bold, 305 

For Dickon thy master is bought and sold!' 

A thing devised by the enemy ! 

Go, gentlemen, every man unto his charge. 

Let not our babbling dreams affright our souls : 

Conscience is but a word that cowards use, 310 

Devis'd at first to keep the strong in awe ; 

Our strong arms be our conscience, swords our law ! 

March on, join bravely, let us to 't pell-mell, 

If not to heaven, then hand in hand to hell ! 

His Oration to his Army. 

What shall I say more than I have inferr'd? 315 

Remember whom you are to cope withal ; 
A sort of vagabonds, rascals, and runaways, 

300. whose puissance'] which Pope. 301. well winged] hyphened Ff. 

302. This . . . Norfolk] one line zsQq; This . . . boote. What . . . Norfolke 
(two lines) Ff. boot] bootes Qq i, 2. think'st thou, Norfolk] Ff; thinkst 
thou Norffolke Q i ; thinkest thou Nor. Qq 2-5 ; thinkcst thou not Qq 6-8. 
304. This] This paper Pope. He . . . paper] Qq ; omitted Ff; Giving a 

Scrowl. Kowe. 305. K. Rich. [Reads.] CapeJ], Camb. so] too Capell. 

307. A thing] King. A thing Qq, Ff. 308. every man unto] Qq ; euery man 

to Ff ; go each man to Pope. 310. Conscience is but] Qq j, 2 ; Conscience is 

Qq3-8; For Conscience is Vf. aft. 313. His . . . /lrw/v]Qq; omitted Ff; turn- 
ing to his Troops. Capell. 317. rascals, and] rascals Ff 2-4; of rascals Pope. 

302. Saint George to boot /] Saint as likely, by a press error, altered from 
George to aid us as well. On "boot" "so" to "to." 

see note at iv. iv. 65 above. 313. pell-mell] So Kitig Lear, iv. vi. 

303. direction] orAer of han]e. Com- 119, and see Mr. Craig's note (Arden 
pare line 16 above. ed. 1901, p. 198). 

304. morning] probably a trisyllable. 315. / have inferr'd] i.e. the argu- 
like the older form " morweninge." ments I have stated already. 

305. so bold] The line in the 317. sort] number, company. "Ye 
chroniclers runs : " lacke of Norffolke see further how a companle of tiaitors, 
be not too bold " ; and Q 6, perhaps in theeues, outlawes, and runnagates of 
accordance with this version (which is our owne nation, be aiders and par- 
certainly the better), or, which is quite takers of his feat and enterprise," See 



sc. Ill] KING RICHARD III 205 

A scum of Bretons, and base lackey peasants, 

Whom their o'er-cloyed country vomits forth 

To desperate adventures and assur'd destruction. 320 

You sleeping safe, they bring to you unrest ; 

You having lands and blest with beauteous wives, 

They would restrain the one, distain the other. 

And who doth lead them but a paltry fellow, 

Long kept in Bretagne at our mother's cost ? 325 

A milk-sop, one that never in his life 

Felt so much cold as over shoes in snow ! 

Let 's whip these stragglers o'er the seas again, 

Lash hence these overweening rags of France, 

These famish'd beggars, weary of their lives, 330 

Who, but for dreaming on this fond exploit. 

For want of means, poor rats, had hang'd themselves ! 

If we be conquer'd, let men conquer us. 

And not these bastard Bretons, whom our fathers 

318. Bretons] Capell, Camb.; Brittains or Brittaines Qq, Ff. 320. adventures] 
ventures Capell. assur'd] omitted Pope. 321. to you] Q i ; you to Qq 2-8, 
Ff. 323. restrain] distrain Hanmer (fr. Warburton). 325. Bretagne] 

Hanmer, Camb.; Brittaine Qq ; Britaine Ff i, 2 ; Britain Ff 3, 4. our mother's] 
his mother's Theobald conj., Pope; our brother's Capell. 326. milk-sop] Ff 

3,4; milkesopt (^q 1-^ ; milkesope Q6; milke-sopFii,2,Qq7,S. 334. these] 
those Rowe. bastard Bretons] Capell ; bastard Brittains (or Brittaines, etc.) 

Qq, Ff I, 2; bastard-Britains Ff3, 4; bastard-Britons Pope. 

Richard II. iv. i. 246. Compare close cage, in the court of Francis duke 
Berners' Froissart, i. 146 : " We are of Britaine." Halle and Holinshed (ed. 
here within, a small sort of knights and i) have " my brothers meanes," which 
squires" ; A.M. .Captivity of yohn Fox, is nearer the truth. Malone explains 
ap. Hakluyt (Arber, Eng. Garner, i. " our brother " as Charles the Bold of 
206): "Which the same John Fox Burgundy, who was Richard's brother- 
seeing, delivered unto them a sort of in-law. Here Shakespeare has copied 
files, which he had gathered together his original too closely. The phrase 
for this purpose." which follows, "and neuer saw armie, 

318. Holinshed has "What a number nor was exercised in martiall affaires: 

of beggerlie Britans and faint-hearted by reason whereof he neither can, nor 

Frenchmen be with him arriued to is able by his owne will or experience 

destroie us, our wiues and children." to guide or rule an hoast," was prob- 

The epithet " lackey " may be intended ably the origin of the statement (line 

to convey an Englishman's contempt 273) which Shakespeare quotes as 

for Frenchmen. coming from Northumberland. " Milk- 

323. restrain] i.e. hold back from sop " in line 326 is the term of contempt 

us. in Holinshed: compare "homicide," 

distain] stain, defile. So Troilus and line 247. Aldis Wright compares 

Cressida, i. iii. 241. lago's contempt for Cassio, Othello, i. 

325. our mother's] Holinshed (ed. 2) i. 20-27. 

has: "brought up by my moofhers 326. milk-sop] ComipaTe 1 Henry IV. 

meanes, and mine, like a captiue in a 11. iii. 35, 36. 



206 



KING RICHARD III 



[act v. 



Have in their own land beaten, bobb'd, and thump'd, 335 
And in record left them the heirs of shame. 
Shall these enjoy our lands ? lie with our wives ? 
Ravish our daughters ? [Drum afar offj] Hark ! I hear 

their drum. 
Fight, gentlemen of England ! fight, bold yeomen ! 
Draw, archers, draw your arrows to the head ! 340 

Spur your proud horses hard, and ride in blood ! 
Amaze the welkin with your broken staves ! 

Enter a Messenger. 

What says Lord Stanley? will he bring his power? 
Mess. My lord, he doth deny to come. 
K. Rich. Off with his son George's head ! 345 



336. i»] Qq I. 2 ; on Qq 3-8, Ff, 
Rauish . . . daughters ? Hearke, . . 
Qq I, 2, 8 ; Right Qq 3-7. bold] Q 
Messenger.] Ff ; omitted Qq. 344. 

Off instantly Hanmer. 

335. bobb'd] As Aldis Wright points 
out, to " bob" is much the same as to 
beat or thump, with an additional spice 
of contempt in the word. See Mr. 
Deighton's note on Troilus and 
Cressida, 11. i. 76, and Mr. Craig's note 
in " Little Quarto " ed. of this play, pp. 
289, 2go. A very common meaning of 
the word is " to cheat or fool " : compare 
Othello, V. i. 16 ; Troilus and Cressida, 
III. i. 75 ; Fletcher and Massinger, 
Spanish Curate, 1622, v. 2 : — 

" Though I were angry yesterday 
with you all, 
And very angry, for methought ye 
bobb'd me" ; 
and "Ye shall be bobb'd, gentlemen." 
For the substantive " bob " and the 
phrase "to give the bob" see /Is You 
Like It, II. vii. 55 ; Greene, Menaphon 
(Arber, 85) : " He smiled in his sleeue to 
see howe kindely hee had giuen her the 
bobbe " ; Fletcher, Wit without Money, 
V. I : " These are fine bobs, i' faith ! " 

342. Amaze the welkin] Frighten the 
sky, i.e. lest it be hit by the broken 
splinters of the lance shafts. The 
conceit is explained by Malone's 
quotation from W, Smith, The Hector 



338. Ravish . . . drum] one line as Qq ; 
. Drumme (two lines) Ff. 339. Fight] 
: ; boldly Qq 2-8, Ff. aft. 343. E?iter a 
come] come to you Capell. 345. Off] 



of Germany, or The Palsgrave, 1615 : 
" Spears flew in splinters half the way 
to heaven," and by Coriolaitus, iv. v. 
115. Compare King John, v. ii. 172. 
343-47. Richard had sent a pursui- 
vant to Stanley, bidding him bring his 
company forsvard, "which thing if he 
refused to doo, he sware, by Christes 
passion, that he would strike off his 
sonnes head before he dined. The lord 
Stanleie answered the purseuant that, 
if the king did so, he had more sonnes 
alive ; and, as to come to him, he was 
not then so determined. When king 
Richard heard this answer, he com- 
manded the lord Strange incontinent 
to be beheaded : which was at that 
verie same season, when both the 
armies had sight ech of other." 
Richard's councillors, however, advised 
him to spare Lord Strange till after 
the battle. "So (as God would) king 
Richard brake his holie oth, and the 
lord was delivered to the keepers of the 
kings tents, to be kept as prisoner." 
The abrupt order in line 345 may have 
suggested Cibber's famous addition after 
IV. iv. 534 above, "Off with his head. 
So much for Buckingham." 



sc. IV.] KING RICHARD III 207 

Nor. My lord, the enemy is past the marsh : 

After the battle let George Stanley die. 
K. Rich. A thousand hearts are great within my bosom. 

Advance our standards, set upon our foes ; 

Our ancient word of courage, fair Saint George, 350 

Inspire us with the spleen of fiery dragons ! 

Upon them ! Victory sits on our helms. 

\Exeunt. 

SCENE W .—Another part of the field. 

Alarum : excursions. Enter NORFOLK and forces fighting ; to 
him Catesby. 

Gates. Rescue, my lord of Norfolk, rescue, rescue! 
The king enacts more wonders than a man. 
Daring an opposite to every danger : 
His horse is slain, and all on foot he fights, 
Seeking for Richmond in the throat of death. 5 

Rescue, fair lord, or else ^he day is lost I 

350. fair'lfare Q 2. 352. helms] Qq i, 2, 4, 8; helf>es Qq 3, 5, 6, 7, Ff. 

Exeunt] Rowe ; Drums, and Exeunt. Capell ; omitted Qq, Ff. 

Scene iv. 
Scene ly.] Capell; Scene viii. Pope; scene continued Ff, Another . . , 

field.] Capell, Camb. Enter Norfolk . . . ] Capell, Camb. ; Enter Catesbie. 

Qq, Ff. I. Rescue . . . rescue] one line as Qq ; Rescue . . . Norfolke, Rescue, 
rescue (two lines) Ff. 

346. A " great marish " separated neither of the earliest quartos were 

both armies. Richmond, in his ad- available, it is clear that Q 4 was not 

vance, left this on his right; and thus referred to by the editor. Q 3 or Q 5 

put the sun at his back, and in the was thus the alternative copy of the 

faces of his enemies. This statement play which he must have used in seek- 

of the chroniclers seems to imply that ing earlier authority for the readings of 

the subject of lines 278-88 above is Q 6. 
due to the invention of the dramatist. ^ 

" When king Richard saw the earles 

companie was passed the marish, he 3. Daring an opposite] Malone 

did command with all hast to set vpon quotes Marston, Antonio and Mclltda : 

them." " Myself, myself, will dare all oppo- 

;iSi. spleen of /iery dragons] Comipaxe sites." An "opposite" is an enemy, 

King John, ii. i. 68. Mr. Craig re- adversary, as Twelfth Night, in. iv. 

marks that the expression " to fight like 293 ; King Lear, v. iii. 42. Tyrwhitt, 

a dragon " seems to have been prover- who proposed to read " Daring and 

bial, and refers to Coriolanus, iv. vii. 23. opposite," probably regarded the phrase 

352. helms] The variation in Ff is as meaning "daring in his opposition 

worth noticing. Apart from the fact to every danger." Wherever Richard 

that first-hand MS. authority was meets an opposite on the field, he dares 

evidently wanting, and that copies of him dffoutrance. 



208 



KING RICHARD III 



[act v. 



Alarums. Enter KING RICHARD. 

K. Rich. A horse ! a horse ! my kingdom for a horse ! 
Gates. Withdraw, my lord ; I '11 help you to a horse. 
K. Rich. Slave, I have set my life upon a cast, 

And I will stand the hazard of the die ! 

I think there be six Richmonds in the field ; 

Five have I slain to-day instead of him. 

A horse ! a horse ! my kingdom for a horse ! 



10 



[Exeunt. 



SCENE V. — A not her part of the field. 

Alarum. Enter KING RICHARD and RICHMOND ; they fight. 
King KlCUAKD is slain. Retreat and fiourish. Reente> 
Richmond, Derby bearing the crown, with divers otiiet 
lords. 

Richm. God and your arms be prais'd, victorious friends ! 

The day is ours ; the bloody dog is dead. 
Der. Courageous Richmond, well hast thou acquit thcc. 



7. Alarumi.'\ Ff; omitted Qq. 



13. Exeunt.] Theobald; omitted Qq. Ff. 
Scene V. 



Scene f'.JDyce; Ff, Pope, Capell, etc., continue scene. Another . . . 

field.] Dyce, Carab. Retreat and flourish.] Ff; then retrait being sounded Qq. 
Re-enter Richmond] Camb.; Enter Richmond Qq,¥f, i. God. . .friends] one 
line as Qq ; God . . . Amies Be . . . Friends (two lines) Ff. 3. Der.] Stan. 

Pope. 3, 4. Courageous . . . royalty] two lines as Qq ; Couragious Rich- 

mond. Well . . . Loe Heere . . . Royalties (three lines) Ff. 



13. The chronicles contain no men- 
tion of the loss of Richard's horse. 
This famous line was possibly sug- 
gested by the statement that "when 
the losse of the battell was imminent 
and apparant, they brought to him a 
swift and a light horsse, to conueie 
him awaie." The " six Richmonds in 
the field " are also without authority. 
Richard knew the earl at once "by 
certeine demonstrations and tokens, 
which he had learned and knowen of 
others that were able to giue him full 
information." He put spurs to his 
horse, and, riding out of his part of the 
host, "like a hungrie lion ran with 
speare in rest toward him." To make 
his way to his enemy, he killed Sir 



William Brandon and overthrew Sir 
John Cheney. The single combat 
which followed was stopped by the 
arrival of Sir William Stanley's rein- 
forcements. These surrounded and 
overpowered Richard, isolating him 
from his army ; and " he himself, man- 
fullie fighting in the middle of his 
enimies. was slaine." Steevens men- 
tions various imitations of Richard's 
CTy for a horse, and quotes Heywood, 
Iron Age : — 

" a horse, a horse I 
Ten kingdoms for a horse to enter 
Troy!" 
The line is reproduced by Marston, 
What you Will, act ii. (quoted by 
Reed). 



sc. 



v.] KING RICHARD III 209 



Lo, here this long usurped royalty 

From the dead temples of this bloody wretch 5 

Have I pluck'd off, to grace thy brows withal : 

Wear it, enjoy it, and make much of it. 
Richm. Great God of Heaven, say amen to all ! 

But, tell me, is young George Stanley living ? 
Der. He is, my lord, and safe in Leicester town ; lo 

Whither, if it please you, we may now withdraw us. 
Richm. What men of name are slain on either side ? 
Der. John Duke of Norfolk, Walter Lord Ferrers, 

Sir Robert Brakenbury, and Sir William Brandon. 
Richm. Inter their bodies as become their births : 15 

Proclaim a pardon to the soldiers fled. 

That in submission will return to us ; 

And then, as we have ta'en the sacrament, 

We will unite the white rose and the red. 

Smile Heaven upon this fair conjunction, 20 

That long have frown'd upon their enmity ! 

What traitor hears me, and says not amen ? 

England hath long been mad, and scarr'd herself; 

The brother blindly shed the brother's blood ; 

The father rashly slaughter'd his own son ; 25 

The son, compell'd, been butcher to the sire : 

4. royalty'X Q i ; roialties Qq 2-8, Ff. 7. enjoy it] Qq i, 2 ; omitted Qq 3-8, Ff. 
II. if it please you] Qq 2-8; it is please you Q i; (if you please) Ff; if you so 
please Pope. if . . . withdraw us] if you please, we will withdraw us now 
Keightley conj. 13, 14. John . . . Brandon.] Qq print in italics. 13. Der.] 
Ff; omitted Qq. Lord] the Lord Pope. Ferrers] Capell; Ferris Qq, Ff. 

14. Brakenbury] Brookenhury Qq i, 2 ; Brokenbury Qq 3-8, Ff. and] omitted 
Pope. 15. become] Qq, Fi ; becomes Rowe, Camb. 25. rashly] madly 

Capell. 

4. royalty] So 1 Henry IV. iv. iii. 55. 12. men of name] Compare Much 

Holinshed has : " When the lord Stan- Ado About Nothing, i. i. 7. 

leie saw the good will and gladnesse 13, 14. Qq print these lines in italics 

of the people, he tooke the crowne of and assign them to no speaker. In 

king Richard (which was found amongst addition to those slain Holinshed gives 

the spoile in the field), and set it on the the name of " Sir Richard Radcliffe." 

earles head ; as though he had beene Sir William Brandon was Richmond's 

elected king by the voice of the people." standard-bearer. See note on v. iv. 13 

10, II. Lord Strange was on the above, 

field, with the keepers of the king's 15. become] If this is not a misprint 

tents. " The same night, in the euen- of the early editions, it is a case of an 

ing, king Henrie with great pompe impersonal verb being attracted into 

came to the town of Leicester." the number of its object. 

14 



210 KING RICHARD III [act v. 

All this divided York and Lancaster, 

Divided in their dire division, 

O, now let Richmond and Elizabeth, 

The true succeeders of each royal house, 30 

By God's fair ordinance conjoin together ! 

And let their heirs, God, if Thy will be so. 

Enrich the time to come with smooth-fac'd peace, 

With smiling plenty and fair prosperous days ! 

Abate the edge of traitors, gracious Lord, 35 

That would reduce these bloody days again 

And make poor England weep in streams of blood ! 

Let them not live to taste this land's increase, 

That would with treason wound this fair land's peace ! 

Now civil wounds are stopp'd, peace lives again : 40 

That she may live long here, God say amen ! 

{^Excunt. 

32. their"] Qq i, 2, 8; thy Qq 3-7, Ff. 33. smooth-fac'd'] Ff; smooth-faste 

Qq 1-3. 5; smooth/ast Q4; smooth-fac't Qq 6-8. 41. hcre]heare Q^(\ 1-3, 

5-7. Exeunt.] Ff ; omitted Qq. 

27. /A«i] Johnson wished to change 117, where the metaphor is very com- 
to the relative "that." But it is tJie plete. The more usual word is "re- 
objects divided, and not the causes of bate." See Measure for Measure, \. iv. 
division, which can be conjoined to- 60; Lodge and Greene, Looking-Glass 
gether. for London (Dyce, 117): "Could not 

35. Abate] blunt, depress, lower, rebate the strength that Rasni 

Aldis Wright quotes ;? //^'wry IV. i. i. brought." 



APPENDIX I 

I. iv. 257-68. Ff admit six lines which are not in Qq, five of 
which (or, rather, four and a half) are inserted between 
Clarence's appeal in line 256, " Relent, and save your souls," 
and the first murderer's repetition of the word " Relent." (i) It 
is quite obvious that the force of the repetition, and of Clarence's 
subsequent comments upon it, is thus destroyed. (2) The 
reading 

Would not intreat for life, as you would begge 
Were you in my distresse. 

is awkward, as it makes Clarence say over again what he al- 
ready has said. In his extremity, however, he might be excused 
for repeating himself, as Queen Elizabeth already has been ex- 
cused for her grammar, I. iii. 62-9 above. The advantage of 
Ff reading is that Clarence, attempting to work on the feelings 
of both murderers, is repulsed by the first, and then turns to the 
second for compassion, with such effect that, when the fatal 
blow is about to descend, the second murderer warns the victim. 
The reading adopted in the text has these drawbacks: (i) it 
places Clarence's appeal to both murderers after the first 
murderer's refusal to relent ; (2) it pieces together the two 
appeals ; and (3) separates the words " as you would beg . . 
distress " in a way for which there is no warrant in the origina 
text. On the other hand, (i) the refusal of the first murderer 
is not absolute, and Clarence might still attempt to soften him ; 
(2) the appeal, producing no effect upon him, might be broken 
off, and a special appeal be begun to the second murderer. (3) 
brings us to the root of the whole matter. We assume that the 
editor of F i used a copy of Q, probably Q 6 ; that he checked 
it by comparison with a MS. of the play ; that he noted down in 
the margin or between the lines of the printed book the vari- 
ations which he preferred from the MS. ; and that, having done 
so, he sent his corrected copy of Q to the printer. In the 
present case, he would have crowded his margin with a number 
of lines which are not in Qq ; and it is easy to see that 

211 



212 APPENDIX I 

the printer would have found some difficulty in gathering the 
method of their arrangement and insertion. He would have 
taken the course which seemed to him most probable ; and, is 
the editor probably never saw a printer's proof of the text, 
the arrangement retained in Ff is, on this hypothesis, that of 
the printer. If this does not actually vindicate Tyrwhitt's 
conjecture, it at any rate vindicates his right to make it ; and 
the sense, as it stands, is excellent. In addition to the arrange- 
ments mentioned in the collation, we may notice that Theo- 
bald followed Ff, proposing the emendation " Ah ! you would 
beg," which was accepted by Warburton and Johnson. John- 
son, however, wished to transfer " Which of you . . . distress" 
to the end of the passage. After the words " what beggar 
pities not ? " one of the murderers should repeat " A begging 
prince!"; and then Clarence should amplify his illustration 
with the new lines. " Upon which provocation," adds Johnson, 
" the villain naturally strikes him." The provocation seems very 
slight. Spedding agrees with Johnson as to the place of the 
lines, but observes that the murderer's cry, " A begging prince ! " 
is not wanted, and would read the end of the new lines thus : 
" Would not entreat for life ? As you would beg Were you 

in my distress 2. Look behind," etc. Collier eked out the 

imperfect line from his MS. thus: "Would not entreat for life? 
As you would beg, Were you in my distress, so pity me." 



APPENDIX II 

II. i. 66-68. Two difficulties are involved : (i) The word " all " 
in line 6"], apparently referring to two people only, so that we 
should expect " both " ; (2) the omission of the extra line in- 
serted in Ff. With regard to (i), a judicious re-arrangement 
of stops surmounts the difficulty thus : 

Of you, Lord Rivers and Lord Grey ; of you 
That all without desert have frown'd on me, 
Dukes, earls, lords, gentlemen ; indeed of all. 

Spedding proposed to read line 66 in Ff thus : " Of you [to Grey] 
and you, Lord Rivers, — and of Dorset, That all," etc. Pickers- 
gill took " all " as an adverb, and " all without desert " as mean- 
ing "altogether without desert": c/. II. iv. 48. If "all" be 
taken in this sense, the flatness of its repetition at the end 
of line 68 is somewhat lessened. (2) Spedding was ready to 
accept the line, " Of you Lord Wooduill, and Lord Scales of 
you" as Shakespeare's, but without any cogent reason apart 
from its appearance in Ff. Pickersgill thought that it was 
original, but was omitted in Qq, because it repeated the form 
of line 66, so that the editor of F i in restoring it, felt it neces- 
sary to change the form in the latter case. Malone, however, 
long ago pointed out that there was no such person as Lord 
Woodville : if the title refers to anybody, it can refer only to 
Rivers. Rivers also, as Malone might have added, was the 
only person who could have been addressed as Lord Scales ; 
since this actually was his style, from the time of his marriage 
with Elizabeth, daughter and heiress of the seventh Lord 
Scales, and Baroness Scales and Neucelles in her own right, 
until he succeeded to his father's earldom in 1469. If we ac- 
cept the line, then, we have to imagine Gloucester begging the 
pardon of a man whom he already has addressed by his proper 
title, not only under a second style, but also under a third which 
does not belong to him. This may be in keeping with 
Richard's usual irony ; but, on this occasion, if he had used 
his opportunity to taunt his enemy so obviously with his many 

213 



214 APPENDIX II 

great preferments, he could hardly have achieved his object of 
lulling his suspicions and effecting, as he did, an apparent 
reconciliation. This Shakespeare must have seen. It is not 
impossible that he made a mistake about the titles : " Lord 
Grey " in Qq is, of course, an inaccuracy. But it is difficult to 
think that the line, whose point, if it has any, must defeat the 
intention of Gloucester's speech, can have appeared in Shake- 
speare's original MS. — at any rate, in such a form that the 
editor of F i, if he had access to that MS., would have been able 
to reproduce it correctly. The position of the line is awkward, 
whether we take it as it stands, or assume that the printer has 
transposed it with the line before. Its meaning and point are 
doubtful and unsatisfactory. My own conclusion is that the 
editor of F i found, in the margin of the MS. which he used, 
some notes intended as the beginning of an alteration of line 66 ; 
that the words " Woodville " and " Scales " were among them ; 
and that, wishing to preserve as much of Shakespeare's text as 
could be recovered, he assumed that a line had been dropped 
and so worked in a new line composed of these fragments. 
The difficulty of " all " was thus settled ; but the printer, work- 
ing with the interlined copy of Q, made a mistake as to the 
order of the lines, and so perpetuated the state of things which 
the new line was intended to remove. 



APPENDIX III 

READINGS OF THE FOLIO IN ACT II. SCENE IV 

The stage-direction at the opening of II. iv. and the first three 
lines of the scene are of high importance with respect to the 
methods adopted by the editor of F i . 

(a) Ff read " Enter Arch-bishop." Qq read " Enter Car- 
dinall." In III. i. Qq again read " Enter Cardinall," Ff read 
" Enter . . . Lord Cardinall." The impression which these 
passages leave is that the archbishop, introduced by Ff in II, iv. 
was not a cardinal, but a distinct person from the Cardinal of 
III. i. and Qq. In HI. i. it is unquestionable that the prelate 
employed to persuade Elizabeth to give up the Duke of York 
was Thomas Bourchier, Cardinal of San Ciriacoand Archbishop 
of Canterbury, But the prelate who, as in this scene, delivered 
up the great seal to the queen-dowager, was Thomas Rother- 
ham, Archbishop of York, and not a cardinal. He fell into 
disgrace with Richard on account of his conduct about the seal. 
The fact that he and Bourchier bore the same Christian name 
caused some confusion among the historians. More, by an 
oversight, made "the archbishop of Yorke" the prelate who 
advised Elizabeth, as in III. i., to give up the Duke of York, and 
speaks of him as " our reuerend father here present, the lord 
cardinall," Halle saw the error, and substituted " Cauntorburye " 
and " the reuerend father my lord Cardinall archebishop of 
Cauntorbury," in the places mentioned above. However, 
Holinshed followed More's account. It is clear thai, in the 
present passage, either Shakespeare himself, or the editor of 
F I, intended the Archbishop and the Cardinal to be, as they 
were, different persons. Probably Shakespeare is responsible 
for this. Scarcity of actors may have led to the union of the 
two parts, which thus may have passed into Qq as one. The 
editor of F i probably restored them from his MS. copy of the 
play. 

{d) The opposed readings are : — 

215 



216 APPENDIX III 

Qq. Car. Last night I heare they lay at Northampton. 
At Stonistratford will they be to night, 
To morrow or next day, they will be here. 

Ff. A rch. Last night I heard they lay at Stony Stratford, 
And at Northampton they do rest to night: 
To morrow, or next day they will be heere. 

Ff reading, while improving the defective metre, is generally 
supposed to be in harmony with history. Edward V., after 
sleeping a night at Stony Stratford, was actually taken back 
by Gloucester to Northampton. If we can satisfy ourselves 
that Ff reading is (i) a distinct metrical improvement; (2) 
intentionally consonant with the true details of time and place 
in the historical account of the affair; and (3) the original read- 
ing of the passage, it should no doubt be adopted in preference 
toQq. 

(i) The metrical improvement is obvious. If we lay stress 
on the first syllable of " Northampton," it is just possible to 
make Qq reading scan. We still speak of Berkhamstead, VVen- 
haston, where the second syllable might seem to demand the 
chief accent. But I can find no instance in Shakespeare's 
time in which the accent of Northampton is thrown so far 
back. Pope read the passage, " I heard they lay the last night 
at Northampton " ; Capell, " Last night, I hear, they rested at 
Northampton." Reed followed Ff ; and Steevens, recognising 
the historical difficulty, wrote, "Where sense cannot claim a 
preference, a casting vote may be safely given in favour of 
sound." 

(2) The historical facts of Edward V.'s journey to London 
are as follows : On his way from Ludlow, he passed through 
Northampton, and went on with his train to Stony Stratford. 
Gairdner (p. 49) says that Rivers and Lord Richard Grey rode 
back to Northampton to salute Gloucester, who was expected 
there the same day (April 29). More's statement is that 
Rivers stayed behind, perhaps for the above reason, and pro- 
bably because the whole train could not have been accommo- 
dated at Stony Stratford. Gloucester, having joined forces 
with Buckingham, as he came south from York, arrived at 
Northampton soon after the king had left. More's account is 
that they were very friendly with Rivers ; but, after he was 
gone to bed, they held a long council with some of their most 
privy friends. They got hold of the keys of the inn, picketed 
the road to Stony Stratford, and anticipated Rivers' household 
in getting to horse, explaining that they were anxious to be the 
first to greet the king that day. When Rivers in person asked 
for an explanation of their movements, they accused him of 



APPENDIX III 217 

wishing to estrange them from the king and compass their 
downfall, and, without more ado, put him in ward. When 
they reached Stony Stratford, the king was about to depart. 
He received them graciously and without suspicion ; but, in 
his presence, they picked a quarrel with Grey and cast re- 
flections on his absent brother Dorset, accusing them of con- 
spiracy with Rivers to rule the king and realm. In spite of 
Edward's readiness to uphold the honesty of his relations, the 
dukes there and then arrested Grey, Sir Thomas Vaughan, and 
Sir Richard Hawte, and took the whole party back to Northamp- 
ton, in order to bring the prisoners together and take further 
counsel. They dined at Northampton, where Gloucester be- 
haved encouragingly. But, before he set out again for London, 
he either directed or provided for the despatch of the prisoners 
to various strongholds in the north of England. 

It does not appear that the king, with his new guardian, 
stopped another night at Northampton. The arrest of the 
lords took place on 30th April. It was on 4th May that 
Gloucester and the king arrived in London, which is sixty-six 
miles from Northampton. 

In London the news became common property about mid- 
night of 30th April. The tidings were announced to Arch- 
bishop Rotherham by a messenger from the Lord Chamberlain 
Hastings. He immediately went to the queen, whom he found 
preparing to go into sanctuary, and committed the great 
seal to her charge. When he returned to York House in the 
dawn of ist May, he " might in his chamber window see all the 
Thames full of boates of the Duke of Glocester's servants, 
watching that no man should go to sanctuarie, nor none could 
pass unsearched." In the course of the day, the Archbishop, 
fearing that he had acted precipitately, sent to the sanctuary at 
Westminster for the great seal, and so recovered it The day 
was one of disquiet. Hastings did his best to quiet the rising 
tumult ; and the common people were satisfied by the arrival 
of some of Gloucester's servants with the baggage of the ar- 
rested lords, in which arms and armour were included. The 
duke's men explained, " Lo, here be the barrels of harnesse that 
these traitors had priuilie conueied in their carriage to destroie 
the noble lordes withall." The intelligence of the mob could 
draw no other inference from this palpable testimony. 

(3) We must not expect Shakespeare, of course, to be in 
complete accordance with the details of history. The inter- 
view in II. iv. clearly is derived from that which took place early 
on 1st May between Rotherham and the queen. If the chroni- 
clers' accounts are correct, (i) Rotherham knew all before he 



218 APPENDIX III 

went to the queen ; (2) a messenger from Hastings had reached 
him at York House ; (3) the queen had received the news at 
least as soon, and was preparing to go to Westminster when 
Rotherham arrived. But in Shakespeare, (i) Rotherham 
knows nothing : all he can do is to calculate the point on the 
road which the party has reached ; (2) the news arrives 
during the interview ; and (3) the queen thereupon decides to 
go to sanctuary, and takes the great seal with her. 

Shakespeare, therefore, makes it impossible for Rotherham 
to know of any change of route on the king's journey. Qq 
reading represents exactly the natural calculations of a man 
who knew the ordinary halting-places on the road from the 
north, and had no reason to suppose that they had been changed 
in this case. So far as Rotherham knew, the coronation was to 
take place on 4th May. The king would therefore arrive in 
London on 2nd May or 3rd May. On 29th April he would 
naturally spend the night at Northampton. What actually had 
happened was that he had passed through Northampton with- 
out stopping, probably because Rivers wished to keep ahead of 
Gloucester. Of this movement, as of its sequel, Rotherham 
was unaware. Ff, on the other hand, assume that Rotherham 
knew of the unusual change of route, but without feeling any 
curiosity about it, or awaking any interest in his hearers. They 
assume that, while aware of the fact, he had no idea of the 
division of the party which made Rivers' arrest an easy matter, 
or of the junction of the dukes with the king. In short, he 
says, as if it were the most natural thing in the world, that the 
party has stopped a night at one place, and then has gone 
thirteen miles back to spend a night at another, which it had 
passed through the day before. Ff reading is thus dramatic- 
ally inaccurate, even if its accuracy as to the king's real 
movements be allowed. 

We need not suppose, of course, that Shakespeare troubled 
himself about the actual hour of the scene as it took place in 
history. He simply compressed into one scene a sequence 
of necessary events, giving them their true dramatic relief. 
An imaginary meeting between the queen and Rotherham is 
made the occasion for the discovery of Gloucester's action. 
Before the messenger arrives with his startling news, Rotherham 
is ignorant that anything has happened. It is utterly im- 
possible, therefore, unless we assume a slip of the tongue, that he 
can put Stony Stratford before Northampton. 

Shakespeare may have written the passage in Ff That, in 
this instance, he made a careless comparison of his authorities 
with the dramatic exigencies of the passage, is not unlikely. 



APPENDIX III 219 

That the editor of F i found the more metrical reading in the 
MS, which he used is highly probable. But Qq already had 
altered it, at the expense of regular metre, it is true, but with 
advantage to the truth of drama. The variation in Qq was 
probably used on the stage ; and, whether it was made by 
Shakespeare himself or by the actors, it is the only reading 
which has any consistency with the facts of the scene. 

My conclusion, then, is that, while Ff have a metrical ad- 
vantage over Qq, and their reading may have been originally 
written by Shakespeare, it does not represent a reading to 
which Shakespeare could or would have adhered consistently. 
And this because it is at variance with the probabilities of the 
drama, and is not quite free in itself from historical error. 

I may add a summary of previous editors' conclusions. 
Malone very justly says, " By neither reading can the truth of 
history be preserved, and therefore we may be sure that Shake- 
speare did not mean in this instance to adhere to it." At the 
opposite pole is Grant White's unqualified praise of Ff reading : 
it has, he says, " on its side authority, rhythm, and — according 
to the chronicles which Shakespeare followed — historical truth." 
Equally short-sighted is Delius' defence of Ff as the result of 
Shakespeare's work with " the authorities open before him " : 
on his theory, Oq would introduce a piratical emendation. The 
Cambridge editors adopt Qq reading, assuming the supposed 
coincidence between Ff and history to be accidental, but dis- 
covering an inconsistency between lines i, 2 and line 3. Sped- 
ding refuted the latter notion ; but upheld Ff on the usual 
historical assumption, estimating Qq reading as a correction 
" by some one whose topographical knowledge was superior to 
his historical." Pickersgill's view is closely allied, though with 
a slight difference in detail, to the view which I have taken. 



APPENDIX IV 

ON THE READINGS AT III. IV. 80 AND III. V. 12-21 

(i) At III. iv. 80 Qq read "some see it done" at the end of a 
line. Ff introduce a new line : " Louell and Ratcliffe, looke 
that it be done." 

(2) In III. V. 12-21 I have adopted Ff reading substantially. 
For the variations in Qq, see collation ad loc. The difficulty 
which Qq introduce is in their stage-directions, corresponding to 
that after line 21, " Enter Catesby with Hastings' head." The 
conspirators, according to Theobald, are standing on the walls of 
the Tower ; and Catesby is told to " overlook " the walls, i.e. to 
look down and see whether any one is coming. Only four lines 
later, Gloucester calms Buckingham's pretended agitation at the 
sound of a drum, with the words " O, O, be quiet, it is Catesby " ; 
and Catesby thereupon enters with Hastings' head. The 
supposition on which this entry of Catesby, inconsistent even 
with dramatic probability, can be defended, is that Catesby, 
overlooking the walls and seeing Hastings' executioners ap- 
proaching, hastens from the scene, receives the head from them, 
and reappears bearing it. Even so, the interval is very short 
indeed between his disappearance and return. 

Ff make Catesby introduce the mayor, and remain on the 
scene. Buckingham hears the drum ; Gloucester tells Catesby 
to overlook the walls, and Ratcliff and Lovel, the executioners 
deputed in III. iv. 80, enter with the head of Hastings, 

The probable explanation of the difference lies in the 
circumstance that Qq require only one actor on the stage to 
fill the parts which Ff allot to three. A scarcity of actors very 
conceivably may have led to a grouping of the parts in the 
stage version. And here is one of many signs that the original 
of the Qq text of the play is to be found in such a version and 
re-arrangement for stage purposes of Shakespeare's text. 

However, by the introduction of Ratcliff, Ff reading in- 
volves a fresh difficulty. Following the chroniclers, it puts 
Ratcliff (III. iii.) in charge of the execution of the lords at 

220 



APPENDIX IV 221 

Pontefract, on the same day that Hastings suffers in London 
(III. iv. 49, 50, etc.) Ratdifif is thus in two widely distant 
places at once, Pontefract being 179 miles by road from Lon- 
don. The discrepancy would not be noticed by a casual 
spectator of the play, who would see each scene complete in 
itself, and would not remember details of place and time. But 
we cannot imagine Shakespeare making the mistake wilfully. 
If he did it involuntarily, he would have found it out on 
revising the play. 

Theobald retained Catesby, as Qq had laid down the part, 
in III. V. In III. iv. he read " Lovel and Catesby, look that it be 
done." This is in accordance with the stage-directions of Qq, 
which assign III. iv. 96, 97 to Catesby and III. iv. 104 to Lovel, 
But in Ff, III. iv. 96, 97 are given to Ratcliff. 

To alter Ff reading substantially would be, as the Cambridge 
editors point out, to take liberties with the text. It is a great 
improvement on Qq in the point of metre and rhythm. Thus, 
in the absence of any indication of a satisfactory alternative, 
Ratcliff must be kept in both passages. It is noticeable that, 
in III. iv., he speaks only two lines, which might well be given 
to Lovel ; while, in III. v., he says nothing, and is not included 
in Gloucester's instructions at the end of the scene. Both in 
Qq and Ff, Lovel alone is necessary to Hastings' execution. 
The chroniclers make no specific mention of the ministers 
employed to carry out this sentence. It is not likely that 
Catesby would have taken an active part in it. He had been 
Hastings' trusted servant ; and, in a play so rhetorical as this, 
he hardly would have been allowed to die without some word 
of reproach to the traitor who bids him make haste that the 
duke may have his dinner. 

The only possible conclusion seems to be that, at III. iv. 80, 
Shakespeare wrote " Ratcliffe " in a moment of forgetfulness, 
and continued the error in III. v. ; that, on the stage, the 
mistake in III. iv. was recognised, and, in III. v., the parts were 
cut down from motives of economy ; that Qq reproduced his 
alteration ; and that Ff, correcting the misplacement of the 
lines and the rough prose of Qq, returned, in this case also, 
to the earlier reading, in spite of its drawbacks. 



2&0 



PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE 
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET 



UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY 



