THE WORKS 

OF 

SHAKESPEARE 

MEASURE FOR MEASURE 

EDITED BY 

H. C. HART 



^ 



METHUEN AND CO. 

36 ESSEX STREET: STRAND 
LONDON 



First Published in igo^ 



^\BRA 







7/^ 

Cop. 2 



957811 



CONTENTS 

PACK 

Introduction .......... ix 

Measure for Measure i 

Appendix 1 149 

Appendix II 152 



INTRODUCTION 

The earliest text of Measure for Measure is that of the 
1623, or First Folio. Thus it was not printed in Shake- 
speare's lifetime, nor have we any early quarto edition to 
come to our aid in textual difficulties. 

The date of production of the play is somewhat doubtful. 
It is usually placed at 1603- 1 604, immediately after the 
accession of James I. to the throne, from the following 
considerations. 

There is a memorandum of plays performed at Court in 
1604 and 1 605, among Malone's manuscripts in the Bodleian 
Library, which was obviously derived from authentic docu- 
ments that existed in his time at the Audit Office in Somerset 
House. After Malone's death these documents were removed 
to the Public Record Office with other Audit Office papers, 
presumably, but they cannot now be traced. This memor- 
andum gives the date of production as December 26, 1604. 

There is an entry in Cunningham's Extracts from The 
Revelles Book (Shaks. Soc, 1842, p. 204) which is on the 
same footing as one relating to Othello (see my Introduction 
to that play), and which is a forgery, but is probably based on 
correct information, from Malone's researches. The entry is: 

By his Ma^*^ plaiers. On St. Stiuens Night in the Hall 
A Play. Shaxberd. Called Mesure for Mesure. 

These entries range from the last of October 1604 to the 
last of October 1605. The above date is accepted by 
Professor Ward, and by Sidney Lee. Malone believed the 
play to have been written in 1603. 
b 



X INTRODUCTION 

Tyrwhitt and Malone conjectured that two passages 
in the play (i. iv. and II. iv. ; see notes) were " intended to 
flatter the unkingly weakness of James the First, which 
made him so impatient of the crowds that flocked to see 
him, especially upon his first coming, that, as some of our 
historians say, he restrained them by a proclamation." 
Tyrwhitt goes on to refer to the Memoirs of Sir Symonds 
D'Ewes in confirmation of this attitude of the King in 
1620— 1 62 1. Steevens gives a further reference of a 
more appropriate date, 1603 (Steevens' Shakespeare^ i793j 
iv. 257). This evidence is somewhat forced and unsatis- 
factory. Shakespeare, himself of a retiring disposition, 
may well have penned these words with no thought 
of the King. The King's dislike for crowds was not 
unreasonable, on other grounds besides those put into 
the Duke's mouth. He was a physical coward, and 
he believed his life was threatened. Moreover, in conse- 
quence of " the terrible encrease of pestilence in the 
City and Suburbes," instead of riding through London " as 
kings have accustomed," he " prohibited all Londoners by 
proclamation from comming at Court " against the time of 
coronation (Stowe). See note at II. iv. 27. 

However, the date 1 603-1 604 may safely be accepted, 
although the internal evidence is practically nil. The 
Duke's pompous utterances, and somewhat sententious and 
didactic remarks whenever occasion arises, might to some 
recall again the pedagogue James I. ; but, on the other 
hand, they may equally well be purely accidental resem- 
blances. More to the point is the dark and sombre tone 
of the play itself, in which respect, and in its morbid, 
painful, and pessimistic tendency (see the Duke's speech at 
the opening of the third Act), lit up though it is by the 
noblest poetry throughout, it forms a parallel to the grander 
and almost contemporaneous tragedy of Othello. In this 
respect these two plays come as a remarkable change and 
contrast as compared with the immediately preceding group 
of light-hearted comedies. They point, as Hallam said, to 



INTRODUCTION xi 

a period of the author's life when some sad influence weighed 
upon the poet's spirit, and prompted him constantly to 
appear as " the stern censurer of man." Malone conjectured 
an allusion to James' " peace at any price " policy in the 
words " Heaven grant us its peace, but not the King of 
Hungary's." One of James' first acts was to conclude peace 
with Spain (1604). As early as 1606 Jonson called James 
" the king and priest of peace " ; and a little later he speaks 
of him as one " who unto peace is vowed." 

Dowden conjectured further that " the revival in 1 604 
of a statute, which punished with death any divorced person 
who married again while his or her former husband or wife 
was living, may have added point to one chief incident in 
the play." Fleay arrived at the date of 1603 by means 
of his metrical tests (see the Transactions of the New 
Shakespeare Society for 1874). He places it in Shake- 
speare's third or " Tragedy period," with Macbeth, Hamlet, 
Othello, and Lear, and one or two others more doubtfully so 
to be placed. Furnivall also gives the date 1603. One or 
two other traces of internal evidence will be found in my 
notes. " Drowned i' the last rain " (ill. ii. 50) may very 
well be a reference to the destructive floods in London, 
1602— 1603 ; with a quibbling allusion to the change in 
the times and in the sovereigns, and in social restrictions. 

What a swift alteration we have in this play from the 
brimful cheeriness and buoyancy in those later ones of Queen 
Elizabeth's reign — from, for example. The Merry Wives of 
Windsor and -^.y You Like It ! One is almost tempted to 
suggest that the loss of his royal mistress, and the advent 
of that heavy-witted pedant James I., had for the moment 
smitten our poet's spirits hip and thigh. Be this as it may. 
Measure for Measure can never have been popular upon 
the stage. The main incidents of the plot are pain- 
fully repugnant. The serious business is full of diatribes 
levelled against a slackness of morality which would hardly 
find an echo in the breasts of the bulk of the courtiers ol 
the time; while the lighter prose portions, where a relief 



xii INTRODUCTION 

of this tension should appear, and an atmosphere of merri- 
ment take its place, are renewed and bitter attacks upon 
immorality on its lower platforms — satirical strictures upon 
the vices of the lowest of the low, but slightly enlivened by 
any frivolous fun or humour. Throughout we are held 
by the hand and led through these mazes of iniquity with a 
high purpose and a stern sense of a duty that must be accom- 
plished, and our reward is to be found in the gift of some 
of the most beautiful passages of dignified poetry to be met 
with anywhere in Shakespeare — passages which are as 
household words to all who love their language at its best. 

Nevertheless we have, as is to be expected, little or no 
record of successful performances of this play. With the 
exception of the revival of almost all Shakespeare's plays 
by Samuel Phelps (i 844-1 862) at the Sadler's Wells 
Theatre, it has rarely been seriously attempted in this 
country. Two recasts, or rather conglomerates, are referred 
to below, but they are not Shakespeare's play. A negative 
proof of the slight hold this play took upon public fancy 
may be found in the seventeenth century allusions to 
Shakespeare's works, collected in Furnivall and Ingleby's 
Centurie of Pray se (Suppl., p. 372, New Shaks. Soc, 1886) 
These are only three in number, whereas Hamlet^ at the 
head of the list, claimed sixty-five references. When 
however, we observe that of the two or three lower in the 
list, those at the very bottom with a single quotatory 
allusion are All's Well and As You Like It^ we are 
prohibited from attaching supreme importance to this result. 
Nothing could be more heretical, from a modern point of 
view, than to place As You Like It below Measure for 
Measure on any footing of popularity. The allusions to 
Measure for Measure are — ( i ) from Dryden's Defence of the 
Epilogue to The Conquest of Granada^ 1672, where it is 
classed amongst " many of the rest, which were either 
grounded on impossibilities, or so meanly written " [ Winter's 
TalCy etc.] ; (2) from Gerard Langbaine, who animadverts 
on Dryden's remarks, and refers to Davenant's recast of the 



INTRODUCTION xiii 

play, combined with Much Ado (Gerard Langbaine refers 
elsewhere to Davenant's play) ; and (3) Davenant's play 
itself, a tragi-comedy of which Pepys wrote on the i8th 
February 1661-62: "went to the opera and saw The 
Law against Lovers^ a good play." Davenant's play met 
with great success. 

Another recast, by Gibbon, was produced and published 
in quarto in 1 700, with a second title of Beauty the Best 
Advocate. " It is said, on the title-page, to have been 
written originally by Mr. Shakespear, and now very much 
altered, with the addition of several entertainments of 
musick." The prologue, by Oldmixon, was spoken by 
Betterton (Hazlitt's Play-Collector's Manual). Gervinus, 
writing in 1850, says, '■''Measure for Measure is performed 
in moral England to this day without alteration." Was 
this a true statement ? 

Before dealing with the views of our ablest critics upon 
the merits of this play, which is in many places of the 
highest excellence, the sources from whence Shakespeare 
obtained his plot must be dealt with. 

In the year 1578 " George Whetstone, Gent.," published 
The Right excellent and famous History of Promos and 
Cassandra : Divided into Commical Discourses^ in two parts. 
It is a tedious and inartistic production, but must ever be 
famous, since from it undoubtedly Shakespeare took his 
story. This play is one of the " Six Old Plays " reprinted by 
Nichols in 1779. It is not known to have ever been acted. 

In 1582 Whetstone gave a prose version of the history 
of Promos and Cassandra in his Heptameron of Civil 
Discourses^ which Shakespeare may have referred to. This 
has been reprinted in Collier's Shakespeare's Library. 
Whetstone derived his tale from the H ecatommithii of 
Giraldi Cinthio, Nov. v., Decad. viii. [Warburton, I believe, 
gave this reference as " December 8, November 5 "], which 
was originally published in Sicily in 1565. This is the 
same source as that from which Shakespeare derived the 
plot of Othello, Whetstone lays his story at Julio, in 



xiv INTRODUCTION 

Hungary. In the original, Cinthio sets it down to 
Inspruck. Shakespeare, we see, transfers it to Vienna. 
Cinthio had himself dramatized the tale in a play called 
Epitia, which Klein (v. 353) describes as having nothing 
in common with Measure for Measure, 

The story is much altered and improved by Shakespeare, 
by whose introduction of Mariana the heroine's virtue is 
saved. She is Cassandra in the original, but the story in 
Whetstone's Discourses is " Reported by Madam Isabella." 
Whetstone's " Argument of the Whole Historye," prefixed 
to his play, in two parts, is as follows : — "In the Cyttie of 
Julio (sometimes under the dominion of Corvinus, King of 
Hungarie^ and Boemid) there was a law that what man 
so ever committed Adultery, should lose his head, and the 
woman offender, should weare some disguised Apparell 
during her life, to make her infamouslye noted. This severe 
law by the favour of some mercifull magistrate, became little 
regarded, untill the time of Lord Promos auctority : who 
convicting a yong Gentleman named Andrugio of incon- 
tinency, condemned both him, and his minion, to the 
execution of this statute. [Note that here adultery is used 
with the sense unchastity, fornication.] Andrugio had a 
very vertuous and beawtiful Gentlewoman to his Sister, 
named Cassandra ; Cassandra to enlarge her brothers life, 
submitted an humble petition to the Lord Pi'omos ; Promos 
regarding her good behaviours, and fantasying her great 
beawtie, was much delighted with the sweete order of her 
talke : and doing good, that evill might come thereof: for 
a time, he repryved her brother ; but wicked man, tourning 
his liking into unlawfuU lust, he set downe the spoile of 
her honour, raunsome for her Brothers life : Chaste Cas- 
sandra^ abhorring both him and his sute, by no persuasion 
would yeald to this raunsome. But in fine, wonne with 
the importunitye of hir Brother (pleading for life) upon 
these conditions, she agreede to Promos. First that he 
should pardon her brother, and after marry her. Promos ^ 
as fearless in promise, as carelesse in performance, with 



INTRODUCTION xv 

solemne vowe, sygned her conditions : but worse than any 
Infydel, his will satisfy ed, he performed neither the one 
nor the other : for to keepe his aucthoritye, unspotted with 
favour, and to prevent Cassandraes clamours, he commanded 
the Gayler secretly to present Cassandra with her brothers 
head. [Note here that Shakespeare modifies this horror, and 
brings the head to the judge.] The Gayler, with the out- 
cryes of Andrugio^ abhorrying Promos lewdenes, by the 
providence of God, provyded thus for his safety. He pre- 
sented Cassandra with a Felons head newlie executed, who 
(being mangled, knew it not from her brothers, by the Gayler, 
who was set at libertie) was so agreeved at this trecherye, 
that at the pointe to kyl her selfe, she spared that stroke 
to be avenged of Promos. And devisying a way, she con- 
cluded, to make her fortunes knowne unto the kinge. She 
(executinge this resolution) was so highly favoured of the 
king, that forthwith he hasted to do justice on Promos^ 
whose judgment was, to marrye Cassandra^ to repaire her 
erased Honour : which donne, for his hainous offence he 
should lose his head. This marriage solempnized, Cassandra 
tyed in the greatest bondes of affection to her husband, 
became an earnest suter for his life : the Kinge (tendringe 
the generall benefit of the common weale, before her speciall 
case, although he favoured her much) would not graunt her 
sute. Andrugio (disguised amonge the company) sorrowing 
the griefe of his sister, bewrayde his safetie, and craved 
pardon. The Kinge, to renowne the vertues of Cassandra^ 
pardoned both him and Promos. The circumstances of this 
rare Historye, in action lyvelye foloweth." 

There is a grave defect in this much too concise 
argument. It removes from our purview almost the whole 
of the sub-plot with regard to Andrugio and his " minion " 
Polina, the counterparts of Claudio and Juliet. This is of 
especial interest since the parallelism here in the two plays 
is accurate enough in several respects, and it is quite in- 
sufficient to quote the above argument as Steevens, Malone, 
Rolfe, and others do. Claudio says (l. ii. 146-150): 



xvi INTRODUCTION 

" Upon a true contract I got possession of Julietta's bed : 
You know the lady ; she is fast my wife, Save that we do 
the denunciation lack of outward order." When Cassandra 
(Isabella) pleads to Promos for her brother's life she says : 
" Behold the wofuU syster here of poore Andrugio, Whom 
though that lawe awardeth death, yet mercy do him show. 
Way his yong yeares, the force of love which forced his 
amis. Way, way that mariage works amends for what com- 
mitted is. He hath defilde no nuptiall bed, nor forced 
rape hath moved ; He fel through love who never ment but 
wive the wight he made " (Actus II. Scena iii. Part I.). 
Andrugio, like Claudio, has " craved and had a proof of 
Venus meed," which is equivalent to the " character too 
gross writ on Juliet." 

There is a curious point in the working out of the old 
play which throws light on a situation in which Isabella 
finds herself in her brother's presence at the close. Cas- 
sandra sacrifices her honour to save her brother's life : 
" And shall I sticke to stoupe to Promos wyll, since my 
brother injoyeth lyfe thereby? No, although it doth my 
credit kyll. Ere that she [he ?] should, my selfe would chuse 
to dye. My Andrugio, take comfort in distresse, Cassandra 
is wonne thy raunsome great to pay" (ill. iv.). In neither 
case (Cassandra's or Isabella's) is there the smallest hint of 
desire or affection, at the earlier stage, on the part of the 
maiden sister towards the seducer or would-be seducer- 
deputy. But since Cassandra yields, her affection for her 
brother is the rather increased, and when they meet at the 
close, instead of no symptom of recognition, as is the case 
with Isabella, we have " Cassandra. Lyves Andrugio^ 
welcome, sweete brother. And. Cassandra ! Cass. I. 
And. How fares my deare syster? King. Andrugio^ \ho\x 
shall have more leysure To greete one another " (v. iv. 
Part II.). This natural greeting has of course to be 
obliterated in the altered circumstances of Isabella's de- 
fiance to her brother, and in doing so, it seems almost an 
oversight to replace it with no sort of recognition (v. i. 480). 



INTRODUCTION xvii 

There is yet another important parallelism between the 
two plays which the argument loses sight of. Although the 
King is not present throughout the action of the play as the 
Duke is, and has not appointed a deputy to relieve him of 
his duties in the old play as the Duke does in Measure for 
MeasurCy and although no signs of such arrangements occur, 
either in the argument or in the opening of the old play, 
nevertheless we find a strong suggestion of it in the third 
Act (near the end) of the Second Part. The King says to 
Promos and to Cassandra : " Cassandra^ take comfort in 
care, be of good cheere: Thy forced fault was free from 
evill intent, So long, no shame can blot thee any way . . . 
\To Promos] Thou wicked man . . . This over proofe ne 
can but make me thinke that many waies thou hast my 
subjectes wronged : For how canst thou with justice use 
thy swaie when thou thy selfe dost make thy will a lawe ? 
Thy tyranny made mee this progresse make How so for 
sport tyl nowe I colloured it, Unto this ende that I might 
learne at large What other wrongs by power thou hast 
wrought, And heere I heare : the ritche suppresse the poore 
. . . Thy offycers are covetous, I finde, By whose reports 
thou over-rulest sutes . . . On thee vyle wretche this 
sentence I pronounce ; That forthwith thou shalt marrie 
Cassandra, For to repayre hir honour thou dydst waste : 
The next day thou shalt lose thy hated lyfe In penaunce 
that thou madst hir Brother dye " (see V. i. 417, 418). 

There is another point in Andrugio's character worthy 
of note. When his sister yields to Promos in order to save 
her brothers life, the latter is set free and hides in a wood. 
But when he learns from a clown that came " peaking 
(searching, prying) through the wood " that Promos, who 
now hath " spoused " his sister, and whom she loves, is to be 
beheaded for murdering him, he (Andrugio) believing he 
will be sentenced to death for his old offence, discloses him- 
self and saves Promos. He is pardoned, but we are to 
esteem him for his sacrifice. Here Shakespeare makes a 
considerable departure from the original. In proportion 



xviii INTRODUCTION 

as Isabella is the more virtuous (Cassandra yields to her 
brother without much parley), so also does Claudio seem 
the more unworthy, and our sympathies are not to be en- 
listed in his favour, as appears to be the case with Andrugio 
— if indeed that ill-worded and thinly worked play of 
Whetstone's can stir any emotion whatever. Whetstone's 
prose version has this final episode thus, after Cassandra 
has failed in her intercession for her husband's life : 
" Andrugio beholdyng this reethfull spectackle was so over- 
come with love towardes his sister, as to give her comfort 
he franckly consented anew to emperill his own life ; and 
followinge this resolution, in his hermyts weede [his dis- 
guise] . . . prostrated him selfe at his Majesties feete, 
humblye to obay the sentence of his pleasure." 

Nevertheless the argument disclosed the broad outlines 
of Shakespeare's plot. Nor is Whetstone's story by any 
means a bad one. Its parts hang together without incon- 
gruity. By the introduction of the Duke in Measure for 
Measure^ Isabella (Cassandra) becomes of much more con- 
sideration, and is raised not merely to her proper dignity as 
heroine of the play, but her virtue is saved through the 
Duke's stratagems. The Duke's other functions in the old 
play, those of receiving the betrayed virgin's appeal and the 
plot by which her brother's life is saved, devolve in the 
one case upon " Corvinus King of Hungarie," and in the 
other upon the gaoler, who is also the gentle provost of 
Shakespeare's play. The weaving together of these two 
characters into one, for these effects, and this abdication in 
favour of Angelo for the purpose of enforcing the laws that 
had become " little regarded " are entirely Shakespeare's, as 
is also the whole under plot of the deputy and Mariana. 
In some slight respects, Phallax in the old play (Part II.) is 
an anticipation of Angelo. But the main incidents — the 
revival of an old statute — the intercession of a beautiful 
sister to save her brother condemned for incontinence — 
the deputy's [Promos is called the Deputy in the first scene 
of the old play] lustfulness and perjury, and the substitution 



INTRODUCTION xix 

of the disfigured head of another criminal for that of the 
heroine's brother, are all in the old play, as well as the most 
prominent part of the denouement when the unjust and 
exposed deputy is condemned to be married to one whom 
he has seduced and to be immediately executed — a death 
sentence from which he is only saved from by the inter- 
cession of the wronged lady, and by the discovery that the 
brother is still living. 

There is hardly a phrase (see for exceptions II. iv. 144 
(note) and V. i. 179) in the least degree noteworthy that is 
common to the two plays. The proverb, " The hood makes 
not the monk " occurs indeed in English in Whetstone, and 
in Latin {Cucullus non facit monachurn) in Measure for 
Measure. But it was earlier in both forms, and common. 
It is most instructive to observe, considering how many the 
parallel scenes and situations are, how absolutely differently 
their presentments are worked out. The one play is as 
utterly devoid of all beauty of language, as the other 
abounds with it. One can imagine the great master's rejec- 
tion of such treatment of so telling a tale. But even in his 
hands the story remains a depraved one. We have, more- 
over, somewhat too much of the low dialogue amongst the 
baser characters, which was given, however, in accordance 
with the taste of the times. It is chiefly in this department 
that Whetstone's play swells itself out in pointless chatter 
to two five-act dramas. 

It is noteworthy that Shakespeare has not made use of 
any of the names of characters in Cinthio or in Whetstone. 

Since Whetstone has followed Cinthio's tale so closely, 
the original of which is reprinted by Collier, and in Hazlitt's 
Shakespeare Library, there is no need to suppose that 
Shakespeare derived the idea of his plot elsewhere than 
from Whetstone, who was a writer of considerable popularity 
and ability. It is probable, from his having made use of 
Cinthio for his Othello, that he met the story there, and 
then resorts to Whetstone to see how it had been dealt 
with. Many Shakespearian expressions (not in Measure for 



XX INTRODUCTION 

Measure) may be found in Whetstone's early play, which 
I will collect later on. These I have relegated to an 
appendix. 

The story of the Heptameron had earlier parallels. 
Douce cited a number of these {Illustrations^ 1807, i. 152— 
160, and ii. 274). Hazlitt's Shakespeare Library gives us 
one from Goulart's Admirable and Memorable Histories y 
1 600, a short and bloodthirsty tale with no redeeming points. 
Rolfe, in his edition of this play, cites several more recent 
examples of similar crimes, which actually have occurred. 
One of these is the well-known story of Col. Kirke in 
the reign of James II. Another one, pre-Shakespearian, 
occurred in Holland in the time of Charles the Bold (see 
Barante, Histoire des Dues de Bourgogne)^ and another is 
stated to have taken place under an early Duke of Ferrera, 
which Rolfe suggests may have been Cinthio's original. 
See Dunlop for further parallels. 

There was one supposed method of escape from the 
death penalty after the ravishment of a virgin. She might 
beg him for a husband and save his head. The Duke's 
sentence upon Lucio recalls this popular belief, which is 
stated to have been actually legal in some countries. In 
Bulwer's A7^tificial Changeling (1653, p. 117) it is stated 
to be Spanish law. In Beaumont and Fletcher's Queen of 
Corinthy it is given as the law of " Lycurgus, the nineteenth 
against rapes," " that it shall be in the choice of the said 
virgin so abused, either to compel the offender to marry her 
without a dowry, if so she will be satisfied, or demanding 
his head for the offences to have that accordingly per- 
formed " (Act V. Scene iv.). The fiction (for it is probably 
nothing else) is made use of in Marston's Insatiate Countess^ 
III. iii. ; in Dick of Devonshire (Bullen's Old Plays, ii. 84) ; 
in Arden of Feversham] and in Nabbes' Covent Garden^ 
II. iii. 

The delegation of his authority to another, by the Duke 
about to travel, forms, as we have seen, no part of Cinthio's 
story. Without any such device, we are told " Lord 

i 



INTRODUCTION xxi 

Promos, with a rough execution " revived this old statute 
(of execution for adultery). In addition to my note (at 
I. iii. 45) the following earlier parallel may be cited from 
Thomas Preston's Cambyses {circa 1570). Cambyses says, 
" From Persia I mean to go Into the Egypt land Them 
to convince by force of arms And win the upper hand. 
While I therefore absent shall be, I do you full permit, As 
governor in this my right, In that estate to sit, For to 
detect, and correct. Those that abuse my grace: This is 
the total of my will, Give answer in this case." This is 
addressed to Sisamnes, a judge who at once determines 
to "abrogate the law As I shall think it good," and to 
" make up his mouth," though he has some unavailing 
qualms lest he should be found out. It is the more likely 
this incident may have occurred to Shakespeare since it is to 
this play he probably alludes in 1 Henry IV. II. iv. 425. I 
have noted a parallel also from Jonson's Sejanus, at the 
beginning of the fourth Scene of the fourth Act (see note). 
This deals rather with the machinery of the unjust deputy's 
exposure. 

Shakespeare has written few more powerful scenes than 
those between Angelo and Isabella, and especially that 
between the latter and her brother in the third Act. There 
is, to my thinking, hardly a dialogue in all his plays where, 
at the first reading, one's anxiety is so tensely strung as 
in this, to see how Claudio will pass through his fearful 
ordeal ; and those two words " Alas ! alas ! " wrung from 
Isabella's anguish at his final breakdown after the conflict 
in which he dives into the horrors of death, form a climax 
of despair and agony that words could not better express. 
And how swiftly and naturally her grief turns to hate and 
horror! It is noteworthy that when Isabella hurls her 
defiance at Claudio, renouncing him as a brother, and 
refusing to hear him more, their intercourse is practically 
concluded. For when in the last scene of the play the 
Duke discloses her pardoned brother to Isabella, she says 
not a word. Her last reference to him is, " My brother 



xxii INTRODUCTION 

had but justice In that he did the thing for which he died." 
But we are left to suppose it will take a longer interval of 
time than the play permits, for forgiveness and reconciliation. 
The Duke hardly seems to be a personage to delight in. 
It is not merely his didactic platitudes and his somewhat over- 
done pompousness that get upon one's nerves, but his inner 
character. We first meet him too timid or irresolute to 
enforce his own laws and deputing his duty to another, 
while he himself plunges into a vortex of scheming and 
intrigue ; concluding by falling into love with a votary. At 
III. i. 167 does he not transgress against the confessional? 
Again, he must have known of Angelo's treatment of 
Mariana, at least we are left to suppose he did (ill. i. 228), 
and was not his (the Duke's) a very shifty way of bringing 
him to justice, instead of a straight prosecution ? Then the 
freedom with which he lies (iv. iii. 10 8- 11 5) is not pre- 
possessing. I imagine Shakespeare was not in love with 
his Duke. "A shy fellow was the Duke." But at the 
close of the play all these feelings are quenched in the 
general atmosphere of mercy and forgiveness which replaces 
the pursuit of crimes, and the dispositions of retribution 
and punishments which form the working of the play. 
And how like a bright particular star of purity Isabella 
shines out from and above the whole of her surroundings ! 
In her shining armour of chastity, and in her absolute con- 
fidence in the supposed sanctity of the Duke, she adopts his 
methods of deception. In the truth of her spirit she has 
courage for anything so long as it is not spiritually foul. 
The unworthy position of intrigue she has to adopt is 
entirely of the Duke's workmanship, and Isabella suffers no 
taint thereby. And after all these intrigues, what does the 
Duke gain ? It is true he gains a wife who is a million 
times too good for him (excepting perhaps in worldly 
position), but that has nothing to do with the motive of the 
play. He upsets all his crafty schemes for setting up his 
tottering justice and infirm authority by a general forgive- 
ness and gaol-delivery all round. So much so that even 



INTRODUCTION xxiii 

where he justifies the title of the play, " An Angelo for 
Claudio, death for death ! " he is in his own mind making 
a mockery of it. We are not even certainly informed 
as to whether punishment has been administered to those 
characters representing the lower forms of wickedness. 
Where does it appear that the law is anything more than 
an accustomed scarecrow to them ? Pompey is indeed im- 
prisoned for a brief space, but he receives there what is to 
be regarded as promotion to a lawful mystery — to the grade 
of hangman. 

For a long and beautifully composed analysis of Isabella, 
who " of all the characters alone has our sympathy," the 
reader must refer to Mrs. Jameson's Characteristics. As it is 
largely based upon the beauties of Isabella's various senti- 
ments and speeches, which are fully quoted, it is too lengthy 
for insertion here. The comparison she draws between 
Portia {Merchant of Venice) and Isabella is a masterpiece 
of subtle delineation of character. Isabella, the writer finds, 
is less mixed in character than Portia, yet "they are por- 
trayed as equally wise, gracious, virtuous, fair, and young. 
. . . Isabella is distinguished from Portia, and strongly 
individualised by a certain moral grandeur, a saintly grace, 
something of vestal dignity and purity which render her 
less attractive and more imposing." The characters are 
widely different indeed, and we cannot conceive the^saga- 
cious and worldly-wisely witted Portia lending herself at any 
price to the Duke's stratagems. 

Measure for Measure has received severe treatment at 
the hands of some critics. Coleridge says : " This play is 
to me the most painful, say rather the only painful part of 
his genuine works. It is Shakespeare's throughout. The 
comic and tragic parts equally borders on the (hateful) — 
the one being disgusting, the other horrible," etc. etc. 
Coleridge's language is too violent and intemperate to be 
quoted with patience. It runs away with itself. See his 
Literary Remains. Coleridge called special attention to the 
artifice of Isabella and her seeming consent to the suit of 



xxiv INTROD UCTION 

Angelo, which are undoubtedly the worst radical blots in 
the play. But I put them wholly down to the power and 
to the discredit of our Duke of dark corners. 

Furnivall (Leopold Shakespeare) especially notices the 
" stifling air of this drama." He decides that Isabella is 
" Shakespeare's first wholly Christian woman, steadfast and 
true as Portia, Brutus's wife, pure as Lucrece's soul, merci- 
ful above Portia, Bassanio's bride, in that she prays forgive- 
ness for her foe, not her friend ; with an unyielding will, a 
martyr's spirit above Helena's of All's Well^ the highest 
type of woman that Shakespeare has yet drawn." There 
are more lovable women in Shakespeare, but there are 
none who stand out so brilliantly against the foil of her 
surroundings and the characters with whom she is brought 
in contact. Furnivall goes on, " She is the first of the three 
splendid women who illumine the dark Third Period : she, 
glorious for her purity and righteousness, Cordelia for her 
truth and filial love, Volumnia for her devotion to honour 
and her love of her native land. Perhaps we may add a 
fourth, Portia, Brutus's wife, for nobleness and wifely duty. 
But the highest of all is Isabella." 

Gervinus (1850), after noticing that the play found little 
favour with English critics. Hunter, Knight, and others, even 
an admirer like Coleridge, gives a lengthy analysis of the 
motion of action, and the passions, in order to " discover 
their psychological connection." Like Coleridge, he appears 
to conceive that Angelo was incapable of sincere repentance, 
— and that he has only the prospect of becoming a greater 
criminal, unless he raises himself to lasting virtue — a con- 
tingency which Coleridge deemed impossible, and which 
there is no show of in the play. This indignant justice, 
so requisite as it appears to be, was not executed. In 
Coleridge's eyes this is a degrading result. Here the old 
play is followed. See note at V. i. 500. 

I imagine Shakespeare intends us to forgive Angelo, 
and regard him as a converted character. Such sudden 
moral transformations are happily rare in Shakespeare. 



INTRODUCTION xxv 

They become a regular property of the stage in later 
plays, such as The London Prodigal^ and most of those of 
Massinger. And earlier we find a good one in Tourneur's 
Atheists Tragedy. In a note to The London Prodigal, 
Halliwell says Shakespeare did not adopt them because 
they have no existence in real life. On the other hand, a 
more modern authority writes [James' Varieties of Religious 
Experience^ : " Were we writing the story of the mind from 
the purely natural-history point of view, with no religious 
interest whatever, we should still have to write down man's 
liability to sudden and complete conversion as one of his 
most curious peculiarities" (p. 230, ed. 1903). But the 
difficulty in most of these dramatic instances is to overcome 
the scepticism one naturally feels at a conversion that owes 
its being, not to a sudden awakening of conscience, but to 
detection of guilt and a presence of alarming consequences. 

Gervinus's explanation of these unjustifiable mildnesses 
is ingenious if not convincing. As the Duke's own sen- 
tences and penalties of the law had fallen into disuse, before 
his abdication, so now in conclusion is he compelled by the 
force of circumstances to mitigate all forfeitures and punish- 
ments, and let all criminals escape, in spite of his over- 
cunning astuteness. And this is Measure for Measure. I 
am not sure if Gervinus exactly meant this, so lengthy and 
wire-drawn are his periods, but he implies it, and I think it 
commends itself. Perhaps we may regard the play as a 
satirical jeremiad for mercy and against severity. 

Hazlitt's words are always worthy of a full meed of 
attention. He says {Characters of Shakespeare^ s Plays^ 
1 8 1 7) : " This is a play as full of genius as it is of wisdom. 
Yet there is an original sin in the nature of the subject 
which prevents us from taking a cordial interest in it." 
The height of moral argument " which the author has main- 
tained in the intervals of passion, or blended with the more 
powerful impulses of nature, is hardly surpassed in any of 
his plays. But there is in general a want of passion ; the 
affections are at a stand ; our sympathies are repulsed and 



xxvi INTRODUCTION 

defeated in all directions. The only passion which influences 
the story is that of Angelo [? Claudio's passionate love of 
life] ; and yet he seems to have a much greater passion for 
hypocrisy than for [Isabella] his mistress. Neither are we 
greatly enamoured of Isabella's rigid chastity, though she 
could not have acted otherwise than she did. We do not 
feel the same confidence in the virtue that is ' sublimely 
good ' at another's expense, as if it had been put to some 
less disinterested trial. As to the Duke, who makes a very 
imposing and mysterious stage-character, he is more absorbed 
in his own plots and gravity than anxious for the welfare 
of the State ; more tenacious of his own character than 
attention to the feelings and apprehensions of others. 
Claudio is the only person who feels naturally ; and yet he 
is placed in circumstances of distress which almost preclude 
the wish for his deliverance. Mariana is also in love with 
Angelo, whom we hate. In this respect there may be said 
to be a general system of cross-purposes between the feel- 
ings of the different characters and the sympathy of the 
reader or the audience. The principle of repugnance seems 
to have reached its height in the character of Master Bar- 
nardine, who not only sets at defiance the opinions of others, 
but has even thrown off all self-regard [Act IV. Scene i.]. . . . 
He is a fine antithesis to the morality and hypocrisy of the 
other characters in the play. . . . We do not understand 
why the philosophical German critic, Schlegel, should be 
so severe on those pleasant persons, Lucio, Pompey, and 
Master Froth as to call them 'wretches.' They appear all 
mighty comfortable in their occupations, and determined to 
pursue them, * as the flesh and fortune should serve.' . . . 
Shakespeare was in one sense the least moral of all writers; 
for morality (commonly so called) is made up of antipathies; 
and his talent consisted in sympathy with human nature, 
in all its shapes, degrees, depressions, and elevations. The 
object of the pedantic moralist is to find out the bad in 
everything ; his was to show that * there is some soul of 
goodness in things evil.' . . . Shakespeare was a moralist 



INTRODUCTION xxvii 

in the same sense in which nature is one. He taught what 
he had learnt from her. He showed the greatest knowledge 
of humanity with the greatest fellow-feeling for it." Hazlitt 
lays special stress on the famous scene between Claudio and 
Isabella (ill. i.) ; and its strong dramatic contrast with the 
preceding lecture given to Claudio by the Duke, recom- 
mending an absolute indifference to life. 

Hazlitt's liberal remarks are to the point. He generally 
seems to say much of what one would wish to have said 
one's self — especially where he prods fun at Schlegel when 
he puts in a word for those vagabonds of the play — the 
worst and most unwholesome spirits of the piece. What 
he says with regard to Isabella comes as rather a shock 
after the ethereal position allotted to that enskyed and 
ensainted heroine by such writers as Mrs. Jameson. Com- 
pare here E. T. Hickey's words about Isabella, quoted by 
Rolfe : Her unhappy words, " Hark ! how I '11 bribe you," 
seem to have first brought out the evil in Angelo : " He 
tempts her through that which is uppermost in the noble 
woman, the passion for sacrifice. There is something 
splendid in the idea of perilling the soul itself for the sake 
of another." 

So many men, so many minds ; and more might be 
referred to, such as Schlegel and Dr. Dowden, who has, 
however, given us little upon this play. Several of John- 
son's, Steevens', and Malone's criticisms are interspersed 
throughout my notes. Johnson says the comic part is very 
natural and pleasing. As compared with scores of other 
comic scenes in Shakespeare, I disagree with that. Johnson 
thinks that the Duke " must have learned the story of 
Mariana in his disguise, or he delegated his power to a man 
already known to be corrupted." Blackstone thought he had 
learnt it in some of his former retirements, " having ever loved 
the life removed." And the Duke had a suspicion (says 
Blackstone) that Angelo was but a seemer^ and therefore he 
stays to watch him. For the suggestion " seemer," see the 
last words of Act I. Scene iv. But I think the Duke meant 



xxviii INTRODUCTION 

there merely " we '11 see if he is really as absolutely perfect 
as he pretends to be " ; and since the action of the play 
cannot permit of the Duke's acquiring this information 
(apart from our being aware of his doing so) subsequently 
to his appointment of Angelo, that appointment of his, of 
one whom he knew to be capable of such base behaviour, 
fully justifies Lucio's epithet " fantastical " to him. 

Perhaps it may not be amiss here to quote from Shake- 
speare's great friend and contemporary, Ben Jonson, when 
referring to him as Virgil {Poetaster^ V. i. 1 600) : 

That which he hath writ 
Is with such judgment laboured, and distilled 
Through all the needful uses of our lives. 
That could a man remember but his lines 
He should not touch at any serious point. 
But he might breathe his serious spirit out of him. 

The whole of which passage can never be too carefully 
pondered on. 

In conclusion, I have to thank my friend Mr. Craig 
for several valuable notes, duly referred to where I have 
made use of them. 



MEASURE FOR MEASURE 



I 
I 



DRAMATIS PERSONAL 

ViNCf • the Duke. 

A^GELf. kc Deputy. 

LbCALUS, an u icient Lord. 

Cla 'DIO, a young Gentleman. 

Lucio, a Fantastic. 

Two other like Gentlemen. 

Provost. 

Thomas, 



AS, ) 



-P, , Two Friars. 

Peter, 

A Justice. 

Varrius.2 

Elbow, a simple Constable. 

Froth, a foolish Gentleman. 

POMPEY, Servant to Mistress Overdone ^ 

Abhorson, an Executioner. 

Barnardine, a dissolute Prisoner. 

Isabella, Sister to Claudio. 
Mariana, betrothed to Angelo. 
Juliet, beloved of Claudio. 
Francisca, a Nun. 
Mistress Overdone, a Bawd. 

Lords^ Officers^ Citizens^ Boy^ and Attendants."^ 
Scene : Vienna. 



^ Dramatis Personse] The names of all the Actors Ff (at end of play). 

2 Varrius] omitted Ff. 

2 Pompey . . . Overdone] Clowne Ff. 

^ Lords . . . Attendants] omitted Ff. 



MEASURE FOR MEASURE 
ACT I 

SCENE I. — An Apartment in the Duke's Palace. 

Enter Duke, Escalus, Lords ^ and Attendants. 

Duke, Escalus. 

Escal. My lord. 
>uke. Of government the properties to unfold, 

Would seem in me to affect speech and discourse ; 
Since I am put to know that your own science 5 

Exceeds, in that, the lists of all advice 
My strength can give you : then no more remains. 
But that to your sufficiency, as your worth is able, 

8. Btit that to your sufficiency ,"] Ff, Steevens (1793), Craig ; hiatus from sufficiency 
to as Theobald conj., inserting jj/cz^ add due diligency ; hiatus Globe, Cambridge ; 
sufficiencies your worth is abled Johnson. Numerous proposed alterations and 
insertions by Hanmer, Tyrwhitt, Farmer, Becket, Jackson, Singer, Collier, Staun- 
ton, Spedding, etc., given in Cambridge edition. 

5. /«/] See note at hne 8. I would transposition of the two terms in 5 and 8. 
read " but," i.e. "only," " I have only See footnotes in Steevens (1793). Mr. 
to know — it is enough for me to know." Daniel {Notes and Emendations^ 1870) 

6. lists'\ bounds, limit. explains the passage by making them 
8. But that to your sufficiency"] "But" refer to the properties of government: 

and '* put " (line 5) have perhaps been ** No more remains (for me to say with 
transposed by the printer. The mean- regard to the properties of govern- 
ing would be, "put that (my strength) ment), but that to your sufficiency [i.e. 
to your sufficiency ('adequate qualifi- betake yourself to your sufficiency?], 
cation,' Schmidt), as your worth (merit) as your worth is able, and let them 
is well able to do, and let them co- (the properties of government, the 
operate in the direction I desire." This laws) work and take their course." 
is practically Dr. Warburton's explana- My query marks my difficulty in this 
tion, although he had not suggested the explanation. 



4 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [acti. 

And let them work. The nature of our people, 
Our city's institutions, and the terms lo 

For common justice, you 're as pregnant in, 
As art and practice hath enriched any 
That we remember. There is our commission, 
From which we would not have you warp. Call hither, 
I say, bid come before us, Angelo. 1 5 

[Exit an Attendant. 
What figure of us think you he will bear ? 
For you must know, we have with special soul 
Elected him our absence to supply. 
Lent him our terror, dress'd him with our love. 
And given his deputation all the organs 20 

Of our own power : what think you of it ? 

EscaL If any in Vienna be of worth 

To undergo such ample grace and honour. 
It is Lord Angelo. 

Duke, Look where he comes. 

Enter Angelo. 

Ang, Always obedient to your grace's will, 25 

I come to know your pleasure. 
Duke. Angelo, 

There is a kind of character in thy life, 

10. city' si Cities Ff. 26. your pleasure] F i ; yotir Graces pleasure F 2, 3, 4. 

10, II. terms For common justice'] 20. organs] means of operation, 
elliptical for times for the administra- machinery. In this figurative sense I 
tion of common justice, i.e. the law. find it in Ben Jonson's Forest. To Sir 
You are fully informed in the practice of Robert Wroth : ' ' Let thousands more 
the Courts. go flatter vice, and win, By being organs 

1 1 . pregnant in] fully informed in. lo great sin ; Get place and fortune. " 
17. with special soul] with full con- 27. There is . . . life] Compare 

tent, energy or satisfaction. We still 2 Henry IV. iii. i. 80: "There is a 

say " to do a thing with all one's soul." history in all men's lives." 
Compare Tempest ^ ill. i. 44, and Troilus 27. character] cipher for hidden or 

and Cressida, iv. i. 52. Malone says, secret writing or correspondence. Com- 

" a translation of the usual formal words pare Ben Jonson, Epigr. xciii. : "They 

inserted in all royal grants : — ''Degratia all get Porta, for the sundry ways To 

nostra speciali, et ex mero motu — " write in cipher, and the several keys To 

Malone's observation is merely for the ope the character." Porta's treatise 

purpose of differing from Steevens, appeared in Latin in 1563. New Eng. 

whose explanation is correct. Diet, quotes the passage in the text 



SCI] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 5 

That to the observer doth thy history 

Fully unfold. Thyself and thy belongings 

Are not thine own so proper, as to waste 30 

Thyself upon thy virtues, they on thee. 

Heaven doth with us as we with torches do, 

Not light them for themselves ; for if our virtues 

Did not go forth of us, 'twere all alike 
/ As if we had them not. Spirits are not finely 
■ touch'd 3 5 

But to fine issues, nor Nature never lends 
* The smallest scruple of her excellence. 

But, like a thrifty goddess, she determines 

Herself the glory of a creditor. 

Both thanks and use. But I do bend my speech 40 

To one that can my part in him advertise ; 

Hold therefore, Angelo : 

In our remove be thou at full ourself ; 

Mortality and mercy in Vienna 

Live in thy tongue and heart. Old Escalus, 45 

Though first in question, is thy secondary. 

42. Hold therefore^ Angelo] Hanmer inserts direction [giving him his com- 
mission]. 

doubtfully, the next illustration being tion ("instruct me about the part I 

PepySy 1659. Perhaps a passage in have to bear to him, or what I have to 

Jonson's Every Man in his Humour, say to him ") is surely astray. 

IV. V. (456), comes closer: "I would 42. Hold therefore'] keep firm and 

select nineteen more . . . gentlemen true for the purposes I have stated, 

of good spirit ... I would choose For "therefore" (concerning this) com- 

them by an instinct, a character that I pare Troilus, ili. iii. 20 ; and 2 Henry 

have." VI. iv. viii. 24. And for "hold," see 

28. history] record. ill. i. 176 in this play. I do not 

32, 33. Heaven . . . themselves] believe the line refers to the act of 

Compare Luke xi. 33, and the parallels handing the instrument of commission, 

in the Gospels of Matthew and Mark. Gififord has a dogmatic note in Jonson's 

41. my part in him] "my office, Catiline, v. 6, where he cites the 
which I have now delegated to him " present passage, and supports Steevens' 
(Malone). My particular business. " commission " explanation. Cunning- 
Compare Timon,V. i. 123: "it is our ham shows that Gifford's note is in- 
part and promise to the Athenians to herently faulty, 
speak with Timon." 43. r(?ww^] absence. 

41. advertise] inform, instruct. I 46. in question] in consideration, 

talk to one who can teach me my own since his appointment is the elder, 

business, now vested in him. Compare a,(>. secondary] subordinate, as in 

below, V. 388. Schmidt's explana- King John, v. ii. 80. 



6 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [acti. 

Take thy commission. 

Ang. Now, good my lord, 

Let there be some more test made of my metal, 
Before so noble and so great a figure 
Be stamp'd upon it. 

Duke, No more evasion : 5 o 

We have with a leaven'd and prepared choice 
Proceeded to you ; therefore take your honours. 
Our haste from hence is of so quick condition 
That it prefers itself, and leaves unquestion'd 
Matters of needful value. We shall write to you, 5 5 
As time and our concernings shall importune, 
How it goes with us ; and do look to know 
What doth befall you here. So, fare you well : 
To the hopeful execution do I leave you 
Of your commissions. 

Ang. Yet give leave, my lord, 60 

That we may bring you something on the way. 

Duke. My haste may not admit it ; 

Nor need you, on mine honour, have to do 

With any scruple : your scope is as mine own. 

So to enforce or qualify the laws 65 

As to your soul seems good. Give me your hand ; 

I '11 privily away : I love the people, 

But do not like to stage me to their eyes. 

51. leaven'd] well fermented, i.e. ward, for Saint Charity And comfort 

tempered, considered. me, till I come without the town." 

56. importunel So accented usually And The Schole- House of Women 

in Shakespeare. And Ben Jonson, (Hazlitt's E. Pop. Poetry, iv. 109), 

Devil is an Ass, l. iii. : " To importune 1572 : "in mine opinion, If God himself 

more or urge a noble nature." would company keep, But they would 

61. bring you . . . way] accompany bring him upon Waking or els asleep." 

you on your way. ^om Winter's Tale, 67-72. I love the people . . . affect it] 

IV. ii. 83: " Clown. Shall I bring thee on This speech, as well as that of Angelo 

the way? Autolycus. No, good-faced, (ii. iv. 27-30), has been cited by Mr. 

sir: no, sweet, sir." Reed quoted Sidney Lee as " a deferential allusion to 

from Hey wood's Woman kiltd with James i., whose horror of crowds was 

Kindneess'. ** She went very lovingly to notorious." Tyrwhitt first suggested 

bring him on his way to horse." Com- this. See Introduction. 

pare the old Moral play Everyman 68. stage] the verb occurs twice in 

(Hazlitt's Dods. i. 112, circa 1520): Antony and Cleopatra [in. xm. Tp, diTidi 

"I pray thee ... To bring me for- v. ii. 17): publicly show myself. 



sen] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 7 

Though it do well, I do not relish well 

Their loud applause and Aves vehement, 70 

Nor do I think the man of safe discretion 

That does affect it. Once more, fare you well. 

Ang. The heavens give safety to your purposes ! 

Escal. Lead forth and bring you back in happiness ! 

Duke, I thank you. Fare you well. \Exit. 75 

Escal. I shall desire you, sir, to give me leave 

To have free speech with you ; and it concerns 

me 
To look into the bottom of my place : 
A power I have, but of what strength and nature 
I am not yet instructed. 80 

Ang. 'Tis so with me. Let us withdraw together. 
And we may soon our satisfaction have 
Touching that point. 

Escal. I '11 wait upon your honour. 

\Exeunt. 

SCENE W.—A Street. 

Enter Lucio and two Gentlemen, 

Lucio. If the duke with the other dukes come not to 
composition with the King of Hungary, why 
then all the dukes fall upon the king. 

First Gent. Heaven grant us its peace, but not the 

King of Hungary's ! 5 

70. Aves\ Exclamations of applause, two or three ladies to dinner to-day. 

Hail ! Welcome ! Compare Greene, Cler. How, sir, wait upon, did you ever 

Orlando Furioso (Routledge, p. 94), see me carry dishes. La-Foole.'^o,^\x^ 

1594: "the king . . . Sits sadly dispense with me." The expression 

dumping, aiming Csesar's death, yet occurs often as here, to enable the 

crying 'Ave' to his majesty." The speakers to leave the stage. See 

expression may have been in use at the Richard III. Ii. i. 40; HI. ii. 125, 

classical plays at the Universities in etc. 
Elizabeth and James' time. Scene 11 

83. wait tipon'] attend upon ; we '11 
go together. The sense is played upon 4. its'] An interesting note might be 

by Ben Jonson in the Silent Woman, written on the use by writers of this 

I. i. (1609): "I am come, Master time of *' its," "it's," and "it" 

Clerimont, to entreat you to wait upon ( = * * its "). It is sufficient to refer here 



8 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [acti. 

Second Gent. Amen. 

Lucio. Thou concludest like the sanctimonious pirate, 
that went to sea with the Ten Commandments, 
but scraped one out of the table. 

Second Gent. " Thou shalt not steal " ? i O 

Lucio. Ay, that he razed. 

First Gent. Why, 'twas a commandment to command 
the captain and all the rest from their functions : 
they put forth to steal. There 's not a soldier 
of us all, that, in the thanksgiving before meat, i 5 
doth relish the petition well that prays for 
peace. 

Second Gent. I never heard any soldier dislike it. 

Lucio, I believe thee, for I think thou never wast 

where grace was said. 20 

Second Gent. No ? a dozen times at least. 

First Gent. What, in metre? 

Lucio. In any proportion or in any language. 

12. First Gent. Why, '/was] I Gent. JV/iy? 'twas Ff; First Gent. Why? 
Luc. 'Twas Singer. 

to Abbott's Shakespearian Grammar grapes and malt, For flesh and fish, 

and the New Eng. Did. and every dish ; Mutton and beef, of 

4. peace] See Introduction, and note all meats chief" ; — and so on through 

at II. i. 15. all known viands, ending "For all 

19, 20. never wast where grace was these and many mo : Benedicamus 

said] An old and still familiar expres- Domino ! " For a short grace, cf. 

sion. So in The Wyf Lapped in Primer of Graces, 1559 : *'God save 

yJ/^r^/Z^j-S/^zw (Hazlitt's E. Pop. Poetry, our Queen and realm, and send us 

v. 221), about 1520: " Daunce yet peace in Christ." This illustrates line 

about dame, thou came not where it 16, above. 

grew." And N. Breton, PasquiVs 23. hi any proportion] refers per- 

/^(?<?/?j C«/ (Grosart, xiv. 19a): "Who haps to the tediously long graces in 

never came where Wit and Reason vogue at this time. Jonson refers to 

grew." "Never came where it grew " the "wire-drawn grace," Alchernist, ill. 

is the parent form. The expression ii. ; and a Puritan in his Bartholomew 

"saying grace" occurs in Merchant of Fair "says a grace as long as his breath 

Venice, il. ii. 202. lasts." Sir John Harington says : 

22. in metre] For a metrical grace, " the other had no great fault that I 

see Timon of Athens, i. ii. For a know, save that he would say too long 

better one, perhaps a burlesque, see the a grace afore dinner ; insomuch that 

old play How a Man may choose a Good one of his own coat told him one day 

Wife frotn a Bad (Hazlitt's Dods. ix. that if he had thought to have had a 

58, 59), 1602. It begins ^^ Gloria Deo, [cold] collation, he would have sung a 

sirs, proface ; Attend me now, whilst I psalm before it," A71 Apology of the 

say grace. For bread and salt, for Metamorphosed Ajax (rept. p. 58), 



sen.] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 9 

First Gent. I think, or in any religion. 

Lucio. Ay, why not ? Grace is grace, despite of all 2 5 

controversy : as for example, thou thyself art a 

wicked villain, despite of all grace. 
First Gent. Well, there went but a pair of shears 

between us. 
Lucio. I grant; as there may between the lists and 30 

the velvet : thou art the list. 
First Gent. And thou the velvet : thou art good velvet ; 

thou 'rt a three-piled piece, I warrant thee. I had 

as lief be a list of an English kersey as be piled, 



1596. And The City Match (Hazlitt's 
Dods. xiii. 225) by Jasper Mayne 
(1639), has ** one that cools a feast With 
a long grace." And Beaumont and 
Fletcher's Captain, ii. ii., ante 1613 : 
" eat my meat without long graces." 
In Shirley's Constant Maid, IV. iii. 
(1640), to " say grace " is spoken of as 
a "ceremony gone out of use." The 
other "proportion" is referred to thus 
by Nashe : ' ' your abrupt Graces, God 
bee praysed. Much good doe it you, or 
saying : We are nought, God amende 
us . . . that shal stop God's mouth," 

28-29. there went . . . between us'\ 
We are both of the same piece (John- 
son). So Harington, Metamorphosis of 
Ajax (Chiswick rept., pp. 133, 134), 
1596: "make him another garment of 
the same stuff (for there need go but a 
pair of shears between them)." And 
Lyly, Pap with a Hatchet, 1588: 
" there went but a pair of shears be- 
tween your knaveries." Lyly has it 
earlier in Euphues (Arber, p. 46), 1579. 
Tailor's scissors are still called shears. 
Nashe, speaking of a bride says : " shee 
is more sparing of her Spanish needle 
then her Spanish gloves, occupies oftner 
her setting sticke then sheeres, and 
ioyes more in her Jewels, then in her 
^t^M^,'^ Anatojuie of Absurditie (Grosart, 
i. 25), 1589. 

33. three-piled] treble-piled? Velvet 
of the richest quality was so called. See 
Winter's Tale, iv. iii. 14. It is very 
commonly mentioned, and the term was 
used in a transferred sense of anything 



very excellent. See iv. iii. 10, below. 
And Tourneur's Revenger's Tragedy, 
i. I : "To have their costly three-piled 
flesh worn off As bare as this." The 
expression occurs in Jonson's Every 
Man in his Humour, ill. ii., 1598. 
Here it is used satirically at first, with 
an immediate and humorous transition 
to a nauseous sense. 

34. English kersey] cloth famous all 
over Europe at this time. In Trade to 
Levant (Hakluyt, rept. 1810, ii. 206, 
207), 1599, it is stated : "In the yeere 
of our Lord 1511, 15 12, etc., till the 
yeere 1534, diuers tall ships of London 
. . . had an ordinarie trade to Sicilia 
. . . Candia . . . Cyprus . . . Tri- 
poli, etc., in Syria . . . they carried 
fine kersies of divers colours, coarse 
kersies, white western dozens, cottons," 
etc. In a Letter to the Moscovie Com- 
pany (Hakluyt, i. 344, rept.), 1560, 
"Hampshire kersies" are expressly 
mentioned as desirable. 

34. piled] peeled or bald. A common 
use with a reference to the * * French 
disease." So in Jonson's Bartholomew 
Fair, II. i. (Cunningham's Gifford, 
167a) : " I '11 see them poxed first, and 
piled and double piled." And Chaucer, 
The Reves Tale, line 15 : "As piled as 
an ape was his skulle." Dekker gives a 
further development of this coarse pun- 
ning in a passage beginning: "his 
breeches once were velvet, and three 
piled, when his great-grandfather wore 
them, but," etc., VVorke for Armourers 
(Grosart, iv. 138). 



10 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [acti. 

as thou art piled, for a French velvet. Do I speak 3 5 

feelingly now? 
Lucio. I think thou dost ; and, indeed, with most 

painful feeling of thy speech : I will, out of thine 

own confession, learn to begin thy health ; but, 

whilst I live, forget to drink after thee. 40 

First Gent. I think I have done myself wrong, have 

I not? 
Second Gent. Yes, that thou hast, whether thou art 

tainted or free. 
Lucio, Behold, behold, where Madam Mitigation comes ! 45 
First Gent. I have purchased as many diseases under 

her roof as come to — 
Second Gent. To what, I pray ? 
Lucio. Judge. 

Second Gent. To three thousand dolours a year. 50 

First Gent. Ay, and more. 
Lucio. A French crown more. 
First Gent. Thou art always figuring diseases in me ; 

but thou art full of error : I am sound. 
Lucio. Nay, not as one would say, healthy ; but so 55 

44. Here Ff have Enter Bawde^ transferred by Theobald to line 57. 

35. for\ after the manner of. that the cup of an infected person was 

35. French velvet] The best velvet contagious" (Johnson). 
came from France. French hoods, the 41. done 7nyself wrong] discredited 

most fashionable and costly wear, were myself, "given myself away." See 

of velvet. In Beaumont and Fletcher's Arden edition oi Merry Wives (note). 

Lovers Pilgrimage ^ II. iii., we read of III. iii. 221. 

cheating drapers: *"tis showed by so 45. Madam Mitigation] "Nsishe has a. 

dark a light to bear out the bracks and similar use of the title in Have with 

old stains in it, that ye may purchase you to Saffron Walden, 1596 (Grosart, 

French velvet better cheap." This shows iii. 192): "Madam Towne of the 

it was the most costly. And in The Realme." 

Widow, by the same authors (in part) 50. dolours] This quibble (dollar and 
Act I. sc. i. (Dyce, iv. 312), there is an dolour) occurs again in Tempest, 11. 
allusion similar to that in the text : **A i. 17, and Lear, 11. iv. 54. Steevens 
man . . . would fit her with French found it in 7'he Tragedy of Hoffman. 
velvet." ln]onson\Bartholoj?iewFair The French crown punning allusion is 
"velvet women" are alluded to as a everlasting. Outside Shakespeare, Mar- 
better class of "wenches of the game," ston's Pasquil and /Catherine, ii., may 
and see iv. iii. (192a) in that play for be mentioned, and Ben Jonson's Case 
more. is Altered, v. i.: "bid thy hands shed 
40. forget to drink after thee] * * It golden drops ; Let these bold French 
was the opinion of Shakespeare's time, crowns be uncovered. " 



sc.ii.] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 11 

sound as things that are hollow : thy bones are 
hollow ; impiety has made a feast of thee. 

Enter MISTRESS Overdone. 

First Gent. How now ! which of your hips has the 
most profound sciatica? 

Overdone. Well, well ; there 's one yonder arrested 60 
and carried to prison was worth five thousand of 
you all. 

Second Gent. Who 's that, I pray thee ? 

Overdone. Marry, sir, that 's Claudio, Signior Claudio. 

First Gent. Claudio to prison ! 'tis not so. 65 

Overdone. Nay, but I know 'tis so : I saw him arrested, 
saw him carried away ; and, which is more, within 
these three days his head to be chopped off. 

Lucio. But, after all this fooling, I would not have it 

so. Art thou sure of this? 70 

Overdone. I am too sure of it ; and it is for getting 
Madam Julietta with child. 

Lucio. Believe me, this may be : he promised to meet 
me two hours since, and he was ever precise in 
promise-keeping. 75 

Second Gent. Besides, you know, it draws something 
near to the speech we had to such a purpose. 

First Gent. But most of all agreeing with the pro- 
clamation. 

Lucio. Away ! let 's go learn the truth of it. 80 

\Exeunt Lucio and Gentlemen. 

Overdone. Thus, what with the war, what with the sweat, 

56, 57. bones are hollow] Compare says: " Ere pause possess your breasts, 

Timon, iv. iii. 151, 152: **Consump- I wish you more of plagues." Gifford 

tions sow In hollow bones of man." says in a note, "The city was about 

67. which is morel So in Merry this time suffering severely from the 

Wives, II. ii. ']^\ "there have been one they had. More than thirty 

earls, nay, which is more, pensioners." thousand people, as we learn from 

A vulgarism. Wilson, died of it this year in 

81. the sweat] the plague, or sudor London only." This is the year of 

anglicus. In Ben Jonson's Fart of this play and gives full force to Over- 

King^s Entertainment in Passing to done's words. The disease was called 

his Coronation (15th March 1603), he also the New Disease, the Sickness, and 



what 



MEASURE FOR MEASURE [acti. 



with the gallows and 
am custom-shrunk. 



what with poverty, 



Enter Pompey. 

How now ! what *s the news with you ? 
Pompey. Yonder man is carried to prison. 85 

Overdone, Well : what has he done ? 
Pompey. A woman. 
Overdone. But what 's his offence ? 
Pompey. Groping for trouts in a peculiar river. 
Overdone. What, is there a maid with child by him ? 90 
Pompey. No, but there 's a woman with maid by him. 

You have not heard of the proclamation, have 

you? 
Overdone. What proclamation, man? 
Pompey. All houses in the suburbs of Vienna must be 95 

plucked down. 
Overdone. And what shall become of those in the city ? 
Pompey. They shall stand for seed : they had gone 

down too, but that a wise burgher put in for 

them. 100 



the Sweat (as here), and in Nashe's 
Unfortunate Traveller. See Dekker's 
account of the 1603 epidemic in A 
Wonderfull Yeere. And compare, ' ' My 
brain doth sweat so I have caught the 
plague," Ben Jonson, Epicene^ i. i. 
(405*^, 409a). 

86. done'\ See 11 i. 116, note. 

89. Groping , . . river] catching 
fish in private water — poaching in 
fact. "Groping "in this sense is our 
"tickling," which is similarly used in 
Twelfth Night, II. v. 25: "Here 
comes the trout that must be caught 
with tickling." Chapman has in All 
Fooles, iii., "these Politicians ... A 
man may grope and tickle 'em like a 
Trowt, And take 'em from their close 
deere holes." See also Ben Jonson, 
Love Restored y 16 11. 

91. woman with maid] Can maid 
mean child here, not girl ? The word 
was used of a virgin of either sex. 
But it had also a dialectic meaning of 



mother. * ' O that 's a Norfolk woman 
(cry thee mercy) Where maids are 
mothers and mothers are maids," 
Brome, English Moor, III. i. 

95. suburbs] the usual situation for 
houses of ill-fame and resort of disre- 
putable people in all walled cities. 
Allusions are endless amongst the play- 
writers. Ben Jonson has "suburb 
brothels," "suburb captains," "suburb 
humours," "wench of the suburbs," 
etc. "Suburb sinner" was a term in 
use also. Nashe raises his protest : 
"London, what are thy Suburbs but 
licensed stewes? ... I accuse none, 
but certainly iustice some-where 's per- 
verted," Christ's Teares (Gros. iv. 224), 

1593. 

99, 100. put in for them] applied for 
them. "Put in" was a regular term 
in gambling for entering one's stake, 
which may be the sense here. See Ben 
Jonson's Epigram, cxii. : "thou darst 
put in Thy all, at all." 



sc.ii.] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 13 

Overdone. But shall all our houses of resort in the 
suburbs be pulled down ? 

Pompey. To the ground, mistress. 

Overdone, Why, here 's a change indeed in the com- 
monwealth ! What shall become of me? 105 

Pompey, Come ; fear not you : good counsellors 
lack no clients : though you change your place, 
you need not change your trade ; I '11 be your 
tapster still. Courage ! there will be pity 
taken on you ; you that have worn your 1 1 o 
eyes almost out in the service, you will be 
considered. 

Overdone, What 's to do here, Thomas tapster ? Let 's 
withdraw. 

Pompey. Here comes Signior Claudio, led by the 1 1 5 
provost to prison ; and there 's Madam Juliet. 

\Exeunt, 

Enter Provost^ Claudio, Juliet, and Officers, 

Claud. Fellow, why dost thou show me thus to the world ? 

Bear me to prison, where I am committed. 
Prov. I do it not in evil disposition. 

But from Lord Angelo by special charge. 1 20 

no, III. worn your eyes . . . servicel it was to superintend public executions, 

Ben Jonson says similarly, "Work his and whose authority extended over 

eyes out for him," in Time Vindicated^ gaols. Ben Jonson mentions the 

1623. "provost and his half dozen hal- 

113. Thomas tapster] See Grosart's berdiers" in Every Man in his 

Greene, y.\. 2^$, A Quip for an Upstart Humour, ill. ii. (32/5), and in the 

Courtier, 1592 : "Last to you Tom Alchemist, I. i. (9^). The full title 

Tapster, that tap your smale Cannes of was " provost -marshall." Massinger 

beere." Compare "William Cook," speaks of "Thy provost to see execu- 

2 Henry IV. Act v. Tom was a very tions done," Virgin Martyr, v. i. 

common prefix, especially if, as here, He is not mentioned in Shakespeare 

there was alliteration. Early examples outside this play. 

of Tom Tiler, Tom Tinker, Tom Turner, II 7. show me thus to the world] It 

might be given, and several others. In was common in old plays to lead 

The Famous Victorie of Henry the fifth prisoners across the stage, who converse 

{circa 1585), Shaks. Lib., 1875 ed., p. with one another, remonstrate with 

367, occurs: " Enter John Cobler and their gaolers, and throw bits of morality 

RobbinPewterer." So names are made to the audience. There are two cases 

to this day. in point in Promos and Cassandra, 

116. Provost] The officer whose duty Part I. (11. vi. and in. vi.}. 



14 



MEASURE FOR MEASURE [acti. 



Claud. Thus can the demi-god Authority 

Make us pay down for our offence by weight 
The words of heaven ; on whom it will, it will ; 
On whom it will not, so : yet still 'tis just. 

Re-enter LUCIO and two Gentlemen. 

Lucio» Why, how now, Claudio ! whence comes this re- 
straint ? 125 

Claud. From too much liberty, my Lucio, liberty : 
As surfeit is the father of much fast, 
So every scope by the immoderate use 
Turns to restraint. Our natures do pursue. 
Like rats that ravin down their proper bane, 130 

A thirsty evil, and when we drink we die. 

Lucio. If I could speak so wisely under an arrest, I 
would send for certain of my creditors. And 
yet, to say the truth, I had as lief have the 

122, 123. by weight The words] Ff, Globe, Cambridge; by weight; P th* 
words Hanmer ; by weight. The words Warburton (after Davenant) and most 
modem editors; by weight — The sword Roberts conj. ; by weight. — The word's 
Becket conj. 



122, 123. by weight The words of 
heaven] so the Folio. Johnson suspects 
a line is lost. The insertion of a stop 
after "weight" adopted by Steevens 
and others from Warburton, does not 
seem to clear up the difficulty, and is 
taking a liberty with the text. Malone 
points out that Dr. Roberts' emenda- 
tion, "the sword of heaven," is sup- 
ported by a passage in the last scene 
of Act III. in this play, where the ex- 
pression occurs. He supposes Authority 
to be the sword of heaven which 
will spare or punish as commanded 
(Roberts). Nearly as hard to explain 
as the text. The meaning is clear ; 
the wording is enigmatical. Henley 
says: "To this uncontrollable power 
(Authority) the poet applies a passage 
from St. Paul to the Romans ix. 15, 
18, ". . . I will have mercy on whom 
I will have mercy . . . and whom he 
will he hardeneth.'" These are the 
"words of heaven." I think Henley 
is right. The words form a comment 



on the headline of the chapter, "God 
hath mercy upon whom He will." 
"It," meaning "mercy," is assumed 
by Shakespeare to be obvious, Claudio 
is much more anxious to obtain mercy 
than punishment at all his appearances. 

125. Why] a call, or exclamation. 
See Merchant of Venice^ ii. v. 6 ; ^ 
Henry IV. V. i. 8, etc. And Ben 
Jonson, Every Man out of his Humour 
(1599). V. v.: "Why, Fido ! my 
shoes." 

128. scope] liberty, license; as in 
I. iii. 35 (Schmidt). 

130, 131. Like rats . . . die] Chap- 
man, in Revenge for Honour, II. 1,, 
borrows, develops, and explains here : 
"like poisoned rats, which when 
they've swallowed The pleasing bane, 
rest not until they drink, And can rest 
then much less, until they burst with 't." 
Steevens referred to this passage. 
Ravin, to devour greedily, occurs 
again in Macbeth^ ii. iv. 28; and in 
Cynibeline^ I. vi. 49. 



sen.] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 15 

foppery of freedom as the mortality of imprison- i 3 5 

ment. What 's thy offence, Claudio ? 
Claud. What but to speak of would offend again. 
Lucio. What, is it murder? 
Claud. No. 

Lucio. Lechery? 140 

Claud. Call it so. 
Prov. Away, sir ! you must go. 

Claud, One word, good friend. Lucio, a word with you. 
Lucio. A hundred, if they '11 do you any good. 

Is lechery so looked after ? 145 

Claud. Thus stands it with me : upon a true contract 

I got possession of Julietta's bed : 

You know the lady ; she is fast my wife. 

Save that we do the denunciation lack 

Of outward order: this we came not to, i 50 

Only for propagation of a dower 

135. mortality Ff ; morality Rowe (after Davenant)and all subsequent editors. 
149, denunciation] pronunciation Collier MS. 151. propagation] F 2, 3,4; 
propagation F i ; prorogation Malone conj. ; procuration Jackson conj. ; preser- 
vation Grant White. 

135. mortality] I restore the reading Compare Timon (Shakespeare Library, 

of the Folios. Shakespeare has the 1875, p. 405), 1600: "My ffriend, 

word " mortality " very often, "moral- word or two. Pseud. Yes, yf thou 

ity" nowhere. In Henry V. iv. iii. wilt, three hundred." 

107, "mortality" has the meaning of 148. fast my wife] See note below, 

"deadliness," which is the sense here, lines 173, 174. 

and forms a better antithesis to the 149. denunciation] proclamation, 

lively folly implied in the word "fop- formal declaration (Schmidt). Usually 

pery" than "morality" does, which at a formal public announcement of some 

this time signified "philosophy," or coming evil, as war, excommunication, 

some such sense. Skeat cites the pre- etc., in which sense early examples are 

sent passage as his earliest authority given in New Eng. Diet. There is 

for "morality," but it occurs in Gabriel one excellent parallel, however, from 

Harvey (Grosart, ii. 172), 1579. Both Bishop Hall's Cases of Conscience^ 

words were borrowed from the French, 1649: "This publique and reiterated 

and we will take Cotgrave's verdict : denunciation of Bannes before matri- 

''^ MoralitL Morality; a moral sense mony." I am strongly tempted to 

or subject; also, a Moral, an Enterlude omit "the." 

or Play of manners." *^ Mortality. 151. propagation] increase. They 

Mortality, frailty, subjection unto death ; expected in time to win the favour of 

also, a mortality, plague, murrein, rot." her friends and obtain a larger dower. 

"Subjection unto death" is highly "Propagation" is not elsewhere in 

suitable to Claudio's predicament, but I Shakespeare. It is not in Cotgrave. 

prefer " to lie in cold obstruction and to Gabriel Harvey has it twice. "The 

rot." flourishing propagation and mightie 

14^, I ^. word witk you ... hundred] encrease of the Catholique church," 



16 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [acti. 

Remaining in the coffer of her friends, 
From whom we thought it meet to hide our love 
Till time had made them for us. But it chances 
The stealth of our most mutual entertainment i 5 5 
With character too gross is writ on Juliet. 

Lucio. With child, perhaps ? 

Claud. Unhappily, even so. 

And the new deputy now for the duke, 
Whether it be the fault and glimpse of newness. 
Or whether that the body public be 160 

A horse whereon the governor doth ride, 
Who, newly in the seat, that it may know 
He can command, lets it straight feel the spur ; 
Whether the tyranny be in his place. 
Or in his eminence that fills it up, 165 

I stagger in : — but this new governor 
Awakes me all the enrolled penalties 
Which have, like unscour'd armour, hung by the wall 
So long that nineteen zodiacs have gone round, 

159. fault and'\ flash fl«fl? Johnson con]., fault or Idem conj. 

and "Propagation of christianitie," both 165. eminence] elevated rank. 

in An Advertisement to Papp Hatchet^ 166. stagger"] hesitate, waver. Com- 

1589 (Grosart, ii. 137, 202). pare Barnaby Googe, The Popish King- 

154. made the?n for us] disposed dome, p. 24, rept. 1570 : "Who if they 

them in our favour (Schmidt). Com- stackering chaunce to stande, and 

pare the following passage in Nero wavering doubtfully." See Merry 

(1624), Bullen's Old Plays, i. 41 : Wives, iii. iii. 12 (Arden, 127). 
"Rufus, the captaine of the guard's 168. unscour'd armour . . . wall] 

with us, And divers others o th' Hanging weapons in the hall is an old 

Praetorian band Already made." In custom — often mentioned. Compare 

the sense of " prepared for a business," Jonson's Silent Woman, iv. ii. : "he 

the term is frequent in Jonson. is so hung with pikes, halberds, pet- 

159. fault and glimpse of newness] ronels, calivers, and muskets, that he 

the imperfection awaiting upon the looks like a justice-of-peace's hall." 
sudden and unaccustomed brightness 169. nineteen zodiacs] K\. iii. 21, the 

or flash of novelty. Compare "the Duke says the period was fourteen 

glimpses of the moon " in Hamlet, I. iv. years, and his word must, of course, be 

53, To glimpse had the sense of gleam accepted. Theobald's alteration should, 

brightly and transiently, flash. See in my opinion, have been made here. 

Gascoigne's Steele Glas (Arber, pp. 54, Malone endeavours to explain the dis- 

90), 1576. For the construction of crepancy : " Claudio would naturally 

"and" here, connecting two notions, represent the period during which the 

the one subordinate to the other, see law had not been put in practice, 

Schmidt, the hurtful " glimpse of new- greater than it really was." Is this 

ness," convincing? 



sen.] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 17 

And none of them been worn ; and, for a name, 1 70 
Now puts the drowsy and neglected act 
Freshly on me : 'tis surely for a name. 

Lucio, I warrant it is : and thy head stands so tickle 
on thy shoulders that a milkmaid, if she be in 
love, may sigh it off. Send after the duke and 1 7 5 
appeal to him. 

Claud. I have done so, but he 's not to be found. 
I prithee, Lucio, do me this kind service : 
This day my sister should the cloister enter, 
And there receive her approbation : 1 80 

Acquaint her with the danger of my state ; 
Implore her, in my voice, that she make friends 
To the strict deputy ; bid herself assay him : 
I have great hope in that ; for in her youth 
There is a prone and speechless dialect, 185 

Such as move men ; beside, she hath prosperous art 
When she will play with reason and discourse, 
And well she can persuade. 

Lucio. I pray she may : as well for the encouragement 

of the like, which else would stand under grievous 1 90 

190. under] F I ; upon F 2, 3, 4. 

173, 174. Mj/ head . . . on thy oio. 6xa\y^ Widow's Tears ^ Act n. ; zxid 

shoulders] This offence (seduction of Menechmus, by W. W., 11. i., 1595 : 

a virgin) was never punishable by death "We are in a tickle place maister : 

in the English law, though rape (ravish- tis best to be circumspect." 
ment) was, and was so by a re-enact- 180. approbation] probation, novi- 

ment in Elizabeth's reign (1573). In tiate. The same term occurs in The 

Whetstone's play (see Introduction) Merry Devil of Edmonton, "Fair 

" rape" is synonymous with our seduc- Millicent to Cheston must be sent To 

tion. The word is rightly used in take the approbation for a nun" (Haz. 

Time's Whistle, by R. C, 161 5, in Dods. x. 222). 

this connection: " Drugo although 185. /r^w*?] inciting. This adjective 

thou lately didst escape The daunger had a use with reference to the passions, 

of the lawe which for a rape Awardeth or desires, which probably influences the 

death,be wise and sinne no more" (Early sense here. Thus in Holland's /"/zwzV, 

Eng. TextSoc, 1871, p. 78). Andrugio xxvi. 10 (257), 1601, occurs: "very 

(the original of Claudio) had fully deter- prone and forward to the sports of 

mined to redeem his offence by marriage. Venus." And see Middleton's Woman 

173. tickle] unstable, as in 2 Henry beware Woman, i. ii. The same sense 

VI, I. i. 216. A common use, now re- appears in Lucrece, 684, and Cyjnbeline, 

placed by "ticklish." So Chapman v. iv. 208. Compare the unmistakable 

(quoted by Steevens), " I have set her use of "proneness" in Jonson's Devil is 

heart upon as tickle a pin as the needle an Ass, iv. i. (258a). 

2 



18 



MEASURE FOR MEASURE [acti. 



imposition, as for the enjoying of thy life, who I 
would be sorry should be thus foolishly lost at a 
game of tick-tack. I '11 to her. 

Claud. I thank you, good friend Lucio. 

Lucio. Within two hours. 

Claud. Come, officer ; away ! 195 

\Exeunt. 

SCENE III.— ^ Monastery. 



Enter DUKE and Friar THOMAS. 

Duke. No, holy father ; throw away that thought : 
Believe not that the dribbling dart of love 
Can pierce a complete bosom. Why I desire thee 
To give me secret harbour, hath a purpose 
More grave and wrinkled than the aims and ends 
Of burning youth. 



193. tick-tack'] A complicated kind 
of backgammon in which pegs were 
driven into holes, as in the modern 
game of "tactics." Cotgrave has 
it under ** Trie Trac." The same 
indelicate application as that in the 
text occurs in Lusty Juventus^ a 
morality of Edward the Sixth's reign 
(Haz. Dods. ii. 85): **You will to 
tick-tack, I fear, If you had time." 
The game is often mentioned. See 
Rabelais^ i. 22. It was one of Gar- 
gantua's pastimes. 

Scene iih 

1. throw away that thought] Evi- 
dently the Friar suspects some love 
entanglement. Did he think the Duke 
wished to gain one of the nuns? as 
indeed he subsequently shaped his 
ends to. 

2. dribbling] Steevens quotes from 
Ascham's Toxophilus, 1589 : "he shall 
be come of a faire archer, a starke 
squirter and dribbler" ; and the term 
" a dribbled shot " occurs in the second 
sonnet of Sir Philip Sidney's Astrophel 
and Stella. ** Dribbling " is still in use 
at the billiard-table and in other games. 
Mr. Craig supplies me with a reference 



to Golding's Ovicfs Metamorphoses^ 
xiii. line 663 (Rouse rept. p. 251): 
* * Where Paris dribbling out his Shaftes 
among the Greekes he spyde. " 

2. dribbling dart] weakly falling 
dart. An alliterative touch such as the 
earlier poets abound in. Here are a 
few (a hundred might be given) from 
T. Howell's Poems, 1568 : ratling rage, 
griping grief, groaning grave, trifling 
trash, pinching pain, wofull wight, gap- 
ing gulf, foaming flood, etc. etc. This 
is the style ridiculed as ** King Darius' 
doleful strain," in Jonson's Poetaster 
(1601): ** O doleful days, O direful 
deadly dump." Ben had *' King Cam- 
byses' vein " {1 Henry IV. ii. iv. 425) 
in his mind here undoubtedly. A few 
lines later he quotes as a play-end almost 
verbatim from Pistol {2 Henry IV. ii. iv. 
175). And '* trickling tears " of i Henry 
IV. II. iv. 431, is duly trolled out in 
Ben's Case is Altered, i. i. {1598). 

3. complete] properly constituted. 

5. wrinkled] resulting from experi- 
ence, mature as from old age. 

6. burning] hot ; as in the expression 
burnt sack, heated sack. See Merry 
Wives (notes), li. i. 219 (Arden edition, 
p. 71). 



sc. Ill] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 19 

Fri. May your grace speak of it ? 

Duke. My holy sir, none better knows than you 
How I have ever lov'd the Hfe remov'd, 
And held in idle price to haunt assemblies 
Where youth, and cost, and witless bravery keeps. lo 
I have deliver'd to Lord Angelo, 
A man of stricture and firm abstinence. 
My absolute power and place here in Vienna, 
And he supposes me travell'd to Poland ; 
For so I have strew'd it in the common ear, i 5 

And so it is receiv'd. Now, pious sir. 
You will demand of me why I do this ? 

Fri. Gladly, my lord. 

Duke. We have strict statutes and most biting laws. 

The needful bits and curbs to headstrong weeds, 20 
Which for this fourteen years we have let slip ; 

10. and witless\ F 2, 3, 4 ; witless F i ; with witless Cambridge Edd. conj. 
12. stricture] strictness Davenant, strict ure Warburton. 20, to\ F i ; for 

F 2, 3, 4 ; weeds'] Ff, j'/^^oTj- Theobald. 21. fourteen] nineteen Theobald ; slip] 
Ff, sleep Theobald (after Davenant). 

9. /;'/V(?] estimation ; as in ^//'j W^^//, to find the metaphor here in strewing 

V. iii. 61 ; idle means unprofitable com- or sowing seed. Compare Hamlet^ iv. 

monly in Shakespeare. v. 14 ; and Pericles, i. vi. 23, where it 

10. bravery] finery. Often applied is undoubtedly and distinctly "sowed." 

to gay apparel or ornamentation of the Jonson makes the word interchangeable, 

person. So in The Play of Stucley , line In Undei'wood, 66, he has : " news they 

250 (Simpson's School of Shakespeare) : gat, to strew out the long meal " ; which 

"Zounds, he has been taking an in- in Epigram 115 becomes "news and 

ventory of my household stuff: all my noise to sow out the long meal." 

bravery lies about the floor." See As 20. weeds] "steeds" is a most de- 

You Like It, II. vii. 80). sirable alteration. Collier says, " weed 

12. stricture] strictness. A very un- is a term still commonly applied to an 

expected word. Its primary senses are ill-conditioned horse." This is true, 

far removed from this Shakespearian but the term refers to a spiritless beast, 

one. It is not in the earlier diction- and is probably quite modern. To 

aries. Blount has it in Glossographia apply bits and curbs to garden weeds is 

(ed. 1670): ^'■Stricture (strictura), a an intolerable confusion of metaphors to 

spark that flies from a piece of iron red our ears. But the whole speech is a 

hot, when it is beaten ; also a gathering jumble of them. The text is counten- 

of fruit ; and sometimes a brief collection anced by the fact that Whetstone has 

or sleight stroke, a Touch or Comment." the same metaphor in the same situation. 

Sir W. Davenant reads ** strictness " in Promos says (ii. 3) : "So that the way 

his alteration of the play. is by severity Such wicked weedes even 

15. strewed] This was the usual term by the rootes to teare." 

for scattering rushes, herbs, and flowers 21. fourteen years] See above, i. 169, 

on floors and elsewhere. But I prefer note. 



20 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [acti. 

Even like an o'er-grown lion in a cave, 

That goes not out to prey. Now, as fond fathers, 

Having bound up the threat'ning twigs of birch. 

Only to stick it in their children's sight 25 

For terror, not to use, in time the rod 

Becomes more mock'd than fear'd ; so our decrees. 

Dead to infliction, to themselves are dead. 

And liberty plucks justice by the nose ; 

The baby beats the nurse, and quite athwart 30 

Goes all decorum. 

Fri, It rested in your grace 

To unloose this tied-up justice when you pleas'd ; 
And it in you more dreadful would have seem'd 
Than in Lord Angelo. 

Duke. I do fear, too dreadful : 

Sith 'twas my fault to give the people scope, 35 

'T would be my tyranny to strike and gall them 
For what I bid them do : for we bid this be done. 
When evil deeds have their permissive pass 
And not the punishment. Therefore indeed, my 

father, 
I have on Angelo impos'd the office, 40 

26. terror] F I ; errour F 2, 3, 4. 26, 27. the rod Becomes more . . . 
decrees'] Pope (after Davenant), the rod More . . . decrees Ff. 

22. o'er-grown lion in a cave] Com- 29. plucks . . . nose] So "tweaks 

pare Whitney's Choice o/Emdlems, 1586 me by the nose," Hamlet^ li. ii. 601. 

(ed. Green, p. 210) : " The Lion oulde 30. 7^he baby beats the nurse] ^tetxens 

that coulde not get his praye, By swift says, " This allusion was borrowed from 

pursute, as he had done of late : Did an ancient print, entitled The World 

faigne him sicke, and in his denne did turned upside down, where an infant is 

staye, And praede on those that came thus employed." This was the name 

to see his state" (marg. ref. '* Horat. of a tract by Thomas Jordan, 1647, and 

Epist. Lib. I. Epist. i "). There is a another by T. Taylor, same date, 

plate of a sick lion in a cavern. 35. Sith] since. The old form 

23-26. fond fathers . . . terror] Com- sithens (which gave rise to since), from 

pare Ben Jonson, Time Vindicated, sith {sithian, to follow), occurs twice in 

1623 : " there is a schoolmaster . . . Shakespeare. Sith is frequent. 

Hangs all his school with his sharp 40. £»^<r<?] official position of a person, 

sentences ; And o'er the execution place So in Whetstone's play (Part 11. iv. 2) : 

hath painted Time whipt, for terror to ' * Was ever man set more freer than I ? 

the infantry." First went my goodes, then my Office 

28. infliction] " The act of laying on, dyd flye." 
execution of a punishment " (Schmidt). 



sc.iii] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 



21 



Who may, in the ambush of my name, strike 

home, 
And yet my nature never in the fight 
To do in slander. And to behold his sway, 
I will, as 'twere a brother of your order, 
Visit both prince and people : therefore, I prithee, 4 5 
Supply me with the habit, and instruct me 
How I may formally in person bear me 
Like a true friar. More reasons for this action 
At our more leisure shall I render you ; 
Only, this one : Lord Angelo is precise ; 
Stands at a guard with envy ; scarce confesses 
That his blood flows, or that his appetite 
Is more to bread than stone : hence shall 



50 



we 



see, 



If power change purpose, what our seemers be. 

[Exeunt. 

42, 43. Ji^k^ To do in slander] sight To do in slander Pope ; Jight So do in 
slander Theobald ; sighty To do it slander Hanmer, Steevens, etc. ; sight, 
So doing slander'' d Johnson conj., etc. etc. 47. bear me] Capell, beare Ff. 



42, 43. juy nature . . . slander] 
Various alterations have been made or 
suggested here. Reading as the texts 
do, Schmidt suggests " perhaps, to 
act in danger of being misjudged." 
The alteration of " in " to *' it " is coun- 
tenanced by a passage in 1 Henry IV, 
IV. iii. 8 : *' Do me no slander, Douglas, 
I dare fight." Perhaps "do in" has 
the sense of bring in, work in. 

45. Visit both prince and people] The 
device of the ruler or magistrate going 
amongst his people in disguse is 
familiar, probably, in all countries and 
times — as well in history as in fiction. 
As a contemporary parallel of a justice 
(in humbler rank) adopting it to dis- 
cover the remissness of the statutes' 
operations, compare Jonson's Bar- 
tholomew Fair, where Adam Overdo 
in disguise discovers all the enormities 
of the commonwealth, and is a main 
character in the play : " Thus must we 



do though, that wake for the public 
good ; and thus hath the wise magis- 
trate done in all ages." (il. i.) . . . 
" Would all men in authority would 
follow this worthy precedent ! for alas, 
as we are public persons, what do we 
know ? nay, what can we know ? we 
hear with other men's ears, we see with 
other men's eyes" {ibidem). See also 
Introduction. 

47. formally] with the form or ex- 
terior (like a true friar). Compare 
Nashe, Christ's Teares (Gros. iv. 104), 
1593 : " they digd lower Caves, which 
covering with hordes, and formally 
paving over, there they eate their Come 
underground closely." 

5 1 . Stands at a guard] stands on his 
defence, acts with caution. " Envy" 
here means malice or calumny, as in 
Sonnet Ixx. 12, etc. The article is 
usually omitted before guard. 



22 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [actt. 

SCENE IV.— ^ Nunnery. 

Enter ISABELLA and Francisca. 

Isab. And have you nuns no further ^^-.ivil'^ges ? 

Fran. Are not these large enough? 

Isab. Yes, truly : I speak not as desiring more, 
But rather wishing a more strict restraint 
Upon the sisterhood, the votarists of Saint Clare. 5 

Lucio. [ WMin.] Ho ! Peace be in this place ! 

Isab. Who 's that which calls ? 

Fran. It is a man's voice. Gentle Isabella, 

Turn you the key, and know his business of him : 

You may, I may not ; you are yet unsworn. 

When you have vow'd, you must not speak with men 

But in the presence of the prioress : 1 1 

Then, if you speak, you must not show your face, 

Or, if you show your face, you must not speak. 

He calls again : I pray you, answer him. [Exit. 

Isab. Peace and prosperity ! Who is 't that calls ? i 5 

Enter Lucio. 

Lucio. Hail, virgin, if you be, as those cheek-roses 

Proclaim you are no less ! Can you so stead me 

As bring me to the sight of Isabella, 

A novice of this place, and the fair sister 

To her unhappy brother Claudio? 20 

Isab. Why " her unhappy brother " ? let me ask, 
The rather for I now must make you know 
I am that Isabella and his sister. 

Lucio. Gentle and fair, your brother kindly greets you. 

Not to be weary with you, he 's in prison. 2 5 

8. Turn you the key\ open the lock, got this reputation and title of peace- 

We would give it the reverse significa- maker in Christendom," Court and 

tion. Times of James I. ii. 189. See 

15. Peace and prosperity'] Perhaps for Introduction for a note to 11. i. 4. 

King James' ear, whose motto was 25. weaiy'] tedious. Not to weary 

'•peace and plenty," and who "hath you. 



sciv.] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 23 

Isab. Woe me ! for what ? 

Lucio. For that which, if myself might be his judge, 
He should receive his punishment in thanks : 
He hath got his friend with child. 

Isab. Sir, make me not your story. 

Lucio. It is true. 30 

I would not, though 'tis my familiar sin 
With maids to seem the lapwing and to jest, 
Tongue far from heart, play with all virgins so : 
I hold you as a thing ensky'd and sainted ; 
By your renouncement an immortal spirit, 3 5 

And to be talk'd with in sincerity, 
As with a saint. 

Isab. You do blaspheme the good in mocking me. 

Lucio. Do not believe it. Fewness and truth, 'tis thus : 

Your brother and his lover have embrac'd : 40 

As those that feed grow full, as blossoming time 
That from the seedness the bare fallow brings 

30. It is true] Steevens, ' Tts true Ff, omitted Pope. 42. seedness] seeding 
Collier MS. 

26. Woe Pie] Mr. Craig refers me to Othello^ ii. i. i8. A very long list will 

Edward the Third I. ii. for a parallel : be found in Cotgrave. Shakespeare 

* ' Woe me unhappy ! " introduced such words (as well as those 

30. make me not your story] There with out and over) as the fancy took 

have been several suggested alterations him. 

here, as " mock me not " (Malone), and 39. Fewness and truth] In few words 

"yourscorn" for "your story "(Collier), and truly. "In few" for "in few 

The expression seems not to have been words " was a common expression at 

understood. It is simply an involved this time, but the form in the text is 

way of saying do not spin yarns to peculiar. 

me — do not invent your tale for my 40. lover] mistress, as in A Lovei''s 

ears. Complaint, where it applies to a deserted 

32,33. lapwing. . . Tongue far from maiden. Malone quotes an example 

heart] The simile of the lapwing, crying from Tarlton's Newes out of Purgatoiy. 

and pretending that her nest is where it 41-43- as blossoming time . . . teem- 

is not, to mislead the intruder, or else ijtg foison] Johnson and Malone find 

by simulating a broken wing to draw this sentence to be ungrammatical. 

him away, is one of the commonest The paraphrase would be: "as the 

in literature. Chaucer calls it "The bare fallow brings on the blossoming 

false lapwing, ful of trecherye," The time from the seed time to the teeming 

Parlement of Foules (Skeat, i. 348). rich harvest, even so," etc. I think it 

Lyly has it in Etiphues and in Campaspe. is difficult to find a difficulty, but there 

So far as I know, Lyly first made use are many comments, 

of the familiar lapwing and nest image. 42. seedness] seed-time. In frequent 

34. ensky'd] For verbs with <?«, em, provincial use ; see English Dialect 

or im, see my note to "enshelter'd," Dictionary. It seems to be a rare word 



24 



MEASURE FOR MEASURE [act 



To teeming foison, even so her plenteous womb 
Expresseth his full tilth and husbandry. 

Isab. Some one with child by him ? My cousin Juliet ? 45 

Lucio, Is she your cousin ? 

Isab. Adoptedly ; as school-maids change their names 
By vain though apt affection. 

Lucio. She it is. 

Isab. O, let him marry her. 

Lucio. This is the point. 

The duke is very strangely gone from hence ; 5 o 

Bore many gentlemen, myself being one, 

In hand and hope of action ; but we do learn 

By those that know the very nerves of state. 

His givings-out were of an infinite distance 

From his true-meant design. Upon his place, 5 5 

49. (9, lei him] F i ; Let him F 2, 3, 4. 54. givings-ouf] Rowe, giving-out Ff. 



in literature, and any dictionary I have 
found it in refers to Shakespeare. It 
occurs twice in Holland's Plinie (1601). 
The passages are : "if the seednes 
prevent not the winter, so as it may 
have good root before it commeth, it 
will bee in daunger of the cold," Book 
xviii. ch. 14, p. 571. And, " there be 
certaine little wormes breeding in the 
root, that doe eat it : which happeneth 
by occasion of much raine falling imme- 
diately after the seednes, "xviii. 17 (574). 
Craig gives me a reference to Palladius 
Husbandry {circa 1420, i. 256). 

43. foison] plentiful crop. New Eng. 
Diet, refers to Golding's De Mornay^ 
1587, for an earlier example. Shake- 
speare uses the word several times. In 
Tempesty ii. i., Gonzalo uses it, as he 
does also "tilth" (tillage) in the suc- 
ceeding line. 

44. Expresseth] exhibits, gives evi- 
dence of. A common sense. 

47. Adoptedly] by adoption as of a 
name given in tenderness. Compare 
"pretty, fond, adoptions Christendoms," 
AlVs Well, I. i. 188. And see Merry 
Wives, II. ii. 310. 

49. O, let him marry her] Compare 
Whetstone's comment on this situation 



in Promos and Cassandra^ Part I. ii. 
I (1578) : "The lawe is so severe in 
scourging fleshly sinne As marriage to 
worke after mends doth seldome favor 
win." And in the same play, when 
Cassandra yields to Promos, the latter 
admits (iv. ii. ) that he is bound with 
oath to marry her. He has no intention 
of keeping his vow (" he must unswear 
his oath"); so that a severe law was 
evidently necessary. 

51, 52. Bore . . . In hand] kept them 
in hope or expectation or delusion. A 
common expression, occurring half a 
dozen times elsewhere in Shakespeare, 
as in Hamlet, li. ii. 67, etc. It is very 
old. " I bare him in hond he had 
enchanted me," Chaucer, Prologue to 
Wyf of Bathes Pale. And " he bare 
my wyf on honde he wolde teche her 
take fyshe wyth her tayl," Caxton, 
Reynard Fox (Arber, p. 94 and p. 61), 
148 1. 

53. nerves] sinews. Used similarly 
(metaphorically) in Troilus, I. iii. 

55- . . 

54. gtvmgs-out] utterances, asser- 
tions. Compare Othello, iv. i. 131 : 
" Nay, this is the monkey's own giving 
out." And Hamlet, i. v. 178. 



sc. IV.] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 25 

And with full line of his authority, 
Governs Lord Angelo ; a man whose blood 
Is very snow-broth ; one who never feels 
The wanton stings and motions of the sense, 
But doth rebate and blunt his natural edge 60 

With profits of the mind, study and fast. 
He, to give fear to use and liberty. 
Which have for long run by the hideous law. 
As mice by lions, hath pick'd out an act. 
Under whose heavy sense your brother's life 65 

Falls into forfeit : he arrests him on it, 
And follows close the rigour of the statute. 
To make him an example. All hope is gone, 
Unless you have the grace by your fair prayer 
To soften Angelo ; and that 's my pith of busi- 
ness 70 
'Twixt you and your poor brother. 

Isab, Doth he so seek his life ? 

Lucio, Has censur'd him 

72. so seek] so, seeke, Ff; Has] H's (for *'PIe has") Malone (Steevens, 
I793)« 71-75'] Ff end lines 5<3, — already — warrant — poor — good\ rearranged 
by Capell. 

56. full line] full extent or scope. Dekker's Whore of Babylon-, "are not 

Compare 2 Henry IV. iv. iv. 39: the edge Of your sharp spirits rebated ? " 

"give him line and scope." New Eng. Diet, quotes Sidney's Area- 

58. S7iow-broth] a common northern dia: '* Compassion so rebated the edge 
expression for snow and water mixed, in of choler. " 

a thaw. In the north of Ireland it is 61. profits] benefits, improvements, 
either snow-broth, snow-brew, or snow- 64. As mice by lions] "The xviij 

bree. Or it is used of rain off the moun- fable [Liber Primus] is of the lyon and 

tains where snow is melting: "that's of the rat . . . a fable Of a lyon whiche 

the could rain, that's snow-bree." slepte in a forest, and the rats desported 

59. j-/w^j-] Compare "carnal stings," and playd aboute hym," Caxton's 
Othello, I. iii. 335; "brutish sting," y^j^/., 1484 (ed. Jacobs, ii. 26). 

As You Like It, ii. vii. 66. 69. fair prayer] So in Midsummer- 

59. motio7is] emotions. Compare Night's Dreajfi : " Amen to that fair 

Sidney's Arcadia: "he thus ... to prayer " (ii. ii. 62). 

loose the reins of his own motion, made 70. my pith of business] the essence 

him answer " (rept. 1898, p. 66); and or marrow of my business. Compare 

again, "who showed in his face no Taming of the Shrew, i. \, 171. 

motions, either at the one's or other's 72. censur'd] sentenced, as in Lear, 

speech" {ibid. p. 467). V. iii. 3. The noun occurs in the last 

59. sense] See ii. ii. 169. lines of Othello. For the omission of 

60. rebate] blunt. Not elsewhere in the governing pronoun before " Has," 
Shakespeare. It is used figuratively in see note 11. iv. 103. 



26 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [acti. 

Already ; and, as I hear, the provost hath 
A warrant for his execution. 

hah. Alas ! what poor ability 's in me 75 

To do hinni good ? 

Lucio. Assay the power you have. 

Isab, My power, alas ! I doubt, — 

Lucio. Our doubts are traitors. 

And make us lose the good we oft might win, 
By fearing to attempt. Go to Lord Angelo, 
And let him learn to know, when maidens sue, 80 

Men give like gods ; but when they weep and 

kneel. 
All their petitions are as freely theirs 
As they themselves would owe them. 

Isab. I '11 see what I can do. 

Lucio. But speedily. 

Isab. I will about it straight ; 8 5 

No longer staying but to give the Mother 
Notice of my affair. I humbly thank you : 
Commend me to my brother ; soon at night 
I '11 send him certain word of my success. 

Lucio. I take my leave of you. 

Isab. Good sir, adieu. 90 

\Exeunt. 

74. A warrant for his] a warrant For 's Ff. 78. 7?iake\ Pope, makes Ff, 
82. freely'] F i ; ti'uely F 2, 3, 4. 

83. owe] possess. earlier, but Shakespeare may have de- 

86. Mother] the prioress. rived it from The True Tragedie of 

88. soon at night] early to-night. Richard the Third {'Shaks. Lib., 1875, 

See note to 6>//^^//^, III. iv. 198 (Arden p. 87), 1594: "lames Terrill . . . 

ed., p. 178). A favourite expression with him my Lord will I so worke, that 

with Shakespeare, occurring in Richard soone at night you shall speake with 

///. IV. iii. 31, 2iX\d Rofneo and Juliet, him." 

II. V. 78. I had not met with it 



SCI.] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 27 



ACT II 



SCENE I. — A Hall in Angelds House. 

Enter Angelo, Escalus, a Justice, Provost, Officers, 
and other Attendants. 

Ang. We must not make a scarecrow of the law, 
Setting it up to fear the birds of prey, 
And let it keep one shape, till custom make it 
Their perch and not their terror. 

Escal. Ay, but yet 

Let us be keen and rather cut a little, 5 

Than fall, and bruise to death. Alas ! this gentleman. 

Whom I would save, had a most noble father. 

Let but your honour know. 

Whom I believe to be most strait in virtue. 

That, in the working of your own affections, i o 

Had time coher'd with place or place with wishing, 

Or that the resolute acting of your blood 

Could have attain'd the effect of your own purpose, 

Whether you had not, sometime in your life, 

Err'd in this point which now you censure him, i 5 

And pull'd the law upon you. 

Ang, 'Tis one thing to be tempted, Escalus, 
Another thing to fall. I not deny. 
The jury, passing on the prisoner's life, 

15. whic/i] where Grant White ; kini] him for Capell. 

1. scarecrow] See 1 Henry VI. I. iv. an Ass, I v. i. (252a), "I not love this 
43, for a similar metaphor of a scarecrow madam," wrongly transposed in Cun- 
turned to ridicule. ningham's edition. 

2. fear] frighten. 19. passing on] passing sentence on, 
6. fair] let fall. See Comedy of as in Lear, iii. vii. 24. Mr. Craig 

Errors, ii. ii. 127, and As You Like gives me an instance from the Statute 
It, III. V. 5, etc. Book translation of The Great Charter : 
18. / ;w/ <^^«/] The particle is placed "Nor we will not (Henry ill.) passe 
before the verb many times by Shake- upon him, nor condemne him, but by 
speare. Schmidt shows about thirty lawfull judgment of his peeres or by law- 
examples (p. 779, col. I)). Jonson of the land." 
does it frequently also, as in Devii is 



28 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [actii. 

May in the sworn twelve have a thief or two 20 

Guiltier than him they try; what's open made to 

justice, 
That justice seizes : what know the laws 
That thieves do pass on thieves ? 'Tis very pregnant, 
The jewel that we find, we stoop and take it 
Because we see it ; but what we do not see 2 5 

We tread upon, and never think of it. 
You may not so extenuate his offence 
For I have had such faults ; but rather tell me. 
When I, that censure him, do so offend, 
Let mine own judgment pattern out my death, 30 
And nothing come in partial. Sir, he must die. 

Escal. Be it as your wisdom will. 

Ang. Where is the provost ? 

Prov. Here, if it like your honour. 

Ang. See that Claudio 

Be executed by nine to-morrow morning : 
Bring him his confessor, let him be prepar'd ; 3 5 

For that 's the utmost of his pilgrimage. 

\Exit Provost. 

Escal, Well, heaven forgive him, and forgive us all ! 
Some rise by sin, and some by virtue fall : 
Some run from brakes of vice, and answer none, 

22. seizes\ ceizes Ff; kiiowl Pope, knowesYl {knows F 3, 4). '^(). from 

brakes of vice, and'\fro?n brakes of Ice, and Ff, through brakes of vice and Rowe, 
from brakes of vice, and Malone, yr^;« brakes of justice, Csipell, from breaks of ice, 
and Collier, from brakes, off ice and Knight conj. 

22, 23. what know , . . on thieves ?] corrupt. Nor does the illegitimate 
the laws are ignorant that thieves have alteration to "vice" render the mean- 
passed judgment upon thieves. ing obvious. Two or three pages of 

28. Por] because. attempted explanations will be found 

36. pilgrimage'l human life. See in Steevens' Shakespeare. They are so 

Genesis xlvii. 9. Shakespeare is much waste of ink. If " vice " be the 

fond of the expression. Compare accepted reading, the meaning would 

Jonson, The Fox, 11. ii. : "so short be some thrive in a tangle of vicious 

is this pilgrimage of man, which some courses, without rendering account to 

call life, to the expressing of it." any one, while others, for a single 

38.] This line is italicised, as though fault, are ruined. A similar expression 

a quotation, in Ff. occurs in Jonson's Magnetic Lady, v. vi. 

39. brakes of vice"] a passage, as (436a) : "I have run myself into A 

Schmidt says, that seems hopelessly double brake, of paying twice the 



SCI] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 29 

And some condemned for a fault alone. 40 

Enter Elbow, and Officers with Froth and POMPEY. 

Elb. Come, bring them away : if these be good 
people in a commonweal that do nothing but use 
their abuses in common houses, I know no law : 
bring them away. 

Ang. How now, sir. What's your name, and what's 45 
the matter? 

Elb, If it please your honour, I 'm the poor duke's 
constable, and my name is Elbow : I do lean upon 
justice, sir ; and do bring in here before your good 
honour two notorious benefactors. 50 

Ang. Benefactors ! Well ; what benefactors are they ? 
are they not malefactors ? 

Elb. If it please your honour, I know not well what 
they are ; but precise villains they are, that I am 
sure of, and void of all profanation in the world 5 5 
that good Christians ought to have. 

Escal. This comes off well : here 's a wise officer. 

Ang. Go to : what quality are they of? Elbow is 
your name ? why dost thou not speak, Elbow ? 

money." If to give the sense "thrive The parallel expression " in the briars " 
by means of," or "prosper," to "run w^as much earlier, occurring in Chaucer, 
from," be illegitimate, the expression Mr. Craig gives me an example from 
may mean some escape from a w^eb of Cavendish's Life of Wolsey (Morley, 
iniquitous courses and pay no penalty. 1885, p. 67), circa 1557: "divers of 
Brake in the sense of briars (as in the the great estates and lords of the 
phrase to be in the briars) is not un- council lay in wait ... to espy a 
common. A good example is quoted convenient time and occasion to take 
in Nares : "Honour should pull hard the cardinal in a brake." And see for 
ere it draw me into these brakes." a later use, Brome, (7^«r/ .5(?^^r (Pear- 
Beaumont and Pletcher, Thierry and son, i. 206). 

Theodoret, v. i., and in Jack Juggler 41. bring them away'\ bring them 

(Haz. Dods. ii. 139), 1563: "My wit along. 

is breech'd in such a brake That I 47, 48. poor duke^s cofistable'] Duke's 

cannot devise what way is best to poor constable. Hardly a transposi- 

take." And Jonson, Miscell. Under- tion, though parallels are common. 

woods, xxxii. : "Crushed in the snaky "Duke's constable" may be regarded 

brakes that he had past." And see as one term or title. 

Dyce's Skelton, i. 105 ; ii. 169. The 54. precise villains'] a hit at the 

word had the natural sense of a trap, Puritans, or Precisians, 

or of an engine for confining a horse 57. This comes off zvelf] this is well 

(in farriery) from these significations, delivered. 



30 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [acth. 

Ponipey. He cannot, sir : he 's out at elbow. 60 

Ang, What are you, sir? 

Elb. He, sir ! a tapster, sir ; parcel-bawd ; one that 
serves a bad woman, whose house, sir, was, as they 
say, plucked down in the suburbs ; and now she 
professes a hot-house, which, I think, is a very ill 65 
house too. 

Escal. How know you that? 

Elb. My wife, sir, whom I detest before heaven and 
your honour, — 

Escal. How! thy wife? 70 

Elb. Ay, sir; whom, I thank heaven, is an honest 
woman, — 

Escal. Dost thou detest her therefore ? 

Elb. I say, sir, I will detest myself also, as well as she, 

that this house, if it be not a bawd's house, it is 75 
pity of her life, for it is a naughty house. 

Escal. How dost thou know that, constable ? 

Elb. Marry, sir, by my wife ; who, if she had been a 
woman cardinally given, might have been accused 
in fornication, adultery, and all uncleanliness there. 80 

80. ttnckanliness\ Y i ; undeanness F 2, 3, 4. 

60. <7M^ a/ <?/3^a'] " elbow " is singular says: "A purging bill now fixed upon 

for the sake of the pun. The expression the door, Tells you it is a hot-house; 

(in rags) is always plural. The passage in so it may, And still be a whore-house : 

the text is the earliest in iV<?w -fw^. Z>zV/. , they're synonyma." In the double 

but it occurs in Nashe, Foure Letters sense, the term was used as early as 

Confuted (Grosart, ii. 286), 1593: "it 151 1 ; see New Eng. Diet. But the 

hath begged itself out at the elbowes up sense of "baths" was the usual one 

and down the country." And it may be until about the time of this play, 

found in Dekker's Satiromastix (Pear- 68. detest"] protest. For an earlier 

son, i. 245), 1602. Ben Jonson has it example of this, see Love's Labours 

in Bartholomew Fair, il. i., 1614. Lost, i. i. 182 : " I myself reprehend the 

62. parcel-bawd] partly bawd — "a Duke's own person," where Dull means 

bit of a bawd" as well as a tapster, represent. See note, line 115, below. 

Ben Jonson has a great affection for this A yet earlier will be found in Appendix 

combination. He has " parcel-broker," II. from Promos and Cassandra, Part 

"parcel-poet," "parcel -guilty," and 11., 1578 (reforming for informing). 

" parcel of a man," "parcel of a sol- 76. pity of her life] Com-p^xe Twelfth 

dier." See Nares for more instances. Night, u. \. i/^. 

64. suburbs] See I. ii. 96, and note. 79. ca7'dinally] carnally. 

65. hot-house] properly a bagnio or 79, 80. accused in] Compare IVinte^^s 
bath-house, but commonly used for a Tale, 11. i. 133 ; and Merry Wives, II. 
brothel. Ben Jonson {Epigram^ vii.) i. 180. 



SCI] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 31 

Escal. By the woman's means ? 

Elb. Ay, sir, by Mistress Overdone's means ; but as 
she spit in his face, so she defied him, 

Pompey. Sir, if it please your honour, this is not so. 

Elb, Prove it before these varlets here, thou honourable 8 5 
man, prove it. 

Escal. Do you hear how he misplaces ? 

Pompey, Sir, she came in great with child, and longing, 
saving your honour's reverence, for stewed prunes. 
Sir, we had but two in the house, which at that 90 
very distant time stood, as it were, in a fruit-dish, 
a dish of some three-pence ; your honours have 
seen such dishes ; they are not China dishes, but 
very good dishes. 

Escal. Go to, go to: no matter for the dish, sir. 95 

Pompey, No, indeed, sir, not of a pin ; you are therein 
in the right ; but to the point. As I say, this 
Mistress Elbow, being, as I say, with child, and 
being great-bellied, and longing, as I said, for 

87. [To Aug.] Capell. 91. distant] F i ; instant F 2, 3, 4. 

89. stewed prunes'] a recognised and Islands which they have found within 

favourite dish amongst prostitutes, these seven yeeres [1565]. They have 

For more on the subject, see my note brought from thence gold and much 

to Merry Wives of Windsor^ i. i. 296. cinamom, and dishes of earth and cups 

Dekker gives an illustration in The of the same, so fine, that every man 

Seven Deadly Sinnes (Grosart, ii. 44) : that may have a piece of them will give 

"the sober Perpetuana suited Puritan the weight of silver for it." In T. 

that dares not . . . come neere the V<lQQ\\i&s,' Madrigals of Six Farts [1600), 

suburb-shadow of a house where they there is also mention: "The Andalu- 

set stewed Prunes before you." sian Merchant that returns Laden with 

93. China dishes] The: editWtii raen- cochineal and china dishes." 

tion of China dishes quoted in New 96. not of a pin] See note to Merry 

Eng.Dict., or of chinaware of any Wives of Windsor, i. \. 117. 

kind, is from Drake's Voyage, 1579. 99,100. longing, as I said, for prunes] 

I have given an earlier one in a note to Cherries are more commonly mentioned 

an edition of Jonson's ^/iri^^;/zzV/, which as desiderata in Shakespeare's time, 

may be repeated here. It is from Hak- But we have Chaucer's authority that 

luyt, ed. 1 8 10, vol. iii., Henry Hawkes, fruit of any sort was a requisite : "To 

Travels in Mexico, 1572. The date eten of the smale peres grene. Help, 

"at which this discourse was written" for hir love that is of hevene quene ! 

(1572) will be found at page 555. It is I telle you wel a womman in my plyt 

too interesting a reference to omit. May hau to fruit so greet an appetyt, 

"They have in this port of Navidad That she may dyen, but she of it have," 

ordinarily their ships which goe to the The Merchantes Tale^ lines 1090- 

islands of China which are certain 1094. 



32 



MEASURE FOR MEASURE [acth. 



prunes, and having but two in the dish, as I said, i oo 
Master Froth here, this very man, having eaten 
the rest, as I said, and, as I say, paying for them 
very honestly ; for, as you know. Master Froth, I 
could not give you threepence again. 

Froth. No, indeed. 105 

Pompey. Very well : you being then, if you be remem- 
bered, cracking the stones of the foresaid prunes, — 

Froth. Ay, so I did, indeed. 

Pompey. Why, very well : I telling you then, if you 

be remembered, that such a one and such a one 1 1 o 
were past cure of the thing you wot of, unless 
they kept very good diet, as I told you, — 

Froth. All this is true. 

Pompey. Why, very well then, — 

Escal. Come, you are a tedious fool : to the purpose. 1 1 5 
What was done to Elbow's wife, that he hath 
cause to complain of? Come me to what was 
done to her. 



100. but two] F 

115. you are a tedious foot] So Jon- 
son, Every Man out of his Humour ^ I. 
i- (1599): "(you) might be . . . a 
constable for your wit" : an expression 
which Dekker repeats in The Guls 
Horn-booke (Grosart, ii. 202): *'all 
that are chosen Constables for their wit 
go not to heaven." And CynthicCs 
Revels^ 11. i. (i6ia), 1600: "ten con- 
stables are not so tedious." In The 
Fox, V. iv., 1605, one is called a "mis- 
taking knave." And in Middleton's 
Mad World, my Masters, v.: "This 
is some new player now, they put all 
their fools to the constable's part still." 
It is hardly necessary to refer to Dog- 
berry in Much Ado about Nothing, who 
is the best known stage example. 
There is a good deal of this mockery in 
Jonson's Tale of a Tub. And see for 
a still later reference, The Parson^s 
Wedding, 1663 (Hazlitt's Dods. xiv. 
393 )• See note above, line 68. 

117. Come me to what] "me" may 
be taken as a redundancy here, as in 



Two Gentlemen of Verona, li. iv. 9, 
and Merchant of Venice, i. iii. 35, etc. 
A few striking examples may be given 
from other writers of the time : " Sate 
me hym roundly downe formoste at 
the hyghest ende of the Table." G. 
Harvey (Grosart, i. 22), 1580: "Up 
starts me he " ; Nashe, Have with you, 
etc. (Grosart, iii. 102), 1596: "Therefore 
what did me I, but," etc., ibid, Christ'' s 
Teares (Grosart, iv. 6), 1594. And as 
late as Vanburgh, "and then — crack 
says me I!" {ALsop, II. i., 1697). 
" Come " in the text may, however, be 
taken to mean "bring," "help along." 
" Done" in this line quibbles upon an 
obscene sense which frequently occurs, 
as above in i. ii. 87, and in the name 
of the Bawd. See Beaumont and 
Fletcher's Spanish Curate, IV. vi. ; 
Barry's Ram Alley, Act I. ; Massinger, 
Parliament of Love, iv. i. ; Ben Jon- 
son's Bartholomew Fair, IV. iii. (192^), 
and especially his Tale of a Tub, li. i. 
(452a). 



SCI.] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 33 

Pompey. Sir, your honour cannot come to that yet. 

Escal. No, sir, nor I mean it not. 120 

Pompey. Sir, but you shall come to it, by your 
honour's leave. And, I beseech you, look into 
Master Froth here, sir ; a man of fourscore pound 
a year, whose father died at Hallowmas. Was 't 
not at Hallowmas, Master Froth ? 125 

Froth. All-hallond eve. 

Pompey. Why, very well : I hope here be truths. 
He, sir, sitting, as I say, in a lower chair, sir ; 
'twas in the Bunch of Grapes, where indeed you 
have a delight to sit, have you not? i 30 

Froth. I have so, because it is an open room and 
good for winter. 

Pompey. Why, very well then : I hope here be truths. 

Ang, This will last out a night in Russia, 

When nights are longest there : I '11 take my leave, 
And leave you to the hearing of the cause, 136 

Hoping you '11 find good cause to whip them all. 

Escal. I think no less. Good morrow to your lordship. 

{Exit Angelo, 
Now, sir, come on: what was done to Elbow's 
wife, once more ? 140 

Pompey. Once, sir? there was nothing done to her 
once. 

Elb. I beseech you, sir, ask him what this man did to 
my wife. 

128. lower chair'] Steevens [says ii. iv. ; and often in plays of a little 
" Every house had formerly, among its later, Beaumont and Fletcher especially, 
other furniture, what was called — a low An earlier example is in Nashe's Un- 
ckair, designed for the ease of sick fortunate Traveller (Grosart, v. i6), 
people, and occasionally occupied by 1593: "bring us a pint of sydar of a 
lazy ones. Of these conveniences I fresh tap into the three cups heere." 
have seen many, though perhaps at See Jonson's Bartholomew Fair^ V. iii. 
present they are wholly disused." (203/^). 

Corroboration of this is needed. 131. open room] public room. A 

129. Bunch of Grapes] The practice frequent use in Shakespeare. Com- 
of giving names to the different rooms pare Henry VIII. 11. i. 168: "We 
in an inn is not wholly disused. It are too open here to argue this ; Let 's 
appears again in the "Half-moon" think in private more." Open court is 
and "Pomegranate" in 1 Henry IV, a common expression. 



34 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [actii. 

Pompey. I beseech your honour, ask me. 145 

EscaL Well, sir, what did this gentleman to her? 

Pompey, I beseech you, sir, look in this gentleman's 
face. Good Master Froth, look upon his honour; 
'tis for a good purpose. Doth your honour mark 
his face ? 150 

Escal. Ay, sir, very well. 

Pompey. Nay, I beseech you, mark it well. 

EscaL Well, I do so. 

Pompey. Doth your honour see any harm in his face ? 

Escal. Why, no. 155 

Pompey. I '11 be supposed upon a book, his face is the 
worst thing about him. Good, then; if his face 
be the worst thing about him, how could Master 
Froth do the constable's wife any harm ? I would 
know that of your honour. 1 60 

EscaL He's in the right. Constable, what say you 
to it? 

Elb. First, an it like you, the house is a respected 
house ; next, this is a respected fellow, and his 
mistress is a respected woman. 165 

Pompey. By this hand, sir, his wife is a more respected 
person than any of us all. 

Elb. Varlet, thou liest : thou liest, wicket varlet. The 
time is yet to come that she was ever respected 
with man, woman, or child. 1 70 

Pompey. Sir, she was respected with him before he 
married with her. 



156. supposed] deposed. sir, by that hand, you may do the part 

163 et seq. respected] suspected. So of a kind gentleman in lending a poor 

Ben Jonson's "high constable of Kentish soldier the price of two cans of beer." 

Town" in Tale of a Tub : ** under a Jonson goes far in this mockery. See 

pair of sureties, And held of all as a Every Man out of his Humour^ 

respected person." He varies the word Cynthia s Revels, and Poetaster passim : 

to despected. "by the tip of your ear," "by the 

166. By this hand] a petty oath, of bright sun," "by this dog," '* by that 

which there is a superfluity in old plays, feather, dog, caper, fan," etc. etc. Jon- 

In Every Man in his Humour, 1598 son calls these "white oaths," like our 

(II. iii. ), Brainworm, when affecting a "white lies." 
soldier's gallant language, says, * ' Good 



SCI] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 35 

EscaL Which is the wiser here ? Justice or Iniquity ? 
Is this true? 

Elb, O thou caitiff! O thou varlet ! O thou wicked 175 
Hannibal ! I respected with her before I was 
married to her! If ever I was respected with 
her, or she with me, let not your worship think 
me the poor duke's officer. Prove this, thou 
wicket Hannibal, or I '11 have mine action of 1 80 
battery on thee. 

Escal. If he took you a box o' th' ear, you might have 
your action of slander too. 

Elb. Marry, I thank your good worship for it. What 

is 't your worship's pleasure I shall do with this 1 8 5 
wicked caitiff? 

EscaL Truly, officer, because he hath some offences 
in him that thou would'st discover if thou couldst, 
let him continue in his courses till thou knowest 
what they are. 190 

Elb, Marry, I thank your worship for it. Thou seest, 
thou wicket varlet, now, what 's come upon thee : 
thou art to continue now, thou varlet, thou art to 
continue. 

Escal. Where were you born, friend? 195 

Froth. Here in Vienna, sir. 

173. wiser . . . Justice or IniquityYThQ 173. Iniquity^ the name of the Vice 

stage-justice of this time is commonly in some of the early moralities. In 

represented as a fool. An excellent Nice Wanton, 1560, there is a contest 

example of this exact date will be found between "Judge " and ** Iniquity " 

\n Hoxv a Alan may choose a Good Wife (Hazlitt's Dods. ii. 178). *' Enter a 

from a Bad in Hazlitt's Dods. vol. roaring Devil with the Vice on his back, 

ix. His speech at page 33 may be re- Iniquity in one hand, and Juventus in 

ferred to. The "Justice, a shallow the other," Histriomastix, Act ii. (line 

one," in Beaumont and Fletcher's Cox- 280), circa 1599. " Iniquity, the Vice," 

comby is another of the type ; and Adam is a character in Ben Jonson's Devil is an 

Overdo, "a wise justice of the peace Ass. He mentions him several times, 

meditant," with his '* magistrate's 176. Hannibal] cannibal. Pistol 

wit," must be recalled (Ben Jonson, does this also in 2 Henry IV. II. iv. 

Bartholomeiv Fair, Induction and v. 180. And Ben Jonson, perhaps earlier 

iii. ( 146(5, 209a)). And in Jonson's still, in Every Man in his Humour ^ 

Staple of News we have him again: ill. ii. (3i3) : "your maids too know 

" the very justice o' peace of the play, this, and yet would have me turn 

he can commit . . . error, absurdity, Hannibal, and eat my own fish and 

as the toy takes him " (i. ii. 289/5). blood," 



36 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [actii. 

Escal. Are you of fourscore pounds a year ? 

Froth. Yes, an 't please you, sir. 

Escal. So. What trade are you of, sir ? 

Pompey. A tapster ; a poor widow's tapster. 200 

Escal. Your mistress' name ? 

Pompey. Mistress Overdone. 

Escal. Hath she had any more than one husband ? 

Pompey. Nine, sir ; Overdone by the last. 

Escal. Nine! Come hither to me, Master Froth. Master 205 
Froth, I would not have you acquainted with 
tapsters ; they will draw you, Master Froth, and 
you will hang them. Get you gone, and let me 
hear no more of you. 

Froth. I thank your worship. For mine own part, 210 
I never come into any room in a taphouse, but I 
am drawn in. 

Escal, Well : no more of it, Master Froth : farewell. 

\Exit Froth. 
Come you hither to me. Master Tapster. What 's 
your name, Master Tapster ? 2 1 5 

Pompey. Pompey. 

Escal. What else. 

Pompey. Bum, sir. 

Escal. Troth, and your bum is the greatest thing 

about you, so that, in the beastliest sense, you 220 

208. hang\ "As it refers to the tap- hose were worn very large stuffed with 

ster, it signifies to drain, to empty; as hair, wool, etc., in Henry viii.'s reign, 

it is related to hang, it means to be They were given up early in Elizabeth's 

conveyed to execution on a hurdle" time, but came in again about 1600. 

(Johnson). There is some further allu- Middleton, in The Family of Love, i. 

sion or quibble here I do not under- i. (1608), speaks of "great breeched 

stand; "draw you" quibbles on the gallants." Allusions are endless. About 

name Froth as well as on " hang, draw, ten years later than this play these great 

and quarter." hose gave place to close-fitting breeches 

211. taphouse'] tavern. Not else- which the Puritans regarded as very 

where in Shakespeare. Ben Jonson indecent. Steevens quotes an ancient 

uses it in Poetaster (1601), and it occurs ballad on the subject. Compare Jonson, 

several times in Nashe's writings; Case is Altered, iv. iv. (1598): "let 

Nashe speaks of * ' the tap-house under me see these drums, these kilderkins, 

the prison ... in Wood Street," Have these bombard slops, what is it crams 

with you to Saffron Walden, i^^d. them so? Juniper. Nothing but hair." 

219. bunt is the greatest thing] trunk 



SCI.] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 37 

are Pompey the Great. Pompey, you are partly 
a bawd, Pompey, howsoever you colour it in being 
a tapster, are you not ? come, tell me true : it 
shall be the better for you. 

Pompey. Truly, sir, I am a poor fellow that would live. 225 

Escal. How would you live, Pompey? by being a 
bawd ? What do you think of the trade, Pom- 
pey ? is it a lawful trade ? 

Pompey. If the law would allow it, sir. 

Escal. But the law will not allow it, Pompey; nor it 230 
shall not be allowed in Vienna. 

Pompey. Does your worship mean to geld and splay 
all the youth of the city ? 

Escal. No, Pompey. 

Pompey. Truly, sir, in my poor opinion, they will to 't 235 
then. If your worship will take order for the 
drabs and the knaves, you need not to fear the 
bawds. 

Escal. There are pretty orders beginning, I can tell 

you : it is but heading and hanging. 240 

222. in\ F I ; omitted F 2, 3, 4. 232. splay\ spay Steevens. 237. the 

knaves\ F i ; knavs F 2, 3, 4. 239. are\ F 2, 3, 4 ; isY 1. 

221. Pompey the Great] occurs again pression, "heading {i.e. beheading) or 
in Love's Labour'' s Lost, iv. i. 136; hanging," is still in use amongst the 
Henry V. IV. i. 70 ; ^ Henry VI. IV. countiy folks in Ireland. Compare 
i. 138; and Antony and Cleopatra^ i. Harington, Metamojphosis of Ajax 
ii. 195. (rept,, p. 65), 1596: " this good prince 

222. colour it] palliate it. Compare would neither head him nor hang him, 
1 Henry IV. l. iii. 109. no, nor so much as once suffer him to 

232. splay] Steevens and several be troubled." And Court and Times 

modern editors, including Schmidt, ofJa?nes I, (i. 409), Letter dated 1616 : 

altered this word to the better known "that his judgment of hanging should 

"spay," which was wrong. Compare be changed to heading." Neiv Eng. 

Cotgrave : " Castrer. To geld, lib. Diet, has an example from Cursor 

cut, spey, or splay." And Florio, in v. Mundi, ante 1300. Mr. Craig gives 

Castrare, 1611. It is in Holland's me an example from P'abyan's C/^rf?«zV/^, 

Pli7iie (1601), viii. 18: "splay the Ellis, p. 492, 1516: "and in this yere 

females." another man of the prouynce of Lange- 

236. take order] take measures. A dok, named Arnolde of Normandy, 

frequent expression in Shakespeare, was hedyd & hanged vpon the common 

See Comedy of Errors, V. 146; Richard gybet of Paris." And again, p. 490: 

//. V. i. 53 ; Othello^ v. ii. 72, etc. * ' put to death by dyverse tourmentes, as 

etc. rakkynge, heddynge, and hangyng." 

240. heading aiui hanging] This ex- In these passages, and others that might 



38 



MEASURE FOR MEASURE [acth. 



Pompey. If you head and hang all that offend that 
way but for ten year together, you '11 be glad to 
give out a commission for more heads. If this law 
hold in Vienna ten year, I '11 rent the fairest house 
in it after three-pence a bay. If you live to see 245 
this come to pass, say Pompey told you so. 

Escal. Thank you, good Pompey ; and, in requital of 
your prophecy, hark you : I advise you, let me 
not find you before me again upon any complaint 
whatsoever; no, not for dwelling where you do: 250 
if I do, Pompey, I shall beat you to your tent, 
and prove a shrewd Caesar to you. In plain 
dealing, Pompey, I shall have you whipt. So, for 
this time, Pompey, fare you well. 

Pompey. I thank your worship for your good counsel; 255 
\Aside ;'\ but I shall follow it as the flesh and 
fortune shall better determine. 



be adduced, it seems that hanging 
originally meant, in the expression 
*' heading and hanging " the suspension 
of the quarters (in quartering) upon the 
public places designed for exhibition of 
the condemned criminal. A variety of 
these combinations will be found in 
Stowe's Chronicle for sixteenth century. 
Hanging and quartering is the com- 
monest. 

245. bay\ " The division of a barn 
or other building generally from fifteen 
to twenty feet in breadth . . . Applied 
to a house it appears to be the space 
lying under one gable, or included be- 
tween two party walls," New Eng. 
Diet, (with quotation from Holinshed's 
Chronicle^ 1577)- The word is in com- 
mon use for one of the divisions of 
a cottage in the north of Ireland. So 
in Sampson's Survey of Derry^ 1802, 
p. 301 : *' Expence of building a Mud 
Cottage. To 3 bay of mud-work ready 
for roofing, £z, 8s. 3d." 

246. say Pompey told you] So in 
Airs Well, IV. iii. 136: ''And say a 
soldier, Dian, told thee this." See also 
below, III. ii. 185, 186. 

251,252. beat you to your tent . . . 



shrewd Ccesar] Compare Antony and 
Cleopatra, iv. viii. I : "We have beat 
him to his camp : run one before And 
let the queen know of our gests." At 
this time Shakespeare's mind was turned 
towards the Roman plays. See my 
note to "Do you triumph, Roman? do 
you triumph?" Othello, iv. i. 119. 
Csesar, I presume, is Octavius Csesar, 
though it is Antony who uses these 
words. Octavius, however, proves a 
"shrewd Csesar" to him immediately 
afterwards. See the Pompey - Ccesar 
allusion again below, ill. ii. 44, 45. 

253. Pompey, I shall have you whipt'] 
Whipping was the usual punishment 
(with the cart and Bridewell) for a 
female bawd, but not so often referred 
to for male ofienders. In AlPs Well 
incontinency is so punished (iv. iii. 212). 
And see Lucio's award at the end of 
our play. In Whetstone's play {Promos 
and Cassandra, I't. II. ill. ii.) John 
Adroines is told he must die for being 
* * naught " with a maid, but if it was only 
a kiss he must be terribly whipped. 
John says, " Whypt ! marry God 
shielde : chy had rather be hanged." 
So say the Hooligans to-day. 



SCI.] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 39 

Whip me ? No, no ; let carman whip his jade ; 
The valiant heart 's not whipt out of his trade. 

{Exit. 
EscaL Come hither to me, Master Elbow ; come hither, 260 

Master constable. How long have you been in 

this place of constable ? 
Elb. Seven year and a half, sir. 
EscaL I thought, by your readiness in the office, you 

had continued in it some time. You say, seven 265 

years together ? 
Elb, And a half, sir. 
EscaL Alas ! it hath been great pains to you. They 

do you wrong to put you so oft upon 't. Are 

there not men in your ward sufficient to serve it? 270 
Elb. Faith, sir, few of any wit in such matters. As 

they are chosen, they are glad to choose me for 

them : I do it for some piece of money, and go 

through with all. 
EscaL Look you bring me in the names of some six 275 

or seven, the most sufficient of your parish. 
Elb. To your worship's house, sir ? 
EscaL To my house. Fare you well. \Exit Elbow. 

What 's o'clock, think you ? 
Just. Eleven, sir. 280 

EscaL I pray you home to dinner with me. 
Just. I humbly thank you. 
EscaL It grieves me for the death of Claudio ; 

But there 's no remedy. 
Just. Lord Angelo is severe. 
EscaL It is but needful : 285 

Mercy is not itself, that oft looks so ; 

264. your\ Pope, the Ff. 281. home\ Y \'j go home F 2, 3, 4. 

270. nvardl "constable of the ward" 284. there'' s no remedy'] See note to 
is not infrequently mentioned. Per- Merry Wives^ II. ii. 128 (Arden edi- 
haps this is Elbow's full designation. tion, p. 90). 

271. few of any wit] See note at line 
115, above. 



40 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [actii. 

Pardon is still the nurse of second woe. 

But yet, poor Claudio ! There is no remedy. 

Come, sir. {Exeunt, 



SCENE II. — Another Room in the Same, 

Enter Provost^ and a Servant. 

Serv. He 's hearing of a cause : he will come straight : 

I '11 tell him of you. 
Prov, Pray you, do. [Exit Servant^] I '11 know 

His pleasure ; may be he will relent. Alas ! 

He hath but as offended in a dream : 

All sects, all ages, smack of this vice, and he 5 

To die for it ! 

Enter Angelo. 

Ang. Now, what's the matter, provost? 

Prov. Is it your will Claudio shall die to-morrow ? 
Ang. Did I not tell thee, yea? hadst thou not order? 

Why dost thou ask again ? 
Prov. Lest I might be too rash. 

Under your good correction, I have seen, lO 

When, after execution, judgment hath 

Repented o'er his doom. 
Ang. Go to ; let that be mine : 

Do you your office, or give up your place. 

And you shall well be spar'd. 
Prov. I crave your honour's pardon. 

What shall be done, sir, with the groaning Juliet ? i $ 

She's very near her hour. 
Ang. Dispose of her 

To some more fitter place, and that with speed. 

9. dost thou] omitted Hanmer. 12. Go to] omitted Hanmer. 

15. ^^^d;«m^] a technical term applied 102. Heywood has the proverb : "A 

to a woman in labour, still in use pro- gronyng horse and a gronyng wife never 

vincially ; " groaning-time," " groaning fayle their maister," 1546. 
cake," etc. Compare Richard II. v. ii. 



sen.] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 41 

Re-enter Servant. 

Serv, Here is the sister of the man condemned 

Desires access to you. 
Ang. Hath he a sister ? 

Prov, Ay, my good lord ; a very virtuous maid, 20 

And to be shortly of a sisterhood, 

If not already. 
Ang. Well, let her be admitted. 

{Exit Servant, 

See you the fornicatress be remov'd : 

Let her have needful, but not lavish, means ; 

There shall be order for it. 

Enter LuciO and ISABELLA. 

Prov. 'Save your honour ! 2 5 

Ang. Stay a little while. \To Isab.'\ You're welcome: 

what 's your will ? 
Isab. I am a woeful suitor to your honour. 

Please but your honour hear me. 
Ang. Well ; what 's your suit ? 

Isab. There is a vice that most I do abhor, 

And most desire should meet the blow of justice, 30 

For which I would not plead, but that I must ; 

For which I must not plead, but that I am 

At war 'twixt will and will not. 
Ang, Well; the matter? 

Isab. I have a brother is condemn'd to die : 

I do beseech you, let it be his fault, 35 

And not my brother. 

22. Well] omitted Pope. 25. for it] Pope, Steevens ; for't Ff ; 'Save] Ff, 
Steevens ; God save Cambridge, Globe, etc. 26. a little] yet a Pope. 

2$. for it. '6^:7;^] This is much nearer 2^. your honour] A title formerly 

the Folio reading ("for 't. Save") than given to any person of rank and 

the reading in the Globe "for 't. God quality. 

save " ; and to my ear more euphonious. 35, 36. let it be . . . brother] let 

I do not know who first departed from the fault be condemned and not my 

Steevens' reading. brother. 



42 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [actii. 

Prov. [Aside.] Heaven give thee moving graces ! 

Ang'. Condemn the fault, and not the actor of it ? 

Why, every fault 's condemn'd ere it be done. 

Mine were the very cipher of a function, 

To fine the faults whose fine stands in record, 40 

And let go by the actor. 
Isad. O just but severe law ! 

I had a brother then. Heaven keep your honour ! 
Luczo. [Aside to Isabella^ Give't not o'er so: to him 
again, entreat him ; 

Kneel down before him, hang upon his gown ; 

You are too cold ; if you should need a pin, 4 5 

You could not with more tame a tongue desire it. 

To him, I say ! 
Isab. Must he needs die ? 

Ang, Maiden, no remedy. 

Isab, Yes, I do think that you might pardon him, 

And neither heaven nor man grieve at the mercy. 50 
Ang. I will not do 't. 

Isab. But can you, if you would ? 

Ang. Look, what I will not, that I cannot do. 
Isab. But might you do 't, and do the world no wrong. 

If so your heart were touch'd with that remorse 

As mine is to him ! 
Ang. He 's sentenc'd : 'tis too late. 5 5 

Lucio. [Aside to Isabella^ You are too cold. 
Isab, Too late ? why, no ; I, that do speak a word. 

May call it back again. Well, believe this, 

40. Tojine] 7 o find Theobald. 55. him!'] him? Ff, Steevens, Globe ei 
seq. 56. You are] Yo art F 2. 58. Sack] F 2, 3, 4 ; omitted F I. 

40. 7f«<f] punish. Seem. i. 115. In 55- ^^w/] The note of interroga- 

the simple sense of "punish" no other tion in the Folios is of no authority, 

example has been adduced. But it may Frequently it stands there for the note 

mean purify, remove the impure matter of exclamation, which I take to be the 

from ; a common sense. case here. ** Might " in the preceding 

44. hang upon] cling to. See Tempest, line but one becomes then more forcible 

I. ii. 474. than if the passage was a simple query. 

48. no remedy] See above, i. 281. The tone is one of pleading, not of 

54. remorse] pity. argument. 



sen] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 43 

No ceremony that to great ones 'longs, 

Not the king's crown, nor the deputed sword, 60 

The marshal's truncheon, nor the judge's robe, 

Become them with one half so good a grace 

As mercy does. 

If he had been as you, and you as he. 

You would have slipp'd like him ; but he, like you, 65 

Would not have been so stern. 
An^-. Pray you, be gone. 

Isad, I would to heaven I had your potency. 

And you were Isabel ! should it then be thus ? 

No; I would tell what 'twere to be a judge. 

And what a prisoner. 
Luczo. [Aside to Isabella.'] Ay, touch him, there 's the vein. 
Ang. Your brother is a forfeit of the law, 71 

And you but waste your words. 
Isab. Alas ! alas ! 

Why, all the souls that were were forfeit once ; 

And He that might the vantage best have took, 

Found out the remedy. How would you be, 75 

If He, which is the top of judgment, should 

But judge you as you are ? O ! think on that, 

And mercy then will breathe within your lips, 

Like man new made. 
Ang, Be you content, fair maid ; 

It is the law, not I, condemns your brother : 80 

59. ''longs'l Theobald, longs Ff, belongs Pope. 

65. slipfd\ committed a fault. See him for a taste of his vein," it means 

Winter's Tale, i. ii. 85. The noun is style of composition or writing, as it 

common. ** Slide" has the same sense did commonly, 

in II. iv. 115. 76. the top of judgment] the last and 

70. there 's the vein] that 's the style, highest appeal, 

or manner. Compare Midstimmer- 79. Like man new made] Schmidt 

Night's Bream, I. ii. 42. "Vein" had says, "new-created by salvation." Rather 

a wider signification than now. It it means * like man newly created free 

means "condition" (physical), or from faults' (like Adam before the Fall), 

"state" in Jonson's Every Man in his Warburton, Johnson, Malone and Holt 

Zr«///^//r, V. i. (57a) :" stripping him to White have different interpretations, 

his shirt, I left him in that cool vein " ; Malone's being practically that given 

while in the same scene (58a), "search here. 



44 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [acti. 

Were he my kinsman, brother, or my son. 

It should be thus with him : he must die to-morrow. 

Isab. To-morrow ! O ! that 's sudden. Spare him, spare 
him ! 
He 's not prepared for death. Even for our kitchens 
We kill the fowl of season : shall we serve heaven 8 5 
With less respect than we do minister 
To our gross selves? Good, good my lord, bethink 

you : 
Who is it that hath died for this offence ? 
There 's many have committed it. 

Lucio, [Aside to Isabella,'] Ay, well said. 

Ang, The law hath not been dead, though it hath slept : 90 
Those many had not dar'd to do that evil, 
If the first that did the edict infringe 
Had answer'd for his deed : now, 'tis awake. 
Takes note of what is done, and, like a prophet. 
Looks in a glass, that shows what future evils, 95 

Either now or by remissness new-conceiv'd. 
And so in progress to be hatch'd and born, 
Are now to have no successive degrees. 
But, where they live, to end. 

Isab, Yet show some pity. 

83.] Two lines in Ff, first ending sudden. 92. the fir sf] Ff, the first man 
Pope, Steevens; In the first Capell (Tyrwhitt conj.); the first thaf] he who 
first Davenant. 96. Either now\ Or new Pope ; Either new Dyce, Craig. 
99. where'l Malone, Steevens ; here Ff ; ere Hanmer, Cambridge. 

85.^ ^j(?flj^;z] of the season — the fowl i. i. (7^), 1610, and Gifford has an 

that js in season. See Merry Wives ^ interesting note to the passage. Com- 

ni. iii. 169. pare also Chapman, Gentlenian Usher, 

90. The law . . . siepf]*^ Dormiunt v. (1606): " liumilitie hath raised me 

aliqtiando leges, moriuntur nunquam, is to the starres : In which as in a sort of 

a maxim in our law "(Holt White). This crystal glass, I sit and see things hid 

maxim is attributed to Sir Edward Coke, from human sight." Compare Macbeth, 

95. Looks hi a glass'] An allusion to iv. i. 1 19, the only other allusion (if it 

the method of divination by looking be one) in Shakespeare. Warburton 

into a crystal, such as Dr. Dee's famous noticed this meaning of the passage 

beryl. An account of this operation is above, but Schmidt evades it. 
given in Reginald Scot's Discoverie of 99. where] this reading ("where" or 

Witchcraft (rept., p. 366), 1584. Ben "ere") is discussed in Steevens' Shake- 

Jonson speaks of " taking in of shadows speare (1793). Malone says, *'The 

[departed spirits] in a glass," Alchemist ^ prophecy is not that future evils should 



sc.ii.] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 45 

Ang. I show it most of all when I show justice; lOO 

For then I pity those I do not know, 
Which a dismiss'd offence would after gall, 
And do him right, that, answering one foul wrong, 
Lives not to act another. Be satisfied : 
Your brother dies to-morrow: be content. 105 

Isab. So you must be the first that gives this sentence, 
And he, that suffers. O ! it is excellent 
To have a giant's strength, but it is tyrannous 
To use it like a giant. 

Lucio. [Aside to Isabella?^ That 's well said. 

Isab. Could great men thunder iio 

As Jove himself does, Jove would ne'er be quiet, 
For every pelting, petty officer 
Would use his heaven for thunder; nothing but 

thunder ! 
Merciful heaven. 

Thou rather with thy sharp and sulphurous bolt 1 1 5 
Splitt'st the unwedgeable and gnarled oak 

108. it is\ omitted Hanmer. III. ne'erl never F i . 1 1 6. Split fsf] splits F I . 

end, ere, or before they are born ... 62, 1575): "Jupiter ... in store of 

but that they should end where they ammunition unwastable : for all Ovid's 

began, i.e. with the criminal : who, censure, that says, Si quoties peccant 

being punished for his first offence, honiines sua fulmina mitt at Jupiter^ 

could not proceed by successive degrees exigus tempore inermis erit. If Jove 

in wickedness [see lines 103, 104] . . . should shoot his thunderbolts as oft as 

It is more likely that a letter should have men offend Assure you his artillery 

been omitted at the press, than that would soon be at an end. " 

one should have been added." Malone 112. /^//z«^] paltry. Very common 

says the same mistake occurred in in writers of the time. See Lear, ii. iii. 

Merchant of Venice (ill. i. 112), where 18, and Craig's note, 

the Folio reads "here in Genowa," iox 1 16. gnarled\ The Folio of 1623 is the 

"where? in Genoa?" I agree with sole authority for this form of " knarled " 

Malone. (a variant of knurled) which has come 

100-104.] Compare R. C, Timers into general use in the nineteenth century 

Whistle, IV. line 1346, 161 5 : "This {New Eng. Diet.). Cotgrave (1611) has 

foolish knavish pittie's an infection the word "knurled" in v. Goderonni. 

Spread through our land, & hurtes our "Gnarre,"aknotinwood, isinBullokar, 

commonwealth — ^Justice restore her to and in Cockeram (1642). Marston has 

her former health ! For true 's the say- " tough and knurly trunk," Antonio 

ing (magistrates, beware!) He harmes and Mellida, iv. i. (Bullen, ed. i, 166). 

the good that doth the evile spare." Com^SiXQ Julius Ccesar, i. iii. 6, 7: 

no. Could great men thuttder'] Com- "the scolding winds Have rived the 

pare Laneham's Z^//^^ (Burn rept., p. knotty oak." 



46 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [actii. 

Than the soft myrtle ; but man, proud man, 

Drest in a little brief authority, 

Most ignorant of what he 's most assur'd, 

His glassy essence, like an angry ape, 120 

Plays such fantastic tricks before high heaven 

As make the angels weep ; who, with our spleens. 

Would all themselves laugh mortal. 

Lucio. [Aside to Isabella^ O ! to him, to him, wench. He 
will relent: 
He 's coming ; I perceive 't. 

Prov. [Aside.] Pray heaven she win him ! 125 

/sab. We cannot weigh our brother with ourself : 

Great men may jest with saints ; 'tis wit in them. 
But in the less foul profanation. 

Lucio. [Aside to Isabella^ Thou 'rt i' the right, girl : more 
o' that. 

Isab. That in the captain 's but a choleric word, 1 30 

Which in the soldier is flat blasphemy. 

117. but\ F I ; ObtitY 2y 3, 4. 126. cannof] canbut Anon. conj. ; ourse!f\ 
yourself V^a.xhMxior\, Theobald. 129. z* the right] C th right F I, 2 ; { right 
F 3, 4, Cambridge ; right Pope ; in the right Steevens (1793), Craig. 

117. soft myrtle] tender, delicate The spleen was held to be the source of 
myrtle. BenJonson(/i?^/aj/<?>',i. i.,i6oi) any sudden fit of either mirth or anger, 
speaks of the "frost- dreading myrtle" See notes to Othello^ IV. i. 89 and IV. 
(jtietuentem frigora myrtuni) in a pas- iii. 93. " Laugh mortal " means laugh 
sage translated from Ovid's Ekgies, i. themselves to death like human beings, 
15. Greene has this antithesis : "Asthe a natural antithesis to the " w^eep " of the 
sappy Myrtle tree v^rill quickly rotte : so preceding line. Compare Ben Jonson, 
the hard Oake w^ill never be eaten with Every Man out of his Humour^ V. ii. : 
wormes," Mamillia (Gros. ii. 61), 1583. " my spleen is great with laughter." 

118. Drest in . . . authority] Com- 126. weigh . . . ourself] judge of 
pare Jonson's Catiline, I v. i. : " the others by ourselves. See v. iii. 
boisterous moods That ignorant great- 129. Thou'rt € the right] Compare 
ness practiseth, to fill The large unfit Othello 11. iii. 339. The expression 
authority it wears." occurs in Timott (Shakespeare Library, 

120. glassy essence] Compare li. iv. ed. 1875, p. 398), 1600. 

125, below. 130, 131. captain . . . soldier] A 

120, 121. ape . . .fantastic tricks] reflection upon the corruption of justice 

Shakespeare recalled Dekker here : at the time. So Ben Jonson (from 

"when the old traveller my Father Juvenal, ^zX..-sX\\.)'. " At what a divers 

comes home, like a young Ape, full of price, do divers men Act the same things ! 

fantasticke trickes, or a painted Parrot," another might have had Perhaps the 

etc., Olde Fortunatus (Pearson rept., p. hurdle, or at least the axe, For what I 

114), 1600. have this crownet." And similarly in 

122, 123. spleens . . . laugh mortal] Whetstone's old play of Promos and 



sc.li.] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 47 

Lucio. [Aszde to Isabella^ Art avis'd o' that ? more on 't. 

Ang. Why do you put these sayings upon me? 

Isab, Because authority, though it err Hke others, 

Hath yet a kind of medicine in itself, 135 

That skins the vice o' the top. Go to your bosom ; 

Knock there, and ask your heart what it doth know 

That 's like my brother's fault : if it confess 

A natural guiltiness such as is his. 

Let it not sound a thought upon your tongue 140 

Against my brother's life. 

Ang. [Aside.] She speaks, and 'tis 

Such sense, that my sense breeds with it. Fare you well. 

Isab. Gentle my lord, turn back. 

Ang. I will bethink me. Come again to-morrow. 

Isab. Hark how I '11 bribe you. Good my lord, turn back. 

Ang. How, bribe me? 146 

Isab. Ay, with such gifts that heaven shall share with you. 

Lucio. [Aside to Isabella?^ You had marr'd all else. 

Isab. Not with fond shekels of the tested gold. 

Or stones whose rates are either rich or poor 150 

As fancy values them ; but with true prayers 

That shall be up at heaven and enter there 

Ere sunrise : prayers from preserved souls. 

From fasting maids whose minds are dedicate 

To nothing temporal. 

Ang. Well ; come to me to-morrow, i 5 5 

Lucio. {Aside to Isabella.] Go to ; 'tis well : away ! 

Isab. Heaven keep your honour safe ! 

Ang. [Aside.] Amen : 

132. avised] avis'd F i, 2 ; advised F 3, 4, Steevens. 142. breeds'] bleeds 
Pope. 149. shekels] Pope, sickles Ff, circles Collier MS. 

Cassandra: "cunning Theeves with And compare "skinned a new beauty," 

lawe can lordships steale When for a Ben Jonson, Cynthia's Revels, II. i. 

sheepe the ignorant are trust," Part li. (1633), i.e. put on a new beautiful 

Act II. sc. V. skin. 

132. Art avised d that?] Have you 141. speaks] speaks to the purpose, 

learnt that truth? See Merry Wives ^ Compare Coriolanus, i. i. 124: "Tore 

I. iv. 106, and note (Arden edition). me, this fellow speaks." 

136. skins] See Hamlet, 111. iv. 147. 153. />r^j<frz^^dQ saved from corruption. 



48 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [actii. 

For I am that way going to temptation, 
Where prayers cross. 

Isab. At what hour to-morrow 

Shall I attend your lordship ? 

-Ang. At any time 'fore noon. i6o 

Isab. Save your honour ! 

[Exeunt Isabella^ Lucio^ and Provost 

Ang. From thee ; even from thy virtue ! 

What's this, what's this? Is this her fault or 

mine? 
The tempter or the tempted, who sins most ? 
Ha! 

Not she, nor doth she tempt; but it is I, 165 

That, lying by the violet in the sun, 
Do as the carrion does, not as the flower. 
Corrupt with virtuous season. Can it be 
That modesty may more betray our sense 
Than woman's lightness? Having waste ground 
enough, 170 

Shall we desire to raze the sanctuary, 
And pitch our evils there ? O ! fie, fie, fie ! 

159. Where] Which your Johnson conj. 172. evils\ of ah Collier MS., 

hovels New Eng. Diet. conj. 

159. Where prayers cross] where 169. sense} sensuality, desire. See 

prayers are at cross purposes. Isabella's above, I. iv. 59 ; and Pericles^ V. iii. 

prayer was that Heaven might keep 30. 

Angelo safe, " your honour " being his 172. evils] Malone and Steevens 

title, as before. Angelo's "Amen" interpret this word to mean "privies." 

refers to his rapidly departing honour Malone gives an unsatisfactory, undated 

with regard to the temptation to possess example. Compare Henry VI 11. II. i. 

himself of Isabella. The 'same expres- 67. A similar thought occurs in 2 

sion occurs in Merchant of Venice^ ill. Kings x. 27. New Eng. Diet, says 

i. 23. The same play on the meaning "meaning uncertain," and suggests 

of "your honour" occurs again im- "hovel," but does not altogether reject 

mediately, lines 161, 162. the above signification. Harington, in 

164. Ha!] Steevens says, "This 67j/jj^j z//^« ^/aj; (rept., p. 42), 1596, 

tragedy " Ha ! ' * (which clogs the metre) tells of a contrary occurrence from 

was certainly thrown in by the player Nicephorus, cap. v. lib. 8 : Arrius died 

editors." I should like to throw it out. in such a situation, and " those of his 

168. season] " benign influence of heresy (to extinguish the indignity 

summer - weather and sunshine " thereof) raised and built a sumptuous 

(Schmidt). The same influence that house in the place." 
makes her virtuous corrupts me. 



sc.iii.] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 49 

What dost thou, or what art thou, Angelo ? 

Dost thou desire her foully for those things 

That make her good ? O ! let her brother live. 175 

Thieves for their robbery have authority 

When judges steal themselves. What ! do I love 

her, 
That I desire to hear her speak again, 
And feast upon her eyes ? What is 't I dream on ? 

cunning enemy ! that, to catch a saint, i 80 
With saints dost bait thy hook. Most dangerous 

Is that temptation that doth goad us on 

To sin in loving virtue : never could the strumpet. 

With all her double vigour, art and nature. 

Once stir my temper; but this virtuous maid 185 

Subdues me quite. Ever till now. 

When men were fond, I smil'd and wonder'd how. 

[Exit. 

SCENE III. — A Room in a Prison. 

Enter DUKE, disguised as a Friar^ and Provost, 

Duke, Hail to you, provost ! so I think you are. 

Prov. I am the provost. What's your will, good 

friar ? 
Duke. Bound by my charity and my bless'd order, 

1 come to visit the afflicted spirits 

Here in the prison : do me the common right 5 

To let me see them and to make me know 
The nature of their crimes, that I may minister 
To them accordingly. 
Prov. I would do more than that, if more were needful. 

186. Ever till now"] F i ; Even till now F 2, 3, 4. 

I. provost l^ See note, i. ii. 1 17. assumes : *' By which also he went and 

4, 5. spirits Here in the prison\ This preached unto the spirits in prison," 

is a scriptural expression, very suitable I Peter iii. 19. 

to the grave character which the Duke 



50 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [acth. 

Enter Juliet. 

Look, here comes one : a gentlewoman of mine, i o 

Who, falling in the flaws of her own youth, 

Hath blister'd her report. She is with child, 

And he that got it, sentenc'd ; a young man 

More fit to do another such offence, 

Than die for this. i 5 

Duke. When must he die? 
Prov. As I do think, to-morrow. 

I have provided for you: stay awhile, \To Juliet. 

And you shall be conducted. 
Duke. Repent you, fair one, of the sin you carry ? 
Juliet. I do, and bear the shame most patiently. 20 

Duke. I '11 teach you how you shall arraign your conscience. 

And try your penitence, if it be sound, 

Or hollowly put on. 
Juliet. I '11 gladly learn. 

Duke. Love you the man that wrong'd you? 
Juliet. Yes, as I love the woman that wrong'd him. 25 

Duke. So then it seems your .most offenceful act 

Was mutually committed ? 
Juliet. Mutually. 

Duke. Then was your sin of heavier kind than his. 
Juliet. I do confess it, and repent it, father. 

9. Enter Juliet] transferred by Dyce to line 15. 11. flawslflames Warbur- 
ton (after Davenant), Steevens. 

II. Jlaws] "storms of passion," 12. blister'd her report"] blemished 

(Schmidt). Flaw was a common word her reputation. The combination of 

for a sudden gust of wind. Steevens terms may have suggested itself from the 

supports the suggested "flames" by saying "Report hath a blister on her 

reference to "To flaming youth let tongue," though the signification is 

virtue be as wax," ZTaw/.?/, in. iv. 84; wholly different. It occurs in Lyly's 

and to Greene's Never too Late, "he Sapho and Phaon, I. ii. (1584); in 

measured the flames of youth by his own Greene's Farewell to Follie (Gros. ix. 

dead cinders." Malone and Farmer 283), 1590, and elsewhere in Greene; 

also supported this "emendation," and in Nashe's Summer's Last Will 

which is quite unnecessary. As Dr. (Hazlitt's Dods. viii. 62), 1592. 
Johnson very sensibly remarked, " Who 23. hollowly'] falsely, insincerely; as 

does not see that, upon such principles, in Tempest, iii. i. 70: "if I speak 

there is no end of correction ? " hollowly." 



sc.iv] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 61 

Duke. 'Tis meet so, daughter: but lest you do repent, 30 
As that the sin hath brought you to this shame. 
Which sorrow is always toward ourselves, not heaven, 
Showing we would not spare heaven as we love it, 
But as we stand in fear, — 

Juliet. I do repent me, as it is an evil, 35 

And take the shame with joy. 

Duke. There rest. 

Your partner, as I hear, must die to-morrow. 
And I am going with instruction to him. 
Grace go with you ! Benedicite! \Exit. 

Juliet. Must die to-morrow ! O ! injurious love, 40 

That respites me a life, whose very comfort 
Is still a dying horror. 

Prov. 'Tis pity of him. {Exeunt. 



SCENE IV. — A Room in Angelas House. 

Enter Angelo. 

Ang. When I would pray and think, I think and pray 
To several subjects : heaven hath my empty words. 
Whilst my invention, hearing not my tongue. 
Anchors on Isabel : heaven in my mouth. 
As if I did but only chew his name, 5 

And in my heart the strong and swelling evil 
Of my conception. The state, whereon I studied, 

30. lest yaii do repent'] F 4 ; least you do repent F i, 2, 3. 33. spare] Ff, 
seek Pope, serve Collier MS. 39. Grace] So grace Pope, May grace Steevens 

conj. ; Grace go with you] given to Juliet, Ritson conj., Dyce. 

Scene iv. 
3. invention] intention Warburton. 5. his] its Pope. 

33. spare heaven] "spare to offend 4. Anchors on] keeps hold on. The 

heaven" (Malone). same expression occurs in Cymbeline, 

42. 'Tis pity of him] See II. i. 76, v. v. 393 : " Posthumus anchors upon 

above ; and Ant07ty and Cleopatra, i. Imogen." 

iv. 71 ; Twelfth Night, ii. v. 14, etc. 5. chew] taste, or mumble overwith- 

<, out swallowing or taking in. 

^'^^^^^^' 6. heart] "The Heart . . . This is 

3. invention] inventive power, con- the very seat of the mind & soule," 

ception. Holland's Plinie, xi. 137 (340H), 1601. 



52 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [actii. 

Is like a good thing, being often read, 
Grown feared and tedious ; yea, my gravity, 
Wherein, let no man hear me, I take pride, lo 

Could I with boot change for an idle plume, 
Which the air beats for vain. O place ! O form ! 
How often dost thou with thy case, thy habit. 
Wrench awe from fools, and tie the wiser souls 
To thy false seeming ! Blood, thou art blood : i 5 
Let 's write good angel on the devil's horn, 
'Tis not the devil's crest. 

Enter a Servant. 

How now ! who 's there ? 
Serv. One Isabel, a sister, 

Desires access to you. 
Ang. Teach her the way. {Exit Servant. 

O heavens ! 

<). feared] sear'dMzxiXixQX. 12. for vain. place tl for vane. place, ot 
for vane o' the place Malone. 15. thou art blood\ thou art but blood Pope, thou 
art still blood Malone. 17. ^Tis not] IsUnot Hanmer, Warburton ; "tis yet 
Johnson conj. 

9. feared] Collier has stated in Notes we should write good angel on the 

and Queries, vol. viii. p. 361, that devil's horn it will not change his 

•' sear'd " is the reading in Lord Elles- nature, so as to give him a right to 

mere's copy of the First Folio. Johnson wear that crest." This seems rather 

says, '* What we go to with reluctance limp. Johnson goes on the same lines 

may be said to be feared." " Fear'd — "Title and character do not alter 

hopes" occurs in Cymbeline, il. iv. 6, nature, however dignified," but he in- 

in the sense of "mixed with fear." clines to Warburton's (Hanmer's) emen- 

9. gravity] dignity, venerableness, as dation. Malone, supporting the old 

in Merry Wives, ill. i. 57. See Arden reading, says that the devil is usually 

edition, p. 114. " Gravity " is rather an represented with horns and cloven feet," 

assumed decorum here, as in Jonson's by which perhaps he means those are 

Magnetic Lady, l. i. (401a): "arts his crest, not good angel. A very prosy 

And sciences do not directlier make A remark. In support of the alteration 

graduate in our universities Than an (which requires a mark of interrogation 

habitual gravity prefers [promotes] A to be added also), see Othello, 11. iii. 

man in court." 363, 364, and Lovers Labour'' s Lost, iv. 

12. ^rz^az'w] " vain" is used substan- iii. 257. As the passage stands, the 
tively — to no purpose, idly. Elsewhere meaning is that good angel or fair 
it is "in vain." seeming is really the devil's motto, and 

13. case] external covering or garb, the strongest weapon in his armoury, 
outside show. Often used expressly of " 'Tis" refers to horn. That (the horn) 
the skin of man or other animal. is not his crest, but the words good 

17. ' Tis not the devir s crest] Altered angel. If we alter the text unneces- 
by some editors to " Is 't not . . .?" sarily, we make "Is't" refer to good 
In explanation M. Mason says, "Though angel. And the meaning is the same. 



sc.iv.] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 53 

Why does my blood thus muster to my heart, 20 

Making both it unable for itself, 

And dispossessing all my other parts. 

Of necessary fitness ? 

So play the foolish throngs with one that swoons ; 

Come all to help him, and so stop the air 25 

By which he should revive : and even so 

The general, subject to a well-wish'd king, 

Quit their own part, and in obsequious fondness 

Crowd to his presence, where their untaught love 

Must needs appear offence. 30 

Enter ISABELLA. 

How now, fair maid ? 
Isab. I am come to know your pleasure. 

Ang. That you might know it, would much better please me 

Than to demand what 'tis. Your brother cannot live. 
Isab. Even so. Heaven keep your honour ! 
Ang. Yet may he live awhile; and, it may be, 35 

As long as you or I : yet he must die. 
Isab. Under your sentence ? 
Ang. Yea. 
Isab. When, I beseech you ? that in his reprieve, 

Longer or shorter, he may be so fitted 40 

That his soul sicken not. 
Ang, Ha ! fie, these filthy vices ! It were as good 

27. The general, subject\']o\\Xi%ovi, Steevens et seq. ; The general subject F I, 
2, 3 ; The general subjects F 4. 33. Yotir brother'] He Hanmer. 

21. unable'] weak, impotent, unfit, as reference to James i.'s hatred of crowds, 

in Taming of the Shrew ^ V. ii, 169. Steevens cites from a True Narration 

27. The general] the people. Com- of the Entertainment of his 2\oyall 

^a.xe/tilius Casar, n.'i. 12, 2iXidiHamleti Majestie from . . . Editibrogh, till his 

II. ii. 457. receivittg in Lojtdon : "he was faine to 

27-30. The general . . . appear publish an inhibition against the in- 

offence] We have had this tirade against ordinate and dayly accesse of peoples 

crowds before from the Duke (i. ii. comming," etc. See Introduction. 

67-72). Tyrwhitt quotes a passage 32. know it] Angelo gives the mean- 

from Sir Symond D'Ewes' Memoirs of ing of sensual gratification to Isabella's 

hisow7i Life, dating 30th January 1620- word pleasure, in his own thoughts. 

1621, in confirmation of his suggestion 42. filthy vices] See ill. ii. 24. 
that these passages are an appropriate 



54 



MEASURE FOR MEASURE [acth. 



To pardon him that hath from nature stolen 

A man already made, as to remit 

Their saucy sweetness that do coin heaven's image 45 

In stamps that are forbid : 'tis all as easy 

Falsely to take away a life true made, 

As to put metal in restrained means 

To make a false one. 
I sab. 'Tis set down so in heaven, but not in earth. 50 

Ang. Say you so ? then I shall pose you quickly. 

Which had you rather, that the most just law 

Now took your brother's life ; or, to redeem him. 

Give up your body to such sweet uncleanness 

As she that he hath stained ? 
Isah, Sir, believe this, 5 5 

I had rather give my body than my soul. 
Ang. I talk not of your soul. Our compell'd sins 

Stand more for number than for account. 

48. inetal\ Theobald, mettle Yi-, means] mints Steevens conj., motdds Malone 
conj. 53. or\ Rowe (after Davenant), and Ff. 



45. saucy\ wanton, lascivious. Com- 
pare AlVs Well, IV. iv. 23. ''Salt" 
occurs in the same sense often, as below, 
V. 402. There are two passages in 77^1? 
Troublesome Raigne of King lohi 
(1591), which bear out this interpreta- 
tion, if I read them right : "I long . . . 
To make some sport among the smooth 
skin Nunnes, And keepe some revell 
with the fauzen Friers." And " How 
goes this gcere ? The Friers chest 
filde with a sausen Nunne " (Hazlitt's 
Shaks. Lib., pp. 260, 265). The 
spelling suggests a new or uncommon 
word. 

45, 46. heaven^ s image In stamps that 
are forbid] Malone quotes here, very 
appropriately, from King Edward III. 
(1595)* "And will your sacred self 
Commit high treason 'gainst the King 
of heaven. To stamp his image in for- 
bidden metal ? " This play, which is 
full of beautiful poetry, has been attri- 
buted to Shakespeare by Capell, Ulrici, 
Collier, and others. There are many 
Shakespearian passages. Ward cites 



Qu. Philippa's speech (v. i.). Tyrrell 
quotes (from 11. i.) a passage which con- 
tains the line in Shakespeare's Sonnet 
xciv. , ' * Lilies that fester smell far worse 
than weeds." See Macbeth, iv. iii. 153, 
for " stamps." 

48. metal] Schmidt says, **no dis- 
tinction made in O. Edd. between the 
two words, either in spelling or in use." 
The remark applies to other writers. 
Nashe has "mettle-brewing Paracel- 
sian " in his Terrors of the Night. 
Jonson uses " metalled" in Welcome to 
Welbeck where we would say "mettled. " 
Malone quotes from Timon of Athens, 
IV. iii. 179, and Richard II. i. ii. 23, 
in support of mettle (in the modern 
sense), but both bear the interpretation 
" the material of which a thing is com- 
posed." 

56. / had rather . . . soul] I had 
rather part with my life than lose my 
soul. 

57, 58. compeWd sins . . . account] 
We are not accountable for compelled 
sins. They are only so many units. 



sc.iv] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 55 

I sab. How say you ? 

Aug. Nay, I '11 not warrant that ; for I can speak 

Against the thing I say. Answer to this : 60 

I, now the voice of the recorded law, 

Pronounce a sentence on your brother's life : 

Might there not be a charity in sin 

To save this brother's life ? 
Isab. Please you to do't, 

I '11 take it as a peril to my soul ; 65 

It is no sin at all, but charity. 
Ang. Pleas'd you to do 't at peril of your soul, 

Were equal poise of sin and charity. 
Isab. That I do beg his life, if it be sin, 

Heaven let me bear it ! you granting of my suit, 70 

If that be sin, I '11 make it my morn prayer 

To have it added to the faults of mine, 

And nothing of your answer. 
Ang. Nay, but hear me. 

Your sense pursues not mine : either you are ignorant, 

Or seem so craftily ; and that 's not good. 7 5 

Isab. Let me be ignorant, and in nothing good. 

But graciously to know I am no better. 
Ang. Thus wisdom wishes to appear most bright 

When it doth tax itself; as these black masks 

68. Were . . . charity\ WereU . . . charity? Hanmer, ^Tzvere . . . charity 
Seymour conj. 73. your'] yotirs Jonson conj. 75. craftily] Rowe (after 

Davenant), crafty Ff. 76. me] omitted F I. 

Compare here what Cassandra says happy masks that kiss fair ladies' 

when her brother presses her to yield brows," Romeo and Juliet, i. i. 236 ; 

to Promos: "Nay, Cassandra, if thou and "these vile guns," 1 Henry IV. 

thy selfe submyt To save my life, to i. iii. 56. These two parallels are 

Promos deadly lust, Justice wyll say quoted in Steevens' Shakespeare, but 

thou dost no cryme commit, For in Tyrwhitt and Steevens conjectured that 

forst faultes is no intent of yll," Whet- there was here an indecorous reference 

stone's Promos and Cassandra, ill. iv. to the masks of the audience. Black 

68. equal poise of sin and charity] masks were worn by ladies at the 

Cassandra uses somewhat similar words theatres. In Beaumont and Fletcher's 

to Promos when pleading for her ^-j^ar'j j5«j-//, Act v., there is a direct 

brother : '* herein, renowned lorde, address to the audience which might 

justice with pitee payse . . . in equall support Tyrwhitt : " We stand here for 

balance waide." an Epilogue ; If you be pleased, look 

79. these] those. Compare "These cheerly, throw your eyes Out at your 



56 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [acth. 

Proclaim an enshield beauty ten times louder 80 

Than beauty could, display'd. But mark me ; 
To be received plain, I '11 speak more gross : 
Your brother is to die. 

Isab. So. 

Aug. And his offence is so, as it appears 85 

Accountant to the law upon that pain. 

Isab, True. 

Aug, Admit no other way to save his life, — 
As I subscribe not that, nor any other, 
But in the loss of question, — that you, his sister, 90 
Finding yourself desir'd of such a person. 
Whose credit with the judge, or own great place, 
Could fetch your brother from the manacles 
Of the all-building law ; and that there were 
No earthly mean to save him, but that either 95 

You must lay down the treasures of your body 
To this suppos'd, or else to let him suffer ; 
What would you do? 

Isab. As much for my poor brother as myself: 

That is, were I under the terms of death, I OO 

The impression of keen whips I 'd wear as rubies, 
And strip myself to death, as to a bed 



80. enshield] in-shelTd Tyrwhitt conj. 89, 90. As I subscribe . . . ques- 
tion] a parenthesis in Ff. 90, loss] loose Singer MS., toss Johnson conj., 
/zj'/ Heath conj., /^r<r(? Collier MS. 94. all-building] Ff, all-holding Rowe ; 
all-binding Theobald, Johnson, Steevens. 

masks." Ben Jonson frequently in- the words referred to the following 

dulges in these illegitimate hits, not in lines, which the parenthesis to a certain 

epilogues, but in the action of his plays, extent forbids. I prefer Malone's ex- 

So does Greene, and all the early plays planation, "in idle supposition, or 

are evidence, or nearly all. And Shake- conversation that tends to nothing." 

speare is not free from it elsewhere. "Question" frequently means " con- 

80. enshield] shielded. A free con- versation " in Shakespeare, as in As 

traction for "enshielded." Tyrwhitt's You Like It, ill. iv. 39, etc. 

conjecture is based upon a passage in 93. fetch . . . from] rescue from. 

Coriolanus, iv. vi. 45. 94. all-building law] law that lays 

90. in the loss of question] Schmidt the foundations of everything. Com- 

says, "as no better arguments present pare "all -ending," Richard III. III. 

themselves to my mind to make the i. 78. There are many such com- 

point clear." This would imply that" pounds in Shakespeare. 



sciv.] MEASURE FOR MEASURE ^ 57 

That longing have been sick for, ere I 'd yield 

My body up to shame. 
Ang, Then must your brother die. 

Isab. And 'twere the cheaper way : 105 

Better it were a brother died at once, 

Than that a sister, by redeeming him. 

Should die for ever. 
Ang: Were not you then as cruel as the sentence 

That you have slander'd so ? I lO 

Isab. Ignomy in ransom and free pardon 

Are of two houses : lawful mercy 

Is nothing kin to foul redemption. 
Ang. You seem'd of late to make the law a tyrant ; 

And rather prov'dthe sliding of your brother 115 

A merriment than a vice. 
Isab. O ! pardon me, my lord, it oft falls out, 

To have what we would have, we speak not what we 
mean. 

I something do excuse the thing I hate, 

For his advantage that I dearly love. 1 20 

Ang, We are all frail. 
Isab. Else let my brother die, 

If not a fedary, but only he 

103. have] I've Rowe. io6. a/] /^/-Johnson conj. iii. Ignomy] Z^^- 
wz«y F 2, 3, 4. Ill, 112. Igno7ny in . . . houses:] Ignomy in ransom and 
free pardon are Of two opposed houses : Cambridge Edd. conj. 112, 113, mercy 
Is nothing kin] Ff, mercy sure Is nothing kin Pope, mercy is Nothing kin 
Steevens. 122. fedary] fedarieY i ; feodary F 2, 3, 4, and Mod. Edd. 

103. longing have been] The Cam- "ignomious" in Sir Clyomon. In 

bridge editors say here (Note xi.): every case where " ignomy " occurs in 

"The second person singular of the Shakespeare it is replaced by " igno- 

governing pronoun is frequently omitted miny" in one or other of the early 

by Shakespeare in familiar questions, editions. 

but as to the first and third persons his 115. sliding] backsliding. See 

usage really differs from the modern." "slipped," above, (note) II. ii. 65. 
They refer to i. iv. 72, ** Has censured 122. fedary] confederate, associate, 

him," for an example of the latter in this A variant of "feodary," which is a 

play. corruption of ** feudary." Shakespeare 

III. Ignomy] a common early form uses it in a sense due to an erroneous 

of "ignominy." It occurs several times association with \j2,\\Xi foedus. Spelt 

in Shakespeare, and Nares gives earlier "federary" {Winter's Tale, il. i. 90), 

examples. Peele has the adjective and "foedary" {Cymbeline, in. ii. 21) 



58 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [actii. 

Owe and succeed thy weakness. 

An^-. Nay, women are frail too. 

Isad. Ay, as the glasses where they view themselves, 125 
Which are as easy broke as they make forms. 
Women ! Help heaven ! men their creation mar 
In profiting by them. Nay, call us ten times frail. 
For we are soft as our complexions are. 
And credulous to false prints. 

An^-. I think it well; 130 

And from this testimony of your own sex. 
Since I suppose we are made to be no stronger 
Than faults may shake our frames, let me be bold : 
I do arrest your words. Be that you are, 
That is, a woman ; if you be more, you 're none ; 135 
If you be one, as you are well express'd 
By all external warrants, show it now, 
By putting on the destin'd livery. 

123. iky weakness] by weakness Rowe, Steevens ; to weakness Capell ; this 
weakness Malone conj. 

in the old editions. * * Feudary " means having. Isabella refers to it then as man's 

a feudal tenant. There appears to be characteristic, and Angelo, perceiving 

confusion in the use of these words in that, says, "but women are just as bad." 

early writers, and also in modern " Thy weakness " means the weakness 

dictionaries. of thy sex. See line 132. 

123. Owe and succeed thy weakness] 127, 128. men their creation . . . by 

Malone thought it extremely probable thetji] Rightly explained by Steevens 

that something had been omitted from {Edinburgh Magazine^ Nov. 1786) : 

the text here. He interprets " We are "Men debase their nature by taking 

all frail, says Angelo. Yes, replies advantage of such weak pitiful crea- 

Isabella : if he has not one associate in tures." Johnson and Schmidt give 

his crime, if no other person own and other unintelligible paraphrases. See 

follow [inherit, Schmidt] the same Schmidt in v. Profit. 

criminal courses which you are now 134, / do arrest yotir words'] I take 

pursuing, let my brother suffer death." them as security. Shakespeare has this 

I differ from this in one important expression in Love's Labour's Lost, i. 

particular, though the explanation seems 160. No other examples are quoted in 

to be on the right basis. Malone im- New Eng. Diet. But Shakespeare may 

plies in the words " you are now pursu- have found it in Sidney's ^rffa^zVz : "She 

mg " — they can mean nothing else — . . . took the advantage one day, upon 

that Isabella is fully awake to Angelo's . . . certain castaway vows, how much 

baseness. She is not to be assumed to he would do for her sake, to arrest his 

be so till line 149. She would not call word as soon as it was out of his mouth, 

him " gentle my lord " at line 139 were and, by the virtue thereof, to charge him 

it so. "Thy weakness" refers to the to go with her," Book i. (rept. 1898, 

frailty that Angelo accuses all men of pp. 80, 81), ante 1586. 



sc, 



IV.] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 



59 



Isab, I have no tongue but one : gentle my lord, 

Let me entreat you speak the former language. 140 

Aug, Plainly conceive, I love you. 

Isab. My brother did love Juliet ; and you tell me 
That he shall die for 't. 

Ang. He shall not, Isabel, if you give me love. 

Isab. I know your virtue hath a license in 't, 145 

Which seems a little fouler than it is, 
To pluck on others. 

Ang» Believe me, on mine honour, 

My words express my purpose. 

Isab. Ha ! little honour to be much believ'd, 

And most pernicious purpose ! Seeming, seeming ! 150 

I will proclaim thee, Angelo ; look for 't : 

Sign me a present pardon for my brother. 

Or with an outstretch'd throat I '11 tell the world 

aloud 
What man thou art. 

Ang. Who will believe thee, Isabel ? 

My unsoil'd name, the austereness of my life, 155 

My vouch against you, and my place i' the 

state. 
Will so your accusation overweigh, 
That you shall stifle in your own report 



144-147.] Compare Promos and Cas- 
sandra, III. ii. : " Yeeld to my will, 
and then command Even what thou 
wilt of me : Thy brother's life. . . . 
Cassandra . . . Renowned lorde, you 
use this speach (I hope) your thrall to 
trye." 

145-147. your virtue . . . other s^^ 
Steevens explains, "Your virtue assumes 
an air of licentiousness (as in ill. ii. 2l6) 
which is not natural to you, on purpose 
to try me." Schmidt makes " license " 
mean "authority," "privilege." The 
meaning would then be, "your virtue 
has the privilege of trying others, a 
privilege that appears fouler than it 
really is (being done for a good pur- 
pose)." Isabella is more likely to have 



thought this, than to have incorporated 
virtue and licentiousness. 

150. Seeming] hypocrisy. 

153. outstretch'd throat] Compare 
Nashe, PasquiPs Apologie (Gros. i. 212), 
1590 : " Shall I not lay out my throate 
to keep them off?" and Webster, Sir 
Thomas IVyatt (Routledge, p. 196), 
1607: "Set forth thy brazen throat." 
See also Nashe, Lenten Stuffe (Grosart, 
v. 232): "wrest them (the spirits) up 
to the most outstretched ayry straine 
of elocution to chaunt and carroll forth." 
Later Brome has * ' stretches his throat 
to the tune," Covent Garden Weeded^ 
II. ii. The throat is the musical in- 
strument, like the harp, strained or 
stretched by the wrest. 



60 



MEASURE FOR MEASURE [actii. 



And smell of calumny. I have begun, 
And now I give my sensual race the rein : 1 60 

Fit thy consent to my sharp appetite ; 
Lay by all nicety and prolixious blushes, 
That banish what they sue for ; redeem thy brother 
By yielding up thy body to my will, 
Or else he must not only die the death, 165 

But thy unkindness shall his death draw out 
To lingering sufferance. Answer me to-morrow, 
Or, by the affection that now guides me most, 
I '11 prove a tyrant to him. As for you, 
Say what you can, my false o'erweighs your true. 170 

[Exit. 
Isab, To whom should I complain ? Did I tell this, 
Who would believe me ? O perilous mouths ! 
That bear in them one and the self-same tongue, 
Either of condemnation or approof. 
Bidding the law make court'sy to their will, 175 



171. should] shall Steevens. 172. perilous'] most perilous Theobald, these 
perilous Seymour conj. 175. court'sy] curtsie Ff. 



159. smell of] smack of, is tainted 
with. Compare AWs Well, v. ii. 5, 
and 7ttus Androniais, ii. i. 132. 
Nashe has "methinks my j easts begin 
aheady to smell of the caske," Strange 
Newes, Ep. Ded. (Gros. ii. 177), 1593. 
In The Disobedient Child (Hazlitt's 
Dods. ii. 281), 1560, occurs : " He hath 
of knavery took such a smell." 

160. sensual race] Schmidt equates 
race here (natural disposition) with the 
word in "thy vile race" in Tempest, 
I. ii. 358. But the word *' rein " rather 
implies the meaning " running, course," 
which is used in a transferred sense, 
"drowsy race of night," va. John, III. 
iii. 39. 

162. prolixious] superfluous. The 
word is not elsewhere in Shakespeare. 
Nashe has it in the Epistle Dedicatorie 
to Have with you to Saffron Walden 
(Gros. iii. 5), 1596: "prolixious rough 
barbarisme." Steevens quotes from 
Nashe's Lenten Stuffe (Gros. v. 274), 
1598 : " Vlysses (well knowne unto 



them by his prolixious seawandering, 
and dauncing on the toplesse tottering 
hilles)" ; and also from Drayton's 
Moyses, 1604. 

165. die the death] A phrase from 
the Scriptures. See Numbers xvi. 29, 
and xxiii. 10. In the Wyclif versions 
the readings are "die through the 
death " and " die in the death " at these 
two passages. Tyrwhitt contradicted 
Steevens as to the scriptural origin, and 
quoted two passages from Chaucer, 
neither of which contains the word 
" die." It is in Bale's Gods Promises, 
1538, which is perhaps the earliest 
instance. Shakespeare has it earlier in 
Midsuinmer-Nighf s Dream, I. i. 65. 
The reference to Bale is Hazlitt's 
Dodsley, i. 290, where there is given 
an example from Ferrex and Porrex, 
IV. ii., in a footnote. In no single one 
of the above instances is the use so 
absolute as it is in Shakespeare, 
"death" being elsewhere followed by 
"of," "that," or "like as." 



sc.iv] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 61 

Hooking both right and wrong to the appetite, 

To follow as it draws. I '11 to my brother : 

Though he hath fallen by prompture of the blood, 

Yet hath he in him such a mind of honour. 

That, had he twenty heads to tender down i 80 

On twenty bloody blocks, he 'd yield them up, 

Before his sister should her body stoop 

To such abhorr'd pollution. 

Then, Isabel, live chaste, and, brother, die : 

More than our brother is our chastity. 185 

I '11 tell him yet of Angelo's request. 

And fit his mind to death, for his soul's rest. [Exit, 



ACT III 



SCENE I. — A Room in the Prison. 

Enter DuKE, as a friar ^ Claudio, and P^-ovost. 

Duke. So then you hope of pardon from Lord Angelo ? 
Claud. The miserable have no other medicine 

But only hope : 

I 've hope to live, and am prepar'd to die. 
Duke. Be absolute for death ; either death or life 5 

Shall thereby be the sweeter. Reason thus with life : 

185. More\ '' MoreYi. 

Act III. Scene i. 
4. / ^vel I have Ff. 

178. prompturel suggestion, instiga- Camden's i?<?wamj (Proverbs), "With- 
tion. This word is probably a coinage of out hope the heart would break. " 
Shakespeare's. Compare "stricture" 5. «(5j^/z//^] confident, decided. Corn- 
above, I. iii. 12; and " expressure " in pare Cymbeline, iv. ii. 106: "I am 
Merry Wives ^ v. v. 71 (Arden ed., p. absolute 'twas very Cloten." There is 
213). a terrible and morbid pessimism in this 

179. mind of honour'] honourable powerful speech on " unhealthy-minded- 
mind, ness " that can have only escaped from 



Aci III. Scene i. 
2, 3. miserable . . . hope] Compare 



a spirit in sore trouble. 



62 



MEASURE FOR MEASURE f act m. 



If I do lose thee, I do lose a thing 
That none but fools would keep : a breath thou art, 
Servile to all the skyey influences, 
That do this habitation, where thou keep'st, lo 

Hourly afflict. Merely, thou art death's fool ; 
For him thou labour'st by thy flight to shun, 
And yet runn'st toward him still. Thou art not noble; 
For all the accommodations that thou bear'st 
Are nurs'd by baseness. Thou art by no means 
valiant ; 1 5 

For thou dost fear the soft and tender fork 
Of a poor worm. Thy best of rest is sleep, 
And that thou oft provok'st ; yet grossly fear'st 
Thy death, which is no more. Thou art not thyself; 
For thou exist'st on many a thousand grains 20 



20. exist'st] Theobald, exists Ff. 

10. keep'st] dwellest, as in 1 Henry 
IV. I. iii. 244; Hamlet^ 11. i. 8, 
etc. 

11. death'' s fool] one that death makes 
a fool of. The early commentators 
endeavoured to fix a meaning here from 
Moralities, Dumb Shows, or The Dance 
of Death. I am doubtful of any such 
reference, any more than there is in 
"Love's not Time's fool, though rosy 
lips and cheeks Within his bending 
sickle's compass come," Sonnet cxvi. 
Greene, in Shakespeare and the Emblem 
Writers, considers that, " without doing 
violence to probability, "we may conclude 
that Holbein's Figures of Death and the 
Idiot Fool had been in the poet's eye 
and mind. See Woltmann's Holbein 
and his Time (Leipzig, 1868, vol. ii. p. 
121), and Holbein's Imagines (Cologne, 
1566). 

14. accommodations] One of Ben Jon- 
son's "perfumed terms of time" {Dis- 
coveriesy Perspicuitas). See also 1 
Henry IV. iii. ii. 72. The word was 
hardly established. Cotgrave gives 
'^Accommodation. A fitting, apting, 
applying, accommodating, furnishing." 
The last word, taken generally, gives 
the requisite sense of " equipment." 
The earliest example of the word (in 



any sense) in New Eng. Diet, is that 
in Othello, I. iii. 239, which is later than 
this. 

16, 17. fork Of a poor worm] The 
popular belief was that the tongue of a 
snake was forked and poisonous. So 
in Ben Jonson, Sejanus, V. i. (1603): 
* * a tongue Forked as flattery . . . foul, 
spotted, venomous, ugly . . . attributes, 
T' express a worm, a snake." And in 
The Poetaster by the same author. In- 
duction, 1 601 : "Cling to my neck and 
wrists, my loving worms . . . Shoot 
out yourselves at length, as your forc't 
stings Would hide themselves within 
his maliced sides," where we should 
undoubtedly read "fork't." See Mac- 
beth, IV. i. 16, and the serpent's "double 
tongue" in Midsummer Nighfs Dream, 
III. ii. 

18. provok'st] challengest, defiest to 
combat. A technical sense from the 
duello. Compare Ben Jonson, CynthicCs 
Revels, v. ii. (1600) : " Sound, musics — 
I provoke you at the Bare Accost, \_A 
charge.^' The meaning of this line has 
not been explained before. Schmidt's 
" rouse " is weak, and spoils the forcible 
antithesis in "fear'st." Craig doubt- 
fully suggests " excites." See also 
Florio in v. Provocare. 



SCI] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 



63 



That issue out of dust. Happy thou art not ; 

For what thou hast not, still thou striv'st to get, 

And what thou hast, forget'st. Thou art not certain ; 

For thy complexion shifts to strange effects, 

After the moon. If thou art rich, thou Vt poor ; 25 

For, like an ass whose back with ingots bows, 

Thou bear's t thy heavy riches but a journey, 

And death unloads thee. Friend hast thou none ; 

For thine own bowels, which do call thee sire, 

The mere effusion of thy proper loins, 30 

Do curse the gout, serpigo, and the rheum. 

For ending thee no sooner. Thou hast nor youth nor 

age, 
But, as it were, an after-dinner's sleep, 
Dreaming on both ; for all thy blessed youth 

24. effects] affects Johnson conj. 31. serpigo] Rowe ; sapego F i ; Sarpego 
F 2, 3, 4. 34. all thy blessed] all thy blasted Johnson conj., all thy boasted 
Collier MS. 



24. complexion] disposition, tempera- 
ment. Compare Merry IVives, V. v. 9. 

24. effects] tendencies, aims, things 
to be effected. All human operations 
at this time were held to be under the 
sway of the moon amongst the super- 
stitious. "Nor any other thing they 
do, but earnestly before They marke the 
Moone how she is placde and standeth 
evermore," B. Googe, The Popish 
Kingdome, Booke iv., 1570. 

25-28. If thou art rich . . . death 
unloads thee] This image may have been 
suggested by Whitney's Emblem In 
avaros. Choice of EtnblemSy 1586 (rept. 
p. 18, ed. 1866). The representation 
is of a laden ass cropping thistles : 
"Septitius ritche, a miser most of all 
. . . This caitiffe wretche with pined 
corpes lo heare, Compared right unto 
the foolishe asse, Whose backe is 
fraighte with cates and daintie cheare, 
But to his share comes neither." And 
compare Jonson, Staple of News ^ V. i. : 
* ' knows he what he brings ? Pick. 
No more than a gardener's ass what 
roots he carries. " Compare too Primau- 
daye's French Academy, translated by 
T. B., 1586, chap. 42 : " They (covet- 



ous men) are like Mules that carie great 
burthens of golde and silver on their 
backes and yet eate but hay." 

31. serpigo] '* A kind of tetter, or dry 
eruption on the skin" (Nares). Men- 
tioned again in Troilus and Cressida, 
II. iii. 81 : "the dry serpigo." Brome 
makes Sarpego the name of a character 
in The City Wit. It is mentioned also 
by Marston in The Fawne, Act iv. 
(1606), and in Heywood's A Royal 
King, etc. (Pearson, p. 50), 1600 : "all 
his body stung With the French fly, 
with the sarpego dried." 

33j 34* after-dinner's sleep. Dream- 
ing on both] * * This is exquisitely imag- 
ined . . . our life, of which no part 
is filled with the business of the present 
time, resembles our dreams after dinner, 
when the events of the morning are 
mingled with the designs of the evening" 
(Johnson). 

34-36. thy blessed youth Becomes as 
aged . . . palsied eld] Schmidt makes 
"becomes as" in this passage mean 
simply "becomes," i.e. "comes to be 
aged, paralleling the use with that in 
Airs Well, IV. iii. 61 : "becomes as a 
prey to her grief," and Troilus and 



64 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [acthi. 

Becomes as aged, and doth beg the alms 35 

Of palsied eld ; and when thou art old and rich, 
Thou hast neither heat, affection, limb, nor beauty, 
To make thy riches pleasant. What 's yet in this 
That bears the name of life ? Yet in this life 
Lie hid more thousand deaths ; yet death we fear, 40 
That makes these odds all even. 

Claud. I humbly thank you. 

To sue to live, I find I seek to die. 
And, seeking death, find life : let it come on. 

Isah. [ Within^ What, ho ! Peace here ; grace and good 
company ! 

Prov. Who 's there ? come in : the wish deserves a 
welcome. 45 

Duke. Dear sir, ere long I '11 visit you again. 

Claud. Most holy sir, I thank you. 

Enter ISABELLA. 

Isah. My business is a word or two with Claudio. 

Prov. And very welcome. Look, signior ; here 's your 

sister. 
Duke. Provost, a word with you. 50 

Prov. As many as you please. 
Duke. Bring me to hear them speak, where I may be 

conceal'd. [Exeunt Duke and Provost, 

Claud. Now, sister, what 's the comfort ? 

35. as aged\ assuaged"^ 2x\s^x\x>Vi\ ahasedC2^xCox\^gQ,'^^^. Q.oxi]. 40. morel 
nioe Ff, a Hanmer. 46. sir\ son Mason conj. 52. Bring me to hear them 
speak"] Malone (Steevens conj.) ; Bring them to hear jue speak F i ; Bring them 
to speak F 2, 3, 4 ; conceaPd] F i ; conceaFd, yet hear them F 2, 3, 4. 

Cressida, 111. iii. ii. Warburton and meaning appears to be that in our youth 

Johnson resort to alteration in the text, we are compelled to seek help from old 

Malone says the sentiment is the same age — acting like palsied old age in 

as that in Edmund's letter, in Z^ar, I. begging alms. **Our aged" is used 

ii. : *' This policy and reverence of age for "our old men " in Timon, v. i. 179. 

makes the world bitter to the best of our 37. /imd] vigorous frame. Compare 

time [blessed youth] : keeps our fortunes 2 Henry IV. in. ii. 276: "Care I for 

from us till our oldness cannot relish the limb, the thews, the stature, bulk." 

them." An impossible sense, it seems 40. more thousand deaths'] a thousand 

to me, to read into these lines. The deaths besides those mentioned. 



SCI] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 65 

Isab. Why, 

As all comforts are ; most good, most good, indeed. 5 5 

Lord Angelo, having affairs to heaven, 

Intends you for his swift ambassador, 

Where you shall be an everlasting leiger : 

Therefore your best appointment make with speed ; 

To-morrow you set on. 
Claud. Is there no remedy ? 60 

Isab. None, but such remedy, as to save a head 

To cleave a heart in twain. 
Claud. But is there any? 

Isab. Yes, brother, you may live : 

There is a devilish mercy in the judge, 

If you '11 implore it, that will free your life, 65 

But fetter you till death. 
Claud. Perpetual durance? 

Isab. Ay, just ; perpetual durance, a restraint. 

Though all the world's vastidity you had, 

To a determin'd scope. 
Claud. But in what nature ? 

Isab. In such a one as, you consenting to 't, 70 

Would bark your honour from that trunk you bear. 

And leave you naked. 
Claud. Let me know the point. 

Isab. O, I do fear thee, Claudio ; and I quake, 

55. most good, most good, indeed] most good indeed Pope, most good in speed 
Hanmer. 68. Though] Pope, Through Ff. 

58. leiger] resident ambassador. A 68. vastidity]\mxi\&Xi%\\.y . Anillegiti- 
common word at this time. mate coinage as though from vastidus ; 

59. appointment] '^xe'^2,x2X\on. like "validity," etc. Nashe uses vastity 
67. Ay, just] A common northern (Grosart, iv. 69; ii. 25; v. 17) in the 

provincialism to this day in Ireland, sense of destitution, emptiness, want, 

when a very appropriate thing is said, Taylor has it in the same sense (empti- 

meaning "Yes, that's exactly it." ness) in Fenni/ese Fi/grimage. 

See As Yoti Like It, iii. ii. 81, and 69. determined scope] fixed limit or 

Titus Andronicus, IV. ii. 24. bounds. Compare Timon of Athens^ 

67-69. a restraint ... To a deter- v. iv. 4, 5 : " With all licentious 

mind scope] ' ' A confinement of your measure, making your wills The scope 

mind to . . . ignominy, of which the of justice." 

remembrance can neither be suppressed 71. bark] peel, strip. Compare 

nor escaped " (Johnson). Antony and Cleopatra^ iv. xii. 23. 



66 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [actih. 

Lest thou a feverous life should'st entertain, 

And six or seven winters more respect 75 

Than a perpetual honour. Dar'st thou die? 

The sense of death is most in apprehension, 

And the poor beetle, that we tread upon, 

In corporal sufferance finds a pang as great 

As when a giant dies. 

Claud, Why give you me this shame ? 80 

Think you I can a resolution fetch 
From flowery tenderness ? If I must die, 
I will encounter darkness as a bride. 
And hug it in mine arms. 

Isah, There spake my brother : there my father's grave 8 5 
Did utter forth a voice. Yes, thou must die : 
Thou art too noble to conserve a life 
In base appliances. This outward-sainted deputy, 
Whose settled visage and deliberate word 
Nips youth i' the head, and follies doth enew 90 

90. head\ bud Grey conj.; enew] New Eng. Did,; emmew Ff, Cambridge, 
etc.; enmew Steevens. 

74. feverous'] feverish ; a common hawking, since birds of prey commonly 

early form. G. Harvey uses it figura- go for the eyes and upper part of the 

tively, earlier, in Three Proper Letters neck. But it is not usually associated 

(Grosart, i. 45) : " feverous and flatuous with falconry, nor does it appear to 

spirits." occur in works on the subject. Com- 

74. entertain] endure, put up with, pare the following: "A henne or 

live through. Compare Jonson, Staple Partridge in hand, that are soon nipped 

of News,\\\.\\. (Chorus): "how should in the heade, and dispatched straight," 

we entertain the time." And 1 Henry North. Doni's Philosophie (Jacob's ed., 

/F. V. i. 24. p. 160), 1570: "these jigges and 

77. apprehension] imagination, con- rhymes have nipped the father in the 

ception. Compare Nashe, The Terrors head, and killed him cleane," Nashe. 

of the Night {Gxos,2iri, iii. 265): "the Martin's Months Mind (Grosart, i. 

feare of anie expected euill, is worse 166), 1589: "nipped in the head like 

than the euill it selfe " (1593). a bird." Thomas of Reading (Thom's 

78-80. beetle . , , giant af/'^i-] Death Early Prose Romances, p. 43), 1590: 

doesn't hurt a giant more than it does a " nipt in the head with nothing," 

beetle. Are you afraid of such an Beaumont and Fletcher, Humorous 

everyday occurrence ? Lieutenant^ V. iii. {ante 1625). The 

79. ^wfl'j] experiences. expression "nipt on the pate "is very 

90, 91. Nips youth i^ the head . . . As common in Greene's prose. He uses 

falcon doth the fowl] I have seen no it of silencing, shutting up, a person, 

explanatory note to this passage. It with a bitter speech. He takes it from 

was a recognised expression for killing Lyly's Euphues. 
a bird, perhaps taken primarily from 90. enew] "Of a hawk, to drive (a 



SCI] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 67 

As falcon doth the fowl, is yet a devil ; 

His filth within being cast, he would appear 

A pond as deep as hell. 
Claud. The prenzy Angelo ! 

Isab. O ! 'tis the cunning livery of hell, 

The damned'st body to invest and cover 95 

In prenzy guards. Dost thou think, Claudio ? 

If I would yield him my virginity, 

Thou mightst be freed. 
Claud. O heavens ! it cannot be. 

Isab. Yes, he would give it thee, from this rank offence, 

So to offend him still. This night's the time 100 

That I should do what I abhor to name. 

Or else thou diest to-morrow. 
Claud. Thou shalt not do 't. 

Isab. O ! were it but my life, 

91. falcon] falconer Grey conj. 93. prenzy] F ; princely F 2, 3, 4 ; priestly 
Hanmer ; primsie Anon. {N. ^ Q.)\ etc. etc. 99. from] for Hanmer. 

fowl) into the water " {New Eng. 92. cast] computed, estimated. Per- 

Dict.). O. Fr. eneauer. According haps a reference to the medical use 

to Nezu Eng. Diet, confused in this *' casting water " is understood, 

passage with "enmew," or merely a 93. /^wrt'] pond of filth, 

misprint. Examples are given from 93, 96. prenzy] This word is un- 

the Boke of St. Albans, i486, and from known elsewhere. Probably connected 

Turbervile, Book of Fatilconrie, IS75- with prim, too nice, demure, *' outward- 

A passage from Turbervile is quoted in sainted." Schmidt refers to Burns' 

Harting's Ornithology of Shakespeare : Halloween, stanza ix., ** primsie 

* ' shee then gets up amaine, For best Maillie " ; and to ancient Scottish 

advantage, to eneaw the springing "prunse." 

fowle againe.'' Steevens quotes from 96. guards] trimmings, facings, 

Beaumont and Fletcher's Knight of ornaments (Schmidt). Compare Lovers 

Malta {ante 1619), iv. ii. To beat Labour's Lost, iv. iii. 58. A common 

down, or disable. Perhaps the watery word, usually spelt "gards" in this 

sense suggested the transference of the sense. 

metaphor to the pond as deep as hell. 96. Dost thou think] Do you under- 
Most commentators (including Madden) stand. 

believe the word should be "inmew," 99, 100. from this rank offence . . . 

to coop up, the reading given in the offend him still] He would give you 

quotation from The Knight of Malta, freedom as a result of this rank trans- 

I think the passage requires the more gression (he proposes to me), and give 

violent and destructive sense implied you power to go on sinning in the self- 

by "enew," and that to confine or same way. 



coop up emasculates the force of the 103. but my life] In the old play 

lines. See last note. There is a Cassandra says : * ' O would my life 

good example in Drayton's Polyolbion, would satisfie his yre, Cassandra then 

Twentieth Song, hne 234, 1612. would cancell soone thy band." 



68 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [actih. 

I 'd throw it down for your deliverance 

As frankly as a pin. 
Claud. Thanks, dear Isabel. 105 

Isah. Be ready, Claudio, for your death to-morrow. 
Claud. Yes. Has he affections in him. 

That thus can make him bite the law by the nose, 

When he would force it ? Sure, it is no sin ; 

Or of the deadly seven it is the least. 1 10 

Isab. Which is the least? 
Claud. If it were damnable, he being so wise, 

Why would he for the momentary trick 

Be perdurably fined ? O Isabel ! 
Isab. What says my brother ? 

Claud. Death is a fearful thing. 1 1 5 

Isab. And shamed life a hateful. 
Claud. Ay, but to die, and go we know not where ; 

To lie in cold obstruction and to rot ; 

This sensible warm motion to become 

A kneaded clod ; and the delighted spirit 1 20 

To bathe in fiery floods, or to reside 

120. delighted] dilated Hanmer, benighted Anon. conj. (Johnson). I2i. 
reside"] decide F i. 

107. affections] passions. fine for it, merce them according to 

108. bite the law by the nose] cause it their . . . purses." 

to weep, grieve it. Stronger than pluck- Ii8. obstruction] stagnation (of the 
ing or tweaking, and bringing tears, blood). Compare Twelfth Night, ill. 
Compare Nashe, Lenten Stuffe (Grosart, iv. 22 : "this does make some obstruc- 
V. 270), 1599 : " because they would bee tion in the blood." 
sure to have a medicine that should 120. ^^/z^/^/i?^ full of delight, delight- 
make them weep at all times, to that some. See Othello, i. iii. 290 ; and 
kinde of graine they turned her . . . Cytnbeline, v. iv. 102, and notes to 
and hence it is that mustard bites a man both passages. No earlier use of this 
by the nose, and makes him weep. " term has been quoted. I am able to 

109. force] enforce. give one from Chapman's Ovid's Ban- 
no. deadly seven] Pride, Envy, guet of Sence, 1595: "And thus to 

Wrath, Sloth, Covetousness, Gluttony, bathing came our poet's goddess, Her 

and Lechery. See Digby Mysteries, handmaids bearing all things pleasure 

circa 1485, ed. Furnivall (New Shaks. yields To such a service ; odours most 

'^oc.)y^. do et seq. delighted. And purest linen." This 

1 14. perdurably] lastingly, perpe- is from near the beginning of the poem, 

tually. 121. bathe hi fiery floods] Compare 

114. fined] punished, as in 11. ii. 40. Chapman, The Shadow of Night, 

The expression occurs in the Porter's 1594: '*saw such cursed sights. Such 

third speech, "Narcissus" (ed. M. y^tnas filled with strange tormented 

Lee, 1893, p. 34), 1602: "lett them sprites." 



SCI] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 



69 



In thrilling region of thick-ribbed ice ; 

To be imprison'd in the viewless winds, 

And blown with restless violence round about 

The pendent world ; or to be worse than worst 

Of those that lawless and incertain thought 

Imagine howling : 'tis too horrible ! 

The weariest and most loathed worldly life 

That age, ache, penury and imprisonment 

Can lay on nature is a paradise 

To what we fear of death. 

Isab, Alas ! alas ! 

Claud. Sweet sister, let me live. 

What sin you do to save a brother's life, 
Nature dispenses with the deed so far 



125 



130 



122. region] regions Rowe. 126. thought] Ff, Cambridge ; thoughts Theo- 
bald, Steevens, Greig. 129. penury] F 2, 3, 4 ; periury F i. 



122. region] tract. " Region of the 
air" is not an uncommon expression. 
Usually in the singular, as in Nashe 
(Grosart, i. 119), 1589. For " thrilling" 
(piercing) compare Lear, iv. ii. 73. 

122. thick-ribbed ice] Compare Ben 
Jonson, Catiline, i. i., 161 1 : " We are 
spirit bound In ribs of ice ; our whole 
bloods are one stone." Jonson has the 
same expression in Underwoods, Iviii. 
In Dante's "Third Circle" {Hell, 
Canto vi.) gluttons are subjected to 
showers, "accursed, heavy and cold 
unchanged For ever . . . Large 
hail." Farmer quotes from an old 
monkish homily : ' ' the fyrste [Hell] 
is fyre that ever brenneth . . . The 
seconde is passying cold, that yf a 
greate hylle of fyre were cast therein 
it shold torne to yce." Burton quotes 
from Surius, Comment Adannum, 
1537' "there be certain mouths of 
hell, and places appointed for the 
punishment of men's souls, as at Hecla 
in Iceland where the ghosts of dead 
men are familiarly seen, and sometimes 
talk with the living," Ajtatomy of 
Melancholy, 1621 (ed. 1854, p. 318). 
And Nashe : " That Mount Hecla a 
number conclude to bee hell mouth : 
for neere it are heard such yellings and 



groanings," Terrors of the Night, 
1 594. The thrilling region may well be 
identified with Iceland. For further 
confirmation, see The True State of 
Iceland, 1592, in Hakluyt's Voyages, 
1598 ; where the writer disputes the be- 
lief that "This place is the prison of 
uncleane soules " (iv. 114, reprint 1904). 
Dekker develops the situation in his 
Dream : "The Etremities of Cold in 
Hell " (Grosart, iii. 43). 

125. pendent world] Milton makes 
use of this expression in Paradise Lost. 

126, 127. those that . . . howling] 
"Conjecture sent out to wander without 
any certain direction, and ranging 
through possibilities of pain " (Johnson). 

134. dispenses with] puts up with, 
tolerates. Compare Comedy of Errors, 
II. i. 103 ; and Lucrece, 1070, 1279, 
and 1704. And the Play of Stucley, 
line 1571, circa 1598: "A kingdom's 
thirst hath to dispense, my lord, With 
any rigour or extremity. " And Nashe, 
Have with you, etc. (Grosart, iii. 
p. 115), 1596: "Vppon his humble 
submission . . . matters were dispenst 
with and qualified." Nature is here 
"Natura naturans," the creative power 
of the schoolmen. See also note to 
"wait upon," above, i. i. 84. 



70 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [actih. 

That it becomes a virtue. 
Isab. O you beast ! 135 

faithless coward ! O dishonest wretch ! 
Wilt thou be made a man out of my vice ? 
Is 't not a kind of incest, to take life 

From thine own sister's shame? What should I 

think ? 
Heaven shield my mother play'd my father fair; 140 
For such a warped slip of wilderness 
Ne'er issu'd from his blood. Take my defiance : 
Die, perish ! Might but my bending down 
Reprieve thee from thy fate, it should proceed. 

1 '11 pray a thousand prayers for thy death, 145 
No word to save thee. 

Claud. Nay, hear me, Isabel. 

Isab. O ! fie, fie, fie. 

Thy sin 's not accidental, but a trade. 
Mercy to thee would prove itself a bawd : 
'Tis best that thou diest quickly. [Going. 

Claud. O hear me, Isabella! 150 

Re-enter DUKE. 

Duke. Vouchsafe a word, young sister, but one word. 
Isab. What is your will ? 

Duke. Might you dispense with your leisure, I would 
by and by have some speech with you : the 

140. shield'] explained '* forbid," as 142. Take my defiance'] Take my 
in Romeo and Juliet^ I v. i. 41, by renunciation, disownment. Isabella 
Schmidt. But must we credit Isabel develops her previous words, and dis- 
with such a sentiment ? I prefer to owns her brother. Compare Dekker, 
explain it as a sudden doubt, shield A Rod for Runawayes (Gros. iv. 296) : 
meaning guard, protect. God protect " How can we expect mercy from Him 
my mother from such a suspicion, but it [him] when we expresse such cruelty 
would seem almost necessary. Isabella towards one another. "When the 
uses the expression later, "Heaven Brother defies the Brother what hope 
shield your grace from woe " (v. i. 1 19). is there for a Londoner to receive com- 

141. slip of wilderness] v^ox\kAQ.s&%\Y^ fort from strangers ? " This brother in 
or scion. Nares quotes from Beaumont Dekker "defied" the other for fear of 
and Fletcher's Maid's Tragedy, Act V. , infection of the Plague. The use is 
and from Paradise Lost, ix. v. 235, for exactly parallel. See Neiv Eng. Did. 
wilderness in sense of wildness. See and Schmidt for their doubtful explana- 
Winter's Tahy IV. iv. 92-95. tions, which may be rejected. 



SCI] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 71 

satisfaction I would require is likewise your own i 5 5 
benefit. 

Isab. I have no superfluous leisure : my stay must be 
stolen out of other affairs ; but I will attend you 
awhile. [ Walks apart. 

Duke. Son, I have overheard what hath passed 160 
between you and your sister. Angelo had never 
the purpose to corrupt her ; only he hath made 
an assay of her virtue to practise his judgment 
with the disposition of natures. She, having the 
truth of honour in her, hath made him that 165 
gracious denial which he is most glad to receive : 
I am confessor to Angelo, and I know this to be 
true; therefore prepare yourself to death. Do 
not satisfy your resolution with hopes that are 
fallible: to-morrow you must die. Go to your 170 
knees and make ready. 

Claud. Let me ask my sister pardon. I am so out of 
love with life that I will sue to be rid of it. 

Duke. Hold you there : farewell. \Exit Claudio. 

Re-enter Provost. 
Provost, a word with you. 175 

Prov. What 's your will, father ? 

Duke. That now you are come, you will be gone. 
Leave me awhile with the maid : my mind 
promises with my habit no loss shall touch her 
by my company. 180 

Prov. In good time. \Exit. Isabella advances. 

169. satisfy\falsify Hanmer. 

169. satisfy your resolution'] feed vant. Compare Jonson's Poetaster y 

your resolve (for death). That is to iv. i. : "lam ... a gentleman, and 

say do not weaken with fallible hopes. a commander, punk. Chloe. In good 

1 74. Hold you there] stick to that. time ; a gentleman and a commander ! " 

181. In good time] Very well, so be And his Epicure, ill, i. (424(5) : **My 

it, that 's all right. In Every Man in cousin, Sir Amorous, will be here 

his Humour^ i. i. (5a) Stephen takes briefly. Truewit. In good time, lady." 

offence at this expression from a ser- And Middleton's A Mad Worlds my 



72 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [acthi. 

Duke, The hand that hath made you fair hath made 
you good : the goodness that is cheap in beauty 
makes beauty brief in goodness ; but grace, being 
the soul of your complexion, shall keep the body 1 8 5 
of it ever fair. The assault that Angelo hath 
made to you, fortune hath conveyed to my under- 
standing; and but that frailty hath examples for 
his falling, I should wonder at Angelo. How 
will you do to content this substitute and to save 1 90 
your brother? 

Isah, I am now going to resolve him. I had rather 
my brother die by the law than my son should 
be unlawfully born. But O ! how much is the 
good duke deceived in Angelo. If ever he return 195 
and I can speak to him, I will open my lips in 
vain, or discover his government. 

Duke, That shall not be much amiss ; yet as the 
matter now stands, he will avoid your accusation : 
he made trial of you only. Therefore, fasten your 200 
ear on my advisings : to the love I have in doing 
good a remedy presents itself I do make my- 
self believe that you may most uprighteously do 
a poor wronged lady a merited benefit, redeem 
your brother from the angry law, do no stain to 205 
your own gracious person, and much please the 
absent duke, if peradventure he shall ever return 
to have hearing of this business. 

Isab. Let me hear you speak further. I have spirit 

to do any thing that appears not foul in the truth 2 1 o 
of my spirit. 

Duke. Virtue is bold, and goodness never fearful. 

201, 202. advisings: . . . good'] Pope, advisings ^ . . . good; Ff. 

Masters : "I am her mother, sir. FoL 197. discover] lay bare, expose. 

Oh, in good time, I like the gentle- 199, 200. avoid . . . he made trial] 

woman well." " The French a la get rid of your accusation by saying 

bonne heure, used either to express he, etc. 

acquiescence, or astonishment and in- 203. uprighteously] uprightly. Pope 

dignation " (Schmidt). made the alteration. 



SCI.] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 73 

Have you not heard speak of Mariana, the sister 
of Frederick, the great soldier who miscarried at 
sea ? 215 

Isab. I have heard of the lady, and good words went 
with her name. 

Duke. She should this Angelo have married ; was 
affianced to her by oath, and the nuptial ap- 
pointed : between which time of the contract, and 220 
limit of the solemnity, her brother Frederick was 
wrecked at sea, having in that perished vessel the 
dowry of his sister. But mark how heavily this 
befell to the poor gentlewoman : there she lost a 
noble and renowned brother, in his love toward 225 
her ever most kind and natural ; with him the 
portion and sinew of her fortune, her marriage 
dowry ; with both, her combinate husband, this 
well-seeming Angelo. 

Isab. Can this be so? Did Angelo so leave her? 230 

Duke. Left her in her tears, and dried not one of them 
with his comfort ; swallowed his vows whole, pre- 
tending in her discoveries of dishonour : in few, 
bestowed her on her own lamentation, which she 
yet wears for his sake, and he, a marble to her 235 
tears, is washed with them, but relents not. 

218. She\ Zi^^r Tope, Steevens (1793). 219. by"] omitted F i (inserted F 2). 
234. her on] on her Capell conj. 

213. heard speak] heard tell; i.e. Mitred Hog [circa 1700): "Money is 

heard people tell. Compare 2 Henry the sinew of love as well as war." 

IV. IV. ii. 16. Usually plural. 

221. /z'wzV] limit of time, date. 228. combinate] affianced. A word 

221. solemnity] solemnisation. Often not known elsewhere in this sense, 

in Shakespeare. And Sidney's Arcadia^ 233. in few] in few words, in short. 

Book IV. (rept. 1898, p. 426) : " act of Occurs again in Henry V. i. ii. 245, 

marriage without solemnity of mar- etc. And in Jonson's Fox^ 11. i., and 

riage." Catiline^ ill. iii. Nashe uses it some- 

226. wa/«r<3:/] kind, tender, brotherly, what differently : " I would wish them 
Compare Hejtry V. 11. Chorus, 19. to speake many things in few, neither to 

227. sinew of her fortune] strength speake all things," Anatomic of Ab- 
of her fortune — her money, as in the surditie (Gros. i. 67)> 1589. 

ancient saying, * ' Money is the sinews 234. bestowed . . . lamentation] 
of war." Compare Tom Brown, The handed her over to her grief. 



74 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [actih. 

Isab. What a merit were it in death to take this poor 
maid from the world ! What corruption in this 
life, that it will let this man live ! But how out 
of this can she avail ? 240 

Duke, It is a rupture that you may easily heal ; and 
the cure of it not only saves your brother, but 
keeps you from dishonour in doing it. 

Isab. Show me how, good father. 

Duke. This forenamed maid hath yet in her the con- 245 
tinuance of her first affection : his unjust unkind- 
ness, that in all reason should have quenched her 
love, hath, like an impediment in the current, 
made it more violent and unruly. Go you to 
Angelo : answer his requiring with a plausible 250 
obedience : agree with his demands to the point ; 
only refer yourself to this advantage, first, that 
your stay with him may not be long, that the 
time may have all shadow and silence in it, and 
the place answer to convenience. This being 255 
granted in course, — and now follows all, — we 
shall advise this wronged maid to stead up your 

255, 256. This being granted in course, — and now follows all , — ] Cambridge, 
Globe; this being granted in course, and now follows all: Ff; this being 
granted in course, now follows all. Pope, Steevens. 

239,240. out of this . . . avail] hardly be spared." The common early 

profit out of this. sense is "praiseworthy." Not else- 

248. impediment in the current] where in Shakespeare. 

Compare King John, II. i. 336. And 252. refer yourself to this advantage] 

Venus and Adonis, 331 : " river stay'd rely upon, depend upon, insist upon. 

. . . swelleth with more rage." I find the expression in exactly a 

2^0. plausible] "seemingly fair or parallel use in Gabriel Harvey, /*z^rc-<?'j 

honest" (N. Bailey). The present sense Supererogation (Gros. ii. 10), 1593- 

of the word was in use at this time, and ' ' relyeth on the judgement of the 

is less open to objection than Schmidt's learnedest, and referreth himself to the 

" willing," " pleased," etc. G.Harvey Practise of the wisest." 

speaks of "the treason of Politique 254. 5>^aa'^w] shade, darkness. 

Achitophell, and plausible Absolon," 256. in course] of course. Still a 

Piercers Supererogation (Gros. ii. 249), usual provincialism in Ireland. 

1592. Earher (i, 95), he speaks of 257,258. stead tip your appointment, 

"plausible elocution," and he has go in your place] %\xy^ox\. yo\xx ^Ly^ovcit- 

" plausibility " in the same sense. See ment by going in your place. There is 

Nashe also, The Unfortunate Traveller a position, or rather imposition, re- 

(Gros. V. 31), 1593 : " a good plausible hearsed in Sidney's Arcadia (Book iv.), 

alluring tong in such a man . . . can which resembles this arrangement : 



SCI] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 



75 



appointment, go in your place ; if the encounter 
acknowledge itself hereafter, it may compel him 
to her recompense; and here, by this, is your 260 
brother saved, your honour untainted, the poor 
Mariana advantaged, and the corrupt deputy 
scaled. The maid will I frame and make fit for 
his attempt. If you think well to carry this, as 
you may, the doubleness of the benefit defends 265 
the deceit from reproof. What think you of it ? 

Isab. The image of it gives me content already, and, 
I trust it will grow to a most prosperous 
perfection. 

Duke. It lies much in your holding up. Haste you 270 
speedily to Angelo : if for this night he entreat 
you to his bed, give him promise of satisfaction. 



* ' Basilius, having passed over the night 
with the sweet imagination of embracing 
the most desired Zelmane . . . thought 
it now season to return to his wedlock- 
bed." In reality he was embracing his 
wife, and, as here, the deceit leads to a 
reconciliation. But the wife was also 
victim of a mistake in Arcadia. 

258. encounter] amorous meeting, as 
in Merry Wives ^ ill. v. 74, etc. Com- 
pare Ben Jonson, Fox, i. i. : *'I 
wonder at the desperate valour Of the 
bold English that they dare let loose 
Their wives to all encounters." " Let 
loose" in this quotation illustrates a 
passage in Merry Wives, il. i. 185. 

263. scaled] weighed (and found want- 
ing), estimated. So Schmidt and Craig 
explain, following Warburton. Johnson 
interpreted it — (i) reached, notwith- 
standing his elevation ; or (2) stripped 
of his scales (as a fish?) or covering, 
and laid bare. Steevens suggested it 
might be the sense "scattered" or 
"dispersed" (as in Coriolanus and pro- 
vincial use), while Ritson says it might 
mean "laid open as a corrupt sore by 
removing the slough." If Ritson's 
sense were possible — "scaled" should 
mean "covered with a scale" — it 
would be satisfactory. I doubt if 
any of the interpretations are correct. 



As they stand, I prefer Steevens, i.e. 
" thrown into confusion." It would 
then have its equivalent in the common 
biblical word " scatter." In this sense 
the following passage in Laneham's 
Z^//<?r (Burn's, p. 45), 1575, must be 
understood: " At which petition her 
Highness staying, it appeared strait 
how Sir Bruce became unseen, his 
bands skaled, and the Lady . . . ap- 
proached toward her Highness." This 
is the earliest literary use I know of a 
common northern word. 

263. frame] discipline, instruct. 
Compare Sidney's Arcadia, Book III. : 
"The poor ladies . . . not suffered 
... to have conference with any other 
but such as Cecropia had already framed 
to sing all their songs to her tune." 

265. doubleness of the benefit] two- 
fold benefit (to your brother and to 
Mariana) ; also explained greatness. 

267. image] vivid description, as in 
Merry Wives, I v. vi. 17. See note. 

270. holding tip] supporting, carrying 
it through. To hold up the jest (keep 
it going) is a frequent expression, as 
in Midstimjfier-Nighfs Dream, III. ii. 
239, and Merry Wives, v. v. 109. 
And compare J onson's CynthicCs Revels, 
III. iii. : "prove how you can hold up 
and follow it." 



76 MEASUEE FOR MEASURE [actih. 

I will presently to Saint Luke's ; there, at the 
moated grange, resides this dejected Mariana : at 
that place call upon me, and dispatch with 275 
Angelo, that it may be quickly. 
Isab, I thank you for this comfort. Fare you well, 

good father. [Exeunt. 



SCENE II. — The Street before the Prison. 

Enter on one side^ DuKE, disguised as before ; on the other ^ 
Elbow, and Officers with Pompey. 

Elb. Nay, if there be no remedy for it, but that you 

will needs buy and sell men and woman like 

beasts, we shall have all the world drink brown 

and white bastard. 

Duke. O heavens ! what stuff is here ? 5 

Pompey. 'Twas never merry world, since, of two usuries. 

Enter . . . Pompey] Cambridge, Globe ; Enter Elbow, Clowne, Officers Ff ; 
Enter Duke as a friar ; to him Elbow, Clown, and Officers Craig. 

274. gratige] a country house. See tard was a sweet Spanish wine. The 

Oihello, 1. i. io6. Nashe wrote, at a earliest mention of it I have noticed is 

time when the plague was raging in in English Policie, circa 1436, reprinted 

London (1593) : " Poore men to you I in Ilakluyt, ed. 1809 (vol. i. p. 208): 

speake, (for ritch men haue theyr "in certaine Commodities called com- 

Country Granges to flye to from con- ming out of Spaine . . . Bene Figs, 

tagion) humble your soules with fasting Raisins, wine Bastard and Datis And 

and prayer," Grosart, iv. 246. Licoris," etc. The quibbling here is 

274. dejected^ depreciated, fallen repeated in Hey wood's Fair Maid of 

from her estate. Compare Captain the /^f^^j^ (Pearson, p. 301) : "are you 

Smith (Arber, p. 217), 1616: "so far a married man, He furnish you with 

dejected from our auncient prede- bastard, white or browne according to 

cessors." And Shirley, The Ball, Aci the complexion of your bedfellow." 

III. : "You must encourage strangers Pale sherry was till very recently called 

while you live : it is the character of a white wine. Furnivall, in Babees 

our nation, we are famous for dejecting Book, p. 205 (Early Eng. Text Soc), 

our own countrymen." And Ben quotes from W. Vaughan, 1602: "Of 

Jonson, The Fox, 11. i. : " Nor that Muscadell, Malmesie, and browne 

the calumnious reports of that impu- Bastard. These kindes of wines are 

dent detractor, and shame to our pro- only for married folkes, because they 

fession . . . hath at all attached, much strengthen the back." 
less dejected me." See v. i, 222, and 6. 'Twas never merry ivorld'\ occurs 

note. again in Twelfth Night, ill. i. 109. 

See The First Part of the Contention 



Scene //. 



etc. (1594) : " Twas never merry world 



3,4. brown and white bastard"] "^diS- with us since these gentlemen came 



SC. II. 



MEASURE FOR MEASURE 



77 



the merriest was put down, and the worser allowed 
by order of law a furred gown to keep him warm ; 
and furred with fox and lamb-skins too, to signify- 
that craft, being richer than innocency, stands for 
the facing. 
Elb. Come your way, sir. Bless you, good father friar. 



lO 



up " ; and footnote with reference to 
Stowe's Chronicle^ in Shakespeare's 
Library {1875), p. 478. The saying 
seems to have been first levelled against 
cardinals. And Mr. Craig refers to 
Dekker's Old Fortunatus (Pearson, i. 
100) : " 'Twas never merrie world with 
us since purses and bags were invented." 

6, 7. two usuries, the merriesf] The 
merriest usury that Pompey laments is 
that sin that was interdicted by the 
proclamation (i. i. 95), and that he 
bewails in the first scene of Act 11. 
He refers backwards perhaps to the 
first enactments (i. iii. 19). But 
Pompey (a Londoner born) alludes 
probably to events much nearer home 
— to the putting down of the public 
Stews, or Bordello, on the Bankside 
These stew-houses were farmed out to 
' ' Froes of Flanders " by the then Mayor 
of London, for, as Stow says, " English 
people disdayned to be baudes." Stow 
tells us, "In the year of Christ 1546, 
the 37th of Henry viii., this row of 
stews in Southwarke was put down 
by the king's commandment." This 
"farming" was easily called a usury. 

7. the worser] money-lending. Fox- 
fur (brown, not black or white) and 
budge (or lamb-skin) facings was the 
recognised garb of usurers at this time, 
a distinct class from the wealthy gold- 
smith bankers of Cheapside, who were 
commonly aldermen. In this year 
(1602) James Pemberton, goldsmith, 
was one of the two Sheriffs of London. 
Touchstone, the goldsmith in Eastward 
Ho .'{1604), is a very different person 
from "that serpent Security," an old 
usurer, in the same play. I will quote 
some references to this hated class and 
their dress. Nashe says, in Pierce 
Penilesse (Gros. ii. 17), 1592: "At 
length (as Fortune served) I lighted 
upon an old, stradling Usurer, clad in 
a damaske cassocke, edged with Fox- 



fur .. . and a short thridbare gown 
on his backe, fac't with moath-eaten 
budge." Greene, in his Groatsworth of 
Wit, tells of "Gorinius (for that shall 
be this Usurer's name)," who "had 
good experience in a Noverint . . . 
and sate as formally in his fox-furd 
gowne" (Gros. xii. 194), 1596. And 
in The Defence of Cony-catching, 1592 
(Gros. xi. 52), Greene [?] says : " those 
Fox-furd gentlemen . . . those miser- 
able Usurers (I meane) that like 
Vultures pray uppon the spoyle of the 
poore." And Dekker, Newes from 
Hell, 1606 (Gros. ii. 139) : " tell me, 
sayes my setter up of Scriveners, Must 
I be stript thus out of all ? Shall my 
Fox-furde gownes be lockt up from 
me ? " Ben Jonson speaks of a " Scriv- 
ener's furred gown" in Bartholomew 
Fair, v. iii. These garments appear 
to have been the everyday working 
wear of the usurer, or combinate 
usurer-scrivener, the scum of the law- 
courts. Many statutes regulated their 
dealings. A statute of 13th Elizabeth 
confirmed that passed in 3rd Henry v., 
which reduced all legal interest to ten 
per cent. Usurers had no livery or 
company, though scriveners had. See 
Stow's Survey, ed. 1842, p. 197. 
Later, in The Magnetic Lady (1632), 
Jonson makes " Usurer" and " Money- 
bawd " synonymous terms. 

9. fox and lamb-skins] Malone refers 
to the Statute of Apparel, 24 Henry 
VIII. c. 13. He quotes also from 
Characterismi, or Lentons Leasures, 
1631 : "An Usurer is an old fox clad 
in lamb-skin, who hath preyed so long 
abroad." For some of the regulations 
concerning the wear of furs, see 
Howell's Vocabulary (sec. Ii.), 1659. 
Sidney refers to lambskins as a grot- 
esquely poor fur : * ' Oh, how mad a sight 
it was to see Dametas, like rich tissue 
furred with XamhsVms,'' Arcadia, Bk. 11. 



78 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [actiu. 

Duke. And you, good brother father. What offence 
hath this man made you, sir ? 

Elb, Marry, sir, he hath offended the law : and, sir, 1 5 
we take him to be a thief too, sir, for we have 
found upon him, sir, a strange picklock, which 
we have sent to the deputy. 

Duke. Fie, sirrah ! a bawd, a wicked bawd ! 

The evil that thou causest to be done, 20 

That is thy means to live. Do thou but think 

What 'tis to cram a maw or clothe a back 

From such a filthy vice : say to thyself. 

From their abominable and beastly touches 

I drink, I eat, array myself, and live. 25 

Canst thou believe thy living is a life. 

So stinkingly depending? Go mend, go mend. 

Pompey. Indeed, it does stink in some sort, sir ; but 
yet, sir, I would prove — 

Duke. Nay, if the devil had given the proofs for 
sin, 30 

Thou wilt prove his. Take him to prison, officer ; 
Correction and instruction must both work 
Ere this rude beast will profit. 

Elb. He must before the deputy, sir, he has given him 

warning. The deputy cannot abide a whore- 35 
master: if he be a whoremonger, and comes 

25. eat^ array myself'\ Theobald (Bishop conj.), eat away myself Yi. 

13, good brother fatherl Tyrwhitt As any key, Harvey speaks of "a 

and Steevens say this is a humorous silver picklock" (Gros. ii. 31 1); and 

response to Elbow's blundering ad- \n Trinwiing of Thomas Nashe,\\\. a^Z: 

dress — mon frere pere and mon pere " helpe thee off with thy shackles. Noe 

frere. Probably Elbow is represented Thomas, noe, I am no pick-locke." 

as a very old man. Ritson's unpleasant suggestion (easily 

13, 14. offence . . . made] To make illustrated) is at once disposed of by the 

offence (commit a fault) is frequent in words in the preceding line, " we take 

Shakespeare. " You " is pleonastic. him to be a thief," etc. 

17. strange picklock] The word 23. filthy vice] See above, 11. iv. 24. 

** picklock" was used of a thief and Filthy means here lewd, lustful. The 

also of a lawyer. Ritson suggests that adverb occurs in Whetstone's play, 

kind of lock mentioned as Bergamasco iv. 7: "I love you so filthily, now" 

locks (they were Italian, not Spanish) (hotly). And a little later in the 

in Rabelais, iii. 36. An Italian girdle, same scene the adjective is used, 



sc.ii.] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 



79 



before him, he were as good go a mile on his 
errand. 

Duke. That we were all,^as some would seem to be, 
From our faults, as faults from seeming, free ! 

Elb. His neck will come to your waist, — a cord, sir. 

Pompey. I spy comfort : I cry bail. Here 's a gentle- 
man and a friend of mine. 



40 



Enter LuciO. 

Lticio, How now, noble Pompey ! What, at the wheels 

of Caesar? Art thou led in triumph? What, is 45 
there none of Pygmalion's images, newly made 
woman, to be had now, for putting the hand in 
the pocket and extracting it clutched? What 

40. Fro7n otir faults] F i ; Free from our fatilts F 2, 3 ; Free from all 
faults F 4 ; as faults from seeming] as from faults seeming Hanmer. 41. waist] 
Johnson, ed. 1778 ; wast F i, 2, 3 ; waste F 4. 44. wheels] heels Steevens. 

48. it] Pope, omitted Ff. 



39, 40. That we were all . , . free /] 
The Folio has no commas at " be " or 
* * seeming. " Various meanings have been 
given to this obscure passage. The 
simplest, too poor a conceit, as Johnson 
says, is Warburton's, who gives "seem- 
ing " the sense of comeliness. The Duke 
appears to be moralising on these abomin- 
able and beastly faults so grossly brought 
before him. They are free from any 
pretence or hypocrisy. ' ' Would we 
were all (as some pretend they are) as 
free from our faults, as these faults are 
from any pretence." But I incline to 
Warburton's view, and would assign the 
simple sense of decency to seeming. A 
similar passage at the close of Jonson's 
Cynthia's Revels (1600), supports me: 
* ' purged of your present maladies . . . 
you become Such as you fain would 
seem." Compare Gascoigne's Steel 
Glas (Arber, pp. 55, 56). 

41. waist, — a cord] alluding to the 
hempen girdle [a halter] of the Francis- 
can friar. Compare The Troublesome 
Raigne of King lohn (Hazlitt's Shaks. 
Lib., p. 262), 1591 : Philip the Bastard 
addresses a Franciscan friar : " Phil. 
Grey-gownd good face, conjure ye, Nere 
trust me for a groate, If this waste girdle 



hang thee not, that girdleth in your 
coate." 

44, 45. Pompey . . . CdSjar.?]Seeii. i. 
250, 251, and note. Compare Antony 
and Cleopatra, IV. ix. 75, 76 : *"' whilst 
the wheeled seat Of fortunate Csesar, 
drawn before him, branded His baseness 
that ensued." 

45-47. is there none . . . to be had] is 
that practice put an end to. 

46, 47. Pygmalion' s images . . . 
woman] perhaps a recollection of Mar- 
ston's poem, The Metamorphosis of 
Pygmalion' sl77iage,\y)?i. In The Argu- 
ment he uses the words, *' the maid, by 
the power of her (Venus') deity, was 
metamorphosed into a living woman." 
This poem is quite gross enough to be 
mentioned in this connection. It was 
ordered to be committed to the flames 
by Archbishop Whitgift in 1599, as 
Steevens tells us. Compare, too, 
Sidney's Arcadia, Book ii. : *' The 
joy which wrought into Pygmalion's 
mind while he found his beloved image 
was softer and warmer in his folded 
arms, till ... it accomplished woman's 
shape." 

48. clutched] clenched (and holding 
money). Compare King John, 11. 589 : 



80 



MEASURE FOR MEASURE [actiii. 



reply, ha? What sayest thou to this tune, 
matter and method ? Is 't not drowned i' the last 5 o 
rain, ha? What sayest thou, trot? Is the 
world as it was, man ? Which is the way ? Is 
it sad, and few words, or how ? The trick of it ? 

Duke, Still thus, and thus : still worse ! 

Lucio. How doth my dear morsel, thy mistress ? Pro- 5 5 
cures she still, ha? 

Pompey. Troth, sir, she hath eaten up all her beef, and 
she is herself in the tub. 



51. trot\ io'lDyce. 

* ' the power to clutch the hand When his 
fair angels would salute my palm," 
where it means simply clench. The 
latter is the earliest use of the word in 
this sense in the New Eng. Did. It 
was a new use, and it is one of the 
terms that Jonson reprehends Marston 
for in his Poetaster, V. i. (257^). Jonson's 
line is " of strenuous vengeance to clutch 
the fist" (1601); and Marston's in 
Antonio's Revenge, v. i. (1601): "The 
fist of strenuous vengeance is clutcht." 
Jonson makes this one of the worst 
words Marston has to vomit. Compare 
Brome, New Academy (Pearson, p. 260) : 
"before we parted . . . Some twenty 
pieces were clutched into this hand," 
1600. 

49. tune'\ humour, fashion. Compare 
Hamlet, v. ii. 198, etc. And Ben 
Jonson, Cynthids Revels, iv. i. (172a): 
" Speaks to the tune of a country lady, 
that comes ever in the rearward or train 
of a fashion." 

50, 51. drowned t* the last rain] This 
probably alludes to destructive floods 
which took place in London some time in 
the winter of 1602-03. Dekker, in The 
King's Entertainment (Pearson, i. 277), 
15 th March 1603, refers to it : " hee that 
should have compared the emptie and 
untroden walkes of London, which were 
to be seen in that late mortally-destroying 
Deluge, with the thronged streets now." 
Notable rains, frosts, and storms often 
help to fix the dates of plays. It is 
not unlikely that a quibble in " the last 
rain " (reign) is intended, alluding to 
these changes due to the new king. This 



gives substance to Lucio's moraliz- 
ing. 

51. trot'\ commonly applied to an old 
woman, contemptuously and familiarly, 
as in Thersites (Haz. Dods. i. 415), 
1527. I know no other example of its 
use to a man. See Nares and Steevens 
for examples of the word. Dyce took 
the liberty of reading " to 't." Old age 
seems to be the essential sense. See 
Sherwood's English- French Dictionary. 
We are told presently that Pompey is a 
bawd of antiquity. 

53. The trick of it 9"^ The fashion, or 
custom, of it. Equivalent to ' ' this tune," 
above. Compare 2 Henry IV, I. ii. 
240. And Ben Jonson, Poetaster, ii. i. 
(1601) : " Chloe. Is that the fashion of 
courtiers ? ... it is easily hit on . . . 
He knows not the trick on't." Lane- 
ham's Letter affords a good example 
(Burn's reprint, p. 50), 1575: "his 
shirt after the new trick, with ruffs fair 
starched, sleeked," etc. 

55, 56. Procures"] Captain Whit in 
Jonson's Bartholomew Fair, iv. iii. 
(191a), makes use of this word in prob- 
ably the present sense, i.e. to pimp. 

58. tubl Quibbling on the two senses 
of tub ; for corning beef, and as used in 
the sweating cure for venereal diseases. 
Compare Beaumont and Fletcher, Custom 
of the County, ill. iii. : "and when you 
catch me in your city powdering tub again , 
boil me with cabbage." Ben Jonson 
speaks of the " saltpetre tub." For the 
other tub, see Nares at Cornelius, and at 
Tub, and Beaumont and Fletcher's plays, 
passim. Hence the use of powdered, 



sen.] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 81 

Lucio. Why, 'tis good ; it is the right of it ; it must be 

so : ever your fresh whore and your powdered 60 
bawd : an unshunned consequence ; it must be so. 
Art going to prison, Pompey ? 

Pompey. Yes, faith, sir. 

Lucio. Why, 'tis not amiss, Pompey. Farewell. Go, 

say I sent thee thither. For debt, Pompey, or 65 
how? 

Elb. For being a bawd, for being a bawd. 

Lucio. Well, then imprison him. If imprisonment be 
the due of a bawd, why, 'tis his right : bawd is 
he doubtless, and of antiquity too ; bawd-born. 70 
Farewell, good Pompey. Commend me to the 
prison, Pompey. You will turn good husband 
now, Pompey ; you will keep the house. 

Pompey. I hope, sir, your good worship will be my 

bail. 75 

Lucio. No, indeed will I not, Pompey ; it is not the 
wear. I will pray, Pompey, to increase your 
bondage : if you take it not patiently, why your 
mettle is the more. Adieu, trusty Pompey. 
Bless you, friar. 80 

line 60, z.^. salted. Nasheusesit: "she 72. good ^us5and] caxeful economist, 

sod, rost, and powdered him," Chrisfs good housekeeper, to which sense the 

7>ar^j- (Grosart, iv. 112), 1593. Else- following words allude. Compare 

where he mentions "powdering beef Tamingofthe Shretv^^.x. 71: " I play 

tubs " (Grosart's A^<3!J-^<?, V. 161). the good husband at home." And 

61. z/«j->^«««^^ inevitable ; that which "Na-she, Foure Letters Confuted {Gxo?,. ii. 

cannot be shunned. 187), 1593: "clapt a paire of double 

65. say I sent thee thither] This may soales on it like a good husband." And 
be merely a piece of chaff, like the G.YidiX\ey,Trim?ning of Thomas Nas he 
modern "mention my name." But at (Gros. iii. 66), 1597: "be a good 
line 200, below, Overdone tells us that husband, Tom, and keep thy coat." 
Lucio was the cause of her arrest, in his The primary sense of husband (house- 
anxiety to do away with evidence against band) is one who keeps the house 
himselffor acts of incontinence. Pompey together. 

was Overdone's servant (see ii. i. 200), 77. wearl fashion. Compare Airs 

and Pompey was included probably in Well^ I. i. 219 ; and As You Like Lt, 

the informations. At i. ii. 70 Lucio il. vii. 34. 

seems anxious for his own safety. Now, 79. mettle] if you give trouble in jail 

being a braggart, he cannot refrain your shackles (metal) will be the heavier, 

from his triumph. These two terms were spelt indifferently, 

70. of antiquity] See note at " trot," and the quibbUng is interminable, 
line 51. 

6 



82 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [actih. 

Duke. And you. 

Lucio. Does Bridget paint still, Pompey, ha ? 

Elb, Come your ways, sir ; come. 

Pompey. You will not bail me then, sir ? 

Lucio. Then, Pompey, nor now. What news abroad, 85 

friar ? What news ? 
Elb. Come your ways, sir ; come. 
Lucio. Go to kennel, Pompey ; go. 

{Exeunt Elbow^ Pompey^ and Officers. 

What news, friar, of the duke ? 
Duke. I know none. Can you tell me of any ? 90 

Lucio. Some say he is with the Emperor of Russia; 

other some, he is in Rome : but where is he, think 

you? 
Duke, I know not where ; but wheresoever, I wish him 

well. 95 

Lucio. It was a mad fantastical trick of him to steal 

from the state, and usurp the beggary he was 

never born to. Lord Angelo dukes it well in 

his absence ; he puts transgression to 't. 

88. to kennel^ Pompey"] Johnson says impostor was upsetting that kingdom, 

this refers to '* Pompey, the common The name was in men's mouths, Nashe 

name of a dog." These unproven com- says, in the beginning of 1599 {Lenten 

ments always need examination. No Stuffe, Grosart's Nashe, v. 289) : "to 

doubt it is now a common name, but, approve himselfe an extravagant states- 

although I have noted down every dog man, catcheth hold of a rush, and 

name I ever met in Elizabethan litera- absolutely concludeth it is meant of the 

ture, Pompey is not one. It is not in Emperor of Russia, and that it will 

'R.\dtx''&\\&\.,BibliothecaScholastica,i<)'&g. utterly marre the traffike into that 

Nor in the later list (over a hundred) in country." Greene mentions "the 

The Gentleman'' s Recreation (ed. 1721). Emperours daughter of Russia" as being 

I think kennel refers merely to his jail, a powerful alliance for Egistus, in his 

and perhaps a bolt or two. Dogs were Pandesto (Grosart, iv. 248), 1588. 

not honoured with magniloquent names 96. fantastical trick] alDSurd whim, 

in Shakespeare's time. Ben Jonson We have had "fantastic tricks "already, 

uses kennel as an insulting epithet for a li. ii. 121. 

low person's bed in Bartholomew Fair 98. dukes it] plays the duke. Com- 

and elsewhere. pare "lords it," 2 Henry VI, iv. viii. 47, 

91, 92. Some . . . other some] occurs, and earlier in Spenser. Shakespeare has 

as here, in Best's True Discourse '' queen it " Winter's 7ale, iv. iii. 4^4, 

(Hakluyt, ed. 1811, iii. no), 1578. and "prince it," C>;/^(^^/2«<?, iii. iii. 85 ; 

And see Acts xvii. 18. " Other-some, ' ' both later plays, as Mr. Craig has pointed 

alone, is frequent in early writers. out. Compare Ben Jonson, Every Man 

91. Emperor of Russici] Kxi\xa&!^n2xy out of his Humour, Y. n. {i<f()g): " Be- 

person? At this time Demetrius the shrew me, he clowns it properly." 



sen] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 83 

Duke. He does well in 't. i oo 

Lucio. A little more lenity to lechery would do no harm 
in him : something too crabbed that way, friar. 

Duke. It is too general a vice, and severity must cure it. 

Lucio. Yes, in good sooth, the vice is of a great kindred ; 

it is well allied; but it is impossible to extirp it 105 
quite, friar, till eating and drinking be put down. 
They say this Angelo was not made by man and 
woman after this downright way of creation : is 
it true, think you ? 

Duke. How should he be made, then ? no 

Lucio. Some report a sea-maid spawned him ; some, 
that he was begot between two stock-fishes. But 
it is certain that when he makes water his urine 
is congealed ice ; that I know to be true ; and he 
is a motion generative ; that 's infallible. 1 1 5 

Duke. You are pleasant, sir, and speak apace. 

Lucio. Why, what a ruthless thing is this in him, for 
the rebellion of a codpiece to take away the life 

115. is amotion generative^ is a motion ungenerative Theobald, has no motion 
generative Capell, is a notion generative Upton conj. 

105. extirp] eradicate. Occurs in 2 115. a motion generative] a puppet 

Henry VI. iii. iii. 24. An older form appearing to be generative or possessed 

than extirpate. Ben Jonson has "ex- of breeding powers. An imitation, or 

tirp the memory Of such an act," in a fraud. Generative has the sense 

The Fox, IV. ii. (1605), an expression of "pertaining to generation." Like 

borrowed by Webster in The White several other passages in this play, it 

Devil (161 2). In the literal sense is easier to believe that we know the 

" extirp " occurs in the earlier part of the author's meaning than to fit that mean- 

sixteenth century. ing to his words. 

111. sea-maid] mermaid, as in Afid- 115. infallible] quite certain. See 
summer • Nighf s Dream, iii. ii. 115. Love's Labotir's Lost, iw. i. 114. Very 
Seems to be a rare word, but Ben common in Gabriel Harvey. The ex- 
Jonson uses it in his Masque of Blackness, pression in the text occurs in Chapman's 
1 605- 1 606. Mons D' Olive, v. i. 

112. stock-fish] a kind of small cod 116. speak apace] \.a\Wd2L^ce,occ\ixs 
imported from Newfoundland, Iceland, in Love's Labour s Lost, v. ii. 369. The 
and Scandinavia. Hence, besides in- adverb is a favourite with Shakespeare, 
sensibility, it conveyed the idea of cold- Tibbet Talkapace is a character in 
ness. Nashe, speaking of Iceland, says, Ralph Roister Doister. 

" how came I to digresse to such a dull, 118. codpiece] "a part of the male 

Lenten Northren Clyme, where there is dress, very indelicately conspicuous in 

nothing but stockfish," Terrors of the the poet's time" (Schmidt). It was 

Night (Grosart, iii. 242), 1594. in vogue from the fifteenth to the 



84 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [actih. 

of a man ! Would the duke that is absent have 
done this? Ere he would have hanged a man 120 
for the getting a hundred bastards, he would have 
paid for the nursing a thousand : he had some 
feeling of the sport ; he knew the service, and 
that instructed him to mercy. 

Duke. I never heard the absent duke much detected 125 
for women ; he was not inclined that way. 

Lucio, O, sir, you are deceived. 

Duke, 'Tis not possible. 

Lucio, Who ? not the duke ? yes, your beggar of fifty, 

and his use was to put a ducat in her clack-dish ; 1 30 
the duke had crotchets in him. He would be 
drunk too ; that let me inform you. 

Duke. You do him wrong, surely. 

Lucio. Sir, I was an inward of his. A shy fellow was 

the duke ; and I believe I know the cause of his 135 
withdrawing. 

Duke. What, I prithee, might be the cause ? 

125. detected] detracted C2i^t\\. 134. shy]slytiQ.x\mex. 

seventeenth century. Urquhart's Rabe- Henderson's Supplement to Chaucer's 

lais (ii. 18) has an interesting note. Troilus and Cresseid : "begging from 

References are endless. hous to hous, With cuppe and clappir 

125. detected] accused, informed like a lazarous." Nares has a good 

against. New Eng. Diet, quotes from article on the subject. Bullen has an 

Hooker's Ecclesiastical Polity, 1594: apposite quotation from Holinshed, ii. 

"The Gentlewoman goeth forward, and 1082, in a note to Middleton's Family 

detecteth herself of a crime." The of Love (iii. 75). When Panurge 

substantive detect appears to have the played the bones (/Pa^^/a/j-, ii. 19) with 

same sense (of accusation) in Greeners an oxrib and two pieces of black ebony 

Vision (Grosart, xii. 244), 1593. he *'made such a noise as the lepers of 

129-132. beggar . . . drtmk] Compare Britanny use to do with their clappering 
Jonson's Fox, i. i. (1605): " Has he clickets." The usual form is clap- 
children? . . . Some dozen or more, dish. 

that he begot on beggars . . . When 131. crotchets] odd fancies. See 

he was drunk." Meriy Wives of Windsor, li. i. 159, 

130. clack-dish] or clap-dish. A and note, Arden edition, p. 73. And 

wooden dish with a movable cover, Jonson, TV/i? 7^?^, v. vii. : *' I must have 

which beggars carried for alms. They my crochets, And my conundrums ! " 
clattered the lid to attract attention. It 134. inward] intimate, Middleton 

is said to have been used originally by uses the word in Michaelmas Term, 

lepers and other infectious beggars, 1607. 

enabling them to keep a sufficient 134. j/^^] reserved, "deep." But see 

distance away. Steevens quotes from note, v. i. 336. 



sen] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 85 

Lucio, No, pardon : 'tis a secret must be locked within 
the teeth and the lips ; but this I can let you 
understand, the greater file of the subject held 140 
the duke to be wise. 

Duke. Wise ! why, no question but he was. 

Lucio. A very superficial, ignorant, unweighing fellow. 

Duke. Either this is envy in you, folly, or mistaking : 

the very stream of his life and the business he 145 
hath helmed must upon a warranted need give 
him a better proclamation. Let him be but testi- 
monied in his own bringings-forth, and he shall 
appear to the envious a scholar, a statesman and 
a soldier. Therefore you speak unskilfully ; or, 150 
if your knowledge be more, it is much darkened 
in your malice. 

Lucio. Sir, I know him, and I love him. 

Duke. Love talks with better knowledge, and know- 
ledge with dearer love. 155 

Lucio. Come, sir, I know what I know. 

Duke. I can hardly believe that, since you know not 
what you speak. But, if ever the duke return, as 
our prayers are he may, let me desire you to 
make your answer before him : if it be honest 1 60 
you have spoke, you have courage to maintain it. 
I am bound to call upon you ; and, I pray you, 
your name? 

155. deare7-'\ Hanmer ; deare F i, 2 ; dear F 3, 4. 

140. file\ "A row of persons" {New 146. upon a warranted need] were a 

Eng. Did.). Compare Coriolanus, I. warrant necessary. 

vi. 43. The greater file, the majority. 147. /r^ir/a///a:/?<?7?] declaration. Com- 

Compare Fletcher's Island Princess, i. pare AlVs Well, i. iii. 180. The or- 

iii. : *'darest thou hold me So far dinary sense of proclamation (public 

behind thy file I cannot reach thee." notices, with which James I. flooded 

143. tmweighing] thoughless, empty- the country on his accession) is very 

headed. common in Shakespeare. 

146. helmed] steered. In Corio- 147, 148. testimonied] witnessed, 

lanus, I. i. 81, the rulers of Rome are proved by testimony, 

called "the helms of the state." And 150. unskilftilly] without discern- 

compare Jonson's Silent Woman, il. ii. ment or sagacity. The adjective has 

(1609) : " I wonder that he is not called the same sense in Othello, i. iii. 27. 
to the helm, and made a counsellor." 



86 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [acthi. 

Lucio. Sir, my name is Lucio, well known to the duke. 

Duke. He shall know you better, sir, if I may live to 165 
report you. 

Lucio. I fear you not. 

Duke. O ! you hope the duke will return no more, or 
you imagine me too unhurtful an opposite. But 
indeed I can do you little harm; you'll forswear 170 
this again. 

Lucio. I '11 be hanged first : thou art deceived in me, 
friar. But no more of this. Canst thou tell if 
Claudio die to-morrow or no ? 

Duke. Why should he die, sir ? 175 

Lucio. Why? for filling a bottle with a tun-dish. I 
would the duke we talk of were returned again : 
this ungenitured agent will unpeople the province 
with continency; sparrows must not build in 
his house-eaves, because they are lecherous. The 1 80 
duke yet would have dark deeds darkly answered ; 
he would never bring them to light : would he 
were returned ! Marry, this Claudio is con- 
demned for untrussing. Farewell, good friar; I 
prithee, pray for me. The duke, I say to thee 185 
again, would eat mutton on Fridays. He's not 

186, 187. He's not past it yet^ mid I say to thee] Hanmer, Mason, Cambridge ; 
He 's now past it, yet {and I say to thee) Ff. 

169. opposite] opponent. Frequent word was very much in people's mouths 

in Shakespeare. Compare Ben Jonson, at this time on account of the wars 

Cj;///^/a'ji'?(?z'^/j, V. II. ;( 1600): "possess between Jonson and Marston with 

your opposite, that the green your mis- Dekker. Dekker's play, Satiromastix, 

tress wears, is her rejoicing . . . you or The Untrussing of the Humorous 

give him the dor." Poet (1602), was perhaps the most 

178. ungenitured agent] "whose stirring dramatic event of the day. See 

blood Is very snow-broth" (i. iv. 57, also Jonson's Poetaster, iv. iv. and v. 

58). Barren. See New Eng. Diet, in i. ; and his Every Man out of his 

v. Geniture. Humour, ii. i., where the Folios print 

181. dark deeds darkly answered] the word in italics, indicating its note- 
See V. i. 279. worthiness perhaps. 

184. untrussing] undoing the points 186. eat mutton on Fridays] The 

and letting down the hose. The appli- primary reference is of course to fasting 

cation here is obvious. The usual sense on Fridays in Lent. The fasts of the 

is whipping, or scourging. "Off with Roman Catholic Church were continued 

thy gowne and untrusse, for I meane in Protestant England for the provident 

to lash thee mightily," Nashe, Pierce purpose of helping on the fisheries and 

Penilesse (Grosart, ii. 6^), 1592. The increasing the number of sailors. See 



sen.] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 



87 



past it yet, and I say to thee, he would mouth 
with a beggar, though she smelt brown bread 
and garlic : say that I said so. Farewell. [Exit 

Duke. No might nor greatness in mortality 190 

Can censure 'scape : back-wounding calumny 
The whitest virtue strikes. What king so strong 
Can tie the gall up in the slanderous tongue ? 
But who comes here? 



Enter ESCALUS, Provost^ and Officers with 
Mistress Overdone. 

Escal. Go : away with her to prison ! 

Overdone. Good my lord, be good to me ; your honour 

is accounted a merciful man ; good my lord. 
Escal. Double and treble admonition, and still forfeit 
the same kind ! This would make mercy 



195 



m 



swear and play the tyrant. 



200 



Wheatley's Introduction to his edition 
of Jonson's Every Man in his Humour. 
The remark is especially made to the 
Duke as a " brother of a gracious order." 
These laws were put into fresh motion 
by James i. See Court and Tifjies of 
Ja?nes I. i. 90 (1609) ; and their un- 
popularity is constantly referred to. 
Mutton had also another meaning 
(prostitute) commonly met with. So 
in Webster's Appius and Virginia, ill. 
ii. : *' mutton's mutton now. Virginia. 
Why, was it not so ever ? Corbulo. No, 
madam, the sinners i' the suburbs had 
almost ta'en the name quite away from 
it, 'twas so cheap and common." See 
Nashe's Lenten Stuffe (Grosart, v. 254), 
and Jonson, The Fox, i. i. 

186, 187. not past it yet] I agree with 
M. Mason that ' ' Hanmer's amendment 
appears absolutely necessary." Other- 
wise there is no force in the previous 
sentence, or rather there would be con- 
tradiction. Nevertheless Johnson and 
Steevens disagree, giving no reasons. 

188. smett] smelt of, as in Merry 
WiveSy III. ii. 69, etc. 

188. brown bread] brown bread had 
a bad name. Breton, in Choice, Chance^ 



and Change, 1606, talks of a fool who 
" loves the Broune loafe better than the 
White." And Nashe uses the term 
" fusty brown-bread" in Christ'' s Teares 
(Grosart, iv. 187, 188), 1593. Brown 
bread was made from rye and un- 
sifted meal. See Harrison's Descrip- 
tion of England, ii. 6, 1587. In Wily 
Beguiled (1606) the expression " broun 
bread clown " occurs. 

188, 189. brown bread and garlic] 
Lenten fare. Barnabe Googe, in The 
Popish Kingdome, 1570 (reprint, folio 
49), says of Lent : "fasting long 
approching doe appeare : In fourtie 
dayes they neither milke, nor fleshe, 
nor egges doe eate . . . Both Ling and 
salt fishe they devoure, and fishe of 
every sorte. Whose purse is full . . . 
But onyans, browne bread, leekes and 
salt, must poore men dayly gnaw." 

190. mortality] human life. Com- 
pare Henry V. I. ii. 28. 

200. play the tyrant] So Cotgrave, 
"Tyranniser. To tyrannise, or play 
the Tirant," 1611. And Ben Jonson, 
Alchemist, v. i. (653) : *«Play not the 
tyrant." And see his Catiline, 11. i. 
(95^)- 



88 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [actiii. 

Prov. A bawd of eleven years' continuance, may it 
please your honour. 

Overdone. My lord, this is one Lucio's information 
against me. Mistress Kate Keepdown was with 
child by him in the duke's time; he promised her 205 
marriage ; his child is a year and a quarter old, 
come Philip and Jacob; I have kept it myself, 
and see how he goes about to abuse me ! 

Escal. That fellow is a fellow of much license : let him 

be called before us. Away with her to prison ! 210 
Go to ; no more words. 

\Exeunt Mistress Overdone and Officers. 
Provost, my brother Angelo will not be altered ; 
Claudio must die to-morrow. Let him be furnished 
with divines, and have all charitable preparation : 
if my brother wrought by my pity, it should not 2 1 5 
be so with him. 

Prov. So please you, this friar hath been with him, 
and advised him for the entertainment of death. 

Escal. Good even, good father. 

Duke. Bliss and goodness on you! 220 

Escal. Of whence are you ? 

Duke. Not of this country, though my chance is now 
To use it for my time : I am a brother 
Of gracious order, late come from the See 
In special business from his Holiness. 225 

219. eveti] F 4 ; 'even F i, 2, 3. 224. See"] Theobald, sea Ff. 

203. Lucio's information] See note at Tusser's Five Hundred Points of Good 

line 64, above. Husbandry: "At Philip and Jacob 

207. cofne] next, when the time away with the lambs." AndinHakluyt 

arrives. Still a common vulgarism in (Maclehose, i. 33), in A Chronicle of 

some districts. So "come Lammas the Kings of Man taken out of M. 

eve" {Romeo and Juliet, i. iii. 17), and Camdens Chorographie{\^^%) : "In the 

"come peascod time" {2 Henry IV. yeere 1185 the Sunne was eclipsed 

II. iv. 413). The expression seems rare upon the feast of S. Philip and Jacob." 
in literature. New Ejtg. Diet, has one 224. the See] commonly misprinted 

earlier, Hoccleve, 1420, and the next, "Sea." Malone refers to Holinshed's 

after Shakespeare, Sou they, 1799. Chrojticle. In Googe's Popish King- 

207. Philip and Jacob] next May ist, dome {1^70) is an example : "The Sea 

the festival of St. PhiHp and St. James, of Rome doth make them all to tremble 

Mr. Craig sends me references to at the name" (folio 17). 



sc. II.] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 89 

Escal. What news abroad i' the world ? 

Duke. None, but that there is so great a fever on 
goodness, that the dissolution of it must cure it : 
novelty is only in request ; and it is as dangerous to 
be aged in any kind of course, as it is virtuous to 230 
be constant in any undertaking. There is scarce 
truth enough alive to make societies secure, but 
security enough to make fellowships accursed. 
Much upon this riddle runs the wisdom of the world. 
This news is old enough, yet it is every day's news. 235 
I pray you, sir, of what disposition was the duke? 

Escal. One that, above all other strifes, contended 
especially to know himself. 

Duke. What pleasure was he given to ? 

Escal. Rather rejoicing to see another merry, than 240 
merry at any thing which professed to make him 
rejoice : a gentleman of all temperance. But 
leave we him to his events, with a prayer they 
may prove prosperous ; and let me desire to know 
how you find Claudio prepared. I am made to 245 
understand that you have lent him visitation. 

Duke. He professes to have received no sinister 

229. and it is as\ F 3, 4 ; and as it is as F i, 2. 

228. dissolution] destruction. the commonplace — constancy is a 

229. only'] pre-eminently, specially, virtue. 

Compare Greene, Follie and Love 233. security . . . accursed] alludes 

(Grosart, iv. 201) : " This onelie is the to giving security for one's friend, 

strangest case that ever chanced unto The dangers of suretyship are constantly 

me." And Ben Jonson, Catiline, v. referred to. Ben Jonson has nearly the 

iv. : "That renowned good man That same words: "But since it is no part 

did so onelie embrace his country." of wisdom in these days to come into 

The Duke does not mean to say (as bonds," Poetaster, iv. iii. Holt White 

Schmidt explains) that nothing but refers to Proverbs xi. 15. And add vi. 

novelty was in request. I, 2. Whitney enumerates the " Seven 

230. 23 1 . it is virtuous to be constant] Sages and their Sentences " in his Choice 
Is not the Duke complaining here of ofEtnblejns, 1586: "And Thales, laste 
the danger of adhering to any course, of all the Sages sayd, Flee sowertiship, 
in an age of novelty ? And if so is it for feare thou be betrayd " (Greene's 
not an immediate contradiction of that edition, p. 130). 

sentiment to announce that it is virtu- 243. events] businesses, 

ous to be constant? I should like 246. lent him visitation] priestly 

to expunge "virtuous," and let the visit. Visitation means visit in the 

meaning be " dangerous to be con- ordinary sense, frequently in Shake- 

stant." But perhaps the Dwke means speare; he has not the substantive visit, 



90 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [actih. 

measure from his judge, but most willingly 
humbles himself to the determination of justice; 
yet had he framed to himself, by the instruction 250 
of his frailty, many deceiving promises of life, 
which I by my good leisure have discredited to 
him, and now is he resolved to die. 

Escal. You have paid the heavens your function, and 

the prisoner the very debt of your calling. I 255 
have laboured for the poor gentleman to the 
extremest shore of my modesty ; but my brother 
justice have I found so severe, that he hath 
forced me to tell him he is indeed Justice. 

Duke, If his own life answer the straitness of his 260 
proceeding, it shall become him well ; wherein 
if he chance to fail, he hath sentenced him- 
self. 

Escal. I am going to visit the prisoner. Fare you 

well. 265 

Duke. Peace be with you ! 

\Exeunt Escalus and Provost. 
He who the sword of heaven will bear 
Should be as holy as severe ; 
Pattern in himself to know, 
Grace to stand, an virtue go; 270 

269, 270. Pattern . . . gd\ Patterning himself to know, hi grace to stand, in 
virtue go Johnson conj. 

257. shore'\ limit. Compare Tempest, here where none obtained before. He 

V. 81. should know in himself a pattern for 

267-270. He who . . . go'l Compare, others, and virtuous disposition to stand 

for the general sentiment, Jonson's upright if it fails elsewhere. This may 

Cynthia! s Revels, v. iii., i6oo (last be a quotation from an educational 

words): "Princes that would their text-book of the time. Nashe has 

people should dowell Must at themselves nearly identical words, undoubtedly a 

begin, as at the head ; For men by reference of the kind : *' These are 

their example, pattern out Their imita- signes of good education, I must con- 

tions and regard of laws ; A virtuous fesse, and arguments of In grace and 

court a world to virtue draws. " vertue, to proceed," Unfortunate Tra- 

270. a;zz'zWw^j'^]if it becomes slack, ?y<?//.j?'(Grosart, v. 14), 1594. And again, 
or fails. "An," the conjunction mean- in Summer's Last Will (Grosart, vi. 
ing "if," is almost invariably written 105), 1592: "Go forward, in grace and 
"and" in the early editions. It ap- vertue to proceed; but let us have no 
pears to me to give excellent sense more of these grave matters." 



sen] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 91 

More nor less to others paying 

Than by self-offences weighing. 

Shame to him whose cruel striking 

Kills for faults of his own liking ! 

Twice treble shame on Angelo, 275 

To weed my vice and let his grow ! 

O, what may man within him hide, 

Though angel on the outward side ! 

How may likeness made in crimes, 

Making practice on the times, 280 

To draw with idle spiders' strings 

Most ponderous and substantial things ! 

Craft against vice I must apply : 

With Angelo to-night shall lie 

His old betrothed but despised : 285 

So disguise shall, by the disguised, 

279-281. may ... 7b draw] many . . . Draw Harness. 279. likeness 
made in crimes] Ff, that likeness made in crimes Theobald, that likeness shading 
crimes Hanmer, such likeness trade in crimes Heath, likeness wade in crimes 
Malone conj. (withdrawn). 280. Making practice] Mocking practise Malone 
conj., etc. etc. 281. To draw] Draw Theobald, So draw Staunton. 

276. To . . , growl] To weed vice eleven words, three begin with "ma." 

in every one else, and cherish his own. Perhaps only two should so begin, 

278. a??^.?/] quibbling on Angelo. and the other should be *'my" not 

279-282. How may . . . things] "may." The compositor's eye may 

This passage is generally regarded as have become confused. The Duke is 

corrupt. Many emendations have been condemning Angelo with the utmost 

suggested, none of which are satis- severity. He is the more indignant 

factory, and all are rather violent, that his likeness (representative), com- 

Malone's conjecture depends on giving pacted in sin, is practising on these 

the meaning "seeming virtue" to like- wicked opportunities to work out im- 

ness, Steevens says very rationally, portant matters of life and death by such 

' ' I neither comprehend the lines before vain and guileful methods. Cobweb 

us as they stand in the old edition, or was constantly used at this time of craft 

with the aid of any changes hitherto and deceit. It is a favourite metaphor 

attempted : and must therefore bequeath ofjonson's. Compare Sejanus, in. i. 

them to the luckier efforts of future (1603): "now they work : Their faces 

criticism. " They are poor lines what- i-un like shittles : they are weaving some 

ever be the meaning, and the soliloquy curious cobweb to catch flies." 
reminds one of the rhymed prose in 286-288. So disguise . . . contracting] 

Pericles, spoken by Gower; or the " So disguise shall, by means of a person 

casket - writing in the Merchant of disguised, return an injurious demand 

Vejiice. I would suggest one very with a counterfeit person " Qohnson). 

slight alteration, but a radical one, and As a modern editor says, "perspicuity 

I lack the courage to make it. In is sacrificed to a jingle of words, 

these two short lines (275, 276) of- This unShakespearian chorus of the 



92 



MEASURE FOR MEASURE [activ. 



Pay with falsehood false exacting, 
And perform an old contracting. 



{Exit. 



ACT IV 



SCENE I. — The moated Grange at St. Luke's. 



Enter MARIANA and a Boy. Boy sings. 

Take, O take those lips away. 

That so sweetly were forsworn ; 
And those eyes, the break of day, 

Lights that do mislead the morn : 
But my kisses bring again, 5 

bring again^ 
Seals of love, but sealed in vain, 

seaVd in vain. 

Mari. Break off thy song, and haste thee quick away : 

Here comes a man of comfort, whose advice i o 

Hath often still'd my brawling discontent. \Exit Boy. 



7. but] though Fletcher. 

Duke's is not justified (Hke those in 
Pericles) by its assistance to the business 
in hand. It is a needless interpolation. 
It seems to me to be suggested in some 
places by some of the early ' ' Books of 
Courtesy," like Seager's Schoole of 
Vertue. See note at line 266. See 
Gifford's note to the Chorus in Ben 
Jonson's Catiline, Act i. 

Act IV. Scene i. 
I. Take, O take] In Fletcher's 
Bloody Brother (acted 1636-7), Act v. 
sc. ii., this song appears with the 
addition of another verse addressed to 
a woman : 

* ' Hide, O hide those hills of snow ^ 
Which thy frozen bosom bears, 

1 Compare "Cupid's Alps," Ovid's Banquet 
0/ Sense, by G. Chapman, 1595. 



On whose tops the pinks that grow 

Are of those that April wears. 
But first set my poor heart free. 
Bound in those icy chains by thee." 
4. Lights] a favourite poetical term 
for the eyes. Compare Sidney's Ast?-o- 
phel and Stella, Sonnet Ix. : "The 
windows now, through which this 
heavenly guest Looks o'er the world, 
and can find nothing such Which dare 
claim from those lights the name of 
best." And Jonson, Staple of News, 
IV. i. : " Her eyes their [lovers] lights 
and rivals to the stars." 

7. Seals of love] Compare Sonnet 
cxlii. ; and Venus and Adonis, 511. 
Jonson has it in The Silent Woman, 
II. iii. : '• Let me now be bold to print 
on those divine lips the seal of being 
mine," 



SCI] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 93 

Enter DUKE, disguised as before. 

I cry you mercy, sir ; and well could wish 

You had not found me here so musical : 

Let me excuse me, and believe me so, 

My mirth it much displeas'd, but pleas'd my woe. i 5 

Duke. 'Tis good : though music oft hath such a charm 
To make bad good, and good provoke to harm. 
I pray you tell me, hath anybody inquired for 
me here to-day? Much upon this time have I 
promised here to meet. 20 

Mari. You have not been inquired after : I have sat 
here all day. 

Duke. I do constantly believe you. The time is come 
even now. I shall crave your forbearance a little : 
may be I will call upon you anon, for some ad- 25 
vantage to yourself. 

Mari. I am always bound to you. \Exit. 

Enter ISABELLA. 

Duke. Very well met, and well come. 

What is the news from this good deputy? 
Isab. He hath a garden circummur'd with brick, 30 

Whose western side is with a vineyard back'd ; 

And to that vineyard is a planched gate, 

That makes his opening with this bigger key ; 

This other doth command a little door 

15. it\ is Warburton. 

12. / cry yott mercy'] I beg your " kindly met." So Johnson, ^/^^^««V/, 

pardon. A common expression. See i. i. : " What ! my honest Abel ? Thou 

Othello, V. i. 69 (note). art well met here." 

18. anybody'] Two words here, and in 30. circu?nmur' cT] walled around. 

Merry Wives l. iv. 4, in the old edition. Words with circuni did not meet with 

20. meet] * * appear, be present " much success fortunately. Some of the 

(Schmidt). Compare Merry Wives y 11. early dictionaries (Cockeram, e.g.) pro- 

iii. 5, and As You Like It, v. ii. posed columns of them. 

129. 32. planched] planked, wooden, 

23. constantly] certainly. boarded. So in Cunningham's Revels 

28. well met] a common greeting; Accounts (Shaks. Soc, p. 67), 1573: 

*'glad to see you." Shakespeare has " Planche boorde and sparres." See 

elsewhere * * fairly met, " ' ' happily met," Nares and Halliwell. 



94 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [activ. 

Which from the vineyard to the garden leads ; 3 5 

There have I made my promise 

Upon the heavy middle of the night 

To call upon him. 
Duke, But shall you on your knowledge find this way ? 
Isab, I have ta'en a due and wary note upon 't : 40 

With whispering and most guilty diligence, 

In action all of precept, he did show me 

The way twice o'er. 
Duke. Are there no other tokens 

Between you 'greed concerning her observance ? 
Isab. No, none, but only a repair i' the dark ; 45 

And that I have possess'd him my most stay 

Can be but brief; for I have made him know 

I have a servant comes with me along. 

That stays upon me, whose persuasion is 

I come about my brother. 
Duke. 'Tis well borne up. 50 

I have not yet made known to Mariana 

A word of this. What, ho ! within ! come forth. 

Re-enter Mariana. 

I pray you, be acquainted with this maid ; 

She comes to do you good. 
Isab. I do desire the like. 

Duke. Do you persuade yourself that I respect you ? 55 
Mari. Good friar, I know you do, and have found it. 
Duke. Take then this your companion by the hand, 

36-38. There . . . hini\ two lines in Ff, ending upon the, him. As here 
S. Walker conj., Cambridge, Globe; prose Delius, Staunton, Craig. 42. action 
all of precept'] precept of all action Johnson conj. 56. have] I have Pope, 

oft have Staunton. 

37. heavy] ^x<yf}%y. " Our Lawes . . . allow no rewarde to 

42. action all of precept] precept all theyr temperate observants." 

of action would read better. A justice's 46. possess'd him] informed him, im- 

precept or written order is often men- pressed upon him. 

tioned. 50. borne up] sustained. Compare 

44. observance] of the precepts Isa- Hamlet, \. v. 95: "my sinews bear me 

bella has received. Compare Nashe's stiffly up." 

Christ's Teares {Giosz-xi, iv. 256), 1594 : 



sc. 



MEASURE FOR MEASURE 



95 



Who hath a story ready for your ear. 

I shall attend your leisure : but make haste ; 

The vaporous night approaches. 

Maru Will 't please you walk aside ? 60 

{Exeunt Mariana and Isabella. 

Duke, O place and greatness ! millions of false eyes 
Are stuck upon thee : volumes of report 
Run with these false and most contrarious quests 
Upon thy doings : thousand escapes of wit 
Make thee the father of their idle dream 6 5 

And rack thee in their fancies ! 



Re-enter Mariana a^id Isabella. 

Welcome ! How agreed ? 
Isab, She '11 take the enterprise upon her, father, 
If you advise it. 

61-66. place . . . fancies\ Warburton would tranfer these lines to in. ii. 191. 
63. thesel their Hanmer ; qtiests\ quest F I. 65. dreajn] ¥i {dreame), dreams 



Pope, Globe ; an idle dream Rowe. 
agreed? Hanmer. 

61-64. place and greatness , . . 
Upon thy doings'] Steevens refers to 
Chaucer's Sompnoures Tale, Tyrwhitt's 
ed., verse 633. The wording of these 
lines recalls a part of Jonson's descrip- 
tion of Fame from Virgil's ^neid, 
Book iv., in Poetaster, Act V. (1601), 
the sentiment here being subjective, not 
objective, as in Jonson : **a monster 
vast, And dreadful. Look, how many 
plumes are placed On her huge corps, 
so many waking eyes Stick underneath ; 
And which may stranger rise In the 
report, as many tongues she bears, As 
many mouths, as many listening ears." 
Warburton very naturally remarked that 
this fine speech seems out of place here, 
and foreign to the immediately present 
subject. But Johnson's reply is suffi- 
cient : ' ' There was a necessity to fill 
up the time in which the ladies con- 
versed apart." 

61, 62. eyes Are stuck upon thee] 
Compare Timon of Athens, iv. iii. 
263-266 : "the eyes and hearts of 
men . . . That numberless upon me 
stuck as leaves Do on the oak." And 



66. Welcome! How agreed?] Well. 

A Lover's Complaint, 81 : "maiden's 
eyes stuck over all his face." And 
compare Jonson's i'^f/Vzwwj, 11. iv. (1603) : 
* ' Were all Tiberius' body stuck with 
eyes And every wall and hanging in my 
house Transparent ... I would hate 
To . . . change an act. " 

63. contrarious] adverse, as in "con- 
trarious winds" in 1 Henry IV. v. i. 
52. Compare Nashe, Terrors of the 
Night ( 1 593) : ' ' From the unequall and 
repugnant mixture of contrarious meates 
. . . many of our mystic cogitations 
proceede." 

6'^. quests] inquiries. Compare Jon- 
son, Fox, IV. i. : " If the senate Right 
not my quest in this, I will protest them 
To all the world no aristocracy." 
Steevens compares this passage with 
Richard III. v. iii. 193-195. 

66. rack] distort. Compare Ben 
Jonson, Poetaster, v. i. (261^): "And 
if at any time you chance to meet some 
Gallo - Belgic phrase, you shall not 
straight Rack your poor verse to give it 
entertainment." 



96 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [activ. 

Duke, It is not my consent, 

But my entreaty too. 
Isab. Little have you to say 

When you depart from him, but, soft and low, 70 

" Remember now my brother." 
Mari, Fear me not. 

Duke. Nor, gentle daughter, fear you not at all. 

He is your husband on a pre-contract: 

To bring you thus together, 'tis no sin, 

Sith that the justice of your title to him 75 

Doth flourish the deceit. Come, let us go : 

Our corn 's to reap, for yet our tithe 's to sow. 

\Exeunt. 

SCENE II. — A Room in the Prison. 

Enter Provost and Pompey. 

Prov, Come hither, sirrah. Can you cut off a man's 
head ? 

Pompey. If the man be a bachelor, sir, I can ; but if 
he be a married man, he 's his wife's head, and I 
can never cut off a woman's head. 5 

77. Our . . . sow'\ Ourtythe^storeap,foryetotircorn^s to sow Capell conj. 
MS. (Cambridge); tithe' si Tithes' F i, 2, 3; Tythes F 4; tilth's Hanmer 
(Warburton). 

76. y^£7?/m/z] adorn, embellish. Com- senses. Thiselton (" Textual Notes ") 
pare Holinshed, iii. 1323 (1587): says the word has here " relation to pre- 
" Deceipt [sheweth] finest when he is contract (line 73), the associating idea 
cunninglieflorished"[iVk2f uE/?^. Z>zV/.]. being obligation." "Tithe of corn," 
And Greene, A Princelie Mirrour and " reap " in connection with " sow " 
(Grosart, iii. 7): "I give quoth he are familiar Biblical language, 
another mans picture, but freshlie _, 

flourished with mine owne coulours." ^cene 11, 

77. tithel Malone, Steevens, and 4. wifes head] See Ephesians v. 23 : 
others of the early commentators " For the husband is the head of the 
favoured Warburton's suggestion which wife." 

gives plain sense. An easy metaphor 5. can never cut off a wotnan^s head] 

for an ecclesiastic to make use of. Does this refer to the law that " burning 

'* Predial tithes " are those which arise was especially the punishment appro- 

from grain of all sorts, hay, etc. priated to women convicted of treason 

Nashe uses the verb tithe vaguely twice and witchcraft " ? Derrick was the 

(Grosart, iv. 69; v. 114) in applied hangman at this time. See Nares (in 



sc.li.] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 97 

Prov, Come, sir, leave me your snatches, and yield me 
a direct answer. To-morrow morning are to die 
Claudio and Barnardine. Here is in our prison 
a common executioner, who in his office lacks a 
helper : if you will take it on you to assist him, i o 
it shall redeem you from your gyves ; if not, you 
shall have your full time of imprisonment, and 
your deliverance with an unpitied whipping, for 
you have been a notorious bawd. 

Ponipey. Sir, I have been an unlawful bawd time out 1 5 
of mind ; but yet I will be content to be a lawful 
hangman. I would be glad to receive some 
instruction from my fellow partner. 

Pi'ov. What ho, Abhorson ! Where 's Abhorson, 

there ? 20 

Enter ABHORSON. 

A hhor. Do you call, sir ? 

Prov. Sirrah, here 's a fellow will help you to-morrow 
in your execution. If you think it meet, com- 
pound with him by the year, and let him abide 
here with you ; if not, use him for the present 2 5 
and dismiss him. He cannot plead his estimation 
with you ; he hath been a bawd. 

Abhor. A bawd, sir? Fie upon him ! he will discredit 
our mystery. 

V. Derrick) for a reference to his offence 15, 16. time out of mind] Pompey is 

against a condemned woman which an old man (see iii. ii. 69). "Time 

appears to be referred to in Dekker's out of mind " occurs in Foxe's Book of 

Satiromastix (Pearson, p. 218), and Martyrs^ 1558, according to Oliphant, 

possibly here. The passage in Dekker New English (i. 540)- Nashe has it in 

is " Tucca. How dost thou my smug Pierce Penilcsse and elsewhere. And 

Belimperia ? how dost thou ? hands off see Ro?neo and Juliet, i. iv. 
my little bald Derricke, hands off." 23, 24. compound with] agree with, 

6. snatches] ' * Fragments of wit " come to terms with. Compare Lear^ 

(Schmidt). Compare Nashe, Death of i. ii. 139. 

Martin (Gros. v. 173): "and they be 29. mystery] handicraft, business, 

not caught in the snatch against their Hence the name "mystery plays" 

will." Used similarly to the word originally acted by the guilds, com- 

" catch." Smartness of speech. panics, or trades. All occupations, 

8. ] Barnardine is a character in Mar- whether of arts or sciences, were so 

hme'^ Jew of Malta, i$()i-2. called. Duelling is Bobadil's mystery, 

13. 7/«//V?V^ pitiless, unmerciful. etc. etc. 

7 



98 



MEASURE FOR MEASURE [activ. 



Prov. Go to, sir; you weigh equally; a feather will 30 
turn the scale. \Exit. 

Pompey. Pray, sir, by your good favour — for, surely, 
sir, a good favour you have, but that you have a 
hanging look — do you call, sir, your occupation a 
mystery ? 35 

Abhor. Ay, sir; a mystery. 

Pompey. Painting, sir, I have heard say is a mystery ; 
and your whores, sir, being members of my occu- 
pation, using painting, do prove my occupation 
a mystery; but what mystery there should be in 40 
hanging, if I should be hanged, I cannot imagine. 

Abhor, Sir, it is a mystery. 

Pompey. Proof? 

Abhor. Every true man's apparel fits your thief: if it 

44, 48. Abhor. Every . . . thief '\ Capell, Steevens, Cambridge, Globe ; 
Abhor. Every . . . thief (44), Clown {i.e. Pompey). If it be , . . thief (45- 
48) Ff; Abh. Every . . . thief, Clown: {i.e. Pompey) if it be . . . thief {^2>) 
Theobald. 



32-34. good favour . . . hanging 
look] Compare Jonson's Every Man in 
his Humour, 11. i. : " he 's a gallant, 
cavaliero too, right hangman cut." The 
quibble here on a downcast expression 
and one born to be hanged is probably 
an old one. Compare " his expression 
is perfect gallows " ( Tempest , i. i. ). 

44> 45-] Capell's emendation is obvi- 
ously right. The error in the Folio 
makes nonsense of the dialogue. Pom- 
pey asks a question and gets his answer ; 
he does not answer his own direct in- 
quiry. 

44-48.] Pompey's argument was : 
Painting is a craft, whores use painting, 
therefore their trade is a craft or re- 
spectable mystery. And since he 
belonged to a kindred occupation, both 
Pompey's and Overdone's occupations 
ranked as mysteries. Abhorson replies, 
similarly I can show that thieves and 
hangmen's trades belong to the dignity of 
a mystery. A fitter of apparel's occupa- 
tion is a mystery (a tailor's craft) ; a 
thief fits himself from every true man, 
therefore his business is a mystery. 
And I, the hangman, find the thief's 



apparel big enough for my use, who am 
a true man, so that I am also a member 
of the thiefs occupation or mystery. 
This is the argument, but the locution 
is decidedly involved, not to say 
higgledy-piggledy. See Heath's note 
in Steevens. In Ben Jonson's Fox, 
III. i., Mosca, the parasite, is so pleased 
with his calling that he similarly extols 
it : " O ! your parasite Is a most 
precious thing, dropt from above , . . 
I muse the mystery was not made a 
science, It is so liberally profest ! " 

44. true man] honest man. The 
expression almost invariably introduced 
** thief." There are about a dozen 
examples in Shakespeare alone ; more, 
indeed, than other writers supply. See, 
however, Armin's Two Maids of More- 
clacke (Grosart, p. 98), and Middleton's 
Mayor of Quinborough, iii. See also 
Nares. It is as old as Chaucer's 
Squyeres Tale, 537. And Nashe, 
Foure Letters Confuted (Grosart, ii. 
236), 1593 : *' One true man is stronger 
than two thieves." 

44. apparel] Steevens quotes from 
Promos and Cassandra, 1578, where 



sc.ii.] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 99 

be too little for your thief, your true man thinks 45 
it big enough ; if it be too big for your thief, 
your thief thinks it little enough : so every true 
man's apparel fits your thief 

Re-enter Provost 

Prov. Are you agreed ? 

Pompey. Sir, I will serve him; for I do find your 50 
hangman is a more penitent trade than your 
bawd ; he doth oftener ask forgiveness. 

Prov, You, sirrah, provide your block and your axe 
to-morrow four o'clock. 

Abhor. Come on, bawd ; I will instruct thee in my 5 5 
trade: follow. 

Pompey. I do desire to learn, sir; and I hope, if you 
have occasion to use me for your own turn, you 
shall find me yare ; for, truly, sir, for your kind- 
ness I owe you a good turn. 60 

Prov. Call hither Barnardine and Claudio : 

{Exeunt Pompey and Abhor son. 
The one has my pity ; not a jot the other. 
Being a murderer, though he were my brother. 

59. yare\ Theobald, y^are Ff, yours Rowe. 62. The one\ TW one Ff, 
One Hanmer. 

the Hangman says : " Here is nyne and For being yare about him." Dekker 

twenty sutes of apparell for my share." has "as yare as a tumbler" (dog), 

The clothes of the condemned man were Satiromastix , 1602. 

the hangman's perquisite. So Ben 60. good turn'] "One good turn 

Jonson, Devil is an Ass, i. i. (217a): asketh another," Heywood's Proverbs, 

"For clothes employ your credit with 1546; and in Gosson, School of Abuse 

the hangman, Or let our tribe of (Arber, p. 67), 1579. There is prob- 

brokers furnish you." ably a quibble here, as Farmer sug- 

59. yare'] ready, brisk. Occurs gested, to the turn of the ladder, the 

several times in Shakespeare. Given hangman's phrase. Compare Three 

as a naval term in Captain Smith's Ladies of Lotidon (Hazlitt's Dodsley, 

Accidence for Voting Seamen, 1626, vi. 351), 1584: " the hangman's hand 

and is still in use dialectically (Scotch). Ready to turn the ladder " ; and 

Nashe has it in nautical parlance : Greene's James the Fourth (Grosart, 

"haling of bolings yare," Terrors of xiii. 279) : ^'' laques Gallowes : What be 

the Night, i^c)-^. In Antony and Cleo- that? Andrezv, Marrie, sir, a place of 

patra, ill. xiii. 131, we have the same great promotion, where thou shalt by 

sentiment as here : ' ' like A halter'd one turn above ground, rid the world 

neck which does the hangman thank of a knave," 



100 



MEASURE FOR MEASURE [activ 



Enter Claudio. 

Look, here 's the warrant, Claudio, for thy death : 

'Tis now dead midnight, and by eight to-morrow 65 

Thou must be made immortal. Where 's Barnardine ? 
Claud. As fast lock'd up in sleep as guiltless labour 

When it lies starkly in the traveller's bones : 

He will not wake. 
Prov, Who can do good on him ? 

Well, go; prepare yourself! {^Knocking within. 

But hark, what noise ? 70 

Heaven give your spirits comfort ! {Exit Claudio. 

By and by. 

I hope it is some pardon or reprieve 

For the most gentle Claudio. 

Enter DUKE, disguised as before. 

Welcome, father. 
Duke. The best and wholesom'st spirits of the night 

Envelop you, good provost ! Who call'd here of 
late ? 75 

Prov. None, since the curfew rung. 
Duke. Not Isabel ? 
Prov. No. 



65. dead midnight'] midnight that is 
still as death: "the dead vast and 
middle of the night," Hamlet, i. ii. 198. 
And see Sonnet xHii. 

66. made immortal] Compare Nashe, 
Unfortunate Traveller (Grosart, v. 85), 
1 594 : ' ' who having gotten but one 
piece of my ill golde into their handes, 
devise of the meanes to make mee im- 
mortall." The opposite sense, as in 
Marlowe's well-known "make me im- 
mortal with a kiss," occurs in Jonson's 
Staple of News^ iii. i. (304a), etc. 

68. starkly] profoundly, perfectly. 
The usual sense of stark was absolute, 
complete, perfect. Nashe has stark 
dead, stark dumb, stark drunk. Ben 
Jonson has stark security and a stark 
pimp, a stark reprobate. I am inclined 



to refer starkly here to sleep : As fast 
locked up as guiltless labour is in sleep, 
When it lies starkly in the traveller's 
bones. As the commentators all inter- 
pret starkly, stiffly, I presume I difiler 
with them. Compare Ben Jonson, 
Catiline, iv. ii. (ii5<^), 1611 : "And 
wake you from a sleep as stark as 
death." The primary sense of the 
Saxon stare is strong. 

69. do good on him] produce any 
effect, prevail with. Compare 1 Henry 
IV. III. i. 198, 199: " She is desperate 
here . . . one that no persuasion can 
do good upon." 

Ti. By and by] addressed to the 
person knocking. 

74. The best . . . night] Compare 
Othello, I. ii. 35. 



sc.ii.] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 101 



Duke. They will, then, ere 't be long. 

Prov. What comfort is for Claudio? 

Duke. There 's some in hope. 

Prov. It is a bitter deputy. 80 

Duke. Not so, not so; his life is parallel'd 

Even with the stroke and line of his great justice : 
He doth with holy abstinence subdue 
That in himself which he spurs on his power 
To qualify in others : were he meal'd with that 8 5 
Which he corrects, then were he tyrannous ; 
But this being so, he 's just. {^Knocking within. 

Now are they come. 

{Exit Provost. 
This is a gentle provost : seldom when 
The steeled gaoler is the friend of men. {Knocking. 



81, 82. paralleTd Even with the 
stroke and line of his great justice'\ The 
force of this passage seems to me to 
have been misunderstood by assigning 
the nerveless sense of "line made with 
a pen" (Johnson, Schmidt, etc.) to 
stroke. Stroke here means sway, in- 
fluence, a time-honoured signification, 
but I believe not found elswhere in 
Shakespeare. The stroke of his great 
justice is parallel with his power to 
qualify, as its line (or direction) is with 
his holy abstinence. ' * Stroke " in the 
sense of sway, power, or influence, is 
given in Nares with the verbs "to 
bear "or " to have " from More's Utopia 
(trans. Robynson), 1551, and Howell's 
Letters. Oliphant quotes from Tyndall's 
Treatise, ii. 219 (1530): "W^hat a 
stroke hath Satan among us." And see 
Skelton, Why come ye not to Courte 
(Dyce, ii. 30), 1522: "There is no 
man but one, That hathe the stroke 
alone." Ben Jonson has it in An 
Interlude, etc. (Miscellaneous Pieces, 
Cunningham's Gifford) : "Why, can I 
carry no sway nor stroke among you ! " 
See also Latimer, Seven Sermons ( Arber 
rept., p. 63), 1549. 

85. qualifyl abate, moderate. Com- 
pare Othello, II. iii. 41. And Sonnet 
cix. : " O, never say that I was false of 
heart Though absence seemed my flame 



to qualify." I may here note that the 
use in Othello is excellently paralleled 
by a passage in Nashe's Prognostication, 
1591 (Grosart, ii. 152): " I wouldwishe 
rich men all this winter to sit by a good 
fire, and hardly to goe to bed without a 
Cuppe of Sack, and that so qualified 
with Sugar that they prove not rew- 
matick." 

85. ineatd with] Nares makes this 
word equivalent to or the same as mell, 
to mingle, mix, a common old word akin 
to meddle (French mesler), which is 
used elsewhere by Shakespeare. John- 
son says "sprinkled," "defiled," and 
refers to ' ' blood-boltered Banquo " 
{Macbeth), a. most inapposite parallel. 
I imagine the word is right as written, 
and is used metaphorically to mean 
composed, compounded with, as bread 
is of meal. Jonson has the same 
metaphor from the baker in Catiline, 
IV. ii. (117^): "I make just doubt, 
Whether all good men would not think 
it done Rather too late, than any man 
too cruel. Cato. Except he were of the 
same meal and batch." 

86, 87. tyrannous . . . just] Since 
the duke knows the deputy's sinfulness, 
these words are the very essence of the 
bitterness he repudiated on the deputy's 
behalf. 

89. steeled] hardened, as though 



102 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [activ. 

How now ! What noise ? That spirit 's possess'd with 
haste 90 

That wounds the unsisting postern with these strokes. 

Re-enter Provost. 

Prov. There he must stay until the officer 

Arise to let him in ; he is call'd up. 
Duke, Have you no countermand for Claudio yet, 

But he must die to-morrow? 
Prov. None, sir, none. 95 

Duke, As near the dawning, provost, as it is. 

You shall hear more ere morning. 
Prov, Happily 

You something know ; yet I believe there comes 

No countermand : no such example have we. 

Besides, upon the very siege of justice, 100 

Lord Angelo hath to the public ear 

Profess'd the contrary. 

Enter a Messenger, 

This is his lordship's man. 
Duke, And here comes Claudio's pardon. 
Mess, My lord hath sent you this note ; and by me 

91. unsisting] F i, 2, 3; insisting Y /^ ^ unresisting Rowe ; unresting Han- 
mer ; unshifting Capell ; unlist'ning Steevens conj. ; resisting Collier conj. ; 
unlisting Mason conj. ; unfeeling Johnson conj. ; untwisting Singer. 102, 
103. This , . . man. Duke. Aftd . . . pardon"] Knight (Tyrwhitt conj.), Duke. 
This . . . man. Pro. And . . . pardon Ff. 102. lordship's] Pope, lords 
Ff, omitted Capell. 

made of steel. Compared " steeled slur than unresisting would necessi- 

sense" in Sonnet cxii. Jonson has tate. 

"steeled patience" in The Case is 91. /^i-/^r«] a back-door. 

Altered, III. iii., 1598. 94. countermand] repeal of sentence, 

91. unsisting] I do not believe this reprieve. Sqq Richard III. ii. i. 89. 

is a word invented by Shakespeare, 96. ^aw«zw^] the coming dawn. See 

since it should mean unstanding, which line 218, below. 

is one of the things it cannot mean. I 100. siege] seat. *' Masquers in 

imagine a syllable was slurred over their several sieges " occurs three times 

before the first " s ," and that the mark in Jonson's stage instruction for his 

of elision was lost, and that we should Masques. Commonly used in a less 

read " un'sisting " for " unassisting, ?.^. dignified connection. See Othello, I. 

unhelping, helpless. It is an easier ii. 22. 



sc.ii.] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 103 

this further charge, that you swerve not from the 105 
smallest article of it, neither iil time, matter, or 
other circumstance. Good morrow ; for, as I take 
it, it is almost day. 

Prov, I shall obey him. \Exit Messenger, 

Duke. [Aside.] This is his pardon, purchas'd by such sin no 
For which the pardoner himself is in ; 
Hence hath offence his quick celerity, 
When it is borne in high authority. 
When vice makes mercy, mercy 's so extended, 
That for the fault's love is the offender friended. 1 1 5 
Now, sir, what news ? 

Prov. I told you : Lord Angelo, belike thinking me 
remiss in mine office, awakens me with this un- 
wonted putting-on ; methinks strangely, for he 
hath not used it before. 120 

Duke. Pray you, let 's hear. 

Prov. [Reads.] 

Whatsoever you may hear to the contrary, let Claudio 
be executed by four of the clock ; and in the afternoon 
Barnardine. For my better satisfaction, let me have 
Claudio's head sent me by five. Let this be duly per- 1 25 
formed ; with a thought that more depends on it than we 
must yet deliver. Thus fail not to do your office, as you 
will answer it at your peril. 

What say you to this, sir ? 
Duke. What is that Barnardine who is to be executed i 30 

in the afternoon ? 
Prov. A Bohemian born, but here nursed up and bred ; 

one that is a prisoner nine years old. 

110-115. Tkts . . .friended] This irrespectively of country, implying wild- 
aside speech has a resemblance, with its ness, savagery ; in a sense akin to that 
moral inculcations and double rhyme- of gipsy, its late equivalent, 
endings, to the duke's remarks at the 133. a prisoner nine years old] nine 
end of the last act. years a prisoner. A peculiar expression 

119. putting-on] incitement, pressing paralleled by *' my absence was not six 

on, as in Coriola?tus, il. iii. 260, and months old," Comedy of Errors, l.\. /^^^ 

elsewhere. and '* ere we were two days old at sea," 

132. Bohemian] Compare " Bo- Hamlet, iv. vi. 15 ; and again in Comedy 

hemian-Tartar " in Merry Wives of of Errors, li. ii. 150. 
Windsor, iv. v. 21. The term was used 



104 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [activ. 

Duke. How came it that the absent duke had not 

either delivered him to his liberty or executed 135 
him ? I have heard it was ever his manner to 
do so. 

Prov. His friends still wrought reprieves for him : and, 
indeed, his fact, till now in the government of 
Lord Angelo, came not to an undoubtful proof. 140 

Duke. It is now apparent? 

Prov. Most manifest, and not denied by himself. 

Duke. Hath he borne himself penitently in prison? 
how seems he to be touched ? 

Prov. A man that apprehends death no more dread- 145 
fully but as a drunken sleep ; careless, reckless, 
and fearless of what 's past, present, or to come ; 
insensible of mortality, and desperately mortal. 

Duke. He wants advice. 

Prov. He will hear none. He hath evermore had the 150 
liberty of the prison : give him leave to escape 
hence, he would not : drunk many times a day, 
if not many days entirely drunk. We have very 
oft awaked him, as if to carry him to execution, 
and showed him a seeming warrant for it : it hath i 5 5 
not moved him at all. 

Duke. More of him anon. There is written in your 
brow, provost, honesty and constancy : if I read 
it not truly, my ancient skill beguiles me ; but in 

146. reckless\ Theobald ; wreaklesse F i, 2, 3 ; wreakless F 4 ; reckless Pope. 
148. desperately mortal'\ mortally desperate Ilanmer. 

140. ««^«3«<5i^w/] undoubted, indubit- 151- 153. liberty of the prison . . . 

able. entirely drnnk] This picture of prison 

148. Mortalityl death, as in i. i. 44. life was true, till a very recent date, 
So in Jonson's Staple of News, v. i. with regard to those who (like Barnar- 
(T,26b) : *' respecting his mortahty" dine) had means to indulge in intoxica- 
te.^, death), tion. Old plays are full of such scenes. 

148. desperately mortal] hopelessly Perhaps an even more lamentable con- 
devoid of any sense of immortality ; a dition of things at this time, with 
paraphrase of the previous words "reck- regard to our public institutions, is the 
less of what's to come." Johnson (fol- description of London hospitals in 
lowed by Schmidt) says it may mean Nashe's Chrisfs Teares (Grosart, p. 242 
"likely to die in a desperate state, ^/ j-<?^.), 1593. 

without reflection or repentance," which 159. my ancient skill] At I. i. 27 the 

means much the same. duke has advanced his skill in diag- 



sc. II.] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 105 

the boldness of my cunning I will lay myself in i6o 
hazard. Claudio, whom here you have warrant 
to execute, is no greater forfeit to the law than 
Angelo who hath sentenced him. To make you 
understand this in a manifested effect, I crave 
but four days' respite, for the which you are to 165 
do me both a present and a dangerous courtesy. 

Prov. Pray, sir, in what ? 

Duke, In the delaying death. 

Prov. Alack ! how may I do it, having the hour 

limited, and an express command, under penalty, 170 
to deliver his head in the view of Angelo ? I 
may make my case as Claudio's, to cross this in 
the smallest. 

Duke. By the vow of mine order I warrant you, if my 

instructions may be your guide. Let this Bar- 175 
nardine be this morning executed, and his head 
borne to Angelo, 

Prov, Angelo hath seen them both, and will discover 
the favour. 

Duke. O! death's a greater disguiser, and you may 180 
add to it. Shave the head and tie the beard ; 

181. tie\ F I, 4 ; /j/^ F 2, 3 ; tire Theobald conj. ; dye Simpson conj. 

nosing men's natures. The brow was very new air to the face." It is very 

commonly regarded as the touchstone of improbable the duke would have sug- 

truth, honesty, and constancy, and the gested anything so elaborate as a dye. 

saying "as honest as the skin between And if it was usual to "tie up the 

your brows " was abundantly common, beard before decollation," there was no 

with various shades of meaning. It is need to suggest it. The expression 

at least as old as Gammer Gurton^s needs explanation. Compare the later 

Needle^ 1575' Compare Much Ado, tie-wig, or Ramillie wig, in which the 

III. V. 14. curls were tied up. Meanwhile I 

160. cunning] knowledge. venture to propose that tie has no 

160,161. lay myself in hazard] si2ikQ business here at all, that it was a 

all I am worth. printer's error for the " the," and that 

179. favour] features of the face. when inserting the right word he omitted 

181. [tie] the beard] Steevens gives to erase tie ; and we should read 

several exainples of the custom of "shave the head and the beard." Mr. 

dyeing beards, in support of Simpson's Craig has, however, given me a refer- 

conjecture. But he also suggests that ence to the expression in the text, 

it may have been " usual to tie up the which tends to upset my suggestion. It 

beard before decollation." Johnson is from Dekker's Honest Whore, l6o8 

thought "a beard tied would give a (Pearson, ii. 108): " My Vizard is on, 



106 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [activ. 

and say it was the desire of the penitent to be so 
bared before his death : you know the course is 
common. If any thing fall to you upon this, 
more than thanks and good fortune, by the saint 185 
whom I profess, I will plead against it with my 
life. 

Prov. Pardon me, good father : it is against my oath. 

Duke. Were you sworn to the duke, or to the de- 
puty ? 190 

Prov. To him, and to his substitutes. 

Duke. You will think you have made no offence, if the 
duke avouch the justice of your dealing ? 

Prov. But what likelihood is in that ? 

Duke. Not a resemblance, but a certainty. Yet since 195 
I see you fearful, that neither my coat, integrity, 
nor persuasion can with ease attempt you, I will 
go further than I meant, to pluck all fears out of 
you. Look you, sir ; here is the hand and seal 
of the duke : you know the character, I doubt not, 200 
and the signet is not strange to you. 

Prov. I know them both. 

Duke. The contents of this is the return of the duke : 
you shall anon over-read it at your pleasure, 

183. bared\ Malone ; bar'de F i, 2, 3 ; barVd F 4. 

now to this maske. Say I should shave convicted for any notorious crimes." 

off this Honor of an old man, or tye it Reed's quotation implies that my sug- 

up shorter : Well I will spoyle a good gestion at the last line may be cor- 

face for once." How would a modern rect. 

hairdresser act if he was required to tie 195. resemblance] probability. I can 

one's beard ? find no example of this use of the word. 

183. <5ar^^ shaved. Compare ^//'j 197. attenipt\ tempt; as in Merry 

Well, IV. i. 54. Reed quotes from Wives, iv. ii. 226. And Jonson, 

Grimston's Translation of P. Mathieu's Case is Altered, i. i., "Such chances 

Henry the Fourth of France (p. i8i, rare and doleful news As may attempt 

1612) ; "This unprofitable care [of your wits to muse." 

Ravaillac in his torture, to shake a 200. character'] handwriting. Occurs 

spark from his beard] to save it, being several times in Shakespeare, mostly 

noted, afforded matter to divers to praise later. And later also in Ben Jonson 

the custome in Germany, Swizzerland, {Fox^ 11. i. ; Staple of News, i. ii.). In 

and divers other places, to shave off", the sense of the style of "writing 

and then to burne the haire from all peculiar to an individual," this is the 

parts of the bodies of those who are earliest example in New Eng. Diet. 



sc.iii.] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 107 

where you shall find within these two days he 205 
will be here. This is a thing that Angelo knows 
not, for he this very day receives letters of strange 
tenor ; perchance of the duke's death ; per- 
chance entering into some monastery ; but, by 
chance, nothing of what is writ. Look, the 210 
unfolding star calls up the shepherd. Put not 
yourself into amazement how these things should 
be : all difficulties are but easy when they are 
known. Call your executioner, and off with 
Barnardine's head : I will give him a present 2 1 5 
shrift and advise him for a better place. Yet 
you are amazed, but this shall absolutely resolve 
you. Come away ; it is almost clear dawn. 

[^Exeunt. 

SCENE III. — Another Room in the Same, 

Enter POMPEY. 

Pornpey, I am as well acquainted here as I was in 
our house of profession : one would think it were 
Mistress Overdone's own house, for here be many 
of her old customers. First, here 's young Master 

210. writl here writ Hanmer. 

i\o^2\\. the unfolding star'\\}i\QX{iOXXv- Altered^ IV. v. (1598): "Nay, thou 

ing star which bids the shepherd lead his shalt want no torture, so resolve : Bring 

flock from the fold. Malone refers to him away." 
Marston's Insatiate Countess (1613) : 

"So doth the evening star present ^cene III. 

itself Unto the careful shepherd's glad- 2. house of profession] house of busi- 

some eyes, By which unto the fold he ness or trade. 

leads his flock." Steevens cites Milton's 4,5. Alaster RashI'M.QsX.ex'R&cXdess. 

Comus : *' The star that bids the shep- Gabriel Harvey calls a notorious Paul's- 

herd fold." The verb occurs in Lodge's man, Peter Shakerly, "Shakerley Rash- 

Euphties Goldefi Legacie (Sh. Lib., swash," in A New Letter of Notable 

1875, p. 104), 1590: " unfolding their Contents, 1593. There was a stuff" 

flockes, they sate them downe under an called "rash," fully illustrated by Douce, 

Olive tree." Steevens, and Malone at this passage ; 

217, 218. resolve you] assure you. but I see no reference to it in this name. 

A frequent use, as in Jonson's Case is It was common stuff. 



108 



MEASURE FOR MEASURE [activ. 



Rash ; he 's in for a commodity of brown paper 
and old ginger, nine score and seventeen pounds, 
of which he made five marks, ready money : marry, 
then ginger was not much in request, for the old 
women were all dead. Then is there here one 
one Master Caper, at the suit of Master Three- 



10 



5-7. covwiodity , . . Jive marks ^ ready 
money'] dealing upon commodity was a 
very common practice, whereby the 
moneylender, instead of cash, gave a 
supposed equivalent in goods. It is men- 
tioned in Gascoigne's 6Y^^/ Glas (1576), 
and abundantly later. A most fraudu- 
lent method. Compare Alchemist (Ben 
Jonson), III. ii. 384, 385: *'Of all 
sufficient young heirs in town, Whose 
bonds are current for commodity." 

5. 6. brown paper and old ginger] the 
commodity brown paper is constantly 
mentioned. It is one of those (with 
morrice bells) in Gascoigne's Steel Glas 
(Arber, p. 71), 1576, and is almost 
always included. In Beaumont and 
Fletcher's Spanish Curate gingerbread 
is added. "Lute-strings" was also a 
usual commodity. Nashe, in Su?nmer's 
Last Will {i$()2), has "lute-strings and 
gray paper." 

6. nine score and seventeen pounds] 
the three odd pounds of the two hun- 
dred pounds loan was probably the 
broker's fee. See note below at *' ready 
money." 

7. five marks] a mark was thirteen 
shillings and fourpence. Three pounds 
six and eightpence. I imagine "score " 
is intended before marks. The figures 
are quite absurd as they stand. See 
next note. 

7. ready money] In Chapman's Trvo 
Wise Men and all the Rest Fools ( 1619), 
this whole process is well set forth. 
Insatiato asks, ' ' Of what value is the 
commodity ? Pestifero. You may have 
100/. worth . . . What will 100/. worth 
yield to be sold? Pes. At a word it 
will yield you 60/. readily . . . Ins. 
What security ? Pes. Yourself and your 
friend such another . . . Ins. What 
will content you? Pes. ... 40 shil- 
lings, I '11 not ingrate upon you. Insa- 
tiato. Now let me cast up my account. 



40/. lost out of the principal at the first, 
10/. the interest [two months], 40 shil- 
lings the broker. All this is but 52 in 
the hundred : 'tis reasonable as the world 
goes now ; here 's my hand." The com- 
modity here was "dunghill rags" to 
make paper for the mills. The tract 
Defence of Cony -catching^ 1592 (some- 
times attributed to Greene), confirms 
this : ' ' the Broker . . . must be feede 
to speake to the Usurer, and have so 
much in the pound for his labour : then 
he [' ayoong youthful gentleman'] shal 
have graunt of money and commodities 
together, so that if he borrow a hundred 
pound, he shal have fortie in silver and 
three score in wares, dead stuffe, God 
wot : as Lute-strings, Hobby-horses, or 
(if he be greatly favoured) browne paper 
or cloath " (Grosart's Greene, xi. 

53). 

8, 9. ginger . . . old women] Compare 
Merchant of Venice^ iii. i. 10: "as 
lying a gossip in that as ever knapped 
ginger." Powdered ginger boiled in 
milk is a favourite warming drink 
amongst old women in some country 
districts. Old women who sold ginger- 
bread or "comfortable bread" are 
mentioned several times by Ben Jonson. 
No doubt they knapped the ginger to 
make their cakes. 

10. Master Caper] To caper with 
grace was a necessary accomplishment 
of a gallant ; either in the lavolta or as a 
display of activity upon any occasion. 
So Hedon in Ben Jonson's Cynthia^ s 
Revels, 11. i. (1600) : "And then I have 
a salutation will nick all, by this caper : 
hay ! " Sir Andrew Aguecheek boasts 
of his ability to *'cut a caper ... in a 
flame-coloured stock," Twelfth Night, 
III. i. See note at Merry Wives, ill. 
ii. 68 (Arden ed., p. 123). 

10, II. Master Three-pile] See above, 
I. ii. 12, and note. 



sc.iii.] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 109 



pile the mercer, for some four suits of peach- 
coloured satin, which now peaches him a beggar. 
Then have we here young Dizy, and young Master 
Deep-vow, and Master Copper-spur, and Master 
Starve-lackey the rapier-and-dagger man, and 
young Drop-heir that killed the lusty Pudding, 
and Master Forthright the tilter, and brave 



15 



13. Dizy] F 2, 3, 4; Dizie F I ; Dizzy Pope; Dicey Steevens conj. 17. 
Fo7'thright] Warburton, Johnson, Steevens, etc. ; Forihlight Ff ; Shootie] F i ; 
Shootig F 2, 3, 4 ; Shooter Warburton ; Shoe-tye Capell ; Shoe-tie mod. edd. 



11. 12. peach-coloured satin] See 2 
Henry IV. ii. ii. 47, for a reference to 
peach-coloured silk stockings. And 
in Jonson's Every Man out of his 
Humour, IV. v. (1599), the "neat 
spruce courtier" Fastidious Brisk men- 
tions "two pair of silk stockings that I 
put on, being somewhat a raw morning, 
a peach colour and another." 

12. peaches] gives evidence against. 
A corruption of "appeach," which 
occurs in All's Well, i. iii. 197. For 
" peach," compare Jeronyino (Hazlitt's 
Dods. iv. 379), 1588: *' Where's the 
pardon? s'foot, I '11 peach else." And 
Hey wood, The Captives (Bullen's Old 
Plays, iv. 173): "I'll peach thee to 
the owner." Impeach was later than 
appeach. 

13. young Dizy] perhaps one fond 
of dice, as Steevens suggests. A dicey 
person ; rather a useful adjective. The 
verb to dice, and the noun dicer, are 
both in Shakespeare. The probable 
pronunciation is against dizzy, as well 
as the early readings. 

14. Copper- spw^ simulating gold, 
like FalstafTs grandfather's seal-ring, 
" worth forty mark." 

15. rapier-and-dagger man] See 
Hamlet, v. ii. 154. In a note to 
"sword and buckler time," Middle- 
ton's Phoenix, II. iii. (1607), Bullen 
quotes from Howe's Stow, 163 1, p. 
1023: "This manner of fight [sword 
and buckler] was frequent with all men 
until the fight of rapier and dagger 
took place, and then suddenly the 
general quarrel of fighting abated, which 
began about the 20 year of Queen 
Elizabeth. . . . But the ensuing deadly 
fight of rapier and dagger suddenly 



suppressed the fighting with sword and 
buckler." Middleton, in the passage 
referred to, calls Rapier and Dagger 
" our present weapon." On account of 
its deadly nature it is constantly spoken 
of with dislike, as in The Two Angry 
Women of Abingdon, 1599 (Haz. Dods. 
vii. 318), where a serving-man calls it 
• 'this poking fight of rapier and dagger." 
It was the method of the upper classes 
that supplanted the less harmful one of 
the people. Hence Pompey's sneer, 
at the class that starved their pages, 
the needy cavalieros of the day. 

16. young Drop-heir] In Pompey's 
gallery of pseudonymous acquaintance, 
the word " heir " inevitably suggests the 
usurer, whose natural victim he was. 
W^e have had two references to the class 
already in this play (line 5 above, and 
at III. ii. 7). Drop-heir, or Droop-heir, 
here is the usurer who killed lusty 
Pudding, or hospitality and good living. 
Drop has the sense of cause to droop or 
pine, bring into a consumption, destroy. 
Compare Nashe, Unfortunate T-aveller 
(Grosart, v. 169), 1593 : "either I must 
finde out some miraculous meanes of 
escape, or drop away in consumption 
as one pined for lacke of meate " ; at 
page 161 he has "languish and droup 
like carrion " ; and at page 98 he has 
the expression " feare-dropped limbs." 
And Jonson, Silent Woman, III. i. : "it 
dropt all my wire and my ruff with wax 
candle" (/.<?. destroyed ; with a quibble). 

17. Master Forthright] I should not 
have adopted Warburton's change, had 
it not been for its occurrence in Sir 
Philip Sidney's noble description of a 
horse and its rider, tilting at the ring 
{Arcadia y Book 11.). The passage is 



no MEASURE FOR MEASURE [activ. 



Master Shootie the great traveller, and wild Half- 
can that stabbed Pots, and, I think, forty more ; 
all great doers in our trade, and are now "for the 20 
Lord's sake." 

Enter Abhorson. 

Abhor, Sirrah, bring Barnardine hither. 

Pompey. Master Barnardine ! you must rise and be 

hanged. Master Barnardine ! 
Abhor, What, ho, Barnardine! 25 

Bar, [ Within?^ A pox o' your throats ! Who makes 

that noise there ? What are you ? 

20. are\ cry Anon. conj. [Cambridge] ; now'\ now in Pope. 



long, and it is desecration (but neces- 
sary) to mutilate it : " his hand and 
leg, with most pleasing grace, com- 
manding without threatening, and 
rather remembering than chastising . . . 
he ever going so just with the horse, 
either forthright or turning, that it 
seemed as he borrowed the horse's body, 
so he lent the horse his mind." As a 
substantive the word occurs elsewhere 
in Shakespeare. 

18. Master Shootie] No doubt stands 
for "Shoe-tie." CompareNashe: "From 
Spaine what bringeth our Traveller ? . . . 
I have not yet toucht all, for he hath 
in eyther shoo as much taffaty for his 
tyings as would serve for an ancient," 
UnfortMiate Traveller {Gxo?,diXt,v. 146), 
1593. The shoe-tie usually refers to 
the roses (rosettes) worn by gallants. 
Ben Jonson includes it in his "hum- 
ours." " But that a rook, by wearing 
a pyed feather ... A yard of shoe-tye, 
or the Switzer's knot On his French 
garters would affect a humour," Every 
Man out of his Humour, Induction, 
1599. And in The Staple of News, iv. 
i., "the shoe-tie" occurs again similarly. 
Dekker has it " shoe-strings " twice. In 
Jonson's 1616 Folio the word is spelt 
correctly. 

18, 19. Half -can] perhaps a canakin or 
little can. " Let me the canakin clink " 
seems to have been a favourite drinking 
song. See Othello, 11. iii. 71, and note. 

19. forty] a common word for an 



indefinite number. A good many more. 
Compare Ben Jonson, Devil is an Ass, 
II. i. : " dresses himself the best, be- 
yond Forty of your ladies." 

20, 21. "/^r the Lord's sake''] the 
cry of prisoners at the grate or window 
for alms, provisions, etc., for the basket 
hanging there for the purpose. Malone 
quotes from Papers Complaint (Davies' 
Epigrams, 1611) : "for the Lord's 
sake, for the Lord's sake, Like Ludgate 
prisoner, lo, I begging make. " It seems 
to have belonged especially to Ludgate. 
Dekker twice has (in Satiromastix, 
1602) "by the Lord of Ludgate." 
Compare also Thos. Brewer, Merry 
Devil of Edmontoji (prose), 1608, rept. 
of 1 63 1 ed., p. 47 : "it hung dangling 
like the poore mens boxe [misprinted 
bore] at Ludgate, and he himselfe like 
the bawling box-man, stood peeping 
through his lattice crying, for the Lord's 
sake, for the Lord's sake, good people, 
pitty a poore prisoner." And Nashe, 
Foure Letters Confuted (Grosart, ii. 
239), 1593 1 "crying for the Lord's 
sake out at an iron windowe, in a lane 
not farre from Ludgate hill." If we 
were to judge by the expression in the 
text, and the parallels here adduced, 
the scene of Pompey's incarceration 
is Ludgate gaol, in the thoughts of 
Shakespeare. With regard to the con- 
struction here, Malone compares 1 
Henry IV. v. iii. 39: "they are for 
the town's end, to beg during life." 



sc.iii] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 111 

Pompey, Your friends, sir; the hangman. You must 
be so good, sir, to rise and be put to death. 

Bar. [ Within.'] Away, you rogue, away ! I am sleepy. 30 

Abhor. Tell him he must awake, and that quickly too. 

Pompey. Pray, Master Barnardine, awake till you are 
executed, and sleep afterwards. 

Abhor, Go in to him, and fetch him out. 

Pompey, He is coming, sir, he is coming ; I hear his 3 5 
straw rustle. 

Abhor. Is the axe upon the block, sirrah? 

Pompey. Very ready, sir. 

Enter Barnardine. 

Bar. How now, Abhorson ? what 's the news with you ? 
Abhor, Truly, sir, I would desire you to clap into 40 

your prayers ; for, look you, the warrant 's come. 
Bar. You rogue, I have been drinking all night; I 

am not fitted for't. 
Pompey. O, the better, sir ; for he that drinks all night, 

and is hanged betimes in the morning, may sleep 4 5 

the sounder all the next day. 
Abhor. Look you, sir ; here comes your ghostly father : 

do we jest now, think you ? 

Enter DuKE, disguised as before, 
Duke. Sir, induced by my charity, and hearing how 

hastily you are to depart, I am come to advise you, 5 o 
comfort you, and pray with you. 
Bar, Friar, not I : I have been drinking hard all night, 
and I will have more time to prepare me, or they 
shall beat out my brains with billets. I will not 
consent to die this day, that 's certain. 5 5 

40. dap into] start at once. Compare 54. billets] blocks of wood. Billets 

As You Like It, v. m.. 11. Ben Jonson were cut to a suitable size for fuel in 

uses strike similarly in Bartholomew the open grates. They were probably 

Fair : " I wonder where Tom Quarlous brought into London from the country 

is, that he returns not ; it may be he is by barges and sold by the hundred by 

struck in here." woodmongers {^Wit without Money y iv. 



112 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [activ. 

Duke. O, sir, you must ; and therefore I beseech you 
Look forward on the journey you shall go. 

Bar, I swear I will not die to-day for any man's 
persuasion. 

Duke. But hear you. 60 

Bar. Not a word : if you have any thing to say to me, 
come to my ward ; for thence will not I to-day. 

{Exit, 

Enter Provost. 

Duke. Unfit to live or die. O gravel heart ! 

After him, fellows : bring him to the block. 

{Exeunt Abhor son and Pompey. 

Prov. Now, sir, how do you find the prisoner? 65 

Duke. A creature unprepar'd, unmeet for death ; 
And to transport him in the mind he is 
Were damnable. 

Prov, Here in the prison, father, 

There died this morning of a cruel fever 
One, Ragozine, a most notorious pirate, 70 

A man of Claudio's years ; his beard and head 
Just of his colour. What if we do omit 
This reprobate till he were well inclin'd. 
And satisfy the deputy with the visage 
Of Ragozine, more like to Claudio? 75 

Duke, O ! 'tis an accident that heaven provides. 
Dispatch it presently : the hour draws on 

63. gravel hearf] grovelling beast Collier MS. 

iv.). Compare Beaumont and Fletcher, 63. ^mz;^/] gravelly, stony. Collier's 

The Captain, II. i. {ante 1613) : "no "manuscript correction" (by the 

more Than stealing of a May-pole, or emendator) is worth noting. 

at worst Fighting at single billet with 6^. transport'] " to remove from this 

a bargeman." And Ben Jonson's world to the next" (Schmidt). Com- 

Staple of News, V. i. : ''I shall see you pare Midsummer- Night' s Dream, iv. 

quoited Over the bar, as bargemen do ii. 4. 

their billets" (punningly addressed to 71, 72. beard . . . ro/our] These 

a lawyer). Compare Cunningham's words give some support to Simpson's 

levels' Accounts (Sh. Soc, 1842, p. conjecture of die for tie, above (iv. ii. 

107): "Willm. Kynge for one thou- 179). 

sande of billets xiijs iiij'^. For an 72. omitl pass by. Compare Othello, 

hundredth of flFaggotts ; v^ iiijd." 11. i. 71. 



sc.iii.] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 113 

Prefix'd by Angelo. See this be done, 

And sent according to command, whiles I 

Persuade this rude wretch willingly to die. 8o 

Prov. This shall be done, good father, presently. 
But Barnardine must die this afternoon ; 
And how shall we continue Claudio, 
To save me from the danger that might come 
If he were known alive ? 

Duke. Let this be done : 8 5 

Put them in secret holds, both Barnardine 
And Claudio : ere twice the sun hath made 
His journal greeting to yond generation, 
You shall find your safety manifested. 

Prov. I am your free dependant. 

Duke. Quick dispatch, 90 

And send the head to Angelo. \Exit Provost. 

Now will I write letters to Angelo, — 
The provost, he shall bear them, — whose contents 
Shall witness to him I am near at home. 
And that, by great injunctions, I am bound 95 

To enter publicly : him I '11 desire 
To meet me at the consecrated fount 
A league below the city ; and from thence. 
By cold gradation and weal-balanced form. 
We shall proceed with Angelo. 100 

85-91.] Lines in Ff end done . . . Claudio . . . greeting . . . ^nd . . . 
manifested . . . dependant . . . Angelo. 88. yond'\ Ff, yonder Pope, the 
under Hanmer, Cambridge. 99. weall Ff, Steevens ; well Rowe, Cambridge, 
Craig. 

78. Prefixed] fixed before. Compare gestion of the under generation, the 

Romeo and Juliet^ v. iii. 253. antipodes, has been adopted by some 

83. contitiue'] keep. Compare Henry editors. Others, who read the un- 

VIII. II. iv. 33. authorised yonder, find the metre needs 

85-91.] I have ventured to rearrange other alterations, or else leave it very 

these lines. Several charges have been defective, 

made by other editors. 99. weal-balanced] " not eagerly and 

88. jotirnal] diurnal, daily, as in passionately . . . but with due observ- 

S^exisex, Faerie Queene, I. xi. 31: "from ance of all forms, which it would be 

their journall labours they did rest." against the public interest to omit" 

88. yond generation] the rest of the (Schmidt). *' Well-balanced "occurs in 

world outside this prison, which ad- Milton's Ode to the Nativity, 
mitted no sunlight. Hanmer's sug- 
8 



114 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [activ. 

Re-enter Provost 
Prov. Here is the head ; I '11 carry it myself. 
Duke. Convenient is it. Make a swift return, 

For I would commune with you of such things 

That want no ear but yours. 
Prov. I '11 make all speed. {Exit. 

Isab, {Within^ Peace, ho, be here ! 105 

Duke. The tongue of Isabel. She 's come to know 

If yet her brother's pardon be come hither ; 

But I will keep her ignorant of her good, 

To make her heavenly comforts of despair, 

When it is least expected. 

Enter ISABELLA. 

Isab, Ho, by your leave ! 1 10 

Duke. Good morning to you, fair and gracious daughter. 
Isab. The better, given me by so holy a man. 

Hath yet the deputy sent my brother's pardon ? 
Duke. He hath releas'd him, Isabel, from the world. 

His head is off and sent to Angelo. 115 

Isab. Nay, but it is not so. 
Duke. It is no other : 

Show your wisdom, daughter, in your close patience. 
Isab. O ! I will to him and pluck out his eyes. 
Duke. You shall not be admitted to his sight. 
Isab. Unhappy Claudio ! wretched Isabel ! 120 

Injurious world ! most damned Angelo ! 
Duke. This nor hurts him nor profits you a jot ; 

Forbear it therefore ; give your cause to heaven. 

Mark what I say, which you shall find 

no. Ho,'\ omitted Pope. 116, 117.] As in Ff, Steevens, three lines ending 
so . . . daughter . . . patience (two half-lines) Spedding, Cambridge. 124. 

find\ surely find Pope. 

112. 7%^ 3^//^r] The goodness of the deems this lie necessary to spur on 

morning is the better for your holy Isabella's vengeance. He might have 

greeting. given that reason for his action instead 

115. His head is off"] The duke of the tame one at lines 108, 109. 



sc. Ill] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 115 

By every syllable a faithful verity. 125 

The duke comes home to-morrow ; nay, dry your 

eyes : 
One of our covent, and his confessor, 
Gives me this instance : already he hath carried 
Notice to Escalus and Angelo, 

Who do prepare to meet him at the gates, 130 

There to give up their power. If you can, pace your 

wisdom 
In that good path that I would wish it go. 
And you shall have your bosom on this wretch, 
Grace of the duke, revenges to your heart. 
And general honour. 

Isab. I am directed by you. 135 

Duke. This letter then to Friar Peter give ; 

Tis that he sent me of the duke's return : 

Say, by this token, I desire his company 

At Mariana's house to-night. Her cause and yours 

I '11 perfect him withal, and he shall bring you 1 40 

Before the duke ; and to the head of Angelo 

Accuse him home and home. For my poor self, 

126. nay\ omitted Pope. 131. If you can, pace] Rowe, If you can pace Ff. 
139. to-night'\ omitted Pope. 

127. covenf] convent, as in Henry home, or thoroughly, was a frequent 
VIII. IV. ii. 19. expression. See Nashe's Unfortunate 

133. bosojrt] heart's desire. See Traveller {Gxosoxt, w. 162): "I'll pay 

Othello, III. i. 57, where it is similarly her home if I perfect it." 
used, meaning " inmost thoughts." 142. home and home"] with increasing 

140. perfecf] inform him fully, make intenseness. Jonson has " throughly 
him perfect in. See Tempest, i. ii. 79. and throughly" {^Fox, i. i.)in the same 

141. to the head of Angelo"] to his sense. The reduplication of the adverb, 
face. Head was used so, totum pro to enforce it, seems to be commoner in 
parte. In Jonson's Magnetic Lady, Shakespeare than his contemporaries. 
III. iv., "head to head and foot to "Over and over" occurs frequently, 
foot" is a drinking expression, where So also does "through and through." 
we would probably say face to face. Ben Jonson has "in and in," and a 
To know one by his head was a saying curious example of the substantive's 
in use in Shakespeare's time, and still reduplication for emphasis is in his 
heard provincially. Compare Golding's Every Man out of his Humour, IV. 
Ovid Metamorphosis {^^. 1611, p. 157), iv. (1599): **he has broken the gaol 
1565: "I made complaint to Paris, when he has been in irons and irons; 
and accused him to his head." and been out and in again." We do it so 

142. Accuse him home] to the heart freely (out and out, again and again, 
of the matter, intimately. To pay one round and round, etc. ) that it escapes 



116 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [activ. 

I am combined by a sacred vow, 

And shall be absent. Wend you with this letter : 

Command these fretting waters from your eyes 145 

With a light heart : trust not my holy order, 

If I pervert your course. Who 's here ? 

Enter Lucio. 

Lucio, Good even. Friar, where is the provost ? 

Duke. Not within, sir. 

Lucio. O pretty Isabella, I am pale at mine heart to 150 
see thine eyes so red: thou must be patient. 
I am fain to dine and sup with water and bran ; 
I dare not for my head fill my belly ; one fruit- 
ful meal would set me to 't. But they say the 
duke will be here to-morrow. By my troth, 155 
Isabel, I loved thy brother : if the old fantastical 
duke of dark corners had been at home, he had 
lived. l^Exit Isabella. 

Duke. Sir, the duke is marvellous little beholding to 

your reports ; but the best is, he lives not in them. 1 60 

Lucio. Friar, thou knowest not the duke so well as I do : 
he 's a better woodman than thou takest him for. 

143. combined] confined Johnson conj. 

notice. I have no hesitation about drop- 152. water and dran] So Nashe, 

ping the comma after the first "home." Summer's Last ^rz7/(Grosart, vi. 122), 

It is not in the Folio. Commonly the 1592: "Whilst thou withholdest both 

"and-" belongs to repeated compara- the malt and floure, And giv'st us 

tive adjectives of dimension (wider and braune and water (fit for dogs)." 

wider, (?.^.). 156. (?/(r//a«/d;j-/zVa/] pleasantly whim- 

143. combined] tied, bound. sical. 

144. Wend] go. Used elsewhere 157. of dark corners] oi ^^zxoX. -^hjc^?, 
twice by Shakespeare when rhyme de- of assignation with women. Com- 
manded it (Cc*///^^;/ <?/"^rr^i>'i", i. i. 158, pare Winter's Tale^ III. iii. 74-76: 
and Midsummer- Nighf s Dream, lli. " I can read waiting-gentlewoman in 
ii. 272). Very common in Spenser, this scape. This has been some stair- 
Saxon wenden, hence our " went." work, some trunk-work, some behind- 

147. ^^rz/^^/] lead astray. door- work." See Nashe, Chris fs 

152. fain to dine] compelled to dine. Teares (Grosart, iv. 229, 230). 
See below, line 173; and J/<?rry Wives, 160. reports . . . lives not in them] 

II. ii. 25, etc. Compare Lodge's his life is innocent of your state- 

Euphues Golden Legacie (Sh. Lib., 1875, ments. 

P- 55): " telling them all that you are 162. woodman] huntsman, but has 

mad and fain to be tied to a poast." here a wanton sense. See Merry 



sc.iii.] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 117 

Duke. Well, you'll answer this one day. Fare ye 

well. 
Lucio. Nay, tarry; I'll go along with thee: I can tell 165 

thee pretty tales of the duke. 
Duke. You have told me too many of him already, 

sir, if they be true; if not true, none were 

enough. 
Lucio. I was once before him for getting a wench with 1 70 

child. 
Duke, Did you such a thing ? 
Lucio. Yes, marry, did I ; but I was fain to forswear 

it : they would else have married me to the 

rotten medlar. 175 

Duke, Sir, your company is fairer than honest. Rest 

you well. 
Lucio. By my troth, I '11 go with thee to the lane's 

end. If bawdy talk offend you, we '11 have very 

little of it. Nay, friar, I am a kind of burr; I 180 

shall stick. [Exeunt. 

Wives of Windsor, v. v. 30, for a Honest Whore (Pearson, p. 98), 1604 : 

doubtful parallel. No good earlier "Women are like medlars (no sooner 

example has, I think, been adduced ; ripe but rotten)." The quibble is a 

but it occurs in Greene's Never too common one. See As Yotc Like It, 

Late (Grosart,viii. 68), 1590 : "As wel III. ii. 128. It occurs later in Wilson, 

featured as Cressida, and as craftie ; The Cheats, i. iv., 1662. 
having an eie for every passenger, a I'jd. fairer than honest'\xi\oxQ.ix\tVi^\y, 

sigh for everie lover, a smile for every or agreeable, than honest. Mrs. Quickly 

one that vailde his bonnet : and because gives the word a similar meaning in 

shee loved the game well, a quiver for Merry Wives, II. ii. 70: "such wine 

every woodman's arrowe. This courti- and sugar of the best and the fairest." 
san," etc. And again in his /'/^z7<?;>'/,?/a, 176, 177. Rest you iveir\ Compare 

(Grosart, xi. 151), 1590 : " Canst thou " God rest you merry," As You Like It, 

not Phillippo content thyselfe that thy V. i. 65 ; and Look about yott (Hazlitt's 

lady is honest, but thou must plot the Dods. vii. 435), 1600: "you speak 

meanes to make her a harlot? if thou like an honest gentleman, rest you 

likest hunters fees so well, seeke another merry." 

woodman, for I will not play an apple- i8o, 181. btirr ; I shall stick'] A very 

squire to feede thy humours." The old simile. New Eng. DicLhoisa-xekx- 

term had the strong sense of " mutton- ence dating about 1330. "They cleave 

monger." See in. ii. 186, where Lucio together like burrs" occurs in John 

repeats this charge. I ley wood (Sharman's ed., p. 126), 

175. rotten medlar] Compare Dekker , 1 546. 



118 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [activ. 

SCENE IV. — A Room in Angelds House. 

Enter Angelo and ESCALUS. 

Escal. Every letter he hath writ hath disvouched 
other. 

Ang. In most uneven and distracted manner. His 
actions show much like to madness : pray heaven 
his wisdom be not tainted ! and why meet him at 5 
the gates, and redeliver our authorities there ? 

Escal. I guess not. 

Ang. And why should we proclaim it in an hour before 
his entering, that if any crave redress of injustice, 
they should exhibit their petitions in the street ? i o 

Escal, He shows his reason for that : to have a dis- 
patch of complaints, and to deliver us from 
devices hereafter, which shall then have no power 
to stand against us. 

Ang. Well, I beseech you, let it be proclaim'd : i 5 

Betimes i' the morn I '11 call you at your house. 
Give notice to such men of sort and suit 

6. redeliver] Capell ; re-liver F i ; deliver F 2, 3, 4. 15-18.] As arranged 
by Capell ; prose in Ff, Cambridge. 15. proclaim d f] Capell, proclaimed Ff. 

I. Every letter] There is an interest- leads immediately to the catastrophe of 

ing parallelism between the opening of the play. Later again (v. i. 13-15) our 

this scene and that of the fifth scene of duke professes public honour to Angelo, 

the last act of Jonson's Sejanus, 1603. whom he is about to destroy, as Tiberius 

Tiberius is at Capua and Sejanus usurps does (by Macro as proxy) with his pro- 

his power, committing many crimes at posed tribunitial dignity. 
Rome. The scene opens with Cotta 10. exhibit their petitions] See Merry 

and Labiaris, "they confer letters." Wives of Windsor^ 11. i. 27, and my 

Cotta says, " My letter is the very same note, Arden ed., p. 61. 
with yours : Only requires me to be pre- 17. sort] rank, as in Much Ado, I. 

sent there " (at an unexpected summons i. 7 : " but few of any sort. And none 

of the senate). Labiaris says, " 'Tis of note." 

strange and singular doubtful." When 17. suit] Steevens says "'Such men 
Sejanus hears this he says : "A senate of sort and suit as are to meet him,' I 
warned without my knowledge ! And presume, means the duke's vassals or 
on this sudden ! Senators by letter tenants in capite.'^ In the feudal times 
Required to be there . . . Time, With all vassals were bound to hold suit and 
every other circumstance, doth give service to their over-lord. See Cot- 
It hath some strain of engine in't." grave in v. Droiet de suittes. This 
Jonson's plot is classical history. The explanation may be correct, but it 
machinery of the letters in both cases seems somewhat stilted and out of 



sciv.] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 119 

As are to meet him. 

EscaL I shall, sir : fare you well. 

Ang, Good night. \Exit Escalus. 

This deed unshapes me quite, makes me unpregnant 20 
And dull to all proceedings. A deflower'd maid, 
And by an eminent body that enforc'd 
The law against it ! But that her tender shame 
Will not proclaim against her maiden loss, 
How might she tongue me ! Yet reason dares her no : 
For my authority bears of a credent bulk, 26 

That no particular scandal once can touch 
But it confounds the breather. He should have liv'd. 
Save that his riotous youth, with dangerous sense. 
Might in the times to come have ta'en revenge, 30 
By so receiving a dishonour'd life 
With ransom of such shame. Would yet he had liv'd ! 
Alack ! when once our grace we have forgot. 
Nothing goes right : we would, and we would not. 

{Exit. 

25. dares her no] Ff, dares her: Pope, dares her: no Hanmer, dares her No 
Warburton, dares her? no: Capell, dares her note Theobald, dares her not 
Steevens conj., dares her on Grant White (Beckett conj.). 26. bears of d\ Ff 

{offY 4), Cambridge, Globe ; bears a Theobald. 

place. Men of suit may very well refer judgment will forbid her to tongue me. 
to those who have petitions. Or But we gather it chiefly from the con- 
simpler, those in attendance. text. To frighten or terrify is a dialectic 

20. unpregnant] unapt for busi- sense of " dare "; we seem to have one 

ness (Schmidt); unprepared, unready provincialism in the line already in 

(Steevens). "tongue." 

25. tongue] speak against, abuse, 26, 27. bears of a . . , That] bears 

scold. The verb is in use provincially : so much of, or such a kind of credent 

** Tongue, to scold," Patterson, bulk, that, etc. 

Antrim and Down Glossary (Eng. 26. credent bulk] bulk of credibility. 

Dial. Society). And in Donegal a Compare Winter's Tale, i. ii. 142. 

tonguing means a severe scolding. 27. particular] private, personal ; 

25. reason dares her no] reason opposed to public. Compare Jonson, 

taunts her, or defies her with no. Com- The Silent Woman, Prologue : '*a sect 

pare Beaumont and Fletcher, A Wife of writers. . . . That only for parti- 

for a Month, iv. : "I am sure he did cular likings care, And will taste nothing 

not, for I charg'd him no." Mr. Craig that is popular." 

suggests the sense of dare (frighten) in 34. we zvould, and we would not] 

the fowling expression "daring larks," Johnson says, "Here undoubtedly the 

which is met with in Henry VIII. ill. act should end, and was ended by the 

ii. 282 ; and perhaps in Henry V. iv. poet ; for here is properly a cessation of 

ii. 36. The meaning is obvious. Her action, and a night intervenes, and the 



120 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [activ. 



SCENE V. — Fields without the Town. 

Enter DUKE in his own habit ^ and F^Har Peter. 

Duke. These letters at fit time deliver me. 

{Giving letters. 
The provost knows our purpose and our plot. 
The matter being afoot, keep your instruction, 
And hold you ever to our special drift, 
Though sometimes you do blench from this to that, 5 
As cause doth minister. Go call at Flavius' house, 
And tell him where I stay : give the like notice 
To Valentius, Rowland, and to Crassus, 
And bid them bring the trumpets to the gate ; 
But send me Flavius first. 
Fri. Pet. It shall be speeded well. 10 

[^Exit. 
Enter Varrius. 

Duke. I thank thee, Varrius ; thou hast made good haste. 
Come, we will walk : there 's other of our friends 
Will greet us here anon, my gentle Varrius. [Exeunt. 



SCENE VI. — Street near the City-gate. 

Enter Isabella and Mariana. 

Isab. To speak so indirectly I am loath : 

I would say the truth ; but to accuse him so, 

8. Valentius] Valencius Ff, Valentinns Capell. 

place is changed, between the passages ii. 103). Compare Winter's Tale, i. ii. 

of this scene and those of the next." 333. Equivalent to ** blink," still in 

Nobody has, however, ventured to use dialectically as a sporting term. In 

make the alteration. Even the Windsor Trevisa's translation of Batman {De 

Shakespeare follows the Folio in this Prop. Rer.), 1397, this passage occurs : 

respect. "yet they pass not always forthright, 

Scene v. ^"^ otherwhiles they blench some- 
whether, aside from the straight way " 

5. blench] turn aside, fly off, some- (ed. Steele, 1893, p. 29). 

times "blanch." An old word occur- 9. /r«;;z/^^/j'] trumpeters, 
ring in Piers Plowman (Skeat's ed., 



sc.vi.] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 121 

That is your part : yet I am advis'd to do it ; 

He says, to veil full purpose. 
Mari. Be rul'd by him. 

Isab. Besides, he tells me that, if peradventure 5 

He speak against me on the adverse side, 

I should not think it strange; for 'tis a physic 

That 's bitter to sweet end. 
Mari. I would Friar Peter — 
Isab. O ! peace, the friar is come. 

Enter Friar Peter. 

Fri. Pet. Come, I have found you out a stand most 
fit, 10 

Where you may have such vantage on the duke, 
He shall not pass you. Twice have the trumpets 

sounded : 
The generous and gravest citizens 
Have hent the gates, and very near upon 
The duke is ent'ring : therefore hence, away ! 1 5 

\Exeunt. 

4. to veil full] Malone ; to vaile full F I, 2, 3 ; ^^ vail ftdl F 4 ; favailful 
Theobald. 

4. to veil full purpose] not to ^^ &\\oyf affair that required only one? The 
our hands." Veil was frequently spelt name of Friar Thomas is never men- 
vail in the Folio, as in Merchant of tioned in the dialogue, and therefore 
Venice, ill. ii. 99. seems arbitrarily placed at the head of 

9. Enter Friar Peter] ** This play the scene " (Johnson), 

has two friars, either of whom might lo. stand] station, 

singly have served. I should therefore 14. lient] taken, made use of, passed 

imagine, that Friar Thomas in the first through. The verb occurs again in 

act might be changed, without any Winter's Tale, I v. iii. 133. Common 

harm, to Friar Peter. For why should in early writers, 
the Duke unnecessarily trust two in an 



122 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [act v. 



ACT V 



SCENE \.—The City-gate, 

Mariana veiled^ Isabella, and Friar Peter, at their 
stand. Enter DuKE, Varrius, Lords Angelo, 
ESCALUS, Lucio, Provost, Officers and Citizens, at 
several doors. 

Duke. My very worthy cousin, fairly met ! 

Our old and faithful friend, we are glad to see you. 

Ang. and Escal. Happy return be to your royal grace ! 

Duke. Many and hearty thankings to you both. 

We have made inquiry of you ; and we hear 5 

Such goodness of your justice, that our soul 
Cannot but yield you forth to public thanks, 
Forerunning more requital. 

Ang. You make my bonds still greater. 

Duke. O ! your desert speaks loud ; and I should wrong it 
To lock it in the wards of covert bosom, i o 

When it deserves, with characters of brass, 
A forted residence 'gainst the tooth of time 
And rasure of oblivion. Give me your hand, 

The City-gate] Capell. Mariana . . . stand] Capell, omitted Ff. Provost, 
Officers] Malone, omitted Ff. 4. thankings] F i ; thankings be F 2, 3. 
9. wrongit] F i ; wrong F 2, 3, 4. 13. rasure] razure Yiet seq. 

I. cousin] a title used by royalty or 12. /^;'/'^flr] fortified, strong, 
princes to those of high rank. Fre- 13. rasure] obliteration. Compare 

quent in Shakespeare. Malory, Morte D' Arthur (Globe ed. , 

5, 6. we hear Such goodness of your p. 437): "For like as winter rasure 

justice] So the king to Promos in the doth always arace and deface green 

old play : " Promos, the good report of summer, so fareth it by unstable love in 

your good governmente I heare ; . . . man and woman." Greene has the 

To incourage you the more in justice to word *' rasor " (eraser) in a similar use, 

perseaver, Is the chiefe cause I dyd in Penelope's Web (Grosart, v. 199) : 

addresse my progresse heather" (Part n. "Further Plato called it (Chastity) a 

I. ix.). preserver of good will, the rasor of dull 

10. wards] prison-cells. See above, thoughts, the corrector of untamed de- 

IV. iii. 62. sires." 

10. covert] secret, hidden. 



SCI.] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 123 

And let the subject see, to make them know 

That outward courtesies would fain proclaim 1 5 

Favours that keep within. Come, Escalus, 

You must walk by us on our other hand ; 

And good supporters are you. 

Friar Peter and Isabella come forward. 

Fri. Pet. Now is your time : speak loud and kneel before 

him. 
hah. Justice, O royal duke ! Vail your regard 20 

Upon a wrong'd, I would fain have said, a maid ! 

O worthy prince ! dishonour not your eye 

By throwing it on any other object. 

Till you have heard me in my true complaint, 

And given me justice, justice, justice, justice ! 25 

Duke. Relate your wrongs : in what ? by whom ? be brief. 

Here is Lord Angelo shall give you justice : 

Reveal yourself to him. 
Isab. O worthy duke ! 

You bid me seek redemption of the devil. 

Hear me yourself; for that which I must speak 30 

Must either punish me, not being believ'd, 

Or wring redress from you. Hear me, O hear me, here ! 
Ang. My lord, her wits, I fear me, are not firm : 

She hath been a suitor to me for her brother 

Cut off by course of justice, — 
Isab. By course of justice ! 35 

Ang. And she will speak most bitterly and strange. 
Isab. Most strange, but yet most truly, will I speak. 

That Angelo 's forsworn, is it not strange ? 

That Angelo 's a murderer, is 't not strange ? 

That Angelo is an adulterous thief, 40 

36. and strange] F i ; omitted F 2, 3, 4. 

20. Vail your regard] let your notice to heare the plaint that wretched I 

descend upon. To vail is to lower, relate." Steevens noticed this parallel. 
When Cassandra, "kneeling, speakes to 38-40. That Angela] This device of 

Promos," interceding for her brother's repetition is very frequent in early 

life, she says : ' ' Vaile thou thine eares plays, particularly Shakespeare, for the 



/ 



124 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [act v. 

An hypocrite, a virgin-violator ; 
Is it not strange and strange ? 

Duke, Nay, it is ten times strange. 

Isab. It is not truer he is Angelo 

Than this is all as true as it is strange ; 

Nay, it is ten times true; for truth is truth 45 

To the end of reckoning. 

Duke, Away with her ! Poor soul, 

She speaks this in the infirmity of sense. 

Isab. O prince ! I conjure thee, as thou believ'st 
There is another comfort than this world. 
That thou neglect me not, with that opinion 5 o 

That I am touch'd with madness. Make not im- 
possible 
That which seems unlike. 'Tis not impossible 
But one, the wicked'st caitiff on the ground. 
May seem as shy, as grave, as just, as absolute 
As Angelo ; even so may Angelo, 5 5 

54j 5S« el's absolute Asl Y ^\ as absolute : As F 2, 3, 4. 

enforcing of a thought or point. Com- 266), Ep. 35. The jingling here on 
pare Richard II. IV. i. 8-1 1 ; Titus true, truer, and truth is in the style of 
Andronicus, II. i. 83-85, etc. It Sidney's Arcadia^ dwelt upon by Put- 
abounds in George Gascoigne's Steel tenham under the name of " Traductio 
Glas (1576). Puttenham deals with it or The Tranlacer." 
in his chapter xix. : "Of Figures sen- 45. ten times'] occurs (before either a 
tention otherwise called Rhetoricall," comparative or a superlative adjective) 
Arte of English Poesie, 1589 (Arber, about twenty-five times in Shakespeare ; 
p. 206-208), under the name of "Ana- for exceedingly, vastly more, 
phora, or the Figure of Repetition." 45. truth is truth] Compare Nashe, 
He quotes from Sir Walter Raleigh in "Truth is truth, and will out at one 
illustration. time or other," Have with you, etc. 

42. strange and strange] See note (Gros. iii. 94), 1596. And Brome, 
above (iv. iii. 142) at "home and " Truth 's truth as well in a Gentleman 
home." Compare Nashe, Lentett as a Beggar," Sparagus Garden, iii. 7. 
Stttffe {G.'CO'&. v. 280), 1599: "Though 52. «^;//zX'.?] unlikely, improbable. 
they were double and double weary of 54. shy] demure. Shy must have 
hym, yet his Edict being a lawe, to the a good sense here, something like re- 
kitchen they returned him." served, dignified, grave. See iii. ii. 

44. as true as it is stra7ige] " Not so 134, and line 336 (note), below. "Shy " 
strange as true " was a standard saying, occurs only in this play in Shakespeare, 
Compare Laneham's Letter (Burn's re- and its literary use seems quite new, or 
print, p. 67), 1575 : " A thing. Master very rare. Ben Jonson has not got it, 
Martin, very rare and strange, and yet and I have no parallels. 
no more strange than true." It is in 54. absolute] quite correct, fault- 
Taylor's Epigrams (Works, 1630, ii. less. 



SCI] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 125 

In all his dressings, caracts, titles, forms. 
Be an arch-villain. Believe it, royal prince : 
If he be less, he 's nothing ; but he 's more. 
Had I more name for badness. 

Duke. By mine honesty, 

If she be mad, as I believe no other, 60 

Her madness hath the oddest frame of sense, 
Such a dependency of thing on thing, 
As e'er I heard in madness. 

Isab. O gracious duke ! 

Harp not on that ; nor do not banish reason 
For inequality; but let your reason serve 65 

To make the truth appear where it seems hid. 
And hide the false seems true. 

Duke. Many that are not mad 

Have, sure, more lack of reason. What would you say ? 

Isab, I am the sister of one Claudio, 

Condemn'd upon the act of fornication 70 

56. caracts\ characts Ff. 63. e'er\ ne'er Capell, Malone. 67. And hide'] 
Not hide Theobald ; that are] omitted Hanmer. 

56. dressings] externals generally. Diet, gives a 1562 example. Greene 

Dress. Compare Jonson's Epicene, has " she harpeth upon the duetie of a 

I. i. (407a) : " I love a good dressing v^^ife as one desirous of a husband," 

before any beauty o' the world. O, a Penelope's Web (Grosart, v. 192), 1587. 

woman is then like a delicate garden ; 65. inequality] injustice. From the 

nor is there one kind of it, she may sense in aquus, just. A Latinism. 

vary every hour." _ _ "Equal" was commonly so used by 

56. caj-acts] distinctive marks or signs Jonson ; and compare Beaumont and 

So Ben Jonson, The Devil is an Ass, Fletcher, Fair Maid of the Inn, I. i. : 

I. iii. : " She 's a simple woman, Knows ** You are not equal to her." Ben 

not her good, whoever knows her ill, Jonson has "equal Jove " in Cynthia's 

And at all caracts." Revels, v. i. (1600). And in his Fox, 

62, 63. Such a dependency . . . As ill. i. : "These imputations are too 

e'er I heard] Compare Hamlet, III. iv. common, sir. And easily stick on virtue 

143. The most remarkable dependency when she's poor. You are unequal to 

of thing on thing I ever heard in mad- me." 

ness. Malone supposes Shakespeare 67. hide] " cause it to disappear, 

wrote ne'er. Surely a familiar idiom, make away with it " (Schmidt). The 

64. Harp not on that (string meaning here is simplified by regarding 

understood)] A very common expres- the words as referring to evidence ; 

sion, occurring several times in Shake- keep that which is false (though seeming 

speare {Hamlet, 11. ii. 189, etc.). It true) out of consideration or sight, 

is in Heywood (Sharman's ed., p. 164), 70. «/£>«] in consequence of. "Con- 

1546, and Udall's Erasmus, 1542. demned upon it " occurs in ^<?«rj/ F///. 

Without string (as here), New Eng. 11. i. 8 ; and see Much Ado, v. iv. 3. 



126 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [act v. 

To lose his head ; condemn'd by Angelo. 

I, in probation of a sisterhood, 

Was sent to by my brother ; one Lucio 

As then the messenger — 
Lucio. That 's I, an 't like your grace : 

I came to her from Claudio, and desir'd her 75 

To try her gracious fortune with Lord Angelo 

For her poor brother's pardon. 
Isab. That 's he indeed. 

Duke. You were not bid to speak. 
Lucio. No, my good lord ; 

Nor wish'd to hold my peace. 
Duke. I wish you now, then : 

Pray you, take note of it ; and when you have 80 

A business for yourself, pray heaven you then 

Be perfect. 
Lucio. I warrant your honour. 

Duke. The warrant 's for yourself : take heed to it. 
Isab. This gentleman told somewhat of my tale, — 
Lucio. Right. 85 

Duke. It may be right ; but you are in the wrong 

To speak before your time. Proceed. 
Isab, I went 

To this pernicious caitiff deputy. 
Duke. That 's somewhat madly spoken. 
Isab. Pardon it: 

The phrase is to the matter. 90 

Duke, Mended again : the matter ; — proceed. 

74. As\ was Johnson. 83. to it] Capell, to^t Ff, Globe. 91. again: 

the matter] again. The matter; Cambridge ; the matter] omitted Capell. 

79, ze/w-^V] bidden. Compare Z(?z;<?'j some editors read "God warrant us" 

Labour ^s Lost, V. ii. ^00 '. " I will wish instead of " God warn'd us." Halliwell 

thee never more to dance, Nor never gives "warn, to warrant, Northern.'^ 

more in Russian habit wait." But it may mean "protection." See 

83. warrant] seems here to be equiva- Cotgrave, Garantie. 

lent to warning. Qom^2.xQ. As You Like 91. the matter; — proceed] "the 

It, III. iii. 5, where " Lord warrant us" matter? pray proceed" may have been 

is explained " Lord warn us." And in the right reading. 
Midsummer - Night's Dream, v. 326, 



SCI] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 127 

I sab. In brief, to set the needless process by, 

How I persuaded, how I pray'd, and kneel'd, 

How he refell'd me, and how I replied, — 

For this was of much length, — the vile conclusion 95 

I now begin with grief and shame to utter. 

He would not, but by gift of my chaste body 

To his concupiscible intemperate lust, 

Release my brother ; and, after much debatement. 

My sisterly remorse confutes mine honour, 100 

And I did yield to him. But the next morn betimes. 

His purpose surfeiting, he sends a warrant 

For my poor brother's head. 

Duke, This is most likely ! 

Isab. O ! that it were as like as it is true. 

Duke, By heaven, fond wretch ! thou know'st not what 
thou speak'st, 105 

Or else thou art suborn'd against his honour 
In hateful practice. First, his integrity 
Stands without blemish ; next, it imports no reason 

92. processl F i ; omitted F 2, 3, 4. 98. concupiscible] concupiscent Pope. 
102. surfeiting] Theobald; surf et ting F i, 2, 3 ', forfeiting Y 4. 

94. refel] refute, disprove. Com- 100. remorse] pity, tenderness of 

pare Lyly : ** Cease then, Hephestion, heart. The usual meaning in Shake- 

with arguments to seek to refel that speare. 

which with their deity the gods cannot 100. confutes] upsets, overcomes, 
resist," Campaspe^ 11. ii. And Jonson, Compare Humphrey Gifford (Grosart, 
Cynthia's Revels, 11. i. : "I can refel p. 60), 1580: *'a prety pollicie con- 
that paradox, or rather pseudodox." It futed." 

is used by Chapman, Sir Thomas Wyatt, 104. /z/'^] likely, probable. Fearful 

Anthony Munday, etc. Not elsewhere that she may not succeed in convincing 

in Shakespeare. the duke of her wrongs, Isabella ex- 

98. concupiscible] This word is found claims, O that I could make it appear to 
in Trevisa's Barthol. De Prop. Rer., be as probable as it really is true. The 
1398. And compare W. Bonde's suggestionthat Isabella meant "seemly" 
Pilgr, of Perfection, i$26 : "sensualite when she used "like" is hardly in 
is called of doctours the appetyte con- keeping with her disposition, 
cupyscible" {New Eng, Diet,), Not 105. /«?««?] foolish, silly, daft, 
elsewhere in Shakespeare. The word 106. suborn'd] procured as false wit- 
is four-syllabled here, the "ci" being ness. "And they suborned men" 
slurred over, as in "disple," "disc'ple," occurs in Acts vi. 11. In Wyclif it is 
not unfrequently. See Jonson's Fox, " priuely senten men." 

IV. i. 107. practice] evil design, schem- 

99. debatement] debating. See Ham- ing. 

let, V. ii. 45. See Cotgrave's French- 108. imports] carries with it, implies. 
English Dictionary, 161 1. Compare Hamlet ^ v. ii. 21. 



128 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [act v. 

That with such vehemency he should pursue 

Faults proper to himself: if he had so offended, i lo 

He would have weigh'd thy brother by himself, 

And not have cut him off. Some one hath set you on : 

Confess the truth, and say by whose advice 

Thou cam'st here to complain. 

I sab. And is this all ? 

Then, O you blessed ministers above ! 115 

Keep me in patience ; and with ripen'd time 
Unfold the evil which is here wrapt up 
In countenance. Heaven shield your grace from woe, 
As I, thus wrong'd, hence unbelieved go ! 

Duke. I know you'd fain be gone. An officer! 120 

To prison with her ! Shall we thus permit 
A blasting and a scandalous breath to fall 
On him so near us ? This needs must be a practice. 
Who knew of your intent and coming hither ? 

Isab. One that I would were here. Friar Lodowick. 125 

Duke. A ghostly father, belike. Who knows that Lodowick ? 

Lucio. My lord, I know him ; 'tis a meddling friar ; 

109. vekeffiency] vehemence Pope. 124. your] our Pope. 

109. vehemency] eagerness. This 118. countenance] authority, credit. 

form occurs three times in Shakespeare, Appearance or hypocrisy would afford 

*' vehemence " once in As You Like It, sense also, and has been accepted as the 

III. ii. 200. Compare Nashe, ^«a/^wzV meaning by some editors. But Isabella's 

of Absurditie {Gxo^. i. 15), 1589: "he troubled experiences are all due to the 

was enforced by melancholic into such weight of authority on the wrong side, 

vehemencie of speech." as she believes. For the extreme legal 

no. Faults proper to himself] Whet- sense compare Menechvms, by W. W., 

stone moralises on the situation thus : iv. i. (1595): "If a poore man never 

" The tirant Phalaris was praysed in so honest, had a matter come to be 

this scan'd, there [at the law court] is he 

When Perillus the brazen torment outfaste and overlaide with counten- 

made, ance." 

He founde the wretch straightway 123. /rar/zV^] wicked plot or intrigue, 

in some amys, Shakespeare uses the word so, often. 

And made him first^ the scourge Compare Ben Jonson, The Fox, v. 8 : 

thereof to taste : ' " Shew him that writing ; do you know 

A just reward for such as doe it, sir? Voltore. Yes, I do know it 

present well, it is my hand ; But all that it 

An other's fault, himselfe the contains is false. Bonario, O prac- 

guiltyst man." tise ! " 
Promos and Cassandra, 
Part II. II. ii., 1578. 



SCI.] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 129 

I do not like the man : had he been lay, my lord, 

For certain words he spake against your grace 

In your retirement, I had swing'd him soundly. i 30 

Duke. Words against me ! This 's a good friar, belike ! 
And to set on this wretched woman here 
Against our substitute ! Let this friar be found. 

Lucio, But yesternight, my lord, she and that friar, 

I saw them at the prison : a saucy friar, 135 

A very scurvy fellow. 

Fru Pet. Blessed be your royal grace ! 

I have stood by, my lord, and I have heard 
Your royal ear abus'd. First, hath this woman 
Most wrongfully accus'd your substitute, 
Who is as free from touch or soil with her, 140 

As she from one ungot. 

Duke. We did believe no less. 

Know you that Friar Lodowick that she speaks of? 

Fri. Pet. I know him for a man divine and holy ; 
Not scurvy, nor a temporary meddler, 
As he 's reported by this gentleman ; 145 

And, on my trust, a man that never yet 
Did, as he vouches, misreport your grace. 

Lucio. My lord, most villainously ; believe it. 

Fri. Pet. Well ; he in time may come to clear himself, 

But at this instant he is sick, my lord, 150 

Of a strange fever. Upon his mere request. 
Being come to knowledge that there was complaint 

131. This '^] this' F i, 2, 3 ; this F 4 ; this is Rowe. 136. Blessed^ Bless d 
Hanmer ; roya^] omitted Hanmer. 144. temporary^ tamperer and Johnson 

conj. 146. trusfl troth '$im^&c. 151. strange] strong S. VfaXktx con]. 

130. swing'd] whipped, beaten. 132. set] incite. 

Occurs seven or eight times in Shake- 135. saucy friar] See note at II. 

speare. With "soundly" in 7a wzw^^ iv. 45. 

the Shrew, V. ii. 104, and 2 Henry IV. 144. temporary] secular, lay, tem- 

V. iv. 21, 23. Gabriel Harvey has the poral. As the word is used by a formal 

word twice (verb and noun) in Pierce's friar in a set speech, it may safely be so 

Supererogation, 1593. Halliwell has understood. A friar who concerns him- 

early examples. Compare Ben Jonson, self with mundane affairs. 

Magnetic Lady, I. i. : "set to him 151. Upon his mere request] tnixxtly 

roundly, ay, and swinge him soundly." owing to his request. 



130 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [act v. 

Intended 'gainst Lord Angelo, came I hither, 
To speak, as from his mouth, what he doth know- 
Is true and false ; and what he with his oath i 5 5 
And all probation will make up full clear, 
Whensoever he 's convented. First, for this woman. 
To justify this worthy nobleman. 
So vulgarly and personally accus'd. 
Her shall you hear disproved to her eyes, 160 
Till she herself confess it. 

Buke. Good friar, let 's hear it. 

{Isabella is carried off guarded; and Mariana 

comes forward. 
Do you not smile at this, Lord Angelo ? 
O heaven ! the vanity of wretched fools. 
Give us some seats. Come, cousin Angelo ; 
In this I '11 be impartial; be you judge 165 

Of your own cause. Is this the witness, friar ? 
First, let her show her face, and after speak. 

Mari, Pardon, my lord, I will not show my face 
Until my husband bid me. 

Duke, What, are you married ? 170 

Mari, No, my lord. 

Duke, Are you a maid ? 

Mari. No, my lord. 

Duke, A widow then? 

Mari, Neither, my lord. 1 7 5 

Duke, Why, you are nothing then : neither maid, widow, 
nor wife ? 

Lucio. My lord, she may be a punk ; for many of them 
are neither maid, widow, nor wife. 

165. ril be impartial] I will be partial Theobald. 167. her facc\ F 2, 3, 4 ; 
your face F I. 169-179.] Printed as verse (four lines) by Steevens (Capell's 
conj.). 

154. as from his 7Houth'\ exactly as 159. vulgarly'] publicly, before the 
he spoke. crowd. 

156. probation] proof. 165. impartial] taking no part, in- 

157. convented] summoned. See different. Compare Venus and Adonis^ 
Henry VIII, V. i. 52, and Coriolanus^ 748: "the impartial gazer." 

II. ii. 58. 179. neither maid , . . wife] given 



SCI.] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 131 

Duke. Silence that fellow : I would he had some cause 1 80 

To prattle for himself. 
Lucio, Well, my lord. 
Mari. My lord, I do confess I ne'er was married ; 

And I confess besides I am no maid : 

I have known my husband, yet my husband knows not 

That ever he knew me. 186 

Lucio. He was drunk then, my lord : it can be no 

better. 
Duke. For the benefit of silence, would thou wert so 

too ! 1 90 

Lucio. Well, my lord. 
Duke. This is no witness for Lord Angelo. 
Mari. Now I come to 't, my lord : 

She that accuses him of fornication, 

In self-same manner doth accuse my husband ; 195 

And charges him, my lord, with such a time. 

When, I '11 depose, I had him in mine arms 

With all the effect of love. 
Ang. Charges she more than me ? 
Mari. Not that I know. 

Duke. No? you say your husband. 200 

Mari. Why, just, my lord, and that is Angelo, 

Who thinks he knows that he ne'er knew my body, 

But knows he thinks that he knows Isabel's. 
Ang. This is a strange abuse. Let 's see thy face. 
Mari. My husband bids me; now I will unmask. 205 

[ Unveiling. 

as a saying, for a prostitute, by Ray : be ruled by mine advise, she should not 

** she is neither wife, widow, nor maid." yeeld her verdict against Venus; but 

It is also in Fuller's Gnomologia. Com- for my part let her doe as she please ; 

pare Whetstone, Promos and Cassandra^ for I am sure prattle she may, but pre- 

IV. iii. : "I, monster now, no mayde vaile she cannot." The word was used 

nor wyfe, have stoupte to Promos lust." and still is of telling things that should 

One of the very few verbal echoes from be hidden, as "in an old Proverb which 

the source of the play. every one knows. Prattle your pleasures 

181. prattle for hiinself'\ plead as under the rose." 

foolishly in his own behalf. Compare 201. just\ true, as in III. i. 67. 

Greene, The Tritameron of Love 204. abuse] deception, imposition. 

(Gros. iii. 85), 1587: " if Sostrata would Covtx^iQ Hamlet ^ iv. vii. 51. 



132 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [act v. 

This is that face, thou cruel Angelo, 

Which once thou swor'st was worth the looking on : 

This is the hand which, with a vow'd contract, 

Was fast belock'd in thine : this is the body 

That took away the match from Isabel, 210 

And did supply thee at thy garden-house 

In her imagin'd person. 

Duke. Know you this woman? 

Lucio, Carnally, she says. 

Duke, Sirrah, no more ! 

Lucio, Enough, my lord. 

Ang, My lord, I must confess I know this woman; 215 
And five years since there was some speech of marriage 
Betwixt myself and her, which was broke off, 
Partly for that her promised proportions 
Came short of composition ; but in chief 
For that her reputation was disvalued 220 

In levity : since which time of five years 
I never spake with her, saw her, nor heard from her, 
Upon my faith and honour. 

Maru Noble prince, 

As there comes light from heaven and words from breath, 
As there is sense in truth and truth in virtue, 225 

I am affianced this man's wife as strongly 

209. belock^d\ Shakespeare has many line 228, below, the place is spoken ot 

of these compounds all through his plays, as his {i.e. private) garden-house. 
See note to " be-leed," Othello, i. i. 30. 218. proportions] portion, dowry, 

211. ^ar^i?«-^£»wj"<?] a private summer- fortune. Compare Two Gentlevien of 

house or arbour connected with a resi- Verona, 11. iii. 3, and Pericles, iv. ii. 29. 
dence. There were also public garden- 219. composition] agreement, com- 

houses, or places of assignation, of the pact. 

worst repute. Nares has several ex- 220. disvalued] discredited, depreci- 

amples, including a description of these ated. Compare Ben Jonson's Sejantis, 

" barbers and bowers fit for the purpose III. ii. (300(^), 1603: "Nor is 't the 

... in the fields and suburbs of the time alone is here disprised, But the 

cities," from Stubbs's Anato77iie of whole man of time, yea, Coesar's self 

Abuses, p. 57 (1584), and all the drama- Brought in disvalue." 
tists refer to them. Hence the word had 221. In levity] in the lightness of 

a bad sense, but the reference here is dis- her conduct. This base defamation of 

tinct from those quoted by Malone, etc. character warrants the stronger sense 

See Ksizlitt^s Dodsley, xiii. 187, and xii. given to "dejected" at III. i. 274. 
119. See also Bullen's Afarj/^w, iii. 202, 226. affianced] See ill. i. 219. Not 

and Beaumont and Fletcher, /aj^zV;?. At elsewhere used by Shakespeare. 



SCI] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 133 

As words could make up vows : and, my good lord, 

But Tuesday night last gone, in 's garden-house 

He knew me as a wife. As this is true, 

Let me in safety raise me from, my knees, 230 

Or else for ever be confixed here, 

A marble monument. 

An^-. I did but smile till now: 

Now, good my lord, give me the scope of justice ; 
My patience here is touch'd. I do perceive 
These poor informal women are no more 235 

But instruments of some more mightier member 
That sets them on. Let me have way, my lord. 
To find this practice out. 

Du^e. Ay, with my heart ; 

And punish them to your height of pleasure. 
Thou foolish friar, and thou pernicious woman, 240 
Compact with her that 's gone, think'st thou thy oaths, 
Though they would swear down each particular saint. 
Were testimonies against his worth and credit 
That 's sealed in approbation ? You, Lord Escalus, 
Sit with my cousin : lend him your kind pains 245 
To find out this abuse, whence 'tis deriv'd. 
There is another friar that set them on ; 
Let him be sent for. 

F7'i. Pet Would he were here, my lord ; for he indeed 

Hath set the women on to this complaint : 250 

Your provost knows the place where he abides 
And he may fetch him. 

Duke. Go do it instantly. {Exit Provost. 

And you, my noble and well-warranted cousin. 
Whom it concerns to hear this matter forth, 

235. informal] inforining Hanmer. 239. t6\ unto Pope, Steevens ; even to 
Capell. 243. against] gainst F 2, 3, 4. 

228. in's garden-house] See above, him a formal man again." And in Jon- 
line 211. son's Cynthia! s Revels, i. i. (153^): 

231. confixed] fastened. "a pretty formal young gallant in good 

235. informal] foolish. Formal had sooth, 

the sense of orderly, sensible, as in 241. Ci?;///ar/ 7e/;M] in compact with. 

Comedy of Errors, v. 105 : " to make of 254. forth] out, fully disclosed. 



134 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [act v. 

Do with your injuries as seems you best, 255 

In any chastisement : I for a while will leave you ; 

But stir not you till you have well determin'd 

Upon these slanderers. 
Escal. My lord, we '11 do it thoroughly. \Exit Duke, 

Signior Lucio, did not you say you knew that Friar 260 

Lodowick to be a dishonest person ? 
Lucio. Cucullus non facit monachum : honest in nothing 

but in his clothes ; and one that hath spoke most 

villainous speeches of the duke. 
Escal. We shall entreat you to abide here till he come, 265 

and enforce them against him. We shall find 

this friar a notable fellow. 
Lucio, As any in Vienna, on my word. 
Escal, Call that same Isabel here once again : I would 

speak with her. \Exit an Attendant. 270 

Pray you, my lord, give me leave to question ; 

you shall see how I '11 handle her. 
Lucio. Not better than he, by her own report. 
Escal Say you ? 
Lucio, Marry, sir, I think, if you handled her privately, 275 

she would sooner confess : perchance, publicly, 

she'll be ashamed. 
Escal I will go darkly to work with her. 
Lucio. That 's the way : for women are light at mid- 
night. 280 

256-258.] As arranged by Spedding, Globe ; lines ending while . . . have . . . 
slanderers Ff ; while . . . well . . . slanderers Steevens. 276. ivould] F i ; 
should F 2, 3, 4. 

262. Cucullus non facit monachum] point le moyne." And yet earlier it 

The hood does not make the monk, occurs in the Ro7nan de la Rose. In 

Trust not to appearances. A late Latin Whetstone's play (iii. 6), the form is 

proverb. See again Twelfth Nighty i. " A holie hood makes not a Frier de- 

V. 62 ; and (translated) in Henry VIII. voute." 

III. i. 23. The Latin form is in Nashe's 267. nolable'] noteworthy. Oftener 

Pierce Penilesse (Grosart, ii. 25), used in a bad than in a good sense in 

1592 ; and the English in his Christ's Shakespeare. 

Teares (Grosart, iv. 215), 1593. I find 275. handled her'] Compare 2 Henry 

it earlier in French, as in Rabelais' IV. 11. iv. 339. 

Prologue to Gargantua (1533): ''car 279. /?^>^^] wanton (with a quibble), 
vous mesmes dictes que I'habit ne faict 



SCI.] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 135 

Re-enter Officers^ with Isabella. 

EscaL Come on, mistress ; here 's a gentlewoman denies 

all that you have said. 
Lucio, My lord, here comes the rascal I spoke of; 

here with the provost. 
Escal, In very good time : speak not you to him till 285 

we call upon you. 
Lucio. Mum. 

Re-enter DUKE, disguised as a friar ^ and Provost. 
Escal. Come, sir. Did you set these women on to 

slander Lord Angelo ? they have confessed you 

did. 290 

Duke. 'Tis false. 

Escal. How ! know you where you are ? 
Duke. Respect to your great place ! and let the devil 

Be sometime honour'd for his burning throne. 

Where is the duke? 'tis he should hear me speak. 295 
Escal. The duke 's in us, and we will hear you speak : 

Look you speak justly. 
Duke. Boldly, at least. But, O ! poor souls, 

Come you to seek the lamb here of the fox ? 

Good night to your redress ! Is the duke gone ? 

Then is your cause gone too. The duke 's unjust 300 

Thus to retort your manifest appeal, 

297. at least\ at least I'll speak Hanmer. 

285. In very good time"] That is very which you appealed from Angelo to the 

well. See III. i. 181 (note). Duke " (Johnson). This is undoubtedly 

287. Mzmi] silence. the sense, but the explanation given by 

294. burning throne'] the seat of Johnson is found in the lines following, 

justice assumed by the devil in Angelo's not in the words quoted. To retort 

person. Another version of the good means simply to throw back, as in 

angel on the devil's crest. Compare Nashe : ** Chance some of them breake 

Sir P. Sidney's Songs (Arber's English a bitter jest on thee, and thou retortst 

Garner, i. 567): "I say thou art a it severly, or seemest discontented," 

Devil ! though clothed in angel's shining; The Unfortunate Traveller (Grosart, 

And thy face tempts my soul to leave v. 142), 1594. And Jonson, The Case 

the heavens for thee." is Altered, i. iii. (1598): "we shall 

301. retort your manifest appeal] retort these kind favours with all alacrity 

*' refer back to Angelo the cause in of spirit we can." 



136 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [actv. 

And put your trial in the villain's mouth 
Which here you come to accuse. 

Lucio, This is the rascal : this is he I spoke of. 

Escal, Why, thou unreverend and unhallow'd friar! 305 
Is 't not enough thou hast suborn'd these women 
To accuse this worthy man, but, in foul mouth, 
And in the witness of his proper ear. 
To call him villain ? 

And then to glance from him to the duke himself, 310 
To tax him with injustice ? Take him hence ; 
To the rack with him ! We '11 touse you joint by joint, 
But we will know his purpose. What, unjust ! 

Duke, Be not so hot; the duke 

Dare no more stretch this finger of mine than he 315 

Dare rack his own : his subject am I not. 

Nor here provincial. My business in this state 

Made me a looker-on here in Vienna, 

Where I have seen corruption boil and bubble 

Till it o'er-run the stew: laws for all faults, 320 

But faults so countenanc'd, that the strong statutes 

Stand like the forfeits in a barber's shop, 

307, in\ with Theobald. 309-313.] As arranged by Capell, lines ending 
from him . . . Injustice! . . . towze you\ . .purpose: . . . unjust? Ff, Cam- 
bridge, "^lo. to glance"] glance Vo^Q, 313. his] this Hanmer. '^22. for- 
feits] forceps Jackson conj. 

310. to glance] to hit obliquely, to you are a mammet ! O, I could touse 

glide off from something and hit. For you now." Hence "Towzer," a dog's 

the literal sense compare Holland's name, one that touses in fighting, as 

Plinie^ xvii. 24 (540-^), 1601 : "or else Mr. Craig suggests to me. 

when the ploughman at unawares doth 312, 313. you , . . /^/j-] The confusion 

loosen the root, or glaunce upon it with of persons in the pronouns has been 

the share." And compare Court and corrected by several editors, needlessly, 

Tijnes of James I. ii. 172: "glanced, it appears. Escalus is addressing the 

they say, scandalously at him and his friar and the officers in the same breath. 

Latinities, as he called them." 317. provincial] within his province. 

312. /<72<j^] tear, pull violently. Prob- Not under his jurisdiction or authority, 

ably the word " toaze " in Winter's Compare Jonson, Z)<?z^z7 ?j a« ^^j, v. 4 : 

Tale^ IV. iv. 760, is identical. Else- *' hell shall make you Provincial of the 

where it is not used by Shakespeare, cheaters." 

See Spenser, Faerie Queene, ir. xi. 33 : 321. countenanced] See note at line 

**And as a beare whom angry curres 1 1 8, above. 

have touzd . . . Becomes more fell." 322. forfeits in a barber'' s shop] See 

And Jonson's Alchemist, v. iii. : " 'Slight Appendix, 



SCI.] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 137 

As much in mock as mark. 
Escal. Slander to the state ! Away with him to prison ! 
Ang, What can you vouch against him, Signior Lucio? 325 

Is this the man that you did tell us of? 
Lucio. 'Tis he, my lord. Come hither, goodman bald- 
pate : do you know me ? 
Duke. I remember you, sir, by the sound of your voice : 

I met you at the prison, in the absence of the 330 

duke. 
Lucio. O ! did you so ? And do you remember what 

you said of the duke ? 
Duke, Most notedly, sir. 
Lucio. Do you so, sir? And was the duke a flesh- 335 

monger, a fool, and a coward, as you then 

reported him to be? 
Duke. You must, sir, change persons with me, ere you 

make that my report : you, indeed, spoke so of 

him ; and much more, much worse. 340 

Lucio. O thou damnable fellow ! Did not I pluck thee 

by the nose for thy speeches ? 
Duke. I protest I love the duke as I love myself. 
Ang. Hark ! how the villain would close now, after his 

treasonable abuses. 345 

Escal. Such a fellow is not to be talked withal : away 

with him to prison ! Where is the provost ? 

324.] Two lines Ff. 

334. notedly] exactly, accurately. secret must be locked within the teeth 

335> 336. flesh - monger] mutton- and the lips"? Perhaps this was a 

monger. See note iii. ii. i86. hidden reference to his timidity, or to 

336. coward] See below, lines 503, his lack of resolution, in leaving it to a 

504, where these three charges, or their deputy to enforce the laws he had let 

equivalents, are repeated as being the fall into contempt, 

duke's faults according to Lucio. But 344. close] become friendly, come 

Lucio's accusations against the duke, to an understanding or agreement, 

though very definite on the score of Compare Nashe, Christ's Teares (Gros. 

lechery (in. ii. 120 et seq.), and of iv. 229): "Great cvmning doe they 

foolishness or incapacity (iii. ii. 143), ascribe to their arte, as the discerning 

do not include that of cowardice, at (by the very countenance) a man that 

least obviously. But what did Lucio hath Crownes in his purse : the fine 

mean when he said, " a shy fellow was closing in with the next Justice, or 

the duke; and I believe I know the Alderman's deputy of the ward." Used 

cause of his withdrawing , , . 'tis a here absolutely. 



138 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [act v. 

Away with him to prison ! Lay bolts enough 
upon him, let him speak no more ! Away with 
those giglots too, and with the other confederate 350 
companion ! 

[ The Provost lays hand on the Duke, 

Duke. Stay, sir ; stay awhile. 

Ang. What! resists he? Help him, Lucio. 

Lucio, Come, sir ; come, sir ; come, sir ; foh ! sir. Why, 

you bald-pated, lying rascal, you must be hooded, 355 
must you ? show your knave's visage, with a pox 
to you ! show your sheep-biting face, and be 
hanged an hour ! Will 't not off? 

{Pulls off the Friar's hoody and discovers the Duke. 

Duke, Thou art the first knave that e'er made a duke. 

First, provost, let me bail these gentle three. 360 

[To Lucio.'\ Sneak not away, sir; for the friar and you 
Must have a word anon. Lay hold on him. 

Lucio, This may prove worse than hanging. 

350. giglots] Capell, giglets Ff. 358. hanged an hour!] hanged! an hour? 
Hanmer, hanged — ati^ how? Johnson conj. Stage-direction due to Rowe. 

348. Lay bolts enough] fetters. See Dodsley, vii. 222, and ix. 41, for ex- 
notes at "mettle" and " kennel," III. amples, and Webster's Westward Ilo ! 
ii. 79, 88. IV. i. Nashe distinctly uses it of a dog 

350. giglots] lewd women. in Pierce Penilesse, 1 592 (quoted by Mr. 

357. sheep • biting face] Compare Craig), but he has the term earlier of a 

Beaumont and Fletcher, Rule a Wife, "strong thief" in Martin'' s Month's 

etc., Y. iv. : " How like a sheep-biting Afind {Grosa.rt, i. 153), 1589. Later 

rogue, taken in the manner." And he uses it of a usurer. Sheep -stealing 

"Narcissus," A Twelfth Night Merri- was punished with hanging. See quota- 

ment (ed. Margaret Lee, 1893, P* 9)> ^io^^ from Promos and Cassandra at II. 

1602: "lyes lurking like a sheep- ii. 130, 131. 

biter." The term "sheep-biter" per- 357, 358. be hanged an hour] go be 

haps belonged originally to a sheep- hanged for a while. " Farewell and 

stealing cur, but was commonly used of be hanged " was a common valediction 

a skulking knave or thief. Compare (Day, Blind Beggar, 1600 ; Patient 

Reginald Scot, Discoverie of Witchcraft Grissel, III. i., 1599, etc.). "Be curst 

(p. 1 73, reprint), 1 584 : ' ' They comfort a while" occurs in Jonson's Bartholomew 

in vaine and therefore they went awaie Fair^ and "be naught a while" in As 

like sheepe . . . If anie sheepebiter or Yotc Like Lt. In Jonson's Alchemist, 

witchmonger will follow them, they shall V. i. " strangled an hour " has the same 

go alone for me." Gabriel Harvey has sense of a short while. Gifford's note 

" Knaves are backbiters, whores are to Bartholo?nezv Fair, 11. i. (Cunning- 

bellybiters, and both are sheepebiters " ham's ed., pp. 165, 166, vol. ii.), is good 

(Grosart, ii. 210), 1589. See Hazlitt's reading. 



SCI] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 139 

Duke, [ To Escalus.l What you have spoke I pardon ; sit 
you down : 
We '11 borrow place of him. [To Angelo.l Sir, by your 
leave. 365 

Hast thou or word, or wit, or impudence, 
That yet can do thee office ? If thou hast, 
Rely upon it till my tale be heard, 
And hold no longer out. 

Ang. O my dread lord ! 

I should be guiltier than my guiltiness, 370 

To think I can be undiscernible, 

When I perceive your grace, like power divine, 

Hath look'd upon my passes. Then, good prince. 

No longer session hold upon my shame. 

But let my trial be mine own confession : 375 

Immediate sentence then and sequent death 

Is all the grace I beg. 

Duke, Come hither, Mariana. 

Say, wast thou e'er contracted to this woman ? 

Ang, I was, my lord. 

Duke. Go take her hence, and marry her instantly. 380 
Do you the office, friar ; which consummate. 
Return him here again. Go with him, provost. 

[Exeunt Angelo^ Mariana^ Friar Peter ^ and Provost. 

Escal, My lord, I am more amaz'd at his dishonour 
Than at the strangeness of it. 

Duke. Come hither, Isabel. 

Your friar is now your prince : as I was then 385 

Advertising and holy to your business, 

371. undiscernible] undiscoverable, 381. f^JwxMwwa/^] consummated, per- 
not to be seen through (Schmidt). formed. Compare ATuch Ado about 

373. passes] passages, events, occur- Nothing, in. ii. 3. 

rences. " Demeanour, course of ac- 383, 384. his . . , strangeness'] the 

tion " ; doubtfully so explained in New dishonour of the man surprises me more 

Eng. Diet. than the wonderfulness of the things he 

374. session hold] sit in judgment, has done. 

So in Lear^ v. 111.-52-54: "they are 386. Advertising] advising, instruct- 

ready To-morrow, or at further space, ing, turning my attention to. See I. i. 

to appear Where you shall hold your 41. 
session." 386. holy] devoted. 



140 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [act v. 

Not changing heart with habit, I am still 
Attorney'd at your service. 

Isab. O ! give me pardon, 

That I, your vassal, have employ'd and pain'd 
Your unknown sovereignty. 

Duke, You are pardon 'd, Isabel: 390 

And now, dear maid, be you as free to us. 
Your brother's death, I know, sits at your heart ; 
And you may marvel why I obscur'd myself. 
Labouring to save his life, and would not rather 
Make rash remonstrance of my hidden power 395 
Than let him so be lost. O most kind maid ! 
It was the swift celerity of his death, 
Which I did think with slower foot came on, 
That brain'd my purpose : but, peace be with him ! 
That life is better life, past fearing death, 400 

Than that which lives to fear : make it your comfort. 
So happy is your brother. 

Isab, I do, my lord. 

Re-enter Angelo, Mariana, Friar Peter, and Provost, 
Duke. For this new-married man approaching here, 

395. remonstrance] demonstrattce Staunton (Malone conj.). 

388. Attorney d at j/our service] em- monstrate to you the third dor." But 
ployed as your attorney. The verb the word may very well have its present 
occurs in a different sense (performed sense: *' I would quickly produce argu- 
by proxy) in Winter's Tale, i. i. 30. ments out of my power at present con- 
In Halliwell's Dictionary this word is cealed." In this sense it was a State 
wrongly explained and illustrated by a term, suitable for ducal usage. See 
passage from Jonson's Alchemist, where titles of various works in Hazlitt's 
the word means proxy. This passage General Index (Quaritch, 1893), and 
has escaped the New Eng. Diet., which Gabriel Harvey (Grosart, i. 240), 1593. 
gives the Winter'' s Tale reference as the And Cotgrave : * * Remonstraiice. A re- 
solitary example of the verb. monstrance . . . reasons given or 

395. rash] quick, sudden. shewed" (no other sense). 

395. remonstrance] The commenta- 397, 398.] The duke is a very facile 

tors agree in explaining this word liar, even in the most grave and serious 

*' demonstration," " manifestation." matter. See above, iv. iii. 129. 

Halliwell quotes an example of this 399. brain'd] knocked the brains 

use from Hooker. The verb occurs in out of, destroyed, defeated. The verb 

that sense in Ben Jonson's Cynthia's occurs, non-figuratively, in Tempest, 

Revels, v. ii. (i84<5) : " But I will re- 11 1. ii. 96, and 1 Henry IV. ir. iii. 24. 



SCI.] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 141 

Whose salt imagination yet hath wrong'd 

Your well-defended honour, you must pardon 405 

For Mariana's sake. But as he adjudg'd your brother, 

Being criminal, in double violation 

Of sacred chastity, and of promise-breach. 

Thereon dependent, for your brother's life, 

The very mercy of the law cries out 4 1 o 

Most audible, even from his proper tongue, 

" An Angelo for Claudio, death for death ! " 

Haste still pays haste, and leisure answers leisure. 

Like doth quit like, and Measure still for Measure. 

Then, Angelo, thy fault 's thus manifested ; 415 

Which, though thou would'st deny, denies thee vantage, 

We do condemn thee to the very block 

Where Claudio stoop'd to death, and with like haste. 

Away with him ! 

Mari. O my most gracious lord ! 

I hope you will not mock me with a husband. 420 

Duke. It is your husband mock'd you with a husband. 

415. fauWs thus manifested\ Ff, Cambridge, Oxford (Craig) ; faults are mani- 
fested; Rowe; faults are manifest; Hanmer; fault thus manifested — Dyce, 
Craig (1903). 

404. i-a/^] lecherous, as in /^«^^;zj/ aw^ 413. Haste still pays haste"] Com^2i!te 
C/(?^/a/;'«, II. i. 21, and elsewhere. H^xbtxt, /acuta Prudentium^ 1640: 

407. criminal, in double'] doubly " Haste comes not alone." 

criminal. Shakespeare freely trans- 414. Like doth quit like] *' it is an 

poses adjectives from their normal posi- old saw, Like to like will draw," 

tion. Double cannot refer here to Barclay, Ship of Fool es (rept., ii. 135), 

violation, since violation cannot refer to 1509; '*the proverbe, Like beareth 

promise-breach. Double refers to the favour and love unto Hke," Udall's 

two crimes of which Angelo was guilty. Erasmus (Roberts, p. 216), 1542. 

408. promise - breacJi] wrecking of "Like will to like " was a very common 
promise. Compare Nashe : ' ' Miserie proverb. 

hath daunted all my mirth. And I am 414. Measure still for Measure] 

quite undone through promise-breach," Steevens refers to A Warning for Faire 

Pierce Penilesse (Gros. ii. lo), 1592. Women, ante 1599: "Measure for 

Shakspeare has " faith - breach " in Measure, and lost blood for blood." 

Macbeth, V. ii. 18. Hey wood has Compare Matthew vii. 2 ; Mark iv. 24, 

' ' spouse-breach " in A Royal King, etc. Shakespeare has the proverb earlier 

etc. (Pearson, p. 56). " Ship-breach" in 3 Henry VI. il. vi. 55 (1592). 

occurs several times in Trevisa's trans- 416. denies thee vantage] your fault 

lation of De Prop. Per., 1397. (manifested) denies you any advantage 

41 1, audible] that can be easily heard. — there is no escape. 
Used adverbially. Loudly. 



142 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [act v. 

Consenting to the safeguard of your honour, 
I thought your marriage fit ; else imputation, 
For that he knew you, might reproach your life 
And choke your good to come. For his possessions, 
Although by confiscation they are ours, 426 

We do instate and widow you withal. 
To buy you a better husband. 

Mari, O my dear lord ! 

I crave no other, nor no better man. 

Duke. Never crave him ; we are definitive. 430 

Mari. Gentle my liege ! — [^Kneeling. 

Duke. You do but lose your labour. 

Away with him to death ! [To Lucio.'] Now, sir, to you. 

Mari. O my good lord ! Sweet Isabel, take my part : 
Lend me your knees, and all my life to come 
I '11 lend you all my life to do you service. 435 

Duke. Against all sense you do importune her : 
Should she kneel down in mercy of this fact. 
Her brother's ghost his paved bed would break, 
And take her hence in horror. 

Mari. Isabel, 

Sweet Isabel, do yet but kneel by me : 440 

Hold up your hands, say nothing, I '11 speak all. 
They say, best men are moulded out of faults, 

426. confiscation] confutation F i. 427. withal] F 4 ; with ail F i ; withall 
F 2, 3. 431. [Kneeling] Johnson. 

426. confiscation] Malone and Gabriel Harvey (Gros. ii. 183), 1589. 
Steevens both think "confutation" (F i) Not elsewhere in Shakespeare. 

may be right — "by his being confuted 437. mercy of] Compare Hamlet ^ iv. 

or proved guilty." Modern editors all v. 199, 200. 

follow the second Folio. 437. fact] evil deed, crime, as at iv. 

427. z<:/2^<?w] "to endow with a widow's ii. 139, above, and in Winter's Tale^ 
right, to jointure" (Schmidt). It is ill. ii. 86, etc. 

not necessary to give the word so forced 438. paved bed] Does this imply that 

and limited a sense. The passage the condemned man was buried in 

means, we make you a widow and the precincts of the gaol, as was the 

endow you with his possessions to custom? Excepting in such circum- 

enable you, etc. In this sense stances, "paved" is not a usual term 

Shakespeare has the verb twice else- to apply to a common grave, 

where. 442.] Compare All's Well, iv. iii. 

430. definitive] decisive, final. So 85 : "our virtues would be proud if 

used from Chaucer onwards. It is in our faults whipped them not." 



SCI.] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 143 

And, for the most, become much more the better 
For being a little bad : so may my husband. 

Isabel ! will you not lend a knee? 445 
Duke. He dies for Claudio's death. 

Isab, Most bounteous sir, {Kneeling. 

Look, if it please you, on this man condemn'd, 

As if my brother liv'd. I partly think 

A due sincerity govern'd his deeds, 

Till he did look on me: since it is so, 450 

Let him not die. My brother had but justice. 

In that he did the thing for which he died : 

For Angelo, 

His act did not o'ertake his bad intent. 

And must be buried but as an intent 455 

That perish'd by the way. Thoughts are no sub- 
jects. 

Intents but merely thoughts. 
Mari. Merely, my lord. 

Duke. Your suit 's unprofitable : stand up, I say. 

1 have bethought me of another fault. 

Provost, how came it Claudio was beheaded 460 

At an unusual hour? 
Prov. It was commanded so. 

Duke. Had you a special warrant for the deed ? 
Prov. No, my good lord ; it was by private message. 
Duke. For which I do discharge you of your office : 

Give up your keys. 
Prov. Pardon me, noble lord: 465 

446. [Kneeling] Rowe. 

450. Till he did look on me] Johnson virtuous, to pardon any act which they 

is very severe here upon Isabel for con- think incited by their own charms." 

senting to importune the duke "against That is a harsh judgment. We must 

all sense," while she still believes her give Isabel credit for the quality of 

brother to be dead, and while she mercy, and the sacrifice she makes, as 

knows Angelo had committed all the Ritson says, of revenge for friendship, 

crimes he was charged with as far as Nevertheless one feels indignant that 

he could. He concludes that the poet Angelo should be spared. Possibly the 

appears "to inculcate, that women poet recalls Cassandra's repeated appeals 

think ill of nothing that raises the credit for mercy for Promos, before she dis- 

of their beauty, and are ready, however covered that her brother was living. 



144 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [act v. 

I thought it was a fault, but knew it not, 
Yet did repent me, after more advice; 
For testimony whereof, one in the prison, 
That should by private order else have died, 
I have reserv'd alive. 

Duke, What 's he ? 

Prov. His name is Barnardine. 

Duke. I would thou hadst done so by Claudio. 471 

Go fetch him hither : let me look upon him. 

\Exit Provost 

Escal. I am sorry, one so learned and so wise 
As you, Lord Angelo, have still appear'd. 
Should slip so grossly, both in the heat of blood, 475 
And lack of temper'd judgment afterward. 

Ang, I am sorry that such sorrow I procure ; 
And so deep sticks it in my penitent heart 
That I crave death more willingly than mercy : 
'Tis my deserving, and I do entreat it. 480 

Re-enter Provost with Barnardine, Claudio muffled, 
and Juliet. 

Duke. Which is that Barnardine? 

Prov. This, my lord. 

Duke. There was a friar told me of this man. 

Sirrah, thou art said to have a stubborn soul, 

That apprehends no further than this world, 

And squar'st thy life according. Thou 'rt condemn'd ; 

But, for those earthly faults, I quit them all, 486 

And pray thee take this mercy to provide 

471. would\ F ; wouldst F 2, 3, 4. 480. muffled,] omitted Ff, muffled up, 
Capell. 485. according\ accordingly F 4. 

467. a^wVg] reflection, consideration. (Grosart, i. 16), 1589. Craig sends me 

Similar to the use of advise, in the a parallel from Montaigne's Essays 

expression "are you advised of (translatedbyFlorio), Book 11. chap. xii. 

that ? " (Temple Classics, iii. 190), 1603: " Con- 

485. j^war'i-/ M_j/ /?)^] shape, regulate forme his behaviors and square his 

thy life. Nashe has "square our life unto it " [doctrine], 
actions," Anatomu of Absurditie 486. ^«zV] remit. 



SCI] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 145 

For better times to come. Friar, advise him : 

I leave him to your hand. What muffled fellow's 
that? 
Prov. This is another prisoner that I sav'd, 490 

That should have died when Claudio lost his head, 

As like almost to Claudio as himself. 

\Unmuffles Claudio. 
Duke. \To Isabella.'] If he be like your brother, for his sake 

Is he pardon'd ; and for your lovely sake. 

Give me your hand and say you will be mine, 495 

He is my brother too. But fitter time for that. 

By this Lord Angelo perceives he 's safe : 

Methinks I see a quick'ning in his eye. 

Well, Angelo, your evil quits you well : 

Look that you love your wife ; her worth worth yours. 

I find an apt remission in myself, 501 

And yet here 's one in place I cannot pardon. 

[To Lucw.] You, sirrah, that knew me for a fool, a 
coward, 

One all of luxury, an ass, a madman : 

Wherein have I so deserv'd of you, 505 

That you extol me thus ? 

500. her worth worth your si her worth worths yours Hanmer, her worth'' s worth 
vours Heath conj., her worth worte yours Hudson (Walker conj.). 

488. advise him] give him spiritual stage for which the play was written, 
counsel. We may suppose she falls into his arms, 

489. muffled fellow"] The muffler over and a stage-direction to that effect 
the lower parts of the face was a would not be amiss. See Introduc- 
common method of disguising one's self. tion. 

See notes to Merry Wives (Arden 499. quits'] requites. Your evil lets 

edition, and Steevens), iv. ii. 82. you off well. 

The muffler was, in fact, a mask, and 500. her worth worth yours] her 

the words are synonymously used several value is equal to your value. In the 

times by Cotgrave. old play. Promos is treated with similar 

495. Give w^] provided you give me leniency: "Be loving to good Cas- 

(Craig) ; but it is wrong to omit the sandra thy wife . . . And now agayne 

comma after sake. the government receyve ... If thou 

affj. perceives he^s safe] Johnson be wyse, thy fall maye make thee ryse, 

makes the natural remark that it is The lost sheepe founde, for joye the 

strange Isabel should give expression to feast was made " (end of Part 11.). 

neither gratitude, wonder, or joy at the 501. a// r<?ww/^ ready forgiveness, 

sight of her brother. Boswell says she See note, previous line, 

may have expressed her feelings on the 504. luxury] lust. 

10 



146 MEASURE FOR MEASURE [act v. 

Lucio. Faith, my lord, I spoke it but according to the 
trick. If you will hang me for it, you may ; but I 
had rather it would please you I might be whipped. 

Duke. Whipp'd first, sir, and hang'd after. 5 i o 

Proclaim it, provost, round about the city. 
Is any woman wrong'd by this lewd fellow, 
As I have heard him swear himself there 's one 
Whom he begot with child, let her appear, 
And he shall marry her : the nuptial finish'd, 5 i 5 

Let him be whipp'd and hang'd. 

Lucio, I beseech your highness, do not marry me to a 
whore. Your highness said even now, I made 
you a duke : good my lord, do not recompense 
me in making me a cuckold. 520 

Duke. Upon mine honour, thou shalt marry her. 
Thy slanders I forgive ; and therewithal 
Remit thy other forfeits. Take him to prison, 
And see our pleasure herein executed. 

Lucio. Marrying a punk, my lord, is pressing to death, 525 
whipping and hanging. 

Duke. Slandering a prince deserves it. 

[Exeunt Officers with Lucio, 
She, Claudio, that you wrong'd, look you restore. 
Joy to you, Mariana ! love her, Angelo : 
I have confess'd her and I know her virtue, 530 

512. Is any woman] Edd., If any woman Ff, If any woman's Hanmer. 
527. [Exeunt . . . Lucio] Dyce. 

507, 508. according' to the trick'] See was pressed to death " in A Cure for a 

above, iii. ii. 53. Cuckold, iv. i. Hall Caine's novel A 

523. forfeits] penalties, punishments. Shadow of a Crime is founded on it. 

525. pressing to death] an ancient And it is described and figured in 
legal punishment, peine forte et dur, for Ashton's Social Life of Queen Anne, 
obstinate silence and refusal to divulge ed. 1883, p. 411. It was constantly 
evidence. For vivid accounts of this used as a metaphor, as here, by the 
terrible torture, see the sentence on Elizabethan writers. See Nashe's 
Samuel Chidley, in A Crying Sin, etc. Lenten Stuffe (Harl. Misc., 1809, ii. 
Harl. Misc. vi. 279, 1652; and the 327), 1599. And Shakespeare else- 
Strange ways case in The Unhappy where, Troilus and Cressida, ill. ii. 
Marksman, ibid. vii. 23, 1659. Webster 217 ; Much Ado, ill. i. 76 ; Richard II, 
mentions "the ballad of Flood that ni. iv. 72. 



SCI] MEASURE FOR MEASURE 147 

Thanks, good friend Escalus, for thy much goodness : 
There's more behind that is more gratulate. 
Thanks, provost, for thy care and secrecy : 
We shall employ thee in a worthier place. 
Forgive him, Angelo, that brought you home 535 

The head of Ragozine for Claudio's : 
The offence pardons itself. Dear Isabel, 
I have a motion much imports your good ; 
Whereto if you '11 a willing ear incline, 
What's mine is yours and what is yours is mine. 540 
So, bring us to our palace ; where we '11 show 
What 's yet behind, that 's meet you all should know. 

[^Exeunt. 

542. that's] F 2, 3, 4 ; that F i. 

532. gratulate] satisfactory, pleasing. 538. motion] proposal. " Will ye 

The verb is common in this sense. The go in to dinner, Sir ? Menech. A good 

duke has referred already at the begin- motion: yea and thanks," W. W., 

ning of this Act to his intention to Menechmus^ li. i., 1595. 
reward Escalus for his good conduct. 
One of the things that is "yet behind." 



APPENDIX I 

V. 321-323 : the strong statutes Stand like the forfeits in a 
barber's shop, As much in mock as mark. Compare Fuller, 
Holy and Profane State, V. x. 395, 1642 : " No more than the 
forfeits in a barber's shop, where a gentleman's pleasure 
is all the obligation to pay " {New Eng, Diet.). Fuller's 
passage is an obvious echo of the words in the text, and 
are interesting as they give his view of their meaning. 
Warburton appears, however, to have first started the 
generally accepted explanation. He says that barbers' 
shops were continually crowded with idle people, "who 
would be perpetually handling and misusing them [his 
instruments as a barber-surgeon]. To remedy which, / 
suppose, there was placed up against the wall a table of 
forfeiture, adapted to every offence of this kind ; which it is 
not likely would long preserve its authority." Dr. Johnson 
says Warburton's " explanation may serve till a better is 
discovered." Steevens sarcastically says : " I have conversed 
with several people who had repeatedly read the list of 
forfeits alluded to by Shakespeare, but have failed in my 
endeavours to procure a copy of it. The metrical one, 
published by the late Dr. Kenrick, was a forgery." Henley 
says : " These forfeits were . . . of a ludicrous nature. I 
perfectly remember to have seen them in Devonshire (printed 
like King Charles's Rules), though I cannot recollect the 
contents." Nares (in v. Forfeits) gives the " rules," excogitated 
by Dr. Kenrick, with scepticism as to their genuineness. 

It will be observed that there is not an iota of support 
for the above hypothesis. Nevertheless it is accepted by 
such authorities as Schmidt and the New Eng. Diet., as well 
as by the commentators to a man. 

I reject the whole fabric ; for two reasons, firstly, because 
if such a custom had existed in Shakespeare's time we would 
know of it ; and secondly, because I have something else 

U9 



160 APPENDIX 1 

to offer. We have ample information as to the interiors of 
the barber-surgeon establishments. The most prominent 
accounts that occur to me are in Harvey's Trimming of 
Thomas Nashe (1597), from the hair-dresser's point of view; 
in Lyly's Mydas (1593), where Motto, a barber, talks a deal 
of shop ; in Ben Jonson's Silent Woman (1609), Act III., 
where Cutbeard's (barber's) business is gone into with the 
fulness of an inventory ; and in Beaumont and Fletcher's 
Knight of the Burning Pestle^ where the surgical department 
of Barbaroso's den is laid open, ad nauseam indeed, but most 
humorously. Many other votaries of St. Cuthbert (Cut- 
beards) might be mentioned, but nowhere is there even an 
allusion, that I have met, that could be construed into a 
reference to any kind of bye-laws. There is a barber's scene 
in Whetstone's Promos and Cassandra (Part I. V. v.), 1578. 

But there was one kind of forfeit which the barber 
took possession of from his customers and hung up as part 
of his insignia in his shop, and that was their teeth. For 
the barber was the dentist of the time. These were the 
innocuous forfeits that could mock, not mark. In the first 
Act (l. iii. 19) these neglected statutes have already suggested 
the metaphor : " We have strict statutes, and most biting 
laws . . . Which for this fourteen years we have let sleep." 
If it be objected that these shop fittings cannot be called 
forfeits, since the idea of penalty is not present, no doubt 
Cutbeard would reply if the sufferers had visited him earlier 
their teeth would have been saved by proper treatment, and 
they forfeited them from neglect. But Shakespeare would 
have made nothing of that point in his choice of a word to 
express a bold idea. He often paid slight heed to the exact 
verbal signification, and left it for others to discover his 
meaning. And he uses forfeit (verb) absolutely in the sense 
of to lose several times. 

With reference to the custom, a few examples will prove 
it. We learn from Jonson's Silent Woman, III. ii. (430^), 
how the decoration was fixed : " Or draw his own [Cut- 
beard's] teeth, and add them to the lutestring." In Beaumont 
and Fletcher's Knight of the Burning Pestle (1611), Act III., 
the string is confirmed : " Lo, where the spear [barber's pole] 
and copper bason are ! Behold the string on which hangs 
many a tooth. Drawn from the gentle jaw of wandring 
knights!" And in The Woman-Hater, III. iii. (1607), by 
the same authors, is another reference : " I will break my 



APPENDIX I 151 

knife, The ensign of my former happy state, Knock out my 
teeth, have them hung at a barber's, And enter into religion." 
Shakespeare has referred a number of times to toothache, 
and raging teeth. It is not therefore an unlikely fancy to 
occur to him. One passage is indeed a remarkable parallel 
to the thought in the text. It is in ^ Henry VI. IV. vii. 
16-19 : " Away, burn all the records of the realm : my 
mouth shall be the parliament of England. HolL Then 
we are like to have biting statutes, unless his teeth be pulled 
out." So that Shakespeare compared the " biting statutes " 
already to teeth that should be extracted, then to become 
a mockery, and hung up as a badge or ornament. I do not 
profess to understand the extract from Fuller. Perhaps a 
wider context would explain his meaning. 

In I. iii. the threatening twigs of birch hung up on the 
wall in the children's sight, more mocked than feared, that 
is to say the biting laws that have been let sleep is an 
exactly parallel simile. 



APPENDIX II 

Although Shakespeare derived the play of Measure for 
Measure, so far as the tale goes, from Whetstone's Promos 
and Cassandra (1575) — modifying it in several ways — it is 
noteworthy that he rarely uses the expressions or language 
of the early drama in his production. But the number of 
apposite illustrations that the old play affords to Shake- 
speare's language elsewhere is so remarkable that I think 
it is fitting to collect here the best of them, after exhaustive 
study. How useful some of these are, any student of 
Shakespearian language will see for himself I take the 
instances in the order they occur in the old play, the refer- 
ences being to the pages in Nichol's Six Old Plays, vol. i., 
1779. For brevity's sake I give only the references to 
Shakespeare in the Globe edition. The page numbers 
precede the quotations. Few of these are in the New 
Eng. Diet. 

11. "I am the stern that guides their thoughts." 

1 Henry VI. I. i. 177. 

12. " Rosko, what newes, that in such hast you come 
blowing f' Merry Wives, HI. iii. 94. No good example in 
New Eng. Diet. 

12. " Marrie, right nowe at the Sessiones I was." 

2 Henry VI. in. ii. 40. 

14. "I smealt he loved lase mutton well." Two Gentle- 
men of Verona, I. i. 102. 

16. ^^Frsityng vixen, Rwayl" Midsummer-Nighf s Dream, 
III. ii. 324. 

17. "marriage to worke after mends doth seldome favor 
win." Troilus and Cressida, I. i. 68. 

1 8. " to proroge my dayes, to-morrow else I dye." 
A ntony arid Cleopatra, II. i. 26. 

20. " Garish shewes for gaze." Richard III. IV. iv. 89. 

162 



APPENDIX II 153 

21. "she knew you and I were at square: and least we 
fall to blowes." Midsummer-Night' s Dreain^ II. i. 30 (verb). 

22. " a chylling feare (The case is such) Makes me from 
speech forbeare." Titus Andronicus, II. iii. 212. 

24. " And some, bej^lady, very good." Romeo and Juliet, 
I. V. 35. " Byrlady," 1570, New Eng. Diet. 

24. " At fast or loose, with my Giptian, I meane to have 
a cast "(spoken by a hangman). A gipsy sleight. Antony 
and Cleopatra, I. i. 10. 

25. "to totter in a rope" (hang, swing). King John, 
V. V. 7. 

26. " How now, Giptian ? All a mort knave, for want of 
company?" 1 Henry VI. III. ii. 124; Taming of the Shrew, 
IV. iii. 36. 

26. " Be crustie, man : the Hangman straight will reade 
fortunes with thee." Troilus and Cressida, V. i. 5. 1570 in 
New Eng. Diet. 

34. " He fryskes abought as byrdes [brize] were in his 
breech." Antony and Cleopatra, III. x. 14. 

34. " But Holla, tongue, no more of this I pray " (and 
again, 63). As You Like It, III. ii. 57. 

39. " She fearde of late of whipping cheere to smell." 
^ Henry IV. V. iv. 5. 

39. " with my mistresse the world is chaunged well." 
Comedy of Errors, II. ii. 154. 

41. "I, monster now, no mayde nor wyfe, have stoupte to 
Promos lust." Measure for Measure, V. i. 178. 

42. " Is my Andrugio done to death ? fye, {y^, o faythles 
trust ! " Much Ado, V. iii. 3. 

43. " God no doubt wyl worke for your and their behoved 
Hamlet, v. i. 71. 

44. " for thy good deede I must remayne thy debtor'.' 
Antony and Cleopatra, V. ii. 205. 

45. " Other market mades pay down for their meate." 
Antony and Cleopatra, III. vi. 51. 

46. " Lay off handes Dalia. You powte me [worry me] 
if that you got my pudding." Coriolanus, V. i. 52. 

46. " hony sweet Grimball." Henry V. II. iii. i ; Troilus 
and Cressida (twice). (Chaucerian, but dropt ?) 

46. " I love you so filthily, law ye nowe." Measure for 
Measure, il. iv. 42, III. ii. 24 ; Winter^s Tale, II. iii. 50 (" la 
you now "). 

47. " by Gys." Hamlet, IV. v. 59. 



154 APPENDIX II 

48. "Nay, bum ladie, I will not by Saint Anne'' (and 
pp. 52, 82). Taming of the Shrew, I. i. 255 ; Twelfth Night, 

II. iii. 126. 

48. " Ich have heard my Gransier say Maide will saye 
naye and take it" Romeo and fuliet, I. iv. 37 ; Richard III. 

III. vii. 51. 

48. " Since Andrugio lost his head, he hath hung dozvne 
the lippe." Troilus and Cressida, III. i. 152. 

48. " This is once, I love a woman, for my life, as well as 
he." Much Ado, I. i. 320. 

49. " canst thou heale a greene wound well." ^ Henry 1 V. 
II. i. 106; Henry V, V. i. 44. 

50. " Thou so didst wytch our wits, as we from reason 
strayed." 1 Henry IV, IV. i. no. 

51. "A Syr, in fayth, the case is altred quight." 
S Henry VI. IV. iii. 31. 

51. "Master Phallax so underprops her fame!' Lucrece^ 

53. 

51. "The slavering foole . . . (He loves her so) upon the 
fylth will spend." Cymbeline, I. vi. 105 ; Othello, v. ii. 231. 

52. " Good luck a God's name, the woodcock is masht!' 
Twelfth Night, II. v. 92 (etc.); Merry Wives, IV. iii. 13. 

52. "Yon is the lyttel knave. How dost Rosko? Rosko. 
Whope, my eyesight God save." Winter's Tale, IV. iv. 69. 

52. ^^ good nowe no more of this stir." Hamlet, I. i. 70 
(etc.). 

52. "I faith Barber, I wyll pyck your teeth straight." 
Leary IV. vi. 260. 

53. "A strong thief e, I warrant him by his looke." Timon 
of Athens, IV. iii. 45. 

56. " This knave your pence in his pocket hath purst." 
Antony and Cleopatra, ll. ii. 192. 

56. " The rather, for that he playde the knave with me." 
All's Well, III. V. 45. 

56. " a foole company him." Cymbeline, V. iv. 408. 

57, 100. "Yet ere I go, as swans sing at their end In 
solemne song I meane my knoll to ryng." Othello, V. ii. 247. 

Second Part. 

62, 100, 103. "Yet in my eare styll goes my passing 
bell'.' Venus and Adonis, 702. 

62. " So ofte as men with poynted fingers tell their friendes 
my faultes." Othello, IV. ii. 55. 



APPENDIX II 155 

62. " My traunces straunge a present death forshewer 
Cymbeline, V. v. 473. 

63. " 1st possible that my mistris Lamia Over the shooes 
should be'yn love with Phallax ? " Two Gentlemen of Verona^ 
I. i. 24. 

63. "But the sport is to see the loving elves By II together." 
Troilus and Cressida^ III. ii. 60. 

64. " I will foresee the consort of Musick well plast to be." 
'2 Henry VI. ill. ii. 327. 

66. " This geare fadgeth now that these fellowes peare." 
Loves Labour's Lost, V. i. 54. 

69. " Where good wyll the welcome geves, provysion syld 
is scant." Comedy of Errors, III. i. 20. 

71." who loves me once is lymed to my heastV Much 
Ado, III. i. 104 (etc.); Love's Labour's Lost, V. ii. 65. 

72. "If pleasure be treasure, the golden world is here." 
As You Like It, I. i. 125. 

73. " good kinde wormes" (pityingly of women). Tempest y 
III. i. 31. 

75. "Of merry mates I have a mQcWngstauld." Richard I IL 
I. iii. 206. 

79. " To part this fraye it is hye time." Much Ado, V. i. 
114; Taming of the Shrew, I. ii. 23. 

80. " yle bum yee, For reforming a lye thus against mee." 
Much Ado, V. i. 262. 

81." wee tryfle tyme too long." Merchant of Venice, IV. i. 
298. 

81. " O, I ken you nowe Syr; chi crie you mercie" (col- 
loquial = " beg your pardon "). Two Gentlemen of Verona, 
V. 4, 94, etc. 

82. " Come on, slouch, wylt please you befogging hence." 
Taming of the Shrew, III. ii. 213. 

82. " now the worlde is groune to such jollie spye [watch- 
fulness, espionage?] As if folke doo kisse th'are nought by 
and by." Macbeth, III. i. 30. 

84. "He showeth gould the ready soules to lure." 
Henry VIIL I. i. 223. 

87. " this wicked deede thou shalt ere long buy deare " 
[ = aby]. Midsummer- Nighf s Dream, III. ii. 426. 

87, loi. "when thou thy selfe dost make thy will a 
lawe." Two Gentlemen of Verona, V. iv. 14. 

89. " hope to be with Master Prostros to bring." Troilus 
and Q'essida^ l. ii. 305. 



156 APPENDIX II 

90. " Who gives two pence a straunge Monster to see ? 
, , . A hoj-ned beast" etc. Othello, IV. i. 63. 

90. " The king, I fayth,hath set us all a-worke" 2 Henry IV. 
IV. iii. 124. 

91. " take in worth this misery, as penaunce for my mysr 
Venus and Adonis, 53. 

98. " Into a carte they dyd the queane conveye Ap- 
paralled in colours verie gaye Both hood and gowne of 
greene and yellowe saye" (colours indicative of anguish). 
Twelfth Night, II. iv. 1 16. 

102. "that I the grace may have At latter gaspe the fear 
of death to kyll." 1 Henry VI, II. v. 58. 

104. " at poynt to lose his head." Coriolanus, II. i. 96. 

106. In fine, a clowne came peaking through the wood." 
Merry Wives, III. v. 51. 

106. " His death ere long would sure have stopt her 
breathy Ltccrece^ 11 80. 



Printed by Morrison & Gibb Limited, Edinburgh 



SOME OPINIONS OF THE PRESS 



** In get up the edition is essentially one which will appeal to the genuine 
book-lover. The type is large, and there are ample margins. The paper 
used is exceedingly light in weight, and the binding is chaste but substantial. 
Altogether, we have nothing but praise for this new edition." — IVestminster 
Gazette. 

" An admirable edition. ... A comely volume, admirably printed and 
produced, and containing all that a student need require. The page is not 
unduly encumbered with notes, but no point needing explanation is neglected 
or passed over." — Speaker. 

' ' This volume is a worthy addition to a charming issue of Shakespeare's 
works. . . . Leaves little to be desired as a model of arrangement and 
printing ; it is light and handy, and eminently readable." — Athenceum. 

"A critical edition of Shakespeare in a thoroughly readable form. . . . 
No previous edition known to us contains so much information in so agreeable 
an outward form. Hitherto, editions in which anything like textual criticism 
was attempted, have been works of reference rather than books to be read 
by the fireside. Now this is eminently such a book. * Helpful yet handy ' 
might be the motto of the edition. The publishers are to be congratu- 
lated on an unobtrusively tasteful and skilful achievement in the art of 
book manufacture. No less are they to be congratulated on their choice of 
an editor. . . . Take it all in all, his work is a model of ripe and sane 
scholarship. " — Daily Chronicle. 

** A very welcome addition to the Shakespeare shelf, for its wealth of 
notes and parallel passages are admirably arranged. No praise can be too 
high. " — Daily Graphic. 

•*We are grateful for a learned and sensible edition of the play." — 
Morning Post. 

"Very handsome, well edited, well printed, and convenient. No reader 
or book-buyer could desire a more attractive and satisfactory form." — St. 
fames' Gazette. 

" The editor has done his work in a scholarly fashion. The notes are 
full of instruction, and are evidently the work of one who understands the 
English language/' — British Weekly. 



SCI.] PRINCE OF DENMARK 



99 



Whether 'tis nobler in the mind to suffer 

The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune, 

Or to take arms against a sea of troubles, 

And by opposing end them ? To die, — to 

sleep, — 60 

No more; and by a sleep to say we end 
The heart-ache, and the thousand natural shocks 
That flesh is heir to, 'tis a consummation 
Devoutly to be wish'd. To die ; — to sleep ; — 
To sleep ! perchance to dream ! ay, there 's the 

rub; 65 

For in that sleep of death what dreams may come, 
When we have shuffled off this mortal coil, 

60, 61. To die^ — . . . Nol Pope, die to sleepe No Q, dye, to sleepe No F. 
63. to,'\ too; Q, too? F. 64, 65. die ;—to sleep ;— To sleep!] Capell, 

die to sleepe^ To sleepe, Q, F. 



Hunter, who would place the sol- 
iloquy, with Q I, in Act 11. sc. ii., 
supposes it is suggested by the book 
which Hamlet is there represented as 
reading. Perhaps, the explanation 
lying in what immediately follows, it 
means, Is my present project of active 
resistance against wrong to be, or not 
to be? Hamlet anticipates his own 
death as a probable consequence. 

57. in the mind] This is to be 
connected with "suffer," not with 
"nobler." 

58. slings and arrows] Walker, 
with an anonymous writer of 1752, 
would read "stings." "Slings and 
arrows " is found in Fletcher's Valen- 
tinian, i. iii. 

59. sea] Various emendations have 
been suggested : Theobald, " siege" ; 
also, "th' assay" or "a 'say"; 
Hanmer, "assailing"; Warburton, 
" assail of" ; Bailey, " the seat." It 
has been shown from Aristotle, Strabo, 
^lian, and Nicolas of Damascus that 
the Kelts, Gauls, and Cimbri ex- 
hibited their intrepidity by armed 



combats with the sea, which Shake- 
speare might have found in Abraham 
Fleming's translation of yS/zaw, 1576. 
But elsewhere Shakespeare has " sea 
of joys," "sea of glory," "sea of 
care." Here the central metaphor is 
that of a battle ("slings and arrows ") ; 
the "sea of troubles," billows of the 
war, merely develops the metaphor 
of battle, as in Scott, Marmion, 
VI. xxvi. : 

" Then mark'd they, dashing 
broad and far, 
The broken billows of the war, 
And plumed crests of chieftains 

brave. 
Floating like foam upon the 
wave." 
63. consummation] Compare Cym- 
beline, IV. ii. 280 : 

" Quiet consummation have : 

And renowned be thy grave ! " 
65. rub] impediment, as in King 
Henry V. il. ii. 188. 

67. mortal coil] trouble or turmoil 
of mortal life. In this sense coil 
occurs several times in Shakespeare, 



SPECIMEN PAGE OF "HAMLET"] 



THE ARDEN 

SHAKESPEARE 

GENERAL EDITOR: 
W. J. CRAIG, M.A. 

EDITOR OF "THE OXFORD SHAKESPEARE" 



I 



Each Volume^ demy 8vOy 2s. 6d. net 

THE FOLLOWING VOLUMES ARE READY : 

HAMLET. Edited by Edward Dowden. 

ROMEO AND JULIET. Edited by Edward Dowden. 

KING LEAR. Edited by W. J. Craig. 

THE TEMPEST. Edited by Moreton Luce. 

JULIUS C^SAR. Edited by Michael Macmillan. 

CYMBELINE. Edited by Edward Dowden. 

OTHELLO. Edited by H. C. Hart. 

HENRY V. Edited by Herbert Arthur Evans. 

TITUS ANDRONICUS. Edited by H. Bellyse Baildon. 

THE TAMING OF THE SHREW. Edited by R. W. Bond. 

THE MERRY WIVES OF WINDSOR. Edited by H. C. 

Hart. 
ALL'S WELL THAT ENDS WELL. Edited by W. O. 

Bricstocke 
A MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM. Edited by H. 

Cuningham. 

the following volumes are in preparation i 
ANTONY AND CLEOPATRA. Edited by R. H. Case. 
MACBETH. Edited by W. A. Brockington. 
THE MERCHANT OF VENICE. Edited by C. K. Pooler. 
TWELFTH NIGHT. Edited by Moreton Luce. 
CORIOLANUS. Edited by W. J. Craig. 
HENRY IV. Edited by R. P. Cowl. 

THE COMEDY OF ERRORS. Edited by H. Cuningham. 
TIMON OF ATHENS. Edited by K. Deighton. 
PERICLES OF TYRE. Edited by K. Deighton. 
TROILUS AND CRESSIDA. Edited by K. Deighton. 
LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST. Edited by H. C. Hart. 
MEASURE FOR MEASURE. Edited by H. C. Hart. 
THE TWO GENTLEMEN OF VERONA. Edited by 
R. W. Bond. 

METHUEN AND CO. 
LONDON 



NOTE 

The aim of this edition of Shakespeare is to meet in some 
degree the requirements of three classes of readers. There 
are those who care only to enjoy the play without the retarda- 
tion or the disturbance of notes ; for them a text, which it 
IS hoped may be regarded as trustworthy, is printed in a 
type which imposes little fatigue upon the eye ; such 
readers may wholly disregard the notes, or may refer to 
them on rare occasions. There are, secondly, readers who 
recognise the fact that many difficulties exist in what 
Shakespeare has written, and that the labour of editors, 
from Rowe to the most recent of annotators, has done much 
to make clear what was obscure, and to render easy what 
was difficult ; for these readers a body of explanatory notes, 
in which a mean is attempted between parsimony and 
superfluity, has been provided. Thirdly, there are scholarly 
readers, who have a legitimate desire themselves to check 
or control the work of the editor in the formation of his 
text. No edition of Shakespeare of moderate size and 
price appears to give at once explanatory notes and adequate 
textual collations. In *^ Hamlet" an attempt is made to 
exhibit the variations from the editor's text, which are 
found in the primary sources, the Quarto of 1604 and the 
Folio of 1623, in so far as those variations are of import- 
ance for the ascertainment of the text. Every variation 
is not recorded, but the editor has chosen to err on the 
side of excess rather than on that of defect. 



PR Shakespeare, William 
2824. Measure for measure 
A2H3 
cop. 2 




PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE 
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET 

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY 



