\ 




THE YALE SHAKESPEARE 



EDITED BY 
WILBUR L. CROSS TUCKER BROOKE 

WlLLARD HlGLEY DURHAM 



PUBLISHED UNDER THE DIRECTION 

or THE 
DEPARTMENT OF ENGLISH, YALE UNIVERSITY, 

ON THE FUND 
GIVEN TO THE YALE UNIVERSITY PRESS IN 1917 

BY THE MEMBERS OF THE 
KINGSLEY TRUST ASSOCIATION 

To COMMEMORATE THE SEVENTY-FIFTH ANNIVERSARY 
OF THE FOUNDING OF THE SOCIETY 




'he Yale Shakespeare 



cVo\.30a 
THE TAMING OF 

THE SHREW 

EDITED BY 

HENRY TEN EYCK PERRY 




NEW HAVEN YALE UNIVERSITY PRESS 

LONDON HUMPHREY MILFORD 
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS MCMXXI 



COPYRIGHT, 1921, BY 
YALE UNIVERSITY PRESS 



PR 

2232 
A2.PH 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 



PAGE 

THE TEXT . 1 

NOTES ....... 102 

APPENDIX A. Sources of the Play . . 115 
APPENDIX B. History of the Play . . 124 
APPENDIX C. The Text of the Present Edi 
tion .... 133 

APPENDIX D. Suggestions for Collateral Read 
ing 185 



INDEX OF WORDS GLOSSED 



136 



The facsimile opposite represents the title-page of the 
Elizabethan Club copy of the early quarto edition. 



A WITTIE 

AND PLEASANT 
COMEDIE 

Called 
The Taming of the Shrevr. 

As it was a<5led by his Maiefties 
Servants *t the Blacke Friers 

and ibff Globe. 

Written by Will. Shakefpcarc. 




L O N <D O N, 

Printed by VT.S. for John Stnttlwicke, andaretobc 
fold ac bis Shop in Saint Dunfonts Church* 

W3*A t/nrlof iVi* T^ialt 



yard vnder the Diall. 
I. 



[DRAMATIS PERSONS 

A LORD 

CHRISTOPHER SLY, a Tinker } _, 

TT r> TI TT f Persons in the 

Hostess, Page, Players, Hunts- V _ . .. 

e , c ( Induction 
men, and Servants 

BAPTISTA, a rich Gentleman of Padua 
VINCENTIO, an old Gentleman of Pisa 
LUCENTIO, Son to Vincentio; in love with Bianca 
PETRUCHIO, a Gentleman of Verona; Suitor to Kath- 

erina 
GREMIO, 



c Suitors to Bianca 

HORTENSIO, ) 

/ Servants to Lucentio 

BlONDELLO, ) 

GRUMIO, ) 

CURTIS, | Servant, to Petruchto 

Pedant, set up to personate Vincentio 

KATHERINA, the Shrew, ) 

-D j- Daughters to Baptista 

Widow' 

Tailor, Haberdasher, and Servants attending on 
Baptista and Petruchio 

SCENE: Sometimes in Padua t sometimes in Pe- 
truchio f s House in the Country.] 

Dramatis Personae; cf. n. 
pedant: a schoolmaster 



The Taming of the Shrew 
[INDUCTION 

Scene One 

Before an alehouse on a heath~\ 
Enter Beggar [Christopher Sly~\ and Hostess. 

Sly. I'll pheeze you, in faith. 

Host. A pair of stocks, you rogue ! 

Sly. Y' are a baggage: the Slys are no rogues; 
look in the chronicles; we came in with Richard 4 
Conqueror. Therefore, paucas pallabris; let the 
world slide. Sessa ! 

Host. You will not pay for the glasses you 
have burst? 8 

Sly. No, not a denier. Go by, Jeronimy, go 
to thy cold bed, and warm thee. 

Host. I know my remedy: I must go fetch 
the third-borough. [Exit.] 12 

Sly. Third, or fourth, or fifth borough, I'll 
answer him by law. I'll not budge an inch, boy: 
let him come, and kindly. 

Falls asleep. 

Wind horns. Enter a Lord from hunting, with 
his train. 

Lord. Huntsman, I charge thee, tender well my 
hounds : 16 

Induction; cf. n. Scene One S. d.; cf. n. 

1 pheeze you: settle your business 2 stocks; cf. n. 

4, 5 Richard Conqueror: Sly's blunder for 'William the Conqueror 1 

5 paucas pallabris: few words; cf. n. 6 Sessa; cf. n. 

9 denier: a small French coin Go by, Jeronimy; cf. n. 

12 third-borough: under constable 16 tender well: take good care of 



The Taming 



Brach Merriman, the poor cur, is emboss'd, 

And couple Clowder with the deep-mouth'd brach. 

Saw'st thou not, boy, how Silver made it good 

At the hedge-corner, in the coldest fault? 20 

I would not lose the dog for twenty pound. 

Hunts. Why, Bellman is as good as he, my lord; 
He cried upon it at the merest loss, 
And twice to-day pick'd out the dullest scent : 24 

Trust me, I take him for the better dog. 

Lord. Thou art a fool: if Echo were as fleet, 
I would esteem him worth a dozen such. 
But sup them well, and look unto them all: 28 

To-morrow I intend to hunt again. 

Hunts. I will, my lord. 

Lord. What's here? one dead, or drunk? See, doth 
he breathe? 

Sec. Hunt. He breathes, my lord. Were he not 
warm'd with ale, 32 

This were a bed but cold to sleep so soundly. 

Lord. O monstrous beast ! how like a swine he lies ! 
Grim death, how foul and loathsome is thine image! 
Sirs, I will practise on this drunken man. 36 

What think you, if he were convey'd to bed, 
Wrapp'd in sweet clothes, rings put upon his fingers, 
A most delicious banquet by his bed, 
And brave attendants near him when he wakes, 40 
Would not the beggar then forget himself? 

First Hunt. Believe me, lord, I think he cannot 
choose. 

Sec. Hunt. It would seem strange unto him when 
he wak'd. 

17 Brach: a hunting hound emboss'd: foaming at the mouth 

20 in the coldest fault; cf. n. 

23 cried upon it : gave the cry merest : most absolute 

36 practise: play a trick 40 brave: finely dressed 



of the Shrew, Ind. i 



Lord. Even as a flattering dream or worthless 
fancy. 44 

Then take him up and manage well the jest. 

Carry him gently to my fairest chamber, 

And hang it round with all my wanton pictures; 

Balm his foul head in warm distilled waters, 48 

And burn sweet wood to make the lodging sweet. 

Procure me music ready when he wakes, 

To make a dulcet and a heavenly sound; 

And if he chance to speak, be ready straight, 52 

And with a low submissive reverence 

Say, 'What is it your honour will command?' 

Let one attend him with a silver basin 

Full of rose-water, and bestrew'd with flowers ; 56 

Another bear the ewer, the third a diaper, 

And say, 'Will 't please your lordship cool your 
hands ?' 

Some one be ready with a costly suit, 

And ask him what apparel he will wear ; 60 

Another tell him of his hounds and horse, 

And that his lady mourns at his disease. 

Persuade him that he hath been lunatic; 

And when he says he is, say that he dreams, 64 

For he is nothing but a mighty lord. 

This do, and do it kindly, gentle sirs: 

It will be pastime passing excellent, 

If it be husbanded with modesty. 68 

First Hunt. My lord, I warrant you we will play 
our part, 

As he shall think, by our true diligence, 

He is no less than what we say he is. 

48 Balm: perfume by bathing 52 straight: immediately 

57 diaper: towel 64 is; cf. n. 66 kindly: naturally 

67 passing: surpassingly 

68 husbanded: carried into effect modesty: moderation 
70 As: so that 



The Taming 



Lord. Take him up gently, and to bed with him, 72 
And each one to his office when he wakes. 

[Sly is borne out.~\ Sound trumpets. 
Sirrah, go see what trumpet 'tis that sounds: 

[Exit Servingman.] 

Belike, some noble gentleman that means, 
Travelling some journey, to repose him here. 76 

Enter Servingman. 

How now ! who is it ? 

Serv. An it please your honour, 

Players that offer service to your lordship. 

Lord. Bid them come near. 

Enter Players. 

Now, fellows, you are welcome. 

Players. We thank your honour. 80 

Lord. Do you intend to stay with me to-night? 

A Player. So please your lordship to accept our 
duty. 

Lord. With all my heart. This fellow I remember, 
Since once he play'd a farmer's eldest son: 84 

'Twas where you woo'd the gentlewoman so well. 
I have forgot your name; but, sure, that part 
Was aptly fitted and naturally perform'd. 

A Play. I think 'twas Soto that your honour 
means. 88 

Lord. 'Tis very true: thou didst it excellent. 
Well, you are come to me in happy time, 
The rather for I have some sport in hand 
Wherein your cunning can assist me much. 92 

There is a lord will hear you play to-night; 
But I am doubtful of your modesties, 

75 Belike: probably 77 An: if 79 S. d.;c/. n. 

84 Since: when 88 A Play; cf. n. 88 Soto; c/. n. 

91 The rather for: the more so because 92 cunning: skill 



of the Shrew, Ind. i 



Lest, over-eyeing of his odd behaviour 

For yet his honour never heard a play 96 

You break into some merry passion 

And so offend him; for I tell you, sirs, 

If you should smile he grows impatient. 

A Player. Fear not, my lord: we can contain our 
selves 100 
Were he the veriest antic in the world. 

Lord. Go, sirrah, take them to the buttery, 
And give them friendly welcome every one : 
Let them want nothing that my house affords. 104 

Exit one with the Players. 
Sirrah, go you to Barthol'mew my page, 
And see him dress'd in all suits like a lady: 
That done, conduct him to the drunkard's chamber ; 
And call him 'madam/ do him obeisance. 108 

Tell him from me as he will win my love 
He bear himself with honourable action, 
Such as he hath observ'd in noble ladies 
Unto their lords, by them accomplished: 112 

Such duty to the drunkard let him do 
With soft low tongue and lowly courtesy; 
And say, 'What is 't your honour will command, 
Wherein your lady and your humble wife 116 

May show her duty, and make known her love?' 
And then, with kind embracements, tempting kisses, 
And with declining head into his bosom, 
Bid him shed tears, as being overjoy'd 120 

To see her noble lord restor'd to health, 
Who for this seven years hath esteemed him 
No better than a poor and loathsome beggar. 

95 over-eyeing: observing 97 merry passion: fit of merriment 

101 antic: buffoon 102 buttery: room where drink was kept 

106 in all suits: in all points 

112 them; cf. n. 113 duty: reverence 

119 declining head into: head hanging down upon 122 him: himself 



6 The Taming 

And if the boy have not a woman's gift 124 

To rain a shower of commanded tears, 

An onion will do well for such a shift, 

Which in a napkin being close convey'd, 

Shall in despite enforce a watery eye. 128 

See this dispatch'd with all the haste thou canst: 

Anon I'll give thee more instructions. 

Exit a Servingman. 

I know the boy will well usurp the grace, 
Voice, gait, and action of a gentlewoman: 132 

I long to hear him call the drunkard husband, 
And how my men will stay themselves from laughter 
When they do homage to this simple peasant. 
I'll in to counsel them: haply, my presence 136 

May well abate the over merry spleen 
Which otherwise would grow into extremes. 

[Exeunt.] 



Scene Two 
[A Bedchamber in the Lord's House] 

Enter aloft the drunkard [Sly], with attendants , some 

with apparel, [others with] basin and ewer, and 

other appurtenances; and Lord. 

Sly. For God's sake! a pot of small ale. 
First Serv. Will 't please your lordship drink a cup 
of sack? 

125 commanded: forced 126 shift: purpose 

127 napkin: handkerchief close: secretly 

128 in despite: despite hts own inability to weep 

129 dispatch'd: performed 130 Anon: presently 
131 usurp: counterfeit 134 stay: stop 
135 simple: low-born 137 spleen: fit of laughter 
Scene Two S. d. aloft; cf. n. ewer: a wide-mouthed pitcher used to 

hold water for the toilet 
2 sack: generic name of Spanish and Canary wines 



of the Shrew, Ind. ii 



Sec. Serv. Will 't please your honour taste of these 

conserves ? 
Third Serv. What raiment will your honour wear 

to-day ? 4 

Sly. I am Christophero Sly ; call not me honour, 
nor lordship: I ne'er drank sack in my life; and 
if you give me any conserves, give me con 
serves of beef. Ne'er ask me what raiment 8 
I'll wear, for I have no more doublets than 
backs, no more stockings than legs, nor no more 
shoes than feet: nay, sometime more feet than 
shoes, or such shoes as my toes look through 12 
the overleather. 
Lord. Heaven cease this idle humour in your 

honour ! 

O, that a mighty man, of such descent, 
Of such possessions, and so high esteem, 16 

Should be infused with so foul a spirit! 

Sly. What! would you make me mad? Am 
not I Christopher Sly, old Sly's son, of Burton- 
heath ; by birth a pedlar, by education a card- 20 
maker, by transmutation a bear-herd, and now 
by present profession a tinker? Ask Marian 
Hacket, the fat ale-wife of Wincot, if she know 
me not : if she say I am not fourteen pence on 24 
the score for sheer ale, score me up for the 
lyingest knave in Christendom. What! I am 
not bestraught: here's 
Third Serv. O ! this it is that makes your lady 

mourn. 28 

Sec. Serv. O ! this it is that makes your servants 

droop. 

14 idle: absurd 19 Burton-heath; cf. n. 

20 card-maker: maker of cards for combing wool 

21 bear-herd: one who leads about a tame bear 23 Wincot; cf. n. 
25 sheer: unmixed 27 bestraught: i.e., distraught 



TkeTawung 







As 

O 

Call 

And bams* lace these abject lowly 

Eadk m bis <*ee rady at tby beck: 

bate msic? baik! Apoflo plays, 




lk: or wiH tfco. 
ake UK wdkm an! 



the iMAnr eaitii. 
FirrtSm. Say Aom Witt coarse; thy 

Dost tikoa lore picfanes? we wffl fetch 



breath? 




of the Shrew, Ind. n 



Lord. Well show dice lo as she 
And how she was beguiled an 
As lively painted as the deed 

TTurdSero. Or Daphne roaming through a thorny 

wood. 
Scratching her legs rit* one hll swear she 

Z . r^r-CLi : M> 

And at that sight shall sad Apollo weep, 

So workmanly the blood and tears are drawn. 

Lord. Thon art a lord and nothing bat a kid: 
Thoo hast a lady far more beautiful *t 

Than any ffimim in *hi* waning ace. 

First Sm. And tffl the tears that she hath 

forthee 

Like enrions floods o'er-rm her lordy face, 
She was the fairest creature in the world; 
And jet she is inferior to none, 

Sly. Am I a lord? and hare I such a lady? 
Or do I dream? or have I dream'd tin now? 
I do not sleep; I see, I hear. I speak; 

Tl m __ ^ "W ^^l fm m"^ y 

smell avuii saroors, ana 1 ted sort tnmgs: 
Upon my life, I am a lord indeed; 
And not a tinker, nor Christopher Sty. 
Well, bring our lady hither to our sight; 
And once again, a pot o' the smallest ale. 
* Sec-Seno. Wffl't please your "^K*^* to 

O, how we joy to see your wit restor'd! 

Or, when yon wak'd so wak'd as if 
Sly. These fifteen years! by my fay, a 




10 The Taming 

But did I never speak of all that time? 84 

First Serv. O ! yes, my lord, but very idle words ; 
For though you lay here in this goodly chamber, 
Yet would you say ye were beaten out of door, 
And rail upon the hostess of the house, 88 

And say you would present her at the leet, 
Because she brought stone jugs and no seal'd quarts. 
Sometimes you would call out for Cicely Racket. 
Sly. Ay, the woman's maid of the house. 92 

Third Serv. Why, sir, you know no house, nor no 

such maid, 

Nor no such men as you have reckon'd up, 
As Stephen Sly, and old John Naps of Greece, 
And Peter Turf, and Henry Pimpernell, 96 

And twenty more such names and men as these, 
Which never were nor no man ever saw. 

Sly. Now, Lord be thanked for my good amends ! 
All. Amen. 100 

Sly. I thank thee; thou shalt not lose by it. 

Enter [the Page, as a~\ Lady, with Attendants. 

Page. How fares my noble lord? 

Sly. Marry, I fare well, for here is cheer enough. 
Where is my wife? 104 

Page. Here, noble lord: what is thy will with her? 

Sly. Are you my wife, and will not call me hus 
band? * 
My men should call me lord: I am your goodman. 

Page. My husband and my lord, my lord and 
husband ; 108 

I am your wife in all obedience. 

Sly. I know it well. What must I call her? 

84 of: during 89 leet; cf. n. 

90 seal'd quarts; cf. n. 99 amends: recovery 



of the Shrew, Ind. ii 1 1 

Lord. Madam. 

Sly. Al'ce madam, or Joan madam? 112 

Lord. Madam, and nothing else: so lords call 
ladies. 

Sly. Madam wife, they say that I have dream'd 
And slept above some fifteen year or more. 

Page. Ay, and the time seems thirty unto me, " 116 
Being all this time abandon'd from your bed. 

Sly. Tis much. Servants, leave me and her alone. 
Madam, undress you, and come now to bed. 

Page. Thrice noble lord, let me entreat of you 120 
To pardon me yet for a night or two, 
Or, if not so, until the sun be set: 
For your physicians have expressly charg'd, 
In peril to incur your former malady, 124 

That I should yet absent me from your bed: 
I hope this reason stands for my excuse. 

Sly. Ay, it stands so, that I may hardly tarry 

so long ; but I would be loath to fall into my 128 

dreams again: I will therefore tarry, in despite 

of the flesh and the blood. 

Enter a Messenger. 

Mes. Your honour's players, hearing your amend 
ment, 

Are come to play a pleasant comedy; 132 

For so your doctors hold it very meet, 
Seeing too much sadness hath congeal'd your blood, 
And melancholy is the nurse of frenzy: 
Therefore they thought it good you hear a play, 136 
And frame your mind to mirth and merriment, 
Which bars a thousand harms and lengthens life. 
Sly. Marry, I will let them play. It is not 

124 In peril to: for fear lest you 138 bars: prevents 



12 The Taming 

a comonty, a Christmas gambold, or a tumbling- 140 

trick? 

Page. No, my good lord; it is more pleasing stuff. 

Sly. What! household stuff? 

Page. It is a kind of history. 144 

Sly. Well, we'll see 't. Come, madam wife, sit by 

my side, 
And let the world slip: we shall ne'er be younger. 

Flourish. 



ACT FIRST 

Scene One 

[Padua. A public Place] 
Enter Lucentio and his man Tranio. 

Luc. Tranio, since for the great desire I had 
To see fair Padua, nursery of arts, 

1 am arriv'd for fruitful Lombardy, 

The pleasant garden of great Italy, 4 

And by my father's love and leave am arm'd 

With his good will and thy good company, 

My trusty servant well approv'd in all, 

Here let us breathe, and haply institute 8 

A course of learning and ingenious studies. 

Pisa, renowned for grave citizens, 

Gave me my being and my father first, 

A merchant of great traffic through the world, 12 

Vincentio, come of the Bentivolii. 

Vincentio's son, brought up in Florence, 

140 comonty: Sly's blunder for 'comedy' gambold: gambol 

143 household stuff; cf. n. 146 S. d. Flourish: r Sound trumpets' 

2 Padua; cf. n. 3 for: a* Lombardy; cf. n. 
7 approv'd: proved 8 institute: enter upon 
9 ingenious: intellectual 



of the Shrew, I. i 



It shall become to serve all hopes conceiv'd, 

To deck his fortune with his virtuous deeds: 16 

And therefore, Tranio, for the time I study, 

Virtue and that part of philosophy 

Will I apply that treats of happiness 

By virtue specially to be achiev'd. 20 

Tell me thy mind; for I have Pisa left 

And am to Padua come, as he that leaves 

A shallow plash to plunge him in the deep, 

And with satiety seeks to quench his thirst. 24 

Tra. Me Pardonato, gentle master mine: 
I am in all affected as yourself, 
Glad that you thus continue your resolve 
To suck the sweets of sweet philosophy. 28 

Only, good master, while we do admire 
This virtue and this moral discipline, 
Let's be no stoics nor no stocks, I pray; 
Or so devote to Aristotle's checks 32 

As Ovid be an outcast quite abjur'd. 
Balk logic with acquaintance that you have, 
And practise rhetoric in your common talk; 
Music and poesy use to quicken you; 36 

The mathematics and the metaphysics, 
Fall to them as you find your stomach serves you; 
No profit grows where is no pleasure ta'en; 
In brief, sir, study what you most affect. 40 

Luc. Gramercies, Tranio, well dost thou advise. 
If, Biondello, thou wert come ashore, 
We could at once put us in readiness, 

15 serve: fulfill 19 apply: ply 23 plash: pool 

25 Me Pardonato: begging your pardon; cf. n. 

26 affected: disposed 31 stocks; cf. n. 

32 devote: devoted checks: stringent discipline 

33 As: that Ovid; cf. n. 

34 Balk logic with: draw out by logic a person with whom one wishes 
to argue 36 quicken : enliven 38 stomach : inclination 

40 affect: incline to 41 Gramercies: many thanks 



14 The Taming 

And take a lodging fit to entertain 44 

Such friends as time in Padua shall beget. 
But stay awhile: what company is this? 

Tra. Master, some show to welcome us to town. 

Enter Baptista with his two daughters, Katherina 
and Bianca, Gremio, a Pantaloon, [and] Hor- 
tensio, suitor to Bianca. Lucentio [and] Tranio 
stand by. 

Bap. Gentlemen, importune me no farther, 48 

For how I firmly am resolv'd you know ; 
That is, not to bestow my youngest daughter 
Before I have a husband for the elder. 
If either of you both love Katherina, 52 

Because I know you well and love you well, 
Leave shall you have to court her at your pleasure. 

Gre. To cart her rather; she's too rough for me. 
There, there, Hortensio, will you any wife? 56 

Kath. I pray you, sir, is it your will 
To make a stale of me amongst these mates ? 

Hor. Mates, maid! how mean you that? no mates 

for you, 
Unless you were of gentler, milder mould. 60 

Kath. T faith, sir, you shall never need to fear: 
I wis it is not half way to her heart; 
But if it were, doubt not her care should be 
To comb your noddle with a three-legg'd stool, 64 
And paint your face, and use you like a fool. 

Hor. From all such devils, good Lord deliver us! 

Gre. And me too, good Lord ! 

Tra. Hush, master! here is some good pastime 
toward : 68 

47 S. d. Pantaloon; cf. n. by: aside 55 cart; cf. n. 

58 stale: laughing-stock; cf. n. mates: low persons 

59 Mates: husbands 62 I wis: verily; cf. n. 
65 fool : a professional jester 68 toward: at hand 



of the Shrew, I. i 15 

That wench is stark mad or wonderful froward. 

Luc. But in the other's silence do I see 
Maid's mild behaviour and sobriety. 
Peace, Tranio! 72 

Tra. Well said, master; mum! and gaze your fill. 

Bap. Gentlemen, that I may soon make good 
What I have said Bianca, get you in: 
And let it not displease thee, good Bianca, 76 

For I will love thee ne'er the less, my girl. 

Kath. A pretty peat ! it is best 
Put finger in the eye, an she knew why. 

Bian. Sister, content you in my discontent. 80 

Sir, to your pleasure humbly I subscribe: 
My books and instruments shall be my company, 
On them to look and practise by myself. 

Luc. Hark, Tranio! thou mayst hear Minerva 
speak. 84 

HOT. Signior Baptista, will you be so strange? 
Sorry am I that our good will effects 
Bianca's grief. 

Gre. Why will you mew her up, 

Signior Baptista, for this fiend of hell, 88 

And make her bear the penance of her tongue ? 

Bap. Gentlemen, content ye; I am resolv'd. 
Go in, Bianca. [Exit Bianca.] 

And for I know she taketh most delight 92 

In music, instruments, and poetry, 
Schoolmasters will I keep within my house, 
Fit to instruct her youth. If you, Hortensio, 
Or Signior Gremio, you, know any such, 96 

Prefer them hither; for to cunning men 
I will be very kind, and liberal 

78 peat: pet 79 Put . . . eye: weep 

84 Minerva : goddess of wisdom and the arts 

85 strange: unusual 87 mew: shut 
92 for: because 97 Prefer: direct cunning: skillful 



16 The Taming 

To mine own children in good bringing up ; 
And so, farewell. Katherina, you may stay; 100 

For I have more to commune with Bianca. Exit. 
Kath. Why, and I trust I may go too; may I not? 
What ! shall I be appointed hours, as though, belike, 
I knew not what to take, and what to leave ? Ha ! 104 

Exit. 

Gre. You may go to the devil's dam: your 
gifts are so good, here's none will hold you. 
Their love is not so great, Hortensio, but we 
may blow our nails together, and fast it fairly 108 
ou^t: our cake's dough on both sides. Farewell: 
yet, for the love I bear my sweet Bianca, if I 
can by any means light on a fit man to teach 
her that wherein she delights, I will wish him to 112 
her father. 

Hor. So will I, Signior Gremio: but a word, 
I pray. Though the nature of our quarrel yet 
never brooked parle, know now, upon advice, it 116 
toucheth us both that we may yet again have 
access to our fair mistress and be happy rivals 
in Bianca's love to labour and effect one 
thing specially. 120 

Gre. What's that, I pray? 
Hor. Marry, sir, to get a husband for her 
sister. 

Gre. A husband! a devil. 124 

Hor. I say, a husband. 

Gre. I say, a devil. Thinkest thou, Hortensio, 
though her father be very rich, any man is so 
very a fool to be married to hell? 128 

H or. Tush, Gremio! though it pass your 

106 gifts: endowments 107 Their love; cf. n. 

108 blow . . . together: be patient 112 wish: recommend 

116 parle: parley (with the aim of coming to an agreement) 

advice: reflection 128 to be: as to be 



of the Shrew, I.i 17 

patience and mine to endure her loud alarums, 
why, man, there be good fellows in the world, 
an a man could light on them, would take her 132 
with all faults, and money enough. 

Gre. I cannot tell; but I had as lief take her 
dowry with this condition, to be whipped at the 
high-cross every morning. 136 

Hor. Faith, as you say, there's small choice 
in rotten apples. But, come; since this bar in 
law makes us friends, it shall be so far forth 
friendly maintained, till by helping Baptista's 140 
eldest daughter to a husband, we set his younges* 
free for a husband, and then have to 't afresh. 
Sweet Bianca! Happy man be his dole! He 
that runs fastest gets the ring. How say you, 144 
Signior Gremio? 

Gre, I am agreed: and would I had given him 
the best horse in Padua to begin his wooing, 
that would thoroughly woo her, wed her, and 148 
bed her, and rid the house of her. Come on. 

Exeunt ambo. Mane[n~\t Tranio and Lucentio. 
Tra. I pray, sir, tell me, is it possible 

That love should of a sudden take such hold? 

Luc. O Tranio ! till I found it to be true, 152 

I never thought it possible or likely ; 

But see, while idly I stood looking on, 

I found the effect of love in idleness ; 

And now in plainness do confess to thee, 156 

That art to me as secret and as dear 

As Anna to the Queen of Carthage was, 

136 high-cross; cf. n. 138 bar: obstruction 142 have to: set to 

143 Happy . . . dole: happiness be Ms portion 

144 ring: a prize offered for running (with perhaps an allusion to 
the wedding ring) 

149 S. d. ambo: both, i.e., Gremio and Hortensio 

154 idly: indifferently 155 love in idleness; cf. n. 

158 Anna; cf.n. 



**_ The Taming 

Tranio, I burn, I pine, I perish, Tranio, 

If I achieve not this young modest girl. 160 

Counsel me, Tranio, for I know thou canst : 

Assist me, Tranio, for I know thou wilt. 

Tra. Master, it is no time to chide you now; 
Affection is not rated from the heart : 164 

If love have touch'd you, nought remains but so, 
Redime te captum, quam queas minima. 

Luc. Gramercies, lad; go forward: this contents: 
The rest will comfort, for thy counsel's sound. 168 

Tra. Master, you look'd so longly on the maid, 
Perhaps you mark'd not what's the pith of all. 

Luc. O yes, I saw sweet beauty in her face, 
Such as the daughter of Agenor had, 172 

That made great Jove to humble him to her hand, 
When with his knees he kiss'd the Cretan strand. 

Tra. Saw you no more? mark'd you not how her 

sister 

Began to scold and raise up such a storm 176 

That mortal ears might hardly endure the din? 

Luc. Tranio, I saw her coral lips to move, 
And with her breath she did perfume the air; 
Sacred and sweet was all I saw in her. 180 

Tra. Nay, then, 'tis time to stir him from his 

trance. 

I pray, awake, sir : if you love the maid, 
Bend thoughts and wits to achieve her. Thus it 

stands : 

Her elder sister is so curst and shrewd, 184 

That till the father rid his hands of her, 
Master, your love must live a maid at home; 
And therefore has he closely mew'd her up, 

164 rated : driven away by chiding 166 Redime . . . minimp; cf. n. 
169 longly: longingly 170 pith: essential point 

172 Agenor; cf. n. 184 curst: vixenish shrewd: shrewish 



of the Shrew, I. i 19 

Because she will not be annoy'd with suitors. 188 

Luc. Ah, Tranio, what a cruel father's he! 
But art thou not advis'd he took some care 
To get her cunning schoolmasters to instruct her ? 

Tra. Ay, marry, am I, sir ; and now 'tis plotted. 192 

Luc. I have it, Tranio. 

Tra. Master, for my hand, 

Both our inventions meet and jump in one. 

Luc. Tell me thine first. 

Tra. You will be schoolmaster, 

And undertake the teaching of the maid: 196 

That's your device. 

Luc. It is : may it be done ? 

Tra. Not possible; for who shall bear your part, 
And be in Padua here Vincentio's son? 
Keep house and ply his book, welcome his 
friends ; 200 

Visit his countrymen, and banquet them? 

Luc. Basta; content thee; for I have it full. 
We have not yet been seen in any house, 
Nor can we be distinguish'd by our faces 204 

For man, or master: then, it follows thus: 
Thou shalt be master, Trania, in my stead, 
Keep house, and port, and servants, as I should: 
I will some other be; some Florentine, 208 

Some Neapolitan, or meaner man of Pisa. 
'Tis hatch'd and shall be so: Tranio, at once 
Uncase thee, take my colour'd hat and cloak: 
When Biondello comes, he waits on thee; 212 

But I will charm him first to keep his tongue. 

Tra. So had you need. 

188 Because . . . will: because she shall 190 advis'd: informed 

193 for my hand: /'// wager my hand 194 jump: agree 

202 Basta: enough (Italian) full: completely 

207 port: state 209 meaner: of lower rank 

211 Uncase: undress colour'd; cf. n. 

213 charm: check as with a spell 



20 The Taming 

In brief then, sir, sith it your pleasure is, 

And I am tied to be obedient 216 

For so your father charg'd me at our parting, 

'Be serviceable to my son,' quoth he, 

Although I think 'twas in another sense 

I am content to be Lucentio, 220 

Because so well I love Lucentio. 

Luc. Tranio, be so, because Lucentio loves; 
And let me be a slave, to achieve that maid 
Whose sudden sight hath thrall'd my wounded 
eye. 224 

Here comes the rogue. 

Enter Biondello. 

Sirrah, where have you been ? 

Bion. Where have I been! Nay, how now! where 

are you? 

Master, has my fellow Tranio stol'n your clothes, 
Or you stol'n his? or both? pray, what's the 
news ? 228 

Luc. Sirrah, come hither: 'tis no time to jest, 
And therefore frame your manners to the time. 
Your fellow Tranio, here, to save my life, 
Puts my apparel and my countenance on, 232 

And I for my escape have put on his; 
For in a quarrel since I came ashore 
I kill'd a man, and fear I was descried. 
Wait you on him, I charge you, as becomes, 236 
While I make way from hence to save my life: 
You understand me? 

Bion. I, sir! ne'er a whit. 

Luc. And not a jot of Tranio in your mouth: 
Tranio is changed to Lucentio. 240 

224 thrall'd: enthralled 228 what's the news: what novelty is this 

230 frame: shape 232 countenance: external appearance 



of the Shrew, I. ii 21 

Bion. The better for him : would I were so too ! 
Tra. So would I, faith, boy, to have the next wish 

after, 

That Lucentio indeed had Baptista's youngest daugh 
ter. 

But, sirrah, not for my sake, but your master's, I 
advise 244 

You use your manners discreetly in all kind of com 
panies : 

When I am alone, why, then I am Tranio; 
But in all places else your master, Lucentio. 

Luc. Tranio, let's go. One thing more rests, 248 
that thyself execute, to make one among these 
wooers: if thou ask me why, sufficeth my rea 
sons are both good and weighty. Exeunt. 

The Presenters above speak. 

First Sera. My lord, you nod ; you do not mind 
the play. 252 

Sly. Yes, by Saint Anne, I do. A good matter, 

surely: comes there any more of it? 

Page. My lord, 'tis but begun. 

Sly. Tis a very excellent piece of work, 256 

madam lady: would 'twere done! 

They sit and mark. 

Scene Two 

[Before Hortensio's House] 
Enter Petruchio, and his man Grumio. 

Pet. Verona, for awhile I take my leave, 
To see my friends in Padua; but, of all 

242-251 Cf.n. 248 rests: remain s 251 S. d. Presenters: actors 

252 mind: pay attention to 257 S. d. mark: observe 



22 The Taming 

My best beloved and approved friend, 

Hortensio; and I trow this is his house. 4 

Here, sirrah Grumio; knock, I say. 

Gru. Knock, sir! whom should I knock? is 
there any man has rebused your worship? 

Pet. Villain, I say, knock me here soundly. 8 
Gru. Knock you here, sir! why, sir, what am 
I, sir, that I should knock you here, sir? 
Pet. Villain, I say, knock me at this gate; 
And rap me well, or I'll knock your knave's pate. 12 
Gru. My master is grown quarrelsome. I should 

knock you first, 
And then I know after who comes by the worst. 

Pet. Will it not be? 

Faith, sirrah, an you'll not knock, I'll ring it; 16 
I'll try how you can sol, fa, and sing it. 

He wrings him by the ears. 
Gru. Help, masters, help! my master is mad. 
Pet . Now, knock when I bid you, sirrah villain ! 

Enter Hortensio. 

Hor. How now ! what's the matter ? My old 20 
friend Grumio! and my good friend Petruchio! 
How do you all at Verona? 

Pet. Signior Hortensio, come you to part the fray? 
Con tutto il cuore ben trovato, may I say. 24 

Hor. Alia nostra casa ben venuto, molto 
honorato signior mio Petruchio. 
Rise, Grumio, rise: we will compound this quarrel. 
Gru. Nay, 'tis no matter, sir, what he leges in 28 

4 trow: believe 7 rebused: i.e., abused (Grumio' s blunder) 

8 me: ethical dative, used without affecting the sense 

soundly : smartly 

17 sol, fa: names of notes in the diatonic scale; cf. III. i. 74-79 
24 Con . . . trovato: with all my heart, well met 
25,26 Alia . . . Petruchio: welcome to our house, my much honored 
Signior Petruchio 27 compound: settle 28 leges: alleges. 



of the Shrew, I. ii 28 

Latin. If this be not a lawful cause for me to 
leave his service, look you, sir, he bid me knock 
him and rap him soundly, sir: well, was it fit for 
a servant to use his master so ; being, perhaps, 32 
for aught I see, two-and-thirty, a pip out? 
Whom would to God, I had well knock'd at first, 
Then had not Grumio come by the worst. 

Pet. A senseless villain ! Good Hortensio, 36 

I bade the rascal knock upon your gate, 
And could not get him for my heart to do it. 

Gru. Knock at the gate! O heavens! Spake 
you not these words plain, 'Sirrah, knock me 40 
here, rap me here, knock me well, and knock me 
soundly?' And come you now with 'knocking 
at the gate'? 

Pet. Sirrah, be gone, or talk not, I advise you. 44 
Hor. Petruchio, patience; I am Grumio's pledge. 
Why, this's a heavy chance 'twixt him and you, 
Your ancient, trusty, pleasant servant Grumio. 
And tell me now, sweet friend, what happy gale 48 
Blows you to Padua here from old Verona? 

Pet. Such wind as scatters young men through the 

world 

To seek their fortunes farther than at home, 
Where small experience grows. But in a few, 62 
Signior Hortensio, thus it stands with me: 
Antonio, my father, is deceas'd, 
And I have thrust myself into this maze, 
Haply to wive and thrive as best I may. 56 

Crowns in my purse I have and goods at home, 
And so am come abroad to see the world. 

Hor. Petruchio, shall I then come roundly to thee, 

29 Latin; cf. n. 33 two-and-thirty, a pip out; cf. n. 

46 heavy : sad 52 in a few : in a few words; cf. n. 

57 Crowns : coins worth five shillings 59 roundly: unceremoniously 



24 The Taming 

And wish thee to a shrewd ill-favour'd wife? 60 

Thou'dst thank me but a little for my counsel; 
And yet I'll promise thee she shall be rich, 
And very rich: but thou'rt too much my friend, 
And I'll not wish thee to her. 64 

Pet. Signior Hortensio, 'twixt such friends as we, 
Few words suffice; and therefore, if thou know 
One rich enough to be Petruchio's wife, 
As wealth is burthen of my wooing dance, 68 

Be she as foul as was Florentius' love, 
As old as Sibyl, and as curst and shrewd 
As Socrates' Xanthippe, or a worse, 
She moves me not, or not removes, at least, 72 

Affection's edge in me, were she as rough 
As are the swelling Adriatic seas: 
I come to wive it wealthily in Padua; 
If wealthily, then happily in Padua. 76 

Gru. Nay, look you, sir, he tells you flatly 
what his mind is: why, give him gold enough 
and marry him to a puppet or an aglet-baby; 
or an old trot with ne'er a tooth in her head, 80 
though she have as many diseases as two-and- 
fifty horses: why, nothing comes amiss, so 
money comes withal. 

Hor. Petruchio, since we are stepp'd thus far in, 84 
I will continue that I broach'd in jest. 
I can, Petruchio, help thee to a wife 
With wealth enough, and young and beauteous, 
Brought up as best becomes a gentlewoman: 88 

Her only fault and that is faults enough 
Is, that she is intolerable curst 
And shrewd and froward, so beyond all measure, 

68 burthen: refrain (here, 'the underlying thought') 

69 foul: ugly Florentius' love; cf. n. 70 Sibyl; cf, n. 
79 aglet-baby; cf. n. 80 trot: decrepit old woman 
90 intolerable: intolerably 91 froward : perverse 



of the Shrew, I. it 25 

That, were my state far worser than it is, 92 

I would not wed her for a mine of gold. 

Pet. Hortensio, peace! thou know'st not gold's 
effect: 

Tell me her father's name, and 'tis enough; 

For I will board her, though she chide as loud 96 

As thunder when the clouds in autumn crack. 
Hor. Her father is Baptista Minola, 

An affable and courteous gentleman; 

Her name is Katherina Minola, 100 

Renown'd in Padua for her scolding tongue. 

Pet. I know her father, though I know not her; 

And he knew my deceased father well. 

I will not sleep, Hortensio, till I see her ; 104 

And therefore let me be thus bold with you, 

To give you over at this first encounter, 

Unless you will accompany me thither. 

Gru. I pray you, sir, let him go while the 108 
humour lasts. O' my word, an she knew him as 
well as I do, she would think scolding would do 
little good upon him. She may, perhaps, call 
him half a score knaves or so: why, that's 112 
nothing: an he begin once, he'll rail in his rope- 
tricks. I'll tell you what, sir, an she stand him 
but a little, he will throw a figure in her face, 
and so disfigure her with it that she shall have lie 
no more eyes to see withal than a cat. You 
know him not, sir. 
Hor. Tarry, Petruchio, I must go with thee, 

For in Baptista's keep my treasure is: 120 

He hath the jewel of my life in hold, 

His youngest daughter, beautiful Bianca, 

96 board: accost chide: scold 106 give you over: leave you 

113 rope-tricks: tricks deserving the halter; cf. n. 

114 stand: withstand 117 cat; cf. n. 



26 The Taming 

And her withholds from me and other more, 

Suitors to her and rivals in my love; 124 

Supposing it a thing impossible, 

For those defects I have before rehears'd, 

That ever Katherina will be woo'd: 

Therefore this order hath Baptista ta'en, 128 

That none shall have access unto Bianca, 

Till Katherine the curst have got a husband. 

Gru. Katherine the curst! 
A title for a maid of all titles the worst. 132 

Hor. Now shall my friend Petruchio do me grace, 
And offer me, disguis'd in sober robes, 
To old Baptista as a schoolmaster 
Well seen in music, to instruct Bianca; 136 

That so I may, by this device, at least 
Have leave and leisure to make love to her, 
And unsuspected court her by herself. 

Gru. Here's no knavery ! See, to beguile the 140 

old folks, how the young folks lay their heads 

together ! 

Enter Gremio, and Lucentio disguised. 

Master, master, look about you: who goes there, 
ha ? 144 

Hor. Peace, Grumio ! it is the rival of my love. 
Petruchio, stand by awhile. 

Gru. A proper stripling, and an amorous ! 
Gre. O ! very well ; I have perus'd the note. 148 
Hark you, sir; I'll have them very fairly bound: 
All books of love, see that at any hand, 
And see you read no other lectures to her. 
You understand me. Over and beside 152 

133 grace : a favor 134 sober: dull-looking 

136 seen: skilled 147 proper: handsome (here ironically) 

148 note: memorandum 150 at any hand: in any case 



of the Shrew, I. ii 27 

Signior Baptista's liberality, 

I'll mend it with a largess. Take your paper too, 

And let me have them very well perfum'd; 

For she is sweeter than perfume itself 156 

To whom they go to. What will you read to her? 

Luc. Whate'er I read to her, I'll plead for you, 
As for my patron, stand you so assur'd, 
As firmly as yourself were still in place; 160 

Yea, and perhaps with more successful words 
Than you, unless you were a scholar, sir. 

Gre. O ! this learning, what a thing it is. 

Gru. O ! this woodcock, what an ass it is. 164 

Pet. Peace, sirrah! 

Hor. Grumio, mum! God save you, Signior 
Gremio ! 

Gre. And you're well met, Signior Hortensio. 
Trow you whither I am going? To Baptista 
Minola. 168 

I promis'd to inquire carefully 
About a schoolmaster for the fair Bianca; 
And, by good fortune, I have lighted well 
On this young man ; for learning and behaviour 172 
Fit for her turn ; well read in poetry 
And other books, good ones, I warrant ye. 

Hor. 'Tis well: and I have met a gentleman 
Hath promis'd me to help me to another, 176 

A fine musician to instruct our mistress: 
So shall I no whit be behind in duty 
To fair Bianca, so belov'd of me. 

Gre. Belov'd of me, and that my deeds shall 
prove. 180 

Gru. [Aside."] And that his bags shall prove. 

154 paper; cf. n. 

160 as yourself: as if you yourself in place: present 

164 woodcock: a stupid bird 

168 Trow: know 181 bags: money-bags 



28 The Taming 

Hor. Gremio, 'tis now no time to vent our love : 
Listen to me, and if you speak me fair, 
111 tell you news indifferent good for either. 184 
Here is a gentleman whom by chance I met, 
Upon agreement from us to his liking, 
Will undertake to woo curst Katherine ; 
Yea, and to marry her, if her dowry please. 188 

Gre. So said, so done, is well. 
Hortensio, have you told him all her faults? 

Pet. I know she is an irksome, brawling scold: 
If that be all, masters, I hear no harm. 192 

Gre. No, sayst me so, friend? What countryman? 

Pet. Born in Verona, old Antonio's son: 
My father dead, my fortune lives for me; 
And I do hope good days and long to see. 196 

Gre. Of sir, such a life, with such a wife, were 

strange ! 

But if you have a stomach, to 't i' God's name : 
You shall have me assisting you in all. 
But will you woo this wild-cat? 

Pet. Will I live? 200 

Gru. [Aside.] Will he woo her? ay, or I'll hang 
her. 

Pet. Why came I hither but to that intent? 
Think you a little din can daunt mine ears ? 
Have I not in my time heard lions roar? 204 

Have I not heard the sea, puff'd up with winds, 
Rage like an angry boar chafed with sweat? 
Have I not heard great ordnance in the field, 
And heaven's artillery thunder in the skies? 208 

Have I not in a pitched battle heard 
Loud larums, neighing steeds, and trumpets' clang? 
And do you tell me of a woman's tongue, 

184 indifferent: equally 186 Upon . . . liking; cf. n. 

206 chafed: made angry 210 larums: calls to arms 



of the Shrew, I. ii ' 29 

That gives not half so great a blow to hear 212 

As will a chestnut in a farmer's fire? 
Tush, tush! fear boys with bugs. 

Gru. [Aside. ~\ For he fears none. 

Gre. Hortensio, hark: 

This gentleman is happily arriv'd, 216 

My mind presumes, for his own good and ours. 

Hor. I promis'd we would be contributors, 
And bear his charge of wooing, whatso'er. 

Gre. And so we will, provided that he win 
her. 220 

Gru. [Aside. ~\ I would I were as sure of a good 
dinner. 

Enter Tranio brave, and Biondello. 

Tra. Gentlemen, God save you ! If I may be bold, 
Tell me, I beseech you, which is the readiest way 
To the house of Signior Baptista Minola? 224 

Bion. He that has the two fair daughters : is 't he 

you mean ? 

Tra. Even he, Biondello! 
Gre. Hark you, sir; you mean not her to 
Tra. Perhaps, him and her, sir: what have you to 
do ? 228 

Pet. Not her that chides, sir, at any hand, I pray. 
Tra. I love no cinders, sir. Biondello, let's away. 
Luc. [Aside.] Well begun, Tranio. 
Hor. Sir, a word ere you go: 

Are you a suitor to the maid you talk of, yea or 
no? 232 

Tra. And if I be, sir, is it any offence? 
Gre. No; if without more words you will get you 
hence. 

214 fear: frighten bugs: bugbears 219 charge: expense 



so The Taming 

Tra. Why, sir, I pray, are not the streets as free 
For me as for you? 

Gre. But so is not she. 236 

Tra. For what reason, I beseech you? 

Gre. For this reason, if you'll know, 
That she's the choice love of Signior Gremio. 

Hor. That she's the chosen of Signior Hor- 
tensio. 240 

Tra. Softly, my masters ! if you be gentlemen, 
Do me this right; hear me with patience. 
Baptista is a noble gentleman, * 

To whom my father is not all unknown; 244 

And were his daughter fairer than she is, 
She may more suitors have, and me for one. 
Fair Leda's daughter had a thousand wooers; 
Then well one more may fair Bianca have, 248 

And so she shall ; Lucentio shall make one, 
Though Paris came in hope to speed alone. 

Gre. What! this gentleman will out-talk us all. 

Luc. Sir, give him head: I know he'll prove a 
jade. 252 

Pet. Hortensio, to what end are all these words ? 

Hor. Sir, let me be so bold as ask you, 
Did you yet ever see Baptista's daughter? 

Tra. No, sir; but hear I do that he hath two, 256 
The one as famous for a scolding tongue 
As is the other for beauteous modesty. 

Pet. Sir, sir, the first's for me ; let her go by. 

Gre. Yea, leave that labour to great Hercules, 260 
And let it be more than Alcides' twelve. 

Pet. Sir, understand you this of me in sooth: 
The youngest daughter, whom you hearken for, 

240 That she's; cf. n. 247 Leda's daughter; cf. n. 

250 speed: succeed 252 jade: a worthless nag 

261 Alcides'; cf. n. 263 hearken: lie in wait 



of the Shrew, I. ii 81 

Her father keeps from all access of suitors, 264 

And will not promise her to any man 

Until the elder sister first be wed; 

The younger then is free, and not before. 

Tra. If it be so, sir, that you are the man 268 
Must stead us all, and me among the rest; 
And if you break the ice, and do this feat, 
Achieve the elder, set the younger free 
For our access, whose hap shall be to have her 272 
Will not so graceless be to be ingrate. 

Hor. Sir, you say well, and well you do conceive; 
And since you do profess to be a suitor, 
You must, as we do, gratify this gentleman, 276 
To whom we all rest generally beholding. 

Tra. Sir, I shall not be slack: in sign whereof, 
Please ye we may contrive this afternoon, 
And quaff carouses to our mistress' health, 280 

And do as adversaries do in law, 
Strive mightily, but eat and drink as friends. 

Gru. ) O excellent motion! Fellows, let's be 

Bion. ) gone. 

Hor. The motion's good indeed, and be it so : 284 
Petruchio, I shall be your ben venuto. Exeunt. 

269 stead: help 272 whose hap: he whose fortune 

273 innate: ungrateful 276 gratify : recompense 

279 contrive: pass away 280 carouses: full glasses of liquor 

283 motion : proposal 
285 I ... venuto : / will guarantee your welcome 



32 The Taming 

ACT SECOND 

Scene One 

[A Room in Baptista's House] 
Enter Katherina and Bianca. 

Bian. Good sister, wrong me not, nor wrong your 
self, 

To make a bondmaid and a slave of me; 
That I disdain: but for these other gawds, 
Unbind my hands, I'll pull them off myself, 4 

Yea, all my raiment, to my petticoat ; 
Or what you will command me will I do, 
So well I know my duty to my elders. 

Kath. Of all thy suitors, here I charge thee, tell 8 
Whom thou lov'st best: see thou dissemble not. 

Bian. Believe me, sister, of all the men alive 
I never yet beheld that special face 
Which I could fancy more than any other. 12 

Kath. Minion, thou liest. Is 't not Hortensio? 

Bian. If you affect him, sister, here I swear 
I'll plead for you myself, but you shall have him. 

Kath. O ! then, belike, you fancy riches more : 16 
You will have Gremio to keep you fair. 

Bian. Is it for him you do envy me so? 
Nay, then you jest; and now I well perceive 
You have but jested with me all this while: 20 

I prithee, sister Kate, untie my hands. 

Kath. If that be jest, then all the rest was so. 

Strikes her. 
Enter Baptista. 

3 gawds: ornaments 13 Minion: a pert, saucy person 

17 fair: supplied with finery 



of the Shrew, II. i 88 

Bap. Why, how now, dame ! whence grows this 

insolence ? 

Bianca, stand aside. Poor girl! she weeps. 24 

Go ply thy needle; meddle not with her. 
For shame, thou hilding of a devilish spirit, 
Why dost thou wrong her that did ne'er wrong thee? 
When did she cross thee with a bitter word? 28 

Kath. Her silence flouts me, and I'll be reveng'd. 

Flies after Bianca. 

Bap. What! in my sight? Bianca, get thee in. 

Exit [Bianca] . 

Kath. What! will you not suffer me? Nay, now 

I see 

She is your treasure, she must have a husband; 32 
I must dance bare-foot on her wedding-day, 
And, for your love to her, lead apes in hell. 
Talk not to me : I will go sit and weep 
Till I can find occasion of revenge. [Exit.~\ 36 

Bap. Was ever gentleman thus griev'd as I ? 
But who comes here? 

Enter Gremio, [with] Lucentio in the habit of a mean 
man; Petruchio, with [Hortensio as a Musician; 
and] Tranio, with his boy [Biondello] bearing a 
lute and books. 

Gre. Good morrow, neighbour Baptista. 

Bap. Good morrow, neighbor Gremio. God 40 
save you, gentlemen! 
Pet. And you, good sir. Pray, have you not a 

daughter 
Call'd Katherina, fair and virtuous? 

Bap. I have a daughter, sir, call'd Katherina. 44 
Gre. You are too blunt: go to it orderly. 

26 hilding: base, menial wretch 28 cross: thwart 

33 dance bare-foot; cf. n. 34 lead . . . hell; cf. n. 



34 The Taming 

Pet. You wrong me, Signior Gremio: give me 

leave. 

I am a gentleman of Verona, sir, 
That, hearing of her beauty and her wit, 48 

Her affability and bashful modesty, 
Her wondrous qualities and mild behaviour, 
Am bold to show myself a forward guest 
Within your house, to make mine eye the witness 52 
Of that report which I so oft have heard. 
And, for an entrance to my entertainment, 
I do present you with a man of mine, 

[Presenting Hortensio.] 

Cunning in music and the mathematics, 56 

To instruct her fully in those sciences, 
Whereof I know she is not ignorant. 
Accept of him, or else you do me wrong: 
His name is Licio, born in Mantua. 60 

Bap. You're welcome, sir; and he, for your good 

sake. 

But for my daughter Katherine, this I know, 
She is not for your turn, the more my grief. 

Pet. I see you do not mean to part with her, 64 
Or else you like not of my company. 

Bap. Mistake me not; I speak but as I find. 
Whence are you, sir? what may I call your name? 

Pet. Petruchio is my name; Antonio's son; 68 

A man well known throughout all Italy. 

Bap. I know him well: you are welcome for his 
sake. 

Gre. Saving your tale, Petruchio, I pray, 
Let us, that are poor petitioners, speak too. 72 

Backare! you are marvellous forward. 

63 turn: purpose 65 like not of: care not for 

71 Saving: without disrespect to 73 Backare; cf n. 



of the Shrew, II. i 35 

Pet. O, pardon me, Signior Gremio, I would fain 

be doing. 
Gre. I doubt it not, sir; but you will curse your 

wooing. 

Neighbour, this is a gift very grateful, I am sure 76 
of it. To express the like kindness myself, that 
have been more kindly beholding to you than 
any, freely give unto you this young scholar, 
{Presenting Lucentio.] that has been long 80 
studying at Rheims; as cunning in Greek, 
Latin, and other languages, as the other in 
music and mathematics. His name is Cambio; 
pray accept his service. 84 

Bap. A thousand thanks, Signior Gremio; 
welcome, good Cambio. [To Tranio.] But, gen 
tle sir, methinks you walk like a stranger: may I 
be so bold to know the cause of your coming? 88 
Tra. Pardon me, sir, the boldness is mine own, 
That, being a stranger in this city here, 
Do make myself a suitor to your daughter, 
Unto Bianca, fair and virtuous. 92 

Nor is your firm resolve unknown to me, 
In the preferment of the eldest sister. 
This liberty is all that I request, 
That, upon knowledge of my parentage, 96 

I may have welcome 'mongst the rest that woo, 
And free access and favour as the rest: 
And, toward the education of your daughters, 
I here bestow a simple instrument, 100 

And this small packet of Greek and Latin books:' 
If you accept them, then their worth is great. 

Bap. Lucentio is your name, of whence, I pray? 
Tra. Of Pisa, sir; son to Vincentio. 104 

Bap. A mighty man of Pisa; by report 



86 The Taming 

I know him well: you are very welcome, sir. 

[To Hortensio.} Take you the lute, [To Lucentio.'] 

and you the set of books; 

You shall go see your pupils presently. 108 

Holla, within! 

Enter a Servant. 

Sirrah, lead these gentlemen 
To my two daughters, and then tell them both 
These are their tutors: bid them use them well. 

[Exit Servant, with Lucentio and Hortensio, 
Biondello following.] 

We will go walk a little in the orchard, 112 

And then to dinner. You are passing welcome, 
And so I pray you all to think yourselves. 

Pet. Signior Baptista, my business asketh haste, 
And every day I cannot come to woo. 116 

You knew my father well, and in him me, 
Left solely heir to all his lands and goods, 
Which I have better'd rather than decreas'd: 
Then tell me, if I get your daughter's love, 120 
What dowry shall I have with her to wife? 

Bap. After my death the one half of my lands, 
And in possession twenty thousand crowns. 

Pet. And, for that dowry, I'll assure her of 124 
Her widowhood, be it that she survive me, 
In all my lands and leases whatsoever. 
Let specialties be therefore drawn between us, 
That covenants may be kept on either hand. 128 

Bap. Ay, when the special thing is well obtain'd, 
That is, her love; for that is all in all. 

Pet. Why, that is nothing; for I tell you, father, 

112 orchard : garden 

125 widowhood: a widow's right in the estate of her deceased husband 

127 specialties: articles of agreement 



of the Shrew, II. i 87 

I am as peremptory as she proud-minded; 132 

And where two raging fires meet together 

They do consume the thing that feeds their fury: 

Though little fire grows great with little wind, 

Yet extreme gusts will blow out fire and all; 136 

So I to her, and so she yields to me; 

For I am rough and woo not like a babe. 

Bap. Well mayst thou woo, and happy be thy 

speed! 
But be thou arm'd for some unhappy words. 140 

Pet. Ay, to the proof; as mountains are for winds, 
That shake not, though they blow perpetually. 

Enter Hortensio, with his head broke. 

Bap. How now, my friend! why dost thou look 

so pale? 

Hor. For fear, I promise you, if I look pale. 144 
Bap. What, will my daughter prove a good musi 
cian? 

Hor. I think she'll sooner prove a soldier: 
Iron may hold with her, but never lutes. 

Bap. Why, then thou canst not break her to the 
lute ? 148 

Hor. Why, no; for she hath broke the lute to me. 
I did but tell her she mistook her frets, 
And bow'd her hand to teach her fingering; 
When, with a most impatient devilish spirit, 152 

'Frets, call you these?' quoth she; 'I'll fume with 

them'; 

And, with that word, she struck me on the head, 
And through the instrument my pate made way; 

139 speed: fortune 

141 to the proof: as if in proof armor, i.e., armor especially hard 
ened 142 they: i.e., winds 
147 hold with her: remain unbroken under her attack 

150 frets: the point at which the string of an instrument is stopped 

151 bow'd: bent 



8 The Taming 

And there I stood amazed for a while, 156 

As on a pillory, looking through the lute ; 

While she did call me rascal fiddler, 

And twangling Jack; with twenty such vile terms 

As had she studied to misuse me so. 160 

Pet. Now, by the world, it is a lusty wench! 
I love her ten times more than e'er I did: 
O ! how I long to have some chat with her ! 

Bap. [To Hortensio.] Well, go with me, and be not 
so discomfited: 164 

Proceed in practice with my younger daughter; 
She's apt to learn, and thankful for good turns. 
Signior Petruchio, will you go with us, 
Or shall I send my daughter Kate to you? 168 

Pet. I pray you do; I will attend her here, 

Exit [Baptista, with Gremio, Tranio, and 
Hortensio]. Manet Petruchio. 
And woo her with some spirit when she comes. 
Say that she rail; why then I'll tell her plain 
She sings as sweetly as a nightingale: 172 

Say that she frown; I'll say she looks as clear 
As morning roses newly wash'd with dew: 
Say she be mute and will not speak a word; 
Then I'll commend her volubility, 176 

And say she uttereth piercing eloquence: 
If she do bid me pack; I'll give her thanks, 
As though she bid me stay by her a week: 
If she deny to wed; I'll crave the day 180 

When I shall ask the banns, and when be married. 
But here she comes; and now, Petruchio, speak. 

Enter Katherina. 
Good morrow, Kate; for that's your name, I hear. 

159 twangling: twanging 160 As: as if 161 lusty: lively 

166 apt: ready 178 pack: depart in haste 



of the Shrew, II. i 39 

Kath. Well have you heard, but something hard of 
hearing: 184 

They call me Katherine that do talk of me. 

Pet. You lie, in faith; for you are call'd plain 

Kate, 

And bonny Kate, and sometimes Kate the curst; 
But, Kate, the prettiest Kate in Christendom; 188 
Kate of Kate-Hall, my super-dainty Kate, 
For dainties are all Kates: and therefore, Kate, 
Take this of me, Kate of my consolation; 
Hearing thy mildness prais'd in every town, 192 

Thy virtues spoke of, and thy beauty sounded 
Yet not so deeply as to thee belongs 
Myself am mov'd to woo thee for my wife. 

Kath. Mov'd ! in good time : let him that mov'd you 
hither 196 

Bemove you hence. I knew you at the first, 
You were a movable. 

Pet. Why, what's a movable? 

Kath. A joint-stool. 

Pet. Thou hast hit it: come, sit on me. 

Kath. Asses are made to bear, and so are you. 200 

Pet. Women are made to bear, and so are you. 

Kath. No such jade as you, if me you mean. 

Pet. Alas! good Kate, I will not burden thee; 
For, knowing thee to be but young and light 204 

Kath. Too light for such a swain as you to catch, 
And yet as heavy as my weight should be. 

Pet. Should be ! should buzz ! 

Kath. Well ta'en, and like a buzzard. 

184 hard; cf. n. 190 Kates: o pun on 'cates,' meaning delicacies 

196 in good time: forsooth 

199 joint-stool: stool made by a joiner 

202 No ... mean; cf, n. 204 light: giddy 

207 buzz; cf. n. buzzard: a blockhead 



40 The Taming 

Pet. O slow-wing'd turtle! shall a buzzard take 
thee ? 208 

Kath. Ay, for a turtle, as he takes a buzzard. 

Pet. Come, come, you wasp; i' faith you are too 
angry. 

Kath. If I be waspish, best beware my sting. 

Pet. My remedy is, then, to pluck it out. 212 

Kath. Ay, if the fool could find it where it lies. 

Pet. Who knows not where a wasp does wear his 

sting? 
In his tail. 

Kath. In his tongue. 

Pet. Whose tongue? 

Kath. Yours, if you talk of tails; and so fare 
well. 216 

Pet. What! with my tongue in your tail? nay, come 
again. 

Good Kate, I am a gentleman. 

Kath. That I'll try. She strikes him. 

Pet. I swear 111 cuff you if you strike again. 

Kath. So may you lose your arms: 220 

If you strike me, you are no gentleman ; 
And if no gentleman, why then no arms. 

Pet. A herald, Kate? O! put me in thy books. 

Kath. What is your crest? a coxcomb? 224 

Pet. A combless cock, so Kate will be my hen. 

Kath. No cock of mine ; you crow too like a craven. 

Pet. Nay, come, Kate, come; you must not look so 
sour. 

Kath. It is my fashion when I see a crab. 228 

208 turtle: turtle-dove buzzard: an inferior kind of hawk 

209 Ay ... buzzard; cf. n. 216 tails: a pun on 'tales' 
220 arms: a pun on the literal meaning and the heraldic 'coat of 

arms' 223 books: heraldic registers; cf. n. 

224 coxcomb: the crest resembling that of a cock worn in the caps of 

jesters 225 combless: without a crest 

226 craven : a cock that is 'not game' 228 crab : a crab-apple 



of the Shrew, II. i 



Pet. Why, here's no crab, and therefore look not 
sour. 

Kath. There is, there is. 

Pet. Then show it me. 

Kath. Had I a glass, I would. 

Pet. What, you mean my face? 

Kath. Well aim'd of such a young one. 232 

Pet. Now, by Saint George, I am too young for 
you. 

Kath. Yet you are wither'd. 

Pet. 'Tis with cares. 

Kath. I care not. 

Pet. Nay, hear you, Kate: in sooth, you scape not 
so. 

Kath. I chafe you, if I tarry: let me go. 236 

Pet. No, not a whit: I find you passing gentle. 
'Twas told me you were rough and coy and sullen, 
And now I find report a very liar; 
For thou art pleasant, gamesome, passing cour 
teous, 240 

But slow in speech, yet sweet as spring-time flowers: 
Thou canst not frown, thou canst not look askance, 
Nor bite the lip, as angry wenches will; 
Nor hast thou pleasure to be cross in talk; 244 

But thou with mildness entertain'st thy wooers, 
With gentle conference, soft and affable. 
Why does the world report that Kate doth limp? 
O slanderous world! Kate, like the hazel-twig, 248 
Is straight and slender, and as brown in hue 
As hazel nuts, and sweeter than the kernels. 
O! let me see thee walk: thou dost not halt. 

Kath. Go, fool, and whom thou keep'st com 
mand. 252 

232 aim'd of: guessed for 235 scape: escape 

246 conference: conversation 



42 The Taming 

Pet. Did ever Dian so become a grove 
As Kate this chamber with her princely gait? 
O ! be thou Dian, and let her be Kate, 
And then let Kate be chaste, and Dian sportful ! 256 

Kath. Where did you study all this goodly speech? 

Pet. It is extempore, from my mother-wit. 

Kath. A witty mother! witless else her son. 

Pet . Am I not wise ? 

Kath. Yes; keep you warm. 260 

Pet. Marry, so I mean, sweet Katherine, in thy 

bed: 

And therefore, setting all this chat aside, 
Thus in plain terms: your father hath consented 
That you shall be my wife; your dowry 'greed 
on; 264 

And will you, nill you, I will marry you. 
Now, Kate, I am a husband for your turn; 
For, by this light, whereby I see thy beauty 
Thy beauty that doth make me like thee well 268 
Thou must be married to no man but me: 
For I am he am born to tame you, Kate ; 
And bring you from a wild Kate to a Kate 
Conformable as other household Kates. 272 

Here comes your father: never make denial; 
I must and will have Katherine to my wife. 

Enter Baptista, Gremio, [and] Tranio. 

Bap. Now, Signior Petruchio, how speed you with 

my daughter? 

Pet. How but well, sir? how but well? 276 

It were impossible I should speed amiss. 

253 Dian: Diana, goddess of hunting and of chastity 

260 Yes . . . warm; cf. n. 

265 will you, nill you: whether you will or not 

271 wild Kate: a pun on 'Kate' and 'cat'; cf. I. ii. zoo 

272 Conformable: compliant 



of the Shrew, II. i 



Bap. Why, how now, daughter Katherine! in your 
dumps ? 

Kath. Call you me daughter? now, I promise you 
You have show'd a tender fatherly regard, 280 

To wish me wed to one half lunatic ; 
A mad-cap ruffian and a swearing Jack, 
That thinks with oaths to face the matter out. 

Pet. Father, 'tis thus: yourself and all the 
world, 284 

That talk'd of her, have talk'd amiss of her: 
If she be curst, it is for policy, 
For she's not froward, but modest as the dove; 
She is not hot, but temperate as the morn; 288 

For patience she will prove a second Grissel, 
And Roman Lucrece for her chastity; 
And to conclude, we have 'greed so well together, 
That upon Sunday is the wedding-day. 292 

Kath. I'll see thee hang'd on Sunday first. 

Gre. Hark, Petruchio: she says she'll see thee 
hang'd first. 

Tra. Is this your speeding? nay then, good night 
our part! 

Pet. Be patient, gentlemen; I choose her for my 
self: 296 

If she and I be pleas'd, what's that to you? 
'Tis bargain'd 'twixt us twain, being alone, 
That she shall still be curst in company. 
I tell you, 'tis incredible to believe 300 

How much she loves me : O ! the kindest Kate. 
She hung about my neck, and kiss on kiss 
She vied so fast, protesting oath on oath, 
That in a twink she won me to her love. 304 

278 dumps: a fit of melancholy 283 face: brazen 

289 Grissel; cf. n. 290 Lucrece; cf. n. 295 speeding: success 

303 vied: tried to outdo me by giving 304 twink: twinkling 



4* The Taming 

O! you are novices: 'tis a world to see, 
How tame, when men and women are alone, 
A meacock wretch can make the curstest shrew. 
Give me thy hand, Kate: I will unto Venice 308 

To buy apparel 'gainst the wedding-day. 
Provide the feast, father, and bid the guests; 
I will be sure my Katherine shall be fine. 

Bap. I know not what to say; but give me your 
hands. 312 

God send you joy, Petruchio! 'tis a match. 

jj ' > Amen, say we: we will be witnesses. 

Pet. Father, and wife, and gentlemen, adieu. 
I will to Venice; Sunday comes apace: 316 

We will have rings, and things, and fine array ; 
And, kiss me, Kate, we will be married o' Sunday. 
Exeunt Petruchio and Katherine 

Gre. Was ever match clapp'd up so suddenly? 

Bap. Faith, gentlemen, now I play a merchant's 
part, 320 

And venture madly on a desperate mart. 

Tra. 'Twas a commodity lay fretting by you: 
'Twill bring you gain, or perish on the seas. 

Bap. The gain I seek, is quiet in the match. 324 

Gre. No doubt but he hath got a quiet catch. 
But now, Baptista, to your younger daughter: 
Now is the day we long have looked for: 
I am your neighbour, and was suitor first. 328 

Tra. And I am one that love Bianca more 
Than words can witness, or your thoughts can guess. 

305 world: wonder 307 meacock: spiritless 

311 fine: in proper finery 

312 give . . . hands: i.e., to join them in solemn betrothal 

317, 318 We . . . Sunday; cf. n. 319 clapp'd up: agreed upon 

321 mart: mercantile transaction 

322 fretting-: wasting away, with a pun on the usual meaning of the 
word 



of the Shrew, II. i 



Gre. Youngling, thou canst not love so dear as I. 

Tra. Greybeard, thy love doth freeze. 

Gre. But thine doth fry. 332 

Skipper, stand back: 'tis age that nourisheth. 

Tra. But youth in ladies' eyes that flourisheth. 

Bap. Content you, gentlemen; I'll compound this 

strife: 

Tis deeds must win the prize ; and he, of both, 336 
That can assure my daughter greatest dower 
Shall have my Bianca's love. 
Say, Signior Gremio, what can you assure her? 

Gre. First, as you know, my house within the 
city 340 

Is richly furnished with plate and gold: 
Basins and ewers to lave her dainty hands; 
My hangings all of Tyrian tapestry; 
In ivory coffers I have stuff'd my crowns; 344 

In cypress chests my arras counterpoints, 
Costly apparel, tents, and canopies, 
Fine linen, Turkey cushions boss'd with pearl, 
Valance of Venice gold in needle-work, 348 

Pewter and brass, and all things that belong 
To house or housekeeping: then, at my farm 
I have a hundred milch-kine to the pail, 
Six score fat oxen standing in my stalls, 352 

And all things answerable to this portion. 
Myself am struck in years, I must confess; 
And if I die to-morrow, this is hers, 
If whilst I live she will be only mine. 356 

333 Skipper: used contemptuously with reference to a young man's 
prancing gait 335 Content you: compose yourselves 

336 he, of both: whichever of you two 
343 Tyrian tapestry: tapestry dyed purple; cf. n. 

345 arras counterpoints: tapestry counterpanes; cf. n. 

346 tents, and canopies: hangings for beds 

347 boss'd: embossed 348 Valance: hangings of a bed or couch 
351 milch-kine: milk-giving cattle 

353 answerable: correspondent 354 struck: advanced 



46 The Taming 

Tra. That 'only' came well in. Sir, list to me: 
I am my father's heir and only son: 
If I may have your daughter to my wife, 
I'll leave her houses three or four as good, 360 

Within rich Pisa walls, as any one 
Old Signior Gremio has in Padua; 
Besides two thousand ducats by the year 
Of fruitful land, all of which shall be her join 
ture. 364 
What, have I pinch'd you, Signior Gremio? 

Gre. Two thousand ducats by the year of land! 
My land amounts not to so much in all: 
That she shall have; besides an argosy 368 

That now is lying in Marseilles' road. 
What, have I chok'd you with an argosy? 

Tra. Gremio, 'tis known my father hath no less 
Than three great argosies, besides two galliasses, 372 
And twelve tight galleys; these I will assure her, 
And twice as much, whate'er thou offer 'st next. 

Gre. Nay, I have offer'd all, I have no more; 
And she can have no more than all I have: 376 

If you like me, she shall have me and mine. 

Tra. Why, then the maid is mine from all the 

world, 
By your firm promise. Gremio is out-vied. 

Bap. I must confess your offer is the best; 380 
And, let your father make her the assurance, 
She is your own ; else, you must pardon me : 
If you should die before him, where's her dower? 

Tra. That's but a cavil: he is old, I young. 384 

Gre. And may not young men die as well as old? 

363 ducats: Venetian coins 

364 jointure: property settled on the wife by the husband when they 
are joined in marriage 368 argosy: a large merchant-ship 

369 road: harbor 372 galliasses : large galleys 

381 assurance: legal settlement 



of the Shrew, III. i 



Bap. Well, gentlemen, 

I am thus resolv'd. On Sunday next, you know, 
My daughter Katherine is to be married: 388 

Now, on the Sunday following, shall Bianca 
Be bride to you, if you make this assurance; 
If not, to Signior Gremio: 

And so, I take my leave, and thank you both. 392 

Exit. 

Gre. Adieu, good neighbour. Now I fear thee not: 
Sirrah young gamester, your father were a fool 
To give thee all, and in his waning age 
Set foot under thy table. Tut ! a toy ! 396 

An old Italian fox is not so kind, my boy. Exit. 

Tra. A vengeance on your crafty wither'd hide! 
Yet I have fac'd it with a card of ten. 
'Tis in my head to do my master good: 400 

I see no reason, but suppos'd Lucentio 
Must get a father, called 'suppos'd Vincentio'; 
And that's a wonder: fathers commonly 
Do get their children ; but in this case of wooing, 404 
A child shall get a sire, if I fail not of my cunning. 

Exit. 



ACT THIRD 

Scene One 

[A Room in Baptista's House] 
Enter Lucentio, Hortensio, and Bianca. 

Luc. Fiddler, forbear; you grow too forward, sir: 
Have you so soon forgot the entertainment 

394 gamester: adventurer 396 a toy: nonsense 

399 fac'd . . . ten: faced it out by sheer impudence; cf. n. 
404 get: beget 



48 The Taming 

Her sister Katherine welcom'd you withal? 

Hor. But, wrangling pedant, this is 4 

The patroness of heavenly harmony: 
Then give me leave to have prerogative; 
And when in music we have spent an hour, 
Your lecture shall have leisure for as much. 8 

Luc. Preposterous ass, that never read so far 
To know the cause why music was ordain'd! 
Was it not to refresh the mind of man 
After his studies or his usual pain? 12 

Then give me leave to read philosophy, 
And while I pause, serve in your harmony. 

Hor. Sirrah, I will not bear these braves of thine. 

Bian. Why, gentlemen, you do me double wrong, 16 
To strive for that which resteth in my choice. 
I am no breeching scholar in the schools; 
I'll not be tied to hours nor pointed times, 
But learn my lessons as I please myself. 20 

And, to cut off all strife, here sit we down: 
Take you your instrument, play you the whiles; 
His lecture will be done ere you have tun'd. 

Hor. You'll leave his lecture when I am in 
tune ? 24 

Luc. That will be never: tune your instrument. 

Bian. Where left we last? 

Luc. Here, madam: 

'Hie ibat Simois; hie est Sigeria tellus; 28 

Hie steterat Priami regia celsa senis.' 

Bian. Construe them. 

Luc. Hie ibat, as I told you before, Simois, 

I am Lucentio, hie est, son unto Vincentio of 32 

6 prerogative: precedence 12 pain: effort 
15 these braves: this defiance 

18 breeching: liable to be whipped 19 pointed: appointed 

22 whiles: while 28, 29 Hie ... senis; cf. n. 



of the Shrew, III. i 49 

Pisa, Sigeria tellus, disguised thus to get your 
love; Hie steterat, and that Lucentio that comes 
a wooing, Priami, is my man Tranio, regia, 
bearing my port, celsa senis, that we might be- 36 
guile the old pantaloon. 
Hor. [Returning. ~\ Madam, my instrument's in 

tune. 
Bian. Let's hear. 

fie! the treble jars. 40 

Luc. Spit in the hole, man, and tune again. 
Bian. Now let me see if I can construe it: 
Hie ibat Simois, I know you not, hie est Sigeria 
tellus, I trust you not ; Hie steterat Priami, 44 
take heed he hear us not, regia, presume not, 
celsa senis, despair not. 
Hor. Madam, 'tis now in tune. 
Luc. All but the bass. 

Hor. The bass is right; 'tis the base knave that 
jars. 48 

How fiery and forward our pedant is ! 
[Aside."] Now, for my life, the knave doth court my 

love: 
Pedascule, I'll watch you better yet. 

Bian. In time I may believe, yet I mistrust. 52 
Luc. Mistrust it not; for, sure, JEacides 
Was Ajax, call'd so from his grandfather. 

Bian. I must believe my master; else, I promise 
Jon, 

1 should be arguing still upon that doubt: 56 
But let it rest. Now, Licio, to you. 

Good masters, take it not unkindly, pray, 

37 pantaloon: i.e., Gremio; cf. I. i. 47 S. d. 

49-51 How . . . yet; cf. n. 

51 Pedascule: vocative of a supposed Latin word for 'pedant' 

53 .<?Eacides: descendant of JEacus, grandfather of Ajax 



so The Taming 

That I have been thus pleasant with you both. 

Hor. You may go walk, and give me leave a 
while : 60 

My lessons make no music in three parts. 

Luc. Are you so formal, sir? [Aside.] Well, I 

must wait, 

And watch withal; for, but I be deceiv'd, 
Our fine musician groweth amorous. 64 

Hor. Madam, before you touch the instrument, 
To learn the order of my fingering, 
I must begin with rudiments of art; 
To teach you gamut in a briefer sort, 68 

More pleasant, pithy, and effectual, 
Than hath been taught by any of my trade : 
And there it is in writing, fairly drawn. 

Bian. Why, I am past my gamut long ago. 72 

Hor. Yet read the gamut of Hortensio. 

Bian. [Reads.] 

' "Gamut" I am, the ground of all accord, 
"A re/' to plead Hortensio's passion; 
"B mi," Bianca, take him for thy lord, 76 

"C fa ut," that loves with all affection: 
"D sol re," one clef, two notes have I : 

"E la mi," show pity, or I die/ 

Call you this gamut? tut, I like it not: 80 

Old fashions please me best ; I am not so nice, 
To change true rules for odd inventions. 

Enter a Messenger [Servant"]. 

Serv. Mistress, your father prays you leave your 

books, 
And help to dress your sister's chamber up: 84 

63 but: unless 68 gamut: the diatonic scale in music 

81 nice: silly 83 Serv.; cf. n. 



of the Shrew, III. ii 



You know to-morrow is the wedding-day. 

Bian. Farewell, sweet masters both: I must be 
gone. [Exeunt Bianca and Messenger.] 

Luc. Faith, mistress, then I have no cause to 
stay. [Exit.] 

Hor. But I have cause to pry into this pedant. 88 
Methinks he looks as though he were in love. 
Yet if thy thoughts, Bianca, be so humble 
To cast thy wandering eyes on every stale, 
Seize thee that list: if once I find thee ranging, 92 
Hortensio will be quit with thee by changing. 

Exit. 

Scene Two 
[Before Baptista's House] 

Enter Baptista, Gremio, Tranio, Katherina, Bianca, 
[Lucentio,] and others, attendants. 

Bap. [To Tranio.] Signior Lucentio, this is the 

pointed day 

That Katherine and Petruchio should be married, 
And yet we hear not of our son-in-law. 
What will be said? what mockery will it be 4 

To want the bridegroom when the priest attends 
To speak the ceremonial rites of marriage! 
What says Lucentio to this shame of ours? 

Kath. No shame but mine: I must, forsooth, be 

forc'd 8 

To give my hand oppos'd against my heart 
Unto a mad-brain rudesby, full of spleen; 
Who woo'd in haste and means to wed at leisure. 

91 stale: decoy 

92 Seize . . . list: let them take thee that will ranging: roving 

93 quit: even 

10 rudesby : a coarse, roug h fellow spleen.: caprice 



52 The Taming 

I told you, I, he was a frantic fool, 12 

Hiding his bitter jests in blunt behaviour; 

And to be noted for a merry man, 

He'll woo a thousand, point the day of marriage, 

Make friends, invite, and proclaim the banns; 16 

Yet never means to wed where he hath woo'd. 

Now must the world point at poor Katherine, 

And say, 'Lo! there is mad Petruchio's wife, 

If it would please him come and marry her.' 20 

Tra. Patience, good Katherine, and Baptista too. 
Upon my life, Petruchio means but well, 
Whatever fortune stays him from his word: 
Though he be blunt, I know him passing wise ; 24 
Though he be merry, yet withal he's honest. 

Kath. Would Katherine had never seen him though ! 
Exit weeping [followed by Bianco, and others]. 

Bap. Go, girl: I cannot blame thee now to weep, 
For such an injury would vex a very saint, 28 

Much more a shrew of thy impatient humour. 

Enter Biondello. 

Bion. Master, master! news! old news, and 
such news as you never heard of! 

Bap. Is it new and old too? how may that 32 
be? 

Bion. Why, is it not news to hear of Petru 
chio's coming? 

Bap. Is he come? 36 

Bion. Why, no, sir. 

Bap. What then? 

Bion. He is coming. 

Bap. When will he be here? 40 

Bion. When he stands where I am and sees 
you there. 

14 noted for: known as being 30 old: rare 



of the Shrew, III. ii 



Tra. But, say, what to thine old news? 

Bion. Why, Petruchio is coming, in a new 44 
hat and an old jerkin; a pair of old breeches 
thrice turned; a pair of boots that have been 
candle-cases, one buckled, another laced; an old 
rusty sword ta'en out of the town-armoury, with 48 
a broken hilt, and chapeless; with two broken 
points: his horse hipped with an old mothy 
saddle and stirrups of no kindred; besides, 
possessed with the glanders and like to mose in 52 
the chine; troubled with the lampass, infested 
with the fashions, full of windgalls, sped with 
spavins, rayed with the yellows, past cure of the 
fives, stark spoiled with the staggers, begnawn 56 
with the bots, swayed in the back, and shoulder- 
shotten; near-legged before, and with a half- 
checked bit, and a head-stall of sheep's leather, 
which, being restrained to keep him from stum- 60 
bling, hath been often burst and now repaired 
with knots; one girth six times pieced, and a 
woman's crupper of velure, which hath two 
letters for her name fairly set down in studs, and 64 
here and there pieced with packthread. 

Bap. Who comes with him? 

47 candle-cases: receptacles for candle-ends 

49 chapeless: without a chape; cf. n. 

50 points: tagged laces used in fastening parts of the dress t espe 
cially the breeches hipped: covered on, or down to, the hips (f) 

52, 53 to mose in the chine: to take a disorder among horses, by some 
called 'mourning in the chine (sfineY 53 lampass; cf. n. 

54 fashions: farcy, a disease appearing as small tumors on the horse's 
legs windgalls: soft tumors on the fetlock joints of a horse 

55 rayed: fouled yellows: a kind of jaundice, causing yellowness 
of the horse's eyes 

56 fives: vives, an inflammation of the parotid gland 
begnawn : gnawed 

57 bots: small worms that breed in the entrails of horses 

swayed: strained shoulder-shotten: with dislocated shoulder 

58 near-legged: knock-kneed half -checked: that only half checks 
60 restrained: drawn tight 63 velure: velvet 
64 her name: the name of the woman whose crupper it was 



54 The Taming 

Bion. O, sir! his lackey, for all the world 
caparisoned like the horse ; with a linen stock 68 
on one leg and a kersey boot-hose on the other, 
gartered with a red and blue list; an old hat, 
and the 'humour of forty fancies' pricked in 't 
for a feather : a monster, a very monster in 72 
apparel, and not like a Christian footboy or a 
gentleman's lackey. 
Tra. 'Tis some odd humour pricks him to this 

fashion ; 

Yet oftentimes he goes but mean-apparell'd. 76 

Bap. I am glad he is come, howsoe'er he comes. 
Bion. Why, sir, he comes not. 
Bap. Didst thou not say he comes? 
Bion. Who? that Petruchio came? 80 

Bap. Ay, that Petruchio came. 
Bion. No, sir; I say his horse comes, with 
him on his back. 

Bap. Why, that's all one. 84 

Bion. Nay, by Saint Jamy, 
I hold you a penny, 
A horse and a man 

Is more than one, 88 

And yet not many. 

Enter Petruchio and Grumio. 

Pet. Come, where be these gallants? who is at 

home? 

Bap. You are welcome, sir. 

Pet. And yet I come not well. 

Bap. And yet you halt not. 

68 caparisoned: dressed stock: stocking 

69 kersey: a coarse-ribbed cloth boot-hose: stocking to wear with boots 

70 list: strip of cloth 71 'humour of forty fancies'; cf. n. 
73 footboy: an attendant in livery 75 pricks: incites 
86 hold: wager 90 gallants: fine fellows 



of the Shrew, HI. ii 



Tra. Not so well apparell'd 92 

As I wish you were. 

Pet. Were it better, I should rush in thus. 
But where is Kate? where is my lovely bride? 
How does my father? Gentles, methinks you 
frown : 96 

And wherefore gaze this goodly company, 
As if they saw some wondrous monument, 
Some comet, or unusual prodigy? 

Bap. Why, sir, you know this is v your wedding- 
day : 100 

First were we sad, fearing you would not come; 
Now sadder, that you come so unprovided. 
Fie ! doff this habit, shame to your estate, 
An eye- sore to our solemn festival. 104 

Tra. And tell us what occasion of import 
Hath all so long detain'd you from your wife, 
And sent you hither so unlike yourself? 

Pet . Tedious it were to tell, and harsh to hear : 108 
Sufficeth, I am come to keep my word, 
Though in some part enforced to digress; 
Which, at more leisure, I will so excuse 
As you shall well be satisfied withal. 112 

But where is Kate ? I stay too long from her : 
The morning wears, 'tis time we were at church. 

Tra. See not your bride in these unreverent robes: 
Go to my chamber ; put on clothes of mine. 116 

Pet. Not I, believe me: thus I'll visit her. 

Bap. But thus, I trust, you will not marry her. 

Pet. Good sooth, even thus; therefore ha' done 

with words: 
To me she's married, not unto my clothes. 120 

96 Gentles: gentle folk 

110 enforced to digress: compelled to deviate from my promise 

119 sooth: truth 



56 The Taming 

Could I repair what she will wear in me 

As I can change these poor accoutrements, 

'Twere well for Kate and better for myself. 

But what a fool am I to chat with you 124 

When I should bid good morrow to my bride, 

And seal the title with a lovely kiss ! 

Exit [with Grumio}. 

Tra. He hath some meaning in his mad attire. 
We will persuade him, be it possible, 128 

To put on better ere he go to church. 

Bap. I'll after him, and see the event of this. 

Exit [with Gremio and Attendants]. 

Tra. But to her love concerneth us to add 
Her father's liking: which to bring to pass, 132 

As I before imparted to your worship, 
I am to get a man whate'er he be 
It skills not much, well fit him to our turn 
And he shall be Vincentio of Pisa, 136 

And make assurance here in Padua, 
Of greater sums than I have promised. 
So shall you quietly enjoy your hope, 
And marry sweet Bianca with consent. 140 

Luc. Were it not that my fellow schoolmaster 
Doth watch Bianca's steps so narrowly, 
'Twere good, methinks, to steal our marriage; 
Which once perform'd, let all the world say no, 144 
I'll keep mine own, despite of all the world. 

Tra. That by degrees we mean to look into, 
And watch our vantage in this business 
We'll over-reach the greybeard, Gremio, 148 

The narrow-prying father, Minola, 
The quaint musician, amorous Licio; 
All for my master's sake, Lucentio. 

121 wear: wear out 126 lovely: loving 130 event: outcome 

131 Cf. n. 135 skills: matters 150 quaint: clever 



of the Shrew, III. ii 



Enter Gremio. 

Signior Gremio, came you from the church? 152 

Gre. As willingly as e'er I came from school. 

Tra. And is the bride and bridegroom coming 
home ? 

Gre. A bridegroom say you? 'Tis a groom indeed, 
A grumbling groom, and that the girl shall find. 156 

Tra. Curster than she? why, 'tis impossible. 

Gre. Why, he's a devil, a devil, a very fiend. 

Tra. Why, she's a devil, a devil, the devil's dam. 

Gre. Tut! she's a lamb, a dove, a fool to him. 160 
I'll tell you, Sir Lucentio: when the priest 
Should ask, if Katherine should be his wife, 
'Ay, by gogs-wouns !' quoth he ; and swore so loud, 
That, all amaz'd, the priest let fall the book; 164 
And, as he stoop'd again to take it up, 
The mad-brain'd bridegroom took him such a cuff 
That down fell priest and book and book and priest: 
'Now, take them up,' quoth he, 'if any list.' 168 

Tra. What said the wench when he arose again? 

Gre. Trembled and shook; for why, he stampt and 

swore, 

As if the vicar meant to cozen him. 
But after many ceremonies done, 172 

He calls for wine : 'A health !' quoth he ; as if 
He had been aboard, carousing to his mates 
After a storm; quaff'd off the muscadel, 
And threw the sops all in the sexton's face; 176 
Having no other reason 
But that his beard grew thin and hungerly, 

155 groom: common fellow 

163 gogs-wouns: a corruption of 'God's wounds' 

166 took: gave 171 cozen: cheat 

174 aboard: aboard ship carousing to: drinking healths to 

176 sops: cakes or wafers dipped in the wine 

178 hungerly : as if starved 



68 The Taming 

And seem'd to ask him sops as he was drinking. 
This done, he took the bride about the neck, 180 
And kiss'd her lips with such a clamorous smack 
That at the parting all the church did echo: 
And I, seeing this, came thence for very shame; 
And after me, I know, the rout is coming. 184 

Such a mad marriage never was before. 
Hark, hark ! I hear the minstrels play. Music plays. 

Enter Petruchio, Katherina f Bianca, Baptista, 
Hortensio [with Grumio and train]. 

Pet. Gentlemen and friends, I thank you for your 

pains : 

I know you think to dine with me to-day, 188 

And have prepar'd great store of wedding cheer; 
But so it is, my haste doth call me hence, 
And therefore here I mean to take my leave. 

Bap. Is 't possible you will away to-night? 192 

Pet. I must away to-day, before night come. 
Make it no wonder: if you knew my business, 
You would entreat me rather go than stay. 
And, honest company, I thank you all, 196 

That have beheld me give away myself 
To this most patient, sweet, and virtuous wife. 
Dine with my father, drink a health to me, 
For I must hence; and farewell to you all. 200 

Tra. Let us entreat you stay till after dinner. 

Pet. It may not be. 

Gre. Let me entreat you. 

Pet. It cannot be. 

Kath. Let me entreat you. 

Pet. I am content. 

Kath. Are you content to stay? 204 

Pet. I am content you shall entreat me stay, 

184 rout: crowd 



of the Shrew, III. ii 59 

But yet not stay, entreat me how you can. 

Kath. Now, if you love me, stay. 

Pet. Grumio, my horse! 

Gru. Ay, sir, they be ready: the oats have 208 

eaten the horses. 

Kath. Nay, then, 

Do what thou canst, I will not go to-day; 
No, nor to-morrow, nor till I please myself. 212 
The door is open, sir, there lies your way; 
You may be jogging whiles your boots are green; 
For me, I'll not be gone till I please myself. 
Tis like you'll prove a jolly surly groom, 216 

That take it on you at the first so roundly. 

Pet. O Kate! content thee: prithee, be not angry. 

Kath. I will be angry: what hast thou to do? 
Father, be quiet; he shall stay my leisure. 220 

Gre. Ay, marry, sir, now it begins to work. 

Kath. Gentlemen, forward to the bridal dinner: 
I see a woman may be made a fool, 
If she had not a spirit to resist. 224 

Pet. They shall go forward, Kate, at thy command. 
Obey the bride, you that attend on her; 
Go to the feast, revel and domineer, 
Carouse full measure to her maidenhead, 228 

Be mad and merry, or go hang yourselves: 
But for my bonny Kate, she must with me. 
Nay, look not big, nor stamp, nor stare, nor fret; 
I will be master of what is mine own. 232 

She is my goods, my chattels; she is my house, 
My household stuff, my field, my barn, 
My horse, my ox, my ass, my anything; 
And here she stands, touch her whoever dare; 236 

214 green; cf. n. 227 domineer: run riot 

231 big: angrily 234, 235 My . . . anything; cf. n. 



60 The Taming 

I'll bring mine action on the proudest he 

That stops my way in Padua. Grumio, 

Draw forth thy weapon, we are beset with thieves ; 

Rescue thy mistress, if thou be a man. 240 

Fear not, sweet wench; they shall not touch thee, 

Kate: 
I'll buckler thee against a million. 

Exeunt Petruchio, Katherina [and Grumio]. 
Bap. Nay, let them go, a couple of quiet ones. 
Gre. Went they not quickly I should die with 
laughing. 244 

Tra. Of all mad matches never was the like. 
Luc. Mistress, what's your opinion of your sister? 
Bian. That, being mad herself, she's madly mated. 
Gre. I warrant him, Petruchio is Kated. 248 

Bap. Neighbours and friends, though bride and 

bridegroom wants 

For to supply the places at the table, 
You know there wants no junkets at the feast. 
Lucentio, you shall supply the bridegroom's place, 252 
And let Bianca take her sister's room. 

Tra. Shall sweet Bianca practise how to bride it? 

Bap. She shall, Lucentio. Come, gentlemen, let's 

go. Exeunt. 

ACT FOURTH 

Scene One 
[A Hall in Petruchio' s Country House"] 

Enter Grumio. 
Gru. Fie, fie, on all tired jades, on all mad 

237 bring mine action: bring my suit in a law court 

242 buckler: defend 251 junkets: dainties 



of the Shrew, IV. i 61 

masters, and all foul ways! Was ever man so 
beaten? was ever man so rayed? was ever man 
so weary? I am sent before to make a fire, and 4 
they are coming after to warm them. Now, 
were not I a little pot and soon hot, my very 
lips might freeze to my teeth, my tongue to 
the roof of my mouth, my heart in my belly, 8 
ere I should come by a fire to thaw me; but I, 
with blowing the fire, shall warm myself; for, 
considering the weather, a taller man than I 
will take cold. Holla, ho! Curtis. 12 

Enter Curtis. 

Curt. Who is that calls so coldly? 

Gru. A piece of ice: if thou doubt it, thou 
mayst slide from my shoulder to my heel with 
no greater a run but my head and my neck. A 16 
fire, good Curtis. 

Curt. Is my master and his wife coming, 
Grumio ? 

Gru. O ! ay, Curtis, ay ; and therefore fire, 20 
fire; cast on no water. 

Curt. Is she so hot a shre'v as she's reported? 

Gru. She was, good Curtis, before this frost; 
but, thou knowest, winter tames man, woman, 24 
and beast; for it hath tamed my old master, and 
my new mistress, and myself, fellow Curtis. 

Curt. Away, you three-inch-fool! I am no 
beast. 28 

Gru. Am I but three inches? why, thy horn 
is a foot; and so long am I at the least. But 

6 a little pot; cf. n. 

1 1 taller : a pun on the usual meaning of the word and another 
sense, 'stouter 1 16 run: the figure is from the 'take-off' in sliding 

27 three-inch-fool: another allusion to Grumio' s small size 

28 beast; cf. n. 

29 horn: the horn of the cuckold, or deceived husband 



62 The Taming 

wilt thou make a fire, or shall I complain on 
thee to our mistress, whose hand she being 32 
now at hand thou shalt soon feel, to thy cold 
comfort, for being slow in thy hot office? 

Curt. I prithee, good Grumio, tell me, how 
goes the world? 36 

Gru. A cold world, Curtis, in every office but 
thine; and therefore, fire. Do thy duty, and 
have thy duty, for my master and mistress are 
almost frozen to death. 40 

Curt. There's fire ready; and therefore, good 
Grumio, the news? 

Gru. Why, 'Jack, boy! ho, boy!' and as 
much news as thou wilt. 44 

Curt. Come, you are so full of cony-catching. 

Gru. Why therefore fire: for I have caught 
extreme cold. Where's the cook? is supper 
ready, the house trimmed, rushes strewed, cob- 48 
webs swept; the serving-men in their new fus 
tian, their white stockings, and every officer his 
wedding-garment on? Be the jacks fair within, 
the jills fair without, the carpets laid, and 52 
everything in order? 

Curt. All ready; and therefore, I pray thee, 
news? 

Gru. First, know, my horse is tired ; my 56 
master and mistress fallen out. 

Curt. How? 

Gru. Out of their saddles into the dirt; and 
thereby hangs a tale. 60 

Curt. Let's ha 't, good Grumio. 

39 duty: due 43 'Jack, boy! ho, boy!'; cf. n. 

45 cony-catching: trickery 48 trimmed: put in order 

rushes strewed : it was the custom to strew floors with rushes 
49 fustian: a coarse cotton cloth 50 officer: retainer 

51, 52 Be ... without; cf. n. 52 carpets: table-covers 



of the Shrew, IF. i 63 

Gru. Lend thine ear. 

Curt. Here. 

Gru. There. [Strikes him.] 64 

Curt. This is to feel a tale, not to hear a tale. 

Gru. And therefore it is called a sensible tale ; 
and this cuff was but to knock at your ear and 
beseech listening. Now I begin : Imprimis, we 68 
came down a foul hill, my master riding behind 
my mistress 

Curt. Both of one horse? 

Gru. What's that to thee? 72 

Curt. Why, a horse. 

Gru. Tell thou the tale: but hadst thou not 
crossed me thou shouldst have heard how her 
horse fell, and she under her horse ; thou shouldst 76 
have heard in how miry a place, how she was be- 
moiled: how he left her with the horse upon 
her; how he beat me because her horse stum 
bled ; how she waded through the dirt to pluck 80 
him off me: how he swore; how she prayed, that 
never prayed before ; how I cried ; how the horses 
ran away; how her bridle was burst; how I lost 
my crupper ; with many things of worthy 84 
memory, which now shall die in oblivion, and 
thou return unexperienced to thy grave. 

Curt. By this reckoning he is more shrew 
than she. 88 

Gru. Ay; and that, thou and the proudest of 
you all shall find when he comes home. But what 
talk I of this? Call forth Nathaniel, Joseph, 
Nicholas, Philip, Walter, Sugarsop, and the rest : 92 
let their heads be slickly combed, their blue coats 

66 sensible: pun on 'reasonable' and 'capable of being felt' 

68 Imprimis: in the first place 71 of: on 

77 bemoiled: bedraggled 



64 The Taming 

brushed, and their garters of an indifferent knit: 
let them curtsy with their left legs, and not pre 
sume to touch a hair of my master's horsetail 96 
till they kiss their hands. Are they all ready? 

Curt. They are. 

Gru. Call them forth. 

Curt . Do you hear ? ho ! you must meet my 100 
master to countenance my mistress. 

Gru. Why, she hath a face of her own. 

Curt. Who knows not that? 

Gru. Thou, it seems, that callest for company 104 
to countenance her. 

Curt. I call them forth to credit her. 

Gru. Why, she comes to borrow nothing of 
them. 108 

Enter four or five Servingmen. 

Natk. Welcome home, Grumio! 

Phil. How now, Grumio? 

Jos. What, Grumio! 

Nick. Fellow Grumio! 112 

Nath. How now, old lad! 

Gru. Welcome, you; how now, you; what, 
you; fellow, you; and thus much for greeting. 
Now, my spruce companions, is all ready, and 116 
all things neat? 

Nath. All things is ready. How near is our 
master ? 

Gru. E'en at hand, alighted by this ; and 120 
therefore be not Cock's passion, silence! I 
hear my master. 

Enter Petruchio and Kate. 

94 indifferent knit: ordinary texture; cf. n. 

101 countenance: do honor to 106 credit: do honor to 

121 Cock's: God's (a corruption of the name) 



of the Shrew, IV. i 65 

Pet. Where be these knaves? What! no man at 

door 

To hold my stirrup nor to take my horse ? 124 

Where is Nathaniel, Gregory, Philip? 

All Serv. Here, here, sir; here, sir. 

Pet . Here, sir ! here, sir ! here, sir ! here, sir ! 
You logger-headed and unpolish'd grooms! 128 

What, no attendance? no regard? no duty? 
Where is the foolish knave I sent before? 

Gru. Here, sir; as foolish as I was before. 

Pet. You peasant swain ! you whoreson malt-horse 
drudge ! 132 

Did I not bid thee meet me in the park, 
And bring along these rascal knaves with thee? 

Gru. Nathaniel's coat, sir, was not fully made, 
And Gabriel's pumps were all unpink'd i' the 
heel, 136 

There was no link to colour Peter's hat, 
And Walter's dagger was not come from sheathing, 
There were none fine but Adam, Ralph, and Gregory ; 
The rest were ragged, old, and beggarly; 140 

Yet, as they are, here are they come to meet you. 

Pet. Go, rascals, go, and fetch my supper in. 

Exeunt Servants. 

'Where is the life that late I led?' 

Where are those ? Sit down, Kate, and wel 
come. 144 
Soud, soud, soud, soud! 

Enter Servants with supper. 

128 logger-headed: stupid 

132 whoreson : vile malt-horse: a brewer's horse, hence a term of 

contempt 136 unpink'd: unscalloped 

137 link; cf. n. 138 sheathing: having a new sheath made for it 

143 Where ... led; cf. n. 145 Soud; cf. n. 



66 The Taming 

Why, when, I say? Nay, good sweet Kate, be 

merry. 
Off with my boots, you rogues ! you villains ! When ? 

'It was the friar of orders grey, 148 

As he forth walked on his way:' 

Out, you rogue! you pluck my foot awry: 
Take that, and mend the plucking off the other. 

[Strikes him.] 
Be merry, Kate. Some water, here; what, ho! 152 

Enter one with water. 

Where's my spaniel Troilus? Sirrah, get you hence 
And bid my cousin Ferdinand come hither: 

[Exit Servant.] 
One, Kate, that you must kiss, and be acquainted 

with. 

Where are my slippers? Shall I have some 
water ? 156 

Come, Kate, and wash, and welcome heartily. 
You whoreson villain! will you let it fall? 

[Strikes him.] 

Kath. Patience, I pray you; 'twas a fault unwill 
ing. 

Pet. A whoreson, beetle-headed, flap-ear'd knave! 
Come, Kate, sit down; I know you have a stomach. 
Will you give thanks, sweet Kate, or else shall I? 
What's this? mutton? 
First Serv. Ay. 

Pet. Who brought it? 

Peter. I. 

Pet. Tis burnt ; and so is all the meat. 164 

What dogs are these! Where is the rascal cook? 

146 when: exclamation of impatience 148, 149 It ... way; cf. n. 

161 stomach: 'appetite' and 'temper' 



of the Shrew, IF. i 67 

How durst you, villains, bring it from the dresser, 
And serve it thus to me that love it not? 

[Throws the meat about the stage.] 
There, take it to you, trenchers, cups, and all. 168 
You heedless joltheads and unmanner'd slaves! 
What! do you grumble? I'll be with you straight. 

Kath. I pray yon, husband, be not so disquiet: 
The meat was well if you were so contented. 172 

Pet. I tell thee, Kate, 'twas burnt and dried away ; 
And I expressly am forbid to touch it, 
For it engenders choler, planteth anger; 
And better 'twere that both of us did fast, ITS 

Since, of ourselves, ourselves are choleric, 
Than feed it with such over-roasted flesh. 
Be patient; to-morrow 't shall be mended, 
And for this night we'll fast for company: 180 

Come, I will bring thee to thy bridal chamber. 

Exeunt. 

Enter Servants severally. 

Nath. Peter, didst ever see the like? 
Peter. He kills her in her own humour. 

Enter Curtis, a Servant. 

Gru. Where is he? 184 

Curt. In her chamber, making a sermon of con- 
tinency to her; 

And rails, and swears, and rates, that she, poor soul, 
Knows not which way to stand, to look, to speak, 188 
And sits as one new-risen from a dream. 
Away, away! for he is coming hither. [Exeunt.] 

Enter Petruchio. 

166 dresser '.sideboard 169 joltheads: blockheads 

175 choler: the humor supposed to cause irascibility 

181 bring: escort 185 continency: self-restraint 

187 rates: chides that: so that 



68 The Taming 

Pet. Thus have I politicly begun my reign, 
And 'tis my hope to end successfully. 192 

My falcon now is sharp and passing empty, 
And till she stoop she must not be full-gorg'd, 
For then she never looks upon her lure. 
Another way I have to man my haggard, 196 

To make her come and know her keeper's call; 
That is, to watch her, as we watch these kites 
That bate and beat and will not be obedient. 
She eat no meat to-day, nor none shall eat; 200 

Last night she slept not, nor to-night she shall not: 
As with the meat, some undeserved fault 
I'll find about the making of the bed; 
And here I'll fling the pillow, there the bolster, 204 
This way the coverlet, another way the sheets: 
Ay, and amid this hurly I intend 
That all is done in reverend care of her; 
And in conclusion she shall watch all night: 208 

And if she chance to nod I'll rail and brawl, 
And with the clamour keep her still awake. 
This is a way to kill a wife with kindness ; 
And thus I'll curb her mad and headstrong 
humour. 212 

He that knows better how to tame a shrew, 
Now let him speak: 'tis charity to show. Exit. 

193 sharp: keen 194 stoop: yield (figure from falconry) 

195 then: when she is full-gorged lure: a stuffed bird used by 
falconers to lure the hawk after it has flown 

196 man my haggard: tame my wild hawk 

198 watch: keep from sleep (also a term in falconry) 

199 bate: flap the wings beat: flutter 

200 eat: ate 201 Last night; cf. n. 
206 hurly: tumult intend: pretend 

211 This . . . kindness; cf. n. 213 shrew; cf. n. 



of the Shrew, IV. ii 69 

Scene Two 

[Padua. Before Baptista's House\ 
Enter Tranio and Hortensio. 

Tra. Is 't possible, friend Licio, that Mistress 

Bianca 

Doth fancy any other but Lucentio ? 
I tell you, sir, she bears me fair in hand. 

Hor. Sir, to satisfy you in what I have said, 4 
Stand by, and mark the manner of his teaching. 

[They stand aside.'] 

Enter Bianca [and Lucentio~\. 

Luc. Now, mistress, profit you in what you read? 

Bian. What, master, read you? first resolve me 
that. 

Luc. I read that I profess, the Art to Love. 8 

Bian. And may you prove, sir, master of your art! 

Luc. While you, sweet dear, prove mistress of my 
heart. 

Hor. Quick proceeders, marry! Now, tell me, I 

pray, 

You that durst swear that your mistress Bianca 12 
Lov'd none in the world so well as Lucentio. 

Tra. O despiteful love! unconstant womankind! 
I tell thee, Licio, this is wonderful. 

Hor. Mistake no more: I am not Licio, 16 

Nor a musician, as I seem to be ; 
But one that scorns to live in this disguise, 
For such a one as leaves a gentleman, 
And makes a god of such a cullion: 20 

3 bears . . . hand: flatters me with false hopes 

4, 5 Sir ... teaching; cf. n. 7 resolve: answer 

8 Art to Love; cf. n. 20 cullion: mean fellow 



70 The Taming 

Know, sir, that I am eall'd Hortensio. 

Tra. Signior Hortensio, I have often heard 
Of your entire affection to Bianca; 
And since mine eyes are witness of her lightness, 24 
I will with you, if you be so contented, 
Forswear Bianca and her love for ever. 

Hor. See, how they kiss and court! Signior 

Lucentio, 

Here is my hand, and here I firmly vow 28 

Never to woo her more; but I do forswear her, 
As one unworthy all the former favours 
That I have fondly flatter'd her withal. 

Tra. And here I take the like unfeigned oath, 32 
Never to marry with her though she would entreat. 
Fie on her! see how beastly she doth court him. 

Hor. Would all the world but he had quite for 
sworn ! 

For me, that I may surely keep mine oath, 36 

I will be married to a wealthy widow 
Ere three days pass, which hath as long lov'd me 
As I have lov'd this proud disdainful haggard. 
And so farewell, Signior Lucentio. 40 

Kindness in women, not their beauteous looks, 
Shall win my love: and so I take my leave, 
In resolution as I swore before. 

[Exit.] 

Tra. Mistress Bianca, bless you with such grace 44 
As longeth to a lover's blessed case ! 
Nay, I have ta'en you napping, gentle love, 
And have forsworn you with Hortensio. 

Bian. Tranio, you jest. But have you both for 
sworn me? 48 

Tra. Mistress, we have. 

45 longeth : belongeth 



of the Shrew, IF. ii 71 

Luc. Then we are rid of Licio. 

Tra. I* faith, he'll have a lusty widow now, 
That shall be woo'd and wedded in a day. 

Bian. God give him joy! 62 

Tra. Ay, and he'll tame her. 

Bian. He says so, Tranio. 

Tra. Faith, he is gone unto the taming-school. 

Bian. The taming-school! what, is there such a 
place ? 

Tra. Ay, mistress, and Petruchio is the master; 56 
That teacheth tricks eleven and twenty long, 
To tame a shrew, and charm her chattering tongue. 

Enter Biondello. 

Bion. O master, master ! I have watch'd so long 
That I'm dog-weary; but at last I spied 60 

An ancient angel coming down the hill 
Will serve the turn. 

Tra. What is he, Biondello? 

Bion. Master, a mercatante, or a pedant, 
I know not what; but formal in apparel, 64 

In gait and countenance surely like a father. 

Luc. And what of him, Tranio? 

Tra. If he be credulous and trust my tale, 
I'll make him glad to seem Vincentio, 68 

And give assurance to Baptista Minola, 
As if he were the right Vincentio. 
Take in your love, and then let me alone. 

[Exeunt Lucentio and Bianca.~] 

Enter a Pedant. 

Ped. God save you, sir! 

Tra. And you, sir ! you are welcome. 72 

57 eleven and twenty; cf. n. 61 ancient angel: good old soul 

63 mercatante : merchant (Italian) 



72 The Taming 

Travel you far on, or are you at the farthest? 

Ped. Sir, at the farthest for a week or two; 
But then up farther, and as far as Rome; 
And so to Tripoli, if God lend me life. 76 

Tra. What countryman, I pray? 

Ped. Of Mantua. 

Tra. Of Mantua, sir ! marry, God forbid ! 
And come to Padua, careless of your life? 

Ped. My life, sir! how, I pray? for that goes 
hard. 80 

Tra. 'Tis death for any one in Mantua 
To come to Padua. Know you not the cause? 
Your ships are stay'd at Venice; and the duke 
For private quarrel 'twixt your duke and him 84 
Hath publish'd and proclaim'd it openly. 
'Tis marvel, but that you are but newly come, 
You might have heard it else proclaim'd about. 

Ped. Alas, sir! it is worse for me than so; 88 

For I have bills for money by exchange 
From Florence, and must here deliver them. 

Tra. Well, sir, to do you courtesy, 
This will I do, and this I will advise you: 92 

First, tell me, have you ever been at Pisa? 

Ped. Ay, sir, in Pisa have I often been; 
Pisa, renowned for grave citizens. 

Tra. Among them, know you one Vincentio ? 96 

Ped. I know him not, but I have heard of him ; 
A merchant of incomparable wealth. 

Tra. He is my father, sir; and, sooth to say, 
In countenance somewhat doth resemble you. 100 

Bion. [Aside.] As much as an apple doth an 

oyster, and all one. 

80 goes hard: is a serious matter 83 stay'd: detained 

95 Pisa . . . citizens; cf. n. 102 all one: no matter 



of the Shrew, IV. Hi 73 

Tra. To save your life in this extremity, 
This favour will I do you for his sake; 104 

And think it not the worst of all your fortunes 
That you are like to Sir Vincentio. 
His name and credit shall you undertake, 
And in my house you shall be friendly lodg'd, 108 
Look that you take upon you as you should! 
You understand me, sir; so shall you stay 
Till you have done your business in the city. 
If this be courtesy, sir, accept of it. 112 

Fed. O sir, I do; and will repute you ever 
The patron of my life and liberty. 

Tra. Then go with me to make the matter good. 
This, by the way, I let you understand: 116 

My father is here look'd for every day, 
To pass assurance of a dower in marriage 
'Twixt me and one Baptista's daughter here: 
In all these circumstances I'll instruct you. 120 

Go with me to clothe you as becomes you. 

S Exeunt. 

Scene Three 

\_A Room in Petruchio's House] 
Enter Katherina and Grumio. 

Gru. No, no, forsooth; I dare not, for my life. 

Kath. The more my wrong, the more his spite 

appears. 

What, did he marry me to famish me? 
Beggars, that come unto my father's door, 4 

Upon entreaty have a present alms; 
If not, elsewhere they meet with charity: 

107 undertake: assume 109 take upon you: act a part 

118 pass: convey (a legal term) 5 present: immediate 



74 The Taming 

But I, who never knew how to entreat, 

Nor never needed that I should entreat, 8 

Am starv'd for meat, giddy for lack of sleep; 

With oaths kept waking, and with brawling fed. 

And that which spites me more than all these wants, 

He does it under name of perfect love; 12 

As who should say, if I should sleep or eat 

'Twere deadly sickness, or else present death. 

I prithee go and get me some repast; 

I care not what, so it be wholesome food. 16 

Gru. What say you to a neat's foot? 

Kath. 'Tis passing good: I prithee let me have it. 

Gru. I fear it is too choleric a meat. 
How say you to a fat tripe finely broil'd? 20 

Kath. I like it well: good Grumio, fetch it me. 

Gru. I cannot tell; I fear 'tis choleric. 
What say you to a piece of beef and mustard? 

Kath. A dish that I do love to feed upon. 24 

Gru. Ay, but the mustard is too hot a little. 

Kath. Why, then the beef, and let the mustard rest. 

Gru. Nay, then I will not: you shall have the 

mustard, 
Or else you get no beef of Grumio. 28 

Kath. Then both, or one, or anything thou wilt. 

Gru. Why then, the mustard without the beef. 

Kath. Go, get thee gone, thou false deluding slave, 

Beats him. 

That feed'st me with the very name of meat. 32 

Sorrow on thee and all the pack of you, 
That triumph thus upon my misery ! 
Go, get thee gone, I say. 

Enter Petruchio, and Hortensio with meat. 

13 As . . . say : as if to say 17 neat's : of an ox or calf 

22 choleric: productive of hot temper 



of the Shrew, IF. in 76 

Pet. How fares my Kate? What, sweeting, all 
amort ? 36 

Hor. Mistress, what cheer? 

Kath. Faith, as cold as can be. 

Pet. Pluck up thy spirits; look cheerfully upon 

me. 

Here, love; thou seest how diligent I am, 
To dress thy meat myself and bring it thee: 40 

[Sets the dish on a table.] 

I am sure, sweet Kate, this kindness merits thanks. 
What! not a word? Nay then, thou lov'st it not, 
And all my pains is sorted to no proof. 
Here, take away this dish. 

Kath. I pray you, let it stand. 44 

Pet. The poorest service is repaid with thanks, 
And so shall mine, before you touch the meat. 

Kath. I thank you, sir. 

H or. Signior Petruchio, fie ! you are to blame. 48 
Come, Mistress Kate, I'll bear you company. 

Pet. [Aside.] Eat it up all, Hortensio, if thou 

lov'st me. 

Much good do it unto thy gentle heart! 
Kate, eat apace: and now, my honey love, 62 

Will we return unto thy father's house, 
And revel it as bravely as the best, 
With silken coats and caps and golden rings, 
With ruffs and cuffs and farthingales and things ; 56 
With scarfs and fans and double change of bravery, 
With amber bracelets, beads, and all this knavery. 
What ! hast thou din'd ? The tailor stays thy leisure, 
To deck thy body with his ruffling treasure. 60 

36 sweeting: sweetheart amort: dejected 

43 is ... proof: proves to be worth nothing 

56 farthingales: hooped skirts 57 bravery: finery 

58 knavery: tricks of 'dress or adornment 59 stays: awaits 

60 ruffling: forming, or rising in, ruffles 



76 The Taming 

Enter Tailor. 

Come, tailor, let us see these ornaments ; 
Lay forth the gown. 

Enter Haberdasher. 

What news with you, sir? 

Hob. Here is the cap your worship did bespeak. 

Pet. Why, this was moulded on a porringer; 64 
A velvet dish: fie, fie! 'tis lewd and filthy: 
Why, 'tis a cockle or a walnut-shell, 
A knack, a toy, a trick, a baby's cap: 
Away with it! come, let me have a bigger. 68 

Kath. I'll have no bigger: this doth fit the time, 
And gentlewomen wear such caps as these. 

Pet. When you are gentle, you shall have one too; 
And not till then. 

Hor. [Aside.] That will not be in haste. 72 

Kath. Why, sir, I trust I may have leave to speak, 
And speak I will ; I am no child, no babe : 
Your betters have endur'd me say my mind, 
And if you cannot, best you stop your ears. 76 

My tongue will tell the anger of my heart, 
Or else my heart, concealing it, will break: 
And rather than it shall, I will be free 
Even to the uttermost, as I please, in words. 80 

Pet. Why, thou sayst true; it is a paltry cap, 
A custard-coffin, a bauble, a silken pie. 
I love thee well in that thou lik'st it not. 

Kath. Love me or love me not, I like the cap, 84 
And it I will have, or I will have none. 

[Exit Haberdasher.] 

63 Hab.jc/. n. 65 lewd: vile 66 cockle: sea-shell 

67 knack: knick-knack trick: trifle 

69 fit the time: suit the fashion 

82 custard-coffin: the raised crust of a custard or pie 



of the Shrew, IF. Hi 77 

Pet . Thy gown ? why, ay : come, tailor, let us see 't. 

mercy, God! what masquing stuff is here? 
What's this? a sleeve? 'tis like a demi-cannon: 88 
What ! up and down, carv'd like an apple-tart ? 
Here's snip and nip and cut and slish and slash, 
Like to a censer in a barber's shop. 

Why, what, i' devil's name, tailor, call'st thou this ? 92 
Hor. [Aside.] I see, she's like to have neither cap 

nor gown. 
Tai. You bid me make it orderly and well, 

According to the fashion and the time. 

Pet. Marry, and did: but if you be remember'd, 96 

1 did not bid you mar it to the time. 
Go, hop me over every kennel home, 

For you shall hop without my custom, sir. 

I'll none of it: hence! make your best of it. 100 

Kath. I never saw a better-fashion'd gown, 
More quaint, more pleasing, nor more commendable. 
Belike you mean to make a puppet of me. 

Pet. Why, true; he means to make a puppet of 
thee. 104 

Tai. She says your worship means to make a 

puppet of her. 

Pet. O monstrous arrogance! Thou liest, thou 

thread, 

Thou thimble, les 

Thou yard, three-quarters, half-yard, quarter, nail! 
Thou flea, thou nit, thou winter-cricket thou ! 
Brav'd in mine own house with a skein of thread! 

87 masguing: fit only for a masquerade 

88 demi-cannon: an old piece of ordnance 

91 censer: a firepan, made with a perforated cover, in which to burn 

perfumes; cf. n. 96 be remember'd: recollect 

98 kennel: gutter 102 quaint: elegant 

109 nail: measure of two and one-fourth inches 

110 nit: egg of a louse 111 Brav'd: defied with: by 



78 The Taming 

Away ! thou rag, thou quantity, thou remnant, 112 
Or I shall so be-mete thee with thy yard 
As thou shalt think on prating whilst thou liv'st ! 
I tell thee, I, that thou hast marr'd her gown. 
Tai. Your worship is deceiv'd: the gown is 
made 116 

Just as my master had direction. 
Grumio gave order how it should be done. 

Gru. I gave him no order; I gave him the stuff. 
Tai. But how did you desire it should be made ? 120 
Gru. Marry, sir, with needle and thread. 
Tai. But did you not request to have it cut? 
Gru. Thou hast faced many things. 
Tai. I have. 124 

Gru. Face not me: thou hast braved many 
men; brave not me: I will neither be faced nor 
braved. I say unto thee, I bid thy master cut 
out the gown ; but I did not bid him cut it to 128 
pieces: ergo, thou liest. 

Tai. Why, here is the note of the fashion to 
testify. 

Pet. Read it. 132 

Gru. The note lies in 's throat if he say I said so. 
Tai. [Reads ^] 'Imprimis, a loose-bodied gown/ 
Gru. Master, if ever I said loose-bodied gown, 
sew me in the skirts of it, and beat me to death 136 
with a bottom of brown thread. I said, a gown. 
Pet. Proceed. 

Tai. [Reads. "\ 'With a small compassed cape.' 
Gru. I confess the cape. 140 

Tai. [Reads.] 'With a trunk sleeve.' 

112 quantity: small fragment 113 be-mete: measure 

114 think on prating: remember thy prating 

123 faced: trimmed 125 Fact: bully braved: made fine 

129 ergo: therefore (Latin) 137 bottom: ball 

139 compassed: round 141 trunk sleeve : large, wide sleeve 



of the Shrew, IV. in 79 

Gru. I confess two sleeves. 

Tai. [Reads.] 'The sleeves curiously cut.' 

Pet. Ay, there's the villainy. 144 

Gru. Error i' the bill, sir; error i' the bill. I 
commanded the sleeves should be cut out and 
sewed up again; and that I'll prove upon thee, 
though thy little finger be armed in a thimble. 148 

Tai. This is true that I say: an I had thee in 
place where, thou shouldst know it. 

Gru. I am for thee straight: take thou the 
bill, give me thy mete-yard, and spare not me. 152 

Hor. God-a-mercy, Grumio! then he shall 
have no odds. 

Pet. Well, sir, in brief, the gown is not for 
me. 156 

Gru. You are i' the right, sir; 'tis for my 
mistress. 

Pet. Go, take it up unto thy master's use. 

Gru. Villain, not for thy life ! take up my 160 
mistress' gown for thy master's use! 

Pet. Why, sir, what's your conceit in that? 
Gru. O, sir, the conceit is deeper than you think 

for. 

Take up my mistress' gown to his master's use ! 164 
O, fie, fie, fie ! 

Pet. [Aside.] Hortensio, say thou wilt see the 

tailor paid. 
Go take it hence; be gone, and say no more. 

Hor. Tailor, I'll pay thee for thy gown to 
morrow : 168 
Take no unkindness of his hasty words. 
Away ! I say ; commend me to thy master. 

Exit Tailor. 

152 bill: pun on usual meaning and 'a kind of halberd' 
mete-yard : yard-measure 

153 God-a-mercy: i.e., God have mercy 162 conceit: idea 



80 The Taming 

Pet. Well, come, my Kate; we will unto your 

father's, 

Even in these honest mean habiliments. 172 

Our purses shall be proud, our garments poor: 
For 'tis the mind that makes the body rich; 
And as the sun breaks through the darkest clouds, 
So honour peereth in the meanest habit. 176 

What, is the jay more precious than the lark 
Because his feathers are more beautiful? 
Or is the adder better than the eel 
Because his painted skin contents the eye? 180 

O, no, good Kate; neither art thou the worse 
For this poor furniture and mean array. 
If thou account'st it shame, lay it on me; 
And therefore frolic: we will hence forthwith, 184 
To feast and sport us at thy father's house. 
Go, call my men, and let us straight to him; 
And bring our horses unto Long-lane end; 
There will we mount, and thither walk on foot. 188 
Let's see; I think 'tis now some seven o'clock, 
And well we may come there by dinner-time. 

Kath. I dare assure you, sir, 'tis almost two; 
And 'twill be supper-time ere you come there. 192 

Pet. It shall be seven ere I go to horse. 
Look, what I speak, or do, or think to do, 
You are still crossing it. Sirs, let 't alone: 
I will not go to-day ; and ere I do, 196 

It shall be what o'clock I say it is. 

Hor. [Aside.] Why, so this gallant will command 
the sun. [Exeunt.'] 

172 Even . . . habiliments; cf. n. 176 peereth : appears 

182 furniture: dress 



of the Shrew, IF. iv 81 

Scene Four 

[Padua. Before Baptista's House] 
Enter Tranio, and the Pedant dressed like Vincentio. 

Tra. Sir, this is the house: please it you that I 
call? 

Ped. Ay, what else? and, but I be deceived, 
Signior Baptista may remember me, 
Near twenty years ago, in Genoa, 4 

Where we were lodgers at the Pegasus. 

Tra. 'Tis well; and hold your own, in any case, 
With such austerity as longeth to a father. 

Ped. I warrant you. But, sir, here comes your 
boy; 8 

'Twere good he were school'd. 

Enter Biondello. 

Tra. Fear you not him. Sirrah Biondello, 
Now do your duty throughly, I advise you: 
Imagine 'twere the right Vincentio. 12 

Bion. Tut! fear not me. 

Tra. But hast thou done thy errand to Baptista? 

Bion. I told him that your father was at Venice, 
And that you look'd for him this day in Padua. 16 

Tra. Thou'rt a tall fellow: hold thee that to drink. 
Here comes Baptista. Set your countenance, sir. 

Enter Baptista and Lucentio. Pedant booted and 
bare-headed. 

Signior Baptista, you are happily met. 
[To the Pedant.] Sir, this is the gentleman I told you 
of: 20 

5 Where . . . Pegasus; cf. n. 11 throughly: thoroughly 

17 t&ll: clever hold: take 18 S. d.; cf. n. 



82 The Taming 

I pray you, stand good father to me now, 
Give me Bianca for my patrimony. 

Ped. Soft, son! 

Sir, by your leave: having come to Padua 24 

To gather in some debts, my son Lucentio 
Made me acquainted with a weighty cause 
Of love between your daughter and himself: 
And for the good report I hear of you, 28 

And for the love he beareth to your daughter, 
And she to him to stay him not too long, 
I am content, in a good father's care, 
To have him match'd; and, if you please to like 32 
No worse than I, upon some agreement 
Me shall you find ready and willing 
With one consent to have her so bestow'd; 
For curious I cannot be with you, 36 

Signior Baptista, of whom I hear so well. 

Bap. Sir, pardon me in what I have to say: 
Your plainness and your shortness please me well. 
Right true it is, your son Lucentio here 40 

Doth love my daughter and she loveth him, 
Or both dissemble deeply their affections: 
And therefore, if you say no more than this, 
That like a father you will deal with him 44 

And pass my daughter a sufficient dower, 
The match is made, and all is done: 
Your son shall have my daughter with consent. 

Tra. I thank you, sir. Where, then, do you know 
best 48 

We be affied and such assurance ta'en 
As shall with either part's agreement stand? 

Bap. Not in my house, Lucentio; for, you know, 
Pitchers have ears, and I have many servants. 52 

36 curious: overscrupulous 49 affied: betrothed 



of the Shrew, IF. iv 83 

Besides, old Gremio is hearkening still, 
And happily we might be interrupted. 

Tra. Then at my lodging an it like you: 
There doth my father lie, and there this night 56 
We'll pass the business privately and well. 
Send for your daughter by your servant here; 
My boy shall fetch the scrivener presently. 
The worst is this, that, at so slender warning, 60 
You're like to have a thin and slender pittance. 

Bap. It likes me well. Cambio, hie you home, 
And bid Bianca make her ready straight; 
And, if you will, tell what hath happened: 64 

Lucentio's father is arriv'd in Padua, 
And how she's like to be Lucentio's wife. 

Luc. I pray the gods she may with all my heart! 

Exit. 

Tra. Dally not with the gods, but get thee gone. 68 
Signior Baptista, shall I lead the way? 
Welcome! one mess is like to be your cheer. 
Come, sir; we will better it in Pisa. 

Bap. I follow you. 72 

Exeunt. 

Enter Lucentio and Biondello. 

Bion. Cambio! 

Luc. What sayst thou, Biondello? 

Bion. You saw my master wink and laugh 
upon you? 76 

Luc. Biondello, what of that? 

Bion. Faith, nothing; but he has left me 
here behind to expound the meaning or moral 
of his signs and tokens. 80 

54 happily: haply 56 lie: lodge 57 pass: transact 

59 scrivener : one who writes contracts 61 pittance: meal 

62 likes: pleases 67 I ... heart; cf. n. 

68 C/. n. 70 one mess: a single dish 



84 The Taming 

Luc. I pray thee, moralize them. 

Bion. Then thus. Baptista is safe, talking 
with the deceiving father of a deceitful son. 

Luc. And what of him? 84 

Bion. His daughter is to be brought by you 
to the supper. 

Luc. And then? 

Bion. The old priest at Saint Luke's church 88 
is at your command at all hours. 

Luc. And what of all this? 

Bion. I cannot tell, except they are busied 
about a counterfeit assurance : take you assur- 92 
ance of her, cum privilegio ad imprimendum 
solum. To the church! take the priest, clerk, 
and some sufficient honest witnesses. 
If this be not that you look for, I have no more to 

say, 96 

But bid Bianca farewell for ever and a day. 

Luc. Hearest thou, Biondello? 

Bion. I cannot tarry: I knew a wench mar 
ried in an afternoon as she went to the garden 100 
for parsley to stuff a rabbit; and so may you, 
sir; and so, adieu, sir. My master hath ap 
pointed me to go to Saint Luke's, to bid the 
priest be ready to come against you come with 104 
your appendix. Exit. 

Luc. I may, and will, if she be so contented: 
She will be pleas'd; then wherefore should I doubt? 
Hap what hap may, I'll roundly go about her: 108 
It shall go hard if Cambio go without her. Exit. 

81 moralize: explain 93, 94 cum . . . solum; cf. n. 

105 appendix: addition to a book or to one's possessions, so 'a wife' 



of the Shrew, IF. v 85 

Scene Five 

[A Road] 

Enter Petruchio, Kate, Hortensio [with Servants]. 

Pet. Come on, i' God's name; once more toward 

our father's. 
Good Lord, how bright and goodly shines the moon! 

Kath. The moon ! the sun : it is not moonlight now. 

Pet. I say it is the moon that shines so bright. 4 

Kath. I know it is the sun that shines so bright. 

Pet. Now, by my mother's son, and that's myself, 
It shall be moon, or star, or what I list, 
Or ere I journey to your father's house. 8 

Go one and fetch our horses back again. 
Evermore cross'd and cross'd; nothing but cross'd! 

HOT. Say as he says, or we shall never go. 

Kath. Forward, I pray, since we have come so 
far, 12 

And be it moon, or sun, or what you please. 
An if you please to call it a rush-candle, 
Henceforth I vow it shall be so for me. 

Pet. I say it is the moon. 

Kath. I know it is the moon. 16 

Pet. Nay, then you lie; it is the blessed sun. 

Kath. Then God be bless'd, it is the blessed sun: 
But sun it is not when you say it is not, 
And the moon changes even as your mind. 20 

What you will have it nam'd, even that it is; 
And so, it shall be so for Katherine. 

Hor. Petruchio, go thy ways; the field is won. 

Pet. Well, forward, forward ! thus the bowl should 
run, 24 

8 Or ere: before 

14 rush-candle: a candle made of a rush dipped in tallow 



86 The Taming 

And not unluckily against the bias. 

But soft! what company is coming here? 

Enter Vincentio. 

[To Vincentio.] Good morrow, gentle mistress: where 

away? 

Tell me, sweet Kate, and tell me truly too, 28 

Hast thou beheld a fresher gentlewoman? 
Such war of white and red within her cheeks ! 
What stars do spangle heaven with such beauty, 
As those two eyes become that heavenly face? 32 
Fair lovely maid, once more good day to thee. 
Sweet Kate, embrace her for her beauty's sake. 
Hor. A.' will make the man mad, to make a 

woman of him. 36 

Kath. Young budding virgin, fair and fresh and 

sweet, 

Whither away, or where is thy abode? 
Happy the parents of so fair a child; 
Happier the man, whom favourable stars 40 

Allot thee for his lovely bed-fellow ! 

Pet. Why, how now, Kate! I hope thou art not 

mad; 

This is a man, old, wrinkled, faded, withered, 
And not a maiden, as thou sayst he is. 44 

Kath. Pardon, old father, my mistaking eyes, 
That have been so bedazzled with the sun 
That everything I look on seemeth green: 
Now I perceive thou art a reverend father; 48 

Pardon, I pray thee, for my mad mistaking. 

Pet. Do, good old grandsire; and withal make 
known 

25 bias: the one-sided form of the bowl which gives an oblique 
motion to it 35 A': he 

47 green: 'of a green color/ and so 'young' as well 



of the Shrew, IF. v 87 

Which way thou travellest: if along with us, 

We shall be joyful of thy company. 52 

Fin. Fair sir, and you my merry mistress, 
That with your strange encounter much amaz'd me, 
My name is called Vincentio; my dwelling, Pisa; 
And bound I am to Padua, there to visit 56 

A son of mine, which long I have not seen. 

Pet. What is his name? 

Vin. Lucentio, gentle sir. 

Pet. Happily met; the happier for thy son. 
And now by law, as well as reverend age, 60 

I may entitle thee my loving father: 
The sister to my wife, this gentlewoman, 
Thy son by this hath married. Wonder not, 
Nor be not griev'd: she is of good esteem, 64 

Her dowry wealthy, and of worthy birth; 
Beside, so qualified as may beseem 
The spouse of any noble gentleman. 
Let me embrace with old Vincentio; 68 

And wander we to see thy honest son, 
Who will of thy arrival be full joyous. 

Fin. But is this true? or is it else your pleasure, 
Like pleasant travellers, to break a jest 72 

Upon the company you overtake? 

Hor. I do assure thee, father, so it is. 

Pet. Come, go along, and see the truth hereof; 
For our first merriment hath made thee jealous. 76 
Exeunt [all but Hortensio']. 

Hor. Well, Petruchio, this has put me in heart. 
Have to my widow ! and if she be f roward, 
Then hast thou taught Hortensio to be untoward. 

Exit. 

54 encounter: greeting 64 esteem : worth 

66 qualified: endowed wit h good qualities 72 pleasant: jocular 

76 jealous: suspicious 79 untoward: refractory 



88 The Taming 

ACT FIFTH 

Scene One 
[Padua. Before Lucentio's House] 

Enter Biondello, Lucentio, and Bianca; Gremio is 
out before. 

Bion. Softly and swiftly, sir, for the priest is 
ready. 

Luc. I fly, Biondello: but they may chance 
to need thee at home; therefore leave us. 4 

Exit [with Bianco}. 

Bion. Nay, faith, I'll see the church a' your 
back ; and then come back to my master's as soon 
as I can. [Exit.] 

Gre. I marvel Cambio comes not all this while. 8 

Enter Petruchio, Kate, Vincentio, [and] Grumio with 
Attendants. 

Pet. Sir, here's the door, this is Lucentio's house: 
My father's bears more toward the market-place; 
Thither must I, and here I leave you, sir. 

Fin. You shall not choose but drink before you 
go- 12 

I think I shall command your welcome here, 
And, by all likelihood, some cheer is toward. 

Knock. 

Gre. They're busy within; you were best 
knock louder. 16 

Pedant looks out of the window. 

Scene One S. d. out before: on the fore-stage, where he cannot per 
ceive the others 5 a : at 
10 bears: is situated 



of the Shrew, V. i 89 

Ped. What's he that knocks as he would beat 
down the gate? 

Fin. Is Signior Lucentio within, sir? 

Ped. He's within, sir, but not to be spoken 20 
withal. 

Fin. What if a man bring him a hundred 
pound or two, to make merry withal? 

Ped. Keep your hundred pounds to yourself : 24 
he shall need none so long as I live. 

Pet. Nay, I told you your son was well beloved 
in Padua. Do you hear, sir ? To leave frivolous 
circumstances, I pray you, tell Signior Lucentio 28 
that his father is come from Pisa, and is here 
at the door to speak with him. 

Ped. Thou liest: his father is come from 
Padua, and here looking out at the window. 32 

Fin. Art thou his father? 

Ped. Ay, sir; so his mother says, if I may 
believe her. 

Pet. [To Fincentio.'] Why, how now, gentle- 36 
man! why, this is flat knavery, to take upon 
you another man's name. 

Ped. Lay hands on the villain: I believe, a* 
means to cozen somebody in this city under my 40 
countenance. 

Enter Biondello. 

Bion. I have seen them in the church to 
gether: God send 'em good shipping! But who 
is here ? mine old master, Vincentio ! now we are 44 
undone and brought to nothing. 

Fin. [Seeing Biondello.] Come hither, crack- 
hemp. 

21 withal: with 28 circumstances: irrelevant formalities 

37 flat: downright 43 good shipping: a happy voyage 

46 crack-hemp: one who deserves hanging 



90 The Taming 

Bion. I hope I may choose, sir. 48 

Fin. Come hither, you rogue. What, have 
you forgot me? 

Bion. Forgot you! no, sir: I could not forget 
you, for I never saw you before in all my life. 52 

Fin. What, you notorious villain! didst thou 
never see thy master's father, Vincentio? 

Bion. What, my old, worshipful old master? 
yes, marry, sir : see where he looks out of the 56 
window. 

Fin. Is 't so, indeed? He beats Biondello. 

Bion. Help, help, help! here's a madman 
will murder me. 60 

[**.] 

Ped. Help, son! help, Signior Baptista! 

[Exit from above.] 

Pet. Prithee, Kate, let's stand aside, and see 
the end of this controversy. [They retire.] 

Enter Pedant [below] with Servants, Baptista f 
[and] Tranio. 

Tra. Sir, what are you that offer to beat my 64 
servant ? 

Fin. What am I, sir! nay, what are you, 
sir ? O immortal gods ! O fine villain ! A silken 
doublet ! a velvet hose ! a scarlet cloak ! and a 68 
copatain hat! O, I am undone! I am undone! 
while I play the good husband at home, my son 
and my servant spend all at the university. 

Tra. How now! what's the matter? 72 

Bap. What, is the man lunatic? 

Tra. Sir, you seem a sober ancient gentleman 
by your habit, but your words show you a mad- 

69 copatain: high-crowned 70 husband: frugal manager 

75 habit: outward appearance 



of the Shrew, V. i 



man. Why, sir, what cerns it you if I wear pearl 76 
and gold? I thank my good father, I am able to 
maintain it. 

Fin. Thy father! O villain! he is a sail- 
maker in Bergamo. 80 

Bap. You mistake, sir, you mistake, sir. Pray, 
what do you think is his name? 

Fin. His name! as if I knew not his name: 
I have brought him up ever since he was three 84 
years old, and his name is Tranio. 

Ped. Away, away, mad ass ! his name is Lu- 
centio; and he is mine only son, and heir to the 
lands of me, Signior Vincentio. 88 

Fin. Lucentio ! O ! he hath murdered his 
master. Lay hold on him, I charge you in the 
duke's name. O my son, my son! tell me, thou 
villain, where is my son Lucentio? 92 

Tra. Call forth an officer. 

[Enter one with an Officer.] 

Carry this mad knave to the gaol. Father Bap- 
tista, I charge you see that he be forthcoming. 

Fin. Carry me to the gaol! 96 

Gre. Stay, officer: he shall not go to prison. 

Bap. Talk not, Signior Gremio: I say he shall 
go to prison. 

Gre. Take heed, Signior Baptista, lest you be 100 
cony-catched in this business: I dare swear this 
is the right Vincentio. 

Ped. Swear, if thou darest. 

Gre. Nay, I dare not swear it. 104 

Tra. Then thou wert best say that I am not 
Lucentio. 

76 cerns: concerns 101 cony-catched: cheated 



92 The Taming 

Gre. Yes, I know thee to be Signior Lucentio. 

Bap. Away with the dotard ; to the gaol with 108 
him! 

Fin. Thus strangers may be haled and abused: 
O monstrous villain! 

Enter Biondello, Lucentio, and Bianca. 

Bion. O ! we are spoiled ; and yonder he is : 112 
deny him, forswear him, or else we are all un 
done. 

Luc. Pardon, sweet father. Kneel. 

Fin. Lives my sweet son? 

Exeunt Biondello, Tranio, and Pedant as fast 

as may be. 

Bian. Pardon, dear father. [Kneels.] 

Bap. How hast thou offended? 116 

Where is Lucentio? 

Luc. Here's Lucentio, 

Right son to the right Vincentio, 

That have by marriage made thy daughter mine, 

While counterfeit supposes blear'd thine eyne. 120 

Gre. Here's packing, with a witness, to de 
ceive us all ! 
Fin. Where is that damned villain Tranio, 

That fac'd and brav'd me in this matter so? 124 
Bap. Why, tell me, is not this my Cambio? 
Bian. Cambio is chang'd into Lucentio. 
Luc. Love wrought these miracles. Bianca's love 

Made me exchange my state with Tranio, 128 

While he did bear my countenance in the town; 

And happily I have arriv'd at last 

Unto the wished haven of my bliss. 

120 supposes: suppositions; cf. n. 

eyne: eyes {old plural, used for the sake of the rhyme) 

121 packing: plotting with a witness: 'with a vengeance' 



of the Shrew, V. i 



What Tranio did, myself enforc'd him to; 132 

Then pardon him, sweet father, for my sake. 

Fin. I'll slit the villain's nose, that would 
have sent me to the gaol. 

Bap. [To Lucentio.] But do you hear, sir? 136 
Have you married my daughter without asking 
my good will? 

Fin. Fear not, Baptista; we will content you, 
go to: but I will in, to be revenged for this 140 
villainy. Exit. 

Bap. And I, to sound the depth of this 
knavery. Exit. 

Luc. Look not pale, Bianca ; thy father will 144 
not frown. Exeunt [Lucentio and Bianca] . 

Gre. My cake is dough; but I'll in among the 

rest, 
Out of hope of all but my share of the feast. 

[Exit]. 

Kath. Husband, let's follow, to see the end 148 
of this ado. 

Pet. First kiss me, Kate, and we will. 

Kath. What! in the midst of the street? 

Pet . What ! art thou ashamed of me ? 152 

Kath. No, sir, God forbid; but ashamed to kiss. 
Pet. Why, then let's home again. Come, sirrah, 

let's away. 
Kath. Nay, I will give thee a kiss: now pray thee, 

love, stay. 

Pet. Is not this well? Come, my sweet Kate: 156 
Better once than never, for never too late. 

Exeunt. 

149 ado: fuss 157 Better . . . late: i.e., 'better late than never' 



94 The Taming 

Scene Two 
[A Room in Lucentio's House] 

Enter Baptista, Vincentio, Gremio, the Pedant, Lu- 
centio, and Bianca, Tranio, Biondello, Grumio, 
[Petruchio, Katherina, Hortensio,] and Widow; 
the Servingmen with Tranio bringing in a ban 
quet. 

Luc. At last, though long, our jarring notes agree: 
And time it is, when raging war is done, 
To smile at scapes and perils overblown. 
My fair Bianca, bid my father welcome, 4 

While I with self-same kindness welcome thine. 
Brother Petruchio, sister Katherina, 
And thou, Hortensio, with thy loving widow, 
Feast with the best, and welcome to my house: 8 
My banquet is to close our stomachs up, 
After our great good cheer. Pray you, sit down; 
For now we sit to chat as well as eat. 

Pet. Nothing but sit and sit, and eat and eat! 12 

Bap. Padua affords this kindness, son Petruchio. 

Pet. Padua affords nothing but what is kind. 

Hor. For both our sakes I would that word were 
true. 

Pet. Now, for my life, Hortensio fears his 
widow. 16 

Wid. Then never trust me, if I be afeard. 

Pet. You are very sensible, and yet you miss my 

sense: 
I mean, Hortensio is afeard of you. 

Wid. He that is giddy thinks the world turns 
round. 20 

Scene Two S. d. banquet: dessert 1 long: after along time 

16 fears; cf. n. 



of the Shrew, V. ii 



Pet. Roundly replied. 

Kath. Mistress, how mean you that? 

Wid. Thus I conceive by him. 

Pet. Conceives by me! How likes Hortensio that? 

Hor. My widow says, thus she conceives her tale. 24 

Pet. Very well mended. Kiss him for that, good 
widow. 

Kath. 'He that is giddy thinks the world turns 

round' : 
I pray you, tell me what you meant by that. 

Wid. Your husband, being troubled with a shrew, 28 
Measures my husband's sorrow by his woe: 
And now you know my meaning. 

Kath. A very mean meaning. 

Wid. Right, I mean you. 

Kath. And I am mean, indeed, respecting you. 32 

Pet. To her, Kate! 

Hor. To her, widow! 

Pet. A hundred marks, my Kate does put her 
down. 

Hor. That's my office. 36 

Pet. Spoke like an officer: ha' to thee, lad. 

Drinks to Hortensio. 

Bap. How likes Gremio these quick-witted folks? 

Gre. Believe me, sir, they butt together well. 

Bian. Head and butt! a hasty-witted body 40 
Would say your head and butt were head and horn. 

Fin. Ay, mistress bride, hath that awaken'd you? 

Bian. Ay, but not frighted me; therefore I'll sleep 
again. 

Pet. Nay, that you shall not; since you have 
begun, 44 

22 conceive: form an opinion by: in regard to 

23 Conceives: becomes pregnant 24 conceives: formulates 
37 ha' to thee: here's to thee 



96 The Taming 

Have at you for a bitter jest or two. 

Bian. Am I your bird? I mean to shift my bush; 
And then pursue me as you draw your bow. 
You are welcome all. 48 

Exit Bianca [with Katherina and Widow]. 

Pet. She hath prevented me. Here, Signior 

Tranio; 

This bird you aim'd at, though you hit her not: 
Therefore a health to all that shot and miss'd. 

Tra. O sir! Lucentio slipp'd me, like his grey 
hound, 52 
Which runs himself, and catches for his master. 

Pet. A good swift simile, but something currish. 

Tra. 'Tis well, sir, that you hunted for yourself: 
'Tis thought your deer does hold you at a bay. 56 

Bap. O ho, Petruchio! Tranio hits you now. 

Luc. I thank thee for that gird, good Tranio. 

Hor. Confess, confess, hath he not hit you here ? 

Pet. A' has a little gall'd me, I confess ; 60 

And, as the jest did glance away from me, 
'Tis ten to one it maim'd you two outright. 

Bap. Now, in good sadness, son Petruchio, 
I think thou hast the veriest shrew of all. 64 

Pet. Well, I say no: and therefore, for assurance, 
Let's each one send unto his wife; 
And he whose wife is most obedient 
To come at first when he doth send for her, 68 

Shall win the wager which we will propose. 

Hor. Content. What is the wager? 

Luc. Twenty crowns. 

45 Have at you : /'// come at you 

46 Am . . . bird: Am I the bird at which you're aiming 

49 prevented: escaped 52 slipp'd: let loose as from the leash or slip 
56 at a bay: at bay 58 gird: taunt 

60 f all'd : scrat ched . 63 good sadness: all seriousness 

65 for assurance : to decide the question 



of the Shrew, V. ii 07 

Pet. Twenty crowns ! 

I'll venture so much of my hawk or hound, 72 

But twenty times so much upon my wife. 

Luc. A hundred then. 

Hor. Content. 

Pet . A match ! 'tis done. 

Hor. Who shall begin? 

Luc. That will I. 

Go, Biondello, bid your mistress come to me. 76 

Bion. I go. Exit. 

Bap. Son, I'll be your half, Bianca comes. 

Luc. I'll have no halves; I'll bear it all myself. 

Enter Biondello. 

How now ! what news ? 

Bion. Sir, my mistress sends you word 80 

That she is busy and she cannot come. 

Pet. How ! she is busy, and she cannot come ! 
Is that an answer? 

Gre. Ay, and a kind one too: 

Pray God, sir, your wife send you not a worse. 84 

Pet. I hope, better. 

Hor. Sirrah Biondello, go and entreat my wife 
To come to me forthwith. Exit Biondello. 

Pet. O ho! entreat her! 

Nay, then she must needs come. 

Hor. I am afraid, sir, 88 

Do what you can, yours will not be entreated. 

Enter Biondello. 

Now, where's my wife? 

Bion. She says you have some goodly jest in hand: 
She will not come: she bids you come to her. 92 

74 A match: term used in accepting a wager 
78 be ... half: share half your wager 



98 The Taming 

Pet. Worse and worse; she will not come! O vile, 
Intolerable, not to be endur'd! 
Sirrah Grumio, go to your mistress; say, 
I command her come to me. Exit [Grumio]. 

Hor. I know her answer. 96 

Pet. What? 

Hor. She will not. 

Pet. The fouler fortune mine, and there an end. 

Enter Katherina. 

Bap. Now, by my holidame, here comes Kath 
erina ! 100 

Kath. What is your will, sir, that you send for 
me? 

Pet. Where is your sister, and Hortensio's wife? 

Kath. They sit conferring by the parlour fire. 

Pet. Go, fetch them hither: if they deny to 
come, 104 

Swinge me them soundly forth unto their husbands. 
Away, I say, and bring them hither straight. 

[Exit Katherina.] 

Luc. Here is a wonder, if you talk of a wonder. 

Hor. And so it is. I wonder what it bodes. 108 

Pet. Marry, peace it bodes, and love, and quiet life, 
An awful rule and right supremacy; 
And, to be short, what not that's sweet and happy. 

Bap. Now fair befall thee, good Petruchio ! 112 
The wager thou hast won; and I will add 
Unto their losses twenty thousand crowns, 
Another dowry to another daughter, 
For she is chang'd, as she had never been. lie 

Pet. Nay, I will win my wager better yet, 
And show more sign of her obedience, 

100 holidame: halidom, i.e., salvat ion 105 Swinge: whip 

110 awful: inspiring awe 112 fair befall thee: good fortune be thine 



of the Shrew, V. ii 99 

Her new-built virtue and obedience. 

Enter Kate, Bianca, and Widow. 

See where she comes, and brings your froward 
wives 120 

As prisoners to her womanly persuasion. 
Katherine, that cap of yours becomes you not: 
Off with that bauble, throw it under foot. 

Wid. Lord ! let me never have a cause to sigh, 124 
Till I be brought to such a silly pass ! 

Bian. Fie! what a foolish duty call you this? 

Luc. I would your duty were as foolish too: 
The wisdom of your duty, fair Bianca, 128 

Hath cost me an hundred crowns since supper-time. 

Bian. The more fool you for laying on my duty. 

Pet. Katherine, I charge thee, tell these head 
strong women 
What duty they do owe their lords and husbands. 132 

Wid. Come, come, you're mocking: we will have 
no telling. 

Pet. Come on, I say; and first begin with her. 

Wid. She shall not. 

Pet. I say she shall: and first begin with her. 136 

Kath. Fie, fie! unknit that threatening unkind 

brow, 

And dart not scornful glances from those eyes, 
To wound thy lord, thy king, thy governor: 
It blots thy beauty as frosts do bite the meads, 140 
Confounds thy fame as whirlwinds shake fair buds, 
And in no sense is meet or amiable. 
A woman mov'd is like a fountain troubled, 
Muddy, ill-seeming, thick, bereft of beauty; 144 

And while it is so, none so dry or thirsty 

130 laying: laying a wager 141 Confounds: ruins 

143 mov'd: provoked 



ioo The Taming 

Will deign to sip or touch one drop of it. 
Thy husband is thy lord, thy life, thy keeper, 
Thy head, thy sovereign ; one that cares for thee, 148 
And for thy maintenance commits his body 
To painful labour both by sea and land, 
To watch the night in storms, the day in cold, 
Whilst thou liest warm at home, secure and safe ; 152 
And craves no other tribute at thy hands 
But love, fair looks, and true obedience; 
Too little payment for so great a debt. 
Such duty as the subject owes the prince, 156 

Even such a woman oweth to her husband; 
And when she's froward, peevish, sullen, sour, 
And not obedient to his honest will, 
What is she but a foul contending rebel, 160 

And graceless traitor to her loving lord? 
I am asham'd that women are so simple 
To offer war where they should kneel for peace, 
Or seek for rule, supremacy, and sway, 164 

When they are bound to serve, love, and obey. 
Why are our bodies soft, and weak, and smooth, 
Unapt to toil and trouble in the world, 
But that our soft conditions and our hearts 168 

Should well agree with our external parts? 
Come, come, you froward and unable worms ! 
My mind hath been as big as one of yours, 
My heart as great, my reason haply more, 172 

To bandy word for word and frown for frown; 
But now I see our lances are but straws, 
Our strength as weak, our weakness past compare, 
That seeming to be most which we indeed least 
are. 176 

167 Unapt: unfitted 168 soft: gentle conditions: qualities 

176 Cf. n. 



of the Shrew, V. ii 101 

Then vail your stomachs, for it is no boot, 
And place your hands below your husband's foot: 
In token of which duty, if he please, 
My hand is ready; may it do him ease. 180 

Pet. Why, there's a wench! Come on, and kiss 

me, Kate. 
Luc. Well, go thy ways, old lad, for thou shalt 

ha't. 

Fin. Tis a good hearing when children are toward. 
Luc. But a harsh hearing when women are 
froward. 184 

Pet. Come, Kate, we'll to bed. 
We three are married, but you two are sped. 
'Twas I won the wager, [To Lucentio.] though you 

hit the white; 

And, being a winner, God give you good night ! 188 

Exit Petruchio [with Katherina]. 

Hor. Now, go thy ways; thou hast tam'd a curst 

shrew. 

Luc. 'Tis a wonder, by your leave, she will be 
tam'd so. [Exeunt."] 

177 vail: lower stomachs: pride boot: advantage 

183 toward: docile 186 sped: done for 

187 white: white center of the target; cf. n. 

FINIS. 



NOTES 

Dramatis Personae. The 'Dramatis Personae' and 
the division into scenes do not occur in the Folio, 
but were originally inserted by Rowe. 

Induction. This title for the two introductory 
scenes of the play is used to show that they lead 
the audience gradually into the main action. The 
word 'Induction' was first employed in this place by 
Pope, instead of the 'Actus primus, Scaena Prima' of 
the Folio. Other original act headings in Latin are 
'Actus Tertia' at the beginning of Act III; 'Actus 
Quartus. Scena Prima' at what is now IV. iii.; and 
'Actus Quintus' at V. ii. Pope first opened Act IV. 
with the present scene, and Theobald is responsible 
for the new division of Act V. ; both of these changes 
have been followed in all modern editions, although 
the original headings are probably more correct. 

Scene One S. d. The Folio stage direction here is, 
'Enter Begger and Hostes, Christophero Sly' and 
throughout the Induction Sly's speeches are assigned 
to 'Beg.' Also the Page's lines in Scene Two are 
given invariably to 'Lady' and the First, Second, and 
Third Servants are sometimes designated as First, 
Second, and Third 'Men.' 

Ind. i. 2. stocks. The Hostess threatens Sly with 
being put in the stocks, if he will not pay for the 
broken glasses. 

Ind. i. 5. paucas palldbrls. These words, a cor 
ruption of the Spanish 'pocas palabras/ are often 
in the Elizabethan drama put into the mouths of the 
lowest characters. 



The Taming of the Shrew 108 

Ind. i. 6. Sessa. An exclamation of doubtful 
origin, connected by some with the French 'cessez' = 
'be quiet/ by others with the German 'sasa/ a cry of 
encouragement. 

Ind. i. 9. Go by, Jeronimy. This phrase is a 
rough quotation from Kyd's Spanish Tragedy: 'Hier- 
onimo, beware go by, go by/ This bombastic, but 
popular, play was the common butt of Shakespeare 
and his contemporaries. The Folio reading here is, 
'go by S. leronimie/ but the emendation has been 
generally adopted. The remainder of Sly's speech 
alludes to another famous line of Hieronimo's: 'What 
outcries pluck me from my naked bed?' 

Ind. i. 20. in the coldest fault. 'When the scent 
was coldest and the hounds had most nearly lost it.' 

Ind. i. 64. is. Some editors have imagined a 
hiatus after 'is/ some even going so far as to suggest 
that a line has fallen out here. The Folio reading, 
here retained, places the emphasis on 'is/ and makes 
it refer to 'lunatic' in the previous line. Although not 
an entirely satisfactory interpretation, it suggests the 
complete confusion into which the servants are to 
throw Sly by their contradictory protestations. 

Ind. i. 79. S. d. In the Folio the stage direction, 
'Enter Players/ precedes the Lord's 'Bid them come 
near/ evidently in order to give the Players time to 
reach the fore-stage from the rear entrances in time 
for the Lord's address to them, 'Now, fellows, you 
are welcome.' Throughout the play similar stage 
directions have been shifted a line or so to make 
clear the natural divisions of the text, rather than to 
conform to the Elizabethan stage business. 

Ind. i. 88. A Play. This line is assigned in the 
Folio to 'Sincklo/ an actor with the Chamberlain's 
men from 1597 to 1604. His name also appears in the 
Quarto of 2 Henry IV., where the stage direction in 
V. iv. reads, 'Enter Sincklo and three or foure offi- 



The Taming 



cers/ and in the First Folio edition of 8 Henry VI., 
III. i., 'Enter Sincklo, and Hurafrey with Crosse- 
bowes in their hands.' 

Ind. i. 88. Soto. There is a character called Soto 
in Beaumont and Fletcher's Women Pleas'd, who is 
the son of a farmer and who attempts to woo a 
gentlewoman; but Women Pleas'd is thought not to 
have been written until after 1604, so the reference 
can hardly be to that play. 

Ind. i. 112. them. This word refers to the 'noble 
ladies' who accomplish (i.e., perform) honorable 
action unto their lords. 

Ind. ii. S. d. aloft. Sly and his attendants enter 
on the balcony which was situated at the back of the 
Elizabethan stage, and from there they watch the 
play performed on the lower stage. The modern 
stage direction, 'A Bedroom in the Lord's House,' 
depends upon the fact that orders have been given 
to carry Sly to 'my fairest chamber' (Ind. i. 46). 

Ind. ii. 19. Burton-heath. Perhaps Barton-on- 
the-Heath, a village in Warwickshire. It has been 
thought that throughout this scene there are to 
be found local allusions to the country and com 
panions of Shakespeare's early life. 

Ind. ii. 23. Wincot. Wincot is the name of a 
hamlet farm about four miles from Stratford on the 
road to Cheltenham. There is also a Wilnecote or 
Wilmecote (pronounced Wincot) about three miles 
north of Stratford, where lived Robert Arden, 
Shakespeare's maternal grandfather. 

Ind. ii. 52. Adonis. A youthful hunter, loved by 
Venus and slain by a wild boar. See Shakespeare's 
poem, Venus and Adonis. 

Ind. ii. 53. Cytherea. Venus, so called from 
Cythera, a Phoenician trading post, where she was 
especially worshipped. 

Ind. ii. 56. lo. Daughter of Inachus, King of 
Argos, loved by Jupiter, who 'beguiled and surpris'd' 



of the Shrew 105 

her under the cover of a cloud. He later changed her 
into a cow, to avoid Juno's suspicions. Juno sent 
a gadfly, which pursued lo far and wide over the 
world, until in Egypt she was restored to her original 
form. 

Ind. ii. 59. Daphne. A nymph, loved and pur 
sued by Apollo. She fled from him through the woods, 
and at last, as she was about to be caught, called on 
her mother, Earth, for help. Earth transformed her 
into a laurel, which was then chosen by Apollo as 
his favorite plant. This story, like that of lo, comes 
from Book I of Ovid's Metamorphoses. Shakespeare 
knew this work in Golding's translation, in which 
Apollo says to Daphne (I, 614-616): 

'Alas, alas how woulde it greeue my hart, 
To see thee fall among the briers, and that the bloud 

should start 
Out of thy tender legges, I wretch the causer of thy 

smart/ 

Ind. ii. 89. leet. A court leet, or manor court, 
for trying those accused of using false weights and 
measures. 

Ind. ii. 90. seal'd quarts. Quart measures offi 
cially stamped to show that they would hold the 
proper quantity. 

Ind. ii. 143. household stuff. There is a pun here 
on the word 'stuff,' used both indefinitely and as 
material for household decoration. 

I. i. 2. Padua. The University of Padua, founded 
by Frederick Barbarossa early in the thirteenth cen 
tury, was at the height of its importance in Shake 
speare's time. 

I. i. 3. Lombardy. The rich plain of Lombardy 
in northern Italy, where Padua is situated. 

I. i. 25. Me Pardonato. This is the Folio reading, 
for which many emendations have been substituted; 



106 The Taming 

but it is impossible to make the words into a correct 
Italian phrase. 

I. i. 31. stocks. Lifeless persons resembling posts 
or stocks, with a pun on 'stoics/ followers of the 
Greek Stoic philosophy, which teaches indifference to 
pleasure and pain. 

I. i. 33. Ovid. Ovid, the poet of love, is here 
contrasted with Aristotle, the moral philosopher. 

I. i. 47. S. d. Pantaloon. A regular character in 
Italian comedy, who represented a silly old man. 
Gremio corresponds to this type of person, and hence 
is thus described. 

I. i. 55. cart. Carting was a punishment which 
consisted in driving the offender around the town 
in a cart. There is a pun here on 'court/ 

I. i. 58. stale. There is a quibbling allusion here 
to the stale-mate in chess. 

I. i. 62. I wis. The meaning of this line seems 
to be, 'Indeed marriage with you hasn't got even half 
way to her (my) heart/ 

I. i. 107. Their love. There have been various 
interpretations of this phrase, of which the most 
satisfactory appears to be, 'the good will of Baptista 
and Bianca towards us.' It has also been referred 
to the affection between Katherine and her father, 
or to the love of Gremio and Hortensio for Kather- 
ine's accomplishments; in this last case the pronoun 
refers to 'gifts.' In the Third and Fourth Folios the 
reading is 'our,' instead of 'their.' 

I. i. 136. high-cross. The market-place, where a 
cross was often erected. In some English towns 
there are two crosses, the High Cross and the Low 
Cross. 

I. i. 155. love in idleness. Apparently an allusion 
to the effect of the flower so-called, i.e., the pansy. 
Cf. Midsummer Night's Dream II. i. 168 ff. 

I. i. 158. Anna. Sister and confidante to Dido, 



of the Shrew 10? 

Queen of Carthage, in the fourth book of Vergil's 
Mneid. 

I. i. 166. Redime . . . minimo. 'Redeem thyself, 
captive, for the least sum possible,' a line quoted 
incorrectly from Terence in Lily's Latin Grammar, of 
which Shakespeare seems to have known the 1574* 
edition. 

I. i. 172. Agenor. Agenor, King of Phoenicia, had 
a daughter Europa, for whose sake Jupiter trans 
formed himself into a bull. In this guise he car 
ried Europa to the island of Crete, where she lived 
for the rest of her life. 

I. i. 211. colour' d. Lucentio as the master prob 
ably wore clothes of more bright and varied hues 
than did his servant, Tranio. 

I. i. 242-251. The Folio prints 11. 242-247 as 
prose and 11. 248-251 as verse, although the former 
make very passable couplets, 'after' rhyming with 
'daughter,' according to Elizabethan usage. Such 
confusion of prose and verse is common in the Folio. 

I. ii. 29. Latin. To Grumio, Italian and its parent 
Latin are all one, as no doubt they were to many 
Elizabethan (not Italian) servants. 

I. ii. 33. two-and-thirty, a pip out. 'An expression 
derived from the old game of Bone-ace or One-and 
thirty ; to be two-and-thirty, a pip out was an old cant 
phrase applied to a person who was intoxicated/ 
(Halliwell.) A pip was a spot or mark on a play 
ing card. 

I. ii. 52. in a few. The Folio punctuates this line, 
'Where small experience grows but in a few.' 

I. ii. 69. Florentius' love. In Gower's Confessio 
Amantis a knight named Florent promises to marry 
a deformed hag if she will tell him the answer to a 
riddle, on which his life depends. Chaucer made 
use of the same plot in his Wife of Bath's Tale. 

I. ii. 70. Sibyl. The name used to designate sev 
eral prophetic old women. There were said to be 



108 The Taming 

from four to ten of them, the most famous being the 
Cumaean Sibyl, who led ^Eneas into Hades. 

I. ii. 79. aglet-baby. A small figure carved at the 
end of an aglet, i.e., the tag of a lace. 

I. ii. 113. rope-tricks. Grumio puns on the resem 
blance of this word to 'rhetoric,' by introducing the 
expression, 'figure/ immediately afterwards. 

I. ii. 117. cat. Because a cat keeps its eyes half- 
closed in the daylight. Also a possible play on the 
words 'cat' and 'Kate.' 

I. ii. 154. paper. This refers to the 'note' of 
1. 148 and 'them' to the books. It does not seem 
necessary to read 'papers,' as some editors do. 

I. ii. 186. Upon . . . liking. This line seems to 
mean, 'if we make an agreement satisfactory to him': 
i.e., if we agree to pay the expenses of his wooing. 
See below, 11. 218, 219 of this scene. 

I. ii. 240. That she's. 'That* may be emphatic 
and 'she' equivalent to 'woman,' as some editors sug 
gest, but this hardly seems to be a necessary inter 
pretation. 

I. ii. 247. Leda's daughter. Helen, wife of Mene- 
laus, King of Sparta, who was wooed and won by 
Paris, son of Priam, King of Troy. Her flight with 
him brought on the Trojan War. It was to Leda 
that Jupiter came in the form of a swan. 

I. ii. 261. Alcides'. Hercules, the performer of 
twelve great labors, is sometimes called Alcides, from 
Alcaeus, one of his ancestors. 

II. i. 33. dance bare-foot. It was a popular notion 
that unless the elder sisters danced barefoot at the 
marriage of a younger one, they would inevitably 
become old maids. 

II. i. 34. lead . . . hell. To lead apes in hell was 
said to be the punishment of old maids. Old bachelors 
were supposed to be doomed to be bearherds in the 
same place. 



of the Shrew 109 

II. i. 73. Backare. 'A cant word, meaning "go 
back," used in allusion to a proverbial saying, 
"Backare, quoth Mortimer to his sow," probably 
made in ridicule of some man who affected a knowl 
edge of Latin without having it/ (Nares.) 

II. i. 184. hard. A pun on 'heard,' which in 
Shakespeare's time was pronounced as if it were 
written 'hard/ 

II. i. 202. No . . . mean. 'Women wereinade to 
bear no such jade as you, if you, by women, refer to 
me/ (Halliwell-Phillipps.) 

II. i. 207. buzz. There is a pun on the words 'be,' 
'bee'; and also on 'buzz,' the verb, and 'buzz/ the 
contemptuous inter j ection. 

II. i. 209. Ay . . . buzzard. In this line Kath- 
erine uses 'buzzard' in both its senses: 'as he (a 
blockhead) takes a buzzard (an inferior kind of 
hawk)/ To take one bird for another was in prover 
bial use, as typifying an ignoramus. Here Kate 
means also that Petruchio will be a fool in taking her 
for a turtle dove, as she is really a hawk. 

II. i. 223. books. There is also a pun here on the 
common meaning of the phrase, 'in one's books/ 
meaning 'in one's favor/ 

II. i. 260. Yes . . . warm. A reference to the 
proverb, 'To have wit enough to keep oneself warm/ 

II. i. 289. Grissel. An allusion to patient Gri- 
selda, the heroine of Chaucer's Clerk's Tale. 

II. i. 290. Lucrece. Lucretia was a Roman ma 
tron, famous for her chastity, who killed herself 
after she had been violated. See Shakespeare's poem, 
The Rape of Lucrece. 

II. i. 317, 318. We . . . Sunday. Collier, in his 
edition of 1842, writes, 'Portions of these lines read 
as if they had been taken from a ballad. If any 
such be in print, it has never been pointed out by 
the commentators; but the following, from the reci 
tation of an old lady, who heard it from her mother 



no The Taming 

(then forty), at least sixty years ago, bears a 
strong resemblance to what Petruchio seems to 
quote : 

To church away ! 

We will have rings 
And fine array 

With other things, 
Against the day, 

For I'm to be married on Sunday.' 

II. i. 343. Tyrian tapestry. So called from the 
celebrated purple dye made in ancient Tyre from 
certain mollusks. 

II. i. 345. arras counterpoints. Called 'counter 
points' because of contrasted points, or panes, of 
different colors. 'Arras' was a superior kind of 
tapestry, which took its name from the town of 
Arras, the chief seat of its manufacture. 

II. i. 399. fac'd . . . ten. The figure comes from 
the game of Primero, in which to 'face' was to 'stand 
boldly upon a card': for example, to act as if a ten 
spot were really a court card, i.e., king, queen, or 
jack. 

III. i. 28, 29. Hie . . . senis. From Ovid's Epis- 
tolce Heroides, i. 33, 34. 'Here flowed Simois; here 
is the Sigerian land; here stood the 'lofty palace of 
aged Priam.' The standard Latin text reads 'Hac' 
instead of 'Hie' and 'Sigeia' instead of 'Sigeria.' 

III. i. 49-51. How . . . yet. In the Folio these 
lines are given to Lucentio, as is 1. 52; 11. 53, 54 are 
assigned to Bianca and 11. 55-59 to Hortensio. 

III. i. 83. Serv. This line is assigned in the Folio 
to 'Nicke,' perhaps the Nicholas Tooley whose name 
occurs among the 'Principall Actors in all these 
Playes' in the First Folio. 

III. ii. 49. chapeless. The chape is variously de 
scribed as the metal at the end of the scabbard, the 



of the Shrew m 

hook on it, or the piece of leather to which the scab 
bard is attached and which slides on the belt. 

III. ii. 53. lampass. A disease in horses consist 
ing in a swelling of the soft parts of the roof of the 
mouth, just behind the fore-teeth. 

III. ii. 71. 'humour of forty fancies/ The title of 
a collection of ballads; the book had been rolled up 
and stuck in Grumio's hat instead of a plume. 

III. ii. 131. The Folio reads for this line: 'But 
sir, Love concerneth us to add.' 

III. ii. 214. green. 'Green' may mean here 'new' 
(sarcastically of course, as his boots were really old), 
but more probably it is merely a proverbial saying. 

III. ii. 234, 235. My . . . anything. The allu 
sion is to the tenth commandment. See Exodus 20. 
17. 

IV. i. 6. a little pot. A reference to the proverb, 
'A little pot is soon hot/ The actor who took the 
part of Grumio was evidently of small stature. 

IV. i. 28. beast. Curtis takes it that Grumio has 
called him a beast, by the epithet 'fellow' following 
the phrase 'man, woman, and beast . . . my old 
master, and my new mistress, and myself.' This 
speech of Curtis's is assigned to Grumio in the Folio, 
where 11. 120-122 of this scene are by a misprint 
headed 'Gre.' instead of 'Gru.' 

IV. i. 43. 'Jack, boy! ho, boy! 9 'The beginning of 
an old catch, the words and music of which are given 
in Ravenscroft's Pammelia, 1609. It runs thus: 

"Jacke boy, ho boy, Newes: 

The cat is in the well 
Let us sing now for her knell 
Ding dong, ding dong, bell." 

Of course the word news suggests it to Grumio.' 
(Rolfe.) 

IV. i. 51, 52. Be . . . without. There is a pun 



112 The Taming 

here on both 'jacks' and 'Jills/ meaning first 'males 
and females/ and secondly, 'two kinds of vessels for 
drinking/ 'The jacks, being of leather, could not be 
made to appear beautiful on the outside, but were 
very apt to contract foulness within; whereas the jills, 
being of metal, were expected to be kept bright 
externally, and were not liable to dirt on the inside, 
like the leather/ (Steevens.) 

IV. i. 94. indifferent knit. 'Indifferent' has been 
variously glossed by editors as meaning, 'very dif 
ferent/ 'not different/ 'of a passable quality' and 'of 
the ordinary tie, not looped too conspicuously/ 

IV. i. 137. link. The smoke from a 'link/ or pitch 
torch, was sometimes used for restoring the blackness 
of a rusty hat. 

IV. i. 143. Where . . . led. The fragment of an 
old song, quoted also by Pistol in 2 Henry IV., V. iii. 
136. 

IV. i. 145. Soud. Variously explained as 'sweet/ 
'the burden of an old song/ 'the humming of a tune,' 
or 'a word coined by the poet to express the noise 
made by a person heated or fatigued/ The last of 
these explanations seems the most probable. 

IV. i. 148, 149. It . . . way. A fragment of 
another old song, now lost. Bishop Percy's ballad, 
The Friar of Orders Gray, was suggested by, and is 
partially made up of, this and other fragments scat 
tered through the plays of Shakespeare. 

IV. i. 201. Last night. It is difficult to see how 
Petruchio could know this, unless he and Katherine 
had been a night upon the road, which is nowhere 
indicated. Perhaps this is merely one of the incon 
sistent slips sometimes made by Shakespeare. 

IV. i. 211. This . . . kindness. A proverbial ex 
pression. Compare the title of Heywood's play, A 
Woman Killed with Kindness (acted 1603). 

IV. i. 213. shrew. Probably pronounced, as it 
was sometimes written, 'shrow/ Compare V. ii. 28, 



of the Shrew us 

where it rhymes with 'woe/ and V. ii. 189, where it 
rhymes with 'so/ as it does here with 'show/ 

IV. ii. 4, 5. Sir . . . teaching. These lines are 
assigned in the Folio to Lucentio, where 11. 6 and 8 
are given to Hortensio; 1. 71 of this scene is headed 
Tar/ 

IV. ii. 8. Art to Love. An allusion to Ovid's 
poem, entitled, Ars Amatoria. 

IV. ii. 57. eleven and twenty. A reference to the 
game of 'Bone-ace' or 'One-and-thirty/ Cf. I. ii. 33, 
and note. 

IV. ii. 95. Pisa . . . citizens. This line is a repe 
tition of I. i. 10. 

IV. iii. 63. Hob. The Folio assigns the Haber 
dasher's line to Tel/ 

IV. iii. 91. censer. These censers were used 
commonly in barber shops, where in addition to 
sweetening the atmosphere they were used to warm 
water and dry cloths. 

IV. iii. 172. Even . . . habiliments. This line is 
taken bodily from the old play, which is followed 
unusually closely throughout this scene. Cf. Appen 
dix A. 

IV. iv. 5. Where . . . Pegasus. This line is as 
signed to Tranio in the Folio and thus made to go 
with the following speech. Stevens says a propos of 
this line, 'Shakespeare has taken a sign out of Lon 
don and hung it up in Padua/ 

IV. iv. 18. S. d. The unusual stage direction, 
Tedant booted and bare-headed' seems to be a note 
for the actor who played the Pedant as to how he 
should appear in the first interview with Baptista. 
It should be noted, however, that the Pedant is al 
ready on the stage, 'drest like Vincentio' and pre 
sumably booted as from a journey. At this point no 
doubt he was to remove his hat out of deference to 
Baptista's entrance. 

IV. iv. 67. 7 ... heart. This line is given to 



The Taming of the Shrew 



Biondello in the Folio, and some editors have 
changed 'Cambio' in 1. 62 to 'Biondello' for agree 
ment's sake. As Lucentio, not Biondello, was acting 
as Baptista's servant, and as it is an integral part of 
the plot to have Lucentio sent for Bianca, it seems 
better to retain 'Cambio' in 1. 62 and to reassign 1. 67 
to Lucentio. 

IV. iv. 68. The Folio has after this line the stage 
direction, 'Enter Peter,' which seems to be entirely 
unnecessary. 

IV. iv. 93, 94. cum . . . solum. 'With the right 
of exclusive printing/ the words put on books so 
licensed. Here the reference is to the exclusive rights 
of marriage. 

V. i. 120. supposes. Gascoigne's translation of 
Ariosto's / Suppositi, from which the intrigue-plot of 
The Taming of the Shrew comes, is entitled The 
Supposes. The proper title would be The Substitu 
tions, and this sense may underlie the use of sup 
poses in the present line. 

V. ii. 16. fears. This word meant both 'to be 
afraid of and 'to frighten.' Petruchio uses it in the 
former sense, but the Widow takes it in the latter. 
Grumio puns on this word in I. ii. 214. 

V. ii. 176. This line seems to mean, 'Seeming as 
we do to be most that which we indeed least are'; 
the difficulty lies in the fact that 'seeming' has no 
word to modify and must be referred to the 'we* 
implied in 'our' of the preceding line. 

V. ii. 187. white. There is also a pun here on the 
name 'Bianca,' meaning 'white' in Italian. 



APPENDIX A 
SOURCES OF THE PLAY 

The chief source of The Taming of the Shrew is 
the older play, The Taming of a Shrew, which was 
entered in the Stationers' Register on May 2, 1594, 
as, 'A plesant Conceyted historic called the Tayminge 
of a Shrowe,' and which first appeared in print the 
same year. It contains, in a rude form, the story that 
Shakespeare used in the 'Induction' of The Shrew, 
the story of a beggar temporarily turned lord. A 
German scholar, A. von Weilen, finds the earliest 
appearance of this tale in Marco Polo's travels, and 
a later oriental version in the Arabian Nights story 
of The Sleeper Awakened.' The first European 
appearance of the plot is said to be the account of 
an actual historical occurrence at the court of Philip 
the Good, Duke of Burgundy, retold by Ludovico 
Vives in his 'Letters,' as on the authority of an eye 
witness. Thomas Warton, in his History of English 
Poetry, states that a book of stories by Richard 
Edwards, dated 1570, also contained the story, and 
surmises this to be the immediate source of the story 
in A Shrew. In the old play, Sly figures more promi 
nently in the action than in Shakespeare's work, 
where he drops out after the first scene of the First 
Act. In A Shrew he intersperses remarks four times 
during the main play and finally falls asleep, to 
be returned at the Lord's command to his former 
estate. Many reasons have been sought for Shake 
speare's early elimination of Sly, but the absorbing 
interest aroused by the main story seems sufficiently 
to account for Sly's slipping unobserved out of the 
play. The epilogue of A Shrew rounds out the story, 



116 The Taming 

but it is distinctly anti-climactic from the dramatic 
point of view. It runs : 

Then enter two bearing of Slie in his 

Owne apparrell againe, and leaues him 

Where they found him, and then goes out. 

Then enter the Tapster 

Tapster. Now that the darkesome night is ouerpast, 

And dawning day appeares in crystall sky, 

Now must I hast abroad! but soft whose this? 

What Slie oh wondrous hath he laine here allnight, 

He wake him, I thinke he's starued by this, 

But that his belly was so stuft with ale, 

What how Slie, Awake for shame. 

Slie. Sim gis some more wine, whats all the 

Plaiers gon: am not I a Lord? 

Tapster. A Lord with a murrin: come art thou 

dronken still? 

Slie. Whose this ? Tapster, oh Lord sirra, I haue had 
The brauest dreame to night, that euer thou 
Hardest in all thy life. 

Tapster. I marry but you had best get you home, 
For your wife will course you for dreaming here to 
night. 

Slie. Will she? I know now how to tame a shrew, 
I dreamt vpon it all this night till now, 
And thou hast wakt me out of the best dreame 
That euer I had in my life, but He to my 
Wife presently and tame her too, 
And if she anger me. 

Tapster. Nay tarry Slie for He go home with thee, 
And heare the rest that thou hast dreamt to night 
Exeunt Omnes. 

The old play likewise contains the germ of prac 
tically all the scenes of The Shrew in which Petru- 
chio and Katherine (called there Ferando and Kate) 
figure. Shakespeare is supposed to have known also 



of the Shrew 



a ballad published about 1550-1560, entitled A Merry 
Jest of a Shrewd and Curst Wife lapped in Morel's 
skin for her Good Behavior, which dealt with a simi 
lar story, but his main taming scenes are all clearly 
based on similar situations in A Shrew: the lute scene, 
the first meeting of the shrew and her tamer, the wed 
ding, the arrival home, the starving process, the inter 
view with the tailor, the disputes over the hour of 
the day and over the sun and moon, the old man 
addressed as a woman, and finally the scene of the 
wager. In some places the later play follows the 
earlier one quite slavishly; in others the elaboration 
is very extensive^ largely for the sake of character 
development. An example of the latter method is 
illustrated in the courtship of the lovers, the first 
interview between Ferando and Kate being the merest 
foreshadowing of the 'Kate of Kate Hall* scene: 

Feran. Twentie good morrowes to my louely Kate. 
Kate. You iest I am sure, is she yours alreadie? 
Feran. I tell thee Kate I know thou lou'st me well. 
Kate. The deuill you doo, who told you so? 
Feran. My mind sweet Kate doth say I am the man, 
Must wed, and bed, and marrie bonnie Kate. 
Kate. Was euer scene so grose an asse as this? 
Feran. I, to stand so long and neuer get a kisse. 
Kate. Hands off I say, and get you from this place; 
Or I wil set my ten commandments in your face. 
Feran. I prethe doo Jcate; they say thou art a shrew, 
And I like the better for I would haue thee so. 
Kate. Let go my hand for feare it reech your eare. 
Feran. No kate, this hand is mine and I thy loue. 
Kate. In faith sir no, the woodcock wants his taile. 
Feran. But yet his bil wil serue, if the other faile. 
Alfon. How now, Ferando, what saies my daughter? 
Feran. Shees willing sir and loues me as hir life. 
Kate. Tis for your skin then, but not to be your wife. 



118 The Taming 

The scenes with the Tailor, on the other hand, are 
remarkably similar in the two plays. A Shrew has : 

Enter Ferando and Kate and Sander 

San. Master the haberdasher has brought my 
Mistresse home hir cappe here. 
Feran. Come hither sirra: what haue you there? 
Habar. A veluet cappe sir and it please you. 
Feran. Who spoake for it? didst thou Kate? 
Kate. What if I did, come hither sirra, giue me 
The cap, He see if it will fit me. 

She sets it one hir head. 

Feran. O monstrous: why it becomes thee not, 

Let me see it Kate: here sirra take it hence 

This cappe is out of fashion quite. 

Kate. The fashion is good inough: belike you 

Meane to make a foole of me. 

Feran. Why true he meanes to make a foole of thee 

To haue thee put on such a curtald cappe, 

Sirra begon with it. 

Enter the Taylor with a gowne. 

San. Here is the Taylor too with my Mistris gowne. 
Feran. Let me see it Taylor: what with cuts and 

iagges. 

Sounes you villaine, thou hast spoiled the gowne. 
Taylor. Why sir I made it as your man gaue me 

direction. 

You may reade the note here. 
Feran. Come hither sirra Taylor reade the note. 
Taylor. Item, a faire round compast cape. 
San. I thats true. 

Taylor. And a large truncke sleeue. 
San. Thats a lie maister, I sayd two truncke sleeues. 
Feran. Well sir goe forward. 
Taylor. Item a loose bodied gowne. 
San. Maister if euer I sayd loose bodies gowne, 



of the Shrew 



Sew me in a seame and beate me to death, 

With a bottome of browne thred. 

Taylor. I made it as the note bad me. 

San. I say the note lies in his throute and thou too 

And thou sayst it. 

Taylor. Nay nay nere be so hot sirra, for I feare 

you not. 

San. Doost thou heare Taylor, thou hast braued 
Many men: braue not me. 
Thou'st faste many men. 
Taylor. Well sir. 

San. Face not me He neither be faste nor braued 
At thy handes I can tell thee. 

Kate. Come come I like the fashion of it well enough, 
Heres more a do then needs He have it, I 
And if you do not like it hide your eies, 
I thinke I shall haue nothing by your will. 
Feran. Go I say and take it vp for your maisters vse 
San. Souns villaine not for thy life touch it not, 
Souns take vp my mistris gowne to his 
Maisters vse? 

Feran. Well sir whats your conceit of it. 
San. I have a deeper conceite in it then you thinke 

for, take 

Vp my mistris gowne 
To his maisters vse? 

Feran. Tailor come hether: for this time take it 
Hence againe, and He content thee for thy paines. 
Taylor. I thanke you sir. Exit Taylor. 

Feran. Come Kate we now will go see thy fathers 

house 

Euen in these honest meane abilliments, 
Our purses shall be rich, our garments plaine, 
To shrowd our bodies from the winter rage, 
And thats inough, what should we care for more 
Thy sisters Kate to morrow must be wed, 
And I haue promised them thou shouldst be there 
The morning is well vp lets hast away, 



120 The Taming 

It will be nine a clocke ere we come there. 
Kate. Nine a clock, why tis allreadie past two 
In the after noone by all the clocks in the towne. 
Feran. I say tis but nine a clock in the morning. 
Kate. I say tis two a clock in the after noone. 
Feran. It shall be nine then ere we go to your fathers, 
Come backe againe we will not go to day. 
Nothing but crossing of me still, 
He haue you say as I doo ere you go. Exeunt Omnes. 

The Bianca plot is also present in A Shrew, al 
though in a modified form. Here Kate has two 
sisters, Philema (Bianca) and Emelia (Widow), each 
wooed by one suitor, Aurelius (Lucentio) and Polidor 
(Hortensio) respectively. Aurelius does his wooing 
in the character of a merchant's son and has a cer 
tain Phylotus (Pedant) play the role of his father. 
Valeria (Tranio) impersonates Aurelius and is sur 
prised in his disguise by Aurelius 's true father, the 
Duke of Sestos (Vincentio). These episodes of the 
disguised wooer, the false father, and the surprisal 
of the imposture come ultimately from George Gas- 
coigne's Supposes (1566), a translation of Ariosto's 
comedy, 7 Suppositi. Now there are also incidents 
in Gascoigne which figure in The Taming of the 
Shrew without appearing in A Shrew, thus showing 
that Shakespeare must have gone back to one of the 
original sources of A Shrew to eke out his own work. 
These modifications of the old play are: (a) the serv 
ant who assumes his master's role urges a pretended 
suit for the hand of the same lady; (b) the young 
lady who is wooed by the gentleman in disguise has 
also an old but wealthy suitor (Gremio), and her 
father desires to give her hand to the wealthiest 
suitor; (c) the false father poses as parent of the 
masquerading servant, not as in A Shrew as parent 
of the disguised master; (d) the actor of the false 
father is led to undertake the deception by being told 



of the Shrew 121 

he has arrived at a city unfriendly to his own; and 
(e) the false and true father (now representing one 
and the same person) meet, and each vigorously 
maintains his right to the character. There also 
appear in Gascoigne's Supposes two servants known 
as Petrucio and Licio, Italian names which figure 
in The Shrew, though there applied to other and 
more important characters. 

It seems probable then that The Taming of the 
Shrew, as we know it, comes directly from A Shrew 
(with new material from Gascoigne added), though 
Professor ten Brink has set forth an ingenious 
theory that both plays went back to a common lost 
source, a youthful play of Shakespeare's. This is 
an attempt to explain the marked agreement in lan 
guage between the two plays and the unparalleled 
excellence of A Shrew, the author of which is called 
by Swinburne 'of all the pre-Shakespeareans incom 
parably the truest, the richest, the most powerful 
and original humorist/ Pope, indeed, followed by 
Courthope and some later editors, claimed A Shrew 
itself as an early work of Shakespeare's, while other 
commentators have assigned it variously to Peele, 
Greene, Kyd, and Marlowe. There are certain 
markedly Marlovian passages in the play, but it 
seems safest to infer only that its unknown author 
was an admirer and an imitator (generally a rather 
servile one) of the author of Tamburlaine. Whoever 
he was, The Shrew owes much to his work; without 
it Shakespeare's play would never have been written 
in its present form. 

It has also been very generally believed that an 
other dramatist beside Shakespeare and the author^ 
of A Shrew is represented in the later play. The 
scenes of the Induction and those which deal with 
Petruchio and Katherine are universally admitted, as 
they now stand, to be the work of Shakespeare, but 
the underplot is for the most part so markedly dif- 



122 The Taming 

ferent from the rest of the play that a collaborator 
is supposed to have assisted in working over A 
Shrew. The facts that the Bianca story is so clearly 
differentiated from the Katherine plot (witness the 
almost exact alternation of scenes in Act IV), that 
the two parts of the play are not in the least simi 
lar in tone, and that all the material coming directly 
from Gascoigne's Supposes falls in the underplot of 
The Shrew tend to confirm the belief in a dual author 
ship. Many attempts have been made to divide the 
present text of The Shrew into the Shakespearean 
and non-Shakesperean parts, but, as is usual in such 
cases, authorities have generally disagreed as to de 
tails. The table on the page opposite represents the 
general consensus of critical opinion in the matter, 
among those who assume Shakespeare to have had a 
collaborator in this play. 



of the Shrew 123 

Shakesperean Doubtful Non-Shakespearean 

Induction 

Act I, Scene 1 
Act I, Scene 2. 
Act II, Scene 1, 1- 

114 
Act II, Scene 1, 

115-168 

Act II, Scene 1, 
169-318 

Act II, Scene 1. 

319-405 

Act III, Scene 1 
Act III, Scene 2, 

1-89 

Act III, Scene 2, 
90-126 

Act III, Scene 2, 

127-151 
Act III, Scene 2, 

152-186 

Act III, Scene 2, 
18T-242 

Act III, Scene 2, 

243-255 
Act IV, Scene 1 

Act IV, Scene 2 
Act IV, Scene 3 

Act IV, Scene 4 
Act IV, Scene 5 

Act V, Scene 1 
Act V, Scene 2, 1- 
176 



Act V, Scene 2, 
177-182 



Act V, Scene 2, 
183-190 



APPENDIX B 

HISTORY OF THE PLAY 

Nothing definite is known about the date at which 
The Taming of the Shrew was first written and pro 
duced; this subject has been a fruitful field of con 
troversy for Shakespearean scholars. Some have put 
the play as early as 1594, the year in which A Shrew 
was printed, some as late as 1604-1609, because of 
certain supposed allusions in the text to contempo 
rary events. These last references are by no means 
so definite as to be conclusive, especially in the face 
of the internal evidence, 1 which points to very early 
composition. One great difficulty in the matter is that 
The Shrew does not appear in Meres's list of 1598, 
though this may be because the work is only in part 
Shakespeare's or because Meres 'affects a pedantic 
parallelism of numbers,' giving only six comedies to 
balance his six 'tragedies/ Another plausible, al 
though not entirely satisfactory, theory has it that 
this play is the Love's Labour's Won of Meres. The 
strongest argument for the identification has been 
set forth by Professor A. H. Tolman in his Views 
about Hamlet and other Essays, but as yet we have 
no conclusive evidence upon this vexed point. It 
seems possible, however, that Shakespeare might 
originally have called his drama by the appropriate 
name Love's Labour's Won to distinguish it forcibly 
from the popular Taming of A Shrew, and when the 
old play had been definitely superseded by the newer 
version, that he returned to an approximation of the 
earlier and more literal title. 

i Konig finds fewer unstopped lines in this play than 
in any other of Shakespeare's works. 



The Taming of the Shrew 125 

Whether or not Love's Labour's Won may be iden 
tified with The Shrew, however, Meres's omission of 
this play is not necessarily a proof that it was not 
in existence in 1598, still less that it was not being 
written at about that time. A point in favor of this 
latter supposition is that line 88 of the first scene of 
the Induction is, in the Folio, given to 'Sincklo,' who, 
according to Fleay, was an actor with the Chamber 
lain's men from 1597 to 1604. This fact, coupled 
with the evidence for early composition furnished by 
metrical tests, rather points to 1597-1598 as the time 
of the play's appearance; but after all, it is impos 
sible to fix any very definite date for the composition 
of The Taming of the Shrew. 

We know, from the title-page of the First Quarto, 
dated 1631, that this play 'was acted by his Maiesties 
Servants at the Blacke Friers and the Globe' thea 
tres; and in 1633 it was given at court before the 
king and queen. It did not, however, survive much 
longer upon the stage in its original form. The first 
important revision of it was that made under the title 
of Sauny the Scot by John Lacy, performed on April 
9, 1667, at the Theatre Royal and published in 
1698. Pepys writes of it: 'To the King's house and 
there saw The Taming of a Shrew, which hath some 
very good pieces in it, but generally is but a mean 
play; and the best part, "Sauny," done by Lacy; and 
hath not half its life, by reason of the words, I sup 
pose, not being understood, at least by me.' In this 
play Grumio's part, much enlarged, is made into that 
of a Scotch servant, Sauny (compare his original 
name of Sander in A Shrew} ; the scene is laid in 
London instead of Padua; and the dialogue is short 
ened, as well as all put into prose. Lacy wrote a 
new Fifth Act which dealt with Katherine (now 
Margaret) 's renewed assertion of independence on 
regaining the shelter of her father's roof. Petru- 
chio first treats her silence as if it were due to the 



126 The Taming 

toothache, until she discomfits the Barber who is 
introduced to extract the offending member. Ulti 
mately the shrew is brought to her senses by a mock 
funeral in which she figures as the corpse and is 
bound on a bier. Her cries of protest are interpreted 
by Petruchio as being the words of a demon within 
her body, and it is only with Margaret's final sur 
render, 'My dear Petruchio, you have overcome 
me, and I beg your pardon,' that she is released in 
time for the final wager scene. This piece was re 
vived at Drury Lane in 1698 and at Lincoln's Inn 
Fields in 1725. 

Other offshoots of Shakespeare's play have been 
The Cobbler of Preston, a two act farce by Charles 
Johnson, performed at Drury Lane in 1716, and a 
slighter version of the same piece by Christopher 
Bullock, given at Lincoln's Inn Fields in the same 
year. This latter play was revived at Covent Gar 
den in both 1738 and 1759, and Johnson's work was 
again given at Drury Lane in 1817, a century after 
its original performance. These works dealt with 
the Sly story of the Induction in a somewhat enlarged 
form, Johnson's play even including a love story for 
Sir Charles Briton, the 'Lord' of The Shrew; but a 
great deal of The Shrew's original dialogue is re 
tained. More distantly related to Shakespeare is 
Jevon's The Devil of a Wife; or a Comical Trans 
formation, acted in 1686, a curious combination of 
the Shrew and Induction plots with an admixture of 
magic, satire on the Puritans, and incidental songs, 
a strange piece, which ultimately became an opera 
outright under the title of The Devil to Pay; or the 
Wives Metamorphosed. Other acting plays somewhat 
indebted to The Shrew are John Fletcher's Rule a 
Wife and Have a Wife (1624), and more especially, 
John Tobin's comedy of The Honeymoon (1805). It 
is also interesting to note that Fletcher wrote a sort of 



of the Shrew 127 

satirical sequel to The Shrew, which he called The 
Woman's Prize, or the Tamer Tam'd, dated variously 
from 1604 to 1621. In this play Katherine has died 
and P.etruchio is married to Maria, a cousin of his 
first wife's, by whom he is henpecked and subdued. 

The most important and most famous version of 
Shakespeare's play is Garrick's Katharine and Pe- 
truchio, which was first given at Drury Lane on March 
18, 1754. Garrick's chief motive in his work was to 
shorten and prune the original, which he did so suc 
cessfully that his work, generally performed as an 
afterpiece to some tragedy, has only three compara 
tively brief acts. This was accomplished by omitting 
the Induction and the entire secondary plot of the 
comedy, including the characters of Grumio, Lucen- 
tio, Tranio, Vincentio, the Pedant, and the Widow. 
He introduced a 'Music Master' to play Hortensio's 
'Broken Lute' scene, gave to Biondello Gremio's de 
scriptive speeches about the wedding, had them 
spoken to a servant named Pedro, presented Horten- 
sio and Bianca as already married, and changed 
Curtis from a man into an old woman. This latter 
transformation has, by the way, become a generally 
accepted stage tradition, along with the representa 
tion of the Tailor as a stutterer. Naturally Garrick 
added to the text of the play throughout, his most 
famous original passage being Katharine's soliloquy 
after the wooing scene at the end of the First Act: 

Why, yes; sister Bianca now shall see, 

The poor abandon'd Katharine, as she calls me, 

Can make her husband stoop unto her lure, 

And hold her head as high, and be as proud, 

As she, or e'er a wife in Padua. 

As double as my portion be my scorn! 

Look to your seat, Petruchio, or I throw you: 

Katharine shall tame this haggard ; or, if she fails, 

Shall tie her tongue up, and pare down her nails. 



128 The Taming 

The immense success of Garrick's piece is its own 
best justification. For ninety years it held the stage 
and was presented hundreds of times throughout the 
English-speaking world. Henry Woodward was its 
first Petruchio, and Mrs. Pritchard, later followed 
by Kitty Clive, the Katharine. It is recorded that 
as Woodward and Mrs. Clive were not upon good 
terms personally, the horseplay in the taming scenes 
was more boisterous and lifelike than necesr ary ; once 
Woodward threw his Katherine to the ground in the 
course of the action, and another time he is said to 
have stuck a fork into her finger. Among the fa 
mous Petruchios to follow Woodward in Garrick's 
farce were Edward Shuter, John Philip Kemble, 
J. W. Wallack, and Charles Kemble; its Katharines 
have included Mrs. Greene, Mrs. Siddons, Eliza 
O'Neill, and Helena Faucit. Garrick's piece held 
the stage from 1754 until 1844, when Benjamin 
Webster revived The Shrew according to the text of 
Shakespeare and according to contemporary ideas 
about Elizabethan stage conditions. The play pro 
duced by John Philip Kemble in 1810 under Shake 
speare's title had proved to be Garrick's version 
once again, and the four performances at Drury Lane 
in 1828 were of an opera based on the play. In 
1856 Samuel Phelps revived the original drama with 
scrupulous fidelity to the text and 'according to the 
usage of the modern stage,' restoring the Induction 
so that he might himself appear as Sly ; Henry Mars- 
ton was Petruchio and Miss Atkinson, Katherine. 
More recent English performances in these parts 
have been those of Henry Irving and Ellen Terry, 
1867 (their first appearance together), Johnston 
Forbes-Robertson and Mrs. Bernard-Beere, 1885, Mr. 
and Mrs. F. R. Benson, 1890, Mr. and Mrs. Herbert 
Beerbohm Tree, 1897, Mr. and Mrs. Oscar Asche 
(Lily Brayton), 1904, Mr. Asche acted both Petru- 



of the Shrew 129 

chio and Sly and Mr. and Mrs. Martin Harvey 
(Nina de Silva), 1913. 

In America Katharine and Petruchio was first pre 
sented in 1766, with Margaret Cheer and Lewis 
Hallam in the leading parts. This version long held 
its place on our stage, being given by such actors as 
Fanny and Charles Kemble, 1882, Fanny Wallack 
and James R. Anderson, 1848, Mrs. Scott-Siddons 
and James K. Mortimer, 1869, and Clara Morris and 
Louis James, 1871. Petruchio was a famous part 
of Edwin Booth's, but he used a two-act variant of 
Garrick's piece, prepared by himself; it was always 
given as an afterpiece to one of his tragic roles. 
His leading ladies in this play included Ada Clifton, 
Isabella Bateman, Rose Eytinge, and Fanny Daven 
port. In 1870 Marie Seebach, a German actress, 
produced in New York a German version of The 
Shrew, which purported to be true to the original 
version, but which was in four acts, omitted the In 
duction, and materially altered the subplot. The first 
performance in America to follow approximately the 
Folio text was that given at Daly's Theatre, New 
York, on January 18, 1887, under the direction of 
Augustin Daly. This revival met with remarkable 
success and continued to be given with various sup 
porting casts all through the lifetime of Ada Rehan, 
whose Katherine was her best role and whose per 
formance dominated the piece. The original cast en 
listed the best talent of Daly's famous company, 
including George Clark as the Lord, William Gilbert 
as Christopher Sly, John Drew as Petruchio, Otis 
Skinner as Lucentio, Charles Leclerq as Gremio, 
Joseph Holland as Hortensio, James Lewis as 
Grumio, Virginia Dreher as Bianca, and Mrs. G. H. 
Gilbert as Curtis. Later Petruchios to Miss Rehan's 
Katherine were George Clark, Charles Richman, and 
Otis Skinner. 

Daly's version of The Shrew was based on Shake- 



130 The Taming 

speare's text, but there were many cuts, transposi 
tions, and additions, all made for the sake of dramatic 
effectiveness. The dialogue was curtailed through 
out, until of Shakespeare's 2647 lines only about 2000 
appear in this acting version. As Katherine was ad 
mittedly to be the star part, she does not come on in 
the street scene of the First Act and thus gains an 
extremely effective entrance as the curtain rises 
on Act II; also she brings down the final curtain of 
this act with Garrick's interpolated speech already 
cited. In the Third Act she does not appear until 
after the wedding ceremony, and both she and Pe- 
truchio are eliminated from V. i. Both scenes of 
Act III are played as one, and Act IV is condensed 
into two sets ; Scenes 2 and 4 go well enough together, 
but when Scenes 1, 3 and 5 are telescoped, the speed 
of Katherine' s taming becomes too rapid to maintain 
the illusion. Nevertheless the practical success of 
this version was phenomenal: it was presented not 
only in the United States and Canada, but in Eng 
land, Germany, and France. In Paris Constant 
Coquelin, the great French comedian, saw the per 
formance and as a result decided to play Petruchio 
himself. The French version of Paul Delair, known 
as 'La Megere Apprivoisee,' was produced by Coque 
lin in Paris, and later in New York (1892) with Jane 
Hading as Katherine. A recent production in France 
was that given at the Theatre Antoine on April 24, 
1919, with M. Gemier and Mme. Celiat in the leading 
parts. In Germany the drama has been very popular 
and has figured nearly every year in the metropolitan 
and provincial repertoires under the title of 'Der 
Wider s pans tigen Zahmung'; a German version of the 
play was given at the Irving Place Theatre in New 
York City during March, 1916. 

In 1903 Elsie Leslie and Jefferson Winter gave a 
performance of The Shrew which included the In 
duction and Garrick's Katharine and Petruchio, per- 



of the Shrew 131 

haps the only time that such a combined text has 
been seen on the stage. In 1905 E. H. Sothern and 
Julia Marlowe first acted the play, which they have 
continuously kept in their repertoire since then; the 
Induction is excluded from their somewhat condensed 
version. Ermete Novelli and Signora O. Giannini 
presented an Italian translation of the play in New 
York in 1907, and in 1915 Margaret Anglin (with 
Eric Blind as her leading man) presented the play 
there, as she had previously done in Australia and 
the West. In this latter revival no words except 
those to be found in the Folio were used, though the 
text was slightly cut; the Induction was at first pre 
sented by Miss Anglin, but later she dropped it from 
her version of the play. This production was made in 
the 'new manner,' an attempt to approximate the 
conditions of the Elizabethan theatre, so that it was 
possible to present the play almost as Shakespeare 
wrote it, without frequent and prolonged changes of 
scenery. The decorations were done for Miss Anglin 
by Livingston Platt. 

Certain amateur performances of The Shrew may 
be also noted in this place. The Oxford University 
Dramatic Society produced it at Oxford in 1897, and 
again for seven performances, beginning February 
6, 1907. As is customary with this organization, 
professional actresses were imported to take the 
women's roles, the part of Katherine falling first to 
Miss Marian Morris and then to Miss Lily Brayton, 
who had already performed it on the regular stage. 
On June 18, 1910, the Yale Dramatic Association pre 
sented the play out of doors on the Yale Campus, 
'for one performance only.' At this time the Induc 
tion and a conventional version of the main play were 
given. 

A German opera made from the drama was first 
performed at Mannheim, on October 14, 1874, and 



132 The Taming 

was revived at the Metropolitan Opera House in New 
York on March 15, 1916. The music for this work 
was composed by Herman Goetz, and the libretto, 
Der Wider spanstigen Zahmung, was prepared by Jo 
seph Victor Widmann. In the process Shakespeare's 
play naturally underwent great change in treatment, 
one important difference being in the psychology of 
the principal characters. Petruchio is represented as 
having seen and loved Katherine before he under 
takes to marry her, his rough exterior is merely for 
the purpose of winning her love; Katherine, on the 
other hand, succumbs at once to Petruchio's master 
ful wooing and confesses to herself after the first 
scene with him that she has quite lost her heart. 
When the taming process ultimately breaks her pride 
and she admits her defeat, Petruchio throws off his 
mask and the lovers are ready to join in a conven 
tional operatic love duet. Another and quite differ 
ent interpretation of the leading characters in Shake 
speare's play is that set forth in a 'travesty in one 
act/ called The Ladies' Shakespeare, 'being one 
woman's reading of a notorious work called The 
Taming of the Shrew, edited by J. M. Barrie.' In 
this work, not as yet published, but produced on the 
stage by Miss Maude Adams at Rochester, N. Y., in 
October, 1914, and subsequently during the season of 
1914-1915 on tour, Barrie explains that Katherine 
was really the tamer, not the tamed, that she was 
hoodwinking Petruchio all the time, by pretending to 
want things she didn't care about and so getting what 
she really wanted. It is he who ultimately capitu 
lates, not she, because her tact and finesse get the 
better of his blundering bluffness. It is astonishing 
how, with a prologue setting forth this view and stage 
business to back it up, Shakespeare's dialogue, prac 
tically without a change, lends itself to such a feminist 
interpretation of the play. Barrie finds that even in 



of the Shrew 



Shakespeare the eternal feminine triumphs over mere 
man, and so the whirligig of time has brought in 
its revenges ! 



APPENDIX C 

THE TEXT OF THE PRESENT EDITION 

The text of the present volume is, by permission of 
the Oxford University Press, that of the Oxford 
Shakespeare, edited by the late W. J. Craig, except 
for the following deviations: 

1. The stage directions of the Folio have been 
restored as far as possible, with necessary modern 
additions enclosed in square brackets. 

2. A few changes in spelling have been made, as : 
antic for antick, buzz for buz, bass for base (string), 
and villainy for villany. 

3. Certain alterations of punctuation have been 
introduced, and the following readings have been 
changed, chiefly to follow the Folio more closely. 
The changes adopted in the present text precede the 
colon; Craig's readings follow it, the Folio authority 
being given wherever involved: 



Ind. i. 17 cur, is: cur is 

Ind. i. 64 And when F : And, when 

is, say F: is say 

Ind. ii. 75 Christopher F : Christophero 
Ind. ii. 129 despite (despight F): spite 
Ind. ii. 139 I will let F: I will; let 

play. It is F: play it. Is 
Ind. ii. 140 comonty, (Comontie, F): common ty 

gambold, F: gambold 
I. i. 25 Me Pardonato F : Mi perdonate 

mine: F: mine, 
I. i. 48 ) 

I. ii. 51 ^farther F: further 
IV. ii. 75 



134 



The Taming of the Shrew 



I. ii. 28 
I. ii. 14-5 
I. ii. 154 

I. ii. 210 

II. i. 25 
II. i. 160 
II. i. 190 
II. i. 202 
II. i. 207 

II. i. 324 

III. i. 19 
III. ii. 1 

III. i. 28, 31, 43 
III. i. 28, 33, 43 

III. i. 45 
III. ii. 15 

III. ii. 16 

III. ii. 170 

III. ii. 239 

IV. i. 51 
IV. i. 52 

IV. i. 93 

IV. ii. 35 
IV. ii. 45 ) 

IV. iv. 7 f 
IV. ii. 73, 74 

IV. iii. 2 
IV. iii. 58 

IV. iii. 134 
IV. iii. 150 
IV. iii. 177 

IV. iv. 91 
V.i.5 
V.i.6 

V. i. 76 

V. i. 105 
V. i. 115 
V. i. 118 
V. i. 146 

V. ii. 3 
V. ii. 78 

V. ii. 114 



leges F: 'leges 

it is F: 'tis 

paper F: papers 

larums F: 'larums 

venuto,: venuto; 

had she F: she had 

Kates F: cates 

as you F: as bear you 

should buzz! (should: buzze. F): should 

buzz 
seek, is F: seek is, 



| pointed F: 'pointed 



Hie F: Hac 

Sigeria F: Sigeia 

not, F: not; 

point F: 'point 

Make friends, invite F: Make friends 

invite 

why, he F: why he 
we are F: we're 
jacks: Jacks (lackes F) 
jills: Jills (Gils F) 
the carpets F: and carpets 
slickly F: sleekly 
world F: world, 

longeth F: 'longeth 

farthest F: furthest. 

wrong, F: wrong 

beads, F: beads 

Imprimis, a F: Imprimis. A 

where, thou: where thou F 

What, is: What is F 

except: expect F 

a' (a F) : o' 

master's: master (mistris F) 

cerns (cernes F): 'cerns. 

say that F: say, that 

sweet F: sweetest 

Vincentio, F: Vincentio; 

all but: all, but F 

scapes F: 'scapes. 

I'll (He F): I will 

crowns, F: crowns; 



APPENDIX D 

SUGGESTIONS FOR COLLATERAL READING 

Hazlitt, William : Characters of Shakespear's Plays 
(1817), pp. 312-320. 

Hudson, Henry Norman: Lectures on Shakespeare 
(1848), Vol. 1, pp. 227-237. 

Clarke, Mary Cowden: The Girlhood of Shake 
speare's Heroines (1850-1852), Everyman's Library 
ed., Vol. 2, pp. 80-161. 

Tolman, Albert H.: Shakespeare's Part in 'The 
Taming of the Shrew' (1890), Publications of the 
Modern Language Association, Vol. V, pp. 200-278. 

Lang, Andrew: The Comedies of Shakespeare, with 
Illustrations by E. A. Abbey, XIII, Harper's Maga 
zine (1894), Vol. XC, pp. 89-102. 

Boas, Frederick S.: Shakespere and his Predeces 
sors (1896), pp. 172-181. 

Way, Arthur S.; Rolfe, W. J.; and Crowell, Ella: 
New Views of Shakespeare's Shrew (1896), Poet 
Lore, Vol. 8, pp. 169-197. 

Tolman, Albert H.: The Views about Hamlet and 
Other Essays (1904), pp. 203-243, and (in connec 
tion with Love's Labour's Won), pp. 292-313. 

Boas, Frederick S., Editor: The Taming of a 
Shrew, The Shakespeare Library (1908). 

Winter, William: Shakespeare on the Stage. Sec 
ond Series (1915), pp. 481-541. 



INDEX OF WORDS GLOSSED 



(Figures in full-faced type refer to page-numbers) 



a' (he) : 86 (IV. v. 35) 
a' (at): 88 (V. i. 5) 
aboard: 57 (III. ii. 174) 
action, bring mine: 60 (III. 

ii. 237) 

ado: 93 (V. i. 149) 
Adonis: 8 (Ind. ii. 52) 
advice: 16 (I. i. 116) 
advis'd: 19 (I. i. 190) 
^Eacides: 49 (III. i. 53) 
affect (incline to) : 13 (I. i. 

40) 
affected (disposed): 13 (I. 

i. 26) 

affied: 82 (IV. iv. 49) 
Agenor: 18 (I. i. 172) 
aglet-baby: 24 (I. ii. 79) 
aim'd of: 41 (II. i. 232) 
Alcides': 30 (I. ii. 261) 
all one: 72 (IV. ii. 102) 
aloft: 6 (Ind. ii. S. d.) 
ambo: 17 (I. i. 149 S. d.) 
amends: 10 (Ind. ii. 99) 
amort: 75 (IV. iii. 36) 
an: 4 (Ind. i. 77) 
ancient: 8 (Ind. ii. 33) 
ancient angel: 71 (IV. ii. 61) 
Anna: 17 (I. i. 158) 
anon: 6 (Ind. i. 130) 
answerable: 45 (II. i. 353) 
antic: 5 (Ind. i. 101) 
apes in hell, lead: 33 (II. i. 

34) 

Apollo: 8 (Ind. ii. 37) 
appendix: 84 (IV. iv. 105) 
apply: 13 (I. i. 19) 
approv'd: 12 (I. i. 7) 
apt: 38 (II. i. 166) 
argosy: 46 (II. i. 368) 



arms: 40 (II. i. 220) 

arras counterpoints: 45 (II. 

i. 345) 

Art to Love: 69 (IV. ii. 8) 
as (so that) : 3 (Ind. i. 70) 
as (that) : 13 (I. i. 33) 
as (as if): 38 (II. i. 160) 
as yourself: 27 (I. ii. 160) 
assurance (legal settlement) : 

46 (II. i. 381) 
assurance, for: 96 (V. ii. 65) 
awful: 98 (V. ii. 110) 

backare: 34 (II. i. 73) 
bags: 27 (I. ii. 181) 
balk logic with: 13 (I. i. 34) 
balm: 3 (Ind. i. 48) 
banquet: 94 (V. ii. S. d.) 
bar (noun): 17 (I. i. 138) 
bars (verb): 11 (Ind. ii. 

138) 

basta: 19 (I. i. 202) 
bate: 68 (IV. i. 199) 
bay, at a: 96 (V. ii. 56) 
bear-herd: 7 (Ind. ii. 21) 
bears: 88 (V. i. 10) 
bears me fair in hand: 69 

(IV. ii. 3) 

beast: 61 (IV. i. 28) 
beat: 68 (IV. i. 199) 
begnawn: 53 (III. ii. 56) 
belike: 4 (Ind. i. 75) 
be-mete: 78 (IV. iii. 113) 
bemoiled: 63 (IV. i. 77) 
ben venuto, I shall be your: 

31 (I. ii. 285) 
bestraught: 7 (Ind. ii. 27) 
bias: 86 (IV. v. 25) 
big: 59 (III. ii. 231) 



of the Shrew 



137 



bill: 79 (IV. iii. 152) 

bird, am I your: 96 (V. ii. 

46) 
blow our nails together: 16 

(I. i. 108) 

board: 25 (I. ii. 96) 
books: 40 (II. i. 223) 
boot: 101 (V. ii. 177) 
boot-hose: 54 (III. ii. 69) 
boss'd: 45 (II. i. 347) 
bots: 53 (III. ii. 57) 
bottom: 78 (IV. iii. 137) 
bow'd: 37 (II. i. 151) 
brach: 2 (Ind. i. 17) 
brav'd (defied) : 77 (IV. iii. 

Ill) 
brave (adjective): 2 (Ind. 

i. 40) 
braved (made fine) : 78 (IV. 

iii. 125) 

bravery: 75 (IV. iii. 57) 
braves, these: 48 (III. i. 15) 
breathed: 8 (Ind. ii. 50) 
breeching: 48 (III. i. 18) 
bring: 67 (IV. i. 181) 
buckler: 60 (III. ii. 242) 
bugs: 29 (I. ii. 214) 
burthen: 24 (I. ii. 68) 
Burton-heath: 7 (Ind. ii. 19) 
but: 50 (III. i. 63) 
buttery: 5 (Ind. i. 102) 
buzz: 39 (II. i. 207) 
buzzard (a blockhead) : 39 

(II. i. 207) 
buzzard (an inferior kind of 

hawk) : 40 (II. i. 208) 
by (aside): 14 (I. i. 47 S. d.) 
by (in regard to) : 95 (V. ii. 

22) 

candle-cases: 53 (III. ii. 47) 
canopies: 45 (II. i. 346) 
caparisoned: 54 (III. ii. 68) 
card-maker: 7 (Ind. iL 20) 
carouses (noun) : 31 (I. ii. 



carousing to: 57 (III. ii. 

174) 

carpets: 62 (IV. i. 52) 
cart: 14 (I. i 55) 
cat: 25 (I. ii. 117) 
censer: 77 (IV. iii. 91) 
cerns: 91 (V. i. 76) 
chafed: 28 (I. ii. 206) 
chapeless: 53 (III. ii. 49) 
charge: 29 (I. ii. 219) 
charm: 19 (I. i. 213) 
checks: 13 (I. i. 32) 
chide: 25 (I. ii. 96) 
choler: 67 (IV. i. 175) 
choleric: 74 (IV. iii. 22) 
circumstances: 89 (V. i. 28) 
clapp'd up: 44 (II. i. 319) 
close: 6 (Ind. i. 127) 
cockle: 76 (IV. iii. 66) 
Cock's: 64 (IV. i. 121) 
colour'd: 19 (I. t 911) 
combless: 40 (II. i. 225) 
commanded: 6 (Ind. i. 125) 
comonty: 12 (Ind. ii. 140) 
compassed: 78 (IV. iii. 139) 
compound: 22 (I. ii. 27) 
conceit: 79 (IV. iii. 162) 
conceive (form an opinion) : 

95 (V. ii. 22) 

conceives (becomes preg 
nant): 95 (V. ii. 23) 
conceives (formulates) : 95 

(V. ii. 24) 

conditions: 100 (V. ii. 168) 
conference: 41 (II. i. 246) 
conformable: 42 (II. i. 272) 
confounds: 99 (V. ii. 141) 
content you: 45 (II. i. 335) 
continency: 67 (IV. i. 185) 
contrive: 31 (I. ii. 279) 
cony-catched: 91 (V. i. 101) 
cony-catching: 62 (IV. i. 45) 
copatain: 90 (V. i. 69) 
countenance (noun): 20 (I. 

i. 232) 

countenance (verb): 64 (IV. 
i. 101) 



138 



The Taming 



course: 8 (Ind. ii. 49) 
coxcomb: 40 (II. i. 
cozen: 57 (III. ii. 171) 
crab: 40 (II. i. 228) 
crack-hemp: 89 (V. i. 46) 
craven: 40 (II. i. 226) 
credit: 64 (IV. i. 106) 
cried upon it: 2 (Ind. i. 23) 
cross: 33 (II. i. 28) 
crowns: 23 (I. ii. 57) 
cullion: 69 (IV. ii. 20) 
cunning (noun) : 4 (Ind. i. 

92) 
cunning (adjective) : 15 (I. 

i. 97) 

curious: 82 (IV. iv. 36) 
curst: 18 (I. i. 184) 
custard-coffin: 76 (IV. iii. 

82) 
Cytherea: 8 (Ind. ii. 53) 

dance bare-foot: 33 (II. i. 

33) 

Daphne: 9 (Ind. ii. 59) 
declining head into: 5 (Ind. 

i. 119) 

demi-cannon: 77 (IV. iii. 88) 
denier: 1 (Ind. i. 9) 
despite, in: 6 (Ind. i. 128) 
devote: 13 (I. i. 32) 
Dian: 42 (II. i. 253) 
diaper: 3 (Ind. i. 57) 
dispatch'd: 6 (Ind. i. 129) 
domineer: 59 (III. ii. 227) 
dresser: 67 (IV. i. 166) 
ducats: 46 (II. i. 363) 
dumps: 43 (II. i. 278) 
duty (reverence): 5 (Ind. i. 

113) 
duty (due): 62 (IV. i. 39) 



eat: 68 (IV. i. 

eleven and twenty: 71 (IV. 

ii. 57) 

emboss'd: 2 (Ind. i. 17) 
encounter: 87 (IV. v. 54) 



enforced to digress: 55 (III. 

ii. 110) 

ergo: 78 (IV. iii. 129) 
esteem: 87 (IV. v. 64) 
event: 56 (III. ii. 130) 
ewer: 6 (Ind. ii. S. d.) 
eyne: 92 (V. i. 120) 

fa: 22 (I. ii. 17) 

fac'd it with a card of ten: 

47 (II. i. 399) 
face (brazen) : 43 (II. i. 283) 
face (bully): 78 (IV. iii. 

125) 
faced (trimmed): 78 (IV. 

iii. 123) 
fair (adjective): 32 (II. i. 

17) 
fair befall thee: 98 (V. ii. 

112) 

farthingales: 75 (IV. iii. 56) 
fashions: 53 (III. ii. 54) 
fault, in the coldest: 2 (Ind. 

i. 20) 

fay: 9 (Ind. ii. 83) 
fear (frighten): 29 (I. ii. 

214) 
fears (is afraid of) : 94 (V. 

ii. 16) 

few, in a: 23 (I. ii. 52) 
fine: 44 (II. i. 311) 
fit the time: 76 (IV. iii. 69) 
fives: 53 (III. ii. 56) 
flat: 89 (V. i. 37) 
Florentius' love: 24 (I. ii. 

69) 
flourish: 12 (Ind. ii. 146 

S. d.) 

fool: 14 (I. i. 65) 
footboy: 54 (III. ii. 73) 
for (at) : 12 (I. i. 3) 
for (because): 15 (I. i. 92) 
for my hand: 19 (I. i. 193) 
foul: 24 (I. ii. 69) 
frame: 20 (I. i. 230) 
frets (noun) : 37 (II. i. 150) 
fretting: 44 (II. i. 322) 



of the Shrew 



139 



f reward: 24 (I. ii. 91) 
full: 19 (I. i. 202) 
furniture: 80 (IV. iii. 182) 
fustian: 62 (IV. i. 49) 

gallants: 54 (III. ii. 90) 
galTd: 96 (V. ii. 60) 
galliasses: 46 (II. i. 372) 
gambold: 12 (Ind. ii. 140) 
gamester: 47 (II. i. 394) 
gamut: 50 (III. i. 68) 
gawds: 32 (II. i. 3) 
gentles: 55 (III. ii. 96) 
get: 47 (II. i. 404) 
gifts: 16 (I. i. 106) 
gird: 96 (V. ii. 58) 
give me your hands: 44 (II. 

i. 312) 

give you over: 25 (I. ii. 106) 
God-a-mercy: 79 (IV. iii. 

153) 

goes hard: 72 (IV. ii. 80) 
gogs-wouns: 57 (III. ii. 163) 
grace: 26 (I. ii. 133) 
gramercies: 13 (I. i. 41) 
gratify: 31 (I. ii. 276) 
green: 59 (III. ii. 214); 86 

(IV. v. 47) 

Grissel: 43 (II. i. 289) 
groom: 57 (III. ii. 155) 

ha' to thee: 95 (V. ii. 37) 
habit: 90 (V. i. 75) 
half, be your: 97 (V. ii. 78) 
half-checked: 53 (III. ii. 58) 
hand, at any: 26 (I. ii. 150) 
hap, whose: 31 (I. ii. 272) 
happily: 83 (IV. iv. 54) 
happy man be his dole: 17 

(L i. 143) 

hard: 39 (II. i. 184) 
have at you: 96 (V. ii. 45) 
have to: 17 (I. i. 142) 
hearken: 30 (I. ii. 263) 
heavy: 23 (I. ii. 46) 
her name: 53 (III. ii. 64) 



high-cross: 17 (I. i. 136) 
hilding: 33 (II. i. 26) 
him: 5 (Ind. i. 122) 
hipped: 53 (III. ii. 50) 
hold (wager): 54 (III. ii. 

86) 

hold (take) : 81 (IV. iv. 17) 
hold with her: 37 (II. i. 147) 
holidame: 98 (V. ii. 100) 
horn: 61 (IV. i. 29) 
household stuff: 12 (Ind. ii. 

143) 
'humour of forty fancies': 

54 (III. ii. 71) 
hungerly: 57 (III. ii. 178) 
hurly: 68 (IV. i. 206) 
husband (noun): 90 (V. i. 

70) 
husbanded (verb): 3 (Ind. 

i. 68) 

I wis: 14 (I. i. 62) 
idle: 7 (Ind. ii. 14) 
idly: 17 (I. i. 154) 
imprimis: 63 (IV. i. 68) 
indifferent (adverb): 28 (I. 

ii. 184) 
indifferent knit: 64 (IV. i. 

94) 

ingenious: 12 (I. i. 9) 
ingrate: 31 (I. ii. 273) 
institute: 12 (I. i. 8) 
intend: 68 (IV. i. 206) 
intolerable: 24 (I. ii. 90) 
lo: 9 (Ind. ii. 56) 
is: 3 (Ind. i. 64) 

4 Jack, boy! ho, boy!': 62 

(IV. i. 43) 
jacks: 62 (IV. i. 51) 
jade: 30 (I. ii. 252) 
jealous: 87 (IV. v. 76) 
Jeronimy, go by: 1 (Ind. i. 

9) 

Jills: 62 (IV. i. 52) 
joint-stool: 39 (II. i. 199) 



140 



The Taming 



jointure: 46 (II. i. 364) 
joltheads: 67 (IV. i. 169) 
jump: 19 (I. i. 194) 
junkets: 60 (III. ii. 251) 

Kates: 39 (II. i. 190) 
kennel: 77 (IV. iii. 98) 
kersey: 54 (III. ii. 69) 
kindly: 3 (Ind. i. 66) 
knack: 76 (IV. iii. 67) 
knavery: 75 (IV. iii. 58) 

lampass: 53 (III. ii. 53) 
larums: 28 (I. ii. 210) 
Latin: 23 (I. ii. 29) 
laying: 99 (V. ii. 130) 
Leda's daughter: 30 (I. ii. 

247) 

leet: 10 (Ind. ii. 89) 
leges: 22 (I. ii. 28) 
lewd: 76 (IV. iii. 65) 
He: 83 (IV. iv. 56) 
light: 39 (II. i. 204) 
like not of (care not for): 

34 (II. i. 65) 
likes (pleases): 83 (IV. iv. 

62) 

liking: 28 (I. ii. 186) 
link: 65 (IV. i. 137) 
list (noun): 54 (III. ii. 70) 
list, seize thee that: 51 (III. 

i. 92) 
logger-headed: 65 (IV. i. 

128) 

Lombardy: 12 (I. i. 3) 
long (adverb): 94 (V. ii. 1) 
longeth (verb): 70 (IV. ii. 

45) 

longly: 18 (I. i. 169) 
love, their: 16 (I. i. 107) 
love in idleness: 17 (I. i. 

155) 

lovely: 56 (III. ii. 126) 
Lucrece: 43 (II. i. 290) 
lure: 68 (IV. i. 195) 
lusty: 38 (II. i. 161) 



malt-horse: 65 (IV. i. 132) 
man my haggard: 68 (IV. i. 

196) 

mark: 21 (I. i. 257 S. d.) 
mart: 44 (II. i. 321) 
masquing: 77 (IV. iii. 87) 
match, a: 97 (V. ii. 74) 
mates (persons): 14 (I. i 

58) 
mates (husbands) : 14 (I. i. 

59) 

me: 22 (I. ii. 8) 
Me Pardonato: 13 (I. i. 25) 
meacock: 44 (II. i. 307) 
meaner: 19 (I. i. 209) 
mercatante: 71 (IV. ii. 63) 
merest: 2 (Ind. i. 23) 
merry passion: 5 (Ind. i. 

97) 

mess, one: 83 (IV. iv. 70) 
mete-yard: 79 (IV. iii. 152) 
mew: 15 (I. i. 87) 
milch-kine: 45 (II. i. 351) 
mind: 21 (I. i. 252) 
Minerva: 15 (I. i. 84) 
minion: 32 (II. i. 13) 
modesty: 3 (Ind. i. 68) 
moralize: 84 (IV. iv. 81) 
mose in the chine, to: 53 

(III. ii. 52, 53) 
motion: 31 (I. ii. 283) 
mov'd: 99 (V. ii. 143) 

nail: 77 (IV. iii. 109) 
napkin: 6 (Ind. i. 127) 
near-legged: 53 (III. ii. 58) 
neat's: 74 (IV. iii. 17) 
news, what's the: 20 (I. i. 



nice: 50 (III. i. 81) 
nill you: 42 (II. i. 265) 
nit: 77 (IV. iii. 110) 
note (noun): 26 (I. ii. 148) 
noted for: 52 (III. ii. 14) 

of (during): 10 (Ind. ii. 84) 
of (on): 63 (IV. i. 71) 



of the Shrew 

of both: 45 (II. i. 336) 
officer: 62 (IV. i. 50) 
old: 52 (III. ii. 30) 
or ere: 85 (IV. v. 8) 
orchard: 36 (II. i. 112) 
out before: 88 (V. i. S. d.) 
over-eyeing: 5 (Ind. i. 95) 
Ovid: 13 (I. i. 33) 

pack: 38 (II. i. 178) 
packing: 92 (V. i. 121) 
Padua: 12 (I. i. 2) 
pain: 48 (III. i. 12) 
pantaloon: 14 (I.1.47S. d.) ; 

49 (III. i. 37) 
paper: 27 (I. ii. 154) 
parle: 16 (I. i. 116) 
pass (convey): 73 (IV. ii. 

118) 
pass (transact) : 83 (IV. iv. 

57) 

passing: 3 (Ind. i. 67) 
paucas pallabris: 1 (Ind. i. 

peat: 15 (I. i. 78) 

pedant: viii (Dramatis Per- 

sonae) 

pedascule: 49 (III. i. 51) 
peereth: 80 (IV. iii. 176) 
Pegasus: 81 (IV. iv. 5) 
peril to, in: 11 (Ind. ii. 124) 
pheeze you: 1 (Ind. i. 1) 
pip out, a: 23 (I. ii. 33) 
pith: 18 (I. i. 170) 
pittance: 83 (IV. iv. 61) 
place, in: 27 (I. ii. 160) 
plash: 13 (I. i. 23) 
pleasant: 87 (IV. v. 72) 
pointed (adjective) : 48 (III. 

i. 19) 
points (noun): 53 (III. ii. 

50) 

port: 19 (I. i. 207) 
pot, a little: 61 (IV. ii. 6) 
practise: 2 (Ind. i. 36) 
prefer: 15 (I. i. 97) 
prerogative: 48 (III. i. 6) 



141 

present: 73 (IV. iii. 5) 
Presenters: 21 (I. i. 251 

S. d.) 

prevented: 96 (V. ii. 49) 
pricks: 54 (III. ii. 75) 
proof, to the: 37 (II. i. 141) 
proper: 26 (I. ii. 147) 
put finger in the eye: 15 (I. 

i. 79) 

quaint (clever): 56 (III. ii. 

150) 
quaint (elegant): 77 (IV. 

iii. 102) 

qualified: 87 (IV. v. 66) 
quantity: 78 (IV. iii. 112) 
quicken: 13 (I. i. 36) 
quit: 51 (III. i. 93) 

ranging: 51 (III. i. 92) 
rated (driven away by chid 
ing) : 18 (I. i. 164) 
rates (chides): 67 (IV. i. 

187) 
rather for, the: 4 (Ind. i. 

91) 

rayed: 53 (III. ii. 55) 
rebused: 22 (I. ii. 7) 
remember'd, be: 77 (IV. iii. 

96) 

resolve: 69 (IV. ii. 7) 
restrained: 53 (III. ii. 60) 
rests: 21 (I. i. 248) 
Richard Conqueror: 1 (Ind. 

i. 4) 

ring: 17 (I. i. 144) 
road: 46 (II. i. 369) 
rope-tricks: 25 (I. ii. 113) 
roundly: 23 (I. ii. 59) 
rout: 58 (III. ii. 184) 
rudesby: 51 (III. ii. 10) 
ruffling: 75 (IV. iii. 60) 
run: 61 (IV. i. 16) 
rush-candle: 85 (IV. v. 14) 
rushes strewed: 62 (IV. i. 
48) 



142 



The Taming 



sack: 6 (Ind. ii. 2) 
sadness, good: 96 (V. ii. 63) 
saving: 34 (II. i. 71) 
scape: 41 (II. i. 235) 



scrivener: 83 (IV. iv. 59) 
seal'd quarts: 10 (Ind. ii. 

90) 

seen: 26 (I. ii. 136) 
Semiramis: 8 (Ind. ii. 41) 
sensible: 63 (IV. i. 66) 
serve: 13 (I. i. 15) 
sessa: 1 (Ind. i. 6) 
sharp: 68 (IV. i. 193) 
sheathing: 65 (IV. i. 138) 
sheer: 7 (Ind. ii. 25) 
shift: 6 (Ind. i. 126) 
shipping, good: 89 (V. i. 43) 
shoulder-shotten: 53 (III. ii. 

57) 

shrew: 68 (IV. i. 213) 
shrewd: 18 (I. i. 184) 
Sibyl: 24 (I. ii. 70) 
simple: 6 (Ind. i. 135) 
since: 4 (Ind. i. 84) 
skills: 56 (III. ii. 135) 
skipper: 45 (II. i. 333) 
slipp'd: 96 (V. ii. 52) 
smallest: 9 (Ind. ii. 77) 
sober: 26 (I. ii. 134) 
soft: 100 (V. ii. 168) 
sol: 22 (I. ii. 17) 
sooth: 55 (III. ii. 119) 
sops: 57 (III. ii. 176) 
sorted to no proof, is: 75 

(IV. iii. 43) 
Soto: 4 (Ind. i. 88) 
soud: 65 (IV. i. 145) 
soundly: 22 (I. ii. 8) 
specialties: 36 (II. i. 127) 
sped: 101 (V. ii. 186) 
speed (verb) : 30 (I. ii. 250) 
speed (noun): 37 (II. i. 

139) 

speeding: 43 (II. i. 295) 
spleen (fit of laughter): 6 

(Ind. i. 137) 



spleen (caprice): 51 (III. ii. 

10) 
stale (laughing-stock) : 14 

(I. i. 58) 
stale (decoy): 51 (III. i. 

91) 

stand: 25 (I. ii. 114) 
stay (stop): 6 (Ind. i. 134) 
stay'd (detained): 72 (IV. 

ii. 83) 
stays (awaits): 75 (IV. iii. 

59) 

stead: 31 (I. ii. 269) 
stock (stocking): 54 (III. 

ii. 68) 
stocks ('a pair of): 1 (Ind. 

i. 2) 

stocks (posts): 13 (I. i. 31) 
stomach (inclination) : 13 (I. 

i. 38) 

stomach ('appetite' and 'tem 
per'): 66 (IV. i. 161) 
stomachs (pride): 101 (V. 

ii. 177) 

stoop: 68 (IV. i. 194) 
straight: 3 (Ind. i. 52) 
strange: 15 (I. i. 85) 
struck: 45 (II. i. 354) 
suits, in all: 5 (Ind. i. 106) 
supposes: 92 (V. i. 120) 
swayed: 53 (III. ii. 57) 
sweeting: 75 (IV. iii. 36) 
swinge: 98 (V. ii. 105) 

tails: 40 (II. i. 216) 

take upon you: 73 (IV. ii. 

109) 

tall: 81 (IV. iv. 17) 
taller: 61 (IV. i. 11) 
tender well: 1 (Ind. i. 16) 
tents: 45 (II. i. 346) 
that (so that): 67 (IV. i. 

187) 

that she's: 30 (I. ii. 240) 
them: 5 (Ind. i. 112) 
then: 68 (IV. i. 195) 
they: 37 (II. i. 142) 



of the Shrew 



143 



think on prating: 78 (IV. 

iii. 114) 

third-borough: 1 (Ind. i. 12) 
thrall'd: 20 (I. i. 224) 
three-inch-fool: 61 (IV. i. 

27) 

throughly: 81 (IV. iv. 11) 
time, in good: 39 (II. i. 196) 
to be: 16 (I. i. 128) 
took: 57 (III. ii. 166) 
toward (at hand): 14 (I. i. 

68) 
toward (docile) : 101 (V. ii. 

183) 

toy, a: 47 (II. i. 396) 
trapp'd: 8 (Ind. ii. 43) 
trick: 76 (IV. iii. 67) 
trimmed: 62 (IV. i. 48) 
trot: 24 (I. ii. 80) 
trow (believe) : 22 (I. ii. 4) 
trow (know) : 27 (I. ii. 168) 
trunk sleeve: 78 (IV. iii. 

141) 

turn: 34 (II. i. 63) 
turtle: 40 (II. i. 208) 
twangling: 38 (II. i. 159) 
twink: 43 (II. i. 304) 
two-and-thirty: 23 (I. ii. 33) 
Tyrian tapestry: 45 (II. i. 

343) 

unapt: 100 (V. ii. 167) 
uncase: 19 (I. i. 211) 
undertake: 73 (IV. ii. 107) 
unpink'd: 65 (IV. i. 136) 



untoward: 87 (IV. v. 79) 
usurp: 6 (Ind. i. 131) 

vail: 101 (V. ii. 177) 
valance: 45 (II. i. 348) 
velure: 53 (III. ii. 63) 
vied: 43 (II. i. 303) 

waning] 9 (Ind. ii. 65) 
wanton: 8 (Ind. ii. 54) 
watch: 68 (IV. i. 198) 
wear: 56 (III. ii. 121) 
welkin: 8 (Ind. ii. 47) 
when: 66 (IV. i. 146) 
whiles: 48 (III. i. 22) 
white: 101 (V. ii. 187) 
who should say, as: 74 (IV. 

iii. 13) 

whoreson: 65 (IV. i. 132) 
widowhood: 36 (II. i. 125) 
wild Kate: 42 (II. i. 271) 
will, because she: 19 (I. i. 

188) 

Wincot: 7 (Ind. ii. 23) 
windgalls: 53 (III. ii. 54) 
wish: 16 (I. i. 112) 
wit: 9 (Ind. ii. 79) 
with: 77 (IV. iii. Ill) 
withal: 89 (V. i. 21) 
witness, with a: 92 (V. i. 

121) 

woodcock: 27 (I. ii. 164) 
workmanly: 9 (Ind. ii. 62) 
world: 44 (II. i. 305) 

yellows: 53 (III. ii. 55) 



PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 



